TITLE: Śaivism and the Tantric Traditions: Essays in Honour of Alexis G.J.S. Sanderson
EDITORS: Dominic Goodall, Shaman Hatley, Harunaga Isaacson, Srilata Raman
SERIES: Gonda Indological Studies, vol. 22 (Brill)
SOURCE: Internet Archive full-text export (archive.org/details/oapen-20.500.12657-42543)
CONTENT: Full text OCR of the Festschrift, incl. the official 'Bibliography of the Published Works of Alexis G.J.S. Sanderson (1983-2019)'.
IMPORTED: 2026-08-12 (R2 sanskritree/saivismessayssanderson); deduped against festschrift_text_ocr.txt (identical).
================================================================================

EDITED BY DOMINIC GOODALL, SHAMAN HATLEY, 
HARUNAGA ISAACSON, AND SRILATA RAMAN 


Saivism and the 
Tantric Traditions 


Essays in Honour of Alexis G.J.S. Sanderson 


BRILL Gonda Indological Studies 


Šaivism and the Tantric Traditions 


Gonda Indological Studies 


PUBLISHED UNDER THE AUSPICES OF THE J. GONDA FOUNDATION 
ROYAL NETHERLANDS ACADEMY OF ARTS AND SCIENCES 


Edited by 


Peter C. Bisschop (Leiden) 


Editorial Board 


Hans T. Bakker (Groningen) 
Dominic D.S. Goodall (Paris/Pondicherry) 
Hans Harder (Heidelberg) 
Stephanie Jamison (Los Angeles) 
Ellen M. Raven (Leiden) 
Jonathan A. Silk (Leiden) 


VOLUME 22 


The titles published in this series are listed at brill. com/gis 


Alexis G.J.S. Sanderson 


Šaivism and the Tantric Traditions 


Essays in Honour of Alexis G,J.S. Sanderson 


Edited by 


Dominic Goodall 
Shaman Hatley 
Harunaga Isaacson 
Srilata Raman 


LEIDEN | BOSTON 


This is an open access title distributed under the terms of the CC BY-NC 4.0 license, 
which permits any non-commercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, 
provided the original author(s) and source are credited. Further information and the 
complete license text can be found at https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/ 


The terms of the cc license apply only to the original material. The use of material from other sources 
(indicated by a reference) such as diagrams, illustrations, photos and text samples may require further 
permission from the respective copyright holder. 


Cover illustration: Standing Shiva Mahadeva. Northern India, Kashmir, 8th century. Schist; overall: 53 cm 
(20 7/8in.). The Cleveland Museum of Art, Bequest of Mrs. Severance A. Millikin 1989.369 


Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 


Names: Sanderson, Alexis, honouree. | Goodall, Dominic, editor. | Hatley, Shaman, 
editor. | Isaacson, Harunaga, 1965- editor. | Raman, Srilata, editor. 

Title: Saivism and the tantric traditions : essays in honour of Alexis G.J.S. 
Sanderson / edited by Dominic Goodall, Shaman Hatley, Harunaga Isaacson, 
Srilata Raman. 

Description: Leiden ; Boston : Brill, [2020] | Series: Gonda indological studies, 1382- 
3442 ; volume 22 | Includes "Bibliography of the published works of Alexis G.J.S. 
Sanderson (1983-2019)." | Includes bibliographical references and index. 

Identifiers: LCCN 2020022036 (print) | LCCN 2020022037 (ebook) | 
ISBN 9789004432666 (hardback) | ISBN 9789004432802 (ebook) 

Subjects: LcsH: Šaivism—History. | Kashmir Šaivism—History. | Tantrism—History. 

Classification: LCC BL1280.53 .S25 2020 (print) | LCC BL1280.53 (ebook) | 
DDC 294.5/513-dc23 

LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2020022036 

LC ebook record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2020022037 


Typeface for the Latin, Greek, and Cyrillic scripts: “Brill”. See and download: brill.com/brill-typeface. 


ISSN 1382-3442 
ISBN 978-90-04-43266-6 (hardback) 
ISBN 978-90-04-43280-2 (e-book) 


Copyright 2020 by the Authors. Published by Koninklijke Brill nv, Leiden, The Netherlands. 
Koninklijke Brill Nv incorporates the imprints Brill, Brill Hes & De Graaf, Brill Nijhoff, Brill Rodopi, 
Brill Sense, Hotei Publishing, mentis Verlag, Verlag Ferdinand Schéningh and Wilhelm Fink Verlag. 
Koninklijke Brill Nv reserves the right to protect this publication against unauthorized use. 


This book is printed on acid-free paper and produced in a sustainable manner. 


Contents 


Preface xi 
List of Figures and Tables xii 
Notes on Contributors XIV 
A Note on Alexis Sanderson and Indology xxv 
Dominic Goodall and Harunaga Isaacson 
Bibliography of the Published Works of Alexis G.J.S. Sanderson 
(1983-2019) XXXI 


Introduction 1 
Dominic Goodall, Shaman Hatley, Harunaga Isaacson 
and Srilata Raman 


PART 1 
Early Saivism 


1 From Mantramarga Back to Atimarga: Atimārga as a Self-referential 
Term 15 
Peter C. Bisschop 


2 Why Are the Skull-Bearers (Kāpālikas) Called Soma? 33 
Judit Tórzsók 


3 Dressing for Power: On vrata, caryā, and vidyavrata in the Early 
Mantramarga, and on the Structure of the Guhyasutra of the 
Nisvasatattvasamhita 47 

Dominic Goodall 


PART 2 
Exegetical and Philosophical Traditions 


4 Further Thoughts on Ramakantha’s Relationship to Earlier Positions in 
the Buddhist-Brāhmaņical Atman Debate 87 
Alex Watson 


VIII 


CONTENTS 


Some Hitherto Unknown Fragments of Utpaladeva's Vivrti (11): Against 
the Existence of External Objects 106 
Isabelle Ratié 


Alchemical Metaphors for Spiritual Transformation in Abhinavagupta's 
Īsvarapratyabhijūāvimaršinī and Īsvarapratyabhijūāvivrtivimaršinī | 144 
Christopher D. Wallis 


On Vāgīsvarakīrti's Influence in Kashmir and among the Khmer 170 
Péter-Dániel Szántó 


Reflections on the King of Ascetics (Yatiraja): Ramanuja in the 


Devotional Poetry of Vedanta Desika 194 
Srilata Raman 


PART 3 


Religion, the State, and Social History 


10 


11 


12 


13 


Not to Worry, Vasistha Will Sort It Out: The Role of the Purohita in the 
Raghuvamša 217 
Csaba Dezsó 


Buddhism, Kingship and the Protection of the State: The 
Suvarņaprabhāsottamasūtra and Dharani Literature 234 
Gergely Hidas 


Adapting Saiva Tantric Initiation for Exoteric Circles: Lokadharmiņī 
Dīksā and Its History in Early Medieval Sources 249 
Nina Mirnig 


Innovation and Social Change in the Vale of Kashmir, circa 
900—1250C.E. 283 
John Nemec 


Toward a History of the Navarātra, the Autumnal Festival of the 
Goddess 321 
Bihani Sarkar 


CONTENTS IX 


PART 4 
Mantra, Ritual, and Yoga 


14 Šārikās Mantra 349 
Jūrgen Hanneder 


15 The Kāmasiddhistuti of King Vatsaraja 364 
Diwakar Acharya 


16 The Lotus Garland (padmamala) and Cord of Power (saktitantu): The 
Brahmayamala's Integration of Inner and Outer Ritual 387 
Shaman Hatley 


17 The Amrtasiddhi: Hathayoga's Tantric Buddhist Source Text 409 
James Mallinson 


18 A Sexual Ritual with Maya in Matsyendrasamhitā 40 426 
Csaba Kiss 


19 Hathayoga's Floruit on the Eve of Colonialism 451 
Jason Birch 


PART 5 
Art and Architecture 


20 The Early Šaiva Matha: Form and Function 483 
Libbie Mills 


21 The Kriyāsamgrahapaījikā of Kuladatta and Its Parallels in the Saiva 
Pratisthātantras 507 
Ryugen Tanemura 


22  Mafijuéri as Adibuddha: The Identity of an Eight-Armed Form of 
Mafijusri Found in Early Western Himalayan Buddhist Art in the Light of 
Three Namasamgiti-Related Texts 539 

Anthony Tribe 


x CONTENTS 
23 Life and Afterlife of Sadrsya: Revisiting the Citrasūtra through the 
Nationalism-Naturalism Debate in Indian Art History 569 
Parul Dave-Mukherji 


Index 589 


Preface 


This volume results from a symposium held at the University of Toronto in 
honour of Alexis GJ.S. Sanderson. The symposium was convened in March 
2015 in anticipation of his retirement as the Spalding Professor of Eastern Reli- 
gions and Ethics at All Souls College, Oxford University. The event was con- 
ceived by Srilata Raman, who worked tirelessly and resourcefully to make it 
a success. In this she was aided by Shaman Hatley, co-convener of the sym- 
posium, and a number of graduate students, especially Kalpesh Bhatt, Tamara 
Cohen, Larissa Fardelos, Nika Kuchuk, and Eric Steinschneider, to whom we 
offer our sincere thanks. It was immensely satisfying to have so many of Pro- 
fessor Sanderson's former doctoral students assemble from across the world 
for the occasion, students whose graduate studies at Oxford spanned more 
than three decades of Alexis Sanderson’s teaching career. The volume is based 
mainly on papers presented in the symposium, with additional contributions 
by several of his former pupils who had not been able to present their work at 
that time (Parul Dave-Mukherji, Csaba Dezsó, Csaba Kiss, Ryugen Tanemura, 
and Anthony Tribe), as well as by Diwakar Acharya, his successor to the Spald- 
ing Professorship. We would also like to extend our thanks and recognition to 
those who enriched the symposium with excellent papers, but who for various 
reasons could not include these in the present volume: Hans Bakker, Gudrun 
Bühnemann, Shingo Einoo, Alexander von Rospatt, and Somadeva Vasudeva. 

We would like to acknowledge the sponsors who made the symposium pos- 
sible: All Souls College, Oxford University; the Centre for South Asian Studies, 
University of Toronto; the Department of Religion of the University of Toronto, 
and its Chair, John Kloppenborg; Brill Publishers; and Srilata Raman, who con- 
tributed quietly and generously from her own research funds. We would also 
like to thank University College of the University of Toronto, and John Mar- 
shall, its Vice Principal, for making available the lovely Croft Chapter House, in 
which the symposium was held. 

The contributors to the volume and the publisher have endured a long wait 
for this volume to come to fruition, and we would like to thank them for their 
patience and cheerful support. Special thanks are due also to Anusha Sudin- 
dra Rao, who proofread the volume carefully on short notice, and to Liwen Liu, 
who prepared the index. 


List of Figures and Tables 


4.1 
4.2 
4:3 
4.4 
4.5 
4.6 
4.7 
5.1 


14.1 
16.1 
16.2 
16.3 
20.1 
20.2 


20.3 


22.1 


22.2 


22.3 


22.4 


22.5 


Figures 


Self as essence 88 

Self as substance 88 

Self as agent 89 

Ramakantha's view in the middle ground 91 

Rāmakaņtha's view as eguivalent to Nyāya 94 

Rāmakaņtha's view as more extreme than Nyāya 96 

Nyaya as equivalent to Ramakantha’s view 99 

Manuscript S3 of Abhinavagupta's Īsvarapratyabhijītāvimaršinī (f. 43A), with 
fragments 4 and 5 of Utpaladeva's Vivrti on vv. 1.5.8-9 in the top and right 
margins (photograph: National Archives of India). 108 

Šārikā stone. Photograph by WalterSlaje. 350 

Garland of the Devis and Dūtīs (padmamālā 1) 396 

Garlands of the Mātrs and Yoginis (padmamālās 11-111) 397 

The pure body of power (avadhūtatanu) 398 

The 9x9 plan, Brhatkālottara, chapter 112 (the vastuyagapatala) 486 

Deity, naksatra, and consequence of door position. Brhatkālottara, 
prasadalaksanapatala 238c—243b. 487 

The nandyavarta/nandikavarta set of nine chambers 490 

Eight-armed Matijušrī, uppermost level, Sumtsek, Alchi. Photograph by Jaroslav 
Poncar (JP93 26.4.05 WHAV) 540 

Mandala of eight-armed Manjušrī, uppermost level, Sumtsek, Alchi. 
Photograph by Jaroslav Poncar (JP83 26.4.01 WHAV) 541 

Eight-armed Majijusri, two-armed Maitreya Chapel, Mangyu. Photograph by 
Christiane Papa-Kalantari (CPO2 44,39 WHAV) 542 

Standing eight-armed Mafijusni, Village Stūpa, Mangyu. Photograph by 
Christiane Papa-Kalantari (CPo2 41,14 WHAV) 543 

Mandala of eight-armed Marijusri, Serkhang, Lalung. Photograph by Jaroslav 
Poncar (JP92 500,15 WHAV) 544 


LIST 


6.1 

13.1 
14.1 
16.1 


19.1 


19.2 


OF FIGURES AND TABLES 
Tables 


Two types of Turyātīta in the īPvv 164 

Developmental phases of the Navarātra 326 

The bijas as defined in the Šārikāstotra 360 

Deities of the Nine-Syllable Vidya 393 

A comparison of the number of verses in early and late texts on 
Hathayoga 457 

The Proliferation of post-fifteenth Hathayogic techniques 460 


XIII 


Notes on Contributors 


Diwakar Acharya 

is the Spalding Professor of Eastern Religions and Ethics at Oxford University, 
a fellow of All Souls College. Before succeeding Professor Sanderson at Oxford, 
he was a visiting lecturer and then associate professor of Indological Studies at 
Kyoto University (2006—2016), before which he held positions at Hamburg Uni- 
versity and Nepal Sanskrit University. His research covers a wide range of topics 
in Indian religious and philosophical traditions, Upanisadic studies, epigraphy, 
the early history of Nepal, ritual, and Sanskrit literature. Recent publications 
include Early Tantric Vaisnavism. Three Newly Discovered works of the Paficar- 
ātra: The Svayambhuvapaficaratra, Devamrtapancaratra and Astadasavidhana 
(Pondicherry, 2015), and a number of articles, such as “‘This world, in the begin- 
ning, was phenomenally non-existent’: Aruni’s Discourse on Cosmogony in the 
Chandogya Upanisad” ( Journal of Indian Philosophy 44.5, 2016). Acharya now 
also serves as editor-in-chief of the Journal of Indian Philosophy. 


Jason Birch 

(SOAS University of London) completed a first class honours degree in San- 
skrit and Hindi at the University of Sydney under Dr Peter Oldmeadow, and 
was then awarded a Clarendon scholarship to undertake a DPhil in Orien- 
tal Studies at Balliol College, University of Oxford, under the supervision of 
Professor Sanderson. His dissertation (submitted 2013) focused on the earliest 
known Rajayoga text called the Amanaska and included a critical edition and 
annotated translation of this Sanskrit work, along with a monographic intro- 
duction which examines the influence of earlier Saiva tantric traditions on the 
Amanaska, as well as the significance of the Amanaska in more recent yoga tra- 
ditions. Birch is currently a post-doctoral research fellow at soas University of 
London on the Hatha Yoga Project, which has been funded for five years by the 
ERC. His area of research is the history of physical yoga on the eve of colonial- 
ism. He is editing and translating six texts on Hatha and Rajayoga, and supervis- 
ing the work of two research assistants at the Ecole francaise d’ Extréme-Orient, 
Pondicherry. Birch has taught courses at soas and Loyola Marymount Univer- 
sity, and given seminars on the history of yoga at the Universita Ca’ Foscari in 
Venice, Italy and Won Kwang University in Iksan, South Korea. He also collab- 
orates with Jacqueline Hargreaves on TheLuminescent. 


NOTES ON CONTRIBUTORS XV 


Peter Bisschop 

is Professor of Sanskrit and Ancient Cultures of South Asia at Leiden Univer- 
sity. In 2004, after finishing his PhD at the University of Groningen under Hans 
Bakker, co-supervised by Harunaga Isaacson, he was offered the opportunity 
of spending a year in Oxford as a Junior Research Fellow at Wolfson College. 
During his spell at Oxford, he met on a weekly basis with Alexis Sanderson in 
All Souls College to discuss his ongoing work on the Pasupata tradition. In par- 
ticular he was able to read with him a draft of his critical edition of chapter 1 of 
Kaundinya's Parícarthabhasya, including a previously lost passage of Kaundi- 
nya's commentary on Pāšupatasūtra 1.37—39 on the basis of a newly identified 
manuscript from Benares. An edition and translation of this passage was pub- 
lished the year after in the Journal of Indian Philosophy, 33. In 2005 he was 
appointed Lecturer in Sanskrit Studies at the University of Edinburgh, where 
he remained until his move to Leiden in 2010 to take up the chair of Sanskrit. He 
has published extensively on different aspects of early Saivism, in particular the 
Pāšupatas and associated lay traditions, from his monograph Early Saivism and 
the Skandapurana: Sects and Centres (2004) to his contributions to the ongoing 
critical edition of the Skandapurana, as well as a new book entitled Univer- 
sal Šaivism: The Appeasement of All Gods and Powers in the Santyadhyaya of the 
Sivadharmasastra (Brill, 2018). He is also the editor-in-chief, with Jonathan Silk, 
of the Indo-Iranian Journal, and general editor of the Gonda Indological Stud- 
ies. 


Parul Dave-Mukherji 
is professor of Visual Studies and Art History at the School of Arts and Aes- 
thetics, Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi, India. She holds a DPhil from 
Oxford University, where she worked with Alexis Sanderson on a critical edition 
of the Citrasütra of the Visnudharmottara Purāņa from 1988—1991. Introduced 
to the rigour and intricacy of critically editing a text based on manuscripts, her 
work vindicated Sanderson's view that the earlier work by Priyabala Shah was 
far from being a critical edition. In 2001, her critical edition, The Citrasūtra of 
the Visnudharmottara Purāņa, was published by the Indira Gandhi National 
Centre for the Arts and Motilal Banarsidass, New Delhi. The sifpasastras and 
pre-modern Indian aesthetics remain important areas of research, along with 
modern/contemporary Indian/Asian Art. Dave-Mukherji has held fellowships 
atthe Clark Art Institute, Williamstown, USA; South Asia Institute, Heidelberg, 
Germany; British Academy fellowship, Goldsmiths' College, London; and Kun- 
sthistorisches Institut, Florence. Her recent publications include "Whither Art 
History in a Globalizing World" (The Art Bulletin 96.2, 2014); Arts and Aesthetics 
in a Globalizing World, co-edited with Ramindar Kaur (Bloomsbury, 2014); and 


XVI NOTES ON CONTRIBUTORS 


«Who is Afraid of Mimesis? Contesting the Common Sense of Indian Aesthetics 
through the Theory of Mimesis' or Anukaraņa Vāda” (in Indian Aesthetics and 
the Philosophy of Art, ed. Arindam Chakrabarti; Bloomsbury, 2016). Currently, 
she is co-editing, with Partha Mitter and Rakhee Balaram, a comprehensive his- 
tory of modern and contemporary Indian art in a volume entitled 20th Century 
Indian Art. 


Csaba Dezsó 

studied Classical Philology, History and Indology at Eótvós Loránd University, 
Budapest. After finishing his masters degrees (Latin Language and Literature 
and Indology), he went to Oxford in 1998 to study for a PhD under the supervi- 
sion of Professor Alexis Sanderson. He submitted his doctoral thesis in 2004, a 
critical edition and annotated translation of Bhatta Jayanta's Agamadambara, a 
satirical play about religious sects and their relations with the court in Kashmir 
around 900 CE. He then returned to Budapest and has been teaching Sanskrit 
since then at the Department of Indo-European Linguistics, Eótvós Lorand 
University. He has published, among others, first editions of fragments of San- 
skrit plays based on codices unici, as well as a new critical edition and English 
verse translation of Damodaragupta’s Kuttanimata, “The Bawd’s Counsel,” in 
collaboration with Dominic Goodall. Recently he has been working on the crit- 
ical edition of Vallabhadeva’s commentary on the Raghuvamša together with 
Dominic Goodall, Harunaga Isaacson and Csaba Kiss. 


Dominic Goodall 
began studies in Classics and German at Pembroke College, Oxford, before fin- 
ishing a BA in Sanskrit with Pali. After two years spent in Hamburg to learn 
medieval Tamil with S.A. Srinivasan, he returned to Oxford, to Wolfson Col- 
lege, where, under Alexis Sanderson’s guidance, he produced a critical edition 
of the opening chapters of Bhatta Ramakantha’s tenth-century commentary 
on the Kiranatantra, which he submitted as a doctoral thesis in 1995 and pub- 
lished from Pondicherry in 1998. He was attached to the French Institute of 
Pondicherry as a junior researcher in 1996—1997 before returning to Oxford as 
Wolfson Junior Research Fellow of Indology from 1998 to 2000. In 2000, he 
became a member of the Ecole francaise d' Extréme-Orient and was appointed 
Head of its Pondicherry Centre in 2002. For his habilitation, he submitted 
to Hamburg a first edition of the Parakhyatantra, which was later published 
from Pondicherry in 2004. Posted in Paris from 2011 to 2015, he gave lectures 
at the Ecole pratique des hautes études (Religious Sciences Section), at the 
invitation of Gerdi Gerschheimer, on Cambodian inscriptions in Sanskrit and 
on Saivism. Now back in Pondicherry, he continues to pursue his interests in 


NOTES ON CONTRIBUTORS XVII 


Sanskrit poetry (both Indian and Cambodian) and in the history of the Saiva- 
siddhanta. With Marion Rastelli, he co-edits the Viennese dictionary of tantric 
terminology, the Tāntrikābhidhānakoša. In May 2016, he was elected membre 
correspondent étranger de l’ Académie des Inscriptions et Belles-Lettres. 


Jürgen Hanneder 

studied Indology, Tibetology and Comparative Religion in Munich, Bochum, 
and Bonn, where he took his MA. His interest in the Šaiva traditions of Kashmir 
led him to Oxford, where he studied under the supervision of Alexis Sanderson. 
After completing his PhD in Indology in Marburg, and working as a research 
assistant in Bonn, he joined the Moksopaya Research Group initiated by Wal- 
ter Slaje in Halle. After some terms as substitute professor in Freiburg he fol- 
lowed his former teacher Michael Hahn to the chair of Indology in Marburg in 
2007. The main areas of his research interests are within classical and modern 
Sanskrit literature, i.e. poetry, religious and philosophical literature, including 
Indo-Tibetan studies and occasional excursions into neighboring fields, as for 
instance the names of lotuses ("The Blue Lotus. Oriental Research between 
Philology, Botany and Poetics?” ZDMG 152.2 [2002]: 295-308), and a study of 
Indian crucible steel, which has played an important role for the modern steel 
industry (Der “Schwertgleiche Raum’. Zur Kulturgeschichte des indischen Stahls; 
Stuttgart: Franz Steiner Verlag, 2005). Current larger projects include August 
Wilhelm Schlegel als Indologe and The Minor Works of Sahib Kaul. 


Shaman Hatley 

completed an interdisciplinary liberal arts degree at Goddard College (1998), 
and then studied Indology and Religious Studies at the University of Pennsyl- 
vania. He completed his doctorate on the Brahmayamala and Saiva yoginī cults 
in 2007 under the direction of Harunaga Isaacson. In 2003 and 2006, he had 
the opportunity to read the Brahmayamala with Professor Sanderson while a 
visiting student at Oxford, a formative scholarly experience that was crucial to 
his doctoral project. He taught at Concordia University, Montréal, from 2007 to 
2015, and is now an associate professor of Asian Studies and Religious Studies 
at the University of Massachusetts Boston. His research mainly concerns early 
Tantric Saivism, goddess cults, and yoga, and he regularly contributes to the 
Tantrikabhidhanakosa. Recent publications include The Brahmayamalatantra 
or Picumata, Volume 1: Chapters 1—2, 39—40, & 83. Revelation, Ritual, and Material 
Culture in an Early Šaiva Tantra (Pondicherry, 2018). 


XVIII NOTES ON CONTRIBUTORS 


Gergely Hidas 

started a DPhil in Oriental Studies under the supervision of Alexis Sander- 
son at Balliol College, University of Oxford, in 2002, after earlier studies in 
Budapest. The revised version of his doctoral thesis, on a principal scripture of 
Buddhist dharani literature, Mahapratisara-Mahavidyarajni, The Great Amulet, 
Great Queen of Spells, was published in New Delhi in 2012. Between 2007 and 
2012 he held research and teaching positions at Eótvós Loránd University, 
Budapest, and thereafter contributed to the Cambridge Sanskrit Manuscripts 
Project, an Oxford medieval sources project, and the Vienna Viscom project, 
and was also was awarded a research grant by the Hungarian Academy of Sci- 
ences. In 2013—2014 he was appointed as Khyentse Fellow at the Centre for Bud- 
dhist Studies, Eótvós Loránd University. Since 2014, he has had a postdoctoral 
affiliation with the British Museum in the ERC Synergy project “Asia Beyond 
Boundaries: Religion, Region, Language and the State," where, among other 
forthcoming publications, he is finalizing a book manuscript entitled Vajra- 
tundasamayakalparaja, a Buddhist Ritual Manual on Agriculture. 


Harunaga Isaacson 

was born in Kuma, Japan, in 1965; he studied philosophy and Indology at the 
University of Groningen, and was awarded a PhD in Sanskrit in 1995 by the 
University of Leiden for a thesis on the early Vaisesika school of philosophy 
(1995). From 1995—2000 he was a Post-doctoral Research Fellow in Sanskrit at 
the Oriental Institute, Oxford University. After holding teaching positions at 
Hamburg University (2000-2002) and the University of Pennsylvania (2002— 
2006), he was appointed Professor of Classical Indology at Hamburg University 
in 2006. He has been a Visiting Fellow at All Souls College, Oxford, and is a 
member of the Akademie der Wissenschaften in Hamburg. His main areas of 
study are: tantric traditions in pre-13th-century South Asia, especially Vajrayana 
Buddhism; classical Sanskrit belles-lettres (kavya); classical Indian philosophy; 
and Purāņic literature. 


Csaba Kiss 
began his doctoral studies at the University of Oxford under the supervision 
of Professor Alexis Sanderson in 2003. After defending his thesis, a critical 
edition of selected chapters of the Matsyendrasamhitā, he worked at ELTE Uni- 
versity, Budapest, as a research assistant. From 2008 to 2010, he was member 
of the Early Tantra Project, conducting research on the Brahmayamala, since 
published as The Brahmayamalatantra or Picumata, Volume 11. The Religious 
Observances and Sexual Rituals of the Tāntric Practitioner: Chapters 3, 21, and 
45 (Pondicherry, 2015). He has since been taking part in a number of research 


NOTES ON CONTRIBUTORS XIX 


projects: writing entries for the Tāntrikābhidhānakoša, contributing to the edi- 
tion of Vallabhadeva's Raghuparicika led by Dominic Goodall and Harunaga 
Isaacson, and contributing to research on jātis, as well as to digitization of 
Gupta-era inscriptions within the ERC Project “Beyond Boundaries.” 


James Mallinson 

met Alexis Sanderson at an open day for prospective undergraduates at the 
Oriental Institute in Oxford in 1987. As a result of this meeting he changed his 
choice of course to Sanskrit. As an undergraduate he had Professor Sanderson 
as his essay tutor. Mallinson was not always the most diligent of students, so 
was delighted when Professor Sanderson agreed to supervise his doctoral stud- 
ies at Oxford, which he started in 1995. His doctoral thesis was a critical edition 
and annotated translation of the Khecarividya, an early text on hathayoga. After 
receiving his doctorate, Mallinson worked as a principal translator for the Clay 
Sanskrit Library for six years. In 2013 he became Lecturer in Sanskrit and Clas- 
sical Indian Studies at soas, University of London. Since his doctorate he had 
continued to work on unpublished materials on yoga, often reading his working 
editions with Professor Sanderson, and in 2015 Mallinson was awarded an ERC 
Consolidator Grant for a five-year project on the history of hathayoga. Among 
the members of the project team is Jason Birch, another former doctoral stu- 
dent of Professor Sanderson, and the team have continued to work closely with 
him. Among Mallinson’s publications is Roots of Yoga (Penguin Classics, 2017), 
an anthology of translations of texts on yoga, including several by Professor 
Sanderson and his former students, together with a detailed analysis of the his- 
tory of yoga and its practices. 


Libbie Mills 

teaches Sanskrit and Pali at the University of Toronto. She completed her doc- 
torate under Alexis Sanderson’s supervision at Oxford University in 20n. Her 
principal research interest is in South Asian architectural theory and practice. 
Her work on the architectural instruction given in the early Saiva installation 
manuals (pratisthatantras) of North India features the first exposition of these 
texts’ contents. By examining extant buildings in light of texts, her research 
introduces new tools for dating, which are valuable for these as well as other 
sources. Her textual study has since expanded to cover domestic and temple 
building practices up to the modern period, in both South Asia and its dias- 
pora. She is currently engaged in two research projects: “The Nagara Tradition 
of Temple Architecture: Continuity, Transformation, Renewal,” funded by the 
Leverhulme Trust, and “Tamil Temple Towns: Conservation and Contestation,” 
funded by the Arts and Humanities Research Council. 


XX NOTES ON CONTRIBUTORS 


Nina Mirnig 

undertook her studies at the Oriental Institute at Oxford University. She first 
met Alexis Sanderson during the second year of her undergraduate course 
when joining an MPhil reading class in 2002. His inspiring teaching and the 
insights he offered into the fascinating world of Saiva Tantrism prompted her 
to do her BA special paper in this field. She continued her post-graduate studies 
under his supervision on the topic of the socio-religious history and develop- 
ment of Saiva tantric cremation rites (antyesti) and post-mortuary ancestor 
worship (sraddha). Upon completing her DPhil in 2010, she continued to work 
on early Saiva religious history in an Nwo-funded project on the composition 
and spread of the Skandapurana under the direction of Hans Bakker. After a 
Jan Gonda Fellowship at the International Institute for Asian Studies in Lei- 
den and briefly joining an AHRC project on the manuscript collections at the 
University Library in Cambridge, under the direction of Vincenzo Vergiani, she 
moved to her current position at the Institute for the Cultural and Intellectual 
History of Asia at the Austrian Academy of Sciences. In addition to the early 
Saiva tantric traditions, her research now concerns early Saiva lay traditions, a 
critical edition of Sivadharmasastra 1-5 and 9, and the cultural history of early 
medieval Nepal, with special focus on the Sanskrit Licchavi inscriptions. 


John Nemec 

is Associate Professor of Indian Religions and South Asian Studies at the Uni- 
versity of Virginia. He earned his PhD from the University of Pennsylvania 
(2005), an MPhil degree in Indian Religions from Oxford University, an MA in 
Religious Studies from the University of California at Santa Barbara, and a BA 
in Religion and Classics from the University of Rochester. At Oxford, he worked 
extensively with Alexis Sanderson in the course of completing his MPhil degree 
and thesis, most notably in the form of weekly private tutorials on Saiva litera- 
ture in Sanskrit, which Alexis generously offered every academic term for two 
full years. Nemec again profited from Alexis’s boundless generosity as a visiting 
doctoral student, when he once more read Sanskrit with him at All Souls Col- 
lege in the Trinity Term of 2002. His publications include The Ubiquitous Siva: 
Somananda’s Sivadrsti and His Tantric Interlocutors (Oxford University Press, 
2011). 


Srilata Raman 
is Associate Professor of Hinduism at the University of Toronto and works on 
medieval South Asian/South Indian religion, devotionalism (bhakti), histori- 
ography and hagiography, religious movements in early colonial India from 
the South, as well as modern Tamil literature. Her areas of interest are Tamil 


NOTES ON CONTRIBUTORS XXI 


and Sanskrit intellectual formations from late medieval to early colonial peri- 
ods, including the emergence of nineteenth-century socio-religious reform and 
colonial sainthood. Her publications include Se/f-Surrender (Prapatti) to God in 
Srivaisnavism. Tamil Cats and Sanskrit Monkeys (Routledge, 2007). 


Isabelle Ratié 

is Professor of Sanskrit Language and Literatures at the Sorbonne Nouvelle Uni- 
versity (Paris). She defended her doctoral thesis in 2009 at the Ecole pratique 
des hautes études after reading about two thirds of Abhinavagupta’s I$vara- 
pratyabhijnavimarsint in Oxford under Alexis Sanderson’s guidance (2005- 
2006). She has published several monographs on Saiva and Buddhist philoso- 
phies (Le Soi et l’Autre. Identité, différence et altérité dans la philosophie de la 
Pratyabhijra, Leiden: Brill, 2011, Weller Prize 2012; Une Critique bouddhigue du 
Soi selon la Mimamsa, Vienna: Austrian Academy of Sciences, 2014; and with 
Vincent Eltschinger, Self; No-Self; and Salvation. Dharmakirti’s Critique of the 
Notions of Self and Person, Vienna: Austrian Academy of Sciences, 2013). She 
has also coedited with Eli Franco the collective volume Around Abhinavagupta. 
Aspects of the Intellectual History of Kashmir from the Ninth to the Eleventh Cen- 
tury (Berlin: LIT Verlag, 2016). She is currently editing and translating recently 
discovered fragments of Utpaladeva's lost Vivrti on the Īsvarapratyabhijūā trea- 
tise, and she is working with Vincent Eltschinger, Michael Torsten Much and 
John Taber on a translation of Dharmakīrti's Pramanavarttika 1 (the section on 
apoha). 


Bihani Sarkar 

completed her BA (First Class) in English from St. Hilda's College, Oxford, then 
undertook an MPhil in Classical Indian Religions and a DPhil in Sanskrit (Ori- 
ental Studies) from Wolfson College, Oxford, both under the supervision of 
Alexis Sanderson. Her doctoral thesis, now the book Heroic Shaktism (Oxford 
University Press, 2017), is a history of the rise and spread of the cult of Durga 
between the ard and the uth centuries CE and its influence on heroic ideol- 
ogy and the rising Indian kingdom. She was a Nachwuchsinitiative Postdoctoral 
Fellow in Hamburg University from 2012—2014, and a British Academy Postdoc- 
toral Fellow at Oxford University from 2014—2017. She is presently a Teaching 
Fellow in South Asian Religions at Leeds University and Associate Member of 
Christ Church College, Oxford. She is working on her second book, on the sub- 
ject of grief and lamentation in kāvya. 


XXII NOTES ON CONTRIBUTORS 


Pēter-Ddniel Szántó 

began his studies at ELTE Budapest, where he received diplomas in Tibetology 
in 2004 and in Indology in 2006. He first met Alexis Sanderson at his depart- 
ment in 2002, where he held a week-long intensive reading of Abhinavagupta. 
These sessions were so inspirational that Szántó decided to apply to Oxford, 
where he was successful in joining in 2006 with the help of Csaba Dezsó, 
thus becoming both the sisya and prašisya of Sanderson. His doctoral thesis, 
defended in 2012, was on the Catuspitha, an early Buddhist Yoginītantra. After 
being a Junior Research Fellow at Merton College, Oxford, and then having a 
ten-month stipend in Hamburg, Szántó returned to Oxford as a Post-doctoral 
Research Fellow at All Souls College, thus having the enormous pleasure and 
privilege of spending many splendid dinners with Sanderson. He is currently a 
postdoctoral fellow at Leiden University in the Open Philology project. Most of 
Szántó's publications deal with the literature of esoteric or tantric Buddhism 
in India, but he has also authored papers on poetics, epigraphy, and material 
culture. His latest publication, "Mahasukhavajra's Padmāvatī Commentary on 
the Sixth Chapter of the Candamaharosanatantra: The Sexual Practices of a 
Tantric Buddhist Yogi and His Consort" ( Journal of Indian Philosophy 46), was 
co-authored with Samuel Grimes. Szántó is currently working on the editio 
princeps of the Sarvabuddhasamāyogadākinījālašamvara, a project featuring 
much input and inspiration from the man we celebrate in this volume. 


Ryugen Tanemura 

is an associate professor of Buddhist studies and classical Indology at Taisho 
University, Tokyo, Japan. After having been educated at the University of Tokyo, 
he went to Oxford in 1997, where he did his doctoral research on tantric Bud- 
dhism under the supervision of Professor Sanderson for five years. He took 
his DPhil in classical Indology at the University of Oxford (2003). After post- 
doctoral research at the University of Tokyo and some other institutions, he 
began his current position in 2014. His main research field is Indian tantric 
Buddhism, and he has authored many works in this area, including Kuladatta’s 
Kriyāsamgrahapaīijikā: A Critical Edition and Annotated Translation of Selected 
Sections (Groningen: Egbert Forsten, 2004) and Kriyasamgraha of Kuladatta, 
Chapter 7 (Tokyo: Sankibo, 1997). His recent publications include critical edi- 
tions of Šūnyasamādhivajra's Mrtasugatiniyojana, a manual of the Indian Bud- 
dhist tantric funeral, and chapters 1 (part), 13 (part), 19, and 22 (pratistha sec- 
tion) of the Padmini, a commentary on the Samvarodayatantra by Ratnaraksita 
(chapters 1 and 13, in collaboration with Kazuo Kano and Kenichi Kuranishi). 


NOTES ON CONTRIBUTORS XXIII 


Judit Tūrzsēk 

completed an Ma in Indic Studies at ELTE University, Budapest, and then con- 
tinued her studies at the University of Oxford in 1993, where she was funded by 
the George Soros Foundation to do research on Abhinavagupta under Professor 
Sanderson’s supervision. In 1994, having received the Domus Senior Scholar- 
ship at Merton College, she started working on the Siddhayogesvarimata for her 
DPhil, supervised by Sanderson. The years spent in Oxford under his guidance 
determined the course of her research, which has focused on the early history 
of yogini cults ever since. After postdoctoral research fellowships at Emmanuel 
College, Cambridge, and at the University of Groningen (supervised by Profes- 
sor Hans Bakker), she was elected Associate Professor (maitre de conférences) 
in 2001 at the University Charles-de-Gaulle Lille 111 in France, and professor 
(directeur d' études) at the Ecole pratique des hautes études (EPHE) in 2018. 
She defended her Habilitation in 2011, at the Ecole pratique des hautes études 
(Religious Studies Section), entitled The Yogini Cult and Aspects of Saivism in 
Classical India, supervised by Professor Lyne Bansat-Boudon. She regularly con- 
tributes to the dictionary of Hindu tantric terminology (Tantrikabhidhanakosa, 
Austrian Academy of Sciences, Vienna) and participates in the Skandapurana 
Project (Leiden-Kyoto). In addition to papers on various aspects of Saivism and 
the early yoginī cult, she has also published on epigraphy, Tamil Šaiva devo- 
tional poetry, and classical Sanskrit literature. 


Anthony Tribe 
is an independent scholar working in the field of Indian tantric Buddhism, and 
at present a senior fellow of the Center for Buddhist Studies at the University 
of Arizona, Tucson. He received his doctorate in Indian Buddhism from Oxford 
in 1995. Subsequently, he taught in the Asian Studies program at the Univer- 
sity of Montana, Missoula, USA. In Oxford, his doctoral thesis on Vilāsavajra's 
Nāmamantrārthāvalokinī was supervised by Professor Sanderson. He remem- 
bers with deep gratitude and much warmth the personal tutoring, encour- 
agement and friendship he received from him during that time. Many after- 
noons and evenings were spent in Professor Sanderson's study at his home 
in Eynsham: learning how to read manuscripts and produce critical editions; 
exploring Vilasavajra's tantric Buddhism; and being fed before catching a late 
bus back to Oxford. He remembers too the infectiousness of Professor Sander- 
son's enthusiasm and commitment, his humour, looking after his house and 
cat, the clatter of the keyboard on his early, tiny-screened but magical, Apple 
Macintosh computer, and the kindness of being given the use of it while he 
was on sabbatical for a term lecturing in Paris. Dr. Tribe is also a fellow of the 
Royal Asiatic Society, and his publications include Tantric Buddhist Practice in 


XXIV NOTES ON CONTRIBUTORS 


India: Vilāsavajras commentary on the Manjusri-namasamgiti. A critical edition 
and annotated translation of Chapters 1-5 with introductions, and (as co-author) 
Buddhist Thought: a complete introduction to the Indian tradition, both pub- 
lished by Routledge. At present he lives in Tucson, Arizona, with two cats and 
too many books. He tries to keep cool in the summer. 


Christopher D. Wallis 

holds a BA (magna cum laude) in Religion and Classics from the University of 
Rochester, an Ma in South Asian Studies from U.C. Berkeley, an MPhil in Classi- 
cal Indian Religions from Oxford, and a PhD in South Asian Studies (Sanskrit) 
from U.C. Berkeley. His doctoral dissertation of 2014 focuses on the role of reli- 
gious experience in the traditions of Tantric Saivism, and is entitled “To Enter, 
to Be Entered, to Merge: The Role of Religious Experience in the Traditions of 
Tantric Shaivism." He has studied with Professor Sanderson formally and infor- 
mally at Oxford, Leipzig, Kyoto, and Portland. He is currently a freelance scholar 
lecturing internationally and a guest lecturer at Naropa University in Boulder, 
Colorado. 


Alex Watson 

completed his Ba in Philosophy and Psychology (Oxford), and Ma in Hindi, 
Hinduism and Indian Philosophy (soas, University of London), before return- 
ing to Oxford to complete an MPhil in Classical Indian Religions. After this, 
he began his DPhil under Alexis Sanderson's supervision on the Saiva thinker, 
Bhatta Ramakantha 11, and his arguments against the Buddhist doctrine of no- 
self. Following a postdoctoral fellowship at Wolfson College, he taught Sanskrit 
at St James’ School, London, and then held short-term visiting appointments at 
the University of Vienna and Kyushu University, Japan. He was associated with 
the EFEO, Pondicherry, for a number of years, and was Preceptor in Sanskrit at 
Harvard University before taking up his present position as Professor of Indian 
Philosophy at Ashoka University. He is author of The Self's Awareness of Itself 
(2006) and, with Dominic Goodall and Anjaneya Sarma, An Enquiry Into the 
Nature of Liberation (2013), as well as several articles in the Journal of Indian 
Philosophy and Philosophy East and West. 


A Note on Alexis Sanderson and Indology 


Dominic Goodall and Harunaga Isaacson 


On the occasion of the Symposium organised by Srilata Raman and Shaman 
Hatley in Toronto in March 2015, Harunaga Isaacson was given the gratifying 
but also daunting task of delivering a eulogy of Alexis Sanderson. This note is 
only very slightly based on what we, Dominic Goodall and Harunaga Isaacson, 
remember of the speech given on the occasion, since it was in large part extem- 
porised from skeletal notes, and since it contained jokes and science-fictional 
scenarios that worked well in the telling, but that proved hard to commit to 
writing without losing their intended flavour. 

Born in 1948, G.J.S. Sanderson later chose to be known as Alexis because he 
liked the name and was known by it by friends in Greece. His early education, 
at the Royal Masonic School for Boys in Bushey, a no-frills charitable boarding 
school where bromide was said to be administered in the boys’ tea, was fol- 
lowed by undergraduate years at Balliol College, Oxford, where he took degrees 
in Classics (1969) and Sanskrit (1971). He then spent a large part of a six-year 
period in Kashmir, studying with the scholar and Saiva guru Swami Lakshman 
Joo, during which time he was simultaneously Domus Senior Scholar at Merton 
College (1971 to 1974) and then Platnauer Junior Research Fellow at Brasenose 
College (1974 to 1977). 

Despite not having taken a doctorate, he was appointed University Lecturer 
in Sanskrit and Fellow at Wolfson College in 1977, where he remained until he 
became Spalding Professor of Eastern Religions and Ethics at All Souls College 
in 1992. He never got around to taking a doctoral degree, or indeed to finish- 
ing any book-length publication in that period, partly because he was so busily 
occupied with teaching all manner of Sanskrit texts to students of every level. 
As a by-product of his projected thesis on the little-read and still unpublished 
Yonigahvara, he had in fact produced a grammar of aiša language, in other 
words of the sorts of irregular Sanskrit encountered in the Nepalese palm-leaf 
manuscripts that transmit many tantras. But that grammar has not seen the 
light of day. Looked at in this light, his career is reminiscent of a 19th-century 
tradition of scholarship, where recognition depended less on publications, cita- 
tions and the acquisition of degrees. 

A few months after the Toronto Symposium in Alexis’s honour, one of the 
two authors of this preface, Dominic Goodall, and perhaps several others of 
the contributors too, found himself in the strange position of being asked by an 
American administrative authority to supply a letter of reference for his own 


XXVI GOODALL AND ISAACSON 


tutor. The letter perhaps now gathers dust in some bureaucratic archive, but we 
can now aptly quote its first two paragraphs in this note: 


I had the great good fortune to begin my studies of Sanskrit at Oxford 
under Alexis Sanderson in 1988. At that time, he had the post of Univer- 
sity Lecturer in Sanskrit, a rare achievement because he had not taken a 
doctorate, and had then published rather little: a couple of reviews (1985), 
one ground-breaking article on “Purity and Power among the Brahmins 
of Kashmir” (1985)—an article so compact that it seemed like a tightly 
compressed book—and one article for “general readers”. This last had few 
references, since it was intended as an overview, in an encyclopedia of 
the world’s religions, of “Saivism and the Tantric Traditions” (1988). Clear 
and very readable, this article remains, twenty-seven years later, the best 
overview there is of a huge subject, covering a broad range of largely still 
unpublished early medieval literature for the first time, and providing, 
again for the first time, a model of how the various parts of the vast and 
complex corpus were related and hierarchized by followers of a major cur- 
rent of Indian religion. 

His “lectures” at that time were really more like intensive reading 
classes, which sometimes seemed to take place round the clock, with stu- 
dents often filing in to his room for one class just as others filed out from 
another, and they were for me the most intellectually exciting events I 
attended at Oxford. I had come up to study Greek, Latin and German in 
the autumn of 1986, but decided to switch to Sanskrit after the first pub- 
lic exam, in 1988, so I had had 5 terms of lectures and weekly tutorials on 
Homer, Virgil, Ovid, Plato and the like behind me. From the settled cer- 
tainties of centuries of classical scholarship on a relatively small corpus, 
I had moved to a literary universe with few well-founded editions, few 
published translations and annotations in European languages and seem- 
ingly endless questions. Classes were therefore essential, and although 
there were other learned teachers in Oxford at the time who were well- 
read in certain genres, it was “Mr. Sanderson" whom everybody acknowl- 
edged to have the broadest reach, and who therefore was called upon to 
teach whatever was required in the genres of philosophy, courtly poetry, 
exegesis of traditional Indian law or indeed any sort of technical com- 
mentary.! Because there was so often no time between classes, there was 
presumably never much time to prepare; but preparation never seemed 


1 In the realm of classical Sanskrit literature, a notable exception here was the technical liter- 
ature of traditional grammar, for which we were fortunate to have the guidance of Dr. James 


A NOTE ON ALEXIS SANDERSON AND INDOLOGY XXVII 


necessary. We, the students, would attempt to render a line of a given text, 
and Mr. Sanderson would interrupt, constantly, with explanations to set 
us right where we were going wrong. Nearly every word called for com- 
ment or explanation of knowledge that needed to be taken into consider- 
ation: details of manuscript-transmission, issues of text-criticism, seman- 
tic flavours not recorded in dictionaries, particle-usage not recorded in 
grammars, essential religious or historical context not described in pub- 
lished secondary literature, and so forth. This might all sound rather dry, 
but it was delivered with humour, verve, plenty of eye-contact, a rich and 
well-chosen vocabulary and an evident delight in teaching. And it always 
zipped by so fast, provoking further questions along the way, that it could 
never all be noted down. In short, it was thrilling. So much so, that after 
two years of post-graduate study in Hamburg, I decided in 1992 that there 
was no alternative as interesting to me as returning to Oxford with a doc- 
toral theme consciously chosen to be of potential interest to the same 
teacher. 


In the interim, Alexis had become Professor Sanderson, having acquired the 
Spalding chair for Eastern Religions and Ethics at Oxford’s most prestigious 
college. There was, in consequence, a marked change in teaching style. The 
lectures were now magisterial, theme-oriented, weekly talks on aspects of his 
chosen field: early medieval religion, focusing on the history of Saivism, its rela- 
tions with the state, and its influence on Buddhism and Vaisnavism. And they 
were well-attended events, taking place around a very long dining table in the 
Wharton Room of All Souls College. Each week, there would be a substantial 
and beautifully typeset hand-out giving passages of often unpublished materi- 
als,? and each week several of us gathered naturally together to discuss it after- 
wards over lunch at Wolfson College, for it was there that several of the throng 
of new doctoral students were enrolled, or over tea in the crypt of the Univer- 
sity Church. It was in this period, because he was at last less rushed than he had 
been as a lecturer, that Alexis Sanderson entered his first phase of prolific writ- 
ing, to begin publishing his many discoveries. To date, his work has appeared 
exclusively in articles, although several of them run into hundreds of pages and 
are actually book-length studies, accepted nonetheless in journals and volumes 
of essays because of their truly exceptional quality and importance. 


Benson, who first introduced me to Sanskrit and painstakingly began to reveal the complex- 
ities of the thought of Panini. Rereading this letter, Iam prompted to add that I am of course 
grateful to him and to all of my other teachers too. 

2 Some of these hand-outs are now available online for download from Alexis Sanderson’s 
academia.edu page. 


XXVIII GOODALL AND ISAACSON 


His most celebrated piece is perhaps "The Saiva Age—The Rise and Domi- 
nance of Saivism during the Early Medieval Period” (2009), an “article” of more 
than 300 pages that bears in fact upon all the classical religions of India, and 
not just upon Saivism. Among his other outstanding articles we may mention 
just two that might be said to have revolutionised different fields of study that 
were not in fact at the centre of Alexis Sanderson’s scholarly interests. The first 
is “The Saiva Religion among the Khmers. Part 1” of 2004, which covers fully 
114 pages of the large-format Bulletin de V Ecole francaise d'Extréme-Orient. This 
paper has much of importance to say about how Saivism may be defined and 
how it has manifested itself in different regions, but it is also essential read- 
ing for historians of medieval Cambodia and other parts of South East Asia, by 
whom it is much quoted. The second, in length a more conventional article of 
just 18 pages, is entitled “Vajrayana: Origin and Function” (1994); this proposes 
a new paradigm for the understanding of Tantric Buddhism and has therefore 
relaunched a vigorous debate among scholars of Buddhism about the relations 
between Saivism and Buddhism. 

As stated above, these articles are in fact peripheral to Alexis Sanderson’s 
abiding central focus of interest, the work of India’s most famous tantric 
thinker, the prolific polymath Abhinavagupta, who lived in Kashmir at the 
turn of the first millennium, where he produced a corpus of rich, difficult and 
influential Sanskrit works on poetry, theatre, aesthetics, theology, ritual and sal- 
vation. In 2015 Alexis Sanderson retired from the Spalding professorship and 
since then has been able at long last to concentrate exclusively on the most 
celebrated work of this seminal thinker, the vast and complex “Light on the 
Tantras” (Tantrāloka), working on a critical edition of the text, with an anno- 
tated English translation and a detailed commentary? 

In other words, the work that Alexis is currently engaged in is the culmi- 
nation of a lifetime of research on Abhinavagupta's place in Indian thought 
and the diverse Šaiva and Šākta traditions that informed his Šaivism and are 
in varying degrees subsumed within it. His other contributions to our under- 
standing of Indian intellectual history, dazzling though they may be, are mostly 
the offcuts and side-products of his preoccupation with this literary giant. Since 
"retiring" he has now been able to write up his prodigious knowledge about 
what has for him always been the "central story” 


3 Inspite of its fame and in spite of its being the focus of numerous scholars' work over the 
last century, only one translation of the Tantrāloka into a European language has ever been 
completed, that of Raniero Gnoli. 


A NOTE ON ALEXIS SANDERSON AND INDOLOGY XXIX 


We do not always find excellence in research combined with excellence 
in teaching. But Alexis's career as a teacher has been extraordinary too. Tes- 
timony to the truly exceptional gualities of Alexis Sanderson as an inspiring 
teacher may be found by looking around the universities of India, Europe, 
North America and Japan where his students have been employed; they are not 
clustered together in one academic fiefdom, but have spread widely abroad and 
attained international recognition as scholars in a range of subjects from classi- 
cal Indian theatre to the history of yoga. They include, for example, Jason Birch, 
Parul Dave, Csaba Dezső, Paul Gerstmayr, Dominic Goodall, Jürgen Hanneder, 
Gergely Hidas, Madhu Khanna, Csaba Kiss, Nina Mirnig, John Nemec, Srilata 
Raman, Isabelle Ratié, Péter-Dániel Szánto, Judit Tórzsók, Somadeva Vasudeva, 
James Mallinson, Ryugen Tanemura, Joel Tatelman, Anthony Tribe, and Alex 
Watson. 

We have mentioned Alexis's reading-classes and his impressively rich lec- 
tures, but what many of his direct students may remember bestare interactions 
with him in tutorials. He tended to offer aspiring doctorands many hours of 
extremely helpful criticism and coaching for the first year or so, and then, when 
he judged them capable of working more independently, he would nudge the 
doors of opportunity half-closed and so encourage them to get on with their 
work by themselves. Once they were thus launched, they would be invited to 
deliver a lecture in his graduate research seminar, an experience which many 
will remember as both daunting and exhilarating, requiring the victims to give 
of their very best before an audience of fellow students along with Alexis and 
Harunaga Isaacson, typically seated to their right and left, at whom they would 
be casting furtive glances to search for their reactions! 

Alexis is something of a raconteur when the mood takes him, imitating 
the accents and mannerisms of the cast that people his narrations, and so we 
tended to learn unwritten snippets of history about other indologists from him. 
One annual occasion was particularly propitious for this. Professor Gombrich 
used to mark the end of the summer term, and so of the academic year, with 
a lunch in his garden, after which several of us would walk to the churchyard 
of St. Mary's in Kidlington to visit the grave of another former Boden Professor 
of Sanskrit, Thomas Burrow. This never failed to call forth a string of reminis- 
cences of Alexis, beginning with something about Professor Burrow himself, 
but leading often to Professor Brough and others. 

The above paragraphs recall Alexis's interactions with students who spent 
years at Oxford. But there were also many others who came for only short 
periods or whose interactions were only or largely epistolary and upon whose 
work Alexis nevertheless had an important influence. Those who have received 
Alexis's immense letters, typically packed with quotations from unpublished 


XXX GOODALL AND ISAACSON 


Sanskrit texts marshalled to demonstrate ideas, doubts and conclusions, will 
know just how extraordinarily rich and useful they are. In some well-known 
cases, they have provided invaluable evidence for the recipients’ books. Parts of 
David Gordon White's The Alchemical Body, for instance, or Frederick Smith’s 
The Self Possessed, or François Grimal's edition of Harihara’s commentary on 
the Malatimadhava, are heavily indebted to lengthy letters from Alexis. 

In a bygone age, it might have been appropriate to gather together in one 
publication all Alexis's Kleine Schriften, or all his published work, as was done 
just over a century ago for another illustrious thinker whose work helped 
shaped knowledge both of Indian and Cambodian history, namely Auguste 
Barth, the first volume of whose complete Guvres was published in 1914. But 
unless and until the internet implodes, such an endeavour seems unneces- 
sary: Indologists throughout the world have PDF copies of Alexis's published 
works, a list of which is appended to the end of this preface. A collection of 
his many fascinating letters would be a boon, but gathering and editing them 
seems impracticable, and we hope that Alexis will himself continue publishing 
such discoveries as they document, as well as others, in the publications that 
he continues to work on today. 

What we hope and expect instead is that the papers gathered in this volume 
will reveal some of the many ways in which Alexis has been influential, their 
authors showing us in the mirrors of their own bright intellects some reflec- 
tions of the radiance, the prakasa, of Alexis Sanderson. 


Bibliography of the Published Works of Alexis 
G.J.S. Sanderson (1983-2019) 


2015 


2013 


2019 


2015 


2014 


2013 


2010 


2009 


2007 


Books 


(in collaboration with Dominic Goodall, Harunaga Isaacson, Diwakar Acharya 
et al.) The Nisvāsatattvasamhitā: The Earliest Surviving Saiva Tantra. Collection 
Indologie 128/Early Tantra Series 1. Pondicherry: Institut francais de Pondich- 
éry/Ecole française d'Extréme-Orient/Asien-Afrika Institut, Universitat Ham- 
burg. 

(in collaboration with Jūrgen Hanneder and Stanislav Jager) Ratnakanthas Sto- 
tras: Sūryastutirahasya, Ratnasataka und Sambhukrpamanoharastava. Indolog- 
ica Marpurgensia 5. Miinchen: Kirchheim Verlag. 


Articles 


“How Public was Saivism?” In Tantric Communities in Context, edited by Nina 
Mirnig, Marion Rastelli, and Vincent Eltschinger, pp. 1-46. Sitzungsberichte 
der philosophisch-historischen Klasse 899; Beitrāge zur Kultur- und Geistes- 
geschichte Asiens 99. Vienna: Austrian Academy of Sciences Press, 2019. 
"Tolerance, Exclusivity, Inclusivity, and Persecution in Indian Religion During 
the Early Mediaeval Period” In Honoris Causa: Essays in Honour of Aveek Sarkar, 
edited by John Makinson, pp. 155-224. London: Allen Lane. 

“The Saiva Literature” Journal of Indological Studies (Kyoto) 24 & 25 (2012- 
2013), 2014: pp. 1-113. 

“The Impact of Inscriptions on the Interpretation of Early Saiva Literature.” 
Indo-Iranian Journal 56 (2013): pp. 211-244. https://doi.org/10.1163/15728536-135 
60308. 

“Ritual for Oneself and Ritual for Others.” In Ritual Dynamics and the Science 
of Ritual, vol. 11: Body, Performance, Agency, and Experience, edited by Angelos 
Chaniotis et al., pp. 9-20. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz Verlag, 2010. 

“The Saiva Age—The Rise and Dominance of Saivism during the Early Medieval 
Period.’ In Genesis and Development of Tantrism, edited by Shingo Einoo, pp. 41- 
349. Tokyo: University of Tokyo, Institute of Oriental Culture. 

“Atharvavedins in Tantric Territory: The Angirasakalpa Texts of the Oriya Paip- 
paladins and their Connection with the Trika and the Kalikula, with criti- 
cal editions of the Parajapavidhi, the Paramantravidhi, and the *Bhadrakālī- 


XXXII 


2007 


2007 


2006 


2006 


2005 


2004 


2004 


2001 


1995 


1995 


BIBLIOGRAPHY OF THE PUBLISHED WORKS OF ALEXIS SANDERSON 


mantravidhiprakarana” In The Atharvaveda and its Paippalāda Šākhā: Histor- 
ical and Philological Papers on a Vedic Tradition, edited by Arlo Griffiths and 
Annette Schmiedchen, pp. 195-311. Geisteskultur Indiens: Texte und Studien, 
n, Indologica Halensis. Aachen: Shaker Verlag. 

"The Saiva Exegesis of Kashmir" In Mélanges tantrigues à la mémoire d'Hélène 
Brunner/Tantric Studies in Memory of Héléne Brunner, edited by Dominic 
Goodall and André Padoux, pp. 231-442 and 551-582 (bibliography). Collec- 
tion Indologie 106. Pondicherry: Institut Francais d'Indologie/École francaise 
d' Extrēme-Orient. 

«Swami Lakshman Joo and His Place in the Kashmirian Šaiva Tradition” In 
Samvidullāsah: Manifestation of Divine Consciousness. Swami Lakshman Joo, 
Saint-Scholar of Kashmir Shaivism, edited by Bettina Bāumer and Sarla Kumar, 
pp. 93-126. New Delhi: D.K. Printworld. 

"The Date of Sadyojyotis and Brhaspati” Cracow Indological Studies 8 (2006): 
PP. 39-91. 

"The Lākulas: New evidence of a system intermediate between Pāticārthika 
Pāšupatism and Agamic Šaivism” Ramalinga Reddy Memorial Lectures, 1997. 
The Indian Philosophical Annual 24 (2006): pp. 143-217. 

“A Commentary on the Opening Verses of the Tantrasara of Abhinavagupta.” 
In Samarasya: Studies in Indian Arts, Philosophy, and Interreligious Dialogue 
in Honour of Bettina Bäumer, edited by Sadananda Das and Ernst Fūrlinger, 
pp. 89148. New Delhi: D.K. Printworld. 

“Religion and the State: Saiva Officiants in the Territory of the Brahmanical 
Royal Chaplain (with an appendix on the provenance and date of the Netratan- 
tra). Indo-Iranian Journal 47 (2004): pp. 229—300. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10783 
-005-2927-y 

"The Saiva Religion Among the Khmers, Part 1” Bulletin de l'Ecole française 
d'Extréme-Orient, go—91 (2003-2004): pp. 349-463. https://doi.org/10.3406/bef 
e0.2003.3617 

«History through Textual Criticism in the study of Saivism, the Paficaratra and 
the Buddhist Yoginitantras.” In Les Sources et le temps. Sources and Time: A 
Colloquium, Pondicherry, 11-13 January 1997, edited by Francois Grimal, pp. 1- 
47. Collection Indologie 91. Pondicherry: Institut Français de Pondichéry/Ecole 
Frangaise d’ Extréme-Orient. 

“Meaning in Tantric Ritual.” In Essais sur le Rituel 111: Colloque du Centenaire de 
la Section des Sciences religieuses de V Ecole Pratique des Hautes Études, edited by 
A.-M. Blondeau and K. Schipper, pp. 15-95. Bibliothéque de l'École des Hautes 
Études, Sciences religieuses c11. Louvain-Paris: Peeters. 

“Vajrayana: Origin and Function” In Buddhism into the Year 2000. International 
Conference Proceedings, pp. 89-102. Bangkok and Los Angeles: Dhammakaya 
Foundation. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY OF THE PUBLISHED WORKS OF ALEXIS SANDERSON XXXIII 


1995 


1992 


1990 


1986 


1985 


2015 


2009 


1988 


1987 


1987 


1987 


1987 


"The Sarvāstivāda and its Critics: Anātmavāda and the Theory of Karma” In 
Buddhism into the Year 2000. International Conference Proceedings, pp. 33-48. 
Bangkok and Los Angeles: Dhammakāya Foundation. 

"The Doctrine of the Mālinīvijayottaratantra” In Ritual and Speculation in Early 
Tantrism. Studies in Honour of André Padoux, edited by T. Goudriaan, pp. 281- 
312. Albany: State University of New York Press. 

"The Visualization of the Deities of the Trika” In L'image divine: Culte et médi- 
tation dans l'hindouisme, edited by A. Padoux, pp. 31-88. Équipe de recherche 
n? 249: “L’hindouisme: textes, doctrines, pratiques." Paris: Éditions du Centre 
National de la Recherche Scientifique. 

«Mandala and Agamic Identity in the Trika of Kashmir" In Mantras et Dia- 
grammes Rituelles dans l'Hindouisme, edited by Andre Padoux, pp. 169-214. 
Équipe de recherche n? 249: “L’ hindouisme: textes, doctrines, pratiques." Paris: 
Éditions du Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique. 

“Purity and Power among the Brahmans of Kashmir" In The Category of the Per- 
son: Anthropology, Philosophy, History, edited by M. Carrithers, S. Collins and 
S. Lukes, pp. 190-216. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 


Reference Articles 


«Šaiva Texts” In Brill's Encyclopedia of Hinduism, Volume vt: Index, edited by 
Knut A. Jacobsen, pp. 10-42. Handbuch der Orientalistik. Zweite Abteilung, 
Indien 22/6. Leiden and Boston: Brill. 

"The Hinduism of Kashmir" published as the entry "Kashmir" in Brill's Ency- 
clopedia of Hinduism, Volume 1: Regions, Pilgrimage, Deities, edited by Knut 
A. Jacobsen, pp. 99-126. Handbuch der Orientalistik. Zweite Abteilung, Indien 
22/1. Leiden and Boston: Brill. 

«Šaivism and the Tantric Traditions" In The World's Religions, edited by S. Su- 
therland, L. Houlden, P. Clarke and F. Hardy, pp. 660—704. London: Routledge 
and Kegan Paul, 1988. Reprinted in The World's Religions: The Religions of Asia, 
edited by F. Hardy, pp. 128—172. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1990. 
«Šaivism in Kashmir.” In The Encyclopedia of Religion, vol. 13, edited by Mircea 
Eliade, pp. 16—17. New York: Macmillan Publishing Company. 

“Trika Saivism” In The Encyclopedia of Religion, vol. 13, edited by Mircea Eliade, 
pp. 15-16. New York: Macmillan Publishing Company. 

«Krama Šaivism” In The Encyclopedia of Religion, vol. 13, edited by Mircea Eli- 
ade, pp. 14—15. New York: Macmillan Publishing Company. 

"Abhinavagupta” In The Encyclopedia of Religion, vol. 13, edited by Mircea Eli- 
ade, pp. 8-9. New York: Macmillan Publishing Company. 


XXXIV BIBLIOGRAPHY OF THE PUBLISHED WORKS OF ALEXIS SANDERSON 
Reviews 


2002 “Remarks on the Text of the Kubjikāmatatantra” Indo-Iranian Journal 45 (2002): 
pp. 1-24. https://doi.org/10.1163/000000002124994513 

1990 Review of: “Paul Eduardo Muller-Ortega, The Triadic Heart of Šiva: Kaula Tantri- 
cism of Abhinavagupta in the Non-Dual Shaivism of Kashmir. SUNY Series in the 
Shaiva Traditions of Kashmir. Albany, N.Y.: State University of New York Press, 
1989.” Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies 53 (1990): pp. 354—357. 
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0041977X00026355. 

1985 Review of: “N.R. Bhatt, Matangaparamesvaragama (Kriyapada, Yogapada et 
Caryāpāda), avec le commentaire de Bhatta Ramakantha. Edition critique. Col- 
lection Indologie 65. Pondichéry: Institut Frangais de l'Indologie, 1982; Idem: 
Rauravottarāgama. Édition critique, introduction et notes. Collection Indologie 
66. Pondichéry: Institut Francais de l'Indologie, 1983." Bulletin of the School 
of Oriental and African Studies 48 (1985): pp. 564—568. https://doi.org/10.1017/ 
$0041977X00038714. 

1983 Review of: "Lilian Silburn, Sivasütra et Vimaršinī de Kgemarāja. (Études sur le 
Sivaisme du Cachemire, École Spanda.) Traduction et introduction. Publications 
de l'Institut de Civilisation Indienne, Série in-8%, Fasc. 47. Paris: Institut de Civil- 
isation Indienne, 1980. (Distribution: Diffusion E. De Boccard, 11 Rue de Médi- 
cis, Paris vie.).” Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies 46 (1983): 
pp. 160—161. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0041977X00077673. 


Introduction 


Dominic Goodall, Shaman Hatley, Harunaga Isaacson 
and Srilata Raman 


Academic study of Asia’s tantric traditions has blossomed in recent decades. 
Once dismissed as marginal, or unworthy of serious attention, we now under- 
stand the Saiva, Buddhist, Vaisnava, and Jaina tantric traditions as integral to 
the religious and cultural landscapes of medieval South, Southeast, Central, 
and East Asia. This shift, which is reshaping the historiography of medieval 
India, is in no small measure due to the magisterial contributions of Alexis 
G.J.S. Sanderson, Fellow of All Souls College and Spalding Professor of Eastern 
Religion and Ethics at Oxford University, from 1992-2015, and now Emeritus 
Fellow of All Souls College. The present book is a collection of essays in his hon- 
our, written by specialists of the various fields he has influenced from around 
the world, most of whom were his students at Oxford. 

The twenty-three chapters of this volume span multiple fields of Indology. 
Organized around the theme of “Saivism and the Tantric Traditions,” the essays 
are nonetheless diverse in method, historical context, and source material. 
Hinting at Alexis Sanderson’s own scholarly breadth, the essays here assembled 
span the history, ritual, and philosophies of Saivism and Tantric Buddhism, 
Vaisnavism, religious art and architecture, and Sanskrit belles-lettres. Together, 
they represent a significant contribution to our understanding of the cultural, 
religious, political, and intellectual histories of premodern South and South- 
east Asia. Most of the contributions are original studies of primary sources of 
the tantric traditions, reflecting Sanderson’s relentless commitment to philol- 
ogy and the discovery of new sources. The essays have been grouped into five 
parts, within which they appear more or less chronologically, according to sub- 
ject matter. Part 1 concerns early Saiva traditions: the pre-tantric Saivism of the 
Atimarga, as well as the Nisvasatattvasamhita, perhaps the earliest surviving 
Saiva tantra. The essays of part 2 concern Saiva and Buddhist exegetical and 
philosophical traditions. Part 3 brings together studies on the topics of religion, 
polity, and social history, while part 4 (“Mantra, Ritual, and Yoga”) concerns 
religious practices. Part 5's essays on art and architecture complete the vol- 
ume. Naturally, the five parts of this book overlap somewhat, and several essays 
would be at home in more than one. 

The volume's first chapter, by Peter Bisschop, bears the title “From Mantra- 
mārga back to Atimarga: Atimārga as a Self-referential Term” Following the 
publication of Alexis Sanderson’s groundbreaking article "Saivism and the Tan- 


© DOMINIC GOODALL ET AL., 2020 | D01:10.1163/9789004432802 002 


This is an open access chapter distributed under the terms of the CC BY-NC 4.0 license. 


2 GOODALL ET AL. 


tric Traditions” (1988), the division of Šaivism into Atimārga and Mantramārga 
has become commonplace among students of Šaivism. Atimārga in this classi- 
fication refers to the ascetic path associated with the Pasupatas and Lakulas, 
while Mantramarga refers to the ‘higher’ tantric path with its various sub- 
divisions. Bisschop’s paper first of all observes that this division represents a 
purely Mantramarga perspective on Saivism, for so-called ‘Atimarga sources’ 
seemingly do not use the term Atimarga. The main part of the paper then draws 
attention to a passage from an unpublished ca. twelfth-century Mahatmya of 
Varanasi that does uniquely use the term in what may be called an Atimarga 
context. The passage in question centers on Vārāņasīs cremation ground and 
Bhairava's teachings and activities there. The passage on the one hand attests 
to the existence of a strong Atimarga community in Varanasi around the time 
of the text's composition, but also to the transmission and knowledge of the 
Svacchanda there. It also testifies to the fact that the views on what constituted 
Saivism in early-medieval India differed across different Saiva traditions and 
that much of our modern understanding derives from specific textual tradi- 
tions that only represent one layer within a much broader spectrum of religion 
oriented around the worship of Siva. 

Chapter 2, by Judit Tórzsók, addresses the question, “Why are the Skull- 
Bearers (Kapalikas) Called Soma?" One of the alternative names by which 
pre-tantric Kapalikas or 'Skull-Bearers' were referred to in classical India was 
"Those Who Profess the Soma Doctrine" or simply "Soma People" (somasi- 
ddhāntavādin, somajana). The word Soma also appears regularly as the last 
part of their initiation name. Tórzsók's chapter explores what this appella- 
tion could have meant for the Kapalikas according to period sources, includ- 
ing inscriptions, puranic and dramatic literature, without arriving at a defini- 
tive answer. First, it is argued that the later derivation sa-Umā ('accompanied 
by Umā') is probably to be rejected, for female initiates also bore the name 
-Soma. Second, the appellation is also unlikely to refer to the vedic Soma, 
for Kapalikas were not commonly known to perform vedic sacrifices. It is 
possible that the name Soma may derive from the name of their legendary 
founder, Somašarman, but it may have had additional connotations. It may 
also have referred to the moon and its whiteness (evoking the whiteness of the 
ashes of the cremation ground or of human bones), the nectar of immortal- 
ity (amrta) the moon is supposed to contain (immortality being a main goal 
of all power-seekers), or any nectar, such as alcohol, regularly used in Kapa- 
lika worship. Finally, given the polysemy of the word, it could also be under- 
stood to mean “the best,” implying that the Kapalikas, just as other Saivas, 
considered themselves to follow the best way that leads to power and final 
release. 


INTRODUCTION 3 


Chapter 3, by Dominic Goodall, is entitled “Dressing for Power: on vrata, 
caryā, and vidyāvrata in the Early Mantramarga, and on the Structure of the 
Guhyasūtra of the Nisvāsatattvasamhitā” One of several meanings proposed 
by Monier-Williams for the term vrata is "a religious vow or practice,” which 
has led to the widespread tendency to translate vrata with “vow,” thus call- 
ing to mind a web of partly alien ideas about promised religious undertakings 
that culminate in offerings made ex voto suscepto, upon attainment of one’s 
desired end. A better approximation is perhaps “timed religious observance.” 
This paper attempts to address the question “What is a vrata?” by attempt- 
ing to uncover how the notion is used and understood in early works of the 
Mantramarga, in particular the sūtras of the Nisvāsatattvasamhitā. In doing so, 
it touches upon the layered composition of the Guhyasutra. The early history of 
the term caryā (in the tetrad jriana, kriyā, carya and yoga) is also illuminated, 
as well as the use of the expressions vidyavrata, purascarya and purvaseva. 


Part 2 contains five chapters concerned with Saiva and Buddhist philosophi- 
cal and exegetical traditions. Chapter 4, by Alex Watson, discusses where pre- 
cisely the self-theory (atmavada) of Bhatta Ramakantha r1—the most prolific 
and influential of the early Saiva Siddhanta exegetes (c. 950-1000)—should 
be placed in the nexus of other rival positions. Its relation to the self-theory of 
Ramakantha's Buddhist and Naiyayika interlocutors is considered, and so too in 
passing to that of the Sankhyas and the non-dualistic Saivas. A previous article 
(Watson 2014) places Ramakantha's Saiddhantika view in the middle ground 
between Nyāya and the momentariness theory (ksanikavada) of the Buddhists. 
The present chapter adds a number of considerations that, while not invalidat- 
ing the ‘middle ground thesis, show it to be one-sided and incomplete. Some of 
these considerations weigh in favour of seeing it as just as 'extreme' as Nyaya; 
others in favour of seeing it as more extreme than Nyaya. The conclusion con- 
siders whether and how these varying perspectives can be integrated. 

Chapter 5, by Isabelle Ratié, is entitled "Some Hitherto Unknown Fragments 
of Utpaladeva's Vivrti (11): Against the Existence of External Objects." As Ratié 
highlights, Utpaladeva's detailed commentary (the Vivrti or Tika) on his own 
Īsvarapratyabhijūā treatise was certainly the most innovative text of the Pra- 
tyabhijfia corpus; unfortunately, however, to date we only have access to frag- 
ments of this work, as first discovered by Raffaele Torella. This chapter is part of 
aseries of papers by Ratié devoted to the edition, translation and explanation of 
shorter fragments of the Vivrti found in the margins of manuscripts containing 
Abhinavagupta's commentaries on Utpaladeva’s treatise. The paper deals with 
fragments of the Vivrti on verses 1.5.6—9, which argue against the Sautrantikas' 
thesis that we must infer the existence of a reality external to consciousness in 


4 GOODALL ET AL. 


order to account for phenomenal variety. In these fragments Utpaladeva shows 
not only that, as already emphasized by the Vijhanavadins, postulating the exis- 
tence of an external world is of no use in the realm of everyday practice, and 
that an external object must have contradictory properties whether it is under- 
stood as having parts or not, but also that the very act of mentally producing 
the concept (and therefore the inference) of an external object is in fact impos- 
sible to perform, because an object by nature alien to consciousness is simply 
unthinkable. 

Chapter 6, by Christopher D. Wallis, is entitled “Alchemical Metaphors for 
Spiritual Transformation in Abhinavagupta’s [svarapratyabhijnavimarsini and 
Īsvarapratyabhijūāvivrtivimaršinī” In this essay, Wallis examines an alchemi- 
cal metaphor for spiritual transformation found in Abhinavagupta’s two com- 
mentaries on the /svarapratyabhijnakarika of Utpaladeva. Analyzing this trope 
provides insight into Abhinavagupta’s innovative usages of the key terms sama- 
vega, turya, and turyātīta. Additionally, the essay considers his homology of 
the fivefold self—Void, prana, the subtle body consisting of the mind and its 
faculties (puryastaka), and physical body, plus the transindividual Power of 
Awareness (citi-Sakti)—with the five phases of lucidity: the states of waking, 
dreaming, deep sleep, the transcendental 'fourth' state, and the state 'beyond 
the fourth' (turyatita). As Wallis shows, these passages in the two different 
commentaries do not entirely agree, and both present textual problems. His 
provisional conclusion is that Abhinavagupta seems to change and develop his 
view in the time between the two commentaries: the Vimarsini features a sim- 
pler model of a gnostic transcendentalist turya succeeded by an ‘immanentist’ 
yogic turyatita (the latter being marked by the transcendent element's perva- 
sion of all that was previously transcended), while the Vivrtivimaršinī proposes 
two distinct versions of both turya and turyātīta, gnostic and yogic, respectively 
(yielding four categories in total), where the yogic is to be preferred despite be- 
ing more gradual because in it the samskāras of dualistic experience are finally 
dissolved. Wallis' analysis of these problems gives us a deeper understanding 
of Abhinavagupta's thought, and points us in some intriguing directions. 

Chapter 7, by Péter-Dániel Szántó, is entitled “On Vagisvarakirti’s Influence 
in Kashmir and Among the Khmer" In this essay, Szántó seeks to elucidate 
the role and importance of an early eleventh-century Buddhist scholar, Vàg- 
īsvarakīrti, far from his homeland in Eastern India. The first part examines a 
passage showing that, probably still during his lifetime, he was considered an 
important opponent by a Kashmirian scholar, Ratnavajra. The debate in ques- 
tion comcerns the validity of the so-called Fourth Initiation. The second part of 
Szántó's essay advances the hypothesis that, although not mentioned by name, 
Vagisvarakirti is referred to in a Khmer inscription from the same century. 


INTRODUCTION 5 


Chapter 8, by Srilata Raman, is entitled "Reflections on the King of Ascetics 
(Yatiraja): Rāmānuja in the Devotional Poetry of Vedanta Dešika” This paper 
is concerned with examining one specific hagiographical genre within the 
Srivaisnava tradition—the praise-poem addressed to the ācārya, in this case 
Rāmānuja. It looks in detail at two of these poems, one in Tamil and the 
other in Sanskrit. These are "The 100 Antati Verses on Ramanuja" (Iramanuja 
Nurrantati) of Tiruvarankattamutanar, one of the earliest hagiographical/sto- 
tra works we have at hand on Rāmānuja, and Vedanta Dešika's “The Seventy 
Verses on the King of Ascetics” (Yatirāja Saptatih). Analysing the main motifs 
of these poems as traceable to the Tamil devotional poetry of the Alvars, the 
paper also demonstrates that a central motif within the poems contributes to 
a reconsideration of prapatti doctrine in the post-Ramanuja period, leading to 
the idea that “love for the ācārya” (acaryabhimana), and, in the most extreme 
case, belief in Ramanuja's prapatti, is itself sufficient for salvation. The analysis 
of the stotra literature on Ramanuja here, by no means exhaustive but rather 
illustrative of the formative phase of doctrine, also reinforces a central con- 
tention of this paper: that devotional poetry composed not just by the alvars 
but also by later the ācāryas is central —as central as commentaries and inde- 
pendent works—to the evolution of Šrīvaisņava doctrine. 


The essays of part 3 concern various aspects of religion, the state, and the 
social history of premodern India. Chapter 9, by Csaba Dezsó, is entitled *Not 
to Worry, Vasistha Will Sort it Out: The Role of the Purohita in the Raghuvamša” 
This essay examines the various tasks Vasistha fulfils in the Raghuvamša as the 
royal chaplain of the kings of the Sūryavamša. As Dezsó shows, these are in 
harmony with the standards laid down in the Arthasastra, from officiating at 
life-cycle ceremonies to empowering and defending the king and his army with 
the help of Atharvavedic mantras. Vasistha also acts as the king's mentor and 
chief advisor who tries to reason against Aja's overwhelming grief, placing the 
interests of the dynasty before the king's private emotions. These verses of the 
Raghuvamša invite comparison with a passage in A$vaghosa's Buddhacarita in 
which the chaplain and the minister try to persuade the bodhisattva to return 
to the palace and to carry out his role as the heir to the throne. 

Chapter 10, by Gergely Hidas, is entitled "Buddhism, Kingship and the Pro- 
tection of the State: The Suvarņaprabhāsottamasūtra and Dhāraņī Literature” 
Hidas's essay focuses first on the ritual core of the Suvarnaprabhasottamasütra, 
which represents the ritual establishment of the state's protection as an act 
of mutual benefit to the Buddhist Sangha and the monarch. The essay then 
explores how this theme appears in some examples of dharani literature from 
the first half of the first millennium. It is shown that offering safeguard for 


6 GOODALL ET AL. 


rulers and their realms is a long-established practice in South Asian Buddhism, 
one that perdures up to modern times, while there have been a variety of incan- 
tation scriptures available for such purposes. 

Chapter n, by Nina Mirnig, is entitled “Adapting Saiva Tantric Initiation 
for Exoteric Circles: Lokadharmiņī Diksa and Its History in Early Medieval 
Sources.” The article investigates the history and scope of usage of the term 
lokadharmiņī dīksā, one of the most accessible and mainstream-conforming 
classes of Šaiva tantric initiation. In essence, this category denotes a form of 
initiation that allows the practitioner to maintain his exoteric register of reli- 
gious practice (the lokadharma), in this context the brahmanical mainstream. 
As such, it is contrasted with the sivadharmini diksa, which operates on purely 
Saiva ritual and soteriological premises. The terminology of the lokadharmint 
diksà was used in different initiation-classification schemes, reflecting differing 
and evolving ways of negotiating the interface between initiatory and exoteric 
practices among different Šaiva tantric groups throughout the early medieval 
period. By tracing the shifting history of the lokadharmini diksa terminology in 
pre-twelfth century Šaiva tantric sources, the article points to the complexities 
of interpretation of terminology relating to initiatory categories. 

In chapter 12, John Nemec investigates "Innovation and Social Change in 
the Vale of Kashmir, circa 900-1250 C.E.” This essay addresses the nature of 
social and religious change by examining the ways in which they are negotiated 
in the writings of selected post-scriptural Šaiva authors of the Kashmir Val- 
ley. Nemec argues that the writings of Somananda (ca. 900-950), Utpaladeva 
(ca. 925-975), Abhinavagupta (ca. 975-1025), and Jayaratha (early 13th C.E.) 
evince a self-consciously constructed, emic theory of scriptural authority and 
social conduct that exemplifies what the author contends should be taken as 
a maxim in the study of South Asian religions and religion more generally— 
namely, that change is not inimical to religion, even if particular religious agents 
are not infrequently inimical to change. Envisioning a layered hierarchy of 
authoritative scriptural sources, both Vedic and Tantric, these authors deemed 
otherwise proscribed religious and social practices permissible in their particu- 
lar contexts; yet, because they promoted novel practices only as modifications 
to otherwise universally applicable social strictures, the changes they autho- 
rized were necessary incremental in nature, which Nemec suggests is in fact 
the normative pattern for social change in premodern South Asia. In doing so, 
he argues that the complex model of scriptural authority exemplified in this 
emic theory challenges Sheldon Pollock's characterization of the relationship 
of theory (astra) to practice (prayoga) as monolithic and simple in premodern 
South Asia. The essay concludes by sketching the implications of this study for 
our understanding of Indian religions, and for religion tout court. 


INTRODUCTION 7 


Chapter 13, by Bihani Sarkar, is entitled “Toward a history of the Navarā- 
tra, the autumnal festival of the Goddess.” This essay provides a chronological 
chart of the development of the Navaratra, the Nine Nights festival of the God- 
dess. Drawing on Sanderson’s work on the Orissan Mahanavami traditions of 
Bhadrakali and ritual descriptions outlined in Sanskrit sources, Sarkar iden- 
tifies four phases in the trajectory of the Navarātra, as it grew into the pre- 
eminent political rite for authorizing and creating royal power. These were: 
an early Vaisnava rite in the monsoon, its incorporation of a pre-established 
Brahmanical military tradition in Agvina, its expansion into a ten day affair 
and inclusion of tantric rituals for powers (siddhis) in East India, and the 
growth later of the distinctive Southern and Western Navaratras. Tamil sources 
of uncertain date, however, add complexity to this picture. 


Part 4 of this book contains six essays on various aspects of religious praxis, 
including yoga. In chapter 14, “Sarika’s Mantra,” Jiirgen Hanneder studies the 
tantric deity Sarika, who is worshipped in the form of a large stone on the 
“Sarika Peak” or Pradyumna Peak in Srinagar. Hanneder examines several rit- 
ual texts that describe the iconography and worship of this goddess, includ- 
ing her mantra. In the seventeenth century the Kashmirian author Sahib Kaul 
wrote a Stotra devoted to Sarika, in which her mantra is given in the style of 
a mantroddhara, that is with code words, so that the “sounds” of the mantra 
need not be explicitly uttered. This chapter contains an edition and trans- 
lation of this text and an analysis, which shows that Sahib Kaul's version of 
the mantra of Sarika strangely fails to accord with most other sources of this 
mantra. 

Chapter 15, by Diwakar Acharya, is entitled “The Kamasiddhistuti of King 
Vatsaraja.” In this chapter, Acharya presents an edition and translation of the 
previously unpublished Saiva Kamasiddhistuti attributed to Maharajadhiraja 
Vidyadharacakravartin Vatsaraja, who can perhaps be identified with King Vat- 
sarāja of the Gurjara-Pratihara dynasty (c. 775—805A.D.), the father of Mahara- 
jādhirāja Nagabhata 11 (805—833A.D.). As a pūjāstuti, this text guides its reciter 
through the mental or actual worship of Goddess Nitya Sundarī, of whom 
the poet is a devotee. He invokes the goddess as Mahešvarī and Gauri, but 
concedes that some call her Laksmi and Para Prakrti. As Acharya shows, the 
poet appears unaware of the systems of nine, eleven, or sixteen Nityas, which 
are worshipped in the traditions of the Nityakaula, Manthanabhairava, and 
Vamakesvara Tantras, respectively. Rather, the author is aware of only one 
Nitya, who is simply called Sundari and is installed as Nitya Sundari at the altar 
of worship in the centre of the mandala, without a consort, independent and 
supreme. 


8 GOODALL ET AL. 


Chapter 16, by Shaman Hatley, is entitled “The Lotus Garland (padmamala) 
and Cord of Power (Saktitantu): The Brahmayamala’s Integration of Inner and 
Outer Ritual.” This essay examines the relationship between "ritual" and “yoga” 
in the Brahmayamala, a voluminous early tantra whose place in the history of 
Saivism was first identified by Professor Sanderson (1988). The early history of 
Saiva yoga remains inadequately studied, and foundational early sources such 
as the Nisvasatattvasamhita and Brahmayamala diverge widely in their tech- 
nical vocabulary and conceptions of the body. The focus of this essay is the 
explication of the Brahmayamala's manner of integrating inner and outer rit- 
ual processes, both of which have their basis in a system of Nine Lotuses and 
Nine Knots (granthi) strung together by the “cord of power" (Saktitantu, šak- 
tisūtra). In analysing this unique system, the essay examines a number of key 
issues, including the role of visualization in ritual, mantra-installation (nyasa), 
the body's subtle channels (nadt) and knots (granthi), and shifting conceptions 
of the relationship between knowledge ( jitāna) and ritual action (Kriya). 

Chapter 17, by James Mallinson, is entitled "The Amrtasiddhi: Hathayoga's 
Tantric Buddhist Source Text” The unpublished circa eleventh-century Amrta- 
siddhi is the oldest text to teach any of the principles and practices that came 
to distinguish the hatha method of yoga practice taught in later Vaisnava and 
Saiva manuals, such as the Dattātreyayogašāstra and Hathapradīpikā. Many of 
its central teachings have no precedents in earlier texts: the yogic body with the 
moon situated at the top of the central channel dripping amrta and the sun at 
its bottom consuming it; the three physical techniques that make up the text's 
central practice (mahamudra, mahabandha and mahavedha); the four stages of 
the practice (arambha, ghata, paricaya and nispatti); the principle that bindu or 
semen is the most important vital constituent and hence that its preservation 
is paramount; and the principle that the mind, breath and bindu are connected, 
so that controlling one controls the others. These are then repeated, often ver- 
batim, in almost all subsequent hatha texts. The Amrtasiddhi has been the 
subject of only one previous study, an article by Kurtis Schaeffer (2004), which 
analyses the text as found in a bilingual (Sanskrit and Tibetan) manuscript that 
probably dates to the twelfth century CE. Schaeffer, because of some seem- 
ingly non-Buddhist teachings in the text, in particular those on jivanmukti, 
understands it to be a Šaiva work. This paper however, shows that some of its 
teachings are specifically Buddhist, and concludes that the text was composed 
in a Buddhist milieu and that later Indian and Nepalese manuscripts of the text 
either misunderstood its Buddhist features or deliberately removed or changed 
them. 

Chapter 18, by Csaba Kiss, is entitled "A Sexual Ritual with Maya in Matsye- 
ndrasamhità 40” The Matsyendrasamhitā, a 13th-century South Indian Kubji- 


INTRODUCTION 9 


ka-Tripura-oriented tantric yoga text of the Sadanvayasambhava tradition, de- 
scribes a unique sexual ritual in its 4oth chapter. Kiss analyses sigificant ambi- 
guities therein, in addition to providing an edition and annotated translation 
of the relevant passages. The chapter recommends that the yogin have sex- 
ual encounters with (human) yoginīs, while avoiding pāšavī (uninitiated?) 
women, but devotes most of its attention to a ritual with Maya, a rather ambigu- 
ous female. Is she an imagined goddess (Kundalini?) or an uninitiated woman 
of low birth? Is the sexual act visualized or ‘real’? Kiss argues that these ambi- 
guities may be deliberate. The ambiguity between actual sex and visualization 
reflects the tension between sexuality and asceticism manifest in the frame 
story of the Matsyendrasamhitā, a unique version of the legend of Matsyen- 
dra and Goraksa. While possibly echoing or quoting older tantric texts con- 
taining descriptions of sexual rituals, the redactors of the Matsyendrasamhitā 
were perhaps transitioning towards ascetic or brahmacarya-oriented teach- 
ings. As a result, Kiss argues, they came up with an obscure variant on the 
figure of the tantric yoginī: Maya, first described as a phantom, resembling 
a goddess visualized in worship, then also takes part in an actual sexual rit- 
ual. 

Chapter 19, by Jason Birch, is entitled *Hathayoga's Floruit on the Eve of Colo- 
nialism” The aim of this article is to provide a framework for examining the 
textual sources on Hathayoga that were composed from the sixteenth to eigh- 
teenth centuries. After a brief introduction to the early history of Hatha- and 
Rajayoga, the main section of the article focuses on the salient features of the 
late literature on Hathayoga by dividing the texts into two categories; extended 
works’ and 'compendiums: The extended works expatiate on Hathayoga as it 
was formulated in the Hathapradipika, whereas the compendiums integrate 
teachings of Hathayoga within a discourse on yoga more generally conceived. 
Both etic categories include scholarly and practical works which, when read 
together in this way, reveal significant changes to the praxis and theory of 
Hathayoga on the eve of colonialism. The article concludes with a brief dis- 
cussion on the regional distribution of the literature of Hathayoga during 
this period and how the codification of its praxis and theory appears to have 
diverged in different regions. 


The papers of part 5 concern religious art and architecture. Chapter 20, by Lib- 
bie Mills, is entitled "The Early Saiva Matha: Form and Function” We are not 
told a great deal in the early Saiva textual record about the practicalities of 
life inside the matha. In this chapter, Mills seeks to find a way into the topic 
by looking at the physical structure of the buildings. Drawing on materials 
that include instructions for building, the essay considers the designs given 


10 GOODALL ET AL. 


for the construction of the matha, and what those designs might tell us of 
what took place inside. The paper aims to add to the exploration of the matha 
treated to great effect by Tamara Sears.! 

Chapter 21, by Ryugen Tanemura, concerns "The Kriyāsamgrahapafijikā of 
Kuladatta and its Parallels in the Saiva Pratisthatantras.” As Sanderson demon- 
strates in “The Saiva Age: The Rise and Dominance of Saivism During the Early 
Medieval Period” (2009), tantric Buddhism devised a number of ceremonies 
in the domain of public religion following the Saiva models, such as consecra- 
tion (pratistha) and funeral rites (antyesti). Tantric Buddhist manuals called 
mandalavidhis teach the details of these public social rituals. These manu- 
als closely resemble the Saiva Pratisthatantras and Paddhatis. Among these, 
the Kriyasamgrahapanjika of Kuladatta, most probably written in the Kath- 
mandu valley in the eleventh century C.E., is particularly rich in information, 
as are also the Vajrāvalī of Abhayakaragupta and the Acaryakriyasamuccaya 
of Jagaddarpana or Darpanacarya. The purpose of this paper is to present var- 
ious Saiva parallels in the Kriyasamgrahapafijika, especially textual parallels 
between the nimittokti section of the Kriyasamgrahaparijikà and the Salyo- 
ddhārapatala of the Devyāmata, a Šaiva Pratisthātantra. The relevant sections 
and chapters of these two texts concern the topic of how to find and remove 
extraneous substances (salya) underground during the rituals in order to avoid 
the calamities which they may cause. Tanemura also presents as an appendix a 
preliminary edition and translation of a section of the Acaryakriyasamuccaya 
called Bhüsalyasutrapatananimittavidhi; this also contains some parallels with 
the Kriyasamgrahaparijika and the Devyamata. 

Chapter 22, by Anthony Tribe, concerns “Mafijusri as Adibuddha: The Iden- 
tity of an Eight-armed Form of Mañjuśrī Found in Early Western Himalayan 
Buddhist Art in the Light of Three Namasamgiti-related Texts" This chap- 
ter examines the identity of an eight-armed form of Mafijusri found in early 
western Himalayan Buddhist art (11th-13th centuries). This figure is found 
most prominently in the Sumtsek (Gsum-brtsegs, "Three-Storeyed") temple 
at Achi, Ladakh where, as a mural, it is the central deity of a mandala. Its 
position on the top storey, suggesting that it is the figure of highest status in 
the temple's iconographic programme, has long puzzled scholars. Less well- 
known are two other examples of this figure: a mural in the chapel of the 
two-armed Maitreya at Mangyu, Ladakh, and a clay figure in the Golden Temple 
or Serkhang (Gser-khang) at Lalung, Spiti. Based on descriptions of the fig- 


1 Tamara I. Sears, Worldly Gurus and Spiritual Kings, Architecture and Asceticism in Medieval 
India (New Haven and London: Yale University Press, 2014). 


INTRODUCTION 11 


ure in three Namasamgiti-related texts—the Ākāšavimala of Mafijusrimitra, 
the *Sadhanaupayika (Sgrub pai thabs) of Agrabodhi, and the Namamantra- 
rthāvalokinī of Vilasavajra— Tribe argues that the figure should be identified 
as (Mafijušrī in the form of) the Adibuddha and not Mafijusri as a bodhisattva. 
The authors of these three texts comprise some of the earliest commentators 
on the Namasamgiti (also known as the Manjusrinamasamgiti), and share a 
concern to promote Mafijušrī by placing him, as the Adibuddha, at the heart 
(both literally and metaphorically) of Mahavairocana in an adaptation of the 
yogatantra Vajradhatu-mahamandala. 

Chapter 23, by Parul Dave-Mukherji, is entitled "Life and Afterlife of Sādrsya: 
Revisiting the Citrasūtra through the Nationalism-Naturalism Debate in Indian 
Art History” This essay revisits the Citrasūtra, a seminal section on painting 
from the Visnudharmottarapurana, in the light of key concerns around the cul- 
tural politics of art historiography, the sastra-prayoga debate, and the related 
question of interpretative frames to study traditional Indian art. The last con- 
cern has lately come to the forefront in the context of postcolonial studies 
and global art history. If the former is critical of intellectual parasitism, the 
latter pushes postcolonial thought to explore 'native' interpretative frames to 
study pre-modern Indian art. This paper attempts to complicate the search 
for alternative frameworks by underlining gaps and slippages that surround 
the meaning of terms in the given text and their modern appropriation. To 
this end, it traces a genealogy of a term, sadrsya, from the $ilpasastric lexicon 
through its twentieth-century reception in art-historical discourse. How does a 
term acquire an afterlife when it enters into the force field of reinterpretation 
steeped in cultural nationalism? How would a newly 'discovered' Sanskrit text 
function in such a space? Dave-Mukherji also addresses a larger question: what 
is the genealogy of India's cultural past, and specifically its “art,” as transcen- 
dental/idealistic/spiritual, which has translated itself into a belief? And why 
does this belief persist, although in different configurations? The essay then 
turns to alternative interpretative frames for the study of Indian art, first by 
critically examining ethnographic approaches to the study of texts, and then 
by relating Coomaraswamy's transcendentalism with David Shulman's recent 
discourse around the ‘more than real.’ 


PART 1 


Early Šaivism 


CHAPTER 1 


From Mantramārga Back to Atimārga: 
Atimārga as a Self-referential Term 


Peter C. Bisschop 


1 Introduction 


The impact of Alexis Sanderson's scholarship can be easily measured by the 
subject of the present paper. Before 1988, when Sanderson published his 
groundbreaking article "Saivism and the Tantric Traditions,” the term Atimārga 
was hardly used by anyone with the exception of a few specialists of Tantric 
Saivism, and it certainly was never addressed systematically.! Thus, for exam- 
ple, Minoru Hara, who completed his dissertation on the Pasupatas at Harvard 
in 1966 and published extensively on the Pasupata tradition in the subsequent 
decades, never once used the term.? In the years to come, however, various 
scholars started to use it with great confidence in increasing numbers and cur- 
rently the Atimārga is widely regarded as one of the two major divisions of 
Saivism, alongside that of the Mantramārga. Quite influential in the dissem- 
ination of the term has been Gavin Flood, who adopted it in his An Intro- 
duction to Hinduism (1996). The chapters on the Šaiva and Šākta traditions in 
this book are deeply dependent on Sanderson's scholarship. As an illustration 
of how commonplace and accepted its use has become, reference may also 
be made to the entry on Atimarga in the popular A Dictionary of Hinduism 
by WJ. Johnson (2009). The description clearly reflects Sanderson's scholar- 
ship: 


One of the two main branches of Saivism described in the Saiva Agamas 
or Tantras (the other being the mantramarga, or "path of mantras"). The 
atimārga, which is entered on solely in order to attain liberation, is open 
only to ascetics. It has two divisions, the Pasupata, and the Lakula, itself 


1 Anearly reference may be found in Goudriaan and Gupta 1981, 35, 45 (referring to the Nisvā- 
satattvasamhita). 

2 Although there are many entries starting with ati-, the index of Hara's collected Pasupata 
Studies (2002) has no entry on Atimārga. 


© PETER C. BISSCHOP, 2020 | D01:10.1163/9789004432802 003 


This is an open access chapter distributed under the terms of the CC BY-NC 4.0 license. 


16 BISSCHOP 


a development from within the Pasupata tradition; both are concerned 
with Siva in his wild and terrible form of Rudra.3 


In the present paper I would like to reconsider the meaning and use of the term 
Atimārga, in the light of an intriguing passage from an unpublished Mahatmya 
on the holy city of Varanasi (sometimes referred to hereafter as *vM"). In par- 
ticular, I want to take up the question whether the term Atimārga was ever 
used by Pasupatas or other groups that one would associate with the Atimarga 
themselves. Was it, in other words, ever used self-referentially or does it only 
represent a higher, tantric ("Mantramargic") perspective on the ascetic path of 
Saivism? 


2 Atimārga and Mantramārga 


For a start, here is the introduction to the Atimārga from “Saivism and the 
Tantric Traditions,” without a doubt the single most influential article on Sai- 
vism of the twentieth century: 


The Teaching of Siva (šivašāsana) which defines the Saivas is divided 
between two great branches or “streams” (srotas). These are termed the 
Outer Path (Atimarga) and the Path of Mantras (Mantramārga). The first 
is accessible only to ascetics, while the second is open both to ascetics 
and to married home-dwellers (grhastha). There is also a difference of 
goals. The Atimarga is entered for salvation alone, while the Mantramarga 
promises both this, and for those that so wish, the attainment of super- 
natural powers (siddhis) and the experience of supernatural pleasures in 
the worlds of their choice (bhoga). The Atimarga’s Saivism is sometimes 
called Raudra rather than Saiva. This is because it is attributed to and con- 
cerned with Siva in his archaic, Vedic form as Rudra (the "Terrible"), the 
god of wild and protean powers outside the šrauta sacrifice. It has two 
principal divisions, the Pasupata and the Lakula. (Sanderson 1998, 664.) 


An important aspect of the above definition is that it is written from the view- 
point of the Mantramārga. Although it follows an emic division of Šaivism,* 
it is one which appears to have been coined by the Mantramārga and not by 


3 Ouoted from the electronic version: http://www.oxfordreference.com/view/10.1093/acref/978 
0198610250.001.0001/acref-9780198610250 
4 Cf. Sanderson 2006, 163: “The term Atimarga, which I suggest we use for the non-Āgamic 


FROM MANTRAMĀRGA BACK TO ATIMĀRGA 17 


the Atimārga itself. In other words, it reflects the higher Mantramārgic system- 
atization of doctrines and practices. The Atimārga, in contrast, represents a 
more archaic ascetic strand of Šaivism, predating the developmert of tantric 
Šaivism. Initially it was not known as Atimārga, nor do we have evidence 
of ascetics who refer to themselves as Atimārgins, "Followers of the Outer 
Path.” The name Atimārga was well chosen, however, for the Pasupata ascetics 
adhered to what they called the Atyāsrama “Outer Discipline,” by which they 
indicated that they were beyond the four disciplines (āšrama) that define 
orthodox Brahmanism. Pāšupatasūtra 2.15—17 plays on the theme of being 
“beyond” (ati-) customary practise: 


atidattam atistam atitaptam tapas tathā atyagatim gamayate 


The extraordinary gift, the extraordinary offer, and the extraordinary 
practise of asceticism leads to the extraordinary goal. 


Whoever coined the term was therefore closely familiar with the tradition. 

The division of Saivism into Atimārga and Mantramārga appears for the first 
time in the Nišvāsamukha, the introduction to the Nisvāsatattvasamhitā. The 
Mantramarga is presented here as the fifth and highest stream (srotas) of reli- 
gion, which has been revealed by Šiva's fifth, upper face. The Atimarga, by 
contrast, is said to have been revealed by Siva’s fourth, eastern face. In terms of 
hierarchy this indicates a lower position, on a par with that of the revelations 
by Siva’s three other faces: the Laukika or mundane religion taught by his west- 
ern face, the Vaidika or brahmanical religion taught by his northern face, and 
the Adhyatmika or system of knowledge of the self taught by his southern face. 
On the other hand, its connection with Siva’s eastern face sets it apart from the 
three other religious traditions and it is clear from the Nisvāsatattvasamhitā 
itself that some of the text's teachings are in fact deeply influenced by those 
of the Atimarga.® The Nisvasamukha’s fivefold scheme itself appears to be an 
expansion based on a passage from the Manusmrti (2.117), where three forms 
of knowledge are distinguished: Laukika, Vaidika, Ādhyātmika.” 


Saivism of the Pasupatas and related systems, is extracted, then, from a stage of the tradition 
which predates our famous commentators and perhaps even some of the Āgamas them- 
selves.” 

5 Fora critical edition, with annotated translation and accompanying study, of the Nisvasamu- 
kha, see Kafle 2015. 

6 See Sanderson 2006. 

7 Manusmrti 2.117 (Olivelle 2015): 


18 BISSCHOP 


Following the Nisvāsamukha, we find the division in a range of Mantramarga 
scriptures and in texts of authors with a Mantramārga affiliation, although it is 
certainly not ubiguitous across tantric literature. As will be seen below, most 
important for the present paper is the following passage from the Svacchanda- 
tantra: 


It is called Atimārga because it is beyond the mental dispositions. It is 
taught as "Atimarga" because the doctrine is beyond the worlds. And the 
lokas are designated “bound souls,” in the cycle of birth and death. They 
who are established in the Atimarga, [that is to say] the followers of the 
observance of the skull and the Pasupatas, they are to be known as beyond 
them. There is no rebirth for them and they abide in [the reality of] Ivara, 
in [the world of] Dhruva.? 


The division into Atimārga and Mantramarga appears to be found only in texts 
belonging to the Mantramarga.? No Pasupata or for that matter "Atimarga" text 
refers to the concept of Atimarga, let alone to Mantramarga. The only excep- 
tion that I am aware of is a medieval Mahatmya about Varanasi, the subject of 
this paper. 


laukikam vaidikam vapi tathadhyatmikam eva ca | 
ādadīta yato jfíanam tam pürvam abhivādayet || 
The first half of this verse is identical to two padas in Nisvāsamukha 1.26—1.27ab, where the 
fivefold division is introduced for the first time: 
srnvantu rsayas sarve paricadhā yat prakirtitam | 
laukikam vaidikam vāpi tathādhyātmikam eva ca || 
a[[timargam ca mantrākhyam||—| 
For a discussion of this incomplete passage, see Kafle 2015, 21; and pp. 49-53, for further evi- 
dence of the influence of the Manusmrti on the composition of the Nisvāsamukha. 
8 Svacchanda 11182184: 
atitam buddhibhāvānām atimārgam prakīrtitam | 
lokatitam tu taj jfíánam atimārgam iti smrtam ||182|| 
lokāš ca pašavah proktāh srstisamharavartmani | 
tesam atītās te jfieyà ye 'timārge vyavasthitah ||183|| 
kapālavratino ye ca tathā pāšupatās ca ye | 
srstir na vidyate tesam īšvare ca dhruve sthitah ||184|| 
9 See Sanderson 2006 for references. 


FROM MANTRAMĀRGA BACK TO ATIMĀRGA 19 


3 The Atimarga in the Varanasimahatmya of the 
Bhairavaprādurbhāva 


For some years now I have been working on a manuscript containing a unigue 
collection of Vārāņasīmāhātmyas.!? It concerns an old palm-leaf manuscript, 
currently in the Kaiser library in Kathmandu (Acc. No. 66).! The manuscript 
may be dated on palaeographical grounds to the end of the twelfth century 
CE. It was most probably penned down in Varanasi itself, as suggested by 
comparison of the old Nagari script with that of other manuscripts written 
in twelfth-century Varanasi, but now likewise surviving in the collections of 
Nepal.!? It is an extensive but incomplete manuscript: 145 folios survive but 
the text breaks off in the middle of a long quotation of the Skandapurana. 
The manuscript consists of Mahatmyas taken from and attributed to a range 
of Puranas, including the Matsyapurana, Nandipurana, Brahmapurāņa, Linga- 
purāna, Šivapurāņa and Skandapurāņa. Several Mahatmyas can be identified 
in the present editions of works bearing the same name (most importantly 
the Mahatmyas of the published Matsyapurana and the early Skandapurāņa), 
but quite a few of them are unknown from any other source. The manuscript 
provides a unique glimpse into the production of Mahatmya literature in early- 
medieval Varanasi. 

The first 13 chapters, covering the first 59 folios, about one third of the sur- 
viving text, contain the complete text of a Mahatmya not known otherwise. 
It is attributed in the colophons to the Bhairavapradurbhava of the Matsya- 
purāņa, but there are strong grounds to think that this attribution is incorrect 
and that it was originally intended to belong to the Bhairavaprādurbhāva of 
the Vamanapurana instead. My reasons for this assumption are the follow- 
ing: 

— The attributions of Māhātmyas to other Purāņas are incorrect in several 
other cases of the manuscript as well. 
— There is no section called Bhairavapradurbhava in the surviving text of the 

Matsyapurana. 


10 See Bisschop 2007 and 2013. 

11 The manuscript has been microfilmed by the NGMPP on reel C 6/3. I also have access to 
excellent colour photographs kindly provided to me by Harunaga Isaacson. There is also 
a paper apograph in a private collection, microfilmed as NGMPP E 766/7. 

12 Some comparable manuscripts produced in Varanasi and dated to the twelfth century are: 
Jayadrathayamala (NGMPP A 996/3, A 997/1), Brhatkalottara (A 43/1), Harivamsa (A 27/5), 
Manusmrti (C 44/4). The scribe of our manuscript is, however, less neat. The text also 
abounds in scribal errors. 


20 BISSCHOP 


— Colophons in several manuscripts of the Vāmanapurāņa, critically edited by 
the Kashiraj Trust, reveal that various chapters from chapter 9 onwards are 
attributed to the Bhairavapradurbhava of the Vamanapurana.? 

— The narrators of the present Mahatmya and the Vamanapurana are the 
same: Narada and Pulastya. 

— The “Origin of Bhairava(s)” (bhairavapradurbhava) is narrated in relation to 
the destruction of Andhaka by Bhairava in Vamanapurana 44.30 ff. 

— The eight Bhairavas (astabhairava) originating from the blood of Andhaka 
when Šiva strikes him correspond with a set of eight Bhairavas mentioned 
in our Mahatmya.* 

I therefore conclude that the Mahatmya was originally meant to be included 

in the Bhairavapradurbhava section of the Vamanapurana. In all likelihood 

the text was composed by a local pandit in twelfth-century Varanasi, for the 
description of the town evinces clear connections to the layout of the town 
around the time when the Gahadavalas were ruling north India and had made 

Vārāņasī into their religious capital. It appears to be the work of a Šaiva author 

who engages with the increasing presence of Vaisnava worship in Varanasi sup- 

ported by the Gāhadavāla kings.!5 
The Atimārgais referred to towards the end of the first chapter of this Maha- 
tmya. After Pulastya has told Narada about the abodes of the eight Bhairavas, 


13 See also Bonazolli 1982. 

14  Vāmanapurāņa 44.23—38: Vidyaraja (east), Kālarāja (south), Kamaraja (west), Somaraja 
(north), Svacchandarāja, Lalitaraja and Vighnarāja. Bhairava himself should be added as 
the eighth. In VM 1.53-54 seven similar Bhairavas are mentioned: Kālarāja (in Avimukta), 
Kāmarāja, Saumya, Svacchanda (in Jayantika), Lalita, Vighnarāja (in Kalafijara), and Bhai- 
rava (in Bhrgutunga). The passage is corrupt and requires heavy emendation. I have ten- 
tatively reconstructed the text as follows, but many readings remain doubtful: 

visistam sarvasattvānām tàranam jagatah param | 
kālarājasya ca ksetram dattam caiva svayambhuvá ||53|| 
kāmarājā tu saumyaé ca svacchandaé ca jayantike | 
lalitaš ca kalau devi vighnarājā kalinjare | 

svayam tu bhairavo devo bhrgutunge vyavasthitah ||54|| 


53a "sattvānām] conj.; °sattanam V]*V,, ?sattanàm Vj (unmetr.) 53b jagatah] V? V»; 
jagata Vi^ (unmetr.) 54a kāmarājā tu] conj.; kalalayam tu V;, kalalayam ca V, 54b 
svacchandas ca jayantike] conj.; svacchande ca jayantika VjV; 54c lalitaš ca] conj.; 
lalitasya VV, 54d ?raja] conj; ?rajam V,V, ekalifijare] Vj, kalimjale V, 

15 Particularly relevant in this connection is chapter 7 of the Mahatmya. It deals with the 
north end of the town, which was the centre of Gahadavala religious activity. This area, 
referred to in the text as “Brahmapura,” is presented as an area of brahmanical author- 
ity where gifts of gold, land, etc., are practised, as is indeed attested by the Gahadavala 
inscriptions, and where Vedic recitation constantly takes place. See Bisschop 2on. 


FROM MANTRAMĀRGA BACK TO ATIMĀRGA 21 


the most important of which is Kālarāja, who resides in Vārāņasī and is also 
known as Kālabhairava or Āmardaka, he introduces a number of important 
tīrthas in the town. From VM 1.99 onwards Pulastya zooms in on the cremation 
ground, the smašāna, also called ūsara (saline ground), where, at the time of 
destruction, all beings and worlds enter into Bhairava’s mouth. He tells Narada 
that it is because of this that the cremation ground grants release.!” He also 
reports that there is a pond there called Kalodaka, which arose when Kalaru- 
dra was playing on the cremation ground. At that time the Lord taught the 
observance of the skull (kapālavrata). He chopped off the fifth head of Brahma, 
as a consequence of which there arose the holy Pasupata pond.!$ Mahadeva 
subsequently carries Brahmā's skull around the world and unites with the cre- 


16 =VM1.37-38: 
kālarājasya devena puri vārāņasī subha | 
nirdista moksanarthaya papanam caiva sarvadā ||37|| 
tasyam caiva sthitah saksad bhairavah kalabhairavah | 
mardayan sarvapāpāni tena camardakah smrtah ||38|| 


37c moksanarthaya] conj.; raksanarthaya VV, 

17 VM1.99cd-101: 
šmašānasya srnusvemam kathàm papapranasanim ||99|| 
šmašānam ūsaram proktam yatra khadyanti jantavah | 
lokāš caiva tu samhāre pravisya bhairavam mukham ||100|| 
kālānalamahādīptam kālarājasya bhairavam | 
tena caiva $masanam tu varanasyam tu moksadam ||101]| 


99c smasānasya] VP"V2; śmaśāna Vj* (unmetr.) 100b khadyanti] conj.; ksidyanti V,V, 
100c lokāš caiva tu] VI^V;; lokās caiva tu lokās caiva tu Vj“ (unmetr.) 101b bhairavam] 
V5; bhaivam V, (unmetr.) 
18 | VM 1102305: 
kālodakam ca nirdistam kālarājasya cagratah | 
kalanalasamaprakhyam tasminn eva mahat sarah | 
sambhūtam kālarudrasya šmašāne kridatah pura ||102|| 
tatah krīdānusaktena devadevena sambhuna | 
kāpālavratam uddistam tasmin kale mahamune ||103|| 
kāpālavratam āsthāya brahmaņas ca širo mahat | 
cakartta bhagavān kruddhah paficamam ghoradaršanam ||104|| 
tasminn eva samutpannam divyam pāšupatam sarah | 
tena trpyanti sakalah ksanamatraniyojitah ||105|| 


103a kridanusaktena] em.; krīdānušaktena V,V, 103b devadevena] V;; devadena V; 
(unmetr.) 104a kāpālavratam] V5; kāpālam vratam V, 105b divyam] V?‘V,; divyam 
divyam Vi' (unmetr.) e sarah] em.; $arah V,V, 105d ?niyojitah] conj.; %nijojite VPS 
?niyojitam VĮ‘, ?niyojite V; 


22 BISSCHOP 


mation grounds.!? There he teaches that transmigration results from attach- 
ment (sneha), that attachment comes from desire (raga), and that attachment 
is destroyed by indifference (vairagya). When people attain indifference, their 
karma is destroyed and they attain unequalled happiness (saukhya).?? He then 
teaches the following: 


The great tree of transmigration has arisen from the seed of desire. After 
cutting the tree with the axe of indifference, whose sharp blade is disat- 
tachment, they proceed on the Atimarga.?! 


Here the text introduces a term that we do not expect to come across in a 
Mahatmya. The text continues in the same vein, however, attesting to the 
appropriation of this significant terminology. The passage is worth quoting in 
full: 


Engaged in the path of the observance of the skull (Kapalavratamarga), 
the Lord wanders, free from attachment, displaying the Lokamarga and 
the supreme Lokātīta. And the lokas are designated “bound souls,’ includ- 


19 J VM 1406: 
sakapālam mahādevo babhrāma sakalam jagat | 
krīdamāņas tadā ksetrair usarair samapadyata ||106|| 


106a sakapalam] conj.; tam kapālam VV, 106c tadā] Vj; tada V, 106c ksetrair] em.; 
ksetrer VV; 106d samapadyata] V;“; sampadyate V}< (unmetr.), samupadyate V; 
20 VM 112-113: 
aho mūrkhā na jānanti samsāram snehasambhavam | 
rāgāc ca jayate sneho vairāgyāt snehasamksayah ||112|| 
tad vairagyam yada pumsām jāyate karmasamksayah | 
tadā samprapyate saukhyam asādršyam tu kasyacit ||113|| 


112b samsāram snehasambhavam] V,; samsārasnehasambhavā V, — nd vairāgyāt] 
VI*V5; vairāgyā Vj^ uga vairagyam] Vj; vairāgya V, 113b °samksayah] conj.; °sam- 
ksaye VV, 113c saukhyam] conj.; mokhyam V,, moksam V; 

21 VML: 
ragabijasamutpannah samsāravitapo mahān | 
vairāgyasya kutharena nihsangatīksņa-m-ašmanā | 
chittvā caiva tu tam vrksam atimārgam vrajanti te ||114|| 


114d °tiksna°] VfV2; °tiksna°® Vj^ 
The reading of pada d is highly uncertain: it shows syncopation throughout and a mean- 
ingless compound-breaking -m- is inserted. As Harunaga Isaacson has pointed out to me, 
the image calls to mind Bhagavadgità 15.3d (= Mahabharata 6.37.3): asamgasastrena dr- 
dhena chittva. 


FROM MANTRAMĀRGA BACK TO ATIMĀRGA 23 


22 


ing gods, demons and men. No one realizes the supreme certainty with 
respect to knowledge of the self. And except for Sarva, the supreme god, 
there is no such behaviour of another [god]. No other god has certainty 
of knowledge. There is no such behaviour anywhere in the world with 
all its gods. The gods, beginning with Brahma, also proceed along the 
Laukikamarga. The God of gods, Virūpāksa, who is established in the 
Lokottaramārga, proceeds beyond [the institutes of] sacrifice ( yajfía), 
giving (dana) and asceticism (tapas). But those sages who are on that 
path, delighting in the knowledge of the self, also proceed along the 
Lokottaramarga, abandoning their bodies. And there is no rebirth in this 
world (iha) for those Pāšupata sages who follow the observance of the 
skull, they who abide by the Atimārga. For the practitioners of the Ati- 
marga there is only (kevalam) indifference. Those who have set out on 
the Atimarga only (kevalā) delight in indifference. Those who die on the 
saline ground (usara) go along that path, but of all saline grounds Varanasi 
is the best, O sage. And there is no sprouting for those who die there. 
The body abandoned on the cremation ground merges in the Lord of 
Time.?2 


VM 1.116—125;: 
kāpālavratamārgastho nihsango bhramate prabhuh | 
darsayan lokamārgam tu lokātītam param ca yat ||116|| 
lokāš ca pašavah proktāh sadevasuramanusah | 
na kascit paramam vetti ātmajitāne tu niscayam ||117|| 
rte Sarvan mahādevān nānyacestāsti cedršī | 
jñānasya niscayo nāsti anyadevasya kasyacit ||118|| 
na cestā īdršī loke vidyate sāmare kvacit | 
laukikenāpi mārgeņa yānti brahmādayah surah ||119]| 
devadevo virūpākso mārge lokottare sthitah | 
atītya vartate devo yajríadanatapamsi ca ||120|| 
tasmin marge tu ye viprā atmajnananuranijitah | 
te piyānti tanum tyaktvā marge lokottarena tu ||121]| 
ye ca pāšupatā viprah kapalavratadharinah | 
na tesam udbhavo 'stiha atimārgeņa ye sthitah ||122|| 
vairagyam kevalam tatra atimarganisevinam | 
atimārgaprayātānām vairagye kevalā ratih ||123|| 
tena te yanti mārgeņa usare tu mrtā hi ye | 
sarvesam usarāņām tu šresthā varanasi mune ||124|| 
tasyam caiva mrtanam ca praroho naiva vidyate | 
kalarajalayam yāti smašāne tujjhita tanuh ||125|| 


116d ca] VPS; om. VV (unmetr.) 117d atmajfiane] Vj; 4janmajfiane V, (unmetr.) 118b 
nanya°] VI*V5; nānyā Vj?  ecedrái] V); cedrsam V, 119b sāmare] V); sāmarah V; 
120b lokottare] V,; lokottarah V, 120d ?dànatapamsi] Vj; "dānam tapāmsi V, 121b 


24 BISSCHOP 


This passage is revealing in several respects. First of all, it is the only known 
non-Mantramārga source that uses the term Atimārga. Moreover, it does so 
in a proper Atimārga context: its message is strict asceticism and there is no 
mention of the Mantramārga at all, neither here nor in the following chap- 
ters of the Mahatmya. As for the identity of the Atimārga in question, the text 
brings together a number of key terms under one umbrella: Kapalavratamarga, 
Lokatita, Pasupata, and Atimarga. In appearance it is a form of Kapalika asceti- 
cism, involving cultivation of indifference (vairagya) and aiming for death at 
the cremation ground. This is an old theme in the Pasupata tradition, harking 
back to the Pasupatasutra itself.?3 

There are several hints in the above passage that indicate a relation with the 
Svacchanda. The Svacchanda, as we have seen earlier, also refers to the division 
of the Atimarga and, like our passage, stresses that it is Lokatita ("Beyond the 
Worlds”). The Vārāņasīmāhātmya elaborates further on this theme, drawing a 
clear distinction between the way of the Lord and that of the other gods. The 
latter are merely followers of the Laukika path, or Lokamarga. 

Moreover, we can identify two textual parallels: 

1. lokāš ca pasavah proktāh (Svacchanda 11183a = VM 1.1174) 
2. kapālavratino ye ca tathā pasupatas ca ye | 
srstir na vidyate tegām (Svacchanda 11184ac) 


ye ca pasupata viprāh kapalavratadharinah | 

na tesam udbhavo stīha (VM 1122ac) 
Aside from these textual parallels it is noteworthy that some of the themes 
that precede the verses on the Atimārga in the Svacchanda are taken up in 
the passage of the Varanasimahatmya. Thus, in Svacchanda 11.176 it is stated 
that those who follow the hetusastra "science of reasoning" find no certainty 
or conviction (ni$caya) in matters of Dharma, Artha, Kama or Moksa: dhar- 
marthakamamoksesu nišcayo naiva jāyate (Svacchanda n.176cd). The theme of 
nišcaya is taken up in the Varanasimáhatmya with respect to the “knowledge 
of the self” (atmajriana), which is restricted to Siva alone. No other god has 
it. 


?rafijitah] Vj; "raksitāh V, 121c yanti] V3; jānti V} 122a ca] V; tu V. 123a vairagyam] 
Vy vairāgya” V, 124c usarāņām] Vj usvarāņām V, 124d šresthā varanasi mune] Vj; 
siddhā varanasi ne V, (unmetr.) 125d tūjjhitā] V;“?; tyajatam VT", tūktitā V, 
The last sentence may be translated alternatively as: “he merges in the Lord of Time, but 
his body is abandoned on the cremation ground.” 
23 The Pasupata ascetic was supposed to die on the cremation ground. See Pasupatasitra 
5-30-40. 


FROM MANTRAMĀRGA BACK TO ATIMĀRGA 25 


Moreover, the Svacchanda also introduces the concept of vairāgya, a key 
term in the Varanasimahatmya, just before its discussion of the Atimarga. The 
Svacchanda distinguishes several religious traditions on the basis of their char- 
acteristic mental dispositions (buddhibhāva):?* 

— Laukika is connected to dharma 

— Paficaratra and Vaidika are connected to dharma and jriana 

— Bauddha and Arhata are connected to vairāgya 

— Samkhya is connected to jriāna and vairagya 

— Yoga is connected to jitāna, vairagya and aišvarya 

The Atimārga is said to be beyond these mental dispositions.?5 Instead of this, 
the Vārāņasīmāhātmya passsage rather stresses the importance of vairagya, 
along with knowledge of the self (ātmajriāna), as the key to liberation. Al- 
though we can thus trace some influence of the Svacchanda the teaching is 
put in a new, proper Atimarga perspective. 

The passage also involves some genuine Pāšupata ideals and concepts. The 
statement that Šiva "proceeds beyond (atitya) [the institutes of] sacrifice 
(yajfía), giving (dana) and asceticism (tapas), instantly calls to mind Pasupata- 
sutra 2.1517, quoted above: atidattam atistam atitaptam tapas tathā atyagatim 
gamayate. Finally, the prominent presence of the word kevala in this passage, 
which is employed to stress that for the follower of the Atimarga only vairagya 
(indifference) remains, can be connected to the technical use of Kevala in the 
Pasupata tradition. For the terms Kevalijfiana and Kevalartha are used as syn- 
onyms for the Pasupata teaching in several sources.?% 

The Mahatmya continues to use the terminology of Atimarga and Loka- 
marga in the subsequent two chapters. In chapter 2 Šiva returns to Vārāņasī 
after he has wandered around with the skull for twelve years. He enters the 


24 | Svacchanda 11.179-181: 
mohakāh sarvajantūnām yatas te tamasah smrtah | 
dharmenaikena deveši baddham jrianam hi laukikam ||179|| 
dharmajfiananibaddham tu pāficarātram ca vaidikam | 
bauddham ārahatam caiva vairāgyenaiva suvrate ||180|| 
jfianavairagyasambaddham samkhyajrianam hi pārvati | 
jūtānam vairāgyam aisvaryam yogajfianapratisthitam ||181|| 

The list of mental dispositions calls to mind Sāmkhyakārikā 23: 

adhyavasāyo buddhir dharmo jrianam virāga aisvaryam | 
sāttvikam etadrūpam tāmasam asmād viparyastam || 

25 | Svacchanda 11.182: 
atitam buddhibhāvānām atimārgam prakirtitam | 
lokatitam tu taj jūānam atimargam iti smrtam || 

26 See Sanderson * 2012, 9, n. 3. 


26 BISSCHOP 


cremation ground and installs the skull to the north of Kālarāja. When he has 
completed his observance, he bathes and satiates the sages, gods and ances- 
tors. In this way, it is said, he displays the Lokamārga and sets an example for 
the people to follow.7 

The logic is illustrated by drawing on a phrase from the Bhagavadgita: 


Otherwise, if Deva would not display it, the path would be destroyed. The 
people follow what he sets up as the standard.?® 


A tirtha called Rnamocana appears, provided with three lirgas. The three 
lirigas release from the threefold debt to the gods, the sages and the ancestors.?9 
In this way the narrative integrates the teachings of the Lokatita, or Atimarga, 
and the Lokamārga. Siva next continues to display more observances. He even 
gives the Kapalavrata to Kubera.?9 


27 | VM2.5-6: 
evam vratasamāptim tu krtvà devo mahešvarah | 
snānam krtvā tatah pašcāt pareņa vidhinā harah ||5|| 
tarpayitva rsin devān pitaras ca yathāvidhi | 
evam ca lokamargam tu daršayāno jagatprabhuh ||6|| 


5d vidhina] VI*V;; vidhi Vj* (unmetr.) 6a rsīn] V); rsin V, 6b pitaras ca yathāvidhi] 
Vy; piras ca yathavidhih V, (unmetr.) 6d dar$ayano] Vj; dar$ayamo V; 
28 VM 2.7: 
anyathā našyate mārgo yadi devo na daršayet | 
sayatpramāņam kurute lokas tad anuvartate ||7 || 


7a na$yate] em.; tasya te VV, 7c kurute] V,; kute V, (unmetr.) 

Cf. Bhagavadgītā 3.21 (= Mahābhārata 6.25.21): 
yad yad ācarati šresthas tat tad evetaro janah | 
sayatpramāņam kurute lokas tad anuvartate || 

Also Kūrmapurāņa 1.16.45: 
evam hi laukikam margam pradaršayati sa prabhuh | 
sayatpramāņam kurute lokas tad anuvartate || 

29 VM2.8-9: 

evam jñātvā gato devas tarpayann rnamocane | 
tasmāt tatra mahatirtham sambhūtam rnamocanam ||8|| 
trini lingāni jātāni devadevasya tarpane | 
ekam devamanusyāņām trtiyam pitrsambhavam ||9]| 


8c tatra] VP°V.; atra Vj? e?tirtham] Vj; °tirtha V, ga trīņi] V»; triņi V, 9c ekam] 
conj.; evam VV, e devamanusyāņām] V,; demanusyāņām V; (unmetr.) gd pitrsam- 
bhavam] V; tu trisambhavam V; 

30 VM 2.20: 


FROM MANTRAMĀRGA BACK TO ATIMĀRGA 27 


In chapter 3, the apparent contradiction in Siva’s behaviour is articulated by 
Brahma, who says that those who have no faith see the path of the world, viz. 
the Laukika and Apavargika, on the one hand, and the great path, the Lokottara, 
on the other, as a contradiction: 


ekatas ca jaganmargam laukikam capavargikam | 
lokottaram mahamargam viparitam aho tvayi | 
drsyate bhuvanadhara yatra šraddhā na vidyate ||6|| 


6a Cmargam] Vi“; °marge V!" V, 6b cāpavargikam] V,; capavarggakam V, 6c 
mahamargam] V,; mahāmārgga V, 6f. vidyate] VI* V5; khadyate Vj* 


But in God the two paths are united. In him there is no contradiction. His ways 
are inscrutable; only he can unite these contradictions and he does so because 
he delights in play (krida).?! 


4 Concluding Observations 


I started this paper with the observation that the term Atimarga, although 
certainly useful for referring to the ascetic strand of early Saivism, appears 
not to have been used by “Atimargins” themselves. The term represents, by all 
accounts, a Mantramargic perspective on the formation of the Saiva religion.3? 

The Varanasimahatmya discussed in this paper is the only exception that I 
know of in which we do find the term Atimarga—as well as the related term 
Lokatita—used outside of a Mantramargic context. Several observations can 
be made with reference to the passages of the Varanasimahatmya discussed 
here: 


dhanadasya vratam dattvā kāpālam paramesvarah | 
so pi tatra vrati bhūtvā devam ārādhayan sthitah ||20|| 


20a dhanadasya] V;; vanadasya V; 
31 VM3.7: 
krīdayā yāni deveša karmāņi kuruse prabho | 
tani lokesu dršyante paramārthapradāni tu || 
32 The same applies mutatis mutandis to terms such as Lokamārga or Laukika. Although 
Mantramārga sources take the Laukika religion to refer to the merit-making rituals and 
practices of the Saiva laity taught in the Sivadharma, the term is not used by the Siva- 
dharma itself to refer to its own religious practice, which is rather referred to as “Siva- 
dharma.” 


28 BISSCHOP 


— The VM provides important evidence on traditions relating to Bhairava, in 
particular attesting to knowledge of the Svacchanda in Vārāņasī around the 
twelfth century. 

— The VM integrates the divide between Lokamārga and Atimārga or Lokotta- 
ramārga in a narrative of the origin of several sacred spots in Vārāņasī and 
the rituals to be performed there. 

— ThevM adopts the term Atimarga within a proper Atimārga context. The ide- 
ology is clearly Atimargic, representing a mixture of Pasupata and Kāpālika 
Saivism. 

- Finally, and most importantly, in appropriating the term, the Atimarga is pre- 
sented here as the ultimate path of liberation. 

It is striking that the author of the text does not seem to have felt the need 

to contextualize the Mantramārga from which he has adopted the term in 

the first place. Although it seems certain that the author had knowledge of 
the Mantramarga—the influence of the Svacchandabhairava is quite clear— 
he chose to neglect the Mantramarga entirely. Is this because he considered it 
irrelevant to the content of the text, which is after all a Mahatmya of Varanasi, 
or because the Mahatmya represents a different perspective on what it means 
to be a Šaiva? It certainly testifies to the fact that views on what constituted 

Šaivism in early-medieval India differed across distinct Šaiva traditions. Much 

of our understanding today derives from specific textual traditions that only 

represent one layer of a much broader spectrum of religions oriented around 
the worship of Siva that sought to define themselves and claim their place. 


5 Postscript 


After the presentation of my paper at the symposium in Toronto, Professor 
Sanderson kindly drew my attention to a veiled reference to the Atimarga 
in the Halayudhastotra. The text of this stotra is recorded, together with the 
Mahimnastava and a Narmadāstotra, on an inscription of 1063AD (samvat 
120) in the Amaresvara temple at Omkaresvar/Mandhata.*3 The inscription 


33 For an overview of the inscriptions of the Amaresvara temple and the publication of 
several more hitherto unpublished inscriptions from the temple, including the Narmada- 
stotra, see Neuss 2013 and 2015. The Halayudhastotra was first published by P.P. Sub- 
rahmanya Sastri, with an additional note containing the prose part of the inscription 
by N.P. Chakravarti, in Epigraphia Indica 25 in 1939—1940 (appeared in 1948: Sastri 1948 
and Chakravarti 1948). The text of the Halayudhastotra was constituted on the basis of 
the inscription and two manuscripts of the stotra from the Madras Government Oriental 
Manuscripts Library. The inscription was subsequently republished by Mittal 1979, 322— 
339, and Trivedi 1989, 604-611. 


FROM MANTRAMĀRGA BACK TO ATIMĀRGA 29 


was written by a Pasupata, pamdita Gāndhadhvaja, while the text itself is said 
to have been composed by a brahmin named Halāyudha.3% The spiritual lin- 
eage of the engraver of the inscription is recorded in a prose passage at the 
end of the inscription and mentions the names of several Pasupata teachers: 
Bhāvavālmīka ^ Bhāvasamudra > Bhavavirimci ^ Supūjitarāši > Vivekarāši > 
Gandhadhvaja.?5 

The Halāyudhastotra is an ornate poem in praise of Šiva. Phyllis Granoff 
(1993) has introduced and translated several parts of the inscription in an arti- 
cle on the experience of religion in medieval hymns and stories, but the verses 
that concern us here have not been translated or discussed before. Verses 34-35 
contain what appears to be an allusion to the Atimarga: 


The visitation of the wives of the distinguished sages in the Pine Park, the 
oblation with seed in Fire, the twilight dance: Your behaviour is not rep- 
rehensible.?6 O Three-eyed one! The doctrines of the world do not touch 
those who have left worldly life, having passed far beyond the path of those 
whose minds are afflicted by false knowledge. 

The gods all wear gold and jewels as an ornament on their body. You 
do not even wear gold the size of a berry on your ear or on your hand. 
The one whose natural beauty, surpassing the path [of the world], flashes 
on his own body, has no regard for the extraneous ornaments of ordinary 
men.” 


These verses poetically allude to the distinction between the Lokamārga and 
Atimārga, although the terms themselves are not used. Significantly the Halā- 
yudhastotra also makes reference to the term Kevalajfiana, in the first pada 


34 Sastri (1948, 74) argues that he is identical with Halayudha the tenth-century author of the 
Abhidhānaratnamālā and the Kavirahasya. 

35 Chakravarti 1948, 185, lines 51-55. 

36 The verse refers to three key mythological events: Šiva's visit as a naked ascetic to the 
Devadaruvana, the emission of his seed into the mouth of Agni leading to the birth of 
Skanda, and his performance of the twilight dance. 

37  Halayudhastotra 34-35: 

dārūdyāne dvijavaravadhūpaplavo retasāgnau 

homah sandhyānatanam iti te cestitam naiva dustam | 
[mithyajnanopa|hatamanasam mārgam ullanghya duram 
yeniskrantas trinayana na tàn lokavadah spršanti ||34|| 
devah sarve dadhati vapusā bhūsaņam hemaratnam 
gunjamatram kanakam api te nāsti karne kare và | 
margatitam sphurati sahajam yasya saundaryam ange 
tasyāhārye[sv itarajanavan na|darah syad gunesu ||35|| 


30 BISSCHOP 


of verse 3: “Victorious is the One God, Šiva, the embodiment of the Kevala- 
jñāna.”38 As mentioned above, Kevalajfiana may be used as a synonym for the 
Pasupata teaching. A Pāšupata background of the Halayudhastotra is further- 
more indicated by the prose part of the inscription, which records the names of 
several Pasupata teachers connected to the Amaresvara temple. The inscription 
also makes reference to the /irigas at five famous Pāšupata centres: Avimukta, 
Kedāra, Omkara, Amara (Amare$vara) and Mahākāla (Ujjain).?? All in all the 
Amarešvara inscription merits further study as a testimony of the survival of 
Pāšupata Šaivism in north India in the medieval period. 


Abbreviations 
conj. conjecture 
em. emendation 


NGMPP Nepal German Manuscript Preservation Project 
unmetr unmetrical 
VM Vārāņasīmāhātmya 


References 


Primary Sources 

Kūrmapurāņa. Anand Swarup Gupta, ed. Varanasi: All-India Kashiraj Trust, 1971. 

Mahabharata. V.S. Sukthankar et al., eds. The Mahabharata. For the First Time Critically 
Edited. 19 vols. Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, 1927—1959. 

Pāšupatasūtra. R. Ananthakrishna Sastri, ed. Pasupata Sutras with Pancharthabhashya 
of Kaundinya. Trivandrum Sanskrit Series, no. CXLIII. Trivandrum: The Oriental 
Manuscripts Library of the University of Travancore, 1940. 

Sāmkhyakārikā. Har Dutt Sharma, ed., trans. The Sāmkhyakārikā, Īsvara Krsna's Mem- 
orable Verses on Samkhya Philosophy with the Commentary of Gaudapādācārya. 
Poona: The Oriental Book Agency, 1933. 

Svacchanda. Madhusūdan Kaul Shastri, ed. The Svacchanda-Tantra with commentary by 
Kshema Rāja. KSTS, nos. 31, 38, 44, 48, 51, 53, and 56. Bombay: Nirnaya-Sagar Press, 


1921—1935. 


38  Halayudhastotra 3a: eko devah sa jayati šivah kevalajiānamūrtir. 
39 ~—s Line 50: 

avimuktas ca kedāra omkaras camaras tathā | 

paricamam tu mahākālah pamcalingah prakirttaye || 


FROM MANTRAMĀRGA BACK TO ATIMĀRGA 31 


Vāmanapurāņa. Anand Swarup Gupta, ed. Varanasi: All-India Kashiraj Trust, 1967. 

Varanasimahatmya. Peter Bisschop, ed. Draft edition of the Vamanapurana-Bhairava- 
prādurbhāva-Vārāņasīvarņana on the basis of NGMPP C 6/3 (= V,) and its apograph 
NGMPP E 766/7 (= V2) 


Secondary Sources 

Bisschop, Peter. 2007. “Notes on a Varanasimahatmya Compendium.” Newsletter of the 
NGMCP 5: 21-30. 

Bisschop, Peter. 2011. Voer voor Filologen: Geüpgradede anonieme Sanskrit literatuur. 
Oratie uitgesproken bij de aanvaarding van het ambt van hoogleraar op het gebied 
van Sanskrit and Ancient Cultures of South Asia aan de Universiteit Leiden op 
vrijdag 29 april 20n. Leiden: Leiden University. https://openaccess.leidenuniv.nl/ 
handle/1887/19582 

Bisschop, Peter. 2015. "The Abode of the Paficamudras: A Yogini Temple in Early Medie- 
val Varanasi.” In 'Yoginī' in South Asia. Interdisciplinary approaches, edited by Istvan 
Keul, 47-60. London and New York: Routledge. 

Bonazolli, Giorgio. 1982. "The Colophons in the Critically Edited Purana-s.” Purāņa 24 
(2): 353-383. 

Chakravarti, N.P. 1948. "A Note on the Halayudha Stotra in the Amaresvara Temple." 
Epigraphia Indica 25 (1939—1940): 183-185. 

Flood, Gavin. 1996. An Introduction to Hinduism. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press. 

Granoff, Phyllis. 1993. “Halayudha’s Prism: The Experience of Religion in Medieval 
Hymns and Stories" In Gods, Guardians and Lovers: Temple Sculptures from North 
India, A.D. 700—1200, edited by Vishaka N. Desai and Darielle Mason, 66—93. New 
York: the Asia Society Galleries. 

Goudriaan, Teun, and Sanjukta Gupta. 1981. Hindu Tantric and Šākta Literature. A His- 
tory of Indian Literature 11.2. Wiesbaden: Otto Harrassowitz. 

Hara, Minoru. 1966. Materials for the Study of Pāšupata Saivism. PhD thesis, Harvard 
University. 

Hara, Minoru. 2002. Pasupata Studies. Edited by J. Takashima. Publications of the De 
Nobili Research Library xxx. Vienna: Institut fiir Sūdasien-, Tibet-, und Buddhis- 
muskunde. 

Johnson, WJ. 2009. A Dictionary of Hinduism. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Kafle, Nirajan. 2015. The Nisvasamukha, the Introductory Book of the Nisvasatattvasam- 
hitā. Critical Edition, with an Introduction and Annotated Translation, Appended by 
Sivadharmasamgraha 5-9. Ph.D. thesis, Leiden University. 

Mittal, A.C. 1979. The Inscriptions of the Imperial Paramāras (8004.D. to 1320A.D.). 
Ahmedabad: L.D. Institute of Indology. 

Neuss, Jiirgen. 2013. “Omkaresvar-Mandhata. Tracing the Forgotten History of a Popular 
Place” Berliner Indologische Studien 21: 15-172. 


32 BISSCHOP 


Neuss, Jürgen. 2015. “Unpublished Inscriptions from the Amare$vara Temple, Mānd- 
hata.’ Berliner Indologische Studien 22: 123-150. 

Olivelle, Patrick. 2005. Manu’s Code of Law. A Critical Edition and Translation of the 
Manava-Dharmasastra. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Sanderson, Alexis. 1988. "Šaivism and the Tantric Traditions.” In The World's Religions, 
edited by S. Sutherland et al., 660—704. London: Routledge. 

Sanderson, Alexis. 2006. “The Lakulas: New Evidence of a System Intermediate Be- 
tween Pāiicārthika Pāšupatism and Āgamic Saivism.” Indian Philosophical Annual 
26 (2003—2005):143—217. 

Sanderson, Alexis. * 2012. "Šaivism and Brahmanism. All Souls Hilary Term 2012, Hand- 
out 3, 8 February” Unpublished handout made available by the author at https:// 
www.academia.edu/6388859 

Sastri, P.P. Subrahmanya. 1948. “Halayudhastotra from the Amaresvara Temple.” Epi- 
graphia Indica 25 (1939—1940): 173—182. 

Trivedi, Harihar Vitthal. 1989. Inscriptions of the Paramāras, Chandēllas, Kachchha- 
paghatas and Two Minor Dynasties. Corpus Inscriptionum Indicarum vī1.3. New 
Delhi: Archaeological Survey of India. 


CHAPTER 2 


Why Are the Skull-Bearers (Kāpālikas) Called 
Soma? 


Judit Tūrzsēk 


1 The Ouestion 


The Kāpālikas or Skull-Bearers, who formed the third group of the Atimārga, 
alongside the Pasupatas and the Lākulas,! were perhaps the most notorious 
Saiva ascetics of classical India. They were known for their cremation ground 
rituals and for wandering around with a skull for an alms bowl. The skull 
(kapāla), their most conspicuous attribute, also provided their name. But the 
Kāpālikas are also designated as Somasiddhāntins, "Those of the Soma Doc- 
trine,”? or the “Soma People with the Skull"? These appellations seem to have 
been of some importance because their initiation names also included or 
ended in -soma in most cases (e.g. Satyasoma, Devasomā,* Somibhattāraka*). 
What was this Somasiddhanta, doctrine of Soma orteaching about (the) Soma? 


1 Conceming these distinctions within the Atimarga, the term Atimarga itself and the Kapa- 
likas as an Atimargic group, see Sanderson 1988 and 2006. Professor Sanderson has published 
several ground-breaking papers focussing on the Kapalikas. This paper, inspired by his discov- 
eries, is dedicated to him. 

2 This term figures in the Pauskaravrtti of Jūānaprakāšācārya, IFP transcript no. 110, p. 591. They 
are also called "Knowers of the Doctrine of Soma" (somasiddhantavedinah in Sarvajnanottara 
14.4, edited by Goodall), which could be corrupt for somasiddhāntavādinah, "Those who Pro- 
fess the Doctrine of Soma." 

3 Or “Skull-Bearers Who are the Soma People” somajanakāpālī in Jayadrathayamala 3.35.33c. 
There may be an attempt here to distinguish the skull-bearing Soma ascetics from other skull- 
bearers, such as those who follow a Bhairava tantra or a Kaula tantra. 

4 Thenames of the two Kapalikas in the Mattavilasaprahasana. 

5 The name or title of a Kapalika in the Kannada inscription of ancient Koļļipāke, Andhra, 
in 1050 CE, cited by Lorenzen 1989, 233-234. This Kapalika is said to be mukha-kamala- 
vinirggata-Somasiddhantabhipraya- “devoted to the meaning of Somasiddhanta issued from 
the lotus mouth [?of Šiva]” (Lorenzen’s translation). While this implies that the Somasi- 
ddhanta or Soma teaching was ultimately considered Saiva revelation (if we accept Loren- 
zen's suggestion of supplying Siva), it does not tell us anything about its nature and content, 
nor about the meaning of the word soma itself. The wording suggests, nevertheless, that it is 
not Siva who is called Soma. 


© JUDIT TORZSOK, 2020 | D01:10.1163/9789004432802 004 
This is an open access chapter distributed under the terms of the cc BY-NC 4.0 license. 


34 TORZSOK 


In what way was it typical of Kapalikas? Why did -soma figure in their initi- 
ation names? 

I am afraid I will not be able to offer conclusive answers to most of these 
puzzling questions. However, I propose to look at a few passages about the 
Kāpālikas which may shed more light on what the word or name Soma pos- 
sibly meant for them. 

Now I am not the first to ask this question. An ingenious answer can already 
be found in commentaries on the Prabodhacandrodaya of Krsnamisra (itself 
dating from 1041-1073): commentators understand soma to mean sa-umā, i.e. 
“with/accompanied by Uma,” with reference to the fact that a male Kapalika 
normally had a consort, just as Siva is accompanied by Uma.® 

This understanding seems rather forced. Female Kapalikas or tantric con- 
sorts are not normally called Uma and this interpretation does not seem to 
figure at all in earlier sources. It also fails to explain how we are to understand 
the element -soma in female initiation names (such as Devasoma), in which 
it cannot mean "with Umā/with a female consort” Nevertheless, the sa-umā 
explanation of soma higlights an important trait of the Kapalikas, namely that 
they were exceptional in the Atimarga in that male and female initiates per- 
formed rituals together? and were obviously not required to maintain celibacy, 
unlike (most probably) the ascetics of the Pa$upata and Lakula groups. 

David Lorenzen has proposed a different hypothesis.? He identified a Kapa- 
lika called Kapali-sarman in a (probably) sixth century inscription from Kar- 
nataka. This Kapali$arman is said to have performed vedic Soma sacrifices. 
Lorenzen therefore suggests that Kapalikas were perhaps dedicated vedic Soma 
sacrificers. 

This is also rather unlikely, for at least two reasons. First, Kāpālišarman may 
not have been a Kapalika in the strict sense, for his name does not include Soma 
and does not appear to conform to other kinds of Kapalika names either? Sec- 
ond, nowhere else is it said that Kapalikas performed vedic Soma sacrifices. 
However, as we shall see they took interest in particular 'essences' other than 
the vedic Soma, and in a metaphorical sense, perhaps did perform their own 
kind of Soma ritual. 


6 For this and some other references to Kapalikas associated with some Soma doctrine, see 
Lorenzen 1991, 83. 

7 Two well-known literary examples are the Kāpālika man with his partner in the Matta- 
vilasaprahasana and the Kapalika couple in the fifth act of Bhavabhūti's Malatimadhava. 

8 Lorenzen1989, 235 citing K.V. Ramesh Inscriptions of the Western Gangas 70—74, no. 19, inscrip- 
tion from Bangalore district, 6th cent.? (sic/). 

9 Since Kapālin/Kāpālika can denote Siva/Bhairava himself, the name could simply mean “Pro- 
tected by Siva/Bhairava" without being markedly Kāpālika. 


WHY ARE THE SKULL-BEARERS (KĀPĀLIKAS) CALLED SOMA? 35 
2 Soma$arman and the Moon Image 


We reach firmer ground when we turn to the often-cited Malhar or Junwani 
copper plate inscription (647 CE, see Bakker 2000 and 2015; Sanderson 2012), 
which lists a lineage of Kapalikas as identified by Sanderson. This mentions 
Somašarman and the "line of tradition starting with Soma" (continuing later 
with Rudrasoma, Tejasoma, Bhīmasoma). It is in Somašarman's house that 
Lakulīša, founder of the Pasupata order, is said to have been born as an incar- 
nation (avatāra) of Siva. Lakuliga was then initiated into or through the maha- 
vrata, perhaps by Somagarman himself: 


[...] adhunā kali-kalam āsādya šrīmal-Lakulīša-nātho 'vatirya Somasarma- 
khya-brāhmaņa-kule jatah mahāvrateļ te?|na diksito jagad-indus tenapi 
Musalisas tatah Somādi-pāramparya-krameņa sthanaguru-sri-Rudraso- 
ma-prasisya-sri-Tejasoma-sisyebhyah srimad-Bhimasoma-padebhyah |... | 


mahavrate[ te]na ] conj. Isaacson; mahavratena 
Musalīšas ] conj. Sanderson; mugalīšas 
sthānaguru | conj. Majumdar; sthāne guru 


[...] reaching the present Kali age, the venerable Lord Lakulīša took up an 
incarnation and was born in the family of a brahmin called Somašarman. 
He was initiated into the Great Observance by him (?) [and became] the 
Moon of the World. Then by him, Musaliáa [was initiated], then, by the 
unbroken tradition starting with Soma, the local Master Rudrasoma, his 
disciple Tejasoma, whose pupil is the venerable Bhīmasoma [...] 


Before examining the question of Soma and related issues, I would like to 
point out some details concerning the word mahāvrata or Great Observance. 
Lakulīša and others were most probably initiated into the mahavrata (maha- 
vrate) and not with/by the mahavrata (mahavratena), for this observance is 
not known to be used as a rite of initiation in any Saiva system.!° 

By the beginning of the seventh century, the mahavrata certainly referred 
to the ritualized mimesis of Siva's expiation for cutting off Brahma's fifth head. 


10 This follows the conjecture proposed by Isaacson, although the reading of mahavratena 
is of course grammatically acceptable. However, it is also possible that the instrumental 
mahavratena was understood to stand for the locative, and that no additional instrumen- 
tal tena was intended. In this case, it is not expressed that Somagarman initiates Lakulīša, 
although it may again be implied. Bakker (2015, 143) opts for the instrumental, but assumes 
that this only implies a Pasupata affiliation of Lakulīša. 


36 TORZSOK 


According to this well-known story, Siva must wander with a skull he uses as 
an alms bowl, for he has committed the sin of killing a brahmin, i.e. Brahma. 
Wandering with a skull for twelve years is in fact the expiatory observance for 
killing a brahmin as prescribed in the Dharmasütras,! but there it is not yet 
called mahavrata. Although most attestations of the mythological story come 
from late puranic sources, the myth already figures in the (original) Skandapu- 
rana (chapters 5-7), dated around the end of the sixth and beginning of the 
seventh century. 

Moreover, the Kāpālika Satyasoma in the Mattavilasaprahasana (600— 
625 CE) mentions that it was thanks to the practice of the mahavrata that his 
Lord bearing the crescent moon on his head was purified of his sin, which he 
had committed by cutting Brahmās head.!? The verse clearly identifies Siva’s 
mahavrata as the expiation rite for a brahmin slayer, and also shows that Kapa- 
likas were practising the mahavrata in imitation of Siva. In fact, the Skandapu- 
rana (6.5—6) also seems to associate this observance with sanguinary practices, 
such as those of the Kāpālikas. For when Šiva-Nīlalohita starts looking for suit- 
able alms, Visnu tries to fill his kapāla-bowl with his own blood—a very odd, 
distinctively Kapalika notion of what alms should consist of. 

Now returning to the question of the Soma lineage: Lakulīša, whether he was 
indeed initiated by Somagarman or not, is said to have been born in Somašar- 


11 See e.g. Baudhāyanadharmasūtra 2.1.2—3: bhrūņahā dvādaša samāh kapālī khatvangi ga- 
rdabhacarmavāsā aranyaniketanah smasane dhvajam šavaširah krtvā kutim kārayet | tām 
āvaset | saptagarani bhaiksam caran svakarmācaksāņas tena prāņān dharayet |. “A man 
who has killed a learned Brahmin should do the following for twelve years. He should 
carry a skull and a post from a bed-frame; wear the skin of an ass; reside in the wilder- 
ness; and, using the head of a corpse as his flag, get a hut built in a cemetery and live 
in it. He should maintain himself by begging almsfood from seven houses while pro- 
claiming his crime.” Translation by Olivelle (2000, 241). See Gautamadharmasūtra 22.4: 
khatvāngakapālapānir va dvadasa samvatsarān brahmacārī bhaiksaya grāmam praviset | 
karmacaksanah. “Or else, for twelve years he should live a chaste life and, carrying the 
post from a bed-frame and a skull, enter a village only to beg for food while proclaiming 
his crime.’ Translation by Olivelle (2000, 175), who remarks in the notes to this passage 
that Ahatvanga must mean skull-staff (a staff topped with a skull) rather than the post of 
a bed-frame. Brick 2012, however, shows convincingly that the post of a bed-frame was 
probably intended at the time of the Dharmasūtras. See also Yajriavalkyasmrti 3.243: ši- 
rahkapālī dhvajavān bhiksasi karma vedayan | brahmahā dvadasabdani mitabhuk šuddhim 
āpnuyāt ||. 

12 The version related here replaces the figure of Siva with one of his ectypes, Nilalohita. On 
this narrative device, which is used here to distance the supreme deity from sanguinary 
practices, see Granoff 2006. 

13 17ab: āsthāya prayato mahāvratam idam bālenducūdāmaņih, svāmī no mumuce pitāma- 
hasiraschedodbhavad enasah |. 


WHY ARE THE SKULL-BEARERS (KĀPĀLIKAS) CALLED SOMA? 37 


man’s house. According to the inscription, the Kāpālikas belong to the spiritual 

lineage starting with Soma, and their initiation names therefore seem to be 

derived from the founder’s name. The name Soma can naturally be understood 
as a short form of Somašarman. Thus, Kāpālikas are the Soma people because 
they follow the tradition started by Somasarman. 

Our investigation could stop here. For the name Soma seems to be suffi- 
ciently explained in this way. However, several issues remain unexplained. It 
is not clear whether Somagarman was a historical person. If he did exist, it still 
remains uncertain whether he was indeed the founder of the Kāpālika move- 
ment or whether Kāpālikas claimed retrospectively that he was their founder. 
Thus, we cannot take it for granted that the Soma name indeed derives from 
him. 

For this reason, I suggest we look at some other details more closely. Lakulīša, 
after his initiation in Somasarman’s house, is called the Moon of the Word 
( jagadindu) in the inscription. There are at least three interpretations of jaga- 
dindu: 

1. A natural understanding of the moon as having cool rays. Thus, "Moon 
[whose cooling rays have calmed the fever] of the world” (translation by 
Sanderson 2012). 

2. Moon on the earth, i.e. having a lunar-white body (sitariga) on account 
of the bathing with ashes (Bakker 2000; 2015, 153). This understanding is 
backed up by the description of Lakuliga in the Skandapurana as being 
white-bodied when covered with ashes.!* 

3. Without going against either of these interpretations, both of which are 
plausible, I propose as a tentative hypothesis that, in addition, the expres- 
sion jagadindu may indirectly allude to a Kāpālika affiliation if we under- 
stand this in the sense of *Jagatsoma, a compound suggestive of a Kapa- 
lika initiation name." This may imply two things. First, it is possible that 


14 It must also be noted that the Skandapurāņa (180.10) calls the mere ash-bath a/the great 
observance (mahavrata). It also says that Somasarman with his family received Lakulisa’s 
grace when he visited them in their house, and that they were given yogasiddhi (167.125 ff.). 
The Skandapurana appears to represent an earlier(?)/pasupata version of the story. (Cf. 
also Bakker 2015, 143 ff.) Bakker 2015, 143—144 (note 442) also proposes that the Soma name 
suggests a parallel with the Soma-vaméa dynastic affiliation of Mahasivagupta. However, 
the Soma name figures elsewhere, in seventh-century South India in the names of Kapa- 
likas of the Mattavilasaprahasana, where no such parallel can be assumed; such implica- 
tions therefore seem unlikely. 

15  Icannotcite any initiate with this name, and I do not intend to suggest that Jagatsoma (or 
Jagadindu) was necessarily an actual initiation name. The word may, nevertheless, be con- 
strued in the same manner as Kāpālika initiation names such as Satyasoma, Devasoma, 


38 TORZSOK 


the Kapalikas derive their name Soma/Moon from Lakuliga, too, who is 
considered the Moon of the World. Second, the sequence of events as 
presented in the inscription may also suggest that Lakulisa himself came 
to be called the "Moon of the World" (suggestive of a Kapalika initiation 
name) because of Somašarman. Whatever is the case, the lunar image is 
emphatically present in the names or epithets of both alleged founders 
as well as in the initiation names of Kapalikas. 
Now the naming of Lakulīša as the “Moon,” in the manner of a Kapalika, may be 
more than a coincidence. It may well be understood as an attempt to present 
Lakulīša as a true Kapalika, perhaps via his association with another "Moon 
person,” Somašarman. Or, from another point of view, by presenting Lakuliga 
as a Kapalika initiate, the text may suggest the preeminence of the Kapalikas 
over the other two Atimārga groups, the Pasupatas and the Lakulas. 

But no matter how we understand the hidden agenda of the above inscrip- 
tion (if there is one), itis undeniable that the Kapalikas' initiation name ending 
in -soma is understood to recall both their founder(s) name and the image of 
the moon. 


3 The Moon and the Nectar of Immortality (amrta) in the Skull(s) 


The moon also forms an important element of Pasupata yogic practices. As we 
learn from the Skandapurana (179.28 ff.), as pointed out by Bakker (2015, 141), 
their “accomplishment in yoga" (yogasiddhi) comes about through a process 
of withdrawing the senses until the practitioner can see a lunar disc (soma- 
mandala) in his heart. From the moonlight within his body, yogic powers, 
omniscience and the like arise. These powers include being immune to disease 
(vyadhayo nāvišanty enam) and possessing a divine body (divyam vapuh). 
Speaking of the moon and practices related to its visualization, the Kapalikas 
appear to share the pan-Indian idea that it also contains the nectar of immor- 
tality.!6 In one passage of Bhavabhuti's Mālatīmādhava (5.23) an invocation is 
addressed to the fierce goddess, Camunda, which describes her violent tandava 
dance. The verse is uttered by the two Kapalikas in the cremation ground. Dur- 
ing this dance, the goddess inadvertently slashes the moon, from which the 


etc., which can be interpreted as "Moon of Truth” "Moon of the Gods” etc. What I pro- 
pose is that this parallelism of names ending with "-moon" seems too remarkable to be 
accidental. 

16 This idea perhaps also contributed to the spread of various visualization practices cen- 
tered around the image of the moon. 


WHY ARE THE SKULL-BEARERS (KĀPĀLIKAS) CALLED SOMA? 39 


amrta flows downward and fills her garland of skulls. The skulls, thus resur- 
rected, start emitting a loud and harsh laughter.!? 

This image is not particularly significant in itself. However, it seems that 
Kāpālikas were particularily interested in a special sort of ambrosia. In their 
quest for the amrta, they probably joined a large range of ascetics or yogins of 
the period who, in various ways and through different practices, all sought the 
same magical essence.!? So what exactly was the amrta of the Kapalikas and 
how did they expect to find or produce it? 


4 What is the Kapalikas' Nectar (amrta/soma)? 


We now turn again to the Kapalikas of the Mālatīmādhava.!? At one point in 
the story (5.2), the female practitioner mentions that she can extract the so- 
called “five nectars" (paricamrta), which are five vital essences of the human 
body. They have a powerful, invigorating effect (as one would expect from such 
a nectar), so much so that the female Kapalika can fly a great distance in a few 
seconds. 


17  pracalita-kari-krtti-paryanta-cafícan-nakha-aghata-bhinnendu-nihsyandamanamrta- 
$cyota-jtvat-kapalavali-mukta-candattahasa-trasad-bhüri-bhüta-pravrtta-stuti — $vasad- 
asita-bhujamga-bhogāngada-granthi-nispīdana-sphāra-phullat-phaņā-pītha-niryad-visa- 
jyotir-ujjrmbhaņoddāmara-vyasta-vistāri-doh-khaņda-paryāsita-ksmādharam | jvalad- 
anala-pišanga-netra-cchatācchanna-bhīmottamānga-bhrami-prastutālāta-cakra-kriyā- 
syūta-dig-bhāgam uttunga-khatvānga-koti-dhvajoddhūti-viksipta-tārā-gaņam pramudita- 
katapūtanottāla-vetāla-tāla-sphutat-karņa-sambhrānta-Gaurī-ghanāšlesa-hrsyan-ma- 
nas-Tryambakanandi vah tandavam devi bhūyād abhīstyai ca hrstyai ca nah |. 

18 Obtaining the nectar of immortality and, thanks to it, an immortal physical body is the 
main goal of the hathayogic and Nath yogic traditions; see Mallinson 2007 and Ondračka 
2007. Mallinson (2015, 120 ff.) proposes that there may have been an early, nonsectarian 
tradition of ascetics, the precursor of what is later known as hathayoga, for which he finds 
traces already in the Pali Canon. 

19 I understand, in the context of this paper, the Kāpālikas of this play to represent the 
Kāpālikas of the Atimarga here under discussion. They could alternatively be considered 
skull-bearing tantric practitioners, as Hatley (2007, 143 ff.) argues on the basis of numerous 
parallels with prescriptions found in the Brahmayamala and elsewhere. In fact, one could 
interpret the evidence in two ways: either take the Kāpālikas of the play to belong to the 
Atimarga, which has strong influence on later Saiva tantras of the Vidyapitha, or one can 
take them to be tantric skull-bearers of the Vidyapitha, who certainly inherit much from 
the Kapalikas of the Atimarga. In either case, the practices described in the play may well 
reflect what is a ritual core common to both the Kāpālikas of the Atimarga and those of 
the Vidyapitha. For this reason, in the context of the present argument, I understand the 
Mālatīmādhava's Kāpālikas to be representative of Atimarga Kāpālikas or their practices, 
even if this identity remains uncertain. 


40 TORZSOK 


The extraction of the five nectars (paiicāmrtākarsaņa), as well as other, 
Kāpālika-type cremation ground practices, also figure in the Brahmayamala, 
as Hatley (2007, 143 ff.) points out. The five substances are not listed in a 
systematic way, but they usually seem to include these four: semen (sukra), 
blood (rakta), fat/marrow (medas) and sneha (see also the entry paricam- 
rta in Tantrikabhidhanakosa, vol. 111). Other sources also describe Kapalikas 
as making use of various parts of the human body. Kapalikas use human 
flesh (mahamamsa), brain (mastiska), intestines (antra), fat (vasa) and blood 
(kīlāla) in ritual, and drink alcohol (sura), according to Prabodhacandrodaya 
313. 

In addition to the extraction of the five nectars, the Brahmayamala also 
includes rituals which make particular use of human body parts and are to be 
performed in the cremation ground. A notable series of chapters prescribing 
such rites forms a small cluster around chapter 46. Since the practices pre- 
scribed have close affinity to the kinds of ritual attributed to Kāpālikas, these 
chapters could well be adaptations or assimilations of originally Kapalika ritu- 
als,2° although this remains a hypothesis in the absence of any surviving Kapa- 
lika scriptures. It is also notable that the Brahmayamala describes possession 
(āveša) by Bhairava, stating that through possession one obtains Bhairavahood; 
and possession was, according to numerous Saiva sources about the subject, the 
way in which Kapalikas claimed to attain final liberation.?! 

Now in chapter 46 of the Brahmayamala, much like the Kapalikas, the prac- 
titioner makes ritual use of human flesh, hair (keša), bones (asthi), body fluids 
(picu), particularly blood (rakta), and intestines (antra); moreover, he offers 
and drinks alcohol (madira). 

It is in this chapter that the amrta comes to fore again in ritual. For the 
main subject here is amrtamanthana, the churning and drinking of the amrta. 
The Sadhaka is to make pots from clay obtained from the cremation ground, 
contruct a sacrificial pavilion from bones, and place the ritual cauldron upon 
a corpse. He is required to churn a mixture including mahapicu (sexual flu- 
ids or various other human fluids?) using a piece of bone as the churning 
stick, with a rope made of human hair, intestines and skin (?). The cauldron 
is identified with Aghorī and the churning stick with Bhairava. In this rite, the 
Sadhaka re-enacts the cosmic churning of the ocean, and the same miracu- 
lous objects emerge (the Kaustubha gem, etc.) as the gods brought forth dur- 
ing the primordial churning. Then the terrifying goddess, Candika, receives 


20 For more arguments, see Tórzsók 201 and 2015. 
21  Onthis, see e.g. Sanderson 2009, 133 note 311. 


WHY ARE THE SKULL-BEARERS (KĀPĀLIKAS) CALLED SOMA? 41 


homage. She appears in the form of Aghori, offering the Sadhaka a boon. 
The practitioner chooses to drink the milk of Aghori’s breasts. The chapter 
ends by saying that having produced the amrta and having drunk left and 
right (probably meaning having drunk Aghorī's milk from both breasts), one 
becomes omniscient, Bhairava himself. Although Aghorīs milk and the amrta 
that the Sadhaka prepares are not identified, they could well be the same 
thing.?? 


22 The following working edition is based on Shaman Hatley's transcription of the old palm- 
leaf manuscript. Only the relevant verses are given here: 

mahāpicususampūrņam kuryāt sthālim šavopari ||44] | 
āyatasya tu nalakam mahā-m-asthi $avopari | 
esa manthānako devi asmin tantre prašasyate ||45|| 
kešesu netrakam kuryād antraih karttrvimisritaih | (karttr in the sense of krtti?) 
navahastam susampurnam vidyāmālāniyojitam ||46|| 
suvisuddhamahibhagam rajasampatasobhitam | 
mahasthali tu pāršve tu evam krtvā mahātape ||47 
Aghoryā sthālirūpām tu dhyāyen mantrī susobhanam | 
Saktistham saktirūpām ca dhyāye somatmake sthitam ||48|| 
Manthanabhairavam devam šuddhasphatikanirmalam | 
sahasrabhujaparyantam cinten manthānarūpiņam ||49|| 


mahāmanthāna kurvīta yam sthitvā tu Sivo bhavet ||61)| 
namaskrtvāsurīm divyam tatah sādhanam ārabhet ||62|| 


evam mālais tu tām dīptām dhyātvā manthānamandiram | 
netrakam ca tathaiveha cintayed Vāsukirūpiņam ||66|| 
ksīrodam sthāpayet sthāli ātmā bhairavarūpiņam | 
pūjayitvā tu manthānam praksipet sthālimadhyatah ||67|| 


ksanamatram mathed yāvac chasankottisthate priye ||92|| 
Kaustubham ca tato tisthe vimānam Puspakam tathā | 

evam ādyāni siddhīni purvasastrena bhasitam ||93|| 

uttisthati mahabhage sataso ['|tha sahasrasah | (mahabhago Ms.) 


ksanamatram mathed yava namaskrtvā tu Candikam | 
tatrottisthati vai devi Aghori siddhidāyikā ||107|| 


sadhakovaca || 

yadi tustasi mam devi stanam me dada Ambike ||114|| 
šrutvā vakyam tato devyam sādhakasya susobhanam | 

ehi ehi mahāsattva stana me piba putraka{h} ||115|| 

tvam muktvā tu mahasattva{h} ko [’|nyo putratvam arhati | 
parisvajya tato vīram stanam dadami sadhaka{h} ||116|| 


42 TORZSOK 


What emerges from this chapter is that the preparation of the nectar of 
immortality was also an important way in which one could obtain Bhairava- 
hood. Moreover, it involved worship of a fearsome goddess, Candika or Aghori, 
which again recalls the Kapalikas in the Malatimadhava, who worship Ca- 
munda. 

But was the bodily amrta the only nectar the Kapalikas collected and con- 
sumed? 


5 Alcohol, Immortality and Soma 


The Kāpālikas were also known for their use of alcohol in ritual. The Prabodha- 
candrodaya (3.20 and prose) presents a Kapalika rite of initiation, in the course 
of which the Kāpālika offers alcohol to the initiands and calls it amrta, for, once 
again, this releases someone from the bondages of this world and of the state 
of being a bound soul. In this sense, amrta is not just a simple metaphor denot- 
ing a precious or delicious liquid. It is a genuine nectar of immortality, for it 
actually makes one immortal by bestowing final release, moksa.23 

In a more satirical way, the Kapalikas’ alcohol is also treated as their equiva- 
lent to the vedic Soma. The Kāpālika in the Mattavilasaprahasana cries out as 
follows when he sees a pub: 


My darling, look. This pub resembles the vedic sacrificial ground. For its 
signpost resembles the sacrificial pillar; in this case alcohol is the Soma, 
drunkards are the sacrificial priests, the wine glasses are the special cups 
for drinking Soma, the roasted meat and other appetizers are the fire obla- 
tions, the drunken babblings are the sacrificial formulae, the songs are the 
Saman-hymns, the pitchers are the sacrificial ladles, thirst is the fire and 
the owner of the pub is the patron of the sacrifice.?* 


evam krtvapi vai devi -m- amrtam sadhakottamah | 
savyāsavyam tato pītvā sarvajfio bhavate ksaņāt ||120|| (ksanam Ms) 
bhairavo ['|tha svayam sāksā guhyakanam prabhu|r] bhavet | (prabhu Ms unmetr.) 
(Superfluous visargas are placed between curly braces. Square brackets indicate editorial 
additions. Comments and variants are in parentheses. A hiatus-filling m is printed as -m-.) 
23 Sraddha: bhaavam, sulāe pülitam bhāanam [= bhagavan, surayā pūritam bhàjanam]. 
Kāpālikah (pītvā, sesam bhiksuksapanakayor arpayati): 
idam pavitram amrtam ptyatam bhavabhesajam | 
pašupāšasamucchedakāraņam Bhairavoditam ||20||. 
24  Kapālī: priye! pašya pašya | esa surāpaņo yajriavatavibhütim anukaroti | atra hi dhva- 
jastambho yupah, surā somah, šauņdā rtvijah, casakas camasāh, šūlyjamāmsaprabhrtaya 


WHY ARE THE SKULL-BEARERS (KĀPĀLIKAS) CALLED SOMA? 43 


Nobody would assume from this passage that the Kāpālikas were Soma 
sacrificers—the comic effect intended is readily evident. It is nevertheless 
interesting that, once again, the Kāpālikas are presented as having a special 
nectar of their own, whether it is called amrta or Soma, and that the ritual 
significance of this nectar may be, it seems, comparable to the Soma of vedic 
ritual. 


6 Inventors of a New Nectar (soma/amrta)? Or Simply ‘the Best?’ 


From the passages looked at here, no firm conclusion can be drawn as to why 
the Kāpālikas included the word Soma in their initiation names and what 
exactly they meant by “the teaching of or about Soma” (Somasiddhanta). The 
most readily explicable case is found in the Junwani copper plate inscrip- 
tion, which associates the Soma name with the name of their alleged founder, 
Somašarman. It is, nevertheless, possible that Kapalikas identified Somaša- 
rman as their founder only retrospectively and that this derivation of Soma 
from Somašarman is secondary. 

Conveniently, Soma as a proper name is also one of Šiva's names,” although 
it does not necessary imply that he is accompanied by Uma (sa-umā). Soma 
is probably used metaphorically for Siva, just as it is used for other gods such 
as Visnu or Kubera. In any case, somasiddhanta can accordingly simply mean 
“Siva’s doctrine.” However, as a rather generic appellation of the god’s teaching, 
it seems unlikely to designate the Kapalika doctrine in particular. 

Soma, meaning “moon,” and more particularly the nectar of immortality the 
moon is supposed to contain, is another possible explanation. Various kinds of 
nectar (amrta/Soma), whether alcohol or essences of the human body, appear 
to be in the focus of attention in Kāpālika rituals. The vital essences in par- 
ticular were considered to have an invigorating effect that provided Kāpālikas 
with the magical power they were apparently famous for. Concoctions of the 
vital essences were probably thought to bestow omniscience and Bhairava- 
hood. Whether it was really this nectar or these nectars that were at the origin 
of the name Soma is impossible to tell; but whatever the case may be, the bod- 
ily nectar of the vital essences was most probably a crucial element of Kapalika 
doctrine and practice.?% 


upadamšā havirvišegāh, mattavacanāni yajumsi, gītāni sāmāni, udankah sruvah, tarso 
gnih, surāpaņādhipatir yajamanah |. 

25 See e.g. Skandapurana 2.3, 29.103, Kathāsaritsāgara 7.1.101. 

26 This may not be sufficient to explain what was meant by their “doctrine of/about Soma” 


44 TORZSOK 


Given this rather wide range of possibilities, it is possible that the Kāpālikas 
themselves intended to make full use the natural polysemy of the word Soma, 
although it is less likely that such polysemy was intended from the very begin- 
ning. 

Finally, to add one more possible interpretation: Soma at the end of a com- 
pound can also mean “chief, principal, the best”?7 In this sense, one could 
understand the Kapalika names to imply that they considered themselves sim- 
ply the best Saivas around. 


Acknowledgements 

I would like to thank all the participants of the Symposium Šaivism and the 
Tantric Traditions held in honour of Professor A.G.J.S. Sanderson for their ques- 
tions, comments and criticism concerning the first version of this paper, in par- 
ticular Professor Sanderson and Professor Bakker. I am also indebted to Csaba 
Kiss and Shaman Hatley for comments on and corrections of the final draft. The 
written version of the paper reproduces some aspects of the oral presentation 
stylistically. 


References 


Primary Sources 

Kathāsaritsāgara of Somadeva[bhatta]. Pandit Durgaprasad and Kashinath Pandurang 
Parab, eds. Revised by Wasudev Laxman Shastri Panshikar. Bombay: Nirnay Sagar 
Press, 1930. 

Gautamadharmasitra. See Olivelle 2000. 

Jayadrathayamala. National Archives, Kathmandu ms. nos. 5-4650 (satka 1 and 2); 5- 
722 (satka 3); 1-1468 (satka 4, NGMP reel no. A151-116). Electronic text provided by 
Olga Serbaeva. I am grateful to Dr. Serbaeva for making her transcription available 
tome. 

Pauskaravrtti of Jianaprakasacarya. 1FP T. no. 110. Electronic text of the Muktabodha 
Indological Research Institute, https://etexts.muktabodha.org/digital library.htm. 

Prabodhacandrodaya of Krsnamisra. Armelle Pédraglio, ed. and trans. Le Prabodhacan- 
drodaya de Krsnamisra Paris: de Boccard, 1974. 

Baudhāyanadharmasūtra. See Olivelle 2000. 


but such “doctrine” was not necessarily an abstract theory. The word siddhanta may be 
used in the sense of “teaching” rather than “philosophy” or “philosophical conclusion.” 
27 For this meaning, see Apte 1957, entries on soma and nrsoma. 


WHY ARE THE SKULL-BEARERS (KĀPĀLIKAS) CALLED SOMA? 45 


Brahmayāmala. National Archives, Kathmandu Ms. No. 3-370. Electronic text provided 
by Shaman Hatley. I am grateful to Dr. Hatley for making his transcription available 
tome. 

Mattavilāsaprahasana of Mahendravikramavarma. T. Ganapati Sastri, ed. Trivandrum: 
Rajakiya Mudranayantralaya, 1917. 

Malatimadhava of Bhavabhūti. M.R. Kale, ed. Mālatīmādhava of Bhavabhūti with the 
Commentary of Jagaddhara. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1996. (1st ed. 1928.) 

Sarvajfianottara. Dominic Goodall, ed. Draft edition based on IFP Ms. T.334, IFP Ms. 
T.760 and NAK Ms. 1-1692 and 3 printed editions. I am grateful to Dominic Goodall 
for making his edition available to me. 

Yajnavalkyasmrti of Yājiiavalkya. Narayan Ram Acharya, ed. Yajfíavalkyasmrti of Yogis- 
vara Yajfíavalkya, with the Commentary Mitaksara of Vijfíanesvara. Bombay: Nir- 
nayasagara Press, 1949. 

Skandapurana. R. Adriaensen, H.T. Bakker and H. Isaacson, eds. Skandapurana, vol. 1. 
(Adhyāyas 1-25). Critically Edited with Prolegomena and English Synopsis. Supple- 
ment to Groningen Oriental Studies. Groningen: Egbert Forsten, 1998. 

Skandapurāņa. Krsnaprasada Bhattarāī, ed. Skandapuranasya Ambikakhandah. Ma- 
hendraratnagranthamālā, no. 2. Kathmandu: 1988. 


Secondary Sources 

Apte, V.S. 1957 [1998]. The Practical Sanskrit-English Dictionary. Revised and enlarged 
edition. Reprint (3 vols. in 1), Kyoto: Rinsen Book Company. 

Bakker, Hans T. 2000. "Soma$arman, Somavamša and Somasiddhānta: A Pasupata Tra- 
dition in Seventh-Century Daksiņa Kosala” In Harānandalaharī: Volume in Honour 
of Professor Minoru Hara on his Seventieth Birthday, edited by Ryutaro Tsuchida and 
Albrecht Wezler, 1-19. Reinbek. Dr. Inge Wezler Verlag fūr Orientalistische Fachpub- 
likationen. 

Bakker, Hans T. 2015. The World of the Skandapurāņa—Northern India in the Sixth and 
Seventh Centuries. Leiden; Boston: Brill. 

Brick, David J. 2012. "The Origin of the Khatvanga Staff” Journal of the American Oriental 
Society 132 (1): 31-39. 

Granoff, Phillis. 2006. “Siva and His Ganas: Techniques of Narrative Distancing in 
Purāņic Stories.” In Voice of the Orient (A Tribute to Prof. Upendranath Dhal), edited 
by Raghunath Panda and Madhusudan Mishra, 77-103. Delhi: Eastern Book Link- 
ers. 

Hatley, Shaman. 2007. The Brahmayamala and Early Saiva Cult of Yoginīs. Ph.D. thesis, 
University of Pennsylvania. 

Lorenzen, David N. 1991 [1972]. The Kāpālikas and Kalamukhas: Two Lost Saivaite Sects. 
2nd edition. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass. 

Lorenzen, David N. 1990 [1989]. “New Data on the Kāpālikas” In Criminal Gods and 


46 TORZSOK 


Demon Devotees: Essays on the Guardians of Popular Hinduism, edited by Alfred 
Hiltebeitel, 231-238. Reprint, New Delhi: Manohar. 

Mallinson, James. 2007. The Khecarividyà of Adinatha. A Critical Edition and Annotated 
Translation of an Early Text of Hathayoga. London; New York: Routledge. 

Mallinson, James. 2015. “Saktism and hathayoga.” In Goddess Traditions in Tantric Hin- 
duism—History Practice and Doctrine, edited by Bjarne Wernicke-Olesen, 109-140. 
London; New York: Routledge. 

Olivelle, Patrick. 2000. Dharmasütras. The Law Codes of Āpastamba, Gautama, Baud- 
hayana and Vasistha. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass. 

Ondračka, Lubomir. 2007. “Perfected Body, Divine Body and Other Bodies in the Nātha- 
Siddha Sanskrit Texts.” Pre-print version of a paper presented at the 13th World San- 
skrit Conference. Available on the author’s page at www.academia.edu. 

Sanderson, Alexis G.J.S. 1988. “Saivism and the Tantric Traditions.” In The Worlds Reli- 
gions, edited by S. Sutherland, L. Houlden, P. Clarke and F. Hardy, 660—704. London: 
Routledge. 

Sanderson, Alexis GJ.S. 2006. “The Lakulas: New Evidence of a System Intermediate 
between Paficarthika Pagupatism and Agamic Šaivism” Indian Philosphical Annual 
24: 143-217. 

Sanderson, Alexis G.J.S. 2009. “The Saiva Age” In Genesis and development of Tantrism, 
edited by Shingo Einoo, 41-350. Tokyo: Institute of Oriental Culture, University of 
Tokyo. 

Sanderson, Alexis G.J.S. 2012. "Šaivism and Brahmanism. All Souls, Hilary Term 2012” 
Lecture handout available on the author's page at www.academia.edu. 

Tāntrikābhidhānakoša. Dictionnaire des terms techniques de la littérature hindoue tan- 
trique. A Dictionary of Technical Terms from Hindu Tantric Literature. Vol. 111. Dominic 
Goodall and Marion Rastelli, eds. Beitrāge zur Kultur- und Geistesgeschichte Asiens, 
no. 76. Vienna: Austrian Academy of Sciences Press, 2013. 

Tórzsók, Judit. 2011. "Kāpālikas” In Brill's Encyclopedia of Hinduism, vol. 111, edited by 
Knut A. Jacobsen, et al., 355—361. Leiden: Brill. 

Tórzsók, Judit. 2015. “The (Un)Dreadful Goddess: Aghorī in early Sakta tantras” In God- 
dess Traditions in Tantric Hinduism: History, Practice and Doctrine, edited by Bjarne 
Wernicke-Olesen, 33—50. London; New York: Routledge. 


CHAPTER 3 


Dressing for Power: On vrata, caryā, and vidyāvrata 
in the Early Mantramārga, and on the Structure of 
the Guhyasūtra of the Nisvasatattvasamhita 


Dominic Goodall 


If, twenty years ago, you had read most of the literature published before the 
1990s about the Saivasiddhanta, you would probably have received the impres- 
sion that this was primarily a South Indian movement, whose scriptures, called 
āgamas, were divided into four sections, or pādas, devoted to ritual (kriyā), 
doctrine ( jñāna), yoga and pious conduct (caryā). The first two of these four 
sections, the kriyā-pāda and the jitāna-pāda, you would have learnt, were the 
most important, the kriyapada being devoted to describing the rituals practised 
in the Saiva temples of the Tamil-speaking area, and the jñānapāda (or vidyā- 
pada) being devoted to teaching and defending a strictly dualist system that 
presents an ontological ladder of thirty-six tattvas, but that recognises three 
irreducible ontological categories: pati, pašu and pasa. That is to say: the Lord 
(pati), bound souls (pašu), and the bonds that bind them (pasa), namely Mat- 
ter, karman and an innate impurity called mala or ànava-mala. 

Each one of these pieces of received wisdom has been challenged by the dis- 
coveries of the last two decades, so that we now know that none of the above 
propositions actually holds true for the earliest strata of the religion to which 
surviving primary literature can give us access. A great many of those discov- 
eries are those of Alexis Sanderson and the students to whom for decades he 
devoted much of his time and energy. 

Of course it is wide reading of a very broad corpus of published and unpub- 
lished sources that has gradually revealed to us quite a different picture of the 
early phases of the religion. But if one were to single out any one text for its 
importance in expanding our knowledge of the early history of the Mantra- 
mārga, it would probably be the Nisvāsatattvasamhitā. 

Ten years ago, hardly any aspect of the text had been explored in print, but, 
thanks in part to the spotlight of the Franco-German 'Early Tantra' project, 
which between 2008 and 2011 focussed the minds of many people present at 
the Toronto symposium on the Nisvasa and on its relation to other early tantric 
literature, parts of the work have been commented upon in an array of publica- 
tions. The first major arcticle actually predates the ‘Early Tantra’ project, and is, 


© DOMINIC GOODALL, 2020 | DOI:10.1163/9789004432802_005 


This is an open access chapter distributed under the terms of the CC BY-NC 4.0 license. 


48 GOODALL 


of course, by Professor Sanderson himself: it is his study of the Lākulas (2006). 
Apart from the first volume of the collaborative edition and translation, cov- 
ering the earliest three books of the Nišvāsa—the Mūlasūtra, Uttarasūtra and 
Nayasūtra— there are now substantial articles on, for instance, the evolution of 
the system of tattvas that can be traced as it gradually takes shape within the 
Nisvasa-corpus (Goodall 2016), and on the lengthy grimoires of magical rites 
contained in the Guhyasütra that are similar in style and content to those found 
in Buddhist kriyātantra works, and most strikingly similar to the those in the 
Mafijusripamulakalpa (Goodall and Isaacson 2016). 

Now that the earliest three books of the Nisvāsa are published at last, and 
now that the introductory book, the Nisvāsamukhatattvasamhitā, has been 
thoroughly examined in a doctoral thesis defended this year at the University 
of Leiden by Nirajan Kafle (2015*), what remains is the largest book of them 
all: the Guhyasiitra. The ninth-century manuscript of the corpus (NGMPP Reel 
No. A 41/14) comprises 114 folios, and all of the hitherto edited works together 
cover only the first 40 of those. The remaining 74 folios give us the text of the 
Guhyasutra. Here is a very brief outline of the structure of its eighteen chapters: 


A. SADHANA 

Ch. 1 personality-types of sādhakas and types of lingas that may be used 
for siddhi. 

Ch. 2 lingapratistha. 

Ch. 3 preparations for sadhana, prognosticatory rites, vratas, procedures 
for attaining certain siddhis. 


B. COSMOGRAPHY 

Chs. 4—7 a lengthy cosmography (prakriyajrana). 

Ch. 8 a variant form of dīksā in the form of worship of a series of mandalas 
peopled by deities of the different levels of the cosmos (prakriyayaga). 


C. OTHER MANTRA-SYSTEMS 
Finally, the use, primarily for magical powers, of mantra-systems other 
than those given in the earlier three sutras, namely 
a) Chs. g-u The vyomavyāpin. 
b) Chs. 12-14 The five brahmamantras. 
Ch. 15 Long forms of their arigamantras. 
c) Chs.16—18 A ten-syllable mantra called vidya. 


The Guhyasiitra is somewhat like a series of appendices to the earlier sutras, 
containing more detailed accounts of some topics that have already been cov- 


DRESSING FOR POWER 49 


ered (cosmography), but also entirely new subjects (new mantras) or treat- 
ments of subjects that have hitherto only been alluded to, notably the acgui- 
sition of siddhis. As I have tried to indicate with the overarching titles (A, B, 
C) in the brief summary above, I think that it can be said that chapters 1 to 
3 have a certain sort of unity because they cover the acguisition of magical 
powers in much greater detail than we see in earlier layers of the text: the 
first chapter gives information about sadhakas, then stresses the importance 
of the liriga for attaining siddhis, after which, in chapter 2, the installation of 
lingas is covered, and then in the third chapter we return to the preparations 
for sadhana and finally the procedures to be followed. Chapters 4—7 then give 
us a very detailed account of the Šaiva cosmos, the higher reaches of which 
have been further expanded and embroidered upon since the composition of 
the earlier sūtras of the text! This is undertaken because dīksā involves purg- 
ing the soul of the fruits of karman that would need to be experienced—and 
thus expended—through every layer of the Saiva universe. Using the same 
cosmography, chapter 8 describes an alternative diksa involving the worship 
of mandalas representing successive layers of the universe, and it then con- 
tains a number of add-on discussions that suggest, it seems to me, that the 
text once drew to a close at that point, as we shall see below. What follow, tak- 
ing us up to the end of the Guhyasitra, are three distinct textual layers each 
devoted to introducing an extra mantra-system, namely 1) that of the 81-word 
VYOMAVYAPIN, 2) that of the brahmamantras, and 3) that of the ten-syllable 
VIDYA. To each of these is attached a grimoire of magical recipes (kalpa). 

Turning to the conclusion of chapter 8, I think that we can see from the sum- 
mary given below that it reads like a series of codas. Verse 105 gives a clear 
statement of what we are supposed to have learnt from the preceding chap- 
ters, and it is followed immediately by remarks about the persons to whom 
these teachings may and may not be submitted, a typical closing device. Tagged 
on to this, from verse 116 onwards, is a treatment of religious suicide, again a 
theme suitable to the conclusion of a work of scripture. The final section, from 
verse 125, is introduced by Devīs question about the status of rival religious tra- 
ditions. In answer, Siva explains that He and Devi, as consonants and vowels, 
are the source of all language, and that they are the source of all the universe 
in that they are to be identified with the various tattvas from which all else 
evolves. 


1 Afullexamination of this embroidery will have to await the publication of the relevant parts 
of the Guhyasütra, but some idea of its extent and nature may be gained from the table on 
PP. 290-293 of Goodall, Sanderson and Isaacson 2015 and from the surrounding annotation, 
as well as from Goodall 2016. 


50 GOODALL 
Summary of the conclusion of Guhyasütra 8:2 


8.88-89 Devi asks how an initiate may foretell his own death. 

8.90-98 Siva recounts signs of death. 

8.99104 Activities that can be done under particular asterisms that 
grant release [from death?]. 

8105 Summary of teachings from chapter 4 up to this point in chapter 8. 


8106-10 Those to whom one should and should not transmit this 
knowledge. 

811-n4b The 4 means of liberation: dīksā, jriana, yoga, carya. 

8.114c-115 One should transmit this only to someone worthy. 


8.116-17 Devi asks about religious suicide. 

8.118—122 Šiva deprecates death in tīrthas for initiates; he teaches instead 
5 varieties of a ‘razor’-mantra for suicide by japa. 

8.123 Increasing length of life by yogic dharanas. 

8.124 The supreme Saiva knowledge, without which one cannot be liber- 
ated, has been taught! 


8.125-127 Devi asks about the fate of those who follow rival religions. 

8.128—133 Siva explains that He and Devi, as the consonants and vowels 
of the alphabet, are the source of all linguistic expression (vari 
mayam) and of all that has evolved (vikarah). 

8.134—136 The MŪLA-mantra is a panacea (mrtasanjtvant ). 

8.137138 Šiva and Parvati are parents of everything in that they are 
respectively these tattvas: purusa and prakrti; kala and niyati; īšvara 
and māyā+vidyā; sadāšiva and kala. 

8.139-140 They are also respectively [supreme] Šiva and His Will (icchā). 

8.141 Those who do not know the NAVĀTMAN, who are devoid of dīksā 
and jrāna, who do not know the MULA, do not attain the highest 
state. 


2 Much of this conclusion has, by the way, been borrowed and adapted into the Nisvāsakārikā, 
which seems itself like another series of addenda that further modify and extend the teach- 
ings of the sutras of the Nisvāsatattvasamhitā. Thus Guhyasütra 8.88—89 and 8.92104 have 
been reworked to produce chapter 21 of the jrianakanda of the Nisvasakarika (T. 17, pp. 131— 
133; T. 127, pp. 36-38); and Guhyasütra 8.125—136 have been reworked to form the beginning 
of chapter 20 (23 in T. 127) of the jrianakanda of the Nisvasakarika (T. 17, pp. 122—124; T. 127, 
PP. 231-233). The chapter continues, at least in T. 17, for a further 32 verses on rival notions of 
liberation and methods for attaining it. 


DRESSING FOR POWER 51 


We may remark in passing that a noteworthy feature of this final passage is 
that the text takes no clearly defined position on the debate between dualism, 
which was to become a defining characteristic of classical mainstream Said- 
dhantika doctrine, and non-dualism: it seems as though this debate had not 
yet caught the interest and attention of Saiva thinkers. Here is the passage in 
question: 


aham pumams tvam prakrti niyati puna[[r eva ca]] 
niya---[2] kālarūpī mahe$varah 8.137 

tvam maya ca tatha vidya aham punas tathesvarah 
sadāšiva ahan devi tvati caturdhā kale$vari 8.138 
īsitvāc ca vašitvāc ca sarvajfiatvac ca nitya$ah 

$antatvan niskalatvac ca samatvāc ca aham šivah 8.139 
mama iccha na hanya tvam tvam hi saktibalodayā 
tvatsütafi ca jagat sarvam $ivada sadanugrahe 8.140 


I am purusatattva and you are prakrti and also niyati; ... Mahešvara is 
Time; you are Maya and Vidya, while I am Iévara-tattva. I, O goddess, 
am Sadasiva [and] you are mistress of the 4 kalas. (137-138) 

Because I rule, I control, I am omniscient, because I am permanently at 
rest, without division and in equilibrium, I am Siva. (139) 

You are my Will, not to be crossed, for you are the one from whom the 
power of the šaktis arises! 

The whole universe has sprung from you; You bestow Siva-nature, O you 
of true compassion! (140) 


Having proposed an identification of the principal layers of redaction that are 
detectable in the Guhyasutra, I should like now to skip back to the verses in 
the conclusion of chapter 8 that speak about those to whom the teachings may 
and may not be transmitted, since these verses bear both upon the themes that 
structure the work and upon the subject of caryā. For, slipped into the middle 
of that section, beginning in verse 8.11, is a short sequence of verses that make 
the claim that the teachings of the text comprise four independently salvific 
parts: dīksā, jndna, yoga and caryā. 


etad buddhva na datavyam sivadevamrtam param 8.110 
diksajfianena yogena caryaya ca yathakramam 
pratyekasah sivavaptis tantre 'smin paramesvare 8.111 
dīksayā sukaram moksam yad gurus sadhayet sada 
jfianafi ca gurum asadya labhyate tat[[prasadatah]] 8.2 


52 GOODALL 


---[f. 72r] te mx yo xx(?) ca gurupadatah? 

ātmašaktyā carec caryam sarvasiddhipradayikam — 8.13 
etac catustayam proktam samsarabhayanasanam 
parasyaiva na deyan tu yadi 'cchet siddhim atmanah 8.114 


Knowing this, one should not give [lightly] the supreme nectar of Lord 
Siva. (110) 

According to this scripture of the Lord, one may attain Siva by each 
of the following [practised individually] (pratyekasah): initiation, 
knowledge, yoga and caryā in due order. (111) 

By initiation one attains liberation easily, since it is the guru who invari- 
ably accomplishes it.* And knowledge is obtained, once one finds a 
guru, through his grace. (112) 

.. yo[ ga] ... from the feet of the guru; One must practise caryā, which 
bestows all supernatural powers, using one's own strength (atmasak- 
tā). (13) 

This tetrad has been taught to destroy the dangers of samsāra. It should 
not [lightly] be given to others if one desires supernatural power for 
oneself. (114) 


An innocent might here at first suppose that we find here what may be the ear- 
liest allusion to the notion that each Šaiva scripture should be arranged in four 
text-units called pādas, for it is not difficult to see that the kriyapada might 
easily be referred to by the most significant ritual of all, namely dīksā. Now 
Brunner (1992) and others? have shown that most early scriptures are not in fact 
divided into four such text-units, and the Nisvāsa certainly is not. Nonetheless, 
one might reasonably suppose that the four topics to which some later scrip- 
tures devote four text-sections called padas are referred to here. But are they? 
Plainly the first three, dīksā, jfíana and yoga, may be found treated at length 
in the Nisvasa; but is there anything that we might recognise as caryā? This is 
a word we are rather used to seeing translated as “conduct” or “comportment,” 
as for instance in the title of Brunner's 1985 translation of the kriyāpāda and 
caryapada of the Mrgendratantra: Mrgendrāgamaļ.| Section des rites et section 
du comportement. When she characterises the content of the caryapada there, 
she observes (p. xxxvii): 


3 Perhaps N once read: yogari ca gurupādatah? 

4 Atthe beginning of the kriyapada of the Matariga (1.2), initiation is similarly presented as an 
alternative route to salvation that is easier than taking the more difficult path of jfiana. 

5 See Goodall 1998, lviii-Ixv. 


DRESSING FOR POWER 53 


La presque totalité de I’ exposé (śl 1-105) est consacrée à un sujet unique: 
le comportement normal des différents groupes d’ initiés.® 


This is a topic that we really do not find addressed in the Nisvasatattvasamhita, 
and it is therefore clear that caryā probably does not mean “comportement nor- 
mal" in this text. When speaking in Toronto, I was unaware that Christian Wede- 
meyer, faced with similar difficulties of interpretation resulting from assuming 
such a meaning, had already devoted a chapter of his work on Making Sense 
of Tantric Buddhism (2013, 133-169) to discussing how caryā and related terms 
should be understood in early Buddhist and Saiva tantric works.” An explo- 
ration of this theme therefore now seems in some respects less pressing to me 
than it once did. But there are still some issues that can usefully be commented 
upon, and there are several early Šaiva attestations of the nexus of caryā-related 
terms of which Wedemeyer was not aware and which serve to adjust, I think, 
some of what he has said about this semantic field, and that go some way to 
explaining a significant juncture in the semantic voyage of the term caryā that 
led to its being commonly assumed in modern scholarship to mean something 
like “comportement normal,” even in passages in which such a meaning does 
not fit. Wedemeyer's account does clarify a number of confusions, and he is 
to be commended for taking into account several Šaiva passages, but a combi- 
nation of a desire to show that it is the Šaivas who have borrowed from the 
Buddhists rather more than the Buddhists have from the Šaivas here (2013, 
136—137, 154) and of not having had access to the earliest known Saiva mate- 
rial (which I should like to have made widely available long ago, but editing 
concurrently the Nisvasa, the Kiraņa and the Sarvajnanottara is proving a very 
time-consuming project) have led him to some problematic assertions and 
assumptions, some of which I hope to correct below? In what follows, I will 


6 "Almost the entire exposition (verses 1-105) is devoted to a single subject: the regular com- 
portment of different groups of initiates." 
7 Iam grateful to Tim Cahill for bringing Wedemeyer 2013 to my attention by kindly giving me 
a copy when he was visiting Pondicherry in 2015. 
8 John Nemec too expresses some reserves in his generally positive review (2014, 272—273) and 
encourages further investigation of the Šaiva understanding of vratas: 
Even if we grant that Wedemeyer limits his argument to instances of the antinomian prac- 
tices that were understood to lead to liberation through a nondualistic, epistemological, 
or gnostic insight, as I think he wishes to do, there is nevertheless some work left to be 
done, in my view, to prove that even this particular understanding of the rites in ques- 
tion originated with tantric Buddhism (and the GuAyasamajatantra in particular [160— 
162, 166]). What is needed is a more thorough effort to establish the relative chronology 
of the relevant texts and, more importantly, a more detailed account of the Šaiva self- 
understandings of the religious observances in question. 


54 GOODALL 


be expanding upon and shoring up what was advanced rather too tentatively 
in a lengthy note on Mūlasūtra 4.17c-18 (Goodall, Sanderson, Isaacson et al. 
2015, 284—287). 

In fact, the basic difficulty with the central term caryā had arguably already 
been resolved, in nuce, by Alexis Sanderson in his 2006 article on the Lākulas, 
but in a somewhat laconic fashion. What he writes, just before presenting the 
vratas in the ninth chapter of the caryapada of the Matargaparamesvara, is 
the following: 


The Šaivas have conventionally divided the means of liberation taught in 
the Agamas, that is to say their subject matter, into the four categories, 
ritual (kriya), doctrine or gnosis ( jfíanam, vidya), meditation ( yogah), 
and ascetic observance and other rules governing the conduct of the 
various classes and kinds of initiate (carya). Continuities between the 
Lākulas and the Šaivas have now been shown in the areas of the ritual 
of initiation and in the doctrine of the path to liberation, [...] Insuffi- 
cient evidence exists to permit much of a comparison in the domain of 
meditation. [...] This leaves only the domain of ascetic observance (vrat- 
acaryā). 


It is clear, in other words, that caryā, in early Saiva works, may refer specifi- 
cally to ascetic observance, presumably indeed because it is a contraction of the 
collocation vratacaryā/vratacaraņa, "the performance (carya/carana) of timed 
religious observances (vrata).” The verb car, “to move,” but also “to be engaged 
in,” has indeed long been the natural idiomatic verb of choice for use with vrata, 
and this accounts for the frequency of such bahuvrihi expressions as cirnavrata 
(“who has observed his observances”), both in non-Mantramārga works (e.g. 
Bodhayanagrhyasütra 4.12.2 on p. 118, Yajnavalkyasmrti 3.298c, Mahābhārata 
3.81.135c) and in works of the Mantramarga (e.g. Mālinīvijayottara 10.17¢c and 
10.34c, Mohacūdottara 1.14a, etc), as well as for the distinctively tantric bahu- 
vrīhi expression cirnavidyavrata (e.g. Siddhayogesvarimata 13.1a),? to which we 
shall return below. 


9 One non-tantric instance has been pointed out to me by Harunaga Isaacson (email of 26.xii 
.2015). 

... [find one occurrence of cīrņavidyāvrata in a non-tantric text and a non-tantric context. 

It is in Vyomasiva’s Vyomavati, the oldest of the commentaries on the Padārthadhar- 

masamgraha (perhaps early 10th century; might be even slightly earlier). Of course, even 

though the context is here of orthodox Vedic/brahmanical practice, we can be pretty cer- 

tain that Vyomasiva, as his name already suggests, was familiar with the Siddhanta and 


DRESSING FOR POWER 55 


If we were concerned only with the meanings of the word caryā, then it 
might seem that we could almost end our essay here: Wedemeyer has pointed 
out that caryā conventionally refers to virtuous behaviour and conduct in 
accordance with religious precepts in a number of early non-tantric Buddhist 
texts (2013, 135), where he characterises it as "by far the most common generic 
term for the spiritual undertakings of buddhas and bodhisattvas” just as it 
does in much later Šaiva works of the Mantramārga, such as the Mrgendra; 
Sanderson has alluded (in the passage just guoted) to the observed fact that 
it may refer in Saiva sources both to the prescribed “conduct of the various 
classes and kinds of initiate” as well as to “ascetic observance,” and he has 
pregnantly suggested that this second meaning is connected with the notion 
of vratacarya; finally, Wedemeyer has observed that caryā in Buddhist tantric 
sources, and in some Saiva ones, refers not to life-long virtuous conduct, but 
rather to timed antinomian practices, in troubling places such as cremation 
grounds and involving transgressive sexual and mortuary elements. 

But, as my title indicates, there is in fact a nexus of terms to be exam- 
ined here. Wedemeyer indeed points out that there are several other related 
terms that seem to be used in places where caryā might have served instead, 
caryavrata and vratacarya being apparently “used with identical meaning” 
(2013, 136), to which he adds instances of these words “in compound with 
qualifiers related to ideas of secrecy or madness,” such as guhyavrata, guhya- 
caryā, prachannavrata, unmattavrata, and “a cluster of interrelated terms that 
appear in the same contexts, and which seem to be largely synonymous,” 
which he tabulates on p. 137. Among these, he singles out vidyavrata, for which 
he suggests the translations “knowledge observance, spell observance, and/or 
consort observance” (2013, 136) as being “treated as essentially equivalent to 
caryāvrata[vratacaryā in Buddhist and Saiva sources.” 

Now it may indeed be the case that several of these terms appear to be 
used interchangeably, but a slightly broader and chronologically deeper slice 
of Saiva samples reveals, it seems to me, both how the terms in fact differ from 
each other and also why it is that they may in some contexts appear to be inter- 
changeable, while at other times they are not. This may seem hair-splittingly 
tedious, but, as Wedemeyer points out, if we do not understand the words, 
then we cannot understand what it is that they serve to express.!? The Viennese 


quite likely other forms of Saivism, so there is a chance that his terminology has been 
unconsciously influenced by tantric usage. 
In the passage in question, on p. 233 of the edition, Vyomasiva is glossing Prasastapada's 
use of the term vidyavratasnataka. 
10 Wedemeyer does not put this truism into such simple words, for he is particularly con- 


56 GOODALL 


endeavour that has so far produced three out of five volumes of the Tantrikab- 
hidhānakoša is a step towards a better understanding of technical terms and 
of common terms used with technical senses in the literature of the Mantra- 
marga, even if it does not, alas, cover Tantric Buddhist literature." 

Turning to the Viennese dictionary for an understanding of caryā is, how- 
ever, not yet particularly useful, for the entry under this word consists only of a 
cross-reference to the term caryapada. But the account of that term does con- 
tain what will one day be a useful cross-reference to a future article on the term 
vrata, and it includes one useful pointer to a moment in the history of the term 
carya: 


Note that vrata is substituted as a synonym for caryā in Kir[ana] 6.6c; 
indeed it is conceivable that the term is an abbreviation of vratacarya 


(Kir[ana] 49.4). 


The volume of the Tāntrikābhidhānakoša in question appeared back in 2004; 
by the time the fifth volume appears, including the terms vrata and vidyavrata, 
this dictionary will be a still more useful resource for tracing out the shifting 
semantics of this and many another nexus of tantric terms. 

Let us follow up this reference to the Kiranatantra. Since its chapter, 49, on 
vratacaryā is short, we may quote much of it below, omitting from the middle a 
detailed treatment of the ideal Aamandalu, and giving just the readings of the 
Devakottai edition (Ep) and the Nepalese manuscript of 924AD (N, f. 7or): 


garuda uvàca— 

samayī putrakas capi desikas ca mahešvara 

esàm vrttih samakhyata sadhakasya bravihi me 49.1 
bhagavān uvāca— 

sadhakah sātviko dhirah sahisnur mantradhīr varah 
apradhrsyo mahaprajfiah samalosta$makaficanah 49.2 
udyukto homanisthas ca japadhyanaratah sada 


cerned with understanding the meanings of common words that are used with technical 
senses (2013, 134): “Recognition of these terms as terms of art is, however, essential, inso- 
far as failure in this regard creates and sustains broad and systemic misinterpretation of 
Tantric literature and of the traditions that produced (and were, in turn, produced by) 
these works.’ 

11 The desirability of covering Buddhist Tantric literature is alluded to in the preface to the 
third volume (p. 11), but it is obvious that the project cannot be simply “tweaked” at this 
late stage to incorporate a huge extra corpus only in volumes 4 and 5. 


DRESSING FOR POWER 57 


vighnaprotsarane kalyo vratanisthah samah $ucih — 49.3 
sasakhayo vanam gatvā vratacaryam samārabhet 
asahāyo tadā tasmim svasakhāyah kamaņdaluh 49.4 


1ab samayī putrakaš capi desikas ca] N; samayīsūtayos capi desikasya Ep «1b mahešvara] 
Ep; mahe$varahN — eic esām vrttih] Ep; esa vrttiN e 2a sadhakah satviko dhirah] Ey; 
sadhaka satviko dhiraN 2b varah] Ep; vara Ne 2c apradhrsyo] Ey; apradrsyoN e 
3c °protsarane] Ep; °proccharane N e 3d Sucih] Ep; Sucit Ne 4a sasakhayo] N; sasa- 
hayo Ep e4b vratacaryam samarabhet] Ej; vratacaranam ārabhetN e 4cd tadā tasmim 
svasakhayah] em.; tada tasmim svasakhaya? N; yada tasmin susahayah Ep 


Garuda spoke: 

You have taught me, O great Lord, the activities of the neophyte, the 
putraka and the ācārya. Tell me those of the sādhaka. (1) 

The Lord spoke: 

The excellent (varah) sadhaka [should be] full of sattva, firm, capable 
of endurance, his mind fixed on [his] mantra, unassailable, of great 
wisdom, looking impartially on mud, stones and gold, (2) 

engaged, regular in [the performance of] oblations, always devoted to 
recitation and meditation, dexterous in the dispelling of obstacles, 
firm in [the practice of his] religious observance, calm, pure. (3) 

Accompanied by his ritual assistant, he should go to the forest and 
begin the practice of his religious observance (vratacaryam). [If he 
is] without a ritual assistant, then his spouted water-pot is his ritual 
assistant in that [practice ].1? (4) 


[Description of spouted water-pot omitted. | 


12 


sašalyas tumbako va syad evam krtvā vratafi caret 49.13 
jatamakutasatopam šsūlakhatvāngalātichitam 
suddhamundardhasamyuktam trlocanakrtadaram 49.14 


This idea that the sādhaka, when embarking on the pursuit of supernatural powers, must 
be accompanied either by a ritual assistant or by his water-pot is expressed elsewhere too, 
for instance in Sarvajfianottara 25.19: 

susakhāyo yadā mantri mantrasadhanam ārabhet 

asakhāyo yogi siddhim kamandalukarah sada 19 


19a susakhayo yada] N; u sāyo yada L e 19c asakhayo yogi siddhim] conj.; asakhayo- 
gasiddhim N; u hayo yogi siddhim L e 19d kamandalukarah] N; kamandaludharas 
L 


58 GOODALL 


vyaghracarmambaram $antam raudram vratam idam šubham 
sunisthasya bhavet sadbhir mmasaih siddhir ihottamā 49.15 
madhya masais caturbhiš ca ksudra māsais tribhir bhavet 
vratanam pravaram raudram tatsiddhau sakalo bhavet 49.16 
karyam mantravratam siddhyai sādhakenānurūpakam 


13c sasalyas tumbako] em.; sa$alyatumbako N; sašalāstambhako Ep «14c $uddha?] N; šud- 
dham Ep «14d trlocanakrtadaram] N; trilocanakrtodaram Ep «15b raudram] N; raudra? 
Ep e15cd sunisthasya bhavet sadbhir mmasaih siddhir ihottamā] N; kanisthasya bhavec 
chuddhir masaih sadbhir ihottamā Ep  16ab caturbhis ca ksudrā māsais] Ep; caturbhi 
syāt ksudra māsai N — —16c vratānām pravaram] N; vratamapravaram Ep © 16d sakalo 
bhavet] N; sakalam punah Ey «17a kàryam mantravratam] Ej; karyamantravrataN ¢17b 
sādhakenānurūpakam] N; sādhakair nānurūpatah Ep 


Alternatively, [instead of a kamandalu, | it may be a gourd with a shaft. 
Having made this [ready], he should practise his observance. (13cd) 

This is the auspicious Raudra-vrata: imposing with a chignon of mat- 
ted locks, marked by a trident and khatvanga, equipped with a clean 
half skull, awe-inspiring with a third eye, clothed in the skin of a tiger, 
peaceful. (14-15b) 

For one firm [in this observance], the highest siddhi will arise in six 
months; middling [powers] in four months; the lowest [powers] will 
arise in three months. (15c-16b) 

The highest of the observances is the Raudra[-vrata]. On accomplishing 
that, one becomes [equal to] the Sakala [form of Siva]. (16cd) 

For attaining siddhi, the sadhaka should perform a mantra-observance 
that is appropriate [to the mantra in question].!? (17ab) 


What we see here, it seems to me, is a reflection of the old notion that carya 
refers to vratacaryā, "the performance of a vrata” where vrata is a timed reli- 
gious observance that typically involves adopting an unusual diet (not men- 
tioned here), an unusual style of dress (often with accoutrements of the cre- 
mation ground, in this case the khatvānga), and unusual behaviour (sexual 
transgressions, mortuary obsessions, or, as here, ascetic detachment). This 
observance is furthermore a preparation for the attainment of magical powers 
through the use of a mantra. 

This is, I think, in essence, the same as what is meant by the term vrata in all 
early tantric literature. It explains therefore how vratacarya, “the performance 


13 Or perhaps "appropriate [to the desired siddhi ]." 


DRESSING FOR POWER 59 


of such a vrata” and therefore sometimes also caryā have come to be used 
interchangeably with vrata.“ But the term carya evidently began to expand 
and then slip in meaning as the Mantramārga expanded to include not just 
sadhakas (who seem to be the only audience of the Nisvāsatattvasamhitā!), 
but also other categories of initiates. We can see that this slippage has in 
fact already taken place by the time of the Kirana, for that work begins its 
thirty-first chapter with an announcement that the next topic to be taught 
will be caryā, and yet, as we have just seen above, does not deal with the 
vratacaryā of the Sadhaka until chapter 49, which follows eighteen chapters 
later. 

Here is the beginning of chapter 31, in which the topic called carya is first 
introduced in such a way as to suggest that the primary meaning has now 
become something like regular enjoined “comportment.” 


garuda uvàca— 
samayisutayor deva kā vrttis tu dine dine 
evam mayi samācaksva caryà me nodità pura 311 


1a samayisutayor] N (unmetrical); samayiputrayor Ep e1b vrttis tu] Ep; vrtyatraN eic 
mayi] conj.; mayā N; sarvam Ep 


Garuda spoke: 

What are the day-to-day activities of the neophyte and the putraka? 
Tell me this. You have not taught me the [regular rules of] behaviour 
(caryā) before. (1) 


No such clear evidence can be found of this broadening of the meaning of the 
word caryā in another post-Nisvasa but pre-tenth-century Saiddhantika scrip- 
ture for which we have an early Nepalese palm-leaf witness, this time appar- 
ently of the ninth-century, namely the Sarvajfianottaratantra.!6 That work gives 


14 As for caryavrata, which, as we have seen above, Wedemeyer considers to be synonymous 
with vratacaryā, I suspect that it rather means “one of the timed religious observances 
belonging to [the body of activities that can collectively be called] [vrata-|carya.’ No 
doubt there is, in certain contexts, little difference between saying this and saying "the 
performance of timed religious observances” (vratacaryā). 

15 For the absence of initiates who are not sādhakas from the religious teachings of the Nis- 
vāsa, see Goodall, Sanderson, Isaacson et al. 2015, 47 ff. 

16  Incaseitshould be supposed that the work's structure is itself evidence of a shift in mean- 
ing of the term caryā, I should mention that, although Aghorasiva's commentary divides it 


60 GOODALL 


us an account of another sort of vrata that will be useful to us in the discussion 
below, in this case somewhat more detailed, but involving no transgression of 
brahmanical rules about purity and sexual behaviour. 


atah param pravaksyami vratanam vratam uttamam!? 
šivavrateti vikhyatam sadevāsurapūjitam!$ 18.1 
visuddham pandaram bhasma?? $uklavasonulepanam 
šuklayajiiopavītī?? ca jatamakutamanditah?! 18.2 
sarvābharaņasampannah?? suklamalyavibhusitah?? 
carubhug brahmacaryasthah?* šivāgnigurupūjakah?* 18.3 
mantramurtih?6 $ivasyaiva yathā rūpam?” prakirtitam 
tatha vai sadhakendranam?? vratam jfieyam tadatmakam?? 18.4 
suklakaupinavaso và usnisaksakamandaluh®° 

šivālaye vasen nityam?! bhiksabhakso?? jitendriyah 18.5 
japadhyanarato?? maunī $ivagnigurupüjakah 

samvatsare vyatikrante sivatulyo bhaved asau?^ — 18.6?5 


into four pādas, including a caryāpāda, it was clearly not originally so divided: see Goodall 
1998, lix-lxi. 

17  vratam uttamam] NL; uttamam vratam M 

18  $ivavrateti vikhyātam sadevasura?] N; $ivavratam iti khyatam sarvodāsura? M; šivavratam 
iti khyatam sarvadā sura? L 

19  pandaram bhasma] N; panduram bhasma M; pàndaram janma L 

20  sukla°] NL; uM 

21  ?manditah] ML; °manditam N 

22  °sampannah] M; ?sampanna? NL 

23 . ?maàlyavibhüsitah] N; °malavibhtsitah M; ?malavibhüsitaih L 

24  carubhug brahmacaryasthah] M; carabhug brahmacaryastho N; carubhūt brahmacar- 
yasya L 

25 °pūjakah] NM; %pūjitah L 

26 Ymūrtih] M; ?mürti? NL 

27  rüpam] NM; pūrvam L 

28  sadhakendranam] NM; sādhakaindrāņā L 

29  vratamjfieyam tadatmakam] NM; vrata jfieyam tathātmakam L 

go šuklakaupīnavāso và usnisaksakamandaluh] NM; suklakaubi(pi)navasam va usnisaksata- 
(ka)mandalum L 

31  vasennityam] N; vasannityam ML 

32 bhiksa°] ML; bhiksa° N 

33 japa°] NM; Siva? L 

34  bhaved asau] conj.; bhavedasauditi N; bhaved iti ML 

35 Here there is a flourish marking a chapter-break in N, and in the Southern sources there is 
a chapter-colophon: iti srimatsarvajfanottare šivavratapatalo 'stādašah M; iti sarvajfian- 
ottare kriyapade Sivavrataprakaranam L 


DRESSING FOR POWER 61 


36 
37 
38 


39 
40 


41 
42 


atah param pravaksyami laksaņam?* tu šivālaye 

sthapanam caiva lingasya yasmin sarvam pratisthitam?7 19.1 
brahmādyā devatah sarva lingam asritya samsthitah?8 
tasmād vai sthapayel lingam?? šāstradrstena karmaņā 19.2 
cīrņavidyāvrato*' yogi gurudevagnipujakah*! 


Next, I shall teach the best observance among observances, which is 
known as the Siva-vrata and which is revered by asuras and gods 
alike. (18.1) 

Pure pale ash [should be used, and] white dress and unguents; he 
should wear a white sacred thread and be adorned by a chignon of 
matted locks. (18.2) 

He should be equipped with all [suitable] ornaments, [and] adorned 
with white garlands; he should consume [only the pure ritual gruel- 
offering known as] caru; he should observe the chaste conduct of a 
student; he should venerate Siva, the fire and his guru. (18.3) 

He should be mantra-bodied;?? the appearance (rūpam) of excellent 
sādhakas [who follow this observance] is to be the same as that of 
Siva: the observance must be understood as consisting in this. (18.4) 

Alternatively, he may wear [just] a white loin-cloth, [and bear] a turban, 
rosary and spouted water-pot. (18.5ab) 

He should dwell constantly in a temple of Siva, eating alms, controlling 
his senses, devoted to recitation and meditation, maintaining silence, 
venerating Siva, the fire and his guru. When a year has passed, he will 
become equal to Siva. (18.5c-6) 


Next, I shall teach the characteristics of a temple of Siva, as well as [how 
to perform] the installation of the linga, in which the universe is 
[itself] ‘installed’ (19.1) 


laksanam] NMT; laksmanam L 

sarvam pratisthitam] M; sarvvapratisthitam N; sarvapratisthitah TL 

devatah sarva lingam asritya samsthitah] em.; devatà sarva lingam āsrtya samsthitā N; 
devatah sarve lingam asritya samshitah M; devata sarve lingam ašritya samsthitah T; 
devatas sarve lingam asritya samsthitah L 

sthapayel lingam sastra°] MTL; sthapaye lingam sastra° N 

cirnavidyavrato yogi] N; cīrņo vidyavrato yena M; ciņyām vidyāvratā yoga T; cinyam vidya- 
vrato yogi L. Cf., e.g., Mohacudottara (NGMPP A 182/2, f. 2r): cirnavidyavrato mantri jnana- 
van susam@hitah. 

?püjakah] NML; %pūrvakah T 

I assume that this means that the mantras of Siva should be installed upon his body. 


62 GOODALL 


All the gods, beginning with Brahma, reside in the liga; therefore a 
yogin who venerates his guru, God and the fire and who has per- 
formed his vidyavrata should install the liga, following the proce- 
dure taught in scripture. (19.2—3b) 


We shall return below to the use of the term vidyavrata, which I have not trans- 
lated here. First we may observe that these passages of the Kirana and Sarvaj- 
fíanottara might appear to confirm Wedemeyer's observation that the vratas in 
early Šaiva works were observances in which the sādhaka imitated God (2013, 


165). 


The early Šaiva Tantric paradigm for the transgressive vrata, then, was 
one of imitatio dei —mimicking the activity of the god in the interest 
of eliding the (presumably mistaken) sense of a gulf between him and 
the devotee. In none of these rites is there mention of transcendence of 
conceptuality or attainment of any epistemic nonduality—the concern 
seems entirely to be one of nonduality in the sense of union with the god 
Siva. 


Imitation of forms of god, whether pure or transgressive, seems indeed to be 
typical of vratas in early Saiva sources, but it is not the invariable rule, as the 
Nisvàsa demonstrates.* Several vratas are described in the course of the work, 
but there is one passage in which a set of nine is concisely described together, 
namely in chapter 3 of the Guhyasiitra. A brief summary of the contents of that 
chapter will help to contextualise that description, showing that it is part of a 
chapter devoted to 1) preparations for magical pursuits, and 2) magical proce- 
dures: 


43 Nemec also (2014, 273) expresses doubt about this point of Wedemeyer's: 
I am, in a word, not convinced that the many transgressive practices in the “early 
period” of Saiva tantra, defined as “pre-tenth century” (165), involve a practice of imita- 
tio dei, “of union with the god Šiva” to the exclusion of “transcendence of conceptuality 
or attainment of any epistemic nonduality" (ibid.). 
As to what states of consciousness such non-imitative observances might or might not be 
intended to achieve, the text gives us no direct information; we can only say that it does 
elsewhere describe practices whose purpose is said to be transcending duality, for exam- 
ple in yogic meditations described in Uttarasūtra 5.42—43 and Nayasütra 4.55 ff., and that 
a non-dualist cosmogony is sketched out in Uttarasūtra 1.13. 


DRESSING FOR POWER 63 


Summary of Guhyasūtra 3 
Preparations for magical pursuits 


3.1-2 Having set up the God of gods in a suitable place, one may employ 
a ritual assistant (uttarasādhaka) for attaining the highest siddhi. 

3.3-6 Qualifications of the uttarasādhaka. 

3.7-11 Construction of a special dwelling for the pursuit of siddhi. 

3.12c-16 Alternative: a suitable cave or empty temple. One should live 
from vegetables or begging or from roots, and perform fasts (cān- 
drayana, etc.) 

3.17-22 Prognostication of success in siddhi by consulting SVAPNA- 
MANAVAKA by calling him to appear in one's sleep. 

3.22—23 Prognostication by consulting AMOGHAMANTRARAJA. 

3.24—27 Catoptromantic prognostication (prasma) using virginal chil- 
dren and the mantra of CANDI. 

3.28-29 japa using the aksamala [in order to prepare it]. 

3.31-43b vratas. 


Magical procedures 


3.43c-112 sadhanas for attaining various siddhis. 


Having underlined the context, we may now turn to the vratas given in this 
chapter, followed, by way of example, by one magical procedure. We may note 
that all of these observances transgress social norms to some degree, but that 


none unambiguously involves imitatio dei: 


44 
45 
46 
47 


siddhi-m-aigvaryayogyas* tu na ca himsanti hinsakāh — 3.29 
siddhavidyavratastho hi jape** ca vratam arabhet 

go mata ca pita bhrātā atithir mitra brahmanah 3.30 

hato me papa|[(care)]]na*® caren (1) Mithyavratam vrati 
<<karasthena kapā>>lena*” khatvāngī bhasmagunthitah 3.31 
śmaśāne carate rātrau (2) Smašānavrata ucyate 


?yogyas tu] NW; °yogye tu K 

jape] NW; japam K 

pàpa[[(care)]]na] K; yapa XXņa N; yāpa Xreņa W; pāpakāreņa conj. Sanderson (2006, 209) 
karasthena kapalena] conj. Sanderson; ---lena NW; una K 


64 


48 
49 
50 
51 
52 
53 
54 


55 


56 


57 
58 


GOODALL 


nrtyate gayate caiva unmatto hasate bruvan*® 3.32 
bhasmangi cīravāsas ca (3) Ganavratam idam smrtam 
japayukto bhaiksabhujo lostusayijitendriyah 3.33 
dhyanasamyamayuktas ca (4) Lostukavratam acaret 
riksavyaghrasama||[kirne]]*9 <<vane sim>>hasamākule 3.34 
jitanidrasano?? jāpī (5) Kasthavratam idafi caret 

gayate nrtyate jāpī strīrūpī valayabhisitah® 3.35 
surppakandukavenibhis (6) Citravratam idafi caret 
šastrapāņir dayayukta-m-ate trateva?? Tjatavant 3.36 
japadhyanarccanirato (7) Viravratam idafi caret 
varsasitatapair ddehan tapayed dhi su--- — 3.379? 
japadhyānaratas caiva (8) Mahavratas sa ucyate 
ratisambhogakusalam rūpayauvanašālinīm — 3.38 

idrsim striyam āsādya niruddhendriyagocarah 
cumbanālinganan kuryal lingam sthapya bhagopari 3.39 
japadhyanaparo bhūtvā (9) Asidharavratafi caret 

yadi kāmavašam gacchet patate** narake dhruvam 3.40 
navātmakatī japel laksam ((tasya)) ---ddhaye®> 

abdam sanmasamatram và yas cared vratam uttamam 3.41 
tasya siddhih prajayeta adhamā madhyamottama®® 
vratasthah*” paficalaksani punar japtvā tu siddhyate 3.42 
sarve mantras ca siddhyante ipsitafi ca phalam bhavet 


[A spell for travelling great distances:] 


om namo vāyupathacāriņe amitagatiparakramaya vimale kulu 258 
thatha 3.43 


bruvan] NW; dhruvam K 

°kirne] conj.; *kirna? K; °ka--- N; °ka u W 

?drasano] N; drāmano K; °drasano W 

valayabhūsitah] conj. (unmetrical); valabhūsitah NKW 

m-ate trāteva] conj.; mathe trā--- N; mathatrà u ca K; mathe tra u W 

°tapayeddhi su] N; °tapaye u K; °tapayedvi u W 

?vasam gacchet patate] conj.; °vasam cche patate N; °vratam gacchet patate K; ?^va$am 
chai Xpatate W 

laksam tasya ---ddhaye] em.; laksa---ddhaye N; laksa u dvaye K; laksam tasya u dvaye W; 
laksam tasya mantrasya siddhaye conj. Diwakar Acharya; laksam samvatsaradvaye conj. 
Diwakar Acharya 

°mottama] K; °mottamah NW 

vratasthah] K; vratastha NW 

kulu 2] conj. Sanderson; kula---2 N; kulam 2 K; kula 2 W 


DRESSING FOR POWER 65 


59 


60 


61 


sila suvarnadhatufi ca ((ka)) --- tam 

varahavasasampistam?? sahasraparimantritam 3.44 
navatmakam punar japtva padau caiva pralepaye[[t]] 
gacchate so 'parisrānto yojananam $atadvayam 3.45 


[Once the rosary has been thus prepared, he becomes] ready for siddhis 
and power. (29cd) 

Dangerous creatures do not harm one who has [first] accomplished 
an observance [that qualifies one] for [using] Spells: he should 
begin an observance by means of recitation ( japeļ= japena]).*% 
(30ab) 

The one engaged in observance should practise the False Observance 
(mithyavrata) [by wandering about proclaiming]: ^I have committed 
bad deeds: I have killed a cow, mother, father, brother, a guest, friend, 
brahmin!” (30c-31b) 

[If] one wanders in the cremation-ground at night, with a skull in one's 
hand and a khatvanga, covered in ashes, that is called the cremation- 
ground observance ($mašānavrata). (31c—32b) 

If one dances, sings, laughs and talks madly, with the body smeared in 
ashes and wearing rags, this is called the Gaņavrata. (32c-33b) 

One performs the Clod-of-Earth Observance (lostukavratam) by 
being engaged in recitation, feeding on alms, sleeping on the earth, 
with senses controlled, engaged in meditation and restraint. (33c— 
34b) 

One may perform the Block-of-Wood Observance (kasthavratam) in a 
forest full of bears, tigers and lions, conquering the urges to sleep and 
eat, [constantly] reciting. (34c-35b) 

If one takes on the appearance of a woman and sings and dances, 
adorned with bracelets, with a winnowing fan, ball and plait, one 
observes the Colourful Observance (citravratam). (35c—36b) 

With a weapon in hand, full of compassion, if one wanders like a saviour 
of creatures (?)® focussed upon recitation, meditation and worship, 
one performs the Warrior Observance (viravratam). (36c-37b) 


varāhavašasampistam] conj.; varāhava+sa+sampista” N; varahavamasampistam K; varā- 
havašasampista W 

This replaces the translation, in which I no longer believe, of 3oab that we offered on p. 285 
of Goodall, Sanderson, Isaacson et al. 2015. 

This tentative translation assumes that jatavān is an error for jantavām, intended as a 
genitive plural with the sense of jantūnām! 


66 GOODALL 


If one torments the body with rain, cold and heat, ..., devoted to 
recitation and meditation, this is called the Great Observance 
(mahavratah). (37c-38b) 

A woman skilled in the pleasures of love-making, endowed with beauty 
and youth; such a woman one should procure, holding one’s senses 
back from the objects of the senses, and one should kiss and embrace 
[her], placing the penis upon her sex while remaining focussed upon 
recitation and meditation—one performs [thus] the Sword-Blade 
Observance (asidharavratam). If one should succumb to the control 
of desire, then one certainly falls into hell. (38c—40) 

One should recite the NAVATMAN one lakh times... for [siļddhi: one 
who [thus] observes such an excellent observance for a year or 
just six months attains lowest, middling or best siddhi. But if, while 
observing such a vrata, someone recites five lakh times, then [that 
mantra] succeeds [for him] (siddhyate), and all mantras succeed for 
him and he attains the fruits he desires. (41-43b) 

[Using the mantra] OM NAMO VĀYUPATHACĀRIŅE AMITAGATI- 
PARAKRAMAYA VIMALE KULU KULU SVAHA, [and taking] arsenic, 
gold [and?] a mineral, ..., ground up with pig fat/marrow, over which 
one has recited [the NAVATMAN] 1000 times, he should smear [the 
mixture] on his feet/legs, while once again reciting the NAVATMAN: 
he will travel 200 yojanās unwearied! (43c—45) 


Right at the beginning of the above-quoted passage, we find a further attesta- 
tion of the term vidyavrata, and this time, rather than prevaricating further, I 
have proposed translating it as “an observance [that qualifies one] for [using] 
Spells" There are other passages that can and will be adduced in support of 
this, but I think that it should already be becoming clear from this passage of 
the Guhyasütra and from the passage quoted just before from the Sarvajrian- 
ottara that the different particular vratas that are performed serve to prepare 
the performer for some subsequent religious activity that involves the use of 
the mantra or vidyā. In the case of the Guhyasütra, it is the pursuit of siddhi 
for which the sadhaka is prepared; in the case of the Sarvajfianottara, the indi- 
vidual is prepared for the performance of the installation (pratisthā) of a linga. 
From the beginning of chapter 10 of the kriyapada, we learn that it is also an 
essential to the consecration of an ācārya in the Matangapāramešvara: 


catuspadarthakusalam mahotsaham hy aninditam 10.2 
satpadarthapranitartham sarvabhutahite ratam 
gurus tam abhisificet tu cīrņavidyāvratam naram — 10.3 


DRESSING FOR POWER 67 
Ramakantha: atha kim tad vidyavratam yat tena cirnam ity ucyate: 


vidyasaktir ihopatta japtavya prak chivalaye 
samniyamyendriyagramam abdam ekam sucismata 10.4 
nityam carubhuja bhūmyām kušaprastarašāyinā 
pujagnibhavane yuktacetasa bhavitatmana 10.5 


Ramakantha: [vidyasaktih] vyomavyapilaksana.9? 


The guru should consecrate [as an acarya] a man who is skilled in what 
is taught in all four padas, who has great energy, who is beyond reproach, 
who expounds the meaning of the teachings [encapsulated] in the six 
topics [of this scripture], who is devoted to the welfare of all beings, who 
has performed the observance for [the propitiation of his] mantra. 


Ramakantha: Now if you ask what this vidyavrata is which he must have 
observed, this is what the text teaches: 


The power of the vidyā that is mentioned here [in this compound vidyā- 
vrata] is first to be recited for a year in a temple to Siva, while exercising 
control of the senses, maintaining purity, eating daily [only the sacrificial 
gruel known as] caru, sleeping on the ground in the room reserved for 
pūjā and fire[-sacrifice] on a spread of kusa-grass, with his mind engaged 
[in meditation], focussed. 


Ramakantha: It [viz. the power of the vidyā] is the vYOMAVYAPIN. 


Once this preparation, taking the form of the observance of one among a vari- 
ety of possible vratas (but ideally one suitable to the mantra to be put to use, 
as seems already to be implied in Kirana 49.17ab above, and as we shall see 
confirmed below), is complete, the observer can be called cirnavidyavratah (as 
here and in Sarvajfianottara 19.3a) or siddhavidyavratasthah (as in Guhyasutra 
3-30a). 

If we make such an assumption, then we can see how the expressions vrat- 
acaryā and vidyāvrata might be regarded as interchangeable in some con- 


62 From Rāmakaņtha's commentary, only the avataraņikā and the commentary to 10.4—6 are 
quoted here (not the remarks on 10.2c-3). The pratīka in square brackets is supplied by the 
editor. 


68 GOODALL 


texts, even though they are not actually synonymous. It also becomes clear 
how it is that vidyāvrata can be characterised as preparatory mantra-pro- 
pitiation and therefore equivalent to what may also be called purašcaraņa. 
Sanderson characterises it in such a way when referring to the account of the 
Bhairavacarya in Bana’s Harsacarita: 


With this account of a purvaseva, also called purašcaryā or vidyavratam, 
i.e. the initial period of ascetic japah etc. to be undertaken after one has 
received a Mantra, whereby one becomes able to accomplish feats (kar- 
mani) with that Mantra ...9* 


So if vrata and vratacaryā and some other terms may seem to be used inter- 
changeably in some works with vidyāvrata, it is because the principal purpose 
of the vratas taught in the early Mantramarga seems to be to propitiate mantras 
prior to further religious activities involving those mantras, rendering those 
who complete such observances describable by such terms as cirnavidyavrata, 
siddhavidyavratastha, vidyavratasnata and so forth.95 Various observances can, 
in other words, be observed in order to become one *who has completed the 
observance [required for the propitiation] of a vidya.” 

This discussion might seem to suggest that in finding the original meaning of 
the expression vidyavrata we believe that we have found its immutable seman- 
tic core, but that is not really what I intend to say. Of course the term vidyavrata 
may have gone on to evolve and be used in contexts that suggest that one 
might elsewhere also or instead render it as "knowledge observance" or "con- 
sort observance" (Wedemeyer 2013, 136) or, as we shall see below, *observance 
relating to a vidyangamantra.”®* Furthermore, one might argue that we have in 


63 Cf. Wedemeyer 2013, 159: “It is worth noting that the Tantrasadbhava| Kubjikamata and the 
Siddhayogesvarimata clearly take the terms vidyāvrata and vratacaryā to be synonymous." 

64 X Sanderson 2001, 13, note 11. Wedemeyer quotes from this definition (2013, 255, note 96), 
but in a manner that suggests that he was oddly not convinced by it, or not convinced 
that the same kind of vidyavrata was being alluded to by Sanderson: 

Sanderson ("History”, 13n11) also describes a very different rite [scil. from that referred 
to in Vinasikhatantra 180?| when he speaks of vidyāvrata as an "initial period of ascetic 
japah etc. to be undertaken after one has received a Mantra,’ i.e., he takes it to be a kind 
of purvaseva or purašcaryā. 

65 Another purpose of performing vratas in the early Mantramarga is of course expiation: 
see, for example, Guhyasiitra 9.10a, Siddhayogesvarimata 10.3c, both quoted below, and 
Hrdayašiva's Prayascittasamuccaya passim (appendix to Sathyanarayanan 2015). 

66 We do not aim, however, to examine here all later passages in which the meaning of 
vidyavrata is arguably stretched. One such passage is a sequence of verses discussing the 
term that has been borrowed from the Tantrasadbhava into the Kubjikamata: that dis- 


DRESSING FOR POWER 69 


any case not started from its point of origin, for the term has presumably been 
drawn from orat least coloured by the brahmanical expression vidyavratasnata 
that is common from the Grhyasutras onwards and that we find, for instance, 
in Manusmrti 4.31: 


vedavidyāvratasnātān srotriyan grhamedhinah 
pūjayed dhavyakavyena viparitams ca varjayet 


Olivelle (2005, 125—126) translates: 


At rites for gods and ancestors, he should honor individuals who have 
bathed after completing the Vedas, vedic learning, or vedic vows, who are 
vedic scholars, or who are householders, but avoid individuals different 
from these.97 


It seems to me very likely that the use of vidyāvrata in the Mantramarga—and 
a fortiori of vidyavratasnata (Siddhayogesvarimata 10.20 and Svayambhuvasu- 
trasangraha 21.35)—should have been influenced by earlier brahmanical usage 
such as we see in the Grhyasutras and in the Manusmrti. Nonetheless, in the 


cussion begins with Bhairava saying (Tantrasadbhāva 4.2ab = Kubjikamata 25.30ab): srnu 
devi pravaksyāmi vidyāyā vratam uttamam, "Listen, O goddess: I shall teach the excellent 
observance of/for vidya.” 

67 Olivelle also adds a note that explains that there is doubt about the term (2005, 270): 
[M]ost commentators take vedavidyavrata as three separate categories. The first refer 
to those who have only learned the Veda by heart; the second to those who have mas- 
tered its meaning; and the third to those who have completed the vows associated with 
vedic study, such as living with the teacher for a certain number of years, even if they 
have not mastered the Veda. 

This interpretation is not wholly consistent with what we find earlier in Grhyasiitra liter- 

ature. In Jaiminigrhyasūtra 1.19 (p. 18), for instance, we read: 
trayah snātakā bhavantiti ha smāhāruņir gautamo vidyāsnātako vratasnātako vidyā- 
vratasnātaka iti tegām uttamah šresthas tulyau pūrvau. 

Caland (1922, 32) translates: 
According to Āruņi Gautama there are three kinds of Snatakas: the Snataka by knowl- 
edge, the Snātaka by the completion of his observances, and the Snātaka by knowledge 
and by the completion of his observances. Of these the last ranks foremost, the first two 
are equal (to each-other). 

Cf. Pāraskaragrhyasūtra (kanda 2, kaņdikā 5, sentences 32—35, p. 220): 
trayah snataka bhavanti: vidyasnatako vratasnatako vidyavratasnataka iti 32 samapya 
vedam asamāpya vratam yah samavartate, sa vidyāsnātakah 33 samāpya vratam as- 
amāpya vedam yah samāvartate, sa vratasnatakah 34 ubhayam samāpya yah samāvar- 
tate, sa vidyāvratasnātaka iti 35 


70 GOODALL 


Nisvasa certainly, and probably throughout the early Mantramarga, the use 
of vidyāvrata to mean “observance for [the propitiation of] a mantra” seems 
to be the norm. As Sanderson has observed in the note of his that we have 
just quoted, vidyāvrata seems indeed to be used in the same way as purva- 
sevā in the Nisvasa. Many short paragraphs of prose in the grimoires (kalpa) 
that we find in the GuAyasütra sketch out the essential features of particular 
observances, and these paragraphs are very often concluded with a succinct 
statement of the magical powers that can be won by following them (the power 
tofly, forexample, orto disappear); but sometimes we find instead the assertion 
that the observance fulfils the requirements of pürvaseva (10.27, 10.99, 14.26) 
or purašcaraņa (14.24) or, as here in Guhyasutra 10.91, the requirements of the 
vidyāvrata: 


devam pūjyāgnau juhuyād audumbarasamidhānām tryaktānām sahas- 
ram trsandhyam. ksīrāšī saptā dināni juhuyat. ctrnnavidyavrato bhavati. 


Having worshipped the Lord, he should oblate into the fire at the three 
junctures of the day a thousand pieces of Udumbara-wood smeared with 
the three [sweet substances]. Consuming [only] milk, he should make 
oblations [in this manner] for seven days. He will become one who has 
accomplished the vidyāvrata. 


Before I wrap up the discussion, it should be mentioned thata different hypoth- 
esis as to the meaning of vidyāvrata was advanced some years ago, when many 
of the above-cited passages had not yet come to light, by Judit Tórzsók when 
translating chapter 10 of the Siddhayogesvarimata. We quote here the begin- 
ning of the chapter (without the apparatus) from Tórzsók's 1999 edition: 


devy uvāca 

maya deva pura prstam vratayāgavivarjitam 
siddhayogesvarinam tu matam mantraprasādhakam 1 
kim tu deva pratijfiatam siddhir vidyangasamsthita 
tasmāt tesu samāsena vratacaryam bravihime 2 
bhairava uvaca 

adau tu sarvasiddhyartham sarvavighnavināšanam 
sarvapapapanodartham vidyavratam samarabhet 3 
sadhakah sadhaki vatha mantratadgatacetasah 
yagam krtva vidhanena vratacaryam samacaret 4 
bhasmalepitasarvango mauni $uklambarah sudhih 
sitayajfiopavitas ca akāmo niyame sthitah 5 


DRESSING FOR POWER 71 
Here is Tórzsók's translation (1999*, 143): 


The Goddess spoke 

I have previously asked you about the Doctrine of the Yoginis (Siddha- 
yogesvarimata), O God, which helps to make mantras effective 
(mantraprasadhakam) without any observances or worship. (1) 

However, you have asserted, O God, that success depends on the ancil- 
lary mantras; therefore, tell me briefly about how to practise the 
observance[s] associated with them (tesu). (2) 

Bhairava spoke 

First [before any other practice to attain a specific supernatural power], 
for all kinds of supernatural powers, [and] for expiatory purposes, 
one has to start the observance of the [ancillary] mantras, which 
destroys all obstacles. (3) 

The male or female practitioner, with his/her mind focused on the 
mantra, should perform worship according to prescriptions and then 
undertake the vow (vratacaryam). (4) 

[In the first of these] all his limbs covered with ashes, the practitioner is 
to observe silence and should wear a white garment; he should be of 
good understanding. He must have a white sacred thread, he should 
be free from desire and established in self-restraint. (5) 


Now the reason that Tórzsók translates vidyavrata with "the observance of 
the [ancillary] mantras" is that each of the vratas in the chapter is specific 
to the cultivation of a particular auxiliary mantra—the first one, given above 
in verse 5, must, by elimination, be an observance for the HRDAYA-mantra— 
and those auxiliary mantras belong to a set known in this work and in others 
as the vidyangamantras.® It was therefore reasonable for her to assume that 
vidyavrata was short for vidyangavrata, for she had no evidence to suggest oth- 
erwise, and she had parallel evidence that seemed to reinforce this hypothesis, 
namely the testimony of Svāyambhuvasūtrasangraha 21 (from which Tórzsók 
quotes, citing Alexis Sandersor's collation, in her notes on p. 78). 

That passage again gives a series of vratas, which are, by the way, again not 
instances of imitatio dei, and which are again specific to the vidyarigamantras; 
so it is wholly understandable that this seemed to Tórzsók in 1999 to confirm 


68 For these mantras and their individual names, see Brunner 1986 and, more recently, 
Goodall 2004, 222-223. 


72 GOODALL 


the notion that the element vidyā in the collocation vidyāvrata must refer to 
the vidyangamantras. I think, however, that it will now be clear that chapter 21 
of the Svayambhuvasütrasangraha might in fact be interpreted equally well 
internally if we assume that vidyavrata is used instead to mean "observance 
for [propitiation of] a mantra" and that, given the other attestations of the term 
that we now know about in, for instance, the Guhyasutra, the Matariga, and the 
Sarvajfianottara, it actually makes better sense to assume this broader interpre- 
tation in this passage too. 

There is somewhat better evidence for pinpointing the place of the Svayam- 
bhuvasūtrasangraha in a relative chronology of Saiddhāntika writings than 
there is for most other pre-tenth-century Siddhantatantras, for in terms of both 
doctrinal and social developments, it seems later than the sūtras of the Nis- 
vasatattvasamhita (see Goodall, Sanderson, Isaacson et al. 2015, 41-44, 47—50, 
58), and yet it cannot be later than Sadyojyotih, who has written a commen- 
tary upon it and who, Sanderson argues (2006b, in particular p. 76), lived 
between c. 675 and 725AD. The edition is not widely accessible, which may 
be why Wedemeyer did not refer to this passage, and its text almost invari- 
ably needs to be corrected against manuscripts, but this particular chapter has 
just been published anew, in the form in which it appears when quoted by 
Hrdayašiva in his Prayascittasamuccaya (see Sathyanarayanan 2015, Appendix 
chapter 10).59 


japtvā vratais ca vidhivat snatah siddhyai japet manum 10.27 
na vilambitam aspastan na cāsvīkrtam adrutam 

nasamkhyam na manobhrāntam japam kuryad vicaksanah 10.28 
sitavasah sitosnisi sitayajfiopavity api 

sitanulepanasragvi cared VIDYADHIPAvratam 10.29 
raktambaradharo mantri raktamalyanulepanah 

māsam ekam puroktafi ca cared BRAHMASIROvratam 10.30 
pītavāsāš caren masam pitamalyanulepanah 

pitayajfiopaviti ca RUDRANYA vratam uttamam 10.31 

vratam PURUSTUTAsyapi màsam ekam cared budhah 
sarvakrsņopacāreņa Sivarcanaratah sada — 10.32 


69  Inthecollation below, H is the reading of Sathyanarayanan’s transcription of the twelfth- 
century manuscript transmitting Hrdayasiva’s work (where this chapter is the tenth); Ed. 
is of course the Mysore edition of 1937 (where the chapter is the twenty-first), and N 
marks the readings of the old Nepalese palm-leaf manuscript filmed by the NGMPP on 
Reel A 30/6. 


DRESSING FOR POWER 73 


citrāmbaradharo dhiras citramalyanulepanah 
sarvasiddhiparo mantri caret PASUPATAM vratam 10.33 
vratavratasamaptau ca kala$ena $ivambhasa 
svamantraparijaptena svatmanam abhisecayet 10.34 
evam vidyavratasnatah sarvatradhikrto 'naghah 

japen mantram anudvignah svakalpavidhina tatah — 10.35 


27c vratais] H, Ed.; vrajaisN «27d manum] H, Ed; matamN 28a na vilambitam] H, Ed.; 
avilambitam N e 28c manobhrantam] H; mobhrantam N (unmetrical); manobhranta? 
Ed. »29ab sitavasah sitosnisi sita?] em.; sitavāsā Sitosnisi sita? N; šitavāsā šitosņīsī šita? 
H; sitavasah sitosnisah sita? Ed. e 29c sitānulepanasragvī] conj.; sitanulepanah sragvī N, 
Ed.; šitānulepanah sragmī H e 29d vidyadhipa?] Ed.; vidyādhipam N, H e 30a rakta?] H, 
Ed.; ratta° N e 31a pitavasas] N, Ed.; pītavāsā H e g1c rudrāņyā] N, Hac, Ed.; rudrāņī” Hpc 
32a purustutasyapi] N, H; puruhūtasyāpi Ed.pc; purutasyāpi Ed.ac e 33c sarvasiddhi”] 
N, H; sarvasiddha? Ed. e 33d pasupatam] N, H; pāšupata” Ed. e 34a vratavratasamaptau 
ca] Ed.; vratam vratasamāptau ca N; vratavratam samāptau tu H e 35a vidyavrata?] N, H; 
vidyāvratah Ed. e 35b sarvatrādhikrto] N; sarvatrāvikrto H; sarvato dhikrto Ed. 


Having recited [a particular mantra] along with [the practice of one of 
the] observances in accordance with the rules, and having bathed [at 
the end of the observance], one may recite that mantra for attaining 
supernatural powers. (27cd) 

The skilled practitioner should do his recitation not too slowly, not 
indistinctly, not without taking [the meaning of what he recites] 
in, not too fast, not without counting, and not with his thoughts in 
confusion. (28) 

Dressed in white, with a white turban and a white sacred thread and 
white unguents and garland, he should perform the observance for 
the VIDYĀDHIPA-mantra. (29) 

Dressed in red garments and red garlands and unguents the Mantrin 
should first perform for one month the stated observance for the 
BRAHMASIRAH. (30) 

Wearing yellow garments and yellow garlands and unguents and a yel- 
low sacred thread he should perform the excellent observance of 
RUDRĀŅĪ for a month. (31) 

The competent ritualist (budhah), constantly devoted to the worship of 
Siva, should perform the observance for PURUSTUTA for one month 
with all accoutrements being black. (32) 

The mantrin, intent on attaining all manner of special powers, should 
perform the observance for the PASUPATASTRA resolutely (dhirah) 
dressed in multi-coloured garments and with multicoloured garlands 
and unguents. (33) 


74 


GOODALL 


And upon the completion of one or another of these observances 
(vratavratasamaptau),” he should pour upon himself Siva-water 
that has been consecrated by recitation of his mantra over it from a 
pot. (34) 

Being thus bathed after the observance [in propitiation] of [his] mantra, 
invested in the right to [pursue] all [manner of special powers], fault- 
less, he should then recite [his chosen] mantra according to the rules 
of his hand-book,” without being afraid. (35) 


In the above lines, 27d and 35 seem to make particularly plain that these vratas 


are performed by way of pūrvasevā, also known as vidyāvrata, as a preliminary 
to the pursuit of siddhi. 


Csaba Kiss, following Judit Tórzsók's lead, has also alluded to the link 


between vidyangamantras and the name vidyavrata, but I think it will be clear 


from what he says below that the evidence that his new edition of parts of the 


Brahmayāmala has recently brought to the discussion again supports rather 


the broader interpretation, in which the element vidya alludes to any mantra, 


not just a vidyangamantra. Below are his remarks (2015, 211) on Brahmayamala 


21.4-5b, which he constitutes and translates as follows: 


70 


71 


ete nava vrata prokta vidyabhede vyavasthita 
etesam tu yathānyāyam yathā caryā bhave tv iha 
kathayami mahādevi tan me nigadatah srnu 


These are the nine ascetic observances (vrata), corresponding to [the 
syllables of] the Vidya[, Canda Kapalini’s nine-syllable mantra]. I shall 
now teach you how to perform them correctly, O Mahadevi. Listen to me 
[while I] teach you. 


... these observances are in fact called the vidyāvratas in 21.10¢, 42d, 47a, 
51b, 53b, 75d and 102d; the nine types of observances obviously corre- 
spond to the nine syllables of the Navaksaravidya (OM CANDE KAPALINI 
SVĀHĀ), taught in BraYā 2; vidyāvratas may also serve, as seen in many 
tantric texts, as preliminary propitiation, by the use of vidyarigamantras, 
of a mantra to be applied later, or simply for the purpose of gaining 


The text and interpretation are not certain here. A possible conjectural emendations that 
suggests itself is vrati vratasamaptau. 
For this sense, see Tāntrikābhidhānakoša, vol. 2, s.v. kalpa. 


DRESSING FOR POWER 75 


mastery over the Vidyā, similarly to the way it is taught in the Yoginīsam- 
cara; as Sanderson (2009:134 n. 311) remarks: ... 


More closely parallel to these nine observances, as we can now see, are the nine 
taught in chapter 3 of the Guhyasütra, which are probably each for one of the 
nine elements of the NAVATMAN. So perhaps the association with vidyariga- 
mantras is simply a red herring. 

Kiss's reference there to Sanderson 2009, 134, note 311 proves to be another 
passage in which Sanderson reveals that, although he did not spell out every 
detail of his assumptions and the evidence upon which he based them, he had 
in fact already assumed the interpretation for which we have been somewhat 
long-windedly arguing here, both of vidyāvrata and of its relation to individual 
named vratas: 


The Yoginisamcara requires anyone who has gone through its initiation 
ceremony and then received consecration (abhisekah) to adopt one of 
three forms of ascetic observance in order to gain mastery over the Vidyā 
(vidyavratam): the Bhairavavrata, the Camundavrata, or the Trisastikula- 
vrata, the observance of the sixty-three families [of the Mothers], which 
it also calls the Kapalavrata, i.e. the Kapalika. 


So let me reiterate my conclusion: we should probably assume that, even if 
the expression vidyavrata was originally drawn from the common brahman- 
ical expression vidyāvratasnāta that we saw in Manusmrti 4.31, and even if 
it may have been subsequently coloured in some contexts by other associa- 
tions of the word vidya (vidyangamantra, "knowledge," *consort”), the expres- 
sion vidyavrata appears throughout the early Mantramarga to be used with 
the understanding that it refers primarily to an "observance for [the prelimi- 
nary propitiation of a] mantra” While some works (such as the Saiddhantika 
Kiranatantra, and the Sarvajitānottaratantra) appear to mention only one way 
of fulfilling the requirements of the vidyavrata, many others (Nisvasa, Yoginī- 
samcāra, Brahmayāmala, Svayambhuvasütrasangraha, Siddhayogešvarīmata, 
Tantrasadbhava, Kubjikamata) teach several vratas, not all of which are equally 
transgressive and not all of which involve imitatio dei, as alternative ways of 
realising the vidyāvrata. 

Finally, let me show how this assumption seems to me to throw light even 
on passages where none of the terms that we have been discussing actually 
occur. The first few times I read the beginning of chapter 9 of the GuÁyasütra, it 
seemed to begin with a curious non sequitur: the goddess asks a question about 
how the alphabet, treated as mantra, can be used to bring about supernatural 


76 GOODALL 


power and liberation; Šiva's reply, however, first explains at some length how 
someone should dress half his body as the goddess and the other half as Siva. 
How could this, I asked myself, be an answer to the goddess’ question? Was the 
apparent incoherence of the text here an indication that it had become cor- 
rupt? 


devy uvaca— 

matrkaya bhavet siddhir mmoksafi caiva mahešvara 
matrkasiddhim akhyahi moksafi caiva yatha bhavet 9.1 
tatsamutthas ca ye mantrah kimarthan kathitas tvayā 
etat prašnavaram brūhi ((bha))---phalam hi me 9.2 
I$vara u— 

arddhastrivesadhari tu arddhena purusas tatha 
arddhena alakam kuryād arddhenaiva jatadharah 9.3 
tilakarddhena netrarddhe valika hy ekakarņņake 
kundalam hy ekakarnne tu $ülan daksinahastatah — 9.4 
vamapar$ve?? stanan kuryād vamardhe caiva mekhalām 
valayam vāmahaste tu vāmapāde tu nūpuram 9.5 
rucakam daksine pade mufijamalam tathā katau?? 
kaupinan daksine kuryād vāme strīvastradhāritā 9.6 
šūrppam vamakare grhņed ardhanārīsvaravrate”* 

etad vratan grhītvā tu bhiksasi tu jitendriyah 9.7 
japahomarato nityam pratigrahavivarjjitah 

triskalam?* arccayed devam triskālam snānam acaret 9.8 
šākayāvakabhiksāšī skandamūlaphalāšinah”$ 

masam e[[ka]]---samanvitah 9.9 

mucyate 'sau”” mahāpāpāt ksudrasiddhinī ca vindate 
dvimāsān madhyamā siddhir abdarddhad uttamā bhavet 9.10 
samvatsareņa siddhis tu vidyāsiddhim avāpnuyāt 
animadyas tu jayante siddhais ca saha modate 9.11 
Ipsitam labhate kāmān akamo moksam apnuyat 


72 vāmapārśve] KW; vāmapārše N 

73 daksine pāde mufijamalam tathā katau] conj.; daksine pa—fijamālāmstathā kate N; dak- 
sine u mufijamalam tathā katau K; daksiņe uņthamālāmstathā kate W 

74 Ynārīsvara”) conj.; ?nàriévaram NW; ?nàri$vare K 

75  triskalam] KW; triskala? N 

76 Jskanda?]NW;kanda?K 

77  mucyate'sau] em.; mucyate so NW; mucyate sa K 


DRESSING FOR POWER 77 


The Goddess spoke: 

From the MATRKA supernatural power and liberation can come about, 
O Lord. Tell me [how to attain] supernatural power and liberation 
through the MATRKA. (1) 

Why did you teach the mantras that arise from it? Tell me [the answer 
to] this excellent question. ... fruit to me. (2) 

The Lord spoke: 

Wearing half the dress of a woman and half [that of] a man, on one half, 
he should place [feminine] tresses, on one half, he should wear mat- 
ted locks. (3) 

On one half, there should be a forehead mark; on one half a [forehead] 
eye. A ring (valika) [should be] in one ear; a [pendant] ear-ornament 
(kundalam) in one ear. He should put a trident (šūlam) in his right 
hand and a breast on his left side, a girdle (mekhalam) on the left 
half, a bangle on the left arm, a woman's anklet on the left leg, a man's 
anklet on the right leg and a murija-grass belt. At the hips, he should 
put a loin-cloth on the right and wear a woman's garment on the left. 
(4-6) 

In the left hand, he should hold a winnowing fan in the observance of 
Ardhanārīšvara. Adopting this observance he should eat alms, keep 
his senses under control, be devoted to regular obligatory recitation 
and oblation, rejecting the receipt of gifts. (7-8b) 

He should venerate God three times [a day] and perform ablutions 
three times [a day]. Eating vegetables and barley-gruel, eating bulbs 
(skanda? [= kanda?]), roots and fruits, for one month ... (9) 

He will be released from [the retributive force of] major transgressions; 
and he will attain low siddhis after two months, middling siddhis after 
half a year and high siddhis after a year; he will attain power over the 
spell (vidyasiddhim). (10—ub) 

The ability to make himself atomic, along with the others [of the yogic 
powers], will arise. He will take pleasure in the company of siddhas. 
He will attain the wishes he desires; if he is without desires, he will 
attain liberation. (11c—12b) 


Although the words vrata, caryā and vidyavrata are none of them to be found, it 
is now clear to me that this passage makes implicit allusion to the structure now 
familiar to us from numerous other passages: the sadhaka propitiates a given 
mantra, here the MATRKA, by performing a timed religious observance involv- 
ing unusual dress and diet, the rules of which are ideally held to be in some way 
appropriate to the mantra in question, and then becomes eligible for the pur- 


78 GOODALL 


suit of particular siddhis. In the case of the MATRKA, adopting the appearance 
of Ardhanārīsvara is particularly appropriate because the MATRKA is made 
up of feminine vowels and masculine consonants, which, as is explained else- 
where in the Nisvāsa-corpus, are to be applied respectively to the left and right 
halves of the sadhaka’s body before worship in a preliminary rite that prefigures 
what came to be called sakalīkaraņa.”$ The imitatio dei that is such a promi- 
nent feature of some observances, such as this one, now seems as if it should 
be more precisely characterised as identification with the mantra-deity being 
propitiated. 


Conclusion 


So what can be learned from the foregoing pages? In the beginning of this 
paper I tried to emphasise the layered structure not only of the Nisvāsa- 
tattvasamhita, but also of the Guhyasütra itself. This incidentally means that 
we should not only be, as always, cautious in proposals for dating both this and 
related literature, but that we should perhaps also allow for a broad fourchette 
for the composition of this work, broad enough to cover the periods of compo- 
sition of other related works."? We should also bear in mind, while attempting 
to model the relative chronology of early Tantric literature, that it is the very 
latest layers of the Guhyasitra that provide the closest parallels with the gri- 
moires of the Buddhist kriyātantras, in particular with the final chapter, 55, of 
the Marijusriyamilakalpa (see Goodall and Isaacson 2016, passim). 

We have also learned, I believe, about a further early stage in the history 
that precedes the familiar idea that Saiva scriptures were divided into four sec- 
tions treating knowledge, ritual, yoga and day-to-day behaviour ( jviana, kriya, 
yoga, caryā). In the period of the redaction of the Nisvasa, initiates were, de 
facto, all sadhakas seeking to harness the power of mantras and their carya 
was not a matter of approved day-to-day behaviour, or “comportment,’ but 
rather of vrata-caryā, the performance of timed religious observances. Such 
timed religious observances could be used, as in many other religious tradi- 
tions, for expiation, but their primary use in the early Mantramarga was for 


78 See Uttarasütra 2.8 and annotation on pp. 351-352 of Goodall, Sanderson, Isaacson et al. 
2015. 

79 For the possibility that, for instance, the Rauravasitrasangraha might have influenced 
the cosmographical chapters of the Guhyasitra, see Goodall 2016, 89ff. For the most 
recent discussion of the dating of the layered corpus that is the Nisvasatattvasamhità, see 
Goodall, Sanderson, Isaacson et al. 2015, 30-73. 


DRESSING FOR POWER 79 


mantra-propitiation prior to other activities involving the mantras. Such pre- 
liminary mantra-propitiation could also be referred to by such expressions as 
vidyāvrata, purašcaryā and pūrvasevā. These notions about mantra-use and 
mantra-propitiation may be found reflected in a wide range of post-Nisvasa 
pre-tenth-century writings. But once the intake of the religion had broadened 
to include many who were not occupied with spell-mastery at all, the term 
caryā in the tetrad of tantric topics also regained its (usually non-technical) 
sense of day-to-day "comportment” This shift in usage had taken place by the 
time of the composition of the Kirana, in other words by the beginning of the 
ninth century at the latest.8° Finally, the early Saiva evidence furnished here 
suggests that this nexus of notions and labels is not such a fertile field as might 
have been supposed for those searching for evidence of instances of Buddhist 
influence upon the early Saiva Mantramarga. 


Acknowledgements 


I am grateful to Harunaga Isaacson for the suggestions he made for improving 
this article. 


References 


Primary Sources 

Kiranatantra. (Ep) Ti. Ra. Paficapagesasivacarya and K.M. Subrahmanyasastni, eds. sri- 
mat kiraņāgamamahātantram. Šivāgamasiddhāntaparipālanasangha, no. 16. Deva- 
kottai, 1932. 

Kiranatantra. National Archives, Kathmandu, Ms 5-893, NGMPP Reel No. A 40/3, a 
tenth-century Nepalese palm-leaf manuscript (most recently described by Goodall 
1998, Ixxxiv-lxxxv). 

Kubjikamata. Teun Goudriaan and Jan A. Schoterman, eds. The Kubjikamatatantra. 
Kulalikamnaya Version. Critical Edition. Orientalia Rheno-Traiectina, no. 30. Leiden; 
New York; Kobenhavn; Kóln: Brill, 1988. 

Jaiminigrhyasūtra. W. Caland, ed. TheJaiminigrhyasutra belonging to the Samaveda with 
extracts from the commentary edited with An introduction and translated for the first 
time into English. The Punjab Sanskrit Series 2. Lahore: Moti Lal Banarsi Dass, 1922. 


80 Fortheobservation that the Kirana belongs to a group of scriptures whose teachings can 
be found paraphrased in the Haravijaya, which was composed in Kashmir around 830 AD, 
see Sanderson 2001, 5-6. 


80 GOODALL 


Tantrasadbhava. Electronic edition of Mark Dyczkowski based on NGMPP Reel Nos. 
A188/22, A 44/1, and A 44/2. 

Nisvasakarika. Institut Francais de Pondichéry, T. 17, 127 and 150. Paper transcripts in 
Devanāgarī script. (I am grateful to S.A.S. Sarma, R. Sathyanarayanan, Nibedita Rout 
and Nirajan Kafle, all of the Pondicherry Centre of the EFEO, for their help produc- 
ing electronic transcriptions of these witnesses.) 

Nisvasatattvasamhita. For the Mūlasūtra, Uttarasūtra and Nayasütra, see Goodall, 

Sanderson, Isaacson et al. 2015. 
For the Guhyasiitra: NAK MS 1-227, NGMPP Reel No. A 41/14. Palm-leaf, early Nepalese 
‘Licchavi’ script. Two apographs have been consulted throughout, both in Devana- 
gari and on paper: NAK MS 5-2401, NGMPP Reel No. A 159/18, and Wellcome Insti- 
tute for the History of Medicine, London, Sanskrit Ms 1.33. The verse and chapter 
numeration used in our annotation is that of Goodall's edition in progress. Diwakar 
Acharya, Peter Bisschop and Nirajan Kafle helped Goodall to produce the first com- 
plete transcription. 

Nišvāsamukhatattvasamhitā. See Kafle 2015*. 

Paraskaragrhyasütra. Mahadeva Gangadhar Bākre, ed. Grihya-sütra by Parashar with 

five commentaries of Karka Upadhyaya, Jayaram, Harihar, Gadādhar and Vishvanath 

as well as appendices called Vapyadi-pratistha Kandika with Kamdeva Bhāshya 
Showcha Sūtra, Snana Sutra with Harihar Bhashya and Shradha Sutra with three com- 
mentaries by Karka, Gadādhara and Shradha Kāshika by Krishnamishra and Bhojana 
Sutra. Reprint, New Delhi: Munshiram Manoharlal, 1982 [Bombay: Gujarati Printing 
Press, 1917]. 

Bodhayanagrhyasütra. R. Shama Sastri, ed. The Bodháyana Grihyasutra. University of 
Mysore Oriental Library Publications Sanskrit Series, no. 32/55. Mysore: University 
of Mysore, 1920. 

Matanga. N.R. Bhatt, ed. Matarngaparamesvaragama (Kriyapada, Yogapāda et Caryā- 
pada) avec le commentaire de Bhatta Rāmakaņtha. Publications de!’ Institut Francais 
d'Indologie, no. 65. Pondicherry: Institut Francais d'Indologie, 1982. 

Mohacüdottara. National Archives, Kathmandu, Ms 5—1977, NGMPP Reel No. A 182/2. 
This is a 1926 paper apograph manuscript in Devanagari script of a twelfth-century 
palm-leaf manuscript from Western India: National Archives, Kathmandu, Ms 1- 
1633, NGMPP Reel No. B 26/29 (for which see Tāntrikābhidhānakoša 2, s.v. gana). 

Vyomavati. Gaurinath Sastri, ed. Vyomavatt of Vyomasivacarya [Part Two]. M.M. Siva- 
kumārašāstri-Granthamālā, no. 6. Varanasi: Sampurnanand Sanskrit University, 
1984. 

Sarvajfianottara. Edition in progress by Dominic Goodall, based on various sources 
including 1FP T. 334 [= L], Madras GOML R 16829 [= M], the early Nepalese manu- 
script (NGMPP A 43/12 [= N]), and manuscripts transmitting the twelfth-century 
commentary of Aghorašiva. 


DRESSING FOR POWER 81 


Svayambhuvasütrasangraha, Venkatasubrahmanyasastri, ed. Svayambhuvasütrasan- 
graha. Mysore, 1937. 

Svayambhuvasütrasangraha. (N) National Archives, Kathmandu, pam 348, NGMPP 
Reel No. A 30/6, a Nepalese palm-leaf manuscript. See also Appendix to Sathya- 
narayanan 2015. 


Secondary Sources 

Brunner, Héléne. 1985. Mrgendragama Section des rites et section du comportement avec 
la vrtti de Bhattanarayanakantha. Publications de l'Institut Francais d’ Indologie, 
no. 69. Pondicherry: Institut Francais d' Indologie. 

Brunner, Héléne. 1986. “Les membres de Šiva” Asiatische Studien/Etudes Asiatiques XL 
(2): 89-132. 

Brunner, Héléne. 1992. “The Four Padas of Saivagamas.” The Journal of Oriental Research, 
Madras. Dr. S.S. Janaki Felicitation Volume vols. 56—72 (1986—1992): 260—278. 

Caland, Willem. 1922. See Jaiminigrhyasūtra. 

Goodall, Dominic. 1998. Bhatta Rāmakaņtha's Commentary on the Kiranatantra. Vol- 
ume I: Chapters 1-6. Critical Edition and Annotated Translation. Publications du 
département d’indologie 86.1. Pondicherry: Institut Francais de Pondichéry/Ecole 
francaise d' Extréme-Orient. 

Goodall, Dominic. 2004 The Parakhyatantra, a Scripture of the Saiva Siddhānta. A Crit- 
ical Edition and Annotated Translation. Collection Indologie, no. 98. Pondicherry: 
Institut Français de Pondichéry/Ecole francaise d' Extréme-Orient. 

Goodall, Dominic. 2016. “How the Tattvas of Tantric Saivism Came to Be 36: The Evi- 
dence of the Nisvāsatattvasamhitā” In Tantric Studies: Fruits of a Franco-German 
Collaboration on Early Tantra, edited by Dominic Goodall and Harunaga Isaacson, 
77-11. Collection Indologie, no. 131/Early Tantra Series, no. 4. Pondicherry: Insti- 
tut Francais de Pondichéry/Ecole francaise d' Extrēme-Orient/Asien-Afrika-Institut, 
Universität Hamburg. 

Goodall, Dominic, Alexis Sanderson and Harunaga Isaacson. 2015. The Nisvasatatt- 
vasamhita. The Earliest Surviving Saiva Tantra, Volume 1, A Critical Edition & Anno- 
tated Translation of the Mūlasūtra, Uttarasūtra & Nayasūtra, edited by Dominic 
Goodall, in collaboration with Alexis Sanderson & Harunaga Isaacson, with contri- 
butions of Nirajan Kafle, Diwakar Acharya & others. Collection Indologie, no. 128/ 
Early Tantra Series, no. 1. Pondicherry: Institut Francais de Pondichéry/Ecole fran- 
caise d’ Extréme-Orient/Asien-Afrika-Institut, Universitat Hamburg. 

Goodall, Dominic, and Harunaga Isaacson. 2016. “On the Shared ‘Ritual Syntax’ of the 
Early Tantric Traditions.” In Tantric Studies: Fruits of a Franco-German Collabora- 
tion on Early Tantra, edited by Dominic Goodall and Harunaga Isaacson, 1-76. Col- 
lection Indologie, no. 131/Early Tantra Series, no. 4. Pondicherry: Institut Français 
de Pondichéry/Ecole française d’ Extréme-Orient/Asien-Afrika-Institut, Universitat 
Hamburg. 


82 GOODALL 


Isaacson, Harunaga. 2015. See Goodall, Sanderson, Isaacson et al. 2015. 

Isaacson, Harunaga. 2016. See Goodall and Isaacson 2016. 

Kafle, Nirajan. 2015*. The Nisvasamukha, the Introductory Book Prefacing the Nisvasa- 
tattvasamhitā, Critically Edited and Furnished with an Annotated Translation and an 
Appendix Giving an Edition of Chapters 5-9 of the Sivadharmasangraha. Ph.D. thesis, 
the University of Leiden. 

Kiss, Csaba. 2015. The Brahmayamala Tantra or Picumata, Volume Two. The Religious 
Observances and Sexual Rituals of the Tantric Practitioner: chapters 3, 21 and 45. Col- 
lection Indologie, no. 130/ Early Tantra Series, no. 3. Pondicherry: Institut Français 
de Pondichéry/Ecole française d' Extréme-Orient/Asien-Afrika-Institut, Universitat 
Hamburg. 

Nemec, John. 2014. Review of Wedemeyer 2013, Journal of Religion 94 (2): 271-273. 

Olivelle, Patrick. 2005. Manu’s Code of Law. A Critical Edition and Translation of the 
Manava-Dharmasastra ... With the Editorial Assistance of Suman Olivelle. New York: 
Oxford University Press. 

Sanderson, Alexis. 2001. “History through Textual Criticism in the Study of Saivism, the 
Paficarátra and the Buddhist Yoginitantras.” In Les sources et le temps. Sources and 
Time. A colloquium. Pondicherry n-13 January 1997, edited by Francois Grimal, 1-47. 
Publications du département d' Indologie, no. 91. Pondicherry: Institut Francais de 
Pondichéry/Ecole francaise d' Extréme-Orient. 

Sanderson, Alexis. 2006. “The Lakulas: New Evidence of a System Intermediate 
Between Pāticārthika Pāšupatism and Agamic Šaivism” Indian Philosophical Annual 
24 (2003-2005): 143-217. 

Sanderson, Alexis. 2006b. “The Date of Sadyojyotis and Brhaspati.” Cracow Indological 
Studies 8: 39—91. 

Sanderson, Alexis. 2009. "The Šaiva Age” In Genesis and Development of Tantrism, 
edited by Shingo Einoo, 41-349. Institute of Oriental Culture Special Series, no. 23. 
Tokyo: Institute of Oriental Culture, University of Tokyo. 

Sanderson, Alexis. 2015. See Goodall, Sanderson, Isaacson et al. 2015. 

Sathyanarayanan, R., and Dominic Goodall. 2015. Šaiva Rites of Expiation. A First Edi- 
tion and Translation of Trilocanasiva's Twelfth-century Prāyašcittasamuccaya (with a 
transcription of Hrdayašivas Prāyašcittasamuccaya), critically edited & translated by 
R. Sathyanarayanan, with an introduction by Dominic Goodall. Collection Indologie, 
no. 127. Pondicherry: Institut Français de Pondichéry /École francaise d' Extrême- 
Orient. 

TantrikabhidhanakoSa. 2004. Tāntrikābhidhānakoša 11. Dictionnaire des termes tech- 
niques de la littérature hindoue tantrique. A Dictionary of Technical Terms from Hindu 
Tantric Literature. Wērterbuch zur Terminologie hinduistischer Tantren, ed. Héléne 
Brunner}, Gerhard Oberhammer, André Padoux. Sitzungsberichte der philoso- 
phisch-historischen Klasse 714, Beitráge zur Kultur- und Geistesgeschichte Asiens 
44. Vienna: Ósterreichische Akademie der Wissenschaften. 


DRESSING FOR POWER 83 


Tāntrikābhidhānakoša. 2013. Tāntrikābhidhānakoša 111. Dictionnaire des termes tech- 
niques de la littérature hindoue tantrique. A Dictionary of Technical Terms from Hindu 
Tantric literature. Wörterbuch zur Terminologie hinduistischer Tantren, sous la direc- 
tion de Dominic Goodall et Marion Rastelli. Osterreichische Akademie der Wissen- 
schaften, Philosophisch-historische Klasse, Sitzungsberichte, 839. Band. Beitrāge 
zur Kultur- und Geistesgeschichte Asiens 76. Vienna: Verlag der Osterreichischen 
Akademie der Wissenschaften. 

Tórzsók, Judit. 1999*. ‘The Doctrine of Magic Female Spirits: A Critical Edition of Selected 
Chapters of the Siddhayogesvarimata(tantra) with Annotated Translation and Anal- 
ysis. Ph.D. thesis, the University of Oxford. 

Wedemeyer, Christian K. 2013. Making Sense of Tantric Buddhism. History, Semiology, & 
Transgression in the Indian Traditions. New York: Columbia University Press. 


PART 2 


Exegetical and Philosophical Traditions 


CHAPTER 4 


Further Thoughts on Ramakantha’s Relationship to 
Earlier Positions in the Buddhist-Brahmanical 
Atman Debate 


Alex Watson 


The present article is a continuation of my previous work on where precisely 
to place Ramakantha’s self-theory (ātmavāda) in the nexus of other rival posi- 
tions. I am delighted to have been included in this volume and in the con- 
ference which led to it, in honour of my former DPhil supervisor, Profes- 
sor Alexis Sanderson, with whom I spent many hours reading Ramakantha’s 
Narešvaraparīksāprakāša (as well as Kumārila's Slokavarttika, ātmavāda, and 
Vasubandhu's Abhidharmakosabhasya, pudgalavini$caya)—and indeed at 
whose suggestion I began working on Ramakantha's philosophical texts. 

A previous article of mine (Watson 2014) places Ramakantha in the middle 
ground between Nyāya and Buddhism. What I would like to do here is present 
some considerations that run counter to that. I do not think they invalidate my 
earlier contentions, but they do reveal them to be one-sided and incomplete. 

In section 11 introduce key issues in the self debate between Nyaya and Bud- 
dhism, in order to then be able to locate Ramakantha in relation to these two. 
In section 2 I briefly explain my *middle ground" idea that was put forward in 
the 2014 article.! In section 3 I present evidence for seeing Ramakantha as just 
as extreme as Nyaya. In section 4 I present evidence for seeing him as being 
even more extreme than Nyaya, with Nyaya being the moderate position. In 
section 5 I present evidence for Nyaya not being so moderate after all. In the 
concluding section I ask where all of this leaves us. 


1 The Naiyayika-Buddhist Debate about the Existence of the Self 


As a means of identifying what precisely separated Nyaya and Buddhism? on 
the question of the self (atman), I like to use a triple distinction, one that I had 


1 In sections 1 and 2 some material is reused from the 2014 article. 
2 I use “Buddhist” and "Buddhism" in this article to refer specifically to the Buddhism that 
was engaged with in debate by Naiyāyikas and Šaivas, that is to say the Abhidharma of 


© ALEX WATSON, 2020 | DOI:10.1163/9789004432802_006 


This is an open access chapter distributed under the terms of the CC BY-NC 4.0 license. 


88 WATSON 


Nyāya Buddhism 


66683 CO 


FIGURE 4.1 Self as essence 


Nyaya Buddhism 


FIGURE 4.2 Self as substance 


not seen in secondary literature prior to my 2014 article, but which I think arises 
naturally from the primary sources. This is a distinction between three ways in 
which the self was envisaged by the Naiyayikas, and three corresponding ways 
in which the self was argued against by the Buddhists. To elaborate the idea, I 
will use the same set of diagrams that I used in my 2014 article. 

Figure 4.1 is intended to illustrate the difference between the Buddhist doc- 
trine of momentariness, according to which we are something different in 
every single moment, and the Brahmanical idea of the self as the unchanging 
essence of a sentient being. The self is something that remains the same— 
both numerically and qualitatively—over time; a Buddhist individual is both 
numerically and qualitatively different in each moment. 

Whereas in figure 4.1 we were focusing on the conception of the self as 
unchanging essence, in figure 4.2 we are dealing with the self as substance, rep- 
resented by the large circle on the left—a substance that is the owner of certain 
qualities (guna), represented by the small circles. For Naiyayikas qualities can- 
not exist without some substance in which they inhere; hence we can infer the 
existence of the self from the existence of qualities such as cognition, plea- 


Vasubandhu's Abhidharmakosabhasya, and the Yogacara and Sautrantika of Dignaga, Dhar- 
makirti and their followers. What is said of Buddhism in this article does not, therefore, hold 
true of Madhyamaka, for example. 


RAMAKANTHA'S RELATIONSHIP TO EARLIER POSITIONS 89 


Nyaya Buddhism 


gon 00000000 


FIGURE 4.3 Self as agent 


sure and pain.? For Buddhists cognitions, feelings and the other constituents 
(skandha) of an individual exist bundled together, without belonging to some 
greater whole. 

In figure 4.3 we are dealing with the conception of the self as agent; and we 
have to distinguish two senses of “agent’— the doer (kartr) of actions, and the 
subject of cognitions ( jíatr). Actions and cognitions (the circles can represent 
either) all share a common agent for Nyaya, namely the self (represented by 
the line). For Buddhism they do not: the agent of one particular action or cog- 
nition will have ceased to exist by the time another action or cognition comes 
into being. 

The Nyāya and Vaišesika concept of the agent of physical actions was some- 
times elaborated by comparison to a puppeteer: as a puppeteer brings into 
being movements of the body of the puppet, so the self brings bodily move- 
ments into being.* And the Naiyayikas and Vaisesikas both borrowed the Gram- 
marians' (Vaiyakaranas) definition of the agent as that which is autonomous, 
ie. that cause of action which does not depend on anything else.5 Buddhism 
opposes this concept of an autonomous agent standing over the psycho-phys- 
ical stream of events, manipulating it from above. Any physical action will 
depend on the previous moment of consciousness, this will depend on what 
causes it, and the latter will depend on what causes it, etc. There is nothing 


3 The argument involves three contentions, each of which had their own supporting argu- 
ments: (1) Qualities cannot exist without substances to which they belong; (2) Cognition, 
desire, aversion, pleasure, pain, and volition are qualities; (3) The self is the only possible 
substance to which these qualities could belong. See Nyayavarttika ad 11.10, p. 62,1218 (that 
is to say, p. 62, lines 12-18—a convention used throughout this essay), and Prašastapāda- 
bhāsya p. 16,3—7. For the second stage of the argument in particular, see Nyayavarttika ad 
3.248, Nyayamafijari Vol. 2, p. 278,14-15 and Candrananda ad Vaisesikasutra 2.2.28. For the 
third stage of the argument, see e.g. Nydyamaiijari, vol. 2, pp. 284,6—293,2 and Nyāyasūtra 
3.2.47 with the commentaries ad loc. See also Chakrabarti 1982; Oetke 1988, 255—256, 258— 
260, 280, 286—300, 359-360, 464; Matilal 1989, 74, 77; Matilal 1994, 286; Preisendanz 1994, 187, 
209, 278—281; Kano 2001; and Watson 2006, 174—184. 

4 See for example Prasastapadabhasya, p. 15,12 and Candrananda ad Vaisesikasiitra 3.2.4, 
p. 2818-19. 

5 Astadhyayi 1.4.54. 


90 WATSON 


here that is autonomous; and if there were it would not be able to be a cause 
as it would stand outside the causal chain. So for Buddhism the agent of an 
action is simply its principal cause, and this will be an event within the psycho- 
physical stream. Buddhism thus replaces a two-tier model with a one-tier 
one. 

If we are talking not of a physical action but specifically of a cognition, its 
agent will not be a previous moment of consciousness but rather the cognition 
itself. The agent of a perception, i.e. the thing doing the perceiving, is the per- 
ception itself. The subject of any act of awareness, i.e. that which is aware, is 
the stream of consciousness at that particular moment. So here too we have 
a contrast between a Naiyayika two-tier model, in which the cognizer (jrtātr), 
i.e. the self, is ontologically quite distinct from the cognition ( jñāna), versus a 
Buddhist one-tier model in which the cognizer is pluralized and dispersed into 
the stream of cognitions. 


2 Ramakantha in the Middle Ground 


Where does Ramakantha fit in all of this? On two counts he falls with Nyaya 
and on two counts he falls with Buddhism. He falls with Nyaya (1) in oppos- 
ing the Buddhist doctrine of momentariness and in upholding the existence 
of a self that is the unchanging essence of the individual; and (2) in maintain- 
ing that there is an autonomous, unconditioned agent of our physical actions. 
But he agrees with Buddhism (1) that cognition does not inhere in something 
other than itself: there is no self-substance over and above cognition; and (2) 
that there is no cognizer over and above cognition, no agent of awareness over 
and above awareness. For him, as for Buddhism, that which does the cogniz- 
ing or perceiving is just cognition/awareness/consciousness ( jiiāty/grāhaka = 
nana). 

How does he manage to reconcile all of these positions? Le., how does he 
manage to preserve the existence of an unchanging, autonomous self when he 
denies that there is anything—any substance or agent—over and above cogni- 
tion/consciousness? The answer is that he equates the self and cognition/con- 
sciousness ( jiāna/samvit/cit/caitanya). This means that he has to maintain 
that cognition/consciousness is permanent and unchanging, not plural and 
momentary as it is for both Buddhism and Nyaya. Thus the three views can 
be laid out on a continuum. 


6 Abhidharmakosabhasya, p. 1228,1-1229,1. 


RAMAKANTHA'S RELATIONSHIP TO EARLIER POSITIONS 91 
Nyāya Rāmakaņtha Buddhism 
Self 


Cognition 


FIGURE 4.4 Ramakantha’s view in the middle ground 


For Nyāya there is both cognition, and a self over and above that. For Bud- 
dhism there is no self, there is just cognition. For Ramakantha there is a self, 
but it is just cognition. Ramakantha falls in the middle in the sense that, like 
Buddhism, he as it were crosses out the line under Nyaya—he reduces the self 
to cognition; but he does not go all the way down the path of Buddhist argu- 
mentation, as he joins up the dotted line into one unbroken one: he argues that 
cognition is permanent. 

I will not here dwell on how Ramakantha further elaborates and defends his 
idea of unchanging cognition, as I have done so elsewhere.” 


3 Ramakantha as Extreme as Nyaya 


It is at this point that I would like to question and supplement my earlier line 
of thinking. What precisely is this continuum intended to capture? What deter- 
mines the particular location on it that a position will occupy? 

One thing it might be intended to capture is the amount of change that a 
position posits in the subject of experience. On the left we have the Naiyayika 
position according to which the self is eternally unchanging. On the right we 
have the Buddhist position according to which the subject is changing, both 
qualitatively and numerically, in every moment. But for Ramakantha the self 
is completely unmodifiable (avikarya), so on this measure his position should 
fall with Nyaya at the left hand extreme. 

One thing it was certainly intended to capture is heaviness or lightness of 
postulation. On the right we have the Buddhist position that postulates no 
more than all the disputants agree exists: a sequence of cognitions. On the left 
we have the Naiyayika position that postulates an extra entity over and above 
that: an eternal self that is the owner and knower of those cognitions. On this 


7 Watson 2006, 333-382; 2010; and 2014, 186. 


92 WATSON 


measure it looks as though the Naiyāyika position should indeed fall to the left 
of Ramakantha’s: the former seems to postulate two things where Ramakantha 
postulates only one. 

But even here there is a consideration that seems to negate this difference. 
Ramakantha actually accepts two very different kinds of “cognition” (jriana). 
In Ramakantha’s discussions with Buddhism, a common objection put by the 
Buddhist purvapaksin is: if cognition ( jfíana) is unchanging and single,® as 
you Saiddhantikas claim, how can we account for the difference between a 
cognition of blue, a cognition of yellow, an awareness of pain, an awareness 
of pleasure, etc.? Ramakantha's usual answer is to maintain that throughout 
such a sequence cognition itself is indeed single and unchanging.? All change 
happens on the object side of the subject-object (grahaka-grahya) divide. The 
subject/perceiver, i.e. cognition or awareness, is like a light shining out always 
in the same form; the red, blue, pleasure and pain are different objects that are 
illuminated in turn by the light, but they do not affect the nature of the light (= 
cognition) at all. 

But sometimes he gives a different answer, namely that there are two dif- 
ferent kinds of cognition, i.e. that the word jriāna can be used in two differ- 
ent senses. There is cognition proper, i.e. the self (atman), the perceiver (grā- 
haka/jnatr), and there is the cognition that is located not in the self but in 
the intellect (buddhi). The first is termed paurusam jiiānam, the cognition 
of the self, or grahakatmasamvit,! cognition whose nature is the perceiver; the 
second is termed adhyavasayatmakam jfíanam? | adhyavasayatmika samvit,? 
cognition that is of the nature of determination, or paramarsatma jfíanam,'^ 


8 "Single" here means single in each individual; the Saiddhantikas, unlike the non-dualistic 
Saivas, maintained that each being's self/consciousness was eternally separate from every 
other's. 

9 See for example Narešvaraparīksāprakāša ad 1.6ab, pp. 26,19ff., passage beginning kas 


tarhi nīlaprakāšāt pītaprakāšasya bhedah? na kas cit ... (translated and discussed in Wat- 
son 2006, 335—348); Matangavrtti, vidyapada introducing 6:34c—35a, p. 172,7 ff. (translated 
and discussed in Watson 2006, 349—382); Naresvarapariksaprakasa ad 1.5, p. 14,218 (trans- 
lated and discussed in Watson 2006, 220 ff.), which has parallel passages at Matangavrtti, 
vidyāpāda pp. 158,510, 172,16—21, 1731—7 and Paramoksanirasakarikavrtti ad 43, p. 168,50- 
169,62 (following the line numbers as printed on those pages); Naresvarapariksaprakasa 
ad1.6ab, p. 26,413 (translated and discussed at Watson 2010, 111-112 and 2014, 186, note 26). 

10 — Kiranavrtti ad 2.25ab, p. 54,3. 

11  Matangavrtti, vidyapada p. 1741—2 and 174,8. 

12  Kiranavrtti ad 2.25ab, p. 54,2. 

13  Matangavrtti, vidyapada p. 174,4. 

14  Matangavrtti, vidyapada p. 175,4. 


RAMAKANTHA'S RELATIONSHIP TO EARLIER POSITIONS 93 


cognition that is of the nature of verbal determination. The second kind is 
not unitary and unchanging, but divided into discrete instances, verbalizable 
as, for example, “this is blue” “this is yellow,” “this is a pain” If these are discrete 
instances of cognition ( j/íana), how is this answer compatible with the first 
answer that all change occurs on the side of objects, not on the side of the sub- 
ject? The answer is that these discrete instances of determination are actually 
objects of cognition in relation to the perceiver.!6 If we are using "cognition" to 
refer to the perceiver, they are objects of cognition; but they themselves can be 
referred to as “cognitions” if we understand “cognitions” to mean determina- 
tions (adhyavasaya, parāmarša). These products of the intellect (buddhi) are 
transient, i.e. plural over time; the nature of the self is unchanging and single 
over time. 

This is no innovation of Ramakantha's: both the earlier exegetes in his Sai- 
ddhantika tradition, and the Saiddhantika scriptures themselves, locate jriana 
at two different places on the scale of tattvas that is partially inherited from 
Sankhya: within the material world (i.e. that which evolves out of maya) at 
the level of buddhi-tattva, where jriana features as one of the eight properties 
(referred to in Saiva literature with such terms as bhava, dharma, guna, aga) 
of the buddhi,” and as the immaterial nature of selves (which are qualitatively, 
but not numerically, identical to Siva). 

Bearing in mind this distinction between two different kinds of cognition, 
let us revisit the situation that is illustrated in figure 4.4. That diagram, since it 
prints the line under Ramakantha on the same level as the dotted line under 
Nyaya and the dotted line under Buddhism, makes the following assumptions: 
(1) Cognition for Ramakantha refers to (more or less) the same thing as cogni- 
tion for Nyaya. (2) Cognition for Ramakantha refers to (more or less) the same 
thing as cognition for Buddhism. These were not unreasonable assumptions. 
They reflect the way that Ramakantha himself presents the situation. When 
arguing against Nyaya, he effectively says: unlike you Naiyayikas, we accept 
only cognition, not some extra self over and above that in which it inheres.!? 


15 Foran elaboration of Ramakantha's distinction between these two kinds of cognition, see 
Watson 2006, 360-382. 

16 See Kiranavrtti ad 135, p. 18,33—35, Parakhyatantra 4:93ab, Tattvasangraha of Sadyojyotis 
13ab, Mrgendratantra, vidyapada 10:23, Boccio 2002, and Watson 2006, 376 ff. 

17  Seeforexample Parakhyatantra 4:74 ff., Matangaparamesvara 17.2, Mrgendratantra, vidyā- 
pada 10:24 (cited at Goodall 2004, 254, note 383), Bhogakārikā 55, and Sadyojyotis’ com- 
mentary on Svayambhuvasiitrasangraha 2:12. This feature of Saivism is inherited from 
Sankhya; see Sākhyakārikā 23. 

18 Inthe Narešvaraparīksāprakāša ad 1.4cd, pp. 8171219 (on which see chapter 1 of Watson 
2006, and Watson 2010, 86—89), Ramakantha aligns himself with Buddhism against not 


94 WATSON 


Nyāya Rāmakaņtha Buddhism 


Self 


Cognition 


FIGURE 4.5 Ramakantha's view as equivalent to Nyāya 


And when arguing against Buddhism he assures us that his self/cognition is 
just the jūāna that Buddhists talk about, not some container of it, some self- 
substance to which it belongs.!? 

But now that we have seen that Ramakantha actually recognizes two kinds 
of cognition, different possible assumptions, and hence different possibilities 
for the drawing of the diagram, emerge. We could take Buddhist jfiana as cor- 
responding more to Ramakantha's plural cognitions. And if we do, then the fact 
that Ramakantha adds an extra layer above that makes him very much akin to 
Nyāya—at least on this point of how many things they are postulating. 

Similarly, we could take Ramakantha's first kind of cognition as compara- 
ble to Nyaya’s self, and the second kind as comparable to Nyaya's cognitions 
(jūāna). When we adopt this perspective, the difference between Nyaya and 
Ramakantha regarding the extent of their postulation disappears. We arrive at 
the situation depicted in figure 4.5. 

To what extent is it reasonable to take the first kind of cognition as equiva- 
lent to Nyaya's self? It is reasonable to the extent that we are aligning Nyaya's 
self and Ramakantha's self, though the former is not of the nature of jriana 
whereas the latter is. To what extent is it reasonable to take the second kind 
of cognition as equivalent to Nyaya's cognitions and Buddhism's cognitions? 
The fact that the second kind is plural makes it a more natural equivalent than 
the unitary first kind; but the fact that the second kind of cognition is uncon- 
scious (a product of primal matter) makes it less equivalent to Buddhist and 
Naiyayika cognitions, which are sparks of awareness, than the first kind, which 
is equivalent to awareness. 

As well as the amount of change in the subject, and the amount of postu- 
lation, there is a third possibility for what the continuum could capture: the 
amount of dynamism in the subject. On this measure does Ramakantha's self 


only the Naiyāyikas, but also the Vaišesikas and Sankhyas, on the grounds that they all 
accept a self over and above cognition, whereas he accepts only cognition. 

19 See Naresvaraparīksāprakāša ad 1.5, pp. 13,5-14,2 (discussed and translated in Watson 
2006, 213-220); and Kiraņavrtti ad 2:25ab, p. 53,4-8 (discussed and translated in Watson 
2010, 87-89). 


RAMAKANTHA'S RELATIONSHIP TO EARLIER POSITIONS 95 


fall closer to a Buddhist stream of consciousness than a Naiyayika self does? Yes. 
Nyaya's rock-like?? self is in its own nature devoid of consciousness and agency; 
Ramakantha's is of the nature of an outpouring—the outpouring of the light 
of consciousness—and during liberation it remains not just conscious, but also 
an agent. But Ramakantha's self is not as dynamic as that of the non-dualistic 
Saivas. For them vimarša, representative cognition, is a power (Sakti) of the 
self?! Ramakantha resists this move, since for him (as for them) there is no dif- 
ference between a power and the thing that has the power (Sakti and saktimat), 
so to accept that vimarsa, which is changing, is a power of the self would have 
been to accept some change in the self. Vimarša for him belongs in the buddhi, 
not the sel£?? so it does not affect the unchanging nature of the self. Ramakan- 
tha was more concerned than the non-dualist Saivas to protect the self from any 
change, though his self does have more dynamism than a Naiyayika one. There 
is a tension in Ramakantha’s self between its lack of change and its dynamism, 
one to which we will return in the final paragraphs of the article. 


4 Rāmakaņtha More Extreme Than Nyaya 


We have seen that by two out of these three measures, Ramakantha’s self 
looks to be just as "extreme" as Nyaya’s. In fact there is one consideration that 
arguably makes it more extreme. Ramakantha’s self is perhaps even further 
removed from change than Nyaya’s, given that for Nyaya changing cognitions 


20 See Nyāyamaīijarī vol. 2 p. 432,4: jadah pásananirvisesa eva tasyam avasthayam ātmā 
bhavet; "The self in that state [of liberation] would be unconscious, just like a rock” These 
words are put by Jayanta into the mouth of an opponent; but the Naiyayika siddhantin 
does not deny the similarity of the liberated soul to a rock. I thank Harunaga Isaacson for 
this reference. 

21 See Sanderson 1992, 288—289. 

22 See (1) Matangavrtti, vidyapada ad 6:35b—d, p. 175,4-5 (and Watson 2006, 366), where 
Ramakantha asserts that parāmarša, despite rising and passing away, does not indicate the 
non-eternality of the self, as it occurs not in the self but in the buddhi (and the ahankara): 
that vimarša is synonymous with parāmarša for Ramakantha is suggested by Naresvara- 
parīksāprakāša ad 117, pp. 41,5—44,3 (translated and discussed in Watson 2006, 313-332), 
where they are used interchangeably; (2) Kiranavrtti ad 2:25ab, pp. 53,10—54.17, where 
Ramakantha distinguishes adhyavasaya, which is transient and a property (dharma) of 
the buddhi, from samvedanātmakam jrianam, which belongs to the soul and is always 
occurrent; that Ramakantha uses adhyavasaya and paramarsa (and niscaya) as synonyms 
is suggested by Matangavrtti, vidyapada ad 6:35b—d, p. 174,4-175,9; (3) Matanigavrtti, vidya- 
pada ad 17:2, p. 382,12—21, which distinguishes adhyavasaya from samvedana and identifies 
the former as the svabhava of the buddhi; (4) Naresvarapariksaprakasa ad 1:6ab, p. 28,12— 
19, where adhyavasaya is said to be a guna of the buddhi. 


96 WATSON 


Rāmakaņtha Nyāya Buddhism 


FIGURE 4.6 Rāmakaņtha's view as more extreme than Nyāya 


inhere in the self. For Rāmakaņtha, by contrast, changing cognitions, as we saw 
above, are objects of awareness (grahya) for the self; they occur outside of it, 
in the intellect (buddhi). So we arrive at a different continuum, illustrated in 
figure 4.6, where the large circle is the self and the dotted lines are cognitions. 
The position that postulates the most amount of change in the subject is the 
Buddhist position on the right; the position that postulates the least amount 
of change in the subject is Ramakantha’s position on the left; Nyaya falls in the 
middle. 

And what is asserted here of cognitions is also true of latent impressions 
(samskaras), pleasures and pains. Whereas for Nyaya these all reside in the self, 
Ramakantha and his fellow Saiddhantikas, arguing that this would entail the 
unwanted consequence that the self is subject to change, locate latent impres- 
sions, pleasures and pains outside of the self in the buddhi.?3 

The fact that we are dealing here with two different conceptions of the rela- 
tionship between self and cognitions—for Nyāya inherence (samavaya), and 
for Ramakantha a subject-object relation (grahyagrahakabhava)—means that 
certain objections that are put to Ramakantha are not so applicable to Nyaya. 

First, a common objection that is articulated in Buddhist texts against a 
Sankhya self,24 and in Ramakantha's texts as a Buddhist objection to his own 
view,”° is as follows. If the self were completely unmodifiable, it would not be 
able to perceive objects, for to perceive a pot, say, followed by a cloth requires 
being able to register the change in the object-sphere from the pot to the cloth. 
And there is no way to register a change without being affected by the change. 
The way in which a perceiver perceives an object is by being modified by that 


23 See Matangavrtti, vidyapada ad 17:2, p. 3831-8 and ad 6:34c—35a, pp. 173,11-174)1. 

24 Eg. Tattvasaùgraha of Santaraksita 287 and 288. 

25 See Matangavrtti, vidyāpāda introducing 6:34c—35a, p. 172,7-10; Naresvarapariksaprakasa 
introducing 1:6ab, p. 17,3-4; and Narešvaraparīksāprakāša ad 1.6ab, p. 2619-20. 


RAMAKANTHA'S RELATIONSHIP TO EARLIER POSITIONS 97 


objectin some way. If the perceiveris permanently unaffected and unmodified, 
itis mysterious how it can be a perceiver. 

Here the Naiyāyika will respond that the self is modified to the extent that 
separate cognitions inhere in it, the first caused by the pot and the second 
caused by the cloth. 

Second, Ramakantha combines the claim that the self is unmodifiable with 
the claim that it is an agent. This lays him open to an objection that, unlike 
the last one, is not applicable to Sankhya: how can something that is beyond 
all change be an agent? There are two aspects to this objection. (1) How can 
something that does not itself *move" cause movement? Here Ramakantha's 
response is to adduce the example of a magnet. A magnet causes movement in 
iron filings without itself moving; so similarly, the self causes bodily movement 
without itself moving.*° But even if it were conceded that the magnet example 
renders plausible a self as “unmoving mover,” there is a related but different 
problem. (2) If the self is beyond all change, how can we explain that at one 
moment it brings about one action and at another moment it brings about a 
completely different action? Surely an agent that is always in the same state 
would have to either always be doing nothing or always be doing exactly the 
same thing? 

Here again, the objection is not so applicable to Naiyayikas, for they accept 
the existence of different impulses (prayatnas) that inhere in the self. A prior 
bodily movement will be brought about by a particular impulse, and a subse- 
quent, different kind of bodily movement will be brought about by a different 
impulse. 


5 Nyaya Not so Moderate after AII 


Section 3 gave reasons for judging Ramakantha's position not to fall in the mid- 
dle ground between Nyaya and Buddhism, but to be just as extreme as Nyaya. 

Section 4 gave reasons for judging Ramakantha's position to be more 
extreme than Nyāya's, with the latter as the moderate one, closer to Buddhism. 
But this section introduces a consideration that reveals Nyaya to be not so mod- 
erate after all. 

It is true that Nyaya holds cognitions, impulses (prayatna), latent impres- 
sions (samskara), pleasures, pains, etc., to inhere in the self, whereas Ramakan- 


26 . Kiranavrtti ad 33; Paramoksanirāsakārikāvrtti ad 3c, pp. 115,99—16,106; and Watson, Good- 
all and Sarma 2013, 258—259, especially note 196. 


98 WATSON 


tha (in accord with his Sankhya inheritance)?’ locates all of these outside of 
the self, indeed outside of the realm of the immaterial altogether, within the 
world derived from maya and prakrti. We thus seem to be left with the picture 
given in figure 4.6, where the small lines can represent any of the things just 
listed: they fall within the self for Nyaya, but outside of it for Ramakantha. But 
the statement that they fall within the self for Nyaya has to be qualified. For 
Nyaya actually regards them as part of the "not-self” How can that be, given 
that they are qualities of the self? Because of Nyāya's view of the firm differ- 
ence between a thing and its qualities (gunagunibheda). Any substance for 
Nyaya is a completely different thing from its qualities. Change in the quali- 
ties of a substance will not necessarily result in any change or modification of 
the substance. And there is even more distance between the self and its quali- 
ties than there is between a physical substance and its qualities. For the self is 
eternal, its qualities temporary; it is omnipresent, while they are restricted to 
a particular location.?? This Naiyayika idea that the self in particular, and sub- 
stances in general, are unaffected by changes in their qualities was one of the 
things that separated their view from that of Kumarila and the Bhatta Mimam- 
sakas. For the latter held the relation between a thing and its qualities to be 
difference-cum-nondifference (bhedabheda); they maintained that changes in 
the qualities of a thing do affect the thing itself. The self, for them, although 
never ceasing to exist, is subject to modification when its qualities change.?9 
The fact that the Naiyayikas rejected this, protecting the self from any effect of 
change in its qualities, means that their view cannot be so starkly differentiated 
from Ramakantha’s view as figure 4.6 suggests. 

This impression is strengthened by Naiyayika passages dealing with libera- 
tion (apavarga, moksa). Here Naiyayika authors assert that the self’s nature is, 
and always has been, free of all its particular qualities (sakalagunapodha).°° 
These qualities are thus irrelevant to its nature. They are described as extrinsic 
to it, not innate (na naisargikah).*! They are part of the “not-self” with which it 
confuses itself while in samsāra, and which is to be abandoned (heya). 

This thoroughgoing difference and separateness of the self’s qualities from 
the self—indicated by all of the considerations above—means that the Nyaya 


27 For the Sankhya stance on these matters and its difference from Nyaya, see Dasti 2013, 
121—135. 

28 For an account of the evolution of the increasing distance that developed between the 
self and its qualities in Nyāya and Vaisesika, see Frauwallner 1956, 91-104; 1984, 61-71. 

29 Šlokavārttika, ātmavāda 21-23. 

3o  Nyāyamaīijarī Vol. 2, p. 359,6: sakalagunapodham evasya rūpam. 

31  Nyāyamarijarī Vol. 2, p. 359,5. 

32 Nyāyamaīijarī Vol. 2, p. 265,10-12 and p. 430,3—4. Nyayabhasya p. 6,9-n. 


RAMAKANTHA'S RELATIONSHIP TO EARLIER POSITIONS 99 


Rāmakaņtha Nyāya Buddhism 


FIGURE 4.7 Nyāya as equivalent to Ramakantha’s view 


position can arguably be represented as it is in figure 4.7, and hence regarded 
as just as extreme as Ramakantha’s position. 


6 Concluding Remarks 


Where do all of these divergent analyses leave us? What is cancelled out by 
what? It may be better to see each perspective as having its own validity. We 
have four perspectives: 
1. Ramakantha in the middle ground (section 2 and Watson 2014). 
2.  Rāmakaņtha as just as extreme as Nyaya (section 3). 
3. Ramakantha as more extreme than Nyaya (section 4). 
4.  Ramakantha as just as extreme as Nyaya (section 5). 
Or rather, three perspectives, since 2 and 4 are the same. In what sense is 1 
valid? The Saiva equating of self and consciousness/cognition and its view of 
the self as the shining forth of prakasa, the light of consciousness, is indeed 
something that differentiates Ramakantha's view from Nyaya in substantial 
and significant ways. Related to this is the Šaiva rejection of the existence of 
substances (dravya) over and above qualities (guna), or property-possessors 
(dharmin) over and above properties (dharma). And just as, for Ramakantha, 
there is no self-substance over and above consciousness/cognition, so too there 
is no self as agent (kartr) or knower ( jriātr/grāhaka) over and above conscious- 
ness/cognition. From the point of view of this equating of self and conscious- 
ness, perspective 1 is valid, and figure 4.4 captures a certain relationship that 
Ramakantha's position bears to Nyaya and Buddhism. This perspective and this 
figure also accord with the way that Ramakantha's self is more dynamic than 
Nyaya's. 

But it is not valid to see things only in this way, because when we add the 
consideration that Ramakantha accepts two kinds of cognition, this allows for 


100 WATSON 


the possibility of aligning not his first kind, but his second kind (that which 
is plural and is located in the buddhi) with Nyāya's and Buddhism’s cognition. 
When we do that, and we add Ramakantha’s self (i.e. his first kind of cogni- 
tion) above that, his position becomes equivalent to Nyaya’s (both in terms of 
the number of things postulated and the amount of change in the self)—and 
figure 4.5 becomes appropriate. 

But this does not exhaust the number of ways of seeing the relationship 
between Ramakantha and Nyaya, because there is a further significant consid- 
eration. While it is true that the selves of both Nyaya and Saivasiddhanta are 
eternally unchanging (which supports the idea that they are both as extreme 
as each other: perspective 2), it is also the case that cognitions, impulses (pra- 
yatna), latent impressions (samskara), pleasures, pains, etc., inhere in the self 
for Nyaya, but fall completely outside it for Ramakantha. Emphasizing this 
makes it appear that Ramakantha’s self, like a Sankhya self, is even more 
removed from change than Nyaya’s. This perspective 3 (illustrated in figure 4.6) 
carries some weight, but is no final resting place, for if we concentrate on those 
places where Nyaya emphasizes that qualities are extrinsic to substances, and 
that consciousness/cognitions, etc., are part of the not-self, not affecting its 
nature in any way, then it appears that there is in fact no more change in a 
Naiyayika self than a Saiddhantika one. So to adopt perspective 4 is to revert 
to perspective 2, which this time can be illustrated with a slightly different dia- 
gram: figure 4.7. 

The explanation for the difference between perspectives 3 and 4 is a cer- 
tain tension within Nyaya, one that was already noted by Frauwallner in 1956.53 
Frauwallner argues that the Naiyayika self is the product of two separate influ- 
ences. On the one hand, it derives from the self as characterized in the old 
philosophy of nature; on the other hand it was subject to continual attrac- 
tion to the self of the Sankhyas. According to the former, selves were of limited 
size, and hence capable of movement; they were that which transmigrates from 
body to body; and they were all qualitatively distinct from each other, as a result 
of being characterized by their own qualities (svagunavisista). There was thus a 
huge difference between these selves and those of Sankhya: the latter were all- 
pervading and hence incapable of movement; it was not they that transmigrate 
(but rather a subtle body); and they were devoid of all qualities. But over time 
the difference of the selves of the Naiyayikas and Vaisesikas from those of the 
Sankhyas decreased. The former became all-pervading and hence incapable 
of movement; they ceased to be that which transmigrates from body to body 


33  Frauwallner (1956, 91-104), (1984, 61-71). 


RAMAKANTHA'S RELATIONSHIP TO EARLIER POSITIONS 101 


(the manas took on this role); and their relationship to their qualities became 
reassessed. They were no longer characterized by their own qualities (svagu- 
navisista); rather those qualities came to be regarded as extrinsic to them, as 
part of the not-self, and as needing to be abandoned if the self is to rest in its 
own nature. Previously selves were affected by changes in their qualities; subse- 
quently they were not. Previously selves were qualitatively different from each 
other; subsequently they were all qualitatively identical as a result of being, in 
their true nature, devoid of particular qualities. 

The residues in a Naiyayika self of earlier philosophy of nature weigh in 
favour of perspective 3; the influence of the Sankhya model of a self pulls it 
towards perspective 4. 

Just as the difference between perspectives 3 and 4 results from focusing 
on different aspects of Nyāya, so the difference between perspectives 1 and 2 
results from focusing on different aspects of Saivasiddhanta. Just as we have 
offered an explanation of the first difference in terms of a tension within Nyaya, 
is there also an explanation of the second difference in terms of a tension 
within Saivasiddhanta? In fact there is. Ràmakantha's self is one whose nature 
derives to a large extent from Sankhya: passing cognitions do not inhere in it, 
samskaras do not reside in it, pleasures and pains fall outside of it. It is elevated 
above all change; it sits above and beyond the various tattvas that comprise 
the psycho-physical universe. This is the kind of self that Ramakantha inherits 
from his scriptural tradition. But his concept of self is also the result of a sec- 
ond influence, one which goes back to some of the Šaiva scriptures?* and which 
had been increasingly making itself felt among the Šaivas of Kashmir (both 
Saiddhantikas such as Narayanakantha and non-dualists such as Utpaladeva) 
during the previous century. This second influence sees the self not as a static 
Sankhya-like entity, but as dynamic and as an outpouring of light (prakasa)— 
the light of cognition/consciousness. The contrast between the two influences 
is strong. (1) According to the first influence it is a passive non-agent; according 
to the second it is a fully-fledged agent. I.e., not only is it an agent while unlib- 
erated, as in Nyāya, but it is also an agent in liberation; indeed at that time its 
agency expands into omnipotence. (2) According to the first, jriana falls com- 
pletely outside of the self; according to the second, the self is of the nature of 
jūāna. 

Perspective 2 (which was presented in section 3) results from focusing on 
the first influence, the Sānkhya inheritance. Perspective 1 (presented in section 
2) results from focusing on the new Saiva insights. 


34 See Watson (2010, 80). 


102 WATSON 
Acknowledgements 


I would like to thank Michael Allen for a conversation over lunch in Harvard 
Sguare in 2013 that planted the seeds of many of the new directions of thought 
in this article. 


References 


Primary Sources 

Abhidharmakošabhāsya. Swami Dwarika Das Sastri, ed. Abhidharmakosa and Bhāsya 
of Ācārya Vasubandhu with Sphutārthā Commentary of Ācārya Yašomitra. Bauddha 
Bhāratī Series, nos. 5—7, 9. Vārāņasī: Bauddha Bhāratī, 1970—1973. 

Astaprakarana. Brajavallabha Dvivedi, ed. Tattvaprakāša, Tattvasangraha, Tattvatra- 
yanirņaya, Ratnatraya, Bhogakārikā, Nādakārikā, Moksakārikā, Paramoksanirāsa- 
kārikā. Yogatantra-granthamālā, no. 12. Vārāņasī: Sampurnananda Sanskrit Univer- 
sity, 1988. 

Astadhyayi. S.M. Katre, ed. Astadhyayi of Panini. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1989. 

Kiranavrtti. Dominic Goodall, ed. Kiranavrttih. Bhatta Ramakantha’s Commentary on 
the Kiranatantra. Volume 1: Chapters 1-6. Collection Indologie, no. 86.1. Pondichéry: 
Institut francais de Pondichéry/École française d’ Extréme-Orient, 1998. (In refer- 
ences to this edition, line numbers are not counted from the top of the page; they 
rather follow the line numbers printed in the edition, which start counting from the 
previous verse-segment.) 

Tattvasamgraha of Santaraksita. Dwarikadas Shastri, ed. Tattvasangraha of Ācārya 
Shantaraksita with the commentary "Pafijika" of Shri Kamalashīla. 2 vols. Bauddha 
Bharati Series, nos. 1-2. Varanasi: Bauddha Bharati, 1981-1982. 

Tattvasamgraha of Sadyojyotis. See Astaprakarana. 

Narešvaraparīksāprakāša. Madhusūdan Kaul Šāstrī, ed. Naresvarapariksà of Sadyojy- 
otis with the Prakasa Commentary of Ramakantha. Kashmir Series of Texts and Stud- 
ies, no. 45. Reprint, Delhi, 1989 [Srinagar: Research Department Jammu and Kashmir 
State, 1926]. 

Nyayabhasya. Anantalal Thakur, ed. Gautamīyanyāyadaršana with Bhasya of Vatsya- 
yana. Nyayacaturgranthika, no. 1. New Delhi: Indian Council of Philosophical 
Research, 1997. 

Nyayamanjari. K.S. Varadacharya, ed. Nyayamafijart of Jayantabhatta, with Tippani— 
Nyayasaurabha by the Editor. 2 vols. Oriental Research Institute Series nos. 16 and 
139. Mysore: Oriental Research Institute, 1969 and 1983. 

Nyayavarttika. Anantalal Thakur, ed. Nyayabhasyavarttika of Bharadvaja Uddyotakara. 
Nyayacaturgranthika, no. 2. New Delhi: Indian Council of Philosophical Research, 
1997. 


RAMAKANTHA'S RELATIONSHIP TO EARLIER POSITIONS 103 


Nyayasütra. See Nyayabhasya. 

Paramoksanirāsakārikāvrtti. See Watson, Goodall and Sarma 2013. 

Parākhyatantra. Dominic Goodall, ed. The Parākhyatantra. A Scripture of the Saiva 
Siddhanta. Collection Indologie, no. 98. Pondichéry: Institut Francais de Pondich- 
éry/Ecole française d' Extréme-Orient, 2004. 

Prašastapādabhāsya. Johannes Bronkhorst and Yves Ramseier ed. Word Index to the 
Prasastapadabhasya: a Complete Word Index to the Printed Editions of the Prasas- 
tapadabhasya. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1994. 

Bhogakarika of Sadyojyotis. See Astaprakarana. 

Matangavrtti. See Matangaparamesvara. 

Matangaparamesvara. N.R. Bhatt, ed. Matangapāramešvarāgama, Vidyāpāda, avec le 
commentaire de Bhatta Ramakantha. Collection Indologie, no. 56. Pondichéry: Insti- 
tut Francais d’ Indologie, 1977. 

Mrgendratantra. Madhusūdan Kaul Šāstrī, ed. The Sri Mrgendra Tantram: Vidyapada & 
Yogapada, with the Commentary (-vrtti) of Narayanakantha. Kashmir Series of Texts 
and Studies, no. 50. Reprint New Delhi: Panini, 1982 [Bombay; Srinagar: Jammu and 
Kashmir State Archaeological and Research Department, 1930. | 

Yuktidipika. Albrecht Wezler and Shujun Motegi, eds. Yuktidīpikā, the Most Significant 
Commentary on the Samkhyakarika. Alt- und Neu-Indische Studien, no. 44. Stuttgart: 
Franz Steiner Verlag, 1998. 

Vaisesikasutra. Muni Sri Jambuvijayaji. Vaisesikasutra of Kanada with the Commen- 
tary of Candrananda. Gaekwad’s Oriental Series, no. 136. Baroda: Oriental Institute, 
1961. 

Slokavarttika. Dvārikādāsa Šāstrī, ed. Slokavarttika of Sri Kumārila Bhatta with the Com- 
mentary Nyāyaratnākara of Sri Pārthasārathi Misra. Prāchyabhārati Series, no. 10. 
Varanasi: Tara Publications, 1978. 

Sānkhyakārikā. See Yuktidīpikā (Appendix 11). 

Svāyambhuvasūtrasangraha. Pierre-Sylvain Filliozat, ed. Svayambhuvasutrasangraha: 
The Tantra of Svayambhu, Vidyāpāda, with the Commentary of Sadyojyoti. Kalāmū- 
lašāstra Series, no. 13. Delhi: Indira Gandhi National Centre for the Arts/Motilal 
Banarsidass, 1994. 


Secondary Sources 

Boccio, Fabio. 2002. "Die Konzeption der buddhi als ‘Genufobject’ in Sadyojyotis’ 
Bhogakārikā” In Sikhisamuccayah. Indian and Tibetan Studies (Collectanea Marpur- 
gensia Indologica et Tibetica), edited by D. Dimitrov, U. Roesler and R. Steiner, 11-26. 
Wiener Studien zur Tibetologie und Buddhismuskunde 53. Wien: Arbeitskreis fiir 
Tibetische und Buddhistische Studien, Universitat Wien. 

Chakrabarti, Arindam. 1982. “The Nyaya Proofs for the Existence of the Soul.” Journal of 
Indian Philosophy 10: 211—238. 


104 WATSON 


Dasti, Matthew. 2013. "Nyāya's Self as Agent and Knower” In Free Will, Agency, and Self- 
hood in Indian Philosophy, edited by M. Dasti and E.F. Bryant, 112—136. New York: 
Oxford University Press. 

Frauwallner, Erich. 1956. Geschichte der indischen Philosophie. Volume 2. Salzburg: Otto 
Muller Verlag. 

Frauwallner, Erich. 1984. History of Indian Philosophy. Volume 2. Translated from original 
German into English by V.M. Bedekar. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass. 

Goodall, Dominic. 2004. The Parakhyatantra. A Scripture of the Saiva Siddhānta. A Crit- 
ical Edition and Annotated Translation. Collection Indologie, no. 98. Pondichéry: 
Institut Francais de Pondichéry/École francaise d' Extréme-Orient 

Halbfass, Wilhelm. 1976. "Zum Begriff der Substanz (dravya) in Vaisesika” Wiener 
Zeitschrift für die Kunde Südasiens 20: 141-166. 

Hulin, Michel. 1980. Mrgendragama: sections de la doctrine et du yoga avec la Vrtti de 
Bhattanarayanakantha et la Dipika d'Aghorasivacarya. Traduction, Introduction et 
Notes. Collection Indologie, no. 63. Pondichéry: Institut francais d’ Indologie. 

Kano, Kyo. 2001. “Parisesa, Prasanga, and Kevalavyatirekin—the Logical Structure of 
the Proof of Ātman” Journal of Indian Philosophy 29: 405—422. 

Matilal, Bimal Krishna. 1989. "Nyāya Critique of the Buddhist Doctrine of Non-soul” 
Journal of Indian Philosophy 17 (1): 61—79. 

Matilal, Bimal Krishna. 1994. “The Perception of the Self in Indian Tradition” In Self as 
Person in Asian Theory and Practice, edited by R. Ames, et al., 279—295. New York: 
State University of New York Press. 

Oetke, Claus. 1988. “Ich” und das Ich. Alt- und Neu-Indische Studien 33. Stuttgart: Franz 
Steiner Verlag. 

Preisendanz, Karin. 1994. Studien zu Nyāyasūtra 111.1 mit dem Nyāyatattvāloka Vacas- 
pati Misras 11. Alt- und Neu-Indische Studien, no. 46. Stuttgart: Franz Steiner Ver- 
lag. 

Sanderson, Alexis. 1992. “The Doctrine of the Mālinīvijayottaratantra” In Ritual and 
Speculation in Early Tantrism. Studies in Honour of André Padoux, edited by 
T. Goudriaan, 281-312. Albany: State University of New York Press. 

Watson, Alex. 2006. The Self's Awareness of Itself. Bhatta Ramakantha's Arguments 
Against the Buddhist Doctrine of No-Self. Publications of the De Nobili Research 
Library, no. 32. Wien: De Nobili Research Library. 

Watson, Alex. 2010. “Ramakantha’s Concept of Unchanging Cognition (nityajfiana): 
Influence from Buddhism, Samkhya, Vedānta” In From Vasubandhu to Caitanya. 
Studies in Indian Philosophy and Its Textual History. Papers of the 12th World Sanskrit 
Conference. Volume 10.1, edited by J. Bronkhorst and K. Preisendanz, 79-120. Delhi: 
Motilal Banarsidass. 

Watson, Alex. 2014. "The Self as a Dynamic Constant. Ramakantha's Middle Ground 
Between a Naiyāyika Eternal Self-Substance and a Buddhist Stream of Conscious- 


RAMAKANTHA'S RELATIONSHIP TO EARLIER POSITIONS 105 


ness-Moments” Journal of Indian Philosophy 42 (1): 173—193. doi: 10.1007/s10781-013- 
9215-2. 

Watson, Alex, Dominic Goodall and S.L.P. Anjaneya Sarma. 2013. An Enquiry into the 
Nature of Liberation. Bhatta Rāmakaņtha's Paramoksanirāsakārikāvrtti, a commen- 
tary on Sadyojyotih’s refutation of twenty conceptions of the liberated state (moksa). 
Collection Indologie, no. 122. Pondichéry: Institut Frangais de Pondichéry/École 
francaise d' Extréme-Orient. 


CHAPTER 5 


Some Hitherto Unknown Fragments of 
Utpaladeva's Vivrti (11): Against the Existence of 
External Objects 


Isabelle Ratié 


1 Fragments of Utpaladeva's Vivrti in Marginal Annotations of 
Manuscripts Belonging to the Pratyabhijiia Corpus 


Raffaele Torella’s discovery and remarkable edition of the only (and very 
incomplete) manuscript of the Vivrti thus far known! has enabled us to deter- 
mine with certainty that some marginal annotations in manuscripts of Abhi- 
navagupta's [svarapratyabhijnavimarsini (henceforth īPv) and Īsvarapratya- 
bhijfiavivrtivimarsini (henceforth 1Pvv) regularly quote Utpaladeva's lost work. 
Nine of the īPv manuscripts that I have been able to consult contain such 
quotations;? two IPVV manuscripts? known to me bear several fragments, the 
most important of which is by far the lengthiest Vivrti fragment known to 
date (including the one found in the codex unicus edited by Raffaele Torella), 
covering three Vivrti chapters? and two manuscripts of the Isvarapratyabhi- 
jfiavrtti (henceforth Vrtti) have been shown to contain some much shorter 
Vivrti quotations.5 The following pages are an attempt to edit and translate 


1 The manuscript as it stands now only covers verses 1.3.6 to 1.5.3. See Torella 1988 (this first part 
of the fragment was in fact edited from a transcript of the original manuscript D later found 
by R. Torella in the National Archives of India and used for the edition of the remaining parts 
of the fragment), and Torella 2007a, 2007b, 2007c and 2007d. 

2 Fora list of parallels between marginal annotations in D2, soAs and S3 and the fragment 
edited by R. Torella, see Ratié 2016. Five other Ipv manuscripts—namely JR, S2, $5, $7, Sg— 
have been shown to contain such fragments in Ratié 2016b, and one more (S15) in Ratié 
forthcoming (see also below). 

3 Si2andju. 

4 On this discovery, see Ratié 2017 and Ratié forthcoming. 

5 See Kawajiri 2016 and 2016b for a diplomatic edition of marginal annotations containing 
Vivrti quotations in a Vrtti manuscript from Lucknow in Devanagari script. Note, however, 
that S19 (a Šāradā manuscript used by Raffaele Torella for his edition of the Vrtti) also con- 
tains many Vivrti fragments. It is described in Torella 2002, l-li (under siglum N) as “profusely 
annotated by a different hand with single glosses or long passages (mostly drawn from the 
IPV) between the lines and often entirely covering the margins." Indeed, many of these quota- 


€ ISABELLE RATIÉ, 2020 | D0I:10.1163/9789004432802 007 
This is an open access chapter distributed under the terms of the CC BY-NC 4.0 license. 


FRAGMENTS OF UTPALADEVA'S VIVRTI (II) 107 


some brief marginal annotations borrowed from Utpaladeva's lost Vivrti on 
Isvarapratyabhiüjfiakarika (henceforth īPK) 1.5.6 and 1.5.8—9.6 

This is no easy task, because very little is known of the source(s), purpose(s) 
and history of these annotations,’ and because most of the time their authors 
do not specify whether they are quoting?—and if so, which text?—or rather 
giving a comment of their own. We can quite safely assume that these anno- 
tations are indeed genuine quotations from the Vivrti whenever we can find 
in them a sequence of words corresponding exactly to the pratikas in Abhi- 
navagupta's IPVv. However, Abhinavagupta's quotations of the Vivrti are some- 
times so brief that we cannot always reach such a high level of probability, 
as can be seen from one problematic instance below.!° Besides, the marginal 


tions are from the IPv; but some are Vivrti fragments, as shown in Ratié forthcoming (see 
also Ratié 2018b, Appendix 1). S19 was not taken into account here, not because it would 
be irrelevant (its margins bear several fragments on IPK 1.5.6—9, and interestingly, most of 
them are not found in the Ipv and Ipvv manuscripts used below), but because unfortu- 
nately, I made this discovery too late to incorporate the new findings in this article. 

6 So far I have not found any Vivrti quotation on IPK 1.5.7 in IPV or ĪPVV manuscripts. 
It should also be noted that S12, to which I only recently had access, bears the frag- 
ment edited in Ratié 2016, 239-240 from marginal annotations in S3. In S12 the frag- 
ment appears in the margins of folios 19A-120B. The missing words in S3 (Ratié 2016, 
239, note 35) appear as tathā carati in S12; the compound parajfianavisayabhavagamana- 
bhisandhir (ibid., 239, $1, last line) has the wrong reading parajrianaparajnanavisaya- 
bhāvagamanābhisandhir; S12 shares with S3 the wrong readings ?vyavaharady? instead of 
?yyaharady? (see ibid., 239, note 36 and 37), and occasionally reads °vyavaharady° where 
S3 has the right reading ?vyaharady? (in tajjfiíanagatavyaharady?, ibid., 239, $2, line 5); 
it reads yadi where S3 has yad iha (ibid., 239, $2, line 6—I had conjectured yadi hi); it 
also has abhasabhedahetutva? instead of abhasabhede hetutva? (ibid., 240, § 5, line 5); it 
shares with S3 the wrong readings yathāvabhāsānām (see ibid., 240, note 41) and prama- 
trprabhasaparyavasanam (see ibid., 240, note 42); finally, it reads napi pratibodhitā ekaiva 
instead of S3's nadhipratitvocitaikaiva (and my conjecture nadhipatitvocitaikaiva). 

7 See Formigatti 2011 and Ratié 2018b. Formigatti 2011 (a very interesting study of marginal 
annotations in Sanskrit manuscripts from northern India and Nepal) bears in part on īPv 
manuscripts; unfortunately it makes no mention of Vivrti fragments, although at least one 
of the manuscripts examined, $7 (- S9 in the present paper), contains quotations from 
Utpaladeva's detailed auto-commentary (see Ratié 2016b). The reason for this is that due 
to the length of the Ipv, Formigatti chose to confine his research to the annotations on the 
first chapter, which are apparently devoid of such quotations. 
This happens, however: see Ratié 2016, 228, note 10, and below, note 58. 
The marginal annotations most often quote from Utpaladeva's Vrtti and Abhinavagupta's 
IPvv, but other works are occasionally cited, including Saiva texts (such as the Šivadrsti) as 
well as Buddhist works (e.g. Dharmakirti's Sambandhapariksa) or Brahmanical treatises 
(e.g. Jayanta's Nyayamafijart): see Ratié 2017, 165. 

10  Seefragment no. 6’ on IPK 1.5.8—9. 


108 RATIĒ 


FIGURE 5.1 Manuscript S3 of Abhinavagupta’s Iévarapratyabhijfiavimarsini (f. 43A), with frag- 
ments 4 and 5 of Utpaladeva's Vivrti on wv. 1.5.8—9 in the top and right margins 
PHOTOGRAPH: NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA 


annotations are sometimes barely legible, and Utpaladeva's prose is difficult. 
For all these reasons, both the edition and translation given here are only ten- 
tative. 


2 The Context and Gist of Fragments 1-3 on IPK 1.5.6 


The overall context of the fragments presented here is a controversy over the 
existence of a reality external to consciousness, and Utpaladeva's main inter- 
locutor at this point of the debate is a Buddhist Sautrāntika. The latter admits 
that we can never have direct access to any reality existing beyond conscious- 
ness, since the objects of our perceptions are nothing but internal aspects 
(akara) of consciousness; yet he claims that an external reality must be inferred 
so as to account for phenomenal variety: according to him, consciousness is in 
itself an undifferentiated manifesting entity or light (prakāšamātra), so that 
the variety of objects of which we are aware must have a cause outside of con- 
sciousness, just as a variety of reflections in a mirror must have as its cause a 


11 On the portrayal of this philosophical figure by the Saiva nondualists and Utpaladeva's 
refutation of his thesis (both of which are only briefly outlined here), see Ratié 2011, 368— 
402 and 442—473, and Rati 2oub. 


FRAGMENTS OF UTPALADEVA'S VIVRTI (II) 109 


variety of forms existing outside of the mirror. In ĪPK 1.5.6, Utpaladeva endeav- 
ours to criticize this thesis by showing that the sphere of ordinary human prac- 
tice (vyavahāra) functions on the mere basis of phenomena (so that from this 
practical point of view, at least, all inquiries into the existence of an external 
reality are useless) and that further, an external object is not even rationally 
possible, so that there is no point in assuming the existence of such an absurd 
object.!2 

In fragment no. 1, Utpaladeva first points out that human activities pertain 
only to phenomena and that no inguiry over a potential external object is 
needed to ensure practical success in the everyday world: in the course of ordi- 
nary existence we are content to deal with mere manifestations, because these 
manifestations are endowed with an efficacy (arthakriyā) capable of fulfilling 
our needs (when we are hungry, we do not ask ourselves whether mangoes 
exist outside our consciousness: we look for the phenomenon of a mango and 
are content with experiencing its perceptible effects, since no entity by nature 
imperceptible can be consumed or utilized).!? 

To this the Sautrantika could reply that assuming the existence of some 
imperceptible entities is nonetheless a necessary requirement if we are to 
make sense of our own perceptions; thus most Indian philosophical systems 
acknowledge that our eyes, which are perceptible elements of our body, are 
not enough to explain the phenomenon of vision (since blind people too may 
possess them), so that we must consider them (as well as our ears, etc.) as mere 
receptacles for the real sense organs (indriya), understood as instruments of 
perception that are too subtle to be perceptible, but that must nonetheless 
be inferred from the fact that we do perceive. Utpaladeva's opponent argues 
that just as we must assume the existence of the imperceptible indriyas so 
as to account for our faculty of perceiving, in the same way, we must infer 
the existence of an external reality so as to explain phenomenal variety. In 
response to this argument, Utpaladeva points out in the fragment that con- 
trary to what the Sautrantika claims, the assumption of the indriyas' existence 
is not universally shared among theoreticians, and in this connection he men- 
tions two theses that claim to explain perception without assuming that such 


12 See ĪPK 1.5.6: sydd etad avabhasesu tesv evāvasite sati | vyavahare kim anyena bahyenanu- 
papattinā || “Let [us admit] this: since ordinary human practice (vyavahara) is determined 
on [the basis of] these manifestations alone, what is the point of some external [object] 
that would be distinct [from consciousness and] that is not [even] logically possible (anu- 
papatti)?" On the two possible interpretations of syād etat according to Abhinavagupta, 
see Torella 2002, 114, note 12, and Ratié 201, 386, note 48. 

13  Cf.īPv, vol. 1, 178, quoted and translated in Ratié 201, 386. 


110 RATIĒ 


imperceptible sense organs must exist. According to Abhinavagupta, one of 
these theses belongs to Bhartrhari and was expounded in his now lost Sad- 
dhatusamiksa,“ while the other is that of a “follower of Brhaspati” (barhas- 
patya), i.e., a materialist (cārvāka).!% In fact Utpaladeva disagrees with both 
theories since in ĪPK 1.5.8—9 he clearly admits that the inference of the indriyas 
is valid; but contrary to the Sautrantika, he believes that inferring the existence 
of a purely imperceptible entity is illegitimate and even impossible (which is 
why he claims that the indriyas are perceived at least in some respect).!6 Most 
importantly, it seems that his goal here is merely to show that there is no con- 
sensus on the necessity of assuming the indriyas’ existence: the fragment only 
points out that there are competing ways of explaining perception, some of 
which do not involve the assumption of imperceptible organs of perception, 
so that the Sautrantika cannot invoke any universal agreement on the indriyas 
in order to substantiate the claim that external objects too must be inferred. 

Utpaladeva then goes one step further in this first fragment and asserts that 
the investigation of the external object is not only useless but also doomed to 
failure, because the external object is not rationally possible. 

It is worth noting in this respect that in his commentaries, Abhinavagupta 
points out that there are two different kinds of argument showing that the 
external object is impossible from a rational point of view.” The first one sim- 
ply consists in stating that the external object cannot exist because it cannot 
be manifest in any way, even as an object of inference.!$ The second set of argu- 
ments (which obviously paraphrases Vasubandhu's Vimšikā!? but may have 
been borrowed, at least in part, from Sankaranandana’s synthetic reformula- 
tion of Vasubandhu's arguments in his Prajfialankara??) consists in showing 
that the external object cannot exist because there is no way of satisfactorily 


14  Onthis work see Ratié 2018. 

15 See below, notes 88—90. 

16 See below, note 115. 

17 See Ratié 2014. 

18 See īPv, vol. 1, 178: ... yatra sādhakam ca nāsti pramāņam bādhakam ca prakasad bhede 
‘numeyatayapi prakāšanābhāva iti tāvan mukhyam. “And there is no argument proving 
[the existence] of the [external object], and the main (mukhya) [argument] refuting 
[its existence] amounts to this much: the fact that there [can] be no manifestation 
(prakāšana) [of it] even as a [mere] object of inference if [this object] is distinct from 
the manifesting consciousness (prakasa)." 

19 On the title Vimšikā (rather than Vimsatika), see Kano 2008, 345. 

20 See Ipv, vol. 1, 181: abhyuccayabadhakam cedam iti natrasmabhir bharah krtah. vistareņa 
ca prajnalankare dar$itam acaryasankaranandanena. “And we have not taken the trou- 
ble of [detailing] here what these additional refuting arguments are; and the master 
Sankaranandana has shown [this] at length in his Prajfidlankara” 


FRAGMENTS OF UTPALADEVA'S VIVRTI (I1) 111 


explaining it, whether or not we consider it to be made of parts.?! Abhinav- 


agupta calls the first argument “principal” (mukhya)*? and specifies that while 


the other, additional arguments focus on the contradictions involved in this or 


that particular property of the external object, the main argument functions 


as a global refutation of the external object's existence.?3 This distinction is 


not found in Utpaladeva's Vrtti, which merely mentions what Abhinavagupta 


calls the “additional” arguments;”* nonetheless, the IPvv’s phrasing shows that 


it was no innovation on Abhinavagupta’s part and that it must have been stated 


21 


22 
23 


24 


See IPv, vol. 1, 178: abhyuccayabadhakas tv avayavino vrttyanupapattih samavayasiddhih 
kampakampavarananavaranaraktaraktadigbhagabhedadiviruddhadharmayogah ... "As 
for the additional arguments refuting [the existence of the external object], they are: the 
impossibility of the existence of a whole (avayavin) [in its parts]; the fact that the inher- 
ence (samavaya) [of the whole in its parts] is not established; the fact that the [external 
object must] possess some contradictory properties, such as movement and the absence 
of movement, being covered and being uncovered, being colored and being colourless, 
being differentiated into parts according to [the six] directions (digbhagabheda), etc” On 
Abhinavagupta's explanation of these additional arguments and its Buddhist sources see 
Ratié 2010, 446—452, and Ratié 2011, 390—403. 

See above, note 18. 

See Ipvv, vol 11, 138: na ca kevalam idam eva bādhakam yat pramāņamukhena 
pravrttam yāvat svato piti ssamukhena prameyasvarüpanirüpanapravrttapratitidvarenàpi 
pravrttam, prameyasvarūpam evāsattvāviskaraņenonmūlayaty* eva bahyam iti yāvat. pūr- 
vakam hi bādhakam prameyasvarūpam anapeksayaiva sāmšam anamšam viruddham 
aviruddham yad bhavatu tad bhavatu, prakāšād bhinnam na prakāšata iti tu sarvagrāsena 
pravrttam. |*evasattvaviskaranenonmülayaty conj.; evāsattvāviskaraņaivonmūlayaty T; eva 
sattvāviskaraņenonmūlayaty Jio, IPVV; eva sattaviskaranenomülyaty Ju.] “And [against the 
thesis of the existence of the external object] there is not only this [aforementioned] 
refuting argument (bādhaka) which functions through the means of [valid] knowledge 
(pramana) [lacking in the case of the external object]; [there is] also [a refuting argument] 
which functions 'by itself' [according to the Vivrti], that is to say, through the [external 
object's] own [nature, or more precisely,] through the awareness arising from the exam- 
ination of the [contradictory] nature of the object of knowledge (prameya). [The latter 
argument] completely eradicates the very nature of the object of knowledge— that is 
to say, the external [object]—by showing that [this contradictory nature can]not exist. 
For the first refuting argument functions while completely disregarding the nature of the 
object of knowledge— [i.e.] whether it has parts or is devoid of parts, whether it is contra- 
dicted or not [by this or that particular property]|—rather, [it functions] through a global 
refutation (sarvagrāsena [lit. ‘by devouring everything |), thus: ‘[What is] distinct from the 
manifesting consciousness (prakāša) is not manifest (na prakasate). " 

See Vrtti on ĪPK 1.5.6, 20-21: ... báhyas carthah pramanabadhitah sāvayavo viruddhadhar- 
mādhyāsāder niravayavas ca diksatkayogāder bahusah. “Moreover, [the existence of] the 
external object is refuted by a means of [valid] knowledge if it has parts, because of [the 
necessity then] of attributing to it contradictory properties, etc.; [and it is contradicted] in 
many ways if it has no parts, because [then] it must be in contact with the six directions, 


» 


etc. 


112 RATIĒ 


by Utpaladeva himself in his Vivrti.?5 This is confirmed by the fragments pre- 
sented below. While fragment no. 3—which mentions the famous criticism 
of atomism in Vasubandhu's Vimšikā 11-15—is obviously concerned with the 
second set of arguments,”° in fragments no. 1 and 3 Utpaladeva clearly refers 
to the first, “principal” argument against the existence of the external object; 
thus the end of fragment no. 1 explains that the only possible objects for con- 
sciousness are phenomena and that objects are nothing but the manifesting 
consciousness (prakasa), and fragment no. 2 further explains that even objects 
known through inference must be manifested (avabhāta) in some way so as to 
be objects for consciousness. 

This latter point is crucial, because the idea that even conceptual objects 
must be directly manifested in some way is one of the main divergences 
between Buddhist and Šaiva nondualistic epistemologies, as Abhinavagupta 
himself makes clear in his commentary.27 The Šaiva nondualists thus accuse 
the Vijfianavadins of unwittingly granting some legitimacy to the external- 
ism of their Sautrantika opponents by admitting that contrary to a perceived 
object, the object of a mere concept does not require any immediate mani- 
festation at the time of its conceptualization. According to the Šaivas, such 
a concession entails that there is nothing inherently wrong in trying to infer, 
as the Sautrantikas do, an external object by nature alien to manifestation, 
whereas Utpaladeva and Abhinavagupta deny the mere possibility of even 
conceptualizing—and therefore inferring—an entity fundamentally distinct 
from consciousness.”8 

Atthe end of fragment no. 2, Utpaladeva states a new objection on the part of 
his externalist opponent. According to the Sautrantika, if we do not assume the 
existence of an external reality, we cannot explain why we are aware of a phe- 
nomenal variety that occurs in a specific sequence: there must be a reason for 
the fact that some things are manifest to us and that these manifestations occur 
successively rather than simultaneously. As Abhinavagupta puts it, *a manifes- 
tation necessarily requires a cause as regards both [its] arising and [its] not 
arising”*9 and if we do not attempt to determine that cause, the very notion 
of causality as well as that of the relationship between the apprehending sub- 
ject and the apprehended object (which, according to the Buddhists, depends 


25 See ĪPVV, vol. 11, 138, quoted above, note 23. 

26 For an explanation of Abhinavagupta's commentaries on this point see Ratié 2010, 451- 
452 and Ratié 2011, 395-399. 

27 See below, note 94. 

28 On this divergence see Ratié 201b, 496—498. 

29 See below, note 99. 


FRAGMENTS OF UTPALADEVA'S VIVRTI (II) 113 


on the causality relationship) is lost. The Sautrantika's intention is obviously to 
have his opponent admit that the only possible cause for this phenomenal vari- 
ety endowed with a specific order is a variety of external objects possessed of a 
corresponding specific order and projecting their forms onto consciousness. 
Unfortunately, Utpaladeva’s answer to this objection is not to be found 
in the margins of the manuscripts that I have consulted so far. It is possi- 
ble, however, to retrieve the gist of Utpaladeva’s reply from Abhinavagupta’s 
IPVV: Utpaladeva seems to have argued in the missing passage of the Vivrti 
that the Sautrantika cannot rightfully look for an external cause explaining 
the arising of manifestations as well as their lack of arising, because reality 
(understood as a unique and all-encompassing consciousness) is always man- 
ifest and always evident for any conscious entity, in the form of the immedi- 
ate self-awareness inherent in any subjectivity.?? In fact temporal and spatial 
sequences (kaladesakrama) are nothing but ways for consciousness to manifest 
its unitary nature as if it were differentiated, and this differentiated manifesta- 
tion is the result of the fundamental dynamism of consciousness, conceived 
as a constantly exerted power of manifesting itself in all possible forms. Thus 
according to the Saiva nondualists, consciousness is not a mirror passively 
reflecting a world of objects existing independently of it, and phenomenal vari- 
ety, far from being the mere reflection of such an external world, is an expres- 
sion of consciousness's freedom (svatantrya) to manifest itself in an infinite 
variety of forms while playfully hiding its fundamental unity. The Sautrantika 
is therefore wrong to assume that phenomenal variety and its spatio-temporal 
sequence can only be explained by postulating an external cause, since they 
can be accounted for as the result of the freedom of consciousness?!—a free- 


go See e.g. ĪPVV, vol. 11, 133: paramabhümir agamesu paramarahasyāpi sati naivānābhāsa- 
mana bhavaty api tv ābhāsamānaiveti tātparyam. etad adisiddhasütre ca vyākhyātam. "The 
highest level [of reality], although it is concealed to the highest point within the [Saiva 
nondualistic] scriptures, is absolutely never unmanifest; rather, it is always [in the pro- 
cess of] manifesting [itself] —this is the gist [of Utpaladeva's answer]. And [Utpaladeva] 
has explained this in the verse on [the Self being] always already established” The verse 
to which Abhinavagupta is alluding here is IPK 1.1.2: kartari jfíatari svātmany adisiddhe 
mahesvare | ajadātmā nisedham và siddhim và vidadhīta kah || “What conscious Self could 
produce either a refutation or a demonstration [of the existence] of the agent, the know- 
ing subject, the always already established (adisiddha) Self, the Great Lord?" 

31  Ontheattemptin the Pratyabhijfia treatise to eliminate all rival explanations for phenom- 
enal variety (i.e. that of the Sautrāntikas, but also that of the Vijfianavadins, who account 
for phenomenal variety by invoking an internal mechanism of latent traces or imprints, 
vāsanā) in order to show that the freedom of consciousness is the only possible cause for 
it, see e.g. IPV, vol. 1, 163-164 (quoted and translated in Ratié 2011, 367—368); see also IPv, 
vol. 1, 184—185, and IPvv, vol. 11, 80-81 (quoted and translated in Ratié 2010, 461—464). 


114 RATIĒ 


dom which, contrary to an external object, is experienced by all conscious 
beings, for example when they imagine.” 


3 The Context and Gist of Fragments 4—6* on ĪPK 1.5.8-9 


In IPK 1.5.8-9,?? Utpaladeva comes back to the Sautrantika’s contention that 
the external object can and must be inferred, and he endeavours to show that 
this inference is simply impossible. In fragment no. 4, he first argues that infer- 
ential knowledge is conceptual in nature and that the concept in which the 
inference results arises thanks to the residual trace (samskāra) left by a previ- 
ous experience. When we draw from the fact that a distant hill is smoky the 
conclusion that there must be a fire there, our concept of fire arises thanks to 
our previous experiences of fire and smoke; fire can be a conceptual object for 
us only because we have already witnessed fires in the past, and these previous 
experiences of fire have left in the conscious stream a trace that is reactivated 
when we form the inferential concept of "fire." It is this residual trace that guar- 
antees the possibility for the conceptual object to be an object manifest for 
consciousness, as well as the reliability of concepts as tools in the sphere of 
human practice, because it enables an object directly perceived in the past but 
no longer existing to be manifested again. 

The consequence of this remark is that the external object cannot be 
inferred precisely because it is by nature imperceptible: it has never been man- 
ifest to any consciousness (if it had, it would not be external) so that we cannot 
form any concept of it.?* Utpaladeva also points out that an inference is valid 
insofar as it manifests the conceptual object as particularized by a specific time 
and place rather than as a pure abstraction: our knowledge that a hill is on fire 


32 See Ratič 2010b. 

33 | anumanam anābhātapūrve naivestam indriyam | abhatam eva bījāder ābhāsād dhetuvas- 
tunah || ābhāsah punar ābhāsād bahyasyasit kathamcana | arthasya naiva tenāsya siddhir 
nāpy anumanatah || “No inference can be admitted as regards that which has never been 
manifested previously. [Before being inferred,] a sense organ has already been manifested 
[at least in the general form of a cause] through the manifestation of a real entity that 
[happens to be] a cause, such as a seed [which is the cause of a sprout]; but the mani- 
festation of an object external to manifestation has never occurred in any way. Therefore 
there can be no establishment of this [external object ]|—not even through an inference." 

34 Cf. Ipvv, vol. 11, 161: tad anupapannam samvidbahyasya svapne ‘py anābhātasya vikalpya- 
tvāyogād anumeyatānupapannā yatah. "This [inference of an object particularized by its 
being external to consciousness] is impossible, since [an entity] external to conscious- 
ness—[and therefore] unmanifested, even in a dream—cannot be an object of inference, 
because [such an entity] cannot be the object of a concept” 


FRAGMENTS OF UTPALADEVA'S VIVRTI (II) 115 


because it is smoky would be useless if it were not the knowledge that the par- 
ticular hill currently seen is on fire—an idea shared with the Dharmakīrtians, 
particularly Dharmottara* (who might be targeted, here as in Abhinavagupta's 
IPVV, as the Sautrantikas’ most prominent champion ).?6 Here too, Utpaladeva 
does not explicitly draw the consequence of this affirmation, but his aim is 
probably to show that the external object cannot be inferred because, as he 
emphasizes later in the treatise, spatial and temporal relations, which are noth- 
ing but a partial incompatibility between some determined phenomena, can 
only belong to manifest entities?" whereas the external object must remain 
purely indeterminate as regards form, time and space. 

To this argument the Sautrantika could object—and obviously did in a now 
missing passage of the Vivrti—that some inferences do not rest on a pre- 
vious perception and actually regard an entity that is by nature impercep- 
tible. According to Abhinavagupta's commentaries, here Utpaladeva's oppo- 
nent relies on the traditional distinction between the pratyaksatodrsta and 
samanyatodrsta types of inference,?? and he argues that in the case of the sense 
organs, the indriyas are not inferred as some particular entity directly witnessed 
in the past, but as a mere generality (samanya), i.e. as a “mere something” (Ain- 
cinmātra) that must be assumed as a purely indeterminate cause of perception. 
This enables the Sautrantika to claim that the external object can be inferred as 
the cause in general of phenomenal variety, although just as the sense organs, 
it has never been perceived.?? 

Fragment no. 5 is a response to the Sautrantika's objection. Utpaladeva 
claims that the reason why we can infer the sense organs as a mere indetermi- 
nate cause of perception is that in fact the sense organs have already been per- 
ceived, at least in the general form of a cause. Utpaladeva can afford to defend 
this paradoxical thesis because he has already shown that the perception of any 
particular entity is in fact the synthetic apprehension of a number of elemen- 
tary phenomena (abhasa) that, when put together, constitute the singularity of 
the perceived entity, but that, when taken separately, function as generalities 
(samanya).^? This means that according to him, the generality “causality” is in 
fact directly perceived in all our experiences of entities endowed with a causal 


35 See Torella 2002, 117, note 19. 

36 On the probability that Abhinavagupta at least saw Dharmottara as defending the 
Sautrantika position, see McCrea and Patil 2010, 141-142, note 71, and McCrea 2016. 

37 See below, note 11. 

38 See below, note 113. 

39 On Abhinavagupta's explanation of this objection see Ratié 2011b, 486—488. 

40 See below, note 115. 


116 RATIĒ 


power (for instance, in our perception of a seed capable of producing a sprout, 
or in that of clay as the material cause of a pot).*! 

Of course, Utpaladeva's strategy here might seem very risky, since the 
Sautrantika could argue that just as the sense organs are inferred as a mere 
general cause enabling us to account for the phenomenon of perception (a 
general cause already perceived in countless previous experiences of partic- 
ular causes), in the same way, the external object can be inferred as a mere 
generality, given that the generality "externality" is constantly experienced in 
the course of everyday life: we can draw the concept of an object external to 
consciousness from our past experiences of objects external to houses, villages, 
mirrors, etc. If Utpaladeva concedes that the sense organs have already been 
perceived as a general cause and can legitimately be inferred as such, he should 
accept the same kind of reasoning regarding the external object inferred as 
a mere "external thing" in general. This objection is the content of fragment 
no. 6*. As explained below,*? I am not sure whether this last passage really 
is a fragment of the Vivrti; but if it is not, it must at least be a paraphrase of 
it, because Abhinavagupta's īPvv? shows that Utpaladeva had expressed this 
very objection in the Vivrti. 

Unfortunately, once more Utpaladeva's answer to this objection is missing 
from the margins of the manuscripts that I was able to consult; but here too, the 
gist of his answer is preserved in Abhinavagupta's commentaries on ĪPK 1.5.g.** 
Utpaladeva apparently argued first that in the case of the sense organs, what 
is inferred as a cause is a mere generality, whereas in the case of the exter- 
nal object, the Sautrantika tries to infer a cause that is not a mere generality 
since itis particularized by the peculiar property of being external to conscious- 
ness. Now, contrary to the notion of causality, this property cannot have been 
included in any previous perception; indeed, we do perceive entities that are 
external to other entities, but the case of an entity external to consciousness 
is radically different from that of the pot being external to a house or a mirror, 
because in the latter examples externality only means a spatial relationship of 
proximity between two forms occupying a particular place, whereas when the 
Sautrantika talks about an object external to conscious manifestations, he does 
not have in mind an object that would stand next to consciousness (since con- 
sciousness is not spatially determined): he rather means an object that is not 


41 As noted by Torella (2002, 116, note 18), Utpaladeva thus "include[s] the concept of 
sāmānyatodrsta within the pratyaksatodrsta” 

42 See note 79. 

43 See below, note 119. 

44 See Ratié 2011b, 491-498 and below, note 119. 


FRAGMENTS OF UTPALADEVA'S VIVRTI (I1) 117 


consciousness. Such an object cannot be conceptualized on the basis of our for- 
mer perceptions involving externality, since there is only a *verbal similarity" 
(Sabdasamya) between the externality (i.e. proximity) of a pot with respect to 
a house, and the externality (i.e. absolute otherness) of an object with respect 
to consciousness. And the latter type of externality constitutes the very limit of 
our power of conceptualization, since however wild our imagination may be, 
we are incapable of picturing anything that would be by nature alien to con- 
scious manifestation. This experience of our limitation as conscious beings is 
paradoxically what reveals the infinite power of consciousness: the very notion 
of a reality existing beyond consciousness is unthinkable and therefore absurd, 
and according to the Šaiva nondualists, this means that whatever exists only 
exists as a manifestation of consciousness. 


4 Fragments of Utpaladeva's Vivrti on ĪPK 1.5.6 


The words quoted in Abhinavagupta's IPVv are in bold type. I have taken the 
liberty of adding punctuation marks and standardizing sandhi. The margins of 
$3 are often damaged and difficult to read; illegible aksaras are noted below 
with the sign "[?]” The Ipvv quotations given in footnotes below only mention 
readings found in the three consulted īPvv manuscripts when the text of the 
KSTS edition seems likely to be corrupt. 


[1]** vyavahartrapeksaya tāvad bhāvavyavasthā kripamanavabhasegv eva 
nirapāyā paryavasyatīty adhikatarādrstavastuparyālocanam idam svacchan- 
dacestitam. yathaiva*® hindriyavicaram vinā na na kifícid upapadyate,*’ tathā 


45 This passage is found in $3 (where it begins on the top margin of folio 40B), S15 (top mar- 
gin of folio 47A), JÈ (folio 82B, top margin) and (up to the quotations mentioned below in 
note 51) ĪPV, vol. 1, 176—177, note 170. It does not appear in D2, S2, S5, $7, Sg or soas, but it 
is found in Ipvv manuscript S12 (folio 121B, right and bottom margins). 

46 X yathaiva | conj.; yathà S3, S15, J*, note 170 IPv (vol. 1, 176). Cf. IPvv, vol. 11, 131: yathaivety 
asya tathaivety anena sambandhah. 

47 nana kificid upapadyate | conj.; na kiñcid upapadyate S3, S15, JR, S12, note 170 ĪPV (vol. 1, 
176). The conjecture is of course tentative but I cannot understand the text as it stands. 
Vincent Eltschinger and Eli Franco both suggested eliminating the negation as a corrup- 
tion instead of doubling it, and they might be right. However, I personally find the double 
negation more in accordance with the writing habits of Utpaladeva and Abhinavagupta 
(Iam assuming that the former shared with the latter a propensity for double negations). 
For his part Eli Franco considers that *nobody writes like this" and that "if a second nega- 
tion should be added, one would expect it in the beginning (yathā na hi ...). (Personal 
written communication.) However, there is no doubt that at least Abhinavagupta writes 


118 RATIĒ 


hi kecid indriyapavarjanenaiva saddhātuvādinah, anye taddvayavādina iti 
tathaiva pratibhasatiriktatyantaparoksarthanvesanam antarenaiva vyavahara- 
parisamaptir ity anangam tadvicarah. 

nāpi vicarasiddhatvam*® asya*? bahyasyanupapatter ity aha syād etad ity 
evam cābhāsānām evarthatve prakāšo rthah, artho ‘pi ca prakāša iti paras- 
paratmakatvam® anayor bhavati. 


[...]5! 


like this (i.e. by simply juxtaposing two negations, whether the sentence comprises sub- 
ordinate clauses or not), and in fact such occurrences of na na are guite often found in 
his works, not only in those which are not directly related to the Pratyabhijītā (see e.g. 
Tantrāloka 9.251cd and 12.5a; Parātrīšikāvivaraņa, 190, line 11; Mālinīšlokavārttika 1.123ab, 
etc.) but also in the IPv (see e.g. vol. 1, 216, line 5, or vol. 11, 33, last line), and they are par- 
ticularly numerous in the IPvv (see vol. 1, 36, line 21; 38, line 16; 60, line 12; 109, line 17; 
181, line 12; 287, line 17; 296, line 11; vol. 11, 6, line 5; 57, line 22; 82, line 3; 325, line 6; 332, 
line 9; 334, line 5; 344, line 7; 347, line 11; 350, line 16; 357, line 12; 415, line 23; 436, line 21; 
vol. 111, 34, line 19; 66, line 13; 107, line 12 and line 20; 218, line 6; 301, line 3; 344, line 9; 366, 
line 12; 369, line 7; 382, line 24). These double negations often occur with verbs the mean- 
ing of which is close to upapad- (such as yujyate/yuktam, vaktum šakyate, etc.) and both 
the expressions na nopapadyate and na nopapannā are found in the IPvv (see vol. 11, 334, 
line 5 and 357, line 12). 

48 X vicarasiddhatvam | S3, S15, JR, $12; vicarasiddham note 170 1Pv (vol. 1, 176). 

49 asya ] conj.; api S3, S15, JR, S12, note 170 IPV (vol. 1, 176). 

50 parasparatmakatvam | S3, S12, note 170 IPv (vol. 1, 176); parasparātmatvam S15, JF. There 
is a discrepancy here between the text of the Vivrti as found in the marginal anno- 
tations (parasparatmakatvam) and Abhinavagupta's pratika in the IPvv (pratītiparam- 
parātmaketi). Abhinavagupta's explanation, however, seems to require rather parasparāt- 
maketi since it makes no mention of a series or succession (paramparā) of cognitions 
(pratiti) and explains that ultimately the vyavahara requires the identity of the object 
with the manifesting consciousness (see below, note 92), which fits with the text given 
in the marginal annotations. So I assume that parasparatmaketi first got corrupted into 
paramparātmaketi and that someone then added pratiti? to try and make sense of this 
“succession,” but I might be entirely wrong (this pratika might in fact belong to a passage 
of the Vivrti that is missing in the marginal annotations; see the following note). 

51 At this point the marginal annotations in S3, S15, JR and S12, as well as note 170 in IPV, 
vol. 1, 176—177, give a series of quotations that do not seem to belong to the Vivrti itself 
(?). The Ipvv, which makes no mention of these quotations, comments on a hi and a 
tat not found in the annotations: ity abhipretyoktam gitasu* yo mam pašyati sarvatra sar- 
vam ca mayi* pašyatīti tathà sarvabhūtastham ātmānam sarvabhūtāni catmaniti tathā 
mahagurubhir* ātmaivasarvabhāvesu sphuran nirvrtacid vibhuh | aniruddhecchaprasarah 
prasaraddrkkriyah* sivah || iti šivadrstau*. [gitàsu S3, S15, JR, S12; srīgītāsu note 170 ĪPV 
(vol. 1, 176). *mayi S3, JA, S12, note 170 ĪPV (vol. 1, 176); maya S15. *mahagurubhir S3, S15, 
JR, S12; mahagurubhih šivadrstau note 170 IPV (vol. 1, 177). *%kriyah S3, JR, S12, note 170 ĪPV 
(vol. 1, 177); ?kriyà S15. *iti šivadrstau S3, S15, JP, S12; iti note 170 ĪPV (vol. 1, 177).] “It is with 
this [very] intention that it has been said in [Bhagavad-]gita [6.30]: He who sees me and 
sees everything in all circumstances in me ...’; and similarly, [in 6.29,] ‘[He sees] himself 


FRAGMENTS OF UTPALADEVA'S VIVRTI (II) 119 


[2]? yo py ānumāniko vyavaharah so py avabhāsamānenaiva vahnina, vikal- 


papratyaye ‘py avabhāto bahya eva vahnir avasiyate. tata eva bahya eva pravrttir 
vahnāv eva ca pravrttih, atīndriyeņāpīndriyādinā svargapavargadinarthena?? 
vikalpapratibhāsinaiva** vyavaharah. evam cābhāsamānarūpataivārthatā tā- 
vanmātra eva ca prayojanam. 


52 


53 


54 


[as] residing in all entities and all entities [as residing] in himself’; [and] similarly, the 
great master [Somananda has said] in Sivadrsti [1.2]: ‘Siva, who is [constantly] engaged in 
flashing forth, whose consciousness is blissful, who is all-pervading, whose flow of will is 
not obstructed [by anything], [and] whose perception and action are [constantly] flow- 
ing, is none other than the Self of all entities.” S3 then gives the Vrtti (bottom left margin) 
followed by what seems to be the Vivrti again; in J this passage, in the right margin, is 
clearly separated from the Vrtti, which is copied at the bottom of the page (and indicated 
as such at the end: iti vrttih), and immediately followed by the same passage apparently 
taken from the Vivrti. The same happens in S15 (where the Vrtti and the remainder of 
the annotation are found in the left margin). Note that note 6 of the Sivadrsti edition, 
4, which is apparently borrowed from a marginal annotation in manuscript D3 (the latter 
being in all probability the manuscript “a” used by the KsTs editors), gives the same quota- 
tions from the Bhagavadgītā while commenting on this verse, and introduces them with 
a text almost identical to that found here: evam carthasya prakāšatve prakaso ‘py arthah, 
artho 'pi prakasah. “And [since it is] so, since the object is the manifesting consciousness, 
the manifesting consciousness is the object, and conversely the object is the manifest- 
ing consciousness.” My assumption that the Sivadrsti manuscript called “a” by the KsTSs 
editors is none other than D3 is based on the fact that the description of “a” (Sivadrsti, 
1-11) closely corresponds to D3 (which unfortunately I was only able to examine very 
quickly at the National Archives of India) as regards the number of folios, the average 
number of lines per folio, and the average number of aksaras per line, not to mention 
that both manuscripts bear many marginal annotations (at least some of which are iden- 
tical). Both, moreover, are bound together with manuscripts of the IPv, Paratrisika and 
Paramādvayadvādašikā. It should also be noted that another Sivadrsti manuscript origi- 
nally owned by the Srinagar Research Library is now preserved in the National Archives 
of India (D4); I could not consult it as it had been sent for repair at the time of my visit to 
the Archives, but from the catalogue description I suspect that it might be the Devanagari 
transcript called “b” by the ksrs editors. A thorough analysis of D3 and D4 would there- 
fore certainly be a welcome addition to the examination of some Sivadrsti manuscripts 
provided in Nemec 2011, 79-90. 

This passage occurs in S3, folio 40B (third line from the bottom of the page), S15, folio 47A 
(left margin) and JR, folio 82B (bottom margin, from line 2 onwards, then on the right mar- 
gin). It is not found in D2, S2, S5, So, S10, SOAS or in the footnotes of the Ksrs edition of 
the IPv, but it also occurs in the Ipvv manuscript S12 (folio 121A, bottom margin). 
svargāpavargādinārthena | conj.; svargāpavargādinā nārthena S3, S15, J"; sargāpavargā- 
dina nārthena 812. Cf. īPVV, vol. 11, 132, quoted below, note 95. 

S3, S15, JR and S12 all bear this reading, and although the pratika in 1Pvv, vol. 11, 132 is given 
as vikalpapratibhasiteti, at least one īPvv manuscript has vikalpapratibhasineti (see below, 
note 95). 


120 RATIĒ 


sā tv ābhāsāt prthagbhūtānām eveti ko 'yam graha ābhāsaikatvena kā vyava- 
hārakhaņdanā, tad āha te cābhāsātmakāh santv iti. 

kevalam ūrdhvam ābhāsamānatāyāh pūrvam ca? yadi te na syus tadā- 
bhāsamānataivākasmikī 6 karyakaranabhavo jrapyajnapakabhavas ca nopa- 
padyata?7 iti paryanuyojyam. 


[3]*% atha bahyarthah*? paramāņava eva niravayavāh sañcitās tathāpi 
ghato vitatarūpatvena prathamānah pūrvāparādibhāgavān eva prathate, na 
caivam paramāņumayatve ghatate. tathā hi yo sau pūrvābhimatah paramā- 
nus tena dvittyah paramanuh samslistamanas tadekatam apadyeta$? niravaya- 
vayor hisamlagnatve kiyad asamlagnam avasisyate, samlagnau cānyonyasvarū- 
paparimagnāv ity ekaparamāņvābhāsataiva! punar apy aparaparamanusam- 
sparše*? tathaivety anantaparamanuyojane ‘py ekaparamanumatraprakasah® 
syat, so pi và na syad ekaikaparamanor$^ atindriyatvat.® 


55  caS3, JR, S12; om. S15. 

56 tadābhāsamānataivākasmikī | S15, JR, S12; tadā[? |samanataivakasmiki S3. 

57 canopapadyata | conj.; copapadyata $3, S15, JP, S12. 

58 This passage is again found in S3 (folio 41A, top margin, from line 3, continuing on the 
left margin), S15 (from folio 47B, bottom margin, to folio 48A, top margin), JR (folio 83B, 
bottom margin, immediately after a quotation from the IPvv corresponding to vol. 11, 141, 
and folio 84A, top margin) and $12 (folio 124B, top margin). In all of these manuscripts it is 
preceded by etad evāha svavrttivivrtigranthakāra utpalacaryah (S12 has tad aha instead of 
etad evaha). It is also found in D2 (folio 108B, right margin), soas (folio 100B, top margin) 
and note 192 in ĪPV, vol. 1, 180, in all three cases from ghato vitatarūpatvena prathamanah 
... (with a Ar inserted after ghato) to atīndriyatvāt. I could not find it in S2, S5, $7 and Sg. 

59 bāhyārthāh | conj.; bahya.. S3, S15, JR, S12. 

60  apadyeta | S3, JR, D2, S12; apadyete soAs; āpadyate note 192 ĪPV (vol. 1,180). It is impossible 
to decide whether S15 reads āpadyeta or āpadyate. 

61 ekaparamāņvābhāsataiva | S3, S15, JR, D2, S12; ekaparamāņur bhāsetaiva SOAs, note 192 
ĪPV (vol. 1,180). 

62 aparaparamāņusamsparše | S3, S15, JR, D2, $12; aparaparimāņusamsparše SOAS; apara- 
paramāņusamsparšo note 192 ĪPV (vol. 1, 180). 

63 ekaparamāņumātraprakāšah | S3, S15, JR, D2, S12, note 192 ĪPV (vol. 1, 180); ekaparimāņu- 
mātraprakāšah SOAS. 

64 ekaikaparamāņor | S3, S15, J^, D2, S12, note 192 ĪPV (vol. 1, 180); ekaikaparimānor SOAS. 

65 From this point onwards, the marginal annotations in S3, S15, JR and S12 quote IPVV, vol. 11 
141 (evam kramasamslese dosah, etc.) without mentioning this change (but the sentence 
has been put in what looks like parentheses in S12). The annotation on the right margin 
in $3 is also taken from the IPvv (see vol. 11, 142: satkone devanāksādau, etc.). 


FRAGMENTS OF UTPALADEVA'S VIVRTI (II) 121 
5 Fragments of Utpaladeva's Vivrti on ĪPK 1.5.8—9 


[4]$6 anumānam hi vikalpah, sa ca purvanubhavasamskarasamuttha iti tāvad 
arthasya purvapratyaksatapeksa,9" tasmimš carthe vikalpapratītir avyabhicā- 
rajanitanumanam,® tac cānubhavasamskārād antahsthitatadartham idan- 
taucityena yavad vimrsati tavad vicchedena prathayati. na ca tavata pravrt- 
tivisayo ’sav arthah, tena prakāšito bhavati visistadešakālo visistadesakalasyaiva 
svalaksanasya9? prapyatvenabhistarthakriyakaritvena” ca pravrttivisayatayo- 
gyatvad™ atas tathaiva yad vimaršanam, tad aha pūrvāvabhāteti"2 nāntarīya- 
kārtheti"? tattaddesakaladiti."^ 


[4] 

[5]7% indriyam api pūrvānubhūtam eva, na hi tat prātisvikenākāreņānu- 
miyate, api tu sāmānyena, tad aha vrttau kificinmātram nimittam iti. ayam 
artho nimittatāsāmānyam, pūrvapratibhātam eva bijasyankuranimittatajnane 


66 This fragment appears in marginal annotations in $3 (top of folio 43A, line 1, after a quo- 
tation from the IPvv, then on the right margin—see figure 5.1), S15 (folio 50A, top and 
left margins), JR (folio 87B, right margin) and S12 (folio 130A, left and bottom margins); I 
could not find it in Da, S2, $5, $7, $9 and soas. 

67 pūrvapratyaksatāpeksā | Sa, JR, $12; pūrvapratyatāpeksā S15. 

68  assumethat the reading avyabhicariti in īPvv, vol. 11, 161 is a corruption for avyabhicareti 
(see below, note 108). 

69 visistadešakālo visistadesakalasyaiva svalaksanasya | conj.; visistakalasyaiva svalaksana- 
sya S15, J*; visistadesakalasvalaksanasya S12; vi|?? |desakala|? svalaksa|? |sya S3. This is 
merely tentative, but from the meaning of the passage as it is summed up by Abhi- 
navagupta (see below, note 110), I assume that something is missing in the text of the 
manuscripts. 

70 prāpyatvenābhīstārthakriyākāritvena | S15, J*, S12; prapya[? |nābhīstārthakriyākāļ? |tvena 
$3. 

71  pravrttivisayatayogyatvad | S15, JR, S12; pravrttivisayatayo|? |tvad S3. 

72 pūrvāvabhāteti | S15, J*, S12; pūrvāva[?]teti S3. 

73 nantariyakartheti | S15, J*, S12; nāntarīya[?]|rtheti S3. 

74  tattaddesakaladiti | corr.; taddesakalad iti S15, JR, S12; taddesakalad[?] S3. Cf. Vrtti, 21-22, 
quoted below, note 11. 

75 Here a part of the text is missing, as is obvious from Abhinavagupta’s commentary (IPVV, 
vol. 11, 162), which mentions the words esa punar and vyāptivimaršāt, and again 
(ĪPVV, vol. 11, 163) dharmapratyaksa. The next fragment is commented in IPvv, vol. 11, 
163. 

76 The following fragment appears in marginal annotations in S3 (folio 43A, right margin— 
see figure 5.1), S15 (folio 50A, left margin), JR (folio 87B, right margin) and 812 (folio 130A, 
bottom margin), in all cases immediately after the preceding Vivrti fragment. The first sen- 
tence up to samanyena is also found in note 236 in ĪPV, vol. 1, 188, but I could not find it in 
D2, S2, $5, $7, Sg and soAs. 


122 RATIĒ 


mrdader ghatadinimittatajnane.” na hi tatra visistam bījam eva nimittatvena 
pratibhātam, mrdo py ajiiānaprasangāt. nàpy uttaratra mrd eva bījāder 
ajnanaprasangat. prasaktataditaravyavacchedāyaiva višegaņam prayujyate 
cātrāpi, mrd eva karanam ghatasya?? na bijam iti. 

[6] ?nanu$?caksuradivisesapariharena yatha bījādyanubhavāts! karanata- 
sāmānyam?? anubhūtam evoktam, tathā šarīrād grhād grāmāder vā bāhyasyā- 
nubhavad bahyatvam api sāmānyenānubhūtam evājiānavišeseņa?3 bahyatva- 
nanubhavoktau và caksurāder api kāraņavišesasyānanubhūtapūrvatvān na 
syād anumānam tat katham nānumānasya vyapara* ity uktih. 


6 Translation of the Fragments on IPK 1.5.6 


[1] To begin with, as far as agents of ordinary human practice (vyavahartr) 
are concerned, it is on [the basis of] mere phenomena that [they] manage to 


77  mrdader ghatadinimittatajrane | S3, JR, $12; om. S15. 

78 kāraņam ghatasya | S15, JR, $12; karanam gha[??] S3. 

79 This annotation is not found in S3, S15, JF or S12, but it appears in both soas (folio 106B, 
upper right corner) and D2 (folio 15B, upper and right margins); it is also found in note 248 
in IPV, vol. 1, 190. In all three cases this passage is preceded by a quotation from IPVV, vol. 11, 
165 (from bahyatvavisisto rthah up to kramikabhasavaicitryat). This īPvv quotation is also 
found in So, S10 and followed in all cases by ity asarikyaha grāmagrhāder iti. But after 
that point, while Sg and S10 add ayam asayah and then quote again the IPvv from nedam 
bahyatvam ghatasya onwards, soas, D2 and the Pv note give tathā cātra pūrvavyavasthā 
sphutam eva drsyate yatha, and then the text quoted above. There is very little direct evi- 
dence that this annotation is indeed a quotation from the Vivrti: the only īPvv passage that 
could comment on it apparently explains a sentence beginning with nanu caksuradi? (see 
IPVV, vol. 11, 165), whereas no nanu is to be found in the annotations and I had to conjec- 
ture it. Nonetheless, it seems to me quite probable that the words preceding caksurādi? 
are not part of the quoted text, as I cannot understand the sentence with the presence of 
the word yathā twice (the KsTs edition has và after the second yathā, although this và is 
found neither in D2 nor in SOAS; but even with this additional và I fail to see the structure 
of the sentence). Besides, as shown in Ratié 2011b, 491-499, this passage expresses a crucial 
objection against Utpaladeva's reasoning, and it is at least certain from Abhinavagupta's 
explanations in the IPvv (see below, note 119) that the Vivrti stated this very objection in a 
passage beginning with nanu caksuradi°. So it seems likely that this passage is a genuine 
fragment from the Vivrti, although this is by no means certain. 

80 nanu ] conj.; om. D2, SOAs (see above, note 79). 

81  yathà bījādyanubhavāt | D2, soas; yathā và bījādyanubhavāt note 248 1Pv (vol. 1, 190). 

82 kāraņatāsāmānyam | conj.; karanasamanyam D2, SOAS, note 248 ĪPV (vol. I, 190). 

83 evājiānavišeseņa | conj.; eva jfíanavisesena D2, SOAS, note 248 IPv (vol. 1, 190). 

84 vyapara | D2, note 248 IPv (vol. 1, 190); vyāpārā SOAS. 


FRAGMENTS OF UTPALADEVA'S VIVRTI (I1) 123 


successful[ly] ascertain®® the existence (vyavastha) of [this or that] entity— 


an ascertainment in which [they necessarily] engage [in their ordinary activi- 


ties]; so this pondering over an unperceived reality that is [supposedly] some- 


thing more (adhikatara) [than phenomena and the consciousness manifesting 


them 86 is a [purely] arbitrary endeavour!®’ For it is not [universally acknowl- 
edged that] no [perception] at all can be accounted for (upapadyate) without 
speculating about the [imperceptible] sense organs;?? thus some?? propound 


85 


86 


87 


88 


See ĪPVV, vol. 11, 131: nirapāyety apāyah pramāņābhāvo dūsaņasambhavas ca, tadrahitā. 
"[This ascertainment] is successful[ly performed] (nirapāya), i.e.,] it is devoid of the fail- 
ure (apaya) [consisting in] the lack of a means of [valid] knowledge, and [it is devoid of] 
the possibility [that the means of valid knowledge] may be refuted.” 

The word adhikatara is the comparative form of adhika, which by itself means “some- 
thing more.” According to Abhinavagupta, Utpaladeva uses it because if the manifesta- 
tions of objects in consciousness are something more than the consciousness manifesting 
them, the so-called external object must be considered as something more than these very 
manifestations: the external object must be considered as existing over and above phe- 
nomena and the consciousness taking their form—which is absurd. See IPvv, vol. 11, 131: 
adhikatarety ābhāsā eva darpanat pratibimbānīva samvedanād adhikāni, yac ca tato ‘py 
adhikataram na kvacid bhāvi tat tata eva* drstam tac ca vastu katham. [*tat tata eva conj.; 
tata eva fio, Ju, T, īPvv]. “‘adhikatara’ [means the following]: the [various] phenomena 
are [something more (adhika)| than consciousness, just as reflections are something more 
than a mirror [reflecting them]; and that which is something more than something more, 
[i.e., that which is something more] than these very [phenomena,] can never be perceived 
in any [circumstance] for the very [reason that it is distinct from phenomena]; and how 
could that be a [real] entity (vastu)?" 

Cf. IPVV, vol. 11, 131: svacchandacestitam iti na pramāņabalopanatam ity arthah. "(It is] ‘a 
[purely] arbitrary endeavour, i.e. it is not brought about by the force of [necessity inherent 
in] a means of [valid] knowledge.’ 

Cf. īPVV, vol. 11, 131: drstam cedam pramanikanam yat saty api vastuny anupayoginām- 
Sena na prayasyanti vicāritena yathendriyādisu saddhatusamiksakaradya bārhaspatyā và. 
ekair* hi bhūtaparicakam cetanā cetiyati vyavahārasamāptir angikrta tatraivānyasyen- 
driyāder anupravešāt. anyair api bhūtacatustaye vicitramelanoditasamvedanākhyavikāra- 
višege nuditatadvikare ca grahakagrahyavyavaharasamaptir upagatā. [*saddhātusamī- 
ksākārādyā bārhaspatyā va T; saddhatusamiksakaradyo varhatyo và J10, Ju; saddhatusami- 
ksakaradyo ba(va)rhatyo va īpvv. *ekair Jio, Ju, T, Ka (quoted in 1Pvv, vol. 11, 131, note 1); 
etair īPVV.] “And [we] observe the [following] among philosophers (pramanika): even if 
[something] exists [as] a real entity, they do not concern themselves with the aspect [of 
it] that is useless [and] speculative (vicarita)—for exemple, regarding such [impercepti- 
ble things] as the sense organs, [this is the case of philosophers] such as the author of the 
Saddhātusamīksā, or of followers of Brhaspati. For the former acknowledge that ordinary 
human practice is accounted for if this much [is admitted]: the five elements and con- 
sciousness, because such other [things as] the sense organs are included in these; whereas 
the latter admit that the ordinary human practice [consisting in the relationship between] 
an apprehending [subject] and an apprehended [object] is accounted for if a particular 
transformation called ‘consciousness’ arises in the four elements from [some of their] var- 


124 RATIĒ 


the theory of the six elements (saddhātu) while not taking the sense organs 
into account in any way, [and] others? defend the theory of the two [sorts 


ious combinations, and if this transformation does not arise [from other combinations of 
the four elements]." On the author of the Saddhātusamīksā and the followers of Brhaspati 
see below, notes 89 and go, and Ratié 2018. 

89 According to Abhinavagupta’s commentary (see above, note 88), their “theory of the 
six elements” (saddhātuvāda) includes a set of five elements (bhütaparicaka)—i.e. most 
probably earth, water, fire, wind and ākāša—to which consciousness (cetanā) is added. At 
first sight one might assume that Utpaladeva and Abhinavagupta had a Buddhist author 
in mind (on the Buddhist theory of the saddhatu see e.g. Abhidharmakošabhāsya 28 
[on Abhidharmakoša 1.27]: ya ime tatra sad dhātava uktāh prthivīdhātur abdhātus tejo- 
dhatur vayudhatur akasadhatur vijfianadhatuh ...; cf. La Vallée Poussin 1923, 49, note 2 for 
sources). But according to Abhinavagupta’s commentary (ibid.), here Utpaladeva is rather 
hinting at the Saddhatusamiksa—a lost work ascribed to Bhartrhari. This treatise, alluded 
to by Somananda in Sivadrsti 2.73 as the Samīksā and mentioned by Utpaladeva himself 
in Sivadrstivrtti, 83—86, is also known as the Sabdadhātusamīksā (see e.g. Iyer 1969, 9- 
10), but as already pointed out in Torella 2002, xxvi-xxvii, note 39 (cf. Torella 2014, 573), 
the latter title, which appears in the ksrs edition of the Sivadrstivrtti, is a corruption 
(note that as seen above, note 88, the Ipvv gives the title as Saddhātusamīksā). On the 
few known fragments of it and what might have been the overall goal of the work, see 
Ratié 2018. As pointed out there, Abhinavagupta makes some interesting remarks regard- 
ing this saddhātuvāda while commenting on another part of the Pratyabhijfia treatise 
(ĪPVV, vol. 1, 93): sākhyasya yady api paricavimSatis tattvāni sphuranti, tathāpi paricaiva 
bhūtāni cetanā cety etāvanmātre tavat sāksātkārarūpo ‘nubhavo nādhike. tata eva tatra- 
bhavato dhatusatkanirupana eva višvam nirūpitam bhavatītyāšayena tatsamiksodyamah. 
sambhāvanānumānāgamajanitesv api jfíanesu tad eva bhāsate, kevalam yojanamatram 
adhikam. yathā prthivy eva ya surabhyasurabhyādivicitragandhā tatraiva visesatyagena 
sauksmyeņa ca gandhatanmātrarūpateti. “Even though for a [follower of] Sankhya, the 
twenty-five principles (tattva) are manifest [as the universe], to begin with, experience 
(anubhava), that is, immediate perception, consists in nothing but this: the sole five ele- 
ments (bhüta) and consciousness (cetanā)—and nothing more. This is why for the master 
[Bhartrhari] (tatrabhavant), the universe is [entirely] explained as soon as the six ele- 
ments are explained—it is with this intention that he has undertaken their Examination 
(Samīksā). It is also this [set of six elements] that is manifest in cognitions that arise 
from hypothetical inferences or scripture [and not only in perceptions; and] anything 
else is nothing but a mere combination [of these elements]. For example, [the prop- 
erty of] consisting in the subtle sensory object (tanmatra) of smell lies in the [element 
(dhātu) of earth] —that same earth that may possess various smells, some pleasant, oth- 
ers unpleasant, etc.—insofar as [earth] is devoid of particularities and subtle.” So it seems 
that Utpaladeva alluded to this theory at this point of the Vivrti because according to the 
author of the Saddhātusamīksā, perception can be explained in its entirety as the result of 
a mere combination of the six elements, without inferring the existence of imperceptible 
indriyas that would be fundamentally distinct from these elements; or, as Abhinavagupta 
puts it (see above, note 88), according to this theory the indriyas are already included 
within the six elements. 

go If we follow Abhinavagupta's interpretation of this passage (see above, note 88), these 


FRAGMENTS OF UTPALADEVA'S VIVRTI (I1) 125 


of combinations of four elements—namely, the sort that produces conscious- 
ness and the one that does not—without taking imperceptible sense organs 
into account either]. And exactly in the same way, ordinary human practice 
[can] be entirely accounted for (parisamapti) without any investigation about 
an absolutely imperceptible object [considered as] something more than phe- 
nomena. Therefore speculating about this [absolutely imperceptible object] is 
[nothing but] air. 

Nor [can] the [external object] be established by any [such] speculation, 
because of the impossibility of this external [object]—this is what [the verse] 


"others" are "followers of Brhaspati" (barhaspatya), i.e. some materialists (carvaka) who 
embrace the ideas expressed in the sütras traditionally ascribed to Brhaspati (on the 
known fragments of this work and the probability that it was written around the sixth 
century see Namai 1976, Bhattacharya 2002 and Franco 2011, 634—636). According to Abhi- 
navagupta, they understand the relationship between the apprehending subject and the 
apprehended object as the mere result of various combinations between four material 
elements. Thus the fragments of the Brhaspatisutras do not deny the very existence of 
sense organs, but they refuse to see them as distinct entities: whereas the Nyaya and 
Vaisesika theories of vision for instance present the visual organ as an imperceptible ray 
of light fundamentally different from the perceiving body and perceived object (see e.g. 
Preisendanz 1989), the materialists see the indriyas as mere aggregates made of the same 
matter constituting the subject and object. See fragments A2 to A4 in Namai 1976, 39 (cf. 
Bhattacharya 2002, 603-604 and Franco 2011, 635): prthivy apas tejo vayur iti tattvāni || tat- 
samudaye sarirendriyavisayasanijnah || tebhyas caitanyam || "Earth, water, fire and wind are 
the principles. [It is merely] their aggregates that the terms ‘body, ‘sense organ’ (indriya) 
and 'object' designate. Consciousness [arises] from these." Besides, according to the "fol- 
lower of Brhaspati" whose views are mocked by Jayanta Bhatta (the term barhaspatya 
appears e.g. in Nydyamanjari, vol. 1, 496 and Agamadambara, 63), inferences are valid 
only if they regard entities that have already been perceived, but not if they are meant 
to establish the existence of entities that are by nature imperceptible, such as God and 
the Self. See Nyayamaríjari, vol. 1, 326: dvividham anumanam, kificid utpannapratiti kificid 
utpādyapratīti. isvaradyanumanam tütpadyapratiti. tatra dhūmānumānādeh pramanyam 
kena nesyate | ato hi sādhyam budhyante tarkikair aksatā api || yat tv atmesvarasarvajfia- 
paralokādigocaram | anumānam na tasyestam pramanyam tattvadarsibhih || “Inference is 
of two sorts: one [concerns an object] the perception of which has [already] occurred [at 
some point]; the other [concerns an object] the perception of which has [yet] to occur. 
But the inference of [entities] such as God [concerns an object] the perception of which 
has [yet] to occur. Among these [two types of inference,] who would not admit the valid- 
ity of an inference such as that [of fire] from smoke? So [people] apprehend what is to 
be established [by such an inference] even though they are not pestered by logicians. But 
the validity of an inference regarding such [entities] as the Self, God, an omniscient or an 
afterlife is not acknowledged by those who know reality.’ 

Whether the materialists of Jayanta’s time had also explicitly targeted the inference of 
the indriyas or not, Jayanta criticizes their thesis by emphasizing that it leaves them with 
no choice but to reject the inference of imperceptible indriyas as well. See Vyāyamaīijarī, 
vol. 1, 501: srotradyanumane pi yathodahrte $akyam evam abhidhatum ... “And also with 


126 RATIĒ 


says with “syad etat"?! And [since it is] so, since only phenomena [can] be 
objects, the manifesting consciousness (prakasa) is the object, and conversely 
the object is the manifesting consciousness; therefore they consist in each 
other.?2 


[...]93 


respect to the inference of the hearing organ and so on, according to the way in which it 
is formulated, one can declare similarly, [as in the case of the inference of God or the Self, 
that it is invalid] ..." C£. Agamadambara, 68, where the Saiddhāntika arguing with a Cār- 
vāka who denies the validity of the inference of isvara points out that then the Carvaka 
should equally dismiss the inference of the indriyas. The Càrvaka replies: "Let [us admit 
that] the [sense organs] too are not inferred; why should it be a problem for us?" (tad api 
manumayi, kim nas chinnam); the Saiddhāntika asks in turn: "But [then] how can you see 
a visual form without any visual organ?" (nanu caksusā vinā katham rūpam draksyasi). See 
Dezső 2005, 168-169. On the possibility that the materialist portrayed by Jayanta might be 
a caricature of a ninth-century Kashmirian materialist, poetician and grammarian named 
Udbhata, see Solomon 1977-1978, Bronkhorst 2008 and Bronner 2016. Cakradhara, while 
commenting on the Nyayamafijari, explicitly identifies Jayanta's materialist target as Udb- 
hata, to whom he ascribes a commentary on the Brhaspatisūtras (see Solomon 1977—1978, 
988—990), and it is not impossible that Utpaladeva and Abhinavagupta also knew this 
work. 

91  Utpaladeva has just argued that there is no universal acknowledgement of the necessity of 
positing the existence of imperceptible entities (such as the indriyas) so as to account for 
perception. He now adds that even granted that we admit this necessity (hence the "Let 
us admit this” syād etat, in the verse), such an argument is in fact invalid because, as he 
is about to show, the existence of the external object is contradictory to reason. Cf. IPvv, 
vol. 11, 131: anupayogino ‘pi vastuvicaracaksuranvesyatvat* tattvam, iha tu bahye "rtha idam 
api nástity aha nāpīti. [*vastuvicāracaksuranvesyatvāt conj.; vastuno vicaracaficuranvisya- 
tat IPVV, vastuvicaracancuranvesyatat T; vastuvicaracamcaranvisyatam Jio, Jn.] "[With] 
‘Nor ...’, [Utpaladeva] says that [something may be considered as] having a reality (tattva), 
even though it is useless [in ordinary human practice], on the grounds that [the existence 
of] the visual organ [for instance] is required when speculating on the real entity [that 
contributes to the production of a visual perception]; but in the [case of the] external 
object, there is not even [room for] such an [assumption]” 

92  SeeiPvv, vol. 11,131: parasparatmaketi. krayavikrayāder api tathāprakāšanam eva prāņāh. 
yad evedam yasyettham* prakāšate tad etenaiva mama prakas$amanasya prakāšamānāyām 
evarthakriyayam upayogah. |*parasparatmaketi conj. (see above, note 50); pratītiparam- 
parātmaketi 1Pvv, Jio, T; pratitiparasparatmaketi Ju. *yasyettham conj.; asyettham īPvv, 
J10,Jn, T.] “[They] ‘consist in each other’ [means the following]: even the essence of [ordi- 
nary human practice] such as buying and selling, etc., is nothing but such a manifesting 
consciousness. Only that which is manifest in such a way is for this very reason useful 
[in providing] to me, for whom [this thing is manifest and while I am] being manifest 
[myself], an efficacy which is [itself] necessarily manifest!" That is to say, as far as I under- 
stand the passage: objects can be desired and aimed at by a subject in the sphere of human 
practice only if they are forms taken on by the subject's consciousness, and are ultimately 
nothing but the manifesting consciousness itself. 

93 See above, note 51. 


FRAGMENTS OF UTPALADEVA'S VIVRTI (I1) 127 


[2] Even an ordinary human practice that is based on an inference[—such 


as trying to reach a fire the presence of which is merely inferred from the per- 


ception of smoke—can only occur] thanks to a fire that is necessarily being 


manifest [at the very time of this endeavour]; even in a conceptual cognition, 


fire is determined [as being] external [to consciousness only insofar as] it is 
manifested.?^ It is for this reason that an activity [can occur] with respect to 


94 


Cf. IPVV, vol. 11, 131-132: bahya eveti saugatais tavad adhyavasayabalat pramanyam 
vadadbhir anumanam api bahyavisayam evety uktam pramanyam vastuvisayam dvayor 
apiti. asmanmate tu vikalpasyavasyam vastunisthatvam evety uktam bhrantitve cāvasāya- 
syetyadyantare. tata eva yad aha bahyavadi vikalpasyasatyaprakasanatvam iti, tad asman- 
mate niravataranam eva. sakarajnanavadina vikalpah svatmani prakāšah, arthe tv avasāya 
ity ukte katham asatprakāšanam. tad āstām tāvat. “|Here is what Utpaladeva means with 
the words] bahya eva. To begin with, the Buddhists, when saying that the validity of a 
means of knowledge arises from the force of determination (adhyavasaya), admit that 
even inference must have an object that is external [insofar as itis based on the determina- 
tion of a previously perceived object. This is what Dharmakirti has said in Pramāņavinis- 
caya 2.7b]: ‘In both [inference and perception], the validity [of the means of knowledge] 
concerns a real thing ...’. But in our doctrine, the concept necessarily rests on the real thing, 
[even at the time of conceptualization: Utpaladeva] has [already] stated this elsewhere, 
for instance in [verse 1.3.5 beginning with] bhrāntitve cāvasāyasya. For this very reason, 
in our system the [Buddhist] externalist's claim that a concept involves no real manifes- 
tation cannot be accepted at all: since the proponent of the theory that cognition has 
aspects says that a concept is [immediately] manifest in itself [insofar as every cognition 
is immediately aware of itself] even though with respect to the object, [this concept] is 
a [mere] determination, how could it have a nonexistent manifestation? So enough with 
this." 

Here is the gist of Abhinavagupta's reasoning as I understand it. The Buddhists see 
conceptualization as bearing on a mere generality or a pseudo-object resulting from a 
process of exclusion (apoha); yet they acknowledge (as Dharmakirti in the Pramanavinis- 
caya) that a valid inference has as its object a real entity inasmuch as its object is capable 
of efficacy (see Pramāņavinišcaya 2, 48: ... arthakriyayogyavisayatvad vicārasya, "because 
a [valid inferential] speculation has an object that is capable of efficacy"). According 
to Dharmakīrti, this is the case because although the generalities aimed at in concepts 
are no real entity (since reality is purely singular), they result from the determination 
(adhyavasaya) as one single entity of many perceived singular entities that have a some- 
what similar efficacy (thus the concept of "fire" results from our determining as one many 
perceived fires that are all in fact different from each other but share the capacity to 
burn, etc.). So even inferences are somehow based on at least one aspect of perceived 
entities (namely arthakriyā), and this is why valid inferences enable us to obtain desired 
entities and to shun undesirable objects. Nonetheless, the Buddhists consider that only 
perceptions involve an immediate manifestation of the object, and the Šaivas see this 
as a contradiction in the Dharmakirtian system: according to Abhinavagupta, the Bud- 
dhist theory of determination entails that conceptual objects too are directly manifested 
at the very time of their conceptualization (and not only in some perception anterior to 
the conceptual elaboration), at least as regards their efficacy (see e.g. IPvv, vol. 11, 132: 


128 RATIĒ 


[something determined as being] external, and that an activity [can occur] 
with respect to [something determined as being] fire. Ordinary human practice 
[can even occur] with an object such as the sense organs, or heaven and liber- 
ation, although [these always remain] beyond the reach of the sense organs, 
[but] only inasmuch as they are [somehow] manifest in the concept [repre- 
senting them ].95 And [since it is] so, being an object is nothing but having a 


arthakriyapi cabhasamanatayaivabhilasaniyeti sapy abhasavisranteti. "And even efficacy 
can be desired only insofar as it is being manifest; therefore it too rests on manifestation”). 
Besides, the Buddhist epistemologists cannot deny that concepts involve a real, immediate 
manifestation since they consider that all cognitions have two aspects (“an aspect [con- 
sisting in] the object,’ visayakara, and “an aspect [consisting in] themselves” svākāra), and 
that even concepts, insofar as they possess self-awareness (svasamvedana, svasamvitti), 
involve an immediate manifestation of themselves (on this idea and its appropriation by 
the Saivas see Ratié 2011, 44—45, note 20). 

Abhinavagupta thus emphasizes in this passage the major point of contention 
between the Saiva nondualists and their Buddhist counterparts as regards concepts: 
according to Utpaladeva, all concepts involve the immediate manifestation of a real thing 
at the very moment when they arise, because there can be no conscious representation of 
something that consciousness cannot present to itself in an immediate way; without such 
a manifestation, concepts could not occur or would be similar to a state of unconscious- 
ness. And this means that even objects conceptualized as being external are ultimately 
internal aspects of consciousness manifesting itself as if it were external to itself. See e.g. 
ĪPVV, vol. LI, 129—130: anumito ‘pi bahyo 'rthah prakāšamāna eva vaktavyah, prakāšād bhede 
hy aprakāšanaprasangād anumitatvam api vastuno mūrchāprāyam bhavet. "Even [if] an 
external object [is] inferredļ, it] can be talked about only insofar as it is being manifest, 
for if [it] were distinct from the manifesting consciousness (prakāša), since as a result it 
would not be manifest, [the awareness of] the very fact that the entity is inferred would 
amount to a state of stupor!” 

95 Cf. IPVV, vol. 11, 132: vikalpapratibhāsinety* upalabdhikriyakaranataya sāmānyendriyam, 
niratišayasukhatatsādhanavisayatayā svargah, | anáhrtasahajanandaghanataikasara- 
paripurnatatmanapavargas* cabhasabhuvam abhyety* eva, anyathābhilasaņīyatvatatsā- 
dhanànvesanatadrüpadesatadavadharanatadanusthanadyayogat. [*vikalpapratibhāsine- 
ty Ju; vikalpapratibhāsitety 1Pvv; vikalpapratibhāsanety T, o. *%paripūrņatātmanāpavar- 
gas T; ūrņatāpavargaš 1Pvv, J10, Ju. *cabhasabhuvam abhyety T; cabhavabhuvam abhye- 
ty IPVv; cābhāva.. satyety J10; cabhavam abhyety eva Ju.] “[The passage] ‘inasmuch as they 
are [somehow] manifest in the concept [representing them' means the following]. The 
‘sense organ, [apprehended as] a generality (samanya) [by conceptual thought, ie.,] as 
the instrument of the action of perceiving, [as well as] ‘heaven, [apprehended] as the 
object of unsurpassed pleasure and as [the means of] realizing it, and liberation; [appre- 
hended] as consisting of an absolute fullness the essence of which is nothing but the 
plenitude of a bliss that is not brought about [because in fact it is] innate— [all these] 
must belong to the realm of phenomena; otherwise such [things] as the fact that [they] 
can be desired, the search for the realization of this [desire], their determination [as hav- 
ing] this [particular] form and place, the practice in accordance with [this determination], 
etc., would [all] be impossible." 


FRAGMENTS OF UTPALADEVA'S VIVRTI (11) 129 


form that is [presently] being manifest, and the goal [of human practice] only 
concerns what is merely such [and nothing beyond manifestation]. 

[If you reply:] "But this [property of being an object] can only belong to 
[things] that are distinct from manifestation,” what apprehension [of these 
objects] could there be [if they are distinct from manifestation]??6 [And] what 
is this [so-called] annihilation of ordinary human practice [that must inex- 
orably occur according to you] if [objects] are one with phenomena? This is 
what [the Vrtti] says in “let [us admit that] they consist in phenomena”?7 

Only [the following] could [still] be objected:?8 if these [objects] did not 
exist after as well as before [their] being manifest, [then] the very fact that they 


96 Here the opponent is arguing that by definition, an object is what we apprehend as being 
distinct from—i.e. external to—us considered as conscious subjects, so that the ideal- 
ist's thesis is absurd because it contradicts our most ordinary experiences in the sphere 
of human practice. He is therefore implicitly invoking the evidence of common knowl- 
edge (prasiddhi) to show that there must be some external object. Utpaladeva answers 
that this evidence, far from being contradictory to his idealism, is in fact an argument in 
favour of it. Cf. IPVV, vol. 11, 132: tataš ca prasiddhyaiva bahyah sidhyatiti pratyuta viparī- 
tam etat ... "And therefore, [to the objection:] 'the external [object] is established through 
mere common knowledge; [one should answer] that it is rather the contrary" According 
to this fragment, the reason why this is so is that apprehending an object means mak- 
ing the object manifest to consciousness, and such a manifestation can only occur if the 
object is nothing but consciousness taking the form of an object. This idea is justified at 
length at the beginning of chapter 1.5 (see Ratié 2011, 309-366). 

97 Cf. the beginning of Vrtti on ĪPK 1.5.6, 20: ābhāsamānair evārthair vyavaharah, te cā- 
bhasatmakah santu, kā ksatih. "Ordinary human practice occurs thanks to objects pre- 
cisely insofar as [they are] being manifested, and let [us admit that] they consist in phe- 
nomena [and nothing else]—what harm [might ensue for human practice if it is the 
case]?" See Torella 2002, 114. 

98 SeeīPvv, vol. 11, 132—133: ābhāsānām eva vastutàm abhidhaya prāmāņikatvāt svayam sva- 
pakse düsanam asankya darsayaty asayasuddhipradarsanena vitaragatam* vaktum keva- 
lam iti. paryanuyojyam idam paryanuyogārham, kim, aha abhasamanataya iti. parvam 
urdhvam ceti ... (*āšayasšuddhipradaršanena vītarāgatām conj.; asayasuddhipradarsane- 
nāvitārakatām 1Pvv, Jio, Ju, T.] "Having explained that only phenomena are real entities 
because [only they are] established by a means of [valid] knowledge, [and] anticipating 
by himself the refutation of his own thesis, [Utpaladeva now] expounds [this refutation 
with the passage beginning with] 'only ..” by empasizing the purity of his intentions, in 
order to state that [he] is free of bias. [According to him] this 'could [still] be objected; 
[i.e.] it deserves the [following] objection. Which one? This is what [Utpaladeva says] 
in if these objects did not exist] after as well as before [their] being manifest ...'" My 
tentative emendation above (vītarāgatām instead of avitārakatām) is based on passages 
such as Nyayamaiijari, vol. 1, 25: “and it [i.e. tarka] can be used in order to show [one's] 
purity of intentions in a debate" (sa casayas$uddhim upadaršayitum vāde prayoksyate). 
Cakradhara (Granthibhanga, vol. 1, 17) explains that it can be used "in order to make 
clear '[one's] purity of intentions; [i.e.] the fact that one is free of bias" (āšayašuddhim 
vitaragatvam prakatayitum), and he adds: tarkakramena svārthānumānakāle yathā prati- 


130 RATIĒ 


are manifest would be causeless, and [under such conditions,] the relation of 
cause and effect and the relation between the knowing subject and the object 
of knowledge would not be possible.%9 


[...] 


[3] If, on the other hand, external objects are only atoms that are part- 
less [and] aggregated, even so, a pot, which appears in a [spatially] extended 


pannah svayam asāv arthas tathaiva parasya pratipādyate, vītarāgakathātvād vādasyeti. 
"Through the method of tarka, something is demonstrated for the opponent exactly as 
it was understood by oneself at the time of an inference for oneself, because a debate is 
a discourse of [people] who are free of bias.’ This is an allusion to the Naiyayikas’ dis- 
tinction between three kinds of discourse, namely debate (vada), disputation ( jalpa) and 
sophistry (vitanda), and the Saivas are well acquainted with it. See e.g. Ksemaraja’s Sva- 
cchandatantroddyota, vol. v1, 98 (alluding to Vyāyasūtra 1.2.1, according to which “debate 
comprehends both the thesis and the antithesis,” ... paksapratipaksaparigraho vàdah): ... 
paksapratipaksaparigraho vītarāgakathārūpo vadah. “Debate, which comprehends both 
the thesis and the antithesis, [and] which is a discourse of [people] who are free of bias...” 
On vada as a vītarāgakathā see also e.g. Nyayamafijari, vol. 1, 18 or Nyayabhüsana, 328; cf. 
Tantrālokaviveka on Tantrāloka 13.126, vol. VIII, 9o. So as far as I understand the īPvv pas- 
sage, Abhinavagupta simply means here that by raising himself (svayam) this objection to 
his own thesis, Utpaladeva is showing to his opponent that he is an unbiased interlocutor. 

99 Cf. Ipvv, vol. 11, 133, which explains the objection in the following way: ... ābhāsanam 
avasyam bhavane cābhavane ca nimittam apeksate. tac cen nāsti, tan nirhetukatā. tatas 
ca karyakaranabhavad ghatarthina mrdam āharet, na kumbhakārakulam abhigacchet, na 
dhūmārthī hutabhujam ādadīta. kāryakāraņatāmūlas ca jfiapyajfiapakabhavah ... “A man- 
ifestation necessarily reguires a cause as regards both [its] arising and [its] not arising. 
And if there is no such [cause], then [this manifestation] is causeless. And since as a con- 
sequence there is no relation of cause and effect, [someone] who wants a pot should not 
get clay [and] should not go see a family of potters; [and someone] who wants smoke 
should not get himself a fire. Moreover, the relation between the knowing subject and the 
object of knowledge has as its root the relation of cause and effect ..." As for the gist of 
Utpaladeva’s reply to this objection according to Abhinavagupta, see above, note 30. 

100 This fragment, which targets the Buddhist Vaibhasika theory according to which external 
objects are nothing but aggregated atoms, must have followed a criticism of the Vaisesika 
thesis that the external object is a whole (avayavin) distinct from its parts (avayava), hence 
the atha here. See IPvv, vol. 11, 140: evam kāņādasammatam bahyam dūsayitvā vaibhasika- 
paribhāsitam api dūsayaty atheti. “Having thus refuted the external [object as it is] under- 
stood by the followers of Kanada, [Utpaladeva now] refutes as well [the external object as 
itis] explained by the Vaibhasikas [in the sentence beginning with] ‘If, on the other hand.” 
This line of argument is of course borrowed from the famous criticism in Vimšikā 11215 of 
the various theories claiming to account for the external object. Vasubandhu shows there 
that we cannot make sense of this external object whether we try to understand it as a 
whole distinct from its parts, as atoms taken individually, or as aggregated atoms. On the 
recent debate as to whether Vasubandhu's reasoning was meant to show that the external 
object cannot exist, or whether his goal was merely to point out that such an object cannot 
be known, and for convincing arguments in favour of the first hypothesis, see Kellner and 


FRAGMENTS OF UTPALADEVA'S VIVRTI (II) 131 


form, necessarily appears as having [different] parts [respectively located in 
the] east, west, etc.; and [this spatial extendedness]!?! is not possible if [this 
pot] is thus made of atoms], since by definition an atom cannot have different 
parts]./9? To explain:l9? a second atom that is connected with the atom con- 
sidered as the first [one]!°* must be one with this [first atom]; for if [these 
atoms] devoid of parts are in contact, how much [of them could] remain that 


101 


102 


103 


104 


Taber 2014; on the Šaiva nondualists' unambiguous interpretation of the Vimšikā along the 
same lines, see Ratié 2014. On Vasubandhu's refutation —summed up in this fragment—of 
the Vaibhasikas’ atomism, see e.g. Kapstein 2001, 181-204; for Abhinavagupta's explanation 
of it, see Ratié 2010, 450—452, and Ratié 2011, 395-399. 

Cf. IPVV, vol. 11, 140: na caivam paramanumayatva iti vaitatyam digbhagabhedavattvam. 
"And [spatial] extendedness, which [consists in] being differentiated into parts according 
to the directions, is [not possible] if [this pot] is thus made of atoms.” 

The main idea is that if perceptible things, which are made of imperceptible atoms, are 
spatially extended, the atoms too must have such an extendedness, but spatially extended 
atoms must have parts, which is absurd since the atom is by definition partless. Cf. Vim- 
šikā 14ab: digbhagabhedo yasyāsti tasyaikatvam na yujyate | "That which is differentiated 
into parts according to the directions cannot be one” See also Vimšikāvrtti, 7: anyo hi para- 
manoh pūrvadigbhāgo yāvad adhodigbhāga iti digbhagabhede sati katham tadātmakasya 
paramanor ekatvam yoksyate. "For if an atom has one part in the direction of the east, 
[and others in the directions of the south, west, north, above] and below, given that [the 
atom] is differentiated into [various] parts according to the directions (digbhagabheda), 
how could the atom be one [whereas it] consists of these [different parts]?” 

According to Abhinavagupta, here Utpaladeva has the externalist face a dilemma, the first 
part of which remains implicit in the Vivrti. See IPvv, vol. 11, 140: tac ca bahünàm para- 
māņūnām bhinnadesatve murtatvenanyonyarupadesakramanayogyatvabhavat* pratilab- 
dhe kimiti na ghatata ity agankyaha tathā hīti. ayam bhavah—yadi santarah paramāņavo 
ghatah, tad adrsyata ... [*mürtatvena? corr.; 'mürtatvena? IPvv.] “[The opponent:] ‘And 
why is [this spatial extendedness of the pot] not possible if [we admit that] the numerous 
atoms get to have different places because, since they are of a material, [i.e. solid] nature 
(mūrta), [they] cannot extend to the place of the others’ forms?’ Anticipating this [objec- 
tion, Utpaladeva] says ‘To explain ...' Here is the implicit meaning [of this passage]: if the 
pot is [nothing but] atoms with intervals [separating them from each other], then [the 
pot] must be imperceptible ...” In other words, the opponent is tempted to respond to the 
objection just stated in the fragment by explaining that atoms can indeed occupy different 
locations because although partless, they cannot penetrate each other so as to coexist in 
the same spot. But this reply is unsound, first and foremost because then the macroscopic 
pot should remain imperceptible, as it would merely consist of imperceptible atoms and 
intervals between them. After enumerating a few more of the "countless defects" (Sataso 
dosāh) inherent in the thesis that atoms are separated by intervals, Abhinavagupta adds 
(ibid.):nairantarye tu parasparasamšlesah. “But if [the atoms] are contiguous, they [must] 
be in contact with one another" It is the absurdity of the latter hypothesis that the frag- 
ment is now going to point out. 

Alternatively, one could understand: *a second atom that is connected with the atom con- 
sidered as [located] in the east." 


132 RATIĒ 


might not be in contact? And [if they are thus entirely] in contact, their natures 
must be immersed in each other, therefore [they] can only be manifest as one 
[single] atom; and if [they are] in contact with yet another atom, the same 
[consequence follows|—therefore even if an infinite number of atoms were 
connected, they should be manifest as having the size of one [single] atom;!05 
or [rather], even this [manifestation] would not exist, because atom[s], [taken] 
one by one, are beyond the realm of the sense organs.!06 


7 Translation of the Fragments on ĪPK 1.5.8—9 


[4] For inference is a concept, and this [concept] arises thanks to the resid- 
ual trace (samskara) [left by] a previous experience; so to begin with, [it] 
depends on the fact that the object was directly perceived [atsome point] in the 
past, and inference is a conceptual cognition that arises as an unfailing (avya- 
bhicāra)!97 [means of knowledge] with respect to this [previously perceived] 
object.!%8 And insofar as this [inference]!9? produces the realization (vimršati) 


105 If atoms are in contact, they must all share the same place since they are partless, and as a 
result their aggregate, however complex, cannot be larger than a single atom. See Vimšikā 
12cd: sannam samanadesatvat pindah syad anumatrakah | "If the six [atoms supposedly 
surrounding the first one] share the same location [as the first one], [they] must [con- 
stitute] a lump [of matter] that has the size of a [single] atom." Cf. Vimsikavrtti, 7: atha 
ya evaikasya paramanor desah sa eva sannam. tena sarvesàm samanadesatvat sarvah pin- 
dah paramāņumātrah syāt parasparāvyatirekāt. "If, on the other hand, the place of one 
atom is also that of the six [atoms supposedly surrounding it], then since they all have 
the same place, [they] must all [constitute] a lump [of matter] that has the size of a [sin- 
gle] atom, since they are not distinct from each other" See also ĪPVV, vol. 11, 141: iti dvāv 
api militau nàdhikam rūpam samutthāpayeyātām. evam anyamelane ‘pi vàcyam. tad aha 
ananteti. "Therefore two connected [atoms] cannot bring about a form larger [than one 
single atom], and the same must be said if another, [third atom] gets in contact [with 
them]—this is what [Utpaladeva explains] with '[even if] an infinite [number] ...’” 

106 If aggregated atoms are not larger than one atom, no material object should be percepti- 
ble, since a single atom is imperceptible. Cf. Vimsikavrtti, 7: iti na kascit pindo drsyah syāt. 
naiva hi paramanavah samyujyante niravayavatvāt. "So no lump [of matter] at all should 
be perceptible; for the atoms cannot be in contact [with each other] at all, since they have 
no parts." 

107 Literally “non-deviating.” 

108 According to Abhinavagupta, here Utpaladeva specifies that inference is a *non-deviating" 
means of knowledge (that is, according to the Buddhist epistemologists, a means of knowl- 
edge that is valid inasmuch as it unfailingly enables us to reach a given object) so as to 
point out that although conceptual, it is not a mere mental construct absolutely unre- 
lated to perception, since it regards a previously perceived object. See īPVV, vol. 1, 161: 
pūrvābhāta evānumānam ity etat sādhayitum tavad aha anumānam hīti. yata evam tas- 


FRAGMENTS OF UTPALADEVA'S VIVRTI (II) 133 


of this object —[which only] exists inside [consciousness at the time when 
we infer|]—thanks to the residual trace of the [past] experience, [and inso- 
far as it produces this realization] as is appropriate [for an object, i.e.] in the 
form "this" (idanta), it only manifests [this object] as being separated [from 
the subject, the latter being expressed as “I”]. And this mere [realization that 
the object is something separated from the subject] is not enough to transform 
this object into something on which [human] activity may be exerted; there- 
fore [this object] is [also] made manifest (prakasita) as having a specific place 
and time, because only a particular having a specific place and time can be 
something on which [human] activity may be exerted, since [only such a par- 
ticular] can be obtained (prapya) and since [only such a particular] may have 
the efficacy (arthakriya) that [we] expect [from it]. So [a valid inference is] an 
act of realization (vimaršana) that is exactly so, [i.e. it is an unfailing means 
of knowledge with respect to a previously perceived object that it manifests 
as having a specific place and time].!? This is what [the Vrtti] says [with the 
words] “manifested in the past" (purvavabhata), “an object invariably concomi- 
tant [with this entity]” (nantartyakartha) [and] "[due to the association of this 
entity with] this or that [specific] place and time, etc!!! 


mád yuktah sūtrārthah. nanuvikalpamātram eva kim anumānam. netyaha avyabhicareti*. 
[*avyabhicareti conj.; avyabhicārīti Jio, Ju, T, 1Pvv.] “In order to demonstrate that infer- 
ence only regards a previously manifested [object], first [Utpaladeva] states [the sentence 
beginning with] ‘For inference ...’ [And] since [inference] is so, the meaning of verse [1.5.8] 
is justified. But is inference nothing but a mere concept? With [the word] avyabhicara?, 
[Utpaladeva] answers ‘no’ [to this question].” 

109 Cf. Ipvv, vol. 11, 161: anumānam kartr prathayatiti sambandhah. 

110 See IPvv, vol. 11, 162: na ca tāvatety antahsthitasamskarasesasya bahīrūpatāvabhāsanalak- 
sanena vicchedamātreņābhāsitenāpi visistau desakalau vinā kaytyavyaparaparyantapra- 
vrttijananam anumānena na krtam bhaved iti visistadesakalalingite rthe pravrttiyogye yad 
vikalpanam tat pramāņarūpam avisamvadakatayanumanam ucyate. “‘And this ... is not 
enough’ [means the following]. [Something] that [only] consists of the manifestation in 
an external form, [i.e. in the form 'this,] of what remains [of the past experience in the 
shape of] an internal residual trace; [that is to say, something] that is merely separated 
[from the subject expressed as ‘I, but] that, although manifested, [appears] without any 
specific place and time— [this is] not [enough] for inference to trigger any activity ending 
in a bodily action. Therefore what [we] call an inference is [not just any] conceptualiza- 
tion (vikalpana), [but only one] that consists in a means of [valid] knowledge since it is 
reliable (avisamvādaka), [and one] that concerns an object possessed of a specific time 
and place, [therefore being] fit to be [something on which] an activity [is exerted ]." 

111 Cf. Vrtti on IPK 1.5.8, 21-22: purvavabhatantahsthita evārthe nantariyakarthadarsanavasat 
tattaddesakaladiyojanaya vimar$anam anumānam. “Inference is an act of realization (vi- 
maršana) with respect to an object that exists internally [now in the form of a residual 
trace because] it has [already] been manifested in the past. [This act occurs] thanks to the 
perception of an object invariably concomitant [with this entity,] due to the association 


134 RATIĒ 


[...] 22 


[5] Even asense organ has already been experienced before [being inferred]; 
for this [sense organ] is not inferred in its own specific form, but rather, as 
a [mere] generality (samanya).!? This is what [I] say in the Vrtti [with the 
words | “a cause that is a mere indeterminate thing” (Kiricinmatra).!^ The object 
[inferred in this inference of the sense organs] is a generality (sāmānya) [that 
simply consists in] being a cause; [and this generality] was manifested before 
[the inference] in the cognition that the seed is a cause of the sprout, [or] 
in the cognition that clay for instance is a cause of the pot and [other such 
objects]. For in that [cognition that the seed is the cause of the sprout],!!6 it 
is not [something] specific|, i.e.] only a seed [and nothing else], that is mani- 


[of this entity] with this or that [specific] time and place, etc” As noted in Torella 2002, 
117, note 19, Utpaladeva's definition specifies that inference “aims at proving the existence 
of an object that is able to propose itself as the possible object of purposeful activity (i.e. 
specified by a definite time and space [...])” And this amounts to saying that the external 
object cannot be an inferential object, not only because there can be no previous experi- 
ence of such an object, but also because according to Utpaladeva's definitions of time and 
space (on which see e.g. Ratié 2011, 197-201), spatial and temporal relationships can only 
belong to manifested entities. See e.g. IPv, vol. 11, 16: nanv evam ābhāsavisayābhyām eva 
desakalakramábhyam bhavitavyam. "But [if it is] so, the spatial and temporal sequences 
can only regard phenomena." 

112 Seeabove, note 75. 

113 Onthe Saivas’ understanding of this type of inference called sāmānyatodrsta (which infers 
the mere existence of some imperceptible and therefore indeterminate entity so as to 
account for a phenomenon that would remain inexplicable otherwise) see e.g. Torella 
2002, 117, note 20, and Ratié 2o11b, 486—488. 

114 Cf. Vrtti, 22: indriyam apy anumiyate kifícinmatram nimittam tac ca bījādyābhāsād ābhā- 
sitam eva. “Even a sense organ is inferred [as] a cause that is a mere indeterminate thing; 
and this [sense organ] has already been manifested due to the manifestation of a seed, 
etc.” See Torella 2002, 117. 

115 Utpaladeva considers every perceived object as a particular synthesis of general features 
(including that of causality); see Torella 1992, 332—333, and Torella 2002, 89-90, note 3. 
On Abhinavagupta's explanations of this point see Ratié 20nb, 488—491. It is this theory 
that enables Utpaladeva to claim here that although the sense organs are imperceptible 
in the sense that they can never be apprehended as singular entities existing in a deter- 
minate place and time, they can still be considered as having somehow been perceived 
before being inferred (so that their inference is valid); this is so because the inference of 
the sense organs does not concern a particular entity but a mere generality (that is, an 
indeterminate cause that must be postulated on top of other conditions such as light so 
as to account for the phenomenon of perception), and this general notion of causality is 
part of countless perceptions of particular fires seen as causing smoke, etc., since the per- 
ception of a particular is nothing but the apprehension of a synthetic unity of generalities, 
including causality. 

116 Cf. Ipvv, vol. r1, 163: na hi tatreti bijasya nimittatajnane. 


FRAGMENTS OF UTPALADEVA'S VIVRTI (II) 135 


fested as a cause; [ otherwise, | as a consequence [we] would not know that clay 
too [is a cause]. Nor is clay only [cognized as a cause] in a [cognition occurring] 
after [that of the seed being a cause], because [if it were so] there would follow 
that [we] would not know that the seed and so on [are also causes]. And [one 
should rather consider that] within this [notion of causality that is present in 
the perception of the clay] as well as [in that of the seed], a [ process of] partic- 
ularization leads to an exclusion [that takes the form]: “it is the clay that is the 
cause of the pot, not the seed”; [and this exclusion eliminates from the general 
notion of cause] that which [the particular cause] is not but which is intrinsi- 
cally linked (prasakta) [with the notion of cause in general].!7 


[...] 


[6]*!!$ [—Objection from the Sautrantika:] But just as [you] have said that 
[in the case of the inference of the sense organs,| the generality “causality” 
has already been experienced through the experience of [particular causes] 


117 Utpaladeva is arguing here that within any act of perception, the apprehension of uni- 
versals or generalities (such as causality) comes first, and it is only once these general 
features are apprehended that we determine our perception as being that of a singu- 
lar synthesis. This determination of the perceptual object as a singular entity takes the 
form of the mental process of exclusion (vyavaccheda, apoha) which, according to Dhar- 
makirti, produces generalities (Utpaladeva's system thus integrates the Dharmakirtian 
notion of apoha, but not without turning it upside down). In other words, upon see- 
ing a pot being made out of clay, we first apprehend a number of generalities inherent 
in the clay, and then we exclude from e.g. the generality "causality" whatever falls into 
the general category of cause (or, as Utpaladeva says, is intrinsically linked with it) but 
has a different efficacy— seeds for instance. According to Abhinavagupta, it is because 
we thus apprehend the generality "causality" before the particularities of the perceived 
cause that we are capable of using the word "cause" to describe various entities. See IPvv, 
vol. 11, 156: anyathaikatra bije karanasabdah sanketito na mrtpindadau sanketito bhavet. 
"Otherwise, the word 'cause' would be conventionally associated with one single [entity, 
such as] the seed, [but] it could not be conventionally associated with a lump of clay, 
etc.” It is also this theory that enables Utpaladeva to claim here that in a sense, all causes 
(including imperceptible ones such as the sense organs) are perceived when we perceive 
clay, although contrary to the singular clay perceived at that particular time and place, 
all the other causes are only apprehended in the form of the general feature "causality” 
Cf. Abhinavagupta's explanation in ĪPVV, vol. 11, 163: nanu kumbham prati mrdo nimit- 
tatajriane bijam api nimittabhāvena svikrtam iti kutah. atrocyate prasakteti. prasangas ca 
kāraņatāsāmānyapratibhāsasamutthāpita iti bhavah. “To the [question:] But how is it that 
in the cognition that the clay is a cause with respect to the pot, [we] apprehend the seed 
too as a cause?, [Utpaladeva] replies [with the expression] ‘that which is intrinsically 
linked (prasakta) [with the notion of cause in general]. And this intrinsic link arises from 
the manifestation of the generality [consisting in] causality—this is what [Utpaladeva] 
means." 

118 On my reasons for thinking that this passage might be a fragment from the Vivrti, see 
above, note 79. 


136 RATIĒ 


such as a seed, without considering the particulars that are the visual organ 
and so on, in the same way, [you must admit that] externality too has already 
been experienced as a generality from the experience of [various objects that 
are] external to the body the house or the village, etc. Alternatively, if [you] 
claim that [the external object cannot be inferred because] there is no expe- 
rience of externality through a particular [entity characterized as] not being 
consciousness, [then] since the visual organ and so on have not been previ- 
ously experienced [as] a particular cause either, there can be no inference [of 
the sense organs either]; so why don't [you simply] admit that inference applies 
[in both cases]?! 


119 Inow think that my understanding of the last part of this sentence was mistaken in 
Ratié 2011, 466, note 221, and Ratié 201b, 494, note 48. As for the general meaning of 
the passage, see IPVV, vol. 11, 165: grāmād darpaņād grhād dehāt samvedanad bahyam iti 
bahyatasamanyam* ekam, tac ca grhād bahyam iti pratitau siddham. tataš ca samarpakam 
darpanad iva bahyam* samvedanād apisetsyati kramikābhāsavaicitryād dhetor ity āšayena 
purvapaksayati nanu caksuraditi. |*bahyatasamanyam conj. Ratié 20ub, found in J10, Ju, 
T, marginal annotations in soas, D2, and note 248 in ĪPV, vol. 1, 190; bahyatah samanyam 
Ipvv. *darpaņād iva bahyam conj. Ratié 2011b, found in T; darpanadibahyam Jio, Ju, 1? vv, 
marginal annotation in soAs, D2 and note 248 ĪPV (vol. 1, 190).] "With [the sentence 
beginning with] nanu caksurādi-, [Utpaladeva] states the prima facie thesis [that he is 
about to refute] with the intention [of conveying the following objection]: It is one [and 
the same] generality of externality [that is present in these various cognitions: ‘this is] 
external to the village, to the mirror, to the house, to the body, to consciousness. And 
this [generality of externality] is established in the [mere] experience: '[this is] exter- 
nal to the house” And as a consequence, [something] may be established to be external 
to consciousness as well and to project [its specific form onto consciousness], just as 
[something is external] to a mirror [and projects its specific form onto the mirror, and 
it may be established to be so] on the basis of the [logical] reason that is the variety 
of successive phenomena [experienced by any conscious being]” As to how, according 
to Abhinavagupta, Utpaladeva was answering this objection in the now missing Vivrti 
passage following this fragment, see IPvv, vol. 11, 165: naivam* bahyatvam ghatasya grā- 
māc ca samvedanāc caikam, samvedanād bahyam hy asamvedanarūpam, na tu grhād 
bahyam agrharüpam. evam sati hi grhaikadešah kudyadir grhāntarvarty api ca ghatādir 
grhabahyah syāt. na caivam, grhasannikrstam ca yadvad* bahyam grhān na tadvad eva 
samvedanāt tasyamurtasya sannikarsādidešavyavahāryatvābhāvāt. tatah $abdasamyama- 
trenedam* sādhyam ekam pratibhātīty abhiprayenottarayaty atrocyata iti. (*naivam T; 
nedam fio, Ju, 1Pvv. *ca yadvad T, 1Pvv; yadvad Jio, Ju, Kha (1Pvv, note 1). *$abdasamya- 
mátrenedam conj. Ratié 20nub, found in T; šabdasāmānyamātreņedam Jio, Ju, 1Pvv.] “In 
‘To this [objection we] reply ...” [Utpaladeva] answers [the objection] with [the follow- 
ing] in mind. The externality of the pot is not thus one [and the same whether it is 
considered] with respect to the village or with respect to consciousness; for that which 
is external to consciousness consists in that which is not consciousness, whereas that 
which is external to the house does not consist in that which is not a house! For if that 
were the case, a particular element of the house—such as a wall—or a pot, for example, 


FRAGMENTS OF UTPALADEVA'S VIVRTI (11) 137 
Acknowledgements 


Although my doctoral research was undertaken and completed at the École 
Pratique des Hautes Études (Paris) under Lyne Bansat-Boudon's supervision, I 
studied in Oxford under Alexis Sandersorrs guidance in 2005 and 2006 while 
working on my PhD dissertation, and I am immensely indebted to him. He 
was kind enough not only to let me attend his classes there but also to orga- 
nize many extra reading sessions so we could cover more of Abhinavagupta's 
Isvarapratyabhijfiavimarsini, and we ended up reading about two thirds of this 
lengthy and difficult text in less than two years. It was an extraordinary experi- 
ence for me, not only owing to Alexis's remarkable erudition and exceptional 
philological acumen, but also because his generosity, humour and curiosity 
have always created among his students a unique atmosphere of intellectual 
freedom and enthusiastic research. I am proud to consider myself a pupil of 
his, and it is a great honour and joy for me to be given this opportunity, by 
contributing to the present volume, to express my profound admiration and 
affection for this wonderful scholar and teacher. 

Most of the research presented in this paper was carried out thanks to the 
generous financial help of the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft, as part of 
project FR 2531/3-1. The National Mission for Manuscripts, the soas Library 
and Mr. Chetan Pandey were kind enough to provide photographs of the manu- 
scripts used for the edition of the fragments given below. Many thanks are also 
due to Vincent Eltschinger and Eli Franco, who read a draft of this paper and 
provided insightful remarks. 


References 


Primary Sources: Manuscripts and Sigla 
D. Iévarapratyabhijfia|-Vrtti, ] Vivrti [and Vimaršinī]. Delhi: National Archives of India 
(Manuscripts belonging to the Archaeology and Research Department, Jammu and 
Kashmir Government, Srinagar), no. 30, vol. rx. Paper, Šāradā script. 


although it is located inside the house, should be external to the house [since they are 
not the house itself]; and it is not so. And whereas that which is external to the house is 
next to the house, it is absolutely not the case as regards that which is [external] to con- 
sciousness, because of the impossibility for [consciousness ]|—which is devoid of material 
form (amūrta)—of having any spatial relation whatsoever such as proximity. Therefore 
this [externality] that must be established appears to be one thanks to a mere similarity 
(sabdasāmya)” 


138 RATIĒ 


D2. Īsvarapratyabhijūāvimaršinī. Delhi: National Archives of India (Manuscripts 
belonging to the Archeology and Research Department, Jammu and Kashmir Gov- 
ernment, Srinagar), no. 5, vol. 11. Paper, Sarada script. 

D3. Sivadrsti. Delhi: National Archives of India (Manuscripts belonging to the Archeol- 
ogy and Research Department, Jammu and Kashmir Government, Srinagar), no. 7, 
vol. 11. Paper, Sarada script. 

D4. Sivadrsti. Delhi: National Archives of India (Manuscripts belonging to the Archeol- 
ogy and Research Department, Jammu and Kashmir Government, Srinagar), no. 83, 
vol. LXVI. Paper, Devanagari script. 

Jio. Ī$varapratyabhijūāvivrtivimaršinī. Jammu: Sri Ranbir Institute, Raghunath Mandir 
Library, no. 1475. Paper, Devanagani script. 

Ju. Īsvarapratyabhijnāvivrtivimaršinī. Jammu: Sri Ranbir Institute, Raghunath Mandir 
Library, no. 5077. Paper, Devanagari script. 

JR. Isvarapratyabhijfiavimarsint. Jammu: Rashtriya Sanskrit Sansthan, no. 47 (formerly 
no. 52A) and no. 70 (formerly no. 52B). Paper, Šāradā script, incomplete. 

S2. Ī$varapratyabhijūāvimaršinī. Srinagar: Oriental Research Library, no. 1035. Paper, 
Šāradā script. 

S3. Iévarapratyabhijfiavimarsini [catalogued as Īsvarapratyabhijūākaumudī]. Srinagar: 
Oriental Research Library, no. 838. Paper, Šāradā script. 

S5. Iévarapratyabhijfiavimarsint [catalogued as Sāmkhyatattvakaumudī by Vācaspati 
Mišra; Abhinavagupta's IPv is copied after the latter]. Srinagar: Oriental Research 
Library, no. 1212. Paper, Šāradā script. 

Sg. Īsvarapratyabhijitāvimaršinī. Srinagar: Oriental Research Library, no. 1161. Paper, 
Šāradā script. 

S10. Ivarapratyabhijfiàvimarsini. Srinagar: Oriental Research Library, no. 1477. Paper, 
Šāradā script. 

$12. Iévarapratyabhijfiavivrtivimarsint [catalogued as Īsvarapratyabhijūā(vimaršinī)]. 
Srinagar: Oriental Research Library, no. 2403. Paper, Šāradā script. 

S15. Iévarapratyabhijfiavimarsint. Srinagar: Oriental Research Library, no. 787. Paper, 
Sarada script. 

Sig. Ī$varapratyabhijūāvrtti [catalogued as Isvarapratyabhijnakarika]. Srinagar: Orien- 
tal Research Library, no. 824. Paper, Sarada script. 

SOAS. Īsvarapratyabhijiāvimaršinī [catalogued as Pratyabhijūāsūtra with Abhinava- 
gupta’s Sutrarthavimarsini]. London: School of Oriental and African Studies 
Library, no. 44255/no. 207 in Dogra 1978. Paper, Sarada script. 

T. Īsvarapratyabhijūāvivrtivimaršinī. Trivandrum: Oriental Research Institute and 
Manuscripts Library, no. 50413 B and C. Palm-leaf, Grantha Malayalam script. 


FRAGMENTS OF UTPALADEVA'S VIVRTI (II) 139 


Primary Sources: Edited Texts 

Abhidharmakosabhasya. Yasunori Ejima, ed. Abhidharmakosabhasya of Vasubandhu. 
Chapter 1: Dhātunirdeša. Bibliotheca Indologica et Buddhologica, no. 1. Tokyo: The 
Sankibo Press, 1989. 

Agamadambara. Csaba Dezső, ed. Unpublished critical edition and online supple- 
mental materials available at http://www.claysanskritlibrary.org/extras.phpžn. Clay 
Sanskrit Library, 2004. 

Granthibhanga. Gaurinath Sastri, ed. Nyayamafijari of Jayanta Bhatta, with the Com- 
mentary of Granthibhanga by Cakradhara. 3 vols. Varanasi: Sampurnanand Sanskrit 
Vishvavidyalaya, 1982. 

Isvarapratyabhijfiakarika (īPK). See Torella 2002. 

Isvarapratyabhijfiavimarsini (īPv). Mukund Ram Shastri and Madhusudan Kaul Shas- 
tri, eds. Ishvara-pratyabhijfia Vimarshini of Utpaladeva [sic] With Commentary by 
Abhinava-Gupta. 2 vols. Kashmir Series of Texts and Studies, nos. 22 and 33. Bom- 
bay: Niraya Sagar Press, 1918—1921. 

Īsvarapratyabhijūāvivrtivimaršinī (1iPvv). Madhusudan Kaul Shastri, ed. [svarapratya- 
bhijfia Vivritivimarsini of Abhinavagupta. 3 vols. Kashmir Series of Texts and Studies, 
nos. 60, 62 and 65. Bombay: Nirnaya Sagar Press, 1938—1943. 

Nyayabhisana. Svāmī Yogīndrānanda, ed. Srimadacaryabhasarvajhapranitasya nyāya- 
sārasya svopajfíam vyakhyanam nyayabhüsanam. Varanasi: Saddaršana Prakāšana 
Pratisthanam, 1968. 

Nyayamanjari. K.S. Varadacharya, ed. Nyayamajijari of Jayanta Bhatta, with Tippani— 
Nyayasaurabha by the Editor. 2 vols. Oriental Research Institute Series, nos. 116 and 
139. Mysore: Oriental Research Institute, 1969—1983. 

Nyayasutra. Anantalal Thakur, ed. Gautamtyanyayadarsana with Bhasya of Vatsyayana. 
Nyāyacaturgranthikā, no. 1. New Delhi: Indian Council of Philosophical Research, 
1997. 

Parātrīsikāvivaraņa. Mukunda Rama Shastri, ed. Parātrimshikā with Commentary, the 
Latter by Abhinavagupta. Kashmir Series of Texts and Studies, no. 18. Srinagar: Tatva 
Vivechaka Press, 1918. 

Pramanaviniscaya. Ernst Steinkellner, ed. Dharmakirti's Pramanaviniscaya, Chapters 1 
and 2. Beijing-Vienna: China Tibetology Publishing House/Austrian Academy of Sci- 
ences Press, 2007. 

Malinislokavarttika. Madhusudan Kaul Shastri, ed. Sri Mālinīvijayavārttikam of Abhi- 
navagupta. Kashmir Series of Texts and Studies, no. 32. Srinagar: Kashmir Pratap 
Steam Press, 1921. 

Sivadrsti. Madhusudan Kaul Shastri, ed. Sivadrsti of Srisomanandanatha with the Vrtti 
by Utpaladeva. Kashmir Series of Texts and Studies, no. 54. Srinagar: 1934. 

Šivadrstivrtti. See Šivadrsti. 

Spandapradīpikā. Mark S.G. Dyczkowski, ed. The Spandapradīpikā: A Commentary on 
the Spandakārikā by Bhagavadutpalācārya. Varanasi: D.K. Book Agencies, 1990. 


140 RATIĒ 


Svacchandatantroddyota. Madhusudan Kaul Shastri, ed. The Svacchanda Tantram with 
Commentary by Ksemaraja. 6 vols. Kashmir Series of Texts and Studies, nos. 31, 38, 
44, 48, 53 and 56. Bombay: Nirnaya Sagar Press, 1921—1935. 

Tantrāloka. Madhusudan Kaul Shastri, ed. Tantrāloka of Abhinavagupta with commen- 
tary by Rajanaka Jayaratha. 12 vols. Kashmir Series of Texts and Studies, nos. 23, 28, 
29, 30, 35, 36, 41, 47, 52, 57, 58 and 59. Allahabad: Indian Press, 1918—1938. 

Tantrālokaviveka. See Tantrāloka. 

Vimsika. Silvain Lévi, ed. Vijnaptimatratasiddhi. Deux traités de Vasubandhu. Vimšatikā 
(la vingtaine) accompagnče d’une explication en prose et Trimšikā (la trentaine) avec 
le commentaire de Sthiramati. Bibliothéque de l' École des Hautes Etudes 245. Paris: 
Honoré Champion, 1925. 

Vimšikāvrtti. See Vimšikā. 

Vrtti (= Īsvarapratyabhijnāvrtti). See Torella 2002. 


Secondary Sources 

Bhattacharya, Ramkrishna. 2002. "Cārvāka Fragments: a New Collection” Journal of 
Indian Philosophy 30 (6): 597—640. 

Bronkhorst, Johannes. 2008. "Udbhata, grammarian and Carvaka.” In Linguistic Tradi- 
tions of Kashmir. Essays in Memory of Paņdit Dinanath Yaksha, edited by Mrinal Kaul 
and Ashok Aklujkar, 281-299. Delhi: Dk Printworld. 

Bronner, Yigal. 2016. "Understanding Udbhata: the Invention of Kashmiri Poetics in the 
Jayapida Moment.” In Around Abhinavagupta. Aspects of the Intellectual History of 
Kashmir from the Ninth to the Eleventh Century, edited by Eli Franco and Isabelle 
Ratié, 81-148. Berlin: Lit Verlag. 

Dezsó, Csaba. 2005. Much Ado about Religion by Bhatta Jayanta. New York: New York 
University Press/JJC Foundation. 

Dogra, R.C. 1978. A Handlist of the Manuscripts in South Asian Languages in the [soas] 
Library. London: School of Oriental and African Studies. 

Formigatti, Camillo. 201. Sanskrit Annotated Manuscripts from Northern India and 
Nepal. PhD Dissertation. Hamburg: University of Hamburg. 

Franco, Eli. 201. "Lokāyata” In Brill's Encyclopedia of Hinduism, vol. 111, edited by Knut 
A. Jacobsen, Helene Basu, Angelika Malinar and Vasudha Narayanan, 629—642. Lei- 
den: Brill. 

Iyer, K.A. Subramania. 1969. Bhartrhari. A Study of the Vākyapadīya in the Light of the 
Ancient Commentaries. Poona: Deccan College. 

Kano, Kazuo. 2008. "Two short glosses on Yogācāra texts by Vairocanaraksita: Vim- 
šikātīkāvivrti and *Dharmadharmatavibhagavivrti.” In Manuscripta Buddhica 1. San- 
skrit Texts from Giuseppe Tucci's Collection, Part 1, edited by Francesco Sferra, 343— 
380. Roma: Istituto Italiano per l'Africa e l'Oriente. 

Kapstein, Matthew T. 2001. Reason’s traces. Identity and Interpretation in Indian and 
Tibetan Buddhist Thought. Boston: Wisdom Publications. 


FRAGMENTS OF UTPALADEVA'S VIVRTI (I1) 141 


Kawajiri, Yohei. 2016. "New Fragments of the Isvarapratyabhijfia-Tika." In Utpaladeva, 
Philosopher of Recognition, edited by Raffaele Torella and Bettina Báumer, 77-101. 
Delhi: DK Printworld. 

Kawajiri, Yohei. 2016b. "New Fragments of the Īsvarapratyabhijīā-vivrti (3)" Nagoya 
Studies in Indian Culture and Buddhism (Sambhasa) 33: 17-46. 

Kellner, Birgit and John Taber. 2014. "Studies in Yogacara-Vijnanavada idealism 1: The 
interpretation of Vasubandhu's Vimšikā” Études Asiatiques/Asiatische Studien 68 (3): 
709-756. 

La Vallée Poussin, Louis de. 1923. L’ Abhidharmakoša de Vasubandhu, traduit et annoté, 
Premier et deuxiéme Chapitres. Paris: Paul Geuthner. 

McCrea, Lawrence and Parimal Patil. 2010. Buddhist Philosophy of Language in India— 
Jnanasrimitra on Exclusion. New York: Columbia University Press. 

McCrea, Lawrence. 2016. "Abhinavagupta as Intellectual Historian of Buddhism" In 
Around Abhinavagupta. Aspects of the Intellectual History of Kashmir from the gth to 
the nth Century, edited by Eli Franco and Isabelle Ratié, 263—286. Berlin: Lit Verlag. 

Namai, Mamoru. 1976. “Koki Bukkyoto ni yoru Barhaspatya Hihan (1)” Indological 
Review 2: 33—74. 

Nemec, John. 2011. The Ubiquitous Siva. Somānandas Sivadrsti and his Tantric Interlocu- 
tors. Oxford; New York: Oxford University Press. 

Preisendanz, Karin. 1989. “On atmendriyamanorthasannikarsa and the Nyaya-Vaisesika 
Theory of Vision” Berliner Indologische Studien 4—5: 141—213. 

Ratié, Isabelle. 2010. “The Dreamer and the Yogin—on the Relationship between Bud- 
dhist and Saiva Idealisms.” Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies 73 
(3): 437-478. 

Ratié, Isabelle. 2010b. “‘A Five-trunked, Four-tusked Elephant is Running in the Sky'— 
How Free is Imagination According to Utpaladeva and Abhinavagupta?” Asiatische 
Studien/Études Asiatiques 64 (2): 341-385. 

Ratié, Isabelle. 2011. Le Soi et V Autre. Identité, différence et altérité dans la philosophie de 
la Pratyabhijria. Leiden; Boston: Brill. 

Ratié, Isabelle. 2onb. “Can One Prove that Something Exists Beyond Consciousness? A 
Šaiva Criticism of the Sautrāntika Inference of External Objects." Journal of Indian 
Philosophy 39 (4-5): 479-501. 

Ratié, Isabelle. 2014. "On the Distinction between Buddhist Epistemic and Metaphysi- 
cal Idealisms: a Šaiva Perspective." Journal of Buddhist Philosophy 42: 353—375. 

Ratié, Isabelle. 2016. "Some Hitherto Unknown Fragments of Utpaladeva's Vivrti (1): 
on the Buddhist Controversy over the Existence of Other Conscious Streams.” In 
Utpaladeva, Philosopher of Recognition, edited by Raffaele Torella and Bettina 
Baumer, 224-256. Delhi: DK Printworld. 

Ratié, Isabelle. 2016b. “Some Hitherto Unknown Fragments of Utpaladeva's Vivrti (111): 
on Memory and Error.” In Around Abhinavagupta. Aspects of the Intellectual History 


142 RATIĒ 


of Kashmir from the gth to the nth Century, edited by Eli Franco and Isabelle Ratié, 
375—400. Berlin: Lit Verlag. 

Ratié, Isabelle. 2017. "In Search of Utpaladeva's Lost Vivrti on the Pratyabhijiia Treatise: 
a Report on the Latest Discoveries (with the Vivrti on the end of Chapter 1.8)” Jour- 
nal of Indian Philosophy 45: 163—189. 

Ratié, Isabelle. 2018. “On the Saddhātusamīksā, a Lost Work Attributed to Bhartrhari: 
an Examination of Testimonies and a List of Fragments.” Journal of the American 
Oriental Society 138 (4): 709—742. 

Ratié, Isabelle. 2018b. “For an Indian Philology of Margins: The Case of Kashmirian 
Sanskrit Manuscripts.” In L’espace du Sens: Approches de la philologie indienne. The 
Space of Meaning: Approaches to Indian Philology, edited by Silvia d Intino and Shel- 
don Pollock, with the collaboration of Michaél Meyer, 305-354. Paris: Collége de 
France/Diffusion De Boccard. 

Ratié, Isabelle. Forthcoming. Utpaladeva on the Power of Action: a First Edition, Anno- 
tated Translation and Study of Iévarapratyabhijfiavivrti, Chapter 2.1. 

Solomon, Esther A. 1977—1978. "Bhatta Udbhata.” Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental 
Research Institute 58—59: 985—992. 

Torella, Raffaele. 1988. “A Fragment of Utpaladeva's Īsvarapratyabhijūā-vivrti” East and 
West 38: 137174. 

Torella, Raffaele. 1992. "The Pratyabhijitā and the Logical-Epistemological School of 
Buddhism" In Ritual and Speculation in Early Tantrism, Studies in Honor of André 
Padoux, edited by Teun Goudriaan, 327—345. Albany: State University of New York 
Press. 

Torella, Raffaele. 2002. Isvarapratyabhijfakarika of Utpaladeva with the Author's Vrtti, 
Critical Edition and Annotated Translation. Corrected edition, Delhi: Motilal Banar- 
sidass [Roma: 1994]. 

Torella, Raffaele. 2007a. "Studies on Utpaladeva's Īsvarapratyabhijūā-vivrti. Part 1: anu- 
palabdhi and apoha in a Saiva Garb.” In Expanding and Merging Horizons. Con- 
tributions to South Asian and Cross-Cultural Studies in Commemoration of Wilhelm 
Halbfass, edited by Karin Preisendanz, 473-490. Wien: Verlag der Osterreichischen 
Akademie der Wissenschaften. 

Torella, Raffaele. 2007b. "Studies on Utpaladeva's Isvarapratyabhijfia-vivrti. Part 11: 
Whatis memory?" In Indica et Tibetica. Festschrift für Michael Hahn zum 65. Geburts- 
tag von Freunden und Schülern überreicht, edited by Konrad Klaus and Jens-Uwe 
Hartmann, 539—563. Wien: Arbeitskreis für tibetische und buddhistische Studien 
Universitāt Wien. 

Torella, Raffaele. 2007c. "Studies on Utpaladeva's [svarapratyabhijfia-vivrti. Part 111. Can 
a Cognition Become the Object of Another Cognition?" In Mélanges tantriques à la 
mémoire d' Héléne Brunner, edited by Dominic Goodall and André Padoux, 475—484. 
Pondicherry: Institut Francais de Pondichéry/École Frangaise d' Extréme-Orient. 


FRAGMENTS OF UTPALADEVA'S VIVRTI (II) 143 


Torella, Raffaele. 2007d. "Studies on Utpaladeva's Īsvarapratyabhijīā-vivrti. Part 1v. 
Light of the Subject, Light of the Object" In Pramanakirtih. Papers dedicated to Ernst 
Steinkellner on the Occasion of his 7oth Birthday, edited by Birgit Kellner, Helmut 
Krasser and Helmut Tauscher, 925-940. Wien: Arbeitskreis für tibetische und bud- 
dhistische Studien Universitát Wien. 

Torella, Raffaele. 2014. "Notes on the Sivadrsti by Somànanda and its Commentary." 

Journal of Indian Philosophy 42: 551-601. 


CHAPTER 6 


Alchemical Metaphors for Spiritual Transformation 
in Abhinavagupta's Īsvarapratyabhijūāvimaršinī 
and Īsvarapratyabhijūāvivrtivimaršinī 


Christopher D. Wallis 


1 Introduction 


It is a great privilege to be able to present a paper in honour of Alexis G.J.S. San- 
derson. I was fortunate enough to be his pupil for two years at Oxford, and to 
study with him subseguently in Leipzig and Kyoto. In my view, if one were to 
accord Professor Sanderson the praise that he in fact merits, it would sound 
(to those who do not know him) like embarrassingly unrestrained hyperbole. 
Suffice it to say here that his example formed my ideal of intellectual integrity, 
an ideal which entails relentless pursuit of the truth as part of a community of 
scholars engaged in the kind of longitudinal study that prioritizes the field as a 
whole over personal glory. Professor Sanderson taught me the value of admit- 
ting when I don't know, of sacrificing my own agenda in deference to the truth, 
and of striving to be as transparent a mediator as possible in the act of trans- 
mitting the words and ideas of the ancient Sanskrit thinkers to students of the 
present day. It is with enormous gratitude to his unstinting scholarly labours (I 
estimate he has logged well over a hundred thousand hours of research so far) 
that I offer this paper in his honour. 

The oeuvre of the Kashmirian Tantric master Abhinavagupta (fl. c. 975-1015) 
is one of the many areas of research Professor Sanderson has mastered, and it is 
this author which the present paper treats. Specifically, we here focus on a trope 
found in Abhinavagupta's two commentaries on the [svara-pratyabhijna-karika 
(ĪPK) of Utpaladeva, viz., that of an alchemical metaphor for spiritual transfor- 
mation. These passages provide no small number of difficulties, because the 
text as we have it is not secure, and because some knowledge of Indian alchemy 
(rasayana, dhatu-sastra) is needed in order to translate it correctly. While I 
do not claim to have solved these problems, this paper may certainly con- 
tribute to our understanding of how Abhinavagupta thought about the process 
of spiritual transformation conferred by the uniquely potent insight ( jriana) 
and yoga offered by initiatory Saivism. Specifically, we learn much about his 
usage of the key terms samāveša, turya, and turyātīta, and it is hoped that 


© CHRISTOPHER D. WALLIS, 2020 | DOI:10.1163/9789004432802_008 


This is an open access chapter distributed under the terms of the cc BY-NC 4.0 license. 


ALCHEMICAL METAPHORS FOR SPIRITUAL TRANSFORMATION 145 


this paper advances our understanding of these topics, which are significant 
within Saiva theology.* 


2 The Pratyabhijiia Doctrine of the Fivefold Self 


Some readers are no doubt aware that in Utpaladeva's IPK we find a teaching 
on the "layers" of the individuated self (see, e.g., 1111.8), parallel to the later 
Vedantic teaching of five košas based on Taittirtya Upanisad 2.3-5.! This teach- 
ing, formed as Sanderson says on "slight scriptural precedent," is adopted by 
subsequent gurus of Utpala's lineage; for example, it has a prominent place in 
Ksemaraja's Pratyabhijfiahrdaya.? In this model, the self is said to be fourfold: 
void (šūnya), life-force (prana), the subtle body consisting of the mind and its 
faculties (puryastaka, i.e. the antahkarana plus tanmatras), and the physical 
body (sarira). It is fivefold with the transindividual Power of Awareness (cit, 
samvit) that permeates the whole. In fact, it is not only cit that permeates the 
other levels: Ksemaraja tells us that "it is clear that the very essence of each of 
these levels is the fact of its pervasion by all the loci of perception prior to it,” 
where "loci of perception" (pramatr) refers to these levels of embodiment as 
those realities with which contracted souls identify, and "prior to" means *more 
fundamental than” 

Abhinavagupta adds to this teaching a homology implied but not spelled out 
in the īPK itself, one that assimilates these five levels to the five “phases of lucid- 
ity” as Vasudeva (2004) calls them: the states of waking, dreaming, deep sleep, 
the transcendental "fourth" state, and the state "beyond the fourth" ( jagrat, 
svapna, susupta, turya, and turyatita). We will come to understand the last two 
terms as we proceed. 

Our texts in this study are Abhinavagupta's two commentaries on the IPK, 
his -vimaršinī (hereafter Ipv) and his -vivrti-vimarsini (īPvv). The former is 
his commentary on the kārikās themselves, the latter is his commentary on 
Utpaladeva's lost Vivrti or longer auto-commentary. For both texts, we will 


An earlier version of this work is found in my unpublished doctoral dissertation (Wallis 2014). 

1 "The košas, mediated through the Paficikarana system ascribed to Sankara, had become part 
of the [Deccani] vernacular tradition by the end of the twelfth [century, and proceeded 
from there into the pan-Indian Sanskrit tradition]." Jason Schwartz, personal communica- 
tion, April 2018. 

2 See, e.g., Pratyabhijnahrdaya, chapter 7: Sünya-pràna-puryastaka-sarira-svabhavatvat catur- 
atma. 

3 Pratyabhijfiahrdaya, chapter 8: ... dehadisu bhümisu pūrva-pūrva-pramātr-vyāpti-sāratā-pra- 

thāyām. 


146 WALLIS 


use the Kashmir Series of Texts and Studies (KsTs) edition. First, though, we 
will consider the two verses of the IPK that Abhinavagupta is commenting 
on, using Torella's critical edition (2002), and summarize Abhinava's initial 
remarks thereon. All translations are my own unless otherwise noted. 


kalodbalitam etac ca cit-tattvam kartrta-mayam | 
acid-rūpasya $unyader mitam gunataya sthitam || 


IPK III.2.11 


And this Awareness-principle, consisting of [unlimited] Agency, [be- 
comes] limited— [though] it is strengthened by partial agency (kala)— 
abiding as a [mere] attribute in a person whose [habitual] nature is 
unconscious, [identifying as he does with] the void, [prana, mind,| and 


[body]. 


mukhyatvam kartrtayas tu bodhasya ca cid-atmanah | 
šūnyādau tad-gune jfianam tat-samavesa-laksanam || 


III.2.12 


By contrast, the characteristic of "immersion into That" is realization of 
the primacy of the Self-that-is-awareness as the [only] true Knower and 
Agent, and [a concomitant] insight regarding [the other layers of individ- 
uality,] the void, [prana, mind] and [body], as mere attributes of it.* 


Explaining the first of these verses in his IPv, Abhinava first describes how 
consciousness—which in its real nature is primordial, a priori, unlimited and 
free— comes to be in the degraded state we consider as normal. Through the 
power of his māyā expressed as the three malas, Siva contracts himself into a 
limited form (anu, the individual soul), then equips himself with the five kañ- 
cukas beginning with kalā (cf. IPK 1111.9), resulting in a being that identifies 
itself with what is actually objective, that is, the body, mind, prāņa, and void 


4 While these verses have been translated a number of times (cf. Torella 2002, 202-203), they 
are not easy to translate in such a way that the reader clearly understands what is being said. 
Here I capitalize words that are equivalent, on this view, to the Deity. An unobtrusive but 
important word here is tat-, which I have translated as That but could also have been ren- 
dered Him. Assuming that it is to be taken as compounded with what follows, then it must 
denote what one is immersing in. The use of a gender-neutral pronoun that could just as well 
denote neuter tattvam as masculine Him (= Siva) is exemplary of the decreased theism of the 
Pratyabhijfia phase of the tradition. 


ALCHEMICAL METAPHORS FOR SPIRITUAL TRANSFORMATION 147 


(cf. IPK r114.8).5 Identification with the void (šūnya) can be identification with 
the state of deep dreamless sleep (as Abhinava states it here) but also, and more 
importantly, the void is the considered the primary locus of the limited “I” (see 
ĪPK III.2.13), which, being in reality empty ($unya), vainly seeks to reify itself 
through identification with the body, mind, and prana. This identification per- 
sists in all three states of ordinary consciousness (waking, dreaming, and deep 
sleep).* 

Note that the real “I” is not here the core of an individual being as in Sankhya, 
but the one transindividual Self of all beings. The individual soul (anu) only 
exists as a particular phase of that transindividual Consciousness, specifically, 
an expression of the contracted state of bondage. Thus, one may argue, the non- 
dual Saiva’s “I” is closer to the view of the Vijiianavada Buddhists than it is to 
the ātman of Vedanta. (Even the dualistic Saivas, who did posit a separate and 
eternal soul, distanced their view of the ātman from those of the brahmanical 
schools (Watson 2006).) 


3 The Exegesis of the I$varapratyabhijfiavimarsint 


Now let us look more closely at our first text as Abhinavagupta charts the trajec- 
tory from bondage towards liberation, commenting on ĪPK III.2.12 (KSTS vol. 33, 
p. 230—231): 


yada tūkta-gurūpadešādi-dišā tenaivāham-bhāvena svātantryātmanā vyā- 
pakatva-nityatvādi-dharma-parāmaršam ātmani vidadhatā tatah šūnyā- 
deh prameyād unmajjya iva āsyate tadā turyavastha’ | 


But when, through realizing [that the divine] gualities such as all-per- 
vasiveness and eternality apply to oneself, by having the experience of 
the [real] “I” whose nature is [unqualified] freedom— [an experience] 


5 For example, Abhinava writes idantapanna-dehadi-sunyanta-prameya-bhaga-nimagnatvat 
prameyam, yo gauro, yah sukhī, yas trsito, yah sarva-rüpa-rahitah so ‘ham: "The levels from 
body to the Void are objects of awareness, [but] because of the submerging of a portion of 
that objectivity, [there arise the erroneous cognitions] Tam the one who is pale’ (body), ‘who 
is happy’ (mind), ‘who is thirsty’ (prana), ‘who was devoid of all appearances’ (void)" (KsTS 
vol. 33, p. 230). 

6 seyam jāgrat-svapna-susupta-rūpā samsārāvasthā (KSTS vol. 33, p. 230). The illusion of sep- 
arate individuality persists even in the deep sleep state because of the presence of the sam- 
skāras (cf. IPK III.2.13). 

7 turyāvasthā | conj. em. Torella (email communication, July 2014); turyātītāvasthā Ed. 


148 


10 


WALLIS 


pointed out by the guru’s instruction and other methods that I have 
explained—[and] having therefore emerged as it were from [identifica- 
tion with] the objective knowables of the Void etc., and [as a result] abid- 
ing [in one’s real nature], then that is the [transcendent] state [called] the 
Fourth. 


yadapi paramrsta-tathabhita-vaibhava-nityatva-aisvaryadi-dharma- 
sambhedena® eva aham-bhavena šūnyādi-deha-dhātv-antam siddharasa- 
yogena vidhyate, tadasyam turyatita?-dasayam tad api prameyatam ujjha- 
tiva | 


When further [the layers of the objective “self” | from the Void to the [very] 
tissues of the body are transmuted!? by means of the “alchemical elixir,’ 
i.e. by the [fundamental] “I’-sense which is certainly conjoined with the 
qualities of magnificent power (vaibhava), eternality, sovereignty, [and 


-vaibhava-nityatva-aisvaryadi-dharma-sambhedena | conj. em.; vaibhava-nityaisvaryadi- 
dharma-sambhedena Ks's ed.; vaibhavadi-nityaisvarya-sambhedena Iyer & Pandey ed. 
turyātīta- | conj. em. Torella (email communication, July 2014); turya- Ed. 

Ayurveda scholar Dominik Wujastyk (of the University of Alberta) recommended this 
translation of vidhyate as “transmuted” (over that of “penetrated”) based on his reading 
of the rasayana literature, especially the Rasa-ratna-samuccaya 8.94—95 and the Bodhini 
thereon (email communications, 7 and 9 July 2014). Ashok Aklujkar also contributed a 
citation from the same text (5.11: vedhajam suvarnam—parada-vedhena samjatam suvar- 
nam), which I believe verifies that vedha must mean transmutation (or similar), not 
piercing or penetration, though he would wish to retain the latter translation (email, 
7 July 2014). (See also n. 27 below.) The alchemical metaphor here (elaborated further 
in the IPVv, infra) is of course not original to Abhinavagupta; we find it earlier in the 
well-known eighth century Buddhist text, the Bodhicaryāvatāra, 110cd: rasajātam atīva 
vedhaniyam sudrdham grhnata bodhicitta-samjfíam, which I translate as “Firmly take 
hold of the alchemical elixir called Intent to Awaken (bodhicitta), which must be thor- 
oughly transmuted” Vesna Wallace (1997, 19) translates almost identically; in this verse, 
it appears, rasajāta is unmodified mercury that must be properly transmuted to be safe 
for consumption, implying that some refinement of the initial raw bodhicitta is neces- 
sary. (However, Matthew Kapstein [email communication, 9 July 2014] points out that 
both the Sanskrit commentator and the Tibetan translation do not take vedhaniyam as 
translated above, but rather in the active sense, “able to transform [this ašuci-pratimā to 
a jina-ratna-pratimā, 1.10ab |" —e.g., Prajfiakaramati glosses atyuccavedhakaritvad —ativa 
vedhaniyam.) Our passage does support this latter reading, for here we certainly have 
siddha-rasa denoting a mercury preparation that can transmute base metals into gold (or 
more accurately, extract gold from base metals). Thus, the pure dynamic power of aware- 
ness called citis here compared to a chemical catalyst: it needs no refinement or alteration, 
but can alter that which it contacts. 


ALCHEMICAL METAPHORS FOR SPIRITUAL TRANSFORMATION 149 


others] of such nature that are cognized [as aspects of that “I”], then 
in this state [called] Beyond the Fourth they abandon (as it were) their 
objectivity. 


Having introduced the three states of waking, dreaming, and deep sleep, Abhi- 
navagupta now discusses turya and turyatita, which complete the set of the 
“phases of lucidity.’ Now, in this passage, I take Abhinava to be reconciling two 
modes of realization: one gnostic, rapid, transcendent, and liberating, and the 
other yogic, gradual, immanent, and siddhi-conferring. Here, the Fourth state is 
the gnostic realization that one has wrongly taken objective realities to be the 
self; it is waking up out of the trance of believing “Iam the body” etc. Such a real- 
ization can be sudden because it requires no transformation, only a recognition 
of what is already the case, including a reflective awareness (parāmarša) of the 
qualities (dharmas) of one's real self. As Torella puts it, “the adept, after becom- 
ing aware of the supreme nature of the I, becomes as though withdrawn from 
the knowable which formed his fictitious identity" (2002, xxxiv). Turya is then 
an exclusive kind of realization. By contrast, the process of turyatita ("Beyond 
the Fourth," but not actually a fifth state)—here described in terms of pene- 
trating the layers of that constructed identity with this deeper awareness or 
transcendent I-sense—is inclusive and gradual, requiring yogic practice. In the 
turyātīta experience, the objective layers of the limited self are seen as expres- 
sions of the transindividual divine consciousness, and thus are recovered as 
part of a greater “I” than the one they were excluded from in the previous turya 
state. This process by which the cidātman penetrates the layers of body, etc., 
is likened to alchemical transformation, whereby the elixir called siddha-rasa 
transforms a base metal into gold (or extracts the gold from the base metal).!! 
The use of the word iva (last word of the passage just cited) denotes that the 
body etc. do not actually cease to be knowables when they come to be seen 
as nothing but crystallizations of the dynamic "liquid" essence of conscious- 
ness in the turyātīta state,!? just as the previous iva denoted that emerging from 


11 Cf. Kularnava-tantra 14.89: rasendrena yathā viddham ayah suvarnatam vrajet | diksa- 
viddhas tathā hy ātmā sivatvam labhate priye ||, "Just as iron penetrated by mercury 
becomes gold, even so a soul penetrated by initiation becomes divine.” Torella writes, 
"[here] the various components of the levels of the limited subject are gradually pene- 
trated by the elixir of the I, until they become, so to speak, transfigured, removed from 
their nature of [being merely] knowable realities" (2002, xxxiv). 

12  Ksemaràja's phrase, cidrasāsyānatā-prathanātmā samāvešah, in the context of a parallel 
discussion, in Pratyabhijnahrdaya, chapter 19. 


150 WALLIS 


identification with knowables does not mean completely leaving them behind 
(which would entail physical death). 

Now, the coherence of this passage only emerges after the emendation to the 
edition suggested by Torella and adopted here, that of exchanging the words 
turya and turyātīta. This may seem a dramatic emendation, but it would make 
little sense for Abhinava to list the three states of ordinary consciousness, then 
proceed to turyātīta when what is obviously called for is turya, “the Fourth.’ 
Further, it would make no sense to argue that turya is an extension of the tury- 
ātīta state without completely ignoring the meaning of those two words; but 
the other way around exactly matches the meaning of the words. 

But what would occasion such a confusion in the edition? It may well be 
that later scribes (for we do find the edition’s reading in the manuscripts), influ- 
enced by the more transcendentalist mainstream Indian philosophies, simply 
could not imagine that turya could denote the transcendent state while tury- 
atita, which is obviously intended as the higher attainment, embraced imma- 
nence. But this is precisely in line with Abhinavagupta’s Kaula view, for with 
the text emended as Torella suggests, we have here a model that is central to 
the Kaula Kālīkula, which Sanderson characterizes as “transcendence followed 
by an expansion that causes the state of enlightenment to pervade the tran- 
scended" (Sanderson 2007, 402-403). The Sivasütra (well known to Abhinava) 
inherits this model, teaching the “establishing of this realization first through 
withdrawal into the heart of consciousness and then through its expansion 
into the states that constitute the mundane awareness of the bound” (ibid.), 
which precisely characterizes our IPv passage. For example, in the Šivasūtra 
(1.7) we find the teaching that the Fourth state can spread to the ordinary 
states of jāgrat, svapna, and susupta, imbuing them with awakened conscious- 
ness, which the Šivasūtra calls turyabhoga but which is simply turyātīta under 
another name. Of course, an examination of all the extant IPV manuscripts, 
preferably after forming a critical stemma, would be necessary to make a final 
ruling on the reading of the passage. 

To return to our text, Abhinava concludes his Ipv discussion of IPK III.2.12 
by informing us that turya and turyātīta are forms of samāveša, which, when it 
becomes continuous and stable (āsyate), is itself liberation. 


seyam dvayy api jīvanmuktāvasthā samāveša ity uktā Sastre, samyag-āve- 
sanam eva hi tatra tatra pradhānam, tat-siddhaye tūpadešāntarāņi | 


13  Jagrat-svapna-susupta-bhede turyabhoga-sambhavah. 


ALCHEMICAL METAPHORS FOR SPIRITUAL TRANSFORMATION 151 


This twofold state of one who is liberated while living is called samāveša 
in the scriptures. For complete entering" is itself primary in each of these; 
other teachings are [only] for its attainment. 


This is a surprising statement, perhaps, for I know of no scriptural passage in 
which these two states are called samāveša. What Abhinava wants us to under- 
stand, I think, is that when the scriptures use the term samāveša, they are 
always referring to one of these two states. In turya, then, one fully and directly 
penetrates into one’s true nature, while in turyātīta, one causes that nature to 
fully and gradually penetrate the objective levels of one’s limited selfhood; for 
this reason they can both be appropriately referred to with the word samāveša 
(from avvis, to penetrate). Abhinava continues: 


dehapāte tu paramesvara evaikarasah, iti kah kutra katham samaviset 


But at the fall of the body, there is only one essence: the Supreme Lord. 
Thus, who could enter (/immerse), where and how? 


In other words, it is only meaningful to speak of samavesa in the context of 
embodiment, for only in that context are there apparently differentiated layers 
of selfhood such that there can be an "entry" of the locus of identity (aham- 
bhāva) from the body, etc., into cit, or an "entry" of cit into one of the layers 
of limited selfhood (dehadi)—the former entry being turya and the latter tury- 
ātīta. 


4 The Parallel Passage in the īPvv 


The corresponding IPvv passage (KSTS vol. 65, 327—331) is similar but sheds 
more light on some important points while simultaneously greatly complicat- 
ing the issue. Abhinava elaborates further on the alchemical metaphor briefly 
introduced in the IPv; here, though, if we do not emend the published text, he 
appears to have changed his view from that seen in the IPv. There the alchemi- 
cal metaphor was reserved for the turyatita state, while here we see two stages of 
the alchemical metaphor, corresponding to both turya and turyátita.!5 Further- 
more, it seems that he now posits two different modalities for attaining both 


14  Abhinava is telling us that the sam- in samāveša is in the sense of samyaric. 
15 Though Torella proposes an emendation which would bring the Ipvv in line with the Ipv 
(see below). 


152 WALLIS 


states, one gnostic and one yogic. (Here I differ from Torella’s 1994 hypothesis 
that a single turya state bifurcates into two kinds of turyātīta.) Abhinava writes: 


etad ajnana-rupa-mala-pratidvandvitaya samavesa-laksanam satya-sva- 
rūpe samyag āsamantāt pravesa-laksanam jnanam, yal-labhena jnani, 
yad-abhyāsena ca deha-pranadav ananta-samvid-dharmātmaka-vibhava- 
samāsādanāt yogī bhavati | 


[Utpala teaches that] the “distinguishing mark of samavesa" is "insight" 
since it is opposed to the Impurity that is ignorance, being characterized 
by a perfect (samyag), that is to say complete (à samantāt), entry into 
one's true nature,!® obtaining which one becomes a gnostic ( jrtānī), and 
practicing which, on the levels of body, prana, etc., one becomes a yogi, 
due to attaining the glory (vibhava) that is an intrinsic quality of infinite 
Consciousness. 


etad uktam bhavati—yada ahambhavah svātantrya-dišaiva vyāpitva-nit- 
yatvadi-paramarsa-balat šūnyādeh prameyikrtad unmajjya iva aste, tada 
turyata;" tadāpi ca šūnyādi-samskāro ‘pi asti,—iti vyatireka!?-turyātīta- 
samatā eva | 


This is said [already in the Ipv]: when the [true] I-sense, due to the 
power of the realization of its all-pervasiveness, eternality, etc., through 
the [scriptural] indication of its [innate] autonomy, emerges as it were 
from the objectified [levels of limited selfhood]—Void etc.—and abides 
[in its real nature], then that is the state [called] the Fourth. Nevertheless 
[in that state] the impressions of the Void, etc., still remain. Thus this has 
exactly the same [nature] as [that which is called] the “separated tury- 
atita.” 


16 We have here an implicit analysis of the word samāveša: samyag and/or āsamantāt + 
pravesa = samāveša. 

17 turyatā | conj. em. Torella (email communication, 16 July 2014); turyātītatā Ed. Without 
this emendation, the following comment turyātīta-samatā eva makes little sense. 

18 itivyatireka | conj. em. Torella; iti avyatireka Ed. Following this emendation (proposed in 
an email, 15 July 2014) we can take vyatireka in the sense of kevala or kaivalya, i.e., a spir- 
itual state which is separated from the samskaras but does not dissolve them. Even if we 
do not emend, we can still argue for the same meaning: avyatireka- could indicate that 
he is “unseparated” from his samskaras in the sense of still having them, though they are 
now powerless to obscure his real nature. However, the emendation makes for a clearer 
meaning. 


ALCHEMICAL METAPHORS FOR SPIRITUAL TRANSFORMATION 153 


Though I am not aware of another usage of the technical term vyatireka- 
turyatita, the meaning here is clear enough (after applying Torella’s suggested 
emendation): the gnostic who does no yoga enters into a transcendental turya 
state in which he is authentically immersed in his essence, but the impres- 
sions of limited selfhood from which he has successfully separated (vyatireka) 
himself from remain undissolved (thus his social self might exhibit little to no 
change). Thus, Abhinava argues, the attainment of turyātīta of the vyatireka 
variety is in fact no different from the turya state itself. This obviously sets 
up the possibility of a higher attainment, an avyatireka-turyatita in which one 
dissolves those impressions through practice, allowing the practitioner to be 
not-separated (avyatireka) from his body, mind, etc., yet still liberated; ie. an 
immanentist state of liberation. 

It is hard to see what Abhinavagupta has gained here, because in the sim- 
pler īPv model, turya was the transcendental state and turyātīta the immanent 
(and therefore higher) attainment. Perhaps he simply wants to indicate here 
that either state can be attained by either gnostic or yogic means. But there is 
more evidence to examine before drawing conclusions. 

Now we see the yogic version of the turya > turyātīta progression. In the fol- 
lowing paragraph (continuing directly from the previous IPvv citation), note 
that the first part closely parallels the 1Pv passage we have seen above (pp. 147- 
149), while the second part is new data. 


yada tu paramrsta-nityatva-vyapitvadi-dharmakaisvarya-ghanatmana 
ahambhava-siddharasena šūnyādi-deha-dhātv-antam!? vidhyate yena 
prameyatvāt tat cyavata iva, tadà turya-dašā; 


But when [all the layers of limited selfhood] from the Void to the tissues 
of the body are penetrated by the “alchemical elixir” that is the [true] 
I-sense—replete with the sovereignty in which the qualities of eternal- 
ity, all-pervasiveness, etc., are cognized [as aspects of that *T'| —through 
which [penetration] they abandon (as it were) their objectivity then that 
[too] is [called] the Fourth State. 


yadapi viddho 'sau pranadehadi-dhatuh samvid-rasena abhinivisto 'tyan- 


tam kanaka-dhātur iva jirnah kriyate yena sa druta-rasa iva ābhāti kevalam 
tat-samskarah, tadapi turyātīta-dašā sā bhavati | 


19 Oriental Research Library manuscript no. 2403 has sünyadi-deha-dhaturtvam here. 


154 WALLIS 


When, further these elements of prana, body, etc., [already] penetrated 
by the elixir of Awareness, are thoroughly permeated [by it], they are 
[then] “digested” like the element of gold [is by mercury], by which [pro- 
cess] their purifier, the “liquefied essence" [of Awareness] as it were, alone 
remains—then that too is the state Beyond the Fourth. 


Here we have a clear progression of turya > turyātīta without the necessity of 
emendation. Or do we? According to the earlier IPv passage, in the Fourth state, 
one simply transcends the objective layers of the self, rather than those lay- 
ers losing their objectivity. Thus, either Abhinavagupta has changed his view 
since writing the Ipv, or an emendation is indeed necessary here. If the lat- 
ter, we could either emend tat to sa (“one leaves behind their objectivity”) or 
we could emend turya-dašā (in the first paragraph above) to turyātīta-dašā. 
The latter solution, tentatively proposed by Torella in an email communica- 
tion (July 2014), seems to me to ignore the grammar that suggests two stages 
here (the first structured around the relative/correlative yada tu... tada, and the 
second around yadapi... tadāpi); or rather, more correctly, he sees the grammar 
(after his emendation) as referring not to two successive stages but to two kinds 
ofturyātīta, the api in tadapi informing us that “thus, this too is turyātīta” How- 
ever, then we have the problem that two apparently distinct stages of the same 
process are denoted by the very same word, turyatita. That they are distinct 
stages is evidenced by the fact that in the first phase (the paragraph ending 
with the compound turya-dašā), we see the verb Vvidh (penetrate?9), and in 
the second (turyātīta) phase we have Vvidh followed by abhinivvis, which here 
denotes a further development of the same process (as also indicated by the 
adverb atyantam, construing with abhinivista). Furthermore, Abhinava's reca- 
pitulation of this discussion (KsTS vol. 65, 348) would seem to argue against 
Torella's conjecture here. On the other hand, if we did adopt the emendation, 
it would allow us to preserve the notion seen in the IPv that turya is the gnos- 
tic attainment and turyatita the yogic one. It seems to me, however, that this 
creates more problems than it solves. 

In summary, by not adopting the emendation, we see here a yogic?! ver- 
sion of the Fourth state that can be developed into the state Beyond the 
Fourth, thus indicating a change in Abhinavagupta's thought since the īPv. 


20 Note that the verb is here being used in a more precise sense than in the IPv passage, in 
which (I argue) it means “transmute.” See also the extended discussion on vedha-dīksā in 
TÀ 29, translated in an appendix to my doctoral dissertation (Wallis 2014). 

21 Besides the alchemical metaphor, Abhinava signals to us that this is a yogic process with 
the word aisvarya, which, like v(a)ibhava, often relates to yogic power (siddhi). 


ALCHEMICAL METAPHORS FOR SPIRITUAL TRANSFORMATION 155 


To explain in more detail my understanding of this rather difficult passage, 
the process goes like this: having inundated/penetrated (viddha) the objective 
layers of selfhood (body etc.) with the “elixir” of one’s ultimate nature (i.e., 
samvid-rasa, autonomous dynamic consciousness), the “gold” hidden within 
them is extracted, i.e. their dependence on consciousness as their substrate is 
revealed.” When those layers have become completely permeated (abhinivisto 
'tyantam), through, one presumes, further spiritual practice,?? all trace of their 
objectivity (and the samskāras thereof) is “worn away” or "digested" ( jirna) 
by the elixir of consciousness—as mercury eats up gold flakes—which thus 
becomes a single unitary mass of awareness (prakasa-ghanam eva samvid- 
rüpam, cited infra). 

Our understanding of Abhinava's vision of this process depends in part on 
grasping his use of an alchemical metaphor rooted in the complex and often 
ambiguous rasayana (alchemy, proto-chemistry) theories of medieval India. 
In this matter I was fortunate to receive the helpful comments of Professors 
Wujastyk and Houben (of the University of Alberta and the Sorbonne, respec- 
tively), who clarified that jīrņa here stands in for jarana, one of the sixteen 
rasa-samskāras (alchemical processes). Jāraņa can mean digestion, assimila- 
tion, or swallowing (in much the same sense that we speak of an acid "eating 
away" at a metal). Here the alchemical elixir of the metaphor is of course pre- 
pared mercury (siddha-rasa), which can indeed "digest" gold (the modern term 
is amalgamate).2^ That Abhinavagupta was aware of the basics of alchemy is 
confirmed by his use of the compound druta-rasa, for according to Houben, 
"initially the mercury remains as fluid as before it started to 'eat' the gold etc. 
but at a certain point its viscosity increases significantly ... [it] remains fluid 
or druta [only] as long as it is not saturated”?* Clearly, Abhinava wishes to 
emphasize that here this saturation does not occur, that Consciousness must be 


22 Cf. Sarvajfianottara 1.5: tāmrasyaiva tu hematvam antarlīnam yathā sthitam | antarlinam 
tathā jfieyam šivatvam pudgalasya tu ("Just as gold is hidden within copper in the same 
way the Divinity which a man seeks to know is hidden within [him]”). 

23 Inthe present context, the nature of the yogic practice alluded to is very likely the proto- 
kundaliniyoga that Utpaladeva outlines at IPK III.2.19-20 and which was presumably 
elaborated in his Vivrti. For Abhinava, such practice must be animated by bhāvanā (con- 
templative insight) to be truly effective. 

24 This can be clearly seen in a video made by Dr. Andrea Sella (Department of Chemistry, 
University College London), which includes the following comment: “[In ancient times] 
mercury was absolutely essential ... in extracting gold and purifying it ... what gold can do 
is, it can actually dissolve in mercury" (https://www.youtube.com/watch?v-gKxCw889qck 
&feature-youtu.be). 

25 Email communication from Dr. Jan E.M. Houben, 7 July 2014. 


156 WALLIS 


understood purely as a catalyst (something that effects change but is not itself 
affected): it remains as it is, a dynamic “fluid” essence (druta-rasa = cid-rasa). 

First, then, in this alchemical vision, the mercury transmutes the base metal 
into gold,?% then “digests” or absorbs it without a (perceptible) trace (as can 
be seen in the chemistry video cited in note 24).?7 That is to say, if we follow 
the terms of the metaphor strictly, first the layers of body, etc., are experienced 
as expressions of the dynamic essence of awareness, then all the samskaras 
implanted in those layers through one’s earlier experience of them as other 
than awareness are dissolved or "digested." 

To summarize, if we are constituting and interpreting the text correctly, 
Abhinava has changed his view as follows: in the IPv, turya is an exclusive, 
gnostic, transcendental state and turyatita an inclusive, yogic, immanent one 
(the progression from one to the other exemplifying the typical Kaula model of 
transcendence followed by pervasion), with the alchemical metaphor denot- 
ing only the turyātīta stage; whereas in the IPvv, there is a rapid gnostic version 
of turya progressing to turyātīta (in which samskāras are not dissolved) and a 
gradualist yogic version of the same (in which they are dissolved in the turyatita 
phase), both stages (of the latter) being described in terms of the alchemical 
metaphor. In the second text, then, we have a fork in the road, giving us four 
stages, only two of which a given practitioner is likely to traverse. 

Before we move on to examine the last version of the alchemical metaphor, 
we have one more problem with the present passage: how to interpret the final 
compound of the phrase sa druta-rasa iva ābhāti kevalam tat-samskarah. Here 
I differ from Torella (2002, 209 n. 35), who seems to interpret it to mean that 
only the samskaras (impressions) of $unyadi-dehantam remain. However, that 
case was already specified for the first, gnostic turyātīta (tadāpi ca sunyadi- 
samskaro py asti, above), and if that were intended here we would have noth- 
ing to differentiate the two turyatitas described. Thus I take tat-samskarah in 
apposition to druta-rasah, in the meaning "the purification (or refinement) of 
that,” or, as translated above on page 10, as a bahuvrihi meaning “their purifier,’ 
the antecedent of the neuter pronoun tat being šūnyādi-dehāntam in either 


26 Even though professional alchemists must have known that mercury actually extracts gold 
from a base metal, rather than magically transmutes that metal into gold, vedha is cer- 
tainly used in the sense of transmute or transform— see the citations in note 10, in one of 
which vvidh is glossed with parivņam (Rasa-ratna-samuccaya-bodhini ad 8.95). See also 
the relevant statement in Rogu 1982, 366: "la transsubstantiation [alchimique] du corps 
(deha-vedha) étant calquée sur la transmutation des métaux vils (loha-vedha) ..." He cites 
Rasárnava 12465166 in support (ibid., note 21). 

27 The reader who has German and wishes to know more about this arcane world of Indian 
alchemy is referred to Hellwig 2009. 


ALCHEMICAL METAPHORS FOR SPIRITUAL TRANSFORMATION 157 


case. Torella argues (email communication, 10 July 2014) that the samskaras 
of šūnyādi-dehāntam cannot be entirely dissolved here because then there 
would be no possibility of samāveša, since, consciousness having become a 
single unitary mass, there would be nothing that could enter or be entered (cf. 
p.151 supra). However, while Abhinava unambiguously does say this with regard 
to the after-death state (dehapate tu eka-ghanā eva Sivateti tada samavesadi- 
vyavahāro na kascid, KSTS vol. 65, 328), I am not at all sure that he thought 
it impossible to go beyond samavesa, as generally understood, before death; 
after all, in a continuous nondual state of "complete immersion" (a new sense 
of samāveša starting with Utpala's usage; see Wallis 2014) there will no longer 
be any kind of "entry" or "penetration" (avvis) per se. 

We need not speculate overmuch on this question, however, for we can find 
evidence to suggest that Abhinava did regard such supervention of samavesa 
as possible. That evidence is found almost twenty pages further on in the īPvv 
(KSTS vol. 65, 348, commentary on ĪPK III.2.19), where he recaps his earlier dis- 
cussion (our most recent passage above) but also adds new information: 


aham ity eka-rasena anuvedhe tu, yada idantā acchadita bhavati, bhāvanā- 
satmyad īsvara-sadāšiva-samvidi iva turya-dasayam rasa-viddha-tamra- 
kanaka-nyayena, yadā và sarvathaiva pradhvamsitā vidravita và bhavati 
turyatita-dasayam šākta-samvidi iva tan-nija-rūpa-samyag-viddha-kana- 
ka-rüpatatyanta-jaranapadita-tat-samskara-vasa-pitata??-avasesa-vidru- 
ta-rasa-nyāyena; tadā purna-svatantryollasa eva deha eva sati api ... 


In the [process of] transmutation by the "one taste" that is [the funda- 

mental] “I,” when 

[a] objectivity is covered, i.e. in the Fourth state [that arises] due to 
becoming habituated to meditative contemplation [on reality], in 
which one possesses the consciousness of Īšvara or Sadāšiva as it 
were, according to the maxim of gold [being extracted] from cop- 
per due to being penetrated by mercury, 


28 pītatā | conj. em. Isabelle Ratié (email, July 2014); pitalata Ed., though pitata as “gold” 
is problematic. Another possibility is to not emend the text, and take it instead to be 
speaking of the digestion/dissolution of the brass or copper (pitala) that remains after 
gold has been extracted from it. This has not been adopted on the assumption that the 
present passage recaps the one on p. 153 supra. Also, I presume that Abhinavagupta, not 
being himself an alchemist, viewed the process of vedha as one of transmutation more 
than extraction—and if so, there would be no brass (or copper) left to digest. Further, the 
metaphor of transmutation suits his purposes better. 


158 


WALLIS 


or when 

[b] [objectivity] is completely destroyed or "liquefied"— i.e. in the state 
Beyond the Fourth, the level of Goddess-consciousness, as it were 
[Sakta-samvit, i.e. Sakti-tattva]—according to the maxim of liquid 
mercury thoroughly digesting the remaining “gold,” i.e. the power 
of the impression(s) of that [objectivity], which [now] have the 
appearance of gold [i.e., radiant and soft] due to having been thor- 
oughly penetrated by the innate form of that ["I"/rasa], 

then [in either case] 

[c] there is simply the delightful blossoming of full autonomy, even 
while the body exists.?? 


This passage features a piling on of parenthetical phrases that is rather easier 


to understand in the Sanskrit than in literal English translation;?? I have illus- 


trated the basic structure here as “when a) or b), then c)" Several things become 


29 


30 


Some parallel passages: cf. TĀ 14.12, TA 5.151 (svayambhāsātmanānena tadatmyam yāty 
ananyadhīh | sivena hematam yadvat tamram sūtena vedhitam ||), and Yogaraja’s com- 
mentary ad Paramārthasāra 96, a verse on anupāya and atitivra-Saktipata, the effect of 
which is compared by the commentator to alchemical transformation by means of siddha- 
rasa ( yathà tamra-dravyam siddharasa-pātāt suvarnibhavati). Note that later in the same 
passage the aspirant is referred to as anugraha-sakti-viddha-hrdayasya, “one whose heart 
has been penetrated/transmuted by the power of divine grace (i.e., Saktipata)." We find 
the same terminology used with reference to dīksā, e.g. in the Kularnava-tantra (14.89): 
rasendrena yathā viddha-mayah suvarnatam vrajet | dīksā-viddhas tathā hy ātmā sivatvam 
labhate priye ||, "Just as [a metal] penetrated by mercury becomes gold, even so a soul 
penetrated by initiation becomes divine” Cf. Goodall 2004, 402 note 904: 

The conception that gold can be created out of copper with an alchemical preparation 
is, as Prof. Isaacson has pointed out to me, commonly used in tantras as an image for the 
irreversible transformation that takes place in dīksā. See, e.g., Kirana 59.36c-38b ... And 
cf. Sarvajfianottara 1.6 (Devakottai ed.): rasa-viddham yathā tamram hematvam pratipady- 
ate | tathātmā jtāna-sambandhāt šivatvam pratipadyate ||. Cf. also Haravijaya 6.137 ... In 
his commentary thereon Alaka cites the following verse: rasa-ghrstam yathā tāmram na 
bhūyas tāmratām vrajet | evam yuktah sivatvena na bhūyah pasutam vrajet. 

I render the last verse cited as: "Just as copper rubbed with mercury [becomes gold 

and] does not again become copper, in the same way one united with Divinity does not 
again become a bound soul.” Goodall informs me (email communication, 13 July 2014) 
that the Sarvajfianottara verse cited in his footnote (viz., 1.6) is the most typical form of 
the maxim; the verse immediately preceding it is cited above in note 22. 
And I wonder if the largely redundant first part of the long compound (tan-nija-rūpa- 
samyag-viddha-kanaka-rūpatā), which fits awkwardly, might have been a marginal anno- 
tation in a manuscript that got incorporated into the main text. However, it may be more 
likely that Abhinava is here incorporating language that Utpala used in his lost Vivrti, as 
he tends to repeat Utpala’s compounds with added glosses. 


ALCHEMICAL METAPHORS FOR SPIRITUAL TRANSFORMATION 159 


clear from this paragraph, despite its density. First, if my translation is correct, 
it corroborates my reading of the previous alchemical passage. Second, it con- 
firms that the samskaras are indeed “thoroughly digested” in the state Beyond 
the Fourth (atyanta-jaranapadita-tat-samskara-), and that this can occur with 
the body still existing (deha eva sati api). However, having said this, we must 
note that “thoroughly digested” does not mean “entirely destroyed” if Abhi- 
navagupta is holding strictly to the terms of his metaphor; for when mercury 
absorbs gold leaf such that the gold is entirely dissolved and thus completely 
invisible, it is in fact still present in the mercury and can be retrieved by evap- 
orating the latter in a retort. We have no way of knowing if Abhinava knew 
this, but if so, Torella could well be correct in arguing that a subtle trace of the 
samskaras (which are themselves subtle traces) can remain in the turyatita- 
dasa. What certainly is entirely dispelled or dissolved (sarvathaiva pradhvam- 
sitā vidrāvitā va) in that state is objectivity, which was only “covered” (acchadita) 
by subjectivity in the turya state. 

We find similar language in chapter three of the Pratyabhijria-hrdaya, 
authored by Abhinavagupta’s disciple Ksemaraja, where the Sadāšiva-tattva is 
described in these terms: "[a level of consciousness] in which an implicit and 
indistinct objectivity is covered by [the predominant] subjectivity [literally, 
"-ness']" (sadasiva-tattve ahantacchaditasphutedanta-mayam).*! Thus, accord- 
ing to the Pratyabhijfia schema, abiding in turya means achieving the ivara- 
or sadāšiva-tattva and abiding in turyātīta means reaching the sakti-tattva. In 
either case the result is the “delightful blossoming of full autonomy" (purna- 
svatantryollasa), i.e. liberation. But if the yogic/alchemical turyātīta is equiv- 
alent to reaching šakti-tattva, are we supposed to understand that the gnostic 
turyātīta reaches siva-tattva, despite the fact that the latter turyātīta does not 
dissolve the samskāras and the former does? If so, does Abhinava mean to 
imply subtly that Sakti is in reality higher than Siva? This would contradict 
the mainstream doctrines of Saivism, but not of the Krama, the sect of Abhi- 
nava's first initiation. We know from the Mālinī-vijayottara-tantra, Abhinava's 
root-text, that the tattvas of Sadāšiva and Īšvara are indeed associated with 
the Fourth state and that "Siva and Šakti exist in the state Beyond the Fourth" 
(2.28c-29b??). So we would expect that the two turyātītas are associated with 
tattvas 1 and 2. But which is which? 


31 However, Ksemaraja loc. cit. posits i$vara-tattva as a level in which subjectivity and objec- 
tivity are equal and opposite, whereas in our present passage Sadāšiva and Īsvara are not 
differentiated, both being described as a level at which objectivity is “covered.” 

32 See Vasudeva 2004, 209-210. 


160 WALLIS 


The reader will recall that we looked ahead eighteen pages in our primary 
source to see how Abhinavagupta recapitulated his alchemical metaphor. Now 
we return to our main passage (KSTS vol. 65, 330) to address the guestions just 
raised. First we see that the distinction we have posited between the gnostic 
and yogic paths to liberation is not as clear-cut as it would seem: 


yada tu dehadeh kim tattvam iti cintopakramam prakāša-ghanam eva 
samvid-rupam iti, tadā bodha-svarupikrtam tad-rasanuviddham iva?? šūn- 
yadi-dehantam avabhati. iti abhyāsāt tasya samvid-dharmah sakti-vise- 
sah samyag avisanto vibhūtīr utthapayanti. anabhyāse pi tu tat-ksanave- 
ša eva ānandodbhava-kampa-nidrā-vyāpti-rūpa-ghūrny-āvirbhāvana-kra- 
mena jtvanmuktata-labhah | 


When one begins to contemplate “What is the reality of the body, etc.?” 
[and subsequently realizes] “it is simply a form of awareness, replete with 
the Light of Consciousness,” then those [levels] from the Void to the body 
manifest as [they really are,] of one essence with Awareness, as if trans- 
muted by its elixir. Thus, due to practicing [this insight], the qualities 
of His consciousness, which are aspects of Sakti, fully penetrate [those 
various levels], causing the [various] powers (vibhüti) to arise. But even 
without practice, in the [rare] case of an instantaneous immersion into 
That, one obtains the state of liberation-in-life through the process of 
the direct experience of [the Five Mystic States]: Bliss, Ascent, Trembling, 
Sleep, and "Whirling” which means Pervasion. 


This passage serves as an explanation of tat-sakti-samāveša in Utpala's Vrtti on 
111.242. The passage confirms for us that Abhinava sees samāvvis (= atyantam 
abhinivviš in the previous iteration of the alchemical metaphor) as denoting 
the further development of the process first denoted by Vvidh. More impor- 
tantly, here we find crucial evidence that the distinction between the yogic 
and gnostic in Abhinavagupta's thought is not as clear-cut as we have been 
led to expect: in this passage, a contemplation (cinta) on the nature of real- 
ity leads to a realization that entails a spiritual transformation metaphorically 
described as alchemical transmutation (= turya stage), which then may be sta- 
bilized and enhanced with yogic practice such that the qualities of this deeper 
awareness (e.g. svatantrya-sakti) come to fully penetrate or infuse (samavvis) 


33 iva ] conj. em.; eva Ed. 


ALCHEMICAL METAPHORS FOR SPIRITUAL TRANSFORMATION 161 


all the layers of limited selfhood (= turyatita stage). Gnostic realization is here 
inseparably wedded to the paricavasthah or Five Mystic States that we see 
repeatedly in the Kaula scriptures. This emphasis on direct experience (avir- 
bhavana) demonstrates that Abhinava's understanding of the path of the jriani 
is not one of intellectual or conceptual realization, but rather one of insights 
into the nature of reality so powerful that they spontaneously bring on psy- 
chophysical experiences. 

Curiously, he uses the phrase “instantaneous immersion" or ksaņāveša in 
describing gnostic realization but then immediately follows it with the term 
krama, denoting a sequential process of passing through the Five States. I 
would hypothesize that Abhinava is saying that each of the Five States is (or 
rather can be) an example of ksanavesa; even though there is a process, it may 
unfold spontaneously and in sudden leaps, in connection with the jrtānī's deep 
contemplation of the nature of reality. 

At any rate, now our reading of two distinct tracks (or two distinct turyātī- 
tas), one gnostic and one yogic, is problematized. Yet we cannot abandon it, for 
on the very next page of our text (KSTS vol. 65, 331) we find the following: 


turya iti etad-dasa-samapatti-paryanta-rüpa api turyātītatā tatraiva uktā, 
vyatirekena tu $Sunyader avasthāpane bodhasya turyātītatā tatraiva ukta— 
šuddhātmatā niskalatā $uddha-caitanyam iti sāmānya-daršanesu sarvot- 
tirnaika-tadrupa-vedakesu daršiteti sūcayati | 


The state of turyātīta taught [above] with reference to that [blossoming of 
insight?*] is simply the [further] extension of the realization of the state 
called turya. But that state of turyatita was taught there as a state of aware- 
ness in which Void etc. remain [as objective knowables], but is separated 
(vyatireka) [from them].?5 This is the state referred to as “the pure Self” 
"the Formless” and "pure Consciousness" in the Saiddhāntika scriptures. 
It is taught with reference to those who know the Deity?8 solely as [being] 
all-transcendent; so [Utpaladeva] indicates [in his Vivrti]. 


34 Inferring the antecedent of tatra from the previous line: jānollāsa iti ajfíana-vigamad 
advaya-bodha-prasaraņād ullasa[h], “‘the blossoming of insight is a blossoming that 
results from the departure of ignorance and the [concomitant] spread of nondual aware- 
ness." 

35 Exactly how to construe the grammar of this sentence is not clear to me, nor am I con- 
vinced that the text is secure. 

36 For Abhinava’s use of tadrüpa to mean the Deity, see, e.g., TĀ 1173c-174b. 


162 WALLIS 


Again we are presented with the notion of a vyatireka-turyatita, though here 
its transcendental as opposed to its gnostic character is stressed. Since this state 
is associated with the transcendent deity (sarvottirnaika-tadrupa, a kenning for 
Anāšrita-šiva, usually considered tattva 1), we are inclined to conclude that, 
as suggested previously, Abhinava wishes us to understand that the turyātīta 
which accesses the sakti-tattva is in fact the superior one. Perhaps this is not 
stated explicitly because it is a subversive view relative to the mainstream of 
the tradition. 

Here Abhinava criticizes the exclusively transcendentalist view of the Said- 
dhantikas, since as a nondualist Sākta he wishes to privilege the Kaula “imma- 
nentist” view. Likewise, his disciple Ksemaraja argues that the defining feature 
of their lineage (trikādi-daršana, meaning the view of the Trika-Krama synthe- 
sis uniquely expounded by Abhinavagupta) is the view that the Divine Self is 
simultaneously transcendent of all and immanent in all.3” Now, since the tran- 
scendental turyātīta is identified with the teachings of the samanya-sastra (i.e., 
right-current Saiva Siddhanta), we would expect the yogic-cum-alchemical 
turyātīta to be identified with the visesa-sastra (i.e., left-current Sākta streams), 
and just such identification is found by Torella (2002, xxxiv note 52) on the 
same page of the IPvv as the passage just quoted, but to me the text is not 
so clear. Apparently glossing visesa-darsanesu in Utpala's lost Vivrti, Abhinava 
says (KSTS vol. 65, 331): "The specialized views are those which predominantly 
teach the nonduality of Power [and the Power-holder, i.e. Consciousness]; they 
are superior (visesa) because they teach the Power-characteristics of the Self, 
[and thereby] lead one to the direct experience [of that]" (visesa-darsanesu 
iti $Saktadvaita-pradhanesu, visesah šakti-laksaņa atmano darsyate saksatkaram 
niyate yesu). There is no explicit correlation with the second, yogic turyātīta, 
but perhaps we can assume it because the power element of the self (vai- 
bhavādi) is repeatedly mentioned in the passages we have examined in con- 
nection with that turyatita. 


37 From chapter 8 of his Pratyabhijriahrdaya: "The Tāntrikas (= Saiddhantikas and other rit- 
ualists) hold that the reality of the Self is all-transcending. Those attached to traditions 
such as the Kula say it is all-embodying. Those who hold [our] viewpoint of the Trika and 
[the Krama] hold that it is [simultaneously] all-transcending and all-embodying" (visvot- 
tirnam ātma-tattvam iti tantrikah, visva-mayam iti kulady-amnaya-nivistah, visvottirnam 
visvamayam ca iti trikadi-darsana-vidah). 


ALCHEMICAL METAPHORS FOR SPIRITUAL TRANSFORMATION 163 
5 Summary of the Data 


Now to summarize what we have learned about these two states of immer- 
sion.?? The primary distinction Abhinava wishes to make is that the first turya 
> turyātīta constitutes an "active" entry/immersion into one's essence-nature 
(one's satya-svarūpa or ahambhava, which is cidananda and prakāša-ghana), 
and the second turya > turyātīta denotes a “passive” process by which one is 
entered; i.e., that in which the various layers of selfhood are permeated by that 
ultimate I-sense (note that it is passive only in the grammatical sense, for the 
yogic method involves considerably more work). This distinction is summed up 
as avesyavesaka-bhavah (p. 331). Since the yogic process is a gradual one, differ- 
ences are noted between turya and turyātīta, whereas the gnostic turyātīta is 
said to be identical in nature (though presumably not in degree) to the turya 
that precedes it (turyatd ... turyatita-samata). 

Table 6.1 summarizes the data in tabular form (items in parentheses are only 
implicit in the primary source text). 


6 Problems of Interpretation 


To close, I will briefly discuss some interesting ambiguities and difficulties of 
these sections of the IPv and Pvy, apart from those already discussed above 
and in the notes. The first problem is the one raised (but not discussed) by 
Torella (2002, xxxv note 52), who tells us that Abhinavagupta's inclinations 
lie towards the second turyātīta, the yogic-alchemical one. This seems evident 
from the passages we have translated here, but on the other hand it is surpris- 
ing, because in general Abhinava tends to privilege the gnostic over the yogic 
in his work. Perhaps the context of a clearly liberation-focused yoga outlined 
in ĪPK III.2.19—20 allowed him to endorse a term that otherwise so commonly 
denotes the pursuit of siddhi and bhoga in the Šaiva literature. 

Butwe have another problem with Torella's hypothesis, one briefly discussed 
already above: the implication in these passages is that the gnostic turyatita— 
(1) in Table 6.1—reaches the šiva-tattva, while (2) explicitly only reaches the 
šakti-tattva. My reasons for concluding that turyatita (1) reaches the siva-tattva 
are as follows: since the term turyatita refers to the highest liberation where 
only the absolute “I” remains, and in the tattva-system that attainment is explic- 
itly identified with the top two tattvas, turyātīta (1) must correspond to the šiva- 


38 sāiyam dvayī api dasa samaveso, KSTS vol. 65, 328. 


164 WALLIS 


TABLE 6.1 Two types of Turyātīta in the īPvv 


Turyātīta (1) Turyātīta (2) 
gnostic (realization) yogic (practice) 
sudden gradual 
āvešaka āvešya 
knowables transcended knowables transmuted 
(objectivity transcended) objectivity dissolved 
vyatireka (avyatireka) 
(šiva-tattva) šakti-tattva 

(isvara- or sadāšiva-tattva in turya*) 
gualities of the Self: qualities of the Self: 
vyāpaka, nitya vaibhava, aisvarya 
(emptiness) fullness 
sāmānya-daršanas (višesa-daršanas) 


a Note that the īPK itself (111.2.20) lists the levels of turya-attainment as those of the Vi- 
jianakalas (= level of Mahamaya, just outside the šuddhādhvan and therefore not yet lib- 
erated), Mantras (= suddhavidyā-tattva, lowest level of liberation), and Īsvara; but Abhinava 
takes mantreša in that verse to refer to the Mantra-lords of īsvara-tattva, then reads -īša a sec- 
ond time, taking it to refer Lord Sadasiva (Torella 2002, 208 note 33). Here he is making the 
correlation correspond to what is found in Trika scripture, for the Mālinī-vijayottara-tantra 
teaches that "the Mantras, Mantrešas and Mantramahešvaras occupy the Fourth state” and 
“Sakti and Siva exist in the state Beyond the Fourth" (2.28c-29b, trans. Vasudeva 2004, 209- 
210). 


tattva, which also matches its transcendent nature (the Siva of tattva 1 is often 
called Anāšrita-šiva??). And we have seen that turyātīta (2) aligns with the šakti- 
tattva. Now, it doesn't seem altogether likely that Abhinavagupta would favor 
an attainment that reached only to tattva 2. However, he may well have held the 
view explicitly articulated by his successor Ksemaraja, i.e. that there is no real- 
ity to hierarchy with regard to Siva/Sakti, they being two aspects of one reality, 
one or the other of them being more prominent in the liberated experience at 
any given moment (see Vasudeva 2004). In other words, Abhinava may have 
held the view that since Siva and Sakti are in fact inseparable except heuristi- 
cally, to attain one is to attain the other. Or perhaps, as already posited above, 
we are to understand that Abhinava is allusively suggesting that in this system, 


39 E.g. in Pratyabhijnia-hrdaya chapters 4 and 5. 


ALCHEMICAL METAPHORS FOR SPIRITUAL TRANSFORMATION 165 


Sakti is in fact tattva 1. Such a hidden doctrine would be in keeping with the 
rest of his esoteric theology, which constitutes a Trika doctrine with a Krama 
core. 

The other problem of interpretation that arises in connection with these 
passages is a philosophical one, not yet to my knowledge addressed in the 
secondary literature. This issue centers on the question of who is the agent 
of the various verbs used here, most especially Vvis. For example, when it is 
said that “there is an entry into one’s true nature” who or what is the agent 
of that entry, since the satya-svarūpa that is entered is the only real source 
of both awareness and agency? This problem is not glaringly obvious because 
of the nature of the Sanskrit language, in which passive voice is so common, 
and nouns or pronouns denoting the agent can be omitted entirely, the verb 
conjugation itself communicating a generic unspecified third-person agent. 
When a first-person active verb is used, for example when Ksemaraja glosses 
namas or naumi as samāvišāmi (in his commentaries on stotras^?), the prob- 
lem is made evident: what exactly is the “I” that enters? Obviously it cannot be 
mind, body, etc. (since they have no agency of their own), nor can it be cit, for 
it would make no sense to say that consciousness, which is undivided, enters 
into itself. 

Two possible solutions occur. First, that what enters from the mind, etc., into 
the Self is a kind of "locus of subjective identity" or ahambhava. But Abhinava 
seems to use this term in the passages we have considered to mean the true I- 
sense, the Self-that-is-awareness. The second and more likely solution is that 
this language of entry is purely metaphorical, derived from the phenomenol- 
ogy of the experience it denotes (i.e., what it feels like to have that experience), 
and that in actuality there is no entry at any time: the true “I” simply realizes 
itself or wakes up to itself, clearly apprehending itself. It may be the case that 
Abhinava addresses this problem of agency in relation to Vvis verbs somewhere 
in his vast body of work, and I simply have not yet come across it. 


7 Postscript: Samavesa and Turya in Tantrāloka 10 
Abhinavagupta also discusses turya and turyatita briefly in Tantraloka 10.264— 
284. Though this passage is not directly a commentary on the IPK (being instead 


a commentary on the phenomenological categories of Mālinī-vijayottara-tan- 
tra, chapter 2 and passim), it clearly has in mind Utpaladeva's phrase tat-sakti- 


40 See Stainton 2013 or Stainton 2019. 


166 WALLIS 


samāveša in the Vrtti on IPK III.2.12 and very likely also alludes to his lost 
Vivrti on the same.“ For Tantrāloka 10.265 informs us that turya is in fact šakti- 
samāveša!?? This seems to imply that turyātīta is stva-samavesa, which could 
match the Ipv account but not the IPvv; again, perhaps Abhinava changed his 
view between the two, the latter having been composed after the Tantraloka. 
Abhinava goes on (in TĀ 10) to subdivide this sakti-samavesa into four stages, 
corresponding to the four epistemological categories of knower, knowing, 
known and the autonomous pure awareness (para-pramātr) which is the 
source and ground of the previous three (Vasudeva 2004, 230).^? The four 
stages are as follows. When immersion into this para samvit is only proximate 
(tat-samāveša-naikatyāt), object-consciousness is dominant (TĀ 10.270d-271a). 
When there is contact^^ with this immersion, the process or faculties of know- 
ing are dominant (tat-samavesoparagan mānatvam, 270cd). In full identifica- 
tion with this immersion, the state of the knower becomes clear (tat-samavesa- 
tadatmye matrtvam bhavati sphutam, 270ab). Beyond this, in the state of the 
so-called pure awareness in which all three previous categories have perfectly 
fused, in which there is perception but no sense of a separate perceiver or per- 
ceived, the Light of Consciousness is self-manifest and we cannot speak of an 
immersion, except metaphorically (10.269). This helps us understand that the 
movement into the transcendent Fourth state can indeed happen in stages, 
the first three of which (prameya, pramāņa, pramātr) are an expression of 
divine grace (trayam tat tad-anugrahat, 270b). We can infer that speaking of 
grace is meaningless in the fourth stage, where there is no duality (though the 
IPV and ĪPVV accounts tell us that there are still samskāras of duality at this 
stage). 


41 This supposition receives support from the fact that Abhinava explicitly comments on 
ĪPK III.2.15—17 further on in the same chapter (viz., TA 10). 

42  pürnatagamanaunmukhyam audāsīnyāt paricyutih | tat turyam ucyate šakti-samāvešo hy 
asau matah ||, paraphrased by Vasudeva (2004, 229) as "In the fourth state ... knowable 
entities appear as awareness on the verge of reaching plentitude because [the] indiffer- 
ence [that characterized the third state of deep sleep] is abating. Abhinavagupta further 
identifies this state as an immersion into Sakti” 

43 For the fourth category of pure awareness, see TĀ 10.269: pramātrtā svatantratva-rūpā 
seyam prakāšate | samvit turīya-rūpaivam prakāšātmā svayam ca sā ||, and Jayaratha ad 
loc.: para samvid evam amša-trayottīrņā ... svātantrya-mayī para-pramātrtā ... sā hi para- 
pramātr-rūpā suddhā samvit svayam prakāšate na tu pasyamityadi-vikalpollekha-bhumih. 
That there are four epistemological categories, not three, is due to the influence of the 
Krama, in which Kālī is identified with the fourth. 

44  Uparāga seems a strange word to use here; its commonest use is "eclipse" or "affliction"— 
perhaps we should emend to upayoga. 


ALCHEMICAL METAPHORS FOR SPIRITUAL TRANSFORMATION 167 


Abhinava then defines turyātīta at 10.278: “that [state] whose beautiful 
nature is full and undivided, overflowing with joy, is called Beyond the Fourth; 
that alone is the supreme state” ( yat tu purnanavacchinna-vapur ananda-nir- 
bharam turyatitam tu tat prahus tad eva paramam padam*). His discussion 
goes on, but it reaches beyond the purview of the present work. 


8 Conclusion 


The present paper does not, of course, entirely solve the complex textual and 
exegetical problems we discovered in the comparison of these passages of the 
IPV and the Ipvv, but perhaps it contributes towards an understanding of their 
significance for the study of Tantric Saiva theology. Provisionally, I propose that 
we see Abhinavagupta changing, developing, and nuancing his view in the time 
between the Ipv and the Ipvv (with Tantraloka falling between the two). If 
I am reading the texts correctly, the Ipv features a simpler model of a gnos- 
tic transcendentalist turya succeeded by a “immanentist” turyātīta (the latter 
being marked by the transcendent element's pervasion of all that was previ- 
ously transcended), while the īPvv proposes two distinct versions of both turya 
and turyatita, gnostic and yogic respectively (giving us four categories in total), 
where the yogic is to be preferred despite being more gradual because in it the 
samskaras of dualistic experience are finally dissolved. 


Abbreviations 


conj em. conjectural emendation 


em. emendation 

IPK Īsvarapratyabhijūākārikā of Utpaladeva 

IPV Īsvarapratyabhijūāvimaršinī of Abhinavagupta 
IPVV Īsvarapratyabhijūāvivrtivimaršinī of Abhinavagupta 
KSTS Kashmir Series of Texts and Studies 

TA Tantraloka of Abhinavagupta 

TAV Tantralokaviveka of Jayaratha 


45  Orwe could take pürnanavacchinna-vapur as a bahuvrīhi meaning “in which every beau- 
tiful embodiment is full and unlimited,” the implication being that every part is now 
experienced as containing the whole (akhaņda-maņdalākāram). 


168 WALLIS 
References 


Primary Sources** 

Isvarapratyabhijfiakarika. Raffaele Torella, ed. The Īsvarapratyabhijnākārikā of Utpala- 
deva with the Author's Vrtti: Critical Edition and Annotated Translation. Rome: ISMEO, 
1994. 

Isvarapratyabhijfiakarikavrtti. See Īsvarapratyabhijūākārikā. 

Īsvarapratyabhijūāvimaršinī. Madhusudan Kaul Shastri, ed. The Isvarapratyabhijfià of 
Utpaladeva with the Vimaršinī by Abhinavagupta. KSTS, nos. 22 and 33. Pune: Aryab- 
hushan Press, 1918-1921. 

Isvarapratyabhijfiavimarsini. K.A.S. Iyer and K.C. Pandey, eds. Īsvara-pratyabhijnā- 
vimaršinī of Abhinavagupta: Doctrine of Divine Recognition. Vol. 2. Reprint, Delhi: 
Motilal Banarsidass, 1986 [1950]. 

Īsvarapratyabhijūāvivrtivimaršinī. Madhusudan Kaul Shastri, ed. The Isvarapratyabhi- 
jā Vivrtivimaršinī by Abhinavagupta. 3 volumes. KSTS, nos. 60, 62 and 65. Pune: 
Aryabhushan Press, 1938, 1941, and 1943. 

Tantrāloka. Pandit Mukund Rām Shāstrī (vol. 1) and Pandit Madhusudan Kaul Shāstrī 
(vols. 2-12), eds. The Tantrāloka of Abhinava Gupta, With Commentary by Rajanaka 
Jayaratha. 12 vols. KSTS, nos. 23, 38, 30, 36, 35, 29, 41, 47, 59, 52, 57 and 58. Allahabad: 
The Indian Press Ltd. (vols. 1, 5—6); Bombay: Nirnaya Sagar Press (vols. 7, 10—12), 
Tatva-Vivechaka Press (vols. 3—4, 8-9), and Shri Venkateshvar Steam Press (vol. 2), 
1921-1938. 

Tantrālokaviveka. See Tantrāloka. 

Pratyabhijfiahrdaya. Pandit Mukund Ram Shastri, ed. KsTs, no. 3. Pune: Aryabhushan 
Press, 1911. 


Secondary Sources 

Hellwig, Oliver. 2009. Wörterbuch der mittelalterlichen indischen Alchemie. Supple- 
ments to eJIM, vol. 2 Eelde: Barkhuis & University of Groningen. 

Roşu, Arion. 1982. “Yoga et alchimie.” Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenlūndischen 
Gesellschaft (bd. 132): 363-379. 

Sanderson, Alexis. 2007. "The Saiva Exegesis of Kashmir" In Mélanges tantrigues à la 
mémoire d'Héléne Brunner / Tantric Studies in Memory of Héléne Brunner, edited 
by Dominic Goodall and André Padoux, 231-442. Collection Indologie, no. 106. 
Pondicherry: Institut Francais d' Indologie/Ecole française d' Extréme-Orient. 

Sella, Andrea. YouTube video, 6 April 2011. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v-gKxCw 
889qck&feature-youtu.be 


46 The text editions cited are available online at the Muktabodha Indological Research Insti- 
tute's Digital Library: http://www.muktabodha.org/digital library.htm 


ALCHEMICAL METAPHORS FOR SPIRITUAL TRANSFORMATION 169 


Stainton, Hamsa. 2013. “Poetry and Prayer: Stotras in the Religious and Literary His- 
tory of Kashmir.” Ph.D. dissertation, Columbia University. https://doi.org/10.7916/ 
D8VT209V. 

Stainton, Hamsa. 2019. Poetry as Prayer in the Sanskrit Hymns of Kashmir. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press. 

Torella, Raffaele. 2002 [1994]. The Isvarapratyabhijfakarika of Utpaladeva with the 
Author's Vrtti: critical edition and annotated translation. 2nd ed. Delhi: Motilal Banar- 
sidass. 

Vasudeva, Somadeva. 2004. The Yoga of the Mālinīvijayottaratantra. Critical Edition, 
Translation and Notes. Pondicherry: Institut Francais de Pondichéry/École francaise 
d'Extréme-Orient. 

Wallace, Vesna A. and B. Alan Wallace, trans. 1997. A Guide to the Bodhisattva Way of 
Life: Bodhicaryavatara. Ithaca, NY: Snow Lion Publications. 

Wallis, Christopher. 2014. "To Enter, to be Entered, to Merge: The Role of Religious 
Experience in the Traditions of Tantric Shaivism” Ph.D. dissertation, University of 
California at Berkeley. https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4po666qj 

Watson, Alex. 2006. The Self's Awareness of Itself: Bhatta Ramakantha's Arguments 
against the Buddhist Doctrine of No-Self. Wien: De Nobili. 


CHAPTER 7 


On Vagisvarakirti’s Influence in Kashmir and 
among the Khmer 


Péter-Dániel Szántó 


1 Introduction 


The aim of this article is to point out the far-reaching influence of an East 
Indian tantric Buddhist scholar, Vagisvarakirti ( floruit early uth c.). In the first 
part I will show that his views were considered important enough to be con- 
tested sometime before 1057 CE, probably still during his scholarly activity, in 
Kashmir. In the second part I wish to propose the hypothesis that although 
unnamed, he is a master alluded to with great reverence on the Sap Bak inscrip- 
tion from the Khmer Empire, dated 1067 CE.* 

“Our” Vāgīsvarakīrti should not be confused with his namesake, a Newar 
scholar from Pharping, whence his epithet Pham mthin ba (for what we can 
gather about this person, see Lo Bue 1997, 643—652). Nor should we confuse 
him with a rather nebulous person, whose name is re-Sanskritised as *Suvā- 
gīsvarakīrti, author of a number of small works extant in Tibetan translation. 
Lastly, there is no good reason to assume that he is the same as a commen- 
tator of Dandin’s Kāvyādarša; this person's name is often re-Sanskritised from 
the Tibetan as *Vagisvara, but it is more likely that his name was Vacaspati or 
Vagisa. 

The writings of Vāgīsvarakīrti are fairly well known to scholars of esoteric 
Buddhism. A significant portion of his oeuvre survives in the original Sanskrit. 


* [have already discussed these two subjects in two separate lectures. The first subject was 


tackled at the First Manuscripta Buddhica Workshop in Procida, Italy in May 2011, where I 
received some extremely valuable feedback, especially from Professor Harunaga Isaacson, 
with whom I also had the opportunity to briefly study the passage in question in Kathmandu 
some months earlier. The second problem I have merely alluded to in a lecture at Kyoto Uni- 
versity in February 2015; Professor Arlo Griffiths commented on an early draft of my notes 
and kindly encouraged me to publish my findings (e-mail, December 4, 2014). A later draft 
was read by Dr. Johannes Schneider, whose suggestions greatly improved some of my state- 
ments and saved me from a couple of blunders. To all involved, I offer my sincerest thanks. 
All remaining errors are mine. 


© PETER-DANIEL SZÁNTÓ, 2020 | DOI:10.1163/9789004432802_009 


This is an open access chapter distributed under the terms of the CC BY-NC 4.0 license. 


ON VAGISVARAKIRTI'S INFLUENCE 171 


While some of the attributions in the Tibetan Canon are disputed, the follow- 
ing major works may be assigned to him with confidence. 

The Mrtyuvaricanopadeša is a learned anthology of rites to cheat death 
once its signs have been perceived. This work, which survives in at least four 
manuscripts! has been admirably dealt with recently by Johannes Schneider 
(2010). His German translation supersedes Michael Walter's earlier English 
translation (2000). As Schneider conjectures (2010, 23), the Tibetan transla- 
tion must have been completed in 1042/3CE, since this is the only time the 
two scholars mentioned in the translators’ colophon, *Adhiga (better known as 
*Atīša or *Ati$a) Dīpamkarašrījāna and Rin chen bzan po, spent time together 
at Tho lin. This date is also Schneider's terminus ante quem for the text. 

The Samksiptabhisekavidhi is a succinct initiation manual for the Guhya- 
samāja system, which also contains a fascinating polemic passage (Onians 
2002, 279-289). At present we may access only one manuscript; this has been 
edited by Munenobu Sakurai, but is in dire need of being revisited. Another 
witness, now probably in Lhasa, is mentioned in the catalogue KCDs, p. 139. 

The Tattvaratnavaloka (henceforth TaRaA), a short treatise in twenty-one 
verses, and a largely prose auto-commentary thereof, the Tattvaratnavalokavi- 
varana (henceforth TaRaAVi), are usually mentioned in the same breath and 
are indeed transmitted together in the only known manuscript. These texts 
have been edited by (presumably) Banarsi Lal. The Tibetan translations were 
undertaken by 'Gos Lhas btsas (although only Toh. 1890 / Ota. 2754 is actually 
signed by him), whose activity falls in the middle of the uth century (Davidson 
2005, 139). 

The *Saptanga (henceforth SaA), another treatise, this time in mixed verse 
and prose, is the only major work of Vagisvarakirti which appears to be lost 
in the original. One of its most important verses survives in quotation (Isaac- 
son and Sferra 2014, 171, 271, passim). The Tibetan translation is the work of the 
same 'Gos Lhas btsas. 

I shall not discuss here Vagisvarakirti’s other, minor works, or the fact that 
some of his major works are present more than once in various recensions of 
the Tibetan Canon, some of them even annotated. 

We shall have the opportunity to study some of Vāgīšvarakīrti's ideas later 
on, although I cannot hope—nor do I propose—to be exhaustive here. The 
two most important features to keep in mind for the time being are these: that 
for the author, the most important cycle of tantric Buddhist teachings is the 


1 A fragment missed by Schneider can be found in NAK 1-1697/vi. bauddhatantra Go = NGMPP 
B 31/19. Nearly twenty-six verses survive on this single leaf (1.63c—1.89b), which may in fact be 
the earliest attestation of the original (Schneider's earliest manuscript is from 1290 CE). 


172 SZĀNTO 


Guhyasamāja, and that he was a proponent of the view that full initiation con- 
sists of four consecrations, culminating in the so-called caturthabhiseka. 

There is very little hard evidence for a prosopography of Vagisvarakirti. All 
modern authorities conjecture that he lived during the 10-11th centuries and 
allseem to accept the statements of Tibetan hagiographies, namely that he was 
active in Vikramašīla in the rather nebulous capacity of "door-keeper” The pri- 
mary source for this information is Taranatha's famous historiography, the Rgya 
gar chos ’byun, which dedicates a long passage to Vāgīsvarakīrti, presenting him 
as a scholar, an accomplished tantric practitioner, a miracle worker, and a pious 
founder (Chimpa and Chattopadhyaya 1970 [2004], 296—299). 


2 Vagisvarakirti in Kashmir 


The source I shall be using for starting the discussion here is found in an 
unpublished and little-studied commentary of the Martjusrīnāmasamgīti, the 
Gūdhapadā of one Advayavajra (incorrectly spelt as Advayavakra or perhaps 
Advayacakra in the colophon), which survives in a single manuscript. This is 
a voluminous text, occupying 180 densely written palm-leaf folios; according 
to the colophon, it measures 4,000 granthas. It has not been translated into 
Tibetan. This Advayavajra is very likely not the same as the famous Advayava- 
jra or Maitreyanatha (some good reasons against this identification are listed 
in Isaacson and Sferra 2014, 74—75). 

Since it was not translated into Tibetan and it survives in a single manuscript, 
the Gūdhapadā may nowadays be perceived as obscure. However, it was not an 
unknown work, at least not in the 12th century. Ravisrijfiana, one of the most 
famous exegetes of the Marijusrinamasamgiti, mentions it as one of the main 
sources he relied upon. Oddly, the particular verse where he does just this is 
not found in the published Amrtakanika, because the Sarnath editor did not 
have access to or ignored the tradition that transmits it. One such witness is 
Royal Asiatic Society London, Ms. Hodgson 35 (the so-called Vanaratna codex; 
see Isaacson 2008), folio 40r1-2.? There can be little doubt that this closing 
verse is authorial: the Tibetan translation, although in a garbled way, mirrors 


2 I give here a diplomatic transcript of the sārdūlavikrīdita stanza in question: srivajrankita- 
panigarbhabhagavallokesatikarthaya (°anvaya?) slaghya güdhapadasritadbhutabrhatkasmi- 
rapaīijīsakhā (?) | nanatantrarahasyavibhramavati nānopadešāšritā prītā tippaņikā ravisriya 
iyam prīņātu cetah satam || The first pada alludes to three exegetes of the Kālacakra tradi- 
tion, known as the bodhisattva commentators: Vajrapani, Vajragarbha, and Pundarika (here 
Bhagavallokeša for metrical reasons). 


ON VAGISVARAKIRTI'S INFLUENCE 173 


it (D 96a5-6, P 15a8-u5b1), and Vibhūticandra's sub-commentary the Amr- 
takanikoddyota, has some of its words in lemmata (Ed., p. 216, ll. 13-16).? 
Vibhūticandra's sub-commentary gives us the upper limit for Ravi$rijfiana. 
The former first came to Tibet in 1204 CE (Stearns 1996). We also know that the 
Amrtakaņikā is one of Ravisrijfiana’s earlier works, because he refers to it in his 
Guņabharaņī (Sferra 2000, 100). He cannot be much earlier than the late 12th 
century, since one of his masters, Dharmākarašānti, lived during the reign of 
Gopala (pace Sferra 2000, 47—48), in whose court he was a royal preceptor. This 
Gopala must be Gopala IV (r. ca. 1128—1143 CE), because the other Gopalas are 
too early for Ravigrijfiana to mention all three bodhisattva commentators of the 
Kālacakra system (see here, note 2). Therefore the Gūdhapadā must have been 
in existence around these dates. The debate we are about to examine seems to 
suggest a mid-11th-century environment, but we cannot be entirely certain. 
The Gudhapada has the following commentary to Mafijusrinamasamgiti 
8.41ab on folio 128r4—128v4. The text is first given in diplomatic transcript. The 
line is here marked in bold; the manuscript highlights it in red. An aksara added 
in the upper margin in the second hand is marked thus ( ). A deleted anusvara 
is marked with (| |). Ihave added the line numbers in square brackets. I split the 
passage into seven units—marked (a) to (g)—for the sake of easier reference. 


(a) tasya ekaksaņamahāprajūah sarvadharmāvabodhadhrg iti | araņa- 
srt namatah | tatra ekaš cāsau ksanas ca eka[5|ksanah | mahas casau pra- 
jaś ca mahaprajfiah sarvadharmavivekatmakas tatas cayam arthah | (b) 
ekaksanas caturānandaikamūrttitvāt | sahajasambodhiksanah | sa ca [6] 
turyatitalaksanam | (c) tatha coktam | srimankasmirtyai suksmavarttabha- 
ttapadaih | kasmīresu kathā nāsti caturthasyaiti niskrpah | asti desantare 
tavac caturtham samyaksevida [7] iti | (d) kutah yad vagisvarakarttino- 
ccyate | dambhaulibijaérutaddhautasuddhah pāthojabhūtāmkurabhūtah 
pusti || turtyam asya paripakam eti | sphutam caturtham binduso [128v] pi 
güdham iti | (e) atmtyabodhahamkaratvat nastipaksya bhilasatam iccha- 
nti | evamadikrta(|m|)sya $rimaratnavajramghrim aha | bhrantya yatra 
pravaramatayah kīrttisāntyādayo |2] pi | idam caturthalokakaraka pūrva- 
desapanditaih | vatyamatram na vijfiata tadgranthatodgatam | (f) asmadī- 
yagurupadamatam aha | turyātītam avacyam tu ksanam ekam art |3]pa- 


3 The Sarnath edition lets us down once again here. For the pratīkas of pāda b we have this 
printed: ... dapadam āsritā | $rinaropadapafijikasandhi(m adhitya) | The only manuscript of 
the Amrtakanikoddyota I can consult for the time being is Tokyo University Library no. 18 (old 
no. 348), last folio, l. 1 and this fairly clearly reads slaghya gūdhapadām āšritā | srinaropada- 
panijikasangt (?) | 


174 SZĀNTO 


kam | sahajasambodhina me jfiatajfieyau tu nirvitar iti | (g) evam eka- 
ksanaiva ksanena sampadyate mahāprajiiatayā yathoktasarvadharmāva- 
bodhanataya ekaksa[4|namahaprajnah sarvadharmavabodhas tad dha- 
rayatiti ekaksaņamahāprā( jia)h sarvadharmavabodhadhrk | 


The beginning (tasyā eka? up to ?vivekatmakas) and end (evam eka? up to 
°avabodhadhrk) of the text—i.e. (a) and (g)—are of no concern to us here. 
These sentences should nevertheless act as cautionary devices that the passage 
is quite corrupt. Most of the content here is in any case an almost word-for- 
word copy of Vilasavajra's Namamantrarthavalokint.^ 

Unit (b) explains the compound ekaksaņa (“a singular moment") in terms 
of post-Hevajra yoginitantra doctrine. According to this teaching, during ini- 
tiation one experiences in sexual union the four "blisses" (ananda), which are 
linked to four “moments” (Asana). This experience is then cultivated in medi- 
tation leading to enlightenment, a state sometimes referred to as "the innate" 
(sahaja). The passage should therefore be interpreted something like this: “[It is 
a] singular moment, because it embodies in a unitary manner the four blisses. 
[And this is nothing else but] the moment of innate complete awakening, 
which, in turn, is beyond the fourth [state of consciousness—the four being 
wake, sleep, deep sleep, and the fourth]” 

Unit (c) seems to take a turn. Apparently, we have a continuation of the pre- 
vious topic, but in fact here we turn to the problem of initiation. The passage 
is doubtless a quotation, introduced by tatha coktam. The author of the quoted 
passage is referred to—once we emend the text slightly, srimatkasmiriyaih for 
$rimankasmirtyai? and understand that the plural shows respect—as "the glo- 
rious Kashmirian, the venerable Sūksmāvartabhatta” The anustubh verse fol- 
lowing may be restored thus: 


kašmīresu kathā nāsti caturthasyeti 1niskrpah | 
asti desantare tāvac caturtham samyakļ |sevitam || 


4 For the sake of comparison, I give here Vilāsavajra's text from Ms. Cambridge University 
Library Add. 1708, folio 81v5—7: ekaksanamahaprajnah sarvadharmavabodhadhrg iti | ekaš 
cāsau ksaņaš ca ekaksanah | mahams cāsau pràjfia$ ca mahaprajrah (em., °prajria Ms. post 
corr., ^prájfías ca Ms. ante corr.) sarvadharmavivekatmakah (Ms. post corr., °atmakah Ms. ante 
corr.) | tata$ cayam arthah sampadyate | ekenaiva ksanena mahapràjfiataya yathoktasarva- 
dharmāvabodhanatayā | ekaksanamahaprajriasarvadharmavabodhas (em., "āvabodhaļs Ms.) 
tad dhārayatīti ekaksanamahaprajnasarvadharmavabodhadhrk || 

5 The first error ni for t in ligature with k is a simple orthographic error. The second is a banal 
feature of East Indian scribal habits: sibilants are freely interchangeable. The third is a cus- 
tomary loss of visarga before sibilants, which may reflect pronunciation. 


ON VAGISVARAKIRTI’S INFLUENCE 175 


The only real intervention here is sevitam for sevida|h], which is nonsense, 
whereas sevitam is both grammatical and yields good meaning. The emenda- 
tion kašmīresu for kasmiresu is rather banal, but I remain undecided whether 
this should be emended further to kāšmīresu (“among Kashmiris” rather than 
"in Kashmir"); the plural is otherwise often used with both toponyms and 
inhabitants of a region. As we shall see, there must be an iti hiding in caturtha- 
syaiti. Spelling ai for e is not uncommon in East Indian manuscripts, although 
of course it is incorrect. We can safely dismiss the idea that the reading is cor- 
rect and what we have here is the present third person singular of the root i, "to 
go”; in that case we would expect an accusative, probably of an abstract noun, 
but nothing of the sort can be conjectured. The corrupt niskrpah (or perhaps 
niskrpah) unfortunately masks a crucial word. We shall return to it forthwith. 

The name of the author and the first third of the verse can be traced in 
Tibetan. The work in question is the *Caturthasadbhavopadesa, attributed in 
the colophon (D 159b3-4) to “the great Kashmiri master ... *Ratnavajra” (kha 
che'i slob dpon chen po ... dpal rin chen rdo rje). We see the same name in unit 
(e). Sūksmāvarttabhatta and Ratnavajra are one and the same, as the last verse 
of the work reveals (D 159b3): 


| dpal kha che’ slob dpon rin chen rdo rje dan | 
| mtshan gan phra bar rtogs pai dpal es bya’ | 


It is immediately apparent that there is something wrong with the Tibetan 
translation: the number of syllables per quarter is out of balance—the ini- 
tial dpal could be superfluous—and the dari seems just a little bit off, unless 
we think it is justified inasmuch as it links a name and an alternative name. 
However, the underlying meaning is clear enough: the author identifies him- 
self as a Kashmiri master called Ratnavajra, also known as *Sūksmāvartasrī, as 
avartta—with a slight stretch—can be reconstructed from rtogs pa, whereas sri 
is perhaps a metrical equivalent of bhatta or an unusual rendering into Tibetan. 

Whatever doubts we may have about having correctly traced the author, they 
are dispelled once we look at the first line of the treatise (D 156b2-3): 


| kha che ba la bži pa'i gtam | | star yan yod par ma thos (em., thas) la | 
| da ltar yod pa mthon na yan | | bži pa rfied pa ma yin no | 


Translated somewhat loosely, this means: 


Previously, in Kashmir (or: among Kashmiris) not a [single] word was 
heard of [this] *Fourth" [Initiation]; although nowadays we see it prac- 


176 SZĀNTO 


ticed, [I will show that in fact] the "Fourth” cannot be found [to have 
authoritative sanction]. 


It is now clear that this is what we have echoed in our Sanskrit verse: kašmīresu 
kathā nāsti caturthasyeti. The Tibetan ba (or pa?) seems to suggest that we 
should understand “among Kashmiris.” 

But now we have a stylistic problem. Apparently, the introduction to the 
quotation applies only up to iti. The corrupt fniskrpah* must be some sort 
of dismissive statement, since the second line seems to contradict Ratnavajra: 
true, Kashmir has not heard of the Fourth Initiation (caturtham), but this does 
not mean anything, since it does exist (asti) and is correctly practiced (samyak 
sevitam) in another land or other lands (dešāntare). One tentative solution for 
niskrpah may thus be niskrtam ("disregarded" “dismissed”), but I must confess 
that I still regard this as nothing more than a diagnostic conjecture. 

It is conceivable that we are wrong to emend srimankasmirtyai to srimatka- 
šmīrīyaih and that we must boldly conjecture brhatkasmiriye. As we have seen 
in the verse given here in note 3, Raviśrījňāna knew of such a work, since he 
lists it as one of his sources of inspiration. Moreover, this is not the only time 
he refers to it: in the body of Amrtakanika we find at least one reference (Ed., 
p. 25,1. 18), which is mirrored in the Amrtakanikoddyota (Ed., p. 197, last line). 
If I interpret Vibhüticandra's commentary correctly, in the text given here in 
note 4, he attributes this work to the famous Nāropāda. If Vibhuticandra is cor- 
rect, we cannot take Ratnavajra/Sūksmāvarttabhatta to be the author of the 
Brhatkasmirapafijika, since there is nothing to suggest that he might be the 
same as Naropada. (Of course, Vibhüticandra could be wrong, but then the 
number of variables becomes too great to contemplate meaningfully.) If we fol- 
low this idea, the introduction would give the source for the entire verse—i.e. 
the Great Kashmiri Commentary—, in which Ratnavajra's idea is embedded 
as a prima facie view. However, the stylistic problem remains: it would be very 
unnatural to give a title and then a name, which is not that of the author but 
that of an interlocutor in it. Perhaps it is not impossible that Ratnavajra's other 
name was once a gloss meant to elucidate the ownership of the point to be 
refuted, and that this gloss made it into the main text at some point during 
transmission. 

Unit (d) issomewhat easier to tackle. The quotation reinforces the existence 
of the Fourth Initiation by quoting Vāgīsvarakīrti. The verse is very corrupt in 
the form given here, but fortunately we have access to the source, which is 
the TaRaA, verse 17. The TaRaAVi does not offer any explanation for the verse; 
indeed, it shrouds it in secrecy, stating that the meaning should be obtained 
from the oral teachings of a qualified guru (Ed., p. 100, l. 20: dambholityadi| 


ON VAGISVARAKIRTI’S INFLUENCE 177 


etat sadgurupadesato jrieyam|). Vagisvarakirti seems to have changed his mind 
about this when he wrote his other major work, the SaA. There, he offers a very 
long explanation (D 199b7—2o1a3, P 235b4—237a2), alluding to the fact that mis- 
understandings of his position prompted him to do so. This verse is also quoted 
by Ravisrijfiana in the Amrtakanika (Ed., p. 76, ll. 22—23). 

Thus, with the help of the TaRaA manuscript (Ms.), the edition (Ed.), the 
Tibetan translation (D and P agree in all the readings), the lemmata in the SaA 
(SaA), and Ravišrījtiāna's testimony as edited (AKa) with the readings of the 
unused Vanaratna codex (V, folio 29110), we may restore unit (d) thus: 


kutah | yad Vagisvarakirtinocyate— 


dambholibijasrutidhautasuddha- 
pathojabhutankurabhutapusti | 
turtyasasyam paripākam eti 

sphutam caturtham viduso ‘pi gudham || iti||® 


The verse does not immediately lend itself to understanding, but in the present 
context, as a cited authority, it must have been understood along these lines: 


Cleansed by the oozing of the seed (i.e. semen) from the thunderbolt (i.e. 
the officiant's penis) growing as a sprout born from a purified lotus (i.e. 
the consecrated vulva of the consort), the crop that is the fourth [state of 
consciousness] comes to full bloom; [although] the Fourth [Initiation] is 
manifest, it is hidden even from the wise. 


The coded language expresses what happens in the three higher initiations 
are of a sexual nature. The SaA makes it clear that the first stage, where the seed 
from the thunderbolt oozes and cleanses, alludes to the guhyabhiseka, where 
in practice the officiating master copulates with a consort and the ejaculates 
are placed in the mouth of the blindfolded initiand. Via this rite, the mind of 
the initiand, which is similar to a field, is purified. The second stage, where a 


6 Variants are provided only for the verse, naturally: dambholi? | Ms. Ed. AKa V, rdo rje'i D, rdo rje 
SA * ?sruti?] corr., °sruti® Ms. Ed. V, °sruta® AKa, 'bab pa D sa: °dhauta®| Ms. Ed. AKa, °dhota® 
V, dri med dga' (1?) D, dag pa SA: °Suddha°] Ms. Ed. V, °suddham AKa, dag pai D, dag pa S^ 
* Spáthoja?] Ed. V, *pathauja? Ms., ?páthojfía? AKa, chu skyes D sa * °bhiita®] Ms. Ed. AKa V, 
"byung D, 'byung ba SA: turīpašasyam] AKa V, tutiya$asyam Ms., trttyasasyam Ed., b£i pa'i ‘bru 
D, bžipa'i bras buSA-paripakam eti] Ed. AKa V, paripakam eta Ms., yons gsal smin gyur bai D, 
yoris gsal smin par gyur ba yi Sa‘ viduso] Ms. Ed. AKa V, mkhas pa rnams la D, no lemma in sA 


178 SZĀNTO 


sprout is said to be born and made to grow in a pure lotus, alludes to the prajria- 

jfianabhiseka, where it is the initiand who copulates with the/another consort. 
The sprout represents his fledgling wisdom. The logic of the allegory demands 
that it is in the caturthābhiseka where this sprout comes to full bloom, that is 
to say reaches the highest state, here called “the Fourth.” This is somewhat con- 
fusing, since just above the author of the Gūdhapadā seems to advocate a state 
“beyond the fourth” as the highest. Also note that sphutam could be construed 
in a different way, either as an adjective to paripakam or an adverb to eti. 

Unit (e) is certainly the most challenging part of the passage. The first sen- 
tence seems to condemn those who do not recognise (nastipaksya|h]) the exis- 
tence of the Fourth Initiation on account of their stupidity and selfishness. 
What exactly the aim of their desire (doctrinal or otherwise) is, I cannot tell. We 
do not fare any better with the next statement. The compound evamadikrtasya 
escapes me completely. The next statement again seems to introduce a quota- 
tion, but the accusative case is puzzling. It is perhaps better to emend to a nomi- 
native while also fixing the first honorific. Thus we get: srimadratnavajramghrir 
aha. The other honorific, amghri (lit. foot), is somewhat unusual. It doubtless 
stands for the more common °pada and it may do so for metrical reasons: if 
we observe the metrical pattern of Ratnavajramghrir aha, the words would fit 
the last seven syllables of a Mandakranta line. However, in this case we must 
give up on Srimad?®, since here we would require laghu-guru (short-long) and 
not guru-guru. This idea must be considered, for what follows is indeed a per- 
fect Mandakranta line (with some minor corrections applied): bhranta yatra 
pravaramatayah kīrtišāntyādayo ‘pi, i.e. “in which respect even those of the 
choicest intellect, such as Kirti and Santi, are deluded.” We may safely assume 
that yatra refers to the matter at hand, i.e. the veracity of the Fourth Initia- 
tion, and we can reasonably suppose that these are Ratnavajra's words, paying 
respect to his opponents, but claiming that they are wrong. Kirti no doubt refers 
to Vagisvarakirti, whereas Santi is most likely shorthand for another great intel- 
lect of early nth-century Eastern India, Ratnākarašānti. While Vagisvarakirti’s 
position on the Fourth Initiation is known, we know very little as to what Ratna- 
karašānti thought of the matter.” 

Although we seem to understand this particular passage, there is a slight 
problem: it is not from the *Caturthasadbhavopadesa and it is not from any 
other work attributed to Ratnavajra in the Tibetan Canon. The next sentence, 
a corrupt anustubh, on the other hand can be traced in the *Caturthasadbha- 


7 Themost likely place for addressing this would have been his Hevajra initiation manual (to 
which he refers as the Hevajrābhyudayamaņdalopāyikā; see Muktāvalī, Ed., p. 215, ll. 15-16), 
but this text is most unfortunately lost. 


ON VAGISVARAKIRTI'S INFLUENCE 179 


vopadesa (D 157a7—157b1). I repeat the lines here along with the Tibetan trans- 
lation, because they are quite crucial: 


idam caturthālokakārakā pürvadesapanditaih | 
vatyamatram na vijnata tadgranthatodgatam | 


| bži pa sgron (em., sgrol) ma mdzad pa yi | 
| Sar phyogs kyi ni mkhas pa yis | 

| gtam tsam yan ni mi $es so | 

| deyi chos la bdag gis rtogs | 


The pronoun idam is puzzling and I am tempted to disregard it completely, 
all the more so since the Tibetan does not mirror it. Alternatively, one could 
emend it to ittham and consider it as an introductory statement. Emending 
the Tibetan sgrol to sgron is warranted by the Sanskrit ?aloka?, and this makes 
good sense, because this is an attested title to which we will return shortly. If 
this is a title, it would make sense to emend ?Karaka to °karakaih following the 
Tibetan mdzad pa yi understood in the sense of “author” to qualify the com- 
pound in the next pada, or to ?karaka? joining the line into one compound. 
Unfortunately, this creates a serious metrical problem. I do not have a solution 
at present, except suggesting that we do indeed need a word meaning "author" 
for the broken part. 

Itis apparent that in the second verse quarter we are one syllable short. The 
most straightforward solution is probably to read ?destya? for ?desa?. Assuming 
that the cruces hide a word meaning “author,” as I suggest, we would thus get 
a line in harmony with the Tibetan expressing a logical subject: caturthaloka- 
tkaraka}f purvadesiyapanditaih, i.e. “the learned one from the Eastern lands, 
the author of the Caturthāloka” The plural is, again, for showing—here, 
mock— respect. This pundit is none other than Vagisvarakirti, since Caturthālo- 
ka is an alternative title for his TaRaA. In fact, this alternative title seems to be 
the one preferred by the author himself, because this is the way he refers to his 
previous work in the SaA. He does so thrice (D 190b3, 199a2, 199b7 & P 22527, 
234b4, 235b4-5), calling the treatise Bži pa snan ba, and citing lemmata from 
TaRaA, verses 8, 11, and 17 respectively. 


8 For the sake of clarity, here are the passages: 1) de dag la yan Bži pa snan ba ñid las | rid 
mtshuns [ha mos 'khyud dan £es bya ba la sogs (D, la sogs pa P) tshigs su bcad pa bdun |...] 
citing svabhangaslesi; 2) ji tar Bži pa snan ba las sku ninam mkha’ dan mtshuns žes bya bas 
[...] citing gaganasamašarīram; 3) da ni B£i pa snan ba las smos pa'i rdo rje žes bya bari tshigs 
su bcad pas [...] citing the beginning of the verse discussed above, dambholi?. 


180 SZĀNTO 


As for the next pāda, this is probably where we should find the logical pred- 
icate, but for this we must emend vijtātā to vijríatam. For the first word, the 
Tibetan seems to suggest vakya? (gtam). No doubt, vātya” (“fried barley,” “fig” 
(?)) seems to be the more difficult reading, but I am not familiar with this 
idiomatic expression, if indeed it is one. Let us accept the emendations and 
read vakyamatram na vijfiatam together with the first line, i.e. “not a single word 
was understood by the learned one from the Eastern lands, the author of the 
Caturthāloka [understand: Vāgīsvarakīrti]” 

What exactly Vāgīsvarakīrti did not understand or how exactly it became 
clear to the Kashmirian author that the Easterner is a fool is a mystery, since the 
last pada seems, at least to me, beyond redemption and the Tibetan is not very 
clear either. One may conjecture with great hesitation after having harmonised 
the two something like tadgranthato mayodgatam, in the sense “| this] I have 
understood from his work.” But this would create a metrical issue, since a ra- 
gana is not permitted for syllables 2-4. A more serious intervention would yield 
tadgranthat/tadgranthe tan mayodgatam. Another problem is that udgatam is 
not entirely elegant and does not make very good sense. However, we are prob- 
ably not too far from a genuine solution. What Ratnavajra seems to be saying 
then is that he had read Vagisvarakirti’s work, the Caturthāloka, and realised 
that the Eastern scholar is an ignoramus. 

The meaning of unit (f) is somewhat clearer, but it is impossible to say who 
the speaker is. Somebody—deutero-Advayavajra? Ratnavajra?— states the 
viewpoint of his guru: the introductory clause asmadiyagurupadamatam aha 
does not need any correction. The first line of the verse seems to be fine as 
is, although the meaning is somewhat obscure: turyātītam avācyam tu ksanam 
ekam arūpakam, i.e. "as for that ineffable [state of consciousness called] 
‘beyond the fourth; it is a singular, formless moment." The second line is prob- 
lematic. Pāda c is unmetrical: both the second and the third syllables are short, 
while the fifth, sixth, and seventh syllables form a ra-gaņa, thus a ra-vipulā, 
but there is no caesura after the fourth. Pāda d with the closing particle should 
etc. The first of the possible solutions, that is to say, leaving the compound 
as transmitted, contains an irregular dvandva, perhaps inspired by the well- 
known matapitr-. In spite of these serious irregularities, I have no reason to 
think that the first half of the line is corrupt, especially since we already had 
the collocation sahajasambodhiksanah in unit (b). The line therefore proba- 
bly meant, “due to complete awakening of the innate, for me [the duality] of 
knower [or: knowledge] and objects of knowledge has been extinguished.” Let 
us attribute the irregularities to the ecstatic power that must have overcome 
the nebulous guru at the moment of enlightenment. 


ON VAGISVARAKIRTI'S INFLUENCE 181 


We will now return to Ratnavajra and his scathing attack on Vagisvarakirti. 
Much light would be thrown on this matter if the Sanskrit original of the 
*Caturthasadbhavopadesa were to become available, or better said, accessible. 

The work is reported to exist in the now famous—and notoriously inac- 
cessible—Lhasa birch-bark manuscript. The existence of this unique codex, 
once penned in Kashmir and until very recently kept on display at the Tibet 
Museum, was first reported by Kazuhiro Kawasaki (2004). The Japanese scholar 
was allowed to consult the table of contents and the colophon on the last folio 
of this remarkable document. We know from his report that the manuscript is 
a composite codex containing twenty-seven works. The sixth item listed in the 
table of contents (Kawasaki 2004, 51/904) is none other than Caturthasadbha- 
vopadesah Sriratnavajrakrtah. 

A decade later, Kazuo Kano (2014) provided a new reading of the colophon 
and converted the date precisely. According to his calculation, the [Kali] year 29 
corresponds to 1057 CE, since the ruling king, Anantadeva, is also mentioned, 
and his reign falls between 1028 and 1063CE (Kano 2014, 62—63). This date is 
extremely important, because it gives us a rather early upper limit for the cre- 
ation of the Caturthasadbhavopadesa and thus Ratnavajra’s mature activity, 
besides confirming his reading of Vagisvarakirti’s work. 

Ratnavajra was an authority not to be taken lightly. His influence and fame 
can be gathered from other sources as well. For example, *Prajfiasrigupta, in 
his commentary on the Mahamudratilaka, now extant only in Tibetan (Toh. 
1201), eulogises him thus (D 154b3-4): "the great scholar, who has obtained ini- 
tiation and the oral teachings, the king over overlords of kings, the best of gurus, 
the teacher from Kashmir, the glorious Ratnavajra” *Prajfiasrigupta also claims 
that Ratnavajra stood at the end of an uninterrupted lineage of masters stem- 
ming from the famous Indrabhüti. He also quotes from at least one of his lost 
works, probably simply called *Utpannakrama (D 155b3—4). In another work, 
the *Ratnamanjart (Toh. 1217), a commentary on the *Tattvapradipa, he again 
eulogises Ratnavajra as his master (D 32542). 

We find several more references to Ratnavajra in the work of *Sambhogava- 
jra, probably *Prajnāšrīgupta's disciple or junior contemporary. In his *Raha- 
syanalinī (Toh. 1418), he claims the same spiritual descent, while adding the 
equally prestigious name of *Avadhūtīpāda along the way. He is only slightly 
less loquacious when it comes to praising the famous master (D 250b2-3): 
“he who has crossed to the other shore of all Vedas, who has obtained the 
accomplishment of the mantra, the Kashmiri master, the glorious Ratnavajra” 
*Sambhogavajra quotes the same passage (partially) from the lost *Utpanna- 
krama (D 240b1) and a verse from another work entitled *Adhyatmapadma 
(D 244b6). He too emphasises that Ratnavajra was a Kashmiri (D 246b5). 


182 SZĀNTO 


Ratnavajra's name was probably exploited to make other works more pres- 
tigious. One such pseudepigraphical case in my view is an initiation manual of 
the Sarvabuddhasamāyogadākinījālašamvara system, the *Sarvasattvasukho- 
daya (Toh. 1679). Contrary to the opinion voiced in the *Caturthasadbhavo- 
padeša, this text does teach the Fourth Initiation (D 294a1-4). A less likely 
scenario is that Ratnavajra eventually changed his mind and accepted what 
was, to him, initially a controversial abhiseka. 

Ratnavajra, too, seems to have been particularly proud of his Kashmiri her- 
itage. In his *Aksobhyavajrasadhana (Toh. 1884) he proudly claims to have sat 
at the feet of Northern gurus (D 162b5), perhaps in yet another attempt to disso- 
ciate himself from innovations in the East.? This work—which, in spite of the 
title, is a manual in the tradition of Jnanapada—is most likely genuinely his, 
since the qualifications of the practitioner mention having received all initia- 
tions but the Fourth (D 144b1-2). 

Returning to his Caturthasadbhāvopadeša, here too Ratnavajra voices what 
is perhaps a challenge to all non-Kashmiris. The third verse of the text says 
(D 156b3-4): 


| yul phyogs gžan na la la dag | gal te skal ldan gyur pa dnos | 
| yod pas gter ni mi nub ces | | bdag blo nes par dbugs dbyun no | 


The verse is not entirely clear, but it probably means something along the fol- 
lowing lines: 


Should there be any fortunate ones (i.e. worthy Buddhists) in other coun- 
tries, let them [come forward and] put my mind at ease so that [this] 
treasure would not fall into oblivion. 


The "treasure" (gter, which more correctly would be rin chen) he refers to is in 
my view the Fourth Initiation, cf. an oft-quoted and later scripturalised pada 
from the Prajriopayaviniscayasiddhi (3.38d): vācaiva dadyad abhisekaratnam. 
Perhaps less likely is the possibility that he uses *ratna as a shorthand for 
TaRaA, in which case we have here yet another reference to Vagisvarakirti’s 
work. In my reading, Ratnavajra was being ironic. He would not have found any 


9 Thisisstatedin the first quarter of the penultimate concluding verse: | de [tar byan phyogs lam 
pa'i mkhas pa’ abs bsten nas | [...] Byan phyogs lam pa mirrors Sanskrit *uttarapatha/uttarā- 
patha. 


ON VAGISVARAKIRTI’S INFLUENCE 183 


comfort in his being convinced of the genuineness of the Fourth Initiation. It 
follows that the “treasure” he seems to be worried about should be read kākvā, 
in a mocking tone. 

Although Ratnavajra seems to refer to the Caturthaloka/TaRaA exclusively, 
it is very likely that his reading of Vagisvarakirti was much broader. After all, 
verse 17 from that work does not reveal much about his position concerning 
the Fourth Initiation. I think that there is a possibility that this is what he refers 
to in the verse (D 157b1) immediately following the one we had attested in the 
Gudhapada: 


| on kyan gti mug bsal ba dan | | som ñi rab tu Zi ba dan | 
| phyin ci log ni bsal ba'i phyir | | mkhas pas bstan bcos rgyas par mdzad | 


Now, in order to dispel confusion, to put doubts at ease, and to clear up 
distortions, [this] learned man expanded his treatise. 


In what follows, Ratnavajra echoes in his purvapaksas many points brought up 
by the TaRaAVi. If this conjecture holds, it would seem that some time elapsed 
between Vāgīsvarakīrti's writing his verses and the auto-commentary. It is also 
not impossible that the SaA was written partly as an answer to Ratnavajra's crit- 
icism. However, for all this to be determined one would need access to the San- 
skrit original of the Caturthasadbhavopadesa. Until that time, we must leave 
the matter to rest. 

In spite of the numerous corruptions we have encountered in the Gudha- 
pada passage, let us recapitulate what may be gathered with certainty. At 
some point before 1057 CE, an influential Kashmiri master called Ratnavajra or 
Suksmavarttabhatta published a scornful refutation of the idea that there is a 
Fourth Initiation (caturthabhiseka). This position he seems to have attributed 
first and foremost to "Eastern" scholars, singling out Vagisvarakirti and his 
Tattvaratnavaloka ox Caturthaloka. In spite of the vitriolic dismissal, it is evi- 
dent that Vagisvarakirti was too important to be ignored. The debate between 
the two remained well known, as some of its salvos were preserved perhaps 
already in the now lost Brhatkasmirapanjika, and certainly in the Gūdhapadā. 
The latter was still an influential work before the end of the 12th century, since 
the famous Ravi$rijfiana used it as a source. 

One could extrapolate a more general point from this debate, namely that 
scholarly communication between East India (at this point in time under 
Pala sovereignty) and Kashmir was vigorous. Kashmiris seem to have been a 
little more orthodox in their views, but innovations—for which the hotbed 
was undoubtedly Pala East India—did filter in. This exchange between the 


184 SZĀNTO 


two regions was certainly not a unique event. The famous satirist Kseme- 
ndra describes Bengali students flocking to Kashmir around the same time 
(Desopadesa, chapter 6 in 45 verses). He is even more scornful of Easterners, 
describing them as illiterate, dim-witted, pretentious, sanctimonious, vulgar, 
and ugly. I find it very likely that the poet’s bigoted diatribe met with many a 
sympathetic ear in his local audience. 


3 Vagisvarakirti among the Khmer 


The document known as the Sab Bak inscription (K. 1158), consisting of fifteen 
(idiosyncratic) Sanskrit verses and a few lines in Old Khmer, was discovered at 
an unconfirmed location in what is now Nakhon Ratchasima province, Thai- 
land. It is one of the most important sources testifying to the presence of the 
Guhyasamaja system in Southeast Asia. The text of the inscription was first 
edited by Prapanvidya (1990). Since then it has been noted and discussed in 
a fairly large number of publications, the latest of which, at least to my knowl- 
edge, is by Conti (2014). This article also features a new translation by Tadeusz 
Skorupski. 

The inscription, dated Saka year 988, 7th of the waxing fortnight of Tapasya 
(Friday, 23rd of February 1067 CE), records the words of one Vrah Dhanus, given 
the title ācārya in the Khmer portion, a devotee of the Guhyasamāja. The text 
first eulogises three teachers of Vrah Dhanus, all indicated by toponymic sur- 
names: the venerables of Cun Vis, Campaka, and Dharanindrapura. It then 
describes the erection of an unspecified number of icons beginning with an 
image of the Buddha. The Khmer portion refers to previous installations as well. 

The document is fascinating and important, but still requires substantial 
work. I cannot touch on these topics here; instead, I wish to concentrate on 
a particular aspect, the identity of a master referred to in verses 3 and 4. The 
most reliable edition of the text is that of Estéve (2009, 557-558), which I have 
checked against an estampage of the original (EFEO n. 1497); here I quote only 
the relevant couplet: 


šrīsamāje para yasya bhak(t)ih sraddhā ca nirmmala 
tasya dāsasya dāso ham bhaveyam sarvajanmasu || [3] 
ity ajfíà paramaguroh šrutvā stutyà namaskrtā 
anukathya maya bhaktya šrīsamājan name sada || [4] 


These are the translations that have been published thus far. Prapanvidya (1990, 
12) interpreted the text as follows: 


ON VAGISVARAKIRTI’S INFLUENCE 185 


In all my births, may I become the slave of that slave, who has great devo- 
tion to and impeccable faith in the Šrīsamāja. ‘Having saluted with praise, 
I must hear and repeat the teacher's command devotedly? thus is the com- 
mand of the supreme teacher. I constantly pay my obeisance to Šrīsamāja. 


Estēve's French translation is perhaps a bit more accurate (2009, 561): 


«Ce Šrī Samāja pour lequel j'ai une dévotion supréme et une foi pure, 
que j' en sois le serviteur du serviteur dans toutes mes existences ». Aprés 
avoir entendu aja du paramaguru, je dois lui rendre hommage avec des 
louanges puis, avec dévotion, le répéter. Je rends hommage perpétuelle- 
ment à Šrī Samāja. 


Finally, Skorupski's translation published in Conti (2014, 393) is quite similar to 
that of Prapanvidya: 


In all my existences, may I become a servant of the servant who has 
supreme devotion and stainless faith in the glorious Samaja. Having thus 
heard the command of the supreme guru, I respect it with praises, (and) 
having repeated it with devotion, I always pay homage to the glorious 
Samaja. 


The first hemistich of the quoted portion is in my view an echo of Vagisvaraki- 
rti’s words. The penultimate closing verse of his TaRaAVi is this: 


šrīsamāje para yasya bhaktir nisthā ca nirmalā | 
tasya vagisvarasyeyam krtir vimatināšinī ||! 


This is the work to dispel all opposed opinions of Vāgīsvara[kīrti], whose 
dedication to the glorious [Guhya]samaja is supreme and whose devotion 
is without blemish. 


Moreover, this is the closing verse of his SaA (D 202b7-203a1, P 238b5—6): 


10 


| dpal ldan gsan ba ‘dus pa las | | dri med dad mchog mthar phyin pas | 
| nag gi dban phyug de yis ‘di | | byas pas blo nan (D, ldan P) Jig gyur cig 


There are two silent emendations by Sarnath editors; the Ms. reads bhaktinistha and 
vimatināsanī. 


186 SZĀNTO 


I find it almost certain that this is a clumsy Tibetan rendering of the same 
verse. The small emendation /as to /a would fix the first pada, whereas the sec- 
ond would better read *dad mchog mthar phyin drima med, were it not the case 
that mthar phyin pa (*nisthāgata?) is a very bad choice for nistha. The third and 
fourth pada may be seen as a very loose rendering: “may this work written by 
Vagisvarakirti destroy wicked views!” However, here too the choice of words is 
inapposite, as we would expect /ta and not blo for mati. 

Iam unaware of any other texts that would use the same phrasing; it can be 
said therefore that this is a ‘signature verse’ of Vagi$varakirti. 

The only difference between the hemistich of the Khmer inscription and 
the verse transmitted in India, Nepal, and Tibet is a mere synonym, sraddha 
for nistha. Perhaps the Khmer author thought that the latter is a lesser-known 
word for “devotion” and decided to replace it with a metrically and gender-wise 
unproblematic, more current noun. Otherwise the echo is unmistakable. 

In light of this discovery, the second line of the Khmer inscription would 
mean that someone is wishing to become a devotee (dasa) of that devoted one 
(tasya dāsasya) in all subsequent rebirths—i.e., these are the words of a stu- 
dent of Vāgīsvarakīrti. 

In the first pada of verse 4, these words seem to be described as "the com- 
mand (ājitā) of the paramaguru” The syntax here is quite incorrect, since 
ajria should also be construed with érutva, and we would therefore require an 
accusative; however, namaskrtā and anukathyā forces the author to leave it in 
the nominative. This is not the only bizarre usage of Sanskrit in the text. To 
note only the most glaring examples, in verse 6 we have a double sandhi, saiva 
for sa eva, in verse 15 the enclitic cet stands at the beginning of the line, and 
so on. Another oddity is that such pious exclamations are not called aj£ia, but 
pranidhana or pranidhi, even in the tantric context (e.g. Hevajratantra 2.8.6—7 
and prose before). 

It should also be noted that the first quarter of verse 4 is a na-vipula, with 
the minor blemish that the fourth syllable is not long. This perhaps suggests 
that the composer found it important to include the term paramaguru. This 
does not only mean "supreme teacher," but has a more technical sense, namely 
one's spiritual grandfather, i.e. one's guru's guru. I could not find Buddhist texts 
that clearly have this usage (a possible exception is the Balinese Buddhaveda, 
p- 75); however, it is prevalent in Saiva literature. In Abhinavagupta's Tantrasára 
(Ed., p.156) we find the sequence guru, paramaguru, and paramesthin, followed 
by the collective purvacaryah. In the glosses to the I$anasivagurudevapaddhati 
(Ed., vol. 3, ad 13.58ab) we find this list stretched for five generations: guru, 
paramaguru, paramesthiguru, püjyaguru, and mahapüjyaguru. We sometimes 
(e.g. Purascaryarnava, Ed., vol. 1, 3.578cd-579ab) find paraparaguru between 
parama and paramesthin. 


ON VAGISVARAKIRTI'S INFLUENCE 187 


Keeping in mind the hypothesis that paramaguru has a technical meaning 
here and does not simply mean "supreme teacher” two further likely hypothe- 
ses emerge. The command, which Vrah Dhanus relates, is spoken by one of his 
teachers, namely his guru's guru, in which case Vāgīsvarakīrti was the guru of 
this person, that is to say, Vrah Dhanus'paramesthiguru or paraparaguru. How- 
ever, given the loose phrasing seen elsewhere in the document, it might just be 
the case that Vrah Dhanus is referring only to the first half of the verse, in which 
case he is acknowledging Vagisvarakirti as his paramaguru. The latter is gram- 
matically speaking less likely, but more likely if we think about the number of 
spiritual generations elapsed between Vagisvarakirti, active in the earlier half 
ofthe nth century, and Vrah Dhanus, whose commissioned inscription is dated 
1067 CE. Whichever scenario we accept as the most plausible, what seems to 
be certain is that by this date Vagisvarakirti’s person and Guhyasamaja-related 
teachings were known in the Khmer lands. 

If Vagisvarakirti was known in the Khmer lands, then so was Jfianapada’s 
school of thought. Although more attention should be dedicated to this mat- 
ter, I feel confident in saying that Vagisvarakirti was a follower of the Jiiāānapāda 
exegesis. The strongest evidence for this claim is his brief overview of Jiiāna- 
pāda's Samantabhadra or Caturangasādhana as well as at least one unattrib- 
uted quotation from the same work in his SaA (D 202a2 ff., P 238a1ff.). 


4 Epilogue 


During the editorial process, I came across two further possible testimonies for 
Vagisvarakirti’s influence. I am grateful to the editors for allowing me the oppor- 
tunity to include them here. 

The first comes from what is now Burma/Myanmar, an inscription dated 
1442 CE celebrating the construction of a monastery and related donations by a 
district governor called Thirizeyathu (Taw Sein Ko 1899, 37-47). The document 
records a large number of books as part of the governor's generous gift, includ- 
ing the famous couple Mahakalacakka and Mahakalacakka tika, long accepted 
as evidence for the presence of the Kalacakra system in Burma. The work listed 
immediately before this (p. 47) is called the Mrtyuvaricana. While this could 
refer to any death-cheating ritual manual, the most celebrated such work was 
that of Vagisvarakirti. There is therefore a strong possibility that he was still 
read in Burma as late as the first half of the 15th century. Naturally, I do not 
claim this as conclusive evidence. 

Another possible allusion to Vāgīšvarakīrti, or at the very least the debate 
he was famous for, comes from certain recensions of Saraha's Dohākoša. In a 


188 SZĀNTO 


verse criticising fellow Buddhists, the famous siddha (or the author posing as 
the siddha) says that “[without having realised reality,] some are immersed in 
explaining the Fourth.’ 

I read the verse in the following three sources: a) Niedersāchsische Staats- 
und Universitātsbibliothek Góttingen manuscript Xc 14/16, folio 2r: ko vi vak- 
khāņa caiitthihi laggo; b) Tokyo University Library manuscript 517, folio 17v: ke 
vi vakkhana caiitthahim laggaii; and c) NAK 1-1607 = NGMPP A 49/18, recto of 
83rd leaf: kot vakkhana caiiththihi laggo. The verse with this line was not avail- 
able for Sastri (1916, 85), Shahidullah (1928, 129—although the Tibetan given 
here does mirror our reading very closely: kha cig bži ba'i don ‘chad pa la žugs) 
or Samkrtyayan (1957, 4); Bagchi (1938, 16) reconstructs the verse, and his read- 
ing is followed by Jackson (2004, 58), who also suggests that one possibility for 
interpretation is the “Fourth Initiation”; see also Schaeffer 2005, 136. 

The single-folio NAK fragment is a part of the Sahajamnayapanjika commen- 
tary, a very precious (and unfortunately very corrupt) witness, as here Bagchi’s 
manuscript has a lacuna. The relevant passage in Tibetan can be found in 
D 18417—185v2. Interestingly, here the target is identified as a monk, but caü- 
ththihi is glossed either as a cardinal number, in which case the four schools 
are meant (Vaibhasika, Sautrantika, Yogacara, Madhyamaka), or as an ordinal 
number, in which case the meaning is innate bliss (sahaja). This commentator 
would therefore not think that the object of the (fruitless) explanation is the 
Fourth Initiation. 

It is of course possible, and perhaps even likely, that Saraha here refers to 
the fourth and ultimate state of consciousness or the fourth and highest bliss 
(ānanda), but it is not out of the question that what he has in mind is the (or a) 
debate regarding the Fourth Initiation. However, again, this is hardly conclusive 
evidence. 


Abbreviations 
Aka Amrtakanika. 
D Tibetan text in the Canon's Derge (Sde dge) print. Numbers accord- 
ing to Toh. 
Ed. edition 


KCDS PEERAA P SCARE SC EME) Hk [Zhong- 
guo zangxue yanjiu zhongxin shouzangde fanwen beiye jing (Suowei 


jiaojuan) mulu] Krun go'i bod kyi ses rig žib jug lte gnas su rar ba'i 
ta la'i lo ma'i bstan bcos (sbyin šog dril mai par) kyi dkar chag mdor 
gsal, n.a. 


ON VAGISVARAKIRTI’S INFLUENCE 189 


Ms. manuscript 

NAK National Archives, Kathmandu 

NGMPP Nepal German Manuscript Preservation Project 

Ota. Daisetz T. Suzuki (ed.), The Tibetan Tripitaka, Peking Edition—kept at 


the Library of the Otani University, Kyoto —Reprinted under the Super- 
vision of the Otani University, Kyoto. Catalogue & Index, Tokyo, 1962. 

P Tibetan text in the Canon’s Peking (Pe cin) print. Numbers accord- 
ing to Ota. 

TaRaA Tattvaratnāvaloka. 

TaRaAVi Tattvaratnavalokavivarana. 

Toh. Hakuju Ui, Munetada Suzuki, Yenshó Kanakura, Tókan Tada (eds.), 
A Complete Catalogue of the Tibetan Buddhist Canons (Bkah-hgyur 
and Bstan-hgyur), Tóhoku Imperial University, Sendai, 1934. 

SaA Saptanga. 


References 


Primary Sources 
Amrtakanika 
(AKa). Banarsi Lal, ed. Aryamanijusrinamasamgiti with Amrtakaņikā-tippaņī by Bhiksu 
Tibetica xxx. Sarnath: Central Institute of Higher Tibetan Studies, 1994. 

(V) Royal Asiatic Society, London, Ms. Hodgson no. 35. Palm leaf, 62 folios (of which 
this work once occupied 1 to 4or), East Indian script (Maithilī/Bengali), undated 
(ca. mid-15th century). 

D) Toh. 1395, translated by *Maniérijfiana, Ni ma'i dban po'i od zer, Chag Chos rje dpal. 

P) Ota. 2111, ditto. 


Amrtakanikoddyota 
Ed.) see Amrtakanika. 
Ms.) Tokyo University Library, no. 18 (old no. 348). Palm leaf, go folios (once complete 


in g1 folios), Old Newar script, dated Vepālasamvat 420 = 1300 CE. (same as Ed.s Ms. 
Ka) 


Isanasivagurudevapaddhati 
T. Ganapati Sastri, ed. [sanasivagurudevapaddhati, vol. 3. Trivandrum Sanskrit Series 
77. Trivandrum, 1922. 


190 SZĀNTO 


Gūdhapadā 
(Ms.) Royal Asiatic Society, London, Ms. Hodgson no. 34. Palm leaf, 180 folios, hook- 
topped Old Newar script, undated (ca. 12—13th century?). 


Caturthasadbhavopadesa 

(Ms.) not accessible. 

(D) Toh. 2475, translated by *Vidyabhadra and Tshul khrims bkra šis. 
(P) O. 


Tattvaratnāvaloka 

(TaRaA) [a.k.a. Caturthaloka]. (Ms.) see Tattvaratnavalokavivarana. 
(Ed.) see Tattvaratnavalokavivarana. 

(D) Toh. 1889, no translator given. 

(P) Ota. 2753, no translator given. 


Tattvaratnavalokavivarana 

(TaRaAVi). (Ms.) NAK 5-252 = NGMPP A 915/4. 

(Ed.) Dhth 21, 129-149, reprint (used here) Bauddhalaghugranthasamgraha (A Collec- 
tion of Minor Buddhist Texts). Rare Buddhist Texts Series 14. Sarnath: Central Insti- 
tute of Higher Tibetan Studies, 1997: 81-103. 

(D) Toh. 1890, translated by ’Gos Lhas btsas. 

(P1) Ota. 2754, ditto. 

(P2) Ota. 4793, no translator given. 


Tantrasara 
Mukund Ram Shastri, ed. The Tantrasara of Abhinava Gupta. Kashmir Series of Texts 
and Studies no. xvi. Bombay: Nirnaya-Sagar Press, 1918. 


Dešopadeša 
E.V.V. Rāghavāchārya and D.G. Padhye, eds. Minor Works of Ksemendra. Hyderabad: 
Osmania University, 1961: 273—306. 


Dohākoša 
See Šāstrī 1916, Shahidullah 1928, Bagchi 1938, Sāmkrtyāyan 1957, and Jackson 2004. 


Purašcaryārņava 
Muralidhara Jha, ed. Puragcaryarnavah, vol. 1. Benares: Prabhakari & Co., 1901. 


ON VAGISVARAKIRTI’S INFLUENCE 191 


Prajnopayaviniscayasiddhi 

Samdhong Rinpoche and Vrajvallabh Dwivedi., eds. Guhyadi-astasiddhi-sangraha. 
Rare Buddhist Text Series 1. Sarnath: Central Institute of Higher Tibetan Studies, 
1987: 63-87. 


Buddhaveda 
Sylvain Lévi, ed. Sanskrit Texts from Bali. Baroda: Oriental Institute, 1933: 72—84. 


Muktāvalī 
See Hevajratantra. 


Samksiptābhisekavidhi 

(Ed.) see Sakurai 1996, 412—421. 

(Ms.) NAK 3-387 = NGMPP A 156/24 and retake B 24/15. 

(D) Toh. 1887, translated by Sumatikirti, Klog skya Gzon nu ’bar, Mar pa Chos kyi dban 
phyug. 

(P) Ota. 2751, ditto. 


Saptānga 
(SaA). (D) Toh. 1888, translated by 'Gos Lhas btsas. 
(P) Ota. 2752, ditto 


Sahajamnayapanjika 

(Ed.) see Bagchi 1938. 

(D) Toh. 2256, translated by Vairocanavajra of Kosala. 
(P) Ota. 3101, ditto. 


Hevajratantra 

Ram Shankar Tripathi and Thakur Sain Negi, eds. Hevajratantram with Muktāvalī Pañ- 
jikā of Mahapanditacarya Ratnākarašānti. Bibliotheca Indo-Tibetica Series XLVIII. 
Sarnath: Central Institute of Higher Tibetan Studies, 2001. 


Secondary Literature 

Bagchi, Prabodh Chandra. 1938. Dohakosa (Apabhramsa Texts of the Sahajayana 
School). Part 1. (Texts and Commentaries). Calcutta: Metropolitan Printing and Pub- 
lishing House. 

Chimpa, Lama and Alaka Chattopadhyaya. [1970] 2004. Taranatha’s History of Bud- 
dhism in India. Reprint, Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass. 

Conti, Pia. 2014. “Tantric Buddhism at Prasat Hin Phimai: A New Reading of Its Icono- 
graphic Message.” In Before Siam. Essays in Art and Archaeology, edited by Nicolas 
Revire and Stephen A. Murphy, 374—394. Bangkok: River Books and The Siam Society. 


192 SZĀNTO 


Davidson, Ronald. 2005. Tibetan Renaissance. Tantric Buddhism in the Rebirth of Tibetan 
Culture. New York: Columbia University Press. 

Estéve, Julia. 2009. Étude critique des phénomémes de syncrétisme religieux dans le Cam- 
bodge angkorien. Ph.D. thesis, École Pratique des Hautes Études. 

Isaacson, Harunaga. 2008. “Himalayan Encounter: The Teaching Lineage of the Marmo- 
padeša (Studies in the Vanaratna Codex 1)” Manuscript Cultures 1: 2—6. 

Isaacson, Harunaga and Francesco Sferra. 2014. The Sekanirdeša of Maitreyanātha 
(Advayavajra) with the Sekanirde$apafijika of Rāmapāla. Critical Edition of the San- 
skrit and Tibetan Texts with English Translation and Reproductions of the mss. Manu- 
scripta Buddhica 2. Napoli: Asien-Afrika-Institut, Universitāt Hamburg and Univer- 
sità degli studi di Napoli “L Orientale.” 

Jackson, Roger. 2004. Tantric Treasures. Three Collections of Mystical Verse from Buddhist 
India. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Kanē, Kazuo. 2014. “ ! Ea ; OMA RITB RUZ Oy € [Fugen jējuhē no shin- 
shutsu bonbun shiryo ni tsuite = ‘Newly Available Sanskrit Materials of Jfiāānapāda's 
Samantabhadrasadhana J.” AKFA [Mikkyēgaku kenkyu] 46: 61—73. 

Kawasaki, Kazuhiro. 2004. "On a Birch-bark Sanskrit Manuscript Preserved in the Tibet 


Museum.” Journal of Indian and Buddhist Studies 52 (2): 50—52/905-903. 

Lo Bue, Erberto. 1997. “The role of Newar scholars in transmitting the Indian Buddhist 
heritage to Tibet (c. 750—c. 1200)” In Les habitants du toit du monde. Etudes recueil- 
lies en hommage a Alexander W. Macdonald, edited by Samten Karmay and Philippe 
Sagant, 629—658. Nanterre: Société d’ ethnologie. 

Onians, Isabelle. 2002. Tantric Buddhist Apologetics or Antinomianism as a Norm, D.Phil. 
thesis. Oxford: University of Oxford. 

Prapanvidya, Chirapat. 1990. “The Sab Bak Inscription. Evidence of an Early Vajrayana 
Buddhist Presence in Thailand.” Journal of Siam Society 78 (2): 11-14. 

Sakurai, Munenobu. 1996. 4 7^ FAZURA- VP BA OVEIAKS- [Indo 
mikkyo girei kenkyu: koki Indo mikkyo no kancho shidai = A Study of Indian Esoteric 
Ritual. Consecration in late Indian Tantric Buddhism]. Kyoto: Hozokan. 

Samkrtyayan, Rahul. 1957. Doha-kos [Hindt-chayanuvad-sahit]. Patna: Bihar-Rastrabha- 
sa-Parisad. 


Šāstrī, Haraprasād. 1917. Hajar Bacharer Purana Bangala Bhāsāy Bauddhagān o Dohā 
(Caryacaryaviniscay, Sarojavajrer Dohakos, Kanhapader Dohākos o Dakarnav). Cal- 
cutta: Vangiya Sahitya Parisad. 

Schaeffer, Kurtis. 2005. Dreaming the Great Brahmin: Tibetan Traditions of the Buddhist 
Poet-Saint Saraha. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Schneider, Johannes. 2010. Vagisvarakirtis Mrtyuvaficanopadesa, eine buddhistische 
Lehrschrift zur Abwehr des Todes. Vienna: Austrian Academy of Sciences Press. 

Sferra, Francesco. 2000. The Sadangayoga by Anupamaraksita with Ravisrijnana’s Guņa- 
bharaninamasadangayogatippani. Text and Annotated Translation. Serie Orientale 
Roma LXXXV. Rome: Istituto Italiano per Africa e POriente. 


ON VAGISVARAKIRTI'S INFLUENCE 193 


Shahidullah, Muhammad. 1928. Les chants mystiques de Kanha et de Saraha. Les Doha- 
kosa (en apabhramša, avec les versions tibétaines) et les Caryā (en vieux-bengali) avec 
introduction, vocabulaires et notes. Paris: Adrien-Maisonneuve. 

Stearns, Cyrus. 1996. "The Life and Tibetan Legacy of the Indian Mahapandita Vibhūti- 
candra.” Journal of the International Association of Buddhist Studies 19 (1): 127—171. 
Taw Sein Ko. 1899. Inscriptions of Pagan, Pinya and Ava. Translation, with Notes. Ran- 

goon: Government Printing. 

Walter, Michael. 2000. “Cheating Death.” In Tantra in Practice, edited by David Gordon 
White, 605—623. Princeton; Oxford: Princeton University Press. 


CHAPTER 8 


Reflections on the King of Ascetics (Yatirāja): 
Rāmānuja in the Devotional Poetry of Vedānta 
Desika 


Srilata Raman 


The ocean of Srivaisnava literature is vast and it is a humbling scholarly endeav- 
or to realize that the more one works on it, the more there is to discover; thus, 
any conclusions that one reaches on the intellectual history of the tradition can 
only be tentative postulations which can and must be superseded by further 
research.! This being said, it has become increasingly clear that we are see- 
ing a particularly fertile period between Rāmānuja (traditional dates: CE1017— 
1137 CE) and Vedanta Desika (traditional dates: CE1268—1369CE): a period when 
doctrinal ideas are emerging from a wide spectrum of genres—from devotional 
poetry and hagiographies to commentaries and kāvya literature. We see also 
that, for instance, when it comes to the issue of the salvational means—the 
upaya for moksa—and their definitions, there was in fact much variation and 
a spectrum of views, without one single overarching version. Thus, to take one 
example, even within what emerged as a consensus on the significance of pra- 
patti as the more appropriate upaya for the Kali Yuga, as opposed to bhakti, 
matters were by no means settled in the immediate post-Ramanuja period as 
to how to understand the qualifications (arigas) for prapatti, or who was qual- 
ified for it.? 


1 In this essay, the transliteration of manipravala passages is uneven in that I have adhered to 
the exact wording in the respective printed books, which is often not systematic, sometimes 
giving the devanagari letters and sometimes not. All translations are my own. 


the Mumuksūpāyasamgraha, is currently lost. I have been able to acquire a copy of a single 
printed Telugu manuscript with this title which, in the Upodghatah section, points to at least 
the mainstream Vatakalai and Tenkalai ācāryas on prapatti. The relevant sentence is: asmin 
granthe dvitryamsavyatiriktesu bahvamsesu srimadvedantacaryapakstyair upādeyārthā eva 
pratipadita iti bhāti. taditaresv arthesv ayam anyatamah sāmānyavisesalaksaņalaksitapra- 
pattijūāne tadarthānusthāne ca traivarnikanam evadhikarah na šūdrasya iti. srimadvedan- 
tācāryapraņītesu granthesu sapramanam prapatteh sarvādhikāratā ya samarthitā sā tatraiva 


© SRILATA RAMAN, 2020 | DOI:10.1163/9789004432802_010 
This is an open access chapter distributed under the terms of the cc BY-NC 4.0 license. 


REFLECTIONS ON THE KING OF ASCETICS (YATIRĀJA) 195 


With the wisdom of hindsight, therefore, one could say that it is not at all 
surprising that a tradition that grappled with such wide divergences would 
find some of them encapsulated and formalized in the Tenkalai and Vatakalai 
astādašabhedas by as late as the eighteenth century. The perception of Rama- 
nuja, as well as ideas regarding his role in the salvation of his community, 
correspondingly, also change with the other doctrinal divergences that emerge 
in the Srivaisnava tradition after him. This topic forms the core of this paper. 

Here, I hope to show that there are many points of convergence in the 
hagiographical understanding of Ramanuja between what consolidated into 
the later Vatakalai and Tenkalai ācārya stotra traditions. The primary texts 
of comparison here are the Irāmānuja Nūrrantāti (henceforth, IN) of Tiru- 
varankattamutanar, one of the earliest hagiographical/stotra works we have 
at hand on Ramanuja (see the next section for some tentative dating), and 
Vedanta Dešika's Yatirājasaptati (henceforth, ys). The paper suggests that we 
do not see any major doctrinal divergence between the views of Vedanta 
Desika and those expressed by Tiruvarankattamutanar. What we are therefore 
seeing is a consolidated viewpoint regarding Ramanuja's stature in the tradi- 
tion as a whole, which remains unchanged through the centuries. Further, I 
would suggest that both these works see Rāmānuja not simply as any other 
ācārya of the tradition, but unique in his special role as being central to the 
salvation of every Šrīvaisņava. Nevertheless, there are definite variations of 
emphasis and hence of doctrinal inflection that can be traced and these, in 
turn, the paper suggests, feed into eventual soteriological differences in sig- 
nificant ways. Exploring these subtle inflections is also the purpose of this 
paper. 

The paper begins with a brief examination of the motifs regarding Ramanuja 
in the rn, contextualizing the poem within the history of earlier devotional 
poetry addressed to the ācārya within the Srivaisnava tradition. It then pro- 
ceeds to consider two of the main motifs of the poem relating to Ramanuja's 
divinity before turning to the vs of Vedanta Desika. It then discusses the dif- 


drastavya. (“In this work, other than with regard to two or three sections, in many sections, 
only the meanings established by those who adhere to Vedanta Desika’s position have, it 
seems, been proven. In the case of meanings that differ, there is this one—that, with regard 
to the knowledge of prapatti characterized by general and special features, as well as in the 
accomplishment of the meaning of it, only those of the three varnas are qualified, not the 
šūdra. In the texts authored by Vedānta De$ika the establishment of [the position that] all 
are qualified for prapatti, together with authoritative proofs, can be seen there [within those 
texts themselves].") I am currently in the process of having this text transcribed and will begin 
a study to determine whether something definitive can be said about its authorship. 


196 RAMAN 


ference in emphases of the two poems and concludes with some historical 
observations about what this might mean for Tenkalai and Vatakalai soterio- 
logical doctrine, post-Rāmānuja. 


1 Amutanar’s Pirapantam on Rāmānuja 


The Srivaisnava hagiographical tradition places the author of the IN, Tiruvara- 
nkattamutanar or Amutanar, as he is also referred to, within Ramanuja’s own 
lifetime. In the hagiography, the Splendour of the Previous Ācāryas (Pūrvācārya 
Vaibhavam), Prativāti Payankaram Aņņankarācāriyār (1955) states that he was 
either the father or the grandfather of Piļļai Perumāļ Aiyankār the author of 
the Astaprabandham, who was a disciple of Para$ara Bhattar. Since Bhattar is 
traditionally considered to date to the twelfth century this would place Amu- 
tanar within Ramanuja's own traditional dates of 1017-1137 CE. This is further 
consolidated by details given in the hagiography of Amutanar. In it, Amutanar 
is introduced as a recalcitrant employee of the Srirangam temple (kēyil kottil 
uļļavar) who first resists but later accepts Ramanuja's chief disciple Kūrattāl- 
van as his own teacher and, rewarded for this by being made the administrative 
head of the temple (srikaryam) by Ramanuja, subsequently also composes the 
IN.3 

The IN is an extensive poem of 108 verses composed in the kalitturaiviruttam 
metre. In terms of its poetic type it falls within the "super-genre" called pirapan- 
tam. Zvelebil (1974, 193) has pointed out that the great variety of poetic forms 
that fall within this category have only this much in common: “the character 
of a connected narrative with strong elements of description.” Traditionally, 
pirapantams were listed as thirty-six in number but by the eighteenth century, 
when Beschi wrote his Caturakarati, the number had increased to ninety-six.* 
The rw faithfully follows the logic of the genre of Nurrantati, being a poem of 
technically one hundred verses (here we actually have eight, auspicious addi- 
tional verses), in venpa and kalliturai metres in an antāti arrangement, where 
the last syllable or word of the preceding stanza is identical with the first syl- 


3 Annankaracariyar (1955, 40): ... irāmānuca nūrrantāti arulicceyta amutanār emperumānāru- 
taiya niyamanattinal ālvānai atipanintu tiruntinavar. A further Tamil work attributed to Amu- 
tanar is the Tiruppatikkovai, a poem in Tamil of 40 verses in the kūvai genre of pirapantam 
literature that is considered to list the 108 sacred places of the Srivaisnavas. 

4 In effect the pirapantam emerged as the most prolific genre of poetic composition in pre- 
modern Tamil literature, outdoing the tanippatal, bhakti poetry and epic/narrative forms. On 
this see Zvelebil 1974, 194. 


REFLECTIONS ON THE KING OF ASCETICS (YATIRĀJA) 197 


lable or word of the succeeding one. It models itself consciously on the poetry 
of the alvars, on the Tiviyappirapantam, and its very specific model is the small 
work attributed to Maturakavi alvar, the “Knotted, Fine, Small Rope” (Kanninun- 
ciruttampu), since the latter is the first work of the Tiviyappirapantam where 
the ācārya himself, rather than Visnu-Narayana, becomes the object of vener- 
ation and worship.5 Hence, the Kanninunciruttàmpu functions as a precursor 
to all subsequent hagiographical stotras on the ācāryas of the tradition. The 
opening verse of this very short poem of ten verses is: 


Sweet it will be, my tongue will fill with nectar 
in saying, "Nampi of South Kurukūr” 

after nearing him through my Lord,® 

the Great Mayan, who allowed himself to be tied 
by the knotted, fine, small rope.” 


The verse sets the tone for the entire poem, where the poet seeks out Nammal- 
var, implicitly seen as the focus of direct devotion rather than Mayon/Krsna. In 
his introduction (avatarikai) to the text, Periyavaccan Pillai (an older contem- 
porary of Vedanta Dešika traditionally dated to the mid-thirteenth century) 
makes it clear that Maturakavi takes refuge with Nammalvar himself as the 
person who can most help him when it comes to reaching God, as the person 
who can bring about the experience of the Blessed One for him (bhagavadanu- 
bhavasahakārī) and who, due to helping him in various ways, is himself the 
object to be aimed at (uddesya).8 There are three motifs in the poem: first, that 
Nammalvar himself is the direct object of refuge; second, that he has rid the 


5 Tiruvarankattamutanār (1999, 1): nālāyirativyaprapantattil “kanninun ciruttāpu” nammālvār 
visayamaka amaintatu pola emperumānār visayamaka irāmānuca nūrrantāti enappatum ti- 
vyaprapantam amaintuļļatu. 

6 The commentators interpret the words “ennappanil nanni” in two different ways. They either 
take the “il” to be a negative suffix, thereby suggesting that the poet moves away from 
Mayan towards Nammālvār or they take it as an ablative suffix, thereby suggesting that he 
approaches Nammālvār through or via God. 

7 Kirusņasvāmi Aiyyankar (1993, 31): 

kaņņinnuņciruttāmpināl kattunnap 
panniyaperumayan ennappanil 
nannit tenkurukur nampiy enrakkal 
annikkum amut trum en nāvukkē. 

8 Kirusnasvami Aiyyankar (1993, 23): ... praptitacaiyil pakavatanupavasahakarikalayum, ippati 
pahumukamana upakarattalé sarvavastaiyilum tatiyaré uttécyarenru atyavacittu, tamakku 
vaisnava visayikarattukku munpē ajfiatajfíapakamukattàle pakavatvisayattile müttina maho- 
pakarakararana ālvār tammaiye parrukirār. 


198 RAMAN 


poet of his bad karma/sins, and finally, that he has rendered the Vedas into 
Tamil. As we proceed to look at the IN we will see that these three motifs as 
well as the religious assumptions and the contents of the Kanninunciruttampu 
both permeate and influence the poem. 

The IN itself came to occupy a special place within quotidian Srivaisnava 
religiosity. Its significance can be gauged from the fact that, though it is not 
composed by the ālvārs, it is one of the few anomalous works to be included 
within the corpus of the Tiviyappirapantam itself, as part of the concluding 
section of the Iyarpa,® and hence also a part of the daily cycle of prayers— 
the nityanusamdhanam—for all Srivaisnavas, both Tenkalai and Vatakalai. A 
further name attributed to it, and included in Amutanar's traditional hagiogra- 
phy, is Prapannagayatri—in other words, that like the Gayatrī mantra recited 
by the twice-born male during the daily morning and evening prayers (sam- 
dhyāvandanam), the IN must also be a part of the daily prayer rituals of the 
one who has undertaken prapatti (prapanna). The hagiography of Amutanar 
points out that the decision to include the zw within the Iyarpa as well as the 
decision to make it part of the daily prayer cycle of $rivaisnavas was taken by 
Utayavar (Ramanuja) himself, as recorded in the chronicles of the $rirangam 
temple (Koyil Oluku).! 

In this brief consideration of this poem, with its verses of simple and elegant 
beauty, I begin with two examples which show its debt both to the Tiviyappira- 
pantam and to the stotra tradition of the acaryas generally. In the first example, 
towards the latter part of the poem, we have the following verse (76) where 
there is the piling up of examples of all that which is precious and delectable, 
culminating in the assertion that only Rāmānuja can offer the devotee that 
which is most precious, which are his feet: 


O Ramanuja! 
Enduring fame, expansive waters, 
splendid Venkatam with its golden summit, 


9 The Tiviyappirapantam is traditionally divided into four books of which the Iyarpa, mean- 
ing, "short metres” forms the third book. For a detailed discussion of the possible rationale 
of the arrangement of the poetry into this four-fold division and their internal contents, 
see Hardy 1983, 247—256. 

10  Tiruvarankattamutanár (1999, 2). 

11  Tiruvarankattamutanār (1999, 2): utaiyavar, nūrrantātiyai iyarpavote —mutalayirattil kan- 
ninunciruttampaip pole cērttu sakala érivaisnavarkalukkum prapannakayatriyaka nityā- 
nusanteyam enrum; inta amutanārukkum tiruppani ceyvārukkum matamum tirumāļikai- 
kaļilē atyapaka srivaisnavarkalukkum munnē pahumānamum tittam ceytu arulinar. ivai 
(koyiloluku) tarum ceytikaļ. 


REFLECTIONS ON THE KING OF ASCETICS (YATIRĀJA) 199 


the land of Vaikuņtha, the celebrated Milk Ocean— 
How much pleasure all these give you! 

That much pleasure your lotus feet also give me. 
Then, grant them, graciously.!? 


Not only does this verse immediately echo for us the opening line of Nam- 
mālvār's verse 68 of the Periyatiruvantāti, which begins, “mountains, the grove- 
ringed Ocean and the heavenly kingdom of Vaikuņtha” (kallum kanaikkatalum 
vaikunta va natum), but even while echoing the prior poem it is doing some- 
thing entirely novel. In Nammalvar’s verse the poet is talking about how Krsna, 
the dark God, has entered his heart and will not be dislodged from it. Hence, 
all God’s usual habitations—the sacred mountain, the Cosmic Ocean and even 
Vaikuntha itself appear abandoned. Here, in the rv, Amutanar seems to suggest 
that these places where Krsna normally dwells are the very same places which 
are within Ramanuja's reach—and give him pleasure. For him, in contrast, he 
would gladly forsake all these for Ramanuja's feet. 

Verse 92 of the IN turns to another ubiquitous theme in Šrīvaisņava prap- 
atti stotras: the unworthiness of the person seeking refuge. Here, in the first 
two lines Amutanār says, “I have not done the virtuous vows” (punniyanonpu 
purintum ilēn), and “I have not spoken the subtle, rare and sacred words” 
(nunarulkelvi nuvanrum ilen). These lines resonate for us with the words of 
another verse of Nammalvar's: Tiruvāymoli 7.5.1 (norranonp illen, nunnariv- 
ilen). We are further reminded of the poetry of another ācārya whose Sanskrit 
work was also heavily influenced by the Tiviyappirapantam—Alavantar’s Sto- 
traratna, verse 22: na dharmanistho'smina cātmavedī na bhaktimams tvaccara- 
nāravinde. 

The zn thus consciously positions itself within this lineage of devotional 
poetry— showing us that it continues and builds upon doctrinal views regard- 
ing God and the ācārya, who are seen as mirror images of each other just as the 
poetry of each previous ācārya becomes a template available for embedding, as 
aliterary echo, within the work of a successor. Indeed, the Kanninunciruttampu 
itself becomes a direct source of further emulation in the Maņavāļamāmunikaļ 
Kaņņiņunciruttāmpu—a 13-verse poem (circa fourteenth-century) by the lat- 


12 IN, verse 76: 
ninra vankirtiyum nilpunalum niraivēnkatap 
porkunramum vaikuņtanātum kulaviyapārkatalum 
unranakk ettanai inpantarum un iņaimalarttāļ 
en tanukkum atu irāmānucā ivai īntaruļē. 


200 RAMAN 


ter's disciple Koyil Kantatai Annan, which centres on Manavalamamuni's feet 
as a refuge because he, in turn, had taken refuge with Nammalvar. 

This brings me to one of the main motifs that appears again and again in the 
poem: the indirect identification of Ramanuja with Mayon/Mayavan/Kannan 
as the dark cloud who brings cool rain and alleviates suffering. 

In this regard a few examples from the poem should suffice: “the dark 
cloud that is Ramanuja" (irāmānucan ennum kar), in verse 24; in verse 25, "O 
Rāmānuja, benevolent as a dark cloud" (karey karuņai irāmānucā ); verse 27 
speaks of Rāmānuja as that capacious rain cloud that enters the heart of the 
poet; verses 55 and 60 use the word koņtal for rain cloud, where Rāmānuja 
is likened to a cloud pouring out the rain of the Vedas (55), or a rain cloud 
endowed with good qualities (60); and verse 83 speaks of his generosity being 
like a dark rain cloud (Kar konta vanmai), as does verse 104, likening him to 
a bountiful rain cloud (celurkontal). Finally, verses 74 and 104 even suggest, 
through a kind of poetic hyperbole similar to that which will surface later in 
the Ācāryahrdayam of Alakiya Manavalapperumal Nāyanār that Rāmānuja, 
the dark cloud who convinces everyone through cool reason, might even be 
more effective than Mayavan with his fiery discus—or that even if one were 
shown Kannan like a gooseberry in the palm of one's hand, one would want 
nothing other than Ramanuja's greatness (cīr).!* 


13 +Thereference here is to Ācāryahrdayam, sūtras 56ff., where the Tiviyappirapantam is com- 
pared to a golden vessel and the Vedas to an earthen vessel. 

14 IN, verse 74: 

terarmaraiyin tiram enru māyavan tiyavaraik 

kūrāli kontu kuraippatu kontal anaiya vanmai 

ērārkuņatt em irāmānucan avv elilmaraiyil 

cērātavarai citaippatu appotu oru cintai ceyte 

Mayavan reduces with the sharp discus 

those who don't understand the path of the Vedas. 

My Ramanuja of great qualities 

with the strength of a raincloud 

destroys those who don't accept the splendid Vedas 

merely through a thought. 

Verse 104: 

kaiyir kaniyennak kannanaik kattittarilum unran 

meyyir piraūkiya cir anri ventilan yan nirayat 

toyyil kitakkilum cotivin cérilum ivv aruļ nī 

ceyyil tarippan irāmānucā en celunkontale 

Ramanuja, my bounteous cloud! 

Even if one were to show Kannan as a fruit in the hand 

other than the splendour emanating from your body 


REFLECTIONS ON THE KING OF ASCETICS (YATIRĀJA) 201 


These multiple references to Rāmānuja as a dark, bountiful, compassionate 
and cooling rain cloud cannot but take us back again to the Tiviyappirapantam 
and, even prior to it, to the early history of Krsna worship in the Tamil coun- 
try. As Hardy in his magnum opus Viraha Bhakti has convincingly shown (1983, 
149 ff.), the earliest references to the God Mayon come to us from specific verses 
in the Puranānūru and Pattuppāttu. The word itself, meaning “the dark com- 
plexioned one,” clearly is the Tamil equivalent of Krsna and the references from 
the earliest poetry are to his dark colour, which is compared to the ocean. Hardy 
masterfully traces the images of Mayon from these early references through the 
late Cankam poetry into the use of the akattinai by the ālvārs. The IN clearly 
situates itself with this lineage of poetic images and plays with the image of 
Ramanuja as both Mayon, as better than Mayon, or in a crucial verse I shall 
come to later, as the incarnation of the weapons of Visnu-Narayana. There is 
no doubt that this invocation of Ramanuja as Krsna is meant to set the stage 
for the second ubiquitous motif in the poem—that Ramanuja has cleansed the 
poet of his sins by giving him his feet as a refuge. 


2 Ramanuja as Saviour from Sin and Granter of the Ultimate Goal 


As mentioned previously, the motif of the acarya saving the disciple appears in 
the Kanninunciruttampu already. The relevant verse is number 7, where Mat- 
urakavi alvar says Nammalvar removed and destroyed his ancient, bad deeds 
(pantaivalvinai parriy arulinan). It is this very claim that the 1v makes with 
regard to Rāmānuja. Let me give a few salient examples for this motif in the 
poem: verse 4 states that Ramanuja destroys karma, as in the lines, "After mak- 
ing mea substantive thing in this world, he [Ramanuja] first cut at the root, age- 
old karma that secreted illusion ..." (ennaip puviyil oru porulakki marul curanta 
munnaippalavinai ver aruttu); verse 7 refers to Ramanuja as he who enables 
the poet to cross over sin (paliyaik katattum iramanucan); in verse 26 the poet 
reiterates that Ramanuja has removed his true defects that are in the form of 
his terrible sins/karma (en cey vinaiyam meyykurram nikki); in verse 35 the poet 
asks how karma could ever shroud him after he has in his memory the lotus feet 
of Ramanuja (aruvinai ennai evvār inriy atarppatuve); verse 41 plays upon the 
idea of the accessibility of Rāmānuja by pointing out that even when Madhava 


I do not want. 

Even if cast into the affliction of Hell, 
or reach the Heaven of light, 

this grace done by you sustains me. 


202 RAMAN 


is born on earth within each body, as the Inner Dweller, those who not recog- 
nize him are able to become his devotees when Rāmānuja incarnates and gives 
them true knowledge; in verse 45 the poet emphatically declares that there is 
no other greater desired object than Ramanuja’s feet, and that no one can make 
them attainable except the feet themselves (per onru marr illai nin caraņ anri, 
apper alittark arenrum illai marraic caran anri), etc. In verse 66 the poet sets 
up an analogy that both compares and distinguishes between the generosity 
of God and Ramanuja. Madhava, he says, gives the supreme abode (vanam) to 
those who pine (naipavar) for him. But this same goal also becomes available 
to those who have committed grave sins, because these have been removed by 
Rāmānuja from their hearts (valvinaiyen manattil inam katinta iramanucan). 
These verses build up to a crescendo in verses 71 (*my previous karma was 
removed due to your gracious conduct,” mun cey vinai nī cey vinayatanál pon- 
tatu) and 77 ("he burnt out my sins at their roots,” en vinaikalai ver pariyak kayn- 
tanan). In verse 94 the poet emphasizes the assurance that Ramanuja grants 
right conduct, the wealth of service to God, and the ability to execute this. 

In a brief digression it must be added that we cannot fully understand the 
theological developments on the Tenkalai side, or the Tamil stotra tradition 
on the ālvārs and ācāryas in particular, without seeing very similar parallel 
developments on the Tamil Šaiva side. We are speaking of a shared religious 
and, most importantly, poetic landscape here where there was mutual influ- 
ence and emulation. Hagiographical pirapantams were composed on the lead- 
ing religious figures of both traditions. Thus, the Irupā Irupaktu, attributed to 
Arulnanti Sivacariyar (traditional dates: thirteenth century), who is considered 
one of the foremost disciples of Meykantar whose work Civafianapotam (Siva- 
jūānabodham) inaugurates the Tamil Saiva Siddhānta canon, is a pirapantam 
poem of 12 verses whose resemblance to the rn is striking. The Irupā Irupaktu 
equates Meykantàr with Siva himself, his greatness as a guru being such that 
he can rid devotees of primal impurity (mala). Such parallels between poetic 
traditions must also be kept in mind when reflecting on the hagiographical 
traditions linked to Tamil devotional poetry, considered across the sectarian 
divides. 

Careful reading of the poem shows that IN sets up a series of analogies: 
between Kannan/Mayon and Ramanuja, and between the salvation promised 
by Krsna in Bhagavadgītā 18.66, the Caramasloka, according to which taking 
refuge with him would remove all sins of the devotee, and the descent of 
Ramanuja in the Kali Yuga, which removes the sins of the poet. This analogy 
is by no means the only one and I do not wish, hereby, to simplify the poem, 
reducing it to this doctrinal message. Indeed, in other verses the poem suggests 
that taking refuge at the feet of the devotees of Ramanuja is equally important, 


REFLECTIONS ON THE KING OF ASCETICS (YATIRĀJA) 203 


or that Rāmānuja is not so much Mayon as the incarnation of Visnu-Narayana’s 
weapons. But there is no doubt that many of its verses suggest that Rāmānuja 
is connected with the promise of the Caramasloka; and it is this motif, with 
the direct analogies it draws between Krsna-Vasudeva, on the one hand, and 
Rāmānuja, on other, that is central to the hagiographical impulse of the poem. 

But before I expand on what this means for the representation of Ramanuja 
from the earliest hagiographical tradition on him, I would like to focus our 
attention on Vedanta Desika’s 70 verses on the King of Ascetics, the Yatirājasap- 
tati, to see how it might converge or diverge in its representation of Ramanuja. 


3 The Yatirājasaptati 


The vs is a poem of remarkable lyrical beauty consisting of a total of 74 verses. 
Of a very different aesthetic feel than the rv, the poem begins with ten verses on 
the guruparampara, where the poet salutes his lineage of teachers, beginning 
with Visnu-Narayana and concluding with Rāmānuja. It is carefully structured 
to hold in a dialectical unity the greatness of Rāmānuja, his divine incarnation, 
on the one hand, and the greatness of his works and his achievements, on the 
other. The poem moves in circles, again and again, around these two themes, 
with the additional theme of the greatness of his devotees inserted in some of 
these circular reflections. Vedanta Desika tells us, at the very end of the poem 
why he has composed it (verse 73): 


upašamitakudrstiviplavānām upanisadam upacāradīpikeyam | 
kabalitabhagavadvibhütiyugmam disatu matim yatirājasaptatir nah || 


May the Yatirājasaptati, the lamp that aids the Upanisads by which the 
distortions that are wrong views are extinguished, give us the knowledge 
that encompasses both the vibhūtis of the Blessed One. 


Thus in this verse, which is a phala-sruti, Vedanta De$ika makes it clear that the 
poem is as much about Ramanuja’s feat in composing the Sribhasya, thereby 
giving the right interpretation of the Upanisads, as it is about the greatness of 
Yatiraja himself. Indeed, Vedanta Desika makes it clear that Ramanuja’s great- 
ness lies in his composition of the work on Vedanta. 

The poem's first ten verses create the context for the exaltation of Rāmānuja. 
This context is the lineage of teachers (guruparampara) who preceded him 
and are listed in the first eight verses of the poem in the following order: 
Narayana, Šrī-Laksmī, Visvaksena, Nammālvār, Puņdarīkāksa (Uyyankoņtār), 


204 RAMAN 


Šrīrāmamišra (Manakkal Nampi), Yamuna (Āļavantār) and Mahāpūrņa (Periya 
Nampi). In verse n Rāmānuja is addressed, for the first time, with the phrase 
"Lord of the Ascetics" (patim yatinam). 

It is relevant that this is not the first time in the hagiographical literature 
that this epithet is used for him. Instead, as the modern commentator of the ys 
Vātūla Nilameghacarya points out, the word is already used for him, as the title 
bestowed upon him by Lord Varadarāja at Kaficipuram when he took the vows 
of an ascetic, according to the hagiographical literature composed contempo- 
raneous to the poem. Here the commentator references the Yatirajabhairavam, 
composed by Rāmānujas immediate disciple Andhra Pūrņa (Vatuka Nampi) 
probably around the same time as the I, where this episode is narrated.! 

When we come to the poem's understanding of the divinity of Ramanuja we 
finda wide spectrum of meanings. In verse 12, which agrees with verse 33 of the 
IN, Rāmānuja is seen as the coming together of all the five weapons of Murari 
(aprthakpratipanna yanmayatvaih vavrdhe pancabhir āyudhair murāreh, 
12cd). In the very next verse, 13, there is a playful simultaneous narration or 
šlega on the victorious activities of both Lord Krsna and Rāmānuja, where 
the meanings converge in the word Ramavarajah, referring both to Yatiraja 
as well as Krsna himself as the younger brother of Balarama, thus establish- 
ing identity between the two figures. Verse 27 lauds Ramanuja as the aggre- 
gation of the threefold splendour (samvalita-tridhāman) of Agni (sikhavan), 
the moon (ausadhigah) and the sun (tapanah). In verse 32 Rāmānuja is seen 
as having the same capacity to offer protection to the world as Visvaksena, 
with the latter’s cane staff transformed into his ascetic's rod.!6 Verse 28 is par- 
ticularly eloquent in describing and encapsulating all his nurturing and pro- 
tecting qualities, which are compared to those present everywhere in nature 
itself as the mountain from which originate all the streams of knowledge 
(sakalavidyavahinijanmaáailah), the tree under which the weary traveller wan- 
dering in samsara takes rest ( janipathaparivrttisrāntavisrāntišākhī), the ris- 


15  Ys(2010,20):parigrhitaturyas$ramasya sriramanujasya bhagavatà $rivaradarajena yatiraja 
itinama krtam iti guruparamparāprabhāve varnyate. Yatirajabhairavam, verse 50: patnīm 
parityajya sa vītarāgah srīdevarājam pranipatya tasmat | turyāšramam svīkrtavān dadau 
sa devo ‘pi tasmai yatirajanama ||. The use of the epithet Yatirāja was not the preroga- 
tive only of the Srivaisnavas but of the hagiographical traditions of other sectarian groups 
as well, seeking to exult their ascetic religious founders, as for instance the Madhvas of 
Vyasatirtha. On this see Stoker 2016. 

16 YS, verse 32cd: 

višvam tratum visayaniyatam vyanjitanugrahah san 
visvakseno yatipatir abhūt vetrasāras tridandah || 


REFLECTIONS ON THE KING OF ASCETICS (YATIRĀJA) 205 


ing sun that keeps the illusionary darkness of those with distorted views at 
bay (nikhilakumatimayasarvaribalasuryah) and the full moon that brings to 
high tide the ocean of the Vedas (nigamajaladhivelapurnacandrah). Finally, in 
verse 63 Rāmānuja is Visnu himself in his form (mūrtih) as Dattatreya, with his 
yellow-ochre robes (pitavasanah) and protective ascetic rod.!? 

When we consider the range of figures that Ramanuja is identified with in 
the ys we see that they converge overwhelmingly, with some exceptions, on 
Visnu-Narayana. Thus, the references to him as Agni, the sun and the moon, as 
the yellow-robed ascetic God, and then, secondarily, as Visvaksena or the col- 
lective of the weapons of Visnu, all draw upon images that have a long geneal- 
ogy in Vedic, epic and Purāņic literature on Visņu-Nārāyaņa. If the ys echoes 
other Vaisnavite devotional poetry at all, in addition to the Tiviyappirapantam, 
we would do well to consider the images of Visnu presented in the Paripatal, 
in the context of the overall Vedicism of the early poetic work.!? Thus, despite 
the commonality between the I and the Ys in stressing Ramanuja's divinity, 
his being elevated to a level above that of the other acaryas, we see a subtle 
differentiation in the manner in which the rw foregrounds the significance of 
the Bhagavadgītā in contrast to the Vedic, epic and Puranic representations of 
Visnu-Narayana in the vs. This difference in inflection can also be understood if 
we consider the overwhelming importance that the vs attributes to Ramanuja's 
establishment of the "right" kind of Vedanta. 


17 YS, verse 63ab: 
kàsayena grhītapītavasanā dandais tribhir mandita 
sā mūrtir muramardanasya jayati traiyyantasamraksini || 

18 On this see Raman 2011, 661-662: “A brief comparison of the Tirumal motifs of the Pari- 
pātal with those relating to Visnu in the Vedic and immediate post-Vedic Brāhmaņa and 
epic literature shows how thoroughly vedicized the Vaisnavism of the text is. It would 
not be unreasonable to speculate that this Vaisnavism of the Paripātal may be drawn 
from Sanskrit textual sources: the Vedas and Brāhmaņas, the Mahābhārata (particularly 
the Nārāyanīya section of the Šāntiparvan) and the Visnupuràána. Here, one should draw 
attention to the following motifs which already appear in these sources: [...] the general 
description of Tirumal clad in yellow garments, with the Goddess and the jewel Kaus- 
tubha on his chest and, finally and, most importantly, the identification of Tirumal with 
elements of the Vedic sacrifice in Paripātal 2.61—64. ... There is also the repeated insistence 
in the text that our only true source of knowledge for Tirumal’s appearance, his deeds, his 
prowess and his divine grace are the Vedas (called, variously, marai, mutumoli and vāy- 
moli), guarded and transmitted by the Brahmins (antaņar)” 


206 RAMAN 
4 The Eyes of the Vedas: Ramanuja's Vedanta!? 


There are allusions to Ramanuja’s “protection” of the Vedas, his defeat of those 
who hold other Vedantic views as well as the significance of his establishment 
of the right interpretation of the Vedas in innumerable verses of the vs. Thus, 
Ramanuja’s words are a firmly established cage of logic to prevent the wan- 
derings that are the Vedas (v. 14) and they also draw in the texts that are the 
Vedanta (v. 26).?? They cause those who have touched the bed of the Ocean 
that is the rules of the Vedanta to rejoice, and have them establish the state 
of salvation.?! Ramanuja, the poem states, is the tridanda-bearing ascetic who 
sits at the base of the tree of the Vedas, removing the fear of deceitful people 
from the minds of people (v. 22).?? Verse 31 captures in a lovely set of images the 
nature of Ramanuja's works. They are wish-fulfilling trees for the imagination of 
debaters (kathakajanamanīsā-kalpanākalpavrksāh), oozing with the nectar of 
Hari's feet (haripadamakarandasyandinah), possessing many branches (anu- 
gatabahusakhah) so that they can remove suffering/heat (apam unmūlayanti), 
and subduing (with their perfume) the stench of sins (Samitaduritagandhah). 
The repeated reference to the Vedic basis of Ramanuja's teachings is stressed 
in several further phrases in verses 44, 47, 50, etc. In verse 57 Vedanta Desika 
interestingly historicizes the tradition, accepting that even if Ramanuja's doc- 
trine (mata) is new (navinam) and others might have come before (prak), this 
does not matter. For Ramanuja is within the lineage of those ancient commen- 
tators such as Tanka, Dramida and Guhadeva, who were fearless (niratankah) 
because of their unobscured vision (nijamatitiraskaravigamat). This view of 
Rāmānujas central role in the establishment of a new, Visistādvaita Vedanta 
is the second central motif in the poem. Thus, even while we also have verses 
in the poem that, like in the In, echo the sentiments of taking refuge at the 
feet of Ramanuja, such as verses Verse 18, where those who take refuge at the 
feet of Yatipati become free of sin (anaghā) or Verse 20, where the feet are a 


19 YS, verse 3o: šrutinayanasanābhih šobhate laksmaņoktih. 
20 YS, verse 14: 
abahusrutasambhavam šrutīnām jaratīnām ayathāyathapracāram | 
vinivartayitum yatisvaroktir vidadhe tah sthiranitiparijarasthah || 
Cf. verse 26a: ākarsaņāni nigamantasarasvatinam 
21 YS, verse 21: 
švasitāvadhūtaparavādivaibhavāh nigamantanitijaladhes talasprsah | 
pratipādayanti gatim apavargikim yatisārvabhaumapadasātkrtāšayāh ||. 
22 ‘YS, verse 22ab: 
mule nivi$ya mahatam nigamadrumāņām 
musņan pratārakabhayam dhrtanaikadandah | 


REFLECTIONS ON THE KING OF ASCETICS (YATIRĀJA) 207 


refuge compared to medicine that stills the fluctuations of the mind (calacit- 
tavrttivinivartanausadham šaraņam yatindracaranam vrnimahe), it becomes 
clear that the framework of the poem does not allow for a predominant focus 
on the analogy between Ramanuja and Krsna nor that his feet themselves are 
the predominant upaya for moksa. 

In summing up, we see a common emphasis in the representation of Rama- 
nuja in the two poems, the one composed in Tamil and the other in Sanskrit 
separated by centuries. This was a representation rooted in a strong hagio- 
graphical, stotra tradition parallel to that of the guruparamparas that emerge 
from the twelfth century onwards and the various commentaries with hagio- 
graphical elements on the Tiviyappirapantam. It reaffirmed Ramanuja’s divine 
descent, similar to the divine descent of the alvars. It was less uniformly codi- 
fied, though, as to in what or in whom to locate Ramanuja’s divinity—in Krsna 
himself, in Visvaksena or Dattātreya, in Visņu-Nārāyaņa or his weapons. It is 
also equally clear that from early on the Srivaisnava tradition was united in 
seeing Rāmānuja as central to the salvific process, and in considering that, for 
those who were his disciples, taking refuge in Ramanuja would accelerate the 
path to Vaikuntha and the state of servitude (kainkarya) to Visnu-Narayana. 
Nevertheless, the frequent references to Ramanuja as destroying one’s sins, a 
reference directly calqued on the central promise of the Caramasloka, is not 
absent but does not function as the fulcrum of the vs as it does in the 1N. 

Here, we would do well to recollect Vedanta Dešika's poetic tribute to other 
figures of the guruparampara in the kavya style, such as his references to Nam- 
mālvār in the Padukasahasram, the mahākavya of 1008 stanzas that centres 
around the Rāmāyaņa episode where Bharata takes the sandals of Rama on 
his head and has these reign as the symbol of Rama's presence, in the latter's 
absence. Playing in certain verses on the double meaning of the padukas— 
one as the divine sandals and one as Nammalvar himself being the sandals, 
adorning the feet of God as his ideal devotee—allows the poet to speak of Nam- 
mālvar's subordination (sesatva) as well as his greatness in giving us the Tamil 
Vedas.?3 Similar to the treatment of Rāmānuja in the vs, the Padukasahasram 
section on Nammalvar is careful to place him within the context of the entire 
guruparamparā tradition as someone who performs an extraordinary function 
in establishing the doctrinal foundations of the school, rather than as a unique 
figure who towers entirely above all the others of the lineage. Such a perspec- 
tive, which even while lauding the achievement of each respective ācārya also 


23 Fora brief analysis of the relevant verses (22—29) of the Pādukāsahasram, see Hardy 1979, 
64—67. 


208 RAMAN 


relativizes it within a historical understanding of the tradition, is very different 
from the affective framework of the rv, which dwells on the emotional reso- 
nance of a single figure. 


5 Post-Prapatti 


The rw's greater emphasis on Rāmānuja in his role as the ācārya significant 
for salvation anticipates Tenkalai doctrinal development, as we see it evolv- 
ing in the works of Pillai Lokacarya (traditional dates: CE1264—1327) and in the 
commentaries on his works. In his works attention had decisively shifted to a 
soteriological path that was considered even more appropriate than prapatti 
for the seeker of salvation—both in terms of being easier as well as the most 
appropriate expression of the humility of the soul. This new salvific means was 
«love for the acarya"—acaryabhimana. 

In her thorough study of the writings of Manavalamamuni in the immediate 
post-Vedanta Desika period, Mumme (1988) demonstrates the consolidation of 
the doctrine of acaryabhimana as the preferred form of salvation in his com- 
mentaries on Pillai Lokacarya's works. Summarily put, the doctrine of ācāryā- 
bhimāna mirrors, in a mimetic fashion, the reasons why prapatti was favoured 
above bhaktiyoga in the immediate post-Ramanuja stage of doctrinal forma- 
tion. Ācāryābhimāna is not simply for the person incapable of prapatti; it is 
also "not only a separate means, but the superior or ultimate means (caramo- 
pāya), given the ultimate limits of the soul's nature and destiny" (p. 243). The 
pragmatics of it meanta total surrender of all one's own responsibility for doing 
anything for salvation by relying on the ācārya to do the needful. What, then, 
exactly was the ācārya to do? As the commentary of Pillai Lokam Cīyaron Pillai 
Lokacarya's Arthaparicakam explains, this meant, in effect, that one surren- 
dered all responsibility for performing prapatti to the acarya, who out of great 
compassion and being a great devotee himself, does it for you in your stead 
and advises you on all your future conduct, so that the prapatti he does for you 
might prove efficacious.* Thus, as Mumme (1988, 226—227) puts it succinctly, 


24  Arthapaficakam, Sūtra 9 commentary: “The person who does this ācāryābhimāna is inca- 
pable of doing anything else. With regard to him, reflecting on his lowliness and the 
happiness of the Lord if he were to obtain him, like a mother, who when her child falls ill, 
sees this as her own fault and gives it medicine, the ācārya is that greatly compassionate 
one (paramadayālu) and great devotee (mahabhagavata) who can undertake the means 
of salvation for the soul. All that the souls has to do is to surrender to the love for him and, 


REFLECTIONS ON THE KING OF ASCETICS (YATIRĀJA) 209 


The only means of salvation in practice today among the Tenkalai is 
ācāryābhimāna— the love of the ācārya. As they see it, Rāmānuja has 
already done prapatti to the Lord for all future generations of his follow- 
ers. Therefore, rather than surrendering to the Lord himself, one merely 
has to take refuge with an ācārya of his lineage. For the Vatakalai, the 
way of salvation is through the performance of prapatti to the Lord in 
the manner prescribed by the šāstras under the guidance of a gualified 
ācārya. Though the ācārya can perform prapatti specifically for a partic- 
ular disciple, mere relationship with the ācārya is no substitute for the 
performance of bharanyasa [understood in the broadest sense as the lay- 
ing down of all one's agency] with it's angas. 


Hence, she also goes on to point out that there is a widely held belief among 
contemporary Tenkalai Srivaisnavas, not established in any of the writings of 
Pillai Lokacarya, Manavalamamuni or Vedanta Desika, that "Rāmānuja is the 
ācārya who has saved all future generations of Srivaisnavas with his prapatti ..." 
There is a conspicuous textual exception to the absence of this doctrine in the 
writings of the major ācāryas of both traditions in the thirteenth to fourteenth 
centuries, though. This is the Caramopayanirnaya of Nāyanār Accan Pillai (tra- 
ditional dates: 1227—1327), the nephew and adopted son of Periyavaccan Pillai, 
a work that clearly endorses the view that taking refuge with Ramanuja himself 
is central to salvation, thus making this a doctrinal position found well before 
contemporary belief. Mumme's arguments (1988, 87—89) for doubting that this 
could be the work of Nayanar Accan Pillai is not dissimilar to the controversy 
regarding Ramanuja’s authorship of the Gadyatraya, which I have addressed in 
some detail in my 2007 book: stylistically, she suggests it is different (too sim- 
ple) compared to the same author's other doctrinal works and ideologically it 
is far too radical for its time, anticipating a doctrine of ācāryabhimāna centred 
on Ramanuja which only came much later. 

The detailed look I have taken at the Caramopayanirnaya, to be dealt with in 
another paper, shows a great deal of doctrinal convergence with the rw. Indeed, 
both works in their emotional appeal to Ramanuja within a salvific framework 


[as in the saying], “if you were to give me the certain prize, then we are meant to obtain 
it’, with regard to all his activities do and not do what he [the acarya] commands.” 

Arthapaficakam vyākhyāna, p. 68: ācāryāpimānamāvatu ivayonrukkum caktananrik- 
kēyiruppān oruvanaik kurittu, ivanutaiya ilavaiyum, ivanaip perrāl īcuvaranukk uņtāna prī- 
tiyaiyum anusantittu stanantaya prajaikku vyātiyuņtānāl atu tan kuraiyāka ninaitta ausata 
sēvaiyaip pannum matavaippole ivanukkaka tan upāyānustānam panni raksikavalla para- 
matayāluvāna makāpākavatan apimānattilē otunki, vallaparicu varuvipparel atu kantum 
enru collukirapatiye sakalapravrttinvrttikalaiyum avanittavalakkākkukai. 


210 RAMAN 


allow one to assume that Ramanuja's salvific qualities, stretching to a point 
where they can extend over historical posterior time, had become accepted 
doctrine in at least one important strand of the tradition, even within (if not 
shortly after) his postulated dates. That Vedanta Desika, for his part, was also 
not unaware of these views centred around Ramanuja becomes clear from a 
particular passage of his major work on prapatti, the Rahasyatrayasaram. In 
Chapter 8 of the text, where he is discussing the different categories of those 
qualified for prapatti (adhikarivibhaga), Vedanta Desika differentiates between 
the uktinisthan person, whose prapatti is based upon the utterance taught to 
them by their ācārya, and the ācāryanisthan person, whose prapatti is done for 
them by their ācārya. Regarding this second category of persons, he has this to 
say: 


Among these [two categories], the ācāryanisthan is himself included 
within the ācārya's laying down of his burden (bharasamarpanam) 
with regard to him and his own .... For this ācāryanisthan, according to 
the axiom of “how much more, then” (kaumutika nyāya), there can be 
no doubt as to the attainment of the fruit. Mutaliyantan [Ramanuja’s 
nephew] taught the verse: like those creatures on the body of a lion 
that leaps from one mountain to another, when Bhasyakara |Rāmānuja] 
jointly leaps [does prapatti], then, due to our bodily relationship with him 
[i.e. being related to him due to kinship ties], we too have been elevated 
[we get the same salvific benefits as he does].2* 


Vedanta Desika is fully aware that these words attributed to Mutaliyantan 
are capable of being understood as implying that Ramanuja’s act of prapatti 
becomes the single soteriological event that saves all those who come after him 
in the community. Precisely to firmly reject such an understanding he adds, 
almost immediately, the following emphasis: 


In the Nyasatilakam [verse 21] we also said: “The blind man is able to move 
about led by the one with sight, O Lord of $rirangam; the cripple, placed 
within a boat, is taken across by a boatman; the children of a servant relish 
[royal] food though they don't know the king; thus will my compassion- 


25 Vedanta Dešika (1980, 293-296): ivarkaļil acaryanisthan .... ācāryanutaiya ātmātmīyabha- 
rasamarpaņattilē tānum antarbhūtan. ... ācāryanisthanukku kaumutikanyāyattālē pha- 
lasiddhiyil sandeham illai. oru malayil ninrum oru malaiyilē tāvum simhacarirattil jan- 
tukkalaippole bhasyakarar samyoga langhanam panna avarotu untana kutaltuvakattālē 
namum uttirnar avuvom enru mutaliyantan arulicceyta pacuram. 


REFLECTIONS ON THE KING OF ASCETICS (YATIRĀJA) 211 


ate teacher help me to reach you” The Lord of All will not relent to give 
the supreme goal without prapatti being done in some way through some 
person.26 


The significant point here is that De$ika is citing poetry of his own to show 
that the acarya is the helper, even up to a point where he can do the prap- 
atti for you. What this means that is that it is your current ācārya who can do 
this for you, and this is what the Nyasatilakam verse elaborates. This does not 
mean that Ramanuja's prapatti at one historical moment absolves his entire 
community from henceforth doing it. Thus, Vedanta Dešika is concerned to 
subtly disagree with the statement of Mutaliyantan's or at least differs in his 
interpretation from what it comes to mean later within the Tenkalai tradition. 

Ultimately, the doctrinal musings on Ramanuja are central to a theme that 
lies at the heart of the tradition: the issue of how to reconfigure the nature of 
God's and the religious canon's own accessibility to the community of ordi- 
nary devotees. Succinctly put, the literature of the Šrīvaisņava tradition has 
repeatedly reconfigured the motif of accessibility both to enable the incor- 
poration of doctrinal change and to allow for canonical expansion. Thus, the 
central argument in the equation of the Tiviyappirapantam and the Vedas is 
one of the accessibility of Vedic revelation in a manner that overcomes lin- 
guistic, caste and gender boundaries. We see this elaborated in detail for the 
first time in Nafijiyar’s Arayirappati vyakhyanam and then more radically reit- 
erated in the Acaryahrdayam of Alakiya Manavalapperumal Nayanar. The rN is 
also drawing upon this theme of accessibility— suggesting that Ramanuja’s feet 
provide the same refuge in the Kali Yuga that Krsna's did in the Dvapara Yuga. 
While Vedanta Desika is determined to pay homage to Ramanuja's significance 
within the tradition and sees him as occupying a summit of his own, he is also 
determined to place him within a framework that establishes the coherence of 
the school of Visistadvaita as a whole. The differences between the two poems 
are reflective of the differences, broadly speaking, in the hermeneutical strate- 
gies between the Tenkalai and Vatakalai literature, which Mumme (1988) again 
summarizes so well: the Tenkalai literature, in general, leans towards hyperbole 
and dramatic intensity, drawing heavily upon popular idioms and metaphors 
and rooting itself in the Tamil, devotional poetry. In contrast, in Vedanta Desika, 


26 Vedanta Desika (1980, 296—297): andho' nandhagrahaņavašago yati rangeša yadvat, pan- 
gur naukakuharanihito niyate navikena | bhunkte bhogan aviditanrpah sevakasyarbhaka- 
dih, tvatsampraptau prabhavati tathā dešiko me dayāluh || enru nyāsatilakattilē connom. 
Eténum oru parkaramākavumām, àrénum oruvar anustikkavumām prapattikk allatu sar- 
vešvaran purusārtham kotukka irankan enratāyirru. 


212 RAMAN 


particularly we see the need to balance rhetorical flourishes with scholastic 
precision. He wishes to be seen to be speaking for the coherence of the tradi- 
tion as a whole, particularly in order that it withstand pan-Vedāntic scholas- 
tic scrutiny. For him, homage to Rāmānuja must not lead, through rhetorical 
excess, to a new and radical turn in the doctrine of prapatti, as it does in the 
Tenkalai case. 

The analysis of the stotra literature on Ramanuja here, by no means exhaus- 
tive but rather exemplary of the formative phase of doctrine, also reinforces 
for us what has already been established for Ramanuja's own writings, as in the 
case of the Gadyatraya: that devotional poetry composed not just by the alvars 
but also the later ācāryas is as central as commentaries and independent works 
to the evolution of $rivaisnava doctrine. 

Finally, it is no mere coincidence that both the Vatakalai and Tenkalai nityā- 
nusamdhānam texts begin with a pool of common single, independent verses 
(taniyan) of salutation to each figure in turn in one's guruparamparā, which Šrī- 
vaisnavas are encouraged to recite on a daily basis. Both contain Kurattalvan's 
taniyan that ends with the words asmadguror bhagavato 'sya dayaikasindhoh, 
rāmānujasya caraņau $aranam prapadye. This convergence in Rāmānuja as the 
object of veneration speaks for his centrality—as the central gemstone in the 
necklace of the guruparamparā, as Vedanta Desika says in his poem (verse 15): 
a pendant that holds together, gives structure to and makes resplendent not 
just the individual beads of the necklace but indeed, as the other acaryas who 
are themselves likened to the beads of the necklace would say, adorning and 
forming the dazzling central gemstone of the entire tradition. 


Abbreviations 
IN Iramanuja Nūrrantāti of Tiruvarankattamutanar. 
Ys Yatirājasaptati of Vedanta Dešika. 
Acknowledgements 
My thanks go to Elisa Freschi and Marcus Schmiicker for their careful reading 


of the first draft and Harunaga Isaacson for his generous correction of errors 
and felicitous reformulations of some textual passages. 


REFLECTIONS ON THE KING OF ASCETICS (YATIRĀJA) 213 
References 


Annankaracariyar, Prativati Payankaram. 1955. Pūrvācāriya Vaipavam. Kaficipuram: 
Granthamala Office. 

Hardy, Friedhelm W. 1979. "The Tamil Veda of a Šūdra Saint. (The Šrīvaisņava Inter- 
pretation of Nammālvār)” In Contributions to South Asian Studies, edited by Gopal 
Krishna, 29—87. Delhi: Oxford University Press. 

Hardy, Friedhelm W. 1983. Viraha-Bhakti. The Early History of Krsna Devotion in South 
India. New Delhi: Oxford University Press. 

Kirusnacuvami Aiyyankar, S. 1993. Srimaturakaviyalvar arulicceyta Kanninun-ciruttam- 
pu vyākyānankaļ. Tiruccirāpaļļi: Puttar Akirakaram. 

Mumme, Patricia Y. 1988. The Srivaisnava Theological Dispute. Maņavāļamāmuni and 
Vedanta Desika. Madras: New Era Publications. 

Mumme, Patricia Y. 1998. “The Evolution of the Tenkalai Understanding of the Acarya: 
Teacher, Mediator and Saviour.” Journal of the Ananthacharya Indological Research 
Institute 1: 75—98. 

Pillai Lokacarya. 20u. Arthaparicakam. With the Commentary of Pillai Lokam Cīyar. 
Tiruchi: Srivaisnavasri. 

Raghavan, V.K.S.N. 1979. History of Visistadvaita Literature. Delhi: Ajanta Publications. 

Raman, Srilata. 2007. Self-Surrender (Prapatti) to God in Srivaisnavism. Tamil Cats and 
Sanskrit Monkeys. Routledge Hindu Studies Series. Routledge: London and New 
York. 

Raman, Srilata. 2011. “Tamil, Vaisnava, Vaidika: Kirusnacuvami Aiyankar, Irāmānuja Tāt- 
acariyar and Modern Tamil Literary History.’ Journal of Indian Philosophy 39 (6): 
647—676. 

Stoker, Valerie. 2016. Polemics and Patronage in the City of Victory: Vyasatirtha, Hindu 
Sectarianism, and the Sixteenth-Century Vijayanagara Court. California: University 
of California Press. 

Tiruvarankattamutanar. 1999. Irāmānucanūrrantāti. Periyactyar Ciyar arulicceyta urai- 
yum, Pillai Lēkācārya Ciyar arulicceyta Vyakyanamum. Srirangam: Srivaisnavasri. 
Vedanta Dešika. 2010. Yatiraja Saptatih. Vaiyakaranamurdhanyena Kūttapākkam Vatsya 
Nīlameghācāryeņa krtà samskrtavyākhyā. Srirahkam Srimat Āņtavan Asramaveliy- 

itu. 

Vedanta Dešika. 1980. Srimad Vedanta Desika's Srimad Rahasya Trayasara with Sara Vis- 
tara (Commentary) by Sri Uttamur T. Viraraghavacharya. Madras: Ubhayavedànta 
Granthamala. 

Zvelebil, Kamil V. 1974. A History of Indian Literature. Tamil Literature. Wiesbaden: Har- 


rasowitz. 


PART 3 


Religion, the State, and Social History 


CHAPTER 9 


Not to Worry, Vasistha Will Sort It Out: 
The Role of the Purohita in the Raghuvamša 


Csaba Dezsó 


It is my greatest pleasure to dedicate this paper to Professor Alexis Sanderson, 
whose guidance I was fortunate to have during my doctoral studies at the Uni- 
versity of Oxford. I couldn't have wished for a better supervisor. His formidable 
knowledge of the intellectual history of early-mediaeval India has been both 
overwhelming and inspiring right from the first lectures I attended. The reason 
why I hold that without the sound skills of philology it is pointless to undertake 
the study of the past is to a large extent thanks to the mastery he has shown in 
using those skills. The breadth of his learning and his keen interest in diverse 
aspects of classical Indian culture prevented me from ever feeling uncomfort- 
able for not doing research on Saivism, his main field, but persisting in studying 
kāvya. Our tutorials had a formative influence on my scholarship; they were 
always stimulating and eminently enjoyable. I am grateful to have had the good 
fortune of being his student. 

Recounting the deeds of several kings of a royal lineage, Kalidasa's epic 
does not describe a single hero's rise to success (abhyudaya). One could regard 
with Bonisoli-Alquati (2008, 105) the dynasty itself as the protagonist of the 
Raghuvamša. There is one character, however, whose timely interventions help 
the continuance of the dynasty throughout the whole epic: this character is 
Vasistha, the royal chaplain, purohita. But how is it possible that Vasistha was 
the purohita and guru of the Sūryavamša for so many generations? Is it the same 
Vasistha? 

A legend in the Taittirtya Samhita tells us that among the sages it was Vasistha 
alone who could see Indra. The god taught him the Stomabhagas with the 
charge that any king who had him as purohita would thereby flourish if Vasistha 
did not tell the Stomabhagas to other sages. “Therefore—teaches the text—one 
should have a descendant of Vasistha (a Vasistha) as one’s brahman priest." The 


1 Taittirtya Samhita 3.5.2.6: tismād Vāsisth6 brahmā karyah. In the later Šatapatha Brāhmaņa 
we read that formerly only a descendant of Vasistha could become brahman, but now anyone 
who is suitable can (12.6.1.41, quoted in Minkowski 1991, 126). 


© CSABA DEZSÓ, 2020 | DOI:10.1163/9789004432802_011 


This is an open access chapter distributed under the terms of the CC BY-NC 4.0 license. 


218 DEZSO 


brahman was the priest who silently monitored the ritual. He was associated 
with the Atharvaveda and with the office of the family priest, the purohita of 
the patron of the sacrifice, the yajamana.* We may connect with these Vedic 
passages the tradition that Vasistha or several Vasisthas were the purohita(s) 
of the kings of Ayodhya, the members of the Iksvaku- or Sūryavamša. Pargiter 
(1922, 203 ff.) distinguished seven Vasisthas in the legends, but, as he pointed 
out, these Vasisthas merged into one person. Thus we read in the Mahabharata 
(1164.9cd—11): 


Iksvakavo mahīpālā lebhire prthivim imam. 
purohitavaram prāpya Vasistham rsisattamam 
Ējire kratubhis capi nrpas te kurunandana. 

sa hi tàn yajayam asa sarvān nypatisattamān 
brahmarsih Pandavasrestha Brhaspatir ivāmarān. 


The Iksvāku kings conquered this world. 

Having obtained Vasistha, the best of sages, as their excellent purohita, 

those kings performed sacrifices, O descendant of the Kurus. 

For that brahmin sage officiated for all those great kings at their sacri- 
fices, 

O best of the Pandavas, as Brhaspati did for the gods. 


In the Raghuvamša, too, it is the same Vasistha who is the purohita of the 
whole dynasty. As Dilipa says to the priest (1.71cd): Iksvākūnām durāpe the 
tvadadhīnā hi siddhayah,? “For the successes of the Iksvakus depend on you in 
goals that are hard to achieve” When Rama returns from Lanka he also greets 
Vasistha as the guru of the lineage of Iksvaku (iksvākuvamšagurave pranamya 
w+) 13.70). 

Both Vedic and epic texts emphasise the purohita’s role by the king’s side 
in achieving victories and averting dangers.* As Gonda (1975, 322) has shown, 
this protective function is already expressed by the name of the office: puro 
hita means “placed in front,” that is in front of the king like a shield. In the 
Aitareya Brahmana we read that “the gods do not eat the food of that king 


2 Cf Paficavimsa Brahmana 12.8.6: annam vai brahmanah purodha, “the office of the purohita 
is the food of the brahman.” 

3 I quote the verses of Raghuvamáa 1-6 from Goodall and Isaacson 2003, and the verses of can- 
tos 7—19 from Nandargikar 1982, unless indicated otherwise. 

4 Gonda 1975 passim, Gonda 1956, 150 ff. 


NOT TO WORRY, VASISTHA WILL SORT IT OUT 219 


who has no purohita,” and “the purohita is half of the ksatriya's self”* he is 
the protector of the kingdom, rāstragopa.” This close relationship between 
king and chaplain and their co-operation in the protection of the state is 
expressed in a verse of the Raghuvamša in which Kalidasa writes about king 
Atithi (17.38): 


Vasisthasya guror mantrah sāyakās tasya dhanvinah 
kim tat sadhyam yad ubhaye sādhayeyur na sangatah? 


The mantras of Vasistha, the guru, and the arrows of that archer— 
what is there to achieve that these two could not achieve when 
united? 


According to the Arthašāstra the purohita had a central place among the king’s 
closest advisers. The ninth chapter of its first book gives us some details about 
the person of the royal chaplain (1.9.9—10): 


purohitam uditoditakulasilam sange vede daive nimitte dandanityam 
cābhivinītam āpadām daivamānusīņām atharvabhir upayais ca 
pratikartāram kurvīta. 

tam ācāryam šisyah pitaram putro bhrtyah svāminam iva cānuvarteta. 


He should appoint as chaplain a man who comes from a very distin- 
guished family and has an equally distinguished character, who is 
thoroughly trained in the Veda together with the limbs, in divine 
omens, and in government, and who could counteract divine and 
human adversities through Atharvan means. 

He should follow him as a pupil his teacher, a son his father, and a ser- 
vant his master. 


trans. OLIVELLE 2013, 74 


When Dilipa visits Vasistha in his ashram he extolls the merits of the purohita 
in preserving the welfare of the kingdom. Vasistha is the one who “counteracts 


5 Aitareya Brāhmaņa 8.24.2: na ha và apurohitasya rajno devā annam adanti (quoted in Gonda 
1975, 320). 

6 Aitareya Brāhmaņa 7.26.4: ardhātmo ha và esa ksatriyasya yat purohitah (quoted in Gonda 
1975, 320.) 

7 Aitareya Brāhmaņa 8.25.2 (quoted in Gonda 1975, 332). 


220 DEZSO 


both divine and human calamities”$ The Arthašāstra lists eight divine disas- 
ters (4.3.1): fire, water, famine, rats, harmful animals, snakes and demons. In 
another passage (8.4.1) it mentions fire, flood, disease, famine and epidemic. 
The mantras and rituals of the Atharvaveda and thus the purohita who was 
an expert in Atharvavedic rituals had major roles in averting these calamities.? 
Vasistha's “holy spells defeat the enemy even from a distance,” and “his offer- 
ing thrown into the fire becomes rain for the crops parched by drought." It 
is the sacred power (brahmavarcasa) of the purohita thanks to which diseases 
and other disasters avoid the people (1.63). The king attributes the welfare and 
safety of his country to his guru (1.64): 


tad evam cintyamanasya guruna Brahmayoninā 
sanubandhah katham na syuh sampado me nirāpadah? 


Therefore when my guru, who was born from Brahma, takes care of me 
in this way, 

how could my accomplishments not be continuous, free from calami- 
ties? 


Vasistha, who is well-versed in yoga, discovers with the help of concentration 
what causes Dilipa’s childlessness: once he failed to salute Surabhi, the sacred 
cow, who cursed the king, at least in some versions of the texts. In another ver- 
sion it is the king’s negligence in itself that made him childless.!? Luckily the 
grandchild of Surabhi is in Vasistha’s ashram, so the king can wait on her to 
obtain her blessing. As soon as her name has been uttered the holy cow appears: 
a good omen according to the sage, who is also an expert in the interpretation 
of signs, as a purohita should indeed be. 

In the eleventh sarga Dašaratha is on his way back from the court of the 
king of Mithila, where they have celebrated the weddings of his sons, when he 
encounters ominous signs: strong headwinds tear the flags of his army, a fright- 
ening circle surrounds the sun, the points of the compass filled with red clouds 


8 Raghuvamša 1.60: daivīnām manusinam ca pratikartā tvam apadam, cf. Ayyar 1925, 8. 

9 Arthasastra 9.7.84 prescribes the rites of the Atharvaveda against too much or too little 
rain, and against demons, 4.3.40 also against demons, while 4.3.35 against snakes. On the 
association of the purohita with the Atharvavedic tradition see Sanderson 2007, 204f., 
notes 28 and 29. 

10  Raghuvamša 1.61: mantrair durat samyamitāribhih. 

11  Raghuvamša 1.62: havir āvarjitam ... vrstībhavati sasyanam avagrahavisositam. 

12 On these variants see Dezső 2014, 163 f. 


NOT TO WORRY, VASISTHA WILL SORT IT OUT 221 


resemble a menstruating woman, and female jackals are howling.!? Dasaratha 
asks for Vasistha’s help (11.61 in Vallabhadeva's text):!* 


tat pratīpapavanādi vaikrtam ksiprasantam adhikrtya krtyavit 
anvayunkta gurum isvarah ksiteh svantam ity alaghayat sa tad- 
vyathām. 


The king who knew what to do asked his guru about those portents like 
the headwind etc., 

if they would be averted soon, and he removed his fears saying, "It will 
end well.” 


The southern commentators (Mallinātha, Aruņagirinātha and Hemadri) read 
the second pada as preksya santim adhikrtya (v. 62 in their version), that is 
Dašaratha asks the purohita about the pacifying ritual that guells the ills. 
Vasistha's reply, “it will end well” might mean in this case that there is no need 
to perform such a ritual. The omens indicate the arrival of Para$urama, who is 
defeated by Rama, so the story does indeed end well.!5 

The purohita performed such important ceremonies for the royal family as 
the rituals associated with childbirth. As we read in the Arthasastra (117.26): 
prajatayah putrasamskaram purohitah kuryāt, "When she (i.e. the queen) has 
delivered, the chaplain should perform the rite of passage for the son" (trans. 
Olivelle 2013, 89). As Olivelle (2013, 486) remarks, this may also refer to the rites 
of early childhood, possibly including the upanayana. In the Raghuvamša we 
see that Vasistha performs the priestly duties when Dilipa's son Raghu is born 
(318): 


sa jātakarmaņy akhile tapasvinā tapovanad etya purodhasā krte 
Dilipasünur manir ākarodgatah prayuktasamskāra ivādhikam babhau. 


When the complete birth ritual was done by the ascetic chaplain who 
had come from the grove of ascetics, 

Dilipa's son shone yet more, like a precious stone taken from a mine and 
then polished. 


13 Raghuvamsa 11.57-60 in Vallabhadeva's commentary, 58—61 in Mallinatha's. 

14 Quoted from a draft edition prepared by Dominic Goodall, Harunaga Isaacson, Csaba Kiss, 
and myself. 

15 The source of the story is Ramayana 1.73.7 ff. 


222 DEZSO 


In Kālidāsa's poetry, as Ingalls (1976, 19) has observed, ritual is associated 
with beauty. The purohita is like the jeweller who polishes the precious stone 
and transforms it into a gem. He performs the life-cycle rituals that make the 
individual a member of civilised society. 

The purohita also had an important role in the marriage ceremonies of 
the royal families. Aja and Indumati were wed by the chaplain of Indumati's 
brother (7.20): 


tatrarcito Bhojapateh purodhā hutvāgnim ājyādibhir agnikalpah 
tam eva cadhaya vivahasaksye vadhivarau samgamayam cakara. 


There lord Bhoja’s venerable chaplain, who was like fire, offered clarified 
butter and other things to the fire, 

and having made the same [fire] witness to the marriage he wed the 
bride and the groom. 


At the end of his life Raghu entrusted the kingdom to his son, Aja, and lived 
the life of a yogin, aiming for apavarga, liberation from the cycle of rebirths 
(8.16). He chose the time of his death himself: “by yogic meditation he reached 
the eternal Soul, beyond darkness” (tamasah param āpad avyayam purusam 
yogasamādhinā, 8.24). The verse describing Raghu’s funeral ceremonies is 
transmitted in two versions. Vallabhadeva knew the following version (8.26):!6 


Srutadehavisarjanah pitus ciram ašrūņi visrjya Raghavah 
vitatana samam purodhasā kratum antyam prthivisatakratoh. (8.26) 


When he heard that his father had laid off his body, Raghu's son shed 
tears for a long time, 

and then performed the final sacrifice of that Indra of the earth together 
with the chaplain. 


The second half is transmitted in the southern commentaries as follows (8.25cd 
in Mallinātha, Aruņagirinātha and Hemādri): 


vidadhe vidhim asya naisthikam yatibhih sārdham anagnim agnicit. 


16 Quoted from a draft edition prepared by Dominic Goodall, Harunaga Isaacson, Csaba Kiss, 
and myself. 


NOT TO WORRY, VASISTHA WILL SORT IT OUT 223 


... he, who had arranged the sacrificial fires, performed his last rites with- 
out fire together with the ascetics. 


According to this version Raghu's body was not cremated but buried, as it was 
the custom in the case of samnyasins, ascetics striving for final liberation. The 
purohita is not mentioned in this version; it was rather Raghu’s fellow yogins 
who attended the ceremony. In the version known to Vallabhadeva it is not 
made explicit that the ritual was performed without fire, and Vasistha, the puro- 
hita was also present. If we suppose that this was the original version, the text 
known to the later commentators might be the result of a correction or dis- 
ambiguation: since Raghu had retired from secular life and was striving for 
moksa as a renunciant, it might have seemed more correct to have his burial 
performed by the community of ascetics.!” However, the question might be 
more complicated, since in the variants of the verses describing Raghu's final 
years, as well as in the Keralan commentaries and that of Hemadri, we can 
detect a tendency to weed out or explain away references to Raghu being a 
samnyasin. But in this verse, interestingly, it is the Southern commentators’ ver- 
sion in which Raghu is clearly treated as a deceased yati. Raghu's position as a 
retired king was not without ambiguities: his son, Aja, did not allow him to 
retire to the forest, so Raghu moved to a place outside the palace, bahih ksiti- 
palavesmanah, at least in Vallabhadeva's version (8.14),!8 because the Southern 
commentators knew a text according to which the old king moved outside the 
town, purad bahih.!? Here we perhaps see the same effort that tries to make 
Raghu's position less ambiguous and to move him further away from the palace 
and worldly life. But this effort is not completely successful since in the second 
half of the same verse we read that $ri, the goddess of wealth and royal majesty, 
who was now enjoyed by his son, served Raghu like a daughter-in-law (samu- 
pāsyata putrabhogyaya snusayevavikrtendriyah ériya), which means that Raghu 
did not entirely live the life of an ascetic. 

The king of the last canto of the epic, Agnivarna, lived a dissolute life and 
died of a consuming disease. His death was kept secret (19.54): 


tam grhopavana eva samgatah pašcimakratuvidā purodhasa 
rogašāntim apadisya mantrinah sambhrte sikhini gūdham adadhuh. 


17 Thus Goodall 2001, 121. 

18 8.14ab: sa bahih ksitipālavešmano nivasann āvasathe yativratah ... (Quoted from a draft 
edition prepared by Dominic Goodall, Harunaga Isaacson, Csaba Kiss, and myself.) 

19 8.14ab: sa kilasramam antyam āšrito nivasann avasathe purād bahih. 


224 DEZSO 


The ministers joined by the chaplain who knew the last rites placed him 
on the pyre in secret 

in the palace garden, under the pretext of a ceremony that averts dis- 
ease. 


The ministers and the purohita concealed the king's death because they wanted 
to secure the succession to the throne. Since Agnivarna did not have a son, they 
placed his pregnant widow on the throne, in accordance with the instructions 
of the Arthašāstra (5.6.36).29 

The purohita had a central role in the ceremony of the royal consecration. 
About Aja we read the following in the Raghuvamša (8.3—4): 


anubhūya Vasisthasambhrtaih salilais tasya mahabhisecanam 
visadocchvasitena medini kathayam asa krtarthatam iva. 

sa babhūva durāsadah parair guruņātharvavidā krtakriyah 
pavanāgnisamāgamo hy ayam sahitam brahma yad astratejasā. 


Having experienced his great consecration with water gathered by 
Vasistha, 

the earth seemed to express her contentment with clear sighs. 

When the ritual had been performed for him by the guru who knew the 
Atharvaveda, he became unassailable by his enemies, 

for when brahman is united with the power of weapons it is a union of 
wind and fire. 


Both Aruņagirinātha and Mallinātha guote ad loc. the Manusmrti which 
teaches the inseparability of royal and priestly power (9.322):?! 


nabrahma ksatram rdhnoti naksatram brahma vardhate 
brahma ksatram ca samprktam iha camutra vardhate. 


The Ksatriya does not flourish without the Brahmin, and the Brahmin 
does not prosper without the Ksatriya; 

but when Brahmin and Ksatriya are united, they prosper here and in the 
hereafter. 


trans. OLIVELLE 2005, 206 


20 See Dezső 2014, 161f. Though many generations separate Raghu and Agnivarna, Vallab- 
hadeva also identifies the purohita of the latter as Vasistha (commentary to 19.54). 
21 Cf. Ayyar 1925, 8. 


NOT TO WORRY, VASISTHA WILL SORT IT OUT 225 


In the case of Atithi's consecration Kālidāsa stresses the importance of 
Atharvavedic mantras (17.13): 


purohitapurogās tam jisnum jaitrair atharvabhih 
upacakramire pürvam abhisektum dvijatayah. 


The brahmins headed by the chaplain began to consecrate him who was 
destined to victory 
first with Atharvavedic mantras that lead to victory. 


The rituals performed by the purohita made the king invincible in battle. When 
Raghu was about to set off to defeat Kuvera, the god of riches, Vasistha empow- 
ered his chariot (5.27): 


Vasisthamantroksaņajāt prabhāvād udanvadākāšamahīdharesu 
marutsakhasyeva balāhakasya gatir vijaghne na hi tadrathasya. 


Due to the power arisen from the sprinkling performed with mantras by 
Vasistha 

the course of his chariot was not blocked on the ocean, in the sky and in 
the mountains, like that of a cloud helped by the wind. 


The source of the mantras used by the purohita was again probably the Athar- 
vaveda. The ritual manual of the Kaušikasūtra (15.31) contains several verses 
prescribed for the consecration of the chariot. 

In the Raghuvamáa we see the purohita at every important ceremonial occa- 
sion taking place in the royal court, from the birth of the heir through the 
marriage of the prince to the funeral of the king. Vasistha protected the king's 
person and made him invincible in battle with his Atharvavedic mantras. On 
the other hand Vasistha was also the guru and adviser of the king who showed 
him the path to be followed: we see him in this role in the eighth canto when 
he comes to the support of the despairing Aja. 

When a garland falling from the sky kills his wife, Aja laments over her with 
some of the most moving verses of Sanskrit literature. The only reason he does 
not throw himself on the funeral pyre is that people would speak badly of a 
king who follows a woman in death. Vasistha learns in his ashram that Aja has 
been paralysed by grief,?? and since he is engaged in a ritual and therefore can- 


22  abhisangajadam: 8.75 in Mallinatha, 76 in Hemadri, 73 in Aruņagirinātha. Vallabhadeva 
reads abhisaūginam (8.76). 


226 DEZSO 


not visit the king personally he sends one of his disciples to convey Aja his 
message. Vasistha knows everything that has happened, happens or will hap- 
pen in heaven, on earth or in the netherworld, so he tells Aja in his message 
that Indumatī was a cursed apsaras who had to live in a human body until she 
was touched by a heavenly garland. Aja should stop grieving (8.84 in Vallabha- 
deva):23 


tad alam tadapāyacintayā vipad utpattimatām avasthitā 
vasudheyam aveksyatam tvayā vasumatyā hi nrpāh kalatriņah. 


So do not think about her death. Those who have been born will surely 
die. 
Have regard for this Earth, for the Earth is the true wife of kings. 


Vasistha first expresses the truism we also find in the Bhagavadgita, jatasya hi 
dhruvo mrtyuh, “death is certain for all that is born.7^ Then he reminds Aja of 
his duty as a king: he must protect the earth, who, as the goddess Earth, is also 
his wife. This idea has already appeared in the same canto: Raghu handed over 
Aja the earth as a second Indumati, and Aja took possession of the earth gently, 
as one enjoys a newly wedded wife (8.7). His divine wife gave him lots of gems, 
his human wife gave him a valorous son (8.28). But Aja's lament makes it clear 
whom he regards as his real wife (8.53 in Vallabhadeva):25 


manasāpi na vipriyam maya krtapūrvam nanu kim jahāsi màm 
vata šabdapatih ksiter aham tvayi me bhāvanibandhanam manah. 


Surely I have not offended you even in my thoughts, why are you leaving 
me? 

Truly I am the earth's husband only in name, my heart is bound with 
feelings to you. 


If we consider Aja’s words we might suspect that Vasistha’s admonition will not 
have much effect on him. 


23 Quoted from a draft edition prepared by Dominic Goodall, Harunaga Isaacson, Csaba Kiss, 
and myself. 

24  Bhagavadgītā 2.27, quoted by Vallabhadeva ad loc. 

25 Quoted from a draft edition prepared by Dominic Goodall, Harunaga Isaacson, Csaba Kiss, 
and myself. 


NOT TO WORRY, VASISTHA WILL SORT IT OUT 227 


The disciple continues Vasistha’s message as follows (8.85 in Vallabhadeva):26 


udaye yad avapyam ujjhata srutam aviskrtam atmanas tvaya 
manasas tad upasthite jvare punar aklīvatayā prakāšyatām. 


The learning that you showed when you avoided what could have been 
achieved in the time of success— 
demonstrate the same again like a man now that your heart is suffering. 


“What could have been achieved” (avāpyam) and what Aja avoided was, ac- 


cording to Vallabhadeva, ecstasy or being overjoyed (praharsam madam va). As 


at the time of success he could stay away from an excessive mental state, in the 


same way he should behave like a man and be composed at the time of grief.2” 
Aja could not find Indumati even if he followed her in death, since those who 
live in the other world go on paths that differ according to their karma (8.86 in 
Vallabhadeva). Aja should stop crying because the tears of the relatives burn 


the departed souls (a belief we also read about in texts on dharmasastra?®). 


Then Vasistha's message becomes more philosophical:29 


26 


27 


28 


29 


maranam prakrtih šarīriņām vikrtir jīvitam ucyate budhaiņ. 
ksanam apy avatisthate svasan yadi jantur nanu lābhavān asau. (8.88 in 
Vallabhadeva) 


The wise say that death is the natural state of embodied creatures and 
life is a change in that state. 
If a being remains breathing even for a moment it is surely fortunate. 


avagacchati mūdhacetanah priyanasam hrdi $alyam arpitam, 
itaras tu tad eva manyate kusaladvarataya samuddhrtam. (8.89 in Vallab- 
hadeva) 


Quoted from a draft edition prepared by Dominic Goodall, Harunaga Isaacson, Csaba Kiss, 
and myself. 

Instead of yad avāpyam Mallinatha (8.84) and Arunagirinatha (8.82) read madavācyam, 
while Hemādri reads yad avācyam (8.85). 

E.g. Yajfiavalkyasmrti 3, n: slesmasru bāndhavair muktam preto bhunkte yato 'vasah | tas- 
man na roditavyam hi kriyā kāryā prayatnatah ||, quoted by Vallabhadeva and Arunagiri- 
nātha ad loc. 

Quoted from a draft edition prepared by Dominic Goodall, Harunaga Isaacson, Csaba Kiss, 
and myself. 


228 DEZSO 


The foolish man regards the loss of his dear one as a dart shot into his 
heart. 

Another man looks on the same as a dart that has been pulled out, for it 
is a door to beatitude. 


svašarīrašarīriņāv api smrtasamyogaviparyayau yada 
virahah kam ivānutāpayed vada bāhyair visayair vipascitam? (8, go in 
Vallabhadeva) 


When we are taught that our own body and soul unite and then sepa- 
rate, 

tell me which wise person should be tormented by separation from the 
external objects of the senses? 


Death should be regarded as an unavoidable, natural event, which can even 
be beneficial: as Vallabhadeva says, when attachment ceases, one attains the 
imperishable state (snehaksayat kila nirapayapadavaptih), the cutting of one’s 
emotional bonds helps achieve the stopping of rebirth and redeath. Aja should 
regard his dead wife as one of the sense objects he meets and is parted from 
every day. 

Finally Vasistha appeals to Aja’s pride:3° 


na prthagjanavac chuco vašam vasinam uttama gantum arhasi. 
drumasanumatoh kim antaram yadi vayau dvitaye pi te calāh? (8.91 in 
Vallabhadeva) 


Best of the self-controlled! You ought not to become subject to grief like 
common people. 

What would be the difference between a tree and a mountain if both 
shook in the wind? 


When Dusyanta gives way to despair over the loss of Sakuntala, the vidūsaka 
expresses his puzzlement with similar words: “How have things got this far? 
How could the fortitude of good men be affected by grief? Surely mountains 
remain unshaken even by a storm wind”! Dusyanta is shaken up by Matali, 


30 Quoted from a draft edition prepared by Dominic Goodall, Harunaga Isaacson, Csaba Kiss, 
and myself. 

31  Abhifianasakuntala 6, 103 (p. 278): kim nedam īdisam uvaņadam? kadā una sappurisā 
soabaddhadiyyā honti? nam pavādeņa vi girīo nippakampa. Trans. Vasudeva 2006, 279. 


NOT TO WORRY, VASISTHA WILL SORT IT OUT 229 


Indras charioteer, who pretends to kidnap the vidūsaka and thus arouses in 
the king his fighting spirit and his sense of duty to protect others. 

Aja seemingly acquiesced in the words of his purohita, but, as Kālidāsa 
writes, Vasistha's counsel *could not find a place in his heart full of grief and 
returned, as it were, to his guru” together with the disciple.? The king took 
into consideration that his son was not yet of age and reigned eight more years, 
while his only solace was the likeness of his beloved (similarly to Dusyanta who 
found pleasure only in painting a portrait of Sakuntala). When his heart was 
completely shattered by grief, Aja starved himself to death and left his body 
behind at the confluence of the Ganga and the Sarayū. Then he met his beloved 
again in Indra’s heaven in a form that surpassed her former beauty. 

We do not know what Kalidasa’s sources were for Aja’s tragic story, but there 
is a work with which we can make interesting comparisons: Asvaghosa’s Bud- 
dhacarita.? When prince Siddhartha leaves the palace to live the life of a 
wandering ascetic in search of the teaching that gives liberation, the king’s min- 
ister and purohita undertake to find him and appeal to his better self. Though 
they do not trust in the success of their undertaking, they set off nevertheless, 
setting off a battle between the bodhisattva and the diverse rules of scrip- 
ture.34 

Like in the Raghuvaméa, we read about a message, but in the Buddhacarita it 
is the purohita who conveys the words of the king to his son, a king whose heart 
has been transfixed by the dart of grief.?5 The king is inconsolable because Sid- 
dhartha has not waited until his old age, as is prescribed in the šāstras, to retire 
to the forest in search of moksa, and so his father could not transfer the king- 
dom to his son and retire himself (9.22). Only the coward needs such things 
as the forest and the symbols of ascetics (vanam ca lingam ca hi bhirucihnam, 
9.18), for kings may also walk on the path leading to moksa (9.20). The purohita 
tries to stir the bodhisattva's feelings and paints in vivid colours the sorrow he 
caused to his father, foster mother, wife, little son and the whole harem when 
he left the palace behind (9.23 ff.). 

The bodhisattva, after some thought, replies that he had no other choice: 
because of the fear of sickness, old age and death he had to forsake his fam- 


32  S892inVallabhadeva: tad alabdhapadam hrdi sokaghane pratiyatam ivāntikam asya guroh. 

33 On the parallels between the works of Asvaghosa and Kālidāsa see Gawronski 1914—1915; 
Johnston 1984, Ixxxi; Nandargikar 1982, 161-196; and Tubb 2014. 

34  Buddhacarita 8.85: yadi tu nrvara karya eva yatnas tvaritam udāhara yavad atra yavah | 
bahuvidham iha yuddham astu tāvat tava tanayasya vidheš ca tasya tasya. 

35 9413: tvacchokaśalye hrdayavagadhe. 


230 DEZSO 


ily.?$ Separation is unavoidable anyway, as in the case of travellers who meet 
on the way, therefore his father’s clinging to him is pointless (9.33): 


maddhetukam yat tu narādhipasya šokam bhavan aha, na tat priyam me, 
yat svapnabhitesu samagamesu samtapyate bhavini viprayoge. 


You spoke about the king’s grief on account of me; I am not pleased that 
he is so distressed, 

amidst associations as fleeting as dreams, when separation is bound to 
take place. 


trans. OLIVELLE 2008, 257 


Such ideas might be familiar from the Raghuvamsa where the purohita tries 
to shake up Aja with similar words, but without much success: during the 
remaining eight years of his life Aja consoles himself with the festivals of brief 
encounters with his wife in his dreams.37 While Aja out of a sense of duty does 
not throw away his life immediately and reigns until his son grows into a man, 
nothing and nobody can convince the bodhisattva to break his vow, return to 
the palace and take upon himself the burden of kingship, which he deplores.?? 

After the purohita the minister also tries to persuade the bodhisattva to 
return to the palace. He argues that we have no certain knowledge about the 
afterlife, so one should enjoy power and wealth as long as one can (9.53 ff.). Real 
liberation is the clearing of the three debts: towards one’s ancestors by father- 
ing offsprings, towards the gods by sacrificing and towards the sages by studying 
the Vedas (9.65). But the bodhisattva cannot be discouraged: for him there is no 
way back to the palace, and instead of a sceptical attitude he wants to acquire 
the knowledge leading to liberation himself (9.73). 

The mission of the purohita in the Buddhacarita does not succeed; the bodhi- 
sattva is unwilling to leave the path he has chosen himself (9.78): 


tad evam apy eva ravir mahim pated, api sthiratvam Himavan giris tyajet, 
adrstasattvo visayonmukhendriyah šrayeya na tv eva grhan prthagjanah. 


Therefore, although the sun may fall to earth, or Himalaya lose its fixity, 
TI not return home like a common man, 


36 9.31: vyadhijaravipadbhyo bhitas tv agatyā svajanam tyajami. 
37 Raghuvamsa 8.93: svapnesu ksanikasamagamotsavaih. 
38  Buddhacarita 9.40: mohayatanam nrpatvam. 


NOT TO WORRY, VASISTHA WILL SORT IT OUT 231 


whose senses yearn for sensual things, and who has not perceived the 
truth. 


trans. OLIVELLE 2008, 275 


Siddhārtha does not want to live the life of a common man, a life into which 
the purohita and the minister want to pull him back. For him separation from 
his loved ones is indeed the door leading to liberation. Vasistha asks Aja to rise 
above common people and not to let his feelings take hold of him. Aja should 
accept what cannot be avoided; he should not grieve because of separation that 
is bound to happen, but he is unable to do this. Siddhartha has recognised the 
impermanence of human relations and he is not shaken by appeals to family 
bonds. 

The bodhisattva is more than human; his firm resolution to break away from 
the values of brahmanical society inspires awe. Aja remains very much human 
in his grief. Vasistha demands of him detachment while remaining in the world: 
away of life that Vasistha himself, an ascetic sage who is at the same time a royal 
chaplain, lives. Vasistha is truly the purohita of the dynasty and the dynasty 
needs kings who rule in an exemplary fashion, beget offspring and transfer the 
kingship to a suitable heir when the time has come. He saves the dynasty again 
since the transfer of power between Aja and his son Dasaratha takes place 
smoothly, but he fails to have any influence on Aja’s feelings. Here we touch 
upon one of the key issues of Kālidāsa's poetry: the difficulty of creating and 
maintaining a harmony of duties, interests, and emotions, be they love or grief. 
Aja’s example shows that there is a grief so deeply felt that no teaching about 
detachment, no appeal to duty can assuage. 


Acknowledgements 


This research has been made possible by financial support from the European 
Research Council synergy project “Beyond Boundaries: Religion, Region, Lan- 
guage and the State,” grant agreement no. 609823. 


References 


Primary Sources 
Abhijfianasakuntala. Somadeva Vasudeva, ed., trans. The Recognition of Shakuntala by 
Kalidasa. Clay Sanskrit Library. New York: NYU Press & JJc Foundation, 2006. 
Arthasastra. R.P. Kangle, ed. The Kautiltya Arthašāstra, Part 1: A Critical Edition With 


232 DEZSO 


a Glossary. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1988 (reprint of the second edition of 
1969). 

Aitareya Brāhmaņa. Theodor Aufrecht, ed. Das Aitareya Brahmana. Mit Ausziigen aus 
dem Commentare von Sāyaņācārya und anderen Beilagen. Adolph Marcus: Bonn, 
1879. 

Kaušikasūtra. Bloomfield, M. 1890. "The Kāugika-Sūtra of the Atharva Veda, with Ex- 
tracts from the Commentaries of Dārila and Kegava” Journal of the American Orien- 
tal Society 14: i-lxviii, 1-424. 

Taittirtya Samhita. A. Weber, ed. Die Taittirtya-Samhitá. Leipzig: Brockhaus, 1871—1872. 

Paūcavimša Brāhmaņa. Ānandachandra Vedāntavāgīša, ed. Tandya Mahabrahmana 
with the Commentary of Sāyaņa Āchārya. Kolkata: Asiatic Society of Bengal, 1870— 
1874. 

Buddhacarita. E.H. Johnston, ed., trans. Ašvaghosa's Buddhacarita, or Acts of the Bud- 
dha. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1984 (combined reprint of 1936) 

Manusmrti. Patrick Olivelle, ed., trans. Manu's Code of Law. A Critical Edition and Trans- 
lation of the Mānava-Dharmašāstra. New York: Oxford University Press, 2005. 

Mahābhārata. V.S. Sukthankar, ed. The Ādiparvan, Being the First Book of the Mahāb- 
hārata, the Great Epic of India, For the First Time Critically Edited. Poona, Bhandarkar 
Oriental Research Institute, 1933. 

Raghuvamša with Aruņagirinātha's commentary. K.A. Poduval, and C.K. Raman Nam- 
biar, eds. Raghuvamsa by Mahakavi Kalidasa with Prakasika Commentary of Aruna- 
girinatha & Padarthadeepika Commentary of Narayana Panditha. 3 vols. Tripuni- 
thura: Sanskrit College Committee, 1959—1964. 

Raghuvamša with Mallinātha's commentary. The Raghuvamša of Kālidāsa With the Com- 
mentary of Mallinātha Edited with A Literal English Translation, Copious Notes in 
English Intermixed with Full Extracts, Elucidating the Text, from the Commen- 
taries of Bhatta Hemādri, Cāritravardhana, Vallabha, Dinakaramisra, Sumativijaya, 
Vijayagani, Vijayanandasüris Varacaranasevaka and Dharmameru, with Various 
Readings etc. etc., edited by G.R. Nandargikar, 5th edition. Delhi: Motilal Banarsi- 
dass, 1982. 

Raghuvamsa with Vallabhadeva’s commentary, sargas 1-6. Dominic Goodall and Haru- 
naga Isaacson, eds. The Raghupaīīcikā of Vallabhadeva, Being the Earliest Commen- 
tary on the Raghuvamsa of Kalidasa. Vol. 1. Groningen: Egbert Forsten, 2003. 

Raghuvamsa with Vallabhadeva’s commentary, sargas 7—19. Critical edition in progress 
by Cs. Dezsó, D. Goodall, H. Isaacson, and Cs. Kiss. 

Raghuvamša with Hemādris commentary. R.P. Dwivedi, ed. Raghuvamšadarpaņa: 
Raghuvamša Commentary by Hemadri, Vol. 1. Patna: Kashiprasad Jayaswal Research 
Institute, 1973. 


NOT TO WORRY, VASISTHA WILL SORT IT OUT 233 


Secondary Sources 

Ayyar, K.B. 1925. “A Study of Kālidāsa in Relation to Political Science” In Proceedings and 
Transactions of the Third Oriental Conference, December 22nd to 24th, 1924, Madras, 
1-16. Madras: The Law Printing House. 

Bonisoli-Alquati, A. 2008. Kālidāsa's Raghuvamša: An Analysis. Dottorato di Ricerca in 
Studi Indologici e Tibetologici Ciclo xx1. Universita degli Studi di Torino. 

Dezső, Cs. 2014. “‘We do not fully understand the learned poet's intention in not com- 
posing a twentieth canto’: Addiction as a Structuring Theme in the Raghuvamša” 
South Asian Studies 30 (2): 159-172. 

Gawronski, A. 1914—1915. “Gleanings from Asvaghosa’s Buddhacarita” Rocznik Oryental- 
istyczny 1: 1-42. 

Gonda, J. 1956. “Ancient Indian Kingship from the Religious Point of View (Continued )." 
Numen 3 (2): 122-155. 

Gonda, J. 1975. "Purohita” In Selected Studies. Vol. 11. Sanskrit Word Studies, edited by 
J. Gonda, 320-337. Leiden: Brill. 

Goodall D. 2001. "bhūte 'aha' iti pramādāt: Firm Evidence for the Direction of Change 
Where Certain Verses of the Raghuvamša are Variously Transmitted” Zeitschrift der 
Deutschen Morgenlündischen Gesellschaft 151: 193—124. 

Ingalls, D.H.H. 1976. "Kālidāsa and the Attitudes of the Golden Age” Journal of the Amer- 
ican Oriental Society 96 (1): 15-26. 

Minkowski, Ch.Z. 1991. Priesthood in Ancient India. A Study of the Maitravaruna Priest. 
Sammlung de Nobili vol. xviri. Vienna: Institut für Indologie der Universitat Wien. 

Olivelle, P. 2008. Life of the Buddha by Ashvaghosha. Clay Sanskrit Library. New York: 
NYU Press & jJ c Foundation. 

Olivelle, P. 2013. King, Governance, and Law in Ancient India. Kautilya's Arthasastra. New 
York: Oxford University Press. 

Pargiter, F.E. 1922. Ancient Indian Historical Tradition. London: Oxford University Press. 

Sanderson, A. 2007. "Atharvavedins in Tantric Territory. The Āngirasakalpa Texts of 
the Oriya Paippalādins and their Connection with the Trika and the Kālīkula” In 
The Atharvaveda and its Paippalāda Šākhā: Historical and Philological Papers on a 
Vedic Tradition, edited by Arlo Griffiths and Annette Schmiedchen, 195-311. Aachen: 
Shaker Verlag. 

Tubb, G. 2014. “Baking Uma.” In Toward a History of Kavya Literature. Innovations and 
Turning Points, edited by Y. Bronner, D. Shulman, and G. Tubb, 71-85. New Delhi: 
Oxford University Press. 


CHAPTER 10 


Buddhism, Kingship and the Protection of the 
State: The Suvarnaprabhasottamasutra and 
Dharani Literature 


Gergely Hidas 


1 Introduction 


This article focuses first on the ritual core of the Suvarnaprabhasottamasütra, 
which teaches the protection of the state for the mutual benefit of the Bud- 
dhist Sangha and the monarch. The essay then explores the ways in which this 
theme appears in dharani literature in the first half of the first millennium. It 
is shown that offering safeguard to rulers and their regions is a long-established 
practice in South Asian Buddhism, persisting into modern times, and that there 
have been a variety of incantation scriptures available for accomplishing this 
task. 


2 The Suvarņaprabhāsottamasūtra: The Sutra of Golden Light 


This scripture of Mahayana Buddhism survives in its oldest form in South Asia 
in two palm-leaf manuscripts from Nepal dated to the 14th and 16th centuries.” 
The remaining witnesses from the subcontinent are paper codices of later cen- 
turies, but dozens of Central Asian Sanskrit fragments survive from the second 
half of the first millennium. The Sanskrit text of the Suvarņaprabhāsottama 
has been edited a few times, most recently by Skjaervo (2004). This scripture 
was remarkably influential across the Buddhist lands of Asia, and was trans- 
lated into Chinese, Tibetan, Khotanese and several additional languages over 
the course of many centuries. The Chinese translation by Dharmaksema is the 
earliest, from circa 417 CE, which marks the terminus ante quem for the emer- 
gence of this sutra. Editions of Tibetan and Chinese recensions were published 


1 Fora survey of dharani literature, see Hidas 2015. 

2 Cambridge Add. 2831, 1385 CE; Toyo Bunko 1979, 1581C E. It appears that previous publications 
have left the dated colophon of the former manuscript unnoticed (Ns 505 [1385 CE], written 
as paricadhikah paficasatah; see cudl.lib.cam.ac.uk/view/MS-ADD-02831/96, lines 3-4). 


© GERGELY HIDAS, 2020 | D01:10.1163/9789004432802 012 


This is an open access chapter distributed under the terms of the CC BY-NC 4.0 license. 


BUDDHISM, KINGSHIP AND THE PROTECTION OF THE STATE 235 


by Nobel in the 1940s and 1950s, while Skjaervo (2004) provides the most com- 
prehensive treatment of the Khotanese version. Several translations of this 
scripture are available in Western languages, with Emmerick 1970 being the 
classical point of reference, based on the Sanskrit. An excellent overview of 
the Suvarnaprabhasottama with a detailed account of previous research was 
published by Gummer (2015). 


3 The Ritual Core of the Suvarnaprabhasottamasutra 


The structure of this scripture shows evidence of considerable expansion over 
the centuries. The most widespread Sanskrit version contains nineteen chap- 
ters, but Nobel (1937) suggests that there may only have been fourteen pari- 
vartas initially? He also proposed that chapter 3, the Desanaparivarta, is likely 
to represent the original core of the Suvarņaprabhāsottama, containing verses 
on the confession of sins, the resolution to attain buddhahood and praise of 
the buddhas, the recitation or hearing of which brings about great benefit.* If 
we look, however, for chapters that actually have detailed ritual instructions, 
it appears that the ritual core of this sūtra is contained in sections 6, 7 and 
8: the Caturmahārājaparivarta, Sarasvatīparivarta and Sriparivarta. The latter 
two include more complex observances and dhāraņī-spells. 

Chapter 6, the Caturmahārājaparivarta or Chapter on the Four Great Kings,” 
conveys an explicit message: those kings (manusyaraja) who venerate the 
Suvarnaprabhasottama and support the Buddhist Sangha will be protected 
from hostile armies and other dangers by the Four Great Kings, and their coun- 
tries will exist in highest state of harmony. Simultaneously, those who ignore 
this tradition will face decline. This sūtra directly and repeatedly refers to 
monarchs, and throughout this chapter and the whole scripture it is obvious 
that kings are envisaged as the principal target audience. At one point the 


3 Onthe structure of this sūtra, see Skjaerve 2004, lii-liv. The earliest Chinese version contains 
eighteen chapters, while later Chinese and Tibetan recensions consist of 21, 24, 29 or 31 sec- 
tions. 

4 Cf. Suzuki 2012. 

5 These eminent yaksas Dhrtarastra, Virūdhaka, Virüpaksa and Vaisravana are celestial guard- 
ians of the cardinal directions, along with their retinues in Jambudvipa. From the Pali Ātānā- 
tiya-sutta (Digha-nikaya 32) to various Sanskrit raksa texts, they often take the role of chief 
protectors. Note that the Four Great Kings guarded the cardinal points at the great stūpa of 
Bhārhut, circa 100BCE (Skilling 1992, 163). For a study of the Sanskrit Atandtiya/Atandatika- 
sütra, see Sander 2007. 


236 HIDAS 


scripture calls itself a rajasastra,® a text for kings, and it is notable that chap- 
ter 12 is entitled Devendrasamayarajasastraparivartah, or Chapter of the Royal 
Treatise called Conventions for Divine Kings, which expounds the ideal of the 
Dharma-following monarch.’ On the basis of the general tone of the Caturma- 
hārājaparivarta it is fairly evident that the main intended function of this sutra 
was proselytizing, that is, attracting leaders of various regions to Buddhism by 
offering them mutually beneficial services. The Buddhist community appears 
to have been in perceptible need of securing support from the highest places; 
some passages seem to indicate a degree of despair, as reflected in their accen- 
tuation of vital threats for those not prepared to follow this tradition.® It is 
also not unlikely that Buddhism was at times persecuted, as certain references 
indicate. Occasionally the text becomes somewhat guarded or equivocal, for 
example in its claim that the Four Great Kings and the summoned deities arrive 
in the king’s palace with invisible bodies,!° which suggests an effort by the text’s 
compilers to achieve their goals in the most secure possible ways. As for the 
ritual instructions in this chapter," it is prescribed that the king should clean 
the palace, sprinkle the premises with perfumes and scatter flowers. He should 
prepare an ornamented Dharma-throne and a lower seat for himself. He should 
listen to this sūtra recited by a dharmabhanaka monk and honour those of the 
Sangha who present the Suvarnaprabhasottama. As a result, the whole universe 
will be adorned, lit up by golden light. The Four Great Kings and other divine 
beings will approach the palace to listen to the recitation and will protect the 
sovereign and his realm. 

In chapter 7, the Sarasvatīparivarta,? the goddess Sarasvatī grants her sup- 
port to the Dharma preacher through the gift of eloquence, and presents a 
bathing ritual with enchanted herbs for him and his audience in order to 
appease all disturbances. It is promised that, invoked by praise, Sarasvati herself 


6 Suvarņaprabhāsottamasūtra 6.2.6 (Skjaerve 2004): yah kascid bhadanta bhagavan manu- 
sya-rājo bhavet ya-m-anena Devendra-samayena rāja-šāstreņa rajatvam karayet. 
7 Cf. also chapter 13 on King Susambhava. 


8 Skjaerve 2004, 6.5.14—6.5.32. Chapter 12 also includes a description of grave dangers for 
kings who fail to follow the Dharma; see Skjaervo 2004, 12.17-12.61. 
9 Suvarņaprabhāsottamasūtra 6.1.35—36 (Skjaerve 2004): manusyarājā ... tesam sūtrendra- 


dhārakāņām bhiksunam sarva-pratyarthikebhya araksam kuryāt. 

10  Suvarņaprabhāsottamasūtra 6.2.17, 6.2.37 (Skjaerve 2004): te vayam bhadanta bhagavams 
catvāro mahā-rājānah sa-bala-parivara anekair yaksa-šata-sahasrair adráyair kayatma- 
bhavais tenopasamkramisyamah. It seems that the redactors wished to avoid the risk that 
the listener expects these divine beings to come in a perceptible form, and then perhaps 
be disappointed. 

11  Skjaerva 2004, 6.3-6.4. 

12  Skjaerve 2004, 7.1-7.67. For a detailed study of this chapter see Ludvik 2007, 145-221. 


BUDDHISM, KINGSHIP AND THE PROTECTION OF THE STATE 237 


will appear and remove all diseases and difficulties. The ritual instructions pre- 
scribe that one should pound herbs and consecrate the powder with mantras 
at the time of the Pusya constellation. A mandala should be drawn with cow- 
dung, flowers should be scattered and gold and silver vessels filled. Four armed 
men and four well-adorned maidens should be placed there holding pots in 
their hands, thus accomplishing the protective sealing of the boundaries (sima- 
bandha). One should use incense, music, umbrellas, flags, banners, mirrors, 
arrows, spears and dharani-spells, and in due course bathe behind an image 
of the Buddha.!? 

In chapter 8, the Sriparivarta,^ the goddess Šrī offers support to the Dharma 
preacher and good fortune to his audience. A rite which provides prosperity is 
described, through which Sri herself enters that place. According to the ritual 
instructions, one's home must be purified and one should bathe and wear clean 
garments. One should offer worship (puja) with perfumes, flowers and incense, 
then sprinkle juices (rasa) and utter the names of Sri, Ratnakusuma Tathāgata!s 
and the Suvarnaprabhasa. One should then recite dharani-spells, draw a man- 
dala of cow-dung and offer perfumes, flowers and incense. Finally, a pure seat 
should be provided where $ri descends and stays. 

As can be seen, chapters 7 and 8 contain ritual instructions primarily for 
securing health and wealth. These seem to be ancillary rites which accompany 
the ritual for the protection of the state taught in chapter 6. Interestingly, these 
rituals are actually more complex than those in the Caturmahārājaparivarta, 
where recitation is the main focus, potentially indicating a somewhat later date 
of composition. It is worth noting that chapters 9 and 10, the Drdhaparivarta 
and Samjfiayaparivarta, also offer further support and protection but do not 
include detailed ritual instructions. 


4 Dharani Literature Presenting Rites for the Protection of the State 


Perhaps contemporaneous with the Suvarnaprabhasottamasütra, there are at 
least three pieces of dhāraņī literature proper which include detailed ritual 
instructions for the protection of the state: the Dhvajāgrakeyūradhāranī, Nara- 
yanapariprccha/Mahamayavijayavahinidharani and the Mahasahasrapramar- 


13  Skjaervo 2004, lvi notes that the treatise on magical herbs and the dhāraņīs may be later 
additions to this chapter. 

14  Skjaerve 2004, 81-8.71. On Sri Laksmi see Shaw 2006, 94-109. 

15 Note that a Ratnakusumasampuspitagatra Tathagata is listed in the shorter Sukhava- 
tīvyūha. 


238 HIDAS 


danasūtra.! The former two are centered on this theme, while in the latter the 
defence of the state is included as one among various rituals. In all three cases 
the monarch is directly referred to as the beneficiary of the rites. 

The Dhvajagrakeyuradharant!" was edited by Giunta (2008) based on an 
undated palm-leaf manuscript, and compared with the Tibetan translation by 
Jinamitra, Danasila and Ye shes sde of circa 800CE. The Chinese translation 
by Dānapāla/Shi-hu dates to 982CE.? The setting of this scripture is the celes- 
tial Trāyastrimšat abode where Sakra requests help from the Buddha after the 
gods have been defeated by the asuras, led by Vemacitrin. The lord tells Sakra 
to learn the invincible Dhvajagrakeyuradharani, which he had come to know 
from Aparajitadhvaja Tathagata during a previous existence. Then the Bhaga- 
van reveals the dharani and teaches that its user becomes victorious in battles 
and conflicts. The spell is to be fixed atop a banner (dhvajagra) or around the 
neck, and protects kings (manusyarāja) or heroic people (surapurusa). Mani- 
festing as a divine female, it stands in the frontline, providing fearlessness and 
protection, driving the enemy away as well as granting blessings and prosper- 
ity.2° Following the main text, the manuscript incorporates the brief Dhvaja- 
grakeyurahrdaya “spell-essence.” 

The Narayanapariprccha/Mahamayavijayavahinidharani? was edited, 
along with the Tibetan translation? by Bstan pa'i nyin byed,? by Banerjee 
(1941) on the basis of a palm-leaf manuscript dated to 1361CE. No Chinese 
translation seems to be available. The setting of this scripture is Mount Svar- 


16 While the Chinese and Tibetan translations of these scriptures are relatively late, on the 
basis of language and terminology it seems that all three date to the first half of the 
first millennium. On the approximate antiquity of the Mahasahasrapramardanasütra see 
Hidas 2013, 229. 

17 Cf. the Dhajagga-sutta in Pali (Samyutta-nikaya 1.11.3), where the Buddha teaches that, just 
as Sakka encouraged the gods to behold his banner or that of other deities when experi- 
encing fear in a battle against the asuras, monks experiencing dread should call to mind 
the Buddha, the Dharma and the Sangha. 

18 — Eg.DergeKanjur 612 = 923. Cf. also Lhan kar ma No. 376 (Herrmann-Pfandt 2008, 215) and 
Dunhuang IOL TIB J 372 (Dalton and van Schaik 2006, 106). 

19  Taisho Tripitaka 943. Cf. also Taisho Tripitaka 1363 from 988 CE. 

20 Dhvajagrakeyuradharani (Giunta 2008, 190): dhvajagre kanthe và baddhvā dhārayitavyā 
| manusyarājitā šūrapurusāņāni ca sarvvesā raksā karoti strīrūpadhāriņī bhūtvā puratah 
tisthati abhayam dadāti | raksā karoti parasainya vidrāpati māngalyam pavitra srilaksmi 
samsthāpikā. Cf. the Sriparivarta of the Suvarnaprabhásottamasütra. 

21 Note that there exists another text titled Vārāyaņapariprechā, quoted, for example, in Šān- 
tideva's Šiksāsamuccaya. 

22 E.g. Derge Kanjur 684. 

23 Known more widely as Si tu Pan chen (1700—1775). 


BUDDHISM, KINGSHIP AND THE PROTECTION OF THE STATE 239 


nasmga,** the mansion of Vaigravana, where Narayana requests help from the 
Buddha upon defeat by the asuras, much like the Dhvajagrakeyuradharant. 
The lord tells him that earlier, during the reign of King Ratnasri of Maga- 
dha, there lived Sarve$vara Tathagata, from whom the Bhagavan learned the 
Mahāmāyāvijayavāhinī spell. For hundreds of thousands of years that king 
ruled righteously by the power of this dharani. In his next existence he was 
born as Māndhātā, a bodhisattva and cakravartin king,25 who practiced char- 
ity for sixty-four thousand kalpas and became a buddha. Then the lord tells 
Narayana that this spell should be learnt, recited and taught to others. The 
dharani should be fixed upon five models of chariots and placed across the 
battlefield. Then the personified Queen of Spells (i.e. Mahāmāyāvijayavāhinī) 
should be visualized there as devouring the enemy.” At midday the king should 
write down this incantation with saffron, after which he is to conquer the hos- 
tile army.” By reciting this dharani three times daily one is freed from even 
the five sins of immediate retribution, gains heaps of merit and shall be able 
to remember former existences. Laypeople, monastics, kings (raja), princes 
(rājaputra), Brahmins and Dharma preachers are all promised to benefit from 
this spell. 

The Mahāsāhasrapramardanasūtra was edited in Iwamoto 1937 based pri- 
marily on a paper manuscript from 1553 (CE?8), while its rituals are studied 
in Hidas 2013. The Tibetan translation by Silendrabodhi, Jfanasiddhi, Sakya- 
prabha and Ye shes sde dates to circa 800 CE, and the Chinese one was com- 
pleted by Danapala/Shi-hu in 983CE. The setting of this long and complex 


24 The Suvarnasrnga is listed as a King of Mountains (parvatarājā) in the Mahamayurivid- 

25 For an overview of the classical Buddhist ideal of cakravartin kingship see Harvey 2007. 
On the vidyadhara-cakravartin of tantric Buddhism see Davidson 2002, 330—334. 

26 For references to consuming the enemy cf. the Dhvajagrakeyurahrdaya: om bhagavati 
dhvajagrakeyure parasainyavidhvamsanakari | svasainyaparipalanakari | ulkamukhi | kha 
kha | khahikhahi| parasainyam anantamukhenānantabhujena prahara prahara | hum him 
phat phat svaha. 

27 Narayanapariprccha (Banerjee 1941, 4): nārāyaņa atha tasmin samparaye senayor ubhayor 
madhye paficasu sthanesu etad dharanicakram rathapratikrtau yuīijyāt | narayana ubha- 
yor madhye parasenāgre tasmin rathamadhye mahamayavijayavahinim nama vidyarajritm 
anekašatasahasrarūpām anekašatasahasrabhujām trinetram lohitakrsnavarnam diptais 
caturvaktraih parasenam bhaksayantim iva cintayet | svayam eva cakravartyakaram krtva 
madhyahne dharanim kunkumena likhitva raja parasya ca senām svabhāvena māyāsa- 
dršena cchādayan vividhena sāreņa vijayt bhavisyati. 

28 Iwamoto (1937) consulted two undated paper manuscripts as well. All three codices are 
Paricaraksa collections kept in Japan. Many thanks to Dr. Kenichi Kuranishi for his help 
with the Japanese introduction to the edition. 


240 HIDAS 


scripture is Rājagrha, where the Buddha and the Four Great Kings offer pro- 
tection from calamities following an earthquake in Vaisali. Towards the end, 
this sutra provides detailed instructions for several rituals, including one for 
the protection of the state. This prescribes that the royal residence (rajadhant) 
should be cleaned and purified with flowers, incense and other offerings. Four 
maidens should be placed in the four directions with swords in their hands.?9 
The dharani should be recited and written on strips of cloth, mounted on the 
top of caityas, trees and banners. Recitation should continue for a fortnight, 
thus saving the state.3° 


5 Dharani Literature Making General Reference to the Protection of 
the State 


Various examples of dharani literature, in the wider sense, include references 
to the defense of the state, while not being centered on this theme and lacking 
detailed ritual prescriptions. Schopen (1978: 363—367) lists the Bhaisajyagu- 
rusūtra, Prajfíaparamita, Ratnaketuparivarta, Sarvatathāgatādhisthānavyūha 
and Šrīmahādevīvyākaraņa as relevant texts surviving among the Gilgit man- 
uscripts (6th-7th centuries). The Bhaisajyagurusutra claims that all distur- 
bances to an anointed ksatriya king, including hostile armed forces, shall cease 
by performing worship (puja). The Prajfíaparamita teaches that those who 
study this text shall be protected in the battlefield. The Ratnaketuparivarta 
declares that those kings who commit this spell-text to writing shall not face 
any danger from an enemy’s army. If they raise the Ratnaketudharani on a 
banner they shall be victorious in battle. Paying reverence to the Sarvatatha- 
gatadhisthanavyuha will cause victory for kings and queens in war and riots. 
Those monarchs who preserve the Srimahdadevistotra will face no calamities 
in their realm, and Sri herself will reside in their homes.3' In addition to these 
scriptures, the Amoghapasahrdaya states that to protect one's land from the 
enemy or calamities the ritually pure officiant should fill a vessel with vari- 
ous substances, perform great puja and recitation; peace shall follow thus.3? 
The Amoghapāšakalparāja teaches a couple of methods for success in warfare. 


29 Cf. the Sarasvatiparivarta of the Suvarņaprabhāsottamasūtra. 

30 Fora detailed translation see Hidas 2013, 236—237. See also Gentry 2016. 

31  CftheSriparivarta of the Suvarņaprabhāsottamasūtra. 

32  Amoghapasahrdaya (Meisezahl 1962, 325-326): paravisayarājyarāstropadravaraksāsu 
pūrņņakalašam sthāpayitvā šucinā $ucivastrapravrtena mahatim pūjām krtvā vācayita- 
vyam | mahāšāntir bhavati. Cf. also Amoghapasakalparaja 3b. 


BUDDHISM, KINGSHIP AND THE PROTECTION OF THE STATE 241 


By the use of a magical noose the army of the enemy and its weapons shall 
be bound.?? By encircling a sword the weapons of the enemy shall be broken 
and disabled.?^ The Mahapratisaramahavidyarajni promises the destruction 
of hostile armies and victory in battle with the help of its dharani.** This scrip- 
ture includes a testimonial narrative in which King Brahmadatta overpowers 
the army of the enemy by fixing the spell upon his body before entering the 
battlefield.36 In another story it is Sakra who defeats the asuras with the help 
of this incantation.?" 


6 The Characteristics of Buddhist Rituals for the Protection of the 
State in the First Half of the First Millennium 


As the passages above show, the protection of the state and acquiring safety 
in battle were recurring topics in Buddhist ritual literature from the early cen- 
turies of the common era onwards. The target audience was primarily monar- 
chs.38 Besides defence, the texts occasionally promise additional rewards as 
well, most commonly health and wealth. While these incantation scriptures 
principally aim at worldly goals, it is worth noting that in a few cases they 
promise a better future existence, such as rebirth as a bodhisattva. Even bud- 


33  Amoghapāšakalparāja 18b (Mikkyo Seiten Kenkyūkai. 1998-2011): sainyamadhyotksipet 
sainyā pāšabandhā bhavanti | samgramamadhye ksipet sarvvasastrapraharanadhanu- 
šarašakti asimusalamusuņdicakrakunta rāyudhavarmakavacā sarvve pāsabandhā bha- 
vanti ||. 21b: samgramamadhye ksipeta yasya nama ksipyate sa ca pāsabaddhā agratam 
upatisthati |. 30a: samgrāme yudhyamāne krodharājam japatā pāšam samgrāmama- 
dhye kseptavyam | mahāntam asivisam pradurbhavati | vikataksam lolajihvam angāradīpti- 
nayanam saha daršanamātrāņi caturangam balakaya disividisani prapalayante |. 

34 | Amoghapasakalparaja 29a (Mikkyo Seiten Kenkyūkai. 1998-2011): ato vidyadharena krud- 
dhena khadga bhrāmayam sarvvavighnavināyakānām dustayaksarāksasānām sarvvabhū- 
tānām chinnā bhavisyati | sakrtasamgrāmamadhye bhramayet sarvvayodhinānā(m)m 
āyudhānā cchinnā bhavisyanti | stambhitani bhavisyanti | sarvve dašavidišāni prapatā- 
yanti |. 

35 Hidas 2012, 205, 241, 243, 249. 

36 Hidas 2012, 216-217. Note the setting similar to the Dhvajagrakeyuradharani. 

37 Hidas 2012, 227. 

38 Note that monarchs were also addressed in a highly elevated literary style by prominent 
Buddhist personalities such as Mātrceta and Nāgārjuna in the first centuries CE (cf. e.g. 
Zimmermann 2006, 228—229, Sanderson 2009, 103-104, Bronkhorst 2011, 103-107). While 
works such as the Ratnāvalī lack the ritual instructions, as might be expected, their coun- 
sel of righteous governance, however idealized, sometimes resonates with certain parts of 
the Suvarnaprabhāsottamasūtra. 


242 HIDAS 


dhahood is promised.?? These texts of both mainstream and Mahayana Bud- 
dhism employ various ritual means, such as the use of mantra, dhāraņī, man- 
dala and sīmābandha. It is difficult to suggest a precise chronology for the 
emergence of these scriptures and, for example, to estimate whether the grand 
Suvarnaprabhasottamasutra appeared first, with independent dharani texts 
following afterwards, or the reverse. What can be stated more or less with cer- 
tainty is that all the aforementioned scriptures originate from the first half of 
the first millennium, but emerged over an uncertain interval of time. 

As far as actual users or evidence for the protection of the state in South Asia 
is concerned, only indirect information is available. Various Chinese sources 
refer to the successful use of the Suvarņaprabhāsottamasūtra in some Indian 
kingdoms as early as the first century CE, although these may only be legendary 
accounts for the promotion of Buddhism in China.^? A more telling piece of evi- 
dence, however, from the middle of the first millennium, is the Gilgit collection 
of manuscripts, where royal patronage and apotropaic literature are closely 
linked, albeit without surviving exemplars of the Sutra of Golden Light. In the 
southern island of Sri Lanka, where monastics and worldly rulers were deeply 
interdependent for most of the centuries, we have no proof that the Sangha 
provided protection for the state or that the king used the above mentioned 
texts. There are however accounts from at least the fourth century CE onwards 
reporting the performance of paritta-recitals with the Ratanasutta in times of 
national calamities.*? Simultaneously, in East Asia we find plenty of direct evi- 


39  Seethe Narayanapariprccha. 

40 Ludvik 2007, 150-151. 

41  SeevonHinüber2014and 2018. It is notable that in Bana’s Harsacarita (early-7th-century), 
the Mahamayuri (surviving in Gilgit in numerous manuscript copies) is mentioned as 
being recited for healing at the royal palace: "So amid the salutations of the chamberlains 
he slowly entered the palace. There he found people bestowing all their goods in presents, 
worshipping the family gods, engaged in cooking the ambrosial posset, performing the Six 
Oblation sacrifice, offering tremulous Durvà leaves besmeared with clotted butter, chant- 
ing the Mahā-Māyūrī hymn, purifying the household, completing the rites for keeping out 
the spirits by offerings. Earnest Brahmans were occupied in muttering Vedic texts; Siva’s 
temple resounded with the murmur of the Hendecad to Rudra; Saivas of great holiness 
were bathing Virūpāksa's image with thousands of vessels of milk.” (Cowell and Thomas 
1897, 137). 

42 Gunawardana 1979, 226—227; Norman 1983, 174. On paritta texts, the Ratanasutta/Ratnasū- 
tra tradition and its remodelling as the Mahasahasrapramardanasütra see Skilling 1992. 
Cf. also Hidas 2013. On modern Thai amulet cultures incorporating the Ratanasutta see 
McDaniel 2014, 143-144. On Southeast Asian aspects and the recitation of the Mahadib- 
bamanta before going to battle see Skilling 2007, 195, and for a detailed study of this text 
Jaini 1965. Note that Pali canonical sources acknowledge the efficacy of spells, but do not 
have a high opinion of them: in the Kevattasutta (Digha-nikaya 11) the Buddha teaches 


BUDDHISM, KINGSHIP AND THE PROTECTION OF THE STATE 243 


dence for protective practices employing dharani texts. De Visser (1935), May 
(1967), Sango (2015) and Gummer (2015) provide a detailed picture how the 
Suvarņaprabhāsottamasūtra was actually used for the defense of the emperor 
and the state. From these studies it becomes clear that Japanese ritual proce- 
dures follow what is prescribed in the original Sanskrit remarkably closely;?? it 
thus appears that the ‘periphery’ preserves well what may have once been the 
norm in the native center of this tradition. 


7 The Continuity of Buddhist Rituals for the Protection of the State 
into Later Times 


From the second half of the first millennium CE, new types of Buddhist rit- 
ual texts incorporated the theme of state protection in South Asia within the 
tantric traditions. Sanderson (2009, 105—106) refers to passages in the Sarvavaj- 
rodaya of Anandagarbha and the Gu/yasamājamaņdalavidhi of Dipankara- 
bhadra (gth c.) being used for the protection of the monarch, in connection to 
rites of initiation. Sanderson (2009, 125) also observes that the Mavijusriyamu- 
lakalpa and Sarvadurgatiparišodhanatantra both offer protection to the ruler 
through royal consecration. In the latter text protection is accomplished by 
Vajradhara and the Four Great Kings, reflecting continuity with earlier sources. 
As for chronicled accounts of the protection of royal dynasties, Sanderson 
(2004, 238; 2009, 93-94) refers to Tāranātha's history of Indian Buddhism, 
which reports that upon seeing omens of the future ruin of the Pala dynasty, 
the eminent master Buddhajfianapada of Vikramašīla persuaded Dharmapala 
(r. circa 775—812) to institute a regular fire-sacrifice at the monastery in order 
to protect his dynasty. The rituals lasted for many years at immense cost. In 
another reference to Taranatha, Sanderson (2009, 107) notes that tantric rit- 
uals were often performed to avert the enemy, especially Turuskas. Based on 
passages from the Marijusriyamūlakalpa and a grant by the Rāstrakūta king 
Govinda 111, dated to 805 CE, Sanderson (2003-2004, 433—434 fn. 308) writes 
that "[t]he practice of going into battle with an image of one's personal deity 
and the belief that this will protect one's troops and confound those of the 


that monks who display supernatural powers in order to promote faith in the Bhagavan 
among people would be thought by some to have used incantations like the Gandhārīvijjā 
or Maņikāvijjā to achieve these accomplishments, rather than the power of their contem- 
plation. 

43 The Sutra of Golden Light reached Japan as early as the end of the 6th century (Skjaerve 
2004, xxxii). 


244 HIDAS 


enemy, is well attested in Indian Buddhist sources and in Far-Eastern sources 
derived from them." A few texts of this period also pick up on the theme of pro- 
tection in warfare. The Siddhaikavīratantra introduces mantric amulets worn 
on the body which, with help from enchanted swords, ensure victory in bat- 
tle.44 The Laghusamvaratantra claims that one who enters the battlefield after 
reciting a certain mantra one thousand times towards the enemy cannot be 
hurt by weapons and obtains an indestructible vajra-body.* Finally, one of the 
latest and most complex tantric scriptures in South Asia, the Kalacakratantra, 
mentions a number of war-machines (yantra), presumably integrated into this 
religious text because of the imminent threat from Western ‘barbarian’ invaders 
in North India around the nth century. 


8 The Protection of the State in Modern Nepal 


As for recent practices in the Kathmandu Valley, there is evidence for the per- 
formance of a royal ritual for protection involving Pañcarakşā recitation in 
the era of Mahindra Vira Vikram Shah (r. 1955-1972). As the officiant, Ratnaraj 
Vajracarya of Patan, kindly provided information, in 1962 he performed a cere- 
mony in the royal palace for the protection of the monarch and his realm using 
this influential apotropaic collection.*” In this part of South Asia, few early 
manuscripts of the Suvarnaprabhasottama survive, though this sutra became 
part of the renowned Navadharma collection of nine texts in medieval times.4? 


44 Siddhaikaviratantra (Mikkyo Seiten Kenkyükai. 1995, 7): kurikumadilikhitam kanthe bāhau 
mantram dhārayan samgrame šastram stambhayati; samgràme ‘nusmaran mantram vija- 
yam labhate; khadgam abhimantrya samgrame pravišam jayam āsādayati. 

45  Laghusamvaratantra 12.4 (Pandey 2002): parasainyabhimukham sahasrajaptam krtvā 
samgrame va prativišati. šastrašatair hanyamanasya vyathā notpadyate. na ca šastrasa- 
hasrair bhidyate. vajrašarīram bhavati. On the formation of the concept of vajrakāya see 
Radich 2011. 

46 See Grönbold 1996. Many thanks to Dr. Péter-Dániel Szántó for calling my attention to this 
article. On Buddhism and warfare in a pan-Asian context through the ages see Jerryson 
and Juergensmeyer 2010. 

47 Personal communication, April 2009. Many thanks to the late Min Bahadur Shakya for 
arranging a meeting with Ratnarāj Vajrācārya. 

48  Onthe Navadharma or Navagrantha collection, consisting of the Prajfíaparamità, Paficar- 
aksā, Nāmasamgīti, Gandavyüha, Dasabhümi, Samādhirāja, Saddharmapundarika, Lali- 
tavistara and Lankāvatāra in an earlier set, with the Suvarnaprabhasa and Tathāgataguh- 
yaka replacing the Paiicaraksā and Namasamgiti in its present form, see Tuladhar- 
Douglas 2006, 144-147 and von Rospatt 2015, 819-821. The latter remarks that “[t]hese 
canonical works are not so much studied for their content as liturgically recited or put 
to other ritual uses." 


BUDDHISM, KINGSHIP AND THE PROTECTION OF THE STATE 245 


Various other scriptures of dharani literature, however, such as the Paricaraksā, 
are available in several old palm-leaf witnesses, and we have colophons from 
the wider region which indicate their use at the court.*? 


Acknowledgements 


This research was funded by ERC Synergy Project No. 609823. I am grateful 
to Dr. Michael Willis and Dr. Sam van Schaik for their support and Professor 
Harunaga Isaacson for useful suggestions. 


References 


Banerjee, Anukul Chandra. 1941. Narayanapariprccha: Sanskrit and Tibetan Texts. Cal- 
cutta: University of Calcutta. 

Bond, Kevin. 2014. “Buddhism on the Battlefield. The Cult of the ‘Substitute Body’ Tal- 
isman in Imperial Japan (1890—1945).” In Material Culture and Asian Religions. Text, 
Image, Object, edited by Benjamin J. Fleming and Richard D. Mann, 120-134. New 
York, London: Routledge. 

Bronkhorst, Johannes. 2011. Buddhism in the Shadow of Brahmanism. Leiden: Brill. 

Cowell, Edward B. and Frederick W. Thomas. 1897. The Harsa-Carita of Bana. London: 
Royal Asiatic Society. 

Dalton, Jacob and Sam van Schaik. 2006. Tibetan Tantric Manuscripts from Dunhuang. 
A Descriptive Catalogue of the Stein Collection at the British Library. Leiden: Brill. 
Davidson, Ronald M. 2002. Indian Esoteric Buddhism: A Social History of the Tantric 

Movement. New York: Columbia University Press. 

Emmerick, Ronald E. 1996 [1970]. The Sutra of Golden Light. Third revised edition. 
Oxford: The Pali Text Society. 

Gentry, James. 2016. Destroyer of the Great Trichiliocosm: Mahasahasrapramardani. 
https://read.84000.co/translation/toh558.html 

Giunta, Paolo. 2008. "The Āryadhvajāgrakeyūrā nàma dhāriņī. Diplomatic Edition of 
MS Tucci 3.246." In Sanskrit Texts from Giuseppe Tucci's Collection, edited by Fran- 
cesco Sferra, 187—194. Roma: Istituto italiano per l'Africa e l'Oriente. 


49 For the use of the Panicaraksā by a Pala queen in the nth century see Pal 1992 (cf. also 
Hidas 2012, 84-85). For modern talismanic cults related to warfare in Japan see Bond 
2014, and for the protective Jinaparijaragāthā used in Thailand see McDaniel 201, 77— 
120. 


246 HIDAS 


Grónbold, Günter. 1996. "Kriegsmaschinen in einem buddhistischen Tantra” In Fest- 
schrift Dieter Schlingloff, edited by Friedrich Wilhelm, 63-97. Reinbek: Verlag fiir 
Orientalistische Fachpublikationen. 

Gummer, Natalie. 2015. “Suvarnabhasottamasitra.” In Brill’s Encyclopedia of Buddhism. 
Vol. 1. Literature and Languages, edited by Jonathan Silk, Oskar von Hintiber and 
Vincent Eltschinger, 249—260. Leiden: Brill. 

Gunawardana, R.A.L.H. 1979. Robe and Plough. Monasticism and Economic Interest in 
Early Medieval Sri Lanka. Tucson: University of Arizona Press. 

Harvey, Peter. 2007. "Buddha and Cakravartins” In Encyclopedia of Buddhism, edited by 
Damien Keown and Charles Prebish, 153-155. London, New York: Routledge. 

Herrmann-Pfandt, Adelheid. 2008. Die (Han kar ma: ein früher Katalog der ins Tibetische 
übersetzten buddhistischen Texte. Kritische Neuausgabe mit Einleitung und Materi- 
alien. Vienna: Austrian Academy of Sciences Press. 

Hidas, Gergely. 2012. Mahāpratisarā-Mahāvidyārājiī The Great Amulet, Great Queen of 
Spells: Introduction, Critical Editions and Annotated Translation. New Delhi: Interna- 
tional Academy of Indian Culture and Aditya Prakashan. 

Hidas, Gergely. 2013. "Rituals in the Mahāsāhasrapramardanasūtra” In Puspikā: Trac- 
ing Ancient India through Texts and Traditions edited by Nina Mirnig et al., 225-240. 
Oxford: Oxbow. 

Hidas, Gergely. 2015. "Dhāraņī Sūtras” In Brill's Encyclopedia of Buddhism. Vol. 1. Lit- 
erature and Languages, edited by Jonathan Silk, Oskar von Hinüber and Vincent 
Eltschinger 129—137. Leiden: Brill. 

Hinüber, Oskar von. 2014. "The Gilgit Manuscripts: An Ancient Buddhist Library in 
Modern Research” In From Birch Bark to Digital Data: Recent Advances in Buddhist 
Manuscript Research. Papers Presented at the Conference Indic Buddhist Manuscripts: 
The State of the Field, Stanford, June 15—19, 2009, edited by Paul Harrison and Jens-Uwe 
Hartmann, 79-135. Vienna: Austrian Academy of Sciences Press. 

Hinüber, Oskar von. 2018. "Magic Protection in the Palola Sahi Kingdom: History and 
Context of Raksa Texts and Dhāraņīs in 7th Century Gilgit” In Kata Me Rakkha, Kata 
Me Parittā. Protecting the Protective Texts and Manuscripts. Proceedings of the Sec- 
ond International Pali Studies Week, Paris 2016, edited by Claudio Cicuzza, 217-237. 
Bangkok and Lumbini: Fragile Palm Leaves Foundation and Lumbini Research Insti- 
tute. 

Iwamoto, Yutaka. 1937. Mahāsāhasrapramardanī. Kyoto. 

Jaini, Padmanabh S. 1965. "Mahādibbamanta: A Paritta Manuscript from Cambodia” 
Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies 28: 61—80. 

Jerryson, Michael K. and Mark Juergensmeyer, eds. 2010. Buddhist Warfare. Oxford: Uni- 
versity Press. 

Ludvik, Catherine. 2007. Sarasvatī: Riverine Goddess of Knowledge. From the Manu- 
script-Carrying Vina-Player to the Weapon-Wielding Defender of the Dharma. Leiden: 
Brill. 


BUDDHISM, KINGSHIP AND THE PROTECTION OF THE STATE 247 


May, Jacques. 1967. "Chingokokka." In Hobogirin 1v. Paris; Tokyo: 322-327. 

McDaniel, Justin. 2011. The Lovelorn Ghost and the Magical Monk: Practicing Buddhism 
in Modern Thailand. New York: Columbia University Press. 

McDaniel, Justin. 2014. “The Material Turn. An Introduction to Thai Sources for the 
Study of Buddhist Amulets.” In Material Culture and Asian Religions. Text, Image, 
Object, edited by Benjamin J. Fleming and Richard D. Mann, 135—148. New York, Lon- 
don: Routledge. 

Meisezahl, Richard O. 1962. “The Amoghapāšahrdaya Dharani. The Early Sanskrit Man- 
uscript of the Reiunji Critically Edited and Translated.” Monumenta Nipponica 17: 
265-328. 

Mikkyo Seiten Kenkyūkai. 1995. "Siddhaikavīratantra” Taisho Daigaku Sogo-—Bukkyo- 

Kenkyusho-Kiyo 15: 366—349 and 16: 1-9. 

Mikkyo Seiten Kenkyūkai. 1998-2011. “Transcribed Sanskrit Text of the Amoghapāša- 

kalparāja” Taisho Daigaku Sogo—Bukkyo-Kenkyüsho-Nenpo 20—23, 26, 32, 33. 

Nobel, Johannes. 1937. Suvarņabhāsottamasūtra. Das Goldglanz-Sūtra. Ein Sanskrittext 

des Mahayana-Buddhismus. Leipzig: Otto Harrassowitz. 


Norman, Kenneth Roy. 1983. Pali Literature. Including the Canonical Literature in Prakrit 
and Sanskrit of all the Hinayana Schools of Buddhism. Wiesbaden: Otto Harras- 
sowitz. 

Pal, Pratapaditya. 1992. “Queen Uddaka’s Illuminated Manuscript.’ In Indian Numismat- 
ics, History, Art and Culture: Essays in Honour of Dr. Parameshwari Lal Gupta, edited 
by David W. Macdowall, et al., 291-296. Delhi: Agam Kala Prakashan. 

Pandey, J.S. 2002. Sriherukabhidhanam Cakrasamvaratantram with the Commentary of 
Bhavabhatta. Sarnath: Central Institute of Higher Tibetan Studies. 

Radich, Michael. 20n. “Immortal Buddhas and Their Indestructible Embodiments: The 
Advent of the Concept of Vajrakāya” Journal of the International Association of Bud- 
dhist Studies 34: 227—290. 

Rospatt, Alexander von. 2015. "Local Literatures: Nepal” In Brill's Encyclopedia of Bud- 
dhism. Vol. 1. Literature and Languages, edited by Jonathan Silk, Oskar von Hinüber, 
and Vincent Eltschinger, 819—830. Leiden: Brill. 

Sander, Lore. 2007. “Preliminary Remarks on Two Versions of the Ātānātīya (Ātānātika)- 
Sutra in Sanskrit.” Journal of the International College for Advanced Buddhist Studies 
11: 159—196. 

Sanderson, Alexis. 2003-2004. "The Šaiva Religion Among the Khmers, Part 1.” Bulletin 
de l'École francaise d' Extréme-Orient 90-91: 349—463. 

Sanderson, Alexis. 2004. "Religion and the State: Šaiva Officiants in the Territory of the 
Brahmanical Royal Chaplain” Indo-Iranian Journal 47: 229—300. 

Sanderson, Alexis. 2009. "The Šaiva Age—The Rise and Dominance of Šaivism Dur- 

ing the Early Medieval Period.” In Genesis and Development of Tantrism, edited by 

Shingo Einoo, 41-350. Tokyo: Institute of Oriental Culture, University of Tokyo. 


248 HIDAS 


Sango, Asuka. 2015. The Halo of Golden Light. Imperial Authority and Buddhist Ritual in 
Heian Japan. Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press. 

Schopen, Gregory. 1978. The Bhaisajyaguru-sutra and the Buddhism of Gilgit. Ph.D. the- 
sis, Australian National University. 

Shaw, Miranda. 2006. Buddhist Goddesses of India. Princeton, NJ: Pirnceton University 
Press. 

Skilling, Peter. 1992. "The Raksa Literature of the Sravakayana.” Journal of the Pali Text 
Society 16: 109—182. 

Skilling, Peter. 2007. “King, Sangha and Brahmans: Ideology, Ritual and Power in Pre- 
modern Siam.” In Buddhism, Power and Political Order, edited by Ian Harris, 182—215. 
Abingdon; New York: Routledge. 

Skjaerve, Prods Oktor. 2004. This Most Excellent Shine of Gold, King of Kings of Sutras: 
The Khotanese Suvarņabhāsottamasūtra. Cambridge, MA: Department of Near East- 
ern Languages and Civilizations, Harvard University. 

Suzuki, Takayasu. 2012. “Who Is the One That Has to Make Confession under the 
Instruction of the Suvarnaprabhasa?” Journal of Indian and Buddhist Studies 60: 
1220—1228. 

Takubo, Shuyo. 1972. Ārya-Mahā-Māyūrī Vidya-Rajfit. Tokyo: Sankibo. 
Tuladhar-Douglas, William. 2006. Remaking Buddhism for Medieval Nepal: The Fif- 
teenth-Century Reformation of Newar Buddhism. Abingdon; New York: Routledge. 
de Visser, Marinus Willem. 1935. Ancient Buddhism in Japan: Sūtras and Ceremonies in 
Use in the Seventh and Eighth Centuries A.D. and Their History in Later Times. Leiden: 

Brill. 

Zimmermann, Michael. 2006. “Only a Fool Becomes a King: Buddhist Stances on Pun- 
ishment.” In Buddhism and Violence, edited by Michael Zimmermann, 213-242. 
Lumbini: Lumbini International Research Institute. 


CHAPTER 11 


Adapting Šaiva Tantric Initiation for Exoteric 
Circles: The Lokadharmint Diksa and Its History in 
Early Medieval Sources 


Nina Mirnig 


1 Introduction 


A consistent concern in the study of early Saivism is to understand the scope 
of the clientele texts were written for, and how representative this literature 
was of practices on the ground at given times. The methodological limita- 
tions we face in exploring this largely prescriptive body of literature in relation 
to actual practice are notorious. Yet, in his seminal works on Saiva religious 
history, Alexis Sanderson developed groundbreaking insights into the socio- 
religious and political landscape in which the surviving texts were produced, 
reconstructing processes that led to the dominant position of Saivism in the 
medieval Indic world. Thanks to his pioneering research, and that of other 
scholars who have taken up the subject in the wake of his work, our understand- 
ing of the relative chronology of Saiva scriptures and medieval authors has also 
greatly improved.! This increasingly enables us to investigate these materials 
historically, and thus to pursue questions of a socio-historical nature, which 
are at the heart of Sanderson’s work. In his own words (Sanderson 2005, 230), 


[...] it is possible, I would say necessary, to read the literature and inscrip- 
tions with the sort of questions in mind that a social historian would wish 
to ask. 


For this felicitation volume, the present article is intended as a small contri- 
bution of this kind, applying a social-historical approach to a certain form of 
Saiva initiation, namely the lokadharmini dīksā. In essence, this denotes a form 
of initiation that is compatible with maintaining one’s socio-religious and rit- 
ual obligations in society—the lokadharma. 


1 See, e.g., Goodall 1997, xxxvi-lxxvi, and the preface and introduction to Goodall 2004, as well 
as Sanderson 2001 and 2014. 


© NINA MIRNIG, 2020 | DOI:10.1163/9789004432802_013 


This is an open access chapter distributed under the terms of the CC BY-NC 4.0 license. 


250 MIRNIG 


Scholars familiar with tantric traditions know well that initiation (dīksā) is 
one of the core tantric rituals. As Goodall explains, tantric initiation was novel 
and different from earlier Indic forms of religious initiation, being not only “a 
preparation for a particular religious undertaking, but ... also a transformative 
rite that purifies the soul”? This purification is achieved through an innova- 
tive ritual technology, using the power of mantras to destroy an individual's 
karmas and connected rebirths at all reality levels (tattvas). This enables the 
Šaiva Guru to free the bound soul of all ties, and to guide the candidate to 
a cosmic level where he can either realize liberation through union with the 
highest form of Šiva, if he is a liberation seeker (mumuksu), or attain divine 
powers, if he is a seeker of supernatural powers and enjoyments (bubhuksu). 
As such, tantric initiation confers spiritual benefits to the candidate a priori 
to his practice. It is thus arguably the most powerful tantric rite, designed in 
principle for practitioners who intend to devote their lives to the religion, as 
was probably the case in its original setting of esoteric, probably ascetic, cir- 
cles. 

Atthe same time, we know from history that tantric Saivism did not remain 
confined to the margins of society, but emerged as a religious movement which 
successfully interfaced with the mainstream, and gradually came to dominate 
the religious and socio-political discourse of the early medieval Indic world.? 
As one would expect, this development is reflected in ritual and in changes to 
the constitution of the initiatory community, which by then encompassed not 
only ascetic practitioners fully devoted to Saiva religious practice, but also brah- 
manical householders. The increasing engagement with the mainstream led to 
the creation of exoteric forms of initiation, including versions that would con- 
fer spiritual benefits without requiring the candidate to adopt a purely Šaiva 
ritual lifestyle. The most well-known example is the nirbījā dīksā ("initiation 
without the seed [of having to perform post-initiatory rites]”), which offers the 
candidate the highest soteriological goal of ultimate liberation at the time of 
death. However, according to the scriptures, such an initiation was only granted 
in special cases, namely when the candidates were considered unable to per- 
form any kind of post-initiatory practice for special reasons. The list of such 
people classically comprises the king, but also the old, the young, the sick, and 
women.* 


2 See Goodall's entry on dīksā in Tantrikabhidhanakosa, vol. 111. 

3 See, e.g., Sanderson 2009. 

4 See, eg. Svacchanda, 4.88, as quoted by Goodall in his entry on nirbījadīksā in Tantrikabhi- 
dhānakoša, vol. 111. 


ADAPTING SAIVA TANTRIC INITIATION 251 


The other, lesser-known form of exoteric initiation is the lokadharmini dīksā, 
which forms the subject of this paper. This term translates as “the initiation 
which contains/adheres to the lokadharma,’ the lokadharma denoting the 
sphere of observance that Saiva sources consistently define as the exoteric 
religion of sruti and smrti, that is to say the domain of the brahmanical house- 
holder. Unlike the nirbījā, access to the lokadharmini initiation is not limited 
to specific groups, and in its original context, the initiation is mainly benefit- 
oriented: a lokadharmu initiate is said to pursue mundane spiritual goals before 
attaining some kind of divine status. He does so by means of the merit procured 
through lay worship, and not through Šaiva rites that require the propitiation 
of mantras. This seemingly antithetical initiatory category is little discussed 
by Saiva authors, probably precisely because of the doctrinal implications of 
such an initiation, which foregrounds a level of practice and spiritual goals 
that Šaivas claim to surpass. In the course of time, the (okadharmiņī initiation 
underwent several shifts in application. These developments are deeply entan- 
gled with the complex history of the system of initiatory categories, which was 
subject to processes of division and reassignment reflecting local and histor- 
ical circumstances. A historical investigation into this form of exoteric Saiva 
initiation therefore touches upon the larger issue of how tantric initiatory com- 
munities related to the brahmanical mainstream, at various stages, after their 
emergence from esoteric ascetic circles. 

The first part of the paper investigates the lokadharmini in its original set- 
ting, as an initiation for Sadhakas, first by surveying the available sources and 
then by contextualizing them in the socio-religious setting of tantric Šaivism's 
early stages. The second part will examine how this category of exoteric bubhu- 
ksu initiation is subsequently re-assigned to the sphere of the mumuksu, thus 
becoming integrated into the Saiva soteriological path, especially in the Jaya- 
drathayamala. The third section looks into the usage of the lokadharmi cate- 
gory in the ritual manuals of the nth—13th centuries, particularly sources from 
the South, tracing how in some works, notably the Jfíanaratnavali there is 
another shift in usage: the lokadharmini diksà comes to denote a regular Šaiva 
initiation for the householder, as opposed to the ascetic, who receives a šiva- 
dharmiņī dīksā. The final section reflects upon how the initiatory category of 
the lokadharmini fits within the larger context of tantric Saivism’s development 
in medieval India. 


5 For an example, see Ksemaraja ad Svacchanda 4.85: lokamārgah srutismrtyacarah ..., also 
quoted in note 10. 


252 MIRNIG 


2 The Original lokadharmint dīksā as a Form of Sadhaka Initiation: 
Sources and Mechanics 


The earliest sources that mention a (okadharmiņī dīksā—alwaysas the counter- 
part of the šivadharmiņī diksa—feature it as a form of Sadhaka initiation? in the 
domain of the bubhuksu, i.e. the seeker of power and enjoyment, as opposed 
to the liberation-seeker (mumuksu). The first extant text to feature the loka- 
dharmint is the Svacchanda. In its fourth chapter, dedicated in its entirety to 
initiation, the text gives an overview of all the initiation categories, dividing the 
initiatory community into mumuksus and bubhuksus. The former may receive 
either a sabījā or nirbījā initiation, and the latter a šivadharmiņī or lokadha- 
rmiņī initiation." Of these, the sivadharmī Sadhaka is the Saiva Sadhaka proper, 
who through initiation gains the ability to propitiate Saiva mantras in order to 
attain benefits and supernatural powers, while the lokadharmi Sadhaka is his 
exoteric counterpart, seeking enjoyments and spiritual benefits through mun- 
dane religious acts rather than mantras: 


The Sadhaka is of two kinds. On the one hand, there is the šivadharmī, 
for whom the cosmic path is purified by Šaiva mantras and who is yoked 
to [particular] mantras that are to be mastered; he is knowledgeable, 
consecrated [to office], and devoted to the propitiation of mantras. This 
Šaiva Sādhaka is capable [of mastering] the threefold supernatural pow- 
ers.? The second [kind of Sadhaka] adheres to the mundane path and 


6 Brunner in her 1975 paper dedicated to the figure of the Sadhaka, also outlines many of the 
general features of the Saiva Sadhaka’s initiation and practice thereafter. She does, however, 
not treat the lokadharmini kind of initiation at length. 

7 Svacchandatantra 4. 79b—81b: atha diksadhvasuddhyartham bhuktimuktiphalārthinām || vi- 
dhānam ucyate sūksmam pasavicchittikarakam | guruh samprcchate sisyam dvividham pha- 
lakanksinam || phalam akanksase yādrk tadrk sadhanam arabhe |, "Next there is the initiation 
for the purpose of the purification of the cosmic path (adhvan) for those who seek the fruit 
of [either] enjoyment or liberation. The subtle method that causes the cutting of the bonds 
is explained. The Guru asks the candidate seeking benefits [about] the two-fold [option]. 
Whatever fruit he desires, accordingly he should start the propitiation of Mantras." 

8 This may be a reference to the old classification of siddhis into three kinds, which goes back 
to early sources such as the Nišvāsa and Buddhist Kriyatantras, as Goodall (2014, 16 and 80— 
82) discusses. Thus, in the Nisvāsa Guhyasütra three levels of siddhi can be attained after 
preparing some potion. Which kind of siddhi has been obtained can be deduced from the 
manifestation of heat, if the power is to cover great distances on foot, the manifestation of 
smoke if he is to have the power to disappear, and the manifestation of flames if he is to have 
the power to walk through the sky (Goodall 2013, 81). For more on siddhi-practices in Tantric 
Saivism, see Vasudeva 2012. 


ADAPTING SAIVA TANTRIC INITIATION 253 


is devoted to the performance of good and meritorious works (istapur- 
tavidhau); desiring the fruits produced by [his] karma, he abides solely 
[devoted to] meritorious [karma |, free of the unmeritorious. [The Guru] 
should always perform the destruction of the unmeritorious portion [of 
the candidate's karma] with mantras.? 


Ksemaraja, in his commentary, further specifies that meritorious acts in the 
case of the lokadharmi consist of bathing at sacred places, providing food and 
building wells, tanks and monasteries.!° These are precisely the kinds of reli- 
gious activity that we would expect of an ordinary lay worshipper. As we see 
in this passage, what the (okadharmiņī initiation does is to enhance the initi- 
ate’s spiritual benefits by destroying bad karma connected to all reality levels, 
leaving only good karma and its positive outcomes in place. 

This function of the lokadharmini diksà is reiterated later in the chapter, 
when the text explains how the two kinds of bubhuksu initiations differ from 
that of the mumuksu. These differences concern two points:" firstly, the portion 
of karma that is purified and thus removed for the candidate; and second, the 
cosmic level at which the candidate is united with the respective deity upon 
initiation's conclusion: 


Next, he should then bring about destruction of the past and future karma 
for the liberation-seeker (mumuksu), because of his indifference [to the 
world]. He should not purify the one [part of karma] that is the prara- 
bdha [karma], [which fuels his present existence]. But for the Sadhaka, he 
should purify [only] one [part of the] past karma for the purpose of power, 
and having manifested the past and future karma together (ekastham), 
he should initiate [the candidate]. This is the sivadharmint diksa. The 


9 Svacchanda 4.83-86b: sadhako dvividhah tatra $ivadharmy ekatah sthitah | $ivamantra- 
visuddhadhva sadhyamantraniyojitah || jfíanavari cabhisiktas ca mantraradhanatatparah 
| trividhayah tu siddher vai so 'trarhah sivasadhakah || dvitiyo lokamargastha istāpūrtavi- 
dhau ratah | karmakrt phalam akanksari $ubhaikastho Subhojjhitah || tasya karyam sada 
mantrair ašubhāmšavināšanam |. 

10  Ksemarāja ad Svacchanda 4.85: lokamārgah érutismrtyacarah. istam tirthasnanannada- 
nādi. pūrtam kūpatadākamathādi, "The mundane path is the observance according to 
šruti and smrti. The sacred rites (istam) [consist of] such actions as bathing at a sacred 
site and giving away food. The meritorious acts (pūrta) are [the donations and setting up 
of] such things as wells, tanks and monasteries for ascetics." 

11 See also, Brunner 1975, 417-420. 

12 See pp. 254ff. for a discussion of this problematic passage, here italicized. 


254 MIRNIG 


other form [of bubhuksu initiation] is the lokadharmini, which destroys 
both past and future demerit. That lokadharmini [dīksā] is known to 
exclude the obligation to propitiate mantras [by means of purvaseva 
etc.]. However, when the current body breaks, [the candidate] expe- 
riences [the series of eight supernatural natural powers] starting with 
becoming very small (anima). Having experienced [these] enjoyments he 
moves upwards to whichever [cosmic level] the Guru has joined him [by 
yojanika]. Whether this is at the sakala or niskala level [of Siva] depends 
on [the preference of] the candidate and Guru.!? 


Thus, we learn that the lokadharmi candidate can be united with any deity 
of any cosmic level at the end of the procedure, and could even choose to be 
united with the highest, niskala form of Siva, a form of union synonymous with 
the state of ultimate liberation. In addition, while the lokadharmi initiate can- 
not propitiate Šaiva mantras, unlike the Sadhaka, he is nevertheless granted 
supernatural powers, which are usually said to result from mantra practice; the 
difference is that he experiences these powers after death. 

Regarding the sivadharmini dīksā, we note that there is some difficulty inter- 
preting how Karma is held to be eliminated at this point. As evident from 
the translation, the problematic phrase is 142ab, sadhakasya tu bhūtyartham 
prakkarmaikam tu šodhayet; this is supposed to define the difference in proce- 
dure from the nirvanadiksa of the mumuksu, for whom only prarabdha karma, 
the karma that fuels the current life, is to be preserved.!^ Looking at the differ- 
ent treatments of this phrase, we find that commentators disagree on whether 
or not any additional karmic bonds are excluded from purification—and in 
effect, whether the dīksā of the Sadhaka is very close to that of the mumuksu 
Putraka or not. Ksemaraja, in his commentary, wants to see a clear difference, 
and interprets this passage to indicate that two kinds of karma are excluded 
from purification, in case of the Sadhaka, namely (1) the karma that is nec- 
essary for the attainment of supernatural powers (i.e. bhutyartham), without 


13  Svacchanda 4341345: prākkarmabhāvikasyātha abhavam bhavayet tadā | mumuksor nira- 
peksatvat prārabdhr ekam na šodhayet || sadhakasya tu bhütyartham prakkarmaikam tu 
šodhayet | prākkarmāgāmi caikastham bhāvayitvā ca diksayet || šivadharmiņy asau dīksā 
lokadharminy ato ‘nyatha | prāktanāgamikasyāpi adharmaksayakāriņī || lokadharminy 
asau jfieyà mantrārādhanavarjitā | prarabdhadehabhede tu bhunkte sa hy animadikan || 
bhogān bhuktvā vrajed ūrdhvam guruņā yatra yojitah | sakale niskale vāpi sisyacaryavasad 
bhaved ||. 

14 For the locus classicus regarding the mechanics of prarabdha karma, see Kiraņa 6.20—21, 
edited and translated in Goodall 1998. 


ADAPTING SAIVA TANTRIC INITIATION 255 


making explicit what that means, and (2) the good portion of the prarab- 
dha karma, which ensures the success of the siddhi practice by preventing 
its being blocked by bad karma.'6 On the other hand, Abhinavagupta, when 
adopting this passage in his Tantrāloka, as discussed below, drops pādas 142cd 
and rephrases 142ab as prākkarmettham tu šodhayet, "He should purify the past 
karma in the same way [as in the case for the mumuksu]"—thus indicating that 
for him, the procedure for the Sadhaka is exactly the same as for the mumuksu 
Putraka, except that the prarabdha karma is directed towards supernatural 
powers rather than liberation. In his commentary on this passage, Jayaratha, 
in turn, criticizes Ksemaraja's reading of ekam instead of ittham, undermining 
his understanding that the bad portion of the prarabdha karma is destroyed, 
instead saying that neither is it possible to remove any part of the prarabdha 
karma, since this fuels the current life force, nor does this interpretation have 
scriptural support. At the same time, he remains silent about the fact that 
the text teaches the removal of only the bad karma in case of the lokadharmini 
dīksā.8 


15  Ksemarāja ad Svacchanda 4.142a (sadhakasya tu bhütyartham): bhütiproyojanam bhavi- 
mantrārādhanarūpam yat tad api na šodhayed ity arthah, "He should not purify the [por- 
tion of karma] which is for the future propitiation of mantras for the purpose of super- 
natural powers; this is the meaning” 

16 Ksemaraja ad Svacchanda 4.142b (prakkarmaikam tu šodhayet): bhūtyarthād yat prag 
dehārambhi subhasubham tata ekam asubham evāsya šodhayet, evam hi nirvighnam bho- 
gasiddhir bhavati || yat tu janmāntarasamcitam šubhāšubham yac casmifi janmani kari- 
syati, tat sarvam uktanityà mantraradhanavarjam asya putrakavac chodhyam evety aha, 
“For the purpose of supernatural powers, from the past pure and impure [karma] that 
maintains the [current] body (i.e. the prarabdha karma) he should only purify the impure 
[portion] for him, for in this way (evam) the achievement of enjoyment comes about with- 
out any obstacles. As for the pure and impure [karma] that is accumulated in other [past] 
births and which he will do in a [future] birth, all those should be purified for him accord- 
ing to the proclaimed procedure, like in the case of the Putraka, apart from [those karmas 
for] the propitiation of mantras (mantraradhanavarjam). Therefore he said, [prakkar- 
māgāmi caikastham bhāvayitvā ca diksayet (Svacchanda 4.142cd) |.” 

17 Jayaratha ad Tantrāloka 15.28: sādhakasya ca ittham eva karmašodhanam, kim tu tat bhū- 
tyartham, tasya hi bhogaunmukhyat tadvasanabhedat phalabheda iti pratijfíato ‘pi artho 
nirvahitah | yad uktam "sadhakasya tu bhürtyartham prākkarmettham tu sodhayet | prakka- 
rmāgāmi (corr. Hatley; prākkarmagāmi Ed.) caikastham bhāvayitvā tu dīksayet” iti. atra ca 
udyotakrtà yad ittham iti apasya ekam iti pathitvā dehārambhisubhāšubhakarmamadhyād 
ekam ašubham api asya $odhayed iti vyakhyatam, tad upeksyam ārabdhakāryadehāramb- 
hikarmocchedāšakyatvasya prāgupapāditatvāt kva cid apy evam anāmnātatvāc ca. 

18 A similar problem of interpretation also occurs in the passage of the Mrgendra, which 
outlines the superior and the inferior bhautikī dīksā, the former being the sivadharmini 
and the latter the lokadharmint. This passage appears to say that for the superior kind, i.e. 
the sivadharmini, along with the prarabdha karma some undefined additional karma is 


256 MIRNIG 


Another early source which distinguishes between the šivadharmiņī and 
lokadharmiņī diksa is the Mrgendra, which was composed after the Svaccha- 
nda. This scripture maintains the same basic set of categories and organiza- 
tion of initiatory groups, even though it uses slightly different terminology. 
Thus, instead of referring to initiations for the mumuksu and the bubhuksu, 
the Mrgendra uses the terms naisthikī and bhautikī!? the former of which is 
divided into the sāpeksā and nirapeksa,”° corresponding to the sabija/nirbija 
distinction, and the latter again into šivadharmiņī and lokadharmini, for which 
we find the following description: 


preserved for the success of the siddhi practice (Saivasadhanasadhyena), perhaps similar 
to Ksemaraja’s bhūtyartham category. Mrgendra 8.146—148: evam eva kriyāyogād bhautiky 
api parāparā | kim tu dehāviyogārtham prarabdham karma dehinah || $aivasadhanasa- 
dhyena samdhāya paripālayet | sānubandham dahed anyad dīpte dīksāhutāšane || kastā- 
kastapadantasthe sādhake paricakesvare | yogo syātmikadešinyām anyasyam istavigrahe || 
(for a translation, see Brunner 1985, 258). However, Bhatta Nārāyaņakaņtha, comment- 
ing on this passage, is against such an interpretation, and rather awkwardly interprets 
šaivasādhanasādhyena to refer to the post-initiatory discipline that the Sādhaka is to carry 
out, which would seem odd given that such post-initiatory practice is also to be carried 
out by the mumuksu: ... prarabdham karma prarabdhakaryam dehinah jantoh dehaviyoga- 
rtham šarīrapātasamraksārtham $aivasadhanasadhyena samayācārapālanena samdhaya 
samyojya paripālayet raksayet. (For a translation, see Brunner 1985, 286). 

19 That the terms bhautiki and naitsthikī correspond at this point to the initiations for the 
bubhuksu and mumuksu respectively, is suggested by the commentary of Nārāyaņakaņ- 
tha(adMrgendra, Kriyāpāda 2: nisthā kaivalyam. te bhūtinisthe prayojanam yayos te tathā. 
bhautikt bhūtikāmasya. nistharthino naisthiki nairvanikity arthah), which also Brunner fol- 
lows in her translation, translating bhautiki as “donneuse de jouissance” and naisthiki as 
“donneuse de liberation” (Brunner 1985, 199). Further, from later passages it is clear that 
the bhautiki is equated with the Sadhaka; e.g. in Mrgendra, Caryāpāda u, where the loka- 
dharmini is even referred to as a Sadhaka. As such, this division of the Mrgendra would 
reproduce the same structure as we found it in the Svacchanda; but internally we have 
to note that the category of the bhautiki and the naisthikī, if taken in this manner, don't 
overlap with what in the Caryapada of the Mrgendra is described as bhautikavratins and 
naisthikavratins, as Brunner (1985, 347, note 2) already points out. Thus, here, the bhau- 
tikavratin, i.e. one who has a temporary vrata, and the naisthikavratin, who has a perma- 
nent vrata, are both opposed to those who have no vrata at all (avrata), a category which, 
in turn, includes the lokadharmi sadhaka featuring under the bhautiki diksa. However, 
it may be that the Mrgendra is simply not entirely consistent. Interpretative problems 
appear also in other places regarding the definitions and procedures for the sivadharmini 
and lokadharmini, and similarly, perhaps confusion also remains on the bhautikī and 
naisthikī distinction. Goodall also draws attention to the difficulties in interpreting the 
terms naitsthika and bhautika in his entry on the term naisthika in Tāntrikābhidhānakoša, 
vol. 111. 

20 However, note that in her English summary it seems that Brunner (1985, 481-482) applies 
the divisions of sapeksa and nirapeksā to both the naisthikī and bhautikī. 


ADAPTING SAIVA TANTRIC INITIATION 257 


The sivadharmini [initiation] is the root of success for the fruits of the 
Saiva religion for the individual soul. There is another [kind of siva- 
dharmint | taught without the destruction of the body, up until the disso- 
lution of the world.?! The remaining one is taught to be the lokadharmini, 
for the purpose of [attaining the eightfold supernatural powers] starting 
with anima after the current life, after all the bad portions [of karma] were 
destroyed at all reality levels.?2 


While the description of the šivadharmīņī initiation differs somewhat, imply- 


ing that there are two levels of Šaiva Sādhaka,23 the explanation of the loka- 


dharmiņī resonates much with what we found in the Svacchanda, namely that 


all bad karma is destroyed and the initiate attains supernatural powers after 


death. Regarding the end point of union for the lokadharmi candidate, the 


Mrgendra offers a choice similar to that of the Svacchanda, namely that the 


candidate is either lifted up to the cosmic level of his choice and absorbs the 


applicable deity’s divine powers, or that he is united with the highest form of 


Siva, for liberation: 


21 
22 


23 


24 


25 


Having lifted up the lokadharmi to [the cosmic level of] the deity he 
desires, he should cause [this deity's] qualities to be present in the can- 
didate, or, for those desirous of liberation, [join him] in Siva. He should 
establish the [regent] who is at the top of the [respective] path,?* together 
with his powers, recite the OM at the end of the mantra, and then join 
[him with the deity], while remaining untouched by unmeritorious 
[karma]? 


See below, note 23. 

Mrgendra, Kriyāpāda 8.6—7: šivadharmiņy aņor mūlam šivadharmaphalašriyah | hitetarā 
vinā bhangam tanor à vilayād bhuvām || bhogabhümisu sarvāsu duskrtāmše hate sati | 
dehottaranimadyartham šistestā lokadharmini ||. 

The definition of the sivadharmini appears more general here, in comparison to the Svac- 
chanda, since the sivadharmini bhautikī initiation is simply said to confer the fruits rooted 
in the Saiva religion, presumably through the propitiation of Saiva mantras. In addition, 
the Mrgendra also teaches a special version of the sivadharmini, in which the candidate 
attains the ability to keep his body until the end of dissolution, the form of the šiva- 
dharmi that Bhatta Narayanakantha declares to be the superior one (see Narayanakantha 
ad Mrgendra 8.6b: itarā dvitiya $ivadharminy eva tanoh bhangam vina hitā vihitā sreyas 
sādhikā.). 

Iam following Brunner’s interpretation (1985, 287) of the problematic phrase placed here 
in italics. 

Mrgendra, Kriyapada 8.149-150: lokadharminam āropya mate bhuvanabhartari | taddha- 
rmāpādanam kuryāc chive và muktikanksinam || yasya yo dhvā tadantas tam upasthapya 
satadbalam | mantrante taram uccarya yojayet kastam asprsan ||. 


258 MIRNIG 


However the Mrgendra goes even further than the Svacchanda and makes 
explicit that this procedure can also be applied in case a candidate wishes to 
be united with a non-Šaiva brahmanical deity: 


In exactly the same way (evam eva), [the Guru] may guide a devotee to 
union [with a deity such as] Ambikā, Sūrya, Smara, Visņu or Brahmā, after 
having purified that path [up to the cosmic level of the desired deity] [of 
all bad karma]. And the same procedure (evam eva hi) [is applicable] for 
any other deity that is on the path [that the devotee wishes to be united 
with].26 


As for the mode of religious practice of the lokadharmi, we learn in the Carya- 
pada of the Mrgendra that the lokadharmi is avrata,?” presumably referring to 


26  Mrgendra, Kriyāpāda 8.151-152b: evam evāmbikāsūryasmaravisņuprajāsrjām | sayujyam 
bhaktimān neyas tad adhvani visodhite || margasthanam paresām ca devānām evam eva 
hi |. 

27 . Mrgendra, Caryāpāda n: sādhako lokadharmi yah putrakah snatako grhi | samayī prāg- 
grhasthaš ca šaivāh syur vratavarjitah ||, "The lokadharmi Sādhaka, a Putraka who is a 
married householder, a Samayin and someone who was previously a householder [and had 
become a samnyāsin] are Saivas without vratas” (I follow Brunner (1985, 349) here in sep- 
arating the Samayin and praggrhastha, i.e. one who was previously a householder, as two 
kinds of initiates intended here; Ksemaraja also interprets the passage thus. However, 
as Brunner already points out, this category makes little sense in the present context.) 
See Ksemaraja ad loc.: sadhakasya sivadharmilaukikadharmibhedad dvaividhye sati loka- 
dharmi yah sādhakah, putrakah, tathā snātako grhi grhasthatve sati snātah, samayī prāg- 
grhasthah pūrvam grhasthaé cety ete vratavarjita jfieyah | praggrhasthas ca ity uttarakalam 
garhasthyatyagapeksaya | yatah sambhavanti kecana ājīvanam ujjhitagrhavasthitayah | 
tadvailaksanyartham prāggrhasthagrahaņam ||. As Brunner (1985, 350, note 5) argues, 
vrata appears here to refer to a Šaiva observance with mantras, as in the Svacchanda, 
perhaps combined with an abstinent ascetic lifestyle, rather than to the performance of 
a Saiva post-initiatory discipline as a whole; this is indicated by the fact that the loka- 
dharmi is mentioned here next to the Putraka who is a snātaka and thus married, the 
Putraka who is a head of the household, the Samayin, and someone who is the head of the 
household, though this last category is dubious. In any case, of those we can expect that 
at least the Samayin and the married Putraka—unless he received a nirbījā initiation— 
would have had to comply with the samayas. On the other hand, the other interpretation 
of vrata above would fit for all those cases, since such an ascetic lifestyle would not be 
appropriate for the married Putraka, and the Samayin would perhaps not be considered 
able yet to do so given his neophyte status. Nevertheless, there appears also to be the 
possibility of becoming a bhautikavratin with a temporary vrata, in which case the practi- 
tioner is instructed to reject the paraphernalia he received for the practice and offer them 
back to the deity after the successful outcome of his vrata (see Mrgendra, Caryāpāda gb— 
10). 


ADAPTING SAIVA TANTRIC INITIATION 259 


his not being able to perform religious observances involving propitiation of 
mantras, just as we have seen in the Svacchanda. 

Aside from the Svacchanda and the Mrgendra, there is one more scrip- 
ture that features the lokadharmini as a type of Sadhaka initiation, namely 
the Tantrasadbhava. However, this scripture does not provide any details con- 
cerning the lokadharmini; it mentions this initiatory category only for the sake 
of completeness while introducing the sivadharmini dīksā, here also called 
vidyādīksā,? as the initiation undertaken by the Saiva Sādhaka before receiv- 
ing consecration.?? 

The lokadharmini/sivadharmini distinction between Sadhaka initiations is 
carried over into Abhinavagupta's early-uth-century Tantraloka;?? since Abhi- 
navagupta incorporates the Svacchanda passage into his work, somewhat mod- 


28 Cf. the vidyādīksā in the Nisvasa, Goodall et al. 2015, 280—282. 

29  Tantrasadbhava 9.516cd—522 (the variants are recorded from the etext of Dyczkowski; 
emendations and conjectures are my own): sa guruh šivatulyas tu *sivadharmaphala- 
pradah (em.; sivadhamaphalapradah Ed.) ||516|| $antyamte bhūtidīksā tu sadasivapha- 
lātmikā | *sivadharmi (kh; sivadharmo Kg) tu sā jfieya lokadharmī matānyathā ||517|| 
šivadharmī tu ya diksà sādhakānām prakirtitah | tesam kuryabhisekam tu sadhakatve (kh, 
g; *sādhakam *? K) niyojayet ||518|| sadhakasyabhiseko "yam vidyādīksād anantaram | 
tvidyādīksā bhavet sā tu vasana*bhedatah (corr.; -bhedata mss.) sthitā ||519|| na karma- 
bhede vidyeta *sarvo 'syādhvani (conj.; sarvāsyādhvani Ed.) samsthitah | krtāni yāni kar- 
mani sarvany adhva*gatāni (K, kh; -sarvānya- g) tu ||520|| tani samšodhya (K, g; sa -- kh) 
vidhivat kalapancasthitani vait | yojanyavasare bhedam vijfiatam (conj. Hatley; bhedo vi- 
jfíanam mss.) sādhakasya tu ||521|| prarabdhakarma pasvarthe tam ekastham tu bhavayet 
| Sivam uccārya sakalam sadāšivatanau (K, kh; sadāsiva -- g) nyaset ||522||, “That Guru is 
egual to Šiva, bestowing the fruits of the Šaiva dharma. The bhūtidīksā contains the fruits 
of Sadāšiva at the end of the Šānti [level]. This [initiation] is known as the Šivadharmī; the 
other is called the Lokadharmi. The Sivadharmi is known to be the initiation for Sādhakas. 
For them [the Guru] should perform consecration, and unite them with the state of being 
Sadhakas (sadhakatve). The consecration for the Sadhaka [should be performed] after the 
vidyādīksā. +The vidyādīksā is based upon a difference in intention (vāsanā); one should 
not understand it on the basis of difference in action (karma). Everything is established on 
the path: all actions which have been performed, associated with [various levels of] the 
cosmic course [of tattvas] [and] established on/with the five kalās, should be duly puri- 
fied.T The difference [in procedure] for the Sādhaka is known to be at the time of union 
[with the deity]: he should manifest together (ekastham) the prarabdha karma for the 
sake of the bound soul, pronounce the mantra of Siva in its sakala form, and place [the 
consciousness] into the body of Sadasiva.” 

3o Tantrāloka15.23c-24b:sādhako dvividhah $aivadharma lokojjhitasthitih || lokadharmi pha- 
lakamksi subhasthas casubhojjhitah |, "There are two types of Sadhakas. The one fol- 
lowing the Saiva dharma [i.e. Sivadharmi] is free of mundane [observances]. The loka- 
dharmi Sadhaka is desirous of fruits, rooted in meritorious [actions] and free of impure 
[actions]” 


260 MIRNIG 


ified.?! However, Abhinavagupta does not deal with the šivadharmī/lokadharmī 
Sādhaka distinction beyond guoting this passage. On the other hand, Jayaratha 
returns to this division among bubhuksus in his commentary on the 13th chap- 
ter, which is dedicated to the different degrees of saktipata, the descent of 
Siva's divine power upon souls, which causes them to seek initiation. In this 
chapter, Abhinavagupta ranks the intensity of saktipāta, relating each degree— 
from highest, middle, and lowest, each further divided into three levels—to 
a certain kind of initiatory category. The principle is that the more intense 
the descent of power, the more immediate is the candidate's final liberation; 
and by this criteria he is to receive the appropriate form of initiation.?? On 
this scale, the enjoyment-seeking bubhuksu is at the lower end, but Abhinava- 
gupta himself does not make explicit how he correlates different degrees of 
šaktipāta to the sivadharmi and lokadharmi initiates. Rather, he restricts him- 
self to the bubhuksu, assigning the middle (madhya-madhya šaktipāta) and 
lower levels (manda-madhya šaktipāta) of the middling kind of saktipata to 
two unspecified categories thereof. Of those, the middle level is for the bubhu- 
ksu who attains Sivahood after enjoying the siddhis of his respective tattva,33 
and the lower level for the bubhuksu who enjoys siddhis in his subsequent 


31  Tantráloka 15.27—30: abhāvam bhāvayet samyak karmaņām prācyabhāvinām (< Svaccha- 
nda [Sv] 4.141ab: prakkarmabhavikasyatha abhavam bhāvayet tadā) | mumuksor nira- 
peksasya prārabdhr ekam na šodhayet (< Sv 4.141cd: mumuksor nirapeksatvāt prārabdhr 
ekam na šodhayet) || sadhakasya tu bhūtyartham ittham eva višodhayet (< Sv 4.142ab: 
sādhakasya tu bhūtyartham prākkarmaikam tu šodhayet) | sivadharminy asau dīksā loka- 
dharmapaharini (< Sv 4.143ab: sivadharminy asau dīksā lokadharminy ato ‘nyatha) || adha- 
rmarūpiņām eva na šubhānām tu $odhanam (< Sv 4.143cd: praktanagamikasyapi adharma- 
ksayakāriņī) | lokadharmiņy asau dīksā mantrārādhanavarjitā (< Sv 4.144ab: lokadharmiņy 
asau jiieyā mantrārādhanavarjitā) || prarabdhadehabhede tu bhunkte 'sav animadikam 
(< Sv 4.144cd: prārabdhadehabhede tu bhunkte sa hy animadikan) | bhuktvordhvam yāti 
yatraisa yukto ‘tha sakale ‘kale (< Sv 4.145ab: bhogan bhuktvā vrajed ūrdhvam guruņā yatra 
yojitah | sakale niskale vāpi sisyacaryavasad bhaved) ||, “He should destroy all the past 
and future karmas for the liberation-seeker who is indifferent. He should only purify the 
prārabdha karma. For the Sādhaka he should purify [the karmas] in the same manner for 
the purpose of powers (bhüti). This is the sivadharmini dīksā, which removes the worldly 
religion (lokadharmapaharini). The purification of only the bad karma, and not the mer- 
itorious, is the lokadharmini dīksā, which is without the worship of mantras. Upon the 
death of his current body he enjoys [the supernatural powers], starting with aņimā; and 
having enjoyed these he goes upwards to where he was joined [during the initiation rit- 
ual], at a sakala or niskala level.” 

32 See Takashima 1992, 72—75, who explains the different levels of saktipāta and the corre- 
sponding initiation categories. 

33  Tantrāloka 13.242. See also Takashima 1992, 72—73. 


ADAPTING SAIVA TANTRIC INITIATION 261 


rebirth and only attains union with Siva after that.34 In his analysis of this 
chapter, Takashima (1992, 73) points out that the sivadharmini and the loka- 
dharmiņī division would fit these two respective levels well, yet Jayaratha’s 
commentary nonetheless interprets these differently. He instead equates the 
two levels of bubhuksu with two levels of the sivadharmi Sadhaka, a distinc- 
tion encountered in the Mrgendra passage above, which spoke of an ordinary 
Sadhaka and one who retains his body until the time of cosmic dissolution.?5 
It is of course not clear whether Jayaratha had precisely this distinction in 
mind, but be that as it may, by assigning these two levels to the sivadharmini 
category, Jayaratha frees up the category of the lokadharmi Sadhaka to cover 
the three remaining, lowest levels of šaktipāta, which are concerned appro- 
priately with practices focused on worldly enjoyments.?6 In order to create 
three levels of lokadharmi, he uses the following distinctions, according to 
which the way to liberation is increasingly remote: the highest (tīvra-manda 
Saktipata) concerns the lokadharmi who automatically attains Sivahood after 
an interval of of some period, which he spends in a desired cosmic level— 
a category of lokadharmi Jayaratha equates with the standard form we have 
so far encountered;?? the second highest (madhya-manda saktipata) concerns 
the lokadharmi who is initiated again in another world before reaching libera- 
tion;?? and the third (manda-manda šaktipāta) concerns the lokadharmi who 
first experiences enjoyments for a very long period, as well as different levels of 
proximity to the deity (salokyasamipyasayujyasadanakramena)?? of the cho- 


34  Tauntráloka 13.243. See also Takashima 1992, 73. 

35 See p. 255. Note that this passage caused some confusion of interpretation, even for 
Narayanakantha. 

36 Tantrāloka 13.245c—246b. See also Takashima 1992, 73. 

37  Jayaratha even quotes the Mrgendra (cf. note 25) passage at this point, ad Tantrāloka 
13.246: yah kaś cit tivramandasaktipatavaml lokadharmi, sa diksabalat dehante kva cana 
yathābhimate bhuvanādau bhogān bhuktvā šivatām yāyāt | yad uktam: lokadharminam 
āropya mate bhuvanabhartari | taddharmapadanam kuryāc chive va muktikāmksiņam 
||, vaksyati ca: prarabdhadehabhede tu bhunkte 'sāv animadikam | bhuktvordhvam yati 
yatraisa yukto ‘tha sakale ‘kale ||. See also Takashima 1992, 73. 

38 Jayaratha ad Tantrāloka 13.246: kas cic ca madhyamandasaktipatavan kva cana bhuvanā- 
dau kañ cit kālam bhogan bhuktva, tadisvaradiksitah paryante šivatām gacchet. 

39  Onthese different grades of “theistic liberation,” see Watson et al. 2013, 249—250, note 154; 
and Goodall 1998, xxxvii-xxxix, note 85. As Watson et al. (2013, 249—250 and note 167) dis- 
cuss, an example of a “lower” level of liberation, associated with pauranic spiritual goals, is 
to become a ganapati, or chief attendant, of the lord, thus experiencing being in the same 
world (salokya) as the Lord or in his vicinity (samipya)— spiritual goals, as the authors 
point out, which are also expressed in the lay literature of early medieval India, such as 
the old Skandapurāņa and Šivadharmašāstra. 


262 MIRNIG 


sen universe, and only then receives initiation again, through which he attains 
Šivahood.* In creating these different levels, Jayaratha might have had a sys- 
tem similar to the Mrgendra in mind, where we also found various levels of 
lokadharmiņī dīksā, whose recipients range from those seeking final liberation 
to those who want to be united with and experience enjoyments related to a 
non-Šaiva deity.*! 


3 Tracing the Socio-historical Context of the Emergence of the 
lokadharmini dīksā 


Thus, to sum up, the following five features consistently appear in descriptions 

of the lokadharmi initiate: 

1. His source of merit lies in lay religion, the lokadharma, namely what is 
taught in sruti and smrti. 

2. During initiation all the bad karma connected with any level of reality 
is to be purified, leaving good karma intact to be enjoyed by the initi- 
ate. 

3. He is not entitled to perform the propitiation of mantras (mantrara- 
dhana). 

4. He experiences supernatural powers after death. 

5. He can choose whether he eventually attains ultimate liberation, or 
instead union with any deity of the cosmos he wishes; in the case of the 
Mrgendra these include even non-Saiva, brahmanical deities. 

For obvious reasons, this initiatory category is difficult to position within a Saiva 

doctrinal framework, for it offers not only enhanced merit through destruction 

of all bad karma, but also attainment of any cosmic level, including libera- 
tion, without the commitment to perform Saiva ritual with mantras. In this 
light, even the very label "Sādhaka” to such a candidate appears inappropriate, 
given the Sadhaka’s paradigmatic association with seeking supernatural attain- 
ments through the power of mantras. Perhaps with this hesitation in mind, 


40 Jayaratha ad Tantrāloka 13.246: mandamandasaktipatavan punas tatraiva salokyasami- 
pyasāyujyāsādanakrameņa cirataram kālam bhogan bhuktvā, tata eva diksam āsādya šiva- 
tām iyat. See also Takashima (1992, 73), who has a slightly different interpretation of 
the sālokyasāmīpyasāyujyāsādhanakrameņa, taking it to denote "various stages of enjoy- 
ment” 

41 Cf. pp. 257-256. Note that in his conclusion, Takashima (1992, 74—75) proposes that Abhi- 
navagupta intended the manda level of šaktipāta for those who only received samaya- 
dīksā, contrary to Jayaratha's interpretation of different levels of lokadharmi initiates. 


ADAPTING SAIVA TANTRIC INITIATION 263 


Ksemaraja ad Svacchanda 4.85, offers a weak explanation for the lokadharmi 
being called a Sadhaka, leaning on the meaning of the underlying verbal root 
“sadh-,” “to be successful, achieve;" he says that the lokadharmt is referred to as 
a Sadhaka “because he achieves (sadhanat) the fruit by his pious acts alone.”42 
One could argue that a stronger reason to refer to the lokadharmi as a Sādhaka 
is that he will experience supernatural powers, like the Saiva Sadhaka, except 
that he does so after death. Yet this addition to the professed outcome of the 
lokadharmini dīksā seems almost to be a doctrinal elaboration added to war- 
rant its place among Sadhaka initiations. Another sign that the lokadharmini 
diksa held a doctrinally difficult position might be the meager commentary 
these passages receive. Bhatta Narayanakantha, for instance, restricts himself 
to rather self-explanatory comments on the entire lokadharmini passage in the 
Mrgendra. 

Regardless of this awkward near-silence, at least for these scriptural sources 
and Kashmirian Saiva authors, such an initiatory category appears to have been 
a social reality that needed to be accommodated and acknowledged. In addi- 
tion to the sources discussed, the lokadharmint /sivadharmini distinction also 
features in a fourteenth century Kashmirian initiation manual, the Kalādīksā- 
paddhati of Mānodatta,*3 and Ksemaraja introduces these initiatory categories 
into his commentary on the Netratantra, even though the root text itself does 
not contain them.** Additionally, we have seen how Jayaratha uses the category 
of the lokadharmi Sadhaka to speak of initiates who pursue mundane spiritual 
goals, giving the impression that there exists a wide range of lokadharmt initi- 
ates with different degrees of involvement in the Šaiva religion, similar to the 
model in the Mrgendra. 

However, the question remains why such an initiatory category, which seems 
so counter-intuitive and difficult to justify doctrinally, came into existence in 
the first place. From a socio-historical perspective, the creation of a bubhuksu- 
orientated exoteric form of Šaiva initiation appears to be connected to the 
position of tantric communities in an early phase, when the sphere of the 


42 . Ksemarāja ad Svacchanda 4.85: Subhakarmanaiva tu phalasya sādhanāt sādhako 'yam. 

43 I thank Professor Alexis Sanderson for sharing with me his handout, "Bhatta Ramakan- 
tha's commentary on the opening passage of the Matangapāramešvara” which quotes 
the Kaladiksapaddhati on this point (pp. 36—37), and through which I found out about 
the usage of the sivadharmi/lokadharmi categories in this manual. For more information 
on Manodatta's work, see Sanderson 2004, 362, note 34. 

44 See Ksemarāja ad Netratantra 4.1: bhuktidīksā sivadharmalaukikadharmabhedena bhinnā 
sādhakasya, “The bhuktidīksā for the Sadhaka is divided into the stvadharma and laukika- 
dharma kind” 


264 MIRNIG 


power-seeking practitioner had a more prominent role. Brunner (1975, 439) 
long ago noted that the Svacchanda and the Mrgendra—both of which contain 
the lokadharmini, as we have seen—appear to preserve a comparatively promi- 
nent position for the power-seeking Sadhaka, which she suspects harkens back 
to an early phase of the tantric traditions, when the gulf between soteriological 
and power-orientated goals was not so vast. Her hypothesis finds confirmation 
in findings of the past decade, particularly those resulting from study of the Nis- 
vāsatattvasamhitā (Goodall et al. 2015). As the earliest extant Saiva tantra, the 
Nisvasa affords important insights into the early stages of the “tantric age”*5 
particularly in that—as Goodall points out—it envisages a time when tantric 
communities appear to have been restricted to limited esoteric circles*® with 
much focus on the propitiation of mantras for magical purposes, which were 
pursued prior to liberation. He further observes that the classical fourfold hier- 
archy of Samayin, Putraka, Acarya and Sadhaka is entirely absent at this stage, 
with all practitioners simply referred to as Sadhakas—a category of initiates 
associated with the utilization of mantras for both supernatural powers and 
liberation. The community had not yet been divided into those who sought 
one to the exclusion of the other.*7 That the pursuit of power and soteriological 
goals belonged to the same spiritual path is reflected in the Nisvasa’s initiation 
system, which teaches rites of two types, namely vidyādīksā,* through which a 
candidate is admitted to the community and becomes a Sadhaka with authority 
to propitiate mantras, and the muktidiksa, through which the confirmed Sadha- 
ka attains liberation.^? Of neither initiation is there an exoteric form at this 
stage.50 

Theoretical repercussions caused by separating the liberation- and power- 
seekers' goals are visible, for instance, in the ambiguous treatment of karma's 


45 The Nisvasa is the earliest extant tantric scripture, preserving a stage of the development 
of tantric communities where non-tantric, Atimargic roots are often visible, as Sanderson 
(2006) observed. 

46 On the absence of the domain of social ritual in the Nisvāsa, see Goodall et al. 2015, 47. 

47 See Goodall et al. 2015, 47-50. As for all initiates probably being referred to as sadhakas at 
this stage, see also Goodall et al. 2015, 281. 

48 See Goodall et al. 2015, 50. And, in fact, the diksà for the Sadhaka is sometimes referred 
to as vidyādīksā, as in the Tantrasadbhava. For more see Goodall’s entry nirvanadiksa in 
Tāntrikābhidhānakoša, vol. 111. 

49 See Goodall et al. 2015, 280—282, 289. However, Goodall also notes that this interpretation 
that any initiate takes first the vidyādīksā and then the muktidīksā is a working hypothesis 
at the moment, not completely excluding the possibility that these may be two separate 
modes of initiation, which at the same time seems less likely. 

50 See also Goodall et al. 2015, 51. 


ADAPTING SAIVA TANTRIC INITIATION 265 


elimination during the initiation ritual for the Saiva Sadhaka.5! Nevertheless, 
we find that the status and centrality of the “original” Sādhaka's position and 
practices are preserved in most early tantric scriptures, even after the commu- 
nity came to be divided into different initiatory ranks, and centered around 
the Acarya and liberation-seekers. It is tempting to conclude that the creation 
of the lokadharmini diksa is directly connected to this early sphere of tantric 
religion, which put so much emphasis on the pursuit of magical powers and 
benefits. While in due course Saiva literature grew to put more emphasis on 
the soteriological aspirations of the mumuksu—reflected in the fact that the 
soteriological-orientated nirbija dīksā has a more prominent role—the attrac- 
tion of the powers and benefits gained through mantras must nonetheless have 
played an important role in the initial popularization of tantric groups. For 
the lokadharmini diksa would hold obvious attractions for laypeople desiring 
to enhance the fruits of their current practice without committing to the dis- 
ciplinary regimen of tantric Saiva ritual. Another appealing aspect may have 
been that through this initiation, a lokadharmi became part of the initiatory 
community and perhaps privy to services accessible only to initiates, especially 
those offered by Saiva Sadhakas. That broadening access to initiation may have 
played an important role in popularizing tantric Saivism at an early stage is 
suggested by the fact that the Mrgendra extends the scope of the lokadharmint 
dīksā to those who are not even Šiva-worshippers, people who may nonetheless 
have desired specific services distinctive to the Saiva tantric domain. However, 
the doctrinally awkward position of the lokadharmi Sādhaka, combined with 
the increasing emphasis on purely soteriological goals, may have led to the 
gradual oblivion of this category, causing its reassignment in later sources, as 
will be seen below. 


51 See ibid., pp. 254 ff. I am not aware of an established, coherent theory on what kind of 
karma needs to be left in place in order to pursue supernatural powers. But note that—in 
quite a different context—the idea that the success of a Sadhaka’s practice is intertwined 
with his karmic position is also found in the Brahmayamala. In his analysis of the chapters 
on the Sadhaka, Kiss shows how the Brahmayamala teaches complex mechanics under- 
lying a logic of karma, according to which the level of a Sādhaka's practice is dependent 
on actions in past births and on whether he had received initiation in a past life, as well 
as special rituals to remove karmic bonds that would block the success of the Sadhaka’s 
practice (see Kiss 2015, 35—55, in particular 52—53 concerning the rites to remove karmic 
bonds). 


266 MIRNIG 
4 The lokadharmini dīksā in the Context of the nirvanadiksa 


The two other early Saiva scriptures which make a distinction between šiva- 
dharmiņī and lokadharmiņī initiations are the Jayadrathayamala?? and the 
rather later Brhatkālottara, both composed after the Svacchanda, and in the 
latter case certainly after the Mrgendra as well. However, in both of these 
works the association of these initiatory categories with the Sadhaka gets lost; 
they become reassigned to the context of nirvāņadīksā, the initiation for those 
seeking liberation rather than supernatural powers and enjoyments. However, 
unlike the Brhatkālottara, the Jayadrathayamala preserves in part the origi- 
nal logic of karma-elimination seen in the bubhuksu category of lokadharmini 
dīksā, despite this reassignment. 

In the Jayadrathayamala we find both of the initiatory categories in ques- 
tion—here referred to as sivadharmadiksa and lokadharmadiksa—in the 
description of initiation types** outlined in the first satka. This is the por- 
tion of the text which Sanderson (2007, 235-236) identifies as its oldest layer, 
deriving originally from a work called the Sirascheda. Unlike the Svacchanda 
and Mrgendra, the Jayadrathayamala does not here employ the broad divi- 
sion between the mumuksu and bubhuksu in its exposition of initiatory cat- 
egories, but rather makes a distinction between an initiation that bestows 
adhikara, that is to say the authority to perform certain rituals,** and those that 
bestow liberation (moksadā).** In presenting the latter, the nirvāņadīksā, the 


52 In search for references and access to this passage in the Jayadrathayamala I am grateful 
to several people: to Dominic Goodall, who first drew my attention to the fact that the 
lokadharmini features in the Jayadrathayamala; to Olga Serbaeva, for searching her etext 
and locating references for me, which showed that the thirteenth chapter is relevant; to 
Csaba Kiss, for sharing with me the paper manuscript of this chapter; and to Alexis Sander- 
son, for sharing his preliminary edition of the passage, which is quoted below in note 57, 
and for reading and discussing the passage in question with me. 

53 The immediate context here is Devi's question to Bhairava about the number of initiatory 
categories as well as the issue whether the initiatory procedure is the same for all four 
caste-classes. 

54 The passage is problematic, and it is not specified what exactly is intended by the category 
of adhikāradā initiations. We may hypothesise that this refers to a kind of initiation that 
bestows to Šaiva office holders—i.e. the Ācārya and the Sadhaka— entitlement (adhikāra) 
to perform rituals for others. See Goodall's entry on niradhikaradiksa in Tantrikabhi- 
dhānakoša, vol. 111. See also note 83 for an example of the pair adhikāradā and niradhi- 
kāradā diksà in a list of initiation types in the Somasambhupaddhati. 

55 The Jayadrathayāmala (1.13.3) appears to want to impose this distinction already on the 
Samayadiksa, which would be unusual, since the Samayadīksā by itself typically cannot 
grant adhikāra. For the Sanskrit text and translation, see note 56. 


ADAPTING SAIVA TANTRIC INITIATION 267 


Jayadrathayāmala teaches the following options:*% (1) the sivadharmadiksa, (2) 


the lokadharmadiksa, and (3) the ksipraghnī, which appears to be a synonym 


of the sadyonirvāņadīksā (i.e. "the initiation that instantly grants liberation"). 


56 


As mentioned earlier (note 52), a preliminary edition of this passage was kindly made 
available to me by Alexis Sanderson, who has also discussed the passage with me, helping 
to clarify points for the translation. I quote his text below, except that I mark his conjec- 
tures with “conj. S.” and degeminate doubled consonants after “r” (any mistakes in the text 
and translation are, of course, my own). Jayadrathayamala, Satka 1, 13.318: sā *samay- 
ātha (conj. S.; sāmayātha Cod.) nirvana dvibhinna dvisvarūpata(h) | samayā hi punar 
yati dvibhavam phalabhedatah ||3|| jfianayogapravrttistha praninam adhikāradā | tad- 
vāsanavadhā *nityavyapti (conj. S.; nitya vyapti Cod.) pada(pra)dayika ||4|| *samayā (conj. 
S.;sāmayā Cod.) t yac cat vijiteyā nirvanapi dvirūpiņī | *moksadhikarabhedabhyam (conj. 
S.; moksarthikarabhedabhyam Cod.) +sthanubhis tantravedibhiht ||5|| bhüyo vimuktida 
dīksā nirvana bahubhedagā | sivadharmma *lokadharmmā (conj. S.; lokadharmmi Cod.) 
ksipraghni pindapatika ||6|| *ekatamādhvacicchuddhyā (conj. S.; ekatamodhvacicchud- 
dhya Cod.) vyavrtte bandhanatraye | sivaptidarsitasesa (conj. S.; šivāptidaršitāšesa Cod.) 
samayācārapālanāt ||7|| moksavaptikari yà tu lokacaraviparyayat | $ivadharma smrtā dīksā 
dvisvarūpā *mahesvari (corr. S.; mahesvari Cod.) ||8|| nirbijakhya *sabījā (conj. S.; savirya 
Cod.) ca diksabhedah šivāgame | pakamürkhasudirnanga- *edaka(conj.; edatva Cod.)kuņi- 
yositām ||9|| *sarujatyantyabhaktanam (conj. S.; sarudhātyantabhaktānām Cod.) bhūbhrt- 
sa(mynyāsinām priye | visuddhasamayacara ya krtā daisikena tu ||10|| nirbījā sa bhaved 
dīksā sabījā syād vilomatah | *vidvad(em.; vidhi Cod.)dvandvasahanam tu sundari kriyate 
tadā ||u|| gurudevagnikaryani yaih kāryāņi subhaktitah | akurvatām hi tattegām vafichitam 
na bhavet phalam ||12|| lokadharmá tu ya dīksā sā syat sthitivilomagā | sivadharmakriya 
sā tu kin tu laukikavrttigā ||13|| šodhayed atha va sarvam dharmam ekam na šodhayet | 
laukikacaradharmasthah tad bhuktvā nirvrtim vrajet ||14|| athasitam višodhyam tu kar- 
maikam daišikena tu | malino dhvāthavā devi *$odhyo bhogo (conj. S; $éuddho bhogyo Cod.) 
na jāyate ||15|| *na bhogyam tad dhi bhuktatvāt (conj. S.; tad bhogyam tadvibhuktatvā Cod.) 
prayāty ātmā param padam | smrteyam *lokadharmā (conj. S.; lokadharmī Cod.) tu diksa 
*nirvāņagāminī (em. S.; nirvvanamamini Cod.) ||16|| esātīte niruddhe tu prarabdhe kar- 
mani priye | ksinabhogyavasad ya tu sā dīksā pindapatika ||17|| ksurikastrogramantrais ca 
*yogenādāya (conj. S.; yogenadhaya Cod,) praksipet | parayogasamāyoge sadyonirvāņadā 
hi sā ||18||, "And that [initiation] is either a Samayadiksa or Nirvanadiksa, divided into 
two because it has two natures. Now the Samayadīksā is further twofold because of a 
difference in the result (phala). [The first] bestows adhikāra [and] follows the prac- 
tices of jfiana and yoga, [the second] destroys the latent impressions (vāsana) of that 
[soul?] and bestows a state of eternal pervasion [with the deity]. + [That is known] by 
the firm ones who know the tantras. + Besides (bhityas) the nirvanadiksa bestowing liber- 
ation is of many kinds: sivadharma|diksa], lokadharmaļ[dīksā] and the initiation which 
kills quickly, causing the body to fall. [The initiation] which reveals everything through 
the attainment of Siva (sivāptidaršitāšegā) through the performance of post-initiatory 
rites (samayācārapālanāt) once the three bonds (i.e. the three impurities (mala)) have 
ceased due to the purification of the consciousness on one [of the six] paths, [that] 
initiation is known to be the šivadharmadīksā, which bestows the attainment of liber- 
ation (moksāvāptikarī) because it is contrary to the mundane practice. [And], O God- 
dess, [the Šivadharmadīksā] has two forms: in Saiva scriptures the division of initiation 


268 MIRNIG 


Of those, the sivadharmadiksa is defined as twofold, namely sabījā (i.e. with 
the seed of post-initatory practice) and nirbījā (i.e. without the seed of post- 
initatory practice), which amounts to the bifurcation we typically expect of nir- 
vānadīksā. The šivadharmadīksā initiate therefore attains liberation at death, 
either with the stipulation to perform post-initiatory rites (sabījā) or without 
this stipulation (nirbija). The lokadharmadiksa variations, on the other hand, 
lead to liberation only after the initiate has enjoyed the merit earned through 
his mundane ritual practice. In this category, two versions are taught: first is 
the lokadharmini kind, which we have already encountered in the Svaccha- 
nda, Mrgendra and Tantraloka, namely an initiation involving the elimination 
of all bad karma, leaving meritorious karma in place to be enjoyed before the 
eventual attainment of liberation. The second appears to be a version of the 
lokadharmadiksa in which only the impure universe is purified, the idea being 
that the initiate will go to some segment of the pure universe after death.” 


is called that without the seed (nirbījākhyā) and that with the seed (sabījā). The Acarya 
performs the [initiation] which contains the duty to perform post-initiatory rites purified 
(visuddhasamayacara) for children, imbeciles, those whose limbs suffered trauma, deaf 
people, women, people who are suffering from chronic illness and kings and renouncers 
(samnyāsin) who are extremely devoted [to Siva]; this [initiation] is the nirbījā. The sabījā 
is the opposite to this and is performed, O beautiful one, for those who are learned, endure 
extremes and are able bodied. By those the rituals towards the Guru, the God and the fire 
have to be performed with extreme devotion, since the desired fruit will not come about 
for them who don't do [these rites]. The lokadharmadiksá is a Saiva ritual [and therefore] 
proceeds contrary to established [practice] (i.e. the brahmanical order), but also conforms 
to worldly religion. Either [the Acarya] should purify all [karma] or only not purify the 
dharma (i.e. the auspicious karma); [then the initiate] is dedicated to [the accumula- 
tion of] dharma through mundane observances (laukikacaradharmasthah), and having 
enjoyed this [dharma] he proceeds to liberation. Thus, the Acarya should only purify the 
bad [karma]. Alternatively, (athava) [only] the impure path is purified, [so that] no expe- 
rience (bhogah) comes about [in the impure universe]. [In other words] that [experience] 
does not have to be experienced [anymore in the impure universe] because it has already 
been experienced [through the process of initiation]. The soul [of the initiate] (atma) 
goes straight to the higher level (i.e. the pure universe). That is known to be the initiation 
called lokadharma, which leads to liberation. Such [an initiation] (i.e. the sivadharma- 
or lokadharmadīksā?) [is performed] when the past action has been destroyed, but the 
prārabdhakarma [is present], O loved one. But that initiation which [is performed] after 
[all experiences that] need to be experienced have waned, that is the piņdapātikā (i.e. 
which causes the dropping of the body). [The Ācārya] should take hold [of the soul] 
through yoga and expel it with the razor and other fierce mantras in order to bring its 
union [with the deity] through the highest fusion (parayogasamayoge). For this is the [ini- 
tiation which] bestows liberation immediately (sadyonirvanada).” 

57 For the interpretation of the second kind of lokadharmadiksa I am indebted to Alexis 
Sanderson. 


ADAPTING SAIVA TANTRIC INITIATION 269 


While our sources discussed so far did not teach such a variation of the loka- 
dharmiņī, we did see that the Mrgendra and Jayaratha conceived of different 
levels of lokadharmi practice, the latter even adding a level in which the loka- 
dharmī is reborn and then initiated again on another cosmic level.58 The šiva- 
dharmadīksā and the lokadharmadiksa thus differ broadly from each other in 
that the former bestows spiritual liberation through the power of Saiva ritual 
alone, being opposed to the worldly practice (i.e. moksvāptikarīyā tu lokacara- 
viparyayat | Sivadharma smrtā dīksā), while in the latter brahmanical ritual acts 
as the source of the immediate spiritual benefit, even though—as in the ear- 
lier cases—the power of initiation eventually brings about union with a deity 
on some or another cosmic level. That in the Jayadrathayamala too this cate- 
gory holds a doctrinally awkward position can perhaps be inferred by the need 
the redactors felt to stress that the lokadharmadiksá is indeed a Saiva ritual 
(Jayadrathayāmala, Satka 1, 13.12.59 

In the case of the Brhatkālottara, the sivadharmini/lokadharmini terminol- 
ogy makes only a brief appearance. So far I have only been able to locate a 
single passage featuring this distinction, at the end of the chapter on initia- 
tion.9? Here too these categories are not used in the context of the Sadhaka or 
bubhuksu, but feature rather as variations of the nirvāņadīksā. In contrast to the 
Jayadrathayamala, the pair is used to describe the nirbija diksa and sabījā diksa, 
respectively, and in the case of the lokadharmini, there is no reference to the 
elimination of bad karma alone. What is curious is that the text, as preserved 
in the manuscript available to me, equates nirbija dīksā with the šivadharmiņī 
and sabījā with the (okadharmiņī.! This seems counterintuitive, since in all the 
classifications we have seen the sabijà is the initiation after which a candidate 
is obliged to observe Saiva post-initiatory rites (samayas) until death, whereas 
in the nirbījā case, the initiate is free of this obligation and maintains his ritual 
obligations in accordance with his position in society. It is tempting to conjec- 
ture that the transmission of the text is simply wrong at this point—that we 
should emend the order so that the nirbījā is equated with lokadharmini and 
the sabījā with sivadharmini. However, this remains conjectural, and a more 
thorough study of the initiatory categories will require critically editing at least 


58 See here, pp. 255ff. and pp. 261ff. 

59 For the Sanskrit text and translation, see above, note 56. 

60 The text has not been critically edited yet and to my knowledge only some parts of it have 
been transcribed electronically, kindly shared with me by Nirajan Kafle; the passage in 
question appears at the end of what is termed "dīksāpatala” in the palm-leaf manuscript, 
also kindly provided to me by Nirajan Kafle. 

61 Brhatkālottara 43x, line 2-3: nirbījā $ivadharmakhya sabījā lokadharmini, "The nirbījā is 


=» 


called the šivadharmaļdīksā], the sabījā is the lokadharmiņī: 


270 MIRNIG 


this portion of the text. Nevertheless, what we can extract for our discussion is 
that here the classification is associated neither with the Sādhaka, nor with the 
“karma logic” of the lokadharmini dīksā found in the Jayadrathayāmala. 


5 Pre-13th Century Saiddhantika Manuals: Householders versus 
Ascetics 


Labels for the initiation categories sivadharmini and lokadharmini are carried 
over into the Saiddhantika manuals, though differently and inconsistently reas- 
signed by various sources, and with weak links to the original Sadhaka context. 
The following surveys early Saiddhantika manuals, with particular focus on the 
earlier sources, but is not exhaustive. Noticeably, the influential Somasambhu- 
paddhati, also called the Kriyakandakramavali, of Somasambhu does not teach 
a mundane form of the sadhakadiksa, nor does it include lokadharmini among 
the mumuksu options; rather, the text speaks of the Šaiva Sādhaka receiving, 
as in the sources discussed earlier, a modified form of the nirvanadiksa right 
before his consecration to office.9? However, in the description of the sabija 
nirvanadiksa, at the point when karmas are emplaced upon the pāšasūtra— 
representing all reality levels of the cosmos, which will be burnt and destroyed 
in the consecrated fire—the Somasambhupaddhati presents various options 
for the karma that can be exempted from purification, namely the prarabdha- 
karma, the karma for mantrasiddhi, and the karma that results from meritori- 
ous acts, comparable to those of the lay devotee. While Somasambhu himself 
does not explicitly correlate these options to specific initiation types, we may 
note that the latter two categories of karma, to be exempted for purification in 
certain circumstances, correspond to the procedures we have seen envisaged 
for the sivadharmini initiation for the Saiva Sadhaka, and the lokadharmini 
initiation, respectively. In fact, in his commentary on this passage, Trilocana 
explicitely assigns these categories accordingly.53 


62 See, Somasambhupaddhati Sadhakabhiseka 1-2: sadhaskyabhiseke tu nivrtyadikalatrayam 
| mumuksor iva samsodhya šāntyatītām višodhayet || tatah sadāšivam dhyātvā mūlama- 
ntreņa pūrņayā | šāntau samyojya kurvīta guņāpādanam astadhā. For a tanslation and 
notes, see Brunner 1977, 500—506. 

63 | Somasambhupaddhati, Nirvāņadīksāvidhi 31—32: sabijayam tu diksayam samayācārapāša- 
tah | deharambhakadharmac ca mantrasiddhiphalad api || istāpūrtādidharmāc ca vyatiri- 
ktam prabandhakam | caitanyarodhakam sūksmam kalānām antare smaret ||. For a trans- 
lation and annotation, see Brunner 1977, 190-196. For Trilocana's commentary on this 
passage, see Brunner 1977, 191, [32a] and notes thereon. 


ADAPTING SAIVA TANTRIC INITIATION 271 


Another manual from this period is the Vimalavati of Vimalasiva, who com- 
posed his work in 1101/2 and lived in Varanasi (Sanderson 2014, 22). Vimalasiva 
explicitly uses the categories of sivadharmini and lokadharmini; and though 
he partly draws on the passage from the Mrgendra examined earlier, he does 
not assign these to different kinds of Sadhaka, but rather assigns the šiva- 
dharmini initiation to the Putraka and Acarya—a feature we also see in the 
Ajitagama®+—and the lokadharmini simply to the Sadhaka devoted to merito- 
rious action.*% However, it appears that in this passage the allocation of initi- 
ation categories has gone awry, such that the Saiva Sadhaka is missing, unless 
the reason for this omission is the actual disappearance of the Sadhaka from 
medieval South-India. 

Jiiānašiva wrote his Jūānaratnāvalī also while residing in Varanasi, probably 
some decades later.% In his application of the sivadharmint |lokadharmini ter- 
minology he seems to be the most innovative of Saiddhantika authors in this 
period. He also quotes sources for this classification that have yet to be identi- 
fied. Jhanasiva uses this terminology to denote divisions of the nirvanadiksa— 
that is to say, the full regular Saiva initiation—in essence in order to distinguish, 
broadly, between initiations performed for the ascetic practitioner, here the 
šivadharmī, and those for the householder practitioner, here the lokadharmi.®” 


64 Ajitagama 77.14: sabījā ca dvidhā bhinnā prathamā sivadharmini || sadhakacaryayoh pro- 
kta desakaladibhedanah | dharmadharmatmakam karma prāgāgāmi vicitrakam || sac- 
intya šodhyate yatra saivoktā sivadharmini | adharmamātrasamšuddhau dvitiya lokad- 
harmiņī ||. 

65 Vimalavati f. 67r: dvividhā syāt sabījāpi tatrādyā šivadharmiņī | *putrakācāryayor (conj.; 
putrakācāryayo Ed.) mukhya dharmādharmaksayakarī || istāpūrtādinirate sādhake loka- 
dharmini || Sivadharminy *anor (conj.; anau Ed.) mūlam sivadharma*phalasriyah (conj.; 
*phalam sriyah Ed.) | *hitetarā (conj.; hitatarā Ed.) vinā bhamgam *tanor (conj.; tannaur 
Ed.) a vilayad *bhuvām (conj.; bhavām Ed.)|| bhogabhūmisu sarvāsu *duskrtāmše (conj.; 
duhskrtāmša- Ed.) hate šati | dehāntarāņimādyartham šistestā lokadharmiņī ||. 

66 See Goodall 2000, 209 for the date of Jhanasiva. I am extremely grateful to Dominic 
Goodall for sharing with me his etext of the Jridnaratnavali as well as his photographs 
of the transcript (Re 1025/52) cited in this article. 

67 Jūānaratnāvalī, p. 266: tatra tāvat *sāpeksānapeksā (conj.; sāpeksāpeksā Cod.) dvividha 
šivadharmiņī lokadharmiņī ceti. tatra tavac chivadharmini linginām šikhācchedasamā- 
yuktà anya grhiņām tadvirahitā. uktam ca: dvedhā nirvāņadīksā laukiki sivadharmini | grhi- 
nam laukikī jreya linginam šivadharmiņī || šikhācchedo na yatrāsti dīksā sā lokadharmiņī 
| šikhākhaņdena samyuktā dīksā sā šivadharmiņī ||, “Therein, now, [the initiation types] 
are twofold, [namely] dependent on [whether] there is a reguirement to perfrom post- 
initiatory practice or not; and [they are also twofold insofar as being] šivadharmiņī or 
lokadharmiņī. Here [in the category of the sapeksa nirvanadiksa kind], the sivadharmini 
is for ascetics and contains the cutting off of the topknot, while the other [initiation] is 
for householders and is without [cutting off the topknot]. And it is said: The nirvanadiksa 
is twofold, [divided into] the mundane (laukikī) [kind] and the šivadharmiņī. The mun- 


272 MIRNIG 


The actual procedures for the šivadharmiņī and lokadharmini initiations are 
the same, being those for the nirvanadiksa, with only one difference: for the 
šivadharmī, the topknot is cut off during the initiation, while for the (okadharmī 
it is not.8 The topknot is believed to contain the rodhasakti,®° that is to say the 
power to delude the soul,” which is apparently eliminated by cutting the top- 
knot off in the case of the ascetic. This is not done for the lokadharmi, who, after 
all, is by definition still engaged in worldly activity. In terms of post-initiatory 
practice prescribed for the (okadharmī initiate, the Jūānaratnāvalī differs from 
the earlier scriptural sources discussed in the first part of the paper, in which 
an initiate who received a lokadharmini or lokadharmadīksā was only required 
to continue his ritual obligations of the brahmanical ritual sphere (the loka- 
dharma), without Saiva-specific additions. In the Jiānaratnāvalī, however, we 
have seen that the lokadharmint is clearly defined as a form of nirvanadiksa, 
which—unless otherwise specified—is of the sabia kind. Thus, the signifi- 
cance here is that the initiate retains his socio-religious status in mundane 
society (lokadharma) as a householder and keeps up these practices in addi- 
tion to his Šaiva post-initiatory ritual obligations, a principle that is already 
expressed in early Saiva sources.”! There is no mention of the procedure to 


dane is known to be for householders, the sivadharmini for ascetics. In the lokadharmini 
initiation there is no cutting of the topknot. The initiation in which the topknot is cut off 
is the šivadharmiņī” At the end of this section, all the sāpeksā types are contrasted with 
the nirapeksa; see Jfianaratnavali, p. 269: evam sāpeksā bahudhā jneya nirapeksā ca parā- 
paratvena dvividhà sadyosadyonirvāņā ceti, “In this manner the sapeksā type is known to 
be manifold, and the nirapeksa type is twofold on account of its higher and a lower forms, 
[namely] the immediate and the not-immediate types of nirvāņadīksā” 

68 For the Sanskrit text and translation, see note 67. Note that this is not the case in all 
manuals; for instance, the Somasambhupaddhati does not maintain this distinction. See 
Brunner 1977, 338, note 395. 

69 Also referred to as tirodhānašakti. 

70 See, e.g, Somasambhupaddhati, Nirvanadtksavidhi, verse 219 (Brunner 1977, 338—339): 
šikhāmantritakartaryā rodhasaktisvarupinim | šikhām chindyāt sivastrena sisyasya catu- 
rangulam ||, and also Jfíanaratnavali, p. 344: sikhan chidyāt tayā šaktyā rodhasakti- 
svarūpiņīm | karanam sarvapasanam sāvadhe dvādašāngulāt. See also Brunner 1977, xli, 
and for a discussion of the cutting of the topknot at other moments during initiation in 
some sources, see Goodall et al. 2015, 282—283. 

71 Sanderson (2009, 302) has demonstrated how Šaiva scriptures and commentaries early 
on developed clear positions regarding the importance for Saiva householder initiates 
of maintaining their brahmanical householder duties, i.e. the lokadharma. This helped 
ensure that Saiva initiation remained attractive to the householder mainstream, who, 
in this way, were not required to completely transform their public lives. However, it is 
emphasised in these sources that such full Saiva initiates were asked to maintain brah- 
manical practice merely for the sake of conformity, or in order to avoid transgression, not 
as a source of spiritual merit. 


ADAPTING SAIVA TANTRIC INITIATION 273 


eliminate only the bad karma linked to all reality levels, which we have seen 
associated with the lokadharmini dīksā. 

However, while this seems to be the underlying basic division of the nir- 
vanadiksa in the Jiiānaratnāvalī, these distinctions subsequently become 
entangled with aspects of the šivadharmiņī and lokadharmini initiations stem- 
ming from their original Sadhaka context. This happens in the context of cre- 
ating sub-categories for both the sivadharmini and lokadharmiņī categories, 
based on a division between those who desire something (sakama), i.e. what 
would otherwise be called the bubhuksu, and those who do not desire anything 
except liberation (akama, niskāma), i.e. the mumuksu. For ascetic practition- 
ers, the sivadharmini is divided into kinds for temporary ascetics (bhautika) 
and permanent ascetics (naisthika),’* and each of these is further divided into 
the sakama and niskama type.” In the case of the naisthikī sakāmā initia- 
tion, the initiate is promised enjoyments of the pure universe, after which he 
is to attain liberation.“ The naisthikī niskāmā initiation, on the other hand, 
bestows liberation immediately. On the division of the bhautikī into sakāmā 
and niskāmā types, Jfianasiva quotes the first two verses of a passage from 
the Mrgendra, which mentions that there are two types of bhautikī diksa, the 
superior and the inferior, the first being šivadharmiņī and the second being 
the lokadharmini type.”> However, since Jiiānašiva uses these as sub-categories 


72  Jjünaratnavali, p. 266 (with a conjecture by Goodall recorded from the etext): tatra 
šivadharmiņī dvidhā naisthiki bhautikī ceti tatra niravadhitapasvino naisthikāh. tesam ya 
sā naisthikī niravadhity api kathyate dvitiya *katipayadina(conj. Goodall, gadipayadina 
ms.)vratapálanad anantaram grhapadadayi |, “Here the sivadharmini kind is twofold, 
[namely] naisthikī and bhautikī. Of these (tatra) the naisthikas are permanent ascetics. 
The [initiation] that is [performed] for them is the naisthikī that is to say the one called the 
permanent. The second [kind of initiation] (i.e. the bhautikī) restores the state of being 
a householder immediately after the performance of an observance for a certain number 
of days.” 

73 Jūānaratnāvalī, p. 266: tatra naisthikī sakamakamabhedena dvidhā, “In that case, the 
naisthiki initiation is divided into one for those who desire [enjoyments and supernat- 
ural powers] and one for those who don't.” 

74  Jnanaratnavali, pp. 266—267: tatra sakāmasya $uddhadhvabhogan datvā tadanantaram 
šivapadapradā sakāmā, "In that case, for the one who desires [enjoyments and supernatu- 
ral powers] the sakāmā [initiation] [first] bestows the pleasures of the pure universe and 
immediately after that the level of the [highest] Siva.” 

75 For the Mrgendra passage, see pp. 256ff. Jfíanaratnavali, p. 267: *atha (em.; athà Cod.) 
bhautiki ca tathā dvividhā | uktam ca: evam eva kriyayogad *bhautiky (conj.; bhaumity 
Cod.) api parāparā | kin tu dehāviyogārtham prarabdham karma mohinam || saivasa- 
dhanasādhyena sandhāya paripālayet | sanubandham dahed anyad dipte dīksāhutāšane 
|| asyapy ayam arthah: evam eveti naisthika*sakamakamavad (conj.; -sakamakamavad- 
Cod.) bhautikasakamakamayor api kriyāyogāt kriyà ca yogaš ceti kriyayogam | tat kriyā 


274 MIRNIG 


of the šivadharmiņī, this is not the way in which he wants the Mrgendra to 
be understood; rather, the prose after the quotation explains that the differ- 
ence lies in the sakama entailing purification of the impure universe only up 
to maya, thus providing enjoyments within the sphere of the pure universe; 
the niskama type, however, entails purification of all levels of the universe, and 
the initiate thus attains liberation at death.”% If we are to understand these as 
two sub-categories of the temporary ascetic, the second type makes little sense, 
a confusion that is probably caused by the terminology bhautikī and naisthikī 
dīksā in the Mrgendra, where the terms are not, in turn, synonyms of the bhau- 
tikavrata and naisthikavrata,"" as they are understood in the Jiianaratnavali.”® 

The lokadharmini dīksā, in turn, is divided into superior (para) and infe- 
rior (apara) forms. Of those, the superior version is what we expect of the 
nirvanadiksa, with all karma but the prarabdha destroyed, the candidate thus 
being united with Šiva at the end of the initiation ritual in anticipation of his 
ultimate liberation at the time of death.”? The inferior form is assigned to an 
initiation in which only bad karma is destroyed, thus the version of the loka- 
dharmint dīksā seen in the Svacchanda and the Mrgendra.®° Jiiānašiva even 


sakāmasya māyāntādhvavišodhanam | niskamasya samastadhvavisodhanan ca yogah | 
punas suddhadhvani bhogayogas sakamasya niskāmasya šivayogas ca |... |, "Next, the bhau- 
tiki |dīksā] is twofold, and it is said [in the scriptures]: In the same way the bhautikī [dīksā 
is achieved] through ritual and union [and] is also of a superior and inferior kind. Rather, 
for the [still] deluded [souls] he should preserve the prarabdha karma, which has the pur- 
pose of keeping [the initiate] with his [current] body, after joining it with [the karma] to 
be cultivated for the practice of propitiating Saiva mantras for supernatural powers (i.e. 
šaivasādhana). The other [karmas] together with their consequences he should burn in 
the blazing initiation fire’ This is the meaning: ‘in the same way’ means through kriyāyoga, 
that it to say the rituals and union [with the respective deity] for the sakama and akama 
bhautikī are just like those for the sakama and akama naisthiki. Therefore the ritual for 
the sakama kind is the purification of the universe up to maya. For the niskama it is the 
purification of the entire cosmic path and then union. Or rather, for the sakama there is 
union with enjoyments in the pure universe, and for the niskama there is union with Siva. 
[ss] 

76 Ibid. 

77 Seep. 254, note 19. 

78 See note 72. 

79 Jūānaratnāvalī, p. 268: atha lokadharmini ca paraparatvena dvividha. tatra para sivatvada. 
uktam ca: $ivasivatmakam karma šodhayitvādhvamadhyagam | ya ya nirvāņam āpnoti sā 
para lokadharmiņī. iti, “Now the lokadharmini is divided into the superior and the infe- 
rior. Of these the superior bestows Sivahood. And it is said: ‘Having purified the pure and 
impure karma situated on the cosmic path (adhvamadhyagam), whichever [initiation] 
brings about liberation is the supreme lokadharmini [initiation |.” 

80 Jūānaratnāvalī, p. 268: *sarīrapātottaram (em.; šarīrapādotaram Cod.) abhilaksitabhu- 
vane šistāparālokadharmiņī. aparā punar abhilasitabhuvanam yāvad adhvasuddhau sa- 


ADAPTING SAIVA TANTRIC INITIATION 275 


quotes a verse which is shared with or probably original to the Mrgendra, 
though embedded in a quotation from a different, unidentified text, which reit- 
erates that the initiate can be united with the deity of his choice at the end of 
the initiation ritual.?! However, what is not made explicit in any of these pas- 
sages is what the practice after initiation consists of; since both of them are 
sabījadīksās, we expect some form of post-initiatory practice to be applicable, 
which is fitting for the superior kind, but not for the inferior kind, as we have 
seen it so far. But given the context, we can probably assume that the inten- 
tion is the same as it was in the original context, namely that the initiate of the 
lower (apara) form simply follows his lokadharma after initiation. However, 
it is difficult to know whether this reflects actual practice—that is, whether 
this categorization intimates the convention of giving initiation even to lay 
worshippers of non-Saiva deities—or whether this is an artificial distinction 
created in the process of accounting for the Mrgendra's shared terminology. 
Another place where Jfanasiva invokes the sivadharmini /lokadharmini dis- 
tinction is regarding the post-funerary sraddha rituals, which vary according 
to initiatory types. Here, the mode of sraddha for the sivadharmi appears to 


tyam abhistabhuvane py *asubhamsakarmanivrttau (conj.; asubhām karmanivrttau Cod.) 
tadbhuvanešvara*guņāņimādisiddhipradā (conj.; *gaņāņimādisiddhipradā Cod.). uktafi 
ca: bhogabhūmisu sarvāsu duskrtamse hate sati | dehottarāņimādyartham *sistestā (conj.; 
šistosta- Cod.) lokadharmini || iti, “The remaining one is the inferior lokadharmini [initi- 
ation], [which] after death (Sarirapatottaram) [leads the candidate to] the universe he 
desired. But the inferior [lokadharmiņī initiation] bestows supernatural powers, starting 
with the power to become as small as one wishes, and the qualities of the deity presid- 
ing over the [respective cosmic level], after the purification of the cosmic path up to 
the level of the universe [the candidate] desires. And even on this desired cosmic level, 
the cessation of karma is [only] of the unmeritorious part. And it is said: ‘The remain- 
ing [initiation], known as the lokadharmini, [is performed] for the purpose of [obtaining 
supernatural powers], such as the power to become as small as one wishes, in a subse- 
quent body, after the bad portion of [karma] is destroyed on all reality levels [through 
initiation].” Note that the appropriation of the Mrgendra verse here to denote the inferior 
level of the lokadharmini dīksā is not the original intention. Rather, the phrase šistestā 
lokadharmini denotes the second kind of bhautiki dīksā, namely the lokadharmini itself, 
in contrast to the sivadharmini. 

81 Jfanaratnavali, p. 268: *sivadharminam (conj.; sivadharminim Cod.) asodhya *yojayet 
(conj.; yo japet Cod.) parame pade | dehapāte ca *moksas (conj.; moksa Cod.) syat sama- 
yācārapālanāt || *lokadharmiņam (conj.; lokadharmiņīm Cod.) āropya mate (conj.; made 
Cod.) bhuvanakartari | *taddharmāpādanam (conj.; taddharmapālanam Cod.) kuryāc 
chive va muktikāmksiņām ||, "Having purified the sivadharmi, he should join him with the 
highest cosmic level, and after having performed his post-initiatory obligations liberation 
will come about at death. Having lifted up the lokadharmi to the desired [level] of the pre- 
siding deity, he should bring about the qualities of this [deity in the candidate] or [unite 
him] in Siva, for those who desire liberation.” 


276 MIRNIG 


be that which is intended for ascetic initiates, while that for the lokadharmi 
is for householder initiates, thus being consistent with the basic distinction 
Jfianasiva sets up in the beginning of the initiation section (Mirnig 2013, 292— 
295). 

The Jiānaratnāvalīs innovative application of the sivadharmini/loka- 
dharmini terminology led to some interpretative confusion and inconsisten- 
cies in subsequent classifications,?? perhaps especially since the influential 
Somasambhupaddhati does not mention this division of initiatory categories.9? 
Thus Trilocana, for instance, who is a student of Jfianasiva and wrote a com- 
mentary on the Kriyākāņdakramāvalī, when commenting on the initiation cat- 
egories taught there, fits the šivadharmiņī and lokadharmini initiations into 
Somasambhu’s system under the category of sapeksa initiation, even incorpo- 
rating such details as the difference in cutting or not cutting off the topknot.%+ 
However, he runs into difficulties when mapping the initiatory categories onto 
the various forms of sraddha, which differ according to the initiate's spiritual 
status during his lifetime (Mirnig 2013, 296). 

This distinctive idea that the topknot is be to cut off in the case of the šiva- 
dharmini initiation, but not in the lokadharmini, is carried over into subse- 
quent sources that include these categories in their initiatory classifications. 


82 See, for instance, Brunner 1977, 194, note 71. 

83 | Somasambhupaddhati, Samayadiksavidhi 5—13: nirādhārā ca sādhārā dīksā tu dvividhā 
mata | nirādhārā dvayos tesam sādhārā sakalasya tu || ācāryanirapekseņa kriyate šambhu- 
naiva ya | tīvrasaktinipātena nirādhāreti sā smrtā || ācāryamūrtim āsthāya mandatīvrādi- 
bhedayā | $aktya yam kurute $ambhuh sā sadhikaranocyate || iyam caturvidhā proktā 
sabījā bījavarjitā | sādhikārā niradhikārā yathāvad abhidhīyate || samayācārasamyuktā 
sabījā jayate nrnam | nirbījā tv asamarthànàm samayācāravarjitā || nitye naimittike kamye 
yasya syād adhikāritā | sādhikārā bhaved dīksā sādhakācāryayor atah || nirbījādīksitānām 
tu tathā samayiputrayoh | nityamatradhikaritvad dīksā niradhikārikā || dvividheyam dvirū- 
papi pratyekam upajāyate | eka kriyavati tatra kundamandalapurvika || manovyāpāramā- 
trena ya sā jfianavati mata | ittham labdhādhikāreņa dīksācāryeņa sādhyate ||. For a trans- 
lation and notes, see Brunner 1977, 4—13. 

84 Thus, Trilocana's Somašambhupaddhativyākhyā, p. 184, is somewhat similar to Jfiānašiva's 
text (see note 67): ... yā dīksaiva sabījā, nirbījā, sādhikārā, niradhikāra ceti caturvidhā 
proktā. tatra tavat samayācārasamyuktā ya sā sabījā. sā ca dvividhā šivadharmiņī loka- 
dharmiņīca. tatra tāvac chivadharmini sikhayas chedasahita. sā ca dvividhā naisthiki bhau- 
tikī ceti. tāvan naisthiki niravadhih. dvitiya katipayadinavrataparipālanānantaram grha- 
padadāyinī. And Trilocanašiva ad Somasambhupaddhati, Nirvanadiksavidhi 31, as quoted 
by Brunner 1977, 191, [32a]: atraivāvasare tāvan nirbījinām deharambhakarmanah | sabī- 
jayam tu dikayam šivadharmiņyām samayācāradehārambhakakarmadvayāt | atha sādha- 
kadiksayam mantrasiddhiphalād api | lokadharminyam istāpūrtādidharmāc ca vyatiri- 
ktam prabandhakam kalānām antare smaret. For notes andatranslation, see Brunner 1977, 
190, note 66. 


ADAPTING SAIVA TANTRIC INITIATION 277 


Thus, the Siddhantasekhara (18—22b)?* of Vi$vanatha, who wrote in Varanasi in 
the first half of the thirteenth century (Sanderson 2014, 23), in essence teaches 
a structure similar to the Jfianaratnavali, with the sivadharmini and lokad- 
harmiņī being the broad divisions of sabija initiation, except that the lokad- 
harmini is not further divided; the šivadharminī, in contrast, is divided into 
naisthiki and bhautiki varieties, but there is no further division into sakama 
and niskama kinds.86 

Even this brief survey of some early-medieval South-Indian sources, writ- 
ten some centuries after the sriptural material discussed in the first part of the 
paper, shows that there was no fixed consensus on what the different initia- 
tory categories covered exactly; the same elements appear in various places, 
assembled together differently.9" What the sources share, however, is that these 
categories are no longer in any case associated with the bubhuksu category. 


6 Conclusion 


The material reviewed above allows us to trace how the emergence and devel- 
opment of the /okadharmini initiation are linked to larger developments in 
tantric Saiva history. To sum up: the initial stage appears to reflect an early 
phase of tantric Saivism, when the power- and enjoyment-seeking aspects of 


85 Siddhāntašekhara p. 145, Naimittikakanda, chapter 2.18—22b: sabījā dvividhā proktā pra- 
thamā sivadharmini | dharmādharmātmakam karma saficitagamicitrakam ||18|| sam- 
mrdya sādhyate yasmat sā dīksā stvadharmini | adharmasaīīcitam sarvam karmangam iva 
šodhyate ||19|| dharmavasesito yatra sā dīksā lokadharmiņī | tatrādyā sasikhaccheda na 
šikhācchedanādarā ||20|| bhautikī naistikī ceti dvidhā sā šivadharmiņī | vratamoksasama- 
yuktā bhautikiti nigadyate ||21|| šarīrapātaparyantā yathā sā naisthiki mata |. 

86 See, for instance, Nigamajfiana 11's Dīksādarša, for which see Ganesh 2009, 196; see also 
further mention of these categories on pp. 137, 164—165, 196, and 240. 

87  Forinstance, in the 16th century Šaivaparibhāsā (for the date of which see Sanderson 2014, 
86) of Sivagrayogin, the sivadharmini and lokadharmini are differentiated according to an 
original feature: that for the former all karmas are destroyed, and for the latter only the 
bad ones. The feature of cutting off the topknot, on the other hand, is connected with 
the nirvanadiksa as opposed to the samayadīksā and visesadiksa; however, the text does 
link the cutting of the top-knot to the ascetic, saying that it should take place after his 
nirvanadiksa; see Saivaparibhāsā, chapter 5, p. 5: (yam api šivadharmiņī lokadharmini ceti 
dvividhā. dharmadharmayor ubhayor api yatra samšodhanam sā sivadharmini. adharma- 
mātrasya yatra samšodhanam sā lokadharmini. kriyavati prakārāntareņa trividhā. sama- 
yadiksa visesadiksà nirvāņadīksā ceti. yatra rudrapade yojanam kriyate sā samayadīksā. 
yatresvarapade yojanam sā višesadīksā. anayor ubhayor api nāsti sikhacchedah. yatra šiva- 
pade yojanam sā nirvanadiksa. yatra nirvanadiksapurvakam sannyasah tatra tv asti sikha- 
cchedah. 


278 MIRNIG 


tantric practice held a comparatively prominent role. It seems that the loka- 
dharmini diksà was created in this milieu in order to extend the benefits and 
services of the tantric repertoire to various groups within the brahmanical 
mainstream, in this way appealing to the ordinary lay worshipper, who was 
perhaps attracted by the magical and merit-enhancing aspects of the religion 
but did not want to commit to the ritual life of a tantric practitioner. This ini- 
tial function aligns with a gradual process of professionalization within tantric 
Saiva communities, bridging the gap between esoteric practitioners and the 
laity. In this matter they followed in the footsteps of the Atimārga, for epi- 
graphical evidence attests to members of these Šaiva ascetic initiatory cir- 
cles serving as religious officiants for lay practitioners from as early as the 
fourth century (Sanderson 2013).$$ However, at the same time, the Sadhaka 
form of lokadharmini diksà is found only in the Svacchanda, Mrgendra, and 
the Tantrasadbhāva, suggesting that in the broader Saiva tantric world —apart 
from Kashmir— its function was of marginal or no importance, a circumstance 
likely contributing to its disappearance from subsequent sources. 

We have seen that in other sources using the lokadharmini category, this was 
reassigned to the sphere of the liberation-seeker. This allocation, in turn, may 
be correlated with two further developments. Firstly, increasing emphasis was 
given to the liberation-seeking aspect of the religion, a development that in 
the South culminates in the disappearance of the figure of the Šaiva Sādhaka, 
as Brunner (1974, 440) observes. Consequently, retention of an exoteric form 
of the enjoyment-seeker category may have gradually become obsolete. Sec- 
ondly, we know that tantric Saivism was successful in gradually adapting to 
the ritual needs of the brahmanical mainstream, even to the point of incor- 
porating its practices within the tantric ritual repertoire, so that full initiation 
also became available to brahmanical householders, giving them unrestricted 
access to the religion.?? This development is reflected in the use of the cate- 
gory lokadharmini diksa in the 12th-century /fianaratnavali, where it is pre- 
scribed for precisely those householder initiates who had full access to the 
tantric repertoire but maintained their position and brahmanical ritual obli- 
gations in society (the lokadharma). Again, the need for a lokadharmint dīksā, 
which made the bubhuksu aspect of the religion more accessible and may 
originally have been a catalyst for outreach, may thereby have become less 
meaningful. The increasingly large-scale inclusion of the brahmanical main- 


88 See also Sanderson 2009 for the many ways in which tantric officiants created strong links 
with the laity, also by acting as officiants in the domain of royal and consecration ritu- 
als. 

89 See Sanderson 1995 and 2009. 


ADAPTING SAIVA TANTRIC INITIATION 279 


stream from this time onwards is also visible in other areas of ritual, especially 
in South-Indian sources. Thus, for instance, we find the emergence of literature 
on penance rites regulating social interactions, such as the two works known 
as Prayascittasamuccaya by Hrdayasiva and Trilocana, respectively, the latter 
having been edited and translated by Sathyanarayanan (2015). In his intro- 
duction to this volume, Dominic Goodall draws attention to the socially all- 
encompassing nature of the work, showing how its prescriptions include even 
women as part of the community, and how the focus shifts to public temple rit- 
ual.?? Goodall also points out another change within these tantric traditions, 
which we may find reflected in the history of the lokadharmini diksa, namely 
that along with these developments the goal of individual liberation gradu- 
ally waned in importance. He observes also that the “colonization by the Saiva 
Siddhanta of many large South Indian temples, and the dominance of Vedan- 
tic non-dualism appear to have diminished the significance of ritual salvific 
dīksā”9 As the tradition’s focus shifted from individual to public ritual life, it 
may be this waning importance of dīksā's salvific function that has contributed 
to the confusion evident in Saiddhantika manuals concerning how to cate- 
gorize the lokadharmini and šivadharmiņī dīksās. The dominant concern in 
allocating these initation types eventually became simply to differentiate the 
householder initiate from the ascetic, rather than to distinguish the spiritual 
goals attained through various initiations. This usage of the terminology is far 
removed from its original purpose: designating special types of tantric intia- 
tion for those seeking powers, access to higher cosmic realms, and, ultimately, 
liberation. 


Acknowledgements 


Iam very grateful to Shaman Hatley for his careful reading and extremely help- 
ful comments, suggestions and edits of the text. 


go  InSathyanarayanan 2015, 15—63. 

91  SeeGoodalls entry on dīksā in Tāntrikābhidhānakoša, vol. 111. For more on the influences 
on the development and formation of Šaiva Siddhānta theology from the 10th century 
onwards, see Goodall 2006, in particular pp. 98-103. 


280 MIRNIG 
References 


Primary Sources 
Jayadrathayamala, Satka 1. NAK 3-358; NGMPP A 995/6—996/1. Palm-leaf, Pala script. 
Jiiānaratnāvalī of Jianagivacarya. Transcript of Re 1025/52 (57) copied by V. Rangas- 
vami (GOML); photographed and transcribed by Dominic Goodall. 

Tantrasadbhāva. E-text by Mark Dyezkowski, dated 1 August 2006, accessed through 
the Muktabodha Indological Research Institute website, based on the following 
manuscripts: NGMPP A188/22, Saivatantra 1533 (siglum k); NGMPP A44/1 (NAK 1- 
363), Saivatantra (kh); NGMPP A44/2 (NAK 5—455), Saivatantra 185 (g). 

Tantrāloka. Shāstrī, Mukund Rām, ed. Tantrāloka of Abhinavagupta, with the commen- 
tary (-viveka) of Rajanaka Jayaratha. Kashmir Series of Texts and Studies, no. 59. 
Bombay, 1938. 

Netratantra. Madhusüdan Kaul Sastri, ed. Netratantra, with the Commentary (Netrod- 
dyota) of Rājānaka Ksemaraja. Kashmir Series of Texts and Studies, nos. 46, 59. Bom- 
bay: 1926 and 1939. 

Brhatkālottaratantra. NGMPP 4—131/V1 Saivatantra 127, Reel no. A43/1, Palm-leaf. 

Mrgendra. Bhatt, N.R., ed. Mrgendra Kriyapada and Caryāpāda, with the commentary 
(-vrtti) of Bhatta Narayanakantha. Pondicherry: Institut français de Pondichéry, 
1962. 

Vimalāvatī of Vimalasiva. NGMPP reel number A186/10. Eletronic text of the Mukta- 
bodha Indological Research Institute typed under the supervision of Mark. S.G. 
Dyczkowski. 

Saivasiddhantaparibhasa of Sivagrayogin. Oriental Research Institute Sanskrit Series, 
no. 9o, Madras: University of Madras, 1950. Eletronic text of the Muktabodha Indo- 
logical Research Institute typed under the supervision of Mark. S.G. Dyczkow- 
ski. 

Siddhantasekhara of Višvanātha. Sītārāma Somayājin and Šiva Sri Talakādu Avamika 
Krsnadiksita, eds. Ubhayavedanti Visvanathakrtah Siddhantasekharah. Manonma- 
nīgranthamālā, no. 20. Mysore: K. Sītārāma Somayajin, 1971. 

Somasambhupaddhati. See Brunner 1977. 

Somašambhupaddhativyākhyā of Trilocana. 1FP T. no. 170. 

Svacchandatantra. Madhusudan Kaul Shāstrī, ed. Svacchandatantra, with the Commen- 
tary (Svacchandoddyota) of Rājānaka Ksemaraja. Kashmir Series of Texts and Stud- 
ies, no. 38. Bombay: 1923. 


Secondary Sources 
Bhatt, N.R. 1962. Mrgendrāgama. Kriyāpāda et Caryāpāda. Avec le commentaire de 
Bhatta-Narayanakantha. Pondicherry: Institut Francais de Pondichéry/ Ecole fran- 
caise d’ Extréme-Orient. 


ADAPTING SAIVA TANTRIC INITIATION 281 


Brunner, Héléne. 1975. “Le sadhaka, un personnage oublié du Sivaisme du Sud.” Journal 
Asiatique 263: 411-416. 

Brunner, Hélène, ed. and trans. 1977. Somasambhupaddhati, Troisième Partie. Rituels 
occasionels dans la tradition sivaite de l'Inde du Sud selon Somasambhu 11: dīksā, 
abhiseka, vratoddhara, antyesti, srāddha. Pondicherry: Institut Français de Pondich- 
éry/Ecole française d' Extrēme-Orient. 

Brunner, Héléne. 1985. Mrgendragama. Section des rites et section du comportement 
avec la vrtti de Bhattanarayanakantha. Pondicherry: Institut Français de Pondich- 
éry. 

Goodall, Dominic. 1998. Bhatta Ramakantha's Commentary on the Kiranatantra. Vol- 
ume I: chapters 1-6. Critical Edition and Annotated Translation. Pondicherry: Institut 
Francais de Pondichéry/Ecole francaise d’ Extréme-Orient. 

Goodall, Dominic. 2000. “Problems of Name and Lineage: Relationships between South 
Indian Authors of the Saiva Siddhanta.” Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society 10 (2): 
205-216. 

Goodall, Dominic. 2004. The Parakhyatantra, a Scripture of the Saiva Siddhānta. A Crit- 
ical Edition and Annotated Translation. Pondicherry: Institut Frangais de Pondich- 
éry/Ecole française d' Extréme-Orient. 

Goodall, Dominic, Harunaga Isaacson, and Alexis Sanderson, et al. 2015. The Nisvasa- 
tattvasamhitā. The Earliest Surviving Saiva Tantra. Volume 1. A Critical Edition & 
Annotated Translation of the Mūlasūtra, Uttarasūtra & Nayasūtra. Pondicherry: 
Institut Francais de Pondichéry/Ecole francaise d’ Extréme-Orient. 

Kiss, Csaba. 2015. The Brahmayamala Tantra or Picumata, Volume Two. The Religious 
Observances and Sexual Rituals of the Tantric Practitioner: chapters 3, 21 and 45. 
Pondicherry: Institut Francais de Pondichéry/École française d'Extréme-Orient/ 
Universität Hamburg. 

Mirnig, Nina. 2013. "Šaiva Siddhanta Sraddha. Towards an evaluation of socio-religious 
landscape envisaged by pre-12th century sources.” In Puspikā. Tracing Ancient India 
Through Cults and Traditions, edited by Nina Mirnig, Péter-Daniel Szántó and 
Michael Williams, 283—301. Oxford: Oxbow Books. 

Sanderson, Alexis. 1995. "Meaning in Tantric Ritual" In Essais sur le Rituel 111: Colloque 
du Centenaire de la Section des Sciences religieuses de l'École Pratique des Hautes 
Études, edited by Anne-Marie Blondeau and Kristofer Schipper, 15-95. Louvain- 
Paris. 

Sanderson, Alexis. 2001. "History through Textual Criticism in the Study of Šaivism, the 
Paficarátra and the Buddhist Yoginītantras” In Les sources et le temps. Sources and 
Time. A colloquium. Pondicherry n—13 January 1997, edited by Francois Grimal, 1-47. 
Pondicherry: Institut Français de Pondichéry/Ecole francaise d' Extréme-Orient. 

Sanderson, Alexis. 2004. "The Saiva Religion Among the Khmers, Part 1.” Bulletin de 
l'École francaise d' Extréme-Orient 90: 352—464. 


282 MIRNIG 


Sanderson, Alexis. 2005. “Religion and the State: Saiva Officiants in the Territory of the 
King's Brahmanical Chaplain” Indo-Iranian Journal 47: 229—230. 

Sanderson, Alexis. 2006. "The Lākulas: New Evidence of a System Intermediate 
Between Pāticārthika Pāšupatism and Agamic Šaivism” Indian Philosophical Annual 
24:143—217. 

Sanderson, Alexis. 2007. “The Saiva Exegesis of Kashmir" In Mélanges tantrigues à 
la mémoire d'Héléne Brunner. Tantric Studies in Memory of Héléne Brunner, edited 
by Dominic Goodall and André Padoux, 231-442. Pondichéry: Institut Frangais de 
Pondichéry/École francaise d' Extréme-Orient. 

Sanderson, Alexis. 2009. "The Saiva Age—The Rise and Dominance of Saivism in 
the Early Medieval Period" In The Genesis and Development of Tantrism, edited by 
Shingo Einoo, 41-349. Tokyo: Institute of Oriental Culture, University of Tokyo. 

Sanderson, Alexis. 2014. "The Saiva Literature” Journal of Indological Studies 24 & 25: 
1-113. 

Sathyanarayanan, R. 2015. With an introduction by Dominic Goodall. Saiva Rites of 
Expiation. A First Edition and Translation of Trilocanasiva's Twelfth-Century Praya- 
Scittasamuccaya (With a Transcription of Hrdayasiva's Prayascittasamuccaya). Pon- 
dicherry: Institut Français de Pondichéry/Ecole française d' Extrēme-Orient. 

Takashima, Jun. 1992. "Dīksā in the Tantrāloka” Institute for Advanced Studies on Asia 
(Tohyobunkakenkyusho kiyo) 119: 45—84. 

Tāntrikābhidhānakoša. Dictionnaire des terms techniques de la littérature hindoue tan- 
trique. Vol. 111. Dominic Goodall et Marion Rastelli, eds. Beiträge zur Kultur- und 
Geistesgeschichte Asiens, no. 76. Vienna: Austrian Academy of Sciences Press, 2013. 

Vasudeva, Somdev. 2012. "Powers and Identities: Yoga Powers and the Tantric Šaiva Tra- 
ditions.” In Yoga Powers: Extraordinary Capacities Attained Through Meditation and 
Concentration, edited by Knut A. Jacobson, 265—302. Leiden: Brill. 

Watson, Alex, Dominic Goodall and S.L.P. Anjaneya Sarma. 2013. An Enquiry into the 
Nature of Liberation. Bhatta Ramakantha's Paramoksanirasakarikavrtti, a Commen- 
tary on Sadyojyotih’s Refutation of Twenty Conceptions of the Liberated State (moksa). 
Pondicherry: Institut Français de Pondichéry/Ecole francaise d' Extréme-Orient. 


CHAPTER 12 


Innovation and Social Change in the Vale of 
Kashmir, circa 900-1250 C.E. 


John Nemec 


iti prakatito maya sughata esa mārgo navo mahagurubhir ucyate sma šiva- 
drstisastre yathā | 


Thus I have set forth this new (nava), easy path as it was explained by my 
distinguished teacher [Somananda] in the šāstra, [entitled] the Sivadrsti. 
Īsvarapratyabhijūākārikās of Utpaladeva at 4.16ab 


1 Introduction 


It is well known that religious agents in premodern South Asia appealed to the 
purported timelessness and transcendence of their scriptural sources to secure 
not only their legitimacy but also that of the ideas found in them. Equally well 
known—in no small part due to the work of Alexis Sanderson on the social 
history of Saiva and other religious traditions in early-medieval Kashmir and 
elsewhere—is the fact that premodern South Asian religions do not appear as 
unchanging and immobile traditions in social stasis. Quite the opposite: the 
various religious traditions of medieval South Asia were nothing if not inno- 
vative in idea and practice, most notably in their literary productions. These 
myriad religious traditions, moreover, had a measurable and not insignificant 
influence on contemporaneous social life. 

In beginning to address the question of religious change in premodern South 
Asia I would like not merely to point out that the religious practitioners of the 
day were surely able to distinguish new religious, and other, ideas and prac- 
tices from received tradition—just as we are today—a fact that itself calls 
into question the reification of the sort of social stasis and lack of historical 
awareness posited in previous Indological scholarship.! I also will argue that 


1 Monier-Williams (1891, 38—39), for example, suggested that Brahminical theology preempts 


© JOHN NEMEC, 2020 | DOI:10.1163/9789004432802_014 


This is an open access chapter distributed under the terms of the CC BY-NC 4.0 license. 


284 NEMEC 


a self-conscious, emic theory or explanation of scriptural authority and social 
change may be found in the history of religions in premodern Kashmir. I wish 
to examine the significance of novelty, of innovation, as it was conceived by 
the authors I propose to place under study, and to identify its role in establish- 
ing, or challenging, religious authority in the period in question, all of which I 
will do by exploring an exemplar that illustrates what I suggest should be taken 
as a maxim in the study of South Asian religions (and religion more generally), 
namely, that change is not inimical to religion, even if particular religious agents 
are not infrequently inimical to change.” 

In particular, I propose to examine selected writings of some among the 
most prominent of the Saiva tantric "post-scriptural" authors of the Kashmir 
Valley, who thrived there in the period reserved by the title of the present 
essay. They include Somananda (circa 900-950), Utpaladeva (circa 925-975), 
and Abhinavagupta (circa 975-1025), as well as Jayaratha (early 13th C.E.), the 
author of the Tantralokaviveka commentary on the Tantraloka (hereafter TAV 
and TA, respectively). Their textual contributions are properly associated with 
what continues, sometimes, to be labeled “Kashmiri Shaivism”3 and they offer 
an important opportunity to reevaluate the nature of various sources of reli- 


any proper appreciation of history. MacDonell, in turn, both reiterates this position and adds 
to it asecond claim regarding what he calls the “total lack of the historical sense” in premod- 
ern Indian literature: he claims that historical events in premodern South Asia were insuffi- 
cient to trigger the cultivation of a properly historical consciousness. See MacDonell [1900] 
1962, 8—9. This pair of views exemplifies the two types of arguments that earlier Indologists 
have made regarding the supposed ahistoricality of premodern South Asian works: Schol- 
ars often suggested either that the authors of premodern Sanskrit works held theoretical— 
mainly religious—views that precluded them from taking interest in historical concerns; or, 
they argued that historical events in premodern South Asia transpired in ways that preempted 
the possibility of a properly historical response to them. 

2 Scholars in the academy have given new attention to the question of the place of change in 
religion in recent years. Jonathan Edelmann, formerly of Mississippi State University and now 
at the University of Florida, has suggested, in an unpublished précis of concerns addressed by 
four panelists of a session of the 2011 American Academy of Religion National Meeting enti- 
tled “Authorizing Theologies” that the question to hand was a matter of “newness,” of novelty, 
and of “authorizing” such novelty in the language of “theology,” with the shared hypothesis 
of all the panelists being that the various theological formulations they placed under exami- 
nation each sought to “recast and re-contextualize influential concepts and arguments from 
earlier traditions” (to quote from the panelists’ description of the session). Some of the prod- 
ucts of this panel may be found ina special issue of the International Journal of Hindu Studies, 
for which see Edelmann 2014. The present essay constitutes a response to and an engagement 
with the broader theme first engaged by these scholars at the AaR Annual Meeting in ques- 
tion. 

3 It is well known by now that this term is something of a misnomer, because it is both overly 
specific geographically and overly general doctrinally. See Dyczkowski 1987: 222-223. 


INNOVATION AND SOCIAL CHANGE IN THE VALE OF KASHMIR 285 


gious authority in premodern South Asia, as well as the manner of establishing 
and deploying such authority in practice in India’s premodernity. 

This is so, firstly and primarily, because the authors in question explicitly 
wedded themselves to the notion that novelty, the production of something 
new, was not only acceptable, but was an asset to their religion. This they 
maintained over and against the ethos of Vedic religious authority, which was 
defined by its claim to offer a kind of knowledge that was beyond question, 
its infallibility guaranteed by the purported timelessness and authorlessness 
of the Vedic scriptures themselves. Secondly, and related to this, they lived 
and wrote in the Valley at a time when Kashmir was economically dynamic 
and culturally and religiously pluralistic, and was perhaps the most active cen- 
ter of Sanskrit literary production in the Indian sub-continent not only in its 
day, but in Indian history (after the time of the Guptas).^ Indeed, the bibli- 


4 Royalpatronage certainly did much to cultivate this cultural richness, as the many Kashmiri 
contributions in poetry and aesthetic theory illustrate, these of course being important con- 
cerns of the premodern South Asian court; but this was not the only catalyst. Five additional 
elements served to make such cultural production possible. These include: 

(1) The relative security of Kashmir. Closing the famed "gates" to the Valley—the moun- 
tain passes or dvāras—offered reliable protection from outside military interference, though 
this did not help quell internal military threats, as the Rājatarangiņī makes abundantly clear. 

(2) This does not mean, however, that Kashmiris were unaware of outside military and 
other influences. One anecdote illustrates as much: to my knowledge the earliest use in San- 
skrit of the term turuska appears in a Kashmiri work, the famed Kuttanimata of Dāmodara- 
gupta; and the term frequently appears in later Kashmiri works such as the Rājatarangiņī and 
the Kathasaritsagara. So much signals the second catalyst: cosmopolitanism, or a cognizance 
of the wider world and significant contact with it. Foreign invaders were long kept at bay, to 
be sure; but, simultaneously, scholars and merchants regularly were given leave to visit the 
Valley from the plains of India and from as far afield as Central Asia and China, and possi- 
bly beyond. Perhaps most notably, Tibetan Buddhist pilgrims frequented Kashmir in order to 
study in the Valley's thriving monasteries, which were influential in the period in question 
even if relatively few archaeological traces of them have survived to the present day. 

(3) Next, the extensive and longstanding cross-pollination of Hindu and Buddhist thought 
did much to enrich humanistic thinking in the Valley in the period under study; it helped that, 
with relatively few exceptions, the kings of Kashmir supported a healthy religious diversity 
in the Valley. (Harsa of course is one exception to the general rule that Kashmiri kings, and 
members of the court, patronized various traditions simultaneously, and certainly lived up to 
the Dharmašāstric norm of leaving religion alone short of the emergence of egregious con- 
cerns therewith.) I would count this intellectual and religious pluralism the third productive 
factor in Kashmiri intellectual and cultural history. 

(4) A fourth influence was economic: global trade along the nearby Silk Road is likely to 
have contributed to the Valley's material prosperity, which would have facilitated the culti- 
vation of Kashmir's cultural wealth (though more work is needed better to understand this 
dimension of Kashmiri social life); and the Valley itself, with its large tracts of arable land, 
was agriculturally largely self-sufficient. 


286 NEMEC 


ography of Kashmiri contributions, one feels, is practically asymptotic to that 
of premodern Sanskrit learning tout court.5 Quite a number of innovative lit- 
erary works were produced there in this period, moreover; and some among 
the Saiva authors in question actively participated in this cultural and liter- 
ary tradition by composing texts that contributed to selected non-tantric lit- 
erary genres. A study of these authors thus opens a window into the ways in 
which religion functioned in larger intellectual and public spheres in a period 
of tremendous intellectual and cultural flourishing, even if the present essay 
will examine the internal logic of the selected tradition’s philosophical and 


(5) Finally, one cannot discount the significance of the location itself: Kashmir was—and 
is—considered to be one of the most beautiful places of the entire sub-continent, and people 
simply wanted to live there. This in part explains the long history of Brahminical migration 
(at the king’s invitation) to the Valley from across the sub-continent. 

5 The Kashmiri contributions are of course numerous and cover the gamut of fields of San- 
skritic learning, from Dharmašāstra to philosophical writings to vyakarana and other tech- 
nical literatures, to works of belles lettres in a range of genres, and, of particular note, to the 
alamkārašāstra. Consider the following. Two of the five works that are demonstrably based 
on Gunadhya's Brhatkatha were composed in Kashmir (these are the Brhatkathāmarijarī of 
Ksemendra and Somadeva's famed Kathāsaritsāgara). Virtually all the alamkarikas of the 
mature phase of the study of aesthetics were Kashmiri—including Vamana, Bhatta Udbhata, 
Rudrata, Anandavardhana, Bhatta Nayaka, Kuntaka, Mukulabhatta, Mammata, Ruyyaka, and 
Pratīhārendurāja. In the various areas of Sastric learning, the famed Naiyayika Bhatta Jayanta 
was Kashmiri, as were Varadaraja and possibly Vyomasiva. Among the Buddhists, Arcata, 
Dharmottara, Sankaranandana, and Jfianaégrimitra hailed from the Valley, and Vinitadeva 
(among many others) spent time there. The grammarians Jayaditya and Vamana, authors of 
the Kasikavrtti, are thought by some to have been Kashmiris, and Kaiyata certainly was (and 
is said to have been the son of Mammata). So, too, was Helaraja a Kashmiri (of course he is 
the author of the Prakīrņaprakāša commentary on the Vākyapadīya). Medhatithi, the famed 
early commentator on the Manavadharmasastra, also hailed from the Valley, as, of course, 
did Kalhana, the author of the Rajatarangini. 

Additionally, a number of key works of unnamed authorship can be shown to have Kash- 
miri origins, including the Visnudharmottarapurana, the Haracaritacintamani, and the Mok- 
sopaya, which, as by now is well known, is the early recension of the Yogavasistha. Among 
Saiva scriptural works, we can say with some confidence that the Brhatkālottara, the sec- 
ond, third, and fourth satkas of the Jayadrathayamalatantra, the Svacchandatantra, the 
Netratantra, and, in all probability, the Trida$adamaratantra (about which I wrote my M.Phil. 
thesis at Oxford under the direction of Alexis Sanderson, the product of which may be found 
in evidence in Nemec 2013) are Kashmiri productions. Among Pajficaratrika scriptures (this 
according to Alexis Sanderson), the Jayakhya-, Jayottara-, and Sāsvata-samhitās are of a 
Kashmiri provenance. Finally, I note that many other works were also influential in the Valley, 
and were heavily studied there, even if they cannot be proven to have a Kashmiri provenance. 
For a survey of Kashmiri authors and the scholarship that treats them, see Nemec 2015. (I 
thank Harunaga Isaacson for his contribution to my understanding of the provenance of 
these anonymous tantric works, which came in the form of personal correspondence, via 
email, in December of 2013.) 


INNOVATION AND SOCIAL CHANGE IN THE VALE OF KASHMIR 287 


religious writings rather than explain the relationship between such writings 
and those of other, more "secular" genres. 

The wider cultural context of the Kashmir Valley is of note, because schol- 
ars have sometimes linked the purportedly transcendent nature of religious 
authority—and of textual production more generally—to a concomitant, 
forced stasis in the social order. Rigid and purportedly timeless ideas about 
the nature of reality and the place of various peoples situated in it, the think- 
ing goes, produced and supported rigid rules concerning the innate rights and 
capacities of particular individuals and groups, with such rights and capacities 
inevitably being hierarchically and inequitably defined, all in a manner as resis- 
tant to change as the transcendent sources of religiously sanctioned authority 
were held to be. The precise social implications of a religious worldview that 
welcomes innovation, in a context in which innovation in literary production 
was not uncommon, is therefore of primary concern in defining the role of reli- 
gion in public life in premodern South Asia.® 

In what follows I will proceed in three stages. First, I will offer a précis of 
the problematic associated with the issues to hand, this by examining Pollock's 
theorization of the relationship of theory (sastra) to practice (or prayoga) in 
premodern South Asia. Pollock is selected for further examination because his 
writings on premodern South Asian cultural change are, in my view, the most 
sophisticated and engaging of any scholarly treatment of the subject to date, 
even if I will ultimately adopt his view only in part, challenging it in part as 
well. 

Following this, I will examine key textual passages from the writings of the 
tradition here placed under study, this to illustrate the ways in which tran- 
scendentally authorized religious ideas can be conceived simultaneously to 
be historically situated and, indeed, new—and therefore demanding of a new 
social consciousness. Here I wish to support the claim that social change in pre- 
modern South Asia tends almost invariably to be incremental, not revolutionary, 
innature. It regularly—not to say exclusively—involves modifications of social 
norms and strictures, not wholesale changes thereof. The relevant textual pas- 
sages will be examined in two sections, the first dealing with the tradition’s 
emic theory of textual authority, the second with its religious practices. 


6 The idea, then, is to begin, at least, to consider the tantric Saivas’ religion in light of the exis- 
tence of their non-tantric lives (if not explicitly their non-tantric textual contributions), as 
well to measure their religious writings with the wider social, cultural, and intellectual con- 
texts in which they thrived in mind. I intend, anyhow, to make a start at this here by examining 
the role of innovation, of change, in religion, even if any exploration of these themes more 
broadly will have to wait for a subsequent study. 


288 NEMEC 


Finally, I will conclude by charting the implications of this exemplar in a 
concentric series of contexts, culminating with the study of religion, broadly 
conceived. If I might be allowed to argue by way of example—ab uno disce 
omnes—I will suggest in conclusion that the present illustration offers insight 
into the nature and functioning not only of religion in premodern India, but 
also of religion tout court. 


2 Theory and Practice: Sheldon Pollock on šāstra and prayoga 


The issues associated with endeavors to negotiate cultural and social change 
may be set in the brightest relief if we read them in light of what is in my 
view the most sophisticated treatment to date of the relation of sastra—i.e., 
(textual) theory—on the one hand, and cultural and intellectual practice or 
prayoga, on the other, that of Sheldon Pollock (as articulated in a pair of arti- 
cles: "Mīmāmsā and the Problem of History in Traditional India" [1989] and, 
perhaps more importantly, "The Theory of Practice and the Practice of Theory 
in Indian Intellectual History" [1985]). Pollock has argued, in what is the most 
significant theoretical contribution of this pair of articles, that classical San- 
skrit theoretical works in premodern South Asia articulated an epistemological 
formulation according to which there was no dialectical relationship between 
theory (šāstra) and practice (prayoga). New practices were not seen as able to 
challenge or shape theoretical models, Pollock has argued, due to the claimed a 
priori status of the theoretical works themselves, which came to be understood 
to represent (in, he suggests, the language of Ryle) a form of “knowing that" a 
given social or cultural form was in its very nature just as it appeared in prac- 
tice, as opposed merely to offering a “knowing how” the social or cultural form 
in question functioned or could function (based on empirical observation). 
This is to say that the purportedly timeless and authorless works defined 
the world in terms of what it is and should—and must—be, rather than artic- 
ulating a contingent theory, one subject to revision on the basis of on-the- 
ground practices, or in other words in a dialectical relationship with events. 
“For here” Pollock argues, “on a scale probably unparalleled in the pre-modern 
world, we find a thorough transformation—adopting now Geertz's well-known 
dichotomy—of ‘models of’ human activity into ‘models for; whereby texts that 
initially had shaped themselves to reality so as to make it 'graspable, end by 


7 See Pollock 1985, 504. 


INNOVATION AND SOCIAL CHANGE IN THE VALE OF KASHMIR 289 


asserting the authority to shape reality to themselves.”$ Pollock ultimately iden- 
tifies three consequences to this theory of theory and its practical application: 
(1) the “‘creation’ of knowledge" was understood to be exclusively a divine activ- 
ity; (2) knowledge was “by and large viewed as permanently fixed in its dimen- 
sions"; and (3) third and finally, there could be *no conception of progress, of 
the forward 'movement from worse to better; on the basis of innovations in 
practice.”? 

One product of such “ahistoricality”!° was an apparent stasis in Brahminical 
views of the normative social order, at least as such views were codified in the 
classical Sanskrit šāstras par excellence—the Vedas, which, to reiterate, were 
reified as authorless and timeless works and said therefore to convey transcen- 
dent and unchanging truths.” The šāstras were self-consciously understood to 


ibid. 
See Pollock 1985, 515. 

10 This is the term so often used to describe Indian attitudes toward history—and change. 
Pollock is not alone in using it (though one should be careful to note that he deploys it 
differently, and in a markedly more self-conscious and sensitive manner, than his prede- 
cessors). So much was it perceived to be the case that India knew nothing of history, that 
some Western Indologists around the turn of the last century went so far as to suggest, 
per A.A. MacDonell, for example, that "early India wrote no history because it never made 
any” See MacDonell [1900] 1962, 8—9; cf. footnote 1, above; finally, see footnotes 11 and 27, 
below, for Pollock's use of the term in question. 

11 As Pollock (1989, 606) understands it, the practice of producing "a content invariably 
marked by ahistoricality" has its root in the early history of Vedic exegesis, which sought 
to establish the authority of the Vedas by claiming them to be timeless and authorless 
productions—ahistorical productions—in which any apparent references to contempo- 
raneous events or persons were said to be explicable by a variety of analyses that served 
to vitiate any reference to historical realities. See Pollock 1989, 608: 

Mīmāmsā holds on empirical grounds that the tradition of the recitation of the Vedas 
must be beginningless (uktam tu šabdapūrvatvam, PMS 1.1.29; cf. Slokavarttika, Vākyā- 
dhikarana, vs. 366). But that is not sufficient to prove its transcendence and thus infal- 
libility (something false can be beginningless, the jatyandhaparamparanyaya). It is 
therefore argued that the Vedas are transcendent by reason of their anonymity. Had 
they been composed by men, albeit long ago, there is no reason why the memory of 
these composers should not have been preserved to us. Those men who are named 
in association with particular recensions, books, hymns of the Vedas—Kathaka, for 
example, or Paippaladaka—are not to be regarded as the authors but simply as schol- 
ars specializing in the transmission or exposition of the texts in question (ākhyā prava- 
canāt, 1.1.30; purvapaksa ad 1.1.27). Texts for which no authors can be identified have 
no authors, and this applies to the Vedas and to the Vedas alone (which are thus pre- 
sumably the only authentically anonymous texts in Indian cultural history). 
See also ibid.: 

The transcendent character of the Vedas, which is proved by the fact of their having 
no beginning in time and no author, is confirmed by their contents: the Vedas show 


290 NEMEC 


articulate a range of social and other normative views that were consciously 
held to be unassailable, because the works in which they were recorded were 
said to stand entirely outside the realm of mundane and contingent existence: 


History, one might thus conclude, is not simply absent from or unknown 
to Sanskritic India; rather it is denied in favor of a model of ‘truth’ that 
accorded history no epistemological value or social significance. The 
denial of history, for its part, raises an entirely new set of questions. To 
answer these we would want to explore the complex ideological forma- 
tion of traditional Indian society that privileges system over process—the 
structure of the social order over the creative role of man in history—and 
that, by denying the historical transformations of the past, deny them for 
the future and thus serve to naturalize the present and its asymmetrical 
relations of power. 


no dimension whatever of historical referentiality. Allusions to historical persons or to 
historical seguentiality are only apparently so. For instance, the Vedic sentence 'Babara 
Pravahani [son of Pravāha] once desired ..” [TS 7.1.5.4]—which might establish a ter- 
minus post quem for the composition of the text (i.e., after Pravaha begot Babara)— 
contains merely phonemic resemblances to the names of historical persons (param tu 
šrutisāmānyamātram 1.1.31; purvapaksa ad 13.28). ‘Etymological’ analysis shows that 
the references are in fact to eternally existing entities (in the case in question, to the 
‘howling wind’). 
Note that Pollock thus challenges the notion, maintained by earlier Indologists such as 
MacDonell, that such ahistoricality reflects any lack or deficiency in Indian intellectual 
historical awareness, and he clearly would disagree, as I emphatically do, with those earlier 
Indologists who denigrated Indian thinkers for failing to develop a “proper” (Western-like) 
historical consciousness. See, e.g., Pollock 1989, 604: “I believe the received view about 
Indian historical consciousness is constructed out of a set of ideas whose truth can no 
longer be taken for granted: ideas about history and narrativity as such, about ancient 
historiography in general and Indian intellectual history in particular. Moreover, even if 
we grant that there are idiosyncratic features about the traditional Indian response to 
historical experience, the characteristics of this idiosyncrasy have never been adequately 
described or convincingly explained.” (See also, ibid.: “On the face of it the reduction of 
historical consciousness to a ‘zero-category’ for traditional India is improbable; from the 
viewpoint of phenomenology, which offers us the most sustained analysis of such con- 
sciousness, it is impossible”) Rather, Pollock argues, any "ahistoricality” is intentionally 
constructed, in his view to perpetuate the social control of those (Brahmins) who con- 
structed it. See below. 
12 See Pollock 1989, 610. 


INNOVATION AND SOCIAL CHANGE IN THE VALE OF KASHMIR 291 
3 The Kashmiri Saiva Example in Its Theoretical Form 


If I question Pollock’s model in part, it is not because it is nowhere operative in 
premodern South Asia or, mutatis mutandis, in contemporary Indian religions. 
For, decidedly it was, and sometimes is; and Pollock’s theory adroitly explains 
a strategy for dealing with cultural and social change that in its primary fea- 
tures is also operative in other religious traditions of other times and places. 
Indeed, it signals what is a fundamental concern for religion and does much 
to theorize and explain what is a common response to it.!3 Where I differ with 
Pollock is with his understanding of this model as monolithic, as functioning 
equally across the gamut of premodern sastric modes of discourse and across 
textual genres and religious traditions. For the facts as we can discern them 
“on the ground” in the period in question challenge the universal applicability 
of his model, and the construction and use of religious authority in premodern 
South Asia was regularly if not uniformly more complex than Pollock’s model 
allows. 

Two dimensions of textual production in premodern South Asia compli- 
cate his view of the sastras—the normative, technical, and for our purposes 
religious writings—of classical India. These are, firstly, (1) the fact that the 
canon—or, more precisely, canons—of Hindu scripture remained (and in cer- 
tain instances continue to remain) open, allowing for a proliferation of scrip- 
tural sources regularly to emerge “on the ground”; and, secondly, (2) the fact 
that "ahistoricality"—the very basis of the authorless and timeless transcen- 
dence that, Pollock has shown, furnished (religious) authority—was conceived 
in multiple ways, including, in the tradition placed under consideration in 
this essay, in a manner that allowed purportedly divine and timeless teachings 
simultaneously to be associated with the particular biographies of historically- 
located religious figures (“perfected ones” or Siddhas, in the present example). 


13 The concern may be summed up in plain terms, namely, that while the world changes, the 
religious ideas, ideals, practices, and principles that are meant to shape and guide human 
activity are established before such changes can be known or fully anticipated. More than 
this, religious authority not infrequently is derived from its very antiquity, from the fact 
that it is born from what is said to be a transcendent source or sources, which can speak 
"truths" neither produced by, nor subject to the revisions of, the fallible and fickle. There 
is a need, then, to prove the prescience of the religiously authoritative sources, either 
through exegesis or eisegesis: one may do so either by finding events as they eventually 
transpired to have been anticipated in the scriptures or by reading events as they tran- 
spire into the scriptures themselves. 

14 On the ubiquity of this strategy, in Pollock's view, see footnote 27, where he refers to the 
use of the strategy in "whatever sort of [Sanskrit] text it might be" that one has to hand. 


292 NEMEC 


This pair of dimensions of scriptural production allowed for the recognition 
of and advocacy for change in Hinduism in ways that have heretofore passed 
without mention: religious authority could be conceived of as simultaneously 
new and timeless; and in a context in which religions could readily proliferate 
textual sources of a staggering variety religious authority was complex, both 
because it was layered and because it could and did change over time. It is 
precisely for these reasons that the example offered by the Šaiva tantrics of 
Kashmir both challenges and confirms elements of Pollock's theory. 

I begin the case-study with the examination of a theoretical work, a šāstra, 
one inspired by Šaiva tantric scriptures and views, but one voided of explicit ref- 
erences to such texts: Utpaladeva's [svarapratyabhijnakarikas (hereafter IPK), 
the preeminent expression of Pratyabhijfia philosophy, for which the author 
wrote both a short and a long autocommentary respectively the Īsvarapratya- 
bhijnakarikavrtti (IPKVr) and the Īsvarapratyabhijūākārikā-vivrti or -tīkā (the 
latter of which is lost excepting that a number of fragments of the work have 
been recovered in recent years; see chapter 5 of this volume). The īPK and IPKVr 
offer an exoteric explanation for the nature of the divine and the place of the 
practitioner in the world. They were written by a Brahmin who in his pub- 
lic life would have adhered to caste norms and the associated rules of purity 
and pollution. Yet, as is well known, Utpaladeva and the other authors of the 
Pratyabhijfia simultaneously would have allowed, in theory, at least, for the 
contravention of these rules in the context of the family of tantric initiates, a 
complex practice summarized by the famous dictum, “internally a Kaula, exter- 
nally a Saiva, and in social practice a follower of the Veda.”!5 (I will return to this 
maxim in what follows in order to examine the wider textual context in which 
it is recorded.) 

My contention is that the īPK and its commentarial tradition exemplify the 
possibility of self-consciously introducing religiously—indeed, what are held 
to be transcendently—authorized innovations, and that they also serve to illus- 
trate and explain the possibilities and limits of such innovations on contempo- 
raneous social life. Consider, to begin, the by now well-known invocatory verse 
(mangala) of Utpaladeva’s masterwork: 


15 See TAvad TA 4.251ab (vol. 3, p. 278, line 5): antah kaulo bahih saivo lokācāre tu vaidikah. 
Cf. TAV ad TA 4.24cd—25ab (vol. 3, p. 27, line 11). 

I note that there is a difference in the writings of Utpaladeva, Somānanda, and Abhi- 
navagupta as regards the place of the norms of varnasramadharma; for, the latter two 
authors were more explicit in their understanding of the merely conventional nature of 
such social distinctions than was Utpaladeva (in the īPK and ĪPKVy, at least). 


INNOVATION AND SOCIAL CHANGE IN THE VALE OF KASHMIR 293 


Having somehow become a servant of Mahešvara, wishing to offer assis- 
tance to all people ( janasyapi), I will facilitate the recognition of [the 
Lord], which brings about the achievement of all successes.!6 


Utpaladeva's stated wish to assist “all people" ( janasyapi) requires further 
examination, and I will return to this statement in what follows. More immedi- 
ately, one may note two key and perhaps obvious qualities of the marigala as it 
is offered to the reader. First, Utpaladeva claims access to the transcendent, for 
he says he has “somehow become a servant of Mahešvara, i.e., of Siva. Second, 
he promises to bring others to a similar level of accomplishment by account- 
ing for his insight in the very text that is to hand, paving a path for others to the 
same ennobled state. 

The first quality is anticipated in the marigala with which Somananda opens 
his Sivadrsti (hereafter $D), a verse that is also by now well known: 


May Siva, who has penetrated/possessed my form by warding himself off 
by means of his own self, pay homage to his (all-)extensive self by means 
of his own power.!” 


Here, as before, the author's association with Siva is noted, though it is rather 
more prominently asseverated than is the association with Šiva described by 
Utpala in the īPk—for the $D uses the Kaula scriptural idiom of possession. 
We thus clearly are not met with those who count themselves merely to be 
informed intellectuals, but with those who claim to be both scholars and practi- 
tioners, who understand themselves to be close to—or in fact the very embod- 
iment of—God in the form of Šiva. 

So much is confirmed in the history of the transmission of the teachings of 
the Pratyabhijīā that is found in a textual passage appended to the Sivadrsti, 
said to be an autobiographical account of Utpaladeva's teacher, Somananda.!® 


16  SeeiPKiaa: Kathaficid dsadya mahešvarasya dasyam janasyāpy upakāram icchan | samas- 
tasampatsamavaptihetum tatpratyabhijfiam upapadayami. 

17 See ŚD 1.1: asmadrūpasamāvistah svātmanātmanivāraņe | šivah karotu nijaya namah šak- 
tyā tatātmane. 

18 An edition and translation of this “autobiography” may be found in Nemec 2011, 22-24. 
As noted there, I have my doubts about the authenticity of the passage as autobiogra- 
phy, and rather think it is something probably composed after Somananda’s day, but I 
here note that it is likely to have existed by the eleventh century, as it is replicated, to 
a substantial degree, in Abhinavagupta's Īsvarapratyabhijūāvivrtivimaršinī (ipvv), which 
explicitly associates the narrative with the $D itself. (See below, especially footnote 33.) 


294 NEMEC 


While this guasi-mythological passage claims a divine origin for the Pratyabhi- 
ja, origins that were shrouded with secrecy, it emphasizes the emergent quality 
of the teachings—their very entry from obscurity into circulation among men, 
or, in a word, their novelty. For the teachings, we are told therein,!? were kept 
by “great-souled sages” (mahatmanam rsinam) until they retreated from the 
world at the dawn of the Kali Yuga, at which point it was incumbent on God 
(deva) himself to cross down to earth “in order to grace [humanity]” (devah 
... anugrahayavatirnah ... bhūtale).2 This he did by instructing the irascible 
and imprecating sage Durvasas to perpetuate the lineage of initiates. Durvasas 
is said to do so by producing a mind-born son named Tryambakaditya, who 
stands at the head of a fifteen-generation lineage of such mind-born Siddhas 
(all named Tryambaka).?! The last falls in love with a Brahmin woman who 
bears him a son named Samgamaditya. He in turn is said to have moved to 
Kashmir”? and over the course of the generations the lineage and its esoteric 
teachings were passed down to Somananda. Thus, we are told, the teachings 
were not lost (nocchidyate). 

I would further suggest that the type of autobiographical expression offered 
by Somananda is also found in Abhinavagupta’s famed autograph verse, with 
which he opens virtually all his Trika commentarial works and which Sander- 
son has examined, already, in detail. Sanderson (2005, 89) has rendered this 
bivalent (slesa) mangala verse as follows: 


May my heart shine forth, embodying the bliss of the ultimate, [for it is] 
{one with the state of absolute potential made manifest in the fusion of 
these two, the ‘Mother’ grounded in pure representation, radiant in ever 
new genesis, and the ‘Father’, all-enfolding | Bhairava], who maintains the 
light [of consciousness] through his five faces} / { formed from the emis- 
sions produced through the fusion of these two, my mother Vimala, whose 


References to verse numbers of this “autobiography” reflect the enumeration of the edi- 
tion found in Nemec 2011. 

19 See the “autobiography” at $D 7.107a—c. saivādīni rahasyāni pūrvam āsan mahātmanām | 
rsinam vaktrakuhare ... 

20 See the "autobiography" at $D 7.108—109: kalau pravrtte yātesu tesu durgamagocaram 
| kalāpigrāmapramukham ucchinne šivašāsane. kailāsādau bhraman devo mūrtyā šrīka- 
ntharupaya | anugrahāyāvatīrņas codayam asa bhūtale. 

21 See the “autobiography” at ŚD 7.1: tatah sa bhagavan devād ādešam prapya yatnatah 
| sasarja mānasam putram tryambakadityanamakam. See also the "autobiography" at 
$p 7.114: siddhas tadvat sutotpattyà siddhā evam caturdaša | yavat paricadasah putrah sar- 
vasastravisaradah. 

22 The move to Kashmir is recounted in the narrative at D 7.18cd. 


INNOVATION AND SOCIAL CHANGE IN THE VALE OF KASHMIR 295 


greatest joy was in my birth, and my father | Nara]simhagupta, [when both 
were] all-embracing [in their union]}.73 


These expressions, in turn, reflect the tradition of the poet’s autograph verse, 
which, it must be added, is something of a late phenomenon in the history of 
Indian literature. I offer for comparative purposes one example thereof, that of 
Ratnakara (as rendered by David Smith), which opens his famed Haravijaya: 


Ratnakara, son of Amrtabhanu who was the son of him who lived at Gan- 
gāhrada on Himādri's peak and was of Sridurgadatta’s lineage, wrote this 
poem, a lovely composition, which is beautiful because it is based on the 
deeds of Siva, whose crest is the digit of the moon.?+ 


The similarities lie precisely in the fact that by identifying his parentage and/or 
family lineage each author stakes a claim to his unique biography and thereby 
his historicality even if each does so without explicitly situating himself histori- 
cally with any traceable reference to a calendrical date or reign of any particular 
royal sovereign. The autograph, then, furnishes precisely what this term sug- 
gests, a marker of the unique identity of the author.?5 


23 The verse reads as follows: vimalakalasrayabhinavasrstimaha jananī bharitatanué ca pa- 
fícamukhaguptarucir janakah | tadubhayayamalasphuritabhavavisargamayam hrdayam 
anuttaramrtakulam mama samsphuratāt. See Sanderson 2005, 89. 

24 The verse reads as follows: sridurgadattanijavamsahimadrisanugangahradasrayasuta- 

"mrtabhànusünuh | ratnākaro lalitabandham idam vyadhatta candrārdhacūlacaritāšraya- 
cāru kāvyam. See Smith 1985, 104. 

25 One may observe that only authors of particular genres reveal much of anything of them- 
selves: some authors never compose autograph verses, or anything similar to them. Thus, 
while the poets who clearly worked in the royal courts of Kashmir reveal parts of their 
own biographies to the reader, or at the least are willing to acknowledge themselves as 
biographical figures, we conversely know little from the playwrights of their parentage 
or their place in the world, nor do the philosophers reveal much of themselves (though 
Kalhana places many such figures in history in his Rājatarangiņī). 

It is clear that the Šaivas of concern in this essay were willing to think of and talk 
about themselves in a language that best pairs—at least up until the time when they 
lived—with the literary agents who operated in the "secular" arena of the royal court. In 
Somananda’s case, his personal story is, as we have seen, offered in semi-mythological 
terms; Utpaladeva's is presented in the marigala of a text that he surely would have had 
circulated in intellectual circles, probably those connected, in some significant ways, to 
the royal court. All of this clearly signals some sense of—some self-conscious awareness 
and articulation of—historical location, which is proximate to a self-conscious awareness 
and articulation of novelty. Abhinavagupta's autograph verse in particular is, in my view, 
most like those of the poets, and it certainly indicates his very entrance into historicality, 
however extraordinary and exulted he wished to suggest his entrance may have been. 


296 NEMEC 


It bears reiterating that the historical accuracy of such accounts is not here 
pertinent; what is of concern in these and other similar expressions is the fact 
that their authors conceive of themselves not only in terms of their historicality, 
the mere fact that they appear in time, but also in terms of their historicity:?* the 
authors in question claim for themselves—and whatever (religious) authority 
they claim—the possibility of being mapped historically, located in particular 
social, political, religious, and other contexts due to their own distinguishable 
personages and individual biographies. 

Most significant is the fact that Utpaladeva is explicit in the īPK about the 
nature and significance of the spiritual path he describes: it is not only efficient 
and effective, but it is explicitly new.?’ This Utpaladeva tells us in the concluding 
passage of the fourth and final section (adhikara) of the work, where, reflecting 
on his completed text, he says: 


26 I here adopt the distinction between historicality and historicity as defined by J.N. 
Mohanty (2010, 334): "Historicality is the property of being in history. Historicity is the 
condition of the possibility of history. One can distinguish between three levels of his- 
toricity: historicity of human existence; historicity of a culture; and historicity of scientific 
thinking and, in the long run, philosophy. A mere fact or an event does not have historicity. 
Only an ideal meaning, as Derrida insists in his work on Husserl, can have it." 

27 That this is so is significant, for it is indeed the case that such expressions of novelty are 
relatively scarce in premodern Sanskrit sources, as Pollock has noted. But they are not 
entirely absent, and one suspects that scholars will find a greater number of such pas- 
sages as they continue to look for them. See Pollock 1989, 606: "To an astonishing degree 
Sanskrit texts are anonymous or pseudonymous, or might just as well be. The strategy 
of eliminating from the text—whatever sort of text it might be—the personality of the 
author and anything else that could help us situate the text in time is a formal correlate of 
a content invariably marked by ahistoricality. Works on statecraft, for example, describe 
their subject without specific reference to a single historically existing state. Books on law 
expatiate on such crucial questions as the relationship between local practices and gen- 
eral codes of conduct without adducing any particularized events or cases. Belles-lettres 
seem virtually without date or place, or indeed, author. Literary criticism prior to the 
tenth century (Anandavardhana) neither mentions the name nor cites the work of any 
poet, the ālamkārikas themselves supplying all examples. Philosophical disputation takes 
place without the oppositional interlocutor ever being named and doxographies make 
no attempt to ascribe the religious-philosophical doctrines they review to anyone, unless 
a mythological personage. Even in those texts whose historical vision I suggest merits 
particular reconsideration—Raghuvamsa, for instance—referentiality remains somehow 
unanchored: We are indeed told that itis the Bengalis that Raghu uproots (4.36), the Kalin- 
gas heattacks (38), the Pandyas he scorches (49), the hair of the Kerala women upon which 
he sprinkles the dust of his army (54), and so on, but if the digvijaya has local contours, it 
remains essentially timeless. In short, we can read thousands of pages of Sanskrit on any 
imaginable subject and not encounter a single passing reference to a historical person, 
place, or event—or at least to any that, historically speaking, matters." 


INNOVATION AND SOCIAL CHANGE IN THE VALE OF KASHMIR 297 


Thus I have set forth this new (nava), easy path as it was explained 
by my distinguished teacher [Somananda] in the šāstra, [entitled] the 
Šivadrsti.28 


We see this sentiment reiterated, moreover, in the ĪPKV; where Utpaladeva 
glosses the term “new” (nava) with the synonym abhinava;?? and Abhinav- 
agupta reproduces this latter term in the shorter of his two sub-commentaries, 
the [svarapratyabhijfavimarsint (īPv), where he adds that the path in question 
is both “included in” all the various secret šāstras (sarvarahasyašāstrāntargata) 
and, because it has been concealed from public view, is not well known (san- 
nigüdhatvad aprasiddha).39 

Isabelle Ratié, the first scholar explicitly to note the significance of this 
passage, has suggested that Utpaladeva refers to the novelty of the path he 
described in the īPK because he wishes to indicate that it does not authenti- 
cate itself by any overt appeal to scripture.! Now, it is undoubtedly the case 
that the Karikas are unmistakably philosophical in tone and content, and that 
they require no special or extensive knowledge of esoteric scriptural sources for 
their comprehension; and one may note that Utpaladeva's teacher, Somananda, 
similarly obscured the scriptural influences on his articulation of the Pratya- 
bhijfia.32 


28 See IPK 4.16ab: iti prakatito maya sughata esa mārgo navo mahagurubhir ucyate sma 
šivadrstišāstre yathā |. 

29 See IPKVr ad īPK 4.16: so ‘yam avakra evābhinavo mārgah sāksātkrtaparamešvarabhat- 
tārakākārair bhattas$risomanandapadaih sivadrstinamni prakarane nirdisto maya yuktini- 
bandhanena hrdayamgamikrtah. etatparisilanena šivatāvešāt jīvann eva mukto bhavati. 
“This new, direct path was foretold in the treatise entitled the Sivadrsti by the venerable 
Somananda, whose very appearance is that of the great lord Parame$vara in front of one's 
eyes; I have made it [i.e., this path] enter the heart(s) (of men) by furnishing a logical justi- 
fication for it. By pursuing this [path] one becomes liberated in this very life [ jīvann eva], 
this as a result of being (fully) penetrated by Šiva-nature” 

go See IPV ad IPK 446: asmatparasmesthibhattarakasrisomanandapadaih šivadrstišāstre 
"am abhinavah sarvarahasyašāstrāntargatah sannigūdhatvād aprasiddho bahyantara- 
caryāprāņāyāmādiklešaprayāsakalāvirahāt sughatas tāvad uktah ... "This new, easy 
[path] (easy) because it lacks in the (need for) skill in the external and internal exertions 
(usually reguired) for the (removal of one's) afflictions, [practices] such as appropriate 
conduct [caryā] and breath exercises [pranayama]— which is included in all the secret 
šāstras, (and) is not well known since it has been concealed from public view, was first 
explained in the šāstra (entitled) the Sivadrsti by the venerable Somananda, our great- 
grand guru.” 

31 See Ratié 20u, 6 (and especially note 8): "Pourtant, Utpaladeva lui-même présente la 
Pratyabhijfia comme une ‘voie nouvelle’ (margo navah). Nouvelle, elle l est avant tout au 
sens où elle ne fait pas appel à l'autorité scripturaire” 

32 About this phenomenon, see Nemec 201, 12-19. 


298 NEMEC 


I would propose, however that one must understand a rather different jus- 
tification for Utpaladeva's description of the path he describes as “new.” It is 
not—or, rather, it is not merely—the fact that one need not appeal to Šaiva 
scriptures to follow it; rather, I suggest that the primary sense of Utpaladeva's 
description of the path as “new” is that it is new to humanity. As is evinced 
in Somānandas "autobiography, the Pratyabhijfia teachings were said to have 
been concealed by great sages at the beginning of the Kali Age, preserved as 
they were by means of the secret lineage described therein, and were only 
revealed subseguently for the benefit of those who would come to be initiated 
into its ways. Some justification for linking these mythological origins to the 
attested novelty of the path may be found, moreover, in the fact that Abhinava- 
gupta explicitly invokes the narrative found in Somananda’s “autobiography” in 
a passage of the Ipvv that comments on ĪPK 4.16, precisely the verse in which 
the novelty of the Pratyabhijfa’s path is proclaimed. And in doing so Abhinav- 
agupta may be understood himself to associate the lineage with Utpaladeva’s 
claim to novelty.?? 

The Pratyabhijia thus presents the reader with a self-conscious (theoretical) 
understanding of their šāstra as divinely sanctioned, guaranteed by the iden- 
tity of the authors in the lineage with Siva himself; and, while thus divinely 
sanctioned, the sastras are intimately, inextricably, tied to the biographies of 
individual, monadic agents—Utpaladeva, Somananda, and those preceding 
and following them in their lineage. Thus, and perhaps not unlike the theology 


33 ĪPVVadīPK 416 (vol. 3, p. 402, lines 14—20): šivadrstīti tadgatam a šrīkaņthanāthāt guru- 
parvakramam sūcayati. tatra hi srigrikanthanathah $asane samutsanne šrīdurvāsomunim 
tadavataranaya dideša, so ‘pi sritryambakadityam traiyambakakhye lokaprasiddhya tairim- 
bābhidhāne gurusantāne pravartayitāram mānasam sasarja—ityadi vitatyoktam. šrīkaņ- 
thanathas cadhigatatattvah šrīmadanantanāthāt, so pi srībhagavacchaktita ityady āga- 
mesu nirüpitam iti sampūrņo guruparvakrama uktah. 

Compare, in the following graph, the lineages as articulated in the īPvv and the $n 

"Autobiography," with coincident names in the respective lineages underlined: 

IPVV: Bhagavacchakti ^ Anantanatha ^ $rikanthanatha > Durvāsas > 
Tryambakaditya. 

§p “Autobiography”: Srikantha > Durvasas + Tryambakāditya + 14 Tryambaka-s > 
Samgamāditya + Varsaditya + Aruņāditya > Ananda + Somanan- 
da. 

Clearly, Abhinavagupta wishes both partially to confirm the lineage offered in the “autobi- 

ography” and also to add to it at the top the persons Bhagavacchakti and Anantanatha. (Or, 

if the composition of the $D "autobiography" postdates that of the IPvv, one may instead 
conjecture that the author of the former wished to add to the lineage of the latter at the 
tail end of the same.) 


INNOVATION AND SOCIAL CHANGE IN THE VALE OF KASHMIR 299 


associated with, e.g., the avatara theory, we are here offered a view of Siddhas or 
“Perfected Ones” who have emerged in human form in the world in their partic- 
ular historical contexts, contexts to which they could—and did—actively and 
explicitly respond. Finally, this concurrence of historicity and divine author- 
ity allows the IPK in particular to claim to offer something that is plainly and 
explicitly “new” (nava), yet nevertheless “transcendent,” even “timeless,” as it 
were, insofar as authorized by Siva himself. The Pratyabhijfià thus achieves in 
its explicit and implicit theoretical formulations the apparently paradoxical 
aims of offering something both historically located and new, on the one hand, 
and transcendent, on the other, the teachings being ultimately authored and 
authorized by Siva himself and thus held to be uncontained by any historical 
bounds. 


4 The Kashmiri, Šaiva Example in Practice 


This much, then, represents the Kashmiri non-dual Saivas' theory, their self- 
conscious view of the place of their šāstra and those who carry it in history. 
But, what of their practices? What did their theory suggest they should do, and 
what, so far as can be known, did they do? 

Asis well known, the Saivas of the Pratyabhijfia understood the various prac- 
tices related to varna or birth to involve mere social custom, their view being 
that caste identity was not based in any real difference in the natures of the 
individuals so marked by it. We see this view exemplified perhaps nowhere 
more clearly than in a passage of Somananda's §D (at 3.42cd—47), where the 
question of the need to purify a fire installed in an outcaste's, a candala’s,3+ 
house is addressed: 


sveccháto bhavarüpatve parādhīnā kutah sthitih 3.42 
ksīravad yadi vocyeta parādhīnam jadam bhavet 

etayaiva disa $odhyam šuddhanyūnādidūsaņam 3.43 
abhagne 'sya svarūpatve šuddhanyūnādikam kutah 
patadgrahādike hemni hematvam mukutādike 3.44 
sthitam eva na hemno 'sya kācid asti vibhedita 
caņdālasadmago vahnir na vahnir yadi kathyate 3.45 
tad evam syād athocyeta vahneh samskāracodanā 
Sastresu varnità kasmāt karyartham kāryam eva tat 3.46 


34  Acaņdāla in this context is the offspring of a Brahmin woman and an outcaste male. 


300 


35 


36 


NEMEC 


na svarupavibhago ‘tra tathā tatra vyavasthiteh 
samjnakaranamatram tad vyavahārāya kalpitam 3.47 


Given that he [i.e., Šiva] exists of his own volition in the form of (all) 
the entities (that make up the universe), how is existence dependent 
on another than himself? If, for example, you say it [i.e., the purported 
dependence] is one similar to (the example of curds, whose genesis 
depends on the) milk (of which they are comprised), it [i.e., the universe] 
would be insentient, dependent on another. The fault (attributed to our 
system) that must be corrected—being pure, being diminished, or the 
like—is precisely the result of this (wrong) point of view. How can there 
be something pure, something diminished, etc., when his nature is undi- 
vided? The fact of being gold simply exists in gold, (be it) in (the form of) 
a golden spittoon, etc., or in (the form of) a tiara, etc. The (fact of being) 
gold is in no way divided [i.e., differentiated] whatsoever. If you argue that 
a fire installed in an outcaste’s house is not (properly) called a fire [i.e., it 
is not a proper, ritually-purified fire], we reply: that may be so [i.e., this 
does not contradict our notion of the uniformity of the nature of fire as 
such]. But, if you say (in reply) that injunctions involving the rites of pas- 
sage for fire are explained in the (Saiva) teachings, (we reply:) what is the 
goal of the (ritual) action (in question)? It is the action itself.* There is 
no division of its [i.e., the fire’s] nature, here. It is the same for his [i.e., 
Šiva's] abiding there [in the world]: that [i.e., the distinguishing of “pure” 
from “impure” elements in the world, or the distinction of that which is 
said to be Siva and that which is said not to be] is conceived of merely 
as the assignation of names for the purpose of everyday speech/everyday 
activity [vyavahara |.3% 


In other words, there is no substantial change in the fire gua being fire that results from the 
performance of the ritual. It is a social custom, not something that materially transforms 
the fire so treated. 

See also the SDVr on the same passage: atha vahner yady ašuddhatā na syāt tat tasya 
kuto mantraih samskārayogah kāryasampādanārtham šāstre codyeta tasmāt tasyasud- 
dhatā sambhavet. naivam kāryam evānustheyam eva tad vyavahārāya na tu svarūpe vah- 
ner vibhāgah, svarūpe nijarūpe sthite tu vahnāv upagamyamāne tatsvarūpatā vahnirū- 
pataiva sarvatra. tadvac chivarūpatā jagatas tasya, tathešvaratanmātraprthivyādirūpatayā 
vyavasthānāt parasthülasuksmatadibhedah. tathā ca sarvatraikye samsāravyavahārāya 
samjnakaranamatram tat kalpitam bhavati. "Now, if you argue that, if fire cannot be 
impure, then it is inexplicable why the rites of passage, replete with the mantras, are 
enjoined to it in the (Saiva) teaching(s), this for the purpose of accomplishing their (puri- 
fying) effect; thus, it must be possible that [fire] can be impure, (we reply:) this is not 
so. The rite itself is simply established for the purpose of everyday speech/activity, while 


INNOVATION AND SOCIAL CHANGE IN THE VALE OF KASHMIR 301 


That caste distinctions should not disgualify anyone from hearing the teach- 
ings of the īPK has also been stated plainly enough, if somewhat obliguely in 
the mangala verse of the īPK, where, as noted above, the *new path” (nava 
mārga) is explicitly said to be offered to “all people" ( janasyāpi). While the 
mangala is merely suggestive of any implications regarding caste, however, the 
IPKVr and Abhinavagupta's īPv and Ipvv further clarify what is intended by 
the expression; and what Utpaladeva means by "all people" is explained with 
increasing clarity as one delves into the succeeding levels of commentary. 

The IPKVr indicates that one should understand the term to refer to all 
people without exception: Utpaladeva glosses janasyapi with imam akhilam.37 
Abhinavagupta, in turn, addresses the caste implications of this pledge—to 
help all people—in a more explicit fashion. In the Ipv subcommentary, he indi- 
cates that the term jana refers to any person regardless of the circumstances of 
his birth ( janasyeti yah kašcij jayamanah tasya); and he further specifies that 
no distinction by the "office" held by a candidate for initiation (adhikarivisaya) 
may serve to restrict access to the teachings of the Pratyabhijfia.3® He later adds 
that the term in question should be understood to refer to anyone afflicted by 
the suffering of incessant births and deaths.?? 

Finally, Abhinava also is explicit, in both the Ipv and IPvv, in stating that 
jāti should not be considered an appropriate measure of a candidate's eligibil- 
ity for entry into the soteriological path of the Pratyabhijfia. This he does in the 
passages of his two sub-commentaries that address the concluding verse of the 
Kārikās, where Utpaladeva has again indicated that the text is meant for "[all] 
people” Referring to himself in the third person, he says (at IPK 4.18):*% 


there is no change in the nature of the fire. Rather, it being established that fire is fixed in 
its nature, i.e., in its own form, the fact of having that nature, i.e., the very fact of being fire, 
exists in every instance (of fire). Similarly, the universe has Siva as its nature. Thus, divi- 
sion into the fact of being supreme, coarse, and subtle, etc., exists as a result of (the same 
Siva) being established in the form of the Lord, the subtle elements, the earth, etc. And 
thus, there being oneness everywhere, that [i.e., such categorization or division of Siva- 
nature] is conceived of as merely the assignation of names for the purpose of everyday 
speech/everyday activity in samsāra” 

37 See IPKVr ad īPK 1.11. paramešvaraprasādād eva labdhātyantadurlabhataddāsyalaksmīr 
aham ekākisampadā lajjamāno janam apimam akhilam svasvaminam vaksyamanopayena 
pratyabhijnapayami yena tasyapi paramarthalabhena paritusyeyam. 

38 SeeīPvadīPK111. (vol.1, p. 14, lines 10—12): janasyeti yah kascij jāvamānah tasya, ity ane- 
nadhikarivisayo nātra kašcin niyama iti daršayati ... 

39  SeeiPvadiPK1aa. (vol.1, p.15, line 9) where Abhinava glosses jana with anavaratajanana- 
maranapidita. 

40  SeeīPK 4.18: janasyāyatnasiddhyartham udayākarasūnunā | i$varapratyabhijfieyam utpa- 
lenopapadita. 


302 NEMEC 


In order that [all] people (jana) can attain perfection effortlessly, Utpala, 
the son of Udayakara, has presented this [svarapratyabhijna [treatise]. 


Abhinava's Ipv suggests that with “people” (jana) Utpaladeva refers to any 
person, for neither jāti nor any other criterion is innately disqualifying.*! He 
reiterates the same in the IPvv as well, where, additionally, he excludes the 
individual's "conduct" (acara) from consideration in determining whom the 
teachings may help.^? Note also that the IPvv explicitly links the present pas- 
sage with the one found at the beginning of the IPK, saying: etac ca prarambha 
evasmabhir vitatam.*? Simply, distinctions marked by birth—including caste 
distinctions—are to be ignored. 

The professed catholic reach of the work is significant, not only due to its 
inclusivism, a quality well attested in the context of tantric rules of initiation, 
even if this cannot be taken to imply the existence in practice "on the ground" 
of a concomitant equality of participation, or status, within the context of the 
initiatory "family" (kula); but it is further significant that it is declared, albeit 
obliquely, in the īPK (and IPKVr), a text (and commentary) that has all the 
hallmarks of works intended for audiences of non-initiates.^^ I submit that 
there must have been some appreciation for a certain novelty in the appar- 
ent inclusivism professed in the work. This, then, may constitute another rea- 
son for Utpaladeva's description of the Pratyabhijfia path as “new”: it offers a 
certain novelty in being (more or less explicitly) indifferent to caste distinc- 
tions. 

While the use of the term jana in the IPK offers a certain ambiguity of 
expression, Abhinava's subcommentaries are explicit in stating the inclusivism 
of the šāstra. One can thus see operative here a certain stratification of expres- 
sion, a certain obliqueness with regard to any reference to caste in the IPK and 
IPKVy, but a more explicit asseveration of the sociological parameters of the 
tradition in Abhinavagupta's sub-commentaries. So much of course reflects the 


41 See Ipv ad IPK 4.18 (vol. 2, p. 276, lines 5-6): yasya kasyacij janor iti nātra jatyadyapeksa 
kācid iti sarvopakāritvam uktam. See also the avataraņikā to ĪPK 4.18 (IPv, vol. 2., p. 275, 
line 14), where Abhinava describes the šāstra in question as one that can help “everyone”: 
sarvopakarakam mahāphalam idam šāstram ... 

42  SeeiPvvadiPK 4.18 (Vol. 3., p. 404, lines 6-8): yah kascij jananadharma, tasyātah siddhih, 
na tv atra jatyacaradau bhara iti sarvānugrāhakatvam uktam. etac ca prārambha evāsmā- 
bhir vitatam. 

43 See footnote 42. 

44 Onthe intended audiences of the īPK and IPKVr, on the one hand, and the śp (and $DVr), 
on the other, see Nemec 2011, 12—19. 


INNOVATION AND SOCIAL CHANGE IN THE VALE OF KASHMIR 303 


complex of practice of the tradition, exemplified as it is by the dictum quoted 
above, “internally a Kaula, externally a Saiva, and in social practice a follower 
of the Veda.” 

This dictum and the complex practice it invokes—one of engaging differ- 
ent rules and norms in differing contexts—is explicitly tied to the question of 
social practices, those associated with caste and life-stages, as the context pro- 
vided by Jayaratha for this quotation clearly indicates. For he considers the sig- 
nificance of preserving the social order—varnasramacara—precisely where 
he quotes the complex form of practice that is here of concern.*5 Moreover, 
the entire matter is raised in the context of coming to understand precisely 
whether the Šaiva practitioner should respect the Veda-based rules of purity 
and impurity. For the relevant section of the fourth ahnika of the TĀ is governed 


45 X See TA (and TAv ad) 4.251ab (vol. 3, p. 277, line 9 to p. 278, line 6): 
evam sarvotkrstatvāc chaiva eva šāstre mukhyayā vrttyā nisthā kāryā, nanyatrety aha 
tasmān mukhyatayā skanda lokadharmān na cācaret | 4.251ab 
nisthāšūnyatayā tu gauņyā vrttyā lokasamraksaņārtham lokadharmān ācarato na kas- 
cid dosa iti bhāvah. tad uktam tatra 
ye tu varnasramacarah prāyašcittās ca laukikah | 
sambandhan dešadharmāms ca prasiddhan na vicarayet. 
garbhadhanaditah krtvā yavad udvaham eva ca | 
tāvat tu vaidikam karma pašcāc chaive hy ananyabhak. 
na mukhyavrttyā vai skanda lokadharmān samācaret. 
iti. ata eva 
antah kaulo bahih šaivo lokācāre tu vaidikah | 
sāram ādāya tistheta nārikelaphalam yathā. 
"Thus, [Abhinavagupta] says that, since it is superior to all (other šāstras), what is to 
be done is fixed in its primary sense in the Saiva šāstra alone and not elsewhere: 

‘Therefore, O Skanda, one need not observe the rules of the (everyday) world as 
though they were of primary importance. 

However, the sense (of this passage) in its secondary meaning, absent of what is 
fixed (to be done), is that no fault accrues to the one who performs lokadharma for 
the purpose of protecting the people/world [loka]. The following is said on the mat- 
ter: 

‘Moreover, one should not cause the well-known, proper customs of the country 
(in which one lives) to go awry, these being (ye) the societal [laukikāh | acts of conduct 
associated with varna and āšrama and the expiatory acts. From the time beginning 
with the ceremony before conception and until one has performed the wedding cere- 
mony, Vedic acts (are to be enjoined). Following this, one is to be devoted to the Saiva 
[path] and no other. Indeed, O Skanda, one need not perform the rules of the (every- 
day) world as though they were of primary importance.’ 

For this very reason: 

‘Internally a Kaula, externally a Saiva, and in social practice a follower of the Veda, 
having extracted the essence, one should remain, as does the fruit of the coconut.” 


304 


NEMEC 


precisely by the question of how the jīvanmukta should behave in the world, 


and Abhinavagupta explicitly cites the eighteenth chapter of the Mālinīvijay- 


ottaratantra there as an authoritative voice in the matter.*® Note, in addition, 


46 


See TĀ 4.213-221ab (vol. 3, pp. 241 ff., which quote the Malinivijayottaratantra, verses 18.74— 
81): 


atra nathah samācāram patale 'stadase 'bhyadhāt | 

nātra šuddhir na ca$uddhir na bhaksyádivicaranam 4.213 

na dvaitam nāpi cādvaitam lingapujadikam na ca | 

na capi tatparityāgo nisparigrahatāpivā 4.214 

saparigrahatā vāpi jatabhasmadisamgrahah | 

tattyāgo na vratādīnām caraņācaraņam ca yat 4.215 

ksetrādisampravešas ca samayādiprapālanam | 

parasvarūpalingādi nāmagotrādikam ca yat 4.216 

nāsmin vidhīyate kimcin na cāpi pratisidhyate | 

vihitam sarvam evātra pratisiddham athāpi ca 4.217 

kim tv etad atra deveši niyamena vidhiyate | 

tattve cetah sthirikaryam suprasannena yoginā 4.218 

tac ca yasya yathaiva syāt sa tathaiva samācaret | 

tattve nišcalacittas tu bhurijāno visayan api 4.219 

na samspršyeta dosaih sa padmapatram ivāmbhasā | 

visāpahārimantrādisamnaddho bhaksayann api 4.220 

visam na muhyate tena tadvadyogīmahāmatih. 4.221 

"Here, the Lord has explained the appropriate conduct (of the accomplished yogin) in 
the 18th chapter (of the Malinivijayottaratantra): "There is no purity here, nor impu- 
rity, no consideration of what is to be eaten, etc. There is no duality, nor non-duality, 
and no (requirement to perform) acts of devotion to the liriga, etc. There is similarly 
no (requisite) abandoning of those [acts], nor the (required) renunciation of mate- 
rial possessions, nor again any (requirement regarding the) accumulation of material 
possessions. There is no (requisite) maintenance of twisted locks of hair [ jata], of 
(smearing oneself with) sacred ashes, or the like, nor any (requisite) abandoning of the 
same. And as regards the performance or non-performance of vows, etc., and entrance 
into sacred places, etc. [i.e., ksetras, pithas, and upapithas; see TĀ 4.259cd and the TAV 
thereupon], the observance of rules of action, and (those rules associated with) initia- 
tory name, initiatory lineage [gotra], or the like [i.e., according to the lodge (ghara) 
and the like of the initiate; see TĀ 4.267cd], whether the form, sectarian marks, and so 
on be one's own or another's—nothing is prescribed here regarding these, nor, con- 
trariwise, prohibited. Absolutely everything is performed here [according to the rules 
of the Malinivijayottara], and, contrariwise, omitted. Yet, this (alone) is necessarily 
enjoined here [in the Malinivijayottara], O Goddess, that the wholly pleased yogin 
must fix his consciousness [cetas] on reality; and he should therefore act only in accor- 
dance with that [reality (tattva)], whatever that may be for him. Moreover, the one 
whose consciousness [citta] is fixed on reality, partaking even in the pleasures of the 
senses [visaya ], is not touched by bad consequences, just as the petal of a lotus (is not 
affected) by water. The yogin who has great understanding [mahamati] is the one who 
is similar to the person who, armed with mantras that counteract poison and the like, 
is not deluded by the poison even while devouring it.” 


I thank Shaman Hatley for answering several queries I had about this passage. 


INNOVATION AND SOCIAL CHANGE IN THE VALE OF KASHMIR 305 


that it is the matter of šuddhi and asuddhi, as in was in $D 3.42cd—47, which is 
here (at TA 4.213cd) explicitly placed in question. The TA and TAV go on to sug- 
gest that yogis know for themselves what is pure, what impure; and they further 
state that it is their very awareness that should determine how they act, for the 
normative rules of purity do not apply to them.*7 

Following this, the key objection is raised: are there not (Vedic) injunctions 
that require one to follow the rules of purity?^? The opponent asks, that is, 
whether tantric Brahmins must respect Vedic authority as well as Saiva truths. 
How is it that, given the apparent validity or "truth" of both sets of šāstric 
injunction, the Vedic and the Šaiva, one can be invalidated, the other affirmed? 
How can one be internally a Kaula, externally a Šaiva, and a Vaidika in social 
practices when to be one sometimes requires one to contravene the strictures 
of the other? 

The answer given not only suggests that it is not always inappropriate in 
practice to contravene the rules of purity and impurity, of suddhi and asud- 
dhi; it further offers a rationale—a theory—for this complex of practice. This 
it does by invoking a general, and common, šāstric sensibility, namely, that the 
šāstras operate by first issuing blanket rules, which may later be superseded 
in certain specified contexts. This is a fundamental organizational structure of, 
among other sastric works,*9 the system of Panini's Astādhyāyī —which (as is 
well known) sets out exhaustively to account for correct speech not by listing 
every possible form of speech, but by structuring classes of rules that first define 
the utsarga or generally applicable rule, only then to itemize the apavādas or 


47 See TĀ (and TAv ad) 4.228ab (vol. 3, p. 249, lines 4-12): 

yoginam prati sā cāsti bhavesv iti viéuddhata | 4.288ab 

pasuprayanam hi mantresv api sivatmatvena parijfianam násti iti tàn prati tesam svakā- 
ryakaritvabhavat sambhavaniyam api a$uddhatvam. dharādīnām ca yoginam prati 
tatparijfíanam asti iti tesam api visuddhatvam. etad eva hi nama yogino yogitvam, 
yat nikhilam idam višvam šivātmatayā parijānāti iti. 

"'As regards the yogin, moreover, that purity exists with respect to (all) entities.’ 
Indeed, the majority of bound souls do not perceive even (Saiva) mantras as hav- 

ing Siva-nature, and therefore they suppose them to be impure, since they fail (even) 

to perform their own duties (in employing these mantras). But, as for the yogin, he 

perceives (everything,) beginning with the earth(-tattva), as having that [Šiva-nature]. 

Therefore, (he perceives that) all of them without exception are completely pure. 

Indeed, this alone is the very nature of the yogin as a yogin, that he perceives this entire 

universe as possessed of Siva-nature. This is definitive." 

48 See TA 4.228cd (vol. 3, p. 250, lines 4-5): nanu codanaya suddhyasuddhyadikaviniscayah. 
"Objection:a fixed knowledge of purity, impurity, and so on exists by way of (Vedic) injunc- 
tion(s) [codanaya ]." 

49 Itis of course a model found in the Mīmāmsā, as well, for example. 


306 NEMEC 


exceptional rules that can override the former in the appropriate contexts. So 
much is explained in Patafijali’s Mahabhasya as follows:5° 


Now, one may object by asking whether it isn’t the case that, when this 
(system of) instruction of (correct) speech is operative, one must recite 
each word in the course of acquiring the (correct forms of) words. (That 
is:) Every word must be recited, as in ‘cow, horse, man, elephant, bird, deer, 
Brahmin.’ Reply: Certainly not! It is not expedient to recite each word in 
the course of acquiring the (correct forms of) words. For, so much has 
been communicated as follows: ‘Brhaspati imparted to Indra the study 
of words by uttering each one individually over the course of a thou- 
sand divine years, and he did not reach the end of it’ Brhaspati was the 
teacher [pravaktr], and Indra was the student [adkyetr]; and the time 
of instruction did not reach its terminus over the course of a thousand 
divine years. What of (the use of this method) today? One who plainly 
lives a long time (today) lives for (only) a hundred years ... How, then, 
should these (correct) words be acquired? A certain characteristic asso- 
ciated with the generic [samanya] and the particular [visesa] should be 
activated, by means of which [people] can—with little effort—become 
acquainted with the extremely massive flood of words. What, pray tell, 
is that? Utsarga and apavada. A general rule [utsarga] is (first) to be 
employed; (then,) an exception [apavāda](, which overturns the general 
rule). But under what circumstances is the general rule to be used, under 
what circumstances the exception? The general rule is to be used generi- 
cally. E.g.: karmany an (A 3.2.1). The exception to it (should be used) in a 
particular circumstance. E.g.: ato ‘nupasarge kah (A 3.2.3). 


50 See Paspasahnika (7) of Patafijali's Mahābhāsya: utsarga and apavāda, vol. 1, p. 5, line 24 
and following of the Kielhorn edition: athaitasmiri šabdopadeše sati kim sabdānām prati- 
pattau pratipadapathah kartavyah. gaur ašvah puruso hasti sakunir mrgo brahmana ity 
evamadayah sabdāh pathitavyāh. na iti aha. anabhyupayah esah sabdanam pratipattau 
pratipadapāthah. evam hi šrūyate. brhaspatir indraya divyam varsasahasram pratipado- 
ktānām šabdānām sabdaparayanam provāca na antam jagāma. brhaspatis ca pravakten- 
draš ca adhyetā. divyam varsasahasram adhyayanakālah na ca antam jagāma. kim punar 
adyatve. yah sarvathā ciram jīvati sa varsasatam jīvati... katham tarhime šabdāh pratipa- 
ttavyāh. kificit samanyavisesaval laksanam pravartyam yenālpena yatnena mahato maha- 
tah $abdaughan pratipadyeran. kim punas tat. utsargāpavādau. kascid utsargah kartavyah 
kašcid apavādah. kathafjattyakah punar utsargah kartavyah kathafijattyako 'pavadah. 
samanyenotsargah kartavyah. tad yathā. karmany an. tasya vigesenapavadah. tad yathā. 
āto nupasarge kah. 


INNOVATION AND SOCIAL CHANGE IN THE VALE OF KASHMIR 307 


Here, we see that it is for efficiency’s sake that this model is adopted. And 
we are given a sample application in Panini’s grammar, the details of which 
are explained in Appendix A. Essential to recognize is the fact that the pre- 
scription delineated by the general rule, the utsarga, always stands; yet, on 
some occasions its application is suspended by a special prescription, in the 
defined context of the apavada or exceptional rule.5! Whenever no apavada 
applies, however, the utsarga automatically prevails, for whenever or wherever 
the special rule does not apply (or must itself be suspended), one reverts by 
default—invariably and automatically—to the general, standing rule. 

It is this very šāstric mode that is explicitly invoked by Jayaratha in reference 
to the very phenomenon we have here, that of a complex of religious practice, 
Vedic and Saiva.52 


TA 4.230ab: ‘If you argue that this [Saiva rule] is invalidated by the Vedic 
one, (we reply:) why shouldn't it be the other way around?’53 


Considering that one may object by asking how it is that both [sastras] are 
equally real, given that in certain contexts the injunction(s) [vidhi] asso- 
ciated with purity and the like are invalidated, even though they apply 
universally, for all people, [Abhinavagupta] says: 


51 Note, therefore, that the domain of application of the general rule is said to be ubiquitous 
(sarvatra) at both Kasikavrtti ad A 3.2.1 (which reads, in part: sarvatra karmany upapade 
dhātor anpratyayo bhavati) and in Jayaratha's explanation of the matter, at TĀv ad TĀ 
4.230cd-231ab, for which see below. 

52 . SeeTA4.230—232ab (vol. 3, p. 253, line1to p. 255, line16), along with the corresponding pas- 
sages ofthe TAv (though one should note that, for the sake of brevity, none of the commen- 
tary is here cited of what follows TĀ 4.230ab, excepting the avataraņikā that introduces 
4.230cd-231ab; and only part of the commentary that appears prior to TA 4.231cd-232ab 
is quoted here below): 

vaidikyā bādhiteyam ced viparītam na kim bhavet | 

... nanu katham anayor avisistam sattvam šuddhyādividheh sarvapurusavisayatayāpra- 
vrttàv api kvacid visaye badhat ity āšaūkyāha 

samyak cen manyase bādho visistavisayatvatah. 4.230 

apavadena kartavyah sāmānyavihite vidhau | 

yadi nama bādhāvritam samyag avabuddhyase, tan na kasyā api codanāyāh sattva- 
hanih. tathā hi—niravakasatvad višegātmā apavādavidhih sarvatra labdhāvakāšam 
sāmānyātmakam utsargavidhim bādhate, iti vakyavidah ... 

Suddhyasuddhi ca sāmānyavihite tattvabodhini. 4.231 

pumsi te badhita eva tathā cātreti varnitam | 

53 This is of course to say, in a rhetorical manner, that it is rather that precisely the opposite 
must be the case. 


308 NEMEC 


TĀ 4.230cd-231ab: Tf you think about it clearly, a rule that is an excep- 

tion [apavada] invalidates a rule generally applied [samanyavihita 

vidhi|, because it applies in a particular domain. 
So, if you properly consider the procedure of invalidation, then (you will 
realize that) no injunction [codanā] whatever loses reality | sattvahani]. 
To explain: the rule that is the exception | apavadavidhi|—by nature spe- 
cific because it is (generally) void of any occasion (for application)— 
supersedes the general rule [utsargavidhi], which, being one that always 
has met with its occasion (for application), is by nature generally appli- 
cable [sāmānyātmaka]. This is what those who know language say ... 

TA 4.231cd—232ab: ‘Moreover, purity and impurity, which are generally 

enjoined, are simply superseded when a man knows reality. This is how 

it has been explained here [in the Mālinīvijayottara]” 


In the face of the objections of a more orthodox opponent who demands to 
know how the less permissive rules of the Veda cannot prevail over Šaiva scrip- 
tures, Abhinavagupta brilliantly inverts the hierarchy by appealing to a main- 
stream sāstric interpretive rule: itis the exception that preempts the normative, 
overarching rule and not the other way around. The rule that applies most gen- 
erally, the Vedic one, is the utsarga. It is invariably prescribed—Jayaratha here 
described the utsarga as sarvatra labdhavakasa and sāmānyātmaka—but it 
is occasionally superseded by the exceptional rule or apavada (described by 
Jayaratha as niravakasatvad visesatma), where in this instance the apavada is 
the Šaiva rule, occasioned as it is by the special knowledge of the accomplished 
yogin who sees reality for what it is, as transcending the conventions of social 
position as determined by birth. 

Nevertheless, whenever this special rule does not prevail—viz., outside the 
confines of tantric knowledge and practice—one must revert by default to con- 
forming to the general rule, the utsarga (i.e., the Veda-based strictures), which 
is never nullified but only occasionally and temporarily superseded. So much is 
the position Abhinavagupta articulates in the TA, and Jayaratha indicates that 
in doing so he responds to the potential criticism that tantric rules authorize 
practices that are proscribed by Vedic norms, implying thereby that the tantric 
practices should be abandoned. This complex of practice, offered by Saivas who 
engaged in rites that transgressed social and other contemporaneous cultural 
norms, was thus said to be the necessary product of the mainstream theoretical 
model that they understood to prescribe it. 

The implications of this exemplar, then, are evident. Divinely sanctioned 
(in no small part by the authors’ identification with Šiva), the Pratyabhijfia 
offers a tradition that prescribes exceptional practices that were introduced 


INNOVATION AND SOCIAL CHANGE IN THE VALE OF KASHMIR 309 


in historical time but are nevertheless rooted in an “ahistorical” authority. The 
knowledge it offers is fixed in its dimensions: there is no theology of “progress” 
in this astra. Each šāstra, moreover, Vedic and Tantric, speaks in a voice that in 
some important sense offers not merely a “knowing how,’ but rather a “knowing 
that”; for each individually denies the possibility of a dialectical relationship 
between theory (šāstra) and practice (prayoga) in Pollock’s sense of the prob- 
lematic. (New political developments could not alter its vision of the nature of 
Siva as a ubiquitous consciousness, for example.) To this extent, then, Pollock’s 
model is applicable to these šāstras. 

Yet, the tantric šāstra here placed under study nevertheless allows for a the- 
ology of novelty, because its “ahistorical” authority was said to have been intro- 
duced by particular agents in particular historical moments. The system thus 
allowed for, indeed anticipated, the emergence of new exceptional rules, and 
because the canon remained open, it was ever possible that another text, a new 
apavada as it were, could emerge in a context in which the general parameters 
of social action—of religious practice or prayoga—otherwise and inevitably 
would remain operative. 

A dialectic, then, between theory and practice in premodern South Asia, 
while it might not be found in the self-representation of any single given work, 
can be found in the proliferation of multiple sastras, which in supplementing as 
well as competing with one another could accommodate innovation, explicitly 
or implicitly, by introducing novel theoretical models as circumstances war- 
ranted. The dialectic may only be found in the scriptural gestalt, however; for, 
it is only by reading multiple scriptural sources with an awareness of their 
mutually shared contexts, pedigrees, and, most importantly, structured mutual 
relations that one might begin to identify patterns of religious (and other forms 
of) change in Indian premodernity.5* 


54 In response to two important observations of Shaman Hatley, who read an earlier draft 
of this essay, two caveats are here reguired. First, I wish herein to indicate not that the 
Pratyabhijfia authors innovated the practice of deriving authority from their siddha- 
hood. This is a practice that indeed predates these authors. Rather, I wish to suggest that 
such a practice, and others like it such as the avatara theory, allowed for innovations 
in tradition—they allowed authors self-consciously and explicitly to introduce unprece- 
dented practices and ideas, what would be new in human history, as those that were 
religiously—transcendently—sanctioned. Thus, in an example offered from the avatāra 
theory, Krsna deploys novel —and context-appropriate—ways of upholding dharma, even 
if he is himself ultimately considered to be an emanation of the timeless and transcendent 
Visnu himself. 

Second, it can be observed (as Hatley did in a personal communication, via email, of 
November n, 2015) that the social model that Abhinavagupta has developed is in fact also 
quite conservative, for while allowing for an innovative social institution that ignores caste 


310 NEMEC 
5 Conclusion 


I note, in closing, a concentric series of five implications of this phenomenon, 
each of an increasing degree of generalization, and in doing so I intend to 
point to possible avenues of further inguiry that lie beyond the scope of the 
present (and admittedly particular) case-study. The first involves a relatively 
narrow methodological concern in the study of Šaiva post-scriptural sources: 
the present exemplar stands as a reminder that knowledge of the wider con- 
text of “orthodox” šāstric texts and concerns should inform scholarly inter- 
pretations of the post-scriptural literature; for even works that are primarily 
rooted in and explicitly concerned with esoteric scriptures, as is the TAV, fre- 


distinctions it also synchronizes such practices with the caste-based Brahminical stric- 
tures that were not, historically speaking, espoused in the Kula-Kaula branch of Saivism; 
and it limits the transgressive practices by defining them as exceptional, as the (rare) 
contravention of the overarching, normative structures of Brahminism. (Similarly, Alexis 
Sanderson, in response to the shortened version of this essay that I presented at the confer- 
ence held at the University of Toronto in his honor, suggested that what is offered here is a 
“vertical” model of authority and innovation, as opposed to the more radical, “horizontal” 
models found elsewhere in the Saiva traditions, which more fully unshackled themselves 
from Brahminical norms.) This cannot be denied. There is, in the complex of theory and 
practice offered by the Pratyabhijfià, a certain preservation of Veda-based tradition. And it 
is true that there were in premodern South Asia models of change that sought not to mod- 
ify (as Abhinavagupta does) but to upend Brahminical norms. Yet, a distinction here must 
be made between the degree to which these traditions in fact changed social norms and 
the fact that they explicitly and self-consciously wedded themselves to the idea that reli- 
gion could offer ideas and practices that were explicitly said to be new. To put the matter 
differently, one might reasonably argue that Abhinava was somewhat inimical to (social) 
change—not entirely so, as what he endorses clearly also allows for the contravention of 
Brahminical norms, in part at least; but he also explicitly does not espouse a view that 
change is inimical to religious ideas and practices. If it is indeed the case that he—and 
Utpaladeva—sought to preserve a certain Brahminical order (in part at least), reigning in 
or domesticating, as it were, the more radical practices of Saiva and Sakta traditions, it is 
all the more noteworthy that they did so by explicitly endorsing the possibility of religious 
change—of changes in ideas and social and other practices—in doing so; for this strategy 
speaks to the very fact that change, in premodern South Asia, was not inimical to religion, 
even if, as one might argue, the fact that they said as much was done in service of limiting 
social change to modifications of Brahminical norms, rather than allowing for the whole- 
sale rejection of them. My own view, as is clarified in the conclusion, is that the model here 
presented—of change through modification of the normative order—both embraced the 
idea of change and ushered in changes “on the ground” in religious and social practice; 
moreover, I maintain that it offers what was the prevalent model of change in premod- 
ern South Asia—that of change through modification as opposed to wholesale change or 
revolution—and scholars should look for such types of change in places where previous 
scholarship has only seen a static social and intellectual order. 


INNOVATION AND SOCIAL CHANGE IN THE VALE OF KASHMIR 311 


quently record a substantial interaction with the mainstream systems of learn- 
ing (including both various šāstric systems such as Paninian grammar and the 
classical philosophical darsanas). 

Second, there is the matter of the social context, the Kashmir Valley of the 
period in question, in which the authors of the Pratyabhijfia lived and wrote. 
While it is worth noting that the tantric initiatory “family” (kula) would have 
frequently offered an uncomfortable home for low-caste and outcaste initiates 
(as many or few as there might have been in practice), entry into the tantric 
kula could also have afforded the initiate a certain place of privilege. Initiation 
was, from the perspective of the tradition, a significant institution, one that 
the tantric practitioner would have coveted and shared sparingly; and member- 
ship would have conferred not only a certain prestige but also a special form of 
knowledge that those within the tradition would have held to be paramount: a 
certain access to the divine. 

Thus, while this form of privilege does relatively little globally to address the 
social inequities enshrined in normative, caste-based strictures, the initiation 
of low-caste or outcaste individuals into the secret šāstras nevertheless consti- 
tutes a social innovation over and against preexisting Vedic (or, perhaps more 
accurately, dharmasastric) norms. The change it offers, however, comes not in 
the form of social revolution but in the form of a particular and circumscribed 
social inclusion. Generalizing from the present exemplar, one suspects that 
social change in premodern South Asia will most often be found in its incre- 
mentalism, as opposed to efforts in total revolution such as the toppling of the 
institution of royal sovereignty or the wholesale displacement of Brahminical 
authority. Social change, simply, will likely be found, where it is to be found, in 
the often-subtle exceptions that contradict overarching and often oppressive 
rules that were more globally applied, in Kashmir or elsewhere, in premodern 
South Asia. 

Third, the model of social conduct witnessed in the Pratyabhijfia exemplar 
finds correspondences in the narrative tropes of (non-tantric) Šaiva mythology. 
Šivais not only paradoxically erotic and ascetical in the mythological literature, 
as is well known, but he also appears there as both asocial or anti-social and 
integrated into society (and often simultaneously so), as is also well known. 
Take, for example, the insult of Daksa's sacrifice, where Siva is depicted as 
a pariah while simultaneously standing as the ideal husband in the eyes of 
the eminently acceptable Sati. One may therefore query whether the sort of 
complex of social practice examined in the present essay constitutes a phe- 
nomenon more widely attested across various Saiva traditions.55 


55 I thank Shaman Hatley for suggesting that, among the various candidates that present 


312 NEMEC 


Fourth, the exceptionalism offered by the utsarga-apavāda model is com- 
monly attested across a range of premodern Indian cultural systems, most 
notably, for the purposes of the present essay, those that address social rules 
and life. The Krsna of the Mahabharata plainly contravenes a series of gener- 
ally applicable social strictures, for example, rules that he otherwise would wish 
vigorously to maintain; and the rules of conduct for crisis-situations (āpad- 
dharma) more generally are premised on the idea that the prescribed actions 
are exceptional both because they contravene otherwise normative behaviors 
and because they are deemed inactionable outside the only context in which 
they may apply: that of a social emergency. And one cannot overlook, in this 
context, the frequency with which the Veda is acknowledged as authoritative in 
Hindu traditions while the contents of Vedic works are nearly entirely ignored. 
It is common, in sum, to find a layering of practice in South Asian religion 
and social life; and such complexes of practice, allowing as they do for the 
exception, in its place, to supersede normative strictures, should probably be 
counted as the normative model of social organization in premodern South 
Asia.56 

Fifth and finally, I address an issue relevant to the study of religion, broadly 
conceived. It is instructive that Pollock appealed to Geertz in formulating 
the theoretic that defines his understanding of the relationship of šāstra to 
prayoga. Indeed, he finds Geertz's famed distinction of "models of" from *mod- 
els for" precisely in the article in which he famously defines religion as “(1) a 
system of symbols which acts to (2) establish powerful, pervasive, and long- 
lasting moods and motivations in men by (3) formulating conceptions of a 
general order of existence and (4) clothing these conceptions with such an 
aura of factuality that (5) the moods and motivations seem uniquely realis- 
tic. 57 

Geertz apparently did not anticipate the possibility of a complex of (some- 
times mutually-contradictory) beliefs or a complex of (sometimes mutually- 
contradictory) practices. His modelinstead elaborates a more singular structure 
or phenomenon, referring as it does to "a system of symbols" that establishes 
powerful moods and motivations in men by formulating *a general order of 


themselves for examination along these lines, the anti-caste Vīrašaivas immediately come 
to mind. 

56 Indeed, the sort of "And" approach that Pollock identifies and endorses (over and against 
an "Either/Or” approach) elsewhere in his writings owes something, I think, to this intel- 
lectual practice of allowing for exceptions in the context of an overarching normative 
practice that otherwise prevails. See Pollock 2006, 574—580. Cf. footnote 59. 

57 See Geertz 1973, 89. 


INNOVATION AND SOCIAL CHANGE IN THE VALE OF KASHMIR 313 


existence,” which is clothed in “an aura of factuality,’ all of which implies a 
model of a singular source of religious authority. There is in this, as in other sim- 
ilarly situated definitions,*% an understanding of religion as involving an appeal 
to an ultimate that does not seem naturally to allow for variegated and equally 
legitimate sources of authority, that fails to account for the type of “And” model 
found in South Asia and, one imagines, elsewhere, as well;? and in defining 
religion in this manner, we see foreclosed any possibility that a religious tradi- 
tion might innovate or simultaneously access disparate sources of authority in 
order to recommend diverse—or even new— doctrines and/or practices, as we 
see in our premodern Indian exemplar. 

The example here studied, then, begs for novel theoretical models of reli- 
gion, ones that could attend more fundamentally or at least more explicitly 
to the capacity of religion to accommodate, indeed self-consciously to cul- 
tivate, change. To proffer as much would refocus our possible ways of read- 
ing premodern religious traditions, allowing us to identify patterns of social 
and religious change that are not defined by modern understandings of the 
same (as exemplified in Pollock's dependence on the concept of “progress” to 
measure any conceptual openness to social change in India's premodernity). 
It would also require one to cultivate a view of religion that emphasizes not 
its interest in certainty, in its capacity to memorialize particular ways of act- 
ing or models of knowing—be they models of “knowing that” or "knowing 
how”—but its interest in possibility. Cultivating such a new model (and thereby 
a new interpretation, even a new scholarly definition) of religion could, that 
is, nurture a view of religion that emphasizes its more active and dynamic, 
and malleable and practical, dimensions, the capacity of religious practitioners 
and authors themselves self-consciously to formulate systems of understand- 
ing and to stake claims where any number of claims could have possibly been 
made. 


58 For example, Durkheim's definition of religion reads as follows: “A religion is a unified sys- 
tem of beliefs and practices relative to sacred things, i.e., things set apart and forbidden— 
beliefs and practices which unite in one single moral community called a Church, all those 
who adhere to them." So too could it be said of a number of others, such as Melford Spiro's 
famed and widely accepted definition of religion as "an institution consisting of culturally 
patterned interaction with culturally postulated superhuman beings.” These and other, 
similarly-oriented definitions all, if they do not demand it, implicitly lean on the notion 
that what can be true or significant is something similar to a singular ideal, rather than 
allowing for the sorts of nuanced and contextually situated notions of what counts that 
we can find in our Indian exemplar. 

59 Ihere follow Pollock in distinguishing between the “And” model offered in South Asia and 
the "Either/Or" model articulated elsewhere. See Pollock 2006, 574—580; cf. footnote 56. 


314 NEMEC 


This would, in short, reguire one to understand religion not primarily as the 
maps of systems and symbols and practices that are charted by religious agents, 
but instead in terms of the strategies they use to sketch their maps. Those who 
have crafted religious ideas and ideals, I think, were—and are—well aware of 
the fact that religions offer changing models of action and modes of reflection 
in the context of a changing world that is perennially met with novel problems, 
begging resolution. Those of us who read and theorize their practices should, in 
turn, seek to shape our reflections on religion in a manner that allows more nat- 
urally for the innate flexibility, the freedom of possibility—of change—in idea 
and practice, with which religious agents developed and develop their models 
for action. 


Abbreviations 
A Astadhyayi of Panini 
IPK — lévarapratyabhijfiakarika of Utpaladeva 
IPKVr Īsvarapratyabhijūākārikāvrtti of Utpaladeva 
īPv  lévarapratyabhijfiavimarsini of Abhinavagupta 
iPVv Īsvarapratyabhijūāvivrtivimaršinī of Abhinavagupta 
KSTS Kashmir Series of Texts and Studies 
$D Sivadrsti of Somānanda 
$DVr — Sivadrstivrtti of Utpaladeva 
TÀ Tantrāloka of Abhinavagupta 


TAV  Tantrālokaviveka of Jayaratha 


Acknowledgements 


I would like to thank Srilata Raman and Shaman Hatley for inviting me to the 
conference in honor of Alexis Sanderson, titled “Saivism and the Tantric Tra- 
ditions,” at which I presented a shortened rendering of this essay. I also thank 
Eric Steinschneider for all he did to facilitate the running of this well-organized 
event. Prior to this, I delivered an earlier version of this essay in the Hindu Stud- 
ies Colloquium at Harvard Divinity School on February 20, 2014. I thank Anne 
Monius for the invitation to speak there and for her thoughtful and instruc- 
tive comments on my lecture. I also thank Ben Williams and James Reich for 
their comments on my lecture and for their hospitality during my time in Cam- 
bridge, MA. Finally, I thank Shaman Hatley for having read a draft copy of this 
essay and for the insightful comments and suggestions he offered in doing so. 


INNOVATION AND SOCIAL CHANGE IN THE VALE OF KASHMIR 315 


60 


Appendix A: utsarga and apavāda as Exemplified in Astādhyāyī 
(A) 3.2.1 and 3.2.3 


3.2.1. karmaņy aņ. 
3.2.3. ato nupasarge kah. 


The Pāņinian example here offered is of a general rule, or utsarga, that 
is preempted by a special rule, or apavāda, in a particular circumstance. 
The general rule is offered at Astādhyāyī (A) 3.2.1; the special rule is sub- 
seguently given at A 3.2.3. The rules here are used to generate what are 
referred to as upapadasamāsas. 

A principal purpose of the grammar, of course, is to allow one to gen- 
erate the correct form of speech by the application of a series of rules 
that build, as it were, the correct form of speech in a series of operational 
steps. The point of the present example is that the general rule, A 3.2.1, 
regularly—indeed, always—applies,®° unless the parameters of the spe- 
cial rule, A 3.2.3, apply, in which case the general rule is suspended. If the 
special conditions that trigger the special rule are not met, the general 
rule is reverted to as authoritative and is applied. 

A 3.2.1. states that the affix an is added after a verbal root (dhatoh is to 
be read into A 3.2.1 by anuvrtti, or ellipsis, from a preceding rule) when 
the object of the verb is in composition with it as an upapada. This 
yields, e.g., kumbhakara (“potter”) and nagarakara ("city-builder"); kan- 
dalava ("branch-cutter") and saralava (“reed-cutter”); and vedadhyaya 
("the learning of the Veda") and carcapatha ("the reading of Carca"). In 
each of these cases, the final “a” of each word is present because of the 
affixation of an. (The a of an is precisely this letter or aksara, while the 
n of an is a “marker,” an anubandha or it, which is dropped out in the 
derivational process and does not appear in the final form of the given 
word or words being derived, though it does serve to trigger certain rules 
and operations in the grammar, and so has a meta-function in the deriva- 
tional process.) 

On the other hand, the affix an is not allowed to be added in cases where 
the special rule found in A 3.2.3 does apply. This rule states that the affix 
ka will come after a verbal root that ends in "ā” if and only if the verbal 
root in question is not preceded by a preverb (upasarga), and only when 


Note that so much is made clear by the Kasikavrtti ad A 3.2.1, which reads in part as follows: 
sarvatra karmany upapade dhātor anpratyayo bhavati. 


316 


NEMEC 


the object of the verb is in composition with it (karmaņi here is extended 
from A 3.2.1 to the present rule by way of anuvrtti or ellipsis). Examples of 
the application of this special rule are: goda (“giver of cows”) and kambal- 
ada (“giver of a blanket”). In both of these examples, the final “a” of each 
word is present because of the affixation of ka. (The a of ka is precisely 
this aksara, while the k of ka is again a “marker” or anubandha|it that is 
dropped out in the derivational process and does not appear in the final 
form of the word being derived.) 

If we were to have been able to use the affix an instead of the affix ka in 
the present pair of examples, we would have been required to preserve the 
long a in the verbal root da, which is present in both examples (goda and 
kambalada), generating thereby the wrong forms. Using rule 3.2.1 instead 
of 3.2.3 (and thus using an instead of ka) would give us the wrong forms 
*goda and *kambalada in place of goda and kambalada. This would be 
bad! 

Similarly, in an instance where the verb employed does take an upasarga 
or preverb, we have an exception to the special rule, which prohibits the 
use of ka in place of an precisely when there is a preverb affixed to the 
verb. Thus, even when the verbal root in question ends in long ā and is 
in composition with its object as an upapada, rule 3.2.3 cannot apply. A 
pair of examples is given with the verbal root dā + sam. The apavāda rule 
(A 3.2.3) is not allowed to take effect, and therefore ka is not appended 
to the verb. Thus, we derive gosamdaya (“who ceremoniously gives a 
cow”) and vadabasamdaya (“who ceremoniously gives a vadaba horse’), 
and here the final vowel (a) of each term is the product of an and not 
ka. 

What is at stake in this last pair of examples (viz., those of gosamdaya 
and vadabasamdāya) is the status of the long vowel (a) in the verbal root 
da + sam. If the affix ka were used in the present examples, then the 
“marker” (anubandha, it) k would have triggered another rule of the gram- 
mar (A 6.4.64, see paragraph 10, below), one that deletes this long vowel. 
If this marker (k) is not in play, on the other hand, as it is not, for example, 
when the affix marked with the anubandha n is used (as in an of A 3.2.1.), 
then the rule in question that deletes the long à does not apply. 

So, to review before concluding: we here have a general rule, A 3.2.1, which 
applies generally. It is the utsarga. We have a special rule or apavada 
(A 3.2.3) that applies within what otherwise would have been the domain 
of this general rule, but which is commanded by the special rule under 
special circumstances, with the application of the special rule blocking 
the application of the general rule or utsarga. 


INNOVATION AND SOCIAL CHANGE IN THE VALE OF KASHMIR 317 


10. 


11. 


61 


How does this figure in the present example? Well, A 3.2.3 should apply 
wherever we have the reguisite special circumstances, namely whenever 
a verbal root ending in "ā” isin composition with its object as an upapada, 
as it did in the derivation of goda and kambalada. But the apavāda rule 
(A 3.2.3) does not apply in the derivations of gosamdāya and vadabasam- 
dāya, even though in both cases we have a verbal root that ends in ā and 
that is in composition with its object as an upapada. This is so, because in 
both cases the verbal root appears with a preverb (upasarga), and A 3.2.3 
specifies that it can apply only in instances when there is no preverb (it 
reads: anupasarge). 

Because the examples gosamdāya and vadabasamdaya include a verbal 
root that appears with an upasarga (the verb is da, the upasarga or pre- 
verb is sam, of course), they are no longer to be marked by ka. This is 
significant because of what k does: according to A 6.4.64 (ato lopa iti 
ca), the final ā would have been elided, the rule effecting as much either 
because it appears before an ārdhadhātuka suffix (defined at A 3.4.114) 
augmented with if, or when the affix begins (as would have been so in 
the present instance) with a vowel and has an indicatory marker (aun- 
bandha or it) of k or n (the affix a in ka begins with a vowel—a of course 
being a vowel and the first member of a single-lettered affix—this after 
taking into account that the k is a marker and not a part of the affix 
itself).6! 

Thus, in these instances A 3.2.3 does not apply. And here is the key to 
understanding the present example of utsarga and apavāda: the utsarga 
or general rule (i.e., A 3.2.1) is thus again deemed operative and auto- 
matically so, by default. This is so because it is understood always to 
apply, only excepting when an apavada overrules or suspends it. What 
this means is that there is no need to write yet another rule to account for 
the derivation in instances where the rule of exception or apavada is itself 
rendered inoperative by an exception; for upon the suspension of the 
apavada rule, the utsarga is immediately and automatically understood 
once again to apply. As such—returning now to the pair of examples here 
reviewed—the final a of gosamdaya and vadabasamdaya results from an 
being applied, not ka. One returns to the original rule by default, thus pro- 
viding for the final letter a of both gosamdaya and vadabasamdaya. And 
theanubandha n, unlike k, does not trigger A 6.4.64 and thus does not lead 


Note that the Kasikavrtti ad A 6.4.64 reads in part as follows: idādāv ārdhadhātuke kniti 
cākārāntasyāngasya lopo bhavati. 


318 NEMEC 


to the elision of ā in the verbal root dā appearing in both compounded 
words. In a word, apavādas can only be written in contexts where an 
utsarga is always otherwise operative. 


References 


Primary Sources 

Astadhyayi. See Kasikavrtti. 

Isvarapratyabhijfiakarika. Raffaele Torella, ed. The Isvarapratyabhijnakarika of Utpala- 
deva with the Author's Vrtti: Critical Edition and Annotated Translation. Rome: ISMEO, 
1994. 

Isvarapratyabhijfiakarikavrtti. See Īsvarapratyabhijūākārikā. 

Isvarapratyabhijriavimarsini. Madhusudan Kaul Shastri, ed. The Isvarapratyabhijfià of 
Utpaladeva with the Vimarsint by Abhinavagupta. KSTS 22 and 23. Pune: Arya- 
bhushan Press, 1918—1921. 

Isvarapratyabhijfiavivrtivimarsint. Madhusudan Kaul Shastri, ed. The Isvarapratyabhi- 
JĀ Vivrtivimarsint by Abhinavagupta. 3 volumes. KSTS 60, 62 and 65. Pune: Arya- 
bhushan Press, 1938, 1941, and 1943. 

Kāšikāvrtti. Swami Dwarikadas Shastri and Pt. Kalikaprasad Shukla, eds. The Kasikavrtti 
of Vamana-Jayaditya, with the Nyasa or Paricikà of Jinendrabuddhipada and the Pada- 
mafijart of Haradatta Misra. 6 vols. Prachya Bharati Series 2—7. Varanasi: Pracya 
Bharati Prakashan, 1965. 

Tantrāloka. Pandit Mukund Ram Shaāstrī (vol. 1) and Pandit Madhusudan Kaul Shāstrī 
(vols. 2-12), eds. The Tantrāloka of Abhinava Gupta, With Commentary by Rajanaka 
Jayaratha. 12 vols. KSTS 23, 38, 30, 36, 35, 29, 41, 47, 59, 52, 57 and 58. Allahabad: 
The Indian Press Ltd. (vols. 1, 5-6); Bombay: Nirnaya Sagar Press (vols. 7, 10-12), 
Tatva-Vivechaka Press (vols. 3-4, 8-9), and Shri Venkateshvar Steam Press (vol. 2), 
1921-1938. 

Tantrālokaviveka. See Tantrāloka. 

Mahabhasya. F. Kielhorn, ed. [1880—1885], revised by K.V. Abhyankar (1972—1996). Vyā- 
karana-Mahabhasya of Pataīijali. 3 vols. Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, 
Poona, 1996—2005. 

Šivadrsti. John Nemec, ed. The Ubiquitous Siva: Somānandas Sivadrsti and His Tantric 
Interlocutors. New York: Oxford University Press, 20n. 

Sivadrsti. Madhusudan Kaul Shastri, ed. The Sivadrsti of Somanandanatha with the Vrtti 
by Utpaladeva. KSTS 54. Pune: Aryabhushan Press, 1934. 


Šivadrstivrtti. See Sivadrsti. 


INNOVATION AND SOCIAL CHANGE IN THE VALE OF KASHMIR 319 


Secondary Sources 

Dyczkowski, Mark. 1987. The Doctrine of Vibration: An Analysis of the Doctrines and 
Practices of Kashmir Shaivism. State University of New York Series in the Shaiva Tra- 
ditions of Kashmir. Albany: State University of New York Press. 

Edelmann, Jonathan. 2014. “Introduction: Innovation in Hindu Traditions.” Special 
issue: Innovation in Hindu Traditions. International Journal of Hindu Studies 18 (2): 
113-118. 

Geertz, Clifford. 1973. “Religion as a Cultural System.” In The Interpretation of Cultures: 
Selected Essays. New York: Basic Book. 

Macdonell, A.A. [1900] 1962. A History of Sanskrit Literature. Reprint, Delhi: Motilal 
Banarsidass. 

Mohanty, J.N. 2010. A Dictionary of Cultural and Critical Theory, edited by Michall Payne 
and Jessical Rae Barbera. Second Edition. Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell. 

Monier-Williams, M. 1891. Brahmanism and Hinduism; Or, Religious Thought and Life in 
India, As Based on the Veda and Other Sacred Books of the Hindus. 4th edition. New 
York: Macmillan and Co. 

Nemec, John. 2011. The Ubiquitous Siva: Somānandas Sivadrsti and his Tantric Interlocu- 
tors. New York: Oxford University Press. 

Nemec, John. 2013. “On the Structure and Contents of the Tridasadamaratantra, A 
Kaula Scriptural Source of the Northern Transmission.” Journal of Hindu Studies 6 
(3): 297-316. 

Nemec, John. “Kashmir.” 2015. Oxford Bibliographies: Hinduism, edited by Alf Hiltebei- 
tel. New York: Oxford University Press. October 26, 2015. doi: 10.1093/OBO/97801953 
99318-0156 

Pollock, Sheldon. 1985. “The Theory of Practice and the Practice of Theory in Indian 
Intellectual History” Journal of the American Oriental Society 105 (3): 499—519. 

Pollock, Sheldon. 1989. "Mīmāmsā and the Problem of History in Traditional India” 
Journal of the American Oriental Society 109 (4): 603—610. 

Pollock, Sheldon. 1993. "Deep Orientalism? Notes on Sanskrit and Power Beyond the 
Raj.” In Orientalism and the Postcolonial Predicament, edited by Carol Brecken- 
ridge and Peter van der Veer, 76-133. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania 
Press. 

Pollock, Sheldon. 2006. The Language of the Gods in the World of Men: Sanskrit, Culture 
and Power in Premodern India. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California 
Press. 

Ratié, Isabelle. 2011. Le Soi et l'Autre: Identité, différence et altérité dans la philoso- 
phie de la Pratyabhijītā. Jerusalem Studies in Religion and Culture, vol. 13. Leiden: 
Brill. 

Sanderson, Alexis. 2005. “A Commentary on the Opening Verses of the Tantrasara 
of Abhinavagupta.” In Samarasya: Studies in Indian Arts, Philosophy and Interreli- 


320 NEMEC 


gious Dialogue, edited by Sadananda Das and Ernst Fürlinger, 89-148. New Delhi: 
D.K. Printworld. 

Smith, David. 1985. Ratnākara's Haravijaya: An Introduction to the Sanskrit Court Epic. 
Delhi: Oxford University Press. 


CHAPTER 13 


Toward a History of the Navarātra, the Autumnal 
Festival of the Goddess 


Bihani Sarkar 


In this essay, I wish to address the problems a historian encounters while 
explaining the function and origin of ancient rituals. One is particularly con- 
fronted by these problems when dealing with a ritual such as the Navarātra. 
With regard to its function, the festival resists sharp distinctions between the 
sacred and the temporal because it simultaneously propitiates a deity and sol- 
emnizes the authority of a ruler. It seems to be two things at the same time: 
a rite of religious power and a rite of political power. In fact, in the South- 
ern Navaratra, for instance as celebrated in Vijayanagara, the worship of the 
Goddess would take place largely out of view in a private shrine, while all the 
individual rites of the festival appeared to publicly celebrate a cult of the king in 
the larger communal area: the Navaratra thus appeared, as it did to Portuguese 
and Persian visitors to the Vijayanagara court, to be a political festival with 
a minor religious dimension.! While explaining its origins, we run into even 
greater difficulty as the earliest traces of the Navaratra are found in more than 
one distinctive religious tradition: the Vaisnava, the Šaiva, the Purāņic and even 
possibly in regional traditions of communities outside mainstream 'Hindu' tra- 
ditions. Where it truly “originates” is therefore difficult to see, though for clar- 
ity's sake I have proposed here that the Vaisnava domain was where a mature, 
theologically coherent? conception of the rite evolved. On the whole the ritual 
appears to have been of a composite character at each stage of its manifesta- 
tion. The overall impression is that we are looking at many permutations of dif- 
ferent rites with different origins that attached themselves around the central 
figure of the Goddess, and through her, and the demon-slaying mythologies sur- 
rounding her, acquired a structural and thematic unity. In the following, I shall 


1 Stein 1983, 78, 80, Sarkar 2017, 211-212, 261. Similarly, Abbe Dubois, a visitor to the Mysore 
Navaratra in the early nineteenth century, described it as a “soldier's feast,’ and as “entirely 
military” (Kinsley 1988, 106). 

2 For instance the conception of Maya that we find in earlier speculative traditions on cos- 
mogony was added to the overall presentation of the goddess. 


© BIHANI SARKAR, 2020 | DOI:10.1163/9789004432802_015 


This is an open access chapter distributed under the terms of the CC BY-NC 4.0 license. 


322 SARKAR 


present and probe these ambiguities of function and origin through a scheme 
of the richly varied regional traditions of the Navaratra that emerged in the 
course of its history. 

Navaratra, the autumnal festival of the warrior goddess Candika, is today 
one of the most eagerly anticipated events of the Hindu calendar. Built up over 
nine lunar days and culminating on a tenth, the festival fulfills several, appar- 
ently disparate, purposes: it offers obligatory worship to the Goddess, without 
which her wrath could become implacable (so legends warn in dire tones); 
wards away omens from—and thereby symbolically cleanses and renews—a 
community of people; and bestows the ritual stamp of victory on the mili- 
tary forces of a kingdom. What is particularly noteworthy even in the mod- 
ern ceremony is the symbolic connection between the political, the martial, 
and the religious, manifested by a priest through a sequence of meaningfully 
choreographed rites and staged within a lavishly ornamented arena of worship 
publicly open to all. Facilitating this connection is the Goddess herself, who 
intertwines in her being an image of secular rulership and transcendent, or 
spiritual, sovereignty. Little, though, is understood about the historical reasons 
for the culmination of this overlap in the figure of Durga and its ritualized real- 
ization in the ceremony of the Navaratra. Doubtless, the Navaratra, given that it 
was dedicated to a war-goddess, played a significant role in preparations under- 
taken by a medieval kingdom to wage war, and furthermore, to affirm social 
structure, as notable studies in the past by Alexis Sanderson (2007, 195-311), 
Shingo Einoo (1999, 33-70) and Ralph Nicholas (2013) have shown. The sea- 
son of autumn, which in many cultural traditions, and also in classical India, 
was when armed campaigns would take place, must also have formed a rea- 
son for the presence of military rituals such as the lustration of weapons and 
war-animals during Durga’s Navaratra: following the monsoon, during which 
it is notoriously difficult to make journeys, the autumn, when the skies are 
clear and the weather cooler, formed the perfect season to venture forth on 
campaign. Doubtless there must also have been an association between social 
governance, its urban political locus, and the Goddess, as there is in the modern 
ceremony. But when did the autumnal festival acquire such a role in sanctify- 
ing heroic endeavor, and in affirming roles and functions dispersed within the 
social organization? For in many Navarātras certain groups and lineages were 
traditionally associated with particular rituals: for example the priest’s duty, the 


3 Dominic Goodall drew my attention to this point, while noting examples from the Raghu- 
vamsa, chapter 4, and Cambodian inscriptions; see Goodall 2014, 187—188. 


TOWARD A HISTORY OF THE NAVARĀTRA 323 


cutting of the head of the animal, the making of the effigy, or the provision 
of virgin girls for worship, etc. This still remains at the forefront of any basic 
inquiry into the nature of this ritual. 

However, answering this question presents certain methodological compli- 
cations. Literature (primarily in Sanskrit) indicates that during the period the 
festival developed and was popularized throughout South Asia, viz. the 5th 
to 12th centuries CE, it grew into a locally diverse tradition. At present these 
regional traditions seem on the surface to be but tenuously interrelated, and 
in their diversity forestall our entertaining the possibility of there having been 
common templates of origination. 

Apart from the Navaratra’s multiplicity of form, other factors have pre- 
vented, it would seem, a full history of the festival from being undertaken— 
apart from, it is important to note, Einoo’s (1999) pioneering study, “The 
Autumn Goddess Festival Described in the Puranas.” These factors are as fol- 
lows: difficulty in interpreting and evaluating sources; confusion prompted by 
the presence of non-Brahmanical rituals within an outwardly Puranic-Brah- 
manic ritual framework; and ambivalence in status because of the important 
roles played by people outside the caste-system in the ritual sequence. How- 
ever, these difficulties, confusions and ambivalences are not insuperable, and 
do in fact point to an important characteristic of the ritual: that its position 
within either the Brahmanical or the non-Brahmanical realms was never very 
clear. Both sides claimed certain aspects of the ritual as theirs, and in fact 
operated in tandem within its domain. A political synergy between different 
power-groups was effected through the course of the festival, as indeed has 
been recently shown by Nicholas (2013) and which will grow even more evi- 
dent through surveying the different traditions. 

However, if we look at a wide range of ritual descriptions in Sanskrit con- 
tained in Puranas for which the conjectured dates seem reliable, in their reused 
forms in Dharmašāstric compendia (nibandhas) and in ritual manuals (pad- 
dhatis), together with ethnographic accounts of ceremonies, where available, a 
historical pattern begins to emerge. The full analysis of that pattern is treated in 
my recent book, Heroic Shaktism: the Cult of Durga in Ancient Indian Kingship, 
including texts and translations from the relevant ritual descriptions.* Since it 
may also be useful to offer a succinct overview of the historical pattern, here 
I offer a condensed summary of that larger narrative, presented in schematic 
form below. I also take the opportunity here to include three very early sources 
that I did not have the opportunity to consider for the arguments made in 


4 Sarkar 2017, 210—274. 


324 SARKAR 


my book: the Southern Cilapattikāram,* and two passages from the Mahab- 
hārata andthe Kādambarī. These offer fresh insights into—if not the Navarātra 
proper—the ritual background of the Goddess: her worshippers, their prove- 
nance and the purpose for which she may have been worshipped prior to the 
development of the liturgical materials on the Navarātra. The consideration of 
the Southern material in particular leads to re-conceiving the historical devel- 
opment of the Goddess's worship south of the Vindhya mountains. In the book, 
Ihad suggested that 


The Deccan seems to have followed in the wake of the eastern form of the 
Navaratra outlined in the Devī[purāņa] and the Kālikāļpurāņa] until at 
least the early half of the 14th century [on the basis of passages from those 
works appearing in Deccan Dharmašāstric nibandha-literature] ... The 
gradual independence of the southern tradition and its advocacy by the 
15th century of a Navaratra that was qualitatively different from the east- 
ern tradition in that it celebrated Dasami differently and eschewed rites 
that were Tantric in their tone are attested by the eyewitness accounts of 
the Navaratras of the Vijayanagara kingdom, of Mysore under the Wode- 
yars, of Ramnad and Sivagangai in Tamil Nadu. 


SARKAR 2017, 258—259 


On the other hand, the Cilapattikaram suggests that already in the early cen- 
turies of the common era, a local form of worshipping the Goddess for power 
in battle, like the Navarātra, was celebrated in the Tamil country, and that this 
included possession, trance and bacchanalia. On this basis, itis possible to sug- 
gest, first, that long before descriptions of Durgā's worship appeared in mate- 
rials of an Eastern provenance, she was popular in the south and, second, that 
the direction of liturgical influence could have been the other way: the ritual 
of bacchanalian enjoyment offered to a goddess of battle could have entered 
into Eastern liturgies, in which they occupy a prominent place, from Southern 
prototypes. Moreover, all three textual examples are magnificently composed, 
and exemplify all that is most vivid and energetic in poetry about the Goddess. 

In some of our earliest sources, the rite did not begin in autumnal A$vina, the 
month usually associated with the Navaratra. Rather it began in the monsoon 
month of Sravana, and prior to that seems to have been a popular festival cel- 
ebrated by everyone regardless of sectarian affiliation. It then came to replace 
amore established set of Brahmanical military traditions (such as the worship 


5 Thearguments made about this Southern work are hindered by my lack of knowing Classical 
Tamil. The reader is asked to treat them as preliminary and to refer to the original source. 


TOWARD A HISTORY OF THE NAVARĀTRA 325 


of weapons and the lustration of the army) practised in A$vina. Once these 
Vedic royal traditions were harmonized with the worship of the Goddess, they 
altered in character to become a goddess-centred heroic tradition, in which 
sanguinary rites to calm down Durga's fiery nature began to dominate. But fur- 
ther alterations in the character of the ritual followed, as it was incorporated by 
other religious “specialisms.” One of the most critical transformations to have 
occurred in the structure of the Navarātra is the appearance of Tantric rituals in 
descriptions of the rite emerging from East India, notably from Orissa and the 
kingdom of Mithila. Compared to the military festival of the earlier Vaisnava 
and then the Vedicized formats, these rituals amplify the power-bestowing effi- 
cacity of the ritual by including rituals that grant siddhis (powers). Moreover, 
there is no single goddess, but many, and of many forms, names and natures. 
In literature from Mithila, the rite expands to nine days to include, apart from 
the worship of nine forms of Durga of different colours, an array of Tantri- 
cized rituals such as the purification of elements (bhutasuddhi), the worship 
of the sixty-four yoginis, the installation of mantras in the body (nyasa), self- 
identification with the deity (a ritual that, although also found in pre-tantric 
materials, came to be associated with tantric practice®), rites bestowing pow- 
ers (siddhi) held at midnight, and the heightening of the Goddess's personality 
so that her ferocious properties are thought to take over. She is invoked as Kali- 
Lauhadanda (Kali, goddess of the iron rod) in mantras in the mediaeval Bengali 
rite. In the Maithila rite she is even summoned as Camunda into a bel branch, 
which is then worshipped as the vehicle of her essence throughout the dura- 
tion of the worship. In Orissa, as shown by Sanderson (2007), mantra elements 
from the Kashmirian Kalikula were incorporated into the Mahanavami tradi- 
tions of Bhadrakali. The effect of this Tantricization was the enhancement of 
the power-bestowing agency of the ritual, desirable no doubt for rulers eager 
to achieve victory in the battles they were about to undertake. 

The sources in which the above ritual patterns are described are as follows 
(the specific references with emended Sanskrit texts and analyses are to be 
found in the locus indicated in the accompanying footnotes): 


1. Early Vaisnava phase in the monsoon’ 

Harivamša 57.35—36; Mahabharata 4.5.29 ff. and 6.22.6 ff., old Skandapu- 
rana 60.46; Kadambari pp. 30-31; Harsacarita p. 126; Candisataka 16; 
Gaiidavaho 318, 319, Purāņic citations in Dharmašāstric compendia from 
Mithilā and Bengal. 


6 Goodall et al. 2005, 13, note 5. 
7 Sarkar 2017, 214—221. 


326 


TABLE 13.1 


Developmental phases of the Navarātra 


SARKAR 


I. circa 4th century 
CE: Early Vaisnava 
Phase in the mon- 
soon 


II. circa 5th century 
CE: Incorporation 
with a pre-existing 
Brahmanical military 
festival in A$vina 


III. circa 8th century CE: 
Expansion and inclusion of 
Tantric power-rituals in East- 
ern Court Traditions, notably 
in the kingdom of Mithila? 


IV. circa 14th century CE: The 
Southern and Western Court 
Traditions of the Kingdoms 

of Devagiri and Vijayanagara 


Worship of Krsna's 
sister Kalara- 
tri/Nidrā, a dark, 
blood-thirsty, 
alcohol-loving 
goddess associ- 
ated with night, 
sleep, hallucination 
and enchantment 


(maya) 


Buffalo-sacrifice by 
a ruler to propitiate 
the Goddess before 
the onset of battle 


Incorporation of 
outcaste groups 
referred to in San- 
skrit literature as 
"Sabaras" 


Association with 
the Vindhya moun- 
tain 


Rites of self- 
mortification to 
be performed by 
heroes to demon- 
strate their valour 


Worship of Bhadra- 
kali is attached to a 
pre-existent strata of 
brahmanical rituals 
of kingship advocated 
in Vedic literature. 
(Brhatsamhità 43; 
Kāthakagrhyasūtra 
574 and Arthašāstra 
2.30.519) 


Celebrated on 

the Eighth and 
Ninth lunar days 
(Mahāstamī and 
Mahānavamī) of the 
bright half of Agvina 


Worship of the God- 
dess ina cloth in a 
shrine built in the 
north-eastern part of 
a military encamp- 
ment 


Worship of weapons 
with flowers, perfume 
and food, adapted 
from the pre-existing 
Vedic model of mili- 
tary festivities. 


Appearance of a ten day 
structure spread out over 
the First lunar day (Prati- 
pat) to the Tenth lunar day 
(Vijayadasami) in the bright 
phase of Agvina 


recitation of the Devimahat- 
mya (candipatha) 


The first seven days involve: 
kalašapūjā (worship of deities 
including the goddess, the 
Mothers and waters from 

the sacred fords in a vase); a 
king bathing in the sanctified 
waters from the kalašapūjā; 
fasting, worshiping Siva thrice 
daily, animal sacrifice (pasub- 
ali); daily worship of the royal 
horses; fire oblations and feed- 
ing a maiden 


The sixth (Sasthi) and the sev- 
enth (Saptamī) lunar days 
involve awakening the goddess 
in a bilva tree (bodhana), wor- 
ship of goddess as Camunda 
and Kali in the branch, sum- 
moning her nine radiations 

in nine leaves (navapatra- 
pūjālpatrikāpūjā), 


On Pratipat: King enthroned 
and given an amulet empow- 
ered by the goddess's mantra; 
vow of fasting and abstinence 
to be undertaken by him; 
king’s sword and sceptre cer- 
emonially presented to him 
and placed at the base of the 
lineage goddess's image; sum- 
moning of the goddess in the 
person of the king 


King worships Durga, Laksmi 
and Vagdevi in lidded pots 

in a flower pavilion (puspa- 
maņdapam) specially built 

to worship the goddess and 
the king; worship of the king's 
thirty two weapons (lohab- 
hisārikapūjā), worship of the 
royal insignia, worship of the 
royal horses and elephants; 
court assembly at the pus- 
pamaņdapa; king travels in 
pomp to an assembly hall 
(āsthānamaņdapa) built for 
the festival at which a dur- 
bar is held; public display of 
goddess’s image next to the 
enthroned king; spectacles in 
front of the dsthanamandapa 


8 The Nepalese Tradition, though deriving in the main from the Maithila tradition as embod- 
ied in the Karnata royal ceremony of the Krtyaratnakara and Durgabhaktitarangini, is much 
more Tantric in character, involving mantra elements from the Kubjika cult. 

9 Allthree are cited in Sanderson 2005, 229-300. It was Professor Sanderson who pointed out 
the existence and relevance of this archaic military stratum of rituals to me (personal com- 
munication). 


TOWARD A HISTORY OF THE NAVARĀTRA 


TABLE 13.1 


Developmental phases of the Navarātra (cont.) 


327 


I. circa 4th century 
CE: Early Vaisnava 
Phase in the mon- 
soon 


II. circa 5th century 
CE: Incorporation 
with a pre-existing 
Brahmanical military 
festival in A$vina 


III. circa 8th century CE: 
Expansion and inclusion of 
Tantric power-rituals in East- 
ern Court Traditions, notably 
in the kingdom of Mithila 


IV. circa 14th century CE: The 
Southern and Western Court 
Traditions of the Kingdoms 

of Devagiri and Vijayanagara 


Celebrated on the 
Ninth lunar day of 
the dark half of Sra- 
vana, the day after 
Janmastami 


Possession and bac- 
chanalia involving 
dancing and the 
singing of hymns 
(suggested by the 
Cilapattikaram) 


Staged entertainment 
of the Goddess 


Kings to keep a night- 
vigil on Mahastami 
night and main- 

tain a fast for victory 
(Sauryavrata) 


Worship repeated on 
Mahanavami followed 
by a parade 


Buffalo-sacrifice 
Festival performed 


for the sake of victory 
and pacification 


enlivening an unfired 
clay image of the goddess 
(prāņapratisthā) 


Nine wooden shrines to be 
built on the Eighth lunar day 
(Mahastami), and the goddess 
is to be installed in a gold or 
silver image, in a sword or ina 
trident; worship involves char- 
iot and palanquin processions 


On Mahastami: worship of 
the Nine Durgas (Rudracanda, 
Pracanda, Candogra, Can- 
danayika, Canda, Candavati, 
Candarüpa, Aticandika, Ugra- 
canda), the eight mothers, 
the sixty-four yoginīs, purifi- 
cation of the gross elements 
(bhütasuddhi), installation of 
mantras on the body (nyasa); 
restraining the breaths 
(prāņāyāma); visualization 
and self-identification with 
the deity, rite of the sword 
(khadgapūjā) in Nepal for 
powers (siddhis); pasubali 
(animal sacrifice) and offer- 
ing blood from a king’s arms 
and naraširahpradāna (offer- 
ing a human head); worship 
of weapons (astrapuja/sas- 
trapuja); goddess is believed 
to morph into a more uncon- 
trollable presence requiring 
constant placation 


From Pratipat to Navami: 
daily worship by the king of 
nine maidens (kumārīpūjā) 
as nine goddesses, Kumari, 
Trimūrti/Trimurtinī, Kalyani, 
Rohini, Kalika, Candika, 
Sambhavi, Durga, Bhadra 


Worship repeated till Navami 


On Navami: fire oblation to 
the goddess (candihoma); 
pašubali, 

king removes the amulet 


On Vijayadašamī: worship 
of a Sami tree according to a 
tradition attributed to the 
Gopathabrahmana; king 
given weapons including 
five arrows by the priest; king 
goes to the sami in pomp 
with his army; shooting 

of arrows in every direc- 
tion to destroy enemies; 
evening court assembly at 
the asthanamandapa 


328 SARKAR 


TABLE 13.1 Developmental phases of the Navarātra (cont.) 


I. circa 4th century 11. circa 5th century 111. circa 8th century CE: IV. circa 14th century CE: The 
CE: Early Vaisnava CE: Incorporation Expansion and inclusion of Southern and Western Court 
Phase in the mon- with a pre-existing ^ Tantric power-rituals in East- Traditions of the Kingdoms 
soon Brahmanical military ern Court Traditions, notably of Devagiri and Vijayanagara 
festival in Agvina in the kingdom of Mithila 
Blood sacrifice to pacify 


demons in various direc- 
tions and the sacrifice of a 
dough image of the king’s 
enemy (satrubali) for “uni- 
versal power” (sarvavašyatā) 
to take place at midnight 
(ardharātrapūjā), when 

the asterism Kanyā (Virgo) 
joins astamī; navadurgāpūjā 
again 


On Mahānavamī: worship 

of Bhadrakālī with mantras 
from the Kālīkula in Orissa 
(Sanderson 2007, 255—295); 
worship of the Goddess in a 
trident; repetition of rites on 
Mahāstamī; kumārīpūjā (wor- 
ship of a maiden); rathayātrā 
(chariot procession) of the 
Goddess 


On Dašamī: worship of god- 
dess Aparājitā; šābarotsava; 
royal consecration (abhiseka) 
of king with empowered water 
from the opening kalasa- 


pūjā 


11. Incorporation with a Brahmanical military festival in A$vina!? 
Visnudharmottarapurana 2.158.6cd—7, Agnipurāņa 267.13cd-16ab (re- 
peating Visnudharmottara); Varāhapurāņa cited in the Krtyaratnākara, 
PP. 364—365. 


10 Ibid., 221-226. 


TOWARD A HISTORY OF THE NAVARĀTRA 329 


III. Expansion and inclusion of Tantric power-rituals in Eastern Court 
Traditions" 

Devipurana, Kalikapurana, Krtyakalpataru, Durgabhaktitarangint, Dur- 
gāpūjātattva, Durgāpūjāviveka, Bhadrakālīmantravidhiprakaraņa in San- 
derson (2007); account of the Durgā Pūjā in Kelomal, West Bengal (Nich- 
olas 2013). 


IV. The Southern and Western Court Traditions!” 

Caturvargacintamani, Sāmrājyalaksmīpīthikā, Purusarthacintamani, ac- 
counts of ceremonies in Sivagangai and Ramnad, Tamil Nadu (Price 
1996), Portuguese traveller accounts from the Vijayanagara Empire (Stein 
1983). 


To the above sources, I would like to add a passage from the Mahabharata 
(first noticed and pointed out to me by Sahisnu Bhattacarya, Bardhaman, West 
Bengal in a personal communication), whose importance in regard to the wor- 
ship of Nidra, Durga’s early form, requires emphasis. This passage appears in 
the Sauptikaparvan (Mahabharata X, 8.64—68) and suggests that the Vaisnava 
Nidra, goddess of Sleep and Death, presided over and blessed battle as a dan- 
gerous spirit (krtyā). Called Kalaratri, identified with apocalyptic destruction, 
adorned with a peacock feather (sikhandinim) that evokes her alliance with 
her brother Krsna, as prevalent in this period, she manifests herself when 
Asvatthaman, the son of Drona, secretly enters the Pandava camp and goes on 
a murderous rampage. Hers is a strange, menacing apparition: 


kālīm raktasyanayanam raktamalyanulepanam | 
raktambaradharam ekām pasahastam sikhandinim || 
dadrsuh kālarātrim te smayamanam avasthitām | 
narasvakunjaran pāšair baddhvā ghoraih pratasthusim || 
harantīm vividhān pretān pasabaddhan vimūrdhajān || 
svapne suptān nayantīm tām rātrisv anyāsu marisa | 
dadršur yodhamukhyās te ghnantam drauņim ca nityadā || 
yatah pravrttah samgramah kurupandavasenayoh | 

tatah prabhrti tām krtyam apasyan draunim eva ca || 


11 Ibid., 226-258. 

12 Ibid., 258-270. 

13 See Couture and Schmid 2001, Schmid 2002, Yokochi 2004 and Sarkar 2017, 41-69, for the 
incorporation of Durga in Vaisnava traditions. 


330 SARKAR 


tams tu daivahatān pūrvam pašcād draunir nyapātayat | 
trāsayan sarvabhūtāni vinadan bhairavān ravān || 
Mahābhārata X, 8.64—68 


Good sir, they saw her, Kālarātri, standing, smiling, alone, blue-black in 
hue, with red mouth and eyes, garlands and unguents of crimson, red 
robes, a noose in one hand, a peacock feather [in her hair], binding men, 
horses and elephants with her horrifying fetters while she stood, captur- 
ing many headless ghosts trapped in her noose, leading those asleep in 
their dreams to other Nights (rātrisv!* anyāsu). And at all times the best 
soldiers saw the son of Drona slaughtering, From the time when the battle 
between the Kuru and Pandava armies began, they saw [both] that evil 
spirit (tam krtyam) and the son of Drona. The son of Drona later felled 
those who had first been struck by this divinity [Kalaratri], terrorizing all 
creatures while shouting out ferocious bellows. 


Towering over the nightmarish battlefield, a grinning image of Death, Kalaratri 
governs both sleep and death, ensuring the interceptor certain triumph during 
his secret raid. 

The Tantricization of Durga’s worship must have been well established by 
700 CE, by which time it must have already been correlated with worship of 
Siva, rather than Visnu. Such is the impression created by a minutely detailed 
description of Durga's shrine and her worshipper in Bāņas Kādambarī 
(pp. 224-22815). On his way from Hemakūta to Ujjayini, the hero of the work, 
Candrapida, stops for shelter at a shrine of the Goddess that comes midway. 
The shrine is nestled in the midst of a densely wooded forest, and the narrative, 
through a telescoping of perspective from outside to inside the shrine, provides 
a leisurely description of its design, appearance and atmosphere. From afar 
Candrapida first sees a “crimson ensign,’ "inscribing the sky with a gold trident, 
from which swung a terrifying bell making a raucous clanging (ghargharar- 
ava) that dangled down from an iron chain attached to the tip, arranged with a 
yak-tail whisk as splendid as a lion's mane" (dolayitasrnigasangilohasrnkhala- 
valambamānagharghararavaghoraghaņtayā ca ghatitakesarisataruciracama- 
raya kancanatrisilikaya likhitanabhahsthalam ... raktadhvajam; p. 224). Going 
ahead a little, he then sees that the Goddess Candika *was enclosed by a 
door made from the ivory of wild elephants, as yellowish-white as fragments 


14 This appears to be a play with Rātri, another name for this goddess. 
15 Allreferences to the Kadambari in this paragraph are from Peterson's edition of 1889. 


TOWARD A HISTORY OF THE NAVARĀTRA 331 


of ketakī filaments, and an iron architrave (toraņa) bearing an ornamental 
garland of black iron mirrors surrounded by a row of red yak tail whisks 
resembling a garland of Sabara heads horrific with tawny hair” (ketakīsūcikha- 
ndapandurena vanadviradadantakapātena parivrtam lohatoranena ca raktaca- 
maraparikarām kālāyasadarpaņamaņdamālām sabaramukhamalam iva kapi- 
lakesabhisanam bibhranena ... candikam; pp. 224—228). Then he notices the 
dvarapala (guardian of the gate), about which it is said that “[Candika] had 
protected her entrance with an iron buffalo installed in front, which, because of 
the fact that it had been marked by palms [dyed with] red-sandalwood, seemed 
to have been stamped by Yama’s hand-prints red with blood, the red eyes of 
which were being licked by jackals greedy for drops of blood” (sanathikrta- 
dvāradešām abhimukhapratisthena ca vinihitaraktacandanahastakatayā rud- 
hirarunayamakaratalasphaliteneva sonitalavalobhalolasivalihyamanalohitalo- 
canena lohamahisena; Kādambarī, p. 224). Then through the main entrance, 
the temple yard: “Her courtyard was adorned with thickets of red agoka trees, 
the spaces between the branches of which were made gapless by flocks of 
perching red cockerels, [trees] which appeared to reveal unseasonal clusters 
of blooms in their fear" (sakhantaralanirantaranilinaraktakukkutakulais ca 
bhayād akaladarsitakusumastabakair iva raktasokavitapair vibhüsitanganam; 
p. 225). (More in fact is said about the overflowing mass of flowers, trees and 
even lion cubs that populate her front courtyard, slippery with blood.) Then 
the portal to the sanctum sanctorum, a riot of colour and form: "She was being 
illuminated by the entrance, on which there were hanging cloths reddened by 
lamp-smoke, a row of bracelets made of peacock-throats festooned [over it], 
a garland of bells closely-set and pale with powdered flour-cakes, which sup- 
ported two door-panels, [studded] with tin lion heads with thick, iron pins in 
their centres, barricaded with an ivory-rod bolt, carrying [what seemed to be] 
a necklace of sparkling bubbles that were mirrors oozing yellow, blue and red 
[light]” (avalambamānadīpadhūmaraktāmšukena grathitasikhigalavalayava- 
lina pistapiņdapāņduritaghanaghaņtāmālabhāriņā trāpusasimhamukhama- 
dhyasthitathūlalohakaņtakam dattadantadandargalam galatpītanīlalohitadar- 
panasphuritabudbudamālam kapātapattadvayam dadhānena garbhagrhadvā- 
radešena dīpyamānām; ibid.). 

Then follows the image of the Goddess, which in its association with the 
terrible, and in the predominance of the colour red, matches the concep- 
tion of Kālarātri in the passage from the Mahābhārata: "She was installed on 
an altar of black stone” (adhyāsitārijanašilāvedikām, Kādambarī, p. 224). "Her 
feet were never bereft of cloths [dyed with] red lac thrown upon the mound 
of her seat [on the altar] as if they were the lives of all creatures arrived 
there for shelter; she resembled an inhabitant of the Underworld because of 


332 SARKAR 


the intense darkness obstructed [only] by the flashes from axes, spears, etc., 
weapons deadly for beings, that seemed to hold nets of hair stuck from decap- 
itations because of the reflections of black yak-tail whisks cast [upon their 
surfaces]; she was adorned in garlands of bilva leaves furnished with gleam- 
ing fruits and buds anointed with red sandalwood, that were like hanging gar- 
lands of infant-heads; she expressed cruelty with limbs worshipped with clus- 
ters of kadamba flowers ruddy with blood, which horripilated, it seemed, at 
the thrill of the flavour of the keen roar of drums during the animal-offering; 
she bore the coquettish apparel of a woman going out to meet Mahakala at 
night, with a vine-like body furnished with a raiment reddened with saffron- 
dye, with a face with red eyes, whose brows were furrowed into a frown, 
whose lip was crimsoned with betel that was blood, whose cheeks were red- 
dened by the light shed from ear-ornaments of pomegranate flowers, with 
a forehead on which there was a tilaka dot of vermillion made by a Sabara 
beauty, covered by a magnificent gold turban (cāmīkarapatta). She was wor- 
shipped by goats ... mice... antelope and black serpents ... She was praised on 
all sides by flocks of old crows.” (pindikapithapatibhis ca sarvapašujīvitair iva 
šaraņam upagatair alaktakapatair avirahitacaranamülam patitakrsnacamara- 
pratibimbānām ca širašchedalagnakešajālakānām iva parašupattišaprabhrtī- 
nām jtvavisasanasastranam prabhābhir baddhabahalandhakarataya pātālani- 
vāsinī, ivopalaksyamanam raktacandanakhacitasphuratphalapallavakalitais ca 
bilvapattradāmabhir bālakamuņdaprālambair iva krtamaņdanām šoņitatā- 
mrakadambastabakakrtarcanais ca pašūpahārapatahapaturatitarasollasitaro- 
māūcair ivangaih krūratām udvahantim carucamikarapattapravrtena ca lalā- 
tena šabarasundarīracitasindūratilakabindunā dadimakusumakarnapurapra- 
bhasekalohitayamanakapolabhittina rudhiratambülarunitadharaputena bhr- 
kutikutilabhruņā raktanayanena mukhena kusumbhapatalitadukülakalitayà ca 
dehalataya mahakalabhisarikavesavibhramam bibhratum ... chagair ... ākhubhir 
... kurangair ... krsnasarpair ... aradhyamanam sarvatah kathoravayasaganena 
... Sttyamünam; pp. 225-226). 

A Dravida ascetic, portrayed as a comical figure, is said to be her priest; per- 
haps Bāņa was conscious in making the priest a Dravida, on account of the 
widespread worship of the goddess Korravai, later correlated with Durga, in 
the South? There are apparently several Tantric rites that Bana pejoratively as- 
sociates with the priest: he, “the ageing Dravida religious man" “demeans Durga 
with his prayers for the boon of sovereignty over the Southern lands" (dak- 
sinapatharajyavaraprarthanákadarthitadurgena ... jaraddravidadhārmikeņa; 
p. 226); “he had copied a hymn to Durga on a strip of cloth” (pattikalikhitadur- 
gastotrena; ibid), “he had collected palm-leaf manuscripts of spells, Tantras 
and jugglery the letters of which were written in red lac and fumigated with 


TOWARD A HISTORY OF THE NAVARĀTRA 333 


smoke" (dhumaraktalakaksaratalapattrakuhakatantramantrapustikasamgra- 
hina; ibid); "he had written down the [work known as ] the ‘Doctrine of Maha- 
kala’ instructed to him by a withered Mahapasupata mendicant” ( jirnamaha- 
pāšupatopadešalikhitamahākālamatena, pp. 226—227); "he was one in whom 
the disease of talking about [finding] treasure had arisen" (avirbhutanidhiva- 
davyādhinā, p. 227); "in him the wind [disease] of alchemy had grown" (sam- 
jātadhātuvādavāyunā, ibid.); "he entertained the deluded desire of becoming 
the lover of a Yaksa maiden" (pravrttayaksakanyakakamitvamanorathavyamo- 
hena, ibid.); *his collection of practices for mastering mantras for invisibil- 
ity had grown" (vardhitantardhanamantrasadhanasamgrahena, ibid.); "he was 
acquainted with a hundred tales about the marvels of the $riparvata mountain" 
($riparvatascaryavarttasahasrabhijfiena, ibid.); "his ear-cavities were punched 
by those possessed by pisaca-demons, who had run to him when struck by 
white mustard seed he had empowered with mantras more than once" (asakrd- 
abhimantritasiddharthakaprahitapradhavitaih pi$acagrhitakaih karatalatada- 
nacipitikrtasravanaputena ibid.); and “he had used magic powders for snaring 
women many times on aging mendicant ladies, who having arrived from other 
lands retired [there to rest]” (anyadešāgatositāsu jaratpravrajitasu bahukrtvah 
samprayuktastrivastkaranacurnena). 

While it would be imprudent to treat this example of poetic literature as 
a bald record of fact, it is possible to see Bana’s extensive and richly crafted 
episode of this horrific, yet magnificent, temple as a reflection of social atti- 
tudes to the Goddess and her worship. There is a mix of suspicion, fear and 
reverential awe underlying the image of the forbidding shrine tucked away in 
the wilds, with its Tantrika priest who knows not how ‘appropriate’ worship 
should be conducted, and its blood-spattered, grisly interiors. The very opposite 
of this ambivalent attitude surfaces in Bana’s unequivocally laudatory poem 
to Durga, the Candigataka—verse 8 of which is consciously alluded here in 
“she seemed to be scolding the wild buffalo who had offended by moving the 
trident-shaft by scratching his shoulders [on it]" (skandapīthakaņdūyanacalita- 
trisuladandakrtaparadham vanamahisam iva tarjayantim; Kadambari p. 226). 
The topos of Mahisa scratching his back on the post appears in Candisataka 8 
too,!6 in which there is a mischievous pun with the word sthanu that means 
both "post" and "Siva" The saviour of Dharma in the Candisataka contrasts 
with the menacing though beauteous figure here. One may suggest that the 


16 grastasvah saspalobhād iva haritaharer prasodhānalosmā 
sthanau kandum viniya pratimahisarusevantakopantavarti | 
krsnam pankam yathecchan varunam upagato majjanāyeva yasyah 
svastho' bhūt padam āptvā hradam iva mahisa sāstu durgā sriye vah || 


334 SARKAR 


wider context for this attitude of ambivalence is a historical transition: the God- 
dess first imagined as we have seen as a krtyā in the Mahabharata was being 
absorbed within mainstream devotional practices, through which her demonic 
attributes became ‘toned down, balanced by the benevolent and the charming, 
but nevertheless remained, at the stage of Bana’s compositions, tinged with a 
degree of the terrible. The comic portrayal of the priest registers the fact that by 
Bana’s time Durga’s worship had acquired firm cultural associations with Saiva 
tantric rites. There was also an association of her site of worship with wild envi- 
ronments inhospitable to people, to flora and fauna in general (note that most 
of the ornaments in her shrine are of plants and flowers) and even, it seems, 
with a peculiarly Southern religious attitude. 

Regarding the Southern Navarātra, it is tempting to conjecture that the roots 
of worshiping the Goddess in Devagiri and Vijayanagara drew also upon the 
older cult of Korravai, the stag-borne goddess described in the old Tamil poem, 
the Cīlapattikāram.'” In fact many salient elements of Durga's rituals in gen- 
eral (especially, though, in the East), such as the transactional nature of wor- 
ship, trance, possession, ecstatic dancing, singing hymns, the important role 
of women, virgin-worship and heroic self-sacrifice involving blood are to be 
found even here, which suggest that among all elements of the Navarātra, these 
appear to be the earliest. In Canto x11 Korravai is said to be worshipped by 
cattle-raiders for victory in their missions.? The canto, called "Vettuvavari" 
(The Hunter's Song), portrays the Eyinar community worshipping their pro- 
tective goddess for victory before setting off on a raid. The chapter describes 
vividly the stages of puja at the shrine of Aiyai (Korravai), eulogized throughout 
the canto as Durga, the slayer of Mahisa, the sister of Visnu and the consort of 
Siva. First, a respected Maravar lady Šālinī, an oracle, becomes possessed and 
dances, singing a hymn urging the hunters to offer tribute to the Goddess.!? 
In the hymn Šālinī rebukes the men for growing weak and no longer robbing 
passers-by* the implication being that the Goddess will re-invigorate them 
with heroic zeal. After the oracle performs, a virgin is selected from the Eyi- 
nars, in what appears to be an early form of the kumārīpūjā, and treated with 
especial care as the Goddess. Dressed in tiger skin, with a snake of silver and a 
wild hog's tooth in her matted hair a necklace of tiger-tooth, a bow of wood and 


17  SeeDikshitar 1939 and Danielou 2009. All references to the Cilapattikaram are from Dik- 
shitar 1939. I am grateful to Professor Goodall for kindly indicating the need to include 
mention of this work within this account. 

18  Cilapattikaram, p. 180. See also Danielou 2009, 76—85, and Mahalakshmi 2011, 68—71. 

19  Cīlapattikāram, x11.6-15 Danielou 2009, 77; Mahalakshmi 201, 69. 

20  Cilapattikaram, X1112-19; Danielou 2009, 77. 


TOWARD A HISTORY OF THE NAVARĀTRA 335 


seated on a stag, the kumārī is brought before the shrine of the Goddess, set in 
lush and verdant groves of fragrant and flowering trees.?! The women offer her 
various gifts of dolls, beautiful birds, paints, scents, food and flowers with much 
fanfare and the beating of drums.?? After worshipping the Goddess, the virgin 
goes into a trance, and speaks to the heroine of the poem Kaņņakī, introducing 
her to Korravai, who from this moment in the ritual, it is suggested, becomes a 
living presence.?? 

Korravai appears. She bore a moon on her hair, a third eye on her forehead; 
her lips were red, her throat blue with poison like that of her consort Šiva. The 
snake Vasuki was her girdle and she wore a bodice resembling snake-teeth, an 
elephant's hide over her upper body and a tiger skin over her hips; she carried 
a trident. There are rich ornaments on her feet. Dark in hue as a sapphire,?+ 
bejewelled, youthful, beautiful, ascendant on the head of the buffalo demon, 
she is called, among many names, the sister of Krsna, Durga, Gauri, the giver of 
victory, worshipped by Visnu and Brahma;?5 and also the defeater of Kamsa.?% 
The names and descriptions indicate that even at this early period, circa 450 CE, 
when the poem is thought to have been composed,?’ the Goddess, whose ini- 
tial sectarian affiliation was with Krsna, had already become associated with 
Siva, and moreover had acquired an independent identity as a supreme divin- 
ity, worshipped by all the gods. Another hymn is sung by a girl to the virgin 
dressed as the Goddess, in which the duality of Korravai-Durgā is emphasised 
in a series of rhetorical questions or paradoxical contrasts: she is worshipped 
by gods and is an exalted repository of Vedic knowledge, yet also stands on a 
buffalo head adorned with wild animal hides; standing as light above the trinity 
of Visnu, Šiva and Brahmā, she stands also on a humble stag with twisted black 
horns, holding aloft, with hands adorned with delicate bangles, a cruel sword; 
she who is consort of Siva with three eyes also has a fierce red-eyed lion and the 
Vaisnava conch and the discus.?? She is also said to have danced the marakkāl, 


21 For the trees see Cilapattikaram X11 verse not indicated, p. 184; Danielou 2009, p. 79. 

22  Cilapattikaram x1.20—53; Danielou 2009, 78; Mahalakshmi 201, 71. 

23  Cilapattikaram X11.51-53; Danielou 2009, 78. 

24 Cīlapattikāram X11, verse not indicated, p. 188; Danielou 2009, 83-84. 

25 Cīlapattikāram X11, verse not indicated, p. 188; Danielou 2009, 83-84. 

26 Cilapattikaram X11. verse not indicated, p. 188; Danielou 2009, 84. 

27 Regrettably the dating of this fine work has not yet been settled. Dikshitar (1939, 8—10) 
suggests sometime in the second century CE. Here I have cited the date proposed by 
Zvelebil (1977, 132), which nevertheless is inconclusive. I am grateful to Dominic Goodall 
for explaining the issues concerning the problem of dating this text and providing me with 
Zvelebil's study. 

28 Cīlapattikāram x11, verse not indicated, p. 185; Danielou 2009, 80—81. 


336 SARKAR 


a dance on wooden legs, to defeat demons. If anyone invokes her wearing a 
victory garland (vetci) before setting forth to seize cattle, omens of defeat will 
appear in the enemy’s village, and the Goddess will accompany the hero on 
his quest before his bow.?? In the song, the plenitude of captured cattle is then 
praised, and the Goddess is asked to accept the raiders’ blood offered by cut- 
ting their necks to her in thanks.?? This offering of flesh and blood is described 
as the Goddess's price for the victory conferred on the warrior and outlines the 
transactional nature of the worship.?! The hymn becomes hypnotic at this cli- 
mactic moment of blood-offering as in verse after verse the Goddess is asked 
to accept the blood. 

Four things illuminated by the description are worth pointing out. Korravai 
is already treated as an eclectic deity merged with Durga, herself a cluster of 
Vaisnava and Saiva elements. From the context here it is tempting to specu- 
late that Durga as a deity of royal power and kingship may trace her roots from 
local warrior communities such as the Eyinar, who sustained themselves by 
periodic looting necessitating armed confrontation. In fact, the evidence of the 
old Tamil text prompts us to refine the schematic diagram, and suggest that the 
first phase of the ritual going back to the early centuries of the common era was 
widely practised in the South and, along with blood sacrifice, included ecstatic 
singing, dancing and deity-possession. When this archaic phase of worship is 
described in literature, Durga has already ceased to be a peripheral deity, as I 
had assumed she still was at this time when I wrote my book, and is considered 
both the consort of Siva and Krsna’s sister, and empress of the gods. 

A historical survey of the Navaratra’s developmental pattern reveals that 
it acquired its characteristic shape from a confluence of two different tradi- 
tions: first, a festival of the goddess Nidra-Kalaratri on the ninth tithi of the 
dark half of amonsoon month, centred on sanguinary rites exhibiting heroism, 
and second, a military tradition celebrated in autumn centred on lustrating 
weapons and armies with fire to ward away ill omens. In this way, through a 
gradual process of coalescence and subsequent transformation, the Navara- 
tra acquired two of its hallmarks: the central place of the Goddess as the 
deity to whom all the rituals were dedicated, and the autumnal season as its 
most favourable and appropriate time. The phases by which this confluence 
occurred and then further developed show us how a relatively small single- 
day civic festival, performed by Vaisnavas as part of the celebrations of Janma- 


29 Cilapattikaram X11, verse not indicated, p. 186; Danielou 2009, 82. 
30 Cilapattikaram, X11, verse not indicated, p. 186; Danielou 2009, 83; Mahalakshmi 2011, 68. 
31  Cilapattikaram X11, verse not indicated, pp. 187—188; Danielou 2009, 84—85. 


TOWARD A HISTORY OF THE NAVARĀTRA 337 


stamī, gradually expanded into a much longer rite thought to safeguard soci- 
ety and the political class, which then came to be performed in the month of 
Āsvina. This development paralleled the attenuation of the rite's importance 
for the Vaisnavas and its absorption, first by Saivas, who would promote the 
worship of the Goddess on Navami by fasting, in literature about rites for lay 
devotees,?? and then by the more widespread Puranic-Brahmanical tradition. 
These sectarian absorptions provided impetus to the popularity of the rite 
among rulers of upcoming kingdoms eager to cultivate the ritual apparatus of 
goddess-sanctified kingship. 

We can map out two broad regional traditions to have matured later in 
courts: an Eastern and a Deccan one. By and large these formed the basic 
blueprint for localized variations. As descriptions of Rajput rites of the šamī 
tree and the weapon-shooting on Dasami from colonial ethnographic reports 
from the nineteenth century show, many of the Rajasthani royal rituals were 
extremely similar to the template of the Southern Navaratra.?? The most splen- 
did Navaratras seem to have flowered in the ornately ritualized Tantricized 
environments of Eastern India, among which the kingdom of Mithila provides 
us with the most detailed testimonia. These appear to have percolated (in 
as much as this is reflected through citations) into traditions as far afield as 
the Deccan. In Mithila the ten-day structure seems to have matured, and the 
ferocious identity of the Goddess took a central place in the Tantric rites of 
Mahāstamī and Mahānavamī. This North-Eastern tradition developed into the 
Eastern or Gaudiya tradition—a trend evidenced by a fifteenth-century Ben- 
gali work, the Durgāpūjātattva by Raghunandana, which incorporates rituals 
of a Bengali character, such as summoning goddesses and worshipping them 
in nine leaves from crops. A separate, even more markedly Tantric tradition, 
with elements borrowed from the Kubjika cult, developed later in the Navarā- 
tra or Dasain of Nepal, but for the time being this will remain excluded from the 
discussion. In the South, rituals of a Tantric character were largely eschewed. 
The Navaratra was choreographed around the public display of the king, his 
court, his weapons and war-animals and magnificent parades, while the wor- 
ship of the Goddess, and indeed the summoning of the Goddess into the king, 
occurred privately. During these days the king would worship nine virgins con- 
sidered vessels of nine forms of the Goddess (different from the Navadurgas of 
Mithilā and Nepal) for powers such as mastery over enemies, knowledge, riches 


32 The rituals of Navami appear in the Sivadharma, and in a parallel in an early Šaiva scrip- 
ture, the Nihsvasamukhatattva; these are treated in greater detail in Sarkar 2017, 72—76. 
33 Report of Alexander Forbes, in Kinsley 1988, 106—107. 


338 SARKAR 


and an abundance of slaves and slave-girls, as described in ritual instructions in 
Sanskrit. The most resplendent examples of this version of the rite took place, 
it seems, in the Vijayanagara empire. 

In this way what we find are many rituals of a large-scale, communal, pub- 
lic character clustering and growing according to differing political environ- 
ments (as the Navaratra was chiefly promoted by the court) around the figure of 
Durga. This process allowed a more sophisticated ritual interaction to develop 
between political agents (chiefly the ruler, then the army and the polis) and the 
Goddess (and her forms), who in the course of the Navaratra’s transformations 
cements her role as the deity who grants the goals of kingship (military victory; 
territorial protection) and protects communal areas such as fortresses, citadels 
and palaces. However, in spite of its proliferation one element remained the 
cornerstone of the rite: blood sacrifice. A key aspect of the nature of the ritual 
as a pact between the Goddess and solicitor of rewards, this remained constant 
throughout the development of the Navaratra and indeed even today is seen to 
be critical to its success. It is possible that before its appearance in Vaisnava 
sources, the worship of Nidrā-Kālarātri in the monsoon was a widespread pop- 
ular festival of heroism based on blood-sacrifice, including ecstatic communal 
bacchanalia, that could have formed part of a marauder’s cult, as in the worship 
of the stag-riding goddess Korravai. It was gradually absorbed into the influ- 
ential sectarian traditions when goddess-cults came to be elevated during the 
Gupta period, as inscriptions from Valkha, Madhya Pradesh, in the late Gupta 
period attest.* 

Recently, the historian Kunal Chakrabarti (2001) has suggested that the ori- 
gins of the Navaratra lie in indigenous practice, and that its late emergence in 
Sanskritic literature is the culmination of a long process whereby the Goddess 
was gradually brought into the Sanskritic sphere. The Goddess, Chakrabarti 
argues, is a strategic means whereby peripheral and popular deities and tra- 
ditions can be absorbed into the mainstream. Her festival was the time of the 
year when these popular traditions could be made public and shown to cohere 
around her. 

Indeed this was the case, and such is also made evident in the description 
in the Cilapattikaram. The festival of the Goddess, unlike its Vedic autumnal 
ancestor, integrated rites of different affiliations. Apart from the Tantric, other 
rites, performed by indigenous groups, would regularly be incorporated into 
the ritual sequence. In the Cilapattikaram we are shown that, while the main 


34 Fora further discussion of this, see Chapter 1 of Heroic Saktism (Sarkar 2017). 


TOWARD A HISTORY OF THE NAVARĀTRA 339 


community profiting from the worship are the Eyinār hunters, a representative 
of another group, the Maravars, plays a critical ritual role as the oracle. Cer- 
tain social groups, for example, were authorized to carry through the animal 
sacrifice. In this sense the Navarātra united disparities within the social can- 
vas in which it was embedded. The obligatory performance of rites that would 
involve everyone regardless of their caste represents a social inversion that the 
Navarātra set into motion during the classical period. It was at this time that 
the strict hierarchies enforced by the orthodox social order were overturned, 
albeit for a limited period, as the single day Šābarotsava attests. This leads us 
to guestion the long-held assumption that the Navarātra is a Purāņic festival. 
Indeed, although in outward character it was, since it was taught in texts that 
were Purāņic, and since it was further elaborated on by Sanskrit writers work- 
ing to strengthen the Brahmanic order, it nevertheless was elusive in essence. I 
would argue that this lack of affiliation was one of the chief reasons why it grew 
into the most important ritual of political and communal affirmation. That it 
was one of the few rituals of elevated, that is to say Sanskritic status, that solid- 
ified the status and place of outcaste groups, and publicly displayed subversive 
rites that would otherwise have been deemed suspicious by brahmanas, such 
as the caste-dissolving, orgiastic sabarotsava (The Festival of Sabara-tribes) on 
Dašamī taught in the Kalikapurana and Dharmašāstric literature, served to 
identify it as a ritualized act of cohesion.?* The Goddess herself was a metaphor 
of this cohesion, worshipped by both outcastes and people within the caste 
hierarchy. Indeed, literature, particularly classical kāvya, shows that her role 
as an outcaste deity preceded that of the Goddess of special importance to 
a ksatriya. The importance for ksatriyas is emphasized in the Devimahatmya, 
from perhaps the late-eighth century CE. Though images of the Goddess in 
the presence of warriors offering their blood to her appear from as early as 
the seventh century, it is in this work that we are first presented with what 
became a canonized narrative of the Goddess blessing a ksatriya king and a 
vaišya merchant, thereby being firmly associated with the power-model of the 
caste system. On the other hand, that the Goddess's worship was meant for 
all varnas and also heretics (pasandas), Tantric physicians (garudikas) and 
Buddhists, is still registered by the slightly later Devipurana, in which an ecu- 
menical devotee-base, including even women, is envisaged in such verses as 


35 Spring rites to Kama were other orgiastic public celebrations of this kind discussed in 
brahminical prescriptive literature, but unlike the Navaratra, which survived, they con- 
tinued in adapted form within Saiva rituals as the festival of the damana plant (damanot- 
sava): see Goodall forthcoming for this argument. 


340 SARKAR 


Devipurana 911396 and 35.17 cd?” (on the right of women to worship and the 
inherence of the Goddess in girls), 22.24 ab?8 (on the worship of the Goddess by 
all varnas including šūdras) and 88.1-3?? (on the Goddess's worship by heretics, 
Tantric physicians, Buddhists and those engaged in other faiths). After the four- 
teenth century, and the rise of the Rajput lineages in Rajasthan, she became, 
nonetheless, even more strictly connected with a specifically ksatriya-ethos 
despite being, in practice, a non-sectarian deity in the earlier classical period.*° 

One manner in which the Navaratra negotiated the boundary between dif- 
ferent religious affiliations is through allowing optionality: nearly all manuals 


36 Devīpurāņa 91.1: brahmanah ksatriyo vai$yah šūdro và yadi và striyah | pūjayen mātaro 
bhaktyā sa sarvaml labhatepsitan || (labhatepsitān should be understood as labhate+īpsi- 
tan; the Sanskrit of this work is idiosyncratic). 

37 Devipurana 35.17cd: kanya devyā svayam proktā kanyārūpā tu šūlinī |. 

38 Devīpurāņa 22.24: sarvesu sarvavarnesu tava bhaktyā prakīrtitā | krtvāpnoti yašo rajyam 
putrayurdhanasampadabh || (-sampadah is the reading of Sharma's edition, adopted by the 
suggestion of S. Hatley; the Bengali edition reads -sampannah. Bhaktyā is used as nomi- 
native singular for bhakti). 

39 ~=—- Devipurana 88.1-3: 

vedaiš sivagamais tv etah pujitas ca mumuksubhih | 

garude bhūtatantre ca bālatantre ca pūjitāh | 

sādhyante sarvakaryani cintamanisamah sivah || 

pasandibhir bhavisyais tu bauddhagārudavādibhih | 

svadharmaniratair vatsa svena nyāyena pūjitāh || 

yena yena hi bhāvena pūjayanti manisinah | 

tena tena phalam dadyuh dvijānām antyajām api || 
Quoted from unpublished draft critical edition prepared by S. Hatley. This passage con- 
cerns worship of the Seven Mothers, who are included in the worship of Durga, even 
during the Navaratra, as her attendants. A translation, citing the working draft of Hat- 
ley ( forthcoming), is as follows: “People desiring liberation worship the Mothers by way of 
the Vedas and the Saiva Tantric revelation. They are also worshipped in accordance with 
the Garudatantras, Bhitatantras, and Balatantras. Beneficent, they bring all endeavors to 
fruition, and are like wish-fulfilling jewels. Heretics of the future— [viz.] the Buddhist pro- 
ponents of Gàruda Tantra—will worship them according to their own methods, devoted 
to their own ways, dear child. They give rewards that accord with any disposition wise 
people worship them with, whether they be Brahmins or even lowborn outcastes.” I am 
grateful to Dr. Hatley for sharing his draft translation and edition with me and indicating 
the need to include mention of the Devīpurāņa. 

40 Fora discussion of the iconography, kavya and narratives in Calukya-era inscriptions por- 
traying the goddess favouring a ruler see the Introduction, Chapter 1, Chapter 3 and Chap- 
ter 6 of my book Heroic Shāktism (Sarkar 2017). One of the arguments therein is that prior 
to the Devīmāhātmya, the worship of the goddess seems to have been non-sectarian and 
open to all rulers regardless of their caste. It is from the fourteenth century that we find 
restrictions concerning who could worship the goddess and in what way in Dharmašāstric 
literature such as the Purusārthacintāmaņi, also treated in my book. 


TOWARD A HISTORY OF THE NAVARĀTRA 341 


include options allowing the substitution of animals with vegetables, and if one 
was averse to cutting a human head, about which the Eastern manuals are quite 
direct, one could just as well manage with a pumpkin. The template was fluid 
and could be adapted to differing tastes and needs. 


Conclusion 


To sum up, I wish to take a step back and reflect on the ritual as a polit- 
ical moment—which is what the Navaratra encapsulates in all its regional 
forms. The political ritual concentrates divine power in the king and simulta- 
neously disperses it within the body politic, thereby integrating all its aspects 
within one divine body. Cycles of nature were renewed thereby, but so also 
were political cycles, such as the military year. Forces of nature and the divine 
that were held to be whimsical were placated, and crises—ill omens, disasters, 
and calamities—that could potentially damage entire kingdoms were averted. 
All this was effected within the controlled environment of the ceremony. The 
charismatic heart of this ceremony was the Goddess herself: elusive because 
she integrated the essences of other goddesses, and yet powerfully coherent. 
Her coherence came from a representation of death, and the ceremony became 
an enactment of her triumph over death. The buffalo, a vahana of Yama, was 
a symbol of death. Durga’s slaying the buffalo symbolized both her mastery 
over and her association with death and danger. In this respect, the character 
of the Goddess that came alive during the Navaratra was that of a capricious 
and fierce deity. If we study the most archaic layer of the buffalo-sacrifice, and 
the words used in the hymns accompanying the offering of the animal’s blood, 
we find an old conception of the Goddess to emerge. She is thought to stand 
at the centre of an essentially cruel natural universe that could only be coaxed 
into a truce through placatory worship, and through the establishment of a pact 
between man and deity. That pact, if regularly and respectfully maintained dur- 
ing the Navaratra, generated the goodwill of divine power. 


342 SARKAR 
Acknowledgements 


My deep gratitude to Professor Dominic Goodall who kindly went through 
many versions of this article in great depth and made detailed comments. The 
paper evolved as a result of his engagement with it. 


References 


Primary Sources 

Kathāsaritsāgara of Somadeva Bhatta. Pandit Durgāprāsāda and Kāšīnātha Pandurang 
Parab, eds. 4th ed. revised by Vasudeva Laksmaņa Šāstrī Paņšīkar. Bombay: Nirņaya 
Sāgara Press, 1930. 

Kādambarī of Bāņa, P. Peterson, ed. Bombay: Government Central Book Depot, 1889. 

Kalaviveka of Jimūtavāhana. See Durgāpūjāviveka, pp. 30-41. 

Kālikāpurāņa. B. Shastri, ed. Varanasi: Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series. 1972. 

Krtyakalpataru of Laksmīdhara. R. Aiyangar, ed. Vol. 11, Rājadharmakāņda. Baroda: Bar- 
oda Oriental Institute, 1943. 

Krtyaratnākara of Candegvara. Thakkura. K.K. Smrtitīrtha, ed. Calcutta: Asiatic Society 
of Bengal, 1925. 

Gaiidavaho of Bappaī/Vākpati. S. Pandurang, ed. The "Gaiidavaho,” a Historical Poem 
in Prākrit by Vápati, with a Commentary of Haripála. Bombay Sanskrit Series, no. 34, 
Bombay: Government central Book depot, 1887. 

Candisataka of Bana. Durgaprasada and Kāšīnātha Pandurang Parab, eds. Kāvyamālā, 
no. Iv. Varanasi: Chaukhamba Bharati Academy, 1988. 

Caturvargacintamani of Hemadri. Yajfie$vara Smrtiratna and Kamaksyanatha Tarkav- 
agisa, eds. Bibliotheca Indica, no. 72. Part 11, vol. 11. Calcutta: K.N. Bhattacharya at 
the Gaņeša Press, 1879. 

Cīlapattikāram. See Dikshitar 1939. 

Dašakumāracarita of Daņdin. M.R. Kale, ed. Reprint, Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1986. 

Durgābhaktitarangiņī of Vidyāpati. [sana Candra Sarman, ed. Calcutta: Samskrta 
Sahitya Parisad, 1856 Saka Era [1932 CE]. 

Durgāpūjātattva of Raghunandana Bhattacarya. Sati$a Candra Siddhantabhisana, ed. 
Calcutta: Calcutta Samskrta Sahitya Parisad: Bengali Samvat 1331 [1922 CE]. 

Durgāpūjāviveka. Satiga Candra Siddhāntabhūsaņa, ed. Samskrta Sahitya Parisad 
Series, no. 7. CalcuttaSamskrta Sahitya Parisad, 1331 Bengali Samvat [1922 CE]. 

Durgotsavaviveka of Sülapani. See Durgāpūjāviveka, pp. 1-27. 

Devipurana. P. Tarkaratna and S. Nyayatirtha, eds. Reprint, Navabharata Publishers: Cal- 
cutta, Bengali Samvat 1400 [1991CE]. 

Devimahatmya. Draft electronic edition of Yuko Yukochi based on the following three 


TOWARD A HISTORY OF THE NAVARĀTRA 343 


manuscripts: NAK Nr. 1-1077= NGMPP Nr. A 1157/; NAK Nr. 1-1534 = NGMPP Nr. 
A 1157/12; palm-leaf manuscript in the possession of Sam Fogg London. 

Purusārthacintāmaņi of Visnubhatta Athavale. Vyasa Mišra, ed. Varanasi: Sampūrņā- 
nanda Samskrta Visvavidyalaya, 2006. 

Mahabharata. Vishnu S. Sukthankar et al., eds. Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute: 
Poona, 1933—1959. 

Vāmanapurāņa. A.S. Gupta, ed. Varanasi: All India Kashiraj Trust, 1968. 

Visnudharmottaramahāpurāņa. Ksemaraja Srikrsnadasa, ed. Venkateshvara Steam 
Press. Reprint, Bombay: Nag Publishers, 1985. 

Skandapurāņa. Yuko Yokochi, ed. Skandapurana, Vol. 111: Adhyāyas 34.1-61, 53-69. The 
Vindhyavasini Cycle. Leiden: Brill, 2013. 

Skandapurana. Krsnaprasada Bhattarai, ed. Skandapuranasya Ambikakhanda. Kath- 
mandu, 1988. 

Haravijaya of Ratnakara. Pandit Durgaprasad and Kashinath Pandurang Parab, eds. The 
Haravijaya of Rájánaka Ratnákara with the Commentary of Rájánaka Alaka. Kavya- 
mālā, no. 22. Bombay: Nirņayasāgara Press, 1890, Reprint 1982. 

Harivamša. Parashuram Lakshman Vaidya et al., eds. 2 vols. Poona: Bhandarkar Orien- 
tal Institute, 1969-1971. 

Harsacarita of Bana. P.V. Kane, ed. The Harshacarita of Bánabhatta: Text of Ucchvasas 
I-VIII. Reprint, Delhi, 1986 [1918]. 


Secondary Sources 

Baldissera, Fabrizzia. 1996. “Candika/Candi Vindhyavāsinī and Other Terrific God- 
desses in the Kathasaritsagara." In Wild Goddesses in India and Nepal, Proceedings of 
an International Symposium in Berne and Zürich 1994, edited by A. Michaels, C. Vogel- 
sanger, and A. Wilke, 73-103. Studia Religiosa Helvetica. Berne and Zürich: Peter 
Lang. 

Chakrabarti, Kunal. 2001. Religious Process: The Puranas and the Making of a Regional 
Tradition. New Delhi: Oxford University Press. 

Couture, A. and Schmid, C. 2001. "The Harivamša, the Goddess Ekānamšā, and the 
Iconography of the Vrsni Triads.” Journal of the American Oriental Society 121 (2): 173— 
192. 

Danielou, A. (trans.). 2009 Shilapaddikaram (The Ankle Bracelet) by Prince Ilango Adi- 
gal. New Delhi: Penguin Books. 

Dikshitar, V.R.R. (trans.). 1939 The Šilapaddikāram. Madras: Humphrey Milford Oxford 
University Press. 

Einoo, Shingo. 1999. "The Autumn Goddess Festival described in the Purāņas” In Liv- 
ing with Sakti: Gender, Sexuality and Religion in South Asia, edited by M. Tanaka and 
M. Tachikawa, 33—70. Tokyo: National Museum of Ethnology Tokyo. 

Goodall, Dominic, N. Rout, et al. 2005. The Paricavaranastava of Aghorašiva: A Twelfth 


344 SARKAR 


Century South Indian Prescription for the Visualisation of Sadasiva and his Retinue. 
Pondicherry: Institut Francais de Pondichéry. 

Goodall, Dominic. 2014. "Communication: Des saisons dans la poésie Sanskrite du 
Cambodge." Comptes Rendus de l'Académie des Inscriptions 1 (January-March): 175- 
188. 

Goodall, Dominic. Forthcoming. "Damanotsava: on Love in Spring, on What Jñāna- 
šambhu Wrote, and on the Spread of Public Festivals in the Mantramārga” In Tantric 
Communities: Sacred Secrets and Public Rituals, edited by Vincent Eltschinger, Nina 
Mirnig, and Marion Rastelli, 385-424. Vienna: Austrian Academy of Sciences Press. 

Hatley, Shaman. Forthcoming. "The Seven Mothers (Sapta Mātarah): Origin Tales from 
the Old Skandapurana and Devīpurāņa” In A Garland of Goddesses: Hindu Tales of 
the Divine Feminine from India and Beyond, edited by Michael Slouber. Berkeley: Uni- 
versity of California Press. 

Kinsley, David. 1988. Hindu Goddesses: Visions of the Divine Feminine in the Hindu Reli- 
gious Tradition. Berkeley: University of California Press. 

Mahalakshmi R. 20n. The Making of the Goddess: Korravai Durgā in Tamil Traditions, 
New Delhi: Penguin Books. 

Nicholas, R. 2013. Night of the Gods: Durga Puja and the Legitimation of Power in Rural 
Bengal. Delhi: Orient Blackswan. 

Price, Pamela. 1996. Kingship and Political Practice in Colonial India. Cambridge: Cam- 
bridge University Press. 

Sanderson, Alexis. 2007. "Atharvavedins in Tantric Territory: The Angirasakalpa Texts of 
the Oriya Paippaladins and their Connection with the Trika and the Kalikula, with 
critical editions of the Parajapavidhi, the Parāmantravidhi, and the *Bhadrakālī- 
mantravidhiprakaraņa” In The Atharvaveda and its Paippalāda Šākhā: Historical 
and Philological Papers on a Vedic Tradition, edited by Arlo Griffiths and Annette 
Schmiedchen, 195-31. Geisteskultur Indiens: Texte und Studien n, Indologica 
Halensis. Aachen: Shaker Verlag. 

Sanderson, Alexis. 2009. "The Šaiva Age—The Rise and Dominance of Šaivism Dur- 
ing the Early Mediaeval Period” In Genesis and Development of Tantricism, edited 
by Shingo Einoo, 41-348. Tokyo: Institute of Oriental Culture, University of Tokyo. 

Sarkar, Bihani. 2012. "The Rite of Durga in Medieval Bengal: An Introductory Study of 
Raghunandana's Durgāpūjātattva with Text and Translation of the Principal Rites.” 
Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society 22 (02): 325-390. 

Sarkar, Bihani. 2017. Heroic Shaktism: the Cult of Durgā in Ancient Indian Kingship. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Schmid, C. 2002. "Mahisāsuramardinī: A Vaisnava Goddess?" In Foundations of Indian 
Art: Proceedings of the Chidambaram Seminar on Art and Religion, Feb. 2001, edited 
by R. Nagaswamy, 143-168. Chennai: Tamil Arts Academy. 

Stein, Burton. 1983. "Mahānavamī: Medieval and Modern Kingly Ritual in South India." 


TOWARD A HISTORY OF THE NAVARĀTRA 345 


In Essays on Gupta Culture, edited by Bardwell L. Smith, 67—90. Delhi: Motilal Banar- 
sidass. 

Yokochi, Yuko. 2004. The Rise of the Warrior-Goddess in Ancient India: A Study of the 
myth of Kausikt-Vindhyavasini in the Skanda-Purāņa. Ph.D. Thesis, University of 


Groningen. 


PART 4 


Mantra, Ritual, and Yoga 


CHAPTER 14 
Sārikā's Mantra 


Jürgen Hanneder 


The goddess Sarika belongs to a group of Kashmirian lineage deities (kuladevī 
or vamšadevī) who, like Bala, Rājtī, and Jvala, are identified with particular 
locations.! Šārikā resides on the Pradyumna peak in Srinagar, also known as the 
“Sarika peak,” and is worshipped there in the form of a large stone around which 
a temple has been constructed. If one wishes to identify the cult practiced there 
and locate it within the religious landscape of the valley, a visitor might start 
with the modern inscription shown in figure 14.1, which reads as follows: 


bindutrikonavasukonadasarayugma- 
manvasranagadalasamyutasodasaram | 

vrttatrayam ca dharanisadanatrayam ca 
šrīcakrarājam uditam paradevatayah || 


This verse describes the sricakra, the yantra of the “supreme deity" ( parade- 
vatā) commonly known as Tripurā, by merely listing in the first three padas the 
geometrical elements of the yantra, for instance bindu (“dot”) and trikona ("tri- 
angle"). It is quoted often, with variations,” and attributed to several scriptural 
sources in Tantric literature. 

What we are to understand here, one must suppose, is that in modern times 
Šārikā was understood or presented as a form of Tripurā, or as belonging to her 
cultic context. 

Unfortunately fieldwork of this kind does not disclose the history of the cult. 
We know that the first scriptures of the cult of Tripura were written not before 
the eleventh century;? needless to say, they make no mention of Šārikā. On the 
other hand, the local Kashmirian cult of Sàrikà is at least as old as the Kathā- 
saritsagara (second half of the twelfth century),* and it is rather doubtful that 
the two goddesses' association is this old. 


1 See Sanderson 2009, 11. 

2 For instance, Laksmidhara in his commentary on the Saundaryalaharī reads the third pada 
as vrttatribhūpurayutam paritaš caturdvāh and in the fourth sricakram etad [...]. 

3 Sanderson 2015, 32. 

4 See 12.6.1: yena pradyumnasikharam šārikākūtam ity api [...], and 12.6.16: tatra snātvā vita- 
stayam arcayitvā vinayakam sampūjya sarikam devim digbandhādipurahsaram. 


© JŪRGEN HANNEDER, 2020 | DOI:10.1163/9789004432802_016 
This is an open access chapter distributed under the terms of the CC BY-NC 4.0 license. 


350 HANNEDER 


FIGURE 141  Šārikā stone 
PHOTOGRAPH BY WALTER SLAJE 


For finding out more about the cult of Šārikā, including her ritual and pos- 
sibly doctrinal details, we have a single published source, the Devirahasya,> 
which contains passages on the cult of the Kashmirian lineage deities. In par- 
ticular, the ritual texts appended to the edition of the Devirahasya give the 
mantroddhāra, sahasranàma and other typical elements of the worship of 
these deities. In this text Sarika is clearly identified as having the form of a stone 
(silarupa)® on the Pradyumna hill. Her worship is said to remove the impurity 
(mala) stemming from such capital offences as the murder of a Brahmin or 
drinking alcohol, or eating what is forbidden." The details of the mantra are 
given, as are the Rsi, etc., a dhyanasloka, her yantra, and how to employ the 
mantra for the magic acts of immobilizing (stambhana) and so forth. This is 
followed by a Sarikapujapaddhati (pp. 412—419). 


Devirahasya, pp. 407ff. 
Op. cit., p. 407. 
Op. cit., p. 408. 
Op. cit., pp. 410 ff. 


ON DU 


ŠĀRIKĀ S MANTRA 351 


Further sources are difficult to trace or remain unpublished. First is a so- 
called Šārikāstrotra attributed to the Pradyumnāvatāra. This text is “a mālā- 
mantra in prose with a dhyānašloka in the beginning and two verses at the 
end”? Apart from its manuscript in the Bodleian, there are two more in the 
Lindenmuseum (Stuttgart), and one in Srinagar." Judging from the excerpts 
given in the Verzeichnis der orientalischen Handschriften in Deutschland 
(VOHD) catalogue, there are variations such as insertions of new names and 
additional phrases that cannot be reduced easily to a single critical text.!? In 
any case, for our purposes a transcript of the Srinagar manuscript (S) is suffi- 
cient: 


bījaih saptabhir ujjvalakrtir asau ya saptasaptidyutih!? 
saptarsipraņatānghripankajatyugā ya saptalokartiha’ | 

kasmirapravaresamadhyanagare pradyumnapithe sthita 
devīsaptakasamyutā bhagavati šrīsārikā patu nah || 


om jaya bhagavatyai vindhyavasini kailāsavāsini $masanavasini hunkarini kā- 
lāyini katyayani himagiritanaye kumāramātah govindabhagini šitikaņtha!$ 
bharaņe astādašabhuje bhujagavalayamandite keyūrahārābharaņe jaya-kha- 
dgā-trišūla-damaru!”-mudgara-parašu-casaka-kalaša-šaracāpa-varadābhaya- 
pāša-pustaka-kapāla-khatvānga-gadā-musula-tomaravarahaste krpāpare pra- 
bhūtavividhāyuddhe krpāprāgbhūtavigrahe candike candaghante kirātaveše 
brahmāņi rudrani narayani brahmacāriņi divyatapovidhāyini vedamatah gāya- 
tribhāvitrisarasvatisarvādhāre sarvešvarivišvakartā (sic) samadhivisrantimaye 
cinmaye cintāmaņisvarūpe kaivalye kaivalyasvarūpe šivasvarūpe sive nirasraye 
nirupadhimaye niramayapade brahmavisņumahešvaranimitte!$ mohani tosaņi 


9 Aithal 1999, 35. Aithal gives a Kashmirian edition (Bhaktivivekasāra, Šrīnagar/Bombay: 
1927), but this work has not made it into a catalogued and accessible library. 

io Verzeichnis der orientalischen Handschriften in Deutschland 2.2.711 and 712. 

11 Oriental Research Library, University Campus Hazaratbal, Srinagar, National Mission for 
Mss. DSO 0000/5517. 

12 There are other sources that utilize the same material, but with variations: the Siddha- 
laksmīpūjāpaddhati —I have merely access to the transcription of ms. “Kashmir Research 
Center accession no: 2376” by the Muktabodha Institute—has for instance a completely 
different third pada of the starting verse. The Agnikaryapaddhati also transmits this verse. 

13 saptasapti] em. The ms. reads saptasapta as does the one in the Lindenmuseum, Stuttgart. 

14 pankaja] em.; panka ms. 

15  ārtihā] S; āšrayvā VOHD. 

16 siti] em.; śati ms. 

17 damaru] em.; dumara ms. 

18 nimitte| em.; nimite ms. 


352 HANNEDER 


bhayankaranāšini ditisutapramathani kale kalakinkarabhasini kalagnisikhe ka- 
larātri aje nitye simharathe yogarate yogesvarinimite (?) bhaktajanavatsale 
surapriyakāriņi durge durjaye hiranye $aranye kuru me dayam kuru me jayam | 


om pradyumnašikharāsīnām mātrcakropašobhitām | 
pithesvarüm šilārūpām sarikam pranamamy aham || 
ama caiva u kama ca carvangt tankadhāriņī | 


iti Srisarikastotram 


From this stotra we can gather something about the iconography of the deity, 
for instance the attributes held in her eighteen arms,?? her names, the seven 
goddesses (amā etc.) that form her retinue and their symbolism. 

The main information on a deity for ritual purposes is of course her mantra. 
Here one unpublished source?! gives the mantra in a Vedic style by stating its 
Rsi, metre, and deity, but augmented with the tantric elements bīja, Sakti and 
kilaka,22 and there is of course also a tantric Gayatri devoted to Šārikā.23 

So it seems the cult of Šārikā is fairly old, but it has been influenced by the 
cult of Tripura or Šrīvidyā. One such influence must have been the Kashmirian 
Kauls, a clan that migrated to Kashmir not before the fifteenth century?^ and 
brought their own cults with them, which were then fused with the local Kash- 
mirian cults.2% The most important figure in this group, Sahib Kaul, is credited 
with three ritual handbooks and furthermore fused Advaita Vedantic ideas with 
the Kashmirian Pratyabhijría.?6 Sahib Kaul has also composed a further text on 
the deity, a Šārikāstotra?” in eighteen verses which, as he says, gives the deriva- 
tion of her Mantra.?8 


19  yogesvari| em.; yogasvari- ms. 

20 We have to count the bow and arrow as one item held in the same hand. 

21 Agnikaryapaddhati. Manuscript no. 781, Research Library of the Jammu and Kashmir Gov- 
ernment, Shrinagar. Transcription of the Muktabodha Indological Research Institute. 

22  asyaérisarikamantrasya | šrīmahādeva rsih | tristupchandah || srisarikabhagavati devatā || 
sam bijam || ām saktih hram kilakam || home viniyogah || 

23 om hrīm sarikayai vidmahe | saptaksaryai dhīmahi || tan nah sila pracodayat ||3|| 

24 Sanderson 2003-2004, 362-366. 

25 Sanderson 2009, 124-125. 

26 | See Hanneder 2001. 

27 Notto be confused with the Šārikāstotra given above. 

28 There are further stotras and other minor works of Sahib Kaul, an edition of which is under 
preparation by the present author. 


ŠĀRIKĀ S MANTRA 353 


1 


Sahib Kaul's Šārikāstotra 


vande devim sarikam moksadātrīm 

sarvastham tam sarvato mohadatrim | 
mithyamrtyupraptidurbhitidatrim 

sadbhaktyaham mūrdhni candrāmšadhātrīm ||1|| 


Mss.: Os (CSS e.264, ff. 529r—531V) L, (SOAS 44389, ff.1-5) B, (Berlin Hs. or.12509). 1b moha] 
O3B,LP% moksa Li" 1d mürdhni] O; By; mūrti L, 1d dhatrim] L,B, dātrīm Og 


With true devotion I worship that divine and omnipresent Šārikā, who 
bears the crescent moon on her head, who grants liberation, destroys 
delusion everywhere, destroys the bad fear of meeting a wrong death. 


Since we have to suppose a Kashmirian pronounciation, which does not prop- 


erly distinguish aspirated from non-aspirated stops, all four lines are real- 


ized as an end rhyme. In this verse the goddess is adored as granting liber- 


ation, removing”? confusion etc. One iconographical detail known from the 


other sources, that she bears the crescent moon on her head, is alluded to as 


well. 


After the introductory stanza the main topic of the stotra, the mantroddhara 


explicitly mentioned in v. 17, commences: 


taram bījam yo japed amba bhaktya 
samsarabdhes tarakam šārike te | 

brahmajnanapraudhaya prajnayayam 
vacam nāthasyāpi kuryad vihasam ||2\| 


2b abdhes] Lj; ábdham Os 


O mother Sarika, whoever devotedly recites your tara-syllable, which car- 
ries one across (tāraka) the ocean of transmigration, may, when his wis- 
dom is ripened through the knowledge of the absolute, even put to shame 
the Lord of the Word (brhaspati). 


"Your bija" means the (first) syllable of the mantra of Šārikā. Sāhib Kaul uses 


code words for the syllables that make up the mantra, a common practice 


29 


In verse 1a the root dan dane (Dhātupātha 1.977) is used, while in 1b and 1c the root is dap 
lavane (Dhātupātha 2.50). 


354 HANNEDER 


which enables a writer to—as it were—speak of a mantra without actually pro- 
nouncing it. Thus, to those uninitiated and ignorant of the codes, the true form 
of the mantra must have, at least in theory, remained unknown. 

tara is a common code word for the syllable om and poses no problems. The 
codes that follow are partly difficult to interpret and will be discussed below. 


īšam sabjam vahnisamstham sapadmam 
bijam te 'nyad yah smaret tam smaranti | 
nāke devyo bhūtale nāgakanyā 
bhūmau nāryo vihvalā marabanaih ||3|| 


3c kanya] O3; patnyo L,B, 


He who remembers your next syllable, which is īša with abja, vahni, and 
padma, is remembered by goddesses in heaven, Naga maidens in the 
netherworld, and women on earth confused by the arrows of Kama. 


laksmībījam durlabham durjananam 
samyagbhaktya yo japec chuddhabuddhih | 
padmā nityam daršanam vīpsur asya 
dvāre tisthaty adarac caūicalāpi ||4|| 


4d adaràc] L, By; ādarā O 


One of pure mind who recites with complete devotion the laksmī-syllable, 
which is difficult for bad people to obtain, him the goddess of good for- 
tune will always be eager to see, and although unsteady (by nature) she 
will remain at his doorstep out of devotion. 


īšam sabjam vamakarnordhvasamstham 
bījam te ‘nyad yo japet tasya šatruņ | 

sarvair devair apy ajayyah ksanena 
drsteh patad yamagehatithih syat ||5|| 


5a karnordhva] L, By; karņardhva Og. 5d drsteh] By drstoh O3L, 5d atithih] L,B,; atithi O3 


He who recites your next syllable, which is īša with abja and the one 
above the left ear, his enemy, although invincible even for all the gods, will 
instantly, in the wink of an eye, become a guest in the house of Death. 


ŠĀRIKĀ S MANTRA 355 


30 
31 


32 


33 


īšam bijam vaktravrttena yuktam 

sabjam yo ‘nyat samsmared vahnisamstham | 
bhuktir muktih sadvicārasya yuktir 

bhaktis caitaddhastayātā bhavanti ||6|| 


6b samsmared| Os; samjaped L,B, 6d bhaktiscai] Lj; bhakticai O3 


He who remembers your next syllable, which is isa together with vak- 
travrtta and vahni, will have at his disposal *enjoyment"?? (bhukti), lib- 
eration, the method of real vicdra,?! and devotion. 


sabjam bījam vaktravrttam japed yah 
samyagbhaktya suddhahrc chārike te | 
vāņī nānāsadrasair jrmbhitasrir 
nityam vaktre tisthati praudham asya ||7|| 


7a sabjam] Os; am L B, 


He who recites your syllable with pure heart and proper devotion, O 
Šārikā, which consists of abja and vaktravrtta, in his mouth a fully devel- 
oped?? voice stays, which has the beauty of unfolding through various 
good emotions. 


sabjam bijam vaktravrttena yuktam 
asthyatmakhyam yo japec charike te | 
jīvanmuktas ceha bhuktvātibhogāl 
līnah pašcāt tvatpade syād bhavāni ||8|| 


8c bhuktva] L, Og; bhukta B, 


He who recites your syllable, consisting of abja and vaktravrtta, and called 
asthyatma, O Šārikā, is liberated in life and, enjoying supreme bhogas,33 
will later dissolve in your state, O Bhavani. 


In context, this may mean the enjoyment of powers (siddhi). 

I understand the term in the sense of atmavicara as used in the Moksopaya (5.5.27), a text 
which Sahib Kaul occasionally refers to. 

praudham is of course an adverb, but to translate “stays ripely” would not really capture 
the intended sense. 

This could again denote the siddhis, but in a less technical register the enjoyment of the 
pleasures of liberation. 


356 


HANNEDER 


etadbījaprāntagām šārikāyā 

ityakhyam te samjaped yo namontam | 
tat te dhàma prāpyate tena sasvad 

gatvā bhityah socyate naiva yatra ||9|| 


9b itya] L, Oz Bj; yitya Os 


He who recites after that syllable your name, Sarika, followed by namah, 
attains forever to that abode where, when reached, one never suffers 
again. 


samstaumi tvàm tvàm imām āšraye 'ham 
seve devim eva sarvaikasaktim | 

tvām atyuccair gadgadam sambravīmi 
sarvam sārvām sarvato bhavayami ||10|| 


10a tvàm tvàm imam | L, By; tvā tvàmim Og 10b seve] L, By; seved O3 10c tvām atyuccair | 
L; By tvàm mrtyuccair Og. 10d sarvàm sārvām] Ly sarvām sarvām O; B, 


I praise you; it is you in whom I take refuge. I serve the Goddess alone, the 
one power of all (powers). I utter my noisy stammering to you; I contem- 
plate (you) who are everything, suitable for all (sarva), and everywhere. 


jātah so' sau satkule tasya dhanya 
mata tasmin saūgatā āšisas ca | 

jnatam sarvam tena $ambhupriyayah 
samyakprajna nirmità yena bhaktya ||u1]| 


na satkule] L, Os; satkulye B, nid prajfía] Og; prajā L, B, 


He is born in a good family, his mother is blessed, and he receives good 
wishes. He knows everything about [Sarika, ] the beloved of Siva, who has 
fathomed true knowledge through devotion. 


bhaktih pusnaty anvaham mam tvadiya 
nityam yadvat purnacandrodayo 'bdhim | 

tvadbhakteh satsampadā prāptayāham 
jisnor laksmīm capy upekse purogam ||12|| 


12a pusnatya] L, By; pusnátyu Oz 12b candrodayo'bdhim | L, By; candrodayabdhim Oz 


ŠĀRIKĀ S MANTRA 357 


My devotion to you nourishes me every day, as the rise of the full moon 
always nourishes the ocean. On accountofthe true affluence of victorious 
devotion to you I even ignore the excellent Laksmī. 


etat sarvam tvanmayam devadevi 
tvam ciddehā kevalā suprasiddhā | 

nasty ajfíanam kvāpi tasmāt kva drsto 
vandhyaputras capam aropya dhāvan ||13|| 


13a etat Lj By et Og. 13c nāstya L, By nāsti Og. 13d capam aro Ly; apasāro Bj; cāpimāro Oz 


The whole world (etat sarvam) consists of you, Goddess of Gods! Your 
body is consciousness, you are alone and perfectly established. Nowhere 
is there ignorance. Thus, where do we see the son of a barren woman run 
and raise his bow? 


asaste me devabhavam na cittam 

süteh kāle strīva bhogam kadacit | 
tvatsadbhaktyā nrtyati prāptayālam 

gayan chrutvā meghanādam šikhīva ||14|| 


14a cittam L, By; citta O3 


My mind does not strive after the divine state, just as a woman giving birth 
never craves enjoyment. Having gained perfect (alam) devotion to you it 
sings like a peacock who has heard the sound of the rain clouds. 


sā ka bhūmir yatra nāsti sthitis te 
sā kā vāņī nocyase vā yayā tvam | 
ko sau šabdah šrūyase yatra na tvam 
ko 'sau bhavo yatra te bhāsanam no ||15|| 


15a bhumih] L; bhūmi O; B, 


There is no place where you do not reside; there is no voice in which you 
are not expressed. There is no word in which you are not heard; there is 
no thing in which you do not shine. 


tvatsadbhaktyarkodayāt sampraphullam 
hrtpadmam me 'tyadbhutāt sadraseddham | 


358 


HANNEDER 


nityam yasmin sarvadā kanksantya 
sarvais tisthaty adaran moksalaksmth ||16|| 


16a tvatsat] conj.; tvatpad L, By; unclear in O3 due to damaged folio 


When the marvelous sun of true devotion to you rises, the lotus of my 
heart is inflamed through true emotion (rasa). In it always resides, out of 
respect, the good fortune of liberation that is coveted by all. 


jnanasvamipraptasadbuddhisaro 
jnatajreyah sarvatah svātmabhāvī | 

stotram mantroddhary adah šārikāyāh 
sahibkaulo vamsadevyaé cakara ||17|| 


17a sarah] conj.; sara Lj, Og B, 17c mantroddhāry adah] L, By mantrodāry adah Oz 17d 
devyas cakara O3B,| devās cakāra L, 


Having attained the strength of true intelligence through Jianasvamin, I 
know what there is to know and everywhere contemplate my own self. I, 
Sāhib Kaula, have composed this hymn to the lineage deity Šārikā, which 
contains the construction of her Mantra. 


Sahib Kaul's Sarikastava deals with some aspects of the worship of this deity; 


most importantly, as the author states in verse 17, it gives the mantroddhara of 


the Sarikamantra. The author's teacher Jiánasvàmin, according to Madhusu- 


dan Kaul,34 was his maternal uncle. 


34 


yo vapy etam kīrtayet stotram ādhyam 
samyagbhaktya srosyati $ravayed và | 
nirmantro pi prapnuyad devadevi 
nihsandeham mantrajam satphalam sah ||18|| 


18a vapyetam] Ly vyāpyetat O3B, 18a kīrtayet| L,; kīrtaye O; 18a adhyam] Lj; madyam 
Os 18b šrosyati] conj.; śrośyati Ly; $risyati Oz 18b va] Lj; vāvā Og 


Whoever chants this rich hymn of praise with perfect devotion, hears it or 


has it recited, even if he be without mantra, he will, O supreme Goddess, 
without doubt reap the great fruit of this mantra. 


See above. 


ŠĀRIKĀ S MANTRA 359 


This final stanza explains the idea behind this work. A person who is not ini- 
tiated into the recitation of the mantra of Šārikā and may not even know how 
to decode the mantroddhāra can still benefit from this type of substitute recita- 
tion. In this the work is similar in approach to the Sūryastutirahasya of Sāhib 
Kauls contemporary Ratnakantha, where the Vedic Gayatri-mantra is hidden 
within a hymn addressed to the sun as an acrostichon.?5 

The aim in both cases is apparently to enable persons who lack proper 
adhikara—for Vedic mantras, in the case of Ratnakantha, or Tantric mantras, in 
the case of Sahib Kaul—to gain at least some kind of access to these restricted 
parts of the religion. This technique of “hiding” the actual form of the mantras 
in a stotra meant for religious recitation is not so much a way to conceal it from 
the outsider, but a method to enable him or her to use it without breaking reli- 
gious rules, in other words a method to bypass religious and social restrictions. 
Theologically the matter is of course complicated, because Ratnakantha’s sto- 
tra actually contains the sounds that make up the Gayatri, so in a sense by 
reciting the stotra one does recite the Gayatri. In the case of the Šārikāstava, 
since only code names are given, one does not utter the sounds that make up 
the mantra of Sarika. 

Despite the fact that the stotra contains the mantroddhara, it is quite diffi- 
cult to decipher the mantra from Sahib Kauls stotra alone, for the system of 
codes is not otherwise known. The most obvious place to search for a solution 
would be the mantroddhara in the Devirahasya, for this text deals in detail with 
the Kashmirian lineage goddesses, and according to Aithal,36 the Srividyanitya- 
pujapaddhati of Sahib Kaul as available in the ms. Chandra Shum Shere c. 264 
is roughly identical with the ritual manuals printed in the appendix to the Devt- 
rahasya.?" This is the relevant verse:*% 


taram parā-mā-tata-sindhurārņāh 

kham Sarma tanmadhyagatam ca nama | 
ante Smart parvati šārikāyās 

trayodašārņo manur asti gopyah || 


35 See Stanislav Jager in Hanneder, Jager and Sanderson, 2012, 23. 

36 Aithal, 1999, 35. 

37 Judging from the excerpts a similar ms. is described in Catalogue of the Sanskrit Manu- 
scripts in the Library of the India Office. Part Iv. A.vi11 Tantra. See Windisch, 1894, 861— 
862. 

38 Devīrahasya, p. 407. 


360 HANNEDER 


TABLE 14.1 The bījas as defined in the Šārikāstotra 


Verse bija Explanation 

2 om taram 

3 hrim īšam sābjam vahnisamstham sapadmam 

4 $rnm laksmibijam 

5 hüm īšam sābjam vàmakarnordhvasamstham 

6 phrām īšam vaktravrttena yuktam sābjam 

7 ām sābjam vaktravrttam 

8 sam sabjam vaktravrttena yuktam asthyatmakhyam 

9 etadbijaprantagam šārikāyā ityākhyānte samjaped yo 
namontām 


The code words—parā for hrim, asmarī for namah etc.—are explained 
in the edition of the Devirahasya.?? Furthermore, in its second chapter the 
mantras are given also in plain language (spastam), as is the mantra of Šārikā: 
om hrīm srim hum phram am sam sarikayai namah.^? We might thus conclude 
that all is well, and that since the wording of the mantra itself is not (and, the- 
ologically speaking, should not) be in doubt, we have a good chance to under- 
stand Sahib Kaul’s mantroddhara. Since these sets of codes cannot easily be 
corrupted in the course of transmission, no banal error should have crept in.*! 

However, if we look at the definitions in Sāhib Kaul's Šārikāstava, we find 
that not all can be brought into accord with this form of the mantra. Table 14.1 
shows the expected bījas and their definitions in the verses. We may leave out 
verses 2, 4 and g, because they do not use complicated codes: tara usually 


“ug. 


means “om,” laksmi stands for “Sri,” and the conclusion of the mantra (dative 
of the deity and namah) is as expected. 

The problem arises when we try to decode the remainder as follows: (1) the 
element present in all definitions is abja and there is only one sound common 
to all five bijas, that is, m. Apart from that nos. 6-8 have only one element in 
common, so vaktravrtta stands for a. Taking now elements that occur only once, 


it follows that in 8 asthy- must signify $, vamakarna- in 5 means ū, and vahni 


39 Op. cit., pp. 19-21. 

40 Op.cit., p. 13. 

41 There is, of course, the counter-evidence of one manuscript of a Šārikāstavarāja (voHD 
2.216), which gives the mantra with the misspelling or wrong transcription of hrm for 
hüm. 


ŠĀRIKĀ S MANTRA 361 


as expected stands for r. Now only isa remains, which stands for A in 3 and 5, 
but—in view of our mantra—should stand for ph in 6. 

Let us now look at another source. The mantra is also given in the Daksiņa- 
mūrtyuddhārakoša, where we find the following definition:*? 


tāram mayam sriyam kūrcam sindhuram šūnyam eva ca | 
kalyanam šārikādevyā bījam saptaksaram smrtam || 


According to the index of code words in the appendix and the 'prakasam" ver- 
sion (ibid., 16) this translates into the seven bijas “om hrim srim hum hram am 
sam.’ The manuscripts reported have three other options for hram, one being 
phrām, our reading from the Devirahasya. 

Now, in the index of the edition of the Daksinamürtyuddharakosa the code 
word sindhura is given as hram, while according to the bījāksarapāribhāsikasūcī 
contained in the Devirahasya (p. 21) it means phram. In other words we find two 
versions of the mantra in the available sources, unless the editors have misread 
their manuscripts. What we can say is that the evidence from Sahib Kaul con- 
firms the version of the Daksiņamūrtyuddhārakoša. 


Abbreviations 


conj conjecture 

em. emendation 

ms(s) manuscript(s) 

vOHD Verzeichnis der orientalischen Handschriften in Deutschland 


References 


Primary Sources 
Agnikaryapaddhati 
Manuscript no. 781, Research Library of the Jammu and Kashmir Government, Shrina- 
gar. Transcription of the Muktabodha Indological Research Institute. 


Uddharakosa of Daksinamurti 
Raghu Vīra and Shodo Taki, eds. $ri-Daksinamürti-viracita Uddhàrakosah. Reprint, New 
Delhi: Mushiram Manoharlal, 1978 [1938]. 


42 Daksinamurti’s Uddhārakoša, p. 15. The first line up to sindhura is identical with another 
mantroddhāra in Devīrahasya, p. 13. 


362 HANNEDER 


Kathāsaritsāgara 
Pandit Durgāprasād, ed. The Kathāsaritsāgara of Somadevabhatta. Bombay: Tukārām 
Jāvajī, 1903. 


Devīrahasya 

Ramchandra Kak and Harabhatta Shastri, eds. Sridevirahasyam. Vrajajivan Prachyab- 
harati Granthamala, no. 33. Reprint, New Delhi: Chaukhamba Sanskrit Pratishthan 
1993 [Srinagar: Vishinath & Sons, 1941]. 


Dhatupatha 
In Otto Bóhtlingk, ed. Panini’s Grammatik, pp. 61-145 (appendix). Leipzig: H. Haessel 
1887. 


Moksopaya 

Krause-Stinner und Peter Stephan, eds. Moksopaya. Das Fiinfte Buch. Upašāntipraka- 
rana. Kritische Edition. Anonymus Casmiriensis: Moksopāya. Historisch-kritische 
Gesamtausgabe. Herausgegeben unter der Leitung von Walter Slaje. Textedition. Teil 
4. Akademie der Wissenschaften und der Literatur, Mainz. Veróffentlichungen der 
Indologischen Kommission. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz, 2013. 


Šārikāstotra of Sāhib Kaul 

(O3) Bodleian Library, Oxford, Chandra Shum Shere e.264, ff. 529r-531v. 

(L;) School of Oriental and African Studies, London, No. 44389, ff. 1-5. 

(Bı) Staatsbibliothek zu Berlin, Preussischer Kulturbesitz, Sammlung Janert, Hs. or. 
12509. 


Siddhalaksmipujapaddhati 
Manuscript, Kashmir Research Center accession no. 2376. Transcription of the Mukta- 
bodha Indological Research Institute. 


Saundaryalaharī 

Anantakrsna Šāstri, ed. Saundarya-laharī of Šrī Samkarācārya with Commentaries, 
Saubhāgyavardhanī of Kaivalyaérama, Laksmidhara of Laksmīdharācārya, Aruna- 
modinī of Kamesvarasurin. Madras: Ganesh, 1957. 


Secondary Sources 
Aithal, K. Parameswara. 1999. A Descriptive Catalogue of the Sanskrit and Other Indian 
Manuscripts of the Chandra Shum Shere Collection in the Bodleian Library. Part 3: Sto- 
tras. Oxford: Clarendon Press. 
Hanneder, Jürgen. 2001. “Sahib Kaul's Presentation of Pratyabhijfia Philosophy in his 


ŠĀRIKĀ S MANTRA 363 


Devīnāmavilāsa” pp. 414—415. In Le Parole e i Marmi. Studi in onore di Raniero Gnoli 
nel suo 70 compleanno, edited by R. Torella, 399—418. Serie Orientale Roma, XC11, 1/2. 
Roma: Istituto italiano per l’ Africa e l’ Oriente. 

Hanneder, Jürgen, Stanislav Jager and Alexis Sanderson. 2012. Ratnakanthas Stotras 
Sūryastutirahasya, Sūryašataka und Sambhukrpamanoharastava. Indologica Mar- 
purgensia, no. 5. Mūnchen: Kirchheim Verlag. 

Sanderson, Alexis. 2003-2004. "The Šaiva Religion Among the Khmers, Part 1.” Bulletin 
de l'Ecole francaise d’ Extréme-Orient go—91: 362—366. 

Sanderson, Alexis. 2009. "Kashmir" In Brill's Encyclopedia of Hinduism, vol. 1, edited by 
Knut A. Jacobsen, 99-126. Leiden; Boston: Brill. 

Sanderson, Alexis. 2015. "Saiva Texts." In: Brill's Encyclopedia of Hinduism, vol. 6, edited 
by Knut A. Jacobsen, 10-42. Leiden; Boston: Brill. 

Verzeichnis der orientalischen Handschriften in Deutschland. 

Windisch, Ernst and Julius Eggeling. 1894. Catalogue of the Sanskrit Manuscripts in the 
Library of the India Office. Part 1v. A. v111 Tantra. London: Printed by Gilbert and Riv- 
ington by order of the Secretary of State for India in Council. 


CHAPTER 15 
The Kāmasiddhistuti of King Vatsarāja 


Diwakar Acharya 


This essay concerns a pūjāstuti! that guides its reciter through the mental or 
actual worship of the goddess Nitya. The text is composed in the first person but 
the author does not name himself in the text. The text is named Vāmakešvarī- 
stuti and attributed to Maharajadhiraja Vidyadharacakravartin Vatsaraja in the 
colophon of the sole palm-leaf manuscript of the text available to me. How- 
ever, the last verse of the text calls it Kamesvaristuti and describes it using two 
adjectives, kamasiddhi and atimangalakamadhenu. It is not unnatural, I think, 
to name this stuti using its first adjective.” 

The manuscript containing this stuti text is preserved in the National Ar- 
chives, Kathmandu. It bears accession number 121077 and can be found micro- 
filmed under NGMPP reel number A 39/15. The same manuscript also contains 
a paddhati text called Asesakulavallari that dwells on the worship of the god- 
dess Tripura, but this text remains incomplete as the folios following the six- 
teenth are absent. Our text begins on the verso of the first folio and ends in 
the third line of the recto of the fourth, with a colophon and a decorative sym- 
bol. The other text immediately follows in the same hand with a salutation to 
the goddess Tripura. The manuscript is written in a variety of North Indian 
script close to Newari with frequent use of prsthamatras. It is possible that 
this manuscript was copied by an immigrant or pilgrim in Kathmandu valley. 
It measures 33 x 4.5 cm and has a binding hole to the left of the centre. It bears 
foliation in numerals in the left margin and in numbers in the right margin 
of verso folios. The text in the manuscript is dotted with scribal errors, but no 
secunda manus corrections are seen. On palaeographical grounds I place the 
manuscript in the late fourteenth century. 

This manuscript contains 46 verses of the stuti and one more verse (num- 
bered here as 38a) can be retrieved from a citation.? A little less than the half 
of the stuti covering the first 21 verses is in Anustubh metre and the rest in 


1 A number of pūjāstutis of the Tripurā traditon can be found in the appendix section of 
Dwivedi 1985. Aghorasiva’s Paricavaranastava, published from Pondicherry (see Goodall et 
al. 2005), is a good example of a Siddhanta Saiva pūjāstuti. 

2 See footnote 32 for further discussion on the name, extent and circulation of the text. 

3 See foonote 32 for details. 


© DIWAKAR ACHARYA, 2020 | D01:10.1163/9789004432802 017 


This is an open access chapter distributed under the terms of the CC BY-NC 4.0 license. 


THE KĀMASIDDHISTUTI OF KING VATSARĀJA 365 


Vasantatilakā. Verses 31 and 32 form a yugalaka as the finite verb comes only 
in the second verse. The author plays now and again with syllabic rhyming 
(anuprāsa), and his language is beautiful, though sometimes elliptical. 

The stuti opens with a pair of verses invoking Paramasiva and Nitya Sakti. 
These verses already tell us of the poet’s understanding of the nature of Nitya 
and inseparability of Paramašiva and Sakti, a point highlighted in the second 
half of the text, particularly verses 31-32 and 42. In verse 3 the poet states that 
he approaches the temple of Mrdani from the west gate (pascimadvara).* The 
next two verses invoke Gaņeša and Ksetreša. The latter, who has the form of 
Bhairava, can be identified as Batuka. Gaņeša and Batuka together are iden- 
tified as the goddess's sons in Sākta systems and serve as her doorkeepers.5 
To our surprise, verse 6 invokes the Vaisnava doorkeepers Sankhanidhi and 
Padmanidhi, who bear the Vaisnava emblems of the conch and lotus on their 
heads. Verses 7-9 invoke respectively three goddesses: Padma, a Vaisņava ver- 
sion of Durgā carrying a conch and discus, and Bhāratī. Verses 10 and n invoke 
Manobhava, namely, the Indian love-god Kamadeva, and describe him as the 


4 This should be the intended meaning, because one is supposed to enter a temple from the 
western or southern gate facing east or north. Therefore, many of the early Saiva-Sakta tem- 
ples, even though they face east, have an older western or southern entry. For more discus- 
sions, see Goodall et al. 2005, 103-107 and Goodall et al. 2015, 366 (Nisvasa, Uttarasütra 3:8 
and annotation thereon). Another possible interpretation of pascimadvara is "the last door 
to resort to." Perhaps, the poet is punning. 

5 For Gaņeša and Batuka as the Goddess' sons, See, e.g., Jayaratha on Tantrāloka 1.6b. 

6 Samkhanidhi and Padmanidhi have strong associations with the cult of Yaksas. In the Megha- 
dita, Kālidāsa's Yaksa tells the cloud-messenger that the marks of conch (šamkha) and lotus 
(padma) are painted on the sides of the gate of his house in the city of Alakā, as he pro- 
vides a number of clues for the identification of his house. In the form of emblems as well as 
human forms, Šamkhanidhi and Padmanidhi are depicted in the Ajantà caves and are asso- 
ciated with Yaksa deities (cf. Bautze-Picron 2002, 225-231). Besides, the Buddhist Vasudhara 
Dhāraņī enjoins worship Sankhanidhana and Padmanidhana with the goddess Vasudhārā 
encircled by a group of eight unspecified Yaksinis. Some other texts name Samkhanidhi and 
Padmanidhi as male consorts of Vasudhārā and Vasumatī, respectively. Anyway, these two are 
adopted by the Vaisnavas as doorkeepers or attendants of Visnu along with the other pairs of 
Jaya and Vijaya, Canda and Pracanda, Nanda and Sunanda. They also feature in some compar- 
atively late Tantric texts of other traditions, particularly those from the south. They are listed 
also among the twelve Vaisnava nidhis found in some Puranic and Vaisnava texts. Professor 
Dominic Goodall kindly informs me (personal communication of November 20, 2019) that 
what is now called the Kailāsanātha temple in Kancheepuram seems to have Sankhanidhi 
and Padmanidhi framing the doorway. According to him, that temple now has an eastern 
entrance to the enclosure, but there is an older western entry, now blocked up. 

For an example of images of Samkhanidhi and Padmanidhi from Anurādhapur, Sri Lanka, 
See Paranavitana 1955. 


366 ACHARYA 


beloved husband of Rati and Prīti.” Here we are told that the love-god forms 
the circular base of the Sricakra, the mandala of the goddess Nitya Sundari. 
With these verses the text enters the process of installation of various deities 
in the Sricakra. It does not specify where these deities are installed, but from 
the order of verses we know that we are starting from the periphery and mov- 
ing towards the centre. Verses 12—14 respectively praise eight siddhis, beginning 
with Anima (in personified forms), eight mother-goddesses, and the deities of 
ten gestures of the goddess.® Verses 15 and 16 venerate sixteen goddesses of 
attraction (ākarsaņa) and eight powers of the bodiless love-god (anangašakti), 
respectively, all in personified forms.? We know from the Vamakesvaratantra 
andother Tripurā texts that these are installed on the petals of the sixteen- and 
eight-petalled lotuses. The next four verses, 17—20, respectively praise the set of 
fourteen goddesses/powers (Saktis) headed by Sarvasamksobhaņī,!? ten Kula 


7 For Rati and Priti as Kamadeva's wives, see, e.g. Brahmāņda Purāņa 111.44.33. A Sunga 
period teracotta plaque of Kamadeva with Rati and Priti is also preserved in the Mathura 
Musuem (accession no. 34-2552). 

8 Itis possible that these three sets of deities are installed on the three lines forming the out- 
ermost retinue of the rectangular boundary. The Vamakesvaratantra, also known as Nityā- 
sodašikārņava, enjoins installing the eight mother-goddesses as well as the eight siddhis 
in the four directions and four sub-directions, and does not instruct one to worship the 
goddesses of the gestures. Bhāskararāya (p. 99), however, mentions that according to some 
other system the outermost boundary is made of three lines and these three sets of god- 
desses are installed there. According to its commentators, the Vamakesvaratantra teaches 
that one should build the boundary with only two lines. Although the Vamakesvaratantra 
does not assign a place for the gestures (mudrā) in the mandala, it does describe them 
and asks the worshipper to use them during the worship. As found in the third chapter 
of the Vamakesvaratantra, these ten gestures are trikhanda, ksobhini, vidravini, akarsini, 
avesakari, unmadint, mahānkušā, khecarī, bija, and yoni. 

As listed in many texts, including the Nisvasaguhya (7.204—205), the eight siddhis are 
aņimā, laghimā, mahimā, isitva, vasitva, prāpti, prakamya, and yatrakamavasayita. The 
Vāmakešvaratantra (1153-155) makes them ten by adding two more, bhukti and iccha, 
and prescribes worshipping them in ten directions. According to the latter (1156-157), 
the eight mother-goddesses are Brahmani, Māhešī, Kaumārī, Vaisnavi, Vārāhī, Indrāņī, 
Camunda, and Mahālaksmī. 

9 These are not individually named in this text, but, as listed in the Vamakesvaratantra, the 
first set is made of Kamakarsini, Budhyākarsiņī, Ahamkārākarsiņī, Sabdakarsini, Sparsa- 
karsini, Rūpākarsiņī, Rasakarsini, Gandhakarsini, Cittakarsini, Dhairyakarsini, Smrtya- 
karsiņī, Namakarsini, Bījākarsiņī, Atmakarsini, Amrtakarsini, and Sarirakarsini (cf. 1.158- 
161), and the second set is made of Anangakusuma, Anangamekhalā, Anangamadana, 
Madanāturā, Anangarekha, Anangavegini, Anangankusa, and Anangamālinī (cf. 1.163— 
164). 

10 We know only the name of the first from this text but the rest can be known from 
the Vamakesvaratantra (1165-168). They are: Sarvavidrāviņī, Sarvākarsiņī, Sarvāhlādinī, 
Sarvasammohini, Sarvastambhanī, Sarvajambhanī, Sarvatovasini, Sarvarafijani, Sarvon- 


THE KĀMASIDDHISTUTI OF KING VATSARĀJA 367 


goddesses (kulesvari) headed by Sarvasiddhiprada," ten goddesses headed by 
Sarvajītā,!? and eight goddesses of speech, headed by Vašinī.!$ They are sta- 
tioned in the four consecutive retinues of fourteen, ten, another ten, and eight 
triangles. All deities in a group (see verses 12-20) are visualised in the same 
way; for example, all mother-goddesses (matr) have the same appearance.* 
Verse 21 invokes and asks the deities of four weapons of the goddess for their 
permission. It is known from other sources that they are placed around the 
central triangle (cf., e.g, Vamakesvaratantra 1179-180). The next three verses, 
22—24, praise Kāmešvarī, Vajrešvarī, and Bhagamalini, and urge them to fulfill 
the reciter's desires. Unlike previous ones, these verses also name the three cor- 
ners of the central triangle as the homes of these goddesses. Verse 25 is in praise 
of Nitya Sundarī, the goddess in the centre. From here onward, until the second 
to last verse (45), the poet praises Nitya in various ways. He first invokes the god- 
dess as Nityà (verse 25) and later as $risundari (verse 30), and describes her as 
“the felicitous banner of the Love-god.’ Verses 25—28 describe the beauty of the 
goddess, and verses 29—45, with the exception of verse 33 (which describes the 
Sricakra made of 43 triangles as her abode), exalt her in various ways, identi- 
fying her as the ultimate reality of the external as well as internal worlds. She 
is described as the primordial light (adyamahas) and paramarthavidya, which 
can be interpreted as the highest mantra, the mantra leading to the highest, or 
the ultimate gnosis. The last verse is a fine eulogy of the stuti itself, describing 
its reward and thus encouraging people to recite it. 

It has been already pointed out by Sanderson and also Golovkova that the 
mature cult of Tripurasundan developed against the backdrop of the nityā cult, 
evidence for which is available in the Nityakaulatantra and the Siddhakhanda 
of the Manthanabhairavatantra. In those texts Tripurasundari is accompa- 


mādinī, Sarvarthasadhani, Sarvasampattipūraņī, Sarvamantramayi, and Sarvadvandva- 
ksayamkari. 

11 Again the list can be completed with the help of the Vamakesvaratantra, but these god- 
desses are here simply called saktis. The other nine following Sarvasiddhipradā are: Sar- 
vasampatprada, Sarvapriyamkari, Sarvamangalakarini, Sarvakamaprada, Sarvaduhkha- 
vimocini, Sarvamrtyuprašamanī, Sarvavighnanivarini, Sarvangasundari, and Sarvasau- 
bhāgyadāyinī (cf. 1169-171). 

12  Sarvajíia is followed by Sarvašakti, Sarvaisvaryapradayini, Sarvajfianamayi, Sarvavyadhi- 
vinasini, Sarvādhārasvarūpā, Sarvapapahara, Sarvānandamayī, Sarvaraksāsvarūpiņī, and 
Sarvepsitaphalapradā (cf. Vamakesvaratantra 1.173—175). 

13 The names of these eight can be retrieved from the mantroddhara section of the Vama- 
kešvaratantra (cf. 1.77-80). They are Vasinī, Kamesvari, Modini, Vimala, Aruna, Jayini, 
Sarvešvarī, and Kaulini. 

14 Neither the Vamakesvaratantra nor any of the paddhatis of that tradition give visualisa- 
tions of these deities. 


368 ACHARYA 


nied bya retinue of eleven and nine nityās, respectively, and worshipped with 
Kāmadeva.! Our text identifies Kamadeva as the husband of Rati and Prīti, 
places him on the base of the Sricakra (cf. verses 10-11), and installs Nitya Sun- 
dari at the altar of worship in the centre of the mandala without a consort, inde- 
pendent and supreme. However, in verses 31-32 she is described as devamahist, 
although itis said that their body is one and undifferentiated. In verse 2 the poet 
names the goddess Nitya and invokes her as the Sakti of Paramašiva possessing 
all powers and carrying out the five tasks (pavicakrtya) for him. In verse 34 the 
poet invokes her as Mahešvarī but states that some royal people in this world 
call her Laksmi and Para Prakrti. In verse 40 she is described as Atibhava, high- 
lighting her transcendent nature, and in verse 42 she is invoked again as Gauri. 
It is thus clear that the poet of our text is a Saiva devotee of goddess Nitya. It 
is important to note that in the system known to our poet there is only one 
Nitya, simply called Sundari, and that the Sricakra is also already known. Our 
poet appears unaware of the sixteen nityās, who are worshipped in the tradi- 
tion of the Vamakesvaratantra. It thus appears that the tradition this stuti text 
represents is different from both the cult of nityas and that of Tripura. 

The inclusion of Sankhanidhi and Padmanidhi (verse 6), Padma (verse 7), 
and the Vaisnava Durga (verse 8) suggests that the goddess Nitya is somehow 
linked to the Vaisnava tradition as well. In fact, in verse 34 the poet mentions 
that some people call her Laksmi and Para Prakrti, but we are not aware of sur- 
vival of any Vaisnava paddhati of Nitya. 

Now I come to the issue of the poet's identity. The fact that he is a king and 
was perhaps somewhat distressed at the time of composition of the stuti can 
be known from the text itself (cf. verse 40). Furthermore, in the colophon the 
text is attributed to Maharajadhiraja Vidyādharacakravarti Vatsaraja.!6 Appar- 
ently, the first epithet is royal—he is the king of great kings—while the second 
is mantric: he is sovereign among the vidyādharas, who are supposed to pos- 
sess esoteric mantric knowledge and due to this have supernatural powers. 
Vatsarāja is his personal name. The most famous Vatsarāja, the mythical king 
of Ujjayini, does not fit the context. Another is King Vatsaraja of the Gurjara- 
Pratihara dynasty (c. 775-805 CE), the father of Maharajadhiraja Nāgabhata 
II (805-833 CE). Vatsaraja is always called paramamahesvara, but in the Pra- 
tapagadh Stone Inscription of Mahendrapala 11 (dated Year 1003 = 946CE), 


15 cf. Sanderson 2009, 47-49; Golovkova 2012, 816—817. 

16  Itisinteresting to note that a fifteenth-century inscription from Vijayanagara remembers a 
king called Vatsaraja blessed by Tripuramba. As Sinopoli (2010, 22) cites, “‘As Vani blesses 
king Bhoka, Tripuramba king Vatsaraja, and Kali king Vikramarka, so does Pampa now 
bless Devaraya' (trans. Rajasekhara 1992: 27)” 


THE KĀMASIDDHISTUTI OF KING VATSARĀJA 369 


Nagabhata 11 is called paramabhagavatībhakta.!” It may be a coincidence, but 
the latter's mother is named Sundari. In any case, this Vatsaraja could be our 
poet.! Our text represents an archaic tradition that does not even know the 
name Tripurasundari, and thus this date in the early-ninth century CE fits it 
well. 


1 Text and Translation 


19nihstmanandaya devyā nityam samarasatmanah | 
paramasya sivasyaham šraye sripadukadvayam ||| 


a. nihsima?] em.; nihšāmā? Ms. b. °rasatmanah] em.; °rasanmanah Ms. 


I resort to the glorious sandals of Paramašiva (Šiva in the Ultimate state), 
who is eternally in equilibrial union with the Goddess characterised by 
boundless bliss (nistmananda).?° 


sarvanugrahinim nityam sarvamangalamataram | 
sarvašaktim bhaje saktim paricakrtyakarum prabhoh ||2|| 


a. sarvanugrahinim | em.; sarvan grāhiņī Ms. d. °karim] em.; °kari Ms. 


I revere the Nitya Sakti of the Lord, i.e. Paramašiva. She possesses all pow- 
ers and carries out the five tasks [for him].?! She bestows grace upon all, 
is eternal, and is the motherly origin of all good. 


17 cf. Sircar 1983, 251. 

18 There is another poet of the same name who flourished in the second half of the twelfth 
and the first quarter of the thirteenth century CE (cf. Dalal 1918, vi-vii), but he is a minister, 
not a king. He served the Kalafijara King Paramardideva and wrote some dramatic pieces. 
Six of such pieces have been published in one volume under the title Rapakasatkam (see 
Dalal 1918). He does not mention Nityā, Sundarī, or Tripurasundarī in his dramas. 

19  Themanuscript begins with an invocation, |ļom namo ganapataye||, preceded by a siddhi 
sign. I do not think that this invocation is part of the text. 

20 The manuscript reads nihšāmānanda- and I have emended it to nihsīmānanda. I have 
found this compound used at least in one more text, the Adhikaraņasārāvalī of Vedan- 
tadesika. 

21 The five tasks of Šiva include punishment (nigraha) and grace (anugraha), besides cre- 
ation, maintenance, and destruction. 


370 


22 
23 


24 


ACHARYA 


pālitam bahir indradyaih paramaisvaryasobhitam | 
prapadye pašcimadvāram mrdanya mandiram mahat ||3|| 


b. paramaigvarya°??] em.; paramešvarya? Ms. 


I approach the great temple of goddess Mrdani that opens to the west. It is 
guarded outside by Indra and the other [gods who guard the directions], 
and shines beautifully with utmost richness. 


pasankusaphalambhojaih panipadmam tu manditam | 
bālam vighnacchidam vande gajavaktram ganesvaram ||4] | 


a. °phalambhojaih] conj.; ^phalambhoja Ms. b. pāņipadmam tu manditam] conj.; pani- 
pādan tu nanditam Ms. c. balam] conj.; bāram Ms. 


I venerate the young elephant-faced master of Siva's ganas, the destroyer 
of obstacles. His lotus-hands?? are decorated with a noose, goad, fruit, and 
lotus. 


kapalasulau bibhranam krpalum krsnavigraham | 
triksanam tiksnam arcāmi ksetrešam ksatavidvisam ||5|| 


a. "šūlau bibhrāņam] em.; °sulo bibhrāņa Ms. b. krpalum] em.; krpalu Ms. b. ksetresam 
ksata?] em.; hyetrešam hyata? Ms. 


I worship the three-eyed sharp-natured Ksetre$a. His body is black, he has 
destroyed his adversaries, he carries a skull-bowl and a spear, [but] he is 
compassionate.?* 


varābhayadharau dhīrau visvasamkalpakalpakau | 
šankhapadmāsanagatau samkhapadmanidht šraye ||6|| 


I resort to Sankhanidhi and Padmanidhi, who who sit upon a conch and 
lotus [respectively] as their seats. They are patient, bear the gestures 
of generosity and protection in their hands, and bring about everyone’s 
dreams. 


pāramaišvarya” is equally possible. 

Finding the manuscript reading panipadan tu nanditam problematic, I have conjectured 
pāņipadmam tu manditam. 

This description reveals that Ksetreša has the form of Bhairava. I assume that he is Batuka- 
bhairava on the basis of his Bhairava-like appearance and companionship with Gaņeša. 


THE KĀMASIDDHISTUTI OF KING VATSARĀJA 371 


25 


padmadvayavarabhitibhasvatpanicatustayam | 
padmavallim bhaje padmam padmāksīm padmavasinim ||v|| 


c. vallīm bhaje padmam] em.; ?valli bhaje padma Ms. d. padmàksim??] em.; padmahya 
Ms. 


I honour Padma, [beautiful and tender like] a lotus plant. Her eyes are 
lotus-like and she dwells in a bed of lotuses. Her four arms look splendid 
with two lotuses [in two hands] and the gestures of grace and safety [in 
two others]. 


šankhacakrānkitakarā kumārī kutilalaka | 
mrgendravahana devi durgā durgāņi hantu me ||8|| 


b. kutila°] em.; kudhila? Ms. 


May the virgin goddess Durga annihilate my hardships (durgani), I pray. 
Her hands are marked by the conch and discus. She has curly locks and 
rides [a lion,] the king of wild animals. 


aksasrakpustakadhara purnacandramaladyutih | 
visvavidyamayt devi bharati bhasatam mayi ||9|| 


a. aksa°] em.; ahya? Ms. d. bharati] em.; bharata Ms. 


May goddess Bharati shine upon me, I pray. She carries a rosary and a book 
in her hands, she has the stainless complexion of the full moon, and she 
embodies the entirety of knowledge. 


palāšapatalacchāyam ramantyam ratipriyam | 
puspesucapam puspesumantam vande manobhavam |ļ10|| 
prapadye pritidayitam purnendum iva vestitam | 

asrayam šakticakrasya sricakrancitaye šriye ||11|| 


10C. puspesu?] conj.; pundesu? Ms. «?mantam] em.; ?mattam Ms. nb. pūrņendum iva 
vestitam] em.; pūņņendur i vestitam Ms. 


padmāksām is possible, but as I have observed confusion between the mātrās of à and ī 


in this manuscript, I opt for padmāksīm. 


372 


26 


ACHARYA 


I venerate the beloved husband of Rati, the beautiful Mind-born [God 
Kamadeva]. He carries a bow and arrows of flowers and his complexion 
resembles the petals of Dhak. [Again,] I approach the beloved husband of 
Priti, bent round (vestitam) like the full moon,?® [serving as] the base for 
the ring of goddesses, in order to draw the Sricakra for the sake of pros- 


perity. 


cintaratnobhayakaras candrottamsas trilocanah | 
animadimahasiddhir arunah siddhaye šraye ||12|| 


a. °karas] em.; "karā Ms. c. anima°] em.; anima? Ms. 


I take refuge with the goddesses of becoming minute (anima) and other 
great accomplishments (mahasiddhis) for the sake of success. They hold 
wish-fulfilling jewels in both hands. They are moon-crested, three-eyed, 
and red in complexion. 


vamsidalagyamalangth kapalotpaladharinih | 
brahmāņyādīr bhaje matrr bandhükarucirambarah ||13|| 


c. ?nyadir bhaje matir] em.; °nyadir bhaje mantar Ms. 


I revere Brahmāņī and the other mother-goddesses. They carry a skull- 
bowl and red lily in their hands, their bodies are dark-colored like the 
leaves of bamboo, and they are clad in lovely [red] clothes resembling 
bandhūka flowers. 


dantah pasankusadharah svasvamudravasoditah | 
anugrhņantu me 'bhistam mudradasakadevatah ||14|| 


a. dantah] em.; dantah Ms. b. ?vasoditah] em.; °vadhoditah Ms. c. °grhnantu] em. 
?grhnamnta Ms. 


May the deities of the ten gestures (mudras), who [have forms that] are 
in accordance with the powers of their respective gestures, are mild, and 
carry a snare and goad, endow me with the object of my desire. 


It appears that Kamadeva is bent round in the shape of the moon inside the sixteen- 
petalled and eight-petalled lotuses, and forms the base for the Sricakra in the form of 
nested triangles. 


THE KĀMASIDDHISTUTI OF KING VATSARĀJA 373 


raktah pas$ankusadharah kala nityah kalanidheh | 
ākarsantu mamabhistam sodasakrstisaktayah ||] | 


b. ?nidheh] em.; °nidhih Ms. c. akarsantu] em.; ākarsanta Ms. 


May the sixteen goddesses of attraction, [representing] the perennial 
constitutive digits (kalanityah) of Kalanidhi [i.e. the Moon], draw towards 
me the object of my desire. 


arunah karuņāvrttīr devyas chāyā ivoditah | 
anangašaktīr astau tah pūjayāmi sudurjayah ||16|| 


a. arunah] em.; aruņā Ms. ab. Yvrttīr devyas chaya] em.; %vrtti ddaivyā cchāyā Ms. c. 
astau tah] em.; astausta Ms. 


I worship those compassionately-disposed goddesses of red-complexion, 
the eight powers of the bodiless [love-god Kāmadeva], who have arisen 
like shadows of the goddess [Nitya Sundari] and are very difficult to con- 
quer. 


sarvasamksobhanipurvah $onabanadhanurdharah | 
caturdaša bhaje śaktīś caturdasajagannutah ||17]| 


a. sarvasam?] em.; sarvasa Ms. b. $ona?] em.; $0no? Ms. e °rdharah] em.; ^dharah Ms. c. 
caturdaša] em.; vantadaša Ms. «$akti$?] em.; Sakti Ms. d. jagannutah] em.; jagantutah 
Ms. 


I venerate those fourteen goddesses, with Sarvasamksobhani at the fore, 
to whom [all] fourteen worlds bow. They carry a bow and arrows made of 
sugarcane. 


šubhā varabhayabhrto vande visvakulesvarih | 
sarvasiddhipradadyas tà bahirdasakadevatah ||18 || 


a. Subha] em.; $uca Ms. — «?bhrto] em.; °bhūto Ms. (unmetrical) c. "pradādyās] em.; 
?pradadyas Ms. 


I venerate all [ten] Kulešvarīs, starting with Sarvasampatprada, the god- 
desses of the external ring of ten. They are auspicious and display the 
gestures of boon-giving and safety. 


374 


ACHARYA 


aksasrakpustakadharāh karpūrarucirākrtī | 
antardašakadevīs tah sarvajfiadyah samasraye ||19|| 


b. karpüra?] em.; kappüra? Ms. c. antardasaka?] em.; antarddhasaka? Ms. 


I resort to Sarvajfia and other goddesses situated in the internal ring of ten. 
They carry a rosary and a book [in their hands], and their appearance is 
charming like camphor. 


capesupustakaksasrakcarupanicatustayah | 
raktā vagisvarir vande vasinyadyastadevatah ||20|| 


a. ?srak?] em.; ?srakta? Ms. (unmetrical) b. °catustayah] em.; ?cantastayah Ms. c. 
?vagi$va?] em.; ?vage$va? Ms. 


I worship those eight goddesses of speech, Vašinī and others, whose com- 
plexion is red. They carry in their four lovely hands a bow, arrows, a book, 
and a rosary. 


raktā varabhayabhrtah svarūpānkitamastakāk | 
catasro me disantv ajfíam isvadyayudhadevatah ||21|| 


a. °bhrtah] em.; ?^bhütah Ms. (unmetrical) b. svarüpa?] em.; surüpa? Ms. c. catasro] em.; 
cartasro Ms. d. isvadya?] em.; istadya° Ms. 


May the four deities of the weapons [of the Goddess|—the arrows and 
others—red in complexion, displaying the gestures of generosity and pro- 
tection, marked on the head by their own respective weapon-forms, grant 
me permission [for worship of the Goddess]. 


pasankusamrtakapalavarabhayankair 
hastais caturbhir abhiramadrsarunangt | 
koņāgragā trinayanā taruņenducūdā 
kamesvari mama dadātu samastakaman ||22|| 


ab. °yankair hastai$] em.; °yanke haste Ms. b. °drsa°] conj.; °bhrsi° Ms. d. kamesvari 
mama dadātu] em.; kàma$vari mama dadanta Ms. 


May the goddess Kame$vari, who dwells at the front angle [of the central 
triangle], give me all objects of my desire. She is three-eyed, her eyes are 
beautiful and her limbs are ruddy. She has the crescent moon on her crest. 


THE KĀMASIDDHISTUTI OF KING VATSARĀJA 375 


Shelooks beautiful with her four hands marked with a snare together with 
a goad, a plate with the nectar of immortality, the gesture of boon-giving, 
and the gesture of safety. 


bālaprabālarucirā karasatkasakta- 
cāpesupāšašrņipālakamātulungā | 
vajresvari prathitadaksinakonavasa 
vajrojjvala vidisatam mama vāīichitāni ||23|| 


a. °sakta°] conj.; °saddhi° Ms. b. °matulunga] em.; °mantalunga Ms. d. dadātu] em. 
dadānta Ms. 


May the goddess Vajrešvarī give me all objects of my desire. She is known 
to have her abode at the right corner [of the central triangle]. She is 
resplendent like a thunderbolt, beautiful like fresh coral, and has a bow, 
arrows, a snare, a hook, a shield, and a matulunga fruit attached to her six 
arms. 


tryaksā šašānkarucirā $ritavamakona 
pasankuseksugunapustakasastrahasta | 
udbhāvayatv anišam adbhutabhurisaktir 
bhagyasriyam bhagavatī bhagamālinī me ||24|| 


a. ?vamakona] em.; °vamako Ms. (unmetrical) c. "adbhutabhūrišaktir| em.; °adbhrta- 
bhurisakti Ms. c. bhagavati] em.; bhagavata Ms. 


May the three-eyed goddess Bhagamālinī give the glory of good fortune. 
She possesses abundant miraculous power and is as lovely as the moon. 
She is stationed in the left corner [of the central triangle] and holds in the 
row of her arms a snare, a goad, a sugarcane, ropes, a book, and a sword. 


suryenduvahnimayabhasurapitharoham 
svaccham grhitasrnipasasaresucapam | 
balendumaulim alakagralalamanetram 

nityam namami satatam mahanīyamūrtim ||25|| 


a. ?roham] em.; ?roham Ms. b. svacchàm] em.; svacchā Ms. °capam] em.; °capam Ms. 
cd. satatam mahaniya?] conj.; mahaniya? Ms. (unmetrical) 


I uninterruptedly bow to Nitya who has a form worthy of worship. She has 
ascended the shining throne made of the sun, moon, and fire. She holds 


376 


ACHARYA 


in her hands a hook, a snare, arrows, and a bow, and carries the crescent 
moon on her crest. She is pure and clean, and her eyes, adorned with the 
tips of the locks of hair, are very beautiful. 


sindūrasundaratanum tanumadhyabhāgām 
kantyasrayam kalabhavatkucakumbhanamrām | 
candrananam calakuranganibhayataksam 
mandasmitam madanamangalavaijayantim ||26|| 


a. °tanum] em.;°tanu Ms. b. kantyasrayam kalabhavatkuca?] conj.; kantisrayah kulabha- 
vatkaca? Ms. d. °vaijayantim] em.; ?vejayantim Ms. 


Her body is beautiful and bears the hue of vermillion. Its middle part is 
slim, [and] she is the repository of beauty. She is slightly bent like a young 
elephant because of her pitcher-like breasts, resembling the temples of a 
young elephant. Her eyes are moving and wide like those of a deer. She is 
moon-faced, her smiles are gentle, and she serves as the felicitous banner 
of the Love-god. 


kotīriņīm katakakuņdalahāravallī- 
kāricīkalāpamaņinūpuramaņditāngīm | 
bandhūkabandhuvasanām bahalānurāgām 
kāšmīracandanasamullasitāngarāgām ||27|| 


a. ?rinim kataka?] conj.; °rini kata? Ms. (unmetrical) ^ «?valli?] conj; °vallim Ms. b. 
?kalapa?] em.; °kalapa° Ms. c. ?nuragam] em.; °nuraga Ms. 


She has braided hair. Her limbs are adorned with bracelets, earrings, neck- 
laces, twining laces, girdles, jewels, and anklets. Her clothes resemble 
Bandhūka flowers. She is full of affection, and the hue of her body is 
brightened up with saffron and sandal paste. 


muktāvitānamahite manivistaragre 
paryankaparsarucire surasopavistam | 
paryankapankajamukhim dhutacāmarālām 
hase vilanghitalasadvadanaravindim ||28|| 


b. paryankaparsa?] em.; paryankaparya? Ms. suraso] em.; suvaso° Ms. c. °mukhim 
dhutacamaralim] em.; ?mukhi dhutacamarala Ms. d. hase] em.; hasi Ms. (unmetrical) 


THE KĀMASIDDHISTUTI OF KING VATSARĀJA 377 


She is elegantly seated on a lofty couch studded with jewels, furnished 
with seats (paryanka) and pillows (parsa), and decorated with a canopy 
of pearls. Her face is a fully developed lotus. She has a row of chowries 
being shaken around her, and her beaming lotus-face surpasses beautiful 
lotuses. 


aradhanamravibudhendrabudhesavrnda- 
stmantaratnaruciranjitapadapitham | 
loladvišālanayanām calakelikļpta- 
svarajyavaisravanatadivarapradanam ||29|| 


a. °budhesavrnda°] em.; °buddhasamuda?® Ms. (unmetrical) d. °klpta°] em.; °klupta° Ms. 
e "vaisravaņa”| em.; "vaišramaņa” Ms. «?pradanam] MsP*, °pradanam Ms?* 


Her foot-rest is illuminated by the rays of jewels on the forehead of the 
king of gods and other gods as they bow in devotion [to her feet]. She has 
roving, wide eyes, and she bestows as boons the sovereignty [of Indra] 
and status [equal to] Vaisravana, lord of riches, and still more, which she 
creates in fleeting acts of amusement. 


ānandasāndraparamodyamadīpyamāna- 
svacchandasamsphuradamandataraprakāšām | 
devim dayardrahrdayam hrdayam rahasyam 
šrīsundarīm šivakarīm šaraņam šrayāmi ||30|| 


a. ^paramodyama?] em.; ?^paramedyama? Ms. b. ?^samsphura?] em.; ?sasphura? Ms. c. 
devim] em.; devi Ms. « hrdayam rahasyam] em.; hrdaya rahasya Ms. 


Iseek refuge with the glorious goddess Sundari, the benefactress of pros- 
perity, the secret heart, whose heart is soaked with compassion. She is 
blazing with an utmost tenacity steeped in joy, and consequently beam- 
ing with plenteous light that shimmers spontaneously. 


tvàm devi devamahisīm avibhāgabhogām 
bhogapavargaphaladam bhuvanesi dharam | 
šaivādhibhūmyavadhisadgunitātmasatka- 
vaicitryacitraracanodbhavabhavamargam ||31|| 


adharavariruhasatkavilasasaumye 
sausumnavartmani sudhāmšurasān šravantīm | 


378 


27 


28 


29 


ACHARYA 


ānanditatribhuvanām aruņāruņāngīm 
vande ‘ham adyamahasam manasapi vaca ||32|| 


31b. dharam] conj.; dhārāh Ms.  g1c. Saivadhibhu°] conj.; šivādhibhū” Ms. gid. vaicit- 
rya?] em.; vecitra? Ms. e?bhavamargam|] conj.; °bhivamarggah Ms. 32b.sausumna®] em.; 
sausyamna? Ms. 32c. ànanditatri?] em.; ananditastri? Ms. e °runangim] em.; °runangi 
Ms. 32d. vande ham àdya?] conj.; m adya? Ms. (unmetrical) vaca] em.; vāpi Ms. 


O goddess, I praise you with mind and speech. Your greatness is primor- 
dial. Your limbs are slightly ruddy like the morning sun, and you have 
made the triple world happy. You are the bride of the god [i.e., Šiva], and 
possess a body inseparable [from his]. You bestow worldly enjoyment and 
also liberation from [the world]. You are the stream [of consciousness or 
immortality] (dhara),?" O ruler of worlds. Dwelling originally in the abode 
of Siva, you multiply yourself sixfold and prepare the path of existence 
where you nurture wonderful and manifold creation with your own six 
forms. You shed moonlight on the path of Susumņā that is charming due 
to the beautiful appearance of the six lotuses serving as [your] bases. 


ekaikavaty api navāsi dašāsi devi 

bhūyo dašāsi punar eva caturdašāsi | 
ittham trikadhikadasadvitayadvayanke 
šaktyarņave vasasi šarmakarī kavīnām ||33|| 


a. ekaikavaty api] conj.; ekekavaty asi Ms. c. ittham trika°] conj.; itthan nrika? Ms. e 
°dvayanke] em.; ^dvayake Ms. d. $aktya?] conj.;$aktya? Ms. e kavinam] em.; kavanams 
Ms. 


O goddess, though you are one and simple,?? you are [also] nine;?? you are 
ten, you are again ten, and again you are fourteen. Thus you, the benefac- 
tor of poets, dwell in the sea of Saktis marked with forty-three triangles. 


These two verses depict the goddess as the stream of consciousness or immortality in the 
human body, known widely as Kundalini, originating from the brahmarandhra, the abode 
of Siva, flowing through various channels and reaching to the six bases. It is in this light 
that these verses should be read. 

I have conjectured api in place of asi to provide a concessive tone. Perhaps this is not even 
necessary. In any case, on her own the goddess is singular and unembellished, but the poet 
appears to imply that all goddesses in different retinues of the Sricakra are her projections. 
The central triangle and the immediately following retinue of eight triangles are obviously 
counted together as nine. 


THE KĀMASIDDHISTUTI OF KING VATSARĀJA 379 


3o 


laksmim param prakrtim atra jagaty a$esam 
ekātapatradharacāmaracārucihnām | 

matar mahesvari yasaskrtam adyasaktün 
prahuh parāparadršam paramesvari tvām ||34|| 


a. laksmim] em.; laksmīh Ms. « °asesam] conj.; a$isam Ms. a. °cihnam] em.; °cihnah Ms. 
c. matar mahe?] em.; māta'rmmahe? Ms. 


O Mother! Great Goddess! Supreme Goddess! People proclaim you 
Laksmi, Para Prakrti,?? who has chowries as lovely distinctive marks and 
who bears a sole [royal] parasol covering the entire world. They proclaim 
you as the conferer of fame, the primordial power, and the supervisor of 
both higher and lower realms. 


šrīs tvam Sriyas tvayi giras tvayi gis tvam ajna 
dhis tvam dhiyas tvayi puras tvayi püs tvam ādyā | 
Saktih para tvam asi šaktiguņās tavaite 

kim vistareņa nanu sarvam idam tvam eva ||35|| 


a. ajfia] em.; ājnā Ms. b. pūs tvam] conj.; pus tam Ms. c. tavaite] em.; tavete Ms. 


You are the goddess of prosperity, and prosperities depend on you. You are 
the goddess of speech, and authority and words depend on you. You are 
the goddess of wisdom, and wise ideas depend on you. You are the fore- 
most fortress, and towns depend on you. You are the primordial power, 
and yours are all the properties of power. What is the use of any further 
explanation: this entire world is nothing but you. 


tvam āvadanti munayas tamaso nihantrīm 
ahladinim smrtimatam amrtam duhanam | 
nityoditam anuditastamayaprasangam 
antašcarīm šašikalām akalankasankam ||36|| 


a. tamaso nihantrīm] em.; tamasā nihandrīm Ms. d. antascarim] conj.; mantascari Ms. 


A number of older texts, including the Šāmkarabhāsya (on Brahmasūtra 2.2.42), state that 


the Paficaratrikas identify Vasudeva as Para Prakrti, the supreme cause (for a discussion on 
Vasudeva as Para Prakrti, see Watson, Goodall and Sharma 2013, 30—31, 241-246). However, 
according to a verse attributed to the Skandapurana and cited in the Bhagavatsandarbha 
of Jiva Gosvamin, Sri is Para Prakrti, the consciousness associated with Visnu (šrīh para 
prakrtih proktā cetanā visnusamsraya |; Bhagavatsandarbha, p. 278). It is possible that our 


380 


31 


32 


ACHARYA 


Sages address you as the destroyer of darkness, the bestower of delight, 
yielding the immortal nectar to all those who remember you. They ad- 
dress you as the ever-risen one with no possibility of rising and setting, as 
the underlying digit of the moon?! never suspected to have a stain. 


tvattejasā tapati devi patir dinānām 
apyayayaty api karair amrtam himāmšuk | 
prāņās tapanta iha vāyuvašāc charīre 

tvam antareņa na hi kasya cana pravrttih ||37|| 


a. tvattejasa] em.; tvattojasa Ms. e patir di°] em.; pati ddi? Ms. b. āpyāyayaty] em.; āpyā- 
payaty MsP*, āpyādapayaty Ms?* (unmetrical) c. prāņās tapanta iha] conj.; prāņā tapan nta 
iti Ms. echarire] em.; charāre Ms. d. cana pravrttih] em.; jana pravrrttih Ms. 


O Goddess! With your energy the sun burns, the moon expands the 
immortal essence with his beams, and here in our body the vital func- 
tions glimmer under the control of the vital air. For, without you none 
can function at all. 


[lokas caturdaša mahendramukhās ca devah 
murtitrayam munigaņās ca vasisthamukhyah | 
sadyo bhavanti na bhavanti samastamūrter 
unmilanena tava devi nimilanenal| 37a |||?” 


poetis telling us about two different identifications: Nitya as Laksmi, the consort of Visnu, 
and Nitya as Para Prakrti Vasudeva, the supreme cause of both sentient and insentient 
beings. 

The underlying digit of the moon (antascari šašikalā) in all likelihood is the sixteen inner- 
most digit beyond the waning and waxing process. 

The late Pundit Vraja Vallabha Dwivedi (1985, 45) presents this verse in his preface (origi- 
nally written in 1968) to the Nityasodasikarnava as cited in the Arunamodini commentary 
of the Saundaryalahari and attributed to the Kamasiddhistotra of Vatsaraja (cf. Sastri 
1957, 221), and suggests that it should be located in the Nepalese palm-leaf manuscript 
of the text (the same manuscript I am editing now). However, in 1983 in the Luptaga- 
masamgraha, a collection of citations from lost Agamic texts he prepared, he writes that 
the verse is not found in the palm-leaf manuscript and so must come from a different 
text (cf. Dwivedi 1983, 25). I think Dwivedi arrived at this conclusion without reading the 
implied name of the stuti. The author of the Aruņāmodinī writes that it is a verse from 
the Kamasiddhistotra of Vatsaraja, and the same name is alluded to in the last verse of our 
text. I conclude that the verse therefore belongs to this text even though it is not found in 
the palm-leaf manuscript. I assume that it was dropped in the process of transmission. It 
is thus just possible that there are still a few more verses missing from the latter part of 
the stuti. 


THE KĀMASIDDHISTUTI OF KING VATSARĀJA 381 


33 


34 
35 


The fourteen worlds, all gods headed by Mahendra, the three embodi- 
ments [of the ultimate reality], and also the groups of sages headed by 
Vasistha, come into existence or cease to exist, O goddess, by the opening 
and closing of your eyes, because you embody all. 


veda vibhinnagatayo vidusah svatantrās 
tantrani mantranivaha mahitaprabhavah | 
bhava vibhaktivisayah kavigumphanās ca 
matah param parinamanti tavayutamsat ||38|| 


b. prabhāvāh] em.; prabhavoh Ms. c. ca] em.; va Ms. d. ?namanti] em.; °namanti Ms. 


The Vedas, independent scholars of different capabilities, the Tantras, the 
collection of mantras with celebrated powers, and thoughts and feelings 
concerning syntax and grammar (vibhaktivisaya) and poetic composi- 
tions, all these, O mother evolve to excellence from a millionth part of 
you. 


yas te vibhūni paramapravilambitātmā 
buddhya pramitsati pumān purusah pramayah | 
samsprsyati?? sphutam asau bhuvane patiyan 
cchayam svakīyaširasah svapadakramena ||39|| 


b. pramitsati puman] em.; pramicchati pumāna Ms. (unmetrical) b. svapadakramena] em.; 
svayadakramena Ms. 


Any person who is hanging on to the ultimate [reality of yours] (parama- 
pravilambitātmā) and wishes to perceive and measure your proportions 
(vibhuni)** with his [limited] mind, that man of perception (pramayah 
purusah) smarter [than everyone] in this world evidently touches the 
shadow of his own head in a series of his own footsteps.?5 


abhyarcya devi bhavatīm vibhavami bhūmim 
āmnāyadaršitapathena yatha-kathaficit | 


Our poet is using the root sprs as if it belongs to the fourth class. We cannot emend it to 


samspršati, because that would be unmetrical. 

The word vibhu is treated here clearly as a noun. 

This reminds me of a verse attributed to the now lost Trikahrdaya and cited by Ksemaraja 
in his commentaries (e.g., Šivasūtravimaršinī, p. 9): svapadā svasiraschayam yadval langhi- 
tum īhate | pādoddeše širo na syāt tatheyam baindavī kalā ||. 


382 


ACHARYA 


vācoratair atibhavabhidhakanyakaya 
vallabhyavartmani janair na viganyate kah ||40|| 


c. atibhavabhidha?] conj.; adhibhavavidha? Ms. d. %vartmani janair na] em.; °vatmani 
janai nna Ms. 


O goddess! Having worshipped you I somehow manage to govern [my] 
land following the path dictated by the scriptures. [But] who among 
the people on the path of winning the love of the young lady called 
Atibhava—the one who has transcended the world—is not disrepected 
by those people who are engaged in gossip? 


sā tvam samāhitadhiyo hrdayangamasi 
gayanti gauri madhuras tava kirtigathah | 
hālāsugandhiharicandanavātikāsu 
vidyadhara vibudhasindhutatasthalisu ||41|| 


a. sa tvam samahitadhiya] conj.; sa ddham samahitadhiyo Ms. 


O goddess! You enter the heart of a man whose mind is composed. Sweet 
ballads of your renown, O Gaurī, the vidyadharas sing in the groves of 
Haricandana trees that emit the sweet fragrance of liquor on the banks of 
the heavenly river. 


devi tvadiyamahasa mahitā mahānto 
bhaleksanah šašibhrto bhujagendrabhusah | 
siddhantasiddhiparamarthavidhiprasiddhah 
siddhah sudhāmšuvadane sivatam vrajanti ||42|| 


a. tvadiya?] em.; tadiya? Ms. emahanto] em.; mahambho Ms. b. bhale?] em.; bhalo? Ms. 
e "bhūsāh] em.; °bhūşah Ms. d. sudhāmšuvadane sivatam] em.; sudhasuvadane sivanta 
Ms. (unmetrical) 


O goddess, those great people who are honoured with your greatness 
achieve Sivahood as they attain perfection. They are the people who have 
attained perfection following the regimen prescribed in the [system of] 
Siddhanta for the purpose of supernatural powers as well the ultimate 
goal [of liberation]. O moon-faced [goddess, they] bear [the characteris- 
tics of Siva] : the third-eye on the forehead, the moon on the head, and the 
ornaments of serpents. 


THE KĀMASIDDHISTUTI OF KING VATSARĀJA 383 


36 


37 


drstiprasādalavalābhavatām tavāmba 

pādau namaty amararajagano ‘pi pumsam | 
prottālamaulimaņimaņditapādapīthāh 

sarve kim aga caturabdhivasundharendrah ||43|| 


a. ?lavalabhavatàm] em.; °lavalabhavatam Ms. (unmetrical) c. prottalamauli?] em.; 
prottvalamoli? Ms. 


O mother! Even the kings of gods bow to the feet of those men who have 
acquired a drop of the grace of seeing you. Kings of all the rich lands 
extending to the four oceans [bow to them] all the more, illuminating 
their footrests with the studded jewels of their elevated crowns. 


tvam kledaniti kulakundaliniti keti 

nityeti nītir iti naur iti nāviketi | 

vidyeti samvid iti viévamayity umeti 
kamesvariti kamaleti vadanti santah ||44|| 


a.tvam] em.; tvā Ms. b. nītir iti] conj; nityar iti Ms. e naur iti] conj.; gaurīti MSP" 
(unmetrical), gaur iti Ms** d. vadanti] em.; vadānta Ms. «santah] bottoms damaged 


Mindful men call you Kledani, Kulakundalini, Ka, Nitya, Nīti, Nau,?9 Nā- 
vika, Vidya, Samvid, Vi$vamayi, Uma, Kāmesvarī,7 and Kamala. 


ekām anuttarakalam kulanathakantam 

bālām atulyamahasam bahumangaladhyam | 
anandamürtim akhilarthavilasahetum 

adyam smarāmy aviratam paramarthavidyam ||45|| 


a. °kalam] em.;?kalaMs. b. balam atulya?] em.; balatulya? Ms. (unmetrical) e°bahuman- 
galadhyam] conj.; ^bahu[pa |ladhya msp*, °bahuladhya ms* (both unmetrical) cd. °hetum 
adyam?] em.; °hetumm adyam Ms. 


The original reading of the manuscript gauriti is unmetrical. The scribe has corrected it 
to gaur iti which is just possible, but I conjecture naur iti because of the following word 
nāviketi. Thus, also, the syllabic rhyme of the line is restored. 

Thus, there are three deities in this tradition who can be called by this name: the chief 
goddess Nitya, one of the goddesses in the central triangle, and one of the goddesses of 
speech in the retinue of eight triangles. 


384 ACHARYA 


I uninterruptedly remember [you], the Vidya leading to the ultimate well- 
being, embodiment of bliss, the cause of the extension of all prosperities. 
[You are] the primordial one, the insurpassable Kala. You are Bala, the 
beloved of Kulanatha (namely, Siva). [Your] glory is incomparable, and 
you are filled with many felicities. 


yah kamasiddhim atimangalakamadhenum 
kamesvaristutim imam pathati pratitah | 
kāntyā šriyā kavitaya guņasampadā ca 

so ‘yam svayam vivrta eva kimu priyabhih ||46|| 


a. kamasiddhim ati?] em.; kamasiddhir iti msP*, kamahsiddhir iti Ms?* (unmetrical) 


One who recites this eulogy of Kamesvari called Kamasiddhi, which 
serves as a very auspicious wish-fullfilling cow, placing trust [in her], is 
specially chosen (vivrta) by [the goddesses of] Beauty, Prosperity, Elo- 
quence, and Treasury of Qualities. So, what would he do with any [other] 
lovers? 


iti $rimaharajadhirajavidyadharacakravartivatsarajaviracità srivamakesvart- 
stutih samāptā ||%)|| 


Here ends the Vamakesvaristuti composed by Vatsarāja, the king of great kings, 
the sovereign among the vidyadharas. 


References 


Primary Sources 

Adhikaranasaravali of Vedantadesika. Kanchi P.B. Annangaradharyar, ed. Vedantade- 
sikagranthamala. Madras: Sannidhi Press, 1940. 

Aruņāmodinī. See Šāstrī 1957. 

Nisvasaguhya. The Guhyasūtra of the Nisvasatattvasamhita. NAK MS 1-227. (The Guhya- 
sutra starts on folio 41). NGMPP Reel No.A 41/14. Palm-leaf, Folios 117, early Nepalese 
(Kutila) script. There are two apographs available, both in Devanagari and on paper: 
NAK MS 5-2401, NGMPP Reel No. A 159/18, and Welcome Institute for the History of 
medicine, London, Sanskrit MS 1.33. The verse and chapter numeration used in this 
paper is that of Dominic Goodall’s edition in progress. 

Tantraloka. Mukund Ram Shastri, ed. The Tantraloka of Abhinavagupta With commen- 
tary of Rājānaka Jayaratha, vol. 1. Kashmir Series of Texts and Studies, no. 23. Srina- 
gara: 1918. Reprint, Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1987. 


THE KĀMASIDDHISTUTI OF KING VATSARĀJA 385 


Brahmāņdapurāņa. J.L. Shastri, ed. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1973. 

Bhagavatsandarbha of Jiva Gosvamin. Haridasa Sastri, ed. Bhagavatasandarbhe dvi- 
ttyah sribhagavatsandarbhah. Vrndāvana: Gadadhara Gaurahari Press, 1984. 

Vamakesvaratantra. Vraja Vallabha Dwivedi, ed. Nityasodasikarnava with Two Com- 
mentaries Rjuvimalā by Sivananda & Artharatnāvalī by Vidyānanda. Second Edition. 
Benares: Sampurnananda Sanskrit University, 1985. 

Šivasūtravimaršinī. J.C. Chatterji, ed. The Siva Sūtra Vimarshini, being the Sutras of Vasu 
Gupta with the Commentary called Vimarshinī by Kshemarāja. Kashmir Series of 
Texts and Studies, no. 1. Bombay: Nirnaya Sagar Press, 1911. 


Secondary Sources 

Bautze-Picron, Claudine 2002. “‘Nidhis’ and Other Images of Richness and Fertility in 
Ajanta.” East and West 52 (1): 225-284. 

Dalal, Chimanlal. 1918. Kalarijaradhipatiparamarddidevamatyakavivatsarajapranitaru- 
pakasat[k]am. A Collection of Six Dramas of Vatsarāja. Gaekwad Oriental Series, 
no. 8. Baroda: Central Library. 

Dwivedi, Vraja Vallabha, ed. 1983. Luptagamasamgraha, part 11. Yogatantra Grantha- 
mala, no. 10. Benares: Sampurnananda Sanskrit University. 

Dwivedi, Vraja Vallabha. 1985. See Vamakesvaratantra. 

Golovkova, Anna. 2012. “Srividya.” In Brill’s Encyclopedia of Hinduism, vol. 1v, edited by 
K.A. Jacobson, 815—822. Leiden: Brill. 

Goodall, Dominic, Nibedita Rout, R. Sathyanarayanan, S.A.S. Sarma, T. Ganesan, and 
S. Sambandhasivacarya. 2005. The Paficavaranastava of Aghorasiva: A twelfth-cen- 
tury South Indian Prescription for the Visualisation of Sadasiva and his Retinue. Col- 
lection Indologie, no. 102. Pondicherry: Institut Français d’ Indologie/Ecole francaise 
d Extréme-Orient. 

Goodall, Dominic, in collaboration with Alexis Sanderson and Harunaga Isaacson 
with contributions of Nirajan Kafle, Diwakar Acharya and others. 2015. The Nis- 
vāsatattvasamhitā. The Earliest Surviving Saiva Tantra. Volume 1. A Critical Edition 
and Annotated Translation of the Mülasütra, Uttarasūtra and Nayasütra. Collec- 
tion Indologie, no. 128 (Early Tantra Series, no. 1). Pondicherry: Institut Français 
d'Indologie/École française d' Extréme-Orient/Universitat Hamburg. 

Paranavitana, S. 1955. "Šamkha and Padma” Artibus Asiae 18 (2): 121-127. 

Sanderson, Alexis. 2009. "The Šaiva Age: An Explanation of the Rise and Dominance of 
Saivism during the Early Medieval Period” In Genesis and Development of Tantrism, 
edited by Shingo Einoo, 41-349. Tokyo: Institute of Oriental Culture, University of 
Tokyo. 

Sastri, Anantakrsna. 1957. Saundaryalaharī of Šrī Samkarācārya with Commentaries: 
Saubhāgyavardhanī of Kaivalyaérama, Laksmidhara of Laksmīdharācārya, Aruna- 
modinī of Kamesvarasurin. Edition, English Translation and Notes. Madras: Ganesh 
& Co. 


386 ACHARYA 


Sinopoli, Carla M. 2010. "Echoes of Empire: Vijayanagara and Historical Memory Vija- 
yanagara as Historical Memory” In Contemporary Archaeology in Theory: The New 
Pragmatism, edited by Robert W. Preucel and Stephen A. Mrozowski, 17—33. New 
York: John Wiley & Sons. 

Sircar, Dines Chandra. 1983. Select Inscriptions bearing on Indian History and Civilization 
From the Sixth to the Eighteenth Century A.D. Volume 11. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass. 

Watson, Alex, Dominic Goodall, and S.L.P. Anjaneya Sarma. 2013. An Inquiry Into the 
Nature of Liberation. Bhatta Ramakantha’s Paramoksakarikavrtti, a Commentary on 
Sadyojyotih’s Refutation of Twenty Conceptions of the Liberated State (moksa). Col- 
lection Indologie, no. 122. Pondicherry: Institut Francais d’ Indologie/Ecole francaise 
d' Extrēme-Orient. 


CHAPTER 16 


The Lotus Garland (padmamala) and Cord of 
Power (Saktitantu): The Brahmayamala’s 
Integration of Inner and Outer Ritual 


Shaman Hatley 


The significance of the Brahmayamala to the history of Saivism was first iden- 
tified by Alexis Sanderson (1988), who was gracious enough to read a section of 
this voluminous text with me at Oxford, in 2004, at an early stage of my doctoral 
research. This was a formative professional experience, and I remain touched 
by his generous hospitality towards me as an unknown visiting student. In the 
present essay, I revisit a particular thread which emerged from these reading 
sessions: the saktitantu or šaktisūtra, the “thread” (tantu) or “cord” (sūtra) of 
divine power (Sakti). This is a technical term of ritual distinctive to the Bra- 
hmayāmala to which Professor Sanderson first drew my attention. Inquiry into 
the Cord of Power leads me to examine the ways in which the Brahmayamala 
(hereafter BraYa) integrates meditational discipline with the somatic perfor- 
mance of ritual, and to query its understanding of the category yoga. 

In chapter 15 of the Tantraloka, Abhinavagupta invokes the authority of 
the BraYā concerning the inseparability of "external" (bahya) and “inner” or 
"internal" (adhyatma) worship. The passage (15.43cd—44) reads as follows in the 
printed (Kashmir Series of Texts and Studies) edition: 


nādhyātmena vinā bahyam nādhyātmam bahyavarjitam ||43|| 
siddhyej jiānakriyābhyām tad dvittyam samprakasate | 
šrībrahmayāmale deva iti tena nyarüpayat ||44|| 


The fourth verse-guarter (44b) is problematic; following the commentator 
Jayaratha,! the passage might be interpreted as meaning, 


"Not without the inner (adhyatma) would the outer succeed, nor the 
inner devoid of the outer. The second [i.e. the inner] manifests through 


1 Tantrālokaviveka ad 15.43c—44: tad dvitiyam iti adhyatmalaksanam, “‘the second one’ means 
‘characterized by being inner (adhyātma)” 


© SHAMAN HATLEY, 2020 | D01:10.1163/9789004432802 018 


This is an open access chapter distributed under the terms of the CC BY-NC 4.0 license. 


388 HATLEY 


both gnosis and ritual action’—the Lord has explained accordingly in the 
revered Brahmayāmala. 


Both the sense and syntax appear doubtful, however. On the grounds of coher- 
ence, it seems significantly better in 44b to read tad dvitayam (“that pair [of 
inner and outer]") for tad dvittyam (“the second one”), an emendation sug- 
gested by Harunaga Isaacson.? In this case the passage might be interpreted 
as follows: 


“Not without the inner (adhyatma) would the outer succeed, nor the inner 
devoid of the outer. That pair [of inner and outer] manifests through gno- 
sis and ritual action, [respectively ]’—the Lord has explained accordingly 
in the revered Brahmayamala. 


Thus it seems that Abhinavagupta places the dichotomy of outer (bahya) and 
inner (adhyatma) worship in correlation with that of kriyā and jitāna: ritual 
action and gnosis, respectively. This accords with his remarks prefacing cita- 
tion of the BraYa, which clarify that the performative acts of ritual are valuable 
only as ancillaries to $ivabhimanata, conviction of one's identity with Siva. This 
inner conviction alone, a form of knowledge, is the real means of liberation.? 

One need not follow Abhinavagupta entirely in reading the BraYa's dichot- 
omy between 'inner' and 'outer' processes in terms of gnosis and ritual: his 
source scripture draws no such distinction overtly. Nonetheless, Abhinava- 
gupta's selection of the Brahmayamala is by no means contrived, for in invok- 
ing the text thus he highlights a premise central to its systems of practice: the 
integration of internal and external ritual processes, which mirror each other 
closely. 

Although many of Abhinavagupta's citations of the BraYa may be identified 
precisely* in this case the passage he had in mind remains uncertain. BraYā 
87440 is perhaps the strongest candidate: 


2 Personal communication, 2003. 

3 Tantrāloka 15.42-43b: sivabhimanitopayo bahyo hetur na moksadah | sivo 'yam šiva evāsmīty 
evam ācāryašisyayoh || hetutadvattaya dārdhyābhimāno mocako hy anoh | ("Conviction of 
one's identity with Siva is the means; no external cause bestows liberation. 'He is Šiva, and 
Iam nothing but Siva’: [in the rite of initiation, this firm conviction of the guru and disciple 
is indeed what liberates a soul, by way of [the guru's conviction] being the cause and [the 
disciple's] the effect (? hetutadvattaya)"). 

4 SeeHatley 2018, Appendix B. 


THE LOTUS GARLAND AND CORD OF POWER 389 


adhyatmaf cintayed bahyam bahyam adhyatmikam tathā | 
cakre samanabhavena tato vinyasam ārabhet ||140|| 


One should meditate upon the internal [wheel/cakra] as external, and 
the external likewise as internal. Considering [these] to be identical, one 
should then commence installation [of the mantra-deities] on the cakra. 


The degree of correspondence is merely suggestive, and Abhinavagupta might 
have had in mind other BraYa passages. His language is actually somewhat 
closer to a verse from the Tantrasadbhava, however, another early scripture 
of the Vidyapitha division of Bhairavatantras. This is highly likely to postdate 
the BraYā and to reflect a degree of historical development vis-a-vis the latter. 
Tantrasadbhava 6.218 may read as follows: 


adhyatmam bahyato drstva bahyam adhyatmasamsthitam | 
yo janati sa siddhyeta tadbhavabhavabhavitah' ||218|| 


After viewing the inner (adhyatma) externally, one who [also] knows the 
outer to be located internally will attain success, purified by contempla- 
tion of their identity (?).’ 


It is conceivable that Abhinavagupta has conflated these two sources, though 
he may instead have had in mind a verse of the Brahmayamala not preserved 
in its oldest manuscript. More probably, he simply paraphrases his source with 
unusual freedom. 

Regardless of which passage Abhinavagupta had in mind, a point of signifi- 
cant interest emerges from considering this question, namely that the Tantra- 
loka, Tantrasadbhava, and Brahmayamala all appear to mean something differ- 
ent by the distinction between adhyatma, “inner/directed towards the self” and 
bahya, “external.” For the Tantrasadbhava, the performative acts and parapher- 
nalia of ritual have superior, inner (adhyatma) equivalents: the outer (bahya) 
finds its true meaning in the inner processes of yoga. Thus, for instance, in the 
section of Tantrasadbhava 6 quoted above in excerpt, the external rosary made 


5 See the discussion in Hatley 2018, 100-104. 

6 For the full passage with critical apparatus, see note 8 below. 
Tantrasadbhava 6.218d—tadbhavabhavabhavitah (or tadbhava?)—is unmetrical and prob- 
lematic; I have understood tad as tayoh, referring to the pair of adhyatma and bahya (inner 
and outer). 


390 HATLEY 


of conch (šamkha) has as its inner form the subtle samkha or šamkhiņī channel 
(nādī) of the yogic anatomy, which extends into the crown of the head.® The 
‘outer’ thus finds true purpose in the ‘inner’ realities of yoga, which supersede 
the outer entirely. This principle applies to sacred geography as well, for the 
Tantrasadbhava transposes into the yogic body a series of cremation grounds 
closely related to those of the BraYā.? Access to these inner levels of meaning 
is a form of knowledge: the inner sacred geography is understood ( jriatavyam) 
by those who know the self (viditatmanam), while only “one who knows [the 
identity of inner and outer] attains success” (yo jānāti sa siddhyeta). Knowl- 
edge ( jfíana) thus transforms ritual into an inner process through which it 


8 Tantrasadbhāva 6.217—220b (based on the draft edition of Marc Dyczkowski, which reports 
the readings of three manuscripts, k, kh, and g): 
ete cāstādaša proktà aksasutra bahisthitāh | 
adhyātme ca gatās tv ete sampratam tàn nibodha me ||217|| 
adhyātmam bahyato drstvā bahyam adhyatmasamsthitam | 
yo jānāti sa siddhyeta tadbhāvabhāvabhāvitah ||218|| 
ekaivādhyātmagam sütram prāg eva kathitam maya | 
šamkhāvartā tu ya nadi sikhante tu vyavasthitā ||219|| 
tena samkhamayi proktā aksasūtram varanane | 


217b bahisthitah] em.; vahisthita k, kh, g 217c tv ete] k, g;tvate kh 218a adhyātmam | corr.; 

adhyātma mss. 218b °samsthitam] em. (Dcyzkowski); samsthita mss. 218d tadbhava°] 

k; tadbhava? kh, g 219b prag eva] kh; prog eva k, g 219c šamkhāvartā] kh; samkhyāvartā 

kg 219d éikhante tu] k, g; šikhāntera kh 220a šamkhamayī] k, g; šamkhamayam kh 

220b aksasūtram] em. (Dyczkowski); maksasūtram mss. 
On šamkhāvartā as a nádi, see Amaraughašāsana 60, which describes it as "having the mea- 
sure of a lotus fibre" (mrnalasütraparimana). The more commonly attested name is samkhiņī. 

9 See especially Tantrasadbhava 15.62—67: 

prayaga nābhisamsthā tu varuņā hrtpradesata|h] | 

kolagiryam tu kanthastham bhīmanādam tu tāluke ||65|| 

bindusthane jayantyam tu nadakhye tu caritrakam | 

ekamrakam šaktimadhye jitātavyam viditatmanam ||66|| 

guruvaktragatam proktam kotivarsam tathāstamam | 

ete sthānā maya prokta adhyātme pudgalasrayah ||67|| 

For those who know the Self, Prayaga should be understood as located in the [cakra of the] 

navel, Varuna [i.e. Varanasi] in the heart region, Kolagiri in the throat, Bhimanada in the 

palate, Jayanti in the place of Bindu, Caritra in [the plexus] called Nada, and Ekamraka in 

[the plexus of] Sakti. The eighth, Kotivarsa, is likewise said to be in the Mouth of the Guru. 

These are the places I have declared to be present in the person internally (adhyatme). 
This list of eight pithas overlaps with the nine smasanas or pithas of the BraYās principal 
mandala (as outlined in chapter 3; see Kiss 2015, 24); however, it corresponds more precisely 
to the eight delineated in BraYā 87 (see Hatley 2018, 134, table 1.16). Cf., also, Tantrasadbhava 
15.70: kulūttamoddiyānam ca erudī pulivallabham | tany eva tu samastani [em.; saman tani 
mss. | svadehe samsthitani tu ||. 


THE LOTUS GARLAND AND CORD OF POWER 391 


ultimately achieves fruition—an orientation consonant with the Kaula turn 
towards interiority, which may presage aspects of Abhinavagupta's gnostic 
nondualism. Yet in contrast to the latter, for the Tantrasadbhāva, the inner 
is nonetheless conceived of in terms of ‘doing’ (kriyā) rather than ‘knowing’ 
( jriana). The inner and outer, respectively, represent higher and lower arenas of 
activity, for the mental processes of meditation are also forms of action (Kriya). 
Chapter 26 of the Tantrasadbhava colourfully proclaims this principle: 


kriyā tu phaladā!? pumsam na vijfianam phalapradam? |[19|| 
yatha stribhaksyabhogajno na sukhi kriyaya vinā | 

kriyā tu dvividhā jiieyā bahya adhyātmikā smrtā!? ||20|| 
adhyātmā dhyānayogena bāhyā! pujavratadibhih" | 


Doing (kriyā) is what gives people results; knowledge does not produce 
results, just as a man knowledgable in the sexual enjoyment of women 
is not happy without doing it (kriya). But doing should be understood as 
twofold: it is held to be outer and inner. Inner action (Ariya) is through 
yogic meditation, while outer action is through worship, ascetic obser- 
vances, etc. ... 


Knowledge is here conceptualized neither in processual nor gnostic terms: 
jñāna and kriyā represent a dichotomy along the lines of “theory” and “prac- 
tice." 

The BraYā likewise embraces the twofold division of kriyā into inner and 
outer—adhyatma and bahya—which refer in its usage to subjective processes 
performed mentally and to the somatic performance of ritual, respectively. In 
contrast to the Tantrasadbhāva, the BraYā draws no overt hierarchy between 
the two. The inner does not represent a higher meaning or reality; the inner 
and outer rather represent complemetary arenas for the performance of ritual 
whose integration is essential. The inner and outer find their fullest integration 
in the performance of yaga or yajana, “pantheon worship,” the paradigmatic 
mode of ritual whose limitless possibilities for inflection account for much of 
the BraYa's bulk. Yet the principle of their unity applies widely, extending to all 


10  phaladà| em.; phaladāh mss. 

11 Cf Srikantha’s Ratnatrayaparīksā, 129ab: kriyā hi phaladà pumsám na jfíánam syát pha- 
lapradam. 

12  smrtà]em.;smrtah mss. 

13  bāhyāļem.; bahya mss. 

14 °vratadibhih] k, kh; vratedibhih g. 


392 HATLEY 


of the various practices encompassed by the terms kriyā and karman, includ- 
ing fire ritual (koma), rites of installation (pratistha), initiation (diksa), dura- 
tional observances (vrata), rites using deity images (pratimakarman) or two- 
dimensional diagrams (yantrakarman), and so forth.!5 This integration of inner 
and outer practice makes a rigid distinction between “ritual” and “meditation” 
artificial: in the context of the BraYa, ritual—kriya or karman—encompasses 
both outer and inner forms of action. These are remarkably parallel in structure 
and process, and aim at the unification of subjectivity, body, ritual space, para- 
phernalia, and the hierarchy of ontic principles (tattva) which comprise the 
cosmos (adhvan). In this respect, despite its cultic affinity to later Kaula sys- 
tems, the BraYa’s harmonious integration of the inner and outer seems largely 
congruent with classical Saivasiddhànta ritualism. Arguably, such integration 
of inner and outer processes is characteristic of tantric ritual, broadly con- 
ceived, as reflected in the ubiquitous dichotomy of antaryaga ("inner worship") 
and bahiryaga ("external worship"). What is most distinctive to the BraYa is its 
unique manner of their integration: the “method of the lotus garlands” (padma- 
mālāvidhi). 


1 Method of the Lotus Garlands (padmamalavidhi) 


Patterning the processes of inner and outer ritual is the BraYā's pantheon of 
mantra-deities, whose core comprises the Four Goddesses (devī) or Guhyakās, 
Four Consorts (dūtīs) or Handmaidens (kinkarī), and their lord, Kapālīsa- 
bhairava. Secondary members of the pantheon are a sextet of Yoginīs and an 
octad of Mother-goddesses (mātr). These (see table 16.1) are the mantra-ele- 
ments manipulated in all practice, both inner and outer, and their permuta- 
tions are the principal ritual variables. Collectively, the deities comprise the 
Nine-Syllable Vidyā (navāksarā vidyā), mantra of the supreme goddess, Caņdā 
Kāpālinī, as first identified by Sanderson (1988, 672) in his pioneering remarks 
on the BraYā. In syllabic terms, the vidya is [OM] HUM CANDE KAPALINI 
SVAHA. 


15 Cf. BraYā go.101: anena vidhinā devi japahomadikarmasu [corr.; karmasu ms.] | bahya- 
dhyatmeva mantrajfiah pūjām [em.; püjyam ms.] kurvan prasidhyati ||101|| ("Through this 
procedure, O goddess, in mantra incantation, fire sacrifice, and other rites, the knower of 
mantras achieves siddhi, practicing both external and internal worship"). In 101c, bahya- 
dhyatmeva should be understood in the sense of bahyadhyatmam eva—nominative for 
accusative, metri causa. 


THE LOTUS GARLAND AND CORD OF POWER 


TABLE 16.1 Deities of the Nine-Syllable Vidyā 


Kapalisabhairava (HUM) 


FOUR DEVIS FOUR DUTIS 
Rakta (CAM) Karālā (LI) 

Karālī (PE) Danturā (N1) 
Candaksi (KĀ) Bhīmavaktrā (svā) 


Mahocchusma (PA) 


Mahabala (HA) 


SIX YOGINIS 


EIGHT MATRS 


Krostukī (OM HUM CANDE 
KAPALINI NAMAH) 
Vijaya (OM ... SVAHA) 
Gajakarna (OM ... HUM) 
Mahamukhi (OM... VAUSAT) 
Cakravegā (OM... VASAT) 
Mahānāsā (OM ... PHAT) 


Mahešvarī (AM) 
Brahmi (E) 
Vaisņavī (Ā) 
Kaumārī (A) 
Vaivasvati (1) 
Indrāņī (1) 

Caņdikā (svā) 
Paramā/Aghorī (HĀ) 


393 


Virtually all ritual begins with the instruction to enter into a state of med- 


itative concentration, called nirācāra, and to take on a body of šakti, called 


the avadhütatanu.!6 Siva is the nirācārapada, “the state beyond regulated con- 
duct,” while the Goddess is avadhūtā, “the stainless/unblemished one.”!” The 
avadhuta-body, the body of sakti, is a body of mantra (mantravigraha) engen- 


dered by the placement of mantra-syllables in a series of bodily lotuses. The 


process of taking on the avadhūta-body culminates in assumption of one’s 


inner identity as Kapalisabhairava at the heart of a mandala of goddesses, all 
of whom collectively comprise the Nine-Syllable Vidya. Although framed as a 


16 Note, for example, BraYā 3.187c-189b: ekākī vijane tasmim daksinabhimukhasthitah ||187|| 
muktakešas ca digvasah krtanyāso vidhanavit | avadhütanur bhūtvā nirācāras tu sadhakah 
|188| prathamam pūjayed devam karnnikayam param šivam |. C£, e.g., 8.3—4b: tato hy 
ekamanā bhūtvā avadhitatanuh sthitah | nirācāreņa bhāvena yada pasyati sarvvatah ||3|| 


tanusthitah ||17|| nirācāreņa bhāvena smared vidyam suyantritah |. 
17  BraYà2.2cd: avadhūtā tu sā šakti nirācārapadah šivah (= 62.98ab). 


394 HATLEY 


preliminary to ritual action, this process of mantra-installation (nyāsa) is in 
fact the very template of ritual, both inner and outer; it has both elaborate and 
abbreviated forms, with numerous inflections. I here summarize one of several 
long descriptions of this process, the padmamalavidhi (“method/procedure of 
the lotus garlands”) of BraYa, chapter 4 (vv. 497 ff.): 


First one visualizes the avadhūtam (i.e. the avadhūtā šakti), whose func- 
tion in this application is analagous to the adharasakti (“basal power") of 
most Šaiva systems.!8 This begins preparation of the practitioner’s body 
as locus for installation of the deities, from the crest (sikha) of the head to 
the feet. A series of nine lotuses is visualized situated at points in the body 
called granthis (knots or joints). These are located at the crown of the 
head (sikha), the forehead (lalata), throat (kantha), navel (nabhi), knees 
( janu), mouth (vaktra), heart (Ard), genitals (guhya), and feet (pāda), fol- 
lowing the order of their sequence in nyasa. The eight-petalled lotuses 
situated therein are loci for installation of the principal nine deities: 
Kapālīsabhairava, who is installed in the crown lotus, and two sets of four 
goddesses, the Devis and the Dūtīs. In each lotus one prepares a mantric 
seat for the deity, whose complete mantra-forms are then installed, inclu- 
sive of their ancillary mantras (ariga).? Each of the eight goddesses is 
installed in a lotus along with the mantra-body of Kapalisabhairava, who 
isthus coupled with each goddess.?? This series of nine forms the Brahma- 
yamala's principal padmamala, the garland of Devis and Dutis, which is 
illustrated in figure 16.1. While one might associate bodily lotuses with 
the body seated in yogic meditation, here a standing position with the 
legs together is implied, for a single lotus presides over the two knees and 
likewise feet. 

Next is installed a second series of seven lotuses, the garland of Yoginis 
(figure 16.2b).?! In contrast to the first lotus garland, these do not lie in a 
vertical axis. Three form a kind of girdle: one lotus is placed in the center 


18 Concerning the adharasakti, see the article on this term in Tantrikabhidhanakosa, vol. 1. 

19  BraYà4.497c-501b: adhunā [em.; adhuna ms.] sampravaksyami padmamālāvidhikramam 
[em.; °vidhih kramam ms.] ||497|| sikhadipadayor antam [em.; antā ms.] avadhütam vi- 
cintayet | navagranthivibhagena tayā |?] proktā punah kramat ||498|| navapadmani sam- 
cintya astapatrani sadhakah | yuktāni kešaraiš caiva caturvvinsatibhih kramat ||499|| ka- 
rnnikayam yutānīha cintanīyāni mantriņā | šikhāpadmam [em.; °padma ms.| samarabhya 
āsanāni prakalpayet ||5oo|| vaksyamanena nyāyena padme padme na samšayah |. 

20  BraYā 4.516—517b: vāmapāršve tatas tasyā kapālīšasya vinyaset | bījamātram mahaprajna 
vaktranetrāngavarjitam ||516|| tasyopari nyased devi bhairavam mantravigraham |. 

21  BraYā 4.523c-529. 


THE LOTUS GARLAND AND CORD OF POWER 395 


of the waist, on the back (katiprsthe), while the other two lie on either side 
of the waist. The remaining four lotuses are situated on the sides of the 
knees and feet. Installed upon these lotuses are goddesses known as the 
Six Yoginis, led by a male deity, Adivira (“Primordial Hero”), positioned in 
the lotus on the back of the waist (see figure 16.2b). 

A third series of lotuses serves as the locus for installation of the 
Eight Mother-goddesses (asta matarah), accompanied by the male deity 
Matrvira (figure 16.2a).? In this case as well the lotuses do not form a 
vertical axis, lying at various positions on the head and torso: the points 
between the eyebrows (bhrumadhya) and between the eyes, the tip of the 
nose, and each ear. Next are a point between the throat and heart, another 
between the heart and navel, and an unspecified place on the back or 
spine? locus of the goddess Carcika or Camunda. The eighth matr, the 
supreme šakti, Paramā, also called Aghori or Yogešī, pervades the entire 
body, lacking a lotus base and being devoid of ancillary mantras.?* 


In figure 16.2, the second and third lotus garlands are shown together, thus illus- 
trating the empowerment of the upper and lower bodies by mantra. 


2 The Cord of Power (saktitantu, Saktisutra) 


What renders the lotuses into garlands (padmamala) is the thread which binds 
them. The BraYa first introduces this idea in presenting the second garland 
(that of the Yoginis), describing the lotuses as "bound together by the cord 
of šakti, like gems [strung] by a cord" (Saktitantunibaddhani sūtreņa manayo 
yathā, 4.526cd). The terms utilized are saktitantu and šaktisūtra, meaning, 
respectively, a thread or a cord of šakti. This divine power binding the lotuses 
together is consubstantial with the supreme Goddess herself, the Nine-Syllable 
Vidyā whose being encompasses the deities of the mandala. 

A concept seemingly unique to the BraYa, the šaktitantu or šaktisūtra re- 
ceives minimal explication. References to it occur almost entirely in the con- 
text of the *method of the lotus garlands" (padmamalavidhi). In what manner 
the cord connects the lotuses of the three garlands is somewhat ambiguous. 
For the first garland, whose lotuses form a vertical series, the Saktitantu must 


22 . BraYà 4.530—538. 

23  BraYā 4.532cd: astaman tu tathā prsthe kalpayen mantravit kramāt. 

24  BraYā 4.538: sarvvange paramā šakti vaktranetrāngavarjitā | padmāsananvihīnā tu vinya- 
sen mantravit kramat ||. 


396 


> Kapalisabhairava (crest) 


Raktā ( forehead) 


Karala (mouth) 


Karali (throat) 


Dantura (heart) 


Candaksi (navel) 


Bhimavaktra 


(genitals) 


Mahocchusma (knees) 


Mahābalā ( feet) 


FIGURE 16.1 Garland of the Devis and Dūtīs (padmamala 1) 


HATLEY 


THE LOTUS GARLAND AND CORD OF POWER 397 


(a) Garland of the Mātrs (padmamālā 111) 


(on Mātrvīra & Vīrašakti (between eyebrows) 
Mahes$vari (between eyes) Cy 


R 
q D 
zg 


Vaisnavi (right ear) KA > KS Brahmi (left ear) 
Kaumārī (nose) 


€ Vaivasvati (between throat & 
Y heart) 
Carcikà 
(back) 
€ Indrāņī (between heart & 
A navel) 
Mahamukhi (right waist) C» Ādivīra C Krostuki (left waist) 


j^ (backofwaist) Y 


Cakravegā (side of right knee) {> {> Vijaya (side of left knee) 
Mahanasa (side of right foot) OQ {> Gajakarni (side of left foot) 


(b) Garland of the Yoginis (padmamālā 11) 


FIGURE 16.2 Garlands of the Mātrs and Yoginis (padmamalas 11-111) 


HATLEY 


398 


pa 
q 


The pure body of power (avad- 


hütatanu) 


FIGURE 16.3 


THE LOTUS GARLAND AND CORD OF POWER 399 


string them together vertically from crest to feet (figure 16.1). In the case of the 
third padmamala, the saktisutra likely begins from the lotus between the eye- 
brows (bhrumadhya), the uppermost of this series and locus of the male deity 
Matrvira, lord of the Mother-goddesses (matr). The cord pierces (bhid-) and 
thus strings together eight lotuses (figure 16.2a).25 Unlike those of the first gar- 
land, these do not forma vertical axis in the body, and itis unclear precisely how 
and in what sequence the šaktitantu links them together: does the cord form 
a garland-like closed circuit, or connect the lotuses like a strand? This šakti- 
tantu extends through the body in three dimensions, for the seventh lotus is 
located on the back, forming the locus of Carcika, i.e. Camunda.?6 In the case 
of the second padmamālā, that of the yoginīs, the manner in which the šakti- 
tantu connects the lotuses seems less ambiguous (figure 16.2b). The garland is 
threaded from a lotus on the back of the waist?" extending outwards to lotuses 
on the sides of the waist, then downwards to lotuses on the sides of the knees 
and feet. Although this is not explicitly stated, the cord might connect the foot- 
lotuses together in a garland-like manner, so forming a closed circuit. 

The principal series of nine lotuses spans the body's axis from crest (sikha) 
to feet, linked by the saktitantu and thus forming a vertical strand (figure 16.1). 
This vertical sequence of bodily lotuses connected by a cord of šakti has obvi- 
ous similarities with models of the yogic body in which sugumnā nadi, the 
central channel, links together an ascending series of cakras or lotuses. This 
ubiquitous paradigm is exemplified by the system of seven cakras common to 
Šrīvidyā and Hathayoga, identified by Sanderson (1988, 687—688) as being first 
attested in the Kubjikamata. Like the saktitantu, the susumnā is closely iden- 
tified with Sakti, especially in the form of the bodily kundalini. The susumna 
of yoga and the BraYa's saktitantu both unite a vertical series of lotuses situ- 
ated at particular "knots" (granthis) in the body, including such standard loca- 
tions as the crest, forehead, throat, heart, navel, and genital region. While the 
susumna came to be envisioned as a vertical channel extending upwards from 
the heart, navel region, or base of the torso,*% there is an old precedent for the 
idea that it extends, like the saktitantu, to the feet: the Matangaparamesvara, 
a comparatively early Siddhantatantra, envisions the susumna running from 


25  BraYà 4.530: bhruvo madhye tatah padmam šaktišūtreņa pürvvavat | bheditah -m- āditah 
(?) krtvā anyāny api tathaiva hi ||530 ||. 

26 = BraYà 4.536cd: prstipadme tu devesi carccikam vinyased budhah. 

27 BraYā 4.527c-529: vīran tu trikapadme tu katiprsthe tato nyaset ||527|| vaktranetrangasa- 
myuktam virasaktyà samanvitam | bijamátranivistayam vamaparsve tathaiva ca ||528|| 
vamakatyadim arabhya yoginyo vinyaset tathā | vaktranetrangasamyuktah padme padme 
na samsayah ||529||. 

28 See Tāntrikābhidhānakoša, vol. 111, entries for pirigala, nādī, nabhi, and nābhikanda. 


400 HATLEY 


the tips of the big toes to the crown of the head via the navel and heart.29 This 
archaic model of a central channel extending to the feet, linking together vari- 
ous granthis, may underlie the BraYā's conception of the šaktitantu. 

It should perhaps be emphasized that the BraYā's series of lotuses do not 
in any simple sense represent “structures” of a subtle or “yogic” anatomy. The 
lotus-seats (āsana) of the mantra-deities are created through meditative visu- 
alization: one actively engenders a divine body of mantra rather than reifying 
a subtle reality already latent in the body. More precisely, through the padma- 
malavidhi, one imaginatively superimposes the mantric body (mantravigraha) 
of Bhairava upon one’s own corpus and psyche. That the deity-lotuses do not 
represent fixed structures of a subtle body is illustrated by variations in their 
sequence: chapter 21 provides an alternative order of the principal nine deities, 
placing Bhairava in the heart, while an inflection of the padmamalavidhi in 
chapter 45 inverts their typical sequence, placing Bhairava in the lotus of the 
feet.! An alternative version of the second garland has the lotuses of the Six 
Yoginis encircle the waist like a girdle.9?? 

Nonetheless, while the BraYa does not treat the lotus garlands as fixtures of 
a subtle body, it does posit the existence of such structures: the body’s channels 
(nādī) and vital airs (vāyu, prana), for instance, and more pertinently, points 
known as granthis ("knots" or “joints”). A particular series of nine granthis 
forms the locus for installing the nine lotuses of the primary padmamala. That 
granthis were considered to be anatomical realities is suggested by their treat- 
ment as points in the body rather than as objects to be placed/installed (nyas-) 
in the body or engendered through meditation (kalp-, cint-, etc.).33 Integral to 
the idea of the padmamālā is this correlation between a vertical sequence of 


29  Matangapāramešvara, vidyāpāda 20.21c-22b: pādāngusthāgrato vyaktā nabhito hrdayam 
gata || 21|| susumnā nama sā jrieya brahmarandhrābjanirgatā |. 

go BraYā 21125ab: hrdaye bhairavo nyasya vaktranetrangasamyutam (understanding bhai- 
ravo as accusative in sense). 

31 In BraYa 45.390-397, the sequence of installation (nyāsa) for inner worship is from feet 
(Bhairava) to head (Param Sakti). See the notes of Kiss (2015, 281-282). 

32 BraYā 21.128—129: nabhyam vaiviravinyasya tato vāmādi-m-āšrtāh | mekhalākrtisamsthānā 
katyam vai yogini nyaset || 128|| daksinaparsvakam yavad varan tu varavarnini | vaktrane- 
trangasamyukta kartavyā nātra samšayah ||129||. 

33 The granthis are referred to solely by their locations in the body. Take for example BraYa 
4.564c-565, which specifies the “knot of the throat” (kanthagranthi) as locus for the lotus 
of goddess Karālī: anenaiva vidhanena karalim [em.; karālī ms. ] vinyaset punah || kantha- 
granthigate [em.; °sate ms.] padme natra kārya vicāraņāt | nabhipadme [em.; "padmes 
ms.] tathaiveha candaksim [em.; "āksī ms.] vinyased budhah ||. (Emendation of sate to 
gate is trivial, given the frequent confusion of ša and ga in the old manuscript, and the 
interchangability of ša and sa.) 


THE LOTUS GARLAND AND CORD OF POWER 401 


lotuses and the body's nine knots, which are repeatedly described as dividing 
the garland.?^ In the case of the two secondary padmamālās, the lotuses' posi- 
tions in the body do not on the whole correlate with granthis. This supports 
the idea that the primary padmamālā is rooted in a model of the yogic body 
in which nine granthis are united by a central channel (nadt), which the BraYa 
reconceives of as the Saktitantu. This cord of šakti, unique to the BraYa, appears 
to combine what in later traditions would be differentiated as the susumnā nāģī 
and the bodily (as opposed to cosmogonic) kuņdalinī.35 

Although archaic tantric conceptions of the yogic body may have inspired 
the BraYa's lotus garlands and cord of power, the concept primarily describes 
the practitioner's assumption of a divine body of mantra. This avadhūtatanu, 
“body of pure šakti” is formed by lotuses of the three garlands and united by the 
šaktitantu, shown as whole in figure 16.3. This embodies the entire pantheon of 
deities as wellas the hierarchy of ontic levels (tattvakrama), from the earth ele- 
ment to paramasiva.?6 The avadhūtatanu taken on by the sadhaka mirrors, in 
part, the mantra-body of the deity as Sadasiva; his divine form is composed 
of a garland of nine lotuses pierced by the cord of power, further augmented 
by a triad of cosmological powers—vāmā, raudrī, and jestha.?" To assume the 


34 Note for instance BraYā 21.123c—124b: šaktitantunibaddhān tu padmamālām [em.; mālā 
ms.] vicintayet ||123|| navagranthivibhagena tato nyasam prakalpayet | ("One should visu- 
alize the garland of lotuses as bound by the cord of sakti, then one should perform 
mantra-installation, according to the division of the nine knots [where are positioned the 
lotuses]"). 

35 Key to this issue is the question of whether and by what other names the BraYā conceives 
of a central channel (nādī). While the BraYā does attest the common nadi triad of ida, 
pingala, and susumna, the expression susumnā (which in most sources refers to the central 
channel) occurs only once (18.80) in the earlier stratum of the BraYa—its first fifty chap- 
ters. Its meaning in later chapters, where it does occur several times, is ambiguous. It may 
not (always) be the middle channel: it is never specifically designated as such, and BraYā 
85.138cd seemingly refers to an unmamed middle channel between ida and susumnā (idā- 
susumnayor madhye muktimārggānusāriņī). Concerning the early history of susumnā, see 
the preliminary remarks of Goodall et al. (2015, 33-34). 

36 Note eg. BraYā 45304ab: saktitantu tato dhyātvā sivadyavanigocare. Similar expressions 
abound in the BraYā. 

37 BraYā 32.42-46: 

evamsvarüpasampannam cintayīta sadāšivam | 
evamsthito mahādevi adidevah sadāšivah ||42|| 
svayamsthito sthitim kuryā trailokye tu na samsayah | 
samhāram tu sadā kuryād icchayā caiva samharet ||43|| 
dahyātmanah punas sarvam trailokyam sacarācaram | 
srjate tu yadātmānam trailokyam srjate sada ||44|| 
vāmayā srjate sarvam raudryā caiva tu samharet | 
jesthayā ca sthitim kuryā tritattvatanusamsthitah ||45|| 


402 HATLEY 


avadhūtatantu is, more specifically, to take on the mantra-body (mantravi- 
graha) of Kapalisabhairava, the deities of whose largely female mandala per- 
vade the lotus garlands. Strung together by the cord of Sakti, the lotuses of 
all the goddesses are also simultaneously loci of Bhairava, whose seed-syllable 
HUM appears in each, paired with the presiding goddess.?? Thus it is that the 
BraYā's opening benediction invokes the bhairavatattva as sporting in the form 
of the lingam in the lotuses of his consorts.?? 

While the sadhaka seeks apotheosis as Bhairava, the divine body he takes on, 
the avadhūtatanu, in fact consists of a feminine power which ultimately tran- 
scends the male deity. The “unblemished” or “pure” (avadhūtā) šakti is present 
not only as the cord which unites the lotus garlands: in mantric terms, she 
also pervades the garlands as HAM, the final syllable of the Nine-Syllable Vidya 
(with the addition of anusvara). In this form she is known as Parama or Yogesi, 
the eighth and highest Mother-goddess from whom the others emerge,^? and 
as Aghori or Bhairavi, consort of Bhairava. Her simultaneous pervasion of the 
body and syllabic presence in each lotus are intimated in BraYā 4.595-596b: 


sarwange parama šaktir*! vaktranetrangavarjita* | 
padmāsanavihīnā tu vinyaset sadhakottamah ||595|| 
padmamālaih samāyuktā padme padme vikalpayet | 


The best of sadhakas should install the supreme sakti [HAM] on the entire 
body, without face, eye, orlimb mantras, devoid of alotusseat; one should 
[also] envision her in each lotus, conjoining/possessing the lotus gar- 
lands. 


navāmbhojakrtām mālām šaktisūtreņa bheditām | 
navagranthivibhāgena bibhrano paramesvarah ||46|| 


43d icchayā] em.; icchayo ms. 44a sarvam]| em.; savam ms. 44c syjate] corr.; srjate 
ms. 45a srjateļ corr; $rjate ms. 45c jesthayā ca sthitim] em.; jestayāvasthitam ms. 
46d bibhrano] em.; bibhranau ms. 

38 E.g. BraYā 4.515, concerning the lotus in the forehead of goddess Rakta: vamaparsve tatas 
tasyah kapālīsasya vinyaset | bījamātram mahaprajna vaktranetrangavarjjitam ||. 

39 BraYā 11b: dūtīnām padmasande 'samasukhavilasal lingarüpam bibharti; see the discus- 
sion in Hatley 2018, 383-385. 

40  BraYā 2.17-18: hakarena para šaktir età yasyā vinirgatah | mātaras te maya proktā yage 
ucchusmapüjite ||17|| ya sa eva maya proktā matrnani caiva purant | tasyedam kathitam sar- 
vam yam jitātvā navasidati ||18||. 

41 Saktir] em.; Sakti ms. 

42 varjitā| corr.; varjitah ms. 


THE LOTUS GARLAND AND CORD OF POWER 403 


As holds true for the deity mandala in all its forms, the supreme goddess has 
a transcendent, subtle presence, lacking a singular locus.*? Thus while Kapal- 
isabhairava reigns from the uppermost lotus, the formless, all-encompassing 
reality to which the sādhaka aspires is “a feminine power which transcends the 
male-female dichotomy which patterns the lower revelations” (Sanderson 1988, 
672). 


3 Yoga and the Integration of Inner and Outer Ritual 


The “method of the lotus garlands” (padmamalavidhi) has more and less elab- 
orate forms and numerous inflections. At its simplest, one installs the seed- 
syllables of the principal deities in nine lotuses.^^ The procedure of the lotus 
garlands applies not only to the body, but to ritual involving external supports 
as well. Thus for the worship system (yāga) taught in chapter 12, one begins 
by laying out nine lotuses in a square mandala on a substrate, then visualizing 
the šaktitantu and installing the mantra-deities. After envisioning an elabo- 
rate mantric throne for installation of Bhairava in the central lotus, one engages 
in the somatic performance of worship. Subsequently, the procedure is repli- 
cated in full detail inwardly “by the path of yoga” (yogamargena), seated in the 
lotus posture.^9 ‘Outer’ ritual thus begins with meditative visualization and is 
followed by the rite's recapitulation internally. 

While the padmamalavidhi represents a basic template for ritual and the 
empowerment of the body, ritual may be patterned by divergent pantheons, 
especially the practitioner's personal pantheon (svayaga), a configuration of 
the mantra-deities established through initiation. These personalized inflec- 
tions of the root pantheon (the mülayaga) are nine in number, based on the 
predominance of each of the nine major deities in turn.*7 In the obligatory 
daily worship (nityakarman) and much other ritual, inner worship (Ardyaga) of 
this specific pantheon forms the standard preliminary to bahirnyasa, the act of 


43 See the discussion of Kiss (2015, 20—22), a section fittingly titled “Where is Caņdā Kapa- 
lini?” 

44 This minimal (svalpa) form of nyasa is described in BraYā 18.75—79. 

45  BraYā 121-3: athatah sampravaksyami āsanam pūrvvam eva hi | yagam caiva mahādevi 
sādhakānām hitāya vai ||1|| pūrvvokte mandale caiva gandhamandalake pi và | puspa- 
mandalake vapi šaktitantu vicintayet ||2|| tasyadho pranavam dadyā kalagnin tatra vinyaset 
| kstrodam tan tu vinyasya avadhütam tato nyaset ||3||. 

46 . BraYà12.29ff. 

47 Concerning the nine pantheons (navayāgāh), see the brief remarks in Kiss 2015, 16—18, and 
the article navayaga in Tāntrikābhidhānakoša, vol. 111. 


404 HATLEY 


installing the mantra-syllables upon the body or another substratum, whether 
the fire pit, ritual vessel, or icon.^? Applications of mantra-deity pantheons not 
based upon the Nine-Syllable Vidya also follow this alternating pattern of inner 
and outer ritual. While worship (yāga, yajana) provides the essential paradigm 
for the BraYa’s integration of inner and outer ritual, the principle and prac- 
tice of their integration applies more widely. This is abundantly evident in the 
domain of “magic,” including all manner of rites involving alphabetical wheels 
(cakra), images of the deities (pratima), and two-dimensional figures (yantra). 
These processes may entail, for example, the fusion of the channels of one’s 
own body with the spokes drawn in the lotus of a cakra—the term nadi refers 
to both—which may then be fused with the channels of the targeted victim 
(sadhya).*9 

Given the integral unity of outer and inner ritual, of somatic acts and sub- 
jective processes, the question arises as to whether and in what manner ‘yoga’ 
represents, for the BraYā, a domain of practice meaningfully distinct from ‘rit- 
ual’ (kriya or karman). The evidence is ambiguous, at least for what seems 
likely to be the core, early stratum of the text (chapters 1-50, more or less).5° 
Occurrences of the term yoga in the sense of meditational practice—often in 
the phrase yogamargena, “via the path of/by way of meditation’—generally 
seem synonymous with inner ritual (adhyatmakriya). Chapter 12, for instance, 
describes the procedure of the inner padmamālā as “installation of the sakti” 
(Saktinyasa) through “visualizing by way of yoga" (yogamargena samcimtya, 
12.35cd).5! On the whole, meditational disciplines are so well integrated into 


48 X Eg. BraYā 4.366c-367b: yagasthanam tato gatya hrdyagan tu prakalpayet ||366|| svayago- 
tthena mārgeņa bahi nyāsam tathaiva ca |. A detailed description of inner worship (rd- 
yāga) of one's own pantheon (svayaga) appears in BraYā 38.24c—31, in this case as a pre- 
liminary to fire ritual (agnikarya). 

49 To give an example, I quote from my remarks on parakayapravesa (“entry into the body of 
another") in Tāntrikābhidhānakoša, vol. 111: "PBY(H) [Picumata-Brahmayamala] 14.254— 
263ab describes a practice in which one should fuse ( yojayet) the nadis of the yogic body 
with those of a cakra of the kulavidyā-mantra of this system, inscribed on cloth, metal 
or wood (PBY(H) 14.240). In this case the purpose is the extraction of ‘nectars’: ‘The sād- 
haka, thus exiting the body through the tip of the nose, should enter the body of another 
and perform the extraction of nectars, after fusing [his with the victim's] nādīs; about 
this, there is no need for deliberation’ (evam dehāļd| viniskramya nasikagrena sadhakah 
|| paradeham vi[$]et mantri amrtakrstiri ca karayet | nādīsamdhānakam krtvā nātra karya 
vicāraņāt, PBY(H) 14.259cd—260)” 

50 See Hatley 2018, 64—71, concerning the BraYa's likely stratification. 

51  BraYā 12.35c-40b: yogamarggena samcimtya šaktinyāsan tu kārayet || 35|| padmāsano- 
pavistas tu cintayitvā tu sadhakah | avadhūtam nyasen mantri pādayor ubhayor api ||36|| 
paricatmika mahādevi guhye caturggunan tathā | hrdayam trgunam nyasya lalate dvigu- 


THE LOTUS GARLAND AND CORD OF POWER 405 


the BraYā's ritual systems that to treat these as a distinct domain of practice— 
whether or not designated yoga—seems artificial. However, three brief chap- 
ters of the core text do focus on meditational practices which, exceptionally, 
seem virtually independent from somatic acts and external supports.5? More- 
over, a passage in chapter 25 specifies that a sadhaka who aspires for libera- 
tion (the mumuksu), rather than supernatural experiences and powers (bhoga), 
should devote himself to a simplified pantheon worship (yāga), giving up all 
other rituals (karman) and “abiding by the path of yoga." While not abandoned, 
outer ritual here assumes a simplified form, the emphasis shifting decidedly 
toward inner practice.5? Thus the degree to which meditational disciplines 
feature primarily as integral elements of ritual may simply reflect the BraYa's 
emphasis on supernatural attainment (siddhi): the path of yoga, ultimately, is 
for seekers of liberation. 

The Brahmayamala likely has two or more distinct textual strata,** and 
yoga proves to be an area in which stark contrasts emerge between these: 
later chapters of the text introduce yogic practices and emphases seemingly 
unanticipated in the core fifty-odd chapters. These include systems of med- 
itation focused on a series of inner voids and resonances,?? a yoga system 
based on internalization of visionary encounters with the goddesses ( yogin- 
imelaka),?9 yogic practices for cheating death (a system which, in contrast 


nam nyaset|| 37|| ekātmikā tathā caiva sikhayam sadhakottamah | sakrt sakrt tathā caiva 
vaktrasthānesu vinyaset ||38|| netrasthanesu vai dadyad angasthānesu caiva hi | šakti- 
tantu tato dhyatva nmastakāt pādayo ntikā ||39|| bahirbhütam sarirastham padmamālān 
tu cintayet |. 

52 These are chapters 36 (nddisaricarapatala), 41 (bindupatala), and 44 (krīdākarmapatala). 
The latter, for instance, describes meditation upon the self in the lotus of the heart; merg- 
ing with bindu, one gains the ability to traverse the universe in various forms. BraYā 44.2— 
3, 8: hrddese kamalam dhyātvā vyomapankajasamyutam | bindumadhye nyase 'tmānam 
[em.; nyasen mànam ms.] visvadeham ayam šubham ||2|| Saktibhih kiranopetam tārā- 
stakavibhūsitam | tam dhyāyet paramam rūpam bindulinam šivātmakam ||3|| ... antarikse 
tathā bhūmau pātālesu ca dehisu | anya-m-anyesu rüpesu vicaren nātra samšayah ||8||. 
For another example of the separation of meditation and ritual, BraYā 24.16c-17b speaks 
of meditative absorption (samadhi) as an activity one may engage in during interludes 
between the daily rites: japayukto ksapen mantri prata[r|madhyahnikottaram ||16|| šāstra- 
sangena va samstho atha va samādhisu sthitah (em.; sthitau ms.] |. 

53 . BraYà 25.341c-342: kevalasya mahādevi šivasya paramatmanah || 341|| bhairavakhyasya 
samprokto yago ‘yam muktilaksanam | etad yagatrayam proktam mumukso sādhakasya tu 
| nanyah karmanivrttasya yogamargasthitasya tu ||342||. (Perhaps read anyakarmanivrtta- 
sya, “desisting from other rituals”?) 

54 As argued in Hatley 2018, 64—71. 

55 Chapters 92 and gq, respectively. 

56 Chapter100. 


406 HATLEY 


to the core chapters, attests the bodily Aundalint),5” and a kind of “yoga of 
absorption” (layayoga) based on the granthis of the principal padmamala.5? 
While not embeded within critiques of outer ritual, these diverse yogas of the 
text’s later stratum tend to eschew external supports and somatic, performa- 
tive acts. Far from being disciplines limited to the liberation seeker, these yogas 
offer the possibility of accomplishing the sadhaka's aims through inner acts 
alone, potentially superceding outer ritual. This is particularly evident in chap- 
ter 100, which teaches a “rite for mastery of the clans of goddesses through 
yoga” ( yogena kulasadhanam). Attainment of direct, power-bestowing encoun- 
ters (melaka) with the goddesses is one of the BraYa's dominant ritual aims, as 
illustrated by the “rite for the mastery of vetālas” (vetalasadhana, ch. 15), “rite 
of the great churning” (mahamanthana, ch. 46), “pavilion of power” (siddhi- 
mandapika, ch. 47), and “worship in the pit [of power]” ([siddhi]garttayaga, 
ch. 48). These virtuoso and macabre performances may culminate with the 
goddesses manifesting bodily before the sadhaka and granting boons. Belying 
this pattern, the yoga of chapter 100 offers the possibility of accomplishing mas- 
tery over the clans of goddesses through a process of inner realization alone.*9 
Similarly, the yoga of BraYā 99 (called vijfíanaparícaka, “the five knowledges”) 
promises the ability to enter the bodies of others without recourse to external 
supports (cakra or yantra), through manipulation of a series of inner reso- 
nances (ràva).9? Incorporation of such meditational disciplines into the text's 
latter strata marks a trend towards increasing differentiation between medita- 
tion and ritual'—between yoga and kriya—and the subversion of outer forms 
of ritual. The possibility of attaining all ritual aims through yoga alone brings 
the vulgate BraYa closer to the Tantrasadbhava's hierarchical dichotomy of the 
inner and outer, whereby the externalities of ritual are subsumed by inner real- 
ities. It is thus possible in this literature to trace early steps in the direction of 
Abhinavagupta's gnostic nondualism, which further overlays the dichotomy of 
jūāna and kriyā upon that of inner and outer ritual. 


57 . Chapter104. 

58 Chapter 53 (cf. 9919-35). 

59  BraYāioo.2-3b, 25-26: kulanam sadhanam nātha kathitan tu pura yathā | tat tathā vidi- 
tam sarvam kulasiddhipradayakam ||2|| sampratam sarahasyan tu yogena kulasadhanam 
|... matryoginikayani šākinīnān kulāni tu | sidhyanti sādhakendrasya yogenanena suvrate 
||25|| yena [conj.; — na ms.] sarvagato bhūtvā yoginisiddhim āpnuyāt | kathayanti ca sad- 
bhāvam kulajam jfianam uttamam ||26||. 

60  BraYà 99.30cd: krtābhyāsas tu vai mantri dehād deham vrajet ksaņāt ||. 


THE LOTUS GARLAND AND CORD OF POWER 407 
Acknowledgements 


I would like to thank Alberta Ferrario, Dominic Goodall, Csaba Kiss, James 
Mallinson, and Alexis Sanderson for their stimulating comments on this essay. 
I would also like to thank Tadeusz Majewski for producing the line drawings 
which I have used for figures 16.1-3. 


Abbreviations 


BraYa Brahmayamala 
conj. conjecture 
corr. correction 

em. emendation 
ms(s) manuscript(s) 


References 


Primary Sources 

Amaraughasasana. Mukunda Ram Shastri, ed. The Amaraugha Shasan of Goraksha- 
Nātha. Kashmir Series of Texts and Studies, no. 20. Bombay: the Research Depart- 
ment of Jammu and Kashmir State/Nirnaya-Sagara Press, 1918. 

Tantrasadbhāva. Mark Dyczkowski, ed. Draft edition; e-text available from the Digital 
Library of the Muktabodha Indological Research Institute. https://etexts.muktabod 
ha.org/digital library.htm. 

Tantrāloka of Abhinavagupta. Mukund Ram Shastri (v. 1), Madhusūdan Kaul Shās- 
tri (v. 2-12), eds. The Tantraloka of Abhinava-Gupta, with Commentary by Rajanaka 
Jayaratha. KSTS, nos. 23, 28, 30, 36, 35, 29, 41, 47, 59, 52, 57, 58. Allahabad; Bombay: 
the Research Department of Jammu and Kashmir State, 1918—1938. 

Nisvasatattvasamhita. Dominic Goodall, et al., eds. The Nisvasatattvasamhita. The Earli- 
est Surviving Saiva Tantra, volume 1. A critical edition and annotated translation of the 
Mūlasūtra, Uttarasutra, and Nayasūtra. Collection Indologie, no. 133 (Early Tantra 
Series, no. 5). Pondicherry: Pondicherry: Institut Francais d'Indologie/École fran- 
caise d’ Extréme-Orient/Universitat Hamburg, 2015. 

Brahmayāmala. National Archives of Kathmandu manuscript no. 3-370 (Nepal-Ger- 
man Manuscript Preservation Project reel no. A42/6). 

Brahmayamala. Shaman Hatley, ed. The Brahmayamala Tantra or Picumata, volume I: 
Chapters 1-2, 39-40, & 83. Revelation, Ritual, and Material Culture in an Early Saiva 
Tantra. Collection Indologie, no. 128 (Early Tantra Series, no. 1). Pondicherry: Insti- 


408 HATLEY 


tut Francais d'Indologie/École francaise d' Extrēme-Orient/Universitāt Hamburg, 
2018. 

Brahmayāmala. Csaba Kiss, ed. The Brahmayamala Tantra or Picumata, volume 11. The 
Religious Observances and Sexual Rituals of the Tantric Practitioner: Chapters 3, 21, 
and 45. Collection Indologie, no. 130 (Early Tantra Series, no. 3). Pondicherry: Institut 
Français d’ Indologie/Ecole francaise d' Extréme-Orient/Universitát Hamburg, 2015. 

Matangaparamesvara. N.R. Bhatt, ed. Matangapāramesvarāgama (Vidyāpāda), avec le 
commentaire de Bhatta Ramakantha. Publications de  Instutut francais d’ Indologie, 
no. 56. Pondicherry: Institut francais d’ Indologie, 1977. 

Ratnatrayaparīksā of Srikantha. Vajravallabha Dvivedi, ed. Astaprakaraņam. Yogatan- 
tragranthamala, no. 12. Varanasi: Sampurnanand Sanskrit University, 1988. 

Sardhatrisatikalottara. N.R. Bhatt, ed. Sardhatrisatikalottaragama, avec le commen- 
taire de Bhatta Ramakantha. Publications de l'Institut frangais d’ Indologie, no. 61. 
Pondicherry: Institut francais d’ Indologie, 1979. 


Secondary Sources 

Hatley, Shaman. 2007. "The Brahmayàmalatantra and Early Saiva Cult of Yoginīs” PhD 
dissertation, University of Pennsylvania. 

Hatley, Shaman. 2018. See Brahmayamala. 

Kiss, Csaba. 2015. See Brahmayamala. 

Sanderson, Alexis. 1986. “Mandala and Agamic Identity in the Trika of Kashmir.” In 
Mantras et Diagrammes rituels dans l'Hinduisme, edited by Andre Padoux, 169—214. 
Paris: Editions du CNRS, 1986. 

Sanderson, Alexis. 1988. “Saivism and the Tantric Traditions.” In The World's Religions, 
edited by S. Sutherland et al., 660—704. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul. 

Tāntrikābhidhānakoša. Dictionnaire des terms techniques de la littérature hindoue tan- 
trique. Vols. 1-11. H. Brunner, G. Oberhammer and A. Padoux, eds. Beiträge zur 
Kultur- und Geistesgeschichte Asiens, nos. 35 and 44. Vienna: Austrian Academy of 
Sciences Press, 2000 and 2004. 

Tāntrikābhidhānakoša. Dictionnaire des terms techniques de la littérature hindoue tan- 
trique. Vol. 111. Dominic Goodall and Marion Rastelli, eds. Beitrdge zur Kultur- und 
Geistesgeschichte Asiens, no. 76. Vienna: Austrian Academy of Sciences Press, 2013. 


CHAPTER 17 


The Amrtasiddhi: Hathayoga’s Tantric Buddhist 
Source Text 


James Mallinson 


Like many of the contributors to this volume, I had the great fortune to have 
Professor Sanderson as the supervisor of my doctoral thesis, which was a critical 
edition of an early text on hathayoga called the Khecartvidya. At the outset of 
my work on the text, and for several subsequent years, I expected that Sander- 
son’s encyclopedic knowledge of the Saiva corpus would enable us to find 
within it forerunners of khecarīmudrā, the hathayogic practice central to the 
Khecarīvidyā. However, notwithstanding a handful of instances of teachings 
on similar techniques, the fully-fledged practice does not appear to be taught 
in earlier Saiva works. In subsequent years, as I read more broadly in the corpus 
of early texts on hathayoga (which, in comparison to the vast Saiva corpus, is 
relatively small and thus may easily be read by one individual), I came to the 
realisation that almost all of the practices which distinguish hathayoga from 
other methods of yoga were unique to it at the time of their codification and 
are not to be found in the corpus of earlier Saiva texts, despite repeated asser- 
tions in secondary literature that hathayoga was a development from Saivism 
(or “tantra” more broadly conceived). 

The texts of the hathayoga corpus do, however, couch their teachings in 
tantric language. The name of the hathayogic khecarīmudrā, for example, is 
also that of an earlier but different Saiva practice. When I was invited to speak 
at the symposium in Professor Sanderson's honour held in Toronto in 2015, 
I decided to try to articulate my rather inchoate thoughts on this subject by 
presenting a paper entitled "Hathayoga's Saiva Idiom.” The inadequacy of my 
theories was brought home to me some months after the symposium when I 
started to read, together with two other former students of Sanderson, Péter- 
Daniel Szántó and Jason Birch,! a twelfth-century manuscript of the Amrtasid- 
dhi (AS), the earliest text to teach many of the key principles and practices of 


1 We were joined at our reading sessions by Sam Grimes, Diwakar Acharya, Camillo Formi- 
gatti, Anand Venkatkrishnan and Paul Gerstmayr, whom I thank for their valuable com- 
ments. 


© JAMES MALLINSON, 2020 | DOI:10.1163/9789004432802_019 


This is an open access chapter distributed under the terms of the CC BY-NC 4.0 license. 


410 MALLINSON 


hathayoga? I had already read much of the text with Sanderson and others, but 
only from later manuscript sources. As we read the older manuscript it gradu- 
ally became clear that the Amrtasiddhi was composed in a Vajrayāna (tantric 
Buddhist) milieu. 

Thus my notion of hathayoga having a Saiva idiom needed readdressing. 
One might perhaps talk instead of its “tantric idiom.’ But I shall leave reflections 
on that topic for a later date and in this short paper focus on the Amrtasiddhi 
and, in particular, the features of it which make it clear that it was composed 
in a Vajrayana milieu. I am currently preparing a critical edition and anno- 
tated translation of the text with Dr Szántó; what follows here results from 
our work in progress. Despite our edition being incomplete, I am confident 
that the conclusion drawn here about the origins of the text is sound (and 
that further work on the text will provide additional and complementary evi- 
dence) and I think it important enough to warrant preliminary publication. 
Subsequent publications will address this unique text's many other remarkable 
features. 


1 The Amrtasiddhi 


The importance of the Amrtasiddhi was first brought to scholarly attention by 
Kurtis Schaeffer in an article published in 2002.? Here I shall reprise as little 
of his rich and dense article as is necessary to provide the background to what 
follows. Schaeffer focuses on the twelfth-century^ manuscript of the text, pho- 


2 I thank Professors Kurtis Schaeffer and Leonard van der Kuijp for sharing with me pho- 
tographs of printouts from a microfilm copy of this manuscript. Schaeffer also kindly shared 
his draft edition of the Tibetan translation of the Amrtasiddhi given in this witness. We read 
the manuscript together with a collation of other witnesses, including a transcription of the 
Grantha manuscript M; prepared by Viswanath Gupta, whom I thank for his assistance. Con- 
cerning manuscript sigla for the Amrtasiddhi, please refer below to the section "Witnesses of 
the Amrtasiddhi” 

3 Prior to Schaeffer's article, the only mention of the text of which I am aware (other than in 
manuscript catalogues) is Gode 1954, 22, in which its citations in the Yogacintamani are noted. 

4 Schaeffer (2002, 517) says that the manuscript's colophon gives a date which “may read 
1159 C. E." The reading is clear: ekāšītijute [ jute is Newar scribal dialect for Sanskrit ?yute] sake 
sahāsraike tu phālgune | krsnástamyàm samāpto ‘yam krtvamrtasiddhir maya || (f.37v). The 
eighth day of the dark fortnight of the lunar month of Phālguna in Šāka 1081 corresponds 
to March 2nd 160ck (according to the calculator at http://www.cc.kyoto-su.ac.jp/yanom/ 
pancanga/). It is possible that the colophon has been copied from an examplar and that 
the manuscript itself does not date to 1160. The mansucript's Tibetan colophon says that the 
Tibetan translation is that of the *monk of the Bya [clan]" (Bya ban de) Pad ma 'od zer, who 


THE AMRTASIDDHI: HATHAYOGAS TANTRIC BUDDHIST SOURCE TEXT 411 


tographs of printouts from a microfilm of which he and Leonard van der Kuijp 
have kindly shared with me. At the time that the microfilm was made, the 
manuscript was in Beijing, although Schaeffer believes that it has since been 
returned to Tibet. The manuscript is unique in that it is bilingual, with three 
registers: the Sanskrit text in a Nepali or east Indian script, a transliteration of 
the Sanskrit in Tibetan hand-printing script and a translation? into Tibetan in 
the Tibetan cursive script. 

This manuscript is referred to in what follows by the siglum C. The other 
witnesses of the text which have been collated are considerably later than C 
(the oldest is perhaps the c. 17th-century Kj). They present versions of the text 
in which redaction has removed or obscured some of the Buddhist features 
evident in C. These witnesses may be divided into two groups. The first is a sin- 
gle Grantha manuscript from the Mysore Government Oriental Library (M2), 
the second seven north Indian and Nepali manuscripts, two from Jodhpur's 
Maharaja Man Singh Pustak Prakash (J, and J, = J) and four from the Nepal- 
German Manuscript Preservation Project (K,—K, = K).® 

The text of the Amrtasiddhi consists of 303 verses divided into 35 short 
vivekas." The first ten vivekas teach the constituents of the yogic body. Vivekas 
11-13 teach three methods of manipulating those constituents (mahamudra, 
mahābandha and mahāvedha) and viveka 14 teaches the practice (abhyasa), 
i.e. how the three methods are to be used together. Vivekas 15-18 teach the four 
grades of aspirant, 19-33 the four states (avasthas) of yoga, and 34-35 the final 
transformation of the body leading up to nirvana.8 


worked towards the end of the eleventh century, which provides us with an earlier terminus 
ante quem for the text than the date of the manuscript itself. 

5 Asnotedin the manuscript's Tibetan colophon, the translation is of a different recension of 
the Sanskrit text from that given in the manuscript. At some places, e.g. 7.10 and 7.26, the 
translation corresponds to the text as found in the other witnesses, but not that in C. 

6 Full details of these witnesses are given at the end of this article. 

7 There are 35 vivekas in the Beijing ms and 38 in the others. All verse numbering given here 
corresponds to the order of verses in C (which does not itself give verse numbers). 

8 Vivekas19-35areinterspersed with very short chapters on a variety of topics. In the first viveka 
(vv. 10—13) there is a list of the topics to be taught in the text. The list corresponds exactly to 
thevivekas up to viveka 19, but then goes awry. More analysis is needed to be sure, but it seems 
likely that at least some of the viveka divisions after 19 are later additions to the text. 


412 MALLINSON 
2 The Amrtasiddhi in the Hathayoga Tradition 


21 Citations and Borrowings 

The Amrtasiddhi is a seminal work in the hathayoga textual tradition.? Scha- 
effer (2002, 518—519) mentions its citations in the Yogacintamani (c. 1600 CE)!° 
and Hathapradīpikājyotsnā (1837 CE).! In addition, several hathayoga texts bor- 
row directly from the Amrtasiddhi without attribution. The c. 13th-century 
Goraksašataka shares three half-verses with it.'? The Vivekamartanda, which 
is also likely to date to the 13th century redacts four of the Amrtasiddhi’s verses 
into three. The c. 14th-century Amaraughaprabodha shares six verses with the 
Amrtasiddhi and paraphrases it extensively elsewhere.“ The Goraksayogašās- 
tra (15th century or earlier) borrows two and a half verses!* and extensively 
paraphrases other parts of the text. The c. 15th-century Sivasamhità is much 
the biggest borrower from the Amrtasiddhi, sharing 34 verses with it.!6 The 
Hathapradīpikā shares five half-verses with the Amrtasiddhi, but these may be 
borrowed from the Amaraughaprabodha since all the shared passages are also 
in that text.!? 


2.2 Doctrinal Innovations 
Several of the Amrtasiddhi's teachings have no prior attestation and are central 
to teachings on hathayoga in later texts, where they are either reproduced ver- 


9 Despite the compound hathayoga being found in earlier Vajrayana works (Birch 201, 535— 
536) and its teachings being central to later hathayogic texts, the Amrtasiddhi does not call 
its yoga method hatha. This paradox will be addressed in subsequent publications. 

10  Yogacintāmaņi p. 13 [AS 6.11, 6.13], p. 26 [14.4, 14.812, 1416c-19d], p. 34 [7.25, 7.15, 7.18, 
7-8-9, 7.12, 7.5, 7.2cd, 7.3cd, 7.6—7, 7.16c—17d, 7.19ab, 7.17cd, 7.20-24], p. 39 [32.3-4], p. 40 
[33.1], 344] p. 101 [6.10], 107 [3.1-4, 4.1a—4.2b, 4.4c-4.12d], p. 112 [5.1, 5.3-4], p. 213 [25.3c- 
4d, 26.1—2, 27.1, 28.1, 294, 31.3c-4b, 31.5ab, 31.5c-7b (with significant differences), 31.8c- 
gb, 3.10, 312], p. 218 [15.3a—4b, 16.1ab, 16.2a—3b, 17.1, 17.2ac (with differences), 17.3, 18.1-5, 
19.1ab]. 

11 — Hathapradīpikājyotsnā ad 3.100 [AS 7.8c-9d, 7.12, 7.5a-, 7.2cd] and 4.1 [AS 33.1, 32.3-4, 7.23, 
34.1, 7.17, 7.20, 7.6c—7d, 7.16cd). 

12 AS 6.7a—6.8b = Goraksasataka 34a—35b. This verse is also found at Gheraņdasamhitā 5.62. 

13  AS7.16-20 = Vivekamartanda 90-92. 

14 AS 16.1c-2b, 1.3, 11.9cd, 11.3cd, 14.6, 13.5cd, 13.7cd, 19.2 = Amaraughaprabodha 20, 29, 32cd, 
37ab, 38, 39cd, 4oab, 45. 

15 AS 3.1, 6.nab, 11.4 = Goraksayogašāstra 5, 13ab, 17. 

16 — AS 115b-146d, 1.17c-1.18b, 1.19ab, 3.14, 4.3-4, n.1ab, 11.3cd, 11.4bc, 1.5ab, 1.6, 11.7cd, 12.6, 
15.1, 16.1—3, 19.2 = f$ 2.1b—2.2d, 2.3, 2.4ab, 2.6c—9, 2.11-12, 4.28cd, 4.27ab, 4.27dc, 4.28ab, 4.31, 
4.34cb, 4.38, 5.13, 5.17c-5.20b, 3.31. 

17  AS1.3,1.9cd, 19.2 = Hathapradīpikā 3.9, 3.13cd, 4.69. 


THE AMRTASIDDHI: HATHAYOGAS TANTRIC BUDDHIST SOURCE TEXT 413 


batim, as noted above, or incorporated into new compositions. These may be 
summarised as follows. 
1. The Yogic Body 
a. The Amrtasiddhi is the first text to relocate to the body the old 
tantric triad of sun, moon and fire.!® The idea of a moon in the skull 
dripping amrta is found in many earlier tantric works, but that of 
the sun in the stomach consuming it is new, as is the conflation of 
the sun and fire. 
i The Moon 
merušrūge sthitas candro dvirastakalayā yutah | 
aharnišam tusarabham sudham varsaty adhomukhah ||3.1]| 


The moon is on the peak of Meru and has sixteen digits. 

Facing downwards, it rains dewy nectar day and night. 
ii. The Sun 

madhyamamulasamsthane tisthati suryamandalah | 

kaladvadasasampürno dipyamanah svarašmibhih ||4.1|| 

urdhvam vahati daksena tiksnamurtih prajapatih | 

vyapnoti sakalam deham nadyakasapathasritah ||4.2|| 

grasati candraniryasam bhramati vayumandale | 

dahati sarvadhatums ca suryah sarvašarīrake ||4.3|| 


2d °pathasritah | CK,; yathāšritam Kg, yathasritah cett. 
3b ?mandale | M5; ?mandalaih C, ?mandalam cett. 


(1) The sphere of the sun is at the base of the Central Chan- 
nel, complete with twelve digits, shining with its rays. (2) 
The lord of creatures (Prajapati), of intense appearance, 
travels upwards on the right. Staying in the pathways in the 
spaces (akasapatha)? in the channels it pervades the entire 
body. (3) The sun consumes the lunar secretion, wanders 
in the sphere of the wind and burns up all the bodily con- 
stituents in all bodies. 

iii. Fire 
kalabhir dasabhir yuktah suryamandalamadhyatah | 
vasati vastideše ca vahnir annavipacakah ||5.1]| 


18 This triad is mentioned at Nisvasatattvasamhità Nayasütra 4.147 and in many subsequent 
tantric works. 
19  Thisisašlesa: akasapatha can also mean the sun’s orbit in the sky. 


414 


MALLINSON 


yo vai vahnih sa vai suryo yah süryah sa hutāšanat | 
etav ekatarau drstau suksmabhedena bheditau ||5.2|| 


1b °madhyatah ] CJK; ?madhyagah M;Y 

1€ vasati vastideše | conj.; vasati vatide$e C, vasate vastide$e M;Y, vasatir 
asthideše cett. 

2d süksmabhedena bheditau | C; sūksmāt sūksmatarau nrbhih Mg, sūks- 
mabhedena bhedinau cett. 


(1) Endowed with ten digits, in the middle of the sphere 
of the sun in the region of the stomach dwells fire, which 
digests food. (2) Fire is the sun; the sun is fire. The two look 
almost the same [but] differ subtly. 
The use of the word bindu for semen, bindu' identification with the 
amrta dripping from the moon, its preservation being essential for 
life and its division into male and female are all innovations of the 
Amrtasiddhi which are widely adopted in later hathayoga texts. 
i X adhascandramrtam yāti tadā mrtyur nrnam bhavet ||4.11]| 


na yati | MK; yati C, ?mrtam yasya J 


The nectar of immortality in the moon goes downwards; as a 
result men die. 

ii. — bindupatena vrddhatvam mrtyur bhavati dehinām ||21.3|| 
The fall of bindu makes men grow old [and] die. 

iii. sa bindur dvividho jrieyah pauruso vanitabhavah | 
bijam ca paurusam proktam rajaš ca strisamudbhavam ||7.8|| 
anayor bāhyayogena srstih samjāyate nrņām | 
yadabhyantarato yogas tadā yogīti gtyate ||7.9|| 
kāmarūpe vased binduh kūtāgārasya kotare | 
purnagirimudasparsad vrajati madhyamāpathe ||7.10|| 
yonimadhye mahaksetre javāsindūrasannibham | 
rajo vasati jantūnām devitattvasamadhrtam ||7.11|| 
binduš candramayo jrieyo rajah suryamayas tathā | 
anayoh samgamah sadhyah kūtāgāre 'tidurghate ||7.12|| 


gcd yadabhyantarato yogas tada yogīti gīyate | CH; yadabhyantarato yogas 
tada yogi sa giyate M», yada tv abhyantare yogas tada yogo hi bhanyate cett. 
10a kāmarūpe | CM,; kāmarūpo cett. 

10b kūtāgārasya” | CM»; kūtādhāraņya J, kūtādhārasya K 

10d ?muda? | C; ?sada? J, °guha° cett. 

10d vrajati | C; vrajate M,, rajanti cett. 

nd °samadhrtam | C; °samavrtam M2, °samavrta K}, samavrtah cett. 


THE AMRTASIDDHI: HATHAYOGAS TANTRIC BUDDHIST SOURCE TEXT 415 


(8) Know bindu to be of two kinds, male and female. Semen 
(bīja) is said to be the male [bindu] and rajas (female gener- 
ative fluid) is female. (9) As a result of their external union 
people are created. When they are united internally, then one 
is declared ayogi. (10) Bindu resides in Kāmarūpain the hollow 
of the multi-storied palace (kutagarasya).?? Through pleasur- 
able contact at Pūrņagiri it travels along the Central Channel. 
(11) Rajas resides in the great sacred field in the perineal region 
(yonimadhye). It is as red as a java flower?! and is supported 
by the Goddess element (devitattvasamadhrtam). (12) Know 
bindu to be made of the moon and rajas to be made of the 
sun. Their union is to be brought about in the very inaccessible 
multi-storeyed palace. 

c. A connection between the mind and breath is taught as early as 
the Chāndogya Upanisad (6.8.2). The Amrtasiddhi is the first text to 
teach that mind, breath and bindu are connected, a notion found in 
many subsequent hathayoga texts. 

calaty ayam yada vayus tadā binduš calah smrtah | 
bindu$s calati yasyayam cittam tasyaiva caricalam ||7.17|| 


17a calaty ayam yada | C; yadayam calate M;, yada camcalate JK, calaty esa yada 
YH, 

17b calah smrtah | JKYH; calah smr'ta'h C, ca caficalah M3 

17c bindus calati yasyayam | C; yasyayam calate binduh M», yasyayam calate 
bindus JK, bindu$ calati yasyange YH, 

17d tasyaiva | CKYH;; tasthyai* Mg, tathaiva J 


Itis taught that when the breath moves bindu moves; the mind of 
he whose bindu is moving is restless. 
d. The three granthis. 
The Amrtasiddhi's system of three granthis, brahma?, visnu? and 
rudra?, which are situated along the central channel of the body and 
are to be pierced by the mahavedha (13.10—11), is very common in 
subsequent hathayoga texts.?? 


20 On the kutagara, see below, p. 418. 

21 The bright red java flower (Hibiscus rosa-sinensis L.), popularly known as the China Rose, 
is common throughout south, southeast and east Asia. 

22 Granthis are mentioned in many earlier Šaiva texts, some of whose lists include brahma, 
visnu and rudra granthis but not in the Amrtasiddhi's configuration. See e.g. Kubjikā- 


416 MALLINSON 


2. The three practices, mahamudra, mahabandha, mahāvedha (vivekas 1x1 
13). 
These practices, which involve bodily postures and breath control, are 
used to make the breath enter the central channel and rise upwards. They 
are an innovation of the Amrtasiddhi and are taught in all subseguent 
hathayoga texts, albeit sometimes with different names. 
3. The four avasthās 
The four avasthās, “states” or “stages” of yoga practice (ārambha, ghata, 
paricaya, nispanna/nispatti) introduced in the Amrtasiddhi (vivekas 19— 
33), are taught in many Sanskrit hathayoga texts; they are also mentioned 
in the old Hindi Gorakhbani ($abds 136—139). 
In addition to these innovations, in viveka 14 (abhyasa, "practice”) the Amr- 
tasiddhi describes, at a level of detail unparalleled in other texts, the internal 
processes brought about by its methods, in particular the movement of the 
breaths. 


3 Buddhist Features of the Amrtasiddhi 


In Schaeffer’s analysis of the Amrtasiddhi (2002, 521-524), he notes how it 
is unique amongst Tibetan Buddhist works because its teachings are said to 
bestow jīvanmukti, "liberation while living” and make the yogi identical with 
Siva. Despite these Saiva features, however, close reading of manuscript C, the 
twelfth-century bilingual witness of the text, shows that the text was composed 
within a Vajrayana milieu. Furthermore, it pits its teachings against those of 
other Vajrayana schools, not Saiva ones. 

As can be seen in the examples given below, manuscript C generally has the 
best readings of the text and presents its Buddhist teachings intact. In the other 
manuscripts the specifically Buddhist doctrines found in C are either unwit- 
tingly included, misunderstood (and sometimes presented in corrupt forms as 
a result) or deliberately changed or omitted. 

Some of the text's Buddhist features are ambiguous or obscure enough for 
them to have been preserved by the redactors of the text as presented in the 
later witnesses. Thus we find multiple examples of Vajrayana (or more broadly 
Buddhist) terminology such as mahāmudrā (viveka 1 and 31), vajrapaīijara 
(7.26d), jfíanasambhara (6.gc, 20.2bc), šūnya (8.2a, 8.8d, 810d, 19.152, 20.7b, 


matatantra 17.61-84, in which there are sixteen granthis and Netratantra 7.22—25, in which 
there are twelve. 


THE AMRTASIDDHI: HATHAYOGAS TANTRIC BUDDHIST SOURCE TEXT 


417 


25.1C), nispanna (19.2c, 311c) and abhiseka (13.15a). Similarly, Amrtasiddhi 7.4 


mentions the very specifically Vajrayana notion of the four blisses:?? 


ānandā ye prakathyante viramantah éariratah | 
te pi bindudbhavah sarve jyotsna candrabhava yatha ||7.4] | 


4c °viramantah | C; ciram antas Mp, viramamta JK 


The [four] bodily blisses whose last is [the bliss of] cessation all arise from 


bindu, just as moonlight arises from the moon. 


Other Buddhist features of the text as found in C are deliberately omitted or 


altered in the later witnesses. Examples of these are listed below. This list is not 


exhaustive; further close reading of the text is likely to reveal more examples. 


1. Chinnamasta 


Manuscript C opens with a sragdharā mangala verse in praise of the god- 


dess Chinnamasta: 


nābhau šubhrāravindam tadupari vimalam mandalam candarasmeh 
samsārasyaikasārā tribhuvanajananī dharmavartmodaya ya | 

tasmin madhye trimārge tritayatanudharā chinnamastā prašastā 
tām vande jfianarupaàm maraņabhayaharām yoginim yogamudrām || 


a $ubhra? ] C; candrā? M, e vimalam | C; vivaram M5 

c tasmin | C; tasyām M, «tri? | M2; tre? C echinnamastà prašastā ] C; cittahastham 
prašastām M, 

d tām vande jiiāānarūpām | C; vande jfianasvarupam M5 


At the navel is a white lotus. On top of that is the spotless orb of the 
sun. In the middle of that, at the triple pathway, is she who is the sole 
essence of samsara [and] the creator of the three worlds, who arises 
on the path of dharma, who has three bodies [and] who is lauded as 
Chinnamastā, “she whose head is cut.” I worship her, she who has the 
form of knowledge, who removes the danger of death, the yoginī, the 
seal of yoga. 


Until the 16th century, Chinnamastā is not mentioned in non-Buddhist 


texts (Būhnemann 2000, 37). Her Vajrayāna origins have been demon- 
strated by Sanderson (2009, 240—241), who notes how the epithet dhar- 
modayā, found in the Amrtasiddhi as dharmavartmodayā, is "strictly Bud- 


23 On the four blisses see Isaacson and Sferra 2014, passim. 


418 


24 
25 


MALLINSON 


dhist” One might argue that this mangala verse could be an addition 
to the text when it was redacted by a Vajrayāna tradition, but the verse 
is also found in the Grantha manuscript M, in a corrupt form. Chin- 
namastā's name is given therein as Cittahasthā, but the epithets dhar- 
mavartmodayā and tritayatanudharā are preserved. The Rajasthani and 
Nepali manuscripts omit the verse. 
chandoha 
At Amrtasiddhi 1.16, manuscript C uses the specifically Buddhist term 
chandoha?^ 

sagarah saritas tatra ksetrani ksetrapalakah | 

chandohah puņyatīrthāni pīthāni pithadevatah ||1.16|| 


16c chandohah | em.; chandoha C, sambhedah M,JK 


There are oceans, rivers, regions [and] guardians of the regions; gath- 
ering places (chandohah), sacred sites, seats [of deities and] the deities 
of the seats 
In Saiva texts chandoha is found as samdoha.25 That the manuscripts 
other than C read sambhedah, which makes no sense, suggests that they 
may derive from an archetype that had samdohah, which subsequent 
copyists did not understand. 
The four elements 
Amrtasiddhi 6.2 refers to four physical elements: 
prthivyadini catvari vidhrtani prthak prthak ||6.2|| 


2a catvari | C; tattvani cett. 


The four [elements] earth etc. are kept separate [by the breath]. 

In Saiva and other Hindu traditions there are five primary physical ele- 
ments. The later manuscripts therefore change catvari, "four, to tattvani, 
"elements." 

kütagara 

This is a common term in the Pali Canon, meaning "a building with 
a peaked roof or pinnacles, possibly gabled; or with an upper storey" 
(Rhys Davis and Stede 1921—1925, s.v. kūtāgāra). It is also found in sev- 
eral Vajrayana texts, where it refers to a “multi-storeyed palace" in the 
middle of a mandala (Reigle 2012, 442). It is not found in Šaiva texts 


Sanderson 2009, 180 note 436. 
Sanderson loc. cit.: "This substitution of initial ch- for s-/$- is probably an east-Indianism” 


THE AMRTASIDDHI: HATHAYOGAS TANTRIC BUDDHIST SOURCE TEXT 419 


26 


and is not recognised by the later north Indian and Nepali witnesses of 
the Amrtasiddhi. 
7.10oab kāmarūpe vased binduh kūtāgārasya kotare | 


10a ?rüpe | CM,; Yrūpo JK 
10b kūtāgārasya | C, rūtāgārasya M5, kütadharanya? J, kūtādhārasya K 


Bindu resides at Kāmarūpa,** in the hollow of the multi-storeyed pal- 
ace. 
trivajra 
8.21 in C mentions the three vajras, i.e. the common Vajrayana triad of 
kaya, vak and citta. In the other witnesses trivajranam is found as trivar- 
ganam. 
trivajranam samāvešas tadā vai jayate dhruvam ||8.21|| 


21c trivajranam | C; trivargāņām M,JK 


Then absorption into the three vajras is sure to arise. 
trikaya 
A reference to the Buddhist notion of the triple body is expunged in the 
later witnesses: 

sarvajnatvam trikāyasya sarvajnanavabodhakam | 

laksanam siddhacittasya jūātavyam jfianasalibhih ||29.2|| 


2a ?kayasya | C; °kalasya M2, °karyasya JK 
2b °bodhakam ] CM3; °bodhanam JK 2c siddhacittasya | C; siddhivit tasya JK 


Omniscience, which brings about complete understanding of the 
triple body, should be known by the knowledgable to be the mark of 
he whose mind has been mastered. 
buddha 
Verses in which C has (or its archetype is likely to have had) buddha are 
reworked in the later witnesses. 
bindur buddhah šivo bindur bindur visnuh prajapatih | 
binduh sarvagato devo bindus trailokyadarpanah ||7.15|| 


15a buddhah ] em.; vrddhah C, ürdhvah cett. 


The Mahamudratilaka (draft edition of Staatsbibliothek zu Berlin Preuss. Kulturbesitz 
Orientabteilung Hs. or. 871, folio 17 verso) locates the bodily Kamarüpa between the eye- 
brows. 


420 


MALLINSON 


Bindu is Buddha, bindu is Siva, bindu is Visnu, the lord of creatures, 
bindu is the omnipresent god, bindu is the mirror of the three worlds. 


tavad buddho ‘py asiddho 'sau narah sāmsāriko matah | 32.3ab 


3a buddho | C; *ddho Mg, udvo J, siddho J», vaddho K 


Even a Buddha, as long as [he remains] unperfected [by means of the 

practice taught in the Amrtasiddhi |, is considered a worldly man. 
svadhisthana yoga 
In two places the Amrtasiddhi mentions svadhisthana yoga. This is a 
method of visualising oneself as a deity which is central to the teach- 
ings of a wide variety of Vajrayana texts (e.g. Guhyasamaja 7.2, where it 
is called svadhidaivatayoga, and the Paricakrama, whose third krama is 
called the svādhisthānakrama). In the two verses from the Amrtasiddhi 
given below, the methods of svādhisthāna yoga are said to be ineffective; 
to achieve the goals of yoga one must use the practice taught in the Amy- 
tasiddhi. The later witnesses of the text do not understand the phrase 
svadhisthanena yogena and, presumably surmising svadhisthana to refer 
to the second of the six cakras in a system taught in many hathayoga texts 
(but not in the Amrtasiddhi, which makes no mention of cakras), they 
change yogena to margena in an attempt to make the phrase refer to a 
pathway in the yogic body. 

svadhisthanena yogena yasya cittam prasadhyate | 

šilām carvati mohena trsitah kham pibaty api ||8.9|| 


ga yogena | C; margena MjJK gbyasya ] JK; yastus C, yatna M, e prasadhyate ] M,JK; 
prasadhyati C 


He who tries to master his mind by means of self-established yoga 
deludedly chews a rock and, thirsty, drinks the sky. 


svadhisthanena yogena na kstyete gunau nrnam | 
asti mudrā višegeņa gurumukhābjasambhavā ||10.11|| 


na yogena | C; mārgeņa M,JK ub na ksīyete | em.; na ksīyate C, praksiyante M5, 
nāksipeti JK e guņau ] C; guna M5, guņo JK nc višeseņa | CJK; visesad va M, nd 
guru? | CJK;gurorM, e°mukhabja® | C;?vaktrabja? M2, "mukhāttuJK e%sambhavā | 
JK; °sambhavam C, ?sambhavat M5 


THE AMRTASIDDHI: HATHAYOGAS TANTRIC BUDDHIST SOURCE TEXT 421 


The two [unwanted] guņas [rajas and tamas] in men are not destroyed 
by self-established yoga. There is a mudrā especially [for that], born 
from the lotus-mouth of the guru. 


4 Conclusion 


The Amrtasiddhi was composed in a Vajrayana Buddhist milieu and its in- 
tended audience was other Vajrayana Buddhists. Its teachings are subsequently 
found in hathayoga texts from a wide range of non-Buddhist traditions. This 
does not mean, however, that hathayoga itself was a product of Vajrayana 
Buddhists. I have argued elsewhere (e.g. Mallinson 2015) that some hathayoga 
techniques were current among ascetics long before their codification. The 
Amrtasiddhi was the first text to codify many of hathayoga’s distinctive prin- 
ciples and practices and was thus the first to assign names to them. As a result 
the Amaraughaprabodha, the first text to teach physical yoga methods under 
the name hatha, includes among its techniques the Amrtasiddhi's mahamudra, 
mahabandha and mahavedha (with slight variations in their methods). In addi- 
tion to these physical techniques, the Amaraughaprabodha also adopts from 
the Amrtasiddhi the more theoretical doctrine of the four avasthās or stages of 
yoga, showing that the Amrtasiddhi’s influence was more than simply termino- 
logical. 

Because they share traditions of 84 siddhas, several scholars have posited 
connections between Vajrayana Buddhists and Nath yogis,2” with whom the 
practice of hathayoga has long been associated. The Amrtasiddhi's Vajrayana 
origins and its borrowings in subsequent hathayoga texts, some of which are 
products of Nath traditions, provide the first known doctrinal basis for this con- 
nection and a stimulus for its further investigation.?? 


27 Although such usage is not found in pre-modern texts, to avoid confusion I use the word 
"Nath" to refer to ascetics usually called yogis or jogīs in texts and travellers’ reports and 
whose traditions, with some exceptions such as those which trace their lineages to Ka- 
nhapa or Krsņācārya, came, by the sixteenth century at the latest, to be grouped together 
in twelve panths or lineages. On the Nāth Sampradāya, see Mallinson 2on. 

28 The historical context of this connection is explored in Mallinson 2019, in which the 
Konkan site of Kadri (in present-day Mangalore) is proposed as the location of the tran- 
sition from Vajrayāna Buddhism to Nàth Šaivism evinced by the Amaraughaprabodha's 
reworking of the teachings of the Amrtasiddhi. 


422 MALLINSON 
5 Witnesses of the Amrtasiddhi 


5.1 Manuscripts Collated 

— (C) China Nationalities Library of the Cultural Palace of Nationalities 
Ms. No. 005125 (21). Paper. Sanskrit text in both Nepali (or perhaps East 
Indian) and Tibetan hand-print scripts, Tibetan translation in Tibetan cur- 
sive script. 

— Maharaja Man Singh Pustak Prakash, Jodhpur 
1. (J,) 1242. Paper. Devanagari. 
2. (J) 1243. Paper. Devanagari. 

— Nepal-German Manuscript Preservation Project. All entitled Amrtasiddhi. 

1. (K,) E655/39. Paper. Devanagari. 

2.  (K,) E1501/11. Paper. Devanagari. 

3. (K,) H232/37. Paper. Newari. 

4. (Kj) E68/7. Paper. Devanagari. 

(M5) Mysore Government Oriental Manuscripts Library D-4342 (ff. 21v— 

40v). Palm leaf. Grantha. 


5.2 Other Collated Witnesses 

These two texts are mentioned in the apparatus only in the small number of 

instances that they provide readings. 

— (Y) Yogacintàmani ed. Haridās Sarma, Calcutta Oriental Press, n.d. 

— (Hy) Hathapradīpikājyotsnā of Brahmananda. Svāmī Mahešānand, Dr. Bābu- 
ram Sarma, Jüànasamkar Sahay, and Ravindranāth Bodhe, eds. Brahmānan- 
dakyta Hathapradīpikā Jyotsna: Locanatmaka Samskarana (Hindi). Lonavla: 
Kaivalyadham S.M.Y.M. Samiti. 2002. 


5.3 Manuscripts Not Yet Collated 
Mysore Government Oriental Library D-4341. Paper. Grantha. 

2. Mysore Government Oriental Library R-2881(n). Palm leaf. Grantha. In- 
complete. 

3. Adyar Library 75278. Palm leaf. Grantha. 

4. Baroda Oriental Institute 7970(b). Palm leaf. Grantha. 


Acknowledgements 
I thank Dominik Wujastyk for his comments on a draft of this article, the 


research for which was carried out as part of the Hatha Yoga Project (hyp.soas 
.ac.uk). This project has received funding from the European Research Coun- 


THE AMRTASIDDHI: HATHAYOGAS TANTRIC BUDDHIST SOURCE TEXT 423 


cil (ERC) under the European Unions Horizon 2020 research and innovation 
programme (grant agreement no. 647963). 


References 


Primary Sources 

Amaraughaprabodha of Goraksanatha. K. Mallik, ed. The Siddha Siddhanta Paddhati 
and Other Works of Nath Yogis. Poona: Poona Oriental Book House, 1954. 

Kadalimanjunathamahatmyam. Sambhu Sarma Kadava, ed. Kasi: Gorakga Tilla Yoga 
Pracarini, 1957. 

Kubjikamatatantra. T. Goudriaan and J.A. Schoterman, eds. The Kubjikamatatantra: 
Kulalikamnaya Version. Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1988. 

Guhyasamajatantra. Yukei Matsunaga, ed. Osaka: Toho Shuppan, 1978. 

Goraksayogašāstra. National Archives of Kathmandu 5-332; Nepal-German Manu- 
script Preservation Project 24/44. 

Goraksasataka. Government Oriental Manuscripts Library, Madras, Ms. No. R 7874. 

Gorakhbani. P.D. Badathval, ed. Prayag: Hindi Sahity Sammelan, 1960. 

Gherandasamhita. J. Mallinson, ed., trans. New York: YogaVidya.com, 2004. 

Chandogya Upanisad. Patrick Olivelle, ed., trans. The Early Upanisads: Annotated Text 
and Translation. New York; Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1998. 

Dattātreyayogašāstra. Unpublished edition by James Mallinson.29 

Navanathacaritramu of Gaurana. K. Ramakrishnaiya, ed. Madras University Telegu 
Series, no. 7. Madras, 1937. 

Nisvasatattvasamhita. Dominic Goodall, Harunaga Isaacson and Alexis Sanderson, eds. 
The Nisvasatattvasamhita: The Earliest Surviving Saiva Tantra, volume 1. A critical 
edition and annotated translation of the Mūlasūtra, Uttarasūtra, and Nayasūtra. Col- 
lection Indologie, no. 128 (Early Tantra Series, no. 1.) Pondicherry: Institut Français 
d'Indologie/École française d' Extréme-Orient, 2015. 

Netratantra. Madhusūdan Kaul Šāstrī, ed. The Netra Tantram, with Commentary by 
Kshemarāja. 2 vols. Kashmir Series of Texts and Studies, nos. 46, 61. Bombay: the 
Research Department of Jammu and Kashmir State, 1926, 1939. 

Paricakrama. Katsumi Mimaki and Toru Tomabechi, eds. Paricakrama: Sanskrit and 
Tibetan Texts Critically Edited with Verse Index and Facsimile Edition of the San- 


29 This edition was read with Professor Alexis Sanderson, Jason Birch, Pēter-Dāniel Szántó 
and Andrea Acri in Oxford in early 2012, all of whom I thank for their valuable emenda- 
tions and suggestions. 


424 MALLINSON 


skrit Manuscripts. Tokyo: The Centre for East Asian Cultural Studies for Unesco, 
1994. 

Yogacintamani of Sivanandasarasvati. Haridas Sarma, ed. Calcutta: Calcutta Oriental 
Press, n.d. 

Vivekamartanda of Goraksadeva. Oriental Institute of Baroda Library, Acc. No. 4110. 

Hathapradipika of Svatmarama. Svami Digambarji and Dr Pitambar Jha, eds. Lonavla: 
Kaivalyadham S.M.Y.M. Samiti, 1970. 

Hathapradīpikājyotsnā of Brahmānanda. Svāmī Mahešānand, Dr. Bāburām Sarma, 
Jfanasamkar Sahay, and Ravindranath Bodhe, eds. Brahmanandakrta Hathapradī- 
pika Jyotsnā: Ālocanātmaka Samskarana (Hindī). Lonavla: Kaivalyadham S.M.Y.M. 
Samiti, 2002. 


Secondary Literature 

Birch, Jason. 20u. “The Meaning of hatha in Early Hathayoga” Journal of the American 
Oriental Society 131 (4): 527—554. 

Bühnemann, Gudrun. 2000. The Iconography of Hindu Tantric Deities, volume 1. The Pan- 
theon of the Mantramahodadhi. Groningen: Egbert Forsten. 

Gode, P.K. 1954. Studies in Indian Literary History, Vol. 11. Bombay: Bharatiya Vidya Bha- 
van. 

Isaacson, Harunaga and Francesco Sferra. 2014. The Sekanirdeša of Maitreyanātha 
(Advayavajra) with the Sekanirdesapafijika of Ramapala. Critical Edition of the San- 
skrit and Tibetan Texts with English Translation and Reproductions of the Mss. (With 
contributions by Klaus-Dieter Mathes and Marco Passavanti). Serie Orientale Roma 
fondata da Giuseppe Tucci Vol. cvir. Napoli: Universita degli Studi di Napoli 
“L Orientale." 

Mallinson, James. 2011. “Nath Sampradāya” In Brill's Encyclopedia of Hinduism, Vol. 3, 
edited by Knut A. Jacobsen, 407—428. Leiden: Brill. 

Mallinson, James. 2015. “Saktism and Hathayoga.” In Goddess Traditions in Tantric Hin- 
duism, edited by Bjarne Wernicke Olesen, 109—140. London: Routledge. 

Mallinson, James. 2019. “Kalavaficana in the Konkan: How a Vajrayana Hathayoga Tra- 
dition Cheated Buddhism's Death in India.” Religions 10 (4), 273. https://doi.org/10 
.3390/rel10040273 

Reigle, David. 2012. “The Kālacakra Tantra on the Sādhana and Mandala.” Journal of 
the Royal Asiatic Society Series 3, 22 (2): 439—463. 

Rhys Davis, T.W. and William Stede. 1921-1925. Pali-English Dictionary. London: Pali Text 
Society. 

Sanderson, Alexis. 2009. "The Šaiva Age” In Genesis and Development of Tantrism, 
edited by Shingo Einoo, 41-349. Tokyo: Institute of Oriental Culture, University of 
Tokyo. 


Sastri, V.V. Ramana. 1956. “The Doctrinal Culture and Tradition of the Siddhas” In The 


THE AMRTASIDDHI: HATHAYOGAS TANTRIC BUDDHIST SOURCE TEXT 425 


Cultural Heritage of India. Vol. 4: The Religions, edited by Haridas Bhattacharyya, 
300—308. Calcutta: The Ramakrishna Mission Institute of Culture. 

Schaeffer, Kurtis R. 2002. “The Attainment of Immortality: From Nāthas in India to Bud- 
dhists in Tibet.” Journal of Indian Philosophy 30 (6): 515—533. 


CHAPTER 18 


A Sexual Ritual with Māyā in 


Matsyendrasamhita 40 
Csaba Kiss 
1 Introduction 


In this short article I revisit the Matsyendrasamhita (hereafter MaSam), a 
Kubjikā-Tripurā oriented tantric yoga text of the Sadanvayasambhava tradition, 
probably from thirteenth-century South India, core chapters of which I edited 
and translated for my PhD studies under the supervision of Professor Alexis 
Sanderson. My purpose there was to demonstrate that this text provides evi- 
dence for a transitional phase in the history of Saiva Tantra, revealing aspects 
of a transition from Kaula practices to early Hathayoga. In the present essay I 
analyse, and partly edit, MaSam chapter 40, in which a unique and somewhat 
ambiguous variant of a Srividya-type sexual ritual is described, and which Pro- 
fessor Sanderson was kind enough to read with me in Oxford in 2005. I would 
like to dedicate this paper to him, offering new interpretations of some key ele- 
ments, and thus updating my previous analysis (Kiss 2009, 66).! 

My approach is based on textual criticism: by restoring the text using four 
available manuscripts, I aim at giving an accurate translation and interpreta- 
tion, which then enables me to draw some modest conclusions regarding the 
history of Saivism around the thirteenth century? I would like to contribute 
to the contemporary research on Saiva sexual rituals which focuses on their 
religio-historical importance. For although it is now generally acknowledged 
that sexual rituals are a distinctive feature of some of the Saiva tantric tradi- 


1 On the Sadanvayasambhava tradition, see Sanderson 1988, 687; 2002, 2—3; 2014, 72—73, 76—77, 
80. On details concerning the MaSam, see Sanderson 2014, 80, Kiss 2007, 2009, 2011, and 2020 
(forthcoming). All quotations from the MaSam are either from Kiss 2020 (forthcoming) or 
from my draft edition of the text. 

2 Iwould definitely like to steer clear of some of the nineteenth- and twentieth-century, and 
contemporary approaches to the topic of tantric sexual rituals, which include, as White 
observes (2000, 4—5): (1) denial, (2) emphasis on the philosophical reinterpretation of these 
rites, “while generally denying the foundational importance of transgressivity or sexuality to 
the traditions themselves” and (3) the commodification of New Age “Tantric Sex” as a com- 
mercial product. 


© CSABA KISS, 2020 | D01:10.1163/9789004432802 020 


This is an open access chapter distributed under the terms of the cc BY-NC 4.0 license. 


A SEXUAL RITUAL WITH MAYA IN MATSYENDRASAMHITĀ 40 427 


tions, much work remains to be done on this topic. Alongside Sanderson's find- 
ings in many of his publications,* as well as publications by Dupuche (2003), 
White (2003) and Biernacki (2007), Hatley's work, especially on the asidha- 
ravrata (Hatley 2018, 195—215), a sexual ritual attested in the Picumata/Brah- 
mayamala (BraYa), chapter 40, as well as in the Nisvāsatattvasamhitā and the 
Matangapāramešvara, is fundamental and is a source of inspiration and in 
many respects a model for this essay. Mallinson’s exploration of the hathayogic 
techniques of khecarīmudrā, vajroli and amarolī is closely related to this field of 
research (Mallinson 2007, 221-223, notes 333—334 and 336—337). My own contri- 
bution so far (Kiss 2015) comprises an analysis of the BraYa's relevant teachings 
in BraYa 45 on sexual encounters that involve the gathering and magical use of 
sexual fluids. 

A detailed overview of the types of sexual ritual found in tantric and hatha- 
yogic texts is beyond the scope of this short essay? but a number of their dis- 
tinctive features can be listed here. This list mainly concerns the variable nature 
of the female and male partners, and the nature of the sexual act. Note that cat- 
egorisation of a phenomenon like this is greatly complicated by that fact that 
many features overlap: 

(1) sexual rituals involving restraint or celibacy; 

(2) a sexual act at the end of which the practitioner applies the vajrolimu- 
drā, "the practice of urethral suction [...] to draw up the combined sexual 
fluids"; 

(3) sexual rituals producing male and female sexual fluids, which are then 
used and consumed for magical purposes;® 

(4) sexual rituals with one's own wife/partner vs. other partners;? 


3 AsShaman Hatley also remarks (2018, 195-196). 

4 E.g. Sanderson 2005a, 110-114, note 63; 2007, 284—287; 2009, 132 ff., 294, note 699; and 2014, 57. 

5 Seeasimilarly non-comprehensive but more detailed list of types of tantric sexual rituals in 
Hatley 2018, 196—199. 

6 Eg.the asidhāravrata, "Razor's Edge Observance,’ as taught in BraYā 40, which involves sex- 
ual contact with a beautiful woman without the sadhaka's engaging in orgasm. (See Hatley 
2018, 195—215.) See also BraYa 45.270—296ab, in which a sexual ritual involving "restraint" (ava- 
graha) is taught (Kiss 2015, 49). 

7 See Mallinson (2007, 189 note 149). Vajroli is described e.g. in the Vaisnava Dattātreyayogašā- 
stra, vv. 299—314. 

8 E.g. BraYā 45, where several variants of a basic type of sexual ritual are described (see Kiss 
2015). 

9 Seeforexample BraYā 24.32cd, where one's mother, sister, daughter and wife are listed as pos- 
sible partners (figuratively or otherwise): mata ca bhagini putri bhāryā vai dütayah smrtāļh|. 
See also Jayaratha ad Tantrāloka 29.102 addressing the question after citing the line svapatnī 
bhaginī mātā duhità và subha sakhī: ityadyuktya svapatny api atra kasmat na parigaņitā ... (“In 


428 KISS 


(5) sexual rituals with one partner vs. several partners;!° 
(6) sexual encounters with human or visionary Yoginis, or other divine 
beings; 
(7) highly zstheticized, philosophic descriptions of Saiva sexual rituals;! 
(8) sexual rituals involving the visualisation of a goddess or the mental pro- 
jection of the image of a goddess onto the female partner, and so forth.!^ 
The passages from MaSam 40 analyzed and presented below seem to represent 
a variety of the last type listed above, but they are somewhat ambivalent: after 
mentioning sexual encounters with (human) Yoginis (verses 38 and 40—41), the 
text focuses on a somewhat ambiguous sexual ritual which could be read either 
as involving an exclusively visualised goddess as partner or as prescribing the 
projection of an image of the goddess onto a human sexual partner. It also 
teaches the magical use of male sexual fluid (real or imaginary). MaSam 40 is 
somewhat ambiguous in other aspects as well, and it seems that it is through 
the analysis of this ambiguity that we may gather clues concerning the his- 
tory of late Saiva traditions and the transition between Saiva Tantra and early 
Hathayoga. 


2 Details and Ambiguities 


The beginning of the chapter in question, MaSam 40.1-28, stands somewhat 
apart from the rest of the chapter and does not discuss sexual rituals. Never- 
theless, a short analysis of it may be useful here. The text starts (1-6ab) with 
the proclamation of its topic: the rituals of Kula/Kaula conduct (kulācāravidhi) 
characterised by “the great non-dualist practice" (mahadvaita) and “freedom 


these kind of statements, why is one's own wife not enumerated?") See also Dupuche 2003, 
249ff. 

10 E.g. BraYā 45.574cd-557ab, where sexual rituals with four to eight women are taught. See 
also Jayadrathayāmala, Satka 4, National Archives, Kathmandu, Ms 1-1468, ff. 206v3— 
207v5 and Ksemaraja's Dasavataracarita 10.26. For these references, see Sanderson 2007, 
284—287; and 2009, 294 note 699. 

11  Eg.the sadhaka engages in "great amusement" with Nàga girls and Asuris (demonesses) 
in BraYā 59.107cd (f. 2541): nagakanyais mahākrīdā asuribhis ca jayate. 

12  Eg.Tantráloka 29 (see Dupuche 2003). 

13 Eg. Nityotsava, p. 60: atha tām devarūpām vibhavya ... (“And visualising her [the sexual 
partner] in a godly form ...”). 

14 This list could easily be expanded by using more variables, as Shaman Hatley has sug- 
gested (personal communication): partners; place/space/circumstances; roles of mantra, 
visualization, accoutrements; kinds of meaning given to the practice; aims/goals; fluids; 
etc. 


A SEXUAL RITUAL WITH MAYA IN MATSYENDRASAMHITĀ 40 429 


from conventional practices” (nirācāra), both familiar terms from earlier Šaiva 
tantras such as the BraYā.!5 Verses 6cd—16 praise and recommend ritual bathing 
at a special sivatirtha, in "Šiva's water” or “water embodying Šiva” (sivamaye 
jale). In the context of the MaSam, it is very probable that what is meant here 
is bathing in or with, and consuming, urine or other bodily fluids. Mallinson 
(2007, 221-223, notes 333—334, 336—337) has shown convincingly that the prac- 
tice of bathing with urine was not unknown in Kapalika and hathayogic tradi- 
tions.!6 On the other hand, in light of the second half of the chapter, it is not 
inconceivable that semen is what is hinted at here. In either case, the appli- 
cation of this magical fluid involves transgression and thus should be carried 
out in a secret place (16cd). Verse 18 names the miraculous fluid as amarī, a 
term echoed in MaSam 27.5 as amarirasa. That chapter, MaSam 27, teaches 
concoctions of herbs and physical secrations such as feeces, urine, menstrual 
blood, phlegm (?) and semen (?) (viri-mütra-rajo-recaka-sarakah) associated 
with Lokeša, Kešava, Rudra, Īša and Sadešvara, respectively (27.2, see Mallinson 
[2007, 220 note 328]). In MaSam 27.5a Sadasiva (i.e. probably Sadesvara, or 
rather the substance associated with him, probably semen) is said to be the 
best among them (sadāšivo varo jrieyas). This may indicate that the meaning 
of amari (and sudhā, amrta etc.) is flexible; it may refer not only to urine, but 
to other bodily fluids as well. Amari should be drunk after reciting the appro- 
priate mantra and should be massaged on one’s body (27.21-26ab), similarly to 
what is taught in MaSam 40.64—65, where it is clearly semen. 

The second part of our chapter, MaSam 40.29ff., commences to further 
describe kulācāra, and claims that sexual rituals should be performed either 
with Yoginis or with Maya-type women (verse 38). Here follows an edition and 
translation of verses 29—38: 


[kulācāranirņayam]!” 


atah param $rnu $ive kulācārasya nirņayam | 
samprapya siddhasamtanam gurum daivam sada yajet ||40.29]| 


15 E.g. BraYā 3.227, 45.159 and Kubjikamatatantra 2.107 etc. 

16  Inasimilar fashion, the BraYa (e.g. in 45.427 and 45.456) prescribes the praise of urine to 
be performed by the sadhaka. 

17 This edition of MaSam 40.1—69 is based on four manuscripts: Ja, Jb, Jc, Well (see the bibli- 
ography; Jd is not available for chapter 40). The transcription of the text of the MaSam 
both in the textus acceptus and in reporting variants involves some inevitable falsifi- 
cation, of which the most important are the following: I have not always attempted to 
report differences in readings between aksaras that are usually interchangable in Mss (b-v, 


430 


KISS 


gurupūjārato yogi param siddhim avapnuyat | 

guroh khatvām tathā $ayyam vastram abharanani ca ||40.30]| 
padukam chattram ajinam patram anyad athapi va | 

padena spršate yas tu sire dhrtvastakam japet ||40.31|| 
gurunindāparam drstva ghatayed athava šapet | 

sthanam va tat parityajya gacched yady aksamo bhavet ||40.32|| 
kulapūjām na nindeta yoginam yoginim api | 

unmattām pustitām narim surakumbham sivam gurum ||40.33|| 
nindanād bhrasyate sadyah paratreha ca parvati | 

pasumargam na seveta pašūcchistam na kamayet ||40.34]| 
yoginimelanam kāryam na seveta pašustriyam | 

nocchistam pašave dadyat na nārīm nindayet kvacit ||40.35|| 
ekibhavam prakurvita prthagbhavam na karayet | 

vrtha panam na kurvita na vrtha mamsabhaksanam ||40.36]| 
asamskrtam na piben madyam tatpūtam māmsam āgraset | 

na kuryan mantragosthisu $aucam ācamanādikam | 

yadi kuryat pramadena yoginisapa apatet ||40.37|| 

bhufijryad yat striyam devi $iva$aktyatmabhavaya | 

yoginim sevayen nityam māyām va pasavim na ca ||40.38|| 


Witnesses for MaSam chapter 40: Ms Ja: ff. 62r-641, Ms Jb: ff. 126v—130v, Ms Jc: ff. 1321-1361, 
ms Well: ff. 89v-91v. 

29a Sive | J; Side Well (pāda a is a na-vipulā) 29b nirņayam | JaJcWell; nirnayah Jb 29c 
siddha? | J; siddhi? Well; cf. Kubjikamata 3.98ab: atraiva siddhasantāne pratyakso 'ham 
vyavasthitah — 29d gurum ] JaJcWell; guru Jb — eyajet ] J; yatet Well — 3oc khatvam | 
J; khadvam Well 31b pātram anyad | J; patramadhyam Well 31a na-vipulā 31d tu 
Sire dhrtvastakam | conj.; tu širasi ghrtvastakam J, u šira ghrtvāstaka Well; cf. Kubjikamata 
3.133cd-134ab [Manthanabhedapracararatisangama chapter]: pādukopānahau chattram 
Sayyāpatto ‘tha bhajanam | padena samspršed yas tu sire dhrtvastakam japet || ^ 32a 
?ninda? | J; ?nida? Well (Well's reading would result in two laghu syllables) e drstvā | J; 


v-c, t-n, y-p), but I always report them when both readings are theoretically possible (e.g. 
candana-vandana, jaya-japa); I have ignored most instances of gemination of consonants 
in ligature with semivowels (e.g. dharmma); I have treated anusvāras and homorganic 
nasals as interchangeable; I have altered them, as well as word-final anusvāras and m-s, 
silently as required by standard orthography; instances of confusion between $ and s are 
reported only in the non-accepted variants; avagrahas are mostly missing in the Mss and I 
have always silently supplied them in the textus criticus and in the lemmata, but not when 
reporting variants; in the apparatus: em. - emendation; conj. - conjecture; corr. - correc- 
tion; % = before correction (ante correctionem); "^ = after correction (post correctionem); 
T-..T enclose corrupted text which I have not been able to improve upon; ° indicates that 
the word is part of a compound or phrase; x stands for an illegible aksara; Jab = Mss Ja 
and Jb; Jall = all available Jodhpur Mss (= Ja, Jb, Jc). 


A SEXUAL RITUAL WITH MAYA IN MATSYENDRASAMHITĀ 40 431 


18 
19 


drstā Well 32d aksamo ] JaJcWell; amo Jb 33ab nindeta yo? | JWellPs; nindeta yogin- 
imelanam karyam na seveta pašus trayam nocchistam pasavo dadyāte Well" (eyeskip to 
verse 35) 33b yoginim | Jab; yogibhim JcWell 33c unmattām | J; unmatam Well e 
pustitàm ] JaJcWell; pustito Jb e nārīm | Jab; nārī JcWell — 33d surākumbham | Jab; 
surxkumbham Jc, surikumbham Well 34a nindanād | JaJcWell; nindanat]b e bhrasy- 
ate | JaJcWell; pra$yate[?] Jb 34d paratreha | J; paratredva Well 34d pasücchistam ] 
J; pa$cacchistam Well — 35b ?striyam ] corr.; °striyam J, °strayam Well 35c pasave | J; 
pasavo Well 35cd note the absence of sandhi between the two pādas. 36a eki? | J; ekvi? 
Well 37a asamskrtam | J; amskrtam Well e pada a is hypermetrical. Cf. Kulapradipa 
3.48: asamskrtam piven madyam balātkāreņa maithunam | svapriyena hatam mamsam 
rauravam narakam vrajet 37c kuryan | Jab; kuryon JcWell ?gosthisu ] Jab; gosthivu 
Well 37f.yogini$apa apatet | Jab; yogini sayatet Jc"^Well, yogani sāyatet Jc% 38a bhuñ- 
jiyad ] ; bhujiyad Well «yat | Jab; yaJcWell 38b °bhavaya | conj.; ^bhavaya]Jajc, "bhāvaye 
Jb, °bhavayam Well 38c yoginim ] Jab; yogini Well  sevayen | Jab; sevayon Well 38d 
māyām và | Jab; mayam cà Jc, māyām ca Well e pāšavīm | Ja?‘JbJcWell; pošavīm Ja% o 
na ca | J; na ce Well 


[The exposition of Kula Conduct] 


After this, O Siva, hear the exposition of the Kula Conduct (kulācāra). 
After he has joined the tradition of the Siddhas, he should worship 
his guru as divine. (40.29) 

The yogin who is engaged in the worship of his guru can obtain the 
highest Power (siddhi). The guru's bedstead, his bedding, clothes, 
ornaments, sandals, parasol, antilope-skin, bowl or anything else: if 
he touches any of these with his feet, he should place them on his 
head and recite [mantras] eight times. (40.30-31) 

If he sees anybody who is abusing the guru, he should beat him or [at 
least] curse him. Or, if he is unable [to do so], he should leave the 
place. (40.32) 

He should not ridicule the worship of the [Yogini] clans (kulapūjā), or 
despise yogins or yoginis, women when they are intoxicated, or nour- 
ished,!® or the wine-pot, or Šiva, or the guru. (40.33) 

Contempt [for these] will make him fall immediately here in this world 
and in the other world, O Pārvatī. He should not follow the path of 
the pašus [i.e. that of the uninitiated] and he should not long for the 
leftover of pašus. (40.34) 

He should strive for an encounter (melana) with the Yoginīs. He should 
not have sex (na seveta) with uninitiated women (pašustrī).!? He 


Perhaps: “pregnant.” Alternatively, some kind of sexual interpretation is needed here. 
See 40.38. 


432 KISS 


should not give leftovers to the uninitiated (pašu). He should never 
abuse women. (40.35) 

He should treat [all phenomena] as one, not as separate.?? He should 
not drink [alcohol] or eat meat idly [with no ritual purpose]. 
(40.36) 

He should not drink wine without first purifying it [with mantras], and 
he should consume meat after he has purified it with that [wine]. He 
should not answer the call of nature, should not sip water, etc., while 
reciting mantras or in an assembly.”! If he does so out of folly, the 
curse of the Yoginis will fall on him. (40.37) 

When (yat) [the yogin] wants to enjoy (bhufijtyat) a woman, O Goddess, 
visualising himself as Siva [and her as] Šakti,?? he should always have 
sex with a Yogini or with a Maya [type of woman], and never with a 
Pasavi [i.e. a pasu-natured woman, or more precisely someone who 
has not been initiated]. (40.38) 


Noteworthy among the above are verse 31, which is more or less parallel with 
Kubjikamatatantra 3.133cd—134ab, reconfirming that the cult of the MaSam 
draws heavily on the Pa$cimamnaya;?? verse 33, which warns against the abuse 
of women; and verse 35, which seems to mention only Yoginis (recommended 
for sexual encounters) and uninitiated women (not recommended), and seems 
to be silent on any other category, in contrast to verse 38, in which the third type, 
Maya, first appears. 

The subsequent verses, 40 and 41, define a Yoginī: she follows the Kula path, 
is initiated, uses alcohol in her rituals, and generally gives the impression of 
being a human female practitioner. Rather awkwardly, the text does not give 
any other detail, but goes on defining her antithesis, the Pasavi: an uninitiated 
woman, who is hostile to Šaivism and who should be avoided (41cd—42). 

A sexual ritual with the third type, Māyā, is what the rest of the text focuses 
on. It is here that major ambiguities come into the picture. The key aspects 
mentioned in the description of the Māyā-type woman are: she has all the 


20  Isuspectthat here the principles of non-hesitation (nirvikalpa) and freedom from conven- 
tional practices (nirācāra) are being reaffirmed: the practitioner should not distinguish 
between right and wrong, pure and impure etc. See 40.1-28. 

21 The interpretation of mantragosthisu is highly tentative. 

22 Thecompoundšivašaktyvātmabhāvayā (conj.; °bhavaya JaJc, "bhāvaye Jb, ^bhavayam Well) 
is rather unusual, and my conjecture is insecure. Perhaps °bhavaya stands for bhāvanayā 
metri causa. The intended meaning seems to be clear, though. 

23 See Kiss 2009, 25 ff. 


A SEXUAL RITUAL WITH MAYA IN MATSYENDRASAMHITĀ 40 433 


auspicious characteristics required (sarvalaksanasampanna), has neither rūpa 
nor kula (kularūpavivarjitā),*% and is to be approached by bhava (bhavagamya, 
40.43).25 All of these terms remain rather ambiguous without the help of clar- 


ification based upon other passages. Here follows the text and translation of 


this section: 


24 


25 


[yogini maya paSavi ca] 


devy uvaca | 
ka nari yoginī deva ka maya kā ca pāsavī | 
etasam samgame dosam guņam ca vada bhairava ||40.39|| 


[yogini] 


bhairava uvaca | 

kulamargagata nārī pa$umargavivarjita | 
mādhvīmadasamādhmātā pašupāšavivarjitā ||40.40|| 
madirānandacetaskā yogini $iva$asane | 


[pāšavī] 


vikalpakutila papa kulacaraparanmukhi ||40.41 | 
šivanindāparā devi tatsaparyavirodhini | 
pāšavī sa mayakhyata mayakhyam érnu suvrate ||40.42|| 


That kula and rūpa are to be understood as a dvandva compound is confirmed in 40.44ab: 
yà māyā rūparahitā kulahīnā mahesvara. 

Elsewhere I have argued (Kiss 2009, 57—60) that while bhāva in the MaSam is mostly to 
be interpreted as "visualisation," which is a rather common meaning for this word, an 
additional specification may be required: bhāva refers to a particularly emotive process 
of creating mental images. I suspect that bhava is preferred in the MaSam to dhyana 
(although dhyana, dhyāyet etc. also abound) for its extremely wide range of meanings. 
One of the basic meanings of bhava is "being, becoming.” Another is “emotion, sentiment" 
or even "passion, love” I think that all these rather different senses of the word are con- 
densed in the yogic key term of bhava in the MaSam. It is a creation of something in the 
mind by the yogin, towards which he should also create a feeling, an empathic attitude, 
perhaps passionate devotion, which will result in the ultimate condition, the desired state 
of mind: the union with the object, with the deity, with Siva, or in our case, with a visu- 
alised goddess. 


434 


KISS 
[maya] 


sarvalaksaņasampannā kularūpavivarjitā | 
bhāvagamyā mahešāni yā sā māyā nigadyate ||40.43|| 


39 devy | JaJcWell; šrīdevy Jb 39a yoginī | Ja"jbJcWell; yogi Ja^ 39b kā ca pāšavī | JaJc; 
kāšavī Jb, kā ca pāśavīh Well 39d bhairava ] J; bhairavah Well 40a nari | JbJcWell; ttàri 
Ja 4ob Yvivarjitā | J; °vivarjitah Well 40cd mādhvīmadasamādhmātā pašupāšavivarjitā 
] em.; madhvimadasamadhyata pasupāsavivarjitā Jab, JcWell omit this line 41b ?$asane 
] JaJcWell; °sasanat Jb gac Ckutila ] J; °kutika Well — 41d °paranmukhi | Ja?JbJcWell; 
?paxnmukhiJa^' 42a °para | J; °paro Well devi | JaJcWell; deviJb 42b ?virodhini | 
corr.; °virodhiti J, °virodhinim Well 42c pāsavī | J; pasavih Well e sā ]J;sa Well 42d 
°akhyah ] corr.; °ākhyah JWell 43b Yvivarjitā ] J; °vivarjitah Well 


[Yoginī, Māyā and Pāšavī] 


Devī spoke: 

O God, what kind of a woman is a Yoginī? Who is Māyā and who is 
Pāsavī? Tell me, O Bhairava, the pros and cons of having sex with 
them. (40.39) 

Bhairava spoke: 

A woman who is on the Kula Path [of the Yogini clans] (kulamārga), 
who avoids the path of bound souls (pasumarga) [i.e. the path of the 
uninitiated], who is elevated by intoxication induced by liquor, and 
is free of the bonds that fetter the soul (pasupasa), and whose mind 
is filled with the bliss of wine (madirā), is [called] a Yoginī in Siva's 
teaching. (40.40—41ab) 

[Pasavi:] her mental attitude is dishonest, she is wicked, hostile to 
Kaula Practice (kulācāra). She tends to abuse Siva, O Goddess, and 
to obstruct his worship. This [type], the Pasavi, has been [now] 
taught by me. O Suvratā, hear the one that is called Maya. (40.41cd— 
42) 

A woman who possesses all favourable characteristics (laksana) [but] 
has neither a [Yoginī] Clan/noble family (kula) nor a [human/mate- 
rial] form/beauty (rūpa), and who is to be approached by empathic 
imagination (bhava), O Mahešānī, is called Maya. (40.43) 


The term rūpa in 43b may refer to “material form" and a lack of rūpa would then 


indicate that Maya, the preferred sexual partner, is solely imaginary. In this case 


sarvalaksaņasampannā indicates that she is to be visualised as a divine being 


with great beauty. But how to interpret "devoid of kula” then? The term kula is 


A SEXUAL RITUAL WITH MAYA IN MATSYENDRASAMHITĀ 40 435 


often used in the sense of “a clan of Yoginis.””6 Is she then not a member of any 
Yoginī clan? Does she transcend the clans of Yoginīs, being the supreme God- 
dess??" This interpretation is supported and at the same time refuted by MaSam 
22.24 (which in fact is a citation of Nityasodasikarnava, alias Vamakesvarimata, 


444): 


kulayosit kulam tyaktvā param purusam eti sa | 
nirlaksyam?? nirgunam caiva kularüpavivarjitam ||22.24||?9 


That noble lady abandons her family (kula) and goes to the highest man, 
who is invisible, who lacks qualities, and is devoid of kula and form. 


Here, in the MaSam as well as the Nityasodasikarnava, the supreme soul 
(param purusam) is described as having neither kula nor rūpa: as being imma- 
terial and formless.?? But the word kula is used in a double sense in the case 
of the female subject of the sentence (kuņdalinī in fact): she leaves her/the 
body to unite with the Supreme Soul as a noble lady (kulayosit) leaves her 
family (kulam tyaktva) to unite with her husband. This does not make it eas- 
ier to interpret MaSam 40.43b (kularūpavivarjitā): the sexual partner might be 
a woman who was not born in an eminent family, i.e. is of low birth (kula- 
vivarjitā), and who lacks beauty (rūpavivarjitā), “beauty” being a natural way 


26 See e.g. Sanderson (1988, 671—672): "All Yoginis belong to the family (kula) or lineage 
(gotra) of one or other of a number of 'higher' maternal powers, and in any instance this 
parentage is ascribed on the evidence of certain physical and behavioural characteris- 
tics. An adept in the cult of Yoginis can identify members of as many as sixty-three of 
these occult sisterhoods, but is most vitally concerned with the eight major families of 
the Mothers (matr) Brahmi, Mahesvari, Kaumari, Vaisnavi, Indrani, Vārāhī, Camunda and 
Mahālaksmī” See also Hatley (2007, 13—23, 33, 392, etc.). 

27 Cf.Tāntrikābhidhānakoša, vol. 1, sv. akula: "Dans les traditions (amnaya*) du Kula, c' est la 
Réalité lumineuse supréme, l'absolu inconditionné: anuttaram param dhāma tad evāku- 
lam ucyate (Tantrāloka 3.143ab),” etc. 

28 em; nirlajjam Cod. 

29 Cf. Mitydsodasikarnava 444: kulayosit kulam tyaktvā param purusam eti sā | nirlaksanam 
nirgunam ca kularūpavivarjitam ||. 

go Cf. Jayaratha ad Nitydsodasikarnava 4.14: tadà kulam šarīram apahaya akulapadavasthi- 
tam param pūrņam [...] kulena šarīreņa taddharmena rūpeņa ca vivarjitam nirāvaraņasva- 
bhāvam, ata eva nirgunam purusam, param pramātāram, eti tadaikatmyam āsādayatīty 
arthah (“Then leaving behind the Kula, i.e. the body, she goes to the one who is in the 
realm of akula, the supreme, i.e. full [...] Person, the highest authority, who is without 
a body and without bodily form, with his innate nature manifest and therefore lacking 
qualities, i.e. she reaches oneness with Him. This is the meaning [of this verse].”) 


436 KISS 


of translating rūpa. In this case, sarvalaksanasampanna (40.43a) refers to the 
form she assumes during the yogin's visualisation, and bhavagamya (40.43) 
may suggest that a sexual ritual with her requires this visualisation. Alterna- 
tively, the ideal sexual partner might be one who is immaterial and formless 
(kularūpavivarjitā): a visualised goddess, or, as a matter of fact, kuņdalinī. As we 
have seen, in the context of the yogin's sexual rituals, first two, then three types 
of partners are enumerated: one, who is hostile to Saivism, is to be avoided; 
initiated human Yoginis are ideal, but are not dwelt upon in the text, perhaps 
because they were less and less available at the time of the composition of the 
MaSam; and as a third alternative, the text either suggests pure visualisation or 
an uninitiated woman of low birth, without any particular charm, as the locus 
of visualisation of the Goddess. 

The text goes on to give instructions on visualisation needed for the sexual 
ritual. The yogin should visualise himself as Šiva in the form of Kāmešvara, and 
his partner as a goddess: 


[mayaya samgah] 


devy uvāca | 

ya maya rūparahitā kulahīnā mahe$vara | 

yoginah samgamas tasyah katham bhavati tad vada ||40.44]| 
bhairava uvaca | 

srnu devi pravaksyami māyayā samgam adbhutam | 

yad amogham mahešāni durvijfieyam utaparaih ||40.45|| 
yogasiddhivihīnais ca yogibhih suranayaki | 


44 uvaca | Jajc; u- Jb, uva- Well 44a ya | J; omitted in Well (pada a is a na-vipulā) 44b 
mahe$vara | Well; mahesvarahJ 44c yoginah | JaJc; yogina Jb, omitted in Well 44d kathah 
] conj.; vathah J, cāthah Well e vada | Jab; vadah JcWell 45 uvaca ] JaJcWell; u- Jb 46a 
°vihinais | JaJc; vihitais Jb, vihinaih$ Well 46b yogibhih ] J; yogibhih Well e suranayaki | 
JaJcWell; suranayakih Jb 


[Sexual ritual with Maya] 


The Goddess spoke: 

Tell me, O Mahesvara, how should the yogin sexually approach the 
one who is called Maya, who has neither form/beauty (rüpa) nora 
clan/noble family/body (kula)? (40.44) 

Bhairava spoke: 

Listen to me, O Goddess, I shall teach you the extraordinary intercourse 
(samga) with Maya. It is fruitful, O Mahesani, and difficult to learn 


A SEXUAL RITUAL WITH MAYA IN MATSYENDRASAMHITĀ 40 437 


31 


by others and yogins without yogic Powers (siddhi), O Suranāyakī. 
(40.45—46ab) 


[paramesvaradhyanam | 


sugupte mandire mantri mrdvasanaparigrahah ||40.46|| 
bhavayec ca svam ātmānam paramesvaravigraham | 
kāmešvaram ivadyantam sūryāyutasamaprabham ||40.47|| 
carumafijirakeyürakundalangadabhüsitam | 
mudrikāchannahīrādikirītamukutojjvalam ||40.48|| 
prasannavadanam kāntam tāmbūlāpūritādharam | 
madirānandacetaskam paramānandavigraham ||40.49|| 
navayauvanasampannam sarvalaksaņabhūsitam | 
svavāmabhāgavinyastamahājagavakārmukam ||40.50]| 
daksabhagojjvalatpaficasaram indivaradyutim | 
nīlotpalalasanmālābhūsitoraskam isvaram ||40.51]| 
madena ksubdhahrdayam īsāsmitamukhāmbujam | 
evam dhyāyec ciram yogi svašarīram sivatmakam ||40.52|| 
candanagarukarptrakurangajayakunkumaih | 
adhivasitasarvangam cāruvaktravirājitam ||40.53|| 
ratnadvīpāyutayutam gehe sattalpamadhyagam | 


46c sugupte mandire | J; sugupto mahdere Well 46d mrdvāsana” ] J; mrddhàsana? Well 
47b ?esvara? | JaJbPJcWell; ?e$va? Jb“ 47d ?sama? ] J; omitted in Well 48b °kundalan- 
gadabhūsaņam | Jab; °kundalangadabhisitam Jc, °kumbhalangadabhisitam Well 48d 
?ojjvalam ] Jc; ?ojvalam JabWell 49a prasannavadanah | Jajc; prasahnah vadanah Jb, 


prasannavadanah Well 4gb tāmbūlāpūritādharam | JabWell; tāxbūlāpūridharam Jc, 
Well 51a daksa? ] J; raksa? Well e °ojjvalat° ] corr.; °ojvalat° JWell 51c nilotpala? ] 
JbJcWell; niloxla?Ja e?lasan? | J; °lasam° Well 52a ksubdha? | Jajc; ksucca? Jb, kusu[?]° 
Well 52b isasmita? | J; ismita? Well e mukhāmbujam | JaJcWell; mukhah Jb 52a na- 
vipulà 52c cirah ] J; cirah Well 53a ?àgaru? | J; ^agara? Well < ?karpüra? ] JaJcWell; 
"karpūrah Jb 53d cāru” | J; caruh Well ¢ °virajitam | J; ?virajitahh Well 54a na-vipulā 
54b gehe sattalpa? ] Ja; gehe satralpa? JbJcWell 


[Visualisation of Paramešvara] 


In a hidden sanctuary, the mantra master should sit on a soft cushion?! 
and should visualise himself as having the body of Paramešvara, as if 


The element °parigrahah in the compund mrdvásanaparigrahah is suspicious. A word 
meaning "seated" would fit the context better. 


438 


32 


33 


34 


35 
36 


37 
38 


39 


KISS 


[he were transformed into] Kāmešvara,? having no beginning and no 
end, shining like millions of suns. (40.46cd—47) 

He is adorned with nice anklets, armlets, rings and bracelets, and he 
shines with small toe rings (mudrika),?3 channahiras,** etc., and 
diadems and a crown. (40.48) 

His face is gracious, beautiful, his lips are smeared with betel leaves. His 
mind is filled with the joy of wine,*5 and his body is supreme bliss 


[itself]. (40.49) 

He is in the prime of his youth and has all the auspicious characteristics. 
He has the great Ajagava* bow placed on his left side. (40.50) 

On his right, he has five glowing arrows. He is shining like a blue lotus. 
On his chest there is a glittering garland of blue lotuses. He is the 
Lord. (40.51) 

His heart is agitated with sexual desire. His lotus face displays a faint 
smile.7 This is how the yogin should visualise his body for a long 
time, as transformed into Siva. (40.52) 

All his limbs are perfumed with sandal, aloe, camphor, musk?? and saf- 
fron. He has a beautiful face. (40.53) 

He is surrounded by millions of gem islands, in a chamber on a fine 
bed.?? (40.54ab) 


Note that Kāmešvara features as Siva or the central deity in the pre-Srividya Daksinam- 
nāya tradition, with which the MaSam is clearly affiliated. See Sanderson (1988, 688), and 
Kiss (2009, 18 and 42-43). 

This is somewhat tentative. See mudrikā as an ornament in Brahmayāmala 21.63cd: 
mudrikām angulis caiva pādau laktakaraīijitau (Kiss 2015, 219). 

A channahira, or rather a channavira, is made up of two sacred threads ( yajfiopavita) 
worn over the two shoulders and across the chest. Bunce (1997) provides two definitions: 
“Channavira—(Ind.: channa-vira) A Hindu iconographic object for bodily adornment. The 
term channavira refers to a chain worn by both male and female deities. It is made up of 
two chains crossed over the chest, a disc covers the front crossing" (Bunce 1997, 58). "The 
term chhannavira refers to two sacred cords similar to yajfiopavita. One is placed over each 
shoulder, crossing on the chest and back and looping as low as the hips" (Bunce 1997, 63). 
See also Rao 1914, vol. 1.2, xxxi (Addenda), where it is defined as a double yajfiopavita. See 
channavīra mentioned in e.g. Rauravagama, Kriyāpāda 10.52d. 

Note that here intoxication is something only to be visualised. 

Note that mahājagava is a rather insecure conjecture for mahadaiksava and mahavai- 
vaksa. Other variants of the name of Šiva's bow are ajakava and ajīkava. 

Note the slightly odd form isasmita? metri causa for the standard isadasmita?. 

I take kurarigajaya in the sense of “musk,” although I have not found any evidence for this 
compound being used instead of the well-known kuranganābhi. 

I am grateful to Harunaga Isaacson for his assistance with this passage. 


A SEXUAL RITUAL WITH MAYA IN MATSYENDRASAMHITĀ 40 439 
[saktidhyānam] 


tatra svavamabhagastham $aktim bhuvanamohinim ||40.54|| 
sarvalaksanasampannam navayauvanagocaram | 
nilalakasamabaddhamalalolupasatpadam ||40.55]| 
kastūrīsāndrakarpūratilakām kamaleksanam | 
kuņdalāngadakeyūragraiveyādivibhūsitām ||40.56|| 
akalankanisanathasadrsasrimukhambujam | 
tāmbūlāpūrņavadanām svarņakumbhopamastanīm ||40.57]| 
divyānulepavastrādhyām vistīrņajaghanāntarām | 
cārūrujanghām saundaryasārasarvasvavigrahām ||40.58|| 
sarvalāvaņyasaundaryasārasarvasvavigrahām | 
mafijiraficitapadadhyam divyamalyanulepanam | 
madirasvadamuditam madanāvistavigrahām |[40.59|| 
vilāsavibhramām kāntām dhyāyet $aktim mahesvari | 


54c sva? | JajcWell; omitted in Jb 55b °gocaram | J; °gaucaram Well 55c nila° | conj.; lila? 
JWell eYbaddha? ] J; °baddhah Well 55d ?mala? | J; ?mala? Well e °lolupa® | conj.; 
?lotuya? JWell 55d°padam ] em.; °padam JWell; 56a kastūrī” ] JaJc; kastū? Jb, kastūra? 
Well 56b °tilakah | J; °tilahkah Well e °eksanam ] Jab; °eksanam JcWell 56c °keyura° | 
J; °keyūrah Well 57a ?nàtha? ] J; °natha° Well 57b ?mukhàmbujàm ] JcWell; °yukham- 
bujah Ja, °yukhambujah Jb 57d ?opamastanim | Ja; "opastanīm Jb, °opamastakim JcWell 
58a ?adhyah | conj.;°adyah JabcWell 58b ?jaghana? | em.; ?jayana? JWell; see Kaundinya’s 
commentary on Pāšupatasūtra 1.9: adhomukhenadamstrena jaghanāntaracāriņā 58b 
°ntaram | JajcWell; ?ntaram Jb 58c saundarya? | J; somdaryam? Well 58d °vigra- 
hàm ] Jab; ?vigraham JcWell 58c ma-vipula 59a °padadhyam | Ja; "pādādyām JbJcrs, 
°padyadam Jc*, °padayam Well 59b °malyanulepanam | Ja”Jb; ?malyanulepanam Ja“, 
?malanulepanam JcWell 59d madanavista? ] Jab; madana? JcWell 5ga na-vipulā 6ob 
dhyayet | JaPJc; dhya Ja", dhyaye Jb, madhyat Well e$aktim ] J; sakti Well 


[Visualisation of Sakti] 


On his left side, [he should visualise] Sakti, who infatuates the world. 
(40.54cd) 

She has all the auspicious characteristics. She is in the prime of her 
youth. She has bees longing for the garland tied in her black locks. 
(40.55) 

The tilaka-mark on her forehead is made with musk thickened with 
camphor. She has lotus-eyes. She is adorned with rings, armlets, 
anklets, necklaces etc. (40.56) 

Her beautiful lotus face resembles the spotless moon. Her mouth is 
filled with betel. Her breasts are like golden jars. (40.57) 


440 KISS 


She is anointed with divine ointments and she is dressed in divine 
clothes, with her loins exposed.^? Her thighs and shanks are beau- 
tiful. Her body is the ultimate essence of gracefulness. (40.58) 

Her feet are embellished*! with anklets. She wears divine garlands and 
[has been anointed] with divine ointments. She is delighted by the 
wine she is enjoying. Her body is filled with passion. She is restless 
with wantonness. [This is how the yogin] should visualise his lover 
(kāntā) as Sakti, O Mahešvarī. (40.59—60ab) 


The appearance of Kāmešvara and the mention of a gem-island (ratnadvīpa) 
in the above verses suggest an affiliation with the Srividya tradition and with 
love magic, perhaps with that of the pre-Srividya Daksinamnaya tradition.*? 
Verse 46cd (“in a hidden sanctuary”) may also be revealing: if the whole ritual 
were purely imaginary, it would be less important to perform it in a secret place. 
Going further in our text, MaSam 40.60cd-68 may also suggest that a real 
sexual encounter is being described by using words such as aslisya (“embrac- 
ing”), samacaret (“he should perform"), bahih (“outwardly”), ksipet (“place [his 
hand]”), vimuricati (“ejaculates”), by giving instructions in 40.61 to stimulate 
the partner, and also by avoiding words that would refer to visualisation, except 
dhyane, probably hinting at the fact that the whole process is accompanied by 
a projection of the image of the Goddess onto the female partner. On the other 
hand, the formulation of verse 40.65 may cast some doubt upon the real-life 
presence of the female partner: the yogin should rub his semen on his body, 
and there is no mention of the female partner's sexual fluids or her receiving 
or consuming any of the magical mixture, a common practice in Šaiva sexual 
rituals.^? Here follows the end of the chapter, describing the sexual ritual: 


40 Ex em. Compare Kaundinya's commentary ad Pasupatasiitra 1.9 (p. 14): adhomukhena- 
damstrena jaghanāntaracāriņā | sarvašāstrācikitsyena jagad dastam bhagāhinā ||, which 
is translated by Hara (1966, 196) as "The world is bitten by a snake whose mouth is below, 
toothless, who has crawled between the loins and whose poison can be cured by no sci- 
ence. Its name is the vulva.” The passage can also interpreted as "The world is bitten by 
the snake of the vagina whose toothless mouth points downward, and who moves in the 
genital area, and for which there is no antidote” 

41 Ihave translated aricita as “embellished,” suspecting that the word may need some emen- 
dation (arikita/rafijita?). 

42 See Sanderson 1988, 688—689 and 2009, 47 ff. 

43 See e.g. BraYā 45.201-202ab (Kiss 2015, 142, 258): upavisyapayet tatra cumbanādyāvagūha- 
nam | krtvā ksobham samarabhya pavitram grhya sadhakah || prāšayitvā tu tau hrstau 
yagadravyani proksayet |. “The Sadhaka should make [her] sit down there. He should start 
kissing and embracing her and stimulating her. He should collect the purifying [substance, 
i.e. the sexual fluids]. Overjoyed, they should consume [the fluids] ...” 


A SEXUAL RITUAL WITH MAYA IN MATSYENDRASAMHITĀ 40 441 
[samgah] 


aslisya cumbanadini yogi samyak samacaret ||40.60|| 
dhyāne bahih susamsnigdham tayā samgam samacaret | 
gajahastam ksipet tasyah $rimanmadanamandire ||40.61|| 
mantram enam smared yogi madam yāvad vimuticati | 
bhautikavyoma 11a aimdif kevalarnas tu bhautike ||40.62|| 
aparo vahni vamaksi bindu yukto mahešvari | 

CALEpadam CALApadam CITREpadam anantaram ||40.63|| 
RETOpadam MUNCApadayugam pūrvabījā vilomagah | 
evam kramena yo yogi mayasamgam samacaret ||40.64|| 
tadviryam svarnakarptrakunkumadiviloditam | 

svadeham mardayet kanti$ candravat samprajayate ||40.65|| 
samūlām brahmamandukim chāyāšuskām prasadhayet | 
mrdvīkārasasammišrām šarkarāghrtamelitām ||40.66]| 
trimasam bhaksayet kalatrayam aksapramāņakam | 
annapanam payah pītvā nāsya $ukrah ksayam vrajet ||40.67|| 
šatavarsasahasrāntam yadi samgam samācaret | 

nāsya praksīyate satyam navatvāptyai tanoh priye ||40.68|| 
rasayanam idam guhyam anyesam na prakāšayet | 

etad rahasyam vyakhyatam durlabham siddhasamtatau | 
gurukarunyasamlaksyam kim bhüyah srotum icchasi ||40.69|| 
|| iti $rimatsyendrasamhitayam catvariméah patalah || 


6oc cumbanā” ] J; cumbuna? Well — 6od samyak | JaJc; samyā[?]k Jb, samyas Well e 
samacaret | Jar«Jb Well; samacare Ja" 61a dhyāne | Jab; dhyaye JcWell e bahih ] corr; 
bahi J, vadi Well «?snigdhah | Jab; °sligdhah Well 61d šrī” ] J; sli? Well 62b vimuficati ] 
JajcWell; vimuhtica Jb (metathesis) 62d kevalārņas | J; kaivalarnas Well etu bhautike | J; 
tv abhautike Well 62 marginalia in f. 64r of Ja (top): HRAIM TVAIM RIM CATE VATA CITTE 
RETO MUNCA 2 RIM KLAIM HRAIM. 63a vahni? | Well; vahvi? J 63b bindu? ] J; bindud? 
Well. e mahe$vari ] J; mahešvarī Well 63c cale? ] J; cile? Well «cala? ] J; cala? Well 64a 
muficapada? | corr.; muficapadam J, mucapadam Well 64a hypermetrical 64b °yugam 
] J; omitted in Well 65a °viryam ] JaJcWell; °bijam Jb e ?karpüra? | Well; *karpūram 
J 66b chaya° | JaJcWell; chayàm? Jb — e °Suskam ] J; ?$uxàm Well 65c mardayet | J; 
marddhayet Well 66c °misram ] J; ?mi$rom Well 66d ?melitàm ] JaJcWell; °melikam 
Jb 67a trimasam ] J; trimase Well kala° ] JajcWell; kā? Jb 67d °pramanakam ] Jab; 
?pramanakramh Well 67c ?pànam | J; "pātam Well 68b samgam | corr.; samga JWell 
68c nàsya | Ja; nāksasya Well e satyam ] Jb Well; xyam Ja 68d navatvaptyai | JajcWell; 
navātvāstha Jb 6ga guhyam | J; guhyamm Well 69d ?labham | J; °lebham Well 69e 
°karunya® | JabWell; °karunyam Jc 69f. bhüyah | J; bhūya Well e śrotum | JajcWell; 
Sritum Jb Colophon: catvārimšaļ | J; catvarimsat Well 


442 


44 
45 


46 


47 


KISS 
[The intercourse | 


The yogin should embrace and kiss her, etc., properly. (40.60cd) 

[Then] he should have sex with her outwardly, very gently, while 
[performing] visualisation. He should apply the “elephant trunk" 
[method]^^ on her divine love temple [i.e. her genitalia]. (40.61) 

The yogin should recall this mantra when he ejaculates: Bhautika 
[A1], Vyoman [H], [...], TU verbatim and Bhautika [Ar i.e. HRAIM 
TVAIM |.*5 (40.62) 

Moreover: Vahni [R] and Vāmāksi [1] with a Bindu [M; i.e. RIM], O Mah- 
ešvarī, the words CALE and CALA and immediately CITRE [CITTE?], 
(40.63) 

the word RETO, MUNCA twice,* and the previous seed-mantras back- 
wards [RIM TVAIM HRAIM]. The yogin who has had sex with Maya 
should rub his semen mixed with gold, camphor and saffron on his 
own body: [his] beauty will become moon-like. (40.64—65) 

He should dry brahmamanduki*’ together with its roots in the shade. 
He should mix it with grape-juice, candied sugar and ghee. (40.66) 
He should have it three times [a day] for three months in portions mea- 
suring a dice as food and drink and he should drink milk. His semen 

will not deteriorate in millions of years if he practises sex [with 
Maya]. His [semen] will never ever wane. It is for the rejuvenation 
of the body, O Priya. (40.67—68) 

This is the secret of alchemy. He should not reveal it to others. This 
secret of the Siddha tradition, which is difficult to obtain, has now 
been taught. It is to be revealed through the compassion of the guru. 
What else do you wish to hear? (40.69) 


Here ends the fortieth chapter of the Matsyendrasamhita. 


See p. 443 below. 

If the decoding of this mantra in the marginalia in f. 64r of Ms Ja (top, HRAIM TVAIM 
RIM CATE VATA CITTE RETO MUNCA 2 RIM KLAIM HRAIM) is more or less correct, the 
puzzling syllables là aimdi must stand for R. Note the slight differences between the code 
in the text and the mantra given in the marginalia. The reconstruction of the mantra is 
somewhat tentative. 

See Kaulavalinirnaya 5.51: AMUKIM DRAVAYA SVAHA vinyaset sādhakottama | vamaya[?] 
CAPALACITTE RETO MUNCAdvayam pathet. 

Clerodendrum Siphonantus? 


A SEXUAL RITUAL WITH MAYA IN MATSYENDRASAMHITĀ 40 443 


Rubbing one’s own semen on one’s body (verse 65) is an old custom, and 
was probably not considered a transgressive practice at all. Brhadaranyaka- 
upanisad 6.4.4—5 describe a practice to be followed in case one discharges 
semen: 


bahu va idam suptasya va jagrato va retah skandati || 6.4.4 || 

tad abhimrsed anu va mantrayeta—yan me 'dya retah prthivim 
askantsid yad osadhir apy asarad yad apah | idam aham tad reta 
adade | punar mam aitu indriyam punas tejah punar bhagah | punar 
agnir dhisnya yathasthanam kalpantam | ity anamikangusthabhyam 
adayantarena stanau va bhruvau va nimrjyāt ||6.4.5|| 


In Humes translation (1921, 168-169): 


“[If] even this much semen is spilled, whether of one asleep or of one 
awake, [5] then he should touch it, or [without touching] repeat:— 

‘What semen has of mine to earth been spilt now, 

Whate'er to herb has flowed, whate’er to water— 

Again to me let vigour come! 

Again, my strength; again, my glow! 

Again the altars and the fire 

Be found in their accustomed place!’ 

Having spoken thus, he should take it with ring-finger and thumb and 
rub it on between his breasts or his eye-brows.’*8 


As can be seen from this passage, semen was probably never considered so 
impure as to forbid its magical application on the body, and this practice was 
recommended to regain strength—exactly as in MaSam 40.68 (navatvaptyai 
tanoh). The question is inevitable: is the somewhat similar practice in MaSam 
40.65 recommended for a similar situation, namely for ejaculation in a state of 
mind comparable to sleep, i.e. visualisation? Does this similarity between the 
two instructions suggest the absence of the female partner in the MaSam? 

To return to 40.61cd, where stimulation of the partner is probably hinted at: 
this gives the instruction to “cast an ‘elephant trunk’ on the partner’s divine 
love temple" (gajahastam ksipet tasyah srimanmadanamandire). This again 
is ambiguous. Gajahasta could be a mudrā to be shown during the ritual,*? 


48 I find Olivelle’s translation (1996, 88) slightly less accurate at this point, although the dif- 
ferences are minor. 
49 See e.g. Kaulāvalīnirņaya 17.133-135ab: esd tu paramā mudrā sarvasanksobhani mata | 


444 KISS 


but could as well be the technigue mentioned in Jašodhara's commentary ad 
Kāmasūtra 7.2.2: 


ratasyopakrame sambādhasya karenopamardanam tasyā rasaprāptikāle 
ca ratayojanam iti ragapratyanayanam | 


Commentary: ratasyeti | samprayogasya upakrama iti | ayam arambhe, 
yady api mando rāgo rate pravartayati stabdhalingatvat, tathāpi pratha- 
matah sambādhasya bhagasya karenopamardanam gajahastena ksobha- 
nam kāryam ... 


[When you are] about to practise sex, [first you should] rub her genitalia 
with your hand, and when there is dampness, the sexual act can be com- 
menced. This is the restoration of passion. 


Commentary: "about to practice sex": at the beginning of the sexual act. 
This is at the start [of the sexual act]. Even if the passion is weak with 
regards to sex because the penis is inert, first "her genitalia," i.e. her vulva, 
should be rubbed with his hand, should be stimulated with the “elephant 
trunk" [method] ... 


The possible hint in MaSam 40.61cd at a Kāmašāstric technique again suggests 
that we are dealing with the description of a sexual ritual involving a human 
female partner. Or should this also be only visualised? 


3 Why All These Ambiguities? 


I think it is safe to say that the teaching of MaSam 4o is ambiguous to an 
extent that makes it rather difficult to decide on one or another exclusive 
interpretation. The question to answer is rather: why is it so ambiguous? Is it 
deliberately so? Is it so due to bad writing, to sloppy composition? Are essen- 
tial details left out because they were well-known to gurus and pupils at the 
time of composition of the text? Did revisions/insertions during the course 
of transmission cause the ambiguity (deliberately or accidentally)? Is the text 


ksobhayed athavā mantrī gajahastakhyamudraya || adhomukham daksapāņim nidhaya- 
ngusthake same | nihksiped angulih sarvà gajatundakrtir yathā || gajahastā mahamudra 
kathita siddhidayika |. 


A SEXUAL RITUAL WITH MAYA IN MATSYENDRASAMHITA 40 445 


ambiguous because of the uncertainty of its redactors, i.e. they were rephras- 
ing old teachings but were not sure of the details? Is this ambiguity the result 
of the redactors’ diffidence in expressing secret teachings on sexuality? Could 
this ambiguity be seen as indicative of some major change in the tradition? 

The first possibility, namely that the text is ambiguous deliberately, would 
imply that the author(s) or redactor(s) wanted to hide their secret teaching 
from unauthorised eyes. This is possible but not as typical as one would think. 
For instance, while they are difficult for the modern reader to decipher, the 
BraYā's radical teachings on sexual ritual are relatively straightforward con- 
cerning what is real and what is imaginary, and while there are technical terms 
which are not openly discussed in the text,°° and its language is far from being 
standard Paninian Sanskrit, it is generally possible to understand how sexual 
rituals were supposed to be performed. 

The next possibility hinted at above, i.e. the effect of bad writing, is possible, 
but the MaSam is far from being a very cryptic or confused text. It would have 
required minimal effort and ability on behalf of the redactors to clarify details 
that we miss: a few lines on how to acquire or invite a Maya woman, similar to 
the BraYa's instructions on finding a partner?! a verse on her role and position 
during the ritual, or a clear remark stipulating the yogin's solitude would have 
been enough. 

On the other hand, one should not forget that texts like the MaSam were 
definitely not written with an outsider reader in mind who would try to under- 
stand them several hundred years later. Essential details could have been left 
out because they were obvious to the redactors. 

As regards possible revisions and insertions, there are signs that MaSam 40 is 
made up of at least three distinct parts. Verses 40.1-28 constitute a small chap- 
ter in themselves with weak links to the rest of the chapter. What they have 
in common is the mention of "Kaula conduct" and bodily fluids. 40.29-37 and 
the rest of the chapter are more closely related. Both mention and discuss sex- 
ual rituals, but the first section, while mentioning sex with Yoginis, is silent on 
Maya, the focus of the second part, i.e. verses 40.38—69, which seem as if they 
were an alternative and additional teaching. But this additional section may 
again be made up of passages drawn from various sources. The visualisation 
of Kāmešvara and his partner (40.46cd-60ab) may come from a source dif- 
ferent from that of the instructions on the sexual act itself, and this in itself 
would provide some explanation for discrepancies in the text. The text may 


50 Eg. the term avagraha ("restraint") or pitha (“external genital organ of the female part- 
ner"). See Kiss 2015, 49, 47—48. 
51 See BraYā 45.185cd-189ab. 


446 KISS 


have originally described a sexual ritual with a human partner but during the 
transmission of the text some passages teaching new ideas (such as a visualised 
partner) were inserted, thus making the text ambiguous. 

This may lead us to another possibility, namely that at some point the redac- 
tors of the text became uncertain of the exact details of the ritual and when 
they tried to solve the problem they may have ended up obscuring it even 
further. Finally, the possibility of diffidence may also have played some role, 
especially if the female partner was meant to be purely imaginary, but other 
details of the ritual were not. 

It seems that a wider perspective may be required to see what this chapter 
of the MaSam signifies. The ambiguity between actual sex and visualisation 
in chapter 40 may have its roots in the tension between sexuality and asceti- 
cism which is clearly manifest in the frame story of the text (chapters 1 and 55). 
The frame story contains a unique version of the legend of Matsyendra and 
Goraksa: Matsyendra occupies the body of a dead king and indulges in sensual 
pleasures. It is Goraksa, his disciple, who *rescues” Matsyendra from the trap of 
sexuality and power, and leads him back to an ascetic life.5? Taking into account 
this wider context, itis possible to discover the same tension in the teaching of 
MaSam 40 between a sexual ritual that may have originated in an earlier tantric 
strata of the cult, and its probably later hathayogic layers. 

As I suggest elsewhere,?? the MaSam could provide clues about the transi- 
tion of a tantric cult from Kaula practices, often involving transgressive ele- 
ments, to early Hathayoga, often associated with brahmacarin practitioners. 
The text may be echoing or quoting old tantric texts with such descriptions 
of sexual rituals that aim at obtaining sexual fluids, but the redactors of the 
MaSam were perhaps in a transition towards more ascetic or brahmacarya- 
oriented teachings, and as a result, they come up with a fairly obscure variant of 
the figure of the tantric Yoginī: Maya, first described as only a phantom, resem- 
bles the wholly mental visualisation of goddesses, but at the same time takes 
part in a human sexual ritual. The redactors may have had reservations about 
a sexual ritual with a low-caste woman, and tried to conceal this with instruc- 
tions on visualisation to such an extent that even the presence of a human part- 
ner is now doubtful. They may also have had kundalini in their thoughts: the 


52 See Kiss 2009, 222—233 and 317-321. 

53 Kiss 2009, 9: "[...] the MaSam provides some clues for, among other things, the under- 
standing of the transition from the early Indian yoga traditions (Patafijala and Saiva) to 
the late and fully developed hatha-yogic teachings as well as of the transition from the 
early Kula traditions to the later Kaula teachings associated with the figure of Matsyen- 
dra.” 


A SEXUAL RITUAL WITH MAYA IN MATSYENDRASAMHITĀ 40 447 


text as it stands now could be a metaphor for meditation on her. The manner in 
which they reconcile two (or three) attitudes, in this case those of explicit sexu- 
ality and of brahmacarin yogins’ mental worship of a goddess (or of kuņdalinī), 
is, as so often in tantric texts, less than convincing. But this imperfection, this 
ambiguity, is exactly the feature which seems to tell us something about the 
history of the cult, its transition from one phase to another. 


Acknowledgements 


I would like to thank Judit Tórzsók, Dominic Goodall, Harunaga Isaacson and 
Gergely Hidas for their constant help and support. I am especially grateful to 
Shaman Hatley and Gergely Hidas for reading and commenting on a draft of 
this article. 


References 


Primary Sources 
Upanisads 
Patrick Olivelle, trans. Oxford World’s Classics. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1996. 


Kamasutra 

Sri Gosvami Damodar Shastri, ed. The Kamasutra by Sri Vātsyāyana Muni. With the 
Commentary Jayamangala Of Yashodhar. Kashi Sanskrit Series, no. 29. Benares: 
Chowkhamba, 1929. 


Kubjikamata 
T. Goudriaan and J. Schoterman, eds. Kubjikamatatantra. The Kulalikamnaya version. 
Leiden: EJ. Brill, 1988. 


Kaulavalinirnaya 
Arthur Avalon, ed. Calcutta: Sanskrit Press Depository, 1928. 


Khecarīvidyā 
See Mallinson 2007. 


Tantrāloka 

Madhusūdan Kaul Šāstrī, ed. Tantrāloka of Abhinavagupta with commentary (-viveka) 
of Rājānaka Jayaratha. KSTS nos. 23, 28, 30, 35, 29, 41, 47, 59, 52, 57 and 58. Bombay 
and Srinagar, 1918—1938. 


448 KISS 


Nityasodasikarnava/Vamakesvarimata 
Madhusüdan Kaul Šāstrī, ed. Vamakesvarimatam, with the commentary Rājanaka Jaya- 
ratha. Kashmir Series of Texts and Studies, no. 66. 1945. 


Nityotsava of Umanandanatha 
A. Mahadeva Sastri, ed. Baroda: Oriental Institute, 1948. 


Pāšupatasūtra 
Pāšupatasūtram. Šrīmaharsikauņdinyakrtabhāsyopetam. Srimadhavanandagrantha- 
mālā, no. 10. Varanasi: Shri Krishnananda Sagar 1987. 


Brhadāraņyaka-upanisad 
Narayan Ram Ācārya, ed. Isadivimsottarasatopanisadah. A Compilation of Well-Known 
120 Upanisads. Bombay: Nirņay-sāgar, 1948. 


Brahmayāmala 

National Archives Kathmandu, ms. no. 3-370. 
See Hatley 2007; 2018. 

See Kiss 2015. 


Matsyendrasamhita 

See Kiss 2009; 2020 (forthcoming). 

(Ja) Maharaja Man Singh Library, Jodhpur (MMsL), No. 1784. 

(Jb) No. 1783, MMSL. 

(Jc) No. 1782, MMSL. 

(Jd) No. 1785, MMSL (not available for chapter 40). 

(Well) 8 1115, Wellcome Library for the History and Understanding of Medicine, Lon- 
don. 


Rauravagama 
3 vols. N.R. Bhatt, ed. Pondichéry: Institute Francais d'Indologie, 1985—1988. 


Secondary Sources 

Biernacki, Loriliai. 2007. Renowned Goddess of Desire: Women, Sex, and Speech in Tantra. 
New York and Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Bunce, Frederick W. 1997. A Dictionary of Buddhist and Hindu Iconography. New Delhi: 
D.K. Printworld Ltd. 

Dupuche, John R. 2003. Abhinavagupta: The Kula Ritual, as Elaborated in Chapter 29 of 
the Tantrāloka. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass Publishers. 

Hara, Minoru. 1966. "Materials for the study of Pāšupata Saivism.” Ph.D. thesis, Harvard 
University. 


A SEXUAL RITUAL WITH MAYA IN MATSYENDRASAMHITĀ 40 449 


Hatley, Shaman. 2007. “The Brahmayamalatantra and Early Saiva Cult of Yoginīs” Ph.D. 
thesis, the University of Pennsylvania. 

Hatley Shaman. 2018. The Brahmayāmalatantra or Picumata. Volume 1. Chapters 1-2, 
39-40 & 83. Revelation, Ritual and Material Culture in an Early Saiva Tantra. Collec- 
tion Indologie, no. 133 (Early Tantra Series, no. 5). Institut Français d’ Indologie/Ecole 
francaise d’ Extréme-Orient/Universitat Hamburg. 

Hume, Robert Emest. 1921. The Thirteen Principal Upanishads. Oxford: Oxford Univer- 
sity Press. 

Kiss, Csaba. 2007. “Notes on the Matsyendrasamhitā” In Indian Languages and Texts 
through the Ages. Essays of Hungarian Indologists in Honour of Prof. Csaba Tüttóssy, 
edited by Csaba Dezsó, 147—184. Delhi: Manoharlal. 

Kiss, Csaba. 2009. “Matsyendranatha’s Compendium (Matsyendrasamhita): A Critical 
Edition and Annotated Translation of Matsyendrasamhita 1-13 and 55 with Analy- 
sis.” Ph.D. thesis, University of Oxford. 

Kiss, Csaba. 20n. "The Matsyendrasamhita: a Yoginī-centered 13th-century Yoga text of 
the South Indian Sambhava Cult” In Yogi Heroes and Poets: Histories and Legends 
of the Nāths, edited by David Lorenzen and Adrián Muñoz, 143-162. Albany: State 
University of New York Press. 

Kiss, Csaba. 2015. The Brahmayāmala Tantra or Picumata, Volume 11. The Religious 
Observances and Sexual Rituals of the Tantric Practitioner: Chapters 3, 21, and 45. Col- 
lection Indologie, no. 130 (Early Tantra Series, no. 3). Pondichéry: Institut Français 
d'Indologie/École francaise d' Extréme-Orient/Universitat Hamburg. 

Kiss, Csaba. 2020 (forthcoming). The Yoga of the Matsyendrasamhitā. A Critical Edition 
and Annotated Translation of Matsyendrasamhitā 1-13 and 55. Pondichéry: Institut 
Francais d'Indologie/École francaise d' Extréme-Orient. 

Mallinson, James. 2007. The Khecarividyà of Ādinātha. A Critical Edition and Annotated 
Translation of an Early Text of Hathayoga. London; New York: Routledge. 

Rao, T. Gopinath. 1914. Elements of Hindu Iconography. 2 vols. (4 parts). Madras: Law 
Printing House, 1914—1916. 

Sanderson, Alexis. 1988. "Saivism and the Tantric Traditions.” In The World's Religions, 
edited by S. Sutherland, L. Houlden, P. Clarke and F. Hardy, 660—704. London: Rout- 
ledge and Kegan Paul. 

Sanderson, Alexis. 2002. “Remarks on the Text of the Kubjikamatatantra.” In Indo- 
Iranian Journal 45: 1-24. 

Sanderson, Alexis. 2007. "Atharvavedins in Tantric Territory: The Āngirasakalpa Texts of 
the Oriya Paippalaadins and their Connection with the Trika and the Kalikula, with 
Critical Editions of the Parajapavidhi, the Parāmantravidhi, and the *Bhadrakālī- 
mantravidhiprakaraņa” In The Atharvaveda and its Paippalāda Sakha: Historical 
and Philological Papers on a Vedic Tradition, edited by Arlo Griffiths and Annette 
Schmiedchen, 195-311. Geisteskultur Indiens: Texte und Studien, no. 11; Indologica 
Halensis. Aachen: Shaker Verlag. 


450 KISS 


Sanderson, Alexis. 2009. "The Saiva Age: The Rise and Dominance of Šaivism during the 
Early Medieval Period.” In Genesis and Development of Tantrism, edited by Shingo 
Einoo, 41-350. Institute of Oriental Culture Special Series, no. 23. Tokyo: Institute of 
Oriental Culture, University of Tokyo, 2009. 

Sanderson, Alexis. 2014. “The Saiva Literature.” Journal of Indological Studies (Kyoto) 
24—25 (2012—2013): 1-113. 

Tāntrikābhidhānakoša. Dictionnaire des termes technigues de la littērature hindoue tan- 
trigue. Vol. 1. H. Brunner, G. Oberhammer et A. Padoux, eds. Osterreichische Aka- 
demie der Wissenschaften, Philosophisch-historische Klasse, Sitzungsberichte, Bd. 
681. Beitrāge zur Kultur- und Geistesgeschichte Asiens Nr. 35. Vienna: Austrian 
Academy of Sciences Press, 2000. 

White, David Gordon, ed. 2000. Tantra in Practice. Princeton; Oxford: Princeton Uni- 
versity Press. 

White, David Gordon. 2003. Kiss of The Yoginī: "Tantric Sex” in its South Asian contexts. 
Chicago; London: The University of Chicago Press. 


CHAPTER 19 
Hathayoga's Floruit on the Eve of Colonialism 


Jason Birch 


My doctoral thesis (Birch 2013), which was supervised by Alexis Sanderson at 
the University of Oxford, contained a survey of texts on Hatha- and Rājayoga. 
One of the challenges of completing such a survey was that very few of the texts 
composed from the sixteenth to eighteenth century had been critically edited 
or studied academically. Inspired by several exemplary surveys of Saiva litera- 
ture in Sanderson's articles (e.g. 2001, 2007 and 2014), I visited a large number of 
libraries in India in an effort to consult manuscripts of unpublished yoga texts. 
By the end of my doctorate, it was apparent to me that yoga texts composed on 
the eve of colonialism provided new insights into the history of yoga and, more 
specifically, are crucial for understanding how Hathayoga changed after it had 
been codified by Svatmarama in the Hathapradipika (circa mid-fifteenth cen- 
tury). In fact, after Svatmarama had successfully transformed Hathayoga from 
an auxiliary practice into a complete soteriological system, there began what 
might be considered the floruit of Hathayoga, insofar as its literature flour- 
ished, its systems of practice accumulated more techniques and it became, 
particularly in scholarly compendiums on yoga, almost synonymous with the 
auxiliaries of āsana and pranayama. 

Building on my doctoral research, this article aims to provide a framework 
for examining the textual sources of Hathayoga that were composed from the 
sixteenth to eighteenth century. After a brief summary of the early literature 
of Hathayoga, I shall discuss some of the salient features of the late literature 
by dividing the texts into two etic categories; ‘extended works’ and ‘compendi- 
ums. The extended works expatiate on Hathayoga as it was formulated in the 
Hathapradīpikā, whereas the compendiums integrate teachings of Hathayoga 
within a discourse on yoga more broadly conceived. Both categories include 
scholarly and practical works which, when read together in this way, reveal sig- 
nificant changes to both practical and theoretical conceptions of Hathayoga. 
Such a reading also illuminates several developments of this time that fore- 
shadowed, and in some cases inspired, the transnational yogas of the twentieth 
century. The article concludes with a brief discussion on the regional extent of 
the literature on Hathayoga during this period and how the codification of its 
praxis and theory appears to have diverged in different regions. 


© JASON BIRCH, 2020 | DOI:10.1163/9789004432802_021 


This is an open access chapter distributed under the terms of the cc BY-NC 4.0 license. 


452 BIRCH 
1 Conceptions of Hathayoga before the Hathapradipika 


The earliest references to the term hathayoga are found in some Buddhist 
Tantras, most notably the Guhyasamdjatantra and the Kalacakratantra, which 
date to the eighth and eleventh centuries, respectively, and mention it as a 
method of last resort when the primary techniques of these traditions had 
failed (Birch 2011, 541-542). An eleventh-century commentary on the Kala- 
cakratantra, called the Vimalaprabha, explains the term hathayoga as the name 
of a type of yoga that forces prana (‘vitality’) into the central channel through 
a practice involving nada (‘internal resonance’) and retention of bindu (‘gen- 
erative fluids"). The earliest known Šaiva work to teach Hathayoga is the circa 
twelfth-century Amaraughaprabodha (Birch 2019). Its Hathayoga is somewhat 
consistent with that of the Kalacakra tradition insofar as both are auxiliary 
practices that induce nada. Nonetheless, a much closer counterpart to the 
Amaraughaprabodha's Hathayoga exists in an eleventh-century Vajrayana 
work called the Amrtasiddhi (Mallinson 2020). Both have similar accounts of 
three complex mudrās and a system of sounds (nada), blisses (ananda) and 
voids (sunya). It is important to note that the author of the Amrtasiddhi does 
not identify its yoga as Hathayoga. The reason for this is not stated in the text, 
but Hathayoga appears to have been a controversial practice among some Bud- 
dhist exegetes,! and it is also possible that Hathayoga, or at the very least some 
of its techniques of that time, had older associations with other religious tradi- 
tions.” 

Unlike earlier Buddhist works, Hathayoga in the Amaraughaprabodha is 
embedded in a fourfold hierarchy in which Rajayoga is the principal yoga. 
Rajayoga is defined as the absence of mental activity? a meditative state that 
was known by this name in other Saiva yoga texts of the same era.^ In this 
hierarchy, Hathayoga was not the sole means to Rajayoga, because the latter 
could also be achieved by Mantra- and Layayoga. Judging by later works, such 


1 On Maitreyanatha’s and Ramapala's rejection of Hathayoga, see Isaacson and Sferra 2014, and 
Mallinson, forthcoming 2020. 

2 On the prehistory of certain techniques which were integrated into Hathayoga, see Mallinson 
2016, 120—122. In the case of the three physical techniques taught in the Amrtasiddhi and the 
Amaraughaprabodha, it seems possible to me that the Amaraughaprabodha may have bor- 
rowed from a source that was older than the Amrtasiddhi (Birch 2019, 964—966) and that the 
physical practices themselves were not the preserve of esoteric Buddhists. 

3 Amaraughaprabodha 3d (yas cittavrttirahitah sa tu rājayogah). 

4 The earliest work to teach Rajayoga by name is the Amanaska, which can be dated to 
the eleventh or early twelfth century (Birch 2014, 406-409). In nearly all texts that teach 
Hathayoga, Rajayoga is mentioned as the goal of Hathayoga. 


HATHAYOGA'S FLORUIT 453 


as the Sivasamhità (5.13-28), which explain the rationale behind this hierarchy, 
it appears that the characteristics of the student were the basis for determining 
which yoga was taught to an individual, and it seems likely that Mantra-, Laya- 
and Hathayoga were superfluous to students of extraordinary capability who 
could achieve Rajayoga without an auxiliary practice.” 

The praxis common to both the yoga of the Amrtasiddhi and the Hathayoga 
of the Amaraughaprabodha is three techniques called mahamudra, maha- 
bandha and mahavedha. A repertoire larger than this rudimentary one appears 
in all systems of Hathayoga that followed, such as that of the Dattātreyayo- 
gašāstra (circa 13th-century), a Vaisņava work in which a collection of ten 
mudras, referred to as the Hathayoga of Kapila, was integrated with a Vai- 
snava form of astarigayoga attributed to Yajfiavalkya.® Kapila's collection of 
mudras consists of khecart, viparītakaraņī, the three bandha ("locks"), and 
three variations of vajrolimudrā, in addition to mahamudra, mahabandha and 
mahāvedha. Combinations of some of these mudrās appear in contemporary 
Saiva works, such as the Yogatārāvalī and the Yogabija,’ which teach basic sys- 
tems of Hathayoga. The latter text is known for its definition of Hathayoga as 
the union of the sun and moon, which are represented by the syllables ha and 
tha, respectively. This definition is absent from the earliest recension of the 
Yogabīja, which simply defined Hathayoga as forcefully consuming the gross 
elements of the body.® 

Some of the mudras in the Dattātreyayogašāstra also appear in systems of 
yoga of the same era that were not called Hathayoga as evinced, for example, 


5 The Dattātreyayogašāstra (14) states that Mantrayoga is for the lowest type of practitioner, 
who has a weak intellect. This is why it is the lowest yoga of the hierarchy (alpabuddhir imam 
yogam sevate sadhakadhamah | mantrayogo hy ayam prokto yogānām adhamas smrtah ||). A 
passage in the long recension of the Amaraughaprabodha (17cd—24), which might postdate 
the Hathapradīpikā, explicitly connects each of the four types of student to one of these four 
yogas. Both this passage and the similar one in the Sivasamhità, mentioned above, appear 
to have been inspired by the Amrtasiddhi's discourse (chapters 15-18) on the four types of 
student in relation to the four stages of yoga. 

6 ThisVaisnava form of astarigayoga is taught (without the Hathayogic mudras) in the Vasistha- 
samhitā and Yogayajriavalkya, which were probably composed in the twelfth and fourteenth 
centuries, respectively. 

7 Recentwork on nineteen manuscripts of the Yogabija by the Hatha Yoga Project has revealed 
an early recension that does not teach these bandhas and mudrās. Nonetheless, it is likely that 
a section on four kumbhakas and the three bandhas was added to the text before the time of 
the Hathapradīpikā, in an attempt to explain the practice of šakticālana and Hathayoga. 

8 Yogabija, ms. no. 29917, f. uv, line 5 (hathena grasyate jadyam hathayogah sa ucyate). The 
"union of the sun and moon" definition was added to later recensions of the Yogabija, one 
of which may still predate the Hathapradipika. 


454 BIRCH 


by two Saiva works, the Vivekamārtaņda and the Goraksašataka.? This suggests 
that from the twelfth to the fifteenth century the practice of these particular 
mudrās was more widespread than the use of the term hathayoga for designat- 
ing a system of praxis. In fact, according to the available evidence, hathayoga is 
used in this sense in only four non-Buddhist Sanskrit yoga texts that are likely 
to predate the Hathapradipika, and two others whose dating is less certain.!° 
Unlike the asceticism and yoga of esoteric traditions, the texts of Hathayoga 
do not mention the need for initiation (dīksā) for its practice, a characteristic 
that appears to reflect hathayoga’s role as an auxiliary practice for people of 
various religions and social status, including householders (Birch 2015, 8—10). 
Although some of the distinguishing mudras of Hathayoga, such as inverting 
the body, may be similar to techniques of older traditions of asceticism (tapas), 
the mudrās had been adapted and repurposed by tantric Buddhist and Saiva 
sects by the time texts such as the Amrtasiddhi and the Amaraughaprabodha 
were composed. None of the early teachings on Hathayoga refer to tapas and, 
in contrast to the mortifying effects of extreme methods of tapas, the propo- 
nents of Hathayoga claimed that this type of yoga would not afflict the body 
and would, in fact, bring about health and jīvanmukti ("liberation-in-life") rel- 
atively quickly. Nonetheless, in this period there were opponents to Hathayoga 


9 One might also include the Sivasamhità as an example here. The fourth chapter of this 
work teaches āsanas, pranayama and ten mudrās, as well as yonimudrā, which became 
an integral part of the typology of the Hathapradipikà. Chapters 1-4 of the Sivasamhità, 
in which these techniques are taught, do not refer to Hathayoga, which is mentioned only 
briefly in the fifth chapter. The first four chapters may have been an original text that 
was combined with the fifth sometime before the seventeenth century (Birch 2018, 107 
note 13). 

10 These are the Amaraughaprabodha, the Dattatreyayogasastra, the Yogabīja and the Yoga- 
tārāvalī. The other two are the Sivasamhità and the Aparoksānubhūti, whose verses on 
Hathayoga may not predate the Hathapradīpikā. On the dating of the Sivasamhità, see 
Birch 2018, 107, note 13. As far as I know, the date of the Aparoksānubhūti is uncertain 
and it is possible that its verses on Hathayoga were added more recently (Birch 2011, 540, 
notes 98-100). A Sanskrit Vīrašaiva work called the Šaivaratnākara by Jyotirnātha men- 
tions in passing the four yogas in the same order as the Yogabija (i.e., Mantra, Hatha-, 
Laya and Rājayoga). According to Elaine Fisher (personal communication, 10 March 2019), 
the Saivaratnākara may have been composed in the late-thirteenth or early-fourteenth 
century, which so happens to be the likely date of the early recension of the Yogabija. A 
large Sanskrit compendium called the Sárngadharapaddhati, probably dated to 1363CE, 
mentions Hathayoga in a syncretic section on yoga that borrows from earlier yoga texts. 
I am also aware of a Marathi text on yoga that may predate the fifteenth century, namely, 
the Vivekadarpana. This work defines but rejects Hathayoga in favour of a gnostic type 
of Rajayoga. I would like to thank James Mallinson for drawing my attention to the 
Vivekadarpana and Elaine Fisher for the Saivaratnakara. 


HATHAYOGA'S FLORUIT 455 


who considered it to be like hard asceticism insofar as it was a cause of suffering 
and unnecessary exertion. These opponents usually favoured effortless gnostic 
methods for attaining liberation." 

The conception of Hathayoga in the Hathapradipika represents a turning 
point in its history. The author of this work Svatmarama incorporated a larger 
repertoire of techniques than earlier works and synthesized diverse teachings 
of various yoga traditions into a cohesive system, which he called Hathayoga. 
Before Svatmarama's efforts, Hathayoga had been conceived as one of several 
auxiliaries in hierarchical models of yoga. In the Hathapradipika, Hathayoga 
is the sole means to Rajayoga and a complete soteriological system. The suc- 
cess of Svatmarama's interpretation is attested by the fact that subsequent 
authors borrowed much of the structure and content of the Hathapradipika 
in creating more extensive works on Hathayoga. Also, the Hathapradipika was 
widely quoted as an authority on its subject, in particular by erudite authors 
of compendiums on yoga that were composed after the fifteenth century, and 
it appears to have spread throughout most of India. Recently published cat- 
alogues indicate that nearly two hundred manuscripts of the Hathapradipika 
are held in libraries throughout India, from Kashmir to Tamil Nadu and Gujarat 
to West Bengal in various scripts, as well as a few vernacular commentaries. 

The Hathapradipika might be considered the culmination of a formative 
period in the development of Hathayoga as a system of praxis. In this sense, 
it marks the beginning of Hathayoga as a distinct method that combined both 
seated and non-seated āsanas, the eight kumbhakas and the ten mudrās. In 
keeping with the earlier literature, the main goal of these techniques was 
Rajayoga. However, in addition to the mudras of Hathayoga, Svatmarama also 
stipulated the practice of three other mudras for Rajayoga, namely, šāmbhavī 
mudra, khecarīmudrā!? and a simplified form of sanmukhimudra, which is not 
named as such, but is prescribed for "fusing the mind with the internal res- 
onance" (nādānusandhāna).! These "meditational" mudrās probably derive 


11 Early examples of texts that critique and reject Hathayoga and its methods include the 
Moksopaya/Laghuyogavasistha and the Amanaska (Birch 2011, 531, 544—545). 

12  Khecarimudrà is taught in chapters three and four of the Hathapradīpikā. In the fourth 
chapter, the practice of this mudrā consists of focusing the mind between the eyebrows, 
rather than the Hathayogic khecarīmudrā of inserting the tongue into the nasopharyngeal 
cavity, which is taught in the third chapter. 

13  TheHathapradipikà (4.68) states that the ears, eyes, nostrils and mouth should be blocked 
in order to hear the internal resonance (nada) in the susumna channel. Brahmananda's 
Jyotsnà commentary on this verse adds that the senses are blocked by the fingers, and 
he calls this practice sanmukhimudra. A simpler technique is also mentioned at Hatha- 
pradīpikā 4.82ab, in which the yogin presses the ears with the hands to initiate nādānu- 


456 BIRCH 


from older traditions of Rājayoga, one of which explicitly rejects the mudrās 
of Hathayoga.'^ Their inclusion in the Hathapradipika reflects Svatmarama's 
efforts to bring together techniques of diverse traditions under the umbrella 
term hathayoga. 

After the fifteenth century, the composition of yoga texts which teach or 
integrate Hathayoga flourished. Although these texts reveal significant efforts 
at augmenting Hathayoga's repertoire of techniques and synthesising it with 
other yogas, religions and philosophies, the schema of the Hathapradipika was 
most often the starting point and, in many cases, the prevailing paradigm for 
Hathayoga in both the scholarly and more praxis-orientated works that will be 
discussed below. 


2 Post Fifteenth-Century Literature of Hathayoga 


A notable change in the literature that followed the Hathapradīpikā was the 
composition of more comprehensive works on Hathayoga and large compendi- 
ums on yoga that integrated Hathayoga. The early literature on Hathayoga con- 
sists mainly of short pithy texts that provide skeletal systems of practice and 
rudimentary theoretical details. The later literature incorporates more tech- 
niques and theory, as well as more elaborate systems of practice. The consider- 
able growth in the length of the later works can be seen in Table 19.1. 

It should be noted that, on the whole, the early works were composed in a 
low register of Sanskrit and anustubh metre.!5 They are prescriptive and ele- 
mentary, which suggests that they were probably written for practitioners. In 
contrast to this, many of the later works, such as the Hathatattvakaumudi and 
the Yogacintāmaņi, are more scholarly and tend to be written in higher registers 
of Sanskrit. Their authors utilize more complex metres, compile their mate- 
rial from a wider range of sources and often include commentary on the older 
sources, which are frequently cited with attribution. 


sandhāna (karnau pidhāya hastabhyam yah srnoti dhvanim munih). A similar technique is 
described in the Sivasvarodaya (383), the Rājayogāmrtasāra of Ānandānandanātha (1.17— 
18, f. gr-9v), the Mandalabrahmanopanisat (2.2.2) and the Jogapradipyaka (685—688), and 
it is depicted in an illustrated manuscript called “seven āsanas of yoga" at the National 
Museum of New Delhi, PCWA gallery. 

14 For example, one of the earliest yoga texts to teach a mudrā called šāmbhavī is the 
Amanaska, a text on Rājayoga that explicitly rejects pranayama and the mudrās and 
karanas associated with it (Birch 2014, 406—408). 

15 The exception is the Yogatārāvalī which is composed in tristubh and incorporates poetic 
images, etc. 


HATHAYOGA'S FLORUIT 457 


TABLE 19.1 Acomparison of the number of verses in early and late texts on Hathayoga 


Texts on Hathayoga No. of verses 
Pre-16th c. texts Yogatārāvalī (14th c.) 29 
Amaraughaprabodha (12th c.) 462 
Dattātreyayogašāstra (13th c.) 169 
Yogabija (14th c.) 170 
Hathapradīpikā (15th c.) 392 
Post-16th c. texts Hatharatnavali (17th c.) 404 
Hathapradīpikā, 10 chs (18th c.) 595 
Siddhāntamuktāvalī (18th c.) 1553P 
Hathatattvakaumudi (18th c.) 1680* 
Yogacintamani (17th c.) 34231 


a This number of verses is based on a short recension of the Amaraughaprabodha, which is 
older than the recension published by Mallik (1954). The short recension is preserved by 
two manuscripts (Ms. No. 1448 at the Government Oriental Manuscript Library, University 
of Madras, Chennai, and Ms. No. 70528 at the Adyar Library and Research Centre, Chennai). 
For more information on this short recension, see Birch 2019. 

b This estimate is given by Gharote, et al. 2006, xvi. 

This is an approximate number of slokas for the Hathatattvakaumudi, which has fifty-six 
chapters, ranging from 5 to 150 slokas each. Most are around 20. So, I have taken an aver- 
age of 30. The Hathatattvakaumudī is undoubtedly a large yoga text, and I have felt no the 
need to add up all of its šlokas to prove this point. 

d This estimate is given in a scribal comment at the end of a manuscript of the Yogacintamani 
held at the Kaivalyadhama Yoga Institute (ms. No. 9785 p. 257, line 14). 


In order to discuss the salient characteristics of the late literature on Hatha- 
yoga, I shall divide the texts into two categories. The first consists of “extended 
works” on the topic of Hathayoga and the second, “compendiums” that borrow 
from Hatha- and Rajayoga texts. There are some texts, such as the Hathasanke- 
tacandrikā, which could be placed in either category. Nonetheless, the purpose 
of introducing these etic categories is to reveal particular stylistic features and 
content that are characteristic of the works in each group. 


24 Extended Works 

The extended works expatiate on the type of Hathayoga that was outlined in 
the Hathapradipika. Many of these works borrow verses from the Hathapradī- 
pikā and their discourse centres on the praxis and theory of Hathayoga. Exam- 
ples include: 


458 


16 
17 


18 


19 


BIRCH 


Hatharatnāvalī (17th c.)!6 
Hathayogasamhitā (17th c.)!7 
Hathabhyasapaddhati (18th c.)!8 
Hathayogamanijari (18th c.?)!9 


On the date of the Hatharatnāvalī, see Birch 2018, 109 note 24. 

The Hathayogasamhitā is a compilation that borrows extensively from the Hathapradi- 
pika. The opening verses (1.2-3) acknowledge the seven sages, namely Markandeya, 
Bharadvāja, Marici, Jaimini, Parasara, Bhrgu and Visvamitra, for spreading Hathayoga in 
the world. The stated aim of Hathayoga is to achieve purification (Sodhanam), firmness 
(drdhatā), steadiness (sthairya), constancy (dhairya), lightness (laghava), direct percep- 
tion (pratyaksa) and liberation (nirlipta) of the body (ghata). Its Hathayoga has seven aux- 
iliaries: the satkarma, āsana, mudrā, pratyahara, pranasamyama, dhyana and samadhi. 
The Hathayogasamhitā appears to have been the basis of the Gherandasamhita (eigh- 
teenth century), which adds a new frame story (viz., a dialogue between the teacher 
Gheranda and a student Candakapali), several elaborate visualization practices and a 
six-fold Rajayoga. The Gherandasamhita calls its yoga ghatasthayoga, omits the Hathayo- 
gasamhitā's teachings on vajrolī and redefines this mudrā as a handstand, thus revealing 
a reluctance to adopt the transgressive practices of Hathayoga. 

The terminus ad quem of the Hathābhyāsapaddhati is the Sritattvanidhi, which was a com- 
pendium composed by Krsnaraja Wadiyar 111, the Maharaja of Mysore, who was active in 
the mid-nineteenth century (Sjoman 1996, 40). The Hathābhyāsapaddhati was a source 
text of the Sritattvanidhi (see Birch 2018, 131-134), and probably predates it by a hundred 
years or so (Birch and Singleton 2019, 14-16). 

Not much scholarly attention has been given to this work. Its name in the published edi- 
tion is not entirely certain according to the colophons. The text begins with the heading 
Hathayogamarijarī. However, the second chapter's colophon refers to the Jogi-cintamani 
of Srisahajanandanatha, the third chapter's colophon to the Srisarvopanisat, and the final 
colophon to the Gorakhajogamajijari. The text could be a composite work consisting of 
summaries or extracts of different texts. Nonetheless, the Hathayogamarijarī styles itself 
as a work on Hathayoga. The terms hathayoga and hathavidyā are used in each chap- 
ter and it contains a description of the hathayogi (p. 32). Its opening verses (2—5) state 
that it is an explanation of the Hathapradipikà in a vernacular language (bhāsā). It cer- 
tainly covers most of the content of the Hathapradīpikā, but also includes additional 
material on yama, niyama, pratyāhāra, dhyāna, etc. A significant difference is that much 
of the Hathapradīpikā's discourse on Rajayoga has been omitted. Like other Brajbhasa 
texts, such as the Jogapradīpyakā (1737 CE), the author of the Hathayogamafijari equates 
vajrolīmudrā with Rājayoga. I am yet to consult a manuscript of this work or even find 
a reference to it in a manuscript catalogue or another yoga text. It may be the work 
referred to as the Jogamaríijart (acc. no. 6543, Rajasthan Pracya Vidya Pratisthan, Bikaner, 
Rajasthan) by Gharote et al. (20068, lxvii). However, the librarian at this library in Bikaner 
was unable to locate this manuscript when James Mallinson and I visited on separate occa- 
sions in 2018. The Hathayogamanjari mentions devotion to Rama (e.g,, p. 10, v. 33 and p.18, 
v. 25 and the last line) and was probably compiled in the same period and milieu as the 
Jogapradipyaka. 


HATHAYOGA'S FLORUIT 459 


Hathapradīpikā with ten chapters (18th c.)?9 
Siddhāntamuktāvalī (18th c.),?! etc. 


In particular, the last two texts are literally extended versions of the Hatha- 
pradīpikā because their authors simply added more verses to the original work 
and created additional chapters on related topics. In fact, these “extended texts" 
enlarge on the Hathapradīpikā in two ways. Firstly, they integrate other types 
of yoga and various related topics. For example, the Hatharatnavali combines 
the fourfold system of yoga (i.e., Mantra-, Laya-, Hatha- and Rajayoga) of earlier 
works, such as the Amaraughaprabodha, with the astanga format. The author 
of the Hatharatnāvalī borrowed over one hundred and thirty verses from the 
Hathapradīpikā and mentions Svātmārāmas views on several specific matters 
(Gharote et al. 2002, xx). The Siddhantamuktavali significantly extends the 
original Hathapradipika by adding sections on the purification of the channels 
(nadiguddhi), meditation (dhyana), cheating death (kalavayicana) and indiffer- 
ence (audāsīnya). A similar array of topics is seen in the Yogamargaprakasika 
(16-18th c.?2), which adopts the fourfold system of yoga noted above. Its teach- 
ings on Hathayoga follow for the most part the Hathapradīpikā. 

Secondly, the repertoire of techniques in most of the texts which follow the 
Hathapradīpikā became larger. As shown in Table 19.2, the number of āsanas 
increases most significantly.?? However, it is also the case that techniques were 
added to the standard collections of the satkarmas and mudras. The original six 
therapeutic interventions known as the satkarma form the basis of a repertoire 
of twenty-one techniques in the Hathayogasamhita. This work also adds fifteen 
mudras to the usual ten that are taught in Hathayoga. Furthermore, these texts 
provide greater detail on many of the mudrās. For example, the Hathabhyas- 
apaddhati contains the most elaborate teachings on vajroli, which is taught in 
great detail along with its preliminary practices and medical applications. In 
table 19.2 the number of kumbhakas remains almost the same but, generally 
speaking, these texts contain many more verses on pranayama.?^ 


20  Onthe date of the Hathapradīpikā with ten chapters, see Birch 2018a, 8 note 32. 

21 On the date of the Siddhāntamuktāvalī, see Birch 2018, 127. 

22 On the date of the Yogamārgaprakāšikā, see Birch 2018a, 8 note 29. 

23 The Hatharatnāvalī lists eighty-four āsanas but describes only thirty-six of them. Other 
examples from this period of yoga texts with the names and descriptions of large num- 
bers of asanas include the Siddhāntamuktāvalī (96 asanas), the Hathabhyasapaddhati 
(112 āsanas), the Yogasana (108 āsanas), the Yogāsanamālā (no āsanas) and the Ujjain 
manuscript (No. 3537) of the Yogacintamani (54 āsanas described and two lists of over 
eighty names of asanas). For further information on this, see Birch 2018. 

24 For example, the Hatharatnāvalī has 97 verses in its chapter on pranayama whereas 


460 


BIRCH 


TABLE 19.2 The proliferation of post-fifteenth Hathayogic technigues 


Texts Number of technigues 


āsana  satkarma kumbhaka mudrā 


Hathapradīpikā (15th c.) 15 6 8 10 
Hatharatnāvālī (17th c.) 84 8 9 10 
Hathayogasamhitā (17th c.) 32 21 8 25 
Hathābhyāsapaddhati (18th c.) 12 9 8 10 


The period in which these extended works arose was one in which physical 


practices were documented on an unprecedented scale. Monographic works 


were composed on particular techniques that had become, by this time, closely 


associated with Hathayoga. Examples include the following: 


Kumbhakapaddhati (17th c.)?5 
Satkarmasangraha (18th c.)*6 
Yogāsanamālā (18th century)?” 
Yogāsana (19th century),?$ etc. 


The composition of such works indicates ongoing innovation and syncretisa- 


tion in the practice of asana, pranayama and the satkarma that is also reflected 
in the extended Hathayoga texts mentioned above. The Kumbhakapaddhati 
describes over seventy varieties of breath retention (kumbhaka) and the Satkar- 


masangraha borrowed many of its additional therapeutic interventions from 


25 
26 


27 


28 


the Hathapradīpikā has 78. The Hathatattvakaumudi has five chapters on pranayama (9, 
10, 12, 37—38), namely, the preliminary auxiliaries and rules of practice for pranayama 
(pranayamapürvangasadhanavidhi), an explanation of the names, nature and charac- 
teristics of kumbhakas (kumbhakanāmasvarūpaguņa), breathing methods for quelling 
suffering (klesaghnavayusadhana), necessary rules for pranayama (pranayamakartavya- 
vidhi) and an explanation of pranayama (pranayamavivecana), which total more than 
240 verses. The Siddhāntamuktāvalī (ff. 53r-86v), the Yogacintamani (pp. 161-220) and 
the Yuktabhavadeva (pp. 107143) have large sections on pranayama as well. 

On the date of the Kumbhakapaddhati, see Birch 2018a, 9 note 41. 

On the date of the Satkarmasangraha, see Birch 2018a, 50. 

The one available manuscript of the Yogāsanamālā was completed on Wednesday, 20 Jan- 
uary 1790 CE (miti mahisa sudi 5 budhavasare samvat 1846). 

See below for information on the date of this text. 


HATHAYOGA'S FLORUIT 461 


Ayurveda.?9 All of these works build on the content of the Hathapradīpikā that 
was relevant to their respective topics. 


2.2 Extended Works: Scholarly vs Praxis-Orientated 

Some of the extended works are the result of scholarly efforts to synthesise 
and elaborate on material from earlier works, whereas others appear to doc- 
ument, perhaps for the first time, a practice that was in use at the time of 
writing. A good example of a more scholarly extended work is the Hatharat- 
nāvalī, which was composed by Srinivasa. At the beginning of the first chap- 
ter, he presents himself as a learned writer by informing the reader that he is 
an eminent astrologer who excels in the Vedas, Vedanta, the works of Patafi- 
jali, Vyakarana, Tantra, Sankhya, Nyaya, Vaisesika, as well as various other 
texts and philosophies.?? His remarks on the Hathapradipika indicate that 
he was responding to deficiencies which he perceived in that work.?! In par- 
ticular, his list of eighty-four asanas appears to have been the creation of a 
scholar who felt compelled to elaborate on references to this canonical number 
of postures in early works, such as the Dattātreyayogašāstra and the Viveka- 
mártanda.3? In fact, Srinivasa’s list of eighty-four names of postures is pre- 
ceded and followed by verses of the Vivekamartanda and the Hathapradīpikā, 
which state that Siva taught eighty-four āsanas.33 The compilatory nature of 
his collection is revealed by explicit references to and tacit borrowings from 
the Hathapradīpikā, the Yogayajfiavalkya, and the Dattātreyayogašāstra in his 
descriptions of thirty-six āsanas.3* Also, Srinivasa incorporated into the list at 
least twelve variations of certain basic postures, which further suggests that 
this list was a scholarly contrivance arising from his intention to expatiate on 
earlier textual references to eighty-four asanas.?* 


29 For further details on this, see Birch 2018a, 49—56. 

go © Hatharatnavali 1.2 (vede vedāntašāstre phanipatiracite sabdašāstre svasastre tantre prā- 
bhākarīye kanabhugabhihite nyayaratnarnavenduh | sankhye sārasvatīye vividhamatimate 
tattvacintamanijfiah šrīmajjyotirvid agre saravaratanujo rājate srinivasah ||). 

31 For example, see Šrīnivāsa's commentary to Hatharatnāvalī 1.27 and 2.86. 

32 For references and translations of the relevant verses, see Birch 2018, 107—108. 

33  Hatharatnāvalī 3.7 (~ Vivekamartanda 8—10) and 3.23 (= Hathapradīpikā 1.35). 

34 In the Hatharatnavali’s section on āsana, the Hathapradīpikā, the Yogayajnavalkya, and 
the Dattatreyayogasastra are cited by name at 3.23, 3.35 and 3.36, respectively. Hatharat- 
nāvalī 3.42—43, 51-54, 57-58, etc., are tacitly borrowed from the Hathapradīpikā. Also, 
Hatharatnāvalī 3.77 is a rewriting of Vivekamartanda 92. 

35 Six types of mayūrāsana are mentioned in Hatharatnāvalī 3.10 and five are described at 
3.42—47; three of matsyendrāsana are mentioned in 3.12 and described at 3.58—60; two of 
pašcimatānāsana are mentioned in 3.13, and both are described at 3.66—68; and possibly 
five of kukkutāsana are mentioned in 3.17 (if one assumes that ākārita and bandhacūlī, 


462 BIRCH 


The scholarly efforts of Srinivasa in compiling a list of āsanas can be con- 
trasted with what one might call “praxis-orientated works” in this category, 
such as the Hathabhyasapaddhati and the chapter on āsana in the Siddhanta- 
muktavali. These works are composed in the same style as the early Hathayoga 
texts; they are prescriptive and focus on praxis rather than theory. Their col- 
lections of dsanas do not appear to be a synthesis of earlier textual sources 
because their authors do not cite or allude to any sources, and a large propor- 
tion of their āsanas is not attested in earlier texts. In the case of the Hathā- 
bhyasapaddhati, innovations seem apparent in the use of moving āsanas, 
sequencing, linking postures, counterposing and the use of props, such as 
ropes and walls (Birch 2018, 134—135). Therefore, it is likely that innovation 
played a significant role in the proliferation of techniques seen in these praxis- 
orientated extended works which postdate the Hathapradipika. Although 
some of these complex postures may predate the fifteenth century, as revealed 
by iconography, the codification of large numbers of complex postures in texts 
specifically on Hathayoga, as well as works on yoga broadly conceived, such 
as the Jogapradīpyakā, appears to have emerged from the seventeenth century 
onwards. In fact, only a small portion of the aggregate number of these āsanas 
are anticipated by the earlier sculptural collections of the Mehudi gate, Brah- 
manath temple and Hampi,’ which further suggests that a certain degree of 
innovation was probably at play during Hathayoga's floruit. 

There is little evidence to indicate that scholarly extended works, such as 
the Hatharatnavali, and the compendiums mentioned below were sources of 
information for Krsnamacarya, Swami Sivananda and other gurus who popu- 
larized physical yoga in the early twentieth century. These gurus deferred to the 
Patafijalayogasastra and the Hathapradīpikā in their publications. Nonethe- 
less, there is significant evidence that they surreptitiously adopted postures 
from traditions of āsana practice that were prevalent in certain regions of India 
in the eighteenth and nineteenth century. The traces of these traditions are dis- 
cernible through texts such as the Hathabhyasapaddhati, the Jogapradīpyakā 
and the Yogāsana,” which preserve teachings on large distinct collections 


which are included among kukkuta, ekapādakakukkuta and parsvakukkuta, are variations 
of the same posture). 

36  Onlarge collections of āsanas at these locations, see Vijaya Sarde 2015 and 2017, and Seth 
Powell 2018. 

37 The asanas of the Yogasana, most of which correspond to untraced Sanskrit descrip- 
tions quoted in a commentary on the Yogasütra by Srikrsnavallabhacarya (1939), were 
reproduced in several early twentieth-century publications, one of which was Swami 
Sivananda’s book Yoga Asanas. This will be discussed at length in a forthcoming publi- 
cation. 


HATHAYOGA'S FLORUIT 463 


of complex asanas (Birch, forthcoming). The growing emphasis on complex 
āsanas and mudrās in practical works such as the Siddhāntamuktāvalī also 
occurs for the first time in the literature of erudite Brahmins of the same era. 
I shall now turn my attention to these more scholarly works which integrated 
Hatha- and Rājayoga into more orthodox conceptions of yoga. 


2.3 Yoga Compendiums 

A century or so after the Hathapradīpikā, a number of lengthy compendi- 
ums on yoga were composed. Most of these compendiums do not focus on 
any particular type of yoga, but treat the subject more generally by combin- 
ing many sources, including texts on Hathayoga. Generally speaking, these 
compendiums are scholarly works of literature, which incorporate philoso- 
phy and metaphysics on a more ambitious scale than earlier texts, such as the 
Hathapradīpikā. In a sense, their authors produced a new discourse on yoga 
by combining the teachings of Hatha- and Rājayoga with those of the Pātari- 
jalayogašāstra and various Brahmanical texts, including the Bhagavadgita, 
the Mahābhārata, early Upanisads, Puranas and Dharmašāstras. In the early- 
twentieth century, a synthesis of the same genres was favoured by Brahmin 
gurus such as Krsnamacarya, Swami Sivananda and Swami Kuvalayānanda, 
who combined physical yoga techniques with concepts from Patafijalayoga and 
Advaitavedanta, as well as metaphysics from tantric traditions, to teach yoga to 
an international audience.% 

The compendiums to which I am primarily referring are:?? 


Yogacintāmaņi of Godavaramisra (16th c.) 
Yogaparicasika (early 16th c.)^9 


38 One should consult the work of Elizabeth de Michelis (2004) and Mark Singleton (2010) 
for the modern elements, such as neo-Vedanta and physical culture, that also shaped the 
teachings of these gurus. Some significant similarities in their teachings with the sources 
I am discussing include the use of the astariga format, the integration of bandhas and 
mudras with āsana and pranayama, the importance of inverted āsanas, the identification 
of samadhi with Advaitavedanta concepts and, above all, the trans-sectarian approach to 
compiling their teachings. 

39 For dating, please refer to Birch 2018a, unless otherwise indicated. 

40 The Yogaparicasika might be the earliest attempt to integrate Hatha- and Rajayoga with 
Patafijalayoga. The text is cited by name in a Sanskrit work called the Vivekamukura, which 
was composed by Nrsimha Bharatiya, according to its last verse (97). If this is the same 
author who wrote the commentary called the Subodhini on the Vedantasara, as stated by 
Thangaswami (1980, 360—361), then Nrsimha Bharati of Varanasi was active in the late 
sixteenth century. Unlike other compilations in this list, the Yogaparicasika is a short 


464 


41 
42 
43 


44 


45 


BIRCH 


Upasanasarasangraha (16th c.)^! 
Yogacintamani of Sivanandasarasvati (17th c.) 
Yuktabhavadeva (17th c.) 

Tattvabinduyoga of Ramacandra (17—18th c.)*2 
Hathasanketacandrika (18th c.) 
Hathatattvakaumudi (18th c.) 
Yogasarasangraha (18th c.)*3 

Yoga Upanisads (18th c.)^^ 

Rajatarala (late 18th—19th c.)** 


work of merely fifty verses that cites only the Pātarijalayogašāstra. It teaches an astan- 
gayoga. The first four auxiliaries are Hathayoga, and the second four, Rājayoga. It is a Šaiva 
work that aims at raising kundalini, uniting Sakti with Šiva and attaining jivanmukti, fol- 
lowed by videhamukti when all prarabdakarma is extinguished. Its yoga is not intended 
for those who deny the validity of scripture (nāstika), but for male life-long brahmacarins 
(nrnaisthika). This text is unpublished and, as far as I am aware, preserved by only one 
manuscript, which has several small lacunae. 

Bouy 1994, 89-92. 

Birch 2014, 415, 434 note 71. 

The Yogasárasarigraha undoubtedly postdates the Hathapradīpikā and the Sivayogapra- 
dīpikā. The latter was probably composed in the late fifteenth century. However, the 
Yogasarasangraha may post-date the Hatharatnavali (seventeenth century), as it shares 
a verse on bhujangikarana, a technique that is only taught in the Hatharatnāvalī (2.31), as 
far as I am aware (cf. Yogasārasangraha p. 28, lines 4—5). Also, there are other verses on 
Hathayoga that seem to follow the Hatharatnāvalī rather than the Hathapradipika (e.g., 
Yogasārasangraha p. 55, lines 8-14 = Hatharatnāvalī 2.32—35). The Yogasarasangraha's ter- 
minus ad quem would probably be one of its manuscripts. Several appear to be reported 
in the New Catalogus Catalogorum (hereafter NCC), but I have not had the opportunity to 
consult any of them. 

These so-called Yoga Upanisads are part of a recent recension compiled in South India 
in the first half of the eighteenth century and commented on by Upanisadbrahmayo- 
gin (See Bouy 1994). They include the Yogatattvopanisat, the Dhyānabindūpanisat, the 
Nādabindūpanisat, the Sandilyopanisat, the Yogacudamanyupanisat, the Yogakundalinyu- 
panisat, the Yogasikhopanisat, the Darsanopanisat, the Mandalabrahmanopanisat, the 
Saubhagyalaksmyupanisat and the Varahopanisat. 

The Rājatarala is a lengthy commentary on the Yogatārāvalī (circa 14th c.) that was com- 
posed by Ramasvamipandita, who is described as a worshipper of Sankaracarya’s feet 
(srīsamkarācāryapādakimkara). He cites the Mandalabrahmanopanisat (ms. no. 72330, 
f. 29v), which means that the Rajatarala was composed after the corpus of one hundred 
and eight Upanisads, that is, the mid-eighteenth century (Bouy 1994, 6, 34, etc.). Also, a 
verse pays homage to a Daksinàmürti in the city of $riéaila, near Kadali, which appears to 
locate the work in Andhra Pradesh (Mahadevan 2018, 68). It is preserved by one undated 
palm-leaf manuscript (No. 72330) in Telugu script at the Adyar Library and Research Cen- 
tre, Chennai, and an undated transcript (No. B378) in Devanagari (circa 20th century) at 
the Oriental Research Institute, Mysore. 


HATHAYOGA'S FLORUIT 465 


Yogasandhya (early 19th c.)49 
Goraksasiddhantasangraha (19th c.)^? 


The authors of these compendiums often combined yoga teachings from differ- 
ent traditions seamlessly. For example, in the Yogacintamani, Godavaramisra 
integrated the physical methods of Hathayoga with the auxiliaries of asana and 
pranayama in Patafijali's astáriga system (see below). Similarly, in Sivananda’s 
Yogacintamani and Bhavadeva's Yuktabhavadeva, the meditative state of 
Rajayoga became the equivalent of Patatijali's highest stage of samadhi, called 
asamprajnatasamadhi.*® Most authors of these works were inclined towards 
Vedanta. They cited the teachings of the Upanisads to express the gnostic 
insights that arise from samādhi. Also, they incorporated theistic teachings on 
yoga from the Puranas and Tantras, and were comfortable with defining yoga 
as meditation (i.e., cittavrttinirodha), on the one hand, and then as the union of 
the self with a deity, on the other hand. Likewise, their descriptions of dharana 
and dhyana juxtapose Patañjali’s definition of “binding the mind to one place, 
etc.” with tantric visualizations of the five elements and deities. 


2.4 Godavaramisra’s and Šivānandas Thought Gems on Yoga 

In the Yogacintamani, Godavaramisra’s method of synthesising Hathayoga with 
other yogas is typical of this genre.*? Godavaramigra was a chief minister 
(mantrivara) and preceptor (rajaguru) to the Orissan king Prataparudradeva, 


46 According to the final colophon, the Yogasandhyā was composed by Srisadasivanarayana- 
brahmacāri, whose guru was Srimajjagannathacaitanyabrahmacari. They belonged to the 
tradition of the Šrngerīmatha. The final verse mentions the date of composition in the 
bhūtasankhyā system. If the term dharma represents the number eight, it would have been 
completed in vs 1861 (= 1804CE), when the sun was in the ninth naksatra (tapas) and 
the moon full. See Yogasandhya, p. 203 (rākešarasadharmorvvīsammite vaikrame 'bdake 
| tapasine ca rakayam satkrtih pūrņatāmitā). 1 would like to thank for their comments 
on this verse Somadeva Vasudeva, Péter Szántó, James Mallinson and, in particular, Chris 
Minkowski, who suggested that dharma could mean 4, 6 or 8. 

47 The date of the Goraksasiddhāntasangraha is not certain, although it post-dates the Sid- 
dhasiddhantapaddhati, which might be as late as the eighteenth century (Mallinson 2014, 
170—171). 

48  Šivānanda's Yogacintāmaņi, p. 9 (na tatra kiñ cid vedyam samprajfiayata ity asamprajnatah 
samadhih | ayam nirbīja iti nirvikalpa iti niralamba iti rajayoga—iti cocyate) and Yuktab- 
havadeva 1.33 ([...] sa eva nirvikalpah samadhih sada savikalpakajfianabhavat || sa eva ca 
rājayogah). 

49 This work survives in a single, incomplete manuscript, which is dated Wednesday, 16th 
November 1715 CE. Yogacintamani (f. 132v, lines 7-8): samvat 1772 varse kārttika vadi mā- 
vasya budhavasare likhitam. 


466 BIRCH 


who ruled in the early sixteenth century. In addition to yoga, Godāvaramisra 
wrote works on various topics, including Advaitavedānta (the Advaitadar- 
pana*?), Tantra (the Tantracintamani) and an extensive treatise on politics and 
warfare (the Hariharacaturanga).5! His view of yoga was mainly shaped by the 
Patanjalayogasastra. He acknowledges this at the beginning of his work: 


In this text, I summarise and examine Patafijali’s doctrine, which was 
explained by Vyasa, Vacaspati and Bhojadeva and which is validated and 
[yet] overlooked elsewhere.*” 


Although Godavaramisra discusses only some of the sūtras of the Patarijalayo- 
gasastra in an order that fits the design of his work, he begins with the first one 
(atha yoganusasanam) and, in his discussion of it, cites with attribution pas- 
sages from the Garudapurana (sic), the Bhagavadgita, the Brahmandapurana 
and the Kūrmapurāņa, as well as the sages Yajfiavalkya (i.e., the Yajriavalkyasm- 
rti) and Maharsimatanga.*? The first half of the Yogacintamani is concerned 
with general topics, such as definitions of yoga, the types of samadhi and so 
on. The latter half is structured on the eight auxiliaries (astanga) of Pātati- 
jalayoga, and it is in his discussions of asana, diet and pranayama that he cites 


50 The Yogacintāmaņi (f. 131v lines 7-8) of Godavaramisra states that he wrote the dvaitadar- 
pana: "Now, they have been explained together by me in the Dvaitadarpaņa” ([...] asmab- 
hir atha dvaitadarpane yugapadanuvarnitáh [...|). However, it seems that atha dvaitadar- 
pane is a scribal error for athādvaitadarpaņe, because yugapadanuvarņitāh refers back 
to two works: the Sanksepasarirakavarttika, which was composed by his paternal grand- 
father (pitamahacarana) and the Advaitacintamani by his father (pitrcaraņa). The cc 
(vol. 6, 126) reports that Godāvaramišra wrote the Advaitadarpana because it is quoted in 
his Hariharacaturanga (p. 178, v. 22; p. 196, v. 502). This is affirmed in a summary of the 
Hariharacaturanga (Meulenbeld 2000, 562—563). 

51 For more information on Godavaramisra’s family and works, see the NCC vol. 6, 1971, 126 
and Meulenbeld 2000, 562—563. 

52 Yogacintamani, f. 1v, lines 4-5 (yad vyāsavācaspatibhojadevaih patarijaltyam niraņāyi 
tattvam | anyatra siddham yad upeksitam ca tad atra sanksipya nirūpayāmi ||3||) The codex 
reads upeksitam, but Gode (1953, 474) transcribes it as apeksitam. Whether he was tacitly 
emending upeksitam to apeksitam is not clear. He may have emended because the mean- 
ing of apeksita is more consistent with siddha, but it seems possible that upeksita was 
intended to contrast with siddha, as I have translated. 

53 | Onewould expect that the Matangapāramešvaratantra is meant by this attribution. How- 
ever, I have not found the cited verse in the published edition of this tantra. The verse in 
the Yogacintamani (f. 3v, lines 5—7) is agnistomādikān yajītān vihaya dvijasattamah yogāb- 
hyāsaratah šāntah param brahmādhigacchati || brākmaņaksatriyavišām strigudranam ca 
pāvanam šāntaye karmaņām anyad yogān nāsti vimuktaye ||. This verse is found in the 
Visnudharma (98.016). 


HATHAYOGA'S FLORUIT 467 


two works on Hathayoga: the Hathapradīpikā (hathayoge—f. 39v, l. 8) and the 
Dattātreyayogašāstra (dattatreyah—f. 361, line 1; f. 4ov, line 3). He also cites 
the Yogayajriavalkya (yajravalkyah—f. 36r, line 6; f. 36v, line 6; f. 37v, line 7; 
f. 38v, line 7), which was a source text for the Hathapradipika. The other sources 
on these topics are the Dharmaputrika, the Pavanayogasangraha, the Agneya- 
purāņa and the Matangapāramešvaratantra. Therefore, on the topic of asana, 
Godavaramisra created a seamless synthesis of hathayogic teachings with those 
of tantric and brahmanical sources. 

Godāvaramišra's work became the basis of an ambitious attempt by Šivānan- 
dasarasvati to integrate a more extensive and diverse array of Hathayoga texts 
with Patafijalayoga and Brahmanical works. Sivananda also named his compi- 
lation the Yogacintamani. He probably lived in the early-seventeenth century in 
Varanasi.*4 At the end of this text, Sivananda informs the reader of the material 
he has included and excluded. He says: 


Meditation along with the practices [ancillary to it] have been explained 
briefly by me according to scripture and my understanding. Listening to 
and contemplating [the teachings] which are seen in detail and at length 
only in the Upanisads, have not been discussed for fear of prolixity. I 
have revealed here all that which is secret in Hatha- and Rajayoga for 
the delight of yogins. However, that Hathayoga which was practised by 
Uddalaka, Bhusunda and others has not been mentioned by me, because 
it cannot be accomplished by contemporary | practitioners. Also], the pro- 
cedures and so forth promoted by the kāpālikas have not been mentioned 
[because] they contravene the Vedas, Dharmašāstras and Purāņas.*5 


54 The terminus a quo of Šivānandas Yogacintamani is Godāvaramišra's Yogacintāmaņi (see 
above). The terminus ad quem is 1630 CE, based on two dated manuscripts of the Yogacinta- 
mani. The first is reported in the catalogue of yoga manuscripts by Kaivalyadhama (2005, 
226—227), which gives the author (Sivanandasarasvati), the library (the Asiatic Society 
in Mumbai), the manuscript number (1083) and the date (vs 1687 = 1630CE). The sec- 
ond manuscript is held at the Panjab University Library and has been catalogued by the 
Woolner Project (Ms. no. 6922). After this manuscript's final colophon, a scribal comment 
indicates that it was copied by Rama on the 13th of the month, Kārttika, in Saka 1552 (i.e., 
Sunday, 17 November 1630 CE). The possibility that Sivananda was a resident of Varanasi 
is supported by a reference to his devotion to Višvešvara, a standard claim of Šaivas who 
resided there. I would like to thank Alexis Sanderson for pointing this out to me, and he 
also noted that similar references to Višvešvara in works of Šaivas who resided in Varanasi 
can be found in Jfiānašiva's Jfíanaratnàvali and Vi$vanatha's Siddhantasekhara, which are 
both Saiddhantika Paddhatis (personal communication, 24 April 2013). 

55 The Yogacintamani pp. 281-282 (with verse numbers added for the clarity of the critical 
apparatus): nididhyasanam etat tu mayā sādhanasamyutam | yathasastram yathābodham 


468 BIRCH 


Both Godāvaramišra and Šivānanda excluded the Hatha techniques of vaj- 
rolī, amarolī and sahajolī, presumably because these are the kāpālika practices 
which would be unacceptable to his brahmanical audience.56 The main differ- 
ence between Godāvaramišra's and Sivananda’s compilations is that the former 
focused on Patafijalayoga and cited Hathayoga texts sparingly, whereas the lat- 
ter discussed Hathayoga as forthrightly and comprehensively as the yogas of 
other traditions, and cited its texts profusely. This is also the case for similar 
compilations of the time, such as Bhavadevamisra’s Yuktabhavadeva and Sun- 
daradevas Hathasanketacandrika. 


2.5 The Polymathy of Bhavadevamisra 

The synthesis of various philosophies and genres of literature in the yoga com- 
pendiums under consideration was created by well-educated Brahmins who 
were knowledgeable in a wide range of scholarly subjects. A good example of 
this is the seventeenth-century Bhavadevamišra, whose Yuktabhavadeva is a 
digest (nibandha) that integrated teachings of Hatha- and Rajayoga with those 
of the Pātarijalayogašāstra and various Upanisads, Puranas, Tantras, Dhar- 
mašāstras and the Epics. Apart from the fact that Bhavadeva cited a wide 
range of Sanskrit works, the breadth of his learning is attested by the com- 
mentaries attributed to him on various šāstras. Manuscript colophons state 
that he was a Brahmin from Mithila and that his father was Krsnadevamisra, 
his elder brother Baladevamišra and his teacher Bhavadeva Thakkura. Based 
on this information, the Bhavadeva who wrote the Yuktabhavadeva also wrote 
commentaries on the Pātartjalayogašāstra,*” the Brahmasūtra,% the Kavyapra- 


sanksepena nirūpitam ||1|| sravanam mananam caiva savišegam savistaram | vedāntesv eva 
drastavyam noktam vistarabhititah ||2||| rehasyam rajayogasya hathayogasya yat sthitam | 
prakāšitam maya sarvam pritaye yoginam iha ||3|| arvācīnair asādhyatvāl likhito na maya 
hi sah | uddālakabhušuņdādyair hathayogas tu yah krtah ||4|| kāpālikapranītās tu itikar- 
tavyatadayah | likhità na maya te tu srutismrtivirodhinah ||5|| 

2b savisesam savistaram |6922, Ed.;savistaravišegakam 3537. 4a arvācīnair | 3537, 6922; 
sadhricinair Ed. 4b asādhyatvāl | 3537; asādhyatvāt Ed.; asādhyatvān 6922. 4b likhito na 
maya hi sah | Ed.; likhitvo na maya hi sah 3537; na likhito hi maya tu sah 6922 (hypermetri- 
cal). 5d virodhinah | 3537, 6922; virodhanah Ed. 

56 The Hathapradīpikā (3.96d) contains a verse that points to the Kāpālika origins of amaroli 
(... kapalike khandamate marolī). Amaroli and sahajolī are generally considered to be vari- 
ations of vajrolī (e.g., Dattatreyogayogasastra 31 and 158, Hathapradīpikā 3.92, etc.). 

57 This commentary is called the Patarijaltyabhinavabhasya and several manuscripts of it are 
held in the Kathmandu National Archives. The chapter colophons of E 1819-9 and A 554- 
522 affirm that Bhavadeva was the son of Krsnadeva and the favourite student (priyasisya) 
of Thakkuraéribhavadeva. 

58 This commentary is called the Candrikā, and the Ncc (vol. 15, 12) reports that it is by 


HATHAYOGAS FLORUIT 469 


kāša*? and the Vajasaneytsamhita$? as well as a work on Dharmašāstra called 
the Dānadharmaprakriyās! and another on what appears to be Vaisesika phi- 
losophy the Vaisesikaratnamala.®? Some manuscript catalogues also attribute 
to a "Bhavadeva" a commentary called the Abhinavabhāsya on the Sandilya- 
sūtra, also known as the Bhaktimimamsasütra,8? and some other works,®* but 
the catalogues I have consulted do not provide enough biographic informa- 
tion to prove that this was the same Bhavadeva who composed the Yukta- 
bhavadeva. Nonetheless, it is clear that Bhavadeva was a scholar whose knowl- 
edge extended far beyond the theory and practice of yoga traditions. 


Bhavadeva, who was the son of Sanmisrasrīkrsņadeva and the disciple of Thakkura- 
bhavadeva. 

59 This commentary is called the Lila. The Ncc (vol. 4, 98) reports that it is by Bhavadeva, 
son of Krsnadeva of Mithila and pupil of Bhavadeva Thakkura. 

60 This commentary is called the Vyakhyanaratnamala. The NCC (vol. 28, 60) reports that it 
is by Bhavadeva of Mithila, son of Krsnadeva and disciple of Bhavadeva Thakkura. 

61  Danadharmaprakriyà was composed by Bhavadevabhatta, son of Krsnadevamisra (NCC 
vol. 9, 6) at the request of Rudradāsasresthin in 1636—1637 CE (NCC, vol. 16, 172). Kane (1930 
vol. 1, 560) points out that this work was by Bhavadeva, son of Krsnadeva of Mithila. In a 
latter volume (1962, vol. 5, part ii, 28), he attributes the Prayascittaprakarana to Bhavadev- 
abhatta. 

62 The ncc (vol. 32, 64) reports that the Vaisesikaratnamala was written by Bhavadeva Pan- 
dita, son of Krsnadevamisra and disciple of Bhavadeva Thakkura. This appears to be based 
on a sole manuscript at the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute (123 of 1881-1882). 

63  Initsentry on the commentary called the Abhinavabhāsya on the Sandilyasütra or Bhak- 
timīmāmsāsūtra (also called the Satasüti or Bhaktisūtra), the cc (vol. 15, 152) reports that 
this work is found in the manuscript libraries of the Oriental Institute in Baroda, the Pra- 
jitā Pathasala Mandala at Wai and the Sampürnananda library in Varanasi. The catalogues 
of the first two do not give any biographic information for Bhavadeva and I have not been 
able to consult catalogues of the Sampürnananda library (sB New DC X11 44408, 44416. ii. 
107900. 107911). 

64 Other works attributed to a Bhavadeva in the Ncc (vol. 16, 172) include the Yogasan- 
graha, the Vyaptivada and commentaries on the Yogadarpana, the Yogabindu, the Raghu- 
vamša (called the Subodhinī) and the Sadangarudra. Karl Potter's Encyclopedia of Indian 
Philosophies Bibliography (1983, vol. 1, 475) adds commentaries by a Bhavadeva (dated 
to 1650) on Bhavānanda's Kārakacakra, I$varakrsna's Sankhyakarika and the Paricalak- 
sana section of Gangeša's Tattvacintamani, as well as a work on Nyaya called the Anu- 
manaprakaranavyakhya. 


470 BIRCH 


3 The Regional Extent of Hathayoga's Literature on the Eve of 
Colonialism 


The compendiums of Godāvaramisra, Sivananda, Bhavadevamišra and Sunda- 
radeva endorsed the teachings of Hathayoga.® These works were part of a con- 
certed effort among some erudite Brahmins to make Hathayoga’s physical prac- 
tices an integral part of the Brahmanical view of yoga, much like the so-called 
“Yoga Upanisads" that were compiled in South India in the first half of the eigh- 
teenth century. Christian Bouy's work (1994) on these Upanisads informs us 
that the compiler liberally borrowed material from earlier Hatha- and Rājayoga 
texts, often presenting the physical practice as a way of purifying the mind that 
would then lead to the realization of vedantic truths. As Bouy (1994, 72) notes, 
the prominence of Hathayoga teachings in these Upanisads indicates that this 
type of yoga had come into vogue in vedantic milieus. He says that the inter- 
est of vedāntists in Hathayoga may have started in the fifteenth and sixteenth 
centuries, and then flourished in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. 

In addition to the Yoga Upanisads and the Upasanasarasangraha, which 
were examined by Bouy, the Yogasandhya and the Rajatarala are large exeget- 
ical works composed in South India that weave together Patafijalayoga and 
Hathayoga within a vedantic framework. The other compendiums discussed in 
this article support Bouy's observations and extend his hypothesis to the region 
of Northeast India. Godāvaramišra lived in what is now Orissa, Bhavadeva 
in Mithila and both Šivānanda and Sundaradeva in Varanasi. The vedāntic 
overtones in the works of these authors include references to the Upanisads 
and an emphasis on achieving the liberating gnosis of Brahman. Also, various 
prosopographic details associate them with Advaitavedanta. Godāvaramišra's 
father Balabhadra wrote a text called the Advaitacintàmani and he himself 
the Advaitadarpana,*® Sivananda mentions Adigankara in his lineage?" and, 
according to manuscript catalogues, Bhavadeva wrote a commentary on the 
Brahmasūtra. Unlike the Yoga Upanisads, their works explicitly cite Hathayoga 
texts. 


65 For information on Sundaradeva and his works, see Birch 2018a, 58—61. 

66 Yogacintāmaņi (ms. no. 220 of 1882—1883) f. 131v. 

67 Yogacintāmaņi p. 2: "Having bowed to Srivyasa, the ascetic Sankara, the teacher of the 
world, [my] teacher Sriramacandra, whose lotus feet are intense bliss, and all of the gods 
of yogins, the ascetic Šivānanda has written clearly the great Yogacintāmaņi, which had 
fallen into an ocean of various texts and has the power to explain everything" (Srivyasam 
yatisankaram bhavagurum šrīrāmacandram gurum sandranandapadambujan ca nikhi- 
làn natvā hi yogīšvarān | nānāgranthapayodhimadhyapatitam šrīvogacintāmaņim nih- 
Sesarthasamarthakam yatisivanandah karoti sphutam ||). 


HATHAYOGA'S FLORUIT 471 


In contrast to this, I am yet to locate any such compendium in Northwest 
India. However, some of the extended works on Hathayoga can be traced to this 
region, such as the Siddhāntamuktāvalī, the Hathapradīpikā with ten chapters 
and the Hathayogamafijari. These works, along with the Hathabhyasapaddhati 
in Maharashtra and Karnataka, are less scholarly and more likely influenced by 
practitioners of the time in which they were composed. 


4 Conclusion 


The flourishing of literature on Hathayoga in both North and South India from 
the sixteenth to eighteenth centuries was concomitant with a growing perva- 
siveness of references, over the same period, to Hathayoga in Sanskrit literature 
of various religions and philosophies.® The findings of this paper suggest that 
Hathayoga became more prevalent in literature composed during this period 
and that the Hathapradīpikā was instrumental in defining the techniques and 
structure of practice for this type of yoga. Moreover, distinct physical tech- 
niques that became closely associated with Hathayoga, such as non-seated 
āsanas and mudrās, had become integral to broader conceptions of yoga on 
the eve of colonialism. 

In the period following the Hathapradipika, it is possible to discern that 
the praxis and theory of Hathayoga developed in different ways as it became 
more widely disseminated. In scholarly circles of Northeast India, its codifi- 
cation took on some of the characteristics of the philosophical yogas, as it 


68 Beyond the texts I have mentioned above, the following literature of the sixteenth to eigh- 
teenth centuries also integrated hathayogic teachings. I mention here only a few exam- 
ples without detailed references, which will appear in a forthcoming publication. Exam- 
ples include the Purascaraņacandrikā (late-fifteenth century) and the Purascaranarnava 
(eighteenth century), two Saiva ritual compilations that incorporated verses on āsanas, 
some of which occur only in the Hathapradīpikā; the Merutantra, a relatively recent Šaiva 
work, which mentions Hathayoga in relation to pranayama; Ramatosana Bhattācārya's 
Pranatosini (1820 CE), which has numerous references to Hathayoga; Narayanatirtha's 
Yogasiddhāntacandrikā, a commentary on the Patafijala Yogasūtra, which integrates fif- 
teen yogas with Patafijali’s astariga format and defines Hathayoga as the auxiliaries of 
āsana and pranayama; Vijfianabhiksu's Sankhyasara, a philosophical treatise that men- 
tions both Hatha- and Rajayoga; Narahari's Bodhasāra, a philosophical compendium that 
has sections on Mantra-, Laya-, Hatha- and Rajayoga; the Bhāvanāpurusottama, a San- 
skrit drama in which a Kapalika mentions hathavidya as a ladder ascending to Rājayoga 
(in terms similar to those of the Hathapradipika); and the Vasisthamaharamayanatat- 
paryaprakāša, a commentary on the Yogavāsistha, which mentions both Hatha- and 
Rājayoga, etc. 


472 BIRCH 


was integrated with the Pataríjalayogasastra and Brahmanical sources. This 
development resulted in a more syncretic and sophisticated discourse around 
the physical techniques. The social background of the authors of these com- 
pendiums was diverse. Some were sannyasins, such as Šivānandasarasvatī and 
Šrīsadāšivanārāyaņabrahmacāri, whereas others identified themselves accord- 
ing to their professions, which included medicine, politics and astronomy (i.e., 
Sundaradeva, Godāvaramišra and Srinivasa, respectively). 

In contrast to the scholarly compendiums of the northeast, the extended 
works on Hathayoga that arose in the northwest of India retained the more 
praxis-orientated focus of the Hathapradīpikā, which they enlarged upon by 
adding more technigues and other auxiliaries, such as yama and niyama. 
Although not much is known of the authors of these works, renunciant tradi- 
tions in this region seemed reasonably active in producing manuals on yoga, 
such as the Hathayogamaīijarī and the Jogapradīpyakā, and monographic 
works, such as the Yogāsanamālā and the Yogāsana, whose content is related 
to the Hathapradīpikā and its extended texts. 

From the Amaraughaprabodha to the current day, Hathayoga has been dis- 
tinguished by physical methods of practice. In the early periodthe practice cen- 
tred on breath retentions with physical locks (mudrā), and it burgeoned over 
the centuries to include an array of complex postures, satkarma and mudras. 
Although these physical techniques were never particular to Hathayoga, the 
textual evidence suggests that after the sixteenth century Hathayoga became a 
dominant paradigm for the practice of physical yoga across most of the Indian 
subcontinent, and this paradigm was significantly shaped by the content of 
the Hathapradīpikā. As outlined in this article, the floruit of Hathayoga was 
a period in which its techniques proliferated, particularly in praxis-orientated 
manuals, and its literature diversified as authors of various backgrounds, most 
notably erudite Brahmins, attempted to expand and integrate it with other 
yogas and different religions. By the eighteenth century, this extensive liter- 
ary activity appears to have peaked, but the momentum behind it carried the 
notion of Hathayoga into the royal courts of Mysore and Jodhpur in the nine- 
teenth century? and placed it firmly at the centre of the revival of postural 
practice in the twentieth century.”° 


69 In the mid-nineteenth century, the Maharaja of Mysore, Mummadi Krsnaraja Wodeyar 
III, commissioned a royal compendium called the Sritattvanidhi, which had a chap- 
ter on āsanas that was based on the Hathābhyāsapaddhati (Birch 2018, 131-132). In the 
early nineteenth century, the Maharaja of Marwar had built two temples in Jodhpur (the 
Mahamandir and the Udai Mandir) with murals of eighty-four Siddhas in complex āsanas, 
many of which correspond to those in the Jogapradīpyakā (Būhnemann 2007, 102). 

70 Recent research is starting to reveal more premodern sources of the dsanas adopted by 


HATHAYOGA'S FLORUIT 473 
Acknowledgements 


I would like to thank Jacqueline Hargreaves for her comments on numerous 
drafts, and also Gudrun Bühnemann, Elizabeth de Michelis, Dominic Goodall, 
Shaman Hatley and Mark Singleton, who commented on earlier drafts. I’m par- 
ticularly grateful to James Mallinson for his detailed comments and for sharing 
unpublished research. My research for this paper was funded by the European 
Research Council (ERC) under the European Union's Horizon 2020 research 
and innovation programme (grant agreement No 647963). 


Abbreviations 


Ncc New Catalogus Catalogorum: An Alphabetical Register of Sanskrit and 
Allied Works and Authors. All Volumes. Madras: University of Madras, 
1968 onwards. 


References 


Primary Sources 

Aparoksānubhūti. Kamla Devi, ed. Aparoksanubhütih—Vidyaranyakrtaya Aparoksadī- 
pikākhyatīkayā Samvalitā. Allahabad: Akshayavata Praka$ana, 1988. 

Amanaska. See Birch 2013. 

Amaraughaprabodha. See Mallik 1954. 

Amrtasiddhi. Unpublished working edition by James Mallinson and Péter-Dániel 
Szántó for the Hatha Yoga Project, 2019. 

Anandakanda. S.V. Radhakrsnasastri, ed. Anandakanda. Tafijapura: Tafijapura Sarasva- 
timahalgranthalayanirvahaka-samiti, 1952. 

Kālacakratantra. Vi$vanatha Devašarma, ed. Kālacakratantrarāja. Calcutta: Asiatic 
Society, 1985. 

Kumbhakapaddhati. M.L. Gharote and P. Devnath, eds. Kumbhaka Paddhati of Raghu- 
vira: Science of Pranayama. Lonavla: Lonavla Yoga Institute, 2000. 

Garudapurāņa. Part 1. Bombay: Venkatesvara Steam Press (or reprint thereof), 1907. E- 


gurus who led the revival of physical yoga in the early twentieth century. For example, 
Krsņamācārya was inspired by the Hathabhyasapaddhati (Birch and Singleton 2019, 49— 
64) and Swāmī Šivānanda of Rishikesh borrowed the majority of the āsanas in his book 
Yoga Asanas (1934) from earlier sources, one of which dates to the mid-nineteenth century 
(Birch forthcoming). 


474 BIRCH 


text, Gottingen Register of Electronic Texts in Indian Languages. http://gretil.sub.uni 
-goettingen.de/gretil/1 sanskr/3_purana/garup1_u.htm. Accessed 1 January 2020. 

Guhyasamajatantra. Yukei Matsunaga, ed. Guhyasamajatantra. Osaka: Toho Shuppan 
Inc., 1978. 

Goraksasataka. Ms. No. R 7874 (IFP transcript T1095). A transcript of Ms. No. 2831(p), 
Government Oriental Manuscript Library, Madras (Chennai). 

Gherandasamhita. See Mallinson 2004. 

Jogapradīpikā. M.L. Gharote, ed. Jogapradīpikā. Jodhpur: Rajasthan Oriental Research 
Institute, 1999. 

Jogapradīpyakā. S. Mahešānanda, B.R. Šarmā, G.S. Sahaya and R.K. Bodhe, eds. Jogapra- 
dīpyakā of Jayatarama. Lonavla: Kaivalyadhama Srimanmadhava Yogamandira 
Samiti, 2006. 

Jyotsnā. S. Mahegananda, B.R. Sarma, G.S. Sahaya and R.K. Bodhe, eds. Brahmānan- 
dakrtà Hathapradīpikā Jyotsnā. Lonavla: Kaivalyadham Srimanmadhav Yogamandir 
Samiti, 2002. 

Tattvabinduyoga. Ms. No. 664 (1883-1884), Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, 
Pune. 

Dattātrayayogašāstra. Unpublished edition by James Mallinson (with the help of Alexis 
Sanderson, Jason Birch and Péter Szántó) for the Hatha Yoga Project, 2019. 

Dharmaputrikā. Yogi Naraharinatha, ed. Sivadharma Pasupatimatam Sivadharmama- 
hasastram Pašupatināthadaršanam. Kathmandu, 1998. 

Pātanjalayogašāstra. Kāšinātha Šāstrī Agase, ed. Vācaspatimišraviracitatīkā-samvali- 
tavyāsabhāsyasametāni pātaijalayogasūtrāņi, tathā bhojadevaviracitarajamartand- 
ābhidhavrttisametāni pātarījalayogasūtrāņi. sūtrapāthasūtravarņānukramasūcībh- 
yam ca sanāthīkrtāni. Ānandāšrama Sanskrit Series, no. 47. Pune: Ānandāšramamu- 
draņālaye, 1904. 

Purašcaraņacandrikā. NGMPP A42/5, National Archives of Kathmandu, Nepal. 

Purašcaraņārņava. Pratapasimha Sahadeva and Muralīdhara Jha, eds. Purascaryār- 
ņava: a Treatise Dealing with Theory and Practice of Tantric Worship. Delhi: Chauk- 
hamba Sanskrit Pratishthan, 1985. 

Prānatosiņī. Ramatosana Bhatta and Saumyānanda Natha, eds. Pranatosinitantra. Cal- 
cutta: Nababharata Pābalisārsa, 1991. 

Bodhasara. J. Cover, G. Cover, and K.V. Mande, eds. Bodhasara: an Eighteenth Century 
Sanskrit Treasure by Narahari. Charleston, S.C.: CreateSpace, 2010. 

Bhāvanāpurusottama of Ratnakhetasrinivasadiksita. Siromani S. Swaminatha Sastri, 
ed. Bhāvanāpurusottamam. Tatijāvūr: Sarasvatīmahālaya Nirvāhakasamiti, 1979. 

Mandalabrahmanopanisat. Pandit A. Mahadeva Sastri, ed. Yoga Upanisads with the 
Commentary of Sri Upanisadbrahmayogin. Madras: The Adyar Library and Research 
Centre, 1968. 

Matangaparamesvaratantra. N.R. Bhatt, ed. Matangapāramšvarāgama, avec le com- 


HATHAYOGAS FLORUIT 475 


mentaire de Bhatta Rāmakaņtha. 2 volumes. Pondicherry: Institut Frangais d'Indolo- 
gie, 1977—1982. 

Merutantra. Paņdita Raghunāthašāstri, ed. Merutantra. Bombay: Srivenkatesvara 
Steam Press, 1908. E-text of the Muktabodha Digital Library. http://muktabodha.org. 

Yajfiavalkyasmrti. The Sastris at the Santuramatmajasundaramalakheda, eds. Maharsi- 
varyasriyogiyajnavalkyasisyaviracita Yajnavalkyasmrtih Vijfianesvara viracitamitāk- 
saravyakhyasamalankrta. Mumbai: $rivenkate$vara Mudranayantralaya, 1919. 

Yuktabhavadeva. See Gharote et al. 2002. 

Yoga Upanisads. Pandit A. Mahadeva Sastri, ed. Yoga Upanisads with the Commentary 
of Sri Upanisadbrahmayogin. Madras: The Adyar Library and Research Centre, 1968. 

Yogacintamani of Godavaramisra. Ms. No. 220 (1882-1883), Bhandarkar Oriental 
Research Institute, Pune. 

Yogacintamani of Sivanandasarasvati. Haridas Sarma, ed. Calcutta: Calcutta Oriental 
Press, n.d. 

Yogacintamani of Šivānandasarasvatī. Ms. No. 3537, Scindia Oriental Research Institute, 
Ujjain, India. 

Yogacintamani of Sivanandasarasvati. Ms. No. 6922, Panjab University Library, Lahore, 
Pakistan. 

Yogatārāvalī. Swami Sridayananda Sastri, ed. Srimacchankarabhagavatpadaviracita 
Yogataravali. Varanasi: Varanaseya Samskrta Samsthana, 1982. 

Yogaparicasika. Ms. No. 29917 (begins at f. 7v), Sarasvati Bhavan Library, Sampurnanand 
Sanskrit University, Varanasi. 

Yogabija. Rāmalāla Srivastava, ed. Yogabija of Gorakhanātha. Gorakhapur: Gorakha- 
nath Mandir, 1982. 

Yogamārgaprakāšikā. Giradhara Šāstri, ed. Srīmahāntayugaladāsanirmitayogamārga- 
prakāšikā. Bombay: Srīvenkatešvara Steam Press, 1904. 

Yogayajnavalkya. Sri Prahlad Divanji, ed. Yogayajriavalkya: A Treatise on Yoga as Taught 
by Yogi Yajriavalkya. B.B.R.A. Society’s Monograph, no. 3. Bombay: 1954. 

Yogasandhyā. Gangavisnu Srikrsnadasa, ed. Yogasandhyā bhāsātīkāsahitā |(sādhana 
karanevalomko amrtakī lata) vedašāstrasampanna dharmamūrti ériyuta jagannātha 
caitanya brahmacarijike caranaravindanuragi astanga yogamem kusala srisadasiva 
narayana brahmacārī nirmita. Mumbai: Laksmīvenkatešvara Steam Press, 1954. 

Yogasarasangraha. 1FP transcript T859 (based on D4373). E-text of the Muktabodha 
Digital Library. http://muktabodha.org. 

Yogasiddhāntacandrikā. Pandita Ratna Gopala Bhatta, ed. Yogadar$anam with a Com- 
mentary Called the Yogasiddhāntacandrikā of Narayanatirtha. Benares: Vidya Vilasa 
Press, 1910. 

Yogāsana ( jaina). A photocopy (R635Y8, 15294) held at the library of the Kaivalyad- 
hama Yoga Institute. A stamp on a folio indicates the Rajasthan Pracya Vidya Prati- 
sthan, Bikaner. 


476 BIRCH 


Yogāsanamālā. A photocopy (R635Y8) at the library of the Kaivalyadhama Yoga Insti- 
tute, Lonavla. 

Rājatarala. Ms. No. 72330, Adyar Library and Research Centre, Chennai. 

Rājayogāmrtasāra. Ms. No. 22/211, Bharat Itihās Samšodak Mandal, Pune. 

Vasisthasamhitā. Philosophico-Literary Research Department, ed. Vasistha Samhitā 
(Yogakanda). Revised edition. Lonavla: The Kaivalyadhama S.M.Y.M. Samiti, 2005. 

Vivekamartanda. Ms. No.4110 at the Central Library, Baroda. 

Vivekamukura. Padma Padmanabhan, ed. “Vivekamukura of Nrsimha Bharati (Edited 
with Introduction, Notes and Index)” The Adyar Library Bulletin 78—79 (2014—2015): 
617—665. 

Šāradātilakatantra. Arthur Avalon, ed. Sarada-Tilaka-Tantra. Delhi: Motilal Banarsi- 
dass, 1996. 

Šivasamhitā. James Mallinson, ed. The Šiva Samhitā: A Critical Edition and an English 
Translation. Woodstock: YogaVidya.com, 2007 

Sivasvarodaya. Swami Maheshananda, et al., eds. Sivasvarodayah: A Critical Edition— 
English Version. Lonavla: Kaivalyadhama S.M.Y.M. Samiti, 2015. 

Sritattvanidhi. The folios on dsana of a manuscript of this work at the Mysore Palace 
were photographed and published in Sjoman 1996. 

Sacitra Vyavaharika Yoga athava Samadhi-Marga. Panduranga Gopalabala Mahajana, 
ed. Sacitra Vyavaharika Yoga athava Samadhi-Marga. Pune, Mumbai: Pustake 
Milanyace Thikana (undated). 

Satkarmasangraha. See Harshe 1970. 

Sankhyasara. Badari Narayana Paticolī, ed. Sākhyasāra: Hindi anuvada sahita. Delhi: 
Paficoli Pustakamala Prakasana Samiti, 1986. 

Siddhāntamuktāvalī. Catalogued under the title Hathayogapradipika. Ms. no. 6756, 
Rajasthan Oriental Research Institute, Jodhpur. 

Hathatattvakaumudi. See Gharote et al. 2007. 

Hathapradipika. Swami Digambaraji and Pt. Raghunatha Shastri Kokaje, eds. Hatha- 
pradīpikā of Svātmārāma. Lonavla: Kaivalyadhama S.M.Y.M. Samiti, 1998. 

Hathapradipika. K. Kunjunni Raja, ed. Hathapradipika of Svatmarama with the Com- 
mentary Jyotsnà Brahmananda. Madras: Adyar Library and Research Centre, 1972.7! 

Hathapradipika (with 10 chapters). See Gharote et al. 2006. 

Hathayogamaīijarī. Hatha Yoga Manjari. Lonavla: Kaivalyadhama S.M.Y.M. Samiti, 
2006. 

Hatharatnāvalī. See Gharote et al. 2002. 

Hathasanketacandrikā. Ms. No. B220, Oriental Research Institute, University of Mysore. 

Hathasanketacandrikā. Ms. No. 2244, Man Singh Pustak Prakash Library, Jodhpur. 


71 Verse numbers are cited from this edition. 


HATHAYOGA'S FLORUIT 477 


Hathasamhitā. Pam. Narayanaradha Agnihotri, ed. Hathayoga Samhita, Bhasanuvada 
sahita. Varanasi: Sribharatadharma Press, 1921. 

Hathābhyāsapaddhati. Catalogued under the title Asanabandha. Ms. No. 46/440, 
Bharat Itihās Samsodhak Mandal, Pune. 


Secondary Sources 

Birch, Jason. 2013. The Amanaska: King of All Yogas. A Critical Edition and Annotated 
Translation with a Monographic Introduction. Ph.D. thesis, University of Oxford. 

Birch, Jason. 2014. “Rajayoga: The Reincarnations of the King of all Yogas.” International 
Journal of Hindu Studies 17, 3 (2013): 401-444. 

Birch, Jason. 2015. “The Yogataravali and the Hidden History of Yoga.” Namarupa 20: 
4-13. https://www.academia.edu/12099338/ (accessed 23 December 2017). 

Birch, Jason. 2018. “The Proliferation of Asana in Late Mediaeval India.” In Yoga in Trans- 

formation: Historical and Contemporary Perspectives on a Global Phenomenon, edited 
by Karl Baier, Philipp A. Maas and Karin Preisendanz, 101-180. Góttingen: V&R Uni- 
press (Vienna University Press). 

Birch, Jason. 2018a. "Premodern Yoga and Ayurveda: Preliminary Remarks on their 
Shared Terminology, Theory and Praxis." History of Science in South Asia 6: 1-83. doi: 
10.18732/hssa.v6io.25. 

Birch, Jason. 2019. "The Amaraughaprabodha: New Evidence on the Manuscript Trans- 
mission of an Early Work on Hatha—and Rājayoga” Journal of Indian Philos 47: 
947—977. doi: 10.1007/s10781-019-09401-5. 

Birch, Jason. Forthcoming. “The Confluence of Hathayoga, Tapas and Modern Postural 
Practice: Distinct Regional Collections of Asanas on the Eve of Colonialism.’ Journal 
of Yoga Studies. 

Birch, Jason and Singleton, Mark. 2019. “The Yoga of the Hathabhyasapaddhati: Hatha- 
yoga on the Cusp of Modernity.’ Journal of Yoga Studies 2: 1—69. doi: https://doi.org/ 
10.34000/JoYS.2019.V2 

Bouy, Christian. 1994. Les Natha-Yogin et Les Upanisads. Paris: Diffusion De Boccard. 

Bühnemann, Gudrun. 2007. Eighty-four Asanas in Yoga: A Survey of Traditions (with 
Illustrations). New Delhi: D.K. Printworld. 

De Michelis, Elizabeth. 2004. A History of Modern Yoga: Patanjali and Western Esoteri- 
cism. London: Continuum. 

Gharote, M.L. 1999. See Jogapradipyaka. 

Gharote, M.L. and Jha, V.K. 2002. Yuktabhavadeva of Bhavadeva Misra. Lonavla: Lonavla 
Yoga Institute. 

Gharote, M.L. and P. Devnath. 2006. Hathapradīpikā (with 10 Chapters) of Svatmarama: 
with Yogaprakasika, a Commentary by Balakrsna. Lonavla: Lonavla Yoga Institute. 


Gharote, M.L., P. Devnath, and VK. Jha. 2002a. Hatharatnāvalīof Šrīnivāsayogī. Lonavla: 
Lonavla Yoga Institute. 


478 BIRCH 


Gharote, M.L. 2007. Hathatattvakaumudi: A Treatise on Hathayoga by Sundaradeva. 
Lonavla: Lonavla Yoga Institute. 

Gharote, M.L., Jha V.K., Devnath, P., and Sakhalkar, S.B. 2006a. Encyclopaedia of Tradi- 
tional Asanas. Lonavla: Lonavla Yoga Institute. 

Harshe, R.G. 1970. Satkarmasangrahah. R.G. Lonavla: Yoga-Mīmāmsā Prakāsana. 

Isaacson, Harunaga and Sferra, Francesco. 2014. The Sekanirdeša of Maitreyanātha 
(Advayavajra) with the Sekanirdesaparijika of Rāmapāla: Critical Edition of the San- 
skrit and Tibetan Texts with English Translation and Reproduction of the Mss. Napoli: 
Universita degli studi di Napoli “L Orientale." 

Kuvalayananda, Swami. 1933 [1931]. Asanas. Revised edition. Bombay: Popular Praka- 
shan. 

Mallik, Kalyani. 1954. Siddha-Siddhanta-Paddhati and Other Works of the Natha Yogis. 

Pune: Poona Oriental Book House. 

Mallinson, James. 2004. The Gheranda Samhita: The Original Sanskrit and an English 

Translation. Woodstock: YogaVidya.com. 

Mallinson, James. 2014. “The Yogis’ Latest Trick.” Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society of 

Great Britain & Ireland 24 (1): 165—180. 


Mallinson, James. 2016. “Saktism and Hathayoga” In Goddess Traditions in Tantric Hin- 
duism: History, Practice and Doctrine, edited by Bjarne Wernicke Olesen, 109-140. 
Oxford: Routledge. 

Mallinson, James. 2020. “The Amrtasiddhi: Hathayoga’s Tantric Buddhist Source Text.” 
In Šaivism and the Tantric Traditions: Essays in Honour of Alexis G.J.S. Sanderson, 
edited by Dominic Goodall, Shaman Hatley, Harunaga Isaacson, and Srilata Raman. 
Leiden: Brill. 

Mallinson, James. Forthcoming, 2020. “Early Hathayoga” In Religious Practice, The 
[Oxford] History to Hinduism, edited by Gavin Flood. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press. 

Powell, Seth. 2018. “Etched in Stone: Sixteenth-century Visual and Material Evidence 
of Saiva Ascetics and Yogis in Complex Non-seated Asanas at Vijayanagara” Journal 
of Yoga Studies 1: 45-106. https://journalofyogastudies.org/index.php/JoYS/article/ 
view/2018.v1.Powell.EtchedinStone. Accessed 14 November 2019. 

Sanderson, Alexis. 2001. "History through Textual Criticism in the study of Šai- 
vism, the Paficaratra and the Buddhist Yoginitantras.” In Les Sources et le temps. 
Sources and Time, edited by F. Grimal, 1-47. Publications du département d'Indo- 
logie 91. Pondicherry: Institut Français de Pondichéry/ École française d' Extrême- 
Orient. 

Sanderson, Alexis. 2007. "The Saiva Exegesis of Kashmir" In Mélanges tantrigues à la 

mémoire d’ Hélène Brunner/Tantric Studies in Memory of Hélène Brunner, edited by 

Dominic Goodall and André Padoux, 231-442, 551-582 (bibliography). Pondicherry: 

Institut Francais de Pondichéry/École francaise d' Extréme-Orient 


HATHAYOGAS FLORUIT 479 


Sanderson, Alexis. 2014. "The Saiva Literature” Journal of Indological Studies (Kyoto) 24 
& 25 (2012—2013): 1-113. 

Sarde, Vijaya. 2015. "Archaeological Signatures of the Nath Cult: A Study of the Yogic 
Postures and Rituals Depicted on the Brahmanath Temple at Parunde, District 
Pune” Journal of Multidisciplinary Studies in Archaeology, 3: 232—254. 

Sarde, Vijaya. 2017. ““Yoga on Stone’: Sculptural Representation of Yoga on Mahudi Gate 
at Dabhot in Gujarat.” Journal of Multidisciplinary Studies in Archaeology 5: 656—675. 

Singleton, Mark. 2010. Yoga Body: The Origins of Modern Posture Practice. New York: 
Oxford University Press. 

Sjoman, Norman. 1996. The Yoga Tradition of the Mysore Palace. New Delhi: Abhinav 
Publications. 

Srikrsnavallabhacarya. 2001. srimanmaharsipravarapatanjalipranitam yogadaršanam 
Srimaddarsanikaparicananasaddarsanacaryanavyanyayacarya-sankhyayogaveda- 
ntamimamsatirthapanditasrikrsnavallabhacaryaviracitena vedantatirthasankhya- 
yogaratnapanditasrisvetavaikunthasastrisvaminarayana-samsodhitena bhasyena 
sahitam tathā tarkavedantamimamsasankhyayoga-tirthapanditasrinarayanacara- 
nasastrisvaminarayanasamsodhitena—panditasrikrsnavallabhacaryasvami-nara- 
yanaviracitena panditapravarabhojarajakrtarajamartandakhyavrtteh kiraņena sa- 
manvitam. Varanasi: Caukhamba Vidyabhavana, 2001. 

Thangaswami, R. 1980. Advaita-Vedanta Literature: A Bibliographical Survey. Madras: 
University of Madras. 


PART 5 


Art and Architecture 


CHAPTER 20 
The Early Šaiva Matha: Form and Function 


Libbie Mills 


We should begin by determining what we think a matha to be in the early Saiva 
context. In the seventh and eighth centuries, mathas began to receive royal 
patronage. By the ninth and tenth centuries mathas collected taxes and agri- 
cultural profits (Sears 2014, 6). In the later period and in the south, mathas 
come to be a place for pilgrims passing through, or an institution for profes- 
sional adepts, a place one might abide in ona hereditary basis. There is a rise in 
endowments for mathas in the eleventh and twelfth centuries, with the head of 
the matha perhaps being the rajaguru, the royal guru, of the dominion, hence 
a figure of political importance (Nandi 1987, 194—195). 

But the matha of the earlier Saiva world is at base something simpler. It is 
a place for an initiate to stay in for an extended period for the purposes of 
study, as an asramin. It is housing for initiated students, with a guru offering 
teaching. Brunner-Lachaux (1998, 380), describing the situation as given in the 
Somasambhupaddhati, tells us: "Celui dont Somasambhu parle (et qu’ il nomme 
asrama en SP1, p. 316) est d'abord un lieu où vivent des initiés de différents 
grades, sous la conduite matérielle et spirituelle d'un guru.” This was not a shel- 
ter for itinerant ascetics, nota locus of political power, but both a residence and 
a school for initiates or, in Sanderson's (1988, 681) terms, a lodge for cult lineage 
members. 

Next, let us look more closely at these matha residents. The residents are 
initiated asramins assigned, as Brunner-Lachaux described, into four levels 
according to their type of initiation. The samayin has received the samaya 
diksa, the initiation for the pledge-holder or neophyte, and is qualified to study 
the teachings. The putraka has received the nirvana dīksā and will thus be lib- 
erated at the moment of death. The ācārya has received the consecration for 
officiants (acarya abhiseka) and is qualified to teach and give diksa. And the 
sadhaka has received the sadhaka abhiseka and is qualified to practice rituals 
in order to obtain supernatural powers. 

As we see stated at Mohacürottara 4.243, all these initiates, at whatever their 
level, are further regarded as being veritable lirigas, “markers” or sacred images, 
of Siva. They are mobile ( jarigama) lingas, as opposed to the fixed (ajarigama or 
sthavara) lingas which are images installed permanently in a temple. To estab- 
lish either is an act of great piety: 


© LIBBIE MILLS, 2020 | DOI:10.1163/9789004432802 022 


This is an open access chapter distributed under the terms of the CC BY-NC 4.0 license. 


484 MILLS 


samsthāpya sthāvaram lingam prāsāde yad bhavet phalam 
tat phalam labhate vidvān mathe samsthāpya jangamam 243 


The reward that a wise man gains from establishing a mobile image 
(jaūgamam lingam) [i.e. an ascetic] in a matha is the same as the reward 
that he gains from establishing a fixed image (sthavaram lingam) in a tem- 
ple. (243) 


Having found the residents to be initiates of different types, all considered to 
be mobile /irigas, let us think about their initiation into that role, and why one 
might build a matha for them. 

If the adept is a mobile liga, is, then, his dīksā (initiation) equivalent to 
the pratisthā (installation) of an immobile liiga, an image in a temple? The 
matter has been considered by, among others, Hikita (2005, 193), and Mori 
(2005, 232); the latter observes that pratistha brings the deity into a fixed 
linga, while diksa does the same thing into a mobile one. As Mori (2005, 202— 
203) notes from the twelfth-century Vajravali of Abhayakaragupta: “and [the 
ācārya] carries out also the installation of an image, etc., like the installation 
of a disciple (sisyapratistham iva pratimadipratistham kuryāt)” Mori goes on 
to demonstrate that “in actuality there are many correspondences between the 
installation and consecration ceremonies.” Given that dīksā (initiation of an 
adept) and pratistha (installation of an image) are parallel processes, the place 
of installation, the home for the initiate, is important, just as the temple, the 
shelter for a fixed image, is a place of consequence. 

If the place has consequence, then there should be a reward from its estab- 
lishment. An immobile linga is installed in a private shrine for the benefit of the 
commissioning sadhaka. What of the installation of a mobile liga, an adept, in 
a matha? Who benefits from that? What is the incentive? As we saw above, the 
Mohacurottara states at 4.243 that the installation of a mobile liga in a matha 
brings merit to the patron who commissions and funds it. So we here move 
on from the idea of installation of an immobile liga in the private shrine, for 
the benefit of the sadhaka patron, to something else, to a liga that can move 
about, but must still be installed and housed, bringing reward to the patron 
who houses it. 

In looking for accounts of this housing for adepts, I am drawing upon six 
early Šaiva records, the same six on which Professor Sanderson worked with me 
some two decades ago (fora study published recently as Mills 2019): the Kirana, 
Devyamata, Pingalāmata, Brhatkālottara, Mayasamgraha, and Mohacürottara. 
I will go through what we can learn about the matha from these texts. We will 
find the most useful material in the Mohacurottara (1oth- or nth-century) and 


THE EARLY ŠAIVA MATHA 485 


Devyamata (in which the prasadalaksana material shows signs of being sub- 
stantially earlier; see Mills 2019). 


1 Housing in General 


To begin, I should give a very brief outline of how these texts describe building 
plans for houses in general: normal housing, not mathas in particular. The texts 
give accounts of the elevation, the vertical design, that are easily followed. But 
descriptions of the plan, the horizontal design, rely on some basic background 
knowledge, which I now supply. 

Measurements are made in Aastas, hands, a measure from the elbow to the 
tip of the middle finger of the patron. Those measurements are checked for 
their aya. The ayas are formulae used to test measurements, to ensure that they 
are suitable for use. A common presentation is of six sets of ayas: aya, vyaya, 
rksa, yoni, vāra, and tithi or amša. There are 12 ayas in a list of items beginning 
with siddhi; 10 vyayas in a list of items beginning with sikhara; 27 rksas in a list 
of the naksatras; 8 yonis in the list of 8 that is dhvaja, etc.; 7 varas in a list of the 
days of the week; 3o tithis in a list of the lunar days in a month; and g amšas in 
a list of items beginning with taskara. In each list, some members are regarded 
as auspicious, some as inauspicious. 

The measurement to be tested is multiplied by a set number. The product of 
that multiplication is then divided by the number of items in the aya set. The 
remainder is checked against the corresponding aya in the set to determine 
whether the measurement is suitable or not. Let me give an example: in the 
yoni aya list, the listed yonis are numbered from 1 to 8. Dhvaja (flag) is 1, dhūma 
(smoke) is 2, simha (lion) is 3, Svan (dog) is 4, vrsabha (bull) is 5, khara (donkey) 
is 6, gaja (elephant) is 7 and khaga (bird) is 8. The yonis with an odd number 
are regarded as auspicious. Those with an even number are considered inauspi- 
cious. A measurement to be checked against the yoni ayas is multiplied by the 
number 3. The product is then divided by the number of yonis, 8. If the remain- 
der is 1, the yoni aya for that measurement is dhvaja, which is auspicious; if it 
is 2, the yoni aya for that measurement is dhūma, which is inauspicious, and 
so on. Each yoni aya, from dhvaja onward, is associated with a planet, and also 
with the cardinal and intermediate directions from the east onwards in a clock- 
wise direction, according to the positions assigned to those planets. Below, we 
will see these associations used to indicate directions in house construction. 

Moving now from measurements to design, the plan for the construction 
is always in the form of a square. That square is divided into a grid of cells 
(padas), with the same number of cells along each side. In the pattern that we 


486 


MILLS 


1 Brahmā 16 Jaya 31 Dauvārika 
2 Marīcaka 17 Mahendra 32 Sugrīva 
3 Vivasvant 18 Sūrya 33 Puspadanta 
4 Mitra 19 Satya 34 Pracetas 
5 Prthivīdhara 20 Bhrša 35 Asura 
6 Āpa 21 Antariksa 36 Sosa 
7 Āpavatsa 22 Agni 37 Roga 
8 Savitr 23 Pūsan 38 Vāyu 
9 Sāvitri 24 Vitatha 39 Nāga 
10 Indra 25 Grhaksata 40 Mukhya 
11 Indrajit 26 Yama 41 Bhallāta 
12 Rudra 27 Gandharva 42 Soma 
13 Rudradāsa 28 Bhrnga 43 Rgi 
14 Īša 29 Mrga 44 Aditi 
15 Parjanya 30 Pitr 45 Diti 
N 
38 | 39 | 40 | 41 | 42 | 43 | 44 | 45 | 14 
37 13 15 
5 
36 12 16 
35 17 
34 4 1 18 
33 19 
32 10 20 
3 
31 11 21 
30 | 29 | 28 | 27 | 26 | 25 | 24 | 23 | 22 


FIGURE 20.1 


gapatala) 


The 9 x9 plan, Brhatkālottara, chapter 112 (the vastuya- 


THE EARLY ŠAIVA MATHA 487 


Isa Parjanya Jaya* Mahendra * Sūrya Satya * Bhrša Kha Agni 
Krttikā Pūrva- Jyesthā Visakha Punarvasu Aslesa Hasta Ārdrā Anurādhā 
bhaya phālgunī vijaya ST pratāpakrt dharma kalaha Stinya daha 
stricalatva 

Diti Püsan * 
Uttarabhadra Visākhā 
hrāsa sukha 
Aditi Vitatha 
Dhanistha Revati 
āyuhksaya duhkha 
Šravaņa Grhaksata 
Šravaņa Mūla 
dainya mrtyu 
Soma * Yama 
Mrgašīrska Bharaņī 
sampatkara ksaya 
Bhalvāta * Gandharva * 
Abhijit Pūrvāsādhā 
dhana susilatà 
Mukhya * Bhrngadeva 
Uttarabhadra Asvini 
-ka dainya 
pradhānatva 
Nāga Mrga 
Svāti Citrā 
kandarpa ašrī 
Anila Roga Sosa Asura Varuna * Puspadantaka | Sugrīva * Dauvāri Pitr 
Āsādha Tisya Asvini Sata(bhisaj) Rohini * Pūrvāsādhā Pūrva- Maghā 
uccátana roga Sosa Arthaksaya Sasyada Uttara- krsisaukhya bhadraka andyusya 

phālgunī vratabandha 

vrddhida 


FIGURE 20.2 Deity, naksatra, and consequence of door position. Brhatkālottara, prāsāda- 
laksanapatala 238c—243b. Positions with an asterisk are those recommended 
in 243c-245b 


will see here, the pattern for the construction of housing, as opposed to tem- 
ples or funerary grounds or other things, there are 9 cells along each side of the 
square, producing a grid of 81 cells in total. See figure 203 as an example from 
the Brhatkalottara of such a configuration. Once these padas have been laid 
out, deities are installed in them. In the most common pattern 45 deities are 
installed. 32 of those deities are placed in the 32 padas around the outer edges 
of the plan, and 13 deities are placed inside that framework, with Brahma at 


488 MILLS 


the very centre. When building houses, particular attention is paid to the con- 
seguences of a doorway placed at any of the 32 padas around the periphery. 
See figure 20.2 for an example of an account of doorway conseguences, again 
from the Brhatkālottara. 

This fundamental 9-by-9-part deity map is used as the basis for plans of 
greater or lesser complexity. For housing, we will see descriptions of three types 
of design. 


2 Type x: The 9-by-9 pura 


The most involved, which I will call type 1, is the design for a 9-by-9-part pura, a 
residential complex for a community and its lead figure. That lead figure might 
be a king or a lesser noble, an important functionary such as a general, or a 
guru. Other members of the community and all the functions of community 
life are arranged on the 81 cells of the 9-by-9 plan just described, with careful 
specifications as to what should be placed in each cell of the periphery in par- 
ticular. 

Here is an account of a type 1 complex from the Mayasamgraha, 5.156159 
and 181-187 (between verses 159 and 181, the text digresses to describe manda- 
pas and column types): 


puri và devagarbhāyām nive$o vo nigadyate 
matalviskambhamanena krtasimni mahitale 156 
sankvadina grhanisapadadini prakalpayet 

tatraise japahomarcadhamopaskarananvitam 157 
parjanye sarvavadyani? vidheyani vipascita 
snanarghasadhanam vastu jayante marubhrnmukhe? 158 
traye pratoli saddvarakapatargalasobhita 

mandapas ca vibhūtyartham geyanatyadisiddhaye 159 


bhrsāditritaye kuryāt pakasthanam yathepsitam 

pūsņi bhojanabhandani vitathe salilaérayah 181 
dhanuhkhadgasarādīni vidadhyāt tu grhaksate 

yame samyaminām sthānam ātmālokanasiddhaye 182 


1 156c mata | em.; matetyādi C; mano A 
2 158a °vadyani | C; "pākāni A 
3 158d*bhrn" ] C; °tvan A 


THE EARLY ŠAIVA MATHA 489 


gandharve gayakasthanam bhrnge vyakhyanasamsrayah* 
snanadhama mrgasthane kone $aucagrham tatah 183 
matham va vipulam kuryad grhaksatacatustaye 
tāmbūladantakāsthādidhāma dauvārike* hitam 184 
sugrīve puspadante ca pracetasi ca bhojanam 
abhyagatasrayam kuryad vidvān asura$osayoh 185 
musalolūkhalakumbhašilāyantrādikam ruji 
gandhasthānam gandhavahe puspāyanam ahitraye 186 
somadvaye košagrham vidyādhāmāditidvaye 
brahmādisu padesv antar amaralayamandapah® 187 


This record lists a place for worship at Isa; music at Parjanya; ritual bathing 
and offering at Jayanta; a gateway at Indra, Surya and Satya (marubhrnmukhe 
traye); the kitchen at Bhrša, Antariksa and Agni (bhrsaditritaye); eating vessels 
at Pūsan; a water tank at Vitatha; a store room at Grhaksata; a place for ascetics 
to achieve contemplation of the self (samyaminam sthanam ātmālokanasid- 
dhaye) at Yama; singers at Gandharva; a place for teaching the šāstras (vyakhya- 
nasamsrayah) at Bhrnga; bathing at Mrga; toilets at Pitr (kone); betel, etc., at 
Dauvarika; food storage at Sugriva, Puspadanta and Pracetas; a room for visitors 
at Asura and Sosa; tools at Roga (ruji); perfumes at Vayu (gandhavahe); flowers 
at Naga, Mukhya and Bhalvata (ahitraye); the treasury at Soma and Rgi (soma- 
dvaye); and a school (vidyadhama) at Aditi and Diti (aditidvaye). Within this 
framework, at Brahma, etc., are a temple and mandapa. At Grhaksata, Yama, 
Gandharva and Bhrnga, a matha is introduced as an alternative at 184ab. 


3 Type 2: The 5-by-5 nandyavarta / nandikavarta 


A second design, somewhat less elaborate, is termed the nandyavarta or nandi- 
kavarta. This serves as a simpler residence to house higher-ups—nobility, army 
generals, and gurus—and their households. In this case, laid over the funda- 
mental 9-by-9-part deity map is a building design of 5 parts by 5 parts, with 
spacing between chambers that produces an array of nine chambers in total, 
or eight if the central position is left undesignated. Each of the eight or nine 
chambers is assigned a function. See figure 20.3 for some examples of these 5- 
by-5 designs. 


4 183b °samsrayah ] em.; °samsraye A 
5 184d dauvārike | em.; daurike A 
6 187d mandapah ] C; mandalam A 


490 


PEE 
Z| 


IE 8 
Heme 
KA N 


C) chamber 


nandyāvarta nandyāvarta nandyāvarta 
Mayasamgraha 5.202- Brhatkālottara prāsādalak- Kiraņa 19.15—17b 
206b saņapatala 218—221 

1 shrine shrine shrine 

2 assembly assembly assembly 

3 kitchen kitchen kitchen 

4 sleeping guarters sleeping guarters sleeping guarters 

5 lavatory lavatory weaponry 

6 dining hall cow shed dining hall 

7 treasury treasury treasury 

8 tool storage granary / tool storage granary 

9 king’s quarters 


FIGURE 20.3 


The nandyavarta/nandikavarta set of nine chambers 


MILLS 


Take for example the description of a type 2 design from Pingalamata 


10.96c-114b: 


astasalayutam dhanyam nandikavartam’ ucyate 


ayacakram vibhajyadau salasadhanahetukam 


pūrve tu šrīgrham kuryad dhvajayena vipascite 


96cd 


97 


yamye šayyāgrham proktam simhayena vijanatah 


pascime bhojanam geham vrsayena® vidur budhāh 98 


nyāsam grhottare kuryad gajayena na samsayah 


dhümayena prakartavyam pākam dahanagocare? 99 


pāyudam pitarasthe tu $vanayena na samsayah 


7 96d nandikavartam | AC; vandikavarttam B 
8 98d vrsāyena | BC; vrsayena A 
9 99d dahana” ] AC; hadahana B : °gocare | BC; °gocaram A 


THE EARLY ŠAIVA MATHA 


10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20 
21 


dhanyadiksodanam geham vāyavyām rasabhena tu 100 
yagamandapa aišānyām dhvanksayena tu sundari 
munitārākareņaiva rudras tridaša eva ca 101 
daSapaficakarenaiva dasasaptadikchaktikam 
ekavimšatkareņaiva dhvajayam pūrvato bhavet 102 
caturasram samantat tu kartavyam Srigrhottamam!° 


tatra sthane sada bhadre!! srimantraih saha samyutah!? 103 


$riyam tatra likhet!? saksac chrigrham tena cocyate 
ekona!vimSahastena purvapa$cayatam!? bhavet 104 
daSasaptakarenaiva vistaram daksinottaram 

simhayam ca bhavet tena daksine Sayanagrayah'® 105 
daSapaficakarenaiva sadirgham daksinottaram 
rudrasamkhyakarenaiva vistaram pürvapa$cimam 106 
vrsayam ca bhavet tena pa$cime bhojanāšrayah 
trayodašakareņaiva purvapascayatam kuru 107 
rudrasamkhyākareņaiva daksiņottaravistaram 

gajayam jāyate tena bhāņdāgārottareņa tu 108 
dasastakaradirgham tu vistareņa trayodašah 

dhūmāyam jāyate tena vahnau pākam vidur budhāh 109 
pradirgham dasahastam tu satkaram vistarena tu 
$vanayam jāyate tena pitrsthāne tv ava$yakam 110 
dasahastam bhaved!’ dairghyam!? svaravad vistaram priye 
kharayam jayate!® vasyam vayavyam kandanigrham?? 1u 
dvirastakaradairghyam tu dvisatkam vistaram priye 
dhvanksayam jayate 'traiva aisanyam yagamandapah n2 
$rigrhe?! vathava tam tu visamam caturasrakam 
vittānusārato budhva cokta nyūnādhikam bhavet 113 
trtīyam nandikavartam cumbakasya prakirtitam 114ab 


103b °grhottamam ] BC; °grhottamah A 
103c bhadre | BC; bhadraih A 

103d samyutah | BC; samyutaih A 

104a likhet ] C; likset AB 

104€ ekona” | A; ekonam C; ekūnam B 
104d °pascayatam | A; °pascayam BC 
105d Sayana$rayah | A; sayanayayam BC 
ia bhaved ] AC; bhave B 

ia dairghyam | BC; dirghyam A 

inc jayate ] AC; jayante B 

md kandanigrham ] BC; kandanigrhi A 
113a Srigrhe | A; grhe BC 


491 


492 MILLS 


This account lists the eight chambers of the nandikāvarta for a cumbaka as 
follows: the assembly chamber is in the east, the sleeping guarters are in the 
south, the dining hall in the west, the treasury in the north, the kitchen is in 
the southeast, the lavatory in the southwest, the granary in the northwest, and 
the shrine in the northeast. For each chamber, the correct aya proportion is 
assigned. 


4 Type 3: The house with four, three, two, or one rooms 


The third, lowest, level of complexity produces housing for normal citizens, 
graded according to either caste or initiation class. Here we see a design, again 
laid over the basic 9-by-9 deity map, for a residence with only four rooms, or 
three, two, or one, in descending order according to levels of caste or initia- 
tion. 

An example of a type 3 presentation for different initiation levels is given at 
Pingalamata 10.93—95 and 114c-128 (verses 96—114b cover the Nandikavarta, as 
seen above): 


samanyam sampravaksyami cumbakadyasrayam priye 
svakrtanyakrtam?? vapi salam caivadhuna $rpu — 93 
catuhšālam trišālam ca dvi$alam caikašālakam 
salasamkhya bhavanty?? eta vibhagas tv adhunocyate 94 
ācāryasya catuhsalam tri$alam?^4 sadhakasya tu 
putrakasya dvišālam ca samayī hy ekašālakah?* 95 


svastikavartam anyac ca tasyaiva catuhšālakam 114cd 
vittahīno yada bhadre tadā tat kathayami te 
sayāgāsthānapūrve?* tu sapakasayanantake?/ n5 
sapatribhojanam capye sayantranyasam uttare?® 

yady asya samnikrstam tu taddisayam prakalpayet 116 
taddišāya yutam caiva kalpanam grhavarjitam 


22 93c svakrtanyakrtam ] A; svakrtanyakrtam BC 

23 94c bhavanty ] AB; bhavaty C 

24 5b trisalam ] AB; trišāla C 

25 95d ekasalakah | em.; ekešālakam ABC 

26 nsc sayagasthana? | A; sayagasthana? BC - "pūrve ] A; ^pürvam BC 
27 115d °Sayanantake ] AB; °samayantake C 

28 . n6buttare ] AB; uttaram C 


THE EARLY ŠAIVA MATHA 493 


trisalam sadhakasyaiva?? kathayāmi sadadhuna 117 
hiranyavartakam caiva hinam cottaramandiram 

kartavyam sādhakendreņa bhogamoksaphalarthina 118 
suprabhavartakam vapi pragghinam sukhadam bhavet 
cullikavartakam caiva yamyahinam na $obhanam ug 
paksaghnavartakam devi na $astam?? cāpyahīnakam 
dvayam grahyam dvayam varjyam yato vai sukhaduhkhadam 120 
dvisalam putrakasyaiva $rnusva varavarnini 

vrsasimhayutam dhamasiddhartham tat prakirtitam 121 
sukhamoksakaram nityam putrakasya na sam$ayah 
gajanadvansamayuktam yamasūryam vidur budhah 122 
mrtyudam ca yato devi varjitavyam prayatnatah 
gajadhvajasamayuktam daņdākhyam tad vijānatah 123 
rajadandakaram nityam na praptam visesatah 
dhvajasimhasamayuktam vatakhyam tad grham bhavet 124 
kalaham ca bhaven nityam na $astam varjayet sada 
vrsadhvajasamayuktam paksiš!nāmnā ca vi$rutam 125 
vittanāšakaram nityam varjitavyam prayatnatah 
gajasimhasamayuktam kākīnāmnā ca tad grham 126 
janaih saha virodham?? tu tyaktavyam tam na samšayah 
samayinaikašālam tu tac chrnusva varānane 127 

dhvajam va pascimasyam tu simham va cottarananam 

vrsam va pranmukham bhadre daksinasyam gajam na hi 128 


In verse 10.95 we are told that the house for an ācārya has four rooms, that for 
a sadhaka has three, and that for a putraka has two, while the samayin has one 
room. The verses from u4cd onward describe the four-roomed, three-roomed, 


two-roomed and one-roomed house. In the case of the four-roomed one, rec- 
ommended for the cumbaka when money is wanting, we are given an account 
of the rooms at 115cd—116ab. The shrine is in the east, the kitchen and bedroom 
are in the south, the vessel store and dining room are in the west, and the uten- 
sils and treasury are in the north. In the case of the three-roomed house for the 
sādhaka, we are told that there may be a room lacking in the north or in the 
east, but not in the south or in the west. The house with no room in the north 


29 
30 
31 
32 


17c sadhakasyaiva | em.; sadhakascaiva ABC 
120b šastam ] A; saptam BC 

125d paksi? ] BC; paksī A 

127a virodham ] A; virodhe BC 


494 MILLS 


is termed the hiranyanabha, while that without a room to the east is termed a 
suprabhavartaka. In the case of the 2-roomed and 1-roomed house, the direc- 
tion of the rooms is described in terms of the 8 aya direction associations, from 
dhvaja in the east onwards in a clockwise rotation. 


5 Mathas 


Having looked at accounts of construction of housing in general, in types 1, 2 
and 3, we now are ready to look at what the texts have to say about mathas 
in particular. The Brhatkālottara and Kirana give details on the design of tem- 
ples and also on the construction of domestic buildings for different members 
of society, from kings down to ordinary caste members. But these texts do not 
refer to a matha or anything that could be understood as a matha. 

The Mayasamgraha mentions the matha, but quite briefly. As we saw above, 
Mayasamgraha 5.156—159 and 181-187 describes the pura on a 9-by-9-plan, list- 
ing the uses to which each of the 32 padas around the outskirts of the plan is 
put: kitchen, storage areas, armories, meeting rooms, etc., in a type 1 design. On 
reaching those padas at the centre of the south side, the text tells us that: 


dhanuhkhadgagaradini vidadhyāt tu grhaksate 
yame samyaminam sthanam atmalokanasiddhaye 182 
gandharve gayakasthanam bhrnge vyākhyānasamšrayah 183ab 


matham va vipulam kuryad grhaksatacatustaye 184cd 


At Grhaksata one should set up [a storeroom for] bows, arrows, swords, 
and other weapons. At Yama there should be a place for ascetics to 
achieve contemplation of the self (samyaminam sthanam ātmālokanasid- 
dhaye). Singers are stationed at Gandharva. At Bhrnga is a hall for the 
exposition [of the šāstras]. Or one may construct a large matha on the 
four [positions] which are Grhaksata and [Yama, Gandharva and Bhrnga]. 


Here, the Mayasamgraha is giving the matha as an option, to be placed on the 
south edge of a pura, as an alternative to a combination of items: weapons, 
ascetics, singers, and a space for teaching. Why here, on the south side? Bakker 
(2004, 118) has pointed out that the south, a direction associated with the inaus- 
picious, with death, is also viewed as being the benign right side of the deity or 
guru as he faces east. Thus it is a suitable position for the initiate, at the right 
side of the deity or guru. 


THE EARLY ŠAIVA MATHA 495 


The Pirigalamata, in chapter 10, verses 3-77, in describing a 9-by-9 type pura, 
lists the uses to which each of the 32 padas all around the outskirts of the plan 
are used. In verses 33-36 the Pirigalamata, like the Mayasamgraha, places the 
matha on the south side, at the padas of Yama and Gandharva. 


yame gandharvake kuryan matham bhümitrayanvitam — 33cd 
athava dvayasardham tu bhümikaikathava priye 

uttamam madhyamam caiva kanyasam ca yathakramam 34 
ācāryasya tad evoktam nijam $ayanahetukam 

istahnikam jayam dhyānam yogābhyāsam tu tatra vai 35 
virabhojyannapanadyair viraih saha samācaret 36ab 


My dear, at Yama and Gandharva one should make a matha with three 
storeys, two [storeys] or one storey. [These are] the best, middling and 
least [mathas] in turn. That is the place for the ācārya to sleep, for [prog- 
nostication of] auspicious days, triumph, meditation, and the practice of 
yoga. [There the teacher] may associate with vīras (vīraih saha), sharing 
vīra food and drink, etc.33 


Altogether, so far, from the Pirigalamata and Mayasamgraha, we have learned 
that the matha is generally placed in the south. The Mohacürottara and Devya- 
mata give more information on the nature of the construction itself. The 
Mohacūrottara uses the term matha. The Devyamata does not. 

First let us look at what the Mohacurottara has to say. At Mohacürottara 
4.234—243 We get a more detailed depiction of the matha: 


mathas cantakadigbhage linginām sthitaye hitah 

yatas te daksiņāšāyām vaseyuh šivabhāvitāh 234 
prasadavistaram sütram tanmanam jagatibahih 

prakaram karayet tyaktva tata$ caéraminam grham 235 
mathagre tatsamam tyaktvā simhayam daksine sthitam 
vrsayam?^ pašcime jfieyam dhvajayam?5 purvatah sthitam — 236 
vipulam va prakartavyam kartur icchavagena tu 


33 Shaman Hatley notes that "Vira likely refers to sadhakas: 'heroic sadhakas' might be a 
good rendering. Vīrapāna refers to impure liquids such as alcohol, used in rituals of the 
Bhairava- and Kulatantras” 

34 236c vrşāyam | F; vrsoyam H 

35  236ddhvajayam | F; dhvajeyam H 


496 


36 
37 


MILLS 


caturašre $arair bhakte madhyam tyaktvā vilopayet 237 
grhāņām svecchayā nyāsah saumye syād ve$anirgamah 
ekabhaumam dvibhaumam va tribhaumam và yathasukham — 238 
dirghasalavrtam bahye praci yagalayanvitam 
pākādigrhavinyāsam yathāyogam nivešayet 239 

purvoktam antaram sàrdham?6 tasyapy ardham yathāyatham 
mathikaikatratyam karyamy pattasala catuskikā 240 
bhumayah pūrvam uddista vittabhave kuti mata 

samasūtram susamsthanam vāstupūjāpurahsaram 241 
linginam ca grham karyam mahapunyajigisaya 

etad?” eva mahapunyam kathayāmi tavākhilam 242 
samsthapya sthavaram lingam prasade yad bhavet phalam 

tat phalam labhate vidvan mathe samsthāpya jangamam 243 


And a matha for ascetics to stay in (linginām sthitaye) should be in the 
south. For they, as devotees of Siva, should reside to the right [of 
Siva]. (4.234) 

One should build a wall (prākāram) at a distance 1 temple-width 
beyond the temple base ( jagatī). At a distance from there (tyaktva 
tatah) is the housing for ascetics (āšramiņām grham). (4.235) 

In front of the matha (mathagre), leaving a distance of the same [size] 
(tatsamam tyaktvā), [houses should be built that are sized according 
to] the simhaya in the south, the vrsaya in the west, and the dhvajaya 
in the east. (4.236) 

Or they may be made as large as the patron wishes. They are on a square 
site divided into five [parts along each side]. One should leave the 
intermediate spaces empty (madhyam tyaktva vilopayet). (4.237) 

The installation of the houses is according to the wishes [of the patron]. 
There should be a [door for] entry and exit to the north. [The houses] 
may have one, two, or three floors, or as is pleasing. (4.238) 

Externally, [the building] is surrounded by a long hall (sala). In the 
eastern side of the building is the place for worship ( yagalaya). One 
should install the kitchen and so forth as appropriate. (4.239) 

At a distance of 12-times the previously given distance, and half that, as 
is suitable, is a single mathikā, in the form of a set of four (catuskikā) 
awnings (pattasala). (4.240) 


240a sardham ] em. Sanderson; sārdham Ātmārthapūjāpaddhati; cārddham FH 
242c etad | H; tad F 


THE EARLY ŠAIVA MATHA 497 


The storeys (bhumi) are as have already been taught. If money is lacking, 
a hut (kuģī) is approved. (4.241ab) 

One should build the dwelling for ascetics with the same measurements 
and a good design, [and] performing the veneration of the site (vās- 
tupuja), out of a desire to attain great merit. I will now describe to 
you this great merit in full. (4.241cd—242) 

The reward gained from establishing a mobile image ( jaūgamam 
lingam) [i.e., an ascetic] in a matha is the same as the reward gained 
from establishing a fixed image (sthavaram lingam) in a temple. 
(4.243) 


So, here, we seem to have a matha housing complex to the south of the temple, 
bracketed to the east, south and west by actual residences. Verse 237 indicates 
that each individual residence is of the 5-by-5 type 2 variety. The term mathika 
is introduced, referring to a set of 4 awnings, and a simple hut, kufī is given as 
a cheaper alternative. 

And, finally, in Devyamata, chapter 105 we are given another account of the 
residence for initiates. The terms used for the residence are grha (verses 1, 15,17); 
asrama (verses 15, 17), and vešman (verse 41). The term matha is not used. The 
terms used for the residents of these domiciles are āšramin (verse 1), prāsādās- 
ramin (verse 82), dīksita (verses 16, 17), grhin, and grhamedhin (verse 72). In 
verses 15-19b is given an account of the residence (grha) for the initiate (dīk- 
sita), outside the temple exterior wall and to the south of the temple: 


daksinayam disi $astam grham ayatanasya tu 

prakarasya bahih karyam āšramāyatanasya tu?8 15 
vastavyam lingam āšrtya diksitaih sujitendriyaih 

tadabhave 'thavānyasmim prade$e sumanorame 16 
nātidūrāmbhasah kāryam āšramam diksitatmanam 
asamkirne $ubhe dese vastavyam dīksitātmabhih 17 
ekasalam dvišālam va trisalam athavā grham 
catuhsalagrham vāpi karyam vittānusāratah 18 

karyam hiranyanabham va suksetram va manoramam — 19ab 


A residence (grham) is recommended to the south of the temple. The 
residence (asramam) should be built beyond the outer wall of the 
temple. (15) 


38 Sanderson, by email communication, points out that the sense intended is certainly āšra- 
mam ayatanasya tu. 


498 


MILLS 


It is to be dwelt in by initiates (dīksitaih), their senses well-subordinated, 
who have come to (asrtya) the image (lingam). Or, in its absence 
(tadabhāve), [they should dwell in] another pleasant place (pradese 
sumanorame). (16) 

The residence (āšramam) for the initiates (diksitatmanam) should be 
built not too far from water. Initiates (diksitatmabhih) should live in a 
fine, unpolluted place. (17) 

The residence (grham) should have one, two, or three rooms. Or a four- 
roomed residence should be built, according to funding. (18) 

A pleasing hiranyanabha or suksetra?? may be built. (19ab) 


In verse 18, the housing described is of type 3. In verses 54—74b the conse- 


quences of a doorway at each of the peripheral padas of the 9 by 9 deity map 


are given in some detail: 


39 


40 


41 
42 


evam yathakramenaiva dvaranam phalam ucyate 

ise hy agnibhayam vidyat parjanye striviso grhi 54 
jaye ca dhanasampanno mahendre nrpavallabhah 
krodhaparas tathaditye satya rta??paro bhavet 55 
bhrée tasya bhavet krauryam cauryam caiva tathambare 
alpasutas tatha cāgnau pūsākhye presyatam vrajet 56 
vitathe 'vinītatām yati grhī grhaksate sudhi 

yame ca raudratàm yāti gandharve šrīm avāpnuyāt 57 
bhrügaraje bhaven nisvo mrgakhye*! nrpapiditah 
uktam dvarastakam tubhyam grhe 'smin daksiņāmukhe 58 
procyate savišeseņa grhe 'smim pašcimāmukhe 
pašcime pitrdevatye grhī syāt sutapiditah^? 59 
ripuvrddhis tathā tasya vidyā dauvārike pade 

sugrīve dhanasampat syād grhiņah sarvadā bhavet 60 
sutarthabalasampat syāt pade ’smim puspadantake 
varune dhanasampattim nrpabhayam tathāsure 61 


As recorded, for example, in Brhatkalottara, prasadalaksanapatala 223—224 and Kirana 
19.18—19, the hiranyanabha is a building with three rooms, in the east, west and south, and 
the suksetra is a building with three rooms, in the west, south and north. At Pingalāmata 
10.118—119 (above), the building without a room in the north is termed a hiranyanabha, 
while that without a room to the east is termed a suprabhavartaka. 

rta? | em.; nrta? MW; nanrmta N. The emendation to rta is supported by the fact that at 
Brhatkālottara, prāsādalaksaņapatala 239 we see dharma at Satya. 

58b mrgakhye | em.; mrsakhye NM; mrsakhya W 

59d sutapiditah | N; sutapatitah MW 


THE EARLY ŠAIVA MATHA 499 


43 
44 
45 
46 
47 


dhanaksayam tatha $ose rogah syāt pāpayaksmaņi 

astau devah samakhyata grhe 'smin pašcimāmukhe 62 
vāyavyādikrameņaiva procyate hy uttarāmukhe 
baddhabandhas tatha roge ripuh syan nagasamjfiike 63 
mukhye sutarthalabham syat sampad bhalvatake tatha 
dhanasampat tathā some putravairam anantake 64 
strīdosas caditau jfieyo daridra grhiņo ditau 

kathitani visesena svadevatanvitanitu 65 

hitavahitani yani syūr dvārāņi $rnu yatnatah 

jayakhyam yat trtiyam tu suprabhūtadhanapradam 66 
mahendrakhyams caturtham tu grhinam sarvakamikam?? 
grhaksatam caturtham tu grhe 'smin daksinamukhe 67 
bhaksyapanasutavrddhim karoti grhamedhinam 
gandharvakhyam tatha sastam Srisaukhyas ca sukhapradam — 68 
dvaradvitayam $astam hi grhe 'smin daksinamukhe 
dhanasampatkaram dvāram trtiyam pascimamukhe — 69 
caturtham puspadantakhyam sutartha*balavardhanam 
paficamam vāruņam dvāram dhanasampatkaram nmam — 7o 
dvaratrtayam akhyatam grhe 'smin pa$cimamukhe 
mukhyadhidevatam dvāram trtiyam cottaramukhe 71 
dhanasutārthasampattim karoti grhamedhinam 
bhalvatakhyam caturtham tu grhiņām sarvakamadam 72 
dhanasampatkaram proktam paficamam somadevatam 
evam jfiatva^? vi$esena yathoktam^9 dvaralaksanam 73 
guņādhikam?” tato vidvān sthapayed dvāram adarat 74ab 


Thus, in due sequence, the consequences (phalam) of doorways are 
given. [With a doorway] at I$a, the householder will have the risk of 
fire; at Parjanya, harm from women. (54) 

At Jaya [the householder] is endowed with wealth. At Mahendra he is 
dear to the king. At Aditya there is anger. At Satya there is lawful con- 
duct. (55) 

At Bhréa is awfulness. And at Ambara there is theft. At Agni there is a 
lack of sons. At Pusan is servitude. (56) 


67b sarvakamikam ] em.; sarvakarmikam N; sakāmikam MW 
7ob sutartha® ] MW; sutakhyam N 

73c jnatva | N; jūāna MW 

73d yathoktam] N; yathokta MW 

74a guņādhikam ] N; ganadhikan M; ganadhika W 


500 


MILLS 


At Vitatha the householder comes to a lack of decorum, at Grhaksata he 
gains wisdom. At Yama he attains savagery. At Gandharva he acquires 
glory. (57) 

At Bhrngaraja there is malady. At Mrga one is oppressed by the king. 
The set of 8 doorways have been described to you, in the house facing 
south. (58) 

Next it will be specifically described for the house facing west. In the 
west, at the Pitrdeva position, the householder will be oppressed by 
his sons. (59) 

There is an increase in the enemy and his knowledge at Dauvarika. At 
Sugriva is always an increase of wealth for the householder. (60) 

At Puspadantaka is a gain in sons, wealth and power. At Varuna is an 
increase in wealth. At Asura is danger from the king. (61) 

There is loss of wealth at Sosa and disease at Papayaksman. Eight deities 
have been listed, in the house facing west. (62) 

Those facing north are listed next, in sequence, from the northwest 
(vayavya) on. At Roga is bondage. At Naga (Vasuki) is an enemy. (63) 

At Mukhya is an increase in sons and wealth. At Bhalvata is gain. At 
Soma is a gain in wealth. At Anantaka is heroism in sons. (64) 

At Aditi is trouble from women. At Diti is poverty. Specifically listed 
with their own deities are those doorways which are especially good. 
Listen with care. The third one, named Jaya, brings great power and 
wealth. (65-66) 

The fourth one, named Mahendra, fulfills every desire for the house- 
holder. The fourth one in the house facing south, Grhaksata, 
increases food, drink and sons for householders. The sixth one, called 
Gandhārva, brings glory, pleasures and contentment. (67—68) 

The second set of doorways has been declared, on the south side. On 
the west side, the third doorway (i.e., at Sugriva) brings an increase in 
wealth. (69) 

The fourth, called Puspadanta, increases sons, power and strength. The 
fifth doorway, Varuna, brings increased wealth for men. (70) 

The third set of doorways has been declared, on the west side. And on 
the north side, the doorway governed by Mukhya brings an increase 
in wealth, sons and property to householders. The fourth one, named 
Bhalvata, gives men every desire. (71-72) 

The fifth one, whose deity is Soma, brings an increase in wealth. After 
learning the features of doorways as described, specifically, the wise 
man should carefully establish a doorway with ample good qualities. 


(73-74ab) 


THE EARLY ŠAIVA MATHA 501 


One should note that, while these are the consequences for doorway posi- 
tions in a residence for ascetics, the consequences do not fall on the ascetic 
residents themselves, but on the patron who commissions and funds the build- 
ing of the residence, and who gains the benefit from it.^? So, the consequences 
are not in any way to be connected to the lives of the residents. None-the-less, 
it is worth noting that these are the same consequences that we see repeated 
over and again for domestic buildings of all sorts. The model that is being used 
is that for normal housing. 

The portion from 81 to 86 describes the layout of the residence (grha) for the 
prasadasramin: 


grham nispadayed yatnad yathokta*laksananvitam 
antaradi$vibhagam ca grhaprāsādayos tatah 81 

uktam yathākrameņaiva prasada$raminam grham 
agneyyam mahānasam šastam i$anyam yagamandapam 82 
ratnahiranyavastranam aindrādiši pra$asyate 

yamyasre 'py uttare*? karyam sthapanam salilasya tu 83 
dhanyanam sthāpanam $astam varunyam sarvadahitam 
udūkhalasya vayavyam sthapanam samudahrtam 84 
sarvavastuspadanam tu kauberyam nilayam smrtam 
nātidūram na cāsannam pracchannam parivaritam 85 
grhasyavahrtam karyam avasyakaranam grham 

pūrveņa vanasandam tu tathā puspaphaladrumāh 86 


One should carefully arrange the residence (grham) in such a way that 
is has the characteristics that have been taught. Then [one should 
arrange] the area in between (antaradisvibhagam) the residence and 
temple. (81) 

The residence for those who come to the temple (prasadasrami- 
nam) is described in due sequence. In the southeast is the kitchen 
(mahānasam). In the northeast is the space for worship ( yagamanda- 
pam). (82) 

Storage for gems, gold and cloths (ratnahiranyavastranam) is recom- 
mended in the east, and for water in the south and centre.*! (83) 


48 I thank Shaman Hatley for this observation. 

49  &byathokta? ] MW; antaram N 

50  83cyamyaére 'py uttare | MW; yāmyāšreruttare N 

51 Itake uttare to refer to the position to the north of the southern cell. That is, the centre. I 


502 MILLS 


Grain storage (dhanyanam) is recommended in the west. In the north- 
west is storage for the mortar (udūkhalasya). (84) 

To the north is general storage (sarvavastuspadanam). Not too far away 
(nātidūram), nor adjoining (na cāsannam), is a secluded (pracchan- 
nam), sheltered (parivaritam) (85) 

lavatory building (avasyakaranam grham), aside from the residence 
(grhasyāvāhrtam). To the east (purvena) should be made a copse 
(vanasandam), and trees with flowers and fruit (puspaphaladrumah). 
(86) 


This is an account of a type 2 nandikāvarta type of construction, with 8 rooms 
on a 5-by-5 plan. 

From verse 87 on we get a detailed description of the trees for the surround- 
ing gardens. Then the chapter ends: 


kathitam savisesena grham āsramiņām tava??  g4cd 
antaram disvibhāgam ca prasadagrhayor drumān 
prakarah svapramāņena prasadanam prakīrtitah 95 
prakarasya bahih proktam udyānam sumanoramam 
kartavyam ca tathodyanam prakaraparivestitam 96 
pūrvavac ca rjuh karyah prakarah sucayas samah 
prakarasya bahih sthapya parivaralayah priye 97 
evam yathakramenaiva karyam sarvam a$esatah 
grhad udyanaparyastam prakarena samanvitam 98 
tat sarvam samudāyena kartavyam samudahrtam | 99ab 
iti grhavastupatalah 


The residence (grham) for the agramins has been described to you in 
particular; (94cd) 

and [also] the intervening (antaram) area (disvibhāgam) between the 
temple and residence (prasadagrhayoh), and trees. The surround- 
ing wall (prakarah), with its measurements, has been described for 
temples. (95) 

The pleasing garden (udyanam) beyond the surrounding wall has been 
described. The garden too is to be surrounded by a wall (prakaravesti- 
tam). (96) 


find support in the fact that, in verse 22 of this chapter, we were informed that the water 
supply should be in the centre of the house (grhamadhye). 
52 94d tava] em.; bhavah MW 


THE EARLY ŠAIVA MATHA 503 


As before, the surrounding wall should be made straight, well erected 
and level. My dear, having established the subsidiary shrines (parivār- 
ālayāh) beyond the wall, (97) 

everything should be made thus, complete, and in due seguence. 
Beyond the residence, it is surrounded by a garden and has a sur- 
rounding wall. Everything to be done has been altogether declared. 
(98-99ab) 

Thus ends the chapter on the residence. 


Looking back over what we have seen, in the Brhatkalottara and Kirana we saw 
no mention of a matha, but from the Mayasamgraha and Pingalāmata came 
the information that the matha should be on the south side. When it came 
to details of the matha design, we saw in the Mohacurotttara and Devyamata 
descriptions that looked very much like those for houses for any other person, 
in types 2 and 3, to the south of a type 1 complex. 

We have been looking at the building designs for clues as to what went on 
inside them, following the sensible line of thinking of Sears (2014, 76), who 
writes, "the architecture of the monastery indexes the concerns of its residen- 
tial community" But perhaps all we have learned from the building designs 
for the matha is that dorms are dorms, in the end. While the installation of a 
jaūgama linga, an initiate, is equal in merit to the installation of an ajangama 
liga, an image, there is by no means the same glamour in its housing. This 
proves to be a practical domestic establishment entirely like that of an alto- 
gether ordinary person who is not initiated—not a jangama linga. 


Acknowledgment 


My gratitude to Professor Sanderson is enormous. His guidance is invaluable 
in many ways, but I will point out just two. On the one hand there is his stern 
search for error in the material, on the other is his patient tolerance of error 
in the student—a tolerance that I put to some pretty severe testing, of course. 
None of this work would have been possible without it. 


References 


Primary Sources 
Kiraņatantra 
Dominic Goodall, ed. Bhattaramakanthaviracita Kiranavrttih. Bhatta Ramakantha's 


Commentary on the Kiranatantra. Volume 1: Chapters 1-6. Critical Edition and Anno- 


504 MILLS 


tated Translation. Publications du département d'indologie, no. 86.1. Pondichéry: 
Institut francais de Pondichéry/Ecole francaise d' Extréme-Orient, 1998. 

Šrīmat-Kiraņāgama-mahātantram. Paficapagesa $ivàcarya and K.M. Subrahmaņyašā- 
strī, eds. Devakottai: Sivagamasiddhantaparipalanasangha, 1932. 

NAK 5-893; NGMPP reel no. A40/3. 

NAK 4-13; NGMPP reel no. B117/11. 

IFP T. no. 47637. 

IFP T. no. 39802. 

IFP T. no. 998. 

IFP T. no. 0746. 

IFP T. no. 0401. 


Devyamata 

(N) NAK 1-279; NGMPP reel no. A 41/15. 
(M) NAK 1-1003; NGMPP reel no. B 27/6. 
(W) Wellcome Institute, gamma 607. 


Pingalāmata 

(A) British Library OR 2279 

(B) NAK 3-376; NGMPP reel no. A42/2 
(C) NAK 5—1929; NGMPP reel no. A166/5 


Brhatkālottara 

NAK 1-273; NGMPP reel no. B24/57 
NAK 1-89; NGMPP reel no. B24/59 
NAK 5-778vi; NGMPP reel no. A42/8 
NAK 5—4632; NGMPP reel no. B118/7 
NAK 4-131; NGMPP reel no. A43/1 


Brhatsamhita of Varahamihira 

Avadha Vihārī Tripāthī, ed. Brhatsamhitā of Varāhamihira with the Commentary of Bhat- 
totpala. Varanasi: Varanaseya Sanskrit Vishvavidyalaya, 1968. 

M. Ramakrishna Bhat, ed., trans. Varahamihira’s Brhatsamhitā, 2 vols. Delhi: Motilal 
Banarsidass, 1981, 1982. 

Krsnacandra Dvivedi, ed. Brhatsamhitā by Šrī Varāhamihira with Commentary of Bhat- 
totpala. Varanasi: Sampurnanand Sanskrit University, 1996. 


Mayasamgraha 
(A) NAK 1-1537; NGMPP reel no. A31/18 
(C) A copy of a commentary to the Mayasamgraha: the Bhāvacūdāmaņi of Bhatta 


THE EARLY ŠAIVA MATHA 505 


Vidyakantha. Shri Raghunath Temple Manuscript Library no. 5291, now in the col- 
lection of the Ranbir Research Institute, Jammu. 


Mohacurottara 

(F) NAK 121633; NGMPP reel no. B26/29 

(G) NAK 4-1622; NGMPP reel no. B27/18 (missing the section of chapter 4 discussed 
here). 

(H) NAK 5—1977; NGMPP reel no. A182/2. 


Somasambhupaddhati 
Hélene Brunner-Lachaux, ed. 4 volumes. Collection Indologie, nos. 25.1-4. Pondichéry: 
Institut Francais de Pondichéry, 1963, 1968, 1977, 1998. 


Secondary Sources 

Bakker, Hans. 2004. "At the Right Side of the Teacher: Imagination, Imagery and Image 
in Vedic and Saiva Initiation.” In Images in Asian Religions: Texts and Contexts, edited 
by Koichi Shinohara and Phyllis E. Granoff, 117-149. Vancouver, B.C.: University of 
British Columbia Press. 

Granoff, P.E. 2004. “Images and their Ritual Use in Medieval India: Hesitations and Con- 
tradictions.” In Images in Asian Religions: Texts and Contexts, edited by Koichi Shi- 
nohara and Phyllis E. Granoff, 19—55. Vancouver, BC: University of British Columbia 
Press. 

Hikita, Hiromichi. 2005. “Consecration of Divine Images in a Temple.” In From Material 
to Deity, Indian Rituals of Consecration, edited by Shingo Einoo and Jun Takashima, 
143-198. Manohar: New Delhi. 

Mills, Libbie. 2019. Temple Design in Six Early Saiva Scriptures. Critical Edition and Trans- 
lation of the Prasadalaksana-portions of the Brhatkālottara, Devyamata, Kiraņa, Mo- 
hacurottara, Mayasamgraha & Pingalamata. Collection Indologie, no. 138. Pondich- 
éry: Institut Francais de Pondichéry/Ecole française d' Extréme-Orient. 

Mishra, R.N. 1993. “The Saivite Monasteries, Pontiffs and Patronage in Central India.” 

Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bombay 64—66: 108-124. 

Mori, Masahide. 2005. “The Installation Ceremony in Tantric Buddhism.” In From 
Material to Deity, Indian Rituals of Consecration, edited by Shingo Einoo and Jun 
Takashima, 199-240. Manohar: New Delhi. 

Nandi, R.N. 1987. “Origin and Nature of Saivite Monasticism: The Case of the Kala- 
mukhas.” In Indian Society: Historical Probings, In Memory of D.D. Kosambi, edited 
by R.S. Sharma, 190—201. New Delhi: People's Publishing House. 

Sanderson, Alexis. 1988. “Saivism and the Tantric Traditions.” In The World's Religions, 
edited by S. Sutherland, et. al., 660—704. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul. 

Sanderson, Alexis. 1995. “Meaning in Tantric Ritual." In Essais sur le Rituel 111, edited by 


506 MILLS 


A.-M. Blondeau and K. Schipper, 15-95. Bibliothēgue de l'École des hautes études, 
Sciences religieuses, vol. cII. Louvain-Paris: Peeters. 

Sanderson, Alexis. 2001. "History Through Textual Criticism in the Study of Šaivism, 
the Paficaratra and the Buddhist Yoginītantras” In Les Sources et le temps, edited by 
Francois Grimal, 1-47. Publications du département d’ Indologie, no. 91. Pondichéry: 
Institut Francais de Pondichéry/Ecole francaise d’ Extréme-Orient. 

Sanderson, Alexis. 2004. “Religion and the State: Saiva Officiants in the Territory of the 
Brahmanical Royal Chaplain (with an appendix on the provenance and date of the 
Netratantra).” Indo-Iranian Journal 47: 229—300. 

Sanderson, Alexis. 2007. “The Saiva Exegesis of Kashmir.” In Melanges tantriques a 
la memoire d' Helene Brunner/Tantric Studies in Memory of Helene Brunner, edited 
by Dominic Goodall and Andre Padoux, 231-442, 551—582 (bibliography). Collec- 
tion Indologie, no. 106. Pondichéry: Institut Français de Pondichéry/École francaise 
d'Extréme-Orient. 

Sanderson, Alexis. 2009. "The Saiva Age: The Rise and Dominance of Šaivism during the 
Early Medieval Period." In Genesis and Development of Tantrism, edited by Shingo 
Einoo, 41-350. Institute of Oriental Culture Special Series, no. 23. Tokyo: Institute of 
Oriental Culture, University of Tokyo. 

Sears, Tamara I. 2007. "Saiva Monastic Complexes in Twelfth-Century Rajasthan: The 
Pasupatas and Cāhamānas at Menāl” South Asian Studies 23: 107—126. 

Sears, Tamara I. 2014. Worldly Gurus and Spiritual Kings, Architecture and Asceticism in 
Medieval India. New Haven; London: Yale University Press. 


CHAPTER 21 


The Kriyasamgrahapafijika of Kuladatta and its 
Parallels in the Saiva Pratisthatantras 


Ryugen Tanemura 


1 Introduction 


Most people think that the prominent features of Tantric religions are their 
esoteric teachings. This might mislead us into supposing that these religions 
were limited to restricted communities. But in fact these religions extended 
over a much wider domain. We see this if we consider the fact that both Saivism 
and Tantric Buddhism offered a wide range of public social rituals.! Following 


1 Sanderson proposes that what kept Saivism alive, and enabled it to exert its influence, was 
ritual for others, as the professional activity of officiants who operated outside the narrow 
confines of self-cultivation (Sanderson 2010, 12). 

Generally speaking, rituals for others, i.e. rituals performed for the benefit of donors, 
were formed through modification of rituals for personal salvation. In the case of Tantric 
Buddhism, the pratisthā ritual is a modification of the utpattikrama practice. See the fol- 
lowing three quotations: Ratnakarasanti’s Bhramahara: tasyanandina āsyena dvihohkaravi- 
darbhitam | jvalad bijadvayam rāgāt padmantah pravišad dravet || tato vajri maharagad 
viltya saha vidyayā | šaraccandradravanibhām tisthen mandalatam gatah || athotthānāya tam 
devyah sthitva koņāsanendusu | codayeyus catasrbhis catasro vajragitibhih || (Isaacson 2002, 
162, lines 9-15); Vajravali (abhiseka section): tais tathagataih prajfíasamapannair mahara- 
gena dravībhūya vairocanadvāreņāntarnivišya vajramargena nirgatya taddravair devipadme 
mukhena pravesitam sisyam jhatiti šūnyatānantaram hümvajrajatasaprajfiaksobhyarüpinam 
jiānasattvābhinnam abhisicya punar bhujamukhādimūrtibhih *padman (corr; padmāt EM) 
nihsrtya gaganam āpūrya sthitair locanādividyāsahitaiš chatradhvajapatākāvastravāditragī- 
tanrtyapuspakunkumadivrstibhih karakisalayavarjitabodhicittamrtapürnasitakalasais tam ši- 
syam *padmān (corr; padmāt EM) nihsrtam abhisicyamanam ... (EM $24.2, vol. 2, p. 341, 
lines 6—11); Vajravali (pratisthā section): tais ca tathagataih prajfiasamapannair mahārāgeņa 
dravībhūya svasya vairocanadvāreņa pravišya vajramargena nirgatya taddravair devipadme 
mukhena pravesitam pratimādikam abhisicya punar bhujamukhādimūrtibhih *padmān (corr.; 
padmat EM) nihsrtya bahir ambaram āpūrya sthitair locanadividyasahitais cchatrapatakanr- 
tyagitavaditrakusumakunkumadivrstiparikaritakarakisalayavarjitabodhicittamrtapurnasita- 
kalasais tat pratimadikam padmād bahir nihsrtam abhisicyamanam ... (EM § 17.3, vol. 2, p. 416, 
line 17-p. 417, line 2). The first passage quoted from the Bhramahara teaches how the practi- 
tioner should generate himself as Hevajra in the First Union (ddiyoga). The practitioner, who 
has the form of the seed syllables, should enter the womb of Nairatmya, Hevajra’s consort, 
through Hevajra's mouth, become liquid (i.e. the state of sūnyatā), be emitted outside the 


€ RYUGEN TANEMURA, 2020 | DOI:10.1163/9789004432802 023 
This is an open access chapter distributed under the terms of the CC BY-NC 4.0 license. 


508 TANEMURA 


Šaiva models, Tantric Buddhism offered various kinds of consecration cere- 
monies (pratisthā).? Saivism produced Paddhatis and Pratisthātantras which 
teach the details of these public social rituals. Tantric Buddhism also produced 
a number of manuals which are closely comparable to Šaiva Pratisthātantras 
and Paddhatis. Of these, three manuals are particularly rich in information: the 
Kriyāsamgrahapafijikā of Kuladatta, the Vajrāvalī of Abhayakaragupta, and the 
Ācāryakriyāsamuccaya of Jagaddarpana or Darpanacarya, which incorporates 
much of the Vajrāvalī but adds some new materials (Sanderson 2009, 126—127, 
note 293). 

The purpose of this paper is to present a variety of Šaiva parallels in the 
Kriyāsamgrahapafijikā, especially textual parallels between the Kriyasamgra- 


womb, and have the form of Hevajra. The second passage quoted from Vajravali teaches how 
the master should visualise the initiand in the udakabhiseka. The master should visualise that 
the initiand is made to enter the womb of the goddess, becomes liquid (šūnyatā), and is emit- 
ted outside the womb. This is a modification of the meditation in the utpattikrama practice. 
The third passage quoted from Vajravali teaches how the officiant should visualise the deity 
of the image in the udakābhiseka of the pratisthā. The same method as the second passage 
is applied here. For the relationship between the utpattikrama practice and the pratisthā in 
Tantric Buddhism, see Tanemura 2004, 85-90. 

2 For the parallel repertoire of rituals between Saivism and Tantric Buddhism, see Sanderson 
2009, 124—127. To add some more information about the manuals of the Tantric Buddhist 
funeral rite (given on p. 126, note 294), after the publication of Sanderson 2009, I published a 
critical edition of and notes on Sinyasamadhivajra’s Mrtasugatiniyojana (Tanemura 2013a), 
an annotated Japanese translation of the same text (Tanemura 2013b), and a preliminary 
edition and annotated Japanese translation of the Antasthitikarmoddesa of Padmasrimitra’s 
Mandalopayika (Tanemura 2012). The visualisation taught in verses 12—13 of the Mrtasuga- 
tiniyojana is a modification of the mrtasamjivana practice elaborated in commentaries on 
the Guhyasamajatantra, which are classified as works of Jfiāānapāda school in the Tibetan 
canon. The utkrānti (intentional death of a yogin) is applied to the visualisations taught in 
verses 14—16. 

3 Sanderson proposes that the fundamental reason for Saivism's success was "that it greatly 
increased its appeal to royal patrons by extending and adapting its repertoire to contain a 
body of rituals and theory that legitimated, empowered, or promoted key elements of the 
social, political and economic process that characterizes the early medieval period (Sander- 
son 2009, 253)” With regard to the second element, the proliferation of land-owing tem- 
ples, "[t]he Saivas of the Mantramārga provided specialized officiants and rituals to estab- 
lish these Šivas [= Lingas], developing in the course of time a secondary body of scriptural 
authorities, the Pratisthatantras, devoted exclusively to this domain, setting out the rituals 
of installation (pratistha) and defining the norms for the form of the Linga, the iconogra- 
phy of ancillary images, and the architectural design of the various temple types" (Sanderson 
2009, 274; the word in square brackets is supplied by the present author). The characteris- 
tics of the Kriyasamgrahaparíijika are very close to those of the Pratisthatantras mentioned 
above. With regard to the contents of the whole Kriyasamgrahapafijika, see Tanemura 2004, 
12-42. 


THE KRIYĀSAMGRAHAPANJIKĀ OF KULADATTA 509 


hapafijikà and the Devyāmata, a Saiva Pratisthātantra, as materials to consider 
concerning the relations between Šaivism and Tantric Buddhism. 


2 Rituals in the Public Domain 


First, I would like to present parallels at the scriptural level between Saivism 
and Tantric Buddhism. Just as in Saivism, where the Saiddhantika religion, 
which non-Saiddhantikas considered to be a fundamental but exoteric and 
lower Saiva teaching, is involved in the rituals in the public domain,‘ so too the 
ritual system of the consecration ceremonies prescribed in the Kriyasamgra- 
hapafijikā is based on the Yogatantras (more precisely, the Vajradhatumandala 
system prescribed in the Sarvatathagatatattvasamgraha, the principal scrip- 
ture of the Yogatantra class), which was considered to be the Vajrayana’s fun- 
damental authority by the “higher,” more esoteric tantras, i.e. Yogottara- and 
Yoginitantras.5 


4 Forthis non-Saiddhāntika view on the Saiddhantika religion, see, e.g., Sanderson 2007, 231. 
On the public character of the Saiddhāntika religion, see, e.g., Sanderson 2007, 238-239 and 
Sanderson 2014, 13. 

5 For instance, the Sūtaka(-melāpaka) (commonly known as "Caryāmelāpakapradīpa” which 
is not attested in Sanskrit primary sources) calls the Sarvatathagatatattvasamgraha the "root 
tantra.” See Sūtakamelāpaka (chapter 3 Vagviveka): vajragurur āha—sādhu sadhu mahasatt- 
va Sritattvasamgrahadau mūlatantre cottaratantre ca vayutattvam na vispastenoktam, sam- 
dhyayabhasitatvat (EW p. 375, lines 13—15); vajragurur āha—sādhu sādhu mahasattva mantra- 
tattvam nama tattvasamgrahādau mūlatantre cottaratantre ca kevalam mantramatram udī- 
ritam mantroddharo na pradarsitah (EW p. 378, lines 13-15). That the system of the Yogatantra 
is the Vajrayana’s fundamental authority might also be implied by the following verse of 
the Samvarodayatantra (21.2): samanyayogatantranam rahasyam na vipancitam | siddhinam 
parama siddhir vratnānām paramam vratam || (ET p. 134). 

That the system of the Vajradhatumandala taught in the Sarvatathagatatattvasamgraha 
is employed for rituals in the public domain is inferred from the fact that the fundamental 
system of the Kriyasamgrahapafijika is the Vajradhatumandala (See the citation from the 
Kalašādhivāsanā section of the Kriyasamgrahapanjika below). 

The verses quoted below from Padmašrīmitra's Maņdalopāyikā suggest that the rituals 
prescribed in his manual, which are performed in public, are based on the Sarvatatha- 
gatatattvasamgraha. See Padmasrimitra’s Maņdalopāyikā 2.39—41: ādāv arghavidhih proktah 
dvitiye bhüparigrahah | trttyam *tippa(em.; tippa- Ms.)sūtram tu jfíanasutram caturthakam 
||2.39|| paricamo rajasām patah sastham kalašādhivāsanam | saptamah kalašanyāso man- 
dalasadhanam astamam ||2.40|| pratisthà navamī caiva dašamī homakriyā mata | ekādašī 
visrstih syād ity uktam tattvasamgrahe ||2.41|| (2r7—8). The eleven rituals from the arghavidhi 
to the visrsti mentioned in the above-quoted verses are rituals related to the pratistha (cf. 
the structure of the rituals prescribed in the Kriyasamgrahapanijika, for which see Tanemura 
2004, Introduction). The phrase "taught in the (Sarvatathagata-)Tattvasamgraha" does not 


510 TANEMURA 


The Kriyasamgrahaparijika as a whole is a kind of construction manual 
for monasteries, and the author Kuladatta teaches details of various kinds of 
rituals within this framework.* In chapter 2, having examined the site for a 
monastery and removed from the site extraneous substances that cause vari- 
ous calamities, the officiant (ācārya) should visualise the site, which has been 
divided into eighty-one compartments, as the Vajradhatumandala. He should 
visualise Vairocana in the centre and the other deities in the rest of the com- 
partments. In chapter 3, the officiant should prepare water jugs which are to be 
used in the ritual. These water jugs represent the deities of the Vajradhatuman- 
dala, and he should draw the symbols of the deities on them. In the pratistha of 
images, although images (or rather the deities of images) go through the brah- 
manical life cycle rites, they are sprinkled with water from the water jugs which 
represent the deities of the Vajradhatumandala. 

The fact that the system of the Vajradhatumandala is fundamental is implied 
by the following remarks of Kuladatta.” 


(1) Kriyasamgrahapanjika, Kalašādhivāsanā in chapter 3: 
yasyacaryasya vajradhatau nādhimoksas tasya svestadevatadhimoksena 
bhūšodhanapratisthāparyantesu sarvakriyakaranam aviruddham.? 


TANEMURA 2004, 135 


necessarily mean that the scripture prescribes the eleven rituals listed in the verses, probably 
only that the mantra-visualisation system employed in those rituals is that of the Vajradhātu- 
mandala taught in the Sarvatathagatatattvasamgraha. (Cf. Kimiaki Tanaka's understanding 
of the words from ādau to visrstih syāt as being directly quoted by Padmašrīmitra from the 
scripture; see Tanaka 2010, 562.) For instance, the samaya which the officiant causes the deity 
of the images to listen to is “om hum trah hrih ah,’ the syllables of the Five Buddhas of the 
Vajradhātumaņdala (org). 

6 See Tanemura 2004, Introduction $1.5. 

7 After the publication of Tanemura 2004, I was able to access the following two manuscripts 
of the Kriyasamgrahapafijika. N2: Kaiser Library Access No. 109; N3: NGMPP E365/12 (private 
collection). I report on the readings of these manuscripts when I quote the texts from Tane- 
mura 2004. With regard to N2, the first forty-five leaves, of which the material is paper, are 
a later addition to the original palm-leaf manuscript. The leaves before folio 35 of the origi- 
nal palm-leaf manuscript have been lost. The original manuscript was copied in samvat 336. 
According to Petech, the date of copying is verified for Thursday, February nth, 1216 (Petech 
1984, 81). With regard to N2, I report only on the readings of the original palm-leaf manuscript. 

8 Mss. N2 and N3 read as follows. N2: yasyācāryyasya vajradhātau namadhimoksah tasya sves- 
tadevatadhi*moksena(N2?* moksauna N2°°) bhüsodhanapratisthaparyyantesu sarvve kriyā- 
karanam aviruddhah || (30v1-2); N3: yasyacaryasya vajradhātau nadhimoksah tasya svestade- 
vatadhimoksena bhüsodhanapratisthaparyantesu sarvvakriyakaranam aviruddham || (24v1— 


2). 


THE KRIYĀSAMGRAHAPANJIKĀ OF KULADATTA 511 


If an ācārya does not have a strong conviction in the Vajradhātu, there is 
no obstacle to his doing all the rites from purification of the site to conse- 
cration [of images etc.] with a strong conviction in his own chosen deity. 


The fact that the pratisthā prescribed in the Kriyasamgrahapafijika is a public 


social ritual is implied in some parts in the text. 


(2) Kriyasamgrahaparijika, chapter 4: 
tato bhüpatih sthapatikarmakarapreksakalokan yatharham kankanangu- 
līpakavastrahiraņyasrakpūgatāmbulādibhih samyak paritosayet.9 


e bhüpatih | em.; bhūpati? N N2 O Ci C2 C3 Tı T2 Tg; bhüpatim Ng ] e?karmakara? ] N 
N2 O C1 C2 C3; °karmakarau N3 °karmakarah T1 T2; karmakare T3 


Then the king should satisfy the architects, the assistants, and the specta- 
tors with a bracelet, a finger-ring, a garment, gold, heap of chaplet, tam- 
büla, or other [articles] according to [the donor's] wealth. 


(3) Kriyasamgrahaparijika, Pratisthā in chapter 6: 
preksakajanams ca tāmbūlādibhih samtosya šreyase bhojanam balis ca 
deyah.!° 


TANEMURA 2004, 162 


[The ācārya should] also entertain spectators with tambula etc. [In addi- 
tion, ] food and a bali should be offered for [their] good fortune. 


(4) Cf. Vajrāvalī (Viharagandhaküticaityavasathasramarghavidhi) 
pūgasrakcandanaih preksakalokan sampūjya 
EM $1.1.6, vol. 1, p. 58; A 4r1; B 3v4 


In the above-quoted passages from the Kriyasamgrahapanijika, it is envisaged 


that the ritual is performed in the presence of spectators. The same character- 


istic of the ritual is also found in the above-quoted passage of the Vajrāvalī. It is 


also envisaged from the first quotation that the sponsor of the ritual is a king. I 


shall come back to this point later. 


10 


The edition is based on the following witnesses (for sigla, see the bibliography): N 37v6, 
N2 39v5, N3 44v1-2, Ca 3315, C2 51v5, C3 43r5, T1 43v4, T2 40v2-3, T3 37v5. 

Mss. N2 and N3 read as follows. N2: preksakajanams ca tamvuladibhih samtosya šreyase 
bhojanam valis ca deyah (150v3); N3: preksakajanās ca tamvüladibhih santosya šreyase bho- 
janam valis ca deyah (174r3—4). 


512 TANEMURA 


From the passage guoted below, we see that people are not only passive spec- 
tators but also active performers of the ritual. 


(5) Kriyasamgrahapafijika, Vanayātrā in chapter 5: 
tato nagarapravešasamaye vrksanam silanam và rājani paurajanesu và 
varttam vidhaya madanasphūrtimūrtibhih pustacittair janair vahayet. 


e °samaye | N N3 K O Ci C2 T1 T2; ?samaya? N2; %sa++ C3; ?samayai T3 e šilānām | N N2 
N3 K O C1T1 T2 Tg; śilānā Cz; [silana] C3 e paurajanesu va | N N3 C1 T2; paurujanesu và 
N2; porajanesu va K; porajaneduva O; porusajanesu va C2; paurajanesu C3; purajaneyuva 
Tı; porajanesu ca T3 e varttam ] K C2 C3 T2 T3; vārttā N N3 Cı; vattām O; vartta Tı e 
vidhāya | N N3 K O C1 Cz C3 Tı T2 T3; vidhātām N2 « madana? | em.; madanamada? N 
N2 N3 KO Cı C2 C3 Tı T2 T3 e?mürtibhih ] N N3 KO Ci C2 C3 T1 Tg; mūrttibhi N2 e 
pustacittair ] N2 K O C2 C3 T2 T3; pustacittai N; pusticittair N3; pustacirtte C1; pusticitter 
Ti ejanair | N N3 KO Ci C3 Tı T2 T5; janai N2 C2; janer 


When the wood [to be used for the construction of a monastery] or the 
stones [to be used for the construction of a caitya] are brought into the 
city, [the acarya] should send a message [that these materials are being 
brought into the city] to the king or the citizens. He should make peo- 
ple with joyful minds whose bodies quiver with excitement carry [these 
materials]. 


3 Royal Patronage 


The above-quoted passage (5) too implies not only that the pratistha prescribed 
is a public social ritual, but also that the king might be envisaged as a donor. 
Royal patronage of the ritual is also implied by the following passage in the 
nimittokti section of chapter 3: 


Sirahkandiyamanam yady ācāryašilpiyvajamānatanniyogijanānām ma- 
dhye kašcit karoti tadaikapaurusad adhah šalyam asti! 


TANEMURA 2004, 150 


If someone, either the tantric officiant, a craftsman [involved in the rite], 
the donor or his officials scratches his head [in the site for a monastery 


11 N 41vi, N2 43v4-5, N3 4911-2, K 45r1-2, O 38v5—6, C1 36v2—3, C2 56r3-4, C3 47v2-3, T1 
47v4-5, T2 44v1-6, T3 41v4—5. 
12 For the reading of Ms. N2 see footnote 28 in this paper. 


THE KRIYĀSAMGRAHAPANJIKĀ OF KULADATTA 513 


etc.], then there is an extraneous thing [that causes a calamity at a depth 
of] the full height of a man underground. 


While an ordinary donor might be present on his own, the king would never be 
seen without his retinue of officials. 

As already mentioned in footnote 3 in this paper, Sanderson proposes that 
the fundamental reason for Saivism’s success was “that it greatly increased its 
appeal to royal patrons by extending and adapting its repertoire to contain a 
body of rituals and theory that legitimated, empowered, or promoted key ele- 
ments of the social, political and economic process that characterizes the early 
medieval period (Sanderson 2009, 253).” With regard to the second element, he 
states as follows: 


The second element of the early medieval process to which I have drawn 
attention is the proliferation of land-owning temples. All but the most 
ephemeral sovereigns during this period, both in the subcontinent and 
in Southeast Asia, gave material form to the legitimacy and solidity of 
their power by building grand temples in which images of their chosen 
God were installed, animated, named after themselves (svanamna), and 
endowed with land and officiants to support their cult. As we have seen, 
the great majority of these temples enshrined Siva [in the form of a Linga]. 


SANDERSON 2009, 274 


The first line after the opening verses of the Kriyasamgrahapafijika might 
reflect similar activities done by royal patrons for tantric Buddhism. 


Kriyasamgrahapafijika, Ācāryaparīksā in chapter 1: 
tatra vihārādikam abhidhatukamo yajamāna ādāv acaryam parīksayet.3 


e tatra | Ca C2 Tz; tatrā K Tı; tato C3 T3 e vihārādikam ] K C1 C2 C3 T1 T3; vihārādikrama 
T2 eabhidhatukamo ] C1 C2 T3; vidhātukāmo K T2; katukāmo C3; vidhatukame Tı e 
yajamana | K C1 C2 T1 T2 Tg; yajamāne C3 e ādāv | K Ci C2 Tı Tg; n.e. C3 T2 © ācāryam | 
K Ci C2 C3 T2 Tg; ācārya Tı « pariksayet | K Ci C2 C3 T1 T2; pariksa[ye]+ T3 


In this case (tatra), a donor who wants to name a monastery and other 
[thing for religious purpose after himself] should, first of all, choose an 
[appropriate] officiant. 


13 N folio missing, N3 folio missing, O folio missing, K 1v2-3, C11v2-3, C2 1v3, C3 1v3-4, T11V3, 
T2 1v3, T3 1v2-3. 


514 TANEMURA 


The manuscripts are divided into two groups with regard to the reading of 
the third word. Mss. C1 C2 T3 read abhidhatukamo, which is employed in the 
above quotation, and Mss. K T2 vidhatukamo. (The reading of T1 is a corrup- 
tion of vidhatukamo, and that of C3 is a corruption of kartukamo, which is a 
synonym of vidhatukamo.!^) I suspect that the author, Kuladatta, envisages a 
king as a donor of a monastery, which should be named after the king. The 
original reading of the third word is therefore abhidhatukamo. The prescrip- 
tions in the Kriyāsamgrahapafijikā are applied to other rituals related to the 
construction of a temple. In some cases, objects of pratisthā are not named 
after the donor. This might have changed the reading abhidhatukamo to vi- 
dhatukamo. Alternatively, it might be the case that the custom that monas- 
teries, caityas, and other religious objects are named after the donor had died 
out or was dying out in Kathmandu in Kuladatta's time. Sanderson points 
out that the Licchavis of Nepal supported Buddhism (Sanderson 2009, 74—77). 
According to the Gopālarājavamšāvalī, the earliest local chronicle, the follow- 
ing monasteries and caitya were named after the donor: the Manavihara by 
Manadeva, the Dharmadevacaitya by Dharmadeva, and the Devalavihara by 
Devaladeva (Sanderson 2009, 74). The first one is confirmed by its mention in 
an undated inscription assigned to his reign (Sanderson 2009, 75). Several of 
the monasteries of the Kathmadu valley are attributed to kings of the period 
of the Thakuri kings— most probably Kuladatta flourished in this period—in 
inscriptions, palm-leaf deeds, manuscript colophons, or their own tradition. 
But no monastery or caitya named after a king is reported (Sanderson 2009, 77— 
80). I am not able to draw a firm conclusion, but there might be factors which 
changed the reading abhidhatukamo to vidhatukamo.® 


4 Textual Parallels 


Next, I would like to present textual parallels between the Kriyasamgraha- 
pafijika and Šaiva Pratisthātantras. The section which contains these Šaiva 
parallels is called the nimittokti. In chapter 3, the ācārya should divide the 


14 This kind of “unfaithful copy” is found in various places of Ms. C. See Tanemura 2004, 102. 

15 Ido not conclude that the prescriptions of the Kriyasamgrahapafijika are merely ideal. 
Rather, as I have already pointed out, the Kriyāsamgrahaparījikā is practical in its char- 
acter (Tanemura 2004, 104-111). For instance, the measurements of a monastery by calcu- 
lation based on the prescriptions of the vāstunāga are very close to those of the plans of 
Cha Bahi and I Baha Bahi in the Kathmandu valley. See Tanemura 2002, 572, note 29. For 
the plans of Cha Bahi and I Baha Bahi, see the plates attached to Watanabe et al. 2009. 


THE KRIYĀSAMGRAHAPANJIKĀ OF KULADATTA 515 


site into thirty-six compartments. He should drive ritual spikes (Kila) sym- 
bolising the thirty-two wrathful deities into the compartments, excluding the 
four central ones, and worship the spikes. Then he should visualise himself 
as Vajrahūmkāra in order to remove obstacles from the site. Then the ācārya 
should re-arrange the placement of the spikes in a proper way. After that, the 
ācārya should connect the paficasutras—the cords of Brahman, the root cords, 
the direction cords, and the side cords—to the spikes driven to the ground 
(sūtrapātana). The nimittokti explains various kinds of good and bad omens 
during the sūtrapātana. I have already shown parallels in the Pingalamata, a 
Saiva Pratisthatantra, the Isanasivagurudevapaddhati, and some other sources 
(Tanemura 2004, 148—155), and I have found yet other parallels in the Devya- 
mata, another Šaiva Pratisthātantra. 


44 The Nimittokti of the Kriyasamgrahapafijika and the 
Šalyoddhārapatala of the Devyāmata 

First I shall quote the relevant part of the Kriyasamgrahaparfijika (abbreviated 
as KSP) from Tanemura 2004, 148-155. The corresponding verse numbers of the 
Devyamata (DM) are indicated at the end of each section. For the convenience 
of readers, the corresponding section number of the Kriyasamgrahaparijika are 
also indicated at the end of each section of the Devyamata, both in the edition 
and in the translation. 


(1) The Nimittokti of the Kriyasamgrahaparijika!9 (Tanemura 2004, 148—155) 


[o] animittair asiddhih syāt sūtracchede guroh ksayah!” 

ity vacanān nimittāny upalaksayet. lingani sūtracchedanarodanasūtrasa- 
mullanghanagātrasparšananāmasamkīrtanādīni.!$ (= DM vv. 9—10) 

[1] tatra sūtracchedanenācāryasya maraņam.!? (= DM v. 7ab) 

[2] $vasrgalagrdhrakankarutair yajamanasya maranam āhuh.20 

[3] (1) mārjāreņa sūtralanghane tadasthi rasabhasya va. (= DM v. 18) (2) gar- 
dabhena langhane tadasthi. (= DM v. 23b) (3) kukkureņa langhane tadasthi. (= 


16 The readings of N3 are presented in the footnotes at the end of each section. 

17 Guhyasamajamandalavidhi v. 229ab (Ms. 1212, ES 134). The numeration follows that of the 
Sarnath edition (ES). 

18 For $[0] Ng reads as follows: animittair asiddhih syat sūtraccheda guroh ksaya iti vacanāt 
nimittany upalaksayet || lingāni sūtracchedanarodanasūtrasamullanghanagātrasparšana- 
namasankirttanadini || (33v1—2). 

19 For §[1] Ms. Ng reads as follows: tatra sūtracchedanenācāryasya maranam | (33v2). 

20 For $[2] Ms. N3 reads as follows: svasrgalagrdhrakankarunair yajamānasya maranam 
āhuh | (33v2). 


516 TANEMURA 


DM v. 1gab) (4) ajāvibhyām langhane tayor asthi gor asthi va. (= DM v. 20a) (5) 
asvenasvasthi. (= DM v. 20cd) (6) hastina hastyasthy ustrāsthi va. (= DM v. 22c) 
(7) a$vatarena tadasthi. (8) mahisena šrgālāsthi. (= DM v. 21ab) (9) mrgena 
mrgasthi. (10) rksena rksāsthi. (11) varahena vyāghrāsthi. (= DM v. 22a) (12) 
vyāghreņa gajāsthi. (= DM v. 22b) (13) mūsakeņa müsakasthi. (= DM v. 19cd) (14) 
sarpena sarpasthi. (15) kacchapena kacchapasthi.?! 

[4] (1) Sirahkandüyamanam yady ācāryasilpiyajamānatanniyogijanānām 
madhye kascit karoti tadaikapaurusad adhah $alyam asti. (= DM vv. 63c-64b) 
(2) bhrūsparše suvarnam hastatrayat kācam và.?? (3) netraspar$e netraparyan- 
tadhastan mukta.?? (4) mukhasparse kešam kastham va trikarādhare. (= DM 
vv. 64c-65b) (5) dantasparsat tribhir hastair dantam anumiyate. (= DM v. 65cd) 
(6) karņakaņdūyane karnantadhastad rūpyam suvarnam vidrumam va bha- 
vet.?4 (7) galaspar$ena tatpramanadhah kanthika lohasrnkhala va, marjarakan- 
kalam va trikaradhare. (= DM vv. 66c-67b) (8) amsasparše tatpramanadhare 
tadabharanam. (9) kaksasparše kaksantadho loham.?5 (10) bahupidane kan- 
thapramanadhare tadabharanam. (= DM wv. 69c—70b) (11) daksinakarasparse 
katimatradhah +*prsthafkapālam mrnmayakapalam va. (= DM vv. 71c—72b) (12) 
vamahastaspar$e janumatradhah katvapadah. (= DM v. 7ocd) (13) pāršvakaņ- 
dūyane narārdhamātrādho dhüli. (= DM vv. 74c—75b) (14) urahsparše katimā- 
tradhah pašukīkasam. (= DM vv. 72c-73b) (15) prsthasparše prsthasthi tatpra- 
manadhah. (= DM vv. 74ab) (16) katisparše dvikaradhah pradese lohakantakam. 
(= DM vv. 75c-76b) (17) lingaspar$ena hastapramanadhare trilohasalyam.26 
(18) jamghaspar$e tadasthy ekadasanguladhare. (= DM vv. 78c—79b) (19) gul- 


21 For §[3] Ms. N3 reads as follows: marjjarena sūtralamghane tadasthi rāsasya va || gard- 
darena lamghane tadasthi || kujjurena lamghane tadasthi || ajavibhyam lamghane tayor 
asthi và || asvenasvasthi || hastinā hastyasthi || ustrāsthi va | avatarena tadasthi mahisena 
srgālāsthi || mrgena mrgāsthi || reksena rksāsthi | varāheņa vyaghrasthi || vyaghrena gajā- 
sthi || mūsakeņa müsakasthi | sarppena sarppāsthi || kacchapena kacchapāsthi || (33v2—5). 

22 Though the Devyamata does not have a parallel to this teaching, Pirigalamata has a close 
parallel: bhruvoh samsparšanād bhadre kacasalyam trihastakam (68r3). See Tanemura 
2004, 150. 

23 Though the Devyamata does not have a parallel to this teaching, the Pirigalamata has a 
close parallel: īša*sthe (conj. Sanderson; sthas Ms.) caksuhsamsparsat tanmānān mauk- 
tikam bhavet (6811). See Tanemura 2004, 150. 

24 Though the Devyamata does not have a parallel to this teaching, the Pirigalamata has a 
close parallel: šruti*sthe (conj. Sanderson; sthah Ms.) srutisamsparšāt pravalam vatha kan- 
canam | rajatam ca šubhā hy ete karnamatrat samuddharet | (6811). See Tanemura 2004, 
150. 

25 Though the Devyamata does not have a parallel to this teaching, tthe Pingalāmata has 
a close parallel: kaksau kaksākrtim vindyāt krsnaloham karatrayāt (68r3). See Tanemura 
2004, 151. 

26 Though the Devyamata does not have a parallel to this teaching, the Pirigalamata has a 


THE KRIYĀSAMGRAHAPANJIKĀ OF KULADATTA 517 


phasparse 'stādasāngulādhare 'svakhurah.27 (20) pādasparšād dvādašāngulā- 
dhare šālmalī kantako và. (= DM vv. 79c-80b) (21) padakanisthangulisparse 
'stanguladhare kamsyam. (= DM vv. 82c-83b) (22) parsnisparse dvadasangulad- 
hare 'bhrakam.28 

[5] sütrapatanasamaye yajamanasya par$ve sthitva kenacid anyena puru- 
sena yasya pranino nama samkirtyate tadasthi tatrastiti ni$cayah.?? (= DM 
v. 12cd) 

[6] (1) akasmād gaur āgatya yadi visthām utsrjati tadadho 'va$yam tatpra- 
māņam kanakam astīti niscīyate. (= DM v. 32ab) (2) yady akasmad agatya 
purisam utsrjati balakumarika tada tadadho 'va$yam tatpramāņam rüpyam 
bhavet. (3) bhekarutena jalabhayam. (4) šukašarikāhamsakokilamayūrajīva- 
mjīvakacakravākavrsabhāņām hrdayopakūjanam kalyāņāya bhavati. (= DM 
v. 34abc) (5) simhagajameghamanojfiasvano dhanadhanyarthalabhodayaya 
bhavati. (6) šankhamangalagītikābālakrīdanair arthāptih. (7) dhūmadaršane 
cittapida. (8) hinadinavyadhiparipiditajanadarsane rogah. (9) dhvajacchatra- 
patakamadyamamsaghantalankarambhojadadhindravahnijvalaphalaminayu- 
garajanganadinam samdaršane subham bhavati. (10) vidvadbrahmanabhiksu- 
sadhujananam samdaršane dharmah syāt.30 

iti nimittoktih. 


close parallel: signe tu vikrtim yate triloham tatra jayate | trikaradhah samuddharyam iti 
šāstrasya niscayah | (68r3—4). See Tanemura 2004, 152. 

27 Though the Devyamata does not have a parallel to this teaching, the Pingalamata has a 
close parallel: gulphasthe gulphasamsparšād dhayapādam vinirdiset | dasastangulama- 
nena tatra *khātvā (em. Sanderson; khatvā Ms.) samuddharet | (67v4) See Tanemura 2004, 
153. 

28 For §[4] N3 reads as follows: sirahkanduyanam yady acaryasilpiyajamanatanniyogijana- 
nam madhye kašcit karoti || tada ekapaurusad adhah salyam asti || bhrūsparše suvarn- 
nam hastatrayāt kācam và || netrasparše netraparyāntādhastān muktā || mukhasparse 
kešam kastham va *trikādhare (N3° trikarādhare N3?°) || dantasparšāt tribhir hastair dan- 
tam anumīyet || karnnakandüyane karnnantadhastad rūpyam || suvarnnam vidrumam và 
bhavet || galasparšena tatah pramanadhah kanthika || lohasrnkhala và anšākamkālam 
và trikaradhare || asasparse tatpramāņādhare tadabharanam || kaksasparse kaksantadho 
loham || daksinakarasparse katimatradhah prsthakapalam mrnmayakapalam va | vāma- 
hastasparse janumatradhah khatvāpādah || parsvakandityane navārddhamātrādho dhūlī 
|| urahsparse katimatradhah panduh kīkašam || prXsthasparse prsthāsti tatpramanadhah 
|| katisparše dvikaradhah pradeše lohakanthakam || lingasparsena hastapramanadhare 
trilohasalyam || jamghāsparše tada*X(N3^5 tyo N3P°)kadasanguladhare gulphasparse 
'stadasanguladhare ’svakurah || padasparsaXt dvadasangulre dhare šālmalī kanthako va 
|| padakanisthangulisparse 'stanguladhare kāmšyam | parsnisparse dvadasanguladhare 
'bhrakam || (33v5-34v1). 

29 For §[5] N3 reads as follows: sūtrapātanasamaye yajamānasya pāršve sthitvā kenacid 
anye[na pu]rusenauyasya pranino nama sa|kittyata tada|sthi tatra[stt]ti ni$cayah || (34v1). 

go For $[6] Ms. Ng reads as follows: akasmād gaur āgatya yadi vistham utsrjati tadadho 


518 TANEMURA 


(2) The Salyoddharapatala of the Devyamata (excerpted) 
(Ms. A 91r5-93v5, Ms. B 50r2-54v5)?! 


Preliminary Edition 


atah param pravaksyami yathoktam salyalaksanam | 
sattvanam apakaraya vastumadhye vyavasthitam |[1]| 


1b yathoktam ] A; yathoktaX B ıc sattvānām | B; satvānām m A 1d vastumadhye ] A; 
vastumadhya B 


caturasrīkrte ksetre sūtrite Sakunadibhih | 
vastudehavibhagajfio vastusalyam nirüpayet ||2|| 
grhaprasadayor vidvan arambhe sütrakarmani | 
laksayec chakunam samyag nimittam copalaksayet ||3]| 
daršanam kirtanam $abdam yajamanasya cestitam | 
vastudehe yathāvastham laksaye $alyam ādarāt ||4|| 


4a daršanam | A; da$anam B 4c laksaye $alyam | A; laksayec chalyam B 


pasandidarsane nestam grhiņām asukhavaham | 
hatam ksatam mrtam bhagnam šrutvā na sütrayed grham ||5|| 


5a pasandidarsane | em.; pàsandidar$anam A; pāsaņdidašane B 5a nestam | A; nestham 
B 


TasastanT ye 'pi ye 'šastā nesta sattvās ca garhitah | 
daršanam kirtanam $abdam TsattvasT tesam vivarjayet ||6|| 


6a ašastān ye 'pi | B; ašastāmy api A 6d vivarjayet | B; vivajayet A 


vasyam tatpramāņan kanakam astīti ni$ctyate | yady akasmād āgatya [pu?]risam utsr- 
jati vālakumārikā tadā tadadho 'vašyam tatpramāņa rūpyam bhavet || bhekarutena jala- 
bhayam || sukasīrikāhamsakokilamayūjīvamjīvakacakravākavrsabhāņām hrdyopakūja- 
nam kalyāņāya bhavati || simhagajameghamanojnasvano dhanadhānyārthalābhodayāya 
bhavati || sankhamangalagitikavalakridaner arthāptih || dhimadarsane cittapīdā || hīnadī- 
navyādhiparipīditajanadaršane rogah || dhvajacchatrapatakasadyamamsaghantalanka- 
rāmbhojadadhīndravahnijvālāphalamīnayugarājānganādīnām sandarsane šubham bha- 
vati || vidvadbrahmanabhiksusadhujananam sandarsane dharmmah syāt || (34v1—5). 

31 The preliminary edition of the Devyamata is based upon the two manuscripts listed below 
under References. There is another incomplete palm-leaf manuscript of the same scrip- 
ture (NAK 5—446/vi. Saivatantra 105, catalogued under the title Nisvasakhyamahatantra = 
NGMPP A41/13), which does not, unfortunately, contain the text of the relevant chapter. 


THE KRIYĀSAMGRAHAPANJIKĀ OF KULADATTA 519 


sūtracchedena maraņam duhkham va maranantikam | (v. 7ab = Ks» [1]) 
evam jiiātvā vidhānajiiah santihomam tu karayet ||7|| 
sarvasukhāvaham yasmāt samam šriyānvitam grham | 

tasmāt susütritam krtvā $alyam ve$mani laksayet ||8|| 


8c susütritam | A; svasütritam B 8d šalyam ] B; $alya A 


sutrasya langhanad vapi dar$anan nāmakīrtanāt | 
$abdasaméravanad vapi laksaye šalyam adarat ||o|| 


gb nāmakīrtanāt | em.; namakirtana A; nàmakirttinat B. gd laksaye šalyam ] A; laksayec 
chalyam B 


langhanam daršanam yasya ruditam namakirtitam | 
tasya sattvasya tac chalyam ādisel langhanadibhih ||10|| (vv. 9-10 = KSP 


[o]) 


10a daršanam ] A; daršanam [ve] B 


anyasya pranino 'py angam vidyād anyasya langhanat | 
grhino 'ngavikāreņa vastunah šalyam ādiset ||11|| 


nc grhiņo 'ngavikāreņa | B; grhinodbhavikarena A 


dr$yate Sakuno vapi sa yasya šrūyate svanah | 
namasamkirtanam yasya tasya Salyam vinirdiset ||12|| (v. 12cd = KSP [5]) 


12c namasamkirtanam | em.; namasamkirtta[na] A; namasamkirttate B 


sūtre prasaryamane tu mārjāro yadi langhanam | 
rasabhasthi vijānīyā tadange vastuno hy adhah |[18|| (v. 18 = Ks» [3](1)) 


18b langhanam | A; lamghayete B (hypermetrical) 18c rasabhasthi ] A; rāsabhāsthim B 
18d tadange | A; tadango B 


yadi $va langhate sūtram tasmim $vanasthim adiset | (v. 19ab = KSP 


[3](3)) 


müsikalanghanenaiva ajavikasthim ādiset ||19|| (v. 19cd = Ks» [3](13)) 


19a langhate | A BP; lamghayete B% 19b $vànasthim | em.; $vàno sthim A; švāno 'sthim B 
19c müsikalanghanenaiva | A; mūsakālamghanenaiva B 


520 


TANEMURA 


ajavikas ca gosthi syad gava-m-asvasthim adiset | (v. 20a = KSP [3](4)) 
ašvasya langhanenaiva mahisam salyam ādišet ||20|| (v. 20cd = KSP 


[3](5)) 


20b asvasthi | A; BP; āsvāsthi B^ B. 20d mahisam $alyam ādiset ] A; mahiset B (haplo- 
graphical error) 


mahisalanghanenaiva asthi syaj jambukasya tu | (v. 21ab = KsP [3](8)) 
jambukalanghanenaiva $ükarasthi samadiset ||21|| 
sukarakramane vyaghram vyaghrenaiva tu kufijaram | (v. 22a = KSP 


[3](11), v. 22b = KsP [3](12)) 
kufijarakramane hy ustram fangarasotstralanghanat ||22|| (v. 22c = KSP 


[3](6)) 


22a vyāghram | A; n.e. B (caused by eye-skip) 22c ustram | A; astam B 


nrlanghanan narāsthi syat kharasthi kharalanghanat | (v. 23b = KSP 


[3](2)) 


evam samlaksayec chalyam langhanadarsanadibhih ||23|| 
23a nrlanghanan | A; nrlamghana B. 23a narāsthi | A B^5; nrrāsthi B^^. 23c samlaksayec | 


A; Salaksayec B 


gavam mūtreņa rūpyam syāt purisenaiva kaficanam | (v. 32ab = KSP 
[6](1)) 

loham mārjāramūtreņa purisenasam ādišet ||32|| 

32a gavam | A; gavā B. 32a rūpyam | conj.; rušmam A; rugmam B 32c loham ] em.; loha 


AB 32c mārjāramūtreņa | B.; mārjāmūtreņa A 32d purīsenāšam | A; purisenagam B 


santayam disi Sakuno madhuram ravate yadi | 
artham tatra vijaniyad ... ||34|| (v. 34abc = KsP [5](4)) 


34a šāntāyām | A; šāntāyā B 


širahkaņdūyamāne tu širasi $alyam uddharet ||63|| 


63c širahkaņdūyamāne | A; sirakanduyama*nde(?) B 63d Sirasi ] B; ++[sa] A 


THE KRIYĀSAMGRAHAPANJIKĀ OF KULADATTA 521 


asthisalyam tu tam jfieyam purusardhena tisthati | (vv. 63c-64b = KSP 


[4](2)) 


mukhe kandüyamanena kasthajam va sirobhavah ||64|| 


64b tisthati | A; tistati B. 64c kaņdūyamānena | A;kanduyamanenaB 64d kasthajam ] 
B; kastajam A 


adhasthad dhastadvayenaiva tisthate natra samSayah | (vv. 64c-65b = 


KSP [4](4)) 
hanujam dantasamsparšād uddhare tatpramanatah ||65|| (v. 65cd = KSP 


[4](5)) 
65a adhasthād | A; adha B 65b tisthate ] em.; tistate AB 65b samšayah | A; sa$ayah B 


65c dantasamsparsad | B; dattasamsparsad A“; dattasamsparšād AP* 65d uddhare | em.; 
urddhare A; dhaddhare B 


yadangam sprsate hy artham tadange salyam adiset | 
yadi kaņdūyate grīvā srnkhalālohajam viduh ||66]| 


66a spršate hy | A; sprtete ty B 

hastatrayena sā jfieya smkhala nātra saméayah | (vv. 66c—67b = KSP 
[4](7)) 

ange kaņdūyāmāne tu angajam šalyam adiset ||67|| 


67b nātra ] A; šātra B 


adhastāt tatpramāņe tu uddharec chalyam ādarāt | 
sphanake spr$yamane tu sphanajam Salyam adiset ||68|| 


68b uddharec chalyam adarat ] A; širaši Salya sudarat B. 68cd Sphana(ka) is a corruption 
of skandha? 


tisthate tatpramane tu samyag jfiatva samuddharet | 
bahukandüyamane tu bahuke katakah sthitah ||69]| 


69b jñātvā | A; krtvaB 69c bāhu” ] B; vāhū° A 69d bahuke katakah | conj.; vahuje 
nakalah A; vahyaje nalakah B 


hastatrayena sārdhena tisthate nātra samSayah | (vv. 69c—70b = KSP 


[4]10)) 


522 


TANEMURA 


haste kaņdūyamāne tu khatvāpādam vinirdišet ||70]| (v. 7ocd = KSP 


[4](12)) 


70a sardhena | A; saddhenaB 7ob tisthate | A; tistate B 


jānumātre sthitam vidyat karajangulisparsanat | 
haste kandüyamane va katimatre sthitam viduh |[71]| 


71a vidyat | B; vindyan A 71c haste kaņdūyamāne va | A; hastena kandüyamane *va(?) B 
(hypermetrical) 


salyam $amuddhared vidvān kapālam vatha mrnmayam | (vv. 71c-72b = 


ks» [4] (1)) 
urahkandüyamane tu pasusalyam athangajam ||72|| 


72a šalyam | A; šalya B 72c urahkaņdūyamāne ] em.; urahkaņdūyamānena A; urakaņ- 
dūyamāne B 


sārdhahastadvaye 'dhastāc chalyam yatnāt samuddharet | (vv. 72c—73b = 


KSP [4](14)) 
hrdaye hrdayasparšāt tatpramāņena tanmayam ||73|| 


73a sardhahastadvaye | A; sarddhahastadvayo B 73b yatnāt | em.;yannān A; yanna B. 73c 
hrdayasparsat | em.; hrdayam sparšāt A B 


prsthajam prsthasamsparšād udare tatpramanatah | (v. 74ab = KSP 


[4](15)) 


pāršve samsparšanād vidyac chalyam pamsulikodbhavam ||74]| 


74a prsthajam | B; sprsthajam A 74a prsthasamsparsad | em.; sprsthasamsparsad A B 
74d chalyam ] A; chalyam B 


tatpramane sthitam $alyam uddharec chalyavittamah | (vv. 74c—75b = 
KSP [4](13)) 

katijam katisamsparšād athavā lohakantakam ||75]| 

hastadvayapramāņe tu $alyam tatra samuddharet | (vv. 75c—76b = KSP 


[4](16)) 


ürukandüyamane tu ūrujam vātha dārujam ||76|| 


76b šalyam ] A; SalyaB 76c ūrukaņdūyamāne | A; urukaņdūyamāņe B 76d ūrujam | A; 
urujam B 


THE KRIYĀSAMGRAHAPANJIKĀ OF KULADATTA 523 


sardhahastapramanena $alyam yatnat samuddharet | 
janukandüyato drstva sthāņujam vātha janujam ||77]| 


77a sardhahastapramanena | A; saddhastapramanena B 77b yatnat] A; yannat B 77c 
janukandüyato | A; jānukaņdūto B 77d sthāņujam | corr.; sthanujam A B 


TnadhitopaskarasvapiT hastamātre samuddharet | 
yada samsprsyate janghām janghāsthim tatra nirdiset ||78|| 


78a nādhitopaskarasvāpi | A; naditopaskaramva B (The readings of both A and B are 
suspected but undiagnosed corruption.) 


ekādašāngule 'dhastāt tisthate nātra samšayab | (vv. 78c—79b = KSP 


[4](18)) 


pāde kāņdūyamāņe tu kautijaram salyam adiset ||79|| 


79a ekādašāngule 'dhastāt | A; ekādašāngulodhastā B 79b tisthate ] A; tistateB 79d 
kaufijaram | B; kaujeram A 


dvadasangulamane tu šalyam kantakam uddharet | (vv. 79c—80b = KSP 


[4](20)) 


angustake yada kaņdū khatikasalyam ādišet ||80|| 
80b šalyam ] A; šalya B 


rītikācitrasammisram loham va tatra nirdiset | 
angulyam yadi kanduya asvapadam vinirdiset ||81]| 


81a ritikacitrasammisram | B; rītikācitrasanmrišram A — 8b loham ] A;lohaB 81d 
asvapādam | B; astapādam A 81d vinirdiset ] A; vinidišet B 


sardhavitastimatrena tisthate natra samSayah | 
kanisthikayam kaņdūya kamsyam tatra vinirdiset ||82|| 


82a sàrdha? | em.; sārddham A; saddha? B 82b tisthate ] A; tistate B. 82c kanisthikayam 
] A; kanisthikāyā B 82d kamsyam | B; kamsamsyavit A 


tac castangulamane tu tisthate natra samšayaļ | (vv. 82c-83b = KsP 
[4](21)) 


adhopadasya kaņdūya carma $alyam samadiset |[83|| 


83a tac ] A; ta[m]B 83d carma | A; cama B 


524 TANEMURA 
astangulapramane tu tisthate šalyakaņtakam | 
iti Salyoddharapatalah. 


Provisional translation 

Next, I shall, as told before, teach the characteristics of extraneous substances, 
which exist beneath the site (vastumadhye) and cause calamities to people. 
() 

When the site, which has been made square, is being divided with cords, [the 
officiant] who has knowledge of divisions of the site (vastudehavibhaga- 

jūah) should investigate extraneous substances by omens, etc. (2) 

When the division of [the sites for] a house and a shrine with cords has been 
commenced, the wise man [i.e. the officiant] should notice an omen and 
observe it correctly. (3) 

[The omens are] seeing [someone or something], announcing [a creature's 
name], cries [of animals], and the actions of a donor. [The officiant] should 
carefully notice an extraneous substance as situated beneath the site. (4) 

If a heretic is seen, that brings an undesirable outcome to householders. If one 
hears someone hurt, wounded, or killed, or something broken, then [the offi- 
ciant] should not divide the site with cords. (5) 

If there are persons who are not praised, undesirable, or blameworthy, then 
one should avoid seeing such persons, hearing [the names of] such persons 
announced, and hearing the voices of such persons. (6) 

If a cord is cut, there is death or deadly pain.3? (= KsP [1]) (7ab) 

[The officiant] who has knowledge of the ritual should perform the fire rite for 
quelling of calamities, if he becomes aware of such [omens]. (7cd) 

Since a levelled house brings every comfort and prosperity [to the residents], 
one should divide the site properly with cords and examine extraneous sub- 
stances beneath the site (vesmani). (8) 

[The officiant] should carefully prognosticate the extraneous thing [under- 
ground] by observing [a creature] step over a cord, seeing [an auspicious 
or inauspicious thing], announcing a [creature's] name, or hearing [an aus- 
picious or inauspicious sound]. If [a creature] steps over [a cord] or is seen, 
or if one [hears] a cry of [a creature] or announce a [creature’s] name, then 
[the officiant] should prognosticate the extraneous thing [related to] that 
creature according to the stepping over and other [omens]. (= Ks» [o]) (9- 
10) 


32 The second outcome, deadly pain, is not mentioned in the Kriyasamgrahapafijika. 


THE KRIYĀSAMGRAHAPANJIKĀ OF KULADATTA 525 


If a creature [intrudes into the site] stepping over [a cord], then [the officiant] 
should know that there is the body [of that creature, i.e. bones of that crea- 
ture beneath the site]. He should prognosticate an extraneous substance 
beneath the site (vastunah) by the bad condition of the householder’s body. 
(x) 

If an omen is seen, or if [a creature] cries out, or if [someone] announces a 
[creature’s] name, then [the officiant] should prognosticate an extraneous 
thing [related to] that [creature]. (= KsP [5]) (12) 


If a cat [intrudes into the site] stepping over [a cord] while a cord is being cast, 
it should be understood that there is the bone of an ass beneath that spot of 
the site. (= KsP [3](1)) (18) 

If a dog steps over a cord, [the officiant] should prognosticate the bone of a dog 
[beneath] the [spot of the site]. (= KsP [3](3)) (19ab) 

If a mouse passes [over a cord], [the officiant] should prognosticate bones of 
goats and sheep [beneath the site].?* (= ksP [3](13)) (aged) 

If rams or sheep [step over a cord], there is the bone of a cow [beneath the 
site]. (= KSP [3](4)) (20a) 

If cows [step over a cord], [the officiant] should prognosticate bones of a horse 
[beneath the site]. (20b) 

If a horse steps over [a cord], [the officiant] should prognosticate an extraneous 
thing related to a buffalo], i.e. the bone of a buffalo beneath the ground].3¢ 
(= ks» [3](5)) (20cd) 

If a buffalo steps over [a cord], there is the bone of a jackal [beneath the site]. 
(= ks» [3](8)) (21ab) 

If a jackal steps over [a cord], [the officiant] should prognosticate the bone of 
a boar [beneath the site]. (21cd) 

If a hog steps over [a cord], there is [the bone of] a tiger [beneath the site]. (= 
KSP [3](1)) (22a) 


33 Although the Devyāmata does not mention the bone of a cat as an extraneous thing, it 
should also be prognosticated if we consider v. 10 of the Devyamata above. 

34 The Kriyāsamgrahaparijikā mentions the bone of a mouse, which is not mentioned in the 
Devyāmata, as the extraneous thing in the case that a mouse passes over a cord. If we con- 
sider v. 10 of the Devyamata above, the bone of mouse should also be prognosticated in 
this case. 

35 The Kriyāsamgrahaparijikā mentions bones of rams and sheep, which are not mentioned 
in the Devyamata as extraneous things. Probably, in this case too, the rule of v. 10 above 
should be applied. 

36  Iftheruleof v.10 is applied, the bone of a horse should also be prognosticated in this case. 
The bone of a buffalo is not mentioned in the corresponding part of the Kriyasamgraha- 
paíijika. 


526 TANEMURA 


If a tiger [steps over a cord], there is [the bone of] an elephant [beneath the 
site]. (= KsP [3](12)) (22b) 

If an elephant steps over [a cord], [there is the bone of] a camel [beneath the 
site].?? (= ksP [3](6)) (22c) 

If an camel steps over [a cord], there is fangārasat [beneath the site]. (22d) 

If a man steps over [a cord], there is a human bone [beneath the site]. (23a) 

If an ass [intrudes into the site] stepping over [a cord], there is the bone of an 
ass [beneath the site]. (= KsP [3](2)) (23b) 

In this way, [the officiant] should examine extraneous substances by [the 
omens] such as stepping over and seeing. (23cd) 


If a cow [which has entered the site] urinates or drops dung, there are pieces 
of silver or gold [beneath the site, respectively].?? (= KsP [6](1)) (32ab) 

If a cat urinates or drops dung, [the officiant] should prognosticate a piece 
of iron or an inauspicious thing (? asam)?? [beneath the site, ] respectively. 
(32cd) 


If a bird sings sweetly in an auspicious direction, then [the officiant] should 
prognosticate a treasure there. (v. 34abc = KSP [5](4)) (34a—c) 


If [someone] scratches his head, [the officiant] should remove an extraneous 
thing at a depth of the full height of a man (sirasi). On the other hand, it 
should be understood that the extraneous thing which is a bone exists [at 
a depth of] a half [of the height] of a man [underground].^? (= Ks» [4](1)) 
(63c-64b) 

If [someone] touches his mouth (or face), there must be [an extraneous thing] 
which is a piece of wood or hair (? sirobhavah) [at a depth of] two cubits 
underground.^! (= KsP [4](4)) (64c-65b) 

If [someone] touches his teeth, there is [an extraneous thing] which is a tooth 
(hanujam). |The officiant] should remove [it from a depth of] that measure- 
ment [= up to the teeth ].^? (= KsP [4](5)) (65cd) 


37 The Devyamata does not mention the bone of an elephant, which is mentioned in the 
Kriyasamgrahapafijika. Probably, in this case too, the rule of v. 10 should be applied. 

38 The Kriyadsamgrahapanjika does not mention the former omen, i.e. the urination of a cow. 

39 There might bea corruption here. It is expected that the extraneous thing is a certain kind 
of metalin this case. 

40 The Kriyasamgrahapafijika teaches only that there is an extraneous thing at a depth of 
the full height of a man in this case. 

41 The Kriydsamgrahapanijika teaches that the depth is three cubits in this case. 

42 The Kriyāsamgrahapaīijikā teaches that the depth is three cubits in this case. 


THE KRIYĀSAMGRAHAPANJIKĀ OF KULADATTA 527 


If [someone] touches a part of his body [the officiant] should prognosticate an 
extraneous thing (artham ... $alyam) [at a depth] up to the part. (66ab) 

If [someone] touches his neck, they know that there is [an extraneous thing] 
which is an iron chain. It should be understood that that iron chain [exists 
at a depth of] three cubits [underground]. There is no doubt about it.3 (= 
KSP [4](7)) (66c-67b) 

If [someone] scratches a part of his body, [the officiant] should prognosticate 
an extraneous thing related to the part (arigajam) at a depth up to the part 
(adhastāt tatpramāņe). [The officiant] should remove the extraneous thing 
carefully. (67c-68b) 

If [someone] scratches his shoulder (?), [the officiant] should prognosticate an 
extraneous thing related to the shoulder (?), which is at a depth up to the 
[shoulder (?)]. If he knows it correctly, he should remove it.44 (68c-69b) 

If someone scratches his arm, there is armlet [at the depth] up to the arm.* 
[That extraneous thing] exists [at a depth of] three and a half cubits [under- 
ground ].*6 There is no doubt about it. (= KsP [4](10)) (69c-70b) 

If [someone] touches his [left?] hand, [the officiant] should prognosticate the 
leg of a couch [beneath the site]. If [someone] touches his finger (karajan- 
guli), [the officiant] should know [that the extraneous thing] is situated at 
a depth up to the knee.*” (= KsP [4](12)) (7oc-71b) 

Alternatively, if [someone] scratches his [right?] hand, it is understood that 
there is an extraneous thing, i.e. a skull or [a bowl] made of clay [at a depth] 
just up to the buttocks [underground]. The wise man [i.e. officiant] should 
remove it.48 (= KsP [4](11)) (1c-72b) 

If [someone] scratches his breast, there is the bone of an animal (pasusalyam) 
or hair (angajam)*? [at a depth of] one and a half cubits underground.5° 


43 The Kriyasamgrahapafijika additionally mentions a necklace and skeleton of a cat as 
extraneous things in the case that someone touches his neck. 

44  Iamnotsure what sphana or sphanaka means. The preceding verse refers to the neck and 
the following the arm, so this word probably means shoulder. 

45  Ifwerefer to the parallel in the Kriyasamgrahaparíijika, the extraneous thing to be prog- 
nosticated is an ornament related to the arm. 

46 The Kriyāsamgrahapaīijikā teaches that the depth is the measurement up to the neck. 

47 The Kriyāsamgrahapaījikā limits the first condition to the left hand, but does not men- 
tion the second condition, i.e. touching a finger. 

48  TheKriyasamgrahapafijika limits the condition to the right hand. The relevant part of the 
Devyāmata does not have a word corresponding to fprsthakapālam*t in the Kriyasam- 
grahapafijikā, i.e. the Devyamata does not give a clue to solve the textual problem in the 
Kriyadsamgrahapanjika. 

49 The Kriyāsamgrahapaīijikā does not mention this second extraneous thing. 

50 The Kriyasamgrahapanijika teaches that the depth is the measurement up to the buttocks 
in this case. 


528 TANEMURA 


[The officiant] should remove that extraneous thing carefully. (= Ks» [4](14)) 
(72c-73b) 

If [someone] touches his heart, there is [an extraneous thing] related to it (tat- 
mayam) at a depth up to the heart (Ardaye ... pramāņena). (73cd) 

If [someone] touches his back, there is [an extraneous thing] arising from the 
backļ, i.e. a back-bone at the depth up to the back]. If [someone touches] 
his belly, [there is an extraneous thing related to the belly] at the depth up 
to the [belly]. (= ksP [4](15)) (74ab) 

If [someone] touches his side, one should prognosticate that there is an extra- 
neous thing arising from dust. The best knower of extraneous things [= the 
officiant] should remove that extraneous thing which exists [at a depth of] 
that measurement [= up to the side] [underground]. (= ksP [4](13)) (74c— 
75b) 

If [someone] touches his buttocks, there is [an extraneous thing] arising from 
the buttocks[, i.e. coccyx?] or an iron nail at a depth of two cubits [under- 
ground]. [The officiant] should remove that extraneous thing from there. (= 
KSP [4](16)) (75c—76b) 

If [someone] scratches his thigh, there is an extraneous thing related to the 
thigh or piece of wood at a depth of one and a half cubits. [The officiant] 
should remove it carefully. (76c—77b) 

If [someone] is seen to scratch his knee, there is an extraneous thing, i.e. a 
stump (sthanujam) or a knee bone ( janujam) at a depth of one cubit. [The 
officiant] should remove it.5! (77c—78b) 

If [someone] touches his shank, [the officiant] should prognosticate a bone of 
the shank [at a depth of] eleven digits underground in that place. There is 
no doubt about this. (= KsP [4](18)) (78c—79b) 

If [someone] scratches his foot, [the officiant] should prognosticate an extrane- 
ous thing related to an elephant], i.e. a born of an elephant (kaurijaram)|.*2 
He should remove the extraneous thing, i.e. a thorn [at a depth of] twelve 
digits [underground]. (= Ks» [4](20)) (79c-80b) 

If [someone] scratches his big toe, [the officiant] should prognosticate an extra- 
neous thing, i.e. a piece of chalk. Alternatively, he should prognosticate a 
piece of iron mixed with various calxes of brass there. (80c—81b) 


51  Ihavenottranslated the corruption, nādhitopaskarasvāpi. 
52 An extraneous thing prescribed in the corresponding part of the Kriyasamgrahapafijika 
is a piece of silk-cotton wood (šālmalī). 


THE KRIYĀSAMGRAHAPANJIKĀ OF KULADATTA 529 


If [someone] scratches his toe, [the officiant] should prognosticate a foot of a 
horse [beneath the site]. It exists at a depth of one anda half vitastis. There 
is no doubt regarding this. (81c-82b) 

If [someone] scratches his little toe, [the officiant] should prognosticate a piece 
of bell-metal [beneath] the spot. That [extraneous thing] exists [at a depth 
of] eight digits [underground]. There is no doubt about it. (= KsP [4](21)) 
(82c-83b) 

If [someone] scratches his sole, [the officiant] should prognosticate an animal's 
hideas the extraneous thing. There is the extraneous thing ata depth of eight 
digits. (83c-84b) 


These are the rules for the removal of extraneous substances. 


5 Concluding Remarks 


Whereas Saivism produced Pratisthātantras, scriptures which specialise in 
temple construction and installation, Buddhism did not produce a scripture 
in this domain.5^ The author of the Kriyasamgrahaparijika was aware that 
there is no scriptural authority at least with regard to the nimittokti section. 
Thus he states that one should consider various omens based on the half 
stanza from Dipankarabhadra's Guhyasamajamandalavidhi. He also employs 
the word liriga as a synonym of nimitta and uses this word not only for an aus- 
picious or inauspicious sign or omen, but also as a term from logic (inferential 
sign). His intention is probably to state that the word nimitta in the half stanza 
quoted from the GuAyasamajamandalavidhi should be understood as a liriga 
and, therefore, things caused by those lirigas are correctly inferred (anumīyate) 
based on the lingalingisambandha. However, this might not necessarily mean 
that Kuladatta thinks his teachings are non-Buddhist. For in ritual manuals 


53 A foot of a horse (asvapādam) is supported by Ms. B and Ms. A reads astapādam (a spi- 
der). Since the omen is scratching the toe, an extraneous thing related to the foot might 
be better. 

54 The Saivas of Mantramārga produced a secondary body of scriptural authorities, the 
Pratisthatantras, devoted exclusively to the domain of construction of royal temples. They 
also asserted the principle that the Šaiva sthāpaka, the specialist who performs the rit- 
uals related to temple construction and installation, is competent not only for the Saiva 
domain but also for all the levels that Šaivas ranked below this (Sanderson 2009, 274—275). 
Cf. Devyamata: pāsandidaršanam nestan grhiņām asukhavaham (Ms. A g1v1); Kriyāsam- 
grahapanjika, nimittokti: vidvadbrāhmaņabhiksusādhujanānām samdaršane dharmah 
syāt (Tanemura 2004, 155). 


530 TANEMURA 


it is important that Buddhist mantra-visualisation systems are employed.55 In 
the case of the Kriyasamgrahapafijika, the mantra-visualisation systems of the 
Yogatantra and the “higher” tantras are employed, and in this sense the rituals 
prescribed function as Buddhist. This syncretism of different classes of scrip- 
tures is common to both Šaivism and Tantric Buddhism. 

The nimittokti and other sections (e.g. bhumipartksa) in which close tex- 
tual parallels to Šaiva Pratisthātantras and Paddhatis are found have little to 
do with Šaiva and Buddhist doctrines and those sections have close parallels 
to jyotihsastras and silpasastras5 One might suppose that this is evidence 
of the fact that both Saivism and Buddhism used this kind of literature as 
common sources and established their own respective ritual systems. This is 
probably not the case. Although the non-sectarian parallels are common to 
the Šaiva Pratisthātantras or Paddhatis and the Buddhist ritual manuals, and 
these two religions employ different mantra-visualisation systems, the struc- 
tures or styles of the rituals prescribed are similar to each other. For example, 
while the Kriyāsamgrahapaījikā teaches that in the preparation of water jugs 
the officiant should make the assistants recite Mahayana sutras, the Somasam- 
bhupaddhati prescribes a preparation ritual for consecration of the Sivalinga in 
which mantras of the four Vedas are recited in the four directions (Tanemura 
2004, 235, note 50). Considering the parallels on the scriptural level mentioned 
above, the parallel repertoire of rituals prescribed in Šaiva ritual texts and the 
Kriyāsamgrahapafijikā, and the similarities of structures or styles of the rituals, 
it is not implausible that one religion, probably Buddhism, followed examples 
of the other. It is, of course, important to consider various parallels of the kinds 
presented in this paper in greater detail in order to understand the relationship 
between Saivism and Tantric Buddhism. 


55 The sutrapatanavidhi, in which the nimittokti section is included, is based on the mantra- 
visualisation system of the Vajradhatumandala taught in the Sarvatathagatatattvasam- 
graha. See Tanemura 2004, 139—155, 237—250. 

56 For example, descriptions similar to those of the nimittokti of the Kriyasamgrahapafijika 
are found in the Brhatsamihtā 53.105110 (EP vol. 1, pp. 489—491). See also Tanemura 2004, 
245-250. 


THE KRIYĀSAMGRAHAPANJIKĀ OF KULADATTA 531 


Appendix: A Provisional Edition and Translation of the 
Bhūšalyasūtrapātananimittavidhi of the Acaryakriyasamuccaya 


After I had finished writing a draft of this article, I found a small section of 
Jagaddarpana's Acaryakriyasamuccaya which teaches about extraneous things 
beneath the site for a mandala or monastery, and the omens for those extrane- 
ous things. Here I present a preliminary edition and provisional translation of 
the relevant section. This is written in verse, and the metre is šārdūlavikrīditā. 
Most probably the material is silently quoted from the work of a predeces- 
sor; the section colophon of Ms. K states that the Ācāryakriyāsamuccaya is a 
compilation of various teachings (for this colophon, see the apparatus of this 
preliminary edition). 


10 


15 


532 TANEMURA 


sūtram tatra nipātayet suvidhinā tullīkrte bhūtale 
paficajfianamayam visuddhavalitam nirgranthi nābhyūrdhvagam | 
sthairyadhyanasamanvito varagurur nasagramadhye 'ksiņī 
ghantamangalagitasankhapathanaih samstūya vam$asvanaih |[1]| 


airandhrikarapallavoddhrtapayomisrapraphullojjvalair 

argham ratnasuvarnagandhakusumaih samdapayed dayakah | 
naimittam ca nirūpayed gurumrtih sūtrasya samcchedane 

nūnam jambukagrdhrakankaruditair mrtyur bhavet svaminah ||2|| 
2c gurumrtih ... samcchedane] = Ks» [1] 2d = KsP [2] 


yajjatiyavisesasattvajanitaih sutram samullanghyate 
tajjatiyakam asthi tatra niyatam sutradhare vastuni | 

datuh parsvagato hi sūtravitate yannama samkirtayet 
tannamanugasattvakikasamalam datrsthabhukhandale |[3|| 
gab = KsP [3] 3cd = Ks» [5] 


svangam va spršati drutam vidhivasat tanmanam akhanya tac 
chalyanam bahudha nimittam uditam samksepamatram tv iha | 
gaur agatya tadā purisam asrjat tanmānahema sthitam 

yadva bālakumārikā ca visrjet tanmānarūpyam bhavet ||4]| 

4a = KSP [4] 4c = KSP [6](1) 4d = KsP [6] (2) 


2 visuddhavalitam] KP Ni N2 (The relevant word in Ms. K is corrected at least three times: viX ^ 
vidha > visuvalitam > visuddhavalitam) || nirgranthi] Ni; nigranthi K; nitranthiN2 3 nāsāgra- 
madhye] K Ni; nasagramadhya N2 || 'ksini] conj.; 'ksano K; ksano Ni N2 4 ? pathanaih] 
Ni N2; ?pradhvanaih K || samstūya] em.(<Tib. bstod pas); santūryya K; santūrya N1N2 5 
airandhrikara?] Ni N2; airandhrikara? K || ° praphullojjvalair] Ni N2; ?prasphullojjvalair K 6 
dāyakah] em.; dayakam K N1 N2 7 gurumrtih] N2; gurumrti K 8 jambuka?] N2; jam- 
büka? K || ° ruditair] K; ?rudite N2 || mrtyur] K; mrtyu N2 10 ° sattva°] N2; ?satya? 12 
dātuh] KP N2; padatuh K“ || parsvagato] K N2P*; $vagato N2% — 15 ākhanya] N2; ākhana K 
16 chalyanam] K; chalyānām m N2 || bahudha] KPe N2; bahuvidhā K“ || nimittam uditam] K; 
nimittavyditam or nimittamaditam N2 || tv] N2;n.e.K 17 asrjat] N2; asrjan K 18 visrjet] K; 
visrjat N2 || tanmānarūpyam] N2; tanmānarūpa K || bhavet] N2; bhave K 


7 naimittam] The folios which contain the text from nimittam to the end of this chapter are missing 
from Ms. Ni. 


THE KRIYĀSAMGRAHAPANJIKĀ OF KULADATTA 533 


The excellent master [= officiant] in steady meditation, gazing upon the centre 
of the tip of his nose, should cast the cord on the surface of the site which 
has been levelled following the rules exactly. [The cord,] into which [the five 
threads of the five colours] are twined, has as its nature the five wisdoms and 
is purified. [It] does not have a knot, and is placed in the centre [of the site 
before casting]. (1a—c) 

Having praised [the cord] with the sounds of a bell, auspicious song, conch 
shell, and bamboo flute, the donor should offer guest water [to the cord] 
together with jewels, gold, and fragrant flowers, which are blooming and 
beautiful, and mixed with the juice extracted from the sprouts of the aira- 
ndhrīkara. (1d—2b) 

[The officiant] should examine omens. If a cord is cut, the death of a master 
[will take place]. (= Ks» [1]) If the cries of a jackal, a vulture and a heron 
[are heard], then the death of a lord [will] definitely [take place]. (= KsP [2]) 
(2cd) 

If a cord is stepped over by a specific kind of creature, then there must be a 
bone of that creature beneath the site (vastuni) on which the cord is being 
cast (sūtrādhāre). (= KsP [3]) (sab) 

If [some other man] who stands beside the donor announces a [creature's] 
name while a cord is being cast, then there is an impure substance, i.e. a 
bone of the creature of the name beneath the site on which the donor is 
standing. (= KSP [5]) (3cd) 

If [someone] touches [a particular part of] his body and [the site] is guickly 
dug to a depth up to that [particular part of the body] according to the rules, 
then there is the [extraneous thing corresponding to the omen]. (= KsP [4]) 
(4a) 

[With regard to bodily sensations,] various omens of extraneous things [be- 
neath the site] are taught. In this [short section], however, [the explanation 
is] just abridged. (4b) 

If a cow comes and drops dung, then there is the same amount of gold as the 
[dung beneath the site]. (= KsP [6](1)) Alternatively, if a young girl [comes 
and] urinates, then there must be the same amount of silver as [the urine 
beneath the site]. (= ksP [6](2)) (4cd) 


10 


15 


20 


534 TANEMURA 


maņdūkadhvaninā grhe jalabhayam dhūmena cittākulam 

rogārtāngavihīnakusthavivašastrīdaršaņe rogabhak | 

jīvamjīvamayūrakokilašukāš cakrankahamsarsabhas 

tesam kantharutam subhodayakaram sampatkaram dar$anam ||5|| 

5a maņdūkadhvaninā ... jalabhayam ] = Ks» [6](3) 5a dhūmena cittakulam ] = KSP 
[6](7) 5b = xs» [6](8) 5cd = ks» [6](4) 


simhāmbhodhararājakunījararavair dhanyarthalabhodayam 
balakridanagankhamangaladhvanau dravyagamas tadgrhe | 
chatrambhojapatakamurajadhvajalankararajangana- 
matsyaksiradadhindramadyadahanajvalaphalanam jayam ||6]| 
6a = KsP [6](5) 6b = xs» [6](6) 


dhanyadravyasutadivrddhir atulā nispannakaryam tada 
bhiksubrahmanadhidhanottamajanaih samdar$ane dharmabhak | 
prarambhe bhuvi sütrapatanavidhau devadisamsthapane 
$reyolingam idam hitodayakaram samviksya kuryat tadā ||7|| 
6c—7a = KSP [6](9) 7b = KSP [6](10) 


silpacaryavicaracarucaturais tyaktvasubham sarvatha 


yena sthananivasisarvajanatarajfiam ca datur yatha | 
kalyanaya subhodayaya nitaram adau vicaryaiva tat 
sattaragrahayogavasarasubhe karyam samarabhyatam ||8|| 


iti bhūšalyasūtrapātananimittavidhih. 


1 maņdūkadhvaninā] N2; maņdakadhvaninā K || cittakulam] em.; cintākulam K; citākulam N2 
2 rogartanga?] K; rogarttanga? N2 || ° vihina?] N2; ?vihina? || ° vivasa°] em.; ?vivasah K; °viva- 
gah N2 || ° strīdaršaņe] N2; Ystrīdaršaņa K 3 cakranka?] K; cakramnka? N2 || ° rsabhas] N2; 
°ganahK 7 ?ravair|em.;?ravaiKN2 8 °dhvanau]N2;°dhvanairK 9 chatrambhoja?] KPē; 
cchatrambhojakha? K*e; chatrambhojakhama N2 || ° muraja?] K; °jera° N2 || ° dhvajalankara?] 
K;?dhvajaghatalankara? N2 10 ° dadhindra?] N2;°dadhisu°K 12 dhanya?] K; dhanyartha? 
N2 | nispanna?] Kinispan? N2 14 bhuvi] N2;guruK 15 šreyolingam] K; šriyolingam N2 || 
samviksya] N2; samvidya K 17 silpācārya”] em.; šisyācāryya” K; šilppācārya” N2 || ° caturais] 
K; catures N2 18 yena] N2; ye K || sthananivasi?] N2; sthanavasinam K || ° sarvajanata?] 
N2; sarvvajananam K*%; sarvvajanatānām K?- || ca datur] N2; pradābhūr K 19 tat] K; tata 
N2 21 iti bhūsalyasūtrapātananimittavidhih] em. based upon N2; nānāmatāt samākrsya man- 
dalacaryadarppanaviracite kriyasamuccaye bhūšalyasūtrapātananimittavidhih sastamapatalah 
K; iti bhūšalyasūtrapātananimitavidhi N2 


8 ° mangala?] la of mangala must be short (dhv does not make the vowel heavy). 9 muraja]la 
of muraja must be short (dhv does not make the vowel heavy). 


THE KRIYĀSAMGRAHAPANJIKĀ OF KULADATTA 535 


If a frog croaks, there is danger of water in the [donor's?] house. (= Ks» [6](3)) 
If smoke [is seen], there is distraction of mind. (= Ks» [6](7)) If a person 
suffering from a disease (rogartanga°), a person of a lower [class], a person 
suffering from leprosy, a deranged person (?vivasa?), and a woman are seen, 
then it causes disease (rogabhāk). (= KsP [6](8)) (sab) 

Songs (kantharutam) of a jīvamjīvaka bird, peacock, kokila bird, parrot, ca- 
kranka, hamsa, and a bull bring auspiciousness. If [these creatures] are seen, 
it brings prosperity. (= KsP [6](4)) (5cd) 

The roar of a lion, the sound of thunder, and the roar of a royal elephant bring 
the gain of grain and property. (= KsP [6](5)) (6a) 

If the voices of children playing, the sound of a conch-shell, or an auspicious 
[song are heard], it brings wealth to the [donor's] house. (= Ks» [6](6)) (6b) 

If a parasol, lotus, banner, muraja drum, flagpole, ornament, a woman of the 
court, fish, milk, the best curd, wine, blazing fire, and fruits [are seen], then 
there are victory, extraordinary increase of grain, property, [the number of] 
sons, and other [merits], and the completion of duties. (= KsP [6](9)) (6c— 
78) 

If a bhiksu, brahmana, wise man (°dhi°), or a wealthy man (°dhanottamajana-) 
is seen, it brings virtue. (= KsP [6](10)) (7b) 

In the consecration of [images of] deities and other [sacred objects], [the offi- 
ciant] should examine the [above-mentioned] omens which bring merits 
[to the donor] in the commencement of the rite of the casting of cords, and 
then perform [the casting of cords]. (7cd) 

The officiant with special knowledge of architecture?" who is skilled in the 
examination [of omens] should abandon inauspicious[, extraneous] things 
by all means. By doing this ( yena), fortune and auspiciousness will certainly 
be brought to the donor, the king, and all people who live in the region. 
[Therefore, the officiant] should first examine the [omens], and then under- 
take the rite [tofollow] when the combination of fixed stars and planets, and 
the day are auspicious. (8) 


These are the rules for extraneous things beneath the site and the omens 
[observed] in the rite of casting of cords. 


57  Ihavenotseen the word silpacarya elsewhere. If this is nota corruption, it probably refers 
toa particular class of officiant which is equivalent to the sthapaka, the Saiva officiant who 
specialises in the installation of images and consecration of temples. 


536 TANEMURA 


Abbreviations 

ac before correction 

conj. a diagnostic conjecture 

COTT. a correction 

DM Devyāmata 

em. an emendation 

KSP Kriyasamgrahaparijika 

NAK National Archives, Kathmandu 

n.e. not existent 

NGMPP Nepal-German Manuscript Preservation Project 

pc after correction 

X an illegible aksara 

+ an aksara lost due to damage to the manuscript. 

Tet suspected but undiagnosed corruption 
References 


Primary Sources and Sigla 
Ācāryakriyāsamuccaya by Jagaddarpana or Darpanacarya 
(K) Manuscript preserved in the Kyoto University Library, No. 7. 
(N1) Manuscript preserved in Kaiser Library, Kathmandu, Access No. 110. 
(N2) Manuscript preserved in NAK, No. 4—123/vi. bauddhatantra 16; NGMPP B31/5. 


Kriyāsamgrahapafijikā by Kuladatta 

See Tanemura 2004. 

For sigla N K O Ci C2 C3 T1 T2 T3, see Tanemura 2004, 103-103. 

(N2) Manuscript preserved in Kaiser Library, Kathmandu, Access No. 109. 

(N3) NGMPP E365/12. According to the card catalogue, N3 is a private manuscript of 
B.H. Bajracharya. The short title given in the card catalogue is Parijika. 


Guhyasamajamandalavidhi by Dipankarabhadra 

(Ms.) Niedersāchsishe Staats- und Universitātsbibliothek, Gottingen, Cod. Ms. Sanscr. 
257, folios 6v4—16v. 

(ES) “Sriguhyasamajamandalavidhih.” Dhih: Journal of Rare Buddhist Texts Research Unit 
42 (2006): 109—154. 


THE KRIYĀSAMGRAHAPANJIKĀ OF KULADATTA 537 


Devyāmata 

(A) NAK 1-279 vi. Saivatantra 104; NGMPP A41/15—42/1 (catalogue title: Niévasakhyama- 
hātantra). 

(B) NAK 1-1003; NGMPP B27/6 (catalogue title: Pratisthātantra). 


Pingalāmata 
NAK 3-376; NGMPP A42/2. 


Brhatsamhitā by Varāhamihira 
(E5) M. Ramakrishna Bhat, ed. Varahamihira’s Brhatsamhitā. 2 vols. Reprint, Delhi: 
Motilal Banarsidass, 1997 [1981]. 


Bhramaharanama Hevajrasadhana (Bhramahara) by Ratnakarasanti 
See Isaacson 2002. 


Mandalopayika by Padmasrimitra 
Ms. preserved in the Tokyo University Library, No. 280 (New Number). 


Vajravali by Abhayakaragupta 

(EM) Masahide Mori, ed. Vajrāvalī of Abhayakaragupta: Edition of Sanskrit and Tibetan 
Versions. 2 vols. Buddhica Britannica Series Continua x1. Tring: Institute of Buddhist 
Studies, 2009. 

(A) NAK 3-402 vi. bauddhatantra 76 = NGMPP A48/3. 

(B) NAK 5—84 vi. bauddhatantra 78 = NGMPP B31/14. 


Somasambhupaddhati 
For the pratisthā section see Brunner-Lachaux 1998. 


Secondary Sources 

Brunner-Lachaux, Hélène. 1998. Somasambhupaddhati: Rituels dans la tradition sivaite 
selon Somasambhu, quatrième partie, rituels optionnels: pratistha. Publications du 
département d'indologie 25.4. Pondichéry: Institut Français de Pondichéry/École 
francaise d' Extréme-Orient. 

Isaacson, Harunaga. 2002. “Ratnakarasanti’s Bhramaharanama Hevajrasadhana: Crit- 
ical Edition (Studies in Ratnākarašānti's tantric works 111)" Kokusai Bukkyogaku 
Daigakuin Daigaku Kiyo [Journal of the International College for Advanced Bud- 
dhist Studies] 5: 80—55. 

Petech, Luciano. 1984. Medieval History of Nepal (c. 750-1480). 2nd edition. Serie Ori- 
etale Roma, no. 54. Roma: Istitute per il Medio e Estremo Oriente. 

Sanderson, Alexis. 2007. "The Šaiva Exegesis of Kashmir" In Mélanges tantriques à 


538 TANEMURA 


la mémoire d' Hélène Brunner/Tantric Studies in Memory of Hélène Brunner, edited 
by Dominic Goodall and Andrē Padoux, 231-442, 551-582 (bibliography). Collec- 
tion Indologie, no. 106. Pondicherry: Institut Francais d’ Indologie/Ēcole francaise 
d Extrēme-Orient. 

Sanderson, Alexis. 2009. "The Šaiva Age: The Rise and Dominace of Šaivism During the 
Early Medieval Period.” In Genesis and Development of Tantrism, edited by Shingo 
Einoo, 41-349. Institute of Oriental Culture Special Series, no. 23. Tokyo: Institute of 
Oriental Culture, University of Tokyo.*” 

Sanderson, Alexis. 2010. "Ritual for Oneself and Ritual for Others” In Ritual Dynam- 
ics and the Science of Ritual Volume 11. Body, Performance, Agency, and Experience, 
edited by Axel Michaels, et al., 9-20. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz Verlag. 

Sanderson, Alexis. 2014. “The Saiva Literature.” Journal of Indological Studies (New title 
for Studies in the History of Indian Thought) 24 and 25 (2012-2013): 1-113. 

Tanaka, Kimiaki. 2010. Indo ni okeru Mandara no Seiritsu to Hatten [Genesis and Devel- 
opment of the Mandala in India]. Tokyo: Shunjūsha. 

Tanemura, Ryugen. 2004. Kuladatta’s Kriyasamgrahaparijika: A Critical Edition and 
Annotated Translation of Selected Sections. Groningen Oriental Studies, no. 19. Gro- 
ningen: Egbert Forsten. 

Tanemura, Ryugen. 2012. “Padmasrimitra Saku Mandalopayika no Antasthitikarmod- 
deša: Preliminary Edition oyobi Shiyaku" [*Antasthitikarmoddega of Padmasrimi- 
tras Mandalopayika: A Preliminary Edition and Annotated Japanese Translation]. 
Gendai Mikkyo 23: 103-121. 

Tanemura, Ryugen. 2013a. "Šūnyasamādhivajra Chosaku no Sogi Manyuaru Mrtasug- 
atiniyojana: Sansukurittogo Kotei Tekisuto oyobi Cha” [$ünyasamàdhivajra's Mrta- 
sugatiniyojana: A Critical Edition and Notes]. Toyo Bunka Kenkyujo Kiyo [The Mem- 
oirs of Institute for Advanced Studies on Asia] 163:136—n10. 

Tanemura, Ryugen. 2013b. "Šūnyasamādhivajra Chosaku no Sēgi Manyuaru Mrtasuga- 
tiniyojana: Shiyaku oyobi Cha” [Šūnyasamādhivajra's Mrtasugatiniyojana: An Anno- 
tated Japanese Translation]. Acta Tibetica et Buddhica 6: 21-60. 

Watanabe, Katsuhiko et al. 1998. Neparu no Bukkyo Soin: I Baha Bahi Shūfuku Hokokusho 
[The Buddhist Monasteries of Nepal: a Report on the I Baha Bahi Restoration 
Project]. Tokyo: Chüo Koron Bijutsu Shuppan. 


57 Genesis and Development of Tantrism is also published by Sankibo Press, Tokyo, under the 
Japanese Title Tantora no Keisei to Tenkai. 


CHAPTER 22 


Manijusri as Adibuddha: The Identity of an Eight- 
armed Form of Manjusri Found in Early Western 
Himalayan Buddhist Art in the Light of Three 
Nāmasamgīti-Related Texts 


Anthony Tribe 


In this article I suggest that an eight-armed Matijušrī found in early Western 
Himalayan Art be identified not as the bodhisattva Mafijusri but as the Adibud- 
dha.! This figure is distinctive in that it holds four swords, one in each of its four 
right hands, and four book volumes, one in each of its four left hands. Previously 
identified as a form of Dharmadhātuvāgīšvara Matijušrī,? this image is found 
in three locations in the Western Himalayas. Two of these are in Ladakh: one 
at Alchi in the Sumtsek (Gsum-brtsegs, "Three-Storeyed") Temple; the other 
at Mangyu, where there are two images, the first in the Two-armed Maitreya 
Chapel, the second in the Village Stūpa. These three images are murals. The 
third location is in Spiti, where there is a clay sculpture in the Golden Temple 
or Serkhang (Gser-khang) at Lalung.^ 


1 The expression "Adibuddha; which may be rendered in English by “Original Buddha," de- 
notes, in the present context, a figure seen as the embodiment of the gnosis ( jfíana) under- 
lying the state of Buddhahood. It is not surprising, perhaps, that Mafijusri, as the bodhisattva 
of wisdom par excellence, would be reconfigured to function additionally as the Adibuddha. 

This article, which, as will become evident, very much represents work in progress, has its 
origins in research on Vilāsavajra's Namasamgiti commentary, research that was supervised 
some twenty-five years ago by Professor Sanderson. I undertake this foray into the field of 
early Western Himalayan art with some trepidation: it is not an area in which I possess exper- 
tise. I have tried not to go beyond the limits of what I feel confident in claiming; nonetheless, 
there are bound to be errors, both of omission and commission. I offer advance apologies! 

2 The Dharmadhatuvagisvara-mandala as described by Abhayakaragupta has an eight-armed 
form of Mafijusrī, named Mafijughosa, as its central deity (Nispannayogavali—hereafter 
NYĀ—54). 

3 “Two-armed Maitreya Chapel” is the nomenclature of Luczanits 2004; van Ham 2011 uses 
“Maitreya Tower 1.” With “Village Stipa,” however, I follow van Ham’s (ibid.) terminology. 
Luczanits (ibid.) has Four-image Chórten," which is somewhat misleading, as while the build- 
ing contains four clay images there are also mural images. 

4 Regarding the dates of these temples, that of the Alchi Sumtsek is still a matter of contro- 


© ANTHONY TRIBE, 2020 | D01:10.1163/9789004432802 024 


This is an open access chapter distributed under the terms of the CC BY-NC 4.0 license. 


540 TRIBE 


FIGURE 22.1 Eight-armed Matijušrī, uppermost level, Sumtsek, Alchi 
PHOTOGRAPH BY JAROSLAV PONCAR (JP93 26.4.05 WHAV) 


The Sumtsek figure, perhaps the best known of the three, is the central deity 
of a fifty-three deity mandala on the top (i.e., the third) level of the temple 
(Figs. 22.1-2). 

Being on the highest level and also on the wall opposite the temple's en- 
trance, it occupies the place of greatest symbolic importance in the building. 


versy. While the eleventh and thirteenth centuries both have their advocates (see Levy and 
Fidler 2014), I am inclined to agree with Linrothe's (2011) assessment of a mid-twelfth to early- 
thirteenth century time frame. For the Two-armed Maitreya Chapel and the Village Stipa at 
Mangyu, Luczanits (2004, 170, 173) has suggested circa 1225 as a date, and the second half of 
the twelfth century for the Lalung Serkhang (ibid., 106). The eight-armed Mafijusni under dis- 
cussion is also present in the murals of the mid-fifteenth century “Great Stipa,’ or Kumbum 
(sKu’bum), at Gyantse, Tibet (see Ricca and Lo Bue 1993, plates 5—9; and also Tribe 2016, 89— 
90, for a brief discussion). 


MANJUŠRĪ AS ĀDIBUDDHA 541 


FIGURE 22.2 Mandala of eight-armed Mañjuśrī, uppermost level, Sumtsek, Alchi 
PHOTOGRAPH BY JAROSLAV PONCAR (JP83 26.4.01 WHAV) 


This position has been puzzling since one might expect to find a Buddha in 
such a location, not a bodhisattva. Emphasizing this apparent oddity is the plac- 
ing of a mandala of Vairocana on the side wall to Mafijusri’s (proper) right. 
As the cosmic Buddha, Vairocana has seemingly been demoted from a more 
appropriate position on the back wall. 


5 For further photographs of the Sumtsek figure and the associated mandala, see Goepper and 
Poncar 1996, 222-223, and van Ham 2019, 344—345, 354-355. Another mural of a multi-armed 
Mafijusri holding swords in the Sumtsek should be mentioned. To the proper right of the 
monumental clay figure of Maitreya on the ground floor, there is, close to the floor, a seated 
ten-armed, five-headed, white Matijušrī, with each hand holding a sword. Goepper and Pon- 
car have just two views of this figure (1996, 127, 135), one very partial, the other small and 
indistinct: the location makes photography especially challenging. Van Ham (2019, 237) has 
a better image, which shows most of the figure clearly. Four of the left hands are not visi- 
ble, occluded by part of the Maitreya statue. Both van Ham (ibid.) and Goepper and Poncar 
(1996, 132) make slips in their descriptions of the figure, however, the former describing it as 
eight-armed, the latter as six-headed. It is clearly five-headed and the five right hands, as well 
as single visible left hand of the photograph, each bear a sword (van Ham states that all the 
hands have swords). While neither Goepper and Poncar nor van Ham attempt to identify this 
unusual image, van Ham (ibid.) nicely demonstrates the stylistic affinity between it and the 
seated figure at Mangyu by placing photographs of the two figures on the same page. 


542 TRIBE 


FIGURE 22.3  Eight-armed Mañjuśrī, Two-armed Maitreya Chapel, Mangyu 
PHOTOGRAPH BY CHRISTIANE PAPA-KALANTARI (CP02 44,39 WHAV) 


At nearby Mangyu, the figure (Fig. 22.3) in the Two-armed Maitreya Chapel 
is found on the (proper) left panel of two narrow panels framing the halo of 
the large standing clay figure of Maitreya. It is one of a number of single figures 
stacked vertically, and is not surrounded by a mandala. 

The second Mangyu figure (Fig. 22.4), in the Village Stipa, is standing rather 
than seated, and is stylistically related to the seated figure. This form, which I 
have not seen elsewhere, appears to be a variant of the seated figures that were 
the initial and primary focus of this article.® 


6 This figure is, perhaps, particular to the context of the three other murals of standing fig- 


MANJUŠRĪ AS ĀDIBUDDHA 543 


FIGURE 22.4 Standing eight-armed Majijusri, Village Stūpa, 
Mangyu 
PHOTOGRAPH BY CHRISTIANE PAPA-KALAN- 
TARI (CP02 41,14 WHAV) 


The figure in the Lalung Serkhang (Fig. 22.5) is a clay sculpture. It no longer 
holds any attributes. However, like those at Mangyu and Alchi, it does not dis- 
play the dharmacakra-mudra, the standard mudra in early Western Himalayan 
art for the principal hands of figures of Dharmadhatuvagisvara Matijušrī.” Each 


ures—of Prajfiaparamita, Avalokite$vara and Tara—in the Village Stipa. Van Ham (201, 45, 
144) identifies both Mangyu images as Arapacana Mafijuéri variations. For photographs of the 
standing Mafijusri see van Ham ibid., 148—149. 

7 Forexample, in the assembly halls ('Du-khang) in Alchi and Sumda, the Two-armed Maitreya 


544 TRIBE 


FIGURE 22.5 Mandala of eight-armed Matijušrī, Serkhang, Lalung 
PHOTOGRAPH BY JAROSLAV PONCAR (JP92 500,15 
WHAV) 


of the eight hands of the Serkhang figure displays the same mudrā—the mid- 
dle and ring fingers curled down, the middle finger touching the thumb, and 
the index and little fingers extended. Christian Luczanits (2004, 98—101) has 
convincingly argued that the Serkhang and Sumtsek figures are the same.® 


Chapel in Mangyu, the Translator’s Temple at Nako, and the main temple’s assembly hall at 
Tabo. This iconography reflects the Dharmadhatuvagisvara-mandala as described by Abhaya- 
karagupta (NYĀ 54). 

8 Luczanits (2004, 99) observes that the position of the principal right arm does not conform 
to his interpretation, but that there is evidence of repair work at the elbow that likely altered 
the arm’s position. Assuming Luczanits is referring here to the figure's proper right arm, I take 


MANJUŠRĪ AS ĀDIBUDDHA 545 


Giving further support to the identification he notes that the Serkhang Mañ- 
jusrī is flanked on each side by two columns of four further clay sculptures 
that form a surrounding mandala of sixteen figures. The inner two columns 
are comprised of four goddesses? and the four directional tathagatas.!° These 
eight deities also form the first circle surrounding Mafijusri in the Sumtsek 
mandala. 

In what follows I will first examine the identity of the central eight-armed 
figure of Mafijusri, after which I will turn to the question of the nature of the 
mandalas surrounding the figures at Alchi and Lalung, as well as their lack 
around the Mangyu figures. The eight-armed figure, as has been noted, has 
previously been identified as Dharmadhatuvagisvara Mafijusri.! This is pri- 
marily in connection with the Sumtsek mural, and seems to be largely on the 
basis of the two figures having the same number of arms, and, in the case of 
the Sumtsek Mafijusri, also having the same number of heads and each being 
white in colour. Thus Snellgrove and Skorupski (1977, 64) suggested the Sum- 
tsek Mafijusri corresponds to the central figure of the Dharmadhatuvagisvara 
Manjušrī of mandala no. 2 in the Alchi Assembly Hall ('Du-khang).? The two 


him to be suggesting that the arm/hand is in an inappropriate position to hold a sword. 
While he identifies the Serkhang and Sumtsek figures as the same, Luczanits identifies 
them as an alternative form of Dharmadhatuvagisvara Mafijusrī. 

9 Luczanits (2004, 100) suggests that these are Locana, Mamaki, Pandaravasini, and Tara. 
However, if it is right, as I will argue, that these eight-armed Mafiju$ri figures are pri- 
marily associated with variants of the Vajradhatu-mandala of the main yogatantra, the 
Tattvasamgraha, I think the four female figures are more likely to be the Vajradhātu- 
mandala's four Perfections (pāramitā), known also as seals (mudrā) and Family-mothers 
(kulamātr). Locanā et al. are not witnessed as a group of four until later, in texts of the 
yogottara/mahāyoga Guhyasamaja cycle, and likely first appearing in chapter one of the 
Guhyasamajatantra. Tanaka Kimiaki (2018, 134—135) suggests the two groups were origi- 
nally from different traditions, with the Guhyasamajatantra group evolving from a triad 
of kulamātrs—Locanā, Mamaki and Pāņdarā—in the Susiddhikaratantra, and, as a result, 
bypassing the Tattvasamgraha. 

10 Le. Aksobhya (E), Ratnasambhava (S), Amitabha (W), and Amoghasiddhi (N). 

11  Snellgrove and Skorupski (1977, 64), Goepper and Poncar (1996, 223), Luczanits (2004, 98— 
99). Snellgrove and Skorupski's identification has, in lieu of alternatives, generally been 
accepted by subsequent writers. More recently however, given the obvious iconographical 
discrepancies between the Sumtsek Mafijusri (plus mandala) and the Dharmadhatuvagis- 
vara-mandala, the identifications have been made with increasing degrees of caution (see, 
for example, Goepper and Poncar ibid., notes 151 and 153). Linrothe (1996, 272) does not 
follow the Dharmadhātuvāgīsvara identification, and although he does not offer a con- 
crete alternative, he usefully explores reasons why Mañjuśrī was of significance not only 
in the Sumtsek and but in the Alchi complex as a whole. 

12 For a photograph of this figure and first circle of the surrounding mandala see Pal and 
Fournier 1988, plate D 14; also van Ham 2019, 114—121, for the whole mandala and details. 


546 TRIBE 


principal hands of the latter figure are in dharmacakra-mudra. Of the remain- 
ing six, the three on the (proper) right hold in turn a sword, an arrow, and a 
vajra, while those on the left grasp a book, a bow, and a bell. This is standard 
iconography for Dharmadhatuvagisvara Mafijusri.? Yet, as far as I am aware, 
a description of him holding four swords and four book volumes is textually 
unattested. 

However, an eight-armed Mañjuśrī holding four swords and four books is 
described by Mafijusrimitra, Agrabodhi, and Vilasavajra, all in works associ- 
ated with the Namasamgiti (hereafter Ns), “The Chanting of the Names”!+ 
The three works are Mafijušrīmitra's Akasavimala (D 2543, a Ns mandalavidhi), 
Agrabodhi's *Sadhanaupayikal5 (Sgrub pa'i thabs, D 2579, a Ns sadhana), and 
Vilasavajra s Vāmamantrārthāvalokinī (NMAA) (D 2533, a Ns commentary). 
They were most likely composed between the mid-eighth and early-ninth cen- 
turies, and were each translated into Tibetan in the early part of the eleventh 
century.!® Only Vilasavajra's text is known to survive in Sanskrit. All three 
authors agree in identifying this eight-armed Mafijuéri as the Adibuddha. Thus 
understood, Mafijusri's location in the position of highest status in the Sumtsek 
makes sense. As the Adibuddha, Mafijuári becomes the source of all Buddhas, 
including Vairocana to his right, as well as Prajfiaparamita, who is at the centre 


The mandala numbering is that of Snellgrove and Skorupski (1977, 38). It should be noted 
that it is mistakenly numbered as *mandala 1" (ibid., 64), which in their own number- 
ing is a mandala with Vairocana as its central figure. Snellgrove and Skorupski state that 
the Sumtsek Mañjuśrī is “not [in the location he is] simply in his own right however, but 
in terms of the Sarvavid (Vairocana) tradition, which controls all the Alchi iconography" 
(ibid.). They may here be tacitly acknowledging that the mandala surrounding Mafijusri 
bears little resemblence to the Dharmadhatuvagisvara-mandala in the 'Du-khang, and 
presumably suggesting that Mafiju$ri as Dharmadhatuvagisvara has been appropriated 
into a Sarvavid context. 

13 This matches the description given by Abhayākaragupta (NYA 54, l. 6—7). 

14 Also known as the Martjušrīnāmasamgīti, the Ns was translated into Tibetan by Rinchen 
Zangpo (Rinchen bzang po, 958-1055 CE), although it is likely that his was not the first 
translation. Rinchen Zangpo also translated the vs commentaries of Mafijusrimitra and 
Mafijusrikirti (respectively D 2532 and D 2534), the latter being the source of the Dharma- 
dhatuvagisvara-mandala. For an English translation and edition of the Sanskrit text of the 
NS see Davidson 1981. For a recent overview of the text and its contents see Tribe 2015. Very 
much on the right track, Linrothe (1996, 272) identified the ws as a crucial text in trying to 
understand the reason for the location of the eight-armed Mañjuśrī at the top of the Alchi 
Sumtsek. 

15 For comment on "Sadhanaupayika as a Sanskrit reconstruction of Sgrub pai thabs, see 
"Note for readers of Tibetan: What is a no pyi ka?" in van Schaik 2009. 

16 On Mafijusrimitra and Vilasavajra see Davidson 1981, 5-8. For a more extended discussion 
of Vilasavajra's dates and life, see Tribe 2016, 21-33. 


MANJUŠRĪ AS ĀDIBUDDHA 547 


of a mandala to his (proper) left. Mafijusri should no longer, at least in this form, 
be seen as a bodhisattva.!” 

The depictions of Mafijuári as Ādibuddha by Vilāsavajra, Mafijuérimitra, and 
Agrabodhi will be examined next. I will also comment on the relationship 
between the textual descriptions and the artistic depictions at Alchi, Mangyu 
and Lalung. 


1 Vilasavajra’s Namamantrarthavalokini 


Of the three authors, Vilasavajra’s description of the Adibuddha is the most 
extensive. The NMAA interprets the Namasamgiti within the context of a tantric 
sādhana,8 one based on an expanded version of the Tattvasamgraha's yoga- 
tantra Vajradhatu-mandala.? The mandala's principal deity is a four-faced 
Mahāvairocana, and it is in his heart that Vilasavajra locates the Adibuddha, 
depicted with eight arms holding four swords and four book volumes. The 
Adibuddha is not the terminus of the interiorization process in Vilasavajra's 
sadhana, however. At the Adibuddha's heart a prajfiacakra (“wisdom wheel") 
is visualised, on which mantras assosiated with the Namasamgiti are placed. 
At the centre of the prajfiacakra a final form is generated, that of Mafijusri- 
jiānasattva ("the gnosis-being Mafijusr"), who is seen as the embodiment of 
non-dual gnosis (advayajríana). Mafijusri-jfianasattva is visualised as six-faced, 
and holding a blue lotus in each of his two hands. Each lotus is crowned with 
a volume of the Prajfiaparamità. As a result, although the Adibuddha is, in a 
sense, the cakresa ("lord of the mandala") of Vilasavajra's Vajradhatu-mandala, 
he is the intermediate figure of three forms, all of whom have, or share, that 
role. 

In the fourth chapter of the MAA, Vilasavajra's description of the Adibud- 
dha directly follows that of Mahavairocana: 


17  Mafijusrī thus transitions from being the bodhisattva of wisdom (prajrtā) to being the wis- 
dom (now jfíana) that underlies, and is therefore conceptually prior to, Buddhahood. 

18 X For a critical edition and translation of the Sanskrit text of the first five chapters of the 
Nāmamantrārthāvalokinī that contains a more detailed analysis of Vilasavajra's sādhana, 
see Tribe 2016. A summary of it is also available in Tribe 1997. 

19 TheVajradhatu-mandalais more accurately called the Vajradhatu-mahamandala. For con- 
venience I use the shorter and more familiar form. The Tattvasamgraha is known also by 
the more extended title, Sarvatathagatatattvasamgraha. The shorter form is commonly 
found in Sanskrit sources, including the NAA. 


548 


TRIBE 


tam evambhūtam mahāvairocanam ātmānam adhimucya caturbuddhā- 
sanayogena taddhrdaye candramaņdalam tadupari dhīhkāreņa parinis- 
pannam ādibuddham bhagavantam | pañcānanam iti pafíicamukham | 
paīūcašikham iti paricacīrakam | tasyaiva bandhanāt paīicacīrakašekha- 
ram | paricavarnopetam | pūrveņa nīlam daksiņena pitam pašcimena rak- 
tam uttarena haritam | mūrdhni paramasvamukhavad avasthitam mu- 
kham švetam (yasya tam) | šāntam kumārābharaņopetam sašrūgāram vic- 
itravastraparidhānam astabhujam šatasāhasrikām prajnaparamitam ca- 
turdhā vibhajya caturbhih karair hrdi samdhar(a)yamanam | aparais ca- 
turbhih karaih prajfíakhadgam praharanabhinayena dhārayantam catur- 
buddhasanayogena vyavasthitam bhavayet || 


TRIBE 2016, 255-256, ll. 105-116 


[The sādhaka,] on generating the conviction that he himself is Mahavai- 
rocana as [previously] described, via the yoga of the four Buddha-thrones, 
should visualise a moon-disc in his heart. Above that, transformed out 
of the syllable dhih, [he should visualise] the lord, the Adibuddha. [The 
Adibuddha] has five faces (paficanana > paūcamukha). [He also] has 
five crests (paficasikha)—in other words, five hair-braids. It is through 
tying up those [hair-braids that he] has a crown of five hair-braids ( pañ- 
cacirakasekhara). [His five faces] have five [different] colours: dark blue 
for the east [and forward-facing face], yellow for the south, red for the 
west, [and] green for the north. On the top, he has a white face, the face 
of [the deity] Paramāšva. He is tranquil, with the ornaments of a youth, 
in fine clothing, wearing about himself a many coloured garment. He 
has eight arms, holding at his heart with four hands the Satasahasrika- 
prajnaparamita (“The Perfection of Wisdom in One Hundred Thousand 
Lines”) divided into four parts, [and] carrying, in each of the other four 
hands, a sword of wisdom in the gesture of striking. [All this is to be] put 
in place [i.e. visualised] via the yoga of the four Buddha-thrones.”° 


This passage is not free from textual or interpretive problems but none of them 


materially affects the present discussion. Although Vilasavajra's figure corre- 


sponds to the Alchi and Mangyu Matijušrī figures in holding the four swords 


and four text volumes, other aspects of the description do not completely 


match. Vilasavajra’s Adibuddha has five faces, differently coloured. The Sum- 


20 


The translation is a slightly adapted version of the translation that accompanies the San- 
skrit edition in Tribe 2016. 


MANJUŠRĪ AS ĀDIBUDDHA 549 


tsek figure has four faces, all white. The Lalung Serkhang Majijusri has three 
faces visible, each painted golden.?! At Mangyu, both the seated and standing 
Manjušrī figures do have five faces, albeit arranged differently from the NMAA 
description. They likely also have the same colours,?? those of the four direc- 
tions plus white for the main forward-looking face, matching their body colour. 
In addition, it is worth noting that in the NMMA the Adibuddha is said to hold 
all four volumes of the Satasáhasrikà-prajfiaparamità to his heart. While the 
seated Mangyu figure holds one book to his heart, the standing Mangyu and 
the Sumtsek figures hold a sword to their hearts (and no book volumes), and 
the Serkhang figure has one (empty) left hand raised to heart level but just to 
the side of his torso.?? 

A note of caution should perhaps be added here. It has been observed that 
the murals and clay sculptures of early Western Himalayan art reflect a process 
of Tibetan integration and adaptation of their Indian sources.?^ This means 
that it may not always be feasible to pinpoint precise textual sources for iconog- 
raphy. Elements of a mandala’s or image's iconography—number of heads, 
or colour of faces, for example—may be local adaptations, or inflections, of 
descriptions transmitted originally via Indian teachers and their Sanskrit texts. 
Bearing this proviso in mind, I hope to show that it does seem possible to rule 
some (broad) iconographic identifications in, and others out. 


21  Luczanits (2004, 99) suggests a fourth head may be hidden by the (cloth-draped) umbrella 
above the eight-armed figure's three heads. It should be noted that the clay sculptures of 
early Western Himalayan art have generally been repainted, and not necessarily in their 
original colours. The Lalung Serkhang was completely repainted in the early 20th century 
Luczanits (ibid., 93-94). 

22 For discussion of the facial colours of the Mangyu figures see the section on below on 
Mafijusrimitra's Akasavimala. While this description of the Adibuddha does not specify 
whether the figure is seated or standing, I think it fairly certain that the former is pre- 
supposed. Prior to the visualisations of Mahāvairocana and the Adibuddha, the vMAA 
describes how the mandala, as a residence, should be visualised. The description con- 
cludes with an account of the thrones (asana) of the deities, with a lion throne in the 
centre. 

23 The positions of the principal hands of the seated Mangyu and Sumtsek and standing 
Mangyu figures are exactly reversed: left hand to heart with book, right hand to hip with 
sword (seated Mangyu), and left hand to hip with book, right hand to heart with sword 
(Sumtsek and standing Mangyu). The seated figure at Mangyu with a book held to his 
heart is thus closer to Vilasavajra's description, as well as in alignment with Mafjušrīs 
primary association with wisdom. In this respect the Lalung figure appears (assuming 
an unchanged principal left arm position) to be more affiliated with the seated Mangyu 
iconography. 

24 See Luczanits (2004, 72) for some comments on this in relation to Tabo. 


550 TRIBE 


In the above description of the Ādibuddha by Vilāsavajra, the words in bold 
typeface reference NS 93 (paricananah paricasikhah paficacirakasekharah). 
When Vilasavajra specifically comments on Ns 93 later in the NMAA, unfor- 
tunately he does not add anything, but simply refers the reader back to the 
present description: 


paricananah paficasikhah paūcacīrakašekhara iti || ayam aparardhas 
cadibuddhasya gurūpadešenādiyoge drastavyah | tatraiva vyakhyatatvac 
ca punar iha nocyate || 


iti] Ab; ti B: ayam] AD; aryam B : aparardhas] corr.; apararddhas B; ana(sthu?)varddhas A; 
anastavarddhas D - ihaiva māyājālābhisambodhikramoktasya mahāvairocanahrdgatasya 
A (as a marginal addition with an insertion mark after cādibuddha) * yoge] AD; ge B 


NMAA chapter 8, on Ns 93cd; mss: A.69v4, B.48v3, D.nor2 


With five faces. With five crests [of hair]. With a crown of five hair- 
braids. And this second half [of the verse] should be understood with 
reference to the Adibuddha, via the teacher’s instruction on the begin- 
ning yoga (ādiyoga) [phase of the sadhana]. And as it is explained there, 
it is not restated here. 


Ms. A's marginal addition (whether scribal or a correction) somewhat super- 
flously adds that the Adibuddha is “in the heart of Mahavairocana [as] stated 
in the "Method of Awakening according to the Mayajala" [i.e., in NMAA ch. 4, 
where the Adibuddha is described]" Although the presence of swords and 
book volumes makes it hard not to see Vilāsavajras Adibuddha as a form of 
Matijusrī, he does not here explicitly say that he is. This is remedied later in his 
comment on the word adibuddha (Ns 100ab: anadinidhano buddha adibuddho 
niranvayah): 


adibuddha iti || ādāv eva buddha adibuddhah | sa ca paficajfíanatmakah 
...25 evam paficajfíanatmakah paficavarnatmakas cāsau bhagavan | sar- 


25 This ellipsis contains a summary of the five jitānāni (gnoses) in terms of various master- 
ies. Thus the adarsajfíanam (mirror-like gnosis) is associated with the five balāni (powers); 
samatajfianam (gnosis of equality), with the four vaišāradyāni (confidences); pratyaveks- 
aņājītānam (discriminating gnosis), with the four pratisamvidah (special knowledges); 
krtyanusthanajrianam (praxis gnosis), with friendliness (maitrī) and compassion (ka- 
rund); and suviguddhadharmadhatujnanam (gnosis of the completely pure dharma- 
sphere), with overlordship of everything (sarvādhipatya). These associations are refer- 
enced to the Māyājālatantra in ms. A (alone). 


MANJUŠRĪ AS ĀDIBUDDHA 551 


vadharmasamatāmukhenaikālambanatvena drastavyah sa ca maīijušrīr 
ata evāsau niranvaya iti || 


varnatmakas] A; varnartmakas B; varņās D * alambanatvena] A; ālambanatve D; arthatve- 
na B: niranvaya] BD; niratvaya A. 


NMAA chapter 8, on NS 100ab; mss: A.75n1, B.5311, D.120v1) 


Adi-buddha: [the word] adibuddha means [he who is] *awakened from 
the very beginning,” and that one has the five gnoses ( jitānāni) as his 
nature ... So that one, who has the five gnoses as his nature and [also] 
the five colours as his nature, is the lord (bhagavan). And he should be 
understood to be Mafijusri, since as the equality of all dharmas he is the 
unique ground [of all phenonena]. For that very reason he is [described 
as] free from [causal] connection (niranvaya). 


To summarize, Vilasavajra has clearly identified an eight-armed figure holding 
four swords and four books as the Adibuddha, and has stated that the Adibud- 
dha is also Mafijusri. At the same time, there are some discrepences between 
Vilasavajra's description and the images at Alchi, Mangyu and Lalung. There is 
also some variance of appearance between each of the four (three mural and 
one clay) temple figures. 

The likelihood of Vilasavajra's text—or Agrabodhi's, as we shall see—being 
of influence in the iconography of these figures is given support by the exis- 
tence of a small clay figure directly above the eight-armed Mafijusri in the 
Lalung Serkhang (Fig. 22.6). The figure is two-armed, each hand holding a lotus 
stem. The two stems each rise to a flower base, one on each side of the figure a 
little above its shoulders.?% 

If it is correct to identify the central eight-armed figure as the Adibud- 
dha, then I think the two-armed figure may be Mafijusri-jfianasattva, who in 


26 This distinctive figure was noted by Tucci (1988, 118), who, having identified the Adibud- 
dha figure as "Vairocana or one of his emanations" (ibid., 117), on the basis that the central 
figure was surrounded by the four directional tathagatas, briefly observed that the fig- 
ure above was Sarvavid. More recently this image has been discussed at greater length by 
Luczanits (2004, 99-100, 208-209), who notes the figure’s unusual iconography and sug- 
gests a possible link with the sun-god Sürya, who holds two lotuses similarly. This in turn, 
he suggests, supports the hypothesis that the figure is a form of Vairocana given the word 
vairocana means "resplendent, exceeedingly bright” In fact, the link between Vairocana 
and the sun is stronger than Luczanits perhaps realised: the literal Sanskrit meaning of 
vairocana is "coming from or belonging to the sun (virocana)” Also, Edgerton (1953 11, 512) 
suggests that in Buddhist contexts virocana, “the sun” and its derivative vairocana, can be 
synonymous. 


552 TRIBE 


FIGURE 22.6 Two-armed Maiijušrī (as Jānasattva), Serkhang, Lalung 
PHOTOGRAPH BY CHRISTIAN LUCZANITS (CL91 52,6 WHAV) 


the NMAA is visualised in the heart of the Ādibuddha. Vilasavajra describes 
Mañjuśrī-jñānasattva as follows: 


tasya cakrasya madhyavartinam akarajam bhagavantam sanmukham 
jfianasattvam saracchasankaprabham indranilagrasacctram bālārkama- 
ndalacchayaprabhamandalam sarvatathāgatamayābharaņam samadhi- 
samāpannam  vicitrapadmasanopavistam | ubhayakarasaktanilotpalor- 
dhvasthitaprajfíaparamitapustakadvayam šāntarasopetam ātmānam vi- 
cintya | 


TRIBE 2016, 260, ll. 172—176 


MANJUŠRĪ AS ĀDIBUDDHA 553 


[Next] he should visualise himself as the fortunate one, the gnosis-being 
[Mafijusri], born from the syllable a situated in the middle of that [wis- 
dom-]wheel [situated in the heart of the Adibuddha]. He has six faces, is 
radiant like the autumn moon, with the best of sapphires in his beauti- 
ful hair, with a halo that has the brilliance of the orb of the newly risen 
sun, with all the tathagatas as [head-]ornaments, immersed in medita- 
tive concentration, seated on a variagated lotus throne, in tranquil mood, 
with a pair of books of the Prajriaparamita above blue lotuses held in his 
two hands. 


The figure in the Serkhang is missing the volumes of the Prajfíaparamita, as 
is the eight-armed Mafijusri below him.?’ There is also a discrepancy in the 
count of heads. Vilasavajra has six for Mafiju$ri-jfianasattva (one more than 
the Ādibuddha, who in turn has one more than Mahāvairocana, the outermost 
figure of the central nested triad). Although the Serkhang figure has just four 
heads, the fourth is about a head's distance above the tops of the first three 
heads. The result is that the figure looks distinctly odd, with one head float- 
ing above the other three. It does not seem impossible (and it would certainly 
improve the aesthetics) that there were originally two further heads in between 
the bottom three and single top head, giving a pyramidal structure of three + 
two + one heads, i.e. six altogether, matching Vilāsavajra's description. 

There is also a small figure in direct vertical alignment with the two-armed 
and eight-armed sculptures, immediately beneath the (let us assume) Adibud- 
dha's lion throne. It is a mural of a white four-faced Mahavairocana, two-armed 
and simply attired, with his hands in dharmacakra-mudra (see Fig. 22.5).2% 
His location may be coincidental, but if not, he completes Vilasavajra's triad 
of Mahavairocana, the Adibuddha, and Mafijuéri-jfanasattva. The location of 
Mahavairocana beneath the other two figures is hard to explain unless he 
is somehow understood to be subordinate to them, which is precisely what 
Vilasavajra is saying.?? 

Vilasavajra describes Mahavairocana as follows: 


27 That the Adibuddha lost the four volumes of the Prajfíapáramità apparantly without dam- 
aging the hand mudrās suggests that they were easily removable. The same detachability 
may have applied to the two-armed figure. 

28 Luczanits (2004, 93-94) notes that while the Serkhang murals were repainted crudely dur- 
ing the early twentieth century, it appears that the repainting followed what was present 
before. 

29 Namely that Mahavairocana (= all samādhis) has the Ādibuddha (= the paficajfíana) as 
his nature, who in turn has Matijušrī-jiiānasattva (= advayajriana) as his nature. It is pos- 
sible that the Mahavairocana mural is not part of the clay sculpture mandala at all, and 


554 


TRIBE 


tatas ca pradhānāsana ahkarena parinispannam mahāvairocanam | yato 
yad eva cittam prakrtyā grāhakādyākāravirahād dharmadhatusvabhavam 
tad eva caturmukham šūnyatādicaturvimoksamukhānām dharmadhātor 
ālambanatvena sarvasamadhiprasütihetutvat | Suklavarnam dharmadha- 
tusvabhāvatvāt | jatamakutopetam nirabharanam ca šāntacittatvāt | bodh- 
yagrimudrayuktam prajfiopayatmakatvat 


TRIBE 2016, 255, ll. 100-105 


And then [the sadhaka should visualise] Mahavairocana on the princi- 
pal seat, generated by means of the syllable ah. [Why has he four faces? | 
Since consciousness—which is ofthe nature of the Dharma-Sphere since, 
by its nature, it lacks such forms as the grasped [i.e., the subject-object 
duality]—is four-faced. [This is] because the four liberation faces 
[/doors] (vimoksamukha)—emptiness and the rest—are the cause of the 
origination of all meditative concentrations (samādhi), [and this in turn 
is] because their ground is the Dharma-Sphere. He is white in colour 
because he has the Dharma-Sphere as his nature. He has braids of hair 
[stacked up on his head] as a crown and is unadorned because he is 
one whose mind is tranquil. Since he has both wisdom and means as his 
nature he makes the bodhyagri (“highest awakening”) hand gesture.30 


In contrast with Vilasavajra's description, the Serkhang Mahavairocana is not 


“unadorned”. He has armlets, bracelets and two necklaces. Yet he is is still 


fairly simply adorned, with no clothes on his upper body and with his hair 


stacked behind a minimal crown.?! He is two-armed but with his hands in 


30 


31 


that the significance of his location should be understood just in relation to the two rows 
of deities that flank him to each side. However, this same vertical alignment of the three 
figures of Vilāsavajra's NMAA is also found in a Tibetan thangka of unknown provenance, 
a photograph of which was kindly sent to me by Tanaka Kimiaki. In the thangka the cen- 
tral figure is Mafijusri-jfianasattva, however, with the eight-armed Adibuddha above him, 
and a small four-headed Mahavairocana beneath him; and as in the Serkhang, the three 
central figures are surrounded by the four directional tathagatas and four kulamatrs. 
bodhyagrī-mudrā. In this mudrā the extended and raised left forefinger is grasped and 
encircled by the fingers of the right hand, the hands being held atthe heart. The Tattvasam- 
graha (89, 4-5) describes it as follows: “The raised left vajra-finger should be grasped with 
the right [hand]. This mudra, which bestows the awakening of the Buddhas, is called bodh- 
yagrī” (vāmavajrāngulir grāhyā [em.; grahya Ed.] daksinena samutthita | bodhyagri [em.; 
bodhāgrī Ed.] nama mudreyam buddhabodhipradāyikā). For discussion of variants of this 
mudrā and confusion surrounding its name, see Tribe 2016, 90—92. 

A good example of a mural of an unadorned (i.e., with no jewelry and simple clothing) 
Mahavairocana with a crown of stacked hair ( jatamakuta) is present in the Gyantse Kum- 


MANJUŠRĪ AS ĀDIBUDDHA 555 


dharmacakra-mudrā rather than bodhyagri-mudra.?? Nevertheless, although 
Vilasavajra's description does not exactly match the Serkhang figure, its broad 
correspondence, and especially its location, is striking. 

Before discussing Mafijusrimitra's and Agrabodhi's texts, it is worth noting 
that Vilasavarja makes a clear distinction between Mafijusri as jiiānasattva and 
as bodhisattva: 


jnanasattva iti sarvatathagatahrdayaviharitvat | mañjuśrīś casau jfiana- 
sattvaš ceti mafijusrijanasattvah | nayam dasabhumisvaro bodhisattvah 
kim tarhy advayajnanam prajfíaparamitaà saiva manjusrijnanasattvah 


TRIBE 2016, 236, ll. 215—218 


He is [described in ws 10 as] the j'íanasattva since he dwells in the heart 
of all the tathagatas. The jfíanasattva Matijušrī is not the bodhisattva that 
is the master of the ten [bodhisattva] stages. Rather, he is non-dual gnosis 
(advayajfiana), the perfection of wisdom (prajfíaparamita) itself.3% 


If Mafijuári-jfianasattva should not be identified with the bodhisattva Mafijusn, 
then by extension, this should equally apply to Mafijusri as the Adibuddha. 
Understanding this helps makes sense of the iconographic programme of the 
Sumtsek (and by extension of the three figures in vertical alignment in the 
Lalung Serkhang). Tucci (1988, 177-118) proposed that the two clay figures in the 
Lalung Serkhang were manifestations or forms of Vairocana or Mahavairocana. 
In the present reading the inverse is true: Mafijusri the Adibuddha manifests 
Mahavairocana. And by implication, he also manifests Mafijusri the bodhi- 
sattva along with all the tathagatas and other bodhisattvas. Thus at Lalung it 
is the jrianasattva Mafijusri, as the topmost figure, that can be read as mani- 
festing, in turn, the Adibuddha and Mahavairocana. 


bum (see Ricca and Lo Bue 1993, plate 5). If jatamakuta is analysed as a dvandva rather 
than a karmadhāraya compound it can be translated as “having a crown and stacked hair” 
Fora Mahāvairocana depicted in this way, also in the Kumbum, with a large crown in front 
of stacked hair see Ricca and Lo Bue ibid., plate 4. 

32 The Alchi 'Du-khang has a mural of four-faced, two-armed Mahavairocana with his hands 
in bodhyagri-mudrà (see Pal and Fournier 1988, plate D 5; van Ham 2019, 94—95). Like the 
Sumtsek eight-armed Adibuddha, this figure has its fourth head stacked centrally above 
the others. In contrast, the Serkhang Mahavairocana has all four heads on the same level, 
with two to the proper right of the front face, and one to the left. 

33 The karmadharaya analysis of mafijusrijfianasattva is omitted from the translation. 


556 TRIBE 
2 Manijušrīmitra's Akasavimala 


Mafijusrimitra, who may have been an older contemporary of Vilāsavajra, 
wrote extensively on the Vāmasangīti.% In the Akasavimala, he describes both 
the Adibuddha and Mafijuéri-jfianasattva, albeit more briefly than Vilāsavjara. 
First, the Adibuddha: 


dang po'i sangs rgyas zhal [nga pa | phyag brgyad pa | g.yas bzhin shes rab 
kyi ral gri | g.yon bzhin shes rab kyi pha rol tu phyin pa'i po ti yod pa | zhal 
bzhi phyogs dang mthun pa | dbus dmar ser ro | 

D 2543, 413-4 


The Adibuddha has five faces and eight arms. In the right [arms] are 
sword[s] of wisdom; in the left volume[s] ofthe Prajitāpāramitā. The four 
faces correspond [in colour] to the directions. The central face is orange. 


Manjušrīmitra and Vilasavajra agree on the key iconographical elements. There 
is one significant difference in that Vilasavajra's fifth face is white, Mafijusri- 
mitra's is orange. As noted earlier, the seated figure at Mangyu has five faces 
(unlike the four-faced Sumtsek figure), and the top and fifth face appears to 
be orange-brown. However, it is likely to have originally been green. If it were 
orange it would point to Mafiju$rimitra as a possible textual source, although 
he does not describe a white face, which is the colour of the principal faces for 
both Mangyu figures. The likely explanation of the orange-brown colour of the 
top face of the seated Mangyu figure is that the original colour has faded over 
time. It is clear from the Sumtsek mandala that while reds and blues preserve 
their colour fairly well over time, greens and yellows can fade; in the Sumtsek 
instance, they both faded to a pale reddish brown.?5 The arrangement of heads 
in both the Mangyu figures (seated and standing) is the same: three heads at 
the same level (front, left and right facing), surmounted by two further heads, 
one above the other. The topmost face of the standing Mangyu figure is clearly 
green, in contrast to the orange-brown of the seated figure. The intermediate 
face colouring for both is similar: very pale brown for the seated figure and off- 
white for the figure standing. The colours of the three horizontal lower faces 
are identical: white (to the front), flanked by blue (to the proper right) and red 
(to the left). If green is correct for the topmost face, and if it is assumed that an 


34 Davidson (1981, 5—6) dates Mafijusrimitra to the mid-eighth century and notes that Buston 
records a tradition that he may have been Vilasavajra's teacher. 
35 See below, note 40. In the Mangyu figures yellow appears to fade almost to white. 


MANJUŠRĪ AS ĀDIBUDDHA 557 


original yellow of the intermediate faces has faded, then both figures have the 
same head arrangement and colouring. These colours are those described by 
Vilāsavajra. The head arrangement differs, however: Vilāsavajra has four heads 
(representing the four directional tathāgatas) at the same level, each facing 
one of the four directions, and the fifth central (principal) white head above 
the four. The Mangyu arrangement could be understood as an adaptation to 
the constraints of two dimensional mural painting.3% 

Turning to Mafijusrimitra’s description of Mafijusni-jfianasattva, it is also 
structurally parallel to that of Vilasavajra and immediately follows his descrip- 
tion of the Adibuddha: 


de'i thugs kar shes rab kyi 'khor lo rtsibs drug pa la | gsang sngags rgyal po 
drug gis mtshan pa | de'i kyil du jam dpal ye shes sems dpa' zhal drug phag 
gnyis pa | g.yas ral gris g.yon po ti dzin pa 

D 2543, 414 


In his (i.e. the Adibuddha's) heart is a wisdom wheel (prajfia-cakra), six- 
spoked, ornamented with the six secret mantra kings. In its centre is 
Matijušrī-jiānasattva, with six faces [and] two hands. The right [hand] 
carries a sword, the left a book. 


Again there is a significant difference between Mafijusrimitra and Vilasavajra. 
Vilasavajra's Mafijusri-jfianasattva does not hold a sword and a book, but has a 
lotus stem in each hand, each topped with a book. If it is correct to identify the 
two-armed figure in the Lalung Serkhang above the Adibuddha as Mafijuéri- 
jfianasattva, Vilasavajra seems a more likely iconographical source than Mañ- 
jušrīmitra. 


3 Agrabodhi's *Sadhanaupayika 


Agrabodhi (Tib. Byang chub mchog) is described as Vilasavajra's maternal uncle 
in the NMAA's colophon.37 This makes him a contemporary of both Matijušrī- 


36 In the murals of these eight-armed Mafijusri figures at Mangyu and in the Sumtsek the 
principal face and body is white in each case, indicating their alignment with Mahāvairo- 
cana, whose distinctive colour is also white, and who is so described by Vilasavajra 
above: šuklavarnam dharmadhātusvabhāvatvāt, "He is white in colour because he has the 
Dharma-Sphere as his nature” 

37 Byang chub mchog has been standardly reconstructed as *Varabodhi. For discussion of 
the NMAA' colophon see Tribe 2016, 25-28 and Appendix 3. 


558 TRIBE 


mitra and Vilāsavajra, and probably the latter's elder. In his Vāmasamgīti *Sa- 
dhanaupayika Agrabodhi also describes the Adibuddha and Mafijusri-jfiana- 
sattva. Again, first the Adibuddha: 


dang po'i sangs rgyas zhal [nga pa | | byis pa'i rgyan gyis rnam brgyan cing 
| | rin chen sna tshogs na bza' can | | phyag brgyad mnga' ba'iphyag mtshan 
ni | | g.yas pa bzhi ni go rims bzhin | | shes rab kyi ni ral gri bsnams | | de 
bzhin g.yon pa'i phyag bzhi na | | shes rab pha rol phyin pa yi | | po ti re re 
bsnams pa^ | | 

D 2579, 62v7—63r1 


The Adibuddha has five faces. He is adorned with the ornaments of youth, 
and [wears] garments [decorated] with various gems. He has eight hands. 
As for the attributes held by the hands: the four right hands in turn carry 
a sword of wisdom; similarly, the four left hands each carry a volume of 
the Prajnaparamita. 


The basic iconography of five faces and eight arms (with swords, and volumes 
of the Prajfiaparamita) follows Vilāsavajra and Mafijusrimitra. Although the 
description is a little more elaborate than Mafiju$rimitra's, Agrabodhi omits 
colours for the Adibuddha’s faces. Agrabodhi's description of Mafijuári-jfiàna- 
sattva follows a half folio later: 


ye shes sems dpa'zhal drug pa | | ston ka'i zla ba [tar gsal zhing | | indra nila'i 
gtsug phud can | | nyima ‘char ka'i'od dras bskor | | zhi ba'ingang tshul dang 
ldan zhing | | g.yas dang g.yon gyi phag gnyis kyis | | utpala dmar po g.yas 
pani | | gyon pa nani sngon po nyid | | utpala de gnyis steng nyid na | | shes 
rab po tis mdzes pad | | 

D 2579, 63v.2-3 


Matijusrī-jiānasattva has six faces. He is luminous like the autumn moon, 
with the choicest sapphire as a [head] crest. He is encircled as if by the 
light of the rising sun, and he has a peaceful disposition. With [his] two 
hands—right and left—[he holds] a red lotus in the right, a blue one in 
the left. Adorning the top of [each of] those two lotuses is a volume of 
Prajfía|paramità |. 


All three authors agree, then, that Mafijusri-jfianasattva has six heads and 
two arms; and Agrabodhi and Vilasavajra concur (against Mafijusrimitra) that 
he holds two lotuses topped with books. Agrabodhi and Vilasavajra differ, 


MANJUŠRĪ AS ĀDIBUDDHA 559 


however, in the colour of the lotuses. Agrabodhi has one red and one blue; 
Vilāsavajra has them both be blue. As noted, the Serkhang scultpures have been 
repainted in the twentieth century’ and at present the Mafijusri-jfianasattva 
figure has two green lotuses. In conclusion, either Agrabodhi or Vilasavajra or 
both could be a source for the Serkhang figures. All three authors also share 
the same core structure for their sadhanas, with the Adibuddha in Mahavairo- 
cana's heart, a wisdom-wheel within the Adibuddha’s heart, and Mafijuéri- 
jfanasattva in the centre of the wisdom-wheel. And like Vilasasvajra, both 
Manjušrīmitra and Agrabodhi describe Mahavairocana with four heads, and 
with hands in bodhyagri-mudra.?? 


4 Broader Iconographic Contexts 


Some remarks about the mandalas surrounding the Mafijusri Adibuddha fig- 
ures at Alchi and Lalung, and the lack of any at Mangyu, follow. First, the Alchi 
Sumtsek. While I am not able to clearly identify either Mafijusrimitra, Vilāsa- 
vajra or Agrabodhi as providing the textual source for the mandala, one thing 
is clear: it is not a mandala of Dharmadhatuvagisvara Mafijusn. This is the case 
irrespective of the identity of the central deity. 

The Sumtsek mandala (Fig. 22.2) contains fifty-three figures in total, all con- 
tained within a single four-gated square courtyard. Within the courtyard is 
another (ungated) square that contains two circles surrounding the central 
deity. The first of these circles contains eight figures, the second sixteen. In 
the first circle in the intermediate directions are the four family mothers (kula- 
matr), identifiable by the family symbols they hold (vajra, gem, lotus, visva- 
vajra). In the four cardinal directions are the four directional tathagatas, indi- 
cated by their mudra, animal/mount (vahana) and colour.^? The second circle 
may well contain the sixteen samadhi deities of the Vajradhatu-mandala. Each 


38 See above, note 21. 

39 See Ākāšavimala D 2543, 412-3; *Sādhanaupayika D 2579, 62v6—7 

40 While Aksobhya (blue) and Amitabha (red) have their colours, Ratnasambhava and 
Amoghasiddhi are a similar pale reddish brown. Their original colours have likely faded, 
both here and throughout the mandala. The colour of the garment on the Adibuddha's 
legs is a similar, presumably faded, colour; it is possible to discern the remains of a floral 
pattern on the leg coverings. The high status of this figure is perhaps further reflected in 
the use of gold paint, not only for the slightly embossed circle that surrounds him and for 
the crowns on his heads, but also for the swords and book volumes. Close inspection also 
reveals that both ends of each sword and book volume are adorned with a terminus of 
vajra prongs. 


560 TRIBE 


figureis iconographically distinct, although with the exception of Vajrarāga (E), 
Vajraratna? (SE), Vajratejas/Vajrasūrya (SSE), Vajratiksna (S), and Vajrayaksa 
(N) I have not been able to make clear identifications. In the corners between 
the second circle and the ungated sguare are four offering goddesses. 

Beyond the sguare, in the space between it and the main gated courtyard 
walls are the remaining figures, twenty-four altogether. The corners are occu- 
pied by four further offering goddesses. This leaves five figures on each side. 
The members of each group of five have the same colour (that of their presid- 
ing tathagata) and hold the attribute definitive of their family (i.e. vajra, gem, 
lotus, or visvavajra).*? It is tempting to identify sixteen of these figures as (non 
iconographically individuated) bodhisattvas. This would leave the remaining 
four as door guardians.^? 

The Dharmadhātuvāgīšvara-maņdala in the Alchi 'Du-khang that, accord- 
ing to Snellgrove and Skorupski (1977, 64), corresponds to the Sumtsek man- 
dala also has eight figures in a circle surrounding the central deity. In this the 
two mandalas are structurally alike. The figures in the 'Du-khang circle, how- 
ever, are the eight usnisa deities, iconographyically identical. Beyond this, and 
within the first of three gated courtyards are four eight-armed tathagatas and 
four eight-armed goddesses.^^ As the existence of three courtyards suggests, 
the Dharmadhātuvāgīsvara-maņdala is large, with over two hundred deities.*5 
The Sumtsek mandala should, I believe, be identified instead as a Vajradhatu- 
mandala variant. If the sixteen putative bodhisattva figures are excluded, the 
maņdala is identical to the thirty-seven deity Vajradhatu-mandala of the 
Tattvasamgraha. A set of sixteen bodhisattvas often supplements the deities of 
the Tattvasamgraha in later Vajradhatu-mandala descriptions. These are gen- 
erally the sixteen bodhisattvas of the present aeon (bhadrakalpa), as described 
for example in Abhayakaragupta's Nispannayogavalt Vajradhatu-mandala.4$ 


41 Also, some of the directional locations of the identifiable figures are unusual: for example 
Vajratīksņa, standardly associated with Amitābha and the west, is in the south. 

42 As with their tathagatas, the colours of the southern and northern deities appear to have 
faded. 

43 However, those that occupy the positions of door guardians are not iconographically dis- 
tinct from their neighbours. 

44 For photographs of Dharmadhatuvagisvara Mafijusri and the usnisa deities, see van Ham 
2019, 115, and Pal and Fournier 1988, plate D 14. For examples of the tathagatas and god- 
desses see van Ham ibid. 115-116, and Pal and Fournier ibid., plates D 15—18. 

45 For Abhayakaragupta's description of the Dharmadhatuvagisvara-mandala, which con- 
tains two hundred and sixteen figures, see NYA 54ff. 

46 See NYĀ 44ff. The same list is also present in Abhayakaragupta's Durgatipari$odhana- 
mandala (NYA 66 ff.). 


MANJUŠRĪ AS ĀDIBUDDHA 561 


In assessing possible textual sources for the Sumtsek and Lalung mandalas, 
at present I am only able to comment on the mandala elaborated by Vilasa- 
vajra around the triple central figure(s) of Mahavairocana, the Adibuddha and 
Mafijusri-jfianasattva.*” It too is a fifty-three deity (if the central triad is counted 
as one) Vajradhatu-mandala variant. The deities are enumerated/emanated 
in the following order: four family mothers (kulamātr),*% four tathagatas, six- 
teen samādhi deities, eight offering goddesses (pūjādevī), four gate guardians 
(dvārapāla), and sixteen bodhisattvas. While Vilasavajra elaborately connects 
these deities with doctrinal categories and Namasamgiti “names,” he gives no 
iconographical descriptions. Also, while the sixteen putative bodhisattva fig- 
ures of the Sumtsek mandala are not distinguished beyond their family affilia- 
tion, the NMAA set is not the same as the bhadrakalpa group.*? Thus while the 
Sumtsek mandala could be derived from Vilasavajra's NMAA, further investiga- 
tion may reveal a more immediate source. 

Turning very briefly to the deities surrounding the Adibuddha figure in the 
Lalung Serkhang, it was seen earlier that (again counting the central triad as 
one figure) they comprise a mandala of seventeen figures, two columns of four 
figures positioned to each side of the Adibuddha. It was also noted that Luczan- 
its (2004, 98-101) identified the eight figures of the two inner columns as identi- 
cal with the figures in the first circle surrounding the Adibuddha in the Sumtsek 


47  Vilasavajra enumerates the NMAA mandala deities in chapter five (associating each with 
a "name" from the Ns). 

48 Namely Sattvavajrī, Ratnavajri, Dharmavajri and Karmavajrī. Although the core thirty- 
seven deities of Vilasavajra's mandala (i.e., discounting the sixteen bodhisattvas) are iden- 
tical in name and number with those of the Tattvasamgraha, the order of emanation of 
the four family mothers—also described in both texts as Perfections (paramita)— differs. 
In the Tattvasamgraha they appear after the sixteen samadhi deities (and before the eight 
offering goddesses and four door guardians). In the NMAA they comprise the initial mani- 
festation of non-dual gnosis. Their more central position can perhaps be seen as reflecting 
the changing status—the increasing centrality—of the feminine within tantric Buddhism 
during this period. 

49 Maitreya and Amoghadarsin are the first two members of the sixteen bhadrakalpa bo- 
dhisattvas (followed by Apayafijaha, Sarva$okatamonirghatamati, Gandhahastin, Suran- 
gama, Gaganagafija, Jianaketu, Amrtaprabha, Candraprabha, Bhadrapāla, Jaliniprabha, 
Vajragarbha, Aksayamati, Pratibhanaküta, and Samantabhadra). The NMAA list is headed 
by Maitreya and Matijušrī (followed by Gandhahastin, Jfiānaketu, Bhadrapāla, Sagaramati, 
Aksayamati, Pratibhanaküta, Mahastamaprapta, Sarvapayafijaha, Sarvašokatamonirghā- 
tamati, Jaliniprabha, Candraprabha, Amitaprabha, Gaganagafija, and Sarvanivaranavis- 
kambhin). That Mafijusri is enumerated here underlines the notion that Vilasavajra sees 
Mafijusri-as-jfianasattva emanating Mafijusri-as-bodhisattva. The NMAA set is also found 
in Abhayakaragupta’s forty-three deity Mafijuvajra-mandala (Tricatvarim$adatmakamafi- 
juvajra-mandala: see NYA 50). 


562 TRIBE 


at Alchi. He also identified the outer eight figures as offering goddesses. This 
seventeen-figure mandala could be derived from Vilasavajra’s NMAA mandala, 
as an abbreviated version. Alternatively, the two rows of mural figures painted 
below the Adibuddha, which flank Mahavairocana may be part of a larger man- 
dala.5° Whether the mandala, larger or smaller, is described more precisely by 
Agrabodhi or Vilāsavajra requires further investigation. 

While the Alchi and Lalung figures each have a mandala as their immedi- 
ate iconographic context—a context that makes sense of, and supports, their 
identification as Mafijusri Adibuddha—this is not the case for the two figures 
at Mangyu, neither of which is at the centre of a mandala. In the Two-armed 
Maitreya Chapel the seated Adibuddha figure has no especial prominence— 
being one among ten deities that flank the large two-armed clay statue of 
Maitreya, five on each side. The iconographic programme of these figures is 
unclear, as they do not appear to constitute a mandala. Among them are also 
two additional Mafijuán figures, one of which is a six-headed, six-armed, white 
Maūijušrī at the same level as the Adibuddha figure, and on the other side of the 
Maitreya statue.5! The iconographic situation of the standing Adibuddha figure 
in the Village Stūpa is not dissimilar. The stupa contains three other standing 
mural figures, those of Prajfiaparamita, Avalokite$vara and Tara. These four fig- 
ures, each of the same size, flank, in two pairs, two clay statues placed on the 
main axis of the stūpa, one at each end. There are eight further murals on the 
side walls (that also flank two clay statues), each of which is half the size of the 
standing figure murals. The Mafijuári Adibuddha figure is prominent, therefore, 
but not especially so. It appears to be of equivalent status to the other three 
standing figures depicted as murals. It is not clear how to read the apparent 
lack of high status accorded to these two Mafijusri figures at Mangyu. It seems 
possible that they were not understood as depictions of the Ādibuddha—and 
this despite their textual context, and in spite of their iconographic context in 


50 Study of these two rows of repainted figures might clarify whether they are part of the 
mandala or not. A combination of sculptures and murals is found elsewhere: for exam- 
ple, in the Translator's Temple at Nako subsidiary deities of the Vajradhatu-mandala are 
murals while the five tathāgatas are sculptures (Luczanits 2004, 79—80). 

51 This intriguing figure, which as far as I am aware has not been identified, has six arms: the 
principal pair in his lap in dhyana-mudra; an upper pair with an arrow (proper right) and 
bow (left), and a lower pair holding a lily (right) and a lotus flower (left). The six faces, in 
two rows of three, have two central white faces. The remaining four have the colours ofthe 
directions. The correspondence of the number of heads with the Mafijusri-jfianasattva as 
described by our commentators is suggestive. Could this be a Mafiju$ri-jfianasattva vari- 
ant, or even an Ādibuddha variant, perhaps from another Vāmasamgīti commentarial 
tradition? 


MANJUŠRĪ AS ĀDIBUDDHA 563 


the Alchi Sumtsek and the Lalung Serkhang. Further work on the iconographic 
programmes at Mangyu might clarify their roles.5? 


5 Addendum: The Relationship between Agrabodhi's 
*Sadhanaupayika and Vilasavajra's Vāmamantrārthāvalokinī 


Agrabodhi's description of Mafijusri-jfianasattva, using images of the moon, a 
sapphire and the sun ("He is luminous like the autumn moon, with the choicest 
sapphire as a [head] crest. He is encircled as if by the light of the rising sun”), is 
very close to that of Vilasavajra, close enough for one to be borrowed from the 
other. What makes the comparison more striking, and the likelihood of bor- 
rowing more certain, is that the three descriptions are also allusions—more or 
less quotations—to three Namasamgiti verse quarters, which are taken in the 
same order by both authors, but which are not in the order of the Namasamgiti. 

The three padas are saraccandramsusuprabhah (Ns 125b), indranilagrasac- 
cirah (NS 126a), and balarkamandalacchayah (Ns 125c). Vilasavajras NMAA 
(see above) has saracchasankaprabham indranīlāgrasaccīram balarkamanda- 
lacchayaprabhamandalam. The second description, except for the change in 
case ending, quotes N$ 126a. Both authors’ descriptions also immediately follow 
a statement that Mafijusri-jfianasattva is six-faced. If we compare Agrabodhi's 
descriptions with the Tibetan translation of the NMAA their closeness becomes 
particularly clear: 


| | ston ka'i zla ba [tar gsal zhing | | indra nila'i gtsug phud can | | nyi ma ‘char 
ka'i od 'dras bskor | | 


AGRABODHI 


| ston ka'izla ba'i mdog can | indra nila mtshog gi gtsug phud ||] nyima ‘char 
ka'i tar od kyi dkyil 'khor gyis bskor ba | 


VILASAVAJRA. D 2533, 3911 


52 Rather than exploring in any depth the iconography surrounding the two Mangyu figures, 
my goal in this paragraph has been to focus on the apparent oddness of their location, on 
the assumption, that is, that they should be identified as representations of Mañjuśrī as 
the Adibuddha. Rather more has been published on the Village Stüpa than the Two-armed 
Maitreya Chapel. On the latter, see Luczanits 2004, 167—170; van Ham 20n, 42-55. On the 
former, see Linrothe 1994 and 1999, 173—174; Luczanits ibid., 170—174; van Ham ibid., 138— 
158. Luczanits usefully comments that the square Village Stüpa has a main axis. Linrothe's 
1994 article unfortunately came to my attention too late for me to consult. 


564 TRIBE 


Alone, this passage does not provide sufficient evidence to establish a direc- 
tion of borrowing. Either could be an expansion or contraction of the other. 
Vilasavajra is the more descriptively elaborate of the two. Agrabodhi’s text is 
in a seven-syllable metrical form (which is the case for his descriptions of 
the Adibuddha as well as Mafijusri-jfanasattva), suggesting that the original 
Sanskrit passage was likely in verse. Further comparison of Agrabodhi’s and 
Vilāsavajra's texts is required. 


6 Conclusions 


In summary, the Namasamgiti-related texts of Vilasavajra, Mafijusrimitra, and 
Agrabodhi indicate that the eight-armed Manjusrī[-like] figures at Alchi, 
Mangyu and Lalung be identified as the Adibuddha. Such an identification 
explains why the Alchi figure occupies the most prominent location in the 
Sumtsek. It makes sense of the organization of the murals of the topmost 
storey, with the Adibuddha representing the deeper nature of Vairocana to 
his (proper) right and Prajfiaparamita to his left. It also makes sense of the 
vertical organization of the storeys of the back (and most important wall), 
with the Adibuddha vertically above, and again representing the underlying 
nature of, both Šākyamuni (on the second storey) and Maitreya (the future 
Buddha, whose large clay figure faces the entrance to the Sumtsek on the first 
storey). However, only the five-headed Mangyu figures have the number of 
heads described by our authors. The Alchi mural figure has four, and the clay 
figure at Lalung just three (or possibly four). These variations, which may or 
may not reflect local adaptation, remain to be accounted for. 

Differences between the three textual descriptions examined both allow 
and disallow the possibility of differing influences. Thus, for the two figures 
at Mangyu, the colouring of their five faces points to a tradition associated 
with Vilāsavajra as a source, and not Mafijusrimitra: Agrabodhi, who does not 
describe the colours, is neither ruled in nor out. Also, the small clay figure above 
the Adibuddha in the Lalung Serkhang is likely to be Mafijuéri-jfianasattva 
as depicted by Agrabodhi or Vilasavajra rather than Mafijusrimitra.5? Further, 


53 Both Vilāsavajra's NMAA and Agrabodhi's *Sādhanaupayika were translated into Tibetan 
inthe early eleventh century by Smrtijfianakirti, who was working in eastern Tibet. It may 
seem unlikely that their tradition of ws interpretation could be the source for the Lalung 
Serkhang images. However, Luczanits (2004, 122) has argued that the sculptures in Cave 
2 at nearby Dunkar reflect influence from north-east India (via Nepal and central Tibet), 


MANJUŠRĪ AS ĀDIBUDDHA 565 


if the Mahāvairocana mural beneath the clay Ādibuddha in the Serkhang is 
part of the main mandala, then together the three figures represent the tri- 
adic and complex deity described in each of the three texts discussed, but 
here as inflected by those of Agrabodhi and Vilāsavajra. Additionally, the evi- 
dence suggests that the mandalas surrounding the Alchi and Lalung figures 
are related to the Vajradhatu-mandala of the Tattvasamgraha rather than the 
Dharmadhatuvagisvara-mandala. A remaining puzzle concerns the position- 
ing of the two Mangyu figures: their respective iconographic contexts raise 
questions about whether they were intended as, or perceived to be, depictions 
of Mafijusri as the Adibuddha. 

In wider perspective, the mid-eighth to early-ninth century Indian textual 
portrayal of Mafijuéri as the Adibuddha, and as the Jüanasattva, by Mafijusri- 
mitra, Agrabodhi, and Vilāsavajra (to place them in their likely chronological 
order) reveals what is hard not to read as a concerted effort during this period 
to promote Matijušrī as the key tantric deity. While the effort ultimately failed, 
as a result of competing claims for the role of Adibuddha (for example by sup- 
porters of Vajrasattva, Vajradhara, and Samantabhadra) and by the increasing 
dominance of the newer yoginitantra traditions, it is nonetheless significant 
that this yogatantra-based vision of Mafijusri as the Adibuddha still had cur- 
rency some two to four hundred years later in the artistic portrayals found in 
early Western Himalayan Buddhist art. 

The findings of the present investigation also give clear support to the sug- 
gestion, made by both Linrothe and Luczanits,** of the importance of the 
Nāmasamgīti and its associated literature in understanding the role of Mafiju- 
sri in Western Himalayan Buddhist art. 


and although he sees Lalung’s artistic origins as being in north-west India, perhaps some 
textual/iconographic influence may have come from the east. If the Lalung Serkhang dates 
from the second half of the twelfth century (see above, note 4) there would be ample time 
for transmission of a Vilasavajra/Agrabodhi based iconographical tradition. In the case of 
Maifijusrimitra’s text there is no equivalent issue of geographical transmission. Rinchen 
Zangpo played a major role in the development of Buddhism in the Western Himalayas, 
becoming associated with many of its temples and monasteries, and although he did not 
translate the Ākāšavimala, he did translate both the vs and Mafiju$rimitra's vs commen- 
tary (see note 14 above). 
54 See Linrothe 1996, 272 and Luczanits 2004, 212—214. 


566 TRIBE 
Abbreviations 


D Catalogue of the Derge edition of the Kanjur and Tenjur published 
by Tēhoku Imperial University. See Ui Hakuju et al. 1934. 

NMAA  Nāmamantrārthāvalokinī of Vilasavajra 

NGMPP Nepal-German Manuscript Preservation Project 

NS Namasamgiti 

WHAv Western Himalaya Archive Vienna 


Acknowledgements 


As my doctoral supervisor, Professor Sanderson gave of his time, enthusiasm, 
deep knowledge and friendship with extraordinary generosity. I owe him a very 
large debt of gratitude. For help on the present article thanks are due to Ver- 
ena Widorn, director of the Western Himalaya Archive Vienna (WHAV) at the 
University of Vienna, for providing invaluable photographs; to Cécile Ducher 
for her overview of the Tibetan translations; and to Jaroslav Poncar, Christian 
Luczanits and Christiane Papa-Kalantari for photograph permissions. 


References 


Primary Sources 
Ākāšavimala of Mafijusrimitra 
Nāmasamgītimaņdalavidhyākāšavimalanāma; Mtshan yang dag par brjod pai dkyil 
'khor cho ga nam mkha’ dri med ces bya ba, trans. Suvajra pa and Chos kyi shes ra. 
Sde-ge Bstan-gyur, Rgyud-grel, vol. ngu, ff. 1v1—13v6 (D 2543). 


Tattvasamgraha 

Yamada Isshi, ed. Sarvatathāgata-tattvasamgrahanāma-mahāyānasūtra: a Critical Edi- 
tion Based on a Sanskrit manuscript and Chinese and Tibetan Translations. Šatapitaka 
Series, no. 262. New Delhi: Sharada Rani, 1981. 


Nāmamantrārthāvalokinī (NMAA) of Vilasavajra 

See Tribe 2016. 

Manuscript belonging to the University of Cambridge (Bendall, 1883: Add. 1708). Palm- 
leaf, Nevari script, 115 folios (c. 1450 CE). (siglum A) 

Manuscript belonging to P.R. Vajrācārya, Kathmandu (NGMPP reel no. E 360/16). Paper, 
Nevar script (first 13 folios lost), undated. (siglum B) 


MANJUŠRĪ AS ĀDIBUDDHA 567 


Manuscript belonging to Dharmavajracarya, Kathmandu (NGMPP reel no. E 1369/3). 
Paper, Devanagari script, 194 folios, undated. (siglum D) 

Āryanāmasamgititīkā Nāmamantrārthāvalokini; Phags pa mtshan yang dag par brjod 
pa'i rgya cher grel pa mtshan gsang sngags kyi don du rnam par lta ba, trans. Smrtij- 
fianakirti. Sde-ge Bstan-gyur, Rgyud-grel, vol. khu, ff. 27v1-115v3 (D 2533). 


Namasamgiti (Ns) 
See Davidson 1981. 


Nispannayogāvalī (NYĀ) of Abhayakaragupta 
Benoytosh Bhattacharyya, ed. Nispannayogāvalī of Mahapandita Abhayakaragupta. 
Gaekwad's Oriental Series, no. 109. Baroda: Oriental Institute, 1949. 


*Sadhanaupayika of Agrabodhi 

Aryamanijusrinamasamgitinopika; 'Phags pa 'jam dpal gyi mtshan yang dag par brjod 
pai sgrub pai thabs, trans. Smrtijfiánakírti. Sde-ge Bstan-gyur, Rgyud-grel, vol. ngu, 
ff. 59r4—7ov2 (D 2579). 


Secondary Sources 

Bendall, Cecil. 1883. Catalogue of the Buddhist Sanskrit Manuscripts in the University 
Library, Cambridge. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

Davidson, Ronald M. 1981. “The Litany of Names of Matijušrī” In Tantric and Taoist 
Studies in Honour of Professor R.A. Stein, vol. 1, edited by Michel Strickmann, 1-69. 
Mélanges chinois et bouddhiques 20. Brussels: Institut belge des hautes études chi- 
noises. 

Edgerton, Franklin. 1953. Buddhist Hybrid Sanskrit Grammar and Dictionary. 2 vols. New 
Haven: Yale University Press. 

Goepper, Roger, and Jaroslav Poncar. 1996. Alchi: Ladakh's Hidden Buddhist Sanctuary. 
The Sumtsek. Chicago: Serindia Publications. 

Levy, Rachel Q., and Luke A. Fidler. 2014. "The Date of the Alchi Sumtsek Murals: nth 
or 13th Century?" International Association for Ladakh Studies 31: 37—38. 

Linrothe, Robert. 1994. "The Murals of Mangyu. A Distillation of Mature Esoteric Bud- 
dhist Iconography” Orientations 25 (11): 92-102. 

Linrothe, Robert. 1996. "Mapping the Iconographic Programme of the Sumstek” In 
Alchi: Ladakh's Hidden Buddhist Sanctuary. The Sumtsek, by Roger Goepper and 
Jaroslav Poncar, 269—272. Chicago: Serindia Publications. 

Linrothe, Robert. 1999. Ruthless Compassion. Wrathful Deities in Early Indo-Tibetan Eso- 
teric Buddhist Art. London: Serindia. 

Linrothe, Robert. zou. “Dating the Mangyu Style” In Heavenly Himalayas: the Murals 
of Mangyu and Other Discoveries in Ladakh, by Peter van Ham, 158—161. Munich and 
New York: Prestel. 


568 TRIBE 


Luczanits, Christian. 2004. Buddhist Sculpture in Clay: Early Western Himalayan Art, 
Late 10th to Early 13th Centuries. Chicago: Serindia. 

Pal, Pratapaditya, and Lionel Fournier. 1988. Marvels of Buddhist Art: Alchi-Ladakh. New 
York and Paris: Ravi Kumar. 

Ricca, Franco, and Erberto Lo Bue. 1993. The Great Stupa of Gyantse: A Complete Tibetan 
Pantheon of the Fifteenth Century. London: Serindia. 

Snellgrove, David L., and Tadeusz Skorupski. 1977, 1980. The Cultural Heritage of Ladakh. 
2 vols. Warminster: Aris and Phillips. 

Tanaka Kimiaki. 2018. An Illustrated History of the Mandala: From its Genesis to the Kala- 
cakratantra. Somerville, MA: Wisdom Publications. 

Tribe, Anthony. 1997. "Matijusrī and ‘The Chanting of Names’ (Namasamgiti): Wis- 
dom and its Embodiment in an Indian Mahayana Buddhist Text.” In Indian Insights: 
Buddhism, Brahmanism and Bhakti. Papers from the Annual Spalding Symposium on 
Indian Religions, edited by Peter Connolly and Susan Hamilton, 109—136. London: 
Luzac Oriental. 

Tribe, Anthony. 2015. “Mafijusrinamasameiti.” In Brill’s Encylopedia of Buddhism, vol. 1: 
Literature and Languages, edited by Jonathan Silk, Oskar von Hinüber, and Vincent 
Eltschinger, 353-359. Leiden: Brill. 

Tribe, Anthony. 2016. Tantric Buddhist Practice in India: Vilasavajra’s Commentary on 
the Mafijusri-namasamgiti. A Critical Edition and Annotated Translation of Chapters 
1-5 with Introductions. London and New York: Routledge. 

Tucci, Giuseppe. 1988. The Temples of Western Tibet and their Artistic Symbolism. Indo- 
Tibetica 111.1: The Monasteries of Spiti and Kunavar. English translation, edited by 
Lokesh Chandra. Šatapitaka Series, no. 349, New Delhi: Aditya Prakashan. Originally 
published 1935. I templi del Tibet occidentale e il loro simbolismo artistico. Parte 1. Spiti 
e Kunavar. Roma: Reale Accademia d'Italia. 

Ui Hakuju, Suzuki Munetada, Kanakura Yensho, and Tada Tokan, eds. 1934. A Complete 
Catalogue of the Tibetan Buddhist Canons (Bkah-hgyur and Bstan-hgyur). Sendai: 
Tohoku Imperial University. 

van Ham, Peter. 2011. Heavenly Himalayas: the Murals of Mangyu and Other Discoveries 
in Ladakh. Munich and New York: Prestel. 

van Ham, Peter. 2019. Alchi: Treasure of the Himalayas. Munich: Hirmer. 

van Schaik, Sam. 2009. “A Tibetan Book of Spells." Blog entry, https://earlytibet.com/ 
2009/02/19/a-tibetan-book-of-spells/ (accessed May 15th 2020). 


CHAPTER 23 


Life and Afterlife of Sadrsya: Revisiting the 
Citrasutra through the Nationalism-Naturalism 
Debate in Indian Art History 


Parul Dave-Mukherji 


This paper sets out to revisit the Citrasūtra, a seminal section on painting from 
the Visnudharmottarapurana, in the light of key concerns around the cultural 
politics of art historiography, the sastra-prayoga debate (Maxwell 1989, 5—15), 
and the related question of interpretative frameworks for studying early Indian 
art. The latter concern has lately come to the forefront in the context of post- 
colonial studies and global art history. It is critical of intellectual parasitism 
(Dhareshwar 2015, 57—77) and pushes postcolonial thought to explore ‘native’ 
interpretative frames to study Indian art (Asher 2007, 12). 

This paper attempts to complicate the search for alternative frameworks by 
underlining gaps and slippages that surround the meaning of terms in a given 
text and their modern appropriations. To this end, it traces the genealogy of 
the term sddrgya, from the šilpašāstric lexicon through its twentieth-century 
reception in art-historical discourse. How does a term acquire an afterlife when 
it enters into the force field of reinterpretation steeped in cultural nationalism? 
How could a newly “discovered” Sanskrit text function in such a space?! 

In this paper, I also intend to address the larger question: what is the geneal- 
ogy of the view of India’s cultural past, and specifically its "art," as transcen- 
dental/ idealistic/spiritual, which has translated itself into a belief? And why 
does this belief persist, although in different configurations? In more recent 
times, an ethnographic approach to the study of texts has emerged as a cor- 
rective, which I will critically examine for its relevance for alternative inter- 
pretative frames for the study of Indian art. In the end, I will conclude by 
relating Coomaraswamy’s transcendentalism to David Shulman’s recent dis- 


1 The first printed text of the Visnudharmottara Purana, edited by Pandit Madhusudhan and 
Madhavaprasada Sarma in 1912 (Venkateshwar Press, Bombay), is the one that caught the 
attention of a pioneering art historian, Stella Kramrisch, who had arrived in India from 
Vienna. It was her English translation which brought the text into the discourse of art his- 
tory and Indology. 


© PARUL DAVE-MUKHERJI, 2020 | DOI:10.1163/9789004432802_025 
This is an open access chapter distributed under the terms of the CC BY-NC 4.0 license. 


570 LIFE AND AFTERLIFE OF SĀDRŠYA 


course around the ‘more than real’ (Shulman 2012), and the latter's implication 
for interpretative frameworks for Indian art. 


1 The Discovery of the Citrasutra 


It is around the first quarter of the twentieth century that some major textual 
sources, either complete or as fragments, were “discovered,” edited and trans- 
lated. They began to acquire tremendous cultural significance as carriers of 
authentic meaning. One such text was the Citrasutra of the Visnudharmottara, 
which emerged on the stage of art history in India when it was first translated 
into English in 1924 by Stella Kramrisch, the pioneering historian of Indian art. 
This art historian from Vienna chanced upon this text soon after her arrival 
in India in 1919. The first printed text of the Visnudharmottara Purana, edited 
by Pandit Madhusudhan and Madhavaprasada Sarma and published by the 
Venkateshwar Press, Bombay in 1912, is the one that caught attention of Kram- 
risch. It was her English translation (Kramrisch 1928 [1924]) which brought the 
text into the discourse of art history and Indology. 

It was almost a decade later that another pioneering art historian, A.K. Coo- 
maraswamy, turned his attention to this text, singling out one of its chapters, 
adhyaya 41, for translation and commentary (Coomaraswamy 1933, 13—21). This 
chapter of the text deals with the classification of painting into four types— 
Satya, Vainika, Nagara and Misra. According to Coomaraswamy, the first two 
types corresponded to the pictorial tradition of the Ajanta caves. 

By now, the two most eminent art historians of Indian art who played a semi- 
nal role in establishing the discipline of art history in India were involved in the 
interpretation of the Citrasutra. This, in turn, exalted the status of the text and 
transformed it into an Ur-text for a wide-ranging extrapolation about Indian art 
and aesthetics, which continued into the first decade of the 21st century (Nardi 
2006). 

Almost twenty-five years separate Coomaraswamy’s commentary on the text 
and its first critical edition, brought out by a Sanskritist, Priyabala Shah in 
1958 and 1961. Shah’s edition broke fresh grounds in textual criticism when she 
incorporated the readings from six new manuscripts. However, her attempt 
at theorization was restricted, interestingly, to the same chapter selected by 
Coomaraswamy, which dealt with the classification of paintings. She was far 
too involved with connecting the types of paintings with types of architectural 
styles to pay attention to whether Coomaraswamy’s metaphysical readings of 
the terminology were borne out by the edited text. Exactly two decades later, 
interest in this text was renewed when another art historian, C. Sivaramamurti 


DAVE-MUKHERJI 571 


published a translation and commentary of all nine chapters of the Citrasūtra 
(1978). A Sanskritist and an art historian of post-independent India, Sivarama- 
murti assigned a diametrically opposite significance to the text, one validating 
"Indian naturalism" as opposed to the manner in which Coomaraswamy used 
this text as a support for his claims of transcendentalism during the colonial 
period. 


2 The Citrasutra Turn in Early Indian Art History 


The interpretation of the Citrasūtra is further complicated by the fact that it 
was "discovered" in colonial India; this implied that its interpretation would be 
caught in a comparative framework involving the art of the colonizer and that 
of the colonized. The central question around which the art of India and that 
of the West were compared and judged was that of'naturalism, a term that was 
seen as intrinsic to the identity of western art. 

When the Citrasūtra came to light in the early decades of the twentieth 
century, cultural nationalism was at its height and art history as a discipline 
was being introduced into Indian universities. Naturalism supplied a key term, 
often as an antithesis to ornamentalism, around which debates on the worth of 
Indian art and craft were being carried out amidst the ascendency of cultural 
nationalism. Transcendentalism and naturalism are dialectically connected as 
part of a discourse largely constructed by A.K. Coomaraswamy to place Indian 
art on a morally higher plane. The former stands for Indian art and its spiritual 
interiority, defined in contrast to the naturalism ascribed to Western art. There 
prevailed a climate of contestation rife with orientalist binaries that pitted the 
‘rational,’ ‘scientific’ West with the ‘mystical, ‘irrational’ India (Masson-Oursel 
1925). If Indian art is believed to be the result of the artists’ power of medita- 
tion, Western art is assumed to capture only the surface of nature or the visible 
world but never its inner essence. Hence the imbrication of the naturalism 
debate within nationalism. In the battle between the superiority of naturalism 
in art as a hallmark of Western control over representation and its rejection by 


2 Paul Masson-Oursel, a French Orientalist, exerted a strong influence on Coomaraswamy. It 
is to be noted that Coomaraswamy found strong support for his views in Masson-Oursel’s 
writings and in fact translated Masson's 1925 article "Une connexion entre |’ esthétique et la 
philosophie de I’ Inde: la notion de pramāna” (Review des Arts Asiatique 2, 1: 6—9) into English 
as “A Connection between Indian Aesthetics and Philosophy in India” (Rupam 27 & 28 [1926]: 
91-94). 


572 LIFE AND AFTERLIFE OF SĀDRŠYA 


Indian nationalists for the higher civilizational ideal of transcendentalism, the 
latter won the day. Its victory placed Coomaraswamy at an advantageous posi- 
tion, and today this discourse has come to assume truth value, constituting a 
common sensibility concerning Indian art (Dehejia 1996). 

For transcendentalism to emerge as an effective discourse to counter colo- 
nial presuppositions about Indian art, such as the denial of the existence of fine 
arts in India, an alliance of Art History with Indology was the need of the day. 
Already by the middle of eighteenth century the discipline of Indology had 
been founded, having as its main objective the study of Indian culture through 
texts. Indology, right from its inaugural moment, operated with the assump- 
tion that it was ancient and classical Indian texts that were the most authentic 
means of recovering India's past (Halbfass 1981). 

Around the early 1920s, art history came to be introduced in an Indian 
university when the Vienna-trained art historian, Stella Kramrisch, began to 
teach this discipline in Kalabhavana, Visvabharati University, Santiniketan, at 
Rabindranath Tagore's behest. In other universities where it was taught, such 
as Calcutta University and Banaras Hindu University, it was as an adjunct to 
ancient Indian history. It was in 1950s that an independent department of Art 
History and Aesthetics came to be established in the Faculty of Fine Arts, MSU, 
Baroda. This discipline was mobilized for the reconstruction of India's past, 
part of the nationalist project to regain the lost essence of Indian-ness as a 
means of reclaiming subjectivity (Guha-Thakurta 1991). 


3 Coomaraswamy's Reading of the Citrasūtra: A Founding Moment 
in Indian Art History 


So strong was Coomaraswamy's commitment to transcendentalism that it im- 
pelled him to interpret the traditional šilpašāstras through the same lens. I have 
discussed his negotiation with the anomaly posed by the šilpašāstras elsewhere 
(Dave-Mukherji 2008, 132—134). Let us see how the term sādršya gets inflected 
by his translation. As a case in point, let us turn to Coomaraswamy’s transla- 
tion of adhyaya 41 of the Citrasūtra, which primarily defines four categories of 
painting: Satya, Desika, Nagara and Misra. He particularly focused on the first 
category, as it seemed to pose a challenge to his assumption that there is no 
place for naturalism in Indian art. In fact, the very term Satya may be translated 
as “real” or “naturalistic” in light of its definition—that any painting bearing 
resemblance to the world belongs to this category: 


yat kincil lokasadr$yam citram tat satyam ucyate 


DAVE-MUKHERJI 573 
I have translated this as follows (Dave-Mukherji 2001, 159): 


Whichever painting that bears a similarity with the world [that painting] 
is called Satya (“Naturalistic”). 


This is in fact in wide variance with Coomaraswamy’s translation (1933, 13): 


Painting that represents any of the worlds (kivicilloka-sadrsya) ... is called 
Pure or Sacred (satya). 


How satya comes to translated as "Pure or Sacred" is not a matter of willful 
mistranslation. Rather, we need to historicize this mode of interpretation and 
ask, under what conditions may satya be taken as "Pure or Sacred”? Satya could 
no longer be accepted as "True to life" as interpreted by Kramrisch (1928, 51). 
Another term, which intensified this problem, was sadrgya, which could not be 
allowed to retain its usual sense (Coomaraswamy 1933, 21): 


If we understood sādršya then to mean “illusion” or “realism,” verisimil- 
itude of any crude or naive sort, we should be contradicting all that we 
know of the oriental conception of art. 


It was the co-existence of satya with sādrsya (resemblance/likeness) which 
compounded Coomarsawamy's problem of avoiding literal translation. Hence 
Coomaraswamy was compelled to connect yatkificilloka- with sādršyam, 
against the rules of Sanskrit syntax, in order to yield the meaning "any of the 
worlds" in place of “any painting.” His translation (Coomaraswamy 1933, 13) 
continues as follows: 


Painting that represents any of the worlds ( yatkificillokasadráya), that is 
elongated and has ideal proportions ... [emphasis added] 


In fact, the description of the painting as “elongated” (dirghangam) and hav- 
ing "ideal proportion" (supramanam) belongs to the next category of painting, 
termed Dešika. By misreading in this manner, he could explain away the natu- 
ralistic potential in the term sadrsya and impose his view of idealism being the 
essential feature of Indian painting (Coomaraswamy 1933, 13): 


So also in verse 2 above, where kificilloka must include devaloka |*abode 
of the gods"], sādršya cannot be interpreted as “naturalistic.” 


574 LIFE AND AFTERLIFE OF SĀDRŠYA 


Coomaraswamy's departure from normal Sanskrit syntax and semantics did 
not go unnoticed, but invited ridicule from his contemporary, a well-respected 
Sanskrit scholar (Raghavan 1933, 905): 


Satya cannot be interpreted as a Sattvika picture. One can as well derive 
it from Sat and say it is the picture of the Upanisadic Brahman. 


In response to Raghvan's criticism, Coomaraswamy revised his translation of 
satya from "Pure or Sacred” to "intellectual and ideal" (Coomaraswamy 1933, 26), 
and rejected its literal meaning, which was however subsequently reinstated by 
Priyabala Shah (1961, 120) in the first critical edition of this text: 


Whatever (yatkiñcid) painting depicts semblance of the world (Loka- 
sadrsyam citram) is called Satya. 


Coomaraswamy evidently felt in need of more support for his elimination 
of the concept of resemblance than the Citrasūtra could provide. He began 
to look to the idealist schools of Upanisadic philosophy and epistemology 
(Coomaraswamy 1933, 26) to arrive at a metaphysical reworking of the term 
satya: 
Satya is "real" “actual”, “intelligible”, “ideal”; namarüpa, "form" as distinct 
from the natural disorder (anrta) of the sensible world (loka) (Brhada- 
ranyaka Upanisad, 1, 6, 3: Taittiriya Upanisad, 11, 6). 


In his recasting of sādršya, Coomaraswamy turned to a rather unexpected 
source for an alternative definition of imitation in art that could preserve the 
term, but be free of the unwanted association of naturalism. He found what he 
was looking for in western medieval sources. In my view, this detour to the west- 
ern medieval sources was not fortuitous but compelled by Coomaraswamy's 
confrontation with the Citrasütra. This is confirmed by evidence of the period 
for his new interest, as given by his biographer, Roger Lipsey. According to 
Lipsey (1977, 73), the beginning of the1930's marks the period of transformation 
for Coomaraswamy: *... itis just at this point that the relation to medieval Chris- 
tian thought changed from an enthusiastic but transient acknowledgement of 


3 Raghavan further comments, "My impression on reading the Visnudharmottara is that even to 
its author the exact import of these names was not clear. The text seems to have been written 
after a cut in the flow of tradition of the artists who were using these words as paribhāsās” 


DAVE-MUKHERJI 575 


the value of Meister Eckhart in particular to a permanent and scholarly inter- 
est in the entire scholastic tradition from its origins in the St Augustine to its 
flowering in the thirteenth century" 

For Coomaraswamy, medieval Christian thought best illuminated how to 
interpret sadr$ya without any ‘naturalistic’ connotations (1933, 26): 


Now as to Visnudharmottara, III, 41, 1 and 9, kimcit is not “any” but “some- 
what”; loka not here “worlds” but the sensible (not alaukika) aspect of the 
world; sadrsya is not “resemblance” but consonantia, adaequatio rei et 
intellectus, ... 


Combining references to western medieval sources with the terms from Indian 
epistemology, Coomaraswamy (1933, 26) arrives at a new definition of the satya 
type of painting as 


... sahitya, sadharanya, all of which have reference to unity self-contained 
in art, and not to likeness (sādršatā) to a model. Kimcilloka-sádráya is then 
“the unity of which is only somewhat as to the world, ...". 


For Coomaraswamy, sādršya with its naturalistic implication and its coexis- 
tence with satya, translated as "Pure," was contradictory. Here, purity is taken 
as a "unity self-contained in art” and for that reason the potential of referen- 
tiality to the world outside implied by the term sādršya was viewed as posing a 
threat to his construct of art as the realm of the mind. In another instance, he 
qualified this term as “a consent (sadrsya) of pictorial and formal elements in 
the substance (Sarira) and essence (atman) of the work" (Coomaraswamy 1933, 
27). While he conceded to some presence of pictorial realism in the other three 
types of painting, it is the first type or Satya through which the ethical notion 
of art as "Truth" could be admitted as that which had to be elevated beyond any 
reference to this realism (ibid.): 


... and this contrasts with vainika and nagara painting in which it is to be 
understood that the realistic, pictorial (sādrša) element is much greater, 
where accordingly an adaequatio (tadakarata) rei et intellectus, sadrsya, 
is only partially attainable. 


Notice a distinction created between sadrša (which allows an element of pic- 
torial realism) and sadrsya (a consent of pictorial and formal elements) was 
crucial for his interpretation to avoid contradicting "all that we know of the 
oriental conceptions of art” Rather than unpacking "the oriental conceptions 


576 LIFE AND AFTERLIFE OF SĀDRŠYA 


of art” Coomaraswamy ended up congealing the old binaries between a ratio- 
nal occident and a spiritual orient. His ‘cultural unconscious’ is betrayed in a 
footnote in which he claims to have captured the voice of tradition through his 
alleged fidelity to the textual sources (Coomaraswamy 1933, 27). 


What follows is derived from all these sources without the addition of any 
thought or phrase of my own. Verbal authority could be cited for any state- 
ment. 


What relevance this kind of interrogation has for us today, this reaching back to 
the cultural politics of the early-twentieth century, also needs to be addressed. 
The transcendentalist claim made by Coomaraswamy on the basis of a “found” 
textual tradition can be explained as a political exigency for combating the 
colonial representation of Indian art. However, when such reliance on ‘scrip- 
tural evidence’ is perpetuated in postcolonial times, its inbuilt essentialism 
can have serious implications today in an India that is witnessing an unprece- 
dented obsession around nationalism. 

Foregrounding the claim that rejection of naturalism by Indian artists was 
intentional, Coomaraswamy effectively undercut the criticism that Indian art 
was deficient in naturalism. He suggested, instead, that it was never the inten- 
tion of the Indian artists to imitate the visible world but to create a symbolic 
image based on a supramundane ideal which transcended the world of appear- 
ance. The charge leveled against Indian art of crude execution and a lack of 
anatomical accuracy (Ruskin 1905, 347) in the rendering of human and animal 
form was answered not by questioning the criteria of execution and cultural 
knowledge of bodies, but by claiming that these so-called “deficiencies” were 
deliberate, a result of a “specialized technique of vision” (Coomaraswamy 1934, 
166): 


Technical production is thus bound up with the psychological method 
known as yoga. In other words, the artist does not resort to models but 
uses a mental construction and this condition sufficiently explains the 
cerebral character of the art, ... 


The vision of the classical Indian artist that emerges from Coomaraswamy’s 
early writings appears to be modelled upon the idea of sculpture of dhyani 
Buddhas, with artistic activity relegated to the domain of pure mental contem- 
plation (Coomaraswamy 1908). The eyes of the artist appear to be visualized 
as half-closed, focused more on the inward, contemplative space of the mind 
and less on the world “out there,” the domain of naturalism. With an ingenious 


DAVE-MUKHERJI 577 


reversal of binaries set up by the colonial critics, Coomaraswamy constructed a 
compelling counter-narrative, but in the process, he reproduced the very colo- 
nialist logic he had set out to resist. 

Certainly, Coomaraswamy’s transcendentalist claims for Indian art and aes- 
thetics did not remain uncontested, as demonstrated by V. Raghavan's (1933) 
criticism of Coomaraswamy’s interpretation and by the translators of the Citra- 
sūtra. However, such voices of dissent were relegated to the margins and rarely 
made an impact on the disciplinary framework of Indian art history, where 
Coomaraswamy's theoretical framework has retained a canonical status. Most 
curiously, Kapila Vatsyayan, in her very Foreword to my edition of the Citra- 
sūtra has cited the same verse that I have used to critique Coomarawamy's 
transcendentalist standpoint in order to justify it. The tenacity of this view can 
be gauged by the manner in which Coomaraswamy's misreading of pratyaksa, 
direct perception, as the least important pramana or source of knowledge in 
Indian epistemology, is ratified by Vatsyayan (Dave-Mukherji 2001, xiii-xiv). In 
fact, all the six classical darsanas of Indian philosophy consider pratyaksa the 
most salient source of knowledge (Matilal 1986). 


4 The Citrasutra in Postcolonial Art Historiography: 
C. Sivaramamurti 


The return of interest in the Citrasutra in the work of C. Sivaramamurti in 
the late 1970s signals a re-appropriation of this text within his agenda of cul- 
tural nationalism. Ostensibly, his turn to this text was to eradicate false read- 
ings and restore it closer to its original state (Sivaramamurti 1978, xv). Under- 
scoring his interpretation of the Citrasütra was the claim that naturalism was 
accorded a positive role both in Indian art and in the text, which resonated 
with the stand taken by him more than four decades earlier (Sivaramamurti 


1934, 189): 


Questions of perspective and foreshortening do not appear to have baf- 
fled the old artists of our land as in evident from their talks on such tech- 
nical details as ksayavrddhi and the actual conformance of the pictures to 
those rules so elaborately discussed in books on theory. 


It is largely the presence of terms such as sādršya and ksayavrddhi (literally 
"decrease and increase, i.e. “foreshortening,” a technique used to show appar- 
ent depth in naturalistic art) that indicated to Sivaramamurti that the tradi- 
tional Indian artist was no less proficient in representing the world "naturalis- 


578 LIFE AND AFTERLIFE OF SĀDRŠYA 


tically” than his western counterpart. In a similar move, he looks beyond the 
context of the silpasastras, examining classical Sanskrit literature, and finds 
further evidence of imitation in art, as for example, in the Mrcchakatika (Sivara- 
mamurti 1934, 189): 


The tendency of imitation in an artist given in the Mrchhakatika is healthy 
sign of progress at a particular stage provided it is directed in the right 
direction. 


Thus by placing the silpasastras in this wider context, Sivaramamurti retrieved 
key terms such as sādršya, anukrti and ksayavrddhi from the framework of tran- 
scendentalism. Sivaramamurti reinstated naturalism in post-colonial India as 
an index of 'progress, as proof that India could measure up, and more, to the 
categories and standards of art set up in and by the West. Indeed, he writes 
naturalism back into the art-historiographical demands of post-colonial India, 
mapping the term powerfully onto nation building. 

For me, the rejection of naturalism in Indian art on grounds of its western 
identity is as problematic as its nativist retrieval in Sivaramamurti's interpre- 
tation of the Citrasūtra. Interestingly, Sivaramamurti's espousal of an Indian 
naturalism met with deep skepticism from Stella Kramrisch, who was invited 
to write the foreword by the author (Sivaramamurti 1934, 10): 


If as the text shows and Dr. Sivaramamurti stresses, realism was a main 
consideration with the painters, their criteria of verisimilitude were, no 
doubt, met in practice, although no object painted in the murals of Ajan- 
ta, which are roughly contemporary with the Chitrasūtra would strike a 
spectator today as being realistically painted. The realism is in the eye of 
the beholder and pious stories told, though not in the Chitrasutra ... 


Kramrisch almost poses as a paradox the gap between the ancient painters' 
intentions to accomplish realism and their actual practice, and argues that 
the premodern criteria of representation do not match up with our modern 
expectations of verisimilitude. Today, it is possible to see an overlap between 
Kramrisch's skepticism about Sivaramamurti's literal reading of the mimetic 
terms in the Citrasütra and David Shulman's (2012) recent problematization of 
'the real” in the context of his study of the South Indian models of mind. 

In his reading of a seventh-century playwright, Harsadeva's classical Sanskrit 
drama, Ratnāvalī, Shulman foregrounds the role of painting in the way the plot 
unfolds. About the question of verisimilitude, which emerges when the char- 
acters recognize each other in their respective portraits, Shulman arrives at a 


DAVE-MUKHERJI 579 


paradox similar to Kramrisch's, but resolves it by stressing the realm of imagi- 
nation (Shulman 2012, 28): 


Apparently, the painted image is recognized not so much by virtue of how 
it is painted but mostly as a prop for projection, ... 


At one stroke, if Kramrisch evacuates realism/naturalism (taken interchange- 
ably in this context) from both the walls of Ajanta and the text of the Citrasūtra, 
Shulman edges it from the painted surface to the space of literary imagination. 
Naturalism or ‘the real’ is discursively edged off to the realm of the mind via 
the “eyes of the beholder” and the physical entity of a painting reduced to a 
“prop for projection.’ Despite her reservations about claims of verisimilitude 
in the Citrasūtra, Kramrisch had earlier accepted cultural specificity in visual 
representation. This view implicitly allowed for “Indian naturalism,’ even if her 
example draws from Chinese and European naturalism (Kramrisch 1922, 25): 


The Chinese naturalism to the European eye appears as an idealistic 
abstraction, while the European naturalism strikes the Chinese as ugli- 
ness. 


However, it is instructive to recognize the difference between Kramrisch and 
Shulman’s skepticism about the claims of the real. Kramrisch, to some extent, 
was able to accommodate naturalism as a culturally specific phenomenon that 
manifested in art theory, if not in practice, while Shulman relegates the ques- 
tion of painterly resemblance solely to the domain of imagination. However, 
such a categorical dismissal of verisimilitude assumes a wide gap not only 
between discourse and practice but also between how the Indian mind thinks, 
how the Indian eyes see and how Indian bodies act; thinking, vision and agency 
are assumed to fall outside of any rational intentionality. 

What needs examination is the persistence of a belief that ancient Indian 
art willfully rejected any empirical interest in the world that surrounded the 
artists. In my view, the theoretical framework of what this belief (i.e. in tran- 
scendentalism) was once a part of has faded into the background, turning the 
belief and the problematic produced by that theory into a widely-shared yet 
questionable sensibility concerning India’s past and art traditions. Rather than 
a simplistic retrieval of an “Indian naturalism,” as attempted by Sivaramamurti, 
the very semantic framework of the real operating in the si[pasastras and liter- 
ary texts needs to be unpacked and thought through. 


580 LIFE AND AFTERLIFE OF SADRSYA 
5 The Šāstra-Prayoga Debate 


Since the inception of art history in India in the late eighteenth century the 
core of the discipline came to be defined by a "detailed study of archeological 
evidence using a stylistic approach” (Maxwell 1989, 5). Despite the momen- 
tous "discovery" of the silpasastras inaugurated by the coming to light of the 
Mānasāra in 1834, and by subsequent work on the Citralaksana, Citrasūtra, 
Mānasollāsa and other sources around the early-twentieth century, these have 
still not been adequately explored for developing interpretative frameworks 
of art history in India. As pointed out by Tapati Guha Thakurta (1991, 170) in 
the context of Bengal, a sharp divide arose between history and aesthetics, as 
between archeology and the study of silpa texts, when modern commentaries 
on ancient texts came to be written by the late-nineteenth and early-twentieth 
centuries:* 


Art history and aesthetics, even as they grew out of the same institu- 
tionalized scholarly sphere, would henceforth always be marked out as 
a discretely differentiated field. 


The separation of aesthetics and archeology got mapped onto the šāstra (the- 
ory) and prayoga (practice) divide, and led to a division of labour in which the 
guestion of meaning and interpretation was seen as the realm of specialized 
Sankrit-based scholarship dissociated from the empirical study of artifacts, 
with the latter thought to lie in the domain of archeology. 

Reflecting on Indian intellectual history, Sheldon Pollock touches upon the 
imbrication of power in the Indian intellectual tradition around šāstra-prayoga 
(Pollock 1984, 499—519). Seldom has modern art history in India responded to 
the issue of the caste hierarchy that has existed between the Brahmin authors 
of the šilpašāstras and the low caste ilpins or artisans who practiced art (Misra 
1975). Kramrisch (1985, 61), in fact, was one of the first art historians to exam- 
ine caste in the context of art practice and point out contradictory views about 
labour and caste often held by the Dharmasastras: 


4 Abanindranath Tagore, who spearheaded the Bengal School, wrote an article, “Shadangas or 
The Six Limbs of Painting” in 1915. It claimed to base its interpretation of Indian aesthetics 
on a verse culled from the Kamasiitra of circa 500 CE. This elicited a vehement critique from 
an archeologist, Akshay Kumar Maitreya, and illustrates the conflict between aesthetics and 
archeology, as pointed out by Guha-Thakurta (1991). 


DAVE-MUKHERJI 581 


Manu says that the hand of a craftsman engaged in his work is always ritu- 
ally pure. The Gautama Dharmasastra postulates that a Brahman may not 
accept food from an artisan. The law books thus distinguish the craftsman 
in his social position on one hand, and in his state of grace on the other— 
when he is engaged in his work, when he creates, and, thereby, gives effect 
to his being an embodiment of Vi$vakarma. 


Despite Kramrisch's attention to caste and its implication for the system of 
patronage and art practice, the model created by Coomaraswamy of the šilpī 
or an artist/artisan aligned with transcendentalism remained dominant. Even 
Kramrisch later began to follow this line of thought (1985, 57): 


As artists and magicians, the Indian craftsmen transmuted matter into 
form, vision into concrete shape, and man beyond his earthy competence 
... Charged with this power their work became concretely real, subtly 
effective, and transcendentally existent .... 


6 Reading Sadrsya through Ethnography 


Since the time of the modern discovery of the šilpašāstras and particularly with 
reference to texts on architecture, ethnography has emerged as a valid method 
of interpreting difficult terminology. As early as Ram Raz's attempt to make 
sense of obsolete terminology around 1830s, recourse to extant practice was 
sought as a way of checking the extent to which šāstric terms had purchase 
with craftsmen. The question that I would like to raise here is the usefulness 
of ethnography in the interpretation of terms that deal with the 'resemblance' 
or 'truthfulness' of visual representation. Where are we placed today in terms 
of our understanding of this terminology, and to what extent is combining 
ethnography with the study of silpa texts useful for shedding light on its slip- 
pery semantics? 

Samuel Parker (2003, 5-34) has been at the forefront of embracing the 
ethnographic approach in the study of texts mainly on architecture. Can this 
method be equally illuminating in the study of the silpasastras? Do critical 
terms that relate to visual representation—anukrti (imitation or mimesis), 
sādršya (resemblance or verisimilitude), viddha (literally “pierced,” or captur- 
ing resemblance), aviddha (that which lacks resemblance), etc.—hold reso- 
nance for traditional idol makers? Here perhaps we need to distinguish be- 
tween technicalterms for parts of a building and terms that deal with aesthetics 
(beauty) and visual representation. Terms that deal with complex semiotics 


582 LIFE AND AFTERLIFE OF SĀDRŠYA 


such as sadrsya, beauty, etc., are too culturally loaded for them to travel well 
across time. Perhaps in this regard it is instructive to turn to British art historian, 
Michael Baxandall (1972, 26), who has brought to our notice how some art ter- 
minologies common in fifteenth-century Italy, which had made perfect sense 
to their contemporary public, resist easy comprehension for today's audience. 

Ethnography, as employed by some Indologists, assumes continuity of 
meaning across time such that by recourse to extant practice by modern stha- 
pati (traditional architects) the meanings of traditional treatises can be un- 
locked. Terms such as sādršya are ensconced in a whole web of meanings and 
practices of viewing that make them intelligible, and in the absence of the lat- 
ter, they often give rise to skepticism around silpasastras—as if what they say 
fails to coincide with what they really mean. 

Besides, do terms like sādršya or satya, no doubt used in classification of 
paintings in terms of degrees of correspondence to the visible world as far as the 
Citrasütra is concerned, have the same valence as technical terms that classify 
a building? Or, as demonstrated by the survey of the historiography of textual 
interpretations, terms dealing with visual representation are seen by cultural 
nationalists as too invested in civilizational identity and the marking of cul- 
tural difference to yield an 'objective' meaning. More recently, Isabella Nardi 
has ventured into this fraught zone and attempted to employ the ethnographic 
approach to analyze how a present-day traditional idol maker engages with 
visual representation and beauty. Nardi has interacted with local sculptors in 
Orissa and Rajasthan to explore the relevance of the silpasastras to their cur- 
rent practice (Nardi 2006, 58—63). 

In her conversation with a local sculptor, Ram Prasad Sharma, Nardi was 
struck by Sharma's comparison of the sculpture of Lakshmi with a European 
Renaissance master, Giovanni Bellini's Young Woman with a Mirror (painted in 
1515), only to demonstrate the greater beauty of the former (2006, 60): 


Applying his rules and ideals, the sculptor explains that the major defects 
of this Renaissance figure are that the woman has a huge belly and very 
big arms. 


Likewise, Nardi (ibid.) attributes this sculptor's failed attempt at copying 
Michelangelo's sculptures to "different vocabulary and aesthetic ideals of the 
Indian sculptor and [the] Renaissance [sculptor] Such an ethnographic exer- 
cise, while shedding light on the gap between text and practice, serves to under- 
line cultural difference and tends more towards truisms about how each cul- 
tural practitioner responds to aesthetics through what is locally familiar than 
to clarify meanings embedded in texts. 


DAVE-MUKHERJI 583 


7 “Mistranslation” of Sanskrit Terms: A Paradigm for Rethinking 
Visual Representation in Indian Art 


There is no simple, pure unproblematic naturalism in the Indian tradition wait- 
ing to be recuperated. The very fact that there is no one-to-one translation 
possible in Sanskrit, for example, opens up an area of interrogation and also 
a paradigm for interpretation. Perhaps we have neither the words nor the con- 
cepts to capture the domain of “naturalism.” 

Kapila Vatsyayan insightfully problematizes the question of naturalism in 
the context of premodern India thus (Dave-Mukherji 2001, xii): 


For a fuller examination, it would be necessary to reopen the question 
of what constitutes as Nature in the Indian mind-scape, more precisely, 
the mahabhitas and prakrti. This comprehension has to be clearly distin- 
guished from the emergence of ‘naturalism’ as an art movement in Europe 
in the 18th and 19th centuries. 


Of course, the absence of a single term does not signify that the concept does 
not exist. Rather, the absence itself can be seen as an important clue. Perhaps 
what we have is a much more complex experience which can be described 
by using a combination of sādršya, satya and anukrti. In the same way, San- 
skrit terms such as ksayavrddhi (literally, diminution and expansion) or vartanā 
need not be directly taken as equivalents of "foreshortening" or "shading." The 
lack of a close fit between them and the gaps opening up as we attempt to map 
one set of Sanskrit terms on another set of English terms may itself signify a 
rich terrain to explore. 

Once it is acknowledged that that no mode of visual representation in any 
given culture in the West or elsewhere has a direct, unmediated and privileged 
access to the visible, it makes futile any defensive and anxious search for an 
"Indian naturalism” In Art History, Norman Bryson (1983) has engaged with 
a post-structuralist critique of representation and argued against any unmedi- 
ated accessto the real, a view that helps us to complicate the issue of naturalism 
even in the context of premodern Indian art. 

In more recent times and a context closer to South Asia, the question of 'the 
real' has assumed new significance in the writings of David Shulman, who has 
added a more specific dimension to this inquiry through his focus on South 
Indian models of mind. I would conclude by juxtaposing Coomaraswamy's 
anti-naturalism with Shulman's evocation of the *more than real” At one level, 
one may discern a certain correspondence between Coomaraswamy's rejection 
of naturalism as alien to the Indian sensibility, a construct created under the 


584 LIFE AND AFTERLIFE OF SĀDRŠYA 


sway of cultural nationalism, and Shulman’s recognition of a different model 
of mind for South Asia that allows for an interplay between the real and the 
imagined. At the same time, it is possible to recognize a distinction between 
their models. While Coomaraswamy’s view of naturalism arose out of a desire 
to defend Indian art from colonial denigration, Shulman—despite his focus 
on South India—complicates any simple binaries of the real and the imagi- 
nary; this he does by refusing a separation between an observing subject and 
observed real, instead posing their mutual permeability. Notwithstanding the 
fact that Shulman arrives at this model through a close reading of literary texts, 
it has important implications for notions of visual representation. 

Once we overcome the defensive rejection of ‘the real’ and resituate the real 
at the cusp of the existing and the imaginary, the sāstric terminology can be 
accessed in new ways. The term vāyugati is a case in point. I would like to 
express my gratitude to Alexis Sanderson for pointing out the ‘literal’ mean- 
ing of vāyugati when I was editing the Citrasūtra as his D.Phil. student in 
Oxford in the late 1980s. This term appears in the description of hallmarks of 
a skilled artist, the citravid, in the last adhyaya of the Citrasūtra, and sets up 
a high standard of verisimilitude for artistic practice: an expert must have an 
ability to depict parts of the body (or difficult transitional points) normally 
covered by ornaments like the neck, wrists, feet and ears; a body wounded 
by an arrow; an old person; he must create differentiation between a sleep- 
ing and a dead body, and an illusion of an apparent undulation of a flat sur- 
face. It is in this context of technical mastery over representation that vayugati 
appears as a further marker of a skilled painter (Dave-Mukherji 2001, 250— 
251): 


tarangagnisikhadhumam vaijayantyambaradikam 
vāyugatyā likhed yas tu vijfieyah sa tu citravit 


He whois able to paint waves, flames, smoke, flags and garments etc. with 
the speed of the wind (vāyugatyā) is considered to be an expert. 


Previous editors of the Citrasūtra, who include Stella Kramrisch, A.K. Cooma- 
raswamy, C. Sivaramamurti and Priyabala Shah, have overlooked the performa- 
tive dimension of vayugati. They have considered its representational mean- 
ing and connected it with the objects to be depicted, such as flames, banners 
and clothes that are windswept (vāyugati). Vayugati can also connect with the 
agent of representation, i.e. the citravid or the expert in painting, who must 
paint flames, banners and clothes with the speed of the wind. If the first sense 
locates the objects to be drawn, such as flames, banners and clothes, in the lived 


DAVE-MUKHERJI 585 


and observable world, the second meaning implies artistic labour and skill, and 
above all points to the temporality of execution as an index of mastery over rep- 
resentation. Either way, it helps to recast the image of a traditional painter, not 
as creating images out of a meditative trance through half open eyes and dupli- 
cating formula from the past, but as one who encounters the world with keen 
eyes, trained hands and a vibrant imagination. 


References 


Primary Sources 

Visnudharmottarapurana. Pandit Madhusudhan and Madhavaprasada Sarma, eds. Vis- 
nudharmottara Purana. Khanda 111. Chapters 1-18. Bombay: Venkateshwar Press, 
1912. 

Visnudharmottarapurana. Parul Dave-Mukherji, ed. Citrasütra of the Visnudharmottara 
Purana. Khanda 111. Chapters 35-43. New Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 2001. 

Visnudharmottarapurana. Priyabala Shah, ed. Visnudharmottara-Purana. Third Khan- 
da. Chapters 1-118. 2 vols. Gaekwad Oriental Series, nos. 130 and 137. Baroda: 1958 and 
1961. 


Secondary Sources 

Asher, Frederick, 2007. “The Shape of Indian Art History” In Asian Art History in the 
Twenty-First Century, edited by Vishakha Desai, 3-14. New Haven: Yale University 
Press. 

Baxandall, Michael. 1972. Painting and Experience in Fifteenth Century Italy. Oxford: 
Clarendon Press. 

Bryson, Norman. 1983. Vision and Painting: The Logic of the Gaze. New Haven: Yale Uni- 
versity Press. 

Coomaraswamy, A.K. 1908. The Aims of Indian Art. London: Essex House. 

Coomaraswamy, A.K.. 1933. “Vishnudharmottara Chapter 41.” Journal of American Ori- 
ental Society 52: 13-21. 

Coomaraswamy, A.K.. 1933. “The Painter's Art in Ancient India, Ajanta.” Journal of the 
Indian Society of Oriental Art 1: 26—29. 

Coomaraswamy, A.K.. 1934. The Transformation of Nature in Art. Cambridge, Ma: Har- 
vard University Press. 

Dave-Mukherji, Parul. 2008. "The Citrasūtra and the Politics of Authenticity” In Tattv- 
abodha, edited by Kalyan Kumar Chakravarty, 125—140. New Delhi: Munshiram 
Manoharlal Publishers. 

Dehejia, Harsh. 1996. The Advaita of Art. New Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass. 

Dhareshwar, Vivek. 2015. "Sites of Learning and Intellectual Parasitism: The Case for 


586 LIFE AND AFTERLIFE OF SĀDRŠYA 


New Humanities." Journal for Contemporary Thought (A Special Number on Critical 
Humanities), 41 (Summer): 57-77. 

Guha-Thakurta, Tapati. 1991. The Making of a ‘New’ Indian Art: Artists, Aesthetics, and 
Nationalism in Bengal, C. 1850-1920. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

Halbfass, Wilhelm. 1981. India and Europe: An Essay in Understanding. Albany: State 
University of New York. 

Kramrisch, Stella. 1922. “The Expressiveness of Indian Art.” Calcutta Review 3 (October): 
1—46. 

Kramrisch, Stella. 1928 [1924]. The Visnudharmottaram: A Treatise on Indian Painting 
and Image-Making. Calcutta University Press. Originally published as "A Treatise on 
Indian Painting” The Calcutta Review 2 (February 1924): 331-386. 

Kramrisch, Stella. 1983. “Traditions of the Indian Craftsmen.” In Exploring India’s Sacred 
Art, edited by Barbara Stoler Miller, 59—68. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylva- 
nia. 

Lipsey, Roger. 1977. Coomaraswamy. Volume 3: His Life and Work. Princeton, NJ: Prince- 
ton University Press. 

Masson-Oursel, Paul. 1925. “Une connexion entre l'esthétique et la philosophie de 
l'Inde: la notion de pramāna” Review des Arts Asiatique 2 (1): 6—9. Translated into 
English by Coomaraswamy as "A Connection between Indian Aesthetics and Phi- 
losophy in India” Rupam 27 & 28 (1926): 91-94. 

Matilal, B.K. 1986. Perception: an Essay on Classical Indian Theories of Knowledge. 
Oxford: Clarendon Press. 

Maxwell, T. S, 1989, "Šilpa versus Šāstra” In Shastric Traditions in Indian Arts, vol. 1, 
edited by Anna Libera Dallapiccola, 5-15. Stuttgart: Steiner Verlag Wiesbaden 
GMBH. 

Misra, R.N. 1975. Ancient Artists and Art Activity. Shimla: Indian Institute of Advanced 
Studies. 

Nardi, Isabella, 2006. The Theory of Citrasutras in Indian Painting: A Critical Re-evalua- 
tion of their Uses and Interpretations. London, New York: Routledge. 

Parker, Samuel K. 2003. "Text and Practice in South Asian Art: An Ethnographic Per- 
spective”: Artibus Asiae 63 (1): 5-34. www .jstor.org/stable/3249692. 

Pollock, Sheldon. 1984. "The Theory of Practice and the Practice of Theory in Indian 
Intellectual History." Journal of the American Oriental Society 105: 499—519. 

Raghavan, V. 1933. "Some Sanskrit Texts on Painting.” Journal of Indian Historical Quar- 
terly 9: 904-905. 

Ruskin, John. 1905. "Aratra Pentilici" Chapter 6 in The Collected Works of John Ruskin, 
vol. 20. London: George Allen; New York: Longmans, Green, and Co. 

Shah, Priyabala. 1958/1961. See Visnudharmottara Purāņa. 

Shulman, David, 2012. More than Real: A History of the Imagination in South India. Cam- 
bridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 


DAVE-MUKHERJI 587 


Sivaramamurti, C. 1978. The Chitrasutra of the Visnudharmottara. New Delhi: Kanak 
Publications. 

Sivaramamurti, C. 1934. "The Artist of Ancient India." Journal of Oriental Research 8: 
168-199. 


Index 


Abhidharmakošabhāsya 87, 88n, gon, 
124189 

Abhinavagupta xxviii, 3—6, 106—135, 144— 
167, 186, 255, 259—260, 262n41, 284, 
292—310, 387—389, 391, 406 

abhiseka, see Caturthabhiseka; consecration; 

kings: royal consecration 

acarya, see guru 

ācāryābhimāna 5, 208—209 

Acáryahrdayam 200, 211 

Ācāryakriyāsamuccaya 10, 508, 531 

Ādhyātmika 17 

Adibuddha  10-u, 539, 546—565 

Advayavajra 172,180 

agency; agent  6,89-90, 95-101, 122, 146, 165, 
209, 283-284, 295n25, 298, 309, 314, 
325, 338, 579, 584 

Aghorī 40-42, 393, 395 402 

Agrabodhi 11, 546-547, 551, 555» 557-559 
562—565 

Ākāšavimala n, 546, 549n22, 556, 559139, 
565n53 

Alakiya Manavalapperumal Nayanar 

Āļavantār 199, 204 

Alchi 539-548, 551, 555132, 559-560, 562- 
565 

alcohol 2, 40—43, 326, 350, 432, 495n33 

Amaraughaprabodha 412, 421, 452, 454, 
459, 472 

Amarešvara 

429 

Amoghapāšakalparāja 

amrta 2,8, 38-43, 52, 197, 206, 375, 379—380, 
404149, 413—414 

Amrtakaņikā (Aka) 172—173, 176—177 

Amrtakaņikoddyota 173,176 

anumāna, see inference 

apoha 

Arthasástra 5, 219—221, 224, 326 

āsana 451, 454D9, 455, 456n13, 458—463, 
465—467, 471, 4731, 549n22 

ascetic(s) 1, 5, 9, 15—17, 23—27, 29136, 33—34, 
39, 54—55, 58, 68, 75, 221, 223, 229, 231, 
250—251, 253n10, 258n27, 270—279, 311, 
332, 391, 421, 446, 454—455, 483—484, 
494-501 


200, 211 


28, 30, 38-43 
amart 
240, 241n32 


127N, 135n117 


asidhārāvrata 64, 66, 427 

āšrama 17, 483, 497—498 

āšramin 483, 496—497, 501-502 
Astādhyāyī (A) 89ns, 305, 315 

astanga 453, 459, 463n38, 465—466, 47118 
Ātānātiya-sutta 23504 

Atharvaveda 5, 218—220, 224—225 
Atimarga 1-2, 15—29, 33-34, 38, 39n19, 278 
ātman, see self 

ātmavāda 3,87, 98n29 


Bakker, Hans xi, xv, xx, xxiii, 35—38, 44, 494 

bandha 8, 453, 463n38 

Banaras, see Varanasi 

banner 36, 220, 237-238, 240, 367, 376, 485, 
535, 584 

bārhaspatya 10, 125n 

bathing, ritual 26, 37, 69, 73—74, 236—237, 
253, 326, 429, 489 

Beyond the Fourth, see turyātīta 

Bhadrakālī 7, 326, 328 

Bhagavadgītā | 22n21, 26, 19n51, 202, 205, 
226, 463, 466 

Bhairava 2, 20—21, 28, 34, 3509, 40—43, 
69n66, 71, 266n53, 294, 365, 370n24, 
393-394, 400, 402—403, 433-434, 
436 

Bhairavaprādurbhāva 19-20 

bhairavas 2, 20—21, 28, 34n9, 40—43, 68—71, 
75, 266n53, 294, 365, 370124, 393-394, 
400—403, 433—436, 4950 

Bhaisajyagurusūtra 240 

Bharati 365,371 

Bhartrhari uo, 124189 

bhava 433-434. 436 

Bhavadevamisra 468, 470 

bhoga 16,163, 211n, 255117, 257, 261-262, 
268n56, 271165, 273—275, 355» 357, 378, 
391, 405, 493 

see also siddhi 

bindu 8,390, 405n52, 414—442, 452 

Brahmayāmala (BraYā) 8, 39n19, 40, 74— 
75, 265n, 387—406, 427, 428n10, 429, 
438n33, 440n43, 445 

Brhatkālottara 19n12, 266, 269, 286n5, 484— 
488, 490, 494, 498nn39—40, 503 


590 


Brunner, Héléne; Brunner-Lachaux, Héléne 
52, 71D, 252n6, 253n11, 256nn18-20, 
257n24, 258n27, 264, 270nn, 272nn68— 
70, 276nn82-83, 85, 278, 483 

bubhuksu 250—256, 260—263, 266, 269, 273, 
277-278, 405 

see also sadhaka 

Buddhacarita 5, 229-230 

Buddhism — xxvii-xxviii, 1, 3, 6, 8, 10, 48, 
53—56, 78—79, 87-94, 97-100, 107n9, 
108—132, 147, 148n, 170—172, 182—188, 
234—244, 25218, 285n, 286n5, 339-340, 
365, 409—421, 452, 454, 507—514, 529— 
530,539-565 —— 

Buddhist-Brāhmaņical Atman debate 87- 
88, 93 


caitya 240, 512, 514 
cakra 389, 39919, 393, 399, 404, 406, 420, 


547) 557 
see also Sricakra 


Camunda 38,42, 75, 325-326, 36618, 395, 
399, 435n26 
Caņdikā 40—42, 322, 327, 330-331 
Caņdīšataka 325, 333 
caryā 3, 47, 50—59, 74, 77—79, 297030 
see also purašcaryā, vratacaryā 
caryāpāda 52—56, 6om6, 256n19, 258 
Caturthabhiseka 172—178, 182—183, 188 
see also consecration (abhiseka) 
Caturthāloka, see Tattvaratnāvaloka 
Caturthasadbhāvopadeša 175, 178—179, 181- 
183 
causality 89—90, 97, 108, 112—116, 130, 134— 
136, 551 
chandoha 418 
Chinnamasta 417-418 
Christian thought, medieval 574-575 
Cīlapattikāram 324, 327, 334—336, 338 
Citrasūtra | 11, 569—585 
cognition(s) 88—97, 99-101, 118n50, 
124189, 127, 128194, 132, 134—135, 136n, 
14715 
colonialism 9, 1, 470—471 
see also postcolonialism 
consciousness 3-4, 62n, 89-101, 108—137, 
146—162, 165—166, 174, 177, 180, 188, 
259n29, 267n, 284n1, 287, 294, 309, 
357, 378, 379N, 554 


INDEX 


consecration (abhiseka) 66,75, 172, 182, 
224—225, 243, 259, 270, 278189, 328, 
417, 483—484, 507—509, 530, 535 
see also Caturthabhiseka; royal consecra- 
tion 
Coomaraswamy, A.K. 569—577, 581, 583-584 
Cord of Power, see šaktitantu 


Daksiņāmnāya  438n32, 440 

Daksiņamūrtyuddhārakoša 361 

Dattātreyayogašāstra? 8, 453, 454110, 457, 
461, 467 

dešika, see guru 

Devīmāhātmya 326, 339, 340n40 

Devipurána 324, 329, 339-340 

Devirahasya 350, 359-361 

Devyāmata (DM) 10, 484—485, 495, 497- 
503, 509, 515—529 

dharmabhāņaka 236 

Dharmakīrti 88n, 107n9, 115-116, 127n, 
135n117 

Dharmottara 

Dhvajāgrakeyūradhāraņī 

dīksā 


115, 286n5 
237—239, 241n5 
2, 4, 6, 33-38, 42—43, 48—52, 54, 75, 
149111, 154n20, 158129, 171-188, 243, 
249—279, 301-302, 311, 388n, 392, 403, 
454, 483—484, 492 
adhikāradā 266 
niradhikāradā | 266n54 
nirbījā 250—252, 256, 258n27, 265, 268— 
269 
nirvanadiksa 
277n88 
naisthikt 256, 273—274, 277 
bhautikī — 255018, 256, 257n23, 258n27, 
259n29, 273-274, 275n80, 277 
lokadharmadiksá 252, 266—269, 272 
lokadharmiņī 6, 249-279 
sadyonirvāņadīksā 267 
sabījā 252, 256, 268—272, 275, 277 
Sivadharmadiksa 266—269 
sivadharmiņī | 6, 251-279 
diksita 497—498 
Durgā 322-341, 365, 368, 371 


254, 264n48, 266—274, 


ethnography u, 323, 337, 569, 581-582 


female 2,9, 34, 39, 71, 221, 238, 402—403, 414 
see also woman 


INDEX 


five nectars 39—40 

see also amrta 
Five States; Five Mystic States 
flag, see banner 
Four Great Kings 235—236, 240, 243 
Fourth Initiation, see Caturthābhiseka 
Fourth State, see turya 
funeral 10, 222, 225, 508n2 


160—161 


Gāhadavāla 20 

gajahasta 441, 443—444 

gnosis 54, 367, 388, 391, 406, 470, 53911, 547, 
5501, 553, 555, 561148 

see also jfíana 

Godavaramisra 463—472 

Goodall, Dominic xxv, xxix, 3, 33n2, 48, 
49n, 52n5, 54, 59n15, 60n16, 65n60, 
71n, 72, 78, 93117, 97n, 158n29, 21813, 
221n14, 222n, 223nn17-48, 226nn23, 25, 
227nn26, 29, 228n30, 249n, 250, 252n8, 
254n14, 256n19, 261n39, 264, 266n52, 
271n66, 272n70, 273n72, 279, 322n, 
325n6, 334n17, 335n27, 339n, 364n1, 
365nn4, 6, 379, 401n35 

Gorakhbāņī 416 

Goraksa 9,446 

Goraksasataka 412, 454 

granthi 8,394, 399—401, 406, 415, 416n 

grha 488—502 

grhastha, see householder 

Gūdhapadā 172-173, 178, 183 

Guhyasamája 53n8, 171-172, 184—187, 420, 
452, 508n2 

Guhyasamajamandalavidhi 

Gurjara-Pratihāra 7, 368 

guru XXV, 5, 10, 52, 57, 61-62, 66—67, 145, 148, 
176, 180—182, 184—187, 195—212, 217—221, 
224—225, 229, 250, 253—254, 258, 264— 
271, 297n28, 388n3, 39019, 430—421, 
431, 442, 444, 462—463, 473N, 483—484, 
488—489, 493—495; 510-515, 572—573 


243, 515017, 529 


guruparamparā 203, 207, 212 
Gyantse 540n, 554n31 
Halāyudhastotra 28—30 


Harsacarita 68, 242n40, 325 

hatha, hathayoga, see under yoga 

Hathapradīpikā 8-9, 412, 422, 451-464, 467, 
468n56, 471-472 


591 


Hatley, Shaman xxv, 8, 39119, 40, 41n22, 
255117, 259n29, 304n, 309n, 3111, 
340nn38-39, 388n4, 389ns, 39019, 
404n50, 405n54, 427, 428n14, 435n27, 
495n33, 501n48 

houses; housing 237, 240, 242, 483-503 

see also grha, kuti, matha, mathikā, pura, 
vešman 

householder 16, 69, 250-251, 258n27, 
270—273, 276, 278—279, 454, 499—500, 
524—525 


idealism 

imitatio dei 

indriya 
126n9o, 134, 443 

inference 4, 110-115, 121-122, 124n89, 125n, 
126n9o, 127, 130n89, 132-136 

initiation, see dīksā 

Irāmānuja Nūrrantāti (IN) 
209 

Isaacson, Harunaga xxv, xxix, 19111, 22121, 
35, 48, 49n, 54, 59115, 65n60, 72, 
78—79, 95n20, 158n29, 170—72, 212, 
219n3, 221n14, 222n, 223n18, 226— 
228, 245, 286n5, 388, 417n, 447, 452n1, 
507n 

Īsvarapratyabhijūākārikā (IPK) 4, 144-150, 
155, 157, 163-166, 283, 292-302 

Īsvarapratyabhijūākārikāvrtti (IPKVr) 292, 
297, 301-302 

Īsvarapratyabhijūāvimaršinī (IPV) 4,106, 
108, 144, 147, 297—298, 301-302 

Īsvarapratyabhijūāvivrtivimaršinī (īPvv) 
167, 293n18, 297—298, 300n36, 301-302 


129n96, 573 
62—63, 71, 75—76, 78 
109-110, 115, 121, 124189, 125n, 


5 195199, 201— 


jaūgama linga 483—484, 497, 503 
see also ascetic(s) 
Jayadrathayamala 19n12, 3313, 251, 266— 
267, 269—270, 286n5, 428n10 
Jayaratha 6, 16643, 255, 260—263, 269, 
284, 303, 307—308, 36515, 387, 42709, 
435030 
jnana 3,8,17, 23-29, 47, 50-55, 68, 69167, 
75» 78, 90—94, 101, 114—115, 130—133, 144, 
146, 152, 180, 202—204, 205n18, 285, 289, 
297, 335, 337, 353, 356, 368, 370, 387- 
403, 406, 417, 539, 547017, 596 
see also gnosis 


592 


jñāna and kriyā, dichotomy of 8, 388-392, 
406 

jfnapáda 47, 182,187, 508n2 

Jitānaratnāvalī 251, 271-278 

jnanasattva 547, 551-559, 561-565 

Jhanasvamin 358 


Kādambarī 324—325, 330—333 
Kadri 421n28 
Kālabhairava 21 
Kālacakratantra 
Kālarātri 


1721, 173, 187, 244, 452 
326, 329—331, 334, 336, 338 
Kalhana 286ns, 295n25 
Kālidāsa 217-231, 365n6 
Kālī 166n43, 325 

see also Bhadrakālī, Cāmuņdā, Kālarātri, 

Kālīkula 
Kalikula 150, 325, 328 
Kamadeva 365—368, 372-373 
Kame$vara 436, 438, 440, 445 
Kāmešvarī 364, 367, 374, 384 
Kaņņinunciruttāmpu 197—199, 201 
kapāla, see skull(s) 
Kāpālika 2, 24, 28, 33—44, 75, 429, 467—468, 
47in 
22, 47, 49, 198, 201—202, 227, 250— 

270, 274, 275180, 392, 404—405 

see also prārabdha 
Kashmir 


karma 


XXV—XXVi, xxviii, 4, 6—7, 79n, 101, 
126n90, 144, 146, 170—176, 180—184, 263, 
278, 283—299, 311, 325, 349-353, 369, 
455 
Kāšikāvrtti 286n5, 307051, 3151, 317n 
Kaul, Sahib 352—353, 355n31 358—361 
Kaula  33ng, 150, 156, 161—162, 292—293, 305, 
310N, 391-392, 426, 428, 434, 445—446 
see also kula 
Kevalajfiana; Kevalijfiana 
khatvanga — 36nu, 58, 65 
Khecarividya 409 
Khmer Empire xxviii, 4, 170, 184, 186—187 
kings; kingship 5—6, 20, 181, 217, 226, 229— 
231, 234—243, 268n56, 285n, 321-327, 
336-341, 368, 383-384, 494, 514, 557 
royalconsecration 328 
royal palace 5,236, 242n40, 244 
royal patronage 242, 285n4, 483, 508n3, 
512—514, 529n54 
see also rājaguru, purohita 


25, 29-30 


INDEX 


Kirana 53, 56, 59, 62, 67, 75, 79, 158n29, 
255n14, 484, 490, 494, 498n39, 503 

Kiranavrtti 92nn10,12, 93n16, 94n19, 95n22, 
97n 

knower 91, 99, 146, 161, 166, 180 

knowledge, see jriana 

Kramrisch, Stella 569n, 570, 582—573, 578- 
581, 584 

kriyà 3,8, 47, 54, 78, 387—388, 391-406 

see also ritual 

kriyāpāda 47, 52, 66 

Kriyasamgrahapafijika (KSP) 10, 508—530 

Ksemarāja  130n89, 145, 149112, 159, 162—165, 
24215, 253-255, 256n18, 258n27, 263, 
381n35, 428n10 

Kubjika 8—9, 326n8, 337, 426 

Kubjikamata 68—69nn, 75, 399, 429n15, 430, 
432 

kula 162n, 302, 310n, 311, 366, 428—436, 445, 
446n53 

see also Kaula 

Kulanātha 383-384 

Kumārila 87,98 

kundalini 9,155023, 378n27, 383, 399, 401, 
406, 435-436, 446—447, 464n40 

kutī 497 


Laghusamvaratantra 244 

Lakuliga 35-38 

Lalung 539, 540N, 543—552, 555-565 

lament 225-226 

Laukika 17, 23-27 

laya, see under yoga 

linga 26, 30, 48—49, 61—66, 229, 402, 483— 
484, 497—498, 503, 508n3, 5131, 529, 
530 

see also jangama linga, sthavara linga 

lingin 271n67, 496, 498 

Linrothe, Robert 540n, 54511, 546n14, 
563n, 565 

lokadharma 6, 249, 251, 262, 275, 278, 
303145 

lokadharmi 6, 251-254, 257—265, 269-272, 
275181, 276 

lokamārga 22—26, 27n32, 28—29, 251n 

Lokamārga 22—26, 27n32, 28—29 

Lokātīta 22, 24, 25n25, 26—27 

Lokottaramarga 23, 27-28 

Lorenzen, David 33n5, 34, 34n6 


INDEX 


Luczanits, Christian 539n3, 540n, 544, 
545nn8-9, 11, 549nn21, 24, 549n24, 
551N, 552, 552n28, 561, 562n50, 563n, 
564n, 565 


Mahābhārata | 22n21, 26n28, 54, 20518, 218, 
312, 324—325, 329—331, 334, 463 

Mahābhāsya 306 

Mahākāla 21, 30, 332, 333 

Mahāmāyāvijayavāhinīdhāranī, see Nārā- 

yanapariprecha 

ājhī 239n23,242n40 

7, 325-328, 337 

Mahapratisaramahavidyarajni | 241 

Mahāsāhasrapramardanasūtra | 237, 239, 
242n41 

Mahatmya 2, 16-25, 28 

Mahavairocana u, 510, 541, 546-551, 
553—555 557036, 559—562, 564- 
565 

mahāvrata 35—36, 37n14, 66 

Mālinīvijayottara 54,159, 164, 166, 304, 308 

Mangyu 10,539, 540N, 541N, 542—551, 556- 
559, 562-565 

Mafijusri 10—11, 539-565 

Mafijusrimitra 11, 546—547, 549n22, 555— 
559, 564—565 

Manijusriyamilakalpa 48, 78, 243 

mantra 1, 5—8,15—16, 48—50, 57—58, 61, 63, 
66—79, 181, 198, 242, 244, 254, 257, 
259129, 325—326, 349-354, 358-361, 
367, 389, 392—404, 428114, 429, 437, 
442, 452—453, 45410, 459, 4711, 45915, 
530, 557 

Mantramarga 1-3, 15-18, 24, 27—28, 47, 
54-56, 59, 68—70, 75, 78—79, 508n3, 
529154 

mantroddhāra 7, 350, 353, 358-361, 367n13 

Manusmrti 17, 18n7, 19n12, 69, 75, 224 

marriage 220, 222, 225, 303n 

Matanga 52n4, 54, 66, 72, 93n17, 263143, 
399, 400n29, 427, 466n53, 467 

Matangavrtti 92nn9, 11, 13—14, 95n22, 
96nn23, 25 

matha 10, 483-485, 489, 494—497, 503 

mathikā 496—497 

mātrkā 77-78 

Matsyapurana 19 

Matsyendra 9,446 


593 


Matsyendrasamhita (MaSam) 
Maturakavi ālvār 197, 201 
Maya 50-51, 93, 98, 146, 274, 326, 429—437, 
442, 445—446 
Mayasamgraha 484, 488—490, 494—495, 
503 
Mayon 197, 200—203 
Mohacürottara 483—497 
moon 2,8, 35—38, 43, 204-205, 295, 335, 
353) 357, 371-382, 413—417, 439, 
442, 453, 465146, 548, 553, 558, 
563 
Mrgendra 52, 55, 93nn16—17, 255n18, 256— 
278 
Mrtyuvaficanopadesa 
mudràá(s) 


8-9, 426—447 


171, 187 

8, 366, 372, 409, 411, 416—417, 
421, 427, 443, 444N, 452—472, 543-559 
562n51 

mumuksu 250—256, 265-266, 270, 273, 405 

see also putraka 

nādī 8, 378027, 390, 399—401, 404, 413, 415- 

416, 452, 456013, 459 

Nāgabhata 11 7, 368-369 

Nāmamantrārthāvalokinī (NMAA) 11, 174, 
546—549, 552, 554n29, 557, 561-563, 
564n 

Namasamgiti (Ns) 11, 539n1, 546—547, 556, 
558, 561, 562151, 563-565 


Nammālvār 197,199, 201 

nandyāvarta/nandikāvarta 489—492, 502 

Narayanakantha 256n18, 257n23, 26135, 
263 

Nārāyaņapariprechā 237, 238, 239n26, 
242n38 


Nardi, Isabella 570, 582 
Narešvaraparīksāprakāša 87, 92n9, 93n18, 
94n19, 95n22, 96n25 


nationalism — 11, 569, 571—572, 576—577, 582, 
584 
naturalism 1, 571-579, 583—584 


Navadharma 244 

Navaratra 7,321-341 

nectar, see amrta; five nectars 
Nidra 326, 329, 336, 338 
Nisvasatattvasamhita (Nisvasa) 1,3, 8,17, 
47—48, 50n, 52—53, 59, 62, 70, 72, 75, 
78—79, 25218, 258n27, 264, 365, 413118, 


427 


594 


Guhyasūtra 2—3, 48—52, 62—67, 68n65, 
70, 72, 75, 78—79 
Nisvāsamukha 17-18 
Nitya Sundari 7, 364—369, 373, 375. 377, 
380n30 
nityanusamdhanam 198, 212 


Nyaya; Naiyāyika 3, 87-101, 125n-126n, 
130n98, 210, 286n5, 461, 469n64 

Nyāyabhāsya | 98n32 

Nyayamarijar: | 89n3, 95n20, 98nn30— 
32, 107n9, 125n, 126n9o, 129n98, 
130198 

omen 219-221, 524—525, 526138, 529, 533 

paddhatis 
530 M 

see also Somasambhupaddhati, Srividyan- 

ityapujapaddhati 

Padma 365, 368, 371 

padmamālā 8, 392—406 

Padmanidhi 365, 368, 370 

Paītcaraksā | 239n27, 244—245 

Panini xxvin, 305, 307, 311, 315—318, 445 

Para Prakrti 7, 368, 379, 380n30 

Paramašiva, see under Šiva 

pāramitā 240, 545n9, 561n48 

Paramoksanirāsakārikāvrtti 92n9, 97n 

Parker, Samuel 581 

Paścimāmnāya 432 

Pasupata  2,15-18, 21-25, 28—30, 33-35, 
37114, 38, 73, 333 

Pāśupatasūtra 17, 24—25, 29, 439, 440n40 

Pātañjalayogaśāstra 462—463, 464n40, 466, 
468, 471, 472 

Patañjali 306, 465—466, 471n 

Pingalāmata 484, 490-495, 498139, 503, 
515, 516nn21-26, 517n27 

Pollock, Sheldon 6, 287-313, 580 

possession 40, 226, 293, 304n, 324, 327, 334, 
336 

see also samāveša 

postcolonialism 11, 569, 576—579 

Power of Awareness 145—146, 154 

Pradyumna peak 349-352 

Prajhaparamita 240, 244n, 543n6, 546—549, 
553, 555558, 562, 564 

prakāša xxx, 108, 112, 118, 119151, 126, 
128194, 133, 155, 160, 163 


10, 364, 367114, 368, 467n54, 508, 


INDEX 


pranayama 327, 451, 45419, 456n14, 
459—460, 461n38, 463138, 465—466, 
471n68 


prapatti 5,194, 1951, 198—199, 208— 
212 
prarabdha 253-255, 259n29, 260131, 


268n56, 270, 274 
see also karma 

pratisthà 10, 66, 392, 484, 507—514, 530 

pratisthātantras 508—509, 514—515, 529— 
539 

Pratyabhijfia 3, 106, 113131, 18n47, 124189, 
145, 146n, 159, 292—294, 297-302, 308, 
309N, 310N, 311, 352 

pratyaksa 458n17, 577 

Priti 366, 368, 372 

pura 488, 494—495 

purāņas 19—20, 26, 323-324, 329, 339-340, 
463—468 

purašcaraņa 68,70 

purascarya 3, 68, 79 

purohita 5, 217—225, 229-231 

purvaseva 3, 68, 70, 74, 79 

putraka 57,59, 254—255, 258n27, 264, 271, 
483, 493 

see also mumuksu 


Raghavan, V. 194n2, 574, 577 

Raghuvamša 5, 217—221, 224—225, 229—230, 
296n27 

rājayoga, see under yoga 

rājaguru 465, 483 

see also purohita 

Rājatarangiņī 28514, 286n5, 295n25 

Ramakantha 3, 67, 87-101 

Ramanuja  5,194-212 

Ratanasutta 242 

Rati 366, 368, 372 

Ratnakantha 359 

Ratnaketuparivarta 240 

Ratnavajra 4, 175-183 

Ravisrijiana 172—173, 176—178, 183 

ritual xxviii, 1, 5—11, 27132, 28, 33-43, 47, 
52, 54, 57, 61, 63, 73, 75, 78, 187, 198, 
218—225, 234—244, 249—251, 262—275, 
278—279, 3031, 300, 321—341, 350, 352, 
359, 387-394, 403-406, 426—447, 4711, 
483, 489, 495033, 507-515, 524, 529- 
539 


INDEX 


see also asidhārāvrata; bathing ritual; 

caryā; Caturthabhiseka; conse- 
cration (abhiseka); diksa; funeral; 
jnana and kriyā, dichotomy of; kriyā; 
Mahānavamī/Navamī; mahāvrata; 
mantra; purašcaraņa; purašcaryā; 
pūrvasevā; pratisthā; sādhana; sex- 
ual ritual; sraddha; vidyāvrata; vrata; 
vratacaryā; worship, outer 

royalty, see kings; kingship 

Rudra 16, 58, 242n40, 277n88, 415, 429, 486 


Sab Bak inscription 170, 184 

Sadanvayasambhava 9, 426 

Saddhātusamīksā 110, 123n88, 124nn88-89 

sādhaka 40—41, 48—49, 57—63, 66, 70—71, 
77-78, 250—273, 278, 401-406, 427n6, 
428n11, 429116, 440143, 483—484, 492— 
493, 495133, 548, 554 

see also bubhuksu 

sādhana 48-49, 63, 547, 550 

*Sadhanaupayika 11, 546, 557, 559039, 563, 
564n 

sādršya u, 569, 572—583 

Saiddhantika 3, 51, 59, 72, 75, 92—93, 96, 
100-101, 126190, 161-162, 270—271, 279, 

j 467054, 509 

Saiva; Saivism xxv-xxviii, 1-3, 6—10, 15—30, 
33-44, 47—79, 8712, 92—95, 99-101, 
107D9, 108n, 112—117, 1270, 128194, 
130198, 1311100, 1341113, 144—147, 159— 
167, 186, 202, 217, 242n40, 249—279, 
283-31, 321, 334—337, 339N, 340139, 
364—384, 387—406, 409—421, 426—447, 
451—454, 464n40, 467n54, 471168, 483- 

: 503, 508-530 

Saivasiddhanta 47, 100-101, 392 

šaktipāta 158, 260—261 

Saktitantu; šaktisūtra 8, 387, 395—403 

samāveša 4,144, 146, 150—152, 157, 160, 163, 
165—166, 419 

see also possession 

Samkhanidhi 36516, 368, 370 

Sāmkhya 3,25, 93, 9418, 96—101, 124, 147, 461 

Sanderson, Alexis 
16, 17n6, 18n9, 25n26, 28, 33n1, 35, 37, 
40121, 44, 47—48, 49n, 54—55, 59115, 
63nn46—47, 64n58, 65n60, 68, 70—72, 
75, 78nn78—79, 79n, 87, 95n21, 144—145, 


XXV-XXXiV, 1, 7—10, 15— 


595 


150, 217, 220n9, 241037, 243, 249, 250n3, 
263n43, 264n45, 266, 267n, 268n57, 
271, 272171, 277—279, 283, 286n5, 294, 
295n23, 310n, 314n60, 322, 325, 326n9, 
328, 349nm1, 3, 352nn24—25, 359, 367, 
368115, 387, 392, 399, 403, 409-410, 
417, 418nn24-25, 426—427, 428n10, 
435n26, 438n32, 440n42, 451, 467n54, 
483-484, 496n36, 497n, 507n, 508, 
59914, 513—514, 516nn23-24, 517n27, 
529154, 539M, 584 

Saptānga (SaA) 171, 177, 179, 183—187 

Sarasvatī 235—236, 240n28 

Sarika 7, 350-361 

Šārikāstava, Šārikāstrotra 351—358, 360 

Sarvadurgatiparisodhanatantra 243, 
560n46 

Sarvajiānottara 3312, 53, 57n, 59, 62, 66— 
67, 72, 75,155n22, 158n29 


Sarvatathāgatādhisthānavyūha 240 

Sarvavajrodaya 243 

šāstra-prayoga 6,11, 287—290, 309, 312, 569, 
580—581 


satya 486, 489, 499, 570—575, 582-583 
Sautrantika 3, 88n, 108—116, 135, 188 
Sears, Tamara 10, 483, 503 
self 4, 24—25, 87-101, 19151, 125n, 126n9o, 
145—166, 293, 389-390, 465, 489, 494 
Self-that-is-awareness 146,165 
9, 426—447 
Shah, Priyabala 570, 574, 584 
Shulman, David 569-570, 578—579, 583—584 
Siddhaikaviratantra 244 
siddhi 7,16, 48—49, 52, 58, 63—66, 70, 74, 77— 
78, 149, 154121, 163, 25218, 255, 256n18, 
260, 325, 327, 335, 355130, 366, 369n19, 
392n, 405—406, 431, 437, 485 
see also bhoga 
Silpacarya 534, 5351 
Siva 
-tattva 159, 163-164 
as sthanu 333 
consort of 34, 334—336, 356, 378, 384 
devotionto 268, 293, 496 
mythology of 20, 25—27, 29, 35—36, 294— 
295, 311, 370 
nature of 17, 24—25, 27, 30, 49—51, 19151, 
146, 159, 162, 202, 300—301, 309, 369, 421 
Niskala- 51,161, 254, 260n31 


sexual ritual 


596 


Parama- 365, 368—369, 401 
Sadā- 50—51, 157, 159, 164, 259129, 
270n62, 401, 429 


Sakala- 58, 254, 259n29, 260n31 
teachings of 16, 3315, 43, 50, 294, 299, 
434, 461 


temple of 61, 67, 242n40, 513 
union or identity with 42—43, 52, 62, 
93, 149, 157, 158, 166, 250, 257, 259n29, 
260—262, 267n, 273—275, 293, 298, 
305n47, 308, 382, 388, 393, 405nn52, 
53, 416, 432—433, 436, 438, 464n40 
worship of 2, 28, 61, 73, 265, 326, 330, 431 
see also Bhairava; Kame$vara; Kulanatha; 
imitatio dei, linga; Mahākāla; Rudra; 
samāveša; šivatva; Šiva-water; Soma 
Sivatva 149, 155n22, 158n29, 260—262, 
274079, 297, 391136, 305147, 382 
see also Šiva, union or identity with 
Siva-water 73—74, 429 
sivadharmī 252, 257—261, 263n43, 271-272, 
275 
see also sadhaka 
Sivadrsti ($0) 107n9, n9n51, 124189, 293, 
294119, 297, 298n, 299, 302n44, 


305 
Šivadrstivrtti ($DVr) 124, 300n36, 302n44 
Sivanandasarasvati 464, 467n, 472 


Sivaramamurti, C. 570—571, 577—579, 584 

Šivasamhitā 412, 453, 45419 

Šivasūtra 150 

skull(s) 2,18, 21-26, 33, 36-39, 58, 65, 370, 
372, 413, 527 

see also khatvanga 

Soma 2, 33—39, 42-44, 486, 489, 500 

Somānanda 6, 119151, 124189, 283— 
284, 292n, 293-294, 295125, 297— 


299 

Somasambhupaddhati | 266n54, 270, 
272n68, 276, 483 

Somagarman 2, 35-38, 43 

Somasiddhanta 2, 33, 43 

srāddha 275-276 

Sri 237, 240 


Sricakra 349, 366—368, 372, 378n28 

Srimahadevivyakarana 240 

Srinagar 7) 349, 351 

Srividya 352, 359, 399, 426, 438n32, 440 
see also Daksiņāmnāya 


INDEX 


Srividyanityapüjapaddhati 359 

stotra; stuti 5, 7, 28—30, 165,195—202, 207, 
212, 240, 353, 358—360, 364—368, 
380n32, 384 

see also Halayudhastotra; Kāmasiddhis- 

tuti; Šārikāstava; S ūryastutirahasya 

sthāpaka 529n54, 535n 

sthāvara linga 483—484, 497, 503 

stuti, see stotra 

Sūksmāvarttabhatta, see Ratnavajra 174- 
176, 183 

Sundaradeva 470, 472 

Süryastutirahasya 359 

Svacchanda 2,18, 20n14, 24—25, 28, 250n4, 
251N, 252—259, 263—266, 268, 274, 278, 
286n5 

svadhisthana yoga 420 

Svayambhuvasitrasangraha 69-72, 75, 
93017 


Tantrāloka (TĀ) 
158n29, 165—167, 255, 259—262, 268, 
284, 36515, 387, 389, 427n9, 428n12, 
435n27 

Tantrālokaviveka (TAV) | 130n98, 165, 284 

Tantrasadbhàva 68n63, 69n66, 75, 259, 
264n48, 278, 389—391, 406 

Tattvaratnāvaloka (TaRaA) 171,173, 176—180, 
182—183 

Tattvaratnāvalokavivaraņa (TaRaVi) 171, 
176, 183, 185 

Tattvasamgraha (Sarvatathāgata-) 509, 
545nn9-10, 547, 560, 561n48, 565 

Tattvasamgraha (by Sadyojyotis) 93m6 

textual parallels 10, 24, 78, 92, 106n2, 151- 
152, 158N29, 432, 508—509, 514—517, 530 

Tibetan 8, 148m10, 170—172, 175—181, 188, 186, 
234, 235n2, 238—239, 285n, 410nn2, 
4, 411, 416, 508n2, 546, 549, 554, 563, 


xxviii, 18147, 130, 154n20, 


564n 

Tiruvarankattamutanār 5,195,196, 197n5, 
198nn10—11 

Tiviyappirapantam 197—201, 205, 207, 211 


Torella, Raffaele 3, 106, 109n12, 15135, 
117141, 124189, 129n97, 134n, 1441111, 
113-115, 146, 14717, 14819, 149, 150, 
151115, 152—159, 162—164 

transcendentalism 1, 569—572, 576—577, 581 

Trika-Krama synthesis 162,165 


INDEX 


Trilocana 270, 276, 279, 372 

Tripurā; Tripurasundarī 8, 349, 352, 364, 
366—369, 426 

turya 4,144—167,177 

turyatita 4,144—167, 180 


Udbhata  126ngo, 286n5 

Utpaladeva 3-6, 101, 106-135, 136n, 144—145, 
15523, 157, 158n30, 161, 165, 283—284, 
292—302, 310n 


Vāgīsvarakīrti 4, 170-187 
Vaidika; vedic 2, 6, 16-17, 20115, 25, 34, 42— 
43, 54n, 69, 205-206, 211, 218, 242n40, 
285, 289, 290111, 303N, 305, 307—312, 
325—326, 335, 338, 352, 359 
see also Atharvaveda; Vedas 
Vaisnava 1, 5—8, 20, 194—199, 204n15, 207— 
212, 321, 325—329, 335—338, 365, 368, 
453 
Vajradhātumaņdala 509-510, 530n55 
Vajravali 10, 484, 507n, 508, 511 
Vajrayana xxviii, 410, 412n9, 416—421, 452, 
509 
Vamakesvaratantra 364, 366—384, 435 
Vamakesvarimata, see Vamakesvaratantra 
Vamanapurana 
Varanasi 2, 16—25, 28, 271, 277, 390n9 
Vārāņasīmāhātmya (VM) 19, 24—27 
Vasubandhu 87, 88n, 110, 112, 130n100, 
1311100 
Vatakalai 194n2, 195-198, 209—212 
Vatsaraja 7, 364, 368—369, 380132, 384 
vāyugati 584 
Vedas 69,181, 198, 200, 205—207, 211, 230, 
242n40, 285, 289, 340, 381, 461, 467, 
530 
see also Atharvaveda; Vaidika; Vedanta 
Vedanta 147, 205—206, 461-466, 470 
Vedanta Desika 5, 194—197, 203, 206—212 
vešman 223, 497, 519, 524 
Vibhūticandra 173,176 
vidyā (mantra) 47—51, 66—68, 69n66, 72—77, 
384, 392-393, 395, 402, 404 
vidyangamantra 68, 71—75 
vidyāvrata 3, 54—56, 62, 66—79 
vidyadhara 7, 239n24, 241n33, 364, 368, 382, 
384 
see also Vatsarāja 


19—20 


597 


Vidyapitha — 39n19, 389 
Vijūānavāda; Vijnānavādin 4, 88n, 112, 
113031, 147, 188 
vikalpa 121, 127n94, 432n20 
Vilāsavajra 11, 174, 539n1, 546—548, 549n23, 
550-565 
Vimalāvatī 271 
vimarša; vimar$ana 95, 110, 112, 121, 132—133 
Visnudharmottara n, 286n5, 328, 569—585 
see also Citrasiitra 
Vivekamartanda 412, 454, 461 
void 4, 145-148, 152—153, 160—161, 405, 452 
Vrah Dhanus 184, 187 
vrata 3, 35, 48, 5318, 54, 56—68, 74—78, 
256n19, 258n27, 392 
see also asidhārāvrata, mahāvrata, 
vidyāvrata, vratacaryā 
vratacaryā 54—59, 67-68, 71 
see also caryā, purašcaryā, vrata 


war; warfare 240, 244, 245148, 322, 337, 466 

Watson, Alex xxix, 3, 87, 8913, 91n, 92n9, 
93nn15—16,18, 94119, 95n22, 971, 99, 
101N, 147, 261139, 379130 

Wedemeyer, Christian 53, 55, 59n14, 62, 68, 
72 

woman 9, 65—66, 77, 221, 225, 250, 268n, 
279, 294, 296n27, 299N, 332—335, 357, 
339, 340, 354, 391, 427nn, 428n10, 429, 
431-432, 434—436, 445—446, 499-500, 


535, 582 
see also female 


worship, inner 387—392, 403-406 
worship, outer 387—392, 403-406 


Yatirājasaptati (YS) 195, 203—207 
Yatirājabhairavam 204 
yoga xxix 1, 3, 7-9, 25, 38, 47, 50—52, 78, 144, 
153, 163, 220, 267n, 268n56, 387-390, 
394, 399, 403—406, 409, 411, 41219, 416— 
421, 426, 446n54, 451-472, 495, 548, 
550, 576 
hatha- 8—9, 39n18, 399, 409—416, 420— 
421, 426—429, 446, 451-472 
laya- 406, 452—453, 454110, 459, 4711 
rāja- 9, 451-459, 463, 464n40, 465, 467— 
470, 471n 
see also āsana; astanga; bandha; bindu; 
granthi; kuņdalinī; mudrā; nadī; 


598 


pranayama; šaktitantu; yogic body; 
worship, inner 

Yogacara, see Vijfianavada 

Yogacintāmaņi 41003, 412, 456—457, 459n23, 
461n24, 463—467, 470n66-67 


INDEX 


yogatantra 1, 509, 530, 54519, 547, 565 
yogic body 8, 390, 393—401, 404N49, 411, 413, 
420 

9, 71, 325, 327, 393, 399, 417, 428—436, 
445—446 


yoginī 


