SANDERSON, Alexis. 2007. “The Saiva Exegesis of Kashmir.” In: Mélanges tantriques 
à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner / Tantric Studies in Memory of Hélène Brunner, edited 
by Dominic Goodall and André Padoux, Pondicherry: Institut frangais d'Indologie 
/ École française d'Extréme-Orient. Collection Indologie 106, pp. 231—442 and 
(bibliography) pp. 551—582. 


The Saiva Exegesis of Kashmir 


ALEXIS SANDERSON 


INTRODUCTION 


The great majority of the surviving exegetical works on the scriptures of the 
Saiva Mantramarga was produced by Kashmirian brahmins towards the end of 
the early medieval period, principally in the course of the tenth century and 
the early decades of the eleventh. Among these authors there were two distinct 
groups in line with the division within the scriptural corpus of the Mantramarga 
between purely Saiva scriptures known collectively as the Siddhanta or Saivasid- 
dhanta and dedicated to the propitiation of Siva and those of a more Sakta 
or completely Sakta character dedicated to the propitiation of Bhairava or the 
Goddess. One group took the purely Saiva scriptures to be the highest of Siva’s 
revelations and saw the others as secondary. The other, while recognizing that 
those texts were indeed the Mantramarga’s fundamental authorities, considered 
its own scriptures to be the higher, believing that they had been revealed by Siva 
for the benefit of an élite within the Saiva community. 

Both groups, Saiddhantikas and non-Saiddhantikas, held that Saivas, at 
least those who were married householders rather than celibate ascetics, were 
simultaneously subject to brahmanical regulation in accordance with their sta- 
tus as members of castes within the brahmanical life-stages. This is prescribed 
in a passage of the lost scripture Bhargavottara much cited by the Saiddhantika 
exegetes:! 


So he should not transgress the practices of his caste-class and brahmanical dis- 
cipline even in thought. He should remain in the discipline in which he was 
when he was initiated into the Saiva religion and [at the same time] maintain 
the ordinances of Siva. 


'E.g. Narayanakantha, Mrgendravrtti, Vidyapáda p. 63, ll. 13—15; Bhatta Ramakantha, Mo- 
ksakārikāvrtti on 146ab: iti varnasramacaran manasapi na langhayet | yo yasminn asrame tisthan 
diksitah sivasasane | sa tasminn eva samtisthec chivadharmam ca pálayet. 


232 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


Non-Saiddhàntika adherence to the same view is seen in the following verse 


quoted without attribution by the Sakta Saiva Jayaratha and the anti-Saiva 
Aparaditya:* 


Inwardly Sakta (kaulah), outwardly Saiva, and brahmanical in his mundane 
observance, he should hold on to what is essential like a coconut [protecting its 


juice inside its flesh and hard shell]. 


Thus they accepted a level of revelation that they shared with non-Saivas (sé- 
mányasástram) as well as a level of revelation applicable to them alone (visesasa- 
stram), with adherents of the Sakta-inclined and Sakta traditions adding a third 
level of more restricted recruitment within the second (visesatarasastram). 

This model of a hierarchy of revelation imposing levels of obligation that 
are accumulated as one ascends from the more universally accessible to the less 
is most clearly articulated by the Sakta-inclined Siraccheda (Jayadrathayamala, 
Satka 1) in an account which extends this model to the Indian religious sys- 
tems in general. The base-line of binding revelation shared with the non-Saivas 
is subdivided here into universal common (sémdnyam) and restricted com- 
mon (samanyavisesam). The former comprises the two Epics and the Puranas, 
since those are accessible and applicable to members of all four caste-categories 
(varnah), that is to say, to all including Südras? —Saiva initiation was accessible 
to the same social range—, and the latter comprises all brahmanical authori- 
ties open only to members of the three regenerable caste-categories (brahmin, 
Ksatriya, and Vaisya), namely Sruti comprising the three Vedas in their various 
recensions and Smrti comprising the Dharmasastras.* The systems on the first 
level of narrower recruitment are set out as follows: 


The Saura, Saiva, and Pafcaratra [scriptures], and [in the Saiva Atimarga] the 
Lakula and Vaimala [scriptures], together with the Atharvaveda, [the texts of] 
Samkhya and Yoga, and the scriptures of the Buddhists, Jains, and the like, are 
restricted teachings (vifesatantram), because a person adheres to [one of] them 
only after taking on specific vows [in addition to or, in the case of the Buddhists 


? Tantralokaviveka on 4.251ab; Yajnavalkyasmrtitika on 1.7, vol. 1, p. 10: antah kaulo bahih 
saivo lokácare tu vaidikah | saram adaya tistheta narikelaphalam yatha. 

3 Jayadrathayamala, Satka 1, f. 166v1—2 (35.65-66b): itihdsapuranani ganitam kavyana- 
takam | chandamsi sabdasastrani sámanyavisayani tu | sarvesim varnikanám tu sámanyasra- 
vanád iha. 

^Jayadrathayamala, Satka 1, f. 16711 (35.77c—78b): atha sámányavaisesa(m) sama-rgyajusah 
priye | sakbacaranabhinnasya smrtyantaragatasya tu. 


Alexis Sanderson 233 


and Jains, as opposed to, the general obligations imposed by brahmanical au- 
thorities].? 


The level of narrowest recruitment, from within systems on this level, is defined 
as follows: 


The Bhairava (Daksinatantras [daksinasrotah]), the Guhyatantras (Vamatantras 
[vamasrotah]), the Garudatantras (parvasrotah), the Bhitatantras[, Matrtantras, 
Jyesthatantras] and [Candasidharatantras] (pascimasrotah), and[, for Buddhists, 
those of] the Vajrayana, are yet more restricted (visesataram), because only a 
person already bound by the vows of the [corresponding body of] restricted 
[scripture] can exercise authority in them.° 


That the text’s Saiva scriptures on the first level of narrower recruitment are 
those of the Siddhanta is made clear later in this passage, when they are defined 
as the [ten] Sivabhedas and [eighteen] Rudrabhedas.’ For this is the standard 
definition of the Saiddhantika canon,’ though in reality the scriptures existent 
or operative in our period are only some of these, mostly within the category 
of the Rudrabhedas. They are principally the Kamika and the Sahasra among 
the Sivabhedas, with the Mrgendra, which claims to be derived from the first, 
and among the Rudrabhedas and derivatives, the Nisvdsa, the Pauskarapara- 
mesvara, the Matangaparamesvara, the Yaksiniparamesvara, he Hamsapárame- 
svara, the Mukuta, the Siksmasvayambhuva, the Svayambbuvasutrasamgraba, 
the Rauravasttrasamgraha, the Kirana, the Kalottara in various recensions of 
differing length, the Sarvajndnottara, and the Parákhya. In addition there were 
specialized Saiddhantika Tantras concerned only with matters pertaining to the 


5 Jayadrathayamala, Satka 1, f. 166v2—4 (35.68—69b): sauram saivam pancaratram prama- 
nam vaimalam matam | atharvam samkhyayogam ca bauddham arabatadikam | vifesakhyam 
yatas *tatra (em. : tantram Cod.) visesasamaydt sthitih. 

° Jayadrathayamala, Satka 1, f. 166v4 (35.69c—70): bhairavam vajrayanam ca guhyatantram 
sagarudam | bhitatantraditantram ca visesataram ucyate | vaisesike tu samayi yato ‘traivadhika- 
rakrt. 

7 Jayadrathayamala, Satka 1, f. 1671-2 (35.78c—79b): atha vaisesasastrasya saivasiddhanta- 
ripinah | Sivarudrabhedasamjnah kramo vacyo *vipascita (corr. : vipascitah Cod.). C£. Satka 
1, f. 4v2—4 (1.65—66) on the ten Sivabhedas beginning with the Kamika and the [eighteen] 
Rudrabhedas beginning with the Vijaya and ending with the Paramesvara: kámikadini yany 
dsan dasa proktani "Salina (conj. : falinám Cod.) | sivabhedagatiniha *saive sarvarthadani (conj : 
saiva saivarthadáni Cod.) tu | 66 vijayadini cányani *paramesantikani (em. : paramesantikani 
Cod.) tu | rudrabhedaprabhinnani bbedanantagatani tu. 

*For canonical lists of these twenty-eight see GooparL 1998, pp. 402-417. 


234 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


installation of idols and the consecration of temples: the Mayasamgraha, the 
Devyamata, the Mohacüdottara, and the Pratisthiparamesvara. 

The more restricted level within the Saiva canon is defined immediately 
after this as comprising the four and the fifteen Tantras of the four divisions 
(bhedah) and three currents (srotamsi).? The four Tantras are identified as the 
primary scriptures (zmzlasutráni) of the Bhairava-centred Mantrapitha; and the 
fifteen as the same of the Goddess-centred Vidyapitha. Of the four divisions 
the first is defined as that of the four Mantrapitha texts. These are listed as the 
Svacchandabhairava, Candabhairava, Krodhabhairava, and Unmattabhairava. 
Of these only the first appears to have been current in the period of the 
commentators; and it is clear that this was considered to be the pre-eminent 
text of this class.!! It survives in Kashmirian, Nepalese, and South Indian 


manuscripts,” influenced the development of the Saiddhantika ritual system, ? 


and attracted learned exegesis.!* 
The other three divisions contain the fifteen Tantras of the Vidyapitha 
canon, namely the seven Saktitantras, the three Vamatantras, and the five 


Yamalatantras. The Saktitantras are listed as the Sarvavirasamdyoga/Sarvavira, 


? Jayadrathayamala, Satka 1, £. 16712. (35.79c-80b): visesatarasastrasya catuhpanca*dasasya 
tu (em. [Aisa]: gatasya tu Cod.) | srotastraya*nibaddhasya (em. : vibaddhasya Cod.) caturbheda- 
gatasya tu. 

0 Tayadrathayamala, Satka 1, f. 16915 (36.12): (1) suacchandabhairavam (2) candam (3) kro- 
dham (4) unmattabhairavam | granthantarani catvari mantrapithe sthitani ca. The same verse 
is cited from the Sarvavira by Ksemaraja on Svacchanda \.4c-7. 

!! See footnote 511 on p. 387. 

The published edition is based on Kashmirian manuscripts. For the existence of Nepalese 
and South Indian manuscripts of this text see SANDERSON 2001, p. 21, footnote 26. The Yoni- 
gahvara claims to have been extracted from the Candabhairava (final colophon, f. 40v3: ity 
uttaramnaye sri-omkarapithavinirgate sricandabhairave sodasasahasre *uddhrtam |conj. : uddhite 
Cod.] yonigabvaram samáptam), but since the former is a not a Mantrapitha text this attribution 
is implausible. 

P For evidence that the early Saiddhantika Paddhatis drew heavily on the Svacchanda see 
SANDERSON 2004, pp. 359-60, footnotes 27 and 28. 

V See p. 400. 

15 Tayadrathayamala, Satka 1, f. 169r7—v1 (36.15-19b): granthantarany asamkhyani vidya- 
pithe sthitani tu | panca ca dasa siddhani milasitrani sundari | vidyapithaprasiddhani namabhih 
kathayami te | (1) sarvavirasamayogam (2) *siddhayogesvarimatam (em. : siddhayagesvarimatam 
Cod.) | (3) paricamrtam ca (4) vitvadyam (5) yoginijalasamvaram | (6) vidyabhedam (7) sirac- 
chedam (8) mabásammobanam tatha | (9) nayottaram (10) mabaraudram (11) rudrayamalam 
eva ca | (12) brabmayamalasamjfiam ca (13) tathanyam visnuyamalam | (14) dasaturyam 
smrtam "*skandam (15) aumam (em. kádamarmam Cod.) paficadasam matam. 


Alexis Sanderson 235 


Siddhayogesvarimatal Trisila, PancamrtalSricakra, Visvadya, Yoginijalaéamvara, 
Vidyabheda, and Siraccheda, the three Vamatantras as the Nayottara, Maha- 
raudra, and Mahasammohana, and the five Yamalatantras as the Rudrayamala, 
Brahmayamala/Picumata, Visnuyámala, Skandayamala, and Umáyamala. The 
three currents are the Daksina, the Vama, and the Mixed. To the Daksina are 
assigned the four Tantras of the Mantrapitha, the first six Saktitantras, and 
the five Yamalatantras, to the Vama the three Vamatantras, and to the Mixed 
the seventh Saktitantra, the Sivaccheda itself.!6 This excludes from the broader 
definition not only the non-Saiva Vajrayana but also two of the four non- 
Saiddhantika divisions of the Saiva scriptures: the Bhütatantras (pascimasrotah) 
and the Garudatantras (parvasrotah), no doubt because these were considered 
to be on a lower level, ancillary corpora concerned with less exalted matters 
such as exorcism." 

Within the two non-Saiddhantika divisions that remain, the Bhaira- 
vatantras and the Vamatantras (/Guhyatantras), the tradition of the non- 
Saiddhantika Saiva exegetes of Kashmir is grounded within the Saktitantra di- 
vision of the Vidyapitha, which contains texts of the two main divisions of that 
tradition: the Trika and the Kalikula, rooted respectively in the Siddhayoges- 
varimata and the Siraccheda, the former further developed in such texts as the 
Malinivijayottara, Trisirobhairava, and Tantrasadbhava and the latter expanded 
into the Jayadrathayamala, also known as the Tantraraja, which comprises four 
sections of six thousand verses each, of which the Siraccheda is only the first, '? 


16 layadrathayamala, Satka 1, f. YV7Ár6—v9 (40.2—9): sarvaviram trifülam ca sricakram visva- 
pürvakam | yoginijdlasamjnam ca vidyabhedam Sirohytam | etani saktitantrani santi *Sulalayani 
(conj. : saralayáni Cod.) tu | savyasrotasi siddhani siracchid ubbayatmakam | nayottaram 
mahévaudram mabasammobanam tatha | trikam etan mahadevi vamasrotasi nirgatam | vibhi- 
nnam kotibhedena sakhakalitavistaram | yamye srotasi siitrani paficakam vaimalani tu | santi 
vistirnasakhabhih kathyante tani namabhih | raudraumam vaisnavam capi caturtham skandaya- 
malam | akravyacaram etad dhi catuskam api tat smrtam | brabmayámalasamjfiam ca panca- 
mam tat picu-r-matam | dvyaksaram matasamjnam ca kravyadocchusmaniscayam | niracara(m) 
mabácáram sarvatobhadrasamjnakam | dvikam sarvatmakam caiva mahadaksinam eva ca | 
brahmayamalam etad dhi sütrair bhinnam tu saptabhih. On the mixed character of the Siraccheda 
see also f. 177:2 (40.75cd): vamadaksinabhedastham Siracchedam suvistaram; and for the doc- 
trine of the three currents f. 168v3 (35.121c): vamadaksinamisresu. 

On the Bhütatantras and Garudatantras and the Kashmirian Ksemaraja’s knowledge of 
the scripture Kriyaékdlagunottara, which covers the territories of both see SANDERSON 2001, 
p. 14, footnote 13. Ksemaraja also cites the Garudatantra Totula, in Netroddyota vol. 2, p. 150, 
ll. 9-14; pp. 151, 16-152, l. 2; and p. 199, Il. 9-17. 

18See p. 254. 


236 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


and further developed in the scriptures of the Krama.'? The non-Saiddhantika 
exegetes of Kashmir also claimed authority over the Mantrapitha by propagat- 
ing a Saktitantra-based exegesis of the Svacchandabhairava.”° 

No manuscript of any of the other five Saktitantras listed by the Siraccheda 
has come to light; and of them only the Sarvavira and Pancamrta have been 
cited by the Kashmirians.*! There is no evidence that they had access to the 
Yoginijalasamvara, Vidyabheda, or Vifvadya.? The same is true of the three Vā- 
matantras and the five Yamalatantras other than the Brabmayámala. The latter, 
also known as the Picumata, is the only one of these eight texts to have come 
down to us, and it was known and cited in Kashmir, where it has left an en- 


See p. 253. 

See p. 400. 

?lSarvavira: Tantráloka 4.55—57b; Svacchandoddyota, vol. 1, p. 10, ll. 9-10; vol. 4, p. 55, 15- 
16; Tantralokaviveka, vol. 7, Ahnika 12, p. 106, Il. 7-15; Netroddyota, vol. 1, pp. 47, 1. 15- 
48, |. 6; Isvarapratyabbijfávivrtivimarsini, vol. 3, p. 311, ll. 57; p. 384, ll. 18-19. The text was 
probably also known as the Sarvácára, since the last of these citations is given as from the 
Sarvácára in Paratrisikdvivarana, p. 266, ll. 21—29 (= KSTS ed., pp. 235—6). For a translation 
and interpretation of this passage see SANDERSON 2005a, pp. 111—112. Other citations of the 
Sarvácára: Tantráloka 13.3034d—304 (= Paratrisikavivarana, p. 218, ll. 1-3 [= KSTS ed., p. 92]; 
and Tantrāloka 13.303c-305. Paricamrta: Tantrálokaviveka, vol. 9, p. 140, Il. 5—13. 

2 Of these three the Yoginzjalasamvara, though not quoted by the commentators, is cited in 
the Yoginisamcára of the third Satka of the Jayadrathayamala as a major source on its subject; 
see f. 172v4—5 (Yoginisamcara 1.83): ity evam yoganiyamam yoginijála*famvare (em. : samcare 
Cod.) | yathotpannam tu kathitam niryogam srnu sámpratam; f. 199v6—7 (7.124cd): uktani yani 
karmáni yoginijalasamvare; f. 215r3—4 (11.60c—6): evam eva samutpannah sad yoginyo *mahá- 
tape (em. : majfiatape Cod.) | tada devi samakhyata yoginijalasamvare | lampatadye "tha rak- 
tàdye sarvavire visesatab. The existence of the Visvádya and Vidyábheda is less certain. The 
Siraccheda says of the former that it was taught by Bhairava to the Goddess but concealed 
by her, that a small part of that was learned by the Sun, that only a small part of that part 
reached earth, and that it will liberate pure souls only at the end of the present aeon (Satka 
1, f. 176r3—4 [40.51—52, 54ab]): tantrasaram viniryatam dhrtam tac ca maya priye | maya tat 
kathitam tubhyam tvaya tad gopitam punah | 52 "bimcinmátram (conj. : kecinmantram Cod.) 
tu vijfidtam tvattas tat kila belina | tasmat *tadasyatab (conj. : tadasyate Cod.) satyam alpakam 
*sarpitam (conj. : sarpite Cod.) bhuvi | ...... 54 *kalpante (conj. : calpyante Cod.) vimalanunám 
malam praksálayisyati. Of the Vidyábheda it says that it comprised seven Samhitàs of which 
six did not reach the earth and will be received only in the final age, that only a very small 
part of the seventh, a short work called the /anaprasuti, was passed on by Bhairava (f. 176v9— 
177r1 [40.72c—75b]: taya janaprasütis ca vidyesinam mahatape | 73 tato pi hi maya jnata sval- 
pasütrà surambike | matto "by amsaphala devi *tadavapi (conj. : tasmadvapi Cod.) tridandina | 
74 tridandito *trnah prapa (conj. : trnapráya Cod.) samhitam saptamam priye | sat "samhita 
(corr. : samhitäm Cod.) na bhürlokam ägatā viravandite | 75 antime tu yuge tasam praptir 
matto bhavisyati). 


Alexis Sanderson 237 


during imprint, albeit minor, in the ritual manuals of the Kashmirian Saiva 
officiants.?? 

Both the Saiddhantika and the non-Saiddhantika scriptures offered the at- 
tainment of two goals: (1) the liberation of the soul from the beginningless cycle 
of birth and death (moksah), insisting that this could be achieved only by those 
who followed their precepts, and (2) the bringing about of the lesser benefits 
termed siddhih, such as the elimination of dangers (santih), the restoration of 
health (pustih), and the warding off or destruction of enemies (abhicarah); and 
they held that the pre-eminent or sole independent means of attaining these 
goals is not knowledge but a supramundane form of ritual empowered by vi- 
sualization and other practices of a meditational character. 

They taught a single ritual system, both in the ordering of their ceremonies 
and in the construction of each. All set out the same elaborate procedures for 
the initiation (diksd) of recruits and the consecration (abhisekah) of officiants, 
the same ceremonies for the installation of images and other substrates of wor- 
ship (pratistha), and the same rituals of obligatory regular worship (zityakarma) 
comprising the summoning of the deity into the person of the worshipper, the 


23For Abhinavagupta's citations of the Brahmayamala (and Jayaratha's lack of access to that 
text) see SANDERSON forthcoming a. The imprint in the manuals is the inclusion of Canda 
Kapalini and her nine-syllable Mantra (the root-Mantra of the Brahmaydmala) among the god- 
desses included among the recipients of oblations in the fire-sacrifice (Agnikaryapaddhati A, 
f.77v1-7 and B, f. 38v8-39r1) and in the worship of the Goddess in the Tantric Sivarátripüjà 
(Sivaratripiijapaddhati, exposures 70, |. 13-71, |. 11). We see it also in the use of Canda Kapalini 
and her four subordinates Rakta, Karala, Candaksi, and Mahocchusma and their Dütis Karali, 
Dantura, Bhimavaktra, and Mahabala as deities of the Sriddha lamp in the Kashmirian Saivas' 
Sivadipasraddham, the Paddhati for which can be seen in photographic reproduction in CHAN- 
pra 1984, pp. 236b—246d. The goddesses appear there in p. 237c9—10 and p. 238a8-10, with 
minor deformation: Candaksi appears as Candakhya, and Mahocchusma as Mahodhma; and 
HRIM is substituted for HUM and CANDI for CANDE in the root-Mantra ([om] HUM CANDE 
KAPALINI SVAHA). In the fragmentary and disordered folios of the birch-bark manuscript of the 
Tantric Sivaratripijapaddhati listed in the bibliography the correct form CANDE is preserved (ex- 
posure 71, ll. 4-10): OM HRIM CANDE KAPALINI SVAHA MAHALAKSMYAMBAPADUKABHYO NAMAH. 
iti mülavidyà. OM HRIM HRDAYAYA NAMAH. OM CANDE SIRASE SVAHA. OM KAPA SIKHAYAI VAUSAT. 
OM LINI KAVACAYA HUM. OM [SVA NETRE]BHYO VAUSAT. OM HÀ ASTRAYA PHAT. [ity a]rigani. The er- 
ror is the result of the lack of clear distinction in Kashmirian pronunciation of Sanskrit between 
e and i, for which see footnote 355 on p. 340. A Nepalese compendium of scriptural passages on 
the worship of the goddess Siddhalaksmi/Pratyangira (Tridasadamara(di) pratyangiravisayaka- 
nánátantra) contains one whose colophon identifies it as the 24th chapter of the Umayamala 
and others whose colophons assign them to the third Satka of a Rudrayamala. But there is a 
strong possibility that these attributions are fictitious. 


238 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


deity’s worship first there (antarydgah) and then externally (bahiryagah) by pro- 
jection into a material substrate such as a Linga, Mandala, or anthropomorphic 
image, followed by the repetition of the deity’s Mantras (japah) and their grat- 
ification with offerings in fire (homah, agnikáryam), with inflections and elab- 
orations of all these for the attainment of siddhih (kamyakarma). The features 
that differentiated the divisions of the Mantramarga, such as the choice of de- 
ity propitiated, the specific character of the visualizations (dhyanam), Mantras, 
Mandalas, Mudras, substrates of worship, and offerings that these choices en- 
tailed, were surface features that did not affect significantly this deeper struc- 
tural unity. 

Central in all this was the enactment of the belief that while brahmanical 
ritual can affect only the body or status of the individual, Saiva ritual works 
directly on the soul, that through intense imagination reinforced by incanta- 
tion, breath-control, and a choreography of hand gestures the soul itself can 
be grasped, manipulated, and transformed. ‘This is the driving force of all the 
rituals of the Mantramarga, and it is most clearly displayed in the ‘fusion with 
Siva’ (Sivayojanika) at the climax of initiation, when the officiant, seen not as 
an agent in his own right but as a vessel through which Siva himself is acting, 
enters the initiand’s body through the flow of the breath, takes hold of his soul, 
visualizing it as a point of brilliant light, draws it out and into his person with 
the return of the breath, fuses it with his own soul, and then, as he exhales, 
raises them both up as one to exit through the cranial aperture and unite with 
the deity. 

The principal features that differentiate the two divisions are (1) that in 
the choice of offerings for the propitiation of the deity the rituals prescribed in 
the Saiddhantika scriptures generally remained within the parameters of purity 
set by brahmanical convention, while those of the non-Saiddhantika systems 
transgressed these parameters to a greater or lesser extent by requiring the inclu- 
sion of alcoholic and sanguinary offerings, in keeping with the special character 
of their deities; and (2) that the rituals of installation taught in the Siddhanta 
extended beyond the consecration of small moveable Lingas for the worship 
performed by initiates for their own purposes or those of individual clients to 
include the consecration of temples where worship was to be performed on a 
regular schedule for the public good, typically those established by royal pa- 
trons, and the installation in such temples of a large immoveable Linga which 
would serve as the principal embodiment of the deity, who was then individu- 
alized for legal purposes (vyavabárartham) by the prefixing of the name of the 


Alexis Sanderson 239 


donor to -isvara, as in Prakàsesvara for a Siva established by, or for the spir- 
itual benefit of king Prakasa[dharma],™ thus allowing it to be treated in law 
as the owner of the benefactions in the form of land-revenue and other valu- 
ables that would sustain the cult. This involvement in the public domain led 
to the production of the specialized revelations known as Pratisthatantras that 
dealt exclusively with these rituals and such ancillary matters as iconometry, 
iconography, and the structure and layout of temple types, attached monastic 
residences, royal palaces, and towns.” 

In later times in the Tamil South a new Saiddhāntika scriptural literature 
emerged under titles listed in early scriptural accounts of the Saiddhāntika 
canon.”° This corpus was concerned primarily with the rituals to be performed 
before these temple images, modelled on those for personal worship but on a 
much more lavish scale, to be conducted by initiated and consecrated Saiva of- 
ficiants engaged for this purpose with the right to pass on their office to their 
descendants. But in the scriptures known to the Kashmirian exegetes, in the 
early Paddhatis, in South Indian sources up to at least the thirteenth century, 
and in the Saiva works that have survived in Nepal from this early period, we 
find no accounts of such rituals. The role of the officiant presented in those 
texts extends no further than the consecration of the image before which the 
worship will be performed. Neither they nor those exegetes make any mention 
of the Saiva officiant in the role of the temple priest after installation has been 
completed.” 


"Tn A.D. 515 a temple for Siva Prakāśeśvara was established in Daśapura by an official of the 
Aulikara Prakagadharma. See RAMESH and Tewarı 1983, |. 17, v. 22. I cite this as a very early 
example of what became universal practice in India and South-east Asia. 

>The following Pratisthatantras cited in the Kashmirian exegesis survive (in Nepalese 
manuscripts): Devyamata, Mayasamgraba, and Pirgalamata. Cited there in the Bhavacidamani 
of Vidyakantha but not surviving to my knowledge are the Nandikesvaramata (ff. 17v, 53r) 
and the Pratisthaparamesvara (ff. 7r, 8r, 12r, 13v, 17v, 23r, 24v, 57v, 671). To these early 
Pratisthatantras must be added the MoPbacüdottara, known to Somagambhu in the late eleventh 
century (see p. 422). 

?6New South Indian scriptures are found under the titles of all the canonically listed Siva- 
bhedas: Kamika, Yogaja, Karana, Cintya, Ajita, Dipta, Süksma, Amsumad, Sahasra, and Supra- 
bheda. Yet others were circulated under the titles of Rudrabhedas: Vijaya, Siddha, Raurava, 
Mukuta, and Vimala. 

"However, it is obvious that Saiddhantika Saiva officiants must have been functioning as 
priests in Saiva temples before the emergence of the South Indian scriptures devoted to their rit- 
uals. The earliest possible evidence of which I am aware is found in the Küram copper-plate in- 
scription of Paramesvaravarman I of the Pallava dynasty of Kafici, who ruled from a.p. 668/9 to 


240 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


The Kashmirian exegesis of the Mantramarga in both its divisions shows a 
deep and comprehensive knowledge of those of these traditions that were cur- 
rent in its time. Yet its perspective imposes a selective emphasis. In the scriptures 
initiates, and the officiants among them, are both married men and celibate as- 
cetics; and the epigraphical record of royal patronage, mostly confined to the 
Saiddhantika tradition, shows that the latter were a conspicuous and influential 
element, presiding over monastic establishments (mathah) attached to temples, 
officiating as royal preceptors (rajaguru/), and bestowing initiation on their 
patrons.?? But in the Kashmirian exegesis we are presented above all with the 
Saivism of married householders, this being the status of the great majority of 
its authors. The lineage of the most Sakta form of the religion does include 
some ascetics who, as we shall see, were observers of the Kapalika Mahavrata,*° 
but the private and esoteric orientation of their religious practice means that 
they are not likely to have been engaged in the manner of the Saiddhantikas in 
management of richly endowed religious foundations. The fact that this lineage 
is distinguished from all others known to us by the inclusion of female Gurus 
tends to the same conclusion.”! 

Furthermore, while the efficacity of ritual for siddhih is nowhere challenged, 
the detail of such rituals is hardly touched upon. The emphasis is overwhelm- 
ingly on the Mantramarga as the means of liberation. The commentators have 


690. This records the appointment of an Anantasivacarya with hereditary rights to perform the 
worship (devakarma) and periodic renovations (navakarma) in the royal Siva temple Vidyav- 
initapallavaparamesvara (MAHALINGAM 1988, no. 46, ll. 55—56 and 84-89). Anantasivacarya is 
a typical Saiddhantika initiation-name. It is therefore probable that he was a Saiddhantika; but 
it is not certain, since it is possible that such names were current among Saiva priests before the 
Saiddhantikas’ advent. The Saiddhantika Saiva priests of South India are commonly referred to 
as Sivabrahmanas in inscriptions and in the Saiddhàntika scriptural sources that defend their 
rights. References to them are numerous in the inscriptions of the Cola period. But the term 
Sivabrahmana occurs considerably earlier in the Tiruvallam inscription of Pallava Nandivarman 
II, dated in c. A.D. 863. Concerning a grant to the temple of Paramesvara of Tikkalivallam it 
specifies that 500 kādi of paddy are for the Sivabráhmanas who offer worship and services in the 
sanctum (ManariNGAM 1988, no. 132, ll. 25—26: ziruvunnáligaiyull-ár[a]di[t]t-uppasarikkum 
[Siva]brahmanarkku nellu ainnirru-kkadiyum). But in this case too we cannot exclude the pos- 
sibility that the term Sivabrahmana predates its Saiddhàntika application. 

?8See SANDERSON forthcoming c. 

?°For the existence of Saiddhantika ascetics in Kashmir see p. 393. 

3°See pp. 254, 282, 293, and 294. 

?! For female Krama Gurus see p. 265 (Mangala [Makaradevi]), footnote 92 on p. 265 (Rüpà- 
nanda), p. 275 (Keyüravati, Madanika, and Kalyanika), p. 277 (Keyüravati [Kakaradevi]), and 
p. 294 (Isani). 


Alexis Sanderson 241 


also tended to give less attention than the scriptures on which they have com- 
mented to meditation (yogah) as a path of practice in its own right. The medi- 
tator (yogi) as opposed to the master of ritual worship (karmi) and the gnostic 
(jnani) has shifted to the periphery of vision. This is very obvious in the works 
of the Kashmirian non-Saiddhantikas. Their scriptures place great emphasis 
on the practice of visionary meditation, particularly as the means of attain- 
ing siddhih, here understood primarily as the achieving of private supernatural 
powers such as clairvoyance, telepathy, and the ability to leave the body to enter 
other worlds. A whole culture of visionary experience has been pushed to the 
margins by the Kashmirian commentators or its accounts translated through 
creative exegesis into teachings of non-visionary liberating gnosis (jZianam); 
and with it have disappeared from the foreground the exotic ascetic observances 
(vidyávratam, purascarya, caryavratam) taught in the scriptures for those seeking 
to master the Mantras for such ends. This shift of focus arises from the nature 
of the commentators’ social milieu, which is one of Saiva brahmins eager to 
consolidate their religion on the level of high culture. It is this, I propose, that 
also predisposed them to devote much more attention than can be seen in their 
scriptures to formulating their metaphysical doctrines and to defending them 
against those of their opponents in the shared language of Indian philosophical 
argument.” 

Concerning the social position of the post-scriptural Saiva authors of Kash- 
mir we have little information and what we have is confined to the non- 
Saiddhantika authors. A number of those bear the title Rajanaka, which was 
given by the ruler to brahmin ministers and inherited by their descendants.? 
The Sakta Saiva teacher Hrasvanatha, also called Viranatha, was minister of war 


32See also SANDERSON 1985, p. 203. 

33See Rajatarangini 6.117: sa parthivatvamantritvamisraya cestaya sphuran | raja rajanakas 
ceti misram evam dhiyam vyadhát ‘Brilliant by reason of his conduct that combined the char- 
acter of both king and minister he thus created the impression that he was both Raja and 
Rajanaka’; 6.261. The title has been attributed to Utpaladeva, Abhinavagupta, Ksemaraja, 
Jayaratha, Taksakavarta, Bhullaka (Svacchandoddyota, vol. 5a, p. 211, Il. 9210), Yogaraja, and 
Rama (the author of the Spandakarikavivyti). In the Agamadambara, p. 47,18-20, p.49, 
14-15 Samkarsana is made Bhattasri-Samkarsana by the king when he is appointed to a 
position in the administration. Kashmirian Sakta Saiva authors whose names are so pre- 
fixed are Kallata (e.g., Yogaraja, Paramārthasāra, p. 91), Bhaskara (author of the Sivasütravar- 
tika), Vàmana[datta]/Viravàmanaka (Spandanirnaya, p. 8, quoting his Subodhodayamanjari, 
Yogaraja on Paramárthasara, p. 146), Sitikantha (author of the Kaulasitra [colophon: krtir 
gurubhattasrisitikanthasyeti subbam]), and Somananda (Utpaladeva, [svarapratyabhijnakarika- 
vrtti on 4.16). 


242 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


and peace under king Yasaskara (r. A.D. 939-948);*4 the innermost circle of the 
devotees of Abhinavagupta, the most famous and gifted of these Kashmirian ex- 
egetes, consisted of members of ministerial families, one a grandson of the same 
king's prime minister;? and his commentator Jayaratha reports that his patri- 
lineal ancestors included ministers under Yasaskara, Ananta (r. 1028—1063), 
Uccala (r. 1101-1111), and Rajadeva (r. 1213-1236), the last of these being 
his own father.’ A connection with the milieu of the court is also suggested by 
contributions by these authors to belles-lettres and the theory of poetry, drama, 
dance, and music.?/ The humbler title Bhatta and the absence of evidence of 
any such high-cultural activities among the Saiddhantikas both suggest that 


their social position was less elevated. 


‘THE SIDDHANTA 


In this domain we have commentaries by Bhatta Narayanakantha on the 
Mrgendra, by his son Bhatta Ramakantha (II) on the Matangaparamesvara, 
the Kzlottara in its three hundred and fifty verse recension, and the first 
twelve chapters of the Kirana (of which the commentary on the first six 
has been published), and references to a commentary, now lost, on the 
Svayambhuvasitrasamgraha (Svayambhuvoddyota). Bhütikantha, probably a 


member of this same lineage, is credited with a commentary on the Kiraza.?? 


34 See p.282. 

35 Payátrifibavivarana, concluding verses 5-10 (A) and Tantraloka 37.65—83 (B), concerning 
his disciples Karna (Vallabha, prime minister [amdtydgranih] of Yasaskara [A 5] — Sauri, who 
retired as a minister to devote himself to religion [B 75] — Karna), and his cousin Mandra, 
described as the wealthy and learned son of an unnamed minister (B 66). Sauri was the brother 
of Mandras father and was married to Vatsalika (A 6ab, B 75a [emending bhrata to bharta]), 
in a house provide by whom Abhinavagupta wrote his Tantniloka (B 82). 

36 Tantralokaviveka, concluding verses 8—41: Pürnamanoratha, minister of king Yasaskara > 
Utpala[ratha] — Prakasgaratha — Süryaratha — Utpalaratha, minister of Ananta, and disciple 
of his mother’s brother Vibhütidatta, grandson of an unnamed minister of finance — Sivaratha, 
minister of Uccala; his brother Sammaratha — Gunaratha — Guigaratha — Srngiraratha, 
minister of Rajaraja (Rajadeva, r. 1213-1236), initiated by Subhatadatta, descendant of Vi- 
bhütidatta and author of a lost commentary on the Tantráloka — Jayaratha. 

"Thus we have Abhinavaguptas commentaries on the Dhvanydloka of Anandavardhana (- 
locana), the Bharatanatyasastra (Abhinavabhárati), and the Ghatakarpara, and Jayaratha's com- 
mentary (-vimarsini) on the Alamkarasarvasva of Ruyyaka. 

38Vaktrasambhu, Mrgendrapaddhatitika, p. 208, ll. 12—17: srimatkiranamrgendramatanga- 
svayambhuvasiksmasvayambhuvarauravadisu sarvesu sastresu garbhadhanddayah *smrtyukta- 


Alexis Sanderson 243 


From Bhatta Ramakantha (II)'s pupil Bhatta Vidyakantha (II) we have an un- 
published commentary (Bhävacūdāmani) on the unpublished Pratisthatantra 
Mayasamgraha; and a commentary on another unpublished scripture of this 
kind, the Pirigalamata, is attributed by one source to Bhatta Nàràyanakantha?? 
and by another to Bhatta Ramakantha.*? From these two authors also came 
a number of exegetical works on the Svdyambhuvavrtti and Rauravavrtti, 
commentaries by the early Saiddhantika authority Sadyojyotis on the doctri- 
nal teachings of the scriptures Svayambhuvasutrasamgraba and Rauravasütra- 
samgraha. Bhatta Narayanakantha’s Svayambhuvavrttitipbpanaka on the former 
has not come to light, but of Bhatta Ramakantha’s Rauravavrttiviveka on the 
latter we have the Moksakarikavrtti and the Paramoksanirásakárikavrtti, and ref- 
erences to and citations from the Mantravartikavrtti, the Agamaviveka (= Sarva- 
gamapramányopanyása), and his commentary on the section dealing with Mu- 
dras.41 We also have his unpublished commentary (-vivrti) on Sadyojyotis 
Tattvatrayanirnaya, which is an analysis of the ontology of the Svdyambhuva- 
sütrasamgraha*. There was also a lengthy commentary (brhattika) by Bhatta 
Narayanakantha on the Tattvasamgraha, in which Sadyojyotis set out the on- 
tology of the Rauravasiitrasamgraha; but this has not come to light. We know 
of it only from the South Indian Saiddhantika Aghorasiva, who tells us that he 
wrote his own short commentary (aghutika) on the Tattvasamgraha for the ben- 


samskarah (smrtyukta conj. : srutyukta Cod.) diksámadhye sivamantrair bhavisyadbrahmanaja- 
tipradakarmasamharay*okta iti (conj. : oktah | Cod.) srimatkiranavrtti*krdbhitikanthacaryena 
(krd em. : krta Cod.) diksdyam uktam. 

3 Trilocanasivacarya, Somasambhupaddhativyakhya, p. 99, ll. 13-15: tad uktam pingalama- 
tatikayam náràyanakanthena pithántam pithavyapiti. 

“The anonymous commentary -vyäkhyāä on the Sivapijastava of Jñānaśambhu, p.90: 
pirigalàmatavrttau ramakanthenapi "vyapinyám adbarasaktyavasthayám sthitam” iti, cited in 
GoopaLrL 1998, p. xxvi. I thank him for reminding me of his report of this citation when I 
mentioned Trilocanasiva’s assertion that the work is by Bhatta Narayanakantha. I see no hard 
evidence that would enable us to establish which of these two attributions is correct, but I in- 
cline to favour the first. Bhatta Ramakantha has not referred to the Pirgalamata in his surviving 
works, while his father cites five lines from it under its alias Jayadrathadhikara, in Mrgendravrtti, 
Kriyápáda, p. 47, ll. 8-13. 

^On these commentaries that constituted or were parts of the Rauravavrttiviveka and Bhatta 
Ramakantha’s other works see Gooparr 1998, pp. xviii—xxviii. 

See GoopaArL 2004, p. lxi. The codex unicus of this commentary has been located by Kei 
KaraAOka and is being edited for publication by Diwakar AcHARYva, Kei Karaoxa and Dominic 
GooDALL, to whom I am very grateful for supplying me with a photocopy of the manuscript 
and his transcription in the form of an e-text. 


244 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


efit of those whose understanding the longer work had taxed.* Finally, we have 
Bhatta Ramakantha’s Naresvarapariksaprakasa. This, a commentary on Sadyo- 
jyotis philosophical treatise Naresvarapariksé ‘An Enquiry into the Soul and 
God’, is surely his most outstanding work. Transcending association with this 
or that individual scripture it provides a reasoned philosophical defence against 
the Buddhists, Mimamsakas and others of what it takes to be the shared doc- 
trinal position of all the scriptures. For while differences between individual 
scriptures in matters of ritual procedure (kriyd), meditation (yogah), and rules 
of discipline (carya) were recognized—indeed one was strictly enjoined to stay 
within the parameters of a single scripture in this regard—differences on the 
doctrinal level (j#anam, vidya), though, of course, they existed, especially be- 
tween earlier and later texts, could not be seen without throwing into doubt 
the unitary validity of the corpus and had therefore to be thought away, either 
through selective neglect or faith-driven creative exegesis. 

Bhatta Narayanakantha also composed a Paddhati, a systematic guide to the 
performance of the Saiddhantika rituals, based on the Kdalottara, now known 
only from references in his son's commentary on that scripture“* and from an 
excerpt or paraphrase in the Nityadisamgrabapaddhati, an unpublished Kash- 
mirian Paddhati in the form of a digest of Saiva scriptural sources compiled by 
Rajanaka Taksakavarta? at some time after the eleventh century.“ A late South 
Indian source claims the composition of Paddhatis not only by Narayanakantha 
but also by other Gurus of this -kantha lineage: by Ramakantha, Vaidyakantha, 
probably identical with Vidyakantha, Vibhütikantha, probably one with the 


43 Tartvasamgrahatika, introductory verses 3—4. 

^ Sardhatrisatikalottaravrtti, pp. 28, 29, 36, 42, 58, and 59. In all these cases Bhatta Rama- 
kantha introduces verses in the Anustubh metre by saying that they are “what his Guru has said 
on this [matter] in [his] Paddhati" (yad uktam |/ proktam | tad idam uktam] asmadgurubhir atra 
paddhatau). 

45 Nityadisamgrahapaddhati, f. 3113-5: pascad asesatattva*vyapitvad ühüya (conj. : vyapitvam 
ahuyec Cod.) chivam mürtau uccárya *mülamantram (em. : mülamantra Cod.) plutantam udya- 
ntrtavalambanatah brabmádikaranefvaranisevitebbyah padebhya udgamya dhvaninidhanadha- 
mni *kramád viliya (conj. : mandngriliya Cod.) srstikramena vinivrttya ciccittapavanavacakava- 
cyanim samarasyam anubhiya hrtpundarikamadhyat sphuradanupamadhamatarakakaram sau- 
sumnena pathà tam samgrhya ca sàntamudrayà nyaset. srinárayanakanthenetyadistam nijapaddh- 
atau. For the title of this digest see the final colophon (f. 75v14—15): samápteyam nityadisamgra- 
hábhidbaná paddhatih krtis tatrabhavatah mabamábesvaracaryasrimattaksakavartasyeti fivam. In 
an intermediate colophon it is referred to simply as the Nityddisangraha and described as ex- 
tracted from the scriptures: ity dgamoddhrte nityadisamgrabe (f. 24v4, etc.). 

46On the question of Taksakavarta's date see p. 422. 


Alexis Sanderson 245 


Bhütikantha who composed a commentary on the Kirana, and Srikantha, 
who is probably the scholar of this name who wrote the Ratnatrayapariksa, a 
treatise of unknown scriptural affiliation. A Srikanthapaddhati, perhaps by 
this scholar, has been quoted once by the South Indian Saiddhantika Vak- 
traambhu, in the twelfth century. 

It may be thought that Somagambhu’s famous Paddhati should be included 
in this account of Kashmirian Saiddhantika literature. For the Rajanakas of 
Padmapura (Pampur, 34°02'35"N 74°53'53"E) have claimed Somasambhu as 
one of their remote ancestors, at least from the fifteenth century onwards. But 
the claim is dubious. In the Kashmirian version of the final verses of his Pad- 
dhati he is said to have been a brahmin of the Gargya Gotra,? while the Raja- 


^"The source that lists these Paddhatis is the Saivabhisana of Paficaksarayogin (17th cen- 
tury). See BRUNNER 1963-1998, pt. 4, pp. xlv-xlvi. On the question of Srikantha's identity 
and position in the Kashmirian -kantha lineage see SANDERSON forthcoming b. 

^8 Mrgendrapaddhatitika, p. 130, ll. 10-15: srikanthapaddhatau .... The name of the au- 
thor of this work is given at the end of the manuscript in the wreckage of the follow- 
ing verse in the Sardilavikridita metre (p.253, ll. 10-15): sri( + + +) natesvarena guruna 
vaktradind sambhuna frimacchamkarasunund viracita tika samapta (maya) | *Ssrimacchrimr- 
gavajarajapadavipraptaprathayah (mregarajarajapadavi conj. : mr[ge|ndrarajapaddhatir iti Cod. 
[probably by substitution of a marginal gloss]) *krter (em. : krtor Cod.) | aradhyasya 
madiyap asavipinacchede (madiya em. : diya Cod.) kuthárátmanab “Here ends the commentary 
composed by the Guru Sambhu-after-Vaktra, *a Nataraja [among ...(?)], son of the venerable 
Sankara, on the composition known as the Mrgendrapaddhati of the Worshipful Master who 
was the axe that served to cut through the forest of my bonds.’ The expression vaktradind samb- 
hunā (‘Sambhu-after-Vaktra) is a periphrasis of acommon type for the initiation-name Vaktra- 
gambhu (= Vaktrasiva, Tatpurusasiva, Purusasiva); cf. somah sambhittarah for Somagambhu in 
footnote 50 on p. 248. The obvious emendation madiya for diya makes him the pupil of Agho- 
rasiva, the author of this Paddhati on the Mrgendra, who dated the completion of his Kriyakra- 
madyotika in Saka 1080 (A.D. 1157/8). It is possible that -nazesvarena after the lacuna of three 
syllables gives his mundane name or part of it. But since we are told the author’s initiation- 
name I have taken it to mean that he is praising himself as outstanding (‘a [veritable] Natesvara 
[Nataraja]’) in some class lost in the lacuna, most probably the [Saiva] learned. In favour of 
this hypothesis we can cite a parallel in a text of the same kind from the same region and com- 
munity. The Atmarthapujapaddhati refers to Prasadasiva, author of the Prasddapaddhati as a 
Nataraja among Gurus (p. 4, ll. 1-2): anyac cárutaram kriyakaranakam sanmandanam nirmitam 
prasadakhyasivena desikanatesena svanimocitam ‘Another, most elegant aid in the performance 
of the rituals, an ornament of the virtuous, was composed by Prasadasiva, that Nataraja among 
Gurus, and named after him’. 

 Karmakandakramavali, v.1810c-1811: gargye kule samudito vitatavadatavidyavisesa*ku- 
Salah (em. : kusala Ed.) srutasilavin yah | sriman asau somasivabhidhano dikcakravalodaragita- 
kirtih | faivagamajfio munivrndavandyas cakre kriyakandapadakramávalim ‘The venerable So- 
ma$iva (/Somasambhu), born in the Gargya Gotra, adept in his vast and pure higher knowl- 


246 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


nakas of Padmapura tell us that their Gotra is the Gautama.?? In any case, 


edge, endowed with both learning and morality, his fame proclaimed through the world in 
all directions, master of the Saiva scriptures, revered by the community of [Saiva] ascetics, has 
composed [this] Kriyakandapadakramavali . 

"The claim that Somasambhu was an early member of the Kashmirian lineage of the 
Rajanakas of Padmapura (the Razdans of Pampur) and the report that their Gotra is that of 
Gautama is seen in the concluding verses of Rajanaka Ananda’s Naisadhiyakavyatattvavivrti, 
in "Rajanakavamsaprasamsa A, £. 1, 11. 2-5, 10-11, £.2, ll. 1-7 (vv. 12, 5, and 10-12): asti 
srisaradapithah *kasmira (B : kafmira A) iti visrutah | | vidyanam muktibijandm ksetram 
ksetrajnasiddhidam | 2 aste padmapuram tatra padmasadmapuropamam | *mábesvaraih (em. 
STEIN in marg. : mahesvaraih AB) sripatibhir bhüdevair upasobhitam | ...... 5 jayanti jagati 
khyata rajanakapadanvayat | tatrabhijatas sadvidya guravo gautamanvayab | ...... 10 *kaiyya- 
ttovattamammattaksirasvamimukhair ayam (B : kaiyyattovattamammatta em. : kaiyyatthova- 
tthamammattha A) | satasakhikyto vamso muktánam udayasthali | 11 asminn anante vamsa- 
bdhau citprakasair vikásayan | lokam *Sambhittaro (B : sambhubhuro A : sambhudharo conj. 
STEIN : Sambhuparo conj. STEIN in handwritten notes at the end of the transcript) jajñe somah 
soma ivaparah | 12 nigrabánugrabaib khyato loke vigrahavan sivah | yas cakre sarmane 'nünām 
saivakarmakramávalim "There is the throne of the Goddess of Learning (Sarada) known as 
Kashmir, the home of the sciences that lead to liberation, the bestower of success on souls. 
In it is Padmapura, the equal of the heaven of Brahmi, adorned by wealthy Saiva brahmins. 
dw Victorious are its noble and wise Gurus of the Gautama Gotra, famed in the world by 
their possession of the title Rajanaka. ...... This lineage, this source of liberated souls, has spread 
in countless branches through Kaiyata, Uvata, Mammata, Ksirasvàmin and others. In the vast 
ocean of this lineage was born Soma, [his name] followed by -Sambhu (sambhittaro ...somah), 
who, like the moon (somah) caused mankind to expand with the radiances of his consciousness, 
who, famed for both his chastisements [of the unobservant] and for the favour he showed [to 
the worthy by granting them initiation and instruction], was Siva himself in human form, who 
composed the Saivakarmakramavali for the welfare of souls’. It is only after this verse that the 
account of the lineage generation by generation begins, running from the fourteenth to the sev- 
enteenth centuries. The claim that Somasambhu was a member of this lineage had already been 
made in the fifteenth century in a similar encomium given by Rajanaka Sitikantha in his com- 
mentary on the Balabodhini of Jagaddhara in *Rajanakavamsaprasamsa A, £.9, 1. 6—9 (vv. 2): 
vidyátirthavibarasalini param íriaradasamfraye kauberya harito lalatatilake kasmiradese "bhaye | 
yac chripadmapuram (yac chri corr. : yah sri AB) purandarapuraprodyatprabham bhasate | 
tatracaryavaro babhiva bhagavan somah sa somaprabhah ‘In Padmapura, which shines with the 
great radiance of the heaven of Indra in the land of Kashmir that is secure from all dangers, the 
forehead mark of the north, the home of Sarada, rich in learning, holy sites, and Viharas, there 
was born the venerable Soma, radiant as the moon, the foremost of [Saiva] Acaryas’. Hélène 
Brunner, to whom I communicated these passages, took them (1963-1998, pt. 4, p. xlv) to be 
persuasive evidence that Somasambhu was indeed a Kashmirian by birth and that the clash of 
Gotras was of no consequence since the verse that attributes the Gargya Gotra to Somasambhu 
appears only in the Kashmirian edition of the text and is therefore not authentic. However, 
one wonders what motive there could have been for a Kashmirian redactor to have inserted 
this false information. There are, incidentally, no Razdans with the Gotra Gargya. 


Alexis Sanderson 247 


even if Somasambhu was from Kashmir, the Saiddhantika Saiva ritual system 
that he teaches is in no sense characteristic of that region. Somasambhu wrote 
for a pan-Indian audience while holding office as the abbot of the prestigious 
Golakimatha near Tripuri in Central India. 

One set of features above all others may be said to mark out the Kashmirian 
Saiddhantikas’ exegesis from that of their Sakta contemporaries. This is its un- 
compromising ritualism, relative mundanity, and professionalism. For Bhatta 
Ramakantha the soul’s state of bondage is one of ignorance, but he denies that 
knowledge, the usual means of liberation in Indian soteriologies, is able to elim- 
inate that state. This is because its root cause is impurity (malah), defined as an 
imperceptible, all-pervasive substance (dravyam) that prevents the deployment 
of the soul’s innate omniscience and omnipotence. Being a substance it can be 
removed only by action (vydparah), and the only action that can remove it is 
the ritual of Saiva initiation performed by Siva himself acting in the person of 
a consecrated officiant. Moreover, the liberation to be achieved through ini- 
tiation is a future state, one that will become manifest only at death. So the 
question who is liberated does not arise for these Saiddhantikas. The only is- 
sue is that of who will be liberated and that being dependent on whether or 
not one has been accepted for initiation is a matter entirely within the control 
of the Siddhanta’s institutions. For the Saktas too the performance of ritual 
and the bestowing of qualification through publicly verifiable ceremonies were 
important, but they were subordinated to a gnostic perspective that allowed 
the possibility of liberation and qualification to office through illumination 
alone, gradual or sudden, without the necessity of ritual. Moreover, the cause 
of bondage was defined simply as ignorance and therefore the state of libera- 
tion brought about by its removal could be seen as a goal that could be achieved 
before death. Of course, liberation through insight alone and recognition as a 
Guru without passing through visible ceremonies but by an internal and there- 
fore unverifiable “consecration by the goddesses of one's own mind and senses”, 
were seen as exceptional. But the possibility was there for charismatic individ- 
uals to enter and innovate in a way and to a degree that was hardly conceivable 
within the more institutionalized Siddhanta. Similarly, Bhatta Ramakantha is 
more restrictive than the Saktas in his assessment of the criteria of selection for 
initiation, trenchantly opposing the lax theory of inferable grace that enabled 
the Saktas to justify post-mortem initiations performed at the request of the 
deceased’s relatives, the fervour of such requests, or simply the Guru’s own de- 
sire to assist the dead being taken as valid signs that Siva wished the ritual to 


248 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


be performed.*! This opposition between Bhatta Ramakantha and the Saktas 
prompts the observation that while the Saivism of the Saktas was in general 
more esoteric and less public than that of the Siddhanta it nonetheless encom- 
passed a spectrum of practice that extended further into the domain of social 
religion than the Saiddhantikas felt able to go. The staider Siddhanta stressed 
in accordance with its metaphysical pluralism (dvaitavadah) the primacy and 
irreducibility of individuals acting for their own benefit, so aligning itself in 
the wider context of religious values with the autonomism of the brahmani- 
cal Mimamsaka ritualists.?? Just as the Mimamsakas’ autonomism prevented 
them from providing an adequate account of the domain of social religion, 
where religious acts are performed by individuals as representatives of families 
or communities who expect to share the merit of those acts, so that the fre- 
quent assertions of shared merit in the literature have to be dismissed as not 
literally true (arthavadah), so the Siddhanta, as it chose to draw closer to this 
polarity of brahmanical thought, found itself disinclined to justify those areas 
of established Saiva practice in which individualism was blurred. The left, there- 
fore, was enabled to outflank the Siddhanta on both sides by offering itself to 
Saivas not merely as a higher, more esoteric kind of practice but also as better 
equipped to justify the more mundane faiths of the religion.” 


"THE COMMENTARY ON THE PINGALAMATA 


Of the scriptures on which these Kashmirian Saiddhantikas wrote or based 
Paddhatis, the Rauravasitrasamgraha, the Svayambhuvasttrasamgraha, the 
Matangaparamesvara, the Kirana, the Kalottara, the Mrgendra, and the 
Mayasamgraba are all texts of the Saiddhantika canon, as we would expect. 
But the remaining scripture, the Pratisthatantra Pingalamata, is not. For that 
work, of which several Nepalese manuscripts survive, connects itself and is in- 
deed connected with the Sakta-inclined Yamala tradition of the Brabmayamala 
(Picumata).>4 That a commentary on such a text should be among the works 


?!On post-mortem initiation (smrtoddharah) in Kashmir see SANDERSON 2005b, pp. 264— 
267. 

52On the Mimamsakas’ autonomism see SANDERSON 1985, pp. 193-196. 

53On the opposition between the two theories of liberation, through ritual and knowledge, 
in the Saiddhantika and Sàkta views, see SANDERSON 1995, pp. 38-47, and on the opposed 
metaphysical doctrines that underly these theories see SANDERSON 1992, pp. 282—291. 

54 Pingalamata, f. 2v4: asya tantrasya kā samjnha. pingalamatasamjna pratisthakalpam jayadra- 
thadhikaram brahmayamalasyantahpatiti ca ...(£.2v6:) sa ca dvividhah (corr. : dvividham Cod.) 


Alexis Sanderson 249 


of these Saiddhantikas may surprise. However, the procedures it teaches are for 
the most part exactly those that are the subject of Saiddhantika texts of this kind 
as described above. It teaches non-Saiddhantika ritual procedures and details of 
iconography specific to the Vàma, Yamala, and Trika traditions, but only in ad- 
dition to these.’ As such it is not only a source relevant to Saiddhantikas—and 
indeed it is much cited by them— 6 but also a valuable indication that the sep- 


kamaripy odayani ca. ayam ca kámarüpi ...(£. 313—5:) idanim brabmayamalasyantabpátity àsa- 
nka "daurvasyam paicikam caiva sérasvatamatam tatha | jayadratham ca phetkáaram paficamam 
parikirtitam | raktadyam lampatadyam ca saptadha brabmayamalam" etesám saptavidhabrahma- 
yamalinim madhye kim iti. jayadratham etat “What is the name of this Tantra? The name is 
Pingalimata. [Also known as the] Jayadrathadhikara it is a text on the rituals of installation and 
is part of the Brabmayamala [group]. ...It is twofold: that of Kamarüpa and that of Uddiyana. 
This is that of Kamarüpa. ...Now it will be asked which this is of the seven Brabmayamala texts 
taught in the passage “The Brabmayámala is sevenfold: the Durvasomata, the Pecikamata, the 
Sarasvatimata, the Jayadratba, the Phetkaramata fifth, the Raktamata, and the Lampatamata’. 
It is the Jayadratha, Cf. Jayadratbayamala, Satka 1, f. 32911—3 (40.163—165), on the Mata divi- 
sions of the BrabmayamalalPicumata: tad ekam saptadha bhinnam brahmakhyam sravakecchaya | 
raktadyam pecikadyam ca frgalimatam eva ca | sambaram nilakesakhyam bharundakhyam ca 
pingalam | sambaram tu dvidha bhinnam bhedenotphullakena tu | evam etani castau ca matani 
kathitàni tu | vistirnáni kurangaksi tantre smin brahmayamale “This one Brabma[yámala] has 
divided into seven to meet the wishes of those to whom it was to be taught: Raktamata, Pecika- 
mata, Srgdlimatal Pheramata, Sambaramata, Nilakesimata, Bharundamatal Bharudimata, and 
Pingalémata, together with the Usphullakamata (for the Sambarémata has this as one of its 
two divisions). Thus, O doe-eyed one, I have told you the eight extensive Mata texts that are 
within this Tantra Brahmayamala’. 

>>The text does not refer to these traditions by name, but it gives the colours of their prin- 
cipal deities in the Citradhikdra, its section on painted images (Para, Parapara, and Apara 
[Trika]; Tumburu, Jaya, Vijaya, Ajita, and Aparajita [Vama]; Bhairava, Rakta, Karala, Candaksi, 
and Mahochusma [Yàmala]), f. 28r5—v6: (Citradbikára, v. 18:) para rakta jaya caiva svaditya 
saha sundari | sarve suklab samakhyata ye cánye Subhasambhavah ...(20:) raktavarnah smrtā hy 
ete karala vijaya tatha | apara saha dütyà ca ye canye tatparicchadab ...(22c-23b:) ajità caiva 
candaksi dütyà saha varanane | sarve pitah samakhyatah svaparigrahasamyutah ...(24:) parapara 
mahocchusma ajita kimkariyuta | krsnavarnah smrta hy età yas canyas tatsamudbhavah ...(33— 
36:) raktadyah patraga likhya bhairavam karnikopari | bhairavam ca dhuram krtva panktisthas 
tas tu devatah | catuskam ca tatha sastham dvadasatmam ca sodasam | caturvimsam likhed devam 
vidhinanena suvrate | jayadyas cakragas tadvat panktistha va likhet kramat | navaridhds ca va 
likhyas tumburub karnadhárakah | paradyah fulahastas ca trifirás tu tripadmake | svasastrokta- 
thava likhya cakrasamsthatha panktigah. 

56E.g., Vidyakantha, Bhavacidamani ff. áv, 8v, 21r, 24r, 25r, 25v, 35v, 37v, 40r, 43r, 43v, 
44y, 50v, 58r, 53v, 55r, 57v, Glr, Glv, 62v, and 66r; Somasambhupaddhati, pt. 4, p.71, 
v. 6cd; p. 123, v. 143cd; Jfianasiva, Jrianaratnavali, pp. 481, 485, 548, 563, and 567; l&anafi- 
vagurudevapaddhati, Kriyapada, p. 369; Vaktra$ambhu, Mrgendrapaddhatitika, p. 238; Bhatta 
Sivottama, Varunapaddhativrtti, p. 41. 


250 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


aration and opposition between the Saiddhantika and non-Saiddhantika forms 
of Saivism is less clear-cut than appears from reading the commentaries on the 
general Tantras. For those are restricted in their scope to one or other of the tra- 
ditions, paying little or no attention to the others. Furthermore, the Kashmirian 
exegetes of the Saiddhantika and Sakta-inclined Tantras developed mutually 
opposed metaphysical views, encouraging us to assume that this dichotomy on 
the level of learned theory must reflect an equally strict separation on the level 
of ritual practice among Saiva officiants. While there may have been officiants 
limited to purely Saiddhantika procedures there were certainly others who were 
not, as the existence of the Pirgalamata indicates.” 


THE KALIKULA 


Kashmirians of the Sakta Saiva division have given us exegesis in two traditions, 
the Kalikula and the Trika, and, from the standpoint of those, on the cult of 
Tripurasundari, and on two non-Saiddhantika scriptures for the propitation of 
Bhairava and his consort that were the primary basis of the Kashmirian Saiva 
Paddhatis, thus inserting their exegesis into the less esoteric domain of main- 
stream observance. 

The Kalikula texts teach the means of propitiating numerous forms of the 
goddess Kali/Kalasamkarsani.? Within this literature we find a great mass 
of Kalpas that conform in their ritual structure to the standard type of the 
Mantramarga, that is to say, with a single goddess to be propitiated at the cen- 
tre ofa single retinue of secondary powers or emanations, but also a tradition of 
a different kind, known as the Krama or Great Teaching (Mahanaya, Mahartha, 


?"In future work I hope to explore further the theme of the co-functionality of these Saiva 
systems that we have too readily seen as though they were those of distinct schools or sects. Some 
evidence of this has already been presented. I have shown the input of the ritual system of the 
Daksina Svacchanda into the early Saiddhantika ritual manuals (SANDERSON 2004, pp. 358- 
361 and footnote 27), the diversity of ritual systems, Saiddhantika and non-Saiddhantika, 
in the practice of the specialized Saiva officiants whose duties are the subject of the Netra 
(SANDERSON 2005b, pp. 245, 252—254), and the co-existence of Saiddhantika, Daksina, and 
Sakta ritual in the repertoire of the Saiva officiant taught in the Ustarabhaga of the Lirigapurána 
(ibid., pp. 235—236). For a summary classification of the Mantramarga into nine ritual systems 
see ibid., p. 229, footnote 1. 

?*The post-scriptural Kashmirian literature regularly gives the name of this goddess as 
Kalasamkarsini, but the manuscripts of our scriptural sources always give it as Kalasamkarsani 
in keeping with common Aiga usage for the feminine of krt derivatives in -ana-. 


Alexis Sanderson 251 


Mahamnaya),” in which Kali is worshipped as the central deity in a sequence 
of deity circles seen as embodying successive phases of her operation in the 
cosmic process conceived as those of a dynamic consciousness to be contem- 
plated through the sequence of worship as the worshipper’s own cyclical flow 
of awareness in the perception of objects. 

Of the scriptures of the Kalikula the following were known to the 
Kashmirians: the Jayadrathayamala, the Kalikulapancasataka, the Kalikula- 
kramasadbhava, and the [Devi-]sárdhaíatika. These, with the exception of the 
[Devi-]sardhasataka and the latter part of the Kalikulakramasadbhava, have sur- 
vived in Nepalese manuscripts. Of the Sardhasataka only four verses have come 
down to us, giving the names of the thirteen Kalis that form the circle of the 
Nameless (anakhyacakram), in which the Krama’s worship culminates in the 
system of the Kalikulapancasataka. 

In addition to these we have Nepalese manuscripts of other related Kalikula 
scriptures: the Devidvyardhasatika, a version of much of which has also been 
transmitted in the Siddhakhanda of the Manthanabhairava,®! the composite 
Yonigahvara, which shares much material with the Devidvyardhasatika and 


>For the variety of terms used to denote this system see, e.g., (1) Kalikulakramasadbhava, 
£.3v8 (3.4); Arnasimha, Mahdnayaprakdsa, f. 120v4-5 (v. 166): kramasasanam; (2) Kali- 
kulakramasadbhava, f. 6v6 (3.1): kramarthah; (3) Tantralokaviveka, vol. 3, p. 189, 1.1: kra- 
madarsanam; (4) Tantralokaviveka, vol. 3, p. 157, 1. 7: kramanayab; (5) Trivandrum, Mahá- 
nayaprakása 1.2cd, 9.52a, Spandanirnaya, p. 9, 1.3, p. 78, l. 16: maharthah; (6) Arnasimha, 
Mahanayaprakdsa, f. 12012 (v. 159); Tantralokaviveka, vol. 3, p. 193, 1. 16: mahānayah; (7) 
Arnasimha, Mahanayaprakasa, f. 103v5 (v. 4), f. 121r1 (v. 167), commentary on Sitikantha's 
Mahanayaprakasa, p. 141, Il. 12-13; Ksemaraja, Sivastitravimarsini, p. 29, 1.7: mabamnayab; 
(8) Arnasimha, Mahdnayaprakésa, f. 120r4—5 (v. 161), Yonigabvara, v. 492: mabasasanam; (9) 
qu. in Zantrálokaviveka, vol.3, p. 193, 1. 16: kalinayah; (10) Kalikakulapaficasataka, f. 8r1 
(2.52): kalikakramah; (11) Arnasimha, Mahdnayaprakdsa, f. 119v5 (v. 157), Mabánayaprakása 
(Triv. ) 3.109: devatanayab; (12) qu. in Tantrilokaviveka, vol. 3, p. 196, |. 11, Vijidnabhairava- 
vivrti, p. 110, 1.15: devinayah; (13) qu. in Tantralokaviveka, vol. 3, p. 195, l. 14: atinayab, 
though the commentator on Sitikanthas Mahdnayaprakdsa refers to the atinayah as that of 
which the Krama teaching is the essence: asmims cátinayasarasarvasve kramárthe (p. 126, ll. 11— 
12; cf. p. 141, Il. 12-13); and (14) Ksemaraja, Sivastitravimarsini, p. 21, l. 5: rahasyamnayah. 

S"The verses have been quoted by Jayaratha in Tantrilokaviveka, vol. 3, p. 161, ll. 6-13. In 
1.9 emend svakālī to sukáli. The passage is identical except for minor differences with Devi- 
dvyardhasatika, fF. 14v7—15r5 (vv. 175c-179). 

9! Manthanabhairava, Siddhakhanda, ff. Y79v1—186v3. This forms a chapter of 115 verses 
with the title sri-asitavidyadhikaravarnanakramodayah. Yn the Devidvyardhasatika Bhairava asks 
the questions and the Goddess answers them. But here the roles have been reversed in line with 
the rest of the Manthanabhairava. 


252 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


some with the Kalikulakramasadbhiva, and the *Uttaragharámnaya that is a 
section of the Cincinimatasdrasamuccaya™ and includes two short texts, the 
Kálikakramaslokadvadasiká and the Kalikakramapancasika, which it describes 
as having been taught by the Siddha Niskriyananda, also called Krodharaja, 
to the Siddha Vidyananda, described as a denizen of the cremation-ground 
(smasanavási) 9 

Several verses of a Kalikakrama have been quoted by Ksemaraja. This should 
perhaps be added to the list of Kalikula scriptural texts known to the Kashmiri- 
ans, though the verses lack the vocatives indicative of dialogue and any of the 
Aisa deviations from Paninian norms typical of such texts. 


‘THE EXEGESIS OF THE JAYADRATHAYAMALA/ TANTRARAJA 


The Jayadrathbayámala, comprising four parts, each of some six thousand stan- 
zas (Satka), is far larger in extent than the rest of the surviving literature of the 
Kalikula combined, and at least the last three parts appear to have been redacted 
in Kashmir. The first part is earlier than the others, presents itelf as a complete 
work, and gives us no strong reason that I can see for assuming that it too is 
Kashmirian in origin. Jayaratha quotes frequently from the first, third, and 
fourth quarters in his commentary on the Tantraloka, without attribution or 


° Cificinimatasarasamuccaya ff. 2018—24v3 (7.155—245). 7.155ab: punar anyam pravaksyami 
amndyagharam uttaram. 

9 Cincinimatasarasamuccaya, f. 20v6—7 (7.164c—165a): labhyate sma mahajnanam vidyara- 
jena suvrate | krodharajena vikhyatam; f.21v3—4 (7.182-183): Silacitir munivaras tasya 
putras tapodhanah | yogabhyasarato devi siddhah sabararipadhyk | vidyanandeti vikhyáto 
mahaviravarah priye | smasanavasi nityastho nisatanaratab param; £.21v7-8 (7.187c-188b): 
tasya tusto munivaro niskriyananda uttamah | amoghavanya tasyaiva samkrantam kālikākra- 
mam; f.24r3—4 (7.241): friniskriyanandanáthena sabarasyaiva bhitale | ukta pancasika devi 
kalikakramam uttamam. 

64 Sivastitravimarsini, p. 118, Il. 1-7 (the first verse has also been cited in Netroddyota, vol. 2, 
p. 202, ll. 2-3, and the first two verses in Paramárthasáravivrti, p. 90, ll. 1-4); Tantralokaviveka, 
vol. 2, p. 56, ll. 3—6; vol. 3, p. 390, Il. 9-12; p. 119, 1l. 8-9; pp. 133,1. 12—134, l. 2; p. 133, Il. 9— 
10; and p. 139, Il. 9-10. 

On the independence of the first Satka see SANDERSON 2002, p. 2. For evidence of the 
Kashmirian origin of the rest of the text see SANDERSON 2005b, pp. 278—283. 

66 Satka 3, ff. 768-7712 at Tantrálokaviveka, vol. 11, Ahnika 29, p. 92, ll. 15-19; f. 130r7— 
vl ibid., p. 66, ll. 15-16. Satka 4: f. 12112—6 ibid., vol. 8, p. 186, ll. 14—5 and pp. 186, l. 17- 
187, l. 2; f. 123r7 ibid., p. 63, 1. 20; f. 199v2—3 ibid., vol. 2, p. 103, ll. 16-17; f. 200v6—7 ibid., 
p. 164, Il. 12-13; f. 200v7 ibid., p. 145, 1.5; f. 206r4—5 ibid., vol. 11, Abnika 29, p. 71, ll. 5-6; 
£. 235v ibid., p. 9, Il. 2-3; ff. 235v7—236r1 ibid., p. 10, Il. 14-17. 


Alexis Sanderson 253 


under the name Tantrarajabhattaraka; and it is probable that this is the Ra- 
jatantra that he says that the Guru Srngara, his teacher's teacher (paramaguruh) 
and son of Rajanaka Dà&i, taught to his father, the minister $rhgàáraratha.? 
‘The importance of this text in Kashmir is evident in the fact that a number 
ofthe forms of Kali whose Kalpas it teaches have found their way beyond the es- 
oteric context of this literature into the Paddhatis used by Kashmirian Saiva of- 
ficiants until recent times for the fire-sacrifice that accompanied their major cer- 
emonies, being included in the section of that sacrifice reserved for the female 
deities (devinim ajyahomah). These Kalis are Bhuvanamalini, Papantakarini, 
Vidyavidyesvari, Vagbhavesvari, Vagisi, Siddhalaksmi, Mantramatrka, Mantra- 
damarika, Saptakotisvari, Bhagyadhirohini, and Nityakali.© In the Paddhatis 
the sections devoted to each of these goddesses include passages from the Kalpas 
themselves to be recited for the goddesses’ gratification (as tarpanaslokah) and 


67 Satka 1: f. 2918-9 at Tantralokaviveka, vol. 5, p. 17, ll. 15-18; f. 29v1—2 ibid., p. 18, ll. 1-4; 
f. 29v2—3 ibid., ll. 6-7; 30v3—5 ibid., 1l. 9-11; f. 41r8—9 ibid., p. 63, ll. 15-16; f. 41v2-4 ibid., 
pp. 63,1. 18—64, |. 4. Satka 3: f. 148r6—7 ibid., p. 17,1. 8-11; f. 148v1 ibid.,l. 12; f. 148v1 ibid., 
1.4; f. 148v1 ibid., p. 18, l. 16; f. 153v1—2 ibid., vol. 10, p. 211, ll. 14-18. Satka 4: f. 59r3— 
5 ibid., vol. 3, p. 189, ll. 19-16; f. 118v2. ibid., vol. 11, Abnika 29, p.46, ll. 8-9; f. 12012-3 
ibid., p. 41, ll. 9-10; f. 12013 ibid., l. 12; f. 120v6—7 ibid., ll. 14-15; f. 124r2 ibid., p. 43, 1. 12; 
f. 124r3-4 ibid., p. 44, ll. 4—7; f. 124r5—6 ibid., p. 49, Il. 22-23; f. 124v6 ibid., 1. 15; f. 124v6 
ibid., 1.15; f. 125r1 ibid., 1. 17; f. 125r7—v1 ibid., p. 51, ll. 3—4; f. 125v1—3 ibid, p. 51, Il. 16— 
19; f. 125v3-4 ibid., p.53, 11. 15-18; £.125v7-126r1 ibid., p. 54, Il. 2—5; f. 126v5—6, p. 45, 
ll. 2—4; 127v1 ibid., p. 52, l. 11; f. 127v2 ibid., 1. 13; £.127v5—6 ibid., ll. 15-18; f. 12817 ibid., 
p. 46, ll. 4—5; f. 130v2-3 ibid., pp. 46, 18-19, 1. 2; £.130v5—6 ibid., p. 48, Il. 18-12; f. 204v5— 
205r5 ibid., p. 68, l. 14-69, 1.19. 

68 Tantralokaviveka, concluding verse 36: apy asya rájatantre cintayato rajatantram asta guruh | 
disirajanakajanma srisyngaro mamápi paramaguruh ‘And Srhgàra, son of Rajanaka Dasi, who 
was also my Guru's Guru (paramaguruh), was the Guru in the Rajatantra of this [my father 
when he was] concerned with the king’s governance’. The alternative is to take this to mean 
that Srigara taught him the science of governance while he was concerned therewith. But 
that would be very flat and out of context, especially since Jayaratha declares him his own 
paramaguruh. It is more probable that Jayaratha has substituted Rajatantra ‘the King Tantra’ 
for the usual title Zantraraja ‘the King of Tantras for the sake of a play on words. 

For the full sequence of goddesses that receive oblations in the Kashmirian Saiva fire- 
sacrifice see SANDERSON 2002, pp. 22-23, footnote 19. They may be summarized as compris- 
ing Durga forms, the local goddesses (Sarika, Sarada, Raji, and Jvalamukhi), Tripurasundari 
forms, these Kalis of the Kalikula, Canda Kapalini (from the Picumata), the Trika’s Malini 
(Pūrvāmnāyeśvarī), Kubjika (Pascimamnayesvari), and Laksmi forms whose origin is as yet un- 
known to me. The Paris manuscript of the Agnikaryapaddhati has added several goddesses taken 
from the later East Indian Sakta tradition, such as Tara/Ekajata (f. 80r5—v2) and Daksinakali 
(f. 8112—v3). 


254 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


give the Mantras to be used, both the primary (mulamantrab) and the six an- 
cillaries (sad angdani), while making the oblations into the fire. This required 
accurate interpretation of the text of the Jayadrathayamala, since that gives the 
Mantras in a coded form, whereas here they are set out undisguised. Where the 
source has no suitable visualization text (dhydnam) for a goddess, the Paddhatis 
make good the lack, since the ritual format requires such verses to be recited 
before the deity is summoned for worship in the fire and in some cases also 
while making the final oblation (parnahutih).”° 

No comprehensive commentary on this text has survived in Kashmir or 
elsewhere. But we do have some explicit exegesis, and all of it is demonstrably 
or probably Kashmirian. We have the Bhuvanamialinikalpavisamapadavivrti of 
Srivatsa, a commentary on the chapter of the fourth Satka that gives the Kalpa 
for the worship of Bhuvanamilini. The worship of this goddess, also known as 
Diksadevi, served among the Saiva officiants of Kashmir as a brief substitute 
for the elaborate regular form of Saiva initiation (diksa), to be used in times of 


70(1) Bhuvanamálini (Diksadevi): Jayadrathayamala (JY), Satka 4, ff. 16215-16516 (bhu- 
vanamálinividhipatalab) — Agnikáryapaddhati (AKP) Paris (P), f. 64r7—v1; Göttingen ms (G), 
ff. 28v7—291:2 (contains JY 4, f. 162v4-162v5, vv. 12-14b); Annapürapüjapaddhati, f. 30v1— 
9 (contains JY 4, f. 164v5—6, vv. 56c-59b); Kaladiksápaddhati (KDP) A, ff. 225v14-226v6 
(contains the same). (2) Papantakarini: JY 4, ff. 142r4-143r1 (papantakmvidhipatalab) — 
AKP P, £ 64v1-11; AKP G, £29r2-8 (contains JY 4, f. 142v3—4); KDP A, ff. 226v15— 
227112 (contains JY 4, f. 142v3-4, 4—5, vv. 11, 13-14b). (3) Vidyavidyesvari: JY 2, ff. 106v5— 
126v6 (vidyavidyesvaricakravidhipatalah) — AKP P, f.71r4-18; KDP B, £2v3; (4) Vag- 
bhaveávari: JY 3, f£. 118r4-121:2. (vagbhavesividhipatalah) — AKP G, £.33v10-12; KDP 
B, £2v3. (5) Vagisi: JY 4, f£.158:5-159v3 (vagisikalividhipatalah) — AKP P, £.71r5-6; 
AKP G, £.33v11-12; KDP A, fE3v11—5r1ll (pustakavagisvaripijavidhih); KDP B, £. 2r4— 
v19 (same; contains JY 4, f. 209r3—4, r5—v2, pustakadhikarapatalah, vv. 20c-21, 23—29). (6) 
Siddhalaksmi: JY 2, f£.129:1-131v6 — AKP P, ff.73r5-74r9; AKP G ff. 35r9-36r5; KDP 
A, ff. 222v8-223v15; and AKP G, £.37r4—3816 (tarpanaslokah, =JY 2, £.129:2—5 [vv. 2- 
5]; f. 130r2—4 [vv. 37—42b], and f. 130r-v7 [vv. 43-53b, 64—65b]). (7) Mantramatrka: JY 3, 
ff. 6913—72r4 (pratyangiravidhipatalah |9]) — AKP P, f.74r9-v4; AKP G, f. 3615-13 (con- 
tains JY 3, f. 69r6—7, v. 6 [as tarpanaslokal], and f. 70v4—5 [as visualization text]); and AKP 
G, f. 38r7— (tarpanaslokah, =JY 3, f. 69r6-7, v. 6). (8) Mantradamarika: JY 3, ff. 72r4—75v5 
(pratyangiravidhipatalah [10]) — AKP P, f. 74v4—18; AKP G, f. 36r14—v8. (9) Saptakotigvari : 
JY 4, ff. 178v5-179v4 (last section of the kuhakadividhipatalah) — AKP P, f.75r1-15; AKP 
G, f. 36v8-37r4. (10) Bhagyadhirohini (Bhagyakali): JY 4, ff. 136v5-137v7 (mahabhagyoda- 
yavidhipatalah) — AKP P ff.79v5—-80r4; AKP G f. 38v11-16 (contains JY 4, f. 137r4, v. 11 
[as tarpanaslokah|, and f. 137r6—v1, vv. 15-18 [as visualization text]). (11) Nityakali: JY 4, 
ff. 15077-151v1 (nityakalividhipatalah) — AKP G f. 4077-13 (contains JY 4, f. 15117, v. 12c— 


13 [as visualization text]). 


Alexis Sanderson 255 


distress:! 

It may happen that he is unable to perform [the regular] initiation. This may 
occur if such things as the [necessary] offerings are lacking and if a circum- 
stance such as a national disaster should arise. In that case he should adopt the 
following procedure. First he should bring fire in the manner taught for the 
sadadhvadiksa. Then, after [summoning and presenting the guest offerings to] 
this Diksadevi and gratifying her [in the fire] with a thousand oblations, us- 
ing her primary Mantra [HUM BHUVANAMALINI HRIM], [he should make obla- 
tions with] the Mantra for raising up [the soul], namely “om HUM HAM HIM 
HUM HAIM HAUM HAH HUM I perform the raising up of N”. When this has 
been completed, he should first give the initiand the Mantra of Bhuvanamalini. 
The Gurus say that the Mantras of Aghorabhattaraka [= Sakalasvacchanda], 
Niskalasvacchanda], and [Aghore$vari] should be bestowed on the initiand after 
that."? 


Concerning its date we can say only that it was written after Utpaladeva (ff. c. 
925—975), since it is imbued with the doctrines of the /varapratyabhijnakarika 
and quotes one of that author's Saiva hymns.” Nothing reveals how soon after 
his time he wrote, but he is likely to have done so several generations later, since 
its colophon reports that its author was a descendant in the "great lineage of 
the learned author Bhatta Divakaravatsa’, who was active around the middle 
of the tenth century." 


7! Kaladiksavidhi A, f. 226114—-226v6: yasya dravyddyabhave sati desopaplavadau ca kadacit 
sati diksükrtau faktir nádsti tasyatrayam prayogah. prathamam sadadhvadiksoktakramendgnim 
Aniya "éridiksadevim (corr. : srideksadevim Cod.) etam svamülamantrenásyà ahutisahasrena devim 
etam samtarpya pascat OM HUM HAM HIM HUM HAIM HAUM HAH HUM AMUKASYODDHARANAM 
KAROMI SVAHA ity uddharanamantrah. *evam (corr. : eve Cod.) krte àdau bhuvanamdalinimantrah 
Sisyaya deyah. tadanantaram aghorabhattarakasriniskaladayo mantrah Sisyasya pratipadya iti 
guravap. 

” These other Mantras are specified because they are three principal Mantras of the Svaccha- 
nda, the source that is the basis of the standard initiation procedure. 

75 Bhuvanamálinikalpavisamapadavivrti, f. 1312-4: sada srstivinodaya sada sthitisukhasine | 
sada tribhuvanaharatrptaya svàmine nama (= Sivastotrévali 20.9) iti vidvadvarastutiriipaya yuk- 
tà .... 
7  Bhuvanamálinikalpavisamapadavivrti, £.1711-3 (colophon): iti sribhuvanamélinikalpe 
visamapadavivrtib sampürnd. krtih srimadbhattasastrakaradivakaravatsaprasrtamahakulaprasii- 
tadvijavarapanditasrivastasyeti sivam. bhadram pasyema pracarema bhadram. No manuscript of 
a work by Bhatta Divakaravatsa has come down to us. But verses from two works of his are pre- 
served in quotations in other works: a philosophico-devotional hymn with the title Kaksydstotra, 
of which we have a number of verses (quoted in Bhagavatotpala’s Spandapradipika, pp. 90, 
103; and Pratyabhijnahrdaya on Sutra 18)—this reveals him to have been a Paficaratrika 


256 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


There is also an anonymous Jayadrathayamalaprastaramantrasamgraha pre- 
served in Nepalese manuscripts. Covering the whole text, it comments on 
and decodes the passages that set out the Mantras (mantroddharah) of its 
many Kalpas, and, since in some parts the Jayadrathayamala describes diagrams 
(prastarah) in which the letters of the syllabary are arranged in patterns so that 
any can be identified cryptically by referring to it as that which is above or 
below another or between two others, it also provides drawings of these.” 

The manuscripts of this useful text preface it with the Tantrarajatantra- 
vatarastotra, an elegant hymn by an Acarya Visvavarta,’° which summarizes 
the first Satka’s account of its place in the Saiva canon and its differentia- 
tion through the process of transmission (avatdrah) from its transcendental 
source to mankind, and hymns what it takes to be the principal Kalis of 
its four parts: Kalasamkarsani in the first Satka, Siddhalaksmi in the second, 
Sarasakti manifest as the three 1000-syllable Vidyas (Trailokyadamara, Mata- 
cakresvari/ Mate$vari, and Ghoraghoratara) in the third, and, in the fourth, Sid- 


influenced by Kashmirian Saiva non-dualism—and a Vivekarjana, the opening and closing 
Padas of a verse or verses of which have been quoted by Abhinavagupta in Jsvarapratyabhi- 
jnavimarsini, vol. 1, p. 10. The approximate limits of his date are established by his knowl- 
edge of Kallata (c. 875+), the influence of whose Spandakárika (1.1ab: yasyonmesanimesabhyam 
jagatab pralayodayau) is evident in the verse of the Kaksyástotra quoted in Spandapradipika, 
p. 90 (tvadasayonmesanimesamatramayau jagatsargalayav itidrk), and by his works having been 
cited by Abhinavagupta (dated works 990+) and Bhagavatotpala. That he was a Paficaratrika, 
like Bhagavatotpala, is apparent from the verse quoted in the latter's Spandapradipiká, p. 103, 
which interprets the Pafcaratrika sddgunyam and the nature of avidya. $rivatsa's short work 
contains nothing that necessitates the conclusion that its author is identical with the Srivatsa 
who composed the Cidgaganacandrika. 

The text as transmitted has no introductory or concluding verses. It begins (A, 
f.3v3; B, £.3v7 [for what precedes see footnote 76]): om svasti | om namah sivadibhyo 
gurubhyah | srijayadvathayamalac caturvimsatisahasrat satka*catustayat (conj. : catustaya AB) 
*prastáramantrasamgrabam (em. : prastàáram mantrasamgrabam AB) likhyate. The title I have 
proposed is based on this alone. This is the work given the title Jayadrathayamalamantroddha- 
ratippani in SANDERSON 1990, p. 84. That name was taken from the catalogue card accompa- 
nying the Ncmpp microfilm of manuscript B. It is not found in the text itself, but is probably 
based on the colophons at the end of the treatment of each Satka, which refer to what precedes 
each as the mantroddharatippakam on that Satka. The meaning of prastaramantrasamgrabab is 
‘A Digest of the Code-diagrams and Mantras’ and of mantroddháratippani ‘An Annotation of 
[the Passages Consisting of] the Extraction of Mantras’. 

7The colophon of Visvavarta’s hymn (A, f3:7-vl: sritantrardjatantravatarastotram 
krtib. frimadácáryavivavartapadanám) is followed by unattributed verses that encode the 
nine-syllable Vidya of Kalasamkarsani (= Devidvyardhasatika, f.8v2—4 [vv. 88-91b]). The 
Jayadrathayimalaprastaramantrasamgraha then begins as stated in footnote 75. 


Alexis Sanderson 257 


dhayogeSvari and the Krama’s culminating circle (saktam cakram) of the thir- 


teen Kalis, twelve surrounding and mirroring their source.” 


7" Tantrarajatantravatarastotra A, f. 2v7—3r7; B, f. 3r4-v6 (vv. 21-27 [last verse]): bibharti 
bhedams caturo vatarapravrttikalikramasamhrtznam | catustayenakhilatustaye yah sritantrara- 
jam tam aham prapadye | 22 *srimadbhairavato ‘dhigamya (em. : bhairavatadhigamya AB) 
vidhivad devi *sarasvaty alam (em. : saratyamla AB) yam tarksydya jagàda so ‘pi bhagavac- 
chukraya yam *abhyadhat (B : abhyadhan A) | datta tena mayaya martyahitakrt prakskandham 
asritya ya vidya saptadasaksara jayati sa srikalasamkarsani | 23 yah párvatipatibimadrisuta- 
dasasyasindhuksitisvaravarakramato vatirnah | *skandham (corr. : skamdha A) dvitiyam avalam- 
bya rahasyabhedo vidyaprapancanicitah sa jayaty anantah | 24 jayati sakalasampadvamanama- 
nusariprakatitaéubbasiddhih sadguruvyaktasuddhih | vividhaviditavidyaratnakosagamagryapra- 
srtasitapatakavibhrama *siddhalaksmih (A : siddhilaksmih B) | 25 ugram santam tadubha- 
yam iti tryatmakam yatsvarüpam tisro vidyah sthitim upagatàs tah sahasrarna*manah (A : 
mánab B) | vacyam tasim mahitamabasam bhati devitrayam *yat tasytahsongah? (yadyasyah- 
songah A : yadyasyabsyerkub B) khalu vijayate kapi sarakhyasaktih | 26 satcakradikulasthiti- 
prakatani *satkonacakrodarad ya satkaranabhedini (A : satkonacakro |...] bhedini B) samudita 
sadbodha*sambodhini (B : sambodhani A) | sanmudrarucira sadadhvajanani sádgunyapürna- 
kramd | vande tām samayaprapüranaparam *Srisiddhayogesvarim (A : srisiddhilaksmifvarim 
B) | 27 yasyavaritaviryam tavivaritah} *sargantam (A : svarggántam B) à sargato bhogam datum 
udatta eva mahimá devipadapraptidah | dhatte yan mukuravalivyatikaravyaktaikavaktropamam 
saktam cakram apakramam paramayá devyà *tad iddham numah (em. : tad iddham namah A : 
tadivyammamah B). The four divisions of v. 21 are the text's four parts of 6000 verses each 
(satkani), assigned here to the four phases of the Krama in the order pravrttib (= srstikramah), 
avatarah (= sthitikramah), samhrtih (= samharakramah), and kalikramah (= andkhyakramab), the 
order of enunciation in the verse being for the metre. The two divisions (prakskandhah and 
dvitiyaskandhah) of vv. 22 and 23 are the first Satka and the rest respectively, the former, origi- 
nally a self-contained work on the cult of Kalasamkarsani, and the latter a supplementary collec- 
tion of Kalpas (procedures for the worship) of numerous ancillary Mantra-goddesses (vidyah) 
of a more esoteric, Kaula character (v. 23: rahasyabhedo vidyaprapancanicitah). The Kalpa of 
Siddhalaksmi (v. 24) is at the end of the second Satka (ff. 129r1—132v3). The Kalpas of the 
three goddesses described here as the aspects of a single 'Sarasakti' (v. 25), are in Satka 3: that 
of Trailokadamara is chapters 2-7 (ff. 5v4—6913), that of Matacakresvari/Mateévari is chapters 
11-14 (ff. 75v5-107v1), and that of Ghoraghoratara is chapters 17—23 (ff. 121r2—169r8). The 
Kalpa of Siddhayogesvari ‘for rectifying defects in one’s observance’ (v. 26: samayaptiranapara) 
is chapter [80] (ff. 215r7—219v6) of the fourth Satka. The saktam cakram [of the thirteen 
Kalis] (v. 27) is taught in chapter [4] of the same (Kalikramavidhi) (ff. 57«2—61v5). Visva- 
varta’s comparison of this circle to a single face reflected in [twelve] mirrors is based on 
vv. 67c-68 of this chapter (f. 6015-6): dhyátva svadbámni *vitate (em. : vitato Cod. : vitata 
qu. in Jayadrathayamalaprastaramantrasamgraha [JYP] Ms A) pijaniyatha mandale | tadvad 
devyah prapujyaiva dhyeyah sarvah yatharthavat | pratibhedagata saika devadevi karankini. The 
Mandala here is a circle surrounded by twelve others within a four-doored square (ff. 59v2—3): 
samlikhya mandalam devi *bhramadvadasasammitam (bhrama qu. in JYPms A, f. 57v4 : maha 
Cod.) | madhye trayodasam karyam rasivarnasamanvitam | raktena rajasā devi *caturlekham 


258 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


Though these two texts have come down to us, like the Jayadrathayamala 
itself, only in Nepalese manuscripts, it is probable that they too were composed 
in Kashmir. In the case of the hymn this is indicated by the author's name. 
Names ending in -àvarta, -varta, -avatta, or -vatta are a Kashmirian peculiarity, 
and that beginning with Visva- is common." That the -prastaramantrasamgraha 
too is Kashmirian is suggested not merely by its transmission with the hymn of 
Visvavarta but also by the fact that it quotes the Spandakarika of the Kashmirian 
Kallata.? 

To these sources we can add an unattributed inclusion and brief explanation 
of five verses from the chapter of the fourth Satka on sixteen centres in the 
meditators body found in the Satcakranirnaya (A), a short Kashmirian treatise 
of unknown authorship and date on this and other series of such centres.?? 

Finally, a section of Abhinavagupta's Zantráloka, though it is a work of the 
Trika, is a Paddhati based on the Madhavakula. That too, as Jayaratha asserts 
and the Nepalese manuscripts confirm, is part of the Jayadratbayamala's fourth 
Satka.*' Jayaratha justifies its inclusion in this text on the Trika by saying that 


(qu. in JYPMs A, £.57v5 : caturlekhyam Cod.) prapürayet | caturdvárasamayuktam tatra püjyam 
kramottamam. 

75] am aware of eleven other Kashmirians bearing such names: (1) Taksakavarta, author 
of the Nityddisamgrahapaddhati; (2-3) two Rayavattas (Rajatarargini 7.1480 [a brahmin] 
and 8.322 [a lamp-bearer]); (4) Nagavatta (bid., 8.664 [a military commander and son of 
a Kayastha]); (5) Lostavatta (ébid., 7.1295 [a soldier]); (6) Madhuravatta (/5id., 7.766 [a cav- 
alry commander]); (7) Visvavarta, who named the hymns redacted by Rama and Adityaraja 
from Utpaladeva's Sivastotrávalivivrti, p. 2; (8) a Sakta Visvavarta, pupil of Ivarasiva (Jayaratha, 
Vamakesvarimatavivarana, p. 36); (9) Visvavarta, the father of Mankha (Srikanthacarita 3.35; 
there the metre requires the second vowel to be short; but in the colophon of the 25th Sarga he 
is Viévavarta: frirajánakavisvavartasunor mahakavisrirajanakamankhakasya); and (10—11) two 
Visvavattas (Rajatarangini 7.337 [a brahmin], 7.617 etc.). 

7? Jayadrathayamalaprastàramantrasamgraha A, f. 1712-5, B, f. 1811—5: bhásvarüpá prakasa- 
mayi pranapanaripa vyakhyata. niskala prandpanakalamadhyodaye somasüryayor bhaksanartham 
*yada (conj. : yatà AB) gata tada sa kálagrasaikaghasmarety ukta. tad uktam: “yim avasthim 
samalambya yad ayam mama *vaksyati (B : vaksyate A) | "tad avasyam (em. : tadavasyam 
AB) *karisye ham (em. : karifye tam AB) iti samkalpya tisthati | *tam (em. : tam AB) arityo- 
rdhvamargena candrasiryav ubhav api | sausumne ‘dhvany *astam ito (em. : astamite AB) hitva 
brahmandagocaram | tada tasmin mahavyomni pralinasasibhaskare | sausuptapadavan midhah 
prabuddhah syad *anávrtab (em. : anàvrtam AB)" ity arthah. The passage quoted is Spandakarika 
1.23-25 in Ksemaraja’s numeration. 

8° Tayadrathayamala, Satka 4, £.113v4—7, kalikule kalikramabhedah, vv. 1—8 — Satcakra- 
nirnaya A, f. 2119—v7 (vv. 30-35). The prose commentary follows: ff. 2v7—3r18. 

8! The Paddhati is Tantriloka 29.56—77. The source is Jayadratbayamala, Satka 4, ff. 117v5— 
135v2 (kalikulapatalah). Abhinavagupta himself does not mention that it is and since the Jayad- 


Alexis Sanderson 259 


there were Gurus in Kashmir whose tradition combined the teachings of the 
Madhavakula with those of the Devyayamala,?? a Trika scripture that no doubt 
lent itself to this fusion since it teaches the worship of the Kalikula’s Kala- 
samkarsani as a fourth goddess transcending the Trika’s three and, like this 
Satka, was probably Kashmirian.?? 


rathayamala suggests that it has incorporated the Madhavakula it is conceivable that Abhinava- 
gupta knew this Kalikula scripture in an independent form (see SANDERSON 2002, p. 2, and 
notes 11 to 14). The work is introduced at the end of the preceding Patala (f. 117v3—4): etat 
kulakramam sarvam mahimadhavake kule | vadisyami punar bbadre tava mandaramirdhani | 
vistarenatirabhasa(t) ‘On a future occasion, on the summit of the Mandara mountain, I shall 
eagerly tell you at length this whole procedure of Kaula worship in the Mabamadbavakula'. 
The opening of the dialogue at the beginning of our text is as follows (ff. 117v6—118r): katha- 
yasva mahadeva sücitam yat tvayádhuná | "tantram (em. : tatvam Cod.) tan madhavakulam 
vaktavyam tatra *bhairava (em. : bhairavi Cod.) | samksepena samakhyahi tantre smin saraha- 
syakam | yena sampirnata *casya (em. : vdsya Cod.) *tantrasya bhavati (em. : tamtresya bha- 
gavati Cod.) prabho | sribbairava uväca: srnusva kathayisyami tantrarajasya madhyatah | yatha 
tan madhavakulam vaktavyam mandaropari “Tell me now, O Mahadeva, the Tantra Madha- 
vakula that you will teach me there, O Bhairava. Explain it to me, O Lord, together with its 
secret teachings in a short form within this Tantra so that that may be complete. Bhairava 
replied: Hear, I shall [indeed] teach [you] within [this] Tantraraja about the Madhavakula that 
I shall teach you on Mandara’. At the end of the chapter Bhairava says (f. 135r7-v1): evam 
samasatab proktam tantre smin tava Sobhane | etad eva hi samksepan mandaragre ca mürdhani | 
bhiyo vaksyami subhage mahamadhavake kule | kalikulam idam guhyam mukbapáramparagatam 
“Thus, O fair one, I have taught you this within this Tantra in summary form, in few words. 
On the summit of Mandara, in the Mahamadhavakula, O beautiful one, I shall teach you again 
this secret Kalikula that has come down through oral transmission.’ 

82 Tantralokaviveka on 29.56: atra hi kesamcana gurinam sridevyayamalasrimadhavakulartha- 
sammelanaya sampradayah samasti. 

83My reason for proposing that the Devydydmala is Kashmirian is as follows. Several 
Saiva scriptures rule that one should not engage a Saiva officiant of any of eight coun- 
tries whose names begin with the letter K. In an unidentified non-Saiddhantika scrip- 
ture quoted by the Saiddhantika Jñānaśiva they are Kāśmīra, Kosala, Kafici, Kalinga, Kā- 
marüpa, Kaveri, Konkana, and Kaccha (/idnaratndvali, p. 314): kasmirakausalah kancikalingah 
kamaripajah | kaverikonkanodbhita *kacchadesasamudbhavah (kaccha em. : kańca Cod.) | 
tathánye pi *surastriyah (conj. : surastrayà Cod.) *kusanga ufchavrttayah (conj. : kusasanga- 
cchavrttayab Cod.) | vipradivarnas catváro gurutve nadhikarinah; and the same eight are given 
in the Pingalamata, f. 517—v1: kapürvastavinirmuktau anyadesodbhavav api | *kamarikaccha- 
kasmirau (kamarükaccha em. : kamarüpaccha Cod.) kalingau konkanodbhavau | kancikosa- 
la*kaverirastrajav (kaveri em. : káveryau Cod.) api varjayet. There are duals here because the 
text applies this restriction to both Gurus and Sadhakas. The Kāmarū (= Kamarüpa) of my 
emendation kémarikaccha- is also seen in the Kulakridávatára as quoted in Tantralokaviveka, 
vol. 11, Ahnika 29, p. 29, 1. 14 (varadevasya kāmarū) and is supported by Chinese kemolou and 
the traveller Ibn Battuta's Kamru/Kamrü/Kamrün (see PeLLIOT 1904, pp. 181-82). Now, the 


260 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


THE KnAMA EXEGESIS 


Of the other Kalikula scriptures to which Kashmirian authors bear witness, 
the Kalikulapancasataka and the Kalikulakramasadbhava are the principal scrip- 
tural authorities of the Krama. The Jayadratbayámala contains Krama materi- 
als and presents them as the Kalikula’s most fundamental teachings, but they 
are embedded there in a mass of Kalpas of the common Mantramargic type. 
Here the Krama alone is presented, and this was no doubt also the case in 
the lost Devisardhasataka, as it is in the Devidvyardhasatika and Yonigahvara. 
‘These texts are focused on setting out the Mantras, deities, and offerings of 
the successive phases of Krama worship and they differ in fundamental re- 
spects from the Mantramargic standard. They teach no rituals of initiation and 
consecration—the post-scriptural Krama tradition envisaged initiation through 
the simple act of consuming a sacrament in the form of the Kaula ‘nectars’ 
(caruprasanam)—,® no hand-postures (Mudras), no visualizations of the con- 
stituent deities’ forms, no fire-sacrifice, and none of the elaborate ascetic ob- 
servances (kastasidhanam) characteristic of the Mantramargic Kalpas of the 
Jayadrathayamala. Moreover, the texts are presented as instruction given by the 
Goddess Bhairavi to Bhairava, in an inversion of the normal gender of teacher 


Devyáyamala too has a list of eight countries beginning with K whose Gurus are to be avoided. 
It is as in the first two sources quoted here with the difference that it drops Kasmira and inserts 
Karnata in its place (Tantralokaviveka on 23.14): kancikosalakarnatah kalingah kamaripajah | 
kunkunodbhavakaverikacchadesasamudbhavah | ete varjyah, a revision most likely to be the 
work of a Kashmirian. A similar manipulation is seen in the version of the list of the eight 
Ks given in the Saiddhantika Vijayatantra quoted in the [sinasivagurudevapaddhati, Kriyapada 
11, pp. 96, 1. 25-97, l. 1: karnatakakalingakhyakacchakasmiravasinah | konkanah karahatas ca 
kambojab kamaripinah | kakarastakasamjnas te desa desikavarjitah. Since this is probably a 
work of the Tamil country it is striking that it has dropped Kafici and Kaveri, which encom- 
pass that region. 

*In the Jayadrathayamala Krama teachings are found in the second Satka in the 
Kalpa of Viryakali (ff. 96v8-100r9), in the third in the consecutive avyapadesyakalivi- 
dhih, devisvaripaniripanavidhih, and devikramapatalah (ff. 215r6—226r3), and in the fourth 
in the kalikramavidhih (ff.57v2-61v5), and the consecutive salambakramavidhibhedah, 
niralambakramapijavidhipatalah, adyayagavidhikramarthapujapatalah, and. viratandavavidhi- 
kramajnanapatalah (ff. 200v7—208r6). Initiation before the Mandala of the thirteen Kalis 
(1+12) is taught here in the kalikramavidhih. It is this set of identical Kalis that Visvavarta 
hymns in the last verse of his Tantrarajatantravatarastotra, implying that the teachings of the 
Tantra culminate here (27cd: dhatte yan mukuravalivyatikaravyaktaikavaktropamam saktam 
cakram apakramam paramayà devyà tad iddham numah “I sing the praise of the sequence- 
transcending circle of powers animated by the supreme Goddess that resembles a single face 
appearing in contact with a series of mirrors’. 

85For the identification of these substances and their role in this initiatory trial of non-dual 
awareness see SANDERSON 2005a, pp. 110—114 (footnote 63). 


Alexis Sanderson 261 


and pupil in the non-Saiddhantika Saiva dialogues, formulating for his bene- 
fit a secret oral tradition concealed in the innermost awareness of the Yoginis 
of Uddiyàna, the Pitha of the North (uttarapithah), on the occasion of their 
assembling there in the Karavira cremation ground to worship her. 


In the North is the great Pitha called Oddiyana, the best all Pithas, the resort of 
Siddhas and Yoginis. In this fair and excellent Pitha is the Karavira cremation 
ground. ...In this fearsome cremation ground thronged by great Bhairavas ...in 
this most fearsome circle thronged with great Matrs rests the supreme goddess 
Kali in the limit of the state of self-awareness, standing on Bhairava, devouring 
the power of Mahakala, void in form, infinite, with eight embodiments, aus- 
picious, adorned by fifty Rudras and attended by sixty-four [Yoginis]. Indra, 
Brahma, Visnu, Rudra, Isvara, Sadasiva Mahadeva, and Bhairava, the seventh, 
are ever present in their entirety as the ‘dead’ [i.e., as the transcended deities that 
form the throne] of that Goddess?" ...Bhairava said [to her]: O Goddess, Why 


86 Kalikulakramasadbhava, f. 1r4—5 (1.1-2): srimaduttaradighhage pitham pithavaram ma- 
hat | *oddiyanabhidhanam tu (em. : oddiyanabhidhanan te Cod.) siddhayoginisevitam | tasmin 
pitha*vare (em. : vane Cod.) ramye $masánam karavirakam; f. 19 (1.9ab), f. lv1—3 (1.17-20): 9 
tasmin pitrvane ghore mahabhairavasamkule | ...... 17 tasmims cakre mahaghore *mahamatrbhi 
(corr. [Aisa] : mahdmatrbhih Cod.) samkule | svavimarsadasantastha tisthate paramesvari | 
18 kali tu bhairavaridha mahikalakalasini | vyomarüpa anantakhya astamartidhara siva | 
19 pancasadrudrakhacita *catubsastisusevita (conj. : catubsastistusevità Cod.) | indro brahma 
tatha visnü rudra isvara eva ca | 20 sadafivo *mahadevo (conj. : mahadevyd Cod.) bhairavas 
caiva saptamah | pretatve samsthità nityam tasyà devyás tu sarvatab; f. 216-8. (1.42c—44b): 
Sribhairava uvaca: asmin pithe mabavir(air) viravirais tu samkule | 43 kimartham agatah 
sarve *catuhsastir (corr. : catubsasti Cod.) mahabalah | yoginiviraviresyo virajah paramesvari | 
44 *tvadaradhanasamsaktà (em. : tvayáradbanasamsaktá Cod.) *maháyágendrasotsukah (em. : 
mahdayogendrasotsukah Cod.); £. 2111-12 (1.49c—51b): prechami paramam devi svavimarsa- 
balena tu | 50 "agragas tu pariah devyáh (corr. : agragd tu para devyá Cod.) samharaka- 
rana*ksamah (corr. : ksamá Cod.) | sarvas tas tu mahabhagah *svecchaya (em. : svacchaya 
Cod.) *visvabhaksikah (em. : visvabhaksaki Cod.) | 51 tathapi hrdeatam tasim (corr. : 
tāsā Cod.) prasnam asti *mahadhiye (conj. [Aisa] : mahadhiya Cod.) | guptam tu paramam 
divyam *kimartham suravandite (conj. [or viravandite] : kimarthanacavandite Cod.); f. 2v10— 
312 (1.67c-72b): atyantamohajalena vestito ham tu *sundari (corr. : sundari Cod.) | 68 
mamarthe ‘nugraham samyak kuru tattvena *bhamini (corr. : bhamini Cod.) | vadasva paramam 
guhyam apratarkyam aninditam | 69 yoginihrdaydvastham prakatam kuru *Sankari (corr. : 
samkari Cod.) | tithivelavinirmuktam desakaladivarjitam | 70 sthanasamketakair muktam 
naksatrais ca grabais tatha | mudramantravinirmuktam rajorangadibhis tatha | 71 aksatais ca 
tilair nityam agnikarmena varjitam | ahvanadivinirmuktam vratacaryadikais tatha | 72 recakaih 
purakais caiva kumbhakais ca visesatah. 

V Cf. Kalikulapancasataka A, f. 1v3—4 (1.3): srimaduttarapithasya smasan\am karavi]rakam | 
püjitam devadevena Sivena paramátmaná; f. 1v5 (1.7—8b): tatrasthà bhairavi bhima sthilasa- 
ksmanuvartini | pithesvaribhih samyukta siddhais ca parivarita | mahanandasamavista maha- 


262 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


have all the sixty-four Vira-born mighty Viraviresis among the Yoginis come to 
this Pitha thronged with Mahaviras and the foremost of Viras, devoted to your 
propitiation and eager to celebrate the Great Sacrifice? ...I ask about the ulti- 
mate, O Goddess, through the power of my self-awareness. Standing before [us] 
are all the greatest and most venerable goddesses, capable of withdrawing [the 
world], who devour all things by their will [alone]. Yet, wise one, the [answer 
to my] question still hides within their hearts. O you who are venerated by the 
gods, why have they continued to conceal the ultimate celestial [secret]? ...O 
beautiful one, I am enveloped by a net of total delusion. O radiant [goddess], 
truly show your favour for my sake. Tell me the perfect, unthinkable, ultimate 
secret. Make plain, O Sankari, what remains hidden in the heart of the Yoginis, 
[the practice] that is free of [restriction by] lunar day and [auspicious] hour, 
without [specified] place or time, free of the conventions of [sacred] sites, with- 
out Mudras and Mantras, the coloured powders [of the initiation Mandala] and 
all other [paraphernalia of ritual], the fire-sacrifice and [oblations of] unhusked 
grains and sesame seeds, the summoning [of the deities] and other [ritual forms], 
the post-initiatory ascetic observance and other [ancillary practices], above all 
free of the exhalations, inhalations and retentions [of breath-restraint]. 


The Krama teaching is seen as the explication of the dynamic structure of the 
ultimate reality embodied and made manifest in that sacrificial assembly, and 
the process of Krama worship is seen as the means of realizing it through re- 
enactment.?? 

No commentaries on these texts survive, and we have no evidence that any 
existed, ? but there is nonetheless a rich body of texts based upon them in 


ghorograndsani “The cremation ground of the northen Pitha is the Karavira, venerated by the 
supreme soul Siva, the god of the gods. In it is fearsome Bhairavi, who permeates the gross and 
the subtle, accompanied by the Pithesvaris and surrounded by Siddhas, immersed in absolute 
bliss, the destroyer of Mahaghorogra[bhairava]’. 

88The notion that the programme of worship re-enacts the primal sacrifice is also im- 
plied in related Kalikula scriptural sources. We see it in the Mabakaravirayága (f. 1v1-2 
[1.1-2]): *mahasiddhasamakirne (mahasiddha em. : mahásiddhi Cod.) smasane karavirake | 
*mahavyndamahasphare (sphare conj. : sphara Cod.) prakasanandakojjvale | *nirvartite (em. : 
nivvatyate) mahacakre yage tridaíadámare | samarasyasthitam devam prcchate kulasundari; in 
the Tridasadamara (B, f. 1v3—5 [81.5—6]): parvam gauri mahaghore smasine karavirake | ārā- 
dhito ‘ham devibhir yage sampijanaya ca | tvám *corusamstham (coru A [cf. B, f. 2r2—-3 (81.139): 
ürum pasyami tvacchünyam] : cáru B) krtva tu yátas tatra varanane | catuhsastis tu *yah kotyah 
(conj : ya kotyd B : ye kotya A) sakinyadya mahabalah | yajhabhagam prayacchanti carum krtva 
svabandhavan; in the Sivaratri aetiology of the Datidamara and the Kashmirian sources pre- 
sented in SANDERSON 2005b, pp. 285—288; and in the Damaramandala (damaraydgah) of the 
Devyayamala (see Tantraloka 3.70cd; 15.335cd; 13.351cd; 30.54c—55b; and 31.100cd). 

8? Jayaratha refers to the interpretation of two verses of the first by an Ojaraja, otherwise 
unknown, saying that his reading of the text at this point is incorrect ( Tantrilokaviveka, vol. 12, 
p. 197, ll. 4-11). It is possible that this interpretation was part of a commentary on the text. 


Alexis Sanderson 263 


the form of esoteric hymns and treatises setting out the course of the Krama's 
meditative worship composed by Gurus in the lineage of this tradition. The 
earliest of them is Jfananetra[natha], also known as Sivananda[natha]. It was 
believed that he had received the Krama revelation in Uddiyana directly from 
its Yoginis, known as the Pithesvaris,° or from their leader (cakrandyikd) 
Mangala, also called Virasimhà Svàmini;?! and all Krama authors who speak 
of their lineage trace it back to him.?? Jayaratha calls him the Promulgator 


‘The two verses quoted are a variant of Kalikulapancasataka A, £.12r4—5 (3.29—30): amrtarnam 
tu brahmarnam tripindam brahma satparam | sa devi sa Sivas tu ca visva(m) tasyanyavistarah | 
granthakotisahasrinam etat sáram vicintayet | prabhavo sya na sakyeta vaktum kalpáyutair api. 
Perhaps Ojaraja was following this reading. 

9 Tantralokaviveka, vol. 3, p. 19, Il. 7-8, quoting Abhinavagupta's Kramakeli: pithesvaribhya 
*uttarapithe (em. : uttarapitha Ed.) labdhopadesac chrisivinandat .... On the Pithesvaris as trans- 
mitters of revelation see also footnotes 87 on p. 263, 312 on p. 328, 330 on p.335, 364 on 
p.345, 374 on p. 347, and 376 on p. 348. 

?'Arnasimha, Mahdnayaprakasa, f.117v2-3 (v.136): ayam (em. : idam Cod.) srivira- 
simhakhyasvaminya samprakasitah | srijfuánanetrandthasya vrndacakrodayah parah, Mahanaya- 
prakáía (Triv.) 7.86ab: virasimhdasanastheyam devi paramamangala. 

There is an exception in a section of the composite Yonigahvara. Though that text at- 
tributes its revelation to JAananetra this part, written in a lower register of Sanskrit than 
the rest, claims to have been put together by one Oghananda, who received the teaching 
from a Yogini called Ripananda, who had received it from Virasimha Svamini (ff. 34v3-35r2 
[492—496]): samyak mabasasanasampradayam pujakatbasamkramapürvam evam | samprapya 
kaulottarasarabhütam abhütapürvam atha *karanadeh (conj. : karandadim Cod.) | 493 devi 
Srivira*simhakhya (corr. : samhakhya Cod.) svamini *prasphuta (corr. : prasphata Cod.) bhuvi | 
tatpadapadmayugalat praptam caiva mahanayam | 494 *srirüpanandabhidha (em. : srirüpanan- 
davidha Cod.) devi dattam tasya prasadatab | tayā dattam svasisyasya oghanandabhidhanatah | 
495 dattam paramrtarasam mahdsasanam uttamam | tenedam racitam sarvam yathapraptam 
*guror (conj. : gurur Cod.) mukhat | 496 sampradayam *susambandham (conj. : susammbadham 
Cod.) sarahasyam mukhagamam | racitam guruvakyena svasamtanahitaya ca Having thus duly 
received the unprecedented tradition of the Great Teaching that is the essence of the Kaula 
Uttar[amnáy]a from the first of the Cause-deities through worship, oral instruction, and direct 
transmission, the holy Virasimhasvamini became visible on earth. From the two lotuses that 
were her feet the holy Ripananda received the Great Teaching, given by her favour. She gave the 
supreme Great Teaching that contains the joy of the highest nectar to her disciple Oghananda; 
and he composed all this exactly as he had received it from his Guru. At his Guru's command he 
composed the well-constructed tradition, the oral transmission with its secrets, for the benefit 
of his spiritual descendants’. The Sanskrit of this passage is exceptional for its use of nom./acc. 
sg. neuter of the past participle passive as an active verbal predicate with past sense; see also 
here f. 36v5: tad eva cakram tu punar drstam devi ‘Once again the Goddess beheld that same 
circle’; f. 37r1—2: *punar ürdhvam (corr. : punah ürddba Cod.) *niriksanti (corr. : niriksanti 
Cod.) drstam anyam kutübalam ‘Gazing up again, she saw another wonder’. This construction 
is common in late Buddhist Sanskrit. 


264 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


(avatárakanathab)? and this term indicates that he saw him as having received 


and propagated the Krama scriptures themselves. For the term avatarakah is 
used to denote a divine or semi-devine promulgator of scripture throughout 
the Saiva Mantramarga and Jayaratha uses the same expression when referring 
to Macchandanátha, saying that he was the avatdarakah of the Kula teachings 
in the Pitha Kamaripa in the present Kali Age after receiving them directly 
from Bhairavi.” Only one of the Krama scriptures, the Yonigahvara, claims 
that it was revealed by JAananetra;”° but it is probable that the same claim was 
made for the Kalikulapancasataka and Kalikulakramasadbhava. For the chap- 
ter colophons of both say that they emerged in the Pitha of the North and 
were promulgated by the venerable Natha (Srinatha).”” This too is an epithet 


of Jñānanetra in the literature of the Krama:?? 


?5 Tantralokaviveka, vol. 3, p. 195, ll. 1—2: srimadavatarakanathena; p. 197, Il. 8-9: srimad- 
avatarakanathasyapi. 

°4Macchanda is also known as Matsyendra, Macchaghna, and Minanátha. The name Mac- 
chaghna means ‘fisherman’ (—OIA matsyaghnah) and Macchanda is probably derived from 
the MIA synonym macchamdha- (—macchabamdha-). Matsyendra can be explained as a false 
Sanskritization of Macchanda and Minanatha as a synonym of Matsyendra. 

?5 Tantralokaviveka, vol. 1, p. 24, 11. 7-12: kulaprakriyayah prakriyantarebhyab pradhinyad 
"bhairavya bhairavat praptam yogam "prápya (em. : vydpya Ed.) tatah priye | tatsakasat 
tu siddhena minakhyena varanane | kámarüpe mabapithe macchandena mahatmana” itya- 
dinirüpitasthityà tadavatàrakam turyandtham eva tavat prathamam kirtayati “Because the 
Kaula system is superior to all others he refers first to the Natha of the Fourth [Age], 
who promulgated it, as taught in such passages as “Beloved, the [corpus that teaches the 
Kaula] Yoga was received in its entirety by Bhairavi from Bhairava, and then from her by 
the great Siddha Macchanda, known as Mina[nàtha], in the great Pitha of Kāmarūpa”. 
Colophons of scriptures of the Kula do indeed refer to them as promulgated by him: e.g. 
(1) Kulapancasika, f.6v5 (end): iti kulapancasikayam srimanmats(y)end(r) apadavatare; (2) 
Guhyasiddhi, f. 2016—7: srimacchagnapadavatarite srikamakhyavinirgatah guhyasiddhisasthamah 
patala(b); (3) Urmikaularnava A, £.2717—9: iti *srinilatantre (nila em. : nima A) 
Srimadirmikaularnave mahasastre laksapadoddhrte paramarahasye sribhogahastakramamniaye 
Srikaulagiripithavinirgate sriminandathavatarite satsatadhikasate kulakaulanirnaye karmakosavi- 
caro nama trtiya(h) patalah; (4) Kaulajhananirnaya, p. 80: iti jhananirnaye mabayogintkaule 
Srimatsyendrapadavatarite candradvipavinirgate trayovimsatitamah patalah; and (5) Kulananda, 
p. 113: matsyendrapadávatáritam kulanandam. 

96 Yonigahvara, f. 1v2-3 (vv. 1-2): srimaduttarapithe tu smaíàne karavirake | sarvayogin- 
imelape [ + + + + ni]ramaye | 2 yonigahvaram uddhrtya mantrasadbhavam uttamam | srijha- 
nanetranáthena bhitale samprakàásitam. 

?7 Kalikulapancasataka colophons: srimaduttarapithodbhite srisrinathavararite srikalikakule 
pancasate; Kalibulakramasadbbáva colophons: srimaduttarapithavinirgate srinathapadavatarite 
Srikilikakulasadbhive. 

*8Old Kashmiri Mahanayaprakasa 3.9: nathe *panavapitha (em. : pavanapitha Ed.) *adiste 
(em. : adisto Ed.) | bahi andara paramathuka *mona (em. : mauna Ed.) | avatare bhütadayáviste 
(em. : bhütadayávisto Ed.) | so-ye kamasamudayu vamona. 


Alexis Sanderson 265 


The Natha after being taught in the Pranavapitha (Oddiyana) was filled with 
compassion for living beings and as the promulgator emitted the internal and 
external silence of ultimate reality as the corpus of the Krama.?? 


Uddiyana and Kashmir 


Uddiyana, also written Oddiyana, U/Odiyana, U/Odyana, and U/Oddayana, 
was the petty kingdom known to the Chinese as Wuzhangna (Jap. Ujona) and 
to the Tibetans as U rgyan or O rgyan, located west-north-west of Kashmir to 
the north of Peshawar in what is now Pakistan. Its capital on the river Swat be- 
yond the Indus? was only about 150 miles from the capital of Kashmir as the 
crow flies, but it was considerably further for a traveller, who on account of the 
mountains that intervene would need about a month to make the circuitous 
and arduous journey on foot from one to the other.!?! It has also been located 
in eastern India, in Kafici in the Far South, near Kashgar in Chinese Turkestan, 
and even in the Urgensh region south of the Aral sea in Uzbekistan.'°* But 


See the Sanskrit commentary thereon: srimanmakaradevyah pithavare praptadesena sri- 
jfünanetranáthena ... ‘JAananetranatha, who received the teaching in the best of the Pithas from 
the goddess M [Mangala] ...’. See also the commentary on the Old Kashmiri Mabanayaprakàsa, 
p.73, 11.6-8: *devagurumantrasvatmandm (em. [reconstructed from the Old Kashmiri on 
which this is the gloss: dyugurumantra-ápa] : deva ...svatma ... Cod.) vastuta aikyam. adipitha- 
dista(h) srinathas tu devagurubhágavyavastham ekasyaivakhandacitsvarüpasya yad adidesa tat sar- 
vais tathaivabhivandyopásyate. For the expression Pranavapitha [= Omkarapitha] for Oddiyana 
see also Trivandrum Mabanayaprakása 2.35c-37; and ibid., p. 60, 1. 10-11; Arnasimha, Mahā- 
nayaprakasa, f. V9r5—v1 (v. 153ab): udgithapithaja srimanmangalanandanirbhara. 

100 According to Xuanzang (602—664, India 629—641) (trans. Beat 1884, vol. 1, p. 118) and 
the New History of the Tang of Ouyang Xiu (1007—72) and Song Qi (998-1061) (Xin Tang- 
shu, chap. 221a, p. 12r, transl. CHAvANNES 1969, pp. 128-129), Wuzhangna’s seat of govern- 
ment was at Mengjieli. It is probable, as Beal has suggested (ibid., p. 121, footnote 9), that 
this was Mangora (/Mingaora, Manglavor, Mangalavor — Mangalapura), which is located at 
34°46'34"N 72°21'40"E. 

101 The Tibetan pilgrim U rgyan pa rin chen dpal (a.D. 1230-1309) gives an account of his 
own return from O rgyan to Kashmir in his O rgyan lam yig. It took him 25 days to travel by 
the most convenient route from the heart of O rgyan to Rdo rje mu la at the western extremity 
of the valley of Kashmir; see the translation (Tucci 1940, p. 58). Rdo rje mu la is surely a 
Tibetan rendering of *Vajramüla, and that is surely a Buddhist assimilation of the toponym 
Varáhamüla (mod. Varahmul/Baramila) (34°12'00"N 74°21'00"E), since the latter is situated 
above the gorge through with the river Jhelum leaves the valley in the West. From Baramula 
he went on to the capital Pravarapura/Srinagar (34°05'00"N 74*50'00" E), which would have 
required two more days travel, as testified by Al-Birüni (SacHau 1964, vol. 1, p. 207). 

102Fastern India (Assam/Bengal/Orissa) has been proposed by Haraprasad SHASTRI and 
Benoytosh BHATTACHARYA (see Sadhanamála, vol. 2, pp. xxxvii-xxxix), Kashgar by Sylvain Lévı 


266 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


the evidence offered for these counter-theories is negligible and they have been 
able to multiply only because of the apparent lack of references to the loca- 
tion of Uddiyàna in known Sanskrit sources. However, such references exist, 
and though they do not locate the place exactly, they are sufficient to conclude 
that it was in the vicinity of Kashmir. The Manjusrimilakalpa mentions it with 
Kapisa, Balkh, and Kashmir as one of several regions in the North where cer- 
103 a Jaina historical text, the Kumarapalaprabodha- 
prabandha, has the Caulukya king Kumarapala include it with Kashmir and 
Jalandhara in an expedition to the Himalayan region from Gujarat; 4 and the 
eighth-century inscription on the base of the Ganeśa statue from Gardez, 60 
miles south of Kabul, states that it was installed by Khingala, the Sahi ruler of 
Odyana.'© Finally, the Kalikulakramasadbhava refers to Uddiyana not merely 
as the Pitha of the North (uttarapithah)—the North of that expression, seen in 


other Krama texts, might be suspected of being non-geographical—but explic- 
106 


tain Mantras are effective; 


itly as located in the northern region. 


(ibid., p. xxxvii), Kafici by Lokesh CHanpra (1979), and Urgensh by Herbert GUENTHER 
(1994, p. 26, footnote 58). 

103 Manjusrimilakalpa 30.2c—3, speaking of the Usnisarajamantras: *kāpise (em. : kavise Ed.) 
*balakhe (conj. : vakhale Ed.) caiva *udiyane (corr. : udiyane Ed.) samantatah | kasmire sindhu- 
dese ca himavatparvatasamdhisu | *uttaram disim aritya (em. [cf. 10.10c; 19.99b: uttaram disim 
dírayet] : uttaram disi nihsrtya Ed.) mantrab siddhyanti freyasáb '[ These] excellent Mantras can 
be mastered in the North: in Kāpiśa, Balkh, throughout Udiyana, in Kashmir, Sindh, and in 
the valleys of the Himalaya’. 

104 umarapalacaritasamgraha, p. 54: athottaram disam prati pratasthe. tatra kasmiroddiyana- 
jalandharasapadalaksaparvatakhasadidesin ahimacalam asádhayat “Then he set out towards the 
North. There he reached Kashmir, Uddiyana, Jalandhara, the Siwaliks, Khasadesa [in western 
Nepal], and other regions up as far as the Himalaya’. 

105 | .pratisthapitam idam mahavindyaka paramabhattarakamaharajadhivajasrisahikhimga- 
lodyinasahipadaih) “This Mahavinayaka was established by the Supreme Lord and Emperor, 
Sahi Khingala, the Sahi of Odyana’. See the reproduction of the ink estampage in KuwavAMA 
1991, p.274, fig. 3. I agree with the reading proposed by Kuwayama in consulation with 
H. Nakatani, except that I see khimgalaudydna rather than khimgdlaudydna. I also accept 
Kuwayama’s interpretation of the date as falling in A.D. 765. 

106 Kalikulakramasadbhava 1.1: srimaduttaradighhage pitham pithavaram mahat | oddiyana- 
bhidhanam tu siddhayoginisevitam ‘In the northern region is the great Pitha called Oddiyana, 
the best of Pithas, the resort of Siddhas and Yoginis’ — Mahdnayaprakasa (Triv.) 2.36-37: 
mahacakrakramo yo yam kathyamáno yathayatham *yatrantarnetranathasya (conj. : atrantarne- 
tranathasya Ed.) prakatanubhavo *bhavat (em. : ‘bhavan Ed.) | tad odyanam (em. : tatodhyanam 
Cod. : tato dhyatam conj. Ed.) mahat (conj. : tu tat Ed.) pitham sarvapithottamam bahih | 
yoginisiddhasamsevyam uttarasyám disi sthitam ‘In the external world it is Odyana, the great 
Pitha, the best of all Pithas, the resort of Siddhas and Yoginis, located in the northern region, 


Alexis Sanderson 267 


The identity of Uddiyana, then, is beyond reasonable doubt. It can also 
be shown that what the Kashmirian Krama knows of the place is exact. For 
the goddess Mangala and the Karavira cremation ground were indeed proper 
to it, these two facts being independently attested by the Tibetan U rgyan pa 
rin chen dpal (1230-1309), who visited it from Pu rans in Western Tibet. He 
tells us in his “Guide to Uddiyana (O rgyan lam yig) that in the heart of the 
region, before the entrance to the town, there was a sandal-wood statue of the 
goddess Mangala (mangaladevi).'°’ He also visited the cremation ground to the 
east of the town and records that it was called bhir sma sha.'°8 This is surely a 


in which this great sequence of the circles that I am relating as it truly is was directly experienced 
by the Natha of the Inner Eye [JAananetra]’. 

1070 reyan lam yig, p. 97, 11. 30-34: de nas nyi ma phyed kyis dhu ma tha lar sleb. de u rgyan 
sprul pai gnas kyi ngo bo. gnas de mthong ba tsam gyis, “ur nas rtsis med la song dug. dei mdun 
na mang ga la dhevi bya ba tsan tan las rang byon pai rje btsun ma gzhugs.. ‘After half a day we 
reached Dhumathala. This is the heart of Uddiyana, the land of miraculous power. When we 
saw that place our cries were beyond counting. Before it there dwells a self-born [image] of the 
goddess Mangaladevi made of sandal-wood’; ibid., p. 98, ll. 7—9: gnas de la mi khyim Inga brgya 
tsam dug. bud med thams cad kyis sprul bsgyur shes. khyed su yin byas rnal “byor ma zhes zer dug. 
mang ga la dhevi drung du nyal bsdad nas bud med gcig na re mo la dod pa sten lo ngas dbyug 
pa gcig brgyab pas bros song. ‘In this place there are about five hundred houses. All the women 
know the art of miraculous transformation. If you ask them who they are they say that they 
are Yoginis. While I was lying down to sleep in the presence of Mangaladevi a certain female 
said [to me] “Enjoy a woman". In reply I struck her with [my] staff and she went running off; 
p. 97,11. 5-8: ngas rgyang nas mthong u rgyan gyi sa cha bags chags ‘thug par dug. sa de rnams su 
tha mal gyi rtogs pa re re tsam byung ma khad la phra men sha zai mkha ‘gro ma du ma mdun 
du rengs la sleb bza'i zer ba dug “When I saw the land of Uddiyana from a distance my residual 
memory traces were aroused. In these regions as soon as any spiritual insight arises [in one], 
however commonplace, many phra men ma flesh-eating Dakinis turn up alone in front of one 
and stay as one’s *wife". 

1080) reyan lam rig, p.99, ll. 2-3: gnas dei shar la bhir sma sha zhes pa dur khrod brgyad kyi 
*ya gcig (conj. : ya ba corr. Tucci : gya ba Cod.) phag rgod dang dug sprul dang dur bya dang ka 
ka dang Ice spyang la sogs pa gdug pai mkha ‘gro sprin ltar du pa Jigs su rung ba skyo bung byed pa 
yod. de nas byang cung zad na o ka sha briksha ces pa shing brgyad kyi ya gcig yod. dur khrod de las 
cung zad lho na dhu mun khu ces pa zhin skyong rdo las rang byung ba yod. shing dei rtsar la ka pa 
la bho jon zhes pai rdo gcig la tshangs pa drag sogs rdo la rang byung du byon pa yod. “To the east 
of that place is one of the eight cremation-grounds, called [Kara]viraémaéa[na], thronged with 
a frightening cloud-like horde of malevolent Dakinis [in the form of] wild boars, poisonous 
snakes, vultures, crows, jackals, and the like. A little to its north there is one of the eight trees, 
called Okagavrksa [recte ASokavrksa]. A little to the south of that cremation-ground is a natural 
stone Ksetrapala named *Dhumunkhu (?). Near the tree, on a single rock called Kapalabhojon 
[recte Kapalabhajana or Kapalabhojana] are natural stone [embodiments of] Brahma, Rudra, 
and other [deities]’. 


268 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


deformation of virasmasanam for karavirasmasánam, confirming that the Kash- 
mirian tradition is accurate in this regard too. It is not probable that he was 
drawing on a Buddhist literary tradition rather than reporting, directly or in- 
directly, local usage heard in situ. For where Uddiyana’s cremation ground is 
identified in Buddhist tradition, as it is as one of those venerated in associa- 
tion with eight sacred places in the ritual system of Heruka and Vajrayogini, 
it is called Attattahása.? Moreover, U rgyan pa shows no inclination to su- 
perimpose Buddhist readings in such cases. He also relates a visit to the Sakta 
Pitha of Jalandhara and reports the name of the cremation ground there to be 
Lang gur,!? which is a close approximation of Lankuta, the name given in the 
Kumárikhanda of the Sakta Manthanabhairava. 

It is not implausible that JAananetra should have propitiated Kali in 
Uddiyana. There is no very strong evidence that he did, but JAananetra himself 
does tell us that he had his revelation of the nature of the goddess in "the great 
cremation ground” (mabafmasanam), ? and if this was meant to be understood 
geographically rather than esoterically then in a Krama context it most probably 
referred to Karavira. Moreover, the practice of seeking revelation by propitiating 
the goddess during a period of ascetic retreat at a remote Pitha is attested else- 
where in the Krama’s literature. Srivatsa, the author of the Cidgaganacandrika, 


109 Karankatoranakrama of Dhyayipada in the Guhyasamayasadbanamála, f.113v4: 
oddiyanadvare attattabdsam smaíanam. 

100) reyan lam rig, p.93, ll. 14—16: dei *dur khrod (em. Tucci : khrod) lang gur zhes pa na 
pha bong thod pa dra ba la rje btsun ma vang byong bzhugs ‘In its cremation ground called Lang 
gur there stays a self-created [image of] the goddess near a big skull-shaped boulder’. 

V Manthanabhairava, Kumarikhanda, £.18v3-4: evam daksinapitham tu oddiyanad vinir- 
gatam | smasanam tatra tcodyanamt lankutam nama bhisanam “Thus from Oddiyana came 
forth the southern Pitha. t...t a terrible cremation-ground there called Lankuta and f. 18v5: 
idrg jalandbaram pitham j(v) alávvá tatra visruta ‘Such is the Pitha Jalandhara. There there is 
the famed Mother Jvala’. 

I am aware of one other Buddhist reference to Karavira in connection with Uddiyana. This 
is in the Grub thob brgyad bcu rtsa bzhii lo reyus, the collection of legends of the eighty-four 
Siddhas, which the monk Smon grub es rab claims to have heard directly from bla ma chen 
po Mi ’jigs sbyin pa (*Mahàáguru Abhayadatta), an Indian of Campa, and then rendered into 
Tibetan. There we are told that when the Siddha Kambala went to Malapura (Mangalapura 
[Dowman 1985, p. 180]), the capital of Uddiyana, he spent time in a cave called Panawa (recte 
Pranava?) in a place called Karavira (RoBINSON 1979, p. 141, Il. 2-3): sras kyis nub phyogs o 
rgyan gyi ma la pu ra bya ba na grong khyer ‘bum tsho phyed dang gsum yod par phyin pa dang | 
de na yul ka ra bi ra zhes bya ba na | pa na wa zhes bya bai dgon pa na ta la tse phug bya bai 
phug pa yod sar bzhugs nas serub pa byas pas. 

112 Kalikastotra, v.19. See p. 274. 


Alexis Sanderson 269 


reports that he propitiated Kali in Pürnapitha,!? and, on a mythological level, 
the frame-story of the Kalikakramapaficasika relates that this text is the teach- 
ing that was transmitted by Niskriyananda through a [disembodied] voice to 
the cremation-ground dwelling Siddha Vidyananda when he was propitiating 
the goddess in a cave in the mountains of the Pitha Srigaila in Andhra. 

However, even if this detail is true, the evidence at our disposal does not 
permit us to suppose that the claim of revelation in Uddiyàna idealizes a pro- 
cess of cultural influence in which a tradition already established in that re- 
gion was assimilated by Jfananetra and then introduced into Kashmir. Nor is 
there is anything in our sources to suggest that a connection with the place 
was maintained after Jfananetra, probably himself a Kashmirian brahmin, had 
passed on his knowledge to his Kashmirian successors. The author of one of the 
later works of this tradition might be taken to be writing in Uddiyana rather 
than Kashmir, since he speaks in an introductory verse of the knowledge of the 
Krama “here in Uddiyàna".!? But since the author is writing a Sanskrit com- 
mentary on a text in Old Kashmiri he is evidently a Kashmirian and writing 
for a Kashmirian audience. It is preferable, therefore, to take this as evidence 
that for the followers of the Krama the original toponym had come to denote 
Kashmir itself, or that its meaning had been extended to include it, or, most 
plausibly, that the author is referring to a sacred site in Kashmir that had been 
identified with the original location, either Bid?r in the south-east of the valley 
or, more probably, Har*parbuth in the capital.!!6 


H3See p. 300. 

14 Kalibakramapaficátika, f. 21v4-8 (7.182—188): silacitir munivaras tasya putras tapodha- 
nah | yogabhyasarato devi siddhah sabararüpadhrk | 183 vidyanandeti vikhyato mahavirava- 
rah priye | fmasanavási nityastho nisatanaratah param | 184 siddhayogindraviraf ca cakracare 
ratipriyah | Sivapitham mahádevi frisailam devatapriyam | 185 tasya uttaradigbhage nanasikha- 
raparvate | tatra hemamayi divyà guha siddhasurarcita | 186 tatraradhanakam kytva vidyasa- 
baram uttamam | karoti bhaktim yogindro niskriyajnanavanchinah | 187 bhaktim tivrataram 
divyam krtvà fabararüpadhrk | tasya tusto munivaro niskriyananda uttamab | 188 amoghavanya 
tasyaiva samkrantam kalikakramam | vamajhanam tu kathitam pancasadbhimikakramam. 

"5 Commentary on the Mabanayaprakása of Sitikantha, p. 2, 1. 3: pithe $minn uddiyane param 
aparamalam jfánam asty ugracaryá “Here in the Pitha Uddiyana is the highest knowledge, free 
of the impurity of the other, [together with] the awesome practice [of Krama worship]'. 

16A Kashmirian Tirthamahatmya, the Nandiksetravatara, states (f. 11v, v. 55) that by the 
command of Mahesani Oddiyàna is present in Kashmir itself (along with the other three Pithas, 
Pürnagiri, Kamaraja [sic], and Jalandhara). A gloss in the margin of the manuscript tells us that 
this Kashmirian Oddiyàna is Bhedar. This must be the large Agrahara called Bhedara in Skt. that 
Kalhana tells us was founded by king Baladitya (Rajatarangini 3.481) and which Srziw (1979, 


270 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


The Kalikastotra 


From Jfananetra we have only a single work, the Kalikastotra, which survives 
in both Kashmirian and Nepalese manuscripts! In twenty Arya verses he 
invokes Kali’s nature as pure, non-dual, all-projecting consciousness: '? 


Supreme, O Goddess, is your formless nature that takes the form of the three 
worlds, free of the concepts of the existent and the non-existent, unlimited by 
adjuncts, to be attained in the purest awareness. Supreme indeed is your stainless 
non-dual nature, that one and multiform pervades the world that flows out 
[within it, yet is] free of change, its name the true ground of consciousness. 


and touches on the phases of a system of worship of the constituent powers of 
this nature that will be set out in detail only in the works of his successors.!? In 


vol. 1, p. 115) identifies with the present Bid'r, a large village in the Bring Pargana(33°35'N 
75°20'E). But a more plausible location is the hill Hár?parbuth (Sarikaparvata, Pradyumna- 
giri) in Srinagar. For that is called Omkarapitha(/Pranavapitha) in the Szribapariccheda (f. 213, 
v. 1: omkarapitham etad vai pitham pradyumnakam param); f. 311: pranavakhyasya pithasya), as 
is Uddiyana in Krama sources; see footnote 12 on p. 236 and 99 on p. 267. This a more plau- 
sible location because it is in a prominent position, rising in the old capital some 125 metres 
above the floor of the valley, and has been a site of the worship of the Goddess since early 
times, principally of Sarika/Cakresvari, who gives the hill its name, but also of other goddesses, 
notably Kali and Siddhalaksmi. The daily five-kilometre circumbulation (parikramah) of the 
shrines on the hill was a conspicuous feature of piety among the Kashmirian brahmins (Sarika- 
pariccheda f. 311: pranavakhyasya pithasya paridaksinatah priye | sa yati fivasayujyam yatra gatva 
na socate) and deep attachment to their Saktipitha (Sarikapariccheda f. 216: saktipithatmakah 
prokto vedasyah pranavah parah) has led them in their present diaspora to establish a replica of 
the temple of Sarika on a hill, renamed Har*parbuth, in Anangpur village, Faridabad, south of 
Delhi. 

17T have not seen Kashmirian manuscripts of the text but it is probable that one at least exists 
since it has been published in Kashmir in booklets for devotional use; see Stutisamgraha and 
Srigurustuti in the bibliography. In the quotations that follow I have cited only the readings 
of the second, that of the first being identical with it but for the addition of numerous minor 
errors. A line of a verse by Srinatha has been quoted by Ksemaraja in Sivastitravimarsini, p. 92, 
ll. 10-12: yathoktam srisrinathapadaih Srayet svatantryasaktim svam sa srikali para kala’ iti ‘As 
the venerable Srinatha has said, “He should take hold of his own power of autonomy. That is 
Kali, the highest power”. This is perhaps from another, lost work by JAananetra. 

118 Kalikastotra, f.90v1—3 (v. 1): sitatarasamvidavapyam sadasatkalanavihinam anupádhi | 
jayati jagattrayarüpam *nirüpam (Ed. : nairüpam Cod.) devi te rüpam | 2 ekam anekakaram 
*prasrtajagadvyápti (prasrta Ed. : prasrti Cod ) vikytiparihinam | jayati tavádvayarüpam vima- 
lam alam citsvarüpákhyam. 

I? For a brief, unannotated account of the phases of this worship see SANDERSON 1988, 
pp. 695—698 (= 1990, pp. 164—167) and SaNpErson in the discussion after GOUDRIAAN 1986, 
p. 164. 


Alexis Sanderson 271 


verse 17 he invokes the first of these phases, that of the goddesss embodiment 
as the Pitha:?? 


Supreme is your embodiment as the venerable Pitha[. For it is] replete with 
the pervasive power of the gnosis that flashes forth through the circles of the 
Bhücari, Dikcari, Gocari, and Khecari goddesses, and [in its culmination] is 
one with the matchless state of rest [in the ground of consciousness]. 


In verses 3-4 and 16 he alludes to the five phases that follow, (1) the 
Five Flows (paficavabacakram), (2) Illumination (prakdsacakram), (3) Bliss 
(anandacakram), (4) Embodiment (mzrticakram), and (5) the Celestial Or- 
der (divyaughah), elsewhere termed the circle of the Multitude (vrndacakram) 
or Sakinis (sakinicakram), comprising the sixty-four Siddhàs and their leader 
Mangala:!?! 


Supreme is the unique (kim api) act, surging up within, in which you assume 
your form through your pure creative urge, the shining forth of that conscious- 
ness absolute and spontaneous [as the cycle of the Five Flows]. Then when you 
have projected all Time [through the circles of Illumination and Bliss] and 
[your] terrible manifestation as the [introverting] ego through the [circle of] 
Embodiment you eliminate this [ego through the rise of the circle of the Mul- 
titude vrndacakram] and so accomplish liberation. 


and: 


Supreme is the Mother [Kali] who saves the world, pouring forth the Celestial 
Order by dividing each of her thirteen forms into five. 


In verses 8—9 he alludes to the four phases that follow these five: the three 
phases of Emission, Stasis, and Withdrawal (srsticakram, sthiticakram, and 
samháracakram), and the thirteen Kalis of the phase of the Nameless (anakhy- 
acakram) in which the course of worship ends:'*° 


120 Kalikastotra, f. 92r4-5 (v. 17): bhidiggokhagadevicakralasajjnanavibhavaparipurnam | nir- 
upama *visrantimayam (Ed. : vif[rlántamayam Cod.) sripitham jayati te *rüpam (Ed. : pitham 
Cod.). 

121 Kglikastotra, f. 90v3—5 (vv. 3—4): jayati tavocchalad *antah svacchecchaya (Ed. : asveccha- 
cchaya Cod.) svavigrahagrahanam | kim api niruttarasahajasvaripasamvitprakasamayam | 3 
vantva samastakálam *mirtyahamkaraghoramirtim api (Cod. : bhitya jbamkáraghoramürttim 
api Ed.) | nigraham "asmin (Ed. : api Cod.) krtvanugraham api kurvati jayasi. 

122 Kalikastotra, f.9213—7 (v.16): rtumunisamkhyam rüpam vibhajya pancaprakaram ekai- 
kam | divyaugham udgiranti jayati *jagattarini (Ed. : jattarini Cod.) janani. 

123 Kalikastotra, £.91r4—v1 (vv. 8-9): *ekam (Ed. : evam Cod.) svarüparüpam prasarasthitivi- 
layabhedatas trividham | pratyekam udayasamsthitilaya*visramatas (visramatas Ed. : visramatas 
Cod.) caturvidham tad api | 9 iti vasupaficakasamkhyam vidhaya sabajasvarüpam atmiyam | 
visvavivartavartapravartakam jayati te rüpam. 


272 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


‘The unitary nature of [your] essence becomes triple in the aspects of Emission, 
Stasis, and Withdrawal; and each of these assumes four aspects through Emis- 
sion, Stasis, Withdrawal, and Rest. Supreme is your form that by thus dividing 
your spontaneous essence into twelve sets in motion the whirl that is your un- 
folding (vivartah) as the world. 


In verses 5 and 18 he venerates the last of these:!*4 
Supreme are you, O Kali, who, after dividing the body of Time into twelve, 
make that same nature shine forth within yourself as one.!”° 


and: !26 


I praise the absolutely transcendent Goddess within that ground that lies within 
the state [of the Nameless] in which withdrawal itself is withdrawn, who is 
untouched by the prolixities of the existent and non-existent that she projects, 
[yet is] manifest in everything at every moment. 


He closes with a prayer that now that this nature of the Goddess has been 
revealed to him it may be realized by all beings: 


O mother, by your favour, may these three worlds appropriate the nature of 
the Goddess that rests within the transcendental void, as I experienced it in the 
great cremation ground. Thus I, Siva, have expressed praise of my own nature 
by force of the state of true immersion. O Mangala, may it benefit the whole 
world that is itself myself. 


In this hymn he draws on both of the principal Krama scriptures. Thus, for 
example, he takes the circle of the Multitude from the Kalikulakramasadbhiva, 
and the circle of the thirteen [Kalis] from the Kalzkulapancasataka.'** Nor has 


124 Kglikastotra, fF.90v5—9111 (v. 5): kalasya kali deham vibhajya munipanca*samkhyayabhi- 
nnam (em. : samkhyaya bhinnam Ed. [Cod., of course, allows both interpretations]) | svasmin 
virdjamánam tad rüpam kurvati jayasi. 

U5He intends us to understand that this manifestation of the twelve Kalis as one is the thir- 
teenth Kali worshipped at their centre. 

126 Kalikastotra, fF.92r5—v1 (v. 18): pralayalayantarabhimau vilasitasadasatprapancahinam | 
"devim (Cod. : devi Ed.) niruttaratarám naumi sada sarvatah *prakatàm (Ed. : prakatam Cod.). 

V7 Kalikastotra, f.92v1—4 (v. 19-20): *yadyn mahasmasane drstam devyah svarüpam *aku- 
lastham (Ed. : akulamstham Cod.) | tadyg jagattrayam idam bhavatu tavámba prasádena | 20 
ittham svarüpastutir abhyadbayi samyaksamavesadasavasena | mayá fivenastu fivaya samyan ma- 
maiva visvasya tu *mangalakhye (Cod. : mangalaya Ed.). 

P*The phase of the 64 (+1) is taught in the Kalzkulakramasadbhava (Patala 2: catuhsasti- 
vibha\ ga) vatàrab) but not in the Kalikulapancasataka, while the phase of the 13 [Kalis] is de- 
rived from the Kalikulapancasataka (Patala 5), the Kalikulakramasadbhava teaching the worship 


Alexis Sanderson 273 


he simply cobbled together elements from the two. ‘The result, to judge from 
the more detailed accounts to be seen in the works of his successors, is a harmo- 
nious and original whole carefully designed to express a coherent model of the 
cyclical unfolding and reversion of cognition pervaded by its non-sequential 
core, producing perhaps for the first time in Saivism a model for a form of 
contemplative ritual entirely fashioned by and subservient to the terms of a 
doctrine of liberating gnosis. !?? 

A passage from a lost text on the Krama lineages quoted by Jayaratha, which 
I shall call the Kramavamsavali, asserts that Jñānanetra had seventeen disciples, 
some of whom came in time to initiate others, so establishing their own lin- 


eages. According to Jayaratha himself the total was at least nineteen.'*° 


The Kramastotra of Eraka 


Abhinavagupta relates that three of these disciples, the Yoginis Keyüravati, Ma- 
danika, and Kalyanika—it is the last two that raise Jayaratha’s count— passed 
on the teaching that Jfananetra had received to Govindaraja, Bhanuka, and 
Eraka;P?! 


First the venerable, excellent Vira Govindaraja, of auspicious name, second 


of seventeen Kalis in this phase. When in verse 9cd (f. 91r5—v1) he speaks of the circle of the 
Kalis as setting in motion the whirl of the [her] unfolding as the world he echoes Kalikula- 
pancasataka A, £.27v4 (7.27ab): tadvivartah smrto jyotihpunjas cakresipirvagah “The mass of 
radiance beginning with the leader of the circle [of Kalis] is her unfolding (vivartah)’. 

129See also SANDERSON 1995, pp. 90-91 

130 Tantralokaviveka, vol. 3, p. 195, ll. 1-11: kim ca srimadavatarakanathena srikakaradevivac 
chrimadanikasrikalyanike cánugrhite ity apy ato ‘vasitam. tad esa ‘kramakulacatustayasrayabheda- 
bhedopadesato náthab | saptadasaiva Sisyan ittham cakre savamsanirvamsan! iti niyamo na 
nyayyah sisyadvayasyasyaparigananad anyasyapi sambhávyamánatvát “Moreover, it is also de- 
termined on the evidence of this source [the Kramakeli of Abhinavagupta] that the revered 
Promulgator initiated not only Kakaradevi [Keyüravati] but also the venerable Madanika and 
Kalyanika. So the limit expressed in the following passage is not justified: “Thus the Natha 
[J&ananetra] initiated precisely seventeen disciples in the teaching of duality-cum-noduality 
that rests on the four phases of the Krama, who themselves had or did not have disciples of 
their own". For its author has failed to count these two disciples and there may well have been 
another’. 

131 Tantralokaviveka, vol. 3, p. 192, 1l. 3-9, quoting Abhinavaguptas Kramakeli: yad uktam 
tatraivanena yathá (‘As [Abhinavagupta] has said in that same work’): ekah srīmān vīra- 
varah sugrhitanimadheyo govindarajabhidhanah sribhanukabhidhano dvitiyah sriman eraka- 
samákhyas trtiyah samam evopadesam pithesvaribhya uttarapithe (em. : uttarapitha Ed.) labdho- 
padesac chrisivanandanathal labdhanugrahabhyah srikeyiravatisrimadanikasrikalyanikabhyah 
prapnuvantah. 


274 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


Bhànuka, and third Eraka received together the teaching from Keyüravati, 
Madanikà, and Kalyanika, all three of whom had been initiated by Sivananda- 
nàtha,?? who had received the teaching in the Northern Pitha from the 
Pithesvaris. 


Eraka first strove for siddhih but later resolved to benefit mankind by passing 
on the esoteric teaching in the form of a hymn: ? 


As for the venerable Eraka, he strove for siddhih, until having achieved it he 
reflected as follows: “What is the value of the supernatural rewards that I have 
undergone this great hardship to attain? Why did I not devote myself exclu- 
sively, as my [two] fellow pupils did, to the spiritual upliftment of those who 
might have come to me as disciples? For: ‘Even on the level of Sadasiva [to 
which those who seek reward ascend] Mahograkali with her ferocious frown 
of fury will come in time to destroy. Realizing this one should ascend to the 
ultimate state and forcibly enter the Goddess Kalasamkarsini [/who withdraws 
even Sadasiva]’. So let me now benefit mankind by spreading through [this] 
hymn the esoteric teaching that I have held hidden in my mind”. 


This hymn was the Kramastotra, which later authors refer to reverentially 
as the Kramastotrabhattaraka, using an honorific otherwise reserved for scrip- 


tures." Unfortunately no manuscript of the text has reached us. All we have 


'32¢ivanandanatha is Jfananetranatha’s alias; cf. Arnasimha. Mahdnayaprakdsa, f. 119v1— 
2 (v.154ab): tatah srimacchivinandanathaguruvaram sada | lokottaramahajhanacaksusam 
pranamámy aham ‘Next I offer homage to the foremost of Gurus, the venerable Sivananda- 
natha, who possessed at all times the eye of the supramundane, great knowledge’. The ex- 
pression -jidnacaksusam is evidently intended to allude to his other name, JAananetra, which 
Arnasimha uses in f. 117v2—3 (v. 136): srijndnanetranathasya (see footnote 91 on p. 265). 

133 Tantralokaviveka, vol. 3, p. 193, ll. 1—11: sriman erakas tu siddhyai prayatata yavat siddhah 
sann evam manasa samarthayate sma. kim bhogair yad ayam mahan kleso mayanubhitah. katham 
aham sabrabmacárivad yavajjivam prapannalokoddharanamatrapara eva nabhavam yatah srimat- 
sadasivapade pi mahograkali bhimotkatabhrukutir esyati bhangabhimih | ity akalayya paramam 
sthitim etya kálasamkarsinim bhagavatim hathato ‘dhitisthet. tad idinim api nijabhavagata- 
rahasyopadesam stotramukhendpi tavat prasárayaml lokin anugrhniyam iti. That the whole pas- 
sage, beginning from ekah frimán viravarah and ending here with lokan anugrhniyam iti, is 
direct quotation from Abhinavagupta’s Kramakeli is confirmed by the fact that Ksemaraja at- 
tributes the first half of the verse cited here to that work in Sivastotravalivivrti, p. 159, ll. 17-18 
(l. 16: yathoktam asmadgurubhih kramakelau ‘As has been said by my Guru in the Kramakel?). 

134We find it in Kashmirian sources in the following: Kramasadbhavabhattiraka (= Kali- 
kulakramasadbhava), Tantrarajabhattaraka (= Jayadrathayamala), Mrtyujidbhattaraka (= Netra), 
Vijnanabhattaraka (= Vijnanabhairava), Sarvavirabhattaraka, and Svatantrabhattaraka (= Sva- 


cchanda). 


Alexis Sanderson 275 


are quotations in the works of others of its verses on twelve out of the thir- 


teen Kalis of the phase of the Nameless, 9? 


lines on (1) the activation of the seed-syllable KHPHREM 


and five citations of verses or single 
136 as the contempla- 
tion of the progressive dissolution of the content of cognition into the sky of 
consciousness (cidakdsah), (2) on the rise of [the goddess in consciousnesss as] 
the Mantra dissolving all differentiated cognitions,?" (3) on the single radiance 
that permeates the object, means, and agent of cognition, (4) on the inexpress- 


ible essence of all verbalization, and (5) on the inner fusion of light and bliss. 18 


Keyüravati 


Later Krama Gurus trace their initiatory lineage back to JAananetra through 
the Yogini Keyüravati alone, who thus occupies a position of particular rever- 
ence in the tradition as the conduit through which the teachings of JAanane- 
tra reached all subsequent Gurus. Nor does Abhinavagupta’s account, though 
it adds Madanika and Kalyanika, claim any independence for them as the 
source of individual lineages, simply merging them somewhat implausibly with 
Keyüravati as co-initiators. No work is attributed to her in spite of her emi- 
nence, or to any other of the known female Gurus of this tradition; but the 
*Kramavamsavali reports that she had three disciples, all of whom began their 
own teaching lineages. Jayaratha raises the total to six, by adding Govindaraja 
and Bhanuka on the authority of Abhinavagupta, and a certain Naverakanatha 
on the authority of a citation from a lost work.'?? 


Hrasvanatha (/Vamanal Vamanadatta/Viranatha) 


‘The transmission that reached these later Gurus passed from her through the 
Vira Hrasvanatha, also called Vamana, Viravamanaka, Vamanavira, and Virana- 


For the citations of these verses see footnote 204 on p. 299. 

136This syllable opens the principal Krama Mantra, the nine-syllable Vidya of Kāla- 
samkarsani: KHPHREM MAHACANDAYOGESVAR. For this verse and a translation see p. 365. 

'37For this verse and a translation see p. 364. 

P*'These five citations are respectively in (1) Tantralokaviveka on 4.191cd, (2) Mahartha- 
mafüjariparimala on v. 49, (3) Mabanayaprakása (Triv.) 6.27; Vijánabbairavavivrti, p. 140; (4) 
Mabárthamafüjariparimala on v. 39; and (5) ibid., on v. 44, partially in Spandasamdoha, p. 10, 
1. 15-11, 1 (yathoktam ...siddhapadaih). 

139 Tantrálokaviveka, vol. 3, pp. 195, l. 16-196, 1. 9. 


276 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


tha.! ^? Jayaratha tells us that Hrasvanatha composed a commentary (-vivarana) 
on Erakas Kramastotra, and claims to have seen a manuscript of it written in 
his own hand.!*' But no trace survives beyond this single mention, nor of any 
of the other commentaries on the same whose existence he reports.!? Of his 
work we have a single verse from an unidentified source, which speaks of "that 
supramundane fire-sacrifice in which the fuel is the forest of dualities and the 
human sacrifice (mahdpasuh) Death himself". 

We also have two short texts: the Svabodhodayamanjari and the Dvaya- 
sampattivartika, also known as the Bodhavildasa. The last verse of the former 
declares that it is the work of Vamanadatta, the son of Harsadatta ‘a lion in the 
forest of the Mimàmsa'. ^ In the closing verse of the latter the author does not 


140(1) Vàmana: Tzntrálokaviveka, vol.3, p. 196, 15-16, quoting from a lost work by 
one Somaraja a passage on his teacher Hrasvanatha: srimadvamanabhainuh kramakamala- 
vikdsane caturah “The venerable Vamana, a [veritable] sun able to cause the lotuses of the 
lineage to unfold’; and Arnasimha, Mahdnayaprakdsa, f. 119v3—5 (v. 156): mabaviravaro 
yo Sau srimadvamanasamjnakah | devidhamni sadarüdhas tam vande kramabhaskaram “I 
praise the best among the best of Viras, Vamana by name, that sun to [the lotuses of] 
the Krama [lineage], who was constantly immersed in the radiance of the Goddess’; (2) 
Viravamanaka: Yogaraja, Paramarthasaravivrti, p. 146, 1.15: yathaha bhattasriviravimanakah; 
(3) Vàmanavira: Mahdanayaprakasa (Triv.), 8.27c: etadvimarsasambhitavirivalyaditarpanat | 
dsid *vamanavirasya (em. : vamanaviryasya Ed.) *vidvesastambhanddikam (conj. : yadvisnu- 
stambhanadikam Cod.); and (4) Viranatha: Tantralokaviveka, vol. 3, p. 196, ll. 10-13: srihras- 
vanathasyapi "srivirandthapádaih pafica ca devinaye krtah sisyah" iti na pancaiva sigyáb "Nor is 
it true of Hrasvanatha that he had only five disciples, as is stated in the verse “The venerable 
Viranatha initiated five disciples in the Devinaya". 

141 Tantrālokaviveka, vol. 3, p. 203, ll. 13-15, speaking of a second verse on Yamakali in that 
hymn: athayam api bhavatkalpita eva sloka iti cen naitat sribrasvanáthenápi svalipivivarane sya 
drstatvát ‘If it is claimed that this verse too is my work [rather than Eraka’s], I reply that this 
cannot be so, because Hrasvanatha too bears witness to this verse in his commentary in his own 
hand’. 

142 To Rtrálokaviveka, vol. 3, p. 203, ll. 15-16: sarvesam eva ca vivaranakrtàm atra pratipadam 
pathanam slokanam (ca) vyatydso drsyate. ity asmaddrsta eva pathe ka ivayam pradvesah ' More- 
over, we find that all the authors of commentaries have inversions of readings and verses at 
every step in this [work]. So why, I wonder, should there be this special hostility to the reading 
that I have seen?’ 

VB Yogarája, Paramarthasaravivrti, p. 146, 1. 15: yathaha bhattasriviravamanakah: yatrendha- 
nam dvaitavanam mrtyur eva mahapasuh | alaukikena yajnena tena nityam yajamahe. For the 
meaning of mahdpasuh see Svacchandoddyota, vol. 2, p. 7: mahapasuh purusapasuh ‘a mahapasuh 
is a human sacrificial victim’. 

144 Svabodhodayamañjarī A, f. 819-11; B, f. 5v7—9 (v. 44): mimamsavanasimhasya harsadatta- 
sya sünund | krtā vamanadattena svabodhodayamanjari. 


Alexis Sanderson 277 


state his name but identifies himself simply as the son of Harsadatta ‘a lion in 
the forest of the Mimamsa and a native of Takadega’.! The -datta of the name 
would hinder us from identifying this author with the Krama’s Vamana alias 
Hrasvanatha, were it not that Siva[svamin] Upadhyaya quotes the second text 
as the work of Vamananatha at one place, 46 and as that of Hrasvanatha, son 
of Harsadatta, at another.'4” Abhinavagupta quotes the same as the work of 
Sri-Vàmana,'^ and Ksemaraja quotes the first as that of Bhattasri-Vàmana,? 
while Yogaraja, the pupil of Ksemaraja, attributes the verse cited above on the 
supramundane fire-sacrifice to Bhattasri- Viravàmanaka. ^? 

The purpose and content of the Svabodhodayamanjari is the teaching of a se- 
ries of purely mental practices to bring about liberation-in-life through the dis- 
solution of contracted awareness (manah, cittam) by means of insight (niscayah) 
into the emptiness of objective and mental phenomena?! and reversion into 
the uncontracted inner ground by observing the process of the arising and dy- 
ing away of cognition, especially where the latter is particularly intense, as in 
the perception of the beautiful and meditation on the sensation of orgasm: 


One may meditate on any beautiful sound that one hears until ceasing it brings 
about the cessation of mind. In the same way one may meditate on the beauty 
of the visible and other [objects of the senses]. After the object-perception has 
dissolved one should let one’s awareness remain empty, with no memory of it, 
full only of the sense of one’s own immediate being. 13? 


145 Dvayasampattivartika A, f.8v24 and upper margin; B, ff. 6v9-7r1 (v. 23): takadesasamu- 
dbhüto mimamsavanakesari | harsadatteti nimnd tu tasya sūnor iyam krtih. 

V6 Viinanabhairavavivrti, p. 78, M. 1-2: dvayasampattikàras tu vamananatho .... 

VW Viianabbairavavivrti, p. 90, ll. 14—17: fribrasvandthena harsadattasiinuna ‘ahamkaramayi 
bhimir *ityadinà dvayasampattau (corr. : ityadind advayasampattau Ed.). The citation is Dvaya- 
sampattivartika A, f. 8118—19; B, f. 6r8 (v. 5a). 

148 Paratrisikavivarana, p. 198, ll. 13714: esa eva srivamana*viracite dvayasampattivartike 
(viracite dvaya corr. : viracite advaya Ed.) upadesanayo boddhavyah. 

V9 Spandanirnaya, p. 48, ll. 14—7: bhattaérivamanenápy uktam ‘alambya samvidam yasmát 
samvedyam na svabhavatah | tasmát samviditam sarvam iti samvinmayo bhaved’ iti. 'Bhattasri- 
Vamana too has said: “One can become flooded with consciousness by [contemplating] the 
fact that since the objects of knowledge exist not in themselves but only in dependence on 
cognition everything is known”. This is Suabodhodayamanjari A, f. 7v19—20 (v. 32). 

150See footnote 143 on p. 278. 

D?! See, e.g., v. 32 translated in footnote 149. 

152 Syabodhodayamanjari A, f. 7111—14; B, f. 314-7 (vv. 15-16): yad yan manoharam kimeic 
chrutigocaram agatam | ekagram bhavayet tavad yaval linam nirodhakrt | rüpadimam tathaive- 
itham bhavayed ramaniyatàm | vilinán *na (A : nā B) smaret pascad atmabhavopabrmhitah. 


278 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


One should direct one’s attention at the climax of love-making to the point be- 
tween the penis and the navel. As the bliss of orgasm fades one will suddenly 
be freed of all perturbation. ^? 
If a person's awareness dissolves into the self in every moment through these 
methods he becomes liberated-in-life, having reached the full reality of con- 
sciousness. ^^ 

The defining feature of these methods, which sets them apart from the med- 
itation practices of the brahmanical tradition and indeed from those taught in 
much of the Saiva Mantramarga, has been expressed by the author as follows: 155 
The ancients taught that the cessation [of the activities of the mind and senses] 
comes about through the method of cultivating distaste for them. I shall teach 
[here] how that cessation can be achieved effortlessly. 


and by Abhinavagupta in an oblique reference to the text: ^ 


To explain, the Guru has taught in many ways in his treatise that it is by an 
effortless detachment that the activities of the senses dissolve. [For] the more 
they are forcibly restrained, the more they rise in ever new forms. 


As for the Dvayasampattivartika, that is an explanation of two verses, as- 
cribed to oral transmission (vaktragama/),?" on the attainment of liberation- 


153 Syabodhodayamanijari B, f. 516—7 (lacking in A) (v. 38): nabhimedhrantare cittam *suratante 
(corr. : svaratante B) viniksipet | liyamane ratanande nistarangah ksanam bhavet. 

154 Svabodhodayamañjarī A, f. 817—9; B, £. 5v5—7 (v. 43): ittham pratiksanam yasya cittam åt- 
mani [yate | sa labdhabodhasadbhavo jivanmukto vidhiyate. 

155 Syabodbodayamafijari A, £.7r6-7; B, ff.2v9-3rl (v.12): pürvair nirodhah kathito 
vairagyabhyasayogatah | ayatnena nirodho ‘yam asmabhir upadisyate. 

156 Malinivijayavartika 2.111-12: tatha hi gurur adiksad bahudha svakasasane | anádaravi- 
raktyaiva galantindriyavrttayab | yavat tu viniyamyante tavat tavad vikurvate. 

157 Dvayasampattivartika A, f. 8117—18; B, f. 5v6—7 (v. 4ab): slokadvayam idam yasmac chi- 
vavaktragamoditam. GNOLI (1974, p. 454) takes sivavaktragamoditam to mean ‘stated in the 
scriptures from the very mouth of Siva' ('state dette nell'agaza dalla stessa bocca di Siva). 
However, the term vaktrégamah and its synonyms such as vaktrémndyah and mukhägamah 
mean oral teaching as opposed to teaching in the form of scripture; see, e.g., Devidvyardhasa- 
tiká, f. 12rá—5 (v. 139ab): pascác *chrnusvaiva (em. : chrnusvava Cod.) mahopadesam vaktra- 
game yalt) sthita khecarisu; f. 36—7 (v.31cd): *mukhagamam idam (conj. : mukhagamami 
Cod.) devi khecarinam hrdi sthitam; Kalikulakramasadbhava, f. &r12—v1 (3.29cd): tena vaktrena 
vaksyami vaktrámnádyakramágatam; Kalikulapancasataka A, f. 2v1 (1.18ab): mukhadgamavidha- 
nena vaktradvaktrakramena tu; Chummasamketaprakasa, f. 9v6 (v. 142): samcáru | mukhanmu- 
khakramayatah sarvasamkalpavarjitab | vaktrámnayab paro yo yam sa samcáro mitah sthitah; 


Alexis Sanderson 279 


in-life (vyutthane sivatvam) through meditative fusion of the two urges, intro- 
vertive and extrovertive, of uncontracted consciousness. 

‘These practices and their description contain no elements that link them di- 
rectly to outward features specific to the Krama. Indeed many are drawn from 
the Vijidnabhairava rather than any scripture of the Kalikula. Nonetheless, 
their spirit is precisely that which animates the Krama; and this proximity is 
particularly clear in the practice of observing the arising and reversion of sen- 
sual cognition, from initial excitation to final quiescence. We cannot conclude, 
therefore, from the abstract character of these instructions that they must have 
been written by an author other than Hrasvanatha. Moreover, both works are 
connected with the oral tradition of the Siddhas, an expression for the enlight- 
ened that is mostly applied in the Kashmirian literature to masters of the Krama. 
The author of the anonymous Mahdanayaprakasa when citing the first verse of 
the Svabodhodayamanjari refers to it or the whole work as siddhamukhamndayah 
‘the oral teachings of the Siddhas’.!°° The author himself refers to those teach- 
ings in that work? and at the end of his Duayasampattivartika identifies them 
as his source. Moreover, he declares that those who achieve success by following 
the path that he has formulated on their basis will attain the yoginipadam, the 
domain of the Yoginis, which is to say the state that they embody or, which 
comes to the same, the state that they hold in their awareness and transmit to 
others.!© This too is consistent with a Krama background, though it does not 


Vatülanáthasutravrtti, p. 19, ll. 1-2: mahamelapasamaye siitropanibaddho vaktramndyah praka- 
Sitah;, Tantrailoka 6.252ab: iti kalatattvam uditam sastrumukhágamanijanubbavasiddham. This 
leads me to question the reading siva-. For the oral teaching of Siva is his scriptures and the 
expression sivavaktrégama- is therefore pleonastic. Moreover, as GNOLI’s translation shows, it 
supposes an awkward ellipsis: ‘scriptures by/from Siva’s mouth’ for ‘scriptures uttered by Siva’s 
mouth’. I therefore suspect that the manuscripts have transmitted a corruption of siddhavak- 
trégamoditam ‘taught in the oral transmission of the Siddhas’. That reading would make better 
sense, and it would be in keeping with the author's statement at the end of the work that it is 
the oral teachings of the Siddhas that he has formulated (see footnote 160). 

158 Mahinayaprakasa (Triv.) 9.52—53: ...iti siddhamukhamnayayuktya .... 

1? Syabodhodayamanjari B, £.5r1-2 (v.35): vamadaksinasamcarabindudvayanigharsanat | 
dvadasinte mahisaktih siddhair ukta mukhagame “The Siddhas have taught in their oral teach- 
ings that the Great Power [becomes manifest] in the Dvadaganta through the friction of the 
two drops in the flows of the left and right [channels of the breath]’. 

160 Dvayasampattivartika A, f. 823-24 and left margin; B, f. 6v8—9 (v. 22): iti siddhamukho- 
dgitam svayam evam udahytam | márgenánena samsiddha labhante yoginipadam “Thus I have 
formulated in my own words the oral teaching of the Siddhas. Those who achieve success by 
this path attain the Yogini’s domain’. 


280 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


prove it conclusively. Finally, the Svabodhodayamanjari, though infrequently 
cited in the Kashmirian literature, is, as we shall see, one of the few texts cited 
by Kashmirian authors of the Krama. I see no good reason therefore to deny 
that these two texts are the work of Hrasvanatha/Vamana. 

Some have asserted that the author of these works is the Vamanadatta 
who wrote the long philosophical hymn to Visnu (*Visnustuti) rooted in the 
Pafcaratrika tradition of the Satvatasamhita that has been referred to as the 
Samvitprakáía, though that appears to be the title only of the first of a series of 
Prakaranas contained in the work.!^! But that position is refuted by the hymn 
itself. For while the author of the Saiva works describes himself as the son of 
Harsadatta, a Mimamsaka of Takadega in the northern Panjab, the author of 
this Paficaratrika work describes himself as a Kashmirian of the Ekayana lin- 


eage, whose father was Devadatta, son of Rátradatta.!9? 


Hrasvanatha and Cakrabhanu 


Hrasvanatha initiated five disciples according to the "Kramavamsávali and 
six according to Jayaratha.'© The foremost of these was Cakrabhanu, whom 
Krama tradition reports to have been an ascetic following the [Kapalika] ob- 
servance as a skull-carrying denizen of the cremation ground (mahdvrata- 
dharah) e 

Now the Kashmirian historian Kalhana reports in his Rajatarangini, writ- 
ten between 1148/49 and 1149/50, that a brahmin ascetic of this name was 
punished by King Yaéaskara (r. A.D. 939—948) for transgressing the limits of 
brahmanical conduct (atydcarah) in a cakramelakah. He also reports the claim 
of the Gurus of this tradition that the Yogin Viranatha, who, he tells us, was 
Yasaskara's minister of war and peace and Cakrabhanu’s maternal uncle, took 


161 This assertion is seen in GNout 1974, p. 453 and 1989, p. 125; and TongLLA 1994, p. 482. 

162 Samvitprakasa, f. 516-9 (vv. 153—155, end): rátradattir devadatto ratnádevyam yam atma- 
jam | lebhe vimanadattakhyam tatstutyà priyate harih | sastyuttaram slokasatam idam bodham 
vinapi yah | pathen madhuripor agre bhaktya moksam sa gacchati | ekayane prasütasya kasmiresu 
dvijanmanah | krtir vamanadattasya seyam bhagavadasraya. iti sumvitprakasanama prathamam 
prakaranam ‘Hari delights in the hymn of Vamanadatta, whom Devadatta, son of Ratradatta, 
obtained as his son by Ratnadevi. Whoever recites these 160 verses in the presence of Visnu 
with devotion, even if he does not understand them, attains liberation. This work on the Lord 
is Vamanadatta's, a brahmin born in Kashmir in the Ekayana [lineage]. Here ends the first 
Prakarana, called the Samvitprakasa’. 

163 Tantralokaviveka, vol. 3, pp. 193, l. 16-197, 1. 4. 

164See Arnasimhas Mahanayaprakdsa, v. 156 in footnote 194 on p. 294. 


Alexis Sanderson 281 


revenge by performing a ritual of chastisement (nigrabakarma) that caused the 
king’s death:!6 


The king, having committed himself vigorously to the task of supervising the 
caste-classes and [brahmanical] disciplines discovered that a brahmin ascetic 
called Cakrabhanu had transgressed prescribed brahmanical conduct in a cakra- 
melakah and, being submissive to his religious obligations as a king, punished 
him by branding his forehead with the shape of a dog's foot. The [Sakta] Gu- 
rus, promoting their standing by [pointing to] the power of their predecessors, 
confidently proclaim that in his fury at this the Yogin Viranatha, who was the 
king’s own minister of war and peace and Cakrabhanu’s maternal uncle, per- 
formed [a ritual of] chastisement against him. The story that they themselves 
have put about is that [as a result] the king died at the end of seven days.!66 But 
how can that be reasonable when [in fact] what killed him was the illness from 
which he had long been suffering? 


I propose that this is the Cakrabhanu of our Krama lineage and that Vira- 
natha, his maternal uncle and Yasakara's minister, is none of other than his 
Guru Hrasvanatha. For, as we have seen, Hrasvanatha was also known as Vīra- 
natha in the Kramas literature, and the placing of these events in Yasaskara’s 


16Kalhaņa, Rajatarangini 6.108—112: varndsramapratyaveksibaddhakaksyah ksitisvarah | 
cakrabhanvabhidham cakramelake dvijatapasam | krtatyacaram alokya *rajadbarmavasamvadab 
(em. : rajà dharmavasamvadah Ed.) | nijagraha svapadena lalatatatam ankayan | tanma- 
tulena tadrosad viranathena yogina | samdhivigrahikenatha sa svenaiva nyagrhyata | purva- 
caryaprabhavena svamahatmyadhiropanam | prakbyapayadbhir gurubhib sraddhayeti yad ucy- 
ate | tatkhyapitaiva saptabat sa vipanna iti srutih | dirghavyadhihate tasminn upapattib katham 
bhavet. I have proposed the emendation rajadharmavasamvadah for the reading raja dharma- 
vasamvadah seen in STEIN’s edition because it both removes the defect of the subject's being 
stated twice in the same sentence (ksitisvarah and raja) and provides an apt adjectival qualifi- 
cation of the former (‘submissive to his religious obligations as a king’), najadharmah being a 
term of art for the special obligations imposed on rulers by the Dharmasastra, which include 
that of ensuring the punishment of wrongdoers. 

'66Texts of the Mantramarga regularly specify seven days as the period for which a fire- 
sacrifice for such a siddhih must be maintained, saying that its effect comes about at the end 
of that time; see, e.g., Kubjikdmata 23.151: sada kruddhena kartavyam nigraham saptavasaraih; 
Picumata, £.70v4 (14.226cd): saptaratrena devesi marayed *ripupungavam (ripu conj. : vapu 
Cod.); Picumata, f.25113 (55.58ab): rajánan tu vaíam kuryát saptaratra(n) na samsayah; 
Vinasikha 198c-199b: jubuyat saptaratram tu yasya namná tu sadhakah | vidvisto drfyate loke 
esa vidvesanam param; Uddamaresvara 1.51cd: saptaratraprayogena sarvasatruprandsanam. It is 
for this reason that I have understood Kalhana’s use of the verb ni-grh- (nyagrhyata) to refer 
to the kind of ritual known as a nigrahakarma, as in the first of these examples of seven-day 
hostile ceremonies. 


282 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


reign accords, as we shall see, with other evidence of the chronology of these 
Gurus.! Moreover, the cakramelakah to which Kalhana refers and that STEIN 
tentatively suggested in his translation of the Rajatarangini might be a place- 
name, is in fact a Kaula ritual, ‘a gathering (-melakah) of a circle (cakra-)’ of 
male initiates and low-caste Yoginis with a strongly orgiastic character. 

The ritual is set out in detail as one of the Krama’s periodic ceremonies 
in the Kalikulakramarcana of Vimalaprabodha, the Guru of the Nepalese king 
Arimalla (r. 1200—1216),!65 under the name cakrakrida.'© The sponsor invites 
the Guru and male initiates of the three grades to a house together with sixteen, 
eight, or four Yoginis of specified castes, mostly or exclusively low, beneath the 
rank of Sadra.!”° He sets up a [wine-]pot, worships the Goddess in it with the 


167See p. 414. 

168That Vimalaprabodha was the Guru of Arimalla is stated in the colophon reported by 
PerEcH (1984, pp. 81-82) of a manuscript of the Amrtesvarapuja of Abhayamalla, Arimalla's 
successor, penned in A.D. 1216. It describes Arimalla as srimadvimalaprabodhapadaprasadal 
labdhabhiseka- ‘consecrated by the favour of the venerable Guru Vimalaprabodha’. 

16? Kalikulakramarcana ff. 2012-2111, 21r5—v3: athücáryasádhakaputrakasamayijanan yogini- 
kulasahitan àmantrayet. yatha brahmani paukkasi dhvajini antyaja cakrini *chippini (corr. : 
chippina Cod.) saunaki ksatrini matangi carmakari dhivari mahamati(h) śūdrī vaisyi 
vefyà dhàvaki nartaki ity uttamayoginikulam. dhivari dhvajini chippini paukkasi carma- 
kari antyajà nati vesya iti madhyamayoginikulam. dhivari dhvajini chippini paukkasi ity ad- 
hamayoginikulam. yathà sobhanagrhe kumbham samsthapya svestakramasahitém tatra devim 
sampüjya pancavahamandalopari balipatram nivesya samayabrdayena | tádanaproksananiri- 
ksanabhyuksanasamikaranadikam sthinasya krtvà. dsanáni. samsthapya pratyekaikdsane pañ- 
cakàlasanán sampüujya guhyahydayena pádapraksalana*pürvakam (corr. : pürvvaka Cod.) 
tatrasane upavesayet. upaviste sati mabásamayahrdayena vàmávartakramena dvarad dvaram ya- 
vad avicchinnam *suradharam (corr. : suradharam Cod.) dadyát. tata dcdryam guruparam- 
parayatam siddhakramena sampüjya sadhakan virakramena putrakan pithakramena samayi- 
nah ksetrakramena *yoginis (corr. : yogini Cod.) catuhkramabhyantare pratyekaikakramaikena 
püjayet. tilakakajjalasindivapuspavastralamkaram yathakramena svasvavidyaya dattva patrani 
jpyesthanukramena pancamrtadisahitani pancavahamandalopari puratah sthapayet. khánapana- 
lehyacosyadikam guhyahydayabhimantritam puratah sthápayitvà samayacchommakam sarvaih 
saha bhased yathé HĀ HĀ srstau HITI HITI sthitau KRE KRE sambdre ARA ARA anakhye KU- 
LURU KULURU bhdsdydm. upasamhdarasamkhyakramena devatatarpanam krtva samayabalim 
dadyát. ... (f.21r1—5). tatah pürvoktàm vai *bhasim (corr. : bhasám Cod.) samuccarya 
pátráni dapayet, vàmabastena grhniyat. adau saktes tadanantaram sarvesim. evam tridha. pürva- 
samskrtacarukam lelihimudraya *pradipam (conj. : paridipam Cod.) ca bhaksaniyam. tada- 
nte yathasukhena srikramasadbhavoktakramena cakrakridà. samáptyante paficavàbam sampüjya 
daksavartena dharim nipatya madhyánte samayabalim dattvà cakrasthinam gomayenopalipya 
puspena püjayet. iti cakrakridavidhib. 

170 The source of the list of sixteen Yoginis is Kalikulakramasadbhava, f. 10r12-12 (4.47c-49): 
brabmani *pukkasi (puskast Cod.) caiva dhvajini antyaja tatha | 48 cakrini ca tatha *chippi 


Alexis Sanderson 283 


deities of his preferred Krama phase, places the vessel for the bali offering on a 
Mandala diagram in which he has worshipped the [goddesses of the] Five Flows 
(pancavahamandalam), ritually prepares the ground of the site, sets out seats 
for each of the guests on it, installs and worships the five deities from Brahma 
to Sadàsiva on each, so transforming them into thrones for the installation of 
Bhairavas or goddesses, washes the feet of each guest, invites them to be seated, 
pours a continuous stream of liquor around the periphery of the site from door 
to door, moving from right to left, and worships the Guru, Sadhakas, Putrakas, 
and Samayins with the Mantras of the Siddhas, Viras, Pithas, and Ksetras re- 
spectively, and the Yoginis with the Mantras of the four phases from Emission 
to the Nameless, one for each, so that the Mantra of each phase is used four 
times if they are sixteen. Then he gives each a forehead mark, collyrium for the 
eyes, vermilion powder, flowers, cloth, and other offerings, using the Mantra 
with which each has been worshipped, sets before them cups [of wine] with 
the five nectars and the rest! on the Five Flow Mandala in the order of their 
seniority, together with various foods and drinks, addressing each of the guests 
with the arcane utterances known as chommakani for each of the five phases, 
from Emission to the Nameless and the Pure Light (bhasa).'”’ After gratifying 


(corr. : chippi Cod.) sauniki (em. : saundiki Cod.) *ksatriyi (corr. : ksatrini Cod.) tatha | 
mátangi carmakari ca dhivari ca mahamate | 49 fudri *vaisyi (corr. : vaifa Cod.) tatha vesya 
"dhavaki (em. : vayaki Cod.) nartaki tatha | etas tu püjayet tatra jatyahamkaravarjitah “He 
should worship without pride of caste [Yoginis of] the following [groups]: brahmin, Pukkasa 
untouchable, liquor-seller, Antyaja untouchable, potter, dyer, butcher, Ksatriya, Matanga un- 
touchable, leather-worker, fisherman, O wise one, Sidra, Vai$ya, courtesan, washerman, and 
dancer.’ Vimalaprabodha’s mahdamatih, which appears to raise the total to seventeen, is due to 
a misconstrual of the vocative mabamate in 4.48d. The same verses are Yonigahvara, f. 913—5 
(vv. 113-115b), which support the emendations pukkasi, sauniki, and ksatriyi but have kanduki 
(corr. : kanduki Cod.) ‘barber, f.’ in place of cakrini and the error mabamatib. They are followed 
by a verse specifying the Yoginis to be invited in the option of four as in the Kalikulakramarcana 
(115c-116b): catvari-m-athavá pijya yathávibhavavistaraih | dhivari dhvajini chippi pukkasi ca 
caturthika ‘Or he may worship four, as abundantly as his resources allow, one from each of the 
following castes: fisherman, liquor-seller, dyer, and Pukkasa untouchable’. For chippi ‘dyer’ or 
‘cloth-printer’ see the evidently cognate words with this meaning in various Indo-Aryan lan- 
guages in TURNER 1966-71, p. 273b (4994) under *chapp- (/*chipp-) ‘to press’. 

V" For the identity of the body-products called the five ‘jewels’ or ‘nectars’ see SANDERSON 
2005a, pp. 110-114 (footnote 63). 

2 These five chommakani are as follows: HA HA, HITI HITI, KRE KRE, ARA ARA, and KULURU 
KULURU. I propose that their language is Dravidian: (1) with HA HA for Emission/Creation cf. 
Tamil z- ‘to come into existence’; (2) with HrTI HITI for Stasis/Maintenance cf. Tulu idi ‘a hold, 
grasp, handful’, Kannada pidi ‘to seize, catch, grasp’; Tamil pizi ‘to grasp, cling to’; (3) with KRE 


284 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


the Krama’s deities in the order of progressive withdrawal he presents a food 
offering on the ground to placate the classes of male supernaturals that inhabit 
the Sakta power-sites and the various classes of non-human Yoginis, ending 
with an invocation to the Goddess. With the same chommakdani he passes the 
guests the wine cups with his left hand, refilling them twice, serving the prin- 
cipal Yogini first and then the rest? They should also eat the sacramental 
substances and the dough lamps (dipacaruh) that are considered a substitute 
for human flesh.'”4 After that, group revelry (cakrakrida) should follow. When 
it has ended the sponsor should worship the goddesses of the Five Flows, pour 
out another stream of wine around the periphery, this time from left to right, 
place a second food offering on the ground at the edge of the central area, pu- 
rify the site by smearing it with cow-dung mixed with water, and then honour 
it with the offering of a flower at its centre. 

An idea of the revelry envisaged may be gained from the fourth Satka of 
the Jayadrathbayámala, where the ritual, described immediately after chapters 


devoted to Krama worship, ? is termed a viramelapah ‘a gathering of Viras’:!”° 


KRE for Withdrawal cf. Tamil karai ‘to dissolve, become gradually attenuated’; (4) with Ara 
Ara for the Nameless, in which the three preceding phases are transcended in a state of blissful 
pervasion, cf. Tamil dr ‘to become full, be satisfied’, Kannada dr ‘to abound, be filled’; and (5) 
with KULURU KULURU for the Pure Light, representing final quiescence, cf. Tamil &u/ir ‘to feel 
cool, get numbed (as in death), satisfied’, ‘to sit, rest’, Kannada kulir to be cool or cold’; and 
Malayalam kulir, kulur ‘coldness, cool, refreshing’. 

V5Vimalaprabodha's text says ‘first the Sakti and then all’ (ddau saktes tadanantaram sarve- 
sam). I surmise that the Sakti is the consort of the Guru. 

174On the dipacaruh see Tantralokaviveka, vol. 11 (Ahnika 29), p.51, ll. 16-19 (quoting 
Jayadrathayimala, Satka 4, f. 125v1—3 [for adbára- there read ddhdre]). For its being a sub- 
stitute for human flesh see Tantralokaviveka, vol. 11 (Ahnika 29), p.39, 1.11. 

'75See footnote 84 on p. 262. 

V6 Tayadrathayamala, Satka 4, ff. 206v3-207v5 (Viratàndavavidhipatala, vv. 5—30b): asritya 
saranam guptam sarvabadhavivarjitam | susobham *kusumamodasudhipagandhamantharam 
(kusumamoda em. : kumbhamamoda Cod.) | 6 kulaparvam samásádya viramelapam áca- 
ret | nimantrayet tatah sarve bhairavacárapalakab | 7 samayajna devibhaktah samtustah 
kramatatparah | samayinah putrakas ca sādhakā desikah pare | 8 yoginyo yah prabu- 
ddhas ca *bhakta và tadalabhatah (em. : bhaktapatadalabhatah Cod.) | "ania vapy asa- 
hitan tàmbüladiyutan kuru (conj. : antya tépyasahatamvritadiyutam kuru Cod.) | 9 asa- 
nany atra deyáni *yathdvat (em. : yatha tat Cod.) kramayogatah | pijyani pranavenaiva 
gandhadhiupasragadibhih | 10 *tatropavesayet (em. : tatopavesayet Cod.) samyag yathacakra- 
niyogatah | gurünám prathamam cakram sadhakanam dvitiyakam | 11 trtiyam putrakanam 
syac caturtham *samayisv atha (em. : samayesv atha Cod.) | yogininam pancamam syad evam 
kuryat kramena ca | 12 sarvavirasamayoge tatra avartayed girih | pafcasarna*mayim saktim 
(em. : maya Saktih Cod.) kali sa sakalavyaya | 13 navavirasamayogas (em. : nacavirasama- 


Alexis Sanderson 285 


On the day sacred to the Lineage [of his Mother-goddess the sponsor] should 
celebrate a Viramelapa in a pleasant, secluded house that is free of all distur- 
bances and full of the scent of flowers, fine incense, and fragrant powders. He 
should invite all those who maintain the observance of Bhairava, who know 
the discipline, are devoted to the Goddess, contented, intent on the Krama, 
Samayins, Putrakas, Sadhakas, Gurus, and Yoginis, the last enlightened or, if 
such cannot be found, at least devout. When he has brought those [initiates 
there, together with the Yoginis] *or even without them (conj.) he should pro- 
vide them with betel nuts and the like and offer them seats in the proper order 
[of precedence]. He should [first] worship these seats with the Pranava (om), 


yogam Cod.) tasyantah pravijrmbhate | tena tad viramelapam pijayet *paramesvari (corr. : 
paramesvari Cod.) | 14 arghaih puspais tatha dhüpaif candandgurucarcitaih | pratyekam ar- 
cayet tatra yathavibhavayogatah | 15 praticakrasya madhyastham pijayen *madyabhairavam 
(em. : madhyabhairavam Cod.) | krsnalohitaraktaksam paramamodavasitam | 16 mabana- 
ndakaram srestham jagadunmadakarakam | evam sampüjya madhyastham patrany esim pra- 
pūrayet | 17 mabákusumapürnáni pafica*ratnánvitáni (conj. : ratnacitani Cod.) ca | pascad 
vividham ahára(m) tesim deyam atandritam | 18 yad yasyabhimatam devi tat tasya "vitare 
sakrt (conj. [Aisa] : vicaret sakrt Cod.) | nānā mamsani citrani bhaksyany uccavacáni ca | 19 
lehya*peyani (corr. : pebyani Cod.) cüsyáni panani vividhani ca | katutiktakasayani madhu- 
ramlani yani ca | 20 evamadi-anekais ca tarpayec cakrapancakam | madhyabne bhüya sam- 
tarpya yavad ananda*mantharam (em. : manthanam Cod.) | 21 tato hy arghais tathà geyair 
vindvamsasvanais tatha | *Srotrotsavakarais (tent. conj. : srotrodakakarais Cod.) citrais tarpa- 
yec cakrapaficakam | 22 tatas taccakragà rasmyah prollasanti sutejitah | sphuranti mahada- 
nanda vilasasatasamkula(h) | nrtyanti ca hasanty uccaih valganti kridanotsukah | 23 pata- 
nti dhavanti *vamanti (conj. : vasanti Cod.) sarve vepanti khidyanti layanti tatra | jalpanti 
mantrani rahasyam anye sanmarmayuktani vacámsi cānye | 24 *chekoktayas (conj. : kekokta- 
pas Cod.) capi vicitrarüpab parasparam te pravadanti devi | kecic ca Thekaracanávir eti fke- 
cic ca mudravalim arabhante | 25ab kecic ca kaulagamajair vilasaih samsthanakair nartanam 
arabhante | 26 kecit tandavam drabhanti subhatah kecic ca tsarvoddhatah tkecid bhairava- 
bhivanahitamana jalpanti *kavyam (conj. : kalam Cod.) pare | kecid *bahum anekadha (tent. 
conj. : dvddasanekadha Cod.) pracalitam kurvanti tatroccakaih kecid rodanatatparah kim aparam 
kecid turajanty avilamt | 27 kecit *paficavilasajam (jam conj. : jà Cod.) rasavaram bhun- 
janti tatrotsukah ke cit} pravaranani cakravaranaih}*samdarsayanty (corr. : samdaríayaty Cod.) 
udbhatam | kecic tcakravinirgatenatsahasa svadeham alambati | kecid vantam *adanti (conj. : 
athamvi Cod.) ghora*vapusah (conj. : vapusam Cod.) *kecit tu hy atyutkatam (conj. : ka cittru- 
tantotkatam Cod.) | ke cin maithunam arabhanti ca pibanty atrodbhavam nirbharah | 28 evam 
viravarendravandyacarane melapam atyuttamam | virakhyam pravitatya rasminikaran uccaih 
samutpadyate drstvà yat prabhavanti tatkrama*pará (conj. : varā Cod.) kim và *bahu (em. : 
bahur Cod.) varnyate | samcarakramanirbharab priyatame *parve tathaikasayah (conj. [Aisa] : 
pamcaitathaikasaya Cod.) yad yasya prabalopadesa*karanam (conj. : kara + Cod.) maudrakramo- 
diritam | tat tasya pravijrmbbate param aho satyam na *caivanrtam (em. : caivámrtam Cod.) | 
29 viratandavam etat te maya samupavarnitam | yenasu krtamátrena sarvasiddhyarhata bhavet | 
30 kramajnanaikanipuno bhavaty eva hi *sadhakah (em. : sádhakam Cod.). 


286 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


presenting them such offerings as scented powder, incense, and flowers. Then 
he should invite the [guests] to sit on them, each in the appropriate circle. The 
first circle is of Gurus, the second of Sadhakas, the third of Putrakas, the fourth 
of Samayins, and the fifth of Yoginis. In this way he should gradually accomplish 
the Union of all the Vīras (sarvavirasamáyogal). As he does this the [sponsor- 
ing] Sadhaka (giri) should repeat the Power that consists of the fifty sounds [of 
speech]. [For] this is eternal Kali in her immanent form. The Union of the *Nine 
(conj.) Vīras becomes manifest within it.!” Then, O goddess, he should hon- 
our the assembly of Vīras (viramelapah) with offerings of guest water, flowers, 
incenses, and pastes of sandal-wood powder and camphor. He should worship 
each [participant] in this [assembly] to the extent that his wealth permits. In the 
centre of each circle he should worship the Bhairava that is Wine (Madyabhai- 
rava), dark red and red-eyed, redolent with the best of fragrances, the cause of 
the highest joy, the best [of liquids], the intoxicator of the whole world. After 
worshipping it thus in the centre he should fill cups for them [from it], which 
should [also] be well provided with the flowers of the human body and the five 
nectars. Then with great attentiveness he should serve them foods of the vari- 
ous kinds. Again and again, O goddess, he should give them whatever it is that 
they desire: meat of various sorts, diverse foods of the masticable variety, both 
exquisite and commonplace, foods to be licked, drunk, and sucked, drinks of 
many kinds, acrid, pungent, astringent, sweet, and sour. With various [offer- 
ings] such as these he should gratify the five circles. Then at midday he should 
gratify them again until they are overflowing with joy. Then he should please 
the five circles with guest water, songs, and diverse music of the lute and flute 
to delight their ears. At this the rays [of their awareness] shine forth with great 
intensity, vibrant, blissful, flooded by so many delights. They dance, laugh out 
loud, and leap about eager to revel. They collapse, run, vomit, tremble, become 
weary, and faint. Some voice Mantras, others the secret [teachings], and others 
words that contain the core teachings [of the Krama]. [Some] exchange clever 
*banter with double meanings (conj.), and some t...T. Some assume series of 
Mudras. Some begin to dance with playful gestures [and] postures taught in 
the Kaula scriptures. Others, who are warriors, commence the [wild] Tandava 
dance [of Siva], and some +...+. Others focus their minds in meditation on 
Bhairava, others give voice to *poetry (conj.), some *hold their arms above their 
heads in various postures and sway them from side to side (conj.), some abandon 
themselves there to loud weeping, and others become T... T. Others there ea- 


V7'The justification for the emendation of the manuscript's reading nacavira- here to navavira- 
is that it may refer to nine Viras as the regents of the nine groups of the fifty sounds: the vowels, 
the seven consonant groups, and the final xs. But the matter is not certain. It is tempting to 
propose sarvavira-. In either case the idea seems to be that the recitation of the goddess as the 
syllabary embodies internally the Union of Viras that the sponsor is establishing externally. 


Alexis Sanderson 287 


gerly devour the excellent liquid *that arises from the five Vilasas (conj.). Some 
vigorously display t...1. Some suddenly suspend their bodies t...t. Some, per- 
sonifying [A]ghora, eat vomit, and others *faeces (atyutkatam) (conj.).'’8 Some 
will engage in copulation and drink its product when replete. O you whose feet 
are worshipped by the foremost of Viras, when in this way it has expanded to 
the utmost the fused mass of the rays [of its consciouness] the supreme Virame- 
lapa comes into being. By beholding it [initiates] become intent on this Krama. 
What need is there for lengthy instruction? My beloved, [by engaging in this 
gathering] *on the sacred day (conj.) they are filled with the cyclical Krama, 
their minds as one. Whatever mighty teaching proclaimed in [this Satka on] 
the practice of the Mudras a person has received becomes completely clear to 
him [through this means]. Behold, the truth. This is indeed no lie. I have taught 
you this wild dance of the Viras (viratandavah), by celebrating which a Sadhaka 
quickly becomes able to accomplish any siddhih and supremely adept in the 
gnosis of the Krama. 


Neither the Kalikulakramarcana nor the Jayadrathayamala uses exactly 
Kalhana’s term cakramelakah (‘the circle gathering’) for this ritual, the former 
calling it cakrakrida (‘the circle revelry’) and the latter viramelapah (‘the gath- 
ering of heroes’) (= viramelakah). But the term does occur in Kashmirian liter- 
ature in what is evidently the appropriate sense in a story of the supernatural 
in the Kathasaritségara of Somadeva. There a band of Yoginis is said to go at 
the onset of night to a cakramelakah in Cakrapura and to return from it at 
its end.'”? Moreover, in the Kaula Kubjikamata we find the related expression 


'78For the use of the term atyutkatam in this sense see Nisisamcara, f.7v1-3, quoted 
in SANDERSON 2005a, p. 112, ll. 31-33). For ritual tasting of the body's excretions in ex- 
treme ‘non-dual practice’ (advaitacarah, nirvikalpacarah) see, e.g., Nisisamcara f. 34v (11.9c— 
10b): *atyutkatam sivambun (em. : atyutkata Sivammunh Cod.) ca pratar uttháya mantravit | 
astramantrena *samsodhya (corr. : samsodhyam Cod.) *mrnálamrtasamyutam (mrnalamrta em. : 
mrnamrta Cod.) | krtvà tu prasayen mantri yadicchet siddhim atmani ‘After rising at dawn the 
Sadhaka should purify excrement and urine with the Weapon-Mantra, combine it with phlegm 
and taste it if he desires siddhih for himself. It is also seen in a less testing form in the Krama 
in the vatikdprasanam taught as an element of daily practice in the Yonigahvara, vv. 212-221. 
This requires initiates when preparing the chalice for daily worship to swallow a pellet (vatikd, 
gutika) made from substances that include excrement (visvaksdram) and urine (sivdmbu). The 
preparation of this pellet is detailed in Kalikulakramarcana, f. 24v3—25v2. The pellet, we are 
told there, should have the size of the kernel of a jujube fruit (f. 24v5: badarasthisusammitam). 

V? Kathasaritsagara 123.212-213b: tarkdlam cátra jānāmi tato mátrganantarát | nirgatya 
yoginigramah parasparam abhasata | adya cakrapure smabhir gantavyam cakramelake “Then that 
time [of the onset of night] I noticed a band of Yoginis who came out from that group of Moth- 
ers and said to each other “Today we have to go to a cakramelakah in Cakrapura”; 123.221: 


288 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


yoginicakramelapah (‘a circle gathering of Yoginis’), described as loud with the 
sound of dancing and music.'*° Everything therefore, points to the conclusion 
that the protagonists of Kalhana’s report are our Krama Gurus Hrasvanatha and 
Cakrabhanu: their names, the reign to which Kalhana assigns them, the identi- 
fication of the cakramelakah, its place in the Krama, and its strongly antinomian 
character. 

It may be thought surprising that Hrasvanatha/Viranatha, a revered figure 
of a tradition whose literature appears to be so concerned with practices for 
the attainment of liberation-in-life, should be depicted as seeking revenge for 
the punishment of Cakrabhanu by performing an aggressive Tantric ritual. For 
Kalhana certainly does not question the tradition that Viranatha performed 
the ritual of chastisement against the king but only that it was the cause of the 
latter's death. But undertaking such rites is certainly not inconsistent with his 
standing as a Guru of the Krama. We have seen that Abhinavagupta reports 
Eraka to have devoted himself to the pursuit of supernatural power before he 
wrote the Kramastotra; but more striking, because it pertains directly to the 
present case, is the fact that a text of the Krama itself supports Kalhanas re- 
port of Hrasvanatha’s involvement in this domain in an incidental remark in 
the course of a discussion of an option of abbreviating the Krama worship by 
omitting three of its phases:'®! 


Those who achieve the highest rest within that [unobscured (nirdvarana-) state] 
simply by [performing those phases of worship up to the circle of the Multitude 
(vrndacakram) that are known collectively as] the Oral Instruction do not need 
to worship the circles of Emission, Stasis, and Withdrawal, but proceed, it is 


athásmin pascime yame yoginyas cakramelakat | agatya tah svayuktyà mam hrtvaivodapatan 
nabhah “Then during this last watch of the night the Yoginis returned from the cakramelakah 
and flew up into the sky by means of their miraculous power, taking me with them’, 

180 Kubjikamata 25.1 8ab: yoginicakramelapam nrtyagitaravakulam. 

181 Viahanayaprakasa (Triv.) 8.24—28: kathanād eva yesam tadvisrantir jayate para | "te 
srstisthitisamharacakrapeksam (te srsti conj. : srsti Ed.) na kurvate | vrndakramanantaram 
tair anakhyam cakram isyate | srstyadicakratritayam tanmate naiva pijyate | asmanmate 
"tu (conj. : pi Ed.) tad api "paripürnyartham (conj. : paripirnartham Ed.) isyate | 
etatsamarudhivasat prabhavo hi pravartate | etadvimarsa*sambhitam (conj. : sambhita Ed.) 
viravalyaditarpanat | dsid *vamanavirasya (em. : vamanaviryasya Ed.) *vidvesastambhana- 
dikam (vidvesa conj. : yadvisnu Cod.). For the emendation vidvesastambhanadikam in place 
of the evidently corrupt reading yadvisnustambhanddikam cf., e.g., Kirana, £.71v2 (50.14cd): 
*vasikaranavidvesau stambhanady (vasi corr. : vasi Cod. e vidvesau conj. : vidveso Cod.) 
adhama matah, Somasambhupaddhati, vol.3, p.47, v.55ab: máranoccátanadvesastambba- 
nartham tu daksine; Amsumadagama 13.36cd: vasyakarsanavidvesastambhanoccatanadikam; 
and Kriyakalagunottara, f. Á6v1—2: uccatanam tatha karmam vidvesam stambhamaranam | 
kilanam cangabhedam ca kurute cintitena tu. 


Alexis Sanderson 289 


held, directly from the phase of the Multitude to the circle of the Nameless. In 
their view, then, these three [intervening] circles are not necessary. But in my 
view they should be included, for the sake of completeness. For immersion in 
them is the source of [supernatural] power. It was through his deep awareness 
of these, by gratifing the sequence of Vīras (viraval;) and the rest [that are to be 
worshipped in them], that the Vira Vamana [was able successfully to accomplish 
the rituals that] caused dissension [among our enemies] and immobilized [their 
armies] (vidvesastambhanddikam). 9? 


This evidence should caution us against the tendency to be misled by 
the focus apparent in this or that branch of the surviving Saiva literature 
into assuming that the groups who produced and followed these texts were 
equally restricted in the range of their rites. Just as the Saiddhantika and non- 
Saiddhantika domains were less disjunct in practice than the doctrines artic- 
ulated by their leading theoreticians, so, we see, a Guru of the Krama, for all 
the apparent dedication of his core tradition to purely transcendentalist self- 
realization, could draw as occasion arose on a wider range of practice for prag- 
matic purposes. In this case the rites in which he is said to have excelled have 
a close relation to his role as a servant of the state. For in the light of Kalhana’s 
report that Hrasvanatha was Yasaskara’s minister of war and peace it surely can- 


I? Propitiating the deity for immobilization (stambhanam) is not restricted to this context. 
The texts speak also of vakstambhanam ‘paralysing speech’, garbhastambhanam ‘preventing a 
foetus from being born’, and of stopping wind, water, or fire (vayutoyagnistambbanam); see, 
e.g, Picumata, f. 3571-2: stambhane sarvabhitanam *vayutoyagnistambhane (conj. : vayustobha- 
gni Cod.) | stambhane parasainyasya *vacah stambhe (conj. : vacastambhes Cod.) tathaiva ca | 
dsanastambhane caiva garbhadinan tathaiva ca | sastam pipilikamadhya(m) aksasütram varā- 
nane. Three kinds of stambhanam, to stop the onset of an enemy army, to silence the speech 
[of an opponent], or to prevent the birth of a child [no doubt as a future dynastic rival], are 
taught in Jayarathayamala, Satka 3, f. 101v4—5 (14.126—127): stambhayed gamanodyuktam api 
sainyam satakratob | evamvidhena vidhina vacasam stambhayisyati | garbham và (deva)devesi 
*stambhayen (corr. : stambhaven Cod.) natra samsayah. But protecting the kingdom by im- 
mobilizing the army of the enemy so that it cannot advance is much the most commonly 
mentioned, often being listed on a par with vidvesah, uccdtanam and other primary pragmatic 
propitiations (karma), which implies that when no specific target of stambhanam is mentioned 
it is to be understood as parasainyastambhanam ‘immobilization of the army of an enemy’; cf., 
e.g., Valadharin, Kriyasamgrabapaddhati, f. 9 1v2—3: (antike paustike caiva vidvesádikramena tu | 
stambhane *parasainyánam (corr. : parasainyáni Cod.). To propitiate the deity for vidvesah/vi- 
dvesanam is to seek to protect one's own side by turning one’s allied enemies against each other; 
see, e.g., Paippaladavasádisatkarmapaddhati, p. 6, ll. 7—9: fatrus ced *anyavidvistah (em. : anya- 
vaddhistah Ed.) syad anyadvesatatparah | tato sau nibsapatnab san vajyabhogam samasnute | 
tasmád raja visesena ripudvesanam ácaret. 


290 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


not be thought coincidental that an author of the Krama, when remembering 
with approval his predecessor's expertise in this ancillary domain, should have 
singled out for mention these rites of state protection. 

There are other reports of liberationist Gurus engaging in destructive rites 
of this kind, which, while hagiographical and therefore unreliable as records of 
history, nonetheless demonstrate that the co-existence of these extremes was 
not considered aberrant. A striking parallel is found in the Great Perfection 
(rDzogs chen) tradition of the rNying ma pa Buddhists of Tibet, which has 
much in common with the Krama by virtue of its emphasis on enlightenment 
through direct experience of the Great Primordial Purity (gzhi ka dag chen po), 
this being conceived in a manner strongly reminiscent of the Krama as an in- 
nate, self-established state of unbounded freedom (ye gro/) that manifests dif- 
ferentiation in consciousness but is untouched in its essence by the dichotomies 
of cognition and the cognized, conceptual and non-conceptual awareness, lib- 
eration and bound existence (nirvanam and samsdarah). For an early authority 
in this tradition, gNubs chen Sangs rgyas ye shes, is remembered for having de- 
stroyed a rebel army through the power of aggressive Mantras (ngan sngags). 9? 

Both the Krama and rDzogs chen present themselves as the ultimate ap- 
proach to reality, transcending all lower levels of revelation. The Krama identi- 
fies, as we shall see, a level of higher practice within itself that by reaching the 
goal through pure intuition transcends the gradualist system of Krama worship, 
while that system is said to transcend the Kali worship of the Uttaramnaya, 
which itself is presented as the summit of a subordinate Sakta hierarchy that 
leads down to its base in the non-Sakta Saiva traditions.'** Similarly rDzogs 
chen, which like the Krama culminates in practice for sudden enlightenment, 
locates itself as the Atiyoga teaching at the summit of a hierarchy that descends 
through the teachings of the Anuyogatantras, Mahayogatantras, Yogatantras, 
and Ubhayatantras to the Kriyatantras, which in turn are ranked above the Sū- 
tras of the Mahayana substrate. But neither the Krama nor rDzogs chen cuts 
itself off from these lower levels. For they are essential to their survival. This is 
partly because both draw their meaning from these wider contexts as gnostic 
disciplines that transcend the Tantric systems from within. But it is also because 
the systems defined as lower provide these Sakta and Buddhist Tantric adepts 


183See ACHARD 1999, pp. 17-22. He is said to have been ordained by Santaraksita, therefore 
during the reign of Khri srong Ide bstan (r. 755—797), and to have founded a community of 
lay Tantric initiates (ibid., p. 17). 

'84For this hierarchy see footnote 363 on p. 344. 


Alexis Sanderson 291 


of sudden enlightenment with the means of operating on other levels as occa- 
sion demands and patronage expects. Thus gNubs chen Sangs rgyas ye shes was 
also learned in the Anuyoga- and Mahayogatantras; and these are the probable 
source of the Mantras, no doubt of the deities Vajrakilaya or Yamàntaka, with 
which he is said to have destroyed the rebels.!5? 


The Sripithadvadasika 


Attributed to Cakrabhanu we have only one short text, the Sripithadvadasika, 
and no reports of other works. This text is not mentioned by name in any 
Kashmirian source, nor does the author confirm his identity by stating his po- 
sition in the Kashmirian Krama’s transmission. But it is included in a codex 
which, though Nepalese, contains other Kashmirian Krama works from this 
lineage, '®° a line is quoted from it without attribution in a text of Krama in- 
spiration by the Kashmirian Ramyadeva,'®’ and the author describes himself 
in the final verse as ‘one whose body is adorned with [pieces of] human bone 
and a skull-bowl', 55 which agrees with the report already mentioned that the 
Kashmirian Cakrabhanu was a Mahavratin ascetic.!®? Furthermore, it contains 
a verse which brings to mind that ascetic's punishment by Ya£askara: ^? 


When [again] may I follow my path in the company of proud Viras at the onset 
of night, my mind made blissful through withdrawal, behaving T...... t of the 
Devikula?!?! 


185See AcHARD 1999, p. 19, footnote 30. 

186See the details of the Kalikakulapancasataka ms in the bibliography, p. 437. 

187 Syipithadvadasika, v.3cd (f.93v5—96r1) is quoted in his commentary on v.47 of the 
Bhávopabárastotra: *nirastasastrarthavikalpajala (Ed. : nirastasastasavikalpajalà Cod.) *devyah 
(Ed. : devyah Cod.) smasane karavirakákhye. 

188 ¢yipithadvadasika, f. 95r1—3 (v. 12 and colophon): pithéravindadalakam sivaéaktigarbham 
virasthikandalavibhüsitavigrabena | stutva maya subhaphalam yad avaptam adya tenaéu 
Sika samapta. 

15? Arnasimha, Mahdnayaprakasa, v. 157, cited in footnote 194 on p. 294. 

190 Svipithadvadasika, f. 94v1—2. (v. 8): ratrydgame garvitavirasárdham (garvita em. : gavita 
Cod.) samharanananditacittavyttih | devikulat+ syatvicestitah tsyan tmarganuyayi bhavita kadā- 
ham. 

I?! can offer no compelling emendation for the whole of the corrupt reading devikulaf 
syavicestitahsyan}. Perhaps the final part was -vicestitah san. I see no acceptable solution to 
devikula + sya if à and sya are sound. If one or both are corrupt, the possibilities of restoration, 
such as devikulácáryavicestitah san, are too numerous for any one of them to carry conviction. 


292 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


The Krama Lineage from Cakrabhanu to Arnasimha 


The Old Kashmiri Ma/anayaprakáía and its Sanskrit commentary venerate this 
unrepentant Guru as the first of the Order of the Disciples (sisyaughah), follow- 
ing Mangala, who alone constitutes the Order of Siddhas (siddhaughah), and 
the Human Order (manavaughal), which comprises [Jfana]netra, the Rajfi 
[Keyüravati], and Hrasvanatha; and it declares that he initiated eight disciples, 
one of whom, Raji Iéani, was the source of the lineage that led to the author 
of the commentary.'” 

From the spiritual descendants of Cakrabhanu we have the Astika of his 
disciple Prabodhanatha, the Paramarcanatrimsika'?’ and Cittasamtosatrimsika 
of Naga, and the Mahanayaprakasa of Naga’s disciple Kulacarya Arnasimha. 
The last of these works provides the details of the line of succession that enables 
us to assign them to it. Its author reports that the tradition has reached him 
through two lines of descent (gurusamtatih) from the two among Cakrabhanu’s 


pupils whose names survive, [sani and Prabodhanatha: 
1. I£àni + Nandaka — Sajjana > Some$vara — himself. 
2. Prabodha — Jaiyaka — Pankaka — Naga — himself. 


Two of these he describes as ascetics who, like Cakrabhanu, observed the [Kapa- 
lika] Mahavrata: Iéani (pazicamudravibhüsità), and Jaiyaka (mahāvratī). Pra- 
bodha he describes both as an ascetic (tapodhanah) and, like Hrasvanatha, as 
the foremost of Vīras (virendrap). ?* 


1?? Old Kashmiri Mahanayaprakasa 9.5 and commentary. On the Kashmirian use of the term 
Rajfii for a female Sakta (+ Modern Kashmiri 767) see SANDERSON 2005a, p. 126, footnote 
91. 

3Verse 2 (f.34v5—6) is quoted by the South Indian Krama author Mahesvarananda 
(Mahárthamafijariparimala, p. 108: yad uktam arcanatrimsikayam). 

19^ Arnasimha, Mabánayaprakása, ff. 11915—121r (vv. 152-169): 152 udgitha *pithaja (em. : 
pithayá Cod.) srimanmangalanandanirbbara | sadasadbbasanávesavarjità tim aham sraye | 
153 tatah srimacchivanandanathaguruvaram sada | lokottaramahajnanacaksusam pranamamy 
aham | 154 srimatkeyuravatyakhyà pithajajhanaparagd | khacakracarini yeyam tām aham 
naumi bhaktitah | 155 maháviravaro yo säv srimadvamanasamjnakah | devidbamni sada- 
ridhas tam vande kramabhaskaram | 156 tatah srimaccakrabhanur devatanayadesikah | 
mahévratadharo yas tam vande "ham paradhimagam | 157 srimadisanikakhya ya paricama- 
dravibhisita | akramakrama*samtanakovidam (samtana em. : santana Cod.) tim namamy 
aham | 158 mabanayaparajfiana*vibbüsitamanah (conj. : vibhisitah Cod.) sada | Ssri- 
mannandakanamá yas tam namami khadhimagam | 159 Srimatsajjananamanam *raha- 


Alexis Sanderson 293 


The Astika of Prabodhanatha 


It is unlikely that the Aszi&a that has reached us, a hymn to the Goddess in 
eight stanzas, is the work of a Prabodhanatha other than that mentioned by 
Arnasimha. The text has come to us in the already mentioned Nepalese codex 
containing other Kashmirian Krama works, and although no attributed cita- 
tion from it occurs in the surviving Kashmirian literature the first two verses 
commonly appear in the Kashmirian recitation-text of the Bahuriipagarbhasto- 
tra, a hymn to Svacchandabhairava that is attributed along with a frame-text 
to the Lalitasvacchandabhairava, and whose recitation is a standard preliminary 
in Saiva ritual in Kashmir.!°° The two verses are placed at the end of the hymn 
proper and in this position enable it to reflect the two visualization-texts that 
are recited before it, these being not only of Svacchandabhairava but also of his 


consort Aghoresvari: ?ó 


You I praise, the unborn beloved of Siva in the lotus of [my] heart, seated in 


syakramanirbharam (rahasya corr. : rabasyam Cod.) | bhedabhedakalankais tu varjitam pra- 
namamy aham | 160 nirmalasphatikaprakhyahrdayam vigatámayam | srimatsomesvaram 
vande mahdsasanaparagam | 161 teneha krpayà mahyam sampradatto mahakramah | 
yenábam bhavanirvanakalankair navrto "niíam | 162 atraiva kathyate ‘smabhir dvitiya 
gurusamtatih | pithoditamahimndayarahasyakramanirbhara | 163 Ssricakrabhanupadais tu 
paramartharthaparagaih | kytaprasado virendrah sriprabodhatapodhanah | 164 tenāhi- 
taprasüdas tu jaiyakakhyo mabavrati | jhanasamkranti*nirbhrantih (conj. : nibhrintah 
Cod.) svanandanandananditab | 165 tenapi "Sripankakakhyo (corr. : sripankakakhye 
Cod.) dattasrikramasasanah | bhavatrdbhrantivibhrantividbvamsoccandadidhitib | 166 tenapi 
srinaganamáa desikapravaragranih | *krtaprasādah (em. : krtaprasádo Cod.) paramahlado- 
dayavighürnitab | 167 tendpy aham *mahāmnāyavare smin (em. : mahimndyavarosmin 
Cod.) paramadbhute | abhisiktah krpáfantacitten"avrtatejasa (em: avrttatejasá Cod.) | 168 
ittham proktà samtatis tu dvitiyaisa mahanaye | niravesasamavesa*camatkavaughanirbhara (conj. 
[7 v. 3d; see here footnote 356 on p.340] : camatkaradyanirbhara Cod.) | 169  ittham 
paramparodbhitah sadgurukramavistarah | sthito yam divyasiddhakhya*manujatakramena ca 
(manujáta em. : manujfidta Cod.). 

195See, e.g., Kalüdiksapaddhati A, f. 5r11—16 (at the commencement of the initiation cere- 
mony, after the worship of Ganega and Pustakavagisvari): tato vighnarajam pustakavagisim ca 
suprasannàm bhavayitva taddattam svabhivanchitam varam bhavanaya grhitva sribhairavanatha- 
prasannikaranaya mantrarajagarbham sribahuriipagarbhastotram pathet; ibid., £.9r12—-14: tataf 
ca sribahuripagarbhastavarajapathanantaram sadadhvadiksadbivasárambhap. 

196 Astika, vv. 1-2 (N, f. 96v1—3) and the modified Baburzpagarbhastotra, vv. 35-36 (K): 
*sarvakaranakalapakalpitollasasamkulasamadhivistaram (sarva K : sadya N) | bardakokanada- 
samsthitam api tvàm pranaumi fivavallabhám ajam (harda K : harmma N) | sarvajantu- 
hrdayabjamandalodbhitabhavamadhupanalampatam (sarva K : sadya N © mandalodbhita K : 
mandalodbhuta N) | *varnabhedavibhavantarasthitam (K : varnabhedavigatilivallabhim N) 
tvam pranaumi *bhavajalabhedinim (N : sivavallabhám ajam K). 


294 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


deepest consciousness on your throne that is full of the radiance created by all 
the Causes. You I praise, who are ever eager to drink the sweet wine exuded 
by the lotus-Mandala in the innermost awareness of all living creatures, hidden 
within the pervasive power that is the variety of sounds, rending the snare of 
bound existence. 


Since the context is the Krama the Causes intended here are probably the seven 
ascending deities Indra, Brahma, Visnu, Rudra, Isvara, Sadasiva, and Bhairava 
that form Kalis throne in the worship taught by the Kalikulakramasadbhiva, 
becoming lifeless (pretah) in her presence, resorbed as her state prevails, or, in 
the idiom of the primal sacrifice in the Karavira cremation ground, offered as 
sacrifices to her, only Bhairava remaining intact, alive but comatose. !?” 

A verse from another, unnamed hymn to the Goddess by Prabodha is cited 
by Ramyadeva and Jayaratha:?? 


You transcend whatever nature I may conceive as higher than you. Nor can 
I conceive of any reality, however low, in which you are not present in your 
entirety. 


His identity with the Krama author is certain. For Arnasimha calls the latter 
Prabodha the Ascetic (virendrah sriprabodhatapodhanah) and both Ramyadeva 
and Jayaratha refer to this Prabodha in the same way, the first calling him Ascetic 
Prabodhanatha (tapasviprabodhandathah) and the second simply ‘the venerable 
Ascetic’ (sritapasvi). Another verse has been cited by Siva[svamin] Upadhyaya, 
who calls him similarly the King among Ascetics (tapasvirajah). That this is 
from the same hymn is not certain; but it is probable, since both verses are in 
the Arya metre: ? 


197 Kalikulakramasadbhava, f. 1v3 (1.19): for text and translation see p. 263; and f. 3r6 (1.80c— 
81): tatas tu *sarve (corr. : sarvva Cod.) tatrasthah pasutve kalpitah sakrt | mahabhairava ekas tu 
sammürcchan tisthate tu "sab (em : yah Cod.) | anye tu karanah sarve bhaksitas tatra lilaya. But 
when read as praise of Aghore$vari in the context of the recitation of the Bahuriipagarbhastotra 
the Causes would be understood as five in accordance with the system of the Svacchanda, the 
same without Indra and Bhairava (Brahma to Sadasiva). That these two verses have been added 
to the Baburüpagarbbastotra is apparent from their absence from the text as it appears together 
with its frame in the commentary of Anantasakti (Baburüpagarbhastotravisamapadasamketa) 
and the Kaladiksapaddhati A, ff. 5v1—9110. 

P*5Ramyadeva on Bhavopaharastotra, vv. 4—5 (p.10), and Jayaratha on Tantrāloka 4.125 
(vol. 2, p. 131): parataratayapi rüpam yad yat kalayami tat tad adharam te | adharatarapi na 
kalaná sé kácid yatra na sthitasy abhitah. 

19? Vijnanabhairavavivrti, p. 90, ll. 19-22: suvisamamamatadamstravidalitajanadhairyasonita- 
pipasuh | aham iti pisica esa tvatsmrtimátrena kimkaribhavati. 


Alexis Sanderson 295 


It is enough to turn our thoughts to you to tame the T’, this demon that thirsts 
to drink the blood that is the sense of men, tearing them open with its terrible 
fangs, belief in ‘mine’. 


The Paramarcanatrimsika and Cittasamtosatrimsika of Naga 


As for Naga, he identifes himself as the author of the two -trimsika texts in 
their final verses”°° but does not confirm his identity as a member of this lin- 
eage by naming his Guru. However, it is unlikely that they are not by the Nàga 
whom Arnasimha identifies as the pupil of Pankaka, since both works use the 
terminology of the Kashmirian Krama. Their subject is the attainment of en- 


lightenment through sudden immersion in the dynamic purity of consciousness 
(sabasasamadbhip):??! 


Is that [true] worship if in it one does not experience the surge of expanded 
consciousness within each and every movement of cognition, taking hold of 
the trance of sudden enlightenment, flooded with radiant, pure awareness? 


a process articulated in the language of the Krama and with reference to ele- 
ments of its cyclical model of the flow of cognition, but without delineating 


the phases of the Krama' distinctive sequence of meditative worship:??? 


Is that [true] worship, in which one does not let go of the travails of one's un- 
liberated existence by gazing directly at the dynamism that, beautiful in the 


200 Paramarcanatrimsika, ff. 40v7—41r4 (31 and colophon): anavacchinnacidvyomaparama- 
mrtabrmhitah | nagabhidho vyadhad etim paramarcanatrimsikam. iti frimabamdábhesvaranaga- 
vipascidviracita paramárcanatrimsikà samáptà and Cittasamtosatrimsika, £.4913-6 (v. 31 and 
colophon): niravaranacidvyomaparamamrtanirbharah | nagabhidhinas tad idam cittasam- 
tosakam vyadhdt. iti Srindgavipascidviracita cittasamtosatrimsika samapta. 

201 Paramarcanatrimsika, ff. 35v5—36r1 (v.7): yatra sahasasamadhisamsrayah prasphuradvi- 
malabodhanirbharah | sphitasamvidudayam na vindate sarvavrttisu kim etad arcanam. For 
the Krama concept of sadhasam, literally ‘violent assault, aggression’ see, e.g., Chumma- 
samketaprakasa, £.3r1-2 (vv.28c-29b); maboddama sihasam padam acyutam | samáru- 
hya bathàd asmi suprabuddhadasanvitah, Vatülandthasütra 1: mahdsdhasavrttya svarüpala- 
bhah; Vátülanatbasütravrtti, opening verse: samghattaghattanabaloditanirvikarafünyátifünyapa- 
dam avyayabodbasaram | sarvatra khecaradría pravirajate yat tan naumi sahasavaram guru- 
vaktragamyam; ibid., concluding verse: iti paramarabasyam vagvikalpaughamuktam bhava- 
vibhavavibhagabhrantimuktena samyak | krtam anupamam uccaih kenacic cidvikasad akalita- 
parasattasahasollasavrttya; Mabanayaprakasa (Triv.) 2.28—29: alamgrásakramab so yam maba- 
sübasajanmabhüh. See also Malinivijayavartika 2.86: mahásábasasamyogavilinakhilavrttikab 
punjibhitasvarasmyoghanirbharibhitamanasah,; — Tantriloka 5.84: mahásábasasamyogavi- 
linákhilavrttikah | punjibhite svarasmyoghe nirbharibhiya tisthati. 

2? Paramarcanatrimsika, fF. 35v3—5 (v.6): khecariprabhrtipancakatmana vyaptim ambaraga- 
tam nibhalayan | hrdvikdsasubhagam bhavapado yatra muncati na kim tad arcanam. 


296 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


unfolding of the heart [of awareness], pervades the sky [of consciousness] as the 
[cycle of its] five [flows] from Khecari to [Vyomavamesvari]? 


This is the ‘true worship’ and ‘delighting of the mind’ that give the works 
their titles. In the second Naga celebrates his own attainment of this enlighten- 
ment through the oral transmission (kathanam) from master to disciple that the 
Krama opposes to the worship of the phases as a higher means of liberation: 


By great good fortune I stand today flooded with the blissful relish of the nec- 
tar of the unlocated consciousness that surges up from [its] unfettered, spotless 
ground, astonished by the fruition of the instruction in the inexpressible prac- 
tice that I obtained from the heart of my true teacher's oral teaching. 


The Mahanayaprakasa of Arnasimha 


Arnasimhas Mahánayaprakása, though permeated by this spirit of direct in- 
sight, reviews the successive phases of the Krama worship that constitutes 
the base of practice, explaining how each reflects the core structure of con- 
sciousness, leading progressively from the contemplation of this in the body 
(pithacakram) by means of the preliminary worship of the Pitha Uddiyana, its 
Karavira cremation ground, its site-guardian (Ksetrapala) Balotkata, the As- 
sembly of Yoginis/Sakinis therein (melapah), and the Great Sacrifice [that it 
enacted] (mahdyagah), to the worship of (1) the circle of the five Flow God- 
desses (vihadevyah) Vyomavamesvari, Khecari, Bhiicari, Samharabhaksini, and 
Raudresvari (paricavabacakram), (2) the circle of Illumination (prakasacakram) 
in which the faculties reach out towards the object, (3) the circle of Bliss (#nan- 
dacakram), in which the faculties incorporate the objects of the senses, (4) the 
circle of Embodiment (marticakram) in which that object-awareness reverts 
into the perceiver’s awareness of himself as their perceiver, (5) the circle of the 
sixty-four Siddhas (vrndacakram), in which that self-awareness reverts to its en- 
lightened core, (6) the worship of the Guru lineage beginning from Mangala 
as the leader of those sixty-four, and finally the extroversion of the enlightened 
state realized in the vrndacakram and embodied in the lineage through the four 
circles of (7) Emission (srsticakram), (8) Stasis (sthiticakram), (9) Withdrawal 
(samharacakram), and (10) the Nameless (the anakhyacakram of the thirteen 
Kalis), in which the perfect interpenetration (sdmarasyam) of the inner and 
outer states is fully realized. 


203 Cittasamtosatrimsika, f. 48v2—5 (v. 29): svacchandanirmalapadoditanirniketasamvitsudha- 
rasacamatkrtinirbharo smi | distyadya sadgurumukbambujamadhyalabdhanuccaryacarakathano- 
dayavismito 'smi. On enlightenment in the Krama through oral transmission see p. 334. 


Alexis Sanderson 297 


The Cidgaganacandrika of Srivatsa 


From the same lineage comes the Cidgaganacandrika of Srivatsa. In the form 
of a hymn to Kali it covers the same ground as Arnasimha’s work but also goes 
beyond it in detail and incidental elaboration. For example, while Arnasimha 
describes only the nature of the circle of the Nameless Srivatsa provides a treat- 
ment of each of its thirteen Kalis, building on the verses dedicated to them in 
Eraka’s Kramastotra. More than a third of its 312 verses are closely related 
to Arnasimha’s text, and these parallels are best understood as rephrasings of 
Arnasimha’s formulations in a more poetic, tighter style.?” 

Srivatsa tells us that the Krama lineage extends from Sivananda to Soma 
comprising both the Order of the Human Masters (zánavaughah [Sivananda, 
Keyüravati, and Hrasvanatha]) and those from Cakrabhanu onwards, that is to 
say, the Order of the Disciples (sisyaughah),”°° and that he himself had received 
the tradition from Soma’s son.”°” If this Soma is the Someévara that Arnasimha 


204 Cidgaganacandrika (CGC), vv. 224—250. Cf. Arnasimha, Mahdnayaprakdsa, ff. 125v3— 
128r4 (vv. 212—236). The lost Kramastotra's verses on the thirteen Kalis are preserved through 
quotation in Jayaratha's Tantralokaviveka as follows, in the order of their worship (pijakramah) 
as taught in all the Krama scriptures: (1) vol. 3, p. 158, Il. 13-16 (Srstikali) —^ CGC 221-224; 
(2) p. 163, Il. 5-8 (Sthitinasakali) —^ CGC 225-226; (3) p. 167, ll. 1-4 (Samharakalt) — CGC 
227—228; (4) p. 160, l. 16-161, I. 2 (Raktakali) —^ CGC 229—230; (5) not quoted but men- 
tioned on p. 202, Il. 1-2 (emend svakalim in Ed. to sukalzm) (Sukali) —^ CGC 231; (6) p. 165, 
ll. 10-13 (Yamakali) —^ CGC 232-233; (7) p. 169, Il. 9—12 (Mrtyukali) —^ CGC 234-235; 
(8) p. 173, Il. 16-19 (Bhadrakali) —^ CGC 236-238; (9) p. 181, 1l. 9-12 (Paramarkakali) — 
CGC 239—240; (10) p. 178, Il. 10-13 (Martandakali) — CGC 241—242; (11) p. 183, ll. 8-11 
(Kalagnirudrakali) — CGC 243—246; (12) p. 185, Il. 4-7 (Mahakalakali) — CGC 247-248; 
(13) p. 188, Il. 1-4 (Mahabhairavaghoracandakali) —^ CGC 249. 

205T have noted the following correspondences: Cidgaganacandrika (CGC) 75-80 — 
Arnasimha (A) 8-13; CGC 85-93 — A 20, 22-29; CGC 100-177 — A 30-31, 33-37, 
40-58, 61-69, 75—82, 84—85, 87—89, 91-94, 96-98, 100—103, 105—112, 114-116, 118— 
120, 122-134, 137-139, 141—145, 147—151, 170—178, 180—209, 211—221, 226c-227, 233, 
236—240, 243—245, 248; CGC 250 — A 227; CGC 290-296 — A 237-249. 

206The verse of the Cidgaganacandrika that mentions the lineage of Krama Gurus is in- 
tractably corrupt in its edition, like much of the text, and I offer only a partial diagnosis of its 
errors (v. 300): yah Sivat prabhrti somapascimas tvatkramaikarasiko gurukramah | *manavaugha 
(conj. : dnandgram Ed.) iba cakrabhanuto *yas tad etad ubhayam tvad dyayau [conj. : yas tvam 
etad ubhayam tvayá yaya Ed.]) ‘From you has come the line of Gurus devoted solely to your 
Krama, from Siva [Sivananda] to Soma, both the Manavaugha and that from Cakrabhanu’. 
For the distinction between the Human Order and the Order of Disciples that has suggested 
the emendation to manavaugha of ánanágram, which yields no appropriate sense that I can 
discern, see p, 294, and footnote 221 on p. 303 . 

207 Cidgaganacandrika, v. 304ab: somaputram f apanesya } madgatas tvatkramo dya kim api 


298 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


has identified as one of his two Krama Gurus, then Srivatsa, as the pupil of 
his son, will have been approximately a generation later than Arnasimha; but 
nothing compels this identification.??? 

In spite of the intimate connection with Arnasimhas Mahdnayaprakdasa 
it is doubtful that the text was composed in Kashmir. The only recorded 
manuscripts of the text are South Indian and all the citations of the text known 
to me occur in South Indian works or in late medieval authors familiar with 
those works."? Moreover, Srivatsa declares his connection with Pürnapitha, 
in verses that convey in spite of their corrupt state that he came to that place 
to propitiate the Goddess and then composed his hymn.?!? This is one of the 
four principal Sakta Pithas, better known as Pürnagiri, the other three being 
Uddiyana, Jalandhara, and Kamarüpa. Though its exact location does not ap- 
pear from our sources, the Kumarikhanda of the Manthanabhairava places it 
in the Bhairavaérama on a mountain in Desh, that is to say, in the west-central 


stuto maya "Today I have hymned in part your Krama that has come to me *from* (?) Soma’s 
son. 

25 RAsrOGr (1979, p. 196-197) assigns Srivatsa to a.D. 1125-1175 by proposing his identity 
with the poet Srivatsa mentioned as a contemporary by Mankha in his Srikanthacarita (25.81— 
82). I see no reason to accept this. It rests on the flimsiest of arguments, namely the identity 
of the names and the fact that the author of the Cidgaganacandrika has written in the Kavya 
style. 

209 Mahesvarananda quotes vv.5, 23, 108, 117, 121, 128, 148, 195, 197, and 223 in 
his Maharthamanjariparimala (pp.27, 161, 98, 90, 91, 93, 96, 148, 119, and 126), 
Amrtanandanatha vv. 9, 13, 32, 40, 72, and 212 in his Yoginibrdayadipikà (pp. 51, 173, 11, 
94, and 18), Mahesvaranandanatha, v. 212 in his Saubbagyánandasandoba (p. 161), and Kaiva- 
lyasrama a verse not included in the edition in his commentary Saubhagyavardhani on the 
Saundaryalabari, p. 5 (amba tavakapadadvayarcakas tuanmayo bhavati nátra vismayah | yas 
tvayaisa vivaso vasikrtah saktir eva samabhic chivah svayam). Another verse not included in 
the edition has been quoted in the South Indian [svarapratyabhijnasitravimarsinivyakhya, p. 9, 
ll. 1-5 (sricidgaganacandrikayam ca: adimantimagrhitavarnarasyatmikaham iti ya svatab pratha | 
mantraviryam iti sadhitagamais tanmayo gurur asi tuum ambiká. The text has also been cited by 
Bhaskararaya in his commentary on the Lalitàsabasranama, pp. 57 and 157. 

210 Cidgaganacandrika, vv. 307c-308b: pürnapitham *upagamya (conj. : avagamya Ed.) 
mangale *tvatprasádanakrte (conj. : tvatprasadam akrte Ed.) maya krtah | esa cidgaganacandrika- 
stavah *kim na (conj. : kin nu Ed.) váfichitam asita mam prati ‘O Mangala, what wish has the 
Cidgaganacandrikà not granted me, this hymn that I have composed to propitiate you after 
*coming to* (conj.) Pürnapitha?'; v. 312: "pürnapithe krtavidhis (conj. : purnapitha krtamsiddhes 
Ed.) *tvadbhavastavam (tvad conj. : tad Ed.) ddarat | *vasanartham (conj. : vanarartham Ed.) 
mahaguhyam srivatso vidadhe Tsatuf “After having completed the rites [of propitiation] in 
Pürnapitha (conj.) Srivatsa has composed [this] most esoteric hymn to your nature in order to 
inculcate it [in himself]'. 


Alexis Sanderson 299 


Deccan Plateau, and the Kubjibamata locates it more narrowly in the forests 
of the Sahya mountains (sahyddrih), that is to say, in the northern part of the 
Ghats that bound this region on the west.?!! 


The Old Kashmiri Mabanayaprakáía and its Sanskrit commentary 


Another Mahanayaprakasa, also called Mahárthaprakasa, has come down to us 
from this lineage, comprising verses in Old Kashmiri by one Sitikantha.?'? The 
work is accompanied by a Sanskrit commentary, which the editor asserts to 
be by the same author.?P There is certainly no statement of separate author- 
ship. But there are elements in the text itself that make it unlikely that this was 
an auto-commentary. In an introductory verse not included with those of the 
published text the commentator declares that in order to expound the ultimate 
nature of the Mahartha he will make an effort (wdyamah) to explain the vernac- 


211 Manthanabbairava, Kumarikhanda, on the Pitha of Pürnagiri, f. 19r3: kva cild) desam 
tatha ramyam desanüm uttamam *viddhi (conj. : nidhih Cod.) | disadaksinadigbhage daksina- 
pathamandalam; £.19v8: bbairavás tatra pancasat pürnagiryám samagatah | tena tad bhairavam 
ksetram bhairavisiddhidayakam; f. 2018: evam devyah svarüpena *pitrnapitham (corr. : pavva- 
pitham Cod.) udabrtam | pürnávvà prakata jfieya. Pirnagiri is equated with Sahya by an un- 
named Pagcimamnaya source quoted without attribution by Mahesvarananda on Mahdartha- 
manjari 39: srnoti Sabdam olambe preksate puskaradvaye | karálambe bhidhatte ca sahye jighrati 
gandhavat | matange tu mahapithe vyapnoty akhilam isvari. Olamba etc. in this verse corre- 
spond to Oddiyana, Jalandhara, Pürna, and Kamarüpa, as can be inferred from the parallel in 
Satsahasrasamhità 2.20, which associates the first four of same faculties with these Pithas: śro- 
tukámáà tu oddakhye vaktukamd tu jálake | pustyarthe caiva purnakhye kimakhye ceksanecchaya. 
Cf. Kubjikàmata 2.63—72 (~Satsahasrasamhita 4/5.62—71), where the place is called ‘the great 
Sahya forest’ (63d: gata sahyam mahdavanam). This reports that the Goddess created the moun- 
tain there and that as its Pithesvari (72a) she is called Pürnà (70d: parnaripini) because she filled 
it with nectar (69c, 70cd). In an earlier publication (SANDERSON 1987, p. 14b) I have written 
that Srivatsa was probably of Sucindram (Pürnajyotihksetra, Pürnasabhà), an important Saiva 
temple centre at the southern extremity of the subcontinent. I withdraw this theory. 

2? Old Kashmiri Mahanayaprakasa 14.1ab: paveta iba kamu pabhusa pasade sitikanthasa gata 
jammu kitathu | tena mi mahajana khalitamasade te marive mahanayaparamathu ‘Since he has 
mastered this Krama by the grace of the Lord the human birth of Sitikantha has fulfilled its 
purpose. Therefore I [have turned to the composing of this work and thus] enabled the pious 
too to attain *without error* (?) awareness of the true nature of the Mahanaya’. 

213The editor, Mukunda Ram Sastri, prints the following words, evidently his own, before 
the text proper: atha mahanayaprakasah srimanmahimahesvaracaryarajanakasitikanthacarya- 
viracitah proktacaryenaiva vivrtas ca “Here begins the Mabánayaprakása composed by the vener- 
able Mahamaheévaracarya Acarya Rajanaka Sitikantha and commented upon by the said Acarya 
himself. 


300 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


ular words of this work.?!^ It is unlikely that one about to explain his own words 
would refer to the undertaking in such terms. Moreover, there are instances in 
the commentary in which he offers multiple meanings of which some seem 
forced,?? and one at least where the explanation is so awkward that I suspect 
that the author has either misunderstood the text or is offering a literal trans- 
lation of a word that has reached him in an already corrupted form.?!6 Finally, 
though he refers to the author of the verses throughout in the third person he 
once refers to himself in the first, if my emendation is correct.*!” 

As for the date of the work, Sir George Grierson, the distinguished scholar 
of the New Indo-Aryan languages, assigned the author of the verses, whose 
authorship of the commentary he does not question, to the latter half of the 
fifteenth century.?'? In doing so he was following the Kashmirian Sastri Pandit 
Nityananda, who had informed him that the Sitikantha who composed this 
Mahäānayaprakāśa was the person of this name who during the reign of Hasan 
Sah (r. 1472-1484) composed the commentary -nydsa on the Balabodhini, 
a commentary by his countryman Jagaddhara on the Sanskrit grammar Kä- 
tantra. But Nityananda Sastri’s opinion was based on nothing more than the 
name Sitikantha, which is too common for this coincidence to prove identity. 
Moreover, the author of the Balabodhininydsa recounts his scholarly accom- 
plishments in its introduction, yet makes no reference to expertise in esoteric 
Saivism, let alone to his authorship of the Mabanayaprakása, but only to his 


Nak Ms of Old Kashmiri Mabanayaprakása between vv. 4 and 5: mabárthaparamárthasya 


vyakhyayai tatprakasake | granthe ‘pabhrastasabdinam kurve satkathanodyamam ‘With the pur- 
pose of expounding the ultimate nature of the Mahartha I shall make an effort to give a true 
explanation of the vernacular words in [this] text that illuminates it’. 

215Thus on Old Kashmiri Mabanayaprakása 1.3 he explains neraji samavani in three ways: 
coming to rest (Samavdani) in (1) the pure (nirajike vimale), (2) [her] own kingdom (nije sám- 
rajyamahotsave |i.e. nije rājye]), and (3) that in which the kingdom [of differentiated states] has 
disappeared (ninajye nastardjye). The second of these interpretations is altogether implausible 
and the third strained. 

16Tn Old Kashmiri Mahanayaprakasa 9.5 we are told that just as Siva’s head was the point 
of descent to earth for the Ganges so Mangala was the point of descent pithadisana. The com- 
mentary glosses this word as pithadisam ‘for the directional quarters of the Pitha'. This refer- 
ence to the directions makes no sense in the context. What we expect here is something like 
‘for the teachings of the Pitha’. Perhaps pithadisana is to be understood as pithádisana (Skt. 
pithadesinam) with a shortening of vowels seen elsewhere in these verses (see GRIERSON 1929, 
S 11) or pithopadisana (Skt. pithopadesandm). Cf. Modern Kashmiri wépadish ‘instruction’. 

217 See footnote 239 on p. 307. 

218See GRIERSON 1929, pp. 73-76. Grierson's dating and the single authorship of the verses 
and commentary are accepted without question by Rastoai (1979, pp. 220—224). 


Alexis Sanderson 301 


mastery of the brahmanical disciplines of grammar and logic. Nor does the 
commentary on the Mahdnayaprakasa show any signs that it was written by a 
scholar who had specialized in these subjects to an advanced level. Furthermore, 
the grammarian tells us that he was a member of the distinguished family of 
the Rajanakas of Padmapura (modern Pàmpar/Pampur),?? but we have no ev- 
idence that the author of the Mahanayaprakdsa was a Rajanaka of any patrilin- 
eage. Had he been a Rajanaka we would expect to see this title accompanying 
his name in the colophon, which identifies him simply as Sitikanthacarya. 
With the collapse of this identification we are left with no means of dating 
the text other than to consider its contents and language. It contains no cita- 
tions of other works but it does provide an approximate prior limit by giving 
the tradition’s preceptorial line. As we have seen, it states that Mangala was the 
source of the three Gurus of the Human Order (manavaughah), that they were 
followed by [Cakra]bhanu, and that he was the source of the eight Disciples.?^? 
The commentary explains that the Human Order comprises [Jfana]netra, Rājñī 
[Keyüravati], and Hrasvanátha,??! thus agreeing exactly with the account of the 


219 Rajanakavamsaprasamsa, ff.9, 11.22—13 (vv. 6—9), in which Sitikantha tells us that he 
visited various centres of learning outside Kashmir in order to master various Sastras, was 
honoured by Sultan Muhammad of Gujarat (r. 1458-1511), studied Nyaya in Gorakhpur 
from Srinatha and Patafjali's Mahabhasya in Benares from Varadesvara before returning to 
Kashmir, where he undertook to write this commentary at the private request of Zayn al- 
‘Abidin, finishing it in A.D. 1472, during the reign of Hasan Sah: 6 yodhdcaryasuto ‘rjuno 
jani jagatkhyato garisthair gunair yasmác chrisitikantha ity abhidhaya jato smi vidyanidheh | 
nandsastravinirnayaya bahusas tirthantarány abhramam püjam girjaranithamahmadasuratra- 
nad avàpam param | 7 Srigoraksapure ‘dhigatya vibudhat tarkam param karkasam srinathad 
adhikasi sesaracitam mimamsaya mamsalam | bbasyam srivaradesvarat svavasatim prapto ‘rthito 
ham rahah frimajjainanrpena so ‘tra karavai vyakhyam satam khyataye | 8 yo balabodhinyabhi- 
dham manisi jagaddharo yam vitatana vrttim | tannaptrkanyatanayanujo vyakhyamy aham tām 
Sitikanthako ‘Ipam | 9 try[3]anka[9]visva[ 13] mite sake [=Saka 1393] varse muniyugaih [74] mite 
[=Saptarsi (45)47] | nabhasyasitasaptamyam samapto néamanirnayah. 

??Old Kashmiri Mahanayaprakasa 9.5: harasiru jina gangi avatáran ta jünu mangala 
pithadisana | sé manavaugha tristhina kularana bbanupada astana fisyana ‘Just as the head 
of Siva was the point from which the Ganges descended to earth so Mangala for the teachings 
of Uddiyana. She was the source of the three stages of the Human Order. [Then came] the 
venerable Bhanu [the source] of the eight Disciples’. The commentary identifies this Bhanu as 
Cakrabhanu in its comments on the next verse. 

210 Id Kashmiri Mahanayaprakasa, commentary on 9.5: sa ca siddhaughariipa *manavaughe 
netrarajnihrasvanathetitrirupasya kulasya ovallivisesasya (conj. : manavaughanetrarajni hrasvaná- 
thetitrirüpasya kularanih kulasya ovallivisesasya Ed.) aranih trayanám agninám ivotpattisthanam 
‘And [Mangala], who constituted the Siddha Order, was the fire-churning stick for the triple 


302 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


lineage in Arnasimha's Mabanayaprakasa. If the eight that followed are under- 
stood as eight successive preceptorial generations then we will have an approx- 
imate prior limit in the twelfth century. But the next verse suggests that the 
author means eight co-disciples, because, playing on Cakrabhanu’s name and 
employing a common simile for the dawning of enlightenment it refers to him 
as the sun (bhanuh) and to these disciples as lotuses opened by his light.”** This 
brings the prior limit back to some time early in the eleventh century. This, 
of course, does not establish a posterior limit, because it does not follow from 
the fact that Sitikantha's account of the lineage ends with the eight disciples of 
Cakrabhanu that he was the direct pupil of one of them. 

As for the language of the text we might suppose that Grierson, who de- 
scribes it as old, “belonging to the period when Prakrit, in the Apabhraméa 
stage, had just merged into the language that finally became the Kashmiri of 
the present day", would have rejected Nityananda Sastri’s identification of 
its author if he had thought the late fifteenth century implausible on linguistic 
grounds. Evidently he saw no difficulty in accepting that this stage of Kash- 
miri, far removed though it is from the modern language, should have been 
reached so late. He was aware that the Kashmiri verses of the Saiva poetess Lal 
Déd (Lalishóri, Lalladevi, Lallayogini), though she lived in the fourteenth cen- 
tury (1335-1376), show a form of Kashmiri that with the exception of few 
archaic forms is virtually indistinguishable from the modern vernacular. But 
he swept aside the implication that Sitikantha’s verses must therefore have been 
written much earlier by asserting that the language of Lal Déd must have been 
modernized through its transmission in the oral culture of Kashmir. With this 
objection disposed of there was nothing to oppose his dating, since he was not 
aware of any evidence of the existence of Kashmiri in earlier centuries. But there 
is such evidence, and it shows that Kashmiri was already a distinct language in 
the early eleventh century. 

The great Khwaàrizmian scientist and polymath al-Birüni (973-1050+), 
who did not enter the valley himself, but evidently had Kashmirians among 


lineage, the distinguished preceptorial line in the Human Order comprising [Jfana]netra, Rajfi 
[Keyüravati], and Hrasvanatha, just as the real] fire-churning sticks are the source of the three 
[Srauta] sacrificial fires’. 

229 6: asta mici mahadyu yakheta va bammu pajapatina nikhilana | arunodaya dinmandala 
takheta bhànu vikasaka fifukamalana ‘Bhanu [/the sun] caused the lotuses that were [these] 
disciples to unfold, just as Siva (Mahadeva) does to his eight Mürtis, or Brahma to all the 
Prajapatis, [or] the rising sun to the quarters of the sky’. 

?23GRIERSON 1929, p. 73. 


Alexis Sanderson 303 


his informants, refers to a number of Indian festivals and related matters under 
vernacular names that are unmistakeably Kashmiri. He tells us in his ‘Descrip- 
tion of India’ (Tarzkh al-Hind), written around A.D 1030 after he had accom- 
panied his patron Sultan Mahmüd b. Subuktakin from Ghazhna to India, that 
in the month of Asadha “there is a fast-day holy to Vasudeva called Devasínf 
(2, e. Deva is sleeping, because it is the beginning of the four months dur- 
ing which Vasudeva slept”.?”4 The name ascribed to this rite corresponds to 
Modern Kashmiri div-wasun, meaning 'God's going down [to sleep]’. He also 
225 that the day in Kartika that commemorates the god’s re-awakening 
is "called Deorthín, .i.e. the rising of the Deva", which corresponds to Modern 
Kashmiri div-wothun. 'God's getting up’. The verb wothun is the antonym of 
wasun and among its uses is ‘to get up (from one’s bed)’.?”° Among other ex- 


tells us 


amples are gan ‘log’ in “certain pieces of wood called gana (?) which the water 
of the river Vitastà (Jailam) carries”; põh ‘the month Pausa and wor" ‘a kind 
of spiced cake’ in “pahaval”, which he defines as a sweet dish eaten in that 
month; wahdran ‘the act of spreading out’ in “vuhara” for the flow as opposed 
to the ebb of the ocean; góra-tray in “gaur-t-r” for the third lunar day of the 
light half of the months Magha and Vaisakha sacred to Gauri; and Par ‘a group 
of young sprouts’ and wé/ ‘a pregnant woman’ in “harbali” for a women’s fes- 
tival in Bhadrapada in which seeds sown in baskets are offered when they have 
sprouted.?"7 

Abhinavagupta (fl. c. 975-1025), stating the view that human language, as 
opposed to Mantras, is a matter of convention (saémketika-), gives examples of 
how the same combinations of sounds have entirely different meanings in dif- 
ferent languages, and cites examples from Tamil, the language of the Saindha- 
vas, and Kashmiri. His example for the last is &rzra for husked grains of barley, 


228 


wheat, or rice^^? with which we may compare Modern Kashmiri déda-kriir“ 


2 SACHAU 1964, vol. 2, p. 176. 

225 Thid., p. 177. 

?26GRIERSON 1932, s.v., p. 1160b26-27. 

27SacHau 1964, vol.2, pp. 181, 183, 104, 179, and 180; Grierson 1932, pp. 287b24, 
305b17—25, 684224 and 113725—6, 1105b9—13, and 343b1-3 and 1113a35-36. 

228 Paratrisikavivarana, p. 227, M. 16—18 (p. 125 in xsrs ed.): yatha daksinatyah caurasabdena 
odanam vyapadisanti saindhavàs tu tenaiva dasyum odanam tu krūraśrutyā taya tu káfmirika 
vitusitayavagodhimatandulan iti ‘...just as southerners say caura- for cooked rice, but the na- 
tives of Sindh use the sound caura for a brigand and krara for boiled rice, while the Kashmirians 
use krūra for husked grains of barley, wheat, or rice’. 


304 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


f. 'milk-£rZr?) ‘a certain kind of rice-plant'.?? He also alludes to the Kash- 
mirian vernacular when commenting on Anandavardhana’s advice that poets 
should avoid any juxtaposition of syllables that might arouse vulgar thoughts 
in the minds of listeners (asabhyasmrtihetuh). He advises poets to write, for 
example, kuru rucim rather than rucin kuru.” The unstated point of this ex- 
ample is surely that the juxtaposition of the syllables ci ku would bring to mind 
what must have been a word corresponding to the Modern Kashmiri cékh f. ‘a 
woman's pudenda (used only in obscene abuse)'.??! 

Finally, Ksemendra, whose dateable literary activity falls between a.D. 1037 
(Brhatkathamanjari) and 1066 (Dasavataracarita), tells us that he has included 
words from the local language (desabhasa) in his sketches of various unsavoury 
characters in the 8th chapter of his Desopadesa;?°? 
deed present there that can only be Kashmiri or which make good sense only 
if so understood. The first that I see in this passage is ghata in 8.12 in mock- 
ery of a Sākta brahmin: ghatagalagalagalasabdair galapüram bhairavam piban 
bhattah. The phrase makes no sense if the word is Sanskrit (‘pot’), but excellent 


and several words are in- 


sense when recognized as Modern Kashmiri g^» ‘choking caused by too eagerly 
drinking’:’°? ‘the brahmin drinking Bhairava (i.e. wine), filling his throat, with 
the sound gala gala gala of choking caused by drinking too eagerly’. The dif- 
ferences between ghata and g“th are inconsequential, since Kashmiri does not 
distinguish between aspirated and unaspirated voiced consonants and aspirates 
the unvoiced consonants £, p, t, t, and é when these end a word. Then there are 
melakalama- (8.40), in a passage on an ignorant scholar, which is meaningless in 
Sanskrit but apposite Kashmiri, since in that language mi/ f. means ‘ink’, and 
mil-kalam ‘an ink-pen;?** navadarakari (8.45) describing a crooked accoun- 
tant, which yields no apposite sense in Sanskrit but if dara is read as Kashmiri 


229 GRIERSON 1932, p. 189b11—14. The caura of the ‘southerners’ corresponds to Tamil and 
Malayalam córu ‘boiled rice’ (Burrow and EMENEaUu 1984, s.v.). C£. Indrabhüti, /nanasiddhi 
15.2: corasabdo |yatha] loke *bhaktartham (conj. : bhaksyartham Ed.) pratipadayet | kesamcic 
coram *evaha (conj. : dhuh Ed.) tantre py evam padas tatha. 

?3In his Dhvanydlokalocana on 2.11: yatha kuru rucim iti kramavyatyáse. 

?31GRIERSON 1932, p. 1068a40—41 

232 Desobadesa 8.1: ekatra samksiptadhiya prakirnajanavarnanam | desabhásapadair mifram 
adhuna kriyate maya ‘With the intention of concision I shall now give in a single [chapter] a 
description of miscellaneous persons that will include [some] words from the local language’. 

233GRIERSON 1932, p. 31la9-11. 

234GRIERSON 1932, pp. 564b48—50 and 565b39—41. 


Alexis Sanderson 305 


derides him for setting new tariffs or fixing the scales to his advantage;?? and 
vali ‘finger-ring’, Modern Kashmiri wój' f.,^ in kusatilarajatavalikalitakara.’*’ 

I see no reason, therefore, to think that the Old Kashmiri Mahanayaprakdsa, 
though not by the fifteenth-century grammarian, must have been composed so 
late. A date early in the history of the Kashmirian Saiva literature, close to the 
limit of the early eleventh century set by the text’s account of the Guru lineage, 
is entirely possible. Indeed it is plausible in the light of the considerable distance 
between this Old Kashmiri and the modern language, which, even if we accept 
Grierson’s view that Lal Déd’s Kashmiri has been modernized—and I see no 
strong reason to do so—is certainly present in the verses of the poetess Habba 
Khatiin in the sixteenth century.”°® 

As for the author of the commentary, he reports, as we have seen, that 
the line of succession (paáramparyam) that had reached him began from Rajfi 
Iéani, indicating thereby that there were several intermediate preceptorial gen- 
erations.??? The sources that he cites include a lost hymn (Stotramālā) com- 


£9 verses from an unnamed Krama scripture or scriptures 


posed by himsel 


?35Modern Kashmiri dar m. ‘price, rate, tariff, market or current rate; a large, fixed pair of 
scales for weighing heavy loads’ (GriERsON 1932, p. 234b10—14), and dar-karun ‘to calculate 
the weight of anything by weighing an aliquot part thereof by measure and multiplying by the 
number of parts’ (GrIERSON 1932, p. 234b18—21). 

?36GRIERSON 1932, p. 1107a30-31. This change of / to j is regular in Kashmiri; cf. &zwoj" 
'cremation-ground attendant’ from käpälikah in that sense (see, e.g., Rajatarangini 7.44ab); 
mól" ‘father’, but mj” ‘mother’ from mahallakah/mahallika venerable one’; hij’ f. ‘peg, spike’ 
from kilika; muj f. ‘a radish’ from mulika; shój f. ‘she-jackal’ from srgalika; and zöj” f. ‘a fine, 
delicate net’ from jalika. 

2371 have emended. The published text gives kusatilarajatavalih kalitakara. 

?38Further clarification of these matters would be possible by studying the Kashmiri of the 
Bandsuravadha, composed by Bhattavatara during the fifteenth century (BUHLER 1877, p. 90), 
c. 1446. The only known manuscript, dated 1020 Hijri (a.p. 1658), was acquired in Kashmir by 
Georg BUHLER and is now in the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute in Pune. I regret that I 
have not yet seen it. This work, I imagine, would not be open to the argument of modernization 
that was applied by Grierson to the poetry of Lal Déd and might also be extended to that of 
Habba Khatin, since her verses too became part of Kashmiri oral tradition. 

39OId Kashmiri Mahanayaprakasa, commentary on 9.5: bhanupadah astanam Ssisyanam 
(corr. : sadantam paramparyanidinam Ed.) “The venerable [Cakra]bhanu was the Lord of the 
Eight Disciples, one of whom, the Rajfi [sani, is the source of the line of succession that ends 
in myself. 

749 Old Kashmiri Mahanayaprakasa, pp. 47, |. 16-48, |. 2 (yat stutam stotramalayam mayaiva). 


306 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


not otherwise known, 7! 


an unattributed verse found in the Urmikaularnava 
(a scripture of a related form of the Kalikula),”” and passages from otherwise 
unknown works of the post-scriptural Krama, of which the Rajika and Pujati- 
laka are named.” The only authors of approximatly known date that he cites 
are Jñānanetra and Utpaladeva? ^^ but this takes us no further in establishing 
his period, since Utpaladeva, the later of these, flourished around the middle of 
the tenth century. He cites a verse that is attributed to Srivatsa,2 but nothing 
requires us identify that Srivatsa with the author of the Cidgaganacandrika. 
The text and its commentary stand apart in the Kashmirian Krama litera- 
ture in a number of respects. This, for example, is the only source therein whose 
account of the course of worship does not culminate in the fourth phase, that 


of the Nameless (anakhyakramah), but adds a fifth, the phase of Pure Light 
(bhasakramah) , ^6 following in this respect the model of worship taught in the 


^10ld Kashmiri Mahdnayaprakdsa, p. 6, 1.7; p. 7, ll. 9-10; p. 16, Il. 4-5; p. 29, 12-13; p. 39, 
Il. 1-2 and 7-12; p. 42, 15-16; p. 43, Il. 1-2; p. 45, Il. 3-4, 6-7, 9-10, 12-13, 15-16; p. 111, 
Il. 11-12. 

Old Kashmiri Mahanayaprakdsa, p. 10, ll. 4—5, = Urmikaularnava, f. 5r4-5 (1.90c-91b). 
This scripture, also called Bhogahasta, teaches a form of the Kalikula related to that of the Krama 
texts (f. 10v7 [2.6]: <aktam kalikramamnáyam bhogahasteti visrutam) and claims to have been 
revealed first by Minanatha in Kàmarüpa and then taken by Siddhas to Kaulagiri (Kolhapur) 
in Karnataka; see SANDERSON 2005a, pp. 133-134 and footnote 111. 

?50ld Kashmiri Mahanayaprakasa, p. 20, ll. 11-14; p.21, Il. 2-4, 5-9, and 16-17; p. 24, 
ll. 6-9; p. 32, ll. 10-13 (in Old Kashmiri, attributed to an unnamed Siddha [yad siddhapada 
ddidisub]); p. 43, ll. 5-8; p. 55, 11. 5—8 (attributed to the Rajika); p. 58, ll. 8-15; pp. 62, 1. 15— 
63, 1.4; p. 79, 1l. 3—4. On p. 141 he refers to a variant order of Krama worship taught in the 
Pijatilaka. 

244Old Kashmiri Mabanayaprakása, p. 6, ll. 14-15, = Kalikastotra, f. 9111-2 (v. 6); p. 12, Il. 5- 
6, = Utpaladeva, Sivastotravali 16.1; p. 12, ll. 16-17 (not traced). 

45The verse is cited (p. 12, Il. 8-11) as that of ‘a certain learned scholar’ (Aascic ca vipascid 
aha). The attribution to Srivatsa accompanies a citation of the same verse in a marginal com- 
ment in a Kashmirian manuscript of the Naresvarapariksaprakáfa (srivatso ‘py aha); see WATSON 
2006, p. 246. 

46Old Kashmiri Mahanayaprakasa 11.2—5 and commentary. The content of this phase is 
unclear. The commentary explains that it contains four sub-phases, calling them the differ- 
entiated (sakalah), the differentiated-cum-undifferentiated (sakalaniskalah), the undifferenti- 
ated (niskalah), and the all-containing (parah) (p. 123, ll. 3-5: catvdro hy asmin bhasdkrame 
‘sakalasakalaniskalaniskalaparakhyah |em. : sakalasakalaniskalaniskalaparakhyah Ed.] *krama 
[em. : krama Ed.] mahakramam avabhásayanti); that there are twelve constituent goddesses 
(cakrinyah) in the first, six in the second, three in the third, and one in the fourth; that 
all the twelve and four of the six have Mantras of eighteen syllables; that the remain- 
ing two of those six and all of the three have Mantras of fourteen syllables; and that 


Alexis Sanderson 307 


Kálikulakramasadbháva rather than the Kalikulapancasataka. However, it fol- 
lows the latter in the preceding phases, giving thirteen Kalis in the fourth rather 
than the former’s seventeen. This illustrates in striking fashion a characteristic 
of the post-scriptural Krama as a whole, namely its readiness to innovate, a fea- 
ture that was no doubt justified in terms of its distinctive narrative of ongoing 
revelation through direct contact with the Yoginis of Uddiyana conceptualized 
in these texts as the sudden unfolding in the meditator's visionary conscious- 
ness of his own inner reality. The text is also remarkable for the richness of 
its reading of the structures of worship not only in terms of the natural flow 
of cognition but also in mapping them on to a model of the flow of energy 
within the body itself. Further, it gives detailed instructions found in no other 
text on a four-day course of training in the worship of the Krama following 
initiatory transmission (samkramanam), in which the initiate worships day by 
day the deities of the four phases from Emission (srstikramah) to the Name- 
less (anakhyakramah), each accompanied with the worship of the Pitha-circle, 
a segment of the Guru lineage, the phase of Pure Light (bhasakramah), and the 
Samayavidya of one hundred syllables that rectifies any defects in the preced- 
ing worship, followed by instruction in a five-day session in which the initiate 
together with his female consort (dati) worships the five deity phases one by 
one with dough lamps (dipacaruh, prakasacarub), each with the Pitha-cycle, a 
segment of the Guru lineage, and the Samayavidya.? ^ 


the goddess of the fourth and highest sub-phase has one of nine syllables, which it calls 
the Kulavidya (ekaiva kulavidyà navarnaiva). The relevant section of the Kalikulakrama- 
sadbháva having been lost, we turn to the Kalikulakramárcana for clarification but find 
that its arrangement of deities differs. There (ff. 14v6-15r2: bhasakramapüjavidhib) one is 
to worship twelve goddesses (Mantrakali, Hamsakali, Kramakali, Jaanakali, Damarakali, 
Cakrakali, Omkarakali, Gaganakali, Ekabhasakali, Sabdakali, Balakali, and Rddhikali), then 
eight (Bhasakali, Bhasahamsakali, Bhasacandakali, Bhasadamarakali, Bhasayogakali, Bhasa- 
gaganakali, Bhasasvarakali, and Bhasa-rksakali), then seven (Stryakali, Candrakali, Ag- 
nikali, Vayukali, Vyomakali, Manahkali, and Sarvakali), then the nine-syllable Vidya in its 
seventeenth-syllable form through the separation of its conjuncts (MA-E-KHA-PHA-RA-MA-HA- 
CA-NA-DA-YA-O GA-E-$A-VA-RI), the 100-syllable Samayavidya (see footnote 247 on p. 309), and 
finally the unseparated nine-syllable Vidya (KHPHREM MAHACANDAYOGESVARI). Only the num- 
ber of the first phase and the nine-syllable Vidyà at the end coincide. Nor do the Mantras 
in the Kalikulakramarcana, with the exception of the nine-syllable Vidya, show the requisite 
number of syllables. Mahesvarananda’s comments on the phase of Radiance in the Mahdartha- 
mafijariparimala (pp. 101—104) are too abstract to clarify these details beyond the use of the 
seventeen-syllable Vidya (sodasadbiká: perhaps the separated form of the nine-syllable is in- 
tended) and the nine-syllable Vidya. 

?* Old Kashmiri Mahanayaprakasa 13.1—5. On the Samayesvari/Samayavidyà/Samayà of one 


308 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


The Anonymous Mahanayaprakasa 


A third Mabanayaprakáía, of unknown authorship, has been published from 
Trivandrum on the basis a single Keralan manuscript.” It too is proba- 
bly Kashmirian, since it has been cited by Jayaratha in his commentary on 
the Tantráloka and by Siva[svàmin] Upadhyaya I in his commentary on the 
Vijfnabhairava? and drawn upon by Sivasvamin Upadhyaya II in his Si- 
varatrirabasya.??? The editor reports with approval hearsay evidence that the 
author was Abhinavagupta.”*! But though the work shows a style and sophisti- 
cation not unworthy of him, the claim that it is his is fatally undermined by the 
fact that Jayaratha cites it as representing the view of unnamed others, namely 
that there are thirteen Kalis in the phase of the Nameless and not twelve as 


hundred syllables see 11.6—9. The author does not give the Vidya itself, but states that it has 
100 syllables divided into sections of 2, 15, 69, 2, and 12, for four sub-phases within the 
phase of the Nameless (Srstyanakhyasamayeévari to Suddhanakhyasamayegvari) followed by 
the phase of Pure Light (Bhasasamayesvari). This is evidently the Samayavidya taught in partly 
encoded form in Kalikulapancasataka 6.19—30. For that has 100 syllables and consists of seg- 
ments of the length indicated by our author. These are not conveyed explicitly, but they are 
nonetheless made apparent by four occurrences at the appropriate places of the syllable PHAT, 
which generally occurs at the end of a Mantra, with PHAT svAHA at the end of the whole. De- 
coded, with the addition of Dandas to mark the segments, it is: KHPHREM PHAT | MAHACANDE 
CANDAMUKHI CANDAYOGESVARI PHAT | CANDADUHKHAVIMOCANI SARVASAMAYALOPAVIGHATANI 
TEJOVATI AMRTAMÜRTE ASIDDHASADHANI SIDDHI-RDDHIPRADE NASAYA SARVADOSAN ABHIMATAM 
ME PRAYACCHA SARVE SARVAGE ARUPE SARVARUPE HRIM PHAT | KHPHREM PHAT | HUM KROM 
KSAM SARVAVIDYESVARI PHAT SVAHA. The function of the Samayavidya is to promote the fruition 
of the worship that precedes it by removing any impediments to that fruition caused by de- 
fects in performance; see SANDERSON in the discussion after GoUDRIAAN 1986, pp. 161—163. 
The segments of the lineage of Gurus are six: (1) the paraughah (=the five Vahadevis), (2) the 
divyaughah (= the Siddhas and Yoginis of the prakdsacakram, ànandacakram, and mürticakram), 
(3) the mahaughah (= the sixty-four Pithesvaris/ Sakinis/Siddhas of the vrndacakram), (4) the 
siddhaughah (= Mangala), (5) the manavaughah (= J&ànanetra, Keyüravati, and Hrasvanatha), 
and (6) the sésyaughah (= Cakrabhanu and his eight disciples). In the four-day course 4-6 are 
combined and in the five-day course 5 and 6. 

48 The editor, K. Sambasiva Sastri, reports that the manuscript, on palm-leaf in the Malay- 
alam script, belonged to Brahmasri Narayanan Bhattatiripad of Parambürillam, Thiruvalla, and 
judges that it is about four hundred years old (Mahdnayaprakasa | Triv.], introduction, p. 3). 

49 Tantralokaviveka on 4.125, vol. 3, p. 128, ll. 12-18 (= Mahānayaprakāśa (Triv.) 9.15—18b); 
Vijnanabhairavavivrti, p. 67, Vl. 10-13 (= 7.127-128), and ll. 18-19 (» 7.144). 

250See footnote 319 on p. 331. 

251 Mahanayaprakasa (Triv.), introduction, p. 2. 


Alexis Sanderson 309 


Abhinavagupta has taught in the passage on which Jayaratha is commenting.” 

This text is distinguished from the other two works with the same title by 
the depth and subtlety of its explanations of the course of Krama worship as 
embodying a process of the unfolding of sudden enlightenment in which con- 
sciousness devours its own content and subjectivity (aJamgrasab, hathapakah) 
to burst forth into the mind and senses as a transfigured mundane experience 
in which the polarity of liberation and bondage is obliterated. It also stands 
apart by reason of its containing a sophisticated and learned philosophical ar- 
gument for the position that the object of cognition has no existence outside 
the cognition itself, as the basis for the soteriologically correct perception of 
the cyclical flow of consciousness personified in the goddesses of the Five Flows 
(vihadevyah) from the inner ground of pure potential before the arising of 
object-cognition (Vyomavamesvari) to the return to that ground (Raudrarau- 
dregvari) at its end;?* and for an eloquent reconciliation of the Krama's Sakta 
perspective on itself as the ultimate revelation within its Saiva context, namely 
that the Goddess of the Krama is that point at the core of Siva’s nature that he 
himself cannot objectivate:?^ 


(104—5b) Maheévara's repose within himself is the highest state of self- 
awareness. But by the finest of distinctions there shines a state even higher than 
that. This is the Goddess-ground, in which even the Lord cannot see his way. 
(105c-106) Being and non-being are grounded in the light of all manifestation, 
and that is grounded in the ecstasy of consciousness void of all dependence, 


252 Tantralokaviveka on 4.125, vol. 3, p. 128, ll. 10—11, introducing the unattributed citation 
of Mahanayaprakása (Triv.) 9.15-18b: nanv asyà parasyah samvido "nyair anayaiva bhangya tra- 
yodaíáatmakatvam uktam. yad uktam: ... ‘Wt may be objected that others following exactly the 
same approach have asserted that fully expanded consciousness has thirteen aspects. As has 
been said: .... 

253 Mahanayaprakasa (Triv.) 3.1-93. 

254 Mahanayaprakasa (Triv.) 3. 94-111. 3.104—111: mahesasyatmavisrantih parahamtatmika 
hi ya | tasyà api paravastha bhati suksmaprabhedatah | 105 tad devidhima yatrasau kam- 
disiko vibhur bhavet | bhávabbavau prakaíe "ntah pratisthim adhigacchatah | 106 sa capi 
sakalapeksastinyayam ciccamatkrtau | táratamyádikalanavasanavedbadürage | 107 paravifra- 
ntiparyante sapi visramyati svatah | paraprakásavifrantidaíayam api ye sthitah | 108 vasana- 
vedhasamskara bhivabhavobhayatmakah | *antas tan grasanikrtya (conj. : atas tam asanikrtya 
Ed.) ya visrantir anuttara | 109 sa devi kathyate tasyà nayo sau devatánayab | *yatravate (em. : 
yatrapate) *pariksino (Ed. : pariksind Cod.) *vitanko (em. [cf. here 1.1d and 3.82a (avatatanka- 
), and commentary introducing Bhavopahdrastotra v 1: niruttaranirniketanavatavitanka-] : pi 
tanko Ed.) sau nayas tatah | 110 ya kalagrásavifrantis tad rüpam paramesituh | ya tadvisran- 
tivisrantis tad devirüpam isyate | 111 ittham "suksmeksikarupo (em. : siksmeksitaripo Ed. : 
süksmiksitarüpo Cod.) bhedo *yam (em. : yat Ed.) paramesayoh | aikye "pi darsitah samyak- 
pratitiparisuddhaye. 


310 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


which in turn comes to rest spontaneously in the limit of the self-groundedness 
of that all-encompassing [light], where the impressions of the influences left in 
consciousness by awareness of degree and the like are completely absent. (107— 
109) What we mean by 'the Goddess' is that untranscendable ground that re- 
mains when it has devoured even the subtlest traces of the impressions of these 
influences, positive, negative and both, that persist even within the state of the 
self-groundedness of that all-encompassing light. This path of [meditating on 
the cycles of] the deities [of cognition] is precisely the path of the Goddess [so 
defined]. It derives from that abyss in which all imprints are obliterated. (110) 
The nature of the Supreme Lord [Siva] is the self-groundedness that devours 
awareness [of degree and the like]. We define the nature of the Goddess to be 
the point in which that itself comes to rest. (111) Thus though the Supreme 
Lords, male and female, are [objectively] one and the same, a subtle experien- 
tial difference between them has been revealed in order to perfect the correct 
perception [of this fact]. 


With the practical details of worship it is little concerned, but it conveys that 
initiation is to take the form of the tasting of the Kaula sacramental substances 
(caruprasanam) at the commencement of the process of oral instruction and 
worship. %5 It also teaches that the phase of the Nameless (anakhyakramah), in 
which its course of worship culminates, is to be realized in the experience of a 
female consort, wine, and meat.”*° 

The work mentions Hrasvanatha, and quotes from the Kramastotra of 
Eraka, the Svabodhodayamanjari of Vamanadatta, and the [svarapratyabhi- 


jnakarika of Utpaladeva.?" It was therefore composed no earlier than about 


255 Mahanayaprakasa (Triv.) 2.4-5: pradhanyena sthito loke vyavaharah kriyatmakah | atah 
pithakramajfiaptis tanmukhenaiva kathyate | anenaivafayenadau caruprasana*purvakam (corr. : 
pürvakab Ed.) | guruná sampradayasya bhajanam kriyate pasuh ‘For the most part our mundane 
experience is active by nature. It is therefore through this that instruction is given in the [five- 
aspected] process of the Pitha phase of worship. And it is with this in mind that the Guru 
transforms the bound soul into a receptacle of the transmission by having him consume the 
sacramental substances'. 

256 Mahānayaprakāsśa (Triv.) 9.35—51b. 

°57Hrasvanatha is mentioned under the name Vamanavira in 8.27, quoted in footnote 140 
on p.278. The Kramastotra of Eraka is quoted in 6.27 as the Samvitstotra of the Hymno- 
grapher: stotrakarasyedam eva sthitam cetasi yaj jagau | *samvitstotre (corr. : samvitstotraih 
Ed.) "samálokam (em. : samáloka Ed.) pramánàrthapramátr*sam (em. : dah Cod. : tah 
em. Ed.) "Ihis is what was in the mind of the Hymnographer when he sang of the sin- 
gle light in the means, object, and agent of cognition'. This refers to a line attributed 
to the Kramastotra by Sivopadhyaya in Vijüanabhairavavivrti, p. 140: tato varo ‘rkasomag- 
nikalabijaprasutibhak | udety ekab samalokah pramanartbapramatrgah iti. arthah prameyam. 


Alexis Sanderson 311 


950. However, I propose that though it does not cite Abhinavagupta directly it 
was influenced by doctrines set out by him in his Zantraloka and therefore that 
it is unlikely to have been written before the first half of the eleventh century. 

This influence is apparent in the text's explanation of the hierarchy of the 
Krama's means of liberation, and its account of the Kalis that are to be wor- 
shipped in the last phase, that of the Nameless. As for the first, it teaches 
that liberation-in-life (jivanmuktih), the Krama’s goal, comes through an ex- 
treme descent of Siva's power (atitivrah saktipátah, atisaktipatah) that brings 
about complete immersion in the reality of consciousness. This descent it sub- 
divides into three degrees, mild (mrduh), moderate (madhyah), and intense 
(atimatrah), also calling them respectively mahdativrah, mahdativratarah, and 
mahátivratamap ??? 


When sémbhava- immersion has been established through the most intense 
(atitivra-) descent of power then liberation in life has been attained and as a 
result everything is experienced as identical with the nectar of the bliss of the 
self. When this extreme descent of power gets under way we find that there ap- 
pears within it a subtle experiential differentiation into [three degrees:] intense, 
middling, and mild. 


These qualify their recipients for the Krama's three ascending methods of 
liberation: (1) through the worship of the Krama (pajanam), (2) through oral 
instruction (kathanam), and (3) without the help of either of these, through 
direct transmission (samkramanam) 2? The last it characterizes as a sudden un- 
folding of enlightenment brought about by a non-verbal fusion with the Guru's 


awareness, which needs no additional practice to establish and maintain ic; 260 


iti Srikramastotrasamvadat .... Y have emended the reading pramatrtab following this citation 
and Abhinavagupta’s unattributed quotation of the same in Paratrifikavivarana, p. 204, l. 25, 
who also cites it as the words of “the venerable Siddha” in Jfvarapratyabhijfavivrtivimarsint, 
vol. 3, pp. 71-72 (yathoktam siddhapadaih). The expression stotrakdrah ((Hymnographer) for 
Eraka is also seen in the *Kramavamsavali quoted in Tantrálokaviveka, vol.3, p. 191, ll. 3-6. 
Utpaladeva's Lvarapratyabhijnakarika (1.5.11cd) is quoted in 3.64 without attribution: ane- 
naivasayenokto yuktitattvavicaksanaih *prakaso "rthoparakto (corr. : prakasarthoparakto Ed.) pi 
sphatikadi*jadopamah (corr. : jàlomapam Ed.). The first verse of Vamanadatta’s Svabodhodaya- 
mafijari is quoted as the oral teaching of the Siddhas (iti siddbamukhámnáyayuktya) in 9.52c— 
53b. 

258 Mahanayaprakasa (Triv.) 1.7-8: atitivrasaktipatad arüdhe sambhave samavese | svananda- 
mrtarüpam jivanmukteh *prakalpyate (conj. : jivanmukteh prakalpate Ed.) visvam | atimatra- 
madhyamrdutábhedenapi pravartamánasya | suksmeksikaprakaro "pi vilasati tasyatisaktipatasya. 

259 Mahanayaprakasa (Triv.) 1.3—29a. 

260 Mahanayaprakasa (Triv.) 1.9220, 24. 1.11: so yam *puranadhisthanakramah (conj. : pu- 
vanddhisthánab kramab Ed.) kramavivarjitah | mabarthasya para nisthà galitasvaparasthitih. 


312 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


This is the non-sequential process of the Ground of the Primordial (purind- 
dhisthanakramah).?®" Yt is the highest limit of the Mahartha, in which the dis- 
tinction of self and other has dissolved. 


and:2° 


This is the process of [immersion] without means, being free of perturbation 
[even] by the latent impressions of the distractions that are reasoning, obser- 
vance, and the rest. One in whom it is established is the king among Yogins. 
He is free of all obscurations, beyond the level of transcending or seeking to 
attain. He needs nothing else to establish [this, since it is] his own true nature. 


The Guru’s glance is sufficient to bring about an unimpeded, spontaneous 
understanding of the flow of the enlightened ground of consciousness in all 
the aspects of its operation expressed in the circles of powers that make up the 
course of worship.^9? 


Through the violent impact of the Guru's glance he achieves unimpeded aware- 
ness in all the phases, from that of the Pitha to [that of the Nameless]. 


In the method of oral instruction the same spontaneous understanding un- 
264 


folds with the help of the Guru’s transmission of the Krama’s aphorisms: 
In the most extreme [descent of power] (mahdtivratame), that rests in self- 
experience [alone], unimpeded awareness dawns for one without descending 
to the processes of instruction or [worship]. And when the more extreme 
(mahdativratare) gets under way [that awareness] dawns as a result of the Guru’s 
teaching, from nothing but his oral explanation of the aphorisms, of which the 
first is “[No sooner] seen [than] lost”. 


2791 Cf the term gdod ma'i gzhi or gdod ma gzhi Primordial Ground, Ground of the Primordial’ 
that denotes the central concept of the Great Perfection (rDzogs chen) tradition of the rNying 
ma pa Buddhism of Tibet as developed by the tenth century; see Karmay 1988, p. 119. 

262 Mahanayaprakasa (Triv.) 1.13—14: yukticaryadiviksepavasanaksobhavarjitah | anupaya- 
kramab so yam yasya *ridhah sa (em. Ed. : riidhasya Cod.) yogirat | sarvavarananirmukto 
hanadanapadojjhitah | sthitaye svasvarüpasya nanyat kimcid apeksate. 

263 Mahanayaprakasa (Triv.) 1.16bcd: gurudrkpatasahasat | pithakramadau sarvatra visuddhis 
tasya jayate. 

264 Mahanayaprakasa (Triv.) 1.20-21: mahativratame + + + + svanubhavasthite | kathanadi- 
kramátità vifuddhis *tasya (conj. : tatra Ed.) kagate | mahdtivra*tare (em. : tame Ed.) casmin 
pravrtte gurusasanat | “drstanastadisamketakathamatrat (em. : drstadrstadisamketamatra Ed.) 
prakásate. For the topic of enlightenment through oral transmission see pp. 334 er seq. 


Alexis Sanderson 313 


and in the method of worship the nature of consciousness dawns through med- 
itative propitiation of the goddessess embodied in the cyclical flow of cogni- 
tion: 

In the [merely] extreme (mahdtivre) the nature of the self dawns through the 
method of worshipping the goddesses of cognition that shine forth in every state 
of mundane experience, flowing outwards and inwards with each successive 
object of awareness, their contraction dissolved as they merge with the great 
void. 


The first access to enlightenment is said to be completely devoid of concep- 
tual awareness (vikalpah), while the other two are defined against it as methods 
in which one relies to a greater or lesser extent on this awareness. In the case 
of oral instruction the conceptual element, though present, is subordinate to 
non-conceptual intuition, whereas in the process of worship it dominates and 
one must gradually transcend it through the intensification of the insight it 


embodies until finally direct, non-conceptual realization ensues:?6ó 


For some, in whom awareness of their identity has taken root without even the 
slightest trace of conceptual thought, knowledge dawns without dependence 
on any means of bringing it about. For others knowledge dawns in which the 
non-conceptual is dominant, as the result of an ever fainter conceptual aware- 
ness based on the [Guru’s] instruction in the aphorisms and the like. And for 
some non-conceptual knowledge relies on the processes of worship and the rest, 
coming about only through and after conceptual awareness. 


This exposition is influenced, I propose, by the theory of the four means 
of liberation set out in descending order of excellence by Abhinavagupta in his 
Tantráloka, namely the sambhavah, saktah, and dnavah modes of immersion 
in Siva (samavesab) with ‘immersion without [the repeated practice of any] 
method’ (anupayah samavesah) added at the summit of the first.” Our text 


?95 Mahanayaprakasa (Triv.) 1.22—23: prakasante (em. Ed. : prakasate Cod.) mahátivre vyava- 
hava*dasasu yah (em. : darasu yah Ed.) | pratyekavisayavrttyà babirantarmukhodayáh | samvid- 
devyo mahavyoma*samghattatrotitargalah (conj. : samghaditrotitassalah (?) Ed.) | tasam pūjana- 
vicchittyà svarüpam samprakásate. 

266 Mahanayaprakasa (Triv.) 1.24-24: vikalpavasanaéunyaprarüdha*svatmasamvidah (em. 
Ed. : ssdtmasamvidah Cod.) prathate kasyacij jnanam anapeksitasadbanam | | udriktani- 
rvikalpamsam mandamandavikalpatah | prathate kasyacij jhanam samketadikathasrayat | 
pijanadikramapeksam tsamsthitet + + kasyacit | vikalpasamanantaryán *nirvikalpam (em. : 
nirvikalpah Ed.) pravartate. 

67See Tantriloka 1.140—245 (preliminary analysis [1.171—213: sambhavah; 214-220: 
saktah, 221—241: anavah, 242-245: anupayah), and Ahnikas 2 (anupayab), 3 (sambhavah), 
4 (saktah), and 5 and following (adnavah). 


314 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


teaches enlightenment through non-conceptual transmission in terms that echo 
Abhinavagupta’s conception of the highest means by defining it as a Sambhavah 
samavesah that transcends all methods (anupdyah), and while it does not use 
the terms saktah and anavah to define its two lower methods, those of oral in- 
struction and meditative worship, its analysis of these follows the same the- 
oretical model, for Abhinavagupta's presents his sakta- and 4nava- methods 
as means of reaching non-conceptual revelation (nirvikalpakah saksatkarab) 
through the progressive refining of conceptual awareness of ultimate reality 
(vikalpasamskárab), through insight alone in the case of the sākta- method and 
through that supported by ritual worship and other forms of action in the case 
of the ánava-.795 Our text's subdivision of the highest degree of the descent of 
power (atisaktipatah) into three levels also echoes the Tantraloka, by adapting its 
doctrine of nine degrees of the intensity of this descent, in which three degrees, 
intense (tivrah), moderate (madhyamah), and mild (mandah), are subdivided 


by themselves. 


As for the text’s treatment of the Kalis of the phase of the Nameless, at 
first sight that differs fundamentally from Abhinavagupta’s, since, as we have 
seen, it teaches that they are thirteen in number in accordance with the tradi- 
tion of their worship in all texts other than the Kz/z&ulakramasadbháva, which 
teaches seventeen, while Abhinavagupta reduces the number to twelve in keep- 
ing with his position that there is no transcendental reality beyond the twelve 
but one consciousness that is both one and twelve according to perspective. 
Our text could not drop one of the Kalis, as Abhinavagupta has done, in order 


268See Tantriloka 4.1-7 for the doctrine that the essence of saktah samavesah or saktopayah 
is the refining of conceptual thought of reality (vikalpasamskarah) through thought alone until 
it transcends itself to become non-conceptual intuition, and Tantraloka 5.1—6 for the doctrine 
that 4gavab samavesah or dnavopayah is this same process when it cannot sustain itself through 
thought alone but must resort to other means. 5.3—4c: vikalpah kasyacit svatmasvatantryad eva 
susthirah | upayantarasápeksyaviyogenaiva jayate | kasyacit tu vikalpo sau svatmasamskaranam 
prati | upayantarasapeksah ‘For some conceptual thought becomes fully stable through it own 
free agency alone, without having to rely on any additional methods. But for others it needs 
such additional methods to develop itself’. This mode of immersion is called dzavah because 
these additional methods are limited and diverse. 5.6: niscayo babudhà caisa tatropayas ca bhedi- 
nah | anusabdena te cokta dirantikavibhedatah ‘And this [process of the attaining of] certainty 
is manifold, and the means to it are many, some being closer to [pure thought] and others less 
so. It is for this reason that they have been termed contractions (anuh). On the methods of 
dnavah samavesah see p. 374. 

299 Tantraloka 13.129c-254b, ending with the report that he owes this classification into nine 
to his Guru Sambhunatha, which is to say that it has no scriptural foundation. 

270See his Kramastotra and Tantráloka 4.148—180b. 


Alexis Sanderson 315 


to make the highest (Mahabhairavacandograghorakali) the twelfth rather than 
the thirteenth, because its exegesis is tied to the order of worship (pajakramah), 
in which this Kali is in the centre of a circle surrounded by the other twelve, 
whereas Abhinavagupta’s exposition of these goddesses is free of this constrain- 
ing context, being concerned, as Jayaratha puts it in a long and tendentious 
justification of this discrepancy, not with their order in worship, which could 
hardly be contradicted in a Krama text, but with their natural order in con- 
sciousness (samvitkramah).?’' However, our text reveals that it is aware of the 
Abhinavaguptan position, because it says that the thirteenth is distinguished 
from the twelve only figuratively (upacaratah), being in fact no more than the 
common essence of the twelve, the ground in which the distinction between 
them is dissolved, and that it is included for separate worship only because it 
is the realization of this inner unity pervading the twelve that is the ultimate 
goal:?/* 


The ground in which the [separate] identities of these twelve goddesses are dis- 
solved, which we refer to figuratively as the thirteenth goddess, is present as the 
highest object of worship, because it is this that is the goal. 


Furthermore, the text has adopted Abhinavaguptas understanding of the 
nature of the twelve. Jfananetranatha presents these as the three successive 
states of emission, stasis, and withdrawal, each subdivided into four stages, 
namely the same three followed by a fourth state, which he terms [final] 
rest (visramah).*’* Thus they are understood as the flow of cognition passing 
through emission of emission, stasis of emission, withdrawal of emission, the 
[final] rest of emission, emission of stasis and so on through to the [final] rest of 
withdrawal.?”4 The same model is seen in all other Krama sources that address 


?"1See Tantrilokaviveka, vol. 3, pp. 127, 1. 6-134, 1. 17. The core of Jayaratha’s answer to the 
Kramas objection that there should be thirteen rather than twelve Kallis is that there could only 
be thirteen in reality rather than worship if the thirteenth were separately manifest and that 
since that thirteenth could only be fully expanded consciousness (par samvit) it would follow 
that the twelve, if other than that, would not be manifest at all, since all manifestation is of 
that one consciousness. There would then remain nothing but a single consciousness void of the 
manifestation of its dynamic structure (nirabhasaiva samvid ekaivavasisyeta) (p. 129, ll. 1-11). 
Jayaratha introduces the distinction between the order of worship (paijakramah) and the order 
in consciousness (samvitkramah) in pp. 161, l. 16-162, 1. 9, saying that the Krama scriptures 
and the great Gurus following them have taught the former in order to conceal the latter. 

27? Mahanayaprakasa (Triv.) 9.60—61b: zsam dvadasadevinam svaripavilayavanih | trayodasiti 
ya devi kathyate hy upacáratah | upadeyatayà saiva paropasyataya sthita. 

273See p. 274. 

274 Kalibüstotra, vv. 8—9. For text and translation see footnote 123 on p. 273. 


316 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


this matter, namely the Mabanayaprakasa of Arnasimha,"? the Old Kashmiri 
Mahanayaprakasa and its commentary," and the Cidgaganacandrika."" The 
Trivandrum Mahanayaprakáía gives the same explanation, in terms that echo 
the Kalikástotra, but modifies it by identifying the emission, stasis, and with- 
drawal that are subdivided into four with the fields of the object of cognition 
(prameyam), its means (pramánam), and its agent (pramata).*”* 


The single nature of the self permeates its states as the object, means, and agent 
of cognition, these being one with emission, stasis, and withdrawal. They in turn 
are fourfold through their multiplication in each case in accordance with the na- 
ture of the self by the phases emission, stasis[, withdrawal], and [the withdrawal 
of withdrawal]. This fourfold expansion [in each], from emergence (udayah) 
[through manifestation (avabhasanam) and internalization (carvanam)] to the 
devouring of time (&zlagrasa/) has a single ground. Therefore, because these are 
the principal [aspects of the cycle], there are thirteen goddesses to be worshipped 
in the circle of the Nameless. 


275 Mahanayaprakasa, f. 126r3-v4 (vv. 217—221): panid *vyomno (conj. : yunmo Cod.) jhatity 
eva sphuritananda*ghirnita (em. : ghürnnitah Cod.) | yakramaspandalahari vidyullekheva can- 
calà | 218 tasya udayasamsthanasamharodrekakalpana | trividhà samakalena prodita kalano- 
jjhitā | 219 tatrapi "triprakárayam kalpanayam (conj. : triprakarakhyakalpanaya Cod.) samanta- 
tah | pratyekasah "svarüpe (conj. : svartipo Cod.) pi srstyadikramasamjnake | 220 "caturürmi- 
citam (conj. [cf. Cidgaganacandrika 174] : caturthormisitam Cod.) rüpam udyogadivibhedatah | 
evam dvisatkasamvittikramo bhati niravrtah | 221 srstikalyadibhedena prathito ¥navadhih (em. : 
ravadhih Cod.) parah | niralambavikasaikamahimá satatoditab. 

276Old Kashmiri Mabanayaprakása, p. 118, l. 11-12 on 10.7 (patteka saha antara dasa ráji 
mülabade samya cukhanda | akkai adideva "jagi |em. : jaga Ed.] bhaji todasa sattadasáksara 
canda [= Skt. pratyekam sahantar dasa rajate mülahrade samyak catuskhanda | ekaivadidevi jagati 
bhrajate trayodasi saptadasáksarà candi] ‘Within the primordial lake [of consciousness] an inner 
four-fold state shines in each of these [phases] by including [the others]. The Primordial God- 
dess, seventeen-syllable Candi, shines undivided throughout the world [that they manifest] as 
the thirteenth’): iz srstikramasya srstisthitisamharanakhyagarbhibhavah. evam sthitisambárayoh 
‘In this way the phase of emission incorporates emission, stasis, withdrawal, and the Nameless. 
Likewise stasis and withdrawal.’ 

77Nv, 173-175. 

278 Mahanayaprakasa (Triv.) 9.15—18b: ekam svasvarüpam hi manameya*pramatrtah (em. [fol- 
lowing citation in Tantrilokaviveka, vol.3, p. 128] : pramatrtah Ed.) | sargavatarasamba- 
ra*mayir (em. [following the same citation] : mayair Ed.) akramya vartate | 16 svasvariipa- 
nugunyena pratyekam kalanavasát | srstisthityadibhedais ca caturdha *tà api (em. [following the 
same citation] : api tah Ed.) sthitah | 17 kalagrasantam udayac caturdha *vibhavo (em. [fol- 
lowing the same citation] : vihito Ed.) hi yah | tasya vifrantir ekaiva tato devyas trayodasa | 18 
*anakhyacakre (em. [following the same citation] : anyékhyacakra Cod. : anákhyacakra em. Ed.) 
prádhanyát püjaniyatayà sthitah. 


Alexis Sanderson 317 


This is exactly the schema found in Abhinavagupta’s treatment of the twelve 
Kalis in his Zantraloka.*” The substitution of this triad of cognition for the 
older triads of emission, stasis, and withdrawal, will, knowledge, and action, or 
Siva, Sakti, and the individual soul (narah) is indeed one of the most striking 
characteristics of his Trika exegesis. 

This was not the only work of the author of the Trivandrum Mahanaya- 
prakása, though no other survives. He tells us here that he had written a com- 
mentary on the /Krama]stotrabhattáraka [of Eraka],?9? and, while outlining the 
hierarchy of the means of liberation, that he will restrict himself to expounding 
the course of Krama worship since the essentials of the higher method con- 
sisting simply of oral instruction in the Krama's aphorisms have already been 
explained at length in another work. It is probable, though not certain, that 
this explanation was contained in another work by the same author.?*! 


I shall now duly reveal to some degree on the strength of [my ...] this process 
of worship that begins with the sequence of the Pitha, that embodies both se- 
quence and non-sequence, that is radiant with the tradition of the method of 
the successive phases of the expansion of the cycle [of cognition], lest this oral 
teaching of the Gurus should be lost with the passage of time, because the es- 
sentials of the method that consists solely in oral instruction in the aphorisms 
beginning with “It is [no sooner] seen [than] lost” have been expounded at 
length in another [work]. 


The Kramavilasastotra 


One other work dealing directly with the Krama's course of worship survives: 
the unpublished Kramavilasastotra. Its author abjures identification, a usage 


279 Tantraloka 4.123c-125, 148-172. 

280 Mahanayaprakasa (Triv.) 9.68—69: anyair avarakatvena ye bhavah parivarjitah | tair eva 
jnaninam ittham jajvaliti para citih | etadartbanusarena stotrabhattarake maya | sphutam ye 
vivrtah flokas tat... “Thus the highest consciousness blazes up for the enlightened through the 
very entities that others have avoided as obscuring [consciousness]. The verses in the /Krama]- 
stotrabhattaraka that I have clearly explained in accordance with this teaching ...'. The codex 
unicus of our text breaks off at this point. The expression Stotrabhattaraka is used for Eraka’s 
Kramastotra elsewhere in this literature, e.g, in Tantrálokaviveka, vol. 3, p. 223, 1.11; Maba- 
rthamanjariparimala, p. 122, l. 20. 

281 Mahanayaprakasa (Triv.) 1.35—36: drstanastádisamhetakathamátrasya marma yat | tat pra- 
pancitam anyatra yad atah sampratam manak | etat püjanam akramakramamayam pithakra- 
mopa *kramam (em. : kramah Ed.) cakrollasavibhagayuktighatandsat*sampradayojjvalam (em. : 
sampradayojjvalah Ed) | *ma gal luptim (em. : ma gal luptam Ed.) ibedréam gurumukham kala- 
kramád ity atah samyak ~~ ~~ ~~~ navasad asmabhir unmilyate. 


318 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


seen elsewhere in the literature of the Krama, referring to himself simply as 
*someone" 7? [n its opening verse the work offers homage to the whole course 
of worship in all its phases and constituents as the dynamic aspects as the sin- 
gle void of consciousness, then to the void alone, then to the four aspects of 
worship, namely the tasting of the sacramental substances (caruh), the prac- 
tice of the sensual ritual (cara, carya), the esoteric Mudras (muda), and the 
Mantras (ravah),**° and finally to each phase of the course of worship, up to 
that of the Nameless. In this course the text bears witness to a tradition that is 
not seen in the other texts discussed here. While in those the first phase, that 
of the Pitha, comprises worship of Uddiyana, its cremation ground Karavira, 
its Ksetrapala, the Assembly, and the Great Sacrifice, here it comprises only 
four elements: worship of the Pitha, the cremation ground, the Ksetrapala, and 
Mangala as the revealer of the Krama.284 Moreover, while this phase is followed 


282 Kramavilasastotra, f. 10215-v1 (v.27 [last]): ittham etad adhigamya kenacit svastutir 
*visayavyndabhavand (conj. : visayandabhavana Cod.) | yena visvam anisam fivafivaprojjhita- 
kramavildsasamstutam. srikramavilasastotram samáptam iti. 

285 Kramavilasastotra, ff. 98v4—99v1 (vv. 3-7): sarvasarvamayasarvacarvanendpi yasya jagatam 
na trpyate | tam carum *brtacaracaroccayam (conj. : hatacaracarocccare Cod.) cárucarvanacitim 
namamy aham | 4 bháti yaya "satatam (conj. : satam Cod.) sphuradarcir bhasurakantir 
"ayam (corr. : iyam Cod.) *sumahagnih (su conj. : sa Cod.) | tam api "samhrtavifvavilasam 
(samhrta em. : samhata Cod.) naumi nijam asamam iha caryàm | 5 yena ghattitam idam 
jagat*trayam (conj. : trayác Cod.) *cárucáracaturakulakramam (cárucara em. : cāracāru Cod.) | 
*visvabhasurakulakramena (bhásura conj. : másuma Cod.) tam *ravam asmi (conj. : rávarasmi 
Cod.) satatam samanatah | 6 vyomni yo jhatiti naiva *laksyate (corr. : laksate Cod.) naiva capi 
(+) tadujibitakramat | tam *vibhinnasakalakalargalam (rgalam conj. : rggala Cod.) naumi mau- 
dram atiraudram ädarāt | 7 yatra visvam idam akramakramaprakramena *hrdi (conj. : hati 
Cod.) samcaraty alam | tam *caracarasamuccayárcisam (conj. : caravarasamuccayorcciydm Cod.) 
naumi ràvam atirávacaryayà. On these four aspects see Cidgaganacandrika 73 and Mahdartha- 
mafüjariparimala, p. 106, ll. 11—20. 

284 Kramavilasastotra, f. 99v1—100r1 (vv. 8-11): yatra *mürtimadamürtimatkramavyutkramo- 
dayaviramabhasuram (amürtimatkrama conj. : amürttimakra Cod. e. bhasuram conj. : bhasura 
Cod.) | bhati *rasmicaya*cakram akramam (conj. : makramakramam Cod.) naumi pitham 
iba tam nirasrayam | 9 "sarvasamhrtimabanalanale (samhrti conj. : samhati Cod.) yatra visvam 
idam eti bhasmasa(t) | tac chmasanam iha bhisanolbanam ravasamkulamahácitim numah | 10 
yo *mahbánalamaricivisphuratspharabarakabalotkato ‘kramat (visphurat conj. : visphura Cod. e 
hárakabalotkato "kramát conj. [see the citation of the Mantra of the Kalzkulakramárcana in 
footnote 286 on p. 321, in which the Ksetrapala is named Mahasamharabalotkata] : sdraka- 
balotkatakramat Cod.) | tam smasana*vasatim sphuradrucim (conj. : tat fÁmasanavasatesphurad- 
rutih Cod.) ksetrapālam *aham (em. : ibam Cod.) ugram *anatah (em. dnnatah Cod.) | 11 
*yasyah sphuraty esa (corr. : yasyasphurattesa Cod.) maha*maricih (em. : marici Cod.) samhara- 
cakrakramanena rivah | niruttarajfnakrtavabhasaám srimangalam asmi *samanatas (corr. : 


Alexis Sanderson 319 


there by the worship of the five flows or voids (paricavabacakram, khapancaka- 
cakram), the twelve rays of the prakasacakram, the sixteen of the 2nandacakram, 
the seventeen of the marticakram, and the sixty-four of the vrndacakram, here 
the arrangement differs: after the first the mürticakram precedes the prakáía- 
cakram and anandacakram; it is extended by the worship of an amürticakram 
seen nowhere else; and between the Znandacakram and the vrndacakram wor- 
ship of the Guru is inserted.?9? This approximates the course of worship set out 
by Vimalaprabodha in his Kalikulakramarcana on the basis of the Kalikula- 
kramasadbháva. That lacks the amaürticakram but has the mirticakram precede 
the prakasacakram and ánandacakram; it gives the same four constituents in the 
worship of the Pitha, though it adds a fifth element after them, the [Bhairava] 
who embodies Mahakali’s weapon-Mantra;”°° and it prefaces the first phase of 
the worship of the vrndacakram, that of the sixteen Jñānasiddhās, with that of 
Mangala, who is indeed the Krama's Guru, being the source of Jfananetra’s 
revelation.*®” The worship of the marticakram before the prakasacakram and 


samannatas Cod.) tam. 

285 Kramavilasastotra, £.98v1—3 (v. 1): yat kham pancamahamaricikhacitam *caturyacarya- 
fitam (caryà conj. : caccà Cod.) mirtamurtamahaprakdsasahitam sridvadasakuncitam | 
ttamkalyamvaputrasmisodasavytam vrndakramálamhkrtam. sripithinkamahdasmasana*nilayam 
(conj. : nicayam Cod.) vande mahaughankitam; and f. 100r1—101rl (vv. 12-18): yadyana- 
hatahatojjhitakrama (kramá em. : krama Cod.) pañcadhā jagati ravabhusthitih | naumi 
*paficavidbarasmipüjanaprakramaprasarasabasena tām (pujana conj. : pūjanam Cod.) | 13 
yatra siryasasivahni*tapakavyapako (conj. : tapakavyápako Cod.) layalayo (conj. : bhaya- 
bhayo Cod.) virajate | rasmicakratnicayoghanahatam} mürticakram amalam namami "tat 
(corr. : tām Cod.) | 14 yasya maricicayasya samastavyastavikasa*nirasaghanasrih (em. : nira- 
saghanaíri Cod.) | bhaty anukhandam *udagram ajam tac (conj. : adusramajanta Cod.) 
cakram amürtimalam pranato ‘ham | 15 yasyà sd jagati sarvagā "sthitir bhati (em. : sthi- 
tibhiti Cod.) nityam aviluptavigraham | tan namami varapithasamsthitam dvadasabham iha 
rasmimandalam | 16 yabhir asya jagato nirantaranugrahakramavidhir vidhiyate | suddhabo- 
dhavibhavaprabhabhidhas *tà (em. : tan Cod.) namani *gharinir visárinib (em. : gharinivisa- 
rini Cod.) | 17 *yam (conj. : yo Cod.) vilokya sabhayabhayabhrama(h) santim eti sabasaiva 
satkramah | tam gurum sadasadádikalpananmarafivadavanalam numah | 18 jüanamantra- 
va(ra) melakollasacchaktasambbavavilasacaryaya | vrndacakram iha yat sthitam sada pancava- 
hamayarasmi naumi *tat (em. : tim Cod.). 

286 Kalikulakramarcana, f. 513-5: pürvottaramandale HRĪM ŚRĪM HOM ODDIYANAPITHAPADA 
madhye. RIM $RIM HUM MAHAPRADIPTICAKRESVARISRIMANGALADEVI AMBAPADA piirve. 
HRIM $RIM HUM MAHAKARAVIRASMASANAPADA dakse. HRIM SRIM HUM MAHASAMHARABALO- 
TKATAKSETRAPALANATHAPADA Uttare. HJSRAUM MAHAKALIKASTRAPADA pascime. 

°87 Kalikulakramarcana, f. 813—v1: sodasajnanasiddhacakrapijavidhih. yatha pascime mandale 
(0) HRĪM $RIM *MAHAMANGALA-AMBAPADA (em. : mabámandala-ambápáda Cod.). (1) HRim 
SRIM SAUNDINI-AMBAPADA pZrve. (2) HRIM SRIM JYESTHA-AMBAPADA. (3) HRIM SRIM KANDUKI- 


320 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


anandacakram is also seen in the Maharthamanjari of the South Indian Sakta 
MaheSvarananda.*** 

These facts are not sufficent to show that the text is not Kashmirian, since 
we know from the *Kramavamsavali that there were Kashmirian Krama lin- 
eages whose procedure was based like that of this text on the Kalikulakrama- 
sadbhava.*®? However, it must be said that there is no certainty that it is a 
product of this region, even though the phraseology of the text makes this very 
probable,’”° 


Krama works. 


as does its presence in a Nepalese codex with other Kashmirian 
291 


AMBAPADA agnau. (4) HRIM $RIM PATTAKI-AMBAPADA. (5) HRIM SRIM KURMA-AMBAPADA daksine. 
(6) HRiM SRIM DHAMANI-AMBAPADA. (7) HRIM $RIM GANDHAKARINI-AMBAPADA nairrte. (8) 
HRIM SRIM MATANGI-AMBAPADA. (9) HRIM SRIM CAMPAKA-AMBAPADA pascime. (10) HRIM SRIM 
KAIVARTINI-AMBAPADA. (11) HRIM SRIM MATTAKAMINI-AMBAPADA vdyavye. (12) HRIM SRIM 
SUTYAKA-AMBAPADA. (13) HRIM $RIM BHAKSAKI-AMBAPADA Uttare. (14) HRIM SRIM NABHAKSAKI- 
AMBAPADA. (15) HRIM SRIM SRAUTIKA-AMBAPADA isdane. (16) HRIM SRIM RUPIKA-AMBAPADA. 

288 Maharthamanjari 37cd: sattadaha phálanette varaha ccholaba a annanettesum (= Skt. sap- 
tadasa phalanetre dvadasa sodaía canyanetrayol) ‘Seventeen in the eye in the forehead, twelve 
and sixteen in the other two eyes’. On which he comments (-parimala, p. 87, M. 6-7): phálo 
lalatam. tadgate netre saptadasa saktayah. tac ca mürticakram ity dmndyate “The phalah is the 
forehead. In the eye thereon there are seventeen powers, and this is called the marticakram. 

289 Tantralokaviveka, vol. 3, p. 192, ll. 3—6: srikramasadbhavadikasastrasayatas ca patrika atra | 
sristotrakarabhaskarakuladharapirvasu samtatisu ‘Authorizations in these lineages that descend 
from [Eraka] the venerable author of the /Krama]stotra, Bhaskara, and Kuladhara follow the 
doctrine of the Kramasadbhava and [related texts]’. 

Note, eg, (1) yat kham pancamahamaricikhacitam (f.98v1, v.1a); cf. Bhuvana- 
málinikalpavisamapadavivrti, f. 13112—13: svabbavamayanánávidbollekbamaricikbacitam; (2) 
caturyacaryancitam (f. 98v1, v. 1a); cf. Kalskulakramasadbháva qu. in Tantralokaviveka, vol. 3, 
p. 190, Il. 12-15: &ramatrayanam yac cakram ghoraghorataram mahat | kalarüpam *maricya- 
dhyam (conj. : maricyadyam Cod.) twastram kalpantakantagam | dcaret tu mabacaracatu- 
ryenaiva tatra ca | ya kala ghoraghorogra tasyah sa turyaga siva; — Kramastotra qu. Tantra- 
lokaviveka, vol.2, p.188, ll. 1—4: kramatrayatvastramaricicakrasamcaracaturyaturiyasattam; 
Rajatarangini 7.279: mabásamayasamcáracaturair yair abhititah | ganyate svaprabhivograir 
bhairavo pi na nirbhayaih; (3) cárucaracaturákulakramam (f. 9912, v. 5b); cf. Jndnakriyddvaya- 
sataka, f. 4v2—3 (v.20cd): taccdrucaryaé kathanam samkrimah sparsa antarah;, (4) anahata- 
hatojjhitakramat (f. 100r1—2); cf. Prabodha, Astikd, f. 97112, v. 5cd: naumi vagvibhavamantra- 
mátaram tvàm anábatabatojjbitam sivam; Mahanayaprakasa (Triv.) 7.147ab: akrsya ghattayaty 
uccair anahatahatojjhitah. 

??1See p. 437. 


Alexis Sanderson 321 


The Khacakrapancakastotra 


In addition to this we have one other surviving but unpublished Krama text 
that evidences a course of worship that deviates from the norm seen in the ma- 
jor Kashmirian sources, though in this case the evidence is indirect. This is the 
Khacakrapancakastotra, the ‘Hymn to the Five Voids’. Written in the scriptural 
register of Sanskrit it is declared in its colophon to have been an oral transmis- 
sion originating in Oddiyanapitha from “all the Yoginis” of that sacred site.??? 
A narrative that precedes the hymn itself tells us that the occasion of the hymn’s 
creation and first transmission was, exactly as in the Krama scriptures’ account 
of their revelation, the “Great Assembly” (mahdamelapah) of Yoginis in the Kara- 
vira cremation ground.” Here too, as in the Kashmirian post-scriptural texts, 
they are led by Mangala, but they are one hundred and seventy rather than 
the sixty-four of the standard account. Five sets of seventeen assemble in five 
circles (bbasácakram, khecakram, dikcakram, gocakram, and bhicakram) corre- 
sponding to the Five Voids of the title, thus eighty-five in total, presided over by 
the five goddesses that govern these Voids (Vyomesi, Khecari, Dikcari, Gocari, 
and Bhücari). From these arises a second set of eighty-five, the first set in the 
sky (the Ahacakram) and the second on the earth (the bhiicakram).?** After they 


7? Khacakrapancakastotra Ms A, f. 89v3—4 (colophon): iti sri-oddiyanapithavinirgatam sarva- 
yoginipranitam mukbanmukhavirnirgatam maharthakramajnanartham srikhacakrapancakasto- 
tram samaptam. 

3 Khacakrapancakastotra Ms B, f.lv (vv. 7c-8): sripitha uttaranta*sthe (conj. [Aisa 
sandhi] : sthd Cod.) "astapithasamudbhavab (asta em. : abja Cod.) | karavirasmasane 
tu ekacakrasamagatah | mabámelapamilità yagakridotsave sthitah (yagakridotsave em. : 
yogakridatsavai Cod.) ‘In the venerable Pitha of the north [the Yoginis] originating from 
the eight Pithas came together in a single circle in the Karavira cremation ground. Joining 
in the Great Assembly they participated in the celebration of the Great Sacrifice’. In sup- 
port of the emendation “astapitha- for abjapitha- see Kalikulakramasadbhava, f. 2v1 (1.53— 
55b): astau pithás tu ye proktah sarvapithesu cottamah | tatrasthas tu imah sarvā ága(ta)s 
tu svabhivatah | astav astaguna divyah svabhava*darsanotsukah (conj. : dasatsukah Cod.) | 
catubsasti(r) mahabhimah sarva*viresanayaka (em. : sarvvavirepranayaka Cod.) | maha*yage 
(em. : yogai Cod.) tu vai rudra udyukta(s) tu vidhanatab; and — Sitikantha, Mahānayaprakāśa 
9.2: asta pitha astav astagune astaste *cuhasta (em. GRIERSON [1929, § 64] : cuasta Ed.) ma- 
haugha. 

294The variant scheme is driven by the multiplication of the five levels, shared with the stan- 
dard model of the 64 Sakinis of the vrndacakram, by seventeen, that being the number of the 
sounds in the nine-syllable Vidya of Kalasamkarsini (KHPHREM MAHACANDAYOGESVAR —MA- 
E-KHA-PHA-RA-MA-HA-CA-NA-DA-YA-O-GA-E-SA-VA-R); cf. Devidvyardhasatika f. 8v4—5 (vv. 91c— 
92b): kule tam navadha yojya kaule saptadasaksara | navavarnavibhedena jneya sa sodasadhika. 
For the name of each Yogini in each subset of seventeen in the first eighty-five begins with one 


322 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


have sung their hymn the eighty-five in the sky dissolve, leaving the remaining 
eighty-five to transmit it to Bhairava.’”° 

It is probable that this too is a product of Kashmir. For in spite of its scrip- 
tural style and consequent deviations from the grammar of the most learned 
Sanskrit, its opening verses venerate not only Mangala but also JAananetra- 
nàtha.? Moreover, the hymn contains two sets of goddesses attested to my 


knowledge only in Kashmirian Saiva tradition." 


of the seventh sounds. At the centre of these eighty-five is their leader (cakrandyikd), the god- 
dess Mangala, associated with the culminating M [Ma-] of the first KHPHREM. From her flows all 
authority through initiation in the Krama (adhikdrah): pancdsitis tu *khecakram (corr. : kham 
cakram) tanmadhye cakrandyika | mangalakhya tu ya devi sadhikarakari tu sā (ms A, f. 76v1—2, 
v. 40). 

25 Khacakrapancakastotra ms A, f. 87rÁ-1 (vv. 146-47): evam stutva mahavidya yoginyah 
sarvapithajah | dviprakarakramodbhütab pancasaptadasotthita(h) | prathamas cakrasambhitah 
stutim krtvà layam gatah | aparab pancacakrastha bhairavasya prakasitam. 

2% Khacakrapancakastotra ms B, f.1v3-4 (v.3): samarasapadalino nihsvabhavaikavirah 
*Samitasakalabhavo (samita corr. : samita Cod. © bbavo corr. : bhdve Cod.) jfanadrstiprakasab | 
viditaparamatattvo labdhavijnanasaukhyo rasitaparamabodho jhananetr*akhyanathah (em. : 
athyanatha Cod.) “The Nàtha Jfananetra has merged with the level where all experience is 
one. He is the solitary Hero of that beyond essence, he in whom all phenomena have been 
brought to silence, radiant with the vision of his gnosis, who has realized the ultimate real- 
ity, who has attained the bliss of understanding, who has relished the highest enlightenment’. 
The term nihsvabhava- ‘without self-hood’, so familiar in Mahayanist literature, is much used 
in the Krama. See, e.g., Kalikulakramasadbhava, £.915 (3.93cd): nibsvabbavam niraupamyam 
nirlaksyam nibprayojanam; Kalikulapancasataka A, f. 5r2—3 (2.6ab): nihsvabhavasvabhavam ca 
dvaitadvaitavivarjitam; Yonigahvara, f. 711—2 (v. 88): etat svarüpam ka[thi]tan ni(P)svabbavam 
svabhivagam | kalinam paramam güdham mahavyomantabhasakam; Kaulasutra f. 2v5: bhava- 
bhitasamvidam ante nihsvabhavataparyavasinam; Chummásamketaprakása, f. 5v4—5 (v. 73ab): 
akulam gurubhih proktam nihsvabhavam sadoditam. 

°7 Thus Khacakrapancakastotra ms A, £.7515—v2 (vv. 130-131b): maricijvaladhtimrabhe tā- 
pane "tápanadyuti (conj. : tapane dyuti Cod.) | *pācani (corr. : pācanī Cod.) havyavihe ca 
(corr. : Pavyavajfia ca Cod.) *tejobhasi (conj. : tejobhapi Cod.) namo tu te | satadhame maba- 
dhame visvadhame tamontike. These are the twelve solar Saktis worshipped in the Kashmirian 
Sivadipasraddha as the retinue of Samkarsanadevi (= Kalasamkarsani), with the exception that 
there we have Padmagarbha rather than Visvadhama (Karmakanda, vol. 4, pp. 416—7; phot. 
reprod. in CHANDRA 1984, pp. 237d—238a): Marici, Jvalini, Dhümra, Tapini, Tapini, Pacini, 
Havyavaha, Tejovati, Satadhàmà, *Sudhàmà (corr. : svadhdmayai Ed.), Padmagarbhà, and 
Tamopaha. The Jayadrathayámalaprastáramantrasamgraha gives this same set as the retinue of 
the Mata goddess Ardhacakreévari whose Kalpa is taught in Jayadrathayamala, Satka 2, ff. 87 r8— 
88v9 (Patala 17), giving the Mantra of the central goddess as HAM RJHRIM DHAMANTAKALI SAH 
and those of the twelve surrounding her in the same form, but substituting the twelve vowels in 
order (a to 6, E to AU, AM, and AH) for the I of RyHRIM and the names in place of DHAMANTAKALI 


Alexis Sanderson 323 


The Bhavopahárastotra and its Commentary 


Other Kashmirian works survive that, though they tell us nothing concerning 
the details of the Krama worship, are nonetheless imbued with or influenced 
by the Krama: the Bhavopahdravivarana of Ramyadeva, son of Jyogdeva,??? the 
Sivaratrirahasya, also called Sivaratrinirnaya, of Upadhyaya Sivasvamin II, and 
the anonymous /fanakriyadvayasataka. 

As for the first, the author of the hymn on which it comments, Bhattaraka 


Cakrapaninatha,*”? was, like Cakrabhanu, Isani, and Jaiyaka, a Mahavratin, as 
he himself declares: °° 


Supreme Lord, witness of all, accept [this] hymn from me whose thoughts are 
free of pride, disdain, and possessiveness, whose head is [now] placed on the 
throne that is your feet, my body covered with ash, a human skull in my hand. 
A nameless (kas cit) ascetic has composed [this] transcendent hymn of the inner 
worship of Sambhu, lord of the wheel of consciousness, after retiring to [the 
cremation ground,] the grove of the Mahapasupatas. 


and:??! 


followed by + KALAKALI (ff. 18v7—19r3: HAM RJHRAM MARICIKALAKALI SAH etc.). 

The hymn also invokes the two sets of four goddesses that are held in the Kashmirian tradi- 
tion to be Saktis of the central deity of the Daksinasrotas (Bhairava) and Vamasrotas (Tumburu) 
respectively (v. 135cd, 137ab): siddhe fuske *kajabhe ca (conj. : kajabhave Cod.) utpalakhye 
namo ‘stu te | jaye ca vijaye devi jayanti cáparajite. The third goddess of the first set of four is 
Rakta ‘the Red’ in all other sources. My emendation kajabhe ca gives a synonym ‘She who has 
the colour of the red lotus’. I have accepted as an Aisa licence the reading jayanti where gram- 
mar requires the vocative, since jayanti would be unacceptable, creating a completely iambic 
posterior Pada. For evidence that the first of these sets and its combination with the other are 
peculiarly Kashmirian see SANDERSON 2005b, pp. 287—281. 

?°8The name of his father is seen only in the colophon. Ramyadeva identifies himself and his 
teacher in the closing verse of the commentary. 

For his title Bhattaraka, denoting a Saiva ascetic with authority over others, see 
Ramyadeva’s commentary, p.2, l. 11 (bhattarakapadah). The name Cakrapani is not found 
in the hymn itself but is given by Ramyadeva, who finds it alluded to in the hymn's last verse 
in ciccakranáthasya ‘lord of the wheel of consciousness’, stating that the author is thereby sug- 
gesting his identity with the object of his worship (Bhavopaháravivarana, p. 44, M. 3—5). 

900 Bhavopaharastotra, vv. 46—47: stotram grhüna paramesvara visvasàksin manévamanamama- 
tojjhitacittavrtteh | mattas tvadanghriyugapithanilinamauler bhasmavagunthitatanor nrkapála- 
paneh | 47 mahapasupatodyane kascid visramya tapasah | cakre ciccakranathasya sambhor bhava- 
nutim param. 

3°! Bhavopaharastotra, v.6: tvatpadabjarajahputacitabhasmavibhusitat | grhana mattah sri- 
kantha bhavapujam akrtrimam. 


324 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


Srikantha, accept this true mental worship from me who am adorned with the 
ash of funeral pyres that has been purified by the pollen of your lotus feet. 


His hymn addresses Siva and has no explicit Krama content. Nonetheless, there 
are elements of double meaning within its three opening verses of obeisance 
(namaskaraslokáb) that reveal that the author was indeed writing within this 
tradition: 


(1) Obeisance to Bhava, the bestower of liberation who withdraws the body of 
Time through the array of the [twelve] solar powers (szryakalajala-), enthroned 
(-pithaya) on (/whose Pitha comprises) both the throne and the enthroned. (2) 
Obeisance to Siva, who garlanded with the lotuses that are the [sixteen] powers 
[latent] in the new moon embodies the highest bliss (-dnanda-), whose form is 
unmanifest (/in whom the martih is withdrawn) (avyaktamürtaye). (3) Obei- 
sance to Hara, the supreme self who manifests the mass of the bonds, immerses 
himself within them, dissolves them, and remains concealed in the innermost 
core of Mantra. 


I propose that this alludes to the phases of the Krama’s course of worship: those 
of the Pitha, the five Flow Goddesses that are its basis (paricavabacakram), the 
twelve solar powers of the circle of Illumination (prakasacakram), the sixteen 
lunar powers of the circle of Bliss (4nandacakram), the circle of Embodiment, 
that is to say, of the re-emergent ego (marticakram), and its resorption [into 
the circle of the Multitude (vrndacakram), and, in the third verse, the four 
phases of Emission, Stasis, Withdrawal, and the Nameless. Ramyadeva does 
not offer this interpretation but he does read the work as a text of the Krama, 
finding its doctrines wherever his ingenuity and the resources of the flexible 
Indian ars interpretandi permit him to do so. Indeed he takes the very concept 
of the hymn, as an expression of worship in which the acts and offerings of the 
external cult are translated into mental enactments of immersion in the deity 


(bhávapüja), to be grounded in the Krama’s tradition of oral instruction:??? 


9? Bhavopaharavivarana, p. 2, M. 1—12: iba hi niruttaranirniketanavata*vitankalamkavalita- 
sakalakalpanakulaparamabbairavasatattuam (em. — vitankasamkalitasakalakalanakula | Ed.) 
avacyavacakam | *avarnanirvarnam (em. : avarnanirvarnanam Ed.) *anddyantam anantar- 
babirüpam (em. : anadyanantam antarbabirüpam Ed.) apujyapüjakam api prasaradadyod- 
yantrtávatàrakramávatáritapatcavàhamayákrtrimapüjyapujakakramena "protsphuratity (em. : 
protsphuratiti ritir Ed.) avigitamukhasampradayasaranisamanugata sarvagamantarghumaghuma- 
yamánà srivijfiánabbairavádisu svakanthenaiva bhagavata nirnità srisvatantrabhattarakadisu ca 
akrtvà manasam yagam ityadivakyair dhvanita mánasayagánatirekini (em. : manasayagatirekini 
Ed.) sarvabhivopahrtih. tām eva bhattarakapadah stotramukhena prakatayanta dadislokena- 
sucayanti. The emendation to -alamkavalitasakalakalpanakulaparamabhairava- is prompted by 
Sivastitravimarsini, p. 18, l. 11—12: sakalakalpanakulalamkavalanamayatvac ca bhairavah. For 
Ramyadeva's dependence on the passage see footnote 315 on p. 329. 


Alexis Sanderson 325 


The highest Bhairava cannot be transcended, is beyond all contexts, and with- 
out imprint in the abyss of his being, having completely swallowed the manifest 
world of every constructive cognition. Being void of signs and what they signify, 
being free of both of the sounds of speech and of that which transcends them, 
being without beginning or end, interior or exterior, [the primordial ground] 
that he constitutes is untouched for us by [the artificial (Artrimah) relation of] 
the worshipped and the worshipper. Nonetheless it does manifest itself as a 
natural and spontaneous (akrtrimah) process of [interaction between itself as] 
worshipped and [itself as] worshipper when it takes the form of the various un- 
foldings of the Five Flows [embodied in the order of Krama worship], these be- 
ing brought into play as the actively flowing state of primordial energetic agency 
surges up [within it]. The 'offering up of all phenomena' [which gives the work 
its title] is in line with this established oral teaching. It resonates indistinctly in 
all the Saiva scriptures, [but] is openly taught in such as the Vijianabhairava,*? 
and evoked in such as the Svacchanda in statements such as "Unless he first does 
mental worship ...'.?9^ Intending to clarify through his hymn this process of 
offering up all phenomena [into Siva], which is none other than that mental 
worship, the venerable Bhattaraka alludes to it in his first verse. 


His position as an exponent of the Krama is also apparent in his cita- 
tions of the works of others. These, apart from three quotations from Rajanaka 
Utpaladeva, one from the Saiddhantika Kalottara,* and one from the Span- 
dakarika of Kallata,*°° are from works of the Krama Gurus Eraka, Hrasvanatha 
(Vamanadatta), Cakrabhanu, and Prabodhanatha,*” and from the Kalikula- 


3% He alludes to Vijianabhairava, vv. 1-16, ending evamvidhe pare tattve kah püjyah kas ca 
trpyati ‘In a supreme reality of that nature who is there that can receive puja offerings and who 
that can be gratified [in the fire of sacrifice]? 

34 Syacchanda 3.32c-33b: akrtvà manasam yàgam yo ‘nyam yàgam samarabhet | asivah sa 
tu vijfieyo na moksaya vidhiyate “Know that anyone who undertakes the other[, external] wor- 
ship without having first done mental worship is not a Siva and [therefore] is not fit to attain 
liberation’. 

3% Bhavopaharavivarana, p.16, 1l.13-16 (= Sivastotravali 16.29); p.26, Il. 14-17 
(= Sivastotravali 13.16); p. 43, ll. 16-17 (not known); p. 30, Il. 3—4; p. 30, Il. 3-4 (= Sardhatri- 
satikalottara 1.6c—7b). 

3% Bhavopaharavivarana, p. 30, 1. 14 (= Spandakarika 2.1a in Ksemaraja’s numeration). 

3°7(1) Kramastotra (Bhavopabaravivarana, p. 3, |. 14, citing Pada c of the verse on Maha- 
kalakali without attribution; see Tantrálokaviveka, vol. 3, p. 185, 1. 15); (2) Svabodhodayama- 
fijari 19cd (Bhavopaharavivarana, p. 19,1. 9 [unattributed]: buddhavat sarvaragi syát sarvadvesyo 
‘tha bhairavah); (3) Sripithadvadasika (Bhavopaharavivarana, p. 43, citing v. 3cd without attri- 
bution), and (4) an unnamed hymn by the ascetic Prabodhanatha (Bhavopahdravivarana, p. 10, 
ll. 5-8). 


326 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


based scripture Vzjasaneya.?9* 
He also includes passages from his Advayadvadasika, ? six otherwise un- 


known works by himself, some of whose titles and contents reveal their Krama 


310 and one from an unnamed work by his unnamed son, which also 


311 


context, 
pertains to the Krama. 

At the end of the work he declares that he has received empowerment from 
the Pithesvaris, and that this occurred through oral transmission from his Guru 
Yogananda,?'? a remark that reveals that initiatory empowerment in the Krama 
was seen as the re-enactment of the original revelation in Uddiyana and that the 
lineage of Krama Gurus was perceived as an internally undifferentiated stream 
of consciousness multiple from generation to generation only in outward ap- 
pearance. Thus in his penultimate verse he can say: 


I bow to the line of Gurus, the sole cause of salvation, the expansive circle of 
the rays [of enlightenment] that has come from that whose form is beyond 
perception.?? 


3% Quoted in Bhavopaharavivarana, p. 6, ll. 9—12. (vajasaneyabhattarikayam api). That this 
scripture is a work of the Kalikula or of one greatly influenced by it appears from two 
verses cited from it by Ksemaraja in his Sivasiitravimarsini, pp. 136, 1. 13-137, 1.3: tatha 
ca srivajasaneyayam: ya sā saktih para siksma vyüpini nirmala Siva | $akticakrasya janani 
paranandamrtatmika | mahaghoresvari canda srstisamharakarika | trivaham trividham tristham 
balat kálam prakarsati. The last line is evidently a semantic analysis of the name Kalasamkarsani. 
Cf. Paryantapancasika 42: trivaham tripatham tristham kalam sa karsati svatah | bahis tatas cat- 
manīti friparà kálakarsini. See also the Kalikula-based Trika text Deydydmala paraphrased in 
Tantraloka 15.335c-338 and the direct citation by Jayaratha on that passage (Tantralokaviveka, 
vol. 9, p. 169, 1. 18): sa graset trividham kalam kalasamkarsini tatha. 

9 Cited in p. 41, Il. 13-16. This work, under the variant title Paramarthadvadasika has been 
wrongly attributed to Abhinavagupta; see RacHAvAN 1980, pp. 76-77. 

310(1) Akulakalikatrimsika: p. 8, M. 5—8 (l. 9: ityddyasmadviracitakula*kalikatrimsikokta- (ka- 
Lika em. : kaulikā Ed.), p. 38, ll. 14-7; (2) Akramakallolakarika: p. 4; (3) Krtantatantisantistava: 
p. 41, ll. 8-11; (4) Cakresvarabhairavastaka: p. 29, ll. 3—6; (5) Sivaravastotra: pp. 10, 17-11,1. 2; 
and (6) Sivaratrivicaravartika: p. 34, ll. 1—4. 

311 Bhavopaharavivarana, p. 6, 1l. 4-7, on the sequence-transcending goddess (krs) enthroned 
above Siva. 

?? Bhavopaharavivarana, p.44, l.10—13: yoganandabhidhanadvijavaravadanayatapithesi- 
devipadavadyotitajhapranayanajanitanantasotsahaharsah | stotre bhavopahare vivaranam akarod 
ramyadevo dvijanmá janmádyaydsabbarngapravanamatilasatsadrabasyopadeíab “This commen- 
tary on the Bbavopabarastotra has been composed by the brahmin Ramyadeva, in whose mind 
intent on putting an end to the torments of birth and [death] the true secret instructions are 
radiant, in whom joy of endless vigour has arisen from his practice of the empowerment re- 
vealed by the venerable Pithesvari goddesses, which has been passed on to him from the lips of 
Yogananda, the foremost of brahmins’. 

313 Bhavopaharavivarana, p. 44, ll. 6-9: adrstavigrabágatam maricicakravistaram | anugrahai- 


Alexis Sanderson 327 


and the first three aphorisms of the Krama-based Kaulasitra can declare to the 
same effect: 


(1) There is but one Guru, the uninterrupted transmission of the rays [of en- 
lightened consciousness] passed on to us through the initiatory lineage (ovallih). 
(2) There is but one deity, the reality that they have perceived. (3) The power 


of its consciousness is nothing but the state of [their] innate self-awareness.? 14 


As for the date of Ramyadeva we can deduce from his citations of other au- 
thors that he was later than Prabodhanātha, who, as a pupil of Cakrabhānu, is 
likely to have been active around 975. However there are elements in his termi- 
nology and phrasing that suggest strongly that he knew the works of Ksemarāja 
and is therefore unlikely to have been active before the eleventh century.?!” 
About his Guru Yogānanda we know nothing more, though it is conceivable 
that he is identical with the person of this name whom Abhinavagupta has listed 


among his teachers.’!6 It has been claimed that Ramyadeva is identical with the 


kakaranam namámy aham gurukramam. 

314 Kaulasutra, f. 1v4: avicchinnam ovallikramayatamaricisamkramanam evaiko guruh | tad- 
upalabdham eva tattvam eko devah | tasyaika sahajahambhavabhimis cicchaktih. Cf. the South 
Indian MaheSvarananda’s Padukodaya quoted in his Maharthamanjariparimala, pp. 15—16, es- 
pecially p. 15, Il. 21-23: sa ca suabhavad ekah sann aneka iva bhasate | arabhya mangaladiptii- 
vanandadikam kramam | ambanathapadadhyasat paramparyena pujyate ‘And this though really 
one appears to be many and is worshipped sequentially beginning with the series that begins 
with Mangaladipti and Sivananda [= Jfananetra] through the superimposition of the epithets 
-amba [after feminine names] and -natha [after masculine: HRIM $RIM MAHAMANGALADIPTI 
AMBAPADA. HRIM SRIM SIVANANDANATHAPADA etc.]’. 

315The novel expression prasaradadyodyantrtà (p.2, 1.4, in the passage cited in foot- 
note 302 on p.326) echoes Ksemaràja, Sivasiitravimarsini, p.50, ll: paraprakasah 
akrtakodyantrtátmanoccárena dhávati prasarati ity arthah and p. 18, Il. 8—12: yo ‘yam prasa- 
radrüpayà vimaríamayyáà samvido jhagityucchalanátmakaparapratibbonmajjanarüpa udyamah 
sa eva sarvasaktisamarasyena asesavisvabharitatvat sakalakalpanákulalamkavalanamayatvac ca 
bhairavo .... The passage in bold beginning sakala- has been adapted by Ramyadeva in the 
same passage; see here footnote 302 on p. 326. The first of the introductory verses speaks of 
the Bhairava who is consciousness (bodhabhairavah) being worshipped on all sides by the god- 
desses that are the sense-faculties (karanesvaryah). The expressions bodhabhairavah and its syn- 
onym cidbhairavah are a feature of the works of Abhinavagupta and Ksemaraja; see Malinivija- 
yavártika 1.42d (bodhabhairave); 2.147a (cidbhairava-); Tantráloka 1.123b (bodhabhairavah); 
4.23c: cidbhairavavesa-; Netroddyota on 10.14 (cidbhairava-); on 19.162 (cidbhairavanathasya); 
Bhairavanukaranastotra 2a (cidbhairavam); 48b (cidbhairava); Svacchandoddyota, introducing 
8.1 (bodhabhairavasya); Mangala verse of commentary on 11 (svacchando bodhabhairavah). 

316 Tantraloka 37.60-62: *amardasamtatimaharnavakarnadhérah saddaisikairakavaratmaja- 
vàmanáthah (amarda em. : ananda Ed.) | srinathasamtatimahambaragharmakantih sribhi- 


328 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


scholar of that name who is mentioned as a contemporary by the Kashmirian 
poet Mankha early in the twelfth century. Nothing excludes that date, but the 
identification rests on the name alone and is fatally undermined by the fact that 
Mankha praises him not as a Saiva but as a master of the Vedanta who wrote a 
commentary on the Jstasiddhi [of Vimuktàtman].?' 


The Sivaratrirahasya of Sivasvamin Upadhyaya 


The Sivaratrirabasya of Sivasvamin, probably the Sivasvamin Upadhyaya [II] 
who was active during the reign of Ranjit Singh (1819-1839),°'® gives an es- 
oteric reading of the deities, the various vessels and other ritual substrates, the 
offerings, and timing of the worship to be conducted by Kashmirians on the 
thirteenth lunar day of the dark fortnight of the month of Phalguna, the high 
point of the annual Sivaratri festival (bérath). The interpretation takes the outer 
elements of the ritual and translates them into symbols of structures in the body, 
senses and mind merging into and arising from Siva in union with the Goddess 
as the pure, dynamic consciousness that is the innermost ground of the wor- 
shipper’s awareness, making contemplation of these structures the power that 
animates and bestows efficacity on the outer processes. The Krama provides the 
symbolism of the cone-shaped Linga of baked clay known as the sané pótul" in 
Kashmiri. Said here to be five-faced and termed the paricaputtalalingam, its 
five faces are equated with (1) the five elements of the worship of the Pitha, 
from the Pitha itself, through the cremation ground (smasanam), the Site- 
Guardian (Ksetrapala), and the Assembly (melapah) to the sacrifice (ydgah), 


tirajatanayah svapitrprasadah | traiyambakaprasarasagarasayisomanandatmajotpalajalaksmana- 
guptanathah | turyakhyasamtatimahodadhipirnacandrah *Srisaumatah (em. : srisomatah Ed.) 
sakalavit kila Sambhunathah | sricandrasarmabhavabhaktivilasayoganandabhinandasivasaktivi- 
citranathah | anye pi dharmasivavamanakodbhatasribhitesabhaskaramukhapramukha maha- 
ntah '(1) Vamanatha, son of the excellent Guru Eraka, [my] helmsman over the ocean of the 
[Saiddhantika] Amardaka lineage, (2) the son of Bhütiraja, initiated by his father, [my] sun 
in the vast sky of the Srinatha lineage, (3) Laksmanaguptanátha, disciple of Utpala, the dis- 
ciple of Somananda, [my Visnu] lying on the ocean of the lineage of Trayambaka. (4) the 
omniscient Sambhunatha, disciple of Sumati[natha], [my] full moon over the ocean of the 
Kaula lineage, (5) Candrasarman, (6) Bhavabhaktivilasa, (7) Yogananda, (8) Abhinanda, (9) Si- 
vasakti, (10) Vicitranatha, and other great [scholars] such as (11) Dharmasiva, (12) Vamanaka, 
(13) Udbhatasri, (14) Bhütesa, and (15) Bhaskaramukha’. On the emendation srisaumatah for 
srisomatab see SANDERSON 2005a, pp. 132-138, footnote 106. 

317 Syikanthacarita 25.32-33. The claim is RAsroars (1979:192—193). 

3180n his date see footnote 653 on p. 425. 


Alexis Sanderson 329 


(2) the five gross elements from ether to earth, (3) the five sense-objects from 
sound to odour, (4) the five Cause deities from Sadasiva to Brahma, (5) the 
five Krama goddesses VameSvari, Khecari, Dikcari, Samharabhaksini/Gocari, 
and Raudraraudesvari, (6) the corresponding fives phases of cognition: initial 
urge (udyamah), illumination (avabhasanam), internalization (carvanam), the 
devouring of time (kalagrasah), and final quiescence (visrintih), and also (7) 
with five manifestations of each of the five material elements in the worship- 
per’s body.?'? The unacknowledged source on which the text is drawing is the 
chapter on the phase of the worship of the Pitha in the Trivandrum Mahanaya- 
prakasa.°*° 


The Jnanakriyadvayasataka 


As for the third and last of these works, the /fanakriyadvayasataka (‘A Hun- 
dred [Verses] on the Unity of Knowledge and Practice’), its subject, as its title 


319 Sivaratrirahasya, f. 3118—19 (v. 84cd): pancaputtalalingasya püjanartho ‘yam iritah; f. 3v1— 
12 (vv. 89c-96): vimrsyam paficadhà rüpam caitanyakulapancake | 90 mrnmaye puttale dehe 
pancadhatvam smrtam budhaih | prathamam pranavah pitham vyoma vamesvari tatha | 91 
sadasivodyamau caiva pithadehah prakirtitah | tatah srikhecari devi vayuh sparso vabhasanam | 
92 isvarah *kaladab*atma (em. : atma Cod.) smasinam cintayed idam | prakasanandarüpasya 
ksetrasya pariraksanat | 93 melapaydgayugmena ksetrapálo ‘bhidhiyate | rüpam sridikcari tejo 
mabhárudro "bi *carvanam (em. : daríanam Cod.) | 94 vyaptam *samharabhaksinya (sambara 
em. : samsára Cod.) samarasyatmakam jalam | ukto melapasabdena pancavahopadesakaih | 95 
raso jalam *gocari (corr. : khecari Cod.) ca kalagrasas ca kesavah | alamgras*atmako (corr. : at- 
make Cod.) yago raudra*raudresvarisritah (corr. : raudrisvarisritah Cod.) | 96 prthivi gandho 
bhicari ca visrantir atmabhüs tatha | anudbhinnacidabhasakulapancakagocaram. Having given 
the correspondences between the faces and the Krama’s five aspects of internal awareness it goes 
on in f. 3v12-17 (vv. 97-100) to show the correspondences with the body of the worshipper. 
Here five entities are listed for each of the five gross elements from ether to earth, down to 
nails, hair, flesh, bone, and skin for earth. He sums up (f. 3v17—20 [v. 101—102b]): evam cin- 
nathadevasya panca vaktrani püjayet | pindasyapi tayos caikyajhanam lingasya pujanam | na 
mrnmayasya lingasya püjanam moksasiddham “In this way he should worship the five faces both 
of the Lord who is Consciousness and of the body. To worship the Linga is to know their untiy. 
Worship of the Linga of clay [alone] bestows neither liberation nor powers’. 

320 Mahanayaprakasa (Triv.) 2.1-29b. The dependence is evident from the agreement in con- 
tent, but also from verbal parallels. Thus cf. kaladahatma smasanam (92a) with kaladahaikabhih 
saisa Smasinam khecari mata (2.15cd); prakasanandarüpasya ksetrasya pariraksandt (92d) 
with etadrüpam param ksetram prakasanandabhimigam | palaye[t] (2.18abc); vyaptam 
*samhavabhaksinya sámarasyatmakam jalam | ukto melapasabdena (94abc) with samarasyát- 
mana sais pratyavrttya samantatah | bhaksayaty antarasparsad atah samharabhaksini Q2c— 
23b); and alamgrásatmako yàgo raudraraudresvarisritah (95cd) with raudraraudefvari yāgas tas- 
mad isto gurüttamaib | alamgrasakramah so yam mabásabasajanmabhüb. 


330 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


indicates, is the necessity of engaging in non-dualistic Saiva practice only if one 
possesses a proper understanding of the doctrine and is sincerely committed to 
its soteriological purpose. Though in general an unmarked expression of Saiva 
non-dualism, it is coloured by Krama language:??! 

Homage to [Siva], whose vast awareness manifests the all-pervading display of 
the [universe of the] six paths, who is [also] the sun that forcibly devours the 
mass of all [those] phenomena. 


Obeisance to him whose nature is to liberate all, glorying in the sequence of the 
Five Flows [that are the goddesses beginning with Vyomavame$vari]. 


All-pervading, beautiful with the bliss and light that flows forth [in him] with 
eternal vigour, who manifests the three worlds as the expansion of the sequence 
of his circles of power, who remains immersed in the core where existence and 
non-existence have dissolved, who is ever eager to devour [into nonduality] 
direction, place, time, form, and all other [aspects of the manifest]. 


It emphasizes Krama methods of enlightenment:?? 


The Krama teaching passed on by the Guru, [participation in] a gathering of 
Siddhas and Yoginis, their sensual practice, oral instruction, [non-conceptual] 
transmission, internal sensation ... 


...through the most intense descent of power, or by force of of one's own insight, 
as the result of practising the Gurus [oral] instruction, by worship, or by study 
of scripture, or by direct transmission of the knowledge of a perfected Yogini or 
Siddha, or by immersion in the blissful sensation of a new consciousness. 


9 Inanakriyddvayasataka A, f£.218—5. (v. 5): sadadhvavitataspharavispharanamabádhiye | 
namah samastabhivaughahathalamegrasabhanave; A, f. 217—v1 (v. 7ab): paicavabakramodagra- 
sarvanugrahadharmine; and A, f. 12r6—v4 (vv. 71-72): vibhuh prasaradamlanaprakasanandasu- 
ndarah | sakticakrakramaspharavispharitajagattrayab | pralinasadasadbhavamadhyavisramama- 
ntharah | digdesakalakavadikavalikaradiksitah. 

322 Imanakriyadvayasataka A, f. 4v1—3 (v.20), in a list of methods of enlightenment: para- 
mparyakramamnayo yoginisiddhamelakah | taccárucaryà kathanam samkramah sparsa antarah; 
f. 1312-4 (v. 75c—77): sutivrasaktipatena svavimarsabalena và | 76 *guriipadesinusthandad arcaya 
Sastrato pi và | nispannayoginisiddhajnanasamkramanena va (B, f. 10r2-3 : lacking in A) | 77 
navinaciccamatkarasparsavesavasena va. The distinctive expression svavimarsabalena occurs in 
the Kalzkulakramasadbháva, f. 2111 (1.49cd): prechami paramam devi svavimarsabalena tu; and 
f. 12v 9-10 (5.44ab): sä vidyàm tava vaksyàmi svavimarsabalena ca. C£. £. 1v2 (1.17c-18b): 
svavimarsadasantasthà tisthate paramesvari | kali tu bhairavarüdha mahakalakalasini. 


Alexis Sanderson 331 


and it pours scorn on hypocrites who use the language of the Krama as an 
excuse for licentious behaviour:??? 


Adopting misconduct they make love to others wives declaring constantly that 
it is wrong to impede the inclination of the powers [of consciousness]. They are 
deluded in constant relish of the objects of the senses, saying that the goddesses 
of their faculties are [thus] filling the Lord that is consciousness with the objects 
of their enjoyment. 


The manuscripts of this work that I have seen do not record the name of 
its author. But it was very probably Sillana, the author of another unpublished 
text, the Svdtmopalabdhisataka. For the phrasing of the two works is remark- 
ably similar.’ As for the time of its composition, that can be determined at 
present only within very wide boundaries. A prior limit in the tenth century is 
set by the fact that it imitates a verse of a hymn by Utpaladeva.?? In another 
verse there is a striking similarity of phrasing with a verse in the Mahdanaya- 
prakáfa of Arnasimha, which would bring the limit up to the late eleventh 


323 Inanakriyadvayasataka A, ff.7v7—8r6. (vv. 43—44): necchavighatah kartavyah saktinam 
iti samtatam | kathayanto duracarah. kamayante parastriyah | 44 cinnatham karanesvaryah 
svabhogaih pürayanti nah | ity ucdnah pramuhyanti visayasvadasamtatau. 

91) [nanakriyadvayasataka (J KAS) f. 5r1-2 (v. 23cd): visrnkhala para saktir hetuh svatmo- 
palabdhaye; cf. Svatmopalabdhisataka (SUS), f. 12r4-5 (v. 102): ity aptasivasadbhavabhava- 
garbhasya sünund | satakam sillanenedam krtam svatmopalabdhaye; (2) JKAS, f. 16r3 (v. 94ab): 
tesim ananyasimanyaparamaisvaryasalinam; cf. SUS, £. 1x6 (4cd): namah svatantratodara- 
paramaisvaryasaline; (3) JKAS, f. 5v6—7 (v. 28ab): saktib sambadhyate tivrà svatantra svaraso- 
dita; cf. SUS, f. 3v2-3 (v. )27: tathaiva nirapeksinyà svarasoditaya vibhoh | mohanidraprasakto 
pi pasuh saktya prabodhyate; (4) JKAS, f. 4r1—2 (v. 17ab): bhavandgurusastrebhyah sadasad- 
vastuniscayah; cf. SUS, f. 5v3 (v. 46cd); buddhyavabudhyate sadasadvastuniscayam; (5) JKAS, 
f. 4r3—4 (18ab): pratitih svatmasattayam sabajánubhavakramab cf. SUS, f. 6r4—5 (v. 51cd): 
tathisya svatmasattàyam pratitir upajayate; (6) JKAS, f. 1216—7 (v. G9cd): vibhuh prasarad- 
amlanaprakasanandasundaraky cf. SUS, f. 6v5 (v. 56cd): sarvatah prasaratspharasvaprabha- 
bharasundarab; (7) JKAS, £12v3-4 (v.71ab): digdesakalakàáradikavalibaradihsitab; cf. 
SUS, f. 6v4 (v. 56ab): kavalikrtadigdesakalakaradikalpanals, cf. (8) JKAS, f. 12v2 (v. 70ab): 
pralinasadasadbhivamadhyavisramamantharah; cf. SUS, £.62-3 (v. 55ab): paramrtarasá- 
svadanirbharanandamantharah; (9) JKAS, £.212-3 (v.4c): durvijfieyarahasyaya; cf. SUS, 
f.7v4 (v.65a): durvijeyarabasyatvad; (10) JKAS, £.2r1—2 (v. 4ab): cardcarajagatsphara- 
sphurattamátradharmine; cf. SUS, f. Gr6 (v. 53ab): sphuraccaracaraspharananakaraparigrahah. 

325 Inanakriyadvayasataka, f. 1v4- (v. 2) (dsannaya sudüraya guptaya prakatatmane | sulabha- 
yátidurgaya namas *citrāya sambbave (unattributed quotation in Subhäsitāvalī, v. 22] and 
£.215—7 (v. 6) (udriktaya prasantaya kathindya dravatmane | mayavine visuddbaya namah 
svadhinasaktaye) draw on Sivastotravali 2.12: mayavine visuddhaya guhyaya prakatatmane | 
suksmaya visvariipaya namas citrāya éambbave. 


332 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


century, if it were not that the direction of borrowing is uncertain.??? The 
posterior limit is set by unattributed citations in the Stutikusumanjalitika of 
Rajanaka Ratnakantha, completed in A.D. 1681,3” and in the Kashmirian an- 
thology Subhasitavali of Vallabhadeva.??? The date of the latter is uncertain but 
it cannot have been earlier than the fifteenth century, since it includes verses 
by Rajanaka Jonaraja, who died in a.D. 1459/60.” 


THE HIGHER KRAMA OF THE ORAL INSTRUCTIONS 


We have seen that the unknown author of the Trivandrum Mahdanayaprakasa 
teaches that the attainment of the goal through the Krama's course of meditative 
worship (piijanam) is the lowest of three means of enlightment, that the highest 
is a non-conceptual transmission (samkramanam), a sudden and definitive rev- 
elation of the Primordial Ground (puranadbisthánakramab, anupayakramab) 
brought about by a non-conceptual (zirvikalpaka-) transmission from Guru 
to disciple, and that between that and Krama worship is a method of oral in- 
struction (kathanam), in which self-realization is initiated by the Guru through 
instruction in a corpus of aphorisms designed to project the recipient with 
a minimum of conceptualization into direct, non-conceptual enlightenment 
(sahasasamadhih) without recourse to the gradualist path of Krama worship. We 
have also seen this higher method claimed by Naga as the source of his 
own enlightenment, invoked by Ramyadeva as the basis of Cakrapaninatha’s 


326There is a close parallel between f. 2v1—2 (v. 7cd) (mohatamisravidhvamsapracandamahase 
namah) and f. 15v4—5 (v.94cd) (te mohadhvantavidhvamsacandamartandamirtayah) on the 
one hand and f. 120v5 (v. 166cd) of Arnasimha's Mabanayaprakasa (bhavatrdbhrantivibhranti- 
vidhvamsoccandadidhitih) on the other. 

Y" Ratnakantha quotes vv. 24-26 in his Stwtikusumanjalitika on 30.39 as the work of a scholar 
of the Agamas (a4gamavidah). According to the opening and closing verses of this commentary 
it was begun in Saka 1602 (a.D. 1680/1] and completed in Vikrama 1738 (a.D. 1681/2). 

98V 1, 2, and 4 have been included by Vallabhadeva without attribution as vv. 21-23 in 
the section of his anthology devoted to verses of religious obeisance (namaskarapaddhatih). 

99 Subhasitavali, v. 3038 (srijonarajasya) = Jonaràja, Rajatarangini 696. The date of Jonaraja’s 
death is recorded by his pupil Srivara in Jainarajatararigini 1.6: srijonarajavibudhah kurvan raja- 
taranginim | sayakágnimite varse fivasayujyam ásadat “The learned Jonaraja attained union with 
Siva while still writing his Rajatarangini in the year [Laukika 45]35'. Subhdsitavali, vv. 621 and 
3038 are attributed to Jonaraja with the title Rajanaka. That anthology also contains numerous 
verses by the fourteenth-century Kashmirian poet and grammarian Jagaddhara. The latter's 
approximate date is determined by the fact that Rajanaka Sitikantha reports in his Balabodhi- 
ninyása, completed during the reign of Hasan Sah (r. 1472-1484), that he is the son of the 
daughter of Jagaddhara’s grandson. 


Alexis Sanderson 333 


Bhávopahárastotra, and mentioned among the means of liberation in the /”d- 
nakriyadvayasataka. 


The Chummasamketaprakasa of Niskriyanandanatha 


The tradition of oral instruction to which these authors refer is preserved in 
the unpublished Chummasamketaprakasa of Niskriyanandanatha. This work is 
a Sanskrit commentary that transmits and explains one hundred and five brief 
aphorisms in Old Kashmiri consisting of from one to three words, which it 
calls variously the chummah, chummapadani, samketapadani, and padani.°°° 
The term chumma is seen in the non-Saiddhantika Saiva Tantras, generally 
of the Vidyapitha, and the Buddhist Yoginitantras (/Yoganiruttaratantras), ap- 
pearing also as chumma-, chummaka-/chummaká-, choma-/chomá-, chomaka- 
/chommaka-, and chommaka-/chommakéa-.*>' In those sources the term denotes 
words or hand-signals by means of which initiates recognize each other or com- 
municate secretly.??? The word is, I propose, Middle Indo-Aryan, deriving from 
Old Indo-Aryan chadman- ‘a disguise.’ Here in the Krama the word means 
rather “esoteric instruction or knowledge’. It is in this sense that it appears in 


330 Chummasamketaprakasa ff. 2v10—3r1 (27—28b): yogyas tvam sanmate putra durgame smin 
mahakrame | ity uktva krpayavisto bodhayim asa maim prabhuh | kimcilc] chummopadesam tu 
samketapadavistaram; f. 318-9 (36-37): parataram aniketam tattvamárgasthitam te | nirupama- 
padachummasampradayam samantat | svarasavasatayaham tvatkrpaghratacittah | prakatatara- 
vacobhir darsayamy asu ninam; f. 1319 (218ab): paricadhikasateneha padaugho yah sthitah parah; 
Anantagakti on Vatilandathasitra, p.2, ll. 2—3: srimadvatilanathasya *pithesvaryas chummápa- 
daugham (em. : pithesvarya ucchusmapádaugham Ed.) uktvà. For this emendation see foot- 
note 374 on p. 347. 

331 Tantraloka 29.37 (chummalchumma-), Svacchanda 15.1, Tantrálokaviveka, vol. 12, Ah- 
nika 29, p.28 (chummaka), Netratantra 20.39 (chummaka-); Picumata, f. 24512. (53.98d): 
cchomakadya(n)galaksanaih; ibid., (53.99a): cchommaka *kidrsa (corr. : kidrfo Cod.) deva; 
f. 246v3 (15.163a and colophon): cchommakam ...cchommádbikàaras; f. 290r4: cchomadhikaro; 
Hevajratantra 1.7.1: atha chomápatalam. 

332 Picumata, f. 245r2 (53.99): chommaka *kidysa (corr. : kidréo Cod.) deva kulanim sadhaka- 
sya ca | prajndyate yatha bhrata bhagini và visesatah; Hevajratantra 1.7.1: atha chomapatalam 
vyakhyasyamah. yena vijhayate bhrata bhagini ca na samsayah; Ksemaraja, Svacchandoddyota, 
vol. 6, p. 126: chummaká tatsamayánupravistasamcityà paribhasiki samjna; Netroddyota, vol. 2, 
p. 233: ágamikapáribhbasikanamani; Kanhapada, Hevajratantrayogaratnamálà on 1.7.1: choma 
miliccha yogininam samketenabhisamayajalpanam;, Caryamelapakapradipa, p. 87, ll. 6-7: kaya- 
chomavakchomasamketena vyavahirah kriyate; Laghvabhidhana, f. 24v4: iti sriberukabhidhane 
bhaksahomabalikriyahastacchomavidhipatala ekatrimsatimah. 

33 Through chatima- by analogy with the development of pomma- from padma- through 
paüma-; see PiscHEL 1900, $8 139 and 166; Siddhahemacandra 8.1.61, 8.2.112. 


334 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


Modern Kashmiri ¢hombé (f.), being glossed in Sanskrit by Pandit Mukunda 
Rama Sastri in Grierson’s dictionary (1932) as giidhavijnanam ‘hidden knowl- 
edge’ and in English as ‘secret knowledge (by which the accomplishment of 
some difficult task is rendered easy), private experience’. 

That the language of the Chummis is Old Kashmiri is not apparent in the 
majority of them, since these consist of unmodified (tatsama-) Sanskrit nominal 
stems, most with the nominative singular ending -u seen in the masculine in 
Old Kashmiri (for Sanskrit masculine and neuter) but also in Apabhramáa, as 
in the first four: Lingu abhbijfanu | aranisamudáyu | cakresimelaku | kalagrasu 
“The point of fusion is the means of recognizing [the self]’; ‘It arises from the 
[attrition of the two] kindling sticks; '[Ihere comes about] the merging of 
the goddesses of the circle’; “Temporal sequence is devoured'.9?4 However, that 
the language is Kashmiri is established by sound changes, morphology, and 
vocabulary. In the first category we see -£i to -ci and -£ti to -cci in the following 
three Chummaás: (1) panthavadhici, glossed:??? 


Though sporting everywhere absolutely unimpeded, with no fixed abode, by 
virtue of the pervasive manifestations of cognition, he comes at last like a trav- 
eller (panthavat) to the pure (avadhitikdm) and beautiful (ancitam) flow that 
cannot be entered, that is untainted [by these wanderings] that are like water 
that rests upon [but does not dampen] the lily-pad. 


(2) macci umacci, glossed:??6 


Because consciousness surges up with innate autonomy she becomes reckless, 
taking on ever-new forms and devouring them all [from moment to moment]. 
She gives no thought to what is right or wrong, being constantly fickle. But 
when this same [consciousness] is sated she completely transcends this madness. 
[For] when [in this way] she catches sight of the highest Siva he tames her 
recklessness. For this reason consciousness, who never deviates from [this] her 
[inner] nature for those blessed [by her favour] has been called mattonmatta 
‘mad [and] free of madness’. 


334 Chummasamketaprakasa ff. 319, 3v3, 3v5, and 3v8. 

335 Chummasamketaprakasa, f. 6v8—9: *panthavadhici (pantha conj. : pantha Cod.) sarvatra 
ramamano ‘pi niyatasrayavarjitah | samvidullasavibhavair anirodhatayabhitah | 92 prápnoti 
vrttim agamam panthavat tv avadhütikam | nirlepam puskaradalasthitavarivad ancitam. 

336 Chummasamketaprakasa, f.7r1—3: maecci umacci. svasvatantryodayataya nirvicāratvam 
dgatà | samvin navanavollekharüpini sarvabhaksini | 94 yuktayuktavicarais tu varjita cancala 
sada | ya sthita nirbhara saiva proccair unmattatam gata | 95 paramam sivam älokya tadvasi- 
krtacapalà | mattonmatta citih khyata satām apracyuta tatah. This indicates that unmattika is 
to be understood as ‘beyond wildness’ (udgatam mattam mattatà yasyà sonmattika). 


Alexis Sanderson 335 


and (3) athici thiti, glossed:??7 


The eternal stasis is the impenetrable, unshakeable domain of the Nameless in 
which the stasis that is the emergence of differentiation is dissolved. 


Niskriyanandanatha, then, takes panthavadhici to be equivalent to Skt. pantho 
vadhütim and to mean '[Like a] traveller [he reaches] the pure [state], macci 
umacci to be equivalent to Skt. mattikonmattika and to mean ‘[First she is] wild 
[; then she is] tamed’, and athici thiti to be equivalent to Skt. asthitya sthitih or 
asthitau sthitih and to mean ‘[True] stasis [comes about] through [or in] the 
cessation of stasis. These readings are in keeping with the change of dental 
t to é before ti-matra (< o1a/Mia -i), i, č, or y that is distinctive of Modern 
Kashmiri.” Moreover, the ending -i for the instrumental or locative singular of 
a feminine noun whose stem ends in -//; is as in the Old Kashmiri of the Maha- 
nayaprakása, which exhibits in vicci (10.2) (Skt. vrttya) both this morphology 
and this sound-change.?? The stem thiti (Skt. sthiti-) is also seen there,*“° and 
though in that text feminine 7/7-stems such as thiti- normally take the ending 
-a in the nominative they do not always do so.?*! 


Also indicative of Old Kashmiri are rami ekayanu, glossed:?? 


He who is the one ground, perfect and all-pervading, plays without falling from 
his nature as he performs every action of every kind throughout the universe. 


337 Chummasamketaprakasa, f. 10v6—7: athici thiti. 163 bhedonmesasthitir yatra layam yata- 
game pade | aprakampye nirakhyakhye sa sthitih sthitir avyaya. 

338GRIERSON 1929, § 8. With macci and unmacci we may compare Modern Kashmiri mac? 
‘mad’ in the feminine as against mor” in the masculine. 

339 GRIERSON 1929, $$ 173 and 206. 

340 Mahanayaprakisa 3.54: thitinistha; 6.5b: thitimaya. 

341 For the nom. sg. in -a of i/i-stems in the Mahanayaprakésa see, e.g., kalasamkarsana (4.6a), 
—Skt. kalasamkarsani; raudresara (5.4a), —Skt. raudresvari; uppatta (6.4b), —Skt. utpattih; 
sista (3.5b), Skt. srstih; and satta (6.4c), —Skt. saktih, Cf. Modern Kashmiri bam ‘land’, — 
Skt. bhimih; bith ‘sacred ash’, — Skt. bhitih; gath ‘motion, — Skt. gatih; gath ‘knot, — Skt. 
granthih; rath ‘night, — Skt. ratrih; sed ‘success’, — Skt. siddhih; shék*th ‘power, — Skt. saktih; 
and shéth ‘the sixth day of the lunar fortnight’, — Skt. sasthi. But the ending in -i/7 is preserved 
in the Mahdnayaprakdsa in utti (12.7c), Skt. uktih); and para satti (3.5a), — Skt. para saktih. 
In the Chummas in all the numerous instances of stems in -/ the final vowel is retained. This 
is consistent with but not proof of their being earlier than the Mahanayaprakasa. 

342 Chummasamketaprakasa, f. 4r7—8: rami ekdyanu. 51 yatas tatas tu sarvatra sarvakarma 
yatha tatha | kurvan nirámayo vyapi kridaty ekayano ‘cyutah. 


336 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


and asphura ulati, glossed: ?*? 


The formless, unlimited Sakti of which we speak in this [system] is this eternally 
open ultimate ground free of all [phenomenal], free of all obscurations, its nature 
the absence of radiance, into which the radiance that is the manifestation of 
infinite cognitions dissolves. 


The -i ending of the two verbs rami and ulati is that seen in the Mabanaya- 
prakása for the third person singular of the present indicative," and the verbs 
themselves survive in the modern language as ramun ‘to play and wultun ‘to 
revert, to turn back ?* The two Chummas, then, are clearly Old Kashmiri, and 
mean respectively ‘He who is the one ground plays and '[Radiance] reverts into 
non-radiance’. 

Other proofs are catta- ‘cutting in cattaniscatti ‘cutting and its ab- 
sence’ (Modern Kashmiri ċath ‘cutting’, ċata-ċath ‘cutting or tearing apart’), 
glossed:*“° 


Cutting is the vanishing of the breath and non-cutting is its [re-]activation. 
Here this one being is the arising of both.*“” 


khita khita ‘having repeatedly devoured’ (khéth khéth, the Modern Kashmiri 


doubled conjunctive participle with the same meaning*®), glossed:?? 


The diverse [reality] that pervades the universe is called food when it has been 
partly dissolved by the rays of one’s awareness, because then one experiences 
[one consciousness simultaneously as] the devourer, the devoured, and [act of 
devouring]. 


95 Chummasamketaprakása, f. 10r8-v1: asphura *ulati (conj. : ulatti Cod). 155 anantasam- 
vidvispharasphurattà layam agata | yatra sarvojjhite dhamni pare nityavikasvare | 156 asphura- 
ttdsvarüpe smin sarvavaranavarjite. 

344Grierson 1929, $ 231, e.g. kari (Skt. karoti) (3.6d etc.); jayi (Skt. jayati) (1.5d). In Mod- 
ern Kashmiri this form in -i has been replaced by a participial construction with the present of 
the auxiliary verb; but it survives as the 3rd sg. of the future and conditional. 

34So in Modern Kashmiri su rami/wulti ‘he will/may play/turn back’ and su cchu 
raman/wul"tan ‘he plays/turns back’. 

346 Chummasamketaprakasa, f. 12v4—5, 203ab: cattaniscatti. cattah pranavindsas tu niscattah 
pranaghattakah | sa eveha vinirdistah cattaniscattakodayah. 

MICE p. 342. 

348 GrieRSON 1932, s.v. khyon", p. 427a10. 

34 Chummgsamketaprakása, f. 12v3—4: khita khita. 202 yad visvavibhavam citram isallinam 
svacitkaraih | tad eva bhoktrbhogyadibhogad bhuktam ihocyate. 


Alexis Sanderson 337 


ditto nitto ‘seen [and] vanished’ (Modern Kashmiri dyith” [stem dith-], past 
participle passive of déshun ‘to see’, and niith", past participle of the intransitive 
nashun ‘to be destroyed, vanish’) ,>”° glossed:??! 


Thus when this universe of differentiation, from the fire of the aeon [at its base] 
to Siva [at its summit], has been seen but once through correct instruction it 
immediately vanishes into the state of non-dual consciousness. 


and lahapravahi, glossed:??? 


A lāhah is so called because through its power it constantly bestows (/2-) em- 
bodiment as the extroverted state of rise and perdurance and then by the same 
means suddenly removes [that state] (-/a-). It is called a lahapravahah ‘a laha- 
flow when it endures. This manifestation of [violent] expansion followed by 
[sudden] transcendence that characterizes a ihapravahah is the non-sequential 
indestructible path of no reflection. It shines uninterrupted as the shining forth 
of the ‘void’ that is the nature of the self. 


The last, I suggest, is connected with Modern Kashmiri ahaprahl lahaprah m. 
‘an attack of hysterical fever or a cataleptic condition brought about by some 
sudden terror (looked upon as a kind of demoniacal posssession which attacks 
babies and pregnant women)',?? and prah m. ‘possession by a demon (be- 
lieved to cause fainting, madness, fury, fever, etc.)'.?4 It appears in the light of 
these meanings and the gloss of Niskriyanandanatha that the Chumma means 
‘seizure and trance’, having in mind a state of spirit possession which first man- 
ifests itself as a state of excessive fury and immediately after that as a state of 
prolonged catalepsy, using this figuratively to point to means of sudden en- 


lightement in which a state of extreme excitation is the point of entry into the 


350GrrERSON 1932, pp. 254b1—2 and 656a45—50. For the ending o instead of the usual w in 
Old Kashmiri for the nom. sg. of nouns originally masculine or neuter see GRIERSON 1929, § 
159. 

351 Chummasamketaprakasa, f. 1316-7: ditto nitto (em. : dibbo nibbo Cod.). 214 ittham 
bhedamayam sarvam kalagnyadi sivintakam | tattvena vyapadesena sakrd yad drstam akramat | 
215 tatksanan nàíam ayati tad evadvayacitpade. 

352 Chummasamketaprakasa, f. 12v5—7: 204 saktyodayasthitispharavigraham lati yas sada | 
tenaiva harati ksiprad yato lahas tatah smrtah | 205 sa eva pravahadripah pravaha iti kathya- 
te | avindasasvabhavo yo nirvitarkakramo ‘kramah | 206 lahapravahika seyam hanivrddhimayi 
pratha | svabhivagaganabhasarupacchinnaiva bhasate. 

55 GnrgRsoN 1932, p. 515b11—16. Sanskrit gloss: bhitavesah. 

9GnrensoN 1932, p. 757a43—b13. Sanskrit gloss: bhitadyavesah. 


338 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


tranquil core of consciousness.??? 


The commentary includes a frame-text in which the author presents himself 
as having received these aphorisms on which he is commenting in a miraculous 
revelation from a Siddha. In the opening passage of the text as it survives—the 
first folio side (1v) is lacking—Niskriyanandanatha relates that the Siddha’s 
favouring glance caused him to fall to the ground in a trance in which he ex- 
perienced the core of consciousness:??ó 
Through the glory of his glance I collapsed on the ground like a felled tree and 
in a flash attained the incomparable state that is free of the external and inter- 
nal faculties, inaccessible to the means of knowledge, free of defects, beyond 
the influence of time or its absence, beyond the lights [of the object, medium, 
and agent of cognition] yet pervading them, unlocated, neither sequential nor 
non-sequential, overflowing with the flooding rapture of the ultimate joy of the 
contactless, beyond bliss, beyond the means of immersion, free of the errors of 
‘is’ and ‘is not’, free both of conceptual and non-conceptual awareness, with a 
nature that transcends [all levels of] cognition, free of the stain [even] of the 
latent impressions [of what it transcends]. 


After a long time he is roused by the Siddha from his rapture and, astonished by 
what he has experienced, full of joy, freed from ego, and feeling the emptiness 
of all the knowledge he had acquired up to that time, he asks the Siddha to 


teach him how the state he has experienced can become permanent:??7 


355 Just such means are taught in Spandakarika 1.22. I take the ending -; in this Chumma 
and cattaniscatti to be that of the nom. pl. of a-stems. In the Old Kashmiri Mahdnayaprakasa 
it is usually -4 (GRrIERSON 1929, $$ 191—192), but there are also a few instances of -e (ibid., 
§ 193). That the same ending should be -z7 in the text of the Chummas may be attributed to 
the fact that for speakers of Kashmiri both e and 7 are pronounced as the latter (ibid., $ 20), 
which has lead to the two vowels being confused in Kashmirian manuscripts, as, for example, 
in Kaladiksavidhi, f. 226r14—v1, where we see srideksadevim for sridiksadevim (see footnote 71 


on p. 257). 
356 Chummasamketaprakésa, f. 211-3: [...ta]ddrkpátamabodayàat | bhümau sampatitah ksiprác 
chinnamüla iva drumah | 2 niruttaropama bhimir bahyantahkaranojjhita | ap[r]ameya 


nilra]tanka *kalakalakalottara (kālākāla corr. : kalakala Cod.) | 3 adhamadhamavibhava 
nirniketakramakrama | asparsaparamanandacamatkaraughanirbhara | 4 nirananda niravesa 
sadasadbhramavarjita | *nirvikalpavikalpa (conj. : nirvikalpavikalpà Cod.) tu samvidujjhita- 
dharmini | 5 práptà maya jhagity eva vasana[hja]navarji[ta]. 

357 Chummasamketaprakasa, f. 214—7: tatraiva bahukalam tu sthito "ham niscalakrtih | 6 akas- 
mát tu prabuddho smi tatprasadavaían manak | apirvasamvidahladacamatkarena ghirnitah | 
7 sthito ‘ham vismayávisto nityanandena nanditah | sastraprapancavimukho gatahampratyayo 
yada | 8 tada maya siddhanathah samprstab pustakanvitah | ‘ya kacid bbür maya natha durgama 
tvatprasádatab | 9 anubhita niratanka tam yatha sarvato "bhitah | samlaksayami satatam tatha 
kathaya me prabho. 


Alexis Sanderson 339 


In that state I remained unwavering for a long time. Then, unexpectedly, by his 
favour, I came round somewhat. I was reeling from the rapturous experience of 
the bliss of that extraordinary consciousness, filled with wonder, ecstatic with 
the eternal joy [of my awakening], now averse to the elaborations of the Sastras 
and freed from all sense of self. Then I addressed a question to the Siddha Lord 
(Siddhanatha) [who was standing there] with a manuscript [in his hand], saying 
“Tell me, my master, my lord, how I may perceive at all times, completely, on all 
sides, the unprecedented, defectless level so hard to reach that I have experienced 
by your favour”. 


The Siddha remains silent, but casts into the sky a glance which causes the 
essence of speech to emerge from the highest void and take form as Atavila:??* 


Then that great-souled one, who remained completely silent, cast a glance 
brimming with the non-sequential into the depths of the sky and through its 
power the unlocated, transcendental Word that is one with Siva, that transcends 
the [levels of ] its immanence [from Pasyanti, through Madhyama] to audible 
speech, came forth from the highest void. It is this that we mean by the Bhairavi 
whose nature is unlocated. It has also been called Atavila, the supreme being 
who embodies the eternally manifest void, who embodies fusion with the radi- 
ances of that most extraordinary consciousness, because at that very moment it 
bestows (-/a) permanently and in non-duality the supreme wilderness (atavi-) 
beyond the [three] lights that is one with that Bhairavi, free of all obscurations. 


Atavila?? points to a manuscript that the Siddha is showing in his hand and 


explains that the two boards that enclose it are the two breaths and the two 


358 Chummasamketaprakasa, f. 217-1: 10 mabáatmaná tadà tena maunasthena visesatah | 
ürdhve vyomni yatah ksipta drstir akramanirbhara | 11 tadadhisthanatas tasmat parakasat 
samutthita | sivasyabhinnaripa tu para vag aniketana | 12 *vaikharyantakulottirna (conj. : 
vaikharyanta kulottirnà Cod.) samastasrayavarjita | bhairavi saiva vikhyata nirniketasva- 
ripini | 13 "tadaiva (conj. : tadaivai Cod.) bhairavi*rüpam (corr. : rüpam Cod.) 
nirdbamaparamátavim | sarvavarananirmukta(m) lati nityam abhedatah | 14 atavilas sama- 
khyáto nityoditakbamürtibhrt | apürvataracidbbabhis sama[ra]syavapuh parah. 

359] surmise that the origin of this unusual name is a narrative in which Atavila was a Sid- 
dha who had assumed the appearance of a member of a forest (atavi) tribe. Such a narrative 
is seen in the Krama in the case of Vidyananda, the disciple of Niskriyananda, who is de- 
scribed in the *Urtaragharamnáya section of the Circinimatasárasamuccaya as sabararüpadhrk 
"having the appearance of a Sabara’ (7.182-83 given in footnote 63 on p. 254). The same is 
reported of the Siddha LokeSvara in the literature of the Buddhist Yoginitantras. He is said to 
have assumed the appearance of a Sabara (sabararüpadbárina) while practising the Sadhana of 
Vidyadhari-Vajrayogini (Guhyasamayamala, f. 87r1—v6). Sabara (/Atavisabara [Mahabharata 
6.10.46c]), Pulinda, and Bhilla, are the usual names applied to such tribal people in Sanskrit 
literature, where they are portrayed as fierce dark-skinned hunters living in the mountainous 
and forested region of the Vindhya who plunder passing travellers and propititate the goddess 


340 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


aspects of the Goddess, transcendent (rsa) and immanent (pzrna), and that he 
must tear these two asunder and behold the ultimate void (mahdastinyatisiinyam) 


that lies between them as his real nature:?9? 


Then [Atavila] deriding me said, “Why are you so proud? What is [the value 
of] this snare of learning? Still you have not shaken off your delusion. Behold 
this manuscript in the hand of Siddhanatha. O you who have mastered the 
Krama, know that its tightly bound five-hood [knot] is the power embodied in 
the five sense-faculties and that its two encircling rings are waking and dream- 
ing. Learn in brief the nature of these its two boards. The outgoing breath with 
its seven flames is held to be the upper, and the lower has the form of the in- 
going. Eternally I am truly present, O brahmin, as these two flows. The two 
boards are [also] known as the awakening of the sequences of immanence (ku- 
lam) and transcendence (kaulam) and as the two immersions that are the active 
and quiescent expansions. Above is the expansive power[, the full-bodied god- 
dess] whose nature is extroversion. Below is this power of Siva that devours[, the 
goddess] whose body is emaciated. Break open these two boards and through 
your awareness [alone] behold between them the great void beyond the void, 
that is free of both the transient and the eternal, that is without sensation, the 
ultimate emptiness, unlocated, unsurpassed, transcending all, unmanifest, eter- 
nally present in everything, the destroyer of Emission, Stasis, Withdrawal, and 


Durga Vindhyavasini with human sacrifices. The hypothesis that the name Atavila points to 
another instance of this primitivist theme gains further support from the fact that Adabilla, 
which, given that M1A voices ora medial ¢ (Pkt. adavi), the common alternation of v and 6, 
and the Law of Morae, is probably the same name, occurs with Sabara/Pulinda in Tantraloka 
29.38 and the Kulakridavatàra quoted by Jayaratha in his commentary on that verse in a list 
of six Lodges (gharam), namely Sabara/Pulinda, Adabilla, Pattila, Karabilla, Ambi/Ambilla, 
and Sarabilla, associated with the six sons of Macchanda and Konkanamba. These Lodges are 
followed by six Pallis. Palli is the standard term in Sanskrit for a Sabara settlement; see, e.g., 
Kathásaritságara 1.2.135—137; 1.5.42; and 12.31.19. 

3° Chummasamketaprakasa, f.2v1—8: provaca prabasan mam sa kimartham wam samu- 
ddhatah | $astrajalam idam kim syad bhrantir nādyāpi te cyutà | 16 pasyemam pustikam 
vipra siddhanathakarasthitim | asyah pancaphano yas tu sthito dydhanibandhanah | 17 
pancendriyamayim saktim viddhi *tam (em. : tām A) kramapdraga | valayau dvau sthi- 
tau yau tu tau jagratsvapnavigrabau | 18 imau yau pattakau dvau tu tau srnusva samása- 
tah | ürdbvapattakarüpas tu pra[na]b sap[ta]sikhah smrtab | 19 adhahsthah) pattako yas tu 
samsthito panavigrahah | pravabadvayarüpo "ham samsthito dvija tattvatah | 20 kulakaula- 
kramonmesarüpau dvau pa[tta]kau smrtau | udriktasintavispharasamavesamayau tv imau | 21 
ürdhvasthà pürnavibhava saktir unmesadharmini | adhath)stha kríadebeyam grasini saktir ais- 
vari | 22 bhittvaitat pattakayugam madb[y]e pasya vimarsatah | mabafünyatisünyam tu ksara- 
ksaravivarjitam | 23 asparíam paramakasam nirniketam niruttaram | sarv[o]ttirnam anabhasam 
sarvatravasthitam sada | 24 srstisthityupasamharakalagrasantakam param | sarvavarananirmu- 
ktam svasvarüpam svagocaram. 


Alexis Sanderson 341 


the [Nameless] devouring of time, supreme, free of all obscurations, the nature 
of the self, present in the self". 


This instruction pushes Niskriyananda into the experience of the ultimate re- 
ality and frees him once and for all from the ‘snare of the Sastras’ that had held 
him in bondage. The Siddha then pronounces him fit to receive the oral in- 
struction and transmits the Chummias to him. Niskriyanandanatha undertakes 
to explain them to his pupil, declaring that by the Siddha’s favour they enabled 
him to achieve liberation through forcible immersion in the state of sudden 
enlightenment (sahasam padam);*°! 


Thus in an instant I experienced directly the most transcendent reality [and] 
abandoned altogether the snare of learning in its entirety. The wise Siddhanatha, 
who [likewise] had let go of all the elaborations of Sastric knowledge, looked at 
me and said ..., “My son with excellent understanding, you are [now] worthy 
to enter this inaccessible Great Krama”. With this, being filled with compas- 
sion, the Lord made me understand completely the wondrous teaching of the 
Chummas with the full expanse of the samketapadani that is hard to grasp [even] 
for the greatest of meditators. As a result I suddenly ascended to the great un- 
fettered, eternal domain of sudden enlightenment, in the state of one who is 
fully awakened. In the same way I shall explain to you fully the unique, most 
extraordinary, indefinable [knowledge] that I have attained by Siddhanatha’s 
favour in that wondrous reality. You have *wandered to (conj.) every Pitha*® 
constantly established in *Brahman (conj.). [Yet] still you have not achieved 


361 Chummasamketaprakasa, fF. 2v8—3r6: ittham parataram tattvam sáksatkrtya mayakramát | 
tyaktam sarvam asesena sastrajdlam samantatah | 26 tyaktasastraprapancena siddbanáthena dhi- 
mata | drstas tu tatksanat tena [......bha]sitah | 27 yogyas tvam sanmate putra durgame smin 
mahakrame | ity uktva krpayavisto bodhayam asa mam prabhuh | 28 kimcei[c] chummopadesam 
tu samketapadavistaram | durbodham tu mabayogipravaránam samantatah | 29 yatas tas- 
män mahoddima sahasam padam acyutam | samaruhya hathad asmi suprabuddhadasanvitah | 
30 ittham apy adbhute tattve siddhanathaprasadatah | praptam *maya (conj. : tvayá Cod.) 
anirdesyam vikalpaughavilapakam | 31 yad apirvataram kimcit tat te vaksyamy asesatah | 
bhranto (conj. : bhakto) 5i sarvapithesu *brahmany avasthitah (conj. : brahmanyevasthitah Cod.) 
sada | 32 tvayadyapi na visrantih samyag "asaditaà para | samdigdhim matim afritya kim 
paryatasi putraka | 33 yogyas tvam parame jhdne yatas tasmad alam bhava | pravaksyami 
mukhamnayam yatha praptam yathákramam | 34 daríanamnayamelapavarjitam satatoditam | 
pijyapujakasambandhaprojjhitam paratattvatah | 35 ekagramanasonmesavimarsena mahamate | 
rabasyapadavistàram vijfieyam vitatam srnu. 

3©2The manuscript reads bhaktosisarvapithesu You are devoted to all the Pithas’. I find this sus- 
pect, since it is not the Pithas themselves that are the object of devotion but the Goddesses and 
Yoginis located in them. I have conjectured bhranto 5i sarvapithesu “You have wandered to every 
Pitha’, because wandering is the action most appropriate in this context and because immedi- 
ately after this statement Niskriyananda will be told that there is no need for him to continue 


342 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


perfect rest. Why continue to roam with confused mind, my disciple? You are 
now fit for the highest wisdom. So cease. I shall teach you in due order the 
oral transmission that is beyond of the schools of philosophy, the [Sakta] Am- 
nayas, and [even] the Melapa [doctrine],>° ever active, in ultimate truth void 


to wander. For this wandering in the Pithas, that is to say, from Pitha to Pitha, see Tantraloka 
29.40: iti samketabhijno bhramate pithesu yadi sa siddhipsuh | aciral labhate tat tat prapyam 
yad yoginivadanát ‘If knowing these conventions he wanders about the Pithas in quest of Sid- 
dhi he soon attains from the lips of the Yoginis whatever goal he seeks’; and Timirodghátana, 
f. 36v3—4: bahudesagata kasci ksetrapithani paryate | varse dvadasavars[e và yogi]ni naiva pasy- 
ati | susamskrto ‘pi devesi bahugrantharthapanditah | bhrame pithopapithani akrtartho nivartate 
‘A person may wander to the Ksetras and Pithas in many lands, [but] in a year or [even] twelve 
see no* Yogini (conj.). Even though correctly initiated and well-versed in the meaning of many 
texts he may wander to the Pithas and Upapithas and return without his purpose achieved’. I 
have not corrected kasci to kascit, paryate to paryatet, or bhrame to bhramet in this passage of 
the Timirodghatana because cases in which final ¢ is treated as though it were silent for the pur- 
pose of Sandhi are not uncommon in the register of Sanskrit evidenced in non-Saiddhantika 
scriptural texts, as, for example, in the Brabmayamala, f. 194v1: sodhaye dhvanam (for sodhayed 
adhvanam); nyase ‘tmanam (for nyased dtmdnam). 

96 The Amnayas referred to here are the Sakta Āmnāyas of the Four Directions (Pürvàmnáya, 
Pagcimamnaya, Daksinamnaya, and Uttaramnaya). The term Melapa, denoting the highest of 
the levels of knowledge to be transcended, lying beyond even the Uttaramnaya (the Kalikula), 
denotes the teachings of the Krama [as opposed to those of the oral instructions]. We find the 
Krama referred to as the Melapa doctrine in the Mabánayaprakáía (Triv.), 9.63: *melapadarsane 
(corr. : melavadaríane Ed.) hy atra pratyaksajhdnagocare. For this hierarchy up to the Krama see 
the commentary on the Old Kashmiri Mahdnayaprakasa on 1.5a (paryantana pari paryanti 
... "akku [Cod. : akka Ed.] mabáthu jayi aniketu “The unique, unlocated Mahartha ...reigns 
supreme within the highest limit of the limits’): paryantavartinim àámnayanam yah para utkrstah 
uttaramndayah tato pi *pancatrimsabhedabhinnad (parca conj. : sat Ed.) yah paryantah pran- 
tavarti navacakrasampradáyab so yam maharthah “The Uttaramnaya, divided into thirty-five 
elements, is the highest [of the limits, i.e.] the foremost of the Amnayas that are at the limit 
[of knowledge]. The limit beyond even that, located at the very summit, is the Mahartha, 
this tradition of [the Krama with] the nine circles [that constitute the phases of worship]’. I 
have ventured to emend the edition’s sattrimsa- ‘thirty-six to paricatrimsa- ‘thirty-five’ because 
in the Devidvyardhasatika the goddess begins her request for instruction by saying that she 
has already been taught the system of Kali worship that has thirty-five divisions (f. 2r3 [v. 8cd]: 
pancatrimsatibhedena kalibhedam maya frutam) and because Vimalaprabodha presents his Kali- 
kulakramárcana as teaching the same on the basis of the [lost] Pavicacdmarasekhara (f. 1v4): 
samviksya vidhivaj jhatua paficacámarasekharam | paficatrimsatibhedáadhyam vaksye srikálika- 
rcanam. The reading in the Devidvyardhasatika Ms is paficavimíati- rather than paricatrimsati-. 
But I have emended it to the latter because it is paricatrimáati- that is given in this verse as it 
appears in the same passage in the Yonigahvara (f. 213 [v. 10cd]) and, with a redactional variant, 
in Kalikakrama (f. 179v2 [v. 2ab]: pancatrimsatibhedena kalikulam maya srutam). The corrup- 
tion sattrimsa- of pancatrimsa- in the Old Kashmiri Mahanayaprakdsa is readily explained as an 


Alexis Sanderson 343 


of the relation of worshipped and worshipper, just as I myself received it [from 
Siddhanatha]. Wise one, learn with one-pointed mind by virtue of awareness 
of the vibrant openness [of your consciousness], the full expanse of the secret 
[Chumma] padas. 


The Chummias with their commentary follow. 


The *Trimsaccarcarahasya (/Prakrtatrimsika) attributed to the Pithesvaris 


The Chummasamketaprakdasa also contains dispersed within it according to con- 
text but without gloss or commentary thirty verses in Old Kashmiri, which it 
claims to be songs transmitted by the Pithesvaris [of Uddiyana] to supplement 
the instructions in the Chummas. It calls them Kathas (Oral Explanations) or 
Carcas (Meditations):?64 


Victory to the miraculous (fo pi) unborn, ever-manifest glory of the Carca 
songs (giticarca) that have come from the lips of the Pithesvaris. For it cul- 
minates in the non-sequential [ground] through the sequence of worship, in- 
struction, and transmission, leading to the void of unsurpassed awareness, 
transcending the relation of words and their meanings.*° This incompara- 
ble instruction that has come forth directly from the source now shines in 
its fullness forever through the supreme collection of one hundred and five 
[Chummà]padas given here supplemented by the esoteric teaching of the thirty 
Carcas ( Trimsaccarcarahasya). Yt opens up with full intensity in the awareness of 
the great [only] through oral transmission. 


The title 7rimsaccarcárabasya has been adopted for convenience from this 
passage.*°° However, it is probable that it is this work that is referred to 


unconscious substitution of the much more familiar number of the Saiva Tattvas. 

364 Chummasamketaprakésa, f. 1317—10 (vv. 216—219): piijasamkramakathanakramenakrama- 
[tat]parab | pithesvarimukhdyatagiticarcamahodayah | 217 ko py anuttaracidvyomaprapakah 
satatoditah | vacyavacakasambandhanirmukto jayatad ajah | 218 pancadhikasateneha padaugho 
yah sthitah parah | trimíaccarcarabasyena nirbharas tena sarvada | 219 carceyam bháti nitaram 
samyagearbhagatasama | vaktradvaktrakramenoccais satam hrdi vijrmbbate. 

36*'Their origin from the Yoginis of Uddiyana is also conveyed by the last of the thirty, the 
Gitikathà, f. 13v1—2: *yith dgatu (conj. : pithagatu Cod.) *pithesari (em. : pethisari Cod.) vada- 
na | gitikatha kamukta fesa jha lakku } | anubhaveti nirupamacissadana | samkamadi*kama 
(conj. : &uráu Cod.) avikampu. The meaning of the whole verse is not apparent to me. But this 
much is probable: *...the Gitikathd *taught in the Krama (?), came *hither (conj.) from the 
mouths of the Pithegvaris *after they had experienced [it] (?) from the domain of incomparable 
consciousness through the process of [worship, instruction,] and transmission’. 

366Tt is also that given on the outer cover of the Berlin manuscript of the Chummasamketa- 
prakisa. 


344 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


by Siva[svàmin] Upadhyaya I in his Vzjzznabhairavavivrti under the title 
Prakrtatrimsika “The Thirty [Verses] in the Vernacular’. For that is a text on 
the Krama, since he directs his readers to a commentary on it by Bhattaraka 
(Prakrtatrimsikavivarana) for its multiple analyses of the Krama’s circle of the 
Multitude (vrndacakram); and there is a Katha among the thirty in the 
Chummasamketaprakasa that would accommodate such analysis:?9? 


Vrndakatha: 

Just as in the external world the stars together with the moon and sun shine eter- 
nally, so the pure mass of the rays (rasmivrndal) [of the vrndacakram] expands 
in the domain of the sensationless void of consciousness. 


If a manuscript of this work should come to light it will be welcome not only 
for its subject matter but also for the light it might shed on Old Kashmiri, at 
present poorly understood. 


The Vátülanathasutra and its Commentary 


Closely related in content to the Old Kashmiri verses transmitted in the 
Chummasamketaprakasa, but written in Sanskrit, is the published Vatilanatha- 
sutra, which has come down to us with a commentary of unknown date at- 
tributed to one Ananta£akti in its final colophon,?9 though in the text itself 
the author avoids stating his name, referring to himself in both the introduc- 
tory and concluding verses merely as "someone", an authorial convention seen 
elsewhere in this literature and no doubt intended to express the position that 
those who articulate the truth of the Krama's sudden enlightenment are like 
that truth itself devoid of social identity.?/? 


39 Vijnanabhairavavivrti, p. 68, M. 11—12: vrndacakranirnayas tu bahudha bhattérakakrta- 
prakrtatrimsikavivarane vicaryah. 

368 Chummasamketaprakésa, f. 3v, after v. 41: bahi yakhiti raji niccu gagani | tārācayu sasidi- 
nakarayutta | takhiti aparisacinnabhasadani | *vikasi (conj. : vikaci) rasmi*vindu (corr. bindu 
Cod.) achutta | vrndakatha (= Skt. bahir yatha vajate nityam gagane taracayah sasidinakarayutah 
tatha asparsacinnabhahsadane vikasati raémivrndo nirmalah). 

999 Vitilanathasiitravrtti, p. 19, ll. 8-9: samápteyam srimadvavilanathasutravrttih. krtih sri- 
madanantasaktipádanám. The commentary by an Anantagakti on the Bahuripagarbhastotra is 
probably not by the author of the Vatalanathbasütravrtti. Its phraseology and style are quite 
different and there is only one place at which it offers an interpretation in terms of the 
Krama (f. 131, glossing tridasapijydya: srimaddarsane dvadasottirnadevidhamaripatrayodasapa- 
ramarüpatvena püjya ity arthah “The meaning of tridasapijya- in tridasapüjyaya is ‘to be wor- 
shipped as the highest, as the thirteenth, which is the ground of the Goddess beyond the twelve 
taught in the venerable [Krama] doctrine). 

9? Virülanathasütravrtti, p. 1., v. 6: yoginivaktrasambhütasütranam vrttir uttama | kenapi 
kriyate samyak paratattvopabrmhità "Someone" will [now] write an excellent commentary 


Alexis Sanderson 345 


Thus "someone" who is free of the error of [believing in] the differentiation 
[manifest] in the expansion that is incarnate existence has correctly articulated 
the matchless, ultimate secret that transcends all words and concepts, through 
the process of the flashing forth of the sudden realization of the unconditioned 
ultimate Being as the result of the expansion of consciousness. ?/! 


Each of its thirteen Sütras conveys an esoteric teaching, which like the Old 
Kashmiri verses in the Chummásamketaprakáía is called indifferently a Katha 
or Carca; and all of these are among those covered in that text. Anantaéakti ap- 
pears to knows the work of Niskriyanandanatha. For commenting on the third 
Sütra, which teaches the instruction on the manuscript with its two boards 
(pustakakatha), he says that he will explain the means of attaining the ulti- 
mate that the venerable Gandhamadanasiddha taught Niskriyanandanatha by 
showing him the manuscript in his hand when he chose to favour him;?? and 
he does so in terms that follow closely and further explain the details of the 
symbolism of the book and the separating of its boards set out in the verses 
of the Chbummásamketaprakáía.?? That work refers to the Siddha who taught 
Niskriyanandanatha simply as Siddhanatha “The Siddha Lord’, but the name 
Gandhamadana reported by Anantasakti may well have been taken from the ab- 
sent opening verses of that work. As for the revelation of the Vztzlanathasutra, 
Anantagakti at the beginning of his commentary relates that the Pithesvaris 
first taught Vatülanatha the Chummas (chummāpadaughah) and then these Si- 


tras. 7/4 


nourished by the highest reality on the Sütras that have come forth from the lips of the Yoginis’; 
p. 19, ll. 4-7: iti paramarahasyam vagvikalpaughamuktam bhavavibhavavibhagabhrantimuktena 
samyak | krtam anupamam uccaih kenacic cidvikasad akalitapavasattasabasollasavrttya. 

371 We see the same explicit anonymity in the Bhavopahdarastotra attributed to Cakrapaninatha 
by Ramyadeva (see here footnote 300 on p. 325: kas cit), and in the anonymous Kramavilasas- 
totra (last verse: ittham etad adhigamya kenacit). 

3” Virülanathasütravrtti, p.4, l.4—6: srimanniskriyanandanathanugrahasamaye | rimad- 
gandhamádanasiddhapádair akrtakapustakadarsanena ya parapade praptir upadistà saiva vitatya 
nirüpyate ‘I shall explain at length the attainment of the highest level that the venerable Gandha- 
madanasiddha taught by showing the manuscript of truth on the occasion of his favouring the 
venerable Niskriyanandanatha'. 

373Compare Vatülanathasütravrtti, p. 4, ll. 7-20 with Chummasamketaprakasa, vv. Y6c-24 
given above in footnote 360 on p. 342. 

374 Varalanathasütravrtti, p.2, M. 1—7: iba kila saddaríanacaturámnayadimelapaparyantasa- 
mastadarsanottirnam akathyam api srimadvatilanathasya pithesvaryas *chummápadaugham 
(em. : pithesvarya ucchusmapádaugham Ed.) uktvà tad anu paramarabasyopabrmbhitatrayodasa- 
katbásaksatkaradrsà kramakramastinastitathyatathyabhedabhedasavikalpanirvikalpabhavanirva- 
nakalankojjhitam kim apy anavakáíam param tattvam sitramukhenadisanti. I have emended 
the edition’s pithesvarya ucchusmapddaugham to pithesvaryas chummápadaugham because 


346 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


Here, according to tradition (kila), the Pithesvaris first taught the venerable 
Vatilanatha the collection of the Chummaápadas, though [in truth its teach- 
ing] cannot be taught, being beyond all doctrines, beginning with the six 
Daráanas?/? and the four [Sakta] Amnayas and ending with the Melapa, and 
then taught [him] through the Sütras the extraordinary, highest reality into 
which nothing can enter, which is free of the stain of [the dualities of] sequence 
and simultaneity, existence and non-existence, the real and the unreal, plurality 
and unity, the conceptual and the non-conceptual, existence in the world and 
liberation, doing so by directly revealing to his experience the thirteen Kathas 
nourished by the ultimate secret. 


At the end of his commentary he adds the detail that they revealed the oral tra- 
dition to Vatülanatha in the Sütras at the time of their Great Assembly (maha- 
melapah), an allusion to their gathering in the Karavira cremation ground of 
Uddiyana for the worship of the Goddess, as taught at the beginning of the 
Kalikulakramasadbhava.*”° 


The Kaulasütra of Bhattasri Sitikantha 


Also connected with the Kashmirian Krama’s tradition of oral instruction is a 
collection of Sütras composed by a certain Guru Bhattasri-Sitikantha. I have 
seen this only in a manuscript that prefaces the text with a remark by the copy- 
ist that his exemplar is fragmentary and that therefore what he is providing 
is only some of the Sutras of this work, which is divided into two sections, 
the Kaulasütra and the Kulasitra.*’’ Among them are five that are versions of 


ucchusmapáda could only be a person (‘the venerable Ucchusma), which would be nonsen- 
sical here, because the terms chummápada- and padaugha- (= chummápadaugha-) are seen in 
the Chummásamketaprakása, and because the result is contextually appropriate. 

375] surmise that the six Daréanas intended here are the Bauddha, Jaina, Vaidika, Vaisnava, 
Saura, and Saiva religious paths. 

376 Virslanathasütravrtti pp. 18, l. 17—19, 1. 2: saddarsanacaturamnayamelapa( ...) *trayodasa- 
katbásaksatkaropadesabhangyanuttarapadádvayatayà (trayodasakathà em. : kathatrayodasakatha 
Ed.) kasyacid avadhitasya pithesvaribhir mahámelapasamaye sutropanibaddho vaktrámnayab 
prakésitah "The oral teaching (*that is beyond (?)) the six Daréanas, the four Sakta traditions, 
and the Melapa, was put into Sütra form and revealed in oneness with the unsurpassed. goal 
by the PitheSvaris at the time of the Great Assembly to a certain sage who had transcended all 
mundane conventions (avadhiitasya) by teaching him to experience directly the [truth of the] 
thirteeen Kathas’. 

377 Kaulasütra, f. 1v1—2: om svasti prajabhyah. om sriarada*devyai (corr. : divyai Cod.). atha 
kaulasiitrantargatani kanicit sitrani likhyante adarsachinnabhinnatvat. The authorship is re- 
ported at the end of the manuscript, f. 5v6: krtir gurubhattasrisitikanthasyeti subham. 


Alexis Sanderson 347 


Kathas or Chummas or the exegesis of these found in the Vatalandathasiitra and 
the Chummasamketaprakàsa: 


The teaching concerning the manuscript is that of opening the two boards.?/? 


Bhairava stands between the full-bodied and emaciated [forms of the] God- 
dess.?7? 


The four goddesses Emission[, Stasis, Withdrawal,] and [the Nameless], who 
are Hunger[, thirst, envy, and thought], constantly delight their Lord as though 
with sanguinary sacrifice by offering up themselves to him.?9? 


378 Kaulasutra, f.1v7: pattakodghatanam pustakopadesab; cf. Vatilanathasitra 3: ubhaya- 
pattodghattanin mahasinyatapravesah; Chummdsamketaprakdsa, f. 2v6—7, v.22: bhittvaitat 
pattakayugam mal[dhy]e pasya vimarsatah | mabasünyatifanyam tu ksaraksaravivarjitam; the 
Manuscript Katha (pustakakathd) ibid., f. 316-7: ...kulakaulikaputayugmu *vidara (em. : vicára 
Cod.) | ...pasu majji Sinyata avikara ‘...Break apart the two boards that are the Kula and the 
Kaulika ...behold the unchanging void between [them]. 

37 Kaulasütra, £.1v8: pürnakríamadhyago bhairavah. Cf. Chummasamketaprakasa, £.7v5, 
v. 105 (on Chumma 40 [f. 7v4—5]: pürna kisi ‘[She is] full-bodied [and] emaciated’): ittham 
pürnasvarüpapi mahagrasaikaghasmara | sarvottirnaviyadvrttim atyajanti krsa smrtā ‘In this way 
she is full[-bodied] by nature. But being altogether gluttonous in her Great Devouring she 
is nonetheless said to be emaciated, since [even as she devours all things] she never surren- 
ders her mode of existence as the all-transcending void’; and f. 2v3—6 (vv. 18c-21): ardhva- 
pattakarüpas tu pra[nalh sap[ta]sikhah smrtab | 19 adbabsthapattako yas tu samsthito bánavi- 
grahah | pravabadvayarüpo ‘ham samsthito dvija tattvatah | 20 kulakaulakramonmesarüpau dvau 
paltta]kau smrtau | udriktasantavispharasamaveíamayau tv imau | 21 ardhvastha pürnavibhava 
saktir unmesadharmini | adhahstha krsadeheyam grasini saktir aisvari "Ihe outgoing breath with 
its seven flames is the upper board and the lower board is the ingoing. In reality, O brah- 
min, I am present as both these flows. The two boards represent the manifestation of the Kula 
and Kaula phases. They are the [two] states of immersion, that in which the extroversion of 
consciousness is active and that in which it has ceased. Above [as the upper board] is the fully- 
expanded Power, whose nature is extroversion. Below is the devouring Sakti of the Lord, her 
body emaciated’. The Sütra also alludes to the practice taught in Netra 18.120 of installing a 
Bhairava flanked by a full-bodied and an emaciated Sakti to mark the site of a cremation; see 
SANDERSON 2005b, p. 267, footnote 92. 

380 Kaulastitra, f£.217—8: prinayanti catasrah srstideviprabhrtayah ksudhadya *balibhir iva 
(conj. : iva balibhih Cod.) *patim satatam (conj. : patisamtatah Cod.) svatmasamarpanena; cf. 
Vatülanáthasutra 9: devicatustayollasena sadaiva svavifrántyavasthitib; Anantasakti'S commen- 
tary: devicatustayam ksuttrdirsyamananakhyam; the Katha of the Four Goddesses (devicatustaya- 
katha) in Chummasamketaprakdsa, f. 717—8: manana isa tia ksuta agüriti paramakasapadi thiti- 
kitti | vittiprapancu *akame (conj. : akame Cod.) püriti bhuji nira(va) kasu avitti “Thought, 
envy, thirst, and hunger, longing to be established in the domain of the highest void, having 
simultaneously satisfied themselves with all the diverse manifestations of cognition, relish the 
lacuna-less [consciousness] beyond cognition’; Rajikd qu. in the commentary on the Old Kash- 
miri Mahdnayaprakdsa, p. 55, ll. 5—8: bhuktva vitvam asesam trptim na yada gatah kulesanah | 


348 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


The essence of the self is made manifest by removing the three shrouds.??! 


When the twelve rays unite without force the confidence of their leader dis- 
solves. [This] one [among the twelve therefore] disappears. So there is a breaking 
of the circle caused by a deficiency in [their] discipline??? 


And there are others that are Katha-like and bear on the Krama but have no 
direct parallels in those works: 


There is but one Guru, the uninterrupted transmission of the rays [of en- 


lightened consciousness] that have come to us through the initiatory lineage 
(ovallih).>*° 


The [Goddess] that rules the wheels [of powers] emerges there from within, 
intoxicated by drinking the juice of the six elements [of the body].>*4 


The one true oral instruction is the revelation of the highest reality.**° 


The teaching of the Krama is the sequence of states, namely that consciousness, 
flowing eternal like a river, manifests four states [in every cognition]: Emission, 


[Stasis, Withdrawal] and [the Nameless].?86 


In two introductory verses the author first praises the sage Durvasas as the 
incarnation of Rudra (rudravatarah) and as the guiding light of this tradition, 


devyà tadà svadehas carur atra niveditah kuladhipateh. 

381 Kaulasutra, f. 317: kancukatritayapavarjanat svaripaviskaral, cf. Vatülanathasütra 6: tri- 
kancukaparityagan nirakhyapadavasthitib; Chummasamketaprakasa, f. 616: bhitabhavanakancu- 
kavilaye apári andkhya*sagani (em. : gamani Cod.) vistamu) “When the shrouds of the gross 
elements, subtle elements, and negation have dissolved there is rest in the limitless void of the 
Nameless’. 

382 Kaulastitra, f. 3v1—2: dvàdasamaricinàm priyamelape nayakavastambhavicyutir ekapayat 
samayalopaja cakrakbandaná; cf. the Chummdasamketaprakdsa’s Katha of the Incomplete Cir- 
cle (khandacakrakatha), £.5v1—2: pasari *pasari (conj. : pamari Cod.) militi *ciccakkasa (conj. : 
miscakkasa Cod.) mafija bhunjiti niju upabhogu | ye pallatia samvitti athakka tma yafthijyo 
khandamarici*mahogu (conj. : sahogu Cod.) “The Mahaugha of the rays of the Khanda[cakra] 
comes about when after uniting within the cycle of consciousness in each flow [of cognition] 
and relishing their respective fields of experience they revert and so eliminate one }...} [of their 
number]’. 

383 Kaulasitra, f. 1v4 (the first Sūtra): avicchinnam ovallikramayatamaricisamkramanam evaiko 
guruh. 

384 Kaulasūtra, f. 1v7—8, following on the instruction on the opening of the boards of the 
manuscript: tatra saddhäturasapānamattāntaś cakreśvarī vijrmbbate. 

385 Kzulasütra, f. 2v8: paratattvasaksatkara evaikà vāstavī kathā. 

386 Kaulasūtra, f. 3v8-9: cito nadivat pravahanityayas catasrah srstyadidasa iti dasakramah kra- 
márthap. 


Alexis Sanderson 349 


and then explains that he is putting into Sütra form both the Kaula teaching 
composed by Mauninatha and other disciples of Srinatha and the Kula teaching 
that was first revealed to Durvasas as Niskriya (Niskriyanandanatha) and then 
studied and propagated by Unmattanàtha.??/ The Kula teaching is no doubt 
that of the Chummaásamketaprakasa and the Vatalanathasutra. The former does 


388 as does 


indeed make Niskriyanandanatha an incarnation of sage Durvasas, 
the *Uttaragharamnaya, since it refers to Niskriyanandanatha as Krodharaja ‘the 
King of Wrath??? and Durvasas' irascible nature is the salient characteristic of 
his mythology.??? Moreover, it is probable that Bhattasri-Sitikantha’s Unmatta- 
natha is none other than Vatilanatha under a synonym, both unmatta- and 
vátüla- meaning ‘mad’. The identity of the Kaula teaching of Mauninatha and 
the other disciples of Srinatha is unknown to me. But it too is evidently in 
the same tradition of oral instruction, since the author refers to it as ‘beyond 
the six philosophical systems’, a distinctive characterization that is also seen in 
the Chummasamketaprakasa and the commentary on the Vatilanathasitra.*?' 
Since the name Mauninatha means ‘the Silent Natha’ it is possible that Bhattasri 
Sitikantha is referring to the Siddhanatha who initiated Niskriyanandanatha 
according to the frame-story of the Chummdasamketaprakdsa. For the salient 
feature of the latter’s account of that initiation is that Siddhanatha remained 
silent when questioned. 


987 Kaulasiitra 1v2—4: om saddarsanatirikte the siitradharabhuvam Ssritah | rudravataro 
durvasah stiyate Sparsakamasüh | *yac chrinathamukbaravindamadhupab (yac chri em. : yas sri 
niskriye prathitam apy unmattanathah kulam samcarcy*avir abhdvayat (conj. : + + vabhavayat 
Cod.) tad ubhayam sūtrair maya badhyate. 

388 Chummasamketaprakasa, f. 13v5—6, vv. 222c-223: yah sa eva puraham tu durvásà nama 
visrutah | yah prak praptamahajnanah siddhanathaprasadatah | sa evaham tu samjato niskriyo 
vigatasprhah. 

389 See above, footnote 63 on p. 254. 

99g g, Jayadrathayamala, Satka 2, f.2r-v: rudramsu(h) krodhanas tiksno durvasa(h) siddha- 
püjitab; Mahabharata 7.10.9ab: durvasà nama viprarsis tathà paramakopanah; 15.38.2: tapasvi 
kopano vipro durvasé nama. In Sakta Saiva texts he is commonly referred to as Krodha- 
muni; see, e.g. Uttaraámnayayajfiakrama f. 18v: HRIM $RIM KHPHREM VIRANATHAYA SVAHA HRIM 
$RIM KHPHREM DASAKANTHAYA 2 HRIM $RIM KHPHREM KRODHAMUNINATHA(YA) 2; Manthana- 
bhairava, Siddhakhanda, f. 467v3: iti krodhamuniviracitam mahadandakam samaptam; Vidya- 
nanda, Nitydsodasikarnavartharatnavali, p. 222, 1. 18-19: srimatkrodhamunibhattaraka iti sri- 
maddurvasasa evabhidhánam. 

3°! Chummasamketaprakésa, f. 3r, 32c-33b: pravaksyami mukhamnayam yatha praptam yatha- 
kramam | daríanaámnayamelapavarjitam satatoditam; Vatülanatbasutravrtti, p. 2, ll. 1—7: sadda- 
rsanacaturamndyadimelapaparyantasamastadarsanottirnam. 


350 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


The dates of the oral instruction texts 


The dates of these texts are obscure. The author of the commentary on the 
Old Kashmiri Mahbanayaprakáía quotes a passage with Krama content from 
a Kulasütra,?? and this is probably the work of Bhattasri-Sitikantha.?? For 
though the Sütra quoted does not appear in the text as known to me, that text 
is incomplete and the Sūtra is similar in style and content to others therein. ??* 

As for the dates of the texts on the Chummas and the Kathas, they them- 
selves contain no quotations and the only quotations of them known to me 
are of the Chummdasamketaprakasa in the Vijüanabhairavavivrti of Siva[svàmin] 
Upadhyaya I and the Gayatrimantravivarana of Siva[svàmin] Upadhyaya II. 
These are very late works. The former was written during the period 1754— 
1763, while Sukhajivana was the Pathans’ governor of Kashmir,??? and the lat- 
ter during the period 1819-1839, while Kashmir was under the rule of Ranjit 
Singh of Lahore.??ó 


3Old Kashmiri Mabanayaprakàsa, p. 60, ll. 7-9: kulapithaksetradivarnapancapindapranava- 
vyapadesyam akhilabhasakarupaya ahambhavabhimatasamvidah samasrayabhitam àtmayatanam 
sariram “The body, termed kulam, the Pitha, the holy site, the first letter (a), the Paficapinda 
(KHPHREM), and Pranava (ow), is the temple of the self, being the support of the awareness, 
identified with I-consciousness, whose nature is that it manifests all [that appears to it]’. For the 
Kramas correlation of the body with a, KHPHREM, and om see Old Kashmiri Mahanayaprakasa 
2.5-6, 4.2, and the commentary on 5.1; also Mahanayaprakasa (Triv.) 9.64. 

995] see no reason to identify Bhattasri-Sitikantha with the author of the Old Kashmiri Maha- 
nayaprakasa. Rastoci (1979, p. 220—221) takes this identity for granted, guided, it seems, by 
nothing more than their sharing a personal name. But this proves nothing. Moreover, when the 
author of the commentary on Mahdnayaprakasa has cited the Kulasitra he has not attributed 
it, as we would expect him to do in accordance with convention if the author on whom he is 
commenting or he himself had written it, using such expressions as yad uktam anenaiva and 
yad uktam mayaiva. 

94Cf. e.g., Kaulasütra, f. 2v7—8: amukhavabhasamanam akhilam ahambhavaspadam vicarya- 
mánam na kimcid apy ahambhavavisayah No locus of I-consciousness presented to [conscious- 
ness] remains, when contemplated, the object of that I-consciousness'; f. 5v1: zdredevatadhàáre 
kule càómumdaáyatanam mukham ‘In this body (kule) that is the abode of such deities, the mouth 
is the temple of Camunda’. 

35 See footnote 652 on p. 425. 

See footnote 653 on p. 425. The Chummuasamketaprakása is quoted but not named in 
the Vjüanabhairavavivrti, p. 67, ll. 20—23: niskriyanandanáthas tu karankinya iti pathati yatha: 
karás trayodasakarah ... (= vv. 99-100, except that the quotation has niralambam param varam 
where the ms gives nirdlambam nirámayam |100d]). Sivasvamin Upadhyaya II quotes the work 
by name in his Gayatrimantravivarana, f. 17v: yat kimcid vágrüpam kathimatram saiva gayatri. 
vannavihina niruttaru *khassaru (em. : khasmarana Cod.) jagasa mülapakiti gayatra | *repha- 


Alexis Sanderson 351 


The Old Kashmiri Chummas and verse Kathas are also of unknown date. 
Their language alone, as we have seen, does not imply that they were composed 
long after the major works of Kashmirian exegesis; nor does the absence of quo- 
tations before the eighteenth century imply that they and the -samketaprakasa 
were composed close to that time, since we have an insufficient body of works 
from the preceding centuries in which absence of evidence might amount to 
evidence of absence.°”’ We can discern at least that their tradition is older than 
the author of the Trivandrum Mahdnayaprakdsa, since its unknown author re- 
ports that he or possibly another had explained the Chummas (samketah) in 
another work. It is conceivable that the sets of these known to him were dis- 
tinct from those that have survived. However, the one example that he cites 
is indeed found in the collection given by Niskriyanandanatha. For he refers 
to the Chummas as "Zrstanasta- and others’ (drstanastádi-),? and this is ev- 
idently the aphorism that appears as the last of the hundred and five in the 
Chummásamketaprakáía in the form ditto nitto (Skt. drstam nastam),°”? which 
Niskriyananda explains as meaning ‘As soon as [the differentiated world is] 
perceived it disappears". ^? Moreover, the same aphorism is surely alluded to 
in a verse from a hymn by a certain Rama quoted by Rajanaka Rama in his 
Spandavivrti and, in a Krama context, by Abhinavagupta’s pupil Ksemaraja in 
his Pratyabhijnahrdaya: ^! 


takàrahakáravikassaru (repha em. : reka Cod. e vikassaru em. : vikasmaru Cod.) vannacitra 
cificeya vicitra iti chummásamketaprakáíe (Skt.: varnavihino niruttarah khasvaro jagato müla- 
prakrtir gàyatri. rephatakárabakáravikasvaro varnacitra *...[?] vicitrah). The Old Kashmiri verse 
is Katha 21 (Chummdasamketaprakésa, f. 8v). 

3°7Rastoci (1979, pp. 224-225) assigns Bhattaraka, Anantagakti, and, by implication, 
Niskriyanandanatha to the period A.D. 1700-1750. His reasoning, as far as one can detect 
it, is spurious. It appears to be that the works of Niskriyanandanatha and Bhattaraka must 
be of late origin because only Sivopadhyaya has mentioned them, and that Anantagakti must 
belong to the same period because his and Niskriyanandanatha’s works have similar contents. 
The precision of the period assigned is reached by substracting 25 years (one generation) from 
the date of Sivopadhyaya. 

398 Mahanayaprakasa (Triv.) 1.34abc: dystanastadisamketakathamatrasya marma yat | tat pra- 
patcitam anyatra; 1.21cd: *drstanastadisamketakathamatrat prakasate (drstanastadi em. : dysta- 
drstádi Ed. e méatrat prakdsate conj. : matratra kasate Ed.). 

39 Chummasamketaprakasa, f. 1316: ditto natto (em. : dibbo nibbo Cod.). The reading of the 
manuscript is meaningless. The emendation proposed follows Niskriyanandanatha’s explana- 
tion in vv. 214-215b, for which see p. 339. 

^" For his gloss on this Chummá see p. 339. 

401 Spandavivrti, p. 135 (yad uktam stotre:) and Pratyabhijfáhrdaya on 11, p. 25: (yathoktam 
sriramena:) samádhivajrenapy anyair abhedyo bhedabhidharah | paramrstas ca nastas ca tvad- 


bhaktibalasalibhih. 


352 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


The mountain of differentiated reality that others have not split even with the 
thunderbolt of Yogic trance disappears as soon as it is perceived by those em- 
powered by devotion to you. 


402 this indicates a posterior 


Since Rajanaka Rama was a pupil of Utpaladeva, 
limit for some form at least of this aphoristic tradition around the middle of 


the tenth century. 


ABHINAVAGUPTAS WORKS ON THE KRAMA 


Abhinavagupta composed a commentary (-vivrti) entitled Kramakeli on Eraka's 
Kramastotra. No manuscript of this has come to light, in spite of claims that one 
exists or existed in a private collection in Srinagar.“ At present we have access 
only to a few quotations. The longest of these, given by Jayaratha in his Tantra- 
lokaviveka,** is the source of the information given above that Sivananda- 
natha (Jfananetranatha) transmitted his teaching to Keytiravati, Madanika, 
and Kalyanika, that these jointly initiated Govindaraja, Bhanuka, and Eraka, 
and that the last was the author of the Kramastotra on which he is comment- 
ing. It also tells us that unlike Eraka, Govindaraja and Bhanuka abjured the 


402 Spandavivrti, p.169, Il. 5-7: sadvidyasarasivibhiisanavaraspharotpaloccasayaprotsarpat- 
paripakvabodbamadhupenedam mayagayi yat | ramendnupamapramodamadhuram baddha- 
vadhánasya tac chrotuh kasya na cetanasya tanute visrantim antah param ‘I, Rama have sung this 
[song] sweet with incomparable joy after drinking the nectar of the mature understanding that 
flows forth from the exalted mind of Utpala, that emanation [of enlightened consciousness] 
that is the finest pearl in the ocean of Siva’s wisdom. On what conscious being who hears it 
with fixed attention will it not bestow the ultimate inner rest?’. I have translated -paripakva- 
bodhamadhupena here as ‘after drinking the nectar of the mature understanding’; but the word 
madhupah ‘nectar-drinker’ is established by convention in the meaning ‘bee’. This undermines 
the possibility that the author wishes only to tell us that he has studied the works of Utpala 
rather than sat at his feet; for the metaphor of the pupil as a bee drinking the nectar of his 
teacher’s knowledge is too common for this choice of words to have been apt if the author 
were not Utpala’s direct disciple. The final colophon too asserts this pupilage. 

403See Rastoci 1979, p. 164, footnote 2, reporting that in 1963 Pandit Dinanath Yach told 
him that a manuscript of the Kramakeli was in the possession of Somnath Razdan of Purshyar, 
Habba Kadal, Srinagar, but that the latter declined even to show it. 

404 Tantrilokaviveka on 4.173ab, vol.3, pp. 192, 1. 4-193, 1. 11, following the words yad 
uktam tatraivanena yathd. For this passage and a translation see footnotes 131 on p.275, 133 
on p.276, and 405 on p. 355. Other citations or reports of its contents: Panitrisikavivarana 
p. 267, |. 5 (Ed. p. 236, Il. 13-14); Ksemaraja, Sivastotrávalivivrti, p. 159, ll. 16-18; Tantraloka- 
viveka on 4.149, vol. 3, p. 162, ll. 6-7; and Maharthamanjariparimala pp. 100, |. 26-101, l. 7; 
p. 122, 1.22; p. 150, Il. 10-13; and p. 183, Il. 19-20. 


Alexis Sanderson 353 


quest for supernatural powers, devoting the rest of their lives to the instruction 
of disciples, that Govindaràja initiated a guru called Somananda, who is evi- 
dently other than the famous author of the Sivadrsti, and that Bhànuka was the 
source of a lineage which passing through Ujjata, Udbhata, and a number of 
other unnamed teachers bestowed initiation on Abhinavagupta himself. ^? 
Although little of this work has survived one striking feature of it emerges 
from Jayaratha’s commentary on the Zaztrzloka. The Kramastotra taught that 
there were thirteen Kalis in the phase of the Nameless, and this is in accor- 
dance with what we see in the Kalikulapancasataka, the Kalikastotra of Jhana- 
netranatha, and the three texts with the title Mabanayaprakáía, indeed in all 
the works considered here except the Kalikulakramasadbhava, which stands 
apart by teaching the worship of seventeen Kalis in this phase.*96 Yet Abhinava- 
gupta presents a text of the Kramastotra that teaches only twelve, lacking 
Sukali between Yamakali (the fifth) and Mrtyukali (the seventh). This revision, 


405 Tantralokaviveka on 4.173ab, vol.3, pp. 192, 1.10-193, 1.1: tatradyah praptopadesa 
evaivam manasy akarsid etavaty adhigate kim idanim krtyam astiti. ittham ca nisthitamaná yava- 
jjivam upanatabhogativahanamatravyapara etadvijhanopadesapatra isyopadesapravanah (Sisyo- 
padesa em. : sistopadesa Ed.) sarīrāntam pratyaiksista. sa cedam rahasyam srisomanandabhidha- 
nàya gurave samcárayàm babhüva. dvitiyo ‘py evam asta. tasyaiva caisà *Srimadujjatodbhatadina- 
náguruparipátisamtatir (ujjatodbhatadi conj. : ujjatodbhattadi Ed.) yatprasadasaditamahimabhir 
asmábhir etat pradarsitam ‘Of these [three disciples] the first, Govindaraja,] realized that now 
that he had gained all this knowledge nothing remained for him to achieve, and having decided 
this he waited for death, engaging in such action as was necessary to carry to completion the 
experience already in train [as the fruition of his past actions], and devoting himself to instruct- 
ing such disciples as were fit to be taught this knowledge. He transmitted this esoteric teaching 
to a Guru called Somananda. The second[, Bhanuka,] passed his time in the same way. It is 
from him that has descended this line of a number of successive Gurus beginning with Ujjata 
and Udbhata, by the grace of which I have been exalted [by initiation] and have given this 
explanation'. The rest of this quotation from the Kramakeli is given here in footnotes 131 on 
p.275 and 133 on p. 276. It is unlikely that the Somananda mentioned in this passage is the 
famous Guru of Utpaladeva and author of the Sivadysti, since if it were the form in which he 
refers to him would have been more reverential. For whenever Abhinavagupta mentions him 
in his other prose works he affixes the respectful -padah to his name. 

406 Tantrilokaviveka, vol. 3, p. 190, ll. 4-6: ...srikramasadbhavabhattarake anakhyacakre 
saptadasa devyah piijyatvenoktah. The seventeen are Srstikali, Sthitikali, Samharakali, Rakta- 
kali, Sukali, Yamakali, Mrtyukali, Bhadrakali, Paramarkakali, Martandakali, Kalagnirudrakali, 
Mahākālakālī, Krsakali, Sarvantakali, Sivakali, Krodhakali, and Mahabhairavaghoracandagra- 
sanakali. This comprises the thirteen Kalis that make up the circle of the Nameless in the Käl- 
kulapancasataka with the addition of the four Kalis given here in bold characters. See SANDER- 
SON forthcoming a for the textual evidence for these names. 


354 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


7 was achieved, 


whose metaphysical significance has been considered above, *? 
by Abhinavagupta or a predecessor, by expunging the reading sukālīm in the 
verse devoted to that Kali and putting bhavanim in its place, a non-specific 
name of the Goddess that enabled the verse to be read as a second on Yamakali, 
the deity who immediately precedes Sukali. 

To the objection that this disrupts the pattern of the hymn, which devotes 
only one verse to each Kali, Jayaratha responds that there is no such pattern, 
since there is also a second verse devoted to Kalagnirudrakali. To the rejoinder 
that the verse in question is an interpolation, no doubt intended to undermine 
the argument from pattern, Jayaratha replies that he has seen it in Hrasvanatha’s 
autograph of his commentary on the hymn and, as though conscious that this 
alone is insufficient to disprove the claim that it is an interpolation, adds that 
there are so many variants in the text of the hymn found in the various com- 
mentaries on it, affecting not only individual words throughout the text but 
also the order of verses, that the opponent has no reason other than prejudice 
(pradvesah) to reject Abhinavagupta's bhavanim. He ends his tendentious ar- 
gument by insisting that it is impossible to adjudicate between the readings 
sukálim and bhavánim on purely textual grounds and that the decision to pre- 
fer the latter has therefore to be based on his inherited tradition of instruction 
(gurüpadesab). 

This last argument refers back to the claim that the tradition of twelve was 
that received by the three disciples Govindaraja, Bhanuka, and Eraka. To the 
objection that JAananetranatha himself taught that there were thirteen in his 
Kalikástotra and that therefore this tradition can only be an unwarranted de- 
viation in a branch of his spiritual descendants, Jayaratha replies that in fact 
Jfananetranatha taught both twelve and thirteen in that work, so that both tra- 
ditions are valid options. That argument is empty, since the verse on the twelve 
states that the Goddess manifests twelve divisions while remaining grounded in 


h.*5 Since Jayaratha does not 


her own nature, which is evidently the thirteent 
cite any textual evidence that the tradition of twelve occurs earlier in this line 
of transmission—he would surely have done so if any were available, since that 
would greatly have strengthened his position as Abhinavagupta’s defender—one 
is bound to suspect that all this is special pleading to justify a major innovation. 
The fact that he can cite a passage from "scripture" (dgamah) that appears to 


list only twelve Kalis would at least show that Abhinavagupta’s view has a basis 


407 See footnote 271 on p. 317. 
408 Kalikastotra, f. 905—91r1 (v. 5). For text and translation see footnote 125 on p. 274. 


Alexis Sanderson 355 


in the tradition of the Kalikula if not in that deriving from Jñānanetranātha. 
However, even if the passage is genuine and earlier than Abhinavagupta, I sus- 
pect that it has been modified to serve this purpose. The first line, giving the 
parts of the first six names that proceed -kali reads yat srstisthitisamhararaktais 
ca yamamrtyubhih, which provides Srstikali, Sthitikali, Samharakali, Raktakali, 
Yamakali, and Mrtyukali; but the conjunction ca is out of place and, more 
significant, the compound yamamrtyubhih has a plural ending rather than the 
dual it requires. The anomalies arose, I suspect, by dropping -su- for Sukali after 
yama- and then inserting the redundant conjunction to restore the metre (— 
-raktair yamasumrtyubhih), with the ungrammatical plural left in place as an 
instance of the deviations from standard Sanskrit that mark the Saiva scriptural 
(aisa-) register of the language. ^? 

The deletion of Sukali is not the only respect in which Abhinavaguptas 
account of the Kalis of the phase of the Nameless differs in his Kramakeli from 
the tradition of the Krama proper. He has also taught that their true order is 
other than that in which they are given in the scriptural account followed by 
the Kramastotra. Jayaratha explains that the conventional order is that of their 
worship (piijakramah) and that it has been designed to conceal the natural order 
in which they unfold in the process of cognition (samvitkramah). Abhinava- 
gupta has not changed the sequence of the verses of the hymn, but Jayaratha 
reports that he has made clear the true order, that in cognition rather than 
worship, through various statements in his commentary, telling us, for example, 
after his explanation of the verse on Srstikali (1) that one must understand that 


in reality the Kali that follows her is not Sthitikali (2) but Raktakali (4).*!? 


40°This elaborate defence of Abhinavagupta's doctrine of the twelve Kalis is set out in Tantra- 
lokaviveka, vol. 3, pp. 189, 1. 1-203, 1. 11. The quotation cited as scriptural evidence for the 
doctrine of twelve Kalis is on p. 191, Il. 12—15. If the plural ending in the compound yama- 
mrtyubhih could be passed off as an element of the scriptural register of Sanskrit, then, it may 
be argued, there is no reason to consider the line suspect. However, while explicable as a reflex 
of the underlying vernacular—in all mta and nia languages the dual was defunct— the use of 
the plural for the dual is very rare in Saiva literature in any context and I have noted no instance 
of its use in a Dvandva compound as here. 

“10 Tyntralokaviveka, vol. 3, p. 162, ll. 3-7: ata evagamaikasaranataya pravrtte pi srikramastotre 
grantha*krta (em. : krtém Ed.) samvitkramam eva pradarsayitum tadvivrtau frisrstikalyádistuti- 
slokavyakbyanánantaram “Sriraktakalya bhagavatya atah param sthitih sambhavyate ityady uktam 
‘It is for this reason that although the Kramastotra proceeds in complete dependence on scrip- 
ture [our] author has made various statements in his commentary on it after his explanation 
of verses of the hymn devoted to Srstikali and the other [goddesses], in order to reveal [their 
true] order in cognition. Thus, for example, he has said [after his commentary on the verse 


356 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


Abhinavagupta's departure from the mainstream Krama tradition in his 
treatment of the Kalis of the phase of the Nameless would indeed be some- 
what surprising if it had been formulated from within that tradition. However, 
in spite of Jayaratha's insistence we lack clear evidence that it was. There is no 
good reason to doubt Abhinavaguptas claim that he had received initiation 
and instruction in the Krama at some point in his career; but since his surviv- 
ing Saiva exegesis is overwhelmingly in the context of the Trika and since his 
presentation of that system is deeply imprinted with elements of the Krama it 
is probable that some or all of his Krama work should be seen as work from 
within the territory of the Trika, work which being outside the authority of the 
Krama proper could adjust and rearrange Krama elements for its own purpose, 
as in this matter of the number of the Kalis of the phase of the Nameless. 

Abhinavagupta also wrote a Kramastotra, a hymn to Siva in thirty verses 
on the subject of true worship as the contemplation of the energetic nature of 
consciousness as manifest in the Kalis of the Krama’s phase of the Nameless. 
Here we see the revised number and order of the Kallis in full. There is a further 
novelty in his referring to the holder of these powers (saktimdn) under the name 
Manthàna-.*!! This is no doubt the Manthanabhairava that his pupil Ksemaraja 
places in this role.*? I know of no scriptural authority of the Krama that makes 
Manthanabhairava Lord of its Kalis. But perhaps the source of this variant is 
the Kalpa of the Mahalaksmimata which ends the fourth Satka of the Jayad- 
rathayamala. For there Bhairava is visualized as Manthana- at the centre of the 


array of Saktis, the innermost circuit of which does indeed consist of twelve.*!° 


on Srstikali]: “It is implied that the position immediately after [her] is that of the goddess 
Raktakal?”. 

41 Kramastotra 28: anargalasvatmamaye mahese tisthanti yasmin vibhusaktayas tah | tam íakti- 
mantam pranamámi devam manthanasamjnam jagadekasáram. 

412 Sivastitravimarsini, pp, 26, |. 14-27, l. 7; Spandanirnaya, p. 6, ll. 5-9. 

“13 Tayadrathayamala, Satka 4, f. 222:3—3 (Mahálaksmimate cakradevyutpattimantroddhara- 
patalah, vv. 10—23): 10 adrsyavigrabac chantac chivac chaktih samutthita | sa ca dvadasa- 
bhedena samsthita cakrabhedatab | 11 madhye sthitam mahadevam bhairavam vikrtananam | 
suddhasphatikasamkasam tuhinadrisamaprabham | 12 sitakundenduvarnabham sankhagoksira- 
panduram | damstrakaralavadanam mahogram bhrkutimukham | 13 ürdhvakefam virüpaksam 
nagayajhopavitinam | sarvabharanasamyuktam sarpagondsamanditam | 14 suvdsam krtti- 
vasanam gajacarmambaravrtam | pahcavaktram dasabhujam tripancanayanair yutam | 15 
kapalakhatvangadharam khadgakhetakadharinam | saracapakaravyagram fülapattisadbarinam | 
16 varadabhayahastam ca nandantam saktimadhyatah | kim tu raktamayam devam manthana- 
tvena. samsthitam | 17 kusumbharajasamkasam dadimi*kusumancitam (em. : kusumarci- 
tam) | jatyabingulakaprakhyam nitambonnatapivaram (conj. : nitambatamuttamam Cod.) | 


Alexis Sanderson 357 


These are the twelve Yogesvaris that form the retinue of Para in the Trika, but 
Abhinavagupta considers these and the twelve Kalis of the Krama to be identical 
in nature, *!4 and this, after all, is a text of the Kalikula. 

The Krama also plays a role in his Bhagavadgitarthasamgraha, as the source 
of his interpretation of the Gits innermost meaning. Thus, for example:*? 


[In 11.18c Vasudeva is called] sattvatadharmagopta ‘concealer of the religious 
practice of the Sattvatas’. The Sattvatas are [so called in the meaning that they 
are] those who possess sat-. Here sat- means (1) the truth (satyam) of the absence 
of any manifestation of distinction between the two [powers,] cognition and 
action and (2) the reality that is the light [of all], namely Being (sazzz). Their 
practice (dharmah), which transcends all other paths, is that of projecting and 
withdrawing. For they are constantly absorbed in [observing] the grasping and 
transcendence [by consciousness of its contents]. It is this that he conceals. I 
have given a more thorough analysis of the esoteric teaching (rahasyam) given 
in this chapter [of the Gita] in my commentary on the Devistotra. 


Thus Abhinavagupta takes the term sdttvatah here not in the common sense, in 
which it refers to Vaisnava devotees of Vasudeva, but to denote those engaged 
in the most esoteric of Saiva practices. That he means the Krama is indicated 
not only by the nature of the practice but also by his use of the term rahasyam 
to refer to it. For we find the same term used elsewhere in this commentary in 
Krama contexts:41° 


The devah [here] are the functions of the senses, [called devah] because it is their 
nature to play,*!” [that is to say] the Karanesvaris, the goddesses well-known in 
the Rahasyasastra. 


18 nibaddbamekhaladamaghargharavalimanditam | manibhisanasobhadhyam Ssiropadadibhis 
tatha | 19 suvesam vesasampannam divyagandhanulepanam | mabalavanyasamyuktam kimcid- 
vibasitàánanam | 20 icchárüpadharam devam pare ksirárnave sthitam | devyah svarüpasamyukta 
*vabanasvádisamyutab (vahanasvadi conj. : vahandsvadi Cod) | 21 dvadasire mahadevi srnu 
naman yatharthatah | siddhi(r) rddhis tatha laksmi dipti(r) mala Siva tatha | 22 sumukhi 
*yanari (em. : cámari Cod.) nanda harikesi hayánana | visvesi ca samakhyata yogesvaryo 
mahabalah | 23 dvadasasvarabhedena samsthita($) cakramadhyatah. 

^^ Malinivijayottara 20.46—47; Tantráloka 3.251—254b, citing the Trikasara. 

415 Bhagavadgitarthasamgraha, pp. 118,1. 18-119, |. 5: sattvatadharmagopteti sat satyam kriya- 
jnanayor ubhayor api bhedapratibhasatmakam tathà sattátmakam prakdsariipam tattvam vidy- 
ate yesim te sattvatah. tesim dharmah anavaratagrabanasamnyásaparatvat systisamharavisayah 
sakalamárgottirnab. tam gopayate. etad evatradhydye rahasyam prayaso devistotravivrtau maya 
prakasitam. 

416 Bhagavadgitarthasamgraha, p. 34, \l.7-8 on 3.11a (devin bhávayata ‘contemplate the 
Devas’): deväh kridanasila indriyavyttayah karanesvaryo devatà rahasyasastraprasiddhah. 

^" He alludes to a semantic analysis of devah ‘god’ from the root div ‘to play (divu kridayam) in 


358 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


and:418 


But for those who know the Rahasya the meaning is as follows: the supreme 
ego-factor that exists beyond the intellect is the ultimate non-duality that is the 
non-dualistic awareness that everything is oneself. 


Here he alludes to the Dvayasampattivartika of the Krama Guru 
Hrasvanatha/Vamanadatta:*” 


Beyond the level of the intellect is this level of the ego-factor. This whole uni- 
verse is pervaded by it. It is this when penetrated that bestows liberation. 


which itself alludes to the Krama practice of penetrating through the ego-factor 
that comes to the fore in the mérticakram into the ego-less non-duality that 
unfolds in the vrndacakram. The use of the term Rahasya to denote the Krama 
is also seen in the works of Ksemaraja. ^? 

That Abhinavagupta read the esoteric teachings of the Gita in terms of the 
Krama is confirmed by the South Indian Maheévarananda. At the end of his 
Maharthamanjari he claims that when Krsna revealed his awesome cosmic form 
to Arjuna in the climax of the events narrated in the Gita he did so while ex- 
periencing the timeless state of identity with Kalasamkarsani embodied in her 
seventeen-syllable Vidya, that it was this state, the ultimate of the Krama, that 
he transmitted to Arjuna in order to rouse him from his reluctance to go to war 


accordance with the first of the meanings of that root listed in 4.1 of the Paninian Dhatupatha: 
divu kridavijigisávyavabaradyutistutimodasvapnakantigatisu. See also Tantraloka 1.101—104b, in 
which he shows following the lost Sivatanusastra of Brhaspati how the word devah is appropriate 
to that which it denotes (anvarthah) in the first five and the last of these nine meanings. 

418 Bhagavadgitarthasamgraha, p. 44, ll. 9-11 on 3.48a (evam buddheh param buddhva ‘having 
thus realized that which is beyond the intellect’): rahasyavidim tv ayam asayab. buddher yah 
paratra vartate paro hamkarah Ssarvam ahaw ity abheditma sa khalu paramo bhedah. 

4 Dyayasampattivartika A, f. 8118-19; B, f. 6r8 (v. 5): ahamkaramayi bhümir buddhibhimer 
para hi sa | taya vyáptam idam sarvam saiva vyapta vimuktida. 

20See, e.g., Spandanirnaya, p. 7, 5—6: tat khecaryürdhvamárgastham vyomavamesigocaram iti 
rabasyanityd ‘in accordance with the position of the Rahasya [stated in] “That is in the domain 
of Vyomavamesvari in the path above Khecari'; p. 20, ll. 20-23: yady api rabasyadrstau na kascij 
jadah karanavargo 5ti api tu vijninadehah karanesvarya eva vijrmbhante tathapiha suprasiddha- 
pratityanusdrenopadesyah kramena rahasyarthopadese 'nupravesya ity evam uktam “He has put the 
matter in these terms with the thought that although there is no “inert group of faculties” in 
the Rahasya doctrine—on the contrary [in that doctrine] the goddesses of the faculties manifest 
themselves as embodiments of consciousness—the student may be introduced to the teaching 
of the Rahasya doctrine indirectly by starting from the well-established [non-esoteric] under- 
standing [of their nature]’. 


Alexis Sanderson 359 


with his own kin, and that it is this revelation that is the basis of all the Gita’s 
eighteen chapters.?! He ends his exposition by appealing to the authority of 
"the renowned Abhinavagupta”, saying that he had explained all this at length 
in his Kramakeli.^? 

As for the commentary on the Devistotra, this has not come to light; but 
that it too was a work with Krama content is apparent from the context in 
which Abhinavagupta has referred to it in the passage in his commentary on 
the Gita translated above, namely as the source of a detailed exposition of his 
view that the eleventh chapter of that text, in which Krsna reveals his cosmic 
form, is in fact conveying the Esoteric Teaching (Rahasya) [of the Krama]. Since 
MaheSvarananda has reported that Abhinavagupta did exactly this in his Kra- 
makeli, we may wonder whether the commentary on the Devistotra is not the 
Kramakeli under another name. For the Kramastotra is indeed a devistotram, ‘a 
hymn to the Goddess’, and it would be somewhat surprising if Abhinavagupta 
had presented the same view of the Gird in detail in two separate works. ?? 


ABHINAVAGUPTA AND BHÜTIRAJA 


These works belong to an early phase of Abhinavagupta’s Saiva exegesis. The 
simplicity of the Bhagavadgitarthasamgraha, the narrow range of the sources 


?! Maharthamanjari 70: enam cea mahattham juttharambhammi panduuttassa | cholaha- 
sahassasatti devo uvadisai madhavo tti sivam (=Skt. enam eva mahartham yuddhairambhe 
panduputrasya sodasasahasrasaktir deva upadisati madhava iti fivam) ‘It is exactly this Mahartha 
that the god Madhava with the sixteen thousand powers teaches to Arjuna at the beginning 
of the battle. [May this work, now completed bestow] salvation [on all]’; Maharthamanjari- 
parimala ad loc., p. 177, ll. 6-10: tam enam eva sodasasahasrasaktih sodasadhikavilasalaksanam 
akálakalitam srikalasamkarsanibhavam anubhavan ...arjunasyopadisati upadiksad iti yavat “He 
who possesses sixteen thousand Saktis teaches, that is to say, taught, this same [Mahartha] 
to Arjuna while experiencing that identity with Kalasamkarsani that is the effulgence of the 
seventeen|[-syllable Vidya] and unaffected by time’; and p. 179, 1. 15—16: etat sarvatrastadasa- 
dhyayánusyütam angangibhavabhangya “This [teaching] pervades all the eighteen Adhyayas [of 
the Gita] in the sense that it is principal and everything else ancillary to it’. 

22 Maharthamanjariparimala, p. 183, |. 19-20: etad vitatya *vikhate (conj. ; vikhyataib Ed.) 
kramakelau kulagame | náthábhinavaguptaryaib paryálocitam adarat. 

43K. C. PANDEY has asserted (1963, p. 40) that the hymn on which Abhinavagupta com- 
mented was the Devistotra attributed to the ninth-century Kashmirian poet and poetician 
Anandavardhana. But that is implausible, since that Devistotra is Pauranika in content and 
style rather than Tantric. 


360 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


cited in it, and its authors modesty,“ point to this conclusion, and, as we 
have seen, the Devistotravivarana is even earlier.’ Moreover, at the time that 
Abhinavagupta wrote his commentary on the Gita it was Bhitiraja that he 
acknowledged as his Guru.*?° That he was still early in his scholarly career at 
that time is consonant with the fact that Bhütirája had also been the Guru 
of his father Cukhulaka (/Narasimhagupta).*?” His Kramastotra, the earliest 
of his dated works, was composed in A.D. 991, twenty-four years before his 
livarapratyabhijfavivrtivimaréini.?? As for the Kramakeli, Y have pointed to 
the possibility that it is none other than the Devistotravivarana cited in the 
Bhagavadgitarthasamgraha and therefore among his earliest works; but we can 
say with certainty only that Abhinavagupta wrote it before he composed the 
Parátrisikavivarana, the second of his surviving works on the Trika, since that 
cites ic, ^? 


“24For this modesty see, e.g., p. 51, l. 22-52, 1.3: ity anena slokena vaksyamanais ca slokaih 
paramarahasyam upanibaddham. tac casmabhir mitabuddhibhir api yathabuddhi yathagurv- 
amndyam ca vivrtam. mukhasampradayam antarena naitan nabhascitram iva cittam uparohatiti 
na vayam upalambhaniyah “The highest esoteric truth has been formulated in this and the verses 
that follow, and I, though of limited understanding, have explained it in accordance with that 
understanding and the tradition received from my teacher. I ask you not to find fault with me, 
for this leaves no impression in the mind, like a picture painted in the sky, unless one receives 
the tradition through oral instruction [by a Gurup’. 

“25 See p. 359. 

“26 Bhagavadgitarthasamgraha, p. 186, concluding verses, 1-2: sriman katyayano ‘bhiid vara- 
rucisadrsah prasphuradbodhatrptas tadvamsalamkrto yah sthiramatir abhavat sausukakhyo "tivid- 
vin | viprah sribhitirajas tadanu samabhavat tasya sinur mahitma yenami sarvalokas tamasi 
nipatitàh proddhrta bhanuneva | 2 taccaranakamalamadhupo bhagavadgitarthasamgraham 
vyadhat | abhinavah "saddvijalotakakrtacodanavasat (*saddvija corr. : sadvija Ed.) “There was 
an illustrious [scholar called] Katyayana, the equal of Vararuci himself. Adorned by descent 
from him was Sausuka, a brahmin of firm resolve and exceptional learning. After him came 
his son, the holy Bhitiraja, who like the sun has rescued so many that were sunk in darkness. 
Abhinavagupta, a drinker of the nectar of the lotuses that are his feet, has composed [this] 
Bhagavadgitarthasamgraha, at the urging of the pious brahmin Lotaka'. 

“27 Tsyarapratyabhijnavivrtivimarsini, vol. 3, p. 405, ll. 16-19: bhattatriguptakulajatavaraha- 
guptajannabhavac cukhulakah fivamarganisthah | sribhitirajavadanoditasambhusastratattvam- 
susititasamastabhavandhakarah *Cukhulaka, son of Varahagupta, a descendant of the lineage of 
Bhatta Atrigupta, devoted to the path of Siva, all the darkness of his bound existence completely 
dispelled by the essence of the reality of Siva’s teachings transmitted to him by the venerable 
Bhitiraja ...". 

“28See footnote 597 on p. 413. 

“2°See Paratrisibàvivarana, p. 267, l. 5: vyakhydtam caitan maya tattikayam eva kramakelau 
vistaratah ‘I have explained this at length in the Kramakeli, my commentary on that text’. 


Alexis Sanderson 361 


The *Kramavamsavali reports that Bhitiraja, whom it identifies as one of 
the pupils of Cakrabhanu, taught the Krama to Abhinavagupta. This adds 
weight to the view that in the period during which Abhinavagupta wrote the 
Bhagavadgitarthasamgraha the Krama was indeed central to his Saivism. Ja- 
yaratha rejects the report. But his reason for doing so is simply that he con- 
siders it to be inconsistent with Abhinavagupta’s adherence to the doctrine of 
the twelve Kalis. For he insists that Cakrabhanu did not teach this doctrine 
to any of his disciples, citing as his evidence the fact that Cakrabhanu’s teach- 
ing on this matter was still widely attested in Kashmir in the lineages derived 
from him, and adding that the author of the *Kramavamsavali himself confirms 
that Bhitiraja practised a different order of worship by writing that this Guru 
and his successors followed the Kalikulapancasataka, which, like Cakrabhanu, 
teaches thirteen Kalis in the phase of the Nameless:**° 


And therefore we should reject as pure invention the claims of Gurus in our time 
who being ignorant that Abhinavaguptas preceptorial lineage is as it is [stated in 
the Kramakeli] have made, for example, the following assertion: “Another dis- 
ciple of Cakrabhanu was the Acarya called Bhütiràja, who was the Guru of the 
Guru Abhinavagupta in the Kalinaya”. For Cakrabhanu never gave this teaching 
[seen in the Kramakeli] to any of his disciples, since we can see with hundreds 
[of Gurus] even today that a different teaching derives from him. Moreover, in 
that same [ *Kramavamsavali| you yourself have attested that Bhütiraja's order 
of worship in this [phase] differs, when you write there: "Bhütiràja and his suc- 
cessors, having adopted the doctrine of the Deviparicasataka ...”. If you hold 
that only twelve goddesses are required to be worshipped [by that text] in this 
[phase], then [it is clear that] you do not even know what it is that the Devi- 
pancasataka teaches. So go. Ask your Guru. Why should I enlighten [you]? 


But this argument is inconclusive, since it rests on the dubious assumption that 
Abhinavagupta could not have adjusted the tradition of the Krama but must 


On the order in which Abhinavagupta composed his surviving works on the Trika (Malini- 
vijayavartika— Paratrisikavivarana— Tantraloka— lantrasára) see SANDERSON 2005a, p. 124, 
footnote 88. 

‘30 Tantralokaviveka, vol. 3, p. 193, 1. 13—p. 194, 1.8 : atas casyaivam gurukramam ajananair 
adyatanaib “sribhitirajanamapy acaryas cakrabhanusisyo ‘nyah | abhinavaguptasya guror yasya hi 
kilinaye guruta” ityadi yad uktam tat svotpreksitam evety upeksyam. na hi sricakrabhanuna prayah 
kasyacid apy evam upadistam tanmülatayaivedanim *anyasyopadesasya (conj. : asyopadesasya Ed.) 
sataso darsanát. tatrapi cátra fribhutirajasyányatbà pujakrama iti “devipancasatasayam áfritya ca 
bhütirdjapürvanám" ity abhidadhadbhir bhavadbhir evoktam. atbátra dvádasaiva devyah püjy- 
atayà sthità ity abhipretam bhavatas tarhi sripancasatikartham api na janise. tad gaccha. svagurum 
precha. kim asmadáviskrtena. 


362 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


have inherited his teaching from his predecessors. Jayaratha has in any case over- 
looked a passage that he himself has cited elsewhere from an unidentified lost 
work by Abhinavagupta. In that Abhinavagupta tells us that he is the inheritor 
of the “glorious lineage of the Siddhas from the Bhattarika to Bhüti". This can 
only be the lineage of the Krama, since no other tradition in this environment 
claims to have descended from a woman. The Bhattarika, then, is Mangala; and 
Bhüti is surely a bhimavat abbreviation for Bhütiraja.*! 

That Bhitiraja was indeed a Guru of the Krama, as the *Kramavamsavali 
reports, is indicated by two citations. Abhinavagupta himself quotes him in 
his Zantrasára for his metaphysical analysis of the meaning of the name Kali 
from the root kal in the meanings ‘to project’ and ‘to know’,**” and Mahesvara- 
nanda quotes him in his Mahdarthamanjariparimala as saying that the Mantra 
is identical with the Goddess herself because it emerges in its real nature by 
drawing all consciousness into itself. That this is the Goddess of the Krama 
is apparent from the context of the citation. He cites this remark immediately 
after citing a statement to the same effect from the Kramakeli: “The Mantra is 
identical with the Goddess herself, namely this sacred consciousness (bhagavati 
samvit) that has the nature described”;*34 and the nature to which he refers is 
that stated in a line of the Kramastotra cited by Mahesvarananda immediately 
before this citation, implying that the latter is a comment on the former: f? 


The Mantra rises radiant with the dissolution that is the [all-consuming] fire of 


431 Tantralokaviveka, vol.1, pp. 28, 1. 18-29, 1.9 (on 1.9: jayati gurur eka eva srisrikantho 


bhuvi prathitah | tadaparamürtir bhagavan mahesvaro bhitirajas ca ‘Victorious is Srikantha, 
manifest on earth as the unique Guru, and his embodiment[s] the venerable Maheévara 
and Bhitiraja’): ...mahesvara iti yah srisamtatyardhatraiyambakakhyamathikayor gurutaydne- 
nanyatroktah paramesa itisa iti ca. yad aha: bhattarikadibhityantah sriman siddhodayakra- 
mah | bhattadiparamesantah srisamtanodayakramah | sriman bhattadir isantab paramo "tha 
gurukramab | trikaripas trikarthe me dhiyam vardhayatamtaram ‘Maheśvara [here] is the per- 
son he has identified in another work as his Guru in the Srisamtana and Ardhatraiyambaka 
lineages under the names Paramesa and Iga. As he states [there]: “May this threefold Guru lin- 
eage greatly increase my understanding of the teachings of the Trika: (1) the glorious lineage 
of the Siddhas, from the Bhattarika to Bhüti, (2) the glorious lineage of the Srisamtana, from 
the Bhatta to Paramesa, and (3) the supreme lineage from the Bhatta to Isa”. 

432 Tantrasara, p. 30, ll. 15-17. 

433 Maharthamanjariparimala, p. 122, l. 23-24: bhattasribhitirajenapy uktam “sarvakrodika- 
rena sthitatvad devy eva mantrah”. 

434 Maharthamanjariparimala, p. 122, 1. 22: srikramakelav apy uktam: seyam evamvidha bha- 
gavati samviddevy eva mantrah. 

45 Maharthamanjariparimala, p. 122, 1. 20-21: sristotrabhattarake ‘pi: “cidagnisamharamari- 
cimantrah samvidvikalpan glapayann udeti" iti. 


Alexis Sanderson 363 


consciousness, eliminating all the conceptual constructions of [differentiated] 
cognition. 


The Mantra is not identified, but it is evidently the Krama's seed-syllable 
KHPHREM. For the Kramastotra describes the manner of its arising in conscious- 
ness (samvitkramah) as follows: * 


Thus one should contemplate the awesome circle [of the syllable kHPHREM], 
which embodies total withdrawal, from the fire of the aeon (R) to the power 
of the circle (m1), dissolving the phases [of cognition] as it swallows up the uni- 
verse and finally reaches the [ultimate] that resides in the void of [unlimited] 
consciousness. 


and Abhinavagupta refers to it as the samharahrdayam ‘the heart of resorption’, 
contrasting it with ‘the heart of emission’ (srstihrdayam), the seed-syllable saum 
of the Trika’s supreme goddess Parabhattarika.‘°” 


436 Tantrālokaviveka, vol. 3, p. 223, ll. 11-15: ata eva sristotrabhattarake ‘pi “kalinalad vyoma- 
kalavasinam cintyam jagadgrasakalalayena | cakram mahbásambrtirüpam ugram gatam cidaka- 
Sapadastham ittham" ityadina samhdarakramenaivasyodaya uktah. 

437See Tantriloka 4.185c-189b (saun), 189c-191b (KHPHREM), 191cd: idam samhérahrda- 
yam pracyam srstau ca tan matam; 5.54c-74 (saug), 75-78 (KHPHREM). The seed syllable as 
stated cryptically in 4.189c-191b has been interpteted as RkskHEM (Papoux 1990, p. 424, 
footnote 117). This is also how it was understood by Swami Lakshman Joo when I studied the 
text with him. But this is incorrect. There is no such seed-syllable in the Saiva Mantrasastra. 
There are in fact two errors here. The first derives from the published text of the commentary 
of Jayaratha, which refers to the second element as sambdarakundalinyatmakasyaitadripalipeh 
kütavarnasya ‘the sound xs[a], which is identical with the Kundalini of withdrawal and whose 
written form embodies this’. The reading Era in katavarnasya is, I propose, a corruption 
of kundala or krüra, which are both code-names for pH[A]. See Jayadrathaydmala, Satka 4, 
f. 20v2—3, in a chapter listing code-names for the sounds of the syllabary (varmanamapatalap): 
kundalam bhairavam ravam ravini yoginipriyam | kundalinatham atulam krüram vai bhi- 
mam ankusam | phakaram dhámadhamánam namabhih samudahrtam. Abhinavagupta himself 
probably had another of these code-names for pH[a] in mind, namely ravah ‘the resonance’ or 
ravini ‘the resonator’, since he refers to the sound in question in the phrase antarnadatparima- 
rsasesibhitam, ‘reduced to nothing but an internally resonating awareness’, speaking of the state 
of the external in this phase, after it has been dissolved in the fire of awareness (= n[A]) (tat sad 
eva babirüpam prag bodhagnivilapitam). The second error was to fail to understand that in this 
passage, as in the verse I have cited from the Kramastotra, the constituents of the syllable are 
stated not in their actual order as pronounced but in the order in which they are held to arise 
in consciousness (samvitkramah), as explained by Jayaratha on this passage in Tantralokaviveka, 
vol. 3, p. 221, ll. 16-18: atra ca samvitkramenaiva sripindanáthasya vyáptib. iti tadanusárenaiva 
tasyoddhárab ‘And in these [verses] the correspondence of the Pindanatha is in accordance with 
the order [of the arising of the phases corresponding to its components] in consciousness itself, 


364 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


The Svabodhasiddhi of Bhüti 


No work by Bhitiraja is known to have survived. However, there is a short un- 
published work that may be his. This is the Svabodhasiddhi, which its colophon 
attributes to Sribhatta Bhüti.9? The naming of the author as [Sribhatta] Bhüti 
rather than [Bhattasri] Bhütiraja is not itself an obstacle. For we have seen 
Abhinavagupta use Bhüti for Bhütiraja in the unidentified work cited above; *?? 
and Ksemaraja and Yogaraja have both referred to themselves as Ksema and 
Yoga.^* Moreover, the content of the text is consistent with its being a prod- 
uct of the Krama. Claiming oral instruction (gurumukham) as its authority"! 
it teaches the attaintment of self-realization through the dissolution of the ac- 
tivity of the mind and senses brought about by coming to rest in one’s own na- 
ture through direct intuition of one’s consciousness (svabodhah) or own being 
(suasattà), a state that cannot be taught, that cannot be attained except through 
one’s own innate capacity, and that once attained liberates from all concep- 
tual constructions, both experiential and theoretical. This is reminiscent of the 
Siddha-teachings of Hrasvanatha’s Svabodhodayamanjari and of the doctrine 
of sudden enlightenment taught in the Chummdasamketaprakdsa, Anantasakti's 


and so he has raised it [sound by sound] following that order [rather than that of their pronunci- 
ation, i.e., in the order R-PH-KHE-M rather than KH-PH-R-E-M]’. That the error is not Jayaratha’s 
is evident from his citation in his commentary on these verses of a passage from an uniden- 
tified Krama text which shows a way of explaining the rise of the Mantra without deviating 
from the order of pronunciation: Sivanabhasi vigalitaksah kaundilyunmesavikasitanandah | pra- 
jvalitasakalarandhrah kaminya bydayakubaram adhiridhah | yogi fünya ivaste tasya svayam eva 
yoginibrdayam | hrdayanabhomandalagam samuccaraty analakotidiptam ‘His senses dissolved 
in the void (= kn[A]) of Siva, with bliss fully expanded through the awakening of Kundalini 
(= PH[A]), all the apertures [of his body] ablaze (= R[A]), immersed in the core of the heart of 
the beloved (= £), the Yogin rests as though in emptiness (= v). The heart of the Yogini (= E) 
surges up in the sphere of the void of his heart (= m), brilliant as countless fires’. 

438 Syabodhasiddhi, f. 59v4—5: iti éribhattabhütiviracità svabodhasiddhis samapta. 

439See footnote 431 on p. 364. 

^OKsemaràja, Pratyabhijnahrdaya, opening verse 2: ksemenoddhriyate sarah samsáravi- 
sasantaye; Ksemaraja, Spandasamdoba, p.25, closing verse 3cd: ksemendrthijandrthitena 
vivrtam érispandasütram manák; Ksemaraja, Sivastotravalivivrti, p. 355, closing verse 3cd: 
tasmad guror abhinavat parameíamürteh ksemo nisamya vivrtim vyatanod amutra; Yogaraja, 
Paramárthasáravivrti, p. V, opening verse 2cd: vivrtim karomi laghvim asmin vidvajjandrthito 
yogah, Yogaraja, Sivdstaka, f.9v10-(v. 8ab): yogena caitanyasivah stuto yam Sivastakeneti 
Sarivasamsthah | tenafu sarvasya sivam karotu Sivah *svahrnmadhyamadhamadhama (sva corr. : 
su Cod.). 

441 Syabodhasiddhi, £.5913—4 (v. 33d, final words): namamy asamasundaram gurumukhopadi- 
stam Sivam ‘I bow to the Siva of unequalled beauty taught to me in the oral instruction of my 
Guru’. 


Alexis Sanderson 365 


commentary on the Vztzlanathasütra, and the anonymous Mahdanayaprakasa. 
It also contains phrasing and terminology found in these and other texts of the 
Krama, including the Sripithadvadasika of Bhitiraja’s Guru Cakrabhanu and 
the Krama-based Prajnakalividhi of the second Satka of the Jayadrathayamala: 


Svabodhasiddhi, f. 56v2—6 (vv. 2-3): asesadarsanavesavisesadhivivarjitam | sva- 
samvedanasamvedyam svastham vande param sivam | nirastakalpanájalavika- 
lpaughavighatine | namo ‘stu paramanandapadatitaya sambhave ‘I venerate the 
supreme Siva located in the self, who can be known only in self- experience, who 
is devoid of the mental torment of all specific doctrines. I bow to Sambhu, the 
destroyer of the flow of conceptual construction, free of the snare of the mind’s 
imaginings, transcending the level [even] of the highest bliss’. Cf. Chumma- 
samketaprakáía, f. 312 (v. 29cd): praptam *mayá (conj : tvayá Cod.) anirdefyam 
vikalpaughavilapakam ‘I attained that undesignatable [reality] that eliminates 
the flow of conceptual construction’; Anantasakti, Varalanatbasütravrtti, final 
verse: iti paramarabasyam vagvikalpaughamuktam “Thus [I have explained] the 
ultimate esoteric teaching that is free of the flow of conceptual construction’; 
and Cakrabhanu, Srzpithadvadasikà 3cd (TesrrwoNtUM: unattributed citation 
by Ramyadeva on Bhávopahára 47): *nirastasastrárthavikalpajala devyah $masane 
karavirakakhye (see footnote 187 on p. 293) '[Supreme] are the goddesses [Jaya 
etc.] in the Karavira cremation ground[. For they are] free of the snare of concep- 
tual construction that is the doctrines of the Sastras’. For the notion that the ul- 
timate ground transcends the highest bliss see Chummdásamketaprakása, f. 5v3— 
6, vv. 71-73: (on the Chumma akulapavesu ‘entrance into the transcendent 
ground): niravarananirdhámaniranandam nirasrayam | paraprakasam aspa- 
ndam santacinmátravigrabam | nanásaktikaraspharavisrantipadam acyutam | 
niyatanubhavaksinasvasvaripaikagocaram | akulam gurubhih proktam nihsva- 
bhavam sadoditam | sa so ‘ham iti samkramat pravesas tatra jayate “The Gurus 
[of the Krama] term Akula the unobscured [reality] that is free of the [three] ra- 
diances [of the object, means, and agent of cognition], beyond bliss, unlocated, 
the highest light, motionless, its substance nothing but quiescent consciousness, 
the stable point in which the expansion of the rays that are its many powers is 
grounded, located nowhere but in that nature of the self in which all specific 
experience is obliterated, beyond any [definable] essence, eternally present. En- 
try into that occurs by immediate transmission through the intuition that it 
is this that is one’s identity’; Kalikulakramasadbhava, f. v2. (v.2.47c): *nitye 
sunye (em. : nityafumya Cod.) niránande ‘In the eternal void, beyond bliss’; and 
Kalikulapaficasataka A, £.20r5 (5.22cd), on Kali in the phase of the Nameless: 
ravimadhye niránandà cinmaricyantabhasika “Beyond bliss in the centre of the 
[twelve] suns, illuminating the limit of the rays of consciousness'. 


Svabodhasiddhi, £.56v10-11 (v.6): mamaham iti hrdgranthicchedanaika- 


366 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


krpanikam | spandaspandakrtagrasam naumy aham fuddbasamvidam “I venerate 
that pure consciousness that has devoured both active and quiescent states, the 
knife that alone can cut through the heart’s knots of ‘my’ and T. Cf. Jayad- 
rathayamala, Satka 4, f. 17917—179v1: *spandaspandakrtagrasa (spandaspanda 
conj. : sadaspanda Cod.) ‘[Pratyangira], who has devoured both the active and 
the quiescent states’; ibid., f. 168v4: spandaspandantarodaraviryavyaktikalalaya 
‘[Nattesvari], whose ground is the power of the manifestation of the exalted 
vigour that lies between the active and quiescent states’; Arnasimha, Mabanaya- 
prakása, f. 129v1—2 (v. 249): spandaspandaparispandasamdhánojjhitavigrabam | 
sarvatravasthitam vande vacatitam animayam “I venerate that perfect reality be- 
yond expression that is present in everything, its nature free of the consciousness 
that is the oscillation of the active and quiescent’. 


Svabodhasiddhi, £.56v11-12 (v.7): vyapadesavihinasya tattvasya kathanam 
katham | svasamvedanasadyuktyà gamyate yadi kena cit ‘How can the process of 
oral instruction convey that nameless reality. If some rare person grasps it then 
it is by the higher method of self-experience’; and f.57r11—12 (v. 14): bodha- 
mátragrabab karyas suprabuddhena cetasà | tavad yavat svasámarthyát svanisthah 
kevalo bhavet ‘With fully awakened awareness he should take hold of noth- 
ing but his consciousness until by his own ability he comes to rest in the self 
and so attains liberation’. Cf. Mabanayaprakása (Triv.) 1.20: mabátivratame + 
+ + + svdnubbavasthite | kathanadikramatita visuddhis *tasya (conj. : tatra Ed.) 
kasate ‘In the most extreme [descent of power] (mahdtivratame), that rests in 
self-experience [alone], unimpeded awareness dawns for him without his de- 
scending to the processes of instruction or [worship]'. 


Svabodhasiddhi, f.57:1—5 (vv. 9-10): upeyapraptyupayo "yam svabodha- 
jágarükatà | svabodhajagarukatvan nirvibhaga sthitir muneh | upáyo naparah 
kascit svasattànugamád rte | tām evanusaran yogi svastho yah sa *sukhi (corr. : sva- 
khi Cod.) bhavet “This method of attaining the goal is to be constantly awake 
to one’s own consciousness. By this means the sage achieves the state free of 
differentiation. There is no method other than holding to awareness of one’s 
own being. It is by maintaining awareness of this that the meditator will at- 
tain happiness, resting in the self. Cf. Jayadrathayamala, Satka 2, f. 101r3—4 
(Prajnakalividhi, v. 24): *sukhena (corr. : mukhena Cod.) sadbyate sa tu svasatta- 
grahanena tu | prajndyogena *yogesi (corr. : yogesi Cod.) siddhyate nanyatha kva 
cit ‘But by taking hold of one’s own being Yogesvari [Kali] is effortlessly accom- 
plished. It is by [this] meditation of direct insight that she is mastered and never 
otherwise’. 


Svabodhasiddhi, f.58r1—7  (vv.22-24): abhedabodhasambodhat | svarüpa- 
nubhavasthitim | vyutthitas san niruddho và labhate yas sa tattvavit | yasya 
sarvdsv avasthasu *svasthitir (corr. : susthitir Cod.) naiva lupyate | tasya kim 


Alexis Sanderson 367 


nama kurvanti sastrabhramanavibhramah | vigalitasadasadvikalpas sadasad- 
bhramajanitamohamuktatma | jivann api janamadhye vigatabhayah sarvada 
yogi ‘One is enlightened who by realizing undifferentiated consciousness 
attains stability in the experience of his own nature both when he has emerged 
from immersion and when he is in it. Of what benefit are agitated wanderings 
in the Sastras to one whose rest in the self is never interrupted in any state 
[of consciousness]? For him the conceptual constructions ‘is’ and ‘is not’ have 
ceased to exist. He is free of the delusion caused by the error of these two. Even 
while living in the midst of society [this] meditator is ever free of fear’. With 
v.24ab cf. Jhananetra, Kalikastotra, f. 90v1—2. (v. 1): sitatarasamvidavapyam 
sadasatkalanavihinam anupadhi | jayati jagattrayaripam nīrūpam devi te 
rüpam ‘Supreme, O Goddess, is your formless form in the form of the three 
worlds, that can be attained [only] by the purest awareness and is devoid of the 
conceptual constructions ‘is’ and ‘is not’, free of all limiting adjuncts’; ibid., 
£.91v1 (v. 10ab): sadasadvibhedasiiter dalanapara kapi sahajasamvittih; *[You, 
O Goddess, are supreme], that unique innate awareness that seeks to obliterate 
the projection of the difference of ‘is’ and ‘is not’; and Chummásamketaprakása, 
f. 218 (v. 4): ...... niravesa sadasadbhramavarjità | nirvikalpavikalpà tu samvid- 
ujjhitadharmini *[Ihe level (bhümih)] that cannot be penetrated, free of the 
error of ‘is’ and ‘is not’, free of both discursive and non-discursive awareness, 
transcending the attributes of cognition’. 


However, while the identity of the author of the Svabodhasiddhi with the Krama 
teacher Bhitiraja is not refuted by his being called Bhüti or by the nature of 
his work’s content, I see no evidence that makes this identity more than plau- 


sible. ^? 


KRAMA WORKS KNOWN ONLY FROM QUOTATIONS OR REPORTS 


Several such works have already been mentioned above: a work by Ojaraja (per- 
haps a commentary on the Kalikulapancasataka), Eraka's Kramastotra, com- 
mentaries thereon by Hrasvanatha, the author of the Trivandrum Mahdanaya- 
prakása, and others unnamed, an unidentified work by Hrasvanatha, Abhinava- 
guptas commentary Kramakeli, his Devistotravivarana, if that is other than 
the Kramakeli, the *Kramavamsavali, a hymn by Prabodhanatha or possi- 
bly two, the Rajikd, the Pijatilaka, some verses from an unidentified Krama 
scripture or scriptures cited by the author of the commentary on the Old 
Kashmiri Mahdanayaprakasa, the Stotramala by the same, a work probably 


442There are other names in Bhüti- in Kashmirian sources. We have the Saiddhantika 
Bhütikantha (see above, p. 244), and the minister Bhitikalasa (Kalhana, Rajatarangini 7.26). 


368 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


by the author of the anonymous Mahdnayaprakasa on the oral instructions, 
the Prakrtatrimsikavivarana of Bhattaraka, the Akulakalikatrimsika and Akra- 
makallolakarika of Ramyadeva, a hymn by his son, and the hymn of a certain 
Rama that alludes to the Chumma ditto nitto.*9 To these may be added the 
Kramasütra, from which we have a passage on how by means of the internal 
kramamudra the meditator achieves immersion even when his awareness is ex- 
troverted, ^^ a collection of verses (vimuktakani) by a certain Bhatta Damodara, 
from which we have a verse stating that the five Flow Goddesses liberate when 
perceived and bind when not,** the Old Kashmiri Siddhasiitra, of which we 
have a verse on the pervasion of the graphic constituents of the syllable om 


by the five elements,““° a work by a Somaraja, pupil of Bhojaraja and grand- 


“See footnote 89 on p.264 (Ojaraja); p.275 (Eraka's Kramastotra); p.278 (Hras- 
vanatha’s commentary on the Kramastotra); p. 319 (a commentary on the Kramastotra by 
the author of the Trivandrum Mahdnayaprakdsa); p.278 (an unnamed work by Hras- 
vanatha); p.278 (unnamed commentators on the Kramastotra); p.354 (the Kramakeli); 
p. 361 (the Devistotravivarana); p. 275 (the *Kramavamsáavali); p. 296 (Prabodha's lost hymn 
or hymns); p. 308 (the Rajikd and Pujatilaka); p.308 (some unidentified Krama scrip- 
tures and the Srotramála); p.319 (a work on the oral instructions); p. 346 (Bhattaraka’s 
Prakrtatrimsikavivarana); p. 328 (Ramyadeva's Akulakalikatrimsika and Akramakallolakarika); 
p. 328 (a hymn by the son of Ramyadeva); and p. 353 (a hymn by Rama). 

444 Pratyabhijnahrdaya, p. 42, Il. 11-15 (yathoktam kramasütresu). 

“4S Pratyabhijnahrdaya, p. 30, 1l. 6-7 (yatha coktam sahajacamatkaraparijanitakrtakadarena 
bhattadimodarena vimuktakesu), emending vamesadyah to vamesyadyah. 

^ The commentary on the Old Kashmiri Mabanayaprakàsa, p. 32, ll. 8-12: yat siddhapada 
ddidisub: pithiva apa *ti (em. : tà Ed.) teju takaru su vatasatti tiryaga "avayava ti (corr. : avaya- 
vati Ed.) | nabhu ra pafica *akaru su ehuya sistipasaru akalati (Skt.: prthivy apas tejas ca takaro 
vátasaktir tiryagavayavas ca. nabho rah. panca akárab. esa eva srstiprasara ákalyate) “Earth, wa- 
ter, and fire are the ża [shape], the power of air the cross-stroke, and ether the ra [shape]. The 
five [combined] make the character z. It is this that is considered the source of creation'. The 
character a in the Kashmirian script (Sarada) can indeed be visualized in this way, as a ta with 
a ra pendent from the right end of its horizontal head-stroke and the two connected at their 
middle by a short cross-stroke. The first Pada is quoted again at p. 60, |. 1 and attributed to ‘the 
Siddha’ siddhasya subhasitam. It is perhaps the source of this verse that the author of the anony- 
mous Mahdnayaprakasa has in mind when he refers to the Sütras of the Siddha (siddhasutrani) 
for the view that practising the Krama worship in full bestows supernatural abilities (8.28ab): 
püjanát khecaratvam hi siddhasütresu gadyate. átmajfiánat pravartante yatheccham animadayah 
"For it is stated in the Siddhasitra that worship leads to the ability to travel through the air. Self- 
realization enables one to manifest at will the [eight] supernatural powers, such as the ability 
to contract one’s size’. 


Alexis Sanderson 369 


pupil of Hrasvanàtha, ^ 


a work by an unknown spiritual descendant of Naver- 
akanatha, one of the pupils of Keyüravati, 44 and the Kalikakrama. 

I have suggested above that the Kalikakrama may have been a scriptural 
text, though the verses cited lack the vocatives indicative of dialogue and any 
of the deviations from Paninian norms that would prove this.“ A certain lack 
of concision and awkwardness of expression suggest that it may be a work at- 
tributed to supernatural revelation rather than claimed by a human author. But 
they too prove nothing conclusively. In any case, the text shows a concern with 
philosophical dialectic that is conspicuously lacking in the other scriptures of 
the Krama. These qualities are evident in a passage that expounds the doctrine 
that the phenomena of experience have no reality apart from cognition: ^? 
Cognition manifests itself both internally and externally in the form of various 
[phenomena]. The objects [of the mind and senses] have no existence apart 
from cognition. Therefore the world is of the nature of cognition. For no-one 
has ever witnessed the existence of an object apart from the cognition [of it]. 
Therefore it is settled that cognition itself has become these [objects]. By force 
of the contemplation of phenomena the identity with cognition that pertains 
to its objects [is established,] by means of negation and assertion with regard to 
the distinction between "is" and "is not". Cognition and its object have a single 
nature because they are experienced simultaneously. 


The probable meaning of the awkwardly phrased penultimate sentence is that 
the existence of objects is inseparable from cognition because they are seen only 
when cognition is present and not when it is absent (anvayavyatirekabhyam). 
There is nothing specific to the Krama in this, though Krama authors shared 
this view with other Saiva non-dualists and may well have been the first to adopt 
and adapt it from Buddhist circles.?! However, the Krama background of the 


447 Tantrálokaviveka, vol. 3, pp. 196, |. 13-197, l. 4: two verses in praise of Vàmana (Hras- 
vanatha) and Bhojaraja. 

“48 Ta ntrálokaviveka, vol. 3, pp. 196, ll. 1-10: two verses in praise of Keyüravati and Naver- 
akanatha. 

49 See p. 254. 

‘50 Sivastitravimarsini, p. 118, ll. 1—7: kalikakrame pi: tattadripataya jnanam bahir antah 
prakasate | jnandad rte narthasatta jhanaripam tato jagat | na hi jianad rte bbavab kenacid 
visayikrtah | jnanam tadatmatam yatam etasmad avasiyate | astinastivibhagena nisedhavidhiyo- 
gatah | jhanatmata jheyanistha bhavanam bhavanabalat | yugapadvedanaj jhanajheyayor ekaru- 
pata. 

4531The Kalikrama’s position that cognition and its object have a single nature because 
they are experienced simultaneously no doubt rests on the oft-cited principle stated by 
Dharmakirti in Pramánaviniscaya 1.55ab (VETTER 1966, p.94): Ihan cig dmigs pa nges pai 
phyir | sngon dang de blo gzhan ma yin (sahopalambhaniyamad abhedo nilataddhiyoh [qu., e.g., 


370 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


text is apparent in the use of the expression kalagrasah ‘devouring of time’ in 


the following:*? 


A meditator will attain the state of Nirvana if by rejecting the mental activities 
of “is” and “is not”, resorting to the inner state [between those two], and tran- 
scending through non-duality the net of conceptual constructions, higher and 
lower, he rests always content in himself alone, intent solely on devouring time, 
immersed in the state of transcendental solitude. 


In Zantráloka 29.43 Abhinavagupta refers to "other Gurus and consorts 
taught in the Ka/ikula”, saying that they should be called to mind though not 
explicitly worshipped in the system of Kaula Trika worship that he outlines 
in this chapter.ó? Commenting on this Jayaratha cites a passage of an un- 
named work by Abhinavagupta which identifies these as the five Gurus Visvay- 
oni, Jagadyoni, Bhavayoni, Prajapatiyoni and Kulayoni, and their five consorts 
Viryayoni, Ksobhayoni, Bijayoni, Srstiyoni, and Sargayoni.*** They are derived 
from the sequence of worship taught for the phase of Emission in the Krama’s 
Kalikulapancasataka and in no other source.Ó? This, then, may be from an 
otherwise unknown work by Abhinavagupta on the Krama. 


THE TRIKA 


I pass now from the Krama and Abhinavaguptas Trika-based Krama to the 
Trika itself. The defining feature of its scriptures is that they teach the propitia- 
tion of the triad of goddesses Para/Matrsadbhava, Parapara and Apara, who are 


Naresvarapariksaprakasa p. 32]) “The blue [object] and the cognition of it are not other, because 
they are invariably cognized together’. 

452 Sivastitravimarsini, pp. 133, 1. 12-134, 1.2: nirasya sadasadvrttih samsritya padam anta- 
ram | vihaya kalpanajalam advaitena paraparam | yah svatmanirato nityam kalagrasaika- 
tatparah | kaivalyapadabhag yogi sa nirvanapadam labhet. The term kalagrasah is found passim 
in the Krama texts. It also appears in the works of Abhinavagupta (Mdlinivijayavartika 1.152— 
156; Pardtrisikavivarana, p. 256, ll. 13-14; and Tantraloka 1.98cd) but no doubt under Krama 
influence. 

45329 43ab: anyãś ca tatpatnyah srimatkalikuloditah, 29.45ab: te visesan na sampüjyah smar- 
tavyà eva kevalam. 

454 Tantrālokaviveka, vol. 11, Ahnika 29, p. 33, Il. 10-11: yad uktam anenaiva: visvam jagad 
bhávam atho prajapati kulam tatah | yonisabdantakam proktam gurünam pancakam tv idam | 
viryam ksobho bijam srstih sarga itimah saktaya uktah. 

455 Kalikulapancasataka A, f. 12r (3.19—212): tathànyam srmu samksepa(d) durvijeyam mahe- 
svara | visvayonim jagadyoni(m) bhavayonim prajapatim | paficamam kulayonim ca patnis tesam 
srnusva me | retayonim bijayonim srja(m) srstim tathaiva ca | paficamam ksobhayonim ca. 


Alexis Sanderson 371 


enthroned, both in the Trika’s initiation Mandala and in the visualization that 
is a component of regular worship, on three lotuses resting on the tips of the 
prongs of a trident, with Para/Matrsadbhava in the centre and the other two to 
her right and left.“ 

Both the Kalikula and the Krama had influenced the Trika by the time 
of the exegetes. The later Trika scripture Devyayamala had incorporated Kala- 
samkarsani as a fourth goddess above the three of the older tradition, a variant 
of Trika worship that is also found within the encyclopaedic scriptural tradi- 
tion of the Kalikula itself; and the Trikasadbhdva had added the Kalis seen 
in the Krama’s phase of the Nameless to the pantheon installed in the Trika’s 
Mandala.**” 

While in the Krama we have an internally differentiated tradition with nu- 
merous authors, in the exegesis of the Trika proper we have only the works of 
a single author, Abhinavagupta, all on a single scripture, the Malinivijayottara. 
The principal of these works are, in the order of their composition, the Malinivi- 
jayavartika and the Tantraloka. A third commentary, the Sripirvapancika, sur- 
vives only in citation.Ó? The first, comprising two chapters of 1135 and 335 
verses respectively, declares itself a commentary on the opening verse of the 
Malinivijayottara but accomplishes this commentary in a form that covers the 
contents of the whole work, the first chapter covering the first seventeen chap- 
ters of the scripture and the second the rest. The Zantráloka, comprising 5859 
verses in thirty-seven chapters (Ahnikas), offers itself as a comprehensive Pad- 
dhati on the Trika taught in the Malinivijayottara. Much that is in the Malinivi- 
jayavartika appears again more or less revised in the Taztrüloka, ^? but there is 
important material in the former that was not repeated or reformulated, most 
notably the section 1.15—399, which presents a metaphysical explanation of 
the origin and differentiation of the principal divisions of the Saiva scriptures, 
based, I propose, on the account of the canon given in the lost Saiva scrip- 
ture Srikanthiyasamhital Srikanthi in a long passage preserved in the Nityddi- 


456See SANDERSON 1986. 

457On the influence of the Kalikula and Krama on the scriptural Trika and the existence of 
variants of Trika worship in the Kalikula itself see SANDERSON 1986, pp. 188-204 and SANDER- 
son 1990, pp. 58-64. In the former I have called these two developments Trika IIa and Trika 
IIb. 

^58 All that survives of the Srzparvaparicikà without doubt is a passage quoted and attributed 
by Jayaratha on Tantrāloka 23.75 (etadvivarane eva pañcikāyām). Abhinavagupta refers to it 
twice in his Paratrifikavivarana (p. 194, ll. 17-19; p. 205, ll. 21-22). 

5°On the priority of the Malinivijayavártika see SANDERSON 2005, p. 142, footnote 24. 


372 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


samgrahapaddhati of Rajanaka Taksakavarta. 9? 

The Zantraloka is not a Paddhati in the narrow sense, that is to say, a detailed 
practical guide to the performance of the systems rituals. Rather it builds on the 
basis of the Malinivijayottara a theory-rich account of his vision of the Trika’s 
teaching of the nature of ultimate reality and the means of its realization. These 
means include ritual, but since Abhinavagupta held to the view, in opposition 
to the Saiddhantikas, that it is knowledge rather than ritual that liberates, he 
also teaches methods that do not descend to the level of ritual performance and 
rationalizes ritual itself as a process of cultivating the insight that in his higher 
methods comes about through direct, non-conceptual intuition or the gradual 
refinement of a conceptual awareness of ultimate reality (vikalpasamskarah) to 
the point at which it transcends its conceptual character to become immediate 
experience (saksatkarah). 

He structures his account of the Trika’s means of liberation in this way on 
the basis of three verses in the Malinivijayottara that define three modes of im- 
mersion in Siva: non-conceptual (sémbhavah samavesah), through conceptual 
thought alone (saktah samavesah), and through meditational and ritual activity 
(Gnavap). 9. In the first chapter he sets out the fundamentals of his soteriology 
and its metaphysical basis, defining the three modes of immersion, adding a 
transcendent fourth, immersion without method (anupdyah samavesah), mean- 
ing by that a sudden direct self-realization that once established requires no fur- 
ther application of means to sustain it. The second is devoted to this mode of 
self-realization, the third to non-conceptual immersion (sambhavah samavesab), 
and the fourth to immersion through thought alone (saktah samavesah). The 
methods that constitute immersion through meditational and ritual activity 
(anavah samavesah) are explained in chapters 5 and following. The medita- 
tional methods are taught first. The fifth chapter teaches visualization of the 
flow of the powers of consciousness through the faculties (Zbyanam), medi- 
tation on the flow of the vital energies (pranatattvasamuccarah) with the help 
of the Mantras saUH and KHPHREM, meditation on these and other syllables 
(varnatattvam), and internal Yogic posture (karanam). The remaining methods 
are gathered under the heading sthanakalpana ‘visualizing the positioning of 
internal structures in external substrates’. Chapter 6 teaches how the cycles of 


460A transcript of this account has been published in HANNEDER 1998, pp. 237—268 from 
Ms Stein Or. d. 43 in the Bodleian Library, Oxford. This is a copy of the manuscript of the 
Nityadisamgrahapaddhati listed here in the bibliography. 

49! Malinivitayottara 2.21—23. 


Alexis Sanderson 373 


external time and, by extension, the sounds of the syllabary circulate internally 
in the vital energy. Chapter 7 shows how the sequences of Mantras of various 
kinds are to be mastered by contemplative repetition within the cyclical flow of 
the breath (cakrodayah). Chapters 8—11 explain the order of worlds (bhuvandd- 
hvà) (8), the order of the Tattvas (tattvddhvd) (9), the correlation between the 
order of the Tattvas and the Malinivijayottara's hierarchy of the categories of 
perceiver (pramátá) (10), and the order of the five Tattva-segments (kaladbva) 
(11). These chapters look both backwards and forwards: backwards in as much 
as these structures of the worlds, Tattvas, and Tattva-segments are seen as ar- 
rayed within the microcosm, forwards in as much as a precise knowledge of 
these structures is ancillary to the officiant’s performance of initiation, whose 
treatment will follow. Chapters 13 and 14 are preliminary to the discussion 
of that topic. The first analyses the nature of the ‘descent of [Siva's] power 
(Saktipatah) that leads to liberation, directly or through initiation, and the sec- 
ond analyses the nature of the absence of this descent, the state of occlusion 
(tirobhavah) that holds consciousness in bondage. ^? 

The external practices of ritual, beginning with initiation, are the princi- 
pal subject matter from the 15th chapter to the 33rd. Chapter 15 teaches the 
ritual of worship in the form that it is to take when done by an officiant as a 
preliminary to initiation, the neophyte’s initiation known as the semayadiksa, 
and the rules of discipline that bind all initiates. The following chapters cover 
the full initiation known as the nirvanadiksd (16-17), an abbreviated form of 
initiation (18), the form of initiation to be performed for those close to death 
(sadyonirvanadiksa) (19), the procedure known as scales-initiation (tuladiksa, 
dhatadiksa) (20), initiation for the dead (mrtoddhari diksa) (21), initiation af- 
ter conversion from another faith (lingoddharadiksa) (22), the rituals for the 
consecration to office of Gurus and Sadhakas (acaryabhisekah, sadhakabhisekah) 
(23), initiation during cremation (azzyestidiksa) (24), and the ritual of making 
offerings to the deceased (sraddhavidhih) (25). Chapters 26 and 27 teach the 
ritual of daily worship to be performed by initiates for the rest of their lives, in- 
cluding the procedure for the consecration (pratistha) of Lingas and other sub- 
strates of personal worship. Chapter 28 covers worship to be offered on special 
occasions (naimittikavidhih) requiring the assembling and gratification of ini- 
tiates and Yoginis (cakrayagal), procedures for gaining encounters with Yoginis 
(yoginimelakah), the procedures to be adopted in the Guru’s regular teaching 


^9 See Tantrilokaviveka, vol. 4, p. 2, ll. 1-6. 


374 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


of the scriptures (vyakhyavidhih), penances (prayascittavidhih), and the ritual of 
the worship of the Guru (28). Having completed his treatment of the rituals 
of the basic form of the Trika, he devotes the 29th chapter to worship, initia- 
tion, and consecration in a higher, Kaula form of the same. It is in this context 
that he sets out as an option the system of Kalikula worship taught in the Mz- 
dhavakula of the Jayadrathayamala's fourth Satka. He then covers the Mantras 
(30), Mandalas (31), and Mudras (32) of the system, and summarizes the sets 
of the Trika's ancillary deities (33), thus bringing his treatment of ritual to its 
end. Chapters 34 to 36 explain the relationship between the three methods of 
immersion (34), and give an account of the hierarchy of revelation (35) and 
of the transmission of the Siddhayogesvarimata, of which the Malinivijayottara 
was considered to be the essence (36). Abhinavagupta ends his treatise with a 
chapter on the value of his composition (sastropddeyatvam) (37). He states the 
position of the Malinivijayottara in the Saiva canon: above the Saiddhantika 
scriptures are those of Bhairava; within those the highest are the texts of the 
Sakta-orientated Vidyapitha; of those the foremost is the Siddhayogesvarimata; 
and the Malinivijayottara is the latter's ultimate distillation. The value of the 
Tantráloka, then, lies in his view in the fact that as the systematic exposition of 
the teachings of this Tantra it conveys the highest essence of the entire Saiva 
revelation. He ends with an account of his patrilineal descent from Atrigupta, 
a learned brahmin of Madhyadesa who was settled in Kashmir by King Lal- 
itaditya (r. c. 725—761/2), of his intellectual history, the various Gurus who 
had taught him, and the circle of his disciples. Within the framework of this 
encyclopaedic treatment he has inserted numerous incidental discussions. Par- 
ticularly noteworthy are his treatments of the metaphysical basis of the Sanskrit 
syllabary (mdatrkacakram) in the 3rd chapter, of the gradations of Guru-hood 
in the 4th, of causality in the 9th, of objectivity (vedyatz) in the 10th, and of 
the nature of death and the destinies of the soul thereafter in the 28th. 
Though the Zantraloka is based on the Malinivijayottara it reaches far be- 
yond that source to draw on a great number of scriptural texts from the whole 
range of the Saiva Mantramarga. Among texts of the Trika he cites principally 
the Siddhayogesvarimata, the Trisirobhairava |= Andmaka\, the Devyáyamala, 
the Tantrasadbhava, the Kularatnamála, the Trikasadbhava, the Trikasara, the 
Bhairavakula, the Viravali, and the Paratrisika. From the Kalikula he cites the 
Madhavakula, the Kramasadbháva, the Urmikaularnaval Bhogahasta, the Kali- 
kula, and the Kalimukha. 9 The identity of che Kalikula is not certain, but it 


463 Abhinavagupta refers to a text with this name as his source for the option of using a 


Alexis Sanderson 375 


is very probably the Kalikulapancasataka. He also cites a number of Kaula 
texts of uncertain affiliation: the Anandesvara, the Utphullaka, the Kulagahvara, 
the Kramarahasya, the Khecarimata, the Gama, the Tattvaraksavidhána, the 
Nandisikha, the Nirmáryáda, the Nisatanal Nisisamcara, the Bhargasikha, the 
Yogasamcara, the Yoginikaula, the Yonyarnava, the Sarvaviral Sarvacara, and the 
Haidara. Descending below this level in his herarchy of revelation he draws on 
the Picumatal Brahmayamala, the principal scripture of the Yamala division, 
and in the Daksina division on the Svacchanda to a great extent and inci- 
dentally on the Aghoresvarisvacchanda. Among scriptures of the Siddhanta he 
cites the Kacabhargava, the Kamika, the Kalottara, the Kirana, the Diksottara, 
the Nihsvasa, the Parakhya, the Pauskara, the Matanga, the Mayasamgraha, the 
Mukutottara, the Rauravasütrasamgraha, the Sarvajndnottara, and the Svayam- 


sword, dagger, knife or clear mirror as one's substrate of worship (Tantraloka 27.44): khadgam 
kypanikam yad và kartarim makuram ca và | vimalam tat tatha kuryac chrimatkalimukhoditam. 
No text of this name has been mentioned elsewhere in the literature known to me, but it is no 
doubt either the Kalikula or a text closely related to it. For we have a close parallel in Kaliku- 
lapancasataka A, f. 18r5 (4.73), referring to the worship of the phase of Withdrawal: athava 
churikam sthapya kartarim và sudarunam | mahamukuraprsthe (em. : mahamukutaprsthe Cod.) 
tu püjyà samharabhairavi. 

^9^His quotation of the Kalikula in Tantraloka 35.33-34 (srimatkalikule coktam paticasro- 
tovivarjitam | dasastadasabhedasya saram etat prakirtitam | puspe gandhas tile tailam dehe 
jivo jale mytam | yatha tathaiva Sastranam kulam antah pratisthitam) appears to be a con- 
densed citation of Kalikulapancasataka B, f. 27rá—v1 (2.35—38): etad rahasyam paramam kulam 
jnatam na kenacit | saivad bahyam idam deva pancasrotovinirgatam | 36 dasastadasabhedasya 
Saivasya paramesvara | antarlinam idam jhanam na jnatam tridasesvaraih | 37 sarvatra sam- 
sthitam deva sugidham kulam uttamam | puspe gandha ivasaktam tailam yadvat tiladisu | 
38 tathaiva sarvasastranam kulam antah pratisthitam. The citation in 13.306 ("&alikulavid- 
hau conj. : kulakalividhau Ed.] coktam vaisnavanam visesatah | bhasmanisthaprapannanám 
ityadau naiva yogyata) is close to Kalikulapancasataka A, £.29v3-5 (7.51c-53b): tantri- 
kanam na saivanim na dadyád vaisnavatmanám | bhasmanisthaprapannanim asthimaladi- 
dharinam | vedoktadikriyaridhidinadharmatapojusam | tirthaframaprapannanám na deyam 
paramarthikam, with the Kalikula's vaisnavanim visesatah being seen in a parallel passage 
in the Devidvyardhasatika, f.4v4—5 (41c-42): tantracararatánam ca siddhantadikriyanvitam | 
vedoktadikriyarudhim vaisnavanam visesatah | *laukikanam (conj. [supported by Kalika- 
krama redaction: laukika ca] : kaulikandm Cod.) kriya*yuktam (em. [Aisa gen. pl.] : yuktas 
Cod.) tebhyo *raksyam (corr. : raksam Cod.) mabakramam. In 28.14c-15b he includes the 
Kalikula among sources that give information on the Kaula days sacred to the Mothers (kula- 
parva) (kulaparveti tad brümo yathoktam bhairave kule | haidare trikasadbhive trikakalikula- 
dike). There is no such information in the Kalikulapancasataka. However, the reading is suspect 
since if kalikuladike is correct, the trika- that precedes is problematic, since it does not denote 
a specific text and no Trikakálikula is known or probable. 


376 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


bhuvastitrasamgraha, considering their prescriptions valid except where specific 
instructions in non-Saiddhantika scriptures block their application for those 
initiated into the practice ordained in these more restricted traditions. His pur- 
pose is to formulate a position for the Trika that enables its followers to see it 
not merely as the highest revelation but as that which pervades and validates all 
others. The Malinivijayottara was a fitting base for this project for two principal 
reasons. The first is that it offers a bridge from the Sakta ground of this exegesis 
to the Siddhanta since it shows striking continuities with the latter system. The 
second is that the 18th chapter of the Malinivijayottara could be read as formu- 
lating the view that while the hierarchy of revelation leads upwards to culminate 
in the Trika, the highest revelation within the Trika itself, to be found in this 
chapter, transcends trancendence by propagating the position that all forms of 
Saiva practice, including that of the Siddhanta, are equally valid provided they 
are informed by the nondualistic awareness enjoined here. 6? 

Though the Zantráloka is a work of the Trika based on a text untouched by 
the Kalikula, Abhinavagupta reads the Kalikula-influenced strata of the tradi- 
tion into the very core of his exegesis and develops this further in the light of 
post-scriptural Krama theory, though always doing so obliquely as though to 
conceal the purely Sakta ground of his Saivism from profane eyes, ^6 as exam- 
ples from the opening chapters are sufficient to demonstrate. Thus the opening 
benedictory verse of the work reveals this character by showing in a veiled mat- 
ter that the author's chosen deity (éstadevata) is Kalasamkarsani. ^^ In the first 
chapter he alludes to the twelve Kalis as the fullest expression of Bhairava’s 
nature, presenting them in a syncretistic fashion as the three principal god- 
desses of the Trika subdivided by emission, stasis, withdrawal, and the [name- 
less] fourth. 95 In the third chapter, after defining the twelve vowels from A to 


465On the hierarchical unity of the Mantramarga as formulated by Abhinavagupta and his 
commentator and the position that the Trika ultimately neither enjoins nor forbids any partic- 
ular form of Saiva practice, requiring only that the method adopted, whether it be, for example, 
the Saiddhantika’s Linga worship or the Kaula’s rejection of that worship, should be animated 
by non-dualistic awareness, see my commentary on the second of the opening verses of Abhi- 
navagupta’s 7antraséra (SANDERSON 2005a, pp. 102—122). 

466On the place of the Krama in Abhinavagupta’s Trika see SANDERSON 1995, pp. 53-62. 

467 See SANDERSON 2005a, pp. 101—102. 

468 Tantriloka 1.107: tasya saktaya evaitàs tisro bhanti paradikah | srstau sthitau laye turye 
tenaita dvadasoditah. Jayaratha on this verse, taking these twelve as the Kalis beginning with 
Srstikali: paradikas tisrah saktayah srstau sthitau laye samhare turye anakhye ca bhanti...ekaikasyas 
catürüpyena Srisrstikalyadyatmakataya. 


Alexis Sanderson 377 


AH (omitting R R L L) as the principal circle of Bhairava's powers, he equates 
them both with the twelve Kalis of the Krama and with the twelve Yoginis that 
form the retinue of Para in the Trika./? In the same chapter he equates the 
Trika’s syllabary-goddess Malini with Kalasamkarsani as the highest state, say- 
ing that the first self-limitation that she manifests is that of her pairing with 
Bhairava, that is to say, of the relationship between her as power and him as 
the powerful, though in reality she transcends this duality.4”° The fourth chap- 
ters account of saktah samávesah, immersion in Siva through the refinement 
of conceptual thought, is centred on an account of the rise in consciousness 
of these same Kalis. Both the fourth and the fifth chapter teach the Krama’s 
seed-syllable KHPHREM on a par with the Trika’s sau; and when in the fifth 
Abhinavagupta teaches meditation on the flow of the powers of consciousness 
through the faculties (Zbyanam), the powers are again the twelve and though 
they are not explicitly identified with the Krama's Kalis it is clear that they are 
to be understood as these. */! 

On the Zantraloka we have an extensive commentary written by Rajanaka 
Jayaratha in the thirteenth century.*” It is of great value to the student of this 
text, since Jayaratha tries to cite in full the scriptural passages that Abhinava- 
gupta frequently paraphrases in a condensed form. It has been described as ex- 
haustive. But this is an exaggeration. The coverage is uneven and often cursory, 
especially on matters of ritual where we would be grateful for more information 
than he seems to have possessed. Moreover, a number of scriptural sources on 
which Abhinavagupta had drawn were no longer accessible to Jayaratha and his 
Kashmirian contemporaries. He never declares this fact and no doubt expected 
no one to be in a position to deduce it. It is only the survival of manuscripts 
of these texts in other parts of the sub-continent that enables us to see that 
he lacked access to them, since his interpretations of Abhinavagupta’s terse 
paraphrases, though always unhesitating, are sometimes wrong. ^? Nonethe- 


49? Tantraloka 3.251—254b. 

470 Tantraloka 3.232c-234; esd vastuta ekaiva para kalasya karsini | saktimadbhedayogena 
yamalatvam prapadyate. 

471 Tantriloka 5.19c—36. Jayaratha on 5.26c-27b indicates that he takes the twelve to be the 
twelve Kalis by saying that the nature of the twelve has not been elaborated here because that 
has already been done in the preceding chapter. This can only be a reference to the treatment 
of the twelve Kalis in the fourth. 

4720n this dating see below, p. 420. 

473For a demonstration of some of these concealed lacunae in his knowledge see SANDERSON 
forthcoming a, in which these are considered in an analysis of the contraction of the knowledge- 


378 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


less, within the limitations imposed on scholarship by a tradition obliged to 
maintain the fiction of undiminished knowledge, it is an impressive work. An 
earlier commentary by Subhatadatta, who gave initiation both to Jayaratha and 
to his father, the minister Srngararatha,*”4 has been lost, no doubt because Ja- 
yaratha’s commentary supplanted it. 

After writing his Zantriloka Abhinavagupta produced in his Tantrasara a 
condensed and simplified coverage of its teachings for the benefit of those un- 
able to master that long and much more complicated work. His Tantroccaya, 
probably written after the Zantrasdra, offers an even briefer version. These two 
works stay close to the content of the Zantraloka, but not to such an extent that 
we can see them as mere summaries. Thus in his treatment of Kaula worship 
in the 29th chapter of the Zantraloka Abhinavagupta teaches two Paddhatis, 
one based on the Mantras of the Trika and the other, as we have seen, drawn 
from the Madhavakula of the Kalikula. But in the Zaztrasara he substitutes a 
Paddhati based on the Paratrisika, while in the Tantroccaya he prescribes a form 
of Krama worship in which Candayoge$vari — this is the name under which the 
Goddess is invoked in the Krama’s principal Mantras — is worshipped as the 
thirty-eighth Tattva enthroned above Bhairava, the thirty-seventh (above the 
thirty-six from Siva to Earth of the common Saiva model), as the source of all 
emissions and resorptions, either surrounded by her retinue of twelve [Kalis] 
or solitary, as their totality.4”° 

There is also the Zantravatadhániká, a brief review of the contents of the 
Tantraloka in 99 verses, mostly restricted to what is covered in the first five 
chapters of that work. Its author identifies himself in the opening and closing 
verses as Abhinavagupta, but the attribution is doubtful, unless we take this to 
be another author with the same name. Two verses (2.1—2) have been cited by 


base of Kashmirian Saivism in the period between Abhinavagupta and recent times. 

“74 Tantralokaviveka, concluding verses 35-39. 

^/5From Jayaratha’s brother Jayadratha we have the Haracaritacintamani, a collection of ac- 
counts of Siva’s deeds in the world of men, the majority of which are told in versions that 
associate them with local sites of pilgrimage and the local religious calendar. The Saivism of 
initiates transcends this level of common observance. But Jayadratha integrates it by introduc- 
ing these narratives with verses that present their content as symbolic of the higher truths taught 
in the Saiva scriptures. 

476 Tantroccaya, p.177: tatra saktitrayatma yo sau paramasivah saptatrimso bhairavas tam 
apy ullanghya tam dsanapaksikrtyástatrimfattami yasau bhagavati paramasamvid ukta saiva 
*candayogesvaryatmika (corr. : candayogisvaryatmika Cod.) visvagrasasrsticakravahini *dvadasa- 
bhir (corr. : dvadasabhir Ed.) maricirüpabhir devatabhih saha kevala và visvabhedavrttya pujya. 


Alexis Sanderson 379 


Jayaratha on Tantraloka 2.2, but without attribution. If he had thought them to 
be the work of Abhinavagupta then we would expect him to have said so, that 
being his habit. The colophon of the Tantravatadhānikā supports this doubt, 
since it attributes it to ‘a certain Acarya Abhinavagupta (srimadabhinavagupta- 
caryavisesa-), an expression that evidently does not refer to the famous author 
of the Tantraloka. 

We also have an extensive prose commentary (-vivarana) by Abhinava- 
gupta on the Pardtrisikd, a short text teaching a form of the Trika known 
as the Anuttara, Ekavira, or Parakrama, in which a simplified, essentializing 
form of worship and meditation is directed to Para alone and her seed-syllable 
SAUH. This commentary was written between the Malinivijayavártika and the 
Tantráloka.A" A much shorter and markedly less brilliant commentary on this 
text, the Paratrisikalaghuvrtti/Anuttaravimarsini, has been published as his. But 
I see no reason to accept the attribution and good reasons not to do so. 
The work is probably South Indian.*? We also have a short commentary (- 
vivrti) on the text written by the Kashmirian Rajanaka Laksmirama, also called 
Rajana Lasaka/Lasaka (Lasa Kak Razdan), at some time near the end of the 
eighteenth century or the beginning of the nineteenth. But this is ignorant 
of, or chooses to overlook, the true character of the text as instruction in the 
worship of, and meditation on, the Mantra of the Trika's Para, wrongly taking 
the Mantra to be the Aghora, that is to say, the thirty-two-syllable Mantra of 
[Sakala-]Svacchandabhairava,**° thus assimilating the text to the Svacchanda- 
based cult of that deity, which, as we shall see, appears to have been the most 
widely established form of Saiva ritual practice in Kashmir down to modern 
times. A verse in praise of that deity is the first of the two final verses of the 
work. His engagement with the tradition of the Svacchanda and Netra is evi- 


“77On the place of the Paratrisikavivarana in the order of Abhinavagupta's works see SANDER- 
son 2005, p. 124, footnote 88. 

478See SANDERSON 2005a, p. 142, footnote 24. 

“The attribution is already seen in the Maharthamanjariparimala of the South Indian 
MaheSvarananda (pp. 8, 52, 66, 114), who refers to it as the Trisikasastravimarsini (p. 114). His 
date remains to be determined, but from the sources he cites we can see that he cannot have 
been earlier than the twelfth century. On this form of the Trika in south India see SANDERSON 
1990, pp. 32-34, 80-82. 

480 Paratrisikavivyti, p. 14 on v. 26: aghoramantrena ca saptavimsativaram astottarasataksamála- 
pádena mantritàm; p. 15 on 28: caturdasavaram aghorabhijaptena puspena; p. 16 on 30c-32b: 
mahesvarim param devim aghoramantrena parayá bhaktyà atyádarena püjayet; pp. 11-12 on v. 21 
imposes the Svacchanda's system of worlds (bhuvandni). 


380 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


denced by a composite manuscript which contains among a number of short 
Saiva texts two attributed to this author: a *Niskalasvacchandadhyanavivarana, 
an analysis in twenty-two lines of a verse of the Svacchandoddyota that is used in 
the Kashmirian Paddhatis for the visualization accompanying the plenary obla- 
tion (parnahutih) of Niskalasvacchanda, and an *Amrtefvaradhyánavivarana in 
seventeen lines on the opening verse of the Netroddyota, which is used in the 
same context for Amrtesvarabhairava. ^?! 

Two other works by Abhinavagupta, though not narrowly tied to the 
Trika in a technical sense, were written on its basis. These are the Bodhapan- 
cadasika and the Paramarthasara, a Saiva rewriting of the Samkhya-Vedantic 
ParamártbasaralAdharakárikà attributed to Sesamuni. The latter has come 
down to us with a commentary by the ascetic Yogaraja, a pupil of Abhinava- 
guptas pupil Ksemaraja,“** who has also given us the Sivdstaka, a hymn to 
Caitanyasiva, ‘the Siva who is Consciousness’. While the commentary on the 
Paramarthasara is devoid of esoteric references, the hymn reflects the Krama- 
orientated idiom of the author's teacher Ksemaràja. ^9? 

Several other short works have been attributed to Abhinavagupta. Among 
these the Paramdarthadvadasika, the Mahopadesavimsatika, and the Rahasyapa- 


481See *Niskalasvacchandadhyanavivarana, f. 91v3 (colophon): iti rajanakalasakakena vivara- 
nam viracitam (the verse is Svacchandoddyota, vol. 3, p. 177, ll. 16-19); and Amrtesvaradhya- 
navivarana, f. 91v17 (colophon): iti lasakdkakrta vivrtib. For the use of these verses in the Pad- 
dhatis see, e.g., Sivanirvanapaddhati, pp. 256-257. 

482The Trika in the technical sense, as opposed to the philosophical discourse of the Pra- 
tyabhijfià texts, appears at the end of the Bodhapancadasika (v. 15) in a reference to Bhairava, 
the identity of all things, seated on a lotus above the trident of the three powers of creative 
impulse, cognition, and action [i.e. Para, Parapara, and Apara], and in the Paramdarthasara in 
(1) v. 4 (see also v. 41) in its reference to the four spheres (andacatustayam) that constitute 
the created universe, those of Sakti, Maya, Prakrti, and Earth, which is a classification drawn 
from and distinctive of the Trika’s Malinivijayottara (2.49); and (2) vv. 43—46, which should 
be understood as a metaphysical reading of saut, the seed-syllable of the Trika’s goddess Para 
(cf. Tantraloka Á.186c-189b for this encoding). 

“83This orientation is apparent in the Sivdstaka’s two opening verses, f. 9r16-20: yo "nta 
*caran (em. : carat Cod.) pránabhrtam hrdabje dhvanaty abhiksnam bhramarayamánab | aénams 
ca sabdadiparagam uccaih namo ‘stu caitanyasivaya tasmai | 2 svadidhitinam karanesvarinam cid- 
arkamürtih samudetya madhye | grasikaroty esa hathat trilokim namo stu caitanyasivaya tasmai | 
"Obeisance to Caitanyasiva, who resonates constantly like a bee in the lotus of the heart, mov- 
ing within all living creatures and eagerly devouring the pollen of the objects of the senses. 
Obeisance to Caitanyasiva. Behold: as the sun that is consciousness rises up in the midst of his 
rays, the goddesses that are the faculties [of sense-perception and action], he violently devours 
the three worlds [that are the objects, means, and agent of cognition]. 


Alexis Sanderson 381 


ficadasikà are certainly not his. The first is the work of Ramyadeva;*** and the 
second and third are evidently South Indian compositions.*® The attribution of 
the Anubhavanivedanastotra and the Dehasthadevatacakrastotra rests on oral re- 
port alone, and the subject of the latter, the mental worship of Anandabhairava 
and his consort Anandabhairavi surrounded by the eight Mothers, has no paral- 
lel in Abhinavagupta’s other works. The Paryantapancasika is attributed to Abhi- 
navagupta in its colophon, but it has not been cited in any Kashmirian source, 
nor has it come down to us, to my knowledge, in any Kashmirian manuscript. 
The manuscript transmission of the text is South Indian and the work appears 
to have been known only there.4*° The Anuttarastika and the Paramarthacarca, 
survive in Kashmirian manuscripts with colophons that assert that Abhinav- 
agupta is their author. But I know of no evidence that confirms this assertion. 
Nor am I aware of any that refutes it. However, the fact that Jayaratha cites a 
line from the former without attribution does not inspire confidence, since this 


goes against his usual practice when quoting Abhinavagupta. 97 


45 See footnote 309 on p. 328. 

“85The Mahopadesavimsatika is for the most part a reworking and reframing of the first part 
(vv. 2-8) of the Nirgunamänasapūjā (RAGHAVAN 1980, pp. 70-75), which is one of the more 
than 300 hymns ascribed to Sankara in the South Indian Smärta tradition under the spiritual 
authority of the Sankaracaryas of $rhgeri and Kafici. On South Indian features in the Rahasya- 
paficadasikà see SANDERSON 1990, pp. 34-35, footnote 21. 

486The text was edited by V. RAGHAVAN on the basis of a manuscript in Trivandrum that 
appears to be a codex unicus. It is mentioned as a work of Abhinavagupta in v. 20 of the South 
Indian Gurunáthaparamaría of Madhuraja/Madhura of Madurai, a verse found in both highly 
divergent recensions of the text, that of the Trivandrum manuscript and that of a copy of a De- 
vanagari manuscript in private possesion in Madras. It has been claimed that Madhuraja was a 
pupil of Abhinavagupta (PANDEY 1963, pp. 20-22) and if that were true this testimony would 
be compelling. But not one of the verses that mention Madhuraja/Madhura is common to both 
recensions and none states that he was anything more than a devotee of Abhinavagupta's works 
and an adept in the Parakrama, the system of meditative worship taught in the Pardtrisika. 
The only citations of the Paryantapancasika that I have located are in the South Indian Maha- 
rthamanjariparimala of Mahesvarananda, a work of c. 1300 (see pp. 414—418) and the South 
Indian /svarapratyabhijnavimarsinivyakhyd, folio sides 8, Il. 18-19 and 9, 1l. 7-8. In none of 
these citations is the name of its author stated. 

487 Anuttarastika 2a is cited without attribution in Tantralokaviveka, vol. 3, p. 99, Il. 11-13: 
anibaddhasya "samsáro sti na tattvatas tanubhrtam bandhasya vartaiva ka" ityadinyayenalabdha- 
prarohasyapi bandhasya kilanam ... 


382 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


THE PRATYABHIJNA 


All Abhinavaguptas exegesis proceeds on the basis of the doctrine of dy- 
namic non-duality newly developed on slight scriptural foundations by Ut- 
paladeva, the pupil of Somananda, in his Lvarapratyabhijnakarika, its two 
auto-commentaries (the -vrttih and the -vivrtib), the Ajadapramatrsiddhi, 
the Jfvarasiddhi, the Sambandhasiddhi, and his commentary on Somananda’s 
Sivadrsti.^*9 That philosophically argued doctrine was transmitted through the 
latter's pupil Laksmanagupta to Abhinavagupta, who in the final phase of his 
Saiva scholarship wrote commentaries on the key texts of this tradition:**° the 
lívarapratyabhijfasütravimarsini on the [svarapratyabhijnakarika, and the vast 
[svarapratyabhijhavivrtivimarsini on the Vivrti. Utpaladeva’s works elaborate 
their position for the most part in the pan-Indian language of philosophical 
debate, eschewing the esoteric terminology of the Trika or Krama. Nonethe- 
less, they were composed within a lineage of Gurus following those traditions. 
Somananda wrote an analytic commentary (-vivrtih), now lost, on the Trika’s 
Parátrisika 
mentary on this text; 


which Abhinavagupta studied before composing his own com- 
^?! and Jayaratha claims that this lineage from Somananda 
through Utpaladeva and Laksmanagupta to Abhinavagupta was versed both in 
the Trika and in the Krama of the Kalikulapancasataka.*” 

On Abhinavaguptas /svarapratyabhijnavimarsini we have a commentary 
(Bhaskari) written by Rajanaka Bhaskarakantha in the seventeenth or eigh- 
teenth century.” That author has also left us the Cittanubodhasastra, a com- 


488On Abhinavaguptas superimposition of this doctrine on the Malinivijayottara see SANDER- 
SON 1992, pp. 291—306. 

489For the evidence that the philosophical commentaries were written after the Trika com- 
mentaries see SANDERSON 2005a, p. 124, footnote 88. 

^? Abhinavagupta refers to it and quotes from it in his Paratrifikavivarana, pp. 191, ll. 28-30; 
204, Il. 8—9; 206, Il. 10-11; 207, Il. 20—22; 208, II. 1-2; 216, ll. 27-28; 218, ll. 7-8, 26; 220, 
ll. 6-12; 225, ll. 12-14; 255,1. 31-256, 1. 4; 279, Il. 14-16. 

41 Paratrisikavivarana, p. 285, ll. 29-30: srisomanandamatam vimrsya maya nibaddham idam 
‘I have composed this [commentary] after reflecting on Somananda’s understanding [of the 
text]. 

42 Tantráloka, vol. 3, p. 194, Il. 8—10: sidevipancasatike py asya srisomanandabhattapadebhyah 
prabhrti trikadarsanavad asya guravah “In the case of the Devipaficasataka too his [Abhinava- 
guptas] teachers were as in the case of [the scriptures of] the Trika, from the venerable Soma- 
nanda onwards’. 

“3QOn his date see below, p.424. There is also the /varapratyabhijnakaumudi of one 
Bhattaraka Sundara. I have not yet seen it; and I have no information concerning its date. 


Alexis Sanderson 383 


mentary (-£ik4) on the Kashmirian Moksopdya (later expanded and vedanticized 
as the Yogavásistha), and a free rendering into Sanskrit of Old Kashmiri Saiva 
verses by Lal Děd (Lallesvarivakyani). 


EXEGESIS OF THE VAMAKESVARIMATA 


From Jayaratha we have a commentary (-vivarana) on the Vamakesvarimata, 
also known as the Nitydsodasikarnava, the primary scripture of the Kaula cult 
of the goddess Tripurasundari. The commentary is technical, abounding in 
494 and as 
such suggests that Jayaratha was a practitioner of this relatively new tradition 
rather than of the Trika or the Krama, though he makes no explicit statement 
to that effect. He also quotes in this commentary from another work of his in 
this tradition.“ 

He refers to a number of earlier Kashmirian scholars of this system of wor- 
ship. He tells us that it was first propagated in Kashmir by Isvarasivacarya and 
Sankararasi, and then passed on through one Visvavarta to all subsequent Kash- 


mirian lineages down to the time of Jayaratha himself.?5 He also mentions in 
498 


polemics against divergent views of the minutiae of ritual practice, 


this tradition the exegetes Rajanaka Kalyánavarman, ?" Allata,?? an unnamed 
author of a Vartika (vartikakarah),*° his own Guru's Guru,??? 


refers to simply as the Guru.??! 


and someone he 


44 Vimaketvarimatavivarana, p. 1, v. 3: parakrtakukalpanamayatimirandhyapohanaya manák 
srivàmakesvarimatam uddyotayitum mamodyamo dyayam “Today I commence this effort briefly 
to illuminate the Vamakesvarimata in order to dispel the blindness caused by the darkness of 
the fanciful interpretations [of this text] produced by others’. 

495 Vimakesvarimatavivarana, p. 58, ll. 8-12. On the relative modernity of this tradition see 
SANDERSON 1988, p. 689 (= 1990, p. 157). 

^96 Vimakesvarimatavivarana, p. 48, ll. 11—14: vastuto hy asya darsanasya etad eva acéryadva- 
yam kasmiresv avatàrakam. "tata (em. : tanas Ed.) srivisvavartamukhenaiva laksyate yat tad evä- 
smatparyantam Sisyaprasisyakramena sarvesam eva praptam ‘For in fact it was these two Acaryas 
that first propagated this system in Kashmir. It is their teaching, passed on through Visvavarta, 
that has been inherited by all without exception through a continuous succession of pupils and 
their pupils [and so on] down to myself’. In speaking of “these two Acaryas” he is referring 
back to Isvarasivacarya, mentioned in p. 47, l. 15, and Sankararagi, mentioned in p. 48, l. 2. 

^7 Vamakesvarimatavivarana, p. 48, |. 8-9; p. 117, 1.25. 

48 Vimakesvarimatavivarana, p. 54, l. 4. 

^9 Vamakesvarimatavivarana, p.9, ll. 15-16; p. 12, Il. 19-23; p. 30, Il. 5-6 

500 Vamakesvarimatavivarana, p. 19, ll. 6-15; p. 57, Il. 14-16. 

99! Vamakesvarimatavivarana, p. 20, ll. 4—9 (guravo ‘pi: ...); p. 68, ll. 10-13 (guravo pi: ...).1 


384 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


None of their works has come down to us. As for their dates, we know lit- 
tle beyond the fact that they are known to Jayaratha in the thirteenth century. 
PANDEY?? dates the introduction of the system in Kashmir to the ninth century 
on the evidence (1) that Jayaratha quotes a verse which refers to Isvarasivacarya 
as the abbot of the Süramatha (éaramathadhipatib)?? and (2) that the historian 
Kalhana records that a Matha of this name was founded for the benefit of as- 
cetics by Süra, while he was the minister of king Avantivarman, who ruled from 
855/6 to 883.5%% I am unable to understand by what route other than thought- 
lessness this scholar arrived at the unstated position that if I$varasivàcárya was 
abbot of this foundation then he must have been the first to hold that office and 
was therefore a contemporary of the founder. There is certainly no reason to 
think that the Süramatha had only one abbot and then ceased to exist. On the 
contrary we know that it was still in existence in the eleventh century.?? The 
error is so blatant that it would be unnecessary to point it out were it not that, 
as so often happens in such cases, the date has been inadvertently repeated. °° 

As for the commentator Rajanaka Kalyanavarman, it is probable that he 
was Jayaratha’s great-great-grandfather.^07 If so, then his active life may be dated 


5 508 and the introduction in Kashmir of 


approximately to the years 1125-117 
the system of the worship of Tripurasundari by Isvarasivacarya and Sankararasi 
to an unknown time before that, certainly after the founding of the Süramatha 
and almost certainly after the time of Abhinavagupta and Ksemaraja, that is to 
say, after c. 1050, since neither author shows any knowledge of the existence 


of this tradition and its primary scripture. Abhinavagupta is aware of a Kaula 


take these to be plurals of respect (dare bahuvacanam). 

9? PANpry 1963, p. 578. 

505 Vimakesvarimatavivarana, p. 48, ll. 19-20: yad bhavanto ‘pi: "srifüramathadhipater lebhe 
guruvaraparamparopanatam | cakram idam isvarasivat puürvacaryo ‘smadiya eva pura" iti ‘As 
you yourselves [have declared]: "Ihe first Acarya of my lineage received this Cakra, that had 
come down through the unbroken line of excellent Gurus, from Isvarasiva, the abbot of the 
Süramatha". 

504 Rajatarangini 5.38. 

°0>Kalhana refers to the Süramatha as a place of sanctuary in the capital during the reigns of 
Abhimanyu (958—972) (Rajatarangini 6.223) and Samgramaraja (1003—1028) (ibid., 7.26). 

°°Gnou 1999, p.700, in a note on Isanasiva mentioned in Tantraloka 22.30, asserts that 
this author is “the same as Isvarasiva, the propagator of the Vamakesvarimata in Kashmir in the 
9th century”, referring the reader to PANDEY 1963, pp. 578—582. 

507 Vimakesvarimatavivarana, pp. 117—118. 

°°8For Jayaratha's date see below, p. 420. 


Alexis Sanderson 385 


tradition of worshippers of the Nityas,°” but nothing requires us to identify 
that with the cult of Tripurasundari seen in the Vamakesvarimatal/Nityasodasika- 
rnava, since there were earlier traditions of the worship of Tripura accompanied 
by nine Nityàs or by eleven Nityas and Kamadeva, which though antecedents 


of this cult are certainly not to be confused with it.?!? 


"THE SAIVISM OF THE SVACCHANDA AND NETRA 


Two other major traditions of Saiva worship are evidenced in Kashmir: (1) 
that of Svacchandabhairava and his consort Aghoresvari, based on the Svac- 
chandatantra, and (2) that of Amrtesa[bhairava] and his consort Amrtalaksmi, 
based on the Nerratantra. The first of these texts is the principal scripture of the 
Daksina or Bhairava division of the Saiva Mantramarga and of its Mantrapitha 
subdivision.?!! The second presents itself as transcending the various divisions 


50 Tantraloka 28.123cd, referring to nityatantravidah followers of the Nityatantras’ for their 
calendar of Kaula special days (parvadinani); also Paratrisikavivarana, p. 238, ll. 25-26: yatha 
nityatantresv aikaratmakamohanabijapradhanyahetuh. 

>See, e.g., Tantrülokaviveka, vol.9, p. 139, ll. 14-15, quoting a Navanityavidhana. The 
Manthanabhairavatantra speaks of the navanityagamah as a class of Tantras above the Pramana- 
Sastras of the Lakulas (on whom see SANDERSON 2006) [and the Siddhantas] but below 
the Bhairava Tantras of the left and right streams (Kumdrikhanda, f. 213r: navanityágama- 
jfanám Sivatattvam param padam; Siddhakhanda, f. 8v3—4: nityatantrani cibukád pürvámnayam 
lalatatah | pascimam sodasantat tu tadürdhve na ca kimcana) and includes a cult of these Nine 
(navanityaékramah) (Kulanitya, Vajresvari, Tvarita, Kurukulla, Lalita, Bherunda, Nilapataka, 
Kamamangala and Vyomavyàpini) with Tripura as the tenth and their leader (Siddhakhanda, 
f. 203r—v). Evidence of a system of eleven Nityàs survives in the scripture /Vityakaula, of which 
a single, incomplete manuscript has come down to us. Here the goddess Tripura is worshipped 
surrounded by a circle of twelve deities comprising eleven Nitya goddesses and Kamadeva. The 
eleven Nityas of this text are Hrllekha, Kledini, Nanda, Ksobhani, Madanatura, Nirafijana, 
Ragavati, Madanavati, Khekala, Dravani and Vegavati; see Nityákaula, f. 217-2vl: + + + + tu 
nàmani kathayami *tanüdari (cor. : tanodari Cod.) | hrilekha kledini nanda ksobhani madana- 
tura | nirafjaná [rágavati tathanya ma\danavati | khekala dravani caiva tatha vegavati vara | 
ekádasaità devyas te madano dvadasa smrtah. Its earlier prominence is indicated by the fact that a 
syncretistic text of the cult of Kubjika, the Ciicinzmatasarasamuccaya, contains a section drawn 
from the Nitydkaula, or from some lost text closely related to it, in which it sets out this Yaga as 
the ‘teaching of the southern order’ (daksinagharamndyah), grouping it with the cult of Kub- 
jika, the Kalikula, and a form of unmarked Kaulism agreeing closely with that found in the 
Trika, which it calls the teachings of the orders of the North, West and East respectively. 

"The Svacchanda is at the head of the list of Daksina Tantras in the Brahmayamala, as 
the first of eight -b/airava scriptures (f. 199r [39.33c—35b]: svacchandabhairavam devi krodha- 


bhairavam eva ca | unmattabhairavam devi tatha caivograbhairavam | kapalibhairavam caiva 


386 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


of the Saiva canon, teaching a system of worship that is universal and at the 
same time can be inflected to be practised in the context of any system of wor- 
ship by the substitution of appropriate deity-visualizations to accompany the 
Mantras of the core cult. These substitutions apply in the first instance to the 
Saiva divisions. Thus one can propitiate Amrtesa as Sadāśiva in the context of 
the Siddhànta, as Bhairava in that of the Daksina, as Tumburu in that of the 
Vàma, and as Kule$vara in the Kaula cult of the eight Mothers. However, the 
cult of Amrtesa and/or Amrtalaksmi is not limited to these divisions. It can be 
extended to absorb the worship of any deity male or female, including the Paf- 
caratra’s Vasudeva, Surya, Bhadrakali, the Buddha, and the forms of Siva wor- 
shipped by or for the uninitiated laity. I have argued elsewhere that the Netra 
is providing in this way for a cult in the hands of a new class of Saiva officiants 
working in what was traditionally the professional domain of the brahmani- 
cal royal chaplain (vajapurohitah), specializing in rituals for the protection of 
the monarch and his family and taking over the performance of worship on the 
king’s behalf of the full range of deities whose worship is prescribed in the brah- 
manical calendar, including those of the major royal festivals of the Indrotsava 
and the Navarátra.?? 

These two cults, of Svacchandabhairava and Amrtesabhairava, appear to 
have been very well established in Kashmir. Indeed we may say that if any cults 
constituted the basic Saivism of the brahmins of the valley, it was these. For 
they form the basis of all the surviving Saiva Paddhatis used as practical guides 
by Kashmir's Saiva officiants and other initiates down to recent times.?'? We see 
this, for example, in the Kaladiksapaddhati, the detailed manual for Saiva initi- 


tatha jhamkarabhairavam | sekharam ca tatha caiva vijayabhairavam eva ca). Yt is the first of 
the thirty-two Daksinatantras listed in the account of the Saiva canon that precedes the Jñã- 
napancasika in a Nepalese manuscript of the Kzlottara recensions (Kalottara, f. 212—5 [v. 17— 
21]: 17 svacchandabhairavam canda(m) krodham unmattabhairavam | asitangam rurum caiva 
kapáliéam samuccayam | 18 aghoram *ghoraghonam ca [conj. : ghonasamghoram Cod.) nisa- 
samcára *dinmukham |em. : durmukham Cod.] | *bhimangam (conj. : bbimásam Cod.) dama- 
raravam bhimavetalavarddhakam | 19 ucchusmam fvahikambelamt sekharam puspam adva- 
yam | trisiram caikapadam tu siddhayogesvarimatam | 20 paficamrta(m) prapancam ca yogini- 
jala*famvaram (corr. : sambaram Cod.) | visvarikanthasamkocam tilakodyanabhairavam | 21 
evam dvatrimsat tantrani sottarani ca ta(d) dvayam | catubsastipramanáni daksinasyodbhavani 
tu. It is also the first of the sixty-four Bhairavatantras listed in the Srikanthi (Tantralokaviveka, 
vol. 1, p. 42, 1. 5). For its position as the first of the Tantras of the Mantrapitha see p. 236. 

512See SANDERSON 2005b. 

5130n the fact that the Kashmirian Saiva Paddhatis are based on the Svacchanda and Netra 
see SANDERSON 2005b, p. 240 and footnotes 20-21. 


Alexis Sanderson 387 


ation, composed by Manodadatta in a.D. 1335/6 and subsequently elaborated 


514 and in such anonymous works as the Agnzkarya- 


in more than one version, 
paddhati for the Saiva fire-sacrifice, and the Sivanirvanapaddhati for Saiva cre- 
mation together with the Paddhatis for the Saiva Sraddhas to be performed for 
the dead.?'? 

It is also apparent in the Nityddisamgrahapaddhati, a digest of passages bear- 
ing on daily (nitya-) and occasional (naimittika-) Saiva worship compiled by 
Rajanaka Taksakavarta at some time after the eleventh century?! from a wide 
range of scriptural texts and Paddhatis, a number of which survive only here?! 
For the passages he has chosen cover three modes of worship, that of the Sid- 
dhanta, and the two based on the Svacchanda and the Netra. 


Lost PADDHATIS 


Rajanaka Taksakavarta cites a number of Paddhatis, of which a few are evidently 
lost products of Kashmir. The Saiddhantika Paddhati of Narayanakantha has 
already been mentioned.*'® He also cites passages from a Paddhati by Visva- 
varta, and these reveal that it taught both worship of Siva according to the 


514On the date of the Kalüdiksapaddhati and its subsequent expansion see SANDERSON 2004, 
p. 362, footnote 34. 

554 volume published for local use containing the Sivanirvanapaddhati and the Paddhatis 
for the offerings of water to the dead and the subsequent Sraddhas is among the Sanskrit texts 
from Kashmir republished in photographic reproduction by Lokesh Cuanpra (1984). Also in 
this corpus of post-mortuary Saiva ritual is the Sivagopradanavidhi. 

516On this prior limit of Taksakavarta’s date see below, p. 422. 

57 His digest contains passages from or references to the following scriptures: Aghoripanca- 
sataka, Adbhuta, Anantavijaya, Analasiddhanta, Anilasiddhánta (probably a scribal error for 
the preceding), /svarasamhita, Ucchusmatantra, Umayamala, Kalottara, Kirana, Kubjikamata, 
Gauriyámala, Gaurisvarágama, Cakrefvaramatal Cillacakrefvara, Caturvimsatisabasra, Catus- 
pancasika, Candrahása, Jayasamhita (= Jayákhyasambita), Ditidimara, Devyayamala, Nandi- 
svarávatára- Nibsvasa, Parágama (= Parákhya), Pauskarapáramesvara, Brhatkalottara, Mangala- 
Sastra, Matanga, Mayasamgraha, Mabalaksmimata, Mukuta, Mrgendra, Mrtyujitsárasamgraba, 
Mrtyufijaya. (= Netratantra), | Yaksinipáramesvara, Raurava, Laksmikaula, Lalitamabatantra, 
Vathula, Vajasaneya, Vidyapurana, Vinasikhottara, Sankarabhairava, Sikhakamesvara, Sikha- 
tantra, Sivadharma, Srikanthi, Sripürva (= Malinivijayottara), Sérasvatamata, Siddhayogesvari- 
tantra, Svacchanda, Svayambhuva, Hamsapáramefvara, and Hátakesvara. He also cites the fol- 
lowing Paddhatis: Karmoddyota of Dharmasiva, Tantráloka, Narayanakanthapaddhati, Brahma- 
sambhupaddhati, Vimadevapaddhati, Vamadeviya[samgraha], Visvavartapaddhati, an unnamed 
Paddhati by Vairocanacarya, and Somasambhupaddhati. 

318See p. 246. 


388 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


Siddhánta?'? and that of Amrtesabhairava following the Netratantra.??? The 
passages cited do not allow us to conclude that it did not also include prescrip- 
tions pertaining to the worship of Svacchandabhairava or some other system or 
systems. The author's name, which is of a distinctively Kashmirian type,??! and 
the absence of any reference to this work outside the Saiva literature of Kashmir 
indicate that this is a work of that region. 

Taksakavarta also gives extracts from the Paddhati of Dharmasiva, called 
Karmoddyota. Because of its author's Saiddhantika initiation-name we would 
expect it to deal only with the rituals of the Saiddhantika Mantramarga. But 
in fact it is clear that it too had a wider scope. After setting out the va- 
rieties of rosary (aksamdala) appropriate to worship for various supernatural 
ends (siddhih), Dharmasiva teaches the procedure for its preparation for use 
(samskarah). After empowering it by repeating over it the principal Mantra and 
its auxiliaries, the worshipper should sprinkle it with water scented with cam- 
phor and sandalwood and then show the Mudra. The last, it says, should be 
whichever is prescribed in the Kalpa that he is following??? This implies that 
it sets out general procedures that can be adjusted as necessary to accommo- 
date the propitiation of non-Saiddhantika Mantras. The same appears from its 
treatment of the procedure for the repetition of Mantras (japavidhih), which he 
refers to as applicable to the pañcasrotah saivam, which is to say, to the Saivism 
of the Mantramarga in its five branches, of which the principal three are the Sid- 
dhànta, the Vàma, and the Daksina, opposing this to the Kula Saivism (kulam) 
of the Sáktas.??? To the same effect he rules in this context that one should vi- 
sualize in one’s heart the iconic form prescribed for one’s Mantra in accordance 


5? Nityadisamgrahapaddhati, £.35v1: itham amantrapijadau srivisvavartabhasita | siddha- 
ntadrstyà tv adhuná vacmi bhairavasasane. 

920 Nityadisamgrahapaddhati, ff. 22v8—9, 23rl: ity esa nydsavidhi(b) siddhantanayasritah 
kathitah. sarvasrotahsamgrahasarasayato pi kathyate so "Ipah ...fri*vifvavarta (em. : visvarta 
Cod.) evam hi jagáda nijapaddhatau. The Sarvasrotahsamerahasara is the Netra. Other citations: 
f. 13v6-14r2 (devaditarpanam proktam "srivifvavartapaddhatau (corr. : srivisvesartapaddhatau 
Cod.]); and f. 32r1 (avabadiprayogo ‘yam srivisvavarta*bhasitah |em. : bhavitah Cod.]-32r9). 

??1On this and other Kashmirian names ending in -dvarta, -varta etc. see p. 260. 

92 Nityadisamerabapaddhati, f. 3715-37v6. (aksamálavidhir hy esa karmoddyote nirüpitab); 
£37112-v1: vinyasya daksine haste prsthe tasyam japec ciram | sástam satam hydadinim 
dasimsenabhimantrayet | toyena secayet tena candracandanagandhina | mudram pradaríayen 
mantri nijakalpakramoditam. 

925 Nityadisamgrahapaddhati, f. 41110-42111 (karmo[ddyote] dharmasive py evam japavidhi(h) 
smrtah); f. 4219: dvaite proktam idam jhanam sa dvaitarthe tato nyaset | paficasrotasi saive smin 
japah proktah kule "'nyatha. 


Alexis Sanderson 389 


with the particular ritual system that one is following.” 

That the systems envisaged by Dharmasiva include the worship of Bhairava 
can be inferred from a passage on the rising degrees of merit to be gained by 
bathing the Linga with various liquids. For he begins with water and ends with 
wine (mrdvikarasah),°”° and bathing the substrate of worship with wine is a 
strictly non-Saiddhantika practice, as Taksakavarta makes clear by following 
this citation with a passage from the lost Aghoripancasataka. That teaches that 
wine and the like should be used to bathe any image in which non-dual Mantras 
have been installed, and may also be used in the case of natural (‘self-created’) 
Lingas and the ovoid stones gathered from the bed of the Narmada river known 
as Banalingas, but never in the case of a fixed Linga fashioned by man and 
empowered with the Mantras of the Siddhanta. Non-dual Mantras here are 
evidently those other than the Mantras of the Siddhanta, and this is confirmed 
later in the passage when it states that one should gratify an image with wine or 
other fermented liquors when it has been empowered with the Mantras of the 
Vama, Daksina, or Trisiddhanta. The last of these is evidently the Trika under 


a synonym. ”° 


54 Nityadisamgrahapaddhati, f. 4Ar10—11: yatha japam prakurvita tatha vyaptir ibocyate | 
samyamyaksini manasa rajivasanasamsthitah | mülamantram samuccárya nade linam svaka- 
rane | dhyátvà hrdi svamantrasya svakarmaproktavigrabam | siksmadehasya hrtpadme sivadehe 
visec chivam. 

525 Nityadisamgrahapaddhati, f. 3411-3: *gavah (em. : yavaf Cod.) prthivyam yavatyas tad- 
danaphalatulyatam | yati linge jala*snanad (em. : snand Cod.) "gandbaif (em. : gadyais 
Cod.) satagunam tatah | gandhasnandc chatagunam ksīrasnānam tatas tatha | dadhisnanam 
satagunam tac cajyena tatah satam | *sadyahpritidamrdvikarase (conj. : sadyafpititadydvikavase 
Cod.) naitatsamam phalam | sadhakasya vinirdistam srimaddharmasivena tu. 

526 Nityadisamgrahapaddhati, f. 3413-7: advaitamantrayukta ye tatha banah svayambhuvah | 
vamamytadibhir dravyaih proktam tesim tu tarpanam | na hi tat sthapite linge *siddha- 
ntamantrakalpite (em : siddhante mantrakalpite Cod.) | jalac chatagunam gandham gand- 
hac chatagunam payah | ksivac chatagunam dadhnam dadhnas satagunam ghrtam | ghrtac 
chatagunam (*vamam) (conj.) vamadaksinasasane | ghrtatulyam madhusnénam draksa ceksu- 
rasam samam | tasmác chresthatamam snánam surayá vasavena và | trnágrabindumatrena linga- 
*sndnena tarpanam (conj. : snanesatarpane Cod.) | krtam bhavati tat tulyam asvamedhasataih 
samam | vame kuryat trisiddhante vibitam bhairave sada | bhairave tu prapannanam snánam 
snánam phaladhikam | aghoripancasatake proktam etad dhi sambhuna. 

Other citations from the Paddhati of Dharmasiva: f. 20r4—12, on the nature of the martih 
that is the base for nydsah; f. 46r1 (bahye tatra balim praha srimain dharmasivabhidhah), on the 
bali offering; f. 55v9—10 (karmoddyote viseso yam srimaddharmasivoditah), concerning the ritual 
preparation of the clarified butter for use in the oblations into the fire (djyasamskarah); f. 57114 
(kalasastakam uddistam srimaddharmasivena tu), requiring eight vases to be placed around the 


390 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


A Paddhati by a Dharmasiva has also been cited by Abhinavagupta in his 
Tantráloka. That this is the same work as the Karmoddyota is probable, since 
Abhinavagupta refers to it as the Karmapaddhati, which is probably a metri- 
cally convenient abbreviation for *Karmoddyotapaddhati. He looks to it for its 
instructions concerning an expiatory fire-sacrifice to be performed before initi- 
ation in absentia. This gives a Mantra for the burning of the initiand's sins that 
was used for this purpose in the practice of the Saiva Gurus of Kashmir until 
recent times, a circumstance that adds to the likelihood that Dharmasgiva was a 
Kashmirian.??" 


To these may be added the Paddhati of Isanasivacarya, of which we have 


sacrificial fire. 

527 Tantraloka 21.50-56b: sriman dharmasivo ‘py aha paroksyam karmapaddhatau | 
paroksadiksane samyak pirnahutividhau yadi | 51 agnis citicitaíabdam sadbümam pratimun- 
cati | dhatte nilàmbudacchayam muhur jvalati simyati | 52 vistaro ghorarüpaé ca mahim dha- 
vati capy adhah | dhvamksadyasravyasabdo và tada tam laksayed guruh | 53 brahmahatyadibhih 
papais tatsangais copapatakaih | tada tasya na kartavyà diksasminn akrte vidhau | 54 navátma 
phatputantahsthah punah pancaphadanvitah | amukasyeti papani dahimy anu phadastakam | 
55 iti sábasriko homah kartavyas tilatandulaih | ante pirna ca datavyá tato smai diksaya guruh | 
56 parayojanaparyantam kuryat tattvavisodhanam ‘And the venerable Dharmasiva has stated on 
the subject of initiation in absentia in his Karmapaddhati that if during this initiation when 
one correctly executes the plenary oblation the fire sputters and billows smoke, if it assumes the 
colour of a dark cloud, if it repeatedly flares up and subsides, if spreading, fierce in appearance, 
it runs out along the ground beneath it, or if it emits a harsh sound such as that of the cawing 
of a crow, then the Guru should understand that this is the effect of [major] sins such as brah- 
minicide and associated minor offences [committed but not expiated by the initiand]. In this 
situation he should not perform the initiation without first having done the following rite. He 
should make a thousand offerings into the fire of sesame seeds and rice grains, reciting [as he 
casts in each handful a Mantra comprising] Navatman with pyar before and after, followed by 
five PHATSs, then AMUKASYA PAPANI DAHAMI, and then eight PHATs. At the end he should offer a 
plenary [oblation]. Only then may the Guru perform through initiation the purification of the 
Tattvas that culminates in the fusion [of the initiand] with the highest [reality]. The Mantra, 
substituting the name of an initiand Sivasvàmin, would be [oM] PHAT H-s-KS-M-L-V-R-YÜM 
PHAT 6 SIVASVAMINAH PAPANI DAHAMI PHAT 8 [svAHA], the numerals indicating the number of 
times that the preceding syllable should be repeated. This procedure is seen in the Kashmirian 
Saiva manual for cremation. There it is performed, as in Dharmasiva’s Paddhati, before the 
purification of the Tattvas that is to be done at the time of cremation in the case of a person 
who has not received initiation while alive. See Sivanirvanapaddhati, p. 274 (= CHANDRA 1984, 
p. 202b), ll. 1—3, p. 275 (= CHANDRA 1984, p. 202c), ll. 3—5: (tad anu) navatmahomah (PHAT 
HASARAKSAMALAVAYAUM PHAT SVAHA sahasram 1000 và 100 và 10 hutvd. pirnd. tejo 5i PHAT 
PHAT AMUKASYA PAPANI DAHAMI SVAHA. ...adiksitasya tattvasodhanam kuryát. àbutinám *1000 
sabasram 100 satam và (conj. : 100 satam satam va Ed.) yathasakti. ajyabutih srestha. tadabhave 
tilayavatandulaib. yathasau prthvitattvam avahya sampüjya cáhunet.). 


Alexis Sanderson 391 


a single citation in the Tantrāloka. That passage gives a ruling that excludes 
converts to Saivism from holding office as Acaryas or Sadhakas, with the ex- 
ception in the former case of converts who achieve self-realization. In giving 
this ruling, Abhinavagupta tells us, I£anasiva was explaining the meaning of a 
statement on this subject in the Trika's Devyzyamala.??? The fact that it cites 
this source makes it likely to have been a Kashmirian work, since it is probable 
that the Devyayamala too was a product of this region??? It cannot, however, 
have been a Paddhati on the Trika, since Abhinavagupta informs us that there 
was no such work when he composed his Tantraloka.>*° 

It will have been noticed that Dharmasiv[acary]a and Isanasivacarya have 
Saiddhantika initiation-names, whereas all the Kashmirian Saiddhantikas of 
the -kantha lineage, as well as all the authors of the Krama and Trika, refer to 
themselves and each other under their secular names. It is probable that the 
adoption of a new name at the time of initiation, or at least its public use, 
was the practice of ascetics, and that these two authors then provide an ex- 
ception to what I have identified in the introduction as the dominant charac- 
ter of the Saivism of the Kashmirian exegetes, namely that it is that of mar- 
ried householders.??! That there were Saiva ascetics in Kashmir as elsewhere 
in India is clear from local literary sources. In Act 3 of Jayantabhatta’s topical 
play Agamadambara, written during the reign of Sankaravarman (r. A.D. 883— 
902), we encounter the ash-dusted abbot (b/attarakah) Dharmasiva receiving 
Samkarsana, who as the king’s minister for the protection of religion through- 
out the land?” has come to his hermitage to calm the anxiety of the Saivas of 
all divisions caused by the recent suppression of the followers of the licentious 
Saiva Black-Blanket observance (nilambaravratam), an event whose historicity 


528 Tantraloka 22.28c-31b. For sridevya yamaliyoktitattvasamyakpravedakab in 22.31ab (Ed.) 
read sridevyayamaliyoktitattvasamyakpravedakah 'Iéanasivacarya,] who has correctly explained 
the esssence of what the Devyáyámala has taught [on this matter]’. 

3?See footnote 83 on p. 261. 

530 Tantraloka 1.14—15: santi paddhatayas citrah srotobhedesu bhüyasa | anuttarasadardha- 
rthakrame tv ekapi neksyate | ity aham bahusah sadbhih sisyasabrahmacaribhih | arthito racaye 
spastam pirnartham prakriyam imam “There are various Paddhatis in abundance on [the prac- 
tice of] the various streams [the Siddhantatantras, Vamatantras, Daksinatantras, Garudatantras, 
and Bhütatantras]. But not one is seen on the procedures of the supreme doctrine of the Trika. 
Therefore, at the repeated request of my excellent disciples and fellow students, I am composing 
this clear and comprehensive treatise’. 

531See p. 242. 

532 Agamadambara, p. 132: saalae vaéumdhalae dhammalaskadhiale niutte (= Skt. sakalaya va- 
sundharaya dharmaraksadhikdre niyuktah). 


392 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


is reported by Jayanta in his Nyayamafijari.??? It appears that Dharmaésiva is 
approached here as the official representative of all the Saiva persuasions, Pasu- 
pata, Kalamukha, Mahavratin, and Mantramargic Saiva.>** From the eleventh 
century we have the testimony of the satirist Ksemendra. Writing for a Kash- 
mirian audience he mocks three Saiva ascetics in his Desopadesa: Nayanasiva 
(= Netrasiva), Rūpaśiva, and Dhyaàna£iva.??? The names suggest in the satirical 
context their inability to take their eyes off women (Eye-Siva, Eyefull-Siva, and 
Ogle-Siva) while at the same time being, like Dharmasiva, regular Saiddhantika 
initiation-names such as are found in inscriptions and Saiva literature.” 

We also have references to and citations from a number of Svacchanda- 
based initiation Paddhatis, otherwise lost or not yet discovered, in Sivasvamin’s 
expanded text of the Kaladiksapaddhati of Manodadatta, the initiation manual 
of the Saiva gurus of Kashmir. It quotes a passage from a metrical Paddhati by 
a Guru Visvavasu for its treatment of the preparation of the five products of 


555 Nyayamanjari, vol. 1, p. 649, ll. 4-7: *asitaikapatanivitaniyatastripumsavihitabahucestam 
(asitaika em. : amitaika Ed.) | nilambaravratam idam kila kalpitam asit vitaih kaiscit | tad apar- 
vam iti viditvà nivarayamása dharmatattvajhah | raja Sankaravarma na punar jainadimatam 
evam ‘King Sankaravarman, knowing the essentials of [brahmanical] religious law, prohibited 
the Nilambaravrata on the grounds that with its many acts committed by licentious couples 
wrapped up in a single black blanket it was an observance without precedent reportedly in- 
vented by certain dissolute rogues; but he did not act in this way against the Jainas and other 
[non-brahmanical religious]’. 

554 Agamadambara, p. 188, l. 10-11, in which the minister of religious affairs declares to 
Dharmaéiva as the government's current policy of toleration of all the Saiva persuasions: tad ime 
saivapasupatakalamukhé mahavratinas ca yathisukham asatim ‘So these, the Saivas, Pasupatas, 
Kalamukhas, and Mahavratins, may relax’. 

535 Desopadesa 8.4647: nayanasivah khalváto + + + danturas ca riipasivah | jatino visanti yage 
dhyanasivas tantramantrabinaé ca | triphalaksalanavimalo dhiupadhyo bhasmamustihatayukah | 
vesyinam upadhinam dhanyo jatinam jatajütah ' [Three] Saiva ascetics, bald Nayanasiva ...buck- 
toothed Ripasiva, and Dhyānaśiva devoid of [knowledge] of both the rituals and their Mantras 
[now] enter [before] the Mandala. The massed tresses of Saiva ascetics, cleansed by washing with 
nutmeg, areca nut, and cloves, richly fumigated with incense, their lice killed with fist-fulls of 
ash, are fortunate indeed, for they are prostitutes’ pillows’. 

°3°Thus among 49 initiated chanters of the Tamil hymns of the Tevaram named as beneficia- 
ries in an inscription in the Rajarajesvara (Brhadigvara) temple of Rajaraja I (r. 985-1014) at 
Tafijavür (South Indian Inscriptions 2, no. 65) there are 9 Dharmasivas and 2 Netrasivas; in the 
series of more than 95 12th-century images of named Sivacaryas in Darasuram (UHERNAULT 
1987, pp. 20-21, 31-35) there are 6 Dharmasivas and 1 Netrasiva; the Rajor inscription of 
A.D. 960 (Epigraphia Indica 3, no. 36) mentions a Ripasiva; and there is a Dhyanasiva in the 
preceptorial lineage of Aghorasiva as reported by the latter in his Dvisatikdlottaravrtti, in a verse 
given in GOODALL 1998, pp. xiv-xv. 


Alexis Sanderson 393 


the cow (paficagavyavidhih) among the preliminary rites of initiation.” It fol- 
lows this with a quotation of the beginning ofa passage on the same procedure 
from a prose Dzksakalpa.??? The two texts are related but it is not possible to 
determine which drew on which.??? The Kalidiksapaddhati also quotes a prose 
Diksakalpalata, probably the same work, on the appropriate times of the year 
for the holding of initiation ceremonies?" and on the cutting off of the candi- 
date's hair tuft (s/&a) at the end of the purification of the highest of the five 
segments (kalah) of the cosmic hierarchy, the procedure taught in the latter 
passage being said to follow the teaching of the Svacchanda.* It is also men- 
tioned together with an otherwise unknown text, the Diksdsdrasamuccaya, as 
a source that does not support the view of an unnamed author of a certain 
Diksápaddhati that at the end of the ritual that bestows brahmanhood dur- 
ing the first preliminary initiation (sisyasamskarah, = samayadiksa) the officiant 


537 Kaladiksapaddhati A, f. 20r11—v9 : atra ca visvavasuguravah: pancagavyavidhaye ‘tha sam- 
bhavat patrasaptakam upaharec chubham | mrnmayavadhimaneh samuksitam castratah kavacato 
vagunthitam | pracy atho navapadim sivadina prárcya tattvanavakena madhyatah | supratisthi- 
tasusantidiptimatsamrtatmakam atho saratnavat | patrapancakam athátra madhyage varmama- 
ntritapayah sikhanuna | pürvage dadhi ghrtam ca daksage castramantraparimantritam nyaset | 
apyage hrdanunatha gomayam gojalam ca firasátra saumyage | aisage kusajalam ca netratah 
saptasah samabhimantritam nyaset | palani vedagnibhujendusamkhyany angusthato rdham kra- 
maso ‘pi madhyat | hrdadibhih saptamabhajane "tha sammisrayet tani kusasanasthe iti. 

538 Kaladiksapaddhati A, f. 20v9-10: tatha ca diksakalpe: atha pancagavyavidhaye sambhavatah 
patrasaptakam hrdyam ityady uktam. 

3° The beginnings of both are so similar that one surely was drawing on the other: pañca- 
gavyavidhaye tha sambhavat patrasaptakam ...subham (Visvavasu’s verse); and atha paficagavya- 
vidhaye sambhavatah patrasaptakam hrdyam (Diksákalpa's prose). 

540 Ka ladiksapaddhati A, f. YOv1—4: tatha sridiksakalpalatayam: tatra saranmadhuyogo vara iha 
diksávidbau tadapraptau varsim vinanyadápi na dosah. 

541 Ka ladiksapaddhati A, f. 166v15—16717: tathà ca srisvacchandabhairavatantramatanusarena 
diksákalpalatàyam: atha satkaranakaranabhütàm vyaptrim anaupamydm suddham santyatitim 
Sikhagragam saspakotijalakanavad dhyatva pránanasakter. mundantoccapravahinyah chettum 
adhovahanatmabandhakatam tadanukarinim dehe niskalasikhabhimantritakartarya sisusikham 
chindyad iti ‘And likewise in the Dzksakalpalatà in accordance with the position of the Sva- 
cchandabhairavatantra: “Then he should meditate on [the highest segment, that of] Santyatita 
as the cause of the six causes [namely, Brahma, Visnu, Rudra, I$vara, Sadasiva, and Anaésrital, 
all-pervading, matchless, and pure, [visualizing it] on the tip of the [candidate’s] hair-tuft as 
resembling a droplet of water on the tip of a blade of grass. Then in order to eliminate the ca- 
pacity of the power of the vital energy that flows up to reach the upper limit of the head to bind 
[the soul] by flowing downwards he should visualize the hair-tuft of the candidate as mirroring 
that [power] within the body and cut it away with a razor empowered by the recitation of the 
Sikha [Mantra] of Niskala[svacchanda]"". This has in mind Svacchanda 4.217—218b. 


394 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


should have the initiand drink scented water mixed with ashes from the fire- 
pit as a substitute for the juice of the Soma plant, thus silently supporting the 
position of the Kaladiksapaddhati that the officiant should simply imagine that 
he is making the candidate drink this liquid.?? The same Diksdpaddhati is crit- 
icized for ordaining that after the cutting of his hair-tuft the candidate should 
be purified not merely by bathing, as the Svacchanda requires, but by a bath 
preceded by the shaving of his hair (vapanam).^9 The Kaladiksapaddhati also 
quotes passages from a Gurupustaka, giving a prayer in verse in which the of- 
ficiant asks Siva to grant permission for him to proceed with initiation," ^ the 
procedure for purifying the Mantras before the culminating act of fusing the 


542 Kaladiksapaddhati A, f.101v12-16: etadante manasa somam pdayayet. manasa manobha- 
vanayaiva. yat tu kenacid atra patre gandhodakam krtvà kundagnibhasmamisritam tac chisyam 
páyayed ity uktam likhitam ca svakrtadiksapaddbatau tan nirmitlatvad upeksyam srisvacchanda- 
tantrardje tadadarsanat somasambhudiksakalpalatadisu diksasárasamuccayagranthesu ca ‘At the 
end of these [rites that bestow brahmanhood] [the officiant] should mentally have [the initiand] 
drink Soma. Mentally means simply by imagining this in his mind. As for the position of a 
certain person that he should put scented water mixed with ash from the fire-pit in this vessel 
and make the initiand drink it, which he has both taught and written in his Diksdpaddhati, that 
should be not be heeded, for it is not evidenced in the Svacchandatantraraja, in such [Paddhatis] 
as Somagambhu’s and the Diksakalpalata, or in the Diksdsdrasamuccaya . 

59 Kaladiksapaddhati A, f. 167v10—15: atra ca sisyam vapanam snanam ca karayitva iti *yat 
(em. : yah Cod.) kenapi nijakrtapaddhatau likhitam (tan) nirmülatvad upeksyam. snánam sama- 
carec chisya iti srisvacchandatantroktya Sisyasya snanamatrenaiva suddhir iti tikadav api likhitvat 
“The statement bearing on this matter by a certain [Acarya] in a Paddhati that he has composed’, 
namely “Having caused the candidate to be shaved and to bathe”, should not be heeded, be- 
cause it has no basis [in any authoritative source]. For the Svacchandatantra says “Let the can- 
didate bathe" (4.219c) and in the commentary on that text and [related sources] we read that 
[his] purification is by bathing alone’. The commentary mentioned here is not Ksemaraja’s. For 
on this verse-quarter he comments only on the reason for the bath: chinnasikhatvat ‘because 
he is one whose hair-tuft has been cut off. 

544 Kaladiksapaddhati A, £.72r-v12: yathà gurupustake: "pürvam eva tvayà éambho niyukto 
ham fivddhvare | guruh parapare sthitva lokanugrahakrd bhava | tvacchaktyaghratahydayo 
bhagavann amuko maya | drstas tato "nugrabaya pravrtto ‘ham na lobhatah | tvam eva catra 
bhagavan pramanam sarvakarmanam | sáksibhütah svayam kartā paramah sankarah sivab | tad 
visesena mam eva samadhisthaya samnidhim | vidhatsva yena tvatpadasamanakriyatim iyam | 
wadajnam hrdaye krtva karomi nikhilah kriyab | anyatha kartum isa hi lokesa api kim prabho | 
wadadesad diksaniyah saktyavisto mayamukah | vibhor avedayisyimi yad yat karma karomy 
aham | dehy ajnim me jagannátha prasida bhagavan mama” iti. This text is that used at the 
beginning of the preliminary initiation (= samayadiksd) as taught in the Sisyasamskarapaddhati, 
an anonymous Paddhati for that ritual (f. 1v4—18). It is possible, therefore, that this Paddhati 
is an extract from the Gurupustaka itself. 


Alexis Sanderson 395 


) 545 546 
P 


candidate with Siva (yojanika the procedure for that act of fusion,?^? and 
its Mantra.*4” On the laying down with a powdered cord of the design of the 
Navanabhamandala, prescribed for initiation by the Svacchanda, it quotes first 
the Svacchanda itself and then a passage in verse to the same effect from the 
work of one Srikanthácárya.?* It is probable that this too was a Kashmirian 
Paddhati for initiation. 

Rajanaka Ananda, in the encomium of his patrilineage (the Padmapura 
Rajanakas of the Gautama Gotra) found at the end of his commentary (-tattva- 
vivrti), completed in 1654, on the Mahakavya Naisadhacarita, reports that his 
patrilineal ancestor Rajanaka Sitikantha composed the Gurupustika at the re- 
quest of the king Samgramasimha and also the Kalpalata “for the pleasure of 
the learned".^? Samgramasimha was probably the Cahamana ruler of San- 
chor (Satyapura), whose son Pratapasimha installed an inscription in 1387.55? 
It is probable that these two works are the Kalidiksapaddhati’s Gurupustaka 
and Diksakalpalata, since the latter is also referred to in that work simply as 


the Kalpalata in a passage that mentions these two as among the sources on 


59 Kaladiksapaddhati A, f. 169113—15: tatha ca gurupustake tantre: dhamno "nte sodhayamy 
astram svahety ekaikayáhutih. evam sarvatra. mülam tu satajapena sodhayed iti. 

546 Kaladibsapaddhati A, f. Y70r15—v4: sa ca gurupustake tantre: iti hutva yojanikam kuryác 
chaivim pare sive | avesat kulajat kaulasarad và samarasyatab | vinyasya hrdayakase simbhavya 
krodhinidría pranaspandad āņavād và vyapinisphárasamsphurád iti. 

47 Kaladiksapaddhati A, f. 17515—15: OM HUM PARAMASAIVE NIRAKJANE PADE AMUKANUM 
YOJAYAMI VAUSAT. iti manasa yojanikümantram samdhaya pürnáhbutim pátayet. pürnábuty- 
ante mantraksarakotim mantraksaraprantam niyojayet. OM HUM AMUKANUCAITANYAM NISKALE 
MANTRE YOJAYAMI HUM NAMAH iti manasa mantrasya pránte yojanikam krtvà Sisyam sammilita- 
mantram kuryat. tena caitanyamatravasesayuktya muktir bhavatiti guravah. iti gurupustake 
yojanikamantrah. 

548 Kaladiksapaddhati A, £.90v9-: iti srisvacchandabhairavamatam. tathà ca srikanthacaryena 
papabhaksanamatantaram avalokyoktam yatha: .... 

^?Ràjanaka Ananda in *Rajanakavamsaprasamsa A, f.2, ll. 16-19 (vv. 17-18: sitikanthah 
sutas tasya sotkanthah Sivadarsane | *samgramasimharthanaya (em. : samgramasimharcanaya 
Cod.) cakre yo gurupustikam | tasya kalpalatakartur budbanam pritaye sutau | adbhutim yodha- 
srikanthav abhütàm siddhim agatau ‘Sitikantha, the son of this [Modaka], devoted to the real- 
ization of Siva, composed the Gurupustika at the request of Samgramasimha and the Kalpalata 
for the pleasure of the learned. He had two sons, Yodha and Srikantha, who both achieved an 
extraordinary degree of supernatural power [through their Saiva practice]'. An incomplete and 
undated Sarada paper manuscript in 93 folios of a work entitled Gurupustika has come down 
to us; (TRIPĀTHĪ 1971, p. 436: Ms. C 4115). But I have not yet examined it. 

550See Ray 1931-1936, vol. 2, p. 1141. The only alternative that I can see is the Cahamana 
of Lata who was the son of Sindhuraja and ruled c. 1215—45. But he is too early. 


396 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


which Manodadatta drew when he composed the original work of this name.??! 


Manodadatta completed his Kaladiksapaddhati in 1335/6??? and the Rajanaka 
Sitikantha patronized by Samgramasimha was, according to Rajanaka Ananda, 
the great-grandson of the Rajanaka Sitikantha who wrote the Balabodhininyasa. 
That work was completed in 1471. If we assume that the active life of its au- 
thor was approximately 1425-1475 and work backwards through time to the 
author of the Gurupustika and the Kalpalata, assigning twenty-five years to each 
generation, then the author of those two works will have been active in approx- 
imately 1350-1400. This is too late for his compositions to have been among 
Manodadatta’s sources. However, apart from the fact that the calculation by 
generations of twenty-five years is only a very rough and unreliable guide, the 
genealogy itself is questionable. While Rajanaka Ananda makes our Sitikantha 
the son of Modaka and the father of Yodha and Srikantha, and Yodha the grand- 
father of the author of the Balabodhininyása,?? 
lineage, at least in the two manuscripts that I have seen, omits our Sitikantha, 
making Yodha the son rather than the grandson of Modaka.°*4 Furthermore, it 
is Sivasvamin, the enlarger of the Kaladiksapaddhati, that claims that Manoda- 
datta used these texts, not Manodadatta himself. The expanded text contains 
a series of hymns of which the latest is the Sambhukrpamanoharastava com- 


that author’s own account of his 


55! Kaladiksapaddhati A, f.9v13-16: srimanmrgendragurupustakatantratantralokasvatantra- 
matakalpalatadisaram ahrtya samsayasamaya sadadhvadiksasiksim jagàda gururajamanodada- 
ttah ‘In order to still doubts Manodadatta, king among Gurus, declared his instruction on the 
[procedure of the] initiation through the six paths after extracting the essence of the Mrgendra, 
the Gurupustakatantra, the Tantráloka, the Svacchanda (svatantramatam), the Kalpalatà, and 
other [texts]. 

552See footnote 514 on p. 389. 

55Ràjanaka Ananda in *Rajanakavamsaprasamsa A, fF. 2, ll. 14— 3, 7 (vv. 16-22): *modakas 
(em. : sodakas AB) tanayas tasya sivatattvaprabodhakah | vedantavidyasiddhantavedi siddhapa- 
tham Sritah | 17 sitikanthah sutas tasya sotkanthah fivadaríane | *samgrimasimharthanaya (em. : 
samgramasimhárcanayá Cod.) cakre yo gurupustikam | 18 tasya kalpalatakartur budhanam pri- 
taye sutau | adbhutam yodhasrikanthav abbütam siddhim agatau | 19 srikanthah pracyasamska- 
raprakaran nirvikaradhih | kanistho "pi param nistham siddhatam saifave srayat | 20 fivadva- 
yopadestabhuj jyestho lokaduristaha | yodho *pi (em. : vi Cod.) sisyasamtatya yo dhahkrtapra- 
japatih | 21 yodhad bodhambudher jata *dvijarajah (corr. : dvijarajà Cod.) *sadoditah (em. : 
sadoditah Cod.) | arjuno ‘tha trinayano mahératha iti trayab | 22 sitikantho rjunasuto vivavre 
balabodhinim | samiksayarthatritayam cakre ca mahimastutau. 

554Rājānaka Sitikantha in *Rajanakavamsaprasamsa A, f. 9, ll. 16-18 (vv. 4c-52): tatputras ca 
modakah samabhavad vedintasiddhantavid dhyayam dhyáyam iyaya devasadanam devam mrda- 
nipatim | tasmad yodhagurur babhiva bhagavan. 


Alexis Sanderson 397 


posed by Rajanaka Ratnakantha in the seventeenth century,” 


sequent inference that Sivasvàmin was active during the time of or later than 
Ratnakantha is undermined by the fact that the hymns appear to have been 
clumsily inserted into the text, the instructions that precede them being re- 
peated after them to re-establish the flow of the Paddhati.??6 

The claim that the Saiva Guru Rajanaka Sitikantha was asked to compose 
his Gurupustika by a king ruling in distant Sanchor in the far southwest of 
Rajasthan may surprise. But the later Sitikantha of this patriline reports in his 
Bálabodhininyása that his grandfather Yodha, the son of our Sitikantha accord- 
ing to Rajanaka Ananda, had given Saiva initiation to a number of kings, en- 
abling them thereby to conquer their enemies and so enjoy long and prosperous 
°°7 He does not identify them; but Rajanaka Ananda’s report that the 
Gurupustikà was commissioned by Samgramasimha (Sangram Singh) suggests 
that they may have been rulers of the Rajput kingdoms of Rajasthan. No king 
of Kashmir can have been among them since the country had been in the hands 
of Muslim rulers since 1339. 


though the con- 


reigns. 


>>The context is the ritual of pavitrirohanam to be performed immediately after a post- 
initiatory consecration ceremony (abhisekah). Kaládiksapaddbati A, f. 196v4—11: ity abhisekah. 
tatah pavitrarohanam. abhisekánantaram. saparivaram mantram yathasambhavam samtarpya 
bhagavantam visesarcabhis ca samptjya pavitrarohane *ca (corr. : ca bhagavatam bhagava- 
ntam Cod.) stutidandapranatyadimahotsavanrttagitavaditrarahasyarcanacarcabhis bhagavantam 
samtosya pavitrakàn püjayet. tatra stutir yathá: .... The hymns that follow are the Bhairava- 
stotra of Abhinavagupta, called here Paramasivastuti and Bhairavadasaka (ff. 196v12-197v8), 
the Apanidhasundarastava ascribed to Sankaracarya (ff. 197v8-199r13), the Bhairavastotra of 
Rajanaka Sankarakantha (ff. 199r13-200r5), the Sambhukrpamanoharastava of his son Raja- 
naka Ratnakantha (ff. 220r6—201v15), and a hymn attributed to Mahakavi Pandita Jagaddhara 
(ff. 201v16—203r1) that is not among the thirty-eight of his Stutikusumanjali as commented 
upon by Rajanaka Ratnakantha in his -laghupancikd. 

556 Kaladiksapaddhati A, f.203r4—5, after the hymns: iti stutibhih puspanjalin dapayitvà Sisyan 
dandapranatií ca kárayitvà nrttagitavaditrarahasyarcanacarcabhis ca srisivam samtosya pavitra- 
kan püjayet. This repeats the meaning and most of the wording of the passage that intro- 
duces the hymns in f. 196v8—11: stutidandapranatyadimahotsavanrttagitavaditrarahasyarcana- 
carcabhis bhagavantam samtosya pavitrakàn püjayet. tatra stutir yathà: .... 

°°7Rajanaka Sitikantha in *Rzjzmakavamsaprasamsa A, f. 9, ll. 18—19 (v. 5): tasmád yodhagu- 
rur babhiva bhagavan samprapya diksim yatab | prajyam vajyam "apástavairinikaras (apásta 
Govind Kaurs transcript [em.] : apasya Cod.) cakrus ciram bhibhujah “His son was the Guru 
Bhagavat Yodha, having obtained initiation from whom kings were freed of their enemies and 
enjoyed long and glorious reigns’. 


398 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


KsEMARAJAS EXEGESIS OF THE SVACCHANDA AND NETRA 


That the cults of Svacchandabhairava and Amrtesa were already well established 
in Kashmir in the tenth century can be seen from the fact that both the Svac- 
chanda and the Netra received elaborate running commentaries from Abhinava- 
guptas pupil Ksemaraja: the Svacchandoddyota and the Netroddyota. The cen- 
trality of these two Tantras during this early period is evident not merely from 
the existence of these learned commentaries—he also refers to a long commen- 
tary on the Svacchanda by a Rajanaka Bhullaka, now lost??5—but also from the 
fact that in both Ksemaraja stresses that his motive is to re-establish what he sees 
as the true, non-dualistic perspective of these texts, which, he says, had been 
overshadowed by the prevailing view, that of the Saiddhantika dualists, an un- 
justifiable inroad into non-Saiddhantika territory that had both imposed a less 
enlightened reading of their teachings and led to the suppression of elements 
of non-dualistic practice (advaitacarah),’”? such as the offering of fermented 
liquor to Svacchandabhairava, that were vital to the proper performance of their 
rites. Ksemaraja has also left us his Bhairavanukaranastotra, a hymn to Svaccha- 
ndabhairava in which he gives a non-dualistic reading of the symbolism of all 
the details of the visualization of this deity. 

As in the works of Abhinavagupta, the philosophical basis of Ksemaraja’s 
exegesis was that of Utpaladeva’s system, but though he was a disciple of 
Abhinavagupta, the Trika enters very little into his analysis. The system of eso- 
teric Sakta doctrine and practice that animates his exegesis is rather that of the 
Krama. We could see this as evidence of a difference in religious perspective be- 
tween the teacher and the pupil, and there certainly are such differences—we 
should be wary of the tendency to assume in line with the religious theory of 
unbroken transmission that disciples were mere clones of their teachers—but 
it may be more accurate to say that both propagated Krama-based analyses, 
Abhinavagupta of the Trika’s Malinivijayottara and Ksemaraja of the Svaccha- 
nda and Netra.>° 


>°8E.g., Svacchandoddyota, vol. 5a, p. 211, Il. 9-10: brhattikakararajanakabhullakena .... 
°° On advaitacarah see SANDERSON 2005a, pp. 110—114, footnote 63. 
560 For evidence of Ksemaraja’s reading the Krama, for him the highest of all religious systems, 


into his interpretation of the cults of Svacchandabhairava and Amrtesabhairava see SANDERSON 


1995, pp. 64-70. 


Alexis Sanderson 399 


OTHER WORKS BY KsEMARAJA 


Ksemaraja extended his non-dualistic exegesis beyond the Svacchanda and Ne- 
tra, technical Tantras mainly devoted to the prescription of ritual, to a wide 
range of texts, all of which have in common that they have no concern what- 
soever with ritual but rather with devotional contemplation of ultimate reality 
as the means of its realization. Just as Ksemaraja brought non-dualistic exegesis 
to those Tantras that appear to have been most widely followed in Kashmir, so 
with these works he sought to propagate the doctrines of his tradition among 
an even larger constituency, that is to say, those who were Saiva by conviction 
and devotion but were not only those who had received formal inititation and 
were therefore engaged in the study of the Tantras and the performance of the 
rituals they prescribe. Thus he wrote a commentary on the Vijianabhairava, 
a work of the Trika but one concerned entirely with methods of meditation 
that transcend the particularities of Mantra, Mudra, Mandala, deity, and ritual 
procedure that are the true criteria for distinguishing between the systems that 
make up the Saiva Mantramarga.*°! This text's simple single-verse instructions 
on a wide variety of meditations no doubt rendered it accessible to this broader 
audience, a surmise supported by the fact that it is often found in Kashmirian 
manuscripts for personal devotional use along with other short, less technical 
Saiva works. It is regrettable that only his commentary on the introductory 
verses has come down to us. Sivasvamin Upadhyaya I, searching for the text 
in the eighteenth century, could find no manuscript of the whole and wrote 
his own commentary on the remainder, appending it to the small portion of 
Ksemaraja’s text that was accessible to him.*” 

Ksemaraja also composed commentaries on a number of Saiva devotional 
hymns, namely the Sambapancasika, the Stavacintamani of Bhatta Narayana, 
and the Sivastotravali of Utpaladeva, a collection of hymns together with single 
devotional verses artificially arranged into hymns by later editors.?9? The con- 


56 The Trika background of the text is revealed in the introductory verses (1-23). 

562 Viinanabhairavavivrti, p. 143, ll. 9-14. The surviving portion of Ksemaraja’s commentary 
extends from its beginning to the end of the commentary on the last of the introductory verses 
(1-23, pp. 1-16). 

3 Ksemaraja, Sivastorrivalivivrti, pp. 1, 1. 14-2, 1.4 (his introduction): isvarapratyabhijna- 
kāro vandyabhidhinah srimadutpalacdryo ‘smatparamesthi satatasaksatkrtasvatmamahesvarah 
svam rüpam tathatvena paramrastum arthijananujighrksaya (ca) samgrahastotrajayastotrabhakti- 
stotrany ahnikastutisüktani ca kanicin muktakany eva babandha. atha kadácit tany eva tadvya- 
misrani labdhva friráma adityarajas ca prthak prthak stotrasayyayam nyavesayat. frivifvavartas tu 


400 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


text of the use of these devotional works is not well known. But if we may judge 
from recent practice in Kashmir it is probable that they were in use not only 
among initiates but also, and perhaps more typically, among lay devotees, who 
chanted them while attending Saiva rituals or when visiting Siva shrines. 

Then there are his commentaries on the Sivasiitra and the Spandakarika. On 
the first we have his Sivasütravimarsini, and on the second his Spandasamdoba, 
which comments only on the opening verse, and his Spandanirnaya, which 
comments on the whole work. Here too we find a strong commitment to 
Krama-based readings. Indeed he considers that the Krama is the very essence 
of the Spandakarika.™ In the case of the Aphorisms of Siva (Sivasütra) he does 
not make the same claim explicitly. However, it is implicit in his assertion that 
Vasugupta wrote the Spandakáriká in order to summarize the teachings con- 


565 


tained in that text, ® and Krama interpretation is to the fore in Ksemaraja’s 


vimsatyà stotraib svatmotpreksitanimabhir vyavasthapitavan iti kila sriyate “The author of the 
Isvarapratyabhijna, my Guru’s Guru's Guru, the Acarya Utpala of venerable name, immersed 
at all times in immediate experience of the Siva that is one’s true identity, in order to meditate 
on his own nature and out of a desire to benefit those who sought [his guidance], composed the 
Samgrahastotra, Jayastotra, and Bhaktistotra, and also a number of single-verse poetic hymns for 
his daily devotions. Some time thereafter Rama and Adityaraja received the latter mixed up with 
the former and then edited them in the form of a series of [multi-verse] hymns. It is reported 
that Visvavarta then [re-]arranged them as twenty hymns with titles of his own invention’. It is 
Visvavarta’s edition that Ksemaraja follows, while recognizing its artificiality. For commenting 
on 1.2 he notices that the arrangement of the verses here is incoherent, since there is no voca- 
tive addressed to Siva in the previous verse to justify the expression bhavadbhakti- ‘devotion to 
yov in this. He puts this observation into the mouth of a critic and replies: ‘Ask this question 
of Vigvavarta. I am concerned only with the explanation of each individual verse’ (p. 4, ll. 8-9: 
katham iyam stotrasayyeti srivisvavarta eva prastavyah. vayam tu siktavyakhyanodyatah). 

564 Spandanirnaya, p.74, M. 15-18: evam copakramopasamharayor maharthasamputikaram 
darsayan | tatsáratayd samastasinkaropanisanmirdhanyatam | asyaviskaroti śästrasya sriman 
vasuguptacaryah ‘And by showing in this way that the Mahartha encloses this Sastra in 
its opening and closing verses the venerable Acarya Vasugupta reveals that it stands at the 
summit of all Siva’s esoteric teachings, since it has that [system] as its essence’. His view of 
the Krama basis of the first verse is set out at length in his Spandasamdoha. Ksemaraja wrote 
his Spandasamdoha, Spandanirnaya, and Sivasiitravimarsini in that order; see Spandanirnaya 
p. 6, ll. 1-2: nirnitam caivampráyam mayaiva prathamasitramdatravivarane spandasamdohe; and 
Sivasiitravimarsini, p.3, M. 7-9: tatpáramparyapráptani spandasütrány asmabhih spandanirnaye 
samyan nirnitani. Sivasutrani tu nirniyante. 

565 Sivasitravimarsini, p. 3, ll. 3—5: etani ca samyag adhigamya bhattasrikallatadyesu sacchisyesu 
prakasitavan spandakarikabhis ca samgrhitavan ‘And having correctly mastered these [Sutras 
Vasugupta] revealed them to Bhattaéri Kallata and others who were his true disciples and sum- 
marized them in the Spandakàriká. 


Alexis Sanderson 401 


analysis of a number of its key aphorisms.?66 


Finally, we have his Pratyabhijnahrdaya, a text in the form of Sütras and an 
auto-commentary that claims to set out the essence of the doctrine taught by 
Utpaladeva in his Lvarapratyabhijnakarika in order to enlighten persons who 
are experiencing the urge to achieve immersion in Siva but lack the philosophi- 
cal training necessary to master the original works.?*7 Here too he privileges the 
Krama, propounding its distinctive contemplation of the cyclical dynamism of 


cognition as the very heart of that philosophical system .?9? 


596See his commentary on 1.6 (sakticakrasamdhane visvasamharah), 1.11 (tritayabhokta 
viresah), and 1.22 (mahdahradinusamdhanin mantraviryanubhavah). In that on 1.6 he iden- 
tifies the ‘circle of powers’ (sakticakram) as that of ‘the venerable Sakti of Emission etc.’ (p. 21, 
|. 4-5: srimatsrstyadisakticakra-). That he means the twelve Kalis beginning with Srstikali can be 
inferred from his commentary on 1.11, since he states there that through continuous contem- 
plation of the circle of powers one enters the state of identity with Manthanabhairava (p. 26, 
1. 14-27, 1.7). For in the Spandanirnaya (p. 6, ll. 5-9) Ksemaraja identifies Manthanabhairava 
as the leader of the circle of these goddesses, glossing the description of Siva in the first verse as 
sakticakravibhavaprabhavam (acc. sg.): Saktindm srstiraktadimaricidevinam cakram dvadasatma 
samühas tasya yo vibhava udyogavabhasanacarvanavilapanatma kridadambaras tasya prabhavam 
hetum. tà hi devyah frimanmanthánabhairavam cakresvaram alingya sarvadaiva jagatsargádikri- 
dim sampadayantity āmnāyah *(I praise Sankara] who is the source (prabhavah), the cause, of 
the pervasive manifestation, the energetic play that is [the cycle of] the urge to manifest, mani- 
festation, the subjective relishing [of the manifest] and dissolution, of the circle, the twelvefold 
group, of [his] powers, of the [twelve] ray-goddesses Srsti[kali], Rakta[kali], and the rest. For 
the teaching [of the Mahartha] informs us that it is through their intimate connection with 
Manthanabhairava as the lord of their circle that they constantly accomplish the play of emit- 
ting, [sustaining,] and [withdrawing] the universe’. 

59 Pratyabhijnahrdaya, p. 37, ll. 8-10: iba ye sukumaramatayo ‘krtatiksnatarkasastraparisramah 
saktipatonmisatpáramesvara *samávesabhilasab (conj. : samavesabhilasinah Ed.) katicid bhakti- 
bhajas tesàm isvarapratyabhijnopadesatattvam manag unmilyate “Here I shall briefly reveal the 
essence of the teaching of the /‘varapratyabhijna[karika] for the benefit of those rare devotees 
who being of undeveloped intellect have not undertaken training in the severe discipline of 
philosophical argument, yet are experiencing an urge towards immersion in Siva emerging in 
themselves through the descent of [his] power’. 

°68 This perspective is alluded to in the first of the benedictory verses: namah £ivaya satatam 
pancakrtyavidhayine | cidénandaghanasvatmaparamarthavabhasine ‘Obeisance to Siva who, 
constantly engaged in his five functions, makes manifest the ultimate reality of one’s iden- 
tity pervaded by the bliss of consciousness’. The five functions are emission, stasis, withdrawal, 
obscuration, and revelation, following pan-Saiva doctrine. But in this work Ksemaraja teaches 
that from the esoteric point of view these are to be seen as operating within the flow of cogni- 
tion, explaining this operation first in neutral terms, though in the spirit of the Krama (Sütra 
10 and commentary), and then directly with Krama terminology (Sütra 11 and commentary). 
It is this Krama reading, I propose, that is intended in the opening verse, the first qualifier 


402 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


Tue SIvASUTRA, SPANDAKARIKA, AND THEIR EXEGESIS 


In addition to the commentaries of Ksemaraja on the Sivasütra and Span- 
dakévika, we have a commentary on the former (Sivasiitravartika) by Bhatta 
Bhaskara, and on the latter we have a brief gloss by Bhattasri Kallata (-vrtti), and 
detailed analytic commentaries by Rajanaka Rama (Spandavivrti), [the Paf- 
caratrika] Bhagavatotpala (Spandapradipika), and Bhattarakasvamin (Spanda- 
pradipika). Others existed but have not survived, such as that by Bhatta Lollata 
reported by Ksemaraja.?7? 

The study of the Sivasütra in its own right is problematic. Many of its 
seventy-seven terse aphorisms are obscure in meaning both individually and 
in sequence, which has allowed considerable divergences between the inter- 
pretations of Bhatta Bhaskara and Ksemaraja. Moreover, they reveal no close 
attachment to the terminology and concepts of the Krama, the Trika, or any 
single scripture-based system so that we could clarify their meaning by drawing 
on its literature. One may say only that they present a creative epitome of doc- 
trine and trans-ritual practice drawing, probably eclectically, from Kaula tradi- 
tions that venerate Bhairava and the Mothers, teaching that the goal of practice 
is to realize that one is oneself the /sakti/cakresvarah, the deity that controls 
the diverse powers that constitute the universe of experience, establishing this 
realization first through withdrawal into the heart of consciousness and then 
through its expansion into the states that constitute the mundane awareness 
of the bound.?"! This model of transcendence followed by an expansion that 


pancavidhakrtyavidhayine expressing the reason (hetau visesanam) for the second: 'Obeisance 
to Siva who [since he is] constantly engaging in his five functions [of the manifesting of the 
object (abhasanam), immersion in the object (ra&ti/), subjective awareness of the perception 
(vimaríanam), laying down the impression of the perception in memory (bijdvasthapanam), 
and completely dissolving all trace of contracted consciousness (vilépanam)| makes manifest 
the ultimate reality of one's identity pervaded by the bliss of consciousness'. See also pp. 50, 
1. 7—51, 1. 1 (Sūtra 12 and commentary) on the five goddesses Vàmesvari etc.; and pp. 58-59 
(Sütra 19 and commentary) on bringing about permanent immersion. 

56?We also have two summaries of his Szvasztravimarsini: the anonymous Sivasütravrtti, and 
the Sivastitravartika of the South Indian Varadaraja alias Krsnadasa, pupil of Madhuraja, an 
ascetic of Madurai. 

570 Spandanirnaya, p. 34, |. 12-13. 

571 Sivastitra 1.5: udyamo bhairavah ‘Bhairava is the primordial dynamism [of consciousness]; 
1.6: sakticakrasamdháne visvasamhárah “When one assimilates the circle of [his] powers the 
universe is withdrawn’; 1.7: jágratsvapnasusuptabhede turyabhogasambhavah ‘[Thereafter] there 
comes about the expansion of the Fourth [state back] into the divisions [of projected con- 


Alexis Sanderson 403 


causes the state of enlightenment to pervade the transcended is central to the 
Kalikula, and the Aphorisms may well have drawn it directly or indirectly from 
that source. But there is much in them that cannot obviously be derived from 
it and several elements that cannot be traced to any other known scriptural 
source. 

Since so much of the early Sakta literature has been lost or preserved only 
in quotations in the works of the Kashmirian exegetes it would be rash to try to 
assess the extent to which the aphorisms are a creative development. However, 
that they were thought to be so at a time when much more of that literature was 
current is implicit in the accounts of their origin given by the commentators. 
For these elevate them in a manner that allows for a degree of originality that 
would not be acceptable in a text claiming merely human authorship. Thus ac- 
cording to Rajanaka Rama and Bhagavatotpala the aphorisms were revealed to 
Vasugupta through oral transmission by a Siddha,’ in the manner claimed for 
the Old Kashmiri Chummas. According to Bhatta Bhaskara directions given to 
Vasugupta by a Siddha led him to discover the aphorisms on Mt. Mahadeva.°”? 
Ksemaraja too held that Vasugupta found the aphorisms on this mountain, but 
attributes the instruction that led to their discovery not to a Siddha but to Siva 
himself appearing to Vasugupta in a dream, thus lifting the text on to the level 


sciousness, namely] the waking state, dream, and dreamless sleep’; 1.8-10: sanam jagrat | 
svapno vikalpah | aviveko maya sausuptam “The waking state [here] is sense-cognition; the dream 
state is [one's] conceptual constructions; the state of dreamless sleep is the absence of aware- 
ness [of transcendence], the state of inner self-concealment'; 1.11: tritayabhokta viresah ‘One 
who [continously] experiences [these] three [as the Fourth] is [Bhairava,] the Lord of Heroes’; 
1.21: suddhavidyodayac cakresatvasiddhih “The result of the arising of non-dual awareness is 
that one is established as the Lord of the circle of [his] Powers’; 2.7: matrkacakrasambodhah 
‘[Through the Guru the disciple] achieves realization of the circle of the Mothers’; 3.19: ka- 
vargadisu mahesvaryadyah pasumatarah ‘Mahesvari and the [other goddesses] are the Mothers 
for bound souls, [being manifest] in the gutturals and the classes [of the sounds of the syllabary 
that combine as conceptual construction]. 

52 Bhàgavatotpala, Spandapradipika, p. 83, ll. 15: siddhamukhenagatam rahasyam yat “The 
esoteric teaching that had come [to Vasugupta] through the oral instruction of a Siddha 
...3 Spandakarikavivrti, p. 165, ll. 12-15: guror vasuguptábhidbanasya saksat siddhamukha- 
samkrantasamastarahasyopanisadbhitaspandatattvamrtanihsyandasya ... *...the Guru called Va- 
sugupta, to whom the outflow of the nectar that is the hidden essence of all the esoteric [Saiva 
scriptures] was transmitted directly from the lips of a Siddha’. 

575Bhatta Bhaskara, Szvasutravártika 1.3: srimanmahddevagirau vasuguptaguroh pura | si- 
ddhadesat pradur asan éivasütrani tasya hi “In the past the Aphorisms of Siva were discovered on 
Mt. Mahadeva by the Guru Vasugupta following the instruction of a Siddha.’ 


404 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


574 though he too knew a tradition that Vasugupta was 


of scriptural revelation, 
the conduit to men of Kaula oral teaching, for he describes him as “one whose 
heart had been purified by the spiritual transmissions that he had received from 
numerous Saiva Yoginis and Siddhas", a formulation that may well have been 
intended also to account for the eclectic character of the text.?/? 

Remaining faithful to the text's character as a creative synthesis of Kaula 
tradition neither commentator has attempted to tie his interpretation to a sin- 
gle scripture-based system. Ksemaraja, as I have stated above, shows a strong 
tendency to read the text in the terms of the Krama, but this is by no means his 
only exegetical resource in this commentary. Bhatta Bhaskara’s commentary, 


too, is relatively system-neutral, though he too on occasion uses language that 
echoes the Kalikula.*”° 


574 Sivastitravimarsini, pp.2, 1.7-3, 1.4: kadacic casau dvaitadarsanadhivasitapraye jivaloke 
rahasyasampradayo ma vicchedity asayato "nujighrhsáparena. paramasivena svapne ‘nugrhyon- 
misitapratibhah krto yathátra mahibhrti mahati silatale rahasyam asti tad adhigamyanugraha- 
yogyesu prakdsayeti. prabuddhas casdv anvisyan tām mahatim Ssilim  karasparíanamátra- 
parivartanatah samvadikrtasvapnim pratyaksikrtyemani Sivopanisatsamgraharipani Sivasitrani 
tatah samásasáda ‘Once Paramasiva, desiring to benefit mankind by preventing the esoteric 


tradition from dying out in a society that was almost completely permeated by the dualistic 
doctrine [of the Saiddhantikas], favoured that [Guru Vasugupta on Mt. Mahadeva by appear- 
ing to him] in a dream and causing him to understand that there was an esoteric teaching 
[inscribed] on a huge rock on that mountain and that he was to learn it and reveal it to those 
who deserved to be so favoured. When he awoke he looked for that rock and turning it over 
by a mere touch of his hand saw that it confirmed his dream. He then acquired from it these 
aphorisms, which are the epitome of the esoteric Saiva scriptures’. 

575 Sivasiitravimarsini, p.2, ll.3-5: páramesvarananayoginisiddhasatsampradayapavitrita- 
hrdayah. 

576See e.g. (1) Sivasütravartika 1.52—53b on tritayabhokta viresah: evam maricinicayo guna- 
trayasamudbhavah | vaikalpike jagaty asmin vamanagrasatatparah | tatrāpi grasakrd yas- 
mat tena viresvarah smrtah ‘In this way the mass of rays that arises from the three Qual- 
ities [that are manifest in the three states of waking, dream, and dreamless sleep] is in- 
tent on projecting and devouring [the contents of consciousness] in this universe of con- 
ceptual constructions. He is called the Lord of Heroes (Viresvara) here because he in turn 
devours these [rays]’; cf. Jayadrathayamala, Satka 4, Á.9ab (Kalikakramapatala): sphurad- 
vamanasamegrasaraviki srstkarika; f. 216v (Siddhayogesvarividhipatala 34cd): asesacakracakresa- 
vamanagrasanisthuram; Arnasimha, Mahdnayaprakasa 226: asim dvisatkadevinim vamana- 
grasatatparam | devim trayodasim vande tàdátmyapratipattaye); (2) Sivasiitravartika 2.12—15b 
(on garbhe cittavikaso vifisto vidyasvapnah “The mind expands within the source [and because of 
that] ignorance sleeps’): prakasanandasarantarvyavartanabalad bhrsam | visayebhyo nivrttasya 
manasas cinmayi sthitib | paro vikdsas ciccandracandrikamrtanirbharah | sravaccháktamrtapüra- 
plutanandijaganmayah | tatsadbhivad avidyayah fprathayantyat dharadibhih | tattvajalair 


alamgrasayuktya svapno vilopanam “The mind becomes consciousness when it turns back from 


Alexis Sanderson 405 


As for the Spandakáriká, all our authors agree that it presents the essentials 
of the Aphorisms, Ksemaraja claiming that Vasugupta himself was its author,?/7 
and Bhatta Bhaskara and Bhagavatotpala attributing it to Kallata, his pupil.’ 


But in fact while there is much that is common to both texts, notably the model 


sense-objects by force of intense reversion into the essence that is [the fusion] of light and 
bliss. This is its full expansion. It is filled with the nectar that is the light of the moon of con- 
sciousness and it is fused with the world now blissful because it has been completely drenched 
by the outsurging flood of the nectar of [Bhairava's] Power. Because of this there arises the 
sleep, the elimination through the process of Complete Devouring (a/amgrasal), of the igno- 
rance that f...f[it] with the entangling Tattvas from earth [to Siva]'. The reading prathayan- 
tyà dharadibhih | tattvajalair yields no appropriate sense that I can see. Perhaps we should 
emend to vyathayantya dharadibhih ‘that torments [it] with the entangling Tattvas from earth 
[to Siva]’. The expression prakdsinanda- is frequently encountered in texts of the Kalikula; 
see, e.g., Jayadrathayamala, Satka 3, £.156r4: yatra ksayam idam yati pranddyam sarvam eva 
hi | yatodeti punar bhiyo prakasanandalaksanam | ciddhima yat param siksmam karanesv 
api káranam | tam sivam paramam devam svasaktiparimanditam; Satka 4, f. 34v4: vikasakuf- 
canenaiva prakasinandayogatah; £.196r7: trisirsa viryamalini | prakasinandamadhyastha prol- 
lasanmantravigraha; and f. 196v1: prakasanandamadhyasthà kadya kankalabhairavi. The term 
alamgrásab too is a feature of the Krama texts; see Arnasimha, Mabanayaprakáfa, f. 127:2-3 
(v. 225cd): devikakramasadbhivo ‘py alamgrasaikaghasmarah; Mahainayaprakasa (Triv.) 7.99ab: 
alamgrasapravrttena kriyavesena tattvatah; Vatülanáthasutravrtti on 2: kalakálakalpanottirna- 
lamgrasavapusa mahdanirihena; on 9: caturatmyena udyogabhásacarvanalamgrásavapusd svasva- 
ripavasthitib; on 10: udyogávabhásacarvanálamgrásavisrantirüpánàm mahdasamvidrasminam; 
Jnanakriyadvayasataka 5cd: namah samastabhavaughahathalamgrasabhanave; and the commen- 
tary on the Old Kashmiri Mabanayaprakàsa 4.6: bhagavatyalamgrasaparaya. 

577 Sivasitravimarsini, p. 3, ll. 4-7: etani ca samyag adhigamya bhattasrikallatadyesu sacchisyesu 
prakasitavan spandakarikabhis ca samerhitavan ‘And [Vasugupta] having mastered these [Apho- 
risms] revealed them to Bhattasri Kallata and other worthy disciples and then summarized them 
in the Spandakarika . 

?75Bhàeavatotpala, Spandapradipika, p. 83, ll. 15-17: ayam atra kilamnayah siddhamukhena- 
gatam rabasyam yat | tad bhattakallatendur vasuguptaguror avapya Sisyanam | avabodhartham 
anustuppancasikaya samgrabam krtaván ‘On this matter the following tradition is reported. 
The moon-like Bhatta Kallata received from the Guru Vasugupta the esoteric teaching that 
had come to him through the oral instruction of a Siddha and summarized it in fifty verses in 
the Anustubh metre’ (for the point of the moon-metaphor see footnote 581); and Bhaskara, 
Sivasiitravartika 1.4—5: sarahasyany atah so ‘pi prādād bhattaya süraye | srikallataya so ‘py evam 
catuhkhandani tany atha | vyakarot trikam etebhyah spandasutraib svakais tatah | tattvartha- 
cintamanyakhyatikaya khandam antimam “He transmitted [the aphorisms] in four sections, 
along with [an explanation of their] esoteric teaching, to the learned Bhattasri Kallata, who 
explained the [first] three of these in his own Spandakáriká and the last section in a commen- 
tary entitled Tattvarthacintémani . Citations from the Tattvarthacintamani, now lost, survive 
in Tantráloka 10.208 (paraphrase), -viveka thereon (quotation); Tantráloka 16.51 (paraphrase), 
-viveka thereon (quotation); and Sivasütravimarsini, p. 138, ll. 5-8 (quotation). 


406 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


of liberation through transcendence and expansion, there is nothing in them 
that supports this supposed intimate relationship and much that goes against 
it, most notably the absence from the Aphorisms of the doctrine that Siva's 
essence is the vibrancy of consciousness (spandah, spandatattvam) that gives the 
Spandakarikà its title. Here too no single Kaula system can be identified as the 
text’s basis. Nonetheless it is probable that the Kalikula was a major element in 
the milieu within which this text emerged. The term spandah is certainly much 
used in the scriptures of that tradition.*”” 

The short gloss on the Spandakarika by Bhattasri Kallata supports the view 
of Bhatta Bhaskara and Bhagavatotpala that the root-text was indeed composed 
by Kallata and not by Vasugupta as Ksemaraja maintained. For it lacks its own 
initial benedictory verse and nowhere gives any indication of separate author- 
ship. The second of three post-colophonic verses in the edition of the text does 
assert that the Spandakáriká is by Vasugupta: "[Here] Kallata has clarified the 
nectar of the Spandakdrika that the venerable Vasugupta extracted from the 


ocean of the Sivasutra taught to him on Mt. Mahadeva by Siva in a dream" ^9? 


>See Jayadrathayamala, Satka 1, f. 190v3—5 (45.120—122): ekah sivo mahamilam nirupa- 
dhir anantakah | vijhanajnanasampirnah sarvakavas tu mantharah | 121 nistarangarnavakarah 
pavitrptah paraparah | susantamürtib sarvatmá nirvaneso tinirmalab | 122 tasya faktib svakam 
viryam ciddhamanandagocaram | vyaktam vyaktivibhedena spandananandasundaram; Satka 2, 
f. 5r: spandanandodaravartavisrantayamalaya te | namas ciccakravitramaprasaradvisvamurtaye; 
Satka 3, f. 107v7—8 (15.9c-10): ya parollasini saktih paraparavibhágagá | jfianakriyanilayani ic- 
cha ciccakramadhyaga | spandodaragata siksma susiksmamrta*syandini (conj. : samdhini Cod.); 
Satka 3, £.95r4 (13.30): tatspandacakramadhyastho smaren mantram mahadbhutam | iyam 
sā devadevesi mantrasuddhih parapara; Satka 4, f. 5815—6 (4.17-18): jidnam jneyam tatha 
jnata jhaptigarbhan *nibhalayan (corr. : nibhalayam) | layam yati pare dhamni nirabamkara- 
dharmini | cidinandaparispandagarbhasthaspandaripaya | vyapta paramaya bháti *sadadhva- 
varanantaga (antaga corr. : dmtigd Cod.); Cificinimatasárasamuccaya, f. 22v4 (7.206ab) (on the 
twelve Kalis, in the Uttaragharamnaya section): sphuraty antargatà ghürmir anakhyam span- 
dam uttamam; Devidvyardhasataka, f. 1112-3 (v. 127): akathyam va(k) kramátitam akulam ca 
kuloditam | spandanantaramadhyastham atmagamam subhavitam. 

580 Spandakarikavytti, p.40, l1l.3—6: *dugdham (em. : drbdham Ed.) mahadevagirau 
mahesasvapnopadistac chivasitrasindhoh | spandémrtam yad vasuguptapadaih srikallatas tat 
prakaticakára. The edition's reading drbdham is unacceptable. For while the Spandakarika 
can be ‘composed’ (drbdha-) the ‘nectar that is the Spandakarik@ (spandámrtam) cannot be 
‘composed from the ocean of the Sivasiitra’. The metaphor requires the nectar to be ‘ex- 
tracted’ from that ocean, in allusion to the Puranic myth of the extraction of nectar from 
the ocean of milk. This meaning is provided by the graphically similar dugdham; cf. Narayana, 
Stavacintamani 1.10: mayajalodarát samyag uddhrtya vimalikrtam | fivajfianam svato dugdham 
dehy chi harahamsa nah, on which Ksemaraja comments as follows: svato dugdham tvayaiva 
kalaslaghyenanitam. 


Alexis Sanderson 407 


But the verse is suspect, since it appears in only some manuscripts, and if it 
were original Bhagavatotpala, who knew this commentary, ^?! could hardly have 
maintained the view that the Spandakarika is Kallata’s. The motive for interpo- 
lation is clear, namely to make Kallata himself support the view of Ksemaraja. 

Kallata’s brief and lucid gloss stays firmly within the parameters of the text 
itself, eschewing, therefore, all reference to the specific doctrines of the Sakta 
traditions, unlike that of Ksemaraja, which, as we have seen, grounds the text 
in the Krama, though it also recognizes its transcendent, syncretistic character 
by connecting some passages with the Trika. 

The commentary of Rajanaka Rama, the pupil of Utpaladeva, likewise ad- 
heres closely to the explicit content of the text, relying also on Kallata’s gloss. 
We find no attempts to clarify its meaning by making connections with the 
Trika or Krama. If he strays beyond the parameters of his text it is only to the 
extent that he applies the philosophical concepts of his teacher.?*” 

Bhagavatotpala’s commentary (Spandapradipika) is of a very different char- 
acter. As a Paficaratrika Vaisnava its author attempts to show through abundant 
citations from Paficaratrika sources, both scriptural and exegetical—in the latter 
case he draws extensively on the philosophico-devotional treatises of the Kash- 
mirian Paficaratrika Vamanadatta (son of Devadatta) as well as a wide range of 
Saiva texts—that the doctrine of the Spandakarikd is equally at the heart of this 
non-Saiva tradition. 

As for the unpublished Spandapradipika of Bhattárakasvàmin,?9? that is 
written from the perspective of a Kashmirian Saiva versed in the works of Ut- 
paladeva and Abhinavagupta but without strong leanings towards the Krama 
or the Trika, though in the Mangala verse at the beginning of his commentary 


581He refers to the commentary as Kallata’s in the introductory verses of his Spandapradipika. 
After reporting the tradition that the Spandakdrikad is Kallatas summary of the teaching 
of the Sivasitra (see footnote 578 on p.407) he adds (p.83, Il. 18-19): yad api tadartho 
vyakhyajyotsnáprakatikrto šti tenesat | mohanisimadhyagata mandadysas tad api nartham iksante 
‘Although he made the meaning of those [fifty verses] slightly clearer with the moonlight of 
a commentary those in the midst of the night of delusion with weak sight are still unable to 
make it out’. 

82 See, e.g., Spandakarikavivrti, p. 25, where he applies Utpaladeva’s distinctive classification 
of the four levels of contracted agency of consciousness (parimitapramdtrta), namely those of 
identification with the body (debapramatrta), intellect (buddhipramatrta), vital energy (prana- 
pramátrtà), and the void (Sanyapramatrtd). 

583The manuscript, which to my knowledge, is the only one to have survived, breaks off in 
the commentary on the last verse of the work proper, before its two closing verses of veneration 
and benediction. 


408 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


on the second chapter he venerates the essence of the Trika that transcends the 
Saktis Para, Parapara, and Aparā.’® In the chapter colophons he is identified as 
a worshipper of Srividya, that is to say, of the Sakta goddess Tripurasundari?? 
and this fact is reflected in the introduction to the commentary. For in its verses 
11-14 he prepares for his task by meditating on an unnamed Mandala, begin- 
ning with obeisance to Ganega, Dharma, Varuna, and Kubera at its gates and 
then dissolving it stage by stage into the point (binduh) at its centre. The stages 
are (1) the four gates, then (2) three circles, followed by sets of (3) sixteen, 
(4) eight, (5) fourteen, (6) ten, (7) ten again, (8) eight and (9) three.?96 The 
Mandala, then, is that of Srividyà, which alone has this structure. There is an 
unusual feature, however, in the deities of the four outer gates. This arrange- 
ment is not found in any form of the Srividya known to me, but does occur, and 
is probably peculiar to, the Kaula system taught in the Devirahasya (| Parara- 
hasya), where these four are worshipped as the door-guardians (dvdrapalah) of 
its Yantras for initiation (Patala 1) and in its worship of the initiation Guru 
(Patala 60). The Kaulism of this text, which was well known in Kashmir,??7 con- 
tains no trace of the terminology of Kashmirian non-dualism and appears to be 
East Indian in character, though it was probably composed or revised in Kash- 
mir since it has integrated the local Kashmirian goddesses into its pantheon,?9? 
and consequently a number of Kashmirian Parisistas which provide Pafcangas 
for their worship within the same ritual parameters have been published with 


5" /Bharrárakasvamin, Spandapradipika, f. 5v18—19: yad anuttaram apürvam pariparapara- 
parákalatitam | suddhasuddhasvabhavam *tad (em. : tam cod.) upasmahe sadardhasarakhyam. 

385 E g., £.5v16—17: iti srimacchrividyopasakasribhattarakasvamikrtaspandapradipikayam pra- 
thamo ‘yam ullasah. 

8>Bhattaraka, Spandapradipika, f. 1r16—18 (arambhaslokah 11—12b): 11 ganesadharma- 
varuna*kuberan (corr. : kubiran cod.) pranipatya ca | caturdváram trivrttànusodasarnastapalla- 
vam | 12 *caturdasadasadasavasuvahnisadasrayan (vasu em. vasva Cod.). 

557 There are, for example, six Kashmirian manuscripts of the Devirahasya, one of them on 
birch-bark, listed in the catalogue of the Sanskrit manuscripts in collection of the Research 
and Publication Department in Srinagar (Rarna 1989, p. 40) and three in the collection of the 
Banaras Hindu University (TRIPATHI 1971, p. 750). 

588Thus among its Mantras are those of Sarika, Sàradà, Maharajai, Jvalamukhi and Bhida. 
Similarly, the affiliated Uddhdarakosa classifies ten of the goddesses of the Devirahasya’s Mantra- 
pantheon as Great Vidyas (mahdvidyah), following the model of East Indian Saktism. But 
whereas there the Ten Great Vidyas (dasa mahdvidyah) are Tripurasundari, Laksmi, Tara, Bhu- 
vanesvari, Matangi, Daksinakali, Bhairavi, Chinnamasta, Dhimavati and Bagalamukhi, here 
they are Tripurasundari, Laksmi, Tara, Bhuvaneévari, Matangi and the local goddesses Sarada, 
Sarika, Rajfii, Bhida, and Jvalamukhi. 


Alexis Sanderson 409 


it.^9? We learn nothing more about Bhattaraka from his commentary; but per- 
haps he is identical with the Kashmirian Bhattaraka Ananda whose commen- 
tary on the Vijnanabhairava (Vijninakaumudi) was completed, according to 
its concluding verses, in [Kali] 4774 (= A.p. 1672).5 For Bhattaraka Ananda 
identifies himself, like our commentator, as a follower of the Srividya, and refers 
to his preparation for composition in similar terms.??! 

It is at least certain that the author was a Kashmirian. When explaining the 
term sabdarasisamutthasya saktivargasya ‘the set of Saktis that arises from the syl- 
labary’ in Spandakdarika 3.13b he gives as an alternative the interpretation that 
it refers to the eight goddesses Ama, Kama, Carvangi, Tankadharini, Tara, Pār- 
vati, Yaksini and Sarika. This places the matter beyond reasonable doubt, since 
this series of goddesses is peculiarly Kashmirian. Sarika is one of the lineage- 
goddesses (kuladevi) of the Kashmirian brahmins and is venerated in the form 
of a rock at the Pradyumnapitha on the hill Hàr?parbuth (Sarikaparvata) in 
Srinagar with the other seven goddesses from Ama to Yaksini as her retinue.*”” 


"THE SAKTA SAIVISM OF THE MAITHILA KAULS 


The East Indian Saktism seen in the Devirahasya, mentioned above in connec- 
tion with Bhattarakasvamin’s commentary on the Spandakdarikd, is also found 
in ritual manuals written by the seventeenth-century Kashmirian scholar Sahib 
Kaul for the worship of Tripurasundari (Srividyanityapüjapaddhati), Bhuvanes- 
vari (Hrllekhapaddhati), and Daksinakali (Syamapaddhati). The Kauls, though 
subsequently integrated as a distinguished division of Kashmirian brahmin so- 
ciety, were Maithila Madhyandiniya Yajurvedins who had come to Kashmir 


°8° The term Paficánga denotes in this context a set of five texts: a verse Patala outlining the 
cult, a prose Paddhati that sets out the procedure and Mantras of worship in full, a verse Kavaca 
invoking the goddess’s protection, a verse hymn of a thousand names of the goddess (sabasraná- 
makam), and a poetic hymn (stotram, stavarajal) to the same. 

599 Vijnanakaumudi, p. 63, v. 3: vedasaptarsivedantyayugabdamadhupaksatau | vijhanakau- 
mudim etàm bhattanando vyakásayat. 

9 Viinanakaumudi, p. 63, |. 1: srividyanugrahavaptapreksalesas .... 

> Bhattarakasvamin, Spandapradipika, £.21116-18: tathà canyatha: ama kama carvangi 
tankadharini tara parvati yaksini śārikā ityadirupasya ca Saktivargasya bhogyatàm gatah san .... 
Bhattarakasvamin’s reason for mentioning these eight is evident from their names and Mantras: 
each name begins with a sound that is the first in one of the eight sound-classes (vargah) that 
make up that syllabary; and the Mantra of each Sakti contains the same sound in the form of 
a seed-syllable. 


410 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


from northern Bihar during the period of Muslim rule, probably after the in- 
corporation of Kashmir into the Mughal empire in 1586; and it is very likely 
that it was they that brought in and sustained this new constellation of Kaula 
observance.°”? Sahib Kaul, though faithful to his East Indian heritage in his 
Paddhatis, venerated the Kashmirian goddess Sarika as his lineage deity” 
and wrote a number of devotional works in which the Sakta Saiva tradition 
of his adopted homeland rooted in the non-dualistic doctrines of Utpaladeva 
and Abhinavagupta is fully integrated. We see this, for example, in his Sac- 
cidanandakandali, Sivasaktivilasa, Sahajarcanasastika, and Nijatmabodha. This 
tradition is also accommodated in his Devindmavilasa,”? a poetic work in full- 
blown Mahakavya style that is based on the non-Kashmirian Bhavanisahasra- 
nàma and interprets in Cantos 6 to 15 the meaning of each of the thousand 
names of the Goddess given in that text. ^6 

Other works in this tradition are the Gurubhaktistotra and Gurustuti of his 
pupil Cidrüpa Kaul, the Sadanandalasya of Sadananda Kaul, another of his 
pupils, the Bhairavisaktistotra (modelled on Abhinavaguptas Bhairavastotra), 
the Srinathastotra and Tripurasundaristotra of Ganesa Bhattaraka, the Guru- 
stotra of Jyotisprakasa Kaul, and, by Jyotisprakaga Kaul’s pupil Govinda Kaul 
of the Dar lineage (daravamsodbhavah), a commentary (-padapradipika) on 
that hymn, a Gurustutiratnamálà, and a hymn to Svacchandabhairava, the 
Svacchandamahesvarastaka, the last another indication of the Kauls’ assimila- 
tion of the local Saiva tradition. 


°°3On the Maithila origin of the Kauls of Kashmir and their religious tradition see SANDER- 
SON 2004, pp. 361—366. 

*°4See the 17th and final verse of his Sarikastava, f. 53v1—2: stotram mantroddhary adah 
sārikäyāh sábibkaulo vamsadevyas cakára ‘Sahib Kaul has composed this hymn to his lineage 
goddess Sarika from which [the letters that make up] her Mantra may be extracted’. 

595See, e.g., Devinamauilása 2.52—54, which allude to the Trika (paradidevisvarz) and men- 
tion Netranatha/Amrtesabhairava (zetreía). Canto 3 elaborates the Pratyabhijnahydaya of 
Ksemaraja; see, e.g., 3.2: mahddvaye darsanarajaraje prasiddhasiddhapratimaprabhavah | citib 
svatantrakhilasiddhisiddhih pürno pi sanyo jayasi svabhatah (echoing Pratyabhijnahrdaya 1.1: 
citih svatantra visvasiddhihetuh). 

596 Devinamavildsa 6.2: sambhus cakre yàni nāmāni devadevyah spastam pūrvam uddesa- 
pūrvam | sahibkaulas tani bhaktyekavasyo vrttair artham laksayadbhir babandha. 


Alexis Sanderson 411 


CHRONOLOGY 


To determine the chronology of the Kashmirian Saiva literature in its most 
creative phase we have only three precise dates, found in concluding verses at 
the end of three of Abhinavaguptas works. These report that his Kramastotra 
was completed in [40]66 (= A.D. 991), his Bhairavastotra in [40]68 (= A.D. 993), 
and his [‘varapratyabhijnavivrtivimarsini in [40]90 (= A.D. 1015).597 

These dates enable us determine approximately both the dates of his pre- 
decessors, where they are connected to him in a known preceptorial sequence, 
and those of his successors Ksemaraja and Yogaraja. If for want of any more pre- 
cise means of measurement we assume preceptorial generations of twenty-five 
years and active lives of fifty, and allow leeway on either side of the earliest and 
latest of the three dated works to approximate the active life of Abhinavagupta 
as c. 975-1025, then Somananda will have been active c. 900—950, Utpaladeva 
c. 925-975, Laksmanagupta and Rajanaka Rama c. 950-1000, Ksemaraja c. 
1000—1050, and Yogaraja c. 1025-1075. 

As for the Gurus of the Krama, Bhütiraja, as Abhinavagupta’s teacher, will 
have been active c. 950-1000. Jfananetra, then, will have been active c. 850— 
900, Keyüravati, Madanika, and Kalyanika c. 875—925, Erakanatha, Govin- 
daraja, Bhanuka, and Hrasvanatha c. 900—950, and Cakrabhanu (Bhitiraja’s 
Guru) c. 925-975, Cakrabhànus disciples Isani and Prabodhanatha c. 950— 
1000, Nandaka and Jaiyaka c. 975-1025, Sajjana and Pankaka, c. 1000—1025, 
Some$svara and Naga c. 1025-1075, and Arnasimha c. 1050—1100. This crude 
calculation receives independent support from Kalhanas report that Cakra- 


597 Kramastotra, v.30: satsastindmake varse navamyam asite hani | mayabhinavaguptena 
margasirse stutah sivah ‘I Abhinavagupta have composed this hymn to Siva on the 9th Tithi, 
a dark day, in Margasirsa, in year 66.’; Bhairavastotra, v.10: vasurasapause krsnadasamyám 
abhinavaguptah stavam imam akarot ‘Abhinavagupta has composed this hymn on the 19th 
of the dark fortnight of Pausa of [the year] Vasus(8)-flavours(6) [68]’); and /‘varapraty- 
abhijhavivrtivimarsini, concluding v.15: iti navatime smin vatsare ‘ntye yugdmse tithisasi- 
jaladhisthe margasirsavasine | jagati vihitabodham isvarapratyabhijnam vyavrnuta paripürnam 
preritah sambhupadaih “Thus, on the whole Isvarapratyabhijna that has enlightened mankind, 
[Abhinavagupta,] instigated by [his] venerable [teacher] Sambhu [nàtha], has completed [this] 
commentary, at the end of Margasirsa in this 90th year in the last of the [four] Yugas [Kali] 
in the [year] lunar days(15)-moon(1)-oceans (4) [= 4115].' When years are given in Kashmir 
with the century omitted, as here, they pertain to the Laukika era, also called Saptarsi, which is 
counted from 3076 B.c. We can deduce that the omitted century is the 40th (4066, 4068, and 
4090) because the last date is further specified as falling in year 4115 of the Kali era, which is 
counted from 3102 B.C. 


412 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


bhanu was punished while his Guru Hrasvanatha was the minister of war and 
peace under Yasaskara. It appears from that account that this event occurred at 
the very end of the king reign, which began in 939 and ended in 948. 

Other authors of the Krama can be less narrowly dated. The anonymous 
author of the Trivandrum Mahánayaprakása wrote after Abhinavagupta (fl. c. 
975-1025) and before Jayaratha in the thirteenth century.??? Srivatsa, author of 
the Cidgaganacandrika wrote after Arnasimha (ff. c. 1050—1100), since he draws 
on the latter's Mabanayaprakása,?? and very probably before c. 1300. This pos- 
terior limit is set by the probable date of the South Indian MaheSvarananda, 
since he cites the Cidgaganacandrika in his Maharthamanjariparimala. 

The certain limits of Mahesvarananda’s activity are widely separated. He 
was active after c. 1175, because Sivànanda, the Guru of his Guru! cites 
the Saiddhantika Paddhati of Somasambhu,9?? which was completed towards 
the end of the eleventh century, 6? and he cannot have been active later than 
about 1500, since Laksmidhara (1497—1539) quotes verses of the Kamakala- 
vilasa of Punyanandayogin, who was one preceptorial generation later than 
Maheésvarananda.9? But the range can be narrowed to the decades around 1300 
if the Sakta Saiva Amrtanandayogin who has given us three works on the wor- 
ship of Tripurasundari, the Yoginihrdayadipika, the Saubhagyasudhodaya, and 
the Cidvilasastava,®” and was a disciple of Punyananda®” and therefore two 


°?8For the succession down to Arnasimha see p. 294; for the date of Cakrabhanu’s punishment 
see p. 283; and for Jayaratha's knowledge of the Trivandrum Mahdnayaprakasa see pp. 310 and 
313. 

399See p. 299. 

6 Maharthamanjariparimala, pp. 27, 51, 68, 70, etc. 

6lSee, e.g., Maharthamanjariparimala, pp. 111-112. (yathoktam asmatparamagurubhih sri- 
kramavasanayam: ... [= Sivananda, Subhagodayavasand, v.21]); p. 127, ll. 11-14 (yathoktam 
asmatparamagurubhih srisubhagodaye: ... [= Sivananda, Subhagodaya, v. 69]). 

6°2He does so in his Nitydsodasikarnava-rjuvimarsini p.225, ll. 10-11. The passage cited 
= BRUNNER 1963-1998, pt. 2, p. 203, v. 5. 

63 See p. 422. 

604Vrajavallabha Dvrvepa, Nitydsodasikarnava, Skt. introd., p. xviii. 

605Mahesvarananda’s teachers teacher, Sivananda, was a pupil of Svatmananda 
(Nitydsodasikarnava-rjuvimarsini, p.2, ll.1-2); and between Svatmananda and Pu- 
nyànanda there were three preceptorial generations: Svatmananda—Trilocanesa—De- 
vesa— Kesavesa— Punyananda (Amrtanandayogin, Saubbagyasudhodaya 6.19d—21c). 

6°6The author calls himself Amrtanandayogin in his Saubhagyasudhodaya 6.21 and is named 
thus or as Amrtanandanathayogin in the colophons of that work and his Yoginibrdayadipika. 

607 Saubhagyasudhodaya 6.21cd, in the account of his spiritual lineage: tasmat punyanando 
mamamrtanandayogino nathah; Yoginibrdayadipika, p.19, 11.7—8: etat kàmakalavilàse py 


Alexis Sanderson 413 


generations later than MaheSvarananda, is identical with the Amrtanandayogin 
who wrote the Alamkdrasamgraha, a treatise on poetics. Nothing in the latter 
proves conclusively that this is so. But there is more than the mere agreement of 
names to judge by. For the Alamkarasamgraha shows that its author was indeed 
a Sakta Saiva devotee of Tripurasundari and expresses this in terms so similar to 
those found in the Tantric works of Amrtanandayogin and others in his region, 
time, and tradition, that this together with the identity of the names makes 
single authorship very probable. Thus in its first verse the Alamkarasamgraba 
venerates the primal couple (4dyam mithunam), describing them as immersed 
in the blissful relish of their union, a single deity whose two ‘feet’, symbolizing 
their dual power, are intent on the creation of the universe.?? Similarly, the 
Cidvildsastava venerates in its opening verse the blissful fusion (sémarasya-) of 
Siva and Sakti, embodying the self-manifest light of reality (prakasah) and its 
innate power of creative ideation (vimarsah) as the ‘supreme sandal’ (para pa- 
dukda) of the Guru Paramasiva (parasivatmano guroh), that is to say, in keeping 
with South Indian Sakta Saiva symbolism, as the hidden, unitary source of that 
dyad.” The equation of the object of veneration with the Guru, that is to say, 
with the deity as the source of the author’s Guru lineage, might be thought to 
be a striking point of difference between these two verses. But in fact the differ- 
ence is merely that the equation is explicit in the second and implicit in the first. 
For the ‘primal couple’ (zdyam mithunam) of the Alamkärasamgraha is a term 
of art in this South Indian Sakta Saiva literature for Paramaśiva and his Sakti 
in their role as the first teacher and his consort under the names Caryanatha 
and Tripurasundari or Kame$vari, worshipped at the centre of the central tri- 
angle of the Sricakra upon the central point that represents Paramasiva in his 
ultimate nature, the supreme bliss in which this polarity is fused in undifferen- 
tiated unity.°!° As for the Alamkarasamgraha's notion that the two feet of this 


asmadgurubhih prapancitam. 

6°8 Alamkarasamgraha 1.1—2: jagadvaicitryajananajagartikapadadvayam | aviyogarasabhijnam 
ddyam mithunam áfraye. 

6 Cidvilasastava 1: svaprakasasivamurtir ekika tadvimarsatanur ekika tayoh | sámarasyavapur 
isyate para paduka parasivatmano guroh. Cf. the hidden third and fourth feet of the Guru in 
Mahérthamanjariparimala, p. 4, ll. 16-22, and the equating of the ‘sandal’ (sripdduka) with the 
innermost state of consciousness as the highest object of reverence ibid., p. 96, ll. 12-22. 

610See Vidyanandanatha, Nitydsodasikarnava-artharatnavali, p. 3, Mangala verse 2: ddyam 
mithunam arabhya svagurvantam kramena tu | vande gurvaugham “I venerate in due order 
the Guru lineage that begins from the primal couple and ends with my own teacher’. For the 
identity of the this primal couple see ibid. p. 218, 1. 13-219, 1. 11: adau prakasavimarsasara- 


414 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


couple are the source of all creation, that too is derived from this same textual 
milieu. For in a discussion of the symbolism of the worship of the feet of the 
deity as the primal Guru MaheSvarananda quotes a verse without attribution 
which says that one foot is white and the other red, representing semen and 
menstrual blood, the two ingredients of conception in Indian theory, and that 
this whole universe is born from its two parents through these.!! Similarly, 
Sivànanda quotes a verse which venerates the footstool on which the [two] feet 
of Siva-and-Sakti rest, identifying it with consciousness itself and describing it 
as haloed by the radiance of the infinite worlds that it spontaneously creates.°! 

In its second introductory verse the Alamhkarasamgraha maintains this Sakta 
Saiva context by venerating the goddess Sarasvati (Sarada) as the presiding deity 
of [all] names and forms, that is to say, all words and the entities they denote 
(namaripadhidevatam), describing her as the blissful relish of all that emerges 
from that union (tadullasarasakaram) and as causing the unfolding of the lev- 
els of reality (tattva-), just as moonlight opens the petals of a night-blooming 
lotus.?? Similarly, in its opening verses the Saubhagyasudhodaya venerates the 
power in the form of creative verbalization or ideation (pardmarsaripini), abso- 
lute by virtue of its fusion with Siva (tadaikarasyat), describing it as that which 
though one assumes plurality and extension through the radiance (-wllasa-) of 
its autonomy.?!^ And in the opening verses of the Yoginihrdayadipika we find 
the creative ideation that is the supreme power of the Guru of the universe being 


nirvisesabindulaksanah paramaánandanubbava eva paramo guruh. sa punar nirvisesabindvatma 
svecchavasat prakasavimarsasaktisivatmandtmanam vibhajyodyanapithe krte yuge kamesvaraka- 
mesvarisamjnaya sthitas catyanatharipi ...paramasivah svabhedena sthitàyai svasaktyai kames- 
varyai prathamam upadidesa. The same information is conveyed in Sivananda, Nityasodasika- 
rnava-rjuvimarsini, pp. 218, 1. 9-219, 1.2; and Amrtanandayogin, Saubhagyasudhodaya 6.1— 
5. Three other such couples are worshipped in the three corners of the central triangle. The 
distinctive term mithunam for these couples is used by Amrtanandayogin himself in Saubha- 
gyasudhodaya 5.7b: tayor mithunam. As for Vidyanandanatha, he may have been a near con- 
temporary of Sivananda, since his account of his lineage ends with Vasudeva, disciple of Rat- 
nadeva (Nitydsodasikarnava-artharatnavali, p. 223, ll. 20-21) and Sivananda adds himself as 
Vasudeva's disciple (Nitydsodasikarnava-rjuvimarsini, p. 224, M. 1—3.). 
! Maharthamanjariparimala, p. 4, ll. 23—24: yad ahuh: “suklo "nghrib suklam avisto raktam 
rakto "ghrir asritah | pitror anghridvayenedam amuna jayate ‘khilam” iti. 
?Sivànanda, Nitydsodasikarnava-rjuvimarsini, pp. 10, 1. 5-11, 1. 2: abhiyuktovaco "pi: "svec- 
chávibhavitánantajagadrasmivitánavat | naumi samvinmahapitham Sivasaktipadasrayam’ iti. 

613 Alamkarasamgraha 1.2: *tadullasarasákaram (tadullasa em. Ed. : samullasa Cod.) tattvakai- 
ravakaumudim | namami saradim devim namaripadhidevatam. 
^ Saubhagyasudhodaya 1.4: seyam tadaikarasyat para paramaríarüpini saktih | svasvátantryol- 
lasaspandad ckapy anekadha vitata. 


nN 


nN 


[2j 


Alexis Sanderson 415 


venerated as that which though one shines forth in the form of the multiplicity 
of names and the named (nànanámártharüpini).9? The expresssion námartha- 
(‘names and the named’) in nánánámaártbarüpini is evidently synomous with 
the »àmarüpa (‘names and forms’) of the Alamkarasamgraha's formulation, as 
can be seen from the use of the expression nánánamarüpa- in a parallel context 
in the Yoginihrdayadipika.°'° What is more, when the Alamkdrasamgraha’s verse 
describes Sarasvati as tadullasarasakaram, literally ‘having the form of the bliss- 
ful relish of the radiance of that [union] it echoes the Saubhagyahrdayastotra 
of Sivananda, which describes ‘the transcendental speech-essence’ (para vik), 
Sarasvati under another name, as an embodiment of ultimate experience ‘hav- 
ing the form of the blissful relish of diversity’ as it descends through its lower 
levels to articulate utterance.9!7 

Now the Alamkarasamgraha can be dated with a high degree of prob- 
ability. For its author tells us that he wrote at the request of Manva/ 
Manma/Manna—all three forms are found in the manuscripts—, son of Bha- 
ktiraja, during the latter’s rule, and we know of only one Bhaktiraja, a king of 
the Ettuva branch of the Telugu Choda family from whom we have a copper- 
plate inscription dated in a.D. 1355/6. Another, issued by his son, Annadeva, 
is dated in A.D. 1388. The Alamkarasamgraha, therefore, will have been com- 
posed c. 1350.9? So if, as is probable, the same author was the Sākta disciple 
of Punyananda, Mahesvarananda will have been active around 1300. The same 


615 Amrtanandayogin, Yoginihrdayadipika, opening verse 3: vimarsarüpini saktir asya visvagu- 
roh para | parisphurati saikapi nananamartharupini. 

616 Yoginihrdayadipika, p.90, ll. 1-2: param tejah fivasaktisamarasyarüpaparámayam jyotir 
iccharüpam svecchágrbitanananamarüpaprapaficamayam “The radiance that embodies the high- 
est [power] that is the fusion of Siva and Sakti (param tejah), one with the multiplicity of 
the many names and forms that it has adopted by virtue of its autonomous will (icchari- 
pam) ...’; ibid., M. 6-7: svecchakalpitaninandmariipaprapancamayam sricakrariipena parinatam 
paramayam tejah “The radiance that is the highest [power], which is one with the multiplicity 
of the many names and forms that it has created by virtue of its autonomous will, [that it to 
say,] which has evolved into the form of the Sricakra ...". 

8 $ivànanda, Saubhagyahrdayastotra, v. 3: smaràmi tam param vàcam pasyantyádikramásra- 
yam | *nánavidbarasakaramabánubhavarüpinim (akara var. : äkārām Ed.). I have rejected the 
reading preferred by the editor for that which he reports from two manuscripts. The reading 
-rasākāra- is also seen in a Kashmirian manuscript of the hymn (Tripurasundaristotra), which 
has nanávidbarasakaraparánubhavarüpinim here. 

915For this epigraphical evidence see KrisHNAMACHARYA and Sarma 1949, pp. xl-xlii. They 
note the difficulty raised by the discrepancy between the names Manna/Manma/Manva (all 
these forms are found in the manuscripts) and Anna[deva], but accepting that they may refer 
to one and the same person. 


416 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


approximate date results if we apply the crude calculation of twenty-five years 
for a generation to Sivananda’s account of his preceptorial lineage and accept 
that the Bhojadeva whom he reports as a contemporary of his spiritual fore- 


619 was, as is very likely, the famous Bhojadeva of Dhara who 


bear Dipakacarya 
ruled c. 1018-1060. By this calculation Sivananda will have been active around 
1225-1275, and Mahesvarananda, as the pupil of Sivananda’s pupil Maha- 
prakaga, will have been active c. 1275—1325.9?! If so, the Cidgaganacandrika, 
since it draws on Arnasimhas Mabanayaprakasa and is quoted by Mahesvara- 
nanda, must have been composed between about 1100 and 1300. 

Sitikantha, the author of the Old Kashmiri Mahanayaprakdsa wrote after 


the disciples of Cakrabhanu, who was active c. 950—1000. How soon after this 


9? Nityasodasikarnava-rjuvimarsini, p. 223, 1.3: asmadgotramahattarah prasiddha *bahvapa- 
dàno (em. : bahvapádano Ed.) bhojadevadrstacamatkiro mahdadesikapravarah sriman dipakaca- 
ryo dandakakarta “The venerable Dipakacarya, author of the /Tripurasundari]dandaka[stotra], 
the foremost of my lineage, the best of great Gurus, whose many noble deeds are famous, 
whose miracles were witnessed by Bhojadeva'. The emendation is supported by Amrtananda- 
yogins Saubhagyasudhodaya, 6.16cd: nànapadanamahito dipakanáthab svasamtater dipab *Di- 
pakanatha, the lamp of his lineage, lauded for his many noble deeds’. 

6200The lineage, as given by Sivananda in Nitydsodasikarnava-rjuvimarsini (pp. 223-234), 
with approximate dates based on this synchronicity with Paramara Bhojadeva, is as follows: 
Dipakacarya (1025-1075), his son Jisnudeva (1050-1100), Matrgupta (1075-1125), Tejo- 
deva (1100-1150), Manojadeva (1125-1175), Kalyanadeva (1150-1200), Ratnadeva (1175— 
1225), Vasudevamahamuni (1200-1250), and Sivananda (1225-1275). The same lineage, up 
to Kalyanadeva, is given by Amrtanandayogin (Saubhagyasudhodaya 6.16c—22). Here it divides, 
Amrtanandayogin’s line reaching him not through Ratnadeva but through Paramananda, an- 
other of Kalyanadeva’s disciples. 

621 Madhusudan Kaur Suasrni claims in the introduction to his edition of the Vimakesvari- 
matavivarana that its author, Jayaratha, acknowledges Amrtanandayogin at its beginning. If 
that were true, the date of the latter would have to be taken further back. But it is not. Ja- 
yaratha, in that edition, acknowledging in the second of his opening verses the Acaryas of 
the past from whom he has learned (parve ...guravo mama), identifies them as Sridipikacarya- 
pramukhah, which Kaur has evidently understood to mean ‘those of whom the first is the 
Acarya of the Dipik@ and that Dipika as the Yoginihrdayadipika of Amrtanandayogin. But to 
refer to a Guru as the Acarya of a text is unparallelled to my knowledge. The published reading 
is clearly an error for dipakacaryapramukhah ‘those of whom the first was Dipakacarya’, as can 
be seen by comparing this with the verse quoted in p. 115, ll. 20-25, which speaks of number- 
less commentators on the Vamakesvarimata, beginning with Dipakanatha (4 fridipakanatbato 
hy aganitair adyapi vrttih krta). The first commentator is evidently the Dipakacarya, author 
of the Tripurasundaridandaka, mentioned in Sivananda’s commentary (-rjuvimarsini, p. 223), 
as the last of the line of Siddhas of this tradition, followed by Jisnudeva, the author of the 
Samketapaddhati and the first of its ‘lineage of men’. The source of the error is the Kashmirian 
pronunciation of Sanskrit, which tends to render a as é/i, as in &bemálkhimá for Skt. ksama. 


Alexis Sanderson 417 


date he wrote cannot be determined from the evidence presently available, but, 
as has been argued above, the archaic character of the Kashmiri of the text sug- 
gests a date well before the fourteenth century, since the Kashmiri of Lal Déd’s 
poems, composed in that period, shows a much later stage of the language, 
one barely distinguishable from the modern vernacular.” The same argument 
applies to the Old Kashmiri Chummis and Kathas. 

Concerning the date of the Chummásamketaprakáía of Niskriyanandanatha 
we can say at present only that it is earlier than its citation by Sivasvamin 
Upadhyaya I in the eighteenth century.9? Equally open are the dates of the 
Varilanathasttra and its commentator Anantasakti, the Sitikantha who com- 
piled the Kaulastitras and Kulasitras, and the author of the /nanakriyadvaya- 
sataka, probably Sillana. Concerning Ramyadeva we can say only that he was 
later than Ksemaraja (f. c. 1000—1050)9^^ and concerning Cakrapaninatha that 
he lived before him. As we have seen, the Srivatsa who wrote a commentary on 
the Bhuvanamálinikalpa of the Jayadrathayamala, cannot be earlier than Ut- 
paladeva (ff. c. 925—975) and is likely to have lived several generations later.9? 
Concerning Viśvāvarta, the author of the Tantrarajatantravatárastotra | can say 
only that he was active at some time after Kallata in the second half of the ninth 
century? and before A.D. 1583, the date of the earliest manuscript of his work 
known to me." 

Isvarasivacarya, Sankararasi, and Vigvavarta, who, according to Jayaratha, 
introduced the Sakta cult of Tripurasundari in Kashmir appear, as we have seen, 
to have been active at some time after c. 1050 and before c. 1125.°78 

The dated works of Abhinavagupta also enable us to settle the dates of the 
Kashmirian Saiddhantikas within relatively narrow limits. For in his Zantraloka 
(8.428—434b), composed at some time after the Kramastotra and before the 
[svarapratyabhijnavivrtivimarsini Abhinavagupta (ff. c. 975-1025) has quoted 
without attribution the summary-verses at the end of Bhatta Ramakantha II’s 
commentary on the 23rd chapter of the Vidyapada of the Matangaparamesvara, 
while the latter's father Bhatta Narayanakantha has quoted verse 55 of the 


622See pp. 304 to 307. 

623 See p. 352. 

624See p. 329. 

625 See footnote 74 on p. 257. 

626See pp. 260 and 420. 

827 ayadrathayámalaprastáramantrasamgraba B, f. 6Ár7: sam 704 märga sukla 6 ravau. 
628See p. 386. 


418 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


Isvarasiddhi of Utpaladeva (ff. c. 925—975), the teacher of Abhinavagupta's 
teacher Laksmanagupta, in his commentary on Mrgendra, Vidyapáda 1.11. 
Both father and son, then, will have been active during the second half of the 
tenth century. Bhatta Ramakantha IT's disciple Bhatta Vidyakantha II will have 
been approximately contemporary with Abhinavagupta. 

As for the date of Bhattasri Kallata, the author of the Spandakdrika and 
Spandavrtti, and hence that of the Sivasitra said to have been revealed to his 
Guru Vasugupta, the only hard evidence in the Kashmirian Saiva literature is 
that Utpaladeva cites Pradyumnabhatta, 9? whom Bhatta Bhaskara reports to 
have been the immediate successor of Kallata in the lineage that led to him- 
self. So there was at least one preceptorial generation between Utpaladeva 
(fl. c. 925—975) and Kallata, which places the latter's active life no later than c. 
875—925, or no later than c. 850—900 if Utpaladeva is correct in saying that 
Pradyumnabhatta was known to his teacher Somananda (c. 900—950).9?! That 
Kallata was not active earlier than the middle of the ninth century follows if 
we accept that this is the Bhattasri Kallata mentioned by Kalhana in the Raja- 
tarangini as one of a number of Siddhas who descended to earth for the benefit 
of mankind during the reign of Avantivarman (r. 855/6—883).9? He will, then, 
have been an approximate contemporary of Jñānanetranātha. 

Bhatta Bhaskara, the author of the Sivastitravartika, gives the follow- 
ing lineage of the transmission of the Sivasütra: Vasugupta — Kallata > 
Pradyumnabhatta — Prajfarjuna — Mahadevabhatta — Srikanthabhatta — 
himself. If we take Kallata's active life as c. 850—900 then by the same crude 
calculation Bhatta Bhaskara will have been a contemporary of Abhinavagupta, 
flourishing c. 975-1025. 

Evidence of the date of Rajanaka Jayaratha, the author of the commentaries 
on the Tantrāloka and Vamakesvarimata, is found in the autobiographical verses 
at the end of the former. There he tells us that his father $rügáraratha was made 


991n the Sivadrstivrtti, p. 94, ll. 5-7, Utpaladeva cites a verse from a hymn to the Goddess 
which Rajanaka Rama identifies (Spandavivrti, p. 129, |. 1-7) as from the Tattvagarbhastotra. 
Utpaladeva tells us in the same work, p. 16, ll. 10-11, that the Zattvagarbha is the work of 
Pradyumnabhatta. 

630 Sivastitravartika 1.4—9b. 

631 Sivadrstivrtti, p. 16, ll. 10-11, on 1.16ab (Eimeiducchünatà saiva mabadbhih kaiscid ucy- 
ate): saiva kimciducchünatà kathyate bhattapradyumnena tattvagarbhe. 

632 Rajatarangini 5.66: anugrahaya lokandm bhattasrikallatàdayab | avantivarmanah kale sid- 
dha bhuvam avátaran. 


Alexis Sanderson 419 


a minister by King Rajaraja.°? No Kashmirian king appears with precisely this 
name in the historical literature of Kashmir. But it is evident that Jayaratha 
means Rajadeva, who according to that literature ruled Kashmir for 23 years 
from [Laukika] 4289, that is to say, from A.D. 1213 to 1236,94 the name Rā- 
jaraja being readily understood as synonymous.9? 

The author of the work on the Krama lineages to which I have given the 
name *Kramavamsavali was a contemporary of Jayaratha, since the latter refers 


to him as such.996 


653 Tantralokaviveka, vol. 12, p. 432, concluding v. 28: raya sa srigararathabhidhano bilo vivr- 
ddhim gamito jananya | sattvakhyaya khyatagunah kramena srivajarajab sacivam vyadhad yam 
"This [son], Srigararatha by name, of famous virtue, whom Rajaraja in due course appointed 
as a minister, was brought up as a child by that mother Sattva’. At the end of his commen- 
tary (-vimarsini) on Ruyyaka's Alamkdrasarvasva (p. 753, ll. 10-15) he reports that his father 
Srigararatha was the principal minister (mantrindm agranih) of Rajaraja. 

34Jonaraja, Rajatarangini, vv. 75 and 87. 

635 However, according to Rastocr (1979: 210), following the suggestion of K. C. PANDEY 
(1963, p.262), this king is not Rajadeva but Jayasimha, who ruled Kashmir from 1128 to 
1155 (Kalhana, Rajatarangini 8.3404 and Jonaraja, Rajatarangini, v. 38). He rejects identifica- 
tion with Rajadeva with the argument (op. cit., p. 211, footnote 5) that it is difficult to believe 
that this king would have patronized Jayaratha since “on the testimony of Jonaraja (Raj. Verse 
74-87) he was just a usurper and had neither talents nor energy for asserting his authority". 
This argument would be without force even if it were the case that Jayaratha claimed Rajadeva’s 
patronage since there is no reason why a weak ruler should not have shown favour to the son of 
one of his ministers. But in fact there is no evidence of any such claim. For Rastoer’ assertion 
(ap. cit., p. 212) that Jayaratha reports in the Tantralokaviveka (vol. 12, p. 430, v. 30) that the 
king inspired him to write this commentary is false. The passage actually states that it was his 
father that inspired him. It is only of incidental interest, then, to observe that Rajadeva was not 
an usurper. In fact RAsrocrs characterization of Rajadeva is not Jonaraja’s but conflates into 
a single statement two passages in the English introduction of Srikanth Kaur to his excellent 
critical edition of that author's Rajatarangini (KAur 1967, p. 56). In the first, from which Ras- 
TOGI has derived the claim that Rajadeva was an usurper, the editor is in fact referring not to 
him but to the Damara Padma, the murderer of his father. The dating proposed by Rasrocr is 
unbelievable on other grounds. If RAsroGr were right, then Jayaratha’s father would have been 
serving as a minister not more than forty-nine years and perhaps as few as twenty-seven after 
a brother of his paternal great-grandfather had done the same. For Jayaratha tells us (Zantra- 
lokaviveka, vol. 12, p. 431, ll. 9-16) that Sivaratha, a brother of his great-great-grandfather, had 
served as a minister under King Uccala, who ruled Kashmir from a.D. 1101 to 1111. 

656 Tantralokaviveka, vol. 3, p. 193, 1. 8, introducing a citation from this work: atas cásya gu- 
rukramam ajānānair adyatanaib [citation] ityàdi yad uktam tat svotpreksitam evety upeksyam 
"And so what a contemporary has said without knowing Abhinavagupta's preceptorial lineage, 
namely “[citation]” should be rejected as his own imagining’. I have assumed that the various 
verses on the Krama’s lineages cited by Jayaratha in his commentary on Tantraloka 4.173ab 


420 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


Manodadattas Kaladiksapaddhati, his detailed guide to the conduct of Saiva 
637 But it 


is not clear how much of the text that has come down to us belongs to the 


initiation following the Svacchanda, was completed in A.D. 1335/6. 


original composition, since that text reports that it has been expanded by a 
certain Sivasvamin. Nor do we know how long after Manodadatta later he was 
active. His expanded text contains a hymn that was composed by Rajanaka 
Ratnakantha in the seventeenth century, but, as we have seen, the section in 
which that hymn is found may well be a later addition.?? There is nothing 
that enables us to identify him with one of the two or more Sivasvamins of the 
Upadhyaya lineage mentioned here. 

For Rajanaka Taksakavarta, the compiler of the digest /Vityadisamgrabapa- 
ddhati, we have a prior limit in the date of the latest of his dateable sources. This 
is the Saiddhantika Paddhati of Somasambhu, the Kriyakandakramávali.8? The 
date of the composition of that work appears in its final verses. Though the 
manuscripts diverge at this point, all readings known to me place it in the 
last quarter of the eleventh century.“ Since I have encountered no reference 


are all from a single work, since all are in the Arya metre and have been cited as evidence of 
the unreliability of their information. These verses have been cited in vol. 3, p. 193, Il. 13- 
16; p. 194, Il. 3—4; p. 195, 11. 5-8, ll. 12-15, and ll. 18-19; and p. 196, Il. 11-12. A verse on 
the scriptural affiliation of certain Krama lineages cited outside this context, in vol. 3, p. 191, 
ll. 3—4, is probably from the same. 

637 See footnote 514 on p. 389. 

638See p. 399. 

95? Nityadisamgrahapaddhati f. 283: nirmályalaksanam sodha proktam srisomasambhuna; see 
BRUNNER 1963-1998, pt. 2, p. 271, v. 61. 

640Tn the colophonic verses in the edition of the text published in the ksrs from Kashmirian 
manuscripts it is said to have been completed in year 1130 of the Vikrama era (vikramarkanrpa- 
kalasamudbhavesu sinyagnibhih samadhikesu ca tacchatesu | ekadasasv amalasastram idam 
samastam |v. 1813]), that is to say, in A.D. 1073/4, if we assume that the years are counted as 
expired rather than current, as is usual with dates given in this era. But in the Devakottai edition, 
prepared from Grantha manuscripts, and reproduced in the edition of Brunner (1963-1998, 
pt. 4, p. 419) the same verse gives the year as Vikrama 1153 (vikramarkanrpakalasamudbhavesu 
paficasata trisahitesu Saracchatesu | ebadasasv amalasastram idam samaptam), which is A.D. 
1096/7. An East Indian palm-leaf manuscript of the text prepared in the seventh year of the 
reign of the Pala king Madanapala [ms A, f. 120v2—4: *paramesvaraparama(em. : paresvarapara 
Cod.)bbattárakamahbárajadhivajafrimanmadanapáladevasya pravardbamáne vijayarajye saptame 
samvatsare [...] bhagavatpádapanditasaivacaryakumáraganena likhápito yam saivágamah soma- 
sambhukrtah), that is to say, in a.D. 1149 in the chronology of D.C. Sircar (1976), doubt- 
less conceals the same reading beneath its errors: vikramárkanrpakálasamudbbavesu panca- 
hata trisusatesu saracchategu | ekadasasca mama sastram idam samaptam (f. 12113). An early 


Alexis Sanderson 421 


to Taksakavarta in any other work, I can propose as his posterior limit only 
the year 1875—76, in which the undated manuscript of his digest was pur- 
chased by Georg BUHLER in Kashmir. However, the great abundance of the 
scriptural sources and Paddhatis on which Taksakavarta has drawn! suggests 
that he was active not far from the beginning of this period from the twelfth 
to nineteenth centuries. Concerning the authors of the lost Kashmirian Pad- 
dhatis that are known from citations, we can say of Visvavarta’s that it pre- 
dates Taksakavarta,?*? and of Dharmasiva’s and Isanasivacarya’s that they pre- 
date Abhinavagupta (fl. c. 975—1025).99 The dates of the Svacchanda-based 
Paddhatis cited in the Kaladiksapaddhati can be dated only within very wide 
limits. But, as we have seen, the Gurupustaka and Diksakalpalata are probably 
works of the fourteenth century. 9^ 

Among the later Kashmirian authors mentioned here Sahib Kaul was born 
in 162959 and completed his Devinamavilása in 1666.94* Bhattaraka Ananda, 
author of a commentary on the Vijanabbairava (Vijňänakaumudī) and, per- 


haps, on the Spandakarika (Spandapradipika), can be placed in the second half 


undated Nepalese palm-leaf manuscript of the text (ms B) lacks this verse, ending after the 
preceding verse with the prose srimatkarnaprakasavyavaharandya sasamasamvatsare kriyàkánda- 
kramávalipustakam panditacaryasrisomasivena vira(ci tam samaptam iti (f. 74r4—5). The reading 
sasama is meaningless. If this is an error for dasama, the meaning will be “Here ends the text of 
the Kriyakandakramávali composed by Somasiva for the use of the excellent Karnaprakaga in 
the tenth year’. The work was composed while Somasambhu was abbot of the Golakisthana in 
the domain of the Kalacuri kings of Tripuri in Central India, whom we know to have appointed 
Saiddhantikas of this richly endowed monastic institution as their Rajagurus. The year is surely 
regnal and I propose that the name Karnaprakaga is a periphrasis for Yasahkarna, the Kalacuri 
king who ruled from Tripuri from a.p. 1073 to 1123, radiance/whiteness (prakdsah) being the 
defining characteristic of fame/success (yasah) in Indian poetic convention (see, e.g. Haravijaya 
13.3: yasahprakdsam; 16.54: sasifubhrayasahprakasa-; Cambodian inscription K. 286, v. 16bc 
(Cas 1952, p. 90): ksitindrah jata jagattrayavikirnayasahprakasah). If this is correct we have 
a third date of composition, 1082. But dasama is not the only possibility. If sasama is a corrup- 
tion of prathama the year will be A.D. 1073 and so agree with the version of the Kashmirian 
manuscripts. The fact that two different dates are given in an otherwise identical verse indicates 
not corruption but conscious revision. Perhaps the text circulated in two editions, an earlier 
and a later. 

64l See footnote 517 on p. 389. 

62 See p. 389. 

643See pp. 392 and 393. 

64 See p. 398. 

645 Madhusudan Kaur' introduction to the xsrs edition of the Devinamavilasa, p. 2. 

646 Devinamavilasa, p. 320, v. 18. 


422 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


of the seventeenth century, since the former reports that it was completed in 
[Kali] 4774 (=a.p. 1672).5* 

Rajanaka Bhaskarakantha has been held to have been active during the 
eighteenth century. But the only evidence for this date is the reported claim 
of his descendants c. 1960 that he lived six generations before them.64 He 
himself tells us at the end of his Citténubodhasastra that he had been educated 
by Ratnakantha, evidently a member of the same patrilineage (the Rajanakas 
of the Kantha-Dhaumyayana Gotra) who had been a pupil of his grandfather 
Vaidiiryakantha. He gives no further information on this scholar, but it is 
not improbable that he is the author of that name and patrilineage®° who com- 
posed the Sambhukrpamanoharastava preserved in the Kaladiksapaddhati, the 
Ratnasataka (a hymn to Sürya), and commentaries on the Yudhisthiravijaya- 
mahakavya of Vasudeva, on the Stutikusumanjali of Jagaddhara, on the Hara- 
vijayamahakavya of Ratnakara, and, in the field of poetics, on the Kzvyaprakasa 
of Mammata and the Devistotra of Yasaskara, since Bhaskarakantha praises his 
teacher as “a master of all the branches of scholarship” (samastavidyanipunah) 
and the author of those works certainly merits that description. For in addition 
to these compositions we have a good number of manuscripts copied by him 
for his own use, often with his annotations, in the fields of poetics, lexicogra- 
phy, grammar, drama, Kavya, Vedanta, and Samkhya. If it was he that taught 
Bhaskarakantha, then the latter was active towards the end of the seventeenth 
century. For Ratnakantha’s works and manuscripts bear dates that extend from 
1648/9 to 1685/6." 

Sivasvàmin Upadhyaya I composed his Vijidnabhairavavivrti during the 


647 See p. 411. 

648Reported by K.C. Panpey (1963, pp. 264—265), who proposes the second half of the 
eighteenth century on its basis. See also HANNEDER and SLAJE 2002, pp. 18-19. 

64915.298: pitámabasya sacchisyat praptavidyat tathaiva ca | samastavidyanipunád ratnaka- 
nthad dayanidheh. 

Both were Rajanakas of the [Kantha-]Dhaumyáyana Gotra. Bhaskarakantha, Bhaskari, 
vol. 1, p. 2, opening verse 6: yah kanthadhaumyayanataprasiddhavisuddharajanakavamsajatah | 
sa bhiaskarakhyo dvija esa tikám karoti Sastre bhinavodite smin ‘[I], this brahmin Bhaskara, born 
in the pure Rajanaka lineage famed for its being of the Kantha-Dhaumyayana [Gotra]. Raja- 
naka Ratnakantha reports his Gotra as Dhaumyayana in the fourth opening verse of his Stuti- 
kusumanjalilaghupancika (dbaumyáyanakulodbhavap). 

61For a list of these compositions and manuscripts in his hand and their dates see STEIN 
1979, vol. 1, pp. 46-47. The Stein collection of manuscripts from Kashmir in the Bodleian 
library (Oxford) contains several of the latter not mentioned in that listing. 


Alexis Sanderson 423 


governorship of Sukhajivana (1753—62),9? and Siva[rama]svamin Upadhyaya 
II his Sivaratrirahasya during the reign of Ranjit Singh (1819—1839).9? This 
Sivasvamin also wrote the Yajnopavitasikhamalanirnaya,o™ and, though this 


93 Vijnanabhairavavivrti, p. 144, 1l. 1-12: sukhajivanabhidhane raksati kàémiramandalam 
nrpatau | agaman nibsesatvam vijndanoddyotasamgrahah sugamah ' [This] simple Vijndnoddyota- 
samgraha has been completed while King Sukhajivana is ruling the kingdom of Kashmir’. The 
term Upadhyaya here is not a mere description but denotes his membership of the Upadhyaya 
(Padey/Padi) kinship group (jatib, Kashmiri za£/). He tells us this and his Gotra in the preced- 
ing verse (p. 143, ll. 7-18): nàmná Siveti gunikausikagotrajatyopadhyayasabdayutayapy upalaksi- 
tena ‘with the name Siva, qualified by the jatih of the Gunikausika Gotra called Upadhyaya’ 
(pace Rastoat, who read this impossibly [1979, p. 226] as giving his name as Sivaguni and 
his Gotra as Kausika). The zh is indeed of the Gunikausika Gotra; see Kour 1924, p. 106, 
listing it as Padi of the ‘Svamina Gan Kaushika’ Gotra and the Census of 1891 (BHac Ram 
1893, p. 137), less accurately, as Padey of the 'Sáman Gan Bhüshak' Gotra. 

$53See the final colophon of the Jammu manuscript of this text (STEIN 1894, No. 2668 
ka): krtir iyam panditasivaramasya kàfmirikopadhyayavamíaprasutasya yah srimabarajaranajit- 
simhasya kasmirarajyarambhe jivitavan "This is the work of Pandita Sivarama, born in the Kash- 
mirian Upadhyaya lineage, who was alive at the beginning of the reign of Maharaja Ranjit 
Singh’, It is likely that he is the Sivasvàmin Upadhyaya/Sivarama/Sivopadhyaya, grandfather 
of the KeSavarama Upadhyaya in whose possession BUHLER found the codex archetypus of the 
Rajatarangini (STEIN, Rajatarangini ed., p. xiii). According to the versified colophon at the end 
of the Calcutta edition of the Rajataranginisamgraha Moorcroft, who arrived in Kashmir in 
1822 and remained until May 1823, during the reign of Ranjit Singh, obtained the manuscript 
on loan from the house of this scholar as a result of the intercession of the Trikesvara, the pa- 
triarch of the trikajatiyah, the members of the Trika lineage (the Tikoo za£/; see GRIERSON 
1932, s.v. tyuk”): srimurkaráphako mantri praptakasmira*mandalo (corr. : mandale Ed.) rajye 
Sriranajitsimhabhipateh priyadarsanah | *Srimattrikesvarapremnd (Srimattrikesvara corr. STEIN : 
Srimantrikesvara Ed.) prapta rajatarangini | murkaraphakadhirena grhác chrisivasvaminab | 
srimacchrifivaramasya grhe rajavali subha | kasmiramandale nityam vartate nányasadmani | 
srimadvibudhendra*sivopadhyayaya (corr. : sivopadhydya Ed.) namo namah | tenopadbyayena 
paficasabasravarsánàm mahaprabhavasahita rajavali svagrhe pálità prayatnena Ssrivibhor dayaya 
bhadram | vartate ca grhe yasya subha rajatarangini | sa jivanmukta eva *syad (corr. : syán Ed.) 
amrtah svargam apnuyat. samvat 1880. 1880, the date of composition given in this colophon, 
equals A.D. 1822/3. STEIN notes (ibid.) that Sivarama and his descendants to the present day 
have been attached as hereditary gurus to the Trika family, which he describes as having held for 
several generations past an influential position in Kashmir. He also notes that Pandit Sivarama 
was commonly called Sivopadhyaya. 

$5 "This follows from the fact that in both works the author uses the pen-name Nityasvatantra; 
see Sivaratrirahasya, f.Ár, colophon: krtir nityasvatantretyaparanamnah sivasyeti sivam; and 
Yajfopavitasikbamalanirnaya, fF. Yv—2r (v. 2): cin nitya yadi sarvakalavisaya kütastharüpá tada | 
yathatathyataya sthitapi yadi sa svanandasardra param | svasvatantryavasac cito vivaranam ya- 
tapi kutrapi cet | sarvavydpitayastu niscitam idam nityasvatantrena tat. In f. 2v5—6 of the latter 
he calls himself Sivopadhyaya: yajrasutrasibbamalanirnayadvárato ‘py aham | cito vimaríanam 


424 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


is only probable, the Satcakranirnaya, a work on meditation on the energy- 


655 not to be confused with the work of that name men- 


centres in the body, 
tioned above as including and explaining some verses on this subject from 
the Jayadrathayamala.°® He may also be the Sivasvamin Upadhyaya who 
wrote the Gayatrimantravivarana and Srividyamantravivarana alias Anubhava- 
bodhavidyá.9?" Those works show their author to have been a worshipper of 
Tripurasundari (srividyopdsakah) who, while following the Trika-based Sivad- 
vaita, sought to reconcile the Sakta Saiva and Vaidika elements of his com- 
munity’s religious practice by showing that the Sivadvaita is supported by the 
Upanisads and that both the Sakta Saubhagyavidya and the Vedic Gayatri share 
the same Saiva meaning and reality.9? This reconciliation of the Vaidika and 
Saiva is also the purpose of the Yajnopavitasikhamalanirnayah, which heightens 
the probability that one author wrote all four works, since we know that the 


kurve Sivopadhyayasamjnitah. The same name is given in the final colophon (f. 19r1—2: iti sri- 
macchivopadhyayaviracito yajhopavitasikhamalanirnayah). 

955In the colophon of his Satcakranirnaya the author says that he wrote at the instigation 
of the son of Purusottama Osu (f. 386): ity osupurusottamaputrasya nodanad akaro(d) dvijah 
upadhyayasivasvami subham satcakranirnayam; and in the last verse of the Sivaratrirahasya the 
author records that he wrote for the pleasure of Purusottama: nityasvatantrakavind nirnita £i- 
vayamini | dlodya sarvatantráni purusottamatustaye. Since the author is a Saiva it is unlikely that 
he would have chosen this usually Vaisnava name for the Deity unless it enabled him to convey 
an additional meaning obliquely: (for the pleasure of the Supreme Soul)/(for the pleasure of 
Purusottama). 

656See p. 260. 

657 Gayatrimantravivarana, colophon: paratattvaptyai racità gayatrimantra uttame vyakhya 
vidusà sivena ramyà samkaracodanavasikrteneyam. samápteyam gayatrimantravivrtih. krtih fri- 
Sivasvaminah. upadhyayakulotpannasivaramaprakasita | srividyatustaye bhiyad gayatrivivrtih 
para | yady apiyam maya drbdha svatmanandavivrddhaye | anyo ‘pi kascit tad api krtakrtyo ‘naya 
bhavet | sastrantaraikarasikaih ksantavyam vibudhaih paraib | svavinodam viracayann anindyo 
yaj jano bhuvi; Srividyamantravivarana, f. 46v11—15: tasmadres carudira tdrivipinamilitasve- 
tagangavagahat pitasvantena kasmirikavibudhasivasvamyupadhyayanimna | vyakhyáto mantra- 
rajah prakatavimalasatsampradayah parayah sri|vidyaya gabhiro hariharadivase sisyabodhartham 
esah]. The manuscript breaks off after fr in the last sentence. The rest of the last Pada has been 
supplied from the transcript of these verses made by RAsroar (1979, p. 227, footnote 1) from 
a manuscript belonging to Pandit Dinanath Yach. That manuscripts colophon adds that the 
author was the son of one Prakasopadhyaya (ibid. , footnote 2): iti frividyavivaranam anubhava- 
bodhakhyam krtih prakasopadhyayasvamiputrasivopadhyayasvaminah. That both works are by the 
same author is certain. For in the Srividyamantravivarana its author refers to the Gayatrima- 
ntravivarana as his own (f. 11v7—9): etac ca yathà tathà matkrte gayatrimantravivarane drstir 
vidheyety alam aprakrtena. 

658 Syividyamantravivarana, f. 26v9—10: iti srividyagayatryor abhedarthah. 


Alexis Sanderson 425 


author of the Satcakranirnaya wrote the last. 

The commentary of Rajanaka Laksmirama (Lasa Kak Razdan) on the 
Parátrifikà does not give the date of its composition, but his commentary on 
the Gitd tells us that it was completed in 1811.95? 


A Brier History 


I conclude by presenting an outline of my view of the historical trajectory of 
the various religious traditions covered in this study, their interaction, and their 
relative strength. 

The earliest dateable evidence of Mantramárgic Saivism in Kashmir is found 
in two hymns in high poetic style, one to Siva and the other to the god- 
dess Candi, that form two chapters of the Mahakavya Haravijaya of Rajanaka 
Ratnakara. Ratnakara was a courtier of Cippata-Jayapida, who ruled Kashmir 
from c. 826—838, and his work was written c. 830. The first hymn, the Siva- 
stotra, Shows knowledge of the literature of the Siddhànta and though it does 
not name its sources it is possible to recognize within its high-flown poetic 
periphrases the wording of the Matanga, the Rauravasutrasamgraba, the Sva- 
yambhuvastitrasamgraha, and the early Saiddhantika exegetes Sadyojyotis and 
Brhaspati.°©° The second hymn reveals knowledge of the technicalities of the 
Trika and, perhaps, of the Trika’s scripture Trisirobhairava.©' We may fairly 
conclude that the presence of these materials in a work of Kashmirian literary 
art indicates that these two traditions were well known by this time in the re- 
fined circle of the court, or at least that they were well enough established to be 
considered worthy of mention. 

There is nothing in these hymns that reveals awareness of the cults of 
Svacchandabhairava, Amrtesvarabhairava, or the Kalikula.® In the case of the 


65° The closing verse: laksmirama iti dvijo ‘tra nivasan kasmirabhiimandale meror mátur upatta- 
dehajanano rajanagopalakat | frisake dvigunadriparimite mase tathaivasvine suklayam pratipady 
ajanghrinirato gitasu tikim vyadhat. 

On the dates of Cippata-Jayapida’s reign, Ratnakara’s relations with him, and his Sai- 
ddhantika scriptural sources see SANDERSON 2001, pp. 5—6, footnote 3. I have not yet published 
my evidence of his knowledge of Sadyojyotis and Brhaspati (for which see SANDERSON forth- 
coming 6); but that concerning the former may be found in outline, with due acknowledge- 
ment, in Watson 2006, pp. 111-14. There is no compelling reason to think that Sadyojyotis 
and Brhaspati were Kashmirians. 

661See SANDERSON 1986, p. 169, footnote 1, and 2001, pp. 18-19, footnote 21. 

662 My view that there is no reference to the Kalikula is contradicted by RAsrocr (1979, p. 93), 


426 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


two Bhairavas, this absence has no weight as evidence, since they may have been 
passed over in silence simply because they could not be accommodated com- 
fortably in either hymn, falling as they do within a domain that lies between the 
Saiva and the Sakta. But this will not explain the absence of the goddess of the 
Kalikula from the hymn to Candi. We may surmise, therefore, especially when 
we consider the comprehensive knowledge of the varieties of contemporary re- 
ligion exhibited in these hymns, that the Kalikula and its Krama refinement 
had not yet come to the fore of the Kashmirian Sakta domain in the knowl- 
edge of the court, whereas the Trika was already well established there. And 
this hypothesis receives support from what we have been able to deduce of the 
chronology of the Krama, namely that Jfananetra, whom the Kashmirian lin- 
eage of that system claims as its source, flourished somewhat later, from around 
the middle of the ninth century. 

The second half of that century saw the composition of the Sivasütra and 
Spandakarika and, especially in the latter, the first attempt from the Sakta Saiva 
domain to present a non-dualistic metaphysics and gnostic soteriology in op- 
position to the dualistic and ritualistic exegesis of the Saiddhantika Saiva scrip- 
tures. This movement was presented in its early phase as coming not from Siva 
as the teaching of certain scriptures but rather as the contemporary irruption 
into the world of the gnosis of enlightened Siddhas and Yoginis; and we have 
seen the same perspective in the propagation of the Krama, which unlike the 


who claims that Kalasamkarsani, the goddess of the Kalikula and Krama, appears in the hymn 
to Candi, in 47.55, in the abbreviated form Samkarsani: praptabhisamdhiparatim anuvrtti- 
lagnagaunasthitih sthitasitatisayad abbiksnam | vidyeti sarvabahulakhiladrstisamjna samkarsani 
nigadità kila íasane tvam. The abbreviation is not uncommon. However, the reading samkarsani 
of the edition (wrongly reported by RAsroar as samkarsini) is a corruption. The editor records 
the variant sdémkarsani and the Bodleian library’s manuscript of the text reads sdmkarsane 
(f. 145r24). The last is evidently to be preferred because it provides the adjective needed by 
the context to qualify the noun sasane ‘in the doctrine’, which would otherwise remain un- 
specified. Moreover, the adjective is entirely appropriate. The preceding seven verses (47.48— 
54) have praised the Goddess manifest as various Mahayana-Buddhist principles, and the verse 
that follows (47.56) praises her as the principle that for the Ekayana Vaisnavas [of the Pañ- 
caratra] is the sole cause of their liberation. Now Bhatta Ramakantha tells us that there were 
two kinds of followers of the Paficaratra: the Samkarsanapafcaratras (Naresvarapariksaprakdsa, 
pp. 87-88) and the Samhitapaficaratras (ibid., p. 91). The sámkarsanam sasanam of 47.55 is 
evidently the doctrine of the former and the Ekayanas of 47.56 those who follow the latter 
(= *Ekayanasamhitapafcaratras). The reading sémkarsani is derived from sdmkarsane as a result 
of the common confusion by Kashmirian copyists of e and 7, which are virtually indistinguish- 
able in Kashmiri pronunciation. 


Alexis Sanderson 427 


Trika maintained this perspective after the initial revelation, as can be seen from 
the tradition concerning the Kramastotra of Eraka, the surviving works of Hras- 
vanatha, and the tradition of the revelation of the Chummas, the Old Kashmiri 
Kathas, and the Varalanathasütra. It is not without good reason, then, that the 
historian Kalhana speaks of the reign of Avantivarman (c. 855/6—883) as one 
that was marked by the descent of Siddhas among men for the benefit of the 
world.565 That this development had a major impact on Kashmirian society is 
evident in the fact that Kalhana records it. For he is generally silent about the 
recent history of religion in the valley beyond noting the religious affiliations 
of certain kings and the temples and other religious foundations that they es- 
tablished. Such figures as Bhatta Ramakantha, Abhinavagupta, and Ksemaraja, 
who loom so large in the learned literature of the Saivas of Kashmir and beyond, 
receive not even a passing mention. 

This pivotal period was followed in the tenth century by a remarkable ef- 
florescence of learned exegesis and philosophical argument in all areas of the 
religion. On the Sakta Saiva side we have the development within the Trika 
of the philosophical tradition of the Pratyabhijfia; and the last quarter of the 
century and the first of the eleventh saw with Abhinavagupta the production 
of Krama-influenced, Pratyabhijfa-based exegesis of scripture in the Trika itself 
and with his successor Ksemaraja the extension of this exegesis to the Tantras 
of the cults of the two Bhairavas and beyond that domain to the interpretation 
of texts both esoteric and devotional that unlike those Tantras were open to a 
much wider audience than that of initiated specialists. The inclusivist aspira- 
tions of this tradition are also expressed in the formulation of the view that the 
Vidyapitha-based system of the Trika does not merely transcend the Siddhanta 
and the Bhairava systems but also includes them within a higher synthesis that 
validates practice on all these levels. 

This was also the golden age of Kashmirian Saiddhantika exegesis, which 
now developed a rigorously dualistic and ritualistic interpretation of the Sid- 
dhanta’s scriptures, with an exclusivist perspective that seems designed to bar 
the gates, as it were, against the intuitionist and charismatic influences that had 
come to the fore since the middle of the ninth century. Bhatta Ramakantha 
presents his exegesis in a fundamentalist spirit as a return to the original posi- 
tion set out in an earlier time by the founding fathers of his tradition with the 
purpose of rescuing it from the contamination it had suffered from attempts to 


663 See footnote 632 on p. 420. 


428 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


assimilate its scriptures to alien perspectives, at one extreme to that of orthodox 
Brahmanism and at the other to that of the Sakta Saivas. 

Concern to counter contamination is also seen in the Sakta Saiva camp 
at this time. For Ksemaraja makes it clear that the principal purpose of his 
commentaries on the Svacchanda and Netra was to reverse inroads from the 
Saiddhantika perspective into the interpretation of these Tantras and the en- 
actment of their prescriptions. Nor does it seem that his concern was primarily 
with theological theory. He consistently imposed the non-dualistic ontology 
of the Pratyabhijfa on these texts, as Abhinavagupta had done on the Trika’s 
Malinivijayottara, but we sense greater urgency when he addresses what he saw 
as unwarranted diluting of the non-dualistic practice (advaitacarah) of the Svac- 
chanda, practice, that is, which transcends brahmanical values of purity, pre- 
senting these departures from prescribed observance as the baleful effect of the 
dominance of the Siddhanta in the Saivism of his community. Indeed he sees 
the rise of non-dualism in Kashmir from its beginnings in the ninth century 
as a mission directed against this dominance, saying in the introduction to his 
commentary on the Sivasutra that Siva appeared to Vasugupta in a dream to 
direct him to the discovery of this text out of his concern that the esoteric tra- 
dition, evidently that of the Sakta Saivas, was on the verge of extinction in a 
society that was then almost completely under the sway of dualism.°* He does 
not state explicitly that the dualism to which he refers is that of the Siddhanta, 
but that it was is the most natural interpretation of his words, especially in the 
light of the fact that he interprets the first Sütra as a refutation of the Saiddhan- 
tika doctrine that God, other souls, and the material universe are irreducibly 
distinct. 

From Ksemaraja’s statement of his purpose in writing his commentaries on 
the Tantras of the two Bhairavas we can infer that the forms of Saivism that 
they authorize had been established in the valley for a considerable period of 
time, though how long they had been present and whether or not they predate 
the advent of the Siddhanta itself in the region cannot be determined from the 
available evidence. We can at least say that the Netra was composed in Kashmir 
at some time between about 700 and 850, probably towards the end of this 
period, that the Svacchanda was used by the redactor of that text, and that its 


practice, therefore, was probably already current in Kashmir at that time.°® 


664 Sivasiitravimarsini, p. 2, ll. 7-12. For this passage and my translation see footnote 574 on 
p. 406. 
665For the date and provenance of the Netra see SANDERSON 2005b, pp. 273—294. I see no 


Alexis Sanderson 429 


The two facts that Ksemaraja extended Sakta Saiva exegesis into this do- 
main and that when he did so it had long been under the influence of the more 
conventional, Veda-congruent Siddhanta suggest that the cults of Svacchand- 
abhairava and Amrtesvarabhairava were far from being fringe phenomena in 
the Kashmir of his time. Moreover, the detailed ritual manuals that have come 
down to us in Kashmir for the ceremonies of Saiva initiation, the fire-sacrifice, 
and the various post-mortuary rituals are all centred on these two deities. It is 
tempting to conclude, therefore, that it was this form of Saivism, that of the 
middle ground between the Siddhànta and the Sakta Saiva systems, that was the 
mainstream tradition in Kashmir throughout the period accessible to us, and 
that the Siddhànta, like the Sakta Saivism of the Trika and Krama, had little im- 
pact on the core practice of the majority but merely influenced it for some time 
on a theoretical level and provided a view of the proper relationship between 
Saiva practice and brahmanical norms that encouraged or justified a drift away 
from the more challenging aspects of non-Saiddhantika observance that would 
probably have occurred even without its influence, simply as the consequence 
of the routinization that we would expect in any tradition that achieved wide- 
spread acceptance within brahmanical society. It is possible, then, that when 
Ksemarája tells us that the Siddhanta was dominant in the Saiva community of 
his time he is referring to its influence rather than reporting that those following 
the Saiddhantika system of worship were in the majority. 

However, the very manuals whose existence shows the dominance of the 
worship of the two Bhairavas in Kashmir in later times also contain evidence 
that must make us hesitate to conclude that this state of affairs goes back all 
the way to the golden age of Saiva exegesis. For while the Tantras and their 
learned commentators present the varieties of Saiva practice entirely within the 
boundaries of this or that system these manuals exhibit eclecticism within their 
Svacchanda- and Netra-based matrix, and since they record the actual practice 
of the local Saiva officiants we may read this incorporation of elements from 
other ritual systems as evidence that these were influential in the valley. Now, 
the Siddhànta figures very strongly in this respect. Thus, for example, in the 
Siva-vase (sivakalasah) set up and worshipped in the preliminaries of Saiva cre- 
mation according to the Sivanirvanapaddhati the officiant worships (1) as the 
principal deities Bahurüpabhairava and his consort Mayadevi—the former, in 
spite of the non-Saiddhantika ring of his name, is an iconographic variant of 


reason to think that the Svacchanda too was Kashmirian. 


430 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


the Kashmirian version of the Siddhànta's distinctive Siva-form, the ten-armed, 
five-faced Sadasiva—,° (2) the ancillary door-deities, (3) Amrtesabhairava and 
Amrtalaksmi, (4) the eight Bhairavas that are the first outer circuit of the ret- 
inue of Svacchandabhairava, (5) the seven deity-circuits, to which I shall re- 
turn, (6) another Mantra-form of Amrtesabhairava (Mrtyufjaya), (7) the six- 
syllable Siva-Mantra (OM NAMAH ŚIVĀYA) of lay Saiva worship, (8) the Mantras 
of Siva's eight Mürtis, (9) Durga and the Dinmátrs, (10) the five Causes from 
Brahma to Sadasiva as the Lords of the five Segments (kaladhipatayah), (11) 
the six cosmic hierarchies (sad adbvanab), (12) the Vyomavyapimantra, said 
here to have the effect of eliminating all sins, and (13) the five Brahmamantras, 
followed by the Paficaratra’s Laksmivasudeva and a series of local goddesses 
(Sarika, Sarada, Raji, Vitastà, Ganga, Jvalamukhi, and Bhuvanesvari).°” Of 
these the Vyomavyapimantra and the five Brahmamantras are Saiddhantika. 
As for the seven deity-circuits, a standard feature in all the Kashmirian Pad- 
dhatis, these are (1) the eight Vidyesvaras (Ananta to Sikhandin), (2) the eight 
Gane$varas (from Nandin to Candeévara), (3) the eight (or ten) Lokapalas, the 
eight Mothers (Jaya, Subhaga, Vijaya, Durbhaga, Jayanti, Uhini, Aparajita, and 
Karali), the eight celestial Grahas (from Surya to Ketu), the eight Nagas (from 
Ananta to Kulika), and the eight (or ten) weapons of the Lokapalas. ‘This is 
a standard Saiddhantika arrangement expanded by the addition of the Moth- 
ers of the Vamatantras, the Grahas, and the Nàgas. 669 Indeed, according to 
Rajanaka Taksakavarta the scriptural authority for this arrangement is an oth- 
erwise unknown 9000-verse redaction of the Saiddhantika Nihsvdsa known as 
the Nandisvaravatára. 69? 

In later times the Siddhànta died out in Kashmir as an independent tra- 
dition. Some works of Saiddhàntika learning continued to be copied down to 
recent times but I have encountered no manuscript of any Kashmirian Paddhati 
that sets out the procedure and Mantras of Saiva ritual on Saiddhantika lines 
for practical use, nor do we see any trace of Saiddhantika literary activity in the 


666 See SANDERSON 2005b, pp. 273-276. 

667 Sivanirvanapaddhati, pp. 218 [188c], l. 13-226 [190b], 1. 3. 

$68'Thus in Saiddhantika scriptural sources we see, for example, the Vidyesvaras, Ganeévaras, 
Lokapalas, and their Weapons prescribed for worship as the outer deity-circuits in the Kirana 
(20.7-12b) ), and the Vidyeévaras, Ganesvaras, and Lokapalas in the Mrgendra (Kriyapáda 
3.20—26b). 

969 Nityadisamgrahapaddhati, f.3513—4: nandisvaravatare nihsvase navasahasrasamkhyake 
saptavarandrca(yd) yah kramo .... These deities form the outer retinue (babiravaranam) out- 
side the inner retinue (garbhavaranam) consisting of the principal Mantra’s auxiliaries. 


Alexis Sanderson 431 


valley after Bhatta Vidyakantha (f. c. 975-1025). This has further encouraged 
the tendency to minimalize the importance of the Siddhànta in the overall pic- 
ture of the Saivism of the valley, even to negate it altogether as in the widespread 
use of the term Kashmir Saivism in modern scholarship to refer to the Sakta 
Saiva elements of Kashmirian Saivism that had the good fortune to survive in 
some form down to Kashmir' encounter with the modern world. However, the 
demise of the Kashmirian Siddhanta cannot be explained simply by appealing 
to the picture of a Saivism dominated by the cults of the Bhairavas, the Trika, 
and the Krama, since that dominance may be more an effect of the Siddhanta’s 
demise than its cause; and the weight of the Saiddhantika elements within the 
Paddhatis that outlived the Siddhànta should be sufficient to inhibit the facile 
conclusion that it had always been a marginal phenomenon in Kashmir. I con- 
sider it more probable that the primary cause of its disappearance here was 
the advent of Muslim rule in the fourteenth century and the consequent with- 
drawal of royal patronage from the public sphere that was the Saiddhantikas’ 
special territory, together with the widespread destruction of Saiva temples and 
Mathas that occurred during the darker periods of Islamic rule. How quickly 
the tradition declined and disappeared is not clear, since we have so little evi- 
dence of the state of religion in the valley between the fourteenth century and 
the incorporation of Kashmir into the Mughal empire. But in the seventeenth 
century Rajanaka Ratnakantha commenting on a reference to meditation on 
Siva, to his Mandala, and to initiation by the fourteenth-century Kashmirian 
poet Jagaddhara in a hymn to Siva takes these without hesitation to be the 
visualization of Svacchandabhairava, the Mandala of the same, and the initia- 
tion taught in the Svacchanda, even though nothing in the hymn indicates this 
specific tradition. 

As for the Sakta Saiva systems, the Trika gives the impression of having 
been less deeply established in Kashmir than the Kalikula. Abhinavagupta tells 
us that his was the first attempt to write a Paddhati on this system. There are no 
works of substance on the Trika by any other author and no later manuals for 
practical use in ritual survive to show that it had succeeded in integrating itself 
into the ordinary religious life of the community. We might cite the existence 
of Jayaratha’s thirteenth-century commentary on the Tantraloka as evidence 
that the tradition did flourish long after Abhinavagupta’s passing; but the in- 
ference would be inconclusive. The intellectual brilliance of the Zantriloka, its 


670Ratnakantha on Jagaddhara, Stutikusumanjali 37.11. 


432 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


relevance as a key to the Saiva religion as a whole, and its undeniable influence 
on the thinking of the Kashmirian Saivas concerning broader soteriological and 
philosophical fundamentals might well have been sufficient reasons to attract 
this secondary exegesis even if the Trika in the narrow sense of a system of ritu- 
als had few followers in Jayaratha's day. Even Jayaratha, I have suggested, may 
not have been among them. That it had some followers, albeit of a form of 
the Trika assimilated to the Kalikula, we know from the testimony of Jayaratha 
himself. For he reports that there were Gurus in Kashmir who followed a sys- 
tem of worship that combined the Trika of the Devyayamala with the Kalikula 
of the Madbavakula.9"' So here we have evidence that the Trika had survived 
in Kashmir in some form down to the thirteenth century, five centuries after 
our first evidence of it in the Haravijaya of Ratnakara. 

In comparison with the Trika the Krama appears to have been much more 
widely developed in Kashmir. While we have only the works of a single if fa- 
mous author for the Trika, here we have a plethora of writers from the mid- 
dle of the ninth century onwards, producing works in both Sanskrit and Old 
Kashmiri, and exercising throughout the most creative period of Kashmirian 
Saivism a profound influence not only on the Trika but also, through the works 
of Ksemaraja, on the understanding of the Svacchanda, the Netra, and a broad 
range of Saiva texts aimed at a wider audience. Influence in the reverse direc- 
tion from the Trika to the Krama is far less evident. Indeed of all the major 
works of the Krama discussed here only the anonymous Mahdanayaprakdsa has 
absorbed the doctrines of Utpaladeva and Abhinavagupta to an appreciable ex- 
tent. Other works, such as the Mabanayaprakasa of Arnasimha, the Old Kash- 
miri Mahanayaprakasa of Sitikantha, its commentary, and the literature on the 
higher Krama of the oral instructions, to which I have drawn attention in this 
study, show an autonomous tradition largely untouched by the thought and 
distinctive terminology of those better known authors.?? 

The distinctness of the Krama is evident not only in the independence of its 
discourse but also in the character of its position in relation to the ‘lower’ Saiva 
traditions. For there is nothing here of the ambition that drives the works of 
Abhinavagupta and Ksemaraja to embrace and subordinate the many-layered 
diversity of the systems of the Saiva Mantramarga within a higher unity. The 


971See above, footnote 81 on p. 260. 

S7" The persistent term ‘Kashmir Saivism’ or ‘Kashmiri Saivism’ is therefore doubly mislead- 
ing. Its current use is mistaken because it excludes the Siddhànta, but it also confuses by fos- 
tering the illusion that non-Saiddhantika Saivism was a single doctrinally unified whole. 


Alexis Sanderson 433 


Krama tradition remained aloof from this inclusivist tendency, and this inde- 
pendent stance is reflected in its observances. For while Abhinavagupta’s Trika 
rejected the tradition of radical Saiva asceticism with its cremation-ground prac- 
tices, making the rejection of such socially distinctive externals a fundamental 
principle of its universalism, the Krama, and indeed the Kalikula as a whole, 
continued to maintain its distance from mundane society. For, as we have seen, 
some of its Gurus were ascetics who had adopted the Kapalika observance, 
decking themselves with ornaments of human bone, carrying a human skull as 
a begging bowl, and living in the cremation ground. 

In the course of the eleventh century the Sakta Saiva cult of Tripurasun- 
dari was introduced into the valley and integrated into the exegetical tradi- 
tion of the Trika. How quickly and widely it was adopted is unclear, since we 
have so little evidence from the three centuries after Jayaratha. But thereafter, 
as we have seen, Bhattaraka, the author of the Spandapradipika, Bhattaraka 
Ananda, the author of the Vij0anakaumudi, if he is not identical with the pre- 
ceding, and the Sivasvàmin Upadhyaya who wrote the Gayatrimantravivarana 
and Srividyamantravivarana were all initiates engaged in this form of ritual. 
Moreover, Tripurasundari is prominent among the goddesses whose worship is 
included in the Svacchanda-based Paddhatis; her cult provides the framework 
for the conceptualization of the cults of the local goddesses seen in the Kash- 
mirian Mahatmya texts;°”? and the literature of her cult, comprising Paddhatis 
and Stotras, much of it non-Kashmiran, is very well represented in the body of 
surviving Kashmirian manuscripts, though this must be in part if not largely 
the effect of the arrival in Kashmir of East Indian Saktism with the Maithila 
Kauls. It is at least probable that just as the cult of Svacchandabhairava came to 
monopolize the domain of non-Sakta Saiva ritual in Kashmir, so this tradition 
of the worship of Tripurasundari (Srividya), which has enjoyed great popular- 
ity throughout the subcontinent down to modern times, came to dominate the 
Sakta, and that the Trika and Krama survived as textual resources of exeget- 
ical and spiritual inspiration, in the manner of the Pratyabhijfia, rather than 
as living traditions of ritual practice. The demise of the Trika in this sense is 
strongly indicated by the commentary on the Paratrisika composed by Raja- 
naka Laksmirama (Lasakaka) around the beginning of the nineteenth century. 
It is unlikely that if this ritual tradition had still been active he could have 
written a work that assimilates the text to the cult of Svacchandabhairava. Cer- 


°73See, for example, the Sarikapariccheda, which assimilates the goddess Sarika of 
Har@parbuth to Tripurasundari, and the Rajnhipradurbhava, which does the same for the Rājñī 
of Tul@mul. 


434 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


tainly, when I studied the Kashmirian Saiva literature in Kashmir from 1972 
to 1977 as a pupil of the Saiva Guru Swami Lakshman Joo Raina (1907-1991) 
I encountered no sign that any practical knowledge of the ritual aspects of the 
Trika or the Krama had reached the present. Even the worship of Svacchanda- 
bhairava and Amrtesvarabhairava had died out. I was informed that the tradi- 
tion of receiving Saiva initiation following the Kalzdiksápaddhati, which was 
still alive when Georg BUHLER visited Kashmir a hundred years earlier, ?/* had 
been neglected for about fifty years, and I heard the same concerning the Saiva 
post-mortuary rituals. 

What did survive was a purely gnostic Trika which lacked ritual practice 
(other than that of the common brahmanical tradition), which had subsumed 
into a homogenized whole without remainder the literatures of the other non- 
Saiddhantika systems. This, however, was not a twentieth-century develop- 
ment, for, as I have argued elsewhere, we find it already in the model of the re- 
ligious life advocated by the Mrtitattvanusmarana, an unpublished Kashmirian 
treatise composed at some time after the fifteenth century and before the nine- 
teenth, which is likely to reflect general belief in the Kashmirian brahmin com- 
munity of its time. It is to be hoped that further research into unpublished 
Kashmirian materials of the post-classical period will clarify further the history 
of this separation of gnosis from ritual, a development that can be seen as a sign 
of Saivism's assimilation to the dominant brahmanical model of the religious 
life with its duality of doing without knowing and knowing without doing. 


ABBREVIATIONS 
ASB Asiatic Society of Bengal, Calcutta 
BHU Banaras Hindu University 
BLO Bodleian Library, Oxford 
Cod. The reading of the manuscript 
conj. My conjectural emendation 
corr. My correction 
Ed. ‘The reading of the edition 
em. My emendation 


S74BiHLER 1877, pp. 23-24. 

9/*'The significance of this text for the early development of the purely gnostic Trika has been 
considered in SANDERSON forthcoming a, which provides an edition of the relevant passage 
on the three forms of the religious life: the way of ritual (Smarta brahmanical), the way of 
meditation (kundaliniyogah), and, for those who have transcended rites, the way of knowledge 


(the Trika). 


Alexis Sanderson 435 


qu. Quotation 

SBB-PK Staatsbibliothek zu Berlin - Preussischer Kulturbesitz 
SOASL School of Oriental and African Studies, London 
SUBG Staats- und Universitatsbibliothek, Góttingen 


MANUSCRIPT SOURCES 


Amsumadágama: Yr» transcript 3. 

Agnikaryapaddhati: A = Paris, Bibliothèque Nationale, Ms Sanscrit 505 C; paper; 
Sarada; B = susc Mu. 1, 134; paper; Sarada. 

Annapürapüjapaddhati. BORI 252 of 1883-84, Pt. 3; paper; Sarada. See also CHANDRA 
1984. 

*Amrteívaradhyanavivarana of Lasa Kaka [Rajanaka Laksmirama]. sBB-Pk Hs or 11664, 
£ [91]v1—17; paper; Sarada script. 

Astika of Prabodhanatha. Kalikakulapancasataka (q.v.), ff. 96v1—97v4. 

Atmarthapijapaddhati. wp transcript 55; paper; Devanagari transcript. 


Isvarapratyabhijnakaumudi of Bhattaraka Sundara. Research and Publication Depart- 
ment, Jammu and Kashmir Government, Srinagar, Sanskrit 1089; paper; Sarada script. 
[Not yet accessed and read]. 

Isvarapratyabhijnavimarsinivyakhya, anonymous. Trivandrum Ms 270 (Isvarapraty- 
abhijnavyakhyavyakhya); paper; Devanagari transcript. 

Uttaragharamndaya. = Cificinimatasarasamuccaya (q.v.), ff. 20:8—24v3 (7.155—245). This 
contains the Kalikakramaslokadvadasika and the Kalikakramapancasika (referred to to- 
gether as the Kalikakramapaddhati [7 .242)). 


Uttaramnayayajnakrama. NGMPP £447/13; paper thydsaphi; Newari script; place of de- 
posit: “Acyuta (owner), Kathmandu”. 


Urmikaularnava. NAK 5-5207; incomplete; paper; Newari script. 
Kaladiksapaddhati of Manodadatta, extended by Sivasvamin. A = BoRI 157 of 1886-92; 
paper; Sarada script. B = BORI 1147 of 1886-92; paper; Sarada script. 


Kalikakulapancasataka. NAK 5-358, NGMPP B30/26; palm-leaf; Newari script; no date 
of copying. This is a composite codex in a single hand, comprising the Kalikula- 
pancasataka, the Khacakrapancakastotra (q.v.), the Kalikastotra of Jfananetra (q.v.), 
the Sripithadvadasika of Cakrabhanu (q.v.), the Astika of Prabodhanatha (q.v.), the 
anonymous Kramavilásastotra (q.v.), and the Mahdanayaprakdsa of Arnasimha (q.v.). 


Kaálikakrama. = Manthanabhairava, Siddhakhanda (q.v.), ff. 17915—186v3. 


436 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


Kalikakramapancasika. = Cificinimatasarasamuccaya (q.v.), ff. 21v1—2413 (7.180c-241). 


Kalikakramaslokadvadasika. = Cificinimatasárasamuccaya (q.v.), ff. 20r8-21v1 (7.155— 
180b). 


Kalikastotra of Jüànanetra. Kalikakulapancasataka, ff. 90v1—92v4. No title in the 
colophon (krtir iyam Ssrijhananetrapadanam iti). 

Kalikulakramasadbhiva. NAK 1-76, NGMP? A203/23; paper; Newari script; incomplete 
(up to 7.2 ); probably penned in the seventeenth-century. 


Kalikulakramarcana of Vimalaprabodha. Nak 5-5188, NGMPP A148/10; paper; Newari 
script; probably penned in the seventeenth-century. 


Kalikulapancasataka. A = Kathmandu, Kaiser Library, 524 (‘Kalikakushe’), NaMPP 
c49/3; palm-leaf; early East Indian script; penned in [Laksmanasena] Samvat 122 
[=a year between A.D. 1230 and 1242]. B =Nax 1-252 (‘Kalikulakramarcana); pa- 
per; Newari script; penned in A.D. 1644/5. 


Kaálottara. Nax 5—4632, NGMPP B118/7; paper; Devanagari. A modern Nepalese tran- 
script containing an unattributed account of the Saiva canon followed by various re- 
censions of the Kalottara. 


Kirana. Nax 5-893, NGMPP A40/23 (= Kiranatantra, Kiranagama); palm-leaf; Licchavi 
script; incomplete; penned in A.D. 924. 

Kulapancasikd. Nax 1-1076. NGMPP A40/13. Palm-leaf; Nepalese Kutila script; penned 
c. A.D. 1100-1200. 

Kaulasütra of Guru Bhattasri-Sitikantha. BORI 445 of 1875-76; paper; Kashmirian De- 
vanagari. 

Kramavilasastotra, anonymous. Kalikakulapancasataka (q.v.), ff. 98v1—102v1. 


Kriyakandakramavali of Somasambhu. A = Nak 1-772, NaMPP B26/1; palm-leaf; early 
East Indian script; A.D. 1149. B = Cambridge, University Library, Add. 1406; palm- 
leaf; Newari script. 


Kriyakalagunottara. NAK 3-392, NGMPP B25/3; palm-leaf; Nepalese Nandinagari/Pala 
script; penned in A.D. 1184/5. 

Kriyasamgrahapaddhati of Valadharin. Kathmandu, Kaiser Library 63, NGMPP c5/3; 
palm-leaf; Nepalese Bhujimol script; penned in a.p. 1090/1. 


Khacakrapancakastotra. A = Kalikakulapancasataka (q.v.), ff. 72v1-89v4. The NaMPP 
microfilm lacks f. 73. For that I have used Nak 5-5183, NGMPP a150/6 (Kalikakula- 
pancasataka) (B), ff. 1v1—6v1; paper; Devanagari. 

Gayatrimantravivarana. of Sivaramasvamin/Sivasvamin Upadhyaya. susc Mu I 30, 
ff. 16r[= 23a] 8—24v[31b]12; paper; Sarada script. 


Alexis Sanderson 437 


Gurupustika. BHU c 4115; paper; Sarada script. [Not yet accessed and read]. 

Gurubhaktistotra of Cidrüpa Kaul. aro Chandra Shum Shere e. 264 (“Tantric Col- 
lectanea’), ff. 290v[511b]1—292r[513a]4; paper; Sarada script; in the same hand and 
format as the Srividyanityapujapaddhati of a.D. [18]35/6. 

Gurustuti of Cidrüpa Kaul. BLO Chandra Shum Shere e. 264 (“Tantric Collectanea), 
ff. 2921[513b]4—297v[518b]3; paper; Sarada script; in the same hand and format as 
the Srividyanityapujapaddhati of a.D. [18]35/6. 

Gurustutiratnamála of Govinda Kaul. sps-pK Hs or 11126; paper; Sarada script. 

Gurustotra of Jyotisprakasa Kaul. sBB-Pk Hs or 12509, ff. [125]r-[129]r; paper; Sarada 
script. 

Gurustotraprakasika of Govinda Kaul. spp-pK Hs or 11126; paper; Sarada script. 

Guhyasamayasadhanamala. BLO Sansk. c. 15 (r); palm-leaf; Nepalese Kutila script; prob- 
ably penned in the 12th or 13th century. 

Guhyasiddhi. NAK 1-163 NGMPP A150/39, ff. 1v1—2618; paper; Newari script. 

Ciücinimatasárasamuccaya. NAK 1-767, NGMPP B157/19; paper; Newari script; penned 
in A.D. 1754. 

Cittasamtosatrimsika. soast 44390 (‘Saiva Hymns’), ff. 41v1—4917; paper; Sarada script; 
penned in a.p. [18]60/61. 

Chummasamketaprakasa of Niskriyanandanatha. sBB-PK Hs or 11387 (‘Trimsaccarca- 
rahasya’); paper; Sarada script; incomplete. 


Jayadrathayamala, Satka 1. NAK 5-4650, NGMrP B122/7; paper; Devanagari script. 
penned in Vikrama 1982 from an old palm-leaf manuscript (pracinatadapatrapustakat) 
for the library of Rájaguru Hemaraja Sakya (f. 214v5). 


Jayadrathayamala, Satka 2. NAK 5-4650, NGMPP 4153/2; paper; Devanagari script; 


penned in Vikrama 1982 from an old palm-leaf manuscript (praczmatadapatrapustakát) 
for the library of Rájaguru Hemaraja Sakya (f. 132v4—5). 


Jayadrathayamala, Satka 3. NAK 5-1975, NGMPP A152/9; paper; Newari script; penned 
in A.D. 1686/7. 

Jayadratbayamala, Satka 4. NAK 1.1468, NGMPP 8122/4; paper; Newari script; penned 
in A.D. 1626/7. 


Jayadrathayamalaprastaramantrasamgraha. A = ff.3v3-6415 of Nak 1-258, NGMPP 
A152/8 (‘Jayadrathayamala); paper; Newari script; a.D. 1642/3. B = ff. ár1-64r1 of 
NAK 1-1514, NGMP? reel number not recorded; paper; Newari script; penned in A.D. 


1584/4. 
Jnanakriyadvayasataka, probably of Sillana. A = soast 44390 (‘Saiva Hymns), ff. 1v1— 


438 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


1817; paper; Sáradà script. The Cittasamtosatrimsika of Naga, the last of the series of 
philosophical hymns in this composite codex and written in the same hand reports 
that it was penned in A.D. [18]60/61. This is the second manuscript in the codex. B 
= sBB-PK Hs or 12833, ff. 1[75]r-11[86]v; paper; Sarada script. 


Jfánaratnavali. re transcript 231; paper; a Devanagari transcript of a Grantha palm- 
leaf manuscript, R. 14898. 


Tattvatrayanirnayavivrti of Bhatta Ramakantha. Lucknow, Akhila Bharatiya Sanskrit 
Parishad, 2390; paper; Sarada script. 


Tantrarajatantravatarastotra of Acarya Visvavarta. A = ff. 1v1—3v1 of NAK 1-258, NGMPP 
A152/8 (‘Jayadrathayamala’); paper; Newari script; penned in a.p. 1642/3. B = ff. 1v1— 
3v7 of nax 1-154, NGMrP reel number not recorded; paper; Newari script; penned in 
A.D. 1584. 


Timirodghátana. NAK 5-690, NGMPP A35/3; palm-leaf; late Licchavi script; incomplete. 


Tridasadámara. A =asB G 9999 (tridasadamare pratyangiravidhinam); palm-leaf; 
Newari script; penned in A.D. 1189. B = Tridasadamara(di) pratyangiravisayakanana- 
tantra (q.v.), ff. 1v1—12r2. According to the colophons this consists of Patala 81 and 82 
of the Tridasadámaramabhátantra, constituting the Pratyangirakalpa (B, f. 6v3—4: iti śrī- 
tridasadamaramabhátantre catustrimsatisahasre sripratyangirotpattimantroddháravidhi(r) 
ekasititamah patalah; and B, f. 1211—2): iti sritridasadamaramahatantre catustrimíati- 
sthasre sripratyangiravidhi(r) dvyasititamah patala(h.) pratyangirakalpam samáptam. 

Tridasadamara(di) pratyangiravisayakanánatantra. NAK 3-30, NGMPP 8173/22; paper; 
Newari script; penned in A.D. 1618/9 


Tripurasundaristotra of Sivananda (= Saubhagyahrdayastotra, q.v. in the general bibliog- 
raphy). BLO Chandra Shum Shere e. 264 (“Tantric Collectanea"), ff. [504]r4—[505]v7. 


Tripurasundaristotra of Ganesa Bhattaraka. Bro Chandra Shum Shere e. 264 (‘Tantric 
Collectanea), ff. 326v[547b]1—328v[549b]5; paper; Sarada script; in the same hand 
and format as the Srividyanityapüjapaddhati (a.D. [18]35/6). 

Devidvyardhasatikà. NAK 1-242. NGMPP A161.12; paper; Newari script; probably 
penned in the 17th century; descendant of a manuscript in the library of Vi- 
malaprabodha, Rajaguru of the Nepalese king Arimalla (r. 1200-1216) (post- 
colophon, f.19r5: paramahamsaparivrajaka-uttaranvayacaryasrimadvimalaprabodha- 
padanam iti). 

Devyámata. NAK 1-279, NaMPP A41/15 (‘Nisvasakhyamahatantra’); palm-leaf; Nepalese 
Licchavi script. 

Dvayasampattivartika of Vamanadatta, son of Harsadatta. A = Malinislokavartika (q.v.), 
folio sides 552 [8r11] to 553 [8v]; paper; Kashmirian Devanagari script. B = BHU 
c4256, ff. 6r—7v; paper; Sarada. 


Alexis Sanderson 439 


Nandiksetrávatàra attributed to the Adipurana. Bio Stein Or. c. 4; paper; Sarada script. 

Nijatmabodha of Sahib Kaul. soast 44389; paper; Sarada script. 

Nityákaula. NAK 2-226, NGMPP B26/21; palm-leaf; Newari script; right side damaged; 
incomplete (—6.28). 

Nityádisamgrabapaddhati of Rajanaka Taksakavarta. Bom 76 of 1875-76 
(‘Bhrngesasamhita); paper; Sarada script. 

Nisisamcara. NAK 1-1606; palm-leaf; Nepalese Kutila script; probably before 1100 a.p. 

*Niskalasvacchandadhyanavivarana of Lasa Kaka [Rajanaka Laksmirama]. sBB-pK Hs or 
11664, ff. [91]r1-[91]v3; paper; Sarada script. 


Paramarcanatrimsika. soasu 44390 (‘Saiva Hymns’), ff. 34v3—41r5; paper; Sarada 
script; penned in Samvat 36 (a.D. [18]60/61 according to the colophon at the end 
of the Cittasamtosatrimsika (q.v.), which follows in the same hand in this codex. 


Picumata. (Brabmayamala). NAK 3-370, NGMPP A42/6; palm-leaf; Newari script; penned 
in A.D. 1052. 


Pingalamata. NAK 3—376, NGMPP A42/2; palm-leaf; Newari script; penned in A.D. 
1173/4. 


Prayascittasamuccaya of Hrdayasiva. Cambridge University Library ms Add. 2833; 
palm-leaf; Newari script; penned in a.D. 1157/8. 


Bahuriipagarbhastotravisamapadasamketa of Anantasaktipáda. BHU C488; paper; Sarada 
script. 


Bodhavilasa. = Dvayasampattivartika (q.v.) 

Bhagavadgitatattvaprakasika. of Lasa Kaka [Rajanaka Laksmirama]. suBG Mu 1 22; pa- 
per; Sarada script. 

Bhavacidamani of Bhatta Vidyakantha. Jammu, Shri Raghunath Temple mss Library, 


5291, now in the collection of the Ranbir Research Institute, Jammu; paper; Kash- 
mirian Devanagari. 


Bhuvanamálinikalpavisamapadavivrti of Srivatsa. sBB-PK Hs or 12231; paper; Sarada 
script. 


Bhairavisaktistotra of Ganesa Bhattaraka. Bro Chandra Shum Shere e. 264 (“Tantric 
Collectanea), ff. 325r[546]r1-326r7[547a]; paper; Sarada script; in the same hand 
and format as the Srividyanityapüjapaddhati (a.D. [18]35/6). 

Manthinabhairava, Kumdarikhanda. Nak 5-4630, NGMPP Al71/11; paper; Newari 
script. 


Manthanabhairava, Siddhakhanda. Scans courtesy of Sam Fogg Rare Books & Manu- 
scripts, London; palm-leaf; Nandinagari/Pala script; probably penned in the 12th cen- 
tury. 


440 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


Mayasamgraha. NAK 1-1537, NGMPP 431/18; palm-leaf; Newari script; incomplete. 


Mabhákaravirayága. NAK 1-816, NGMPP 827/17; palm-leaf, Nandinagari/Pala script; 
penned in A.D. 1266. 


Mahanayaprakáía of Arnasimha Kulacarya. Kalikakulapancasataka (q.v.), ff. 103v1— 
130r5. 


Mabhánayaprakása of Sitikantha in Old Kashmiri with Sanskrit commentary. NAK 1-252, 
NGMPP B135/41; paper; Devanagari. 


Malinislokavartika. Jammu, Shri Ranbir Sanskrit Research Institute, 623 (20 ka 2). This 
is a composite codex containing many small works in addition to the Malinislokavar- 
tika, each with its own folio numeration. See here Dvayasampattivartika, Sivastaka, 
Satcakranirnaya A, Satcakranirnaya B, and Svabodhodayamanjari. 


Mrgendrapaddhatitika of Vaktra$ambhu. 1FP transcript 1021; paper; a Devanagari tran- 
script of a Grantha palm-leaf manuscript, RE 4006. 


Mobacüdottara. NAK 5-1977, NGMPP 4182/2; paper; Devanagari. 


Yajnopavitasikhamalanirnaya of Sivasvamin Upadhyaya [II]. sps-pK Hs or 11710; pa- 
per; Sarada script. 


Yonigabvara. asg G 1000; palm-leaf; Newari script. 


*Rajanakavamsaprasamsa. A = BLO Stein Or. e. 17; 19th century paper; text written 
on the rectos only; Devanagari script; marginal annotations in pencil by M.A. Stein; 
‘Notes on Ananda’s Pragasti’ handwritten by the same on ff. 13a-14b; on f.1 in 
his hand: “Extracts from Ananda Rájánaka's commentary on Naishadiyacharita and 
Sitikantha Rajanaka’s Kasikavretinyasatika. Copied from a paper (6" x 3") of Pandit 
Sun?káka Razdan, Habba Kadal, Srinagar" (signed M.A. Stein, Nishat Bagh, Septem- 
ber 19-20, 1894)”; copied by Rajanaka Laksmana in 1845. The second extract is in 
fact from Sitikantha’s Balabodhininyasa (Katantravrttinyasatika). B = B10 Stein Or. d. 
62; copy of the same exemplar prepared by Pandit Govind Kaul; paper; Sarada script. 


Rajüiprádurbháva. Bio Stein Or. d. 81; paper; Sarada script. 
Varunapaddbativrtti of Bhatta Sivottama. rrP transcript 143; paper; a Devanagari tran- 


script of a Grantha palm-leaf manuscript, Government Oriental Manuscripts Library, 
Madras, R 14871. 


*Visnustuti of Vàmanadatta, son of Devadatta, comprising six complete Prakaranas 
(Samvitprakáía, Atmasaptati, | Vikalpaviplava, | Vidyáviveka, | Varnavicara, and 
Paramárthaprakáía), and the beginning of a seventh. Buu C4003; paper; Kashmirian 
Devanagari script. 

Sarikápariccheda. Bio Stein Or. e. 2 (viii); paper; Sarada script. 


Sáribastava of Sahib Kaul. Bro Chandra Shum Shere, e. 264, ff. 308r[529a]5— 


Alexis Sanderson 441 


310v[531]v5; paper; Sarada script; in the same hand as the Srividyanityapujapaddbati 
(a.D. [18]35/6). 

Sivagopradanavidhi. BLO Stein Or. f. 12, ff. 1v1—26v11. On outer cover: gopradanavi- 
dhib saivanam. Colophons: iti nandisivadharmasamhitayam gopradanavidhih (f. 25r4— 
5); iti Sivagopradanam (f. 26v9—10). penned in A.D. [18]86, probably 1886). 

Sivaratripüjápaddhati. SBB-PK, Hs or 11279. Birch-bark; Sarada; disordered folios, 
each incomplete through damage; no folio numbers. Abbreviared title in margin of 
folio sides 6, 51, 59: sivarapi. 

Sivaratrirahasya. BLO Stein Or. e. 24, ff. 111-4125; paper; Sarada script. 


Sivasaktivilasa of Sahib Kaul. suBG Codex Vish 5 (parts numbered 5—20), part 5; paper; 
Sarada script. 

Sivastaka of Yogaraja. Malinislokavartika (q.v.), folio sides 241 [9116] to 242 [9v12]; 
paper; Kashmirian Devanagari. 


Sisyasamskarapaddhati. Paris, Bibliothèque Nationale, Sanscrit 505 C; paper; Sarada 
script; acquired in 1898. 

Syamapaddhati of Sahib Kaul. (1) Photocopy courtesy of Sam Fogg Rare Books & 
Manuscripts, London; paper; Devanagari script; probably from Jaipur. (2) sBB-rx Hs 
or 12439; paper; Devanagari script. 

Srinathastotra of Ganega Bhattaraka. BLO Chandra Shum Shere e. 264 (‘Tantric Col- 
lectanea’), ff. 288v[509b]1—290r[511a]7; paper; Sarada script; same hand and format 
as Srividyanityapujapaddhati (a.D. [18]35/6). 

Sripithadvadasika of Cakrabhanu. nax 5-358, NGMpP 830/26 (Kalikakulapancasataka), 
ff. 93v1—95r4; palm-leaf; Newari script. 


Srividyanityapijapaddhati of Sahib Kaul. sto Chandra Shum Shere e. 264 (‘Tantric 
Collectanea), ff. 1v[226b]1—156v[378b]5; paper; Sarada script; A.D. [18]35/6. 

Srividyamantravivarana of Sivasvamin Upadhyaya [II]. sss-pK Hs or 11663; paper; 
Sarada script. 

Satcakranirnaya (A), anonymous. Malinislokavartika (q.v.), folio sides 538 [2r], 1. 1 to 
543 [4v], 1. 18; paper; Kashmirian Devanagari. Follows the Malinislokavartika and is 
followed by the Tandulastavaraja. 

Satcakranirnaya (B) of Sivasvamin Upadhyaya [IT]. Malinislokavartika (q.v.), folio sides 
378[1r]1 to 386[5r12]; paper; Kashmirian Devanagari. 


Samvitprakása of Vamanadatta. See *Visnustuti. 


Saccidanandakandali of Sahib Kaul. Bio Stein Or. e. 26 (iii), ff. 32r[18a]5—44v4; paper; 


Sarada. 


442 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


Sadanandalásya of Sadananda Kaul. sBB-PK Hs or 12509, ff. [121]v-[125]r. 


Sahajarcanasastika of Sahib Kaul. B10 Stein Or. e. 26 (ii), ff. 22r[8a] 1—32r[18a]5; paper; 
Sarada; followed by Saccidinandakandali (q.v.). 


Somasambhupaddhativyakhya of Trilocanasivacarya. IFP transcript 170; paper; a De- 
vanagari transcript of a Grantha palm-leaf manuscript belonging to Kailasabattar of 
Tirunelvely. 

Spandapradipika of Bhattarakasvamin. BORI 513 of 1875-76 (‘Spandapradipa’); paper; 
Sarada script. 

Svacchandamahesvarastaka. sBB-PK Hs or 12509. [5v]-[15]r; paper; Sarada script. 

Svabodhasiddhi of Bhattaéri Bhüti. ssp-pK Hs or 11415, ff. 57v-60r; paper; Sarada 


script. 


Svabodhodayamanjari of Vamanadatta, son of Harsadatta. A = Malinislokavartika (q.v.), 
folio sides 549 [6v7] to 552, [8r11]; paper; Kashmirian Devanagari script. B = BHU 
C4255, ff. 1v—5v; paper; Sarada script . 


Svatmopalabdhisataka of Sillana. sB5-PK Hs or 12833, ff. 87[1]1-98[12]r; paper; Sarada 
script. 


Haravijaya of Ratnakara. Bo Stein Or. d. 52; paper; Sarada script. 


Hrllekhapaddhati of Sahib Kaul. sto Chandra Shum Shere g. 27; paper; Sarada script; 
penned in a.p. [18]55. 


General Bibliography 


ABBREVIATIONS 


BORI Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute 

CNRS Centre National pour la Recherche Scientifique 
EFEO Ecole française d'Extréme-Orient 

IFI Institut francais d'indologie 

IFP Institut frangais de Pondichéry 

KSTS Kashmir Series of Texts and Studies 

NAK National Archives of Kathmandu 

NGMPP Nepal-German Manuscript Preservation Project 
PDI Publications du département d'indologie 


PIFI Publications de l'Institut francais d'Indologie 


EDITIONS 
AGNIPURANA 
(AP) dvaipáyanamunipranitam agnipuranam dnandasramasthapanditaih samsodhi- 
tam. Anandasramasamskrtagranthavalih 41. Poona: Anandagramamudrana- 
laya, 1900. 


(AP2) Agnipurana of Maharsi Vedavydsa, ed. Baladeva Upadhyaya. Kashi Sanskrit Se- 
ries 174. Varanasi: The Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series Office, 1966. 

(AP3) The Agnimahapuranam, ed. Ksemaraja Srikrsnadasa. Delhi: Nag Publishers, 
1985 (reprint). 


AJITAGAMA 
(AA) Ajitagama, ed. N. R. Bhatt. 3 Vols. PIFI 24.1—3. Pondicherry: IFI, 1964, 1967, 
1991. 
ATHARVAVEDAPARISISTA 


The Parisistas of the Atharvaveda, ed. George Melville Bolling & Julius von 
Negerlein. Vol. 1, parts 1 and 2. Leipzig, 1909, 1910. 
ANUTTARASTIKA 


Ed. K. C. Pandey in: PANDEY 1963, pp. 943-44. 


552 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


ANUBHAVANIVEDANASTOTRA 
Ed. K. C. Pandey in: PANDEY 1963, p. 953. 

ALAMKARASAMGRAHA of Amrtanandayogin 
Alankara sangraha of Amrtananda Yogin, re-edited with critical introduction and 
appendices, ed. K. Bhaskara Rao, Tirupati: Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams, 
1984. 


See also KRISHNAMACHARYA & SARMA 1949. 


ALAMKARASARVASVA of Rajanaka Ruyyaka and Mankha with the commentary (-vimarsini) of 

Rajanaka Jayaratha 
Alamkéara sarvasva of Sri Rajanaka Ruyyaka & Mankha With the Vimarsini of 
Jayarath And with the translation and explanation of both in Hindi, ed. Rewa Pra- 
sada Dwivedi. The Kashi Sanskrit Series 206. Varanasi: Chaukhamba Sanskrit 
Series Office, 1971. 

ALAMKARASARVASVASANJIVANI of Vidyacakravartin 

(ASS) Alamkara-Sarvasva of Ruyyaka with Sanjivani Commentary of Vidyacakravartin. 

Text and Study, ed. S. S. Janaki, Delhi: Meharchand Lachmandas, 1965. 

ASTAPRAKARANA 
Ed. Krsnagastri. Devakottai: Sivagamasiddhantaparipalanasangha, 1923 (raT- 
TVAPRAKASA, TATTVASANGRAHA, TATTVATRAYANIRNAYA, with the commentaries 
of Aghoragivacarya) and 1925 (RATNATRAYAPARIKSA, BHOGAKARIKA, NADA- 
KARIKA with the commentaries of Aghorasivacarya, and MOKSAKARIKA and 
PARAMOKSANIRASAKARIKA with the commentaries of Ramakantha II). 


Astaprakaranam, ed. Vrajavallabha Dvivedi. Yogatantragranthamala Vol. 12. 
Varanasi: Sampurnananda Sanskrit University, 1988. 


AHIRBUDHNYASAMHITA 
(AhirS) — Abirbudhnya-Sambhita of the Pancaratragama, ed. by M. D. Ramanujacharya un- 

der the Supervision of F. Otto Schrader. Revised by V. Krishnamacharya. 2 vols. 
The Adyar Library Series 4. Madras: The Adyar Library and Research Centre, 
1986 (reprint of 2nd edition of 1966). 

AGAMADAMBARA Of Jayantabhatta 
See Dzzsó 2005. 

ISADYASTOTTARASATOPANISADAH 
One hundred and eight Upanishads (Isha & others.) with various readings, ed. 
WAsudev Laxman Shastri Pans'ikar. Bombay: Nirnaya Sagar Press, 1932. 

ISANASIVAGURUDEVAPADDHATI: the Siddhantasara of Isanasivagurudeva 
liánasivagurudeva Paddhati of lsanasiva Gurudeva, ed. T. Ganapati Sastri, 4 
Vols. Delhi: Bharatiya Vidya Prakashan, 1990. (Reprint, but with a substan- 
tial new introduction dated to 1987 by N. P. Unni, from Trivandrum Sanskrit 
Series Nos. 69 [Samanyapadab), 72 (Mantrapadah, = Tantrasarab]; 77 |Kriyá- 
padah pt. 1] and 83 [Kriyapádab pt. 2, and Yogapadah]. Trivandrum, 1920, 
1921, 1922, 1925.) 

ISVARAPRATYABHIJNAKARIKA of Utpaladeva 


(IPK) See TorELLA 2002 (1994). 


General Bibliography 553 


ISVARAPRATYABHIJNAKARIKAVRTTI of Utpaladeva 
See TongLLA 2002 (1994). 
ISVARAPRATYABHIJNAVIMARSINI of Abhinavagupta 
(IPV) The Iswarapratyabhijna of Utpaladeva with the Vimarsini by Abhinavagupta, ed. 
Madhusudan Kaul Shastri. KSTS 22 and 23. Bombay, 1918-1921. 
See also BHASKARI. 


ISVARAPRATYABHIJNAVIVRTIVIMARSINI of Abhinavagupta 
(PVV) The lsvarapratyabhijna Vivritivimarsini by Abhinavagupta, ed. by Pt. Madhusi- 

dan Kaul Shastri. 3 vols. KSTS 60, 62, 65. Bombay, 1938, 1941, 1943. 

ISVARASAMHITA 
Isvarasamhita, ed. Prativadibhayankaranantacirya. Sastramuktavali Series 45. 
Kafici, 1923. 

UDDAMARESVARATANTRA 
The Uddamareshvara Tantram (A Book on Magical Rites), ed. Jagad Dhar Zadoo. 
KSTS 70. Srinagar, 1947. 

UTTARAKAMIKAGAMA 

(UKA) See KAMIKAGAMA. 

UDDHARAKOSA 
Daksinamirtis Uddhara-kosa. A Dictionary of the Secret Tantric Syllabic Code, 
ed. Raghu Vira & Shodo Taki. 2nd edition, New Delhi: Mushiram Manoharlal, 
1978. Originally published: 1938. 

O RGYAN LAM RIG 
See Tucci 1940. 

KARMAKANDAKRAMAVALI of Somasambhu 
Karmakanda-kramavali By Sri Somasambhu (Outlines briefly the procedure of 
Shaivistic Sandhya, Diksha and other ritual.), ed. Jagaddhar Zadoo. KSTS 73. 
Srinagar, 1947. 


(SP1-4) | See Brunner 1963, 1968, 1977 & 1998. 


KADAMBaRI of Bana 
The Kadambari of Banabhatta and his son Bhisanabhatta (with the Commen- 
taries of Bhánucandra and his Disciple Siddhacandra, Proteges of the Emperor 
Akabar) ed. Kashinath Pandurang Paras and revised by Wasudeva Laxmana 
Shastri Panstkar. Delhi: Nag Publishers, 1985. 

KAMAKALAVILASA 
Kimakalivilasa by Punyánandanátba, with the commentary of Natanándanátha, 
ed. and trans. Sir John Woodroffe (Arthur Avalon), Madras: Ganesh & Co. 
Ltd., 1953. Second revised ed. 

KAMIKAGAMA 

(PKA) Kamikágama, Pirvabhaga. No editor accredited: published by C. Swaminatha 

Sivacarya. Madras: South Indian Arcakas' Association, 1975. 


(UKA) Kāmikāgama, Uttarabhaga. No editor accredited: published by C. Swaminatha 
Sivacarya. Madras: South Indian Archakar Association, 1988. 


554 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


KARANAGAMA 
Pürvakárandgamam milam. No editor accredited. Published by Mayilai 
Alakappa Mutaliyar. Cintatirippéttai, 1921 (ali 5023). 


Uttarakarandgamab. uttavakárandkamam. No editor accredited. Published by 
Li. Ku. Civafianaccelvakkurukkal. Cuddalore (Katalür): Archana Printers, 
2002. (Photomechanical reprint of the 1928 Cintatiripéttai edition.) 

KALABHAIRAVASTAKA 
Printed in: Srisamharagranthavalib, samputah 11, Stotrani, laghuprakaranani ca, 
Shrirangam: Vanivilas Press, no date. 

KALIKASTOTRA of Sivananda (Jfananetra) 
In STUTISAMGRAHA and SRIGURUSTUTI. 

KIRANATANTRA 

(KA) Kiranatantra. [Edited by] TiRa. Paficapagesasivacarya and K.M. 

Subrahmanyasastri. Sivagamasiddhantaparipalanasangha 16. Devakéttai, 
1932. 


(KA) Il "Kirandgama". Testo e traduzione del “Vidyapada”, a cura di Maria Pia Vivanti, 
Supplemento n. 3 agli Annali, vol. 35 (1975), fasc. 2, Napoli; 2). 


(KA) See also Gooparr 1998. 


KIRANAVRTTI of Bhatta Ramakantha II 
See Gooparr 1998. 

KUBJIKAMATATANTRA 
The Kubjikámatatantra. Kulalikámnáya version. Critical Edition by T. Goudri- 
aan & J. A. Schoterman. Orientalia Rheno-traiectina 30. Leiden: Brill, 1988. 

KUMARATANTRA 
Kumáratantram. No editor accredited. Published by Mayilai Alakappa Mu- 
taliyar. Cintatirippéttai, 1915/16 (kali 5017). 

KUMARAPALACARITRASAMGRAHA 
Kuméarapala Charitrasamgraha (A Collection of works of Various Authors Re- 
lating to Life of Kumarapala of Gujarat), collected and edited from various old 
manuscripts by Acharya Jina Vijaya Muni. Singhi Jain Series, No. 41. Bombay: 
Adhisthata, Singhi Jain Shastra Shikshapith, Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan, 1956. 

KUMARASAMBHAVA of Kalidasa with the commentary of Vallabhadeva 
Vallabhadeva’s Kommentar (Sarada Version) zum Kumarasambhava des Kalidasa, 
ed. M. S. Narayana Murti. Verzeichnis der orientalischen Handschriften in 
Deutschland, Supplementband 20,1. Wiesbaden: Franz Steiner Verlag, 1980. 

KULACUDAMANI 
Kulacidamani Nigama, ed. Arthur Avalon, with an introduction by Aksaya 
Kumara Maitra, Madras, 1956. 

KULANANDA 
In KAULAJNANANIRNAYA, pp. 107-113. 

KÜRMAPURANA 

(KaP) The Kürma Purana. Critically edited by Anand Swarup Gupta. Varanasi: All- 

India Kashiraj Trust, 1971. 


General Bibliography 555 


KRSNAYAMARITANTRA 
Krsnayamáritantrum With Ratnavalipatjikà of Kumáracandra, ed. Samdhong 
Rinpoche & Vrajvallabh Dwivedi. Rare Buddhist Texts Series 9. Sarnath: Cen- 
tral Institute of Higher Tibetan Studies, 1992. 
KAULAJNANANIRNAYA 
Kaulajánanirnaya and some Minor Texts of the School of Matsyendranátha, ed. 
Prabodh Chandra Bagchi. Calcutta Sanskrit Series 3. Calcutta, 1934. 
KRAMASTOTRA of Abhinavagupta 


Ed. K. C. Pandey in: PANDEY 1963, pp. 945-951. 


GANAKARIKA 
Ganakárikà of Acarya Bhasarvajna with the Ratnatika and four appendices, ed. 
Chimanlal D. Dalal. Gaekwad Oriental Series No. 15. Baroda, 1920. [Reprint 
1966.] 

GARUDAPURANA 


(GarP) The Garuda Mahápuranam, ed. Khemaraja Srikrsnadasa. Delhi: Nag Publishers, 
1984 (reprint). 
GURUNATHAPARAMARSA of Madhuraja 
Gurunathaparamarsa of Madhuraja, ed. P.N. Pushp. KSTS 85. Srinagar, 1960. 
GUHYASIDDHI of Padmavajra 
In GUHYADI-ASTASIDDHI-SANGRAHA. 
GUHYADI-ASTASIDDHI-SANGRAHA 
Guhyadi-astasiddhi-sangraha, ed. Samdhong Rinpoche & Vrajvallabh Dwivedi. 
Rare Buddhist Text Series 1. Sarnath: Central Institute of Higher Tibetan Stud- 
ies, 1988. 
GORAKSASAMHITA 
Goraksasamhita, ed. Janardana Pandeya. Sarasvatibhavana Granthamala 110. 
Varanasi, 1973. 
GAUTAMADHARMASUTRA 
(GautDhSü) The Gautama-Dharma-Sitra With the "Mitáksara Sanskrit Commentary of Hara- 
datta, ed. Umesh Chandra Pandey. The Kashi Sanskrit Series 172. Varanasi: The 
Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series Office, 1966. 
GRUB THOB BRGYAD BCU RTSA BZHI'I LO RGYUS 
In Rosinson 1979, pp. 311-391. 
GHERANDASAMHITA 
The Gheranda Samhita Translated into English by Rai Bahadur Srisa Chandra 
Vasu. Delhi: Oriental Books Reprint Corporation, 1980 [reprint of Allahabad 
edition of 1914-15]. 
CATURVARGACINTAMANI of Hemadri 
(CVC) . Chaturvarga-Chintámani by Hemádri, ed. Bharatachandra Siromani. Vol. 2, 
Fasc. 9. Bibliotheca Indica, New Series 372. Calcutta: Asiatic Society of Bengal, 
1877. 
CARYAGITITIKA of Munidatta 
Edited in: Per Kverne, An Anthology of Buddhist Tantric Songs. A Study of the 
Caryágiti. Det Norske Videnskaps-Akademi, II. Hist.-Filos. Klasse Skrifter Ny 
Serie No. 14, Oslo, 1977. 


556 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


CARYAMELAPAKAPRADIPA of Aryadeva 
Aryadevaviracitam Caryamelapakapradipam. Phags-pa-lhas mdzad pa’i spyod pa 
bsdus pai sgron es bya ba béugs so, ed. Janardanasastri Pandeya. Durlabha Baud- 
dha Granthamala 22. Sarnatha, Varanasi: Durlabha Bauddha Grantha Sodha 
Yojana, Kendriya Ucca Tibbati Siksà Samsthana, 2000. 

CITTANUBODHASASTRA of Rajanaka Bhaskarakantha 
Cittanubodhasastram: saradatah devandgaraksaresv anuvartya prathamam mu- 
dranam/ Rajanaka-Bhaskarakanthapranitam, ed. Susama Pandeya. Varanasi: 
Tara Book Agency, 1990. 

CIDGAGANACANDRIKA of Srivatsa 
Cidgagana=candrika with English Introduction by Arnold Avalon, ed. Trivikrama 
Tirtha. Arthur Avalon Series — Tantrik Texts, 20. Calcutta: Agamanusandhana 
Samiti, 1937. 

CIDVILASASTAVA of Amrtanandayogin 
See NITYASODASIKARNAVA. 

JAYAKHYASAMHITA 

(JS) Jayákhyasambita, ed. Embar Krishnamacharya. Gaekwad’s Oriental Series 54. 

Baroda: Oriental Institute, 1931. 

JABALADARSANOPANISAT 
See ISADYASTOTTARASATOPANISADAH. 

JAINARAJATARANGINi of Srivara 
See Kaur 1966. 

JNANASIDDHI of Indrabhüti 
In GUHYADI-ASTASIDDHI-SANGRAHA. 

TATTVATRAYANIRNAYA of Sadyojyotis with vrtti of Aghorasiva 
In: Astaprakaranam. 

TATTVAPRAKASA of Bhojadeva with vrtti of Aghorasiva 
In: Astaprakaranam. 

TATTVAPRAKASATATPARYADIPIKA of Kumaradeva 
In: Astaprakaranam, ed. Vrajavallabha Dvivedi. 

TATTVABINDU of Vacaspatimiéra 
Le Tattvabindu de Vacaspatimisra, édition critique, traduction et introduction, ed. 
Madeleine Biardeau, PIFI 3. Pondicherry: IFI, 1956. 

TATTVASANGRAHA of Sadyojyotis with tikd of Aghorasiva 
In: Astaprakaranam. 

TANTRAVATADHANIKA attributed to Abhinavagupta 
The Tantravata-dhanika, ed. Mukund Ram Shastri. KSTS 24. Bombay, 1918. 

TANTRASARA of Abhinavagupta 
The Tantrasára of Abhinava Gupta, ed. Mukund Ram Shastri. KSTS 17. Bom- 
bay, 1918. 

TANTRALOKA of Abhinavagupta 
The Tantraloka of Abhinava=Gupta. With Commentary by Rajanaka Jayaratha, 
ed. Madhusüdan Kaul Sastri. KSTS 23, 28, 30, 35, 29, 41, 47, 59, 52, 57 and 
58. Bombay and Srinagar, 1918-38. 

TANTRALOKAVIVEKA of Jayaratha 

(TaAlVivg) See TANTRALOKA. 


General Bibliography 20 


TANTROCCAYA of Abhinavagupta 
"Ihe Tantroccaya of Abhinavagupta. Critical Edition’, ed. Raniero Gnoli & 
Raffaele Torella. In: Paolo Daffinà (ed.), Indo-Sino-Tibetica. Studi in onore di 
Luciano Petech. Studi Orientali publicati dal dipartimento di Studi Orientali 9. 
Rome: Università di Roma “La Sapienza", 1990, pp. 153-189. 

TEVARAM 
Teváram. Hymnes sivaites du pays tamoul, édition établie par T. V. Gopal lyer sous 
la direction de François Gros, volume I Nanacampantar. PIFI 68.1. Pondicherry: 
IFI, 1984. 


Teváram. Hymnes sivaites du pays tamoul, édition établie par T. V. Gopal lyer 
sous la direction de Francois Gros, volume II Appar et Cuntarar. PIFI 68.2. 
Pondicherry: IFI, 1985. 


Digital Tevaram, ed. Jean-Luc Chevillard and S. A. S. Sarma. Pondicherry: IFP, 
EFEO and CNRS, forthcoming. 


DEVINAMAVILASA of Sahib Kaul 
The Devinámavilasa by Sahib Kaul, ed. Madhusüdan Kaul Shastri. KSTS 63. 
Srinagar, 1942. 

DEVIRAHASYA 
Devi rahasya: with parisishtas, ed. Ram Chandra Kak and Harabhatta Shastri. 
Delhi: Chaukhamba Sanskrit Pratishthan, 1993. Originally published: Srina- 
gar, 1941. 

DESOPADESA of Ksemendra 
The Desopadesa & Narmamala of Kshemendra, ed. Madhusüdan Kaul Shastri. 
KSTS 40. Poona, 1923. 

DEHASTHADEVATACAKRASTOTRA 
Ed. K. C. Pandey in: PANDEY 1963, pp. 952-53. 

DVAYASAMPATTIVARTIKA of Vamanadatta 
‘Il Dvayasampattivarttikam di Vamanadatta’, ed. Raniero Gnoli, in: Gururdja- 
mafüjarikà. Studi in onore di Giuseppe Tucci, Napoli: Istituto Universitario Ori- 
entale, 1974, vol. 2, pp. 451—455. 

DHVANYALOKA of Anandavardhana with the commentary (-/ocana) of Abhinavagupta 
Dhvanyáloka of Sri Anandavardhanácárya ; with the Locana & Balapriya com- 
mentaries; by Sri Abhinavagupta & Sri Ramasaraka ; edited with the Divyanjana 
notes, introduction, indices & appendices, ed. Pandit Pattabhirama Sastri. Kasi 
Samskrta granthamala 135. Benares: Jaya Krishna Das Haridas Gupta, 1947. 


See also INGALLs, Masson, and ParwAaRDHAN 1990. 


NARESVARAPARIKSA of Sadyojyotis with the -prakdsa of Ramakantha 
The Nareshvarapariksha of Sadyojyotih with commentary by Ramakantha, ed. 
Madhusudan Kau Shastri. KSTS 45. Srinagar, 1926. 
NADAKARIKA of Ramakantha 
(NK) In: Astaprakaranam. 
See also FrLutozar 1984. 


558 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


NARADIYASAMHITA 
(NarS)  Naradiya Samhita, ed. Raghava Prasàda Chaudhary. Kendriya Sanskrita 
Vidyapeetha Series 15. Tirupati: Kendriya Sanskrita Vidyapeetha, 1971. 
NITYASODASIKARNAVA 
Nityasodasikarnava With two Commentaries Rjuvimarsini by Sivananda & 
Artharatnavali by Vidyananda, ed. (with Sanskrit introduction) Vrajavallabha 
Dviveda. Yogatantragranthamala 1. Varanasi: Sanskrit University, 1968. [Also 
contains editions of the Tripurasundaridandaka of Dipakanatha, the Subhago- 
daya, Subhagodayavasana, and Saubhagyahrdayastotra of Sivànanda, and the 
Saubhagyasudhodaya and Cidvilasastava of Amrtanandayogin.] 
NILAMATAPURANA 
Nilamatapurana, ed. K. de Vreese. Leiden: Brill, 1936. 
NETRATANTRA 
The Netra Tantram with commentary by Kshemaraja, ed. Madhusudan Kaul 
Shastri. KSTS 46 and 61. Bombay, 1926 and 1939. 
NYAYAMANJARI of Jayantabhatta 
Nyayamanjari of Jayantabhatta with Tippani—Nydayasaurabha by the editor, ed. 
K. S. Varadacharya. 2 Vols. Oriental Research Institute Series Nos. 116 & 139. 
Mysore: Oriental Research Institute, 1969 & 1983. 
NYASOPADESA 
(NyasU) In: Naradapancaratra (Bháradvajasambità) Sarayiprasadamisrakrtatikasahita. 
Bombay, 1827 [1905/1906 ap]. 
PANCAVARANASTAVA 
The Paficavaranastava of Aghorasivacarya: A twelfih-century South Indian pre- 
scription for the visualisation of Sadasiva and his retinue, An annotated critical edi- 
tion, ed. Dominic Goodall, Nibedita Rout, R. Sathyanarayanan, S. A. S. Sarma, 
T. Ganesan, S. Sambandhasivacarya, Collection Indologie 102. Pondicherry: 
IFP/EFEO, 2005. 
PADMAPURANA 
(PP) vydsapranitam padmapuránam, ed. Ravasaheba Mandalika and Viésvanatha 
Narayana. Vol. 3. Poona: Mahadeva Cimanaji Apate, 1894. 
PARAMASAMHITA 
(ParS) Paramasamhita [of the Pacharátra], ed. and translated into English by S. Krish- 
naswami Aiyangar. Gaekwad's Oriental Series 86. Baroda: Oriental Institute, 
1940. 
PARAMARTHACARCA 
Ed. K. C. Pandey in: PANDEY 1963, pp. 946. 
PARAMARTHADVADASIKA of Ramyadeva 
Ed. K. C. Pandey in: PaNpEv 1963, pp. 944-45. 
PARAMARTHASARA of Abhinavagupta 
The Paramartha-Sara by Abhinava Gupta, with the commentary of Yogaraja, ed. 
Jagadisha Chandra Chatterji. KSTS 7. Srinagar, 1916. 
PARAMOKSANIRASAKARIKA of Sadyojyotis with vrtti of Ramakantha 
In: Astaprakaranam. 


General Bibliography 559 


PARĀKHYATANTRA 
(ParT) The Parükhyatantra. A Scripture of the Saiva Siddhanta. A critical edition and 
annotated translation, ed. and trans. Dominic Goodall. Collection Indologie 
98. Pondicherry: IFP/EFEO, 2004. 
PARATRIMSIKATATTVAVIVARANA of Abhinavagupta 
The Paré-trimshika with commentary. ‘The latter by Abhinava Gupta, ed. 
Mukunda Rama Shastri. KSTS 18. Bombay, 1918. 


Il commento di Abhinavagupta alla Paratrimsika (Paratrimsikatattvavivaranam), 
traduzione e testo, ed. Raniero Gnoli. Serie Orientale Roma 58. Rome: Istituto 
Italiano per il Medio ed Estremo Oriente, 1985. 


Paratrisika-vivarana, the secret of tantric mysticism / Abhinavagupta. English 
translation, with notes and running exposition, by Jaideva Singh. Sanskrit text cor- 
rected, notes on technical points and charts dictated by Swami Lakshmanjee, ed. 
Bettina Baumer, Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1988. 


PARATRISIKALAGHUVRTTI 
The Parvátrifikà Laghuvritti by Abhinavagupta, ed. Jagaddhara Zadoo Shastri. 
KSTS 68. Srinagar, 1947. 
PARATRISIKAVIVRTI of Lasa Kaka (Laksmirama) 
The Paratrisika Vivriti of Rajanaka Lakshmirama, ed. Jagaddhara Zadu Shastri. 
KSTS 69. Srinagar, 1947. 
PARYANTAPANCASIKA 
The Paryanta Pancasika of Abhinavagupta, ed. V. Raghavan. Annals of Oriental 
Research 8. Madras, 1950-51. 
PADMASAMHITA 
(PadS) Padma Samhita, Vol. 1, ed. Seetha Padmanabhan and R. N. Sampath. Vol. II, 
ed. Seetha Padmanabhan and V. Varadachari. Paficaratra Pari$odhana Parisad 
Series 3 and 4. Madras: Paficaratra Parisodhana Parisad, 1974 and 1982. 
PARAMESVARASAMHITA 
(ParS) Paramesvarasamhita, ed. Govindacirya. Srirangam: Kodandaramasannidhi, 
1953. 
PASUPATASUTRA with Paficarthabhasya of Kaundinya 
Pasupata Sutras with Pancharthabhashya of Kaundinya. ed. R. Ananthakrishna 
Sastri. Trivandrum Sanskrit Series, No. 143. Trivandrum: University of Tra- 
vancore, 1940. 
PURVAKAMIKAGAMA 
(PKA) See KAMIKAGAMA. 
PAIPPALADAVASADISATKARMAPADDHATI 
Paippaladavasadisatkarmapaddhati, ed. Pandita Umakanta Panda. Balasore, 
2002. 
PAUSKARASAMHITA 
(PausS) Sree Poushkara Samhita. One of the Three Gems in Pancharatra, ed. Sampathku- 
mara Ramanuja Muni. Bangalore: A. Srinivasa Aiyangar and M.C. Thiru- 
malachariar, 1934. 


560 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


PAUSKARAGAMA 
(PA) Pauskarágama (Jñānapādah), ed. K. Ramachandra Sarma. The Adyar Library 
Pamphlet Series 50. Madras: The Adyar Library and Research Centre, 1995. 
PRATYABHIJNAKARIKA of Utpaladeva with his autocommentary (-vrtti) up to 3.20 
The Siddhitrayi and the Pratyabhijna-karika-vritti of Rajanaka Utpala Deva, ed. 
Madhusudan Kaul Shastri. KSTS 34. Srinagara, 1921. 
PRATYABHIJNAHRDAYA of Ksemaraja, sütras with autocommentary 
The Pratyabhijna Hridaya being a Summary of the Doctrines of the Advaita Shaiva 
Philosophy of Kashmir, ed. Jagadisha Chandra Chatterji. KSTS 3. Srinagar, 
1911. 
PRAKIRNADHIKARA of Bhrgu 
(PrA) Prakirnadhikarah, ed. M. Ramakrishna Kavi. TTD Religious Publications Se- 
ries 483. Tirupati, 1997 (reprint of Madras 1929). 
PRAPANNAPARIJATA of Varadaguru 
(PraP)  Prapanna Parijata in Sanskrit with Translation in English by Nadadoor Ammal 
[= Varadaguru]. Madras, 1971. 
BAHURÜPAGARBHASTOTRA 
In Cnaxnavanrv 2005. 
BRHADBRAHMASAMHITA 
(BBS) nàradapaficarütrántargatà brhadbrahmasamhita, ed. $. Venegavakara. Ananda- 
$ramasamskrtagranthàvalih 68. Poona: Hari Narayana Apate, 1912. 
BODHAPANCADASIKA of Abhinavagupta with the commentary (-vivarana) of Harabhatta Shastri 
Bodhapanchadashika and Paramartha-charcha With the Vivarana by Pt. Hara 
Bhatta Shastri, ed. Jagaddhara Zadoo Shastri. KSTS 76. Srinagar, 1947. 
BRAHMASUTRA with Sribhdsya and Srutaprakasika 
(BrSü) = badarayanapranita brahmasutrakhyasarirakamimamsabhasyam vàmánujaviraci- 
tam fribhásyam sudarsanastriviracitasrutaprakasikakhyavyakhyasamudbhasitam. 
2 Vols. Ubhayavedantagranthamala. Madras, 1967. 
BRAHMANDAPURANA 
(BdP) Sri-Vyása-mabarsiproktam Brahmandapuranam. (With Introduction in Sanskrit 
and English and an Alphabetical Index of Verses), ed. J.L. Shastri. Delhi etc., 
1973. [Reprint of the Venkateévara edition of AD 1912.] 
BHAGAVADGITARTHASAMGRAHA 
Srimad Bhagavad Gita With Commentary by Mahaimdaheshwara Rajanaka 
Abhinavagupta, ed. Pandit Lakshman Raina Brahmachari [Swami Lakshman 
Joo]. Srinagar: Kashmir Pratap Steam Press, 1933. 
BHAVANISAHASRANAMA 
acaryasrisihibhakaulakrtadevisahasranamavaliprasiddha bhavininimasahasra- 
stutih svahakarasahita. Srinagar: Srikantha Kacarü, 1958. 
BHAVOPAHARASTOTRA of Cakrapani 
The Bhavopahdara of Chakrapani Natha with commentary by Ramya Deva Bhatta, 
ed. Mukunda Rama Sastri. KSTS 14. Bombay, 1918. 
BHAVOPAHARAVIVARANA of Ramyadeva 
See BHAVOPAHARASTOTRA. 


General Bibliography 561 


BHASKARI of Rajanaka Bhaskarakantha 
Bhaskari. Isvarapratyabhijnavimarsini, Abhinavagupta. Vols. I-II, A Commen- 
tary on the Isvarapratyabhijnavimarsini of Abhinavagupta, ed. K. A. Subrahmia 
Iyer and K. C. Pandey. 2 volumes. Allahabad: Superintendent, Printing and 
Stationery, United Provinces, 1938 & 1950. 

BHAIRAVASTOTRA of Abhinavagupta 
In PANDpEY 1963, pp. 951—952. 

BHAIRAVANUKARANASTOTRA of Ksemaraja 
In Gnou 1958, pp. 223-226. 

MANJUSRIMULAKALPA 
Aryamanjusrimilakalpa, ed. T. Ganapati Sastri, Trivandrum Sanskrit Series 70, 
76 and 84. Trivandrum: The Oriental Manuscript Library of the University 
of Travancore, 1920, 1922 and 1925. Reprinted by PL. Vaidya as Buddhist 
Sanskrit Texts 18 (one volume), Darbhanga: Mithila Institute, 1964. 

MATANGAPARAMESVARAGAMA 

(MPA) Matangaparamesvaragama (Vidyapada) avec le commentaire de Bhatta Rama- 

kantha, ed. N. R. Bhatt. PIFI 56. Pondicherry: IFI, 1977. 


(MPA)  Matangaparamesvaragama (Kriyapada, Yogapada et Caryapada) avec le commen- 
taire de Bhatta Rámakantha, ed. N. R. Bhatt. PIFI 65. Pondicherry: IFI, 1982. 


MATSYAPURANA 


(MP) dvaipáyanamunipranitam Matsyapuranam anandasramasthapanditaih samsodhi- 
tam. Anandàéramah Samskrtagranthavalih 54. Poona: Anandagramamudrana- 
laya,1903. 

MANUSMRTI 


Manusmrti with the “Manubhasya” of Medhatithi, ed. Ganganatha Jha. Biblio- 
theca Indica No. 256. 2 Vols. Calcutta: Royal Asiatic Society of Bengal, 1932 
and 1939. 

MAYAMATA 

(MM) Mayamata: Traité Sanskrit d'Architecture, ed. and trans. Bruno Dagens. 2 Vols. 

PIFI 40.1—2. Pondichéry: Institut Frangais d'Indologie, 1976. 

MAHANAYAPRAKASA of Sitikantha 
The Mahanaya-Prakasha of Rajanaka Shiti Kantha, ed. Mukunda Rama Sastri. 
KSTS 21. Bombay, 1918. 

MAHANAYAPRAKASA (anonymous) 
Mahanayaprakasa, ed. K. Sāmbaśiva Sastri. Trivandrum Sanskrit Series 130, 
Citrodayamafijari 19. Trivandrum, 1937. 

MAHABHARATA 

(MBh) The Mahabharata. For the first time critically edited by V. S. Sukthankar, with 

the cooperation of S. K. Belvalkar, A. B. Gajendragadkar, V. Kane, R. D. Kar- 
markar, P. L. Vaidya, S. Winternitz, R. Zimmerman, and other scholars and il- 
lustrated by Shrimant Balasaheb Pant Pratinidhi. (Since 1943 ed. S. Belvalkar). 
19 Vols. Poona: BORI, 1927-1959. 

MAHARTHAMANJARIPARIMALA of Mahesvarananda 
The Maharthamanjart with the commentary Parimala of Mahesvarananda, ed. T. 
Ganapati Sastri. Trivandrum Sanskrit Series 66. Trivandrum, 1919. 


562 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


MAHOTSAVAVIDHI of Aghorasiva 
(MV) Mabotsavavidhi, ed. C. Swaminatha Sivacarya. Madras: South Indian Archakar 
Association, 1974. 

MAHOPADESAVIMSATIKA 
Ed. K. C. Pandey in: PANDEY 1963, pp. 946-47. 

MALINIVIJAYAVARTTIKA of Abhinavagupta 
Malinivijayavárttika of Abbinava Gupta, ed. Madhusudan Kaul Shastri. 
KSTS 31. Srinagar, 1921. 

See also HANNEDER 1998. 
MALINIVIJAYOTTARATANTRA 
(MVUT)  Malinivijayottaratantram, ed. Madhusüdana Kaula Sastri. KSTS 37. Srinagar, 
1922. 
See also VasupEva 2004. 
MRGENDRATANTRA 
(MrgT) — Sri Mrgendra Tantram (Vidyapada & Yogapüda) with the Commentary of 
Narayanakantha, ed. Madhusudan Kaul Shastri. KSTS 50. Srinagar, 1930. 
(MrgT)  Mrgendrigama (Kriyapada et Caryápdda) avec le commentaire de Bhatta- 
Narayanakantha, ed. N. R. Bhatt. PIFI 23. Pondicherry: IFI, 1962. 

MRGENDRAVRTTIDIPIKA of Aghorasivacarya 
sri mrgendram kámikopágamam vidydyoga-padadvayamilitam sribhattandraya- 
nakanthaviracitaya vrttyà tadvyakhyaya ghorafivacaryaviracitayà dipikaya cála- 
nkrtam, ed. Na. Krsnasástri and K.M. Subrahmanyasastri. Sivagamasiddhanta- 
paripalanasangrahasamkhya 12. Devakottai, 1928. 

MOKSAKARIKA of Sadyojyotis with vrtti of Ramakantha 
In: Astaprakaranam. 

YATINDRAMATADIPIKA 
Sri Bháshya Vártika, A Treatise on Visisthddvaita Philosophy; Also Yatindra Mat 
Dipika, By Nivásá Chárya son of Govinda, And Sakalachéryamat Sangrah, ed. 
Ratna Gopal Bhatta. Benares Sanskrit Series 123 & 133. Benares, 1970. 

YAJNAVALKYASMRTI 
Yajnavalkyasmrti With the commentary Mitaksara of Vijndanesvara. Notes, Varient 
readings etc., no editor accredited. Delhi: Nag Publishers, 1985 (declared to be 
a reprint of ‘an earlier edition of Nirnaya Sagar Press’). 

YAJNAVALKYASMRTITIKA of Aparaditya/Apararka 
apararkaparabhidhaparadityaviracitatikasameta yajnavalkyasmrtih, ed. the Pan- 
dits of the Anandagrama. 2 vols. Anandasramasamskrtagranthavali 46. Pune, 
1903-4. 

YOGACUDAMANYUPANISAT 
See ISADYASTOTTARASATOPANISADAH. 

YOGABHASYA of Vyasa 

(YBh) See Yogasiitra. 
YOGASUTRA of Patafijali 
(YSü) Patanjala-Yogastitra-Bhasya-Vivaranam of Sankara-Bhagavatpáda, ed. Polakam 
Sri Rama Sastri and S. R. Krishnamurthi Sastri. Madras Government Oriental 
Series 94. Madras: Government Oriental Manuscripts Library, 1952. 


General Bibliography 563 


YOGINIHRDAYA with the commentary of Amrtanandayogin 
yoginibrdayam amrtanandayogikrtadipikaya, bhásanuvádena ca sahitam, ed. Vra- 
javallabha Dviveda. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1988. 

RATNATRAYAPARIKSA of Srikantha 

(RTP) In: Astaprakaranam. 

RATNATRAYAPARIKSOLLEKHINI of Aghorasiva 
In: Astaprakaranam. 

RAHASYAPANCADASIKA 
Ed. K. C. Pandey in: PANDEY 1963, pp. 954-56. 

RAJATARANGINI of Kalhana 
Kalhana’s Rajatarangini. Chronicle of the Kings of Kashmir. Volume III. San- 
skrit Text with Critical Notes, ed. M. A. Stein. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1988 
(reprint of Bombay edition of 1892). 

RAJATARANGINI of Jonaraja 
See Kau 1967. 

RUDRANAMANI of Vi$éuddhamuni 
Printed as an appendix to the Ganakárika. See GANAKARIKA. 

RAURAVASÜTRASANGRAHA 
Published in volume 1 of RAURAVAGAMA, q.v. 

RAURAVAGAMA 

(RA) Rauravagama, ed. N.R. Bhatt. 3 Vols. PIFI 18.1—3. Pondicherry: IFI, 1961, 
1972, 1988. 
LAKSMITANTRA 
(LT) Laksmi-Tantra. A Pancaratra Agama Edited with Sanskrit Gloss and Introduction, 
V. Krishnamacharya. The Adyar Library Series 87. Madras: The Adyar Library 
and Research Centre, 1959. 

LALITASAHASRANAMA with the commentary (Saubhagyabhdskara) of Bhaskararaya 
brahmandapuranottarabhagiyam lalitasahasranima bhaskararayapranitasaubha- 
gyabhaskarakhyabhasyopetam, ed. Vasudeva Sarma Panasikara, Bombay: 
Panduranga Javaji, 1935. 

LINGAPURANA 

(LiP) Sri-Vyása-mabarsiproktam Sri-Lingamahapuranam, with the Sanskrit commen- 
tary Sivatosini by Ganesa Natu, ed. Gangavisnu (son of Krsnadasa). Bombay: 
Venkatesvara Press, V.S. 1981 [= AD 1924]. [Reprinted, with a Slokanukramani 
by Nagagarana Simha, Delhi: Nag Publishers, 1989 (2nd ed. 1996)] 

VAKYAPADIYA of Bhartrhari 

(VP) Vakyapadiya of Bhartrhari with the Commentaries Vrtti and Paddhati of Vrsabha- 
deva. Kanda I, ed. K. A. Subramania Iyer. Deccan College Monograph Series 
32. Pune, 1966. 

(VP) Bhartrharis Vakyapadiya. Die Milakarikas nach den Handschriften herausgegeben 
und mit einem Pada-index versehen, ed. Wilhelm Rau. Abhandlungen für die 
Kunde des Morgenlandes 42, part 4. Wiesbaden: Komissionsverlag Franz 
Steiner, 1977. 


564 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


VATULANATHASUTRAVRITI of Anantagakti 
The Vatiilanatha-Sitras with the Vritti of Anantasaktipáda, ed. with English 
translation and notes by Pt. Madhusudan Kaul Shastri. KSTS 39. Bombay, 
1923. 
VAMAKESVARIMATA 
The Vamakesvarimatam With the Commentary of Rajanaka Jayaratha, ed. Mad- 
husudan Kaul Shastri. KSTS 66. Srinagar, 1945. 
VAYUPURANA 
(VaP\.;) The Vayumahdpuranam. Edit. by Khemaraja. Delhi: Nag Publishers, 1983. 
[Reprint of the Venkatesvara edition of AD 1895.] 
(VaPi)  Mahamunisrimad-Vyasa-pranitam Vayupurdnam, etat pustakam anandasrama- 
sthapanditaih samsodhitam. Poona, SS 1827 [AD 1905]. Ànandàíramasam- 
skrtagranthavalih 49. [reprinted without the critical apparatus in 1983]. 


VIJ&ANAKAUMUDI of Bhattaraka Ananda 
The Vijnana-Bhairava with commentary called Kaumadi by Ananda Bhatta, ed. 
Mukunda Rama Sastri. KSTS 9. Bombay, 1918. 
VIJNANABHAIRAVA 
Vijnanabhairavah anvayartha-rahasyarthavyakhya (samskrta-hindi) samvalitab, 
ed. Vrajavallabha Dvivedi. Varanasi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1984. (Reprinted 
from an edition of 1978.) 
VIJNANABHAIRAVAVIVRTI of Sivopadhyaya 
The Vijnana-Bhairava with commentary partly by Kshemaraja and partly by Shiv- 
opadhyaya, ed. Mukunda Rama Sastri. KSTS 8. Bombay, 1918. 
VISVAMITRASAMHITA 
(VisS) Visvamitra Samhita, ed. Undemane Shankara Bhatta. Kendriya Sanskrit 
Vidyapeetha Series 13. Tirupati: Kendriya Sanskrit Vidyapeetha, 1970. 
VISNUSAMHITA 
(VisnuS) The Visnu Samhita, ed. M. M. Ganapati Sastri. Trivandrum Sanskrit Series 85. 
Delhi: Nag Publishers, 1925 (revised and enlarged edition of 1991). 
VISNUDHARMA 
(VDh) See GRUNENDAHL 1983-89. 
VISVAKSENASAMHITA 
Visvaksena Samhita, ed. Lakshmi Narasimha Bhatta. Kendriya Sanskrita 
Vidyapeetha Series 17. Tirupati, 1972. 
VINASIKHATANTRA 
The Vinasikhatantra A Saiva Tantra of the Left Current, Edited with an Introduc- 
tion and a Translation by Teun Goudriaan. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1985. 
SATARATNASANGRAHA of Umapatisivacarya 


(SRS) Sataratnasangraha of Sri Umápati Sivacarya, ed. and trans. P. Thirugnanasam- 
bandhan, Madras: University of Madras, 1973. 
SANDILYOPANISAT 


See ISADYASTOTTARASATOPANISADAH. 


General Bibliography 565 


SIVADRSTI of Somananda 
(SDr) The Sivadrsti of Srisomanandanatha with the Vritti by Utpaladeva, ed. Madhusu- 
dan Kaul Shastri. KSTS 54. Srinagar, 1934. 
SIVADRSTIVRTTI of Utpaladeva 
See SIVADRSTI. 
SIVANIRVANAPADDHATI 
In: panditakesavabhattajyotirvida samskarasodhanabhyam sampaditam sángopá- 
nga-visnubalividhi-sanga-Saivikriyatmakam karmakandam. caturthapustakam, 
Bombay: Nirnayasagara Press, 1936, pp. 205—292. 
SIVAPURANA 
(SivaP) The Sivamahapuranam, ed. Ksemaraja Srikrsnadása. 2 Vols. Delhi: Nag Pub- 
lishers, 1986 (reprint). 
SIVAPUJASTAVA of JAanagsambhu 
Sivapujastavab savyakhyah jnanasambhusivacaryapranitah, ed. K. M. Subrahma- 
nyasastri. Sivagamasanghaprakasitagranthasankhya 19. Devakottai: Sivagama- 
sangha, 1935. 
SIVASÜTRAVARTIKA of Bhaskara 
Shiva Sütra Varttika by Bháskara, ed. Jagadisha Chandra Chatterji. KSTS 4. 
Srinagar, 1916. 
SIVASÜTRAVARTIKA of Varadaraja 
Shivasutra-Vartikam by Varadaraja, ed. Madhusudan Kaul Shastri. KSTS 43. 
Srinagar, 1925. 
STVASUTRAVIMARSINI of Ksemaraja 
The Shiva Sütra Vimarshini, being the Sütras of Vasu Gupta with the Commentary 
called Vimarshini by Kshemaraja. KSTS 1. Srinagar, 1911. 
STVASTOTRAVALI of Utpaladeva with the commentary (-vivrti) of Ksemaraja 
The Sivastotravali of Utpaladevacárya with the Sanskrit Commentary of Ksema- 
raja edited with Hindi Commentary, ed. Rajanaka Laksmana [Lakshman 
Raina, Swami Lakshman Joo]. Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series 15. Varanasi: 
Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series Office, 1964. 
SESASAMHITA 
(SesaS)  Shesha Samhita of Pancharatna Agama, ed. G.R. Josyer. Mysore, 1981. 
SAIVAPARIBHASA 
srisivagrayogindrajnanasivacaryaviracita saivaparibhasa. The Saivaparibhasa of 
Sivagrayogindrajnanasivacarya, ed. H. R. Rangaswamy Iyengar and R. Ramasas- 
tri. Oriental Research Institute Publications Sanskrit Series No. 90. Mysore: 
Oriental Research Institute, 1950. 
SAIVAGAMAPARIBHASAMANJARI 
(SAM)  Saivägamaparibhāsīmañjarī de Vedajnana: Le Florilège de la Doctrine Sivaite, ed. 
and trans. Bruno Dagens. PIFI 60. Pondicherry: IFI, 1979. 
SRIKANTHACARITA of Mankha 
Srikanthacaritam of Mankhaka. With the Sanskrit Commentary of Jonaraja. 
Delhi/Varanasi/Patna: Motilal Banarsidass, 1983. [No editor accredited, but 
this is a reprint of the Bombay Nirnayasagar Press edition of 1897, Kavyamala 
3, ed. Durgaprasada & Kaginath Pandurang Parab.] 


566 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


SRIKANTHIYASAMHITA 
Part of this text is printed in an appendix in HANNEDER 1998. 
SRIGURUSTUTI 
Srigurustuti. Srinagar: I$vara Agrama, Vikrama 2033 (a.p. 1976/7). A booklet 
for devotional use among the disciples of the Saiva Guru Swami Lakshman 
Joo (1907-1991) containing (1) the Srigurustuti of Ramesvaracarya (Rāmeś- 
vara Jha) (pp. 1-21); (2) an unidentified hymn on the following page; (3) the 
Sripadukastuti of Jiyà Lal Kaul (pp. 1-19); (4) the Dehasthadevatacakrastotra 
attributed to Abhinavagupta (pp. 1—4); (5) the Kalikastotra of Jfananetranatha 
(pp. 1-3); and (6) miscellaneous devotional verses by RameSvara Jha (5 pages, 
unnumbered). Items 1-3 are hymns in praise of Swami Lakshman Joo. 
SRIPRASNASAMHITA 
(SripráS)  Sriprasna Samhita, ed. Seetha Padmanabhan. Kendriya Sanskrit Vidyapeetha 
Series 12. Tirupati: Kendriya Sanskrit Vidyapeetha, 1969. 
SATSAHASRASAMHITA 
The Satsábasrasamhita. Chapters 1-5, ed. and trans. J. A. Schoterman, Leiden: 
Brill, 1982. 
SANATKUMARASAMHITA 
(SanS) ^ Sanatkumdra-Samhita of the Pancaratragama, ed. V. Krishnamacharya. The Ad- 
yar Library Series 95. Adyar: The Adyar Library and Research Centre, 1969. 
SARVAJNANOTTARA 
(Ep) srikantaparamécuvarar sri cuppiramaniyarukkupatécittaruliya caruvafánottara 
dkamam ñänapātam tamilmülam um, itarkut tiruvdvatuturai ätīna caivap- 
piracárakarum, tévakóttai civakamacittanta paripálanacankattuc cittantacattira 
pótakarum akiya tuüttukkuti po. muttaiyapillai elutiya muttiratnam ennum 
viruttiyuraiyum, ed. Pd. Muttaiyapillai, Devakottai, 1923. 
(Er) Ed. Vi. Brahmanandasvamin (edition only of the 'yogapáda! and ‘vidyapada in 
Devanagari script with a Tamil translation). Tanjore, 1933.! 
(Œa) ‘Sarvajñānottarāgamah vidyapada and yogapāda , ed. K. Ramachandra Sarma 
and revised by R. Thangaswami Sarma, Adyar Library Bulletin 62, 1998 [ap- 
peared 1999], pp. 181-232. 
SAMKHYAKARIKA 
The Samkhyakarika: Isvarakrsna’s Memorable Verses of Samkhya Philosophy with 
the Commentary of Gaudapádácárya. Poona Oriental Series 9. Poona, 1933. 
SATTVATASAMHITA 
(SS) Satvata-Samhita. With Commentary by Alasinga Bhatta, ed. Vraja Vallabha 
Dwivedi. Library Rare Texts Publication Series 6. Varanasi: Sampurnanand 
Sanskrit Vishvavidyalaya, 1982. 
SADHANAMALA 
Sadhanamalé, ed. Benoytosh Bhattacharya. 2 volumes. Gaewkwad’s Oriental 
Series 41. Baroda: Oriental Institute, 1968. 


Opening pages, including title page, not seen. 


General Bibliography 567 


SAMBAPANCASIKA 
The Sámbapanchás ika of Samba. With The commentary of Kshemarája, ed. Pandit 
Kedárnátha and Wasudeva Laxman Shastri Panashikar. Kavyamala 13. Bom- 
bay: Nirnaya-Sagar Press, 1910. 
SARDHATRISATIKALOTTARA 
(Sark) — Saürdhatrisatikalottarágama avec le commentaire de Bhatta Rámakantha, ed. N. R. 
Bhatt. PIFI 61. Pondicherry: IFI, 1979. 


See also TonELLA 1976. 


SIDDHAYOGESVARIMATATANTRA 
(SYM) See Tónzsók *1999. 

SIDDHAHEMACANDRA of Hemacandra 
Hemacandras Grammatik. der Prakritsprachen (Siddhahemacandram Adhyâya 
VIII) mit kritischen under erléuternden Anmerkungen, ed. Richard Pischel, Os- 
nabrück: Biblio Verlag, 1969 (reprint). Originally published: 1877-1880. 

SIDDHANTASARAVALIVYAKHYA of Ananta$ambhu 

(SSAV) Published in five parts in the Bulletin of the Government Oriental Manuscripts 

Library Madras: Vol.17.1, pp.29-68 (ed. A.A. Ramanathan and T.H. 
Viswanathan); Vols. 17.2, pp. 1—48; 18.1, pp. 1-64 and 19.1, pp. 53-84 (ed. 
R. K. Parthasarathi and T. H. Viswanathan); Vol. 19.2 pp. 1-48 and Vol. 20.2, 
pp.49-71 (ed. T.H. Viswanathan, P.G. Seetharaman and R. Ganesan). 
Madras, 1965-1968. 

SUPRABHEDA 
srimat suprapétakamam, printed by Mayilai-Alakappa Muyaliyar (no editor ac- 
credited). Madras (Cintatiripéttai): Civafanapotayantracalai, 1908 (Kaliyuga 
5009). 

SUBHAGODAYA of Sivananda 
See NITYASODASIKARNAVA. 

SUBHAGODAYAVASANA of Sivananda 
See NITYASODASIKARNAVA. 

SUBHASITAVALI of Vallabhadeva 
The Subháshitávali of Vallabhadeva, ed. Peter Peterson and Pandit Durgápra- 
sada. Bombay Sanskrit Series no. 31. Bombay, 1886. 

SOMASAMBHUPADDHATI 


(SP1-4) | See Brunner 1963, 1968, 1977 & 1998. 
See also KARMAKANDAKRAMAVALI. 


SAUNDARYALAHARI attributed to Sankarabhagavat 
Srimacchamkarabhagatpadaviracita Saundaryalahari Laksmidhara-Saubhagya- 
vardhani-Arunamodini-Anandagiriya-Titparyadipini-Padarthacandrika-Di- 
ndimabhasya-Gopalasundari-Anandalahari-Kaivalyavardhani, amglanuvada, 
tippani, prayogayantra tathà puja vidhi sahita, ed. A. Kuppuswami. Revised & 
enlarged edition. Delhi: Nag Publishers, 1991. 

SAUBHAGYAVARDHANI of Kaivalyasrama 
See SAUNDARYALAHARI. 


568 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


SAUBHAGYASUDHODAYA of Amrtanandayogin 
See NITYASODASIKARNAVA. 

SAUBHAGYAHRDAYASTOTRA of Sivananda 
See NITYASODASIKARNAVA. 

SAUBHAGYANANDASANDOHA of Maheévaranandanatha, son of Konkanastha Bhaskararayayajvan 
Paramánandatantram With the Commentary Saubbágyanandasandoha by 
Mabhefvaránandanátha, ed. Raghunatha Misra. Yogatantra-Granthamala 9. 
Varanasi: Sampurnanand Sanskrit Vishvavidyalaya, 1985. 

SKANDAPURANA 

(SP I) The Skandapurana. Volume I. Adhyayas 1—25. Critically Edited with Prolegomena 
and English Synopsis by R. Adriaensen, H.T. Bakker and H. Isaacson. Supple- 
ment to Groningen Oriental Studies. Groningen: Egbert Forsten, 1998. 


(SPHA) | 7heSkandapurána. Volume ITA. Adhyayas 26—31.14. The Varanasi Cycle. Critical 
Edition with an Introduction, English Synopsis & Philological and Historical Com- 
mentary by Hans T. Bakker & Harunaga Isaacson. Supplement to Groningen 
Oriental Studies. Groningen: Egbert Forsten, 2004. 


(SP pp) Skandapurdnasya Ambikdkhandah, ed. Krsnaprasada Bhattarai. Mahendra- 
ratnagranthamala 2. Kathmandu, 1988. 


STAVACINTAMANIVIVRTI of Bhatta Narayana 
The Stava-Chintamani of Bhatta Narayana with commentary by Kshemaraja, ed. 
Mukunda Rama Sastri. KSTS 10. Srinagar, 1918. 

STUTIKUSUMANJALITIKA 
The Stutikusumánjali of Jagaddhara Bhatta with the commentary of Rájánaka Rat- 
nakantha, ed. Pandit Durgáprasád and Kasinath Pandurang Parab. Kavyamala 
23. Bombay: The Proprietor of the Nirnaya-Sagara Press, 1891. 

STUTISAMGRAHA 
A booklet published by the Saiva Mandali (Kashmir) without publication de- 
tails. Contains the following: (1) a Ganesadhyanaslokah (p.1); (2) the Bahu- 
rüpagarbbastotra attributed to the Lalitasvacchanda (pp. 1-12); (3) the Sam- 
grahastotra of Utpaladeva (pp. 13—14); (4) the Kalikastotra of JAananetranatha 
(pp. 15-16); (5) the Mahimnahstotra of Puspadanta (pp. 17-24); and (6) the 
Bhairavastava of Abhinavagupta (pp. 24-25). 

SPANDAKARIKAVIVRTI of Rajanaka Ramakantha 
The Spanda Karikas with the Vivriti of Rimakantha. KSTS 6. Srinagar, 1913. 

SPANDAKARIKAVRTTI of Kallata 
The Spanda Karikas with the vritti by Kallata, ed. Jagadisha Chandra Chatterji. 
KSTS 5. Srinagar, 1916. 

SPANDANIRNAYA of Ksemaraja 
The Spandakarikas of Vasugupta with the Nirnaya by Kshemaraja edited with Pref- 
ace, Introduction and English Translation, Madhusüdan Kaul Shastri. KSTS 42. 
Srinagar, 1925. 

SPANDAPRADIPIKA of Bhagavatotpala 
In: Zantrasangraba [Part I], ed. Gopinatha Kaviraja. Yogatantra-granthamala 
3. Varanasi: Director, Research Institute, Varanaseya Sanskrit Vishvavidyalaya, 


1970. 


General Bibliography 569 


SPANDASANDOHA of Ksemaraja 
The Spanda Sandoha of Kshémaraja, ed. Mukunda Rama Shastri. KSTS 16. 
Bombay, 1917. 
SPHOTASIDDHI of Mandanamiéra 
Sphota Siddhi (La démonstration du sphota) par Mandana Mi'sra. Introduction, 
traduction et commentaire par Madeleine Biardeau. Texte sanskrit établi par N. R. 
Bhatt avec la collaboration de T. Ramanujam, ed. Madeleine Biardeau. PIFI 13. 
Pondicherry: IFI, 1958. 
SVACCHANDATANTRA with -UDDYOTA of Ksemaraja 
(SvT) The Svacchanda-Tantram with Commentary by Kshema Raja, ed. Madhusüdan 
Kaul Suásrni. KSTS 31, 38, 44, 48, 51, 53, and 56. Bombay, 1921, 1923, 
1926, 1927, 1930, 1933, 1935. 
SVAYAMBHUVASUTRASANGRAHA 
srifaivagame svayambhuvasitrasangrahah (svayambhuva maharsibhya uddistab), 
ed. Venkatasubrahmanyasastri, Mysore, 1937. 
See also FrLutozar 1994. 
HAYASIRSAPANCARATRA 
(H) The Hayasirsa Pancharatram. Adikanda, ed. Bhuban Mohan Sankhyatirtha. 2 
Vols. Rajshahi: Varendra Research Society, 1952, 1956. 
HARAVIJAYA of Ratnakara 
The Haravijaya of Rájánaka Ratnákara with the Commentary of Rajanaka Alaka, 
ed. Durgaprasada and Kasinath Pandurang Parab. Kavyamala (reprint) 22. 
Varanasi: Chaukhamba Sanskrit Sansthan, 1982. Originally published: Bom- 
bay: Nirnaya Sagar Press, 1890. 
HEVAJRATANTRA 
See SNELLGROVE 1959. 
HEVAJRATANTRAYOGARATNAMALA of Kanhapada 
In SNELLGROVE 1959. 


"TRANSLATIONS AND STUDIES 


ABHYANKAR, K. V. (ed.) 
1967 Paribhásásamgraba (a collection of original works on Vyakarana Paribbasas) edited 
critically with an introduction. Post-graduate and Research Department Series 
No. 7. Poona: BORI. 
ACHARD, Jean-Luc 
1999 L'Essence perlée du secret: recherches philologiques et historiques sur l'origine de la 
Grande Perfection dans la tradition rNying ma pa. Bibliothéque de l'Ecole des 
Hautes Etudes, Section de Sciences Religieuses, volume 107. Turnhout: Bre- 
pols. 
ACHARYA, Diwakar 
forthcoming A Antestividhi: A Manual for the Funeral Rite of the Lakuliga Pasupatas. 


forthcoming B Parravidhi: A Pāśupata Manual on Purification of the Pot. 


570 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


forthcoming C Prayascittavidhi: A Manual on Atonement of a Lakuliéa Pasupata. 
ACRI, Andrea 
forthcoming ‘On the Textual Basis of Saivism in Ancient Indonesia. The Sanskrit-Old Ja- 
vanese Tutur Literature from Bali’, in: Rivista di Studi Sudasiatici 1. 


Baccut, Prabodh Chandra 


1934 See KAULAJNANANIRNAYA. 
Bakker, Hans 
2000 'Somasarman, Somavaméa and Somasiddhanta. A Pagupata tradition in 


seventh-century Daksina Kosala. Studies in the Skandapurdana WT, in: Ryutaro 
Tsuchida and Albrecht Wezler (eds.), Haninandalahari. Volume in Honour of 
Professor Minoru Hara on his Seventieth Birthday. Reinbek, pp. 1-19. 


2004 ‘At the Right Side of the Teacher: Imagination, Imagery, and Image in Vedic 
and Saiva Initiation’, in: Phyllis Granoff and Koichi Shinohara (eds.), Images in 
Asian Religions. Vancouver: University of British Columbia Press, pp. 117-148. 


BANERJEA, Jitendra Nath 
21956 The Development of Hindu Iconography. Calcutta: Munshiram Manoharlal Pub- 
lishers (reprint of 1985). 
Bea, Samuel (transl.) 
1884 Si-yu-ki. Buddhist Records of the Western World. London: Trübner. 
Buac RAM, Rai Bahadur Pandit 
1893 The Kashmir State. The Report on the Census and Imperial and Supplementary 
Tables. Census of India, 1891, Volume 28. Lahore: Mufid-i-am Press. 
BHATTACHARYA, Kamaleswar 
1966 ‘Linga-koga’, in: Ba Shin, Jean Boisselier & A. B. Griswold (eds.), Essays offered 
to G.H. Luce by his colleagues and friends in honour of his seventy-fifth birth- 
day, Volume II. Papers on Asian Art and Archaeology. Ascona: Artibus Asiae 
Publishers, pp. 6-13. 
BisscHop, Peter 
2004 ‘Sivas dyatanas in the Various Recensions of Skandapurdna 167’, in: Hans 
T. Bakker (ed.), Origin and Growth of the Puranic Text Corpus. With Special Ref- 
erence to the Skandapurana. Papers of the 12th World Sanskrit Conference Vol. 3.2. 
Delhi, pp. 65-78. 
2005 ‘Paficarthabhasya on Pasupatasütra 1.37—39 Recovered from a Newly Identified 
Manuscript in Journal of Indian Philosophy 33, pp. 529—551. 
2006 Early Saivism and the Skandapurána. Sects and Centres. Groningen Oriental 
Studies XXI. Groningen: Egbert Forsten 
forthcoming A “The Sütrapàtha of the Pasupatasütra', submitted to the Indo-Iranian Journal. 
forthcoming B “Two parallel passsages in the Vayupurana and the Skandapurana.’ To be pub- 
lished in the Proceedings of the 13th World Sanskrit Conference, Edinburgh, 
10th-14th July 2006. 
BisscHop, Peter, & GRIFFITHS, Arlo 
2003 "Ihe Pàéupata Observance (Atharvaparisista 40), Indo-Iranian Journal 46 
(2003), pp. 315-348. 


General Bibliography 571 


Boccio, Fabio 
*2005 La Bhogakárikà di Sadyojyotis con il commento di Aghorasivacarya. (Unpublished 
doctoral thesis submitted to the University of Rome "La Sapienza"). 
BUHLER, Georg 
1877 Detailed Report of a Tour in Search of Sanskrit MSS. made in Kasmír, Rajputana, 
and Central India. Extra number of the Journal of the Bombay Branch of the 
Royal Asiatic Society. Bombay and London: Trübner. 
Burrow, T. & EMENEAU, M. B. 
1984 A Dravidian Etymological Dictionary. 2nd edition. Oxford: Clarendon Press. 
CHAKRAVARTY, Hemendra Nath 
2005 ‘Bahurūpagarbhastotra: An Annotated Translation, in: Sadananda Das & Ernst 
Fürlinger (eds.), Szmuarasya. Studies in Indian Arts, Philosophy, and Interreligious 
Dialogue, New Delhi: D.K. Printworld, pp. 37—47. 
CHANDRA, Lokesh 
1979 ‘Oddiyāna, A New Interpretation’, in: Ludwik Sternbach Feliciation Volume, 
pt. 1, Lucknow: Akhil Bharatiya Sanskrit Parishad, pp. 491—514. 


1984 Sanskrit Texts from Kashmir, Volume 7. Sata-pitaka Series, Indo-Asian Litera- 
tures, No. 333. New Delhi: Sharada Rani. 


CHAVANNES, Edouard 
1969 Documents sur les Tou-kiue (Turcs) Occidentaux, receuillis et commentés suivi de 
notes additionelles. Reprint. Taibei: Ch'eng Wen Publishing. This combines 
Documents sur les Tou-kiue [Turcs] Occidentaux (originally published: Paris: 
Adrien-Maisonneuve, 1903) and ‘Notes additionnelles sur les Tou-kiue (Turcs) 
Occidentaux’ (originally published: Toung Pao 2nd series, 5, pp. 1-110, 1904). 
CaipEs, George 
1937—1966 Inscriptions du Cambodge. 8 volumes. Paris: EFEO, 1937 (vol. 1), 1942 (vol. 2), 
1951 (vol. 3), 1952 (vol. 4), 1953 (vol. 5), 1954 (vol. 6), 1964 (vol. 7), 1966 
(vol. 8). 
Cotas, Gérard 
1996 Visnu, ses images et ses feux. Les métamorphoses du dieu chez les vaikbánasa. Mono- 
graphies 182. Paris: Presses de l'École Francaise d'Extréme-Orient. 
DASGUPTA, Surendranath 
1922 A History of Indian Philosophy. Vol. V: Southern Schools of Saivism. Delhi, etc.: 
Motilal Banarsidass (reprint of 1991). 
Davis, Richard H. 
*1986 “Ritual in an Oscillating Universe.” Ph.D. diss. University of Chicago. 


1991 Ritual in an Oscillating Universe: Worshiping Siva in Medieval India. Princeton: 
Princeton University Press. 


1992a ‘Aghorasiva's Background’, in: The Journal of Oriental Research Madras (Dr. S. S. 
Janaki Felicitation Volume) 56-62 (1986-1992), pp. 367-378. 

1992b ‘Becoming a Siva, and Acting as One, in Saiva Worship’, in: Teun Goudriaan 
(ed.) Ritual and Speculation in Early Tantrism: Studies in Honor of André Padoux, 
Albany: State University of New York Press, pp. 107—119. 


572 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


DEvaSENAPATHI, V. A. 
1966 Saiva Siddhanta as expounded in the Sivajhanasiddhiyar and its six commentaries, 
Madras University Philosophical Series No. 7. Madras: University of Madras. 
Dezső, Csaba (ed., transl.) 
2005 Much Ado About Religion by Bhatta Jayanta. Clay Sanskrit Library. New York: 
New York University Press/JJC Foundation. 
DowMAN, Keith (transl., comm.) 
1985 Masters of Mahamudra: Songs and Histories of the Eighty-Four Buddhist Siddhas. 
Albany: State University of New York Press. 
DuNvuwiLA, Rohan A. 
1985 Saiva Siddhanta Theology. A context of Hindu-Christian Dialogue. Delhi: Motilal 
Banarsidass. 
Dyczxowsxt, Mark S. G. 
1988 The Canon of the Saivagama and the Kubjika Tantras of the Western Kaula Tra- 
dition. New York: State University of New York Press. 
Epigraphia Indica 
1892— Epigraphia Indica, Calcutta/Delhi: Archaeological Survey of India. 
FriLiozar, Pierre-Sylvain 
1984 ‘Les Nadakarika de Ramakantha, Bulletin de l'Ecole francaise d'Extréme-Orient 
73, pp. 223-55. 


1994 Svayambhuvastitrasamgrahah, vidyapadab, sadyojyotiskrtatikasahitah. The Tantra 
of Svayambhi vidyápáda With the commentary of Sadyojyoti, ed. and trans. 
Pierre-Sylvain Filliozat. Kalamilasastra Series 13. Delhi: Indira Gandhi Na- 
tional Centre for the Arts & Motilal Banarsidass Publishers. 


2001 ‘Structures architecturales et iconographiques de temples de Siva au Karnataka 
du XI° au XIII* siècle’, pp. 667-85 in: Académie des inscriptions et belles- 
lettres—Comptes rendus des séances de l'année 2001, janvier-mars. 


FRAUWALLNER, Erich 
1992 Nachgelassene Werke II. Philosophische Texte des Hinduismus, ed. Gerhard 
Oberhammer and Chlodwig H. Werba. Osterreichische Akademie der Wis- 
senschaften, philosophisch-historische Klasse, Sitzungsberichte 588, Veróf- 
fentlichungen der Kommission fiir Sprachen und Kulturen Siidasiens 26. Vi- 
enna: Verlag der Osterreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften. 
GANESAN, T. 
2005 ‘Approaching the Agama: A brief Survey of their contents’, in: Lakshmi- 
narasimha Bhatta, K. Hayavadana Puranik & Haripriya Rangarajan (eds.) 
Glimpses of the National Seminar on Agamas. Agamasusamé, Rashtriya Sanskrit 
Vidyapeetha, Tirupati Series 115. Tirupati: Rashtriya Sanskrit Vidyapeetha, 
2005, pp. 140-62. 
2006 'Caivakamankal kürum tirukkoyil urcavankal’, in: Tzruvitaimarutür Arulmiku 
makálingacuvami tirukkoyil tirukkutannirattu peruvila malar, Tiruvavaduthu- 
rai: Tiruvavaduthurai Adeenam, pp. 93-104. 


General Bibliography 573 


GENGNAGEL, Jórg 
1996 Maya, Purusa und Siva. Die dualistische Tradition des Sivaismus nach Agho- 
rafivacáryas Tattvaprakdsavrtti. Beiträge zur Kenntnis südasiatischer Sprachen 
und Literaturen 3. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz. 
GNoLI, Raniero 
1958 "Miscellanea Indica’, East and West 9 (n.s.), pp. 215-226. 


1959 ‘Vac. Il secondo capitolo della Sivadrsti di Somananda’, Rivista degli Studi Ori- 
entali 34.1—2, pp. 55-75. 


1985 Il Commento di Abhinavagupta alla Paratrimíika (Paratrimsikdvivarana). 
Traduzione e Testo. Serie Orientale Roma 58. Rome: Istituto Italiano per il 
Medio ed Estremo Oriente. 


1999 Abhinavagupta, Luce dei Tantra. (Tantraloka). Biblioteca Orientale 4. Milan: 


Adelphi Edizioni. 
GooDALL, Dominic 

1998 Bhatta Ramakanthbas Commentary on the Kiranatantra. Volume I: chapters 1—6. 
Critical edition and annotated translation. PDI 86.1. Pondicherry: IFP/EFEO, 
1998. 

2000 "Problems of Name and lineage: relationships between South Indian authors of 
the Saiva Siddhanta’, Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, Series 3, 10, 2, pp. 205— 
16. 


2001 "Ihe Saiddhantika Parakhyatantra, its Account of Language, and the Inter- 
polation of the Eighth Chapter of the Published Pauskaragama’, in: Raffaele 
'TonzLLa et al. (ed.) Le parole e i marmi. Studi in onore di Raniero Gnoli nel 
suo 70? compleanno. Serie Orientale Roma 92.1—2. Rome: Istituto Italiano per 


l'Africa e l'Oriente, pp. 327—50. 


2004 See PARAKHYATANTRA. 
2005 See PANCAVARANASTAVA. 
2006 ‘Initiation et délivrance selon le $aiva siddhanta’, in: Gérard Colas & 


Gilles Tarabout (eds.), Rites hindous, transferts et transformations. Collection 
Purusartha 25. Paris: École des Hautes Études en Sciences Sociales, pp. 93— 


116. 
GOUDRIAAN, Teun 
1985 See VINASIKHATANTRA. 


1986 'Kubjikas Samayamantra and Its Manipulation in the Kubjikdmata’, in: André 
Padoux (ed.), Mantras et Diagrammes Rituelles dans l'Hindouisme, Paris: Edi- 
tions du Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, pp. 141—60. 


GOUDRIAAN, T. & SCHOTERMAN, J. A. (ed.) 
1988 The Kubjikamatatantra. Kulalikámnáya Version. Leiden: Brill. 
GRIERSON, Sir George A. 
1929 “The Language of the Maha-naya-prakaga: an Examination of Kashmiri as Writ- 
ten in the Fifteenth Century’, Memoirs of the Asiatic Society of Bengal 11, 
pp. 73-130. 


574 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


Grierson, Sir George, assisted by Mukundarama Sastri of Srinagar 
1915 & 1932 A Dictionary of the Kashmiri Language compiled partly from materials left by 
the late Pandit Ivara Kaula. Bibliotheca Indica, New Series No. 1405. Hert- 
ford: Asiatic Society of Bengal. Reproduced in one volume, Delhi: Low Price 
Publications, 1993. 
GRIFFITHS, Arlo (in collaboration with J. C. Eade and Gerdi Gerschheimer) 

2005 ‘La stèle d'installation de Sri Tribhuvanesvara : une nouvelle inscription 
préangkorienne du Musée National de Phnom Penh (K. 1214)’, Journal Asi- 
atique CCXCIIL pp. 11-43. 

GRIFFITHS, Arlo 
2006 See BisscHop. 
GRUNENDAHL, Reinhold (ed.) 
1983-89  Visnudharmah. Precepts for the Worship of Visnu. 3 Vols. Wiesbaden: Otto Har- 
rassowitz. 
GUENTHER, Herbert V. 

1994 Wholeness Lost and Wholeness Regained: Forgotten Tales of Individuation from 
Ancient Tibet. SUNY Series in Buddhist Studies. Albany: State University of 
New York Press. 

HANNEDER, Jürgen 

1998 Abhinavaguptas Philosophy of Revelation. An edition and annotated translation of 
Malinislokavárttika I, 1-399. Groningen Oriental Series Volume XIV. Gronin- 
gen: Egbert Forsten. 

HANNEDER, Jürgen & Stayz, Walter (ed.) 

2002 Bhaskarakanthas Moksopaya-tika. A Commentary on The Earliest Available Re- 
cension of the Yogavasistha. I Vairagyaprakaranam. Revised edition in Devanagari 
script. Geisteskultur Indiens. Texte und Studien, Bd. 1. Indologica Halensis. 
Aachen: Shaker Verlag. 

Hara, Minoru 

2002 Pasupata Studies, ed. Jun Takashima. Publications of the de Nobili Research 

Library Volume 30. Vienna: Sammlung de Nobili. 
HarimorTo, Kengo 

2004 ‘Appendix. Adhyayas in the R and A Manuscripts’, in: Hans T. Bakker (ed.), 
Origin and Growth of the Puránic Text Corpus. With Special Reference to the 
Skandapurdna. Papers of the 12th World Sanskrit Conference Vol. 3.2. Delhi, 
pp. 139-190. 

HAnrEL, Herbert 

1987 ‘Archaeological Evidence on the Early Vasudeva Worship’, in: Orientalia losephi 
Tucci Memoriae Dicata, ed. G. Gnoli and L. Lanciotti. Serie Orientale Roma 
56,2. Roma: Istituto Italiano per il Medio ed Estremo Oriente, pp. 573-587. 

Hazra, Rajendra Chandra 
1953/1954 ‘Studies in the Genuine Agneya-Purana alias Vahni-Purana.’ 2 parts. In: Our 
Heritage 1/2 (1953), pp. 209-245; 2/1 (1954), pp. 77-110. 


21975 Studies in the Puránic Records on Hindu Rites and Customs. Delhi: Motilal Ba- 
narsidass (first edition: Dacca, 1940). 


General Bibliography 575 


LHERnautt, Françoise (avec des collaborations de P. R. Srinrvasan et de Jacques DuMARGAY) 

1987 Darasuram. Epigraphical Study, Etude architecturale, Etude iconographique. 
2 volumes. Publications de PEFEO, Mémoires Archéologiques XVI. Paris: 
EFEO. 

Hun, Michel 

1980 Mrgendragama. Sections de la doctrine et du yoga avec la Vrtti de Bhattanarayana- 
kantha et la Dipika d’Aghorasivacarya. Traduction, introduction et notes. PIFI 63. 
Pondicherry: IFI. 

InGALts, Daniel H. H., Masson, Jeffrey Moussaieff & ParwarDHan, M. V. 

1990 The Dhvanyáloka of Anandavardhana with the Locana of Abhinavagupta, trans- 
lated by Daniel H.H. Ingalls, Jeffrey Moussaieff Masson, and M.V. Patwardhan; 
edited with an introduction by Daniel H.H. Ingalls, Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard 
University Press. 

JANAK1, S. S. 

1988 Dhvaja-Stambha (Critical Account of its Structural and ritualistic Details). My- 

lapore, Madras: The Kuppuswami Sastri Research Institute. 
Kanns, Eivind 

1998 Indian Semantic Analysis. The ‘nirvacana tradition. University of Cambridge 

Oriental Publications 55. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Karmay, Samten Gyaltsen 

1988 The Great Perfection (Rdzogs chen): A Philosophical and Meditative Teaching in 

Tibetan Buddhism. Leiden: Brill. 
Kaur, Śrīkanth 

1966 Rajataranginyau Srivara-Sukabhyam krte. te ca pathavimarsaupayikena 
pathabhedaditippanena samyojite satyau. Woolner Indological Series 8. 
Hoshiarpur: Vishveshvaranand Institute. 


1967 Rájatarangini Jonarajakrtà. Woolner Indological Series 7. Hoshiarpur : 
Vishveshvaranand Vedic Research Institute Press. 


KERSENBOOM, Saskia C. 
1987 Nityasumangali: Devadasi Tradition in South India. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass. 
KinrzL, Willibald 
1920 Die Kosmographie der Inder (nach Quellen dargestellt). Bonn/Leipzig. [reprint: 
Hildesheim 1967]. 


1927 Das Purina Pancalaksana. Versuch einer Textgeschichte. Leiden. 


1954 Das Purina vom Weltgebáude (Bhuvanavinyasa): die kosmographischen Traktate 
der Purdna’. Versuch einer Textgeschichte. Bonner Orientalische Studien N.S. 1. 
Bonn. 


Kout, Anand 
1924 The Kashmiri Pandit. Calcutta: Thacker Spink & Co. Reprint: Delhi: Utpal 
Publications, 1991. 
Kramriscu, Stella 
1946 The Hindu Temple. 2 Vols. Calcutta, 1946 (reprinted Delhi: Motilal Banarsi- 
dass, 1976). 


576 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


KrisHNAMACHARYA, V. and K. Ramachandra Sarma (ed.) 
1949 Alamkàrasamgraha of Amrtanandayogin. Adyar Library Series, 70. Madras: The 
Adyar Library and Research Centre. 
Kuwayama, Soshin 
1991 "L'inscription du Ganésa de Gardez at la chronologie des Turki-sahis’, Journal 
Asiatique 279, pp. 267—287. 
La VarrÉE-PoussiN, Louis de 
1929 Vijnaptimatratasiddhi: La Siddhi de Hiuan-tsang. Traduit et annotée. Paris: Paul 
Geuthner. 3 vols. 
MAHALINGAM, T. V. 
1988 Inscriptions of the Pallavas. New Delhi/Delhi: Indian Council of Historical Re- 


search/Agam Prakashan. 
MALAMOUD, Charles 
1976 "Terminer le sacrifice: Remarques sur les honoraires rituels dans le brahman- 


isme’, in: Madeleine Biardeau & Charles Malamoud, Le sacrifice dans l'Inde 
ancienne, Paris: Presses universitaires de France, pp. 155—204. 
OBERHAMMER, Gerhard 
2004 Materialien zur Geschichte der Ramanuja-Schule VII. Zur spirituellen Praxis 
des Zufluchtnehmens bei Gott (Saranagatib) vor Venkatanatha, Osterreichis- 
che Akademie der Wissenschaften, philosophisch-historische Klasse, Sitzungs- 
berichte 710). Wien, 2004. 


2006 'Ahirbudhnyasamhità 37. Ein Beitrag zur Geschichte der sarandgatif’, in: Karin 
Preisendanz (ed.), Expanding and Merging Horizons. Contributions to South 
Asian and CrossCultural Studies in Commemoration of Wilhelm Halbfass. Wien: 
Verlag der Österreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften, 2006, pp. 667—678. 
(In press.) 


OBERLIES, Thomas 
1998 Die Svetaévatara-Upanisad. Edition und Übersetzung von Adhyaya IV-VI. 
(Studien zu den “mittleren” Upanisads II — 3. Teil), Wiener Zeitschrift für die 
Kunde Südasiens 42, pp. 77-138. 


2003 A Grammar of Epic Sanskrit. Indian Philology and South Asian Studies Volume 
5. Berlin/New York: De Gruyter. 


Orr, Leslie C. 

2000 Donors, Devotees, and Daughters of God: Temple Women in Medieval Tamilnadu. 
South Asia Research. New York: Oxford University Press. 

*2004a "Priests and Kings/ Temples and Teachers: The Making of Saiva and Vaisnava 
Identities in the Chola Period.’ Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the 
Association for Asian Studies, San Diego. 

2004b ^ "Processions in the Medieval South Indian Temple: Sociology, Sovereignty and 
Soteriology’, in: Jean-Luc Chevillard and Eva Wilden (eds.) South-Indian Hori- 
zons: Felicitation Volume for Frangois Gros on the occasion of his 70th birthday, 
pp. 437-70. PDI 94. Pondicherry: IFP/EFEO. 


General Bibliography DEL 


*2005 ‘Cholas, Pandyas, and “Imperial Temple Culture" in Medieval Tamilnadu’. Pa- 
per presented at the conference of the European Association of South Asian 
Archaeology and Art History, London. 


2006 ‘Preface’ in: Pondicherry Inscriptions. Putucceri Manilak Kalvettukkal. Part I: In- 
troduction and texts with notes, compiled by Bahour S. Kuppusamy, ed. G. Vi- 
jayavenugopal. Collection Indologie 83.1 Pondicherry: IFP/EFEO. 


Papoux, André 
1978 ‘Contributions a l'étude du mantraéastra I. La sélection des mantra (mantro- 


ddhira) , Bulletin de L'Ecole française d'Extréme-Orient 65, pp. 65—85. 


1990 Vac. The Concept of the Word in Selected Hindu Tantras (transl. Jacques Gontier), 
Albany: State University of New York. 


Panbey, Kanti Chandra 
1954 Bhaskari. Vol. III. An English Translation of the Isvara Pratyabhijna Vimarsini in 
the Light of the Bhaskari With an Outline of the History of Saiva Philosophy. The 


Princess of Wales Saraswati Bhavana Texts 84. Lucknow. 


1963 Abhinavagupta. An Historical and Philosophical Study. Second edition, revised 
and enlarged. Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series, Vol. 1. Varanasi: Chowkhamba 
Sanskrit Series Office. 


PeLLIOT, Paul 
1904 ‘Deux Itinéraires de Chine en Inde’, Bulletin de l'Ecole francaise d'Extréme- 
Orient 4 (1904), pp. 131-413. 
PETECH, Luciano 
1984 Medieval History of Nepal (c. 750-1482). Second, thoroughly revised edition. 
Serie Orientale Roma, 54. Rome: Istituto Italiano per il Medio ed Estremo 
Oriente. 
PiscHet, Richard 
1900 Grammatik der Prakrit-Sprachen. Grundriss d. indo-arisch. Philol. u. Altertum- 
skunde Bd. 1. Strassburg: Triibner. English translation by Subhadra JHA: Com- 
parative Grammar of the Prakrit Languages. Varanasi/Delhi/Patna: Motilal Ba- 
narsidass, 1957. 
RAGHAVAN, V. 
1980 Abhinavagupta and His Works. Chaukhamba Oriental Research Studies 20. 
Varanasi/Delhi: Chaukhambha Orientalia. 
[RArNA, A. K.] 
1989 A Catalogue of Sanskrit Manuscripts. Srinagar: The Research and Publication 
Department, Jammu and Kashmir Government. Based on a draft prepared by 
Srikanth Kaul and Dinanath Yach. 
Ramesh, K. V. & Tewari D S. 
1983 ‘Risthal Inscription of Aulikara Prakaéadharmma, [Vikrama] Year 572’, Journal 
of the Epigraphical Society of India 10, pp. 96-103. 
Rao, T. A. Gopinath 
1914, reprinted 1997 Elements of Hindu Iconography. 2 volumes, each in 2 parts. Delhi, Moti- 
lal Banarsidass: 1997. 


578 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


RasTELLI, Marion 

1999 Philosophisch-theologische Grundanschauungen der Jayakhyasamhita. Mit einer 
Darstellung des täglichen Rituals. Österreichische Akademie der Wissenschaften, 
philosophisch-historische Klasse, Sitzungsberichte 668, Beitrage zur Kultur- 
und Geistesgeschichte Asiens 33. Wien: Verlag der Osterreichischen Akademie 
der Wissenschaften. 

2006 Die Tradition des Pancaratra im Spiegel der Paramesvarasamhita. Osterreichis- 
che Akademie der Wissenschaften, philosophisch-historische Klasse, Sitzungs- 
berichte 748, Beitrage zur Kultur- und Geistesgeschichte Asiens 51. Wien: Ver- 
lag der Osterreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften. 

Rasroci, Navjivan 
1979 Krama Tantricism of Kashmir. Volume 1. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass. 
Ray, H.C. 
1931-1936 The Dynastic History of Northern India (Early Medieval Period). Calcutta. 
Rosinson, James B. (transl.) 

1979 Buddhas Lions. The Lives of the Eighty-Four Siddhas, Caturasiti-siddha-pravrtti 
by Abhayadatta, Translated into Tibetan as Grub thod brgyad cu rtsa bzhi'i rgyus 
by sMon-grub Shes-rab. Berkeley, CA: Dharma Publishing. 

SacHau, Edward C. 

1964 Alberunis India. an Account of the Religion, Philosophy, Literature, Geog- 
raphy, Chronology, Astronomy, Customs, Laws and Astrology of India about 
A.D. 1030, edited with notes and indices. Two volumes in one. Delhi/New 
Delhi/Jullundur/Lucknow/Bombay: S. Chand & Co. Originally published: 
1887. 

SANDER, Lore 

1968 Paláographisches zu den Sanskrithandschrifien der berliner Turfansammlung. 
Verzeichnis der orientalischen Handschriften in Deutschland, Supplement- 
band 8. Wiesbaden: Franz Steiner Verlag. 

SANDERSON, Alexis 

1985 ‘Purity and Power among the Brahmans of Kashmir’, in: M. Carrithers, S. 
Collins and S. Lukes (ed.), The Category of the Person. Anthropology, Philoso- 
phy, History, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 190—216. 

1985b Review of: N. R. Bhatt, Matargaparamefvarágama (Kriyapada, Caryápáda et Yo- 
gapada), avec le commentaire de Bhatta Rimakantha. Édition critique. (PIFI 65), 
Pondichéry 1982; Idem: Rauravottaragama. Edition critique, introduction et 
notes. (PIFI 66), Pondichéry 1983", Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African 
Studies 48, pp. 564-68. 

1986 ‘Mandala and Agamic Identity in the Trika of Kashmir’, in: A. Padoux (ed.), 
Mantras et Diagrammes Rituelles dans l'Hindouisme, Paris: Editions du CNRS, 
pp. 169-214. 

1987 Article ‘Krama Saivism', in: The Encyclopedia of Religion edited by Mircea Eliade, 
volume 13, pp. 14a-15a. New York: Macmillan Publishing Company. 

1988 ‘Saivism and the Tantric Traditions’, in: S. Sutherland, L. Houlden, P. Clarke 
and E Hardy (eds.), Zhe World's Religions, London: Routledge, pp. 660—704. 


General Bibliography 579 


1990 


1992 


1995 


*1997 


2001 


2002 


2004 


2005a 


2005b 


2006 


“The Visualisation of the Deities of the Trika’, in: André Padoux (ed.), L'Image 
Divine, Paris: Éditions du CNRS, pp. 31-88. 


"Ihe Doctrine of the Malinivijayottaratantra', in: Teun Goudriaan (ed.) Ritual 
and Speculation in Early Tantrism: Studies in Honor of André Padoux, Albany: 
State University of New York Press, pp. 281-312. 


‘Meaning in Tantric Ritual’, in: Essais sur le rituel III. Colloque du centenaire 
de la section des sciences religieuses de l'Ecole Pratique des Hautes Etudes sous la 
direction de Anne-Marie Blondeau et Kristofer Schipper, Louvain, Paris: Peeters, 
pp. 15-95. 


Lecture series: 'Seeking the Mata Level of Esoteric Saivism: New Sources’. 
(Handout 4 contains edited citations of the Jayadrathayamala.) 


‘History through Textual Criticism in the study of Saivism, the Paficaratra and 
the Buddhist Yoginitantras’, in: Francois Grimal (ed.), Les Sources et le Temps. 
Sources and Time. A Colloquium. Pondicherry 11-13 January 1997. PDI 91. 
Pondicherry: IFP/EFEO, pp. 1-47. 


‘Remarks on the text of the Kubjikamatatantra’, Indo-Iranian Journal 45 
(2002), pp. 1-24. 


‘The Saiva Religion among the Khmers (Part I)’, Bulletin de l'Ecole française 
d'Extréme-Orient 90-91 (2003—2004), pp. 349—462. 


‘A Commentary on the Opening Verses of the Tantrasára of Abhinavagupta, 
in: Sadananda Das and Ernst Fürlinger (eds.), Szmarasya. Studies in Indian Arts, 
Philosophy, and Interreligious Dialogue, New Delhi: D.K. Printworld, pp. 89— 
148. 


‘Religion and the State: Saiva Officiants in the Territory of the King’s Brah- 
manical Chaplain’, Indo-Iranian Journal 47 (2004), pp. 229—300. 


"Ihe Lakulas: New Evidence of a System Intermediate Between Paficarthika 
Pasupatism and Agamic Saivism’, Indian Philosophical Annual 24 (2003-2005), 
pp. 143-217. 


forthcoming a (2007) ‘Swami Lakshman Joo and His Place in the Kashmirian Saiva Tradi- 


tion’, in: Bettina Baumer and Sarla Kumar (eds.) Samvidullasah. Manifestation 
of Divine Consciousness. Swami Lakshman Joo, Saint-Scholar of Kashmir Saivism. 
A Centenary Tribute. New Delhi: D.K. Printworld. 


forthcoming b “The Date of Sadyojyotis and Brhaspati’, in: Marzenna Czerniak-Drozdzowicz 


(ed.), Tantra and Visistadvaitavedinta. Cracow Indological Studies Vol. 8 
(2006). Cracow: Ksiegarnia Akademicka. 


forthcoming c Religion and the State: Initiating the Monarch in Saivism and the Buddhist Way of 


Mantras. Ethno-Indology. Heidelberg Studies in South Asian Rituals, Volume 
2. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz. 


SCHOTERMAN, J. A. 


1982 


See SATSAHASRASAMHITA. 


580 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


SFERRA, Francesco 
1991 ‘Aspetti della speculazione linguistica nello Saivasiddhanta. Le Nadakarika di 
Ràmakantha', Rivista degli Studi Orientali 65.3—4, pp. 311—337. 
SixGH, Tehsildar 
1985 ‘Agni-Purana on Temple Architecture’, Vishveshvaranand Indological Journal 
23/1-2 (1985), pp. 176-190. 
Sincan, D. C. 
1976 ‘Indological Notes: R.C. Majumdar's Chronology of the Pala Kings’, Journal of 
Ancient Indian History 9 (1975-76), pp. 209—210. 
SIVARAMAN, Krishna 
1973 Saivism in Philosophical Perspective. A Study of the Formative Concepts, Problems 
and Methods of Saiva Siddhanta, Delhi/Patna/ Varanasi: Motilal Banarsidass. 
Surrg, H. Daniel 
1975 A Descriptive Bibliography of the Printed Texts of the Paricaratrágama. Vol 1. 
Gaekwad’s Oriental Series 158. Baroda: Oriental Institute. 


1978 The Smith Agama Collection: Sanskrit Books and Manuscripts Relating to Pancara- 
tra Studies. a descriptive catalog. Foreign and Comparative Studies / South Asian 
Special Publications 2. Syracuse: Maxwell School of Citizenship and Public AF 
fairs, Syracuse University. 


SNELLGROVE, David L. 
1959 The Hevajra Tantra. A Critical Study. London Oriental Series Vol. 6. London: 
Oxford University Press. 
South Indian Inscriptions 
1980- South Indian Inscriptions. Madras/ Delhi: Archaeological Survey of India. 
STEIN, Mark Aurel 
1979 Kalbanas Rajatarangini. A Chronicle of the Kings of Kasmir. Translated with an 
Introduction, Commentary and Notes. 2 Volumes. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass. 
Reprinted from the edition of 1900. 
Taare, G.V. 
1984 The Brahmanda Purana. Translated and Annotated. Part IV. Ancient Indian Tra- 
dition and Mythology Series 25. Delhi. 


1988 The Vayu Purana. Translated and Annotated. Part I. Ancient Indian Tradition 
and Mythology Series 38. Delhi. 


"TANTRIKABHIDHANAKOSA | 

2000 Tintrikabhidhanakosa I. Dictionnaire des termes techniques de la littérature hin- 
doue tantrique. A Dictionary of Technical Terms from Hindu Tantric Litera- 
ture. Worterbuch zur Terminologie hinduistischer Tantren. sous la direction de H. 
Brunner, G. Oberhammer et A. Padoux. Osterreichische Akademie der Wis- 
senschaften, Philosophisch-historische Klasse, Sitzungsberichte 681, Beiträge 
zur Kultur- und Geistesgeschichte Asiens 35. Vienna: Verlag der ósterreichis- 
chen Akademie der Wissenschaften. 


General Bibliography 581 


"IANTRIKABHIDHANAKO$SA II 
2004 (TAK II) Wntrikabhidhanakosa II. Dictionnaire des termes techniques de la littérature 


hindoue tantrique. A Dictionary of Technical Terms from Hindu Tantric Liter- 
ature. Wörterbuch zur Terminologie hinduistischer Tantren. sous la direction de 
H. Brunner, G. Oberhammer et A. Padoux. Osterreichische Akademie der Wis- 
senschaften, Philosophisch-historische Klasse, Sitzungsberichte 714, Beiträge 
zur Kultur- und Geistesgeschichte Asiens 44. Vienna: Verlag der ósterreichis- 
chen Akademie der Wissenschaften. 


"TORELLA, Raffaele 


1976 


1988 


1998 


2001 


2002 


2004 


‘ll Sardbatrisati-Kalottarágama (edizione critica e introduzione a cura di Raf- 


faele Torella), Rivista degli Studi Orientali 50.3-4, pp. 279—318. 


‘A Fragment of Utpaladeva's I$varapratyabhijfa-vivrti, East and West 38, 
pp. 137-74. 


‘The Kaficukas in the Saiva and Vaisnava Tantric Tradition: A Few Consid- 
erations Between Theology and Grammar’, in: G. Oberhammer (ed.), Stud- 
ies in Hinduism n, Miscellanea to the Phenomenon of the Tantras, Osterreichis- 
che Akademie der Wissenschaften, Philosophisch-historische Klasse, Sitzungs- 
berichte 662, Beiträge zur Kultur- und Geistesgeschichte Asiens 28. Vienna: 
Verlag der österreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften, 1998, pp. 55—86. 
"Ihe Word in Abhinavagupta's Brhad-Vimarsin?, in: Raffaele Torella et al. (ed.) 
Le parole e i marmi. Studi in onore di Raniero Gnoli nel suo 70? compleanno, Serie 
Orientale Roma 92.1—2, IsLAO, Rome, pp. 853-874. 

The Isvarapratyabhijnakarika of Utpaladeva with the Author’ Vrtti. Critical edi- 
tion and annotated translation, Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass. (1st ed. appeared as 
Serie Orientale Roma 71, Rome: ISMEO, 1994.) 


‘How is Verbal Signification Possible: Understanding Abhinavagupta's Reply’, 
Journal of Indian Philosophy 32, pp. 173-188. 


forthcoming A ‘Studies on the Ẹvarapratyabhijñä-vivrti. Part I. Apoha and anupalabdhi in a 


Saiva garb’, in: Preisendanz, K. (ed.), Halbfass Commemoration Volume. Vienna. 


forthcoming B ‘Studies on the Jfvarapratyabhijfa-vivrti. Part IT. What is memory?’, in: Hart- 


mann, J. U., Klaus, K. (eds.), Indica et Tibetica. Festschrift für Michael Hahn zum 
65. Geburtstag von Freunden und Schülern überreicht, Vienna. 


TORzsOK, Judit 


*1999 


2003 


‘The Doctrine of Magic Female Spirits.’ A critical edition of selected chapters of 
the Siddhayogesvarimata(tantra) with annotated translation and analysis. Unpub- 
lished doctoral thesis submitted to the University of Oxford, *1999. 


‘Icons of Inclusivism: Mandalas in Some Early Saiva Tantras’, in Gudrun Büh- 


nemann (ed.), Mandalas and Yantras in the Hindu Traditions, Leiden: Brill, 
pp. 179-224. 


TriPATHI, Rama Sankar 


1971 


Descriptive Catalogue of the Samskrit Manuscripts in Gaekwada Library, Bharat 
Kala Bhavana Library and Samskrit Maba-Vidyalaya Library, Banaras Hindu 


582 Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Hélène Brunner 


University. Banaras Hindu University Samskrit Series 6. Varanasi: Banaras 
Hindu University. 
Tucci, Giuseppe (transl.) 
1940 Travels of Tibetan Pilgrims in the Swat Valley. Calcutta: The Greater India Soci- 
ety. 
TURNER, R. L. 
1966-71 A Comparative Dictionary of the Indo-Aryan Languages. 3 volumes. London: 
Oxford University Press. 
VASUDEVA, Somadeva 
2004 The Yoga of the Malinivijayottaratantra. Chapters 1—4, 7, 11—17. Critical Edition, 
Translation & Notes. Collection Indologie 97. Pondicherry: IFP/EFEO. 
VETTER, Tilmann 
1966 Dharmakirtis Pramánaviniscayah 1. Kapitel: Pratyaksam. Einleitung, Text der 
tibetischen übersetzung, Sanskritfragmente, deutsche übersetzung. Vienna: Verlag 
der Osterreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften. 
VELLE, Christophe 
2005 ‘From the Vayuprokta to the Vayu and Brabmánda Puranas: Preliminary Re- 
marks towards the Critical Edition of the vayuprokta Brahmdandapurana’, in: 
Petteri Koskikallio (ed.), Epics, Khilas, and Puranas: Continuities and Ruptures, 
Proceedings of the Third Dubrovnik International Conference on the Sanskrit Epics 
and Puranas September 2002. Zagreb, pp. 535—560. 
Watson, Alex 
2006 The Selfs Awareness of Itself: Bhatta Rimakantha’s Arguments against the Buddhist 
Doctrine of No-self: Publications of the De Nobili Research Library, 32. Vienna. 
Yoxocut, Yuko 
*2004 The Rise of the Warrior Goddess in Ancient India. A Study of the Myth Cycle of 
Kausiki-Vindhyavasini in the Skandapurana. [Unpublished] Thesis, University 


of Groningen. 


