७ 
If TES UH | École française 
& Society idi d'Extréme-Orient 


la! e e. ges 
a" Institut Francais Universitát Hamburg XA 
de Pondichéry DER FORSCHUNG | DER LEHRE | DER BILDUNG 


Collection Indologie - 128 
Early Tantra Series - 1 


THE NISVASATATTVASAMHITA 
THE EARLIEST SURVIVING SAIVA TANTRA 
Volume 1 


A Critical Edition & Annotated Translation of the 
Mülasütra, Uttarasütra & Nayasütra 


edited by Dominic GOODALE 


im collaboration with Alexis SANDERSON ec Efarunaga ISAACSON 
with contributions of Nirajan KABLE, Diwakar ACHARYA’ others 


Me 
+ 
400 ० 
Au 
॥ : 5 2 it 


After studies in Oxford and in Hamburg, Dominic 
Goodall passed several years working in Pondicherry, 
where he was head of the Pondicherry Centre of the Ecole 
francaise d'Extréme-Orient from 2002 to 2011. He has 
published critical editions of Saiva works and of classical 
Sanskrit poetry (most recently, with Csaba Dezsó, the 
eighth-century Kurtanimata of Dimodaragupta). He is 
currently based in Paris, where he gives lectures on Indian 
and Cambodian Sanskrit literature at the Ecole pratique 
des hautes études (religious science section). 


Après avoir étudié à Oxford et à Hambourg, Dominic 
Goodall a travaillé pendant plusicurs années à Pondicbéry, 
oit il fut responsable du Centre de l'EFEO de 2002 à 2011. 
Il a publié plusicurs éditions critiques d'ouvrages Sivaites et 
poétiques en sanskrit, dont le plus récent, en collaboration 
avec Csaba Dezső, est l'édition ct la traduction anglaise du 
Kuttanimata de Damodaragupta, un roman sanskrit en vers 
du VIIF siecle. Actuellement affecté à Paris, il anime à 
l'EPHE (Ve section) des séminaires de littérature sanskrite 
d'Inde et du Cambodge. 


Alexis G. J. S. Sanderson is a renowned expert on the 
history of Saivism and on tantric traditions. After taking 
undergraduate degrees in Classics and Sanskrit at Balliol 
College, Oxford, he spent six years in Kashmir studying 
with the celebrated scholar and Saiva guru Swami 
Lakshman Joo. From 1977 to 1992 he was Lecturer in 
Sanskrit in the University of Oxford, and Fellow of 
Wolfson College. Since 1992 he has held the Spalding 
Chair of Eastern Religions and Ethics in the University 
of Oxford, and is a Fellow of All Souls College. 


Alexis G. J. S. Sanderson est un spécialiste renommé de 
l'histoire du Sivaisme et des traditions tantriques. Après sa 
formation de premier cycle en lettres classiques et en sanskrit 
au Balliol College, à Oxford, il a passé six ans au 
Cachemire, étudiant auprès du guru Sivaite et lettré réputé 
Swami Lakshman Joo. Maitre de conférences en sanskrit et 
Fellow du Wolfion College entre 1977 et 1992, il occupe 
depuis 1992 la « Spalding Chair of Eastern Religions and 
Ethics » à l'université d'Oxford, où il est Fellow du All Souls 
College. 


Harunaga Isaacson studied in Groningen (MA 1990) and 
was awarded a PhD in Sanskrit by the University of 
Leiden in 1995. After holding positions for research and 
teaching at the Universities of Oxford, Hamburg and 
Pennsylvania, he was appointed Professor of Classical 
Indology in the Department of Indian and Tibetan 
Studies, Asien-Afrika-Institut, Hamburg, in 2006. His 
main research areas are: tantric traditions in 
pre-13"-century South Asia, especially Vajrayana 
Buddhism; classical Sanskrit poetry; classical Indian 
philosophy; and Puranic literature. 


Harunaga Isaacson a étudié à Groningue (MA 1990) et a 
soutenu sa thése de doctorat à l'université de Leyde en 1995. 
Après avoir mené des recherches et enseigné dans les universités 
d'Oxford, de Hambourg et de Pennsylvanie, il occupe depuis 
2006 la chaire d'indologie classique au département des 
études indiennes et tibétaines de l'Asien-Afrika-Institut, à 
Hambourg. Ses centres d'intérét incluent les traditions 
tantriques en Asie du Sud avant 1200, notamment le 
bouddhisme vajrayana, la poésie sanskrite, la philosophie 
indienne classique et les Purana. 


Ali ies —— 


Jan DAMUN ANI o era a Mardi ri I LE ERES m HP IT TRES 


'THE NISVASATATTVASAMHITA 
'THE EARLIEST SURVIVING SAIVA TANTRA 
VOLUME 1 


A CRITICAL EDITION & ANNOTATED TRANSLATION OF THE 


MULASUTRA, UTTARASUTRA & NAYASUTRA 


L'Institut Frangais de Pondichéry (IFP), UMIFRE 21 CNRS-MAEE, est un établissement a autonomie 
financiére sous la double tutelle du Ministére frangais des Affaires Etrangères et Européennes (MAEE) 
et du Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS). Il est partie intégrante du réseau des 27 
centres de recherche de ce Ministére. Avec le Centre de Sciences Humaines (CSH) à New Delhi, il forme 
PUSR 3330 du CNRS « Savoirs et Mondes Indiens ». Il remplit des missions de recherche, d'expertise 
et de formation en Sciences Humaines et Sociales et en Ecologie dans le Sud et le Sud-est asiatique. Il 
s'intéresse particuliérement aux savoirs et patrimoines culturels indiens (langue et littérature sanskrite, 
histoire des religions, études tamoules..), aux dynamiques sociales contemporaines, et aux ecosystémes 


naturels de l'Inde du Sud. 


The French Institute of Pondicherry (IFP), UMIFRE 21 CNRS-MAEE, is a financially autonomous in- 
stitution under the joint supervision of the French Ministry of Foreign and European Affairs (MAEE) 
and the French National Centre of Scientific Research (CNRS). It is a part of the network of 27 research 
centres under this Ministry. It also forms part of the research unit 3330 "Savoirs et Mondes Indiens? 
of the CNRS, along with the Centre de Sciences Humaines (CSH) in New Delhi. It fulfils its missions 
of research, expertise and training in Human and Social Sciences and Ecology in South and South-East 
Asia. It works particularly in the fields of Indian cultural knowledge and heritage (Sanskrit language and 
literature, history of religions, Tamil studies...), contemporary social dynamics and the natural ecosystems 
of South India. 


French Institute of Pondicherry, 11, St. Louis Street, P.B. 33, Pondicherry—605001, India 
Tel: (413) 2231600, Email: ifpdir@ifpindia.org Website: http:/www.ifpindia.org 


eg? 


L'École francaise d’Extréme-Orient (EFEO), fondée en 1900 à Hanoi, est un établissement relevant du 
ministére francais de l'Enseignement supérieur et de la Recherche dont la mission scientifique est l'étude 
des civilisations classiques de l'Asie. Son champ de recherches s'étend de l'Inde à la Chine et au Japon 
et, englobant l'ensemble du Sud-Est asiatique, comprend la plupart des sociétés qui furent indianisées ou 
sinisées au cours de l'histoire. Autour de ses dix-sept centres et antennes, installés dans douze pays d'Asie, 
se sont constitués des réseaux de chercheurs locaux et internationaux sur lesquels l'École a pu s'appuyer 
pour construire son essor. L'EFEO aborde l'Asie par des recherches pluridisciplinaires et comparatistes, 
associant l'archéologie, l'histoire, l'anthropologie, la philologie, et les sciences religieuses. À Pondichéry, 
les projets de l'EFEO portent essentiellement sur 1’« indologie » classique : sanskrit, tamoul ancien, 
histoire, histoire de l'art et des religions. 


The mission of The French School of Asian Studies (EFEO), founded in 1900 in Hanoi and today under 
the aegis of the French Ministry of Higher Education and Research, is to study the classical civilizations 
of Asia. Stretching from India, in the West, across the whole of South-East Asia to China and Japan, 
the EFEO’s research areas cover most of the societies which have been ‘Indianised’ or ‘Sinicised’ over 
the course of history. A network of international scholars working at the EFEO's seventeen centres and 
branch offices, which are spread across twelve Asian countries, has been essential in the development of 
the School's research programme. Interdisciplinary projects bring together leading scholars in the fields 
of anthropology, archaeology, history, philology, and religious studies. In Pondicherry, the projects of 
is EFEO focus mainly on classical Indology: Sanskrit, Old Tamil, History, and History of art and of 
religions. 


École francaise d'Extréme-Orient, Pondicherry Centre of the EFEO 

22, avenue du Président Wilson, 16 & 19, Dumas Street, 
A ’ 

fae Paris, France. Pondicherry—605 001, India. 

el: (33) 1 53 70 18 60 Tel: (91) (413) 2334539/2332504 


Website: http: /'www.efeo.fr/ Email: administrationGefeo-pondicherry.org 


THE EARLY TANTRA SERIES 


Tantric scriptures form the basis of almost all the various theistic schools 
of theology and ritual in post-Vedic India, as well as of a major strand of 
Buddhism (Vajrayana). Among these schools, those centred on the Hindu 
deities Siva and Visnu spread well beyond the Indian subcontinent to Kam- 
buja (Cambodia/Laos/Thailand), Champa (Vietnam) and Indonesia, while 
Buddhist tantrism quickly became pan-Asian. 

With this mini-series, launched within the ‘Collection Indologie’, we 
are releasing some of the fruits of a Franco-German project funded from 
2008 to 2011 by the Agence Nationale pour la Recherche and the Deutsche 
Forschungsgemeinschaft. The series takes its name from the project’s title: 
‘Early Tantra: Discovering the interrelationships and common ritual syntax 
of the Saiva, Buddhist, Vaisnava and Saura traditions? Our aim was to 
study the interrelationships between the tantric traditions on the basis of 
fundamental source-material, which we would edit and publish for the first 
time. For this we made use of some of the exceptionally rich manuscript re- 
sources gathered in the twentieth century and studied by German and French 
research institutes at opposite poles of the sub-continent. 

In recent centuries, the Tamil-speaking South is the only area where a 
vast corpus of Sanskrit texts of what was long the dominant school of tantric 
Saivism continued being copied and so transmitted to the present day. So 
when, in 1956, Jean Filliozat secured a foothold in Pondicherry for French 
indological research, he created an ideal institutional base for the study of 
a forgotten chapter in the religious history of Asia. Gradually, the largest 
specialised manuscript collection of texts relating to the Saiva Siddhanta 
was amassed, recognised in 2005 by UNESCO as a “Memory of the World” 
collection: The Saiva Manuscripts of Pondicherry. 

At the other end of the subcontinent, the cool climate of Nepal has 
preserved ancient manuscripts of texts of virtually every branch of Indian 
learning. Much of the early history of tantrism is thus preserved in the vast 
archive of Nepalese manuscripts microfilmed over more than three decades by 
the Nepal-German Manuscript Preservation Project (NGMPP), then partly 
catalogued by the Nepalese German Manuscript Cataloguing Project (NGM- 
CP), run from Hamburg and from the NGMCP's base in Kathmandu, the 
Nepal Research Centre (NRC). One Nepalese treasure, also included, in 
2019, in UNESCO's register, formed the corner-stone of our project: the 
ninth-century manuscript of the Nisvasatattvasamhita. 

The Early Tantra Series is not a closed collection: as well as the editions 
and translations promised as part of the *Early Tantra” project, studies of 
numerous related works were inspired or further advanced during the project's 
workshops. 


सृजति तावदशेषगुणाकरं 
पुरुषरत्रमलंकरणां भुवः | 
तदपि ceca करोति चेद्‌ 


Wee कष्टमपरिडतता विधेः i 


COLLECTION INDOLOGIE 128 
EARLY TANTRA SERIES 1 


THE NISVASATATTVASAMHITA 


THE EARLIEST SURVIVING SAIVA TANTRA 
VOLUME 1 


A CRITICAL EDITION & ANNOTATED TRANSLATION OF THE 
MULASUTRA, UTTARASUTRA & NAYASUTRA 


EDITED BY 
DOMINIC GOODALL 
IN COLLABORATION WITH 


ALEXIS SANDERSON & HARUNAGA ISAACSON 


WITH CONTRIBUTIONS OF 
NIRAJAN KAFLE, DIWAKAR ACHARYA 


& OTHERS 


INSTITUT FRANGAIS DE PONDICHERY 
ÉCOLE FRANGAISE D'EXTRÉME-ORIENT 
ASIEN-AFRIKA-INSTITUT, UNIVERSITAT HAMBURG 


Comité Éditorial / Advisory Board 


Diwakar ACHARYA (Kyoto University), , 
Nalini BALBIR (Université de Paris III et Ecole 
Peter BisscHoP (Leiden University), 

R. CHAMPAKALAKSHMI (Jawaharlal Nehru University, retired), 
Alexander DUBIANSKI (Moscow State University), 

Arlo GRIFFITHS (École francaise d'Extréme-Orient), 

Francois GROS (Ecole pratique des hautes études, retired), 

Pascale HAAG (École des hautes études en sciences sociales), 

Oskar von HINÜBER (University of Freiburg im Breisgau), 

Jan E.M. HOUBEN (Ecole pratique des hautes études), 

Padma KAIMAL (Colgate University), 

Kei KATAOKA (Kyushu University), 

Vempati KUTUMBA SASTRY (Banaras Hindu University), 

R. NAGASWAMY (Tamilnadu State Department of Archaeology, retired), 
Leslie ORR (Concordia University), 

Aloka PARASHER-SEN (University of Hyderabad), . 

Pierre PICHARD (École francaise d'Extréme-Orient), 

Herman TIEKEN (Leiden University). 


pratique des hautes études), 


Comité de Lecture / Évaluation 
Les membres du comité éditorial font appel à des spécialistes de leur choix. 
The members of the advisory board call on experts of their choice. 


O Institut Francais de Pondichéry, 2015 (ISBN 978-81-8470-205-7) 

O Ecole francaise d'Extréme-Orient, 2015 (ISBN 978-2-85539-151-9) 

O Department of Indian and Tibetan Studies, Asien-Afrika-Institut 
Universitát Hamburg Í 


Typeset by Dominic GOODALL in Latin Modern and Velthuis’ Devanagari 

using EDMAC, TEX and X4ATFX. 

Cover design: B. Thilakasivasundaran, Pondicherry. 

Cover ca O Los Angeles County Museum of Art: The Androgynous 
m of Shiva and Parvati (Ardhanarishvara), Mathura, 2nd—3rd century. 
; x 00. a red sandstone. Gift of Mr. and Mrs. Herbert Kurit 

Printed at the Sri Aurobindo Ashram Press, Pondicherry. 


CONTENTS 


Acknowledgements 


Short Preface—On the importance of the Ni$vasatattva- 
samhita for the history of tantrism 


Prolegomena 
The early core: the sutras of the NiSvasa. -. - - - . . - - - -- 
Other works bearing the name १४४०८७०. .......--...: 
The Early Place of the Nisvasa in Tantric Saivism ....... 


The Ni$vasa and the Vamasrotas .............- 
Paleographical archaism . . . . . -<-s eee 
Iconographical archaism .........---------- 
Terminological archaism ........-.--------- 
Theological archaism . .....-...----------- 


"Dheikalas < ceca, नय कक Ee 
tattvadhvan, bhuvanadhvan, sadadhvan 
Numbers of tattvas . - - - - . ee. 
Number of Gaņeśas . . - .. - . ५ -.  * - .. 
Archaism in the realm of social religion ........-.- 
Absence of social rites ............ 
Hierarchy of initiates . ............ 
Absence of an initiation for women, kings 
and simpletons (nirbija diksa) . 
The absence of initiation names ....... 
The character of prayascitta . ........ 
The absence of utsavas..........--- 
The rôle of pratistha . . . «n n nn 
References and borrowings in other literature ....... 
A conclusion to the discussion of dating ......-..-- 


11 


Nigvasatativasamhita 


8 
The place or places of composition? ..---+--+-7°°° 73 
Someremarks ion yopa ON cR p ceu up 73 
Some remarks on magic es °°" 7°" 7 त 7 78 
man GRIP Odo E के CT नल E 85 
Summary of the Mülasütra ..-- +--+ sc 85 
Summary of the Uttarasūtra . . « -+> sss sorosoro) 90 
Summary ofthe Nayasütrà .. «cott ttn vn 95 
Sources and editorial policies ....--*:**?**£2£2 nn 103 
Editorial conventions . . . < < «rtt t t ttn n 110 
Editorial policies - . ONE 111 
Remarks on peculiarities of language . . - . < ie 113 
Irregular treatment of consonantal stems...-.------ 113 
Irregular treatment of vocalic stems... ..  - 116 
Irregular numbers... - +--+ 2n nt n t t n 2 n n 120 
Verbal irregularities . . .. rn nn 121 
Oddities of case-usage . . . . . s « ee eee * * * nn 124 
Oddities of word-formation . . . . . . ss s es sses.. 127 
Irregular compounds ............+.--+« s+; 128 
Peculiarities of external sandhi ...............- 131 
SyteRtote antes sos SINS UN NNO 134 
Sanskrit Text 137 
Mala subak NIT COSTS NN Ss ef 137 
Uiltarasukra cet DIO dE UOTE FT ७ RC S 157 
Nayasubat 5 वह MOONS Sh त कच आय 5 3 अय 181 
Translation and notes 235 
Translation of the Mulastitra ................. «.. 235 
Translation of the Uttarasütra . ................ . . 337 
Translation of the Nayasutra ................ e. 403 
Appendices 505 
A note on the appendices .......... llle 505 
Appendix I, chapter 7 of the Svacchandatantra ......... 507 
Appendix II, from chapters 11-12 of the Svacchandatantra . . . 515 
Appendix III, chapter 42 of the Nisvasakarika.......... 537 
Appendix IV, chapter 37 of the Nifuasakarika.......... 543 
Appendix V, chapter 9 of the Diksottara............. 547 


Works Consulted 


Contents 


Index of Padas 


General Index 


ACNOWLEDGEMENTS 


Since this book has been produced by a large team of collaborators, some 
words are required about how we worked and who did what. At the insti- 
gation of Harunaga ISAACSON (Hamburg), a first complete transcription of 
the early manuscript, N, was prepared over a number of years by Dominic 
GOODALL (EFEO), with considerable help at different moments from Pe- 
ter BISSCHOP (then at Edinburgh, now in Leiden) and Diwakar ACHARYA 
(Kyoto). This was collated in a number of places against the apograph K 
and in a very few places against the apograph W. In 2006, Nirajan KAFLE 
(Kathmandu) came to Pondicherry and worked for several months at check- 
ing the transcription of N and collating it systematically against K and W. 
Meanwhile, in 2005 and 2006, an electronic transcription was prepared of 
the three Pondicherry transcripts transmitting the Nisvasakarika, namely 
IFP T.17, 127 and 150 by S. A. S. SARMA, Nibedita ROUT and R. SATHYA- 
NARAYANAN respectively (all of the EFEO, Pondicherry). 

A workshop was then conceived by Alexis SANDERSON (All Souls, Ox- 
ford) and Dominic GOODALL, to which all of the above were invited and 
all came to participate. Along with them came also the following schol- 
ars: Andrea ACRI (Rome/Leiden), Arlo GRIFFITHS (then of Leiden, now 
at the EFEO), Shaman HATLEY (Concordia, Montreal), Kei KATAOKA 
(Fukuoka), Nina MIRNIG (Oxford, Groningen, and now Vienna), and Jun 
TAKASHIMA (Tokyo). A preliminary edition of the text was circulated some 
months before the workshop, which took place at the Pondicherry Centre 
of the EFEO in January 2007, as were the electronic transcriptions of the 
Nisvasakarika. We were happy to have with us also a few other scholars 
who happened to be present in Pondicherry at the time: S. L. P. ANJANEYA 
SARMA (EFEO, Pondicherry), H.N. BHAT (EFEO, Pondicherry), Daniele 
CUNEO (Rome), Hugo DAVID (EPHE), Anil KUMAR ACHARYA (IFP), and 
Deviprasad MISHRA (IFP). 

The plan of the workshop was simple: for two weeks, we would attempt 
to read through and discuss the text and interpretation of as much of the text 
as possible and we would conclude on some afternoons with lectures by the 
participants on the Nisvasa and its bearing on other literature. The reading 


12 Nisvasatattvasamhita 


sessions were chaired by Alexis SANDERSON, who read out each verse and 
proposed an interpretation, which others were then free to discuss. Images 
of the relevant leaves of the old manuscript were projected on a screen for all 
to follow and most participants had computers open to search for parallels. 

In this way, we covered a lot of text and useful suggestions were made 
by many. Thus, although most interpretations were put forward by Alexis 
SANDERSON, who led the discussion, important contributions from relevant 
fields were particularly frequent from Diwakar ACHARYA, Peter BISSCHOP, 
Shaman HATLEY, Anil KUMAR ACHARYA and Harunaga ISAACSON. 

So stimulating and productive was this first meeting of January 2007 
that we were inspired to draw up a three-year project involving the prepa- 
ration of critical editions of a handful of related works structured around 
annual two-week study meetings. To our great delight, the project, entitled 
“Early Tantra: Discovering the interrelationships and common ritual syn- 
tax of the Saiva, Buddhist, Vaisnava and Saura traditions”, was approved 
by the French and German scientific funding institutions, the Agence Na- 
tionale pour la Recherche and the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft. Thus 
with Franco-German financial backing from 2008 to 2011 we were able to 
employ Csaba Kiss and Nirajan KAFLE on the French side, to produce crit- 
ical editions and translations respectively of selected chapters of another 
monumental early Saiva tantric work, the Brahmayamala, and of the intro- 
ductory book of the Ni$vasa corpus, the Nisvasamukha, and on the German 
side we were able to engage Martin DELHEY to edit and translate selected 
chapters of the Manjusriyamulakalpa. 

Our annual reading meetings thereafter—organised by the Nepal Re- 
search Centre in Kathmandu in 2008, the Pondicherry Centre of the École 
francaise d'Extréme-Orient in 2009, and the Asien-Afrika-Institut of the 
University of Hamburg in 2010, and funded from the “Early Tantra” 
project— were therefore further enriched by these dedicated young schol- 
285. and although the meetings were no longer focussed exclusively on the 
Nisvasa, the widening of scope was of immense heuristic value, and drew an 
increasing number of outsiders to the meetings of the project. 

c rd one clon a during these many discussions, Dominic 
a aE E. E and proposed a draft of the annotation in this 
Wan d E: ^ ii aa contributed ideas that it is difficult now tO 
Poor tere m Ea = ort was made, throughout the work on the text, 
Cero Te E. p that were actually jotted down with the initials 
eonim eei em. When, therefore, in the following pages SUE 

ed without mention of publications or correspondence 


Acknowledgements 13 


to Diwakar ACHARYA, Peter BISSCHOP, Csaba DEZSÓ, Arlo GRIFFITHS, 
Shaman HATLEY, Nirajan KAFLE or Judit TORzSOK, this is because those 
suggestions were probably made at one of our reading meetings. Untold 
numbers suggestions, invaluable at the time they were put forward because 
they have helped us to reach a better understanding of the Nigvasa, have 
not been recorded because they now no longer seem pertinent. And it goes 
without saying that, although the initials of Dominic GOODALL, Harunaga 
ISAACSON and Alexis SANDERSON occur very frequently in the notes jot- 
ted down during the meetings, such suggestions have not been explicitly 
attributed to them in this book! 

In the summer of 2013, Shingo EINOO kindly read through our edition 
and made numerous useful observations, drawing attention to places where 
the annotation was especially dubious or thin. In the winter of 2013-2014, 
the annotation to the first two sutras of the text was further strengthened 
in the light of Alexis SANDERSON's weekly classes, given in All Souls but 
attended, through Skype, by Dominic GOODALL in Paris and Harunaga 
ISAACSON in Hamburg. Various students attended and contributed, through 
questions and observations, to improving the book, among whom we should 
mention in particular Paul GERSTMAYR and Akane SAITO. Several passages 
were also read and discussed in Dominic GOODALL’s 'séminaire Sivaite’ at the 
École pratique des hautes études in Paris between 2011 and 2014. The ques- 
tions of the participants of this seminar (notably Hervé BODEMER, Hélène 
Boucuorr, Jean-Claude DUSART, Michaël MEYER, André PADOUX and 
Charlotte SCHMID) helped to refine the interpretation of numerous points. 

Finally, we are grateful to the two anonymous readers for the Collec- 
tion Indologie, who later revealed their names to us, for their numerous 
corrections and suggestions for improvement: James MALLINSON and Yuko 
YOKOCHI. 

As well as all of the individuals mentioned above, we wish to acknowl- 
edge the help of the following libraries and other institutions, who allowed us 
access to the manuscripts we have used: the French Institute of Pondicher- 
ry; the Government Oriental Manuscripts Library, Madras; the Oriental 
Research Institute, Mysore; the National Archives, Kathmandu; the Nepal- 
German Manuscript Preservation Project; the University Library, Cam- 
bridge; the Wellcome Institute for the History of Medicine, London; the 
Oriental Research Institute and Manuscripts Library, Trivandrum; and the 
Hoshiarpur Vishveshvaranand Vedic Research Institute. Finally, we wish 
to reiterate our thanks to the Agence Nationale pour la Recherche and the 
Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft, whose financial support made possible 


14 Nisvasatattvasamhita 
the stimulating annual meetings that have made such a great difference to 
our understanding of this unique document of religious history. 


The Editors 
November 28, 2014 


SHORT PREFACE 


ON THE IMPORTANCE OF THE NISVASATATTVASAMHITA 
FOR THE HISTORY OF TANTRISM 


Some of the research of recent years that has thrown most light on the ori- 
gins of Tantric Saivism has not been primarily about tantrism proper (the 
Mantramarga, or ‘way of mantras’), but about the non-tantric Paáupata 
religions from which the Mantramarga sprung: the Atimarga. The most 
substantial contribution in this area is an article of SANDERSON that ap- 
peared in 2006 under the title ‘The Lakulas: New Evidence of a System 
Intermediate Between Paficarthika Pagupatism and Agamic Saivism* For 
it is in this article that it is demonstrated that there is a remarkable doctri- 
nal continuity, particularly in the cosmographic conceptions that are set to 
work in the context of religious initiation, between the Atimarga and what 
is arguably the earliest known Saiva tantra, namely the Nisvasa.* 

How may we characterise the shift from Atimarga to the Mantramarga? 
How does the latter set itself apart? The Mantramarga for the first time 
placed strong (perhaps equal) emphasis on two goals: liberation (mukti) and 
the enjoyment of supernatural powers (bhukti). Both goals were attained 
through the power of spells (vidya, mantra), the propitiation and use of 
which required a ritual technology of considerable complexity, and the pur- 
suit of both required initiation (diksa). Now there may seem to be nothing 
very new here: initiation was required for the Atimarga too, and indeed for 
Vedic sacrifices, while the use of mantras for magic is also not an innovation. 
And liberation, after all, is the goal of the Atimarga. But these elements 
have been reconfigured and, in some cases, reinterpreted: the spells of the 
Mantramarga are with five exceptions (the five brahmamantras) not Vedic,” 


*Many of the points made in these opening paragraphs are to be found in GOODALL 
and ISAACSON 2014:124-7. nae 

^Even these exceptions have recently been called into question.The common wisdom 
used to be that the Pasupatas adopted the five brahmamantras from the tenth chapter of 
the Taittiriyaranyaka (see, e.g., HARA 1966*:121). Now ACHARYA (2011:459) has hinted 
at a different but still Vedic origin: “These five mantras are found in the Tuittirzyaranyaka 
(10.43-47), but this may not be the vedic source from which they were first adopted 


Ni$vasatattvasamhita 
16 


and initiation (diksa) is no longer simply a necessary EE ० titi 
a new religion, as it had been for at least the Paficarthika Pasupatas, but 
has become instead a transformative rite. Liberation is no longer brought 
about, as in the Atimarga, through a lengthy progression fa postanitiatony 
practice, but is conceived of as being essentially the resul of the cutting of 
bonds by Śiva, acting through the guru and with mantras as his instruments, 
at the time of initiation. Furthermore, this liberation, conceived of both as 
release from suffering and at the same time as the realisation of omniscience 
and omnipotence, was offered not only to brahmin males, as appears to have 
been the case in the Atimārga, but to those of all varpas and, in some cases, 
to both sexes. 

This combination of innovations may have been a factor in the powerful 
appeal which the Mantramarga evidently had, and in its ability to attract a 
wide base of followers. A similar nexus of notions — mantras as both mag- 
ical and soteriological instruments, to be wielded only by practitioners who 
have received a certain initiation (abhiseka) — also makes its appearance in 
Buddhist tantric sources. 

Crucial evidence for understanding not only the relationship between 
the Atimarga and Mantramarga, as mentioned above, but also between the 
various emerging tantric traditions, is furnished by the Ni$vasa. The last of 
its five sütras, the Guhyasütra, provides evidence of common ground with 
the non-soteriological tantric magic of Buddhist kriyatantras. For, like the 
Marijusriyamilakalpa, it contains a grimoire of recipes in prose for attaining 
magical siddhis. The recipes of both are couched in very similar language, 
with many identical elements identically phrased, and there is at least one 
entire recipe that is the same in almost every detail, as we shall see below. 

Another shared feature that recurs frequently in both sources is the 
notion that three levels of siddhi may be attained by following a given 
recipe, the level attained being heralded by the manifestation of heat, smoke 
or flames. A recipe given in Guhyasütra 10.27ff, for instance, concludes: 
"With oblation one thousand and eight times, power, which is of three [pos- 
sible] grades, arises: if there is heat, power to cover great distances fast 
on foot [is attained]; if there is smoke, the power to disappear; if there are 
flames, the power to fly? These three levels of siddhi are also to be found 


hs क क T Made 55517 a ८। 
by Pasupatas. But, as BISSCHOP had already shown some years earlier (2005:544-5 and 
fn. 101), two of those five brahmamantras, namely AGHORA and TATPURUSA, appear not 
to have been regarded at first by Paáupatas as being even Vedic. Further reflection on 


this theme has been offered by Peter BISSCHOP i i ; :vered in 
Bochum in 2012*. in a still unpublished paper delive 


Short Preface i 
in other Buddhist tantric works, such as the Amoghapasakalparaja,3 but the 
classification is extremely rare in Saiva literature outside the Nisvasa. 

So the Ni$vasa may be linked both to pre-tantric Saiva soteriology and 
to non-Saiva non-soteriological tantric magic found in Buddhist sources. 
It is also linked to some of the tantric literature that was drawn on by 
Kashmirian exegetes of Saiva non-dualism, for a large number of its verses, 
more than a thousand, were adopted and adapted to become part of the 
widely transmitted Svacchanda commented on by Abhinavagupta's disciple 
Ksemaraja in the eleventh century, and the Svacchanda in turn was itself 
cannibalised in a similar fashion by another large esoteric tantra, this time 
of the Trika, namely the Tantrasadbhava. 

Once again, cosmography forms a considerable part of what was adopted, 
but mantras and yogic material have also migrated. The wide influence of 
the Svacchanda, a Bhairava-tantra of the Southern stream (daksinasrotas), 
can be gauged also from its wide dissemination (plentiful manuscripts sur- 
vive today from Kashmir, Nepal and the Tamil-speaking South) and the 
absorption of its ideas into many ritual manuals.* 

Furthermore, the Ni$vasa is an ancestor not only of such tantras, but 
also of the relatively orthodox and Veda-congruent Saivasiddhanta (whose 
scriptures some erroneously refer to as “South Indian agamas", a label which 
rightly belongs only to one relatively late group among them). For although 
the work makes no reference to different schools within the Mantramarga, 
and therefore may well predate a split into Saivasiddhanta, Daksinasrotas, 
etc., it includes what is probably the earliest surviving list of a canon of 
twenty-eight scriptures (Uttarasutra 1:23ff), a list in which its own name 
features, now known as the canon of the twenty-eight principal Siddhanta- 
tantras. It then came to be seen as belonging to the Saivasiddhanta when 
that school came into existence.® 

From the inclusions and omissions in this voluminous work, we can tease 
out a picture of an early stage of development of what appears, judging from 
inscriptions and surviving literature, to have become the dominant strand 
of Tantric Saivism in and beyond the Indian sub-continent by the tenth 
century. Over the last century, various scholars have drawn attention to 
the importance of the Nisvasa, beginning with Hara Prasad SASTRI in 1905 
(1905:Ixxvii and 137-140), and including FARQUHAR (1920:200), BAGCHI 
furnished us with his unpub- 


3We are grateful to Professor Shingo EINOO for having 
lished notes on this text. 

4For the Svacchanda's influence on paddhatis, see, ०.8५» 
2005:240, fn. 20. 

SFor the earliest attestations of the term ‘Saivasiddhanta’, see p. 67 below. 


SANDERSON 2004:358-360 and 


18 Nigvasatatitvasamhita 


(1939:3f and 93-6), GOUDRIAAN and GUPTA 1981:33-6), and SANDERSON 
2001:22-31, 2006, etc., and this volume at last puts an edition of its earliest 
textual layers before readers. 


PROLEGOMENA 


The Nisvasa, as has now been suggested several times in print, may be the 
earliest surviving Saiva tantra and its publication is obviously important for 
the reconstruction of an Indian history of ideas. We were therefore anxious 
in 2007 to rush out a preliminary edition with scant annotation, in order to 
be able at once to put some version of the text before interested scholars, as 
soon as we had completed its transcription. But since our access to the text 
is through only one old manuscript, probably of the ninth-century (and three 
twentieth-century copies of that manuscript) the reconstruction of the text 
has proved extremely tricky: the tasks of transcription and interpretation are 
by no means neatly separable, and we have read and reread some parts of the 
text countless times, astonished again and again to discover not only extra 
possibilities of interpretation but also blatant mistranscriptions and slips of 
all kinds. In two cases (in Uttarasutra 5 and Nayasütra 4) we discovered 
extremely late in the day that the foliation, which is not as old as the 
manuscript, had misled us into flipping a folio and so treating a recto as 
a verso. Thus some passages that had seemed destined forever to resist 
all attempts at understanding resolved themselves into sense. We therefore 
came reluctantly to the conclusion in 2009 that to offer a text of the work 
without any translation would be regrettable, partly because we would be 
missing the opportunity ourselves to clarify and improve our interpretations, 
and partly because we wished to help others avoid some of the pointless 


muddles that we had surmounted. 


The early core: the sütras of the Nisvasa 


After this apology for tardiness, let us turn to the text. We have said that 
it is early, but we should add at once that it clearly does not all belong 


AUNT iw Sha Sea 

SSANDERSON 2006 (particularly pp. 153-154); GOODALL and ISAACSON 2007; 
GOODALL 2009; GOODALL 2010; GOODALL and ISAACSON 2014. Cf. BAGCHI 1939:3-4, 
who calls it “[ojne of the oldest Tantrik texts preserved in the Nepal Darbar Library”, 
and GOUDRIAAN and GUPTA 1981:34, Who observe—wrongly, we now believe—“Although 
the text therefore certainly belongs to a very early period of Saiva literature, its influence 


may have been limited." 


Nisvasatattvasamhita 
20 


to the same period. It consists of five books, ordered as follows in the 
manuscript: Nisvasamukha, Mülasütra, Uttarasutra, Nayasttra, and Guhya- 
sūtra. We believe that the earliest of these, the kernel of the text, was the 
Mülasütra, and that to this was tacked on, as a form of commentary, the 
Uttarasütra. The Nayasütra was then added on to expand and comment on 
the Uttarasütra. The text was then further expanded by the addition of the 
Guhyasütra, which is by far the largest section of the text. 

The Guhyasütra is less a commentary on the earlier sutras than a sup- 
plement, containing accounts of new subjects, such as the personality-types 
of sadhakas and types of lingas that may be used for siddhi (chapter 1); the 
installation (pratistha) of a linga (chapter 2); accounts of particular siddhis 
and observances (vrata) (chapter 3); a lengthy cosmography (chapters 4-7); 
a variant form of diksa in the form of a series of yagas of the different lev- 
els of the cosmos (chapter 8); the use of mantra-systems other than those 
given in the earliest books, including the VYOMAVYAPIN (chapters 9-11), 
the five brahmamantras (chapters 12-14), long forms of the angamantras 
(chapter 15) and of a ten-syllable mantra called VIDYA (chapters 16-17). It 
is the Guhyasütra which contains grimoires of magical recipes (kalpa) in a 
prose-style that it shares with certain early Buddhist tantric works, such as 
the Manjusriyamilakalpa.’ It refers in its very last verse (18:15, quoted on 
p.23 below) to another work, the karika, as making up the next sütra of 
the work, and this is presumably a reference to the Ni$vasakarika. But the 
Nisvasakarika are not contained in the manuscript, and it seems to us that 
we cannot conclude from this concluding reference that the Guhyasutra and 
Nisvasakarika were both composed at the same time. (The Nisvasakarikà 
themselves, as we shall see below, seem clearly to be a composition of more 
than one layer!) Whereas the Mülasütra, Uttarasütra and Nayasütra seem 
v eau aie E EE in one go, perhaps each by a single author, 
its SERE and | 5i a ae pané AN Ee S 2 
| E NUN 2 s pd written at 8 time when the Nisvasakarika (or 

cu Ed Ain e LR) had come into existence. 4 
Dra oi EE e ear est three books of the collection: the Mila 
म volume m for Nous s E ts Produce the CU 
EM e rese: s iur book in the collection, the Nisvasamukha, 
ति rag AN TEPS ; e Nisvasamukhatattvasamhita, which presents 
Mantramarga (tantric $ Rr a ligious background against which the 

aivism) saw itself, that book has been edited and 


"For this choice of title, 


ey over the more familiar Mañjuśrīmūlakalpa, see DELHEY 2012: 


Prolegomena zi 


translated by Nirajan KAFLE as part of a doctoral thesis and will also be 
published as a separate volume in this series. 

The relative chronology of the sütras of the Nigvasa seems rather clearly 
indicated, for instance, by backward references in the later layers and by 
doctrinal developments, such as in the matter of tattvas, as mentioned briefly 
below (see p.44). Some of the references, however, are perhaps not quite 
what they seem. The first four and a half verses of Guhyasütra 1, for instance, 
clearly speak of the Guhyasutra being the fourth sutra to be taught and of 
the preceding three sutras, together with the Guhyasutra and the Nisvasa- 
mukha, forming one unit, the Nisvasasamhita.? 


uparistac caturthan tu sutram arabhyate punah 

tatra sutratrayam proktam boddhavyam anupurvasah 1:1 
mulan cottarasttra| (fi ca nayasutram tathaiva)| ca 
guhyasütraü caturthan tu procyamanan nibodha me 1:2 
tenaiva saha samyukta samhitaika prapathyate 

ni$vaseti ca namena sampurnna tu tato bhavet 1:3 
ni§vasasamhita hy esa mukhena saha samyuta 
paticasrotas tu ye prokta mukhena parikirtitah 1:4 

tena yuktà bhavet pusta? sarvasutresu pathyate 


Now (punah) below (uparistat) begins the fourth sutra. Among those 
[sūtras], it should be understood that three have been taught in order: 
the Mula, the Uttarasitra and the Nayasutra. Hear from me the Guhya- 
sütra, the fourth, being taught. Joined with that [sutra], one samhita is 
promulgated: it then becomes complete, [known] by the name Nisvasa. 
This, joined with the Mukha, is the Nisvasasamhita. The five streams 
that are spoken of!? are proclaimed by the Mukha. Joined with that, it 
becomes full: [the full samhita] is taught in all [these] sutras. 


But were these four and a half verses originally the opening of the Guhya- 
sütra? It seems quite possible that they were not, that they were rather 
added to explain the structure of the unity that resulted when all five books 
came to be transmitted together as one book. (They are followed immedi- 
ately by a string of vocatives addressing the Lord that might have formed 


8This unit has been quoted in a discussion of the structure of Siddhantatantras by 
GOODALL (1998:lxiv), but with misreadings and without the letters that the apographs 
K and W enable us to supply in 2b, and the first three verses have been quoted by 
SANDERSON (2006:153) in his discussion of the structure of the Nisvasa-corpus. 

9bhavet pustà] conj.; bhavet (p/y)* sta N; bhavaty esa K; bhave sta W 

10For these five streams, see p. 30 below. 


Nisvasatattvasamhita 
22 


There is a similar problem with what we have print- 
rses of the Uttarasutra, which quote four alternative 
hich make explicit that the Uttarasutra is the 


the original opening.) 
ed as the first three ve 
names for the Mulasutra and w 


second sütra of the work. 
Fortunately, however, there are other references that seem less likely 


to be later insertions. The question of the Devi in Witana TUR 1:4, for 
example, is about the eight forms of Sadaáiva ‘taught [earlier] by you’, plainly 
a reference back to Milasutra 6. Similarly, in Uttarasutra 1:9, right at the 
beginning of that text, the Devi states that the mantras of the levels of the 
cosmos have not yet been taught, a further implicit acknowledgement that 
the Uttarasiitra sees itself as a continuation of the Mulasutra. At the end of 
the Uttarasütra, in 5:52, the Mūlasūtra is referred to by name as being the 
basis for the teachings of the Uttarasitra. The Nayasutra in turn seems to 
refer to the Uttarasutra," as does the Guhyasütra.? 

We are therefore confident that the Mülasütra was followed by the Uttara- 
sutra, which was followed by the Nayasutra, which was in turn followed by 
the Guhyasitra, exactly the order in which those works are transmitted 
in the manuscript. More problematic is the relative date of the Nisvasa- 
mukha in the corpus. Being professedly an introduction, it presupposes the 
existence of at least one sütra for it to introduce, but because it does not 
discuss the subject matter of the sütras, it is difficult to judge whether or not 
it was written when all of them were already in existence and constituted 
together a Nisvasatattvasamhita. The allusion, in Ni$vasamukha 3:28, to the 
properties of the water of Kedara together with what seems to be a reference 
to the VIDYA-mantra, suggests knowledge of Guhyasütra 16 and 17, which 
deal with a ten-syllable VIDYA and an aetiological myth about it that links 
it with Kedara.'3 But it might be that both are drawing independently on 
earlier material. At the moment, however, we are provisionally assuming 


that the Nisvasamukha forms the latest layer of the text transmitted in the 
old Nepalese manuscript. 


pr Ut pertes FO 
“The teachings of Uttarasütra 1:1-12 are referred back to in Nayasitra 4:67; there may 
bee reference back to Uttarasütra 5:24-26 in Nayasütra 3:38. 
The account of rosaries in Uttarasūtra 4:24 is referred back to in Guhyasütra 3:288 
(aksamalas ca purvoktah). 
3It was Peter BISSCHOP who first drew our 


i attention to this i ntation he gave 
in Pondicherry in 2007. is in a prese 


Prolegomena 23 


Other works bearing the name Ni$vasa 


Let us briefly review the other surviving and apparently missing texts called 
Nisvasa. The one on which we have drawn on the most, because it is closest 
in subject-matter, even if it reflects considerable evolution in the themes it 
handles, is the Nisvasakarika, the existence of which, as just mentioned, is 
indicated in the final lines of the Guhyasütra, and of which many chapters 
survive transmitted in South Indian manuscripts, among which we have used 
IFP T. 17, 127 & 150. 


catvaro kathita sutra samukhadya varanane 
paricaman tu para[m] sutram karika nama namatah 
sücità sutramatrena karikam [punah pr]cchatha'4 18:15 


Four sutras have been taught, o you of lovely face, along with the Mukha 
as introduction; now there is a further fifth sutra, called the Karika by 
name. It has been hinted at only briefly(?). Ask further for the Karika. 


As this allusion to the Nisvasakarika at the very end of the Guhyasutra sug- 
gests, and as the various notes in which we quote the Nisvasakarika will make 
clear, the work seems to have been intended as an extension that explained 
and supplemented the early corpus of the sutras of the Nisvasa, just as each 
successive sütra had been in its turn. The South Indian manuscripts all have 
different lacunae, but we cannot unfortunately reconstruct the whole text 
by slotting their fragments together, for they are all missing at least the first 
ten chapters out of what was probably a total of sixty-one. Belonging to 
the Nisvasakarika, according to its chapter-colophons, is the Diksoittara, all 
nineteen chapters of which are transmitted in the same three transcripts.75 


"karikam [punah pr]cchatha] conj. SANDERSON (2006:153); karika — cchatha N; 
karikah kimu prcchatha K; karika punah prcchatha W 

45The most complete source is T. 17, which, judging from the chapter colophons, gives 
the following chapters of the Nisvasakürika proper: 12-33, 35-42, 44-61. The remarks 
after the colophon to chapter 61 reveal that the scribe considered this to be the end of 
a major section of text (p.794): samapto 'yam dvadasasahasrikayah dvitiyah khandah. 
Of the above listed chapters, 12 is assigned to the jüanakandaprakarana; 13-14, 19-22, 
26-27, 29, and 36-41 are assigned to the jüanakanda; 54 is ascribed to the samudaya- 
prakarana; 56 is ascribed to the aristasamudayaprakarana; 58-60 are ascribed to both 
the kriyakanda and to the samudayaprakarana; and 61 is ascribed to the Jüanakriya- 
kanda. After chapter 61 follows the text of the Diksottara. Its colophons present it 
as a further section of the Nisvāsakārikā. The last colophon, for example, reads iti 
nigvasakarikayam diksottare prakarane ekonavimsatih patalah This is then followed by 
this observation: samapto ’yam samhita itil] idam paficasitrojvalam samudāyena dva- 
dasas&hasrikam samaptam ni$vasakarikakhyam tantram. 


" Nisvasatattvasamhita 


We believe that the Diksottara too is likely to be an addition tagged on 
to the Nigvasakarika at a later date, and in support of this we may quote 
the concluding lines, just before the colophon, of chapter 61 of the Nisvasa- 
karika, which follow upon an enumeration of things that have been taught 


to the goddess (T. 17, PP- 793-4; TT. 127, p- 493; T. 150, P- 31): 


nafi caiva visesat kathitam tava 


marmanam laksa. 
anye caiva padartha ye noktàá caiva varanane 145 


te sarve devadevesi jnatavyas tattvacintakaih 

karikayam mahadevi kathitas tava suvrate 146 

niévàse tu pare tantre uttame kotisammite 

kulakotigatam sagram jnataram tarayisyati 147 

prakatayasvedam jnanam madbhaktaya varanane 

raksaniyam prayatnena taskarebhyo yatha dhanam 148 

iti te kathitam devi jfianam paramadurlabham 

tvaya guptataram karyam na dadyad yasya kasyacit 149 

e 145a marmanam | 127, 150; marmajam 17 e 146ab te sarve devadevesi 


4° s~ 


150 e 146c karikayam ] 17; kanikayam 127, 150 e 146d kathitas tava 


suvrate ] kathitam tava suvrte 17, 127, 150 e 147ab nigvase tu pare tantre 
uttame kotisammite ] 17; migvase tu pare .. te 127; ni$vase tu pare tantre 
uttame kotisamyute 150 e 148a prakatayasvedam jüanam | Sataratna- 


sum क verse is quoted as Sataratnasangraha verse 91); prakatartham 
d e 17, 127, 150; idam prakataya jfianam Sotaratnasarigraha as transmit- 
PAR : E (p.576) avi 1480१ raksaniyam prayatnena taskarebhyo yatha 
m jal Jataratnasarigraha; om. 17; raksa .. ya taskaranam yatha dhanam 

: sanlyamasa ... t yatha (49; १ 
न ऑन y askaro.. yatha dhanam 150 e 149abcd ] 127, 150; 


E mn of the vulnerable points has been taught to you in de- 
£), as well as other topics that have not been taught [elsewhere], o 


MIR WEG SRE S t 
T.150 h 
Ditgoitame (ell x9, pae d s of the work: it gives chapters 44-58 after its text of the 
those chapters, 54 D à and for chapters 59 to 61 before its text of the Diksottara. Of 
ion dec A SEN a 1 59, 60 eae be from the samudayaprakarana. 
chapters), then, accordin RTA and disordered text. It gives first the Diksottara (all 19 
17 and is in m m" el e chapter-colophons (where the numbering differs from T. 
18-19, 23, 2?, 28-30 2 y impossible), it gives the following chapters: 11-17, 20722 
Of those chapters, 12 is Rd Seu SD 36 (bis), 37(bis), 40-42, 45-46, 44, 47-91: 
36bis, 37, 37bis, 40, 41, 45, and to the jfanakandaprakarana; 13-14, 19-23, 27, 32: 9^ 
PANG samudayaprakarana, and 61 are ascribed to the jflanakanda; 54 and 56 are ascribe 
ascribed to both the d n ascribed to the aristasamudayaprakarana; 59 and 60 are 
begins after 61, but it t yatanda and to the samudayaprakarana. An incomplete chapter 
; urns out to be the first verses of the first chapter of the Diksotta™ 


Prolegomena 25 


you of lovely face. All those, empress of the gods, must be known by 
those who reflect upon the truth. They have been taught to you, o you 
who are true in your observances, in the Karika, great goddess, [which 
forms a part] inside the supreme Nisvasa, most excellent, measured in a 
crore [of verses]. It will liberate one who knows it entirely, along with 
a crore of generations of his patriline. Reveal this scripture, o you who 
are fair of face, to those devoted to me. Protect it carefully, like wealth, 
from thieves. Thus, o goddess, has this Scripture, which is hard to ob- 
tain, been taught to you: keep it very secret. Do not give it to just 
anybody. 


These lines are clearly intended as a summing up of the Nisvasakarika. Of 
course although the beginning of the Diksottara follows the end of chapter 
61 in all sources, this does not necessarily mean that it was originally placed 
there and that it was therefore composed as an addendum to be tagged 
on after chapters 1-61 of the Nisvasakarika, but its colophon-structure and 
chapter-numbering suggests as much, and so too, perhaps, its attempts to 
be systematic in its treatment of certain subjects, for example in the clear 
enumeration of the thirty-six tattvas in Diksottara 13 (quoted in GOODALL 
1998:lii-liii, fn. 114), in the listing of the twenty-eight Saiva scriptures and 
their transmitters in Diksottara 4 (quoted in GOODALL 1998:404-8), in the 
detailed definitions given of the four classes of initiate (samayin, putraka, 
sadhaka and acarya) in Diksottara 7 (pp. 907ff in T.17), and perhaps also 
in the treatment of the six initiatory paths (bhuvanadhvan, tattvadhvan, 
kaladhvan, mantradhvan, padadhvan, varnadhvan) in Diksottara 9:17ff (see 
Appendix V).16 


२611) these last two cases, the terms used in these classificatory schemes do occur else- 
where in the Nisvasakarika too, but the classes of initiates are not there clearly explained, 
and the initiatory paths are twice said to be seven (chapter following chapter 42 in T. 17, 
on pp. 382 and 383), without it becoming quite clear which the seven paths are, whereas 
the "classical" number of six paths has been adopted in the presentation in Diksottara 
9:17ff (for which see Appendix V), and the number six is explicitly repeated when this is 
referred back to in Diksottara 11 (T. 17, p. 970, T. 127, p.80, T. 150, p.116): 


bhuvanadhva kaladhvà ca tattvadhva ca varanane 
jfianadhva ca padadhvà ca varnadhva ca yatha punah 25 
satprakaram idam devi adhvanam parikirtitam 


e adhvanam parikirtitam | 17, 127; adhvanah parikirtitah 150 


(The expression jñānādhvā seems to be unparallelled, but it seems unproblematic to as- 
sume that it is intended to mean mantradhvan, which is the expression used earlier in the 


text.) 


Nisvasatattvasamhita 
26 


The dates of composition of the Nisvasakarika and Diksottara, beyond 
that we may assume that they are later than the old ४७१५ > (८५५५५०२ the 
four sütras and the Nigvasamukha, are of course difficult E establish. At 
least part of the Nigvasakarika must be contemporary with at least the final 
lines of the Guhyasütra, as we have seen, 80 We might expect them to belong 
to the same period, in other words the seventh century, the period by which, 
as we shall argue below, the final layers had probably joined the early corpus 
and the four sūtras had thus taken their current shape. We know also, from 
quotations in the Tantraloka, that the Diksottara was known to Abhinava- 
gupta (see GOODALL 1998:xli-xliii, fn. 96). As Dr. Shaman HATLEY has 
pointed out to us, one further piece of evidence that also suggests such a 
relatively early date is that the thirty-ninth chapter of the Brahmayamala 
appears to have drawn on the account of Saiva scripture given in chapter 4 
of the Diksottara. The evidence will be presented in the introduction to the 
forthcoming revised version of his doctoral thesis (HATLEY, forthcoming A). 

A quotation of twenty-one verses appears in Hrdayasiva’s * Prayascitta- 
samuccaya," an anthology of chapters of Saiva scripture devoted to rites 
of reparation, under the heading nihsvasakarikayam prayascittam likhyate, 
ending (Cambridge MS Add. 2833, ff. 67v-69v) with 


hatva tu desikan kamad bhaiksabhuk susamahitah 
ekasitipadam mantram laksam avartya Sudhyati 27:21 
nih$vasaprayascittaprakaranam samaptam iti 


(The numbering here is that of R. SATHYANARAYANAN's diplomatic edition 
of Hrdayaśiva’s anthology, which is to be incorporated as an appendix into 
his forthcoming edition of the slightly later Prayaácittasamuccaya of Tri- 
locanasiva.) This section is not among the chapters transmitted in the IFP 
transcripts, but it may nonetheless have belonged to the Nisvasakarika, for 
instance to one of the first ten chapters. 

A second quotation in the same anthology, attributed to the Nih$vasot- 
tara, begins with the same six padas with which the first began and, since 
it is so short, may be given in its entirety here (ff. 69v—70r): 


nih$vasottare prayascittam likhyate 

asamaptahniko mantri nanyat karma kathaficana 
pramadahnikavicchede ghrtahomo vidhiyate 29:01 
ahutinam sahasraikam apramadac chatam hunet 

paticasat paficavimgad và mantri mantran tato japet 29:02 


= Me eer विक ea 
*7We have used this invented title to 


22227 20% distinguish the work from Trilocanaésiva’s Praya” 


Prolegomena a 


vidyadhipena mantrena panicabrahmayutena ca 

parigrhya japam mantri samkhyacchinnam japet tatah 29:03 
kalpoktam tu japan krtva rudraya vinivedayet 

rudrarpitani japen mantri vighnendrena na badhyate 29:04 
janubhyam avanim gatva japam 182 nivedayet 

iti nih$vasottare prayascittam samaptam iti 


The source of these verses too has not been traced. Could these have be- 
longed to a lost Nihévasottara? As the Luptagamasaügraha records (vol. 
1, S.v. Nihsvasottaram), another verse is quoted in the Sataratnollekhinz ad 
Sataratnasarigraha 65-6 on p.74, and this too we have not been able to 
trace. We may add that of the 39 half-lines that the Luptagamasangraha 
records as being quoted in the Sataratnasangraha or Sataratnollekhint with 
ascription to the Nigvasakarika, 34 are indeed traceable in the surviving 
chapters of the Nisvasakarika (not in the Diksottara). It is indeed striking 
that the NiSvasakarika and the Diksottara (taking into account Abhinava- 
gupta’s quotations) are thus not very infrequently identifiably quoted in 
surviving exegetical literature, whereas the old sutras virtually never are.2® 
Perhaps the siitras, which may quickly have become dated in their liturgical 
and doctrinal teachings, already seemed strange and remote to the largely 
tenth- and post-tenth-century commentators whose works have survived.!9 

A second large and probably relatively early work that associates 
itself with the Ni$vasa is the Devyamata, which is also called the 
Nisvasakhyamahatantra. The work describes itself, both in colophons and 
in its own text, as a pratisthatantra, in other words a work that is primarily 
concerned with the construction of temples and of the ritual installation of 
lingas in them. It survives in three early Nepalese palm-leaf manuscripts 
filmed by the NGMPP, the earliest of which is dated to 1060 AD.2° The 


"S Perhaps the only labelled allusion to a particular identifiable passage in the Mülasütra 
in a surviving Saiddhantika work that is not part of the Nisvasa-corpus is this remark 
at the end of Trilocanagiva’s Prayascittasamuccaya (827): brahmahatyadisuddhyartham 
nihsvase sakaladibhih/ $ivabijair japah prokto ... ‘In the Nihsvasa, recitation has been 
enjoined using Siva’s seed-syllables such as the SAKALA, for the sake of cleansing away 
such faults as the murder of a brahmin? This may be a reference to the beginning of the 
seventh chapter of the Malasitm, in which it is explained that one who knows the TATTVA 
is unstained by the consequences of the major transgressions (mahapataka). 

"9Sadyojyotih is of course much earlier, but, as we have had occasion to remark before 
(WATSON, GOODALL and ANJANEYA SARMA 2013:466, fn. 906), Sadyojyotih appears 
almost never to incorporate verbatim quotations in his works. i 

2°The earliest manuscript bears NGMPP Reel No. A 41/15 (=A). Its date, given after the 
final colophon on f. 121v, appears to read asitiyukte sasate possum Subhe maghatrtiye 
vasare. Assuming some oddities of syntax, and that satsara? is an error for samvatsara 


Nisvasatattvasamhita 
28 


nt studies have drawn upon it, one be- 


H t tem l t pes (prasa rJ 5 2 १ z : i / 


i i iptions. We abstain here from 
an edition of the work's iconographical prescripti 


speculating about the date of the work, which may S mE Ti 
layer of composition, for more study is required. Es ce xu e zn j 
have as yet seen rather little overlap in Mere e i : T ek" 
the Ni$vasa; but there is one chapter in our corpus evo a ५2 a gee 
namely Guhyasütra 2, and so this is a theme to which we ie a ur 
we come to furnish an annotated edition of that part of the क ; s 

In this catalogue of Ni$vasas, we finally turn briefly to the sma est 
hitherto unassigned fragments for which some affiliation to the Nisvasa is 
claimed. 


work is unpublished, but two rece 


As SANDERSON has pointed out (2007:430 and fn. 669), an otherwise 
unknown Nandisvarüvatüra-Nihávasa in 9000 verses is cited in the Ni- 
tyadisarigrahapaddhati, a Kashmirian ritual manual by Taksakavarta. 


Commenting on the sutra 3.9 (nartaka atma), Ksemaraja in his Siva- 
sutravimarsini quotes the half-line tvam ekamSenantaratma nartakah 
kosaraksita prefaced by the following attribution: tad uktam srl- 
naigvasadevimahesvaranartakakhye saptamapatale devikrtastave. We 


and that the Nepalese era beginning in 880 is intended, this gives a date of 1060 AD, 
which seems palaeographically plausible. NGMPP Reel No. A 41/13 (=B) is not dated, 
but seems to belong to the twelfth-century. The claim that the text is a recension of the 
NiSvasa is to be found in the opening chapter: 


[sra]yatam yatnato devi ya[t tvaya] pariprcchitam 
kathayami na sandeho tava bhaktya visesatah 1:9 
ni$vasakhye mahatantre bijabhede varanane 
sarvatantresu samanyam pratisthatantram uttamam 1:10 


gab [Sru]yatam yatnato devi ya[ttvaya] pariprcchitam ] conj.; .. yatam yatnato devi 
~ Pariprcchitam A om. B ० gcd sandeho tava bhaktya ] A; sandeha tata bhatKa 


B e 10b bijabhede varanane] A; bija ..B e 10c sarvatantresu samanyam 
conj. .. nyam A; .. tresu samanya? B 


Listen, o goddess, with attention: I shall tell you, 


what you asked about, there is no doubt, [namely] the excellent tantra on the subject 


of installation, [a subject] common to all tantras, [which falls] within the Bija-recension 
of the Great Tantra called the Nisvasa, o you of fair face. 


especially because of your devotion; 


(For the cliché sarvatantresu samanyam, cf., e.g., Sardhatrigatikalottara 5:6c, and Diksot 
tara 1:29c and 1:34c [T. 17, Pp. 801-2].) 


Prolegomena 5 


should perhaps correct here to ‘naiSvasadevimahesvare, in which case 
this might refer to another wholly lost work that claimed some affilia- 
tion with the Ni$vasa’s stream of scriptural revelation, or to naigvase 
devimahe$vara?, in which case this might have been a reference to the 
lost seventh chapter of the Nisvasakarika. 


Finally, the tantrotpattivyakhyapatala of the Brhatkalottara, describing 
the recensions of the Paramesvara and the Ni§vasa, has this to say 
(NGMPP B 24/59, ff. 511-51): 


vijayam paficadhà khyatam saptadha parame$varam 
pauskaram hamsamatangam yaksini vamadevakam 17 
dadhicih saptamam jneyam pratisthaparames$varam 
nih$vasam triprakaram tu trikandam tu vidhiyate 18 
nih$vasa karika caiva uttara tritayam smrtam 


Perhaps the three works referred to here are 1) the Nigvasa formed by 
the four old sütras, 2) the Nisvasakarika, and 3) the Nisvasottara from 
which Hrdayagiva quoted. Later in the same chapter (ff. 52v-53r), 
the key teaching (adisutra, mülasütra) of “the Nisvasa" is given and 
commented upon as follows:?! 


athatah sarvvavijnanasutikrt pramathasrayam 48 
pravaksyami?? mahatantram yogayogesvararcitam 
adisutram idam tantre ni$vase paribhasitam 49 
vijnanasutivacanad vidyatattvaparigrahah 
pramathaSrayasabdac ca yogapithapadasya ca 50 
vidyavidyatmakam sarvvam vidyayamrtam apnuyat 
yogapithapadenaiva sa vibhor asane sthita 51 


This could be a fictional adisutra (most of the adisutras listed and 
expounded in the Brhatkalottara cannot be verified,?3 but perhaps 
only because we have lost the scriptures to which it refers), or it could 
belong to a lost recension, or it could belong to one of the opening 
chapters of the Nisvasakarika. 


“The Brhatkalottara claims there to give the adisütras of the twenty-eight scriptures 
of the canon: see GOODALL 1998:414-416, quoting SANDERSON. Such an adisutra, char- 
acterised, with examples, by Ramakantha in Kiranavrtti 1:12.18-21, was held to contain, 
compressed in a nutshell, the essential teaching of the tantra. 


22 = > 
pravaksyami] em.; pravaksami MS 2 
CE, GOODALL 2004:xxxviii-xxxix on the adisütra attributed by the Brhatkalottara to 


the Parakhya, which is also not found in the text transmitted to us. 


Nisvasatativasamhita 
30 


t ill make use, from time to time, of the Nisvasa- 
a Mn we will use the expression TA to re- 
fer, unless otherwise stated, to the sūtras that are yon P he old 
So namely the Mulasutra, Uttarasutra, Nayasutra, an E yasutra. 
The Nigvasamukha is a case apart, as we have indicated above: although 
it is transmitted in the early manuscript, it Was Dos conceived as a work 
for promulgating tantric teachings, but rather as an introductory book that 
would present the religious context in which the Mantramarga arose. It 
begins its presentation by dividing religious literature — which is to say all 
religious literature that has some validity from the particular perspective 
of the author of this Saiva work — into five types, laukika (lay devotional 
religion), vaidika, adhyatmika (philosophy in a Sankhya vein), atimarga and 
mantramarga (1:21): 


Srnvantu rsayah sarve pañcadhā yat prakirtitam 
laukikam vaidikañ caiva tathadhyatmikam eva ca 
a|timargam ca mantrakhyam| 1... 


Each of these is then expounded in turn, excepting the last, which is the 
subject of the sutras of the Ni$vasa.25 


The Early Place of the Nisvasa in Tantric Saivism 


It will be noticed that we speak cautiously of the Mantramarga and not of 
“Tantrism” or “Tantra”, for there seems to be little evidence in the Nisvasa 
that tantra had already become privileged as a term for texts of tantric 
revelation. One might attempt to argue that the expression had become or 
was becoming privileged in such a way from some verses, for instance from 
this question of the goddess in Guhyasütra, 4:5: 


adhvanam me mahadeva brühi vistaraso prabho 
adhvanam ca parijfianam Sivatantresu giyate 


But the addition of the element £iva? in Sivatantregu is telling (cf. Uttarasütra 
1:22 and 1:31-2), and we find &ivatantras distinguished from anyatantras 


2 T y 
. 4The parallel or “quotation” in the Pirva-Kamika (1:17c-18b) appears not to be GED 
or reconstructing the missing last pada: laukikam vaidikam caiva tathadhyatmikam E 
Eo mantrakhyam tantram etad anekadha. 
a res her : Brion of these five streams, and particularly on the distinction between 
timarga an the Mantramarga, see SANDERSON 2006:156-163, in which he ar 
especially on the testimony of the Svacchanda (111790184). 


Prolegomena 31 


(Nayasutra 1:14 and 1:106) and also pasutantras (Nayasutra 1:112). Fur- 
thermore, although self-references in our text do sometimes use the term 
tantra (e.g. Mūlasūtra 8:3, Uttarasütra 4:11, Guhyasütra 8:111, 12:25-7, 
13:20, 13:23, 13:112, 13:180), they also use other terms, such as samhita 
(Uttarasütra 5:53-4, Nayasütra 4:41, 4:151, Guhyasütra 3:3-4, 2:112) and 
tattvasamhita (Mulasutra 8:10, 8:20 and all colophons!) But although 
tantra in the language of the Ni$vasa seems simply to have meant “book? 
and had probably not yet evolved into a privileged term for revealed tantric 
literature, such a category of revealed literature did exist (see, e.g., Uttara- 
sutra 1:25ff), and the general term used for it in the Nisvasamukha (1:21 and 
4:135-6) was the Mantramarga. 


The Ni$vasa and the Vamasrotas 


There is evidence that the Mantramarga of the Nisvasa predates a split into 
various schools of Tantric Saivism. It is true that the Uttarasütra (1:26f) 
lists the names of a canon of twenty-eight scriptures, including the Ni$vasa 
itself, a list which, with some small differences, is now known as the list 
of names of scriptures of the canon of the Saivasiddhanta. But there is no 
indication in the Ni$vasa that a school of theology and ritual called Saiva- 
siddhanta existed: the list seems to have been a list of works—some or even 
most of them perhaps mythical—belonging simply to an undifferentiated 
Mantramarga. By speaking of the Mülasütra as possibly the earliest surviv- 
ing Saiva tantra and by referring to other works listed in the Uttarasutra as 
possibly mythical we do not mean that the Mūlasūtra was the earliest Saiva 
tantra: its concision, indeed abruptness, seems rather to suggest that it was 
not the one and only text of its genre at the time of its composition. Further- 
more, although the Saivasiddhanta may not have existed, and although there 
is no other evidence in the text for the existence of other tantric schools, 
other schools that we now refer to as tantric might already have been in 
existence. Fragments of a work belonging to another Saiva tantric school, 
the Vamasrotas, have been discovered among folios of a Gilgit MS of the 
sixth century by Alexis SANDERSON and Somdev VASUDEVA,”° plentiful ev- 
idence of the importance of the central divinities of the Vamasrotas, namely 
the four sisters and their brother Tumburu, is furnished in several chapters 
of the Mafijusriyamilakalpa,7 and there is a surviving work of the same 
School, the Vinasikhatantra, which might be of comparable antiquity. 


————————ÀÀ— N D jam 
26 For details about this *Devitantrasadbhavasara, see SANDERSON 2009:50-51. 
27868, for example, GOUDRIAAN 1973 and SANDERSON 2009:129-30. 


Nisvasatattvasamhita 

32 
preoccupations to those of the Nisvasa 
nd it too contains magical recipes similar to those found in certain Buddhist 
us sources. Indeed Harunaga ISAACSON has pointed out one procedure 
that is found almost identically in the Guhyasutra, the Manjusriyamila- 
khatantra. It explains how to gain control of another 


kalpa and the Vinasi Age : : 
gets by making an effigy in salt and then offering it piece by piece into 


the fire. 


The Vinasikhatantra has similar 


Guhyasutra 14:65: s do : 2 
atha lavanamaynn pratikrtim krtva rudhirenabhyajya tiksnaSas- 
trenotkrtya padau prabhrti cchitvastasahasram juhuya striya purugasya 
và sa va$yo bhavati. 


Mafijuáriyamülakalpa, ch. 55, p. 673: 
lavanamayim pratikrtim chitva chitva juhuyat astasahasram; yam iccha- 
ti, sa vaso bhavati, stri và puruso va. 


Vinasikhatantra 268c-269: 

pratimam lavanamayim krtvà Satabhimantritam budhah 
pàdau prabhrti hotavyam yavad astaSatam bhavet 
trisandhyam ekacittas tu amoghava$yatam nayet. 


Here too, in other words, we find the distinctive atmosphere of the early 
Mantramarga, in which soteriological goals and worldly magical ones—mukti 
and bhukti—are given equal emphasis and are taught to be attainable 
through the power of mantras. 

Although there are shared procedures, shared notions, and even shared 
clichés, there is rather little that we are aware of that makes it possible to 
make certain declarations about the relative dates of the Vinasikhatantra 
and any one of the sütras of the Nisvasa. We may point out, however, 2 


couple of surprising features in the Nisvasa that we believe may be pointers 
to its greater antiquity. 


The terminology of mantranyasa, which one might have expected to be 
an ubiquitous feature of tantric writing—including the use of vari- 
ous forms of the verb nyas itself—seems to be almost entirely missing 
from the sütras of the Niévasa.?8 In the Vipasikhatantra, by contrast 
such usage of nyas is common (e.g. 41, 71, 79-84, 174, 204, 209; 277 


वि त न च * : 
h in vidyādīksā i 
ie setae ts yrs 3 xt in vidyādīkşā in which nyāsa is mentioned, and it is unclear Whe, 
of the Sivahasta oss (cs मा 3:21. Since it is closely followed by the E 
onto the acarya’s hand. nitiand’s head, it may refer to the laying of the brahmaman 


Prolegomena m 


302, etc.), and we find what seems to be an allusion to sakalikarana 
(transformation through imposition of mantras into the sakala deity) 
in 37. 


The simplicity of the yogic body as described in the Nisvasa is striking. 
There appear to be only two tubes, Susumna and Ida (Uttarasutra 
5:37), and Susumna is not, as is so common elsewhere, the central 
tube. Furthermore, there is no unambiguous mention of a central tube 
at all: when the yogin cultivates visuva (Uttarasitra 5:38-9), his life- 
breath moves into a space between the other two tubes (madhyadese). 
(Of course one could argue that, if there is a madhyadega between 
two tubes on the left and right, then this must by definition be a 
tube, and one could further point to Nayasutra 4:10 as containing 
what might be an allusion to a central tube; but neither of these 
passages seems conclusive.) In the Vinasikhatantra, by contrast, a 
more complex picture of the yogic body is drawn (140f),?9 and it 


29 Vinasikhatantra 140-6: 


medhranabhyantare devi kandamülakrtir bhavet 
dvasaptatisahasrani nadir adharasamsthitah 140 
nabhidese sthito granthis tatra padmam vyavasthitam 
karnika padmamadhyasya tatra sadhyam vyavasthitam 141 
karnikasusirante tu ya kala cordhvagaminr 
tasya madhye sthito devah sa tu dipasikhopamah 142 
Suddhasphatikasamkasam visphulingarkasamnibham 
varimarutasamkirnam valagrasatabhagakam 143 
vayuvahanam arüdham Sabdatitam anamayam 
sampraty ayam tu gamyo ’sau vahate dehamadhyatah 144 
idamadhyagato vapi pingalantargato ‘pi va 
susumnantargata$ caiva visuvam samudahrtam 145 
ida tu vamaja prokta daksine pingala smrta 
anayor madhye susumna tu srstisamharakarika 146 
GOUDRIAAN (1985:112113) translates as follows: 
[power centre] in the form of a bulbous root. 
are based in this resting-place. 
rving as] knot; there a lotus exists; there 


Between the penis and the navel exists à 
Seventy-two thousand yogic ducts (nadis) 
In the region of the navel exists a [centre se ; SES AT Rd 
is a pericarp in its centre; there the object of one's meditation is located. ax i 
The subtle particle which is directed upwards in the hollow e E e xm 
carp—within it the god resides; he is equal to the upper part of [the flame within 
a lamp]. 

It resembles pure crystal, 
by water and wind, as subtle as a hun 
seated on wind as mount, beyond the rea 
with the body and can be reached... i? 
He can be moving with the [duct called] Idā, 


it is equal in lustre to sparks or sunshine, constituted partly 


dredth part of the tip of a hair; 
ch of speech, imperishable. He moves about 


or within the Pingala; when he resides 


Nisvasatattvasamhitg 
34 


is one in which, out of the 72 000 tubes in the body, Susumna has 
become the familiar central tube, flanked by two other principal tubes 
called Ida and Pingala. Not only is there no certain mention of a 
central tube in the sütras of the Nisvasa, we find also no mention of a 
dvadasanta,3° or of what may have been its predecessor as the highest 
point in the yogic body, namely nasagra,?" nor of kundalini,? nor is 
the list of five karanegas alluded to, namely Brahma, Visnu, Rudra, 
Iévara and Sadagiva, residing in the heart, throat, palate, etc.33 The 
absence of a central tube, by the way, may particularly surprise those 
familiar with Upanisadic passages in which the existence of a central 
tube is sometimes explicitly mentioned,*4 as is the total tally of 72 000 
tubes.35 But although the number 72 000 reveals that there is some 


within the Susumna this is called Visuva (equinox; intersection). 
The Ida is proclaimed to belong to the left, the Pingala is on the right; between these 
two is the Susumna|,] which is the cause of creation and dissolution. 


In 144c, GOUDRIAAN prints sampratyayam and offers no translation. One might simply 
split as we have and render that pada with ‘He may be attained at once’. 

3? Among early references to this are those in Sardhatrisatikalottara 2:4 and 8:28, and 
Diksottara 9:21 (for which see Appendix V). 

S' VASUDEVA (2004:285-8) points out that nasagre should have been accepted in place 
of nadante in Sardhatrisatikalottara 23:11, and adduces other passages in which nasagra 
features as a high point (though not always the highest point) in the yogic body. To these 
could be added Sarvajnanottara 10:31. The location of the nasagra, which may differ from 
text to text, is rather unclear. See also GOODALL 2004:372-3, fn. 807. 

37 Among early references to kundalini are Sardhatrisatikalottara 12:1, Nisvasakarika, 
jnanakanda 13:60 (T.17, p. 50), and Kirana 58:59. 

33For the karanesas/karanesvaras, see TAK2 s.v. karana (1). A rather different list, 
although it begins with Brahma, Visnu and Rudra, of eight divinities associated with 
the enunciation of the pranava (and ther 


x i efore perhaps a precursor to the classical list of 
kāraņeśas) appears in Nayasutra 4:93. 

See the prepenultimate verse of the Kathopanisat ($atam caika ca hrdayasya nadyas 
tasam mürdhanam abhinihsrtaika / tayordhvam ayann amrtatvam eti visvati anya utkra- 
mane bhavanti), which OLIVELLE (1998:403) translates as follows: 

One hundred and one, the veins of the heart. 

One of them runs up to the crown of the head. 
Going up by it, he reaches the immortal. 

The rest, in their ascent, spread out in all directions. 


35562 Brhadaranyakopanisat 2.1.1 
da. hità nàm 


pratyavasrpya puritati Sete. 
gatva Sayita. evam evaisa etac chete, 

But as soo i 
oe eee is a asleep—as soon as he does not know of anything, [this is V 
ty-two thousand veins called hitá start from the heart towards the 


Prolegomena 35 


continuity between the notions of the early Upanisads and the much 
later accounts of that yogic body such as that quoted above, there is 
an important difference: the Upanisads are referring to blood-vessels, 
whereas the nàdis of the yogic body are primarily carriers of breaths, 
some of them pushing fluids about the body. (Might the redactors of 
the early Upanisads have had closer experience of animal sacrifice and 
meat preparation than the yogins of later times?) Perhaps we may 
speculate, then, that the number 72 000 may have been mapped on 
to a model of wind tubes from an Upanisadic notion of 72 000 blood- 
vessels at some point after the redaction of the Uttarasitra? The 
absence of a central tube in the Uttarasutra might then be regarded 
as less problematic, since the redactor might simply not have had 
Upanisadic notions of blood-carrying tubes in mind, but rather an 
entirely separate notion of wind-channels. 


We have indicated elsewhere (GOODALL and ISAACSON 2007 and GOODALL 
2004) a number of other features of the Ni$vasa that we believe to be ar- 
chaic, but we need to recapitulate them here in order to set out in full what 
we think about the early date of the text, which begins, we think, with the 
Mulasutra (c. 450-550 AD) and is completed with the Nisvasamukha and 
Guhyasütra, probably by the end of the seventh century. The pointers may 
be broadly grouped under the (partially overlapping) heads of palaeography; 
iconography; terminology; theology; social religion; and intertextuality (al- 
lusions within the Nisvasa to other literature and allusions in other literature 


pericardium. Having crept down by means of them, he is there in the pericardium. 
Like a prince or a great brahmin would be lying there after reaching excessive pleasure, 
in the very same way that [purusa] lies there. 


'This is the translation of ACHARYA (2013:15-16), except that we have inserted '[this is 
what happens], taking inspiration from OLIVELLE's (1998:63). ACHARYA's notes 20 and 
21 contain interesting speculation about the shift in Vedic terminology from hirá to hitá, 
which we see here explained as nadi, and about the possibility that the number 72 000 
might be the result of a transmissional error: 


I propose that such vagueness was indeed intended: the text originally was speaking 
of thousand(s) of veins, and the number ‘seventy-two’ crept in here in the course of 
the transmission of the text. The text of the SB [scil. Satapathabrahmana] is counted 
in hundreds, and in the Madhyandina recension, wherever & unit of one hundred 
grantha-s (Satam) is completed|,] that point is marked. It is thus perhaps not Eo 
a coincidence that just two paragraphs before the text-counter indicates the end o 

the seventy-second unit of Satam, and soon after it, the number of the veins of the 
heart is claimed to be seventy-two thousand. 

(From fn. 21 in ACHARYA 2013:15.) 


Nisvasatattvasamhitg 
36 


They are arranged here beginning with the most weakly 


to the Nisvasa). g in the more complex 


i t i t t, culminatin 
suggestive and the quickest to present, un > 
but perhaps more convincing factors. Individually, each piece of evidence 


for antiquity may seem merely suggestive, but we believe that it is their 
. . 6 
cumulative weight that is compelling.? 


Paleographical archaism 


This title does not refer, of course, to the palaeography of the early ninth- 
century Nepalese manuscript through which the text is transmitted to us, 
but rather to the clues as to the sort of script used by the redactors. For 
in Nayasutra 1:32ff we have an explanation about how the sadhaka is to 
arrange his body or parts of his body to form the shape of each letter of 
the alphabet in turn. Many of the descriptions are unclear or inconclusive, 
but it seems to us that what is described is a Northern Indian alphabet 
type of between the 4th and the 7th centuries AD, and similar to the one 
to which Somdev VASUDEVA has drawn attention in his article about the 
alphabet-goddess Malini (2007). 


Iconographical archaism 


The notion, widespread in the works of the Saivasiddhanta, that the central 
deity Sadasiva is to be visualised as five-faced and ten-armed is absent from 
the sutras of the Ni$vasa. As Judit TORZSOK has suggested,37 four-faced 
central deities in early tantric sources (such as Tumburu in the Vmasikha- 
tantra) seem to have at some point been widely replaced by central five-faced 
ones. Lesser four-faced divinities may remain, but five faces become the de- 
fault for important figures in many tantric Saiva works. This is perhaps the 
result of the influence of the Saivasiddhanta, in which Sadagiva presumably 
came to be regarded as five-faced when the five brahmamantras became 
oe re his faces. But none of the familiar associations we have with 
E i eae (for instance the particular association of AGHORA 
ms present in the Nisvāsa,38 and there appears to be 
a. सा 

We hope therefore that the discussion below will go some way to dispelling the scep- 


ticism about our datin r 
P- 150), who judges it a E essed by BAKKER (2014:9, fn. 36, reiterated in fn. 469 on 


mainly based 
Sn a : Thi on palaeography’ 
h 010 and nan plein tc ermal जाळा on Kari Tantra in Hob 
38Nirajan KAFLE x € Indo-Iranian Journal (2013) 
made t int i : : 
on Early Tantra, held in point in a paper given at the First International WorkshoP 


: Kathmandu i : z e 
brahmamantras that are presented in chem ^ mich che analyerd, ५० 


Prolegomena 37 
no link mentioned between the brahmamantras and the faces of a deity in 
the earliest sutras of the Nisvasa. There is, however, a visualisation, at the 
level of the tattva of I$vara (below sadasivatattva) of what one might call 
a proto-Sada$iva. This visualisation has four heads facing the four cardinal 
directions and what may be a standing figure emerging above them (Naya- 
sutra 3:421). This passage has been incorporated into the Svacchanda, 
where it has been interpreted by transmitters of that text as a visualisation 
of 8908808. Moreover, in the Nisvasamukha, the five streams of knowledge 
there expounded are said to have emanated from the five faces of the lord 
(3:197, 4:41-2, 4:132, 4:136).39 It is not made explicit, however, that these 
are Sadasiva’s faces or that they are the brahmamantras. In Guhyasitra 
12, however, we find the five brahmamantras said to be the sources of four 
Atimarga schools (Vaimala, that of the Pramana-scriptures, Karuka and 
Lakulisa [= Paficarthika-pasupata?]) and of the Mantramàrga (Saivam) 


panicabhis tu tatah sarvam yad bhütam yac ca bhavyati 
1$ane Saivam utpannam vaimalam purusa[t| smrtam 12:17 
pramanam hrdayaj jatam vamadevat tu karukam 

sadyac ca lakuligan tu parica bhedah prakirttitah 12:18 


e vamadevat tu karukam | conj; vamade —ntu karakam N e lakuligan 
tu] conj.; lakuligantah N 


Instead of commentary on how the oddities of language may be intended to 
be understood, here is an attempt at a translation. 


From these five everything that has existed and that will exist [arises]. 
In [the face(?) that is called] I$ANA arises Saiva [teaching]; from TATPU- 
RUSA are held [to arise] Vaimala [teachings]; from the heart [of Sadasiva, 
viz. AGHORA] arose the Pramana[-scriptures]; from VAMADEVA the Karu- 
ka [teachings]; and from SADYOJATA the Lakuliga [teachings]: the five 
divisions [of Saiva scripture?] have been proclaimed. 


There is no explicit statement here that these are faces, but the fact that 
they emit scriptures suggests this. It is, in other words, conceivable that 
they are thought of as five fully anthropomorphic forms of Siva. There is, 
however, evidence of their association with body-parts, since AGHORA is 
referred to as the “heart” of the Lord. As for the god in question being 
explicitly thought of as Sadagiva, that is made plain just below: 


39Here we follow the numeration of Nirajan KAFLE's edition in progresi tha की कक बे 
are quoted (with different verse-numbering) in SANDERSON 2006:156-157- Cf. ovaccha 


11:43C-45b, quoted by SANDERSON on p. 159. 


Nisvasatattvasamhitg 
38 
sarva ye canye puravasinah 
devam arccayanti sadasivam 12:20 
adhir na ca duhkhita 


daityà vidyadhara[h] 
sthapya pancatanun 661 
na tatra mrtyur na jara na vy. 


e paiicatanun ] conj.; paücatanur N e duhkhita] conj. (cf. Mulasitra 


1:7ab); dubkhitah N 

..[and] Daityas and Vidyadharas and all other body-dwelling(?) souls, if 
they install the God Sadasiva, who has five [mantras] as his body, and 
worship him, there will be no death among them (tatra), no ageing, no 


disease, no suffering. 


We take the expression paficatanu to be equivalent in sense to the later us- 
age pancamantratanu (cf., e.g., Svayambhuvasitrasangraha 4:9;4° Matanga 
kriyapada 5:65, 9:3; Mrgendra vidyapada 13:197, etc.); but it is possible that 
we should interpret instead: “the god who has five bodies”. 

To summarise, it appears that the notion of a five-headed figure known 
as Sadasiva and whose five heads are the brahmamantras is absent from the 
earliest sutras of the Ni$vasa but is beginning to take shape in the latest layer 
of the text, namely that constituted by the Nisvasamukha and Guhyasutra. 


Terminological archaism 


We have already alluded above, in our discussion of the Vinasikhatantra, to 
one instance of such archaism, namely the absence of a vocabulary to refer 
to a ubiquitous tantric “technology”, that of mantranyàsa,* in particular 
sakalikarana (and related terminology, for example sakali-bhü-, sakali-kr-, 


niskali-kr-), even though the corresponding ritual act may be known, for see 
Mulasitra 1:20cd: 


tattvangais ca susannaddhah pascat karmma samarabhet. 


B s with the principal mantra (TATTVA-) and with the body-part- 
antras, one should afterwards undertake [ritual] action. 


It could be argued here, h 
; Dowever, that t t ७ 0 ent 
but also the concept of sak not only the terminology is absen 


practitioner is ralikarana, for this formulation suggests that the 
ARES ees with the mantras rather than transformed into the 
y \sakali-krta) by the imposition of that deity’s mantras. Suc 
OC a 
47836 Mcd e attestation of this expression in a Saiddhantike 5007९: 
use of forms of the ve nating remarks on the pre-tantric history of nyasa and 07 
९ verb nyas to refer to it: EINOO 2005b:109-113 


Prolegomena 39 


an idea is, however, clearly present in the mind of the redactor of the next 
layer of the text, the Uttarasutra, when he uses the expression éivibhiitah 
to refer to the officiant who has placed the consonants and vowels (the two 
halves of the MATRKA, the syllabary treated as mantra) on the two halves 
of his body in 2:8.4? 

We may note also the absence in the first three sütras of avahana and 
related verb-forms, which are ubiquitous in other tantric literature. The 
first appearances in the Ni$vasa corpus appear to be those in the Guhya- 
sutra, the first of which is in Guhyasütra 14:35: avahayed va mahesvaram, 
ato ’parimitam và japam kuryat. The counterpart action of visarjana (and 
related forms) is attested in Mulasutra 2:10, 6:26 and Uttarasitra 4:23. 

Other terminological lacunae are suggestive but less certain: the term 
kunda, for example, to describe the fire-pit seems to be absent from the 
Mulasutro, but makes its appearance in the Uttarasutra (2:21). See our note 
on Mulasutra 3:1c-2 below, in which we refer to EINOO’s observations on 
the term in 2005a (pp. 20-23). Before moving to the next heading, we may 
remark in passing that terminological archaisms of this sort are rather hard 
to spot, and so there may be many more staring us in the face that we have 
not noticed, but that they are in any case rather slippery as evidence for 
dating. 


Theological archaism 


Theological archaism is potentially a rather large subject, since one could 
tease out and discuss at length, for instance, the various clues that suggest 
an evolution in soteriology. But this section is intended instead to gather 
together and present a handful of clear-cut theological criteria for placing 
the Nigvdsa early. One intriguing doctrinal subject that is therefore not 
treated here is the Nisvasa’s ambiguous position on what was to become the 
baseline of Saiddhantika theology: philosophical dualism. As we shall $ a 
occasion to remark below (p. 341), we find that the redactors of the sutras 
of the Nisvasa appear not to have seen the need to choose between philolo- 
sophical dualism and non-dualism, perhaps because the issue Hadinot ye 
been raised as a matter of importance in Saiva circles. Moreover, as we long 
ago observed, referring to Uttarasütra 1: 1390 (GOODALL 1998:lviii): 


although the early Siddhantas are indeed generally dualistic, they may 


o that of Siva is referred to in Nayasütra 4:107, as 


42 A transformation of the body int 
d but there is no explicit mention there of the use of 


a preliminary to the practice of yoga, 
mantras. 


Nisvasatattvasamhita 
40 
and evidence of non-dualism in a Siddhanta, 
ddity or the result of late Vedantic influence, 
ointer to the date of its composition. 


not invariably have been so, 
since it might be an archaic o 
is therefore at best an unreliable p 


The first of these criteria is, once again, an absence. In the doctrine 
of the Saivasiddhanta, each soul is innately all-knowing and all-powerful, but 
its nature can only be realised by the removal, through a ritual initiation, 
of bonds that fetter it. The idea that embodied souls are fettered by bonds 
(pàsa) has a long history in Saivism. The ancient name ‘Pasupati’, a name 
of Siva that may be translated as ‘Lord of cattle’ or ‘Lord of beasts’, has 
played a réle in speculation about bondage because the element pasu is 
taken to refer to beast-like individual souls, who are all bound by bonds 
(paga). Indeed a number of Saiva works begin their presentations of doctrine 
in terms of these three ‘P’s: pati (‘the Lord’), pasu (‘bound souls’) and 
pasa (‘bonds’). And even in tantras in which these three do not form by 
themselves the list of didactic categories (padartha) into which the cosmos 
is divided, they usually form at least a part of such lists (v. s.v. padartha in 
TAK 3). 

So what are the bonds by which souls are bound? We quote (without the 
footnotes) this succinct summary of the problem of bondage from SANDER- 
SON's useful résumé of developed Saiddhantika doctrine (1992:285-6): 


Mala 


Liberation cannot be achieved through mere knowledge of 
reality without recourse to ritual. This is because the state 
of bondage, in which the soul fails to realize its innate omni- 
me and omnipotence, is not caused by mere ignorance. The 
ignorance that characterises the unliberated is the effect of an 
imperceptible Impurity (malam) that acts on the soul from out- 
side; and this Impurity, though it is imperceptible, is a material 
substance (dravyam). Because it is a substance, only action 
2 can remove it; and the only action capable of re- 
r g it is that of the rituals of the initiation and their sequel 

s by Siva in his Tantric Scriptures. 
ject Demi Impurity the soul continues to be sub- 
particular world : ios maya. It is bound by incarnation in 8 
ical faculties It m. 3 2 य body, and mental and phys- 
eh c j x limited powers of knowledge (vidya) and 
acts (niyatih) It x ound to experience the effects of its past 
a nonspecific | 3 Subject to time (kalah); and it is driven by 
craving for worldly experience (ragah). While it 


ri mena 
Prolego m 


is caught by these products of maya it acts and experiences the 
fruits of its actions in birth after birth. The unliberated soul 
(pasuh, anuh) is therefore said to be constrained in its condition 
by four fetters (pasah): (1) Impurity (malam), (2) maya, (3) 
its past actions (karma), and (4) the power of Siva’s will that 
holds it subject to these three (rodhasaktih). In later texts the 
term Impurity is extended from the first fetter to the second and 
third. The first is then termed the Impurity associated with [all] 
the Unliberated (anavam [< anuh] malam), whereas the second 
and third become the Impurities of Maya (mayiyam malam) and 
Karma (karmam malam). 


But there is no mention in the Nisvasa of the notion of an innate impurity 
(mala, anavamala) that blocks the capacity of each soul other than Siva. 
Such a notion was already crucial to Saiddhantika theology as formulated by 
Sadyojyotih, who was probably active between 675 and 725 AD,43 and who 
is the first systematising theologian of the Saivasiddhanta of whom works 
survive. Sadyojyotih found the notion of mala in the Svayambhuvasüutrasari- 
graha, from which (using 1:17) he was able to draw the doctrine of malapari- 
paka.44 Given the centrality of bondage and, in particular, of the bond of 
impurity (mala or anava-mala), to Saiddhantika doctrine, one expects to find 
it expounded in all Saiddhantika literature. This suggests that the earliest 
three chapters of the Ni$vasa are earlier than the Svayambhuvasutrasan- 
graha, which cannot be placed, as Sadyojyotih's commentary confirms, later 
than the middle of the seventh century. Moreover, as we began to notice in 
January 2007, this “impurity” is entirely missing not just from the Ni$vasa, 
but also from a few other early scriptures of the Siddhanta which appear, 
on other grounds, to be later than the earliest sütras of the Nisvasa: there 
is no trace of mala in the non-eclectic recensions of the Kalottara (Dvisati- 
kalottara, Sardhatrigatikalottara, Saptasatikakalottara, etc.), in the surviving 
chapters of the Rauravasitrasangraha and of the Nigvasakarika or in the 
Sarvajnanottara.45 In other words, at least one generation of scriptural 


43866 SANDERSON 2006, the conclusions of which regarding Sadyojyotih's date are to 
be found on p. 76. 

44866 the Tattvatrayanirnaya, particularly 1ff, in GOODALL, KATAOKA, ACHARYA, 
YOKOCHI 2008. 

The Sarvajfianottara does use the term mala in a discussion of the pes dec 
(28:515), but it is clear that it refers not to impurity Enan u m purum 
retributive force of good and bad past actions. The commentary of Ag "DE E na ह 
Judiciously distorts the text (in particular verses 10 and 11) to make S uH 
Tefers to the well-known bonds of impurity (mala), past actions (karman), p. 


Nisvasatattvasamhitg 


42 


ext s to have intervened between the Nigvasa and the composition of 
texts seem 


the Sváyambhuvasütrasarigraha. 


] return below to other matters of doctrine and so. 
the relative lateness (among the seventh- and pre- 
) of the Svayambhuvasütrasangraha; but we intend 
o the Rauravasütrasangraha, the non-eclectic 
recensions of the Kalottara and the Sarvajnanottara being later than the 
Nigvasa. Widespread in tantric Saivism is a set of five (sometimes four) 
indefinable entities called kalas. Their names are nivrtti, pratistha, vidya, 
éanti and, when there is a fifth, éantyatità. They are so commonly homolo- 
gised with different entities in ritual and in the Siva cosmos that it can be 
difficult to know what they really designate (for various homologisations ac- 
cording to a number of sources see Planches I-VIII in SP 3). In Ratnatraya- 
pariksa 86ff, for example, they are characterised as five modes/activities of 
the subtle sound-matter bindu (binduvrttayah), each of which pervades a 
section of the cosmos: nivrtti corresponds to prthivitattva; pratistha to the 
tranche from water up to and including prakrti; vidya to the tranche from 
purusatattva up to and including maya; Santi to vidyatattva, 1$varatattva, 
and sadasivatattva; and Santyatita to Sivatattva (cf. Tantraloka 11:8-9b). 
Indeed it is as labels for tranches of the universe that the five kalas com- 
monly appear in ritual contexts, because they thus constitute one of the 
six initiatory paths that lead through the cosmos, known collectively as the 
sadadhvan, on which more in a moment. 

_Now it seems to us possible, from reading the Ni$vasa, that they were 
originally conceived of as four Saktis of the Lord or divisions (kala) of the 
Lord's Sakti: thus in Guhyasütra 8:291—7, they are the four principal Saktis 
of Sadasiva; in Nayasütra 3:66-7 they are the four kalas of God as bindu. 
ae pe we still occasionally encounter them as 2 d 
D E theme x are HUY five, even in the texts which ०८९२8 i 
creation of a set of five i rA DR i Re AE I e s the 
reaction of the Nifuzsn y the addition of santyatita took place a 
I egre Ou may meris tat» pentad De पु 

S, eg. to match the five mahabhütas (see 


refer to GOODALL’ 
“In Kirana 8:1 
13:161ab and 166 


The kalas We shal 
cial religion that suggest 
seventh-century scriptures 
first to consider one pointer t 


ent 


5 restraining will (rodhagakti). (For both text and commentary x 

S edition in Progress.) ae 

UR they are four kalas in isvaratattva; in Mrgendra (००४०१८ 
€y are four worlds in bindu. 


Prolegomena 43 


account of paficatattvadiksa in Sardhatrisatikalottara 8), the five anga- 
mantras (see again Sardhatrisatikalottara 8 and Diksottara 6:12, T.17, 
p. 882 and T.127, p. 46) and the five brahmamantras (e.g. Sarvajnanottara 
11:9-10; Mrgendra kriyapada 7:82cd). But perhaps it simply seemed natu- 
ral to add a transcendent fifth (Svayambhuvasitrasarigraha 4:7, Svacchanda 
10:1217-18).47 


tattvadhvan, bhuvanadhvan, sadadhvan Predicated on the view that 
there are five kalas, each embracing a tranche of the cosmos, is another 
doctrine that makes its first appearance in the Svayambhuvasütrasarigraha, 
namely the view that there are six parallel initiatory paths (sadadhvan) that 
lead from earthly existence to the liberated state of Sivatva (Svayambhuva- 
sutrasangraha 4:1-2): 


athatmabandhasantanapasutvavinivrttaye 

vyaktaye ca Sivatvasya sadvidho 'dhveha kirtyate 1 
tattvadhva ca padadhva ca varnadhva bhuvanatmakah 
mantratmakah kaladhva ca vigaty ekam Sivam padam 2 


Now in order to arrest the workings of innate impurity (paSutva[=mala]), 
which is what gives rise to the soul's bondage, and in order to allow the 
manifestion of [the soul’s innate] Siva-hood, the six-fold path has been 
proclaimed: the path of tattvas, the path of mantra-words, the path of 
mantra-syllables, the path of worlds, the path of mantras and the path 
of the [five] kalas [all] lead to the one destiny: Siva. 


Much of the rest of Svayambhuvasütrasarigraha 4 is dedicated to setting out 
the correspondences between these paths. Now this doctrine may seem al- 
most ubiquitous in Saiva literature, but it is in fact conspicuously absent 
in several of the pre-tenth-century Siddhantatantras, notably in the vari- 
ous sütras of the Ni$vasa (though it does appear in the Diksottara, e.g. In 
1:3), the Kirana, the Sarvajrianottara, and in the non-eclectic recensions of 
the Kalottara.1 Furthermore, in the Ni$vasa none of the required corre- 
Spondences have been established, not even the mapping of bhuvanas onto 


*7 Note that we find the four kalas identified with the four powers of Tumburu, Rar. 
Jaya, Vijaya, Ajita, Aparajita in Jayadrathayamala 1.6:3c-4b and 23; where Tumburu 
himself, who is there located in iévaratattva, is identified with Santyatita. " 

** Mrgendra (kriyapada 8:153-156b) mentions all six possibilities, but it adds a जव E 
namely the overlords of the bhuvanas (tadigan va), and does not use the convention 


पा diksa and 

vocabulary. "he Mate (Fg 1.9) teaches Bened and La 
uses th i à i tanga vidyapada 5:27 \as on 

e expression tattvadhvan, e.g. in Matanga viayapa her adhvans in kriyapada 9:55- 


sañgraha 1:2), and it may cryptically be referring to the ot 


Nisvasatattvasamhitg 


44 
nd the only initiatory path is that of 
is an archaism shared with the Raouravasutrasarigraha 
d not only with Svayambhuvasutrasarigraha 4 but also 
9, Kirana 8, Parakhya 5; Matanga vidyapada passim, 
da 13: all these place DECORE worlds in particular 
T ing of bhuvanas onto tattvas can be seen 1n an incipient 
Ea esce uon clearly in the latest layer of the text, the Guhya- 
sūtra. In all the accounts of the cosmos in the Nisvasa we find that all 
the tattvas of the Sankhyas have been inserted together as a batch form- 
ing a layer in the hierarchy of bhuvanas (Nigvasamukha 4:119, Muülasütra 
5:10, Uttarasutra 1:15, Guhyasütra 1:316; 7:160f and 8:37). But for the up- 
per reaches of the universe we find, at least from the Uttarasutra (1:16), 
the names of tattvas mixed up with bhuvanas as marking significant points 


along the way. In Guhyasutra 7, the mapping of the bhuvanadhvan onto 
the tattvadhvan takes further strides, notably by the inclusion in the cos- 
mography of the tattvas niyati, raga and kala (Guhyasütra 7:222ff), two of 
which appear to have been introduced into the tattva-system propounded 
by the Uttarasütra from another source, possibly the Rauravasitrasangraha, 
as I have argued elsewhere (GOODALL forthcoming). But even here, the 
bottom cosmographical layers remain staked out only by bhuvanas, not by 
tattvas. In this, as SANDERSON has demonstrated at length (2006), the 
Nisvasa remains strikingly close to the Atimarga model preserved for us in 
the Nisvasamukha, where the cosmography is one of a series of bhuvanas 
(including the Sankhyas’ tattvasarga) that reaches its highest level a little 
below the highest level claimed for the Mantramarga in Mülasutra 5. 


a hierarchical sequence of tattvas, 2 


the bhuvanas. This 
and can be contraste 
with Sarvajnanottara 
and Mrgendra vidyapa 


ree bers of tattvas Fairly ubiquitous in Saiva tantric literature is the 
RE un ere is a hierarchy of thirty-six tattvas comprising the twenty- 
secant n Ren as; a group of five factors above these that attempt to 
earlier set of dr human embodiment felt not to be covered by tle 
kala (time) Popes Damêl raga (attachment), niyati (binding fate); 
and kala (p uddha-vidya (impure and therefore partial power to know): 

4 (partial power to act); a super-prakrti called maya; and then ? 


ou i 
group of five variously labelled pure levels that transcend matter.*? 


Since th ate 


bi pee m of the tattvas in the Nisvasa has been dealt WI 
where (GOODALL forthcoming), only a very brief Jes 
हान jaga त EINER are of ८ 


lists, such as that 
detailed overview 


some early 


ourse n "T b 
umerous variations in order and nomenclature and ore 
ghtly m 


of Rauravasütrasari ५ 
graha 10:98— sli 
; GOODALL 1998:li-lv. 0:98101, are shorter. See, for a 


Prolegomena 


Table 1: The growth of the tattvas 


Uttara, Naya 
passim, esp. 
Uttara 1:717 
(homologised 
with elements of 
NAVATMAN) 
[11]] niskala 

[10] áakti 


[9] [dehavyapin = M] 


[8] sadasiva (=H) 
[7] Ivara (=R) 
[6] vidya (5125) 
[5] maya (=M) 


[a] kala (=L) 

I] niyati (=V) nas) — 26) क — 
[2] purusa (= Y) purse U2) puru 5 o pur 
[1] prakrti (— U) 


Guhya 7 


niskala (299-302) 


Sakti (296-9) 


[Susumna (293-5) 


Nada (292) 


4 kalas (282-90) 


5905809 (279-81) 


Ivara (254-8) 


mahavidya (250-3) 


maya(246-9) 
kala (238-40) 
vidya (234-7) 
rage (223) 
kala 


niyati (222-33) 


purusa (171-2) 
pradhana 


Rauravasutra 
10:98ff and 
fragment of 
Parame$vara 
(explicitly 30) 


[30] Siva 


maya 
raga 
vidya 
kala 


purusa 
avyakta 
gunah 
buddhi 
ahankara 


10 indriyani 
5 tanmatrani 
5 mahabhutani 


"फा जात a messi 


Diksottara 
13:29-33 


[36] śiva 
[35] Siva 


[34] sadasiva 
[33] 18४919 
[32] vidya 

[31] maya 
[30] kala 
[29] vidya 
[28] raga 
[27] kala 
[26] niyati 


[24] pradhana 


[buddhi] 
[ahankara] 
[manah] 

[10 indriyani] 
[5 tanmatrani] 
[5 bhütani] 


Nisvasatattvasamhitg 
46 


here. In the layers of the १८४०८5० we can trace the 
doctrine outlined above. No list of tattvas appears 
in the Mülasütra at all; a short list, beginning with prakrti and purusa at the 
bottom (and therefore implicitly including the other twenty-three tattvas of 
the Sankhyas) appears in the Uttarasutra (1:10ff); the list is amplified in 
the Guhyasütra by the inclusion of raga and kala (7:222) and a lower vidya 
(7:236) and possibly extended by the addition of other higher entities that 
might have been intended as tativas but have not been explicitly identified 
as such. (In other words, the number thirty-six might have been reached, but 
thirty-six has not yet become the canonical number and no total is stated.) 
And finally, in the Diksottara, the canonical list of thirty-six is attained. 
The above sequence of developments is set out in Table 1. 


the subject is offered 
evolution of the tattva- 


Number of Ganegas Among lists familiar to us from other Saiva litera- 
ture in longer forms than may be found in the Nisvasa (thirty-six tattvas, 
three principal nadis, etc.), the lists of the principal Ganas or Gane$varas 
appear to us archaic. In much Saiva literature, eight Ganas or Ganeávaras 
form one of the circuits around the central deity in the context of puja. 
Moving round from North to North-West we find: Devi, Candega, Nandin, 
Mahakala, Bhrügin, Vinayaka, Vrsabha, Subrahmanya. No circuit of eight 
Ganas features in the Nigvasa’s accounts of Siva-worship. Instead, we find 
two different lists of seven principal Ganas, the first being that of Nayasutra 
1:100ff, which comprises: Vidyeśa, Sanmukha, Ganapati, Nandi, Candisa, 
Devi and Hathakusmanda. Now Vidyeáa and Hathakusmanda do not figure 
as Ganas elsewhere, and the Nisvasa omits here Mahakala, Bhrügin and the 
rd vue a se the tantra (Guhyasütra 16:52) we find another list 
iesu ah citly seven of them and not eight, which includes these 
g that Kapali stands for Mahakala) but omits Cande$a: 


devi skandafi ca vighnegam nandi kapalim eva ca 

vrsabham caiva bhrůgiñ ca saptaite tu prakirtitah. 
In spite of the omission | 
almost the standard li 
the omission of Cand 
list. Peter BISSCHOP 


this time of 081688, we have something that is NOW 
Si of Gaņeśas of developed sources: in fact, but for 
ee TE it seven-membered, it is the sinn 
thou ER as recently observed (2010) that all the Gane$vare*: 
ter eomm i poek as a list of eight, have appeared together in chap- 
that the crystallisation and he has further suggested (2010:2434 
sources might are of the “rigid” set of eight found in Saiddbantike 
dharmaáüstra, That rawn upon such a listing as the one found in the 2507 

- Lhat the set of Gane$varas had not yet become rigid in the 


Prolegomena 47 
Nigvasa suggests that it may have have been not far in time from the Siva- 
dharmasastra. The time of composition of the Sivadharmasastra, however, 
is still quite uncertain: as BISSCHOP remarks (2010:243), R. C. HAZRA's 
dating of "between 200 and 500 AD" still *remains to be confirmed". 


Archaism in the realm of social religion 


We should place alongside these telling doctrinal differences the evidence 
that suggests that the Ni$vasa reflects an earlier phase in the evolution of 
the social dimension of the religion of the Mantramarga. 


Absence of social rites We may note first of all that there appears to 
be a near total absence of social ritual. We might not of course expect, in 
a Saiva context, to have rites for births and marriages, but in later Saiva 
scriptures there would be an account of death-rites (the growth of which in 
Saiva sources has been documented by Nina MIRNIG 2010) and there are 
none in the books edited in this volume. In the Guhyasitra there is a single 
reference to death-rites (11:38ab): 


vilomahomam hy antyestya ekasitipadena tu 
vilomahomam ] conj.; vilomaho N (unmetrical) 


This follows on immediately after a brief account of vidyadiksa and mukti- 
diksà using the VYOMAVYAPIN, and so it should perhaps be interpreted to 
mean: “For death-rites the oblations should be performed using the word|s] 
of the eighty-one-word mantra [namely the VYOMAVYAPIN] in reverse order”. 

Whereas later Saiva sources reflect borrowings and modifications and 
inventions in the area of post-mortuary ritual, the sutras of the Nigvasa do 
not. 

A possible conclusion that suggests itself is that the Nisvasa might not 
reflect a heavily institutionalised religion, but rather a young movement that 
Saw itself as a path beyond established social religion leading its adepts to 
the attainment of extraordinary powers and to a state of divinity. 


Hierarchy of initiates This seems consistent with an absence of evidence 
Pointing to a social hierarchy within the religion of the Niévasa. Of d 
there are acaryas, and a simple ritual for consecrating them is Ps 
(Mülasütra 8:10-18), but all members of the religion may apparent y 


५ : itual 
referred to simply as sadhakas. It is true that there is mention also of ritua 


Nisvasatattvasamhyz 
48 


Mülasütra 4:17 and uttarasadhaka in Uttar. 
ütra 4:34 (both terms are used in Guhyasutra 3:2-6); but these may be 
au ie B too. What are missing are the elsewhere ubiquitous hierarchical 
ae adhaka and acarya. Once again, we know of 


categories of samayin, putraka, 5 ; ya. O : 
dese from the Svayambhuvasutrasarigraha, the Siddhantatantra commented 


upon by Sadyojyotih (c. 675-725 AD), which means that they existed in the 


seventh-century: 


assistants, called sahaya in 


athacaryavarah Sriman agrajanma supesalah 
heyopadeyatattvajnah SivaSasanatatparah 10:1 
yathoktajüeyatattvajüo yayajuko jitendriyah 
ksamavan nabhimani ca5? sarvabhütanukampakah 10:2 
$raddadhanah Sucir daksas tridiksadiksitah5™ sudhih 
devasuramanusyanam bhayabhayanirodhakah5? 10:3 
na hinango 'dhikango va laksanai$ ca Subhair yutah 
deSakalanimittajnah sthanabhivarnavittamah 10:4 
tithinaksatrayogajrio bhiparigrahakarmavit 
adhivasavisesajiiah Sivamandalakovidah 10:5 
Sastradhikarakarmajiias taduttaravidhanavit 
sadadhvakarmanipunas candayagavidhau parah 10:6 
abhisekavidhanajüah snanapujagnikarmavit53 
yogabhijnio vratatito»4 vyutkrantividhigastravit 10:7 
sadyotkrantividhanajfiah Sivakarmani pesalah 
manase caiva yage ८865 kamandaluvidhau tatha 10:8 
EE eva gunair yuktah sádhyakarmavratah sudhih 
uoc nityam apramattah sahayavan 10:9 
yamanirarpitamanàh sadhyamantravrate sthitah 


किरा I 
ksamavan nàbhimani j.; ava Ene 
E"; C P DEA Kh conj.; ksamavana LI mani ca MY; kşamāvānabhimānī © 
MEE passage in the Mrgendrapa 
M’ = Mysore, ORI, MS P 2 


t give testimony at this point. In order not to clutter the 


39 (pp. 71-2) are only given when helpful. 


T. i "virodhakah EM a) 
zdar$a): 
x m क Quotation on p. 19 of T. 76 (transmitting the 1४607 s 
: st niant: ac = न anapūjāg"? 
Mrgendropaddhatikg ° hanapüjinti" MYEM Snānapūjādi? T. 39; sn 
. n 
Y is unfortunately broken here, T. 39 records ) of 
ace of vratatito, and the only quotation We E 
**yage ca] T. 39; ya U MrEM Mrgendropaddhatifika, here has vratatiko. 


Prolegomena in 


sadhyamantrabhisiktah san sadhakah parikirtitah 10:10 
triparvadhvasu niskrantah Sivagnigurupüjakah 
mantratantrasthito yo và sa putraka iti smrtah 10:11 
samsaraduhkhasantrastah®® Sivadhamani baddhadhih 
Sivahastam anupraptah ivagnigurupüjakah 10:12 
gurvadhino 'svatantra$ ca sarvakaryesu sarvada 

samay1 samayasthah san Sastre 'dhikriyate puman 10:13 


Now an excellent acarya [should be] illustrious; of excellent 
birth; very handsome; he should have true knowledge of what 
is desirable and what should be avoided; he should be entirely 
concentrated on the Saiva teaching: he should know the true na- 
ture of what must be known exactly as it is taught [in scripture]; 
he should be a performer of frequent acts of worship; he should 
have his senses under control; he should be patient and without 
pride;57 compassionate towards all creatures; possessed of faith; 
pure; skilled; initiated with three initiations;5® intelligent; capa- 
ble of blocking the danger or the security of gods, demons and 
men; with neither too few nor too many body-parts; possessed 
of auspicious characteristics; knowledgeable about appropriate 
times and places [for rites] and about omens; knowledgeable 
about the colours of the earth in places [for rituals]; knowledge- 
able about the days, asterisms and conjunctions [appropriate for 
rites]; informed about the rites for laying hold to a piece of land 
[for a ritual]; he should know the particularities of incubation; he 
should be skilled in [the making of] the Sivamandala; he should 
know [the rites] for [conferring] authority to study scripture; he 
should know the rites that follow that; he should be skilled in 
the rite of [initiation that involves one of] the six paths [of the 
cosmos]; he should be devoted to the performance of the worship 
of Canda; he should know how to perform a consecration rite; 
he should know how to perform bathing, worship ae fire-rites; 
he should be proficient in yoga; he should be beyond voluntary 
extra] religious observances(?); he should know the rules relating 
to [expiation for] transgressions; he should know how to perform 


56osantrastah ] MY; °santrasthah EM MUR e 

57We could perhaps have retained ksamavan abhimānī, patient and proud es 

5816 is not certain what this means, but it might simply ies to his having received the 
initiations of the samayin and putraka and the abhiseka making him an acarya. These 


appear to be referred to here in 6a, 6cd and 7a respectively. 


Nisvasatattvasamhita 
50 
A illed in Saiva rites, and in 
] de; he should be skilled in Saiva rites, 
sudden [yogic] suici ules relating to the water-pot. 


i in the r 
ental worship, and in | 
2 A man who (san) has been consecrated for a mantra he aims 


to master (sadhyamantrabhisiktah) is called a sadhaka. He 
should be possessed of the same qualities, [but he should be] 
engaged upon an observance to accomplish a certain goal, intel- 
ligent, with a compassion always characterised by non-violence, 
vigilant, accompanied by a ritual assistant, his mind fixed upon 
the mantra that he aims to master, engaged in an observance for 
[mastering] his chosen mantra. 

The putraka is held to be one who, being engaged in the [use 
of] mantras and tantric scripture (?), has emerged [thanks to his 
initiation] from the cosmic paths of the triparva;59 he venerates 
Siva [in the linga], the fire and his guru. 

The samayin [is so called] in as much as (san) he observes the 
post-initiatory rules; he is à man who has received the entitle- 
ment for [the study of] scripture. Fearful of the woes of samsara, 
his mind is fixed upon the Saiva liberation; he has received the 
Siva-hand [of the acarya laid upon his head]; he venerates Siva 
[in the linga), the fire and his guru; he is subject to the guru at 
all times in all his actions and cannot act independently. 


Whether these ranks of initiates were already so widespread in the seventh- 
century that their absence in the sutras of the Ni$vasa can be used as ev- 
idence of greater antiquity is impossible to determine with certainty. We 
may note, however, that they are plainly present in the Diksottara (IFP 
T-17, PP-906-8, 917) and in other parts of the Nifvasakarika (IFP T.17, 


terminological archaism: th 
diksa enabling one to 


Prolegomena E 


One further clarification may be useful for readers who spot that the term 
samayajna, often a synonym for samayin, appears (with a privative prefix) 
in Mulasutra 1:12. We cannot, however, assume that the term is used as a 
synonym for samayin here, and we should note that the post-initiatory rules 
(samaya) after which the samayin is named are mentioned only after the full 
initiation, the muktidiksa, in Mülasütra 5:24. It seems therefore not unlikely 
that samayajna should be used to refer generically to all initiates, since they 
“know the post-initiatory rules', and not to a particular class among them. 


Absence of an initiation for women, kings and simpletons (nirbija 
diksa) And there is another widespread class of initiate not mentioned in 
this fourfold hierarchical classification that is again strikingly absent from 
the Nisvasa, namely the recipient of a seedless liberatory initiation (nirbija 
or nirapeksa diksa) that requires no post-initiatory ritual activity. Such 
seedless initiations were to be conferred on those judged too busy or too 
incompetent for onerous daily rituals, in other words women, idiots and kings 
(see, for example, Svacchanda 4:87-8 and Kirana 6:11-14 and commentary). 
The initiates referred to in the Nisvasa appear instead all to be sadhakas. 


The absence of initiation names We may observe in passing that no 
procedure is recorded in the sutras of the Nisvasa for conferring initiatory 
names. In other sources, the initiand’s casting of a flower or garland on the 
mandala is used to determine the mantra that will form the first part of his 
initiatory name. The subsequent part of the name, in the earliest texts, is 
simply Siva, e.g., in the Svayambhuvasutrasarigraha (13:8c-9): 


anayec chivasamipyam vastrenacchaditananam 
brüyàt tam praksipasvaitam srajam anga Sivopari 
tatpataveditam®? nama sravyam Sivapadottaram 


He should bring [the initiand], whose face should be covered by a cloth, 
into the presence of Siva. He should tell him “Throw this garland, my 
dear (ariga), onto [the mandala in which resides] Siva? The name made 
known by the fall of that [garland] should be proclaimed [to the initiand 
as his initiatory name], followed by the word -Siva. 


and also the Sarvajnanottara: 


“This absence has been pointed out by SANDERSON (2009:254, fn. 591). 
*"tetpataveditam] NGMPP A 30/6 (f. 28v); tatpatavoditam Ed. 


Nisvasatattvasamhita 
52 


[...] netrabandham tu karayet 10:9 


[...] " so agahan ngang 
amjalisama; ksinamurtim ana, 
spamjalisamayuktam daksir Da ^ 
पक abhimukham$é sthapya®> tatah puspani ksepayet 10:11a 
ani namagotran tadatmakam 


asmin patanti puspa zi be 
f wen आ siddhyate®® tasya Sivanamap adantikam 10:11b 


He should bind his eyes. [...] He should bring him, clutching a handful 
of flowers, to the Southern side of the form [of Siva in the mandala] 
(daksinamirtim).°7 Making him stand facing Siva, he should then cause 
him to throw the flowers. Where the flowers fall [is a mantra]; his name- 
family (nàmagotram) is of that [mantra]. That mantra becomes his, 
ending with the word that is the name -Siva. 


In the Svacchanda, the second part of the initiatory name is not made ex- 
plicit:®8 

netre baddhva tu netrena puspam panau pradapayet 4:61 

akaman niksipet puspam devasyabhimukham sthitah 

puspapatavasan nama kuryad vai sadhakasya ca 4:62 


Binding his eyes with the NETRA-mantra, he should put a flower in his 
hand. Without aiming (akamat), [the initiand] should throw the flower 
while standing facing the god, and according to the fall of the flower one 
should create the sadhaka’s [initiatory] name. 


In slightly later (but still pre-tenth-century) sources the name-ending is dis- 
tinguished according to “families” that are defined by moral propensities 
and behaviour, as, for example, in Kirana 39:2: 


Sivah Sikha tatha Jyotih savitram ceti gocaram 
gocaram kulam ity uktam taccihnam 878४558176 


we Sh, -jyotih, and -savitra are the gocaras; with gocara what iS 
ressed is ‘family’; that is the convention in this Saiva teaching. 


OR 
A ts *yukta T. 760, T. 334 
abhim a Sivana n T 
"o am sthapya (...) Sivanamapadantikam] RE 47852; omitted in +. du? 


65 = ; 
a sthapya] conj. sthapya RE 47852 


Prolegomena 8 


Slightly later still, name-endings are supposed to vary according to the varna 
of the initiands, as the eleventh-century Somasambhupaddhati describes (see 
samayadiksa 107-109 and BRUNNER's annotation: 1977:97-105), -Siva being 
there reserved for Brahmins, -deva for Ksatriyas and -gana for Vaiáyas.7? 

But in the Nisvasa such a naming practice is not recorded and had per- 
haps not yet come into existence. This could therefore be taken as weak 
supporting evidence for the hypothesis that there was little internal hierar- 
chy of the kind that would probably quickly develop in an institutionalised 
religion organised, for instance, into monasteries (matha), about which our 
text is also silent. This is of course not to suggest that mathas of devotees 
of Siva did not exist (we find mention of them for instance in the account 
of lay religion in the Nisvasamukha in 2:34 and 2:36), but rather that they 
were not a part of the religion of the sutras of the Nisvasa. 

The oldest examples of Saiva initiatory names ending in -$iva known to 
us from the inscriptional record belong to the seventh century and are fairly 
widely spread across the sub-continent. 


Aghoragiva Guru of Dirgha, who was in turn guru of VyapaSiva, who 
was in turn the recipient of a land-grant for the establishment of a 
mathika at the Bale$vara temple in Sripura, in the 38th regnal year 
of Balarjuna Mahasivagupta (BOSMA 2008*:65-66). 


Anantagivacarya Appointed in the second half of the 7th century (reign of 
the Pallava Parameévara I) to officiate at a Saiva temple (Vidyavinita- 
pallavaparamesvaragrha) in Kuram, near Kancheepuram (SII 1.50, 
HULTZSCH 1890:147, 150-1). The inscription opens with an elaborate 
invocation to a five-faced, ten-armed Sadasiva. 

Astragiva Disciple of Bhagavad-VyapaSiva and guru of the tapovanastha- 


na of the Balegvara [temple] in Sripura. Recipient of a land-grant in the 
52nd regnal year of Balarjuna Mahasivagupta (BosMA 2008*:56-61). 


79 A couple of twelfth- and thirteenth-century cases of initiatory names ending in -gana, 
one known to us from an inscription and the other from a manuscript colophon, were 
mentioned in the short article on gana in TAK II. It is perhaps possible that a rather 
older instance may be added to this list: a Tamil inscription of the ninth century (twenty- 
eighth year of the reign of Nandivarman) that begins on the West wall, to the right of the 
entrance, of the Muktesvara temple in Kancheepuram records, among other endowments, 
that the Pallava queen Dharmamahadevi provided a livelihood for three men for per- 
forming worship in the temple, a certain [T]attas[i]van (perhaps for Tattvasiva), a certain 
Dharmmakannan (perhaps for Dharmagana) and a certain Anantasifveln (for Anantasi- 
va). We are grateful to Valérie GILLET for drawing our attention to this inscription, 
which is No. 14 of 1893 in the Annual Report and No. 827 in South Indian Inscriptions 


IV, pp. 285-286 and Plate IX. 


Nisvasatativasamhita 

54 
ith other brahmins, including the Para- 
ntioned below, of a village offered first 
by the Calukya Vikramaditya I of Badami toa certain Sudarsanacarya, 
as gurudaksinà for Sudaráanacarya having i Vikramaditya Sai- 
va initiation. The grant is recorded in “The Amudalapadu Plates 
of Vikramaditya I, Year 5’, edited by D. C. SIRCAR (EI XXXII, No. 
entified the date as goth April 660 AD. 


21, pp- 175-84), who has id i 
g ERA (2001:8-9, fn. 6) includes this among the first record- 


ed instances of Saiddhantika initiation being bestowed upon a major 


Gayatrisiva The recipient, along w 
maáiva and Rudrasivacarya me 


king.” 

Gonnasiva The śilpin who carved the damaged stone inscription of the 
Gandharvegvara temple in Sirpur (EI XXXIX, No. 22, pp. 149-156), 
who is probably to be identified, as the editors S. SANKARANARAYA- 
NAN and BALACHANDRA JAIN suggest (p.155), with the Aryagonna 
who is mentioned as the engraver (lekhaka) of the undated Sirpur stone 
inscription of Balarjuna Mahasivagupta (EI IX, No. 19, pp. 184-201, 
ed. Rai Bahadur HIRA LAL). The form of the first part of the name, 
which is not recognisably the name of a mantra, or even Sanskrit, and 
the fact that the man is described as a Silpin, may suggest to some 
that Gonnaáiva is not in fact an initiation name. 


Patangagivacarya Recipient of a village, apparently as gurudaksina af 
ter the performance of diksa for Devendravarman (Ganga year(?) 
184 [2682-3 १07९. (EI XXVI, No. 5, pp.62-8: ..vedaveda- 
ügetihasapurananyayavidyasvasiddhantadhigataya bhagavatpatanga- 
Sivacaryaya gurave diksottarakale gurupüjayai dattas...) 


Parama$iva One of the brahmin recipients, along with Gayatrisiva (4-V- 
above) of a land-grant of 660 AD. 


Rudrasivacarya One of the brahmin recipients, along with Gayatrisiv 
(q.v. above) of a land-grant of 660 AD. 


base Guru of Astrasiva (q.v. above), pupil of Dirgha and grand- 
Eds of AghoraéSiva (q.v. above) and recipient of a land-grant for the 
esta lishment of the Bale$vara temple in Sripura in the 37th regnal 
year of Balarjuna Mahāśivagupta (BOSMA 2008*:64-6). 


aon are grateful 
gr to Peter BISSCHOP for pointing out this initiatory name. 


This, ; i 

eoi rona 604, is the date SANDERSON gives (2001:10, fn. 6), on the assumption 

R.K. GHOSHAL, is sald te fs ProPsed by MIRASHI, in 498/9. The inscription, edite ; 
e palaeographically of the second half of 7th century. 


Prolegomena 55 


Sadyahéivacarya Ascetic described as amarddhakakhyatitapovananirgga- 
tah, whose brother's grand-disciple Sadaáiva received a Saiva temple 
from a certain Durgaraksita in the reign of Balarjuna Sivagupta (EI 
XXXI, No. 5, pp. 31-6).73 


Now Peter BISSCHOP has pointed out that there may be indirect evidence of 
the use of religious Saiva names of this type in a lay text that we have men- 
tioned above and that might be argued to be as early as the earliest layers 
of the Nisvasa, namely the Sivadharmasastra. The first exchange of ques- 
tions and answers in that text begins as follows in a Kashmirian manuscript, 
Srinagar ORL 1467 (transcribed from 1.10, lines 3-10, by SANDERSON in an 
e-mail of 9.xi.2013): 


sanatkumara uvaca || 

bhagavan munayah sotkah $iva(4)jiana*parayanah  (corr.: 
parayana Cod.) | 

Srotukamah param dharmam imam sarve samagatah || 

agnistomadika yajfia bahuvitta*kriyanvitah (corr.: kriyanvitauh 
Cod.) | 

naiva tu phalabhüyistha (5) bahvayasasamanvitah || 

na Sakyas te tatah kartum alpavittair dvijatibhih | 

brühi no moksaphaladam sarvakamarthasadhakam | 

hitaya sarva(6)martyanam Sivadharmam sanatanam || 

śrīnandikeśvara uvaca || 

Sivam vyoma śikhā jyoti$ catvarah śivagocarāh | 

tesam dharmam pravaksya(7)mi $rnu vipra yathakramam Il 

etais tu gocarair istah Sivah saksat prasidati | 

tesam caturyuge dharmam §ivena samudahrtam || 

$rüyata(8)m abhidhasyami svargopayam mahaphalam | 

paramam sarvadharmanam $ivadharmam śivātmakam || 

Sivena kathitam pürvam pārvatyā sa(9)nmukhasya ca l 

ganànàm api mukhyanam sarvesàm $ivabhasitam || 

śivadharmottamah śrīmān uttarartham *udahrtah (corr.: udāhr- 
tam Cod.) | ^ 

yair ayam santace(10)taskaih $ivadharman Sivarthibhih || n 

samsevyate param dharmas “te (corr.: ta Cod.) rudra natra 
samsayah | 


Sanatkumara spoke: 


"3 First half of the seventh century, according to M. G. DIKSHIT and D e SIRCAR (ibid.); 
contra Ajay Mitra SHASTRI (1995:154): “about the middle of the eighth”. 


Nisvasatattvasamhita 
56 
Lord, all these sages who are eager, devoted to Siva-knowledge, have 


gathered together with a desire to hear this supreme Dharma. Sacrifices 


such as the Agnistoma are associated with rites that involve consider- 


able expenditure; but they are not rich in rewards and they require great 
effort. They cannot therefore be performed by brahmins of small means, 
For the benefit of all mortals, tell us the eternal Siva-Dharma, which 
bestows the fruit of liberation, which can accomplish the objects of all 


desires! 

The venerable Nandike$vara spoke: 

There are four Siva-families (sivagocarah): Siva, Vyoma, Sikha, and Jy- 
otis. I shall teach you their Dharma, o brahmin, in due order. Wor- 
shipped (istah) directly by these families (gocaraih), Siva is pleased. 
Listen, I shall tell you what their Dharma is in the four ages, which has 
been taught by Siva; it is the means to reach heaven and brings great 
rewards. The Siva-Dharma, whose nature is Siva, is the highest of all 
Dharmas; it was earlier taught by Siva to Sanmukha with Parvati and 
to all the principal Ganas; it is the teaching of Siva. It is the highest 
Siva-Dharma, glorious, proclaimed for posterity. Those people of calm 
minds who quest for Siva and follow the Siva-Dharma [as] the supreme 
Dharma will become Rudras, there is no doubt. 


There is of course no explicit mention here of individuals’ being assigned 
religious names, but the association between gocaras and names is 9 natural 
one. Texts such as the Kirana (chapter 39) which teach these gocaras seem 
therefore to imply that initiates received initiation names in which the gocara 
was treated as a suffix. This seems to be made explicit in Taksakavarta’s 
Nityadisangrahapaddhati (f. 119v) 


yena ye diksitas te pi tadgocarasamakhyaya 
khyatas tv asramadharmaés ca sveccha sankalpato bhavet 
etas sa[m]jñā dvijagryanam rajadmam ganankitah 
Saktisamjnas tatha strinam sarvasam parikirtitah 
Mo e majority of hitherto identified Saiva initiation names end 
a न s Ue -Sambhu, or, in the case of acaryas, in -Sivacarya/ 
a ind = 3 of names ending in -jyotih has been found (see TAK 2 
SEE म. only famous instance being Sadyojyotih. 
M i m that the mention of these gocaras in the Sivadharm® 
to the text that E 00. they are omitted in the Southern witnesses 
several old N s ave examined, and a rather different list appears E 
९0268 ones. Taking the same passage from the last verse ° 


na 
Prolegome E 


Sanatkumara's question, here is the Nepalese text (B 7/3; £.1v [=B]; A 3/3 
f.1v [=A]; Cambridge MS Add. 1645 [=0]):74 


sukhopayam ato brühi sarvakamarthasadhakam 

hitaya sarvamartyanam Sivadharmam sanatanam 

nandikesvara uvaca 

caturvarnnahitarthaya lokadharmam anuttamam 

tesan caiva pravaksyami Srnu vipra yathakramam 

Sivo jyoti$ Sivo 17894 catvarah Sivagocarah 

etaih sumatibhir yasta anugrhnati Sankarah 

caturvidho hy esa dharmah Sivena samudahrtah 

Sruyatam abhidhasyami sukhopayam mahatphalam 

paramam sarvadharmmanam Sivadharmmam Sivatmakam 

Sivena kathitam purvam parvatyah sanmukhasya ca 

gananam devamukhyanam asmakai ca visesatah 

ajnanarnnavamagnanam sarvesam atmabhavinam 

Sivadharmmodupah Sriman uttarartham udahrtah 
e “martyanam | B; ?satvanam AC e caturvarnnahitarthaya ] BC; catu- 
varnnahitathaya A e caiva pravaksyami] BC; .. mi A e jyoti$ $i- 
vo linga$ catvarah] B; jyoti $ivo lingam catvaram A; lingah Sivo jyotis 
catvara§ C e ?bhir yasta] conj; °bhir yas tam AC; ?bhis tais tamm 
B e sukhopayam | BC; sukhopaya? A e sarvadharmanam Sivadhar- 
mam] em.; sarvadharmmanam sivadharmma? AB; $ivadharmmanam Sivad- 
harmmam C e parvatyah] C; parvatya AB e atmabhavinam] AB; 
praninam ayam C e uttarartham udahrtah | B; utarartham udahrtam A; 
urartham udahrtah C 


So, for the benefit of all mortals, tell us the eternal Siva-Dharma, which 
is a means to happiness, which can accomplish the objects of all desires! 
Nandikegvara spoke: 

For the benefit of the four varnas, I shall teach you the highest Dharma 
of the world for them: listen, o brahmin, in due order. There are four 
Siva-families (Sivagocarah): Siva, Jyotis, Siva, and Linga. Worshipped 
by these wise [members of the families], Sankara bestows त a 
This Dharma taught by Siva has indeed four forms. Listen, I shall t 
t being Cambridge MS Add. 1645, dat- 


from the superb images put on- 
he Cambridge University Library 


>>>“ 
All are palm-leaf manuscripts, the earlies 
m to 1139 AD, which we consulted (on Sao) 
ne as part of the useful new catalogue-in-progress of the ८ £ writ- 
(http:// cudl.lib.cam.ac.uk/view/MS-ADD-01645/4); but it is clear that es r म t 
ten in a more recent Newari script, is a replacement for a lost or damag i as a 
leaves of the other two, NGMPP A 3/3 and B 7/3, dated to Nepal Samvat 3 
(1200/01 AD and 1169/70 AD) respectively, are old, however. 


Nisvasatattvasamhitg 

58 
ness that brings great rewards: the mr 
: ll Dharmas, taught by Siva for- 

ture is Siva, supreme among a m by 

iren TIU adi to Sanmukha, to the Ganas, to the principal gods, 
ae A ecially to us. For all those sinking in the ocean of ignorance, 
EUROS upon the atman, this glorious raft that is the Sivadharma 


has been taught to carry them across. 


you a means to happi 


It is clear then that the witnesses diverge quite widely at this point, and 
this different list of gocaras, which is problematically repetitive, is not one 
attested in scriptures of the Mantramarga. Furthermore, as we have men- 
tioned above, South Indian witnesses, such as T. 32, miss out the allusions 
to gocaras and have Nandikegvara’s speech start instead directly from érüy- 
atam abhidhasyami, as does the ‘edition’ of NARAHARINATHA.75 And this 
does seem rather more natural in view of the fact that in the subsequent 
text of the Sivadharmasastra there does not appear to be a division into four 
forms of the Sivadharma to suit four gocaras, as, for instance, the phrase 
caturvidho hy esa dharmah leads us to expect. 

In short, although there is nothing inherently improbable about the idea 
that ardent followers of the religion taught in the Sivadharmaáastra should 
have received special religious names, a phenomenon common to religious 
movements everywhere, the evidence for it is thin. 


The character of prayascitta We may note also another category of so- 
cial religious teaching which is nearly absent from the Nisvasatattvasamhita, 
namely prayascitta, that is to say rites of reparation and expiation. The ex- 
pression prayascitta does occur in the early corpus from time to time, but 
often without detail of what rites are to be conducted to repair or expiate,’ 

and the problems requiring expiation seem not to be social transgressions.’ 

Elsewhere, in most Saiva scripture from the Svayambhuvasütrasarigraha Om 
wards, we find a large body of reparatory and expiatory rites for what 910 
typically transgressions of rules of social order (eating habits, cleanliness; 


75]y YA | 
s Diyak ar ACHARYA, who has seen the witness which was used, has informed us "a 
is n his view a late Nepalese manuscript. - 
E.g. Mülasütra 418. 
तपा 
undertaken to avert inaus 
sutra 9:180cd, dantadhavan 
prayascitte here to 


a to be 
Guhya- 
erstan 
ntaile 


condition (५ 
or [a ritual fault entailing] 


Prolegomena zc 


social interactions). Some expiatory rules that are attributed to recensions 
of the Ni$vasa are quoted in an anthology of chapters devoted to prayascitta 
in Saiva works compiled by Hrdayasgiva,7® but they are not to be found in 
the early corpus. For a fuller discussion of the evolution of prayascitta in 
the Mantramarga, GOODALL’s introduction to the edition of Trilocanagiva’s 
Prayascittasamuccaya. 


The absence of utsavas The annual ceremonies categorised by some as 
prayascitta, namely the pavitrotsava and damanotsava are also absent in 
the Nigvasa. And finally, just as in other demonstrably pre-tenth-century 
Saiddhantika scriptures, the crowded calendar of temple festivals, utsavas, 
is also conspicuous by its absence in the Nisvasa-corpus. 


In short, the Ni$vasa seems to reflect a religion of spell-masters questing 
for empowerment (bhukti) and liberation (mukti). That religion is certainly 
still far distant from the religious world of priests in public temples, such 
as is reflected in, for instance, the Kamika, Karana, Ajitagama and other 
such twelfth- and post-twelfth-century South Indian Temple Agamas, and 
it is probably not yet a socially organised religion housed in monasteries 
or ordered around rich householder gurus (such as is reflected in, for in- 
stance, the Kirana, Matariga, etc., and in the surviving paddhatis). So, 
given that it teaches a religion which, like that of Pancarthika-Pasupatas, 
takes for granted and is parasitic upon the social substrate of brahminism, 
it would perhaps be no surprise to find it silent about pratistha too, as 
Jun TAKASHIMA’s study of pratistha in Agamic sources might lead us to 
suppose. For his conclusion (2005:142) speaks of his “hypothesis that the 
earliest stage of the pratistha ritual is the lingaparigraha”, in other words 
appropriation by a sadhaka of an already existing linga.'9 


Lil dap EY I वन éh 

781७ forthcoming study by R. SATHYANARAYANAN (EFEO) of the twelfth-century Pra- 
yascittasamuccaya of Trilocana$iva will contain in its appendix the ton of म 
Prayascittasamuccaya based on a twelfth-century manuscript. For à discussion of the oe 
and significance of Hrdayagiva’s work for what it tells us about the Saiva canon in his 
time, see SANDERSON 2001:2-4, fn. 1. 


9For lingaparigraha, see, for example, Svayambhuvasutrasarigraha 21:13-18: 


śuddhakāyah sunakşatranimittopacite dine 
sampüjya devadevesam kuryāl lingaparigraham 13 
sthapitam rsibhih pürvam sarvalaksanalaksitam 
asrayet siddhidam lingam svayam va parikalpitam 14 
kilitam varjayed viprah skandavisnvindramatrbhih 
upary upari lingam ca mukhaliigam tathaiva ca 15 
atha và laksanair yuktam sthandilam parikalpayet 


Nisvasatattvasamhitg 
60 3 


The róle of pratistha 

in fact contain 8 detailed account of liriga. 
pratistha, which may be the earliest such account: to survive. There is à 
Rudrapratisthakalpa in the Bodhayanagrhyasesasutra, which may be the 
earliest surviving account of a Saiva pratistha, but the norm that the au- 
thor of that text had in mind was the installation of a statue, and, as 
EiNOO (2005b:96) has observed, the Rudrapratisthakalpa very closely fol- 
lows a Visnupratisthakalpa given earlier in the text. The NiSvasa’s account 


Now the Nisvasa does 


sthandile ‘pi hi mantranam siddhir agu pravartate 16 

srestham pascanmukham lingam abhave pranmukham smrtam 
yamyakauberavaktram tu na siddhav isyate budhaih 17 
parigrhyepsitam lingam lingakalpoditam Subham 

püjayet satatam mantri matva deham agasvatam 18 


13a sunaksatra®] MY E™; sunaksatre Hrdayasiva e 15a viprah] EM; vipra MY; 
vidvan Hrdayasiva. (Hrdayagiva includes this chapter of the Svayambhuvasütrasan- 
graha as the tenth in his compendium the Prayascittasamuccaya, mentioned in the 
previous footnote.) 


His body pure, on a day made propitious by a good asterism and auspices, having 
worshipped the god of gods he should take possession of a linga. He should resort to 
a liniga that has been installed before by sages and that is possessed of all required 
characteristics and bestows success, or to one that he has prepared himself. He should 
avoid, o brahmins, one that [belongs to a sacred area that| has been staked out 
(Kilitam) by Skanda, Visnu, Indra or the Mothers, and also one that is above another 
(?), or one that has a face or faces emerging from it. Alternatively he may prepare 8 
bare patch of ground with the requisite characteristics, for on a patch of bare ground 
100 the mastery of mantras may also be quickly attained. The best is a linga that [is in 
a shrine that] faces West. In the absence [of that], an East-facing one is recommended. 
But one that faces South or North is not held to be suitable for siddhi by the wise 
Having adopted the liga that he wishes to take, that is [as] described in manuals 


on ligas, that is auspicious, th i i ing in 
: , the mantrin should constantly venerate [it], bearings 
mind that the body is impermanent. पध 


i SEE AA ud conceivably mean that it has been pierced and so damaged ० 
bs € p e list of divinities mentioned afterwards suggests that this might er. a 
it as sacred Eee 8 out of the ground in which the 1789 is installed in order to demarc® m 
and of kilaka to ur Support for this may be adduced from the use in inscriptions of ki 5 
क lan ae er A boundary-stones: BHATTACHARYA (1991:44, 8108) records EA 
the beginning if dis : js expression ksetram kilankitam in a Cambodian inscription 
copper-plate inscriptio; fth century (K. 598, 1007/8 AD) and kilaka in a sixthroe पु 
N.G. MAJUMDA RI from Bengal ("The Mallasarul Copper-plate of Vijayasen?: S 
upary upari pes I XXIII, No. 24, p. 161, line 15). 
pari lin (which is also found in Kirana 51:69) is unclear: co 


lin 
Eas carved into them in layers (in other words, 


| it refer to 
gas that have multiple smaller Ji P 
hasraliriga in South India today)? 


हि 1 
Sort of object that is known as a sa 


rolegomena 
Proleg he 


of pratistha is detailed and complex and is part of the Guhyasütra (chapter 
2), 50 8 full discussion will have to be Postponed, but a few features may 
be mentioned here to indicate ways in which it differs from later accounts 
and a longer treatment of lingapratistha in the early Mantramarga will be 
found in GOODALL forthcoming B. 

We may observe first of all that there appears to be no definition of 
pratistha in the NiSvasa and that it would be difficult to say whether there 
is really any one defining moment in the rituals. One might expect a moment 
in which the linga is instilled with some sort of life force to be identified as 
a central moment. But we find here no jivanyasa (as we find in Soma- 
Sambhupaddhati SP4 2:216) or pranapratistha (as in some late South Indian 
Temple Agamas: see TAK3 ad loc.). Another animating moment in other 
traditions is the nayanonmilana, the opening of the eyes of the image with 
a golden stylus. The linga of course does not have eyes, but this moment is 
often equated (for example by Somasambhu in SP4, 2:177) with the tracing 
on the linga of the lines that suggest the glans of a phallus. Again, this 
is ritually accomplished with a golden stylus. Now the tracing of the lines 
on the linga is included in the Guhyasütra (2:73c—75), but it is noteworthy 
that such an equivalence is not alluded to in the Bodhayanagrhyasesasütra's 
Rudrapratisthakalpa (2.16.1314): 


hiranyena tejasa caksur vimocayet “tejo’si” iti 13 
linge cen nivartate, caksusor abhavat 14 


With the fire of gold he should open the eye, saying “You are fire”. In 
the case of [the installation of a] linga, this is omitted, since there are no 
eyes. 


One might alternatively expect the kernel of the rite of pratistha to be 
what Somasambhu identifies as its defining moment in SP4 1:1, namely the 
moment when the spouted collar of stone called the pindika or yoni is lowered 
down over the linga to rest upon the base, called the pitha.°° But the 
Nigvasa makes no obvious distinction between pitha and pindika, for it 
appears to use only the latter expression, even when it cannot refer to the 
flanged and spouted collar of stone which BRUNNER identifies as the pindika 

derstand SP4 
shove veh js Siva, with the pith, 
bhih. This echoes a remark 


(2:128ab): linge rudro uma 
after joining them as 


Sop Ls. : 
his is how BRUNNER, in her copious annotation, 
1१८०, which defines pratistha as the union of the linga, y 
Which is Śakti: prtham śaktih sivo lingam tadyogah sā śivāņu 
made at the very end of the Guhyasütra's account of pratistha 
vedi ekikrtya ca püjayet, “Rudra is in the linga, Uma [in] the vedi: 
one, one should worship’, 


Nisvasatattvasamhita 
62 


81 Now in her discussion of the distinction between pri tha and pindika 
व आज and 210-12, fn. 82), BRUNNER observes (p.xix) that more 
nm n a Somagambhu’s often fail to distinguish between the two; 
bu Mure ns himself, as well as most older literature, often 
makes no distinction either. So the Nisvasa is certainly not alone here: 
the Matariga only uses the expression pindika (kriyapada 13:23 and 13:40); 
the Kirana and the Mohacüdottara appear to use pindika, pindi and pitha 
interchangeably; and the Sarvajnanottara, by contrast, appears only to use 
the expressions pitha and vedi (with one uncertain use of uttaravedi, which 
might correspond to the upper collar). BRUNNER at one point suggests 
(1998:212, fn. 82)9? that the various shapes prescribed for the pindika can 
only refer to the upper-most part of the pedestal, in other words to the collar 
that should alone properly be referred to as pindika. Guhyasutra 2:121-4, 
for instance, lists seven types (Vapi, Yaksi, Vedi, Vajrini, Padmasamsthana, 
Mandala, Trikona), and the Kirana has a similar list of 8 (53:18ff), as does 
the Mohacidottara (3:13ff). But this conclusion is not obvious to us. Why 
can these shape-names not refer to the whole unit that surrounds a part of 
the linga above ground? Why should the whole not be, for instance, round 
or triangular? It seems to us that we should accept that, even if a base and 
a collar were distinguished by the period of Somagambhu, and even if pitha 
and pindika were typically the terms privileged respectively for base and 
collar, we cannot trace the terminological distinction back far.?3 
Moreover, it seems not impossible that the Nisvasa simply doesn't know 
about the flanged and spouted collar of stone that is slid over the linga. 
The description of the placing of base and linga (Guhyasitra 2:116-19) 15 
not clear and could be read in two different ways, depending on whether one 
assumes or does not assume its existence: 


proper. 


vamadevena $vabhre tu yojayitva ganambikam 
yonir visnuh sivo lingam sadya $vabhre nivegayet 2:116 
imam rudraya vai japtva prthivyam vai give punah 
KEN GEGE auc GL T Guhyasütra 2:22 
the pindika, 
*^'Le Mohaéirottara ... donn 
aucune facon le pitha’ 


53016 mi 
ght speculate, h ide 
because it originally means owever, that pindika can only have come to mean 


wheel-like surround fr EUM and that it therefore probably did originally me 
in the absence of ear] om which a liñga emerges. But this speculation seems rather pap 
comparably Gi ee Support: other than the Nisvasa another source af ey 
Brhatsamhita, which uet does not support such an understanding of pindika ! 


indika seve ३ ; base ९ 
statue and not a collar for f Higa, several times (e.g. in 55:16) to denote the 


off, for instance, give the dimensions of bricks to be used for 


d n 
€ pour cet objet huit formes possibles, qui ne concernent € 


“pedestal” 
an the 


Prolegomena és 
calite kampite vapi saSabde bhramite tatha 2:117 

patite ca tatha Santim diva saptam yadakramet 

1isanyam asrte linge sarva|( siddhi)| — 2:118 

trataram indra japtva tu pindikam bandhayet tatah 

adhobhagam nyase Svabhre pindikasthan tu madhyatah 2:119 


With VAMADEVA he should place Ganambika [viz. the pedestal?] in the 
pit. The “womb” (yonih) is Visnu; Siva is the linga. One should at 
once?4 lower [the linga] into the pit. He should recite IMA RUDRAYA. 
If Siva [i.e. the linga] should move or tremble in the earth, or should 
slip noisily or should fall, then pacification [will take place] when one 
has passed seven days (?).°5 If the linga settles [pointing] in the North- 
East, then all siddhis...[[will succeed]]. He should then fix the pindika96 
while reciting TRATARAM INDRAM. He should place the lower part [of 
the linga(?)] in the pit, resting on the pindika (?) in the middle. 


Certainly there is no unambiguous presentation in the Nisvasa of the sliding 
of a stone ring down over the liniga, nor is there mention of an a$vattha- 
leaf-shaped representation of the vulva on the inside of the ring, nor is 
there any mention of the showing of the lingamudra, a gesture that suggests 
sexual intercourse, immediately after this solemn joining of the linga with the 
pindika. I mention these absences particularly since BRUNNER's article "The 
sexual aspect of the linga cult according to the Saiddhantika scriptures" 
points to these features in SP4 to shore up her thesis (1998b:95-96). 
Another moment that one might reasonably expect to be identified as 
central is the insertion or application of mantras. And yet it appears that no 
tantric mantras are used in the pratistha described in Guhyasutra 2. Only 
Vedic mantras are deployed, and not only for brahmaghosa (the creation of 
auspicious ambient noise), but even for the nyasa (though this label is not 


छ 01 could sadya be intended to mean "[while uttering] SADYOJATA"? | bein: 
SThe text and interpretation are uncertain here. One expects the officiant to be 1 
structed to perform expiatory rites, as in this example that also involves a period p Wr 
days (Uttara-Kamika gi:51c-52b: linge bere ca pithe và svedo asirah Rame “ना 
Praksalyastrambunabhyarcya santim saptaham caret. ‘If sweat appears on ie 

an image, on the pedestal, then there is danger to the realm. One should wash 1 


ification-ri seven 
Water empowered with the ASTRA, venerate it and perform a pacification-rite for 


days.) 4 : 
“Or could these words be interpreted rather to mean “He should then bine HUE 

Pindika’? Apart from this difficulty, it is not clear whether this pindika is the meng pea 

that was lowered into the pit at the beginning. If it is, then it might he Dana collar, 

again after the pacification-rite. If it is a different object, in other words, pads 

then what is it that is about to be described as pindikastham? 


Nisvāsatattvasamhitz 
64 


ti t ic hierarchy ( prakriyā) 

t the installation of the a ८ a 
rae M > prominent use of Vedic mantras (although 
DE se he text, with the exception of the Vedic forms of 


: in t : 
WT ce eee that these rituals are borrowed from earlier 
the brahman 


० 87 
arga material. 
ios हक न absence of a defining moment in the ritual, we may note 
SW 


1 or two mandapas, as in the 77४०७5८ 
that the ips eint Ea e in all Saiva sources in me 
in front of the projected prasada is re "aser ] ॥ 

rate detail. As BRUNNER observes (1998:xxxiii), we learn muc , much 
Md det e the temporary yagamandapa and about the objects that 
M cass ready inside it in preparation for the pratistha than we learn 
about the permanent prasada, the temple which isto house the linga for ever 
after. This, she suggests, is in part because the acarya has a larger e in 
getting ready the mandapa and in part because every part of the mandapa 
and each of the objects inside it is charged with symbolism and has some 
part to play in the ritual. But she cannot rid herself of the suspicion that the 
temporary yagamandapa might simply be older than the temple as 8 place 
of worship. And indeed the construction of this yagamandapa, with four 
wooden toranas of Palaga (E), Udumbara (S), Aśvattha (W) and Vata (N) 
seems to be a constant among old pratistha rites, whether Saiva ( Guhyasütra 
2:67-68; Kirana 56:26-27) or Vaisnava (Svayambhuvaparicaratra 5:95), and 
it has antecedents in the Grhyaparigistas, particularly Atharvavedaparisista 
21.4:4-21.6:6 (for which see EINOO 2005a:13-20). 

What all of this suggests is not just the unsurprising conclusion that 
lingapratistha largely consists of modified borrowings from earlier non- 
Mantramarga rituals of pratistha, but also that the Guhyasutra is ab 97 
earlier stage in the process of adapting the borrowings to Saiva needs than 
is reflected by any other tantric account known to us. For, as we have md 
only Vedic mantras are used in the Guhyasütra's account, whereas in Er 
test of the early corpus no Vedic mantras are used (other than as bral 
81059), and no part of the ritual seems yet to have been singled out 85 
defining moment that makes the pratistha logical in its new tantric cone 

Aside from these awkwardnesses, the Guhyasütra arguably reflects 2 
०९९ uncertainty about the purpose of the pratistha: is the linga to be 


jc 
धस ऊ could auus Quar one could argue that the absence of a moment of instilling Saiva ace? 
mantras 15 connected with the way tantric puja is constructed. on each occasion inv? xd 
Ser nat the mantras into the locus worshipped, followed by a dismissal at E. 990 
= ch might in turn be related to an early tendency to worship Siva in perishable र 
ot earth/clay and Such, but Perhaps such a structure of püjà developed in part 


sadhakas typically appropriated ready-installed lingas. 


Prolegomena 6; 
focus of a public temple or is it to be for private use? Such an uncertainty is 
not unparallelled in Saiva literature: typically, accounts up to and includin 
that of Somasambhu give hints that reveal that they are sometimes SC 
ing of the installation of images for sadhana or for private worship (see, for 
example, BRUNNER 1998:68-9, n. 2, commenting on -.Inuktyai, bhuktyai..) 
and sometimes of the installation of images for public temples. As for 
the Nisvasa’s account, although it includes subjects that can surely only 
be relevant to large-scale (and therefore probably public) worship, such as 
a typology of vimana-shapes (Guhyasutra 2:20ff), and the positioning and 
orientation of a temple within a town (2:39-40), it is accompanied by asser- 
tions to the effect that the pratistha is taught to meet the sadhaka’s need 
of a linga in order to begin sadhana. The topic is introduced, for example, 
as follows: 


siddhiksetrani punyani yatra devo svayam sthitah 
rsidevatajustani siddhilingani yani ca 1:34 

esam ekatame sthitva lingam va sthapya yatnatah 

tam vidhim sampravaksyami $rnusv! ekamana priye 1:35 


Holy fields of power, wherever God has established himself [as a sponta- 
neously occurring 1789], or [wherever there may be] any lingas that are 
associated with powers and that have been used by sages and gods—he 
should station himself in one of these sorts of places, or he should care- 
fully set up [his own] liga. I shall teach you that rite [of installation 
next]: listen with focussed mind, my dear. 


And chapter 3, which immediately follows the account of pratistha, and 
which is about the pursuit of siddhis, begins as follows: 


gokulakulabhüdese coradamaravarjite 
nissarppakitavalmike Itibhih parivarjjite 3:1 
devadevam pratisthapya susaha( yo)... 


In a country rich with herds of cattle, devoid of thieves and pa 
makers, without snakes, insects, ant-hills, and free of Ban 
installed the God of gods, with [the help of] a good assistant... 


i a 
“The Kirana, by contrast, gives directions (Kirana 1914) for the 27707 
Private temple (devatagrha) in the north-east corner of a private house, TE distinction to 
abels options that are to be followed in a private house (mandira) in con 
Options that are to be followed in a temple (prasada). 


Nisvasatattvasamhita 
66 


In short, Jun TAKASHIMA's intuition seems a good one: it seems क्‌ 
हा the  Guhyasütra may indeed have integrated and begun to adapt 
A ds about pratistha from a non-Mantramargic tradition that was 
veneered with the installation of temples at a time when the Mantramarga 
was not. 
References and borrowings in other literature 
SANDERSON has drawn attention to various early references to the Nisvasa 
when speaking of its having been drawn upon extensively by the redactor 


of the Svacchanda (2001:22-31): 


This work, which is much the largest of the Saiddhantika scriptures, 
seems to have been of little importance when viewed with the perspective 
of the Kashmirian commentators and their successors, since they seldom 
refer to it. But there are reasons to suppose that in earlier times it 
was in the forefront of the tradition. In Cambodia, where later Indian 
developments do not appear to have penetrated, it was the principal 
authority of the Saivas; the Varahapurana speaks of the Siddhanta as the 
teaching of this scripture, as though it knew no other; and the Guhya- 
siddhi of Padmavajra speaks of the teaching of the Siddhanta as following 
either ‘the Kalottara etc? or this text. That the text should have fallen 
into obscurity in later times is not surprising. For it contains, as we shall 
see, features that link it closely with the earlier, pre-Tantric Saivism, t00 
closely, I suspect, for the comfort of the later commentators, who received 
and further moulded a Siddhànta more starkly differentiated both from 
that Saivism and from that of the non-Saiddhantika Tantric systems of 
which the Svacchanda is exemplary. 


S = the last of these references first, SANDERSON's fn. 3 of the same 
article (2001:6) explains that verses 8:11-16 of the Guhyasiddhi 


i d be Initiate to disguise himself as a Saiva, win the coo 
ह y Eurer cuales teach them the Siddhanta, give them Eu 
sn e the Daksina and then exchange it for one of E 
his Vidya- girls, thus obtaining the consort necessary to the practice 1 

Idya-observance (vidyavratam). 


SANDERSON quot 
es er] : z i 2.7 to 
be used न ER 8 specification of the Saiddhantika text? 


darsay, > 
A. Quas tesam dharmam siddhantapiirvakam 
amsiddham no cen nihávasasambhavam 


Prolegomena 67 


Then he should reveal to them the Siddhantadharma established in such 
[scriptures] as the Kalottara, or that whose source is the Nisvasa. 


SANDERSON has since quoted and discussed the passage at greater length 
(2009:144-5), where he is more emphatic about the date of the Guhya- 
siddhi, describing it as “written in all probability in the eighth century”.9° 

The Varahapurana refers to the text in chapter 71, Some verses of which 
are quoted, as SANDERSON has pointed out (2006:154), by Apararka in 
his commentary on Yajüavalkyasmrti 1:7,9* and some are quoted by Ya- 
munacarya in his Agamapramanya (pp. 987). We give here just the first 
two of the passages of the Varahapurana that Apararka quotes. They are 
printed together in a block, with no intervening iti, as though they formed 
a single unit:9? 


ye vedamarganirmuktas tesam mohartham eva ca 
siddhantasamjtakam pürvam maya śāstram pradarsitam 
pasur yah paSubhavasthas sa yada patito bhavet 

tada pasupatam sastram jnayate vi$vamohakam [70:41c-43b] 


e 70:42a siddhantasamjnakam purvam] A[pararka]; nayasiddhantasamjiüa- 
bhir V[enkateávara Steam Press]; nayasiddhantamargena Y [amunacarya's quo- 
tation in the Agamapramanya] e 70:42b pradarsitam ] A; tu darsitam 
V e 70:42c pa$ur yah pasubhavasthas ] conj.; pa$ur yo 'pasubhavasthas 
A; paso "yam pasubhavas tu V e 70:43b jüayate vi$vamohakam | A; jay- 
ate vedasamjfiitam V 


Just in order to bewilder those who abandon the path of the Vedas I 
earlier taught the body of works known as the Siddhanta.93 A ‘bound 


891९ has mentioned it briefly also in 2006:154. 

9०907 the justification, see SANDERSON 2009:144, fn. 332, in which he points out that 
the Guhyasiddhi is quoted in the Caryamelapakapradipa of Aryadeva, which TOMABECHI 
assigns to the early years of the ninth century. 

The verses quoted ad Yajüavalkyasmrii 1:7 on p.12 correspond to 70:41c-73b; 
71:55-57 and 70:36-37b. (The last of these quotations actually contains 10 padas, but 
4 have been omitted, probably because of eyeskip, in the Venkateswara Steam Press edi- 
tion of the Varahapurana of samvat 1867.) There are of course variant readings, and 
the text transmitted in the edition seems in general inferior to that quoted by Apararka. 
(SANDERSON makes the same observation about the critical edition (2006:211, endnote 
3). १ १ 
४ We are grateful to Patrick OLIVELLE for sharing with us a draft of his translation of this 
part of Apararka’s commentary. Of the lines that we reproduce below, only 70:41c-42b 
and 51ab figure among the lines quoted by Yamunacarya. आ. s viia 

93This may be among the oldest attestations of the label Siddhānta Garon 
to identify the teachings of a group of scriptures of the Mantramārga, and therefore a 


Nisvasatattvasamhita 
68 


j t iti f a tamed beast: since (yada 
१ suh) is one who has he condition o ar [ a) 
soul’ (pasuh) ecause of it to such a condition], therefore this bo dy 


one ‘falls’ ( patitah) [b | Ee. 
of works that deludes the universe is known as Pasupata’.94 


mayaiva mohitas te hi bhavisyanto jana dvija 


laulyarthinas tu astrani karisyanti kalau narah 


nihévasasamhità ya hi laksamatram pramanatah 

saiva pagupato yogah bhedah paSupatas tatah 

etaya vedamargader yad anyad iha jayate 

tat ksudrakarma vijneyam raudram gaucavivarjitam [71:55-57] 


e 71:55b bhavisyanto jana dvija] A; bhavisyaj janata dvijah V © 71:55¢ 
tu] A; sva? V e 71:56cd pasupato yoga bhedah pasupatas tatah ] A; 
pagupati diksà yogah paSupates tatha V e 71:578. etaya vedamargader | 
A; etasmad vedamargad dhi V 


It is I who have deluded these people of the future, o brahmin.95 Men 
in turn (tu), desirous of pleasure, will create [further] scriptures in the 
Kali age. It is the Nihévasasamhita, which is one lakh [units of thirty- 
two syllables] in length, that is alone the [true] Pagupata yoga; from it 


hint that the author of this part of the Varahapurana may after all have known of other 
scriptures than the Nisvasa even though he mentions only the Nigvasa. The earliest 
known datable use of the label Saivasiddhanta remains that in the foundation inscription 
of what is today known as the Kailasanatha temple in Kancheepuram, in a verse which 
alludes to the initiation of the Pallava king Narasimha II in the late seventh-century 
(see, ९.8.) GOODALL 2004:xix, fn. 17). If we were to follow the reading of V here, naya- 
दा या then we could perhaps understand “with names such as Naya and 
p rH qc has suggested (2012:1155 and note 8 on p.1159) that Naya may 
हि FA a F 5 for the dualist doctrine of the Saivasiddhanta in the ninth-century 
Fo ds m F ME ; we were to follow Yamunacarya’s reading nayasiddhanta- 
allowing the ES A a ama becomes a single notion (‘I earlier taught a body of works 
20, aie s Mm anta"), as it appears to be in Brahmayamala 63 (labelled 61), verse 
sense as Śaivasiddhānta. eR nayasiddhanta may sometimes be a label with the es 
sense, perhaps not different a नह be cautious, for it seems to have a more neutr? 
घाग aa om that of siddhanta, in this half-line (6cd) from Devana- 
Dt Dose Pe he consulted at the end of his sixteenth-century 
94We interpret this as a ite naisvaryah nayasiddhantam adarat. ‘ch is 
of course usually regarded as RE ng nirvacana intended to subvert the term, whi m 

proktam). In the light of the MS taught by Pagupati” (Astadhyay: 4.3100 
contusion in the transmission in 42c, Yuko YOKOCHI (person? 


communication E 
was pāśur, an Po T E it is perhaps possible that what was originally write 
of a pasu’, rather than the ended meaning of which would be ‘one in the ur 


PaSupata. regular pasur , Since this would account for the long voW! 


9 . 
SRudra is speaking to Agestya. 


Prolegomena 69 


the various [forms of the religion of the] Pasupatas [arise].99 Whatever 
[practice] arises here [on earth] because of this [text] that is other than 
Vedic should be understood to be base ritual that is cruel and devoid of 
purity. 


Just before this in chapter 71, Rudra has explained that it was in response 
to a plea to mitigate a curse of Gautama that had deluded brahmins into 
following pointless Raudra practices that he created the Niívasa as a work 
that involved some Vedic ritual. 


ucur mam te ca munayo bhavitaro dvijottamah 50 
kalau tvadrüpinah sarve jatamukutadharinah 
svecchaya pretavesa$ ca mithyalingadharah prabho 51 
tesam anugraharthaya kimcic chastram pradiyatam 

ye casmadvamSajah sarve vartteyuh kalipiditah 52 
evam abhyarthitas tais tu puraham dvijasattama 
vedakriyasamayuktam krtavan asmi samhitam 53 
nihsvasakhyam tatas tasyam lina babhravyasandilah 
alpaparadham Srutvaiva gatas te dambhika’ ’bhavan 54 


71:51b jatamukuta® | AV; jatalaguda? Y 


And these sages told me: “All brahmins in the Kali age will take on your 
form, bearing matted locks heaped up in a crown, deliberately dressing 
as corpses, bearing the marks of a sham [religion], o Lord! Please give 
some teaching to bestow grace on them, and all those born of our lineage 
who will be oppressed by Kali may [then] turn [back from falsehood].’ 
Beseeched thus by them, o best of brahmins, I produced long ago a scrip- 
ture that involved Vedic rites called the Nihévasa. The Babhravyas and 
Sandilas [would then be] absorbed in that [scripture]. As soon as those 
[sages] heard that the faults [of their descendants] would be diminished, 
they left [Kailasa] and became puffed up with pride. 


The Varahapurana appears to go on to say that those who practise the im- 
pure forms of Rudra-worship that are taught in false scriptures inspired by 


‘This seems strange because in the future world that the sages describe to Rudrajin 
75:51 (quoted below) the people for whose benefit the Nisvàsa will be taught will vong 
have been wearing what might be considered Pa$upata marks, such as matted Joas 2 
the accoutrements of dead bodies. Should the other reading perhaps be preferred ak 4 
It might be rendered: tis alone [the true teaching relating to] Pasupata initiation and the 
[true] yoga of Pasupati. 


Nis$vasatattvasamhita 
70 
the Veda-congruent Nigvasa are to be seen as Ucchusmarudras (ucchusmaru- 


ras te jneyah).97 4 dersi 
EI d s fall among those which HAZRA considers to be the old- 


est part of the work and which he dates to “between the middle of the 8th 
and the beginning of the gth century A.D., i.e., about 800 A.D? (HAZRA 
1940:104). On the same page, incidentally, he makes the following interest- 


ing, if debatable, observation: 
As in the Rudra-gita of the Varaha-p. the words ‘raudra’ and ‘pasupata’ 
have been used to mean the Agamic Saivas and their scriptures, these 
chapters should not be placed later than the beginning of the gth century 
A.D., because the distinctive terms ‘Saiva’ and “Agama? were well-known 
in the gth century A.D. 


As for the quotations in Cambodia, which are detailed in fn. 28 on pp. 22-3 
and in fn. 5 on pp.7-8 (of SANDERSON 2001, as well as SANDERSON 
2006:154-156), all belong to the tenth, eleventh or twelfth centuries and 
are therefore not relevant to the question of the dating of the text. One of 
these inscriptions, however, is worth particular mention for another reason: 
it alludes to a commentary having been written upon the Guhya, in other 
words on the Guhyasutra, by a certain Bhüpendrapandita, namely K. 692, 
an inscription which is to be dated to either 1189 or 1195 AD (thus ODES 
1937:227). The fifth verse reads: 


bhüpendrapanditapadam munimastakali- 
malanatam kajam iva pranamantu santah 
sansarasindhubhuvanoddharanaya guhya- 
tikapatha yad akarod yamasadma Sunyam 


"May the good bow before the foot of Bhüpendrapandita, like a lotus, the 
garland of bees at whose top is [formed by] the heads of [bowing] sages: 
for, in order to raise the world up from the ocean that is samsara, he has 
Cm the abode of Yama empty by means of his commentary on the 
E: ded as SANDERSON’s above-quoted remarks suggest, no such com- 

ty was composed, or at least none was known in South India to Vaktra- 


a= Sa Er a 
ye rudram upajivanti kalau 
narah/ 58/ ucchusmarudras 


vakarye yada pura/ 59 i 
cm Nartt. ya ya. 
ninisata daityan so / Tuhah | 


Prolegomena 5 


$ambhu, the twelfth-century disciple of Aghorasiva,99 for he lists the twelve 
Siddhantatantras which he knew to have commentaries in his Mrgendrapa- 
ddhatitika (namely the Raurava, Svayambhuwvasütrasarigraha, Mrgendra, Ki- 
rana, Parakhya, Matanga, Suksmasvayambhuva, Dvigatikalottara, Sardhatri- 
§atikalottara, Catuhéatika, Sarvajnanottara and MohaSiurottara) separately 
from the thirteen-hundred-verse recension of the Kalottara and the Ni$vasa, 
which he regarded as not having been commented upon.99 

The absence of commentarial literature on the sütras of the Nigvasa or 
indeed of quotations drawn from them — for identifiable quotations that 
are labelled as belonging to the Ni$vasa seem invariably to belong to the 
Nisvasakarika — must be contrasted with the abundant borrowings in ear- 
lier scriptural literature. The following list (table 2 on p.72), no doubt in- 
complete, covers only the Miulasutra, Uttarasutra, and Nayasütra, and leaves 
aside the many hundreds of verses shared between the Guhyasütra and other 
works, notably the Svacchanda. Nor does it take account of the Nisvasa- 
mukha, which, as the thesis of Nirajan KAFLE demonstrates, was the source 
for almost half of the Sivadharmasangraha (chapters 5, 6, 7, 8 and g).2°° 


A. conclusion to the discussion of dating 


None of the external references to the Nsvasa takes us back before the eighth 
century, but, as we mentioned at the beginning of this discussion, we feel 
that the cumulative weight of the various other pieces of what might individ- 
ually have been considered merely suggestive evidence allows us to feel some 
confidence that all four sütras of the Ni$vasa had probably attained their 
present form by the seventh century, before the systematising efforts visible 
to us in the Svayambhuvasütrasangraha and in Sadyojyotih's commentary 
thereon. As for the time that must be allowed to have elapsed between the 
composition of the early kernel, the Mülasutra, and the latest layers, the 
final chapters of the Guhyasütra, this will inevitably be a question of taste. 


95For Vaktra$ambhu's being Aghorasiva’s disciple, see GOODALL 2000:210-11, fn. 8; for 
a discussion of his name, see SANDERSON 2007:245, fn. 48 Me zi 

99 .sadyojyotiprabhrtibhir mahadbhir acaryair vyakhyatesu érimad-Raurava-Svaya- 
mbhuva-Mrgendra-Kirana-Parakhya-Matarga-Suksmasvayambhuva-Dvisat adu “का A 
Sati-Catuhsatika-Sarvajfianottara-Mohasiirottaresu, avyakrtesu (conj; vivyakrtegu MS) 
Srimat-Trayodasasatika-Nisvasadisu... (T. 1021, p.111). : ing thesis 

100 An edition of these chapters is included as an appendix to KAFLE s for d As ^ 
The first parallels between the two texts were pointed out by SAMBAN c Anata 
and alluded to by Anil KUMAR ACHARYA (2009*:83ff), both eut FS Siva- 
ACHARYA’s thesis (2009*) furnishes a first critical edition of chapters 1-3 ©: 
dharmasarigraha. 


Table 2: Verses in the 1st 3 sutras 


Mulasutra 1:2c-3 
Mülasütra 1:4-5b 
Mulasutra 1:6c—7 
Mulasutra 4:1 
Muülasutra 4:7ab 
Mulasutra 6:615 
Mülasütra 6:10ab 
Mulasütra 7:20ab 


Mulasutra 7:20c-21b, 22 


Milasitra 8:1-3b 
Mulasutra 8:7 
Mulasutra 8:8 
Mulasttra 8:9ab 
Muülasutra 8:13c-14b 
Mulasutra 8:14cd 
Mulasttra 8:16-17 
Uttarasutra 1:10-11 
Uttarasutra 1:23 
Uttarasutra 1:33 
Uttarasutra 3:3ab 
Uttarasütra 4:23c-24b 
Uttarasütra 4:24c-25b 
Uttarasutra 4:42 
Uttarasutra 4:51c-52b 


Uttarasütra 5:36c-49 
Nayasitra 1:98c-99b 
Nayasütra 2:6-9 

Nayasütra 2:17c-20b 


Nayasütra 2:21-102 
Nayasütra 3:1-72 
Nayasitra 4:12-14b 
Nayasiitra 4:51 
Nayasütra 4:79 
Nayasütra 4:100-144b 
Nayasütra 4:107c-144b 
Nayasütra 4:144C-158 
Nayasütra 4:149cd 


Nisvasatattvasamhita 


of the Ni$vasa found used elsewhere 


Guhyasütra 12:192 ob 
Tvaritamulasutra 1:6—7b 
Tvaritamülasütra 1:7c-8 

Matasara 4:1 

Matasara 4:?, f. 31v 
Sardhatrisatikalottara 19:211 
‘Kamika’ ( Tantraloka 23:47cd) 
Jayadrathayamala 2.3:86cd 
Svacchanda 328c-330 
Timirodghatana 10:16c-18 
Timtrodghatana 10:21c-22b 
Timirodghatana 10:23c—24b 
Timirodghatana 10:23ab 
Timirodghatana 10:24c-25b 
Matasara 2:?, f.14v 

Timirodghatana 10:25c-27b 

& Svacchanda 5:5-7 

Svacchanda 8:27c-28b 
Jayadrathayamala 1.36:42b—43b 
Svacchanda 5:24cd 

Svacchanda 2:145 

Svacchanda 2:148 

Svacchanda 2:234c-235b 

Svacchanda 11:199 

[= Tantrasadbhava 10:195] 

& Satikakalottara 90c-104 
Svacchanda 11:103 

Svacchanda 11:316-319 (appendix II) 
Svacchanda 11:196-198 

[= Tantrasadbhava 10:19 2-1 94] 
Svacchanda 12:1c-82 (appendix II) 
Svacchanda 12:83-157 (appendix II) 
Svacchanda 12:163-165b (appendix II) 
Svacchanda 11:35c-36b 
Tantrasadbhava 9:352c-353b 
Svacchanda 7:285c-330 (appendix I) 
=Tantrasadbhava 28:18c-60b 
Nisvasakarika 37:10-24 (appendix IV) 
Rauravasitrasangraha 3:28ab 


Prolegomena A 


We think that the two extremes should be separated by at least a century. 
For further fuzzy evidence that points to the later layers, particularly the 
kalpas in prose, of the Guhyasütra being completed by the seventh century, 
see our concluding remarks about magic on p. 84 below. 


The place or places of composition? 


For the earliest three sutras of the text, there is very little evidence indeed 
that could be used to point to a particular place of composition. All that 
can be determined is that they are probably Northern works rather than 
Southern ones. This is suggested by the description of the script that is 
given in Nayasutra 1:31ff, and also, arguably, by some of the irregulari- 
ties of language described below, in particular such Prakritisms as sayojya 
(in Uttarasutra 4:51, 5:14, 5:29, 5:45, and Nayasutra 3:67, 4:5), Damaniga 
(for Damane$a, in Mulasutra 5:14), vagendriya (for vagindriya, in Nayasitra 
2:30 and 3:9), jagi$a (for jagadi$a, in Uttarasutra 1:7) and jagotpatti (for 
jagadutpatti, in Nayasutra 2:84). These are not usages found in the cor- 
pus of Southern Siddhantatantras. The few toponyms, however, such as 
Kailasa (Mulasutra 1:2), have a mythical status that makes them useless as 
geographical pointers. It is only in the next layer of composition, that of 
the Guhyasütra and Nigvasamukha, in which we find a toponym that is nei- 
ther semi-mythical nor simply part of a list, namely Kedara (Nisvasamukha 
3:28 and Guhyasütra 16 passim). But even if we were to make the tentative 
assumption that those parts of the text are likely to have been written near 
Kedara, we could not from that conclude anything about the place or places 
of composition of the earliest three sütras. 


Some remarks on yoga 


Through the above discussion of archaisms and of evidence that might point 
to its being older than other Saiva tantric literature, we have revealed or 
mentioned in passing numerous features of the religious world of the text. A 
Picture has emerged of a group of Saiva enthusiasts who have placed magic 
and soteriology on the same plane: liberation (mukti) and the enjoyment 
of supernatural powers (bhukti) are both goals to be attained through the 
same means, namely the ritual propitiation and manipulation of mine. 
Social religion is largely absent, and that seems to be because the movemen 
recruited from the adherents of a substrate brahmanism that provided the 
rites and values of social religion. The central rituals, taught repeatedly 
in the sütras of the Nisvàsa, each time using different mantra-systems, are 


Í Nisvasatattvasamhita 
T 


the first, vidyadiksa, being a rite for neophytes 
antrasādhana, and the second, nirvànadiksà, a 
d sadhakas that guaranteed liberation. These 
initiations were presumably held to place the followers of the religion of the 
Nisvása above and beyond the laity of social brahmanism. We may assume 
that their ritual obligations were considerable, for although we do not find a 
schedule of daily ritual duties laid out as in a paddhati, the information from 
which one could be extrapolated is clearly there, and there are clues that 
indicate that such a schedule was presupposed.'^' What we have until now 
barely touched upon is the róle of yoga, which is the principal subject-matter 
of the Nayasütra and occupies a large part of the Uttarasutra. For magical 
powers were to be pursued not only through rituals, but also through yogic 
practices. As we would expect for such an early work, the yoga taught is 
not a sort of regimen of virtuosic physical exercises.'?? Good upper-body 
posture appears to be described (in Nayasūtra 4:10 6) and a handful of leg- 
postures (asana) are taught (in Nayasutra 4:4c-16 and 4:105), but any one 
of these may be adopted, for the emphasis is on finding and maintaining a 
comfortable posture (see also 4:106) for meditation. 

Unlike Patafjala yoga, the Nigvasa’s yoga is not divided into eight 
“limbs” (astanga), nor does it spell out at any point the angas that it con- 
tains, but it speaks of itself as teaching at one point (in Nayasütra 4:24) 
an essential “supportless” (niralamba) yoga that goes beyond the yoga of 
six “limbs” (sadangayogavarjitam) or that is without those “limbs”. This 
shows that the redactor of the Nayasütra was aware of an existing sadanga- 
yoga, ^3 and it suggests that he thought of the Nayasütra as building upon 
or transcending that tradition. 

We have remarked that the conception of the yogic body reflected in the 
Ni$vasa is archaic in that it has only two tubes and makes no reference to 
the dvadasanta or to the karaneSas (see p.33 above). But we could also 
emphasise what might have been relatively new features in its time, such 85 
its lengthy tattvajaya, in other words a yogic conquest of the tattvas that 
extends the notion of bhütajaya, ‘conquest of the elements’, that we find in 
Yogasütra 3.43 to reach well beyond the ontological ladder of the Sankhyas 
(see Uttarasütra 5 and Nayasutra 3). 


two rituals of initiation, 
that qualifies them for m 
rite apparently for confirme 


hit ल्न 
Me the ie the expression nityahoma, for instance, in Uttarasütra 2:14 and 2:7: 
NES = ud etermined to find in the Nisvasa a precursor for such a phy sical JOE 
RA aa Ev. sd has pointed out to us, draw attention to the pisos 
llab E 0 sadhaka to shape his body into the written form of all the letters of 
Syllabary in Nayasütra 1:32ff (referred to above on p. 36). 


103 RE a A 4 
or a detailed discussion of Saiva sadangayoga, see VASUDEVA 2004:367É. 


Prolegomena n 


In this tattvajaya, the meditation on each tattva from prakrti onwards 
is to be accompanied by meditation on a sound-element of the NAVATMAN 
that has been taught in Uttarasütra 1:11f to correlate with that particular 
element. Thus in Uttarasütra 5:10 we learn that meditation on prakrti is to 
be accompanied by meditation on the syllable U. Whether this blending of 
visualisation with meditation on mantric bijas other than OM (rather than 
other sorts of mantrajapa) is an innovation we cannot say. One feature 
that seems odd about the matching of mantric-elements with levels is that 
when the tattvajaya begins at the bottom of the cosmos in Nayasitra 3, 
all of the evolutes of prakrti are also assigned the prakrtibija, namely U. 
This means that the visualisations of earth, water, fire, air and ether lack 
something that becomes a widespread distinctive feature in later accounts of 
“meditative fixations” (dharana) on the elements, namely their associations 
with the semi-vowels LA, VA, RA, and YA and with HA respectively. The 
convention of associating the semi-vowels with the elements may nonethe- 
less have existed, for the Mulasutra speaks of an agnibija (in 3:8), which 
we have assumed to refer to RA.!?4 Of the others, vayubija and varunabija 
are explicitly mentioned frequently, but only in relatively high-numbered 
chapters of the Guhyasutra. As for the letter L, it is assigned the la- 
bels mahendra, mahendra and aindra in Guhyasütra 13:51, 15:73, 15:102, 
15:121, 96 but it is once called ksmavarna (in Guhyasutra 15:129), presum- 
ably in the sense of ‘the sound of earth (ksma)’, and once called parthiva (in 
Guhyasütra 15:140). The letter associated with akasa, however seems not to 
be H, but rather M,107 just as it is in Paricaratra sources. 98 As for the letter 
H, it gets instead the names moksada (Guhyasütra 13:131) and hetubhuta 
(Guhyasütra 15:69, 15:85). 

It is possible, therefore, that the classical associations between the semi- 


‘This is the sense it bears later in the text, e.g. in Guhyasütra 13:45- i 

"5For vayu, see Guhyasütra 13:14, 13:42, 13:146, 15:26, 15:52; 15:71, 15:92; 15:95 15:115, 
15:155, 15:194. (See also 13:134, where it is alluded to as antarātmā.) The letter VA 5 
described as varunasamjüakam in Guhyasitra 13:15ab, as varuna in 15:72, 15:121 Eo 
15:180, as varuna in 15:148, as toya in 13:133, and it is alluded to in Guhyasutra RUE 
as follows: trtiyasya caturthan tu varnam apyayanam priye. "The fourth of the thir 
sro up [namely v, which is] the letter that nourishes’. 

For a possible explanation of why such expressions mi 

"eo our note on Uttarasutra 5:28 on p. 394 below. 

TA confusing range of labels is used for the letter M in t 
the Guhyasiitra: binduyoni (in 13:9, 13:17, 13:38, 13:44, 13:65, 13:6! 
15:5, 15:18, 15:54, 15:83, 15:151, etc.); bindu (in 15:51) vyapaka (in 13 
13:112); àkasastha (in 13:176); and various synonyms of ether in 13:13 
ponar vakşye vyomastham vyoma eva sah. 

See Jayākhyasamhitā 10:18-19. 


ght have come to mean tearthen’, 


he mantroddhara sections of 
13:68, 13:71, 13:80, 13:167; 
:49, 13:76, 13:82, 
6cd: vyomabijam 


Nisvasatattvasamhita 
? 


ur elements came into being over the period of redac- 
tion of the Nisvasa. The completion of the set with H and their further 
association with five dharanas seem to have come later still. For outside the 
context of bhütasuddhi, early Paiicaratra sources speak not of five dharanas 
focussing on the five elements, but of only two, namely dahana and plavana; 
other early Saiddhantika sources speak of four, only the first two of which 
are clearly associated with elements, namely the agneyi and the vàruni or 
dharanas (for references, see TAKg, s.v. dharana, and TAK3, s.v. 


vowels and the first fo 


saumya 
agneyi dharana). 

The classical Saiva dharanas used in bhütasuddhi, such as we find for 
example in Parakhya 14:33ff, appear in other words to be starting to form 
at the time of the redaction of the Nayasütra, and we can see from Bud- 
dhist accounts, such as that of the Vairocanabhisambodhi, and from those 
of other slightly later Saiva sources, such as Kirana 58 and Sardhatrigati- 
kalottara 2:2-4, that the full set of conventions took some time to settle.*°9 
According to such classical Saiva conventions, which are closely mirrored in 
the Paficaratra,”° the earth is associated with the semi-vowel LA and is to 
be visualised as yellow, square and marked with vajras; water is associated 
with the semi-vowel VA and is to be visualised as white, half-moon-shaped, 
and marked with white lotuses; fire is associated with RA and should be 
visualised as a red triangle marked with flames; wind is associated with YA 
and is visualised as a gray or black disc or hexagon marked with six dots; 
ether is associated with HA and is to be visualised as emptiness marked by 
emptiness. They are to be purified respectively by five, four, three, two and 
one yogic udghatas. In the Nayasütra, however, not only is each element 
assigned the same bija, namely U, as we have just seen above, but shapes of 
mandalas are not prescribed and in only two cases are colours mentioned: 
earth is said to be yellow and wind is said to be ‘whirling with black dust’ 
(Arsnarenvakulah). 

The emergence of one other bijamantra in the context of yogic practice 
may be mentioned in passing, namely the CATUSKALA. If our tentative 
interpretations of the opening verses of Nayasütra 4 are not too far from what 
the redactor intended to express, then this passage speaks of meditation 
involving the visualisation of the graphic form of a seed-syllable, perhaps 
HUMM, that expresses the nature of Sada$iva,"? its four mantra-divisions 


फरार क mE TENE 
or further elaboration of this point, see GOODALL and ISAACSON forthcoming: 


“For presentations of the Jaya ; 
ayakhyasamhita’ 7i hi. see RAST 
1999:2010f and FLOOD 2000. yasamhita’s account of bhitasuddhi, 


M below ad Nayasütra 4115-17. 
Note that the label CATUSKALA is retained by Ksemaraja for speaking of the 77 


ELLI 


üla- 


Prolegomena - 
(kala) being the four kalas that are nivrtti, pratistha, Santi and vidya (for 
which see p. 42 above). This is interesting for more than one reason: not 
only is it a further instance of the integration of bijamantras into yoga, it 
is also an instance of what appears long to have remained widespread in 
tantric Buddhist practice but that appears soon to have lost importance 
in the 88109 Mantramarga, namely the visualisation of mantric graphemes. 
The same emphasis on the visual aspect of the varpas, which in later Saivism 
cedes entirely to a preoccupation with their sonic aspect, is evident elsewhere 
too in the Ni$vasa, most obviously in Nayasitra 1:32ff (referred to above on 
p. 36), where the sadhaka is exhorted to see the shape of every letter of the 
syllabary in his own body. 

Turning to yogic terminology, the Nigvasa appears also to be among 
the earliest surviving works to use (in Nayasutra 4:110ff) the now ubiqui- 
tous labels recaka, puraka and kumbhaka (and variants of those names) 
for the three principal divisions of breath-control (pranayama). In fact, the 
Nisvasa’s pranayama is not quite the same as this widespread tripartite one, 
for it also includes a fourth stage that it calls suprasanta, which, although 
now little known, can be found in some other early Saiva works, as well as 
in certain Buddhist tantric ones (see our note on Nayasütra 4:113). 

Unless we assume them to be hyperbole, the claims made about the 
rewards of yogic practice (such as, for example, in Nayasütra 4:5) suggest 
that yoga, like diksa, might have been considered to be an independent path 
to liberation. We find no trace, however, of the notion that yoga was one of 
four paths, along with kriya[pada], carya[pada] and jnana[pada], that could 
be followed, together or separately, to attain the liberated state. Indeed the 
four padas are nowhere mentioned, either as upayas and therefore as topics 
that the work must cover (the sense found, for example, in the Kirana), or in 
the apparently later sense of text-divisions devoted to those four topics." 

Yoga, again like diksa (or more precisely the rituals which the sadhaka 
may practise after having received diksa), is of course also a means of access 
to magical powers, for through yogic practices the yogin attains supernatu- 
ral control over his own body and faculties. But while the grimoires of the 
Nisvasa, as we shall see in the next section, contain recipes for such ends 
— disappearance (antardhana), flying (akagagamana), traversing ord pa 
tances fast ( pādapracāra™4)— they add also means to control other objects 
and persons: magical murder, subjugation of others (vastkarana), attain- 


ant Persons: magical murder : 
mantra of Svacchandabhairava: see Svacchandatantroddyota ad 9:94 and eee shifts, 
"For a discussion of the four padas and how understanding about what they 
= GOODALL 1998:lviii ff. a 
For this expression and its sense, see TAK 3, s.v. मिड 3: 


Nisvasatativasamhitg 
7 


ment of wealth, destruction of villages and towns, obtaining a vetala as a 
slave, and so forth. The supernatural powers attained through the yoga of 
the Nigvasa, however, appear to remain the same as the powers of magica] 
control over one's own body and faculties that had already been associated 
with yoga long before: flying ( Yogasutra 3.42), entering someone else's body 
( Yogasutra 3.41), acute hearing ( Yogasütra 3.41), attainment of beauty and 
vigour ( Yogasütra 3.46), attainment of omnipotence and omniscience ( Yoga- 
sütra 3.49) and the eight powers (animadi) of ai$varya ( Yogasutra 3.42). 


Some remarks on magic 


We have referred above to the shared magical universe to be found in early 
Buddhist tantric works, in the Vznasikhatantra and in the Nisvasa, and we 
could compare this with other early non-tantric literature in which similar- 
sounding spells appear, for instance Arthasastra 14. But since this volume is 
primarily concerned with the three earliest sütras of the corpus—a layer of 
composition in which no magical recipes are spelled out, even if we think it 
reasonable to assume that such recipes existed and were presupposed by the 
redactors of the text, as the conception of vidyadiksa suggests—we intend 
to postpone a detailed exploration of this rich subject to our edition of the 
Guhyasütra. Just to give an idea, however, of this magical thought-world, 
we quote below four passages that we have commented upon at considerable 
length in a recent paper (GOODALL and ISAACSON, forthcoming), two drawn 
from the Guhyasitra and two from the Mafijusriyamülakalpa, that furnish 
plentiful examples of shared magical ideas. 
E.g. 1, Guhyasutra 3:54c-64 (f. 49"): 


narirajam tu samgrhya trlohaparivestitam 3:54 
a$vatthapatraih samcchadya dasasahasramantritam 
vadane tu samutksipya gacchate yojanasatam 3:55 
anastamitam aditye punar agacchate drutam 

grhitva rajakhadgam tu Surakhadgam tv asambhave 3:56 
puspalohamayam vapi paficagavyasu$aucitam 
asvatthapatrais sa|ficchadya a|[4]$vatthadalachaditam 3:57 
Sivatattvayutam japtva sa grahesu prasiddhyate 

trvidha tasya siddhi syad usme dhüme ca jvalite 3:58 
ügme padapracaran tu antardhanan tu dhümake 
akasagami jvalite sarvalokesu samkramet 3:59 
siddhavidyadharo hy esa na kvacit pratihanyate 

ekalinge ekavrkse śmaśāne samgame vane 3:60 


Prolegomena 79 


|tatra mandala| [5]m alikhya tattvangabhuvanam $ubham 
aksatam mrtakan grhya sthapayitvavigankitah 3:61 
susnapitam suliptahgam puspasragdamabhüsitam 

hrdi tasyopavistan tu tatvena sravitañ carum 3:62 

tasya vaktre tu hotavyam Satasahasramayutam 

tato jihva viniskramet tam tu mantrena cchedayet 3:63 
sa jihva bhavate khadga grhya vidya|dharo bhavet | 

[6] [av] y&hatagatis so hi jived acandratarakam 3:64 


Taking menstrual blood and enclosing it in three metals, wrapping it in 
asvattha leaves and reciting the mantra over it ten thousand times, if he 
pops it in his mouth, he can travel a hundred leagues and return quickly 
again before sunset. Taking a king’s sword or, if that is impossible, a 
hero’s sword, or [failing that] one made of puspaloha, cleansing it well 
with the five products of the cow, [he should cover it?] with asvattha 
leaves. Once it is covered with a$vattha leaves, after reciting the SIVA- 
TATTVA over it ten thousand times at times of eclipse (grahesu) he will 
succeed. The supernatural power [that may be attained] is of three kinds 
according to whether heat, smoke or flames manifest themselves. If there 
is heat, then he can cover great distances on foot (padapracara); if there 
is smoke, he may become invisible; if there are flames, he may walk in 
the sky and cross through all the worlds. For such a man is a fully 
realised Vidyadhara; he cannot be opposed anywhere. In a place where 
there is only one Jinga or only one tree, or in a cremation ground, or at 
a confluence of rivers, or in a forest, he should there draw the mandala, 
the auspicious mandala of the TATTVA and the arigamantras. Having 
obtained an undamaged corpse and having washed it without allowing 
himself to feel reluctance, [such that is] well washed, the limbs smeared 
[with oil, and adorned with flowers and garlands, he should sit on its 
heart region. The caru [should be] cooked while repeating the TATTVA. 
In its mouth he should perform fire-oblations, hundreds, thousands, tens 
of thousands. Then the tongue will emerge; he should cut it off while 
uttering the mantra. That tongue will become his sword; having grasped 
it, he will become a spell-bearer. For he will live as long as moon and 
Stars with nothing to impede his movements. 


E.g. 2, Mañjusriyamū : 

yusriyamulakalpa, chapter 55, P- 713: me 
es Vetüdam sadhayitukémah akşatāħgam mrtakem grhya at 
ROUES va catuhpathe và ekalinge va sarvabhutikam balim upa Ie i 
ahadevasya daksinamürtau mandalakam upalipya balim daiya 


E Nisvasatattvasamhitg 


vg bhasmana mandalakam likhya tasya madhye pürvag;. 
haditasadhakah $uklavasasasakhayah disapalam 
= mrtakakaksopari?) wupavi$ya tasya mukhe 
tilasarsapam juhuyat. tavad yavat tasya mukha|n] manir nirgacchati. 
tam grhyatmano mukhe praksipya sarvabhütikabalim upahrtya daksinamür- 
tau sthitah haritalamanabéilafijanamafijistharocanam ekatrayam (= ° ro- 
cananam ekatamam?) grhya aévatthapatrantaritàm krtva tavaj japed 
yavat trividha siddhir iti usmayati dhumayatijvalati. iismayamane 
padapracarikam paficavarsasahasrayur bhavati. sarvasattvavaSikaranam. 
dhimayamane’ntardhanam dagavarsasahasrayur bhavati. jvalitena sarva- 
vidyadharo bhavati. 


bhyalankrtam krt 
ram sthapya $uklapatapracc 
sthapayet. krtaksasyopari ( 


Now one who desires to gain power over a vetala should take an un- 
damaged corpse, and having brought a bali-offering for all bhutas to the 
cremation ground, or to a place with one tree, or a cross-roads, or to a 
place with only one liniga, he should draw the mandala to the South side 
of the Siva’s form, and having offered the bali and adorned [the corpse] 
by washing it and so forth, he should draw a mandala with ash on its 
midriff, place it so that its head is in the East and set up protectors 
of the directions. The sadhaka should be covered in white cloth and 
accompanied by a ritual assistant clothed in white. Sitting on the torso 
of the corpse, he should oblate sesame and mustard seeds into its mouth 
until such time as its jewel[-like tongue?] should emerge from its mouth. 
Taking hold of that, he should put it into [his own] mouth, offer a bali 
for all bhutas, and standing in such a way that the form [of Siva] presents 
its Southern side (daksinamiirtau), he should take one or other the in- 
gredients yellow orpiment, red arsenic, collyrium, madder, or a bovine 
bezoar,"5 he should wrap it in asvattha leaves and then recite over it 
until [one of the] three types of siddhi should arise: it will become hots 
it will smoke, [or] it will burst into fame. If it gets hot, he can cove? 
great distances on foot, he will live for five thousand years, [and he will 
be capable of] subjugating all creatures to his will; if it smokes, he can 
become invisible, and he will have a life-span of ten thousand years ' 

there are flames, he will become the bearer of all spells (vidyadharah). 


E.g. 3, Guhyasütra 10:27ff, f. 80”: 


Japamanam eva masena purvaseva krta bhavatity evam krsnayor 
mena ekalinge yathavibhavatah (10:27) püjàm krtva devadevam 


ekata- 
vijna- 


ज 
Nie न्क prefer to translate ‘ox-bile orpiment. See GOEPPER 1993:31 and fn. 93: 
8 on the use of human and bovine bezoars in Buddhist tantric magic" 


Prolegomena & 


payet karma siddhim ca punaś ceti (10:28) dikpalà raksam me kuru 
mama krpanasya sahaibhih sahayam. daksinayam mürtau kuéavindo- 
palvistah| (10:29) ahjanamanahsilaharitalagairikarocanadyanam=6 sid- 
dhadravyāņām ekatamam grhya kapilaghrtasahasrasampatabhihutam krtva 
pradaksinavartair''? a$vatthapatrai$ caturbhih pracchadya trbhih sthapya 
daksinapaninavastabhya japet (10:30). astasahasrahomena trividhà sid- 
dhir bhavati (10:31). usme padapracarikam,"? dhiimayamane’ntardhanam 
jvalitenakasagamana|m | (10:32). | 


By reciting [the mantra] for one month the preliminary propitiation is 
accomplished. [When it has been] thus [performed] on either of the 
two dark [days, in other words on either the eighth or the fourteenth of 
the dark fortnight], at a place where there is only one liniga, he should 
perform a rite of worship in accordance with his wealth, and then he 
should inform the God of gods of the rite [he is about to perform] and of 
the power [he seeks to obtain] thus: “Protectors of the directions! protect 
and accompany me, who am pitiable, along with these [my helpers(?)]”. 
Seated on a seat of kusa grass with the South face [of the linga] mandala] 
towards him, he should take one among the various power substances, 
such as collyrium, red arsenic, yellow orpiment, red chalk and bovine 
bezoar-stones, purify it with a thousand sampata-oblations using the 
ghee from a tawny cow, wrap it with four right-hand-twisting asvattha 
leaves, set it down with three [further such leaves beneath it(?)], support 
it with his right hand and recite [mantras over it]. After one thousand 
and eight oblations [one of] three types of siddhi will arise. If it gets hot, 
he can cover great distances on foot (padapracara); if it smokes, he can 
disappear; if there are flames, he will be able to walk in the sky. 


E.g. 4, Marijusriyamilakalpa, Chapter 55, p.681: virakrayakritam 
manahsilam grhitva rajavrksasamidbhir agnim prajvalya tava] japed yavad 
agnivarnà bhavati. tatah samanavatsayah goh kapilayah kanyamathitena 
navanitena krtva tasmim ghrte nirvapayet. evam dadhipurnabhajane mad- 
hupürne ca. tatah anenaiva raksam krtva samudgake sthapya candra- 
Brahe trir&trogitena sadhatuke caitye aryamanjusriyasyagratah pujam tide 
uttarámukhenasvatthapatracatustaye sthapya tavaj japed yavad usmayati, 
dhiimayati, prajvalati. vagikaranantardhanam akasagamanam iti. 
PNE ESO C 


Um हि ahsilaharitalam 
zi n, namanahéilaharitalagairikarocanadyanam | 007 
ud Tocanadyananyanam N 
ix vartair ] em.; ° vartteh N BAN 
sme padapracarikam ] conj.; usmai pa XpaX br 


i Nisvasatattvasamhitz 


Having obtained red arsenic that has been purchased with immediate 
payment of the price asked,"9 he should cause the fire to burn with 
firewood of the rajavrksa; he should [then] recite lover the heated req 
arsenic] until it becomes the colour of fire. Then, with the fresh butter 
churned by virgins [and using milk] from a tawny cow with a calf of the 
same colour, he should make (ghee, and] in that ghee he should scatter if. 
In the same way, he should place [the mixture] in a vessel full of curds, 
and [that] in a vessel of honey. Then, having thus protected it, he should 
place it in a box and, when there is an eclipse of the moon, after he has 
fasted for three days, he should perform worship facing North in front 
of Aryamaiijusri at a caitya that has a relic. Placing it on four aSvattha 
leaves he should recite over it until it becomes hot, emits smoke or burst 
into flames. Subjection [of others], the power to disappear, or walking 
in the sky [result respectively]. 


Since, as mentioned just above, we have discussed these at length elsewhere 
(GOODALL and ISAACSON, forthcoming), we shall not examine and furnish 
parallels for the several shared features here, many of them apparently mak- 
ing their first appearance in early tantric sources (rather than in pre-tantric 
magical recipes such as those of, for example, Arthaéastra 14 and of the 
Atharvavedaparisista). Most will be at once obvious: the wrapping of mag- 
ical substances with three metals, with seven aávattha leaves, the use of à 
magical metal called puspaloha, the use of pellets to be held in the mouth 
(gudika) in order to be able to travel great distances (among other magical 
purposes), the raising of vetalas,!?° oblation into the mouth of a corpse, the 
tongue of the corpse used as a 'sword', the preference (both among Saivas 
and Buddhists) for places in which there is only one linga, the ubiquity of 
magical fire-oblations (one might expect distorted versions of Vedic fire-rites 
to have long been used in magical rites, but homas do not feature in the 
magical recipes of the Arthagastra: cf. the remarks of SANDERSON 2006:193 
on the use of fire in the Mantramarga, quoted below on p. 294), the sadha- 
ka's positioning himself to face the Southern side of the linga or caitya Of 
image, etc. 

We shall, however, underline here just one shared feature of magical 
practice that suggests the closeness of the Buddhist magic of the kriya 
tantras with that of the Nisvāsa. n ly th ion that three levels of 
siddhi may be attained by foll SM mage nue ined being 
हल EE y 1o! owing a given recipe, the level attaine 

anifestation of heat, smoke or flames. 


ETT T IE— — RE H 
Ni e sense of virakraya, see TANEMURA 2004:237-8, fn. 52. 
or a detailed recent treatment of vetalas, see DEZSŐ 2010. 


Prolegomena 83 


The three levels of siddhi are also to be found in other Buddhist tantric 
works, such as the Amoghapaáakalparaja, but the classification is extremely 
rare in Saiva literature outside the Níávasa, and we have so far found it only 
in two places. It occurs in 12ab of the 65th chapter (gudikasadhanadhikara, 
labelled as the 63rd) of the Brahmayamala: 


usma dhümo tha jvalanam tridha siddhes tu karanam 
And it is described in more detail in Sarvajrianottara 22:16c-19: 


kathitam tu pura vatsa trividham dravyasadhanam 22:16 
uttamam madhyamam caiva kanyasam ca yathakramam 
sattvikam rajasam caiva tamasam ceti tat smrtam 22:17 
jvalantam sattvikam vidyat sadhumam rajasam smrtam 
sosnam vai tamasam vidyad dravyam dravyavicaksanah 22:18 
uttistham jvalamanena sadhümena suramganah 
sosmanadráyatam yati iti te trividha gatih 22:19 


16d trividham ] conj.; strividha T334, T760 e 18c sosnam | T334, T760; 
sosmam 47852 e 18d dravyam] T; U da 7334, 1700 e 19a ut- 
tistham ] T334, T760; uttistha 47852 ० 199 sadhümena suramganah ] 
conj; sadhümena suramgana T334, T760; sadhumenasunahanah 47852 
e 19c sogmanadráyatam ] conj.; sosmano dréyatam T334, T760; sosmano drsy- 
atam 47852 e 19d te trividha gatih] em.; totrividha gatih T334, 7700; 
te trividha gati 47852 


I have previously taught you, my child, the three [levels of] sadhana 
[determined] by substance: best, middling and worst, in due order. They 
are held to be sattvika, rajasa and tamasa. [If the substance is] flaming, 
one should know it to be sattvika; if [it begins] smoking, it is held to be 
rajasa; if [it merely gets] hot, then the expert in substances should mx 
that substance to be tamasa. By [the substance] flaming, he may fly; 
by it smoking [he may obtain] celestial women; by it becoming hot, he 
becomes invisible: those are your three levels’. 


We could perhaps have included the above brief demonstration of the shared 
atmosphere of the grimoires of the Guhyasütra and the Marijuériyamülakalpa 
in our discussion of the dating of the earlier sütras of the Nisvāsa, {buen 
is evident that “shared atmosphere” is necessarily a rather fuzzy criterion 
for dating two texts to the same period, and moreover the dating of the 
Marijusriyamülakalpa is not unproblematic: the first Chinese translations 


MWR 7 Fe 
12 Aghoragiva comments: uttisthasabdena akaSagamanam ucyate. 


Nisvasatattvasamhits 
84 


ae the eighth century, but they are partial ang 
garelo ul p idm dee ens a text of more than one layer.122 
d e in conjunction with the other criteria for dating, the 
Nonetheless; is S and several chapters of the Manjusriyamilakalpa 
Se ps zs || npa and indeed seem more closely related than any other 
Ms mne par of works known to us, may be counted as a further 
gn x for our hypothesis (expressed on p. 71) that, with the addition 
essa recipes of the Guhyasütra, the four sutras of the Nigvasa had 
probably attained their current form by the seventh century. 


For the most up-to-date accoun Se - see 
For the most up-to-date account of the transmission of the Mafijuériyamülakalpa: 


012, whose remarks on the k fi 0 
= e known H oun 
: pre-modern translations are to be 
P- 59. 


SUMMARY OF THE TEXT 


Summary of the Mulasutra'?3 
Mulasutra 1: upodghata and preliminaries for worship 
The scene is set 


1:1 Assembled sages request Nandi to relate in what circumstances the god- 
dess learnt the scripture from 150919. 

1:2-7 Nandi describes the joyous assembly of divine beings and Siddhas 
on Kailasa when Devi asked to be instructed. 

1:8-11 Devi, dissatisfied with knowledge of Vedanta and Sankhya, asks to 
hear about the acarya, pupil, place and time, adhivasa, caru, the mandala, 
liberatory initiation and the TATTVA. 


The Lord's teaching 


1:12-14 The suitable acarya. 

1:15-16 The suitable Sisya. 

1:17 Appropriate places for initiation. 

1:18-19 The characteristics of the soil. 

1:20 In the morning, the practitioner should arm himself with mantras 
before worship of Siva. 

1:21 Preparation of the yagabhumi. 


Mulasütra 2: worship of Siva 


2:1-2 Preparation of the throne of worship (Ananta). 

2:3 The NAVATMAN is to be placed on the throne, al 
mantras, angamantras and GAYATRI. 

2:4 After the worship of the sakala divinity, the niskala sh 
Shipped. 

2:5-8 The offerings are listed. 


ong with the brahma- 


ould be wor- 


>. I. oss 
i KATAOKA. 
SA first version of the synopsis of this chapter was prepared by Kei Kat 


" Nisvasatativasamhitg 


2:9 One should then worship the circuits of Vidye$varas, Lokapalas ang 
assit of the Lokapalas and then cast bali-offerings in the directions. 
2:10 Circumambulation of the ground of worship, musical entertainment, 


followed by the invitation to the deity to depart. 


Milasitra 3: fire-rites and incubation 


3:1-2 The place for the fire is prepared. 

3:3 Brahma is seated in the fire-place and worshipped; kindling is put 
on the fire; the paridhi is laid out; the pranità vessel is placed to the North. 

3:4 The vessels and ladles are sprinkled and the ghee is heated and 
skimmed. 

3:5-7 The aghara offerings and the ajyabhaga offerings, followed by the 
full oblation (purnahuti) while visualising the fire as Sivagni and pouring 
into his Western face. 

3:8 The seed-syllable of fire is to be used for these rites. Afterwards, the 
siddhi-seeker may inflect the rites for attaining particular desires. 

3:9 The mantras of Siva and the cosmos are installed on to [a thread 
that embodies] the bonds. 

3:10-12b The caru is prepared and divided into three parts: one for 
the fire; one for the god, and one for the sadhakas after they have sipped 
palicagavya. 

3:12C-13 Initiands must chew a tooth-cleaning stick and then cast it and 
observe whether or not it falls in an auspicious direction. 

3:14 Reparatory oblations are prescribed in case it does not; the initiand 
then sleeps on a bed of ash in the sacrificial ground. 

315 After performing his recitation the initiand relates his dreams to 
his guru. 

3:16-17 Auspicious and inauspicious dreams. 


Mulasütra 4: vidyadiksa 


4:1-4b Instructions for drawing the round or square liberation-mandala. 
_ 44-5 The circuits of VidyeSvaras, Lokapalas and weapons of the los 
palas are to be worshipped with incense and flowers. 
a a The mandala should then be closed(?) and the fire transformed into 
4:7 Siva has two states: beyond mantra and mantra; the soul has ० 
States: mantra and [merely] sentient. 


Summary of the Mülasutra 8r 


4:8 The rite of initiation is performed for the [latter] soul: the womb is 
installed in the fire and Siva’s semen is cast into it. 

4:9 The life-cycle rites for the initiand's soul, now reborn in the fire, are 
performed, from garbhadhana to cudakarman. 

4:10 upanayana is performed. 

4:11 The formula of salutation (abhivadana) to be used by the soul who 
was reborn in the fire is given. 

412 After the abhivadana, he abandons the vrata of brahmacarya, 
bathes, and is made to marry the mantra JNANASIDDHIKUMARIKA. 

413 With her he symbolically performs domestic and Vedic sacrifices, 
before adopting the aSramas of vanaprastha and samnyasa. 

4:14 Imposition [of mantras onto the guru's hand], laying hold of the dis- 
ciple, laying the Sivahasta on the disciple's head, and cutting of the [thread 
embodying the] bonds using the brahmamantras. 

4:15-17b The bonds are offered in the fire, tadana is performed and the 
cutting of the topknot using the $IKHA. After this conclusion of the vidya- 
diksa the sadhaka is bathed with water empowered with the chosen mantra. 

4:17c-18 A list is given of things about which the sadhaka needs to know 
before embarking on sadhana. 


Mulasutra 5: muktidiksa 


5:1-2 Liberatory initiation is announced, in which the soul is raised into one 
world after another until he reaches the reality level that is without blemish. 

5:3-4 The sadhaka is linked to the world of Kalagnirudra with VAMA, 
purification is achieved with JYESTHA by means of oblations, and the soul 
is raised up to the next level, that of the hells (naraka) with RAUDRI. 


The subsequent levels with which the diksya is to be linked 


5:5-6b The patalas (7) or subterranean paradises for the deviant: Abha- 
satàla, Uttala, Sritala, Gabhastika, Siloccaya, Sarkaroccaya, Sauvarna. 
5:6c-7 On and above our earth: Bhur-loka, Bhuvalr]-loka, Svar-loka, 
Neier oe Jana-loka, B Satya-loka. 
rahmapura, Visnupura, Sivapura. a 
5:8 The piercing by te soul] of the shell of the cosmic egg (brahmanda). 
5:9ab The Satarudras. lled de- 
5:9cd The 5 ogdoads of worlds (paficastaka) and the ogdoad 0 ९ 
vayonyastaka. 


2 Nisvasatattvasamhitg 


the [12] Susivas, the 3 guru-lineages (gurupanke; 


10 The yo, astaka, 
5:10 yog: Sankhyas (tattvasarga), the world of Gahana, ang 


traya), the tattvas of the 


the [8] Vigrahas. ; ; T 
i. The [10] Sivas and the [10] Sankaras, Hari, Rudra, the 10 Isas, the 


5 Sisyas and 5 Acaryas, and the 3 Mahadevas. gang 
5:12 Gopati in the great barrier (mahagranthi), Vi$va, Trikala, Ksemiga, 


Brahmapati. : 
5:13 The soul is then placed in the Madamohas, the lineages of the sages 


(risikula), the wombs (yoni), and Vagisvari. 

5:14 Pranava, Sadhyonkara, Dhatara, Damanisa, Bhasmadeha. 

5:15ab The 8 Pramanas, 8 Vidyas and 8 Murtis. 

5:15cd 1... 

5:16-17b The [4] Rupas, [3] Saktis, 2 Vidyas, Tejisa, [the first] Dhru- 
va, Rudra, Pratoda, Manava, Ekaksa, Pingala, Hamsa in Saumya, and the 
second Dhruva. 

5:17c-18 Brahma, Darka, Dindi, Mundi, Saurabha, Pavana, Janmahara, 
Rudra, Pranita, Sukhaduhkhada, Vijrmbhita. 

5:19-21b The third Dhruva, Niraüjana, Sakti, Samskara, Modita, 
Pralamba, Visnu, Mandara, Gahana, Pravitata, Prabhava, Samaya, Ksu- 
dra, Vimala, Siva, Ghana. 

5:21cd The soul should then be placed in Rudronkara and in Sakala- 
tattva, [which is the level of] Sadagiva. 

5:22ab The union (of the initiand’s soul) with the unutterable Niskala. 


The veneration of Candiga on the day after diksa 


5:220-23 On the morrow, Candia should be venerated in his mandala with 
his five arigamantras and should receive 800 oblations. 
5:24-5 Candiga is appealed to forgive faults or omissions in the ritual. 


Mulasütra 6: the mantras 


: T Y 
6:1 The nature of mantras announced as topic. 


The mantras of the throne 


6:2 Ananta. 


= s i 4 legs: Dharma, Jñāna, Vairagya, Aigvarya. 
‘4 416 Padma and the Nine Saktis [from Vama to Manonmani]. 


Summary of the Mülasütra 39 


The mantras of Siva and his retinue 


6:5-15 The TATTVA and its eight forms: SAKALA, NISKALA, SUNYA, 
KALADHYA, KHAMALANKRTA, KSAPANA, ANTASTHA, and KANTHYOSTHA. 

6:16 The 5 brahmamantras and RETAH. E 

6:17-18 VAGISI and JNANASIDDHIKUMARIKA. 

6:19-20c The angamantras: HRDAYA, SIRAS, SIKHA, KAVACA, ASTRA. 

6:20d-22d GAYATRI and the mantras of the VidyeSas, Lokapalas and 
their weapons. 

6:22e-24b The mantras of the yaga of Candiéa: his throne, Candiga 
himself, and his five angas. 

6:24c-25b A damaged account of sakalikarana? 

6:25c-26 Four mudras mentioned but not described: bijamudra na- 
maskara, amrta, and kotimudra. 


Mulasutra 7: the benefits of knowing the Sivatattva 


7:1-2 The SIVATATTVA is the ineffable supreme Siva, it is brahman, imper- 
ishable, and if one knows it one will not be reborn. 

7:3-4 One who knows the TATTVA cannot be stained by the maha- 
patakas. 

7:5-9 He is immune to injury by others and by reciting the TATTVA he 
gains the fruits of tapas, of Soma-sacrifices, of bathing at tirthas. 

7:10-15 He attains all his desires and has magical powers. 

7:16-17 He can liberate others. 

7:18 In case of doubt he should practise yoga. 

7:19-22 The benefits of yoga combined with meditation on the TATTVA. 

7:23-5 The merits of offering hospitality to one who knows the TATTVA. 

7:26—7 What need is there of other religious practices for one who knows 
the TATTVA? 


Mulasutra 8: transmission of knowledge; acaryabhigeka 


8:1 The TATTVA should not be given to anyone. IAS 
8:2-4 The circumstances in which one should not teach the VA 
others. 
8:5-13 The circumstances in which one should teach the TATTVA. 
8:10 The selection of a suitable acarya. 


8:11 abhiseka of the suitable person with water empowered by the TA 
VA. 


TT- 


90 Nisvasatattvasamhitg 
8:12-13 In the North-East of the sacrificial ground he should confer the 
lia of office upon the new acarya. 


arapherna S 
E. The instructions to be given to the new acarya about whom to 


8:14-17 
initiate and about rules of conduct. 

8:18 A guru who flouts the rules goes to hell. 5 

8:19 The gains from studying, memorising, reciting and understanding 
the text (the last being that of becoming Siva). 

8:20 The tattvasamhita is concluded. Even just having it in manuscript 


liberates one's relatives. 


Summary of the Uttarasutra 


Uttarasütra 1: elements of the Navatman homologised with 
tattvas; arising of language; transmission of scripture 


Remarks on the structure of the corpus 


1:1-3 The first sūtra, which is part of the 5th srotas, viz. that of the Mantra- 
marga announced in Nisvasamukha 1:21, and which is called Mulasutra, 
Adisütra, Prathamasütra or Pürvasütra, has ended and now follows the 2nd 
sutra [viz. the Uttarasiitra]. 


Creation and the Navatma-mantra 


14 Devi asks whether the 8-fold Sadasiva taught earlier'?4 is self-born or 
arisen. 

1:5 Siva and his Sakti are eternal. 

1:6 From Siva and his Sakti comes forth binduka. 

1:7-8 Creation comes from Sadagiva, who is 8-fold and resides in the 9 
tativas [given below]. Above them is Sakti who is the tenth, and above Her 
is Siva. 

1:9 Devi asks how Sadāśiva is 10-fold and what the mantras of the levels 
of the cosmos are. 

1:10-12 Homologisation of 9 elements of the NAVATMAN with 9 tat 
prakrti = U; purusa =YA; niyati = VA; kala = LA; maya = MA; Vi 
= KSA; isvara = RA; Sadasiva = HA; dehavyapin is 9th; Sakti is 10 
supreme Siva is formless and unutterable. 
ad ES These tattvas arise from Sadasiva and pervade the whole 

tse: U in brahmanda; YA in tattvasarga; VA in Gahana; LA up to Go 


Vie AE 6:7-15. 


1vas: 
idya 
th; 


uni- 
pati; 


Summary of the Uttarasutra " 


MA in maya; KSA in vidya; RA up to I$vara; HA up to Sakala; dehavyapi 
in Sakti; Sakti is linked in Niskala. ; denavyapin 


Arising of language and scripture 


1:18 Devi asks how the aksaras arise and how many gurus there are. 
1:19-20b All the letters of the syllabary are shown to derive from the 
TATTVA and its eight inflections. 
1:20c-21 From them arise scripture (sastrani), all language and mantras. 
1:22-5 The arising of scripture: from Siva came forth scripture in the 
form of nada; Sadasiva understood it and taught me [I$vara?|; I redacted it 
into books; these were taught in metrical form to gods, rsis and men. 


The 28 principal scriptures 


1:26-27b Siva taught it in 10 scriptures. 

1:27c-30 Rudra taught it in a further 18. 

1:31-3 The 28 were then further divided in thousands. Further sub- 
redactions of scripture (tantra) bear the names of transmitters. 

1:34-40 List of gods and rsis who transmitted the tantra (beginning 
with Siva, 8808108, Vidyegas and Umasuta) until, in smaller redactions, it 
reached ordinary men. 

1:41 All scriptures and all mantras are born from the syllabary (matrka), 
than which there is no greater mantra. 


Uttarasutra 2: mulayaga 


2:1 Devi asks to hear about matrkayaga, since it is the root. 
2:2 The mülayàga is announced. 
2:3-7 A suitable place is selected and prepared. 
2:8 bijas (consonants) are placed on right [of the body]; the yoni (vowels) 
is placed on left; the worshipper thus becomes Siva and begins to worship 
iva. 

2:9 Short phoneme = ANANTA (throne); long one = SAKALA; the moment 
at the end of the sound = NISKALA; long phoneme used for most PS 
2:10-11 The prolated form of whichever phoneme is chosen is E 
times; these are the Vidyeévaras in the 2nd circuit; the [ordinary] long m 
is for the Lokapalas [in the 3rd circuit]; the short form is for their weapo 

[in the 4th]. Worship then homa. 


Ni$vasatattvasamhita 
92 ; 


Agnikarya 


2:12-17 Four shapes of fire-pit } 
different goals (pusti, abhicāra, etc.) are explained. Rs 
238-21 The arani is described; fire generated with it is to be purified 


with 5 samskaras and introduced into the fire-pit. । 
-3 Alternative ways of getting fire: from a crystal, lightning, forest- 


are described; their sizes and positioning for 


2:22 
fire or Vedic fire. 

2:24 Preparation of the fire-pit involving digging, placing a cross of grass, 
a curtain of grass and Brahma in it. 

2:25 Positioning and preparation of vessels. 

2:26 Rites concerning the ghee. 

2:27 Full oblation (pürnahuti); preparation and division of the caru. 

2:28-31 Laying mantras, the cosmos and bonds onto [threads that em- 
body] the bonds [and with which the initiand's soul is probably linked]. The 
bonds [to be laid on the threads?] are those of: prakrti, purusa, niyati, kala, 
maya, vidya, Iévara and 8905809; then the ganapasas; then age, disease, 
grief, hunger, thirst, delusion, etc. 

2:32-33b One should give paricagavya, the caru and the tooth-stick [to 
the initiand] to drink, eat and chew respectively. 

2:33c-35b The tooth-stick (dantadhavana) is described and the manner 
in which it falls when cast is to be used for prognostication. 

2:35cd The initiand sleeps there and recounts his dreams in the morning. 

2:36-8 Auspicious dreams. 

2:39-41 Inauspicious dreams and what to do about them. 


Uttarasutra 3: vidyadiksa 
Mandala 


3:1-2 Determining the directions by means of the asterisms Citra and Svati 
for drawing the mandala. 
3:3-8b Marking out the square mandala. 
3:80-90 One should normally block all but the Western door, but n 
Nd rites one should leave open the Southern one and for abhicara the 
orthern. 


3:90-728 Drawing the 4-doored round mandala and the 1-doored half- 
moon one. FS 

3720-13 CE the 1-doored or 3-doored triangular mandala. ॥ 

iyi he round and square mandalas are for Santi and puşti, 
crescent for Candiga and the triangle for abhicara. 


the 


Summary of the Uttarasutra E 


3:14c-16 Decoration of the mandala with triple or quintuple lines; pūjā 
3 . 


Vidyadiksa using the matrka 


3117-19 The life-cycle rites beginning with garbhadhana are performed [for 
the initiand who has been caused to be reborn in the fire]. 
3:20 Marriage, the pakayajfias, and the Soma-sacrifices are performed 
for him, and he is made to become vanaprastha and then samnyasin. 
3:21-3 paSupatavrata, Sodhana, proksana, nyasa, Sivahasta, cutting of 
bonds, striking (tadana), worship and, as the last part of vidyadiksa, cutting 
of the Sikha. 


Uttarasutra 4: daily routine, mudras, japa, nirvanadiksa 
Daily routine? 


4:1-5b Inspection of site for the pursuit of siddhi (siddhibhümi), ablutions, 
sandhyavandana, pranayama, meditation (dharanas). 

4:5c-9 Worship of Siva with certain substances for santi and pusti, and 
with others for abhicara. 


Mudras 


4:10-11b bijamudra described. 
4:11C-12b namaskaramudra. 
4:12c-14b amrta mudra. 
4:14¢-15b kotimudra. 
4:15c-18b dravyamudra. 
4:18c-19b anantasanamudra. 
4:19c-20b sakalamudra. 
4:20c-22 niskalamudra. 


Japa 


4:23c-24b mental, whispered (upamésu) and loud recitation are respectively 
for Santi, pusti and abhicara. E? 

4:24c-29b Specifications, options and use of japama/a. 

4:29c-33 Remedies when mantras do not work. 


^ Nisvasatattvasamhitg 


Uttarasadhaka 
4:33c-5 The use of an assistant worshipper (uttarasadhaka) for mudras, 
[fetching] ingredients, expiation rites... 


Materials for worship 


4:36-8 Characteristics of firewood. 


4:39-40 sruva and sruk. 
4:41-46b Miscellaneous remarks about ritual. 


Salvific initiation (nirvanadiksa) [using matrka] 


4:46c-47 nirvanadiksa may be performed using KSA to A as mantra, culmi- 
nating in linking [the initiand's soul] to the unutterable niskala. 
4:48 Alternatively, the pindaksara (viz. NAVATMAN) may be used. 
4:49-52b Liberation. 


Uttarasutra 5: siddhi and yoga 
Programme of the chapter 


5:1-2 Devi recapitulates that she has heard about the 8 divisions of the root- 
mantra (pindaksara), the 8 divisions of the alphabet (matrka), Sadasiva and 
Siva and about cosmography (prakriya). She now asks about Sakti, the yoge 
ee me a and about laksyalaksya (yoga with and without a meditation- 
ocus?). 

EX One should meditate on the tattvas—prakrti, purusa, niyati, kala, 
maya, vidya and I$a—one by one. 

5:4-5 Also Sadāśiva, “day”, “night”, the “semesters”, the “equinox” and 

a state called Saktisamarasa. 


Meditation on the tattvas 


= Four types of meditation distinguished for meditation on the ०0७ 
attvadhyana, chayadhyana, ghosadhyana and laksyadhyana. 

5:7-11 Meditation on prakrti. 

5:12-16 Meditation on purusa. 

jen Meditation on niyati using reflective surfaces. 

5:21-3 Meditation on time (kala). 

5:24-6 Meditation on maya using an effigy. 

5:27-9 Meditation on vidya involving the alphabet (matrkasiva). 


Summary of the Nayasütra S 


5:30-31 Meditation on the tattva of Iévara involvin 
two lingas in the sky, and a subtle linga above them. 

5:32-5 The goals to be attained by meditating on the 8 forms of Sadagi- 
va: SAKALA, NISKALA, SUNYA, KALADHYA, KHAMALANKRTA, KSAPANA, AN- 
TASTHA and the NAVATMAN. : 


g the sound of à bell, 


Homologisation of actions of the breath with planetary movements 


११ ८८ » ८६ 


5:36 "Days", “nights”, “semesters”, sankranti, “equinox”, and Saktisama- 
rasa announced. 

5:37 The upward breath is “day”; the downward is “night” Susumna and 
Ida are the two tubes associated with the Northern and Southern movements 
of the sun respectively. 

5:38-39b When the soul-breath is between them, that is “equinox”. 


Saktisamarasa 


5:39c-40 A mantric form of Sakti. 
5:41 Awareness of Sakti is essential. 
5:42-3 Cultivation of a sense of the pervasion of Siva (samarasya) which 
seems to correspond to the state announced with the label Saktisamarasa. 
5:44-46b Awareness of Siva as niralamba. 


Conclusion 


5:46c-9 Persons to whom the above-taught jaanayoga may and may not be 
taught. 

5:50-1 Nirvacana of the name Nisvasa. | 

5:52-54b This Nisvasottarasamhita explains what has been taught in 
the Mulasitra; hereafter the 28 samhitàs must be expounded. 

5:54cd phalasruti. 


Summary of the Nayasütra 


Nayasütra 1: the alphabet and the pa$as (pasaprakarana) 


Devi's question: 
1:1-2 The tattvas have been shown to be in the NAVATMAN, a wid the 
bonds, but how are the bonds situated in each letter of the alphabet: 


* Nisvasatattvasamhita 


Aksaras 
Iévara replies 
1:3-4 All tattvas are in A; à 


hence aksaras can burn the bonds. 
1:5-6 Devi asks how the bonds and the soul become fused and how, once 


fused, damage done to the bonds does not damage the soul. 

1:7-13 Siva explains with images (fish in water; akasa in objects, etc.) 
how the soul may be undamaged when the bonds are burnt. 

1:14 Followers of other tantras are not released from bonds. 

1:15-16 Devi asks how the 9 tattvas may be in A. 

117-20 lévara explains how all 9 tattvas find some counterpart in a 
grapheme for A (which appears to contain 5 strokes). 

1:21-24b All 50 aksaras are in A and one should in some way draw them 
after mapping out 5 points (representing the 5 strokes of the letter) 

1:24c-29 ISvara explains where the aksaras/tattvas reside in the body. 

1:30ff How to shape one’s body, or parts thereof, to become each aksara 
in turn. 

1:31 Stretch out limbs and hold arms to the sides: the body is niskala. 

1:32-33b One knee on ground, left hand out-stretched, etc.: the body is 
sakala (viz. the letter A). 

1:33cd Changing the position of the left hand, one becomes A. 

1:34-40 Graphemes for the remaining vowels are imitated by body parts 
or body positions. 

1:41-75b Ditto for the consonants. 

1:750-82b The benefits of this knowledge: control over mantras, etc. 


ll aksaras in A; all aksaras in all aksaras; 


Pasas 


1:82c-83b Devi asks about the nature of the bonds. 

1:83cd Isvara states that anugraha and tirobhava are the two ‘ponds’ of 
Sadasiva. 

1:84-86 tirobhava. 

1:87-89b anugraha. 

1:89c-92b The “bond” of Iévara: srsti, bestowing knowledge and liber 

tion, resting on earth in the form of a linga. 

1:92Cc-95c mayapasa. 

1:95d-97b kālapāśa. 

1:97c-98b niyati 


Summary of the Nayasütra 97 


1:98c-100a dehapasah: the soul (purusa) is bound by 3 gunas, the bud- 
dhi, vaikarika [= ahamhara], the tanmatras, indriyas and bhütas. 

1:100b-108 ganapasani: these are duties (mostly to punish transgressions 
of the diksita) that belong to Vidyeéa, Sanmukha, Ganapati, Nandi, Candiéa 
(103b-105b), Devi, and Hathakusmanda. ^; 

1:109-112 One cannot be released from the various passions and moral 
weaknesses of the human condition (love, anger, lust, etc.) by adhering to 
non-Saiva scripture (pasujüana). 


Nayasutra 2: the tattvas; how these (up to prakrti) produce the 
world we know (prakrtivicara) 


2:1 An obscure programme-verse for this chapter lists these topics: nama, 
tatv1(?), yoga, meditation-goals (laksa), and the arising and nature [of tatt- 
vas]. 

2:2-5 ISvara is the cause of the universe; he fills and transcends it; he is 
omniscient and omnipotent; he has many names. 

2:6 Devi asks how I$vara could act without desire (niskamah). 

2:7-8 Ivara gives the examples of the sun and magnets acting without 
desire, and asserts that binduka evolves from Siva and Sakti simply when 
the season is right. 


Emanation of tattvas 


2:10 From bindu arise the following tattvas: Isvara, vidya, maya, kala, 
niyati, purusa, prakrti. 

2:11-12 From prakrti comes buddhi; from buddhi comes ahankara (bhi- 
tadi); from bhutadi the tanmatras. 

2:13-14 indriyas + manas. 

2:15-17b The tanmatras and their relation to the mahabhitas. 

2:17c-20 All things derive from the tattvas; all may be understood from 
them and found in them; nothing exists outside them. 


Nature of tattvas from prthivi to prakrti 


2:21-2 Devi asks knowledge of the tattvas, how the prakriya is in them and 
diksa. 
2:23-30 The mahabhitas (beginning with prthivi) and where they are 
found in the body. 

2:31-52b The activities of the hand and other indriyas. 

2:52c-53d The actitivies of the manas. 


ee 


Nisvasatattvasamhis; 
98 


The ró atras in perception. 
2:53e-56 The róle of the tanma r = 
e The functions of ahankara (vaikarika). 
2:61d-83b The 8 properties of the buddhi. 
2:83c-93 The properties of avyakta (tamas, rajas, sattva). 
2:94-102 To understand all this is to be liberated, according to the 
Sankhyas, but this is not true liberation. 


Nayasütra 3: dharanas and dhyana of Sada$iva (rüpavicara) 
3:1ab Meditiations and presiding deities (dhyanadhidaivatam) of the above 
tattvas announced. 


Dharanas (the term is not used) 


3:1c-8 Meditations upon prthivi, jala, vahni, vayu, akasa and the powers 
thus obtained. 

3:9-14 Meditations upon the indriyas, including the manas, with deities 
visualised in each. 

3:15-16 Meditations upon the tanmàtras. 

3:17 Meditation upon [Rudra in] ahankara. 

3:18-19 Meditation upon [Brahma in] the buddhi. 

3:20-23b Meditation upon prakrti. 

3:23c-28 Meditation upon purusa. 

3:29-31 Meditation upon Niyati (sic). 

3:32-34b Meditation upon Kala. 

3:34c-38 Meditation upon Maya. 

3:39-41 Meditation upon Vidya. 


Visualisation of four-faced I$vara 


3:42-44a Meditation upon the Eastern face of Iévara as a yellow three-eyed 
Ardhanariga. d 
3:44b-47 Meditation upon the Southern face as a black, fanged Bahuru- 
pa (Aghora) holding a kapala and adorned with snakes and jata. di 
3:48-9 Meditation upon the Western face: white, three-eyed, holding 
aksasütra and kamandalu. 
3:50-51 Meditation upon the Northern face: two-eyed, holding bps 
water-lilies. 
3:52-4 Meditation upon an Upper figure (?), bearing trident, jat@, akga- 


E. kamandalu, Vinà(?), damaru. He should be moon-crescented, ithy- 
phallic. 


Summary of the Nayasitra 99 


3:55-8 Bell-sound meditation and meditation on 2 lingas. 

3:59-63 I$vara seen as the agent in one's heart and visualised as a warrior 
the various parts of whose body and chariot are identified with constitutive 
elements of the universe. 

3:647 The 8 mantra-forms of Sadāśiva (viz. of the breath mantricised, 
as described in Mülasütra 6:7-15) in yogic practice. 

3:68-9 Meditation with the orifices of the face blocked by thumbs and 
fingers (sanmukhankaranam) upon Sadāśiva as having 10 colours. 

3:70 The wise should ultimately reject His various forms, for they are 
secondary and He is only one. 

3:71-2 The Lord's nature (laksana) is that of a bright moon-like, light- 
ning-like, star-like light: bindu. He has 4 kalas: nivrtti, pratistha, vidya, 
Santi. 


Nayasütra 4: yoga (paramamrtasadbhavavicara) 
God as the 4 kalas 


4:1 Devi asks about nature of the kalas. 

4:2-3 The mantric identity of the four kalas: nivrtti, pratistha, vidya 
and Santi. They are Sadasiva. 

4:4 One should meditate on the group of four (CATUSKALA) as white, 
red, yellow or black for obtaining siddhis. 

4:510 The benefits of doing so. 


Yoga 
4:11 How can there be yoga when Siva is niralamba? 

4:112-14b One should seek Him not in the objects of the senses but within 
one's own body. 

4740-16 One should venerate Maheévara after adopting one of the 
asanas: svastika, padmaka, bhadra, ardhacandra, prasarita, sapasraya, añ- 
jalika, yogapatta. 

4:17-18b One should venerate earlier &caryas, turn one's eyes inward and 
break through the door into the fourth state (turyadvara). 

4:18c-25 The sensations and benefits of yoga described. 

4:26 Devi asks about the nature of Sakti, yoga [with Sakti], and the 
nature of reality tattvasadbhava. 

4:27-34 The guru must see the Sakti-laksa to be able to initiate; prepared 
and purified suitably, he should venerate earlier Siddhas, close his eyes and 
see in space the supreme Sakti as yellow, red, black and crystal. 


icd 


Nisvasatattvasamhitg 
100 


-ar-98b Benefits: after one month's practice he attains intelligence, 
b Sand health; after two he sees divinites; after six, the eight powers of 
eaut, ; alt 
lity to Siva. 
QOO OR zi may liberate other creatures by sight, voice, touch, ming 
or Er he can have any siddhi he desires; he strides through the universe; 
3 


i al to Siva. M 
* phe yoga is more powerful than knowledge; it gives power and liber- 


jon wi he need for effort. 
M वन त following teaching should be taught to one who has been a 
disciple for 12 years, or 3 if he is pure. 

4:48c-52 Siva pervades everything; so does the soul. 

4:53-55 One should therefore see Siva and the soul and all things as one; 
one becomes free of attachment and hatred. i 

4:56-8 He should see enemies and friends as equal, brahmins and dog- 
cookers as equal: everything is Siva. 

4:59-61b Vicious beasts cannot harm him; Siddhas and gods will be 
under his control. E 

4:61c-62b Success in yoga depends on [this] state of Saktisamarasa. This 
is the nature of knowledge [of reality] (asked about in 4:26). 

4:62c-66 This knowledge should only be transmitted to one who has 
devotion, is obedient, non-violent, etc. 

4:67-9 Devi recapitulates what she has heard (about the tattvas, the 
letters with which they are associated, about their cosmic hierarchy, about 
how to meditate upon them individually), and she asks how all the tattvas 
are to be seen as one. , 

4:70-1 One should visualise thus: Siva is like the navel of a wheel, with 
Sakti in the centre and with the tattvas and worlds as spokes. 

4:72-5 Visualisation (unclear) of coloured lines as tattvas to be achieved 
while staring at the sun. 

4:76 God and Sakti compared to a bubble on water. 

4:77-83 By meditating on this Sivacakra one becomes equal to Siva, ca- 
pable of liberating through a glance or touch, etc., freed of sins, in control 1 
the siddhis associated with all the tattvas, omniscient, omnipotent, capable 
of changing shape at will. 

4:84-8 How and to whom this jhanasadbhava may and may not be trans 
mitted and its superiority to sacrificial acts. 

4:89 Devi asks how the pranava is salvific. 

4:90 The Lord replies: the NISKALA, which has 8 matras and cont 
32 tattvas is salvific when meditated upon. 


ains 


Summary of the Nayasütra 101 


4:91 Devi asks how to meditate upon it. 

4:92-3 The Lord replies with an (unclear) analysis of the pranava that 
yields 8 matras that are identified with Brahma, Visnu, Rudra, Ardhacandri, 
Iga, Nada, Sakti and Siva. 


4:94-8 Analysis of the pranava to find within it the tattvas, culminating 
in the 32nd, Siva. 


Yoga 


4:99-100 Devi asks about the nature of yoga, about nadisamsodhana, about 
conquering the breaths, and about their places, colours, functions and 
sounds. 

4:101 The Lord announces his hitherto unrevealed teaching about yoga. 

4:102-3 A suitable place for yoga is described. 

4:104 Preliminary veneration of God and earlier acaryas. 

4:105 One should adopt one of the 559185: padmaka, svastika, bhadra, 
candraka, sapasraya, yogapatta, or yathasukha.'?5 

4:106—7 He should adopt the correct upper-body posture, mentally burn 
his body, transform it into Siva and then begin focussing on God using the 
10-fold path of yoga. 

4:108 One should meditate upon [Siva as]: 1) the mantra, 2) bindu, 3) 
that which is beyond (atitam), 4) nada, 5) atma, 6) jyoti, 7) vigraha, 8) 
kalpana, 9) alaksa, 10) akala. 

4:109 Yoga is also 10-fold because one begins with prakrti and ends with 

iva. 

4:110-114 Breath-control: pürana, recana, rodha (= kumbhaka) and 
suprasanta. 

4:115-118 dhàranàs of the mahabhitas in different regions of the body 
and using different numbers of udghatas. 


The Breaths 


4:119 The places in the body of the breaths prana, apana, samana, udana, 
and vyana. 
4:120-1 The colours and sounds of the same 5 breaths. 


4:122-5 The functions of the same 5 breaths. a t 
4:126-9 The positions and functions in both fe and in death of the 


other 5 breaths: Naga, Dhanañjaya, Kūrma, [and Devadatta and Krkara, 
Which are not explicitly named]. 


—a Low I pou TCU TOME NN 
125Note that this is a repetition: cf. 4:14-16. 


7४४४००८. ita 
H satativasamhitg 


essential to conquer prana first. 


120 It is 
433 paired with prana and the benefits 


4:131-6 The conquest of each breath 


of this conquest. ten | 
4:137-144b By combining mantra-enunciation with the blocking of prana, 


sometimes coupled with other breaths, in certain positions in the body, 
particular sensations and results may be attained: he may have the sense of 
tanmayatva; he may cross into others? bodies; past, present and future are 


known to him. 


Miscellaneous 
4:1440-1480 The Goddess asks about the nature of a sutra and obtains a 
mystical (and unclear) reply. 

4:148c-150b The Goddess asks an unclear question to which the Lord 
replies that all gods are mantras and all mantras are Siva. 

4:150c-158 The guru must know this to initiate; knowledge is more im- 
portant than other qualifications for the guru; the desika is no different from 
Siva. 

4:159-160 Siva-truth (Sivatattva) is rare and precious and should not be 
taught out of greed or indiscriminately. 

4:161 phalasruti. 


SOURCES AND EDITORIAL POLICIES 


For the text of the sutras of the Ni$vasa, we know of four manuscripts, 
one being a ninth-century Nepalese palm-leaf manuscript of which the other 
three are early twentieth-century apographs. One might therefore suppose 
that the three apographs could be discarded and that only the readings of 
the oldest manuscript should be reported, since it is the sole independent 
witness to the text and since, when the apographs deviate from it, this can 
only be the result of error or of twentieth-century modifications with no 
basis in an earlier transmission. But since the old manuscript is so often 
damaged around the edges, and since the apographs were all copied at a 
time when the margins were less damaged, and since, furthermore, they 
were independent copies, made by scribes with different habits of mind, it is 
useful now to be able to consult them. We could have reported their readings 
only for those portions where the reading of N, the old manuscript, was 
doubtful or invisible to us, but this would not then have given potentially 
interested readers an idea of the reliability of these witnesses. We have 
therefore recorded the readings of two of the apographs throughout; the 
third apograph, T, proved to be of such poor quality that we abandoned 
including its readings after collating just three chapters, Nayasutra 2-4. We 
have left most of its readings in the apparatus so that some data is available 
that shows how poor it is, but we have not collated it for the Mulasutra and 
Uttarasutra. 


N The old manuscript is preserved in the National Archives in Kathman- 
du (NAK MS 1-277/ vi. Saivatantre 103), but we have worked from 
the black and white microfilm of the NGMPP, Reel No. A 41/4, and 
from printouts and scans of that microfilm. Since the leaves were mi- 
crofilmed with other leaves behind them, there are occasions when it 
is difficult to be sure whether a given akgara actually belongs to a 
leaf beneath the one photographed, and we have therefore sometimes 
also had recourse to a more recent and less sharp set of colour digi- 
tal photographs. This is, on the whole, a remarkably पक 
Nepalese palm-leaf manuscript of 114 folios. It is p in painte : 
cover-boards that may or may not be as old as the text. The text ० 


Nisvasatattvasamhit 


ग्य FIRU भाथशु तया 


(a) taxkama (b) ntaraixkalpa (c) nafpadma (d) fpa 


104 


Figure 1: Examples in the old manuscript of the Nisvasa of the very rare jihvamüliya (the 
first instance seems in fact to be one of tafpa corrected to taxka) and the much commoner 


upadhmaniya. 


the Nisvasamukha begins on f.1v, and the text of the Guhyasütra ends 
on the verso of 9 now very framentary f.114. The margins, particu- 
larly on the right, are damaged throughout the text. The date and 
place of copying are not recorded, but palaeographical considerations, 
which will be explained below, lead us to conclude that it was probably 
written in the ninth century. 

According to the preliminary cataloguing sheet of the NGMPP, the 
folios are 4cm by 50cm. The oldest foliation, which was in the left- 
hand margin of each verso, is now missing entirely for the first half 
of the manuscript because of the left-hand margin having worn away, 
and recent foliation in modern Devanagari numerals has been added 
in a thick-nibbed pen in the blank bands that surround the two string- 
holes. The folios were at that time clearly not all correctly ordered and 
furthermore sometimes a recto was taken for a verso. The folios were 
subsequently rearranged and reordered and the thick-nibbed foliation 
has in some places been crossed out and replaced with a corrected fo- 
liation, sometimes on the other side of the folio, again using modern 
Devanagari numerals, but this time with a lighter ink and a slightly 
thinner nib. In one case, f. 38 in the more recent hand and f. 41 in the 
thick-nibbed hand, the thick-nibbed foliator seems to have correctly 
identified which was the verso, which he numbered, and the latest fo- 
liator has mistakenly corrected him by numbering the recto. The folio 
that preceded this one at the time of microfilming in 1970, namely 
f 37 in the most recent foliation (and f. 38 in the thick-nibbed folia- 
tion) may not have been the folio that originally preceded: we think it 
possible that a folio may have gone missing at this point. This, the™ 
would be the only major break (resulting in the loss of more than 2 
couple of verses) in the text. It is possible, however, that there 15 E 
loss, and certainly it is unlikely to have been one of several folios ® 
the oldest foliation dates from the time of the copying of the text, 95 


Sources and editorial policies 105 


lugg NAH कमाथिट sre 


(a) mabhyaset (b) tatvavit (c) kasyacit (d) nirdiset 


Figure 2: Words ending in final t in the Cambridge Páramesvara MS of 828 AD. Almost 
all end with a fully formed t, often written smaller than the other letters, with a viráma line 
beneath it; we have spotted only one instance (d) of an abbreviated form of this combina- 
tion. 


AAN HAA KAS IS, WS). 
ico Sa 2 - liman 
(a) rbhavet (b) bhavet (c) bhavet (d) yet (e) gat 


Figure 3: Instances of final t, the first three of which are all from one folio, f. 9r, of the old 
MS of the Nisvdsa, showing five different fashions of rendering the final t, which are used in 
fairly free alternation. 


it appears to do, since the original letter-numeral foliation is visible or 
partly visible for ff. 62-113 and 61 folios precede f. 62. Of course we 
cannot rule out entirely that the scribe might inadvertently have give 
two folios the same number, or that the foliation was added after the 
loss of a folio.2 At the time of microfilming, the leaves were broadly 
in the order presupposed by the latest foliation, but with one or two 
hiccoughs: the larger part of f. 114, for example, which has been bro- 
ken into two fragments, is placed after f. 44. In our edition, we have 
recorded both the foliation and the lineation of N, in order to help 
both ourselves and future readers who wish to consult the manuscript 
to find the place quickly. 

The upadhmaniya is used not infrequently, though far from consistent- 
ly, in place of visargas before unvoiced labial stops; the jihvamuliya, 
before gutturals, is used only occasionally: see figure 1. Instances of 
the use of both have simply been transcribed with visargas. 


As for the date of the manuscript, Hara Prasad SAsTRI ep 
first suggested that it might belong to the eighth il when ae ® 
scribed its lettering as ‘transitional Gupta character which may be a 


———————E Ni "r? . p 
*26For further remarks on the possible gap, see our note ad Nayasütra 4:41-42b. 


106 


Nisvasatattvasamhita 


century older than the Paramesvara Tantra copied in 859 AD’. BAGON 
(1939:3-4) spoke of it as being ‘written in p Gupta script of the 8th 
century AD' and noted (1939:4, fn. 1) that ‘[t]he Exalted Raj Gury 
Hemaraja Sarma who has handled these MSS for a long time js also 
of the same opinion GOUDRIAAN and GUPTA, however, after com. 
paring the script with that of the Paramesvara manuscript and with 
the scripts of unspecified inscriptions, retain in quotation marks Hara 
Prasad SASTRI's script-label, but judge this eighth-century date to be 
too early (1981:33-4): “It is preserved in a Nepalese Ms. "transitional 
Gupta" script which has probably been written, in our own opinion, 
not much earlier or later than A.D. 900. 


For ourselves, we tend to the view that the old manuscript belongs 
somewhere in between these two informed guesses: while we cannot 
exclude an eighth-century date, we think that it belongs somewhere 
in the ninth century. We are not sure which formal characteristics of 
the script of the fragmentary Paramesvara manuscript might have led 
Hara Prasad SASTRI to place it later than that of the old manuscript 
of the Nisvasa or whether indeed he had the opportunity to view leaves 
or images of both at the same time so as to be able to compare them 
carefully. Generally speaking, the Paramesvara manuscript appears 
to be of rougher workmanship, written less evenly, with three, four or 
five lines to a side, and on leaves that are much less regularly shaped. 
The tops of its letters also lean a little more to the left. In other 
words, the two manuscripts present several differences, but none of 
these seemed to us at first blush to point obviously to the conclusion 
that one must be appreciably older or younger than the other. We 
think them palaeographically similar, but we think that if there is 4 
S MS in date, it may be the manuscript of the Nisvasa that 18 
ter. 


Two small differences may be mentioned that might be pointers: the 
profusion of abbreviated forms for final t and final m in the old 
manuscript of the Nisvasa (see figures 3 and 5), contrasted with the 
near absence in the Paramesvara manuscript, where we find inste® 

the regularly shaped ta or ma, typically slightly smaller than standar 

size, with a virama mark beneath it (see figures 2 and 4); and the fact 
that the form of the letter ja in the old manuscript Nisvasa seems t0 
have shifted further away than it has in the Paramesvara manuscript 
from the old pan-Indian form that resembles a capital roman E 
(compare figures 6 and 7 on p.108 below). In the old manuscript ° 


Sources and editorial policies 


JPL EAS 


(a) om (b) ghattanam 


107 


Figure 4: Instances of final m in the Cambridge Paramesvara MS of 828 Ap. These seem 
always to consist of a miniaturised but fully formed ma above a virama line. 


श à à Pn. d | 
(a) tam (b)tam (c)tam (d)tam (e)tam | 


Figure 5: Instances of final m in the old MS of the Nisvasa. Both an abbreviated and, less 
frequently, a full form (c) of the miniature m above a virama are found. 


the Ni$vasa (figure 7), the once horizontal central bar of the ja has 
become just a little longer and downward tending, its upper bar has 
become a short vertical pendentive to the right of the main body of 
the letter and the upward bend in its bottom bar has become even 
more tightly flexed. These changes may be detectable as incipient de- 
velopments in the lettering of the Paramesvara manuscript (figure 6), 
but its ja could perhaps still be mistaken for a Gupta-period one (an 
example of which can be seen in our figure 8 on p. 402 below). 


As for the absolute date of the Paramesvara manuscript, we think that 
it is rather to be identified as 828 AD.127 We think that goo AD, the 
proposition of GOUDRIAAN and GUPTA might bring the manuscript of 
the Nigvasa too close to early tenth-century manuscripts, such as the 
oldest manuscript of the Kirana (NAK MS 5-893; NGMPP A 40/ 3), 
which is dated to 924 AD, and which seems to us palaeographical- 
ly more developed. Furthermore, there is another = manuscript 
that has not entered the discussion until now which seems to us really 
extremely close, in terms of palaeography, to N, and which happens 
to fall neatly in the middle of the second half of the ninth centu- 
ry. That manuscript is in the Kesar Library in Kathmandu, bearing 
accession number 699 (filmed by the NGMPP on reel C 80/7). It 
transmits the Sugrutasamhita, and the date it records (most ० 
discussed by HARIMOTO 2011:87-8 and HARIMOTO 2014) is “Sunday, 


NES OMA EU UT 
"See GOODALL 1998:xliii, fn. 97, quoting SANDERSON. 


Nisvāsatattvasamhitz 


यकह झ९ सः कर को 


(a) The palatal consonants (b) ja  (c)ja (d) ja 


108 


Figure 6: The palatal consonants, particularly JA, in the Cambridge Paramesvara MS of 


828 AD. 
थकब ॐ OO S 


(a) pujakah (b) ja (c) ja (d) ja (e) ja 


Figure 7: The more developed form of the letter JA found in the Nisvdsa MS. 


13th April, 878 C.E.. We therefore conclude this discussion by reiter- 
ating SANDERSON's judgment that N 'can be assigned approximately 
to the period 850-900 AD’. 


K Preserved in the National Archives, Kathmandu (NAK 5-2406), this 
is an early twentieth-century Nepalese apograph copy of N in Deva- 
nagari script. Once again, we have used the N epal-German Manuscript 
Preservation Project microfilm (NGMPP, Reel No. A 159/18) rather 
than the original manuscript. Like the other apographs, K has followed 
the foliation of N: it has, in other words, copied the text of one folio 
of N onto one sheet of paper, so that it too has 114 folios. It has not, 
however, followed the lineation of N. K often has a few more aksaras 
than now survive at the edges of the folios of the old manuscript. The 
scribe of K clearly thought with the text as he copied and he displays 
a tendency silently to correct what he perceived as faults of grammar 
in the original, and to fill out gaps. He has marked his suppletions 
by including them within single round brackets: ( ). When we have 
accepted into our edited text letters that are in K and that are not 
legible in N, we have enclosed them in L-shaped brackets: | | WDR 
some of those letters appear enclosed in single round brackets in B, 
then they are further enclosed in our edited text in single round brack- 
ets: | () |. After copying what is transmitted in N , the scribe has 
written the following lines at the bottom of f. 114v, revealing that he 
made the copy for Hemarājapaņdita in 1925 AD: 


Sources and editorial policies 100 


likhitam idam puratanajarattadapatralivitah samuddhrtya vi- 

kramabde 1982 pramite $ravana$uklaikada$yam samapya sa- 

mbasivaya samarpitam|(?) virajati nepalabhiimandaladhiévare 
$ripamcakasampanne tribhuvanaviravikramavarmani samabhi$a- 

sati +pam-+tad (?) dhisacive $ritritayasampanne maharajaca- | 
ndrasam$erajangabahaduraranavarmami mahamahodaye tadiyagu- 
ruvaragururajasrimaddhemarajapanditamahodayanujiiaya tadiya- 
sarasvatisadane nivesitam ca bhuyal lekhakapathakayor mude- 

Subham- mamgalam hariharau Saranikaravami- iti- śubham- 


W This slightly earlier twentieth-century Nepalese apograph copy of N in 
Devanagari is now kept in the Wellcome Institute in London: San- 
skrit MS I 33. The manuscript has been described by WUJASTYK 
(1985:151-152), who assigns it ‘Serial no. 622’ and gives the informa- | 
tion that it is ‘[s]helved at 6 41. W reproduces both the foliation and | 
the lineation of N. It, too, often has a few more aksaras at the edges || 
than now survive on the folios of the old manuscript. When we have || 
accepted into our edited text letters that are in W and that are not | 
legible in N, we have enclosed them in single angled brackets: ( ). On | 
the whole, the scribe makes the impression of not having understood 
the text he copied, which has led to a rather larger number of "inno- 
cent" copying mistakes than are found in K and virtually no instances 
in which the scribe tried to correct the morphology or syntax of N's 
text. The folios are disordered. After copying what is transmitted in 
N, the scribe has written the following lines at the bottom of f. 114v, 
revealing that he was a Buddhist Vajracarya and that he copied the | 
text in 1912 AD: | 


idam pustaka tarapatraguptaksarapustake drstva nepalavasi- 
bauddhasgevitavajracaryyena likhitam|| éubham|| $risamvat H 
salam iti asadha$ukla astamyam|| || 


T The existence of a third twentieth-century apograph in Rome, MS Tucci 
3.7.1, was pointed out to us in 2008 by Francesco SFERRA, who has 
described it (2008:60) and has reproduced an image of one side of its 
folios, f. 10v, juxtaposed with the same folio of N (2008:78, figs. 22-5). 
SFERRA’s description (2008:60, fn. 132) reads as follows: 
NAK 1-277 (Saivatantra 
d to produce a facsimile 
mber of lines as the orig- | 


This is an incomplete apograph of MS 
103), NGMPP A 41/14. The copyist trie 
of the original—each folio has the same nu 


Nisvasatatt sits 
110 vasamhita 


inal, and each successive line contains the same number of aksaras 
as the original. It measures 48.5cm x 9.5cm. Content: Mukhagama 
2r-318ve, Mülasütra 18vg-23v1, Uttarasutra 23v1—29rs, Nayasitry 
29rs-41r4, Guhyasutra 4774-97 ए- The MS ends abruptly in the 
middle of the prose between 14.104 and 14.105 with the follow- 
ing words, which I transcribe verbatim: atha $rotaüjanam adaya 
plaksapatraih saptabhih pithaya sahasram sampatabhihutam krtva 
sahasrabhitan ca te... 


The exact date of copying is not known, but the manuscript seems to 
have belonged to a set of ninety manuscript copies of different works in 
the Kathmandu collections that was commissioned by Giuseppe Tuc- 
CI and that he brought back with him from Nepal in 1929 (SFERRA 
2008:18-19). 


Editorial conventions 


We have maintained the conventions used for several earlier editions of Saiva 
works that have appeared in the Collection Indologie in recent years. We 
have attempted to reproduce the fragments of text in the lemmata exactly as 
they are printed in the teztus receptus and the apparatus is fully positive.28 
Each lemma in the apparatus is preceded by the verse number and a letter to 
indicate to which pada it belongs and followed by a lemma sign: |. (A spot 
(०) separates different entries within the same pàda.) There follow the sigla 
of the witnesses which read as printed. Where no witness reads as presented, 
small repairs to the text are marked em|endation|; bolder conjectures are 
marked conj[ecture]. (The difference is of course subjective.) Finally the 
variants are reported, followed by the sigla of the witnesses that give them 
and separated from one another by semicolons. A siglum with superscript ०८ 
(ante correctionem) marks readings of a manuscript before alteration (e.g. 
10००), and a siglum with a Superscript pc marks readings of a manuscript 95 
altered (e.g. N°). A single illegible syllable is signified in the apparatus with 
an anceps symbol: —. Where the scribe has marked a syllable as illegible 
to him, this may be represented in the apparatus with a raised dash e 
imitation of a convention often used in Devanagari manuscripts. In song 
places gaps have been left in the manuscripts and these are signified with 8 
LJ. Where damage to the manuscript prevents us from reading some letter 
the lacuna is signalled with an interrupted line: ---. 


[CUT aan an UI er e MRNA न ce 
A short defence of the merit iti for insten 
S of a full aratus may be found, for 
here: GOODALL 1998:cxxi. d$ ts z | 


Sources and editorial policies 


111 


On some pages, an additional register of apparatus appears above the 
main one and this extra register reports testimonia and gives information 
about parallel passages in other works. 

Three bracketing conventions that have not been mentioned above in the 
descriptions of the individual manuscripts may be signalled. 


Curly braces (( )) enclose editorial suppletions. 

Plus-marks (+ +) enclose text that can be seen to have been added 
(perhaps sometimes only a few seconds after copying what is not brack- 
eted by plus-marks). 

Crux-marks ( t) enclose text that appears to us to be irreparably cor- 
rupt. 


Editorial policies 


Rather than prepare both a diplomatic transcription and a polished edi- 
tion, which would make for a bulky volume whose extra weight would help 
readers little and would have slowed the editors down considerably;?9 we 
have tried to combine what is required from both into a single edition. This 
means that a certain number of non-standard orthographies are retained as 
they appear in the early manuscript (doubled sibilants, for example, where 
in a modern edition one would expect a visarga followed by a sibilant, a 
homorganic nasal where a modern editor would normally print an anusvara, 
etc.) and yet at the same time the text deviates from what is transmitted 
whenever a conjecture is adopted. With such an approach, total consisten- 
cy cannot easily be attained. At one time we decided therefore to try to 
normalise orthography in line with widespread modern typographical prac- 
tices throughout, for instance by replacing doubled consonants in ligatures 
with semi-vowels with single ones, by replacing double sibilants with visar- 
ga plus sibilant, by replacing some anusvaras with homorganic 3 and 
some homorganic nasals with anusvaras and so forth. But we soon realised 
that such a policy also raised difficulties, for we found that we were often 
not sure whether we were dealing with an orthographic habit or an authorial 
aisa usage. For instance, masculine, accusative plurals regularly appear with 
à final anusvara instead of a final n (e.g. puspam in Mulasutra 1:5b, idhmām 
in Mūlasūtra 3:3c, yajãām in Mūlasūtra 6:18d). Are these all instances of 
an authorial peculiarity? Or are all of them transmissional? Or are only 


but it is our impression that 


eee ee Sd तोही A 
Such a format was tried for the edition of the Parakhya, they derive little 


readers do not consult the diplomatic transcription, and that, if they do, 
use from it. 


12 anan? Niévasatattvasamhisz 


some transmissional? And pronominal locatives (asmim/asmin) present, th 
ihe 


same difficulty. 

In the following attempt to list irregularities of language in the text edi 
ed in this volume there may therefore be several features that other edit i 
might choose to record as scribal rather than as authorial [ताते 


REMARKS ON PECULIARITIES OF LANGUAGE 


Lists of non-standard ‘aiga’ usages have appeared in the introductions 
to a few editions of tantric works (GOUDRIAAN and SCHOTERMAN 
1988:44-109 for the Kubjikamatatantra; GOODALL 1998:lxv-Ixxx for the 
Kirana; TORZSOK 1999*:xxvi-lxix for the Siddhayogesvarimata; GOODALL 
2004:lxxviii-lxxxvii for the Parakhya); and KISS (forthcoming) for the 
Brahmayamala; but since each text has its own idiosyncracies, the Parakhya, 
for instance, being much closer to standard Sanskrit than is the Brahma- 
yamala, an account of the language of the Nivasa (which would figure some- 
where between the Parakhya and the Siddhayogesvarimata on such a scale) 
is given below. For a more discursive account of a comparable form of aia 
language, the reader is referred to that of TORZSOK. In this less well ordered 
presentation, we have referred in footnotes to discussions of comparable ir- 
regularities in OBERLIES’ A Grammar of Epic Sanskrit (2003). This has 
the incidental advantage of highlighting both the kinds of irregularity that 
are shared with the epics and those that are not. 


IRREGULAR TREATMENT OF CONSONANTAL STEMS 


§ 1.1 stems in -in treated as stems in -i nandir badhnati in N 
1:103a.78° 


§ 1.2 nominative singular of stems in -in, -an, -vat, and + 
taking the form of the genitive singular’ jianinah (for jüanr ) 
in M 136a; kalayoginah (for kalayogi) in U 5:23b; iSvarisiddhi- 
kànksinah (for ‘kariksr) in U 5:30b; mahatmanah (for mahatma) in 
N 1:66d; dharmavatah (for dharmavan) in N 1:878; lingarüpinah (for 
lingarüpi) in N 1:91d; bāhuśālinah (for bahugalr) in N 2:58b and 


33०0६, OBERLIES 2003:94, § 3.18. In this part of this book, as in the pada-index, the 
names Mülasütra, Uttarasütra, Nayasütra have been abbreviated to M, U, N. i 
"3'These, as well as the forms cited under some of the next few headings, could all be 
considered to be cases of the "thematicization of consonant stems", which OBERLIES is 
able to treat together in a rather brief paragraph § 3.22 (2003:98-9), since the epics 
furnish fewer instances of this sort of irregularity. 


E Nisvasatattvasamhiys 


3:9१; “buddhimatah (for ebuddhimàn) in IN 2:92a; dehadharinah (ex 
conj.) in N 3:26d; brahmavedinah (for brahmaved?) in N 4:775, 


8 1.3 nominative singular of present active participle taking the 
form of the genitive singular dhyayatah (for dhyayan) in N Ben 
pathato ‘pi (for pathann api) in N 4:151b. 


8 1.4 nominative singular of present active participle taking the 
form of the nominative plural’? jvalantah (for jvalan) in N 3:6b; 
pūrayantah (for pūrayan) in N 3:7c. 


§ 1.5 other cases of stems in -in treated as thematic stems in -ina 
tarkkavadinam (apparently for accusative plural) in N 1:93b. 


§ 1.6 contractions of -in stems trailokyadarsi (for trailokyadarśinī) in 
N 3:58a; diksakari (for diksakarinah, nominative masculine plural) in 
NN 4:39b. 


8 1.7 feminine plural of stems in -in used for masculine plural 
sarvasiddhantavadinyo (m.c.'33 for sarvasiddhantavadinah) in N 


1:79C. 


8 1.8 stems in -an treated as vocalic by dropping the final n34 
karmmam (for karma) in M 3:8b, N 4:100c; brahmah (masculine 
plural) in M 6:16c; karmah (nominative plural) in M 7:10b; namena 
in U 1:33c; cüdakarmmah in U 3:18a; navatmena (for navatmana) 
in U 4:28; janme janme (for janmani janmani) in N 1:86a; namam 
(for nama) in N 2:1a; majje (for majjani) in N 2:246; karmmah 
(nominative plural) in N 2:352; vyomesu (for vyomasu) in N 4:514. 


§ 1.9 stems in -s treated as vocalic by dropping the final 535 te- 
jasannibham in M 2:2b; paricatapah (instead of paücatapàh, emery 
mative masculine singular bahuvrihi) in M 7:68; tapadibhih (for 
tapaadibhih) in M 7:27b; srote (for srotasi) in U 1:18; वदा i 
brmhitā (for Sivatejatipabrmhita) in U 1:5d; sivatejena (for १४९/१58) ¦ 

CE again OBERLIES 2003:98-9, § 3.22. 
meiri causa. This is not of course meant to suggest that other non-stendar 

MER not adopted because of metrical constraints, for they clearly typically Wer® 

€ EOM it is particularly clear that metre played a decisive réle here. 

RX irl गट OBERLIES 2003:98-9, § 3.22, and pp.88-9, § 3.70. I 

sma (for Ui : " 5 is ri 

MONIER-WILLIAMS. usman) are not included here, since the variant form is 


135R : 
or the entries under this heading, cf. OBERLIES 2003:90-92, § 3-13- 


d usages 
but 


f 
nstances ० 
ecorded by 


Remarks on peculiarities of language 115 


U 1:69, N 2:9c; anustupchandabandhena (for "chandobandhena) in U 
1:258; ricikorvarigirantas ca in U 1:382; Siracchedam (for siraáchedam) 
in U 2:380; Sire (for Sirasi) in IN 1:192, 1:64c; Siram (typically as an ac- 
cusative for Siras) in IN 1:41c, 1:542, 1:60c, 1:700; ^medesu (for medah- 
su) in N 2:152; teja (a pratipadika used asa nominative) in N 2:26b; 
caksubhyam in N 2:55a;13° tapām (for tapamsi, accusative plural) 
in N 2:74a; tapam in N 2:76c; tamasy[] etani (tamasya intended as 
genitive) in N 2:92c; mane (for manasi) in N 3:14d; mahatejam (for 
*tejah) in IN 4:33c; padarajam (for padarajah) in N 4:79a. 


§ 1.10 other consonantal stems treated as vocalic by dropping the 
final consonant tiryam (for tiryak) in IN 1:612, 1:716; viyam (for 
viyat) in IN 4:338; visuva (for visuvat) in U 5:4०, 5:36c, 5:38b, IN 
3:64d. 


§ 1.11 consonantal stems treated as vocalic by adding a after the 
final consonant??? atmanasya in M 7:15b; alpayusah smrtà martyah 
in U 1:40a; dhanusakrtim in U 2:20; mrdai (accusative plural?) in 
U 4:2a; sa-tvaca[h] (nominative plural) in U 4:36d; samidhah (for 
samidhah) in U 4:37b; taducchidah (for the nominative taducchit) in 
N 1:94b; apsarasopaman in N 2:72d.!3? 


8 1.12 stems in -an treated as vocalic stems in -ana adhvana in छ 
1:96, 1:14b, 1:17c.139 


§ 1.13 consonantal stems treated as vocalic by adding 1 after the 
final consonant srucim in M 3:4b, U 4:39c. 


S 1.14 locatives used as stems mürdhnim (for mürdhanam) in U 5:44b 
and N 4:117b;4? hrdistha in IN 1:272, 41138254. hrdipadme N 3:23d; 
mürdhnidvaram (perhaps) in N 4:141a and 4:142b. 


§ 1.15 ap (‘water’) declined by taking the plural = asa vocalic 
stem apabindu (for abbindu) in IN 3:28b. 


SCE OBERLIES 2003: 97, § 3.20. 
RC again, OBERLIES 2003:98-9, $ 3.22. 
Cf. OBERLIES 2003:92- -14. 

२39 Qf, OBERLIES irs ae where the only word concerned is also adhvan. : 

२4०१ the first of these cases, one could instead assume that the final m of murdhnim is 
not an accusative-marker, but rather a hiatus-breaking consonant inserted as a euphonic 
glide sound. But this will not work in the second case, where there is no following vowel. 
Cf. also the instances of anim disim in Guhyasütra 2:46 and 5:96, where the locative 
digi has become the stem from which an accusative is formed. 

"^'These could perhaps instead be taken as aluk-samasas. 


: Nisvasatattuasamhts 


§ 1.16 irregular inflection of tvac tvacasi (for tvaci, perhaps influenceg 
by vacas) in N 3:13b; tvage (for tvaci) in N 3:13d. 


IRREGULAR TREATMENT OF VOCALIC STEMS 
8 2.1 oblique cases of -u-stem nouns formed as -a-stems with the 


base of the nominative plural guravam (for gurum) in M 1:16c; 
guravasya (for guroh) in M 8:16a; jantavan (for jantün) in N 1:89d. 


8 2.2 a-stem endings on u-stem nouns bàhau (dual, for bahi) in N 
1:57b; jantave (intended as locative) in IN 2:92d. 


8 2.3 non-thematic endings on a-stem nouns japahomasu (for japa- 
homesu) in U 5:33b; ^homabhih (for ‘homaih) in N 1:78d. 


§ 2.4 neuter nouns with masculine endings’? puspam (accusative 
plural) in M 1:50; Jaksam (accusative plural) in M. 7:252; karanah 
(ez conj.) in U 1:12d; tattvah in U 1:13a and N 1:15c; puspah (nomi- 
native plural) in U 4:6c (after puspani in 4:69); dravyam (accusative 
plural) in U 4:35a; kulan (accusative plural) in U 5:54c; tapam (ac- 
cusative plural) in N 2:748; kalacatustayah in N 3:726; siddhilingah 
in N 4:35b; adibijah in N 4:942. 


§ 2.5 masculine nouns with neuter endings'43 sakalam in M 2:48; 
homam in M 3:8c, 3:13d; samskaram ucyate in M 6:25b; kalam in M 
8:9०, N 4:132c; devam sivam in U 1:5b; paurusam gabdam in U 5:148; 
tad dhumam in U 5:15c; yogam in U 5:29c, N 2:19, 4:11b, 4:101d 
(prefaced by tad); na deyam $ivasadbhavam in U 5:48c; samsayam in 
N 1:26; akaam in N 1:108 and 1:10d; letters of the alphabet such as 
akaram, kakaram, nakaram, etc., in N 1:40b, 1:41b, 1:43d, 1:448; 1:44b; 
1:53b, 1:55b, 1:58c, 1:58d, 1:59d, 1:64b; pasani (frequently also treat- 
ed as masculine in the immediate context) in N 1:22a, 1:818, 1:100b, 
111086; Sabdani in N 2:36b, 2:43a; sugandhani (immediately followed 
by durggandhah) in N 2:51a; dharmmàni in N 2:87c; madam in 
2:91b; vajini in N 3:59c; pratyayam in N 4:86; dhyanasadbhavam 
«s N 4:242; "jantuni in N 4:40c; jfianasadbhavam in N 4:628; 4 
sadasivam devam in N 4:97a; mahesvaram in N 4:97b; Jayam i 
4:100b; udghatam in N 4:117८. 

aE 

"On gender changes in Epic usage, which tend to be sporadic and have therefore PI^ 


sumably been resorted to for : XL. 
metrical reaso क 0 0 0 011 
२8062 previous P ino. ns, see OBERLIES 2003 


Remarks on peculiarities of language 117 

8 2.6 accusatives used as nominatives of stems other than a-stems 
devam Sivam jagatpatim in U 1:5b; divyasiddhim (for divyasiddhih) 
in N 3:67c; bindum in N 3:71d. l 


8 2.7 neuter and non-neuter nominative and accusative singulars 
used interchangeably bhrkutikaralavaktram kapali sarpabhüsitam 
in N 3:45ab.!44 


8 2.8 neuter and masculine forms used interchangeably in the case 
of nominalised adjectives mrduś ca kathina§ caiva karkkaSam 
Sitalan tatha.. etc., in N 2:44; adibijah..dirgham..trimatram in N 
4:94- 


8 2.9 neuter pronouns with masculine endings yam for yat in M 
1:70, 4:70, 6:10. 


8 2.10 masculine and feminine plurals without final visarga yajna 
sadaksina in M 7:9b; prasrta in N 1:72d; laksa in N 2:1b; a§rama- 
dharma in N 4:6c. 


8 2.11 loss of final visarga from the nominative masculine singular 
of an -s stem aceta (for acetah) in IN 3:25b. 


छ 2.12 masculine accusative plurals in -m sadaksinam in M 6:80; 
jñānamokşām in N 1:91b. Note that masculine accusative plurals end- 
ing in an anusvara are included on p.133 below as cases of irregular 
sandhi among instances of ‘final n replaced with anusvara’. 


§ 2.13 feminine accusative plurals ending in a nasal angulim in N 
1:72d; prajàm in N 1:97b; kalam in IN 4:6d; samhitam (ez conj.) in 
N 4:150d. 


§ 2.14 feminine nouns in -i treated as nouns = 1149 adityamani- 
vahniva in U 1:6c; niyatim in N 13196, 3:306; namakotibhih (m.c. for 
namakotibhih) in N 2:5a. 


. . oe ७ . -7146 vi ७ 
8 2.15 shortened nominatives of feminine nouns 1n -1 devi in IN 


1:106b. 


244 0६ course this could be presented quite differently, for instance as a case of 
tives of stems in -in treated as accusatives”. 


"45Cf. OBERLIES 2003:82-5, § 3-3- xn - 
146This could instead be classed as an instance of a feminine noun in 


one in -i, for which see OBERLIES 2003:79-82, $ 3-1- 


*nomina- 


-T being treated as 


: Nisvāsatattvasamhitz 


8 2.16 feminine nouns in -7 treated as nouns in -a devese (voca. 
tive) in M 1:150 and N 1:18c. 


8 2.17 feminines in -a treated as feminines in -I iSànaplavani in M 
138b. 


S 2.18 feminine nouns in -i or -1 treated as nouns in -ya'47 iśānyā- 
bhimukhah (for 1$anyabhimukhah?) in M 8:12b; mantrakotyah (nom- 
inative plural) in U 1:41b; devyamatrgrhe in U 2:46; vrddhyaya (in- 
strumental or ablative of vrddhya for vrddhi) in U 3:106; niyatyajaya- 
siddhisu (a tatpurusa compound) in U 5:17d; angulyas (accusative 
plural) in N 1:56a; ‘paripanthinya in IN 3:36a. 


8 2.19 feminine nouns treated as masculine/neuter'48 tattvasamhi- 
tam uttamam in M 8:10b; samyag esa samakhyato tattva-samhita- 
m-uttamah in M 8:20ab; vidya (for vidya) in U 1:11b; mantrabhasa- 
padani in U 1:21d; diksahomayoh in U 2:13d; sarvadevatavandane in 
U 4:12b; matrka (perhaps intended as an ablative singular without a 
final consonant) in U 4:51d; prakriya (intended as an ablative singu- 
lar without a final consonant) in U 4:52a; vasanad eva (for vasanaya 
eva) in U 5:13d; "sandhyatithayah (m.c., for °sandhyatithayah) in U 
5:218; drstapratyayasiddhini in U 5:35c; $usrügatatpare (for $uérüsa- 
tatpare in U 5:47d; kalikavad yatha in N 1:5d; rekhena (for rekhaya) 
in N 1:71b; matrkasadbhavam in N 1:77; matrkavedane (for matrka- 
vedanena) in N 1:79b; màtrkavijüanam in N 1:80a; dhisanat (for 
dhisanayah) in N 2:11b; °vasesu (for *vasasu) in N 2:25b; catvary etani 
Saktes tu kalāni in N 4:8cd; mahanidra[t| (ablative) in IN 4:47b; pra 
kriyabhedanam (m.c.) in N 4:682; samaih (for samabhih) in N 4:85; 
ghantikesu (for ghantikasu) in N 4:115d; dharanaih (for dharanabhih) 
in N 4:18c; khatikena (for khatikaya?) in N 4:147b. 


§ 2.20 shortening of vowels for metre'49 mayavam (for mayavan or 
mayavi) in M 8:88; vàcaya[h] (for vacayah) in N 432b;59 maya” 


वतन IE note that this sort of Stem-shift appears to be attested only for the oblique cot 
and at the seams of compounds, with one possible exception: paripanthinya in NGA 
ce may have been intended as a nominative. 
X: E e usages cited in this paragraph, particularly those in which th 
aa question is the first member of a compound, could of course instead II, for 
ances of metrically required shortening of a vowel. Cf. OBERLIES 2003: 


up terae usages treated as shortening to suit metrical requirements. 
c OBERLIES 2003:XXXII. 
Cf. OBERLIES 2003:57, 8 2.2. 


e feminine 


Remarks on peculiarities of language 119 


ja vidyaja in IN 4:81b; kalaja in N 4:81d; vamanasikaya (for vā- 
manasikayah) in N 4:114d. 


8 2.21 lengthening of the vowel in locative plurals yonisu in M 
5:13c;'9?' astasu in M 5:15b. 


§ 2.22 stems in -r treated as stems in -ara!5? dhatare in M 5:4८; 
paSutantrapranetaraih (for (^pranetrbhih) in N 1:112c. 


8 2.23 metrically induced contraction of feminine locative singular 
mayam (for mayayam) in U 1:16a. 


§ 2.24 metrically induced contraction of feminine ablative singular 
samyukta Sakteh (for samyuktayah Sakteh) in U 1:6ab and N 2:9cd. 


8 2.25 metrically induced contraction of feminine instrumental 
singular ghantika saha (for ghantikaya saha) in IN 1:38b. 


8 2.26 metrically induced lengthening of feminine instrumental 
singular gananasamkhyaya in N 1:96a. 


8 2.27 metrically induced contraction of genitive plural risideva- 
ganam (for risidevagananam) in U 1:32d. 


§ 2.28 contracted instrumental in -a sparsa (for sparSena, perhaps on 
the analogy of spr$a) in N 4:40a, 4:782; japa (for japena) in N 
4:78b.753 


§ 2.29 meaningless extension of words with -ka bindukah in U 
1:6b, N 2:9d; pürvoktakah in U 3:11b; rasatanmatrakam in N 2:12b; 
"rathyakah in N 2:33b; pitaka-varnabha in N 3:2c; pitaka, Suklaka 
and krsnaka in IN 3:15abd. 


§ 2.30 meaningless extension of nominal forms with -ti or otiose 
iti sparSaneti ca (extended locative, m.c.) in N 2:27b. 


§ 2.31 metrically induced contraction of instrumental singular i 
bhaksane (for bhaksanena) in IN 1:39b;54 matrkavedane (for matrka- 
vedanena) in IN 1:79b; ekatve (for ekatvena) in IN 4:69a and 4:69c; 


151This could instead be treated as the transfer of an “i-stem to an 9j-stem: cf. OBERLIES 
2003:82-5, § 3.3, which includes an instance of yonisu. 


152 Cf. OBERLIES 2003:88, § 3.8. T t 
153 These could be considered as ablatives lacking a final consonant. ; d with 
'54Such forms could of course instead be classed as instances of the locative used wi | 


instrumental sense. 


Nisvasatat on 
120 tuasamhita 


pute (for putena) in N 4:114d; pratyahare (for pratyaharena) in N 
4:118d; sütre (for sütrena) in N 4:146b. 


8 2.32 a semantically weakened -ante used as a locative ending? 
gopatyante in U 1:15d; i$varante in U 1:16c; Saktyante in U 1:78. 


IRREGULAR NUMBERS 


8 3.1 irregular combinations to fit metrical constraints!55 Satàny 
astau perhaps used to mean 108 in M 5:23d; tripaücaka used to 
mean ‘fifteenth’ in M. 6:4c, 6:19a. 


8 3.2 cardinals used for ordinals*5® astantam (in the sense of astaman- 
tam) in M 6:29, 6:7a; dvadasantan in M 6:2b; sadanta in M 6:26, 
6:70, 4:4० sapta for saptama in M 6:4c; sadvarna? (in the sense 
of sasthavarna’) in M 6:80; adiparica? (for adima-paricama??) in N 
4:928; sat (for sastha) in IN 4:92c. 


8 3.3 cardinals used for other adjectival forms caturviméat (used to 
mean "consisting of 24") in N 2:693; trayah (used to mean “threefold”) 
in N 4:11b. 


$ 3-4 compound forms used for ordinals dvibhinnam (in the sense 
of dvitiyabhinnam) in M 6:3b; dvicaturthasya in M 6:3c; tri- 
caturthakam in M 6:14d. 


$ 3.5 compound forms used for cardinals caturdiéi (in the sense of 
catasrsu diksu) in U 3:40; dvimasena (for dvabhyam masabhyam) 
in N 4:36b, 4:80d; ekadvitrécatuhpaiica udghataih in N 4:116cd. 


9 3.6 number-group nouns used for ordinals satka (in the sense of 
sastha) in M 6:78. 


§ 3.7 numeral adverbs used as cardinals dvirabdike (for dvyabde) in 
N 3:67d (ez conj.); trh (for trih) in ekadvitrscatuhpatica udghataih in 
N 4:11600. 


$ 3.8 number-group nouns used for cardinals ekapaficasikam (used 
in the sense of छा") in U 4:272. 


“Ot Os 20051623, इ OBERLIES 2003:116-23, § 5.1.6. 
ne example of this Phenomenon is cited by OBERLIES (2003:127-8) in § 5.2.2: 


Remarks on peculiarities of language 121 


8 3-9 uninflected cardinals astavimsati in U 1:31c, 5:53a; saptavimáati 
in U 4:27d; unaviméati in U 4:28b; ekavimáati in N 2:38b. 


8 3.10 eküna? for ekona? ekiinaparicasa[t] (for 497) in U 4:28a and N 
2:38c. 


8 3.11 dropping of final consonant in pancasat ekünapancasa in N 
2:38c; pancaga in IN 4:161c. 


§ 3.12 adverbs for stem-forms triskonan (for trikonam) in U 3:12d; 
triskalam (for trikalam) in U 4५:1०. 


8 3.13 muddled declensions caturah for catasrah in IN 1:56a;157 daśāt 
for dasabhyah in N 4:872. 


VERBAL IRREGULARITIES 


8 4.1 passive for active'59 püjyeta (for püjayeta?, in turn for püjayet?) 
in M 2:8c; yojyeta (for yojayet) in M 5:22b; badhyate (m.c. for 
badhnati) in N 1:100d, 1:101b; vaksyate (for vaksyati, or m.c. for vakti) 
in N 2:80b, 4:160b; vibhidyate in N 4:18b (?) 


§ 4.2 atmanepada for parasmaipada™® garjante and hasante in M 1:6; 
nindate in M 1:16c, N 1:107b; bhrameta (for bhramayet) in U 4:15; 
japeta in U 5:34a; dahate in N 1:3c; bhavisyate in N 1:57d; dahante 
in N 1:812; bhavate in N 3:198, 4:144a; gacchate in IN 3:38d; tapate in 
N 3:51a; pasyate in U 5:16b (?), 5:22d, IN 3:66c, 4:22d, 4:336, 4:726; 
dhyayeta in IN 4:4b. 


8 4.3 parasmaipada endings on atmanepada forms! jayati 4 
for jayate) in U 1:6b; mucyati in U 5:10d; chidyati (m.c. for chidyate) 
in N 132a; dráyati (m.c. for dráyate) in IN 1:70b, 2:92d; badhyanti 
(m.c. for baddhyante) in N 1:82c; cestati in N 2:34b; badhyati (m.c. 
for baddhyate) in N 2:49b, 2:50d; grhyet (m.c. for grhyeta) in IN 
3:70c; manyet (m.c. for manyeta) in IN 4:66a. 


'TOpzRLIES (2003124, $ 5.1.7) mentions a couple of other confusions in the declension 


of catur, but not this one. 


758 (1६ OBERLIES 2003:243-4, § 8.7.1. É 
159 OBERLIES notes the SEE of the opposition between atmanepada and paras- 


maipada in the usage of the epics (2003:131) and furnishes a list of roots which one might 
expect to be used in the parasmaipada, but that are used also or ‘instead in the atmanepada 
(§ 6.1 (b)). Those that feature in our list too are ,/dah, ,/dhya and ,/bhram. 


76०01 OBERLIES 2003:240-2, § 8.7. 


Nisvasatatty . 
asamhita 
122 | hita 


8 4.4 active or middle for passive’ kalpayet in U 2:10b; chinatt in N 
1:90; pravarttante in IN 2:358; pasyate (for dr$yate) in N 3:26b (and 
perhaps in U 5:16b?); manyamanam (intended as a passive participle) 
in N 4:55d. 


§ 4.5 lyap for ktva'?2 tapya in M 3:46; püjya in M 2:4c, 2:98, 4:6a; 
sthapya in M 3:3c, 4:8b; yojya in M 5:2c; grhya in M 8:3b. 


8 4.6 ktva for lyap'93 sakalikrtva in M 3:9c; uddharitva in M 5:4c; ud- 
vahayitva in M 6:18c; ullikhitva in U 2:248; Sivikrtva in U 2:282; 
adhitva in U 5:506; vartulikrtva in N 1:51c; sankocayitva in N 1:61a; 
namaskrtva in IN 4:178, 4:31C, 4:1040. 


8 4.7 causative for simplex! karayet (m.c. for kuryat) in M 3:3b, 
3:89, 4:14d, U 5:25b, N 1:23d, 1:36a, 1:37¢, 1:56b, 1:57b, 1:61d, 1:69b, 
1:758, 3:80, 3:62d, 4:140b; bandhayet in M. 3:90, U 2:28b; niriksayet 
(for nirikseta) in M 3:12d, IN 1:70, 1:23b, 1:39d, 1:66c, 4:72b; bhe- 
dayet in M. 5:80; dapayet in M 8:6d and 8:8d; pariksayet (for parikse- 
ta) in U 4:1b; karitam in N 2:50, 2:31d; tapito (for tapto) in N 2:7b; 
vedayate (for vetti) in IN 2:50b. 


§ 4.8 finite forms based on nominal stems vasayet (a regular form, 
but apparently used, under the influence of vasana, as though it meant 
“he should meditate”) in U 2:432. 


§ 4.9 third-person singular extended ending in -eti hareti (m.c. for 
harati) in N 1:92b; samhareti in N 3:51b. 


§ 4.10 third-person singular extended endings in -teti sidhyateti 
(m.c. for siddhyati/siddhyate) in U 5:25d, U 5:31d, and N 3:43di 
stunateti (m.c. for stunoti) in N 1:1070; kramateti (m.c. for kramate) 
in N 4:44b.165 


9 4-11 third-person singular forms used for second-person vadet 
in N 4:26a. 


Pc akh KN 
Cf. OBERLIES 2003:245, § 8.7.2. 
me: OBERLIES 2003: 283-4, § 9.7.2. 
DE OBERLIES 2003: 281ff, 8 9.7.1. 
हः Cf. OBERLIES 2003: 249ff, 8 8.8.1. ird-person 
SNote that in most cases the extended form follows another verb in the third-P 
singular and is followed by a ca (to fit the cadence of an even pada). 


Remarks on peculiarities of language E 


8 4.12 thematic endings placed on irregularly derived bases of 

athematic verbs homayet (for juhuyat) in M. 3:5b; homayitva (for 

hutva) in M. 5:89; dadet (for dadyat) in M 3:6d, 4:59: chindayet 

in M. 4:15a; grhnayet (for grhniyat) in U 2:23b; vaksyet (intended 

as an optative of vac) in U 2:35d; rundhayet (for rundhyat) in U | 
3:8d;*67 indhayet U 4:31d; homayeta (for juhuyat) in U 4:38c; grhnita | 
(ez conj., for grhniyat) in U 4:416; bandhate (for badhnati) in N 1:3c, | 
1:93b (ez conj.), 1:105b, 2:61b, 2:63a; nibandhati (for nibadhnati) 

in N 1:106b;168 grhnet (for grhniyat) in N 1:106a; grhnate (for 

grhnite) in IN 2:36b, 2:54b, 2:55d, 4:35d; moksate (for mocayati) 

in N 2:63b; abhidhyanat (for abhidhyayet?) in N 3:18c, 3:31a and 

3:42c; dhyanat (?) in IN 4:4c, 4:71a; püreta (for purayet) in N 4:110a; 

receta (for recayet) and puret (for purayet) in N 4:112ab; vimuiicayet 

(for vimuficet or vimocayet) in N 4:114¢; niruddhayet (unless this is a 

misreading of nirundhayet) in N 4:132b, 4:138b; labhyet (for labheta) 

in N 4:159b. 


$ 4-13 plural for singular (in athematic verbs) prakurvate (for pra- 
kurute) in N 1:96b, 1:106d; udirate (for udirte) in N 4:159c. 


§ 4.14 forgotten samprasarana yastvà (for istva) in M 7:7a and U 2:20; 
yasta in M. 7:9b; yastena in U 2:2b. 


§ 4.15 passive present participle calqued upon active present part- 
iciple chidyatah (for chidyamanasya, where the sense apparently 
required is that of chidyamanesu) in N 1:60. 


§ 4-16 vowel syncopation (for metre) vadyanti (for vadayanti) in M. 
1:5d. 


§ 4.17 irregular imperatives vidhih for viddhi (m.c.) in N 1:51d and 
1:60d; nibodhatah (intended as a 2nd singular imperative) in N 2:23b, 
2:39d;69 prabravihi (for prabrühi) in IN 4:69d.*7° 


= NN 
166016 OBERLIES 2003:195, who classes this as a transference of a root of class III to 
class I: 8 6.6.3.1. i 
167 OBERE 15 records the use of yrudh (class VII) as a verb of class VI in 8 6.6.7.3 
(2003:200). i f 
"A present stem bandha- is recorded, among other instance of curd eS 
class IX to class I, by OBERLIES 2003:201, § 6.6.9.1. No such transference 
for /grah. j$và: 1 
२69 Although there are no parallels for this in the other books of the Nisvasa edited here, 
we find ten similar instances of nibodhatah in the Guhyasutra. 
77०८६ OBERLIES 2003:209, § 7.2.4. 


Nisvāsatattvasamhitz 
124 2 


& 4.18 confusing the verbal bases of different wens vyavrttena 
used in the sense of vyavrtena in M 0 samasnute, x takes". 
used as though it were samasnati, “he eats , in M 7:23b; 77 utsrjet 
apparently used as if it were from ut-s and not ut-srj in N 1:65d. 


§ 4.19 other irregular verbal bases dreáyadre$yaü (for dryadrgyam) 
in U 1:13d, N 4:50b.7? 


§ 4.20 agent- and action-nouns governing objects in the accusative 
padapracaram...pradayakah N 3:10ab; purvabi jam abhidhyanat in N 
3:18¢;273 jagad vyapi caracaram in N 4:52d; jantun anugraharthaya 
(unless jantün is a compressed genitive plural?) in N 4:62d; guru- 
vakyam alamghake in IN 4:64d; Sivacakran tada dhyanat (perhaps) in 
N 4:712; kham vyapi in N 4:146d. 


ODDITIES OF CASE-USAGE 


S 5.1 frozen locative serving in lieu of various case-endings in the 
case of compounds ending in -adi madhuradau in M 1:18d; tri- 
paücakantasaptadau in M 6:4c; aranyadau in U 2:41c; sütranadau in 
U 3:238; adiparicasvaradau (?) in N 4:92a; prakrtyadau in N 4:1098. 


$ 5.2 instrumental for locative hrdayena in M 6:90; vayur ebhih sthito 
dehe in N 2:282. 


- 


§ 5.3 instrumental/dative/ablative dual used for locative 
padbhyam in N 3:10c. 


§ 5.4 instrumental plural for dative kalpayet sadhakais tatah in U 
2:27. 


: 4 
§ 5.5 instrumental for ablative mucyate...bhaksane in IN 1:397. 7 


. . 1०5, 1 2 pa 
§ 5.6 ablative for instrumental? Sastratoyavisagnibhyo...na badiy 
in M 7:21cd; giritoyavisagnibhyo in N 2:74c. 
= ll o 2020 inia aph 
For this confusion in the Mahabharata, see OBERLIES 2003:203 in the parag" 
devoted to ‘Crossings of roots’: § 6.7. 
1 27 Y ७ 
E he form adresya is also attested in Mundakopanisat 1.1:6. 
ee N 3:31a and 3:42c. 
Cf. OBERLIES 2003:326-8 in § 10 e 
2 : 3.3. ; ed 10 
"CF. OBERLIES 2003:326 in 8 10.3.3, who notes that instrumental is ६ 
ablative particularly in the plural, 'probably because of the merger of these 
Middle Indo-Aryan’, He also notes that the reverse occurs (2003:328)- 


ases in 


Remarks on peculiarities of language ds 


8 5.7 ablative for locative mamse caiva tathasthibhyo in N 2:242. 


8 5.8 locative for ablative adrstavigrahe ante sive paramakarane in U 
1:23ab. “ 


8 5.9 locative for dative? dadyad vedaparage in M 7:25; na deyam 
paradiksite in M. 8:70; vipre...ksatriye... vaigye ..Sudresu dapayet d 
M 8:6; nastikanindake in M 8:7b; sathe in M 8:7c; bandhu- 
jane...krtopakare ..na dadyat in M 8:14bcd; krtajñe ca dayāyukte dā- 
tavyam in M 8:15cd; risidevesu kirtitah in U 1:31b; darśayet...uttare 
in U 4:17cd; dadyāc cottarasadhake in U 4:34d; brahmane vrtti- 
sampanne ksatriye dharmmasiline/ vaigye caiva dayayukte śūdre 
Susrusatatpare U 5:47; dadati ca adiksite in N 1301d; ahimsake 
dayayukte guruvakyam alamghake| samsarabhayavitraste dharmma- 
४7० in N 4:64c-65b;"77 datavyan tu jitendriye in N 4:65d. 


8 5.10 locative plural for locative singular? sauvarnesu (perhaps for 
sauvarne) in M 5:6a (see note ad loc.); yonisu (perhaps for yonau) in 
M 8:30. 


§ 5.11 interchangeable use of the oblique cases of the dual? 
sadaSivasya $akte$ ca dvabhyam in U 4:49cd; ubhabhyam jighrate 
(where ubhabhyam appears to be the direct object) in N 2:51c. 


§ 5.12 genitive for dative? mlecchasyaiva tu datavyam in M. 8:86; 
patalamartyasiddhman japeta in U 5:34ab; tasya deyam .. dvada- 
Sabdanivasine in IN 4:63cd. 


§ 5.13 genitive for locative etesam yojayitva in M 5:19. 

$ 5.14 genitive for ablative mama tv abhyadhiko in IN 2:59b.779 

$ 5-15 accusative for nominative susantam niskalam devam sivam Sar- 
vajagatpatim in U 1:5ab; ükaram kutilakrtim in U 5:10b; matapitr- 
sutan daram (but perhaps this is accusative for locative) in N 1:93¢; 
vyadhimrtyuii ca (interpretation uncertain) in N 1:978. 


§ 5.16 nominative for locative muhürtasandhyatithayah (apparently 
locative, for it belongs to a list of other time-divisions that are 


Loss son hits eR D Moi 
aE OBERLIES 2003:352-3, § 10.3.7 (4). | 
wgsometimes, as in this passage, we have locatives an 
PAST OBERLIES 2003:304. 

Cf. OBERLIES 2003:304 and 358 in $ 10.3.6. 


d datives mixed together. 


126 


Nisvasatattvasamhjy= 


locative) in U 5:218; lingalinge (perhaps intended as both locative 
and dual, unless this is the locative of 8 samaharadvandva?) in U 
5:312; nabhikanthau (intended as both locative and dual!) in N 


4:1194. 


8 5.17 nominative for accusative puman (for pumāmsam) in U 5:16. 


§ 5.18 nominative for instrumental dhyeyas sada budhah (for bud- 


hena) in U 5:32d. 


8 5.19 nominative for genitive sadhakah (apparently construed with 


jayate sarvakamitvam) in M 7:20d. 


8 5.20 pratipadikas used instead of inflected forms (particularly 


nominative) pranata for pranatah in M 1:40; bhü (accusative) 
in M 10b; dantadhavana (accusative) in M. 3:12c; pürva paácima 
isorddha (locatives?) in M 3:13a; eka in M 6:28; dharma in M 6:38; 
paricadasakranta in M 6:4a; astabheda (adjective to accusative Siva- 
tattvam) in M 6:5b; koti in M 6:14a; tattvapahartun (where tattva 
must be understood as an accusative governed by apahartum) in M 
8:39; samapta (71.0. for samapte) in U 1:3c; àdityamanivahni (triple 
dvandva) in U 1:6c; agasti (m.c. for agastih) in U 1:38d; pluta in U 
2:10b; sadasiva in U 5:1c; dhama in U 5:15b; mayapratima (feminine 
accusative singular) in U 5:25b; sankranti (accusative) in U 5:366 
fakara in N 1:48c; takara...vicchinna in N 1:492; anyonya in IN 1:52b; 
vama (m.c. for vame) in N 1:63c; hiskarandhra in N 1:70c; hasti- 
sandhi in N 1:72¢; grhavahana (intended case uncertain) in IN 1:938; 
teja (m.c. for tejah) in N 2:26b; °tanmatra (nominative, m.c.) in 
2:548, 2:54C, 2:55a, 2:55c; paficagni (accusative, m.c.) in N 2:730; 
Sauca (nominative, m.c.) in N 2:86d; rasatanmatra, rapatanmatra 
and sparsatanmatra in N 3:15bed; rüpa in IN 3:26a; adityavarna 25 
apabindu in N 3:28ab; granthi in N 3:36b; bhüta tanmatra 17 
3:596; Santi in N 4:2c; Sakti (?) in N 4:33d, 4:75d; Sakty evam (for 
accusative Saktim evam, m.c.) in N 4:38d; sama (m.c., shortene 
from of the adverb samam?) in N 4:596; yogasiddhi-m-apeks ni $ 
(prātipadika treated as nominative but followed by euphonic glide) ig 
N 4:610;76० karoty anugrahecchayā (for karoty anugraham iochay™ 
unless this is an instance of double sandhi) in IN 4:78d; niskala in à 
4:90d; niyati in N 4:96a; dirgha in N 4:96b; bindu in N 4:97% 20) 
in N 4:97b; ghurughurusya? and utkrama in N 4:128b; divyakant 


a a ea 3 ५ age): 
Alternatively this could be classed as accusative for nominative (see previous Per 


Remarks on peculiarities of language 127 


N 4:1348; onkara and Jaya in N 4:156cd; apaya-m-ukto (with m as a 
hiatus-breaking glide consonant?) in N 4:160c; na deya tattvamrta 
(m.c.) IN 4:160d. í 


8 5.21 -tah used for accusative paśyati sarvatah in N 2:48d. 


ODDITIES IN WORD-FORMATION 


§ 6.1 Sivanih for Sivani, itself an elsewhere unattested expression formed 
on the analogy of Bhavani, meaning ‘spouse of Siva’ in U 1:5c. 


§ 6.2 abhicaruka instead of abhicarika (vowel dissimilation) e.g. in U 
4:6d, 4:8d, 4:9d, 4:26b, 4:37d, 4:38d, 4:41b. 


8 6.3 urddha instead of ürdhva. Like many other old Nepalese 
manuscripts, N consistently writes this word with a graph that could 
be interpreted as rddha or as rdva. MONIER-WILLIAMS records ürd- 
dha as an incorrect spelling of ürdhva. It is possible that ürddha is 
transmissional, but the possibility that it is authorial cannot be ex- 
cluded. 


§ 6.4 Prakritic vowels samopeta (for samupeta) in M 3:79, U 2:36; yo- 
jya (for yuktva) in M 5:20; sayojya for sayujya in U 4:51b, 5:50, 5:14d, 
5:29b, 5:45d, IN 3:67d and 4:5a. 


8 6.5 irregularly formed comparatives gurutari (for gariyasi) in IN 
4:632. 

8 6.6 truncation of words asta (for astaka) M. 5:90, 5:158; dusvapnam 
(for duhsvapnantam) in U 2:418; punsava (for pumsavana) in U 3:176; 
anyonyantara? (for anyonyantarita^) in U 4:17b. 

§ 6.7 irregularly formed verbal nouns lambha (for labha) in U 2:37d 
and 2:39b; homanam in U 3:19d. 


§ 6.8 rekhinr for rekha (metrically motivated stem-extension) 
daksinarekhini in N 1:19b; dvirekhini (apparently used with the sense 
of dve rekhe in apposition to grivaskandhe) in IN 1:41d; CEU 
in N 4:74b. 

§ 6.9 damstrina for damsíra (metrically motivated stem-extension) 
Sastradamstrinabhedais ca in N 3:13c- 


A Nisvāsatattvasamhitz 


० s € t 
8 6.10 icana/1éani used as an adjective COC North-Eastern’ 
isanaplavanr in M 1:18b; iganim tu di$am in M 8:12a;382 1881975011. 


mukhah (for iganyabhimukhah?) in M 8:12b. 


8 6.11 anusüya/anusüyu for anasuya/anasuyu anusiyah in M 1:555; 
éraddadhànanusüyave in M 8:15b (vowel assimilation). 


8 6.12 non-standard use of possessive suffixes dec (for rüpavàn, 
presumably under the influence of tejasvi) in IN 2:58b and 3:663. 


8 6.13 cch for ts ucchrta for utsrta (in various cases) in U 417a and in 
N 1:42a (suggesting that the unprefixed form should be read as srta 


rather than as sría). 


8 6.14 simplification of consonant clusters (e.g. ksy to ks) laksa 
(probably for laksyah) in N 2:1b; tiryatvam (for tiryaktvam) in N 
2:68b; irsalug ca (for irsyalu$ ca) in IN 2:91a; kamsah (for kamsyah) 
in N 4:121a. 


8 6.15 sambhasyam for sambhasa in N 4:21c. 


§ 6.16 non-abstract nouns used as abstract nouns samarasa (for 
samarasya) in U 5:4d, 5:36d, N 4:10, 4:61c, 4:68d; marttyas (for 
martyatvam) in IN 2:68a; jalasayinam (for jalaáayitam, or m.c. for 
jalagayanam?) in N 2:73d; samantam, samantat and gramat used 
for samantatvam, samantatvat and gramikatvat respectively in N 
2:81c-82a. 


8 6.17 redundant abstract suffixes Sivasayojyatam vrajet in U 4:51b, 
5:50, 5:29b, 5:45d; visnusayojyatam vrajet in U 5:14. 


§ 6.18 dambhana for dambhana in N 2:78d. 
§ 6.19 yodha for yoddha in N 3:60a. 


IRREGULAR COMPOUNDS 


$ 7-1 broken compounds sitottanam ürddhavaktram in M 3:62 15 PY 
sumably intended to give the sense of a single bahuvrihi: sitottanor 
dhavaktram; similarly sandhyamupasanam in U 3:80 appears to tu 
intended to convey the sense of sandhyopasanam; dravyamudré 
laksanam in U 4:15d appears in place of dravyamudralaksana™ 1 


aoe >>> C = H 
f. again the instances of isanim disim in Guhyasütra 2:46 and 5:96- 


Remarks on peculiarities of language ia 


8 7-2 compounds whose first member irregularly retains inflection 
prakrtisiddhidayakam in U 5:9b; isvarisiddhikanksinah in U 5:30b; 
matapitrsutan in N 1:93c. : ; 


§ 7-3 bahuvrīhi-compounds whose first member is an absolutive 
(lyap) nimilyaksah (for nimilitaksah) in N 4:33a. 


§ 7.4 compounds whose first member irregularly retains a stem- 
form anyattantravratan (for anyatantravratan) in N 1:106a; ma- 
hatkule (for mahākule) in N 2:57d. 


8 7.5 irregular (non-neuter) samāhāradvandvas 
angusthamadhyatarjanya (‘by thumb, middle-finger or index fin- 
ger’) in U 4:28c. 


8 7.6 bahuvrīhi-compounds ending with a possessive suffix arūpī 
in U 1:126; anivaritasammohi (ez conj.) in N 2:53a. 


8 7.7 bahuvrihi-compounds without a qualifier caracaram/ caraca- 
ràn (apparently intended to convey the sense of sacaracaram/sa- 
caracaran in M 7:4b and N 4:52d, 4:55d and 4:67b;?? akgasütra- 
kamandalum (presumably intended to convey the sense of dhrtaksa- 
sütrakamandalum) in N 3:48b and 3:52d; lakgalaksam (describing 
yogah) in IN 4:99b. 


§ 7.8 compounds in which -vicitra functions like -visega tantriva- 
dyavicitrani in IN 2:41a. 

8 7.9 dvandvas whose members are linked with a following ca — 
adyante ca (for adav ante ca) in U 4:32d; pindaksarastavargan ca in 
U 4:493; madhuramlarasam caiva in IN 2:496; atitanagatan caiva in 
N 4:143c. 


$ 7-10 inconsistent compounding of elements in a list rakta- M 
ning is that of raktani 


malyani vastrani (where the intended meaning 1S that 
malyani vastrani ca) in U 2:396; pitarakta tatha krsnà (where we 
expect pita rakta) in IN 4:348. 

8 7.11 strings of words in which the last word is in a compound- 
relation that should apply to every member lohan a uos 
sisafi ca asthimalah (‘rosaries of iron, tin, lead and bone’) in 
4:26ab. 


Sa also in U 1:13d. 


a Nisvāsatattuasamhitz 


§ 7.12 irregular cvi-formation with -s stem nouns tejibhütàh in N 
1:13¢. 

§ 7.13 irregular sandhi between the elements of compounds vaj- 
ragaigvaryam in M 6:3d; mahadhanuh (for mahad dhanuh) in N 
3:60b. 


8 7.14 use of cvi-formations when the sense does not justify their 
use amrtibhavet (“becomes immortal") in M 1:11d; nirmalikaranah 
(“that which renders clear") in U 5:53b; ekibhüutam (“as one") in N 
4:53b. 

8 7.15 vowel-lengthening between the elements of compoundsi3 
devayonyastakan in M 5:9d; gopatyante in U 1:50; tarjanyagre 
in U 4:214; nàbhyopari in N 1:414; kasthayuktani in N 2:41; 
a$vamedhayutasya (in the sense of a$vamedhayuktasya) in N 3:43b; 
asramadharma[h] in N 4:6c; sadadhikani (for sadadhikani) in N 
4:161b. 


§ 7.16 vowel elision instead of crasis damanise (for damaneSe) in M 
5:14c; candisa (with various inflections) in M 5:22d, U 3:148, N 
1:103b, 1:105b. 


§ 7.17 false vowel crasis (the result of crasis when no crasis can 
have taken place) vagest (for vagi$i), formed on the analogy of such 
words as devesi, in M 4:11b; vagendriya (for vagindriya) in N 2:308 
and 3:99. 


S 7-18 semi-vowel elision vairagaivaryam (for vairagyaiSvaryam) in M 
6:3d. 


$ 7.19 syllable elision Jagisasya (for jagadisasya) in U 1:78; "jagotpattil 
(for Jagadutpattih) in IN 2:84. 


$ 7.20 unparallelled vrddhi-derivatives artavi (from rtu, referring t0 
à menstruating woman) in N 1:104c. 


§ 7.21 compounds with numerals as second member (qualifying 
the first member) masaikena (for ekena masena) in N 3:56c- 
(2003:364) 
ut gives 00 


ords 
sof X there 


SMO oo 

iD ती excursus on ‘Nominal Composition’ (§ 10.4), OBERLIES refers 

ean c lengthening and shortening of vowels! at the seams of compounds; 
amples. Instead he refers back to a passage of his about phonetic adjustments 

meet metrical constraints (2003:XXXII-XXXIII), but the lengthenings mentione 

are instances of words such as parinaha, parivara, anücita, and so forth. 


Remarks on peculiarities of language 131 


§ 7.22 other muddled compounds?&4 kusagradvayasamyuktam (ap- 
parently in the sense of kusadvayam agrasamyuktam) in U 4:42a; 
atmotkarsabalam (with the sense of atmabalotkarsam?) in U 4:43c; 
dantasparsi (in the sense of dantair dantan yo na spréati) in N 431062; 
nasadrstigah (unless this should be emended to nasadrstikah) in N 
4:106b; anahimsah (ex conj., in the sense of ahimsah) in N 4:106c. 


PECULIARITIES OF EXTERNAL SANDHI 


8 8.1 double sandhi of -ah + u-?5 tatopari M 2:40, N 3:56d, 4:238; 
tatodvasya M 3:4c; tatoparistat M. 5:9c; tatoddhrtya M 5:136; tatod- 
dharet M. 5:14d; atorddham M 5:16c; kutotpattih U 1:18a; tatod- 
distah in N 1:696; Siropari in IN 4:22d; ahladanodvejaé ca in N 431272. 


8 8.2 double sandhi of ah + other following vowels akageva in N 
112b;96 upastho 'nandakarakah (upasthah + anandakarakah) in N 
2:34d.187 


8 8.3 double sandhi of -am + following vowel ato rthasarigrah 'ok- 
tam in U 1:40c; ekadvara "rdhacandram in U 3:12a; karoty anugra- 
hecchaya (for karoty anugraham icchaya, unless this is a pratipadika 
used as an accusative) in IN 4:78d. 


8 8.4 double sandhi of -ब + following voweP? viparitabhicaruke in 
U 4:6d, 4:8d, 4:99, 4:38d, 4:41b;189 asthimalabhicaruke in U 4:26b; 
satvacasphatitah in U 4:36d; dalahinastangulah in U 4:376; viparitab- 
hicare in U 4:40c; matrkayastakam in U 5:10; jüeyaksare in N 1:20; 
uktahankaradharmmas tu in N 2:61c; Sesanye in IN 3:70d. 


8 8.5 double sandhi of e + i purvarajye’va in N 2:82d.!9? 


8 8.6 e + a becoming ya vrajety adhah (m.c. for vrajete 'dhah) in N 
4:151b. 


384 (16 OBERLIES 2003:363: ‘Sometimes the members of compounds are arranged differ- 
ently from what would be expected in Vedic or Paninian usage... 

1385 06 OBERLIES 2003:37ff, § 1.8.4. 

१3601 OBERLIES 2003:35-7, § 1.8.8. 

M: OBERLIES 2003:34-5, § 1.8.2. 

Cf. OBERLIES 2003:40-6, § 1.8.7. E 

१891 the last couple ut mos LORE one might instead wish to class DEEP 
unanalysable idiom in which viparita need have no particular elided case-ending. 

Cf. OBERLIES 2003:47-8, § 1.8.12. 


» Nisvāsatattvasamhitz 


§ 8.7 ah + a becoming a + a (at the pāda-break)*9 japya ang: 
dīksāsu in U 5:32ab; prokta ahoratrayanani in U 5:36ab; prone 
aklesat U 5:46ab, N 4:47cd; deva anama in N 1:18ab; "samayuk. 
ta ayuktan in N 1:84cd; svargga adharmmanirayau in N 1:94cd; 
abhidhyata ajayah in IN 3:9cd. 


8 8.8 irregular sandhi of the pronoun sah'9?? so hi (for sa hi) in M 
7:248, U 5:32c, N 1:788, 3:25¢. 


8 8.9 loss of final consonant of a word This most commonly takes 

place after the long vowel of a third person optative or of a singu- 
lar ablative. In some cases, the loss of the consonant could be an error 
of transmission, as for example with abhyuksaye ca in M 3:48 (which 
could be corrected without creating metrical difficulty to abhuksayec 
ca); abhisifice tam in U 4:31b; matrka (probably) in U 4:51d; prakriya 
in U 4:52a; sankrame in N 1:3100c; vade in N 1:101¢; vatsarardha (for 
vatsarardhat) in N 4:30b; mahanidra (for the irregular ablative maha- 
nidrat) in N 4:47b; anya (for anyat) in IN 4:50b; kimci in N 4:50d; 
guhya guhyataram (for guhyad guhyataram) in IN 4:101b; Sosaye ca in 
N 4:129d; dhyaye (ez conj.) in N 431312. 
But elsewhere we find confirmation that the dropping of the consonant 
is authorial in the application of sandhi to a following word: püjaye 
‘strani in M 4:5c; and yojaye ‘igustham in N 1:732; dharaye "rigusthe 
(ez conj.) in N 4:115a; praveSaye ’nnapanani in IN 4:1238. 


§ 8.10 loss of final visarga after u before a following vowel jantu 
asesa? in M 43cd; jantu annapanasya in N 1:39ab. 


S 8.11 loss of final visarga after u and crasis with a following vowel 
vayucchvase in N 2:272. 


S 8.12 loss of final visarga after u without lengthening in front of 
a following r ahu rasa? in N 2:12ab. 


8 8.13 loss of final visarga before sibilants jantu (this could squad 
be classed as the use of à pratipadika for a nominative) in U 67879 
prokta samhitah in U 5:53ab.193 

ia 8 
* Cf. OBERLIES 2003:23, § 1.2.2, who notes that this sandhi may, but does ao 
occur between two padas. ) 

. . j : 
कक has instead & section on this sandhi involving esah: $ 1.4(2) € used 
r r instances of this may have been placed in other categories (prētip ay. 
inflected forms), or treated as transmissional errors and therefore corrected aw 


192 
193 


Remarks on peculiarities of language 133 


8 8.14 otiose additional final visarga kadacanah in N 4:664. 


8 8.15 frozen sandhi (-o for -ah without a following voiced 
stop)*94 sarvasiddhantavadinyo (for sarvasiddhantavadinah) in 
N 1:79c; mantro ahutas tu (at the pada-break) in N 1:81cd; 
tathasthibhyo snayu° in N 2:24ab; abhyadhiko kutah in N 2:59b; 
giritoyavisagnibhyo praharo? in N 2:74cd; apanno karoti in N 2:78ab; 
duhkhartto-m-atate in IN 2:89b; dhyatavyo siddhim in N 3:17b; 
pravarttanto icchaya in N 3:61cd; bandho sarvañ in N 3:62ab. 


8 8.16 final n replaced with anusvara 295 kasmim in M. 1:1c; puspàm 
(intended as accusative plural) in M 1:5b; idhmàm (accusative plural) 
in M 3:3c; pasam (accusative plural) in M 3:9d; devacaryadvijam 
(accusative plural) in M. 3:69; yajed yajñām pakadyam (accusative 
plural) in M 4:13ab; laksam (accusative plural) in M 7:25a; mayavam 
(for mayavan) in M 8:8a; svapnam in U 2:35d; mantram (accusative 
plural) in U 4:31c; dravyàm (accusative plural) in U 4:35a; parid- 
ral) in IN 1:80b; daram (accusative plural) in N 1:93¢; °lingastham 
(accusative plural) in N 1:107¢; nagadyam pranasamyuktam (ex conj.) 
in N 4:132b. Note that the rare use of a masculine plural accusative 
ending in m (rather than with an anusvara) appears on p.117 above. 


8 8.17 initial vocalic r or ] treated or spelled as ri or 179° ^ tatha 
risikulesu M. 5:13b; ri (for 7) in IN 1:37b; likaran and likaram in N 
1:38ab; ritukalam in IN 2:9a; riksah in IN 4:57b. 


8 8.18 ri spelled as r asrtah in N 2:55d;9' “trkesu in N 4:95b; 
dvatrmsakah in N 4:982; trh (for trih) in ekadvitr$catuhparca udgha- 
taih in IN 4:116cd. 


8 8.19 insertion of euphonic glide sounds to avoid hiatus vaksye- 
d-asta° in M 6:5ab; tattva-samhita-m-uttamah in M 8:20; 
jaüghau-m-anyonya in N 1:52b; ya ca-m-adhogata in N 1:70d; 


"AOBERLIES records only one instance of this phenomenon, which he classes as an in- 

dence of -as before c becoming -o: $ 1.2.5 (2003:27). 
Cf. Y: :74. dii 

न ee pee: instances of hiatus between two vowels in sections vided up 
according to the vowels involved, this phenomenon is treated by OBERLIES 2003 in §§ 
1.1.2.3, 1.1.3.3, 1.1.3.7, 1.1.4.4, 1-1.4-11, 1.2.1. 

197 Again, this deviation from normal usage could of course 
authorial. 


be transmissional rather than 


n Nisvāsatattvasamhitz 


durggandhāś ca-m-asobhanah in N 2:51b; duhkhartto-m-atate i 
N 2:89b; panau-m-abhidhyata in N 3:96; manasa-d-udakena in N 
4:40b; yogasiddhi-m-apeksate (pratipadika treated as nominative) in 
N 4:61d; kham vyapi-m-ajaram in N 4:146d. 


8 8.20 hiatus in mid-pada'9? ca urvi in M 139b; adhyapayitya etam 
in M 8:09; samjnamatrena uttare in U 4:17d; tu indhayet U 4:31d; 
aksare aksare in N 1:16c; evan te aksaras sarve in N 1:80¢; ca adiksite 
in N 1:101d; anyany api ayuktani in IN 2:77c; ajayah bahusalinah in 
N 3:9d; bhütani adibijas tu in N 4:94a. 


8 8.21 shortening of initial 1 after a vowel? ..nitvà iSanyabhimukhah 
in M 8:12ab. 


§ 8.22 elision of case-endings tattvapahartum (= tattvam apahartum, 
‘in order to steal the truth/TATTVA’) in M 8:ga;199 sadhyamantrabhi- 
sekam (= sadhyamantrenabhisekam) in U 3:242; trtiyangani calabhet 
(= trtiyenangani calabhet) in U 4:20; namaskaramalam kuryat (for 
namaskarenamalam?) in U 4:32a; pratimosirajan nyaset (for pra- 
timam usirajam) in U 4:30d; Saranapanno (for garanam apanno) in 
N 3:63c. 


§ 8.23 other elisions anadhitya ‘tha in U 5:502; tamasy’ etani in N 
2:92c. 


SYNTACTIC ODDITIES 


§ 9.1 singular for dual (nominal forms) kundalam in M 2:6c; hrd- 
gude (locative, ez conj.) in N 4:119a. 


$ 9.2 singular for plural (nominal forms) vidyeávaram and digiéva- 
ram refer respectively to the 8 Vidyeávaras and the 8 Lokapalas in 
2:98; niskasya (for niskanam) in M 7:252; sarvasandhau (for sarv- 
sandhisu) in N 4:119b; arigusthajanuhrdaye in IN 4:126a; karma tesa™ 
in N 4:126d. 


$ 9.3 singular for dual (verbal forms) prasiddhyati in U 3:27" 


heces hti pl dy h 
OBERLIES 2003 has divided up instances of hiatus between two vowels according ^ 
the vowels involved, so that they are split up across 88 1.1.1.1 and 1.1.4-11 (2003:2) ce of 
infi These might instead be classified as instances of the use of prātipadikas y iut 
i क forms (see p.126 above); one or two could perhaps instead be ER 
instances of compounding between nouns and verbs. 
Cf. OBERLIES 2003:299, 8 10.2.2(b). 


Remarks on peculiarities of language 135 


S 9.4 singular for plural (verbal forms) devadanavagandharvà 
.. dr$yate in N 4:36ab.2° 


§ 9.5 plural for dual niskamah SivaSaktayah in U 1:6d; etau...viparita’ 
‘bhicare kartavyah in U 4:40a-c. 


§ 9.6 dual for plural etau (referring to the bonds and the soul) in N 1:5c. 


§ 9-7 masculine pronouns or adjectives agreeing with neuter 
nouns??? aksarani...sthitah in IN 1:29cd; kecit pratyangarupani kecit 
tv angakrtini in N 1:30cd; purusakrtim in N 1:41b; vastvantaram...yas 
in N 2:20cd; tejas tatha samakhyatah in N 2:26c; anivaritasammohi 
ajayyah..manah (ez conj.) in N 2:52abc; rasatanmatra...samsthitah 
in N 2:54cd; manah..coditah in N 3:59d; vayusparsasamopamah 
(agreeing with pratyayam) in N 4:18d; esa..dhyanasadbhavam in N 
4:248; esa...jnanasadbhavam in 4:62a, 4:84a; sa..jagat in N 4:67bc; 
sa manah proktam (ez conj.) in IN 4:94c. 


8 9.8 masculine/neuter pronouns referring to feminine nouns 
tasya (to refer back to prakrti) in IN 3:20c. 


8 9.9 neuter qualifiers with masculine or feminine nouns svapnāñ 
caiva pravaksyami aSubhani Subhani ca M. 3:15cd; tani (referring 
back to mantrah) in U 1946 puspani pitaraktasugandhinah in U 
4:6ab; türyadvaraviniskrantam (qualifying dhüma, a pratipadika 
in lieu of a nominative) in U 515b; ekarüpam..sa prabhuh in N 
1:70ab; prasrta trini cāùgulīm (feminine accusative plural! in N 
1:72d; evan te aksaras sarve..moksadani bhavanti N 1:80c-81b; 
màyàpàéas samakhyatam in N 1:95c; sparsatanmatrasambhutam 
vayur dvigunalaksanam N 2:15cd; sthülani (qualifying Sabdan) in N 
2:39c; tapam sevanti ghorani in N 2:748; parameSah...samsthitam 
in N 4:51ab; bindumalan tu nanarekhavicitritam in N 4:72cd; 
dvàtrimáattattvasamyuktam dhyato niskala moksadah in N 4:90cd; 
asinam (applied to the yogin?) in N 4:105d; traya$ cabhyantarani 
(describing pranayamah) in IN 4:112d. 


$ 9.10 °yuktena in the sense of saha binduyuktena pranarodhan tu 
karayet (for binduna saha?) in N 4:140ab. 


St Se RR RR MA 
"Cf. OBERLIES 2003:300-1, § 10.2.2(d). — 
*°2Comparable cases to these and to those given und मा 

listed by OBERLIES 2003:292ff in his section on ‘Lack of concord betwee: 

substantive’ (§ 10.2.1). 


er the following two headings are 
ective and 


Nisvasatattvasamhiys 


136 

8 9.11 two particles of comparison where one is intended kalika- 
vad yathà in N 1:5d. 

8 9.12 anacoluthic sentences involving relative clauses2°3 mis- 


matched relative clause in M 1:13; missing correlative pronoun tasya 
in M 7:6, 7:7, 7:8 and 7:19; anacoluthic relative construction with 
a singular in one half picked up with a plural correlative in M 7:16; 
yatha ... vyavasthitah ... tani ... pravaksyami in U 1:14bc; yad dravyam 
viparita’ 'bhicaruke (here viparitabhicaruke is the entire correlative 
phrase, with viparitàh being perhaps intended as a nominative plural) 
in U 4:41; missing correlative pronoun in U 5:49; N 1:92c-93b 
(er conj); IN 3:54ab and 4:4ab: bhavet siddhih.. yo ’bhyaset/yo 
dhyayeta... (the addition of a tasya would have restored sense); N 4:6 
(the addition of a tasya restores sense). 


8 9.13 different subjects of absolutive and main verb prāśya kşi- 
ptva niriksayet in M. 3:12d.?94 


8 9.14 anacoluthic variation between singular and plural verbs in 
N 2:72-5. 


§ 9.15 other sorts of anacoluthon?^5 Ellipsis of a verbal form, such as 
drstva, in M 1:2-3; a mixture of 3rd person optatives and 2nd per- 
son imperatives may occur in the same sequence of instructions, 8$ 
in M 3:2cd, N 4:148ab; words in the nominative not built into the 
sentence, as in U 2:40cd (yanam chatram grham śayyā bhidyamanair 
na siddhyati in the sense of yanadinam bhede na siddhyati) and in 
N 2:52c (samkalpāś ca vikalpa ca); a mixture of adjectives describ- 
ing people and of action nouns all identified as adharmacestitam in 
N 2:78c-79b; a list of attributes of a man expressed as a mixture 0 
adjectives and abstract nouns in IN 2:85-87b and 2:90c-93b; a nom- 
inative as an object of a transitive verb (?) in IN 3:7; prane being 
both the logical subject of a locative absolutive and of the main verb 
nivarttate in the same sentence in N 4:17ab; a mixture of adjective 
and abstract nouns to describe the functions of vyàna in N 4:125: 


M Mr ५ 
VP READS begins his section on ‘Syntactical irregularities’ (§ 10.2) with the € 
p (2003:290) ‘t]he Epics have rather a great deal of “careless” constructions d it 18 
acoluthic...”; he then gives only one example of mismatched relative clauses i 
der that he could have given many others 
Cf. OBERLIES 2003:287-8. | 


*°5Cf. OBERLIES 2003:290-1. 


निश्वासतत्त्वसंहितायां मूलसूत्रम्‌॥ 


ऋषय AT: ll 
शिवज्ञानं परं गुह्यं कथमुक्तं स्वयम्भुवा | 
कस्मिं स्थाने श्रुतन्देव्या |प्रसादा]|द्वक्ुमर्हसि}॥ 1: 1॥ 


[नन्दिरुवाच) I 
[f. 197] कैलासशिखरासीनन्देवदेवज्नगन्नुरुम्‌ | 
ब्रह्मविष्णुसुरा: सर्वे गणाः स्कन्दपुरोगमाः॥ 1:2॥ 


ऋषयो ऽप्सरसो यक्षा नागगन्धव्वृंकिन्नराः | 
दैत्या विद्याधरास्सिद्धास्तथान्ये पुरवासिनः॥ 1:31 


केचित्स्तुन्वन्ति देवेशं केचिन्नृत्यन्ति चाग्रतः। 
केचिङ्गायन्ति ह्ृष्टास्तु केचित्प्रणत मू(र्धेनि)॥ 1:4॥ 


केचित्‌ {सामानि} [शगायन्ति केचित्पुष्पां क्षिपन्ति च। 
केचिद्यायन्ति निरता वाद्यं वाद्यन्ति चापरे॥ 1:5॥ 


सिंहनादं प्रमुञ्चन्ति गर्जन्ते ह्युत्पतन्ति च। 


11 ऊचुः] K; कार उ aa श्रुतन्देव्या ] NG); च तद्देव्या ८; श्रुतद्देव्या W 
1:1 प्रसादाद्वक्तुमर्हसि ] conj; — \; प्रसादो UK; प्रसाप Li W 1:2 °पुरोगमाः ] 
N; पुरो(ग)माः K; पुरो sur W 1:3 दैत्या] NW; यक्ष” K 1:4 मूर्धनि] Wi; 
मू < प; मूर्धभिः K 1:5 केचित्‌ सामानि] ००य/.; — N; केचिद्रमन्ति K; केचि U 
W 1:5 पुष्पां ] NW; पुष्पान्‌ K 1:6 सिंहनादं ] KW; सिंहनादम्‌ N 1:6 प्रमुञ्चन्ति ] 
NW; प्रकुर्वन्ति K 1:6 गर्जन्ते ] NW; गर्जन्ति £ 


निश्चासतत्त्वसंहितायाम्‌ 


१३८ 


हसन्ते किलकिलायन्ते नित्यप्रमुदितेन्द्रियाः॥ 1:6॥ 


न तत्र मृत्युन्न जरा न व्याधिन च दुःखिता | 
एवम्प्रमुदितन्दृष्टा देवी वचनमत्रवीतू॥ 1:7॥ 


सं।सा(रसागरे)] [अंघोरे जन्ममृत्युभयावहे । 
त्वमेव पोतभूतस्तु नान्यस्त्राता सुरेश्चर॥ 1:8॥ 


वेदान्तं विदितं देव सांख्यं वै पञ्चविंशकम्‌। 
न च तृप्ति गमिष्यामो ह्यृते शैवादनुग्रहात्‌॥ 1:9॥ 


आचार्यं च तथा शिष्यं भू कालं रज एव च। 
अधिवासञ्चरुञ्चैव मण्डलं पूजनन्तथा॥ 1: 10॥ 


आचक्ष्व देवदेवे|(श) (दी)|[4क्षां निर्वाणगामिनीम्‌। 
शिवतत्वं परञ्चैव यं विदित्वामृतीभवेत्‌॥ 1:111 


प्रेषयित्वासमयज्ञां देवो वचनमब्रवीत्‌ | 
शृणु देवि Wye यत्त्वया चोदितो ह्यहम्‌॥ 1:121 


शिवतत्वमविज्ञाय दीक्षां कुर्वन्ति ये नराः। 
दीक्षितास्ते न मुच्यन्ते देशिको नरकं ब्रजेत्‌॥ 1:13॥ 


दीक्षाभिज्ञो ऽथ त|(त्वज्ञो =) (sare: शिवपूजकः | 
सर्वेलक्षणहीनो ऽपि स गुरुः शिवतुल्यगः॥ 1: 14॥ 


श्रद्दधानो ऽनुसूयञ्च गुरुदेवाग्निपूजकः। 
अन्त्यजातो ऽपि देवेशे स तु शिष्यस्तु मोक्षभाक्‌॥ 1:15॥ 


दीक्षितो ज्ञानिनञ्जैव शिवभक्तिविवज्जिंतः | 


RE Wa 
1:6 हसन्ते ] NW; हेमन्ते # 1:8 संसारसागरे ] K; सं -- N; संसा 1 ए 1:8 सुरेशः 
x] NW; महेश्वर # 1:994] em.; देवं NW; त्वेवं K 1:9 तृप्ति ] em.; तृप्तिर NKW 
1:9 ह्यृते ] NK; होते W 1:9 शैवाद ] N; dam W; नेव (त्व)द K 1:10 आ- 
चार्य] KW; आचायं N 1:11 दीक्षां निर्वाणगामिनीम्‌ ] K; --क्षां निर्वाणगामिनी Ni 
(क्षा निर्वाणगामिनी % 1:11 यं] Nw: TEK 1:11 अमृती ] NW; अमृतीर्‌ K 
उ UIN N 1:13 देशिको ] Nw; दैशिको K 1:14 तत्त्वज्ञो प नव 
NW; ज्ञानवांञ्चैव A TUW 1:15 "नुसूयद्च ] NW; °नसूयञ्च K 1:16 


मूलसूत्रम्‌ १३९ 


निन्दते गुरवं यस्तु ब्राह्मणो ऽपि न मोक्षभाक्‌॥ 1:160 


शिवालये नदी(तीरे) (पर्व)[6ते चत्वरे तथा। 
श्मशाने वा गृहे वापि यत्र वा रमते मनः॥ 1:17। 


सितरक्तकृष्णपीता ईशानञ्जवनी मही। 
शुद्धा शल्यविहीना तु मधुरादौ चतुर्विधा॥ 1:18॥ 


अशुद्धा विपरीता च या च उर्वी भविष्यति। 
तत्वजप्तेन तोयेन सिक्ता भवति शोभना॥ 1:19॥ 


सन्ध्याकाले तु सम्‌[(प्रासते)| {कृतकृत्यो विचक्ष)(ण:)॥ 
[६19°] तत्वाङ्गैश्च सुसन्नद्धः पद्मात्कर्म्म समारभेत्‌॥ 1:201 


यागभूमिं प्रलिप्यादौ गोमयेन शुभेन तु। 
पञ्चगव्येन चाभ्युक्ष्य गन्धतोयेन वा पुनः॥ 1:21॥ 


इति निश्वासतत्वसंहितायाम्मूलसूत्रे प्रथमः पटलः खो 231 


अथातस्सम्प्रवक्ष्यामि शिवार्चनवि|(धिक्रमम्‌)| | 
{योग|पीठं स)मादध्याच्चतुर्भिच्वरणे)[शर्युतम्‌॥ 2:11 


सितरक्तपीतकृष्णैर्वतुले तेजसन्निभम्‌। 
तस्योपरि सितं पद्यं नवशक्तिसमन्वितम्‌॥ 2: 2॥ 


अनन्तपूजां निर्वर्त्यं नवात्मानं ततोपरि। 
पञ्चब्रह्मसमायुक्तं साङ्गं गायत्रिसंयुतम्‌॥ 2:3॥ 


सकलन्तु Weld तस्य पूजाम्प्रकल्पयेत्‌। 


117 नदीतीरे ] W; नदीः Ny नदी (क्षोत) K 1:18 सित° ] NK; चेत” W 138 
"जवनी NK; <वनी ow 1:20 पद्मात्कर्म्म ] NW; पंचकर्म्म £ 1:21 वा Vs 
NK; चा Saw 2:1 योगपीठं समादध्याचतुर्मिच्वरणै" ] con; ¬ A Brus 
UW 2:2 "कृष्णर ] £; "कृष्ण NW 2:2 तेजसन्निभम्‌] NW; तजः ica. 
(unmetrical) 2:2 सितं] K; सितम्‌ N(2); शिम्‌ ॥ 2:2 श्शक्ति] NK; ls 
2:3 अनन्तपूजां ] N; -न्तपूजां K; ५ पूजां ॥ 2:3 पञ्चब्रह्म° ] NW; पच्चवर्करे 


१४० निश्वासतत्त्वसंहितायाम्‌ | 


एवम्पूज्य यथान्यायन्निष्कलञ्च ततोपरि॥ 2:41 


स्वागत(श्चार्घपाद)[2श्च स्रानमाचमनन्तथा | 
पञ्चगव्येन पयसा दधिक्षीरघृतादिभिः॥ 2:51 


गन्धोपवीतं धूपं च पुष्पाणि सुरभीणि wi 
मुकुटडुण्डलक्वैव केयूरं कटिसूत्रकम्‌॥ 2:6॥ 
रल्लानि विविधार्हाणि वस्त्राणि विविधानि च। 
ध्वजादर्शपताकानि चामरं च वितानकम्‌॥ 2:7॥ 


षड्विधं च बलिं दद्यात्‌ कलशं CATIA] | 
[विधिनानेन पूज्येत पञ्चभिब्रैह्मभिबुंधः॥ 2:81 

विद्येश्वरं ततः पूज्य ततः पूज्य दिगीश्वरम्‌। 

अस्त्राणि च समभ्यर्च्य कर्म्मान्ते दिग्बलिं क्षिपेत्‌॥ 2:9॥ 


TATA कर्म्मणि चैव कृत्वा चैव प्रदक्षिणम्‌। 
वाद्यं गीतं ततः कृत्वा ब्रह्मभिस्तु विसर्जयेत्‌॥ 2:101 


इति मूलसूत्रे द्वितीयः पटलः॥ ०॥ स्रो 10॥ 


aT (are (प्र)|[ऽुवक्ष्यामि तन्‌ मे निगदतः शृणु। 
उल्लिख्य तृद्धरेद्वद्ानुद्धत्याभ्युक्षयेत्‌ पुनः॥ 3:1॥ 


चतुष्पथन्ततः कृत्वा ae स्थाप्य AAA | 
ब्रह्माण स्थापयेद्यामे कुशैरास्तरणं HEN 3:2॥ 


कुशानास्तीर्य पूर्वाग्रान्‌ अर्चनन्तत्र कारयेत्‌। 


RO es के... से 
2:4 यथान्याय ] NW; यन्यायं K 2:5 स्वागत" ] NG); ५ KW 2:6 सुरभीणि] 
£; सुरभीनि Nw 2:7 विविधार्हाणि ] nw; विविधारहानि K 2:8 पञ्चमि्रह्मभिः 
NW; ब्रह्मभिः पञ्चभिः K 2:9ततः पूज्य ] KW; तत पूज्य N 2:9 समभ्यर्च्य ] KW 
ve 2:9 दिग्वलिं ] NW; च बलिं 7 2:10तु] NW; च # 371 <2 
L] coni; «दूत्याभ्युक्षयेत्‌ N; “द्ुत्याभ्युक्षयत्‌ K; “दुत्याभ्यक्षयेत्‌ W 9 

OMT] NW; चतुःपथं K 3:2 यामे] NW; याम्ये K 3:2 कुशैः ] NÉ: ge: W 
3:3 पूवाग्रान्‌ ] K; पूर्वग्रान्‌ NW 


मूलसूत्रम्‌ १४१ 


हुत्वेध्मां परिधिं स्थाप्य प्रणीताञ्चोत्तरे न्यसेत्‌॥ 3:3) 


अभ्युक्षये च पात्राणि तापये|(च्च)| {खरुवं}[॥ख्ुचीम्‌। 
घृतं ताप्य ततोद्वास्य स्थापयित्वोत्ञ्जवेत्पुनः॥ 3:4॥ 


दक्षिणोत्तरमाघारौ आज्यभागन्तु होमयेत्‌। 
पूर्णाहुतिं ततो दद्याच्चिन्तयित्वा हुताशनम्‌॥ 3:51 


सितोत्तानमूर्द्धवक्तू त्रिनेत्रं च चतुर्भुजम्‌। 
निष्कलं हृदये तस्य ध्यात्वा पूर्णाहुतिन्ददेत्‌॥ 3:6॥ 


पूर्णाहुत्यान्तु दत्तायां शिवाग्निरिति (सि)ध्यति)। 
E. 20" पश्‌)चिमास्येन देवेशो हुविर्गृह्णाति नित्यशः॥ 3:71 


अग्निबीजेन तत्सर्वमगिनिकर्म्मंञ्च कारयेत्‌। 
यथेष्टं तु ततो होमं eder सिद्धिमिच्छता॥ 3:8॥ 


त1(त्वे)|न तु षडङ्गेन पञ्चब्रह्मयुतेन च। 
अध्वानं सकलीकृत्वा पाशां तत्वेन बन्धयेत्‌॥ 3:9॥ 


चरुञ्च श्रपयेत्‌ पञ्चाच्छालि|षष्टिकतण्डुलैः | 
[2] — प्रसृतिसंयुतैः ॥ 3:101 


घृतक्षीरसमोपेतं ब्रह्मभिस्साधयेच्चरुम्‌। 
साधयित्वा ततो ह्येकं हुत्वा देवाय कल्पयेत्‌॥ 3:11॥ 


तृतीयं साधकेभ्यञ्च पञ्चगव्यपुरःसरम्‌। 


3:3 हुत्वेध्मा ] NW; UK s परिधिं ] K; परिधि NW. 34 सुचीम्‌] NG); g: 
Wi शुचिः K 3:5 आज्य] NW; *ह्याज्य K 35 चिन्तयित्वा हुताशनम्‌] NK; 
चित्त £ हुतासनं w 3:7 शिवाग्निरिति सि] w; शिवाग्निरिति N; शिवाग्निरिति 
PK 3:7 पञ्चिमास्येन] ७7; --चिमास्येन N; (पञ्चिमास्ये)न £ 3» देवेशो] NK; 
देवेशा W 3:8 “कर्म ] NW; कर्म £ 3:8 कर्तव्यं] ४; कर्त्तव्य NW 3:9 त्वेन तु 
षडङ्गेन ] conj; त ऽन तु “डङ्गेन ४; त(त्वे)न तु ४ न #; त नतु ` TW 
3:9 अध्वानं ] em.; आध्वान NW; आधानं 1: 3:9 पाशां तत्वेन बन्धयेत्‌ em. aik ik 
तत्वेन बन्धयेत्‌ N (tops missing); यासां तत्वेन चत्वयेत्‌ W; पासान्तत्त्वेन बन्ध E 
3:10 चरुश्च श्रपयेत्‌ ] N; चरुं च श्रपयम्‌ W; WEN श्रपयेत्‌ K तय ० “ 
£; ~ N; "सश्किम uW 3:11 ह्येकं ] conj.; ह्येवं NW; देवं K 


१४२ 
दन्तधावन सक्षीरं प्राश्य fara निरीक्षयेत्‌॥ 3:121 


पूर्वपश्चिम ईशोद्धं उत्तरस्यां तु शोभनम्‌ | 
अन्यस्यामशुभं चैव होमं (तस्य) {शतं भवेत्‌)॥ 3:13 


[| एवं होमपवित्रै्ज ढुःस्वप्रस्य च दर्शने | 
भस्मशय्यासमारूढो यागभूमौ स्वपेङ्ुधः॥ 3: 14॥ 


प्रभाते कृतजाप्यस्तु गुरोः स्वप्नान्निवेदयेत्‌ | 
स्वप्राच्चैव प्रवक्ष्यामि अशुभानि शुभानि च॥ 3:15॥ 


देवाचार्यद्विजां गावो नरेन्द्रं श्वेतवाससम्‌। 
दृष्टा सिध्यति स्वप्नान्ते गजपर्वतरोहणम्‌॥ 3: 16॥ 


GUE (Vea {चैव पा}[4]तालं विशते यदा। 
तैलाभ्यङ्गं तथोद्वाहं दृष्ट्रा चैव न सिद्धति॥ 3: 17॥ 


इति मूलसूत्रे तृतीयः पटलः स्रो 17॥ on 


अतः परं प्रवक्ष्यामि मुक्तिमण्डलमुत्तमम्‌। 
यन्दृष्ठा मुच्यते जन्तु अशेषपशुबन्धनात्‌॥ 4:1॥ 


वर्तुलं Aer वा सर्वकामफलप्रदम्‌ | 
एकहस्तात्समारभ्य यथाकामं समालिखेत्‌॥ 4:21 


KADER चतुर्द्वारं मध्ये पङ्कजभूषितम्‌। 
fate पञ्चरेखं वा आलिखेत्तत्वमण्डलम्‌॥ 4: 3॥ 


EST SPM, S1 TE EPR 
3:12 “धावन सक्षीरं प्राश्य ] NK; *धावन सक्षीरं प्रास्य Ww 3:13 होमं तस्य शतं भवेत ] 
coni; होम — N; U K; होमं तस्य सत UW 3:15 स्वप्नान्निवेदयेत्‌ ] NW; ani 
दर्शयेत्‌ K 3:15 स्वप्राच्चैव ] NK; स्वघ्ांच्चै ए 3:16 द्विजां गावो] NW; fat 
गाव K 3:17 खरोष्ट्ररोहणम्‌ ] K; खरोष्ट्र -- N; खरोष्ट्रोह uw 3717 तथोद्वाह ] 
NK; तथाद्वाह W 4:1 यन्दृष्टा N; यद्दृष्टा K; WqET W 4:1 जन्तु] NW; जन्तुर 
à 4:2 वर्तुलं ] KW; वर्तुलम्‌ ॥ 4:2 चतुरम्रं ] N; चतुरस्रं KW 4:2 ] 
TW; एकहस्तं K 4:3 चतुरश्रं em; --रश्नज्‌ N; चतुरस्रं KW 


एकहस्तार्त्‌ 


TESI १४३ 


त्रिवर्णकैस्त्रिरेखं स्यात्‌ wahr: पञ्चवर्णकम्‌। 
पूर्वोक्तेन विधानेन मध्ये देवं तु पूजयेत्‌॥ 4:4॥ 


विद्येश्वरान्द्वितीये तु लोकपालांस्तृतीयके | 
चतुर्थे पूजये ऽस्त्राणि गन्धपुष्पैर्यथाक्रमम्‌॥ 4:5॥ 


एवं पूज्य यथान्यायं) (द्वा)|[6रमस्त्रेण घट्टयेत्‌ | 
पूर्वोक्तेन विधानेन कृत्वा ufus शिवात्मकम्‌॥ 4:6॥ 


मन्त्रातीतस मन्त्रश्च द्विधावस्थः परः शिवः। 
मन्त्रात्मा चेतनख्चैव द्विधा च पुरुषः स्मृतः॥ 4:7॥ 


दीक्षाकर्म भवेत्तस्य योनिं स्थाप्याग्निमध्यतः। 
शिवोत्सर्ग क्षिपेत्तत्र ध्यात्वा लिङ्गे तु साधकम्‌॥ 4:8॥ 


गर्भाधानं पुन्सवनं सीमान्तञ्‌ (जातकर्मे] [६८20 च। 
निष्क्रामणन्तथा नामं प्राशनं चूडमेव च॥ 4:9॥ 


मेखलाजिनवासांसि पवित्रं दण्डधारणम्‌। 
सन्ध्याजापञ्च होमञ्च त्रिपुण्ड चाभिवादनम्‌॥ 4:10॥ 


व्योमव्यापी पिता मह्यं वागेशी जननी मम। 
सद्योजातः कुमारो ऽहमग्निस्थमभिवादयेत्‌॥ 4:11 i 


अभिवाद्य शुरु ह्येवं व्रतन्त्यत्का {तु स्राप)येत्‌। 
ST चो)द्वाहःयेद्धार्या)[१ ज्ञानसिद्धिकुमारिकाम्‌॥ 4:12॥ 


तया सह यजेद्यज्ञां पाकाद्यां आसहस्रिकां। 


4:6 WERT] NK; घ पेत्‌ W 4.8 योनि] NK; योनि W 4:8 साधकम्‌] NW; 
साधकः K 4:9 सीमान्तञ्‌ ] N; सीमान्तं ४; सीमन्तो 17 4:9 जातकर्म] ४; जातक 
UW; —N 4:9नामं] NW; नाम 4:10 TTT] N; "जाप च W; SE 
K 4:10 त्रिपुण्ड्र चा° ] K; तृपुण्डञ्चा० N; तूपुणं चा" W 4:11 व्योमव्यापी ] 124 
MATAN 4:11 वागेशी ] kw; वागीशी Kk" 4:12 गुरु AT] NW: गुरु 
चैवं £ 4:12 व्रतन्त्यत्का तु स्राप° | con; बरतन्त्यत्का — N; ATR U K; व्रत U 
W 4:18 तया सह यजेद्यज्ञा पाकाद्यां आसहस्निकां conj; तया सह यजेद्यज्ञा 

वासहस्रिका N; तया सह यजेद्यज्ञान्‌ पाकाद्यान्‌ वासहरस्रिकान्‌ K; मया सह 
पाकाड्यां वासहस्रिकां W 


1 पाकाद्यां 
ह यजेदाज्ञा 


तापस्यं च परिब्राज्यं शोधनं प्रोक्षणं तथा॥ 4: 13॥ 


न्यासमालंभनं चैव शिवहस्तं पाशकृन्तनम्‌। 
पञ्चभिब्रैह्मभिश्चैव सर्वाण्येतानि कारयेत्‌॥ 4:14 


शिवेन च्छिन्दयेत्‌ पाशं हुत्वा पूर्णाहुतिं ददेत्‌। 
ताडनं च शिखाच्छेदं शि[ख)[]या Haga: 4: 15॥ 


विद्यादीक्षा भवेद्येषा सकले योज्यदायिका। 
विद्यादीक्षासमाप्तौ तु कलशेनाभिषेचयेत्‌॥ 4: 16॥ 


शताष्टाधिकजस्तेन इष्टमन्त्रेण साधकम्‌। 
स्थानं कालं सहायं च लिङ्गं वेदी जपं तथा॥ 4:17॥ 


प्रायख्रित्ताक्षमाला च विघांशा होममेव च। 
भक्षाभक्षं तथा शौचं सिद्यसि|(द्धि) [4]बलाबलम्‌। 
ब्रतानि सम्यग्बुद्धा तु ततः साधनमारभेत्‌॥ 4:18॥ 


इति मूलसूत्रे चतुर्थः पटलः स्लो ण्ड उ॥ on 


मुक्तिदीक्षामतो वक्ष्ये तां समासेन DT । 
यामवाप्य विमुच्यन्ते जन्ममृत्युभयादिभिः॥ 5:1॥ 


कालाग्निरुद्रादारभ्य यावत्तत्वं निरामयम्‌। 
योज्य योज्य पुनस्तत्वाइुद्धरेन्मति{मान्‌}-- [5] ॥ 5:2॥ 


कालाग्निरुद्रे संयोज्य वामया साधकं बुधः । 
साङ्गेन देवदेवेन पञ्चब्रह्मयुतेन च॥ 5:3॥ 


Mi sucre SAR Vins, EE DUE 
413 शोधनं ] NK; साधनम्‌ W 4:14 “लंभनं ] N; *लभनं KW 14 TT] 
BRS mast ruhe 4:15 पाशं ] NK; पासं W 4:17 साधकम्‌ ] conj.; साधकः NKW 
RIED ] N; विघ्रांशो K (८०००५५०); च Frater W 4:18 सिद्यसिर्द्धि | 
Wi सिद्यासि — N; सिद्यासिद्धिर K 5:2 कालाग्निरुद्रादारभ्य ] NW; कालाग्निर 
TOT £ 5:2 मति] N; म; मिशा 5:3 बुधः] NW; बुधः । साङ्गेन देवदेवे 
वामया साधकं वुध: K(eyeskip) 


मूलसूत्रम्‌ १४५ 


होमं तु कारयेद्विद्वान्ज्येष्ठया तु विशोधयेत्‌। 
Cet चैवोद्धरित्वा तु नरकेषु तु योजयेत्‌॥ 5:4॥ 


आभासतालमुत्ताले श्रीताले च गभस्तिके। 
शिलोच्चये च तं नीत्वा तथा वै शर्करोञ्चये॥ 5:5॥ 


सौवर्णेषु |च] {तं प्राप्य}[6| भूलोके च भुवे तथा। 
स्वर्लोके महलोंके च जनलोके तथैव च॥ 5:6॥ 
तपोलोकं ततः प्राप्य सत्यलोकं नयेत्पुनः। 
ब्रह्मविष्णुपुरं नीत्वा पुनः शिवपुरं नयेत्‌॥ 5:7॥ 
एवं वै होमयित्वा तु ब्रह्माण्डं भेदयेत्ततः। 
हुंफङ्कारान्तेन मन्त्रेण भेदनम्‌ परमं स्मृतम्‌॥ 5:8॥ 


तं भि(त्त्वा) — [E217] {शतरुद्रे}षु सुव्रते। 
ततोपरिष्टात्पञ्चाष्टं देवयोन्याष्टकन्ततः॥ 5:91 


योगाष्टकञ्च सुशिवं शुरुपङ्कित्रयं dd! 
तत्वसर्गे च संयोज्य गहने विग्रहे तथा॥ 5:10॥ 


शिवशङ्करे ह्यसाध्ये हरिरुद्रे दशेशके। 
पञ्चशिष्ये तथाचार्ये महादेवत्रयेषु च ॥ 5:11॥ 


गोपतौ च महाग्रन्थौ विश्वे {च} तृकले तथा। 
क्षेमीशे {च ततो नीत्वा)[2 योज्य ब्रह्मपतौ शिवे॥ 5: 12॥ 


मदमोहेषु संयोज्य तथा रिषिकुलेषु च। 


5:4तु ] KW; TN 5:5 *तालमुत्ताले NW; °तालमुत्ताल K 55 गभस्तिके ] NW; 

TK a शिलोच्चये] K; शिलोचये NW 5:5तं नीत्वा ] KW; m 
5:6 भूर्लोके च भुवे तथा] em; भूलोके च भवे तथा NW; तथा £ 5:6 महलाक ] 
NW; महलोके K 5:8 परमं स्मृतम्‌] N; परमं महत्‌ K; परमं U W ERSTE: 
कन्ततः ] NW; देवयोन्यष्टक ततः K 5:10 Ta conj; गुरुपङ्कित = 
NW (unmetrical); गुरुपङ्कि (यु) त॑ नयेत्‌ K 5:10 संयोज्य गहने] emi से jus 
ग्रहने NKW (unmetrical) 5:11 °शङ्कुरे ] conj.; zgt N; U KW AS महा- 
महादेवत्रयेषु च] NG *चापे महादेवं त्रयेषु च £; “चा UW श्यश्गोपती च महा, 
ग्रन्थौ विश्वे च तृकले तथा] em. गोपतौ च महाग्रन्थौ विश्वे “तृकले तथा N; U 
5:13 रिषिकुलेषु] Nw; ऋषिकुलेषु K 


१४६ निश्चासतत्त्वसंहितायाम- हितायाम्‌ 


योनीषु च ततोद्धृत्य वागीश्वर्या नियोजयेत्‌॥ 5:131 


प्रणवे च विनिक्षिप्य साध्योङ्कारे च योजयेत्‌। 
gram दमनीशे च भस्मदेहे ततोद्धरेत्‌॥ 5: 14॥ 


प्रमाणाष्टकविद्याष्टौ मूर्तिष्वष्टासु योजयेत्‌ | 

रूपे द्वितीयस्तु श्रुवे तस्योद्धे |तु| [॥ -पुनः1॥ 5:151 
रूपे शक्तिषु तं नीत्वा द्वे विद्ये तेजसि ws 

ade रुद्रप्रतोदमनवेषु च d नयेत्‌॥ 5:161 

एकाक्षः पिङ्गलो हंसस्सौम्ये चैव श्रुवे तथा। 

ब्रह्मादकें दिण्डिमुण्डिः सौरभो पावनस्तथा॥ 5: 17॥ 


जन्महरश्च रुद्रश्च प्रणीतः सुखदुःखद: | 
विजृम्भितः पुनश्चापि उपरिष्टाद्भवेदिह॥ 5:181 


एतेषां योज[4||(यि)|त्वा तु तृतीये च ध्रुवे तथा। 
निरञ्जने च संयोज्य शक्तिसंस्कारमोदिते॥ 5: 19॥ 


प्रलम्बे चैव विष्णौ तु मन्दरे गहने तथा। 
प्रवितते प्रभाते च समये क्षुद्रमेव च॥ 5: 20॥ 


विमले च ततो योज्य शिवे चैव घने तथा। 
रुद्रोङ्कारे च सकले तत्वे चैव सदाशिवे॥ 5:211 


अनुच्चाये तथात्मानं स तु योज्येत निष्कले। 
BIRUAN चण्डीशं टङ्कधारिणम्‌॥ 5: 22॥ 


पञ्चाङ्गेन समायुक्तङ्कुत्वा वै मण्डलोत्तमम्‌। 


— 4. tW PA VE na a 
5:14 साध्योड्रारे ] NK; ल्क्‌ ध्याङ्कारे ॥ 5:15 तस्योर्द्धे तु] K; Teale -- Ni im 
W 5:16 *तोदमनवेषु ] conj; *तोदे मनवेषु NW; TT K 5:17 ब्रह्माद्क ] 
Ni ब्रह्मदकं ८; ब्रह्मादर्क W 5:18 विजृम्भितः ] विजृम्भितम्‌ NKW 5:18 भवेद्‌ ] 
NK; भवद्‌ W 5:19 योजयित्वा ] w; योज (यि) त्वा £; योज >त्वा N 5:9 a 
NK; ya W 5:20 विष्णौ ] em.; विष्णो N;विuK;चिuw 5:20 क्षुद्रम्‌ | NW: 
JIK 5:21 रुद्रोङ्कारे ] NK; रुद्ाङ्कारे ए 5:22 अनुच्चार्ये तथात्मानं ] Ni aga अप 
ai K; अनुच्चाये तथात्मानं ए 5:22 अप (रे) दयर्‌ ] K; अ ~ LIEN: 


मूलसूत्रम्‌ १४७ 


प्रकान्तहोमं हुत्वा वै शतान्यष्टौ तु होमयेत्‌॥ 5:231 


हुत्वा विज्ञापयेद्देवं क्षन्तव्यं तु त्वया विभो। 
समयाष्टकदोषेण साधको नैव लिप्यते॥ 5: 24॥ 


तेषां दोषविशुद्यर्थ कृतं होमं मया तव। 
क्षमते पूर्वमेकन्तु|[6] च{ण्डीशं य}|(स्तु) ATH 5:251 


[JI 
दीक्षादग्धा न रोहन्ति भिन्नदेहे शिवं व्रजेत्‌॥ 5:261 


इति मूलसूत्रे पञ्चमः पटलः। स्रो षह्य 5॥ ०॥ 


अतः परम्‌ प्रवक्ष्यामि मन्त्राणां तत्त्वलक्षणम्‌। 
यं विदित्वा विमुच्यन्ते नरास्संसारबन्धनात्‌॥ 6:1॥ 


अष्टान्तमेक पूर्वन्‌ तु [६21°] |(द्वा]]दशान्तन्ततोपरि। 
षडन्तेन समायुक्तमनन्तं ह्यासनोत्तमम्‌॥ 6:2॥ 


प्रकृतिस्थं भवेद्धर्म्म द्विभिन्नं ज्ञानमुच्यते। 
Prager भेदेन वैरागैश्वर्यमुच्यते॥ 6:3॥ 


सविसर्ग भवेत्‌ पद्य पञ्चदशाक्रान्त कर्णिका। 
त्रिपञ्चकान्तसप्तादौ भित्वा तत्त्वं तु शक्तयः॥ 6:4॥ 


शिवतत्त्वं परं वक्ष्ये द्‌- अष्टभेदाङ्गसंयु|तम्‌ | 


5:24 क्षन्तव्यं ] Ky STOTT NW 524 दोषेण ] NK; दोषेणं ॥ 5:25 पूर्वमेकन्तु ] 
NK; Wu  5:25स्तु] K; — N; स्तू W (unmetrical) 5:26 दीक्षादग्धा न 
रोहन्ति ] conj; दीक्षादगधा न रो ऽत्तिं ४; दीक्षादग्धो न रो U K; दीक्षादग्धा न 
रो [न्ति WO 6:1 तत्त्वलक्षणम्‌ ] K; तत्वलक्षणम्‌ W; त्वत्वलक्षणं  6:1यं] NW; 
ITK 6:3 द्विभिन्नं ] conj; विभिन्न NKW 6:3 वैरागैद्वर्यम्‌ NK; वैरागैश्वयम्‌ W 
6:4 पञ्चदशाक्तान्त कर्णिका ] £; पञ्चदशाक्रन्तकर्णिका NW 6:4 तत्त्व ] mid तत्वं NW 
6:5 तत्त्व] K; “तत्व NW 6:5 २दष्टभेदाङ्गसंयुतम्‌ ] conj.; संयु — N; 
दष्टभेदेन संयुतम्‌ K; दष्टभेदा «संयु UW 


१४८ निश्चासतत्त्वसंहितायाम 


[2] [(ये)|न विज्ञातमात्रेण न Ted तनुम्‌॥ 6:5॥ 


सकलं निष्कलं शून्यं कलाढ्यं खमलङ्कतम्‌। 
क्षपणं क्षयमन्तस्थङ्कण्दयोष्टञ्चाष्टमं स्मृतम्‌॥ 6:6॥ 


अष्टान्तं षट्टसंयुक्तं षडन्तेन समन्वितम्‌ | 
सकलं सर्वंदेहस्थं शिवतत्वं प्रकीत्तितम्‌॥ 6:71 


स्वयं निष्क्रमते देवो देहन्त्यत्का समारुतः। 
निष्कलं तं [3] विजानीयात्‌ षड्वर्णरहितः शिवः॥ 6:81 


निश्वासोच्छुवसनं भित्त्वा स्थितन्देहे तु काष्ठवत्‌। 
शून्यं तं तु विजानीयाद्धूदयेन तु भावयेत्‌॥ 6:9॥ 


चुम्बाकारेण वक्तेण यत्तत्वं श्रूयते pr 
कलाद्मन्तं विजानीयादाकाशस्थं च मे शृणु॥ 6:10॥ 


6 Cf. Sardhatrisatikalottara 19:2: 

सकलं निष्कलं शून्यं कलाद्मं खमलंकृतम्‌। क्षपणं च तथान्तस्थं कण्ठोष्ठ्यं चाष्टमं fag: 
7 Cf. Sardhatrisatikalottara 19:3: 

प्रासाद षष्ठसंयुक्तं षडन्तेन समन्वितम्‌ । सकलं सर्वभूतस्थं शिवतत्त्वं प्रकीर्तितम्‌॥ 

8 Cf. Sardhatrigatikalottara 19:4: 

निष्क्रामति स्वयं देवो देहं त्यत्का समारुतः। निष्कलं तं विजानीयात्‌ षड्वर्णरहितं शिवम्‌॥ 
9 Cf. Sardhatrisatikalottara 19:5: 

निश्चासोच्छुवसने हित्वा स्थितो देहे तु काष्ठवत्‌। शून्यं तं तु विजानीयाद्धुदयेन तु भावयेत्‌ 
10 Sardhatrisatikalottara 19:6: 

चुम्वाकारेण वकेण तत्तत्त्वं परिकीर्तितम्‌। कलाद्मं तं विजानीयादाकाशस्थमथ शुणु॥ 


6:5 विज्ञातमात्रेण ] NW; विज्ञानमात्रेण K es पुनर्गुङ्कते K; पुन गृह्णते NW ताक 
कल] NK; सकले W 6:6 कण्योष्टञ्‌ ] NW; U K 6:7 * Ng] NÉ; oe 
6:8 त्यत्का ] NW; TH K 6:8 समारुतः ] NK; समाठतः W 6:8 s 
em.; निष्कल (2) त (7) N (tops missing); निष्कलेन K; निष्कलन W 6:9 frais 
च्छुवसनं ] em.; निश्चासो श्वसनं N; निःश्वासो श्वसनं K; निश्चासा स्वसनं W si 
त तु विजानीया*] ve; शून्य तं तु विजानी+या+ Ny अल्प तं तु विजानीया* त 
स -न्तन्तु विजानीया* W 6:10 यत्तत्व श्रूयते ] em.; यत्तत्व श्रूयते N; षङ्गत्व 

£; यन्तत्व श्रूयते W 6:10 आकाशस्थं ] NK; आकासस्थं W 


मूलसूत्रम्‌ १४९ 


ऊध्वैनादस्य क्षीणस्य यदन्तं परिकीर्तितम्‌। 
तत्रस्थन्तम्‌ विजानीया|(दा)||4काशेन त्वलड्डुतम्‌॥ 6:111 


व्यावृत्तेन तु वक्तेण श्रुत्वा देवं जगङ्गुरुम्‌ | 
दुःखक्षपणमित्युक्तन्तत्क्षयात्क्षपणं स्मृतम्‌॥ 6:12॥ 


अघोनादस्य क्षीणस्य यदन्तं परिकीर्तितम्‌। 
अन्तस्थं तं विजानीयादनुच्चार्यम्‌ प्रकीर्तितम्‌॥ 6:131 


अष्टवर्गाष्टमं कोटि सप्तमस्य द्वितीयकम्‌। 
वर्गातीतं षडन्तं च सप्तमे (त्रि)][शचतुर्थकम्‌॥ 6:141 


आदिमञ्च पुनर्योज्यं षष्ठं वै प्रथमस्य तु। 
खशेखरसमायुक्त कण्द्योष्ठ्चाष्टम स्मृतम्‌॥ 6:15॥ 


वर्गान्तं पञ्चकेनैव भेदयेत्‌ परमेश्वरम्‌। 
पश्चब्रह्मास्समाख्याता हःकारो रेत उच्यते॥ 6:16॥ 


12 Cf. Sardhatrisatikalottara 19:8: 

व्यावृतेनैव वक्तेण ब्रूयादेवं जगङ्गुरुम्‌। इःखक्षपणमित्युक्तं तत्क्षयात्क्षपणं स्मृतम्‌॥ 

13 = Sardhatrisatikalottara 19:9. 

14 Cf. Sardhatrisatikslottara 19:10-11: सप्तवर्गाष्टम कोटिः सप्तमस्य द्वितीयकम्‌। वर्गा- 
did षडन्तं सप्तमात्तिचतुर्थकम्‌॥ आदिमं तु पुनयोंज्यं षष्ठं वै प्रथमस्य तु। खशेखरसमायुक्त 
कण्ठोष्ठ्यं चाष्टमं स्मृतम्‌॥ Ramakantha’s comments: सप्तमाद्‌ यकारादिवर्गाद अष्टमं ह- 
कारं; सकारः कोटिः प्रान्तं सप्तममित्यर्थ:। तस्यैव वर्गस्य सम्बन्धि द्वितीयकमक्षरं 
रेफात्मकं, वर्गातीतं च क्षकारात्मकं, षष्ठस्य च वर्गस्यान्तं मकारात्मकं, सप्तमाच्च वर्गात्‌ 
पूर्वोक्तात्‌ त्रिचतुःसंख्यायुक्तं च [लकार] वकाराख्यं, आदिमं तु पुनः सप्तमाद्य यकाराख्य- 
TAT, प्रथमस्य च वर्गस्य षष्ठम्‌ Hat, खशेखरम्‌ अर्धचन्द्रविन्ड॒युक्तम्‌ अष्टमम्‌ अक्षर 
मन्त्रोक्तमेकप्रयलोच्चार्यकत्वान्नवात्मकमित्युक्तम्‌॥ 


6:13 अनुच्चार्यम्‌] N; अन्तोद्चा्यं K; award W 6:74 सप्तमे त्रि” ] con; सप्तमे 
< N; सप्तमस्य ८; सप्तमे Wo 6:15 खशेखर” ] N; खसेखर° W; स्वशेखर° K 
6:15 Was] N; क USK; was K 6:16 वर्गान्तं पञ्चकेनैव] NW; DC 
चकेनेव K 6:16 पञ्चब्रह्मास्समाख्याता ] NW; पश्चब्रह्मसमाख्याता K 6:16 8: ] 
NeW; हकारो NEK 


१५० निश्चासतत्त्वसंहितायाम्‌ 
वामा तु बिन्डुसंयुक्ता वागीशीति निगद्यते। 
रेतोभूतः प्रविष्टस्तु सद्य एव प्रजा|(यते)|॥ 6: 17॥ 


[6] तत्वमीकारसंभिन्नं ज्ञानसिद्धिकुमारिका | 
उद्दाहयित्वा तां पल्लीं यजेत्‌ यज्ञां सदक्षिणाम्‌॥ 6: 18॥ 


त्रिपञ्चकेन संयुक्तं हृदयं तत्‌ प्रकीतितम्‌। 

~ ~ वर्गादिसंयुक्तं शिरो देवस्य कीर्तितम्‌॥ 6: 19॥ 
उभयोरपि 27] |सं]योगात्‌ स्वरैः पञ्चभिर्भेदितम्‌। 
शिरः शिखा कवचास्त्रं गायत्रीह TAART: I 6:20॥ 


वर्गेण सप्तमेनैव चतुर्धा योजयेच्छिवम्‌। 
वायुरग्नि ° प्रा ~ चतुद्धौ तन्तु योजयेत्‌॥ 6:21॥ 


द्वादशादिसमायु(क्तं उकारान्तप्रतिष्ठितम्‌ | 
--[सविस])[2] गर्गास्त्रयोनयः i 
सप्षमस्य द्वितीयेन युक्तं वै परमेश्चरम्‌॥ 6: 22॥ 


आसनं चण्डनाथस्य देवदेवस्य कीर्तितम्‌ | 
त्रिपञ्चकेन भित्त्वा वै |(चण्डी)]शस्तु स्वयं भवेत्‌॥ 6:231 


आं ईं ऊं अं अः। पञ्च अङ्गा तस्य विनिर्दिशेत्‌। 
वामाङ्गु्ठात्‌ समारभ्य नवात्मा(नं नियोजयेत्‌)॥ 6: 24॥ (?) 
(सकल)-[3] संस्कारमुच्यते। 


ne HP RN REN Zl 
6:17 वामा तु विन्दुसयुक्ता conj; वामं तु विन्दुसंयुक्ता NW; वामं तु बिन्दुसंयुक्त £ 
6:17 रेतोभूतः ] N; रेतोभूतं K; एतोभूतः % 6:18 सदक्षिणाम्‌ ] NW; सदक्षिणम्‌ 
£ 6:19 त्रिपश्चकेन ] K; तृपञ्चकेन NW 6:20 संयोगात्‌] K; < योगात्‌ N; MET 
गात्‌ W 6:20 गायत्रीह तथेश्वराः ] conj; गायत्रीहन्तथेश्वरा NW; गायत्रीहं तथेश्वरी 

K 6:21 चतुर्धा ] KW; चतुद्धा N 6:21 वायुर  --प्रा --] N; वायुर U Ki 
वायु U W 6:21 चतुर्धा तन्तु योजयेत्‌] w; चतुद्धा त(?) न्तु(?) योजयेत्‌ NF 
UK 6:22 द्वादशादिसमायुक्त उकारान्तप्रतिष्ठितम्‌ ] w; द्वादशादिसमायु — Ni 7 2 
6:23 त्रिपश्चकेन ] K; तृपञ्चकेन NW 6:23 चण्डीशस्तु ] K; <ण्डाशस्तु N; ee 
W 6243 ऊ] NW; इं उं K 6:24 नवात्मानं नियोजयेत्‌] W; नवात्मान ie 
2 bt K 6:25 सकल LI संस्कारमुच्यते ] W; — संस्कारमुच्यते Ni 


मूलसूत्रम्‌ १५१ 


बीजमुद्रान्‌ तथा बद्धा आसनार्थे प्रयोजयेत्‌॥ 6:251 


सकले निष्कले चैव सा तु मुद्रा भविष्यति | 
अन्येषां तु नमस्कारो अमृतां वापि योजयेत्‌। 
हीनस्य पूरणी ह्येषा कोटिमुद्रा विसर्जने॥ 6:261 


इति मूलसूत्रे षष्ठः पटलः॥ °॥ स्रो [25] 


(।एत]त्‌ त)[(त्परमं)[4/] तत्वमनुच्चार्यं शिवं परम्‌। 
एतत्तत्परमं ब्रह्म एतत्तत्परमाक्षरम्‌॥ 7:1॥ 


विदित्वा बहुभिभेंदैर्न भूयोजन्मतां ब्रजेत्‌। 
नैव पापं भवेत्तस्य नैव पुण्यं तथैव च॥ 7:2॥ 


स्तेयेन कनकादीनां गोमांसस्य च भक्षणे। 
ब्रह्मवध्यासहस्रेण तत्वविच्नैव लिप्यते॥ 7:3॥ 


अगम्यागमनङ्कुत्वा {हत्वा लोकां}[5श्वराचरान्‌। 
सुरापानादिभिद्दोषेस्तत्वविच्नैव लिप्यते॥ 7:4॥ 


मायानृतसहस्रेषु परहिंसारतो ऽपि a: | 
नित्यशुद्धो भवेद्देवि यस्य तत्वं हृदि स्थितम्‌॥ 7:5॥ 


फलाहारो पञ्चतपो यस्तिष्ठेत शतं समाः। 
सकृडुञ्चारिते तत्वे तत्सर्वं फलमाघुयात्‌॥ 7:6॥ 


VET ऋतुसहस्न॑ तु य — [6] 
सकुदुञ्चारिते तत्वे तत्सवं फलमाप्रुयात्‌॥ 7:7॥ 


— ine MISUSE | 
6:26 सकले निष्कले] N; सकलं निष्कलं K; सकल निष्कले WO 6:26 स्रो eb ] K; 
ST — N; स्रो षत्यु W 7:1 तत्वमनुच्चार्य ] N; तत्त्वं मनुच्चाय K; तत्त्व 

W 7:1 ब्रह्म] K; ब्रह्मम्‌ NW 7:2 बहुभिभेंदैर्न em.; बहुभिभेंदेन्न N; बहुभिभेंदेर * 
£; बहु भिँदै ow o 7:3भक्षणे] NW; भक्षणात्‌ K 75 *शुद्धो] NK; E: 
7:6 फलाहारो ] NW; फलाहारी K 7:6 समाः] K; समा NK 7:6 तत्वे] ४; त 
K; तत्त्व W 7:7 GET] NW; यष्टा K 


१५२ निश्चासतत्त्वसंहितायाम्‌ 


शिवार्चनाग्निकार्य च द्वादशाब्दां करोति यः | 
सकृदुच्चारिते तत्वे तत्सवं फलमासुयात्‌॥ 7:81 


तेन दत्तं तपस्तप्तं यष्टा यज्ञा सदक्षिणा | 
कृतस्तीर्थाभिषेकञ्च यस्य तत्वं हृदि स्थितम्‌॥ 7:91 [६ 220] 


आरोग्यं धनमैश्वर्यं कामास विविधास्तथा | 
सर्व सम्पद्यते तस्य यस्तत्वं जपते सदा॥ 7: 10॥ 


पादप्रचारं खङ्गं च रोचना पाइुके तथा। 
गुडिकाकाशगमनं दन्तकाष्ठपवित्रकम्‌॥ 7: 11॥ 


अन्तर्धानाञ्जनाकर्षविद्वेषोच्चाटमारणम्‌। 
निर्बीजं विषसंक्रामं --॥ 7:121 


> ल वृ(?) — [2 याणां तु शुष्कदारुप्ररोहणम्‌। 
निर्विषानग्निकरण ग्रहराक्षसनाशनम्‌॥ 7: 13॥ 


परमन्त्रप्रभेदं च परसैन्यस्य स्तम्भनम्‌ | 
नगोद्धरणमावेशं सर्वदुष्टनिबन्धनम्‌॥ 7: 14॥ 


तुलया शोधयेत्पापमात्मनस्य परस्य aT | 
परमन्त्रप्रयोगेन सर्वकर्माणि कारयेत्‌॥ 7:151 


प — (--चे) uf] बीजान्तेन TATANG | 
फङ्कारेण समायुक्तं सद्य एवोत्क्रमन्ति Wi 7:161 


यं यं स्पृशति हस्तेन यं यं पश्यति चक्षुषा | 
ध्यात्वा तत्वं तु मेधावी दीक्षितं तं विनिर्दिशेत्‌॥ 7: 17॥ 


A MRSS, FE 
7:8 द्वादशाब्दां ] N; द्वादशाब्दं £; द्वादशां WO 7:8 *चरिते] KW; °चारिते N 7 
तत्सर्व फलमाङ्जुयात्‌ NW; तत्सर्वफलमाप्रुयात्‌ K 7:9 यज्ञा सदक्षिणा ] N; UNT 
सदक्षिणा+:+ K; यज्ञ सदक्षिणा W 7:10 कामाञ्च ] conj; ATT NKW 7:10 यः] 
NW; यत्‌ £ 7:11 गुडिकाकाशगमनं NK; गुडिकाकासगमनं W 7:11 त 
con; दण्डकाष्ट ० NKW 7:12 र्धानाञ्जना° ] em.; र्धानञ्जना° NKW — 712 7. 
वीजं विषसंक्रामं ] ॥ (7); निर्वीज WwW; UK 7:14 परसैन्यस्य] KW; प्रस्येच्य अ 

e pM conj. ; नगोद्धरम्‌ NW (unmetrical) ; नगोद्धर (।1) म्‌ K 7:16 फट्‌] 


मूलसूत्रम्‌ १५३ 
विदित्वा तु परं तत्वं यदि स्यात्संशयो भवेत्‌। 

योग एव तदा सेव्यो आत्मप्रत्ययकारणात्‌॥ 7: 18॥ 

ध्यायते यस्तु युक्ता {त्मा द्वाद)[4शाब्दां सुयन्त्रितः | 
अणिमादिगुणैख्वर्यं सर्वज्ञत्वं प्रजायते॥ 7: 19॥ 

दूराच्छूवणविज्ञानं दर्शनं मननन्तथा। 

जायते सर्वकामित्वं देहेनानेन साधकः॥ 7:20॥ 

aad परदेहेषु क्षुत्तृषाभ्यां न वाध्यते। 

शस्त्रतोयविषाग्निभ्यो शीतोष्णेन न बाध्यते॥ 7:211 


अतीतानागततच्चैव त्रैलोक्ये यत्प्रवर्तेते। [5] 
प्रत्यक्षं तड़वेत्तस्य शिवस्वच्छन्दतां ब्रजेत्‌॥ 7:221 


सुसिद्धस्तत्वविच्चैव गृहे यस्य समसुते । 
कोटिवेदविदां तेन भोजिता तु भविष्यति॥ 7:231 


यत्र देशे व्रजेत्सो हि स देशः पूततां ब्रजेत्‌। 
भिक्षां यस्य तु गृह्णाति सकुलख्रोद्धूतो भवेत्‌॥ 7:241 


लक्षां लक्षान्तु निष्कस्य यो दद्याद्वेदपारगे। 
शिव — [6] न्तच्च तानि च तत्समम्‌॥ 7:25॥ 


विदित्वा द्ष्टभिभेदेर्देवदेवं जगङ्गुरुम्‌। 
तत्किमर्थं गृहं त्यत्का वने तिष्ठन्ति मानवाः॥ 7:26॥ 


ब्रह्मचर्योदिभिर्देहन्तापयन्ति तपादिभिः। 
परिज्ञानेन ते मुक्ता न तेषां यन्त्रणा भवेत्‌॥ 7:27॥ 


इति मूलसूत्रे सप्तमः पटलः स्रो थ 


7:18 तदा सेव्यो] con; सदा सेव्यो NW; सदा सेव्य K 7:2 क्षुत्तपाभ्यां ] NW; 
श्ुट्तृषाभ्या 1 7:22 यत्प्रवर्तते ] em; T— N; TU KW 7:22तद्भवेत्तस्य ] NW; तु 

K 7:22 शिवस्वच्छन्दतां ] conj; शिवः स्वच्छन्दता NKW 7:23 EE ] 
conj; असिद्ध° NKW 7:25 "पारगे] NK; ०पारगः NeW 7:27 * ] 
conj; oT ~ ऽन्ति N; u न्ति KW 7:27 मुक्ता ] K; मुत्का NW 


१५४ — 


एतत्ते परमं तत्वमसन्दिग्धमविस्तरम्‌ | 
त्वत्प्रियार्थं समाख्यातं न देयं परदीक्षिते॥ 8:11 


मर्त्या बहुविधा दुष्टाः परसिद्धान्तवादिनः। 
द्रव्येण मायया वापि सेवाधमेण वा पुनः॥ 8:2॥ 


तत्वापहर्ततुडडबन्ति नाभिनन्दन्ति गृह्य च। 
पूर्वमेव मया ज्ञातमस्मिस्तन्त्रे [2 च पद्यते॥ 8:3॥ 


एवं ज्ञात्वा तु मेधावी न च तत्वं प्रकाशयेत्‌। 
भ्रामयन्मन्त्रमुद्राभिर्दीक्षामण्डलयोजनेः॥ 8:4॥ 


साधनैयोंगचयामिस्तपोध्यानजपा|(दि)]भिः | 
यदा शान्तं प्रबुद्येत तदा तत्वं प्रभेदयेत्‌॥ 8:5॥ 


त्रिचतुःपञ्चभिद्विप्रे षट्सप्ताष्टभिः क्षत्रिये। 
द्वादशदशभिर्वैश्ये विंशच्छूद्रेष दापयेत्‌॥ 8:6॥ 


[3] सुपरीक्ष्य च दातव्यं न च नास्तिकनिन्दके। 
मायाविने शठे चैव न देयं तत्वमुत्तमम्‌॥ 8:7॥ 


ब्राह्मणो मायवां यस्तु ख्नेच्छञ्चैव त्वमायवान्‌। 
स्ेच्छस्यैव तु दातव्यं न तु विप्राय दापयेत्‌॥ 8:8॥ 


बुद्धा भक्तिमयं शिष्यं यदि तुष्यति वै Te: | 
न तस्य कालमाख्यातं सद्य एव तु भेदयेत्‌॥ 8:9॥ 


अध्यापयित्वा एतं (तु) [rer] [fi हितमुत्तमम्‌ | 
बुद्धा भक्तिमयं शिष्यमाचार्यत्वे नियोजयेत्‌॥ 8: 10॥ 


ba १८5७५०२ १० "iet: स qs 
8:1 तत्वमसन्दिग्धमविस्तरम्‌ ] con; तत्वं [£237] --दिगधमविस्तरम्‌ NG v SE 
सन्दिग्धमविस्तरम्‌ K; तत्वं u भविस्तरं w 8:2 सेवाधर्मेण ] K; सेव--म्मेण Ni 
TW 8:4भ्रामयन्‌ ] K; भ्रामयेन्‌ NW 8:6 छुद्रेषु दापयेत्‌] N; uF aT- 
£; Bay दापयेत्‌ ॥ 8:7 नास्तिक० ] K, नास्तीक० NW 8:8 मायवां ] NW i 
यवान्‌ 8:10 एत तु तत्व" ] conj.; एतन्‌-- N; एतत्तत्त्व? K (unmetrical) ; vdd 
त्व: W (unmetrical) 8:10 नियोजयेत्‌] NK*W; निवेदयेत्‌ K“ 


मूलसूत्रम्‌ १५५ 


आलिख्य तत्वभुवनं पूर्वोक्तविधिना qu: | 
अभिषिच्याष्टकलशैरष्टतत्वाभिमन्त्रितैः॥ 8:110 


ईशानीं तु दिशं नीत्वा ईशान्याभिमुखः स्थितः। 
गीतवादित्रनिर्घोषैवेंदशब्दसमन्वितम्‌॥ 8:121 


पीठन्दत्त्वा तथा छत्रमुष्णीषं कर्त्तरिन्तथा। 
शिवतु[ऽ]ल्यस्त्वमाचार्यो लोके चानुग्रहङ्कुरु॥ 8:13॥ 


द्रव्यलाभे TRS न च बन्धुजने तथा। 
कृतोपकारे कलहे न दद्याच्छिवशासनम्‌॥ 8:14॥ 


शान्ताय शिवभक्ताय श्रद्दधानानुसूयवे। 
कृतज्ञे च दयायुक्ते दातव्यं शिवशासनम्‌॥ 8:15॥ 


गुरवस्य समीपस्थो न कुर्याच्छिष्यसंग्रहम्‌। 
अध्यापनं च व्या|(ख्यानं गुरु)]{शिष्य}[6प्रबोधनम्‌॥ 8:16॥ 


अपूर्वं च शिवज्ञानं दृष्टा च सुचिरं गुरोः। 
निवेदयेद्भृष्टमनाः पूजयेच्च यथा शिवम्‌॥ 8:17॥ 


अन्यथा कुरुते यस्तु विलोमं गुरुणा सह। 
दीक्षाज्ञानं गुरुत्वं च हित्वा नरकमाप्रुयात्‌॥ 8: 18॥ 


वाचनाच्छुवणात्पुण्यं |. 23 धारणादतुलं फलम्‌। 
यो ऽधीते स महादेवो यो sig: स शिवः स्वयम्‌॥ 8:19॥ 


8:11 तत्वभुवन ] con; तत्वम्भुवनम्‌ NKW 8:11 पूर्वोक्तविधिना ] W; पू ऽक्तविधि- 
ना \; पू((वोक्त) विधिना K 8:17 अभिषिच््याष्टकलशैर्‌ ] em; अभिषिश्याष्टाकलशैर्‌ 
NW; अभिषिंच्याथ कलशैर्‌ K 8:12 ईशान्याभिमुखः ] em; इशान्याभिमुख ae 
K 8:12 समन्वितम्‌] NW; समन्वितैः K 8:13 WAWI] K, "wil 
N; “Wa Ww 8:13 कर्त्तरिन्‌] NW; कर्तरीं K 8:13 शिवतुल्यस्त्वमाचार्यों ] = 
शिवन्तुल्यत्वमाचार्यो w; शि < <ल्यत्वमाचार्यों N; शिव <ल्यत्वमाचायो K 8:14 प- 
रिप्रश्ने ] NK; परिप्रेम्ने W 8:14 कृतोपकारे ] coni; कृतोपकार° NKW 8:14 T 
दद्याच्छिवशासनम्‌ ] K; न दव्यच्छिवशासनम्‌ N; दद्याच्छिवसासनम्‌ W eris 
8:15 *नुसूयवे ] N; gaT K; "नुशूयवे W 8:16 अध्यापन] KW; ma 
N 8:17 °HAT:] conj; "मना NKW 8:19 "च्छूवणात्‌ ] £, AT 
8:19 शिव: ] K; शिव NW 


१५६ निश्वासतत्त्वसंहितायाम 


सम्यगेष समाख्यातो तत्वसंहित-म्‌-उत्तमः | 
सगोत्रा एव मुच्यन्ते यस्य लेख्ये ऽपि तिष्ठति॥ 8:201 


इति मूलसूत्रे ऽष्टमः पटलः। स्रो थ॥ ---॥ 


NR su UN 
8:20 समाख्यातो ] NW; समाख्यातम Bq: ] KW; SEH N 
] NW; समाख्यातम्‌ K 8:20ऽष्टमः ] KW; SEH 


निश्चासतत्त्वसंहितायाम्‌ उत्तरसूत्रम्‌॥ 


मन्त्राख्ये पञ्चमे स्रोते मूलसूत्र तु नामतः । 
= [शन्तु खोकाञ्चैव त्रयोदश॥ 1:1॥ 


सज्ज्ञाचतुष्टयेनेव नामभिः परिकीर्त्यते। 

प्रथमं मूलसूत्र तु द्वितीयमादिसज्ज्ञितम्‌॥ 1:2॥ 
तृतीयं प्रथमं नाम चतुर्थ पूर्वसूत्रकम्‌ | 

तस्मिन्‌ समाप्त सूत्रे तु द्वितीयं सूत्रमुच्यते॥ 1:3॥ 
देव्युवाच | 

सदाशिवो ऽष्टभेदस्तु यस्त्वयोक्तो हि मोक्षदः। 

कि स्वयम्भुर्भवे|(त्वेष)] [s उत्पन्नो वा ASAT 1:4॥ 


ईश्वर उवाच। 
सुशान्तं निष्कलं देवं शिवं सर्वजगत्पतिम्‌। 
तस्य शक्तिः शिवानिर्या शिवतेजोपबुंहिता॥ 1:51 


शिवतेजेन संयुक्ता शक्तेर्जायति बिन्डुकः। 
आदित्यमणिवह्णीव निष्कामाः शिवशक्तयः॥ 1:6॥ 


एषा सृष्टिर्जगीशस्य सदाशिवसमुद्भवा। 


1 सोते] भ; जरे छः (द्वो K 1:3 समाप्त ] NK; समाप्ते W 1:4 क 
वा महेश्वर] N; उत्पन्नो वा महेश्वरः K; ।। वा महेश्वर WO 15उवाच] K; उ 

1:5 शिवानिर्या] n; शिवानी या K; शिवानि या W; शिवा नित्या eon Acharya 
1:6 “TET निष्कामाः ] conj; °वह्लेस्तु निष्कामा NW; वह्नेस्तु निष्कामाः K 


निश्चासतत्त्संहितायाम्‌ 


१५८ 


स चाष्टभेदो व्याख्यातो नवतत्त्वव्यवस्थितः॥ 1:7॥ 


शक्ति्च दशमा ज्ञेया शक्तेः परतरः शिव: | 
एवं ज्ञात्वा च बुद्धा च देशिकः पाशहा भवेत्‌॥ 1:8॥ 


देव्युवाच | 
स कथं दशधा ज्ञेयो देवदेवो सदाशिवः | 


प्रक्रियाध्वानमन्त्रा्च नोक्ताः पूर्वं हि मे वद॥ 1:9॥ 


ईश्वर उवाच। 
ऊकारः प्रकृतिज्ञेया यकारः पुरुषः स्मृतः | 
वकारो नियतिविन्द्याह्लकारः काल उच्यते॥ 1:10॥ 


मायातत्त्वं मकारस्तु क्षकारो विद्य एव तु। 
रकार ईश्वरो ज्ञेयो हकारस्तु सदाशिवः॥ 1:11॥ 


देहव्यापी च नवमो शक्तिश्च दशमा स्मृता | 
अकथ्यस्च अरूपी च कारणः स शिवः परः॥ 1:121 


एते तत्त्वाः समाख्याताः सदाशिवसमुद्भवाः | [6] 
KAK) जगत्सर्वं द्रेश्याद्रेश्यञ्चराचरम्‌॥ 1 : 13॥ 


प्रक्रियाव्यापिनो मन्त्रा यथाध्वाने व्यवस्थिताः | 
तानि चैव प्रवक्ष्यामि याथातथ्येन मे शुणु॥ 1: 14॥ 


ब्रह्माण्डे चैव ऊकारस्तत्त्वसरगे च यः स्मृतः | 
गहने च |(व)कारो वै गोपत्यान्ते च लः स्मृतः॥ 1:15॥ 


SE SEE SE 
1:7 व्याख्यातो ] coni; व्य--[4] त N; व्या (ख्या)तो K; व्याख्यात W 18 द 
कः] em; ऽशिकः N; दैशिकः K; “सिकः w 1:8 पाशहा ] NK; >सहा W 
1:9 देवदेवो ] NW; देवदेवः K 1:9 पूर्व ] K; पूर्व Nw 1:10 उवाच] Ki उ NW 
1:10 ज्ञेया ] NW; ज्ञेयो K 1:10 वकारो नियतिविन्द्याल्‌ ] conj; वकार नियति zB 
"MT N; वकार निययति (विं) न्द्याल्‌ £; वकार नियति ~न्द्याल्‌ W 7772 कारणः ] 
£; कारण पाए 1: ब्वेश्याद्रेश्यम्‌] N; दृश्यादृश्यं 1८; ट्रेस्याद्रेस्य W 115 ब्रह्माण्ड is 
चैव] NW; ब्रह्मणन्नैव K 1:15 गहने च वकारो वै गोपत्यान्ते च लः स्मृतः | ” 
च [24] -गोपत्यान्ते च लः स्मृतः N; गहने च वकारो वै गोपञ्चात्ते च लः UU 
£; गहने च वकारो वै गोपत्यात्ते च लः स्मृतः W 


उत्तरसूत्रम्‌ १५९ 


मकारः संस्थितो मायां विद्यायां चैव क्षः प्रभुः। 
रकार ईश्वरान्ते तु हकारः सकलावधेः॥ 1 :16॥ 


देहव्यापी तु WaT शक्तया योज्येत निष्कले। 
अध्वानव्यापिनो ह्येते कथिता हि समासतः॥ 1:17॥ 


देव्युवाच | 
अक्षराणां कुतोत्पत्तिः सर्ववर्ण्ण ...। 
{तन्त्राणां कियती सं)[2ख्या गुरवञ्च कति स्मृताः॥ 1: 18॥ 


ईश्वर उवाच। 
पिण्डाक्षरस्य चाद्यन्ते स्वयन्देवस्सदाशिवः। 
निष्कले च तथा शून्ये कलाद्ये खमलङ्कृते॥ 1:191 


क्षपणे क्षयमन्तस्थे वर्णषद्धन्नियोजयेत्‌। 
तान्येव चाष्टवर्गाणि मातृका यैस्तु कथ्यते॥ 1:201 


अनुक्रमेण जातानि यतः शास्त्राणि वाङ्कयम्‌। 
दिव्यादिव्य{निब}[द्धानि मन्त्रभाषपदानि तु॥ 1:211 


एषाक्षरसमुत्पत्तिर्व्याख्याता हि वरानने। 
शिवतन्त्रस्य चोत्पत्तिं कीर्त्यमानां निबोध मे॥ 1:221 


अद्ष्टविग्रहे शान्ते शिवे परमकारणे। 
नादरूपं विनिष्क्रान्तं शास्त्रं परमदुल्लभम्‌॥ 1: 23॥ 


सदाशिवस्तु वेत्ता वै स च मां प्रति बोधकः। 
नादरूपस्य शास्त्रस्य अहं ग्र|(न्थनिबन्धकः)|॥ 1: 24॥ 


116 क्षः] NK; = W 147 इहव्यापी ] K; "eu NW 1:17 कथिता हि] 
KW; कथिता ~ N 1:18 अक्षराणां कुतोत्पत्तिः सर्ववर्णं ] conj.; E 
Rr: सर्ववरण्ण-- N; अक्षराणी कुतोत्पत्तिः सेववक्त u W; अक्षराणां कुतोन्पत्तिः U K 
1:18 कति ] Kr; कतिः NK“; कटिः W 1:19 उवाच] K; उ ६% 1:20 P su 

] NK; “मन्तस्य W 1:21 क्रमेण] K; क्रमेणा NW 1:21 2 
दिव्या — |$ द्वानि N; दिव्यादिव्य -. हानि K; दिव्यादिर्व्या xpo शा 121 = 
दानि तु NK; *पदानि च ए 1:22 कीर्त्यमानां conj; कीर्त्यमाने NKW 1:24 अहे 

:] WK; agy — [4] वन्धकः N 


१६० निश्वासतत्त्वसंहितायाम्‌ 
देवेभ्यः प्रतिपादितम्‌। 
रिषिभिञ्च पुनः प्राप्तं तेभ्यो मर्त्येषु सन्ततिः॥ 1 : 25॥ 


कामिकं योगदं दिव्यं कारणमजितं तथा। 
दीप्तं सूक्ष्मं च साहस्रमंशुमान्‌ सुप्रभेदि Ti 1:261 


अनन्तं शिवशास्त्रं तु दशधा परिकीत्तितम्‌। 
पुनञ्चाष्टादशैभेँदै रुद्रेण परिकीतितम्‌॥ 1: 27॥ 


विजयं प्रथम|( ते)|[ऽ]षां निश्वासं तदनन्तरम्‌। 
स्वायम्भुवमतश्वैव वाथुलं तदनन्तरम्‌॥ 1: 28॥ 


वीरभद्रमिति ख्यातं रौरवं माकुटं तथा। 
विरसं चन्द्रहासं च ज्ञानं च मुखबिम्बकम्‌॥ 1:29! 


परोङ्गीतं ललितं चैव सिद्धं सन्तानमेव च। 
सर्वोङ्गीतं च विज्ञेयं किरणं पारमेश्वरम्‌॥ 1:301 


पारमेश्वरतन्त्रो ऽयं रिषिदेवेषु कीर्तितः । [6] 
॥अ)|ष्टाविंशति तन्त्राणि प्रभिन्नानि सहस्रशः॥ 1:311 


यो ऽन्यः परतरो भेदो शिवतन्त्रेषु पद्मते। 
age: स तु विज्ञेयो रिषिदेवगणां गिराम्‌॥ 1:321 


येन येन श्रुतं तन्त्रं येन येनावधारितम्‌। 
तस्य तस्य हि नामेन तत्तन्त्रं परिगीयते॥ 1: 33॥ 


शिवं सदाशिवं चैव विद्येशाञ्च उमा|(सुतः)| | 


a eee AERE के 
1:25 अनुटटप्छन्दवन्धेन ] K; अनष्टुच्छन्दबन्येन N; अनष्टुछन्दबन्धेन W 7:25 ru 


Bra पुनः प्राप्त] ८००/.;रिषिभिञ्च पुनञ्चाह Nw; ऋषिभिश्न पुनख्चाह K 1:25 : 
Rr] NK; ~ ऽति W 1:26 अंशुमान्‌ ] em. अशुमां W; अशुमां N; att 
eei K; सिद्ध" NW 1:31 श्तन्त्रो ऽयं रिषिदेवेषु कीर्तितः ] em. Er 
ऋषिदेवेषु कीर्तितः K; शतन्त्रोयं रिषिदेवेषु कीर्ति ~ nN; शतन्त्रायं रिषिदेवेषु क K 
त: W 1:31 सहस्रशः] K; षहश्रसः N; सहस्रसः W 1:32 भेदो ] NW; भव 
1:32 विज्ञेयो रिषिदेव* ] nw; विज्ञेय ऋषिदेव° K 1:32 गिराम्‌ ] con 

NKW 1:33 तन्त्रं ] K; तत्रं N; तंत्रं शा 


उत्तरसूत्रस्‌ १६१ 


Aafa 24शंगणा) मुख्या विजया कालिरेव च॥ 1 :34॥ 


ब्रह्मा विष्णुस्तथा dhadha: सूर्यश्न चन्द्रमाः | 
ध्मेन्द्रौ वरुणञ्चैव यक्षरक्षमहोरगैः॥ 1:351 


मातृभि्गुह्यकैश्चैव गरुडेन च धीमता। 
कोटिशश्चाप्यधीतानि लक्षायुतशतानि च॥ 1:36॥ 


शुक्रश्चैव दधीचिञ्च दुर्वासो ऽथ रुरुः कचः। 
aaRS) — [2] श्च सनन्दनः॥ 1:371 


रिचीकोर्वङ्गिरान्तञ्च श्वेतो रामञ्च वाह्लिकः। (?) 
मरीची चोपमन्युञ्च मार्ङ्ण्डो ऽगस्ति काश्यपः॥ 1:381 


तन्त्रस्य पारगा ह्येते शतशो ऽथ सहस्रशः। 
तेभ्यो मनुजमुख्यानां तत्र किञ्चिदिहागतम्‌॥ 1:391 


अल्पायुषाः स्मृता मर्त्या अल्पवीर्याल्पबुद्धयः | 
अतो $थेसङ्गहोक्त तु मत्येभ्यञ्ज {प्रका} शितम्‌॥ 1:401 


शास्त्रकोटिसहस्राणि मन्त्रकोट्या ह्यनेकशः i 
मातूकासम्भवाः सर्वे नास्ति मन्त्रमतः परम्‌॥ 1:41॥ 


॥ °॥ इति निश्वासतत्वसंहितायामुत्तरसूत्रे प्रथमः पटलः खो 41॥ °॥ 


देव्युवाच | 
मातूका परमो मन्त्रो यदि देव निगद्यते। 


NYI 9 — भेरवाझ गणमुख्या विजया] conj; ।मुख्या विजयो N; (भैरवाञ्च) गणमुख्या 
विजया 1८; भै शण -ख्या विजयो ww 1:37 दघीचिख दुर्वासो ] K; दघीचिख as 
N; दधीचि <दव्यासो W 1:37 वसिष्ठा ] em.; वसि — N; वलि- Ki dE ie 
1:39 *ख्यानां तत्र] NW; ख्यानामत्र K 1:40 मर्त्येभ्यक्च ] (7); मत्त्येभः ua 
“K 1:40 शितम्‌] N; सितम्‌ KW 1:41 मनका क i परतो 
K 1:41 मातृकासम्भवाः ] K; मातृकास्सम्भवास्‌ NW 2:1 NDS 
NW; देवता K 


१६२ निश्चासतच्त्वसंहितायाम्‌ 


मातृकायागमाख्याहि मूलाच्छाखा प्ररोह(ते)॥ 2:11 


[4] ईश्वर उवाच। 
मूलयागं प्रवक्ष्यामि येन यष्टेन सुब्रते। 
सप्तकोखस्तु मन्त्राणां यष्टा चैव भवन्ति हि॥ 2:2॥ 


पूर्वोत्तरखवे देशे सर्वशल्यविवर्जिते। 
क्षीरवृक्षसमोपेते नदीसरस्तटेषु वा॥ 2:3॥ 


महागिरिवरे रम्ये उद्याने च शिवालये। 
देव्यामातृगृहे वापि चत्वरे तु चतुष्पथे॥ 2:4॥ 


प्चषण्डतटे चै७]व प्रासादे वा मनोरमे। 
यत्र वा रुचिते स्थाने सर्वदोषविवरजिते॥ 2:5॥ 


शुक्ता रक्ता तथा पीता कृष्णा वर्णक्रमेण TI 
सुकुट्टिमान्ततः कृत्वा गोमयेनोपलेपयेत्‌॥ 2:6॥ 


पञ्चगव्येन चाभ्युक्ष्य पञ्चवर्गाभिमन्त्रितैः | 
सकलेनोदकं दद्याद्देवदेवं तु पूजयेत्‌॥ 2:71 


दक्षिणे योजयेद्वीजां वामे यो(निन्तु) [6] कल्पयेत्‌। 
शिवीभूतः प्रसन्नात्मा शिवस्यार्चनमारभेत्‌॥ 2:8॥ 


हस्वाक्षरः स्मृतो ऽनन्तो दीर्घस्तु सकलो भवेत्‌ । 
शब्दान्ते निष्कलः प्रोक्तो दीर्घ सर्थ्चार्थकर्मसु॥ 2:91 


यस्याक्षरस्य यागो ऽयं सोष्टधा स्रुत कल्पयेत्‌ | 
द्वितीयावरणे योज्या ते तु विद्येश्वराः स्मृताः॥ 2:101 


RRS ei ei 
21 मातृकायाग° ] NW; मातृका याग” K 2:1 मूलाच्छाखा प्ररोहते ] Wi TAT 
खा प्ररोह > N मूलो ।। ण प्ररोहणम्‌ K 2:2 उवाच] K; उ NW 2:2 ] 
NK"; मूल योगं ६“; मूलयोगं छ 2:2 यष्टेन] NW; यज्ञेनाः 2:5 पद्यषण्डतटे 
चेव] em; पच्चषण्डतटे <व N; पचस्वण्डे तटा येव K; पच्चखण्डतटे चेव W 2” वा] 
KW; dTN 2:6 कृष्णा वर्ण” ] NK; कृष्णवर्णा W 2:6 सुकुट्टिमां ] K; सुकुटिमान K 
NW (unmetrical) 2:6 गोमये० ] NK; सोमये* Ww 2:7 दद्याद्‌ ] NW; दद्यान्‌ ] 
2:8 वीजां ] NW; बीजं £ 2:8 योनिन्तु] W; यो zz N; UK 2:10 सुत AT 
Ki सु त? क ल्प? येत्‌ N; ञ्जत कल्पयेत्‌ ए 2:10 योज्या ते] NW; 


उत्तरसूत्रम्‌ १६३ 


दीर्घौ वै लोकपालास्तु [E257] Rear वै चास्त्रयोनयः। 
एवं पूज्य यथान्यायं होमं तत्रैव कारयेत्‌॥ 2:11॥ 


अग्न्यागारास्तु चत्वारस्तन्मे निगदतः शृणु। 
queque वा त्रिकोणं धनुषाकृतिम्‌॥ 2:12॥ 


हस्तमात्रन्तु कतैव्यं चतुरंगुलमु।च्छ्रितम्‌|। 
~~ क? त क “~ ~ कर्तव्यं दीक्षहोमयोः॥ 2:13॥ 


नित्यहोमं च {तन्मानं लक्षहोमे चतु)श्रगुणम्‌। 
अष्टधा गुणितं ह्येवं कोटिहोमे प्रकल्पयेत्‌॥ 2:14॥ 


वर्तुले जनितो ह्यग्निः पश्चिमेन पुरस्य qi 
।अनिर्वाणञ्चतुर्याम्यो पूर्वे होमं तु कारयेत्‌॥ 2:15॥ 


दक्षिणे पञ्चिमे चैव उत्तरेशानयोस्तथा। 
शान्तिके पौष्टिके चैव होमः सिद्धिकरो भवेत्‌॥ 2:161 


अग्निर्नैऋतिवायव्ये अभिचारे प्रसिद्धि[दः)। 
(च)[$तुरस्रे नित्यहोमे शान्तिके पौष्टिके तथा॥ 2:171 


अरणीं हस्तमात्रान्तु पालाशीं कारयेङ्ुधः। 
अश्वत्थप्रभवां वापि कुर्याच्छान्तिकपौष्टिके॥ 2:181 


अष्टाङ्गुलं तु विस्तारमुच्छुयं चतुरङ्गुलम्‌। 
मन्थानं च तथैवेह त्रिगुणा चोत्तरारणी॥ 2:191 


2:11 लोकपालास्तु ] coni; लोकपा-- N; लोकपाला —WK 2:11 कारयेत्‌] NK; F- 
ल्पयेत्‌ W 2:12 अग्न्यागारास्तु ] NW; अग्न्यगारास्तु K 2:12 तन्मे निगदतः ] les 
त+त+मे निगदितः W 2:12 चतुरस्रं ] K; चतुरस्र N; चतुरश्रं W iind 
धनुषाकृतिम्‌ ] K; तृकोणं धनुषाकृतिम्‌ 19; तृकोणं धनुराकृतिम्‌ ॥ 2:13 कर्तव्य चतुरंगु- 
लमुच्छितम्‌ ] K; EMERE Hp N; कर्तव्य चतुरंगुलमुच्छुतम्‌ ॥ 2:13 कर्तव्यं 
दीक्षहोमयोः ] 1९९ : KW 2:14 नित्यहोमं च तन्मानं] con; नित्यहो- 
मे? च? -- प; नित्यं होम च ।। w; नित्यहोमं च (ता) ५ £ 2:14 कोटिहोमे ] NW; 
कोटिहोमं K 2:15 अनिर्वाणञ्जतुर्ाम्ये] N; अनिर्वाणत्वे तु याम्ये K; अनिर्वाणचतु- 
याम्ये Ww 2:16 होमः] N; होम KW 2:17 अगिनर्नैत्ऋति° ] NW; anadene K 
2:17 चतुरस्रे] W; gA N; (च)तुरख्रे = 2:19 अष्टाङ्गुलं तु] NW; अष्टाङ्गुल K 
(unmetrical) 2:19 चोत्तरारणी ] conj; चोत्तरायणी NKW 


१६४ निश्चासतत्त्वसंहितायाम्‌ 


नेत्रकं व्याममात्र तु मस्तकं षोडशाङ्खुलम्‌ | 

योनिं वै कल्पशयित्वा तु योन्यां मन्थे च सुव्रते॥ 2:201 
शोधनं प्रोक्षणं पूजा योजनं जननं तथा। 

पञ्चसंस्कारसंशुद्धं कृत्वा कुण्डे प्रवेशयेत्‌॥ 2:21! 
अलाभात्त्वरणेर्वह्णौ गृह्णीयान्मणिसम्भवम्‌। 

वज्ाग्निश्नैव दावाग्निरग्निहोत्राग्निरेव च॥ 2:22॥ 
एतेषामप्यलाभेन लौकिकागिनं तु edd | 

ूर्वसंस्कारशुद्धे तु Be होमं तु कारयेत्‌॥ 2:231 
उल्लिखित्वा तु तत्कुण्डमुद्धूत्याभ्युक्षयेत्पुनः i 
चतुष्पथाक्षपाटन्तु ब्रह्माणं दक्षिणे न्यसेत्‌॥ 2: 24॥ 
पूजयित्वा ततो sia तु प्रणीतां चोत्तरे न्यसेत्‌। 
अभ्युक्षयेच्च पात्राणि परिधीध्मानि तापयेत्‌॥ 2: 25॥ 
पवित्रमाज्यसंस्कारं श्रुवादीनां प्रतापनम्‌। 
आज्यसंस्कारमाघार्य [6] आज्यभागन्तु होमयेत्‌॥ 2: 26॥ 
पूर्णाहुति ततो दत्त्वा चरुं च श्रापयेत्ततः। 

हुत्वा चरुं च देवाय कल्पयेत्साधकैस्ततः॥ 2: 27॥ 
शिवीकृत्वा विधानेन पाशान्तत्त्वेन बन्धयेत्‌। 

प्रकृतिं पुरुषं चैव नियतिं {कालमेव च}॥ 2: 28॥ 

॥-25 मायां विद्याञ्च पाशो ऽयमीश्वर्च सदाशिवः | 
गणपाशास्तथा चान्ये धर्माध्ममया परे॥ 2:29! 


rue 100 173 ४ 
2:20 व्याम" ] conj.; व्योम NKW 2:21 *्संशुद्धं ] NW; "सयुक्त K वच E 
NW; कुण्ड K 2:23 34 तु] conj; YR म्‌-\; शुद्धं तु KW 2 E K 


conj; ब्राह्माणन्‌ N; ब्राह्मणं KW 2:26 प्रतापनम ] W, प्रतापणं N; प्र 
2:26 "माघार्य ] conj; “माघ (?) ~ N; "मापाद्य K; "मा ५ W 2:27 e 
em.; श्रावयेत्‌ N; स्रावयेत्‌ K; श्रावयन्‌ ए 2:27 *धकेस्ततः ] conj; i. 
“नकस्ततः K; “धक ततः % 2:28 प्रकृति पुरुषं चैव नियतिं] N; प्रकृति परा 
निय uw; प्रकृतिः पुरुषञ्चैव नियति uk 2:29 मायां free] NW; माया 
च £ 2:29 *मयापरे ] NW; मथापरम्‌ K 


उत्तरसूत्रम्‌ १६५ 


कामः क्रोधञ्च लोभञ्च जन्म मृत्युस्तथैव च। 
जरा व्याधिश्च शोकञ्च क्षुत्तृष्णा मोहमेव च॥ 2: 30॥ 


विषादश्च भयञ्चैव मदमात्सर्यदारुणः। 
स्थूलास्सूक्ष्मास्तथा चान्ये समयाख्या निरोधकाः॥ 2:311 


{Rr} ष्यं पञ्चगव्यं तु पाययेत्‌। 
चरुं तेषां प्रदातव्यं दन्तधाव|(न)|मेव च॥ 2:32॥ 


पूर्वास्यो भक्षयेद्विद्ठान्‌ दन्तधावनमुत्तमम्‌। 
सक्षीरं Aiah सदलन्द्रादशाङ्गलम्‌॥ 2:33॥ 


पूर्वास्यं दक्षिणास्यं तु उत्तरास्यं तथैव च। 
ऊर्द्धमीशानवक्तू तु सर्वकामफलप्रदम्‌॥ 2:34॥ 


अन्यास्यमशुभं विद्धि होमं तस्य शतं भवेत्‌ [3] । 
वसेत्तत्रैव शुद्धात्मा स्वप्नां वक्ष्येन्निशिक्षये॥ 2:35॥ 


नदीनदसमुद्रे वा तरणं गिरिरोहणम्‌। 
सिंहासने विमाने वा गजगोवूषरोहणम्‌॥ 2:36॥ 


छत्रध्वजगवां लाभं स्रगदामधान्यवाससाम्‌। 
कुमुदोत्पलपद्चानि भूलम्भं दधिभक्षणम्‌॥ 2:37॥ 


मद्यासुक्पानलेपञ्च अमेध्यस्य च भक्षणम्‌। 
अग्निदाहं शिरच्छेदं दृष्टा सि{ध्यति}|[4] मानवः॥ 2:38॥ 


तैलाभ्यङ्गं च-म्‌ -उद्वाहं पुत्रलम्भं प्रनर्तनम्‌ । 


2:30 कामः ] K; काम” NW 2:36 क्षुत्तृष्णा ] NW; क्ुट्तृष्णा K 2:31 स्थूलास्सूक्ष्मा- 
स्तथा] NG स्थूला सूक्ष्मास्तथा W; स्थूलः सूक्ष्मस्तथा K 2:31 समयाख्या निरोधकाः ] 
K; ~मयाख्या निरोधका NW 2:32 ष्यं पश्च" ] N; U पंच" K; | म्‌ पच" W 
2:33 नित्रैणावक्रं ] conj; निर्त्रणावक्त NW; नित्रेणं वक्क K 2:35 शतं भवेत्‌ ] conj.; 
शत -- NKW 2:35 स्वप्ना] NW; स्वप्रान्‌ K 2:35 *न्निशिक्षये ] NW; निरीक्षयेत्‌ 
£ 2:37 स्रगदामधान्यवाससाम्‌ ] conj; स्रग्दामं धान्यवासस NW; अयान ee 
सः £ 2:37 भूलम्भं ] conj; भूलम्भं N; Weed £; भूलग्न W 2:38 SET सिध्य | 
मानवः ] conj; gETRT ~ [4] मा “वः N; दृष्टासिद्धिमवाप्नुयात्‌ K; sisi Es 
W 2:39 “भ्यङ्गञ्च मुद्वाहम्पुत्रलम्भम्प्रनत्तैनं ] N; Ay समुद्दाहः पुत्रलब्ध च नत्तनम 
K; "xd च मुद्दाहम्पुत्रलम्भम्प्रनर्त्तनं W 


१६६ निश्चासतत्त्वसंहितायाम्‌ 


रक्तमाल्यानि वस्त्राणि महिषोष्टप्ररोहणम्‌॥ 2: 39॥ 


कलहम्‌ मुण्डितं नग्नं पङ्के चैव निमज्जनम्‌। 
यानं छत्रं गृहं शय्या भिद्यमानैर्न सिद्धति॥ 2:401 


अरण्यादौ तु इस्वप्रं यत्कर्म परिकीर्तितम्‌। 
आद्यक्षरेण हस्वेन सर्वकर्माणि कारयेत्‌॥ 2:41॥ 


७ उत्तरसू|त्रे| [5] द्वितीयः पटलश्स्रो 411 ®॥ 


द्वि्रातस्तु शुचिर्भूत्वा सूत्रयेद्धवनं शुभम्‌। 
चित्रास्वात्यन्तरे प्राची प्रतीची तेन सिद्धति॥ 3:1॥ 


उदीचीदक्षिणे चैव धुवेनैव प्रसिद्यति। 
प्राक्प्रतीची स्मृता रेखा अपरा दक्षिणोत्तरा॥ 3:2॥ 


भ्रामयेच्चतुरो वृत्ताश्वतुरदुलसंमितां | 
दलाञ्चोपदलाञ्चैव क(णिका)6]केशरान्तथा॥ 3 : 31 


तुल्यमानाः स्मृता ह्येते पीठ द्वात्रिंशदङ्गुलम्‌ | 
पीठान्ते सूत्रयेद्रेखामेकैकान्तु चतुर्दिशि॥ 3:4॥ 


कोणान्तरेषु या रेखा [द्वाभ्या -.-तु| सिद्धति। 
पञ्चविंशो ऽथ पञ्चाशद्वात्रिशञ्चतुषष्टि वा॥ 3:5॥ 


एषा(न्ते)- [261] (व्या) देशिकेन तु। 


ae Set esce iind 
2:41 दुस्वप्े ] N; gA KW 3:1 प्रतीची ] \८”°॥; प्रतिची ६” 2:2 उदीची ] 
NKW; उदीचि K 3:3 *संमितां] NW; संमितान्‌ K 3:3 ] 
NK; दला चोपदला स्वैव W 3:3 कणिका” ] W; क 1116; का — N sagem 
नाः स्मृता ह्येते पीठं दवात्रिंशदङ्गुलम्‌ em; तुल्यमाना स्मृता होते पीठ द्वातृंशदर्जुल S 
तुल्यमाना स्मृता ह्येते पीठं द्वात्रिंशदंगुलम्‌ K; तुल्यमाना स्मृता प्रेते पीर्ठ e 
W 3:4 "कान्तु चतुर्दिशि ] N; “कांत्तु च+तु+र्दिशि कान्तु चतुर्दिसि W न u 
गान्तरेषु ] con; कोणोत्तरेषु Nw; कोणान्तरेख K 35 द्वाभ्या - तु] ED o. 
Wi —N 35 द्वाविशच्च ० ] K; द्वातुंशच्च" NW 3:6 देशिकेन ] NW; दैशिकेन 


उत्तरसूत्रम्‌ १६७ 


कोणे बिन्द्रनि चान्यानि कुर्यादावरणानि तु॥ 3:61 


स्वतन्त्रमानसिद्धानि द्वाराणि तु यथाविधि। 
गर्भेतुल्यम्भवेह्वार शोभा द्वारार्धलम्बिता॥ 3:7॥ 


शोभा द्विगुणकपोलं उपशोभा तु — | 
पश्चिम वाहयेह्ारन्त्रीण्यन्यानि तु रुन्धयेत्‌॥ 3:8॥ 


पौष्टिके दक्षिणं द्वारमभि[शचारे तथोत्तरम्‌। 
चतुरश्रं समाख्यातं वर्षुलञ्च निबोध मे॥ 3:9॥ 


चतुरश्रन्ततः कृत्वा हस्ताद्धस्तप्रवद्धनम्‌। 
हयङ्गुलेन तु वृद्याया ततो वृत्तन्तु भ्रामयेत्‌॥ 3:101 


वृत्त एष समाख्यातो द्वाराः पूर्वोक्तका स्मृताः। 
वृत्तार्धन्तु परित्यज्य अर्घचन्द्रम्भविष्यति॥ 3:11 


एकद्दारार्धेचन्द्रन्तु त्रिकोणं साम्प्रतं शुणु। 
बिन्दुत्रयेण सिद्धेत त्रिष्कोणन्नात्र संशयः॥ 3:12॥ 


त्रिद्वारं वा त्रिकोणन्तु मध्ये शून्येन सिद्यति। 
वर्तुलञ्चतुरस्रं वा शान्तिके पौष्टिके तथा॥ 3:131 


अर्धचन्द्रन्तु चण्डीशे अभिचारे त्रिकोणकम्‌। 
एवं वै सूत्रयित्वा तु येन यत्‌ कम्मं वाञ्छितम्‌॥ 3:14॥ 


त्रिरेखम्पञ्चरेखं वा आलिखेद्भुवनं शुभम्‌। 


3:6 कोणे बिन्दूनि चान्यानि ] conj; कोणे बिन्डुभि चान्यानि N; कोणविन्दूनि चान्यानि 
K; कोणे बिन्डुभि चान्यानि ॥ 3:7 °मान°] N; "मात्र" K; "मा DOW 3:7 य- 
थाविधि] em; यथाविधिः NKW 3५ गर्भेतुल्यम्भवेह्वारं ] W; गर्भेतुल्यम्भवेह्वार N; 
गर्भेतुलोड्भवेद्वारे K 3५ द्वारार्ध°] K; ares N; द्वा -र 7 W 3:8 त्रीण्यन्यानि ] 
conj; त्रीण्येतानि NKW 3:9 पौष्टिके दक्षिणं द्वारमभिचारे ] coni; पौ? टके दक्षि ¬ 
चारे ४; । चारे ८; पौष्टिके दक्षिणद्वार (चारे W 3:10 "या ततो] NW; ततो K 
(unmetrical) 3:11 एष] NW; एषः K 3:11 पूर्वोक्तका ] NK"W; पूर्वोक्तका+: > 
K 3:12 त्रिकोण साम्प्रतं शृणु] conj; तृकोणं साम्प्र-- [अ णु N; त्रिकोण सान्द्र bo 

K; तृकोण सांप्रतं शृणु w 3:12 त्रिष्कोणन्‌ ] N; त्रिकोणं KW 315 भुवन शुभ T] 
conj; भुवनं शु --- N; शु - W; भुवने शुभे £ 


१६८ निश्चासतत्त्वसंहितायाम | ।हितायाम्‌ 


uj fate तु त्रिदैवत्यं द्वाभ्यां शिवसदाशिवी॥ 3:151 
एवमालिख्य यलेन पूर्वोक्तमर्चैनम्भवेत्‌ | 


भक्ष्यमोज्यसमाकीर्ण वितानध्वजशोभितम्‌॥ 3:16॥ 


सम्पूज्य च यथान्यायन्ततो दीक्षां समारभेत्‌। 


गर्भपुन्सवसीमन्तञ्जन्म निष्क्रमणन्तथा॥ 3:17॥ 


प्राशनझ्नूडकर्म्मश्न अजिनं ब्रतमेखलम्‌। 
वाससञ्चोपवी[ऽ]तञ्च दण्डं सन्ध्यामुपासनम्‌॥ 3: 18॥ 


जपहोमन्तथा चान्यत्त्यायुषञ्चाभिवादनम्‌। 
स्रातव्रतपरित्यागो दण्डादीनाञ्च होमनम्‌॥ 3:19॥ 


विवाहपाकयज्ञा्च हविर्यज्ञा्च सोमकाः। 
आसहस्रास्तु कत्तेव्या वानप्रस्थान्तभेक्षुकम्‌॥ 3:20॥ 


ब्रतम्पाशुपतं कृत्वा शोधनम्प्रोक्षणन्तथा। 
न्यासञ्च शिवहस्तञ्च पाशानाङ्कुन्तनं त[6]था॥ 3:211 


ताडनं पूजनञ्चैव कुर्याच्छास्त्रविधानतः | 
शिखाच्छेदविधानन्तु विद्यादीक्षासमाप्तिके॥ 3:22॥ 


सूत्रणादौ शिखान्तञ्च यत्‌ कर्म्म परिकीत्तितम्‌ | 
दीर्घाक्षरेण qq सर्वं कर्तव्यं देशिकेन तु॥ 3: 23॥ 


[६26°] {सा)ध्यमन्त्राभिषेकञ्च कर्तव्य सिद्धिमिच्छता॥ oll 


3:15 निरेख तु त्रिदैवत्यं ] K; जिरेखन्तु त्रिदेवत्यं भ; त्रिलेखन्तु त्रिदेवत्य WO 376 ए- 
वमालिख्य] NW; एवं मालिख्य K 3:17 जन्म fashe ] cons; ज शी ष्कः Ni 
जातनिष्क्र” £; ज -निष्क्रः W 3:18 कर्म्मझ ] N; कम्मञ्च K; कर्म च ए 3:83] 
ससञ्चोपवीतच्च ] coni; वाससञ्चोप — F N; वाससं T U K; वाससञ्चोपवी m 
3:18 चच दण्ड सन्ध्यामुपासनम्‌ ] NK; दण्डं सद्यामुपासनम्‌ Wo 3:19 खात” | a 
सान” K 3:20 आसहस्रास्तु ] ८०१. ; आसहतसारान्तु NKW 3:21 पाशुपतं ] Ki प 
IT NW (unmetrical) 3:21 न्यासञ्च ] conj; ज्ञासञ्च N; सभ्य Ki NW न] 
3:21 पाशानाङ्कुन्तनं तथा ] conj.; ei ऽङ्गं — TN; पा एधा KW 3:22 ताडन | 
K; ताड >म्‌ N; ता-म्‌ ॥ 3:23 IT] NW; सूत्रेणादौ K 3:28 जिला 
NW; शिखान्ते K 3:28 देशिकेन ] N; देशिकेन K; देसिकेन W 5247707 
conj; "ध्यम" N; [Ho K; -म° W 


उत्तरसूत्रम्‌ १६९ 


उत्तरसूत्रे तृतीयः पटलः स्रो 24 (?) 


सिद्धिक्षेत्रेषु पुण्येषु सिद्धिभूमिम्परीक्षयेत्‌। 
देवं संस्थाप्य विधिना स्नात्वा त्रिष्कालमर्च्चयेत्‌॥ 4:11 


नवात्मेन मृदाञ्जस्वा सर्वदिक्षु विनिक्षिपेत्‌। 
द्वितीयन्तोयमध्ये तु तृतीयाङ्गानि चालभेत्‌॥ 4:2॥ 


—[] वन्दयेत्सन्ध्याम्प्राणायामन्तु मूर्तिना। 
उपस्थानन्तु वक्तेण वामेन पितृतर्प्पणम्‌॥ 4:3॥ 


पृथिव्यां यानि तीर्थानि सरितः सागराणि च। 
सातो भवति सर्वेषु यः स्रायीत शिवाम्भसा॥ 4:4॥ 


पवित्राणि ततो जस्वा प्राणायामस्तु धारणैः। 
शिवध्यानं समालम्ब्य enda यथाविधि॥ 4:5॥ 


सितानि चैव पु!ष्पाणि) [3] पीतरक्तसुगन्धिनः। 
शान्तिके पौष्टिके पुष्पा विपरीताभिचारुके॥ 4:61 


युग्गुल्वादीनि धूपानि सुरभीणि विशेषतः i 
शान्तिके पौष्टिके धूपा अभिचारे विलोमकाः॥ 4:7॥ 


चन्दनादीनि गन्धानि सुरभीणि विशेषतः। 
शान्तिके पौष्टिके गन्धा विपरीताभिचारुके॥ 4:8॥ 


घृतपक्कानि दिव्यानि भक्ष्यभोज्यानि (चै)(व) [4] हि। 


41 देवं संस्थाप्य ] NW; देवेशं स्थाप्य K 4:1 त्िष्काल° ] NW; निष्काल° K 4:27- 
दाञ्जस्वा ] NW; मृदं जस्वा 4:2 तोयमध्ये तु] W; द्वितीयन्तोय <ध्ये g N; द्वितीयं 
तोय (मध्ये) K (unmetrical) 4:2 तृतीयाङ्गानि चालभेत्‌ conj; तृतीयङ्गानि चालभू 
? त्‌? ॥; तृतीयेड्डभि (चालने K; तृतीयङ्गानि ।। W 4:4 खायीत ] £; स्नायी = 
N; सायी - ए 4:5 प्राणायामस्तु ] NK; प्राणायामम्तु W 4:5 यथाविधि ] SE 
यथाविधिः Nkw 4:6 पुष्पाणि ] W; पुष्पा (णि) K; पु-- 4:6 "गन्धिनः ] mu 
“गन्धिना NKW 4:6 *चारुके] N*W; “्चारके NK 4:7 धूपा] NW; धूप 
4:8 °चारुके] NW; "चारको 


शान्तिके पौष्टिके देया विपरीताभिचारुके॥ 4: 9॥ 


वेणीबन्धन्ततः कृत्वा हस्तयोरुभयोरपि। 
कनिष्ठिके सृते लग्ने ager मध्यगोपितौ॥ 4: 10॥ 


बीजमुद्रेति विख्याता अस्मिन्तन्त्रे प्रकी तिता | 
एकतस्तु करौ कृत्वा सृतास्सर्वास्तु युग्मकाः॥ 4:11॥ 
नमस्कारः समाख्यातस्सर्वदेवतव|न्द(ने)| । [5] 
मध्यमे 5नामिके द्वे द्वे अन्योन्यान्तरिते कृते॥ 4:12॥ 


तर्जनीमध्यमे युक्ते विपरीते परस्परम्‌। 
कनिष्ठानामिके ऽप्येवं विपरीता तथैव fen 4:13॥ 


अधोगतौ तथाङ्गुष्ठौ मुद्रैषा अमृता स्मृता। 

ष्ठे पृष्ठे करौ योज्य अन्योन्यान्तरिताङ्गुली॥ 4: 14॥ 
वर्तुलीकृत्य भ्रामेत कोटिमुद्रा विधी|(यते)] i 

{अतः परं प्र}वक्ष्यामि द्रव्यमुद्रा तु लक्षणम्‌॥ 4:15॥ 


यदैव यादृशन्द्रव्यं साधके मनसि स्थितम्‌। 
तादृशन्तु सदा कुर्यात्करयुग्मविकारकम्‌॥ 4: 161 


उच्छूतौ तु करौ कृत्वा अन्योन्यान्तरशाखकौ | 
चालनाहूर्शयेच्चैव सञ्ज्ञामात्रेण उत्तरे॥ 4:171 [६27] 


तेनैव जायते सर्व निर्विघ्रकरणं तथा। 
अधोमुखौ करौ कृत्वा अन्योन्यान्तरिताङ्गुली॥ 4: 18॥ 


अनन्तासनमुद्रैषा कनिष्ठादुष्ठलम्बितौ | 


4:9 "चारुके ] NW; शचारके# 4:12 °देवतवन्दने ] em; देवतव — Ni Ka 
न्द (ने) K; दैवतवन्द UW 4:12 दवे द्वे] NW; GAK 4:14 मुद्रैषा ] ॥ qu 
NW 4:14 पृष्ठे पृष्ठे] conj. पृष्ठे पृष्ठ NKW 4:4 °ङ्गुली ] em.; गु NKW 
4:15 वक्ष्यामि zaga] W; --मि द्रव्यमुद्रा N; ।। द्रव्यमुद्रा K 4:16 i 
मन? ÎN; TUKW 417380] N; उ ।तौ £; उक्तौ W 4:17 d 
येच्चैव सञ्ज्ञा ] conj; चालनादर्षये ~ ~ञ्ज्ञा N; N; चालना LT? K; "n 
iue *तादुली K; >छुली N; ०-उली W 4:19 भ्मुद्रैषा ] Ki (d 


उत्तरसूत्रम्‌ १७१ 


करद्वये तु मुष्टिन्तु एकैकान्तरिताङ्गुली॥ 4:19॥ 


सकलस्य भवेन्मुद्रा (सृताय — मध्यतः | 
कनिष्ठानामिके द्वे द्वे अन्योन्यान्तरिते PI 4:20॥ 


तर्जन्याग्रे — [2 प्रसृते मध्यमे युते। 
तन्मध्ये प्रसूता ङ्गुष्ठौ अधोकृत्वा तु कुञ्चयेत्‌॥ 4:211 


निष्कलस्य भवेन्मुद्रा सव्याङ्गुष्ठेन तर्जनी | 
दृष्टेतान्तु विमुच्यन्ते बध्वा शिवपदं व्रजेत्‌॥ 4: 221 


अन्येषान्तु नमस्कारो कोटिमुद्रा विसर्जने। 
शान्तिके मानसो जाप्य उपांशुः पौष्टिके स्मृतः॥ 4:231 


सशब्दज्चाभिचारे तु {प्रागुदग्‌}[दक्षिणामुखः | 
रुद्राक्षशङ्कपद्याक्षाः पुत्रज्ञीवास मौक्तिकाः॥ 4:241 


स्फाटिका मणिरलाख्च सौवर्णा वैदूमास्तथा। 
शान्तिके पौष्टिके चैव एता मालाः प्रकीर्तिताः॥ 4:251 


23 Cf. Svacchanda 2:145f: शान्तिके मानसो जप्य उपांशुः पौष्टिके स्मृतः। 
सशब्दश्चाभिचारे ऽसौ प्रागुदग्दक्षिणामुखः॥ 145॥ 

आत्मा न शृणुते यं तु मानसो ऽसौ प्रकीर्तितः। 

आत्मना श्रूयते यस्तु तमुपांशुं विजानते॥ 146॥ 

परे शृण्वन्ति यं देवि सशब्दः स उदाहृतः। 

अष्टोत्तरशतेनैव अक्षमाला समेरुका॥ 1471 


रुद्राक्षशङ्कपच्ाक्षपुत्रजीवकमौक्तिकैः | 
स्फाटिकी मणिरल्नोत्था सौवर्णी agar तथा॥ 1481 


419 तु] N; UK; - W 427 भवेन्मुद्रा conj; “मुद्रा N; भवे मुद्रा K; UT W 
4:20 सृताय ---मध्यतः ] W; --ध्यतः N; मृताय ।मध्यतः K 4208 द्वे] NW; इन्दवे 
K 4:21 तर्जन्याग्रे] KW; तज ~~ N 4:22 दृष्टेतान्तु W; gag N; Bde 
WK 4:22 शिवपदं ब्रजेत्‌] KW; शिवपम्व्रजेत्‌ N (unmetrical) 4:23 नमस्कारो ] 
NKW; नमस्कारः Kee 4:23 विसर्जने] NK; "वि जने W 4:23 स्मृतः ] ie 
मतः K 4:24 सशब्दश्चाभिचारे तु MYST] con; सुशब्दच्चाभि — N; सुशव्दछाभ- 
चारे OK; सुशाब्दज्चाभिचारे तु W 4:24 पुत्रज्ञीवार ] NWK"; प्रत्र जीवाञ्च £ 
4:25 वैद्रमास्तथा ] K; agar तथा NW 


१७२ निश्चासतत्त्वसंहितायाम्‌ 
aga त्रपुसीसञ्च अस्थिमालाभिचारुके | 

एकाधिकशतक्कुर्योदथवा पञ्चविंशतिः॥ 4:261 

एकपञ्चाशिकं [वापि मा(ला शान्ति)|[4[कपौष्टिके | 
सप्ताधिकशतङ्कयोदथवा सप्तविंशति॥ 4: 27॥ 


त्रयोदशैकूनपञ्चाशदूनविंशति मारणे। 
अङ्गुष्ठामध्यतजैन्या मालामाकर्षयेङ्ुभः॥ 4: 28॥ 


शान्तिकादिक्रमेणैव जपस्सर्वफलप्रदः | 
न सिद्यते यदा मन्त्रो विघ्रं संलक्षयेद्ुध:॥ 4:291 


अभिषेकेन्धनं छेदं बोधनामलदी|(पनम्‌)| | 
— [ऽुमेखलं कृत्वा प्रतिमोशीरजान्न्यसेत्‌॥ 4:30॥ 


सहस्रजप्ततोयेन APTS †तमात्मनः। 
जुंकारो बोधयेन्मन्त्रां ओंकारेण तु इन्धयेत्‌॥ 4:31॥ 


नमस्कारामलं कुर्यात्स्वाहाकारेण दीपयेत्‌ | 
सःकारश्छेदने योज्य आद्यन्ते च प्रतिष्ठितः॥ 4:32॥ 


सर्वेकामान्प्रयच्छुन्ति यथोक्ते कर्म्मणा कृते | 
सत्यसः{न्धो Sura} [eet शौचाचारसमन्वितः॥ 4:33॥ 


सिध्यते अचिरेणैव क्रोधलोभविवर्जितः। 
मुद्रां द्रव्याकृतिं चैव दद्याच्चोत्तरसाधके॥ 4:34॥ 


तेन सम्पादयेहूव्यां मौनकाले तु साधकः | 


ERR: al. aute MR 
4:27 वापि माला शान्ति» ] K; वा? >मा? ला-- N; वापि मला 7 छ 420897 
विंशति ] NW; सप्तविंशतिः K 4:28 त्रयोदशैकून ] N; ।दशैस्तून” Ki ।दशैकून" 
hs 4:29 fast संलक्षयेद्दुधः ] conj; fag संलक्षयेद्ुधः N; विघ्नेशं लक्षयेदुधः Ki 7. 
: 4:30 मेखलं ] N; । खल KW 4:31 मन्त्रां ] N; मन्त्रान्‌ K; de 
W 4:31 ओंकारेण तु इन्धयेत्‌] NW; उकारेण तु इद्धयेतूह 4:32 सःकारश्छेदने ] 
con; स+:+कारच्छेदने NW; सकारःच्छेदने K 4:32 प्रतिष्ठितः ] Ki A 
NW 4:83 यथोक्ते कर्म्मणा ] NW; यथोक्तकर्म्मणा kK 4:38 सत्यस ] Ni सत्य | 
सत्यस W 4:34 क्रोधलोभ० ] NW; क्रोध ।भ० K 4:34 मुद्रा द्रव्याकृर्ति ] ud 
मुद्रा द्रव्याकृतिश्‌ NKW 4:35 दृव्यां ] NW; द्रव्यं K 4:35 साधकः ] conii uH 
NW; साधक K 


उत्तरसूत्रम्‌ NOE 


प्रतिग्रहे प्रायश्चित्ती समयस्य च लङ्घने॥ 4:35॥ 
~~ ~ वा हविषन्द्रव्यञ्‌? -- or 27°] 
{अग्र)मध्यमूलञ्च सत्वचास्फाटितास्तथा॥ 4: 36॥ 


शान्तिके पौष्टिके ह्येतास्समिधा द्वादशाङ्खुलाः। 
दलहीनाष्टाडुला वक्ता स्फाटिताञ्चाभिचारुके॥ 4:371 


हविष्यादीनि द्रव्याणि शान्तिके पौष्टिके ऽपि ari 
होमयेत ततो मन्त्री विपरीताभिचारुके॥ 4:38॥ 


Wd हस्तप्रमाणन्तु आधाराङ्गुल — 

[2 =स्रुचीं कुर्यात्पुष्करं हस्तसम्मितम्‌॥ 4:39॥ 
पलाशाश्वत्थजावेतौ शान्तिके पौष्टिके fag: | 
विपरीताभिचारे तु कर्त्तव्या देशिकेन तु॥ 4:40॥ 


अतः परन्तु यह्ूव्यं विपरीताभिचारुके। 
परिधीध्मां तु गृह्णीत याज्ञिकां सर्वकर्म्मसु॥ 4: 41॥ 


कुशाग्रह्टयसंयुक्तम्प्रादेशम्मध्यग्रन्थितम्‌। 
पवित्रं विहितन्तन्त्रे (आज्य)|3स्योत्मवनाय वै॥ 4:42॥ 


पुण्यदर्शेनसंवादन्नरेन्द्रजनवर्धनम्‌ | 
आत्मोत्कर्षबलन्दृष्टा सिध्यते नात्र संशयः॥ 4:431 


अपुण्यजनसंवादन्नरेंद्रजनविश्रमम्‌। 
आत्महानिञ्च सततन्दृष्टा चैव न सिध्यति॥ 4:441 


साधकस्य विधिः प्रोक्तस्सर्वकामार्थसाधकः i 


4:35 प्रायश्चित्ती ] conj; प्रायश्चित्तो NW; प्रायश्चित्त+:+ K 4:36 °स्फाटितास्‌ ] K; 
*स्फाटिता+:+ N; *स्फटिता we; स्फटिक we 4:37 वक्रा ] em; वक्ता कि 
4:97 *चारुके ] NW; *चारके K 4:39 "प्रमाणन्तु] KW; S CSI I NA 4 
शिकेन] Nw; दैशिकेन K 4:41 परिधीध्मा तु गृह्णीत ] conj; डि 
Teli याज्ञिका ] N; परिधीध्मा तु गुह्णीतयाज्ञिकाः K; परिधीध्मा तमा 
4:48 भन्रेन्द्रजनवर्भनम्‌ ] em; भननरेद्रजेनवर्षनं \; R जनवर्धनम्‌ K; ER दानिश 
वर्धन छा. 4:44 नरेंद्रजन° ] NW; नरेन्द्रे जन" K 4:44 *हानिच्च ] conj; "ET 
NKW 4:45 विधिः] K; विधि NW 


निखासतत्त्वसंहितायाम r 


१७४ 
मन्त्रचर्यासमायुक्ता येन सिध्यन्ति साधकाः॥ 4:451 
संयुक्ता TUMI [4] सिद्यन्ति अज्ञानादपि मानवाः। 
निर्वाणदीक्षा वक्ष्यामि तन्मे निगदतः शृणु॥ 4:46॥ 


क्षकारादि अकारान्तं होमङ्कृत्वा यथाक्रमम्‌ | 
अनुञ्चायें तु संयोज्य शक्तया योज्येत निष्कले॥ 4: 47॥ 
waar निष्कलतां याति शिवम्पदमनामयम्‌। 

अथ पिण्डाक्षरेणैव प्रक्रियां शोधयेद्कुधः॥ 4:481 
पिण्डाक्षराष्ट्रवर्ग्ग्च द्वावेतौ एक) [5] एव च। 
सदाशिवस्य Was द्वाभ्यां परतरः शिवः॥ 4:49॥ 


तत्र संयोजितो medi न भूयोजन्मतां व्रजेत्‌। 
धर्म्माधम्मैविनिर्मुक्तस्सर्वपापविवर्जितः॥ 4: 501 


व्योमेव निर्मलश्शुद्धः शिवसायोज्यतां व्रजेत्‌। 
नास्ति दीक्षासमो मोक्षो न विद्या मातृकापरा॥ 4:51॥ 


प्रक्रिया न परञ्ज्ञानं नास्ति योगमल{क्षकम्‌}॥ 


[6] उत्तरसूत्रे चतुर्थः पटलः॥ 


देव्युवाच | 
पिण्डाक्षराष्टभेदन्तु मातृकायाष्टकञ्च यत्‌ | 
सदाशिव Rada प्रक्रिया गदिता त्वया॥ 5:1॥ 


शक्ति ब्रूहि महादेव प्रक्रियायोगमेव च। 
लक्ष्यालक्ष्य च देवेश अत्र मे संशयो महान्‌॥ 5:2॥ 
तु संयोज्य K 


ae PRA BH TE o 
4:47 अनुच्चार्ये तु संयोज्य conj; अनुच्चारे तु संयोज्या NW; Agere DX Ki 
4:49 एक | W; ए-- N; TUK 4:50 im संयोजितो ] conj; dX ui 
तत्तु संयोर्जितो NW 4:51 मातृका] KW; मातृकां प्र su शिवञ्चैव ] Ni महादे 
fe ae _ 5:1 त्वया] NW; मया K 5:2 महादेव प्रक्रिया” ] Ki 
“क्रिया” N; महादेव ure ५ 5:2 लक्ष्यालक्ष्यं च] KW; लक्षालक्ष N 


उत्तरसूत्रम्‌ १७५ 
ईश्वर उवाच [६ 28 

प्रकृतिः पुरुषञ्चैव नियतिः काल एव च। 

माया विद्या च ईशश्च ध्यातव्यानि पृथक्पृथक्‌॥ 5:31 


सदाशिवो ऽष्टभेदश्च अहोरात्रायनानि च। 


सङ्कान्तिर्विषुवञ्चैव शक्तिसमरसन्तथा॥ 5: 4॥ 
सर्वानेतान्‌ विदित्वा तु शिवसायोज्यताम्ब्रजेत्‌। 


ध्यानात्सिद्धिमवाप्रोति सर्वज्ञत्वम्प्रजायते॥ 5: 5॥ 


[तत्त्व|ध्या|नं प्रथमकं छायाध्यानं] [2 द्वितीयकम्‌। 
घोषध्यानन्तृतीयन्तु लक्षध्यानञ्चतुर्थकम्‌॥ 5:61 


चतुर्विंशति तत्त्वानि ध्यात्वा बीजेन चिन्तयेत्‌ । 
प्राकृतेन तु बीजेन तद्यानं तात्त्विकं स्मृतम्‌॥ 5:7॥ 


छायाचित्तं समावेश्य तावद्यायेद्व्चिक्षणः | 
यावच्छुक्का भवेच्छाया ततो सिद्धति मानवः॥ 5:8॥ 


घोषध्यानन्तृतीयन्तु प्राकृतीसिद्धिदायकम्‌ | 
[RT च) | [3 सर्वज्ञतां याति स्वतन्त्रञ्चैव जायते॥ 5:9॥ 


आकाशे वीक्षमाणस्य ऊकारं कुटिला|(कृ)तिम्‌। 
स वै प्रकृतिलक्षन्तु दृष्टा मुच्यति बन्धनात्‌॥ 5:10॥ 


ध्यायते यस्तु युक्तात्मा योगसिद्धिमवाप्ुयात्‌ | 
एष ते प्राकृतो योग उक्तो मोक्षकरः परः॥ 5:11॥ 


5:3 ईश्वर उवाच ] K; UCT छः N 5:3 प्रकृतिः पुरुषञ्चैव नियतिः काल एव च] 
Ki =~कृति पुरुषञ्चैव नियतिं कालमेव च 79; क्षति पुरुषञ्चैव नियतिं कालमेव च 
5:3 TT] K; STE NW 5:4 AGT] K; “भेदञ्च N; NGEWO 5:4 °विघुवच्चै- 
T] NW; शविषुवञ्चैव kK 5:5 सर्वानेतान्‌] K; सर्वानेतां NW 5:5 *सायोज्यम्त्रजेत्‌ ] 
भ; भसायुज्यं ब्रजेत्‌ K; *साया म्‌ ब्रजेत्‌ W 5:6 तत्त्वध्यानं प्रथमकं MITTIS; 

द्वितीयकम्‌ ] K; --ध्या --द्वितीयकम्‌ N; तत्वध्यान (द्वितीयक W 5:8 "चित्त ] Es 
"चित्त? NW 5:8 ततो] NW; ततः K 5:9 "दायकम्‌ ] K; दायक — NG UND 
W 5:9 (सच) ] ८; --- $; सि. ॥ 5:10 आकाशे ीक्षमाणस्य ] con; लाका 
4 वीक्ष्यमानस्य NKW 5:11 एष] NW; एषं K 5:11 मोक्षकरः ] NKW; 


१७६ निश्चासतत्त्संहितायाम्‌ 


चेता वै (5 )कर्तृविज्ञानन्द्ितीयञ्चिञ्चिणीयकम्‌ । 
qaqa (AAT छायालक्ष चतुर्थकम्‌॥ 5:121 
अकर्त्ता निर्गुणखाहं प्रकृत्या कर्मं कारितम्‌। 
विज्ञानध्यानमेवन्तु वासनादेव मुच्यते॥ 5:131 


चिञ्चिणी पौरुषं शब्दं ध्यायेद्युक्तेन चेतसा | 
ध्यानात्सिद्धिमवाप्रोति विष्णुसायोज्यताम्ब्रजेत्‌॥ 5: 14॥ 


तुर्यद्वारविनिष्क्रान्तं धूम लक्षन्तु पौरुषम्‌ | 
ध्यानाज्ज्वलति dq तेजो दृष्टा (तु सि)5]{ध्यते}॥ 5: 15॥ 


[छा]याचित्तं समालम्ब्य वियत्स्थं पश्यते पुमान्‌। 
एवमभ्यस्यमानस्तु सिद्धयते च शिवो भवेत्‌॥ 5: 16॥ 


महालाभविपत्तौ च उदकादिरसेषु च। 
दर्प्पणे ध्यानमालम्ब्य नियत्याजयसिद्धिषु॥ 5: 17॥ 


महालाभविपत्तौ च न तुष्येन्नैव चोद्विजेत्‌। 
ज्ञात्वा नियतिसङ्भावन्निजिता सा भविष्यति॥ 5: 18॥ 


उदके वा घृते {वापि नियति}लक्षमभ्यसेत्‌। 
तोयात्मको हि भवति नियतिन्दृष्टा तु सिद्धते॥ 5:19॥ 


दर्पणे नियतिन्ध्यायेद्वह्किरूपं प्रजायते | 
नियतिञ्च ततो पश्यन्नियत्या सिध्यते धुवम्‌॥ 5:20॥ 


मुहुत्त॑सन्ध्यतिथयः पक्षमासार्तवेषु च। 
पुण्यकालेषु सर्वेषु कालमेवमुपास्यते॥ 5: 21॥ 


[सर्व|कालन्तु कालं हि हीय{मा}नं तु {दृश्यते}। 


MRT Firs) 6008) त्य 

5:12 चेता ] NW; चेतो K 5:12 चतुर्थकम्‌ ] NW; तृतीयकम्‌ K 5:13 “कारितम्‌। 
NW; HIRE: K 5:15 तद्धूमं ] NW; तधूमं K 5:15तु सि] Wi ¬ t 
K 5:18 सा] NW; शो K 8:19 घृते] W; घ-- N; घट K 5197. agi 
सेत्‌] N; तस्थमभ्यसेत K; क्षमसेत्‌ W 5:20 ध्यायेद्वक्किरूप ] NW; ध्यायेन्‌ वर्हि P 
K 5:21 "मासात्तवेषु च] NK; *मासान्तरेषु W 5:22 "कालन्तु ] NÉ: a u W 


5:22 हीयमानं तु दृश्यते ] conj.; हीय~न तु? —N; हीय |! न तु ।। ET 


उत्तरसूत्रम्‌ 
RN १७७ 


[.28°] [कालाभिध्य)तचित्तस्तु स कालम्पश्यते $चिरात्‌॥ 5: 22॥ 
जायते कालरूपी तु सिद्धते कालयोगिन:। 

सर्वज्ञः कामरूपी च शिववत्स्वच्छताम्ब्रजेत्‌॥ 5: 23 

स्नेहे तु निस्पृहो यस्तु ज्ञानान्वेषणतत्परः | 


संसारोद्विग्नमोक्षार्थी माया तेन विलंघिता॥ 5:24॥ 


तरुजाम्मृन्मयीं वापि |(माया)|प्रतिम कारयेत्‌। (?) 
तत्र ध्यानःम्प्रकुर्वीत [2] ज्वलिते} सिध्यतेति च॥ 5:25॥ 


मणिरलप्रदीपेषु मायाध्यानं समादधेत्‌। 
ज्वलिते सिद्धयते चैव मायाध्यानेन साधकः॥ 5:26॥ 


एकैकाक्षरयोगेन अभ्यसेन्मातृकाशिवम्‌। 
विद्यासिद्धिमवाप्रोति शिवतुल्यञ्च जायते॥ 5:271 


एकैकन्तु लयन्ध्यायेदथवा वह्लिरूपिणम्‌। 
वायुरूप)महेन्द्रापखरूप!-- [3] चिन्तयेत्‌॥ 5:281 


सिद्यते तेन रूपेण शिवसायोज्यताम्ब्रजेत्‌। 
विद्यायोगं समाख्यातं ध्यानञ्चैवेश्वरं uri 5:291 


घण्टानादं सदा ध्यायेदीश्वरीसिद्धिकांक्षिणः। 
ईश्वरञ्च ततः पञ्येत्सिद्यते शिवताम्ब्रजेत्‌॥ 5:30॥ 


†आकाशे लिङ्गलिङ्गे वा चक्षुर््यानं) समारभेत्‌। 
सूक्ष्मलिङ्गन्ततः पश्येज्ज्वलिते सिद्धतेति च॥ 5:31॥ 


(मो)[4क्षदस्सकलो जाप्य अर्चादीक्षासु निष्कलः। 


5:23 सिद्धते ] NW; fred 5:23 सर्वज्ञः ] NKW; सर्वज्ञ+:+ N 5:24 निः 
स्पृहो ] NW; निःस्पृहो K 5:26 समादधेत्‌ ] NW; TS DAS SNR 
NW; ०रूपिणी ४ 5:28 खरूप--चिन्तयेत्‌ ] N; aget (वि) चि त्तयेत्‌ ipm 
प वा चिन्तयेत्‌ W 5:29 *सायोज्य" ] NW; "सायुज्य" K 5:30 aa Le 
“काक्षिणः N; ०कांक्षणः ए 5:31 आकाशे लिङ्गलिङ्गे ] NW; आकाशलिंगे cH 
आकाशे लिंगे लिंगे Kee 5:31 ज्वलिते] conj; ज्वलते NKW 5:32 ° 
NK; "दन्‌ सकलो W 


१७८ निश्ासतत्त्वसंहितायाम: 


योजकस्तु भवेत्सो fg शून्यो ध्येयस्स|दा] बुधे:॥ 5:320 


दिव्यसिद्धिप्रदानाच्च कलाढ्यो जपहोमसु | 
शिवपथप्रणेता च योगिनां खमलङ्कतः॥ 5:331 


पातालमर्त्यसिद्धीनाञ्जपेत क्षपणात्क्षयम्‌। 
जराव्याधिक्षुधामृत्युं ध्यातो ऽन्तस्थस्तु नाशयेत्‌॥ 5: 34॥ 


निवा(त्मा) — [5] तुलाग्निभ्यो निर्बीजेषु च सङ्कमेत्‌। | 
दृष्टप्रत्ययसिद्धीनि जपहोमेन सिद्धते॥ 5:351 


सदाशिवोष्टधा प्रोक्त अहोरात्रायनानि च। 
सङ्कान्ति विषुवञ्चैव शक्तिसमरसं शूणु॥ 5:36॥ 


ऊर्ध्वप्राणो Tear अपानो रात्रिरेव च। 
सुषुम्णा उत्तरं ज्ञेयमिडा वै दक्षिणायनम्‌॥ 5:37॥ 


मध्यदेशे यदा ह्यात्मा विषुवं तं विदुर्बुधाः | 
चलते गच्छते चैव मध्यदेशे यदा पुमान्‌॥ 5:38॥ 


सङ्गान्तिरिति विख्याता शक्तिं चैव निबोध मे। 
तृतीये चैव आयामे fayt षष्ठबिन्डुकम्‌॥ 5: 39॥(?) 


श्रूयते च यदा शक्तिः श्रुत्वा बुध्वा च मानवः। 
लीयते च शिवे देवि भिन्नदेहे न संशयः॥ 5 :40॥ 


न शक्तिरहिता मत्या दीक्षानुग्रहकारकाः। 
[शक्ति] २9हीना न सिद्यन्ति न च यान्ति पराङ्गतिम्‌॥ 5:41॥ 


5:32 94: ] co; बुध: NKW 5.33 कलाव्मो ] NW; wera K 5:38 शिवपथ” | 
W; शिवप्रथ" NK 5:34 जपेत क्षपणात्क्षयम्‌ ] conj.; जपेत क्षपणो क्षयम्‌ NW; STR 
येत क्षपणो WATAK 5:34 ध्यातो ऽन्तस्थस्तु नाशयेत्‌] conj; ध्यातोन्तस्थन्तु नाशयेत्‌ 
N”: ?; pan <शयेत्‌ 1“; ध्यातोत्तः ery - सयेत्‌ ४; ध्यातोन्त “तु AI : 
W 5:36 ] NK; विषुवंच्चैव w 5:37 सुषुम्णा ] NK; gg-W ७:४7 सिड 
HIN: *मितो K; "मिता WO 5:38 ह्यात्मा विषुवं] em; ह्य- N; TUT 
UW 5:39 शक्ति] K; शक्तिश NW 5:40 श्रूयते च यदा शक्तिः ] NW; तुम 


यदा शक्ति £ 5:41 दीक्षानुग्रहकारकाः] W- ENTE 
दीक्षानग्रह U Ke नुग्रह :] W; दीक्षानुग 


उत्तरसूत्रम्‌ १७९ 


शिवं सरव॑गतं विद्धि नामरूपविवर्जितम्‌। 

चिन्मात्रः पुरुषञ्चैव शिवो व्याप्य व्यवस्थितः॥ 5: 42॥ 
वासयेत्समरसञ्चाहं शिवेन सह्‌ संयुतः। 

एवं समरसो भूत्वा गच्छते शिवमव्ययम्‌॥ 5:431 


अथवा तु निरालम्बम्मूर्ध्निमालम्ब्य यल्लतः | 
यागं योगं {जपं ध्यानं सर्वकर्मा)|शुणि कारयेत्‌॥ 5:441 


शिवमाधाय कर्म्माणि कुर्वन्नपि न लिप्यते। 
योगसिद्धिमवाप्नोति शिवसायोज्यतां ब्रजेत्‌॥ 5:45॥ 


ज्ञानयोगो मया ख्यात अक्केशात्सिद्धिमोक्षदः। 
सुपरीक्ष्य प्रदातव्यं अब्दत्रयनिवासिने॥ 5 : 46॥ 


ब्राह्मणे वृत्तिसम्पन्ने क्षत्रिये धर्म्मशीलिने। 
वैश्ये चैव दयायुक्ते शूद्रे {शुश्रषतत्प}[रे॥ 5:47॥ 


अन्यथा इुष्टमत्त्यानाग्निंदातङ्ञानुवत्तिनाम्‌। 
न देयं शिवसद्भावमन्यायपथवरत्तिनाम्‌॥ 5:48॥ 


शिवभक्तिविहीना ये गुरुभक्तिविवर्जिताः। 
जिञ्ञासाकौतुकालीना न देयन्तत्त्वमुत्तमम्‌॥ 5:49॥ 


अनधीत्यथ निश्वासं निश्वसन्ति पुनः पुनः। 
अधीत्वा चैव निश्वासन्न पुनर्न्निश्चसन्ति [(ते)|॥ 5:50॥ 


।(निश्चास)] [4] एव विख्यातस्सर्वतन्त्रसमुञ्चयः। 


5:42 चिन्मात्रः पुरुषञ्चैव ] conj; चिम्बरातरम्पुरुषञ्चैव N; विश्वान्तं पुरुषं चैव KU; वि- 
श्रान्तं पुरुषं विद्धि ६०; वि्चात्रम्पुरुषं चैव w 5:43 वासयेत्‌] NW; वासयन्‌ K 
5:44 निरालम्बम्मूर्ध्निमालम्ब्य ] conj.; निरालम्बम्मूर्धिमालभ्य N; निरालम्ब u मालभ्य 
K; निरालम्ब ।विमालभ्य w 5:44 यागं योगं जपं होमं सर्वकर्मा ] conj; योगयो- 
ग — N; योगे योगे K; योगयोगं जपहोम UW (unmetrical) 5:45 लिप्यते ] 
KW; लिम्य?ते N 5:46 न्मोक्षदः ] K; "मोक्षदं NW 5:47 शुश्रूषतत्परे] em; 
— [B] UN; uK; g रे ए 5:49 "कौतुकालीना न] K; Nias NW 
5:50 निश्वासं] N; निःश्वासं K; निस्वासं W 5:50 निश्वासन्‌] NW; "निःश्वास E 
5:50 पुन््निश्चसन्ति ] \; पुनर्निःश्वसन्ति K; पुन ५% 5:51 निश्वास] K; — Ni 
-W 


१८० निश्वासतत्त्वसंहितायाम्‌ 


यं ज्ञात्वा मुच्यते जन्तु संसारभवबन्धनात्‌॥ 5:51॥ 


मूलसूत्रेण यत्ख्यातमुत्तरेण निगद्यते। 
तेनैव सर्वमाख्यातं निम्मैलीकरणस्तु सः॥ 5:52॥ 


अष्टाविंशति या प्रोक्ता संहिताः परमेष्ठिना। 
तेषां व्याख्या तु कर्तव्या उपरिष्टात्समन्ततः॥ 5:53॥ 


{शते द्वे दश स्लोकानां)निश्चासोत्तरसंहिता। 
एकविंशत्कुलान्देवि अधीत्य ह्युद्धरिष्यति॥ 5:541 eu 


उत्तरसूत्रे पञ्चमः पटलः स्रो 52 सूत्रोत्तरस्रो 210 समाप्तञ्च॥ ॐ नमः शिवाय। 


न Me TE MN : 
s um m जन्तुः K; जन्तु. W 5:51 शवन्धनात्‌] KW; °बन्थे po 
बो TK 5:3 संहिताः ] em.; संहिता NKW 5:54 शते F 
T? निश्वासोत्तरसंहित N; सत uU K; सतत UW 5:54 निखासोत्तरसंहिता ] Wi 
See T SN N; निःश्वासोत्तरसंहिता K 5:54 ह्युद्धरिष्यति ] NW; d 
the lett = phon: The totals ‘52’ and ‘210’ (the latter being expresse 

er numerals à o) have not been copied by the apographs. 


निश्वासतत्त्वसंहितायां नयसूत्रम्‌॥ 


ॐ नमः शिवाय। 


देव्युवाच । 
नवात्मके स्थितास्तत्त्वाः पाशाञ्चैव महेश्चर। 
छेदको योजकञ्चैव मोक्षद(स्स प्रकीर्तितः)॥ 1:10 


6] ५ (योगे तु) ये पाशा कथं ज्ञेयाक्षरे ऽक्षरे। 
एतन्मे |(स)|शयं ब्रूहि पाशदाहनिबन्धनम्‌॥ 1:2॥ 


ईश्वर उवाच। 
अकारे सर्वतत्त्वानि संस्थितानि यशस्विनि। 
बन्धते दहते चैव स एष परमेश्वरः॥ 1:3॥ 


अकारे त्वक्षरास्सवे स च सर्वेषु संस्थितः। 
एवन्ते सर्व|(वर्णास्ते पा)]शदाहक्षमाः स्मृताः॥ 1:41 


दे|(व्युवाच)| | 
॥. 29५ {स्थूलरूपाः SAT: पाशा जीवस्सूक्ष्मस्स उच्यते। 
एकीभावगतावेतौ ताम्रे कालिकवद्यथा॥ 1:5॥ 


1:1 नवात्मके स्थितास्तत्त्वाः ] conj; नवात्मके स्थिता तत्त्वा NW; नवात्मकस्थिता- 
स्तत्त्वाः K 1:1 मोक्षदस्स प्रकीर्तितः ] conj; मोक्षद — 7; मोक्षद U K; मोक्षदक्च 
प्रकीर्तितः ए 1:2 योगे तु ये पाशा] W; — ये पाशा N; U ये पाशा ४ 1:2 पाश- 
दाह" ] NK; -सदाह० W 1:3 उवाच] K; उ NW 1:4 त्वक्षरास्‌ ] NW; NUT 
K 1:4 एवन्ते सर्ववर्णास्तु पाशदाहक्षमाः स्मृताः ] conj. Csaba Dezsó; SN e 
ण्णै-- शदाहक्षमस्मृतः N; एवं ते सर्ववर्णानां पासदाहक्षमः स्मृतः K; po 
U सदाहक्षमस्मृतः W 1:5 °ताः पाशा] em; “ता पाशा N; UK; "ता पा 

1:5 कालिकवद्‌ ] W; कालकवद्‌ N; कलिकवद K 


१८२ निश्चासतत्त्वसंहितायाम 


बध्यमानेषु पाशेषु कथज्ञीवो न बध्यते। 
न दाहो दह्यमानेषु च्छेदो वा नास्ति च्छिद्यतः॥ 1:6॥ 


ईश्वर उवाच। 
जलमध्ये |य]था मत्स्या बध्यन्ते जालयोगतः | 


सलिलन्न |(च)| Tet) तद्द|ज्जीवो न बद्धते॥ 1:71 


हेमकर्त्ता Keay etsy च दह्मते। 
दह्यमानेषु पाशेषु तद्वज्जीवो न दह्मते॥ 1:8॥ 


अयस्पिण्डो यथा ध्मातरश्छिद्यमानस्तु खण्डशः | 
न च छिनत्त्यसौ वह्लिस्तद्वज्जीवो न च्छिद्यते॥ 1:9॥ 


आकाशं सवंगं यद्वत्सर्वद्वव्येष्ववस्थितम्‌। 
द्रव्येषु च्छिद्यमानेषु नाकाशं च्छेदमर्हति॥ 1:101 


एवम्पाशगणास्स्वे स्थूल! सूक्ष्मविभा]ऽगशः i 
दह्यमानेषु पाशेषु दीक्षाकाले शिवाध्वरे॥ 1:111 


न च च्छिद्यत्यसौ ह्यात्मा आकाशेव व्यवस्थितः | 
बन्धदाहन्तु मन्त्रज्ञाः कुर्वन्ति शिवशासने॥ 1:121 


जन्मबन्धञ्च पाशानां दग्ध्वा चैव शिवाग्निना | 
तेजीभूता विशन्त्येते स्वतत्त्वम्पुनरेव हि॥ 1 : 13॥ 


सर्वपाशनिवृत्तास्तु कथिताः शिवशासने i 
बन्ध्यन्ते 


1:6 च्छिद्यतः ] NK; छिद्यते ॥ 1:7उवाच ] K; उ प्र 1:7 बध्यन्ते K; 
NW _ 1:7 बद्येत तद्दज्जीवो ] K; ~ ~ ~ ~ज्जीवो N; ब -तद्वज्जीवो ए 1:8 &- 
मकर्ता RANE] conj; हेम — षाङ्‌ N; हेमवा u षां K; हेमकत्ता u षोन्‌ W 
1:8 दह्यते ] NW; वध्यते K 1:9 अयस्पिण्डो ] N; अयःपिण्डो K; अ “म्पिण्डो W 
L9 ध्मातश्‌ ] coni; धान्तश्‌ N; ध्मान्तश्‌ £; धातु W 1:9 छिनत्त्यसौ ] NEC 
छिनात्त्यसौ ६° 1:11 एवम्पाशगणास्सर्वे ] NW; एवं न्यासगणः सर्व £ 7४ स्पू 
लसूक्ष्मविभागशः ] em. स्थूल — [3] गशः N; स्थूल LWA: K; स्थूलसूक्ष्मविभागर्ण ने 
W _1:11 दीक्षाकाले ] KW; दीक्षाकाल N 1:12 न च च्छिद्यत्यसौ ह्यात्मा ] NS C 
च च्छिद्यत्यसावात्मा K 1:12 आकाशेव व्यवस्थितः ] Nw; आकाशे च व्यवस्थित” 
तेल ial TTT "us NW; जन्मवन्धञ्ज पासानां K 1:13 तेजीभूता m : 
KT K= 1:14 ०निवत्ता . ms कथिता N (unme 
*निवृतस्तु कथिताः w वृत्तास्तु कथिताः] K; eB eq कथि 


नयसूत्रम्‌ १८३ 


न मुच्यन्ते $न्यतन्त्रज्ञा ये पाशैर्न विमोचिता:॥ 1:14॥ 


देव्युवाच । 
नवतत्त्वा अकारे तु कथन्देव व्यवस्थिता: | 
स च एकः स्थितो व्यापी कथं वर्णास्तु संस्थिता:॥ 1 :15॥ 


भगवडःशक्व सर्वज्ञ सर्वनाथ जगत्पते। 
अक्षरे अक्षरे ज्ञानं अकारे वद सुव्रत॥ 1:161 


ईश्वर उवाच | 
अकारस्त्वक्षरो ज्ञेय --: -- पञ्चाशत्तत्र संस्थिता:5]। 
(य)|था तस्य शरीरे तु तथात्मनि निरीक्षयेत्‌॥ 1:171 


शिखाग्रावस्थितो देव अनामा शक्तिसंयुतः। 
शिखाग्रन्थौ च देवेशे सदाशिव इति स्मृतः॥ 1:181 


ईश्वरस्तु शिरे नित्यं विद्या दक्षिणरेखिणी। 
सव्यरेखा तु माया वै अधः कालः प्रलम्बितः। 
अकुटीन्नियतीं विद्धि पुरुषच्चाद्धंचन्द्रके॥ 1:191 


अध ऊदडङ्गता या तु प्रकृतिर्ध्व॑जरूपिणी। 
एतानि नव तत्त्वानि अकारे संस्थितानि तु॥ 1:20॥ 


अकारस्सर्ववर्ण्णानां शिरमाक्रम्य संस्थितः | 
एवन्ते सर्ववर्ण्णास्तु सर्व॑तत्त्वसमन्विताः॥ 1:21 


1:14 न मुच्यन्ते ऽन्यतन्त्रज्ञा ] em.; — [4] न्यतन्त्रज्ञा N; U तन्त्रज्ञा K; न मुच्यन्ते 

STAN W 1:15 एकः ] K; एक NW 1:16 भगवङ्शङ्ग] N; भगवन्‌ शर्वं K; 

भगवत्‌ wd W 1:16 जगत्पते] K; गजत्पते NW 1:16 अक्षरे अक्षरे] NW; अक्षरे 

त्यक्षरे K 1:17 उवाच] K; उ NW 1:17 अकारस्त्वक्षरो ज्ञेयः ] N; अकारस्थः 

क्षरो ज्ञेय £; अकारस्ब्वक्षरो ज्ञेय छ 1:17 पञ्चाशत्तत्र संस्थिताः ] conj; पञ्चाशत्ततुः 

— N; पंचा (शत्त 0) संस्थितः £; पंचा - संस्थितः ॥ 1:17 तस्य] NW; स्यः 

K 1:18 शिखाग्रन्थौ च देवेशे] N; framers K; शिखाग्रस्था च W 1:19 अधः 

कालः ] conj; अधः काल N”; अथ काल NG अधः काल K; त्यथः कालः W 

1:19 नियती ] Nw; नियतिं kK 1:20 अध ऊर्द्धड़ता या तु] em; अध -[6] Bs ) 
अध ऊर्ध्वं ।। या तु £; अध अर्घ्वङ्गता यो ऽस्तु W 1:21 शिरमाक्रम्य ] ar | 
आक्रम्य K 1:21 एवन्ते सर्ववर्ण्णास्तु ] NW; एवे ते सर्ववर्णस्तु K 1:21 "समन्विताः ] 
conj; "समन्वित: NKW 


Eee 


१८४ निश्चासतत्त्वसंहितायाम्‌ 


दहते सर्वपाशानि दीक्षाकाले शिवाध्वरे। 

पञ्च बिन्दूंस्ततः कृत्वा अकारं तु समालिखेत्‌॥ 1:221 
— [६307] (ख्यं) तु ततो वि[(दद)॥न्वण्णेकेकन्निरीक्षयेत्‌ | 
यत्र quot न दृश्येत ।तित्रैकाशन्तु कारयेत्‌॥ 1: 23॥ 


शतार्धं तत्र दृश्येत अकारस्य शरीरतः। 
स्वदेहे देशिकेन्द्रेण द्रष्टव्यानि पुनः पुनः॥ 1:241 


अनामा कारणो देवः शिखाग्रावस्थितः परः। 
शक्तिश्च --तपया (?) (ज्ञेया बि(न्दु) मूर्‌!द्धनि संस्थितः) 1:251 


(ललाट) {ईश्वर ज्ञेयो विद्या च तालुम)}[2ध्यतः | 
घण्टिकायाम्महामाया कालः कण्ठे समाञ्रितः॥ 1:261 


हृदिस्था नियतिज्ञेया पुरुषः Taser: | 
प्रकृतिन्नाभिमध्यस्था ज्ञात्वा तत्त्वान्नवैव तु॥ 1 : 27॥ 


दीक्षकस्तु गुरुश्रेष्ठः शिवतत्त्वस्य पारगः | 
अन्यथा न गुरुज्ैंयो न दीक्षा न च मुक्तिंदा॥ 1: 28॥ 


शरीरस्थानि तत्त्वानि अज्ञात्वा न तु मुच्यते। | 
(अक्षराणि च) [सर्वा)|अंणि शरीरे तु यथा ferar: d 1:291 


तानि सर्वाणि वक्ष्यामि प्रत्यक्षलिखितानि तु। 
केचित्ररत्यङ्गरूपाणि केचित्त्वड्राकृतीनि तु॥ 1:301 


देहलीनौ करौ कृत्वा जद्दौ चान्योन्यसंस्थितौ | 
प्रसृत सर्वकायन्तु निष्कलाकारविग्रहम्‌॥ 1: 31॥ 


1:22 विन्दूंस्ततः ] K; विन्दन्ततः N; *बिन्द ततः w 1:22 अकारं d समालिखेत्‌] 
W; अकार — N; अकार UK 1:24 शतार्ष ] N; शतार्ध्वं KW 1:24 देशिकेन्द्रेण ( 
N; दैशिकेन्द्रेण K; देसिकेन्द्रेण W 1:26 amaa: ] K; समाशृतः Ni; M 
W 1:27 मध्यस्था ] NW; मध्यस्थाज्‌ K 1:28 गुरुश्रेष्ठ: em.; WEIS N Wing 
WAS: K 1:28 ज्ञेयो ] N; ज्ञेया KW 1:30 प्रत्यङ्गरूपाणि केचित्त्वङ्घाकृतीनि | a 
Sanderson; प्रत्यक्षरूपाणि केचित्त्व (7) ड्रकृतानि N; प्रत्यक्षरूपाणि केचि U कृतानि 
1:31 जज्ञै ] NW; जंघे K 


नयसूत्रम्‌ 


धरण्यवस्थितञ्जानुं वामवाहुम्प्रलम्बितम्‌ | 
ति्यंगू्द्धापसव्यन्तु मध्यग्रन्ध्युप]रि (स्थितम्‌॥ 1: 32॥ 


[॥स)|कलं विग्रहं ह्येतदकारस्य विनिर्दिशेत्‌ | 
तिर्यग्वामकरङ्कृत्वा आकारन्तु विशिष्यते॥ 1 :33॥ 
भ्रुवोः सन्धिं शिरः कृत्वा नेत्रतारौ तु बिन्दुकौ। 
इकार एष विख्यातो नासावंशेन दीर्घिका॥ 1: 34॥ 
उ ऊ श्रवणमध्यस्थौ ऋकारं वाहुकारितम्‌। 
संहतौ च स्मृतौ जङ्घौ wears प्रसारितम्‌॥ 1:351 
दक्षिणं कारयेत्तिर्यर्बाहुं [5] चोपरिसंस्थितम्‌। 
कराग्रं विन्यसेत्तत्र वामबाहुस्तुः मध्यतः॥ 1:36॥ 
वामबाहुं adhe कृत्वा री च भविष्यति। 
चरणौ कारयेत्‌ तिर्यगृकारस्सम्प्रदृश्यते॥ 1 :37॥ 
लिकारन्तु रसास्वादि लीकारं घण्टिका सह। 

ए ऐ दशनपङ्किस्तु रेखा दन्तान्तरेषु च॥ 1:38॥ 


विदित्वा मुच्यते जन्तु अन्नपानस्य भक्षणे। 
(न -गेत) — [6 पर ~ ऽमो औकारे निरीक्षयेत्‌॥ 1:39॥ 


मस्तक बिन्डुरूपन्तु अकारं पूर्वचोदितम्‌। 


१८५ 


1:32 “TET ] em.; "गूर्धांव० NW; yates K 1:32 “परि स्थितम्‌] K; "पा 
— N; "परि u % 1:34 सन्धिं] conj; सन्धि N; सन्धिः KW 1:34 कृत्वा ] 
NW; कृआ(?)त्वा N; UK 1:35 Heat] NW; wed कायं K 1:36 दक्षिणं 
कारयेत्तिर्यःबाहुं चोपरिसंस्थितम्‌ ] coni; दक्षिणकार — [5] =परिसंस्थितम्‌ N; द- 
क्षिणे कारयेत्तिय u ण्ठोपरिसंस्थितः K; दक्षिणं कारयेत्ति्यग्बाहं चोपरिसंस्थितम्‌ W 
1:36 कराग्रं ] NKW; करांग्रं K* 1:37 वामबाहुं ततोद्धन्‌ तु] em. as - 

weg NW; वामबाहुं ततोर्ध्वं TK 1:37 री] NKW;  K" 1:37 प्रदृश्यते T 
K; कारये NW 1:37 *गृकारस्सम्प्रदृश्यते] NW; ०(गृक्र)कारः स प्रदृश्यते K we 
गकारः स प्रदृश्यते Ks 1:38 लिकारन्तु रसास्वादि ] NW; (5)कार तु रसास्वादी 
K^; लिकारं तु रसास्वादी 7“ 1:38 लीकारं] NW; (TERE) कारं K”; puru 
1:39 NT GT] K; «पान्नस्य NW 1:39 पर ~ “मो औकारे ] N; U यो ओकारे K; 


U भ्या योन्तोकारे / 


१८६ ds निश्चासतत्त्वसंहितायाम्‌ हितायाम्‌ 


वृषणेन्द्रियसंयोगादःका रो दृश्यते धुवम्‌॥ 1:401 


नाभ्योपरि समाख्यातं ककारम्पुरुषाकृतिम्‌। 
शिरः freq कृ(त्वा वै) ग्रीवास्कन्धे द्विरेखिणी॥ 1:41॥ 


उच्छुतं कारयेद्वाहुन्तिर्यग्म (7) £-[पा]णिना i 
[.30ण[खकार]) |(ए)ष विख्यातो शुतपाणिस्तु ग स्मृतः॥ 1:420 


ऊद्धंबाहुकरौ कृत्वा मुष्टिन्दक्षिणपाणिना। 

घकारः शिरसा युक्तं ङकारं हीनबाहूना॥ 1:43॥ 
चकारं TPA तु छकारं नासिके स्थितः। 
ऊद्धंबाहुकरौ कृत्वा शि|रो]युक्तन्तु ज स्मृतः॥ 1:441 
झकारं सम्प्रवक्ष्यामि यं विदित्वा शिवो भवेत्‌। 
पिण्डितम्प्रसृतङ्कायं भुजं चैवोद्धंदक्षिणम्‌॥ 1 :45॥ 


झकार एष विख्यातो अकारञ्च निबोध GI 
भुजान्तलीनजठरङ्ुत्वा चोर्ध्वंभुजं भवेत्‌॥ 1:461 


द्विगुणीकृत्य तां बाहुं दक्षिणम्पाणि योजयेत्‌। 
दक्षिणे श्रवणे योज्य वामबाहुन्निकुञ्चयेत्‌॥ 1:47 


शिरस्याभिमुखो भूत्वा करौ तौ भोगसन्निभौ। 
[| अकार विश्रुतो ह्येष शृते संहतजङ्घयोः ॥ 1:481 


टकार विद्धि विच्छिन्न यावद्वन्ध तलं गतः। 


1:40 °दःकारो ] NP; दकारो NKW 1:41 नाभ्योपरि समाख्यातं ककारम्पुरुषाई 
तिम्‌] NW; नाभ्युपरि समाख्यातः ककारः पुरुषाकृतिः K 1:42 तिर्यग्म (?) पाणि 
ना] तिर्यग्म (?) -नणिना \; तिर्यग्रा u पाणिना K; तिर्य | णिना ए 142X 7 
NW; <त० K 1:42 ग] NW; गः K 1:43 उर्दू” ] NW; ऊर्ध्वः K L^ 2) 
° ] NW; ऊर्ध्व K 1:44 ज ] NK*W; जः K* 1:45 यं विदित्वा] Wi gil 
विदित्वा \; यद्विदित्वा K 1:45 कायं ] NW; कार्य K 1:45 भुजं चैवोर्ददकि चैवो- 
con; भुजशचैवोद्धदक्षिण N; भुजं चैवो्कदक्षिणे ८; भुजं चैवोर्द्धदक्षिण wes पुण Tg 
eater Wee 1:46 भुजान्तलीन" ] NW; भुजान्तलींन° K 1:47 ता] NW; 
ids TENN W; भो -- N; UK 1:48 अकार ] N; भकार "वच्छ Ni 
:48 शृते ] N; सृत K; शृते W 1:49 विच्छिन्न ] conj.; - 
विधि विच्छिन्नो K; विधि विछिन्न w Lied 


नयसूत्रम्‌ १८७ 


ठकारस्सम्प्रदुश्येत ठकारो रन्भ्रविग्रहः॥ 1 : 49॥ 


तिर्यक्पिण्डीकृतौ जङ्घौ पार््चलीनौ तु तौ भुजौ। 
डकार एष विख्यातो care निवोध मे॥ 1: 50॥ 


शिरः शिरस्तु कृत्वा वै वामवाहुन्निकुञ्चयेत्‌। 
निकुच्य वर्तुलीकृ(त्वा ढकारं ग्रीव)७या विधिः॥ 1:510 


अधख्चैवोरुसीमायां जंघौ मन्योन्य दर्शयेत्‌ | 
अधोरुलीनविरला कृत्वा णश्च भविष्यति॥ 1:521 


प्रसृते च तथा जङ्घे तकारं कटिना सह। 
थकारो नाभिरुद्दिष्टा वलिरेखासमन्विता॥ 1:531 


शिरः शिरन्तु विज्ञेयं भुजमध्ये निकुञ्चयेत्‌। 
हस्तञ्चैव निकुञ्चेत दकारो दृश्यते बुधैः॥ 1 :54॥ 


(कण्ठं तु यो[ऽ]जेद्धस्तं धकारं कायवर्जितम्‌। 
मणिबन्धं शिरः कृत्वा दक्षिणस्य करस्य तु॥ 1:55॥ 


सङ्घुच्य चतुरोऽङ्गुल्यास्तथा मुष्टिन्तु कारयेत्‌। 
अधोमुखः स्मृतो syst नकारस्तु भविष्यति॥ 1:561 


कण्णैलीनौ भुजौ कृत्वा ऊद्धेबाहौ तु कारयेत्‌। 
मुष्टिन्दक्षिणपाणौ तु पकारन्तु भविष्यते॥ 1:57॥ 


1:50 तिर्यक्पिण्डीकृतौ sir] Nw; नित्यं पिण्डीकृतौ जंघौ K 1:51 भकृत्वा ढकारं 
भ्रीवया विधिः ] w; भ्कृत्‌ -- [5] या विधिः N; भकृत्वा ढ | या विधिः K 1:52 जंघौ 
मन्योन्य दर्शयेत्‌ ] NW; जङ्घा अन्योन्य दर्शयेत्‌ K 1:52 अधोरुलीनविरला कृत्वा ] 
NW; अधोरुलीनविरलीकृत्वा K 1:53 कटिना ] coni; कथि (?)ना NW; कथिता K 
1:53 थकारो नाभिरुद्दिष्टा वलिरेखासमन्विता ] NW; थकारो नाभिरुद्दिष्टो वलिरेखास- 
मन्वितः K 1:54 भुजमध्ये ] NW; भुर्जमध्ये K 1:54 निकुच्चेत ] NW; ह 
K 1:54 बुधैः ] K; बु ~ N; बुधः W 1:55 कण्ठं तु योजये” ] coni; — १ 
केद [| जये० K; कण्ठं Tu जये" W 1:55 धकारं कायवर्जितम्‌ ] मि 
कायवर्जितः K 1:56 तथा मुष्टिन्तु] em; ऽथाम्मुष्टिन्तु N; तथा U थां मु x 3 
“थाम्मुष्टिन्त W 1:56 अधोमुखः ] K; अधोमुख" NW 1:57 °वाहौ] NW; "वाहु 
K 1:57 भविष्यते] NW; भविष्यति K 


१८८ निश्चासतत्त्वसंहितायाम्‌ 
अस्य रूपस्य सव्यन्तु बाहुं संकुच्य ॥लक्षयेत्‌ | 
फकारन्दिव्यविमलं बकारमुरसि स्थितम्‌॥ 1:58 


दक्षि|(ण)/म्प्रक्षिपेद्धस्त वामकक्षे विचक्षणः | 
WguT वामकं बाहुम्भकारं कायवर्जितम्‌॥ 1: 59॥ 


प्रसृतन्दक्षिणं बाहुं वामञ्चैवोर्द्वकारितम्‌ | 
शिरः शिरन्तु कृत्वा वै मकारं कक्षया विधि:॥ 1:601 


सङ्कोचयित्वा तिर्यन्तु बाहुन्दक्षिण|(मध्यतः)| | 
(वाम) [६३17] ~ & वामन्तु कारयेत्‌॥ 1:61॥ 


कक्षाबाधे यकारस्तु रकारं साम्प्रतं शृणु | 
जानुशिरस्तु पादोद्धं रकारञ्जङ्कसंयुतम्‌॥ 1: 62॥ 


देहलीनौ भुजौ कृत्वा उपविश्य च लक्षयेत्‌। 
सङ्कुच्य वाम जङ्घौ तु लकारन्दिव्यरूपिणम्‌॥ 1:631 


मुष्कसूत्र शिरः कृत्वा वकारं पायुरुच्यते। 
शिर एव शिरे देवि वामबाहुद्धकारिते॥ 1:641 


--दिक्षि)2(णप््मध्ये योजयित्वा च शः स्मृतः। 
पूर्वोक्तं हि शिरः कृत्वा दक्षिणम्भुजमुत्सृजेत्‌॥ 1:651 


अभ्यन्तरे सव्यभुजङ्कृत्वा योज्येत मध्यतः | 
निरीक्षयेद्वही रूपं षकारस्य महात्मनः॥ 1:66॥ 


सकार सम्प्रवक्ष्यामि दिव्यरूपेण संस्थितम्‌ | 
1:58 फ- 


me 
1:58 सकुच्य ] W; — NK 1:58 लक्षयेत्‌ ] em.; — NK; d ^ aq W ] 
कारन्दिव्यविमलं ] N; फकारं u विमलं K; ware URAT W 1:59 विचक्षणः 
N"KW; विचंक्षणः N* 1:61 तिर्यन्तु] Nw; तिर्यकु K 1:61 द्ध] emi जत] 
(tops missing); €t K; X W 1:62 कक्षाबाधे ] NW; कक्षबोधे K 1:62 T 
co; सा ~ d N; (सा । d) K; म्य -त W 1:62 संयुतम्‌ ] NWG ) Ki 
K 1:63सङ्कुञ्य] NK; संकुच्य W 1:64 वकारं पायुरुच्यते ] N? (tops missa (N) 
वकार पायुरुच्यते W 1:64 शिर एव शिरे देवि वामवाहूर्डकारित ह्वार 
TW व शि(?) रे देवि वामवाहुद्धृकारित N (tops missing); U रूप] N^ 
K; AN 1:65 शः ] N; सः Kw 1:65 हि] NW; तु 1:66 बही 

हरूपं NKW 


नयसूत्रम्‌ १८९ 


दक्षिणं योजयेद्धस्तं वामस्कन्धे विचक्षण:॥ 1:67 ॥ 


अधोलम्ब्य सव्यभुजं अद्ध | 
[शंसकार एष विख्यातो gerer निबोध मे॥ 1 : 681 


लकारस्य तु यदूपं दक्षिणे त्च कारयेत्‌। 
हकारस्तु ततोद्विष्टः क्षकारं साम्प्रतं शृणु॥ 1:691 


एकरूपञ्चतुर्घा तु देहे दृश्यति स प्रभुः। 
हिष्कारन्ध्र शिरन्तस्य रेखा या च मधोगता॥ 1: 70॥ 


कट्या रेखा तु सम्प्राप्ता स्तनरेखेन कः स्मृतः । 
कटिरेखा च fate नाभिरे![खा] च मध्यतः) 1:711 


[4] पार्श्वै च या भवेद्रेखा क्षकारः प्रथमः स्मृतः | 
हस्तसन्धि शिरः कृत्वा प्रसृता त्रीणि चाङ्गुलीं॥ 1:721 


मध्यमा योजये SPS तर्जनी वर्तुला तत: | 
ऊर्ध्वन्तु मध्यमङ्कत्वा क्षकारस्तु द्वितीयकः॥ 1:731 


स एव दक्षिणे हस्ते क्षकारस्तु तृतीयक: । 
ऊर्द्धकायककार स्तु जंघौ संकुछ्य पिण्डितौ॥ 1:741 


कायोर्दधका--र--येत्तत्रा क्षकारः स्पष्टलक्षि|[8त: | 
मातृकाविग्रह ह्येतच्छरीरे यस्तु विन्दति॥ 1:751 


अकारे च तथैवेह स संसाराद्विमुच्यते। 


1:68 "Usb अर्द्ध] NW; भभु U अद्ध K 1:69 लकारस्य तु] NW; लकारस्य K 
1:69 ततो दिष्टः ] NK; ततोद्दिष्ट NW 1:70 स] NKW; सः ६“ 1:70 मधोग- 
ता] NW; अधोगता K 1:71 कया रेखा तु सम्म्राप्ता ] NW; कट्टा रेखा तु सम्प्रोक्ता K 
1:71 रेखेन कः ] New; रेखेन क Ne; रेखेण कः K 1:71 तिर्यश्व NW; तियं चा 
K 12 प्रथमः ] K; प्रथम NW 1:72 चाङ्गुलीं ] NW; चाङ्कुली K 1:73 iia 
NW''; मध्यमा KW 1:74 ऊर्द्धकाय" ] N; ऊर्ध्वकाय° K"UW; ऊर्ध्वः काय” K 
1:74 जंघौ ] KW; जघौ ॥॥ 1:75 कायोद्धंका+र+येततत्र] N; कायोर्ध्वं कारयेत्तत्र Ki 
कायाडका + T+ यैन्तत्र W 7:१७ क्षकारः स्पष्टलक्षितः ] con क्ष -तः Ny क्षकार U 
£; क्षेकार स्पृष्टलक्षितः W 1:76 अकारे] KW; अकारे N 


१९० निश्वासतत्त्वसंहितायाम 


`N 


एतज्ज्ञानं परं श्रेष्ठ सर्वगुद्योत्तमोत्तमम्‌॥ 1:76॥ 


ज्ञात्वा मातृकसद्भावं गुरुर्भवति पाशहा | 
'मन्त्रास्तस्य वशास्सर्वे आज्ञां कुर्वेन्ति चोदिताः॥ 1: 77॥ 


शिववडूतले सो हि मोचकस्तु गुरुः स्मृतः | 
न |दानस्रा|नतीर्थेन न जपध्यानहो|(मभिः)|॥ 1: 781 


prster परमं स्थानं यथा मातृकवेदने | 
सर्वसिद्धान्तवादिन्यो कथयन्ति मुमु|(क्ष)|वः॥ 1: 79॥ 


मुक्का मातूकविज्ञानन्तुषां क्षोदन्ति मोहिताः | 
एवन्ते अक्षरास्सवेँ तत्त्वसम्पूर्ण्णसंस्थिता:॥ 1 :80॥ 


दहन्ते सर्वपाशानि मोक्षदानि भवन्ति च। 
अजपः सिध्यते मन्त्रो अहुतस्तु फलप्रदः॥ 1:81॥ 


|यथा विहायांसफलं अध्या(तो मातृ) — [£317] | 
{देव्युवा\च)। 
कथं बध्यन्ति ते पाशास्तत्त्वरूपेण संस्थिताः॥ 1:821 


पाशधर्म वद शीघ्रमत्र मे संशयो महान्‌। 
ईश्वर उवाच। 
अनुग्रहतिरोभावौ द्वौ पाशौ तु सदाशिवे॥ 1:831 


NUM S t Xu sl. 
83 अनुग्रहतिरोभावो द्वौ पाशौ तु सदाशिवे Quoted without attribution by Ramakanthe 
ad Paramoksanirasakarika 4ab and ad Matangavidyapada 3:1-3 and by Tryambake- 
1:76 एतज्ज्ञानं ] K; एतज्ज्ञान N; एतज्ञान W 1:76 परं] N; वरं KW 178 T, 
स्मृतः] K; गुरु स्मृतः N; गुरु स्मृतं W 1:79 प्राप्नोति ] coni; — Ni uw) क्षो 
ति W 1:79 *वादिन्यो] Nw; *वादिभ्यो K 1:80 मुत्का मातृकविज्ञानन्तुषा ३ दन्ति 
दन्ति ] conj; मुत्वा मातृकविज्ञानन्तुषा क्षोदन्ति \; मुक्ता मातृकविज्ञान तपा श 
K; मुत्त्का मातृकविज्ञानन्तुषा क्षोदन्ति W 1:81 अजप्तः ] K; WWW Ni A 
1:81 मन्त्रो ] NK*"W; मन्त्रः Kw 1:82 यथा विहाय ] K; ~ य = वहाय १7  , 
वहाय W 1:83 "धर्म वद शीघ्रमत्र मे संशयो महान्‌] conj; MAT वद TR संसयो 
सशयः -हान्‌ N; “धर्म वद शीघ्रमेतन्मे संशयो महान्‌ K; "धर्म वद शीत भावी 
edis W 1:83 अनुग्रहतिरोभावौ ] em.; अनुग्रहतिरोभाव NW; अ = 


30 १९१ 


नास्तिक्यञ्च तिरोभावः शुष्कतङ्गौवलम्बनम्‌। 
तङ्॑भावसमायुक्त अयुक्तङ्करुते बहुम्‌॥ 1:840 


अयुक्तकारी पुरुषो नरकेषु प्रपच्यते। 
ति(येग्यो)(निमनुप्रासतः) [2|(पशु)यो]निषु जायते॥ 1:85 ॥ 


जन्मे जन्मे विमूढात्मा तिरोभावगतिं ब्रजेत्‌। 
तिरोभावञ्च कथितो ऽनुग्रहञ्च निवोध मे॥ 1:861 


श्रद्दधानो धर्म्मवतः शुभकर्म्मसु चेष्टते। 
विद्यान्वेषी स्वगर्गगतिः स्वर्गलोके तु क्रीडते॥ 1 :87॥ 


तत्रैव तु परिभ्रष्टो जायते चोत्तमे कुले। 
शिवशक्तिनिपातेन दीक्षा |(ज्ञा)नम्प्रयच्छति॥ 1:881 


सो sque: स्मृतो [(ह्येवं [3 दा)|ता चैव सदाशिवः। 
ईश्वरस्सृष्टिपाशेन योजयेत्सर्वजन्तवान्‌॥ 1:89॥ 


प्रेरकः पुण्यपापाभ्यां सर्व॑स्य gf संस्थितः। 
ब्रतम्पाशुपतम्प्रोक्तमनुग्रहनिमित्तये॥ 1 :90॥ 


ददाति च परान्निष्ठाञ्ज्ञानमोक्षाम्प्रयच्छति। 
अक्षयं हि गणत्वञ्च भूलोके लिङ्गरूपिणः॥ 1:911 


संस्थित ईश्वरो भूत्वा ददाति च हुरेति च। 
शास्त्रात्थमन्यथा |(सत्य)म]न्यथा यः प्रभाषते॥ 1:921 


Sambhu ad Kirana 1.13 (IFP T. 1102, p.13). A nearly identical line (with dharmau in 
place of Pasau) is quoted in the Sataratnollekhini on p. 7. 


184 बहुम्‌] NW; बहु K 1859 अयुक्तकारी पुरुषो नरकेषु प्रपच्यते] conj; अयुक्तका 
— धु भ्र?) पच्यते 19; अयुक्त (कारी पुरुषो नरकेषु प्रपच्यते K; अयुक्तकारि -वि 11 
प्रपच्यते W 1:85 तिर्यग्योनिमनुप्राप्तः ] ति -- N; U K; तिर्यग्यो u W 1:85 प- 
शुयोनिषु] K; — «निषु  ; u यानिषु ए 1:86 जन्मे जन्मे] NW; जन्म at 
K 1:87 लोके तु] NW; श्लोकेषु K 1:89 "नुग्रहः ] K; "नुग्रह NW Hen M 
आता] con; (ह्येव दा)ता K; ता N; 1 ता W N; m 
ESO © W sey *ज्ञानमोक्षाम्‌ ] NW; ज्ञानं मोक्षां 1:92 MESH i 
हरति K (unmetrical) 1:92 सत्यमन्यथा ] K; ~ — [4] “AUT \; सन्तमन्य 


१९२ निश्नासतत्त्वसंहितायाम 


अन्यार्थभाषणे विद्या बन्धते तङ्वादिनां। 
मातापितृसुतान्दारां गृहवाहन यद्वसु (7) ! 1:931 


अतिस्नेहसमापन्नो मायापाशस्तदुच्छिदः | 
नास्ति धर्म्मो न च स्वर्ग अधर्म्मनिरयौ न च॥ 1:94॥ 


दुःखिताञ्च मृयन्त्येते ज्ञानमोक्षन्न विद्यते | 
मायापाशस्समाख्यातं कालपाशञ्च मे शूणु॥ 1:95॥ 


कालो गणन संख्याया आयुख्तैव प्रकुर्वते। 
RaRa ददात्यायुः कौमारं यौवनं जरा॥ 1:96॥ 


व्याधिमृत्युञ्च कालेन स वै संहरते प्रजां। 
शुभं वाप्यशुभं यच्च अन्यजन्मार्जितम्भवेत्‌॥ 1 : 97॥ 


तस्य भोगप्रदा ह्येषा नियतियोंजयेद्बलात | 
पुरुषस्त्रिगुणैबंद्धो gum वैकारिकेण च॥ 1:981 


तन्मात्रेन्द्रियबन्धेन दृढ भूतैस्तु वेष्टितः॥ 1:991 


[।दे]हपाशाः स्मृता ह्येते गणपाशानि मे शृणु। 
लब्धानुज्ञो KT) सङ्कामे विद्येशस्तेन बध्यते॥ 1 : 100॥ 


98 Cf. Svacchanda 11:103: बुद्धिस्त्रिगुणबन्धेन qum वैकारिकेण तु। 
तन्मात्रेन्द्रियवन्धेन दृढं भूतैञ्च वेष्टितः। 


1:93 अन्यार्थभाषणे विद्या बन्धते ] conj. ARIE “भाषणे विद्या वदन्ते N; अन्यथाभा- 
षणे विद्या वदन्ते £; अन्य ।। षणे विद्या वदन्ते ॥ 1:98 तर्ङ्वादिनां ] NW: ताक 
£ 1:98 गृहवाहन WaT] N; गृहवाहन U K; गृहवाहनय 11 W 1:94 "FIGIT ] Ki 
निरयो NW 1:95 दुःखिताञ्ज ] NW; दुःखिताञ्च K 1:95 न्ख्यातँ ] NW; s 
£ 1:96 कालो गणन संख्याया] K; काल — [8] संख्याया N; काला CU Bes 
W 1:96 आयुञ्चैव ] NW; आयुंञ्चैव K 1:96 नियतिञ्च ददात्यायुः ] con); नि 
ददत्यायुः N; नियतं च ददत्याशुः K; नियत्यं न्व ददन्त्यायुः ४ 1:97 न ता अज 
jet K; व्याधिमभ्युं च ए 1:97 संहरते se संहते 
] NW; ~गप्रदा ॥ 1:98 त्रिगुणैर्बद्धो ] ४; तूर Ni ९७ og 
1:98 वैकारिकेण ] K; वैकारिकेन NW 1:99 eris NW; बद्धेन £ Ne i 
भूतैस्तु वेष्टितः ] em. (cf. Svacchanda 11:103d); दृढ — N; दृढभूस्तैस्तु त 
दृढभूतेस्तु ae w 


CSS १९३ 


मूल्यङ्कत्वा वदेज्ज्ञानं षण्मुखस्तेन वध्यते। 
अलब्धानुज्ञो [व]दे ज्ञानं ददाति च अदीक्षिते॥ 1 :101॥ 
सिद्धिं गणपतिर्हन्याच्छिद्रन्दृष्टा तु साधके। 
परिवर्तयति rege पशुज्ञानेन मोहितः॥ 1:102॥ 


नन्दिर्बश्चाति वै शीघ्रं ((चण्डीशः aye 32]मयाष्टसु। 
यो निन्दति शिवम्देवन्तड्भक्तन्देशिकन्तथा॥ 1 :103॥ 


निर्‌|(मा)|ल्यभक्षणे वापि बलिदाने पशोरपि। 
आदत्ते चातैविस्पृष्टं शास्त्रनिन्दा करोति च॥ 1:104॥ 


लिङ्गच्छायाविलङ्घी च चण्डीशो बन्धते भूशम्‌। 
प्रतिज्ञाब्रतमारूढो पुनस्त्यत्का शिवं व्रतम्‌॥ 1:1051 


अन्यत्तन्त्रव्रतङ्गहेद्देवी तेन निबन्धति। 
शिवतन्त्रमधीत्वा तु शिव|यज्ञं APAR 1: 106॥ 


यजते वैदिकैर्यज्ञैः शिवभक्तांश्च निन्दते। 
विप्रांश्चैवान्यलिङ्गस्थां पूजयेत्स्तुनतेति च॥ 1:107॥ 


हाठकुष्माण्डरुद्रस्तु तं वै बध्नाति दुर्म्मतिम्‌। 
गणपाशानि बध्चन्ति दीक्षितन्तु तथा दृढम्‌॥ 1:1081 


कामक्रोधञ्ज TPT जन्ममृत्युस्तयैव च। 
जरा व्याधिश्च शोकञ्च क्षुत्तृष्णा च मदस्तथा॥ 1:1091 


विषादश्च भयञ्चैव महामोहद्व दारुणं। e 
1:101 वदेज्ज्ञाने ] NW; वदे ऽज्ञानं K 1:103 शीघ्रं चण्डीशः स" ] em; — N; 

चण्डीसस्स० KW 1:104 बलिदाने ] conj; बलिदान" NKW 1४04 आदत्ते ] conj. ; 
अदत्ते NKW 1:105 चण्डीशो ] NW; चण्डीशै K 1:105 "मारूढो ] NW; a 
x _1:105 शिवं ] Nw; शिव" K 1306 गृहेदेवी तेन निवन्धति] NW; गृह a 
वि तैन K 1:106 शिवयज्ञं wg] K; शि ~ — N; शिवयज्ञाअ : 
५07 “तुनतेति] NW; *तुवतेति K 13084 वै bec इम्मेतिम्‌ ] ORE 
Twit दुर्म्मतिम N; ade प्रातिदुर्मतिः K; तवैव प्रातिदुम्मेति शा. 1:108 set 
NW: दीक्षितस्तु K 1:108 दृढम्‌] NW; दृढः K 1:109 कामक्रोध" ] MER i 

wT? K 15109 ATOT] NW; क्षुट्तृष्ण K 1110 994] NW; ute 

ioe महामोहद्व दारुणं] em.; म — [3] णं 9; महामोहद्य (दारु) णः K; मह 

W 


१९४ निश्चासतत्त्वसंहितायाम 


दम्भो रागञ्च Aes |मद|मात्सर्यमेव च॥ 1:110॥ 


उन्मादश्षैव शोषञ्च WT HEAT |(त)था] | 
धर्म्माधर्म्मञ्च हिन्सा च अस्वतन्त्रा सदा तनुः॥ 1:111 


एभिः पाशैस्सुबद्धाञ्ज न मुच्यन्ते ऽन्यशासनात्‌। 
पशुतन्त्रप्रणेतारैन्ने दृष्टम्पशुबन्धनम्‌। 
तस्मात्ते तु न मुच्यन्ते पशुज्ञानरता नराः॥ 1: 1121 


॥ @॥ इति निश्चासतत्त्वस{हितायां) {नय}[4]सूत्रे 


पाशप्रकरणं प्रथमः पटलः स्रो अल ॥ ®॥ 


देव्युवाच | 
नामन्तत्वी च ANTS लक्षा प्रोक्ता महेश्वर | 
क्रमोत्पत्तित्व तत्त्वानां रूपकञ्चैव मे वद॥ 2:1॥ 


ईश्वर उ। 
सूक्ष्म सर्वंगतन्देवं कारणं जगतः पतिम्‌। 
अनिर्देश्यमनौपम्यमक्षरं परमेश्वरम्‌॥ 2:21 


निष्प्रपञ्चनिरालम्बं वाग्विशुद्धमनक्षरम्‌ | 
व्योम{व्यापि} [5] निराभासम्प्रपञ्चातीतगोचरम्‌॥ 2:3॥ 


शक्तिमूर्धि स्थितं शान्तं योगगम्यं सनातनम्‌। 
सवंज्ञं सर्वकत्तारं सर्वतोक्षिशिरोमुखम्‌॥ 2: 4॥ 


अनामा नामकोटीभिस्स शिवः परिगीयते | 


LIL धर्म्माधम्मञ्च ] NW; धर्माधर्मस्व K 1:111 अस्वतन्त्रा सदा तनुः ] ००४ 


तन्त्रसदातनुः NW; अस्वतंत्र सदाञ्च वै 1: 1:112 निञ्चासतत्त्वसं ° ] NW; निचासमु 
तत्वस० K 1112A अल] NW; StuK 2:1 नामन्तत्वी ] NWT: a Ni 
£ 258 निष्प्रपश्चनिरालम्बं ] NWT; निष्प्रपञ्चं निरालम्बं K 2:3 निरा” ] Ti T 
uu “  2:4शक्तिमूर्घि ] K; शक्तिमूध्चि N; शक्तिमूर्त्रि Wi 

2:4 सवकर्तारे ] KT; सर्वकारत्तारं NW 2:5 अनामा] NW; अनाम K 


VENT १९५ 


तेन सर्वमिदं विश्वं कारितन्न च कामतः॥ 2:5॥ 


देव्युवाच | 
अकामस्य क्रिया नास्ति निष्कामः सृजते कथम्‌। 
एतत्प्रश्नवरं गु|ह्यं कथयस्व] [6] प्रसादतः॥ 2:6॥ 


ईश्वर उवाच। 
आदित्यस्य मणिर्यद्वत्तापितो रविरश्मिभिः। 
वक्किस्सञ्जायते तत्र न रवे तत्र कामता॥ 2:7॥ 


मणेरपि न कामित्वन्तद्वद्देवस्य चेष्टितम्‌। 
आदित्यवच्छिवो ज्ञेयः शक्तिर्म्मणिरिव स्थिता॥ 2:8॥ 


रितुकालमनुप्राप्य कालस्तत्र नियोजयेत्‌] i 
शिवतेजेन संयुक्ता |श|क्ते्जायति बिन्दुकः}॥ 2:91 


[६.३2] {बि}न्दोकश्चेश्वर विद्या च माया कालस्तथैव च। 
नियतिः पुरुषञ्चैव प्रकृतिञ्च समासतः॥ 2:101 


प्रकृतेद्धिषणा जाता भूतादिर्धिषणादपि। 
भूतादेशशब्दतन्मात्रं स्पर्शैतन्मात्रसंयुतम्‌॥ 2: 11॥ 


रूपतन्मात्रमेवाहू रसतन्मात्रकन्ततः। 
गन्धतन्मात्रसंयुक्तं जायते चेन्द्रियेण च। 


MRSS ~ FOS ee ee MOY 
6 ‘This passage, from 2:6-9, has been adapted to create Svacchandatantra 11:316-19, 
for which see Appendix II. 


2:5 कारितन्न च] NW; कारितं ade K 2:6 गुह्यं कथयस्व ] K; गु? — < ७; गुह्यं 
0 यञ्च W;LT 2:7 उवाच ] K; INW 2:9 रितुकालमनु° ] NW; ऋतुकालमनु° 
K; ऋतुकालमतु° T 2:9 शिवतेजेन ] N; शिवस्तेजेन w; शिवविज्ञ" K; शिव u 
T 2:9 शक्तेर्जायति बिन्दुकः ] conj. Kafle (cf. Uttara-Sü 1:6ab); — NW; श U gan 
Wu T 2:10 बिन्दोश्नेश्वर विद्या] conj; -- < खश्चरविद्या NT; दाख fr- 
WFK; न्दोख्च अरविद्या ए 2:10 समासतः ] KW; समा(?)सभः N; 7 समः T 
21 RAT] NWT; ०द्वि(द्वे) षणा K 211 भूतादिर्धि* ] conj; भूतादिद्धि* um 
भूतादिद्वि (दे) K; भूतादिद्वि" WT 2:12 संयुक्त] K; संयुक्त NWT 2:12 3 
चेन्द्रियेण च] coni; ~ यते चे(?)न्द्रिये(/)ण च (7) N; यते च ४; UIW; UT 


BM 


१९६ निश्चासतत्त्वसंहितायाम 


piri त्वक्चक्षुषी जिल्ला नासिका च यथाक्रमम्‌)॥ 2:12 


[2॥(बु)द्वीन्द्रियाणि पञ्चैव विद्धि कर्म्मेन्द्रियाणि च । 
वाक्पाणिपादपायुश्च उपस्थेति च पञ्चमम्‌॥ 2: 13॥ 


मनआैकादशो ज्ञेयमुभयोरपि धावति। 
अहंकारोद्धवा ह्येते षोडशैते प्रकीत्तिताः॥ 2:141 


शब्दतन्मात्रसम्भूतमाकाशं शब्दलक्षणम्‌ । 
स्पर्शतन्मात्रसम्भूतं वायुद्दिगुणलक्षणम्‌॥ 2: 15॥ 


रूपतन्मात्रतो ज्ञेयन्तेज|स्‌]त्रिगुणलक्ष[अणम्‌ | 
रसतन्मात्रसम्भूता आपञ्चैव चतुर्गुणाः॥ 2: 16॥ 


गन्धतन्मात्रसम्भूता पृथ्वी पञ्च|(शु)]णान्विता। 
तच्वैरेतैजैगत्सर्वज्ञातं स्थावरजङ्गमम्‌॥ 2: 17॥ 


भुवनानि विचित्राणि शतशो ऽथ सहस्रशः | 
तत्त्वाभ्यन्तरसंस्थानि शास्त्राणि विविधानि च॥ 2:181 


विज्ञानं कुहकं शिल्पं सिद्धिसन्दोहलक्षणम्‌ । 
प्रक्रिया शिवदीक्षा च तत्त्वैरे|(तै)स्तु] [4] लभ्यते॥ 2:191 


सर्व तत्त्वेषु बोद्धव्यं सर्वं तत्त्वेषु दृश्यते। 

न च वस्त्वन्तर ङ्किचिदात्तत्त्वाह्यतिरिच्यते॥ 2: 20॥ 
देव्युवाच। 

e E Tu DRILL 
2:12 ओत्रं त्वक्चक्षुषी जिल्ला नासिका च यथाक्रमम्‌] conj. cf. (Svacchandatent? 
109243); अ~ ~ -क्षु(?)ष(?) — N; U KWT 2:14 *क्षैकादशो IAT. ] E 
चैकांदशो ज्ञेयमु" NW; *चैकादश ज्ञेयमु" K; "श्षैकादशो ज्ञेयशु° 7 2 सन्दोह”] 
क्षणम्‌ ] conj; तृ — णम्‌ N; TUK; तृगुण u णम्‌ ७; Tu ण T 2:19 E 

s TE याज NKW; *संचोप* T 2:20 सर्व quy बोद्धव्यं ] Ni ` चि 
प्वोद्धव्य K; सर्वतत्वेषु बोद्धव्य WT 2:20 bana SEE d ] em: 
दास्त्वत्वाद्यातिरिच्यते N; किंचिद्यस्तत्वाह्मतिरिच्यते 1८; किचियस्त्वत्वोद्यतिष्यते 
किचिदास्तत्वाह्यतिरिष्यते T 


नयसूत्रम्‌ १९७ 


तत्त्वसृष्टिस्त्वया प्रोक्ता जगत्सम्भवकारिणी | 
तत्त्वविज्ञानमाख्याहि सिद्धिञ्चैव कथम्भवेत्‌॥ 2:211 
प्रक्रिया च कथन्तेषु दीक्षा निर्वाणगामिनी। 
पुनर्विस्तरशो ब्रूहि प्रभ गुह्यतरं विभो॥ 2:22॥ 
ईश्वर उवाच। 


पृथिव्या|(दि)| {शि}[ऽ]वान्तञ्च प्रवक्ष्यामि निवोधतः। 
पृथ्वी कठिनरूपेण शृणु देहे यथा स्थिता॥ 2:23॥ 


मांसे चैव तथास्थिभ्यो स्रायुलोमनखेषु च। 

अन्त्रे मज्जे च विज्ञेया पृथ्वी पञ्चगुणोत्कटा॥ 2:241 
कफासृक्भूत्रमेदेषु रसस्वेदवसेषु च। 

शुक्रे च age चैव स्थिता ह्यापञ्चतुर्गुणाः॥ 2: 25॥ 
पचने दर्शने चैव पित्तोष्मे तेज संस्थितम्‌। 


(तेज)(स्तथा)[6] समाख्यातो स च ज्ञेयस्त्रिलक्षणः॥ 2: 26॥ 


वायूच्छुवासे निरुच्छुवासे चेष्टने स्पर्शेनेति च। 
मूत्रोच्चारविसर्गे च अन्नपानप्रवेशने॥ 2:27॥ 


वायुरेभिः स्थितो देहे विज्ञेयस्तु द्विलक्षणः | 
एकलक्षणमाकाशन्तद्धि वक्ष्यामि quud: 2: 28॥ 


सुशिरात्मकन्तु विज्ञेयन्नवधा च्छिद्रलक्षणम्‌। 


aa SS SEN SM CENE 
21 This passage, from 2:21-102, has been adapted to create Svacchandatantra 12:1c- 
82, for which see Appendix II. 


2:21 भृष्टिस्त्वया ] K; “सृष्टि त्वया NT; "शृष्टि त्वया W 2:21 °संभवकारिणी ] K; 
°सम्भवकारिणि NW; “सर्वभवकारिणी 7 2:21 Aa] £7; च्चैव NW 2:23 
K; उ NWT 2:24 मांसे] K; MÀ NW; मान्सै T 2:25 "्सृक्मूत्रमेदेषु xS: 
वसेषु च] NK; «शक्मूत्रमेदेषु रसास्वादिवसेषु च W; TORT ` चोष्णे 
T 2:25 ह्याप°] NWT; आप" K 2:26 पित्तोष्मे तेज [] conj.; 
तेजस्संस्थि- N (unmetrical); पीतोष्मे तेज संस्थितः K; पीतोष्मे तेज FE W; 
पीतोष्मे तेजसांस्वि -- T 2:26 तेजस्तथा ] coni; — N; तेजी(शख) a 
Wi UT 2:28 द्विलक्षणः ] NW; विलक्षणः K 2:28 तद्धि] N; तद्वि K 


pe 


१९८ निश्चासतत्त्वसंहितायाम 


शब्दात्मकगुणो ह्येष तेनासौ ह्येकलक्षणः॥ 2: 29॥ 


६.33] वागेन्द्रियं Tea सा च वाणी चतुर्विधा | 
संस्कृता प्राकृता चैव अपभ्रंशानुनासिका॥ 2:301 


उक्ता वागेन्द्रिये धर्म्मा हस्तेन्द्रियमतः शृणु। 
छेदनं भेदनं दानं वेधनं शिल्पकारितम्‌॥ 2:31॥ 


ग्रहणं विजयञ्चैव सर्वं हस्तेन्द्रिये स्थितम्‌। 
समनिम्नोन्नतानीह कण्टलोष्ट्रकवालुका॥ 2: 32॥ 


कर्हमञ्जलदुगर्गाणि [पर्वता|ट्वालर(थ्यका:) | 
[पादे)[2] न्द्रिये गुणाः प्रोक्ता देशान्तरगमागमे॥ 2: 33॥ 


उत्सग्गें Bled चैव पायुश्रेष्टति Aaa: | 
गम्यागम्ये प्रवत्तेत उपस्थो नन्दकारकः॥ 2: 34॥ 


एते कर्म्माः प्रवर्तन्ते तेन Hagar: स्मृताः। 
बुद्धीन्द्रियास्तथा पञ्च वर्त्तन्ते बुद्धियोगतः॥ 2: 35॥ 


श्रोत्रे श्रवणधर्म्मित्वं यानि शब्दानि Ted | 
तानि वक्ष्यामि तत्त्वेन यथावदनु।पू(र्वशः)|॥ 2:36 


[3] षड्जं च क्रषभञ्चैव गान्धारम्मध्यमन्तथा | 


2:29 ह्येकलक्षण: ] K; होकल _ N; ह्यकलक्षणः W; ह्ये 11 T 2:30 amiga] Wi 
-गेन्द्रियं N; वागीन्द्रियं £; -गेन्द्रियं 7 2:31 उक्ता वागेन्द्रिये wen] NW; उक्त 
वागीन्द्रिये धर्मो K; उक्ता वातेन्द्रिये धर्म्मा 7 2:31 दानं वेधनं शिल्प" ] cows दान 
< धनं Brev N; दानं u धनं शिल्प» ह; दा ~ रो ध ~ शिल्प Wi 1 Tu 
T 2:32 हस्तेन्द्रिये NW; हस्तेन्द्रिय* KT 2:32 कण्टलोष्टुक” ] coni: :] 
** N; कणलोष्टक° K; कण्ठलोष्टक° W; कण्ठलोष्टक° T 2:33 र्वताट्टालरथ्यका रिष्यते K 
conj. (cf. Svacchandatantra 12:12); — ट्रा (?)लर — N; पर्वता ल 1 ] 
पवता -लरण्यम W; LT 2:33न्द्रिये] Nw; न्द्रिय० KT 2:33 उत्सः 
WT; दशान्तरगमागमे N; देशान्तरसमागमे K 2:34 उत्सर्गे छर्दिते ] ०५ ` 
ग्ग्‌ स्पते NK; उत्सर्ग्गे स्पद्धिति W; उत्सग्गस्पद्धितेश T 2:34 गम्यागम्ये ] ८० i 
गम्यागम्य NWT; गम्यागम्यं K 2:34 उपस्थो नन्दकारकः ] NW; Ni 
KT 2:36 यानि] conj; याति NKT; यांति W 2:36 न्नुपूर्वशः ] Ki नु 
"NSW; he UT 


OE १९९ 


पञ्चमन्धैवतं षष्ठन्चिषादञ्चैव सप्तम:॥ 2:37॥ 

सप्त स्वरास्त्रयो ग्रामा एकविंशति मूर्च्छना: | 
तानान्येकूनपञ्चाश इत्येतत्स्वरलक्षणम्‌॥ 2:38॥ 
सूक्ष्माश्शब्दाः स्मृता ह्येते सर्वजन्तुष्ववस्थिता: | 
स्थूलान्यपि प्रवक्ष्यामि यथावत्तन्निबोधतः॥ 2: 391 
भेरीशंखमृदङ्‌|(गं च)| (पटहं)[4] |प|णवन्तथा। 
मर्दलन्दहुर वेणुं गोमुखतालमेव च॥ 2:401 
तन्त्रीवाद्यविचित्राणि करवाद्यानि यानि च। 
मुखवाद्यानि रम्याणि काष्ठायुक्तानि चैव हि॥ 2:41॥ 
संस्कृतं प्राकृतं चैव अपभ्रंशानुनासिकम्‌। 
ससस्वरप्रतिष्ठानि व्यक्ताव्यक्तानि यानि च॥ 2:421 
उक्तादनुक्तशब्दानि गृह्णाति श्रवणेन्द्रिय|(:)| | 
शब्दस्य विषयो ह्येष पुरुषो येन बध्यते॥ 2: 431 


Wea कठिनब्चैव qur शीतलन्तथा। 
उष्णञ्च पिच्छिलं लोष्ट्र कण्टकं वालुकर्दमम्‌॥ 2:44॥ 


शरकुन्तासिघातानि ताडनञ्छेदनञ्च यत्‌। 
एतान्यन्यानि जानाति स्पर्शेन तु त्वगिन्द्रियः॥ 2:45॥ 


स्पर्शस्य विषयो ह्येष येनात्मा तु निबध्यते। 
चक्षुषञ्चैव कर्मा(णि कथ्य{माना)नि) मे शृणु॥ 2:46॥ 


2:37 °धैवतं ] N; चैव तं KWT 2:37 निषादञ्चैव सप्तमः] NTT; निषादचैव सप्तम~ 
NeW; निषादं चैव सप्तमम्‌ K 2:38 मूर्च्छनाः ] conj; मूर्च्छना NKWT 2:38 ताना- 
न्येकूनपञ्चाश ] N; तानान्येक्ुनपञ्चाश W; तानाभ्यक्तेनपञ्चाश £; तानान्ये -न पञ्चाश 
T 2:40 पटह] conj Kafle; — NKW 2:40 पणवन्तथा] W; ~णवन्तथा NT; 
पणवस्तथा K 2:40 वेणुं] NW; वेणं K; वेणु T 2:41 काष्ठा" ] NWT; काष्ठ" K 
2:42 प्राकृतं चैव ] NKW; प्रकृञ्चञ्चैव 1००; प्राकृतंच्चैव T 2:43 शब्दस्य विषयो am 
conj; शब्द u विषयो ह्येष W; — - [5] षयो ह्येष NT; ।। विषयो ह्येषः K 2:44 
ष्ट कण्टकं] N; wie कण्टकं KT; लोष्टकण्टकं W 2:45 जानाति ] conj.; is 
NKW; ज्ञातानि T 2:46 कर्माणि कथ्यमानानि मे] coni; ˆ ¬ [6] मे N; कर्माणि क 
UÑ £; कर्माणि कथ्य u नि मे w; कर्म्माणि (1 मे T 


Exc 


२०० निश्नासतत्त्वसंहितायाम 


सितं रक्तञ्च पीतञ्च कृष्णं हरितपाण्डुरम्‌। 
कपिलं पिङ्गलं बश्चुरन्यान्यपि विशेषतः ॥ 2: 47॥ 


नरनारीपशुमृगं ज्योति स्थावरजङ्गमम्‌ | 
रूपाकृतिविभक्तानि चक्षुः पश्यति सव॑तः॥ 2:481 


रूपस्य विषयो ह्येष येन बध्यति पुङ्गलः। 
मधु{रात्नरसं चैव लवणं कटु तिक्तकम्‌}॥ 2:491 [t.33"] 


{कषाय}|(मि)|श्रं स्वादुञ्च जिह्वा वेदयते X | 
रसस्य विषयो ह्येष येन बध्यति स पुमान्‌॥ 2:50॥ 


सुरभीणि सुगन्धानि दुग्गेन्धाञ्च-म्‌-अशोभनाः। 
उभाभ्यां जिघ्रते नासा विषयो गन्धलक्षणः॥ 2: 51॥ 


येनासौ बध्यते क्षेत्री अहङ्कारेण मोहितः | 
संकल्पाञ्च विकल्पास्च {दशधाक्षे}षु धावति॥ 2: 52॥ 


अनि{वारितसम्मोही अजय्यः} (सर्व॑जन्तुषु)। 
(rpg कथितं ह्येतद्धरम्माधर्म्मनिबन्धकं | 
स्वरूपधर्मम्वक्ष्यामि तन्मात्राणां यथार्थतः॥ 2:531 


गन्धतन्मात्र गन्धन्तु नासिकाग्रेण गृह्णते | 
रसतन्मात्र जिह्वायां रसं गृह्णाति संस्थितः॥ 2:54॥ 


रूपतन्मात्र चक्षुभ्यां रूपं गृह्णात्युपागतम्‌। 
MEAM uibs FN | 
2:47 कपिलं ] KWT; कपिलं N 2:48 ज्योति] NWT; ज्योतिः K 2:49 es 
JATT: ] conj; वध्यति “ददलं N; वध्यति पुंगलः K; बध्यति पुंगलं Wi quit 1 स्वा- 
2:49 मधुरान्नरसं चैव लवणं कटु तिक्तकम्‌ ] conj; मध — N; UW KWT 250 j 
इश्च em; IGT NKWT 2:51 सुगन्धानि | NW; च गन्धानि ४; गन्थानि 
(unmetrical) 2:51 म्‌-अशोभनाः ] conj; मशोभना NW; अशोभना T वारितसम्मोही enu 
T 2:52 दशधाक्षेषु coni; --षु N; U प्र, K; U WT 2:53 E. 
अजय्यः सर्वजन्तुषु ] conj; अनि — N; u KT; अनिर्वाण ५ अजयं स्य परत 
2:53 मनस्तु ] conj; — तु NW; ॥ षु K; ug T 2:53 ह्येतद्‌ Ki erat 
2:54 गृहृते ] N; गृह्यते KT; गृह्णते ए 2:55 गृह्तात्युपागतम्‌ ] Ni 
KT; गृह्नात्युपोगतः w 


नयसूत्रम्‌ २०१ 


स्पर्शेतन्मात्र स्पर्शन्तु गृहृते त्वचमाशृतः ॥ 2: 55॥ 
ग्राहक शब्दतन्मात्रं श्रोत्रशब्दत्वमागत: | 
सिक्ष्मस्त][न्मात्रधम्मो हि भूतानाम्प्रभृतिक्रमात्‌॥ 2:561 


वैकारिकस्तदूर्द्धन्तु येन बध्यति पुङ्गलः | 
अहं विद्दानहं भोगी अहज्ञातो महत्कुले॥ 2:571 


अहन्दाता च भोक्ता च रूपस्वी वाहुशालिनः। 
मया जिताश्च सङ्गामे Mess पराजितः॥ 2: 581 


धर्म्मेशीलञ्च गुणवान्मम त्वभ्यधिको कुतः। 
अहम्पापी दुराचारो मूर्खञ्चाहन्चिराकृति(:)|॥ 2:59॥ 


(न दत्तन्न) [4] च मे भुक्तम्मत्समो नास्ति दुःखितः | 
इत्यहंकारचित्तानां ममत्वमनुवत्तिनाम्‌॥ 2:60॥ 


संसारगृहबन्धेन अहङ्कारस्तु बन्धते। 
उक्ताहङ्कारधर्म्मास्तु धीगुणांश्व निबोध मे॥ 2:61॥ 


धर्म्मे ज्ञानञ्च वैराग्यमैश्वर्यञ्च चतुर्त्थकम्‌। 
अधर्म्मेञ्च तथाज्ञानमवैराग्यमनैश्वरम्‌॥ 2:62॥ 


बन्धते सप्तधा सा तु ज्ञानभावेन मोक्षते। 
बु|द्धि(र)|[5]ध्यवसायेन करोति विकरोति Th 2:63॥ 


2:55 गृहते त्वचमाशृतः ] N; ed त्वचमाञ्रितः K; TET u सृतः W; Age U शृतः 
T 2:56 ग्राहक शब्दतन्मात्रं ] conj; Wen: शब्दतन्मात्रं N; ग्राहकः शब्दतन्मात्र 
६; ग्राहकः शब्दत U W; ग्राहकः शब्दतन्मात्रं 7 2:56 शरोत्रशव्दत्वमागतः ] K“; 
श्रोतशब्द — \; श्रोत्रः शब्दत्वमागतः K; श्रोतशुब्द -मागतं W; शब्द - मागतः T 
2:56 *तन्मात्र* ] em; -न्मात्र® N; U मात्र" K; 0 = W; ५ श्रोतः T 29:57 पुन्ग- 
ल: ] NT; पुंगलः KW 2:58 सङ्गामे ] NWT; Agr K 2:58 शत्रुश्चैव पराजितः ] 
conj; शत्रुश्चैव पराजिताः KT; शत्रु चैव पराजितां NW 2:59 त्वभ्यधिको कुतः ] 
NW; त्वधिकः कुतः K; मम -त्यधिको कुतः T 2:60 न दत्तन्न] W; — N; न 
दत्त UK; न द - ए 2:61 बन्धते] NWT; बद्धते K 2:61 हाव र त ] 
NWT; उक्तोहंकारधर्मस्तु K 2:61 धीगुणांख ] K; धीगुणाञ्च NWT 2:63 = | 
NWT; बध्यते K 2:63 मोक्षते] NWT; मोक्षति K 2:63 बुद्धिरष्यवसा" ] K; वु 
TITEN; बुद्धिखो -यवसा° W; बुद्धि u येंवमा" T 


NUNT. 


२०२ निश्चासतत्त्वसंहितायाम हितायाम्‌ 


धर्म्मादीनान्तथाष्टानां लक्षणानि निबोध मे | 

उप|(वासं जपम्मौनमक्रोधम्स्तेयवर्जितम्‌॥ 2: 64॥ 
सत्यं शौचञ्च दानञ्च दया क्षान्तिश्च सर्वदा | 
विद्याभ्यासञ्च लज्जा च इन्द्रियाणाञ्च निग्रहः॥ 2:651 


aia dele पितृणाञ्चैव तर्प्पेणम्‌ | 
अभयं सर्वभतानां जीवितस्य (तु) रक्ष[6]ण॥ 2:661 


धीगुणः प्रथमो ह्येष धर्म्मे इत्यभिशब्दितः | 
धर्म्मकर्म्मनिबद्धानां संसारमनुवरत्तिनाम्‌॥ 2:67॥ 
पुनस्स्वगर्गः पुनम्मैत्त्येस्तिर्य॑त्वं च पुनः पुनः। 
धर्म्मस्य भावमाख्यातं ज्ञानभावन्निबोध मे॥ 2:68॥ 


पिण्ड एष चतुर्विंशत्‌ करणेन्द्रियसंयुतः | 
प्राकृतस्स तु विज्ञेयो धम्माधम्मेप्रवतैकः॥ 2:69॥ 


अकर्त्ता {निर्गुण्राहं न) [534] मे बन्धो ऽस्ति प्राकृतः | 
साझ्लज्ञानम्मया प्रोक्तम्प्रकृत्या येन मुच्यते॥ 2:70॥ 


मुक्तः प्रकृतिसृष्ट्या तु पुनर्बश्चाति चेश्वरः | 
पुनस्संसरते भूयो याव देवन्न विन्दति॥ 2:71॥ 


ईश्वरं सृष्टिकत्तोरं सर्व॑जन्तुनिबन्धकम्‌। 
वैराग्यात्त्यजते भोगान्दारांख्राप्सरसोपमान्‌॥ 2:72॥ 


हस्त्यश्वरथयानानि सुहून्मित्रधनानि च। 


न + 
2:64 उपवास जपं] £; उप ASTON; उप LAT W; उप "जप T 
EL N; मौनंमक्रोधं K; मौनमक्रोध० WT 2:66 रक्षणम्‌ ] conj. (c 
tra 12:46b); — णं NW; LI UIT NWT; T 
2:69 प्रवर्तकः ] K; प्र — N Mies Kk S anag 2:70 अकर्तता | ue 
अकर्मा? FN; ~< < ए 2:70 निर्गुणञ्जाहं न] con; - N; UT K; Aer 
UT 271*WNT] NT; *सृष्टौ K; oyar W 2:71 याव देवन्न विन्दति ] ° 
यावदेवन्न विन्दति N; यावद्देवं न विन्दति K; urat u विंदति W यावदेव g Wi 
SUD (सुहन्मित्र)घनानि च] K; सु --धनानि -- N; सु 7 ता 


2:64 मौनम- 
f. Svacchands 
K 


नयसूत्रम्‌ zo: 


SII} Let जपन्तीर्थ पञ्चाग्नि जलशायिनम्‌॥ 2:730 
तपां सेवन्ति घोराणि देहः सन्त्यज्यते क्षणात 


~ 


गिरितोयविषाग्निभ्यो प्रहारोद्वन्धनाशकैः॥ 2: 74॥ 


वैराग्यन्तु समाशृत्य कुरुते साहसान्यपि। 
ऐश्वर्यभावमापन्नो द्रव्ये तृप्ति न गच्छते॥ 2:75 | 


न राज्येन च भोगैञ्च परिवारायुधवाहनै: | 
तपं ब्रतञ्च मन्त्रांश्च ऐश्वर्यार्थी तु साध[अयेत्‌॥ 2: 76॥ 


युद्ध Yas माया च चौरिकानृतहिन्सनम्‌। 
अन्यान्यपि अयुक्तानि विस्रम्भच्छलघातनम्‌॥ 2:77॥ 


'ऐश्वर्यभावमापन्नो। करोति च विहन्यते। 
प्राणिहिन्सारतो नित्यं चौरिकानृतडम्भनम्‌॥ 2:781 


वञ्चको दुःखदाता च भवेद्चाधर्म्मचेष्टितम्‌। 
नास्ति धर्म्मो न चाधर्म्मो स्वर्गमोक्षञ्च को गतः॥ 2:79॥ 


अज्ञानभावमापन्नो (सर्वं मिथ्येति वक्ष्यते। 
नित्यडुःखी परप्रेष्यो भारयानं वहत्यपि॥ 2:801 


कृच्छुजीवी च सततमवैराग्यान्न खिद्यते। 


2:73 उपवासं ] conj; — ~ पञ्‌ NT; UM KW 2:73 जपन्तीर्थं ] N; जपेत्तीर्थे K; 
जपन्तीर्थ WT 2:73 शायिनं] NT; शायिनः K; सायिनं W 2:74 तपा] NWT; 
तपः K 2:74 सन्त्यज्यते ] NK*WT; संत्यजते K” 2:74 १भ्यो प्रहारोद्वन्धनाशकैः ] 
coni; “भ्यो प्रहारो बन्धनाशकैः NW; *भ्यः प्रहारैर्वन्धनाशकैः K; भ्यो प्रहारो T- 

TNS: T 2:75 समाशृत्य ] NW; समाश्रित्य K; समासृत्य T 2:75 द्रव्ये qf] 
con; द्रव्ये TAC NWT; द्रव्यतृ्तिर्‌ K 2:76 राज्येन ] NW; wert £; राज्यो न 
T 2:76 तपं व्रतं च ] NW; तपो व्रतञ्ज K; UT 2:76 मन्त्रांञ्च ऐश्वर्यार्थी तु साधयेत्‌ 
] coni; मन्त्राश्च ऐश्वर्या — त्‌ N; ware ऐश्वर्या 11 येत्‌ £; मन्त्राञ्च QW “ था तु 
1 येत्‌ W; uq T 2:78 ऐखर्यभावमापन्नो ] T; ऐश्व+र्य+ भवमापन्नो N; ऐश्वर्यभा- 
वमापन्नः K; Wad भावमापन्नो W 2:78 "डम्भनम्‌ ] NW; "भर्त्सनः K; कक 
2:79 *चेष्टितम्‌ ] NWT; चेष्टितः K 2:79 धर्म्मो न चाधर्म्मो NW; धमो न i 
K; धर्म्मा न चाधर्म्मा 7 2:79 स्वर्ग» ] NWT; स्वर्ग 17 2:80 सर्व मिथ्येति ] mE 

सर्वमिथ्येति W; — [| < ति प; ष्यति £; 11 ति 7 2:80 वक्ष्यते NT; चक्षुते K; 
Wad w 


२०४ निश्चासतत्त्वसंहितायाम्‌ 


राज्यङ्कत्वा तु सामन्तम्सामन्ताद्वामिको भवेत्‌॥ 2:81॥ 


ग्रामाडृथ्टस्तु लब्धेन वर्त्तते स त्वनीश्वरः | 
न शोचते न चोद्देगः पूर्वराज्येव क्रीडते॥ 2:82! 


अनैश्वर्यस्थ भावो SAAT ते समुदाहृतः | 
अव्यक्तन्तृगुणं (वक्ष्ये) [5] (संसारस्य प्रवत्तकम्‌॥ 2: 83॥ 


यतस्सर्वजगोत्पत्तिः प्रकृतिस्तेन सोच्यते | 
तस्य धरम्मान्प्रवक्ष्यामि सत्त्वरजस्तमोत्कटान्‌॥ 2: 84॥ 


प्रकाशन्तु भवेत्सत्त्वं धर्म्मसत्यसमन्वितम्‌। 
संविभागी च सततं अनृशंसत्वकारितम्‌॥ 2:85॥ 


क्षमादयासमायुक्तो ज्ञानविज्ञानपारगः। 
प्रीतिर्दानन्धृतिमेधा तपः शौच दमस्तथा॥ 2: 86॥ 


अदृष्टेषु समदृष्टिर्‌[0(दि/व्यबुद्धिप्रबोधकः | 
यस्मिन्नेतानि धर्म्माणि भवन्ति पुरुषोत्तमे॥ 2:87 


स सात्त्विकस्तु विज्ञेयो रजोधर्मञ्च मे शृणु। 
निस्त्रिंशञ्जातिलोभी च विद्देषी क्रोधनस्तथा॥ 2: 88॥ 


कामी हुर्ष॑समाविष्टो इःखात्तो -म्‌-अटते सदा। 
मानी दम्भसमायुक्तो ह्यहंकारे व्यवस्थितः॥ 2:89॥ 


FN EE TS RE ३८३१ 
2:82 स त्वनीश्वरः ] NWT; सद्ध?नीश्वरः K 2:82 ०राज्येव ] NW; “राजक 
राज्यो T 2:83 अव्यक्तन्तृगुणं ] WT; अव्यक्त — N; अव्यक्तं तरिगुणं K मह 
con; ~ N; U KT; वक्ष्येत्‌ W 2:83 संसारस्य प्रवत्तंकम्‌] W; --सारस्य s 
N; U सारस्य प्रवत्तैकः K; Lp सारप्रवर्त्तंकं T (unmetrical) 2:84 प्रकृतिस्तेन ] T 
प्रकृति तेन NWT 2:85 "समन्वितम्‌ ] NWT; समन्वितः K 2:85 त m 
अदृश० NWT; अदृसं० K 2:86 °पारगः] NWT; पारग K 2:86 T 
धृतिमेधा NW; वृतिमेधा T 2:86 शौचदमस्तथा ] NW; शौचं द ८स्तथा 1, N; 
तथा T (unmetrical) 2:87 समदृष्टि्दिव्य" ] conj; — सा — व्य” Mi feai d 
ससम ।। दिव्य» w; m च ।| 7 2:88 निस्त्रिशञ्चातिलोमी च] N; rical) 
लोभी च £; निस्त्रिशञ्चातिलोभी च w; निस्त्रीशम्‌ वातितिलाभी च 
2:89 इःखात्तोमटते ] NW; दुःखार्त अटते K i 


T (unmet 


नयसूत्रम्‌ २०५ 
नित्यं युद्धरतः {शूरः} रा{जसं गुणलक्षणम्‌}। 

(काम)क्रोधा)[: 34१|(भि)|भूतञ्च लोभेन च समन्वितः॥ 2:901 
ईर्षालुश्च विषादी च मदमुन्मादचेष्टवान्‌। 
निद्रालस्यमकर्म््मित्वन्डुरमेधाज्ञानमेव च॥ 2: 91 ॥ 


अधर्म्मताबुद्धिमतो नास्तिक्यञ्चलचित्तता। 
तमस्येतानि चिह्लानि यस्मिन्दृश्यति जन्तवे॥ 2:92 ॥ 


तामसो हि स विज्ञेयो पुरुषः [(क) |लुषात्मकः | 
एतत्तृगुण(मव्यक्त TT समुदा)हृतम्‌॥ 2:931 
[विदित्वा प्राकृतैर्बन्धैमुंच्यते न च मुच्यते। 
गुणधर्म्मा न चाव्यक्तं धीहंकारगुणो न हि॥ 2:941 


।तन्मात्रेन्द्रियधम्मेण महाभूतगुणेन च1। 
करणेन्द्रियहीनत्वाड्ततन्मात्रवर्जितः॥ 2: 95॥ 


अकत्तौ निर्गुणञ्चैव चिन्मात्रः पुरुषः स्मृतः। 
मानसं वाचिकञ्चैव शारीरं कर्म्म यत्कृतम्‌॥ 2:961 


प्रकृत्या कारितम्मन्ये अकर्ता पुरुषोच्य|(ते)| i 
BIT सन्न्यस्य कम्मौणि प्रवर्त्तस्तानि सर्वतः॥ 2:97॥ 


नाहं कर्त्ता न मे बन्धो ह्येवं बुध्यन्ति ये नराः। 
प्रकृत्या ते विमुच्यन्ते यावन्न सृजतेश्वरः॥ 2:981 


साह्यज्ञानम्मया प्रोक्तम्मुक्तिरित्यभिशब्दिता। 


2:90 युद्धरतः ] em.; Fat --- NWT; Fata K 2:90 रा] NWT; UK 2:90 लो- 
भेन] NW; लाभेन KT 2:91 मदमुन्माद* ] conj.; मदन्मुन्माद” N; judi 
मदन्मु ।। द° W; मदमुत्पा।। T 2:91 *चेष्टवान्‌ ] KWT; चेष्टंवान्‌ \ 2:92f A ] 
KWT; चिंह्णानि N 2:93 विज्ञेयो] NWT; विज्ञेयः K 2:93 एतत्तू" ] conj.; EE 
\; एतत्त K; एतत्तु WT 2:93 *गुणमव्यक्त तृगुणं समुदाहृतम्‌ ] conj. "व्य (2) क्त- 
न्तू (?) -- N; "गुण U KT; - ण | हृतः W 2:94 विदित्वा ] conj; - N; U 
KT; L त्वा W 2:94 "बन्चैर्‌० ] K; À NWT 2:94 गुणधर्म्मा न Tam 
EOD; गुणाधर्म्मा न चाव्यक्तं NWT; गुणधर्मो न aae K 2:90 Lon. is = 

निगुण° Nw 2:97 मन्ये ] NWT; मर्त्ये K 2:97 सन्न्यस्य ] conj; सन्य (१) स्य N; 
सत्यस्य KWT 


२०६ निद्वासतत्त्वसंहितायाम 


न हि मुक्तिर्भवेत्तस्य किञ्चित्कालं विदेहता॥ 2:991 
तिषठठेत्प्रकृतिनिर्म्मुक्तस्सृष्टिसंहारवर्जित 4 

यावन्न सृजते सृष्टिमीश्व|(रः) [4 परमेश्चरः॥ 2:1001 

तावत्प्रकृतिबन्धेन संसारे क्षिप्यते पुनः | 

क्षिप्तस्तु जायते भूयो जातस्संसरते पुनः॥ 2:1011 

धर्म्माधर्म्मनिबद्धस्तु साझुज्ञानेन मोहितः | 

अहं कर्ता अहं भोक्ता ईश्वरो बलवानहम्‌। 

ममत्वेनैव संमूढो भ्रमते घटियन्त्रवत्‌॥ 2: 102॥ eil 


नयसूत्रे प्रकृतिविचारो द्वितीयः पटलः स्रो अ2॥ 


[p] ईश्वर उवाच। 
साझ्झज्ञानम्मया प्रोक्तं शुणु ध्यानाधिदैवतम्‌। 
पृथ्वी कठिनरूपेण चतुस्सागरमेखला॥ 3:1॥ 


सपर्वेतवनाकीर्ण्णा मृगपक्षिसमाकुला। 

स्थिरा पीतकवर्ण्णाभा पूर्वबीजसमुत्थिता॥ 3:2॥ 
ध्यायतः सिद्धिमभ्येति विषसत्त्वानि स्तम्भयेत्‌ । 
अचाल्यस्सव॑भूतानां यथैव वसुधा भवेत्‌॥ 3:3॥ 
जलपूरितसा[शु्वांगो जलध्यानेन पूरयेत्‌। 
एवमभ्यसमानस्तु विषसत्त्वानि नाशयेत्‌॥ 3: 4॥ 
qut दाघविनिर्मुक्तस्सर्वमीतिविवर्जितः | 


गे... व जया ee _157, 
l This entire chapter has been adapted to create Svacchandatantra 12:83-157 
which see Appendix II. 


for 


क YN 00 
2:102 घटि ] NWT; घटी° K 2:102 स्लो अ2] NWT; स्रो 1 K उ ब 
£; उ \॥ 3:3 सिद्धिमभ्येति ] x; सिद्यमभ्येति n; सिध्यन्येति Wi सर्वागो £ 
33 स्तम्भयेत्‌ ] NWT; स्तम्भयन्‌ K 3:4 wahr] W; — वाँगो Ni 

3:5 *मीतिविवर्जिंतः ] Nw; *भीतिविवर्जितः K. *मितिविवर्जित 


नयसूत्रम्‌ 


जगदापूरयेत्सवम्पूर्वबीजविचिन्तकः॥ 3: 5 ॥ 
स्वशरीरोत्थितो वहिर्ज्वलन्तो जगदाहकः। 
कुर्यात्कर्म्मसहस्राणि स्वबीजेन तु चिन्तकः॥ 3: 6॥ 
[.357] {कृष्णरे}ण्वाकुलो वायुर्ध्यायेद्वीजेन संयुतः। 
पूरयन्तो जगद्देहं सिद्धिद्वाश्वर्यकर्म्मकृत्‌॥ 3:71 
सुशिरात्मक स्वदेहज्नगच्च सुशिरात्मकम्‌। 
ध्यायेत्प्रकृतिबीजेन चित्रकर्माणि कारयेत्‌॥ 3:8॥ 
वागेन्द्रिये तथा वह्लिध्यांतो वाक्सिद्धिदायकः। 

इन्द्रः पाणौमभिध्यात अजयः बाहुशालिन:॥ 3:91 
पादप्र{चा)रम्पञ्चान्तु {ध्यातो विष्णुः}[2] [(प्र|दायकः | 
पायौ मित्रं सितन्ध्यातः पायुव्याधिविनाशनः॥ 3:101 


शिञ्जे प्रजापतिः श्यामो ध्यायेदयुक्तेन चेतसा। 
जितेन्द्रियश्च भवते इच्छया रमते शतम्‌॥ 3:11॥ 
श्रोत्रेन्द्रिये दिशाखित्रा ध्यायेद्दीजेन संयुताः । 
Wage श्रुतङ्खक्केद्दिशायात्रा च सिद्धते॥ 3:121 


२०७ 


3:6 *्वेलन्तो जगदाहकः | NW; “ज्वलत्तेजस्स दाहकः K; “अज्वलन्ते जसदाहक T 
3:6 स्वबीजेन तु ] conj. Kafle; स्व तान TN; स्वकीयेन तु K; स्वकं -तु W; स्वकी 
“TET 3:6चिन्तकः] W; चि -- N; चित्त(तैः) K; चि ५ 7 377 कृष्णरेण्वा- 
कुलो] coni; --ण्वाकुलो N; U ञ्चा कुलो K; u ष्णरेणो कुलो W; ५ ण्याकुलो T 
3:8 च सुशिरात्मकम्‌ ] NW; च सुशिरात्मकः K; च सुसिरात्मकम्‌ T 3:8 ध्यायेत्पर- 
कृतिबीजेन ] N; ध्यायन्प्रकृतिबीजेन K; eaters ˆ रीजेन W; A T 
T 3:9 वागेन्द्रिये तथा ] conj. Sanderson; वागेन्द्रियन्तथा NKT; वागीन्द्रियं तथा W 
3:9 इन्द्र: पाणौमभिध्यात ] Nee; इन्द्र+:+ पाणौ (?) मभिध्यायत N; इन्द्र: पाणिमभि- 
ध्यात K; इन्द्र --: + पाण्यमभिध्यात W; इन्द्रि पाणौमभिध्यात T 3:9 वाहुशालिनः ] 
१०; बाहुशालनः NAK; बाहुसालिनः W; बाहुसालनः T 3:10 पादप्रचारम्पद्यान्तु 1 
Cons पादप्र — N; पाद(प्र Li ) रं Wb ५ K; पाद U रम्पन्मान्तु ॥; पाद s 
TPUT 3:11 प्रजापतिः श्यामो ] NW; प्रजापतिं श्यामं K; प्रजापतिः स्यात्मा e 
जन भवते ] NWT; भवति K 3:12 दिशाक्षित्रा] NWT; दिशां चित्रां K ळी 
पाः ] NWT; संयुता K 3:12 गृहेद्‌ ] NT; Tẹ K; Jeo W 312 °य 
सिद्धते conj; earma सिद्धते NWT; यात्रा च सिद्धति K 


२८७ निश्चासतत्त्वसंहितायाम 


मरुतं कृष्णरूपेण ध्याये त्वचसि संस्थितम्‌। 
शस्त्रदंष्टिण(भेदैद्व न) [3] त्वगे जायते व्यथा॥ 3:13॥ 


आदित्यञ्चक्षुषि ध्यायेज्जिक्वायां वरुण स्थितः। 
नासिके पृथिवी पीता ध्यायेच्चन्द्र मने स्थितम्‌॥ 3: 141 


पीतकं गन्धतन्मात्रं रसतन्मात्र शुक्रकम्‌ | 
रूपतन्मात्र रक्तन्तु स्पर्शतन्मात्र कृष्णकम्‌॥ 3:15॥ 


अरूपं शब्दतन्मात्रं ध्यातव्यं बिन्दुरूपिणं। 
विषये चेप्सितां सिद्विञ्चिन्तितञ्च विजानते॥ 3: 16. 


वैकारिके तथा रुद्रो ध्यातव्यो सिद्धिमिच्छता। 
ध्यानात्सिद्धिमवाप्रोति मुक्तो ऽहङ्कारबन्धनात्‌॥ 3: 17॥ 


बरह्माणं बुद्विसंस्थन्तु ध्यायेद्युक्तेन चेतसा। 
पूर्वबीजमभिध्यानाज्ज्ञानौघस्सम्प्रव्तते॥ 3: 18॥ 


दिव्यबुद्धिञ्च भवते संशयच्छेदकारिणी i 
भूतम्भव्यम्भविष्यञ्च प्रत्यक्षन्तस्य जायते॥ 3: 19॥ 


प्रकृतिः कृष्णवर्णा तु शुक्करक्ता विराजते। 
रक्त च हृदयन्तस्य बहुपादभुजानना॥ 3:20॥ 


ध्यात्वा प्रकृतिबीजेन यदिच्छेत्सिद्धिमात्मनः | 
सिद्धञ्चैव स्वतन्त्रश्च दिव्यसृष्टिः प्रजायते॥ 3:211 


षण्मासाद्यानयोगेन दिव्यसिद्धिः प्रजायते | 


3:13 ध्याये त्वचसि संस्थितम्‌ ] conj; ध्यायेद्वचसि संस्थितः NW; ध्यायेद्वचसि सं 
TAK; ध्यायेद्वचसि संस्थित 7 3:13 त्वगे ] N; OT KWT 3:14 ध्यायेज | ` 
ध्यायं K 3:14 पृथिवी पीता] Nw; पृथिवीं पीतां x; पृथिवी पीतो 7 ४ 
मने स्थितम्‌ ] NW; oag मनःस्थितम्‌ K; cay मने स्थितां T 3:17 E. 
ध्यातव्यो ] W; त — [4] [तव्यो N; तथा रु ।। ध्यातव्यः ४; TUT जते ४! 
कृतिः ] K; प्रकृति NWT 3:90 शुक्तरक्ता विराजते] NW; शुक्ला रक्ता स्य 
TA रक्ता विराजे T (unmetrical) 3:20 रक्तं च हृदयन्तस्य ] Wi गि, 
TT ।। तस्य K; रक्तं च ।। तस्य ग 3:20 बहु° ] conj. Sanderson ud 
3:21 दिव्यसूष्टि: ] NK; दिव्यदृष्टिः w 


नयसूत्रम्‌ je 


त्रैलोक्ये यः प्रवत्तेत प्रत्यक्षन्तस्य जायते॥ 3:22॥ 


एष ते प्राकृतो योग उक्तो मोक्षकरः परः। 
पुरुषस्तत्परत्वेन हृदिपचे (|व्य]वस्थितः)॥ 3:231 

[6] चित्स्वरूपेण पिण्डेन देहमापूर्य यत्स्थितम्‌। 

स जीव इति विख्यातो येन जीवति तत्पुरम्‌॥ 3:241 
निर्गतेन yada अचेता शीर्यते पुनः | 

बध्यते मुच्यते सो हि सुखदुःखन्च विन्दते॥ 3:251 


न तस्य रूप वर्ण्णं वा प्रमाणम्पश्यते क्कचित्‌। 
अशक्यः कथितुं वापि [६35°] {सूक्ष्मञ्च देह)(धा[रि|ण:॥ 3:26॥ 


बालाग्रशतभागस्य शतधा कल्पितस्य च। | 
तस्य सूक्ष्मतरो जीवस्स चानन्ताय कल्पते॥ 3:27॥ | 


आदित्यवर्ण्ण रुग्माभमापबिंद्वेव पुष्करे। 
तारकेव तु लक्षेत योगी दिव्येन चक्षुषा॥ 3:281 


दक्षिणेन सिताङ्गा तु वामतो कृष्णरूपिणी। 
तद्द्ण्णानि च वस्त्राणि {मण्डनानि विशेषतः॥ 3:29॥ 


कर्मबन्धेन बध्नाति सुख)[2(दुः)खं प्रयच्छते | 
नियतीन्तां विजानीयादनिवार्या सुरासुरैः॥ 3:30॥ 


पूर्वबीजमभिध्यानादूपेण च समन्विता। 


3:23 पुरुषस्त° ] K; Jered? NWT 3:23 हृदिपचे ] KT; हृदिप ~ N; afarer 
W 3:24 देहमापूर्य यत्स्थितम्‌ ] NW; देहमापूरयन्‌ स्थितः K; देहस्यपूर्यं य स्थितं 
T 3:24 जीव ] conj. Sanderson; वीज NKWT 3:24 "पुरम्‌] NWT; शपुरः K 
3:25 शीर्यते ] N; म्रीयते K; सीयते WT 3:25 सुखदुःखच्च ] NWT; सुख दु हना 
3:26 रूप वर्ण वा] NW; रूपं वर्ण वा ८; रूप वर्णश्च 7 9:26कचित्‌] W; क ers 
N; UK; भृशं 7 3:26 अशक्यः कथितुं वापि सूक्ष्मश्च ] conj. Sanderson; अशक्यः — 
N; UK; U कथितु W; UT 3:27 चानन्ताय] N; चाभेदाय K; Tu ae 
--य T 3:28 रुग्माभ० ] NW; रुक्माभ° K; रुग्माभे T 3:29 तद्दुण्णानि च वक्ता r] 
N; U KWT 3:29 मण्डनानि विशेषतः ] con; म — N; U KWT 3:30 इःख] 
W; --ख्खं N; खं KT 3:30 °वार्यां] em.; “dd NKW; शवाय T 


EU | 


२१० 


निद्वासतत्त्वसंहितायाम 


ध्यानात्सिद्धिमवाप्रोति नियत्या चैव मुच्यते॥ 3:31॥ 
त्रिनेत्रन्तु चतुर्वक्त कृष्णणवर्णश्वतुभुजम्‌ | 
संहरन्तन्दुराधर्षमनन्तं कालमीश्चरम्‌॥ 3:32 I 


स्वबीजकालरूपज्ञो न कालः कलयिष्यते। 
चक्रवत्परि|(वर्त्तन्ते)| [॥ |(का)|लध्यानविवर्जिता:॥ 3:331 


एवं कालं सदा ध्यायेद्येन fates शाश्चती | 
कृष्णवर्णा च रक्ताक्षी दीर्घदन्ता सुलोमशा॥ 3:341 


कुचोर्द्धपिङ्गकेशी च स्थूलकाया महोदरा। 
या पातयति भूतानि ब्रह्माद्यानि पुनः पुनः॥ 3:351 


निर्वेरपरिपन्थिन्या माया ग्रन्थि दुरत्यया । 
सांख्यवेदपुराणज्ञा अन्यशास्त्रप्रयोगिन:॥ 3: 361 


न ते लंघयितु [4] शक्ता ये चान्ये मोक्षवादिनः। 
किश्यन्ते मायया भ्रान्ता अमोक्षे मोक्षनिश्चिताः॥ 3:37॥ 


स्वबीजध्यानयोगेन पूर्वध्यानादिरूपकैः । 
दीक्षासिना तु ताञ्छित्त्वा गच्छते शिवमव्ययम्‌॥ 3:38॥ 


agit भवेद्विद्या अवर्ण्णां वापि कथ्यते। 
सितरक्तपीतकृष्णा ध्यातव्या सुशिरात्मिका॥ 3:39॥ 


आकाशवायुमारूढा रूप|(यौव)|[5]नशालिनी | 
स्ववीजेन तु 1सङ्भावंः साधके सिद्धिदायिका॥ 3:401 


34 कृष्णवर्णा च रक्ताक्षी दीर्घदन्ता सुलोमशा ] om. T 


~ ux Ga day. ina. 
3:32 चतुर्भुजम्‌ ] KW; चतुभुजम्‌ N; चतुर्भुजा T 3:33 स्वबीज” ] ०० 
N; सुवीजः K; -वाज° W; सुवीजा° T 
3:34 सुलोमशा ] NK; सुलोमसा W 3:36 *पन्थिन्या ] NT; पन्थिन्यो 


W 


3:36 अन्यशास्त्रप्रयोगिनः ] conj; अन्यशास्त्रयोगिना NWT 


न्यशास्त्रयोगिणः K (unmetrical) 3:37 न ते लंघयितुं ] em न ¬ 


लक्षयितुं ८; न ता लंघयितुं ए; TUT हिदोत्‌ यितुं 7 3:37 °वादिन 


NWT 3:39 चतुर्वर्ण्णा ] K; चतुवरण्ण NWT 


3:34 रक्ताक्षी ] N; नक्ताक्षी K 


; AU 


; ] K वादिता 


नयसूत्रम्‌ २११ 


विद्यासिद्धिमवाप्रोति सिद्धस्सर्वत्र सङ्कमेत्‌। 
देवलोकानि सर्वाणि कामरूपञ्च जायते॥ 3:41॥ 


कुङ्कमाभार्धनारीशन्त्रनेत्रन्तु जटाधरम्‌। 
पूर्ववक्तमभिध्यानाद्वायुःभक्षाम्बुदस्थितम्‌†॥ 3: 421 


तस्य पुण्यमवाप्नोति अश्वमेधायुतस्य F | 
जगच्च वशमा|(या)][6]ति क्रमते सिध्यतेति च॥ 3:431 


षड्भिमासैन्न सन्देहो दक्षिणन्तु तथैव fe 
नीलाम्बुदप्रतीकाशम्मिङ्गश्रूश्मञ्रुलोचनम्‌॥ 3:44॥ 


भूकुटीकरालवक्तृ कपाली सर्पभूषितम्‌। 
बहुरूपं जटाधारन्दक्षिणास्यन्तु चिन्तयेत्‌॥ 3:45॥ 


सर्वदुष्टविनाशाय {ईतिज्वर)}[६.36']विनाशनम्‌। 
विषग्रहादिसत्त्वानि ध्यातो नाशयते क्षणात्‌॥ 3:46॥ 


अग्निवज्ज्वलते योगी जरामृत्युविवर्जितः। 
क्रमते सर्वलोकानि सिध्यते च शिवो भवेत्‌॥ 3:47॥ 


सितन्त्रिनयनं वक्ते अक्षसूत्रकमण्डलुम्‌। 
पञ्चिमं वदनं ध्यायेद्द्व्यिसिद्धिप्रदायकम्‌॥ 3:48॥ 


{हत्वा} (प्राणिसहस्राणि परदा)[र)(शतानि च)। 
(अलेपको विशुद्धात्मा) सिध्यते च शिवो भवेत्‌॥ 3:491 


दविनेत्रमुत्तरं वक्तून्नीलोत्पलकरन्तथा। 


3:42 जटाधरम्‌] K; जाठाघर N (unmetrical) ; ज घर ७; ज पर 7 3:42 "भ- 
क्षाम्बु० ] NWT; "भक्ष्याम्बु० K 3:44 षड्भिमा° ] K; षड्भि मा" xu $45भूकु- 
टी०] NWT; भ्रुकुटी० K 3:45 "दक्षिणास्यन्तु ] NW; "दक्षिणस्य तु KT 3:46 स- 

वेदुष्टविनाशाय ] conj; सर्वदुष्टविनाशं च K; सर्वेदृष्टवि -- N; सर्वदुष्टविनाशा W 
सवेदुष्टविना u 7 3:46 ईतिज्वरविनाशनम्‌ ] conj; विनाशनम्‌ K; -- N; र विना- 
सनम्‌ W; UT 3:48 शप्रदायकम्‌ ] W; "प्रदा शक ¬ N; "प्रदायिवा (१) K; O काळ 
3:49 हत्वा प्राणिसहस्राणि पर दारशतानि च] conj; “4“5णि — N; = = Weal | 
परदा ~ शतानि च Ww; UKT 3:49 अलेपको विशुद्धात्मा] W; ¬ मा N; UK; 
LI त्मा T 


२१२ निम्नासतत्त्वसंहितायाम 


ध्यानात्तस्य जगत्सर्वं वशमायात्यसंशयः॥ 3:50॥ 


तपते वर्षते चैव सृजते संहरेति च। 
ईप्सिता तु भवेत्सिद्धिर्यो $ब्दमेकन्तु चिन्तयेत्‌॥ 3:51 


सितम्मूर्धि सदा ध्यायेच्छूलहस्तज्लटाधरम्‌ | 
व्याप्रयज्ञोपवीतेन अक्षसू|(त्रकम)|ण्डलुम्‌॥ 3:52 I 
[वीणाडम)[३(रु|क|,हस्तन्नागयज्ञोपवी तिनम्‌ । 

चन्द्रमूधोद्धलिङ्गन्तु ध्यायेन्नित्यम्महेश्वरम्‌॥ 3:53॥ 


ईप्सिता च भवेत्तसिद्धिविग्रह यो ऽभ्यसेत्सदा। 
अनेनैव स्वदेहेन सर्वज्ञः कामरूपवान्‌॥ 3:54॥ 


अथवा घण्टशब्देन सिद्धिः षाण्मासिका भवेत्‌। 
ईप्सिता सर्वलोकेषु सिद्धिरेव प्रजायते॥ 3:55॥ 


लिङ्गद्वयन्तु यो ध्यायेत्‌ पूर्वबीजेन संयुत|(म्‌)| | 
[4] [मासै)(केन) ततः पश्येत्सूक्ष्मलिङ्गन्ततोपरि॥ 3:56॥ 


शुद्धस्फटिकसंकाशन्तन्दृष्टा तु विमुच्यते। 
सिद्धिश्च मानुषे लोके षण्मासेन तु जायते॥ 3:57॥ 


त्रैलोक्पदर्शी सिद्धिद्ध प्रत्यक्षन्तस्य जायते। 
क्रमते सर्वलोकानि ईश्वरेण समो भवेत्‌॥ 3:581 


सोमादित्यौ स्थितौ नेत्रे चक्रे चैकरथस्य तु। 
भूत तन्मात्र वाजीनि मनस्सारथि |(चो)|[5]दितः॥ 3:59॥ 


अहङ्कारो भवेद्योधा YOST महाधनुः | 
इन्द्रियाणि शरास्तस्य मृगो ऽधर्म्मः प्रकीत्तितः॥ 3:601 


3:50 वशमायात्यसंशयः | em.; वशामायात्यसंशयः N; वसमायात्यसंशयः ह 
यात्यसंसयः W; वशामाया -शंशयः T 3:51 Haq] NWT; "मेक तु? ओर्द "m 
‘are ] NWT; समाध्या K 3:53 न्मूर्घोर्ड” ] N; “मूर्घोद्ध” Ki “मू ८ 
“मृद्धाद” T 3:55 घण्टशब्देन ] N; U Henr K; घण्ठशब्देन WT eee 
conj; Riga NKW; सिद्ध T (unmetrical) 3:58 त्रैलोक्यदर्शी ] NW 

K 3:60 इन्द्रियाणि] T; इन्द्रियाणि NKW 


TINE २१३ 


यद्येवं क्रीडते नित्यमीश्वरो हृदि संस्थितः। 
पुण्यपापैः प्रवत्त॑न्तो इच्छया परमेश्वरः॥ 3:611 


नाहं कत्तौ न मे बन्धो सर्वश्चेश्वरकारितम्‌। 
मत्वा चेश्वरविज्ञानं सर्वकर्माणि[6] MATH 3:621 


धर्म्माधर्मस्य कत्तृत्वे प्रेरको हृदि संस्थितः। 
त्वमेव शरणापञ्नो न मे बन्धो ऽस्ति Ada: | 3:631 


सदाशिवो ष्टभेदेन दिनरात्र्ययनानि च। 
दक्षिणोत्तरसङ्कान्त्या ज्ञातो विषुव मोक्षदः॥ 3:64॥ 


((वं)| {शध्व)}[६.३७१]|(नि)|समप्रख्यः शान्तनादस्तु स स्मृतः। 
सदाशिवस्तु विज्ञेयो ध्यानयोगबलं शृणु॥ 3:65॥ 


मासाद्भवति रूपस्वी वागीशस्तु द्वितीयके। 
तृतीये पश्यते सिद्धां दिव्यदृष्टिञ्जतुर्थके॥ 3:66॥ 


सिद्धिस्तु मानुषे (लोके {वत्सरार्धान्न संश)यः। 
दिव्यसिद्धिन्तथाब्देन सायोज्यन्तु द्विरब्दिके॥ 3:67॥ 


षण्मुखङ्करणङ्कत्वा ध्यायेद्देवं सदाशिवम्‌। 
दशधा वर्णरूपेण दृश्यते च सदाशिवम्‌॥ 3:68॥ 


सितं रक्तञ्च पीतञ्च कृष्णं हरितपिङ्गलम्‌। 
नीलच्चित्तृकवण्णञ्च स्फटिकाभम्मनोरमम्‌॥ 3:69॥ 


दृष्टा सर्वाणि रूपाणि त्यजेत्तानि विचक्षणः। 


3:61 प्रवरत्तन्तो इच्छया ] पप; प्रवर्तन्ते ईच्छया K; प्रवत्तन्तो ईछया W 3:62 सो 
NW; बन्धः K; qur T 3:62 *कर्माणि] KW; "कम — N; "कर्मस्य T 3:64 द- 
क्िणोत्तरसङ्कान्त्या ज्ञातो ] conj; = zf णोत्तरसङ्का ऽ ज्ञातो N; दक्षिणोत्तरसङ्काशो 
जातो K; दक्षिणान्तरस u ज्ञातो w; दक्षिणोत्तरसं ।। जातो T 3:65 शान्त” ] Eu 
सान्त० K*"W'T 3:66 सिद्धां] em; सिद्धा NWT; सिद्धो K 3:67 मानुषे लो ud 
पर" (१) W; मानुषे के N'*K (unmetrical); मान्त येके T (unmetrical) i 3 
Water संशयः ] con; वत्स ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ यः N; वत्स | KW; र » 
3:67 दिव्यसिद्धिन्तथाब्देन सायोज्यन्तु द्विरब्दिके ] conj; — डिन्तथाव्धेन iles =- 
RIS N; u fet ४; u सिद्धि - ब्देन सायोज्यन्तु — ब्दिके ए; U न्दिके T 


२१४ निद्वासतत्त्वसंहितायाम 
एक एव तदा गृह्येच्छेषान्ये गुणरूपकाः॥ 3:70॥ 
चन्द्रमण्डलसंकाश विद्युत्पुञ्जसमप्रभम्‌ | 
तारकाचलिताकारं बिन्दुन्देवस्य लक्षणम्‌॥ 3:71॥ 
निवृत्तिश्च प्रतिष्ठा च विद्या शान्तिस्तथैव च। 
कलाचतुष्टयो ऽप्येवं ज्ञातव्यं बिन्डुरीश्वरम्‌॥ 3:72॥ e 


॥ ®॥ इति निश्चासतत्वसंहितायां नयसूत्रे [4] (त){त््व}|(रू)|पविचारस्तृतीयः पटः 


लः॥ ®॥ स्रो 7 7 5॥ Gil 


देव्युवाच | 
का निवृत्तिः प्रतिष्ठा च विद्या शान्तिस्तथैव च। 
तत्त्वं सङ्भावतो ब्रूहि कलाभेदञ्च कः स्मृतः॥ 4:1॥ 


ईश्वर उवाच। 
निवृत्तिः प्रकृतिज्गेया प्रतिष्ठा सकला स्मृता | 
'अंशिरशुद्धां विद्या च शान्ति मायावि|(शुद्धि)|[5]का॥ 4: 2॥ 


एवं सदाशिवं ज्ञात्वा शुद्धाशुद्धे व्यवस्थितम्‌ | 
मुच्यते सर्वबन्धैस्तु शिवं याति निरामयम्‌॥ 4:31 


योगेन च भवेत्सिद्धिर्यो ध्यायेत चतुष्कलम्‌ | 
सितरक्तपीतकृष्णन्ध्यानात्सिद्धिर्यथेप्सिता॥ 4:41 


अभिन्नेन शरीरेण शिवसायोज्य[(तां व्रजेत्‌)| [6] 
3:70 एक एव तदा गृह्येच्छेषान्ये गुण ] conj; एक एव — होछेषान्ये TU es 
एव न ।। हो ।। न्ये K; एक एव त || गृहेच्छेषान्ये गण” W; एक es ] NW; 
गुण० T 3:72 *चतुष्टयोप्येवं | NKW; °चतुष्टयो ह्येव N 3:72 Regel, कः] 
विन्दु ईश्वरम्‌ K; बिन्दुनीश्चर T 3:72 स्रो 7 7 5] NWT; खोकः - 1 अंसिर 
K; क NWT 4:2उवाच] K; उ NWT 4:2 अंशिर ] NT; अंशिरस्‌ AU 
SANAN NWT; शान्तिर्‌ £ 4:4 *पीतकृष्णन्‌ ] NW; "पीतकृष्ण ? के 


NUS २१५ 


आश्चर्याणि च कुरुते यथेष्टम्भूतले सदा॥ 4:5॥ 


दानतीर्थब्रतं त्रानं संयमञ्जपपूजनम्‌। 
अग्निहोत्राश्रमाधर्म्मा कलां यश्च न विन्दते॥ 4:6॥ 


चतुष्कलपरिज्ञानी (न लिप्ये u पापकैः)। 
[.377] {प्रथमा तु कला) सूक्ष्मा सुसूक्ष्मा च द्वितीयका॥ 4:7॥ 


अमृता तु शिरावस्था चतुर्थी चामृतामृता। 
चत्वार्येतानि शक्तेस्तु कलानि कथितानि वै॥ 4:8॥ 


ज्ञात्वैतानि विमुच्यन्ते किम्पुन हृँष्टलक्षणः। 
स्फोटशब्दन्तु तस्यैव यदि यो ऽन्ते (?) — 1 
— ॥4:9॥ 


— [2] ।प{र)]मसद्भावं यद्गत्वा न निवर्त्तते। 
SET चैव महाशक्तिं गुरुं शिवसमं fag: 4:10॥ 


देव्युवाच | 
शिवे चैव निरालम्बे योगञ्चैव कथम्भवेत्‌। 
समरसञ्च पुनर्भूत्वा शिवत्वं लभ्यते कथम्‌॥ 4:11॥ 


ईश्वर उवाच। 
चक्षुषा यच्च दृश्येत वाचया यच्च गोचरम्‌। 


—— — WOES, 4.” 
12 This passage, from 4:12-14b, has been adapted to create Svacchandatantra 12:163- 
165b, for which see Appendix II. 


4:5 आश्चर्याणि ] N; ऐखर्याणि K; न्मुख्र्‍योणि W; ॥॥ माणि T 4:6 दानतीर्थव्रत ] NW; 
दानं तीर्थ व्रत K; दानतीर्थव्रत° T 4:6 कलां यञ्ज] conj; कलां या N; कलां यो 
W; कला या KT 4:6 विन्दते] WT; विन्द ~ N; विन्दुना £ 4:77 frat u 
पापकैः] w; ~ˆ -- N; न लिप्तो ७ 5; न ली ५ 7 4४7 --सूक्ष्मा WENT च 
द्वितीयका ] N; u सूक्ष्मं च द्वितीयकम्‌ K; 1 सूक्ष्मं च द्वितीयका W; u सूक्ष्म द्वितीयका 
T 4:8 अमृता तु शिरावस्था] N; अमृता तु शिरोवस्था K; अता Rss 
W; अमृतान्तु शिरवस्था 7 4:9 "लक्षण: ] NW; "लक्षणम्‌ K 4:9 ७०१० ] mi 
KWT 4:9 यो ऽन्ते (?) ] N; यो ८ ६; UT 4:11 योगञ्चैव ] TUIS 
4:12 उवाच] K; उ NW 4:12 चक्षुषा यच्च दृश्येत वाचया यच्च गोचरम्‌ Ea : 
यो यच्च दृश्येत वाचं यावच्च गोचरम्‌ K; चक्षुसा यञ्च दृश्यन्ते मोचया शुद्धगोचरम्‌ 


२१६ निश्चासतत्त्वसंहितायाम्‌ 


मनश्विन्तयते यानि (बुद्धिञ्चैव) (वि)[3|(क)|ल्पयेत्‌॥ 4:12 


अहङ्कतानि यान्येव यच्च रूपेण संस्थितम्‌। 
यत्र नास्ति स तत्रैव अन्वेष्टव्यं स्वदेहतः ॥ 4:13॥ 


यत्र तत्र स्थितो देशे यत्र तत्राश्रमे रतः। 
स्वस्तिकम्पद्यकम्भद्रमद्धचन्द्रम्प्रसारितम्‌॥ 4: 14॥ 
सापाश्रयं अञ्जलिकं योगपट्टं यथासुखम्‌। 

अष्टासनानि मुख्यानि कीर्तितानि समासतः॥ 4: 15॥ 


एषा|मेक(तमं Dist पूजयित्वा महेश्वरम्‌। 

कर्म्मणा मनसा मन्त्री एकचित्तस्सुयन्त्रितः॥ 4: 16॥ 
ूर्वाचार्यान्नमस्कृत्वा अभावं भावयेत्सदा। 

मूर्घि चित्तं समालम्ब्य ऊर्द्धडुत्वा तु चक्षुषी॥ 4:17॥ 


एवमभ्यसमानस्तु तुर्यद्वारं विभिद्यते | 
प्रत्ययञ्जायते तत्र वायुस्पर्शसमोपमः॥ 4: 18॥ 


पिपीलिकासमो वापि कण्टका(वेध५स)5]|(प्र॥भः 1 
अग्निर्ज्वलति देहे तु अधूमो दहनात्मकः॥ 4: 19॥ 


दिव्यगन्धञ्च जायेत दिव्यवाणी प्रवर्त्तते | 
अपूर्वशास्त्रं यत्किञ्चिच्चिन्तितं तु विजानते॥ 4:201 


तेजस्वी कान्तियुक्तञ्च ऊद्धंगामी तु सञ्चरेत्‌। 


सिद्धैश्च सह सम्भाष्यं त्रिभिर्म्मासैः प्रजायते॥ 4: 21॥ 
412 यानि बद्धजिव वि. (नाउ s ; यानि बुद्धिश्च व ५ 
4:12 यानि बुद्धिञ्चैव वि ] conj.; यानि — N; तानि बुद्धि U K; बात ii 


अलिक u 
मायात्रयं अ्नलिकं T 4:16 एषामेकतमं बद्धा ] K; एषा — [4] --ध्वा N; TT E: 


A K; UT 4:19 अधूमो ] K; अधूमा° NWT 4:20 चिन्तित s 
चिन्तित्तस्तु N; चिन्तितस्तु KW 4:21 त्रिभिर्‌] ८; तृभिर NWT 


नयसूत्रम्‌ २१७ 
आब्रह्मस्तम्बपर्यन्तं पश्यते दिव्यचक्षु|(षा)| | 
[6] ।संव]त्सरेणार्धचन्द्र पश्यते च शिरोपरि॥ 4: 22॥ 


ततोपरि शिवं शान्तन्तन्दृष्टा चामृतीभवेत्‌। 
सर्वज्ञः कामरूपी च agers जायते॥ 4:23) 


एष ते ध्यानसद्भावं षडङ्गध्यानवर्जितम्‌। 
निरालम्बेति विख्यातं यं ज्ञात्वा न तु शोचते॥ 4:24॥ 


किम्पुन्ध्यानयुक्तात्मा असिद्धो ऽपि |शिवो भवेत्‌] | 
E37] {संसा)रे क्रीडते चैव यथैव परमेश्वरः॥ 4:251 


देव्युवाच। 
शक्तेरपि वदेदूपं योगच्चैव महेश्वर | 
तत्त्वसद्घावमखिलं सुखबोध्यमविस्तरम्‌॥ 4:26॥ 


एतत्सर्वं समासेन कथयस्व प्रसादतः | 

ईश्वर उ। 

शृणु देवि) — । 

{द}[2रशनान्मोचयेज्जन्तुं रूपं शक्तेश्वतुर्थ्चिथम्‌॥ 4:27 


अदृष्टा शक्तिलक्षन्तु न भवेत्पाशहा गुरु: | 
SET चैव महालक्षं शक्तिबीजेन साधकः॥ 4: 28॥ 


स गुरुश्शिवतुल्यञ्च दृष्टा मोचयते जगत्‌। 
अन्यथा साधकास्सङ्घँ न मुच्यन्ते न मोक्षकाः॥ 4:29॥ 


ध्यायते यस्तु युक्तात्मा वत्सरार्धा सुयःन्त्रितः}। 
{सिद्धिस्तु मानुषे)[3] लोके शिवतुल्यञ्च जायते॥ 4:30॥ 


Wurde शुचिर्भूत्वा पूजयित्वा महेश्वरम्‌। 


4:29 “ब्रह्मस्तम्ब पर्यन्त ] em. -्म्हास्तम्भ पर्यन्तं N; "ब्रह्मस्तम्भ पर्यन्तं KW; °F 
ह्यस्तु रू सन्त्रं ए (unmetrical) 4:23 तन्दृष्ठा ] NT; TERT KW 4:24य KE 
NW; यज्ज्ञात्वा K 4:25 रे] NW; TK 4:26 “वमखिल ] NW; RU Fa 
4:30 ध्यायते ] conj; < शते N; ।। यते KW; जायते T 4:30 सिद्धिस्तु मानुषे ] conj. 
(cf. 3.67 etc.); — N; सिद्धिं UK; सिद्विम्त ५ W; सिद्धि ॥ T 


२१८ निश्चासतत्त्वसंहितायाम firm 


पूर्वसिद्धान्नमस्कृत्वा युक्ती ध्यानपरायण:॥ 4:311 
निर्लोकभूप्रदेशे तु गुरुभक्तस्समाहितः | 

श्रद्धामालंब्य यलेन आसनन्तु यथासुखम्‌॥ 4:321 
वियं वीक्ष्य निमील्याक्षो भास्करोदयसन्निभम्‌। 
qad च महातेजं +श)[क्ति wes भासते 4:331 
पीतरक्ता तथा कृष्णा स्फटिकाभा मनोरमा। 

द्रष्टव्या तु परा शक्तिस्तान्दृष्टा तु शिवं व्रजेत्‌॥ 4:341 


अभ्यासान्मासमात्रेण सिद्धिलिङ्गा भवन्ति fa i 
मेधा कान्तिस्तथारोग्यं सकृदुक्तन्च Wed 4: 35॥ 


देवदानवगन्धर्वा द्विमासेन तु दृश्यते। 
दिव्यादिव्य तु यत्किचिद्वाङ्कयं सम्प्रवर्तते॥ 4:361 


अणिमाद्या भवेत्सिद्धिः षण्मासाभ्यन्तरेण तु। 
सिद्धस्सर्वज्ञतामेति शिवतुल्यञ्च जायते॥ 4:37॥ 


त्रैलोक्ये यः प्रवत्तेत प्रत्यक्षन्तस्य जायते | 
योजकस्तु परे तत्त्वे Mart विन्दते तु यः॥ 4:38॥ 


33 This passage, from 4:33-4, has been adapted to create Svacchandatantr. 
160b, for which see Appendix II. 


a 12:158c- 


4:32 निर्लोक० ] K; frere NT; fane W 4:32 °सनन्तु ] con: € 
*सन्नन्तु NT; भसन्नस्तु K; भ्सन्न तु ए 4:33 वियं वीक्ष्य ] Nw; वियद्वीक्ष्य है 
विक्ष्य 7 4:33 निमील्याक्षो ] Nw; निमीलाक्षो K; ति शित्याङ्को T 489 पर 
महातेजं स] W; पश्‌ — N; पश्यते च महा LIK; पश्यते | 7 4:33 सा a 
em; — Tet N; क्तिप्रयुक्तेन K; सतिप्रद्लेन W; क्षप्र T 4:34 पीतरक्ता ] 
पीता रक्ता K 4:34 स्फटिकाभा ] KW; स्फटिकांभा NT 4:36 दिव्यादिव्य प 
त्किचिद्वाङ्कयं सम्प्रवर्तते conj; दिव्यादिव्य — [5] — म्प्र?वरत्तते Ni 
यत्किचि ।] स्य प्रवर्त्तते K; दिव्यादिव्यन्तु यत्किचिद्वा जयं सम्प्रवर्तते Wi 5 agr 
युक्ति 1] प्रवर्तेते T 4:37 सिद्धस्सर्वज्ञतामेति ] KW; सिद्धस्सर्वज्ञतामेति A ent 
E यः] NWT; त्रैलोक्ये K (unmetrical) 4:38 1q ] NW; ward K 
T; च K 


TENE २१९ 
B न पश्यन्ति लक्षस्थान्दीक्षाकारी न मोक्षदा: | 
तां (दृष्टा देशिकेन्द्रस्तु) [6] लोकानुग्रहकारकः॥ 4:391 


चक्षुषा वाचया स्पर्शा मनसा-द्‌-उदकेन वा। 
दीक्षयेत्सर्वजन्तूनि शिवशत्तपोपवृंहितः॥ 4: 40॥ 


संसारतारको ऽसौ हि स च पूज्यो यथा ह्यहम्‌। 
साधकान्ये समाख्यातास्संहितापारगा|ख्च ये|॥ 4:411 


[(न) (ते) मोचयितुं शक्ताः| (शक्तिज्ञानवि){वर्जिताः}। 
— ॥4:42॥ 
zu नकः [FOLIOS LOST ?]. . . . . 


{सो grossa देहेन सिद्धि कुर्वन्ति चेप्सिताम्‌॥ 4:431 


सृजेत्संहरते विश्वं क्रीडते क्रमतेति च। 
नानारूपधरो भूत्वा इच्छया कुरुते क्रियाम्‌॥ 4:44॥ 


सर्वज्ञभावमापन्नः शिवतु{ल्यञ्च जायते) | 
— [2] ~ विन्दते॥ 4:451 


जिज्ञासुरपि योगस्य कलान्नाईँन्ति षोडशीम्‌। 
एकाह्लमपि योगन्तु अभ्यसेत्कलुषात्मकः॥ 4:46॥ 


तत्क्षणात्स तु शुद्धो हि महानिद्रा विमुच्यते। 
एष योगो मया प्रोक्त अक्ेशात्सिद्धिमोक्षदः॥ 4:47॥ 


ल मल लक्षस्थान्दी» ] W; लक्षस्थान्‌ fre N; लक्षस्था दी° K; लक्षम्वा दी° T 4:39 
मोक्षदा: ] ८०८/.; मोक्षदा NKWT 4:39 दृष्टा देशिकेन्द्रस्तु] W; दृष्‌ — N; दृष्टा दै- 
शिके uk; दृष्टा देशि ५ T 4:41 शञ्ज ये] ४; - प्र; “पि ये ॥ 4:42 मोचयितुं 
शक्ताः शक्तिज्ञानविवर्जिताः ] conj; मोचयि — N; मोचयितुं शक्ताः K; चा त 
क्ताः शक्तिज्ञानवि w; मोचयितुं MT ५ 7 4:43 नैव ] N; देव K; नैव T 
4:45 सर्वेज्ञभावमापन्नः ] N; सर्वज्ञो भावमापन्न K; सर्वज्ञ u W; uT mo E il ] 
N; U KWT 4:46 जिज्ञासुरपि योगस्य] N; u रपि योगस्य K; Dn d cad 
4:46 एकाहमपि] NWT; एकाहनपि K 4:47 परोक्त अकेशात्‌ Ky श्त अक गात 
NW; प्रोक्ते अक्षषात्‌ T 


330 निश्वासतत्त्वसंहितायाम 


कथ्यं ह्वादशभिर्वर्षेस्त्रिमिः शुद्धेन -- | 
ज्ञानं ते संप्रवक्ष्यामि शुणु] — ॥ 4:48॥ 


3] — चान्ततो भवेत्‌ | 
स्थावरञ्जंगमं चैव अण्डजं स्वेदजन्तथा॥ 4:49॥ 


स्थूलं सूक्ष्मञ्च यच्चान्य ्रेश्याद्रेश्यञ्च यत्स्थितम्‌ | 
आब्रह्मस्तम्बपर्यन्तं यञ्च किंचि व्यवस्थितम्‌॥ 4:50॥ 


तत्सव॑म्परमेशो हि विश्वरूपेण संस्थितम्‌। 
{व्यापयित्वा} |(जगत्सर्वं स्थितो व्यो}|{मेषु व्योमवत्‌)॥ 4:51॥ 


[4] एवं सर्वगतो देवः शिवः परमकारणः। 
चेताप्येवं स्थितो नित्यं जग्यापी चराचरम्‌॥ 4:521 


एवं शिवन्तथात्मानमेकीभूतं विचिन्तयेत्‌। 
एवं हि सर्वभूतानि आत्मानञ्च तथैव हि॥ 4:53॥ 


शिववन्मन्यमानो हि रागद्वेषविवर्जितः। 
भवन्ति निर्मलाः शुद्धाः शिवभाव|(समन्विताः)|॥ 4:541 


([समरस]स्तु विज्ञेयः शिवेन सह) {संयुतः}। 


51 Cf Svacchandatantra 11:35c-36b: एवं सर्वगतो देवि शिवः परमकारणः। व्याप्य 
देवि जगत्सर्व व्योमसु व्योमवत्स्थितः | and cf. the corresponding verse in the Tantra- 
sadbhava (also 11:35c-36b): एवं सर्वगतो देवि शिवः परमकारणः। व्यापयित्वा 
स्थितं व्योमेषु व्योमवत्‌। 

तृभि शुद्धे 


a वड PR 
448 कथ्य] N; U K; कथं W; क - T 4:48 त्रिभिः शुद्धेन ] emi * ततो 
N; तृभिस्तु 1८; तृभि शुद्धेन W; तु भिशुद्ध UT 4:49 चान्तो भवेत्‌] Ni “ग 
भवेत्‌ K; ताम्ब्रजेत्‌ W; णसा Wdq T 4:49 जंगमं चैव] K; जगमञ्‌ N | ar 
W; जंगमञ्चैव T 4:50 यच्चान्य द्रेश्याद्रेश्यम ] N; यच्चान्यद्दृश्यादृश्य Ki यश्चा uT 
eset W; येचान्य द्रेश्याद्रस्यञ्च T 4:50 ०स्तम्ब० ] em; “स्तम्भ” NKW त] 
4:50 किञ्चि] NWT; किंचिद्‌ ४ 4:51 व्यापयित्वा जगत्सर्वं स्थितो व्योमेषु gu 
conj. Kafe; — N; u जगत्सर्वं स्थितो व्योम u KW; L| जगत्सर्वं ॥ देव U 
T 4:52 एवं सर्वगतो देवः शिवः] conj: --- देवः शिवः N; U Na Ki 
T 4:52 चेताप्येवं ] N; चेतोप्येव KWT 4:54 *विवर्जितः ] NW; mcd fat 
dini T 4:55 समरसस्तु विज्ञेयः ] conj; — N; समरस UKs समर 
An 


TW २२१ 


७] ।(शिव)|वत्सर्वविश्वन्तु मन्यमानञ्चराचरम्‌॥ 4:55 
समं शत्रु समम्मित्र ब्राह्मणः श्रपचस्समौ। 
तुल्यदर्शी भवेत्सिद्धो ज्ञात्वा सर्व शिवात्मकम्‌॥ 4:561 


निश्चयी एकचित्तस्तु शिवभावसमन्वित: i 
शत्रवो दंष्ट्रिणो व्याघ्रा fear: सिंहाञ्ज वानराः॥ 4:57॥ 


क्रस — पि|शिता हिंस्रका] — | 
—[5] (Ae विचिन्तयेत्‌॥ 4:58॥ 


एवं चिन्तयतस्तस्य न ते हिंसन्ति हिंसकाः। 
समया सम तिष्ठन्ते दुष्टसत्त्वाञ्च राक्षसाः॥ 4:59 


सिद्धाञ्चैव तथा देवा वशमायान्ति भृत्यवत्‌। 
तुल्यदर्शी विशुद्धात्मा शिवतुल्यश्च जायते॥ 4:60॥ 


क्रीडते दिव्यसि!द्वैद्ध [६ 38" गच्छेच्चै]व सदाशिवम्‌ | 
शक्तिसमरसञ्चैव योगसिद्धिमपेक्षते॥ 4:61॥ 


एष ते ज्ञानसद्भावं सुखबोध्यमविस्तरम्‌। 
जन्तूननुग्रहार्थाय दातव्यं शिवभक्तिने॥ 4:62॥ 


शिवाङ्गुरुतरी भक्तिर्यस्य नित्यं गुरोस्सदा। 
तस्य देयमिदञ्ज्ञानं द्वादशाब्दनिवासिने॥ 4:63॥ 


{अहिंसा[शके} दयायुक्ते गुरुवाक्यमलंघके॥ 4:64॥ 


4:55 °विश्वन्तु ] NK; चिद्वस्तु W; “विश्व 11 T 4:55 मन्यमानश्चराचरम्‌ ] N; U 
चराचरम्‌ KW; स -- घराचरम्‌ 7 4:56 श्रपचस्समौ ] NW; श्वपचः समः K; 7 व- 
"HT T (unmetrical) 4:56 सर्व] N; सर्व KWT 4:57 Feat: ] K; REGNO NW 
ऋक्षा 7 4:58 क्रूरस ---पिशिता हिंस्रका ] em.; qur ~~ पि NG du u 5E q 
हिस्रका K; क्रूर u पिसिता हिन्सका W; क्रूर 11 प 4:58 मेके विचिन्तयेत्‌ ] Mies 
के विचिन्तयेत्‌ N; — K; UT 4:59 समया] NKT; समयो W 4:61 व 
वम्‌] NW; u सदाशिवम्‌ KT 4:63 *वासिने] KT; "वासिन — N; *्वासिनः MEET 
d गुरुवाक्यमलंघके ] W; गुरुवाक्यंमलड्डके N; गुरुवाक्यमलंघाके K; 


२२२ निश्चासतत्त्वसंहितायाम 


संसारभयवित्रस्ते धर्म्मज्ञे प्रियवादिने | 
जपलिक्षार्चनिष्ठाय दातव्यन्तु जितेन्द्रिये॥ 4:651 


शिववद्यो गुरुम्मन्येद्वक्तिप्रह्षेण चेतसा | 
तस्य देयमिदं शास्त्रमन्यथा न कदाचनः॥ 4:661 


देव्युवाच | 
शिवश([क्तिसमुडूतं जगत्त्सर्वं चराचरम्‌। 
स चैकाद]श)पर्य)[9न्तं श्रुतं विस्तरशो मया॥ 4:67॥ 


अक्षरा तत्त्वलक्षाख्ज दीक्षाप्रक्रियभेदनम्‌। 
ध्यानं चैव पृथत्केन समरसञ्चैव वण्णितम्‌॥ 4: 68॥ 


एकत्वे सर्वतत्त्वानि उपास्यन्ते यथा हर। 
एकत्वे दर्शनच्चैव प्रसादात्प्रब्रवीहि मे॥ 4: 69॥ 


ईश्वर उवाच। 
नाभिवच्च शिवो ज्ञेयः श! [क्तिमध्ये प्रतिष्ठिता i 
अरध+:+ सर्वतत्त्वानि प्रत्यर]:) — [4] कानि च॥ 4:70॥ 


शिवचक्रन्तदा ध्यानात्सर्वतत्त्वसमन्वितम्‌। 
दर्शेनञ्च यथा तस्य निमिषाद्धैन मे शृणु॥ 4:71॥ 


खगस्याभिमुखो भूत्वा भ्रेक्षकान्तन्निरीक्षयेत्‌।। 
पश्यते बिन्डुमालान्तु नानारेखाविचित्रितम्‌॥ 4: 72॥ 


अव्यक्ता कृष्णरेखा तु जन्तुरेखा सिता भवेत्‌। 
[पीता नियतिरेखा तु धूम्रा कालात्मिका स्मृता]॥ 4:731 


{ग्र)5न्धिरेखा भवेन्नीला विद्या वै रक्तरेखिणी। 
A Rand VE PM yon a 
4:66 °T] em.; “Nat NW; न्युक्तेन KT 4:66 कदाचनः ] NWT; mr 
4:67 स चैकादशपर्यन्तं ] conj; --न्तं प; सा चाइकाद UK; सा चाइकादश "रा 
4:67 Fi विस्तरशो ] NW; ।श्रुतं विस्तरतो K; शरुतं विस्तरसो 7 ^, ७७ हर] 
NWT; अक्षरास्‌ £ 4:68 पृथक््केन N; पृथक्‌ तेन KW; पृथक्‌ “एन 7 T बद 
con; हरः NKWT 4:70 उवाच ] K; उ NWT 4:70 नाभिवच ] NWT ] emi 
gi र 4:74 *न्यिरेखा] ॥?; *स्थिरेखा Kr; *स्थिरेखो w ara रक्तरेखिणी 
रक्तेखिनी NKWT 


SR २२३ 


ऐश्वरी चित्ररेखा तु बिन्दुरेखा तु स्फाटिकी॥ 4:741 


चतुष्कला बिन्दुमाला सुषुम्णापदिके ferar i 
नादः प्रत्यरवज्ज्ञेयः शक्ति पत्रे विराजते॥ 4:75॥ 


जलबुद्गुदवद्देवं शक्तिमध्ये प्रतिष्ठितम्‌। 

तन्ढृष्वा मुच्यते ([जन्तुः संसारभयवन्धनात्‌॥ 4:76॥ 
SET चक्र भवेत्त]त्वी स) {गु}[6रुब्रह्मवेदिनः | 

स चानुग्रहकत्ता च शिवतुल्यञ्च जायते॥ 4:77॥ 


चक्षुषा वाचया स्पर्शा कर्म्मणा मनसा जपा। 
धारणाध्यानयोगेन करोत्यनुग्रहेच्छया॥ 4:78॥ 


तस्य पादरजन्देवि ब्रह्महा यदि धा|(रयेत्‌। 
तत्क्षणादेव)| (मुच्येत)[. 397] (सर्प](स्य कवचं यथा॥ 4:791 


[ध्यायते ART युक्तात्मा मासमेकं सुयन्त्रितः। 
प्राकृता जायते सिद्धिद्विमासेन तु पौरुषी॥ 4:80॥ 


नियतिकालसिद्धिश्च मायजा विद्यजा qur i 
watt बिन्दुसिद्धिश्न कलजा शक्तिजा तथा॥ 4:81॥ 


प्रतिमा( [सेन सिद्धन्ते| अष्टा) — । 

(सर्वज्ञः) [2] सर्वगः शुद्धः स्वतन्त्रः कामरूपवान्‌। 

न चेच्छा हन्यते तस्य शिवस्वच्छन्दताम्ब्रजेत्‌॥ 4:82॥ 

स्थूलात्स्थूलतरो भूत्वा सूक्ष्मात्सूक्ष्मतरः परः। 

सतनुर्वितनुञ्चैव इच्छया कुरुते तनुम्‌॥ 4:83॥ 

एष ते ज्ञानसङ्ावमतिगुह्यम्प्रकीत्तितम्‌। 
mee ee reer n ४ 
79 Cf. Tantrasadbhava 9:352c-353b: तस्य पादरजो देवि शिरसा धारयेद्‌ यदि | तत्क्ष 
णादेव मुच्येत सर्पस्य कवचं यथा। 
475 Wi] K; ज्ञेय NWT 4:76 मुच्यते] KWT; wer = N 4:78 स्पर्शा] 


०] K; करोत्या° 
NW; स्पर्शात्‌ K 4:78 जपा] NW; जपात्‌ K 4:78 करोत्य ] mu 
NWT 4:79 धारयेत्‌] WK; धा -- N; UT 4:84 एप d] NW; ए 


२२४ निश्चासतत्त्वसहितायाम 


त्व! [या गुप्ततरं कार्य]ममृतं न प्रकाशयेत्‌)॥ 4:84॥ 


{सुपरीक्षितशिष्याय देयं)[3] (द्वाद)शभिस्समैः। 
अन्यथा दुष्टमर्त्यानां न देयममृतामृतम्‌॥ 4:85॥ 
हव्यकव्यप्रदा मर्त्या देवानान्तु कुटुम्बिनः | 

तत्त्ववेत्ता शिवं याति देवानां हीयते हविः॥ 4:86॥ 


Mee यदि ब्रूयाल्लोभाद्प्पेण वा पुनः | 
शिरच्छेदन्तु वज्रेण क्रुद्धः कुर्याच्छतक्रतुः॥ 4: 87॥ 
एतस्मात्कारणा!।द्वेवि] नाख्यातव्यं हि)[तैषिणा) । [4] 
(शि)(वशक्तिसमाकृष्टे दातव्यं सुपरीक्षिते॥ 4: 88॥ 


देव्युवाच | 
वेदादौ सर्वशास्त्रे च प्रणवं किल मोक्षदम्‌। 
स कथम्मोक्षदो देव प्रसादाद्दक्तुमहसि॥ 4:89॥ 


ईश्वर उ। 
अद्धंषोडशमात्रस्तु देवाष्टकसमन्वितः। 
दवात्रिंशत्तत्त्वसंयुक्तं ध्यातो निष्कल मोक्षदः॥ 4:90॥ 


देव्युवाच । 
अद्धेषोडशमात्र|(स्तु देवाष्टकसमन्वितः | 
द्वा)[ऽत्रिशत्तत्त्वसंयुक्तः कथं ध्येयो हि निष्कलः॥ 4:91॥ 


ईश्वर उ। 
आदिपञ्चस्वरादौ तु पञ्चविंशस्तु योनिजः। 
बिन्डुषण्नादशक्ति्च पञ्चवर्ण्णत्रिभिन्नकाः ॥ 4: 92 


ब्रह्मा विष्णुञ्च ees अर्धचन्द्रीश नाद च। देण] 
een du. "EET VW. C 
4:84 कार्यममृतं ] W; — N; का(र्यम्‌) UK; ॥ म्स्थू 4:87 Ra a 
conj; शिरच्छेदन्तु वक्रेण 1; शिरच्छेदस्तु चक्रेण K; शिरःछेदन्तु वज्रेण Wi मोक्षदः 
दन्तु चक्रेणः T 4:90 *षोडश०] K; *षोडष० NW 4:91 निष्कलः ] Ore Ki 
K 4923] NWT; उवाच K 4:92 योनिजः ] conj.; योनजः Bc K; f 
योनजा 7 4:98 ब्रह्मा K; ब्रह्म NWT 4:93 °श नाद TING ^ : 
नादच W; शनादव T 


TANAH २२५ 


शक्तिश्च सप्तमी ज्ञेया शिवञ्चैव तथाष्टमः॥ 4:93॥ 


भूतानि आदिबीजस्तु दीर्घमक्षेषु कीर्ति|ताः| | 
(त्रिमार्ज स म)[नः) [५प्रो]क्तं तन्मात्रेषु च उ स्मृतः॥ 4:94॥ 


अहंकारे च बुद्धौ च अव्यक्तादितृकेषु wi 
दीघेञ्चैव समाख्यातः स्रुतः पुरुष उच्यते॥ 4:951 


नियति पञ्चविंशस्तु दीर्घं कालञ्च पद्यते। 
त्रिमात्रस्तु भवेन्माया संसारपरिवर्त्तिंनी॥ 4:961 


बिन्दु सदाशिवं देवमस्य नाद महेश्वरम्‌। 
॥. 39५ (देशी च रश्मयः प्रोक्ता विद्या चैव निगद्यते॥ 4:971 


द्वातुंशकः शिवो ज्ञेयो निष्कलः परमेश्वरः। 
यं ध्यात्वा मोक्षमायान्ति शिवतुल्या भवन्ति च॥ 4:98॥ 


देव्‌|(युवाच I 
योगस्तु बहुधा ख्यातो लक्षालक्षं महेश्वर। 
योगस)|द्वावमाख्याहि अत्र मे संशयो महान्‌॥ 4:99॥ 


[2] नाडीसंशोधनञ्चैव वायूनाञ्च जयं कथम्‌। 
स्थानं रूपञ्च HAT शब्दं प्रब्रूहि शंकर॥ 4:100॥ 


ईश्वर उवाच। 
परमं योगसद्भावङ्गुद्या गुह्यतरम्परम्‌। 


ERDAS, h 
100 This passage, from 4:100-144b, has been adapted to create Svacchandatant 
7:285c-330, for which see Appendix III. 


4:94 दीर्घमक्षेषु ] coni; दीर्घामोक्षेषु NKW; दीर्घा मोक्षसु T 4:94 रक्त] 
NT; त्युक्तं W 4:94 उ] NK*WT; उ+:+ K 4:96 नियति] NW; निय 
497 बिन्दु] NWT; विन्दं K 4:97 नाद] NWT; नादं 497 परोक्ता] NWT; 
NUNT K 4:98 द्वातृंशकः ] प; द्वात्रिंशकः KW; -तृशंक T 4:99 Bae 
महेश्वरः KW 4:99 अत्र मे संशयो महान्‌] NW; U KT s जय W; 
NW; नाडीसंरोधन* £; नाभीसंशोधन" T 4:100 जयं] K; जय-- Ni A Ko 
जाय ” 4301 उवाच ] K; उ NWT 4:101 गुह्या Uer] NWT; गुह्यातुह्य 


226 निश्चासतत्त्वसंहितायाम 


यन्न कस्यचिदाख्यातन्तद्योगं शृणु तत्त्वतः॥ 4:101 


सुप्रशस्ते भूप्रदेशे नाग्न्युदकसमीपतः i 
वालुकाशरङ्कराहीने शुष्कवृक्षविवर्जिते॥ 4: 102 I 


निस्सर्प्प/कीट)[3वल्मीके ईतिभिः परिवर्जिते। 
पुण्यधर्म्मिष्ठसंवासे तत्र योगं समभ्यसेत्‌॥ 4: 103॥ 


देवदेवं समभ्यर्च्य विघ्रेशञ्च पुनः पुनः। 
पूर्वाचार्यान्नमस्कृत्वा युक्तो ध्यानपरायणः॥ 4: 104॥ 


आसनम्पद्यकं बद्धा स्वस्तिकम्भद्वचन्द्रकम्‌ | 
सापाश्रयं योगपट्टमासीनञ्च यथासुखम्‌॥ 4: 105॥ 


तालुजिह्लो दन्तास्पर्शी (समको) [4] नासदृष्टिगः | 
सत्यवाग (?) न (?) fees नित्ययुक्तञ्च सिद्धति॥ 4: 1060 


शिखाङ्कुरैस्तु निर्दग्धन्देहङ्कत्वा शिवात्मकम्‌। 
दशधा योगमार्गेण अभ्यसेत्परमेश्वरम्‌॥ 4: 107 ll 


मन्त्र बिन्दु अतीतञ्च नादात्मा ज्योति [qu | 
कल्पनालक्षमकलं ध्यात्वाद्वैतेन सर्वगम्‌॥ 4: 108॥ 


प्रकृत्यादौ शिवान्तञ्च योग|: (ख्यातो महांस्त)|{व}। 
७] (STAT च पुनः ख्यातो ध्यायेत्प्राणस्य संयमात्‌॥ 4: 1091 


अवसव्येन qur सव्येनैव तु रेचयेत्‌। 
नाडीसंशोधनं ह्येतन्मोक्षमार्गपथस्य qi 4: 110॥ 


HORSES त "CF: 4 
4102 सुप्रशस्ते भू" ] conj; सुप्रशस्तभू° NKW (unmetrical); 
4:102 शुष्कवृक्षविवर्जिते ] NW; u K 4:103 निस्सर्प्पकीट° ] conj; निः 
UK; निसर्प्पक ।। W — 404 पूर्वाचार्यान्नमस्कृत्वा ] NW; पूर्वाचार्य्य नम 
4:105 सापाश्रयं ] NW; मायाश्रयं K; मायोश्रयं T 4:106 ° be 
*जिह्ला दन्तास्पर्शी N; ।। £; *जिह्कादन्तास्पर्सी छ; जिह्लादन्तास्प 
मको ] conj Kafle; — NKT; समका W 4:106 सत्यवाग (?) न (?) हिस Frage! 
त्यवाक्‌ । ञ्च £; सत्ववा u हि || ञ्च %; सत्ववाममहिमञ्च T 4107 WT: 
conj. Sanderson; शिखाङ्कारस्तु NWT; शिखाकारस्तु K 4:110 
अपसव्येन £ 4110 RT] NWT; Yaa K 


नयसूत्रम्‌ २२७ 


रेचनात्पूरणाद्रोधात्प्राणायामस्त्रयः स्मृतः | 
सामान्याद्वहिरेतानि पुनञ्चाभ्यन्तराणि च॥ 4:111॥ 


अभ्यन्तरेण रेचेत पूरेच्चाभ्य|(न्तरेण तु)|। 
(निःष्किम्पं कुम्भक)[6] कुर्यात्तूयञ्जाभ्यन्तराणि qu 4:112॥ 


नाभ्यां हृदयसंचारान्मनश्चेन्द्रियगोचरात्‌। 
प्राणायामञ्रतुर्थस्तु सुप्रशान्तस्तु AAT: I 4:113॥ 


प्राणरोधे तु सम्पूर्ण्णें नाभिन्नीत्वा समुच्छुवसेत्‌। 
शनैविमुञ्चयेद्वायुं वामनासिकया पुटे॥ 4:114 


वायवीन्धार(ये (SHS आग्नेयीं नाभिमध्यत्तः)। 
{माहेन्द्री कण्ठदेशे तु वारुणीं [£407] घ}ण्टिकेषु च॥ 4: 115॥ 


आकाशधारणा मूर्धि सर्वसिद्धिकरी स्मृता। 
एकद्दितृञ्चतुःपञ्च उद्घातैञ्च प्रसिद्यति॥ 4: 116॥ 


संरुद्धे चैव प्राणे तु मूधिङ्गत्वा Mate 
तड॒द्बातमिति प्रोक्तञ्ज्ञातव्यं योगिभिस्सदा॥ 4: 117 


रागद्वेषौ} प्रक्षीयेते प्राणायामैस्च धा(रितैः)। 
घारणैस्सर्वपापानि (प्रत्याहारे ऽक्षसंयमः)॥ 4: 118॥ 


ER ना[शभि)कण्ठौ च सर्व॑सन्धौ तथैव च। 


4:111 भ्मस्त्रयः स्मृतः NWT; शमस्तु यः स्मृतः 4113 हृदय" ] Kyo हृदयं 
N 4:114 पुटे] NW; पुटा K; पुटो 7 4:115 वायवीन्धार” ] W; वायवींन्धा < 
N; वायवी द्वार K; वायुं नीत्वा 11  4:115 आग्नेयीं ] conj; आग्नेयी NKW 
4:115 ०ण्टिकेषु] N; ०ण्डिकेयु K; ०ण्डकेप्र W; Li केषु T 4:116 "धारणा ] NWT; 
*धारणान्‌ 7 4:116 सर्वसिद्धि० ] K; wdufgs N; सर्वेसचिकरी W; सर्वेसत्वी* T 
4116 एकद्वितृञ्चतुःपश्च ] N; एकद्वित्रिचतुर्थ च K; एकदित्रिस्चतुःपंच ॥; एकद्वितृचतु- 
ज्ये TO 4:116 ऽद्वातैञ्च ] N; *घातैद्व K; "त्थातैश्च W; 'त्यातै T ee 
4:117 मूधिङ्गत्वा ] NW; मूर्धि गत्वा K; मुद्धर्नि गत्वा 7 4:118 प्रक्षीयेते प्राणाया 
धारितैः ] w; प्रक्षीय ऽ प्राणाया -- च धा -- N; UKT 4:18 हल ता ] 
W; धारणेस्सव « = N; UKT 4:119 हल्लुदे नाभिकण्ठौ ] conj; s d 
कण्ठौ K; कृ Li कण्ठौ W; URS T 4:119 egat] NW; *सतौ K; °स 


RRG नि्चासतत्त्वसहितायाम 


प्राणाद्यास्संस्थिता ह्येते रूपं शब्दञ्च मे शुणु॥ 4:119॥ 


द्रततारनिभः पीत इन्द्रगोपकसन्निभः | 
क्षीराभ स्फटिकाभक्ज पञ्चानां रूपलक्षणम्‌॥ 4: 120॥ 


घण्टा «ieu मधुरो गजनादो बहुध्वनिः। 
प्राणादीनान्तु पञ्चानां शब्दमेतदुदाह्ृतम्‌॥ 4: 121॥ 


जल्पितं हसितं ([गीतं नृत्यं] युद्धगतिः) [3] {कलाः} । 
शिल्पञ्च सर्वक्म्माणि प्राणस्यैव हि चेष्टितम्‌॥ 4: 122॥ 


प्रवेशये ऽन्नपानानि नृमलं स्रावयेदधः | 
अन्धत्वं श्रोत्ररोगं च अपानस्तु करिष्यति॥ 4: 123॥ 


अशितं लीढपीतञ्च समानस्समतान्नयेत्‌। 
क्षुतहिक्काच्छद्दिकास उदानस्य विचेष्टितम्‌॥ 4: 124॥ 


रोमहर्षज्च Cee शूलदो ह्यङ्गभञ्जकः | 
व्यानस्यै!|तानि] कर्माणि) [स्पर्श)[शत्वञ्चैव विन्दति॥ 4: 125॥ 


अङ्गुष्ठजानुहृदये लोचने मूर्ध्निं संस्थिताः। 
नागाद्या बहुरूपा्च कर्मे तेषान्निबोध मे॥ 4:1261 


आह्झझादनोद्वेजनञ्च शोषणस्त्रासकस्तथा | 


4:120 *W: पीत इन्द्रगोपकसन्निभः ] Nw; of इन्द्रगोपकसन्निभम्‌ K; “गतीत F 
न्द्रगोपकसन्निभ: T 4:120 क्षीराभ स्फटिकाभञ्च ] NW; क्षीराभं enfeant ^y 
क्षीरानस्फटिकानञ्च T 4:122 Gantt: कला] conj; — N; य U Ki 2 
Wi UT 4:122 प्राणस्यैव] W; <णस्यैव N; स्यैव £; -णासौ व 7 40231 
मलं ] K; नृमल NW; निर्मल T 4:123 अन्धत्वं श्रोत्ररोगं च अपानस्तु] ०४ 
अन्धत्वश्रोत्ररोगञ्च अपान्नस्तु N; अत्यर्थग्रोत्ररोतं च अपात्रं K; Ni 
च अपान्नस्तु W; अन्वत्व श्रोतरोगं च अपानंस्तु T 4:124 अशितं लो षु 
असितं लीढपीतं KW 4:124 क्षुतहिङ्गाच्छह्दिकास ] \; क्षुतं दिन्छ तका N 
तदिङ्ञाच्छर्दिकास W; क्षतहिङ्ञाछर्दिकाकाश T 4:125 ह्यङ्गभञ्जकः | pb seat] 
(unmetrical) ; ह्यड्भंजक: W (unmetrical); ह्यंगजक T (unmetrical) : : i 
N; UKWT 4:126 अङ्गुष्ठः ] NWT; अङ्गुष्ठे £ 4:126 संस्थिताः ] com: 
संस्थितः NKWT 4:126 कर्म] KT; कम्म NW 4:127 आह्लादनोदेजन आल्हानीं 
स्त्रा° ] £; आह्लानोद्वेजनञ्च शोषणत्रा" N; आह्लानोद्वेजेनख्र शोषणत्रा Wi 

इज्ञानञ्च शोषणत्रा° T 


EN २२९ 


निद्वातन्द्रीकरञ्चान्यो योजको हि धनञ्जयः॥ 4:127॥ 


श्वाससड्ठोचच्छेदे च घुरुघुरुस्योत्क्रमेति च (7) i 
नागादीनान्तु पञ्चानाम्मृत्युकाले (विचेष्टितम्‌)|॥ 4:128॥ 


(न) (चैव याति)[5] चोत्कान्त्या HASH] तिष्ठति। 
आकुञ्चयति वै कूर्मः शोषये च कलेवरम्‌॥ 4: 1291 


प्राणमेव जयेत्पूर्वज्ञिते प्राणे जितम्मनः | 
जिते मनसि शान्तात्मा परन्तत्त्वम्प्रकाशते॥ 4:1301 


प्राणापानौ गुदे ध्याये प्राणसमानौ च नाभितः | 
प्राणोदानञ्च कण्ठे च प्राण|व्यानञ्च स]व{गम्‌}॥ 4:1311 


नागाद्यां प्राणसंयुक्तां स्वस्था[6]नेषु)निरुद्धयेत्‌ | 
निरुद्धस्य च यत्कालं प्रवक्ष्यामि निबोधत॥ 4: 1321 


तालात्प्रभृति धार्येत यावत्पञ्चशतङ्गतः | 
जितो ऽनिलो भवत्येवं सङ्कान्त्युत्क्रान्तिकर्म्मकृत्‌॥ 4:1331 


दिव्यकान्ति शुभो गन्धो प्रज्ञा चास्य विवद्ध॑ते। 
Ragika श्रोत्रं च दिव्या वाचा प्रवर्‌|तते]॥ 4: 134॥ 


(वायुवद्‌) [.40°] विचरेल्लोकां सिंद्धान्देवांञ्च पश्यति। 
मनेच्छाचिन्तितप्रासिः प्रवर्त्तेत गुणाष्टकम्‌॥ 4:1351 


सर्वकामसुसम्पूण्णस्सर्वद्वन्द्वविवर्जितः | 


4:128 *स्योत्क्रमेति] NWT; शश्चोत्क्रमेति K 4:128 मृत्युकाले ] NW; मृत्युकाल KT 
4:129 चोत्कान्त्या ] W; ? त्क्रान्त्या N; UK; U न्त्याच T 4:129 कूर्मः शोषये 
च कलेवरम्‌ ] conj Sanderson; कूरम्मस्साधये च कलेवरम्‌ N; कूर्म वाधयेच्च कलेवरम्‌ 
K; कुर्म्मश्चाधये च कलवरम्‌ W; कुम्मंस्वापये च कलेवरम्‌ T 4181 गुदे ध्याये ] 
conj; तु देव्यायै NWT; तु देव्याये K 4:131 CAAT सर्वगम्‌ ] conj; ATT 
WALK; --र्व- N; UWT 4:13 स्वस्थानेषु ] conj; — N; U KT; "तेषु 
4:133 धार्येत] NW; धामेत K; धायेते 7 4:134 शुभो गन्धो] NW; भोगं चा K; 
स्तुभोगत्वा T 4:134 श्रोत्रं च ] em; श्रोतञ्च NW; स्रोतञ्च KT 4:135 विचरेल्लोकां ] 
W; विचरेल्लोका N (but an anusvara might have been cut off in the upper margin) ; 


विरचेल्लोका+न्‌+ K; विचरेल्लोका T 


२३० निश्चासतत्त्वसंहितायाम 


संसारबन्धान्निर्म्मुक्तः Breqegu जायते॥ 4:1361 


प्राणापाने तु संयोज्य हृस्वकोटिसमन्वितम्‌। 
नाभ्यान्धारेत योगीन्द्रः स्वेदकम्पञ्च जायते}॥ 4: 137॥ 


(पुनरेव हृदिस्थौ हि प्राणापानी)[2 (नि)रुद्धयेत्‌ । 
दीर्घकोटिसमायोगात्क्षणात्पतति मूर्च्छितः॥ 4: 138॥ 


कण्ठस्थं हि तथैवेह प्राणमेकन्निरुन्धयेत्‌। 
सुतकोटिसमायोगात्स्वप्रवृत्तिस्ततो भवेत्‌॥ 4: 139 


भ्रूमध्ये बिन्दुयुक्तेन प्राणरोधन्तु कारयेत्‌। 
सुषुप्तं जायते तत्र क्षणाञ्चैव प्रबुध्यति॥ 4: 140॥ 


मूर्धि द्वारं समालम्ब्य निष्कलं ध्यानमारभेत्‌। 
{एवमभ्यस}[3]|(त)|स्तस्य प्रत्ययस्तु तदा भवेत्‌॥ 4: 141॥ 


पिपीलकण्टकावेधो मूर्धि द्वारं विभिद्यते। 
जायते तन्मयत्वं हि देहेनानेन साधके॥ 4: 142॥ 


सङ्कमेत्परदेहेषु क्षुत्तृष्णाभ्यान्न बाध्यते। 
अतीतानागतत्चैव त्रैलोक्ये यत्प्रवर्त्तते॥ 4: 143॥ 


प्रत्यक्षम्भवते तस्य सर्वज्ञत्वञ्च जायते | 
देव्युवाच। 


SR; oco T^ 
4:138 न्योगात्क्षणात्पतति ] N; *योगा ।। त्पतति K; “योगा u तति Wi ` =. 
कल्पये -तति T 4:138 मूर्च्छितः] NT; मूत्तितः w; (मूर्च्छितः) K alee 


माचरेत्‌ W; मूर्धि n पुष्कलध्यानमारभेत्‌ T 4:142 पिपीलकण्टकावेधो aft) पा 
ue K; पिपीलकण्ठकावेधौ w; पिपीलकर्णकावेधौ T 4 a 
TIK 4:142 हि] NWT; च K 4:142 साधके ] conj; साधकः NG बोधते NW: 
SMS TTA] NWT; कषुड्तृष्णाभ्या K 4:48 बाध्यते ] con 
d T 


नयसूत्रम्‌ २३१ 


सूत्रन्नाम महादेव आलोक्यपद [| वाचकम्‌)|॥ 4:144॥ 


[4] |त]दहं श्रोतुमिच्छामि भगवन्वक्तुम्हसि। 
ईश्वर उवाच। 
सूचनात्सूत्रमित्याह सूत्रन्नाम पदम्परम्‌॥ 4: 145॥ 


तेन सर्वेमिदं व्याप्तं सूत्रे मणिगणा इव। 
अखण्डितन्तु तत्सूत्रं खम्व्यापि-म्‌-अजरं परम्‌॥ 4:146॥ 


तडिद्दलयसन्तानं खटिकेन Wenn | 
हृत्पौण्डरीकमध्यस्थं सोमसूर्याग्निमध्यगम्‌॥ 4: 1471 


यः प([श्ये(त्पर)|॥७]मं सूक्ष्मं स लेख्यं कतुंमरहसि। 
देव्युवाच | 
तत्त्वा देवगणाः Wd सर्वन्यासे व्यवस्थिताः॥ 4: 148॥ 


तेषां मन्त्रविभागो ऽयं कथयस्व प्रसादतः | 
ईश्वर उ। 
सर्वे मन्त्रात्मका देवास्स्वे मन्त्राः शिवात्मकाः॥ 4: 149॥ 


शिवात्मकै्च मन्त्रैश्च शिवयागे तु पूजयेत्‌। 
अप्राप्य शिवसङ्भावम्पठतो ([पि] हि) {संहि[शुताम्‌}॥ 4: 150॥ 


अज्ञात्वा कुरुते दीक्षां शिष्याचार्यौ व्रजेत्यधः। 
तस्मान्न समानपशोः शिष्यत्वेनोपतिष्ठते॥ 4: 151॥ 


उभयतो ऽपि न शिवाशिवमेकपशोः परः। 


— DEN 057 seeks. ८ 
144 The parallel with the Svacchandatantra ends with 4:144b; the following passage 
(4:144c-158) has been incorporated into the Jnanakanda of the Nigvasakarika (37:10-24 
in T.17), for which see Appendix IV. 


4145 उवाच ] K; उ NWT 4145 सूचनात्‌ ] NWT; सूचना K — 4:146 EU 
NW; व्यापी K 4:149 मन्त्राः ] K; मन्त्रा NWT 4150 शिवयागे] N; शिव 

योगे KTW 4:150 पठतो] NKT; पधतो W 4:151 ब्रजेत्यथः ] NW; व्रजत्यघः 
K; व्रजोत्यधः T 4:151 शिष्यत्वेनोपतिष्ठते NK; शिष्यञ्च नोपतिष्ठते Wi शिष्यञ्च 
रोपयतिषुते T (unmetrical) | 


२३२ निखासतत्त्वसंहितायाम 


अविदित्वामयं सम्यङ्कियां यः Hed भिषक्‌॥ 4:152) 


नातुरस्सुखमाप्रोति वैद्यो ऽपि न फ[.417]|(लं ल)भेत्‌|। 
ज्ञानविज्ञानकुशलस्सर्वावस्थागतो ऽपि यः॥ 4: 153॥ 


स मोचयति पाशेभ्यो ज्ञाननिर्धूतकिल्बिषः | 
सर्वलक्षणहीनो ऽपि ज्ञानवान्‌ गुरुरुच्यते॥ 4: 154॥ 


दीक्षाविधिविधानज्ञो पाशजालविमोचकः। 
शिवः शक्तया महाशक्तिः शक्तिभावेन देशिकः॥ 4: 155॥ 


उभयोरन्तरं] नास्ति देशिकस्य शि|(वस्य च)|। 
{स चैवोङ्कार}[2] (fem) स नादो लय निष्कलः॥ 4: 156॥ 


तस्मिं सर्वाणि विद्यन्ते स चैव परमश्शिवः। 
सर्वविद्यासुसम्पू्ण्णस्सर्वविद्यार्थकोविदः॥ 4: 1571 


आचार्यस्य च मन्त्रस्य शिवज्ञानशिवस्य च। 
नानात्वं नैव कुर्वन्ति अनन्तेशादयश्शिवाः॥ 4: 158॥ 


जन्मान्तरैः कल्पसहस्रकोटिभिः 


कथञ्चि लभ्येच्छिवतत्त्वमुत्त|(मम्‌)| | 
FAIT चात्मविमोक्षहेतोर्‌ 
ददाति लोभाय कथम्परस्य तु॥ 4: 159॥ 
LOO 
4152 "मय ] NKW; eq ६” 4:152 भिषक्‌ ] conj. (cf. Nisvasakarika E 


भृशम्‌ NKWT 4:153 फलं लभेत्‌] K; फ — NT; फ न लभेत्‌ W x कुश- 
| ° ] coni; "कुशलस्सर्वांवस्थ" NK; *कुशलेस्सर्वावस्था" Wi कु T 
ल सर्वविश्व० T 4:154 पाशेभ्यो ] N; (पाशे)भ्यो ४; मासेभ्यो Wi o NW; 
4:154 गनिर्धूत० ] NK; “विद्धृंत० NWT 4:154 “हीनो ] con नवान्तुरुस्च्यते "क्षीनो ० 
"क्षी(ही)नो K; *णीनो 7 4:154 ज्ञानवान्‌ गुरुरुच्यते ] KW; शिवः] 
N; ज्ञानवान्‌ कुरुरुच्यते T 4:155 esr] NT; eg: K; "SW us 56 दे- 
conj.; शिवे NKWT 4:155 देशिकः ] N; दैशिकः K; देसिकः Wi O T iaa 
शिकस्य 2s NT; दैशिकस्य K; देसिकस्य w 4:158 शिवज्ञान° ] NWT; UU am 
4:158 ] NW; कुर्वीत K; कूर्वन्ति T 4:159 कथञ्चि ] conj; कथिल » 
(unmetrical) 4:159 ददाति लोभाय] W; दादाति लोभाय N (unmetrical)i 
लाभाय K; दाति लोभाय T (unmetrical) 


नयसूत्रम्‌ २३३ 
नूनं हि सो नेच्छति मोक्षमात्मनो मोहेन लोभेन च यो हि वक्ष्यते। 
अपायमुक्तो हि मया गुरूणान्न देय तत्त्वामृत यस्य कस्यचित्‌॥ 4:1601 
चत्वारि चैतानि शतान्यधीत्य 

सषष्टियुक्तानि षडाधिकानि। 
उद्धृत्य पञ्चाश कुला|(नि यो) (वै)| [4] 

शिवत्वमायाति स्वरूपतेजसा॥ 4:1611 


I 8॥ इति निश्वा[स)तत्त्वसंहितायां नयसूत्रे परमामृतसद्धावविचारद्षतुर्थः पटलः॥ 


स्लो 466 (?) ॥ 8॥ स्रोत्रे सूत्रत्रयं समाप्तम्‌॥ 


41603] N? K; - W; र T 4:160 देय तत्त्वामृत] NWT; देयं T 

(unmetrical) 4:161 शतान्यधीत्य ] NK; त्यधीत्य W (unmetrical); निया 

T 4:161 षडाधिकानि ] NK; षताधिकानि WT 4:161 निश्चास” ] CURE ATW 
PET? K 4161466] N? K; 46 W 4161 WIT] N; श्रौतः Ki 


TRANSLATION OF THE MÜLASÜTRA 


1:1 "The 55 spoke: 
How did the self-born [Lord] teach the supreme, secret Siva-knowledge? 
In what place did the goddess hear it? Out of [your] grace [you should 
tell us]. 


This translation reflects the restitution prasadad vaktum arhasi, but 
the last part of the verse might be conjecturally restored in other ways, 
for instance: prasadac chivabhasitam. 


1:2—3 ‘Nandi spoke: 
All the gods, [headed by] Brahma and Visnu, [and] the Ganas, headed 
by Skanda, the sages, celestial nymphs, Yaksas, snakes, Gandharvas 
and Kinnaras, Daityas, spell-bearers, Siddhas, as well as other in- 
habitants of the citadel [of Siva] (puravasinah) [having seen] the God 
of gods, the teacher of the universe, seated upon a peak of Mount 
Kailasa,...’ 
The restitution nandir uvaca is a bold guess, for Nandi otherwise fea- 
tures only in the frame-story of the Nisvasamukha. But we do need to 
assume some speaker indication here, and Nandi would not be inappro- 
priate. Furthermore, it is not inconceivable that the brief, perfunctory 
frame-story of the Mulasitra should have been added at the time of 
the Nisvasamukha. 
brahmavisnusurah sarve, which we have taken as compound in which 
one has to understand a missing àdi, might be a corruption oi bral 
māvişņū surāh sarve: “Brahmā and Vişņu, [and] all the gods... The 
Ganas, when listed in Nayasütra 1:100-108, are Vidyesa, Sanmukha, 
Ganapati, Nandi, Candia, Devi and Hathaküsmanda. But one 
precise list is perhaps not intended here. A verbal form such as drst 
or pasyanti is missing here. 
Parts of this opening recall-a passage in Guhy 
once again, the scene appears to be a place upon 
denizens of Sivapura have descended: 


asütra 12, in which, 
earth into which the 


236 NiSvasatattuasamhie 

brahmavisnusurah sarve gana skandapurogamah 

rsayopsarasa yaksa nagagandharvvakinnarah 12:19 

daitya vidyadharah sarva ye canye puravasinah 

sthapya paricatanun devam arccayanti sadasivam 12:20 

na tatra mrtyur na jara na vyadhir na ca duhkhitah 
19a “surah ] K; “sura NW e 19b skandapurogamah ] em.; Skand 
hapurogamah NW; skandapuroganah K ° 190 rsayopsarasa | NW. 
rsayopsaraso K e 20a “dharah | K; “dhara NW © 20c paiicata- 
nun] conj.; paricatanur NW; paficatamtur K 


All the gods, [beginning] with Brahma and Visnu, the Ganas, with 
Skanda at their head, sages, Apsaras, Yaksas, Nagas, Gandhar- 
vas, Kinnaras, Daityas, Vidyadharas, and all other inhabitants of 
[Siva's] city, having established the God with five-bodies, worship 
[there] Sadasiva. There there is no death, no ageing, no disease 
and [they do] not suffer. 


For a discussion of this Saiva paradise, see BISSCHOP 2007. The ab- 
sence of death and disease appears below in 1:7 of our passage. 


1:4-5 ‘..some praise the Lord of gods and some dance in front [of Him]; 
some sing in pleasure; some bow with their heads (kecit pranata mürd- 
hani); some sing verses of the Samaveda; and some throw flowers; some 


meditate with intense focus, and others play musical instrument]: 


We have therefore taken pranata as a pratipadika used with the Be a 
of pranatah (nominative plural, which would be metrically impossible 
and construed it with W’s murdhani. We have preferred Sh है 
mürdhani over the proposals of K, namely ramanti and mêrddhah a 
on the strength of a parallel in the Tvaritamulasutra, whose im : ‘ol 
ter borrows two verses from our first chapter. Verses ies we 


ws: 
SLOUBER’s forthcoming edition of the first chapter read as follo 


kecit stunvanti deveam kecin nrtyanti cagratah 
kecit samani gayanti kecit pranatamürdhabhih 

stotraih stunvanti tatranye kecit puspam kgipan 
hasanti kilikilayanti garjanti cotpatanti ca "n 
na tatra mrtyur na jara na vyadhir na ca dubkhita 
evam pramuditam drstva ivam suravararcitam 


ti ca 


«chad! 
T 7 | g: i 

he manuscripts, it seems, in fact read miurdhanl, i just 88 ९ 
SLOUBER has not unnaturally corrected to emürdhabA^ 


Translation of the Mulasitra 
237 


had done in our passage. We could also have understood kecid... hrstah 
and kecit pranatamürdhani as two parallel phrases qualifying gayanti: 
“Some sing happily, some with bowed heads” We have of course faker 


puspam (corrupted, we suspect, to puspam in the transmission of the 
Tvaritamülasutra) in the sense of puspani. 


1:6—7 ‘They let out lion-roars, they thunder and they leap about, they 
laugh, they ululate [with joy], their senses in a state of permanent 
exhiliration. There is no death there, no ageing, no disease, no being 
unhappy. Seeing him to be thus pleased, the goddess spoke these 
words.’ 


hasante kilakilayante is hypermetrical, but, as Judit TÖRZSÖK has 
pointed out ((TÓRZSÓK, forthcoming), it is nevertheless a stock cliché, 
usually in descriptions of the deity, eg. in Siddhayogesvarimata 
20:33c-34b: 


hasantam kilikilayantam mahabhimattahasinam 
evam vicintya devesam karnikayam nivesayet 


and in Timirodghatana 1:15c-16b: 


hasantam kilakilayantam mahabhimo[']ttahasitam 
bhairavam rūpam asthaya mahayogibhir avrtah 


and in the Brahmayamala, e.g., in chapter 62 (labelled 60), verse 60: 


hasantam kilikilayantam yoginiviravanditam kh 
mudrabharanasamyuktam mudrayuktam prapujayet. 


We at first conjectured evam pramuditan drstva, “seeing them HEE 
thus pleased”, since there has been no mention of Siva’s being pleased 
up to now; but the usual topos requires the goddess to ses Siva to i 
pleased before putting her question. Furthermore there is FoR 
rather weak) for pramuditam, in Tvaritamilasutra 1:8, quoted in the 
previous note. 


which entails the terrors of birth and 


1:8 ‘In thi i à 
Is terrible ocean of samsara, o Lord of the gods, can 


death, you alone are the boat; nobody else, 
protect [us] 


«xv. f devoted to the 
1:9 ‘We have come to know the [teachings of the P with its 


interpretation of the] Vedānta, o God, [and] indee 


Nisva 
z Csatattvasamh i 


twenty-five principles, and [yet] we will not reach satisfac 
the grace of Siva (Saivad anugrahat): 


The expression Saivad anugrahat may refer to Saiva initiation 


tion With out 


1:10—11 ‘The acarya, and the pupil, the ground, the [appropriate] ü 
and the powder (rajah), the incubation (adhivasam), the cmm E) 
mandala and the process of worship—teach [these] o God or a 
[and] initiation that leads to liberation, and the supreme Siva-tattys 
[viz. the mantra], knowing which one becomes free of death? 


In this list of topics, most elements can be recognised and their treat- 
ment later in the text identified, but the element rajah is uncertain, 
We considered interpreting it to mean “[purification of] impurities" and 
taking it to refer to Sauca, which was probably mentioned in passing 
below in 1:20b, but we decided this to be implausible. We now believe 
that it might mean “[the details of the colours for the] powder [used 
for the mandala]". It is true that there appears to be no detailed treat- 
ment below of coloured powders, but the different colours required for 
the mantra are indeed referred to, first in Mulasutra 2:2 and then in 
4:3-4 below. As for the others, we find the treatment of the acarya in 
1:14; of the Sisya in 1:15-16; of the ground (bhū is presumably intend- 
ed as a pratipadika here, but we could consider emending to bhith) in 
1:17-19; of the appropriate time for worship in 1:202; of the incubation 
of the gisya in 3:14; of the caru in 3:10-12b; of the mandala in 414 
; of puja in 2:1-10; of nirvanadiksa in 5:1-26 and of the root mantra, 
or TATTVA in 6:5-15. The last of these could of course be taken i 
mean "true knowledge", for that too is presumably essential for t 
performance of initiation, but cf. Sardhatrisatikalottara 1:5-6. 


1:12-13 ‘Sending away those who do not know the rules of the cult, he 
spoke these words: “Listen, o goddess, to the supreme secret, or 
have been questioned about by you. If men perform v 
knowing the [root-mantra of this system, namely the] Siva m 
those initiated are not liberated and the teacher [who PE * 
initiation] goes to hell.” ? 


1:12a contains a sa-vipulà and is thus not metrical by im 
of common practice. But, as the tables of TOKUNAGA 5 * ere 9 
devoted to a metrical analysis of the Mahābhārata 3 D 
occasional instances of this vipula (referred to by TORUM 
the *minor Ionic") to be found in the great epic- ०४०० 


€ standards 
rt 


Translation of the Mülasütra 23 
9 


iting T án 
diede E RR attention to an instance in 68:7c of 
footnote af JA. ies i eae as Roland STEINER mentions in 
Svayambhi appears to ता e oneen Le agire 

: LN record that Pingala regarded this vipula as 
a theoretical possibility; the transmitted text of Pingala’s work does 
not, however, confirm this. As Vincent TOURNIER has pointed out to 
me, a few occurrences are to be found in Buddhist works, notably the 
Udanavarga, and in Cambodian inscriptions, e.g. K. 92, 6c (C@DES 
1953:230) and K. 904, 2c (Caps 1952:58). Finally, Roland STEINER 
has kindly sent me a small unpublished dossier that he compiled in 
2008 on the sa-vipulà, in which he makes reference to, among other 
works, Michael BALK's 1988 thesis (published in 2011) on the Udana- 
varga, in which BALK found no fewer than twenty-seven instances, 
leading him to conclude that the sa-vipula was a “reguläre Struktur". 
To cite all the material in the dossier would take us too far from our 
subject, but it is worth summing up STEINER's preliminary conclusion, 
namely that the sa-vipula is regular in Vedic and early Buddhist works, 
but suspicious, at the least, in later texts, especially when not preceded 
by a caesura after the fourth syllable and when, as here, there is just 
one isolated case.2° We could therefore perhaps treat the pada here as 
a na-vipula by considering the syllable before -jnan as laghu (assuming, 
in other words, that the author did not regard the conjunct jn as 
necessarily rendering the preceding syllable heavy). 


It is noteworthy that the text refers to samayajnas, an expression 
that often refers to samayins, a category that appears nowhere else 
in the sütras of the Ni$vasa. We may assume that it is not yet a 
technical term with the restricted meaning of samayin; but it is also 
not inconceivable that this short frame-story (Mulasutra 1:1-12) is a 
later addition. The second of these verses is anacoluthic, for the te 
cannot refer to the same people as the ye, unless we were to assume 
that kurvanti could mean undergo, and this seems less likely to us than 
that there should be a sentence with 9 mismatched relative clause, for 


206 Roland STEINER's preliminary conclusion to his unpublished dossier begins 
vipula ist in vedischen und fruhbuddhistischen Tex- 
mit Zasur nach der 4. Silbe); in MW Texten 
auch nicht von vornherein unmöglich), vor 
singular oder (in einem lüngeren Text) nur 
Silbe vorkommt. 


Mein vorlàufiges Fazit: Die sa- 
ten metrisch regular (vor allem 
prinzipiell zumindest verdáchtig (wenn 
allem, wenn sie in dem jeweiligen Text 
selten und/oder ohne Zisur nach der 4. 


240 


1:14 


1:15 


1:16 


1:17 ‘[The appropriate place for initiation is:] in a Siva-temple, 


1:18 


NiSvasatattvasampie 


this is a common stylistic peculiarity in this text. 


‘One who knows [how to perform] initiation, who knows the Tett 
[viz. the mantra], who is compassionate, who [regularly] worships 6; va 
even if he should lack all the [normally required characteristics w 
[nonetheless truly] a guru who has attained the state of being k 
same as Siva.’ 

We have treated Sivatulyagah as an abbreviated way of saying divat- 
ulyatam gatah or Sivatulyatam gacchati or, and this is perhaps more 
likely still, as a way of saying Sivatulyah that fits the metrical cadence, 


“One who has faith, who is not [by nature] mean-spirited, who vener- 
ates his guru, the God and the fire, even if he be of lowest birth, o 
goddess, is a [worthy] student who may receive liberation? 


We are assuming that anusuya is an authorial corruption of the word 
anasuya, resulting from an unconscious assimilation of the vowel of 
the second syllable to that of the following syllable (see p.128 and cf. 
Mülasutra 8:15). We take devese as a feminine vocative (either from 
devesi or from devesa). 


“And one who is initiated and has knowledge, if he (yah) is devoid of 
devotion to Siva, or criticises the guru, may not receive liberation even 
though he be a brahmin? 


As elsewhere, the scribe of K has made efforts to purge the text of 
non-standard usage: jfianinas, intended as a nominative singular, 5 
converted in K to jfianavams and, above guravam, intended as भी 
accusative, the scribe of K appears to have written ca gurum. 

on the bank 


1 ve . ¢ zs ० emation- 
of a river, on a mountain, in a front yard (catvare), in 9 € 


i 0 १ ind. 
ground, or in one's house, or wherever it pleases one's min 
ER t t e Ut itra 2:397 ७ 
or the translation “front yard”, see our note on Uttarast 


T T ० 10 caste 
he earth should be white, red, black, [or] yellow [accord PE oid of 


class], inclined to the North-East. [It is] pure fs ud 876 
thorns/splinters and is of four types [according to taste, 72 
or [astringent, bitter, sour]. te, red plack 


hi 1 
One could no doubt interpret “The earth should be ka rns Jsplinte^ 
or yellow, inclined to the North-East, pure, devoid of th 


Translation of the Mülasütra 


1:19 


1:20 


241 


etc^; but we have assumed that Suddhà is parallel with aguddha in the 
following verse. 


For the four tastes, see Guhyasütra 2:13cd, where they are corre- 
lated with Brahmins, Ksatriyas, etc.: madhura kasayatikta amla 


varnnakramena tu. Only the four colours are mentioned in Uttara- 
sutra 2:6ab. 


The case-ending of madhuradau may seem surprising, but compounds 
ending in -àdi are frequently put in the locative regardless of the case 
apparently required (see p.124 for comments on this aiga usage). 


‘(Earth that is] the opposite [in respect of the above-mentioned qual- 
ities] is impure. But (ca) earth that will be sprinkled by water over 
which the TATTVA has been recited becomes fitting (Sobhana)’. 


"When the time of the [first] juncture of the day has been reached, the 
competent man, having performed the necessary [matutinal ablutions] 
(krtakrtyah), well-armoured with the mülamantra and the body-part 
mantras (tattvangaih), should then (pascat) begin his [daily obliga- 
tory] ritual. 


This interpretation reflects a conjecture. Two possible restitutions 
have been suggested here: either krtanityo vicaksanah (cf. Jranarat- 
१८००, Madras MS, p.200; Uttara-Kamika 20:1; Isanasivagurudeva- 
paddhati mantrapada 43:56) or krtakrtyo vicaksanah, which has been 
preferred because of the parallel in Svacchanda 3:. If we do under- 
stand krtya to refer to obligatory daily rituals (rather than to ablu- 
tions), then we could take pascat karma samarabhet to mean “he 
should then begin [this special] rite [of initiation]”. In other words, 
we could take krtakrtyah to mean krtanityah and take what follows 
to be naimittika. This is possible, for initiation is going to be taught, 
but the reference to “armouring” oneself with the principal mantras 
is presumably a reference to a process that subsequently came to be 
called sakaltkarana (the expression sakalikrtva in Mulasutra 3:9 ap- 
pears to refer to something else), and that later has the form of a 
ritualised process of identifying oneself with the deity worshipped, 
and this is something that we would expect to precede regular dai- 
ly worship. (Furthermore, if this is not a a n = m 
of nityapüjà, then regular daily worship would p be reque 
the Mülasutra.) Here what is emphasised is not self-identi im R PB 
the deity, but protection by being girt with the mantras o y: 


7१८४०८. 
* WSalativasamp ३ 


the body is not said to be transformed and identified with Siya 


only *armoured" and protected thereby. In the Uttarasiitra, i 
er, we find that the practitioner is described as Sivibhütah (in "e 
Vh 


ready for worship of Siva (2:8d), immediately after what may be 
description of a nyasa of consonants and vowels (2:89): daksine y, 
jayed bijam vame yonin tu kalpayet. Judit TÖRZSÖK has Suggested 
in conversation that there may have been a similar development from 
protection to identification with the divinity in the Siddhayoge$yar;. 
mata, for cf. 3:6cd (vidyangai$ ca susamnaddho rudra$aktim sama. 
likhet 3:6cd) with 20:83ab (bhairavikrtam atmanam dhyatva pindam 
yathavidhih). She has also observed that it is not necessary to under. 
stand tattvangaih as a dvandva: we could instead interpret “with the 
body-part-mantras that belong to the TATTVA”. 

Note that the five brahmamantras are not included here, which is 
perhaps a further indication that they have not yet come to be thought 
of as forming the faces of the deity (see p. 36 above). 


1:21 '[He should do so] after having first (àdau) smeared the worship-area 
(yagabhümim) with pure cow-dung and after having sprinkled it with 
the five products of the cow and then optionally with fragrant water: 
Cf. Svacchanda 3:64 and 3:91, where the fragrant water is to be applied 
above the five products of the cow. The qualification Subhena perhaps 
means, among other things, that the cow-dung should not have fallen 
on the ground. We take the absolutives as subordinate to the verb 
samarabhet in the previous verse. 


2:12 ‘Next, I shall teach you the sequence for accomplishing the v 
of Siva: [one should set down| the [yoga-|pitha, [which] has p a 
that are white, red, yellow and black. [It is] circular, [bright] Ey 
above it is a while lotus, together with nine Saktis [on the eici 
and pericarpel]. ext in- 
This interpretation is based on a conjecturally reconstructed E that 
spired by the letters retained in W. We have considere dd 97 
yogapitha is once used of the throne of worship in Gui ee 11 
and that the word used for the legs of the throne in Guhyas 
is carana. 


The colours white, red, yellow and black are almost oe ae 
to describe the legs of the throne (pitha) on which t n is nowhel? 
tests, each of whose eight petals is occupied by @ Sakti. 


d 
intend? 
nly 2 otus 


243 


explicit in the text that these Saktis are those whose names derive 
from the VAMADEVA mantra, beginning with Vama and ending with 
Manonmani on the pericarpel. There are of course many other such 
sets of nine (see TAK2 s.v. jyestha and TAKS s.v. pithagakti, prahvi), 
but that beginning with Vama and ending with Manonmani may be 
the earliest attested. 


2:3 ‘After accomplishing the veneration of [the throne/part of the throne 
called] Ananta, [he should venerate] NAVATMAN on top of that, togeth- 
er with the five brahma-mantras and the auxiliary /body-part-mantras 


Translation of the Mülasütra 
= | 
and with the GAYATRI? | 


These seed-mantras will be raised below (Mülasütra 6). In some cases, 

such as that of the GAYATRI, we have not only a seed-mantra, but also 

a long form, which is given in Guhyasitra 15:225 (f.109v). The name 

NAVATMAN does not occur in Mülasutra 6, but we think it reasonable 

to assume that it is the KANTHAUSTHYA, which is raised in 6:14-15. 

The number of angamantras is uncertain here: there is no NETRA 

taught in this text (for the probable lateness of NETRA, see TAK3 ad 

loc.), so we would expect there to be five (those taught in Mulasutra 

6:19-20: HRDAYA, SIRAS, SIKHA, KAVACA and ASTRA), rather than 

six. But Mulasutra 3:9 appears to speak of six. It is unlikely that 

GAYATRI is intended to be included, since she is mentioned separately 

here. Perhaps RETAH, the mantra of which (given in Mulasutra 6:16d) | 
resembles the typical ASTRA, and which does not figure in other works | 
known to us, was part of the group? For further discussion of the | 
problem, see the note on Mülasütra 3:9 below. 


| 
2:4 “Thus the [deity] becomes sakala; one should perform his worship. Hav- | 
ing venerated him in this way, according to rule, [one should worship) | 
also the formless (niskalam) above him. | 
One could also render the first pada thus: “Thus is the [deity when] | 
with form (sakalam);.." If this label sakala applies to the grouping | 

of mantras in the previous verse, then it is arguably implicit that the 
brahmamantras do in some way form part of the divine body: contrast | 
|] 


this with 1:20 above and with our remarks on p.36 above. As for 
the worship of niskala prescribed here, we may oe b cul um 
visualising the transcendent and formless aspect of the livinity Eus 
somehow enthroned above the sakala form, or we may Imagine " à i 
refer to mental installation and worship of the NISKALA mantra, whic 


is taught as an inflection of the TATTVA in Mülasütra 6:8. | 


| 


र Ni$vasatattunga i 


2:5ab ‘Welcome greeting (svagatam), guest-water-offering (argha 
water[-offering], bathing|-water-offering], and water for sippi 
the above are to be offered] using the five products of the ¢ 
is to say] using water with curds, milk, ghee and so on? 


We have conjecturally supplied padya and argha (cf, Svacchang 
2:167ab: svagatam carghyapadam ca samnidhanam tathaiva ca) bit 
there are other possible candidates. We ruled out avahana, the m 
moning of the deity (mention of which is curiously absent throughout) 
and asana on the grounds that the deity seems already to have bes 
summoned and seated. But one might instead assume that a verb 
(such as dattva or dadet) is missing. 


Cf. Brahmayamala 12:120ab: arghapadyadikam dattva svagatani 
purassaram and 12:226ab: svagatadi tatah krtva arghadikavidhi- 
kramat. For other combinations involving svagata, argha and padya, 
cf, e.g., Svacchanda 2:101, 2:167, 2:261. Cf. also the following 
verse, quoted without attribution in Jnanasambhu’s Jnanaratnavali 


(pp. 101-2): 


), foot. 
1g—Iall 
Ow, [that 


padyam àcamanam carghyam durvapuspaksatadikam 
svausvagatakriyapurvam vikalpena kalpayet 


In later Saiddhantika works, svagata is not invariably included asa rite 
on a par with the offering of padya, etc. Jianagambhu envisages its 
performance thus (p. 101): atha susvagatan te bhagavann iti vijnapy? 
tatah susvagatam (em.; susvatam MS) vatsa iti sivenoktam vicin 
As for the form argha (preferred over arghya), it is, as has best 6j 
marked before (TAK 1, s.v. arghya and GOODALL 2007147); E 
typical of Northern manuscripts (whereas arghya is typically ue M 
Southern sources). We do not consider here whether one form is m 

"correct" than the other. 


tayel. 


from one's own clasped hands, pouring over the recipient her Sa! 
ing an arghapatra in the hands of the recipient, etc.) 
dhantika works, argha that is offered to Sadāśiva is CO 
posed to be poured or sprinkled on each of his five heads. nano for 
earliest Siddhantatantras to describe this may be the Sa १ “30 
(5:540-59, collated here from N , f. 8r; T, f. 40r; L, P- 40; D, P 


mmonly 


mong the 


anyi 5:54 
padbhyam padyam pura dadyad agatasya sivasy? ™ 


Translation of the Mülasütra 


245 
e 54d tu] NL; ca TD 


mukhesv acamaniyam ca Sirasy argham pradapayet 
pratham’avahane hy argham püjante ca tathaparam 5:55 


० 55b Sirasy argham pradapayet ] N; girasv arghyan niyojayet T; $irassv 
arghyam nidhoyajet L; girasy arghyam niyojayet D e 55c hy argham | N; 
tv arghyam T; hy arghyam LD * 55d ca tathaparam ] T; * tathopasam 
N; ca tatha puram LD 


visarjanante cargham syat trtiyam parikalpayet 
purvamurdhni samarabhya daksinottarapascimam 5:56 


o 5690 visarjanante cargham syat trtryam parikalpayet ] conj.; visarjanante 
cargham sya trtiyam parikalpayet N; visarjjane trttyan tu devasyarghyam 
prakalpayet TLD e 56c “murdhni samarabhya | N; ?nürddhasvamarab- 
hya T; ?mürdha samarabhya L; ?mürdhnas samarabhya D e 56d °paści- 
mam] N; °pascime TLD 


madhye caiva tu mantrajnah paricasv argham niyojayet 
savyam caivapasavyam ca argham datva punah punah 5:57 


e 57b paiicasvargham] N; paricasarghyan T; paricasvarghyam LD 
e 57cd ca argham datva punah | N; ca arghyandadyat puh T (unmetrical); 
carghyam dadyat punah LD (unmetrical) 


ürdhvavaktre tu datavyam sammukham ca paranmukham 
samsthitasya tu devasya sammukham parikalpayet 5:58 


e 58b sammukham ca parahmukham ] conj.; sanmukham ca paranmukham 
N; asmanmukhafica paranmukham T (unmetrical); samukham ca paran- 
mukham LD e 58c tu] N; om. T (unmetrical); ca LD e 58d sam- 
mukham | T; sanmukham N; samukham LD 


visarjane tu gangeya deyam argham Lo 
evam arghavidhanena tato dadyan nivedanam 5: 


e 59ab gangeya deyam argham ] N; gamgeya devam iw d E बत 
deyam arghyam L; gangeyam deyam arghyam D ° vui Lo ordin 
TLD; paranmukham N e 59cd arghavidhanena is हे meo dravyan 
em.; arghavidhanena dadya nivedanam N; BEATAE in LD 
nivedanam T; arghyavidhanam tu tato dravyam nibodha me 


Nisvasat 
246 attvasam) à 


To Siva, once he has arrived, one should first offer foot-wate; m 

feet, and one should give sipping water to his mouths anq "s 1 ॥ 
to his head. The first argha is offered upon invitation [of m E 7 
another is at the end of worship; at the end of the invitation d 
depart there should be an argha. ae should offer [that as] the aii 
Beginning on the Eastern head, [then] the Southern, Northern um 
Western, the mantrin should use the argha in the middle on [each 
of] the five [heads], giving the argha also at the left and right [of 
each head], one after the other (punah punah). To the upper face 
one should give [arghas characterised by the deity being] ‘facing’ 
and ‘turned away’: when the god is present, one should present the 
‘facing’ [argha]; at the invitation to depart, o Skanda, one should 
give the ‘turned away’ argha. After thus performing the [offering 
of an] argha, one should give the food-offering (nivedanam). 


But our text, if it indeed made reference to an argha here, contains no 
clues about whether the argha was to be made to Sadaáiva's heads. 


2:6—7 ‘Scented sacred thread[s], incense, and fragrant flowers, a crown, 

ear-ring|s], upper-arm bands, and a thread for the waist, jewels that 
are various and valuable, and diverse cloths, flags, a mirror, banners, 
yak-tail fly-whisk|s], and a canopy’ 
We assume that gandhopavitam is not a dvandva, but a scented thread; 
perhaps the same as what is elsewhere commonly referred to as 3 
gandhapavitra (for which see TAK2 and TAK3 s.v. pavitraka). a 
only other occurrence of the collocation gandhopavita of which e 
aware is that in Sivadharma£astra 5:133cd: gandhopavitam Hi 
datvā vedāntago bhavet. 


2:8 “He should [then] offer six-fold bali [and] a jewel-filled pon the five 
pert should perform worship [using for all the above offerings] 
brahmamantras. 


We had earlier interpreted this differently: “He should [then] 
fold bali. The expert should worship (püjyeta) [Siva in] a P s 
jewels in this same [above-taught] way, using the five "e fault Jocus 
For we had supposed that this verse specified either th £ 


offer शड 
ith 


a hi here (sirasi 5 
We have assumed that the anomalous vowel-lengthening in the sand $ 8 seams ° 
argham = sirasy argham) might be authorial: cf. the vowel-lengthening 


compounds described on p. 130 above. 


2:9 "Then he should worship the [eight] Vi 


Translation of the Mülasütra 


247 


in which Siva is to be worshipped, or an alternative locus. But in 
Guhyasütra 16:61 jewel-filled pots are clearly among the offerings. 


vastrais ca vividhais citraih kalasai ratnapüritaih 
dhvajadarsapatakais ca vitanair ghantacamaraih 


Furthermore, it is clear from the beginning of the chapter that the 
locus of worship of Siva here is rather the mandala and not, as one 
might have expected, the linga, or a pot filled with jewels and water. 


We have assumed that püjyeta is intended to mean püjayet and is 
perhaps a contraction of pijayeta. One could understand paücabhir 
brahmabhih to mean "along with the five brahmamantras, and so in- 
clude them as objects of worship along with Siva. As for the six-fold 
bali, it is not known to us from other scriptures. We find a poorly 
transmitted account of a six-fold bali in the Nisvasakarika (chapter 


47:65-6, T.17, pp. 514-15, and T.150, p. 258, T.127, p. 377): 


mandale tarpanam krtva daSadiksu balim haret 62 
navatmakena devena balim sarvatra dapayet: 

tena te trptim ayanti bhutagramam aSesatah. 63 
prabhunam utsave devi ko na tusyati suvrate? 
tato bhutani tusyanti Sivena balina sada. 64 

bali§ ca dvividho deyo desikena mahatmana 
payasam krsarafi caiva haridram ca gudodanam 65 
hàridraü ca tatha kuryat krsnaü ca palalanvitam 
tsadvidhe sadbalir} devi maya te parikirtitah 66 


e 63a navatmakena devena] 17, 150; na catmakena dehena 127 
e 64a prabhinam | 17; Unam 127, 150 ० 640 ko na ] 17; kena 127, 
150 e 64c tato bhütani] 17; tadabhetani 127; tada bhutani 150 
e 6590 ] baligca dvi U 127 e 65a deyo ] 17; jfieyo 150 e 65cd ] 
om. 127 e 65d haridram] 150; haridraü 17 ० 66a] om. 127 
e 66b krsnafi ca palalanvitam ] 17; krsnam pala U 127; ahaa ca 
palalanvitam 150 e 66c sadvidhe sadbalir ] a pan r zm 
LI yesadbalir 127 e 66d parikirtitah ] 17; parikirtitam 127; parikir- 


tita 150 


This appears to suggest that six substances make up the six bali of- 


ferings. 
dyesvara[s], then he should wor- 


ship the [eight(?)] Lords of the directions, then he should worship the 


248 


2:10 


3:1-2 ‘I shall teach the fire-rites: listen to me as I tell [you ab 


Ni$vasatathuaga 


weapons [of the Lords of the directions]; at the end of the rite he sh 
cast bali-offerings in [all] directions.’ ould 


It seems natural to suppose that vidyesvaram and digisvaram 
spectively to the eight Vidye$varas and the eight Lokapalas "— 
in circuits around the central deity and that astrani refers to the m 
most circuit, that of the anthropomorphised weapons of the protectors 
of the directions. There is no circuit of Gane$varas here (who seem 
in any case not to be eight in our text, for see Nayasitra 1.100-8), 
It is commonly thought that five circuits of divinities (paticavarana) 
make up the yaga, but there is much variation in both early and later 
literature: see, for instance, GOODALL et al. 2005:23-26. 


Tefer re. 


What is not clear is whether there is an inner circuit of mantras. One 
could perhaps read the second half of 2:8 to be a reference to the 
five brahmamantras forming an inner circuit, but we have hesitated 
to do so because they appear in the instrumental, which suggests that 
they were mantras the utterance of which was to accompany the act of 
worship. This does not mean, however, that the brahmamantras were 
not in some unspecified way arranged in the mandala of worship, for 
see 2:3 above and see our note on 4:4c-5 below. 


“Once the rite [of worship] is finished, he should circumambulate [the 
substrate of worship], then he should perform instrumental music and 
singing, and then he should invite [the deity] to depart, to the accom- 
paniment [of the recitation] of the brahmamantras: 


Once again, it is perhaps just conceivable that brahmabhih means o 
“while reciting the brahmamantras”, as our translation supposes; 
“along with the brahmamantras”. It is conceivable, in other V? d 
that the brahmamantras should be invited to depart along with E 
principal deity. In later prescriptions, visarjana would follow a ye 
formance of the fire-rites (see BRUNNER 1963:228, fn. 2), whi 
about to be described in the next chapter. 


out] P 

| T 
having marked out [the area of the pit] and raised out the eor 
the pit] and thrown it aside (uddhatya), the expert shou grass) 
[the pit]; he should make a cross-roads [with two pieces © [the deity] 
install the fire and then sweep it together; he should inst " 
Brahma in the South [of the fire-place] then strew the ku 
the fire]? 


3:3ab ‘He should spread the kuéa-grass wit 


Translation of the Mülasütra 


249 


We should note that the expressions kunda and agnikunda are not used 
in the Mülasütra (they do appear later in the corpus eg. Uttarasutra 
2:21), and that these terms are not used in the deas ES where 
“[i]n order to set up fires on these sites they are prepared analy by an 
act denoted by the verb ud-han- and by sprinkling with water" (EINOO 
2005a:20). (We have, on the strength of this observation, and the use 
of uddhared earlier in the line, emended uddhrtya to uddhatya; but 
the emendation is tentative, since uddhrtya is paralleled in Uttara- 
sutra 2:24 and Guhyasütra 2:82, and an optative of uddhr appears 
in the same context in Guhyasitra 16:35.) The expression agnikunda 
may occur for the first time in the Vaikhanasagrhyasütra (1.8, 4.1 and 
6.14) and Atharvaparisista 25, according to EINOO (20052:21), quot- 
ing GONDA. 


For the use of two blades of darbha-grass to make a cross-roads in the 
centre of the fire-pit, cf. Svacchanda 2:191cd: catuspatham kundamad- 
hye darbhabhyam pranavena tu. (Cf. TAK2 s.v. catuspatha.) 


As for the installation of Brahma, we have taken this to refer not to 
seating the Rtvij to the South of the fire-pit (though this idea may 
be deliberately echoed), but to the mental installation of the deity 
Brahma inside the fire-pit, in its Southern part. Cf. the immediately 
preceding verses of the Svacchanda (2:189-190): 


kundasya daksine bhage Suskagomayam asanam 
darbhena vistaram puspam pranavena prakalpayet 
svanàmapadasamyuktam svadhyanena namontagam 
àmantranapadenaiva brahmanam sthapya püjayet 


Ksemaraja’s commentary ad loc. explains: kundantardaksine go- 
mayasanopari darbham vistaram tadupari puspam om brahmasanaya 
namah iti dadyat. “Inside the fire-pit to the South he should place a 
seat of darbha-grass on top of cow-dung, and en top of that a flower, 
with the mantra OM BRAHMASANAYA NAMAH-" Usually the officiant 
in a Saiva rite would himself sit to the South of the fire and facing 
North (see, e.g. Somagambhupaddhati 1.4:2), not facing esi E 
Smarta rite, and he would thus occupy the place that a Rtvij mig 
have occupied, but this detail is not made explicit here. 

h the tips pointing Eastwards; 


there he should perform worship [of Brahms]. 


250 


Nisvasatatty, Samhita 


We suppose that this is parallel to a still earlier instructio 


n in 
Svacchanda (2:188): the 


asinaivagnikundam tad darbhaih purvagrasamstaraih 
sabahyabhyantaram chadyam grhahetvartham ‘vari 


Inside and out that fire-pit is to be covered, using the ASTRA, by 
bunches of darbha-grass whose tips point East, for the sake tad 
[protection of the] household, o goddess. 


3:3cd ‘Having offered pieces of kindling (idhmam) to the fire, he should lay 


out the [sticks that make up the] paridhi and place the [water-vesse] 
called the] pranita to the North [of the fire-pit]. 

On the offering of samidhs into the fire (rather than their being used 
to build up the fire before the offering of other substances), see EINOO 
2005a:41ff. But here perhaps the verb hu is simply loosely used in the 
sense of “burn” rather than “offer as oblation in the fire”. In Srauta 
and smarta contexts, we would expect the paridhi to be a fence round 
the fire consisting of the three sticks called the madhyama, daksina 
and uttara. But in other Saiva works (e.g. Sarvajfianottara 6:19-20; 
Kirana 16:18-20; Somasambhupaddhati volume 1, 4:22-4), there are 
four, one for each of the cardinal directions, and they are the seats 
of four deities, Brahma, Sankara, Visnu and Ananta, going clockwise 
from East to North, or, according to Svacchanda 2:219-21; Brahma, 
Rudra, Visnu, Sadasiva. 


We assume idhmam to be intended to be a masculine accusative x 
(see p.133). We might similarly have assumed pranitam to F E. 
ed to be a feminine accusative plural, since, as Professor p wr 
pointed out to us (letter of 25.viii.2013), the word refers in this We 
commonly to the water (apah), which is why it comes है e fa 
plural. MONIER-WILLIAMS (s.v. pranita) records also goes attes- 
partic. vessel used at sacrifices, a sort of cup’, but mer tation 
tation only ‘L? (scil. ‘Lexicographers’). (In fact, numerous ह. ,8 

could be pointed to, but in somewhat later literature.) The V ommo 

plied either to water or to the vessel that contains it, 78 "e and 1 

in pre-tenth-century Saiddhantika literature: other khan बु dal 
Uttarasütra 2:25, we find it used in the sense of ‘water ?' 5 6:56 
noun at the beginning of a compound in Mrgendra ES ing 0” 
and we find it again in compound as a feminine noun, buta 


Translation of the Mülasütra 


251 


vessel, in the Puskara-Paramesvara as quoted in Trilocanagiva’s Praya- 
scittasamuccaya 68480 (pranitàdarvipürvani guddhim ayanti bhanda- 
vat, The pranita, the darvi-ladle and such like [vessels] become pure 
in the same way as storage-vessels’) and as quoted in Hrdayasiva’s 
Prayascittasamuccaya 7:60cd (with variants). Professor EINOO has 
nonetheless pointed out to us one passage in late Grhyasütra material 
in which pranita is plainly used in the sense of a water-vessel, name- 
ly Bodhayanagrhyasegasütra 2.5.1 (...pranitam adbhih pūrņām...). It 
is therefore not impossible that pranita should have been used here 
as a singular feminine noun referring to the vessel, or indeed as a 
singular feminine noun referring to the water (as we find in Narayana- 
kantha’s commentary on Mrgendra kriyapada 6:56: pranitayah pa- 
tram). The same ambiguity might perhaps arguably be present in 
another passage pointed out to us by Professor EINOO, namely Grhya- 
samgrahaparisista 1:96 (commenting on Gobhilagrhyasütra 1.7.16-17): 
vihitapratisiddham ca pranitam nopakalpayet; but there BLOOMFIELD 
has understood pranita to refer to the vessel rather than to the wa- 
ter (1881:565): ‘Das (in gewissen Fallen) verordnete und (in andern 
Fallen) verbotene pranit 4-Gefass (zum Sprengwasser etc.) soll man 
nicht verwenden’. 


3:4 ‘And he should sprinkle the vessels and heat the sruva and the sruk 


(srucim). Having heated the ghee, he should at remove it from 
the fire (udvasya), set it down and skim off the top [with kusa grass] 
(utplavet). 

The notion of utplavana is in origin a misunderstanding of the term 
utpavana, from utpu, from which one would expect the optative form 
utpuniyat. That utpavana is primary is clear from passages in the 
Grhyasütras which, instead of using utpavana, a form that can easily 
be confused in transmission with utplavana, use verbal forms such 
e.g. Khadiragrhyasutra 2:14: Daas sere angusthabhyam 
sangrhya trir ajyam utpunati, ' taking up the [two 
h between his thumbs and ring- 


as utpunati, 
anamikabhyam ca tri 
darbha-blades with] tips pointing Nort 
fingers he purifies the ghee [by swiping 
But utplavana and other forms derived from utplu are widely found 
व both in tantric and non-tantric literature: Manusmrti 
5:114ab, VHS Medhatithi (among others) o coe tee 
॥ tam, is repr 
sarvesam $uddhir utpavanam SIVA) TS 
(e.g. Visnudharmottara 231:6ab) with utplavanat or utplavanam. The 


them across it] three times...” 


Nisva, 
: Vasatativasam) ji; 


use in our text of the form utplavet is perhaps confirmation that 

ligature tpl is authorial (and not the secondary result of textual E: 
ruption), since the author is probably less likely to have thought t m 
utpavet would be a possible optative of utpu. "m 


For the unusual form sruci, repeated in Uttarasütra 4: 390, cf. Saru 
jnanottara 17:2, quoted below ad Uttarasutra 4:39. 


3:5-6 ‘Sprinklings [of the ghee are to be made] (agharau) to the South 
and North; he should offer portion[s] of clarified butter into the fire. 
Then he should make a full oblation: he should visualise the Fire as 
having his upper face white and upturned, as being three-eyed and 
four-armed. Imagining the formless deity/mantra (niskalam) in the 
heart of this [fire], he should give the full oblation? 


In order to interpret this passage, it would be useful to know whether 
the ritual scheme followed here is closer to the $rauta and smarta mod- 
els that predate our text or to the other known tantric models that 
post-date it. In both, we find the notion of aghara and ajyabhaga (fora 
brief characterisation of what these labels refer to in Srauta and smarta 
contexts, see, e.g., GONDA 1980:313-314), but apparently rather dif 
ferently understood. In the daráapürnamasau, which furnish the model 
Srauta rite, we find, as Professor EINOO has pointed out to us (let- 
ter of 27.viii.2013), several elements of the Ni$vasa's ritual Bed 
the bringing of grass (barhiraharana, described in Apastambasrauto- 
sutra 1.3.1-1.5.5), and of idhma (Apastambasrautasutra 1.5.6-1.6.3); 
the bringing forward of the pranita-water (pranitapranayana: à ? af 
stambasrautasitra 1.16.1-11), and two agharas (a srauva b i 
Prajapati in the South-West part of the ahavaniya fire is GEE 
Apastambasrautasitra II.12.7-9 and a srauca aghara to Indra ae 
into the North-East part of the fire in 1L.13.2-11.14.13) and A (We 
bhagas, to Agni and Soma, in Apastamba$rautasutra II.18.3-9- 


70): 
have used here CALAND's analysis of the ritual structure; 19277 € 
Turni $ orresp 

rning to later tantric sources, the two agharas here may T Suaccht 


to the two sprinklings of ghee prescribed, for instance; in th 
nda (3:108-110), the Kirana (18:31-32)?°° and the Mrge 
the first said to be “hot” (taptaghara/taptabhighara) ° oma 
Agni and the second “cool” (sitabhighara) and devote aah mention 
the Svacchanda, Kirana, and Mrgendra, however; thee 


. of the 
Nepales ४ manuscript 0 


m The sense is obscured by corruptions in Ep, but the early 
“rapa enables us to see that hot and cold āghāras are enjoined. 


Translation of the Mülasütra 


253 


of directions, bo these two offerings are made after cooking the caru 
and after taking it down off the fire respectively, whereas in our text 
the cooking of the caru is yet to be mentioned. 


Another sort of aghara occurs at an earlier stage of the fire-rites de- 
scribed in the Matariga (kriyapada 4:33-34), the purpose of which 
appears to be “create” the five faces of the Siva-fire, but grouped in 
pairs (ISANA being paired with the mülamantra): 


aghara$ catra kartavyah Slesayitva dvayam dvayam 
sadyojatena vamena ghorena purusena ca 
iganasivamantrabhyam vaktrasampadanaya tu 
prabhor astrena diptena vaktrodghatanam ipsitam 


And into it [viz. the fire] the sprinkling is to be performed, hav- 
ing first fused together pair by pair SADYOJATA with VAMADEVA 
and AGHORA with TATPURUSA, [and] ISANA with the $IVA-mantra. 
Now in order to accomplish the [re-]creation of the faces of the 
Lord, a rite of splitting the faces (vaktrodghatanam) is required, 
[accomplished] by means of the illuminated [i.e. prefixed with OM?) 
ASTRA. 


There appears to be no suggestion in our text, however, that faces 
are being either joined together or separated, and it remains in fact 
quite unclear how many faces the fire is thought to have in our passage. 
Moreover, as BRUNNER points out (1985:105), Narayanakantha quotes 
this portion of the Matariga with the lines arranged in a different order 
(and with vaktragharas ca for aghara$ catra) ad Mrgendra kriyapada 
6:18c-19, as though not satisfied with the logic of the passage. And yet 
the same process of grouping the brahmamantras in Du E introduced 
in the Kirana with the label of vaktraikikarana (16:23), the blending 
of the faces into one", and it follows the process with what it calls 


aghara (16:25): 
vàmena ghorena vaktrenaiva kramad dvayam 
amantrena madhyagharam dadet khaga 


éivenaiganamantrena N e mad- 
madhyagharan dadet khagah N; 


sadyam 

Sivenesan 
e giveneganamantrena | Ep; 
hyüghüram dadet khaga] em; 
madhvakaram 08066 punah Ep 


The text of the Sarvajfianottara is uncertain, pit it eee SN 
sort of abhighara followed by a “splitting of the faces (6: : 


254 


M 


tato ‘bhigharayed vaktram brahmabhis tv anupürvasa], 
punar udghatanam kuryad astrabijena sanmukha ? 


°bhigharayed vaktram ] N; *bhigharayed vaktran GOML R, 16829; bhig 
harayed vaktran T. 334 e brahmābhis | N; brahmabhis GOML F 
16829, 7,334 ‘© udghatanam] N, GOML R 16829; adghitanan 
T.334  egapmukha] GOML R 16829, T. 334; sanmukhah N ` 


Then he should cause [8166] to trickle down over [each] face in due 
order while reciting the brahmamantras; after that, he should per- 
form the splitting [of the faces], o Skanda, using the seed-syllable 
[form of the] ASTRA. 


Another parallel for the performance of two agharas outside the con- 
text of the preparation of the caru occurs in Rauravakriyapada 15:24, 
but without explanatory details. 


As for the sequence of agharas being followed immediately by a rite 
called ajyabhaga, aside from a parallel in our own corpus (Guhyasütra 
2:84cd), we find it in the Suksmagama in 6:54-57, just before a series 
of samskaras beginning with annapràéana, but there the aghara rite 
appears to consist of oblations in the fire in the four intermediate di- 
rections, and ajyabhaga to consist of oblations in it in the four cardinal 
directions. We also find an aghara followed by an ajyabhaga in four 
directions in Pürva-Kaàrana 22:53-6. 


But not uncommonly we find a preliminary rite that is called aya 
bhaga preceding something called aghara. Thus in the Somasambhi- 
paddhati ajyabhaga consists in visualising the ghee in the m. bi 
divided into three parts, that on the left corresponding to iga e 
therefore also fire), that on the right to pingala (and therefore E 
the moon), and that in the centre to susumna, then wee y Fs 
oblating some ghee from each part in turn to the intentiona ti SP! 
of Soma, and of Agni and Soma together (Soma$ambhupada i rites 
4:37); this is afterwards followed by vaktrabhighara, among ^ differen! 
(SP 1, IV:41ff), the order of which is transmitted variously ” 

Sources (BRUNNER 1963:254, n. 1). 


The same is true of Diksottara 14:80ff (following the 
T.17), where the ghee is again divided into three (1.2 
and T.150, pp. 143-4): 


samskaraih Sodhite ajye ajyabhagan tu homayet 80 


mbering of 
pP: 103 07 


Translation of the Mülasütra 


255 


daksinenottarenaiva madhyadese tathaiva ca 
om agnaye namah, om somaya namah, om agnisomabhyarn 
namah, om agnaye Svistakrte namah 
ajyabhagavibhagan tu kathitam tava Sobhane 81 

Suddhe ajye tato mantri bindum bindun tu praksipet 
ajyasuddhividhir hy esah kathitan tu yathakramam 82 
ajye Suddhe tato devi kuryad vaktrabhigharanam 
sadyàdisanaparyantam ekaikahutikam hunet 83 
vaktrabhigharanam hy esa kathitam vai Sivena tu 


Principal variants: 80९ ajye] 17; hy ajye 150 e 82b mantri | 150; 
mantram 17 e 83b vaktrabhigharanam | em.; vaktrabhidharanam 
17, 150 e 83०0 sadyadisanaparyantam ekaikahutikam ] 150; sadya- 
di iSaparyantam ekaikahutayo 17 ० 84a vaktrabhigharanam | em.; 
vaktrabhidharanam 17; vajrabhidharanam 150 


But in some early Saiddhantika works we do indeed find the ajyabhaga 
following a rite of aghara/abhighara, e.g. Matariga kriyapada 4:40 and 
in Kirana 16:29cd, where there appear to be only two divisions of the 
ghee: 


ajyabhagam hunet pascad agnisomadvayena tu 


ajyabhagam hunet paścād | conj.; agnibhaga hunet pascad N; ajyabha- 
gam ca juhuyad Ep e agnisomadvayena tu N; agnisomaprayogatah 
Ep 


What can be made of all this confusing data? It seems that Saiva 
sources have adapted the terms aghara and ajyabhaga from age 
ritual practice in rather various ways. In poe of them, pt FR 
kling" or “moistening” (aghara) of the पाण मिले an ee 
some way connected with the separation and fusing of 3 ve eas s 
of the fire as Siva, whereas the ajyabhaga to EE mae : OR 
the one hand become conflated with hot and cold ag. tis ra Met a 
preparation of the caru, and On ie QT d = been split into 
preparatory rite before the principal Se i Ma T 
three, presumably because of the association ० SE P d 
the tub es ida and pingala, to which it was natu 


and central tube susumnaà. 


The tantric parallels do not b 
in the Nigvasa, which has use 


themselves reveal what is intended 
these terms differently and which, 


t 


256 


OP Tha oan ——— ———— Y ran es 
he pranità is, as we have seen in the note on 3:3cd above, 


N 24 = 
"S vasatattuasam) i 


given the sequence of ritual elements, and notably the inclusio 
pranitapranayana, omitted in other tantric SOurces,2?09 appears à E 
to be closer to earlier Srauta or smarta models. We have E. 
above to the pair of agharas and the pair of ajyabhagas in the gra ed 
dargapirnamasau, and these are maintained in smàrta ritua]: a aie 
agharas, one offered to Prajapati and the second to Indra, followed i 
mediately by a pair of ajyabhagas, one offered to Agni and the se 
to Soma, are extremely commonly prescribed in the Grhyasütras as a 
preliminary to the principal oblations. Thus we find in 1.3 of the 
Jaiminiyagrhyasttra: prajapataye svahety uttaram paridhisandhim 
anvavahrtya sruvam, indraya svaheti daksinam paridhisandhim an- 
vavahrtya, agharau hutvajyabhagau juhoty agnaye svahety uttaratah 
somaya svaheti daksinatah, and in prasna 1, khanda 15, sentences1 and 
2 of the Vaikhanasagrhyasütra (p.146): sruvenajyam sravayan parid- 
hi sprstva vayavyadyagneyantam prajapataye svaheti nairrtyadiéanan- 
tam indraya svahety agharau juhuyac cakşuşī buddhvagnaye svaha 
somaya svahetyajyabhagav uttaradaksinayor juhoti. (Cf. also Varaha- 
grhyasutra 1.21; Kausttakagrhyasitra 1.5.19—24 (p. 22); Manavagrhya- 
sutra 2.2.13-14 (p.129); and Bodhayanagrhyasütra 1.3.26-31.) 


In Atharvavedaparisista 40 too, a text that gives instructions for fol 
lowing a paSupatavrata, we find the pair of agharas followed by the 
pair of ajyabhagas (3.5), but apparently offered to Vayu, Sarva, Pasu- 
pati and Santyadhipati (BISSCHOP and GRIFFITHS 2003:333). No 
divinities are specified here in the Mülasütra. 


Although in this detail the Nisvasa is closer to the Grhyasütras E : 
other early Siddhantatantras, the next verse refers to the vi 
of the fire as Siva, and one might suppose that this would pd this 
Nisvāsa off firmly from Vedic precedents. But in fact even sn in 
respect matters are not so clear, for the visualisation of à हे 3) 
the fire seems to be referred to in the Aitareyabrahmana, Lm 

adhyaya 1, paragraph 8 (p. 58 in HAUG's edition): jyan 
176787” 

yasyai devatayai havir grhitam syat, tam dhyay' cd ee 
saksad eva tad devatam prinati, pratyaksad devatam it , 

tence 
and in the Vaikhanasagrhyasütra, pragna 1, khanda 14 i 
(P. 143 in the edition with Srinivasamakhi): other 
mentioned in two 


antric sources, but not in the ritual context in which it occurs. 


Translation of the Mülasütra 
257 


s devatayai havir nirupyate tam devatam manasa ha vai 
ayan nirvapet 
Furthermore we should note that the visualisation in the Ni$vasa is 
not preceded by the stages known to us from other Saiva sources, 
suce carving out the faces (vaktrodghatana), or moistening them 
by besprinkling them (vaktrābhighāra), or of choosing one of the faces 
to inflect the fire rites for Santi, abhicāra or the like (though this is 
perhaps implied by 3:7cd) and fusing the other faces into it so that the 
chosen face alone receives the subsequent oblations (vaktraikikarana). 
Moreover the visualisation, though unclear in most details, is not one of 
a ten-armed and five-faced 5858109, for it is stated to have four arms. 
We do not learn how many faces there are in total, and although we 
have interpreted sitottana-m-ürddhavaktram as having the sense of a 
single bahuvrihi interrupted by m as a vocalic glide, “having his upper 
face white and upturned", we could have interpreted it to mean “with 
his face upwards, white and upturned”. We have not done so because 
the next verse appears to refer to a Western face, which suggests after 
all that there may have been five. But even this is uncertain, because | 
the use of the Western face for oblations actually implies that the 
Western face should be the face that is upturned, and so there may in 
fact only have been four faces. (Cf. our notes on the visualisation of 
Igvara in Nayasutra 3:42f.) 
An oddity in the account of the visualisation of the faces of the Siva-fire 
in Sarvajñānottara 4:59 and in Mrgendrakriyapada 3:7 suggests that a 
four-faced form may have been the early default (cf. the observations 
of TORZSOK 2013). Both texts explain the use of the thirty-eight divi- 
sions (kala) of the five brahmamantras to create the body of the deity, 
and both texts refer to the creation of four faces (vaktracatustayam) 
using TATPURUSA. Both then do add the creation of a fifth face, that 
either TATPURUSA (the mantra also known 


of ISANA, but for that n : Xu Ur nee | 
T {SANA (the mantra of the face in question) is used. | 
as VAKTRA), nor ISANA ( बचा 


Sarvajfiánottara 4:59 reads as follows in the early Nep 
i anam paücadha mürdhnim vaktram vaktracatustaye | 

; a: ni I: tu | 

diptatejo sitottanam pancamam pranavena | 

। 


fivefold [because divided into five 


T 1 TOA ich is 
he mantra ISANA, whi ATPURUSA [is used] for the 


: tra T. 
kalas), [makes] the head; the man ub ur Meus | 
four faces; the fifth [face], of flaming radiance, | 


produced] by OM. | 


uem 


i Mc 


One other possibility is perhaps worth mentioning: is it concehah 
that one is supposed to begin with a visualisation of Agni (similar E 
Iśāna, perhaps) and that the fire is only completely transformed in 
Sivagni by the purnahuti, which is prescribed in the next verse? 


3:7 ‘Once the full oblation has been offered, [the fire] is established x 
“Sivagni”. The Lord of gods receives oblations with his Western face 
in daily obligatory rituals (nityaSah). 

We would not normally expect the adverbial form nityaśah to be capa- 
ble of this sense, but the interpretation of this last word is suggested 
by parallels. Thus Svacchanda 2:246—7 read: 


Santikam paustikam caiva saubhagyakarsanani ca 
saubhagyarohasiddhim tu uttare homayet sada 246 
pascime nityakarmani viniyogah prakirtitah 
ajyabhago hi hotavya urdhvavaktre tu pascime 247 


Cf. also Somasambhupaddhati SP3, samayadiksavidhi 52cd: 
pascime Sisyasamskaram nityahomam samacaret. 


And cf. this passage of the Tattvaratnavalz (top of verso of unnumbered 
folio now 8th in sequence): 


urdhvasye homato muktih piirvasye sarvasiddhayah 

daksasye maradahadyah Santih saubhagyam uttare 

pascime nityakarmadi svarucer juhuyad budhah 

fferings from 
he 18 facing 
namely 


It is conceivable, however, that Siva in the fire takes 0 
the West only in the sense that the worshipper, becat da 
East, oblates into the side of the fire that is nearest to him, 


the Western side. ^ 
yllable of fire: 
3:8ab ‘All these fire rites one should perform with the seed-sylla 


bly 
5 10 9100920 
The seed-syllable for fire is ra, at the end of which id e re-rit 
supply an anusvàra to make it into the mantra Tedha ould the fire 
RAM. But should the syllable RAM be used by itself, ० 


a! 
syllable be integrated into some form of the root-mantr > 


ing 10 
ording 
3:8cd ‘After that, the siddhi-seeker may do the homa acc 
particular desire? 


Translation of the Mülasütra 259 


This may be another general statement about fire rites and not one 
specifically about fire-rites in the context of initiation. But it could 
be interpreted to apply to an initiation for an initiand who is seek- 
ing the diksa for a particular purpose, e.g. conquest of enemies. Our 
interpretation of tatah as a temporal "then", assumes that the nitya 
rite should always be performed, and that it may then be followed by 
fire-rites inflected to achieve the sadhaka's goals. 

3:9 ‘Using the root-mantra (tattvena), the six auxiliary mantras and with 
the five brahmamantras, he should install the entire path [of worlds 
that are to be purged of rebirths] (adhvanam sakalikrtva) [on the 
threads that embody the bonds| and bind [the threads that embody] 
the bonds [to a lock of the initiand's hair at one end and to the in- | 
tiand's big toe at the other] using the root-mantra? | 


There are a number of uncertainties here. To begin with, the damaged 
part could have been restored tattvena tu ca sangena, but it looks as 
though the second of the damaged syllables in N might have been a 
retroflex da, and in that case the only restitution that seems possible 
is tattvena tu sadangena. This is problematic, since, as we shall see | 
below (6:19-20), the text seems really not to have the six angas typical । 
of later tantras (the missing sixth being NETRA). If, therefore, N read | 
sadangena, this might have been a corruption, sadangena being a cliché 

in later literature. Another possibility, as we suggest in our annotation 

on Mülasütra 2:3 above, is that RETAH (raised in 6:16) was treated as 

the sixth aga. A third possibility is that the GAYATRI is here included 

as an angamantra (cf. 6:20 below), even though it is excluded from 

the group of arigamantras in 2:3. In the Dvisatikalottara too we find | 
the same oddity of referring to the body-part-mantras as a group of i 
six even though there seem only to be five explained, and there the i 
number six is attained by the expedient of including the SIVAMANTRA 

(a solution which does not seem to work for our passage): 


prathamam hrdayam vidyad dvitiyam tu Sirah smrtam 
trtiya tu Sikhadevi caturtham kavacam bhavet 1:10 
paficamam tu Sivam vidyat sastham astram visargajam 
sadangam etat kathitam givena paramatmana 1:11 
And there is even a fifth possibility: the NETRA might sana 
to be present within all the others in the form of the anusvara, an 1dea 
expressed in Sardhatrigatikalottara 1:10ab: 


260 


M 


anusvaro bhaven netram sarvesam copari sthitah 


But the principal problem here is to identify what rite 18 be 
formed. In later literature sakalikarana is used of a practice of iq 
tifying with the deity to be worshipped, a practice that involves E 
stalling the deity's mantras upon one's own body, and it would A 
mally be enjoined before worship rather than after it. And indeed 
something approximating to sakalikarana, though not so labelled was 
enjoined in 1:20 above (see our notes), just before the account of wor 
ship. Nonetheless, it is conceivable that adhvanam is here a corruption 
of atmanam, and that this is after all an injunction to transform the 
worshipper's body into that of the deity by the application of the de. 
ity’s mantras. We could therefore instead translate as follows: “Using 
the root-mantra, together with the six arigamantras and with the five 
brahmamantras, he should transform himself into the Sakala deity, 
and he should block the bonds [of bodily existence] by means of the 
root-mantra.” But if this were a standard sakalikarana, why would it 
be included here after puja and agnikarya and just before the cooking 
of the caru? One possible justification might be that it thus precedes 
the consumption of the caru, a gruel-like concoction which, in pre 
tantric ritual, would normally only be consumed by deities and manes 
(see note on 3:11-12 below). But the allusion to the pasas here would 
seem odd, and we have therefore rejected this interpretation. 


We have assumed instead that the pasas refer to what is commonly 
called the pasasütra (cf. Svacchanda 3:163ff), a thread that € 
in the ritual as the substitute for the body of the soul whose bonds "a 
to be purged: the purification of karman in the worlds of the Re is 
is performed on the threads. We expect only one thread, but also 
probably triple-stranded, like many other ritual threads, and it 18 The 
possible that the plural is used because there are many Hoe are 
ya- 
the three bonds of mala, karman and of what evolves fro aj r is 
cchanda 3:175ab: pāśās tu trividhā bhavya mayiyana is. existe 
not possible, since our text does not appear to assume | 
of mala and makes no explicit mention of a matter called 7 mos 


3 the com" 
As well as bearing the initiand’s soul, the pagasiitra also has he malt 
mentally installed along it (Somasambhupaddhati 873; 


ing per- 


ae — ie 
divisions of which are marked out with knots; it is to २९ taken off and 
topknot to the big toe of the initiand, and it is to be 


Translation of the Mülasütra 261 


stored overnight (see, e.g., Mrgendrakriyapada 7:91) when the initiand 
sleeps at the ritual ground where the initiation is to take place (adhi- 
vasa). In the course of the initiation, sections of the thread are cut 
off and oblated, thus cutting the bonds (Mrgendrakriyapada 7:88) and 
destroying the births at different levels of the universe to which that 
soul would have been bound. 


There are various problems with assuming that it is the pasasütra 
that is referred to in our text. To begin with, we would expect a 
paSasutra to be prepared for a salvific initiation, in which the soul's 
karman in all levels of the cosmos must be destroyed, and yet the 
following chapter gives a vidyadiksa, which is clearly distinguished 
from the muktidiksa given in chapter 5. This objection might be 
answered either by pointing out that the vidyadiksa too appears to 
raise the soul to a higher level in the universe (see 4:16), and so one 
might expect it to contain a purging of lower levels of the cosmos, 
or by interpreting the adhivasa explained below in this chapter to be 
intended to be something that should precede both a vidyadiksa and | 
a muktidiksa. A more serious problem is that the pasasütra is not a | 
feature of diksa in some other early tantric accounts, and that it is | 
not certain whether or not it is alluded to again in the Milasutra. It | 
is possible, however, that it is alluded to in 4:14-15, in the account 
of vidyadiksa, where some bonds are cut, or that, although it is not 
explicitly mentioned in the account of muktidiksa, the homas that are 
to be performed as part of the purification of each level of the cosmos 
(5:3) involve the oblation in the fire of sections of the pasasutra. 

In favour of our interpretation is that it appears to be what is spelled 
out in the beginning of Diksottara 9, with the difference that tattvena 
bandhayet appears to have been interpreted there to refer to binding 
the thread with the mülamantra after it has been detached from the 
initiand's topknot and big toe prior to adhivasa (97-16): see Appendix 
V. 

*He should afterwards cook the caru using unhusked grains a etter 
Sali or the rice that ripens in sixty days, together with handfuls of ... 


It is possible that the compound Salisastika is intended to refer to pe 
one variety of rice. For a passage that might or might not distinguis 


between Sali and sastika, see, 6.8: Tantrasadbhava 9:53-4: 


3:10 


carum vai Srapayen mantri ksirenamrtavatsaya 


3350 UT 5251 आती 


^ Misuasatatiug 


gyamakatandulair devi nivarair và priyangubhih 
sastya Salyatha va devi yavagodhumavrihibhih 
tamrasauvarnarajatya athava mrnmayena va 


The mantrin should cook the caru with milk from a cow of whom 
calf has died (amrtavatsaya [= amrtavatsayah]) using little me 
grains ($yàmakatandulaih), o goddess, or wild rice (nivaraih) k 
fox-tail millet (priyangubhih), or sasti or Sali,?*° o god denne a 
barley, wheat and rice, using [a vessel of] copper, gold, silver or 
clay. 


Because of damage, we cannot be sure of what was intended, but one 
possibility is that we are missing an indication of quantity (a certain 
number of handfuls for the fire and for the acarya, and then for the 
variable number of sadhakas): cf. Somasambhupaddhati SP3, 1:85. 
One might therefore consider emending the second half-line of the 
verse to: yavagodhumanivaraih paficaprasrtisammitaih. Also possible 
is that we are simply missing further ingredients, for cf. the account 
of the beginning of the preparation of the caru in Diksottara 14 (T.17, 
p. 1028; T.127, pp.108-9; T.150, 9. 142): 


carum Srapeta mantrajfio vidhidrstena karmana 
sangena devadevena paiicabrahmayutena ca 68 
sakalikrtya tam sthalim sivam tatraiva vinyaset 
tritattvam vinyaset pürvam sivam tattvat tu vinyaset 69 
ghrtadigdhan tu tām krtva ksirapurnaii ca karayet 
yavagodhümanivarais Salisastikatandulaih 70 

kanguna vatha kurvita carukam susamahitah 


; ‘na TIN 
68a carum érapeta mantrajfio ] conj; carum $rupeta Ibn. T150 


carum $rapeta mantra U T127; caram érupeta mantel 5 T150 
e 68b vidhidrstena karmana ] T17; L| mana T127; bei] Tif 
e 68d ^yutena] T17; °vratena T127, T150 e 69d buds 
T327; tatvam tu T150 e 70a °digdhan ] T17; "dug 0. em 
० 70८ yava?^] T17, T150; U T127 e 700 “sastikatané ० ma kali 
“sastikatandalaih T17; °pistakatandulaih T127, T150 
guna | T17, T127; priyanguna Tigo (unmetrical) ding t 
rain 
One who knows the mantras should cook the caru a sakala 


. . j to 
the enjoined rite. Having transformed the vessel in with Te? 
‘or 


ean 
nina) a Se Perhaps sastya Salyatha va should rather be understood tO m 
[that matures] with sixty [days]’. 


Translation of the Mülasütra 263 


deity using the [mantra of the] god of gods, together with the 
angamantras and the five brahmamantras, he should install Siva 
in it. He should first place the three tattvas [namely atmatattva, 
vidyatattva and Sivatattva] and then place Siva after the tattva[s]. 
Having smeared it with ghee he should fill it with milk. Concen- 
trated, he should make the caru with barley, wheat and wild rice, 
with sixty-day rice (?) or with millet (kariguna). 


3:11-12b “He should make the caru [using the above ingredients] together 
with ghee and milk while uttering the brahmamantras; having made 
it, he should oblate one [part], offer [the second part] to the god, 
and the third to [all the] sadhakas, after [they have sipped] the five 
products of the cow? 


The caru in non-tantric contexts is for gods and manes, but in tantric 
contexts, of which this may be the first known example, the caru is 
often offered to Siva in the main support of worship, then to Siva in 
the fire, and then to [Siva in] the disciples and acarya (cf, e.g. Mr- 
gendrakriyapada 7:47-50, Kirana 18:34, and Vinasikhatantra 19-20, 
all in the context of preparation for adhivasa). Here in the Ni$vasa, 
the third part of the caru is given simply "to sadhakas" (not sepa- 
rately to the éisyas and the acarya), but that is probably simply an 
indication that the term sadhaka had not yet acquired its later sense 
of someone belonging to a class of initiates who, alone, were bubhuksu 
(in contradistinction to the liberation-seeking putrakas and samayins, 
who are absent from the Nisvasa). 

It is possible that a half-line is missing here, for we might have expected 
the text to express more clearly that the caru is to be divided into three 
parts, one for the fire, one for the god and one part for the sadhakas, 


as we find, e.g., in the Svacchanda (3511411 5b): 


tribhagam kalpayitva tam carum sthalyam tu samsthitam 
Sivagnisadhakebhyas ca Sivayagram nivedayet 
dvitiyam homayed agnau sadhakebhyas trtiyakam 
The adverb paficagavyapurahsaram refers to the poe being = 
; before eating the caru. In 
uired to sip the five products of the cow ०९८ ॥ 
au later iom e.g. the Mrgendra (kriyapada poi me the 
Svacchanda (see following quotation), the close gece x ue con- 
sumption of paricagavya, the consumption of the caru an the chewing 


MEER WR ER. cu —— 
an Er conj. 


Nii) 
E e vasatattvasamh i 


and casting of the tooth-cleaning stick is reinforced by the diss 
having three rings of cow-dung marked out on the ground, one "e of 
of these three acts. Thus in Svacchanda 3:192-194b we rea d: ach 


gomayena $ucau dese karyam mandalakatrayam 
ekasmin mandale vistah paficagavyam $i$uh pibet 199 
upavigya dvitiye tu carukam praSayed budhah 
acamya dantakastham tu trtiye mandale sthitah 193 
bhaksayitva ca devesi tata$ caiva viniksipet 


g:12c-13 ‘Having caused the initiands to chew the tooth-stick, which 
should be [of a wood] with milk[y sap], they should be made to throw 
it and the acarya should examine it. If [it falls pointing] East, West, 
North-East, upwards, North, [then it is] auspicious; and [if it falls 
pointing] in another direction, then it is inauspicious: one hundred 
[repetitions of] an oblation should take place for [remedying] it? 


We assume that dantadhavana is a pratipadika form used, for metrical 
reasons, with the sense of the accusative. As Diwakar ACHARYA has 
pointed out, verse 13 can be reconstructed with some confidence, for 
it has been rewritten (presumably in order to avoid the awkward com- 
bination of pratipadikas and locatives in the sequence purvapascima 
isorddha uttarasyam) as Svacchanda 3:194c-195b: 


purvam pascat tathaigordhvam cottarasyam ca Sobhanam 
anyasyam agubham viddhi tasya homah satam bhavet 


3:14 'In the same way, [viz. just as in the case of the tooth-cleaning E 
falling such that it points in an inauspicious direction,] so too " j 
case of [the initiand’s] seeing inauspicious dreams [exo a e 
be effected] by oblations and [recitations 01] the brahmamentm 0 
expert [viz. the initiand] should mount the bed of ash in d 


worship and sleep [there]. «Jn the 
pret: 


One could emend to evam homam pavitrai§ ca and inter homa [pe 
Same way, in the case of bad dreams [too], there should be eci 
formed] using the brahmamantras”. Subsequent sources B other 
certain classes of initiands should sleep on a bed 0 anh Hr grhasi 
should sleep on darbha-grass. For Somagambhu, it 75 ; the ya 
whom the acarya should cause to sleep on darbha-gr? 

who sleeps on ash (SP3, 3:52): 


ss an 


= = raksitan 
&rhasthan darbhasayyayam pūrvaśīrşāms tu I aks! 


Translation of the Mülasütra 6 
205 


hrda sadbhasmagayyayam yatin daksinamastakan 


| 
| 
F 
or others, however, such as Bhoja in his Siddhantasarapaddhati (B, | 
f.31r-31v) and Ramanatha in his Natarajapaddhati, the mumuksu | 
sleeps on ash and the bubhuksu on kuSa-grass (7:138cd, MS, p. 64) : | 
| 

| 

| 

| 

| 


Sayita bhasmasayyayam mumuksur itarah kusaih. 


3:15 ‘In the morning, having performed his recitation, he should tell his 


dreams to the guru. And I shall teach you about dreams, both inaus- 
picious and auspicious. 


Given that he is not yet initiated, it is not clear what sort of recita- 
tion he should be performing: can it be of tantric mantras or texts? | 
Perhaps the five brahmamantras, given that they are considered to be | 
Vedic as well as tantric, might be recited? | 
| 
| 


3:16 'If he sees the/a god, the/a guru, brahmins, cows, a king [or] a person 
dressed in white at the end of his dream[ing sleep] (svapnante), or if he 
sees [himself] mounting an elephant or mountain, then he will succeed? | 


The expression svapnante is perhaps used because dreams in the final 
part of the night are considered to be the most significant in Indian 
oneiromancy: see, e.g., Mrgendrakriyapada 8:22c-23b: 


esam nigante jyayastvam madhyamatvam nisardhake 
pradose laghutanyesu triyamamsesu kalpana 


3:17 'And if he mounts a donkey or camel [or] enters into a nether world, 
or sees massage with oil [performed on himself], or [his own] marriage, 


|| 
| 
then he will not succeed. | 
| 
| 


We could have emended the first half of this verse to something like: 
krtva patalam vigate yada. But this would make 


rarohanam i 
kharostrarohanan ere two may be intend- 


the half-line refer to just one negative omen wh ae | 
ed, for mounting on an ass or camel or other animal appears usually | 
to be an omen by itself: cf. Kirana 18:43, Maenaka anaa pu | 
Svàyambhuvasütrasarigraha 13:3; Sarvajfianottara 8:38, and Svaccha- | 

ohanam in Uttarasutra 2:39d. | 


C ahisostraprar 
nda 4:24c-25b. Cf. also manisos! 
Entering a subterranean world, however, may bea separate ee Ro 
as in Svacchanda 4:19b, where the world a question i = E 

instead kharostrarohanam calva... 1- 
ae nee S. asn i the eve of initiation because 
ma 


egative on 1 m 
they suggest an interest in this-worldly enjoyment. But 01 -massage 1 


266 


Nisvasatattuasampi: 


dreams seems long to have been considered an ill-omen in scc 
texts: among his other dreams that augur ill, Bharata sees his sd 
covered in oil in Ramayana 2.63:10: er 


tatas tilodanam bhuktva punah punar adhahsirah 
tailenabhyaktasarvangas tailam evavagahata 


Aside from in the other tantras just mentioned, longer lists of good 
and bad dreams are to be found below in Uttarasütra 2:36. 


4:1-3b ‘Next I shall teach the excellent liberation-mandala, upon Seeing 


which [any] creature is released from all the bonds that bind bound 
souls. [It may be] round or square; it bestows as fruit all that one 
may desire. One should draw it [in a size] according to one's wishes, 
starting from one cubit [across]. [When] square it should have four 
gateways and it should be adorned in the middle with a lotus? 


The first verse here is parallel with the first verse in the fourth chapter 
of the Matasara (f. 26r-26v): 


athatah sampravaksyami mamdalam devapujitam 
yam drstvà mucyate devi aSesapasubandhanat 


The half-verse 4:2cd recurs verbatim in the Guhyasutra, but surround- 
ed by prose, at the end of the unit 14:6. 


It is odd that our mandala should be described as à muktimandala 
when what is about to be described is the vidyadiksa and it is odder 
still given that no further mention is made of the mandala in e. 
description. We have tentatively assumed that the mam ala T 
be taught at this point because its use is implicit for the कह or 
the initiand’s “chosen mantra” (istamantra), which is to be DS” note 
empowering the water for the concluding bath: see 4:17 and our 


th ; 
ereon "P. 


Another conceivable possibility is that the procedure ef p later 
post-initiatory name (diksanaman) that is so Mee casting 2 
Sources and that typically involved the blindfolded initian ready fol 
flower upon the mandala (see prolegomena, pP- puff Mer. mukti 
lowed, even though it is not explicitly prescribed, and tha t ives 
mandala just happens to be the only hint of it that E already ® 
us, perhaps because the procedure was considered to ०० gr 
well-known. But this does seem unlikely, for, al 


655 
5 C mpr 
sutra account of every ritual action is indeed extremely 


0 


4:4C-5 ‘According to the instruction 


Translation of the Mülasütra 


267 


and omits so many details that it could not be followed by someone 
who did not already have an idea of what was intended and who was 
therefore ready to add in whatever elements were alluded to without 
being described, the later sütras of the १८४०७८ too, which all reprise 


the pair of initiations taught in the Muülasütra, also make no allusion 
to this procedure of name-selection. 


As for the element mukti in the name of the mandala, perhaps this 
is used primarily or partly because the same mandala is used in the 
nirvanadiksa. 

Round mandalas are not common, and, as we shall see, this option 
appears at once to be forgotten in what immediately follows. (It is 
taken up again, however, in Uttarasütra 3:10, where it is clear that the 
round mandala is based upon the square one.) The description of the 
drawing of the mandala in this chapter is strikingly simple compared 
with later accounts, and this simplicity could perhaps be considered 
as a mark of its antiquity; but the fact that so many options are 
mentioned plainly suggests that, although the Mülasutra may give the 
earliest tantric account known to us of the drawing of a mandala, it 
certainly was not the first. 


4:3c—4b ‘He should draw the tattva-mandala with three or five [coloured] 


lines [enclosing the lotus]. The three-lined [mandala] should be [drawn] 

with three colours; the five-coloured with five lines.’ 

Once again, the element tattva presumably designates the müla- 

mantra, or perhaps the most important of its eight forms, the NAVAT- 

MAN or KANTHAUSTHYA (raised in 6:14-15). For the colours, cf. 

Uttarasütra 3:15. Presumably the lines should go round the outer 

edge of the mandala 

s taught earlier he should worship God 

in the centre. In the second [circuit (avarane)] he should worship the 

Vidyegvaras, in the third the Lokapalas, in the fourth their weapons, 
, 

in due order, using incense and flowers. 

The “instructions taught earlier” are presumably those Lc 

The circuits are the same as those of Mülasutra 2:9; "E rr. 

they are numbered, and here the use of dvitiye s e Vi es tage 

suggests that the Brahmamantras and perhaps also eee: 

might have been considered as forming 8 first Inner : 


" Nisvasatattvasamhitz 


4:6 ‘After thus worshipping them according to the rules, he should close the 

door|s of the mandala] (dvaram) with the weapon-mantra. He should 
[then] make (krtva) the fire into Siva (Sivatmakam) according to the 
instructions given above. 
Instead of dvaram, the restitution of K, one could consider puram, 1.6. 
the mandala. In that case, this instruction could mean “he should sea] 
the mandala [but for the Western door)”. Cf., e.g., Uttarasütra 3:8 (and 
our note on 3:8c-9) and Somasambhupaddhati SP4, 2:118cd: praviset 
pascimadvarac chegadvarani ghattayet. But such an instruction would 
usually be given at the beginning of a sequence of worship and not after 
its conclusion. Here, perhaps, we have the instruction to "close" the 
whole mandala, or the door to it, because worship in the mandala has 
been completed. The expression "instructions given above" refers here 
to chapter 3. 


4:7 ‘Supreme Siva has two states: beyond mantra, and mantra. And the 
soul is held to be twofold: he whose nature/body is mantra (mantrat- 
ma), and he who is [merely] sentient. 


This verse, which has the air of a parenthetical aside or interpolation, 
is difficult to interpret because it presents a categorisation of Siva and 
of the soul that our text appears not to make use of elsewhere and 
that we have found little used in other tantras. 


The first half of the verse is to be found in the middle of chapter 4 of 
the Matasara (f. 31v), where, in the light of what precedes, one might 
expect accusatives, except that, as in our context, it has the air of an 
explicatory aside, as does the half-line that follows it: 


dhyayed devadevesam pranatartivinasganam 
mantratita§ ca mantras ca dvidhavasthah parah Sivah 
bharanad bhairavah prokto na punar bhisanakrteh 


® mantratitas ca] conj. mantratitam sva? MS e parah ] em para 
MS ० "krteh | conj. VASUDEVA; °krtih MS 


A chapter of the Nisvasakarika transmitted in both T.17 and T. at 
as the 42nd patala of the jiianakanda offers an interpretation of bot 
statements in this verse, and it is not impossible that that choma 
conveys something of what was intended. There the two states of k 
va appear to be equated with niskala and sakala ( 42:10-11) and 


Translation of the Mülasütra 6 
209 


cetanatma refers to the ordinary 


powerless pasu, whereas 2d 
mà refers to the empowered soul : the mantrat- 


who has armed hi i 

(42:26c-32). (In 42:27c and 29a we should Da RE 
ing to sannaddhadehasya.) A rough edition of the chapter based on 
the two surviving sources is reproduced in Appendix III. 

Instead of the above interpretation of the second half of the verse, one 
might instead see here an adumbration or unfamiliar osten of 
the classical doctrine that the seven crore mantras are individual souls 
who are close to full liberation (see, e.g., Parakhya 3:57). According 
to this reading, mantratma would refer to individual souls who have 
been liberated up to the level of becoming mantras and cetanatma 
would refer to embodied souls in need of liberation, such as ourselves. 


The Sarvajnanottara too gives an analysis of the term mantratman, 
but as part of a sixfold classification of the soul (30:2 [-Ez 2:4]): 


bhutatma hy antaratma ca tattvatma jivasamjüitah 
mantratma paramatma ca tasmat parataram na hi 


(The classification is repeated in 31:28 [=Ey 2:112; Ep 7:5c-6b].) In 
explanation, the text teaches a modified pranava that is inflected for 
each tattva (31:5-5 [=Er 2:98-99, Ep 6:5-6): 


yasya yasya hi tattvasya ādimam tu yad akşaram 
sastham trayodaśāntam ca tasmims tasmin niyojayet 5 
tam tu mantram vijaniyat sarvatattvatmakam param 
bindunalankrtam mürdhni sarvakamaphalapradam 6 


Taking the first letter of [the name of] each tattva he should join 
to it the sixth [vowel, viz. U] and the one following the thirteenth[, 
namely AU]. One should know that this is the supreme mantra 
that is the nature of all the tattvas. It should be adorned with 
the dot [of the anusvara] on its head. It bestows the fruits of all 
desires. 


] : ites 
The Sarvajñānottara further explains that one is to "e nne 
With this mantra, and then makes this unclear RAT. re 
tended to define the soul who is mantratman (31:14 [-Er 2:107, 


6:14]): 
; =evavacakabhedatah 
yo yasyaiva bhaven mantro mem smrtah 14 


sthülasüksmaparah so hi mantratma 


" Niśvāsatattvasamhitz 
This is perhaps intended to mean that the mantrātman is one who 
truly possesses the modified pranava that, as we learnt in 37:60, is 
held to be the nature of all tattvas. Such a soul would in other words 
be a practitioner who identifies with his mantra (31:18ab [-E,, 2:111]; 
yam eva sadhayen mantram tam atmanam prakalpayet) in such a wey 
as to become one with it (31:29cd [=Er 2:122cd, Ep 7:6ab]): 


mantratma mantramayo hy antaratma giranvitah 29 


e mantramayo hy antara? | conj.; mantramayo jiieyo hy antara? E,. (un- 
metrical); mantram yo jiieyo hy antara” T. 334 (unmetrical); mantrayo- 
gena antara? Ep 


Such an interpretation might then after all not be far from what we 
find in Nisvasakarika 42. 


4:8 ‘For him [viz. the merely “sentient” soul] the rite of initiation must be 
[performed]: after one has installed the womb in the middle of the 
fire, one should cast Siva's [seminal] emission there, while visualising 
(dhyatva) the sadhaka [i.e. the initiand] to be in [Siva’s] penis.’ 
Unless 4:7 was an early interpolation, the tasya must always have 
been intended to refer back to one or other of the two types of soul 
and we have assumed that it refers to the cetanatman. As the first 
step in initiation, the neophyte must be born anew in the fire. Hence 
the womb, which presumably refers to VAGIÓI (whose mantra is raised 
in Mülasutra 6:17ab), is here placed in the fire, then the semen (the 
mantra of which we know, from 6:16d, to be HAH) 


The parallelism with Vedic upanayana is no doubt deliberate: in UP. 
anayana there is rebirth through the Veda; here the rebirth is in Vagish 
a Saiva ectype of Sarasvati, and thus symbolic of Saiva scripture. 


For the expression Sivotsarga we know of only one parallel, in ihe 
fifth chapter of the Matasara, which describes eight pots to be use d 
for a consecration as requiring to be "filled with Siva’s 01 

decorated with banana-leaves”: Sivotsargasahitam kadalidalasobhita? 


(E 427). Nothing in the immediate context makes clear what exactly 
1S Meant. 


If we retain the reading linge, then it seems that he should visus 
the semen as being first inside the penis; but one could instead per 
to dhyatva lingam tu sādhakah “the sādhaka should [at the j 
time(?)] meditate upon the mp 


Translation of the Mülasütra 


4:9 ' 


4:10 


ल es एर गळ a the appearance of TAK 3, the verse numeration S 
anjunath BHAT’s edition in progress of Aghorasiva’s comme 


271 


[The rite to be performed at] conception (garbhadhanam), [the rite 
ensuring] the conception of a male, [the rite of] parting [the mother’s] 
hair, the rite [performed immediately] upon birth, [the rite of] taking 


[the child] out [to see sun and moon], and [the rites of] i ; 
[solid food], and [making] the topknot? | ] naming, eating 


Here follow the life-cycle rites that are to be in some symbolic way 
performed, presumably by oblations into the fire, for the initiand who 
has now been caused to be "reborn" in the fire. A verb with the sense 
"he should perform" must be supplied. 


Taking the child out to see the sun and moon (niskramana), which 
unusually appears here before *naming", is sometimes dropped from 
the list of brahminical samskaras (in Saiva works it is not normally 
included, for instance, among the samskaras performed for the fire 
before it receives offerings, an exception being in Netratantra 3:53, 
where it again precedes “naming”), but it is included in a handful 
of Saiva works among samskaras that are to be performed for the 
initiand in the course of initiation (see TAK 3, s.v. niskrama), and 
in one of those passages it appears in the same surprising sequence, 
namely before the naming ceremony (Sarvajnanottara 10:42?!?): 


garbhadhanam pumsavanam simantonnayanam tatha 
upaniskramanam nama annapraSanam eva ca 


‘Girdle, black-buck-skin, garments, the purifying [yajñopavīta], the 
bearing of a stick, [the manner of performing] sandhya-worship and 
recitation, and oblations, as well as the triple body-mark [of ash to be 
worn on various parts of the body, beginning with the forehead], the 
formal greeting (abhivadanam). 


This verse records the things to be given on the य Sead 
anayana and the vrata of brahmacarya. The mention of SE 
is presumably made because brahmin boys may be Eas qum = = 
receive upanayana, but must always be clothed after it. e Ei ; 
sumed that pavitra refers here to the yajnasutra, but it z re dx 
also conceivable that pavitra might have been intended = Pa e 
ring of darbha looped round a finger, which would then be ? cise: 
given to the brahmacarin for the ritual occasion of pes ह 
example for the sake of expiating errors in pO 

been adjusted in line with 
tary on this chapter. 


272 Nisvasatattvasampis i 
than something with which he would be I for the period of his 
brahmacarya. One could take sandhyajapan as two words, the second 
referring to instructions about the repetition of the GAYATRI, but this 
is a part of sandhyavandana, so one compound is no less logica], As 
for abhivadana, it presumably refers to the salutation that is given in 


the next verse. 


‘Vyomavyapin is my father; VageSi is my mother; I am the child Sadyo- 
jata. [In this way] he should formally greet the one who is in the fire 
[viz. Siva?]: 

The use of the name vyomavyapi here is odd, for vyomavyapin is not 
typically used as a name for Siva, and the Mülasütra nowhere else 
mentions vyomavyapin, since its mantra-system is a bija-type one. As 
for sadyojatah, it may also not be intended as a name here, but simply 
as a description of the initiand as ‘newly born. We have the same 
interpretative problem when this part of the ritual is briefly recalled 
in Mülasutra 6:17cd below. A parallel is to be found in Vairocana's 
Pratisthalaksanasa@rasamuccaya 2:43, and this arguably suggests that 
sadyojatah should not be treated as a name: 


e 
kd 
Hi 


vagisi jananī yasya vyomavyāpī pita Sivahvagisr 
mantraih śivādhvare jatah sa śūdrah syat katham punah” 


How can he again become a Sudra, he whose mother is Vagisi, 
whose father is Vyomavyapin, [and] who has been [re-]born, by 
means of mantras, in a Siva-sacrifice? 


It is possible that we should take the final m of agnistham as 8 mean- 
ingless glide-consonant that has been introduced to obviate 8 hiatus. 
This would enable us to understand agnistha as & nominative, w 
could then agree with the initiand, who has just been born á t $ 
fire: “situated in the fire, he [viz. the initiand] should greet ims 
( This could be imagined by the initiating priest; otherwise, the = 
m might really speak, but while imagining himself to be in 
re. 
412ab ‘He should greet, his guru in this way and, once he has abandoned 
his observance [of brahmacaryà], [the guru] should cause him to 58 


St no भा EA 5 p gan apre 
kasa m Pack A 255 with tv iti for punah, in the Sivagamadimahatmba of another 
À : P- 35) with attributi TAG a, appa: 
name for Vairocana’s work. ibution to the Jrianalaksanasamuccag?, 


Translation of the Mulasutra 
273 


This is perhaps more likely to be restatement of 4:11d (which is further 
support for understanding agnistha there as a nominative), but if it is 
not, and if the greeting in 4:11d was directed at Siva in if fire, then 
we could interpret 4:122 to mean: “He should greet his statis 
in the same way.” One might expect the abhivadana to be addressed 
first to the parents (first mother, then father), but the salutation in- 
cludes statements about who the parents are (rather than about gotra, 


pravara, etc.), so perhaps we should not understand gurum to mean 
"father". 


Here we assume that the initial conjunct of snapayet does not lengthen 
the preceding vowel. After this bath, he is a snataka. 


4:12cd ‘After bathing [at the end of his brahmacarya], he should marry 
Jnanasiddhikumarika as his wife 
After the formal salutation of the guru and the ritual bath, both of 
which mark the completion of the vrata (presumably of brahmacarya), 
the reborn initiand marries Jüanasiddhikumarika, whose mantra is 
raised in 6:18. This marriage is not widely found in subsequent Saiva 
literature. One might assume it to have been edited out of the part 
of the Svacchanda in which we would expect to find it, for it survives 
only in this form in the KSTS edition (10:397ab): snata udvahayed 
bhàryàm jüanasiddhah kumarikam. Ksemaraja, furthermore, com- 
ments on jfianasiddhah and passes over kumarikam without comment. 
The passage in question follows not far after the Suddhi of various life- 
cycle rites (10:386cff) in the middle of the purification of Bhürloka. In 
the Nepalese text, however, the name has not been corrupted in this 
fashion, for we read there (NGMPP B 28/18, f. 98r): 


snatako [’Jdvahayed bharyam jüanasiddhikumarikam 
krtvà darbhamayim patnin taya saha yajet kratum 


[As one who has] bathed after completing Vedic studies, he should 
marry Jüanasiddhikumarika as his wife: having made a wife of 
darbha-grass, he should perform sacrifice[s] with her. 


The same verse is to be found as Tantrasadbhava 10:432c-433b (with 
jfianasiddhakumarikam in DYCZKOWSKI's e-text). 


i i iévasakarika, and in the 
i i tioned also in the Nisvasakarika, and ı 
Mes कर तरा headed with this question of 


expected context, namely in a chapter 


Ni$va. } 
" vVasatattvasamhits 


the goddess (T.17, P- 469 and T.127, p. 365):?4 


bhagavaii chrotum icchami adhivasanam uttamam 
carukañ ca mahadeva dantadhavanam eva ca 
mantrabodhavidhanan ca bhagavan kathayasva me 


The passage in question (T. 17, pp. 482 and T. 127, p. 371) reads: 


evam püjya yatha nyayam tato diksam samacaret 
patnisamyojanam kuryat jnanasiddhikumarikam 62 
tayà saha yajed yajüam patnya-m-asasahasrakam 
vidyadiksasamaptau tu sadhakah sa vidhiyate 63 


62d ° kumarikam] conj; ° kramaritam 17; ° kumaritam 127 63b 
patnya-m-asasahasrakam | 127; patyamasasahasrakam 17. 


Having thus worshipped in accordance with the rules, he should 
then perform the initiation. He should join [the initiand] with a 
“wife”, [namely] Jianasiddhikumarika. With her he [the initiand] 
should [symbolically] perform sacrifice[s] up to the *thousand-fold". 
At the conclusion of the vidyadiksa, [the initiand] is taught to be 
a sadhaka. 


For the so-called “thousand-fold”, see the next note. 


4:13ab "Together with her he should perform sacrifices, beginning with Me 
[smarta ones called the] pakayajiias and ending with [the group gi 
Vedic rites known here as] the 8811851105. 


In conjecturing pakadyam, we assume that the final anusvara may 
have replaced the final n of the masculine accusative plural even be 
fore a vowel. The initial v could perhaps have been retained, but ast 
euphonic glide, for và seems not to make sense either as the conjunt 
tion Or as part of a name of a sacrifice. Furthermore, the Diksottara, 
in the slightly different context of causing the initiand to be rebot” 
first as a brahmin, in the course of §odhana in every level of the E 
verse, gives a list of sacrifices beginning with various types of CIO it 
or pàka-) yajña and ending with a group of ten sacrifices that 9107 


a १ = ८ because 
he chapter is numbered 45 in T. 17 and 47 in T. 127 (but this may simply 9» Sir 


text i ing i 4 हि i 
xt including intervening chapter-colophons is missing) and is not transmitted ! 


Translation of the Mulasitra 
275 


seems, referred to as the asahasra yajfia, the "up-to-a-thousand sacri- 
fice" (18:172-188?'5 in T. 17, pp. 1122-5, T.127, pp.165-6, and T. 150, 
pp. 189-91): 


brahmatve yojayitva tu kuryat samskarakarmani 
garbhadhanam pumsavanam simantam jatakarmani 172 
nama niskramanafi caiva annapràsanam eva ca 
cudopanayanafi caiva vratabandham tathaiva ca 173 
mekhala dantakasthaii ca ajinafi ca triyayusam 
sandhyayagner upasam ca vratàni punar eva tu 174 
bhütesam paSupatyaii ca ganam caiva trtiyakam 
gane$varam caturthan tu unmattam casidharakam 175 
saptamam tu ghrte$am tu apürvena prakirtitah 
aistikam parvikam caiva bhautikam saumikam tatha 176 
vedavratah samakhyatas catvaro hy anupürvasah 
godanan tu tatah krtva panisamyojanam tatha 177 
astakah parvani $raddham Sravany agrayani tatha 
caitri caSvayuji caiva pakayajnah prakirtitah 178 
adheyan cāgnihotrañ ca darśañ caiva tatah punah 
paurnamasiti vijüeya sautramani tatah param 179 
haviryajüà smrta hy ete jüatavyas tu yathakramam 
agnistomo "tyagnistomam ukthyo yajnas trtryakah 180 
caturthi sodas jñeyā vajapeyo ‘tha pañcamah 
triratram sastham ity uktam aptoryamas ca saptamah 181 
somasamsthah samakhyatah sapta caiva kramena tu 
hiranyapadah prathamo hiranyaguhyam atah param 182 
hiranyamedhram trtiyan tu hiranyapanis caturthakam 
hiranyagarbhas tatha proktah paticamah paramesvari 183 
hiranyasrotram tatha devi sastham etat prakirtitam 
hiranyatvak samakhyatam hiranyaksam tathastamam 184 
hiranyajihvo navamo dasamo ‘tha hiranyadhrk in 
Tàsahasrasya yajñasya dasa yajñāh parah smrta: 185 
ekaikaparivaras tu Satena parivaritah] 
dasayajüoparistat tu a$vamedhan tu homayet 186 
evam grhastho bhavati vanaprasthas tatha punah 
parivrajyam tato yojya antyestin tu tato hunet 187 
antyestin tu tato hutva ürdhvam krtva tu yojayet 
puryastakasamayuktam pascat tattveşu yojayet 188 

"Uh numbering is that of T-17; in T. 150 the passage is also in Diksottara 18, but in 


T.127 it appears before a colophon to the 11th patala of the Niévasakarika. 


RES 


216 


Nisvāsatattvasamhitz 


172cd ] 17; 0m. 125, 150 »r3ob caiva annan] em.; caivanna? > 173cd 
17, 150; cü U 127 173d vrata? | 150; vrta? 17 174a mekhala dantakastham 
ca] 17, 150; U 127 174b triyayusam | 17, 127; tridhayusam 150 174० sang. 
hyayagnerupasam ca] conj. (cf. Svacchanda 10:390a); LI magnirüpasaica 17; 
sandhyayam nirupasam ca 127; sandhyayam nirupasyam ca 150 175b ganam 
caiva trtiyakam | 150; ganas caiva trtiyakam 17; gana L 127 175d unmattam 
casidharakam ] conj. (cf. Svacchanda 10:391); uttamaü cadhisasakam m 
uttamam cadhivasakam 127, 150 176a saptamam tu ghrtegam tu] conj.; 
saptam U 17; saptamam tu ghrteSastu 127, 150 176c aistikam parvikam | 
conj. (cf. Svacchanda 10:395a); aistikam darthakaii 17; aistikandarthikam 
127; aistikam darthikafi 150 177a veda? | conj.; deva? X 177b catvaro ] 17, 
127; catvara 150 177८ godanan] 17, 150; U danam 127 177d pani? ] 127, 
150; patni” 17 178ab astakah parvani $raddham $ravany agrayani tatha ] 
conj; astakaparvanisraddham $ravanya$rayani tatha 17; astakapa U 127; 
astaka parvanisraddham $ravanyam grhini tatha 150 178d caitri ca$vayuji 
caiva ] 17; U 127; caitri ca$vayugaá caiva 150 179cd vijfieya sautramant | 17; 
vi U ni 127; vikhyata U | gramani 150 180cd agnistomo ’tyagnistomam ukthyo 
yajüas trtlyakah ] conj.; agnistomotyagnistomamuthya yajnastrtiyakah 17; 
agnisto’tyagnistomamarthyayajfias trtiyakam 127; agnistomo tyagnistomam 
arthayajfiastrtiyakam 150 181९ triratram sastham ity uktam] 17, 150; 
trira U ty uktam 127 181d aptoryamaá ca] conj. aptoryaman ca 17; 
aptoryama$ ca 127; aptoryamas tu 150 182a somasamsthah samakhyatah | 
17; Somasamstha samakhyata 127; somasamstha samakhyatah 150 182b] 
17, 150; L| 127 182cd hiranyap&dah prathamo hiranyaguhyam atah] 
17, 150; U tah 127 183a hiranyamedhram ] 17, 150; hiranyamedhra 127 
183b caturthakam ] 17, 150; caturthakah 127 183cd proktah paficamah 
Paramesvari] em.; prokta paficamah parameévari 17; proktà pafica U 127; 
proktah paiicamah parameévari 150 184a °Srotram] 17, 150; “srotam 
127 184c "tvak] 17, 150; °tvat 127 184d hiranyaksam tathastamam] 
1T; hiramyatvam tathastakam 127; hiranyaksam tathastakam 150 pe 
navamo da$amo "tha hiranyadhrk ] 17; navamo LI tha hiranyayuk 127; M 
LI tha hiranya yut 150 185d yajñāh parah smrtah ] 17; yajña U के, 
yajnaparasmrtah 150 186a ekaikaparivaras tu] 150; ekais tu Peri 
U stha we £t cate [ sry daya 7150 2878 eram Er peu 150; 
re 1 127; evam grhastho bhavati 150 187b vanap 8800] 1^ 
1.17, 127 188a antyestin tu ] 17; L1 127; L n tu 150 > 
127; om. 150 


Translation of the Mülasütra nes 
Unfortunately, the crucial part of this, 185c-186b, is not clear. Now 
the whole passage has been adapted to become Svacchanda 10:386f, 


where the portion that corresponds to the cruxed lines in the KSTS 
edition reads (Svacchanda 10:406c-407b): 


Satena tu ghrtam catra ekaikam tu vijayate 
ete sarve sahasrena Suddhyante saptatrimáakah 


We may interpret this, with the help of Ksemaraja’s remarks, to mean 
that the just listed ten rites, beginning with hiranyapada, form a unit 
and that each is to be accomplished now for the initiand by a hundred 
oblations of ghee, in other words by a total of a thousand oblations, 
whence the name Sahasrika: 


Each of these [above ten] comes into being (?) by one hundred 
[oblations of(?)] ghee. [Thus] all of them are purified [for the ini- 
tiand] by a thousand [oblations in total]. [This group of ten is the] 
thirty-seventh [in this list of rites]. 


The Nepalese text of the Svacchanda, however, suggests something 
closer to what we have seen above, for in place of ghrta we find there 
vrta, an echo of the Diksottara’s parivarita (NGMPP B 28/18, f. 98v): 


Satena tu vrta hy ete ekaikas tu vijanata 
etaih sarvaih sahasro pi Sudhyate saptatrimsati 


Know [that] (vijanata?) these are each (ekaikas for ekaikas?) sur- 
rounded by a hundred [other sacrifices (?)]. With all of those [being 
accomplished], the “thousand” is also accomplished. [This forms 
the] thirty-seventh [in this list]. 


But the different versions are not irreconcilable: in each we have a 
list of ten sacrifices that can in some way be counted as just one 
group of a thousand called “thousand”. Ksemaraja Co Me 
ndatantroddyota ad 10:404c-400b) that the ten ars Eo Er. d 
because they all involve the construction of pyres of special m ds xs 
the placing of gold upon the body-parts that give pi mi 
(ete paksyadyakara agnicityavisesa yesam exis win ( ल. 
diyate) and he gives them the collective name cbe. pe 
ndatantroddyota ad 10:407ab: sa eva pup त uis AR 
pàdadiá cityayajfiah). We have not been able to find thi 

list of ten sacrifices used elsewhere. 


278 Nisvasatattvasamhi¢a 
There is, however, a further parallel for a list of vaidika rites culmi- 
nating in a sacrifice whose name involves the element sahasra in the 
initiation for a samayin that is described in Suayambhuvasitrasangrahg 
13 (the colophon of which calls it the samayasamskara). There, after 
the laying on of the Sivahasta (13:11) various life-cycle rites are per- 
formed, apparently upon the initiand (though this detail is not made 
clear), followed by the pakayajnas and somayajnias (13:19-2 2): 


pàkayajüam haviryajnam somasamstham tatah Sanaih 
ekadvitrigunenaiva karayed dhomakarmana 19 

tatas tv audumbare patre mantrasampatasamskrtam 
payayet somam acaryah krtam gandhodakena va 20 
asahasrasamaptyartham homam krtva Sivadibhih 
purnahutim tato dadyan nayanayavikalpitam 21 

tato ‘nenaiva vidhina kratuprastavadaksinam 

nirhrtya nirhared enam vanaprasthasramantaram 22 


e 19ab pakayajriam haviryajtiam somasamstham | conj.; pakayajfio havi- 
ryajüah somasamstha N; pakayajfiam haviryajfiam somasamstham E" 
e 19c ekadvitri?] E^; ekadvistri° N e 20b ?pàta?] N; °piita’ E^ 
० 2000 *caryah krtam | N; °caryo ghrta? EM e 22c nirhrtya nirhared 
enam | EM; nirhatya nirhared evam N 


Whereas the Ni$vasakarika and the Svacchanda add the (seemingly 
irrelevant) a$vamedha, the Svayambhuvasütrasarigraha here, like our 
passage, has the sequence of vaidika sacrifices end with “the thousand”. 
Cf. also Uttarasütra 3:20. 


4:13cd [There should then follow] austerities [in the forest] (tapasyam), 
renunciation (parivrajyam), purification and sprinkling’ 


We have assumed that tapasya refers to vanaprastha (cf. Uttarasutra 
3:20) - With Sodhana we move out of the vaidika domain into the PIS 
liminaries of Saiva diksa; but what is it that should be purified? Out 
of the five purifications often enumerated in later literature (atmasu 3 
dhi, sthanasuddhi, dravyasuddhi, mantrasuddhi and lingasuddhi 15 
TAK 3 s.v. dravyasuddhi and paficaguddhi) it is presumably the nt 
(also called bhütasuddhi or dehasuddhi) that seems the most rele 
nae Ds might then be a yogic or mental process of purificatio® r 
the initiand performed by the guru (or by the initiand himse if? ash 
Some externa] purificatory act such as touching the disciple with 


८ ed. 
or darbha-grass. But perhaps other purifications might De 


Translation of the Mulasitra 


4:14 


279 


E "E we rather understand “ the purifying sprinkling [of the ini- 
“[Then follow] the superimposition [of mantras onto the hand of the 
acarya? [onto the body of the initiand?], the laying hold of the disciple 
(alabhanam/ alambhanam), the [laying of the guru's] Siva-hand [upon 
the head of the initiand], and the cutting of the [thread embodying 
the] bonds. All these [acts] he should perform using the five brahma- 
mantras.’ 


We have assumed that the hypermetry of 14b is authorial. As our 
translation reveals, we are not certain about what is intended by 
nyasam and alabhanam/ alambhanam. (There is a dot floating above 
the line which, if interpreted as an anusvara, would give us alamb- 
hanan, but neither of the apographs follow this.) Cf. Vinasikhatantra 
76-77 for the combination of nyasa and alabhana in a different con- 
text: 


dharanayogamargena nirdahet sadhakottamah 

deham sam$odhayen mantri ghorapapam tu kalmasam 
nyasam alabhanam kuryad bhaven mantratmavigrahah 
digbandhabhümim samsodhya cakraguddhyartham eva ca 


GOUDRIAAN (1985:106-107) translates as follows: 


the excellent practiser should execute the combustion [of his 
body] by the method of yoga of sustained concentration. The pos- 
sessor of mantras should cleanse his body [and remove] the stain 
of horrible evil. If he performs the assignment [of divine powers] 
by touching, he obtains a body the essence of which is mantra. 
Having purified the site which was [protected] by a digbandha, in 
order to realize purification of the mandala, .. 


he striking of the dis- 


It is possible that alambhanam might refer to t 
but tadana occurs in 


ciple (tadana) with a mantra-empowered flower, 
the immediately following verse. 


Sivahastam refers to the guru’s laying of 
pal mantras have been installed, on the 
to have been the defining moment in Laku 
the Niévasamukha (see SANDERSON 2006:1 | 
er Saiddhantika texts the culminating moment 1 
the samayadiksa, which introduces neophytes int 


his hand, on which the princi- 
initiand's head. This appears 
la initiation as described in 
88-190) and became in lat- 
n the first initiation, 
o the religion and 


280 


Nisvasatattvasambirs 


obliges them to follows its rules (samaya) but does not confer libera. 
tion, for which another initiation, nirvanadiksa, is required. But the 
scheme followed here in the Nigvasa is evidently not this standardised 
scheme that we find, for instance, in the Somasambhupaddhati: here 
we have instead first a vidyadiksa and then, as we shall see in chap- 
ter 5, a muktidiksa. The same pair of initiations is taught for other 
mantra-systems later in the text: Uttarasutra 3:22, Guhyasitro 4:3, 
9:202, 11:28 (quoted below in this note), 17:21-2. If the vidyadiksa 
corresponds to the samayadiksa, it does not end where we would ex- 
pect it to end, namely with the sivahasta, but continues beyond it with 
the cutting of the thread, pasakrntana. In later accounts of salvific 
initiation, the thread is cut, segment by segment (each segment repre- 
senting a tranche of the universe), and oblated; but such detail is not 
given here, and it is possible that it is cut off all at once and oblated 
in the fire (chindayet pasam hutva...). 


The term vidyadiksa is not much used outside the sutras of the 
Nisvasa, even in the texts closely influenced by them (Nisvasakarika, 
Svacchanda, Tantrasadbhava). What is clear is that it is not a purely 
mental operation and that it is therefore not equivalent to what in 
later works may be called jiianadiksa. According to Ksemaraja (Sva- 
cchandatantroddyota ad 4:483cd: sadhakasyabhiseko’yam vidyadiksa- 
ta uttarah), this initiation is preliminary to an abhiseka to become 
a sadhaka and is so-called because vidya refers to the sakalamantra 
(vidya sakalamantras tatkrtà vidyatmakasadasivapadayojanatma $iva- 
padayojanad anantarabhavini ya diksa, tata uttarah sadhakasyayam 
itidanim eva kathyamanaprakaro 'bhisekah karyah). We think that 
Ksemaraja is right to associate the vidyadiksa with qualification for 
sadhana, but that his notions of the sequence of the rites involved for 
becoming a sadhaka may not be what the redactor of the Svacchanda 


intended, who may rather have had in mind the initiation-structure ° 
the Ni$vasa. 


In the Nigsvasakarika the term vidyadiksa appears only to occur d 
the passage quoted above in our note on 4:12, where it appears m n 
stated to be the rite which makes one a sadhaka. Now it is E d to 
We often see the term sadhaka used in the old sütras of the NU re 
refer to all those who have been initiated into the cult and that € 
15 no evidence for a hierarchy of initiates that distinguishes 12% 8 
Samayins, Putrakas and sadhakas. But that is perhaps beran 
Initiates at this period were indeed sadhakas, in the sense that 


Translation of the Mülasütra 281 


the entry-level initiation qualified initiates for mantrasadhana. 


In other words, it now seems to us that vidyadiksa is indeed intended 
to be a preliminary initiation and so to correspond to the later samaya- 
diksa, but it is clearly also at the same time a qualification for sadhana. 
As we shall see, this vidyadiksa is followed in 4४7०-18 with a list of 
things that one should know before beginning religious practice in 
the pursuit of siddhi (Mulasitra 18ef: ...buddhva tu tatah sadhanam 
arabhet), and this enumeration of topics, arguably, corresponds with 
the teaching of the rules of the cult (samaya) that might normally 
follow a samayadiksa. And yet the list of topics that must be known 
appears not to be a list of samayas, whose existence is not mentioned 
until the prayer to Candiga at the end of the muktidiksa (Mülasütra 
5:24). It seems clear from that list, and from other evidence, that 
the vidyadiksa is therefore not simply an initiation for the neophyte 
mumuksu, but a preliminary to the pursuit of siddhis for a bubhuksu, 
comparable therefore, at least in that respect, to what in the later 
tradition is known as the visesadiksa. 


Now the cutting and burning of the thread might seem less logical if 
the initiation is a non-salvific rite for neophytes, assuming that this is 
indeed the rite by which the initiand's karman for each birth at each 
level of the cosmos is magically expended. Such thread-burning would 
fit well, however, in an initiation for a bubhuksu, who would wish 
to have the way cleared for him to moksa but to delay the moment 
of reaching liberation in order to be able to experience other-worldly 
pleasures. This is consistent with the linking of the initiand's soul with 
the second highest level of the cosmos, that of the sakala deity, in 4:16 
below. It is perhaps surprising, though, that the cutting of the thread 
has not been described in any detail: no explicit connection has been 
made with the destruction of the initiand’s karman and the cosmos 
will not be mapped out until the muktidiksa of the next chapter. 


On the basis of such evidence as we have been able to find, we are 
inclined to think that the vidyadiksa is both an initiation for neophytes 
and at the same time an initiation for bubhuksus. We surmise that it 
because it confers mastery over mantras, Rr 
The second of the Nisvasa's 
as its name implies, an 
to be spelled out in 


gets its name, vidya-, 
in particular those that are magic spells. 
two initiations, the muktidiksa, is of course, 
initiation for the mumuksu. This idea seems 
Guhyasütra 11:28: 


: Nisvasatattvasamhite 


mantrasiddhiprada hy esa vidyadiksa prakirtita 
muktida viparita ca Siva sayojyadayika 


What remains uncertain, as we shall discuss below (opening note on 
Mülasütra 5), is whether these two initiations are both separate and 
parallel or whether a liberatory diksa always in fact follows a vidya- 


diksa. 


4:15-17b ‘He should cut the [thread embodying the] bonds using the Siva. 
mantra, and after oblating it in the fire [again with the mülamantra], 
he should offer a full oblation. The expert should perform the tapping 
and the cutting of the topknot [of the initiand] using the SIKHA. This, 
the vidyadiksa, bestows a linking with the sakala [level of the deity]. 
Once the vidyadiksa has been concluded, he should consecrate the sad- 
haka [by pouring water on him] from a pot that has been empowered 
by 108 repetitions of the chosen mantra.’ 


The act of tadana, usually the striking of the initiand by the acarya 
with a flower empowered with the ASTRA, is elsewhere used just before 
the soul is extracted from the body and installed on the thread (see 
TAK3, s.v. tadana). It is said to concentrate the soul in one place 
in the initiand’s body, thus enabling the acarya to lift it out (see 
Somasambhupaddhati SP3 2.3 and BRUNNER’s notes ad loc.) Here 
the pasasitra has been burnt in the fire, and the purified soul is now 
without embodiment, so perhaps the tadana here is for reinserting the 
purified soul in the body. It is not clear, however, how the acarya 
would catch hold of the soul to do this (by performing some sort of 
samharamudra over the fire perhaps?). It may instead be a subsidiary 
part (8788) of the rite of cutting the topknot, since it is apparently 
performed with the same mantra. 


Tic cutting of the initiand’s Sikha is elsewhere also a rite that b 
in a salvific liberation and, according to the Somaáambhupa 
(nirvanadiksavidhi 219) involves the SIVASTRA, but using scissor 
have had the §IKHA uttered over them: 


elongs 
ddhati 
5 that 


sikhamantritakartarya rodhasaktisvarüpinim 
Sikhàm chindyac chivastrena gisyasya caturangulam 


BRUNNER translates (SP3, p. 338): I 
oit ०००९९ 


Avec les ciseaux sur lesquels il a récité SIKHA, [le gur u] d ontrainte 


la Touffe du disciple, qui représente la Puissance ८९ E 


Translation of the Mülasütra 


283 


(Rodhasakti), en utilisant [comme mantra] l'Arme (Astra) de Siva 
Il en coupera quatre pouces... 


In Svayambhuvasütrasangraha 13; however, the cutting of the topknot 
is the culmination of the neophyte's initiation, taking place after the 
laying on of the sivahasta (the hand of the initiating acarya over which 
the brahmamantras have been laid) and the selection of the initiand's 
name by his casting a flower onto the mandala (quoted on p. 51 above). 
There is no mention there of the pasasütra, the place of which is ap- 
parently occupied by the topknot (Svayambhuvasütrasarigraha 13:11): 


homante tu sikham chittva dadyat pürn&hutim kramat 
Sivahastam anupraptah samayy evam ihocyate 


At the end of the homa, he should cut off the [disciple's] topknot 
[and offer it to the fire and] then, in due order, he should offer a 
full oblation. One who [as above described] has received the hand 
of Siva is called in this system a samayin. 


In the rite described in the Pasupata Samskaravidhi, the use of iron 
implements is explicitly ruled out in verse 87, and the topknot is rather 
to be “cut” (one wonders exactly how!) using the Sivahasta: 


tenaiva chindayed yatnac cchikham sadhakamürdhajam 
na lohair na nakhair vapi cchindyan notpatayet tatha 


This ACHARYA translates as follows (2007:47): 


He should cut off the topknot on the disciple's head with the same 
[hand]. He should not cut it off with iron tools or nails, or pluck 


it off. 


But the scissors, though not mentioned in our text, should perhaps 
nonetheless be assumed to be the instrument used, since REC 
among the things transmitted to the new acarya on the occasion of his 
abhiseka according to Mülasütra 8:13. 


One could assume that, given that cutting m is pP Ripon 
: ‘rvanadiksavidhi 22190), and ther : 
Mich c es Siva known in the commentaries 


the culminating rite of fusion with si ¥ dhati 
and in the paddhati-literature as the yo] anika Er 2 T 
SP3, nirvāņadīkşāvidhi 2218), in which the Ea ot and into his 
body through the flow of the breath, draws OS 


E Nisvāsatattvasamhitz 


person with the return of the breath, fuses it with his own soul, and 
then, as he exhales, raises them both up as one to be united with 
Siva. But in fact the bathing is performed with the sadhaka’s choses 
mantra, which shows that this is an abhiseka equipping the sa dhaka 
for pursuing his siddhi. 

This is therefore a statement about the level to which vidyadiksa raises 
the soul. As for the form of the word, yojya may therefore rather be a 
truncated form of sayojya (itself a widespread Prakritism for sayujya): 
cf. Guhyasütra 11:28, quoted in the previous note. 


The translation “chosen mantra” (istamantra) is deliberately ambigu- 
ous: who does the choosing? It is conceivable that the sadhaka might 
have expressed a preference for a particular mantra, but it is also pos- 
sible that one might have been chosen by the sadhaka by casting a 
flower on to the mandala, a device used in later tantras for selecting 
an initiatory name (see TAK3 s.v. diksanaman and puspaksepa). Per- 
haps we may infer therefore that the muktimandala, whose use in the 
vidyadiksa has not been otherwise explained or alluded to since its cre- 
ation was enjoined at the beginning of the chapter, was taught there 
because it is required for selecting the istamantra for this concluding 
bath. 


4:17c-18 ‘When he has correctly understood the places and times [suit- 
able for sadhana], who may assist him, [the characteristics of] the 
linga and of its pedestal, [how to perform] recitation, reparatory acts 
(prayascitta), [the characteristics of ] the telling beads, obstacles and 
affiliations (vighnaméah), [how to perform] fire-sacrifice, what may 
and may not be eaten, [the rules of] purity, [portents of] success and 
failure, [and] strengths and weaknesses, [the various specific] qus 
vances [from among which one must choose], then he may begin 178 
[mantra-]sadhana: 
We require a list of accusatives governed by buddhva and it is poate 
that we should therefore emend, for instance, to prayascittaksam सी 5 
ca vighnāmśām ca. We should understand “After thoroughly UP js 
standing about [appropriate] places and times, about the ritual n 
tant, the 1789, the altar, about recitation of mantras, about expan ' 


the rosary [..] he may begin the practice of seeking [powers] E i 
The ritual assistant (sahaya) figures elsewhere in the corpus Miti 
defined in Guhyasütra 3:3-6 (see appendix to TAK 3, SV- ८ 

sadhaka). With vighnàmáa we see various possibilities, 


Translation of the Muülasütra 
285 


chosen to take it as a dvandva re 
personality-types or partialities of 
length in Guhyasütra 1:9f (cf. also Kirana 30 on ama). As for 
bhaksabhaksam, it clearly refers to knowledge of what should and what 


should not be eaten, but should it be emended to bhaksyabhaksyam? 


The next item we may understand either by splitting tathagaucam or 
tatha Saucam. d 


ferring to obstacles and to the 
sadhakas that are described at 


The term vratani may refer both to the compulsory initial propitiation 
of the principal mantra known elsewhere (e.g. Guhyasütra 3:30) as the 
vidyavrata, as well as to numerous optional timed religious observances 
that may be undertaken after the completion of the vidyavrata. This 
is the model that might be suggested by Guhyasütra 3, in which 30ab 
tells us 


siddhavidyavratastho hi jape ca vratam arabhet 


Once he has completed the vidyavrata he may proceed to the 
japavrata (?). 


There then follow accounts of a mithyavrata (3:30c-31), a $masana- 
vrata (3:32ab), a ganavrata (3:32c-33b), a lostukavrata (3:33c-34b), 
a kasthavrata (3:34c-35b), a citravrata (3:35c-36b), a vīra- 
vrata (3:36c-37b), a mahavrata (3:37c-38b), and an asidharavrata 
(3:38c-40), without any mention of criteria for choosing between 
them. It is possible, however, that what Guhyasutra 3 instead means 
to teach is that any of those vratas might be chosen as one's vidya- 
vrata. Such a model is rather suggested by parallels elsewhere, such 
as chapter 10 of the Siddhayogesvarimata, which gives instructions for 
numerous options that all appear to satisfy the eee for a 
vidyavrata. Consider also, for example, this instruction from uhya- 
sūtra 10, a chapter devoted to magical rites to be accomplished with 
the VYOMAVYAPIN (10:92): 

devam püjyagnau juhuyad audumbarasamidhanam xL d d 

hasram trsandhyam. ksirasi sapta dinani juhuyat. cirnnavidya 

to bhavati. 


i f 

he should oblate a thousand pieces o 
oe eet substances]. Con- 
[in this manner] for 


Having worshipped the L | 
Udumbara-wood smeared with the three [SW 
suming [only] milk, he should make oblations 


286 


Nisvāsatattvasamhitz 


seven days. He will become one who has accomplished the vi dye 


vrata. 


And there are other passages that suggest that particular vratas are 
appropriate as preliminary propitiations for particular mantras. Such 
a notion presumably explains why chapter 9 of the Guhyasütra opens 
with Devi’s questions about how to obtain siddhi from the alphabet- 
as-mantra (MATRKA), which the Lord does indeed go on to explain, 
but not before recounting, without any explanation of why it might 
be relevant, a relatively detailed ardhanariSvaravrata, in which the 
sadhaka must dress as Ardhanariéa (9:3-12b). This seems only to 
make sense if the ardhanarisvaravrata is the recommended vidyavrata 
for rites involving the MATRKA. 


The Svayambhuvasitrasangraha (chapter 21) appears to teach a vrata 
to be performed by the acarya only (21:1-6), which it calls the acarya- 
vrata (Svayambhuvasitrasangraha 21:1ab: athacaryavratam Srestham 
cared acarya eva hi), and then a series of mantra-specific vratas that 
may be followed by the acarya or the sadhaka 


vratagrahanakale ca desikah sadhakas tatha 6 
abhisicyatmanatmanam anantavijaye tatah 
caren mantravratam mantri sadhyamantroktavartmana 7 


Now (ca) at the time of adopting a timed religious observance, 
the acarya or the sadhaka, having first himself consecrated himself 
in the Anantavijaya[-mandala], may then, as mantrin, practise 8 
mantra-specific observance, following the path taught for his cho- 
sen mantra. 


Confusingly, when the same text refers to the completion of the vidya 
vrata, it follows upon an account of a series of vratas specific to the 
vidyaügamantras, which makes the use of the term vidyavrata a 
biguous, since it could appear to refer just to the vidyanga-rel A 
observances, when it is more probably intended to refer whicheY 


Pw has been followed (Svayambhuvasütrasarigraha 21:38) ' 
48v): 


evam vidyavratasnatah sarvato 'dhikrto 'naghah 
Japen mantram anudvignah svakalpavidhina tatah 35 


० vidyavrata? ] N; vidyavratah Ed. 


Translation of the Mülasütra 


287 


Having bathed after thus completing his vidyavrata, being fully 
authorised, pure, he should then calmly recite the mantra following 
the rules of his own ritual manual. 


Other somewhat later Saiddhantika texts tend not to expound de- 
tailed vratas, with the notable exception of the Matariga (caryapada 
9, for which see SANDERSON 2006:2028). Although the Matariga 
makes having performed one's vidyavrata a prerequisite for being con- 
secrated as an acarya (kriyapada 10:3), it does not make absolutely 
explicit how this may be achieved, and Ramakantha (ad loc.) identifies 
the vidyavrata with the short series of instructions given in kriyapada 
10:4-6 rather than with the Atimarga-derived practices described in 
caryapada 9 (on which no commentary survives). The Sarvajrianottara 
tells us that the officiating guru in a pratistha must have performed his 
vidyavrata (19:3ab: cirnavidyavrato yogi gurudevagnipijakah), and it 
is clear from context that this must refer to the Sivavrata to which 
the preceding six-verse chapter is devoted. No vratas at all are de- 
tailed in the Kirana, in which the old notion of vratacarya has become 
supplanted by carya, conceived of as a body of rules of dress and be- 
haviour for initiates (Kirana 41), that may occasionally be referred to 
with the label vrata (Kirana 6:6). 


No firm conclusion to this digression about the evolution of vratas is 
possible, but it seems likely that in the period of the sutras of the 
Nisvasa each of the various vratas taught could be adopted as the 
vidyavrata, and that we should therefore not interpret vratani to mean 
‘[the vidyavrata and other optional] timed religious observances', but 
rather just ‘timed religious observances’. 


It remains for us to comment on the unit siddhyasiddhi balabalam. 
A similar term occurs in Guhyasütra 3:21cd: svapnamanavako de: 
vah kathet siddhibalabalam. In this passage, dream, personified as 
the deity Svapnamanavaka, reveals to the sleeping es कि 
Strengths and weaknesses in his mastery of supernatural B iui m 
Tantrasadbhava 9:41, the siddhyasiddhividhanajfiah appe ल A d 
used to mean one who can judge the potential for siddhi x र the 
and this accords with Svayambhuvasiitrasangraha 19:578, de E 
colours, smells, flames and sounds of fires are Me 
mine the same (19:57abc: agner varpamé ca gandhams e दया 
dams ca laksayet/ siddhyasiddhyor abhivyaktyai...). 


AN d 
it appears elsewhere to be used to refer to hierarchies of strength an 


288 


5:1-2 


Nisvasatattvasamhit= 


weakness of which one should be aware in quite 2 range of different 
things (e.g. vastubalabala in Matarigacaryapada 6:31; dravyab alābala 
in the Vāthula as quoted in Hrdayaśiva’s Prayascittasamuccaya [43:88 
in SATHYANARAYANAN's edition]; and cf. Diksottara 17:42cd on p. ion 
of T.17: evam balabalam jüatva atmanasya parasya va), and so it iş 
perhaps more general than siddhyasiddhi-. 


‘Next I shall teach the initiation that bestows liberation; listen from 
me [as I tell it to you] in brief to that [liberation] by attaining which 
men are freed from birth, death, dangers and so forth. Uniting a 
person again [and again] (punah) [with one world after another], the 
expert (matiman) should lift [that person] from one world (tattvat) 
[to the next], beginning with [the world of] Kalagnirudra, up to the 
reality (tattvam) that is free from all defect.’ 


The translation of tattva may seem surprising here, but it is impossible 
that tattva should here have been used in the narrow technical sense 
of tattva of the Saükhyas and later Saivas, for the layers of the cosmos 
here are principally, though not exclusively, bhuvanas. And we shall 
see that the Sankhya tattvasarga (which is neither a tattva nor a bhu- 
vana) is included as a stage on this cosmographic “path”. For this wider 
or vaguer use of tattva in this sort of context, cf., e.g., Nisvasamukha 
4:99, where it is used of the eleven realities of the Lokatitavratas' path. 


We should note, furthermore, that in the cosmography that begins 
here no attempt is made to correlate worlds with tattvas, a tendency 
that we see emerging in the Guhyasütra and that is fully developed 
before the time of the classical Siddhanta of the exegetes: what w° 
have here is rather a stratigraphy of worlds beginning with that of 
Kalagnirudra at the bottom. 


We have included below a comparative table of the four cosmograP 
ical accounts given here in the Mülasütra, in Guhyasütra 1 (where ' 


ग cosmos is mapped onto the liriga as the body of Siva), in Guhyasti” 


chapters 4~7 (the source for much of Svacchanda 10), and in ie 
0 


mukha 4 (an account of the Atimarga cosmography of those wh 


| (9 n 

the Lokātītavrata, the Lākulas). The last of these passages o 

edited and annotated by SANDERSON (2006:166ff). Note ien. 0 
is 


verse-numeration for that passage, in the pages that follow; :982 
Nirajan KAFLE's forthcoming edition and differs very slightly: gh 
in SANDERSON’s numeration is 4:99cd in KAFLE’s, and 80 OF : 

out the passage. 


Translation of the Mülasütra à 
209 


Of course what is really required for 
evolving cosmography of the Ni§vasa-corpus is a careful edition of the 
thousand or so verses forming chapters 1, 4, 5, 6, 7 and 8 of the Guhya- 


sutra, but this will take some more time: the following comparative 
table is the best we can do for the time being. 


a clearer understanding of the 


We have established above (note on Mülasütra 4:14) that the corpus 
of the Nisvasa appears to teach for each mantra-system an initiation 
for the bubhuksu, namely the vidyadiksa, and one for the mumuksu, 
namely the muktidiksa. We left unresolved, however, whether the two 
are conceived of as separate and parallel rituals for initiands with dif- 
ferent goals, or whether muktidiksa is in fact always to be undertaken 
after an initial vidyadiksa. What suggests the latter hypothesis is that 
the muktidiksà is consistently described after an account of the vidya- 
diksa and that the structure of the muktidiksa, if it consists in more 
than the purification of each level of the cosmos (prakriya-Sodhana), 
is never described here or elsewhere in the Nisvasa-corpus. The rites 
that we would expect a salvific initiation to contain (beginning with 
adhivasa) are thus taught only as part of the vidyadiksa and no line 
of text indicates that they must be performed again in the salvific 
initiation. But of course they may have been. 


In short, no certainty is possible here. Even if we knew whether or not 
the initiating priest was expected to weave the ritual elements of the 
vidyadiksa together with the cosmography of the muktidiksa to fashion 
a free-standing ritual of muktidiksa, this would not of course tell us 
whether or not the vidyadiksa and the muktidiksa were performed 
or intended to be performed in close succession. Having emphasised 
that any interpretation is necessarily largely guess-work, mee dita 
interpretation that seems plausible to us: the vidyadiksa probably 
functioned as an initiation for neophytes, who thereby i pae 
for sadhana; this initiation might have been followed S SS 
at a later time by a salvific initiation, the muktidiksa; the A ae is 
was probably never intended to be offered to someone wio 
already received a vidyadiksa. AMOR 
Historically, as SANDERSON has shown (3000न Fs कळक 
Structure in the Nisvasa must derive from that of the eae M 
in Nisvasamukha 4, and this too is difficult = "disciple? and then 
it involved the laying of the Sivahasta upon the 


Vaga ——— सर पनि > ig, hi ; 1१८ calva so bhramet, quot- 
j ° Nisvāsamukha 4:89ab ālabdhaf pañcabhir guhyair ddiksitas ca! 


Nisvasatattuasamhits 


290 


Table 3: Cosmography 


Guhyasttra 4,5,6,7 


Kalagni 111 Kalagni 4:24ff 

narakas 140 narakas 4:33 7 

patalas Abhasatala 5:2 
Uttala 


Nisvasamuklia 4 


32+108 narakas 1000 
Mahatala 108 
Rasatala 


Kalagni 3 

narakas 4 
Abhasatala 5 
Uttala 


Sritala Sritala Talatala 109 
Gabhastika Gabhastika Nitala 

Siloccaya Siloccaya Sutala 110 
Sarkaroccaya Sarkaroccaya Vitala 

Sauvarna 6 Sauvarna 5:3 Nitala/Sauvarna 11 
Bhürloka Bhiloka Bhirloka 5:22 Bhiloka 113ff 


Bhuvarloka 6:119ff 
Svarloka 6:138ff 


Bhuvarloka 115 
Svarloka 116 


Bhuva Bhuvarloka 112 


Svarloka 


Maharloka Mahah Maharloka 6:150ff Maharloka 
Jana Jana Jana 6:151 Jana 

Tapah 7 Tapah Tapah 6:153 Tapah 

Satya Satya Satya 7:1ff Satya 
Brahma(pura) | Brahma(pura) 113 Brahmaloka 
Visnupura Visnupura Visnupuri 7:14 Visnuniketa 117 
Sivapura Sivapura Sivapura 7:69ff Sivapura 


Brahmanda 8 
atarudrah 9 


Kapalavarana 
atarudrah 118 


Kapalavarana 
atarudrah 114 


Andakapala 7:81 
atarudrah 7:81ff 
andas of water, fire, 
wind, Bhutadi, 
buddhi and tamas 
Pratyatmikastaka 7:110 
Guhyastaka 
Atiguhyastaka 7:111 
Pavitrastaka 
Sthanastaka 
Devayonyastaka 7:125ff 
Krodhastaka 7:128ff 
Tejastaka 7:131ff 
Yogastaka 7:134ff 


paticasta paficasta paricasta 


Devayonyastake 
Yogastaka 


Devayonyastaka 


Devayonyastaka 
Yogastaka 10 


Yogastaka 115 
Krodhastaka 
Tejisastaka 
Akrtastaka 116 
Suśiva 


12 Suśivas 7:136ff 
Virabhadra 7:140 


Translation of the Mülasütra 


291 
[Milasitra 5 — | Guhyasütra 1 Guhyasütra 4,5,0,7 Nisvasamukha 4 


Mahadevastaka 7:141f 
Gurupanktitraya 7:143ff 
Tattvasarga 7:160ff 
Bhavasarga 7:190ff 
Gurusisyapankti- 

traya 7:206f 

Astadha Prakrti T:219f 
(=Nadividyastaka of 
Svacchanda 10:1087f) 
Vigraha 7:120f 

Niyati, Kala and 

Raga 7:222ff 

10 Sankaras in 

Niyati 7:225f 

10 Sivas 7:227 


Gurupanktitraya 
Tattvasarga 


Gurupanktitraya 


= Gurupanktitraya 
attvasarga 


Tattvasarga 119 


Gahana Gahana 117 


Gahana 122 


Vigrahega 
Niyati, Kala and 
Raga 
Sivagankara 


Vigraha Vigrahesa 


Sivasankara 11 Sivasankara 


Asadhya Asadhya Asadhya 7:231 Asadhya 
Harirudra Harirudra Hariharau Harirudra 
Dagegaka Dasesanah 118 Dagesanah 7:231f Dasegaka 
Pancaáisya 5 Sisyas 5 Sisyas 7:234 5 Sisyas 123 
Acarya 5 Gurus 5 Gurus 7:235 5 Acaryas 


Mahadevatraya (Vama, | Mahadevatraya 
Jyestha, Raudra) 7:236 
Other worlds named 
after elements in the 


VAMADEVA 7:237f 


Gopati [in?] Hrdaya- 
granthi 7:239 


Vi$va 7:240 


Mahadevatraya Mahadevatraya 


Gopati [in?] Maha- 
granthi 12 
Visva 


gopater granthih 


Abhibhava- 
pañcaka 123 


Gopati in granthi 


Abhibhava 119 


Trkala 

Ksemiáa 

Brahmapati 
iva 


Trikala 

Ksemisa 

Brahmano 'dhipati 7:241 
Siva 

Ananta 

Pāśas 


Ananta 124 
Pāśas 
(a$uddhadhvan 
summarised 124f) 
Rsikula 126 


madamohesu 13 Pasas 


Rsikula Rsikula Rsikula 7:242 


NiSvasatattuasampjys 


[Guhyasütrai | Guhyasütra 4,5,6,7 Nisvasamukha [Pons oni 
yonir vāgeśvarī Rebirth in yonyam 
vagesyam 127 | 
Rebirth as 
Pranava 


292 


yonisu (?) 
Vagisvari 


yonir vagesvari 


Pranava 


Pranava 14 
Sadhyonkara 


Omkara 7:243 
Sadhya 
Dhatara 
Damanesa 
Dhyana 
1311851058 

8 Pramanas 7:244f 


Dhatara 
Damaneávara 
Dhyana 
Bhasmisa 128 
Pramanastaka 
Vidyastaka 


Dhatara 120 
Damanesa 


Dhatara 
Damanisa 


Bhasmesa 
Pramanastaka 
Vidyastau 


Bhasmadeha 
Pramanastaka 15 
Vidyastau 

8 Mirtis 


8 Miurtis 
Maya 7:246ff 


Maya 


mayi ca vidyayoh(?) | Mahavidya 7:249ff 
Iévaram tattvam 
7:254f 

Dharma, Jnana, Vai- 
ragya, Ai$varya 7:259 
Vama, Jyestha 

and Raudri 


fasedi 
Rupa 16 


4-fold Rupa 121 


Saktis 3 Saktis 


dve vidye Jiiana$akti, Jüana$akti, Kriyasakti 
Kriyasakti (dve vidye) 7:260 

Tejas Tejiga Tejisa Tejisa 

Dhruva nidhano dhruvam | Dhruva Dhruva 


Rudra 
Pratoda 
Manava 


Rudra 123 
Pratoda 
Manava 


Rudra 7:263 
Pratoda 
Manava 
Ekaksa 7:264 
Pingala 
Hamsa, 


Dhruva II 7:265 


Translation of the Mulasutra 


Mülasütra 5 _Guhyastiira 1 | Guliyosüra umi ठ 26.67 [ —] 


Brahma, Darka, Brahma, Darka, 11 Rudras 
Dindi, Mundi, Dindi, Mundi, 
Saurabha, Pavana, | Saurabha, Pavana, 
Janmahara, (18) Janmahara, 

Rudra, Pranita, Rudra, Pranita, 
Sukhaduhkhada, | Sukhaduhkha, (125) 
Vijrmbhita Vijrmbha 


Dhruva Wag [Dhrmallliz; | 


Dhruva III 7:269 


akti akti 128 akti 7:271 
Samskara Samskara Samskara 
Modita Pralamba Pramudita 
Pralamba 20 Pramudita Pralamba 7:122 
Visnu Visnu Visnu 
Mandara Mandara Mandara 
Gahana Gahana Gahana 
Pravitata Pravitata Pravitata 
Prabhata Prabhava 129 Prabhava 7:273 
Samaya Samaya Samaya 
Ksudra Ksudra Ksudra 
Vimala 21 Vimala Vimala 
Siva Siva Siva 


Sadagiva brahma 
(sakale tatve) 'stabhedena 7:278 


Nada 133 4 kalas 7:281ff 
(Nivrtti, Pratistha, 
Vidya, Santi) 
Nada 7:291 


Susumna 7:293f 
Niskala 


caturdha Saktih 


293 


1515 
: tsvasatattvasamhitz 


meditation upon the Lākula cosmography, coupled with some ac 


tion 
nible because of damage to the manuscript, involyin, 


no longer discer lang 


that cosmography (SANDERSON 2006:188): 


The officiant, we are told here, must meditate on the cosmic hier- 
archy (prakriya), make that hierarchy the object of an action un- 
fortunately lost in a lacuna caused by damage to the manuscript, 
and then initiate the candidate through what the text calls the 
descent of the word atha (atha$abdanipatah). 


SANDERSON further suggests (2006:190) that ‘the gnosis of the 
prakriyadhva completes by the time of death the task that initia- 
tion had almost but not completely accomplished’, just as following 
the post-initiatory practices completes the process begun by Agamic 
diksa according to classical Saiddhantika doctrine. (For a discussion 
of how athaSabdanipatah may be understood, we refer the reader to 
SANDERSON 2006:191-192.) 


In the Mülasutro, however, it is made clear how the cosmography 
is ritually involved: the initiand is lifted and placed in each of the 
levels of the cosmos in turn and this involved oblations in the fire 
(note the use of homayitvà in 5:8). SANDERSON therefore con- 
cludes his discussion of Lakula initiation with the following observation 
(2006:192-193): 


Lakula initiation, then, differs from Paficarthika by adding the 
purification of the cosmic hierarchy, so transforming it into a means 
of liberation; and in this most fundamental respect it is one with 
the Agamic Diks&. Details apart, about which we know almost 
nothing in the Lakula case, it differs from the Agamic in only two 
respects. The terminus of its cosmic hierarchy is lower than that 
of the Agamic systems, because those have extended their own 
beyond it in their bid for supremacy within the greater religion; 
and they appear not to have developed the hautri 41158, the w 
through the placing of offerings in a consecrated fire, that 18 E 
principal formal characteristic of the Agamic rite. In this pr. 

the Paficarthika and Lakula systems stand together against E 
Agamic. Just as they are systems for ascetics outside society 


ed by SANDERSON as 


touched by the five B 
dicant)’ 


een 


: as b 
When he has 


4:88ab (2006:188), and translated as follows: der [as 8 ™ 


rahmamantras and received initiation he should wan 


Translation of the Mulasutra 


295 


they are without fire. And just as the Agamic systems incorporate 
the householder so they have their initiates install fire in order that 
they may gratify their Mantra deities therein. 


To conclude, one more trivial and obvious difference between the Laku- 
la and early-Mantramarga initiation-process may be added: whereas 
the scant Lakula material available leaves us in doubt about whether 
initiation is essentially the bestowal of the Sivahasta, the meditation 
upon the prakriya or the ‘descent of the word atha’ and whether or 
not one of these moments is soteriologically the most significant, the 
Mulasutra has provided an answer by the use of the labels vidyadiksa 
and muktidiksa. And the very use of distinct labels further suggests 
the possibility that the two rites might have been intended to be per- 
formed on separate occasions. 


5:3-4 ‘After uniting the sadhaka with [the world of] Kalagnirudra us- 


ing VAMA, the expert should perform oblation[s] using the mila- 
mantra (devadevena), together with the auxiliary mantras and the 
five brahmamantras; the acarya (vidvan) should [then] purify [all the 
karman that has accrued or might accrue to the soul for experience in 
that world] using JYESTHA; raising [the soul] out [of that world] using 
RAUDRI, he should join him in the hells [using again VAMA]. 

The first three Saktis whose names are drawn from the VAMADEVA 
mantra, Vama, Jyestha and Raudri, are here associated with yojana, 
Sodhana and uddharana respectively, an association that continues 
into the paddhati-literature and that is arguably the same as the triad 
rodha, vislesa and harana with which Ramakantha associates them in 
Moksakarika 32c-33b: for further detail, see GOODALL 1998:329-30; 


fn. 491, and for other associations with these Saktis, see Parakhya . 


2:43ff and annotation ad loc. Of. also Nigvasakarika, verse 6 of chapter 
44 (the chapter that follows 42 in T.17, P- 378): 


vamaya yojayen mantri jyesthaya ca viyojayet Pe 
raudrya cotkarsnam proktam punar anyatra yojayet 


It is not clear what it means to say that one should “use” Mor ius 
the others, since we have no explicit mantras taught te Ex. a 
(except where they form part of the set of nine Saktis D. F 
lotus throne, in 6:4cd, and it seems not particularly likely Bs 
first three mantras of that set would be used outside the context o 


: Nisvasatattyasog a 


throne); but perhaps their names could be mantrified by the aq dition 
of a mantra-jati or inserted into a mantra-like sentence. 


5:5-6b ‘He should take (nitva) him to Abhasatala, Uttala, Sritala, Gab- 
hastimat, Siloccaya, Sarkaroccaya and cause him to enter (prapya) 
into the Golden ones (sauvarnesu), into Bhürloka and Bhuva’ 


The m after abhasatala is presumably a meaningless euphonic glide 
(inserted after sandhi has been applied to the locative). Because we 
find it thus also in Guhyasutra 8:25, it is not likely just to be trans- 
missional. The use of the plural in sauvarnesu is something that we 
cannot explain, but that too is parallelled in Guhgasütra 8:26. 


Even in this relatively well-known Puranic section of the universe, 
there are considerable discrepancies and the list of seven subter- 
ranean paradises (patala) given here (which is the same as that of 
the Guhyasutra) is not shared with other sources: even the Nisvasa- 
mukha (4:106f) gives a different list (see our table on p. 290 above). 
Various lists are presented by GOODALL 2004:289-291, fn. 522. 


Instead of the restitution in 5:69, one could consider reproducing the 
first pada of Guhyasütra 8:26ab, which N transmits thus: sauvarnesu 
punar yago bhurloke tu bhuvas tatha; but we did not do so because 
of the prapya in Mülasütra 5:7a, where the Guhyasütra (8:272) has 
yasta, presumably an error for yastva. As this quotation of Guhya- 

, Sūtra 8:26ab reveals, the plural sauvarnesu is not without parallel, 
but we do not know how to explain it, and it is conceivable that this 
should be considered as an aiáa use of plural for singular, comparable 
perhaps to the use of -ehi as 8 plural or singular case-ending for both 
locative and instrumental in Apabhraméa (for this see TAGARE 1948; 
981, p.120), for the singular is used for this particular underworld in 
Guhyasitra 5:3ab: sauvarnam saptaman tesàm patalas sapta karttitah. 
For another possible instance of such a usage, see 5:132. below. 


5:6c—7 ‘Then having conducted him to Svarloka, Maharloka, J analoka and 


Tapoloka, he should then lead him on to Satyaloka. Then having Ie 
him to the worlds of Brahma and [then] Visnu, he should ०0 
to the world of Siva. 


f 
We expect the world of Siva to be lodged in the shell of the A 
Brahma, as the next verse suggests. The world of Brahma p 
sumably been omitted from the account of the Guhyasutra (see 


Translation of the Mülasütra ^m 


on p. 290) because Brahma is there presented at some length (7:1— 
as the regent of Satyaloka. gth (7:110) 


5:8 'Having made the fire offerings (homayitva) in this way [i.e. to this 
effect] (evam), he should then break through the egg of Brahma [so 
that the initiand's soul can pass through and beyond it]. This supreme 


act of breaking through [the egg] is held [to be accomplished] by means 
of the mantra ending in HUMPHAT’ 


The second half is hypermetrical and we could emend it to 
humphatkarantamantrena. One may defend, however, retaining the 
hypermetry as possibly authorial, for at least the cadence is correct 
(suggestion of Shaman HATLEY). The mention of HUMPHAT could be 
enough to lead the reader to understand that the ASTRA-mantra is 
intended. It is possible, however, that the mülamantra is to be used. 


hundred Rudras, o goddess? 


After bursting through the shell of the egg of Brahma, we expect 
to arrive among the Satarudras, whose inclusion alludes to the Sata- 
rudriya, an important litany of lay Saivism. Guhyasütra 7:107-108, | 
however, might lead us instead to expect to have found in the damaged | 
line a reference to concentric rings around the egg (avarana), each ten | 
times greater than the last, of water, fire, air, ether, bhütadi (i.e. 


5:gab ‘Having burst through that ..[he should bring him] among the one 
| 
|| 


ahankara as the cause of the elements), buddhi and darkness. Our 
half-line might therefore have ended either with avaranesu suvrate or 
with $atarudresu suvrate. We have preferred the latter, since there is 
no evidence at this stage that the tattvas beyond prthivi are ranged 
beyond the egg. There are still some syllables left unaccounted for, | 
which we assume would have expressed the sense of yojayet pascat | 
or yojayitvà tu or similar. Also possible (cf. 5:4) would be tu nayed | 
vidvan (suggestion of Diwakar ACHARYA). | 

| 

। 


5:9c—10 ‘He should then conduct him above those through the five ogdoads 
[realms of the] eight classes of su- 
ad, the [twelve] Susivas, and the 
the Gahana and 


[of worlds] (paficastam), then the 
pernatural beings, then the yoga-ogdo 
three guru-lineages. Placing him in the tattvasarga, 
the Vigraha....’ 

The ‘five groups of eight’ 
names also apply to worlds above us t 
ously in those sites on earth: see TAK 2, 


ilgri i earth whose | 

re forty pilgrimage sites on whos | 
i hat can be reached by dying pi- | 
s.v. guhyastaka and SANDER- | 


AC TIE ee ME 


298 


NiSvasatattvasamhits 


SON 2004, footnotes 199 and 200 on pp. 403-405. Each layer of Worlds 
has eight presumably because they are arranged in the four interme. 
diate and four princial directions. Above these are more Ogdoads of 
worlds whose names may not have been those of sites on earth: the 
devayonyastaka and the yogastaka. Su$iva refers to a group of twelve 
worlds that are listed in Guhyasutra 7:137ff (SSvacchanda 10:1039f). 
For the gurupanktitraya, three lists of 32, 30 and 21 teachers of the 
Atimarga who figure in the cosmography of the NiSvasa and of the 
Svacchanda as Rudras and their worlds, see TAK II s.v. gurupankti, 
What is meant by tattvasarga here is not explained, but the parallel 
in Guhyasitra 7:163f suggests that we are to insert here the ontology 
of the Sankhyas. The inclusion of the tattvasarga as a step on the 
ladder of worlds (also in Guhyasütra 1:117) appears to confirm that 
there the redactor did not intend a consistent correlation from bottom 
to top of a hierarchy of tattvas with a hierarchy of bhuvanas. We take 
Gahana to refer to the Rudra Gahaneáa/Gahaniáa (cf. Nisvasamukha 
4:22, Guhyasütra 1:117, 7:56, and perhaps 7:149, where he is locat- 
ed among the gurus of the first gurupankti) and that Vigraha refers 
either to Vigraheóa (cf. Nivasamukha 4:122, Guhyasitra ) or to the 
group of eight worlds (vigrahastaka) which he presumably governs (cf. 
Guhyasütra 7:220-1). 


‘in Siva and Sankara, in Asadhya, in Hari and Rudra, in the ten 1885, 
in the group of five Sisyas and [the group of five] Acaryas, and in the 
three Mahadevas? 


The terms Siva and éaükara refer here to two groups of ten 
tortoise-shaped worlds described in Guhyasütra 7:225ff (= Svacchand 
10:1106f). It is at this place in the Guhyasütra's cosmography tha 


OS tattvas mentioned as the loci of worlds for the first p p 
Sankaras being in niyati. Asadhya is a single world (if pes a 
— y ^ed 


the compound is to be understood in Guhyasütra 7:232ab asadhye" i 
padam ürdhvam tato hariharau varau, which is omitted at this DO 
in the Svacchanda, between 10:1112 and 1113) and Hari and Rudra a" 
two. There are then ten worlds called iga or ana, which are ee 
m Guhyasütra 7:233 (&Svacchanda 10:1113-1114b). There fol 
sisyas and five gurus, once again presumably teachers of 8 bo 
now metamorphosed into Rudras whose names signify also the a 
they govern. They are listed in Guhyasütra 7:235-6, where we hav tatt- 
second explicit mention in that text of worlds being placed in ? Jaces 
va, in this case vidyā, whereas the Svacchanda (10:11140-111 p 


Translation of the Mulasutra 


5:12 


5:13 


a7 Perhaps more usually printed as Trigala, 


299 


them in ràga. The group of three worlds called mahàdeva is identified 
in Guhyasttra 7:237ab: vamo Jyesthas ca rudra§ ca mahadevatrayam 
smrtam. 'The redactor of the Svacchanda appears to have garbled this 
by supplying a longer list of names derived from the VAMADEVA mantra 
and then, noticing there to be more than three 


worlds, by supplying a 
fresh triad (Svacchanda 10:1117-1119): y supplying 


vamo jyesthas ca raudra§ ca kalo vikaranas tatha 
balavikaranaé caiva balapramathanas tatha 1117 
sarvabhütadama$ ca tatha caiva manonmanah 
kalatattve mahadevi mahadevatrayam sthitam 1118 
mahadevo mahateja mahajyotih pratapavan 
kalatattvam samakhyatam samasena varanane 1119 


‘Taking him into Gopati, [which is] in the Mahagranthi, in Vi$va, 
Trikala, Ksemiga, and the Siva called Brahmapati, ...’ 

From the parallels in Guhyasütra 7:239-41 and Svacchanda 10:1129-31, 
it is clear that Gopati is a world inside the “big knot" of maya, whereas 
Vi$va, Trikala,?'7 Ksemiéa and Brahmapati (or Brahmanahpati), the 
last two being respectively the highest deities of the Mausulas and 
Karukas (thus SANDERSON 1988:667, following Ksemaraja's Svaccha- 
ndatantroddyota ad 11:71cd), are above it. Little is known about either 
Mausulas or Karukas, but for a few further scraps of recent information 
and speculation, particularly about the latter group, see TAK 2, s.v. 
karuka, SANDERSON 2006:169 and 176-177, ACRI 2008:195-196, and 
WATSON, GOODALL and ANJANEYA SARMA 2013:65-67. 


For more on the *big knot" (granthi), see annotation on 5:15¢-16b 
below. Gopati, as we shall see in Uttarasütra 1:10 and 1:15 below, nis 
be used as a marker on the cosmographical map setting the upper limit 
of the tattva of kala (although kala appears to be inserted elsewhere 
on the map in other works, including the Guhyasutra: see the table on 


p. 291 above). 


“having [then] placed him in the Intoxications and Delusions क 
mohesu), and in the lineages of the sages, and the wombs (yonisu ; 
should then extract him therefrom and place him in VagiSvari. 

level as whatever is designated 


he same 
madamohesu must refer to t Guhyasiitra 7:242 and Svaccha- 


by the pagas in the parallels in the 


e.g. in Kirana 8:134 and in Svacchanda 


10:1124. 


300 


5:14 


Nisväsatattvasamhitz 


nda 10:1131c31132b. Both texts also include here rsikulam (a singular 
but plural in Nisvasamukha 4:125) without further explanation, and 
then the half-line yonir vage$vari caiva yatra jato na jayate (or, in the 
normalised KSTS edition, yonir vagisvari caiva yasyam jato na Gen 
Svacchanda 10:1132cd). Here there is an ambiguity as to whether X 
(for the locative yonisu, see p.119 above) and vàgesvari are in appo- 
sition and refer to the same entity, which is what Ksemaraja assumes 
ad loc. Our passage, because of the discrepancy in number, appears 
to suggest them rather to be two different entities, but Nisvasamukha 
4:94c-96b reveals they are probably intended as one, since the text 
there enumerates entities in the pure path: 


asuddhamargo vyakhyatah Suddhamargam ca me śrņu 94 
yonir vàge$vari devi pranavo yatra jayate 

trtiyam caiva dhataram dhyanam caiva caturthakam 95 
tejigam paficamam khyatam dhruvam sastham prakirttitam 


This SANDERSON translates as follows (2006:165): 


I have explained the impure cosmos (a$uddhamargah). Hear me 
now as I teach the pure (Suddhamargah). [First is] the Womb (yo- 
nih), Vagigvari, from which one is [re]born as Pranava [the second 
pure level]. The third is [that of] Dhatr and the fourth is [that of] 
Dhyana. The fifth is Tejiga[’s] and the sixth is Dhruva|’s]. 


The shift from the singular yonih in the Atimarga account to the 
Plural yonigu is unexpected and therefore makes us wonder whether 
this might not again be an instance of a plural locative intended as 8 


: t :5-6b 
Singular locative (see the remarks on sauvarnesu in our note on 5:9 6 
above). 


. oy mun (2): 
‘Having placed him in Pranava, he should put him in Sadhyohkarat ) ; 
then he should raise him up into Dhatara, Damaniga and Bhasmadeha- 

It i ite 
t is not clear how many names there are intended to be here oF qui 
how they are to be divided up. Cf. Guhyasütra 7:243c-244 


onkaram sadhyadhataram damaneáas tatha smrtam 243 
dhyanad urdhvam tu bhasmegam kramena kathitani tu 
pramanani tatordhvam tu procyamanani me |érpu] 244 


and Svacchanda 10:1133: 


Translation of the Mülasütra 


301 


onkarasadhyadhataro damaneéas tatah param 
dhyanam bhasmegam evahuh pramanani tadurdhvatah 


Ksemaraja's  Svacchandatantroddyota too reflects uncertainty: 
onkarabhidhan sadhyadm pafica rudran ahuh; anye tu rsikulam 
yad anantaram uktam, tad eva onkarasadhyadinamasatkena vibhak- 
tam iti vyakhyatavantah. 


They say there are five Rudras, beginning with Sadhya, called 
Omkaras. But others have interpreted this to mean that what 
is taught after the Rsikula is [to be] divided into a group of six 
names beginning with Omkara and Sadhya. 


As we have seen in the note on the previous verse, Nisvasamukha 
4:94 includes only three entities at this point, namely Pranava, 
Dhatr/Dhatara and Dhyana. But in the extended list later in the 
same chapter of the Nisvasamukha there are more (4:125c-126): 


yonyam capy atha vage$yam jatah pranava ucyate 125 
dhataram damanam caiva i$varam dhyanam eva ca 
bhasmigam ca samakhyatam pramanastakam eva ca 126 
vidyastakam ca murtyastau tejisa$ ca dhruvas tatha 


This SANDERSON translates as follows (2006:174): 


When it has been regenerated in the womb which is the goddess 
Vagiévari, [the soul] is known as a Pranava. [The levels above that 
are as follows:] Dhatr, Damanesvara, Dhyana, Bhasmisa, the Eight 
Pramanas, the Eight Vidyas, the Eight Murtis[, who are the Lords 
of those Vidyas], Tejisa and Dhruva. 


It is, however, perhaps just worth mentioning the possibility that the 
idea intended to be expressed in most of these passages, viz. in the 
expanded cosmography of Nisvasamukha 4, in the Guhyasutra e in 
the Svacchanda (pace Ksemaraja), was that the soul is reborn rom 
Vagisi as Pranava and then in turn as Dhata, Damane$vara (assuming 
a split compound in the last passage), Dhyàna and, finally, Bee 
We might then emend to omkarasadhya- in ECS 7:2430 
interpret *Dhatr [is then] produced out of pranava - १ 
Whether or not this proposition seems plausible, it does m ud 
that some misunderstanding has crept in early, long Pe TE 
rāja and those he cites, for it seems probable that, given its a 


30? Ni$vasatattasam ig 
in the Nivasamukha, the unit Sadhyonkara (or ‘Sadhya, Okara’ 
the Mülasütra, which in the Guhyasütra and Svacchanda has become 
‘Omkara, [followed by] Sadhya' (or ‘Omkarasadhya’), was originally 
intended to reflect the idea of the soul passing beyond the last level 
of the Lakulas’ impure universe, namely Rsikula, and being reborn 
from Vagisvari in the pure universe as Pranawa, in other Words, being 
produced (sadhya) as Omkara. 


)in 


5:15ab 'He should place him in the eight Pramanas, the eight Vidyas and 
the eight Murtis. 
The eight Pramanas are Rudras bearing the names of eight Pasupata 
scriptures of the Lakulas: cf. Guhyasutra 7:245-246b and Svacchanda 
10:1134-1135b and see Ksemaraja’s commentary thereon. For more 
about these, see SANDERSON 2006:169ff. 


Immediately after these, our text is missing a reference to maya, 
which figures here in the Guhyasutra (7:246ff) and in the Svacchanda 
(10:1138ff). Is it possible that the redactor of the Mūlasūtra regard- 
ed the mahagranthi of 5:12 as maya? Or was he just not interested 
in correlating levels with the tattvas. The eight vidyàs appear to be 
eight forms of mahavidya (Guhyasütra 7:250—2), probably a synonym 
for mahamaya, for she is followed by mahamayin (Guhyasütra 7:253); 
presumably her consort, whose retinue is made up of the eight vidyesas, 
referred to here in the Mülasütra by the term murti (they are described 
as murtidharah in Guhyasütra 7:258). As for what the eight forms of 
mahavidya are, the Guhyasütra tells us (7:252): 


astabhedavibhinna tu vidya sa eva pathyate 
vamadyaih Saktibhir bhinna punas ca paripathyate 


The second division is one into a familiar list of Saktis, but the primary 
division into eight is not specified. In the Svacchanda, however, it P 
said to be the eight groups of the alphabet (10:1143cd: aştavargavi 
bhinnà ca vidya sa matrkaiva tu), and this seems a plausible solution. 


575० 5:69 ‘f...fand having led him up to [the four] Rüpel[s], the I^ re 


Saktis, the two Vidyas, Tejiáa and Dhruva? 

5:15¢d is puzzling to us, for rüpa and dhruva o 
next half-line. rapa (apparently a name for the fo 
buddhidharmas follows immediately after the Vidyeśas in 
7:259-60, along with the three gaktis (Vama, Jyestha and : 
the two vidyas (Jfanasakti and KriyaSakti) referred to in OW : 


ccur in the uel 
ur positiv? 
Guhyasiir 
Raudri) an 


Translation of the Mulasutra 303 


ata urdhvam tu vijfieyam tattadrüpacatustayam 
dharmajüànam ca vairagyam ai$varyam ca catustayam 259 
vama jyesthà ca raudri ca Saktitrayam atah param 
jüanas$aktih kriyasaktir dve vidye parikirtite 260 


Above that one should know that there are the group of the four 
various rüpas, [namely] the group of four [that are] Dharma, Jiiana, 
Vairagya and Aiávarya. Beyond that, the three Saktis: Vama, 
Jyestha and Raudri. [Then] Jñānaśakti and Kriyasakti, proclaimed 
as the two Vidyas. 


There is one piece of information that we might have anticipated find- 
ing roughly here and that is conspicuously missing: we might have 
expected to find here an indication of the end of the impure universe 
(as$uddhadhvan) and the beginning of the pure universe Suddhadhvan). 
This division falls just below Vagisvari in the Lakulas' cosmography, 
as we have seen in the annotation to 5:13 above; in the Mantramarga, 
as SANDERSON has pointed out (2006:174-175, Fig. 1), the barrier 
between the pure and impure universes moves up beyond this and is 
often thought to be just above maya: see our table on p. 292 above. 
In the text of the Mülasütra as it now stands, there is no indication 
of such a barrier at this level. Nor do the cosmographical accounts of 
the Guhyasitra (chapters 1 and 7) seem to signal a demarcation here 
between the pure and impure “paths” of the universe, nor does the 
account of Svacchanda 10, nor do some other early sources, such as 
the cosmographical accounts of Svayambhuvasitrasangraha 4, Sarva- 
jrianottara 9 and Kirana 8. But we do find the idea of a split between 
the pure and the impure appearing explicitly in such lines as Kirana 
3:26cd: 


Suddhe 'dhvani givah kartā prokto ‘nanto ‘site prabhuh 
In the pure path Siva is the creator; Ananta is taught to be Lord 
in the impure [path]. 
And it appears in a visualisation in Svacchanda 2 as follows (2:58ab): 


mayatmako bhaved granthir aguddhadhvavyavasthitah 


The knot [below the lotus blossom] is maya, which constitutes the 


impure path [of the universe]. 


| 
ETS SPO 


304 


NiSvasatattuasamhiya 


Furthermore, the notion of the granthi, a knot that is hard to dis. 
entangle and cross beyond, suggests of course a bridge between the 
pure and the impure, even where an “impure path” is not explic- 
itly mentioned (as it is here in Svacchanda 2:58ab). And this di- 
vision is underlined in some works by stressing that the Section of 
maya below the knot is the adhahputa, a lower half, and the Sec- 
tion above it is the ürdhvaputa. Thus the Kirana (8:134), the Sarva- 
jnanottara (9:142-143, T. 334, p. 70, where we must correct atha sam- 
putas samsthas te to adhahsamputasamsthas te) and the Svacchanda 
(10:1124-1125) all agree in placing Gopati just below the granthi, in 
the lower puta, and Ksemisa and Brahmapati above it in the upper 
puta. As BAKKER puts it (2000:268), 


[t]he domain that forms the trait d’union between both universes 
is the Mayatattva. According to the Svacchandatantra, this reality 
can be divided into two layers (puta), which are separated by a 
knot or barrier (granthi). 


Now this granthi in fact remains in the same “place” for all the cos- 
mographical accounts of the Mantramarga that we have been talking 
of here (Guhyasutra 1 and 7, Kirana 8, Sarvajnanottara 9, Svaccha- 
nda 10), unchanged from its position relative to other bhuvanas (or 
Rudras) in the cosmography of the Lakulas (Nis$vasamukha 4123). 


And yet, as we have seen, there is also an explicit statement to the 
effect that the pure path begins rather earlier, just before Vagisvat, 
in the Lakulas' cosmography (Nigvasamukha 4:940-9 5, quoted ad 5:13 
above). That statement comes from an abbreviated account of the 
Lakula path that does not mention any level between Vigraha and 
Vagisvari. But the point is reiterated in 4:126-127b as follows: 


asuddhadhva samakhyatah suddhadhvanafi ca me Srnu 
mukta rsikulebhyas tu samsarac ca duratyayat 4:126 
yonyan capy atha vagesyam jatah pranava ucyate 
० 126a Samakhyatah ] K; samakhyatam N e 126c m ukta ] ८४४ 
SANDERSON (2006:167-168); — NK 
me: 
I have taught you the impure path; hear the pure path en 
released from the Rsikulas and [thus] fróm uncrossable dr. in 
[the soul] is then said to be born as Pranava in the TRU 
Vageá. 


Translation of the Mülasütra 
305 


Does this mean that in a yet older Saiva cosmography the barrier 
between impure and pure was the granthi and that this was moved u 
by the Lakulas to above the Rsikula but not at first explicitly aa 
again in the first cosmographical accounts of the Mantramarga? Or 
was the granthi earlier conceived of simply as an almost uncrossable 
point but not a barrier between pure and impure? In that case, the 
idea of such a barrier, introduced perhaps by the Lakulas, might 1 
disappeared in the early works of the Mantramarga before resurfacing 
later. 


Following SANDERSON 2006:174-175, Fig. 1, we have marked in our 
table (p. 292) the point where the Lakula pure universe begins as being 
between Rsikula and Vagisvari, but for Guhyasütra 7 we have instead 
just placed double bars between maya and mahavidya, for we now 
think that the barrier between the pure and impure universes, if it 
was maintained, may have been (once again?) the granthi, which we 
have enclosed with double lines (p. 291). 


The term granthi, apparently identified with maya in Nayasütra 3:36, 
comes in later works to be commonly used as a synonym for maya 
(e.g. Parakhya 4:133 and Mrgendravidyapada 9:1), the barrier between 
pure and impure in classical cosmography, as does the term Gahana, 
the name of 8 world in this same region of the cosmos (see TAK 2, 
s.v. gahana). But it is worth observing that there is no explicit state- 
ment here in the Mülasütra that tells us where maya is situated in the 
cosmos, or indeed whether it is yet a layer in the cosmic hierarchy. 


As for tejasi and dhruve, these refer to Tejia and Dhruva (or Dhru- 
vega), the uppermost divinities of the cosmographies of the Vaimalas 
and of the Pramanas respectively, according to Sa TaD: 
Which is quoted and translated in SANDERSON 2006:169. uhyasütra 
7:260c-261 is less specific, in that it simply places both deities at 
the top of the cosmos of the Pramanas. SANDERSON (1002: Sot) 
emends (by conjecturing the syllables *ddhaye to fill a lacuna) an 
translates the passage as follows: 
teji$a$ ca dhruvas caiva pramanadhvanakirtitam 
kapalavratam asthaya pramanagamasi[ddhaye] 
gatà dhruvapadam ye tu diksajüanavisodhitah 
[Then] come Tejiéa and Dhruva, taught in the world-hierarchy of 


“ha emen EU his numbering, the unit is 7:261-262b. 


MUSEI 


306 


Nisvasatattyasq p 


the Pramana system. Purified by initiation and gnosis and havin 
practised the Kapalavrata in order to fulfil [the command of] the 
Pramana scriptures those [ascetics] go to the realm of Dhruva. 


For further pieces of information and speculation about the Vaimalas 
see BAKKER 2000:6, ACRI 2008, particularly PP. 194-195 for s 
tations from Guhyasutra 7, 12 and 13 and from the Diksottara, and 
WATSON, GOODALL and ANJANEYA SARMA 2013:65-67. 


5:16c-17b ‘Then he should lead him to Rudra, Pratoda and Manava; [then] 


Ekaksa, Pingala, Hamsa in Saumya; and [then he should place him in 
the second] Dhruva.’ 


Cf. Guhyasütra 7:263: 


dhruvam caivoparistat tu bhuvanatrayasamhatim 
rudrapratodamanavan trayaite bhuvanesvarah 


Rudra and Pratoda are clearly the names of the first two of these, but 
the third could be intended to be Manava or perhaps Manu. The Sva- 
cchanda departs somewhat from the Mülasutra and the Guhyasütra on 
this point, but agrees about the three Rudras that follow and upon 
the second Dhruva (10:1174c-6): 


pramanavarane cordhve kathayami ca manatah 1174 
brahma rudrah pratodas ca anantaá ca caturthakah 
susuddhavaranam cordhve tatra rudratrayam viduh 1175 
ekaksah pingalo hamsah kathitam tu samasatah 
Sivavaranam ürdhvam tu tatraiko dhruvasamjfiakah 1176 


Cf., however, T. 17, p. 406 (a prose section in the middle of what may 
be chapter 43 or 44 of the jfiamakanda of the Nisvasakarika): 


om brahma namah| om visnu namah| om rudra namah) a 
Pratodana namah| om manava namah) atah param a 
ekaksaram| om ekaksara namah| om pinga namah) om hams 
mah| saumyarudratrayam| ata uparistad dhruvah| 

“in saumya^ 


As for the mention that the three named Rudras are tu tray? 


this is partly explained by Guhyasütra 7:265ab: saumyas te jn one 
Tudra ity ete parikirttah|. It is not clear whether they are ^; 
world called Saumya or in a group of three so called. It eri 
too that our text in fact intended simply a list (“..in Ekaksa, P^ 


Translation of the Mülasütra 
307 


Hamsa, Saumya") and that subsequent texts reinterpreted the locative 
of Saumya as meaning that Saumya was the locus for the previous 
three. 


5:17c-18 ‘Brahma and Darka, Dindi and Mundi, Saurabha and Pavana, 
Janmahara, Rudra, Pranita, Sukhaduhkhada and Vijrmbhita is even 
higher again here [in this sequence]. 


Guhyasütra 7:268 tells us that this is a list of eleven Rudras and so 
we must take brahmadarke as a dvandva. The stem-form should be 
brahma-, but that particular word seems elsewhere also (e.g. Nisvasa- 
mukha 1:12 and 1:178a) to be treated as though its base ended in 
a long vowel. We have decided to retain brahmadarke instead of 
following the improbable form given in the KSTS edition of the 
Svacchanda (Svacchanda 10:1178ab appears there as follows: brah- 
madankidindimundah saurabhaá ca tathaiva ca) because N seems con- 
sistently to treat the second name as Darka: see, e.g., Guhyasitra 
1:125. 

dindimundih must also be treated as a dvandva and Rudra is one of 
the 11 names (unless we choose to understand Sukhaduhkhada to stand 
for Sukhada and Duhkhada). For further references to occurrences of 
the name Dindi (and of Dindi and Mundi) in a range of contexts, see 
TAK3 s.v. dindin. 


5:19—21b ‘Having placed him [in each] of these (etesam), and then in the 
third Dhruva, and having placed him in Nirafijana, Sakti, Samskara, 
Modita, Pralamba, Visnu, Mandara, Gahana, Pravitata, Prabhata, 
Samaya, Ksudra, he should place him in Vimala and Siva and then in 
Ghana? 


The first two levels here are clear: they are the third Dhruva and 
Nirafijana. saktisamskaramodite could be a dual dvandva, but it might 
be intended as the locative of a dvandva of three elements. The parallel 
in the Guhyasitra suggests that we have here a list of eight regents 


called paramesvaras (7:272-273b): 


Sakti caivordhvasamskaram khyati--h- pramuditas tatha 

| prala|mbaii ca tatha visnum mandaram gahanan tatha 272 
pravitatam ca -m- uddistam astau te paramesvarah 

but it is possible that this 


This does not make things quite clear, Pralamba, Visnu, | 


is the list intended: Sakti, Samskara, Pramudita, 


A Se ee 


308 Ni$vasatattvasam) ३६ 
Mandara, Gahana, Pravitata. The Svacchanda departs too 


3 far from 
the text of the Guhyasütra here to be of use (10:7181-2) : 


prabuddhavaranain cordhve kathayami samasatah 

pritah pramuditas caiva pramodas ca pralambakah 1181 

visnur madana evatha gahanah prathitas tatha 

rudrastakam samakhyatam vijüeyam pragdisah kramat 
1182 


Adding a further group of five to these gives us a unit of 13 bhu- 
vanesas, according to Guhyasutra 7:2773c-274, in which they are Prab- 
hava, Samaya, Ksudra, Vimala and Siva. We could therefore emend 
prabhate to prabhave; but in the Svacchanda we find Prabhava instead 
(10:1183): 


samayavaranam cordhve kathayami samasatah 
prabhavah samayah ksudro vimalas ca Sivas tatha 1183 


Beyond these in the Guhyasütra, as here, there is then Ghana (7:275). 


5:21cd '[Then he should place him] in Rudronkara, then in the reality-level 
in which are found the [four powers of God called the] kalas (sakale 
tattve), [which is that of] Sadasiva: 


It seems, from comparison with the Guhyasutra, that we have only two 
levels here, the first being Rudronkara (as in Guhyasütra 7:278), then 
"SadaSiva in the reality-level(?) with the kalas”, for verses 7:279% 80 
on to describe Sadasiva with four personified kalas, namely Nivrtti 
Pratistha, Vidya, Santi (a fifth kala, Santyatita has apparently not yet 
been thought of: see prolegomena p. 42). 


5:22ab "Then he should place the soul in the ineffable (anuccarye) Part- 
less/Transcendent/Aspectless (niskale) . 


Immediately above Sadāśiva and the kalas in the Guhyasutra we = 
first Nada (7:291-2), then Susumna (7:293-299b) and mete ne 
Niskala (7:299cd-301). In the Malasiztra we seem to miss bot ms 
these out, unless we assume that anuccarye refers to Nada. I E 
not unlikely, however, that this upper part of the cosmos was कह ie 
by the redactor of the Guhyasütra and that the redactor of the 


ütra i Uttarasütr 
Sutra intended anuccarye to qualify niskale. Cf., however; Dus 
4:470१. à 


Translation of the Mülasütra 


5:22c-23 “On the morrow he should make offerings to Lord Candia, the 


bearer of the axe, together with his five auxiliary mantras, after first 
preparing for him an excellent mandala. He should offer eight hundred 
oblations after offering a prakrantahoma(?)? 


This is one of the earliest surviving references to CandeSa, frequently 
known in early texts as Candiga. He bears, as in his most common 
representation in South Indian temples of all periods, an axe. In echo 
of this, his mandala is usually crescent-moon shaped (e.g. in Kirana 
23:3), though this is not mentioned here. His mantras will be given 
in Mulasutra 6:23-24b below. After initiation, the disciple is to be 
taught the rules of the cult (samaya) before Candesa, who is respon- 
sible for enforcing them, and worship is then offered to Candeása (cf. 
the concluding versions of Kirana 22 in the Nepalese sources?!9). 


For a detailed exposition of what can be known of the history of this 
deity, see GOODALL 2009. 


prakrantahomam hutvà is a problematic expression: it appears to 
mean "having performed the homa that has/had been begun”. Should 
it therefore refer to a homa of Siva that has to be performed before 
that of CandeSa? Perhaps the most likely solution is that the pra- 
krantahoma refers to a basic homa for Cande$a, which is performed 
after worship of Candesa in his mandala, and which must then in turn 
be followed by another homa, also for Candeáa, of either 800 or 108 
oblations, that second homa being inflected for reparation (prayascit- 
ta) of possible shortcomings in the ritual, as the next unit of text, 
5:24-25b, is intended to make clear. As for the number of oblations, 
Satany astau should of course mean 800, but it seems possible that it 
is an aia usage intended to mean 108. 


5:24-25b 'Having offered the oblations he [viz. the acarya] should respect- 


= 0088 पना QU , 
“The South Indian edition omits Candeáa from the end of Kirana 22, 


t 


fully address the deity, saying “Please have forbearance, 0 lord. The 
sadhaka [viz. the śişya] is not stained by any of the faults pertaining 
to the eight rules of post-initiatory conduct. In order to cleanse कळ 
any faults relating to these, I have performed this fire offering to you. 


For these eight rules and for CandeSa’s authority in enforcing oon 
see Nayasütra 1:103-5 below. We have emended the irregular ksan- 


tavyan to ksantavyam, on the grounds that it seems more likely to be 
a chapter devoted 


AA F deśa. 
० initiation, but the next chapter, 23, is an account of the yaga goes 


g10 aW. Ni$vasatattvasamj ii; 
a transmissional error than an authorial irregularity, for Which there 
seems to be no obvious motivation. 


5:25c-26 ‘He who venerates Candiéa [..| will [be] forgive[n] ( ksamate, 
perhaps an error for ksamyate?) in advance (pürvam?) ff once 
burnt by initiation, they do not rise [again]; once his body has fallen 
away, he goes to Siva? 
The lacuna in 5:25d has been patched by supplying, as appears to be 
required, the name of Candi$a; but this still leaves missing a correlative 
pronoun and an explicit mention of the pasas, which are evidently the 
subject of the next piece of text: "once burnt by initiation, they do 
not rise”. Cf. Suprabheda vidyapada 2:29ab: agnidagdhani bijàni na 
prarohanti bhutale. Cf. also Tantrasadbhava 9:241: 


dagdhabijas tu te devi yesàm diksa tu pasavi 
stabdhah pasa yada tasya tada mokso na saméayah 


We have therefore conjectured that a half-line of text, 5:26ab, has gone 
missing, in which a final statement about the power of diksa might have 
occurred and an explicit mention of the pasas, to supply a subject for 
the following line. For other instances of such similes or metaphors 
involving burnt seeds, see Rauravasütrasangraha 4:51-2, Kirana 6:20 
and Matariga vidyapada 10:30-1. The same idea is present, although 
there is no mention of seeds, in Mrgendra caryapada 25-6: 


karmasamjivanam kuryad vyabhicarini diksite 
srstitah samhitahomad adhah pürnasamanvitam 
samjivanam na dagdhasya karmano ’sti mrs citah 
khedanapayasamanam prayaécittam hi tad guroh 


BRUNNER (1985:357) translates as follows:220 


Si [le guru] a donné la diksa à une personne indigne, il doit 
le rite de “réanimation du karman”, en offrant des oblations, 
[les mantra de] la collection, [aux réalités prises] dans le sens 
l'émission ; et à la fin, une oblation pléniére. 

Il n’y a pas réanimation du karman brûlé. [Le rite], en V 


faire 
avec 


érité, est 


a UE e न p 
तग puc however, that Narayanakantha chooses to split karma sarnjivand 
S dus perform the rite [called] samjivana'), presumably because he arma 
all possi ility of scripture even appearing to support the notion that karman 
Initiation might be resuscitated. 


Translation of the Mülasutra 31 


un rite de réparation, que le guru accomplit pour effacer le mal qui 
résulte [pour lui] de la vaine fatigue des Mantra. 


We might assume that asking forgiveness from Candióa at this point in 
our text is similarly prescribed in case the mantras should have been 
needlessly troubled for the initiation of someone unworthy; but it is 
also possible that forgiveness is asked in case there should have been 
any other shortcoming in the rituals. 


We take bhinnadehe as a one-word locative absolute equivalent in sense 
to bhinne dehe: “once his body has fallen away, he goes to Siva.” 


6:1 ‘Next, among the mantras, I shall teach the characteristics of the TATT- 
VA, knowing which men are liberated from the bondage of samsara! 


Another possible translation would be: ‘Next I shall teach the charac- 
teristics of the nature of mantras...’ 


6:2 '[In] first [position] is the last of the eighth group [viz. H]; upon it is 
that which follows the twelfth [vowel, viz. 0], together with the last of 
the sixth group [viz. M]. This is the excellent throne [called] Ananta. 


As in several other early scriptures, the system followed here for "rais- 
ing" the mantras (mantroddhara) is the simple one based on the vargas 
of the standard alphabet. astantam we take to be the last letter of the 
eighth varga, namely H, and this serves as the mantric base. Another 
possiblity considered was KS, which is included at the end of the al- 
phabet in Nayasütra 1:71ff and which serves as the base-sound for the 
principal seed-mantras in other tantric works, such as the Kirana. But 
in view of the breathing sound that the base is supposed to echo, in 
6:7-8 below, and in view of the expression vargatita apparently used 
in the sense of KS (6:14), we feel that we may be almost certain that 
H is intended. ekapürvam could perhaps refer to the first aim in the 
first varga, viz. A, but it could instead be taken to mean "first, on its 
own,' assuming that we understand eka pürvam as a metrically short- 
ened form of ekam pürvam (shortened, that is, in order to a ue 
regular pathya). It is this second suggestion that we have ES me ३ 
dvadaéantan is not “the last of the twelfth group", but rather the one 


after the twelfth”, in other words the thirteenth of the vowels. This 


i R, L, Ẹ) are included and they must 
eee E 2 here would m no thirteenth 


be included, for if they were not, then t Vct 
vowel, ERUNT and AH would then be 1101 and 12th Pw m 
Sixteen vowels, including the sandha ones, are ER 


312 Nisvasatattuasampirs 
1:31-40.) Assuming that sadantena refers to the last letter of the 6th 
varga, in other words M, the mantra of the throne becomes HOM. The 
throne is called Ananta (neuter), but may perhaps not, in this period 
be confused or associated either with the serpent Ananta (or View 
as the serpent) or with the Vidye$a: see GOODALL et al. 200 5:117~21 
and GOODALL 2011:238-9. 


6:3 [The same mantra-base, namely H] upon the natural [vowel] 
(prakrtistham) becomes DHARMA; spliced with the second [vowel] 
(dvibhinnam) it is taught to be JNANA; by being spliced with the 
third and fourth [vowels] it is taught to be [respectively] VAIRAGYA 
and AISVARYA? 


These properties of the buddhi are the four legs of the throne, whose 
mantras, assuming that they are, in the usual way, to be nasalised, are: 
HAM, HAM, HIM, HIM. Their fully realised forms would presumably be 
om ham dharmaya, om hàm jñānāya, etc. In later literature these ‘legs’ 
are usually to be visualised as lions and their identity with the four 
positive buddhidharmas is denied: see GOODALL et al. 2005:121-2. 
We have assumed that vairagaiSvaryam is an authorial oddity, a case 
of irregular sandhi at the seam of a compound resulting in the disap- 
pearance of the palatal semi-vowel y before the palatal vowel ai. But 
it could equally be the result of corruption in transmission. 


6:4ab “The lotus [on the throne] is [the same base] with visarga; the peri- 
carpel [is the same base] with the fifteenth vowel [viz. AM] imposed 
upon it? 


"The lotus is with visarga" presumably means that the mantra for the 
lotus is HAH. The next pada could either be taken as a bahuvrihi de 
scribing the lotus, although it does not accord with it in gender, or 89 
4 separate statement all in one compound about the calyx, or 85) else 
where, a two-word sentence in which paficadasakranta is a pratipadika 
used, for metrical reasons, as an inflected form. We have preferred ie: 
last possibility. We assume that paficadaga is another cardinal ur. 
ber used in the sense of an ordinal. This gives us HAM. Given that Ri 
15th vowel appears to be assigned to Manonmani in 6:4cd, and t E 
Manonmani is placed on the karnikà after the other eight $aktis un 
been placed on the petals, this interpretation seems plausible. 
mantra-bas® 


6: T AA [ v 
4cd ‘The [nine] saktis [from Vàmà to Manonmani] are the vowels 


E] (tattvam) being spliced (bhittva) with [each of the nine 


6:7 "The last of the eight[h group, H), 


Translation of the Mülasütra 


313 


ending with the 15th [namely A 


= M] and beginning with the 7th [namely 


This gives us HR, HR, HL, HL, HE, HAI, HO, HAU, HAM. For the frozen 
locative in °saptadau, see p- 124 above. 


6:5 ‘I shall next teach the §IVATATTVA [mantra] in its eight forms, together 


with its auxiliaries, on merely knowing which a soul never becomes 
embodied again’. 


We have retained astabhedangasamyutam, assuming that the first el- 
ement, astabheda, is a pratipadika functioning as an inflected adjec- 
tive; but it is perhaps not impossible that this is a corruption of asta- 
bhedatmasamyutam. Also conceivable would be to understand it as 
one compound: “together with the eight forms that are its auxiliaries”, 
but we think it somewhat unlikely that the eight forms (taught imme- 
diately below) should be referred to as auxiliaries (taught in 6:19ff). 


6:6 ‘[Those eight forms are:] the SAKALA, NISKALA, SUNYA, KALADHYA, 


KHAMALANKRTA, KSAPANA-KSAYA, ANTASTHA, and KANTHOSTHYA|, 
which] is the eighth’ 


This verse is virtually identical to Sardhatrigatikalottara 19:2, whose 
second half BHATT gives in this form: ksapanam ca tathantastham 
kanthosthyam castamam viduh. Essentially the same chapter is to be 
found as Duiéatikalottara 15. It is possible that the account in the 
non-eclectic recensions of the Kalottara is based upon this part of the 
Mülasütra. As we shall see below, these are eight forms of the seed- 
mantra called the SIVATATTVA, which, in the Kalottara tradition (and 
nowhere in the Nisvāsa corpus) is also called the prasada or prasada. 
A yaga peopled by these eight mantras is taught in the first 50 verses 
of the Sardhagatikakalottara, which is clearly a later work than the 
Dviáatikalottara (cf. GOODALL 2007:126). As Diwakar ACHARYA He 
suggested to us, these eight inflections may be intended to be वह 
in pairs: certainly the first two form an obvious pair, and Ru E ers 
can be interpreted as forming pairs without difficulty, as we shall see 
below. 


together with the satka and with the 


last of the six[th group, viz. M] is the SAKALA, which is situated in all 


á VA TA T T ? 
bodies and is proclaimed to be the SI VA. ^ 
1H essi 
This gives us the first of the eight forms, the ee Face 
satkasamyuktam, which we have not fully translat f 


a Nisvasatattvasamhjys 
seem to mean “together with the group of six [vowels: A, A, 1,7 
0]”. But we should not exclude the possibility that satka might be used 
here as an ordinal and be intended to mean “the sixth [vowel]”, and 
that the mantra raised is therefore not HA-A-I-I-U-UM, but rather HUM. 
This is what we find in the Kalottara, in which the first half-line of 
this sequence reads (Sardhatrisatikalottara 19:3ab): prasadam sastha- 
samyuktam sadantena samanvitam. This is incidentally also further 
evidence against the possibility (alluded to in our note on 6:2 above) 
that the initial sound be KS rather than H. The same realisation of 
this mantra is presented in a snippet of the Trayodasagatikakalottara 
quoted by Ramakantha in his Sardhatrisatikalottaravrtti ad loc.: 


) U, 


sasthah svaro hy ukarah syan makarena susamvrtah 
hakare hy ardhacandro hi bhrajate tasya murdhani 
etat sakalasadbhàvah 


The sixth vowel is U, it should covered with M, [and mount- 
60] upon प; the crescent moon shines upon its head. This 
is the nature of the SAKALA. 


6:8 "The [mantra-]deity that spontaneously (svayam) exits (niskramate), 
leaving the body along with the breath, one should understand to be 
the NISKALA; it is the §IVA[-mantra] devoid of the six[th] vowel. 


The NISKALA is thus either simply H or, since it is the SAKALA without 
six vowels, HM. It is possible that the use of the verb niskramate 18 
intended to suggest a nirvacana of the name. This verse appears | is" 
in the Janasiddhanta as 25:6, with the reading niskalam tad vijaniy at 
sadvargarahitah $ivah. We have taken sadvarna? to mean ‘the sixth 
vowel’ because it seems to us that this is what satka in the previous 
verse is most likely to mean, but it is once again an irregular express 
if that is the intended sense, since we expect the ordinal sastha e 
than the cardinal Sat. Once again, a half-line, perhaps still g^ 
Trayodaáasatikakalottara, that is quoted by Ramakantha in his 56 
trisatikalottaravrtti (ad 19:4) supports this understanding: 


niskalas tvam Sivo devah santo marutasamyutah 


Yi Z ८ etter 
ou are the NISKALA [form of the mantra-]deity SIVA: the | 


following s, [namely H,] together with the breath. 


6:9 'One must split apart the incomin 


Translation of the Mülasütra 


315 


g and outgoing breaths [and thus st 
their flow]: that which remains motionless like a block || wood in ae 


body one should know to be §UNYA. One should produce it/meditate 
on it in the heart? 


Alternatively one might assume that what is like a block of wood 
(kasthavat) is the body (and not the breath). We suppose that the 
instrumental of hrdayena is intended to give the force of the locative. 
If there is a ‘ritual’ application, it is perhaps yogic suicide. One could 
imagine that, since Sunya may mean “dot”, the mantra intended here 
might be reduced to just the nasalisation; but Ramakantha in his 
Sardhatrisatikalottaravrtti ad 19:5 comments as follows: 


kumbhakavasthayam hakaram ity arthah. yad uktam tatraiva 
Sunyo bhagnasira devo bhujangakutilakrtih 
nihgabdo nirahankaro nirabhaso nirindriyah. 
What is meant is the sound H in a state of kumbhaka. This has 
been taught in the same text [the Trayodasasatikakalottara]: 


The SUNYA is the [mantra-]deity with broken head, with the 
crooked shape of a serpent, soundless, without [the breathing 
sound] AHAM, without appearance, without senses. 


6:10abc ‘That [form of the] TATTVA that is heard on earth (bhuvi) [when 


it is uttered] with the mouth in the shape that it takes on for kissing: 
[this] one should know to be KALADHYA* 


In other words, this could be the sort of whistling sound produced by 
breathing HUM through the mouth when the lips are pushed forward 
into a moue. The bhuvi looks odd, and it could be a corruption for 
something else (bhruvi?, vibhu?), but see below. The redactor or a 
transmitter of the Sardhatrigatikalottara has perhaps reformulated the 
verse so that this word does not appear in BHATT's text, and we find 
param in its place in a similar verse, which Jayaratha attributes to ie 
Kamika, when it appears as Tantraloka 32:47C-48: 


cumbakarena vaktrena yat tattvam $rüyate param 
grasamanam idam visvam candrarkaputasampute 

tenaiva syat khagamiti érimatkamika ucyate 

n BHATT’s text of the Sardhatrisati- 


But although bhuvi is not i and it is possible 


kalottara, it appears there in the Dvisatikalottara, 


316 Nisvasatattvasamhiys 
that it is not corrupt. One could suppose it to be used in deliberate 
contrast with akaSastha in 6:11, but given that the eight inflections 
appear to be arranged in pairs (observation of Diwakar ACHARYA), it 
would make better sense to understand bhuvi, ‘out in the world’, as 
marking the contrast between KALADHYA and its counterpart §UNYA 
(described in 6:9), which is ‘held in the body’ (dehe). The Trayodngn. 
gatikakalottara, that is quoted by Ramakantha in his Sardhatrigatj- 
kalottaravrtti (ad 19:6abc) has this to say: 


ye guna sakalasyoktah kaladhyasyapi te gunah 
adisvaram sudirgham ca ma au tasyottarottaram 
etadaksarasamyogat sakalad adhikas tu sah 
kalabhih sahito yasmat kaladhyah sa Sivah smrtah 


Those properties that have been taught as belonging to the SAKALA 
belong also to the KALADHYA: the initial vowel is very long, and 
the M and AU each more than the preceding. By this sequence 
of [prolated] letters, it is fuller than the SAKALA. Because it has 
[numerous] mantra-divisions (kalabhih), it is known as the [form 
of] SIVA that is KALADHYA. 


6:10d—11 ‘And hear from me the one which is in the ether (akasastham): 
one should know that that which rests there, in what is called the end 
of the upper resonance (/sound of the upward [breath]), when it dies 
away, is the one ornamented by ether [i.e. KHAMALANKRTA]. 


This might appear to refer to the “sound” of the breath in the moment 
of silence after the whistling sound of KALADHYA has been produced 
by breathing out. Ramakantha, however, who perhaps understands 
‘upper resonance’ to be a code term for H, comments as follows on this 
unit in his Sardhatrisatikalottaravrtti (ad 19:6d-7): 


Pranavrttisahitanadapraksayad  dvadasantakasastham tam 2 
carayet. sadyojatabindujam iti kecit. hrdayabijam ity any® % 
chastravidas tu Sirobijam ity ahuh. yad uktam tatraiva 
santam mayasamayuktam binduna mürdhni bhügitam 
vyomastham tam vijaniyat khamalam mantranayakam 


In the space that is the dvadaáanta, as a consequence of the P 
tion of the sound that accompanies the act of breathing put. oe 
Pronounces this. Some say that jt is produced from [the P ADYO- 
tion of] the nasalisation [at the end of the seed-syllable of] § 


Translation of the Mülasütra 


317 


JATA[, namely HAM]. Others Say that it is the seed- 


t syllable of 
the HRDAYA[, namely HAM]. But those who truly know scrip- 


ture say that it is the seed-syllable of the SIRAS[, namely HIM]. 


This is taught in the same work[, namely the Trayodasaáatika- 
kalottara]: 


The letter following S, [namely H,] together with [the letter 
known 95] maya, adorned with a dot upon its head — this 
one should know to be the great mantra [called] KHAMALAM, 
situated in the ether [beyond the body]. 


6:12 “When one listens to the God[-mantra], the master of the universe, 


with the mouth open, that [scil. the sound one hears] is taught to be 
‘destroyer of suffering’: it is held to be KSAYAT KSAPANAM? 


Both or either of the expressions duhkhaksapanam and ksayat ksa- 
panam could be intended as names of the mantra here. The first 
might seem a more likely contender, but we find ksapanat ksayam 
apparently used as the name in Uttarasitra 5:34. 


Given that it is possible that each of these mantras is produced in 
sequence, a hypothesis that is suggested already by 6:10-11 and that 
gains strength from the next verse, this might be a description of the 
sound of the in-going breath when one simply holds one's mouth wide 
open. Such an interpretation is perhaps slightly more awkward with 
BHATT’s reading brüyàt instead of Srutva; but we may note that the 
Dviásatikalottara here also has Srutva. The vowel most naturally pro- 
duced with a wide open mouth is A (which presumably explains why 
mukhadarana, ‘that which splits the mouth’, should be used frequent- 
ly in the Jayadrathayamala as code for A), and Ramakantha after 
once again recording that he was aware of disagreement about the in- 
terpretation of this verse, takes it to refer to the sound HAM in his 
Sardhatrisatikalottaravrtti ad 19:8: 
udghatitenasyena brüyad ity uccarayed devam kgapapam a 
ram evety eke. aghorabijam ity anye. hr dbijam evety anye sa 
stravidah. yad uktam tatraiva A 
vyavrtenaiva vaktrena yo 'yam 0700 ou YS 
dirghasvaravibhinnam tam santam ksapana 
ate (uccarayet = brityat) the 


: : ci 
With gaping mouth त A 


[mantra-]deity KSAPANA. Some say t 


318 Mi$vasatattvasam) ii; 
others say it is the seed-syllable of AGHORA|, namely HUM]: others 
those who truly know scripture, say that it is the seed-syllable 
HRDAYA[, namely HAM]. This is taught in the same work], 


‘Laka namely 
the Trayodasasatikakalottara]: 


That which arises in the mouth of the Lord [when Spoken] with 
a wide open mouth, that [one should know to be] KSAPANA- 
VIGRAHA, the letter following S, [namely H,] spliced with the 
[first] long vowel[, namely A). 


6:13 "That which is said to be the limit of the ended [breath] one should 
know to be ANTASTHA. It is declared to be unutterable (anuccaryam). 


While ‘upper resonance’ (ürdhvanada) in 6:11 has been assumed to 
be a coded expression that refers to the sound H, here ‘lower reso- 
nance' (adhonada) could be assumed to be a coded expression that 
refers to the sound S, the nectareous sound of the incoming breath 
(apana). Presumably it is ‘unutterable’ because it involves breathing 
in, whereas articulating some sound, at least in theory, necessarily 
involves breathing out. Ramakantha’s rather longer commentary on 
this verse in his Sardhatrisatikalottaravrtti seems difficult to construe, 
probably because it is corrupt, so we have not quoted it here. He may 
be suggesting that the sound to be produced is HAH (astrabijam eva). 


6:14-15 Following Ramakantha’s commentary (see apparatus) on the 
corresponding unit of the Sardhatrisatikalottara, we could reconstruct 
the KANTHYOSTHA (or should we rather disregard the consistently 
maintained spelling of the old manuscript and call it KANTHOSTHYA: 
as follows: H-S-R-KS-M-L-V-Y-U-M. Note that Ramakantha makes 
explicit that this is the NAVATMAN. (His justification for doing 80 does 
not seem to make sense as transmitted to us, but we can quickly ee 
that there are nine elements if we do not count the final nasalisation.) 
Our difficulty, however, is the word koti, which Ramakantha pr 
to represent S: sakárah kotih prantam saptamam ity arthah, ls 
is the ‘edge’ [next to the previously mentioned H?], in other M 
the seventh [and last in the seventh group]”. There is no par 
difficulty in getting the sound s out of the expression koti, fold 
the beginning of the Uttarasütra, in which it is shown how 2 o 
Sadasiva is to be homologised with the constituents of the pes 


Eum ee cc RES = (there 
gue could alternatively Bet koti to refer to s by taking it as a phteser पड 
5 Seven crores of mantras) and meaning therefore “seven[th in the sevent 


Translation of the Muülasütra 


6:16 


“““There is, incidentally, no explicit identifi 
Sadasiva with the NAVATMAN or the KANTHAUSTHYA ( 


319 


plainly spells out the mantra H-R-KS- 
1:10-11), which is the same as Ramakantha’s NAVATMAN except that 
it misses out the S and so requires us to count the nasalisation as the 
ninth element.??? Thus, although we could understand koti to refer to 
S in our passage, we should perhaps rather be trying to find here the 
mantra that is spelled out in Uttarasütra 1:10-11. We could do this by 
taking kofi to be a coded name intended as a further description of H 


and so added in apposition after "eighth of group eight”. A possible 
translation of these verses then would be as follows: 


M-L-V-Y-U-M (Uttarasütra 


The eighth of group eight, [namely H, which is] the top [of the al- 
phabet] (koti); the second of the seventh [group, namely RJ; that 
which is beyond the groups [of the alphabet, namely Ks] (vargati- 
tam); the end of the six[th group, namely M]; the third and fourth 
in the seventh [group, namely L and v]; and the first [of the same 
group, namely Y]; then one should join the sixth of the first [group, 
namely U], together with the 'crest of ether', [namely the candra- 
bindu: this] is held to be KANTHYOSTHA, the eighth [form of the 
SIVATATTVA]. 


Ramakantha does not explain why khasekhara might mean ‘a cres- 
cent moon and dot’, but three possibilities suggest themselves. First, 
the ‘crest of ether’ might be a kenning for the ‘moon’, which we are 
expected to guess, from context, to be a way of referring to the candra- 
bindu. Second, kha, since it means ‘ether’, might be code for bindu, 
in which case khasekhara might be rendered ‘which has bindu as its 
crown’. Third, ‘the crest of kha’ might mean a slice taken off e top 
of a grapheme representing the sound kha: for such a grapheme ‘in a 
Gupta hand of the 3-4th century CE’, see the kha reproduced by us 
SUDEVA (2007:532, top of 2nd column) and in our table below (Fig. 


8 on p. 402). 

‘He should splice the last [letter] of [all] the vargas, [namely ana 
is the Lord, with the group of five [vowels]. These are pod EN 
be the five BRAHMAMANTRAs; the syllable HAH is taught to 
RETAH [i.e. Siva’s seed]. 


cation in the Uttarasütra of this form of 
however the name is spelled), but 


is intended. 
We think it reasonable to assume that the same mantra is intend 


320 


6:17 


6:19 


Mi$vasatattvasam) ii; 


Which are the five vowels spoken of here? In the Kalottara (Sardhatry 
$atikalottara 1:9¢-10b) the five ‘short’ vowels (A, 1, U, छ, 0) are used 
to form the brahmamantras; and the tantric ‘long’ vowels form the 
angamantras, except that the ASTRA is HAH, which here in our text ` 
is given as the mantra for RETAH. We may suppose, then, that the 
five brahmamantras are HAM (SADYOJATA), HIM (VAMADEVA), HUM 
(AGHORA), HEM (TATPURUSA) and HOM (ISANA), but we should bear 
in mind that it is not made explicit that a final anusvara is intended. 


—— 


‘VAMA, [viz. HR,] together with the anusvara, is said to be VAGISI, [The 
initiand having] become the seed [of Siva] enters [into VAGIST, who is 
placed in the fire in the course of initiation,] and is at once born? 


The mantra for Vam seems to have been identified above (6:4) as 
HR, which means that VAGISI may be HRM. The alternative would 
be to take vàmà to be an abbreviated way of referring to VAMADEVA, 
in other words HI (assuming that the addition of anusvara was after 
all not intended to be understood from the previous verse), which 
would give us the mantra HIM. But it seems to us unlikely that the 
brahmamantras should be devoid of anusvaras and unlikely also, on 
the other hand, that the mantras for VAGISI and for VAMADEVA should 
have been the same. The second half of the verse is not describing the 
raising of a mantra for SADYOJATA, but simply a reminder of the ritual 
context in which VAGISI and RETAH are used, which we saw in Mila- 
sutra 4:8. One could alternatively interpret sadya eva prajayate to 
mean "is born [as] Sadyojata”: cf. 4:11 above, where we are faced with 
the same problem of interpretation. 


‘The [base of the] root-mantra (tattvam), fused with the vowel I (kar 
sambhinnam), is JNANASIDDHIKUMARIKA. After marrying her 85 Hô 
wife, he [viz. the initiand] should perform [through the oblations ० 
fered by the acarya during the course of the initiation] sacrifices; E 
gether with the [payment of the necessary] ritual fees (sadakginam/ 


This gives us HI or HIM for Jü&nasiddhikumarika, the bride of tle 
initiand who has been newly reborn in the fire. We understand gE 
sadaksinam as accusative plural. Only after he is married can E 4 
be day avibhaga and therefore property; thus only with १ wife ९१ 
perform the yajnas and give the necessary daksinas. 


"m tra- 
ogether with the fifteenth(?) [vowel, namely AM,] that [same man 


base] is declared to be the heart. Together with the first of the ~ 


Translation of the Mülasütra 321 


group, it is declared to be the head of God? 


Assuming tripaficaka to be, again, the 15th vowel, this gives HAM 
(again) as the HRDAYA, which, in the Kalottara, would be HAM. Having 
two illegible syllables at the beginning of the next half verse makes it 2 
riddle. The second of the syllables looks as though it might have been 
pta. Tentatively assuming, then, that the text once read saptavargadi- 
samyuktam, we may interpret: "Together with the first of the seven [th] 


group, [ namely Y,] it is said to be the Lord's head? In other words 
the SIRAS would be HYAM. 


6:201 ‘By combining both of them [viz. H and v?] and splicing them with 

the five [“short”?] vowels [one finds] the §IRAS (HYAM), the SIKHA 
(HYIM), the KAVACA (HYUM), the ASTRA (HYEM) and the GAYATRI 
(HYOM) in this tantra (iha). And (tatha) [for the eight] Vidyegas 
(1$varah), one should join Stva [in other words HUM?] in four ways 
with the seventh group; [the consonants of] wind, fire, 1...1 one should 
join it in four ways’ 
We require eight bijamantras for the eight Vidyegas, but the seventh 
group contains only the seven letters Y, R, L, V, $, S and S, or four 
letters if one excludes the sibilants. We may suppose that the first 
half-line of 6:21 gives us the first four VidyeSas, namely HYUM, HRUM, 
HLUM and HVUM, but what the second half-line gives us is not clear. 
Perhaps one could repeat the sequence again? 


Only five angas are given because of the omission, typical in this pe- 
riod, of the NETRA: see TAK3, s.v. netra and see our note on 3:9 
above. 


6:22abcd 'Linked with [the eight vowels] beginning with the twelfth and 
ending with the vowel U, |it furnishes the eight Lokapalas]; with the 
visarga [the same combination furnishes] the weapons (astrayonayah). 


This verse is presumably intended to identify the bijamantras m 
eight Lokapalas, starting with INDRA in the East and ending wit ISA- 
NA in the NE. The vowels of these bijamantras are AI, E, L, र R, R, U, 
U (8 vowels counting backwards from the 12th up to u). Each is per 
haps to be prefixed with H, and perhaps also followed by an ae 
We would then, following ISAACSON's suggestion, have Es Tem 
to them in order to give us mantras for their weapons (astrayo h), 


di > T án 1 NE. 
starting with VAJRA in the East and ending with TRISULA in the 


The addition of the visarga to the mantras of the Lokapalas to yield 


T 0४०८७८८८७८ 


mantras for their weapons recalls also the Kalottara’s use of the visar 
ga for ASTRA alone, and it seems to be what is taught in the account 
of another yaga later in the text: Guhyasūtra 9:196-7. The term 
astrayoni appears to be archaic: outside the Nisvāsa corpus we find 
it in only one place, the account of bāhyayāga in the Sarvajnanottan, 


(5:38): 
vidyeSvaraganesanam asanam pranavam viduh 
bindum tu lokapalanam visargam castrayonisu 


It is clear that it refers to the weapons of the Lokapalas, perhaps 
because it is intended to be parallel to expressions such as devayoni, 
‘born of a god’, and tiryagyoni. Also possible is that the seed-syllables 
that are the mantras of the weapons are thought of as the sources from 
which those weapons are produced, in which case the term would not 
be a bahuvrihi and would primarily designate not the weapons but 
rather the mantras of those weapons: “[the mantras that are] the 
sources of the weapons [of the Lokapalas]". 


6:22e-23 ‘The Lord [viz. HUM or H?], combined with the second of the sev- 
enth [group, namely R] is proclaimed to be the throne of Candanatha, 
god of gods. Splice this [namely HR] with the fifteenth [vowel] and it 
becomes Candiga himself? 


The throne of Candega could be HRUM, if we assume that the R is 
inserted into the mulamantra, but this would be odd, since it would 
yield a throne-mantra that would be heavier than the deity sitting 
upon it. Perhaps it is after all simply HRA, which would mean 8 mantra 
without a final anusvara. Or should we assume that we are required to 
supply the addition of a visarga from 22d? Candega himself is HRAM. 
The inserted semi-vowel is the semi-vowel of fire and thus of anger. 


. = ऱ्य. T1 nd 
6:24ab 'He should designate his five auxiliaries as: AM, IM, UM, AM १ 
AH? 


cs A 5. of 
anga could be considered to be an archaic neuter plural in long ® | 


DEUS MN more likely, a masculine plural form with frozen PE 
third possibility is that it is a transmissional corruption of 81887 


à ; j on 
6:24c-25b “He should apply the NAVATMAN beginning with the Ws X oe 
the left foot: this is taught to be the qualifying rite T--T sakala. 


Ti ithout 
I his damaged unit appears to be giving a sort of sakalikarana Qm iab 
this term being used, unless it was contained in 6:258, NOW UI 


Translation of the Mülasütra 
323 


damaged) involving the imposition onto the body of the various parts 
of the NAVATMAN (this name appears here for the second time in this 
text, the first being in 2:3, but, as we have suggested above, it probably 
refers to the KANTHAUSTHYA raised in 6:14-15) and beginning with the 
big toe of the left foot and going up, perhaps, to the dvadaganta or the 
Saktidvadasanta (neither of which terms being attested in the sütras 
of the Nisvasa). 


6:25c-26 ‘He should thus (?) form the bijamudra and use it for the throne. 
This mudra will [also] be used for [worshipping both] the sakala and 
the niskala [deity]. But for [all] other [deities] the namaskara [should 
be used], or one should use the amrta [mudra]. This [last] is that 
which makes full whatever is incomplete [in a ritual performance]. 
The kotimudra [is used] for dismissing [the deity]? 


Note that Mülasütra 6:26c and 6:26f recur as Uttarasütra 4:23ab. 


The Uttarasitra (4:10ff) gives instructions about how to form these 
mudras. There is, however, no indication later of the function of 
the amrta mudrà, and another mudrà is there added the function 
of which could be understood to be similar, namely the dravyamudra 
(see Uttarasutra 4:15d-18b). But the Uttarasitra’s description given 
of the amrtà reveals that it is what is in later works commonly called 
the dhenumudra, the function of which is often said to be to transform 
the materials used in worship into amrta (see TAK3 s.v. dhenumudra). 
Perhaps the function of this ritual gesture has changed over time? 


7:1-2 "This is that supreme reality, the unutterable supreme SIVA; this is 
that supreme brahman [taught in the Upanisads]; this is the supreme 
imperishable (aksaram). Having understood it in its various forms, a 
man will not be reborn. He will not be subject to sin or merit. 


TATTVA refers here again also presumably to the mülamantra, in other 
words the mantra that is Siva in the Mülasutra. But, as we have seen, 
this could take a variety of forms: SAKALA, NISKALA, जम 
etc. The qualifier anuccaryam might seem to suggest that it is the 
NISKALA that is meant here, but the next verse implies instead that 
TATTVA refers to all the forms collectively. As for the Pme of pon 
qualifier, it presumably does not mean *unpronounceable', but rather 
‘whose essence cannot be articulated’. 


TATTVA is not stained by stealing gold or other 


7T:3—4 ‘He who knows that s braune: 


things, by eating the flesh of a cow or by slayin 


Sal Nisvasatattuasambp 
If one knows the TATTVA one is not stained if one has had Sexual 
relations with those with whom it is forbidden, if one has slain all the 
worlds with their moving and unmoving creatures, nor by such Sins as 
that of drinking fermented liquor.’ 


The suppletion in 7:4b makes good sense and, even though we might 
expect (AA) a reference here to the fifth of the mahapatakas, as we 
find in Guhyasütra 16:72, it is difficult to see how such a reference 
could be phrased involving the still legible letters. 


7:5-6 ‘That man in whose awareness the TATTVA dwells, o goddess, is 
permanently pure, even if he gives himself to engaging in thousands of 
deceptions and lies and to injuries of others. By reciting the TATTVA 
only once he attains all the benefit [obtained by one] who lives for a 
hundred years eating nothing but fruit and practising the penance of 
the five fires? 


The construction is anacoluthic, but, as our translation reflects, what 
is clearly meant with 7:6 is that the benefits of eating only fruit and 
being surrounded by five fires (four fires and the summer sun) for a 
hundred years can be attained simply by uttering the TATTVA once. 
À similar anacoluthic structure is to be found in the next couple of 
verses. 


7:7 ‘By reciting the TATTVA only once one obtains all the benefit that some 
one attains by offering a thousand Soma-sacrifices...’ 


All but the first of the syllables are missing in 7b: perhaps there je 
a reference to the giving of gold, or perhaps just a neutral expans! 
of what we already see in 7a. 


७६ ७ i j b 
7:8 ‘By reciting the TATTVA only once one obtains all that is wa E. 
one who performs for twelve years [regular] worship of Siva an 
[daily] fire rites: 


hi ; not 
À hierarchy is presumably intended, up to this point, but perhaps 
with the following verse. 


p T z jons); 
7:9 That person in whose heart the TATTVA dwells has given [all d AT 
he has performed all forms of austerity, he has offered all ‘fone 
Sacrifices, along with [generous] ritual fees. And he has Pe 


[self-Jinundation at every sacred bathing place’ ith 
. ६ so. easels 
T:10 He who constantly recites the TATTVA achieves all this: 


wealth, power, and the manifold objects of his desires. 


Translation of the Milasitra 


325 


If we were to retain karmà$ ca, an irregular usage, we would translate 


“and [the results 01] manifold [ritual] acts". This could then be taken 
to be pointing forward to the siddhis listed in 7:11ff. 


7:11-12 “The supernatural power to travel great distances on foot, the su- 


pernatural sword, bovine bezoar-stones, the [magical] sandals, magical 
pellets (gudika), the power to fly through the air, [magical] tooth- 
cleaning sticks and [magical] sacred thread (dantakasthapavitrakam), 
eye-salve for invisibility, the power to forcibly attract, the power to 
sow dissension, the power to drive out, the power to kill, the power to 
render infertile, the power to transfer the effects of poison, ...? 


Some of these are familiar (see e.g. TAK2 s.v. khadga and Guhya- 
sutra 3:56, quoted on p.78 above, and for the use of bovine bezoar- 
stones or ox-bile orpiment, cf, e.g., Guhyasütra 10:27ff, quoted on 
p. 80 above), and some less so. For the emendation of dandakastha? 
to dantakastha?, cf. Guhyasütra 10:103-4, where we find a similar list 
of substances and magical objects that are classified as siddhidravyani: 


Sila rocanam afijanam dantakasthan tathaiva ca 
siddhartham upavitan ca sakamandalum eva ca 

cakram kanapa-śūlañ ca patti$am vajratomaram 
ratham vrsam tathanyani siddhidravyani yani ca 


(Here kanapa-, which we assume to be a variant form of kanapa-, a 
missile, is an emendation from kanaya-) Cf. also Svacchanda 4:11. 
uccata is presumably a shortened form (to fit the metrical cadence) 
of uccatana (driving someone out of a place). nirbijam perhaps refers 
to nirbijikarana (cf. Svayambhuvasütrasarigraha 20:14, as corrected by 
GOODALL 2007:150, and Sardhatrisatikalottara 21:2). 


T:13—14 '.. causing dead wood to grow, removing poison gadi counten 


ing fire, destroying Grahas and Raksasas, breaking the powe nor ne 
mantras of one’s opponents, paralysing an enemy army, lifting E 
mountains, causing [animate or inanimate things] to tee possessed, the 
binding of all the wicked [—all this he may achieve]: 


paramantraprabheda refers to the blocking of the effects da EM 
uttered by someone else. In support of nagoddharanam, E कट 
cite Parakhya 14:46bd (calayed bhütaraksasan - y y Eds 
api) and Malinivijayottara 13:378 (curnayaty साक का a EN Satika- 
Strength of which nagoddhare was emended to Ta is mue dd 
kalottara 43cd) (see GOODALL 2007:150). Alternatively, 


326 


Nisvasatattvasampirs 


conjecture nagoddharanam, which might refer to the raising of Snakes 
from the underworld (but probably not to the removal of Snakes, since 
we would expect derivations of the verb uddhr, when used With ani- 
mate beings, to carry a nuance of saving them). In support of this one 
could adduce two passages, the first being Svayambhuvasütrasarigrohs 


20:14: 
nirbijikarane caiva himasya ca vina$ane 
nàgoddhare riputsade dharanam dharayed imam 


nirbij? ] conj.; nivij? MY; nivicr Ed. 


The second is an unidentifed Buddhist tantric fragment transcribed 
by Harunaga ISAACSON from NAK 1-1697 2/23 (NGMPP B 31/22), 
on f. 2r of which nagoddharanam is attested, next to nagakarsanam, 
and followed by the words nagakanyakanàm ca visesatah. 


7:15ab ‘He may eliminate his own or others’ sins by scales|-initiation]? 


We could also interpret: *He may purify [the retributive effects of] his 
own or others” bad deeds [in such a way that their removal may be 
known to have taken place] by means of a set of scales.” In this case 
construing the instrumental form tulaya is a little odd. According to 
Tattvasarigraha 36, if an initiand is weighed before initiation, and then, 
after the removal of papa through mantras (in initiation), the initiate 
is weighed again, he may be found to be lighter. This may or may 
not be what is referred to in Sardhatrisatikalottara 21:15¢-16 as yeh 
See also Nareévarapariksaprakàsa p. 209, where such a phenomenon ® 
said to be observed after non-tantric prayascitta, and the Svacchanda- 
tantroddyota ad 5:89. (See TAK3 s.v. tuladiksa.) 


775०4 “He can accomplish all [magical] rites by employing the supreme 


7:16 


mantra’ 


; e 
If he touches a bound soul (pasum) with ... ending in the seeds 
~ together with the syllable PHAT, then they [i.e. that boun 
instantly ascend from [the body to liberation]. 


The wording and interpretation are uncertain here (and the US 
plural utkramanti in the second half suggests that the senten 


e of the 
ce ma. 


"d 0 
have been anacoluthic), but it seems that the verse refers E an the 
euthanasia which bestows liberation. The opening SY lla ed ver 


verse might well have been paśuñ ca. The subject of the P 


Translation of the Muülasütra पुत्र 
utkramanti might have been the vital breat 


hs (prana) of the indivi 
who is touched. (p. na) of the individual 


7:17 “He should consider as an initiate any person whom that wise one 

touches with his hand or beholds with his eyes after meditating upon 
the TATTVA. 
In later sources, e.g. Ajitagama 77:2-4, these procedures were to be- 
come known as spargadiksa and caksust diksà. Somewhat earlier, the 
expression cakusi to describe a form of initiation is used by Ramanatha 
in 87cd (T. 284, p.56) of his Siddhantadipika, whose final verses, as 
transmitted in T. 914, date the work to 1071 AD (993 Saka): 


visistamalapakasya karya syac caksusi mata. 


7:18 ‘Upon learning the TATTVA, if some doubt should somehow (syat) 

arise (bhavet), then yoga is then (tada) to be practised for the sake of 
inspiring in oneself faith? 
Perhaps one could instead take pratyaya as “evidence” and understand 
“in order to produce evidence for himself to have belief”. The combi- 
nation of syat and bhavet is so odd that we are tempted to emend the 
text, for example to yady asya, but this would give an awkward (and 
irregular) metrical rhythm. 


7:19-20b ‘He who, engaged in yoga, controlled (suyantritah), meditates 
[on the TATTVA] for twelve years attains the power that consists in the 
[eight] properties beginning with the capacity to make oneself very 
small (animadigunaisvaryam), and omniscience, [and the capacity for] 
aural, visual and mental cognition from a great distance. 
There are echoes here of Pafupatasutra 1:20-4: tato. sya yogah pra- 
vartate (20) düradarsanasravanamananavijnanani casya pravartante 
(21), sarvajfiata (22), manojavitvam (23) and kamarupitvam (24). 


7:20c-22 ‘The condition of attaining all his desires arises, iud He aid 
haka remains in this same body. He may pass into thebadies soe 
he is not tormented by hunger and thirst; he is not pained was ees! 
water, poison, fire, cold or heat. Whatever has आ on he 
or is happening in the triple world is directly perce टि " १ 
attains the state of liberty to act at will that is dm ; a datam 
Cf. Nayasütra 4:143-144b and, for the expression dice i हर 
vrajet, Nayasutra 4:82d. If we retain the above B aues ae 
cording to which 7:20c and 20d are construed tog , 


MOSS) rss) LU 


328 Nisvasatattuasamhits 
taking 7:20d with 7:21a, then we must either assume that the nom. 
inative sadhakah is to be construed as a genitive or locative or that 
the sentence is anacoluthic. Another option would be to emend to 
sadhake, which is supported by Nayasūtra 4:142c-143b (an almost 
identical reprise of Mülasütra 7:20c-21b), and by the KSTS reading of 
Svacchanda 7:328c-329b (the Nepalese MS consulted for Appendix 1 
however, has sadhakah), and by Tantrasadbhava 28:58c—-59b. 

For the siddhi of entering others’ bodies, see TAK3 s.v. parakàyapra. 
7059. 


[brahmins] who know the Vedas. Whichever place he [who knows 
the TATTVA] goes to will become purified. The person whose alms he 
accepts will be raised up [from hells or bad births] together with [seven 
generations of] his patriline [before and after him)? 


7:25 "If someone gives hundreds of thousands of gold coins (niskasya) to one 
who has crossed to the further shore of Vedic learning, ... [he obtains| 
the same [if he gives] ... [to one who knows the] $rvA- | TATTVA]" 
This probably conveys essentially the sense of this damaged verse. We 
assume that the singular niskasya has been used with the sense of the 


Plural. We guess that the two syllables after Siva might have been 
tattva. 


7:26 ‘If they know the God of Gods, the Lord of the universe, together 
with his eight forms, then what need do men have to abandon the 
home and dwell in the forest [practising asceticism]?' 


7:27 ‘Others may] torture the body with chastity and such and su. T 
ceticism and the like; these [who know the TATTVA] are liberated १ 
knowledge: for them there are no [such] restraints.’ 


: T 11: a 
8:1 his Supreme TATTVA, which is beyond doubt, has been (uc M 
briefly in order to favour you; you should not give it to E 
has been initiated into another [tantra]? 
The coco paradiksite could instead mean ‘to one aes ] a ४2 
another religion’, or ‘to one initiated by [someone belong mi Netro- 


[tradition], or simply ‘to one initiated by another person’ 
tantra 15:29. 


ated into 


Translation of the Mülasütra 
329 


8:2—3 'There are evil men of many kinds who Promulgate the views of other 
systems. Through money, by trickery or by following [hypocritically] 
the course of service, they act to steal the truth/TATTVA. And once 
they have attained it they will not rejoice, [thinking:] "I knew this 
before and am reading it [again] in this tantra?’ 


tattvapahartum could either be seen as a case of irregular elision of a 
final accusative ending, as the use of the pratipadika (tattva) instead 
of an accusative, or as a compound of noun and verb. The former two 
solutions seems to us more likely. It seems odd to say that these people 
“will not rejoice", and it is perhaps possible that nabhinandanti is an 
error for nabhivandanti, in which case we could interpret this to mean: 
"And once they have attained it they won't respect it, [thinking:]...” 


8:4-5 ‘Knowing all of the above, the wise person should not reveal the 

TATTVA, [thereby] deluding [such persons] with mantras, mudras, in- 
troductions to initiation-mandalas, by practices for the acquisition of 
powers, by yoga, by ascetic observances, by asceticism, meditations, 
repetition of mantras and such. Only when he realises that [an ini- 
tiand] is in [the requisite state of spiritual] tranquility may he reveal 
the TATTVA to him. 
We first considered interpreting part of this differently: “When he re- 
alises that [an initiand] has been calmed by practices for the acquisition 
of powers, by yoga, by enjoined conduct, by asceticism, meditation, 
recitation and such, then he should impart to him the TATTVA.” For 
prabhedayet in the sense of ‘disclose, reveal’, cf. bhedayet in 8:9d be- 
low. 


8:6 “To a brahmin he may give it after three, four or five [years]; to a 
Ksatriya after six, seven or eight; to a Vai$ya after ten or twelve; to 
Sudras [after] twenty? < 
That it is units of time that are referred to here becomes clear in 8:9. 
Compare Sarvajñānottara 15:29-30b, where the South अ up 
(T. 334), as here, prescribes twenty years of probation for Su T kk 
that of the ninth-century Nepalese manuscript excludes them entirely: 


diksakale tv amīmāmsyā jüanadane vicis o 
tricatuhparicabhir vipre ksatriye हलक जति 2 
varsair dvàdasabhir vaigye $üdre jnanam na ९4०८ 
i : ficabhir vipre 
e 29cd tricatuhparicabhir vipre ksatriye ] er HERTA E p : 
ksatrye N; tricatuhpañcabhih vipraksatri 334 


330 


Nisvasatattvasamhiss 


dvadagabhir vaisye 80018 jfianam na dapayet] em.; varssai 2 
hir vai$ya śūdre jaanan na dapayet N; astabhir dagabhir Vai$ye हाता 
viméatya dapayet 1334 


[Aspirants] need not be examined at the time of initiation, but One 
should examine them when it comes to imparting knowledge to 
them: to a brahmin, [he may impart knowledge] after three, four 
or five [years]; to a Ksatriya after seven or nine; to a Vaigya after 
twelve years; to a Südra he should not give knowledge. 


8:7 ‘One should give it having [first] thoroughly examined [the potential 


8:8 ‘ 


initiand]; to one who does not believe, to one who denigrates (Siva, his 
teachings, the guru, or His followers], to one who is deceitful, and to 
one who is dishonest one should not give the supreme TATTVA? 


[If there is] a brahmin who is deceitful and an honest mleccha, then it 
is to the mleccha that one should give [the TATTVA]; one should not 
give it to the brahmin* 


8:9 ‘Ifthe guru is pleased, having realised that a disciple is full of devotion, 


[then] for such [a disciple] no [minimum] period of time [of study and 
service] is taught [to be required]; he may reveal [the mantra known 
as TATTVA to such a disciple] at once? 


The same statement, but garbled by transmission, is to be found in 
chapter 10 of the Timirodghatana, as are a number of the other verses 
of this chapter (see the table on p. 72). 


‘Having taught him this supreme tattvasamhità, if he realises that his 
disciple is full of devotion, he may appoint him as an &carya. 


We could also understand “Having taught this same person the tative 
samhita”. Perhaps there is an intentional play on words here A 
-tattvasamhitā is an alternative way of saying -tantra Or वि 
but in the context we think at once also of the TATTVA (viZ i e 
mantra). Could this expression then contain the earliest occurrent 
of samhita used in the sense of a group of related mantras, ? i 
we find in a handful of our other earliest sources (6.8. Sardhatris? 

kalottara 3:2, Svayambhyuvasütrasangraha 21:1, Sarvajfianottaro E le 
and 25:16) and then commonly in later literature? A differ ent p sae 
restitution would be: adhyapayitva etat tu tattvasamhitam Lf 


T T hi Š - = yaa A | ary a 
S Verse introduces a very brief account of how an 4८81, ; 
to be consecrated (abhiseka). 


Translation of the Mülasütra 


8:11 


8:12 


8:13 


331 


‘Having drawn the mandala of the TATTVA following the procedure 


taught above [at the beginning of chapter 5], the expert may inundate 


[the disciple] using eight [water-filled] pots empowered by the recitation 
of the eight [forms of the] TATTVA? 


We have emended to tattvabhuvanam (a na-vipula), but we could per- 
haps have retained tattvambhuvanam (a bha-vipula) and interpreted 
it as an irregular compound with the same Sense: ‘the mandala of 
the TATTVA’. The ‘eight TATTVAs’ are the eight forms taught above 
in Mulasutra 6:6ff. Should the acarya-to-be stand beside or in the 
mandala? 


"To the accompaniment of the sound of Vedic recitation, along with 
the noise of songs and instrumental music, he should lead him to the 
North-East [of the sacrificial ground] and he [viz. the officiant] should 
stand facing the North-East’. 


iganyabhimukhah has been emended, for it would be irregular to start 
with a short vowel, though perhaps this could have been the result of 
an irregular sandhi after nitva. The word contains a long à as though 
isanya were an adjective meaning ‘North-Eastern’ (cf. devya for devi. 
Alternatively, we could assume that the adjective presupposed was 
i$àni and that the initial vowel of abhimukha has been lengthened 
by an irregular internal sandhi. The latter solution seems equally 
plausible. 


The North-Eastern direction appears, incidentally, to be the only one 
of the intermediate directions explicitly associated with a presiding 
deity (Iéana in the Mülasütra. This may simply because there hap- 
pened to be no occasion to refer to the other presiding deities (two 
of which are alluded to in Uttarasütra 2:17 below), but the absence 
is perhaps worth mentioning since EINOO (2005c:111ff) has p 
drawn attention to the absence of a consensus about the guardians ० 
the intermediate directions until the period of the grhyaparisista texts, 
Which he dates “very roughly between several centuries B.C. and the 
sixth century A.D.” (2005¢:119). 

o has just received abhiseka) 
[saying:] “You are an acarya, 
[through performing 


“He should give [to the new acarya wh 
his throne, parasol, turban and scissors, 
equal [therefore] to Siva [himself]: bestow grace 
initiations] upon the world!" ' 2d 
carya 
In other texts we have longer lists of the accoutrements of the acary 


" १४८७८८००७८ 


that are to be handed over. Cf. Svacchanda 4:470-4710: 


usnisam mukutadyams ca chatram padukam asanam 
hastyasvasivikadyam$ ca rajangani hy aSesatah 470 
karanim kartarim khatikam sruksruvau darbhapustakam 
aksasütradikam dattva... 


Also Somasambhupaddhati, acaryabhisekavidhi 17-18: 


usnisam makutam chatram padukacamarani ca 
gajasvasibikadini kartarim karanim ghatim 17 
aksamalam$ ca darbham$ ca sruksruvau pustakadi ca 
adhikaram gurus tasmai Sisyaya vinivedayet 18 


Here only the throne, parasol, turban and scissors are mentioned. In- 
stead of emending to Sivatulyas tvam acaryah, we could retain Sivat- 
ulya! tvam acaryah. 


8:14 ‘He should not give the $ivasasana in order to acquire wealth, or on be- 
ing nagged, or to relatives [just because they are relatives], to someone 
who has given help, in [the cause of] a quarrel. 


dravyalabhe could also be interpreted to mean “in exchange for the 
receipt of money”. The transmitted text is krtopakarakalahe, ‘to one 
who has done favours or to one with whom one has quarelled’, but 
we have emended on the strength of the parallel in the Matasam 
(VASUDEVA'S transcription of NGMPP B28/16, f.14v): 


tribhih samvatsarair vipre bhūmipe paficabhih priye 
dasabhir varsair vai$yo dvadasai Sudrajatisu 


| : ed 

8:15 ‘One should give Siva’s teaching to one who is at peace, who 15 b 
to Siva, who has faith, who is not mean-spirited, who is gt pue 
who has compassion? 


are 
Clearly the sense is that of Sraddadhanaya, anasuyave Ca, Doi 


assuming that anusiyave is an authorial oddity. 


० t 1:31 13 res 
8:16 ‘One should not accept disciples (&isyasamgraham) while in the pr 


iyi or give 
ence of one's own guru, or cause [students] to read [viz. teac k the 
exposition [in the presence of one’s guru], nor should one ve 
Pupils of one's guru. 


Translation of the Mülasütra 


8:17 


333 


The acarya should not take on his own disciples (for initiation) while 
he is still beside his (abhiseka-)guru, for this would be disrespectful. 
The same prohibition, but garbled by transmission, is to be found 
in chapter 10 of the T'imirodghatana, as are a number of the other 
verses of this chapter (see the table on 9.72). Cf. Sarvajüünottara 
11:39c-41b, which Aghoragiva introduces (MS 47852, p. 132) as being 
about the newly consecrated guru's behaviour in front of his own gu- 
ru (athavābhişiktasyāpi (em.; "syapa 47852) guruvisaye (em.; “visayo 
47852) vrttim aha): 
cchatram naivagrato dharyam nosnisam na ca paduke 39 
kiritany ujjvalanty evam na kuryad gurusannidhau 
nadhyapanam prakurvita vyakhyanam Sisyasamgraham 40 
guro$ caiva samipastho gurusisyaprabodhanam 


° 39C-40b ] 47852, T334; om. T760 e 39c chatram ] 47852; cit- 


ram T334 ० 39d nosnisam] 47852; nosnamsam T334 ० 40a 
kirtany  ujjvalanty evam] conj; kirtadyujvalanty evan 47852; 
kiritadyujvalajvalamty evam T334 ० 419 caiva] T334, T760; caiva? 


47852 ० 41b gurusisya? T334, T760; gurus Sisya? 47852 


He should not [cause someone to] carry a parasol [above him] in 
front [of his guru], nor, similarly (evam), should he wear (kuryat?) 
a turban, sandals, brilliant crowns in the presence of his guru. He 
should not teach, expound, accept [new] students or instruct the 
students of his guru when he is in the vicinity of his guru. 


This is a problematic verse. Perhaps it means: ‘[The incoming guru], 
since he has for a long time observed [his old] guru’s unparalleled Siva- 
knowledge, should happily inform him [viz. take his permission?] and 
worship him like Siva? 

Once again, the unit is to be found in the Timirodghatana, but - 
poorly transmitted that it is of no help (VASUDEVA’s transcription ० 
NGMPP A35/3, f.38v): 


~- pū —tathà jfieyam drstvà ca suciram guruh 
nivedaye —-püjaye ca tatha guruh 


d 
In the light of this, we might instead have emended to guruh an 


interpreted: "The guru, having long observed his sca d 
unparalleled Saiva knowledge, should transfer [his Ga himself? But 
py in his mind, and worship him as though he were 


334 


8:18 


8:19 


Nisvasatattvasamhiss 


the problem with this is that the contiguous verses suggest rather that 
the subject here really must be the newly anointed acarya. 


A third possibility is that the new guru sees unparalleled knowledge in 
another person and informs his own guru before initiating this Person 
as his successor: ‘[The incoming guru], having long observed unpar- 
alleled Siva-knowledge [in another person], should happily inform his 
guru, [obtain his permission,] and [then, having consecrated that other 
person,] he should worship [that newly consecrated person] as Siva: 


The lingering presence of the acarya’s acarya upon the scene Suggests 
that the religion does not yet envisage a complete transfer of all the 
duties and prerogatives of one acarya to the next, and this could per- 
haps be taken as evidence that the acarya was not yet (or not yet 
typically) an abbatial figure vested with the wealth and infrastructure 
of a large matha. A total transfer of duties from one acarya to his 
successor is something that we find attested from the Svayambhuva- 
sutrasangraha onwards, for in the conclusion of the ritual speech of 
the outgoing acarya there we read (Svayambhuvasitrasangraha 16:21, 
as quoted in the Paramoksanirasakarikavrtti on karika 14): 


adya sankramito yo 'yamadhikàro maya tvayi 
sa kartavyas tvaya tavad yavat samkramito ’nyatah 


These duties that I transfer to you today are to be performed by 
you until they are transferred to another. 


(In the Mysore edition, the second half reads: kartavyam hi tay 
yavan naiva sankramito "nyatah.) 


‘One who behaves otherwise, acting in a manner contrary to णा 
with respect to his own guru, loses initiation, knowledge; gui 
and will reach hell? 


fet 6 it: from 
"From recitation and from studying [this text] one obtains merit; {ro 


memorising [it] (dharanàt) the fruit one attains is incomparab E id 
who recites it is Mahadeva; he who understands the sense a 
himself!’ 

But why merit in a tantric context? This is perhaps an a e 
gesting that the boundary between the laukika and the tantric 7९ 2 jie 
worlds has not yet been drawn or not yet fully assumed. Te is 
hierarchy between Mahadeva and Siva is noteworthy: Maha 


Perhaps typically the God of lay Saiva devotion. 


Translation of the Mülasütra, 3 
35 


8:20 "This supreme tattvasamhità has been fully taught. All the members 


of one's gotra are liberated if one has it even [only] in [the form of] a 
manuscript. 


The assertion of the second half of this verse would be problematic 
in developed Saiddhantika soteriology, since there should be no merit- 
sharing (tantric religion being one of power-seeking individualists). 
For the last pàda, cf. Svacchanda 7:238: yaval lekhye ‘pi tisthati. 


We have to assume that Samhita is treated as masculine for metrical 
reasons and that the m between tattvasamhita and uttamah, which 
could be authorial or transmissional, is a euphonic glide that obviates 
hiatus. 


Note that the Mülasütra evidently considers itself complete at this 
point and does not announce any further section of text (cf. the con- 
clusion of the 1st satka of the Jayadrathayamala and various places in 
the Brahmayamala (observation of Shaman HATLEY)). 


क नेट Posh ७ 


TRANSLATION OF THE UTTARASUTRA 


1:1-3 ‘In the fifth stream, called the mantra-|stream], is the work known 
by the name of the Mülasütra. |It is of one hundred and fifty plus| 
thirteen 8101085 [in length]. It is spoken of with four names, the first 
being the Mülasütra; the second the Adi-; the third is “The First”; the 
fourth the Pürvasütra. Now that that Sūtra is completed, the second 
Sutra is taught. 


These first 3 prefatory verses link what was probably originally a free- 
standing work, the Mülasutra, with the Uttarasitra. It is possible that 
they were written at the same time as the Uttarasitra, but also possible 
that they were written at some later point with a view to knitting 
together the first two parts of the Ni$vasa corpus. The first might 
actually have been written as a colophon verse to the Mulasutra. It 
locates the Mülasütra in the ‘fifth stream’. This probably refers to the 
classification of 4 ‘streams’ of non-tantric religion that are presented, 
along with a fifth, tantric, stream, the Mantramarga, in Nisvasamukha 
1:21. The second statement is damaged, but it presumably gave the 
size of the Mulasitra to be 163 Sloka-length units ([150]+13). The 
missing pada therefore presumably conveyed the sense ‘150’. A possible 
restitution of 1:1c might be sardham ekaSatan tat tu, except that the 
final syllable, visible at the beginning of the second line of the folio, 
seems really to be ntu. The remaining part of these verses explains that 
the Mülasütra may be referred to by four names: milasutra, pri 
prathamasütra and pürva-sütra and that the Uttarasutra 15 the secon 
sūtra of the Nisvasa. No other sections of text are explicitly referred 
to, and although it is possible that the mention of the fifth ora 
an implicit allusion to the Nisvasamukha (see p. 30), it is E hae 
that the ‘streams’ figured in some other early source now lost to us. 
because we assume that 


; apta sütre as two words z 
We have printed samapta silir al vowel of samapte has 


a locative absolute is intended and that the fin 
been shortened for the metre (see p.126). 


j Nisvdsatattvasamhits 


1:4 ‘The goddess spoke: a l 
The liberatory eight-fold Sadasiva which you have taught, did it m. 
of itself, or was it produced, o Lord?' 


The eightfold Sadàéiva is of course the TATTVA, whose eight forms 
were taught in Mulasutra 6:6ff. Note that the suspicious syllables that 
K supplies in 1:4c are enclosed in round brackets and are therefore a 
conjectural restitution by the scribe of K. 


1:5 “The Lord replied: 

Utterly inactive, partless, the Lord Siva is the overlord of all the uni- 
verse. She who is Sivani is His Sakti; [she is] filled with the power of 
Siva (sivatejopabrmhita). 

We earlier conjectured tasya Saktih Siva nitya, ‘His Sakti is the eternal 
(nitya) Siva, filled with the power of Siva’; but even though Sivani, 
“spouse of Siva”, is not listed among the familiar spouse-names of this 
type, such as Bhavani, Rudrani and Indrani, and is not, as far as we 
know, elsewhere attested, it seems not impossible that it should have 
been used here and treated as ending in a short vowel. 


This may not seem to be a very direct response to the question, but 
it is a response nonetheless: Siva does not arise at all, for Siva and his 
Sakti are eternal. 


1:6 ‘From Sakti, once she is joined with the power of Siva, arises bindu. 
These [namely Siva, Sakti and bindu] are like sun, sun-stone and fire. 
Siva and Sakti are without desire’ 


This interpretation assumes that samyukta is a contraction of samyuk- 
tayah, that adityamanivahni is a triple dvandva used without an end- 
ing and that niskamah śivaśaktayah is plural for dual. We first E 
terpreted (less plausibly) as follows: “She is joined with the pu 
of Siva [and once this happens,] from Sakti there arises bindu. Pi 
powers [come forth] without partiality, just as fire [comes forth 

the sun-stonesun-stone.” din 
Cf Nayasūtra 2:7, which occurs also as Svacchanda 11:317: 9" we 
which the absence of kama is emphasised (which explains ह i 


have decided not to emend N's niskramah to nigkrantàh i 
Saurasamhità 1:12: 


adityamanisamyogad vahnih samjayate yatha 
Saktitejasamayogad bhanuh sambhavita tatha 


Translation of the Uttarasutra 
339 


1:7-8 “This [below] is the creation of the Lord of the universe; it arises from 
Sadasiva. He has been explained to be eightfold [as the eight forms of 
the TATTVA]; He is established in the nine [principal] elements [of the 
universe]. The tenth should be known to be Sakti and above Sakti is 
Siva. Knowing and understanding this, the guru becomes one capable 
of destroying bondage? 


We note that desikah pasaha bhavet is a cliché found frequently in the 
recensions of the Kalottara, e.g. as Sardhatrisatikalottara 1:6b. 


1:9 “The goddess spoke: 
How can he, the god of gods, Sadasiva, be understood to be tenfold? 
And you have not taught me the mantras of the path [to Siva] that is 
the cosmos’ 


This verse introduces the homologisation of the ten principal elements 
that make up the universe with the nine elements of the NAVATMAN, 
the eighth of the forms of Sadasiva. It is not certain that the compound 
prakriyadhvanamantrah should not be taken as a triple dvandva. 


1:10—12 "The lord spoke: 
The sound U should be understood to be prakrti; the sound YA is held 
to be purusa; the sound VA one should know to be niyati; the sound 
LA is said to be kala; mayatattva is the sound MA; the sound KSA is 
vidya; the sound RA should be understood to be I$vara; the sound HA 
is Sadasiva. dehavyapin is the ninth; Sakti is held to be the tenth. 
Supreme is Siva, unpronounced (akathyah) and formless, the Cause.’ 


It is to be noted that this is the first appearance of a sequence of 
post-Sankhya tattvas in the text. 

As we have explained in our note on Mülasütra 6:14-15, we think 
that these verses presuppose H-R-KS-M-L-V-Y-U-M as the form of the 
NAVATMAN. Cf. Svacchanda 5:5-7, in which the same homologisations 
are given, up to Sadaáiva. Thereafter the two texts differ, = e 
Svacchanda has brought the passage in line with its more develope 
cosmography: 


dharitryadi pradhananta ukaro vàcakah smrtah 
purugasya yakaro vai ragatattvanvitasya tu 5 
niyamika vakarena vidyatattvasamanvita 
kàlam kalam lakarena kalpayita varanane 6 
mayatattvam makarena ksakarena ca vidyaya 


940 


Ni$vasatattvasam) ji; 


rephenevesvaram tattvam hakarena sadasivam 7 
pranavena sada Saktir nyasitavya varanane 
vyapinim samanam cordhvam tatraiva tu visodhayet 8 


5a pradhananta] N; pradhanantam KSTS ० 5d tu N; ca KSTS 
e Ga niyamika] conj.; niyamita N; niyamika KSTS ° 6b “samanvita 
conj.; °samanvitah N; °samanvitam KSTS ० 6c kalam | KSTS; kala N 
e Gd kalpayita | N; kalpayet tu KSTS o 7b ksakarena ca vidyaya ] N; 
vidyatattvam ksakaratah KSTS ० 7c rephenevesvaram ] N; rephena 
cai$varam KSTS e 7d sadasivam | N; sadasivah KSTS ° 8a sada ] 
N; tatha KSTS e 8b nyasitavya ] KSTS; nyastyavya tu N ° 800 
vyapinim samanam cordhvam tatraiva ] KSTS; vyàpini samana corddhe 
tatraikam N 


As the Svacchanda passage reveals, prakrti can be taken to include 
all the tattvas of the Sankhyas from earth to prakrti. Above this are 
the tattvas of purusa, niyati, kala, maya, vidya, 1$vara, and sadāśiva. 
This leaves the ninth element of the NAVATMAN unexplained. It is here 
referred to as dehavapin, but it seems unlikely that this is the name for 
a tattva, since there would then be no mention of the mantric element 
to which it must correspond, namely the anusvara. Moreover, it is 
clear from Uttarasütra 1:17 that it is a mantric element, and a passage 
from the beginning of the 5th chapter of the Diksottara appears to 
confirm that it is the anusvara, for it identifies bindu with the label 
vyapaka. The same passage appears also to confirm that the tenth 
and eleventh tattvas, Sakti and Siva, are not to be identified with pho- 
netically distinguishable parts of the NAVATMAN. Diksottara 5 (T-1% 
P- 839; T.127, p.17; T.150, p. 52): 


navatmakena devesi yathavad bhavate $rnu 7 
varnastakam idam devi bindu vyapaka ucyate 
nadam tasya sikha prokta Saktis tu parama sthita 8 
ekadasa padarthan tu karanam paramam Sivam 
Suruvaktrat tu labhyeta yatha tenaiva coditah 9 
yathavad 


7d yathavad bhavate $rnu ] 150; yatha bhavati tacchrnu 17; rami 
bhavati érunu127 ७88 idam ] 127, 150; dhrvamı7 ९ 8178 
sthita ] 150; paramam sthita 17; U 127 e 9à ekadaga ] 17: 
dasa 127 e 8d paramam §ivam ] 127, 150; param asti ca 17 i yada 
Suruvaktrat tu | 127, 150; guruvakrac ca 17 e gd yathā ] "m 

127, 150 


150; 


o the 
So we may conclude that dehavyapin very probably refers t 


Translation of the Uttarasütra 


341 


anusvara and that Sakti very probably refers to the graphic repre- 
sentation of part of the after-resonance of the nasalisation namely the 
Sikhà or “crest” written above the anusvara. 

Note that the list of nine (not eleven 


) tattvas given in Svacchanda ६: 
differs at the top: 6 5:11 


prakrtih purusa§ caiva niyatih kala eva ca 
maya vidya tatheSas ca sadasivasivau tatha 


In 12d we have not retained N’s karana (pratipadika for nominative), 
since that would leave both 2nd and 3rd syllables short and therefore 
be unmetrical. One could, however, consider emending instead to 
karanam. 


1:13ab ‘These tattvas have been taught to arise from Sadaégiva’ 


This assertion, which echoes 1:7ab, should perhaps not be taken en- 
tirely literally as a statement about the genesis of the Saiva ontolog- 
ical realities. We would not expect Paramaáiva and Sakti to arise 
from Sadasiva; but we must bear in mind that we are talking not 
simply about the tattvas that make up the universe, but we are talk- 
ing about them as correlated with the elements of the NAVATMAN or 
KANTHOSTHYA, which is one of Sadasiva’s eight forms. We must al- 
so bear in mind, however, that the nexus of notions about Sadasiva 
common to the later Saivasiddhanta (see, e.g., Kirana 3:13 and com- 
mentary) have not yet crystallised by the time of the Uttarasutra and, 
secondly, that a clear doctrinal split between philolosophical dualism 
and non-dualism had probably not yet emerged as a fault-line separat- 
ing different tantric schools from each other (see Prolegomena p. 39). 


1:13cd ‘It is with these (etair eva) that the whole universe [is created], 


1:14 


visible and invisible, moving and stable.’ 


One could emphasise the eva more strongly pes. im 
[tattvas] and no others...’ The claim is that the list of tattvas is 


complete ontological description of the universe. 


hich pervade 
yo thfully how these mantras, wmc. ; 
न smic] path: hear [this] from me. 


the cosmos, are disposed along the [co i 
for we have to take the iri 
back to the masculine 
ras are disposed (yatha 


Tt is with these 


This sentence is anacoluthic, | 
pravaksyami to be both tani (referring 
mantras) and the manner in which the mant 
vyavasthitah) along the path. 


342 


1:15 


1:16 


1:17 


0४०८७८८०८७ 


‘The sound U is in the egg of Brahma; YA is in the creation 0 
[of the Sankhyas]; the sound VA is in Gahana; LA is held to 
tranche that reaches] up to Gopati. 


The sound U, which ‘is’ prakrti, is in some sense located in the egg of 
Brahma; the sound v, which is the purusa, is in the tattvasarga: the 
sound V, which is niyati, pervades gahana; the sound L, which is kala 
pervades up to Gopati, which is a place located above gahana and with 
or inside granthi in cosmographical sections of the text, e.g. Nisvasa- 
mukha 4:122 and Guhyasutra 7:239. For the aisa locative gopatyante 
(gopati+ante), cf. Guhyasutra 8:46. The element ante could be taken 
to mean ‘edge’ and therefore ‘up to’, but it could instead be intended 
to be semantically weakened and equivalent to a locative ending. 


f tattvas 
be [in the 


This verse, taken in conjunction with 1:10-12 above, begins to plot the 
tattvas onto the cosmography, which had hitherto been a bhuvanakra- 
ma, a sequence of worlds, and it is to be noted that the positioning, for 
instance of kala, equated with LA and mapped therefore onto Gopati, 
does not coincide with later mappings, as can be seen, for instance, 
from our table on p. 291 above, which shows that in the Guhyasütra 
kala is mapped rather lower down, onto the Vigrahas. 


‘MA resides in maya; and KSA wields control in vidya; RA is in 1$vará; 
HA [extends] up to Sakala [Siva, i.e. up to Sadaáiva]* 

We treat mayam here as though it were mayayam, in other words as an 
aisa locative contracted to fit the constraints of the metre. The case 
ending of sakalàvadheh seems peculiar, though it could of course be 
Justified in various ways (genitive for locative; ablative of limit, with 


ellipsis of à as postposition...) and is recorded by MONIER- WILLIAMS 
S.v. avadhi. 

ET Y = 1 e 
Is anusvara (dehavyapi) is in Sakti; through Sakti the soul e 
initiand may be united with niskala. These [elements of the n 
have [thus] been briefly taught to pervade the cosmic hierarchy. 


We earlier considered understanding śaktyā yojyeta niskale to i 
‘Sakti is to be joined in niskala’, which would have required të riy 
Saktya as a nominative Singular. This now seems unlikely to U^ ii 
because of the parallel in Uttarasütra 4:47d below, but elg r 
although we find other instances in the Nisvasa of this sort of Tc 
feminine stem used in compounds and in oblique cases, We deg 
them in the nominative singular. 


Translation of the Uttarasitra 


1:18 


343 


"The goddess spoke: 

From where do the letters (varnanàm) arise .. 
number of tantras? And how many teachers 
taught?’ 


- ? How great is the 
[of those tantras] are 


For the suppletion in 1:18c, cf. Rauravasittrasarigraha 3:3-4 and in 
particular 3:4a: mantranam kiyati samkhya. Also possible, as Diwakar 
ACHARYA has suggested, would be tantrotpattis tantrasamkhya. 


1:19—20 ‘The lord spoke: 


1:21 


At the beginning and end [letters] of the PINDAKSARA [namely the let- 
ters H and U of the NAVATMAN] is to be found the Lord Sadagiva himself 
[namely HU[M], the two letters of which belong to and thus represent 
the first and last of the vargas of the alphabet]. With the NISKALA, 
the SUNYA, the KALADHYA, the KHAMALANKRTA, the KSAPANE KSAYA 
and the ANTASTHA we should connect the [other] six letter[-group]s. 
[Thus] these are [the source of] the eight [letter-]groups with which the 
alphabet (matrka) is taught [to be endowed]? 

We assume that this passage is intended to show how the eight groups 
of letters of the alphabet all derive from the root-mantra of the text. 
Six of those eight groups are linked with six of the eight mantra- 
inflections, and this leaves the first and last of the inflections of the 
root-mantra, namely the SAKALA and the KANTHOSTHYA (or NAVAT- 
MAN) unassigned. We think that the first line might have been meant 
to explain how the first and last vargas of the alphabet emanated from 
the first and last letters of the NAVATMAN, namely H and U, which 
together form the SAKALA. Thus, in fact, all inflections of the root- 
mantra might have been intended to be involved in this demonstration 
that all sound derives from the Siva as mantra. 


We have interpreted varnasatkan in 1:20b as meaning the a as 
[varna-] vargasatkam; we could perhaps have emended to vargasatkam. 


‘From them (yatah) arise in due order the scriptures aes p enm 
language (varimayam), whatever is composed in dume and non-div 
[styles of speech], the words of Mantra-language- x 

One could assume that vaimayam refers rather to ab Rd oo 
that the following words refer to branches of acis i पा 
parallel in Guhyasütra 8:132 that suggests that it is rathe 


languages that are intended: 


e and 


samskrtam prakrtam caiva apabhramsanunasikam 


H Nisvdsatattvasampjss 


divyadivyam tu yat kificid vanmayam samprasiiyate. 


Instead of divyadivyanibaddhani, we had earlier conjectured divyadi. 
vyani siddhani and translated 21cd as follows “divine and non-diving 
[styles of speech], those of Siddhas, the words of Mantra-language» 
But we noticed that the category of Siddhas' speech is not mentioned 
either in the above-quoted passage of the Guhyasütra or in Nayasütm 


4:36 below. 


1:22 ‘This is the [account of the] arising of the letters that has been ex. 
plained to you, o fair-faced one; hear from me, as I relate it, about the 
arising of Saiva scripture (Sivatantrasya). 


1:23 ‘From the inactive Supreme Cause Siva, of whom no body can be 
seen, came forth scripture in the form of sonic energy (nadarüpam), 
extremely difficult to grasp.’ 


This verse (with ablatives in the first line: adrstavigrahac chantac 
chivat paramakaranat) is quoted in the Yasastilaka (Asvasa 5, p. 255) 
and it appears (again with ablatives in the first line) with jnanarupam 
viniskrantam anavacchadanam mahat in the second line in the Srika- 
nthiyasamhita (verse 1 in HANNEDER's appendix, 1998:240). Cf. also 
Svacchanda 8:27c-28b as they appear in the KSTS edition: 


adrstavigrahayatam śivāt paramakaranat 
dhvanirüpam susüksmàm tu susuddham suprabhanvitam. 


Note, however, that when Ksemaraja refers forward to this place (in 
his commentary on verses 4:1-4b) he gives a very different rene 
which is closer to our text: 


adrstavigrahac chantac chivat paramakaranat 
dhvanirüpam viniskrantam $antam paramadurlabham. 


ara 
= Rs also this verse from near the beginning of the Matas 
. 9r): 


matasaram param tantram rahasyam paramadbhutam 
adrstavigrahayatam Sivat paramakaranat. 
1 redacted 


77245 ‘Now Sadagiva understood it and he enlightened mei ergy int? 
n 


[this] scripture [that I had received] in the form of sonic € 


Translation of the Uttarasütra 


345 


books. It was expounded for the gods in the form of metrical compo- 
sition in anustubh. [From them] it reached the Sages; and from them 
the tradition [came] among mortals? 


If we trust the speaker-indications (the transmission of Which seems 
often doubtful), this passage indicates that. Iévara, who is the teacher 
here, was in turn taught by Sadaáiva. This receives some confirma- 
tion in the Svacchanda, where the account of the early steps in the 
transmission is filled out somewhat (8:314): 


anustupchandasa baddham kotyarbudasahasradha 
gurusisyapade sthitva svayam devah sadasivah 31 
purvottarapadair vakyais tantram adharabhedatah 
tajjnanam ivare ‘dat tad iévarena Sivecchaya 32 
vidyayah kathitam pürvam vidyesebhyas tathadarat 
mayaniyatiparyantais tasmad rudrair avapi tat 33 
SrikantheneSvarat praptam jfianam paramadurlabham 
tenapi tadadhah proktam rudranam isvarecchaya 34 


A slightly different conjecture in 1:25c, punas captam, is perhaps al- 
So possible and would have the merit of being slightly closer to the 
transmitted text but the disadvantage of leaving an extra ca. 


1:26-30 "The Kamika, Yogada, Divya, Karana, Ajita, Dipta, Suksma, 


Sahasra, Am$umat and Suprabhedin. The infinite teaching of Siva was 
proclaimed in [those] ten forms. Then it was proclaimed by Rudra in 
eighteen recensions. The Vijaya was the first of these; after Sia: the 
Nisvàsa; then the Svayambhuva, and then after that the Vathula. he 
one called Virabhadra was [then] taught, and the Raurava, Maku} i 
Virasa, Candrahasa, Jñāna, Mukhabimbaka, Prodgita, Lalita, Siddha, 
Santana, Sarvodgita, Kirana and Paramesvara: 


This may be the earliest surviving list of the twenty eight EE B 
tantras. Note, however, that there is no mention of these wo ix 

ing a Saiddhantika canon as opposed to a Wer i dis 
are simply the tantras of Paramesvara. We cannot li ka drawn 
twenty-eight works with these names existed when this aah VOU 
up, but it seems not impossible that they did not. For a A 
of this list, see Appendix III in GOODALL 1998 (00.4 to literature 
discussion of how this canon of twenty-eight titles relates i 


; j-xxxiv. 
see the preface to GOODALL 2004, particularly 00-१० 


346 


Nisvasatattuasampis 


1:31—2 ‘This [body of] scripture of the Supreme Lord was taught to sa = 


1:33 


and gods. The twenty-eight works were [further] divided in thousands 
Any other subsequent (paratarah) recension listed among tantras of 
Siva must be understood to be a résumé of the words of Sages and 
gods (risidevaganam giram). 

We take ‘gapam to be a contracted genitive (for "ganànàm) and ye 
have supposed it to act as a plural-marker; but we could Perhaps 
instead interpret it to refer to Siva’s Ganas. 


‘Whoever heard a given tantra, whoever memorised it, that tantra is 
declared to have that person’s name.’ 


Perhaps this means that there were human sages called Kamika, Yo- 
gada (sage), Divya (sage), and so forth, who transmitted the Kamika, 
Yogada, Divya and the others among men. Very different traditions 
about the transmitters of the twenty-eight scriptures may be found in 
later accounts, for which see, for example, GOODALL 1998 appendix 
III. But it seems more likely that these remarks were rather intend- 
ed as a strategy for accounting for subsequent tantras, perhaps ones 
thought of as still not composed at the notional point in time of the di- 
alogue related in the Uttarasütra, and not as commentary on the names 
of the canon of twenty-eight. In other words, this passage seems to 
leave open the way for the integration of such works as the Matang, 
a version transmitted by a particular sage of the Paramesvara, Of the 
Mrgendra, a version of the Kamika. This is not, of course, to Say that 
those particular texts had already been written, but perhaps other 
texts that attached themselves in a similar way to the canon already 
had. Alternatively, one might speculate that this passage, OT pee 


part of it, might have been interpolated in the Uttarasiitra at 8 late 


date. 


. i x 
Incidentally, some of the individual names are more usually a E 


ferently: Yogada, for instance, is elsewhere Yogaja or 7००० i 3 
and Suprabhedi is usually Suprabha in older sources and Suprab i 
in later ones, which makes one wonder whether suprabhedi a 
26d might not be a corruption of suprabheti, the name d 
pratipadika followed by an iti. | that 
The tantravatara of the Diksottara (as quoted on pP- 405-7 E. peen 
same appendix of GOODALL 1998) seems as though it might ‘a w 07 
intended to show how many of the names given immediately E 


Translation of the Uttarasütra 
347 


Uttarasutra 1:34f) might be related to the names of 


articular tant 
but a complete correlation has not been achieved. s d 


1:34-6 ‘Siva, Sadagiva, the Vidyesas, Umasuta, the principal Ganas be- 
ginning with Mahakala, Vijaya, Kali, Brahma, Varuna, Vahni, Vayu 
Surya, Candra, Dharma, Indra, and Varuna, along with (?) Ve COR 
Raksasas, and great serpents, and with the Mothers and Guhyakas 
and with the intelligent Garuda—([by them] were studied crores, lakhs, 
billions and hundreds(?) [of granthas of text]. 


If the text is correct here, Siva and Sadagiva are treated as neuter 
perhaps because they are tattvas. Umasuta is not a common name of 
Skanda, whom one would expect to be included among the principal 
Ganas, who are mentioned immediately afterwards, and the text is 
especially insecure here, for the syllables sutah appear within round 
parentheses in K, indicating that they are a conjectural suppletion 
of the scribe. Equally possible would have been to restore umapatih 
(Umapati), who does not appear in the tantravatara of the Diksot- 
tara, unlike Skanda (verse 30c, GOODALL 1998:406), or uma tatha 
(Uma figures as devi in 30b of the same passage). We have hesitated, 
however, to meddle with the text here. 


But in the following pada, we have removed from the text a suppletion 
of K's that seemed to us unlikely: bhairavaé ca ganamukhya. Aside 
from finishing with an unmetrical cadence, this seemed odd to us be- 
cause the text does not refer elsewhere to a person called Bhairava, 
much less to Bhairavas, in the plural. Nonetheless, the initial syllable 
bhai is confirmed by the transcription of W, and so we have conjectured 
bhairavadiganà mukhya and assumed that Bhairava is intended as a 
name for Mahakala, who features in the tantravatara of the Diksottara 
in verse 31 (GOODALL 1998:406). 

We could have retained vijayo, assuming it to be a frozen-sandhi 
form of Vijaya (although who this might be we do not know), but 
in emending to vijaya we have instead chosen to adopt the sugges- 
tion of Shaman HATLEY, who has pointed out (HATLEY forthcoming 
B) that Jaya/Vijaya and Kali occur together in some lists 2 EE 
(e.g. Malinzvijayottara 20:448, Siddhayogesvarimata 20:42cd, dd 
dharmottara 1.41:15cd), that Vijaya may be one of the Mothers or ind i 
(Ur-Skandapurana 64:25), and that Kali (Mahakalt) may be associa 
with the matrs (Ur-Skandapurana 68:8). | 
Although the first members of the list are nominative, we might per- 


348 


NiSvasatattyg Samhita 


haps be meant to understand them to be construed as instrumenta 
like later members of the list. Some noun has to be Supplied to ams 
with the numbers: we have assumed that granthas might have m 
intended, in other words thirty-two-syllable units of text. 


1:37 'And Sukra, Dadhici, Durvasas, Ruru, Kaca, Vasistha ... Sanandana’ 
) 


Of the two names missing here, one might be Sanaka: the line might 
have ended with sanaka$ ca sanandanah, for cf., e.g., Agnipurang 
219.4b and Visnudharmottara 1.27.14b. 


1:38-9 ‘And Ricika, Ürva, Angiras, Anta, Sveta, Rama and Vahlika, 


1:40 


Marici, Upamanyu, Markanda, Agasti, and Kasyapa—these have 
reached the further shore of [the mass of] scriptures [numbered] in hun- 
dreds and thousands. From them thereupon (tatra) a certain amount 
(kiñcit) has reached great men here [on earth]. 


Ricika, Urva and Rama are also to be found in the transmission of the 
Rauravasitrasangraha (3:9): 


tasmad avaptam urvena rcikena tatah punah 
tasmad avaptam ramena ramac caham adhitavan 


Ricika (or Raka) is also an interlocutor in the Nisvasamukha. 


‘Mortals have little span of life, little energy, little intelligence, and 2 
a summary of the meaning [of scripture] has been revealed for mortals. 
for 


Of. the beginnings of the various recensions of the Kalottara, 
instance Sardhatriatikalottara 1:2ab: alpayusas tv ime mariya à 
paviryalpabuddhayah, and Dvigatikalottara 1:1ab: alpayusas tv a 
marty alpaviryaparakramah (NGMPP No.118/7). Cf. also ४006८ 
nda 1:5c—7: 


catuspitham mahatantram catustayaphalodayam 9 

na Saknuvanti manuja alpaviryaparakramah 

alpayuso "Ipavittas ca alpasattvas ca $amkara 6 

tadartham samgraham tasya svalpasastrarthavistaram 
bhuktimuktipradataram kathayasva prasadatah 7 

ended and 


It seems likely that in our passage a double sandhi is et neute): 


that we must understand (assuming sangraha to be treated à 
therefore (atah) a summary of the meaning (arthasangr^" 
taught (uktam)? 


Translation of the Uttarasitra 


[than the syllabary]. 


We have assumed that we have here a nominative plural form mantra- 


kotyah, irregularly based upon the stem “kotya, but one could perhaps 
instead interpret mantrakotya as an instrumental. 


2:1 “The goddess spoke: 
If, o Lord, the syllabary is said to be the greatest mantra, tell [me 
about] the worship of the syllabary; [for] it is from the root that the 
branch grows.’ 


The last pada, in which the atmanepada seems anomalous, appears to 
be an arthantaranyasa: any branch must come from a root (and the 
root of a mantra is in a sense the matrka). Thus mülayaga, in the 
next verse, must mean the same as matrkayaga. We could understand 
yaga here to mean the act of worship (yajanakriya), the pantheon of 
worship (ijyante iti yagah, devata iti yavat), or the place upon which 
the pantheon is installed and worshipped, or all three of these. 
The use of the matrka as mantra is in later literature typically reserved 
for contexts where some general all-purpose mantra is required (hence 
its prominence in the relatively eclectic Isanasivagurudevapaddhati), 
such as in lingoddhara (this appears not to be the context in Diksot- 
tara 9:84ff, for which see Appendix V) or in cases where an existing 
image is to be newly adapted for worship and the mantra that was orig- 
inally installed in it is no longer known. This is made explicit in the 
sadhakabhisekavidhi of Bhoja’s Siddhantasarapaddhati (A, ff. 17-32; 
B, ff. 40v-41r): 
vijfata(vijnata B; jata A)mantrapratisthitalingesu mantran sam- 
uddhrtya pratisthavidhina mantram aropyaradhayet. cha ले 
ntralingesu (mantralingesu B; mantresu A) pranavam m m = 
(pranavam matrkam và conj. SANDERSON; pranavamakg je 
AB) vinyasya hrdi pürakena samaniya recakena dM E 
nitva pratisthavidhina svamantram vinyasya य (eae si 
na em.; sanmasena B; sanmase A) püjite ceti lingam panier: 
mantram aradhayet. 
The MATRKA is therefore commonly counted among types Se 


T १ - 7171 t avali 
10 or ‘universal’ (sadharana) mantras. hus in the Jfianarain 
Madras MS, p. 138) we find the following: 


Nigar 
i Svasatattvasamhire 


atha sadharanalingapakse sadharanamantrenaivarcanam karyam 
tatha i 


pranavo matrka maya vyomavyāpī sadaksarah 
prasadaghoramantra$ ca sapta sadharana matah 
ebhih sampüjayed vidvan sarvasadharanam sivam. iti 


In Trilocanagiva’s Somasambhupaddhatitika (GOML MS R 14735 
p.161) this appears without attribution in the following form: | 


pranavo matrka maya vyomavyapi sadaksarah 
prasado bahurüpas ca sarvasadharano matah 


Tantraloka 22:20 is a version of the same, but with the NETRA for the 
PRASADA: 


pranavo matrka maya vyomavyàpi sadaksarah 
bahurüpo ‘tha netrakhyah sapta sadharana ami 


Cf. also Netratantra 17:22 and the commentary ad loc. 


2:2cd “The lord spoke: 
Ishallteach you the worship of the “root”, by which, when worshipped, 
o faithful one, [all] seven crores of mantras are [effectively] worshipped: 


Here the plural of koti is kotyah (contrast with Uttarasutra 1:41) and 
yasta (for ist) must be intended to agree with it, so we could consider 
emending to yastas ca. 


2:3-5 ‘In a place that slopes to the North East and that is devoid E- 


sharp debris, that has a tree of milky sap, or on the banks of a 7 A 
or lake, or on a great mountain, where it is agreeable, or in a gar 3 
or temple of Siva, or a temple of the goddess or of the Mol or 
in a front yard or at a crossroads, or on the bank of a lotus-P0" nd 
in a pleasant building, or in whatever place is pleasing (ruc) à 
devoid of all defects? 

S North- 


The selection for a yāga of a clean piece of ground that n ‘sharp 
East is typical. The term Salya, which we have translated ia द ] bones 
debris', covers in fact a range of inauspicious objets: pns 


pieces of wood, charred wood, husks, thorns and the like. 


Curious here is the mention of the possibility of using 8 ka 
goddess (devya is probably used here as the stem-form) or ° ish 
ers. catvare, since it is here juxtaposed with catugpathe, सी 


le of the 
F Moth- 


2:8 ‘On the right [side of his body] he should place the s 


Translation of the Uttarasitra 


351 


something different from crossroads: 
‘courtyard’ or ‘forecourt’ (cf. Mūlasūtra 1:17), although court: ard 

not commonly included in such lists, Cf. Vandyaghatiyasarvana zi 
commentary on Amarakoga, 2nd kanda, puravarga 19b (ane sats E 
varajire): anganatrayam pratigane, ‘the three Fronds bei तय irs 
angana are used in the sense of forecourt’ 


rucite may be a corruption (or a Middle Indic variant form?) for ro- 
cate: the familiar cliché is yatra và rocate manah, found, for example 
in Siddhayogesvarimata 6:30. i 


perhaps simply ‘front yard’ or 


2:3d is unmetrical for being entirely iambic. We have only a string 
of locatives and there is no sentence, but it is clear that this is a 
description of the places one might select for the yagabhümi. Cf. 
Mülasütra 1:17. 


2:6 ‘[The earth should be] white, red, yellow or black in accordance with 


the caste-class [of the worshipper]. He should then [after selecting it] 
make it well levelled by beating and he should smear it with cow-dung. 


For the colours of the earth, cf. Mulasutra 1:18. We have corrected, 
with K, from the unmetrical sukutiman of N (even though this form 
recurs in Guhyasütra 8:10), since, as Peter BISSCHOP has pointed out, 
the word appears also in the Sivopanisad in 4:13 and in the Sivadhar- 
mottara 2:169. The word sukuttiman here appears to mean something 
like susthu kuttitam and, given that kuttima usually seems to refer to 
polished floors, the word might be the result of a conflation of kutfita 
(“pounded down”) and kuttima. 


2:7 ‘Having sprinkled it with the five products of the cow and [with waters] 


over which have been intoned the [consonants of the] five groups [viz. 
KA to MA], he should offer water with the SAKALA and [begin to] 
worship the God of gods. pee: 
For the use of water after the five products of the cow, see Milasutra 
1:21. 

eeds [=consonants]; 
[Thus] transformed 
he worship of Siva: 


he worshipper 


on the left he should arrange the womb [-vowels]. 
into Siva, serene (prasannatma), he should begin t 


i i ; is that t 
What is plain from the first half of this verse 15 a a masculine ac- 


Should join the consonants (bijàm, which we take ) o the lef. But 
Cusative plural) to the right and the vowels (yo 


352 


Nisvasatattygs a 


to the right and left of what? Until now, we have been Speaki 
the yagabhümi, but here, since the following half-line begins wit 
bhütah, it must rather be the worshipper's body on which the al 
is installed, thus identifying him with Siva before Worship begins ang 
this is confirmed, as Peter BISSCHOP has observed, by the parallel in 
the account of matrkayaga in Diksottara 9:85b-86c (Appendix V), in 
which this installation is given the label sakalikarana: 


ng of 
h sivi. 
Phabet 


daksine yojayed bijam vame yonin tu vinyaset 
sakalikaranam hy etad durlabham tridaSair api 


“On the right [side of the body] one should place the seed[s, viz. the 
consonants]; on the left the womb [viz. the vowels]. This is sakali- 
karana, difficult to accomplish even for the gods.” 


This passage of the Uttarasutra, then, is the second instance of a rite 
corresponding to what subsequently comes to be called sakalikarana; 
for the first, see Mülasütra 1:20. 


Note that the feminine vowels are placed on the left, which thus makes 
the worshipper’s body mirror that of Ardhanariéa. 


2:9 "The short [form of any given] syllable is held to be [the throne] Ananta; 


2:10 


the long becomes the SAKALA mantra; at the end of the [dying] sound 
[of the enunciated mantra] is taught to be the NISKALA mantra. The 
long [form is to be used] in rites for all purposes. 


The NISKALA is the sound heard as the sound of the mantra dies 2 
the long vowel is the generic mantra to be used where no other a 
is specified (just as the HRDAYA is the generic mantra in the Kalotta 
System: it is sarvakamika). 

rshipped 


"The prolated form (pluta) of whichever syllable is being WO! tions 
i 


should be formed (kalpayet) eight times: [these eight repet 
the prolated form] are to be placed in the second circuit [aroun 
deity]; they are held to be the Vidye§varas. 


of 
This seems to mean that we repeat eight times the pluta er. 
the vowel that is chosen as the focus of the yaga in OIC A T 
duce the eight Vidye$varas, who make up the second Es st 
seem not to have been told which mantra-deities populate à erhaps 
circuit, but we would expect them to be angamantras eo s 
also brahmamantras. If one is supposed to select any ae throne 


the mantra-base, KSA, for instance, then KSAM would 20 


Translation of the Uttarasütra 353 


Ananta, KSAM would be SAKALA, KSA3M repeated eight times would 
give us the Vidyesas, and perhaps the brahmamantras would be KSAM, 


KSIM, KSUM, KSEM and KSOM, and the angamantras would be KSAM 
KSIM, KSUM, KSAIM and KSAH? PU 


We assume that pluta is an instance of a pratipadika used, for metrical 
reasons, in lieu of a nominative, and that kalpayet is intended as a 
passive. An alternative would be to assume that the nominative is 
used instead of the accusative to mark the object. 


2:11 ‘The long forms are the Lokapālas; the short ones are the weapons 
of the Lokapālas. Having thus worshipped [the Lord and his retinue 
using elements of the syllabary as mantras] in accordance with the 
rules, one should perform oblation [into the fire] in the same [ground 
of worship)? 


For the expression astrayoni, used to refer to the weapons of the pro- 
tectors of the directions, see note on Muülasüutra 6:22abcd. 


2:12—13b "There are four types of fire-pit. Listen to me as I tell you about 
it: round, square, triangular or bow-shaped. [The fire-pit] should be 
made one cubit across and four finger-breadths in height. 
Here the fire-pit, which can now be called an agnyagara and a kunda 
(see Uttarasütra 2:21 below), has developed from what is described 
in the Mülasütra (see note on Mülasutra 3:1-2), as can be seen both 
from the options of shapes that are recorded and from the information 
that the fire-pit should be specifically four finger-breadths high. Later 
texts typically list further forms: see, for example, the passages cited 
in the note on 2:15-17 below. 


2:13cd ‘should be made for initiation and [regular(?)] oblation- 


Unclear. 


2:14 “Regular obligatory oblation should be [into a pit] of that size; he 
should make [the fire-pit] four times [that size] in the case of a homa 
of a lakh of oblations and eight times the same in the case of a homa 
of a crore. 


For this restitution, cf. Svayambhuvasitrasangraha 19:17-18: 
sahasrake tu kartavyam samantad dhastasammitam 


dagasahasrike home dvihastam sarvatah samam 17 
tato laksamite mantri caturhastam prakalpayet 


" NiSvdsatattvasamhie 


kotihome param srestham astahastapramanatah 18 


2:15-17 ‘The fire may be generated in a round [pit] to the West of the 
mandala [in which Siva has been worshipped] (purasya); .. . M 
should perform oblation in the East(?). Oblation for appeasing ang 
for nourishing [that is performed] in [a fire placed to] the South, West 
North and North East brings success. A fire [that is placed] in the 
South West and North West confers success ( prasiddhidah) in the case 
of malefic rites. In the case of regular obligatory oblation (nityahome), 
and also in the case of rites of appeasing and nourishing, [one should 
make oblations into a fire] in a square [pit]. 


The half-line 2:15cd is particularly problematic. Both bàna and agni- 
dhaman are names for types of kundas and it is therefore not impos- 
sible that what is transmitted is a corruption involving one or other 
of them. We could therefore, for instance, conjecture agnir bane catur 
yamye purve and interpret ‘Fire, in the case of the bana-type kunda, 
[should be placed] in the South; in the case of the 4-[cornered] type, 
in the East’ (suggestion of Diwakar ACHARYA). But this is somewhat 
unlikely, since only four types were announced and named in 2:12. 


Another possibility might be to leave anirvana§ unchanged and in- 
terpret it as an injunction to the effect that the fire should never be 
allowed to go out (cf. Mrgendrakriyapada 6:31; Prayascittasamuccays 
82-3; Isanasivagurudevapaddhati, prose before kriyapada 15:4); what 
follows might then be expiation if the fire does go out, but the syllables 
caturyamye would remain problematic. 


In 2:17c, one could emend caturasre to caturasram (cf. e 
3:13cd), which would make the translation of 2:17cd smoother: "The 


square [pit] is for regular obligatory oblation and for rites of appeasing 
and nourishing” 


For the correlation of particular shapes of kunda with particular di- 
rections, cf. Svayambhuvasiitrasarigraha 19:8c-12b: 


caturasram bhavet kundam vritam và hastasammitam 8 
nitye naimittike caiva kamye kalpapracoditam 
caturasram bhavet pracyam agneyyam ca bhagakrti 9 
yamyayam ardhacandram ca nairrtyam tu trikonakam 
vrttam kundam ty varunyam vayavyam paiicakonakam 1 
Padmakaram hi saumyayam aiganyam astakonakam 
‘sfakabhih supakvabhir apakvabhir asambhave 11 


Translation of the Uttarasutra see 


kuryat kundam tu Sastroktam mantrahomanurüpatah 


gd ca bhagakrti ] N (f. 41r); tu bhagakrtim Ed. e 10a "candram | 
Ed.; °candrag N e 10b tu] N; ca Ed. ० 10c vrttam ] N; v 


ta? Ed. ० 11b aiganyam astakonakam | N; aisanyam saptakonakam 
० 11cd “bhir apakvabhir asambhave ] Ed.; *bhih capakvabhir asambhavat 
N 1 


The fire-pit should be square or round and measure one cubit across 
in regular obligatory, occasionally obligatory and wish-directed 
[rites], [and it should conform with what is] taught in the man- 
ual [followed by the ritualist]. [For wish-inflected rites,] it should 
be square in the East; in the South East it should have the form of 
the female sexual organ; in the South, [the shape of] the crescent 
moon; in the South West, triangular; the pit should be round in the 
West; in the North West, pentagonal; lotus-shaped in the North; 
octagonal in the North East. [It should be built] with well-fired 
bricks; if this is impossible, then [it should be built] with unfired 
ones. One should make the fire-pit as taught in scripture, in ac- 
cordance with the [sorts of] mantra [used] and oblations [that one 
intends to perform]. 


caturasram bhavet kundam caturvimSatikangulam 

karyam trimekhalam madhye kulisenatha lanchitam 102 
sarvasiddhipradam nrnam pürvasyam vihitam sada | 
agneyyam disi saubhagye kundam kuryad bhagakrtim 103 | 
yamyayam ardhacandram syac chantyai tad vihitam mune 

trikonam marane $astam nairrtyam tu prakalpayet 104 

varunyam vartulam Sastam pustyai rajyartham eva ca 

vayavyam api kartavyam paticakonam samam gubham 105 

uccatane munivyaghra padmakaram udagdisi _ 

divyasiddhau sada Sastam kundam padmadalanvitam 106 

aianyam astakonam syad yogasiddhav abhipsitam PN 

kartavyam sudrdham bhadram pakvestakasusamcitam 1 


The fire-pit should be made square, twenty-four Qu i aea 
across, with three girdles and then marked in the a bi 
thunderbolt. [Such a pit] created in the S dei P 


all siddhis upon men. For sexual good fortune Poeni airs | 
should make a fire-pit with the shape of the femal sex | 


| 
| 
Cf. also Matangakriyapada 4:102-7: | 
| 


mem 


in the South East. For peace, it should be made Crescent-moon, 
shaped in the South, 0 sage. A triangular one is recommended for 
[rites of] killing; one should make it in the South West, A round 
one in the West is recommended for [rites of] nourishment, ang 
for the sake of the kingdom one should make a pentagona] one 
even and beautiful, in the North West. For driving others away 
(uccatane), o tiger among sages, it should be lotus-shaped in the 
North. For divine powers,??3 [such] a fire-pit with lotus-petals is 
always recommended. For yogic powers, an octagonal one in the 
North East is desirable. [The fire-pit] should be made good and 
firm, well-constructed with fired bricks. 


For another account that may be relatively early (though its list of 
purposes added to the early triad of santi, pusti and abhicara arguably 
suggests otherwise), see Atharvavedaparisista 25. 


2:18—19 ‘The adept should make the [lower piece of wood of the] arani one 
cubit long of palasa wood, or he may make it of a$vattha wood for 
rites of appeasing and nourishing. Its width should be eight finger- 
breadths; its height should be four finger-breadths. The upper arani, 
which is the drill (manthanam), is to be the same, [but] three times 
[in length]. 


2:20ab ‘The cord (netraka) should be of one vyama; the head [of the upper 
arani] should be of 16 angulas [across]. 


We should therefore perhaps imagine a ‘head’ that is like a pair 5 
handlebars rather than circular. 


2:20C-21 ‘Having made the lower piece [of the arani] (yonim) an we 
performed over both the lower piece and churning stick a Du 
and sprinkling and puja, and having joined them and generate 


| : into 
he should put [the fire, which has thus been] purified by five rites m 
the fire-pit? 


T 7 t ki 1 ]ves 
He making’ of the lower piece that is the ‘womb’ presumably inv? 
drilling a hole into it. 


. t uld 
2:22ab "If he cannot get hold of a [pair of] arani for [making] fire, he sho 


find [fire] that has been produced from a crystal. 


i t 
J 
refers here to the € gh 


[Dep का) F : F 
or this uncertain expression, see TAK 3 s.v. divyasiddhi. If it nterprete 


ace of aisvarya, then Perhaps 106cd and 107ab should after all be rei 
8 a single (somewhat repetitive) unit about a pit in the North East. 


Translation of the Uttarasitra ee 


The ‘crystal’ may refer to the suryakanta, which is mentioned else- 
where as the first among alternatives to the arani, e.g. in Svayam- 
bhuvasutrasangraha 19:35 (quoted in the note on 2:24cd below) and 
in AghoraSiva’s Kriyakramadyotika (p. 234), which is quoted by BRUN- 
NER in her annotation to SP1 4:9 (1963:237). 


2:22C-23 ‘The fire from a lightning bolt [may also be used], the fire of a 
forest conflagration, and the fire of an agnihotra. If these too are not 
available, he should take the ordinary fire [of the hearth]. But one 
should perform oblations into a fire that has been purified by earlier 
preparatory rites (pürvasamskarasuddhe) 


The samskaras here presumably refer to what is about to be described. 


2:24ab 'Having dug out (ullikhitva) that fire-pit and having lifted out [the 
earth] (uddhrtya), he should then sprinkle it? 


This "digging out" of the fire-pit is in later works perhaps often sym- 
bolically achieved with mantras. In the Somasambhupaddhati and 
later manuals, rather than mere sprinkling (here abhyuksana) we 
would expect to find a four-fold purification of the fire-pit consist- 
ing of niriksana, abhyuksana, tadana and proksana: see Somasambhu- 
paddhati SP1 4:9. 


2:24cd '[He should place two blades of kusa grass in the shape of a] cross- 
roads and [then a ‘curtain’ of upright blades of kusa grass leaning 
against the sides of the fire-pit and forming] an enclosure. He should 
place Brahma in the South? 


According to MONIER-WILLIAMS, an aksapata is an ‘arena’, or 
"wrestling ground' or 'place of contest. But in this particular con- 
text it is probable that it refers rather to the Rv blades of 
grass that mark off space, and it is even glossed by [ep 
(Somasambhupaddhatitika, IFP T.170, p. 67) with tiraskarani, a n 
tain', which justifies translating in this way, as does the SRS 
remark of Ksemarája in his Svacchandatantroddyota ad Se E 
vyà guptyartham aksavatam javanikasthaniyam uc a (x d 
mukhair darbhair nyaset, ‘in order to shield the goddess, he 5 abi 
set an aksavata, serving as a curtain, for protection, SE m » 
pointing blades of darbha-grass. In that context, the go x14 a 
vari is shielded because she is about to conceive and bear a e E h tis 
Our account is so brief that we cannot be certain that that is what 1 


intended here too. 


3 Nisvasatattuasampis 


One could emend to °vatan, but aksapata is also attested. A numb 
of rites to prepare the fire-pit (kundasamskara) are enjoined Ww 
this in later works (e.g. Somasambhupaddhati SP1 4:4-8). Just i 
fore forming a “crossroads” with two blades of grass pointing North 
and East, some later works enjoin making a vajra, which, according to 
the more detailed accounts, is achieved by laying down three blades 
of grass in the shape of a vajra (Kirana 16:11, Svacchanda 2:187; Mr. 
gendrakriyapada 6:3 and commentary; Somasambhupaddhati SPi 4१; 
and Matangakriyapada 4:102, which is quoted ad Uttarasütra 2:15-17 
above), but this detail is not universal and seems to be omitted in 
Paricaratra works. 


For the seating of Brahma, see our notes on Mülasütra 3:1-2. At this 
point, the Svayambhuvasutrasangraha has a vistara, a seat made of 
darbha grass, in the centre of the fire-pit for GAYATRI (Svayambhuva- 
sutrasangraha 19:34-5): 


catuspatham athastirya gayatrim vistare nyaset 
gandhadhupapavitradyaih pranavenabhimantritaih 34 
tatra sadyena gayatrya-m-aranyagnim nivesayet 
suryakantodbhavam vapi dvijam tatha grhotthitam 35 


34cd | N; U Ed. ० 35ab tatra sadyena gayatrya-m-aranyagnim | Ni 
LI dyena gayatryamaranyagnim Ed. 


Then, having spread a crossroads [of kuga grass], he should place 
GAYATRI on a seat, along with perfumes, incense, pavitras and 
the like, over which the PRANAVA has been recited. There, E: 
GAYATRI, he should put, while using SADYOJATA, the fire raise 
from an arani, or else fire produced from a sun-stone (süryakantt 
१ OF coming from a home of brahmins (dvijam = dvija[na]m)- 


vessel (0 


2:25 'Having then venerated the Fire, he should place the pramita Js [with 
S 


the North [of the fire] and having sprinkled the [various] vesse 
water] he should heat the sticks making up the paridhi’ 7 
mea 


Alternatively, one could perhaps understand paridhidhmani p For 
"the sticks making up the paridhi and the [smaller] fuel-sticks * that 
the paridhi, see our note on Mulasutra 3:3cd. It is conceivable 
the sticks are also intended to be objects of abhyuksya and tha 


ase itive OM" 
= "We assume dvijàm to be an aiga contraction, to suit the metre, of the EC?! 
Janam: cf. p.119 above. j 


Translation of the Uttarasütra 


2:26 


2:27 


359 


are therefore supposed to supply an obj 


ect to tapayet, which mi 
the ghee. Te IUE. 


‘(Then follow] the purificatory ( pavitram) preparatory rite for the ghee 
(ajyasamskaram), the heating of the sruva and sruk (sruvadinam) 
and, having performed the preparatory rite for the ghee known as 
the aghara (ajyasamskaram agharya), he should perform the oblations 
known as the ajyabhaga. 


Here we have taken pavitra to be adjectival and we think that the 
purificatory ajyasamskara must be the utpavana, in other words the 
purification of the ghee achieved by skimming its surface with darb- 
ha grass; but we could instead understand it (SASS, SN) to refer to 
the kusa grass itself, which serves as an instrument in performing the 
utpavana (cf. Narayanakantha ad Mrgendrakriyapada 6:33-34: pavit- 
rasya cajyasamskarangasya ... laksanam, ‘the characteristics ... also of 
the pavitra, which is a necessary adjunct of the procedure of purify- 
ing the clarified butter.."). Taking pavitra merely as an adjective may 
seem implausibly weak, since every samskara may have a purificatory 
function; but taking it to refer to blades of darbha grass is also not 
unproblematic, for there appears then to be no verb of which it could 
reasonably the object. 


The syllables “gharya are partly conjectural: part of an aksara that 
to us resembles the first two-thirds of a gha more than most of a pa 
is visible at the edge of the folio in N, but it is not impossible that 
K's reading °padya is correct. If we were to read with K, we could 
interpret “Having accomplished the purificatory preparatory rite for 
the ghee, the heating of the sruva and sruk and the [remaing rites 
belonging to the(?)] ajyasamskara...” 

For annotation about aghara and ajyabhaga, see our notes on Mila- 
sutra 3:5-5. 

after that he should cook 
of] the caru [in the fire], 
dala, and one part] 


‘Then he should give a full oblation, and 
(Srapayet) the caru. Having oblated [one part 
he should give [one part] to the deity [in the man 
then to the sadhakas. 


; i dhivasa 
Although this account of agnikarya before the eu al 
of initiands expands upon that given in Mulastiira 3 ae the Fire 
it offers us no detail whatsoever about the manner 1n 


$ :eualised i fire. For 
is to be visualised, or in which Siva is to be visualised in the 


360 


NiSvasatattuasamhis 


this we have to refer back to the very unclear instructions jn Mila sūtra 
3:5d-7. 

Perhaps śrāvayet is authorial, since the confusion in this word ma 
be old. This oddity is apparently not in the Brahmayamala, so We 
have tentatively corrected to $rapayet. The interpretation, of course 
remains the same whichever form is chosen. For the making and d 
viding of the caru, see our notes on Mülasutra 3:10-12b above. We 
understand sadhakais to be used with dative sense. An emendation to 
sadhake, would have been possible, but we expect a plural. 


2:28-31 ‘Having transformed [the threads that embody] the bonds into 


Siva in the manner prescribed, one should *bind' [these threads that 
embody] the bonds using the TATTVA. [One should then install upon 
them the following layers of the cosmos] prakrti, purusa, niyati, kala, 
maya and vidya. These constitute the [layers of the cosmos that prin- 
cipally comprise] ‘bond[age]’ (paso "yam). [Then there are] also [the 
borids which] I$vara and Sadāśiva [inflict], as well as those other bonds 
controlled by the Ganesas and further the bonds that consist in reli- 
gious duty and its opposite (dharmadharmamaya([h]), and love, anger, 
greed, birth and death, old age, disease, grief, hunger, thirst, delusion, 
despondence, fear, pride, jealousy, cruelty,—|these being] the gross 
[bonds], and also the subtle ones, those that block (nirodhakah?) that 
are called “rules” (samayakhyah?)? 


This instruction corresponds to what we find in Mulasutra 3:9 (see 
notes ad loc.), in which we think that the pàáasütra (or prakriy 
sutra), a three-stranded cord onto which the initiand's soul is installed 
as well as the cosmographic hierarchy of worlds in which ic 
can take place, is made into Siva by the application of mantras. T fo 
expression bandhayet could refer either to the tying of this thread on j 
the initiand’s topknot and big toe, or to the enclosing of the ae 
after it has been detached from the topknot and big toe, for incuba 3 
on the night before initiation. The description of this rite 185 E 
brought up to date here by listing the tattvas beginning with PI E 
(as mentioned above, this list of tattvas does not feature anyw h गा cate 
the Mulasiitra): their mention here is presumably meant to 77 RS 
that the cosmos should be installed on the thread in these E 
But the list of tattvas is followed immediately by a list of further onto 
(pasa). We assume that these are in some way also to be installec 


110 
the thread because they bind souls who are embodied at the x 


Translation of the Uttarasitra á 
361 


levels of the cosmos. 


The Nayasütra comments on these in 1:81ff. We learn there that 
Sadasiva wields the two ‘pagas’ of tirobhava and anugraha (Nayasiitra 
1:83c-89b); that lévara ties creatures with the srstipaga (Nayasiitra 
1:89c-92b); then follow vidya, maya etc. (Nayasütra 1:92c-99) and 
then the ४००8४85 (Nayasütra 1:100-108), which are the bonds in- 
flicted by the Ganeáas. 


Thereafter, the same bonds are listed again, with a few fresh items, 
in Nayasutra 1:109ff, but no commentary on them is offered or ex- 
planation of why these ethical ‘bonds’ follow here after all the other 
‘pasas’. 

For the ‘bonds’ of religious duty and its opposite, cf. the last verse, 
113, of chapter 3 of the Guhyasitra: 


eso gurur mantramayo hi dhiro na lipyate dharmma-m- 
adharmapasaih 

yasyajnaya mantraganam hi türnnam karoti karmmani ca 
siddhayaás ca 


This wise mantra-master is not stained by the bonds of dharma 
and adharma, at whose command the corpus of mantras quickly 
produces effects and supernatural powers. | 


(We must assume that dharmma-m-adharmapagaih is intended as a 
compound, and that the m is inserted to fit the metre.) 


The meaning of the unit 2:31cd is not clear to us. If the "rules" are 
the eight rules of post-initiatory conduct (samaya), they should have 
been included among the ganapagas, since they are enforced by the 
Gana Candiáa (Nayasütra 1:103-5); furthermore it is not clear what 
is being called ‘subtle’ and ‘gross’: one could instead understand the 
Samayas to be divided into subtle and gross. 


2:32 ‘...he should cause [each] disciple to drink the five products न 
he should give them the [remainder of the] caru and the tooth-c 
Stick? 
The pronoun tesam refers to the initiands (referred to bes rs | 
vious half-line in the singular), to whom the initiating gu 


: y 2 tooth- 
हाए९ paficagavya and the caru for purification, and icr Wi | 
Cleaning stick, both for purification and for prognostication, | 


i 
|| 
f 
I 


MESS 


P किक 


described immediately below. (Cf. Mülasutra 3:12.) The beginning of 
Matarigakriyapada 5:118 suggests a possible restitution for the missing 
syllables: 


tarpayitva tatah Sisyan palicagavyam tu payayet 

carum vibhajya yac chistam dattvà deyam prayatnatah 118 

rjv agranthy avranam sàndram ksiravrksasamudbhavam 

kanisthangulivat sthaulyam dairghyam ca dvadasangulam 
119 

dantakastham ... 


"After satisfying [the fire], he should then make the disciples drink the 
five products of the cow and, having divided the caru and given [them] 
what remains of it, he should carefully give them a tooth-cleaning stick 
that is straight, without knots or blemishes, smooth, and taken from 
a tree of milky-sap — its thickness should be that of one's little finger 
and its length should be of twelve finger-breadths...' 


2:33 ‘Facing East the competent [initiand] should chew the best [variety 
of?] tooth-cleaning stick, [which should be] of a tree of milky sap, 
without blemish, not crooked, with the bark intact (sadalam) and of 
twelve finger-breadths in length’. 


Having the bark intact is a normal requirement and it seems to US 
conceivable that this should be expressed with sadalam (suggestion af 
Anil KUMAR ACHARYA). Literally, however, this expression should 
mean ‘with leaf’, a prescription for which we know no parallel. 


2:34-35b '[If it falls] facing East, facing South, facing North, upwards 0 
facing the North-East, then it bestows [by presaging the attainment oa 
all desired fruits. Know that [if it falls pointing] in any other diront 
it is inauspicious: for that one hundred oblations must be [perform 
to obviate the difficulties that have thus been indicated]? 


Er. if 
When the used tooth-cleaning stick is discarded by the inition | 
lt points East, South, North, upwards or toward the North-E? i 
presages success in the ritual. If it points in some other er are 
15 à poor omen and one hundred [and eight] oblations into the tion 
prescribed before the initiation can proceed. The West is We (the 
as an auspicious direction for the stick to point in Mülasütra rend 
second half of which is almost the same as Uttarasutra 2:352)! 
of the South. 


Translation of the Uttarasutra 


2:35cd “Purified (Suddhàtma), [the initiand] should 


363 


sleep [that night] in 


the same place [namely the sacrificia] enclosure]; at dawn he should 


relate his dreams [to the initiating guru)? 


We have taken vaset in the sense of adhivaset. This sequence of verses 
that follows expands on the extremely brief mention of good and bad 
dreams given in Mülasutra 3:16-17. 


2:36—8 '[If he sees himself to be] crossing a river or tributary or the Ocean, 


reaching the top of a mountain, mounting a lion-throne, a celestial 
chariot (vimane), an elephant, cow or bull, obtaining a parasol, stan- 
dard, cows, flower-garlands, grain, garments, [obtaining(?)] white or 
blue water-lilies or lotuses, receiving land, eating curds, drinking or 
being smeared with alcohol or blood, eati g what is unclean (ame- 
dhyasya), being burnt in fire, having his head cut off, [that] man will 
succeed.’ 


Here in 2:37cd, we have emended to bhülambham (in the sense of 
bhulabham) since ksitilabha is to be found in the same context in Sva- 
cchanda 4:13 and prthivilabha in Brahmayamala 34:248. In 2:38cd, 
we should perhaps rather understand ‘if he sees a conflagration or a 
decapitation [of someone else] 


2:39—40 '[If he sees himself] being smeared in oil, being married, obtaining 


2:41 


a son, dancing, [wearing(?)] red garlands and garments, climbing upon 
a buffalo or camel, [or if he sees] a quarrel, a shaven[-headed man), a 
naked [man], [or feels himself to be] sinking in mud, [or sees] a vehicle, 
parasol, house or bed being broken—by these [he may know that he] 
will not succeed [in the coming initiation]: 


In 2:39a, we may either retain ca-m-udvaham and take the -m- as an 
authorial euphonic glide consonant, or we could emend it away on i 
assumption that it is transmissional and has been inserted to i 
8 hiatus. In 2:39b we could emend to putralambhe or p rA Rs 
but it is not necessary to assume that the dancing is occasioned by the 
birth of a son: the two could be separate dreams. 

‘Beginning with [the rites connected with] the arani and lea 
the rite which is prescribed in the case of dreams of actin 
should perform all [those] rites using the short form of i 


Thi ite a 
his could be interpreted to mean that whatever Na. Fd p 
Plies, beginning from one entailed by problems in the prep 


Nisoz 
A Svasatattuasamh i 


the arani or in the case of bad dreams, one should use the first lett 
in its short form, namely A, probably followed by M as the mah e 
all the actions in it. But the interpretation we have chosen "€ 
support from the parallel in Uttarasutra 3:23ab below (या 
&ikhantaii ca yat karmma parikirttitam), which furthermore Suggests 


that dusvapnam here is indeed used in the sense of duhsvapnantam, 


3:1 ‘Having bathed twice (dvisnatah), after becoming pure, he should mark 
out with threads [the lines of] the mandala (bhuvanam). [One should 
set posts] between the asterisms of Citra and Svati; by this one may 
determine [the axis between] East and West. 


We assume that the expression dvisnatah means that he should have 
performed a malasnana followed by a vidhisnana. Cf. Sardhatrisati- 
kalottara 3 and 4 (in particular 4:2), Kirana 13:5, Sarvajfinottam 
25:8, Svacchanda 2:7, Somagambhupaddhati 1.1:38. The second half 
of the verse describes diksadhana: one has to determine the line be 
tween the asterisms Citra, the brightest star in Virgo, and Svati, the 
star Arcturus. Other asterisms may be used in this procedure, which 
goes back at least to the Manavaáulbasütra: see YANO 1986:28, fn. 
2 and, for a presentation of the account of the Mrgendra, BRUNNER 
1985:148-151. Other accounts that involve specifically Citra and Svati 
include, for instance, Tantrasadbhava 9:100—101, in Pratisthalaksane- 
sarasamuccaya 22:78, and in the commentary on Saradatilaka 3:20: 


3:2 ‘The North and South are determined just by the pole star. Tie = 
line [to be pitched] is held to be the East-West one; the next is t 
South-North one’ 


A line from the pole star that meets the East-West line per pendiculatly 
Is enough to determine the North-South axis. 


ac) 6 j i 
3:3 ‘He should draw four concentric circles [around the centre-point, ns 
elsewhere as the brahmasthana (the intersection of the two lines ; ive 
of which should be four angulas apart, [and corresponding respe? 


to the outer most extremities of] the petals, ‘inner petals’, pericarp? 
and stamens? d 
If this were a list of the concentric circles in the order in which i 
occur working from the outside to the inside, then we wor al (50 
the tips of the stamens to be mentioned before the pericsrP artic 
BRUNNER 2003:167). The ‘inner petals’ (upadala) are not e fot 
ularly common feature in the older literature, but they do ९ 


Translation of the Uttarasitra 
305 


instance, in Brahmayamala 11:107, and in the Dewg 

f.27v). In the later South Indian Ti emple ल्याकत E 
common: see, e.g., Ajita 20:153. It is possible that the term does not 
in fact refer to a separate set of smaller petals, but rather to the points 
where the eight petals converge. In other words, on 
by the tips of the petals, and four finger-breadths inwards an inner 
concentric circle is formed by the points at which the petals begin to 
overlap with each other (cf. BRUNNER 2003:167, where these points 
are referred to as dalagra and dala respectively). 


e circle is formed 


3:4 “These [petals?] are of equal measurement. The base (pitha) is [a square 
of] thirty-two finger-breadths [across]. [Around] the edge of the base 
he should mark with a thread (sitrayet [= sütrena patayet}) each line 
in the four directions? 


We assume that the pitha is the square base inside which the lotus fits; 
its side is thirty-two finger-breadths, which is thus double the length 
of one petal from the central point. Around the base are to be marked 
the three (or five) coloured lines mentioned again below in 3:13 (cf. 
also Mülasutra 4:3). Each side of the square lies in one of the four 
cardinal directions. 


3:5-6 The small gaps in these verses are large enough to prevent us from 
being able to interpret them. 


3:7-8b “They [scil. the above-mentioned avaranas (?)] may be [made using 
dimensions that are] according to one's own tantra (?), whereas the 
doors [should be made] according to the rule: the door [on each side] 
should be [of] the same [width] as the inner part [of the mandala); the 
Sobha should be half the [width of the] door; the Sobha should be twice 
the width of the kapola(?); the upa$obha..” 


The instruction svatantramanasiddhani is not clear to us. The ids 
interpretation seems to be "established in the proportions d ERE 
by one's own book"; but does it make sense here? The width 1 e 
door is then said to be the same as that of the garbha, which a Be 
refers to the pericarpel of the lotus. Each Sobha is perhaps m x 
width of the door. What survives of the text here is not n 
make clear how these parts of the mandala are to be made ae = 
to the Uttarasütra, but it is noteworthy that 40008 and eer ru 
already technical terms in the Uttarasutra and that ur Rm 
though the reader is already expected to have an idea ० 


366 


NiSvdsatattvasampis 


mean. For these elements (Sobha, upaSobha, dvara) in other mandalas 
see, e.g., BRUNNER 2003 and TÖRZSÖK 2003. Per 


If correctly transmitted, 3:8a furnishes us with another instance ofa 
sa-vipula (see note on Mülasütra 1:12-13). 


3:8c-9 ‘He should keep open (vahayet) the Western door; the three others 


he should block. In the case of rites for nourishing, [he should use] the 
Southern door; for malefic rites, the Northern. I have explained about 
the square [mandala]; now hear from me about the round one? 


The general rule for a yagabhumi is that one should use only the West- 
ern door. Cf. Somasambhupaddhati 4.2:48cd: vahayet pascimadvaram 
pidadhyad aparani tu. BRUNNER translates (1998:86): ‘Jl faudra aller 
et venir par la Porte Ouest, et fermer les autres. (Cf. also Sürdha- 
trigatikalottara 7:5, Kirana 28:3; Sarvajrianottara 8:75; Saurasamhita 
8:28.) It is curious that the one direction not mentioned should be 
the East, since that is, in some later literature, the only option men- 
tioned other than the West: thus, e.g., Jianaratnavalt (GOML, p.19): 
vahayet pascimadvaram purvadvaram athapi va. The use of the West- 
ern door may have been originally adopted because of the East being 
conventionally placed at the top, which would mean that someone 
looking down on the mandala would be next to its Western door. The 
later adoption of the option of keeping the Eastern door open might be 
a reflection of mandala-worship having been adapted to or infiuenc 

by temple-worship, given that a large number of temples face East. 


‘Having then (?) made a square, [he should bring about its] enlarge 
ment from one [sauare?] cubit by a further [square?] cubit by ee, 
ing it by two finger-breadths [at the middle of each side(?)] and t 
he may draw round [those points to form] a circle’ 


This verse is unclear. What is clear is that it is intended re 80 
a means of obtaining a circle by using a square asa startin the 
It is probable that it is describing a circle whose diameter vil tends 
diagonal of a square with a side of one cubit. Perhaps what ik m 4 
is that one should set a string of half a cubit (could asi hs 2t 
conceal a corruption of hastardhatah?) and two finger Dre pin 
each corner of the square and then use it to mark off two o col 
arc-lines opposite the middle of each side of the square. ' ts 0 
then trace a circular curve that would run through the Dative 


r 
Square and the points where the arc-lines intersected- Alte 


Translation of the Uttarasütra ; 
307 


perhaps one end of a string of half the side of the Square plus tw, 

i i us two 
finger-breadths is to be set in the middle of the square to draw a circle 
round it that touches the points of the square. 


But why begin with a square? Why not simply take a piece of chalk 
on a string and draw a circle without a Square? One might suppose 
the square to be needed to be sure that the orientation is exactly 
correct. But even this seems implausible because that would not be an 
easy way to achieve this, and because there is a method that was well 
known described by YANO 1986 in a section entitled ‘Method of the so- 
called Indian circle’, about which he remarks (1986:18): ‘This method, 
which is good enough for practical purposes, must have been used 
commonly throughout the history. No text on architecture discusses 
the orientation problem without mentioning this one? 


We have assumed that vrddhyaya is intended as an instrumental or 
ablative of vrddhya, which is in turn intended to mean vrddhi. 


$:11-12b ‘This is the circular version [of the mandala]; the doors are to be 
understood to be as taught before. If half the circle is left aside, there 
will be a half-circle [mandala]. The half-circle [mandala] has one door. 
Now hear about the triangle’ 


Presumably we must understand that ekadvaram ardhacandram has 
been run together for metrical reasons and that it is a sentence con- 
sisting of predicate and subject. 


3:12c-13b ‘The triangular [mandala] should be produced with three dots. 
About this there is no doubt. Optionally the Moenum [mandala] may 
have three doors. In the centre it should be empty(?): 


It is not clear how the three dots from which the triangular form z 
Senerated should be produced. Presumably specifying the option f 

having three doors is intended to imply that the norm is, as m t e 
case of the half-circle, to have one door. As for the last ie e 
it is not clear what it means: perhaps one should instead tran t 61 

With ‘in the centre it should have a dot’. In that case it might a = 
instruction similar to that about forming the triangle using three dots. 
es of appease- 


3:13C-14b ‘The round and square [types are suitable] for rit eons 


ment and of nourishment; the semi-circular [mandala] is 
the triangular [type] is for malevolent rites.’ — 
The shape of the semi-circular mandala is perhaps thought o 

echo of Candeéa’s distinctive emblem, the axe. 


mx s og 


368 


Nisvasatattvasambits 


It might seem that the implication of this sort of teaching here is that 
the initiation-ceremony itself may be inflected for particular siddhis 
but it seems more probable that these extra shapes are Supplied E 
ancillary information, and the inclusion of the mandala of Candas 
seems to confirm this. : 


3:14c-15 “When he has thus drawn out the outline [using a thread] (si 


3:16 


3:17-19b ‘Having venerated [Siva in the mandala] according to the 


trayitva) in accordance with the [sort of] ritual act he wishes [to per- 
form],??5 he should fill in (alikhet) the mandala (bhuvanam), [in such 
a way that it becomes] beautiful (Subham), [making it] three-lined or 
five-lined. The three-lined [type] has three divinities; with the [other] 
two [lines of the five-lined type] Siva and Sadagiva [are represented]? 


Presumably this means that a mandala may be executed with three 
or with five colours, for cf. Mulasutra 4:3-4. No method is specified, 
but we guess that colours are added in the usual way: coloured pow- 
ders are added in lines, released from the tips of the fingers. As for 
the divinities, it is possible that they are the five karanegas, namely 
Brahma, Visnu and Rudra for the first three colours, and then Siva 
(here used to refer to 15९919?) and Sadāśiva. 


‘Once he has thus drawn [the mandala] with care, the worship, 25 
taught above, should take place. It should be surrounded by biteable 
and chewable food and adorned with a canopy and flags.’ 


Does this mean that the mandala should be surrounded by food and 
adorned with flags, or that the worship (arcanam) should involve these 
things? 

rules, 


: be 
one should then begin the initiation. [The following rites are t0 


accomplished for the soul who is being initiated by oblations:] d 
rite attending conception, the rite ensuring male offspring; por e 
ing of the hair, the birth-ritual, the rite of going out [to 808 Oe 
and moon], that of eating solid food, the rite of creating the kin 
knot, [and the conferring, on the occasion of upanayana 9 n for] 
of the black buck, the girdle of [mauñja grass that is to be M. 4 
the religious observance [of brahmacarya], clothing, a 88678 

a staff, [instructions for the] worship of the junctions ० 
further also [for] recitation and oblation, the wearing of 


(tryàyusam) and the formal salutation? 


ire translation pl : ; ing yena ya t 
Biosses over the difficulties of rendering yena yat- 


Translation of the Uttarasütra 


369 


Up to and including the final salutatio 
this list of life-cycle rites is essentially the same as that of Mülasütra 
4:9ff, but in that passage namakarana, which is not found here, ap- 
pears after niskramana (Mülasütra 4:9); the three elements ajina, 
vratamekhala and vasas appear in the single compound mekhala- 
jinavasamsi in Muülasütra 4:10a; the expression used for the upavita 
there is pavitra; and instead of tryayusa we find tripundra in Müla- 
sutra 4:10d, but the two expressions denote the same rite, accord- 
ing to Ksemaraja's Svacchandatantroddyota ad 10:389c-390b. BRUN- 
NER remarks (1985:299, fn. 6) that the rite consists in tracing three 
stripes of ash across a young man's forehead symbolising childhood, 
youth and adulthood. One could instead take vratamekhala to signi- 
fy upanayana (cf. Narayanakantha's remark on the expression vrata 
in Mrgendrakriyapada 8:160c: vratam iti vratam upanayanakhyam) 
or assume that it is intended as an expression equivalent in sense to 
mekhalavrata, ‘observances connected with the girdle’, which are said 
to be seven in number and are identified as the Bhüteáa, the Pasu- 
patya, the Gana, the GaneSvara, the Unmatta, the Asidhara and the 
Ganega in a passage of the Paramesvara quoted below in this note, 
and also, with some differences in the names, in Svacchanda 10:391. 
We have assumed that sandhya-m-upasanam is intended as a com- 
pound with an -m- inserted to lengthen it to fit the metre. But it is 
also possible that this is a corruption for sandhyagnyupasanam, since 
we find the mention of fire here in the parallel lists of life-cycle rites 
of Svacchanda 10 (verse 390) and of the Paramesvara as quoted in 
Narayanakantha’s Mrgendravrtti ad kriyapada 8:159c-161: 


n of the guru, the abhivadana, 


yad uktam paramesvare— f 
vratani vratabandhe 'smin Sodhyany eva caturdasa 
tatradau mekhala dandam ajinam tryayusam tatha 
sandhyagnyupasane bhiksa mekhalavratasaptakam 
bhütesam pasupatyam ca ganam ganesvaram tatha 0) 
unmattam asidharakhyam ganeóam saptamam tatha 
caryavratani Sodhyani iti 


3:19cd '[Next in the list comes] abandonment of the observance by one who 


has taken the [final] bath, and offering of the stick and so forth into 
the fire? 

We could emend the first pada to read snanavrataparityago 2 
it with ‘[final] bathing and abandonment of the observance’; bu 


370 


0010 


transmitted text is also interpretable. 


As for dandàdinaii ca homanam, we could instead have taken it to refer 
to offering homa to the stick and to the other vratarigas (rather than 
to oblating the stick and other accoutrements of brahmacarya into the 
fire). No mention of either appears in the account of Miulasitro 4 
but this is perhaps simply because it is considered part of the vrata. 
parityaga. For a discussion of the abandonment of the vrata in the 
course of initiation, see BRUNNER 1977:148ff. Offering oblations to the 
vratangas is specified in Somasambhupaddhati SP3 2:26 (BRUNNER 


1977:154-5). 


3:20 ‘[Then] marriage and the domestic rites and the Soma sacrifices up to 


3:2 


3:22 


ji 


and including [the group of Vedic rites known as] “the thousand” are 
to be performed, and [then the initiand is then ritually made to enter 
the asramas of] forest-dwelling and mendicancy [as a renunciate]. 


For the marriage and pakayajfias, etc., see Mülasutra 4:12-13. We 
have assumed that asahasrah means the same as what is meant by 
asahasrikam in Mülasutra 4:13b, and we have emended to a nominative 
to make this an adjective agreeing with yajiiah. For this group of Vedic 
rites known as the Sahasra, Sahasraka or Sahasrika, see our note on 
Muülasütra 4:13ab (and the quotation at the end of the note on 4:12cd). 
For the last pada, cf. Mülasütra 4:130, tapasyam ca parivrajyam, 8 
phrase which is also meant to refer to vanaprastha and sammyasa. 


‘Having [then] effected [symbolically the performance by the initiand 

of] the Pasupata observance (vratam), he [viz. the initiating guru 

should [perform] purification and sprinkling [of the initiand], super 

imposition [of mantras on to his own hand(?)], [laying on of E 

d (Sivahastam) [onto the initiand’s head], and severing of t 
07052 


In the account of the Mülasütra (4:13), the purification and 
which mark the beginning of the Saiva rites and the end of t 
ones, follow on immediately after tapasyam ca parivrajyam- s of 
however, a Pasupata observance is inserted between the two ir P 
nites, thus marking a continuity with the Atimārga in the NV” 
‘He should perform [the ritual] striking [of the initiand] Co, 
and worship (pujanam) according to the procedure enjoine iki the 
fure, [then] the cutting of the topknot (sikhacchedavidhana™ 
Conclusion of the vidyàdiksa: 


sprinkling: 
he Vaidik? 
Here, 


Translation of the Uttarasitra án 


It is conceivable that püjanai caiva is an error for yojanani caiva. For 
a discussion of vidyadiksa and muktidiksa, the two types of initiation 
mentioned frequently in the Nisvasa Corpus, see the annotation on 
Mulasütra 4:14-15b above. The purpose of the striking in this partic- 
ular context is uncertain. The cutting of the topknot serves to mark 
the loss of mundane status. 


3:23 'All the ritual acts taught [here], beginning with the measuring out 

[of the mandala] by threads and ending with the [cutting of the] top- 
knot, are to be performed by the master [using the base of the root 
mantra| with a long [form of the] letter [chosen for use in initiation] 
(dirghaksarena). 
Throughout the Uttarasütra, the mantra-system is that of the matrka, 
but this appears to mean, judging from Uttarasutra 2:10, that a par- 
ticular aksara is to be chosen and that shorter and longer vowels are 
attached to it to inflect it. According to 2:9d, the ordinary long vowel 
(dirgham) is to be generally used unless specified otherwise. The same 
model is outlined in the beginning of Sarvajnanottara 2: 


kakaradi ksakarantam svarasamyogapurvakam 2:2 
ekaikam aksaram bhinnam svarair dvadaSabhis tatha 
hrasvair brahma samakhyata dirghair angani nirdiset 2:3 


Sivam evamvidham vidyat sarvavarnesv anukramat 2:6ab 


2:3c hrasvair brahma samakhyata | conj. hrasvai brahma samakhyata 
P,; hrasvai brahma samakhyata T334 


Each letter, beginning with KA and ending with KSA, depending 
on being linked to a vowel [may be used to form the mantras]. 
Each letter is spliced with [one of] the twelve vowels: thus with the 
[tantric] short [vowels, the seed-syllables obtained] are taught to 
be the brahmamantras; with the long [vowels] one may pronounce 
the arigamantras. [..] One should understand that SIVA is of this 
nature [just described above, where the vowels just mentioned may 
be attached] in due order upon all of the consonants. 


onsecrat- 


3:24 'One who wishes to attain special power should perform a c (südhya- 


ing bath with the mantra chosen for attaining his power 
mantrabhisekam). 


372 


Nisvdsatattoasambite 


We assume that this stands for sadhyamantrenabhisekam an 
words have been run together for the sake of the metre. This Statement 
could be taken to describe one of three different scenarios. It coulg 
imply that in certain cases only an initiate might be a sadhaka anq 
that he might then follow the above ceremony with a concluding bath 
for which he would use the particular mantra that has been chosen 
for his particular sadhana; it could be intended to convey that all 
recipients of the vidyadiksa (all of whom might be sadhakas) should 
conclude with a consecratory bath, before proceeding to pursue their 
sadhana, and for this bath the same chosen mantra as was used for 
the initiation should be used; or it could be intended to mean that all 
recipients of the vidyadiksa should conclude with a consecratory bath, 
before proceeding to pursue their sadhana, and that at this point a 
mantra should or may be "chosen", perhaps by some device such as 
the casting of a flower onto the mandala (a device which, as we have 
observed, is not explicitly mentioned in the sütras of the १४४०७७). It 
is perhaps the last of these three possibilities that would best accord 
with what we have read in Mülasütra 416-7. 


d that the 


4:1 “In meritorious sites for siddhi he should examine a piece of land for his 


sadhana. Having established God there in accordance with prescrip- 
tion he should bathe and worship Him thrice daily’. 


4:2 ‘He should recite the NAVATMAN over the [three portions of] earth; [one 


4:3 


¢ — FEE yam with 
he should venerate the junction of the day, [perform] pranayam? x 


of these] he should cast in all directions; the second [he should cast] 


into the water; with the third he should touch [in order to clean] his 
body? 

The transmitted reading mrdafi, if it is not a corruption, might iE 
been intended as an accusative plural, which is what we take it to 2“ 


For a fuller description of this part of the bathing procedure, see ९:8० 
Sardhatrisatikalottara 3:3-4 and Somasambhupaddhati SP1 1:26-9- 


= isfy the 
SADYOJATA, [perform] the upasthana with TATPURUSA and satisfy 


ancestors with VAMADEVA? n 
In place of the three missing syllables at the beginning, one one 
Jecture something like ghorena or Isena, in order to supply १ = but 
and thus make this injunction parallel to the others in this at | 
one could also Supply an action, such as snatva tu, ‘hav? g :20c0 
(suggestion of Diwakar ACHARYA). Cf. also M atarigakriyapada 1 


Translation of the Uttarasütra i 


which enjoins using all five brahmamantras: brahmabhir vandayet 
sandhyam gayatrya tarpane sada. (But there seems to be no trace 
of a superscript r on the v of vandayet in N.) The term upastha- 
na, mentioned, for instance, in Sardhatrisatikalottara 3:3 and Matan- 
gakriyapada 2:22 as part of sandhyavandana, is presumably short for 
suryopasthana and refers therefore to the casting up of an offering of 
water towards the sun, who is to be regarded as Siva. 


4:4 ‘One who bathes in Siva-water [in the above-described fashion] has ef- 
fectively bathed in all the sacred bathing spots, rivers and oceans on 
earth. 


4:5 ‘Having then recited the BRAHMAMANTRAs, the breath-control exercises 
(pranayamah) [are to be performed] along with the yogic exercises of 
focus (dhàranaih). He should [then] begin meditation on Siva and 
worship [Siva] according to [scriptural] injunction? 


4:6 ‘[He should offer] white flowers for rites for peace (santike) and fragrant 
yellow or red flowers for prosperity (paustike). [Flowers that are] the 
opposite [in that they are dark and bad-smelling are to be used] for 
maleficent rites (viparitabhicaruke)? 


We first chose to render the first three padas of this verse differently: 
"[He should generally offer] white flowers; fragrant yellow and red flow- 
ers are for rites for peace and prosperity [respectively]. But a parallel 
in the Nisvasamukha rather suggests that white flowers are for Santi 
and yellow ones for pusti. 


sarve $uklas tu santyarthe sarvve pitas tu paustike 1:147 
nilaraktas tu ye puspà arccane parikalpitah 
vaSyakarsanam evam hi sarvan taih parikalpayet 1:148 


All white [flowers may be used] for the purpose of peace; all a 
ones for prosperity; as for blue/black and red flowers eae in 
worship, one should accomplish all rites of subjugation and attrac- 


tion with them. 
4:7—9 "Types of incense such as bdellium, particularly SE माल a 
should be used for rites of peace and prosperity; the E A SE 
[are to be used] for maleficent rites. Fragrant unguents SU : 


: e and 
particularly sweet-smelling ones, should be used for RS ea for 
prosperity; the opposite kinds of fragrant unguents [ar 


m Nisväsatattuasamhin 
maleficent rites. Ghee-cooked cakes and delicious (divyāni) foods hus 
to be offered] for rites of peace and prosperity; the opposite [kinds or 
food are to be used] for maleficent rites. 


4:10-11b "Then (?) joining together the wrists (venibandham., krtyg) of 
both hands, the little fingers should be stretched out (srte) and pressed 
together (Jagne), the two thumbs concealed in the middle [of the joined 
hands]. This is the called the bijamudra [as] taught in this tantra? 


A few other tantras speak of a bijamudra, but without necessarily 
having the same gesture in mind: the Matariga, for example, gives this 
name to another posture for the hands, which it describes in kriyapada 
1:7-8b; the editor’s understanding of it is presented in the back of the 
volume as Fig. 2. It is possible that the unclear description given in 
Pirva-Karana 28:15c-16b accords with ours: 


amgusthau praksipen madhye kanisthau prasrtau yutau 
bijamudreyam akhyata dargayec chaktikalpane 


Cf. also Suprabhedakriyapada 9:21-22: 


uitanau tu karau krtva venibandhan tu karayet 
angusthau praksipen madhye hastasamputagopitau 9:21 
kanisthakau tatha caiva muhuh krtva prasaritau 

agre gurusamàyuktàm bijamudram pradaráayet 9:22 


Perhaps the “Then” (tatah), which does not seem to fit here at all, 
might be an indication that this passage has been lifted from some 
other context. 


4:11¢-12b ‘Putting the hands together, all the pairs [viz. the tro Hl 
the two index-fingers, etc.] should be stretched straight (sr tah): 
18 called the namaskara; [it is used] for venerating all gods. 


#120 14b "The two middle fingers should be interlaced with the two 2n 
fingers, [then] the index and middle fingers on opposing hands p on 
be joined together, as well as the little fingers and ring fing" own 
opposing hands in the same way, and the thumbs should point 
[inwards]: this mudra is known as the amrtà? nape 
This gesture is elsewhere referred to as the dhenumudra, since ut NER 
recalls the four udders of the cow. For an illustration, see BR 
1963, Planche 1, No. 8. 


Translation of the Uttarasütra 3 
T5 
4:14c-15b ‘Placing the hands together back to back, with the fingers of the 
one interlaced with those of the other, one should turn them round 
[so] turning them into a ball: [thus] is taught the kotimudra? | 


Other than the Nisvasa (Mülasütra 6:26; Guhyasütra 16:55), the only 
other text in which we find the kotimudra referred to is the Sarva- 
jnanottara (5:53), which lists several mudras without describing them. 
The same mudra may perhaps be given another name elsewhere, but 
we have not been able to find it. 


4:15c-18b ‘Next I shall teach you the definition [of] the dravyamudra: 
whenever the Sadhaka has in mind a particular thing [that should be 
offered] he should always make a changed arrangement of his hands 
that is similar [to the required offering]. He should raise (ucchr- 
tau...krtva) both hands with their fingers interlaced; by moving them 
[to and fro] he should show them to the [ritual assistant known as 
the uttara[sadhaka] (uttare) as a sign alone [without accompanying 
words]. By this [act] alone, everything can be brought into being (jay- 
ate), and in this way one removes obstacles [that the absence of certain 
offerings would have produced]. 


This interpretation makes a number of assumptions that are particu- 
larly uncertain. First of all, it is assumed that verse 17 is still describing 
the same mudra, which seems to be implied by 18ab, but one might 
take 17-18b as describing a separate (unnamed) gesture. Secondly, 
ucchrtau could be an aiga form for utsrtau or, as we have assumed, 
for ucchritau, and anyonyantara° a metrically shortened expression 
intended to convey the sense of anyonyantarita^ (cf. 4:14d above and 
4:18d below). Thirdly, uttare, which could perhaps be taken to be an 
odd adverbial expression meaning ‘afterwards’, or an ae 
out a final t and with the sense of vitaret (“he should offer [them] 
in sign alone"), we have taken to be an instance of the locative for 
dative and to refer to the ritual assistant, the uttarasadhaka. For this 
assumption, cf. Uttarasitra 4:34 below. f 
A few other much later works teach different versions of a कक > 
for when something that should be offered is not to hand (Ge n 
15:10-11; Iéanasivagurudevapaddhati, kriyapada 7:15¢-16b; Lu 
Karana 28:18-19; Ajitagama 26:55). 

inter- 


4:18c-19b ‘He should turn his two hands downwards with the fingers ards: 


locking, [but] with the little fingers and thumbs hanging downw 
this is the anantasanamudra’ 


376 Nisvasatattuasamhig 
Presumably the thumbs and little fingers pointing downwards ar 
to evoke the four feet of the throne. Later Saiva sources NS. 
not to record an asanamudra, but some Vaisnava ones do, eg 
Jayakhyasamhita 8:61-3 (the mudra being quite different from the 
one described here). 


4:19c-20b *[Placing] the hands so that their fingers are locked together [he 
should make] a fist: this is the mudra of Sakala f...f in the middle? 


The text is damaged here and we find no Saiva parallel for a mudra of 
this name. There is, however, a definition of a different sakalamudra, 
followed, as here, by niskalamudra, which appears again not to be the 
same as ours, given in Visnudharmottara 3.33:13-17: 


padmakaro bhaved dhastah kanisthatarjaniyutah 
catasra ucchritah krtva prsthe "'nyonyam tu yojayet 13 
angusthav ekatah krtva pranalam caiva karayet 
sakalasya bhaven mudra dustanam samani subha 14 
trayah sankucita yatra kanisthangusthakevalah 
uttanam daksinangustham vamangusthena vestayet 15 
daksinangulibhi§ catra vamangustham tu vestayet 
vamasyangulibhi$ catra tv angulih parivestayet 16 
tarjanyau kuñcitau krtva mudra niskalarüpini 


4:20c-22b 'He should interlink the two little fingers and ring-fingers, 
stretching out the middle fingers joined 1... tips of the index fingers. 
In the middle he should bend the stretched out thumbs, putting them 
downwards: this is the mudra of Niskala, the index finger together 
with the thumb(?)? 


The description of the mudra is unintelligible to us and we know 
parallel other than that given in the previous note. 


of 10 


2 : 1 ; : ag it. one 
4:22c-23b ‘On seeing this [mudra, souls] are released; on forming it, ; 


goes to the PEE of Siva. For all other [gods] one should show 
namaskara [for welcoming] and the kotimudra for dismissal 


d 

4:23C-26b ‘For rites for peace, mental [silent] recitation of mantras a d 
be practised; for rites for prosperity, mumbled recitation; one tively] 
recite mantras] out loud for malefic rites. One should face [70006 ch, 
East, North and South [for these]. Rosaries of rudraksa beac) ol 


० ones 
lotus-seeds, Putraüjiva seeds, pearls are for rites for peace 


Translation of the Uttarasitra 


377 


crystal, precious stones, gold and coral are for rites for prosperity; 
rosaries of iron, tin, lead and bone are for malefic rites? 


This passage has been integrated, with modifications, into the Sva- 
cchanda (2:145ff): see apparatus for the part that is closely parallel. 


4:26c-29b ‘A hundred and one, or twenty-five, or fifty-one [beaded] 


rosaries [are to be used] for rites for peace and prosperity. One 
should make [a rosary of] one hundred and seven, or twenty-seven, 
thirteen, forty-nine or nineteen [beads] for rites for killing. The com- 
petent man (budhah) should draw the rosary along using respectively 
his thumb, middle finger and index finger for rites for peace and the 
others [namely for prosperity and for malefic purposes] respectively 
(Santikadikramenaiva): recitation [of mantras performed in this way] 
will bestow all the fruits required. 

The fingers with which the bead may be moved vary: see, e.g., Kirana 


14:39-40, where the Nepalese sources disagree with the South Indian 
edition about the fingers to be used. 


4:29c-30b ‘When the mantra does not work, the wise man should discern 


the obstacle. [The remedies are] bathing, inflaming, cutting, awaken- 
ing, purifying, lighting up? 

As we shall see below, these appear to be remedies used first upon a doll 
of vetiver (usira) and then, in 4:31cd and perhaps in the following lines, 
to the mantras. It is conceivable therefore that the doll represents 
the sadhaka, who needs to be protected by an abhiseka before the 
mantras are treated with the other processes; but it is also possible 
that the mantra that has not been giving results is to be installed in or 
represented by the doll and thus that all the remedies are to be applied 
to the mantra. It is rather this second possibility that is suggested zi 
a rite in Mañjuśriyamūlakalpa 26 (p.297) in which again a doll ० 
vetiver is bathed in order to nourish all mantras and, after d ar 
Order to restore a mantra that has been ‘pierced’ and so immobilised 
(kilita)?26 or otherwise damaged: 


Sarvavidyanam apyayanam kar tukamah gomitrayavaks- 
harah usiramayim pratikrtim krtva Suklapuspair siopa 
ksirastaatam juhuyat. kşīreņa ca snapayet. adea 
ptena agarudhüpam dadyat. apyayito bhavati. saki 


56 TAKs काना TAK2, s.v. kilita. 


: NiSvdsatattvasampie 


caritena atmaraksa krta bhavati. dvir uccaritena Parasya 
trir uccaritena dravyasya raksa krta bhavati. 

chinnabhinnanastakilitanam apyayanam kartukamah 
usiramayim pratikrtim krtva Suklapuspair abhyarcya anena 
usnisarajena patasyagratah rajasarsapanam dadhimadhu- 
ghrtaktanam astasahasram juhuyat, vidyam uddi$ya. ut. 
kilita bhavati. 


One desirous of nourishing all mantras should consume 
[only] cows’ urine and barley gruel, should make an image 
of vetiver [root?/grass?], venerate it with white flowers and 
oblate with milk one hundred and eight times. And he 
should bathe it with milk. And he should offer agaru as 
incense over which the [USNISARAJA] mantra has been recit- 
ed one hundred and eight times. The [mantra] will become 
nourished. By [thereafter] reciting [the USNISARAJA] once, 
one’s own protection will be effected. By reciting it twice, 
that of another person; by reciting it thrice, the protection 
of some substance will be effected. 

One desirous of nourishing [mantras] that have been cut, 
broken, destroyed or transpierced should make an image 
out of vetiver [root?/grass?], venerate it with white flow- 
ers and, with this USNISARAJA he should, in front of the 
cloth, perform 1008 oblations into the fire of mustard seeds 
smeared with curds, honey and ghee for the sake of the 
mantra (vidyam uddigya). She [scil. the vidya] will become 
un-pierced. 


Cf. also Guhyasütra 10:126—7: 


chin hi , ana; 1 2. i 
ccinnabhinnakilitakotitavitrasitani baddhani sattvanam d 
avin 


ati. ustrapratima|m] krtvà gandhodakena snapayed ek 
Japtena dosamuktaá ca siddhyati. 


| [mantras] 
[With the VYOMAVYAPIN] he frees for [other] beings je p: ter- 
that have been cut, broken, transpierced, hammered dova 
rified, [in other words that have been] bound. He shoul hi 


1 : wa ver whic 
image of vetiver [root] and bathe it with fragrant water oye E 
and 


a SA TAG. . es 
. sattvanam might alternatively be connected with the understood mantran 
in the sense of “divine beings’, 


Translation of the Uttarasütra ; 
T9 


[the VYOMAVYAPIN] has been Iepeated twenty-one times. And [the 
mantra) becomes freed from the problem and will be effective, 


Cf. also the procedure included in a long quotation of the Ucchus- 
matantra that appears in Taksakavarta's Nityadisarigrahapaddhati 
in which it appears that a given mantra is visualised according to 
the dhyana-prescription for that mantra-deity, installed in an effi- 
gy of vetiver, which is then installed on a throne and bathed with 
waters that have been empowered by the recitation of the mantra 
of Paramaksaradeva (Oxford MS, f. 123r): yada mantraganas sarve 
bhogad jvivrtajlalasah/ dhyanoktam rüpakam jüatva uSsirapratimam 
kuru) simhasane nivesyaitàn kalasenabhisecayet/ paramaksaradevena 
sahasram abhimantrayet. 

In Atharvavedaparisista 6.1 we find a nourishing rite involving a doll, 
but in that case it is not mantras that are nourished or repaired, for 
the effigy in question, which is to be made of flour (pista), is an effigy 
of the year (samvatsarasya pratimam, 6.1:5). 


4:30c-31b ‘Having made a .. [with] a surrounding rim ([sa-?] mekhalam), 
he should place [there] a doll made of usira. With milk/water that has 
been empowered by a thousand repetitions he should bathe (abhisifice) 
that (tam) tatmanaht? 


It would be natural, perhaps, to make a snanapitha for this bathing, 
So perhaps one could conjecture pitham samekhalam krtva. In place 
of atmanah, the conjecture atmanam has been proposed (an irregular 
accusative attested in the Brahmayamala). 


4:31b-33c "The syllable JUM awakens mantras; with the syllable OM he 
should kindle them; with NAMAH he should perform purification [0f 
them] (amalam kuryat); with SVAHA he should make them ह 
payet); the syllable SAH, positioned at the beginning and the Aa 0 
be used for “cutting”. They [scil. mantras] bestow all objects o oes 
when this rite has been performed as prescribed (yathokte karmman 
krte). oe 
Note that OM JUM SAH is the central mantra, the death celos or 
ty uñjaya) NETRA of the Netratantra. For the procedures pa si 
with it on other mantras, cf. the following quotation, EE mi 
Netratantroddyota ad 18:6c-8: tad uktam $rimaducchusma 


dipane tu mahabhaga pranavobhayayojanam 


CN 


380 Ni$vasatattnsa ji 
bodhane tu namaskarah svahakaro ‘male tatha 
vausadantargatam mantram abhiseke niyojayet 
phatkarobhayasamyuktam tadane viniyojayet 

adyantam caiva humkaram indhane viniyojayet 


We have taken yathokte karmmana krte as a phrase consisting of three 
instrumentals in apposition (the first and last being irregularly formed, 
Alternatively, we could emend to the locative karmani (assuming that 
the following kr, pronounced as kri, would make the final -i metrically 
long), or emend to an irregularly formed locative karmane, and take 
the phrase as a locative absolute. 


4:33c-34b ‘One who is true to his word, accepting no gifts, who observes 
the rules of cleanliness and good conduct, [and] who is without anger 
or greed will succeed in a short while? 


4:34c-35 “To his ritual assistant (uttarasadhake) he should show a gesture 
that resembles a thing [that he requires]; in this manner (tena) the 
sadhaka may obtain things (dravyam) when he is observing silence 
(maunakale). If he receives [gifts] or transgresses rules, he will be due 
for a rite of reparation (prayaácitti)? 


4:36 '.. substances fit for offering into the fire .. [at] the top middle un 

base, [the fuel-sticks] should have their bark (satvacah?) and not be 
split (asphatitah?), 
Judging from parallels and from 4:37cd, the missing syllables might 
have explained that these fuel-sticks should be of sacrificial woods, 
straight and devoid of blemishes (vrana), knots (granthi), फि 
other such faults. Cf. Sarvajfianottara 22:4-7: 


4a. "kantakino] NLT; °kandakino P e 4b. 
“bhitaka N; °bhitakam T ० 4cd. Sigriislematakascal”? ajah 5 
Pai Sigriislesmatakascaiva vijňeyā N; éigruslesthatakaseaiv 


Translation of the Uttarasitra A 
301 


SraSakraSlesmatakaSscaiva vijüeya L ° idhapra Lig 
hagra TP,L (unmetrical) 4 5b. vakracehedah sam, A, E 
vakracchedasasamndhayah N; vakracchedasamiüksayah "op yan 2 ne 
visastkkatutailaktah prayojyah krarakarmani ] conj.; il | M 
tam prayojya krürakarmani N; visayasrkkatukailaktah prayojyah 
krükarmmani T; -— srkkatukailaktah prayojyah krürakarmmani 
Pi; visaprakatikairlaksah Prayojyah krürakarmani L e 6, 
uktabhyas tv anyatha skanda ksiravrksasamudbhavah ] TL; uk 
tasamanyatha skanda ksiravrksasamudbhava N; uktabhyastvanyatha U 
ndaksiravrksasamutbhava P, e 600.  vijüeyas tyaktà và brah- 
mavrksajah] conj.; vijüeya tyakta và brahmavrksaja N; vijiieyantyak- 
tvà và brahmavrksajah T; vijieyantyaktva va — mavrksajah P,; vi- 
jüeyastyaktva va brahmavrksaja(jau N=) L e 7b granthihinah 
samatvacah] conj.; granthihma samamgula N; grandhihinassamatvacah 
TP,; granthihmah samatvacah L e 700. niruja nirvranah śānte 
kruresv eta vilomikah] conj.; niraja nivrana santo krüresvesa vilomika 
N; nirujà nirvrnas santah krüresv età vilomikah TP,; niruja nirvranah 
Santakruresveta vilomikah L 

Long-thorned trees, Neem, Nux vomica, Terminalia bellirica, the 
drumstick tree, and Cordia dichotoma are to be understood [to be 
used] for “cruel” rites. [Such] fuel-sticks should be split-ended, fis- 
sured, crooked, twisted and broken. They may be used for “cruel” 
rites when smeared with poison, blood and mustard oil. Different 
from those taught above, o Skanda, are those of woods of milky 
sap. They may be understood to be [used] for rites of appeasement. 
One may (va) exclude those of Ficus racemosa. For [rites of] ap- 
peasement, they should be [selected from] between the branches 
and sprouts, devoid of knots, with even bark, free of shee pa 
of wounds; they should be [of the] opposite [attributes] for “crue 
rites. 


4:37—8 ‘For rites for peace and for prosperity (śāntike paustike), these e. 
Sticks should be of twelve finger-breadths [in length]. In malefic ri x 
however, they must be without bark (dalahinah), [only] eight zi 
breadths [in length], crooked, and split. For rites for id nally] 
Prosperity, the mantrin should oblate things that are ae a 
fit for oblation and the like (havigyadini dravyani); in ma 9 
the opposite (viparitabhicaruke): ka 
This last expression we must either take here as a fixed i; d | 
€rammar of which resists analysis (cf. Uttarasutra 4:6d, 2 perit ah 
and cf. 4:40c below), or we may assume that viparità (o 9 


| 
| 
= 


d Nisväsatattvasamhi 


with double sandhi) is intended as an adjective agreeing with dam 
and treated as nominative plural: "the opposite sorts of things la 
be used] in malefic rites". 0 


4:39 “The [ladle known as the] sruva should measure one hand [in len ath} 
its [liquid-holding] base ... finger-breadths... One should make the lladle 
known as the] sruk ...; its lotus[-shaped receptacle] (puskaram) shoul i 
be the size of a hand.’ 

It is tempting to repair 4:39 in the light of Sarvajnanottara 17:2, which 
is so similar that it might have been based on our text: 


sruvam hastapramanam tu adharo ‘rigusthaparvakah 
bahumatra sruci jneya puskaram karasammitam 


2b °parvakah | conj.; °parvakam N; °piirvakam GOML R 16829; °par- 
vatah L e 2c bahumatra sruci jieya | conj.; bahumatrasruci jfieya 
N; bahumatram sruvam jieya GOML R. 16829; bahumatram srucam 
jüeya L e 2d karasammitam ] N, GOML R 16829; samnisannibhah 
L 


The sruva should be one hasta in length; its [liquid-holding] base 
should be [like] the joint of the thumb [in size]; the sruk should 
have the length of the arm; its bowl should be of the size ofa 
hand. 


We have hesitated to do so, however, partly because N in our s 
clearly reads “ngula? and not “ngustha?. The puskara, the bowl of EA 
sruk, would be very large, by the way, if hasta referred here to x 
unit of measure defined, e.g. in Parakhya 5:3, 95 twenty-four fin e 
breadths; but the expression karasammitam in Sarvajnanottam T 
suggests that this is a non-technical use and that the bowl simply 
the size of a human hand, and this is why we have not trans 
‘which should measure one hasta across’. 


1077 
Much more detailed descriptions of these ladles can of course d 
elsewhere, e.g. Mrgendravrtti ad kriyapada 6:3र्छी. 


:40 "They [ण f pali?? 
4:40 "They |viz. the wise] know that these two [ladles] should Ek ००४ 
and of asvattha wood for rites for peace and for prosperity; 


should make them [of] opposite [materials] for malefic rites: 


py 2 P“ 
In the second half of the verse the dual has been replaced The Jos 
ral but it is presumably still the ladles that are spoke? 9" 


Translation of the Uttarasitra 8 
393 


of the dual might have been partly induced by the use of the idiom 
viparitabhicare/viparitabhicaruke, for which see the note on 4:37-8 
above. The woods in this case this ma: i 

y be those of nt 
such as vibhitaka. Wee ais or, 


4:41 ‘Any substances other than those listed are the “opposite” (viparita) 
[substances] that are to be used for malefic rites. But for all [types of] 
rites he should [invariably] take enclosure-sticks of [the usual] sacrificial 
woods.’ 


The first half of this verse seems oddly expressed: we would expect 
atah param to mean rather "after this", Perhaps the text is corrupt 
here. 


We take this last injunction, which we have repaired by conjecture, 
to mean that for the three sticks that are used to form the enclosure 
of the sacrificial fire (paridhi), standard woods that are recommended 
for sacrifice (yajfiika) are to be selected for all types of rite, whether 
for Santi, pusti or abhicara. 


4:42 “Two blades of kusa-grass of one inner span [in length] placed together 
at the tips [should be] knotted together in the middle: [this is how the 
tool known 95] the pavitra is made, according to this work (tantre), 
for scraping off the scum of ghee. 


We have assumed that kusagradvayasamyuktam is a muddled com- 
pound that is intended in the sense of kusadvayam agrasamyuktam). 


4:43 ‘Seeing and conversing with meritorious folk, prosperity among the 
people of the court, observing an access of increased strength in oneself 
(atmotkarsabalam), [—in the case of such signs impending success,] he 
[viz. the sadhaka] will enjoy success, there is no doubt: 


We have assumed that atmotkarsabalam is another VOL com- 
pound and that the intended sense is that of atmabalotkarsam. here 
is, however, a parallel for this strange compound in a similar verse in 
the Sarvajnanottara (22:10): 


. 8 
viśiştajanasamvādo narendrajanavardhanam”” 
atmotkarsabalam caiva yadi syat sidhyate dhruvam. 


oan °sampado narendrajanavandanam T. 760, 


samvado narendrajanavardhanam ] conj.; 
P. 92. 


Lo e 


384 Misvasatattug 


The following half-line in the Sarvajnanottara confirms that this ; 
intended as a list of impending signs of success for the sādhaka: is 


divyantariksabhaumani siddhilingani pasyati. 


We have taken punya? to refer to meritorious folk, assuming it to be 
parallel with the Sarvajnanottara’s visistajana?, but it is Possible that 
punyadaráana? is intended as a bahuvrihi conveying the same idea: 
“those the sight of whom is meritorious”. This would make the Verse 
more closely parallel with the following one. 


4:44 ‘Conversing with unmeritorious folk, trepidation among the people of 
the court, [or] observing the diminution of [the power of his] self, [it 
he sees such signs of impending failure,] he will never enjoy success’ 


Unfortunately there is no parallel in the Sarvajndnottara for these 
signs of impending failure. Our translation (“he will never enjoy”) 
assumes that satatam, in spite of its position, may be taken with the 
apodosis. It would be possible, of course, to take it earlier: “observing 
the constant (satatam) diminution of [the power of] himself”. 


4:45-46b ‘The rules (vidhih) for the sadhaka that give rise to the attain- 
ment of all desired objects have been taught; through them (yena); 
sadhakas who know the mantras and follow [the requisite] observances 
(mantracaryasamayuktah) succeed. Equipped with them (samyukta 
yena) [ordinary] men [will also] succeed even in spite of ignorance 


0 » but 
We have taken ajfianad api to mean “even in spite of ignorance bi 
it should more literally mean “even because of ignorance”. 


4:46c—-47 ‘I shall teach you salvific initiation (nirvanadiksam) leet 
listen to me while I speak. Performing an oblation [using 85 WE. 
the letters of the syllabary] in due order, beginning viu "em e 
ending with A, he should join (samyojya) [the initiand's 50 him i 
Ineffable (anuccarye) and then, using Sakti, he should merg? 
the Indivisible (niskale)? 


We earlier assumed that anuccarye (emended, partly on E 
of Mülasütra 5:22, from anuccàre) was an adjective to ultimate 
may be in Mulasitra 5:22, and that 4:47cd spoke only of thé accoust 
level attained through liberation; but it seemed difficult 6 818 
for samyojya (or samyojya in N) in such an interpretation- jt 98 
gestion advanced was to retain samyojyà and to understa 


strengt h 
it 


Translation of the Uttarasütra 38 
5 


equum So 
what sense Sakti is instrumen- 
talised to link the soul with niskala, for it is not clear what Sakti is: 
does it refer here to a mantra (cf. Uttarasütra 1:17 and 5:39c-40), or to 
an invisible power of Siva that is neither enunciated nor smilies or 
could it refer perhaps to the yogic cultivation of Saktisamarasa that will 
be described in the following chapter?) In the interpretation we have 
adopted, however, we have the difficulty of having to identify the level 
that is referred to as anuccarya. We may note that the ANTASTHA is 
described as anuccarya in Mülasutra 6:13cd (= Sardhatrigatikalottara 
19:9cd). But could this be thought of as a level just below niskala? 
On the basis of Uttarasutra 1:17 above and 4:49cd below, the levels we 
Re expect to be mentioned below niskala are those of sakala and 
kti. 


4:48 “By means of Sakti he becomes niskala and goes to the Siva-state. 
Alternatively (atha), the acarya may purify [the initiand's rebirths 
throughout] the cosmos (prakriyam) simply (eva) using the cluster- 
letter (pindaksarena) [viz. the NAVATMAN]. 


Instead of performing fire-oblations for each sound in the syllabary as 
a means of purging the soul of all karmic obligation to live through 
future rebirths, the acarya may simply use the letters of the NAVAT- 
MAN, whose correspondences with levels of the cosmos were taught at 
the beginning of the first chapter of the Uttarasutra. The use of the 
syllabary is very lightly touched on here and will be expanded upon 
in the first chapter of the Nayasutra. 


4:49ab ‘The cluster-letter [viz. the NAVATMAN] and the eight-grouped [syl- 
labary|—these two are in fact one [and the same] (dvav etau eka eva 
ca)? 
The point of this equation is presumably to emphasise that the syl- 
labary can be used as a mantra just as effectively as the NAVAT- 
MAN. The above translation glosses over some oddities of language: 
pindaksarastavargafi ca may be taken to be an instance of soe 
sandhi of pindaksaram and astavargam Or of a dvandva Sass a 
a superfluous ca linking its members (see p.129 above), and t e fin 
ca is odd if the eva before it is intended to be an emphatic predicate- 
marker (as we have taken it to be). 


4:49c-51b ‘Higher than both Sadagiva and Sakti is Siva. Once linked there 


naa E oo 


386 


Nisvasatattvasamhits 


[at that level of niskala), a [formerly] mortal beng does not return to 
perpetual rebirth; liberated from merit and demerit, devoid of all sins, 
immaculate like ether, pure he goes to Śiva-liberation (śivasāyojyatām 
vrajet). 

In 49cd, we have assumed that dvabhyam is probably meant to be tak- 
en in apposition with Sivasya SakteS ca, which, though formally geni- 
tive, we construe as ablatives depending on the comparative paratarah. 
We earlier supposed that the juxtaposition of 49ab and 49cd might 
have been meant to suggest to the reader that Sadasiva and Sakti were 
to be equated respectively with the NAVATMAN and the syllabary and 
that these two were, at the level of ultimate truth, not different from 
the ineffable transcendent Siva. But the implicit identification with 
Sakti of the syllabary ranged in the conventional order from A to KSA 
would be odd, since the conventionally ordered syllabary (sabdaraii, 
matrkasiva [mentioned in 5:27 below]) is associated elsewhere with 
Siva himself. 


4:51c-52b "There is no liberation equal to [the liberation granted by] initi- 


ation; there is no mantra (vidya) beyond the syllabary (matrkapara), 
there is no knowledge beyond [the knowledge of] the cosmos (prakriya); 
there is no yoga [in a real sense] without [the highest] goal? 


This restitution and interpretation was proposed by Peter BISSCHOP 
on the basis of comparison with Svacchanda 11:399: 


nàsti diksasamo mokso na vidya matrkapara 
na prakriyaparam jüanam nasti yogas tv alaksyakah 


To get the same sense, we might assume either that there is a split 
compound of prakriya and param or, and this is the solution we have 
preferred, that prakriya, and perhaps also matrka, must have been 
intended as ablative, Cf. also Sarvajnanottara 30:70: 


na param prakriya jfianam na Sivad vyapakam param 
na yogat paratarah siddhir na Samat paramam sukham 


T eee is no knowledge higher than [the knowledge of] cosmoEr? 
Phy; there is no all-pervasive entity higher than Siva; there is 70 


attainment higher tha y : 4 than 
n yoga; eater 
peace. oga; there is no happiness gr 


Translation of the Uttarasutra हि 
Here the editions (the verse is 2:68 in the Tanjore edition and DN 
the Devakottai edition) print prakriyajnanan, but this would leave us 
without a subject for the first pada. 


“The goddess spoke: 

You have taught the eight varieties of the cluster-letter [mantra], the 
eight [groups of letters] of the alphabet, Sadagiva, Siva and the cos- 
mography.’ 

The ‘eight varieties of the cluster-letter [mantra] are the eight forms 
of the mülamantra (also known as the eight forms of Sadasiva) given 
in Mūlasūtra 6, and in the course of the raising of those forms the 
eight groupings of the alphabet are used. But it is possible that the 
text is here referring back instead to Uttarasūtra 1:18f. A detailed 
cosmographic account occurs in Mulasutra 5, but it is possible that on 
this point the text refers back instead to Uttarasutra 1:13-17. 


5: 


5:2 "Tell me about Sakti, great lord, and about the yoga of the cosmos 
(prakriyayogam), about what should be aimed at and what should 
not (laksyalaksyam), o lord: on this I have considerable doubt.’ 


As we shall see below, “yoga of the cosmos' could be analysed to 
mean ‘yogic practice involving [levels of] the cosmos’ or "linking oneself 
[through yoga] to [successive levels of] the cosmos’. It is not clear what 
precisely is referred to, among the topics mentioned in the following 
chapter, by the term laksyalaksyam. 


5:3 “The lord spoke: 
Matter, soul, binding fate, time, maya, vidya, 
meditated upon one by one.’ 
These are the seven tattvas homologised with seven of the ten elements 
of the TATTVA in Uttarasitra 1:10-11. The neuter form dhyatavyanl, 
‘they should be meditated upon’, might have been used because the 
unstated term tattvani is to be understood, but we have assumed 
instead that the neuter adjective is used to qualify the whole group 
of words of various genders. The text now gives an pero uds 
the soul through the cosmic hierarchy to liberation by NET 
Snostic yoga, and in this it seems archaic, harking back to WE a 
intiation (cf. 9. 294): elsewhere in the Mantramarga, 5 e a 
salvific yoga has often been ousted by a more concrete a edd) 
involving fire oblations, with yogic processes (such as ae 
typically retained only as ancillaries to ritual. 


Téa—these should be 


ie Nisvasatattvasamhitg 


5:4-5 ‘Also Sadasiva, who is eight-fold, day, night and the semesters, trans. 

fers, equinox, [a state of awareness in which everything has] the same 
favour as Sakti (Saktisamarasam). Knowing all of these one may reach 
union with Siva. By meditation [upon them] one may attain power; 
omniscience will arise.’ 
With this the programme for the chapter has been announced. Know. 
ing about time must refer to knowing the correspondences between 
macrocosmic external time and microcosmic internal yogic time. One 
might be tempted to repair the metrical fault in 5:4d by emending 
Saktisamarasan (in which both the second and third syllables of the pā- 
da are short) to Saktisamarasyan, but it seems that Saktisamarasa, not 
Saktisamarasya, really is the technical label in this text, and the same 
metrical fault involving the same term recurs in Ultarasutra 5:36d 
below. 


5:6 ‘The first [element of this meditation] is the meditation on the essential 
nature (tattvadhyanam) [of a given thing]; the second is the meditation 
on its form (chayadhyanam); the third is the meditation on its sound; 
the fourth is the meditation upon [it as] a target (laksyadhyanam). 


The meaning of the fourth of these is not entirely clear, nor does it 
become so during the course of the chapter. In fact, as we shall see, it 
seems that not every one of the tattvas listed in 5:3 is meditated upon 
in each of these four ways. 


5:7 ‘After meditating upon the [bottom] twenty-four tattvas, he should re- 
flect [on them] using the seed[-syllable-mantra] (bijena). Now this 
meditation involving the seed|-syllable] of matter (prakrtena tu bije- 
na) is held to be that upon its essential nature (tattvikam smrtam)- 


The bijena in the first half-line could simply refer to the same as that 
in the second, namely that of prakrti, which was identified above (in 
Uttarasütra 1:10) as being U. If not, a different seed-syllable might be 
required for each of the twenty-four tattvas. But this seems less likely, 
since the purport of this verse appears to be to define prakrti's nature 
as something that envelops all the twenty-three tattvas beneath it. 


5:8 s आ ening into an awareness of the form [of prakrti] (chayacittam 
DA teu the wise person should meditate upon that until the form 
Ould become white: then the man will succeed? 


T 2 e 
a word citta has been used in place of dhyāna here, which is why 
ave translated it in this Way. The translation “First” (of tava? 


Transla 


tion of the Uttarasutra T. 
suggests that these meditations were sequential, but the text does not 
clearly tell us whether or not they were to be engaged upon one after 
the other. 


5:9 ‘Meditation on the sound [of prakrti] is the third; it bestows the super- 


5:10 


5:11 


5:12 


natural power associated with matter (prakrtisiddhidayakam). And 
he [who attains it] becomes omniscient and becomes all powerful (sva- 
tantrah). 


What is not specified is what the sound in question is. We suppose 
that it is the sound U, which has been identified in Uttarasitra 1:10 
as the seed-syllable of prakrti and whose written form is about to be 
mentioned in the following verse as the laksya of prakrti. 


‘For one who stares into the heaven, a letter U, with its wiggly shape, 
[appears there]. Upon seeing [this] meditation-focus [that enables the 
grasping] of matter (prakrtilaksam), he is released from bondage. 


We have corrected to the &tmanepada form viksamanasya and assumed 
that sa picks up the same subject in the next half-line, almost as though 
there had been a relative pronoun yasya agreeing with viksamanasya. 


“He who, engaged in yoga, meditates [on that| must obtain success 
in yoga (yogasiddhim). This yoga connected with prakrti has been 
taught to you, [which is] salvific, supreme. 

The second half of this verse recurs verbatim as Nayasutra 3:22ab. 


‘(The first element of meditation, namely the tattvadhyana, is] the 
awareness that one is conscious but not an agent; the second [element 
of meditation on purusa) is a zinging sound (cificintyakam); the third 
is the mark of smoke (dhümalaksam); the fourth is the mark of shadow 
(chayalaksam)? 

Very little of this is clear and almost not 
moved up to meditating on the next tattva, d 
seem to have four types of meditation given for it just as 508700 
lead us to expect. The first pada, therefore, gives US a a ale 
meditation on the essential nature of the purusa. We have emended Ee 
first pada and treated it as though it were 9 compressed and pe. 
formulation of cetaham, na tu karta, iti vijüanam: " [The tattva ed c 
on the purusa consists in] an awareness of the form ‘Tam UT n 
an agent’, (The sentiment, surprisingly, isa Sankhya rat ee 

aiva one.) An alternative translation, perhaps even more EDD 


hing is certain. We have 
namely purusa, and we 


390 Nisvasatattvasamhits 
awkward, might be to take the first word as a sort of title: “The kn on 
[viz. the soul has this as its essential nature]: knowledge that it is not 


an agent;”. 

The second type of meditation here sounds as though it should be 
a ghosadhyana, which we would expect, from 5:5, to be third rather 
than second. The fourth here, chayalaksa, sounds as if it might cor. 
respond to the second of 5:6, namely chayadhyana, but in that case 
it is not made explicit what shape should be thought of (unless it be 
a “shadow”). This would leave dhumalaksa to be the laksadhyana of 
5:6. The following verses now expand upon these meditations on the 


soul. 


5:13 '"Iam not an agent and I am without the gunas [that pervade material 
creation]; action is caused by matter (prakrtya)"—such is the medita- 
tion of awareness [of the nature of the purusa): one is released [through 
this meditation] from the latent traces (vasanat) [that keep one locked 
inside the illusion that purusa and prakrti are not distinguishable]. 


Instead of assuming that vasanad eva mucyate refers to the practi- 
tioner being liberated by this meditation from the traces left by good 
and bad actions, one might interpret it to mean “through the mental 
traces [left by this meditation] (vasanat) alone (eva) one may be re- 
leased? This appears to be how Ksemaraja has interpreted the pada 
when it occurs as Svacchanda 12:50b (for which see Appendix II), for 
he embeds the half-verse in his commentary thus: prakrtya karitam 
manye buddhyadidvarena pravartitam iti nigcinomi; tadidrsaviveka- 
Jfianotthat vasanad eva mucyate. vasanam samskarah. mucyata iti 
sankhyabhiksuh. This meditation, as we have remarked in the previous 
mote, corresponds to the tattvadhyana of 5:6. 


5:14 'A buzzing sound (यया) is the sound of purusa-tattva; one should 
meditate upon it with one's mind engaged in yoga. By meditating one 
obtains success: one attains union with Visnu (visnusayojyatam) i 


pa ation, as remarked above, appears to be the ghosadhyan@ 
5:6. 


m a moke that has emerged from the door to the fourth is the meditation- 

Hes (laksam) of purusatattva. If one meditates [on it] (dhyanêi); 

at smoke bursts into flame. If one sees fire [when performing p 
meditation], then one succeeds? 


Translation of the Uttarasutra * 


Ksemaraja identifies the “door to the fourth [state of consciousness?]” 
with the brahmarandhra in his Svacchandatantroddyota ad 4:449. We 
assume that this is what it is here too, as well as in Nayasütra 4:18. 
Somdev VASUDEVA observes of this practice (TAK 3, s.v. turyadvara): 
“This implies an unstated notion of a flame-like soul (presumably in 
the heart) that produces a normally imperceptible trace of smoke that 
rises out of the cranial aperture.” 


This meditation we assume to be the laksadhyana of 5:6 (and it is 
partly for this reason that we read dhüma as a pratipadika (for nomi- 
native) rather than in compound with laksam). 


- 


5:16 ‘Focussing on one's awareness on [one’s] “shadow” (chayacittam), one 
will see the soul (puman = pumamsam?) in the sky (viyatstham). 
Practising in this way, one attains success and becomes Siva. 


We have puman as an instance of the nominative for an accusative, a 
usage for which we may lack other evidence, but the word is awkward 
to decline and its accusative would be metrically problematic here. 
We could instead take pagyate to have passive sense, take viyatstham 
to agree with the masculine nominative puman and assume an anaco- 
luthic shift of subject in this pada: "the soul will be seen standing in 
the ether". 


This presumably corresponds to the chayadhyana of 5:6. Is the chaya 
no more than the "shadow" or shape of a given object of meditation? 
What then is the “shadow” of the soul? With this unclear meditation, 
the focus on purusatattva is concluded. 


5:17-18 ‘In the case of great gains and losses (mahalabhavipattau), one 
should meditate [while looking at a reflective surface] on liquids such 
as water, [or] in a mirror in order to gain successes in conquering 
niyati (niyatyajayasiddhisu). [After attaining such success] one does 
not rejoice or become despondent in the case of great gains and pas 
once one knows the true nature of niyati, she will be vanquished: 


This meditative practice strikingly recalls catoptromancy, known E 
Sanskrit works as prasena or prasina, that is to say the on d a: 
looking at shiny, reflective surfaces, or getting others, typi M af 
cent children to do so, in order to try to “see” the future in them. 


VIC. 74 119454 86 0 M MN fe ; ina is the 
8 a Prasinà procedure is described, for example, in Guhyasttra seas as Zane subject 
es ate of a forthcoming article by Somdev VASUDEVA. See also his art 

AK 3; S.V. prasena. 


392 


Nisvāsatattvasamhitz 


What that in turn suggests is that niyati is probably not yet conceived 
of here in the theologically sophisticated manner of Ramakantha, in 
other words as the subtle imperceptible entity whose only function 
is to ensure that the consequences of morally significant acts accrue 
to the perpretator, but rather as “chance” or “destiny”. Moving to 
the next text-layer, that of the Nayasutra, we find a another medita- 
tion on niyati, in which she seems to be little different from karman 
itself, incarnate as an ineluctable goddess: Nayasütra 3:29-30. We 
think that the second of the above verses, 5:18, may correspond to the 
tattvadhyana of 5:6. 

We have assumed niyatyajayasiddhisu to be a compound in which 
niyatya is treated as a stem-form (instead of niyati: see § 2.18 in our 
discussion of language above), but we could equally have assumed a 
genitive niyatyah from niyati. 


5:19-20 ‘One should practise on the meditation-target of niyati in water 


5:21 


or in ghee, for it is of the nature of water. If one sees niyati, one will 
succeed. [Alternatively] he should meditate on niyati in a mirror; it 
(?) will arise in fiery form. Then, seeing niyati, he will definitely have 
success with/over (?) niyati? 


Depending on whether one takes niyatya in 20d as an ai$a nominative 
(cf. the form devya, e.g. in the title Devyamata) or as an instrumental 
of niyati, the final statement could be read either as “niyati is surely 
mastered" or as “he surely succeeds by niyati" We have preferred to 
assume the latter, since we are not certain to have seen clear instances 
of this sort of stem-shift (from i/7 to ya) other than in oblique cases 
and at the seams of compounds. We assume that the above two verses 
correspond respectively to the laksadhyana and the chayadhyana of 
5:6. There seems to be no ghosadhyana for niyati, for the next verses 
moves up to the next tattva, that of kala. 


दा day-junctures, days, in fortnights, months and seasons, in 
al’ auspicious times, Time is worshipped thus’ 


OR > hard to construe here. We have assumed that muhürte- 
ae ea functions as a locative because of its proximity M 
B I E But does the sentence mean that time is "worshippe. 
= Tia that one marks such divisions as those listed? Or DNE 
xj sd ps understand kalam eva (with a following hiatus-blocki 
er than kalam evam? In that case we could interpret: gu 


Translation of the Uttarasütra i 
these auspicious times it is none other than Time that is worshipped” 
Meditations on time seem not to have been divided up into the four 
types announced in 5:6 above. 


5:22 ‘At all times he should [strive to] see Time as dwindling ( hiyamanam), 
One who meditates [thus] on Time will soon see Time? 


This interpretation is of course speculative since it depends on conjec- 
tures. It may seem odd to say that Time “dwindles”, but we assume 
that what is enjoined here is a meditation on transience. 


5:23 ‘He becomes one whose form is that of Time; he attains power (sid- 

dhyate), [being] a Time-yogin (kalayoginah). Omniscient, and able to 
take form at will, he becomes pure (svacchatam vrajet) like Siva? 
It may seem tempting to correct Sivavat svacchatam vrajet to Siva- 
svacchandatam vrajet, but we find parallels for svacchatam vrajet in 
the Nigvasakarika: na tasya kalayate kalah kalena svacchatam vrajet 
(IFP T. 150, p.182) and srjan samharate vi$vam Sivavat svacchatam 
vrajet (IFP T. 127, p. 204). This concludes the meditation on Time. 


5:24-5 'One who is without desire for affection, who is intent on pursu- 
ing knowledge, who is perturbed by samsara and desirous of libera- 
tion—such a person has gone beyond maya. He should make an effigy 
of maya of wood or of clay. One should meditate on that. And when 
it bursts into flames, he succeeds? 


Here pratima is used, metri causa, for pratimam, and the causative 
kàrayet has the flavour of the simplex kuryat, which the metre also 
precludes. The form sidhyateti, which has the appearance of siddhyate 
with an iti crushed on to the end, appears here and in a few other places 
in the text (e.g. 5:31d and Nayasütra 3:43d: see 9. 122) to be simply 
8 metrically padded form of sidhyate. 


No indication appears here of how maya is to 
might suppose that she is to be seen as a beauti 
Visualisation given in Nayasütra 3:34c-37 (१४ ४०००८ > 
is emphatically not intended to be one of intoxicating beauty. 

[while staring) into sap- 
aneous] flames, 


be represented, and one 
ful seductress. But the 
handa 12:118-121b) 


pao ‘One should perform meditation upon maya 
Phires, [other] jewels, lamps. When there are [pont 
the aspirant succeeds with his meditation on maya. Na 
1 . . ma 
It might seem conceivable that this should mean “if the uA A i 
burns, the sadhaka will enjoy success..", but yogic vision 


Nisvasatattvasamhiys 
394 
without there necessarily being something to burn axe) commonplace 
in the Nisvàsa: cf., e.g., Uttarasutra 5:15; 5:31, Guhyasütra 3:59, 3:68, 
3:76-80. Cf. also pp. 82ff above. 


*He should meditate on Siva as the alphabet (màtrkasivam), focussing 
on each phoneme in turn: he will obtain the supernatural power asso. 
ciated with the tattva of vidya and he will become equal to Siva? 


5:27 


From this very short visualisation it is clear that the vidyatattya 
beyond maya is from the first associated with meaningful sound. 
The meditation on vidya in Nayasutra 3:39-40 (œ~ Swacchanda 
12:122c-124) is unfortunately obscure, but it implies (in 3:40a) the 
same association. When we reach the Guhyasutra (7:249c-251~ Sva- 
cchanda 10:1142C-1143), a lower vidya has been included among the 
mesoteric tattvas, and so, not surprisingly, we find this upper vidya 
prefixed by a qualifier. The qualifier is not Suddha-, as in most later 
literature, but maha-. 


5:28 'One should visualise each dissolution (ekaikan tu layam). Alterna- 
tively one should visualise ... as having the form of fire (vahnirüpinam), 
of wind, of earth, water, ether (vayuriipamahendrapakhariipa...); 


We expect to move straight from meditation on vidya to meditation on 
isvaratattva and it is not clear what this surprising verse is prescribing. 
It seems conceivable that the first pàda is intended to mean that the 
yogin should visualise himself as undergoing a total immersion (Jaya) 
into each of the tattvas dealt with in this chapter thus far (prakrti, DE 
Tusa, niyati, kala, maya and vidya) or else, since we may still be inside 
the prescription for meditation on vidyà, a total immersion into each 
sound of the syllabary. The rest of the verse might then be proposing 
as an alternative the cultivation of the sense of being immersed into 
each of the five gross elements in turn, as in the dharanas of the kd 
 €ments. But the word dharana is not mentioned and damage tO the 
manuscript has obscured what should be visualised as having the I 
eT ee Sa we apply ann d abr i 
ut could repair the damaged pada to read *kharüpar 
vicintayet, 
The “translation” 
but Judit Törzs 
cchanda, t 
edition of 


of mahendra with “of earth” may seem Kup 
s OK has observed that in the dharanas in the TS 
at of earth, which is referred to as Māheyī in the 


f 
Svacchanda 7:300ab, appears as Mahendri in all the M550 


Translation of the Uttarasutra ix 


the Svacchanda consulted (a reading that has therefore been adopted 
into our text of the damaged verse 4:115cd of the Nayasütra, which 
is the source of Svacchanda 7:300ab). This still leaves wnexplained 

however, why it should be that mahendra or mahendra might come to 
mean earth. A possible explanation is that the bridge is the expression 
parthiva, a derivate of prthivi that can mean either ‘earthen’ or ‘king’ 

just as mahendra can mean king. As we have remarked on 9.75 above, 
parthiva, mahendra, mahendra and aindra all appear to be used to 
designate the ‘earthen’ semi-vowel L in passages of mantroddhara the 
Guhyasutra. 


As for the order of the elements, it is not what we expect, but the 
dharanas in the Nayasütra are also not arranged as we would expect 
(from most gross to most subtle), but in another seemingly arbitrary 
sequence. 


5:29 ‘He will attain success with that form (tena rüpena), and he will attain 
Siva-liberation (Sivasayojyatam vrajet). The yoga connected with the 
tattva of vidya has been taught; now hear the meditation related to 
the tattva of I$vara? 


The expression tena rüpena probably means “with that [same group 
of] form[s prescribed above for visualisation]", but it could perhaps 
instead be interpreted to mean “with this same embodiment”. 


5:30 ‘One who desires the attainments associated with the tattva of Isvara 
should meditate constantly on the sound of a bell (ghantanadam). 
Then he will see Iévara, he will attain power (siddhyate), he will be- 
come Siva (sivatam vrajet)- 

For meditation on the sound of the bell, cf. Nayasutra 3:55- 


5:31 'Alternatively he may take up a visual meditation (caksurdhyanam) 
upon two lingas (lingalinge) in the sky (akase). He will then see a 
subtle linga [above them]; and when there are spontaneous flames 
(jvalite), he will attain power (siddhyateti): 

It may seem extremely implausible to take lingalinge as both d a 
locative (or as the locative of a samaharadvandva), as we have don 

but we are motivated to do so after reading the parallel brc 6. 

meditations connected with ivaratattva given in Nayasutra 3:55 7 

there we find a meditation on two lingas (lingadvayam) E DE dia 

diately after the meditation on the sound of the bell and follow 


Nisvasatat} d 
396 vasambita 


turn by a vision of a subtle linga above them ( tatopari). It is conceiy. 
able of course that the passage 1n the Nayasutra is in fact a distortiye 
commentary on this passage and that we should not be following it 
But no alternative interpretation seems more convincing. 


“The SAKALA is to be recited as bestowing liberation, the NISKALA in 
the contexts of worship and initiations. The SUNYA is that which joins 
[the soul to higher levels of the cosmos]; it is to be meditated upon 
always by the wise.’ 

The mantras discussed here are the inflections of the root-mantra list- 
ed in Mülasutra 6:6. We have emended to budhaih, but perhaps we 
could have retained the budhah, defending it as a nominative used for 
metrical reasons in place of the instrumental singular, the force of the 
cliché (of padding a half-verse out with budhah) being perhaps con- 
sidered so strong that the need to use the required case-ending was 
felt not to be absolute (cf. the idiom natra karya vicaranat, in which 
case-endings are irrelevant). 


5:32 


5:33 'KALADHYA [is to be used] in recitation and in fire-oblations (japaho- 
masu) because it [there] bestows divine powers; KHAMALANKRTA leads 
yogins on the path of Siva (Sivapathapraneta). 

We could consider emending divyasiddhipradanac ca to divyasiddhi- 
pradatarah: ^when used in recitation and fire-oblations the KALADHYA 
bestows divine powers". 


5:34 '[For the attainment] of supernatural powers connected with the 
subterranean paradises and with mortal [worlds (?)] (patalamartya- 
siddhinam) one should recite KSAPANAT-KSAYA. The ANTASTHA, when 
meditated upon, may destroy ageing, disease, hunger and death: 


For variant forms of the name of the mantra referred to here 9$ 
KSAPANAT-KSAYA see, e.g., Mülasütra 6:6 and 6:12. 


5:35 The NAVATMAN 1... from the scales and from fires (?) can transfer 
(9) in things that have no seeds(?)/ in magical rites of rendering 
infertile(?)} accomplishes through recitation and fire oblations the sid- 
dhis that give faith because their effects are directly observed.’ 


Although this verse is probably both damaged and corrupt, the ba- 
ri purport seems clear: it appears to state that the NAVATMAN | 
Be used for faith-inspiring mantra-miracles such as those ४९ 
expounded in Sardhatrigatikdlottara 21 (cf. also Mülasütra 7125 


Translation of the Uttarasutra 397 
Among these are the miracle of the scales (tula), in which someone is 
shown to weigh less after initiation, the miracle of burning things that 
can't burn (perhaps referred to here with the element agni), and the 
miracle of rendering plants infertile (nirbijikarana). It is all that 
the verse should begin with navatmana (or navatmena). 


5:36 'Sada$iva has been taught to be eightfold [in that he is divided in- 
to the above-mentioned eight mantric forms]; hear [now about yogic] 
days, nights, the semesters [marked by the Northern and Southern] 
movements [of the sun] (ahoratrayanani), transitions [from one plane- 
tary house to another] (sankranti) and the equinox, [and the state in 
which there is] a sense of identity with Sakti [pervading all things]? 


Cf., e.g., Sardhatrisatikalottara 11:3. This verse recalls part of the pro- 
gramme for this chapter (cf. 5:4-5). Our text is closely parallel from 
here up to 5:49 with the one-hundred-verse recension of the Kalottara, 
the Satikakalottara (90-104), which we believe to have drawn on the 
Uttarasutra. At the time of the preparation of GOODALL’s publication 
of an annotated edition of that text (2007), we had ff. 28r and 28v 
inverted in our transcription of the Uttarasutra, and it was the discov- 
ery of this parallel that enabled us to see that our text was wrongly 
ordered. 


5:37 "The upward breath is taught to be “day? and the downward breath 
is “night”. [The tube called] Susumna should be known to le ine 
Northward [movement of the sun]; Ida is the Southern movement. 


Note that we appear to have only two tubes here: Susumma is not 
the central tube, as is so common elsewhere, and there is in fact Rr 
mention of a central tube at all. For a discussion of this oddity, see 
Pp. 33ff above. 


5:38-39b ‘When the [life-breath that in some sense carries and is therefore 
identified with the] “soul” is in the centre [between the two i 
mentioned tubes], then the wise know this to be “equinox . When ks 
"soul" comes and goes [from or] into the centre, then this is taught to 
be "transition". Hear from me also about Sakti’ 


5:39c-40 ‘In the third stretching [of the breath?] the sixth Ws n 
ly U, with] (?) the anusvara and preceded by the xS h aes 
namely A]. When this power is heard, and when, once pe n En 
heard, a man understands, then he is merged in Siva, o God ess, UP 
his body being destroyed (bhinnadehe), there 15 no doubt. 


Nigvasat : 
3 9 8 attuasamhit ü 


This is one extremely tentative interpretation produced (but not print. 
ed) for the same unit in the Satikakalottara (the fact that both texts 
contain the same string of obscure syllables suggests that there is no 
corruption here). But we may be forcing upon the words an analysis 
that produces a sort of pranava: A-U-M. Perhaps we should rather 
allow Sakti to be some other mantra entirely. If we take trtiye...ayame 
to refer to the third range of consonants (rather than the seemingly 
irrelevant type of breath-stretching known in Nayasutra 4:112 as kumb- 
haka), then we could interpret: “the sixth vowel [with] an anusvara 
and preceded by the second letter in the third range of consonants 
[viz. cH]”. This would give us the mantra CHUM. Perhaps we could 
interpret the irregular compound dvipurvam to mean (irregularly) 
“the second in the first group [viz. KH]”. We could then assume that 
sasthabindukam was tagged on at the end without syntactic mark- 
ers and that the intended mantra was therefore KHUM. No wholly 
convincing interpretation has suggested itself. 


In place of the vocative devi, Satikakalottara has the locative deve: 
this is probably a conscious change, since, as in other recensions of the 
Kalottara, Siva is there addressing Skanda. The bahuvrihi bhinnadehe 
used here as a one-word locative absolute here (cf. Mülasutra 5:26) has 
been unpacked in the Satikakalottara to bhinne dehe. 


5:41 ‘Men (martyah), if devoid of Sakti, cannot bestow the grace that is 
initiation. Those without Sakti do not succeed and do not reach the 
supreme destiny? 


Instead of martyah, the Satikakalottara here has mantrah, which works 
well for the first half-line, but less so for the second. 


5:42-3 "Know that Siva is omnipresent, devoid of name and form. And Siva 
15 soul that is pure consciousness; he rests pervading everything; On 
should cultivate the [following] awareness (vasayet): I, being linke 
With Siva, am of the same flavour [as everything else]. Having thus 


become of the same flavour [as everything else], one goes to indestruc 
tible Siva? 


The Satikakalottara here gives a grammatically improved text of these 
s. The translation of vasayet here reflects the Śatikakālottart | 
p ee bhavaye (for bhavayet). vasayet is presumably use ; 
s dug under the influence of an awareness of the possible senses 


Translation of the Uttarasutra y 


The cultivation of samarasya has been twice announced using the word 
saktisamarasam (Uttarasutra 5:4, 5:36) and it will be referred to again 
in the same manner in the Nayasütra (4:61); but there seems to be no 
distinction between Saktisamarasa and a state that one might have 
called Sivasamarasa: there appears instead to be just one state of 
samarasya taught in the Uttarasutra and Nayasütra. We may contrast 
this with the Svacchanda, which distinguishes seven levels of samarasya 
(Svacchanda 4:2977c-315), including a saktisamarasya. 


5:44 'Alternatively, with [great] effort resorting to [meditation upon] the 
Supportless [and therefore inconceivable, viz. Siva] upon one's head, 
one should perform worship, recitation, visualisations, [and] all [man- 
ner of religious] acts.’ 


Usually, the supreme form of the divinity cannot be focussed upon by 
the mind at all: cf., e.g., Kirana 3:22c-23. 


5:45-46b ‘Having [thus] placed Siva [in his head], even though [he con- 
tinues to be] engaged in performing acts, he is not stained [by the 
karmic consequences of those acts]. He will obtain the power of yoga 
(yogasiddhim); he will reach Siva-liberation (Sivasayojyatam). I have 
taught you the yoga of knowledge (jnanayogah), which gives powers 
and liberation without [the need for] effort’ 


The last half-vere is almost the same as Nayasitra 4:47cd. 


5:46c—47 ‘It should be given, after careful examination, to one who has 
dwelt [beside his guru] for three years, to a brahmin of [good] conduct, 
to a Ksatriya of moral behaviour, to a Vai$ya who is compassionate, 
to a Südra who is obedient (Susrisatatpare).’ 


This is another clear indication of a relative openness to receive non- 
brahmins, while still retaining strong notions of social hierarchy. On 
three years of dwelling with the guru are mentioned here, De E 
Nayasütra 4:48 and 4:63 the number of years is twelve (the period 
commonly recommended for the study of one Veda, e.g. m Morus 
3:1; for other references, see SCHARFE 2002:226, fn. 86). The Mr P s 
sitions are not necessarily in contradiction, however, for in Malasutra 
8:6 it was explained that the number of years differs by ar xs 
from three years for brahmins to twelve years for Sudras. Per er 
the Uttarasütra is speaking of the default of three it i b a 
whereas the Nayasiitra treats the twelve years for Südras as the 
fault? 


Nigvasat T 
40 0 attvasam hita 


The locatives and datives mixed together here are all intended to have 


dative sense. 


5:48 '[It should] not [be given] otherwise, to bad people who follow la 
path of] reviling and reasoning away [faith]. The Siva-truth (Siva- 
sadbhavam) should not be given to those who follow wrong paths? 
The expression anyayapathavartin has become a cliché in the Nigvasq- 
karika. It occurs also in the Trikasara as quoted in the Tantralokavi- 


veka ad 23:97. 


5:49 [70 those] who are devoid of devotion to Siva, without devotion 


to their guru, obsessed with curiosity to acquire knowledge (j 
kautukalinah), this supreme Truth should not be given: 


The modifications in the Satikakalottara are intended to improve away 
the anacoluthic structure of this verse. It there reads (104): 


Sivabhaktivihinaya gurubhaktivivarjite 


DD 


With this verse ends the parallel with that text. 


5:50-1 ‘Now (079) those who do not study the Nisvasa will go on sighing 
and sighing. And those who do study the Ni$vasa, they will not sigh 
again. [For this reason] it is known as the Ni$vasa, the compendium 
of all Tantras, on knowing which a creature will be released from the 
bondage of being in samsara: 


It is not certain that tantra in sarvatantrasamuccayah should be tak- 
en to refer to what came to be known as Tantras; it could simply 
mean “treatises” (see prolegomena p.30). When this etymology 15 
later referred to and further embroidered upon in Guhyasutra 12; the 
first half-line is dropped and the second improved upon (12:28ab) by 
replacing adhitva: adhitya caiva ni§vasam na punar nigvasanti hi. 


9:52-3 “What was taught in the Mulasiitra is explained (nigady. ate) by the 
Uttara. By it everything has been expounded (akhyatam): it ue 
clarifier (nirmalikaranas tu sah). Of the twenty-eight scriptures E 
by the Supreme One commentary will have to be offered (kertan) 
later (uparistat) in full (samantatah)? 

These two verses reveal that the Uttarasütra was intended 29 s 
vyakhya-tantra on the Mulasütra and they imply that more 388 


Translation of the Uttarasutra M 


was soon to follow. Is this still the voice of the Lord? The use of 
the expression proktah..paramesthina suggests that it is not. Does 
5:53, announcing the need for(scriptural?) commentary on the other 
twenty-seven scriptures, prepare the way for the Nayasütra? Perhaps 
not, since the Nayasüutra appears to be intended an explanation of 
the Uttarasütra (particularly of Matrkasiva and of the Uttarasitra’s 
account of yoga). 


If the text is indeed correctly transmitted and interpreted here then 
the usage in 52d is irregular. 


5:54 “Two hundred and ten verses?3? make up the Nisvasottarasamhita. 
If one studies it, o goddess, one raises [out of samsara] twenty-one 
generations of one's family (kulan). : 


32 Ex conj. 


402 


a 4 
u$ 
e S 


ka मु 


ca उ 
ta € 


ta $ 
pa W 


ya Ox 


$a A 


Figure 8: A Gupta "font? 
SANDER 1968, 
Alphabete” of 


sa "E 


NiSvasatattvasamhitg 


ga QA gha RRI 


ja E jha F 
da X dha G 
day dha Q 
bas bha <5 
lal va रू 


sati ha ze 


na 9 
na BA 


na A 


ma & 


ksa कू 


sis of 

created by Somdev VASUDEVA on He sm 
Tables IX-XIX, which document what she = 
"Schrifttypus II" from c. 3rd to 5th century AD. 


TRANSLATION OF THE NAYASUTRA 


1:1 “The goddess spoke: 
The tattvas and the bonds, o Lord, are present in the NAVATMAN. That 
[mantra] is proclaimed to be that which [in initiation] cuts [souls free 
from the bonds], that which joins [souls to higher and higher levels] 
and that which [ultimately] bestows liberation: 


1:2 ‘.. how can the bonds be understood to be found in each letter? This 
is my doubt: tell me [the response] that will cause the burning of the 
bonds? 


Perhaps one could instead understand: “Tell me [the answer to] this 
doubt, which will cause the burning of the bonds? We have no confi- 
dent conjecture to propose for the missing opening, but one suggested 
possibility is worth mentioning: diksayage tu, “In the context of the 
sacrifice that is initiation’. 


1:3—4 "Ihe lord spoke: 
All the tattvas reside in the letter a, o splendid one: it binds and it 
burns. It is none other than the supreme Lord. All the letters reside 
in the letter a, and the letter a resides in all of them. Thus all these 
letters are held to be capable of burning bonds [in initiation]. 


1:5-6 “The goddess spoke: : 
The bonds are taught to be gross [and] the soul (jīvah) is MIU 
be subtle. They have become fused together, like YE ane 
[So] when the bonds are bound [in initiation], how is it that the so h 5 
not bound? [How is it that] there is no burning [of the soul] at)? z 
are burnt, or cutting [of the soul] when they are cut (chidyatah) | 
We assume that chidyatah is an irregular passive prese 34 ce 

the singular when we require a plural, and in the genitive, AE 

expect a locative. We have translated as though we read chidyamane: 


(which would not have fit the metre). 


Nisvasatatty 
404 asamhitg 


1:7-8 “The lord spoke: 
T Just as fish in the water are bound by means of a net and yet the wa c 


is not bound, so too the soul is not bound. The goldsmith burns away 
the flaws and yet the gold is not burnt; similarly, when the bonds are 


burnt, the soul is not burnt.’ 


1:9-10 ‘Just as [when] an iron ball is melted and broken into portions, the 
fire is not split, so too the soul is not split. It is like ether, which 
is all-pervasive and resides in all things: when things are split, ether 
cannot be split.’ 


1:11ab ‘Thus the groups of bonds are all [to be divided] according to a 
division into gross and subtle. 


For the notion that some bonds are suksma and others sthiila, cf. 
Uttarasutra 2:31. Nonetheless, we are somewhat uncertain of the text 
and of the interpretation here. What we might rather expect at this 
point is a restatement of the correct position, which seems to be that, 
as the Devi said in 1:5, the pagas are sthüla and the soul süksma, now 
that Siva has answered the objection to that position given in 1:6. But 
we see no easy way to restore the text so that the idea that the soul 
is suksma, unlike the pagas, is also contained in the line. 


1:11C-13 "When the bonds are burnt at the time of initiation in the Siva- 
sacrifice [that is the initiatory fire], the soul does not split; it remains, 
just as ether does. According to [this] teaching of Siva, those who 
know the mantras perform the binding and burning ( bandhadaham) 
[of the bonds],?3* and having burned the power of the bonds to bind 
one to birth (janmabandhai ca pasanam) with the Siva-fire, they be 
come transformed into energy (tejibhütàh) and enter their natural 
state (svatattvam) once again (punar eva). 


2 the interpretation of janmabandham, cf. Sardhatrigatikalottara 
:12ab: hutenaiva tu mucyante sadhaka janmabandhanat. 


The second half of verse 13 implies the doctrine of abhivyakti, namely 
that souls 


OUAIS are innately endowed with infinite powers and that they 

E os S innate state in liberation. But it is also possible that the 

to ther, na 204 as tejlbhütah and that it is the bonds that return 
“Ir natural states by being resorbed into their source. 


oe ; 
“Alternatively, one could understand 


‘the burning of the bonds? 


Translation of the Nayasutra 


405 

1:14 ‘They are said in this scripture of Siva to have been withdrawn from 
[all contact with the] bonds; those knowers of other teachings who are 
not released from the bonds are not liberated. 


Note that here we have, in effect, the standard argument for the indis- 
pensability of initiation, even though we have no mala, which is usually 
held to be the fundamental bond. We could take sarvapasanivrttah 
as a disordered compound with the sense of nivrttasarvapasah (like 
agnyahita). 


1:15-16 ‘The goddess spoke: 
How, o Lord, are the nine tattvas present in the letter a? And [how] 
does that one [letter] pervade (vyapi sthitah) [all the others]? And how 
do the [other] letters reside [in the letter a]? O Lord, Sarva, Omniscient 
one, Lord of all, Master of the universe, tell me what there is to be 
known with regard to each letter, [and] with regard to the letter a, o 
you who are true to your observances.’ 


Describing Siva as suvrata is perhaps meant to express that he is a 
faithful husband. 


1:17-20 ‘The lord spoke: 
The [letter] a should be known to be indestructible (aksayah); the 
fifty [letters] are found in it. [The sadhaka] should see them in him- 
self [viz. in his own body] just as he sees them in the body of that 
[letter a]. Situated at the top of the crest [written as a stroke rising 
above the half-moon that is in turn written above the letter 8] is the 
Lord Anàman, together with his power (Saktisamyutah). In the knot 
of the crest,23? o goddess, is held to be Sadasiva. As for Iévara, he is 
in the head [of the letter]; vidya is the right-hand line [of the letter] 
(daksinarekhinr);?33 maya is the left-hand line; kala hangs down be- 
low. Know that niyati is the curve [at the base?) of thea (a-kutim) and 
that purusa is in the half-moon. That which goes up and down [viz. 
the long vertical line that runs the length of the letter on its right] E 
prakrti, which has the form of a standard (dhvajarüpini). ies nine 

tattvas are [thus] situated in the [written form of the] letter a. 


३ he 
Here the tattvas that were homologised with the einen en F 
NAVATMAN in Uttarasutra 1:10-12 are allocated positions qu d 
ten form of the letter a surmounted bya crescent moon 


aaao Eee : 
7३3 resumably the śikhā rises up from a node at its base. 
Those unhappy with the proposition that rekhini is u 


expedient (for which see p.127) may interpret instead 'vidya poss 


sed for rekha when metrically 
esses the right-hand line’. 


NiSvasatattvasamhrts 
406 mhità 


(sikha). We are not certain of the written form of the letter a ip. 
volved. 

1:21-22b ‘The letter a stands at the head of all the letters; thus all the 

: letters reside in all the tattvas. It burns all the bonds at the time of 

initiation in the Siva-sacrifice.’ 
Presumably ‘standing at the head’ of other letters refers both to the 
position of a at the head of the alphabet and to its being present by 
default in each consonant, for the consonants cannot be enunciated 
without pronouncing it. Since the tattvas are in a, and since a is thus 
in the other letters, the tattvas reside therefore in the letters of the 
alphabet. 


1:22c-23 ‘Making then five dots, he should draw the letter a. .. the wise 
man should then discern each letter... Wherever a letter may not be 
seen, he should there make a f...}’ 


1:24 ‘The fifty [letters of the alphabet] should be seen in the body of the 
letter a. The best of teachers (desikendrena) should see them in his 
own body one after the other (punah punah)? 


The use here of desikendrena could be taken to imply that this practice 
is a prerequisite for performing an initiation. 


1:25-8 "The Lord Anama, the cause, who is supreme, is situated in the tip 
of the topknot (sikhagravasthitah); and his power (Sakti ca) should 
be understood to be t...{; the bindu [viz. Sadagiva?] is situated in the 
head; Isvara is to be understood to be in the forehead and vidya in the 
soft palate; mahamaya is in the uvula; kala resides in the throat; niyati 
is to be understood to be in the heart; purusa is in [the very centre 
of] the lotus [within the heart]; prakrti is in the navel. When one has 
understood these nine tattvas [one becomes] competent to initiate, the 
best of gurus, one who has reached the farther shore of Saiva truth. 
Otherwise, [viz. without this knowledge,] he is not a guru, there ® 
no [true] initiation [that he can perform], and [whatever initiation he 
might perform is] not salvific? 


The illegible location of Sakti could perhaps be the topknot. 


dn Ss knowing the tattvas [as] situated in the body, and all 
"i ae as they are situated in the body, one cannot be liberate i 
ese I shall teach you [as they are] written visibly. Some have : 


Transl 


1:31 


J Nayasttra 
ation of the Nayasu v 


shape of parts of the body; some have the shape of the [whole] body 
[arranged in particular ways]. 


The conjecture angakrtini is perhaps not indispensable: angakrtani, if 
retained, could be interpreted to mean ‘made with the [whole of the] 
body’. 


‘Putting the hands against [the sides of] the body and the shanks next 
to one another, [with] the whole body stretched out (straight, one 
makes one’s] body the shape of the “formless” letter a (niskalakaravi- 
graham). 

Presumably this does not, unlike the following descriptions, correspond 
to any written letter. (Indeed one could even understand that this 
refers not to becoming the niskala form of the letter a (a-kara) but a 
niskala shape (akara).) With what follows below, however, we have 
a complete written alphabet described, and thus a much better ba- 
sis for dating on palaeographical grounds than the descriptive names 
offered of the letters in the Jayakhyasamhita (6:32-58), which BHAT- 
TACHARYA in his preface used inventively, but not quite convincingly, 
to date the Jayakhyasamhita to the fifth century (pp.30-35). His 
demonstration fails to persuade because such code-names for the let- 
ters can easily be borrowed from one source to another without change, 
long after the script that suggested the code-names has ceased to be 
used, and this proves indeed to have been the case for a number of 
works later than the Jayakhyasamhita, as a glance at TOKUNAGA’S ar 
ticle of 1990 reveals. More convincing is VASUDEVA'S demonstration 
(2004) that the ordering of the letters of the alphabet deity Malini was 
originally based on the position taken by the letters in a top-to-toe vr 
sualisation of her body in which each letter, because of its distinctive 
written shape in an early Northern alphabet, represented a body-part 
or ornament. In that instance too, however, the identifications of let- 
ters with body-parts is shared by other sources, utm 
and so although the identifications seem old, their appearance In hat 
Malinivijayottara can once again plainly not be used to argue dh 
the composition of the Malinivijayottara must date from the pene D 
Which the script that is implicit in the identifications vig qum A 
the Ni$vasa, however, we do have such evidence: if it were » 
to pin down the script described here, it seems reasonable D n ^ 
that this part of the Nisvasa was composed at the time an E rm 
Which the script in question was in use. Unfortunately, as We 


in this case Trika ones, 


7४४४००८. J 
s vasatattvasamhita 


below, most of the descriptions cannot help us to pin down any one 
century or place. 

The descriptions of some letters are unintelligible (several vowels, for 
instance, and the letters kha, jha and fia), and quite a number are 
clear or nearly clear but cannot usefully be used for dating (the letters 
cha, gha and tha, for instance, are too unchanging for too long to be 
useful for our purposes). Among the more interesting cases are ta, dha, 
ma, la and ha (see below). On the basis of these, we can assert with 
confidence that this part of the text was probably written between the 
fourth and the seventh centuries.?34 


Aside from its value for situating the text in time and place, this 
account of the written alphabet is evidence, as we have remarked above 
(see p. 77 above), of the importance of the visual aspect of letters in the 
Saivism of the early Mantramarga: the purpose of adopting with one’s 
body the shape of each grapheme, as will be explained in 1:75c-82b 
below, is to attain liberation and control over all mantras. Emphasis on 
this visual aspect appears to have retained its importance in Tantric 
Buddhism, but its importance appears gradually to have waned in 
Saivism, which stresses rather the sonic aspect of mantras and of their 
building blocks, the sounds of the syllabary. 


1:32-3 '[With one] knee placed on the ground, the left arm hanging 
down, the right arm across and upwards (?), placed(?) above Es 
central joint/knot(?)—he should show (vinirdiset) this [as the] “form 
endowed" (sakalam) body of the letter a. [By] making the left hand 
horizontal the letter à is distinguished [from the letter 4]? 


Unfortunately this is not clear to us. The distinguishing feature d 
most fifth-century graphs of à is a loop attached to the bottom right 
of the letter from the viewer’s perspective (see figure 8 on P. ey 
most pre-fifth-century graphs for a, it is distinguished bya horizontal 
line extending to the right from the middle of the letter. Either could 
correspond to the horizontal left hand, depending on whether it €" 
tends horizontally outwards from the body (pre-fifth-century d 
is hooked back and held horizontal pointing towards the badi Ge 
century hook), since the sadhaka’s left often seems to correspond tO 
the letter’s right as seen by a reader. 


"9 We thank Victor Da, thank Vi e 
AMEN Ex DAVELLA and Nina MIRNIG for agreeing to be photographed 


t-shapes for the annotation below. 


Translation of the Noyasutra b 

1:34-35a ‘If one makes the junction of the brows into the head [of the 
letter], with the pupils of the eyes as the [lower two] dots, this is taught 
to be the letter i; together with the column of the nose [it becomes] the 
long [i]. The letters u and i are [to be discerned in the curly shapes] 
inside the ear.’ 


The earliest type of letter i is simply produced by a cluster of three 
dots (once again, see figure 8 on p.402). In Gupta and post-Gupta 
Northern scripts, one of these dots may become a short line. The line 
may occur at the left, at the right and at the bottom (the most common 
position), but it also may occur at the top (e.g. BÜHLER 1896, Tafel 
IV, column IX), and this presumably is the type that corresponds to 
our prescription, in which the junction of the brows forms the upper 
part of the letter. 


1:35b-36 ‘The letter r is made with the arms(?): the two shanks are to 
be placed together and the upper body stretched out straight; one 
should make one's right arm horizontal, resting on top(?). One should 
place the front of the hand [viz. the fingers(?)] there(?). The left hand 
[should be] in the middle(?). 


Unfortunately, this account of r is unclear to us. 


1:37 ‘Placing the left arm above that (?), the letter F will result. He should 
make his feet horizontal (?): the letter r will be visible: 


Again, the description is unclear. We have of course interpreted r1 to 
be intended to stand for r. 


1:38ab ‘The letter ] is that which tastes flavour [viz. the tongue]; the letter 


lis [the tongue again] together with the uvula- 

We must assume either that ghantikasaha is an unusual E des 
or that ghantika is here used asa contracted instrumental (instead o 
ghantikaya) to fit the metre. 


1:38c-g9b ‘The letters e and ai [form] a row of teeth. [There ae z 
the interstices between the teeth; when he eats food and drin [w. 
bearing this in mind] a creature is liberated.’ 


Perhaps rekha dantantaresu should instead be hee de ee 
‘[there is] a line in between the [two] teeth’ (plural for deha लि 
could be the line resembling a prsthamatra letter e that disti i eii 
the ai from the e in Gupta and late Gupta scripts (see ag 


7४४४०८ १ 
: asatattvasamhita 


figure 8 on p. 402 and VASUDEVA 2007:533). The last statement co ula 

perhaps alternatively be interpreted to mean "knowing [these letters] 

a creature is released from having to consume food and drink”. 
1:39cd ‘One should see the letters o [and] au ...’ 
The description is unfortunately lost. 


1:40 '[To get the letter am,] the head has [to be imagined as having] the 
form of the dot [and] the letter a is as taught above. The letter ah can 
definitely be perceived if one joins the testicles [to the letter a]. 


1:41 ‘The letter ka is taught to have the shape of a man above the navel: 
making the head [of one’s body] as the head [of the letter], the [two 
lines formed by the] neck and the shoulders [become] the two [crossed] 
lines [of the letter ka]. 


For this interpretation, we are assuming that dvirekhini is an oddly 
formed (because situated at the metrical cadence) dual with the sense 
of dve rekhe. The cross-like form of the ka is a constant in early 
North Indian scripts. Note that the arms are not included for the 
branches, only the shoulders, suggesting a relatively early form of the 
cross, similar perhaps to that shown in figure 8 on p. 402. 


1:42 'He should stretch out his arm horizontally .. with hand (?). This is 
proclaimed to be the letter kha. The ga is held to be [visible when the 
sadhaka] has his hands stretched out [in front of him]. 


The description of the letter kha is unfortunately too damaged to be 
interpretable. Perhaps what we should expect is something like the 
letter ga except that neither of the hands is turned outwards and one 
of them is actually curled inwards? 


As for the letter ga, the two arms stretched out in front of one will 
presumably form the horseshoe shape that is distinctive of the letter 
88 In many Indian scripts, and, if the hands are turned outwards, they 
might make the form that is found, for example, in the Gupta-perio 

letter in our figure 9. Whether one should transcribe sríapanis 0 
rap anis is a matter of doubt. We think that the scribe may not >° 
vonsistent. Note that when the prefix ut is attached to srta, 29 at the 


beginning of this verse, it becomes ucchrta, as though the unprefixe 
form were &rta, — 


Translation of the Nayasutra 


1:43 


411 


AT AR Bi eee 


(b) 8a (c) gha 


Figure 9: The letters ga, gha and ja formed with the body. 


‘If one holds both arms upright [and makes] a fist with the right hand, 
[this, taken] together with the head is the letter gha; minus an arm 
(?) [it is] the letter na’ 


The letter gha can indeed be recognised here if one raises both arms 
but keeps them bent at the elbow, and if one discounts the whole body 
below the shoulders (see figure g on p. 411 above). The central prong of 
a Gupta and post-Gupta gha is then recognisable in the head. The left- 
hand upright prong, which has a thickened end, is recognisable in the 
right fist and right forearm of the sadhaka. We may extrapolate from 
this description that whatever is on the sadhaka’s right side typically 
becomes a feature on the left side of the letter as viewed on the page. 
This means that most letters shaped by the sadhaka’s body would not 
be clear to him if he were looking in a mirror, but they would be clear 
to an external observer (such as an uttarasadhaka?). 


Less clear is the letter na. If, taking the letter gha, one were to discount 
the sadhaka’s right arm (both upper arm and forearm), this would 
perhaps give the simple cup shape which, when turned 90° to the 
reader’s right, forms the characteristic shape of a letter na such as it 
appears in ligatures such as rika in Gupta and post-Gupta alphabets. 


Once again, see BUHLER 1896 Tafel IV (“Nördliche Alphabete von ca. 
350 bis 800 p. Chr”). 
vaktramarge); the 


‘Th JS outh 
e letter ca is in the path/space of the m d hands, [these;] 


letter cha resides in the nose. If he raises his arms an 
together with the head, are the letter ja: 


The letter ca could simply be the elliptical shape OF en 

mouth. (Cf. its use ast eyes of the goddess Malini Vee 
2004:532 and 536).) Given that it is not, however, i while 
elliptical, but often has a pointed protrusion only on its i sali ti 
being rounded on its right, perhaps this rather means the E right in 
visualise the open mouth of someone facing to the viewer 


of the partly open 


7१४४०७०! s 
412 attvasamhita 


three-quarter profile? The letter cha consists of two circles suspended 
from a straight line, so to describe it as residing in the nose presumably 
means that its shape is visible in the shape of the nostrils. The ja, 
somewhat like a roman capital E, is presumably formed by the head 
and the arms raised but bent at the elbows, in other words just like the 
letter gha except that neither hand forms a fist (see figure 9 on p.41 
above). The descriptions of the letters ca and cha could be read 88 
consistent with many Northern and Southern scripts even beyond the 
tenth century; but a clearly E-shaped ja seems to begin to disappear 
after the end of the eighth century both in the North and the South. 


1:45-469 ‘I shall teach you the letter jha, knowing which one becomes 
Siva. [Keeping] the body straight (prasrtam?) and together [viz. with 
the arms against the sides ?], his right [fore-Jarm [should be raised] 
upwards. This is the letter jha. 


The constitution of the text and the interpretation are both tentative 
here. À distinctive element of the letter jha in several early Northern 
Scripts seems to be a thin straight stroke emerging from the middle 
of the right-hand side of the letter and pointing up at an angle of 
about 45° (see, e.g., BUHLER 1896, Tafel VI). In our manuscript N, 
however, this stroke is on the left-hand side of the letter, which would 
correspond better to the description here, since the sadhaka’s right 
seems in other instances to correspond to the left of the letter on the 
page (but this is not an invariable feature of these descriptions). 


1:46b—-48c ‘Hear from me the letter fia: ... The hands are like the coils [of 
a snake]. This is taught to be the letter ña? 


We can make nothing of this description and so have attempted neither 
to emend it, to constitute a readable text, nor to translate it. 


1:48d—49b ‘Stretched out [legs?] with (?) the shanks together: know [this 
to be] the letter ta, as much as (?) a broken circle (?), on the groun 
(talam gatah) (2); 


This description is unintelligible to us. We expect, however, that iig 
SM should be somewhere between a modern roman capital L and à 
alf circle. So perhaps this means that one should sit on the groun 


With the legs stretched out in front and together, and with the arms 
kept to the sides, 


1:49cd ‘The letter tha may be seen [as follows]: the body pee dr 
circle is the letter tha? 


Translation of the Nayasutra 


CE Moe 


(a) ja (b) .na 


413 


Figure 10: The letters ja and na formed with the body. 


Perhaps this means that one should continue sitting on the ground 
with one's legs stretched out in front, but that this time the circle 
should be closed by touching one's hands to one's feet? Alternatively, 
we could interpret: "The letter tha has as its body [the round shape 
of] an empty circle.” 


1:50 ‘With the shanks folded (?) and horizontal [viz. in a kneeling position 
(?)] and with the arms pressed against the sides, this is taught to be 
be the letter da. Hear from me the letter dha.’ 


If the body were in a squatting kneeling position (rather than an up- 
right kneeling position), and if the knees formed the bottom right of 
the letter, then a Gupta or post-Gupta letter da might be imitated. 


1:51 ‘Making the head into the head of the letter, one should draw up the 
left arm and having drawn it up, one should curve [the hand around 
towards the upper arm to form] a circle. Know (vidhih, for viddhi!) 
that this, taken together with the neck, is the letter dha? 


We imagine that the head forms a sort of serif at the top of the letter, 
that the neck is the upright, that the right shoulder is the angle to 
the left of the letter, that the line of the shoulder and of the left arm 
up to the elbow forms the downward tending transverse stroke, and 
that the forearm and hand form the ring at the bottom right of the 
letter. (The rest of the body, namely the right arm and torso, are 
to be discounted.) The same sort of shape can be found in mu 
Northern scripts beyond the eighth century, and is still to be d 
virtually unchanged in modern Ssrada script. Note that the left eis र 
also identified with the letter dha in the visualisation of the alphabe 

goddess Malini (VASUDEVA 2004:532)- 

n this verse, but this is 
be seen in the wobbly 
h the knees flexed 


1:52 We can translate almost nothing meaningfully i 
what we suspect it may mean: the letter na may 
zig-zag pattern formed by the legs when one sits wit. 


Nisvāsat : 
414 attvasamhits 


and the legs loosely splayed in such a way that a inside lower Je 
are both touching the ground, as are the inner thighs inside them, 
An ancient na in the Brahmi script looks like a roman capita] 1 with 
pronounced serifs both at the top and bottom. By the Gupta perio il 
this shape had split down the middle from the top and peeled apart, 
resulting in two n-shaped loops linked at the bottom by a horizontal 
bar. Here the two n-shaped loops were presumably formed by the 
flexed legs splayed outwards on the ground. This sort of na is less 
commonly found among the Southern scripts, but remained common 
in Northern scripts until the end of the eighth century. 


1:53ab 'And when the legs are stretched out [slightly apart, they form) 
together with the waist [as the top] the letter ta. 


This describes the tuning-fork-shaped letter ta that is typical in many 
early Northern scripts. Note that the thighs of the alphabet goddess 
Malini are homologised with the letter ta. In VASUDEVA’s reconstruc- 
tion (2004:536), each thigh has this shape, but VASUDEVA observes 
(2004:533) that the letter might have been intended 'to cover both 
thighs together”. 


1:53cd "The navel, together with the line of a fold of flesh [across it] is the 
letter tha’ 


This describes the tha typical of Indian scripts of the fourth, fifth and 
sixth centuries: a ring with a horizontal bar crossing its middle. In 
earlier lettering, there is usually a dot rather than a bar in the middle, 
and in later scripts, the letter is either no longer ring-shaped, or the 
bar becomes shortened and/or hooked. 


1:54 "Making the head into the head [of the letter], one should flex [the left 


arm] at the elbow and one should curve the hand [upwards]: a letter 
da is seen by the wise? 


We assume that what is intended is the same as in the case of the 


letter dha (1:51), except that the hand is not curved round to form ^ 
ring by touching the arm. 


e [rest of 


1:55ab ‘One should join one’s hand to one’s neck: discounting th 
he letter 


the body [other than the neck shoulder and arm], this gives t 
a. 

hich 
Presumably the point of the elbow forms the base of the letters ind 
is often pointed in Northern scripts (not in Southern ones). It! 
Specified whether the left or right arm should be used. 


Translation of the Nayasitra 
415 


(a) ta (b) na 


(c) sa 


Figure 11: The letters ta, na and sa formed with the body. 


Li TI १0 HA 
(a) pa (b) pha (c) bha 


Figure 12: The letters pa, pha and bha formed with the body. 


1:55¢-56 ‘Making the wrist of the right hand into the head [of the letter], 
one should draw together the four fingers and thus make a fist; the 
thumb is to face downwards: the letter na will be produced. 


Here the fist, hanging downwards and with the thumb detached from 
it, is to be arranged so that the back of the hand faces the viewer. The 
fist then gives the thickened knot-like left-hand branch of the Gupta 
na, while the thumb looks like the thinner right-hand branch. 


1:57 “He should put his arms up, placing his arms against his ears, [and 
make] a fist on his right hand: the letter pa will be produced: 


The line produced by the raised lower arms and the top of the head 
will give the distinctive upturned square-cup shape of the old letter 
pa that is typical of Northern scripts from Gupta times up to the end 
of the seventh century and in Southern scripts still later. The fist of 
the right hand produces the knot-like head at the top of the left-hand 
branch of the letter. 


1:58abc ‘[With the starting point] of this [above letter’s] shape, he pun 
curve (samkumcya) the left (savyam) arm and see (Jaksayet) the divine 
and pure letter pha. 


This description could have been clearer, but, as Yuko YOKOCHI has 


Suggested t i i ick one's left 
est we j ne that one 1S meant to stic 
0 us, we may imagi i 


upper arm out horizontally, keeping the el e 4 
looped back to touch the left shoulder: a beholder will then see in the 


416 


Nisvāsatattvuasamhitz 


head, neck, shoulder and left arm the lines of the sort of pha that ae 
be seen in figure 8 on p. 402 above. 


1:58d ‘The letter ba is in the [square shape formed by the] chest? 


1:59 


1:6 


o 


Already in Brahmi scripts, the letter ba is simply a square. 


“The wise one should let down ( praksipet) his right hand [so that his 
right arm hangs down beside the torso] and flex (sankuficya) his left 
arm [so that the left hand rests] in the left [side of his] waist: without 
[taking into account the torso of] the body, this is the letter bha’ 


Once again, we thank Yuko YOKOCHI for her illuminating suggestions 
about the interpretation of this body-letter. It seems that here the 
usual directions of right and left are reversed: if one stands looking in 
a mirror with the left arm akimbo and the right hanging down, one 
can indeed see, if one takes only the head and arms into consideration, 
a shape that resembles the sort of bha that can be seen in figure 8 on 
p. 402 above. 


‘He should extend the right arm and the left and raise them up, making 
the head into the head [of the letter]: know that this (vidhih!), together 
with the girdle zone (kaksaya?) is the letter ma? 


This too is not plain. We assume that the two arms raised above the 
head (even though the head is said to be the head of the letter) form 
the two horn-like branches at the top of the letter ma. The expression 
kaksaya, ‘with the girdle zone’, might then be intended to indicate 
that one should include the body down to the waist in order to form 
the bulb of the ma to which the two horns are attached. (One might 
be tempted, by the way, to assume some corruption of kuksi.) 


But such a description assumes the ox-head-shaped letter ma that 15 
typical of Southern scripts, but which disappears in Northern scripts 
after the fourth century. It is presumably also this same rounded type 
of ma, and not the angular post-fourth-century Northern type, that 
is homologised with the goddess Malini’s buttocks, as VASUDEVA has 
suggested (20047533 and 536). In other words, if this understanding ९ 
the description of ma is correct, we must assume either that the author 
es this passage had a Southern script-type in mind, or & Norther 
Script-type unlikely to be later than the fourth century. The hypothesis 
that this alphabet may have been based on a Southern script might " k 
seem possible at this stage, but it will be weakened by the informatio. 

&ven below that that Ja and ha are mirror-images of each other. 


Translation of the Nayasutra 


417 


^ei hr 


(a) la (b) ha 
Figure 13: The letters la and ha formed with the body. 


For the irregular imperative vidhih (in place of viddhi), see Nayasütra 
1:51. 


1:61-62a ‘Flexing the right arm in the middle (?) horizontally (?).. he 


should raise the left arm: excluding the girdle region (?), this is the 
letter ya. 


Unfortunately, too much is lost for this description to be intelligible, 
but this appears (because of the mention of flexing one arm to form 
a loop) to be a description of a tripartite ya, and not of the bipar- 
tite ya that began to replace it from the end of the sixth century in 
Siddhamatrka lettering. 


i:62bcd ‘Now hear the letter ra: above the foot, with the knee as its head, 


1:63 


the letter ra is [made] with the shank’ 


As in many scripts up to the seventh century, the letter ra is simply a 
straight vertical line with a node at the top, formed here by the knee. 
Some have also a node at the bottom, which could be formed by the 
ankle, but this is not specified. 


‘Placing his arms against the body, sitting down [on the ground], and 
flexing both legs (jarighau) [at the knee] on the left [from the perspec- 
tive of a potential observer], he may discern (laksayet) the divine letter 
la? 


We assume here that vama (standing here for vame) has been left 042 
inflected because a short syllable is required for the = EE 
pathy& cadence) and that it does not qualify jaüghau (tor w. 


two left shanks?). If it means '[with his feet] to the left [from the per- 


i imi 1 ter la that 
i MÁS १ lausible imitation of a let 
Ive of an observer] १ then a p. 


is typical of Northern scripts from the fourth to EE 
results. The information (given in 1:69 below) that the same; 200 


i ter ha 
position, but qualified instead with daksine, produces the lette 


ear 
appears to confirm this interpretation, for the letters ha and Ja app 


Nisvasatattvasamhis 


indeed to be mirror images of each other in Northern scripts of the 
fourth to the seventh century (see, e.g. figure 8 on p. 402). Soi d 
scripts, in which the upright of the 19 is commonly looped over mm 
rest of the letter, can probably be excluded. 


In the letters 19 and ha, left and right of the sadhaka's body appear to 
correspond to left and right of the letters as they might be Observed 


on a page. 


1:64ab “Making the line of/from the testicles(?) into the head [of the letter], 
the anus [when joined with that line] is taught to be the letter va? 


Alternatively, if one were to take muskasutrasirah as a bahuvrihi, one 
could translate: “The letter va is taught to be the anus, if you make 
it with the line of the testicles (7) as its head? But this seems to us 
less likely. 

In many Southern scripts, and in Northern scripts before 600 AD, 
the letter va is commonly a round, triangular or oval bulb (clearly 
compared here with the anal orifice) sometimes (particularly in Brah- 
mi) descending from a short vertical stalk. The expression muskasütra 
could therefore perhaps mean ‘the [vertical] line [drawn from the anus] 
to the testicles’, or it could perhaps mean ‘the [horizontal] line [above 
the bulb of the va] formed by the testicles’. 


1:64c-66 “Making the head at the head [of the letter], surmounted (?) by 
the left arm, ... one should join the right [arm?] in the middle(?): this 
is the letter Sa. Making the head [of the letter] as taught above [in the 
previous letter], he should stretch out (utsrjet?) his right arm. Inside 
(?) he should put his left arm and join it in the middle (?). [From the] 
outside a great-souled person (mahatmanah) may see the shape of the 
letter sa?235 | 


Sadly the description of ga, on which the interpretation of the letter 
$a also depends, is too damaged to be interpretable. In many early 
Northern scripts the sa appears almost like the sort of mirror imag? 
that one might see if one placed a mirror beneath a Sa. 


1:67-68c T shall tell you the letter sa as it is in its divine form (वाणाच्या 
samsthitam): the wise man should connect his right hand with his ® 
r than 85 2 


es 

ternatively, 

ES ; one could take mahatmanah ar genitive (rathe 
nominative), qualifying MN h as a regular g 


Translation of the Nayasutra 
419 


shoulder, allowing his left arm to hang down, half ... T 


hi . 
be the letter 542 Is is taught to 


Once again, damage prevents us from being able to read the whole de- 
scription, but here there is perhaps just enough to be able to recognise 
the letter as the kind of sa found in Brahmi, early Southern scripts 
and in some Gupta-period Northern styles. To do this, however, we 
must perhaps assume that the right of the sadhaka’s body is ss the 
left of the letter (as it has been in some earlier descriptions) but the 
right.?36 The lines of the letter are then produced entirely by the right 
arm, flexed at the elbow and resting on the left shoulder, and the left 
arm, which might have been described as slightly flexed at the elbow 
in the lost pada beginning arddha.... The rest of the body, including 
the shoulders, would not be taken into consideration: see our figure 
11c on p. 415 above. 


One could perhaps get the description to accord with the general rule 
that the right of the sadhaka’s body corresponds to the left of the 
letter by emending 1:67cd to read daksine yojayed dhastam vamam 
skandhe vicaksanah, but this would be a surprising word-order and 
would entail taking savyabhujam in the following line to refer to the 
right arm, even though savya has in this passage been used for the 
left. 


1:68d—69c ‘Hear from me the letter ha: he should make the same form, 
[but with the feet] on the right [from the perspective of the viewer] as 
[was taught] for the letter la. The letter ha has been taught with this 
(tatah): 


See annotation on 1:63 above and figure 13b on p. 417- 


1:69d—72b ‘Now hear the letter ksa: this powerful [letter] (prabhuh), 
[though] having [just] one shape, may be go in the Do ps 
ways. The hollow [at the base] of the throat (hiskarandhra) is d 
head of this [letter] and the [vertical] line that goes down [from id 3 
touch (samprapta) the line of the waist, together with the [horizon 


oss 1 to 3) eat 
^35 We are grateful to Dr. Ferenc RuzsA for this observation. a 

"5 Monten- WILLIAMS records hiska / hikka as referring to 2 ccough, bir RA 
that hikka and hikkasütra are used as reference points on the body, खु mE dae 
Ajita 36:49, for instance, uses the expression hikkantam, which BHATT; eae 
FILLIOZAT render (2005, vol. 3, p.13) "that which ends at the Adam’s app i e 
Sutra, which appears, for example, in 36:83-84, is rendered (2005, ४०- 3 
neck-baseline", 


420 


1:72 


Nisvāsatattvasamhitz 


Figure 14: The letter ksa formed with the hands as described in 1:72c-74b. 


line between the breasts, [forms the cross that] is remembered as the 
letter ka. [And if you add] the waist-line and the horizonal line [at 
the level] of the navel [measured out to one side] from the centre, and 
the line that is [formed] by the side [of the torso and that is therefore 
perpendicular to the navel line], this is held to be the first letter 188. 


This is clearly recognisable as a Gupta-period ksa: the cross of the 
ka is drawn on the chest and the sa is beneath it to one side (it 
doesn’t matter which side of the body, since instances of ksa with the 
sa attached both to the left and to the right of the central descending 
line of the ka are attested), its outer edge being the outer side of the 
body. Given that the navel is the central point of the letter, one might 
speculate as to whether or not it is coincidence that ksa is identified 
as Malinr's navel (VASUDEVA 2004:533). 


०740 ‘Making the joint of the [left] hand [viz. the wrist] into the head 
[of the letter, and showing] three fingers [index, middle and ring-fingers 
of the left hand] extended (prasrt trini cangulim),?3° one should jom 
the middle [finger] with the thumb [of the right hand], then [keeping] 
the index finger [of the right hand] rounded [so that its tip touc 
the middle of the thumb], one should extend the middle [finger of f 
end upwards. [This is] the second [way of making the] letter 
ksa. The same [but] on the right hand is the third letter 1८59. 


We thank Yuko Yoxocut for pointing out that this description 
Perfect sense if we assume that the left hand forms the upper P 


makes 


म ative 
ass inine accus 
! umes that these three words are in apposition and are feminine 


plural! 


Translation of the Nayasutra 
421 


the letter (namely the ka) and that the right hand fi 
part (namely the 58): see figure 14. orms the lower 


1:74c-75b ‘With his upper body [including the arms (?)] as the letter ka 
he should draw up his lower legs [in such a way that they become] 
bunched up [against the thighs?]. f There he should make the upper 
body(?)t. The letter ksa is clearly discernible? 


1:75c-76b ‘Whoever finds these shapes of the letters of the syllabary in 
his [own] body, and similarly in the letter a, is released from the cycle 
of rebirth [while remaining] in this world [itself] (iha)? 
It would also be possible to take iha simply as a pronoun in agreement 
with akare, particularly since it falls in the same pada, or as meaning 
simply “in this system”, but cf. bhütale in 1:78, which might again 
suggest something like jrvanmukti. 


1:76c—80b ‘This is the supreme, highest knowledge, beyond all other se- 
cret knowledge (sarvaguhyottamottamam). He who knows the true 
nature of the alphabet becomes a guru who may destroy bonds [in 
initiation]. All mantras will be under his control; when urged by him 
they will carry out his commands. He is held to be a guru capable of 
liberating souls, like Siva himself, [but] on earth. Not through giving, 
bathing, [visiting] sacred sites (tirtha), nor through recitation, medi- 
tation or oblations can one attain the highest state in the same [easy] 
way (yathà) as one can through knowledge of the syllabary. Those 
liberation-seeking teachers of other schools, who teach [doctrines] oth- 
er than that of the knowledge of the syllabary are deluded pounders 
of chaff? 


Perhaps one could understand "who talk [and talk] (kathayanti) with- 
out knowledge of the syllabary are in their delusion [merely] pounding 
chaff” or “who teach [all the various doctrines], but not the knowledge 
of the matrka, are deluded pounders of chaff”. 


1:80c-82b ‘Thus all these letters, when pregnant with the reals ben 
sampürnasamsthitah), burn all the bonds and become pu 
giving. [Even] without being recited repeatedly (ajaptab), CM 
succeed [if one knows the true nature of the alphabet]; [even] de fruits 
being sacrificed to with oblations (ahutah), [mantras] give their 
1-1 without being meditated upon "तौ? 


422 


1:82c-83b ‘The goddess spoke: 


ao. e d G 
OODALL and Isaacson 2007:5; 


Nisvāsatattvasamhitz 


which exist as [given] realities (tattvaripeng 


How can these bonds, ॥ 
samsthitah), be bound? Tell me quickly the nature of the bon dc 


this point I have great doubt.’ 
Or perhaps: ‘How do these bonds bind, [and how are they] constituted 
as entities? Or perhaps even: ‘How do these bonds bind, [and how 


are they] arranged in truth?’ 
The speaker-indication has been supplied here because we seem to 
require an introduction to this question about bondage. 


A fundamental tenet of the Saivasiddhanta is that each soul is innately 
all-knowing and all-powerful, but that its nature can only be realised 
by the removal, through a ritual initiation, of bonds that fetter it. 
As mentioned in the introductory pages to this book (pp. 4off), the 
notion that embodied souls are fettered by bonds (pasa) has a long 
history in Saivism. The ancient name ‘Pasupati’, a name of Siva that 
may be translated as ‘Lord of cattle’ or ‘Lord of beasts’, has played a 
role in speculation about bondage because the element pasu is taken 
to refer to beast-like individual souls, who are all bound by bonds 
(paga). Indeed a number of Saiva works begin their presentations of 
doctrine in terms of these three ‘P’s: pati (‘the Lord"), pasu (‘bound 
souls’) and pasa (‘bonds’). And even in tantras in which these three 
do not form by themselves the list of didactic categories (padartha) 
into which the cosmos is divided, they usually form at least a part of 
such lists. 


So what are the bonds by which souls are bound? We have quot- 
ed above the succinct summary of the central problem of bondage 
from SANDERSON’s useful résumé of developed Saiddhantika doctrine 
(1992:285-6, quoted on p.40). Given the centrality of bondage and, 
in particular, of the bond of impurity (mala or anava-mala), to Said- 
dhantika doctrine, one expects to find it expounded in all Saiddhantike 
literature. But, as we began to notice in January 2007, impurity * 
entirely missing from a number of early scriptures of the school.^3? 


The account of bondage in the Nayasütra, as we shall see from Tévara 8 
answer below, is entirely different from those of classical Saiddhantike 
Sources. It first assigns the róle of “binding” in certain particular ways 
to Sadasiva and Tévara, rather implying thereby that the divinities 977 
themselves bound by the obligation to bind, just as the souls they p 


GOODALL et al. 2008:315. 


Translation of the Nayasutra e 
are bound. It then runs through the bonds inflicted by the others 
of the tattvas that we have earlier seen homologised with the nine 
elements of the NAVATMAN. It lists then a number of bodily bonds, and 
bonds inflicted by seven divinities classed as Ganas (1:100f), and is 
concludes with a disparate and catch-all list of constraints experienced 
in life on earth (1:109-111). There is no mention at all of mala, and the 
description of maya leaves one in doubt as to whether it is conceived 
of as “primal matter” or as some sort of “delusion”. 


1:83cd ‘The lord spoke: 
Grace and Occlusion are the two bonds of Sadasiva. 


This is a well-known tag (see apparatus) and it is unclear whether 
this is the source in which it first appeared, for when quoted by Saiva 
authors (see apparatus for quotations by Ramakantha and Tryamba- 
kagambhu) it is taken to be an opponent’s claim that even Sadasiva 
is subject to bonds, whereas here the bonds in question are under 
Sadaáiva's control. But it is possible that this text is its source, that 
it was really intended to mean that the bonds, although they are un- 
der Sadagiva’s control, bind him too with the obligation to use them, 
and that it was later put in the mouths of opponents of Saivism as 
being a statement of Saiva scripture that reveals Siva’s power to be 
circumscribed. 


1:84—86 ‘Occlusion is nullifidianism, which relies on dry logic. 4° One 
equipped with a faith in logic does much that is wrong. A man who 
does wrong is cooked in the hells, [and] having attained an animal 
[re]birth, is then [re]born as a domestic animal (pasuyonisu jayate). 
In birth after birth the deluded soul lives a life of occlusion. I have 
taught you Occlusion: hear about Grace from me. 


For the partly conjectural half-line tiryagyonim anupraptal pa^ 
onisu jàyate, cf. Guhyasutra 4:68cd: sthavaratvam anuprapto pašu- 
yonisu jayate, “having first become a plant, he is born as à pie 
tic animal”. Either tiryagyoni is here differentiated from Pes 
(perhaps it could be intended here to refer to mainly s capi 
animals?), or the reading of one or other of the QU, c : 
able. The often sloppy but uninventive scribe of W has rea "i i 4 
Which is partly supported by N, for we can read the initia , 
d] a reliance on dry logic’ B 
ary ad loc. 


D Wc san eaaa maing ut cf. 
N 7 perhaps: *Occlusion [produces] nullifidianism [an 
oresvarapariksaprakasa 1:74 and Ramakantha’s comment 


Nisvas 3 
424 atattvasamhika 


whereas the scribe K has plainly supplied pasu, since he places jt in 
round brackets. In other words, paSuyonisu is more doubtful here than 
tiryagyonim. 

1:87-89b ‘A man with faith, endowed with moral rectitude, *4 is active in 
good deeds—a seeker after knowledge, his destiny is heaven: he plays 
in a heavenly world. Now when he falls from there, he is born in हवा, 
excellent family. Initiation, through Siva's power falling upon him, 
grants [him] knowledge. This is how Grace is held to be, and the one 
who gives it is Sadasiva. 
One could instead take diksajnanam as a compound, meaning either 
“initiation and doctrine” or “the knowledge that is/concerns initia- 
tion”, and understand the subject of prayacchati to be Sadasiva. 


1:89c-9ob 'Iávara ties all creatures with the bond that is Creation. He 
resides in the heart of everyone, impelling them, because of their merit 
and demerit (punyapapabhyam)? 
I$vara is the second of the tattvas (after Sadasiva) that were homolo- 
gised with the elements of the NAVATMAN in Ufttarasütra 1:10-11. 


In view of the parallel in Svacchanda 12:146ab (see appendix II), it 
seems possible that punyapapabhyam is intended to have genitive 
flavour: “impelling good and bad deeds”; or a locative one: “impelling 
with respect to good and bad deeds”. Also conceivable is that we 
should construe backwards and understand “he links creatures with 
the consequences of their good and bad deeds”. 


1:90C-91b “The Pagupata observance has been taught [by him] for thie 
sake of grace. He gives the Supreme State; he bestows knowledge and 
liberation (jfanamoksam). 
This translation assumes that jfanamoksam is intended as an 9७ 
cusative plural with the sense of a dual. Masculine accusative plurals 
in this text often end in -àm, as recorded on p.133, but the use é 
a final m is rare: see p. 117. (Here of course, there is a following P» 
and so one could regard it as a final anusvara transformed into 8 fine 
m by a natural operation of sandhi.) Exactly what is meant by the 
Pasupata observance (vrata), alluded to also in Uttarasutra 3:21, ‘sig 
clear. Perhaps it is some adapted form of some part of the A 
observance of Paricarthika Pagupatas. This mention is in any = 


a e E MM e 
corr "EET 5 
ect form, for a nominative masculine singular, would be dharmavan 


Translation of the Nayasttra 


425 


unlikely to be a reference back to the description of Atimarga religion 
given in Nigvasamukha 4, for we think it unlikely that the ue 
mukha had become part of the corpus at the time of the composition 
of the Nayasutra. It is noteworthy that it is a lower form of the Lord 
who is presented here as teaching an observance associated with the 
Pasupatas. 


1:91c-92b ‘Residing in the world in the form of a linga, he also bestows and 


1:92c-93b ‘If someone teaches the meaning 0 


ru T xn s f which 
he correct form of the nominative masculine singular, the sense 0 
१ Would be lingarapr. 


ere 


withdraws the [potentially] indestructible condition of being a Gana? 


Note that it would also be possible to link aksayam hi ganatvari ca with 
the dadati in 1:91a and so to tag it onto the previous sentence: “and 
[he] also [bestows] the indestructible condition of being a Gana”. In 
that case we would interpret 1:91d-92b as follows: “Remaining in the 
world in the form of a Linga,?4? I$vara bestows and takes [rewards] 
away.” As for the “indestructability” of being a Gana, perhaps this 
only means that this is a reward that is guaranteed, not that it is 
eternal. One could perhaps understand aksayam and ganatvam to be 
two different rewards. 


As for “the condition of being a Gana”, this is typically a reward 
for lay Saivas (mahesvaras) following a worldly (laukika) religion (cf., 
e.g., Nisvasamukha 1:89, 1:94, 1:115, 1:161, 1:163, 2:18, 3:30, 3:168, 
3:178, 3:192). It is therefore just the sort of a reward that would be 
appropriate for devoted worship, in a laukika fashion, of the linga. 
We shall see below (1:100ff) that the principal Ganas or Ganesvaras 
are seven (not the standard group of eight found in later Siddhanta- 
tantras). Presumably “becoming a Gana” here refers to becoming 
adopted by Siva as part of his train in a similar way to the well-known, 
named Ganas. 


46. wa 21 
Hara is one of the names of Siva, and so to say that he “takes away 
ogy of that name: Hara takes 


(hareti) is to allude to an affective etymol E 

away (souls to liberation, or bonds from the soul). (Fort र pem 
cf. Kiranavrtti ad 1:1 and GOODALL 19982165, fn. 12.) As for the bod 
form, it is a metrically required irregular form used in the sense 0 
regular third person singular harati. 

f scripture wrongly (any A 
id Iya binds such logicians 


atha), [or teaches] truth wrongly, then Vi 
is intended 


Nisva, १ 
3 satativasamhits 


(tarkavadinam) for speaking falsehood (anyarthabhasane)? 


This interpretation is based on a conjectural restitution. If the consti- 
tution and interpretation of the text are correct, then the use of the 
plural tarkavadinam, without a correlative pronoun, is anacolouthic, 
and it must be assumed to be an unusually irregular accusative plura]. 


What is clear is that we require vidya, as the third of the tattvas 
homologised with the elements of the NAVATMAN, to bind here. 


1:93c-94b '[If] someone is too much attached [to] mother, father, Sons, 
wife, house, vehicles and whatever wealth [he possesses] (yad vasu), 
the bond of Maya cuts him/them down. 


taducchidah is here assumed to be used as though it were a masculine 
nominative singular agreeing with mayapasah and with the sense of 
taducchedakah. As Yuko YOKOCHI has observed to us, however, we 
would expect a bond to bind and not to cut, and so perhaps we should 
consider emending to mayapaSas tu duschidah, “the bond of maya, 
which is impossible to cut”; but in this case further conjecture would 
be needed to supply a syntactic relation between this pada and the 
rest of the sentence. The relatives listed in 1:93cd have been put in 
the accusative, whereas the possessions have not. This sort of lack of 
marking may indeed be found elsewhere in the text, but it is indeed 
not impossible that the text is corrupt (a locative plural, which might 
be concealed behind the problematic syllables yadvasu, would construe 
naturally with sneha). Maya, the fourth of the tattvas homologised 
with the elements of the NAVATMAN, is of course the name of the primal 
matter of the Saivas, but its function here might seem to suggest rather 
the ‘delusion’ of Vedantins. 


1:94c-95 ‘ “There is no morality (dharmah), nor heaven, nor immorality, 
nor hell.” These people [who say such things] die miserable; they do 
not attain knowledge [and] liberation. The bond of Maya has been 
told; hear from me the bond of Time? 


It is probable that these are the same people who have had me 
possessions cut away from them by māyā and who therefore, becaus 
of their materialism, die unhappy. 


1:96-97b ‘Time brings about the counting of the units [of its passat 
and [brings about] life-span, and Binding Fate (niyatih) bestows [tha 
life-span, as well as childhood, youth, old age, disease and death, 
acting] together with Time. That [time] resorbs creatures. 


Translation of the Nayasutra 
427 


This interpretation assumes that niyati is what 
We could instead construe as follows 
be a compound): 


produces quality of life. 
(assuming gananasamkhyayah to 


‘Time creates life-span, by counting divisions; and Binding Fate also 
bestows life-span. Childhood, youth, old age, disease and death [are 
produced] by Time; it is that [Time] that resorbs creatures? 


In these interpretations, the pair of kala and niyati, the sixth and 
seventh of the tattvas homologised with the elements of the NAVATMAN 
would be responsible, together, for length and quality of life. But 
we could also constitute g6c differently, for instance by conjecturing 
niyatan ca dadaty ayuh, which would make Time alone the subject of 
96-97b: 

*.. and Time [then] bestows fixed life-spans...’ 


Depending on the interpretation chosen, one might emend to or under- 
stand jaram, and one might emend to or understand vyadhir mrtyus 
ca. 


1:97c-98b ‘Binding Fate (niyatih) is that which bestows the fruit of the 
[retributive force of] good and bad [deeds] accumulated in previous 
lives: it forcibly connects [this fruit with the soul responsible]: 


It is not clear whether niyati is intended to be a paga in this list, and 
therefore on the same level as kalapaga and dehapaga, or whether it is 
meant to be subsumed within kalapasa. 


1:98c-100a ‘The soul is bound by the three Gunas [of sattva, rajas and 
tamas], by the intellect (buddhya), by the transformed [principle of 
identity] (vaikarikena [ahamkarena]), by the bond of the subtle ele- 
ments and faculties of sense and action (tanmatrendriyabandhena); x 
is firmly wrapped with the gross elements (bhütaih). These are thg 
bonds of the body (dehapasah)- 
The purusa is the eighth of the tattvas homologised with the cleme i 
of the NAVATMAN, but it does not bind itself. des it is ded 
here as bound by the bonds of the body (dehapasa), which are eR 
from the ninth and lowest tattva, namely prakrti. सिम) wa from 
is not explicitly named here because the evolution of these Fa nae 
prakrti was considered to be sufficiently well-known from the itera 


of the Sankhyas. 


7४४४००८. : 
wk vasatattvasamh; ta 


1:100b ‘Hear from me the bonds of the [seven divinities known here as the] 
Ganas. 

The following list of seven Ganas is archaic. In most Saiva literature. 
eight Ganas or Gane$varas form one of the circuits around the centra] 
deity in the context of paja. No circuit of eight Ganas features in 
the Nigvasa’s accounts of Siva-worship. Vidyeáa and Hathakusmanda 
do not figure as Ganas elsewhere, and the Nisvasa omits three figures 
who occur in the later standard list, namely Mahakala, Bhrngin ang 
the bull (vrsabha). In a later part of the tantra (Guhyasütra 16:52) 
we find another list of Ganas, again explicitly seven of them and not 
eight, which includes these three (assuming that Kapali stands for 
Mahakala) but omits CandeSa: 


devi skandañ ca vighneSam nandi kapalim eva ca 
vrsabham caiva bhrngin ca saptaite tu prakirtitah. 


1:100cd ‘If, having received authorisation [to act as a guru], one does not 
transmit [knowledge], VidyeSa punishes him for that (tena)? 


We take sankrame as a third person optative that has dropped its final 
t. Several forms of badh, depending on metrical constraints, seem to 
be used irregularly in this passage with the sense of badhnati, ‘binds’ 
or (here) ‘punishes’ 

It is not clear who Vidyeéa is. There are usually eight Vidyeévaras who 
form a circuit of divinities around Sadasiva when he is worshipped 
(cf., e.g., Mülasütra 4:5). Their names are listed in the Guhyasütra 
(7:257-8), but not in the earlier sütras of this text. The most impor- 
tant of them is Ananta, and it is possible therefore that 0107०69 here 
means Ananta, who is not usually classed as a Gana. 


1:101—102b ‘If someone sets a price and teaches scripture, Sanmukha pun- 
ishes him for that. If someone teaches scripture without having first 
obtained permission or (ca) transmits it to a non-initiate, Ganapati 
searches for some flaw in the sadhaka and destroys his power: 


This may be the first allusion in our text to the elephant-faced dm 
ity Vinayaka/Ganea. The name Ganapati does not of course tell = 
that he is elephant-faced, but his inclusion here in this group ० हर 
tral Ganas, together with Skanda, here presumably also counte 
part of Siva’s Puranic family, suggests that this is Gajavaktre- a 
may be alluded to later (Nayasutra 4:104) with the name Vighn 


Translation of the Nayasutra 
429 


His being elephant-faced is not mentioned, however, in either place. 
Cf. Yajriavalkyasmrti 1:271-94, where a figure called Vinayaka who is 
said to be the son of Ambika is venerated, but no mention is made 
of whether or p he is elephant-faced. Judit TORZSOK, in an article 
that discusses aiva chapters that have been added to the old Skan- 
dapurana, including a chapter that recounts an early legend of the 
birth of Vinayaka, gives two principal reasons for judging the myth 
to be early (2004:21-2). The first is the consistent use of the name 
Vinayaka, never ganeSa or gane$vara, for the latter are invariably not 
proper names but terms of rank in the old Skandapurana, just as they 
are frequently are in other early Saiva works, such as the Nisvasa- 
mukha. 'The second is the close association, implied already by the 
name Vinayaka, with the class of possession-demons called vinayakas, 
and not with his now familiar róle of removing obstacles (vighnavina- 
yaka). We might therefore expect to find here only the name Vinayaka 
used, not Ganapati or, as in Nayasütra 4:104 below, VighneSa. But 
other comparably early allusions to an elephant-faced Ganapati can 
in fact be found, such as the second of Bana's introductory verses 
to the fourth ucchvasa of the Harsacarita, to which TORZSOK refers 
(2004:22, fn. 22), in which the name used is Ganadhipa and the trope 
concerns his tusk. The Amarakośa also catalogues names that allude 
to his being elephant-faced, that suggest a fairly developed mytholo- 
gy, that reveal an association with the removal of obstacles and that 
include the “rank” Ganadhipa (1.1:39): 


vinayako vighnarajadvaimaturaganadhipah 
apy ekadantaherambalambodaragajananah 
1:102C—103a ‘Nandi quickly punishes one who, deluded by the systems of 
thought devised by bound souls, distorts (parivarttayati) the tantric 
teaching’ 
1:103b-105 ‘In the case of [transgression of] the eight posting uS 
of conduct, [it is] Candia [who punishes]. 1f one reviles the Lo 2: 
(i), a devotee of His (ii) or a guru (iii), or in the case of e À 
nirmàlya (iv), or of giving it as bali to a bound soul [or pe dm 
beast?] (v), or if one takes what has been touched by क E E 
woman (vi), or reviles scripture (vii), or steps on the shadow o 
(viii), Candiga vigorously punishes/binds.’ 
The interpretation of rule vi assumes that 
dhi derivative from rtu and so means ‘a wom 


artavi- is intended as a vrd- 
an in her season’. The con- 


NiSvasatatt: ; 
430 Vasamhita 


jecture and interpretation are based upon the Siddhantasarapaddhas; 
of Bhoja, who gives an overlapping list of eight post-initiatory rules 
(samaya), the last of which being that ong should not eat food touched 
by a menstruating woman (SANDERSON 72005): ~astau Samayan $ra. 
vayet. (i-iv) mahesvaratacchastragurusadhakadininda na karya. (y) 
lingacchayam na langhayet, (vi) nirmalyam ca. (vii ) na tad any 
(viii) rajasvalasprstannam na bhaksayet. Assuming that the bhakta 
of our text corresponds to the category sadhakadi in Bhoja’s, the list 
of eight rules is the same, though presented differently, except for one 
item: while Bhoja's list forbids stepping on the nirmalya, the Nisvasa 
forbids giving the nirmalya to non-initiates or perhaps to beasts. For 
a detailed examination of the deity CandeSa, see GOODALL 2009. 


1:105c-106b ‘If someone undertakes a religious observance beginning 
with(?) a vow and then abandons that Siva-observance and takes up 
an observance taught in another [viz. non-Saiva] work (anyattantra- 
vratam), Devi punishes (nibandhati) for that? 


One could consider correcting here to anyatantra°. 


1:106c-108 'If someone studies the Sivatantra, performs Siva-yajiia, sac- 
rifices with Vedic rites and [then] reviles devotees of Siva and ven- 
erates and praises Brahmins with other religious affiliations, Hatha- 
kusmanda-rudra punishes that wrong-thinking person. In this way the 
bonds inflicted by the Ganas firmly bind the initiate? 


The form stunateti is of course irregular, but probably authorial rather 
than transmissional: see p.122 above. Hathakusmanda never appears 
elsewhere as a Gana. A Kusmanda is often, in later Saiva works, the 
supreme regent of the hells (see, e.g., Parakhya 5:38) and a Hatake 
(or Hathaka) is often the supreme regent of the patalas (see, ५8० 
Parakhya 5:531). 


1:109—111 ‘Love, anger, lust, birth and death, old age and disease and 
grief, hunger and thirst, as well as intoxication, and despair and TH 
utter delusion, violence (darunam), hypocrisy, passion, illusion, pride, 
Jealousy , insanity, withering/ meanness(?) (Sosah), a tendency to i 
finding, irascibility, morality, immorality, violence, and a body that 
always out of control? 


Alternatively asvatantrasadatanuh could perhaps be translated 
-:—he body is always in thrall” 


Translation of the Noyasutra à 
431 


There appears to be no ordering principle behind t 


25 his list of disparat 
factors. darupam may be intended as adjective to ip: 


mahamohah. 


1:112 ‘Because they are bound by these bonds, people are not liberated 
from [the false] doctrines of others: the authors of the books of bound 
souls have not seen what binds bound souls. Therefore men who are 
devoted to the scriptures devised by bound souls are not liberated? 


Perhaps one could instead interpret the first half-line here with “Thor- 


oughly bound by these bonds, [people] are not liberated by any other 
teaching [than the Saiva teaching]:”. 


The regular instrumental would of course be pasutantrapranetrbhih. 
One would also normally expect pasutantra to mean a ‘scripture 
taught/devised by a bound soul’, but this analysis is awkward when 
the expression is compounded with °pranetaraih. 


2:1 "The goddess spoke: 


[His] name[s], [the fact that he 15] one who is made up of tattvas 
(tatvi), union [with them and, ultimately, with him (?)] (yogam), 
the [meditation-]goals (laksa[h])— [these things] have been mentioned 
(proktah), O Lord—teach [them] to me, as well as the sequential com- 
ing into being of the tattvas and their natures (rupakan caiva): 


This verse, in spite of the use of the past tense (prokta), seems to be 
a programme-verse announcing what is about to be presented, for it 
lists a number of items that we find described below: some names of 
the Lord are given in 2:2-5; the emanation of the tattvas is set uvam 
2:10-20; their nature is explored in 2:21-102; and chapter 3 explains 
how yoga is to be attained (see 3:23) with each of phe rates ki 
make up the universe in turn, by meditating upon them, which requires 
knowing their characteristics (laksana and, in some placens e 
in 4:28) and 4:11ff discuss how yoga is possible with respect to E e 
ultimate Siva who is “supportless” (niralamba). This Sopas? : 
laksa in this verse could be meant to mean either “meditation-goal 

(laksya) or “defining characteristic [which can e used s 
focus for meditation]" (laksana). Most problematic in tas p McRae 
is tatvi. We have guessed that it might refer to god as M i 

in the universe and therefore pervading and pervaded by om. it 
Another possibility would be to understand the word as T 
were formed on the analogy of a dvigu compound Mo. » s pate 
or an expression such as trayī, in other words meaning 


Ni$vas 
432 atattvasamhit i 


of tattvas”. The expression tattvi recurs in Nayasütra 4:77, where it 
appears to refer to a yogin being a “master of reality”. It is unlikely 


that it is so used here. 


2:2-4 “The lord spoke: y ds 

[He is] the subtle, the all pervading, the divine (devam), the cause, the 
Lord (patim) of the universe, the ineffable, the incomparable (anau- 
pamyam), the indestructible (aksaram), sovereign (parameSvaram), 
without diversity and without support (nigpraparicaniralambam), pure 
[by virtue of being devoid] of speech (vagvisuddham), beyond sylla- 
bles (anaksaram), filling all space (vyomavyapi), devoid of false ap- 
pearances (nirabhasam), beyond the realm of [created] diversity (pra- 
paiicatitagocaram), situated at the head of [viz. above] Sakti, inactive 
(santam), knowable [only] through meditation (yogagamyam), eternal, 
omniscient, omnipotent, who has eyes and heads and mouths on all 
sides (sarvatoksiSiromukham). 

Neuter forms and masculine accusatives are mixed together pell-mell 
here, and there is no governing verb, so we take this list of names 
as a list of predicates. "Situated at the head of Sakti" is perhaps a 
statement about cosmography. For the last attribute in this series, cf., 
e.g., Svetasvataropanisat 3:16. 


2:5 ‘Nameless, Siva is spoken of by hundreds of thousands of names. All 
this universe has been created (karitam) by Him, but not out of desire 
[on His part]. 


The causative could perhaps be taken literally: “has not been caused 
to be created by Him". anama could be a name: cf. Nayasütra 1:18. 


2:6 "The goddess spoke: 
One without desire cannot act. How [then] can he create, being Ww 
out desire? Tell me [the answer to] this secret best of questions, OU 
of [your] grace? 


The first pada here, akamasya kriya nàsti, is presumably 9 conscious 
ha karhictt. 


echo of Manusmrti 2:4ab: akamasya kriya kacid drsyate ne 
2:7-8 ‘The lord spoke: a 
Just as [when] the sun-stone is heated by the rays of the sun fire quo 


singe e 
m [and yet] the sun has no desire for that [fire], nor does the ee 
have desire, so too the activity of God [takes place without his ha 


Translation of the Nayasutra 
433 


any desire]. Siva is to be understood to be the sun 


Sakti is like the stone’ [in this comparison]; 


Cf. Uttarasutra 1:6. No doubt one could emend to na raves tatra 
kamita in 2:7d (as in the KSTS edition of Svacchanda 11:317d: raves 
tatra na kamita), but we have assumed this to be another Eun 
of authorial irregular usage (closer to the reading of the Nepalese 
manuscript of the Svacchanda that we have collated for Appendix II 
which has raves tatra na kamata). 


2:9 “When the right season comes, time is what is active in this [process]. 
From Sakti when she is conjoined with the energy of Siva Bindu arises? 


The end of this verse has been repaired on the basis of Uttarasutra 
1:6, where we also find samyukta apparently used as a contracted 
feminine ablative (instead, in other words, of samyuktayah) As for the 
beginning, it may seem difficult to interpret because “Time’ should 
not yet have evolved as a tattva (it does so in the following verse), 
but perhaps we should simply treat rtukalam anuprapya as a cliché 
(used also as Matarigavidyapada 19:262) the use of which is not strictly 
logical here. The point is to emphasise that desire is not involved. 


2:10 ‘From bindu [arise the following:] Isvara, vidya, maya, time (kalah), 
binding fate (niyatih), the soul (purusah), and [al] other evolutes], in 
brief (samasatah), prakrti’ 

For more on bindu, its being identified with Távara and its division 
into four powers (kala), see Nayasiitra 3:72 below. 


As for samasatah (an uncertain reading, incidentally) might it mean 
that the list as a whole is short? Or does samasatah apply specifically 
to prakrti, which is further subdivided by the Sankhyas? Two passages 
below speak of there being thirty-two tattvas in total (Nayasutra 4:90 
and 4:98), which means that the (80785 of the Sankhyas have there 
been included in the tally. 


*11—14b ‘ rakrti ari ddhi, and from the buddhi [arises] 
2:11-14b ‘From prakrti arises the bu Y c rac 


ahankrti (bhitadih). From bhütadi [arises 
sound, HE i the subtle element of touch; then, they say, mi 
arise the subtle element of form and the subtle element of pou = 
gether with the subtle element of smell, and with the RE a js 
(indriyena): the ear, the skin, the eyes, the tongue men 


Nisvas हे 
434 atattvasamhits 


due order,?43 are the five faculties of knowledge. Learn [now] the fac. 
ulties of action: speech, hands, feet, anus and, as the fifth, the sexual 
organs. Know that the faculty of attention is the eleventh; it runs in 


two directions.’ 

According to Sankhyakarika 25, the indriyas all arise from the Taijasa 
aspect of aharikara and not from the aspect called Bhutadi. There is 
however considerable divergence of opinion on this subject (for diver- 
gence in Saiva sources, see GOODALL 2004:359-60, fn. 399, to be read 
with the corrections of ACRI 2011:449-50), and it is possible that our 
text (which doesn’t mention Taijasa at all) uses Bhutadi and Vaikari- 
ka simply as synonyms for ahankara. Also perhaps conceivable is that 
Bhiitadi is used when the generative aspect of the ahankara is empha- 
sised (its being the source of further evolutes), whereas Vaikarika is 
used when its function as egoity is spoken of (see, e.g., Nayasutra 2:57 
below). 


The running in two directions refers to the fact that the manas is 
both an organ of sense and one of action (cf. 2:52-3 below); Nirajan 
KAFLE has suggested that it might also refer to the yogic notion that 
it pursues dharma and adharma, which is also mentioned in the same 
place below. 


2:14c-17b “These arise from ahankara; they are proclaimed to be sixteen. 
From the subtle element of sound arises ether, which has sound as 
its characteristic. Air arises from the subtle element of touch; it is 
characterised by two properties [namely touch and sound]. From the 
subtle element of form it is known [that] fire [arises], which is charac- 
terised by three properties [namely form, touch and sound]. And from 
the subtle element of taste arises water, which is characterised by four 
properties. Earth arises from the subtle element of smell; it has five 
properties 


2:14cd sounds like a conscious echo of part of Sankhyakarika 22: d 
mad ganas ca Sodasakah. 


?::7c719b “With these tattvas the entire universe is produced (jstam) 
made up of stationary and moving beings, [and also] the various worl 
कु pe ir hundreds and thousands. The various scriptures [of the various 
religions] (Sastráni) are located within [the hierarchy of the various 
tattvas, [as well as non-religious(?)] knowledge (vijfianam), quackery 


a, Ex conj. 


Translation of the Nayasütra 
435 


(kuhakam), technology (Silpam), that which teaches all the vari 
siddhis, ..' 2020 
Why it should be emphasised that 8551795 are to be found in the tattvas 
is not made clear. The most likely possibility, it seems to us, is that 
it refers to the notion that the adherents of different religions attain 
different levels in the cosmic hierarchy. This is a cliché known to us 
for instance, from Ramakantha's Sarvagamapramanyopanyasa (edited 
and translated in GOODALL 1998:xxi-xxv). Such levels of attainment 
are not spelled out in the sutras of the Ni$vasa, but they may be 
referred to here. Perhaps the earliest passage known to us to give 
a ladder of doctrines ranged across the cosmos is that of the Sarva- 
jñānottara, which is quoted and translated in fn. 235 on pp. 279-80 
of WATSON, GOODALL and ANJANEYA SARMA 2013. 


This unit, from 2:17c to 2:20b, corresponds to Svacchanda 113196198, 
in which the order of lines differs. Cf. also the end of chapter 15 of the 
Nisvasakarikà (T.17, p 95, and T. 127, p.210): 


prakrtih purusas caiva niyatih kala eva ca 151 

maya vidya ca 160 ‘yam bindos sarvam idam jagat 

vedam samkhyaá ca yogas ca bauddham arahatam tatha 152 

yani kani ca śāstrāņi sarve bindor vinihsrtah 
152bc idam jagat/ vedam samhkhya$ ca] पण; i .. T127 e ara- 
hatam] conj; arhatam T17, T127 (unmetrical) e 153b bindor 
vinihsrtah ] em.; bindor vinisrtah T17 (unmetrical); bindur vyavasthitah 
T127 


We have emended siddhisambodhalaksanam to siddhisandohalakşa- 
nam on the strength of the Kashmirian reading of the Svacchanda 
here (11:196-8, N, f. 145r-145Y): 


tattvair etair jagat sarvam srstin ca sacaracaram 

bhuvanani vicitrani SataSo ‘tha sahasrasah. A 

tattvabhyantarasamsthani Sastrani vividhani ca 

vijfianam kuhakam Silpam siddhisandohalaksanam 

sarvatatvesu sandráyen natra karya vicarana 

prakriyà Sivadiksa ca tattvair etais tu labhyate 

. dhis o . 

196b srstiü ca] N; visrstam KSTS ० 1970 siddhisandoha" ] pne 
siddhasambodha? N e 10880 sarvatatvesu Fo स 
vicarana | N; sarvam tattvesu boddhavyam sarvatattvesu dr 
e 198d etais tu] N; etair hi KSTS 


7४८४०० } 
T asatattvasamhitz 


(The immediately following verse in the Svacchanda is the last verse 
of Uttarasütra 4.) The expression siddhisandohalaksanam is 9150 to be 


found in Guhyasiddhi 1:70. 


2:19cd ‘..[knowledge (?) of] cosmic hierarchy and Saiva initiation— [n 
these] may be obtained through [knowledge (?) of] these tattvas? 


This might appear to allude to some form of tattvadiksa, but there 
is none described in the text. Alternatively, this may be intended to 
mean only that an initiating guru requires true knowledge of the tatt- 
vas in order correctly to understand the prakriya (into which the tatt- 
vas are embedded) and in order thereby to be able to perform effective 
initiation (cf. the knowledge required of the alphabet, matrka, in the 
previous chapter). (Another less likely possibility is that the tattvas, 
since they have been homologised with elements of the NAVATMAN, a 
crucial mantra, are instruments in the performance of initiation.) 


- 2:20 ‘Everything must be understood to be contained in the tattvas; ev- 
erything can be seen in the tattvas. And there is no other entity at 
all beyond the tattva|s]. 


This sort of statement, making the claim that the tattvas are a com- 
plete ontology, explains the concern noticeable in the literature of the 
developed Saiddhantika to find even mala in the tattvakrama. In the 
Nisvàsa it is not problematic that the tattvasarga is a complete ontol- 
Ogy: mo has apparently not yet been thought of (see discussion on 
PP. 4011). 


2:21-22 "The goddess spoke: 
You have taught the emanation of the tattvas, which causes the uni- 
verse to arise. Tell [ne now] the knowledge [of the nature] of the 
tattvas and [tell me] how supernatural powers arise. And how is the 
cosmic hierarchy [arrayed] through those [tattvas]? And [how is] ini- 
tiation which leads to liberation [related to the tattvas]? Tell me p 
answer to this] most secret question next at length, O immanent Tog 


This passage, from 2:21-102, has been adapted to create Svocchanth 
12:1C-82, for which see Appendix II. 

2:23-4 "The lord spoke: 
Ishall tell you [the nature of the tattvas] from earth up to Siva. List 


EU: how the [element] earth is found as something solid in the E 
arth, fully endowed with [all] five properties, is to be understoo 


— n2 TD RENE in Ay 
^ Or perhaps ‘in the fire that is bile’, for pitta is supposed to be hot or fiery 


Translation of the Nayasutra ji 
be found] in flesh and in the bones, in the sinews, the hair and the 
nails, and [also] in the entrails and the bone-marrow? 


2:25 ‘Water, which has four properties, is situated [in the body] in phlegm, 
blood, urine, fat, chyle, sweat, flesh-marrow, semen and in its property 
of holding [the body] together (sanigrahe)? 


The particle hi is perhaps a secondary ‘improvement’ intended to ob- 
viate a hiatus. 


2:26 ‘Fire is found [in the body] in the cooking [of digestion], in [the 
light of the eye that accounts for] seeing, and in bile and in [body- 
]warmth(?).?44 Fire has been taught thus, and it should be understood 
to be characterised by three [properties]? 


2:27—28b 'Air is in breathing in and in breathing out (nirucchvase), in 
moving [the limbs of the body] and in [the sensation of] touch, and in 
expelling urine and excrement, and in ingesting food and drink. Air is 
found in the body in these [functions]; it is to be understood to have 
two properties’ 


Alternatively: ‘Air is in breathing and in not breathing (nirucchvase)...’ 


2:28c—29 ‘Ether has one property; I shall teach you [how] that [is found in 
the body] truthfully. It is to be understood to be hollow space, that 
is to say the nine orifices [of the body]. This [ether] has sound as its 
[sole] property and therefore it has one characteristic.’ 


2:28a is hypermetrical. 


2:30 ‘The organ of speech speaks speech and this [speech] is of four 

kinds: polished (samskrta), natural (prakrta), lapsed/vernacular (apa- 
bhramáa), and nasalised (anunasika): 
The nature of the last of these is unclear to us, and Ksemaraja 5 A ] oe 
nation, ad Svacchanda 12:10b, does not really seem to help: sue 
nasikam anugatà giyamanaksararupa varnangam iti कक Ud 
first three are usually literary languages, and since the listos pro E. 3: 
intended to be comprehensive, perhaps the last 15 katen की 
all other non-literary languages. The list also appears in A m - 
8:132, quoted ad Ulttarasutra 1:20c-21 above, and in 2:42 below, 


well as in Jayakhyasamhita 32:45¢d. 
urveda. 


Nisvāsat ; 
438 attvasamhita 


यार properties of the organ of speech have been taught; next 
i hear [about] the hand. Cutting, breaking, giving, piercing, the actions 
of craftsmanship (silpakaritam), grasping, conquering—all these are 


[activities] located in the faculty “hand” 


2:32c-33 ‘The properties in the faculty “foot” are [for(?)] moving to and 
from other places (desantaragamagame) in this world (iha), [over ter. 
rains such as] even [ground], sunken [ground], raised [ground], thorns, 
earth-clods, sand, mud, water, inaccessible places, mountains, build- 
ings, roads. 
The syntax here is certainly peculiar, but no other sense seems likely. 


2:34ab ‘In excretion and in vomiting, it is always the [faculty] “anus” which 
acts. 
Ex conj. Cf. pardite in the KSTS edition of the Svacchanda, which 
Ksemaraja takes to be flatulation: gudarandhrena kutsitaSabdah. But 
chardita (vomition) not only makes good sense (given that payu means 
not exactly the anus, but rather a faculty of ejection that is focussed 
principally in the anus), but it could also have given rise to some of 
the other readings. 


2:34cd ‘The [faculty] “penis” is active with respect to those with whom 
intercourse is and is not permitted; it produces pleasure. 


Perhaps gamyagamye is intended rather to mean what would normally 
be expressed by gamyagamane, ‘sexual intercourse with those with 
whom intercourse is possible’. 


2:35 ‘These processes are actions (pravartante); therefore [we speak of] 
faculties of action. And the five faculties of intellection [are so called 
because they] act in conjunction with the buddhi? 


We assume that pravartante is either used elliptically or is an instance 
of an atmanepada form used for a passive one. 


u truthfully 


2:36 "The “ear” has the property of hearing: I shall tell yo 5 
(yathavat), 


(tattvena), in due order (anupürvasah), exactly as they are 
the sounds which it receives. 


237-8 Sadia, Rsabha, Gandharva, Madhyama, Paficama, Dhaivat® n: 
sixth, and Nisada as the seventh. [These are] the seven notes: [T 


Translation of the Nayasütra 
439 


are| three types of basic scale, twenty-one secondary scales (mürc- 


chanah), forty-nine note-sequences (tanàni): this is the definition of 
[musical] sound: 


For the translations of grama, mürcchanah and tànàni, we have fol- 
lowed the glossary of NIJENHAUS (1977:38-9). 


2:39 “These are held to be the subtle sounds, residing in all creatures. I 


shall teach you the gross ones also: hear about that [subject] as it is 
(yathavat). 


2:40 'Kettle-drums, conches, mrdanga-drums, pataha-drums, panava- 
drums, marddala-drums, dardura-drums, bamboo-[flutes], trumpets 
(gomukha-) and cymbals (-talam). 


The identifications here are uncertain. 


2:41 'Various types of stringed instruments, sounds produced by the hands, 
and the lovely sounds that are produced with the mouth, and those 
which are associated with wood. 


Here, we assume that kasthayuktani stands for kasthajani, with irreg- 
ular lengthening at the juncture of the compound. 


2:42 'Polished (samskrtam), natural (prakrtam), corrupted/vernacular 
(apabhramga-), and nasalised (anunasikam) [forms of language], 
[which can be] based on the seven notes, [in other words set to music, 
and which can be] clear or unclear ? 


For the division into samskrta, etc., see 2:30 above. 


2:43 ‘The faculty of hearing grasps [by inference (?)] unexpressed words 
from [hearing words that have been] expressed (uktat). This is the 
range of sense-perception (visayah) of sound, by which the soul is 
bound (badhyate). 


If the text is correct here, then this is evidence of a notion akin to spho- 


ta that accounts for a person's capacity to “hear” unspoken sounds. 


i anuktàni, which 
iti i e a corruption of uktanuktani, wii 
But it is rather tempting to assum Ls o 


we find in Svacchanda 12:21, and to interpret: 
grasps the sounds taught [above] as well as ones the eon 
mentioned? We have resisted correcting to M. nd 2:50) reveal 
of Svacchanda 12:22, since parallels below (2:46, 2:49 aR $ 


that bondage is indeed intended. 


Nisvasatatt ; 
440 vasamhit; 


2:44-46b ‘Soft, hard, rough, cool, hot, slippery, lumpy, thorn[y], sand[yl 
muddy], the blows of arrows, spears, swords, all manner of (yat) beat. 
ing and cutting—these [and] other types [of contact] the faculty "skin" 
knows by touching. For this is the realm of touch, through which [also] 


the soul is bound.’ 


2:46c-49b 'Hear from me the functions of the eye being told: White, 
red, yellow, black, green, pale, light brown, tawny, russet, and oth. 
er [colours] differentiatedly, man, woman, cattle, beasts, light, plants, 
creatures, things differentiated according to colour and form—the eye 
sees them all. This is the scope of "form", by which [also] the soul is 


bound? 


2:49c-50 ‘Sweet and sour taste, salt, acrid, bitter, astringent, mixed, and 
tasty—the tongue senses taste. This is the realm of taste, by which 
the soul is bound? 


2:51-52b 'Sweet-smelling fragrances and unpleasant stinks—the nose 
smells from among both: this is the realm of smell, by which the 
embodied soul (ksetri), who is deluded by egoity (ahankarena), is 
bound? 


2:52c-53d ‘As for volitions and decisions (sarikalpa$ ca vikalpas ca)—[for 
these] it darts about (dhavati) in ten ways in [i.e. corresponding to] 
the [ten] faculties, which deludes unrestrainedly, uncontrollable in all 
creatures. This is the mind that has been described, which brings 
about [the accumulation of] merit and demerit? 


The nominative of sankalpas ca vikalpas ca is very awkward: we could 
have chosen to follow the Svacchanda (with sankalpe ca vikalpe ca) 
or to emend to ablatives, which could easily be confused with nomi- 
natives. The text after that is largely conjectural and one could make 
other choices. It would be possible, for instance, to conjecture dagadha 
yat pradhavati and one could adopt the neuter adjectives that we find 
in the KSTS edition of the Svacchanda, namely anivaritasandeham 
ajayyam. But we have decided to follow the Nepalese manuscript ९ 
the Svacchanda relatively closely here. For the idea of the mind P 
sung merit and demerit, cf. the Yogabhasya ad 1.12: cittanadi nam? 
ubhayatovahini; vahati kalyanaya, vahati papaya ca. 


A ¢ [ he 
2:53ef T shall [now] teach you truly the characteristics of the nature oft 
subtle elements? 


Translation of the Nayasutra 
441 


2:54-56b ‘The subtle element of smell [residing in the sense of smell] gras 
smell through the tip of the nose. The subtle element of taste तीन 
in the tongue grasps taste. The subtle element of form [residing in the 
sense of sight] grasps form, when [form is] presented [to the perceiver] 
(upagatam), through the eyes. The subtle element of touch residing 
in the skin, grasps touch. The subtle element of sound xus when it 
becomes sound in the faculty of the ear (Srotragabdatvam agatah): 


As far as we are aware, this notion that the tanmatras residing in 
the faculties (or in the places in the body in which those faculties 
are concentrated, such as the nose) are responsible for perceiving the 
same tanmatras, residing as gunas in external objects, is not a notion 
that known figures among the Sankhyas have propounded. Ksema- 
raja defends this rather odd view in his Svacchandatantroddyota (ad 
12:33-35b). 

Note that these sentences have been rephrased, in order to obviate the 
(metrical) need for pratipadikas in the Svacchanda (12:33ff). In one 
case, spar$atanmatra, the use of the pratipadika only obeys the metre 
if one treats the following ligature (spa) as not making the previous 
syllable long. It is possible that jihvayam is a corruption of jihvaya, a 
metrically required lengthened form of the instrumental jihvaya. For 
the expression Srotrasabdatvam agatam, cf. the Nepalese reading of 
the previous line in the Svacchanda (12:34cd). 


2:56cd "The elements have as their subtle properties the subtle elements 
in due order from the beginning" 


It is uncertain to us whether this is what the text really means. Ksema- 
raja’s interpretation of this line, in which he reads prakrtikramat, takes 
this as a statement to the effect that the above lines were teaching a 
subtle, which is to say generally unknown, property of the tanmatras 
as residing in the indriyas. But it is not clear that this is what the 
text was originally meant to express. 


2:57-61b ‘Vaikarika [namely ahankara], by which the a k T 
above these [tanmatras]. I am wise, I am wealthy; I have cat res 
in a great family; I am a giver; 1 am an pag lee ae pe enemy 
strong; people have been conquered by me m pedro ir how 
has been vanquished;?45 I am pious; I am Mh i am of bad 


could there be anyone greater than me. I am a sinner; 


a 
45 Ex conj, 


Nisvasatatt she 
442 Vasamhita 


conduct; I am a fool; I am ugly; I do not give; I do not enjoy; there 
is no unhappy being like me. For those os minds are in this way 
[fixed] in egoity, following [always] the notion “mine”, ahañkāra binds 
with the bondage that is the [prison-]house of samsara? 


Note that several of the irregularities of syntax and morphology here 
have been corrected not only in the KSTS text of the Svacchanda, but 
also in that of the old Nepalese manuscript (see Appendix II, 12:36ff). 


2:61c-63b ‘I have taught [you] the properties of ahankara; hear from me 
the properties of the buddhi: piety (dharmam), knowledge (jrianam), 
dispassion (vairagyam), and control (ai$varyam) as the fourth, and 
impiety, nescience, lack of dispassion and lack of control. This [bud- 
dhi) binds [thus] in seven ways [viz. through seven of the above eight 
properties], but liberates through the disposition that is knowledge 
(jranabhavena). 
Usually all four of the bhavas, that is to say the positive properties 
of the buddhi, are placed on an equal footing (for the workings of 
the buddhidharmas, see below and cf., e.g., Parakhya 4:74-90). The 
emphasis on jfiana here might seem to suggest a stronger emphasis 
on gnosis than is typical of the later Saivasiddhanta, but it becomes 
clear in 2:69—70 below that the redactor is thinking of the Sankhyas' 
discrimination of purusa and prakrti leading to kaivalya. 


2:63cd "The intellect (buddhih), through discrimination, makes and alters: 


Discrimination (adhyavasaya) is well known to be the responsibili- 
ty of the buddhi (e.g. in Sarikhyakarika 23), but it is not clear here 
what it “makes” and what it “alters” (karoti vikaroti ca); perhaps it 
changes the moods of the person? The pāda is a not particularly com- 
mon cliché, found, for example, in Mahābhārata 3-31:33d; Bhagavata- 
gurang nid Brahmandapurana 3.2:281d; Kürmapurüna 1-4-54d and 
1.11:224d. 


2:64-67 b ‘Hear from me the definitions of the eight [properties of the bud- 
dhi] beginning with morality. Fasting, recitation, silence, absence 9 
anger, refraining from theft; truthfulness, cleanliness, giving, compa 
sion, and tolerance at all times; practising learning, modesty, and n 
staining the senses; [the meritorious activities of] sacrificing and doing 
pious deeds [for others’s welfare] (istapurtam), pilgrimages, and i 
Tying o ne's ancestors; not endangering any creatures, and protectin 
life. This is the first property of the buddhi, called “morality” 


Translation of the Nayasutra 
443 


Usually we would expect this property, 
in similar terms, but with those terms 
five niyamas. See, e.g., 


2004:254-5, fn. 384). 


dharma, to be explained 
tl grouped as five yamas and 
Parakhya 4:77-8 and annotation (GOODALL 


2:67c-68 ‘Now heaven, now [birth as a] mortal, now being an ani- 
mal—[each] occurs again and again for those bound by moral acts 
[and] following samsara. The disposition of morality has been taught; 
hear from me the disposition [known as] “knowledge” 


2:69 ‘This lump [that is the body and that consists] of twenty-four [tattvas 
and that is] endowed with instruments and faculties is to be understood 
to be made of matter (prakrtah); it generates [the embodied soul’s] 
merit and demerit. 


Note that the KSTS edition of the Svacchanda here reads caturvim- 
Satikah pindah, which gives the sense that we require. karanendriya- 
seems tautologous, for karana and indriya seem synonymous. We could 
conjecture karanendriya-, but this finds no support in the Svaccha- 
nda. Nirajan KAFLE has suggested that it might stand for antah- 
karanendriya-. 


2:70—72b ‘“I am not an agent; I am without qualities; the bonds of matter 
do not [really] exist for me”—[with this] I have taught you the gnosis 
of the Sankhyas, through which one may be released from matter. But 
[though] liberated from the creation of matter ( prakrtisrstya), the Lord 
binds him again, and again he will continue to be reborn further, enl 
he finds God, the Lord, the Creator, the controller of all creatures. 


2:72c—75b ‘Because of [the buddhidharma of] dispassion, he rejects plea- 
sures; a wife like an Apsaras; elephants, horses, chariots, vehicles; 
friends, acquaintances and wealth. [Because of dispassion people] prac- 
tise severe austeries: fasting, recitation, pilgrimage, [being ak 
by] five fires; sleeping in water (jalasayinam). [By such peoplel ue 
body may be suddenly abandoned [by throwing it] from a DM a 
into water, by poison or by fire, [or] by the destructive means E d 
[to himself] or hanging. It is when one depends on dispassion tha 
also does [such] violent [acts]. 


i tion noun, 
ding jalagayinam as though it were an ac 
Med ss hened form of jalasayanam. 


perhaps a confused and metrically length qui tation 
Note that the KSTS text here has jalasayi-tam. he interpre 


Nis$vas 
444 atattvasamhitz 


and the constitution of the text of 2:74, which appears to allude E 
religious suicide by such means as bhrgupata, are particul arly unge. 
tain. Ksemaraja, whose text apparently reads gitivrksajalagnibhyah 
praharodbandhanaganaih (Svacchanda 12:54cd), offers little commen, 
tary: giryadm asrityety arthah. vrksah prayagadisthito vatah. Sanam 
aganam an pürvasya aSnateh prayogah. This last element, in his anal- 
ysis, might refer to the eating of poison. 


2:75c-76 ‘One who is given over to the mental state of “sovereignty” at. 
tains no satisfaction from material things, nor from kingship, nor from 
pleasures, from retinue, weaponry and vehicles. One who desires [this 
state of] “sovereignty” practises austerities, religious observances and 
mantras.’ 


2:77-78b ‘Fighting, dice, trickery, theft, falsehood, violence, and other 
wrong deeds, [and] destroying trust by deceit—fone who is given over 
to the mental state of “sovereignty”, if he does [such things], will be 
destroyed: 


It is possible that ai$varyabhavam apanno is the result of an accidental 
transfer of 2:75c to here. The sense is a little awkward, for if the person 
is really full of ai$varya, then why should he indulge in dicing, trickery 
and so forth. But perhaps his doing so emphasises that we are talking 
of the Sankhyas’ limited notion of aigvarya? 


2:78c-79b ‘One who constantly delights in harming creatures; theft, false- 
hood and injury; one who deceives; and one who gives trouble— [all 
this] is the activity of [the mental state of] immorality” 


The construction here is anacoluthic, for we have a mixture of agents 
and action nouns all identified with adharmacestitam. We assume that 
dambhana is an alternative form of the word dambhana. 


2:79c-80b '"There is no morality, no immorality! And who has [ever 
gone to heaven or to the liberated state? "»— [thus] someone given over 


to [the mental state of] nescience speaks falsely of everything: 


2:80c-81b '[Lack of dispassion:] Always suffering, directed by other? n 
[must] even carry burdens and draw vehicles.24 He always Hr 
livelihood with difficulty. Because of lack of dispassion (avaira£» ¢ 


does not grow weary. 


gh = CE = = 
bharayanam vahaty api could instead mean “he draws vehicles of burden" 


Translation of the Nayasutra 
445 


The idea appears to be that a person in who - i í 
driven, in spite of hardship, to keep on grin p UCM dominates is 
2:81b-82b ‘One who rules a kingdom (rajyan krtva) [and who is domi- 
nated by the mental state of anaigvarya will become] a feudal lord 
(samantam), and from [being] a feudal lord, he will become a village 
headman (gramikah), and once he falls from [control of] the village 
he lives by what he find (Jabdhena varttate), [being] impotent? , 


In the Kashmirian text of this unit the grammar has been considerably 
tightened up (Svacchanda 12:61c-62b: see Appendix II) 


2:82c-83b 'He does not grieve, nor [does he experience] vexation (udveg- 
ab); he enjoys himself (kridate) as though [he were still in his] kingdom 
as before. This was the mental state (bhavah) of lack of sovereignty 
(anai$varyasya) that has been taught to you? 


2:83c-84 ‘I shall teach you [next] the “unmanifest” (avyaktam), which is 
made up of three qualities, [and which is] that which propels this world 
in which we transmigrate (samsarasya pravarttakam). Because it is 
that from which the entire universe arises, it is therefore called source- 
matter (prakrtih). I shall teach its effects (dharman), which are full 
of sattva, rajas, and tamas? 


N here transmits prakrti, a prātipadika, which, although we have not 
adopted it, may in fact be authorial, since prātikpadikas are elsewhere 
in the text used as quotative forms for giving names or labels. Of 
course this would make the line unmetrical, strictly speaking, unless 
one were to read the prātipadika with a following pause, to indicate 
that it is a name. Note that dharma again (cf. the usages In 2:31, 
2:53, 2:61) appears here to mean not a “property”, as we would nor- 
mally expect, but rather a function or effect or product. The KSTS 
version of the corresponding unit in the Svacchanda (12:64cd) has ob- 
viated the difficulty by reformulating: tasya dharmam pravaksyami 
sattvarajastamobhidham. 


2:85—88a ‘Now sattva is luminous (prakasam) and endowed with good- 


i in whom satt- 
ness and truth (dharmmasatyas amanvitam). [A person in w 
क 4 ting, [characterised by] acts 


va predominates is] invariably discriminatin 
of mercy (anrgamsatvakaritam), endowed with tolerance E am 
sion, has reached the further shores of learning and EY ; e ME ai 
vijfanaparagah), [manifests] affection, generosity, steac!as ^P 


Ni$va. 
446 ८४०८८४०८७५ 


ligence (medhà), austerity, cleanliness (890८9), and self-control, equa. 
nimity (samadrstih) with respect to [the various fruits of] the Unseen 
[viz. karman), [and] awakens divine insight (divyabuddhipraboghs. 
kah)—the excellent man in whom these qualities occur is known to 
be full of sattva.’ 

samadrstih is a conjecture, based of course on the Svacchanda, but 
where the latter text reads the opening of the line differently. The 
translation assumes that adrstesu can mean karmasu and therefore 


karmaphalesu. 


2:88b-gob ‘Hear from me the properties of rajas: cruel, excessively 
greedy, full of enmity, and angry, full of desires (kami), filled with 
happy excitement (harsasamavistah), oppressed by troubles, he wan- 
ders constantly [through samsara]. Proud, deceitful, rooted in egoity 
(ahankare), always fond of battles, a warrior (Sürah)—these are the 
characteristics of the properties of rajas? 


2:90c-93b 'Overpowered by desires and by anger, full of greed, jealous, 
despondent, intoxication (madam), acting madly (unmadacestavan), 
sleepiness, torpor, inactivity, stupidity, and ignorance, having a mind 
fixed on immorality (adharmmatabuddhimatah), being a non-believer, 
fickle-mindedness—these are the signs of tamas. The creature in which 
they are seen should be understood to be a man of tamas, impure in 
nature.’ 


Note that in the Kashmirian text of this passage as it occurs in the Sva- 
cchanda (Appendix II, apparatus to 12:72a) adharmatabuddhimatah 
seems to have been interpreted instead as two things: adharmata and 
abuddhimattvam. 


2:93cd ‘Having these as its three qualities (etattrgunam), the unmanifest 
15 said to have three gunas; 


Perhaps one could instead interpret this to mean: ‘This, the UP 
manifest, has three qualities; [those] three qualities have been taug 
[above]. Ksemaraja (Svacchandatantroddyota ad 12:73cd) inp 
Stead that this is a justification for the use of triguna as a name à 
avyakta: etat tribhir gunair yuktatvat trigunam. 


xpi Ae he 
2:94-96b ‘If one [truly] knows [the following] then one is released fromt 


bonds of matter [according to the Sankhyas], and yet one is not p 
released. [The soul does] not [have] the properties of the gura 


Translation of the Nayasütra 
447 


does it have the properties of] the unmanifest ( 
it have the properties of intellect or egoity (dhthamkaraguno na hi) 
{..t. Being devoid [ultimately] of the gross and subtle elements [and] 
because it is [ultimately] without the [internal] faculties and tior: 
the senses ([antah-]karanendriyahinatvat), the soul is held to be not 
an agent, devoid of the gunas, pure consciousness! 


avyaktam), nor does 


One could emend the cruxed text to read tanmatrendriyadharmo na 
mahabhutaguno na ca, which one could then translate as follows: *[The 
soul] does not have the subtle elements and faculties as its nature, nor 
does it have the gross elements as its nature’ But we have not emended 
in this way because the Nepalese MS of the Svacchanda has the same 
problematic text as the Nayasütra here (Appendix II, 12:75), and the 
KSTS version omits the half-line altogether, which suggests that it 
was problematic to the Kashmirian polishers of the text too. 


2:96c-97b ‘Whatever acts of mind, speech and body are performed, they, 
I believe, are caused to be performed by matter (prakrtya); the soul 
is taught to be inactive (akarta): 


2:97c-98 ‘“Having thus renounced [the fruits of] actions, while continuing 
in every way (sarvatah) to engage [in performing] them, I am not their 
agent, nor am I bound”—men who understand thus are liberated by 
matter until the Lord creates [the universe again]. 
Cf. Bhagavadgità 13:29 (Mahabharata 6.35:29): prakrtyaiva ca kar- 
mani kriyamanani sarvagah/ yah pasyati tathatmanam akartaram sa 
pasyati. 


2:99-100 ‘I have taught the knowledge of the Sankhyas; fit is] what they 
call “liberation”. There is in fact no (na hi..bhavet) liberation for 
such a person (tasya): [there is only] bodilessness for à certain time. 
He remains (tisthet) freed from matter, unaffected by creation and de- 
struction (srstisamharavarjitah), until God, the Supreme Lord, creates 
[a new] creation? 


It may seem odd to describe this temporarily Hbere A Ar the 
affected by creation and destruction! in the light of e pe t à 
sentence, but perhaps what is meant is that such a soul is una aie 
by certain low-level phases of creation and destruction EN TN 
avantara-pralaya). This semi-liberated state prefigures that of the p. 
layakala of classical Saiddhantika doctrine. 


Nigva 
448 “Satattvasamhitg 


‘At that time (tavat), he is again thrown into samsara because of his 


2:101 : 
hrown there he i i ; 
and once t S again born; [once] 


being bound by matter; 
born, he again transmigrates. 

This interpretation may be wrong: we would not normally expect ta. 
vat to carry such a sense (that of tada). We would rather expect tavat 
to be coordinated with yavat in 2:100C, but that clause seemed in- 
stead to be coordinated with 2:100ab. One could attempt to interpret 
tavatprakrtibandhena as a single compound: "by the bondage of [ali] 
matter as much as there is"; but this seems to give no sense. We are 
not sure that we understand what Ksemaraja means by his remark on 
this pada: tavat prakrtad avisisto yah prakrtibandhas tena. Does he 
simply mean ‘because of that bondage by matter which is “thus much”, 
[i.e.] not different from [the matter that is] the subject of discussion’? 
In that case, should he not have written tavan? 


2:102 ‘Bound by merit and demerit, having been deluded by the knowledge 
of the Sankhyas, [he is again reborn thinking] “I am an agent; I am an 
enjoyer; I am powerful and strong”; misled by the notion “this is mine", 
he wanders [back again and again] like [the pots of] a waterwheel [which 
are dipped again and again into the water].” 


3:1-2 ‘The lord spoke: 
I have taught the doctrine of the Sankhyas; hear [now] the manner 
of visualisation and the presiding deity [of each tattva]. The earth 
[is to be visualised] as firm, girdled by the four oceans, crowded with 
mountains and forests, filled with wild animals and birds, stable, yellow 
in colour, arising from the first seed, [namely 5]. 


Note that an edited version of this chapter has been incorporated into 
the Svacchanda, where it now appears as 12:83-157: See Appendix I 


The expression purvabijasamutthita echoes the type of parinama b 
sualisation that is typical of Buddhist tantric practice, and of witeh 
we find an example from the Diksottara quoted by Abhin avagup'® 
in Tantraloka 5:148b-150 (identified in the Dzksottara transcripts "à 
GOODALL 1998:xliii, fn. 96). Otherwise, we would have to ass s t 
weak sense of ‘samutthita, such as that of "samanvità, which 15 ee 
the redactors of the Svacchanda have done when adapting this 2०) 
(see Appendix II, 12:84d and cf. the Kashmirian reading a our 
As for the identification of the bija, as will become clear; it is is 
vowel of the NAVATMAN, which, as we have seen above UT 


Translation of the Nayasutra 
449 


1:10), is homologised with prakrti. This section, in other words, dif. 
fers from later accounts of the dhàranas of the dest (such Fil 
of Parakhya 14:33-50), in which each is assigned a particular eum 
vowel, and a mandala that is to be of a certain shape and colour and 
marked with some distinctive emblem. Earth we would expect to be 
yellow, square, marked with vajras and to have a mantra involving its 


semi-vowel la. The only one of these features mentioned here is the 
colour yellow. 


3:3 ‘Meditating [on earth in such a manner], he will attain power. He can 
block poisonous creatures; he cannot be budged by any beings; he is 
[immoveable] like the earth [herself]. 


3:4 ‘His whole body filled with water, he should fill [the whole world] with 
[his] water-meditation; practising thus, he may destroy [by apyayana?] 
poisonous creatures.’ 


3:5 ‘Satisfied, free of fever/thirst, free of all calamities, he will pervade the 
entire universe, [by] meditating on the first seed’ 


We have taken the m in sarva-m-itivivarjitah to be a hiatus-breaker 
(used for the sake of the metre, and perhaps also to ensure that the 
element iti remains recognisable). Cf. Svacchanda 12:87, where the 
Nepalese text has sarva-iti-vivarjitah and the KSTS text has been 
reformulated to obviate the problem (see Appendix II). We assume 
that the bija is still U. 


3:6 '[Visualising] a blazing fire rising from his own body that burns up the 
universe, he may perform thousands of [magical] deeds while meditat- 
ing using its seed-syllable [which is that of prakrti, namely v] 
One could interpret ‘its seed-syllable [of fire, viz. RAM]’, but Ksema- 
raja in his Svacchandatantroddyota ad 12:88ab supposes the use of U, 
the bija of prakrti, throughout this passage. 


3:7 ‘[As] wind, filled with dark dust, together with the seeden [o] he 
should meditate, filling the universe [as his] body; power [will acc 
to him]; he will accomplish wonders. 


This verse is anacoluthic in two ways: the Kashmirian Es PR 
ated difficulties, for it reads vayur dhyeyo (instead of e . ‘Wind 
siddhah (for siddhih). Its text can be rendered more smoo 2 a 
filled with dark dust should be meditated upon, with 3७७४ i 


m Nisvasatattvasamhirs 
as filling the body [that is the] universe; when [he has] Mastered [it] 
he may accomplish wonders: : 


“He should visualise his own body as hollow, and the universe as hollow 
[as well], using the seed-syllable of prakrti [viz. 0], [and] he may thus 
perform various [miraculous] acts.’ 


3:8 


3:9 ‘And fire, when visualised in the organ of speech, bestows supernatural 
powers of speech. If one visualises Indra in the organ of the hand, then 
one will become invincible, mighty in the arms’ 


3:10ab 'Visnu, when meditated upon in the feet, bestows the ability to 
traverse great distances on foot.’ 


For the reconstitution of this line, in which we assume that padbhyam 
is intended as a locative and that pradayakah governs an object, as 
though it were a main verb, see Svacchanda 12:91cd in Appendix II. 


3:10cd ‘If one visualises a white Mitra in the anus, he will remove piles? 


These same correlations are found almost identically in Susru- 
tasamhita, Sarirasthana 1.17, although no colours and no siddhis are 
mentioned in that passage. Cf. also Mahabharata 12.305:1-7, which 
gives an account of which divinity's worlds one reaches according to 
which part of the body the soul exits from in a yogic suicide: 


tathaivotkramamanam tu Srnusvavahito nrpa 
padbhyam utkramamanasya vaisnavam sthanam ucyate 1 
jaüghabhyam tu vasün devan apnuyad iti nah árutam 
Janubhyam ca mahabhagan devan sadhyan avapnuyat 2 
payunotkramamanas tu maitram sthanam avapnuyat 
prthivim Jaghanenatha ürubhyàm tu prajapatim 3 
Parsvabhyam maruto devan nasabhyam indum eva ca 
bahubhyam indram ity ahur urasa rudram eva ca 4 
Brivayas tam rsigrestham naram àpnoty anuttamam 
uid mukhenatha digah $rotrena capnuyat 5 
E gandhavahanam netrabhyam süryam eva ९8 
vus "pa calva$vinau devau 1818608 pitrn atha 6 — 
S DTE apnoti vibhum mürdhnà devagrajam tatha 
y utkramanasthanany uktani mithileávara 7 


3:11 ‘With well- £ ५३ 
eda depu mind, he should visualise a dark Prajapati “2 m 
; wiv’ Senses mastered, he may at will enjoy a hundred [women]. 


Translation of the Nayasütra 
451 


4 


Alternatively, ‘he may at will take his pleasure for a hundred [years]. 


3:12 ‘He should visualise the directions, each with their own colour (citrah) 
and with the [same?] seed-syllable, in the ear; he will retain whatever 


he is taught, having heard it only once, and he will master travelling 
in all directions. 


Cf. Mahabharata 12.305:1ff (quoted above), and 14.28:8-10, about the 
various parts of a sacrificed goat being absorbed into different direc- 
tions: in this latter passage, the ears go into the directions. 


3:13 ‘He should visualise the wind-god as having black form, situated in the 
skin: no pain in his skin will arise from various weapons and fanged 
creatures.’ 


Our conjecture dhyaye tvacasi assumes the loss of the final t of the con- 
ditional (though we could equally have conjectured dhyayet tvacasi), 
followed by an irregular locative of tvac calqued perhaps on that of 
vacas. It would have seemed natural to many a transmitter to assume 
this to be an error for dhyayed vacasi, which is what N transmits. 


3:14 ‘He should visualise the sun in the eye; Varuna is to be located on the 
tongue; the earth, yellow, in the nose; he should visualise the moon as 
situated in the mind? 


3:15-16b ‘The subtle element of smell is yellow; the subtle element of taste 
is white; the subtle element of form is red; the subtle element of touch 
is black. The subtle element of sound is to be visualised without colour 
as having [simply] the form of a dot.’ 


3:16cd ‘[He attains] whatever siddhi he desires in [every] sense-realm; he 
knows whatever he thinks of? 


It is perhaps conceivable that visaye was intended as a third Di 
optative, for note that the Nepalese version of the pk ती = 
vimSate (Appendix II, 12:98ab); but the use of the root vi$ with si 


seems unlikely. For 3:16d, cf. 4:20d below. 


3:17-18 ‘And (tatha) Rudra in ahankara should be meditated upon zd iH 
who desires supernatural power: by meditation [on inl ot One 
from bondage by ahanikara [and] one attains supernatural P 
should meditate upon Brahma situated in buddhi with त eels 
by meditating on the [same] previous[ly stated] Se 


ए] a mass of knowledge arises: 


NiSvasotottvo Es 
452 sam, hita 


We have assumed here that we have an action-noun taking a direct 
object (pürvabijam abhidhyanat), but one could instead assume a com. 
pound without loss of case-ending, or with m inserted as a euphonic 
glide. For parallels, see 3:31, 3:42 and 4:4 below. 


‘And a supernatural intelligence arises which will cut away [all] doubts. 
The past, present and future [will] become directly perceptible [for 
him)? 
3:20 “Prakrti shines forth as black, white and red, but (ca) her (tasya) 
heart is red; she [is to be visualised as having] many feet, arms and 
faces. 


3:19 


This interpretation assumes a confusion of masculine and feminine 
pronouns (tasya for tasyah), which we have not encountered elsewhere 
in this text. Ksemaraja's commentary (Svacchandatantroddyota ad 
12:101-102) explains that her upper part is white and her lower part 
is black: the heart in the middle is therefore red. 


3:21ab “He should visualise [her] using the seed-syllable of prakrti if he 
desires siddhi for himself? 


This interpretation requires understanding yad icchet as yadicchet and 
assuming that dhyatva was used as a metrically convenient contrac- 
tion of dhyatavya. This assumption seems to have been made by the 
redactor of the Svacchanda, which reads (12:102cd): dhyatavya tattv- 
abijena yadicchet siddhim atmanah. 


3:21cd ‘He masters it (siddhah), becomes powerful [and] a divine capacity 
to create arises [in him]? 


Alternatively, ‘[If] he succeeds, he gains control [and] a divine capacity 
to create arises [in him]. 


It is surprising to find here divyasrstih, the reading in N, K, and in 
the Nepalese MS of the Svacchanda, since divyadrstih (the reading of 
the KSTS) is the familiar cliché. It is odder still given that the fol- 
lowing verse appears to be an explanation of divyadrsti. Nevertheless 


we should probably retain it, and it is an appropriate power to be 
associated with prakrti. 


:22— t [ A i 

3:22 iD By this] yoga of visualisation [of prakrti], after six morie. 

‘ vine Power arises: whatever might be happening in the universe, 
ecomes directly perceptible to him. This yoga concerning Pr akrí 


Translation of the Nayasutra 
453 


has been taught to you; it is supreme [and] b li : 
estows li 
moksakarah parah)? ] WS liberation (ukto 


What is surely meant in 3:22cd is trailokye yat pravarttate: cf. Naya- 
sutra 4:38ab, where the same line occurs, again with yah dune | 
This could be corrected to yat (assuming, e.g., a misinterpretation of | 
an upadhmaniya), but it is at least conceivable that the masculine | 
nominative should here be doing duty for a neuter nominative. | 


The last statement here is a theologically problematic one; Ksemaraja 
takes it to mean instead "that which gives liberation is to follow". 


3:23cd “The [tattva of the bound] soul is situated beyond that [tattva of 
prakrti] in the lotus of the heart.’ 


3:24 "Ihat which resides, filling the body, as a mass of consciousness, is 
called “life” (jrvah), by which this body lives’ 
Perhaps it is conceivable that the instrumental of pindena is simply 


the result of attraction to the previous word; pinda might then be 
intended to be in apposition with deham. 


3:25 ‘On the other hand (punah), as the result of it having departed, [the 

body] is dead and falls apart, devoid of consciousness. This [soul] is 
bound, is released and finds happiness and unhappiness.’ 
We have assumed here that mrtam and aceta agree, the latter being 
therefore treated as neuter, or the former as masculine (the nomina- 
tive acetah with loss of final visarga). Some might choose instead to 
emend, for instance by correcting mrtam to mrtah or emending punah 
to puram or to tanuh. 


3:26—28 ‘Its form, colour and dimensions cannot be seen anywhere; it is 
d yet the sustainer 


not even (vapi) possible to describe it; it is subtle an A 
of the body. The jiva is tinier than the hundredth part of a 5 
[further] divided a hundred-fold, and yet (ca) it partekes of ME 

is sun-coloured, gold-coloured, like a drop of water on a m : Sed 
star; the yogin should perceive it with the eye of supernatural vision. 


Verse 27 echoes Svetasvataropanisat 5:9: 


balagrasatabhagasya Satadha kalpitasya ca 
bhàgo jivah sa vijüeyah sa canantyaya kalpate 


Nisvasatatty M 
454 क. 


The whole passage is paralleled in a quotation attributed to the Pra. 
bhasakhanda of the Skandapurana from a Vaisnava work, namely Jj. 
vagosvamin’s Paramatmasandarbha: 


na tasya rüpam varna và pramapam dr$yate kvacit 
na gakyah kathitum vapi siiksmas canantavigrahah 
balagragatabhagasya Satadha kalpitasya ca 

tasmat süksmataro devah sa canantyaya kalpyate 
adityavarpam siksmabham abbindum iva puskare 
naksatram iva pagyanti yogino jnanacaksusa 


3:29-30 ‘On the right, she is white-bodied; on the left, she is black. Her 
garments, and especially her ornaments, have those colours [too]. She 
binds with the bond of karman; she hands out happiness and unhap- 
piness. One should know that she is niyati, unconquerable [even] for 
gods and demons? 


3:31 ‘He should meditate (abhidhyanat) on the above [taught] seed-syllable 
[for niyati]. [Unlike the soul, niyati should be visualised as] equipped 
with form. Through this meditation, one attains siddhi and becomes 
liberated from niyati? 


The seed-syllable for niyati is VA (Uttarasiitra 1:10c). As in 3:18 above, 
the expression piirvabijamabhidhyanat is problematic: it could be tak- 
en as an action-noun taking a direct object (pürvabijam abhidhyanat) 
or as a compound without loss of case-ending, or as a compound with 
m inserted as a euphonic glide. These solutions all assume that abhi- 
dhyanat is an action noun, but it is perhaps conceivable that it was 
intended as a third singular optative: see the discussion of pürvava- 
Ktramabhidhyanat in 3:42c below. 


3:32-33b '[One should visualise] the Lord who is Time, infinite, insuper- 
able, devouring (samharantam), with three eyes, four faces, black in 
colour and four-armed. Time will not control [him], [if he is] one who 
knows the nature of time with its seed-syllable? " 

nal 


Lie honda 12:15cd in the KSTS edition: svabijadhysnarüpajfih 
kalena na hi kalyate. We could therefore understand our text 88 0 
lows: na kalah [tam] kalayisyati. The Nepalese MS of the Svacchanda 
however, suggests that the yogin who meditates on kala with its 5 
Jamanira becomes time and will be able to divide up [the UR ME. 
(sa kalah kalayisyati) in the way that time does. Perhaps 54 18 in 


Nisvasatatty M 
454 क. 


The whole passage is paralleled in a quotation attributed to the Pra. 
bhasakhanda of the Skandapurana from a Vaisnava work, namely Jj. 
vagosvamin’s Paramatmasandarbha: 


na tasya rüpam varna và pramapam dr$yate kvacit 
na gakyah kathitum vapi siiksmas canantavigrahah 
balagragatabhagasya Satadha kalpitasya ca 

tasmat süksmataro devah sa canantyaya kalpyate 
adityavarpam siksmabham abbindum iva puskare 
naksatram iva pagyanti yogino jnanacaksusa 


3:29-30 ‘On the right, she is white-bodied; on the left, she is black. Her 
garments, and especially her ornaments, have those colours [too]. She 
binds with the bond of karman; she hands out happiness and unhap- 
piness. One should know that she is niyati, unconquerable [even] for 
gods and demons? 


3:31 ‘He should meditate (abhidhyanat) on the above [taught] seed-syllable 
[for niyati]. [Unlike the soul, niyati should be visualised as] equipped 
with form. Through this meditation, one attains siddhi and becomes 
liberated from niyati? 


The seed-syllable for niyati is VA (Uttarasiitra 1:10c). As in 3:18 above, 
the expression piirvabijamabhidhyanat is problematic: it could be tak- 
en as an action-noun taking a direct object (pürvabijam abhidhyanat) 
or as a compound without loss of case-ending, or as a compound with 
m inserted as a euphonic glide. These solutions all assume that abhi- 
dhyanat is an action noun, but it is perhaps conceivable that it was 
intended as a third singular optative: see the discussion of pürvava- 
Ktramabhidhyanat in 3:42c below. 


3:32-33b '[One should visualise] the Lord who is Time, infinite, insuper- 
able, devouring (samharantam), with three eyes, four faces, black in 
colour and four-armed. Time will not control [him], [if he is] one who 
knows the nature of time with its seed-syllable? " 

nal 


Lie honda 12:15cd in the KSTS edition: svabijadhysnarüpajfih 
kalena na hi kalyate. We could therefore understand our text 88 0 
lows: na kalah [tam] kalayisyati. The Nepalese MS of the Svacchanda 
however, suggests that the yogin who meditates on kala with its 5 
Jamanira becomes time and will be able to divide up [the UR ME. 
(sa kalah kalayisyati) in the way that time does. Perhaps 54 18 in 


Translation of the Nayasttra "E 


an error for na? Note, however, that the meditator becomes Time in 
Uttarasutra 5:23. 


The seed-syllable for kala is LA (Uttarasütra 1:10d). 


3:33c-34b “Those who do not know the meditation on Time revolve 
around [in samsara] like [the vessels on a water-|wheel. One should 
always meditate on Time thus in order to attain eternal siddhi? 


Note that the Svacchanda here (Appendix II, 12:117) inserts a visusal- 
isation of the other kaficukas (raga, kala, vidya) here. That insertion 
underlines their absence in the Nayasutra. 


For the image of the waterwheel, cf. Nayasütra 2:102 and Vakyapadiya 
III.9:14: 


jalayantrabhramaveSasadrsibhih pravrttibhih 
sa kalah kalayan sarvah kalakhyam labhate vibhuh 


Rau translates (2002:253) as follows: 


Indem sie alle Teile (kala) [der Welt] treibt (kalayan) mit Bewe- 
gungen welche den Anstóffen der Umdrehungen eines Wasserrads 
ähneln, erhält sie, allverbreitet, den Namen ‘Zeit’ (kala). 


3:34c-35 “Black in colour, with red eyes, with long teeth, very hairy, with 
tawny hair above her breasts (?), coarse-bodied, big-bellied, [Maya is 
the one] who causes creatures, from Brahma downwards, to fall again 
and again. 


3:36ab 'She is one who blocks the way without hostility; Maya is a barrier 
who cannot be crossed? 


Assuming that the word separation here is what the author intended, 
ed as a nominative femi- 


and assuming that paripanthinya is intend 

nine dne A ni wen sense as paripanthini Gane => me 
the way, an antagonist, adversary, enemy’, according to sed 
WILLIAMS), this might perhaps also be rendered as ei might 
friendly, [now] hostile, Maya is as inscrutable as MEN ne ud 
however, instead choose to interpret mayagranth! as i E with 
‘the knot that is Maya’. Note that Ksemaraja Due ud thir du- 
niskaranam eva and that he reads eparipanthitvan mara xa she 
ruttara: following him, we might translate instead ipe knot’. 
blocks the way without hostility, Maya is an i 


a Nisvasatativasamhits 


3:36c-37 ‘The followers of the Sankhyas, the Veda, the Puranas, ang those 
who follow other sastras, they cannot go beyond [maya], nor can othe 
thinkers who seek liberation (moksavadinah). 'They are tonic m 
by maya, being mistakenly convinced, with respect to what 15 e 
liberation, that it is liberation. 


3:38 ‘By meditating on her seed-syllable [MA] with the forms given in the 
previous visualisations (?), one cuts her [away] with the sword that is 
diksà and goes to the indestructible [state that is] Siva? 


It is possible that this plural, *visualisations", is intentional and refers 
back both to the dhyana given immediately above and to the visuali- 
sations given in Uttarasütra 5:24-26. 

Perhaps one finds here an intimation that lower levels (niyati, etc.) 
can be crossed purely by meditation, whereas crossing maya requires 
also diksa. 


3:39 ‘Vidya is said to be four-coloured or uncoloured: she should be visu- 

alised as white, red, yellow and black, [or] as hollow/empty (susirat- 
mika). 
The reading of the KSTS of the Svacchanda (12:122d), however, is 
quite different: sa varnavyapini smrtà, "she is held to pervade all 
phonemes”. It is possible therefore that vapi is an error for vyapi, which 
could be understood as a metrically expedient contraction of vyapini. 
This would then be equivalent to the Nepalese reading of the 5va- 
cchanda: avarnna vyapini smrtà. This could be rendered “not being 
herself ai phoneme, she is held to pervade [all phonemes/all things ^ 
Alternatively, avarnà might be taken to refer to the sound a, which 
pervades all the sounds of language. 


3:40 E rests [being subtle sound] upon space and wind; she has beauty 
T youth. jsadbhavam} .. with her own seed-syllable [viz. KSA], she 
estows powers upon the practitioner! 


Pec ere laa ad loc., Ksemaraja says that she ree 
aaa =. of Susumna, the place from which all letters arise: 
गण nodayaspadam sausumnam padam aradha. In place of the 
ayes y core sadbhavam, the Svacchanda here (12:1243) reads X 
s ns 2 ris therefore repair our text by emending sadha 
interpreted tc ternatively, perhaps the transmitted reading qu 
iik 0 mean Her existence is through her own seed-syllab 8 » 

sense that she arises through a transformation of her own bija- 


Translation ० the Nayasutra 
anstatt f a 


3:47 ‘He attains power over Vidya; having become a Siddha he is 
move/cross everywhere into all divine worlds, and he becomes dus 
who can take on any form at will? 


3:42-44a ‘By meditating on the frontal face, which is a yellow Ardhanariéa 
with three eyes and matted locks, he obtains the merit of fone who 
lives on nothing but the air], and of ten thousand horse-sacrifices, and 
the universe will come under his thrall; he will stride [about in it] and 
be powerful, within six months, there is no doubt? 


Here begins a visualisation of each of the faces of I$vara in turn, this 
being now the level of 1i$varatattva (not of sadasivatattva), beginning 
in the East. As well as our notes below, the reader may refer to 
TORZSOK 2013:41-45 for a discussion of this passage. 


We may note that the name SadaSiva is not used here, that there 
is no correlation explicitly established between each face and a giv- 
en brahmamantra, and that it is possible that only four rather than 
five faces are intended. After four faces have been described, verses 
3:52-53 appear to give a description of the body, rather than the face, 
of a figure placed on top of the four-faced head. In short, this is not an 
iconographical account of a Sadasiva—indeed we find no iconography 
of Sadagiva in the NiSvaso—but it reflects a stage in the evolution of 
the iconography of Sadasiva, and it appears to have been interpreted as 
an account of the iconography of Sadasiva by transmitters of the Sva- 
cchanda, who have at some point replaced Ardhanariga as the Eastern 
“face” with Narega, intended as a synonym of Tatpurusa (12:125¢d): 
the Nepalese manuscript we have collated retains Ardhanarisa, but in 
the KSTS we find kunkumabham ca naresam trinetram tu jatadharam, 
and Ksemaraja comments: ardhanarigam ity apapathah, “Ardhanarisa 
is a wrong reading”. 


For a four-faced I§vara with Ardhanarisa blished 
Kushana period (AD 250-350), see the image from Mathura pu E 
by KREISEL 1986: 69-70 and 204-5 + plates 6oa-h. SE ‘he 
shows an instance of a full figure of an Ardhanarisa alone pee aie 
shaft of a linga (plate 113) and of a full figure of an sar iius 
the front of the shaft of a liniga with a sketchy shallow-re n S 
he calls a “Gana-Kopf” on the back (plates 148 and 

said to be “Spatkusana”. 


For interpreting the partly cruxed h 
able to do no better than rely on the 


as the frontal face of the late 


we have been 


“li r text 
alf-line of ou ’ seas 


Svacchanda, which here 


3 Nisudsatattvasamhy: 


(12:126ab): pürvananam abhidhyanad (abhidhyayed KSTS) vaya. 
bhaksasya yat phalam, ‘one should meditate on the Eastern face; such 
fruit as is obtained by one who eats only air... We are inclined to take 
abhidhyanat therefore as though it were a third singular Optative (cf. 
3:18c and 3:31a above and 4:4cd and 4:71a). For the cruxed syllables, 
several suggestions for emendation have been proposed, for instance, 
that we could correct to vayubhaksam upasthitam ‘that punya of those 
who eat [only] air’, assuming a genitive plural (the suggestion of Csaba 
DEZSÓ), but none seems wholly satisfying. 


3:44b-45 ‘And in the same way [one should meditate upon] the southern 
[face of ISvara], [which is] like a dark cloud, with tawny brows, mous- 
tache and eyes, with a face terrible by its wrinkled brow, skull-bearing 
and adorned with snakes; one should visualise the southern face as 
Bhairava/many-formed (?bahurüpam), bearing matted locks’ 


The expression bahurüpa could be taken as evidence that these faces 
were homologised with the brahmamantras, since it can be used as a 
synonym for the mantra AGHORA; but we have not interpreted it as 
AGHORA for the reasons presented in our note on 3:42-44a above. 


3:46 '[It acts] for the destruction of all bad [deeds/creatures ?]; it destroys 
plagues and fevers. When meditated upon, it destroys at once poisons, 
possessing demons and other such creatures? 


When the Southern face later came to be associated with the AGHORA, 
that mantra became the default mantra for expiations (prayascitta); 
but, as Nirajan KAFLE has pointed out (lecture on the occasion of 
the first “Early Tantra” Workshop in Kathmandu in 2008), when we 
examine what is said about the brahmamantras in the Nisvāsa (in 
other words in the Guhyasütra, for they are not introduced before); 
we find no obvious trace of such an association. In the kalpas devoted 
to the ritual uses of each of the brahmamantras in Guhyasütra 14, WO 


find 70 evidence that AGHORA has become specialised in the way ४४ 
might expect. 


3:47 The yogin, free of ageing and death, flames like fire, strides throug? 
all worlds, he succeeds in siddhi (sidhyate), he becomes Siva.’ 


3:48-49 Tn should visualise the Western face as a white, three-eyed < 
[bolding] Tosary and water-pot, [capable of] bestowing divine D 
[Even] if he were to have killed thousands of living beings and Dao! 


Translation of the Nayasutra Ee 


hundreds of wives of other men, he is free of taint 


i i ; pure, he succe 
in siddhi, he becomes Siva? , eds 


3:50 ‘And (tatha) [one should next visualise] the two-eyed northern face 
with a blue water-lily in [one] hand; from meditating on it, the cu 
universe comes under one's control, there is no doubt? 


The text is ambiguous here as to whether this is a female or merely 
a feminine (but male) face. In Kushana images this face is that of 
a woman (and not a male VAMADEVA). It is possible that there are 
meant to be two blue water-lilies, since the faces of the other directions 
have an attribute for each hand. 


3:51 ‘He may radiate heat, he may rain, he may create, he may re- 
sorb—whatever supernatural power he desires to obtain will accrue 
[to him] who meditates [on this face] for one year. 


3:52-53 ‘On the head [of the four above-mentioned faces] one should in- 
variably visualise a white [1806] with spear/trident in hand (śūla- 
hastam), bearing matted locks, with a tiger-skin and sacred thread 
(vyaghrayajfiopavitena), [holding] rosary and water-pot, with a vina 
and an hour-glass drum in his hands, with a serpent as sacred thread 
(nagayajfiopavitinam). One should always visualise [this] Mahesvara 
with the moon on his head and with an upright penis’ 


As indicated in our notes above, this may not be a fifth face: there is 
no mention of a word such as vaktra, the description mentions body 
ornaments and attributes (e.g. ithyphallicism) but not eyes or facial 
features, and it includes five hand-held implements, where the earlier 
four faces have only have two. We may note also that the figure is de- 
scribed as a vigraha in 3:54 below. Judit TORzSOK (paper at the 3rd 
“Early Tantra” Workshop in Hamburg in 2010) therefore concludes 
that, rather than describing another face, this is a description of the 
body of Mahegvara (see TORZSOK 2013:143). Ksemaraja, however, 
assumes it to be Sadagiva’s fifth, upper face, and in the Kashmirian 
recension of the Svacchanda (though not in the Nepalese recension); 
we find sitam mirdhni changed to sitam ürdhvam, ‘the P 
per [face]’ (12:135c). Alexis SANDERSON has suggested MR y 
Tantra” Workshop in Pondicherry 2009) that it may be m emn 
be visualised as a miniature image of Isvara standing or sitting 


headdress of the four-faced divinity. 


Nisz 
: *Svasatattvasamhite 


It is decidedly odd that the figure’s sacred thread should be PEN 
tioned twice, and that the first mention could be held to Suggest 
something impossible or unlikely: a sacred thread made of a tiger 
or tiger-skin (vyaghrayajfiopavitena). In place of this attribute, the 
Svacchanda reads vyaghracarmaparidhanam (Appendix II, 12:1363) 
and it is tempting to place that in our text, which would obviate the 
difficulty of repetition (or contradiction, if one assumes that vyaghra 
qualifies the sacred thread) with nagayajnopavitinam in the next line. 
We have not done so because the Vinasikhatantra has the expression 
vyaghrayajnopavitinam (in the context of a visualisation of Devadeva) 
in 100b. 


As Peter BISSCHOP has pointed out to us (e-mail of 18.viii.2011), 
the fact that this full figure rises up above the other heads suggests 
the image from Bhita referred to as ‘Paiicavaktra Siva’ by KREISEL 
(1986:54-65, Anhang, plates A 1a-f). This shows half the body of 

iva rising out of the middle of four faces. He has matted locks, a 
sacred thread, his right hand is raised, he has a water-pot in his left 
hand and his erect penis is carved out in shallow relief below the level 
of the four heads. The placement of the four faces seems not to match 
our description, even if we were to assume that the face designated 
‘Saumya-Aspekt’ by KREISEL might perhaps be Ardhanariga. But, 
as the various discussions to which KREISEL refer show, it does not 
neatly fit any familiar pattern. He describes it (1986:54) as ‘[e]ines 
der frühesten Zeugnisse des Bilderkults in Indien und zugleich der äl- 
testen mehrfigurigen Darstellungen...” and dates it on the basis of its 
sculptural style and the palaeography of its short inscription to the 
decades around the turn of the Christian era (1986:54-5)- 


3°54 ‘One who constantly visualises this body [of Maheávara], [for him all 
desired Supernatural powers arise. With this very body of his [in us 
m DEOR he becomes] omniscient and able to adopt any form 2 
will? 


The first half of the verse is anacoluthic: supplying a tasya restore? 
sense. 


9:55 56 ‘Alternatively a six-month super-natural power may arise throug 
[meditation on] the sound of a bell; desired supernatural powe! m 2 
worlds arises. Whoever meditates on two lingas(?), together with a 
previous seed-syllable [viz. that of Iśvara], after one month he ur : 
spontaneously] see a subtle [i.e. usually invisible?] linga above p 


Translation of the Nayasutra 3 


For this sequence (bell-sound, two lingas and then a süksmaliri a) 
also Uttarasutra 5:30-31. There too, the two-linga meditation Mad 
to be an alternative manner of getting isvarr-siddhi. The meditation 
on two lingas is unfamiliar to us and receives no explanation: it prob- 
ably seemed odd too to the redactors of the Svacchanda, eee it 
has disappeared, for lingadvayan tu yo dhyayet has been replaced by 
lingadhyanam tu yah kuryat (12:392). 


3:57 ‘On seeing that [subtle linga], which is transparent like pure crystal, 
he is released; and supernatural power will arise [for him] in this world 
of humans [itself] after six months’ 


3:58-60 ‘A siddhi that shows the triple world [arises]; [everything] becomes 
manifest to him. He can stride about between all worlds; he becomes 
equal to I$vara. The sun and moon are present [as his] eyes; the wheels 
of his one chariot are the bhütas; the tanmatras are the horses; mind 
is taught to be the charioteer; ahankara is the warrior; the gunas are 
his great bow; the faculties (indriyani) are the arrows; the [hunted] 
animal is adharma (?) 


We had originally translated 59abc thus: "The sun and moon are 
present [as his] eyes(?), [being] the wheels of his one chariot; the bhutas 
and tanmatras are the horses;”, a translation that involved the sun and 
moon being both the Lord's eyes and the wheels of his chariot. Our 
present translation avoids this difficulty; in the Svacchanda (Appendix 
II, 12:142) the difficulty has been obviated in a different way: there 
the second pàda has been corrected to read cakre vai dhi rathasya un 
"the buddhi [forms] the wheels of his chariot". This change gives a róle 
to the buddhi, which is otherwise omitted. 


Perhaps the intended sense of yodha (for y oddhà) 
Csaba KISS notes that there is a similar passage in :no involved 
in which the pudgalatman drives a chariot (five atmans being ण E 
altogether). But the passage in question (Kubjikamata 2535) is at 
closely parallel. Of course we could understand the hunted anima bl 
be dharma rather than adharma, in which s you ene 
be the object of capture (and not prey to be pa Ret r Sai- 
Yoxocut has reminded us, would then recall the Vedic oe apie 
va) myth of the sacrifice (yajria) taking the form of a mrga ner 
BisscHoP YoxocH et al. 2014:44, fn. 103). Of CAES imd to be 
pect dharma to be represented as a bull and the deer or an 


क erhaps 
rather the form taken by yajfia; but such identifications are P 


is rather “hunter”. 
the Kubjikamata, 


Nisyz 
" Svasatattvasamhits 


more fluid than one might suppose: we may note, for example, that 
prescriptions for dhyana sometimes use the term veda (not Yajfia) to 
refer to the antelope held in one of Siva’s hands in (originally) South 
Indian iconography, which might or might not be an allusion to the 
myth of the fleeing yajna.747 

Peter BisscHOP notes that a similar metaphorical passage in 
the Bhagavatapurana has the indriyas identified with the ar- 
rows(12.11:16ab): indriyani Saran ahur akutir asya syandanam. Jy 
that passage, however, everything is equated with parts of Visnu as 
the supreme person, and there is therefore no prey. 


3:61-62 ‘In that case (yady evam), [it is] I$vara, the supreme Lord, residing 
in the heart, who is constantly engaged in play, acting with meritorious 
and bad [acts] in accordance with his will: “I am not the agent; I am 
not bound; everything is caused to be done by the Lord”—with such 
an awareness of vara [as the true agent], one should engage in all 
one's actions.’ 


Alternatively, one might wish to interpret the structure as follows: ‘If 
he [viz. the sadhaka as I$vara?] plays in this fashion, with Iévara, the 
supreme Lord, constantly residing in his heart, acting with meritorious 
and bad [acts] in accordance with his will, [then he will realise:] “I am 


not the agent; I am not bound; everything is caused to be done by the 
Lord"... 


3:63 'It is you who are located in my heart as the instigator with respect 
to my agency in meritorious and non-meritorious action. I have taken 
refuge [in you]: there is no bondage for me as a result of agency: 


We might instead have assumed Saranapannah as a passive past par- 
ticiple of a single-notion verb (“You alone, being one in whom I have 
taken refuge, are located in my heart, ...”); but the Kashmirian version 

of the Svacchanda does not unpack the syntax in such a way (12:1460): 

tam aham Saranam praptah. A problem with our interpretation is that 
d T pointed out, for instance, this dhyana on p.70 of & collection of 
aiyalam commentary called simply Dhyanaslokaririal: 


sphutitanalinasamstham maulibaddhendurekha- 
gal adamrtarasardram candravahnyarkanetram 
svakarakalitamudrap&savedaksama]am 
sphatikarajatamuktagauram igam namami 


Translation of the Nayasutra 


463 
we have taken tvam eva with the previous line and assume the elli 
sis of an accusative tvam. We could instead have treated tvam i 


nominative for accusative. 


3:64 “When Sadasiva has been understood, with His eight divisions, with 
respect to [viz. "in"?] the day, night, the semesters, through (?) the 
movement from South to North [at the solstices], in the equinoctial 
point (?), He is liberatory. 


Note that the structure here has been expanded and altered both in 
the Nepalese and Kashmirian texts of the Svacchanda (Appendix II, 
12:147-8). Our text, however, is difficult to construe since the case- 
endings do not mark the intended structure of the sentence. Presum- 
ably the verse refers to Sadasiva as the root-mantra of the tantra (the 
eight divisions of which are taught in Mulasitra 6) being meditated 
upon as fused with the breath present in different parts of the micro- 
cosmic yogic body homologised with the macrocosm. Day and night, 
therefore, refer to the ingoing and outgoing breaths (cf. Uttarasutra 
5:37), and they are mentioned to indicate that while breathing in one 
should focus on a mantra-form of Sadasiva. The uninflected form visu- 
va, used to fit the metrical cadence, we assume to be a locative. This 
“equinox” in the body we take to be the moment when the soul-breath, 
meditated upon as fused with the mantra, is in a place of rest between 
the left and right tubes. Whether there is or is not supposed to bea 
central tube here is not clear (cf. Uttarasiitra 5:38 and annotation). 


3:65-66 'Sadàáiva is to be understood as that in which Nada comes to rest; 
he is like the sound of a flute: hear the power of the yoga of meditation 
[on him]. In one month [the yogin] will become beautiful; in the second 
month he will become eloquent; in the third he will behold Siddhas; 
in the fourth he will have celestial sight.’ 


3:67 'S i ined in this world of men after half a year, 
7 "Supernatural power is obtained in this w WEE Te 


there is no doubt. And after a year, divine Po [ 
in two years, union [with the divine] (sayojyam). 


3:68-69 ‘He should form the posture [called] “six-face” [which sate 
Closing ears, eyes and nostrils with the fingers] and n Pi 
Sadāśiva. Sadagivam is seen as tenfold by colour. per do 
low, black, green, tawny, blue, mottled, crystalline, beaut! 
mam). 


464 


Nisvasatattvasamhiss 


Note that the six-faced karana is described in an inserted verge hee 
in the Kashmirian version of the Svacchanda (not in the Nepalese): 
12:152c-153b (see Appendix II). To arrive at ten colours, we would 
need to take manorama as a colour, but it is not clear what colour 
it might be. As for the neuter form sadasivam, could it have been 
deliberately chosen to express the abstract nature of the deity? 0. 
should we understand it after all to be a masculine accusative and 
suppose that the passive form dr$yate has irregularly been used here 
as though it were active: “[the yogin] sees SadaSiva"? Or should we 
correct to sadagivah? Or understand sadàsivam to be intended to 
be equivalent to sadasivah on the grounds that there is no need to 
distinguish masculine and neuter forms? 


3:70—71 ‘On seeing all these forms, the wise one should reject them. [Fi- 


nally] only one should be grasped; the others are subordinate. It is 
like the orb of the moon, like à mass of lightning, its form twinkling 
like a star; [this] bindu is the mark of the Lord’ 


We assume that grhyet is here intended as the passive grhyeta. 


3:72 ‘nivrtti, pratistha, vidya and santi—all four kalas are thus to be 


known as bindu, [i.e. as] Ivara. 


Here the Svacchanda too (12:157) lists only these four kalas, but it 
does not, in the KSTS version, use the expression kalacatustayo Pi 
an expression which suggests that only four exist, and furthermore 
it proceeds to describe five Saktis. Note that this description of five 
Saktis (in Svacchanda 12:158-60) draws again on the Nayasutra, for see 
4:33ff below. (Svacchanda 12:160-68, in which further levels are added 
above, appears to be an addition of the redactor of the Svacchanda.) 
The fifth kala of this list, absent throughout the Ni$vasa, appears ™ 
later works (including elswhere in the Svacchanda, e.g. in 3:140 and 
4:244) with the name Santyatrta. One could consider emending with 
the Nepalese MS of the Svacchanda here, to kalacatustayopetam. 


5 later Saiva literature, the five kalas are so often homologised Y 
different, things, and particularly with five tranches of the cosmos, E 
it is difficult to know what they really designate: see TAK2, 8.४. m 
meaning 6. Throughout the siitras of the Ni$vasa, it seems that t 4 
are still only four and that they are the four powers of Tévara; c 
15 identified with bindu. Their names suggest that they might he 


ics r : rent 
originated as names for aspects of I$vara when engaged 17 diffe 


Translation of the Nayasütra ^ 
405 
cosmogonic activities, pratistha and nivrtti being creati 
o : FF E : reation 
tion/destruction, Santi being the state of rest B and resorp- 


CGU fe after destruction, and 
vidya being perhaps a phase of knowledge that would need to mm 
creation. 


For bindu being visualised with ten colours and being made up of 
these four kalas, cf. these verses in the forty-fourth chapter of the 
first satka of the Jayadrathayamala 1.44 (f. 352r of NGMPP A 996/1; 
1.45.166c-168b of Olga SERBAEVA SARAOGI's e-text). | 


pürve binduh samakhyata$ caturdhà vyaktibhedatah 

nivrttakhyah pratisthakhyo vidyakhyah antigo 'parah 

candrardhamadhyago jüeyah prasphuratkiranakulah (em.; 
*kulam e-text) 

daSavarnah samakhyatah Sukladikramabhedatah 


After the colophon for this chapter we read that the number of thirty- 
two-syllable units of texts copied is 775. But since this chapter is 
closely paralleled in the Svacchanda, it seems unlikely that we have 
lost large quantities of text. More likely is that “775” is simply an 
error for “75”, which is quite close to the actual number of granthas. 


4:1 “The goddess spoke: 
What is nivrtti, and pratistha, and [what are] vidya and Santi? Tell 
me [their] nature truthfully. And what is held to be the difference 
between [these] kalas?’ 
Instead of taking tattvam ... brahi in this way, one could translate “Do 
you (tvam) tell me that (tat)”. 


4:2 ‘The lord spoke: 
nivrtti should be understood to be prakrti [viz. the sound homologised 
with it, namely 0(?)]; pratistha is held to be sakala [viz. the sound 
homologised with Sadagiva(?), namely प्रा; vidya is purified by [i.e. 
solved by identification with(?)] M at its head; Santi has maya [viz. M] 
as its solution (visuddhika): 

sumption that this is 


This attempt at a translation makes the as Se dd 
क्काम ER and that the mantra being raised, which es 
of elements representing the four kalas, may be HUMM, um 4 3 Ti 
mantra referred to as the CATUSKALA below (4:4; 4:7) EE 3 ie 
tion further depends on the assumption that sakala is e dem 
to the level of Sadasiva, which is homologised with H (for w 


Niéoz 
3 Suasatattvasamhirs 


Uttarasütra 1:11 and 1:16). It is conceivable that the verse is after 
all speaking of an ordinary pranava (om), which is sometimes said to 
be CATUSKALA, whose four parts are here homologised with the four 
kalas. But CATUSKALA is also found elsewhere as a name for HUM (e.g. 
commentary on the Saradatilaka 2:77). 

The interpretation of visuddhika (and Suddha [for "Suddha?] in amái- 
rasuddha) to refer to the “solution” of a symbol or code is uncertain; 
such a usage is typical of Buddhist commentarial literature (see SFER- 
RA 1999) and may be unparalleled in early Saiva sources. Alterna- 
tively, one could split maya from visuddhika and take the latter as an 
adjective meaning “pure 1.6. without a following vowel]”. As for the 
element Suddha, that too could be understood as not forming part of 
a compound: “pure [i.e. without a preceding vowel]” Or it could per- 
haps instead be intended to qualify vidya and to distinguish it from 
the non-pure vidya, namely the tattva of Uttarasutra 1:11. Confus- 
ingly, that same tattva came later to be known as Suddhavidyatattva 
to distinguish it from the yet lower vidyatattva among the karicukas. 
The lower vidya among the kaficukas is absent, however, in the earliest 
sutras in the Nisvasa, and when it does make its appearance ( Guhya- 
sutra 7:236) the Ni$vasa's original vidyatattva becomes distinguished 
with the label mahavidya (7:249). 


4:3 ‘If one knows Sadasiva to be thus, situated in what is pure and impure 
(?), one is then released from all bonds; one goes to the diseaseless 
[state of] Siva: 


Suddhàsuddhe could conceivably be emended to suddhasuddhaih, per- 
haps referring to the kalas as being pure and impure. Even without 
such an emendation, perhaps this could be taken to refer to the whole 
universe, which is partly pure and partly impure (and which pense 
even at this early stage of speculation, is to be homologised with the 
four kalas). 


4:4 'He who meditates on the CATUSKALA [acquires] siddhi through yor 
Through meditating on [the CATUSKALA as] white, red, yellow, OF Lx 
the siddhi that one desires [may be attained]? 

Yoga here could conceivably refer to “union with Siva” (in view oh 

Previous half-line), or simply to meditative practice. 

1S PRSE to correct *krsnandhyanat to "krsnadhyanat 
e should avoid doing so, for cf. 3:8०, 3:31 and 3:42, 


but perhaps 
where abhi- 


Translation of the Nayasutra P 


dhyànat takes a direct object with the accusative. Of course in the 
other cases, the accusative could be supposed to be governed by the 
abhi®, and so the retained accusative may seem more suspicious here 


yathepsita perhaps refers to the fact that siddhi in the realms of magic 
corresponding to these colours can be attained. One could, however 
understand "through meditating on [the parts of the CATUSKALA as 
respectively] white, red, yellow, black” (cf. Svacchanda 3:139); the 
colours reappear, in a different order, in 4:34 below (=Svacchanda 
12:159). 


4:5 “Without losing his [current] body he attains union with Siva [or Siva- 
liberation(?) and] he performs wonders, exactly as he wishes, at any 
time (sada), upon the earth. 


4:6 ‘Giving, [visiting] sacred sites, religious observances, bathing, restraint, 

recitation, worship, Vedic sacrifice, the religious practices particular 
to one’s asrama—[all these are only for one] who does not know the 
kalas” 
This sentence, if correctly interpreted, is uncomfortably elliptical, but 
the addition of a tasya would restore sense, and we have seen compa- 
rable instances of anacoluthon elsewhere. We assume that in asrama- 
dharmmah the vowel at the bridge between the two elements of the 
compound has been lengthened in order to yield the regular metrical 
pattern of the pathya. 


4:7ab ‘One who thoroughly knows the CATUSKALA is not stained by [the 
fruits of] misdeeds.’ 
Although the general sense seems clear, one could repair the lacu- 
na in different ways, for instance na lipyet sarvapapakaih (assuming 
lipyet to be a metrically required shortening of lipyeta) or with 2 4 
lipyeta ca papakaih, or even, as Nirajan KAFLE has उ i 
na lipyet pupyapspakail, for cf. this half-line of the s arika 
(T.17, p. 505) na lipyate punyapapaih svacaryasyapi mocakab. 


4:7c-9b ‘The first kala is [called] Suksma; the second is Ga i d 
is [the third, which is] situated (7) on the head [since it 1 मर amah 
the fourth is Amrtamrta. These are taught to PTS e who 
Power. Those who know these are liberated: how much more on 


A lis . , 
has seen their nature [through visualisation?]- 


E Ni$vasatattuasam ija 


Cf. Nigvasakarika 47:14c-15b (in T.17, pp. 501-2), where the aa 
are not all the same: 


suksma nama kala ya tu susuksma ca dvitiyaka 
amrtamrta trtiya ca bijamrtam tatah param 


4:9cdef '?' 
The use of the word sphota is intriguing here, but we cannot decipher 
enough to interpret what is said. 


4:10 '[This is (?)] the highest reality, on attaining which one does not return; 
once someone has seen Maha$sakti [viz. the CATUSKALA?], [then] they 
[the learned] know him to be a guru, equal to Siva? 


This assumes the conjecture etat paramasadbhavam. The second half 
of the verse could be interpreted: “The wise say that one who has seen 
it is a Guru, equal to Siva, of great powers". 


4:11 "The goddess spoke: 
How can there be yoga [viz. meditative focus] upon Siva, who is with- 
out [the] support [of body]? Moreover, once the [yogic state called] 
samarasa has arisen, how can one attain Siva-hood?’ 


For the state of samarasa, a state of Siva-samarasya, see 4:53ff below. 
The expression appears to refer to a state that may also be called 
Saktisamarasa: see 4:61 below and Uttarasütra 5:4 and 5:36. We 
have wondered whether éaktisamarasa was intended to be different 
from [Siva-]samarasa, but we have not found clear evidence that it is. 
Uttarasütra 5:36ff suggest that just one mental state is intended. 


4:12-14b "The lord spoke: 
What may be seen by the eye, that about which it is possible to speak, 
those [thoughts] which the mind thinks, what the buddhi discerns, and 
those things which are appropriated by ahankara, and whatever im 
form—wherever [all these] are not [to be found], there He [viz- m 
should be sought [while remaining] in one's own body. [This one E. 


: १ in whichever place one is, and whichever walk of life one is attache 
०. 


Cf. Svacchanda 12:163-165b. We must either assume that gocaram y 


to be construed with the instrumental or that vācayāļh] is intended 95 
a genitive. 


| 


Translation of the Nayasutra 


469 


4:14c-15 ‘The svastika, the lotus-posture (padmaka), the bhadra, the half- 


4:16 


moon posture (ardhacandra), the stretched out posture (prasaritam) 
the back-rest-assisted posture (sapaSrayam), the aiijalika, the प 
band[-assisted] posture (yogapattam), at ease—[thus] the principal 
eight seated positions [for meditation] have been briefly proclaimed? 
This list of eight is given also in Nigvasamukha 4:49c-50b, but there 
too the sixth is doubtful. Note that the Kirana (58:4-5) also teaches 
eight (asanastaka), but its list differs. In our text yathasukha is not, 
as elsewhere (e.g. Svacchanda 7:291), a name for an asana. For more 
information about what Saiva sources have to say about the posture 
of the legs for yoga, see the annotation on Parakhya 14:4-9 (GOODALL 
2004:348-51). 


‘The mantrin should adopt one of these [postures], venerate Mahesvara 
by deed and thought, with one mental focus, well controlled’ 
Perhaps a brief puja, such as an astapuspika rite, is intended here. 
Also possible is that karmana manasa was intended to mean karmana 
manasena, “by mental action", in which case this would be an ir- 
regular (aiga) usage. Note that the parallel here in the Svacchanda 
(12:165c-166b) also suggests a purely mental activity: 


sukhasanah samyatatma ekacittah samahitah 
svacchandan tu anusmrtya abhavam bhavayet sada 


4:17ab ‘After first offering obeisance to the previous acaryas of his tradition 


4:17c-18b ‘He should concentrate his thoughts/mi 


he should always meditate on the absence [of all that should not be in 
his mind(?)]. 

Perhaps abhavam bhavayet sada here should rather be interpreted: 
“he should constantly cultivate [awareness of] the absence [of external 
objects]”. Ksemaraja comments on abhavam bhavayet sada when X 
occurs in Svacchanda 12:166ab (quoted in the previous note) thus: 
citprakasavyatiriktam na kificid api kadapy astiti pratyabhijaniya’- 
The mention of earlier teachers may be missing from the parallel in 
Svacchanda 12, but cf. also Svacchanda 7:289-90: 


devadevam samabhyarcya bhairavam sai 
purvacaryan namaskrtva yukto dhyanaparayanat 
nd in his head and fix 


ae into 
his eyes [to look] upwards. [While he is] practising thus, Qus 


the fourth state is broken through: 


7४४४०८ i 
: asatattvasamhitz 


We have assumed that abhyasamanah, though nominative, is intended 
to function as a locative absolute, but one could instead assume that 
vibhidyate is intended to have active sense here (“he breaks through 
the door into the fourth state”). 

Ksemaraja explicitly identifies the “door of the fourth” as the brahma- 
randhra in his Svacchandatantroddyota ad 4:449: turyadvàram tu. 
ryanubhavapradhanam brahmarandhram, "The door of the fourth 
[state] is the aperture of Brahman, where the experience of the fourth 
state predominates" Presumably this is what is meant here. Of, also 
Uttarasütra 5:15. (For futher discussion of the term, see TAK III s.y. 
turyadvara.) 


4:18c-1g ‘There arises [for him] there a sensation/awareness/sign 
(pratyayam) comparable to the touch of wind. Or like [the crawl- 
ing of] an ant [upon him], or like being pricked by a thorn. Smokeless 
burning fire flames in his body? 


Cf. Nayasütra 4:142 below. 


4:20 'À divine smell will arise and a divine voice begin [to speak]. He knows 
whatever he thinks about, even [in the realm of] unknown sastras: 


Cf. Nayasutra 3:16 above and cf. Malinivijayottara 2:16cd: sar- 
vasastrarthavettrtvam akasmac casya jayate. 


4:21 ‘He becomes radiant, full of beauty, ascending [into the air] he moves 
about. After three months conversation with Siddhas comes about [in 
his experience]. 


This interpretation presupposes that sambhasyam has been irregu- 
larly used here in the sense of sambhasa; but it is possible that we 
should emend to sambhasyah and त. * After three months 
he becomes worthy of conversation with Siddhas”. For prajayate in 
the sense of “become” (rather than arise"), cf. for instance Nayasütra 
3:21 above. (This usage is widespread, if not actually common, 7 


non-tantric literature too, but not apparently reflected by MONIER- 
WILLIAMS.) 


Faaa He sees [all creatures] from Brahmā down to blades of grass with 
divine vision; within a year he sees a crescent moon above [his oyi 

head. Above that [crescent moon?] he sees Siva at peace and becomes 

क E N omniscient, able to change form at will and becomes eg 
va. 


Translation of the Nayasutra i 
1 


The expression ardhacandra appears literally to mean ‘half-moon’ but 
by convention it refers rather to a digit of the crescent moon ; 


4:24 ‘This quintessence of visualisation practice, which is beyond the yoga 
of the six “limbs”, [has been taught] to you under the name nirālamba 
having [just] known [about] which a person will not grieve? ; 


Instead of interpreting sadanga-dhyana-varjitam to mean “beyond the 
yoga of the six ‘limbs’”, one could prefer to understand “which does 
not contain the six parts that constitute [regular] yoga (dhyana)"; but 
the position of dhyana in the compound makes such an interpretation 
difficult. Another possibility, suggested to us by James MALLINSON, 
is that we should understand “which is different from the dhyana of 
sadanga[yoga]. This is the first reference to six-limbed yoga (here 
dhyàna). There is no explanation, which presumably means that the 
anticipated audience was supposed already to be familiar with six- 
linbed yoga. We have assumed that niralambeti is an instance of 
a pratipadika used to give a name, followed by an iti, but we could 
perhaps assume a double sandhi with niralambe in the locative and 
interpret: “this quintessence of visualisation of [Siva as] supportless”. 


4:25 ‘Moreover, a person [actually] engaged in meditation [and not merely 
knowing about it, as mentioned in the previous verse] although not a 
Siddha [i.e. an especially talented person for yoga] becomes Siva; and 
he plays around in samsara like Paramesvara [himself]. 


4:26—27b "The goddess spoke: 
[You] should tell the nature of Sakti, and yoga [with that Sakti], O 
Maheśvara; [which is(?)] the nature of reality, whole, Be form that 
is] easily comprehensible, and not at length—tell me all t succinctly, 
out of your grace.’ 


4:2'7cdef ‘The lord spoke: 
Listen, o goddess,... by perceiving the fourfold form of Sakti he can 


liberate a soul? 


Because of the missing text we cannot be sure that thi 
meant. 


s is what is 


4 ak is Sakti, then one 
4:28-9 ‘If one does not see the meditation focus that is zm य 


cannot become a guru who destroys the bonds. editation-focus 
er (sadhakah), once he has perceived this supreme EE equal to Siva 
(mahàlaksam) accompanied by the éaktibija, becom 


Nisvasa ; 
m tattvasamhitz 


and, seeing it, he can liberate [all] creatures. Otherwise no sa, dhakag 
3 . 

can be liberated or can liberate. 

It is not made clear what the éaktibija is, but we assume it to be x 


CATUSKALA mantra given at the beginning of the chapter. As we shall 


see in verse 34 below, it too has four colours (cf. 4:4 above). 


4:30 ‘[For one] who, engaged in yoga, meditates [on this], [with Senses] wel] 
controlled, for half a year, supernatural power [arises] in [this] world 
of men; he becomes equal to Siva? 


For the restitution, cf. Nayasutra 3:67. 


4:31-3 ‘Having bathed thoroughly, having become pure, he should ven- 

erate Mahegvara [and] do obeisance to earlier Siddhas; he should be 
concentrated, focussed on his meditation. In a deserted place, devot- 
ed to his guru, focussed, resorting with conscious effort to faith, [he 
should adopt] a seated posture in accordance with comfort. Looking 
into the sky with closed eyes, he sees a great radiance which is like the 
rising of the sun: [it is] Sakti [who] is appearing [as] bending [before 
him] (prahvena [= prahvatvena])? 
Note that 4:33ff have been adapted as Svacchanda 12:158-68. Instead 
of conjecturing asanan tu, which requires one either to supply a verb 
or to take asanan as a further object to alambya, we could have chosen 
to adopt K's asannas tu and to understand it as an irregular form of 
the participle, or we could have chosen to emend to àsinas tu. 


The tentative restitution Sakti prahvena (understanding $aktih) is un- 
certain. Other possibilities considered were bhaktiprahvena (in which 
case the expression, although instrumental, would presumably describe 
the practitioner, unless one should supply or restore a noun such 85 
manasa) and Saktiprahve ca, “to one who is bowed before Sakti, she 
appears..." 


4:34 Beautiful, [this] supreme Sakti is to be seen as yellow, red, black, 
crystalline; on seeing her, he goes to [the state of] Siva? 
The second half of this verse corresponds to Svacchanda 12:160cd; and 


fae parallel ends there, for the Svacchanda then adds a fifth (transcend- 
me?) Sakti called Vyapini, and then further levels of subtle univer?" 


. . . 1 e 
Once aga In, 1t is possible that what is meant here instead is that i 
practitioner should see each “colour”, rejecting them in turn, Bh 
sees the “colour” called “manorama” 


Translation of the Nayasüutra d 


4:35-6 ‘By practising this for just a month, there arise signs of [attainment 
of] power: intelligence, beauty, good health; and he grasps what i 
said [just] once. Devas, Danavas and Gandharvas are perceived iis 
two months; there arise [from him] all manner of divine or non-divine 

teachings (varimayam). 
For the restitution of the last line, cf. Guhyasütra 8:132cd: divyadivyan 
tu yat kincid vanmayam samprasiyate. Cf. also Nigvasakarika Tab 
in jüanakanda 20, as given by T.17, p.122 bis: divyadivyani ca yat 
kificit vanmayam tvatprasütijam. (We had earlier considered such 
possibilities as divyadivyan tu yat kimcij jayam tasya pravarttate and 
divyadivyan tu yat kificit trimasena pravarttate.) 


4:37-38b ‘Within six months the [eight] powers beginning with that of 
becoming atomic in size (animadya) arise; the Siddha becomes omni- 
scient and he becomes equal to Siva. Whatever is taking place any- 
where in the triple universe, that is directly visible to him? 


Cf. Nayasutra 3:22cd and note ad loc. 


4:38cd ‘He who finds Sakti in this way can link [other souls] with the 
supreme level. 


K was perhaps thinking of another interpretation: “He who knows 
[things] thus through Sakti can link souls with the supreme tattva.” 


4:39 ‘Those who do not see her situated in the sign, [even though] they 
may perform diksa, do not bestow liberation. Upon seeing her, how- 
ever, that best of teachers may bestow the grace [of liberation through 
initiation] upon people: 

This seems to be a reformulation of 4:28 above. It is for this reason 
that we have rejected an earlier hypothesis, which required pour 
ing laksasthah (nom. pl.): “Those who, [though] “standing in E T 5 
do not see [her, viz. Sakti], cannot perform initiation and [thereby 
erate” 


We have assumed that diksakari is intended as a plural. But > a 
take this as another anacoluthic relative construction, pees is 
plural and ending in the singular. In that case, one could BIET 
mokgadah, although it is perhaps possible that moksada re singular. 
and intended, on the analogy of the form pāśahā in 4:28, as ME 
Note that the syllables laksastha could conceivably be read as J un 
in N: “Or, those who don't see the goal (Jaksam [cune 


7४८४००८ 
s vasatattuasamhitz 


they perform diksa do not bestow liberation.” 


‘Filled with Siva’s Sakti, he may initiate all creatures, by sight, voice 
touch, mind, or water.’ ) 
Cf. 4:78 below. The expression udakena could perhaps refer to an 
abhiseka, but it is more likely that it refers to padodaka, one of Several 
forms of initiation requiring little or no contact that may be offered 
to lower classes, and which consists in the initiating guru offering the 
water used for washing his feet to initiands to drink: see SANDERSON 
2009:288 and fn. 688. 

We assume that sparsa is intended as an instrumental (perhaps on the 
analogy of sprsa), though it could be a truncated ablative. 


4:40 


4:41-42b ‘He, [because he is] one who causes [others] to reach the other 
side of samsara, is deserving of worship in the same way that I am. 
Those others who are known as sadhakas and those who have mastered 
the Samhitas are not capable of liberating, devoid [as they are] of 
knowledge of Sakti. 


sadhakanye has been taken to be an instance of double sandhi (of 
sadhakah + anye) but one could also consider emending to sadhaka 
ye. 


Here, between folio 37 and folio 38, we wondered whether at least one 
folio might have gone missing, perhaps several. It is just conceivable 
that nothing is lost, but we note that 1) the text seems discontinuous; 
2) foliation has become confused (the recto of f. 38 has at some time 
been labelled as the verso of 41); 3) there isn’t enough space at the end 
of f. 37v for the letters we require for the first verse on f. 381, which 
begins directly with naiva dehena; 4) the number of verses recorde 
in the colophon at the end of this chapter (466) is very much higher 
than the number preserved (161). On the other hand, we have about 
443 verses in total for the whole of the Nayasitra, and it is conceivable 
that 466 is intended as the total tally for the Nayasütra, just 95 T 
have a total tally for the thirty-two-syllable units in all five chapters 
the Uttarasütra given at the end of the Uttarasütra. Most folios ps 
between 35 and 38 verses, however, so if only one folio is missing: E 
We would expect the number of units of thirty-two syllables to १ 
little higher than 466. 

What suggests, on the other hand, that there really has been no 108 


is the early letter-numeral foliation, which begins to be visible 1° 


Translation of the Nayasutra 
475 


f. 62. If that foliation dates from the time of the copying of the text 
as it appears to do (an analysis of the inks used for eri foli to 
might confirm this), and if no folio number was mistakenl ied T 
more than one folio, then the tally of leaves appears to be 00118 r 


4:43—5 '..for he, with this same body, can perform any siddhi he desires; 
he may create and destroy the universe; he plays and strides bat 
[between worlds]. Taking on various forms, he performs deeds at will. 
Attaining omniscience, he becomes equal to Siva... finds... 


We may note that this is unlike Atimargic notions in that transcen- 
dence in liberation is abandoned in the pursuit of an active liberated 
state characterised by the importance of power. 


4:46—7 ‘One who quests after knowledge is not worth a sixteenth part of 
[one who practises] yoga. If somebody [even though he may be] defiled 
should practise yoga even for a day, purified from that moment, he is 
released from great delusion/death (mahanidra). This yoga that I have 
taught [you] gives powers and liberation without [the need for] effort.’ 


We assume that mahanidrà is an irregularly formed ablative (maha- 
nidrat) that has been truncated by the loss of its final consonant. ak- 
lesat siddhimoksadah is a rare cliché: we find it as Uttarasutra 5:46b 
(and Satikakalottara 101b, copied from the Uttarasütra). In this rank- 
ing of yoga above knowledge we see perhaps an adumbration of the 
as yet unattested notion that scripture is devoted to the four topics 
(pada) of jñāna, yoga, carya and kriya. 


4:48ab “It should be taught [to a disciple] after twelve years [of the disciple 
residing at the guru's house, or] after three, [if the disciple be of] pure 
[mind]. 
The last word here renders the possible conjecture $uddhena cetasa. 
For the period of years, cf. the note on Uttarasütra 5:46c-47 above. 


4:48c—49b ‘I shall teach you the knowledge: listen ...’ 


Too much text is damaged here for us to guess at what might have 


been expressed in 4:49ab. 
and those 
Anca t : tures], those born of eggs and t 
4:49c—52b 'Stable and moving [crea ]; ee टा करा oF ie 


born of sweat, gross and subtle ones, an 


visible, from Brahma down to blades of grass—the supreme Lord is 


476 


Nisvasatattvasamhiys 


present in his universal form as all of that. Pervading the e 
verse he remains like space filling [all] ‘spaces (vyomesu yomani 
thus the Lord Siva, the supreme cause, 15 all pervasive? 1 


Cf. Svacchanda 11:35¢-36b (quoted here in the apparatus). We may 
note the absence of a strict Saiddhantika dualism, but this is perhaps 
simply because the context here is the yogic cultivation of samarasya, 
and in later Saiva works the states of awareness to be cultivated in 
yoga do not necessarily reflect doctrine. 


4:52cd ‘The [individual] soul remains thus also eternally pervading the 


universe, [composed of] moving and non-moving [beings]: 


For the usage ceta (cetr), cf. Svetasvataropanisat 6:11. As for jagad 
vyàpi caracaram, we may take it as a jumbled compound with the sense 
of caracarajagadvyapi, or we may assume that vyapi is governing a 
direct object. 


4:53-54b ‘Thus one should meditate upon Siva and the [individual] soul 


as one. Thus thinking of all things, and similarly [one’s own] self, as 
like Siva, one becomes devoid of attachment and hatred. 


We suppose that the cvi-formation in ekibhütam (“unified”) is not to 
be taken literally. The sequence of ideas is that we recall that Siva is 
all-pervading, that the soul too is all-pervading and that all creatures 
fill the universe: ergo all things are “one”, 


4:54cd ‘They [scil. those who think in this way] become spotless, pure, full 


4:55cd ‘The whole universe, 


of Siva nature? 


This assumes that we have an anacoluthic shift and that the plural 
subject is intended to be the same as the singular subject of the PIF 
vious half-line. Otherwise we could interpret as follows: “All things 
become pure [for him] and full of Siva-nature.” 


4:55ab ‘He should understand [himself] as having one flavour [with Siva], 


being [as he now is] joined with Siva’ 


For the restitution of the last pada, proposed by Nirajan KAFLE; 
Uttarasütra, 5:43. 


cf. 


moving and unmoving, is thought of (many? 


manam) as being like Siva? 


Translation of the Nayasutra 
477 


T y 
The first two characters of manyamānañ ca are uncertain. The passive 


use of this word would be surprising, and Diwakar ACHARYA therefore 
suggested conjecturing manyammanaá ca (cf. 4:54ab). 


4:56-57b ‘Enemy and friend are equal; brahmin and dog-cooker are 
equal—seeing everything as equal he becomes a Siddha, knowing ev- 
erything to be Siva, decided, with one mental focus, in a mental state 
of immersion in Siva (Sivabhavasamanvitah)? 


Cf. Svacchanda 7:244: samah Satrau ca mitre ca brahmane Svapace 
samah/ tulyadarsi bhaven nityam sarvam sivamayam smaret. Cf. also 
Bhagavadgita 12:18 [= Mahabharata 6.34:18]: samah Satrau ca mitre 
ca tatha manapamanayoh/ sitosnasukhaduhkhesu samah saügavivar- 
jitah. 


4:57C-58 ‘Enemies, fanged [beasts], tigers, bears, lions, apes, cruel [crea- 
tures]... flesh-... harmful ... —he should think of [all these as] one’ 


Various conjectures involving pi$acas and flesh-eaters (pisitasanah) 
have been suggested, but we have been unable to come up with a 
convincing restoration of what might have filled the gaps here. 


4:59 ‘While he thinks thus, vicious beasts will not harm him; and even 

the worst creatures [and] Raksasas will remain (samatisthante [= 
samtisthante?]) peaceful (samaya = Samaya [= Santataya?)).’ 
As the bracketed suggestions reveal, this interpretation seems uncer- 
tain to us. Other suggestions have been made: could samaya mean 
“within a year”? Or could it be intended in the (familiar, lexicalised) 
sense of “close by”? And could sama tisthante be an instance of met- 
rical shortening (rather than lengthening) intended in the sense of 
samam tisthante? In that case we could perhaps interpret “they re- 
main ‘equal’ [i.e. indifferent] to him when close by”. 


4:60—61b 'Siddhas and Gods will fall into his control, like servants. One 
who sees all things as the same and who is pure becomes e to we. 
He sports with celestial Siddhas and [after death] goes to sadasivam. 


The last half-line of this unit is conjectural. One might expect him to 


sport with divine women instead. Perhaps instead of divyasiddhais ca 


à ine divyasi & ca, “[having become] a 
one might consider conjecturing vyasiddha$ ca, " [having 


divine Siddha”, for which cf. Kubjikamata 11:1078b. 


478 Nisvasatattvasamhiss 
4:61cd ‘And attainment of yoga [viz. union with the divine/yogic power 
depends on [the meditative state of believing in] everything being E 
the same flavour as Sakti. 

This interpretation depends on understanding yogasiddhi-m-apeksa te 
in other words on yogasiddhi being a prātipadika used as a nomina. 
tive, followed by m used as a hiatus-breaker. (One could translate 
instead: “And the supernatural powers [that are possible] through yo- 
ga depend...”) We assume that Saktisamarasa is the same state that has 
been described in the preceding verses (especially 4:55), even though 
a sense of identity with Siva (rather than with Sakti) was emphasised. 
See our note on Nayasutra 4:11 above. 


4:62 "This is the true nature of knowledge [described in a form that is] easy 
to understand for you, without prolixity. For the sake of bestowing 
compassion on creatures, it should be given to one who has devotion 
towards Siva? 


The expression jantunanugraharthaya could be analysed as containing 
an accusative (jantün) governed by a verbal noun (anugraha) or as con- 
taining an instance of a compressed genitive (jantiinam => jantün), 
or as a corruption of jantiinanugraharthaya, a phrase which would 
contain an irregular sandhi of jantünam anugraharthaya. 


4:63-5 "He of whom there is at all times devotion towards the guru which 
is greater than [the devotion that he bears towards] Siva should be 
given this knowledge once he has lived with the guru for twelve years: 
It should be given to one who does no violence to others, who is com 
passionate, and who does not transgress the guru's command, to one 
who is frightened by the terror of samsara, to one who knows moral 
duty, to one whose words are pleasing, to one devoted to recitation 
and linga-worship and who has his faculties under control.’ 


© . 

ontrast 4:63 with 4:66 below, in which the pupil regards the EU 
as the same as Siva (not as more important than Him), and in "s 
case there is no twelve-year wait. 


4:66 uh astra should be given to one who, with a mind reverent y 

evotion, thinks of the guru as [equal to] Siva, never in other circum 
stances, 4 

be that this 


C hi . 
ontrast this with 4:63 above. The implication seems to e 
d for twelv 


us devotee does not need to be examined and traine 


Translation of the Nayasutra 
479 


4:67 “The goddess spoke: 


The whole universe of moving and non-moving beings has arisen from 
the power of Siva, and I have heard it at length up to the eleventh? 


We suppose that "the eleventh" may refer to the nine tattvas together 
with Sakti and niskala/ niralamba. This would then bea reference back 
to the teaching of eleven tattvas making up the universe correlated 
with eleven elements in the NAVATMAN: Uttarasitra 131-12. 


4:68 ‘[I have also heard] the letters that are the [yogic] focus-points [using 
which one can meditate] on the tattvas, [and] differentiation of [the 
layers] of the cosmography [required for the performance of] diksa, 
and meditation [on those] separately [viz. in chapters 2 and 3], and 
also a [state of mental awareness in which everything has the] same 
flavour [as Siva] (samarasam) has been described? 


In this interpretation aksaras tattvalaksah alludes to the fact that the 
letters of the NAVATMAN have been homologised with the tattvas in the 
beginning of the Uttarasutra. But we could take that teaching to be 
alluded to only by the word aksarah and understand tattvalaksah (for 
tattvalaksyani) to refer to the mental focus-points using which one can 
meditate on the tattvas. These are referred to and discussed in Uttara- 
sutra 5:6 and 5:10ff. For the “same-flavour” awareness, see 4:55 and 
surrounding verses above. One could perhaps interpret diksaprakriya- 
bhedanam to mean: “and the penetration of [the various successive 
layers of] the cosmos through initiation" 


4:69 '[You have told me all these separately, but] please (prasadat) teach 
me how all the tattvas are [to be] worshipped together as one and how 
they are to be perceived together as one. 


ekatve here could be taken as a shortened form of ekatvena. 


4:70 If we assume that 4:70cd is a damaged corruption of something like 
arakah sarvatattvani pratyarah purakani ca, then we might translate 
as follows: 

‘The lord spoke: - 

Siva is i [wheel’s] navel; Sakti is established in the me [of 
that); the spokes are all the tattvas; and the intermediary spokes ar 
the worlds? ya 
Since, however, the intermediate spokes are identified z : a 
4:75cd below, perhaps we should consider ce उ p à 5 i 
yara varnakani ca (suggestion of Diwakar ACHARYA), W. 


2४४०6, 
3 Svasatattvasam hitz 


take to mean: “the intermediate spokes are the sounds of the alpha 
bet”. 


4:71 ‘One should then [-therefore?] meditate (dhyanat) on the Siva-viea 
together with all the tattvas. And hear from me how one may see Ru 
in half an instant. | 
Once again, we have dhyanat either used as a finite verb (= dhyayet) 
or used as a noun but governing an accusative (in the way that a m 
verb would): cf. abhidhyanat above in 3:18c, 3:31a, 3:42c and m 
If it is not a main verb but an action noun governing an accusative 
(cf. 4:62c and note), then one could instead translate: “And hear from 
me how one may see Him in half an instant from meditating upon the 
Siva-wheel, together with all the tattvas.” 


4:72 ‘Facing the sun, he should gaze ]..]: he will see a row of dots distin- 
guished by various lines.’ 


What is meant by preksakantan is unclear. Could it mean ‘for as long 
as he can see’ (suggestion of Csaba Dezső)? 


4:73-75b “The black line is prakrti (?); the white one is the line of purusa; 
the yellow one is the line of niyati; the smoky one is Time; the line of 
the barrier [viz. maya] is dark blue; vidya is the red line; that of Iśvara 
is a variegated line; but the line corresponding to bindu is crystalline; 
the four kalas [for which see the beginning of the chapter] are the 
garland of [4?] dots situated at the level of Susumna.’ 


This is the identification of the tattvas with the principal spokes of 
the Siva-wheel that was alluded to in 4:70. With avyakta krsnar ekha, 
if the text is correctly interpreted here, we have an instance of a noun 
(avyakta) inflected to agree in gender with another noun. The allusion 
to Susumna is uncertain. One could instead have split sugumpnà p adike 
sthita, but then what would be the padika? And what, for that matter; 
would Susumna be? In the Uttarasutra, as we have seen, it is used 85 
a name for the northern tube of the yogic body (not the central one): 
but this seems unlikely to be intended here. In the cosmography i 
die Guhyasütra (7:293-5), however, Susumna is a subtle goddess d 
situated above nada and having the shape of a lotus-fibre. 


. c ad . ५०1६7 
4:7 5cd ‘Sound (nadah) is held to be like the intermediate spokes Sa 


shines in the [central] lotus? 


Translation of the Nayasutra 


4:76 


4:77 


4:78 


4:79 


481 


As we suggested ad 4:70, it is possible that the sounds of language 
(varna) are to be identified with the intermediate spokes. For Sakti 
being placed in the centre, cf. Guhyasütra 7:296-9, in which Sakti is 
either identified with Susumna or placed on a level above her. 


‘Like a bubble in/on water, god is situated in/on Sakti; upon seeing 
him, a creature is released from the bondage that is the terror that is 
samsara. 


Perhaps this image, odd in this contekt (since a bubble is usually used 
as an example of transience), is meant only to emphasise the extreme 
subtlety of God (and not the inseparability of Sakti from Siva). 


‘Having seen this wheel [of Siva] he will become one who has mastered 
reality (७४); that guru is the true knower of brahman. And it is 
he who can bestow the grace [that is initiation(?)] and who becomes 
equal to Siva? 


‘He bestows grace, according to his will, through a glance, through 
speech, through touch, through ritual, by his mind, through recita- 
tion, [or] through the yoga that consists in the visualisations of the 
dharanas.’ 

Alternatively the last item may be interpreted: ‘[or] through the yoga 
that consists in fixations and meditation’. Cf. 4:40 above for a similar 
(but shorter) list of low-contact forms of initiation. Various liberties 
with the language have to be presupposed: sparsa and japa are either 
to be interpreted as instrumentals (on the analogy of spréa, in the first 
case) or as ablatives missing their final consonant; anugraha must be 
the object of karoti, which requires either the assumption of a double 
sandhi of anugraham + icchaya or the use of a pratipadika for an 
accusative. 


‘If [even] the murderer of a brahmin should bear the dust of that 
he will be liberated in that very 


person's feet [on his head], o goddess, ME 
instant, just as [a serpent is liberated] from the serpent s slough. 
devi $irasa dharayed 


Cf. Tantrasadbhava 9:352c-353b: tasya padarajo dev C 3 

yadi/ tatksanad eva mucyeta Sap YF a dh p Tte 
E ० üli s a DOE 

hasta 2:59: tasya pādarajodhūlivandan danüd is Diwakar 


hapi na sandeho bhavate viravandite. (Here "van = rr ain 
ACHARYA’s conjecture in place of °handhanad.) It was 0 th 
ble to restore the verse and to flip 1. 


of these parallels that we were 8 


= Nisväsatattvasamhi 


38, whose recto had been marked as if it had been the verso, with the 
१ . ७ 

result that we had first transcribed and struggled to Interpret the text 
on the verso as coming before what is written on the recto, 


4:80-82b ‘If someone engaged in yoga, thoroughly controlled, meditates 
[upon the Sivacakra] for one month, supernatural power [associated 
with all levels up to that] of prakrti will arise [for him]; in two months 
however, supernatural power [associated with all levels up to that of 
the tattva] of purusa [will arise]. The [eight levels of] power associated 
with niyati, kala, maya, vidya, 1$vara, bindu, the [four] kalas and with 
Sakti are attained each with one [extra] month ... eight...’ 


It is possible that the scribe finished copying early on this first line 
of the folio, and that we are therefore missing no more than the end 
of this half-line, in which case some notion such as possessing eight- 
fold ai$varya might have been expressed, for instance with a pada 
such as astaisvaryasamanvitah. Also conceivable, however, is that a 
full further half-line is missing, which could mean that we had a list 
of eight properties culminating in sarvajnah etc. (of 4:82cd below). 
But one could consider that we have already had eight levels of siddhi 
listed (if one leaves off prakrti and purusa) and all that may be partly 
missing is an expression of the idea that the eight above-listed types 
may be attained within eight months. How this would be phrased is 
uncertain. 


4:82c-83 '[He will become] omniscient, omnipotent, pure, acting at will, 
teking [any] form at will; his will will not be blocked; he will attain the 
state of Siva-autonomy. This supreme [one can become] grosser thag 
gross, subtler than subtle, embodied and disembodied: at will he can 
make a body [for himself]? 


4:84-5 “I have taught you the very quintessence of knowledge, which छ 

supremely secret; you should keep it very much hidden: you should 

_ ot reveal [this] nectar [to just anyone]. One should give it to someone 

who has been thoroughly examined over twelve years; one should not 
otherwise give this nectar of nectars to bad people? 

For the restitution of the first half of 4:85 (by NK), cf. 5 ard 

hasatikakalottara, (150-verse recension) 146c-147b: supariksita$isy?y” 


Tin J a 
datar, 7 tu dayanvite/ anyathā dustamartyebhyo +a+mrtam 2 
prakaáayet. c 


Translation of the Nayasutra 
483 


As in several other places in this corpus (cf., e.g., Nayasütra 4:63; but 
contrast with, e.g. Uttarasūtra 5:46), the isya should live cu the 
guru for twelve years before the guru may transmit knowledge to him. 


4:86 ‘Ordinary householding (kutumbinah) mortals give oblations and [an- 

cestral] offerings to gods; the one who knows the truth goes to Siva 
[whereas the merit of] sacrificial offerings to the gods [eventually] ge 
minish?’ 
The problem with this interpretation is that havyakavya should refer 
respectively to offerings to gods and ancestors. We could take devanam 
in the sense of devatanam and thus include both devas and pitrs or 
we could take kutumbinah as singular for plural and assume that it is 
an unusual way of referring to ancestors. 


4:87-8 ‘If, out of greed, or, moreover, out of pride, he should teach it to 
more than ten [disciples], Indra, angry, will cut off his head with a 
thunderbolt. For this reason, o goddess, it should not be told [to just 
anybody] by someone who is desirous for his own good. It should be 
given [only] to one who has been attracted by Siva's Sakti and who 
has been thoroughly examined. 


Being “attracted to Siva’s Sakti? might be a way of alluding to what 
in later works came to be known as receiving a Saktipata, a descent 
of power regarded as a prerequisite for initiation (see TAK 2, s.v. 
karmasamya. 


4:89 ‘The goddess spoke: उ me 
In all śāstras, beginning with the Vedas, pranava, it seems, is ibera- 
tory. Out of your grace, o god, you should say how it 1s salvific. 


4:90-1 "The lord spoke: 
The niskala-mantra, consisting of half sixt 
with the eight forms of god, together with t 
meditated upon bestows liberation. 
The goddess spoke: 
How is the NISKALA, 
gods and which is conne 


upon?’ x 
Presumably the ‘eight forms of god’ are not the eight forms of Sadasiva 


taught in Mülasütra 6, since we have eight divinities cone a न 
the thirty-two tattvas, these are the nine tattvas of the Uttara 1 


but with prakrti unpacked into twenty-four constituents. 


een [viz. eight] morae, linked 
he thirty-two tattvas , when 


which has eight morae, which is linked with eight 
cted with thirty-two tattvas, to be meditated 


Nisvas 
I atattvasamhita 


4:92 “The lord spoke: | 

The first [vowel, viz. A] 
the twenty-fifth [consona 
source (yonijah?), bindu, 
tribhinnakah). 
As this incoherent attempt at a translation reveals, this verse is not 
clear to us. What seems likely from what is interpretable here is that 
an analysis of the pranava, referred to just above as the NISKALA. 
mantra, is intended. The first three elements then are A, U and M. 
As for the conjectural restitution yonijah, it is assumed that it might 
refer to the anusvara since the anusvara might be described as being 
“born of [the sound] M”, and M is homologised with maya (the yoni of 
material creation) in Uttarasutra 1:1. That would leave bindu to be 
an after-resonance (anuranana), followed by a subtler resonance, nà- 
da, which appears to be labelled as the sixth element in this analysis, 
which makes Sakti the seventh, but leaves the eighth and final matra 
(announced in 4:90 above) unclear. Perhaps the eighth is simply Si- 
va, just as in the list of eight deities with which these elements are 
homologised in the following verse? But then how is it referred to by 
the expression paficavarnatribhinnakah? And, if it is it not referred 
to by that expression, then what does that expression describe? We 
shall see in the following verses that A, U and M are subdivided into 
short, long and prolated forms, which could conceivably be what the 
element tribhinna alludes to, but this would not help us to arrive at 8 
tally of eight matras. 


Yuko YOKOCHI has suggested another possible path of interpretation. 
reading verses 02 and 93 in parallel, we can see that it is likely that 
A = Brahma, U= Visnu, M = Rudra, yonija = Ardhacandrin, bindu 
= Isa, and Sakti = Sakti. There appears to be no named element ho- 
mologised with the eighth divinity, Siva. Among these, yonija, Que 
it is parallel to Ardhacandrin, may be assumed to be the ardhacandra 
that is written above the letter, and bindu can be assumed to CO 
respond to the anusvara that is written above that. Thus the a 
five elements divinities all correspond to graphic elements, and "d 

an idea might conceivably be expressed by paficavarna; the following 
three, Nadanada, Sakti and Siva, for whom there are no graphem®® 
(or sound-descriptions), might somehow be alluded to by tribhinna^ 
and Sakti 


and the fifth vowel [viz. U] at the beginnin 
nt, viz. M], that which is born of [maya] m 
nada [as the] six [th], Sakti, ..? (pañcavarna. 


4:93 Brahma, Visnu, Rudra, Ardhacandrin, Iga, and Nadanada; 


Translation of the Nayasütra 
485 


should be understood to be the seventh and Siva is the eighth? 


Another possibility we considered was to take Ardhacandrin as refer- 
ring both to bindu and ardhacandra (perhaps understanding it as a 
sort of dual), then to read sanada in compound: “together with Nā- 
da”. But we expect here a list of eight names of divinities (rather 
than a mixture of divinities and graphical symbols). Furthermore, it 
is perhaps appropriate that Ardhacandrin should be used as the Sai- 
va deity corresponding to the fourth element given in the preceding 
verse, since that might be the anusvara, which may be described as 
“possessing a crescent moon” when it is written as a candrabindu. Isa 
then corresponds to the resonance called bindu and the divinity Nada 
corresponds to the mantra-element nada. Could this group of eight be 
a precursor to the classical list of five karanesas (for which see TAK2 
s.v. karana 1)? 


4:94—5 ‘The first seed-syllable (adibijah) [viz. A] is the five gross elements; 
the long form [of the same] is used in the sense of the sense faculties; 
the prolated vowel is the mind (manah); and ए denotes the subtle 
elements (tanmatresu). The long form [of ण is taught to express 
ahankara, buddhi and the triplet [of gunas] that have avyakta as their 
origin (avyaktaditrkesu); the prolated form is taught to be the soul? 


The expression avyaktaditrkesu is uncertain: we might instead trans- 
late “the long [U] is said to refer to ahankara, buddhi and prakrti, 
which are a triplet”. 


4:96 ‘niyati is the twenty-fifth [letter, viz. M]; the long [form of M] is read 
[in authoritative literature] to be Time; the prolated [form of M] is 
maya, which is [that which causes the] rolling of samsara. 


Usually we cannot have a long and superlong form of M, but it is 
required here! 


4:97 ‘bindu is the god 8905809; His nada is Maheévara; the streaks/rays 
[emanating from the visualised graph for 0007] are ONE to be the 
goddess [viz. Sakti], and [she is] also said to be vidya. $ 
The interpretation is uncertain. Maheśvara is not expected vd 
high level and so this is perhaps evidence that MaheSvara has no 2 

become almost inevitably synonymous with Iévara. But the Qs = 7 

these elements may not be strictly hierarchical: we p inte : 

vidya and devi separately, since niskala Siva is said pA e T व; 

second tattva in 4:98 below, and counting both separa SAN 


* Ni$vasatattvasam) ia 


us to thirty-three (assuming that up to and including purusa gives 
the well-known Sankhya set of twenty-five tattva), rather than the 
required thirty-two. Furthermore, vidya should be lower down than 


Sadagiva and 160919. 


4:98 ‘The thirty-second should be understood to be niskala Siva, the 
Supreme Lord, meditating on whom people attain liberation and be. 


come equal to Siva? 


4:99-100 ‘The goddess spoke: 
Now yoga in many forms has been taught, O Mahe$vara, both with and 
without a meditation focus (laksalaksam); tell [me] the essential nature 
of yoga: on this point I have great doubt. [Tell me] also the purification 
of the tubes and how the conquest of the breaths [is attained]. Tell 
[me], O Sankara, the places, colours, activities and the sounds [of the 
breaths]. 


The compound laksalaksam, if it has been understood correctly (as 
an adjective to yoga), is irregular: we might have expected salaksyala- 
ksyah. Perhaps it is intended as an adjective to yogasadbhavam? For 
the laksyas, see Uttarasütra 5:6 and 5:10ff. See also the note on Naya- 
sutra 4:108 below. Here begins a passage, from 4:100 to 4:144b, which 
has been incorporated, with changes, into the Svacchanda, where it 
forms 7:285c-330 (see Appendix I). The question about the places, 
e ep activities and sounds of the breaths is answered in 41198 
elow. 


4:101-3 "The lord spoke: 

Listen truly to [an account of] that yoga which has not been taught 
to anybody: the supreme essence of yoga, ultimate, more secret than 
the secret. On an excellent (suprasaste) piece of ground, not near to 
fire or to water, without sand or pebbles, and without any withered 
trees, free of snakes, worms and ant-hills, devoid of natural calamities, 
mna holy Place in which [only] the most meritorious reside (puny 
dharmisthasamvase)—there he should practise yoga? 


Note that 4:103ab, as now constituted, is identical to Guhyasuira 
3:100, in which the context is one of preparing for sadhana. In place ० 
Punyadharmisthasamvase, the KSTS edition reads punye dharm ithe 
bins (Appendix I, 7:289a), which would be a smoother way 9 
expressing what we have translated. One might instead assume go 
Punya and dharmistha were supposed to refer to two different 8707 


tion of the Nayasutra 
Translation of y n 


of people: cf. rsidevatajusta[s] ca Sünyayatanamandapa[h] in Guhya- 
sutra 3:13. £ j 


4:104—5 ‘Having venerated the God of Gods and the Lord of obstacles 
(vighnesam) again and again, [and] having bowed before earlier teach- 
ers, engaged in yoga, focussed on meditation, he should adopt the 
lotus-posture, or the svastika, bhadra, the half-moon, the back-rest- 
assisted, the yoga-band[-assisted], or (ca) he may be seated (asinam) 
as he chooses? 


An elephant-faced Ganadhipa who protects from the vinayakas is men- 
tioned in the Nisvasamukha (3:77-8), and a Ganapati who may be the 
elephant-faced god has been mentioned in Nayasütra 1:102 above (see 
note ad loc.). Here the name VighneSa may be the same figure. 


Perhaps we should emend here to asina$ ca ? Otherwise is this an aia 
use of 9 neuter/accusative for nominative? Note that this list gives 
only six sitting postures for yoga (unless yathasukham is intended 
as one here) and that it omits añjalika and prasarita (cf. Nayasutra 
4314-15 above). 


4:106 'Placing the tip of the tongue against the palate, with [the two rows 
of| the teeth not touching, with the body upright (samakah?) and 
the eyes fixed on the [tip of the] nose, one who speaks the truth and 
does not harm [other creatures] (?), if he remains constantly engaged 
in yoga, will attain success. 

This translation is based on the assumption that this is a corrupt 
description of correct upper-body-posture (karana) for meditation, in 
which we expect to have mentioned that the tongue 15 against the 

palate, that the teeth don't touch, that the trunk and/or head ps d 

samakah could refer to either) is upright and that the eyes are 

on the nose-tip. (For a clearer expression of this last prescription, we 

could perhaps emend nasadrstigah to nasadrstikah.) 

Cf. Nisvasamukha 4:51: 
baddhva yogasanam samyak pjukayas samahitah - 

jihvan tu taluke nyasya dantair dantan na samsprse 
th his [upper] body 


: ly, wi 
Adopting a seated posture for yoga correctly, w T Uds 
straight, he should be concentrated; placing his tongue agains 


: ith his [other 
palate, he should not touch [one row of] his teeth with his | 
row of] teeth. 


Nisvasatattvasambiss 
488 

1 k ana: talau jihvam san adha. 
C -4ocd in the old Skandapurana n samādhāya 
2s Wo nacaspr$an. Although the parallel passage in Svaccha. 
en omits this prescription, we find a (rather less clear) description 
df sentially the same idea in Svacchanda 4:365c-367b: 


jihva tu taluke yojyà kimcid urdhvam na samspréet 
Isat prasarya vaktram tu kimcid osthau na samspréet 
dantapankti tathaiveha drstis cadhordhvavarjita 
kayam samunnatam krtva karanam divyam ucyate 


These parallels make the attributes of 4:106ab interpretable; in 4:106c 
the letters cannot all be clearly read, but it is possible that what 
was written was satyavaganahisa$ca, which could perhaps be partly 
emended, by adding an anusvsara, to satyavag anahimsaá ca. Could 
anahimsah be a form with a doubled negative ? We have tentatively 
assumed so and have therefore translated as though the word were 
ahimsah. 


4:107 ‘Having caused his body to burn up with sprout-like flames 
(sikhankuraih) and transformed it into Siva [using mantras], ne should 
begin to focus on Paramegvara using the tenfold path of yoga: 
sikhankurais is a conjecture, the transmitted reading being sikhanka- 
rais. We considered and rejected also Sikharigarais (burning coals seem 
less appropriate), Sikhakarais (usually adjectival, and yet we lack a 
noun) and Sikhakaram (“He burnt his body [visualising it as] d 
shaped"). For the first half of the verse, the Svacchanda CAPD 
7:291c-292b) has a longer explicit reformulation that uses more fam 
iar terminology, including sakalikarana (which, as we have explaine 


cts ch- 
On p. 38 above, is not attested in the Nisvasa in this widespread te 
nical sense): 


dahanotpüyanam krtva plavanàmrtam eva ca 
sabahyabhyantarenaiva sakalikaranam kuru 


; 1 ding with nec 
Having performed the burning, purification and flooding w 
tar248 internally and externally,?49 perform sakalikarana: 

EI tle E E assumes that plavanamrtam 


as amrtaplavana, The KSTS text gi 
Plavayed amrtena ca. 


semaraja appears to construe this with yogamargena in 293a below. 


the same 
is an inverted compound intended to pue oe 
ves what appears to be a secondary imp 


Translation of the Nayasūtra 
489 


We are not sure what the ten-fold path is. Ksemaraja (Svacchand 
tantroddyota ad 7:290c-292b) suggests first that it consists of the e 
ternal and internal types of recana, pürana and kumbhaka (26) to 
which are added the fourth pranayama, called prasanta-kumbhaka 
and then pratyahara, dharana and dhyana. He adds that it may zs 
refer to the conquest of the ten breaths. Neither of these proposals 
seems likely to be what the redactor of the Nayasütra had in mind 
who probably intended to give the ten constituents of the ten-fold path 
in the mysterious list that forms the next verse. 


4:108 ‘He should meditate upon (dhyatva) [Siva], who pervades all things 
without being different from them, as 1) the mantra, 2) bindu, 3) that 
which is beyond (atitam), 4) nada, 5) atma, 6) jyoti, 7) vigraha, 8) 
kalpana, 9) alaksa, 10) akala? 


Alternatively, one could take nadatma as one element and assume 
advaitena sarvagam to be the tenth. Unfortunately this translation 
makes almost nothing clear. Ksemaraja, commenting on a slightly 
modified text, is of little help. The passage has been incorporated 
from the Svacchanda into the Tantrasadbhava (28:18c ff) before some 
of those modifications were made. We think that this is a list of ways in 
which Siva, who is beyond conceptualisation, can be meditated upon 
by the yogin. A similar idea is expressed in similarly obscure language 
in Kirana 3:23: 


pumsam anugrahartham tu paro ‘py aparatam gatah 
nàdabindukhamantranusaktibijakalantagah 


Shorter lists of six, some of them overlapping with ours, are discussed 
by VASUDEVA in his treatment of the six laksyas (laksyabheda) in 


Malinivijayottara 12:9-13 (2004:253ff). 


4:109 ‘Great yoga, beginning with primal matter and [going] up to ia 
has [also] been taught to you: [there] again it is taught to be tenfold. 
He should meditate through controlling the breath. 


a reference to the siddhis of the levels of these 


This we assume to be ined in 4:80-3 above. This 


ten tattvas alluded to as having been atta hd 
verse is omitted in the Svacchanda and Tantrasadbhava. 


i [nostril]; he should void it 
4:110 ‘He should fill [the body] through the left [nos zia channels of one 


through the right [nostril]. This is the purifying ० 
whose path is the path to liberation (moksamargapathasya). 


490 


Nisväsatattvasamp; t 


One might expect mokşamārgapathasya to be the central channel 
and indeed Ksemaraja comments: evam anavaratam kriyamànam 8 a 
nadinam moksamargapathasya va madhyadhamnah Sodhanam naa 
taprasamanam bhavati. “This being performed ceaselessly in this wa 
purifies, i.e. calms the breaths of, the tubes or of the channel that is 
the path to liberation, viz. the central channel.” We could have chosen 
to interpret as Ksemaraja does (supplying a vā!), but we have not 
seen a central channel mentioned elsewhere in this text: see note on 
Uttarasutra 5:37 above. 
For evidence of an early association of the central path with liberation, 
see Vinasikhatantra 147: 

ida Santikapustyarthe mrtyuccatana pingala 

susumna moksada caiva jivamarganusarini. 
GOUDRIAAN (1985:113) translates as follows: 


The Ida is applicable for pacification and acquisition of goods, the 
Pingala [for] ritual killing and eradication of an opponent; and the 
Susumna grants release, following the soul’s course. 


4:111 ‘By expelling (recanat), by filling (püranat) and by holding in (ro- 


dhat) the threefold breath-stretching (pranayamah) is held [to be ac- 
complished]. Generally, these are external; but there are also internal 
ones. 


We have resisted the temptation to correct to pranayamas tridha smr- 
tah orto pranayamas trayah smrtah and we assume instead that trayah 
is treated as a singular adjective. (Cf. the numerous instances of 
dvayani used as an adjective in Mahābhārata 12.229:13f.) Here we 
have what may be among the earliest attestations of recaka, piraka 
and kumbha(ka) used to describe pranayama. The Yogasutra (2.49) 
and Yogabhasya speak rather of gvasa and pragvasa, and it is per 
haps the Yogabhasyavivarana which introduces this terminology into 
the tradition of commentaries on the sütras. Kaundinya’s P aficartha 
bhasya, however, (on Pa$upatasitra 1.16) refers to recaka and purané 
Another early attestation for all three terms in the context of pran?” 
ma, as Peter BISSCHOP has pointed out to us (letter of 22.iii.2011 
the Nyayagamanusarinz of Simhasüri (C6th?), the commentary ०1 
Duadasaranayacakra of Mallavadin. The terms occur in an imp ae 
Passage on sadarigayoga, clearly referring to a Saiva tradition ° d 
ga (p. 332, ed. JAMBUVIJAYAJI) Another early testimony, 95 


Translation of the Nayasutra 
91 


YOKOCHI has pointed out to us in her reader’s re 


x port, would 
certainly have been found in the old Skandapurana but for are 
the transmission: ge in 


.. Skandapurana 174.37cd refers to kumbha as the third method in 
the context of pranayama. The other two, püraka and recana were 
probably mentioned in the lost portion between 36ab and 36cd 
(about j^ padas probably lost according to the oldest Nepalese 
MS, 81). 


4:112 ‘Internally he should expel; internally he should fill. He should per- 
form a motionless kumbhaka [internally]: these are the three internal 
ones.’ 


We think this means that within the external kumbhaka we imagine an 
internal recana, etc. Ksemaraja, however, understands abhyantarena 
to refer to the central channel ! 


4:113 ‘There is a fourth breath-exercise which is called Suprasanta, 
[achieved] by moving [the vital energy] from the heart into the navel 
and [by moving] the mind away from the sense-objects.’ 


The fourth pranayama, called suprasanta, is parallelled of course in the 
Svacchanda and in the Tantrasadbhava, since they have incorporated 
this part of the Nayasitra; but it is to be found also (as NK has pointed 
out) in the Dharmaputrika (a work of the Sivadharma corpus) in 1:19: 


pürakah kumbhakaá caiva recakas tadanantaram 
prasantaá caiva vijfieyah pranayama$ caturvidhah. 


Furthermore, although it is quite commonly asserted in a very wide 
range of works, including many early Saiva ones, that DS 
has three parts (e.g. Vinasikhatantra 69-70; Sarihatrifaba ne 
11:11-14), a fourth pranayama is in fact spoken of already in fied 
tra 2.51 (bahyabhyantaravisayaksep! caturthah).?5° It seems od र 
though it may refer to a profound subjacent super-kumbhaka ur 
not measured out but that is felt to come to exist, after long prae^? 


as a state that underlies all three other pranayamas. 


न रारा rich Ti GH, Roland STEIN- 
A discussion involving Hartmut BUESCHER, Ulrich Timme Ihi; indolog 


ER and Judit TÖRZSÖK on the Indolo il list in July 2011 

? 3 gy e-mal 79 nabled us to 
Fd bipermail/indology. list.indology-info/2011-July/thread.htmlf3191) E 

?cate some of the references in this note. 


7१८४००. 
492 *Satativasamhirn 


This verse of the Nisvasa may, however, be the earliest Passage in 
which it is assigned the name Suprasanta/ Prasanta. This fourth phase 
referred to as Prasanta, is also mentioned in Siddhayogesvarimata "isa 
(see TORZSOK 1999*:132), where it is associated with the seed Sylla 
ble of Para. A detailed explanation is given in the Tantraloka and 
Tantrülokaviveka (17:87ff). As Yuko YOKOCHI has observed to us 
again in her reader’s report, pranayama is also said to be fourfold 
in the old Skandapurana 179:37b (pranayamam caturvidham), but no 
name appears there for the fourth phase. 


In some Buddhist tantric literature this fourth pranayama is referred 
to as prasantaka, e.g. Hevajratantra 1.xi.3 (patana recakenaiva kumb- 
hakena vaéikaret/ pürakenaiva tv akrstih prasantakena stambhana), 
Samvarodayatantra 19:30, and in the auto-commentary on Vagigvara- 
kirti's eleventh-century Tattvaratnavaloka, which refers to Sankhyas 
and Saivas as the source of the information.25 


James MALLINSON, in a letter of 2.viii.2011, has commented that the 
fourth pranayama may be what is called kevalakumbhaka “in a num- 
ber of early hatha texts, including the Dattatreyayogasastra, Goraksa- 
Sataka, Vasisthasamhita (its verses on it are also found in the Yoga- 
yajnavalkya) and the Hathapradipika compilation (using verses from 
all the aforementioned texts)" The description of kevalakumbhaka, 
which is apparently something that can be performed after years of 
practice, is to be found described in verses 2:71-4 of the last named 
work. 


As a final example of an account of pranayama that is subdivided into 
more than three we may mention that of Hemacandra’s Yogaéastm 
which, as pointed out to us by James MALLINSON, teaches four breath- 
control practices in addition to püraka, recaka and kumbhaka, namely 
pratyahara, Santa, uttara and adhara (5:5). Among these, Santa is & 
plained (5:8) to consist in preventing the breath from flowing through 
de mouth, nose and palate. The relevant part of the presentation ९ 
pranayama reads as follows (Yogasastra 5:7c—-9): 


nàbhipadme sthirikrtya rodhanam sa tu kumbhakah 
a > 
2. esca on the expression vayoh svarüpam in verse 18, Vagis d 
put ee Svarüpam iti. pürakakumbharecakaprasantakalaksanam anapanac! 
GN सा bkavati Saivasamkhyadinirdistam vayusvarüpam inne oe 
a avanaya sthirikrtyakasenotp] ana! urapravesam Y@ 
ca saksatkurvanti vayuvadinah. Miu a 


ya yum 
uktim 


Translation of the Nayasütra 
403 


sthanat sthanantarotkarsah pratyaharah prakirtitah 
talunasananadvarair nirodhah Santa ucyate 
apiyordhvam yad utkrsya hrdayadisu dhàranam 


uttarah sa samakhyato viparitas tato "dharah 
This is translated by GOPANI (1989:132-3) as follows: 


That very wind, when it is suspended and stopped at the navel 
is called Kumbhaka. The Pratyahara is that type of pranayam in 
which the breath is moved from one part of the body to another. 
When the breath is prevented from escaping through the palate, 
nostrils or mouth, it is called the Shanta. That pranayam in which 
the wind is drawn from outside and stored in the region of the 
heart is called the Uttara. When it is shifted to the lower parts of 
the body, such as the navel etc., it is named the Adhara. 


The difference here between kumbhaka and Santa seems to lie only in 
the place within the body where the breath is retained. 


4:114 ‘Once he has completed this suppression of breathing, having brought 
it to the navel he should release it; he should release the air slowly using 
the nostril of the left [side of the] nose’ 


We take pute as a shortened instrumental and nasikaya as a metrically 
shortened genitive. We assume that 114c describes the same expulsion 
of breath as samucchvaset, but adding more detail. Since it is not clear 
whether praganta is the fourth stage of each cycle of pranayama or a 
special attainment achieved after years of yogic practice, it is therefore 
not clear whether the breath is to be released in this way after prasanta 
or after kumbhaka. 


4:115-16 ‘He should hold the wind visualisation in his [left] big toe; he 
should hold the fire visualisation in the navel; in the region of the 
throat he should hold the earth visualisation; in the uvula/tonsils 
(ghantikesu) he should hold the water visualisation; m his a 
the ether visualisation, which is held to bring about all pm e 
will obtain success [in these visualisations] through one, two, three, 
four and five udghatas. z 
For māhendrī (ez conj.) being an adjective appropriate to uS - ho 
the remarks ad Uttarasitra 5:28. The word ag aE pus 
being treated irregularly as masculine/neuter (rather than 9 


is is 
has been given a plural ending and we are not sure whether this i 


i Nisväsatattvasomhi 
49 | 
tonsils), or plural for singular (uvula) or plural 

Du Te a it pis to then?). Usually for the Purif id 
Mem dharanas there are as many udghatas performed as there 
0 mas in the corresponding element: one for akasa Up to five for 
Bas pe Here the dharanas have not been placed in ascending order 
of aes with the grossest, that of earth, put first. 


:117 ‘Yogis should always understand that this is called “eruption” (udgha- 

peice the breath having been blocked reaches the head and comes 
back.’ 

If this interpretation is correct then prane is both the subject of the 

locative absolute and the subject of the verb nivarttate. For a more 

detailed account of udghatas, see s.v. udghata in the appendix of 

Corrigenda and Addenda to TAK 2, and see VASUDEVA’s discussion 

(2004:402-9), which concludes: ‘To summarise, “eruption” appears 

to be the yogic term for the sensation of a spontaneous upward surge 

of vital energy brought on in the early stages of self-induced asphyxi- 
ation’ 


4:118 ‘By these breath-restraints having been maintained, attachment and 
hatred cease. Through the dharanas [one is freed] of all sins; through 
withdrawing the mind, one has complete control over the sense- 
faculties? 


in N - we t be 
The tops of the letters are missing in N for this verse, so we canno 
certain about the vowel-signs. 


There are scriptural passages which equate raga and dvega em 
outgoing and ingoing breaths, but that is perhaps not intende a a 
given what is said in the following half-verse, and Ksemaraja ete 
mention it as a possibility. 


१ [ tively] 
4:119 "These [five breaths] beginning with prana are situated aa an 
in the heart [prana], anus [apana], navel [samana], throat b s]? 
all joints [vyana]. Hear from me [their] colour[] and sounds]: ded to 
These are the sthanas of the first five of the ten breaths, allu h 


is intended as bot 
in 4:100 above, We assume that nabhikanthau is inten 
locative and dual! 


4120-1 ‘Having the appearance of molten silver; yellow; pe 
milky; crystalline: this is the definition of the colours uch sounds: 
[breaths]. Bell: gong; sweet; elephant-trumpeting; many/m 


Translation of the Nayasitra 
495 


this is said to be the [group of] sound [s] 


of the fi inni : 
prana” ve beginning with 


We have taken kamsah as “gong” (suggestion of Judit TÖRZSÖK), since 
that seems more plausible in this list than “bell-metal”. 


4:122-5 “Talking, laughing, singing, dancing, fighting, the arts(?), craft 
all tasks: these are the activities of prana. The downward Waco 
(apanah) allows food and drink to enter [the body]; it causes human 
waste to flow down [out from the body]; it will also cause blindness 
and ear disease. Samana homogenises what is eaten, licked and drunk. 
The function|s] of the rising breath (udanasya) are sneezing, hiccoughs 
(°hikka°), vomiting (°chardi°), and coughing (°kasah). These are the 
functions of vyana: horripilation, sweating; it causes [stomach-]pain; it 
causes the limbs to bend, and it knows the sense of touch (spargatvam)? 


Cf., e.g., Parakhya 4:114-16 and 14:20-5. 


4:126—7 ‘In the big toes, the knees, the heart, the eyes and the head are 
the [five subsidiary breaths] beginning with Naga, which have various 
forms; hear from me their function|s]. [The first four] produce pleasure, 
excitement, drying, terror. The other, Dhananjaya, who joins [the soul 
to its next embodiment], produces sleep and weariness.’ 


Before the introduction of Dhanaüjaya in 4:127cd, the KSTS edi- 
tion of the Svacchanda inserts a half-line that names these five extra 
breaths: nagah kūrmaś ca krkaro devadattas ca pancamah (Appendix 
I, 7:312ab). This would certainly be useful here, but it is improb- 
able that it has simply dropped out by accident, since it is missing 
from the old Nepalese MS of the Svacchanda and it is missing between 
Tantrasadbhava 28:42ab and 42cd. 


Ksemaraja, in his Svacchandatantroddyota ad 7:312, comments on yo- 
jaka thus: yojako dehantarasambandhakrt. Elsewhere we find that 
it is Dhanafijaya which alone remains in the body after death, as in 
Svacchanda 7:314 (a modified version of Nayasütra 4:129) below. 


4:128 ‘At the time of death, the functions of Naga and the others ere p. 
spectively]: the [leaving of the] breath; shrinking [of the pore e 
ting(?); the death-rattle(?) (ghurughurusya?); and exit [of the body 
(utkrameti ca)? 

The second half of the verse is hypermetric 
to emend. For the interpretation of ghurugh 


al, but there seems no need 
uru as 9 death-rattle, cf. 


496 


4:12 


Nisväsatattuasamhi 


the passage of the Dharmaputrikā quoted below in the annotation w 


the next verse. 


9 "The Kūrma alone remains [at death] and does not leave by exitin 
[the body] (utkrāntyā). The Kūrma causes the corpse to contract and 
dries it out.’ 

The Svacchanda (and following it the Tantrasadbhava in 28:44) has 
only half changed the text to reflect the notion that it is Dhanaiijaya 
which leaves the body last (Appendix I, 7:314): 


na caiva yati cotkrantau tanum tyaktva dhanaiijayah 
akuficayati vai kurmah Sosayeta kalevaram 


And when [the soul] steps beyond [the body] (utkrantau), Dhanaii- 
jaya does not leave, abandoning the body; Kurma draws it together 
and dries out the cadaver. 


But this appears to make little sense, for it must surely be the Kurma 
which remains after the others in the body if it is to account for the 
transformation of the corpse after death. The notion that Dhanai- 
jaya remains is well known from the Kalottara tradition, for see, ९.8. 
Sardhatrisatikalottara 10:13: 


udgare nàga ity uktah kürma unmilane smrtah 
krkaras tu ksute caiva devadatto vijrmbhane 
dhanamjayah sthito ghose mrtasyapi na muficati. 


Naga is taught to be be [responsible] for vomition, Kūrma for open- 
ing up [the eyes(?)], Krkara for sneezing, Devadatta for yawntns 
Dhanaiijaya for noise; it does not leave [the body] even of someone 
who has died. 


Perhaps, nonetheless, the revised reading of the Svacchanda ndai 
be inconsistent: the Kūrma could perhaps account for न 
death (although this is unlikely to have been what was inten lest 
the redactor of the Nayasutra) and Dhanaiijaya could रि Br. - 
to leave the body and yet also the yojaka, that is to say din १ 
for connecting the life-breath to the next embodiment. Wee : 
this kind is perhaps suggested by the account of the Dh 
4:62-67 (labelled as 165—70, because the edition's numeration 

not start with the chapter, on pp. 703-4): 


Translation of the Nayasitra 
407 


nàgakhyah krkarah kürmo devadatto dhanarijayah 
vikurvate mumiirgiinap paricaite vayavo "pare 62 
asannamrtyur manujo gadham nisvasate yada 
etan nagabhidhanasya vayor lingam udahrtam 63 
tato marmani safichidya parva parva yathakramam 
yada santyajyate pranair vikarah krkalasya sah 64 
Sakhasv avasthitan sarvan samhrtya hrdaye yada 
vartate cottarad urdhvam etat kirmasya laksanam 65 
tato ni$caladehasya kanthe ghuraghurayate 

idam tu devadattasya vayor lingam prakirtitam 66 
yada dhanafijayo nama vayurajo vikarakah 

tac chariram parityajya jivo lokantaram vrajet 66 


Naga, Krkara, Kurma, Devadatta, Dhanarijaya—these further five 
breaths transform [the bodies] of those about to die. When a per- 
son whose death is near breathes shallow, this is declared to be a 
sign of the breath called Naga. Then, when the breaths, piercing 
through the vulnerable spots, abandon [the body] section by sec- 
tion in due order, this is a change wrought by Krkara. Drawing 
those [breaths that had been] situated in all the limbs together into 
the heart, when it remains beyond the end (? uttarad ürdhvam), 
this is the characteristic of Kürma. Then there is a death-rattle 
(ghuraghurayate) in the throat of the person, whose body is mo- 
tionless: this is proclaimed to be the sign of the breath Devadatta. 
While the king of the breaths, Dhanafijaya by name, [acts as] trans- 
former [of the body], the soul (jivah) goes to another world. 


There is one early parallel for Kurma being the last breath to leave the 
body, and that is in the account of what the chapter-colophon on 
pagupatayoga in the old Skandapurana. In that text it seems that 
the breaths except Kürma (referred to there consistently as ue 
excepting once, in 181:46d) gather together in Dhananjaya 2 n 
quit the body, leaving Kurma behind alone (182:39): 


ekastha vayavah sarve purayanti dhanamjayam A 
Sesas tatra hi kūrmāro jivam tyaktva sa tisthati 


All the winds fill Dhanafjaya [and leave], for bu Kürmara is 
left: quitting the life-breath/soul (jivam), it remains. 


rana i ered 
4:130 ‘It is prana that he should conquer first; once prana is conquered, 


Nisoz 
" Svasatattvasampis 


the mind is conquered; once the mind is conquered the sou] is calmed 
(śāntātmā [=santa atma?)) [and] ultimate reality shines [before it} 


In the KSTS edition (Svacchanda 7:315), the awkward Santatma has 
been replaced by Santasya: “the ultimate reality shines for him [since 


” 
he is now] at peace’. 


4:131 ‘Prana together with apana one should visualise in the anus; prana 

together with samana in the navel; prana together with udana in the 
throat; prana together with vyana [one should visualise] everywhere 
[in the body]. 
We have restored gude dhyaye’ on the strength of the parallel in Sva- 
cchanda 7:316. One could obviate the hypermetry by removing the ca 
in 4:131b (as in the Nepalese and Kashmirian texts of the Svacchanda: 
see Appendix I, 7:316b), even thought this destroys the cadence, but 
the pada would remain problematic because both its second and third 
syllables are short. We suspect that both unmetrical features here are 
authorial. 


4:132-3 ‘He should restrain Naga and the other [five breath]s, [each] to- 

gether with pràna in their proper places. I will teach [you] the time for 
[which] each one [should be] restrained: listen. [Each breath] should 
be held for [a period] from one tala going up to five hundred [talas]. 
In this way breath will be conquered; [it will be capable of] performing 
the functions of migration [into another living being’s body] and [yogic 
suicide by] exiting [the body]: 
Ksemaraja explains here (Svacchandatantroddyota ad 7:318) that : 
tala is the time taken to whisk one's finger around one's knee: añgulyā 
Janubhramanavadhikalas talah. Other works define it as a much longer 
length of time: see VASUDEVA 2004:405-8. This section, about eU 
quest of the breaths, is in answer to the question of 4:100b: vayunam 
ca katham jayam. 


#1346 ‘Divine beauty, lovely odour and wisdom increase for him; and he 
develops celestial vision, hearing and a celestial voice. Like the wind, 
16 moves through the worlds, and he sees Siddhas and gods; he ee 
whatever his mind’s desire conceives; the eight [yogic super! ae 
qualities (gunastakam) arise [for him]. Replete with all he desires, 


vol es 
devoid of all dualities, freed from the bondage of samsara, he gee 
equal to Siva? 


Translation of the Nayasutra 


sarvadvandvavivarjitah could perhaps instead be rendered: 
[the pain or trouble caused by] all extremes". । 


499 


"devoid of 


4:137 ‘Joining the prana and apana, together with [the enunciation of] the 


[initial] short-syllabled moment [of the pr. 


81878, viz. with the vowel 


A], the excellent yogin should hold [them there] in the navel: sweating 


and trembling arise [in him]. 


As the suppletions in square brackets reveal, it is not entirely clear 
whether the short, long and prolated kotis in this verse and in the 
two subsequent verses allude to a particular mantroccara. We have 
assumed that it is the uccara of the pranava that is intended. Ksema- 
raja, who characterises this passage as giving an account of vedha- 
samave$a, “possession by penetration” (?), that is taught by some 
other school (avatarika in the Svacchandatantroddyota before 7:322: 
... darganantaroktavedhasamavesasvarupajnanam Siksayati), appears to 
have done the same (Svacchandatantroddyota ad 7:322-4). 


If the text is correctly constituted, we must assume either that “saman- 
vitam is intended to agree with pranapane or that it is adverbial. As 
for svedakampaé ca, this could be taken as an instance of a dvandva 
compound whose elements are superfluously also linked with a fol- 
lowing ca (cf. p.129), or we could understand sveda as a pratipadika 
used as a nominative. But the text is in any case conjectural: the 
manuscript might equally have had svedakampani ca. 


4:138-9 ‘Again he should block the prana and apana in the heart, con- 
necting [them] with the [enunciation of the] long-syllabled moment [of 
the pranava, viz. U|: in an instant he falls fainting [to the ground]. 
He should in the same manner block prana alone here in the throat, 
connecting [it] with the [enunciation of the] prolated-syllabled moment 
[of the pranava, viz. M?]: then the sleeping mode arises [for him]. 


The “long-syllabled moment” (dirghakoti) could refer io U, even 


though it is itself a short vowel, 
that A becomes AU. Perhaps it is no 
svapne to svapna^, but it seems hard to t 


4:140 “He should block the prana in the centre 
[it] with the bindu [in the enunciation 0 


(susuptam) will arise then (tatra?) and in an i 


[again]. 


because if is by the addition of U 
t absolutely necessary to emend 
ranslate svapne convincingly. 


of the eyebrows, connecting 
f the pranava]: deep sleep 
nstant he will awaken 


Nigva: 
Eoo 9०८०८0०७०6 


It appears that binduyuktena has been used as though it Meant 
binduna saha. 


4:141 ‘Resorting to the gateway in the head, he should begin to me ditate 

upon the Formless (niskalam). As he practises in this Way, there then 
arise sensations (pratyayah) in him. 
The expression pratyaya might refer to many things: “faith”, Deum 
ness", “probative miracles that give faith”, and so forth (cf., for exam- 
ple, TAK3, s.v. pratyaya). We have interpreted it as "sensations" in 
view of the next verse. 


One could treat murdhnidvaram as an ai$a compound. The change 
made in the KSTS edition (Svacchanda 7:326a) rather suggests that 
others read it in that way (and wished to correct it). 


4:142 ‘[The sensation of the touch of creeping] ants or of being pricked by 
thorns [arises]; the gateway in his head is broken through; [the feeling 
of] being one with Him (tanmayatvam) arises for the sadhaka, while 
he remains in this [same] body? 


One could instead interpret the first phrase thus “[the sensation of] 
being pricked by ants or thorns [arises]”. This interpretation depends 
on the conjectured reading sadhake. If we retain the transmitted sad- 
hakah, then we could read 142d with the following and so understand: 


“While retaining the same body, the sadhaka may cross into others’ 
bodies...” 


4:143-144b ‘He may cross over into others’ bodies; he is not troubled by 
hunger and thirst; whatever is past or future or is happening [now] in 


the triple world becomes directly perceptible to him; and omniscience 
arises for him. 


Alternatively, following the suggestion of Nirajan KAFLE, we could 
Interpret “whatever happens in the triple world, both past and future, 
becomes directly perceptible to him...” The long parallel with the Stc 
cchanda ends after 4:144ab (&Svacchanda 7:330ab). The two half-lines 
that conclude the chapter there (Appendix I, 7:330cdef) appear to be 


a Secondary addition whose function is to furnish a transition to the 
next chapter. 


4:144C-145b ‘The goddess spoke: 


T a) — 4 d 
he word siitra, o &reat god, expresses a state [of knowledge attained] 


Translation of the Nayasitra à 
501 
after having examined [truth] (alok = 
ya-padavācakam?). : 
[about] that, o lord: you should tell [me]: akam?). I wish to hear 


Here begins a section that occurs also in chapter 37 of the Nisva 

karika (for which see Appendix IV). In the (rather poor) AS ion 
that transmit that chapter, we read alokapadavacakam: “exp ile 3 
state of illumination”. Both readings may be conceivable but neith : 
seems wholly satisfying. 4 dus 


4:145c-147b “The lord spoke: 
Because it penetrates (sücanat) one calls it sūtra; a sūtra is the highest 
word; by it everything is pervaded, just as groups of gems [are pen- 
etrated] by a thread (sütre). This unbroken “sūtra”, which fills the 
ether, which is undecaying, supreme, causes to appear a sequence of 
loops of lightning [as though writing] with a piece of chalk’ 


The nirvacana of sütra is well known and widespread (see, for example, 
Yuktidipika, p.3: aha: sutram iti kasmat? ucyate: siicanat sutram), 
but the rest of this unit is full of uncertainties. It is possible that 
praptam is here a corruption of the rarer word protam, which is also 
corrupted (to proktam) in the only manuscript that transmits Nisvasa- 
karika 37:11cd. Fortunately, the testimony of the Sivajfianasiddhi- 
svapaksadrstantasarigraha has there preserved what is no doubt the 
correct reading (see apparatus ad loc. in Appendix IV). 


4:147c—148b ‘He who sees the ultimate, which is subtle, inside the lotus of 
his heart, inside [concentric rings of| moon, sun and fire, you should 
render it writable [i.e. commit it to writing (?)] 


Here again we are very uncertain of whether we are even on the right 
track here. Is this an incitement to compose scripture? Or simply 
to copy it? The shift from 3rd to 2nd person is not common in the 
Nayasütra: could this be an indication that 4:144c and following were 
cobbled onto the end of the text by someone other than the author of 
the verses up to 4:144b? The seeming incoherence and the detachabil- 
ity of this section also suggest this. 


4:148c-149b "The goddess spoke: 
All the tattvas and groups of gods are 
tsarvanyase}. This (?) is the division 
[about it?] please’ 
As this translation reveals, this is opaque to US: D 


locatable (vyavasthitah) in the 
(?) of their mantras. Tell me 


oes nyasa here refer 


N iad -— 
* Sv asatattvasamhitn 


to mantranyasa? There appear not to be parallels in the earliest dd 
sutras of the Nisvasa for such a usage. 


4:149c-151 ‘The lord spoke: i : : 
All the gods have mantra as their nature (mantratmakah); all Mantras 
have Siva as their nature (Sivatmakah). With [these] mantras that are 
of the nature of Siva one should venerate [Siva] in Siva-worship (Siva. 
yage). If, without attaining [this understanding of] the true nature of 
Siva (Sivasadbhavam), if, in spite of reading the scriptures, without 
knowing [this nature], someone performs an initiation, then both the 
disciple and the teacher go down [to hell]; therefore one does not, as a 
disciple, approach an ordinary bound soul. 


Note that the first half-line of this unit, 4:149cd, occurs verbatim as 
Rauravasitrasangraha 3:28ab. 


4:152ab ‘On both sides...’ 


This is unfortunately quite unclear, both in the version in the Naya- 
sutra and in that in the Nisvasakarika (Appendix IV, 37:17cd). 


4:152c-153b ‘If (yah) a doctor (bhisak) without understanding fully a 
disease forcibly follows some [curative] course of action, [then] the sick 
person does not get satisfaction, nor does the doctor get his reward. 


We have adopted the reading bhisak (instead of the more banal 
bhrgam) from the Nisvasakarika (Appendix IV, 37:18). 


4153c-155b ‘[If] blessed with knowledge and wisdom (jfianavijfiana 
kuSalah), though he may be of any [social] status [however low], he 
can liberate [others] from bonds, being [himself] one whose blemishes 
have been shaken off through knowledge. Although devoid of all [aus- 
Picious] marks, [if he is] possessed of knowledge, he is taught to be 4 
guru: he knows the procedures for the ritual of initiation; he liberates 
from the web of bonds? 


The half-verse 4:154cd expresses a widespread cliché (cf., e.g, 00४00: 
jnanottara 19:4ab: sarvalaksanahino ‘pi SivaSastrarthavid guha) 2n 3 
appears almost verbatim as Tantraloka 23:6ab: sarvalaksanahino P! 
Jnanavan gurur işyate. 


#155cd ‘Siva is of great power (mahasaktih) because of [His] Salt E 
guru [is of great; power too] because of the presence of Sakti [in bimi 


Translation of the Nayasütra 
503 


This is 9 very tentative interpretation, given in the light of the fol- 
lowing half-verse. Note that the line becomes quite different in the 


Nisvasakarika (Appendix IV, 37:21cd): $ivabh à ; 
ktibhavena desikah. ): Sivabhakto mahabhaktih bha- 


4:156—7 ‘There is no difference between them both, [viz.] between the guru 
and Siva. He too [scil. the guru?] is OM, is bindu; he is nada and Jaya 
and niskala; in him all things are to be found; he too is Parama£iva. 


He is replete with all knowledge; he is skilled/adept in the meanings 
of all scripture(?)? 


We assume that both onkara and Jaya are pratipadikas used, for met- 
rical reasons, as nominatives. Given that all the other items listed in 
4:156cd are elements of mantroddhara, could laya be used here in the 
sense of nadanta? 


4:158 "They [scil. the wise] do not distinguish (nanatvam naiva kurvanti) 
[at the level of ultimate reality| between the guru, the mantra, Siva- 
scripture and Siva: AnanteSa and others are [also] Sivas !? 


Is this the earliest use of Siva in the plural to refer to other liberated 
souls? 


4:159 "Through further rebirths, across thousands of crores of eons, one 
may, somehow (katharici) attain the supreme Saiva truth. And one 
should teach it [only] because it is a cause for liberation of the self: 
how could someone give it to another person out of greed?’ 


If our conjecture, udirate, is correct, this would be an instance of a 
plural form used as a singular. Note that in these final verses we have 
a mixture of eleven-syllable tristubh and twelve-syllable jagat1 padas. 


4:160 ‘Surely one who will teach [this knowledge] out of delusion and greed 
must not desire liberation for himself! For I have taught [that there 
will be] annihilation (apaya-m-ukto) for gurus [who do so]: this nectar 
of truth is not to be given to just anybody- 


4:161 ‘If someone (yo vai) studies these four hundred E S des 
of thirty-two syllables], he raises up [from म्य pe £ Re 
[of his family] and becomes Siva by the fieriness o 


०५ Ce ith a hanging relative 
4 itution yo vai is suspicious: it leaves us w1 
K's restitution yo p DN E min "i 


clause in which the main verb is an 8 


504 


Nisur 
१०७७८८८०८७ 
ita 


As explained in the note on 4:41-42b above, we think that th; 

of the verses (or of the thirty-two-syllable-length units) E 

of the Nayasütra, rather than of just this chapter, but 
? 


not quite certain. 


vals isa tal] 
in the ze 
the matter 1६ 


A NOTE ON THE APPENDICES 


In the pages that follow, the reader will find extracts relevant to the con- 
stitution and interpretation of the first three sütras of the Nisvasa that are 
too long to be included in the notes. It is to be noted that these portions 
have been only minimally edited. 

In the case of the Svacchanda, portions of chapters 7, 11 and 12 have been 
included that are plainly based on the Nayasutra. We could simply have re- 
ferred readers to the KSTS edition, but for these passages the text of the 
Svacchanda that is reflected in old Nepalese manuscripts is clearly often clos- 
er to that of the Nayasütra than is the polished up Kashmirian text on which 
Ksemaraja commented. As SANDERSON has shown (2005:243), the trans- 
mission of the Netratantra is similar to that of the Svacchanda: there too 
the printed Kashmirian version differs from what the Nepalese manuscripts 
transmit, notably in that it is grammatically more correct. 


With the exception of an insertion of 95 verses seen in the Nepalese 
manuscript the only major difference between the transmissions of the 
Netratantra in that and the Kashmirian manuscripts is that the devia- 
tions from strictly grammatical Sanskrit that abound in the early Saiva 
scriptures are much fewer in the latter, most of whose divergent readings 
are best explained as the result of rephrasing to remove such anomalies. 
In the citations that follow I have therefore privileged the readings of the 
Nepalese manuscript (N) as evidence of an earlier state of the Kashmirian 
text. 


Obviously a full collation of numerous non-Kashmirian manuscripts of the 
Svacchanda would be useful, but it is beyond the scope E pague Jic 
small test for chapter 7 performed by Nibedita ROUT using E TE To 
held in Pondicherry (IFP T.507, T.1032, RE 10832b, ES T time- 
351592), we discovered that a full collation would be volumin ik h ae 
consuming to produce and full of recent trivial copying p Grantha- 
that the text of the Svacchanda transmitted in manuscripts of the 


iL pn n attempt 
Script region is similar to the printed K aah eT को, b but that 
. १ way i rrectlo , 
has been made in both to polish away impe न ie adjustments as the 


Southern transmitters have not always made 


506 NiSvdsatattuasambite 
Kashmirians. More could and should be said on this subject, but the re 
lations between the Nepalese, Southern and Kashmirian versions ang the 
role of the Svacchandatantroddyota in the transmission of the Svacchanda 
are subjects that require further study and will therefore have to be treated 
another day by someone else. 

At the suggestion of Shaman HATLEY, who has discussed the sources 
and transmission of the Svacchanda at greater length (forthcoming), We 
therefore decided to give a text based just on the KSTS edition and on One 
old Nepalese palm-leaf manuscript, namely NAK MS 1-225 (NGMPP Reel 
No. B 28/18). The result is of course not a critical edition, but merely a 
collation the purpose of which is to point to an older state of text than is 
reflected in the KSTS edition. 

We have also not produced carefully considered editions of the fragments 
of the Nisvasakarika and Diksottara given below, but rather a collation of the 
readings that appear in the scant sources available to us. Where conjectural 
improvements have occurred to us, we have proposed them, but we have 
not combed repeatedly through these passages with a view to perfecting a 
plausible critical text. 


Finally, a reminder of the contents of the appendices and of why they have 
been included: 


Appendix I Svacchanda 7:285c-330b is parallel to Nayasütra 4:100-144b. 


Appendix II Svacchanda 11:316-319 is parallel to Nayasutra 2:6-9; 
Svacchanda 12:1c-82 is parallel to Nagasütra 2:21-102; 
Svacchanda 12:83-157 is parallel to Nayasutra 3:1-72; 
Svacchanda 12:163-165b is parallel to Nayasutra 4:12-14b. 


Appendix III. Nisuasakarika jňīnakāņda 42 appears to comment on Mila 
sutra 4:7. 


Appendix IV Nisvasakarika jüanakanda 37:10—24 is parallel to Nayasttre 
4:144c-158. 


hich 
Appendix V Diksottara 9 has been included for various passages at Be. 


we refer in our annotation, for instance, its accounts (9:1 "T 
pasasutra, in our annotation on Mülasütra 3:9, and of mali 
(9:848), in our annotation on Uttarasütra 2:1. 


APPENDIX I 
स्वच्छन्दललितभैरवे 


सप्तमः पटलः 


बहिरलिङ्गानि चैतानि अङ्गारिष्टानि यानि च। 
पूजया जपहोमेन ध्यानेन धारणा प्रिये॥ 7:2841 


कृतरक्षाविधानेन जीर्यन्ते नान्यथा तु ते। 
भैरव्युवाच 
नाडीनां शोधनच्चैव वायूनां च जयं कथम्‌॥ 7:285॥ 


स्थानरूपं च कर्म च शब्दं ब्रूहि मम प्रभो। 
भैरव उवाच 
परमं योगसद्चावं गुह्याङ्गुह्यतरं TALI 7:286॥ 


यन्न कस्यचिदाख्यातं तद्योगं शृणु तत्त्वतः | 
सुप्रशस्ते भूप्रदेशे नद्योदकसमीपतः॥ 7:2871 


बालुकाशर्कराहीने शुष्कवृक्षविवर्जिते। 
निस्सर्पकीटवल्मीक ईतीभिः परिवर्जिते॥ 7:2881 


7:284 चैतानि ] Ex; चेतानि N 7:284 ध्यानेन धारणा] N; जा i 
7:285 जीर्यन्ते] N; जीयन्ते Ex — 7:285 नान्यथा तु ते] N; नात Secr 
7:285 भैरव्युवाच ] N; om. Ek 7:28 जयं] N; जयः Ex 7:286 at 
कर्म च शब्द] N; स्थानं रूपं च शब्दं च कर्म Ex 77286 भैरव DEEN ; regu 
Ex 7:286 परमं योगसङद्भावं गुद्याहुह्मतर पर] ४; परमो योगसद्वावो Tega B 
प्रिये छ 7:287 यन्न कस्यचिदाख्याते तद्योगं ] N; यो न कस्यचिदाख्यातस्त 

7:287 नद्योदक० ] N^; नद्योतक" Nw; नाग्नितोय” Ex 


Fret: N; निशब्द» EX 7:288 ईतीभिः ] Ex; इतीभिः N 


५०८ निद्वासतत्त्वसंहितायाम्‌ 


पुण्यधर्मिष्ठसंवासे तत्र योगं समभ्यसेत्‌। 
देवदेवं समभ्यच्ये भैरवं सविनायकम्‌॥ 7: 289॥ 


पूर्वाचार्यान्नमस्कृत्वा युक्तो ध्यानपरायणः i 
आसनं पञ्चकं बध्वा स्वस्तिक भद्रमासनम्‌॥ 7: 290॥ 


सापाश्रयमर्द्ध चन्द्र योगपट्ट यथासुखम्‌ | 
दहनोत्पूयनं कृत्वा ज्रावनामृतमेव च॥ 7: 291॥ 


सबाह्याभ्यान्तरेणैव सकलीकरणं HE | 
अन्तर्यागं यथापूर्वम्‌ उच्चारणपरन्तथा॥ 7: 292॥ 


दशधा योगमार्गेण हंसस्वच्छुन्दमभ्यसेत्‌। 
मात्राबिन्दुमतीतं च नादात्मा ज्योतिविग्रहम्‌॥ 7: 293॥ 


कल्पनालक्षसंकल्पं ध्याये Sade सर्वेगम्‌ | 
अवसव्येन qur सव्येनैव तु रेचयेत्‌॥ 7: 294॥ 


नाडीसंशोधनं ह्येतन्मोक्षमार्गपरस्य तु। 
रेचनात्पूरणाद्रोधात्प्राणायामत्रयः स्मृताः॥ 7: 295॥ 


सामान्या बहिरेतानि पुनश्चाभ्यन्तराणि q । 
अभ्यन्तरेण रेचेत पूरेच्चाभ्यन्तरेण तु॥ 7:2961 


yir e eee RUN 
7:289 पुण्य" ] N; पुण्ये Ex 7:290 पूर्वाचार्यान्‌ ] Ex; पूर्वाचार्यन्‌ N 7:290 नमस्कृ- 
त्वा] N; नमस्कृत्य Ek 7:290 आसनं पद्यकं बध्वा स्वस्तिकं भद्रमासनम्‌ ] N; आसन 
स्वस्तिकं वद्धा पच्चक भद्रमेव वा Ex 7:201 अर्द्धचन्द्र ] N; सार्घचन्द्र Ex 7:291 यो- 
TE] Ex; योगं पट्टं ` 7:291 दहनोत्पूयनं ] N; दहनोत्पूयने Ex — 7:291 ख्रावना- 
मृतमेव ] N; स्रावयेदमृतेन E, 7:292 कुरु] N; ततः Ex 7:292 यथापूर्वम्‌ ] Pri 
यथापूर्वे N _7:292 उच्चारणपरन्तथा | N; उच्चार्यं च परं तथा Ex 7:293 “मभ्यसेत्‌ ] 
Ex; MATN 7:293 मात्रा" ] N; मन्त्रं ७८ 7:293 च नादात्मा ज्योतिविग्रहम्‌] 
Ni तु नादान्तज्योतिराकृतिम्‌ Ex 7:294 कल्पनालक्षसंकल्पं ] N; संकल्प्यं कल्पता 
ष्ये Ex a प्रेत ] N; अपसव्येन पूर्येत EX 7:294 तु रेचयेत्‌] ०० 
तु पूरयेत्‌ ४; येत्‌ Ex 7:295 शोधनं] Ex; शोधन ॥ 7:295 ह्येतन्मोक्षमार्ग zi 
i तु] coni; ह्येतन्मोक्षमार्गपस्य तु N (unmetrical); चैतन्मोक्षमार्गपथस्थ 

2495 SHAT: स्मृताः ] N; भमस्त्रिधा स्मृतः Ex 7:296 बहिरेतानि उ 
a IN; वहिरेते तु पुनञ्चाभ्यन्तरे त्रयः EQ 7:296 अभ्यन्तरेण रेचेत ] Ni 

TEx 7:296 पूरेच्चा” ] N; पूर्येता° Ex 


Appendix I: स्वच्छन्दललितभैरवे सप्तम: पटलः ५०९ 
निष्कम्पकुम्भकङ्कत्वा त्रयञ्चाभ्यन्तराणि तु। 
नाभ्या हृदयसंचारो मनश्ेन्द्रियगोचर:॥ 7:297 ॥ 


प्राणायामञ्चतुर्थस्तु सुप्रशान्तस्तु विश्रुतः | 
प्राणरोधे तु संपूर्ण नाभिन्नीत्वा समुच्छुवसेत्‌॥ 7:298॥ 


शनैविंमोचयेद्वायु वामनासापुटेन तु। 
वायवीं धारये ऽङ्गुष्ठे आग्नेयीं नाभिमध्यतः॥ 7: 299॥ 


माहेन्द्री कण्ठदेशे तु वारुणी घण्टिके स्मृता। 
आकाशधारणा मूर्धि सर्वसिद्धिकरी स्मृता॥ 7:3001 


एकह्वित्रिचतुःपञ्च -उद्घातैञ्च प्रसिद्धति। 
संरुद्धे चैव प्राणे ufu गत्वा Frade 7:3011 


उद्घातमिति तत्प्रोक्तं ज्ञातव्यं योगिभिः सदा। 
रागद्वेषौ प्रहीयेत प्राणायामैः सुधारितैः॥ 7:302॥ 


धारणे सर्वपापानि प्रत्याहाराक्षसंयमः। 
TAS नाभिकण्ठे च सर्वसन्धौ तथैव च ॥ 7:3031 


` प्राणाद्याः संस्थिता ह्येते रूपशब्दं च मे शृणु। 
दृततारनिभः प्राण इन्द्रगोपकसन्निभः॥ 7:304॥ 


क्षीराभः स्फटिकाभश्च पञ्चानां रूपलक्षणम्‌। 


7:297 निष्कम्पकुम्भकङ्कुत्वा त्रयस्जाभ्यन्तराणि तु] N; निष्कम्प कुम्भक कृत्वा कार्याश्चा- 
भ्यन्तरास्त्रयः Ex 7:297 नाभ्या हृदयसंचारो मनख्षेन्द्रियगोचरः | N; नाभ्या हृदयः 
संचारान्मनश्चेन्द्रियगोचरात्‌ Ex 7:298 सुप्रशान्तस्तु विश्रुतः ] NG; सुप्रशान्त इति 
Ex 75298 संपूर्णे] Ex; संपूण्णे N 7:298 नाभिन्नीत्वा समुच्छुवसेत्‌ ] N; ना mus 
नीत्वा समुच्छुवसन्‌ EX 7:299 वायवीं धारये sgB आग्नेयौ ] N; we 
गुडे आग्नेयी E, 7:300 माहेन्द्री ] N; माहेयी Ex 7:300 वारुणी aft n 
em.; वारुणीं घण्ठिके स्मृता N; वारुणी घण्टिकाश्रया Ex ete La M 
N 7:301 «पन्च-उद्दातैस ] N; "पश्संख्योद्दातिः Ex 7:301 संरुद्धे चैव प्रा non 
संनिरुद्धे तु वै प्राणे ७, 7:30 उद्दातमिति dom ज्ञातव्य ] Ni T Mos प्रत्याहा- 
ज्ञातव्यो E, 7:302 TAT] N; NAAT Ex 7908 धारणे सर्वपापा पा र 
राक्षसंयमः ] N; धारणाभिर्दहेत्पारप प्रत्याहारे ऽक्षसंयमः Ex 7. प्राण इन्द्रगोपक 
प्राणाद्यः N 7:304 रूपशब्दं ] N; रूपं शब्दं Ex 7:304 दृततारनिभः 

सन्निभः ] N; दृततारनिभो रक्त : Ex 


५१० निश्चासतत्त्वसंहितायाम्‌ 
घण्टिकाकांसमधुरो गजनादो महाध्वनिः॥ 7:305॥ 


प्राणादीनां च पञ्चानां शब्दमेतडुदाहृतः | 
जल्पितं हसितं गीतं नृत्यं Genta: कला॥ 7:3061 


शिल्पं च सर्वकर्माणि प्राणस्यैव हि चेष्टितम्‌। 
प्रवेशये ऽन्नपानानि त्रिमलं स्रावयेदधः॥ 7: 307॥ 


अन्धत्वं श्रोत्ररोगाञ्च अपानस्तु करिष्यति। 
अशितं लीढपीतञ्च समानः समतान्नयेत्‌॥ 7: 308॥ 


ad fear च fear च कास उदानस्य चेष्टितम्‌। 
रोमहर्षश्च स्वेदश्च शूलं दाघांगाभञ्जकः॥ 7: 309॥ 


व्यानस्यैतानि कर्माणि स्पर्शत्वञ्चैव विन्दति। 
अङ्गुष्ठजानुहृदये लोचने मूर्ध्निं संस्थितः॥ 7:310॥ 


नागाद्या बहुरूपाश्च कर्म तेषां निबोध मे। 
आह्लादनोद्वेजनश्न शोषणस्त्रासनस्तथा॥ 7: 311॥ 


नागः कूर्मश्च कृकरो देवदत्तस्च पञ्चमः | 
निद्रातीवकरश्चान्यो योजको हि धनञ्जयः॥ 7:312॥ 


श्वाससंकोचनच्छेदे घुर्घुरख्रोत्क्रमेति च। 


7:305 घण्टिकाकांसमधुरो ] N; घण्टाकंसाब्दमधुरो Ex 7:306 च ] N; d Ex 7:306 
शब्दमेतडदाहृतः ] N; अयं शब्द उदाहृतः Ex 7:306 नृत्यं ] N; नृत्तं Ex _7:306 केः 
ला] N; कलाः Ex 7:307 हि चेष्टितम्‌] N; विचेष्टितम्‌ Ex — 7:307 प्रवेशये SA- 
पानानि त्रिमलं ] N; प्रवेशयेदन्नपानं तन्मलं E. 7:307 स्रावयेदधः ] Ex; आवयेदधः 
N 7:308 श्रोत्ररोगाञ्च ] N; श्रोत्ररोगं च EX 7:309 क्षुत्‌ fear च छिक्का च कास 
उदानस्य चेष्टितम्‌ ] N (unmetrical); क्षोभो fea तथा छिक्का उदानस्य विचेष्टितम्‌ P 
7:309 रोमहर्षश्च स्वेदश्च शूलं ] N; Bes रोमहर्षश्च शूलं Ex 7:309 दाघांगाभञ्जकः | 
N; दाहो ऽगभञ्जनम्‌ Ey 7:310 व्यानस्यैतानि ] Ex; व्यानस्थैतानि N go 
Jasa विन्दति] N; स्पर्श चैव स विन्दति Ex 7:310 ags” ] Ex: SIE 
7:3:0 P संस्थितः ] em. afr संस्थितः N; मूं संस्थिताः m. 79111) 
N; Ex 7:311 आह्वादनोद्वेजनख्ज ] N; आह्झादोद्वेगजनकः Ex 7:311 
Wate] Ex; शोषणत्रा" N 7:312 नाग: कूर्मञ्च कृकरो देवदत्त पञ्चमः] Ex; a 
हिली योजन. निद्रातीवकरश्चान्यो ] conj; निद्रातीकरञ्चान्यो N; च्छदा 
पर TR] N; योजकञ्च ७. 7:313 *च्छेदे घुर्घुरख्जोत्क्रमेति च] Ni 

ET 


Appendix I: स्वच्छन्दललितभैरवे सप्तम: पटल: 
२११ 


नागादीनां तु पञ्चानां मृत्युकाले विचेष्टितम्‌॥ 7:3131 


न चैव यान्ति चोत्क्रान्त्या धनंजयो न त्यजे तु तम्‌। 
आकुञ्चयति वै कूर्मः शोषयेत कलेवरम्‌॥ 7:314॥ ` 


प्राणमेव जयेत्पूर्वं जिते प्राणे जितं मनः। 
जिते मनसि शान्तात्मा परतत्त्व प्रकाशयेत्‌॥ 7:3151 


प्राणापानौ गुदे ध्यायेत्प्राणसमानौ नाभितः। 
प्राणोदानौ कण्ठे च प्राणो व्यानश्च सर्वगः॥ 7:316॥ 


नागाद्याः प्राणसंयुक्ताः स्वस्थानेषु निरुन्धयेत्‌। 
निरुद्धस्य च यत्कालं प्रवक्ष्यामि निबोधत॥ 7:317॥ 


तालात्प्रभृति धार्येत यावत्पञ्चशतं गतः। 
जितो ऽनिलो भवत्येवं सङ्कान्त्युत्क्रान्तिकर्मणि॥ 7:318॥ 


दिव्यकान्तिः शुभो गन्धः प्रज्ञा चास्य विवद्धंते। 
दिव्यदृष्टिश्च श्रवणो दिव्यवाक्‌ संप्रवर्तते॥1819॥ 


वायुवद्विचरेल्लोकां सिद्धान्देवांञ्च Water | 
मनेच्छा चिन्तितप्राप्तिः प्रवत्तेत गुणाष्टकम्‌॥ 7:320॥ 


7:314 न चैव यान्ति चोत्क्रान्त्या ] N; नचैव याति चोत्क्रान्तौ Ex 7:314 धनंजयो न 
त्यजे तु तम्‌] N; तनुं त्यत्का धनञ्जयः Ex 7:314 आकुञ्चयति ] Ex; आकुच्चति N 
(unmetrical) 7:314 शोषयेत ] N; शोषयेच्च Ex 7:315 MATT परतत्त्व IANT- 
येत्‌] em. शान्तात्मा परतत्त्वं प्रकायेत्‌ N (unmetrical); शान्तस्य पर तत्त्व प्रकाशते 
Ex 7:316 प्राणापानौ] N (unmetrical); प्राणापानं Ex 7:316 aka 
प्राणसमान E, (unmetrical) 7:316 प्राणोदानौ कण्ठे च] N; प्राणोदान प तु 
Ex 7:316 प्राणो व्यानश्च सर्वगः ] \; प्राणव्यानं तु सर्वगम्‌ Ex क पा ना a 
युक्ताः Ex; नागाद्या प्राणसंयुक्ता  7:317 निरुन्धयेत्‌] N; निरोध S 
7:317 यत्कालं प्रवक्ष्यामि ] N; यं कालस्तं वक्ष्यामि Ex 7:317 निवोधत ] = 4 
बोधतः N; निवोध मे ७८ 7:318 तालात्प्रभूति धार्येत ] conj. ताता NE E 
तालात्रभृति तं ध्यायेद्‌ Ex 7:318 पञ्चशतं ] Ex; पञ्चगत N bes अवतो णो 
Ex 7:319 दिव्यकान्तिः ] N; दिव्या कान्तिः Ex 7:319 Bee: 

क संप्रवर्तते] N; दिव्या दृष्टिञ्च श्रवणं दिव्या वाक्च बा M 

Ni; लोकान्‌ Ex 7:320 मनेच्छा चिन्तितप्रास्तिः ] N; मनसा चिन्तिताः 


५१२ निश्चासतत्त्संहितायाम हितायाम्‌ 


सर्वकामसुसंपूर्ण सर्वद्वन्द्वविवर्जितम्‌ | 

संसारबन्धनिर्मुक्तः शिवतुल्यञ्च जायते॥ 7:321॥ 
प्राणापाने तु संयोज्य हस्वकोटिसमन्वितम्‌ । 

नाभ्यां धारेत योगीन्द्रः स्वेदः कम्पञ्च जायते॥ 7:3221 


पुनरेव हृदिस्थं हि प्राणापानौ निरुन्धयेत्‌। 
दीर्घकोटिसमायोगात्तत्क्षणात्पतते महीम्‌॥ 7:323॥ 


कण्ठस्थ हि तथैवेह प्राणमेकं निरुन्धयेत्‌। 
स्रुतकोटिसमायोगात्स्वपनवृत्तिस्ततो भवेत्‌॥ 7: 324॥ 


भ्रूमध्ये विन्ढुयुक्तेन प्राणरोधन्तु कारयेत्‌। 
सुषुप्तः जायते तत्र क्षणाच्चैव प्रबुध्यति॥ 7: 325॥ 


qiian समाशृत्य निष्कलं ध्यानमारभेत्‌। 
एवमभ्यसतस्तस्य प्रत्ययं तु तदा भवेत्‌॥ 7 :326॥ 


पिपीलिकाण्ठकावेधान्मूरष्निद्वारं विभिव्यति। 
भित्त्वा क्रमेण सर्वाणि उन्मनान्तं तु यावतः | 327॥ 


पूर्वोक्तलक्षणाद्देवि त्यत्का स्वच्छन्दतां व्रजेत्‌ | 
जायते तन्मयत्वं हि देहेनानेन साधकः॥ 7:3281 


संक्रमेत्‌ परदेहेषु क्षुत्तृष्णाभ्यां न बाध्यते। 


nv SES S 
7:321 “पूर्ण ] N; "पूर्ण: E, 7:321 °विवर्जितम्‌ ] N; *विवर्जितः Ex 7:321 HE 
मुक्त: ] Ex; "निर्मुक्त: N 7:322 प्राणापाने ] N; प्राणापानौ Ex 7:322 °समन्वितम्‌ ] 
N; "समन्वितौ Ek 7:322 नाभ्यां धारेत ] N; नाभ्याधारे Ex 7:322 स्वेदः ] Ex; 
स्वेद N 7:323 हृदिस्थं हि] em; हिदिस्थं हि N; तु हृत्स्थौ हि Ex 77323 नि- 
s N; निरोधयेत्‌ Ex — 7:323 तत्क्षणात्पतते महीम्‌ ] N; तत्क्षणाच पतेड्डवि 
Em mend Nj MEK 7:324 प्राणमेकं निरुन्धयेत्‌ ] N; प्राणमेव निरोधयेत Ex 
MEN युक्तन ] N; ०योगेन es 7825 सुषुप्तः ] N; सुषुप्तं Ex 7722० a 
Sr Dev ei nn IN; मूर्घद्दार E, 7:326 प्रत्ययं TING; WATS 
fugi Ec पिपीलिकाण्ठकावेधान्मूधिद्दारे विभिद्यति] em; पिपीलिकाण्ठकावेधा: 
bras भिद्यति N; पिपीलकण्टकावेधो मूर्ध्वद्वारं विभिन्दतः EX 7:32 उन्मान T 
Ra aui: उन्मनान्त यावतः NG उन्मनान्तानि यानि तु E 7:925 “्लक्षणाद 
p. TA Ex 7:328 तन्मयत्वं ] N; उन्मनस्त्वं Ex 7:328 साधकः ] Ni 

x  T329 संक्रमेत्‌ ] N; संक्रामेत्‌ E, 


Appendix I: स्वच्छन्दललितभैरवे सप्तम: पटल: "E 


अतीतानागतश्चैव त्रैलोक्ये यत्रवत्तैते॥ 7:329! 


प्रत्यक्षन्तद्ववेत्तस्य सर्वज्ञत्वं च जायते। 
प्रसङ्गे ५ध्यात्मकालस्य ज्ञानविज्ञानमेव च। 
सर्वमेतत्समाख्यातमङ्शकाम्च निवोध मे॥ 7:330॥ 


इति स्वच्छन्दललितभैरवे महातन्त्रे मन्त्रपीठे आध्यात्मकालपटलः सप्तमः॥ 


— NN ; ०मंशकांञ्च Ex 
7:330 ज्ञान" ] N; ज्ञान Ex 7:330 asana | N 


APPENDIX II 
स्वच्छन्दललितभैरवे 
एकादशमद्वादशमौ पटलौ 


देव्युवाच। 
अकामस्य क्रिया नास्ति निष्कामः सृजते कथम्‌। 
एतत्प्रश्नवरं गुह्यं कथयस्व प्रसादत्तः॥ 11:3161 


भैरव उवाच। 
आदित्यस्य मणिर्यह्दत्तापितो रविरश्मिभिः। 
qf: संजायते तत्र न रवेस्तत्र कामता॥ 11:317॥ 


मणेरपि न कामित्वं तद्वद्देवस्य चेष्टितम्‌। 
आदित्यवच्छिवो ज्ञेयः शक्तिर्मणिरिव स्थिता॥ 11:318॥ 


रितुकालमनुप्राप्य कालस्तत्र नियोजकः। 
शिवशक्तिसमावेशात्तद्वदेव जगोद्भवः॥ 11:3191 


इति स्वच्छन्दललितमभैरवे महातंत्रे ृष्टिस्थित्येकादशमपटलः॥ 

11:316 निष्कामः सृजते] N; निष्क्रियश्च सृजेत्‌ Ex 11:316 जत MEA : 
तत्प्रश्मपरं N; एवं WAAC Ex 11:317 Jeo 
मणेयंद्वत्तापिताद्‌ Ek 11:317 तत्र न रवेस्तत्र कामता] Ni तस्मादरवेस्तत्र रितुका- 
Ex 11:318 शक्तिर्मणिरिव स्थिता ] Ex; शक्तिमणिरिव E नियोज = 
लमनुप्राप्य कालस्तत्र नियोजकः ] N; ऋतुकालमित द SUN E काला ४5 गोड़वः 
11:319 शिवशक्तिसमावेशात्तद्ददेव जगोड़वः ] con. 

N; यद्दच्छिवसमायोगात्तद्दच्छक्तेर्जंगत्स्थितिः Ex 


५१६ निश्चासतत्त्वसंहितायाम्‌ 


भैरव्युवाच | | 
सृष्टिः स्थितिश्न संहारस्तत्त्वानां कथितस्त्वया | 


जगत्संभवहेतुश्न॒ त्वत्प्रसादाच्छतं मया॥ 12:11 


तत्त्वविज्ञानमाख्याहि सिद्धिञ्चैव कथं भवेत्‌ । 


भैरव उवाच | 
पृथिव्यादि शिवान्ता च प्रवक्ष्यामि समासतः॥ 12: 2॥ 


पृथ्वी कठिनरूपेण शुणु देहे यथा स्थिता। 
मांसे चैव तथास्थिभ्यो ख्रायुलोमनखेषु च॥ 12:31 


मज्जान्त्रेषु च विज्ञेया पृथ्वी पञ्चगुणोत्कटा। 
कफस्सृग्मूत्र आमेषु रसस्वेदवसासु च॥ 12: 4॥ 


शुक्रे च संग्रहे चैव स्थिता आपञ्चतुर्गुणाः | 
पचने दहने चैव ऊष्मे तेजसि वै पुनः॥ 12:5॥ 


तेजस्त्वेवं समाख्यातो विज्ञेयस्तु त्रिलक्षण: । 
वायुरुच्छुवासनिश्वासस्पर्शने च तथा पुनः॥ 12:61 


ूत्रोच्चारविस्गे च अन्नपानविसर्जने | 
वायुरेभिः स्थितो देहे विज्ञेयस्तु द्विलक्षणः ॥ 12: 7॥ 


एकलक्षणमाकाशं कथयामि यथा स्थितम्‌। 


121 भैरव्युवाच ] N; देव्युवाच E i | y 
ST Ex 12:1 सृष्टिः स्थितिञ्च संहारस्तत्त्वानां कथितः 
स ७५; सृष्टिस्थितिसंहारं तत्वानां कथितं त्वया N 12:2 सिद्धिश्चैव कथं ] N; 
HEA यथा Ex 12:2 भैरव ] N; श्रीमैरव Ex 12:2 शिवान्ता च प्रवक्ष्यामि ] N; 
च. मास कथयामि Ex 12:3 स्थिता ] Ey; स्थितां NG 12:3 मांसे चैव तथास्थिभ्यो ] 
$ मासेऽस्थिषु तथा चैव E, 12:4 मज्जान्त्रेषु ] Ex; मज्जान्तेषु N 12:4 कफस्सृ- 
i N; कफासृगाममूत्रेषु E. 12:4 रसस्वेदवसासु च] Ex; रसस्वादीवसासु 

! remm] Ex; आप चतुर्गुणाः N i12: ऊष्मे तेजसि वै पुनः] 
conj.; ऊष्मो वै पुनः N; तेजस्यूष्मणि 
त्रिलक्षण: ] NG स्थितं देवि प्रकाशे च त्रिलक्षणम्‌ E, 12:6 वायुरुच्छुवासनिश्वासस्पः 


शेन च तथा पुनः] N; वायुरुच्छुवासनिः eli BRUT - 
अन्नपानविसर्जने ] N; fate अन्नपान वेश d कप sU 


Appendix IL स्वच्छन्दललितभैरवे एकादशमद्दादशमौ पटलौ 
५१७ 


सुषिरात्मक तु विज्ञेयं नवधा च्छिद्रलक्षणम्‌॥ 12:8॥ 
शब्दात्मकगुणो ह्येकः कथितं तव सुद्रते। 
वागेन्द्रियं वदेद्वाणी सा च वाणी चतुर्विधा॥ 12:9॥ 


संस्कृता प्राकृता चैव अपश्रंशानुनासिका। 
छेदनं भेदनन्दानं वेधनं शिल्पकारितम्‌॥ 12:10॥ 


ग्रहणं विजयश्चैव सर्वं हस्तेन्त्रिये स्थितम्‌। 
समनिम्न्नोन्नताहीनकण्टकलोष्टवालुकाः॥ 12:11 


कर्दमो जलदुर्गाणि रथ्याट्टालकपर्वंताः। 
पादेन्द्रियशुणा व्यक्ता देशान्तरगमागमे॥ 12:12॥ 


उत्से wféd चैव पायुचेष्टितङ्सर्वदा। 
गम्यागम्ये प्रवर्तेत उपस्थानन्दकारकः॥ 12:131 


कर्मसु सम्प्रवर्तन्ते तेन कमेन्द्रियाः स्मृताः | 
बुद्धीन्द्रियाणि देवेशि वर्तन्ते बुद्धियोगतः॥ 12:14॥ 


षड्जं च ऋषभं चैव गान्धारो मध्यमस्तथा | 
पञ्चमं धैवतं षष्ठं निषादञ्जैव सप्तम:॥ 12:15॥ 


[गान्धारो मध्यमः षड्जस्त्रयो WATS पार्वति |] 


त IN: = गणं X 12:9 वागेन्द्रियं वदेद्वाणी ] 
12:9 शब्दात्मकगुणो ह्येकः ] N; शब्दात्मकं गुणं ह्येतत्‌ ४ VN आकृती दैव 
अपश्रष्टानुनासिका Ex 12:10 वेधनं शिल्पकारितम्‌ ता यत नही 
12:11 “जैव सर्व हस्तेन्द्रिये स्थितम्‌ ] Ex; oad सर्व हस्तेन्द्रियं स्मृतः N 12:11 
नकण्टकलोष्ट" ] N (unmetrical); AT अलातः 
N 12:12 पर्वताः] Ex; "पर्वेता N 12:12 i 
गम्यन्ते Ex डरते चैव पायुचेष्टितङ्सवंदा ] N; पर्दिते NS पाव 
Ex 12:13 गम्यागम्ये प्रवर्त्तेत उपस्थानन्दकारकः ] N; wh A Mire 
वर्तकः E, 12:14 कर्मसु सम्प्रवर्त्न्ते तेन कर्मेन्द्रियाः स्मृता 19:15 षड्जं 
न तु कमेन्द्रियाः स्मृताः N; कर्मस्वेतानि वर्तन्ते तेन कर्मेन्द्रयाणि त -५ प्रिये Er 
च ऋषभं चैव गान्धारो मध्यमस्तथा ] N; VS wearers चा ~ निषादच्चैव सप्तमं 
12:15 पञ्चमं धैवतं षष्ठं निषादखैव सप्तमः ] con) bs : 

N; धैवतो निषध्चैव स्वराः सप्त प्रकीर्तिताः Ex 12:16 गान 
WATS पार्वति] Ex; om. N 


५१८ निश्चासतत्त्वसंहितायाम हितायाम्‌ 


सप्त स्वरास्त्रयो ग्रामा एकविंशति मूर्छनाः॥ 12:16॥ 


ताना ह्येकूनपञ्चाश इत्येतत्स्वरमण्डलस्‌ | 
सूक्ष्मशब्दाः स्मृता ह्येते सर्ववस्तुषु संस्थिताः॥ 12:17॥ 


arida प्रवक्ष्यामि यथावत्तान्निबोध मे। 
भेरीशंखमृदङ्गञ्च पटहं पणवं तथा॥ 12:18॥ 


मर्दलो द्रो वेणुगामुखं तालमेव च। 
तन्त्रीवाद्यानि चित्राणि करवाद्यानि यानि च। 
मुखवाद्यानि रम्याणि करवाद्यानि यानि च॥ 12:19॥ 


संयोगजवियोगजकाष्ठ चोक्ताप्यनेकधा। 
संस्कृतं प्राकृतञ्चैव अपश्रंशानुनासिकम्‌॥ 12: 20॥ 


सप्तस्वरप्रतिष्ठानि व्यक्ताव्यक्तानि चैव fai 
उक्तानुक्तानि Ned श्रवणेन्द्रिययोगतः॥ 12:21 


शब्दस्य विषयो ह्येष येन बुध्यति पुङ्गलः | 
मूदुझ्न कठिनख्चैव कर्कशः शीतलं TATI 12:221 


उष्णं च पिच्छिलं लोष्टं कर्दमं वालुकास्तथा | 
शरकोन्तासिघातानि ताडनं छेदनं तथा॥ 12: 23॥ 


eI 
12:16 स्वरास्त्रयो ] Ek; स्वरा त्रयो ॥ 12:16 एकविंशति मूर्छनाः ] conj; एकविंशति 
मूर्छना \; मूर्छनाञ्लैकविंशतिः EX 12:17 ताना ह्येकूनपञ्चाश इत्येतत्स्वरमण्डलम्‌ ] Ni 
तान एकोनपच्चाशदित्येतत्सुरमण्डलम्‌ Ex 12:17 "शब्दा: ] Ex; oyra N 12:17 d- 
TNT संस्थिताः N; चराचररवस्थिताः Ex 12:18 तान्निबोध ] Ex; Ma. 
GRAN भेरीशंसमृदङ्गष्च पटहं पणवं तथा] conj; भेरीशंखमृदङ्गपटह पणवं तथा N; भेः 
दु S तय मृदङ्गपणवोत्थितः Ex 12:19 मर्दलो दडुरो वेणुर्गोमुखं तालमेव च ] Ni 
ES पुखशव्दञ्च मन्दलो दईरो ध्वनिः 7४ 12:19 मुखवाद्यानि रम्याणि करवाद्यानि 
वियोगो | N; om. Ex 12:20 संयोगजवियोगजकाष्ठ चोक्ताप्यनेकधा ] N; संयोगज- 
Ec e काष्ठपाषाणवारिजा: Ex 12:20 संस्कृतं प्राकृतञ्चैव अपभ्रंशानुनासिकम्‌ | 
12 अपभ्रेशो5नुनासिक्यः सस्कृतः प्राकृतो रवः Ex 12:21 T&T] Ni गृह्णाति Ex 
= Bd N; शब्दो sere, 12:22 बुध्यति ] N; JAT Ex 12:22 मूड 
ब il N; 49 च कठिनं चैव कर्कशं EX 12:23 पिच्छिलं लोष्ट f E 
N; AER utei वालुका तथा N 12:23 शरकोन्तासिघातानि 


Appendix IL स्वच्छन्दललितभैरवे एकादशमद्दादशमौ पटलौ ५१९ 
एतान्यानि विजानीत स्पर्शने च त्वगिन्द्रियम्‌। 
स्पर्शस्य विषयो ह्येष येन बुध्यति पुङ्गलः॥ 12:241 


चक्षुरिन्द्रियकर्माणि कथ्यमानानि मे शृणु। 
सितं रक्तं च पीतं च कृष्णं हरितधूम्रकम्‌॥ 12:251 
कपिलं पिङ्गलं wp अन्यान्यपि विशेषतः। 
नरनारीपशुमृगाञ्ज्योतिः स्थावरजङ्गमम्‌॥ 12:26॥ 


रूपाकृतिविभक्तानि चक्षुः पश्यति सर्वदा। 
रूपस्य विषयो ह्येषः येनात्मा प्रतिबुध्यति॥ 12:27॥ 


मधुरासतनरसं चैव लवणं कटु तिक्तकम्‌। 
कषायमिम्रं स्वां च जिह्वा वेदयते रसम्‌॥ 12:28॥ 


रसस्य विषयो ह्येषः येन बुध्यति पुङ्गलः। 
सुरभिर्दिव्यगन्धानि डुर्गन्धाञ्चाप्यशोभनाः॥ 12:29॥ 


उभौ जिघ्रति नासाग्रे विषयो गन्धसंज्ञकः | 
येनासौ बुध्यते क्षेत्री अहङ्कारेण मोहितः॥ 12:301 


संकल्पे च विकल्पे च दशधा क्षेत्रेषु धावति। 
अनिवारितसंमोही अजयः सवैजन्तुषु॥ 12:31॥ 


मन्च कथितो ह्येष धर्माधर्मनिबन्धकः। 
स्वरूपघर्म वक्ष्यामि तन्मात्राणां यथार्थतः॥ 12:321 


12:24 एतान्यानि विजानीत स्पर्शने ] em. एतान्यानि विजानीतः स 
नि वै विजानाति स्पर्शनं EX 12:24 स्पर्शस्य ] conj; SEEN E 
12:24 बुध्यति ] N; बुध्येत Ex 12:25 सितं ] Ex: सित" N 12125 qa a = 
“हारितम्‌ N 12:26 «मृगाञ्ज्योतिः ] Ex; हि NO IAS : रूपाख्यो fr- 
“विविक्तानि EX 12:27 रूपस्य विषयो ह्येषः येनात्मा 2s r बुध्यति N; 
षयो ह्यस्य येनात्मा प्रतिबुद्यते ७, 12:29 रसस्य विमा ANA :] N 
रसोऽस्य विषयो ह्येष येन बुद्धेत Ex 12:29 मासा काल 12:31 दशधा 
TREES दुगंन्धञ्जाप्यनेकधा Ex 12:30 oman: ] N; "११९. क सर्वजन्तुषु ] 
aay] N (unmetrical) ; दशधाक्षेषु Ex 12:31 कथितो ह्येष र्माधर्मनिव- 
N; अनिवारितसन्देहमजय्यं सर्वदेहिनाम्‌ Ex 12:92 SUE वक्ष्यामि ] Ex; क्ष्यामि 
न्धकः ] N; मनञ्च कथितं ह्येतद्ध्माधर्मनिबन्धकम्‌ Ex Fa 

N 


५२० निश्चासतत्त्वसंहितायाम 


गन्धं तु गन्धतन्मात्रं नासिकाग्रेण जिन्नति। 
जिह्घायां रसतन्मात्रं रसं गृह्णाति संस्थितम्‌॥ 12:33॥ 


चक्षुषो रूपतन्मात्रं रूपं गृह्णात्युपागतम्‌। 
गृह्णाति स्पर्शतन्मात्रं त्वक्स्पशैत्वमुपागतम्‌॥ 12: 34 1 


maq शब्दतन्मात्रं ed श्रवणेन तु। 
सूक्ष्मतन्मात्रधमोऽयं भूतानां प्रकृतिक्रमात्‌॥ 12:35॥ 


वैकारिकन्ततस्तूद्धे बध्यते येन पुङ्गलः। 
अहं विद्वानहं भोगी अहं जातो महत्कुले॥ 12: 36॥ 


अहं दाता च भोक्ता च तेजस्वी बलवानहम्‌। 
अहं योद्धा च संग्रामे शत्रवश्च मया जिताः॥ 12:37॥ 


धर्मशीलश्व गुणवां श्रेयं HAAS परम्‌। 
अहं पापी दुराचारो Sere निराकृतिः॥ 12:381 


न दत्तं न मया भुक्तं मत्समो नास्ति दुःखितः | 
इत्यहङ्कारचित्तानां ममत्ववशवर्तिनाम्‌॥ 12 : 39॥ 


अहङ्कारो निबध्नाति संसारदृढबन्धनै: | 
त्रिविधस्याप्ययं धर्मो5हड्जारस्य प्रकीर्तितः॥ 12:401 


वुद्धिधर्ममतो वक्ष्ये धर्मादि तव सुव्रते। 
wat ज्ञानं च वैराग्यमैश्वर्यं च चतुष्टयम्‌॥ 12:411 


C MM TA ey + 
12:33 गन्ध तु ] Ex; गन्धस्तु N 12:33 Remi] conj; fergut N; जिह्लया Ex 
1239 संस्थितम्‌ ] Ex; संस्थितः N 12:34 चक्षुषो ] N; चक्षुषा Ex 12:34 त्वः 
क्स्पर्शत्वमुपागतम्‌ ] NG त्वचा स्पर्शमुपागतम्‌ Ex 12:35 ग्राह्मन्तु शब्दतन्मात्रं Ted] 
N; शब्द च शब्दतन्मात्रं गृह्णाति E, 12:35 सूक्ष्मतन्मात्र° ] \; सूक्ष्मस्तन्मात्रः Ex 
12:35 प्रकृति” ] Ex; प्रभृति N 12:36 वैकारिकन्ततस्तूर्द्धे वध्यते ] N; वैकारिकः 
बुध्यते Ex 12:36 अहं जातो महत्कुले ] N; त्वहं जातो महाकुले Ex 
87 दाता] Ex; जाता प्र 12:38 गुणवां श्रेयं कुर्वाम्यहं ] N; गुणवान्‌ 
d Ex 12:38 निराकृतिः ] N; दुराकृतिः E, 12:39 ममत्ववशवर्तिनाम्‌ | SE 
कीर्ति (unmetrical) 12:40 ससार° ] N; संसारे Ex 12:40 ऽप्ययं धर्मोऽहङ्कारस्य 
*] Ex; "प्यय धर्म अहं N 12:41 *्धर्ममतो] N; ° 
Ex 12:41 धर्मादि तव ] N; धर्मादींस्तव en 


K 


Appendix पा: स्वच्छन्दललितभैरवे एकादशमद्वादशमौ पटलौ ARR 
अधर्मञ्च तथाज्ञानमवैराग्यमनैश्वरम्‌। 
बन्धते सप्तथा सा तु ज्ञानभावेन मोचयेत्‌॥ 12: 42॥ 


बुद्धिश्नाध्यवसायेन करोति विकरोति च। 
धर्मादीनां च अष्टानां लक्षणानि निबोध मे॥ 12:431 


उपवासं जपं मौनं अक्रोधस्तेयवर्जनम्‌। 
सत्यं शौचं च दानं च दया क्षान्तिश्च सर्वदा॥ 12:441 


विद्याभ्यासञ्च लज्जा च इन्द्रियाणां च निग्रहः। 
इष्टापूर्तं च तीर्थानि पितृणां चैव तर्पणम्‌॥ 12:45॥ 


अभयं सर्वसत्त्वेभ्यो जीवितस्य च रक्षणम्‌। 
धीगुणः प्रथमो ह्येष धर्म इत्यभिशब्दितः॥ 12:46॥ 


धर्मकर्मनिबद्धानां संसारमनुवरतिनाम्‌। 
पुनः स्वर्गं पुनमैत्यन्तिर्य॑त्वं च पुनः पुनः॥ 12:47॥ 


धर्मभावः समाख्यातो ज्ञानभावं निबोध मे। 
पिण्ड एष चतुर्विंशः करणेन्द्रियसंयुतः॥ 12:48॥ 


प्राकृतः स तु विज्ञेयो धर्माधर्मप्रवर्तकः | 
अकर्ता निर्गुणब्वाहं न मे बन्धोऽस्ति प्राकृतः॥ 12:491 


प्रकृत्या कारितं मर्त्ये वासनादेव मुच्यते। 


12:42 बन्धते ] N; बघाति Ex 12:42 मोचयेत्‌] N; मोहयेत्‌ Ex EE 
न करोति विकरोति च] N; "साय च करोति विविधेष्वपि Ex 712. ना 
अष्टानां लक्षणानि निबोध मे] ems “दीनां च अष्टानां लक्षानि निवोध मे N bos 
trical); *दीनामथाष्टानां लक्षणानि शुणु प्रिये E 12:44 उपवासं जप] ub सत्यं] 
WE, 12:44 अक्रोधस्तेयवर्जनम्‌ | N; अक्रोधोऽस्तेयमार्जैवम्‌ us p 
Ex; सत्य ॥ 12:45 विद्याभ्यासञ्च लज्जा च इन्द्रियाणां च निग्रहः ] Er N; तीर्थ- 
लज्छा च इन्द्रियानां च निग्रहम्‌ N (unmetrical) 12:45 T | ] पोगुण N 
सेवा Ex 12:46 जीवितस्य ] Ex; जीवतस्य N 12:46 धीगुण a paiet 
12:46 "शब्दितः ] N; "घीयते Ex 12:47 पुनः स्वग पुनमत्य्तिर्य I 
पुनः स्वर्ग्यं तिर्यत्क EQ 12:48 निबोध मे] N; च ae 12: 
चतुर्विंशः ] em.; पिण्ड एष चतुर्विश N; चतुर्विशतिकः पिण्डः Ex : 
सध (unmetrical) 12:50 मर्त्ये ] N; मन्ये Ex 


49 स तु] Ex: 


२२२ निच्चासतत्त्वसंहितायाम्‌ 


साझज्ञानं मयाप्युक्तं प्रकृत्या येन मुच्यते॥ 12:501 


मक्त प्रकृतिबन्धात्त पुनर्वध्नाति चेश्वरः | 
ag: संसरते भूयो यावदेतं न विन्दति॥ 12:511 


इश्वरं सृष्टिकर्त्तारं सर्वजन्तुनिबन्धकम्‌ | 
वैराग्यात्सन्त्यजेत्पुत्रां दारानिष्टां सुसंमता॥ 12:52॥ 


हस्त्यश्वरथयानानि सुहृङ्गोगधनानि F | 
उपवासं जपं तीर्थं पञ्चाग्निजलशायिताम्‌॥ 12:53॥ 


तपां सेवन्ति घोराणि देहं संत्यजते क्षणात्‌। 
गिरितोयजलाग्निभ्यो प्रहारोद्वद्वनाशकैः॥ 12: 54॥ 


वैराग्यं तु समाशृत्य Hed साहसान्यपि। 
ऐख्रर्यभावमापन्नो द्र॒ब्यैस्तृप्ति न गच्छति॥ 12:55॥ 


न दानैञ्च धनैभोगैः परिवारायुधवाहनेः। 
तपो व्रतानि मन्त्रांश्च ऐश्वर्यार्थी तु साधयेत्‌॥ 12:56॥ 


युद्धं दूतं तथा माया चौरिकानूतहिंसकम्‌। 
अन्यान्यपि अयुक्तानि विस्रम्भच्छलघातकम्‌॥ 12:571 


ऐश्वर्यभावमापन्नः करोति च विहन्यते। 
प्राणिहिंसारतो नित्यं चौरिकानूतदम्भकम्‌॥ 12:58॥ 


CNN AME C Soe 
12:50 मयाप्युक्तं प्रकृत्या येन ] N; मया प्रोक्तं प्रकृतेर्येन Ex 12:51 मुक्त प्रकृतिबन्धात्तु | 
conj.; मुक्त प्रकृतिवन्धा तु \; मुक्त प्रकृतिवन्धात्त Ee 12:51 यावदेतं ] N; यावद्देवं Ex 
12:52 पुत्रा दारानिष्टां सुसंमतां ] N; पुत्रान्दारानिष्टान्‌ सुसंमतान्‌ Ex 12:53 n 
जलशायनम्‌ ] coni; पञ्चाग्नजपसाधनं N; पञ्चाग्निं जलशायिताम्‌ Ex 1254 तपा 
सेवन्ति] N; उपास्येतानि 7, 12:54 संत्यजते ] N; सन्त्यजति Ex 12:54 गिरिः 
तोयजलाग्निभ्यो प्रहारोदद्धनाशकैः ] NG गिरिवृक्षजलाग्निभ्यः प्रहारोद्दन्थनाशनैः Bx 
12:55 समाशृत्य ] N; समाश्रित्य E, 12:56 न दानैञ्ज धनैभोंगिः परिवारायुधवाह 
नैः] Ss दारैर्न धनैर्भागैः परिवारैर्न वाहनैः Ex 12:56 मन्त्राञ्च ऐश्वर्यार्थी ] om 
AN N; मन्त्रांश्च ऐखयार्थे EQ 12:57 माया चौरिकानृतहिंसकम्‌ ] od 
माया चौर्य चानृतहिंसनम्‌ E. 12:57 अयुक्तानि ] N; त्वयुक्तानि Ex 12577 

तकम्‌ ] N; “घातिताम्‌ Ex 12:58 विहन्यते] N; वहुन्यपि Ex 12:58 *दम्भकम्‌ 

N; *दम्भवान्‌ Ex 


Appendix II: स्वच्छन्दललितभैरवे एकादशमद्वादशमौ पटलौ 
५२२ 


याचको दुःखदाता च भावद्चाधर्मचेष्टित:। 
नास्ति धर्मो न चाधर्मः स्वर्ग मोक्षं च को गतः॥ 12:59॥ 


अज्ञानभावमापन्नः सर्वं मिथ्येव भावयेत। 
नित्यं दुःखी परप्रेष्यो भारं यानं वहत्यपि॥ 12:601 


कृच्छुजीवी च सततमवैराग्ये न खिद्यते। 
राज्यं कृत्वा तु सामन्तः सामन्ताद्वामिको भवेत्‌॥ 12:611 


ग्रामाडृथ्स्तु लब्धेन वर्तते तु-म्‌-अनीश्वरः। 
न शोचति न चोहिग्नः पूर्वराज्येव क्रीडते॥ 12:62॥ 


अनैश्वर्यस्य भावोऽयमेवं ते समुदाहृतः। 
अव्यक्तं तृशुणं वक्ष्ये संसारस्य प्रवर्तकम्‌॥ 12:63॥ 


यतः सर्व्वजगोत्पत्तिः प्रकृतिस्तेन सोच्यते। 
तस्य धर्म प्रवक्ष्यामि रजःसत्त्वतमोत्कटम्‌॥ 12:64॥ 


प्रकाशभावः सत्त्वं च धर्मसत्वसमन्वितम्‌। 
संविभागी च सततं नित्यं स॒त्त्वोपचारकम्‌॥ 12:65॥ 


क्षमादयासमायुक्तो ज्ञानविज्ञानपारगः। 
प्रीतिरदौनं धृतिमेधा तपः शौचं दमस्तथा॥ 12:661 


12:59 भावद्चाधर्मचेष्टितः ] N; भवेच्चाध्म चेष्टितम्‌ Ex 12:59 स्वर्ग] Ek; स्वर्ग” N 
12:60 सर्व मिथ्येव भावयेत्‌ ] om; wd मिथ्येव भावयेत्‌ N; सर्वं मिथ्येति भाषते Ex 
12:60 वहत्यपि ] N; वहुन्नापि Ex 12:61 राज्यं कृत्वा तु सामन्तः ] Ex; राज्य कृत्वा 
तु सामन्तो प्र 12:61 सामन्ताद्वामिको भवेत्‌] em; समन्ताङ्गामिको m 3 WE 
न्त्याद्वामभुग्भवेत्‌ Ex 12:62 ग्रामाडूथ्स्तु लब्धेन वर्तते तु-म्‌- sei ] iF = 
WERT लब्धेन वतेते तुमनीश्वरः 1; ग्रामादृष्टस्तदर्धेन वर्ततेडसावनीधरः Ex aN 
STE क्रीडते ] N; क्रीडते पूर्वराज्यवत्‌ im 12:63 MR igit 
समुदाहृतम्‌ No 12:63 तृगुणं ] N; Ex 1 i ५ 

तिस्तेन सोच्यते] N; यस्माच्च जगडत्पत्तिः प्रकृतिस्तेन चोच्यते Ex 12:64 sae ii ] 
N; अस्य धर्म ष 12:64 *तमोत्कटम्‌ ] N; °तमोऽभिधम्‌ pg HARTE ES 
“भाव ॥ 12:65 धर्मसत्वसमन्वितम्‌ ] N; धर्मः सत्त्वसमाश्रित : wol 

चारकम्‌ ] N; सत्त्वोपकारकः Ex 12:66 प्रीतिर्दाने धृतिमेंधा ] Ex s 


N (unmetrical) 


५२४ निश्चासतत्त्वसंहितायाम 


रिजुं वा समदृष्टिञ्च दिव्यबुद्धिप्रबोधकः | 
यस्यैतानि तु धर्माणि भवन्ति पुरुषोत्तमे॥ 12:671 


स सात्त्विकस्तु विज्ञेयः रजोधर्माणि मे शृणु। 
निस्त्रिंशञ्जातिलोभी च विद्वेषी क्रोधनस्तथा॥ 12:681 


कामी हर्षसमाविष्टो दुःखातों अटते सदा | 
मानी दम्भसमायुक्तोऽप्यहङ्कारे व्यवस्थितः॥ 12:69॥ 


नित्यं युद्धरतः शूरो राजसं गुणलक्षणम्‌। 
कामक्रोधाभिभूतञ्च लोभेन च समन्वितः॥ 12: 70॥ 


ऐश्याँ चैव विशादञ्ज मदमुन्मादमेव च। 
निद्रालस्यमकर्मित्वं दौर्मेध्याज्ञानतास्तथा॥ 12: 71॥ 


अधर्मेताबुद्धिमतो नास्तिक्यं चलचित्तता | 
तमस्त्वेतानि चिह्लानि दृश्यन्ते यत्र मानवे॥ 12:721 


तामसस्तु स विज्ञेयः पुरुषः कलुषात्मकः | 
एतत्तिगुणमव्यक्तं त्रिगुणं समुदाहृतम्‌॥ 12 : 73॥ 


विदित्वा प्राकृतैर्बन्धैमुच्यते न च मुच्यते। 
गुणधर्मो न चैवाहं धीहंकारगुणो न हि॥ 12: 741 


12:67 रिजुं WT] N; ऋतवाक्‌ Ex 12:67 °प्रवोधकः ] N; शप्रबोधनम्‌ Ex 12:67 य- 
स्यैतानि तु धर्माणि] प्र; यस्मिन्नेते सदा धर्मा Ex 12:68 स सात्त्विकस्तु ] Ex; T 
N — 12:68 रजोधर्माणि] N; रजोधर्मा्च Ex 12:69 इःखार्तो अटते 

WT] N; इःखातः पर्यटेत्सदा Ex 12:69 युक्तो ह्यहङ्कारे ] em.; °युद्धो Teale Ni 
TASAR Ek 12:70 शूरो] Ex; WTN 12:70 कामक्रोधाभिभूतञ्च लोभेन 
साग] em; कामक्रोधाभिभूतस्य लोभेन च समन्वितः N; कामक्रोधाभिभूतत्व 
बन या समन्वयः Ek 12:71 tear चैव विशादस्च मदमुन्मादमेव च] Ni ईर्श्या 
TW मद उन्माद एव च E, 12:71 *ज्ञानतास्तथा ] N; "ज्ञानिते तथा Er 

| त गतो नास्तिवर्ष चल° | NG “वुद्धिमत्त्व नास्तिक्यं छल” E. 222 तम? 
Spuk चिह्लानि] N; तमञ्चिह्णानि चैतानि Ex 12:72 मानवे ] 1००६८; मानवी NT 
n 3 तामसस्तु स विज्ञेयः] No. तामसस्तु स विज्ञेयो Ne. तामसः स तु = 
= ०2:73 कलुषात्मकः ] N; कलुषाशय: Ex 12:74 विदित्वा N: 
TITIN; एतत्सम्यग्विदित्वा तु मुच्यते प्राकृतैगुणैः छ, 12:74 गुणधर्मों] N 


गुणधर्मा पीहंकारगुणो 1 em 
TRE. 1214 पीहंकारगुणो न हि] con. धीहंकारगुणेव हि ४; बगे 


Appendix II: स्वच्छन्दललितभैरवे एकादशमद्वादशमौ टन ; 
२५ 


तन्मात्रेन्द्रियधम्मेण महाभूतगुणेन च। 
करणेन्द्रियहीनत्वाद्‌ भूततन्मात्रवर्जितः। 

अकर्ता निर्गुणञ्चैव चिन्मात्रः पुरुषः स्मृतः॥ 12:75॥ 
मानसं वाचिकं चैव शारीरं कर्म यत्कृतम्‌ | 

प्रकृत्या कारितां मन्ये अकर्ता पुरुषः स्मृतः॥ 12:76॥ 
एवं संन्यस्य कर्माणि वर्तितव्यं ति नित्यशः। 

नाहं कर्ता न मे बन्धो एवं बुध्यति यो नरः॥ 12:77॥ 
प्रकृत्या स विमुच्येत यावन्न सुजतीश्वरः। 
साझ्झज्ञानेन संमूढो मुक्तिरित्यभिमन्यते॥ 12:781 

न हि मुक्तिर्भवेत्तस्य किञ्चित्कालं विदेहता। 
तिष्ठेत्प्रकृतिनि्मृक्तः सृष्टिसंहारवर्जितः॥ 12:79॥ 
यावत्करोत्यसौ सृष्टिमीश्वरः परमेश्वरः। 
तावत्प्रकृतिबन्धेन संसारे क्षिप्यते पुनः॥ 12:80॥ 
farm: संसरते भूयः संसारे घोरसागरे। 
घर्माधार्मनिबद्धस्तु साझुज्ञानेन मोहितः॥ 12:81॥ 
अहं कर्ता च भोक्ता च ईश्वरो बलवानहुम्‌। 
ममत्वेनैव संमूढो भ्राम्यते घटियन्त्रवत्‌॥ 12:82॥ 
साङ्काज्ञाने मया प्रोक्तं शुणु ध्यानाधिदैवतम्‌। 

पृथ्वी कठिनरूपेण चतुःसागरमेखला॥ 12:83॥ 


12:75 तन्मात्रेन्द्रियधम्मेण महाभूतगुणेन च ] N; ००. Ex 12:75 “हीनत्वाद्‌] N; °ही- 
TW Ey 12:77 संन्यस्य कर्माणि वर्त्तितव्यं ति नित्यशः ] con); Bb एवं 
वरत्तितव्यन्नि नित्यशः \संन्यस्य कर्माणि वर्तते न च नित्यशः Ex 12:7 


बुध्यति] N; wer एवं बुध्येत Ex 12:78 प्रकृत्या N; WET Ex yaiki) 
Ex; समूर्‌ N (unmetrical) 12:79 किञ्चित्काल विदेहवान्‌ ] ०० mu son 


N (unmetrical); कंचित्कालं विदेहता Ex 12:81 क्षिप्तः] Ex; 7 
बद्धस्तु ] Ex; AN N 12:82 अहं कर्ता च पा ईश्वरो दला ती 
om, N_ 12:82 संमूढो ] Ex; समूढो N 12:82 TIN; MEET 
12:83 "दैवतम्‌ ] Ey; *देवतम्‌ N 12:83 पृथ्वी ] N; पृथ्वी Ex 72 

N; "मेखलाम्‌ Ex 


५२६ निद्वासतत्त्वसंहितायाम 
सपर्वतवनाकीर्ण्णा मृगपक्षिसमाकुला | 


स्थिरा च पीतवर्ण्णाभा ऊबीजेन समन्विता॥ 12:841 


ध्यायतः सिद्धिमभ्येति विषसत्वानि नाशयेत्‌। 
अचाल्यः सर्वभूतानां यथैव वसुधा भवेत्‌॥ 12:85॥ 


जलापूरितसर्वाङ्गो जलध्यानेन पूरयेत्‌। 
एवमभ्यस्यमानस्तु विषसत्वानि नाशयेत्‌॥ 12:86॥ 


तृष्णादाघविनिर्मुक्तः सर्वईतिविवर्जितः | 
जगदापूरयेत्सिद्धः पूर्ववीजविचिन्तक:॥ 12: 87॥ 


स्वशरीरोत्थितो वह्लिज्वलन्तः सर्वदाहकः | 
कुरु कर्मसहस्राणि स्वबीजेन तु बीजितः। 
कृष्णरेण्वाकुलो वायुर्वायोर्बीजेन संयुतः॥ 12:881 


पूरयन्वै जगद्देहं सिद्धिम्राम्चर्यकारकः | 


88 स्वशरीरोत्थितो dhada: सर्वदाहकः ] This half-verse has been printed in 
the KSTS edition as though it were part of a quotation of the Malinivijayottara, and 
it has therefore not been taken into account in the KSTS numeration. Misled by 
this error, Somdev Vasudeva has mistakenly included it, against his other sources, 95 
Malinivijayottara 13:21cd. Note that Ksemaraja refers back to it as belonging to the 


Svacchandatantra in his commentary on Svacchandatantra 12:90cd. 


et Eee Sr 
12:84 सपर्वतवनाकीर्णा ] N^; सर्वार्वतवनाकीण्णा Ne; सपर्वतवनाकीर्णां Ex 12:84 
"कुला ] N; भ्कुलाम्‌ Ex 12:84 स्थिरा च पीतवर्ण्णाभा ऊबीजेन समन्विता] Ni 
M पीतवर्णाभामूवीजेन समन्विताम्‌ Ex 12:85 ध्यायतः सिद्धि” ] conj; ध्यायत 
र्येत ७. AND daha enk 12:85 विषसत्वानि नाशयेत्‌] N; विषसत्त्वान्निवा- 
VAY Ex 12:85 अचाल्यः ] Ex; अचाल्य N 12:86 ०सर्वाङ्गो जलध्यानेन ] Exi 
"NUIT: जलाध्यानेन N 12:86 °सत्वानि नाशयेत्‌] N; ° सत्त्वान्विनाशयेत्‌ Pr 
12:87 "दाघविनिमुक्तः सर्वईतिविवर्जितः | N; ०दाहविनिर्मुक्त ईतिभिञ्च विवर्जितः 
= ai, “विचिन्तकः ] N; "समन्वितः E. 12:88 स्वशरीरोत्थितो वहिर्ज्वलन्तः स 
ae Ni स्वशरीरोत्थितो वह्विर्जवलन्वै सर्वदाहकः Ex 12:88 कुरु] Ni कुर्यात्‌ ES 
ee वायुर्वायोर्‌ ] conj.; कृष्णरेण्वाकुलो वायुर्वायो N; कृष्णरेण्वात्मकी है 
Ex 12:89 पूरयन्वै जगद्देह सिद्धि" ] N; AÈ जगद्देहान्‌ सिद्ध” Pr 


Appendix IL स्वच्छन्दललितभेरवे एकादशमद्दादशमौ पटलौ " 
२७ 

शुषिरात्मकं स्वदेहं तु जगच्च शुषिरात्मकम्‌॥ 12:89) 

ध्यायेत्प्रकृतिबीजेन चित्रकर्माणि aram i 

वागेन्द्रिये तथा afe ध्यातो वाक्सिद्धिदायकः॥ 12:90) 


इन्द्रः पाणावभिध्यातः अजयो वहुशालिनः। 
पादप्रचारं TAT तु ध्यातो विष्णुं प्रदायकः॥ 12:91॥ 


पायौ मित्रं सितं ध्यायेत्‌ पायुव्याधिविनाशकः। 
RA प्रजापतिं श्यामो ध्यायेद्युक्तेन चेतसा॥ 12:921 


जितेन्द्रियश्च भवति इच्छया रमते शतम्‌। 
श्रोत्रेन्द्रिये दिशश्रित्रा ध्यायेद्वीजेन संयुताः॥ 12:931 


सकृदुक्तं तु गृह्णाति दिग्गजां चैव सिद्धति। 
मरुतं कृष्णरूपेण ध्यायेत्‌ त्वक्सु संस्थितम्‌॥ 12:94! 


†शस्त्रदष्ट्रादिभेदं स्यादन्धं च जयते व्यथां। 
आदित्यं चक्षुषी ध्याये जिह्वायां वरुणं तथा॥ 12:95॥ 


नासायां पृथिवी पीता मनसीन्दुस्तथैव I 
पीतकं गन्धतन्मात्रं रसतन्मात्रकं सितम्‌॥ 12:96॥ 


रक्तं तु रूपतन्मात्रं शुक्रञ्च स्पर्शसंज्ञितम्‌ | 


12:89 स्वदेहं तु जगञ्च ] conj; स्वदेहस्तु जगच्च \; स्वदेहं तु जगच्च Ex 12:90 वागे- 
न्द्रिये तथा afe ध्यातो ] N; वागिन्द्रिये तथा agaid Ex 12:91 इन्द्रः पाणावमि” | 
Ex; इन्द्रियाणि अभि० N 12:91 अजयो बहुशालिनः ] N; वाहुशाली Ti Ex 
12:91 पादप्रचारं wert तु ध्यातो विष्णुं प्रदायकः ] N; पादयोईरसचार ध्या 
प्रयच्छति E. 12:92 मित्रं सितं ध्यायेत्‌] N; मित्रः सितो ध्यातः Ex ka NG 
व्याधि० ] E; पायुर्व्याधि N 12:92 प्रजापतिं श्यामो ] conj; प्रजापति pa 
प्रजापतिं श्यामं ए; 12:93 इच्छया ] conj; चेच्छया N; त्विच्छया Ex 129 oe 
चित्रा ध्यायेद्दीजेन संयुताः ] Ex; दिशांचित्रां ध्यायेद्वीजेन सुतम्‌ भ ii. uy 
sé 12:94 दिग्गजां ] N; दिग्यात्रा Ex ae मारुत S ides 
[ त्वक्सु ] N (unmetrical); ध्यायेत्तु त्वचि Ex 12: स्या 
जयते ज y यः स es स्यात्‌ न क्चिज्ञायते व्यथा edis 22% 
ध्याये] \; चक्षुषि ध्यायेज्‌ Ex 12:96 पृथिवी पीता मनसीन्दुस ; 
पीतां मनसीन्डुं तथैव EX 12:97 शुक्नच्च ] N; कृष्ण d Bx 


५२८ निश्चासतत्त्वसंहितायाम 


hi 


अरूपं शब्दतन्मात्रं ध्यातव्यं बिन्दुरूपिणं॥ 12:971 


विशते चेप्सितां सिद्धिं जानाति च विचिन्तितम्‌। 
चैकारिके तथा रुद्रो ध्यातव्यः सिद्धिमिच्छता॥ 12: 98॥ 


ध्यानात्सिद्धिमवाप्रोति मुक्तो ऽहङ्कारबन्धनात्‌। 
ब्रह्माणं बुद्धिसंस्थं तु ध्यायेद्युक्तेन चेतसा॥ 12:991 


स्मरन्वै पूर्वबीजेन ज्ञानौघं संप्रवर्तते | 
दिव्या च जायते बुद्धिः संशयच्छेदकारिका॥ 12: 100॥ 


भूतं भव्यं भविष्यञ्च प्रत्यक्षं तस्य जायते। 
प्रकृतिः कृष्णवर्णा तु sper रक्ता विराजते॥ 12: 101॥ 


रक्तं च हृदयं तस्या बहुपादभुजानना। 
ध्यातव्या तत्त्वबीजेन यदीच्छेत्सिद्िमात्मनः॥ 12: 102॥ 


fread स्वतन्त्रश्च दिव्यसृष्टिश्च जायते | 
षट्मासाध्यानयोगेन दिव्यसृष्टिः प्रवर्तते॥ 12: 103॥ 


त्रैलोक्ये यत्प्रवतेंत प्रत्यक्षं तस्य जायते | 
एष ते प्राकृतो योग उक्तो मोक्षकर: परः॥ 12: 104॥ 


अतः परतरं पुरुषं मध्ये पद्चस्य संस्थितम्‌। 
चितिस्वरूपः पिण्डेषु देहमापूर्यं संस्थितः॥ 12: 105॥ 


स जीव इति विख्यातो येन जीवति तत्पुरम्‌। 


क. ` 
12:97 "रूपिणं ] N; "efr E, 12:98 विशते चेप्सितां ] conj.; विशते चेप्सितां Ni 
विषयेष्वीप्सितां E, 12:98 ध्यातव्यः ] Ex; ध्यातव्यः N 12:99 मुक्तो 5हड्ढारवन्ध- 
नात्‌] \; मुकताहङ्कारवन्धनाम्‌ E, 12:99 Har] Er; ०संस्थ N 12100 स्मरन्वै] 
Ex; स्मरं वै N 19:00 ज्ञानौघं ] N; ज्ञानौघः Ep — 12:100 संशयच्छेद" ] N; 
T ° Ex 12:101 भविष्यच्च प्रत्यक्षं तस्य जायते] N; भविष्यच्च अ 
संप्रजायते Ex 12:101 शुक्ता रक्ता] N; रक्तशुक्ता Ex 12:102 बहुपादभुजानना ' marg | 
Ex; वहुरूपावहुभुजानना N (unmetrial) 12:103 दिव्यसृष्टिञ्च ] N; दृष्टिः 
Ex 124103 षट्मासाध्यानयोगेन दिव्यसृष्टिः ] N; षण्मासाभ्यासयोगेन दिव्या पुरुषः 
क 12:105 परतरं पुरुषं मध्ये yer संस्थितम्‌ ] N (unmetrical); पर तु aay 
TET व्यवस्थितः Ex 12:10 चितिस्वरूपः पिण्डेषु] coni; चितिस्वरूप 
N; चित्स्वरूपश्च सर्वेषु Ex 


Appendix II: स्वच्छन्दललितभैरवे एकादशमद्वादशमौ पटलौ 
५२९ 


निर्गतेन मृतो येन अचेताः शीर्यते पुरं॥ 12:1061 


बध्यते मुच्यते सो हि सुखडुःखानि वेत्त्यसौ। 
न तस्य वर्ण्ण रूपं वा प्रमाणं दृश्यते क्कचित्‌॥ 12: 1070 


न शक्यः कथितुं वापि सूक्ष्मञ्चानन्तविग्रहः। 
वालाग्रशतभागस्य शतधा कल्पितस्य च॥ 12: 108॥ 


तस्य सूक्ष्मतरो जीवः स चानन्त्याय कल्पते। 
आदित्यवर्ण्णरुक्माभमापबिद्वेव पुष्करे॥ 12:109॥ 


तारकेव हि पश्येत योगिनो दिव्यचक्षुषा। 
रागविद्याकलोपेतः कालबद्धञ्च रूपवान्‌॥ 12: 110॥ 


श्यामो वर्णेन विज्ञेया सितो जीवस्य देवता। 
दक्षिणेन सिताङ्गी तु वामेनासितरूपिणी॥ 12:1111 


तद्दर्णानि च वस्त्राणि मण्डनानि विशेषतः। 
कर्मबन्धेन wur सुखदुःखं प्रयच्छति॥ 12:1121 


नियतिं च विजानीयादनिवार्या सुरासुरैः i 
पूर्वबीजसहुध्याता द्विरूपेण समन्विता॥ 12:1131 


ध्यानात्सिद्धिमवाप्रोति नियत्या चैव मुच्यते। 


110 रागविद्याकलोपेतः कालबद्धो हि रूपवान्‌] Not in the 2/2578; 
111 श्यामवर्णेन विज्ञेया स्थिता जीवस्य देवता ] Not in the Nayasutra. 


lardgSor जेना तताय मृती येन] N; मृता येन Bx 12:106 अचेताः शीर्यते पुर] conj; अचेता 
सीर्यते पुर N; AE सीर्यते तनुः N 12:107 मुच्यते sid WAS N; 
Ex 12:107 वेत्त्यसौ ] em.; वेत्यसौ N; वेत्ति च Ex — 12:077 नती च] 
रूपं वर्णो वा Ex 12:108 न शक्यः कथितुं a i es M wet E विर 

N; TEx 12:109 ० : 
B तु 12:10 तारकेवः fg wem] भ; पश्यन्ति तारकमिव Ex वक LAN कलोपेतः ] 
Ex; “SAMAN 12:110 611464] N; कालबद्धो हि Bx क मण्डनानि ] N; 
विज्ञेयः सितो] N; श्यामवर्णेन विज्ञेया स्थिता Er 12:112 2118 *ध्याता] NG 
वक्ताणि मण्डलानि E, 12:113 निवार्या ] N; Saut e नियत्या यत्या चैव मुच्यते ] 
*ध्याना E, 12:113 समन्विता ] Ek; समन्वितः N 1274 = 


N; नियतेख्ज विमुच्यते Ex 


५३२ निश्चासतत्त्वसंहितायाम्‌ 
क्रमते सर्वलोकानि सिद्धश्च समतां TIT । 

सितं त्रिनयनं वक्तुमक्षसूत्रकमण्डलुम्‌॥ 12:1311 

पश्चिमं वदनं ध्यायेद्विव्यसिद्धिप्रदायकम्‌ | 


हत्वा प्राणिसहस्राणि परदारशतानि च॥ 12: 132॥ 


अलेपको विशुद्धात्मा सिद्धि प्राप्य शिवो भवेत्‌ । 
द्विनेत्रमुत्तरं वक्तं रक्तोत्पलमहृद्युतिं॥ 12: 133॥ 


ध्यानात्तस्य जगत्सर्वं वशमेति न संशयः। 
तपते वर्षते चैव सृजते संहरत्यपि॥ 12: 134॥ 


ईप्सितां लभते सिद्धिं योऽब्दमेकं तु चिन्तयेत्‌। 
सितं Afd सदा ध्यायेच्छुलहस्तं जटाधरम्‌॥ 12: 135॥ 


व्याघ्रचर्मपरीधानम्‌ अक्षसूत्रकमण्डलुम्‌। 
वीणाडमरुकहस्तं च नागयज्ञोपवीतिनम्‌॥ 12: 136॥ 


चन्द्रमूद्धोर्द्धलिङ्गन्तु ध्यायेन्नित्यं महेश्वरम्‌। 
अनेनैव तु देहेन सर्वज्ञः कामरूपवान्‌॥ 12: 137॥ 


घण्टानादस्य च ध्यानात्सिद्धिः षड्यासिका भवेत्‌ | 
ईप्सिता मर्त्यलोकेषु सिद्धिस्तस्य प्रजायते॥ 12: 138॥ 


लिङ्गध्यानं तु यो ध्यायेत्पूर्वबीजेन संयुतम्‌ | 
मासेनैकेन पश्येत सूक्ष्मलिङ्गन्ततोपरि॥ 12: 139॥ 


ed का 
12131 *लोकानि ] N; लोकान्वै Ey 12:131 समतां ] Ex; क्रमतां 12:1317- 
कृमक्षसूनकमण्डलुम्‌] N; देवि साक्षासूत्रकमण्डलु Ex 12:133 अलेपको ] Ex; अः 
छर 12:188 भवेत्‌ ] Ex; भवो भवेत्‌ N (unmetrical) 12:133 द्विनेत्र° ] N; 
E Ex 1233 onggi] N; “समद्युति E, 12:134 सृजते संहरत्यपि ] 
Td स सृजेत्सरहत्यपि N 12:13 सित a] conj; सित मूध्नि N; सितमूर्ध्व 

= De अक्षसूत्रकमण्डलुम्‌ ] N; साक्षसूत्रकमण्डलु Ex 12:136 वीणाडमरुकर्हः 
E ॥ (unmetrical); वीणाडमरुहस्तं च E, 12:136 न्वीतिनम्‌ ] N; “वीतकम्‌ 
Ha “मूद्धोद्धलिड्रन्तु N; *मूघोर्ध्वलिडुं च EQ 12188 च] N; वा Bx 
मरत्यलोकेष फक] म; पाण्मासिकी Bk 12:38 ईप्सिता मर्त्यलोकेषु ] em; SAT 
SS ईप्सिता मर्त्यलोके तु Ex 12439 यो ध्यायेत्‌ ] N; यः कुर्यात्‌ Bx 

त सुक्ष्मलिज्ञन्ततोपरि ] NG पश्येत्स सूक्ष्मं लिङ्गं तनूपरि Ex 


Appendix II: स्वच्छन्दललितभैरवे एकादशमद्दादशमौ पटलौ ५३३ 


शुद्धस्फटिकसङ्काशं तन्दृष्ठा तु विमुच्यते | 

सिद्धिस्तु मानुषी लोके षट्मासेन प्रजायते॥ 12:140॥ 
बरैलोक्यदर्शने बुद्धिः प्रत्यक्षं तस्य जायते | 

क्रमते सर्वलोकानि ईश्वरेण समो भवेत्‌॥ 12:1411 


सोमादित्ये भवेन्नेत्रे चक्रे वै धीरथस्य तु। 
तन्मात्राणि हयास्तस्य मनः सारथि चोदितः॥ 12:1421 


अहंकारो भवेद्योधा गुणञ्चास्य महाधनुः | 
इन्द्रियाणि शरास्तस्य मृगो धर्मः प्रकीतितः॥ 12:143॥ 


यद्येवं क्रीडते योगी परमात्मा हृदि fen: i 
पुण्यपापैः प्रवर्तन्ते इच्छया परमेश्वरः॥ 12: 144॥ 


नाहं कर्तो न मे बन्धो सर्वञ्चेश्वरकारितम्‌। 
मत्वा चेश्वरविज्ञानं सर्वकर्माणि सन्यसेत्‌॥ 12:145॥ 


धर्माधर्मस्य कृत्वे प्रेरको हृदि संस्थितः। 
त्वमेव शरणापन्नो न मे बन्धो ऽस्ति Haas: Il 12: 146॥ 


सदाशिवोऽष्टभेदेन पूर्वबीजसमन्वितः। 
ध्यात्वा पूर्वोक्तरूपेण तत्सिद्धिफलमिच्छता॥ 12: 147॥ 


147 ध्यात्वा पूर्वोक्तरूपेण तत्सिद्धिफलमिच्छता ] Not in the Nayasutra. 


12:140 q-gET] N; JEET Ex 12:140 मानुषी लोके षट्मासेन] N; लोके WAT- 
सेन मानुषे Ex 12:141 बुद्धिः प्रत्यक्षं ] em; बुद्धि प्रत्यक्ष N; बुद्धिः प्रत्यक्षा Ex 
12:141 क्रमते सरवैलोकानि ] N; आक्रामेत्सर्वलोकांञ्च Ex 12:142 सोमादित्ये भवेन्नेत्रे 
चक्रे वै धीरथस्य ] N; सोमार्को चक्षुषी स्यातां चक्रे वै धी रथस्य Ex 12:142 हयास्तस्य 
मनः] Ex; हया तस्य नमः N 12:143 भवेद्योधा ] N; भवेद्योद्धा Ex — 12:143 T- 
पञ्चास्य] Ex; शुणास्य N (unmetrical) 12:143 इन्द्रियाणि ] Ex; ईन्द्रियानि N 
12:44 यद्येवं ] N; एवं स Ex 12:144 परमात्मा हृदि स्थितः ] NG परमात्मनि &- 
त्स्थिते E. 12:144 *पापै: प्रवर्तन्ते] N; *पापैरवेततेमान Ex — 12:144 परमेश्वरः | 
N; परमेश्वरि EQ 12:145 बन्धो सर्वश्चेश्वरकारितम्‌ ] N; बन्धः सर्वेमीश्वरकारणम्‌ Ex 
12:45 सन्यसेत्‌ ] N; सन्त्यजेत्‌ Ex — 12:146 त्वमेव शरणापन्नो न मे बन्धो ऽस्ति 
PAN E N; तमहं शरणं प्राप्तो न मे बन्धोऽस्ति कऋतृता Ex 12:47 ध्यात्वा ] Ni 


K 


५३४ निश्वासतत्त्वसंहितायाम- हितायाम्‌ 


नादं वै व्यापक ध्यायेदहोरात्रायनेषु च। 
दक्षिणोत्तरसंक्रान्त्या विषुवज्ञस्य मोक्षदः॥ 12 : 148॥ 


वंशध्वनिसमप्रख्यः शान्तनादस्तु स स्मृतः | 
सदाशिवः स विज्ञेयो ध्यानयोगबलं शुणु॥ 12: 149॥ 
मासमात्रेण तेजस्वी वागीशस्तु द्वितीयके। 

तृतीये पश्यते सिद्धान्दिव्यसृष्टिश्वतुर्थके॥ 12: 150 


सिद्धिस्तु मानुषे लोके वत्सराद्धौन्न संशयः | 
दिव्यसिद्धिस्तथाब्देन सायोज्यं तु द्वितीयके॥ 12: 151॥ 


षट्मुखं करणङ्कुत्वा ध्यायेद्देवं सदाशिवम्‌। 
[अङ्गुष्ठाभ्यां श्रुती नेत्रे तर्जनीमध्यमाक्रमात्‌] ॥ 12:152॥ 


[शेषाभ्यां वृणुयाद्वाणे षण्मुखे किल बद्धधीः] । 
दशधा वर्णरूपेण दृश्यते च सदाशिवम्‌॥ 12: 153॥ 


Raa रक्तपीतञ्च कृष्णं हरितपिङ्गलम्‌। 
नीलं चित्रकवर्णं तु स्फटिकाभं मनोरमम्‌॥ 12: 154॥ 


SET तु सर्वरूपाभे त्यजेत्तानि विचक्षणः | 


= NON 
148 नादं वै व्यापकं ध्यायेदहोरात्रायनेषु च ] Not in the Nayasütra. 

152 अङ्गुद्ठाभ्या श्रुती नेत्रे तर्जनीमध्यमाक्रमात्‌ ] Not in the Nayasütra. 
153 शेषाभ्यां वृणुयाद्वाणे षण्मुखे किल बद्धधी: ] Not in the Nayasütra. 


= Ide v vum. 

12:148 विषुवज्ञस्य ] N; विषुवज्ज्ञस्थ E, — 12:149 Ex; ° TAN 
laa, x 12:149 °समप्रख्यः ] Ex; °समप्रख्य 

ly IN; ध्यानात्सिद्धिफलं Ex — 12:150 द्वितीयके] E, ; द्वितीयते 

is m N सृष्टिदयतुर्थके ] N; “दृष्टिच्चतुर्थके E. 12:151 लोके वत्सराद्धान्न ] emi 

aie N (unmetrical); लोके वत्सरार्घे TE, 12:151 दिव्यसिद्धिस्तथाब्देन सा” 

onj. ; दिव्यसिद्धिस्तदाव्देन सायोज्यं N; दिव्या सिद्धिस्तथाब्देन सायुज्य नड 

पात Tid N; p Ex 12:152 अङ्गुष्ठाभ्यां श्रुती नेत्रे तर्जनीमध्यमाक्र Y 
[| Ex; om.N 12:153 T वृणुयाद्वाणे षण्मुखे किल बद्धधीः ] Ex; om 
12:153 3 ro 

पीत॑ सदाशिवम्‌ ] N; सदाशिवः Ex 12:154 सितञ्च रक्तपीतञ्च ] N; सित र 


त q Ex 12:155 © सर्वरूपार्भ ] 
= d सवरूपाभ : f त्यजेत्तानि 
Ex; त्यजेत्यानि N y IN; सर्वाणि रूपाणि Ex 12:155 


Appendix II: स्वच्छन्दललितभैरवे एकादशमद्वादशमौ पटलौ ५३५ 


एकमेव तु गृह्णीया शेषान्ये गुणरूपकाः॥ 12:1551 


चन्द्रमण्डलसङ्काशं विद्युत्पुञ्जनिभेक्षणम्‌। 
तारकाचलिताकारं बिन्डुदेवं तु लक्षयेत्‌॥ 12: 156॥ 


निवृत्तिश्च प्रतिष्ठा च विद्या शान्तिस्तथैव च। 
कलाचतुष्टयोपेतं ध्यातव्यं बिन्दुमीश्चरम्‌॥ 12: 157॥ 


बिन्दुध्यानं समाख्यातं शक्तिलक्षं निबोध मे। 
वियद्दीक्ष्य निमीलाक्षो भास्करोदयसंनिभं॥ 12: 158॥ 


पश्यते च महातेजः शक्तिः Wer भासते। 
पीता रक्ता तथा कृष्णा स्फटिकाभा मनोरमा॥ 12:159॥ 


ष्टव्या परमा शक्तिः तां दृष्टा शिवतां ब्रजेत्‌। 
व्यापिनी च daré पञ्चरूपां विचिन्तयेत्‌॥ 12:1601 


कारणैञ्च समोपेतां ध्यात्वा स्वच्छन्दतां ब्रजेत्‌। 
समना उन्मना-दूद्धं ध्यायेद्युक्तेन चेतसा॥ 12:161! 


ध्यानात्सिद्धिमवाप्रोति व्यापकः प्रभुरव्ययः | 
waste शिवं शान्तं पूर्वञ्च कथितं मया॥ 12:1621 


चक्षुषा यच्च दृश्येत वाचया यच्च गोचरं। 


158 विन्दुध्यानं समाख्यातं शक्तिलक्षं निबोध मे] Not in the Nayasutra. 
158 These lines (158c-160) are versions of Nayasütra 4:334. 
160 This unit, from 12:160c to 162, finds no parallel in the Niśvāsa. 


E O OETA 
चि या शेषान्ये ] भ; गृह्णीयादन्ये TEx 12:156 विन्डुदेवं तु लक्षयेत्‌ ] N; 
विलक्षयेत्‌ Ex 12:157 कलाचतुष्टयोपेतं ध्यातव्यं बिन्डुमीश्वरम्‌ ] N; आभिः 
REUS रोदयसंनिर्भ संयुक्तो ध्यातव्यो बिन्दुरीश्चरः Ex 12:158 वियद्वीक्ष्य निमीलाक्षो भास्क- 
ie ॥; खे वीक्ष्य मीलिताक्षो यडुद्द्धास्करसन्निभम्‌ Ex 12:159 पश्यते च 
T : शक्तिः wea भासते ] N; ईक्षते च महत्तेजः शक्तिः प्रभ्वीति सा स्मृता Ex 
ae, शक्तिः] Ex; शक्ति N 12:160 व्यापिनी च ततखोदै ] N; व्यापिनीं च तत- 
Ex Mia न कारणैश्च ] N; कारणैः स्वैः Ex 12:161 समना उन्मनादृरद्ध ] N; 
शिवः चोक्तां Ex 12:162 प्रभुरव्ययः ] 8; प्रभुरख्ययः Ex 12:162 ततदोद्ध॑ 
दृश्येतः शान्तं पूर्वश्च कथित] N; ततश्ोध्वें शिवः शान्तः पूर्वं वै कथितो Ex 72768 पच 
त वाचया यच्च गोचरं] N; यञ्ज दृश्येत वाचो वा यञ्च गोचरः Ex 


निश्चासतत्त्वसंहितायाम i 
५३६ q T 


मनश्चिन्तयते यानि बुद्धिखैव विकल्पयेत्‌॥ 12: 163॥ 


अहंकृतानि यान्येव यच्च रूपेण संस्थितम्‌। 
यत्र नास्ति स तत्रैव अन्वेष्टव्यं स्वदेहतः॥ 12: 164॥ 


यत्र तत्र स्थितो देहे यत्र तत्राश्रमे रतः। 
सुखासनः संयतात्मा एकचित्तः समाहितः॥ 12:165॥ 


स्वच्छन्दन्तु अनुस्मृत्य अभावं भावयेत्सदा। 
भावनात्तस्य तत्त्वस्य तत्समञ्चैव जायते॥ 12: 166॥ 


ये धर्मस्तस्य आख्याताः पूर्वन्ते वरवर्णिनि। 
तैस्तु धर्मैः समायुक्तो योगिनो भवते प्रिये॥ 12: 167॥ 


स्वरूपं रूपकध्यानं तत्त्वानां कथितं मया। 
एवं ज्ञात्वा च ध्यात्वा च सिद्यते मुच्यतेति च॥ 12:168॥ 


इति स्वच्छन्दललितभैरवे मन्त्रपीठे महातन्त्रे द्वादशमः पटलः॥ 


ल 
ह विकल्पयेत्‌] \; बुद्धिर्यानि व्यवस्यति EX 12:164 अहंकृतानि ] 

ह e i DN da 12:164 रूपेण संस्थितम्‌ | N; वेद्यतया ee 
ST: Wee: E ] N; यश्च नास्ति Ex 12464 अन्वेष्टव्यं स्वदेहतः ] Ni om 
B LL 12:165 देहे ] N; देशे Ex 12:165 सुखासनः ] N; सुखासीनः | 
Ex; स्या 'चछन्दन्तु अनुस्मृत्य ] N; स्वच्छन्दं समनुस्मृत्य Ex 12:166 भावत 
m B An N; चाख्याताः Ex 12:167 पूर्वन्ते | e 
स्वरूप० p. 2, म गा भवते] ४; योगी वै भवति E.  12:168 स्वरूप ] 7 

x 72168 मुच्यतेति च ] N; मुच्यते ऽपि E. 


APPENDIX III 
निञ्चासकारिकाया ज्ञानकाण्डे 
द्विचत्वारिशत्पटलः 


देव्युवाच | 
आत्ममूर्तिस्त्वया देव कथितं शिवशासने। 
स पशुः पूर्वमाख्यातो देवो ज्ञेयस्तथैव च॥ 1॥ 


नमश्चेता च जीवश्च कथितन्तु त्वया पुरा। 
स पशुः निष्क्रियञ्चैव अस्वतन्त्रमधोमुखम्‌॥ 2॥ 


कथं शिवत्वमायाति ज्ञेयमादिक्रमेण तु। 
एतदिच्छामि विज्ञातुं भगवन्‌ वक्तुमहसि॥ 3॥ 


ईश्वर: -- शुणु देवि परं गुह्यं यत्त्वया परिपृच्छितम्‌। 
तदहं संप्रवक्ष्यामि त्वत्तप्रियार्थं वरानने॥ 4॥ 


सर्व॑संहितसामान्यं विधिमेतत्समासतः। 
कथयामि न सन्देहः एकैकस्य यथाक्रमम्‌॥ 5॥ 


षड्विधं मानसं ज्ञेयं शक्तिस्तु नवधा स्मृता। 

अनन्तपूजामित्युक्ता वसगेण समन्विता॥ 6॥ 
Mn RE NASA a EET , 
427 देव्युवाच ^ देवी हि a जात es a Ba TULIT 

42:2 स Ws: निष्कियक्षैव अस्वतन्त्रमधोमुखम्‌] ^; — पूजामित्युः 
42:8 ज्ञेयमादिक्रमेण तु] B; ज्ञेयं नामादिक्रमेण तु A (unmetrical) 42:6 ° (SIMICS 
का] B; ०पूजमित्युक्ता A 


५३८ निश्चासतत्त्वसंहितायाम 
एवं पूज्य अनन्तन्तु मुक्ति तत्रैव विन्यसेत्‌ । 
हांहंकारसमायुक्तमध्भेदस्य चाष्टमम्‌॥ TII 

3 r देवेशि अस्मिन्‌ तन्त्रे उदाहृतम्‌ | 
दीक्षाकाले यथायोगं ग्रहणञ्च यथा भवेत्‌॥ 8॥ 
तथा ते कथयिष्यामि ग्रहणं येन यद्यथा | 


अनन्तमूरतिसंयोगमेभिर्वीजैरुदाहृ तम्‌॥ 9॥ 


एवं विन्यस्य Wer सकलीकरणं TT: | 
मन्त्रातीतञ्च मन्त्रश्च मया पूर्वमुदाहृतः॥ 10॥ 


तं ज्ञात्वा सकलं देवं निष्कलञ्च तथैव च। 
qi वक्ते च हृदये गुह्ये चैव यथाक्रमम्‌॥ 11॥ 


विन्यसेद्देवदेवेशि सद्योजातन्तु मूतिषु। 
समयज्ञस्य देवेशि सकलीकरणं हितम्‌॥ 12॥ 


अर्चनं तस्य वक्ष्यामि तन्मे निगदतः शृणु। 
स्थण्डिले शिवलिङ्गे तु प्रोक्षणाभ्युक्षणादिना॥ 131 


अग्नौ शिवे च देवेशि दरव्यमालभते तथा। 
पञ्चभिब्रैह्मभिञ्जैव विधिसर्वमशेषतः॥ 14॥ 


ईशानं मध्यतो दद्यात्‌ पूर्वे तत्पुरुषं न्यसेत्‌। 
अघोरं दक्षिणे चैव वामदेवं तथोत्तरे॥ 15॥ 


पञ्चिमे विन्यसेन्नित्यं सद्योजातन्तु सुवृते | 


ST eee 
10 मन्त्रातीतश्च मन्त्रश्च मय पूर्वमुदाहृतः | See Mülasütra 4:7ab. 


42:7 एवं पूज्य अनन्तन्तु] 4; एत । = ;; हां हुङ्कारः 
त न्तु] 4; एत ५ 5 42:7 हांहुंकारसमायुक्तम्‌ ] conj. हा हक 
सो A मकन A 42:7 चाष्टमम्‌ ] A; चाष्टकम्‌ 5 42:8 | Js 

2 अन्तमूर्तिसयोग B 42:9 येन] A; केन 8 42:9 अनन्तमूर्तिसंयोगमेभिर्बी ] Ai 
EE SENE afe are B (unmetrical) 42:10 हूतः] A; ०हृतम्‌ B 42:11 नि 
कल] ^; निष्कलन्तु छ 421 मूर्थि वक्ते च हृदये गहय] cons Uf T 
" M i UT गृह्ये 5 42:13 शिवलिङ्गे ] B; शिवलिङ्गन्‌ A 42:15 e 

| 42:15 तत्पुरुषं ] B; तत्पुरुष :15 वामदेवं तथोत्तरे ] ^; प 

UB 4216 पञ्चमे ] A. i | त्पुरुष A 42:15 तथोत्तरे ] 


Appendix III: निश्वासकारिकायां ज्ञानकाण्डे द्विचत्वारिंशत्पटलः ५३९ 


अनेन विधिना यस्तु यजेत सुसमाहितः॥ 16॥ 


इश्वरावास्तिसंयोगं समये कथितं मया। 
पञ्चब्रह्मसमायोगात्‌ कलाभिश्च स सुवृते॥ 17॥ 


frags समायुक्त पुत्रके कथितं मया। 
आवाहनादि देवस्य पूर्ववत्कथितं तव॥ 18॥ 


द्वारावरणसंयुक्तं कथयेत्तस्य देशिकः। 
एवं तत्सकलीकृत्य सन्ध्याकाले उपासनम्‌॥ 19॥ 


कर्तव्यं पुत्रकेनैव कथितं सुरसुन्दरी। 
अनेन विधिना देवि पुत्रकः सुसमाहितः॥ 20॥ 


लभते सामीप्यपदं सादाख्यस्य न संशयः। 
तैरेव पूजयित्वा तु शिवाङ्गैश्च समन्वितः॥ 21॥ 


आवाहरोधसंयोगध्यानयोगविचक्षणैः। 
लभते सायुज्यमात्मानं सादाख्यस्य महात्मनः॥ 22॥ 


चतुरावरणैर्युक्तं यजेत सुसमाहितः | 
मन्त्रैः करणयोगेन स पशुः सुरसुन्दरि॥ 23॥ 


भवेन्मन्त्रात्मकञ्चैव स पशुर्नात्र संशयः। 
अमन्त्रेण पशुः प्रोक्तः चेतामात्रं समाविशेत्‌॥ 241 


स चेतनः स्मृतस्तन्त्रैः अकिञ्चित्ञ्ञः पशुः स्मृतः। 
स मन्त्रैश्च सदा युक्तश्चेतनः परमेश्वरि॥ 251 


तदा योग्यश्शिवध्याने भवते नात्र संशयः | 


क ` ` | 
42:17 पश्चब्रह्मसमायोगात्‌ कलाभिञ्च स सुवृते] A; om B 42:18 fries समायुक्त 
पुत्रके कथितं मया] A; om B 42:21 पूजयित्वा तु] 5; पूर्वोक्तैस्तु A (unmetrical) 
42:22 *विचक्षणै: ] 4; *विचक्षणः छ 42:22 "त्मानं सादाख्यस्य ] A; "त्मा 1 €T 
B 42:24 मन्त्रात्मकञ्चैव ] A; मात्रात्मकञ्चैव छ 42:24 चेतामात्रं] A; चत वाह B 
42:25 पशुः स्मृतः] A; परश्शिवः। स्मृतः B (unmetrical) 42:25 परमेश्वरि ] A; 
परमेश्वरः छ 42:26 तदा योग्यश्शिवध्याने भवते] A; ।- शिवध्याने भवन्ते B 


निश्चासतत्त्वसंहितायाम याम 


५४० [ 


देव्युवाच | 

कथं मन्त्रात्मकं देहं पशोर्विज्ञायते प्रभो॥ 26॥ 
एतदिच्छामि विज्ञातुं भगवन्‌ वक्तुमहेसि | 

इश्वरः | 

मन्तरैस्संबद्धदेहस्य शृणु तस्य पराक्तमम्‌॥ 27॥ 
पातालाइुद्धरेन्नागान्‌ पातयेद्दैत्यराक्षसान्‌। 
नाशयेत्सर्वविघ्रानि शान्ति पुष्टिं करोति च॥ 28॥ 
मन्त्रैः संबद्धदेहस्य प्रपलायन्ति नायकाः | 
उत्तिष्ेदन्तर्द्धाने च पादचारे तथैव च॥ 29॥ 


खङ्गे च पाइुके चैव रेचने अर्चने तथा। 
गुडिकाकाशगमने दण्डकाष्ठपवित्रके॥ 30॥ 


आसनञच्चैव urn सर्वमन्त्रैः प्रसिध्यति। 
चेतनात्मा यदा देवि न किञ्चिदपि सिध्यते॥ 31॥ 


भूतैश्च बाध्यते देवि अज्ञानेन समावृतः | 
मन्त्रात्मा चेतनात्मा च कथितस्तव सुव्रते॥ 32॥ 


कथितञ्च रहस्यन्तु भेदस्तु उभयोरपि। 
बिन्दुनादसमायोगात्‌ वर्णस्तु नदते यदा॥ 33॥ 


तन्तु मन्त्रात्मकं प्रोक्तं शिवं परमकारणम्‌ | 


EN. i ee 75 0५ 
32 मन्त्रात्मा चेतनात्मा च कथितस्तव सुव्रते। See Mülasütra 4:7cd. 


स्स्स € , 
42:26 देव्युवाच ] 4; देवी 5 42:26 पशोर्विज्ञायते ] A; पशोर्विज्ञाप्पते छ 42:2५ 
तदिच्छामि विज्ञातुं] A; एत L| छ 42:28 पातालादुद्धरेन्नागान्‌ ] A; पातालाइधरते 
नागान्‌ B (unmetrica 42:29 संबद्धदेहस्य ] A; स ।| देहस्य B 42:29 नायकाः ] 
A; नायकः B 42:30 Wea चैव रेचने अर्चने] 4; पाद || वने 5 चने छ 42:31 आ- 
pe aS A; आसने चैव B 42:31 चेतनात्मा ] A; L| तनात्मा छ 42:31 J 
भयोरपि ति उ 4232 TATI B; सुवृते 4 42:33 भेदस्तु उभयोरपि ] ^; we 

B (unmetrical) 42:33 °समायोगात वर्णस्तु नदते ] T n द्वार्णस्तुवते र्णस्तुवते 
42:34 °कारणम्‌ ] A; "कारण: B | 


Appendix III: निश्वासकारिकायां ज्ञानकाण्डे द्विचत्वारिंशत्पटलः ५४१ 


पञ्चब्रह्मकलैर्युक्ते कृते तु सकले शिवे॥ 34॥ 


तस्मिन्‌ प्रकाशते देवो मन्त्रात्मा परमेश्वरः | 
वर्णव्यूहे स्थितो यस्मात्‌ शिवः परमकारणः॥ 35॥ 


तेन देवि समाख्यातो मन्त्रात्मा परमेश्वरः | 
प्रणवोभयसंयुक्तो व्योमव्यापी इति CAT: ll 361 


पदमन्त्रसमायुक्तो धर्मात्मा परमेश्वर: | 


अनन्तेशादितः कृत्वा शिखण्ड्यन्तं वरानने॥ 37॥ 


स एव संस्थितो नित्यं मन्त्रात्मा परमेश्वरः। 
लोकपालान्‌ सहास्त्रैञ्च त्रैलोक्यं सचराचरम्‌॥ 38॥ 


मन्त्रात्मावस्थितो देवः शिवः परमकारणः। 
एवं मन्त्रात्मकं देवि कथितं तव सुवृते॥ 39॥ 


ज्ञातव्यं देशिकेनैव शिवतन्त्रानुवतिना | 
बिन्दुर्नादञ्ज शक्तिश्न अतीतः परतश्च यः॥ 40॥ 


यदा विज्ञानतत्त्वेन मन्त्रातीतः परस्तु सः। 
शब्दरूपरसादीनां अतीतः परमेश्वरः॥ 41॥ 


तन्तु देवि विदित्वा तु देशिकः पाशहा भवेत्‌। 
नादातीतः परश्शान्तः शक्तिरित्यभिधीयते॥ 42॥ 


तस्यातीतः परन्देवि मन्त्रातीतः स उच्यते। 
पूर्वमुच्चारयेद्वर्णान्‌ शब्दलीनञ्च कारयेत्‌॥ 43॥ 


शब्दलीनः पुनश्शब्दः शब्दातीतं पुनर्नेयेत्‌। 


EN EOE 
42:34 “कलैयुक्ते कृते तु] A; em UB 42:35 वर्ण” JA; वर्णे B 42:35 परमका- 
रणः] 4; TUB 42:37 वरानने] A; UB 42:38 सहास्वैज्ध त्रैलोक्य सचराचरम्‌ | 
A; सहस्तैञ्च U चराचरम्‌ B 42:39 एवं ] A; एतन्‌ B 42:40 ज्ञातव्य देशिकेनैव 

शिवतन्त्रानुवर्तिना] 4; ज्ञातव्य --नैव शिवतन्त्रानुवर्तिनि छ 42:40 विन्दुर्नादद्द ] As 
epee नादश्च छ 42:41 अतीतः] A; मन्त्रितः B 42:42 नादातीतः ] A; नादान्ततः 
42:43 तस्यातीतः परन्देवि मन्त्रातीतः स उच्यते] A; तस्यातीतं परं देवि मन्त्रा 

B 42:43 पूर्वमु* ] A; UW? छ 42:44 शब्दलीनः ] A; शब्दलीने 8 


५४२ निद्वासतत्त्वसंहितायाम्‌ हितायाम्‌ 


तस्यातीतं परन्देवि मन्त्रातीतः स उच्यते॥ 44॥ 


एष ते कथितो देवि कारिकायाञ्च निर्णयः। 
पूर्वसूत्रे तु कथितं व्याख्यातं तव सुवृते॥ 45॥ 
देव्युवाच। 

सकलं पूजयित्वा तु निष्कलन्तु ततोपरि । 

त्वया देवि समाख्यातमादिसूत्रे महेश्वर॥ 46॥ 
पशुस्तु सकलः प्रोक्तः स मूर्तिः परिकीतितः | 
निष्कलञ्च कथं तस्मिन्‌ पूज्यते परमेश्वरः॥ 47॥ 
निष्कलः कलयातीतः न मन्त्रस्वरयोर्गतिः i 
कथं सकलदेहे तु स्थातव्यः परमः शिवः॥ 48॥ 


ईश्वरः। 

मन्वमुच्चारयेत्पूर्व हृदि कृत्वा महेश्वरम्‌ | 
कूटशब्दपरे लीनं स वै निष्कल उच्यते॥ 49॥ 
उच्चारणे यदा देवि निर्विकल्पं पदं ब्रजेत्‌। 
देहे सकलयोगेन यदा ज्ञातं महेश्वरि॥ 501 


अतीतः कलयातीतः स वै निष्कल उच्यते | 
उच्चारणे यदा हीनं निर्विकल्पपदं ब्रजेत्‌॥ 51॥ 


मनसा चिन्त्यते सच्च बुद्या यत्र विकल्पना | 
बुद्धहकारनिर्मुक्त स वै निष्कल उच्यते॥ 52॥ 


समयी पुत्रको वापि साधकाचार्य एव वा। 
सर्वैविधिरनुष्ठेयो विशेषः कथितो मया॥ 53॥ 


इति निश्चासकारिकायां द्विचत्वारिंशत्पटलः 1 


जा तस्यातीतं] A; UB 42:46 त्वया देवि समाख्यातम्‌] A; U देव वेव स की 
42:4 छ 42:47 निष्कलघ्च कथं] A; ।! छ 42:48 कलयातीतः ] छ; ur 
c RARE B; सकलदेहस्तु 4 42:49 महेश्वरम्‌ ] A; महे विकल्प pn 

४ केर० 3 42:50 पदं ] 4; परं c यदा हीनं निर्विकल्प 
A; ॥ नं निर्विकल्पं B JA; परं छ 42:51 उच्चारणे य 


APPENDIX IV 
निञ्चासकारिकाया ज्ञानकाण्डे 
सप्तत्रिशतिमः पटलः 


ईश्वर उवाच 
सृजते ईश्वरो भूत्वा संहरेच्च सदाशिवः। 
शिवन्तु स्थितिकर्तृत्वे शान्तेति परमं पदम्‌॥ 1॥ 


आत्मतत्त्वं भवेत्ञ्रष्टा पद्मपत्रं स उच्यते। 
विद्या वै केसरं तस्य संहारः कणिका ह्यधः॥ 2॥ 


कर्णिकायां शिवं तत्त्वं स्थितितत्त्वप्रकर्तृकः | 
एतत्तितत्वतत्त्वादिं कैलासकमलं fag: il 3॥ 


ast were पत्राणि दन्ताः केसरसंज्ञिताः। 
जिह्वा वै कर्णिका प्रोक्ता शरीरं नालमुच्यते॥ 4॥ 


मुखमध्ये यदाकाशं तत्र देवो जगङ्गुरुः। 
सगिका तालुमध्ये तु जिल्ला कैलासपिण्डिका॥ 5॥ 


स्वयमाचरते यस्मादाचारं दर्शयेति च। 


wore gox vcr 
374 ईश्वर उवाच] A; Sac: B 37:1 शिवन्तु] A; शिवं च छ 372 NACH 
ET] B; भवेच्छूष्टा ५ 37:2 संहारः कर्णिका ह्यधः ] em; संहारं कर्णिका DT: ^; 
नहार: कर्णिका ह्यथ छ 37:3 कर्णिकायां शिवं तत्त्व ४) A; UB 
37:3 एतत्तितत्वतत्त्वादि ] A; u दिं छ 37:4 ओष्ठौ] 4; ओष्टौ B 


निश्वासतत्त्वसंहितायाम्‌ 


५४४ 


उच्चिनोति च शास्त्राणि आचार्यस्तेन पद्यते॥ 6॥ 
अशब्ददेहोऽपि स शब्दकारी कृतस्य कर्मस्य च अन्तकारी। 


रैलोक्ममायापुरसूत्रधारी यस्तन्तु पश्येत्स तु सर्वकारी॥ 7॥ 


एवं कृत्वा तु देवेशे देवतानां निवेशनम्‌। 
मुखमन्त्ये पि u न्त्येन करोत्यनुग्रहेच्छया॥ 8॥ 


वाचयानुग्रहेद्देवि कथितन्तु वरानने। 
इति वाचानुग्रहः 1। ॥ 9॥ 
देव्युवाच 


सूत्रं नाम महादेव आलोकपदवाचकम्‌। 
तदहं श्रोतुमिच्छामि भगवन्‌ वक्तुमहँसि॥ 10॥ 


ईश्वरः 

सूचनात्सूत्रमित्याहुः सूत्रन्नाम महत्पदम्‌ | 
तेन सर्वमिदं प्रोतं सूत्रे मणिगणा इव॥ 11॥ 
अखण्डितं तु विज्ञेयं खं व्यापी अजरं पदम्‌। 
तडिद्वलयसंकाशं घटिकायां प्रकाशयेत्‌॥ 12॥ 


हृत्पौण्डरीकमध्यस्थं सोमसूर्यागिनिमध्यगम्‌। 


11 This verse is quoted thus in the Sivajfianasiddhisvapaksadrstantasangraha, T.31, 


p.97: अत्र सूत्रलक्षणं निश्चासकारिकायामुक्तम्‌, तद्यथा-- सूचनात्सूत्रमित्याहुस्सूत्रनास 
महत्पदम्‌ | तेन सर्वमिदं प्रोतं सूत्रे मणिगणा इव॥ 


कृतस्य कर्मस्य 


छ 288 नि- 
B 


37:93- 


ST EE 
37:6 आचार्यस्तेन ] A; तच्चार्यस्तेन 5 37:7 अशब्ददेहोऽपि स शब्दकारी 
WE E TUB 37:7 त्रैलोक्यमाया° ] 4; O लाक्यमाया” 
37:9 वाचयानुग्रहेदेवि क B 37:8 मुखमन्त्ये fru न्त्येन ] 4; मुखमध्ये तु 
Renae कथितन्तु वरानने ] A; वाचयानुग्रहदे कथिता वरानने 8 ji 
8 phy : U] A; इति वाच x Tx कानुग्रहभ्य 8 37:10 देव्युवाच ] 2, हेन 
ene SANT सूत्रन्नाम महत्पदम्‌ ] Ts A; सूचनात्सूत्र UB 3 pu 
पग वी सूत्रे मणिगणा इव] em. तेन सर्वभिदं प्रोक्त सूत्रे मणिगणा इवं | d 
घटिद्वलय० Sas व्यापी] A; सापि B 37:12 तडिद्दलय” ] em; तदिद्वलय 

B“; तटिद्दलय० B' 37:13 न्मध्यगम्‌ ] B; “मध्यशम्‌ A 


Appendix Iv; निश्चासकारिकायाो  ज्ञानकाण्डे सप्तत्रिंशतिम: पटलः yvy 


यः पश्येत्परम सूक्ष्मं स लेख्यं कतुमर्हसि॥ 131 
देव्युवाच 

तत्त्वा देवगणाञ्चैव सर्वे नान्ये व्यवस्थिताः। 
तेषां मन्त्रविभागोऽयं कथयस्व प्रसादतः॥ 14॥ 


ईश्वर उवाच 
सर्वे मन्त्रात्मका देवाः सर्वे मन्त्राः शिवात्मकाः। 
शिवात्मकेन मन्त्रेण शिवयागे तु पूजयेत्‌॥ 15॥ 


अप्राप्य शिवसद्भावं पठन्तोऽपि हि संहिताम्‌। 
अज्ञात्वा कुरुते दीक्षां शिष्याचार्यौ व्रजत्यधः॥ 16॥ 


तस्मान्न समानपशोः शिष्यत्वेनोपतिष्ठति। 
न चाप्युभयोः पत्यनुग्रहोऽयं प्रवतेते॥ 17॥ 


विभुरेकः परः पश्येच्छिष्याचार्यौ wade | 
अविदित्वा स्वयं सम्यक्‌ क्रियां यः कुरुते भिषक्‌॥ 18॥ 


आतुरो दुःखमाप्नोति वैद्योऽपि न फलं लभेत्‌। 
ज्ञानविज्ञानकुशलः सर्वावस्थां गतोऽपि यः॥ 19॥ 


स मोचयति पापेभ्यो ज्ञाननिर्धूतकिल्बिषः | 
सर्वलक्षणहीनोऽपि ज्ञानवान्‌ शुरुरुच्यते॥ 20॥ 


दीक्षाविधिविधानज्ञः पाशजालप्रदाहकः। 


37:13यः] A; यत्‌ छ 37:13 स लेख्यं ] 5; सुलेख्यं A 37:14 देव्युवाच] ^; देवी 8 
37:14 “गणाञ्चैव सर्वे नान्ये] B; "गणाश्च सर्वे न्यासे A (unmetrical) 37:14 HA- 
विभागो ] conj; मन्त्रविवाहो A; मन्वव्यवाहो B 37:15 ईश्वर उवाच] A; ईश्वरः 8 
37:15 सर्वे मन्त्रात्मका देवाः सर्वे मन्त्राः शिवात्मकाः ] A; सर्व । छ 37:15 शिवात्म- 
केन मन्त्रेण ] 4; UTB 37:16 ब्रजत्यधः ] A; प्रजत्ययम्‌ छ 37:17 *पशो: ] conj; 
"वसो: AB 37:17 न चाभ्युभयोः पत्यनुग्रहो ] conj. (unmetrical); न चाभ्युभयोः 
पत्यनुग्रहो A (unmetrical); न चाभ्युपयोत्यनुग्रहो B (unmetrical) 37:18 अविदित्वा ] 
A; अविदत्व B 37:19 आतुरो डुःखमाप्रोति वैद्योऽपि न फलं लभेत्‌] conj; आतुरो 
इःखमाभोति वैद्योऽपि न फलं भवेत्‌ A; आतुरो इःख 1 छ 37:19 ज्ञानविज्ञानकुशलः 
n] A; uem B 37:21 दीक्षाविधिविधानज्ञः ] conj; दीक्षावित्त विधानञ्चः 
; दीक्षाविधविधानज्ञः 5 


५४६ निश्चासतत्त्वसंहितायाम्न 


शिवभक्तो महाभक्तिः भक्तिभावेन देशिकः॥ 21॥ 


उभयोरन्तरं नास्ति देशिकस्य शिवस्य च। 
स चैवोङ्कारबिन्दु्च स नादो लयनिष्कलः॥ 221 


तस्मिन्‌ सर्वाणि विद्यन्ते स चैव च परश्शिवः। 
सर्वविद्यासुसंपूर्णः सर्वविद्यार्थकोविदः॥ 23॥ 


आचार्यस्य च मन्त्रस्य शिवज्ञानशिवस्य च। 
नानात्वं नैव कुर्वन्ति अनन्तेशादयः शिवाः॥ 24॥ 


इति निश्वासकारिकायां ज्ञानकाण्डे वाचानुग्रहवक्तृपच्मप्रकरणे सप्ततुंशत्‌ पटलः। 


37:22 FE A QUAS ° 37:22 स चैवोङ्कार° ] B; स चैवाड्ठार A 
रश्शिवः ] 4; परम A UB 37:23 तस्मिन्‌] A; u स्मिन्‌ छ 37:23 प- 
8094 आचायस्य जम. 5723 सर्वेविद्यासुसंपूर्णः Sata B 
चानुग्रहवक्तपत्मप्रकरणे थ] 4; URB 37:24 शिवाः ] A; शिवः B 37:24 वा- 

ससतृंशत्‌ A; ।। पद्चप्रकरणे सप्तविंशत्‌ 5 


APPENDIX V 


निञ्चासकारिकायां दीक्षोत्तरे 
नवमः पटलः 


ईश्वरः 
अतः परं प्रवक्ष्यामि श्रूयतां सुरसुन्दरि। 
प्रक्रियासूत्रयोगं च पाशानां ग्रहणं तथा॥ 1॥ 


यद्यद्‌ विज्ञाय कर्तव्यं कथयामि तवाखिलम्‌। 
कन्याकर्तितसूत्रेण त्रिगुणं त्रिगुणीकृते॥ 21 


पञ्चगव्येन चाभ्युक्ष्य गन्धतोयेन वा पुनः। 
अर्च्यैकादशिकेनैव तत्सूत्रन्तु विचक्षणः॥ 3॥ 


अर्चयित्वा तु तत्सूत्रमाचार्यः सुसमाहितः! 
पादाबुष्ठप्रदेशे तु सूत्र कृत्वा प्रधारयेत्‌॥ 4 


प्रसारयेत्ततः सूत्रं शिखाग्राद्यावतास्थितम्‌। 
सकलीकृत्य तत्सूत्रं सव॑मन्त्रैविचक्षणः॥ 5॥ 


यः शिवः पूजितो देवि देशिकेन महात्मना। 


Lane A TAAA 
an '्सूत्र० ] 4; ०पुत्रि० BC 9:2 यदाद्‌ EE conj. ; S ra Mes 

थ 5 9:2 "कर्तितसूत्रेण ] coni; ° AC; "कर्तृत्वसू- B 9 
Fait: ] c; त्रिगुणी त्रिगुणी" A; tire B 9:3 अर्च्यैकादशिकेनैव ] conj; अ 
कदशकेनेव A; अर्घ्येकदशकेनैव BC 9:4 अर्चयित्वा ] A; अर्घ्येयित्वा BC — 9:5 "च्य 
पतास्थितम्‌ ] B; *द्यावस्थितम्‌ 4 (unmetrical); वद्यवतस्थितः C 


निश्चासतत्त्वसंहितायाम्‌ 


५४८ 


तेन पाशानि संगृह्य सूत्रग्रन्थ्या तु कारयेत्‌॥ 6॥ 


संपुटीकृत्य तं पाश गृहेत्संहारमुद्रया | 

तत्त्वेन बन्धयेड्यः तान्‌ पाशास्तु विचक्षण: ॥ 7॥ 
क्रमेण सर्वपाशानि बन्धयेद्वेशिकोत्तमः i 

बध्वा पाशं यथान्यायं वासयेद्देवसंयुतम्‌॥ 8॥ 


गन्धैः पुष्पैः समभ्यर्च्य देवदेवेन संमतः। 
दीपयेत ततः पाशां हुंफडन्तक्रमेण तु॥ 9॥ 


एकैकमाहुतिं दत्त्वा पाशे पाशे न संशयः। 
प्रभाते विमले मन्त्री द्वितीये ऽहनि सुव्रते॥ 10॥ 


संहारक्रमयोगेन हुनेत्तत्त्वान्यथाक्रमम्‌। 
होमान्ते तु ततो मन्त्री पाशच्छेदन्तु कारयेत्‌॥ 11॥ 


हुंफडन्तशिवेनेव छित्वा तेनेव होमयेत्‌। 
हुत्वा पाशांस्ततो मन्त्री पूर्णाहुत्या तु पातयेत्‌॥ 12॥ 


पूर्णाहुतिक्रमेणैव सर्वतत्त्वान्‌ समुद्धरेत्‌। 
तत्स्थानात्सन्ततः पाशान्‌ तत्त्वं तत्त्वेन सन्धयेत्‌॥ 13॥ 


शुद्धतत्त्वं भवेद्धस्वमशुद्धं दीर्घसंयुतम्‌। 
विलीनमानं संचिन्त्य सन्धीत कारणान्वितम्‌॥ 14॥ 


एवं क्रमेण तान्‌ सर्वान्‌ हुनेत्सन्धेन सुव्रते। 
पृथिवीमादितः कृत्वा शिवतत्त्वमपश्चिमम्‌॥ 15॥ 


MEN का 
9:6 सगृह्य सूत्रग्रन्थ्या तु] AC; स -- B 9:7 Ted | A; Ted BC 9:7 पाशांस्तु ] 
= TWIN B 9:8वध्वा] A; वध्य 80 9:9 दीपयेत ततः पाशां ] ^; प 
आ B; दीपयेत ततः पाशं 0 9:9 हुंफडन्त* ] 80; हुंफडन्तः ^ 9:10 मन्त्री 
2 fud C; मन्त्री प्रदीपेहनि सुवृते 4; म--ते 5 9:11 ततो ] E ^ 
Thee ] wig '1 फडन्त B; हुंफडन्तं 0 9:12 पाशास्‌ ] Ci ` ततः 
Wess त्तर! SCR °] A; पूर्णाहुति BC 9:13 सन्ततः पाशान्‌ तत्त्व ] pen 
त चेज्वा स्वमशुद्ध उ; based SB Bot ts वेड conj. i 
EAE तेष्टास्वमशुद्ध ० 9:14 संचिन्त्य सन्धीत कारणान्वितम्‌ ] 

त करणान्वितम्‌ 4; सं -- 8; संचिन्त्य सन्धितं कारणान्वितम्‌ © 


Appendix V: निदम्नासकारिकायां दीक्षोत्तरे नवमः पटलः ५४९ 
एष एव विधिः प्रोक्तः पाशानां छेदनं प्रति। 
तत्त्वानां सन्धनं चैव एष एव विधिः स्मृतः॥ 16॥ 
भुवनाध्वे कलाध्वे च तत्त्वाध्वे च वरानने। 
वर्णाध्वे च पदाध्वे च मन्त्राध्वे च तथैव च॥ 17॥ 


यः शिवः कल्पितस्तत्र तेन पाशानि छेदयेत्‌। 
भुवनाध्वे ततः कुर्यात्‌ कथयामि समासतः॥ 18॥ 


तत्त्वं संस्थापयेत्पूर्वं ततो भुवनजल्पनम्‌। 
गन्धैर्धूपैः समभ्यर्च्य ततो योनिविकल्पनम्‌॥ 191 


गन्धपुष्पैः समभ्यच्यै ताडनं च पशोस्ततः। 
शिखया ताडनं कृत्वा ग्राह्यं संहारमुद्रया॥ 20॥ 


शत्या संताडिते पुंसि तत ऊर्ध्व प्रयात्यसौ। 
द्वादशान्तमनुप्राप्तं ततो ग्राह्यं विचक्षणः॥ 211 


वामया योजयेन्मन्त्री तेन दद्यात्तु आहुतीः। 
अधिकारे दशा दद्याद्‌ भोगे दद्याद्‌ दशाहुतीः॥ 22॥ 


लये STEM प्राज्ञः ततस्तत्त्वाद्वियोजयेत्‌। 
वियोज्य मन्त्रवित्‌ प्राज्ञः पाशच्छेदं तु कारयेत्‌॥ 23॥ 


वियोजनं तु ज्येष्ठयाया शिवः पाशान्निकुन्तति। 


9:16 एष एव विधिः प्रोक्तः पाशानां] A; ए U सिः प्रोक्तः पाशानाच्‌ 5; एष एव 
विधिः प्रोक्तः पाशानाच्‌ C 9:17 भुवनाध्वे कलाध्वे च तत्त्वाध्वे conj; भुवनाध्व- 
कलाध्वे च तत्त्वाध्वे A; भुवनाध्वाकलाध्वे च भुवनाध्वे B (unmetrical); भुवनाध्वो 
कलाध्वा च भुवनाध्वे C (unmetrical) 9:17 qua हि] 0; तथैव हि 4; TUT 7B 
9:18 कथयामि समासतः] AC; कथ ५ छ 9:9 तत्त्व संस्थापयेत्‌] AC; u पयेत्‌ B 
9:19 भुवन० ] A; भवन० BC 9:20 पशोस्ततः ] BO; पशोस्मृतः A 9:20 ग्राह्य ] 
BC; ग्राह्य ^ 9:21 संताडिते ] A; सन्तापिते 80 9:21 प्रयात्यसौ ] A; व्रतात्यसौ 
B; वृतान्यसौ C 9:22 वामया] AC; MUB 9:22 दद्यात्तु आहुतीः ] conj; दद्यात्तु 
आहुती 4; दद्यात्तु आहुतिम्‌ 5; दद्यात्त्वाहृतिः C 9:22 दशा दद्याद्‌ ] AB; दश C 
9:22 दशाहुतीः ] con; दशाहुतिः AC; दशाहुति B 9:23 लये दद्याद रज्ञः ततस्‌] 
AC; UR छ 9:24 तु ज्येष्ठाया शिवः पाशान्िकृन्तति] con; d ज्येष्ठायां शिवः 
पाशन्‌ A; ज्येष्ठाया u छ; तु ज्येष्ठायां शि C 


"e निश्वासतत्त्वसंहितायाम्‌ 


पूर्णाहुतिं ततो ऽन्ते तु रौद्रा तस्मात्तु उद्धरेत्‌॥ 24! 


एष एव विधिः प्रोक्तः सर्वाध्वानमशेषतः। 
विधिमेवं सकृज्ज्ञात्वा मोचयेन्नात्र संशयः॥ 25॥ 


तत्त्वाध्वाने तु मन्त्रज्ञः कथयामि तवाखिलम्‌। 
तत्त्वमावाहयेद्देवि ततो होमं प्रकल्पयेत्‌॥ 26॥ 


गन्धैः पुष्पैः समभ्यर्च्य ताडनं तु ततः पुनः। 
शिवेन योजयेत्तत्र हुनेत्तेनैव सुव्रते॥ 27॥ 


शतं शतं च होतव्यं पूर्णाहुत्यां प्रति प्रति। 
त्रितत्त्वाध्वरशुद्धे च शिखाच्छेदं तु कारयेत्‌॥ 28॥ 


तत्त्वात्मस्थं पशुं कृत्वा योजयेत्परमे TS | 
योजिते तु परे तत्त्वे सौम्यमाहुतयो हुनेत्‌॥ 29॥ 


ओं सर्वज्ञतायै च परिपूर्णति चापरम्‌। 
परितृप्तो भवस्वेति निर्वाणं भवस्वेति च॥ 301 


यथा सर्वगतो ह्येवमाहुतिः प्रतिपादयेत्‌। 
सर्वेव्यापीति होतव्यं देशिकेन महात्मना॥ 31॥ 


भवेत्सर्वज्ञता देवि स पशुः कारणाञ्ञया। 
agh देवदेवेन तड़वेन्नात्र संशयः॥ 32॥ 


कलास्तथैव ज्ञातव्याः पदेनैव तथैव च। 
वर्णाध्वाने तथा प्रोक्तं कर्तव्यं देशिकेन तु॥ 33॥ 


= 

eum cni; रौद्रं 4; dT B; रौद्र C 9:26 मन्त्रज्ञः ] AC; मन्त्रज्ञ U 
9:28 A Ta] BC; सुवृते 4 9:28 शतं शतं च होतव्यं] BC; U शतं शतञ्च 
ठ जल प्रात] ae UB 9:28 त्रितत्त्वाध्वरशुद्धे च] A; uU ध्वरशुद्धेव B i 
EE [] BC; [A 9:30 सर्वज्ञतायै ] A; सर्वन्तुज्ञताये B (unmetrical) i 
9:30 as B n चापरम्‌] C; शति च परम्‌ A (unmetrical); U Td 
ET U 8 हन ॥। AB; भजेति च C (unmetrical) 9:81 *हुतिः अतिपारय 
B; करणज्ञया pa पर्वव्यापीति] Ac; ७ पीति 5 9:32 कारणाज्ञया ] ^; करण 
ज्ञातव्याः पदेनैव 9:32 देवदेवेन तड़वेन्‌ AC; U न तड़ावे छ 9:33 memes 

` पदनेव ] 4; कथास्तथेव ज्ञातव्या पदेनैव 5; कथास्तथैव ज्ञातव्या पदेने च 


Appendix V: निश्चासकारिकायां दीक्षोत्तरे नवमः पटल: ५५१ 


वर्णा एव स्मृतास्तत्त्वा वर्णयोनिस्तथैव च | 
प्रणवे योजनज्चैव ताडने प्रणवः स्मृतः॥ 34॥ 


ग्रहणं प्रणवेनैव IAT: प्रणवेन तु। 
वर्णाध्वाने यथा प्रोक्तं पदाध्वाने तथैव च॥ 35॥ 


कलाध्वाने तथैवेह आचार्येण महात्मना | 
मन्त्राध्वानं प्रवक्ष्यामि संक्षेपान्न तु विस्तरात्‌॥ 36॥ 


गायत्री तु भवेद्योनिः तया मन्त्रान्विशोधयेत्‌। 
सावित्र्या ताडनं कुर्यात्‌ ग्राह्यं तेनैव मन्त्रतः॥ 37॥ 


योजनं तेन कर्तव्यं तथा चैव वियोजनम्‌। 
उत्कर्षणं तु तेनैव सावित्र्या तु विचक्षणः॥ 38॥ 


पाशच्छेदं शिवेनैव कर्तव्य देशिकेन तु। 
पूर्णाहुतिः प्रदातव्या योजनाय परे शिवे॥ 39॥ 


वसोर्धाराप्रयोगेन पातयेत्तु विचक्षणः। 
एष एव विधिर्देवि कथितो ह्यनुपूर्वशः॥ 40॥ 


ज्ञातव्यं देशिकेनैव योजनाय परे शिवे। 
सर्वसंहितसामान्यं कथितं तव शोभने॥ 41॥ 


दीक्षा पञ्चविधा देवि कर्तव्या देशिकेन तु। 
तदहं संप्रवक्ष्यामि साधकानां हितावहम्‌॥ 421 


आसनं प्रणवेनैव कर्तव्यं देशिकेन तु। 


9:34 वर्णा एव स्मृतास्तत्त्वा ] AC; वर्णायेव स्मृतास्तत्व B 9:34 प्रणवः ] BC; प्रणव A 
9:35 प्रणवेनैव TAT: ] 4; प्रणवेनैवोक्षेपः छ; प्रणवेनैवोत्क्षेपः 0 9:35 वर्णाध्वाने यथा 
परोक्तं] AC; TUB 9:36 कलाध्वाने ] AB; कथाध्वाने C 9:37 गायत्री तु ] AB; 
गायत्री ० 9:38 तु विचक्षणः] AB; नु विचक्षणः C 9:39 शिवेनैव ] AB; विशेनैव © 
9:39 पूर्णाहुतिः प्रदातव्या योजनाय ] AC; पूर्ण | य B 9:41 देशिकेनैव योजनाय 
E विका योजनाय शिवे परे BC 9:41 ag ud A : pis 
व सामानं 8; सर्व हि तव सामान्यं 0 9:42 कर्तेव्या] A; TAB > 
सप्रवक्ष्यामि NN हितावहम्‌ ] 4; om.BC 9:48 आसनं प्रणवेनैव कर्तव्य देशिकेन 
तु] A; om. BC ५३ 


५५२ 


अनन्तधर्मज्ञानञ्च वैराग्यैश्वर्यमेव च॥ 43॥ 


नवधा शक्तिदेवेन प्रणवं विन्यसेद्वुधः | 
qag चन्दनं तेन कर्णिकां तेन कारयेत्‌॥ 44॥ 


पुष्करान्तेन कर्तव्या मण्डलान्तेन कारयेत्‌। 
देवतान्तेन कर्तव्या मूर्त्यन्तेनैव कारयेत्‌॥ 45॥ 


पञ्च ब्रह्मा तु तेनैव अष्टत्रिंशत्कलैरयुतः | 
आवाहनं तु तेनैव कर्तव्यं सुरसुन्दारि॥ 46॥ 


ब्रह्मणस्तु न सन्देहो देशिकेन महात्मना। 
निवृत्तिस्तु शिरस्तस्य इडिका हृदयं fag: 47॥ 


सूक्ष्मा शिखा तु विज्ञेया सद्यस्तु कवचं भवेत्‌। 
पृथिवी तु भवेवस्त्रं ब्रह्मणाङ्गाः प्रकीतिताः॥ 481 


पूर्वेण प्रणवं दद्यात्‌ दक्षिणेन तथैव च। 
पञ्चिमेनोत्तरेणैव मध्ये प्रणवसंयुतम्‌॥ 49॥ 


आग्नेय्यां हृदयं चैव ईशान्यान्तु शिरः स्मृतम्‌। 
शिखा नेऋतदिग्भागे कवचं वायुगोचरे॥ 501 


रुद्रोङ्कारेण कर्तव्य रुद्रतत्त्वस्य शोभने | 
इकारस्तु शिखा देवि अकारस्तु शिरः स्मृतम्‌॥ 51॥ 


गकारो हृदयं चैव सद्यस्तु कवचं fag: | 
लकारमस्त्रमित्युक्तं ग्राहकाः परिकीर्तिताः॥ 52॥ 


हन्ताख्यभेदयेततैस्तु ग्राहकैः सुरसुन्दरि। 


RE Nana 
9:44 AAT] ABC; योगेन Be 9; 44 कर्णिकां तेन कारयेत्‌] AO; कर्णिका U 
FR ुष्करान्तेन ] AC; UAT 5 9:45 देवतान्तेन कर्तव्या मूर्त्यन्तेनैव कारयेत्‌] 
^; om B; देवतान्तेन कर्तव्या yd तेनैव कारयेत्‌ 0 9:48 सूक्ष्मा शिखा तु विज्ञेया 
ous TT शिखान्तु विज्ञेया 4; सूक्ष्म: शिखां तु विज्ञेयं BC 9:49 प्रणवं दद्यात्‌ 
m AC; UB 9:50 शिरः] BC; शिर A 9:50 नैऋत J A d 
9:53 E हारेण] A; रुद्र करणें B; रुद्रां करणे © 9:51 शिरः ] 80; 

53 हन्ताख्यभेदयेत्तेस्तु ग्राहकैः ] AC; हन्ताख्यभेव U कैः B 


pendix V: निञ्चासकारिकायाँ दीक्षोत्तरे नवमः पटलः 


Ap ५५३ 


भूतत्त्वं ब्रह्मतत्त्वस्य प्रणवेन तु होमयेत्‌॥ 53॥ 


एवं हुत्वा विधानेन पूर्णाहुत्या तु पातयेत्‌। 
योजने साधकेन्द्राय प्रजनत्वमपाञ्जिते॥ 54॥ 


तस्मिन्‌ युक्तं ततो मन्त्री ब्रह्मसायुज्यतां ब्रजेत्‌। 
ब्रह्मणे तु यथा प्रोक्तं विष्णवे ऽपि तथा स्मृतम्‌॥ 55॥ 


प्रतिष्ठा तु शिवस्यैव आकारः परिकीतितः। 
रुकारो हृदयं प्रोक्तमीकारस्तु शिखा स्मृता॥ 56॥ 


वामं तु कवचं प्रोक्तं वकारो ऽस्त्रं प्रकीतितम्‌। 
पूर्वोक्तेन विधानेन कुर्यादावाहनं बुधः॥ 57॥ 


सायुज्यं तादृशं प्रोक्तं शिवेन परमात्मना। 
अनाद्ये तु पदे देवि विष्णुसायुज्यतां ब्रजेत्‌॥ 58॥ 


तस्मिन्युक्तमया देवि विष्णुतुल्यपराक्रमः। 
विद्या शिरः समाख्यातमङ्गारं नाम नामतः॥ 59॥ 


ऋकारं हृदयं तस्य कथितं तव शोभने। 
अघोरं कवचं देवि रुद्गतत्त्वस्य शोभने॥ GON 


ब्रह्मणे विष्णवे यद्वत्‌ तद्वत्कुयोतु देशिकः | 
आसनेऽयं विधिर्देवि मया ते परिकीतितः॥ 61॥ 


TY Vo Tet 7 c गती 
57 The text of B switches to the middle of chapter 7 of the Diksottara here (p. 60); 
the text of verse 57 resumes at the top of p.69 in B. 


954 पातयेत्‌] A; होमयेत्‌ BC 9:54 प्रजनत्वमपाञ्निते ] A; प्रजने त्वमुपाश्रिते छ; 

TAT त्वमुपाञ्जिते 0 9:56 रुकारो ] A; ऋकारे BO 9:56 "sum me JA; 
*स्त्वशिखोस्मृतः 5; eae शिखा स्मृताः 0 9:57 वामं तु कवच Hin] 3८; 

UB 9:57 वकारो = प्रकीतितम्‌] AC; UT ऽस्त्रं परिकीतितम्‌ B 9:58 J- 

जेत] AB; यजेत्‌ ० 9:59 तस्मिन्युक्तमया देवि] 4°; तस्मिन्युक्तमधो A"; om. B; 
तस्मिन्युक्तमयो 0 9:59 विष्णुतुल्यपराक्रमः ] A; om. B; विष्णुसायुज्यता यजेत्‌ 0 

१:59 विद्या शिरः ] AB; विद्याश्शिरस्‌ C 9:60 ऋकारं] A; रुकार BC 9:60 अघोरं 

कवच देवि रुद्रतत्त्वस्य शोभने] AC; ००. छ 9:61 ब्रह्मणे विष्णवे] AC; u x मणि» 

मणे वि - वे 9:61 आसनेऽयं विधिर्देवि ] ^; आसने ऽयं U 8; आसने यो विधिर्देवि 

° 9:61 मया ते परिकीर्तितः] 0; मया ते परिकीर्तिताः A; U ते परिकीर्तितः 5 


५५४ निश्चासतत्त्वसंहितायाम्‌ | 
तस्य उकारः परिकीर्तितः । 
समाख्यातमकारं नाम नामतः॥ 621 
कवचं fag: | 
चेश्वरि॥ 63 


यो विधी रूद्रतत्त्वस्य ईब्वरे$पि तथा स्मृतः | 
अनन्ता रुद्गतत्त्वस्य निर्वाणं परमं पदम्‌ 64॥ 
ईश्वरी व्योमरूपा तु कथिता तवशोभने । 
निधनेन तु कर्तव्यं तत्त्वेन तु सदाशिवे॥ 65॥ 


यथापूर्वं मयाख्यातमत्रापि विधिरेव सः। 
परमाक्षरं शिखा तस्य शान्त्यतीतं शिरः स्मृतम्‌॥ 66॥ 


बिन्डुदेवं तु हृदयं ईशानं कवचं fag: | 
शून्यतत्त्वं हकारस्तु अस्त्रं तत्परिकीतितम्‌॥ 67॥ 


सायुज्यं पूर्वमेवोक्तं यथा कुर्यात्तु नान्यथा। 
एते पञ्चमहायागा नाख्याताः कस्यचिन्मया॥ 68॥ 


नैष्ठिका ब्रह्मचर्येषु स्थिता भुवि च मानवाः। 
तेषामुद्धरणार्थाय मया तु कथितं तव॥ 69॥ 


लिङ्गोद्धारविधिह्यष कथितस्तव aad | 
नेष्ठिकानां तु कर्तव्यं लिङ्गोद्धारं समीरितम्‌॥ 70॥ 


स्वजातीयपदे स्थाप्य ततो दीक्षां तु कारयेत्‌। 
a nnn ना . - 
9:62 उकारः ] BO; इकारः A 9:62 समाख्यातमकारं BO; समाख्यातं मका, ह 


9:63 यकारम्‌ ] AC; ।। कारम्‌ छ 9:63 'न्येतानि चेश्वरि ] AB; °न्यैतानि च 
MEO C; स्मृताः 4; स्मृता B 9:65 ईश्वरी व्योमरूपा ] C; ईश्वरे Ai 
; इच BY; ईश्वरस्योमरूपात्वा छ” 9:66 यथापूर्वं श्र] 
यथापूव मयाऽऽख्यातं मन्त्रापि 5; यथारूपं मयाख्यातं मन्त्रस्य 0 9:66 परमाक्षर] 
AC; परमाक्षर छ 9:66 शिरः] Bo; शिर ^ 9:67 बिन्डुदेवँ ] ABE `= नान्यः 
68 पूर्वमेवोक्तं ] AC; YUB 9:68 याथा कुर्यात्तु नान्यथा ] 4; U कार्यातु न 
m यथा कार्याशु नान्यथा ० 9:68 नाख्याताः ] BO; नाख्याता A yu : 
2 च] A; संस्थिता भुवि Bc 9:70 "विधिह्येष ] em.; "विधि ay Ai ` 


अमृता तु शिखा 
विद्या शिरः सम 
आकारं हृदयं तस्य पुरुष कव 


Appendix V: निश्वासकारिकायां दीक्षोत्तरे नवमः पटलः ५५५ 


अथवा ब्रह्मविद्ये तु अभियुक्तस्तु साधकः॥ 71॥ 


तत्र दीक्षा तु कर्तव्या अभिषेकन्तु शोभने। 
वैष्णवे ऽपि तथैवेह कथितं परमेष्ठिना॥ 72॥ 


रूद्गरुद्रगाणानां तु साधनं परिकीतितम्‌। 
_ गणगुह्यकमन्त्रेषु साधनेनैव साधकः॥ 731 


विनायकानां सर्वेषां तत्र दीक्षां तु कारयेत्‌। 
डाकिन्यो मातरख्जैव योगीन्योऽपि तथापराः॥ 74॥ 


अस्मिंस्तु दीक्षितेनेव साधकः स विधीयते। 
ईश्वरे पाशुपत्यानां उद्धारे तु विचक्षणः॥ 75॥ 


लिङ्गोद्धारविधानं तु eder देशिकेन तु। 
शुद्धायुक्तास्तु ये तस्मिन्‌ दीक्षिते मुक्तिमिच्छता॥ 761 


सर्वतत्त्वफलोपेतं सर्वतत्त्वफलोदयम्‌। 
यजेद्देवाधिदेवेशं सर्वेषां फलमापुयात्‌॥ 77॥ 


एष सर्वोदयो नाम सर्वमुक्तिफलप्रदः। 
एष ते योग आख्यातः पञ्चव्योमात्मकः शुभः॥ 78॥ 


शिवयागं प्रवक्ष्यामि सर्वयागमनौपमम्‌। 
चतुरावरणैर्यागं कर्तव्य देशिकेन तु॥ 79॥ 


पञ्चब्रह्म शिवाङ्गा्च गर्भमेतदुदाह्तम्‌ | 
द्वितीयावरणे देवि कलाशत्तयात्मकानि तु॥ 801 


दिशासु विन्यसेद्देवि शक्तेस्तु विदिशा: कलाः। 


UES het 1 Fie mdi. EN 
9:72 तथैवेह कथितं ] AC; TUB 9:75 उद्धारे तु] AC; उद्धारस्तु B 9:76 शु- 
ये तस्मिन्‌ दीक्षिते ] 80; शुद्धायुक्तस्तु एतस्मिन्‌ दीक्षितेन ^ (पश) 
9:77 °फलोपेतं सर्वतत्त्वफलोदयम्‌] A; ८ त्वफलोदयः B; °फलोपेतं सर्वतत्वफलो- 
देय: © 9:77 °धिदेवेशं] c; ०दिदेवेशं AB 9:79 शिवयागं] A; शिवयोगं BC 
9:80 शिवाङ्गा्च गर्भेमेतढुदाहृतम्‌ ] conj; शिवाङ्गाच्च गर्भमेतदुदाहृतम्‌ A; शिवाङ्गोच् 
: CB; शिवाङ्गोच्च गर्भकैस्तत्रकीर्तितम्‌ C 9:81 "सेद्देवि शक्तेस्तु विदि- 
शा; कलाः] AC; बसे U लाः B 


निश्वासतत्त्वसंहितायाम 
५५६ | 


नादस्यैककलायास्तु दिशासु विदिशासु च॥ 81॥ 


यस्मादेककंला देवि निन्देच्छौचं तथैव च । 
एष ते याग आख्यातो दुर्लभस्त्रिदशैरपि॥ 821 


सर्वस्वं गोपितं ह्येतत्‌ व्याख्यातं तव शोभने। 
एष सर्वादयो यागः कथितास्तव शोभने॥ 83॥ 


ज्ञात्वा बुद्धा च यट्टा च मुच्यते नात्र संशयः। 
प्रणवं ह्यासनं कृत्वा मातृकां तु यजेङ्ुभः॥ 84॥ 


मूर्ति तु प्रणवं कृत्वा योजयेत्सुसमाहितः | 
दक्षिणे योजयेद्वीजं वामे योनिं तु विन्यसेत्‌॥ 85॥ 


सकलीकरणं ह्येतत्‌ दुर्लभं त्रिदशैर्‌ अपि। 
एवं न्यस्य वरारोहे संपत्‌ सम्पद्यते तदा॥ 86॥ 


सप्तकेन तु मन्त्रेण मातूकेण वरानने। 
निष्कलीकरणं ह्येतत्‌ कथितं तव शोभने॥ 87॥ 


अवर्ग पूर्वपत्रे तु कवर्गं चाग्निगोचरे | 
चवर्ग दक्षिणे चैव टवर्ग नेऋतेन Til 88॥ 


तवर्ग पञ्चिमे चैव पवर्ग वायुगोचरे | 


9:81 नादस्यै” ] BC; नादस्येश A 9:82 यस्मादेककला देवि निन्देच्छौचं ] Ci TU 
द कला EE निन्दोश्जौ A; यदककला देवि निन्दे्षौचं छ 9:82 ह A d 
B 9:82 दुलंभस्‌ ] 45; दुर्लभं C 9:83 सर्वस्व गोपितं ] 4; सर्वसङ्गो ऽ प 
सर्वसज्ञोपिते ० 9:83 सर्वादयो यागः कथितास्तव ] AS; dad योगाः कथितास्तव 
A“B; सर्वोदयो यागः कथितस्तव C 9:84 ज्ञात्वा ] AB; ज्ञत्वा 9:84 

तु यजेद्‌] 4; मातृकायां यजेद्‌ B; मातृकायां व्रजेद्‌ C 9:85 मूर्ति] BC मुक्तिन्‌ 
A 9:85 योजयेत्सुसमाहितः ] AC; L| 5 9:85 वामे] A; वाम BC संपत्‌ 
Pretty अपि] 0; om A(eyeskip); geli त्रिद | 8 ७:86 एवं न्यस्य वरारोहे TG, 
सम्पद्यते तदा] C; om. Aeyeskip); Li व न्यस्य वरारोहो (हे) संपत्सम्पद्यते त 
ecd सप्तकन तु मन्त्रेण मातृकेण वरानने] BC; om. A(eyeskip) 9:87 uM 
SR BC; om. A(eyeskip) 9:88 अवर्ग पूर्वपत्रे तु कवर्ग चाग्निगोचरे ] ^ दक्षिण 
VT तु गवर्ग वायुगोचरे B; कवर्ग पूर्वपत्रे तु गवर्ग वायुगोचरे 0 9:88 चवर्ग 
चैव टवर्ग teat] 4; जवर्ग दक्षिणे चैव दवर्ग नैक्रतिन BC 


Appendix V: निश्चासकारिकायां दीक्षोत्तरे नवमः पटलः vids 


यवर्गमुत्तरेणैव शवर्ग त्वीशगोचरे॥ 891 


एष वै मातृकायागः कथितस्तव शोभने। 
अवर्ग प्रथमं तत्त्वं कवर्ग पुरुषं स्मृतम्‌॥ 901 
एवं वर्गक्रमेणेव शिवतत्त्वं तु मातृकान्‌। 
ओंकारमात्मतत्त्वं तु प्रथमं परिकीतितम्‌॥ 91॥ 


रुद्रोङ्कारेण देवेशि विद्यातत्त्वं तु कारयेत्‌। 
निधनेन तु होतव्यं शिवतत्त्वं समाहितैः॥ 92॥ 


एवं ते मातृकायागो इुर्लभस्त्रिदशैरपि। 
कथितं सरहस्यं तु न मया गोपितं तव॥ 93॥ 


इति निश्वासकारिकायां दीक्षोत्तरे नवमः पटलः॥ 


Eee A Bes 
9:89 यवर्गमुत्तरेणेव शवर्ग त्वीश० ] AC; यवर्ग 11 5 9:90 कथितस्‌ ] BC; कथित A 
9:90 अवर्ग प्रथमं ] 4; अवर्गपरमं 5; कवर्गं परमं 0 9:90 पुरुष TATA] AC; पुरु U 
rn एवं] AC; UB 9:91 मातृकान्‌ ] AB; मातृकाम्‌ C 9:91 SUME 
न्योगे मात्र, C 9:92 रुद्रोङ्कारेण ] A; रुद्राकारेण BO 9:98 "यागो ] A; 
B; *्योगो C 9:93 सरहस्यं ] BC; सुरहस्यन्‌ A 


^35 vido iu King 
—— 


WORKS CONSULTED 


Abbreviations 
EFEO Ecole française d’Extréme-Orient 
EI Epigraphia Indica 
GOML Government Oriental Manuscripts 


IFI Institut Francais d'Indologie (name used in old publications) 


Library, Madras 


IFP Institut Français de Pondichéry/French Institute of Pondicherry 
KSTS Kashmir Series of Texts and Studies 


NAK National Archives of Kathmandu 


NGMPP Nepal-German Manuscript Preservation Project 


SII South Indian Inscriptions 
SP Somaáambhupaddhati 


SP1, SP2, etc. Somaśambhupaddhati volume 1, volume 2, etc. 


T Transcript 


TAKi, etc. Tantrikabhidhanakoga volume 1, etc. 


Editions and manuscripts of primary sources 


AGNIPURANA. Agni Puranam By Shrimanmaharshi Vedavyas. Gurumandal Series 
No. XVII. Calcutta: 5, Clive Row, 1957- 
AJITA. Ajitamahatantram The Great Tantra of Ajita, ed. and trans. N.R. BHATT, 


Jean FILLIOZAT, Pierre-Sylvein FILLIOZAT. 5 vols. Kalamiilasastra Series 
49. New Delhi: Indira Gandhi National Centre for the Arts / Delhi: Motilal 


Banarsidass, 2005. 


ATHARVAVEDAPARISISTA. The Parigistas of the Atharvaveda, ed. George vera 
BOLLING and Julius von NEGELEIN. Vol. 1, parts 1 and 2 (all published). 


Leipzig: Harrassowitz, 1909-1910. 


Nisva. 
: vasatattuasam hitz 


marasimha with the commentaries of Lingayasürin, Mall 


rya. Amarakosa with the unpublished South Indian CO 
n- 


Volume 


AMARAKOSA of A 


Appaya T : 
SR UE A. RAMANATHAN. 3 vols. The Adyar Library Series, 


101. Madras: Adyar Library and Research Centre, 1971, 1978, 1983. 


AMARAKOSA of Amarasimha with the commentaries of Ksirasvamin and Vandya. 
ghatiyasarvananda. The Námalingánusásana of Amarasimha With the tuo 
commentaries, Amarakosodghátana of Kshírasvámin and Tik@sarvasva " 
Vandyaghatiya-sarvénanda. Part II. end Kanda, 1-8 Vargas, ed. T. Ganap. 
ATI SASTRI. Trivandrum Sanskrit Series No. XLIII. Trivandrum: Travancore 


Government Press, 1915. 


AMOGHAPASAKALPARAJA. “Transcribed Sanskrit Text of the Amoghapasakalpa- 

raja Part 1’, ed. T. KIMURA, N. OTSUKA, and T. SUGIKI, Annual of the 
Institute for Comprehensive Studies of Buddhism, Taisho University ( AICS- 
BTU) 20 (1998), PP- 304(13)-251(54); ‘..Part IP, ed. Y. Iro, R. Kov- 
DA, Y. MATSUNAMI, AICSBTU 21 (1999), pp. 154(88)-107(128); '..Part 
IIT, ed. A. Suzuki, N. OTSUKA, H. KIMURA, AICSBTU 22 (2000), pp. 
372(1)-309(64); ‘..Part IV’, ed. Y. Iro, H. YAITA, S. MAEDA, AICSB- 
TU 23 (2001), pp. 406(1)-331(64);A ‘..Part V’, ed. N. OTSUKA, AICSB- 
TU 26 (2004), pp. (120)-(183); ‘..Part VI’, ed. Y. Iro, 32 (2010), PP. 
(170)-(207). 

ARTHASASTRA. The Kautiliya Arthagastra, ed. R.P. KANGLE. University of Bom- 
bay Studies Sanskrit, Prakrit and Pali, Nos. 1-3. Bombay : University of 
Bombay, 1960, 1963, 1965. 


ASTAPRAKARANA, ed. KRSNASASTRI. Devakottai: Sivagamasiddhantaparipalana- 
safigha, 1923 (TATTVAPRAKASA, TATTVASANGRAHA, TATTVATRAYANIR- 
NAYA, with the commentaries of Aghorasivacarya) and 1925 (RATNATRAYA- 
PARIKSA, BHOGAKARIKA, NADAKARIKA with the commentaries of Aghorar 
$ivacarya, and MOKSAKARIKA and PARAMOKSANIRASAKARIKA with the com- 
mentaries of Ramakantha II). 


— 2 ed. Vrajavallabha DVIVEDI. Yogatantragranthamala Vol. 12. Varanasi: 


Sampurnananda Sanskrit University, 1988. 

übersetzt, €T 
o BOHTLINGK 
ष्ठ edition 


AS TA AUT =- s e at Toe 
Ee of Panini. Pánini's Grammatik herausgegeben, 
utert und mit verschiedenen Indices versehen, ed. Ott 


Hildesheim/New York: G 7. : of Lelpal 
of 1887). : Georg Olms Verlag, 1977 (reprint o 


AG AMAN YANA of 
ac Agamapramanya of Yamunacarya, ed. M. Naras 
aekwad's Oriental Series 160. Baroda: Oriental Institute, 1976. s 


80187" 


IBANASIVAGURUDEVAPADDHATI of Iéanagivagurudeva, ed. T. GAN ith 8 
4 Vols. Delhi: Bharatiya Vidya Prakashan, 1990. (Reprinted, d drum 
substantial new introduction dated to 1987 by N. P. UNNI, from Tr HE: 25. 
Sanskrit Series Nos 69, 72, 77 and 83, Trivandrum, 1920; 1921, 1922 


Works Consulted 561 


AITAREYABRAHMANA. The Aitareya Brahmanam of the Rigveda, containing the 
Earliest Speculations of the Brahmans on the Meaning of the Sacrificial 
Prayers, and on the Origin, Performance, and Sense of the Rites of the 
Vedic Religion. Edited, translated and explained by Martin Haug, [..] Vol. 1 
Sanscrit Text, with Preface, Introductory Essay, and a Map of the Sacrifi- 
cial Compound at the Soma Sacrifice, ed. Martin HAUG, Bombay/ London: 
Government Central Book Depót/ Trübner and Co., 1863. 


KATHOPANISAT. See OLIVELLE 1998. 


KARMAKANDAKRAMAVALI of Somasambhu. Karmakanda Kramavali by Sri So- 
mashambhu, ed. Jagaddhar ZADOO. KSTS 73. Srinagar, 1947. 


See also SOMASAMBHUPADDHATI and BRUNNER 1963, 1968, 1977. 


KAMIKAGAMA, PURVABHAGA and UTTARABHAGA. No editor accredited. Published 
by C. SWAMINATHA GURUKKAL. Madras: South Indian Archaka Associa- 
tion, 1975 and 1988. 


KARANA, PURVABHAGA. érimat pürvakaranakamam, ed. Mayilai Alakappa MU- 
TALIYAR. 2nd impression (irantam patippu). Chennai, Cintatirippettai, 1921 
(kaliyuga 5023). 

KIRANATANTRA, árimatkiranagamamahatantram érigarudopaérutam idam éribi- 
lvaranyasthalábhijataérimacchaivagamabdhiparinaériramasvamistvacarya- 
varyavarasununa érimanmayiirasthasarvasastravisaradasrivaidyanathast- 
vacaryavaryavarantevasina sripaficanadasthammalagraharasrisaivagama- 
pathagalapradhanadhyapanena ca érimattatpurugasivaparanamakaériparica- 
pagesasivacaryavaryena yathamati parisodhitam. devakottai[|-]$ivagama- 
siddhantaparipalanasabhadhyaksaih kumbhaghonanagaravirajamanasrikoma- 
lambamudraksarasalayam mudritam, ed. Ti. Ra. PANCAPAGESASIVACARYA. 
Sivagamasiddhantaparipalanasanghaprakasitasankhya 16 (=Ep). Deva- 
kottai, 1932. 


. See also GOODALL 1998 and VIVANTI 1975: 

KAUSITAKAGRHYASUTRA. kausitakagrhyasutrant bhavatratakrtavivaranayutant, ed. 
T.R. CHINTAMANI. Madras University Sanskrit Series 15. Madras: Univer- 
sity of Madras 1944. 


KRIYAKRAMADYOTIKA of Aghorasivacarya with the commentary (PRABHA- 
VYAKHYA) of Nirmalamani, ed. RAMASASTRIN and AMBALAVANAJNANA- 
SAMBANDHAPARASAKTISVAMIN. Chidambaram, 1927- 


KHADIRAGRHYASUTRA. Khadira-grhya-sitra with the commentary “Suérartha Bod- 
hini” of Sri. Pattabhiramarya. khàdiragrhyasutram बीए म नि a 
itayà sütrarthabodhinya vrttya sahitam. Madras: P. Ramadoss, Anandatan- 
davapura, 1955 [Printed at Sri Vani Vilas Press, Srirangam]. 

GUHYASIDDHI of Padmavajrapada. In: Guhyadi-astasiddhi-sanigraho, ed. anih 
hong Rinpoche and Vrajvallabh DWIVEDI. Rare Buddhist Text Series 1. 
Sarnath/Varanasi: Central Institute of Higher Tibetan Studies, 1987- 


Nisvasatat : 
562 tvasamhitg 


HYASAMGRAHAP. ARISISTA of Gobhilaputra. See BLOOMFIELD 1881. 
GR V -* 


AYAMALA. Using the e-text of Olga SERBAEVA SARAOGI. 


JAYADRATH ee 
z q ita, ed. Embar KRISHN CHARYA 
HYASAMHITA. Jayakhyasamhita, ed AMACHARYA. Gaek. 


s Oriental Series 54- Baroda, 1931. 


ÜT Ti iminigri utra belonging to the Sa 

uyASUTRA. The Jaiminigrhyasutra ümaveda, ed. 

[Reprinted: Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass 
१ 


JAYAK 
wad' 


JAIMINIYAGR 
Willem CALAND, Lahore 1922. 
1984.] 

ET TNAVALT of Jñānaśi i h Institute, Mysore, MS P 

JRANARATNAVALI of Jiianasiva. Oriental Researc , Mysore, 3801 
(=M?). Palm-leaf, Nandinagar. Also GOML MS R 14898 (=M,) and its 
apograph IFP MS T. 231, as well as pp. 13-60 of IFP MS T.106 (the latter 
giving the text of what is probably a manual based upon the JNANARATNA- 
VALI, for see GOODALL 2000:209, fn. 11), all paper transcripts in Devanagari. 


JNANASIDDHANTA. Jfüünasiddhanta, ed. and trans. Haryati Soebadio. Bibliotheca 
Indonesica 7. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1971. 


TATTVARATNAVALI of Vimalacarya. National Archives, Kathmandu, MS 1-1679 
7/6, NGMPP Reel No. B26/16. Incomplete palm-leaf manuscript. 


TANTRASADBHAVA Electronic edition of Mark DYCZKOWSKI based on NGMPP 
Reel Nos. A 188/22, A 44/1, and A 44/2. 


TANTRALOKA of Abhinavagupta with commentary (-VIVEKA) of Rajanaka Jaya- 
ratha. The Tantraloka of Abhinava=Gupta. With Commentary by Rajanaka 
Jayaratha, ed. Madhusüdan Kaul SASTRI. KSTS 23, 28, 30, 35, 29; 41 4^ 
59, 52, 57 and 58. Bombay and Srinagar, 1918-38. 


TIMIRODGHATANA. Transcription of Somdev VASUDEVA of NGMPP A35/3- 
TVARITAMULASUTRA. Forthcoming edition of 1st chapter by Michael SLOUBER- 
DIKSADARSA IFP T. 76. 


DIKSOTTARA IFP T. 17 [=A], 127 [=B] and 150 [=C]. For details, see fn. 15 9" 


p. 23. 
DEVYAMATA. Two Nepalese palm-leaf manuscripts: NAK MS 5-446, NGMPP ue 


No. A 41/15 (—A), dated to 1060 AD ([Nepal Samvat] 180), and 
1-279, NGMPP Reel No. A 41/13 (—B). 


DVADASARANAYACAKRA. Dvadasaram Nayacakram of Acarya Sri Mallavadi Ju 
masramana With the commentary Nyayagamanusarini of Sri Simhasüri OF 
Vadi Ksamasramana Part 1 (1-4 Aras), ed. Muni Jambuvijaye "P ng 
manand Jain Granthamala Serial No. 92. Bhavnagar: Sri Jain Atman? 
Sabha, 1966 

ei ISAACSON OF 


DVISATIKALOTTA limi 
KALOTTARA. Preliminary electronic edition prepared by M No. B 318/7- 


the basis of Nepalese Paper MS NAK 5-4632, NGMPP Reel 


rks Consulted 
Works Consulte 563 


DHARM APUTRIKA. Printed in: Pasupatimatam sivadharmamahasastram pa$upati- 
nathadarsanam, ed. Yogi NARAHARINATHA. Kathmandu: Brhadadhyatmi- 
kaparisadah Kasthamandapah Gorakhahindurastram, 1999 (Saka 1921) 


DHYANASLOKAH K dhyānaślokańńal bhasavyakhyanasahitam. Vyakhyata: Kanip- 
payyur Sankaran Nampitirippat. Kunnamkulam: Pancamgam Pustakaéala 
1986 (Kollam 1161). [Second edition.] Te: 4 


NATARAJAPADDHATI of Ramanatha. Preliminary electronic text typed in by Nira- 
jan KAFLE, Michael GOLLNER, Dominic GOODALL, S. A. S. SARMA, and R. 
SATHYANARAYANAN from the Paper Devanagari MS at the Math n Tiruva- 
vatuturai. 


NARESVARAPARIKSA of Sadyojyotih with commentary (-PRAKASA) of Bhatta 
Ramakantha, ed. Madhusudan Kaul SASTRI. KSTS 45. Srinagar, 1926. A 


NITYADISANGRAHAPADDHATI of Taksakavarta. Bodleian MS Stein Or.d.43. Pa- 
per, Sarada script. 


NISVASAKARIKA IFP T. 17 [=A], 127 [=B] and 150 [=C]. For details, see fn. 15 on 
p.23. 

NETRATANTRA with the commentary (UDDYOTA) of Ksemaraja. The Netra 
Tantram with commentary by Kshemaraja, ed. Madhusudan Kaul SHASTRI. 
KSTS 46 and 61. Bombay, 1926 and 1939. 

PARAMATMASANDARBHA of Jivagosvamin. ériérila-srijivagosvami-prabhupada- 
viracite safsandarbhatmaka-srisribhagavatasandarbhe triyah Srisriparama- 
tmasandarbhah, ed. Puridasa. Calcutta: &rivrndavanadhama-vastavya-$riha 
-ridasa-Sarman, 1951. 


PARAKHYATANTRA. The Parakhyatantra, a scripture of the Saiva Siddhanta. A 
critical edition and annotated translation, ed. and trans. Dominic GOODALL. 
Collection Indologie 98. Pondicherry: IFP/EFEO, 2004- 


PARAMESVARA/ [PAUSKARA]-PARAMESVARA Cambridge University Library 
MS Add. 1049 (codez unicus). Palm-leaf, early Nepalese ‘Licchavi’ script. 
Described by BENDALL (1883:27-8). 

PASUPATASUTRA with the commentary (PANCARTHABHASYA) of Kaundinya, ed. 
Ananthakrishna SASTRI. Trivandrum Sanskrit Series No. CXLIII. Trivan- 
drum: The Oriental Manuscript Librery of the University of Travancore, 
1940. 


PICUMATABRAHMAYAMALATANTRA. See BRAHMAYAMALATANTRA below. 
and BABUKRSNA- 


PRATISTHALAKSANASARASAMUCOCAYA, ed. DAMODARASARMAN 
: 1966 and 1968 


SARMAN. Kathmandu: Nepāla Rajalaya Pustakalaya, 
(Vikram Samvat 2023 and 2025). 


Nigvas : 
564 atattvasamhits 


of Trilocanagiva. Saiva Rites of Expiation. A first edi. 
Trilocanasiva’s twelfth-century Prayascittasamuccayg 
(with a transcription of Hrdayasiva’s Prayascittasamuccaya), ed. and trans 
R. SATHYANARAYANAN, With an introduction by Dominic GOODALL. Collec. 
tion Indologie 127. Pondicherry: IFP/EFEO, 2015. 


PRAYASCITTAPATALASANGRAHA of Hrdayasiva. See PRAYASCITTASAMUCCAYA of 
Trilocanasiva above. 

BRHATKALOTTARA NAK MS pra 89. NGMPP B 24/59. Palm-leaf, hooked 

^ Newari. NAK MS pam 779. NGMPP B 25/2. Palm-leaf, Nagari with 

prsthamatra vowel-notation. 

BRHATSAMHITA of Varahamihira. The Brihat Samhita by Varahamihira with the 
commentary of Bhattotpala, ed. Sudhákara DVIVEDI. Part 2. The Viziana- 
gram Sanskrit Series No. 12. Benares: E. J. Lazarus & Co., 1897. 


PRAYASCITTASAMUCCAYA 
tion and translation of 


BODHAYANAGRHYASUTRA and BODHAYANAGRHYASESASUTRA. The Bodháyana 
Grihyasutra, ed. R. Shama SASTRI. Oriental Library Publications Sanskrit 
Series 32 55. Mysore: University of Mysore, 1920. 


BRAHMAYAMALATANTRA "Transcription by Shaman HATLEY, with correction by 
Csaba Kiss, of NAK MS 3-370, NGMPP A 42/6. See also HATLEY forth- 
coming A and Kiss forthcoming. 


BHOGAHASTA. Preliminary edition of Diwakar ACHARYA based on NGMPP B 
115/9. 


MANJUSRIYAMULAKALPA. The Aryamanjusrimilakalpa, ed. T. GANAPATI SASTRI. 
3 volumes. Trivandrum Sanskrit Series LXX, LXXVI, and LXXXIV. 
Trivandrum, 1920, 1922, and 1925. 


MATANGAPARAMESVARAGAMA, with commentary (-vRTTI) of Bhatta Rama 
kantha. Matarigaparamesvaragama (Vidyapada) avec le commentaire de 


Bhatta Ramakantha, ed. N.R. BHATT. Publications de VIFI No.56. 
Pondicherry: IFI, 1977. 


MATANGAPARAMESVARAGAMA, KRIYAPADA, CARYAPADA and YOGAPADA, with the 
commentary (-VRTTI) of Bhatta Ramakantha up to KRIYAPADA x 
Matarigaparamesvaragama (Kriyapada, Yogapada et Caryapada) avec leso 
PONE de Bhatta Ramakantha, ed. N.R. BHATT. Publications de pe 
0. 65. Pondicherry: IFT, 1982. 

MATASARA. Transcription 


of Somdev V, -379 vi. Saivatantra 197 
(NGMPP B28/16). ev VASUDEVA of NAK3-379 vi. 98 


ries 


MAN = 
USMRTI. Manava-Dharma Sastra [Institutes of Manu] with the Commentar 


T: He Sarvajrianarayana, Kullüka, Raghavananda, Nandana, 

EI 2 ru Appendix by Vishvanath Narayan MANDLIK br E 
TOJ. recht E = hi harlal, 

(first edition 1886) WEZLER. Delhi: Munshiram Manoha 


Works Consulted ete 


MANTRAKAUMUDI of Devanathathakura. Mantrakaumudi of Devanatha Thakkura. 
ed. Ramanatha Jha. Darbhanga: Mithila Institute of Post-G Me 
and Research in Sanskrit Learning, 1960. ost Graduate Studies 


MAHABHARATA. The Mahabharata for the first time critically edited, ed. V.S. 
SUKTHANKAR (1927-43) and S.K. BELVALKAR (from 1943) Ui he eee 
operation of Shrimant Balasaheb Pant PRATINIDHI, R.N. DANDEKAR 
S.K.DE, F. EDGERTON, A.B. GAJENDRAGADKAR, P.V. KANE RD. 
KARMAKAR, V.G. PARANJPE, Raghu VIRA, V.K. RAJAVADE, N. B UT- 
GIKAR, P.L. VAIDYA, V.P. VAIDYA, H.D. VELANKAR, M. WINTERNITZ 
R. ZIMMERMAN and other scholars. 19 Vols. Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental 
Research Institute, 1927-1959. 


MANAVAGRHYASUTRA. Mánavagrhyasütra of the Maitrayaniya Sakha (sic) with the 
commentary of Astávakra, edited with an introduction, indexes, etc., Ramakr- 
ishna Harshaji SASTRI, with a preface by 8. 0. LELE. Gaekwad's Oriental 
Series, 35 Baroda : Central Library 1926. 


MALINIVIJAYOTTARATANTRA. Sri Malinivijayottara Tantram, ed. Madhusudan 
Kaul SASTRI. KSTS 37. Bombay and Srinagar: The Research Department 
Jammu and Kashmir State, 1922. 

See also VASUDEVA 2004. 


MRGENDRATANTRA Mrgendragama (Kriyapada et Caryapada) avec le commentaire 
de Bhatta-Narayanakantha, ed. N.R. BHATT. Publications de l'IFI No. 23. 
Pondicherry: IFI, 1962. 


MRGENDRAPADDHATITIKA of VaktraSambhu (commenting on the MRGENDRAPA- 
DDHATI of Aghoraáiva). IFP T. 1021. 


MOHACUDOTTARA. NAK MS 5-1977, NGMPP Reel No. A 182/2. Paper, Deva- 
nagari. 

YASASTILAKA. The Yasastilaka of Somadeva Siri with the Commentary of Srutade- 
va Siri, ed. Pandit SIVADATTA and Kaginath Pandurang PARAB. Kavyamala 
70. Bombay: Tukárám Javaji, 1901-03- 

YAJNAVALKYASMRTI with the commentary of Apararka. Aporürkipar t os 
radityaviracitatikasameta yajnavalkyasmrtih, ed. Pandits ane Anan’ ae 
ma. Anandagramasamskrtagranthavalih 46. Pune: Anandasramamudran 
laya ,1903. 

YAJNAVALKYASMRTI with the commentary (MITAKSARA) of Vijnanesvare, ed. 

Narayan Ram ACHARYA. 5th edition. Bombay, 1949- 


YUKTIDIPIKA. Yuktidipika. The Most Significant Commentary on the pod 
rikà. Critically edited by Albrecht Wezler and Shujun de ae 
und Neu-Indische Studien 44. Stuttgart: Franz Steiner Verlag, 1999- 


^ Nisvāsatattvasamhitz 


n= The Yoga Shastra of Hemchandracharya (A 

GASASTRA of Hemacandra. The S , 121) 

po Century Guide to Jain Yoga), trans. A. 8. opani, ed. Surendra, Bothara, 
Prakrit Bharti Pushpa 63. Jaipur: Prakrit Bharti Academy / Mevanagar: 
Shri Jain Swetamber Nakoda Parshwanath Teerth, 1989. 


YOGASUTRA of Patañjali with the YOGABHASYA of Vyasa, the TATTVAVAISARADI 
of Vacaspatimisra, the PATANJALARAHASYA of Raghavanandasarasvati, the 
YOGAVARTTIKA of Vijfianabhiksu, and the BHASVATI of Hariharanandaranya, 
Sange Yogadargana Or Yogadaráana of Patanjali With the Scholium of Vyasa 
and The Commentaries Tattva Vaigaradi, Patanjala Rahasya|,] Yogavartika 
and Bhàsvati of Vacaspati Misra, Raghavananda Sarasvati, Vijriana Bhiksu & 
Hariharanandaranya, ed. Gosvami Damodara SASTRI. Kashi Sanskrit Series 
110. Varanasi: Chaukhambha Sanskrit Sansthan, 1998 (3rd edition). 


RAMAYANA of Valmiki. The Valmiki-Ramayama. Critically edited for the First 
Time, ed. G.H. BHATT, P.L. VAIDYA, P. C. DivANJI, D.R. MANKAD, G.C. 
JHALA, Umakant Premanand SHAH. 7 vols. Baroda: Oriental Institute, 
1960-1975. 


RAURAVASUTRASANGRAHA Printed at the beginning (pp.1-16) and as Appendice 
I (pp.173-194) of volume 1 of the RAURAVAGAMA (see below). 


RAURAVAGAMA, ed. N. R. BHATT. 3 Vols. Publications de PIFI No. 18. Pondicher- 
ry: IFI, 1961 [reprinted 1985], 1972 and 1988. 


LUPTAGAMASANGRAHA. Luptagamasarigraha [part one], collected and edited by 
Gopinatha KAVIRAJA. Yogatantra-granthamala 2. Varanasi: Sampur- 
nanand Sanskrit University, 1998 [second edition]. 


VARAHAPURANA. Srimadvarahamahapuranam. Bombay: Laksmivenkatesvara 
(stim) yantralaya, [samvat ?] 1867. 


VAKYAPADIYA of Bhartrhari. See RAU 2002. 


VARAHAGRHYASUTRA Varaha-grhya-sutra with short extracts from the paddhatis 
of Garigadhara and Vasistha, ed. Raghu VIRA. Panjab University Oriental 
Publications 17. Lahore: The University of the Panjab, 1932. 


VISNUDHARMOTTARA. Visnudharmottara-Purana Critically edited with Introduc- 
tion, Notes, etc. Third Khanda (Text, Critical Notes etc.), ed. Priyabala 
SHAH. Gaekwad’s Oriental Series 130. Vadodara: Oriental Institute, 1994: 


Mt The Vinasikhatontra. A Saiva Tantra of the Left Current 
- {eun GOUDRIAAN. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1985. 


VAIKHA HYASUT n fee rhya- 
ANASAGRHYASUTRA. $ra bhagavadvikhanomunipranitam $rivaikhanasag! hya 


en 2 $rinivasamakhivedantade£sikaih viracitaya लवर र n 
~ 1207296/10/0096 vyakhyaya : dU NT zdu $ri Rom. 
PARTHASA yak^yaya samalarikrtam, ed. Akulamannad 


RATHIBHATTACARYA. Tirupati: Tirumala Ti i Dor 
[प्‌ ala Tirupati Ue 
1997 [reprint of edition of 1967]. ? i 


Works © lied 


SATAR ATNASANGRAHA of UmapatiSivacarya with an anonymous commentary (- 
ULLEKHINI). Sataratna Samgraha with Sataratnollekhani. Introduction b 
Srhimat (sic) Swami Bhairabananda, ed. Pancanan SASTRI. Arthur Ales 
Tantrik Texts XXII. Delhi / Varanasi: Bharatiya Vidya Prakashan, 198 
(reprint of Calcutta edition of 1943). eae 
Also IFP MSS T. 112, pp. 558-76, and T. 804, pp.1-62 (with Tamil commen- 
tary). Paper transcripts in Devanagari. 


&IVAJNANASIDDHISVAPAKSADRSTANTASANGRAHA of Vedajnana. IFP MSS T. 317, 
pp. 968-1118, and T. 533, pp. 197-224. Paper transcripts in Devanagari. 


&IVADHARMASASTRA. Printed in: Pa$supatimatam — sivadharmamahasastram 
pagupatinathadarganam, ed. Yogi NARAHARINATHA. Kathmandu: 
Brhadadhyatmikaparisadah ^ Kasthamandapah ^ Gorakhahindurastram, 
1999 (Saka 1921). à: 
Also consulted: Cambridge MS Add. 1645 (Nepalese, palm-leaf, dated to 
1139 AD); NAK 5-737, NGMPP A 3/3 (Nepalese, palm-leaf, dated to Nepal 
Samvat 321 [=1200/01 AD]); NAK, MS pra. 1075, NGMPP B 7/3 (Nepalese, 
palm-leaf, dated to Nepal Samvat 290 [=1169/70 AD]); and Srinagar ORL 
1467 (paper, Sarada script). 

SIVADHARMASANGRAHA. Printed in: Pasupatimatam sivadharmamahasa- 
stram pasupatinathadaráanam, ed. Yogi NARAHARINATHA. Kathmandu: 
Brhadadhyatmikaparisadah Kasthamandapah Gorakhahindurastram, 1999 
(Saka 1921). 

See also, for chapters 1-3, Anil KUMAR ACHARYA 2009* and, for chapters 
5-9, Nirajan KAFLE (forthcoming). 


SIVADHARMOTTARA. See DE SIMINI 2013*. 

SIVAGAMADIMAHATMYA of Jňānaprakāśa. IFP T.1059. Paper transcript in Deva 
nagari. 

SIVASUTRAVIMARSINI of Ksemaraja. The Shiva Sutra Vimarshini being the Sutras 
of Vasu Gupta with The Commentary called Vimarshinz by Kshemaraja, ed. 
J.C. CHATTERJI. KSTS 1. Srinagar, 1911. 


SVETASVATAROPANISAT. See OLIVELLE 1998. 


SAMVARODAYATANTRA. The Samvarodaya-tantra Selected Chapters, ed. Shinichi 


TSUDA. Tokyo: The Hokuseido Press, 1974- 

SARVAJNANOTTARA Edition in progress by Dominic C EM si ote ZW 
partial editions given below, as well as on P T.334 [=U ; (NGMPP À 
Madras GOML R 16829 [=M], the early Nepalese cm E SEU orti 
43/12 [-N]), and the testimony of the unpublished commentary 
va. 


Nisvasatattvasamps 


568 
ed. MurTAIYAPILLAI (‘vidyapada’ only ). árikanfaparamecuvorar $ra cupping, 
, E iyarukkupatécittaruliya caruvananotiara akamam Nanapadam 
tamilmülamum, itarkkut tiruvavatuturat atina cotvappiracarakarun, 
7 


tevakottaic civakamacittantap paripalanacarikattuc cittantacatting 
potakarumakiya tuttukkuti po. muttaiyapillai elutiya muttiratnam 
ennum viruttiyuraiyum, ed. with Tamil translation and commentary 
by Po. MUTTAIYAPILLAI. Devakottai (tévakottai): Estate Press, 
1923 [=Ez]. 

ed. BRAHMANANDASVAMIN (‘vidyapada’ and ‘yogapada’ only, in Devanagan 
with a Tamil translation). Sri carvananottaram|.] itu taficai śrī 
pirahma nistapandita ve. cuppusvami raj ennum pürvacirama nā- 
mam pintirunta ri vi. pirahmanantasvamikalal molipeyarkkap 
perrum tañcai pirahma Sri cupramaniya castirikalal parvaiyitap- 
pattum taficai sri carkaravilaca caratamantirapirasil patippikkap 
perratu. Tanjore, 1933 [=Er]. 

ed. SARMA and SARMA (‘vidyapada’ and ‘yogapada’ only). *Sarva- 
jnanottaragamah vidyapada and yogapada’, ed. K. Ramachandra 
SARMA and revised by R. Thangaswami SARMA. Adyar Library 
Bulletin 62 (1998, appeared 1999): 181-232 [छ]. 


SARVAJNANOTTARAVRTTI of Aghoraáiva. Oriental Research Institute and 
Manuscripts Library, Trivandrum, MS 6578 [=T]. Grantha script, palm-leaf, 
probably originally from Madurai; 199 folios. Also IFP RE 47852, Grantha 
script, paper, 202 pages [=P,]. 


SARDHATRISATIKALOTTARA. Sardhatrisatikalottaragama avec le commentaire de 
Bhatta Ramakantha, ed. N.R. BHATT. Publications de PIFI No. 61. 
Pondicherry: IFP, 1979. 


SIDDHAYOGESARIMATA. See TORZSOK 1999*. 


SIDDHANTADIPIKA of Ramanatha. IFP MSS T. 284, pp. 48-89, and T. 914. Paper 
transcripts in Devanagari. 


SIDDHANTASARAPADDHATI of Bhoja. Unpublished transcription of Alexis SANDER- 
SON of two palm-leaf manuscripts: NAK 1-1363 [=A], NGMPP B 28/29 
(completed in Samvat 197 [1077/8 AD]) and NAK 5-743 [=B], NGMP. P 
28/19 (completed Samvat 231 [1111/2 AD]). | 


We printed by Mayilai-Alakappa Mudaliyar (no editor accredit- 
HOD" (Cintatiripettai): Civafianapotayantracalai, 1908 (Kaliyugea 


SUSRUTASAMHITA. Su$rutasamhita of Suéruta with the Nibandhasagraha Com- 
Trl AN SH Dalhanacharya and the Nyayacandrika Pañjikā of a 
ए a adasāchārya on Nidānasthāna, edited from the beginning to the 9th r 
ह Ya of Cikitsāsthāna by Vaidya Jadavji Trikamji ACHARYA and the 1e 
y Narayan Ram ACHARYA "Kavyatirtha" Jaikrishnadas Ayurveda Baek 


Works Consulted 
569 


No. 34. Varanasi/Delhi: Chaukhamb : j 
Ei ambha Orientalia, 1980 (Reprinted Fourth 


SÜKSMAGAMA. Süksmagama Volume I. Chapters 1 to 19, ed. S. SAMBANDHA 
éIVACARYA and T. GANESAN. Collection Indologie 1343. Pondich 3 
IFP/EFEO, 2010. ER PS 


See also BRUNNER 1963, 1968, 1977 and KARMAKANDAKRAMAVALI. 


SOMASAMBHUPADDHATIVYAKHYA of Trilocanasiva. Edition in progress of S.A.S 
SARMA, based on several MSS, including IFP MS T.170 (described by BRUN- 
NER 1998:li-lii) and GOML MS R 14735. 


SAURASAMHITA Forthcoming edition of Diwakar ACHARYA. 
SKANDAPURANA. Old recension. 
skandapuranasya ambikakhanda, ed. Krsnaprasad BHATTARAI. Kathmandu, 
1988. 
See also BAKKER, BISSCHOP and YOKOCHI et al. 2014. 
See 9190 YOKOCHI 2013. 


SVACCHANDATANTRA with the commentary (-UDDYOTA) of Rajanaka Ksemaraja. 
The Svacchanda- Tantra with commentary by Kshema Raja ed. Madhusudan 
Kaul SHASTRI. KSTS 31, 38, 44, 48, 51, 53, and 56. Bombay 1921-35. 
Also NAK MS 1-225, NGMPP Reel No. B 28/38, palm-leaf. 


SVAYAMBHUVAPANCARATRA. See Diwakar ACHARYA 2015. 


SVAYAMBHUVASUTRASANGRAHA, ed. VENKATASUBRAHMANYASASTRI, Mysore, 
1937. 
Readings from the following manuscripts have also been quoted: National 
Archives, Kathmandu, MS pam 348, vi. jyautisam 80, NGMPP Reel number 
A 30/6, a lacunose Nepalese palm-leaf manuscript (=N); Mysore, ORI, MS 
P 258, a palm-leaf manuscript in Nandinagart script (= MY); IFP T. 39, à 
paper transcript giving the text of the Svayambhuvasitrasangraha embedded 
in what appears to be an expanded South Indian text. 


— — with the VRTTI of Sadyojyotih, see FILLIOZAT 1991- 


HARSACARITA of Bana. The Harshacarita of Banabhatta (Text of Uchchhvasas 
I-VIII), ed. P.V. KANE. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1986 (repaginated 
reprint of first edition of Bombay 1918). 

HEVAIRATANTRA. The Hevajra Tantra. A Critical Study [..] Fart 2 rg gu 
Tibetan Texts, D.L. Snellgrove. London Oriental Series Volume 6. Loncon: 
Oxford University Press, 1959. 


ल NiSvasotattvasamhitg 
Translations and Studies 
RYA, Diwakar 

ACHA 2007 ‘The Samskaravidhi: A Manual on the Transformatory Rite of 

the Lakuliga-Pasupatas’ in: Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire 

d'Hélène Brunner. Tantric Studies in Memory of Héléne Brun, 
ner, ed. Dominic Goodall & André Padoux. Collection Indologie 

106. Pondicherry: IFP/EFEO, pp. 27-48. 

‘Pagupatas’, pp. 458-466 in: Brill Encyclopedia of Hinduism, vol, 

3, ed. Knut Jacobsen. Leiden: Brill. 

‘N&TI NÉTI Meaning and Function of an Enigmatic Phrase in the 

Gargya-Ajatasatru dialogue of Brhad Aranyaka Upanisad YL1 and 

II.3’, Indo-Iranian Journal 56 (2013), pp. 3-39. 

2015 Early Tantric Vaisnavism: Three Newly Discovered Works of the 
Paficaratra. The Svayambhuvapancaratra, Devamrtaparicaratra, 
and Astadagavidhana. Critically edited from their 11th- and 12th- 
century Nepalese palm-leaf manuscripts with an Introduction and 
Notes. Collection Indologie 129/ Early Tantra Series 2. Pondicher- 
ry: IFP/EFEO/Asien-Afrika-Institut, Universitat Hamburg. 


Acri, Andrea 
2008 ‘The Vaimala Sect of the Paéupatas. New Data from Old Javanese 
Sources’, Tantric Studies 1 (2008), pp.193-208. 
2011 Dharma Patarijala. A Saiva Scripture from Ancient Java. Studied 
in the Light of Related Old Javanese and Sanskrit Texts. Gonda 
Indological Series XVI. Groningen: Egbert Forsten. 


BAGCHI, Prabodh Chandra 
1939 Studies in the Tantras Part I, Calcutta: University of Calcutta. 
BAKKER, Hans T. 


2000 ‘Somagarman, Somavaméa and Somasiddhanta. A Pasupata T 
dition in Seventh-Century Daksina Kosala. Studies in the Skanda- 
purana IIT’, in Haranandalahari. Volume in Honour of Professor 
Minoru Hara on his Seventieth Birthday, ed. R. Tsuchida and A. 
Wezler. Reinbek: Dr Inge Wezler, pp. 1319. 

2014 The World of the Skandapurana. Northern India in the Sisih ae 
Seventh Centuries. Supplement to Groningen Oriental er 
Brill: Leiden / Boston. 


BAKKER, Hans T., BISSCHOP, Peter C., YOKOCHI, Yuko, in cooperation ge 
MIRNIG and Judit TORZSOK 


Ti h Vài d 
2014 The Skandapurana Volume II B Adhyayas 91-59. The ahati ae 
Naraka Cycles. Critical Edition with an Introduction & Ann ill: 


Sah Synopsis. Supplement to Groningen Oriental Studies. PP" 
Leiden/Boston. 


2011 


2013 


Nina 


Works Consulted 
571 
BALK, Michael 


2011 Untersuchungen zum Udanavarg 
FETS a. Unter Berücksichti it- 
telindischer Parellelen und eines tibetischen o कक dica 
et Tibetica 53. Marburg: Indica et Tibetica Verlag. i 
BENDALL, Cecil 
1883 Catalogue of the Buddhist Sanskrit Manuscripts in the Universit 
Library, Cambridge. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press 4 
BHATT, N.R., FILLIOZAT, Jean, and FILLIOZAT, Pierre-Sylvain 


2005 See AJITA. 
BHATTACHARYA, Kamaleswar 


1991 Recherches sur le vocabulaire des inscriptions sanskrites du Cam- 
bodge. Publications de l'Ecole francaise d'Extréme-Orient CXVII. 
Paris: EFEO. 

BisscHoP, Peter C. 

2005 ‘Pancarthabhasya on Pasupatasutra 1.37-39 recovered from a new- 
ly identified manuscript’, Journal of Indian Philosophy 33 (2005), 
PP. 529-551. 

2007 ‘The description of Sivapura in the early Vayu- and Skandapurana’, 
in: Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d'Héléne Brunner. Tantric 
Studies in Memory of Héléne Brunner, ed. Dominic Goodall & An- 
dré Padoux. Collection Indologie 106. Pondichéry : IFP/EFEO, 
PP- 49-71. 

2010 “Once Again on the Identity of Candeśvara in Early Saivism: A 
rare Candeévara in the British Museum?’, Indo-Iranian Journal 53 
(2010), pp. 233-249. be 

2012* ‘The Five Brahma-mantras of the Pasupatas Reconsidered. Un- 
published paper delivered at the workshop Mantra and Dharani in 
the Religious Traditions of Buddhism, Jainism and Hinduism at the 
Ruhr University, Bochum, in April 2012. 


BISSCHOP, Peter, and GRIFFITHS, Arlo 
2003 ‘The Pagupata Observance (Atharvavedaparisista 40)? Indo-Iranian 
Journal 46 (2003), pp. 315-348- 
BLOOMFIELD, Maurice 
1881 ‘Das Grhyasamgrahaparicishta des Gobhilaputra’, Zeitschrift der 
Deutschen Morgenlandischen Gesellschaft 53 (1881), pp. 533-587- 
Bosma, Natasja : 
2008 Early Saiva Sects in Daksina Kosala, Unpublished Masters puc. 
submitted to the University of Groningen in 2008. 


B =e 
RUNNER, Héléne, ed. and trans. 


Nigvasat z 
572 attvasamhits 


7 8 Somaíambhupaddhati. 4 vols: Première Part; 
us Dp प मताला dans la tradition $ivaite de l'Inde du Sud a. 
Somasambhu; Deuziéme Partie. Rituel Occasionnels dans 1८ tradi- 
tion Sivaite de l'Inde du Sud selon Somasambhu I : Pavitrarohang 
Damanapija et Prayascitta; and Troisième Partie. Rituels य्य 
sionels dans la tradition Sivaite de l’Inde du Sud selon Somagambhy 
II : diksa, abhiseka, vratoddhara, antyesti, sraddha; and Rituels dans 
la tradition sivaite selon Somasambhu. Quatrième partie : rituels 
optionnels : pratistha. Publications de PIFI No. 25. Pondicherry: 
IFI. - 
See also KARMAKANDAKRAMAVALI and SOMASAMBHUPADDHATI. 
Mrgendragama Section des rites et section du comportement avec 
la urtti de Bhattanarayanakantha. Publications de PIFI No. 69. 
Pondicherry: IFI. 
1998b ‘The sexual Aspect of the linga Cult according to the Saiddhanti- 
ka Scriptures’ in Studies in Hinduism II, Miscellanea to the Phe- 
nomenon of Tantras, ed. Gerhard Oberhammer. Vienna: Verlag 
der österreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften, pp. 87-103. 
2003 ‘Mandala and Yantra in the Siddhanta School of Saivism: Defini- 
tions, Description and Ritual Use’, pp.153-177 in: Mandalas and 
Yantras in the Hindu Traditions, ed. Gudrun Bühnemann. New 
Delhi: D. K. Printworld. 
BÜHLER, Georg 
1896 Indische Palaeographie von circa 950 a. Chr. — circa 1300 
p. Chr. Grundriss der Indo-Arischen Philologie und Altertum- 
skunde, 1. Band, 11. Heft. Strassburg: Trübner. 
CALAND, W. 
1921 Das Srautasütra des Apastamba aus dem Sanskrit übersetzt... d 
Buch. Quellen der Religionsgeschichte (Gruppe 7). Gottingen: Van- 
denhoeck & Ruprecht / Leipzig: J. C. Hinrichs’sche Buchhandlung. 
CEDÈS, Georges 
1937 Inscriptions du Cambodge Volume I. Collections de textes et docu- 
ments sur l'Indochine III. Hanoi: Imprimerie d'Extréme-Orient. 
1952 Inscriptions du Cambodge Volume IV. Collections de textes et doc- 
uments sur l'Indochine III. Paris: De Boccard. 
1953 Inscriptions du Cambodge Volume V. Collections de textes et doc- 
uments sur l'Indochine III. Paris: De Boccard. 
DELHEY, Martin, 


2012 "The Text ual S ources of the Majijuériyamülakaln, 
(Manjusrimiilakalpa), With Special Reference to Its Barly e ntre 
Witness NGMPP A39/4?, Journal of the Nepal Research 


XIV (2012), pp. 55-75. 


1985 


Works Consulted js 


DE SIMINI, Florinda 


mslation of Sivadharmottara’s 
Chapter Two ‘On The Gift 


0 of Knowledge’, unpublished doctoral 
thesis submitted to the Università degli Studi di Torino. 


Dezső, Csaba 


2010 ‘Encounters with vetalas. Studies on Fabulous Creatures T, 


Acta 
Orientalia Academiae Scientarum Hung. 63 (2010), 


PP- 391-426. 
EINOO, Shingo 
2005a “The Formation of Hindu Ritual’, From Material to Deity. Indian 


Rituals of Consecration, ed. Shingo Einoo and Jun Takashima, New 
Delhi: Manohar, pp. 7-49. 


2005b “Notes on the Installation Ceremonies described in the Grhya- 
parisistas', From Material to Deity. Indian Rituals of Consecra- 
tion, ed. Shingo Einoo and Jun Takashima, New Delhi: Manohar, 
Pp. 957113. y ii ९ 
2005c ‘Ritual Calendar. Change in the Conceptions of Time and Space’, 
Journal Asiatique 293.1 (2005), pp. 99-124. 
FARQUHAR, J.N. 


1920 An Outline of the Religious Literature of India, London etc.: 
Humphrey Milford/ Oxford University Press. 
FILLIOZAT, Pierre-Sylvain ; d 
ed. and trans. 1991 Le Tantra de Svayambhi, vidyapada, avec le commentaire 
de Sadyojyotih. Geneva: Librairie Droz S.A. 
FILLIOZAT, Jean, BHATT, N. R., and FILLIOZAT, Pierre-Sylvain 
2005 See AJITA. 
FLOOD, Gavin 
T : ti . David Gor- 
2000 ‘The Purification of the Body’, Tantra in iin m oe 
don White, Princeton and Oxford: Princeton 
Pp. 509-20. 
GOEPPER, Ro 
digit Iconological Study. 
1993 Aizen-Myoo. The Esoteric King of ui d Mann Hite / 
Artibus Asiae Supplementum XXXIX. Zurich: 
Artibus Asiae. 
GONDA, Jan 


: Orientalistik, 
1980 Vedic Ritual. The non-solemn rites. Handbuch der 


2. Abt., Bd. 4, 1. Abschn. Leiden / Cologne: Brill. 


574 


GooDALL, Dominic 


1998 


2000 


2004 


2007 


2009 


2010 


2011 


Nisvāsatattvuasamhitz 


Bhatta Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra. Volume 
5 है 3 1-6. Critical edition and annotated translation, Pub. 
lications du département d'indologie 86.1. Pondicherry: Institut 
francais de Pondichéry/ Ecole francaise d’Extréme-Orient. 
‘Problems of Name and Lineage: relationships between South In- 
dian authors of the Saiva Siddhanta' [a review article of BRUNNER 
1998] in: Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, Series 3, Vol. 10, 
Part 2, pp. 205-16. 

See PARAKHYATANTRA. 

*A first edition of the [Satika-]Kalajiiana, the shortest of the non- 
eclectic recensions of the Kalottara' in: Mélanges tantriques à la 
mémoire d'Héléne Brunner. Tantric Studies in Memory of Héléne 
Brunner, ed. Dominic Goodall & André Padoux. Collection Indolo- 
gie 106. Pondichéry : IFP/EFEO, pp. 125-66. 

‘Who is Candesa?' in: The Genesis and Development of Tantrism, 
ed. Shingo Einoo: Tokyo: Institute of Oriental Culture, University 
of Tokyo, pp. 351-423 + 44 plates. 

‘Atelier sur la Nisvasatattvasamhita, le plus ancien tantra Sivaite 
conservé’ in: Bulletin de l'École française d'Extréme-Orient 94 
(2007, appeared 2010), pp. 319-22. 

‘The Throne of Worship: An “Archaeological Tell” of Religious 
Rivalries’, in Studies in History 27(2) (2011, appeared 2013), 
pp. 221-50. 


forthcoming ‘How the Tattvas of Tantric Saivism came to be 36: the evi- 


dence of the Nisvasatattvasamhita’, in forthcoming special edition 
of Tantric Studies devoted to the findings of the “Early Tantra 
project. 


forthcoming B ‘On image-installation rites (linga-pratistha) in the early 


Mantramarga’, in a volume of essays resulting from a conference 
organised in Trondheim by Istvan Keul. 


G eos 
OODALL, Dominic, and ISAACSON, Harunaga 


2007 


2014 


SAMUS 
his belongs ६ : m hi of a 
ers EA = 2 revised edition (cleaned of many typographical errors) that 


appeared under the 


"Workshop on the Niávasatattvasamhità: The Earliest Surviving 
Saiva Tantra?” in: Newsletter of the Nepal-German Manuscript Ca 
aloguing Project, No.3 (January-February 2007), pp. 4-6: 


‘Tantric Hinduism’ in: The Bloomsbury Companion to Hindu 


Studies, ed. Jessica FRAZIER, with foreword by Gavin Ko 
London/New Delhi/New York/Sydney: Bloomsbury, PP: da ye 


189-91 (notes), 361-400 (bibliography for the whole book). 
2077 


e same content and same pagination (but muddled endnotes 


title The Continuum Companion to Hindu Studies. 


rks Consulted 
"e 575 


forthcoming ‘On the shared “Ritual Syntax” of the Early Tantri diti 
in forthcoming special edition of Tantric es Pe Ed 
findings of the “Early Tantra” project. gris UE 
GOODALL, Dominic, KATAOKA, Kei, ACHARYA, Diwakar, YOKOCHI, Yuko 
20053 A First Edition and Translation of Bhatta Ramakantha’s Tattva- 
trayanirnayavivrti, A Treatise on Siva, Souls and Maya, with De- 
tailed Treatment of Mala’ in: South Asian Classical Studies 3 
(2008), pp. 311-84. 
GooDALL, Dominic, ROUT, Nibedita, SATHYANARAYANAN, R., SARMA, S. A.S. 
GANESAN, T., SAMBANDHASIVACARYA S. 
2005 The Paficavaranastava of Aghorasiva: A twelfth-century South In- 
dian Prescription for the Visualisation of Sadasiva and his Retinue. 
Collection Indologie 102. Pondicherry: IFP/EFEO. 
GOPANI, A.S. 
1989 See YOGASASTRA. 
GOUDRIAAN, Teun 
1973 “Tumburu and his sisters’, Wiener Zeitschrift für die Kunde Sü- 
dasiens 17 (1973), PP. 49-95- 
1985 See VINASIKHATANTRA. 
GOUDRIAAN, Teun, and GUPTA, Sanjukta 
1981 Hindu Tantric and Sakta Literature. A History of Indian Literature, 
volume 2, fasc. 2. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz. 
GOUDRIAAN, Teun, and SCHOTERMAN, Jan A. 
1988 The Kubjikamatatantra. Kulalikamnaya Version. Critical Edition. 
Orientalia Rheno-Traiectina 30. Leiden / New York / København 
/ Kóln: Brill. 
GRIFFITHS, Arlo, and BISSCHOP, Peter 
2003 See BISSCHOP and GRIFFITHS. 
HANNEDER, Jiirgen 
1998 Abhinavagupta’s Philosophy of Revelation. An edition and 10 
ed translation of Malinsslokavarttika I, 1-399- Groningen Urien 
Series Volume XIV. Groningen: Egbert Forsten. 
HARA, Minoru i 
1966* Materials for the study of Pa$upata Saivism. Unpublished doctora 
thesis submitted to Harvard University. 
HARIMOTO, Kengo 
2011 ‘In Search of the Oldest Nepalese Manuscrip 
Orientali, Nuova Serie 84 (2011), PP- 85-106. 


t, Rivista degli Studi 


570 Nisvāsatattvasamhitz 
2014 ‘Nepalese Manuscripts of the Susrutasamhita’, Journal of ए 
and Buddhist Studies 62-3 (2014), pp. 1087-93. 


HATLEY, Shaman 
forthcoming A The Brahmayamalatantra or Picumata, volume I. A stud 


edition, and translation of chapters 1-2, 39-40, and 83. S 
Indologie / Early Tantra Series. Pondicherry: IFP/EFEO/Asien- 
Afrika-Institut, Universitat Hamburg. 
forthcoming B ‘akti in Early Tantric Saivism: Historical observations on 
goddesses, cosmology, and ritual in the Nisvasatattvasamhita’, in 
Goddess Traditions in Tantric Hinduism: History, Practice and 
Doctrine, ed. Bjame Olesen. Routledge, 2015. 


HAZRA, Rajendra Chandra 
1940 Studies in the Puranic Records on Hindu Rites and Customs. Dacca: 


University of Dacca. 


ISAACSON, Haru, and GOODALL, Dominic 
See GOODALL and ISAACSON 2007, 2011 and forthcoming. 


KAFLE, Nirajan 
forthcoming The Nisvasamukha, the introductory book prefacing the Nisvasa- 
tattvasamhita, critically edited and furnished with an annotated 
translation and an appendix giving an edition of chapters 5-9 of the 
Sivadharmasarigraha. Unpublished doctoral thesis to be submitted 
to the University of Leiden in 2014. 


KAVIRAJA, Gopinatha 
1998 See LUPTAGAMASANGRAHA. | 
Kiss, Csaba 


2015 The Brahmayamala Tantra or Picumata, Volume Two. The Reli- 
gious Observances and Sexual Rituals of the Tantric Practitioner: 
chapters 3, 21 and 45. Collection Indologie 130/ Early Tantra Se 
ries 3. Pondicherry: IFP/EFEO/ Asien-Afrika-Institut, Universitàt 
Hamburg, 2015 

KREISEL, Gerd 


1986 Die Siva-Bildwerke der Mathura-Kunst. Ein Beitrag zur frihet 
duistischen Ikonographie. Monographien zur indischen Archäolog!®, 
Kunst und Philologie, Band 5. Stuttgart: Franz Steiner Verlag. 


Ss atha- 
2009 Sivadharmasarigrahasya adyadhyayatrayasya 100000. 


sampadanam adhyayanañ ca (A Critical Edition and Study १ al 
Ti 7 f r 
hree Chapters of the Sivadharmasarigraha. Unpublished docto 
thesis submitted to Pondicherry University in May 2009: 


Works Consulted 
977 


MILLS, Elizabeth 
2011* Dating and placing early Saiva texts through prasadalaks 
study of prasadalaksana material in sir early Saiva texts he Bh ८ 
kalottara Mahatantra; the Ni$vase Mahatantre Pratisthatantr 
Mayasamgraha, with its commentary, the Bhavacüdamani: and the 
Brahmayamala Jayadrathadhikara Pingalamata. Unpublished d : 
toral thesis submitted to the University of Oxford in 2010. e 


MinNIG, Nina 


2009*  Liberating the Liberated. A History of the Development of Crema- 
tion and Ancestor Worship in the Early ४०१०० Siddhanta. Analysis 
Texts and Translations. Unpublished doctoral thesis submitted to 
the University of Oxford in 2009. 


MONIER-WILLIAMS, Monier 
1899 Sanskrit-English Dictionary. Oxford, Clarendon Press. 


TE NIJENHUIS, Emmie 


1977 Musicological Literature. A History of Indian Literature VI, Fasc. 1. 
Wiesbaden: Otto Harrassowitz. 


OBERLIES, Thomas 


2003 A Grammar of Epic Sanskrit. Indian Philology and South Asian 
Studies Volume 5. Berlin/New York: De Gruyter. 


OLIVELLE, Patrick 


1998 The Early Upanisads. Annotated Text and Translation, South Asia 
Research. Oxford, New York, etc.: Oxford University Press. 


RASTELLI, Marion 
1999 Philosophisch-theologische Grundanschauungen der Jayakhya- 
samhita. Mit einer Darstellung des täglichen ins Oster- 
reichische Akademie der Wissenschaften, Philosophisch-historische 
Klasse, Sitzungsberichte 668. Vienna: Verlag der Österreichischen 
Akademie der Wissenschaften. 


Rav, Wilhelm 
2002 Bhartrharis Vakyapadiya. Versuch einer vollständigen deutschen 


Übersetzung nach der kritischen Edition der Müla-Karikas, = 
von Oskar VON HINÜBER. Abhandlungen der Geistes-und Me - 
wissenschaftlichen Klasse, Einzelveróffentlichung I m 
Akademie der Wissenschaften und der Literatur / Stuttgart: franz 
Steiner Verlag. 

SANDER, Lore 


578 


1968 


SANDERSON, 
1988 


1992 


2001 


2004 


2005 


2006 


2007 


2009 


NiSvasatattvasamhitg 


Palüographisches zu den Sanskrithandschriften der Berliner Tos 
fansammlung. Verzeichnis der orientalistischen Handschriften in 
Deutschland, Supplementband 8. Wiesbaden: Franz Steiner Ver- 
lag. 
Alexis 

‘Gsivism and the Tantric Traditions’, in The World's Religions, ed. 
S. Sutherland, L. Houlden, P. Clarke and F. Hardy, London: Rout. 
ledge, 1988, pp. 660-704. 

‘The Doctrine of the Malinivijayottaratantra’, in Ritual and Spec- 
ulation in Early Tantrism: Studies in Honor of André Padouz, ed. 
Teun Goudriaan, State University of New York Press, pp. 281-312. 
“History through Textual Criticism in the Study of Saivism, the 
Paiicaratra and the Buddhist Yoginitantras’, pp. 1-47 in Les sources 
et le temps. Sources and Time. A colloquium. Pondicherry 11-19 
January 1997, ed. Frangois Grimal. Publications du département 
d'indologie 91. Pondicherry: IFP/EFEO, 2001 [appeared 2002]. 
‘Saivism among the Khmers (Part I)’, Bulletin de l'École francaise 
d'Extréme-Orient 90-91 (2003-2004), pp. 349-462. 

‘Religion and the State: Saiva Officiants in the Territory of the 
King's Brahmanical Chaplain’, Indo-Iranian Journal 47 (2004; ap- 
peared 2005), pp. 229-300. 

‘The Lakulas: New Evidence of a System Intermediate Between 
Paficarthika Pa$upatism and Agamic Saivism’, Indian Philosophical 
Annual 24 (2003-2005), pp. 143-217. 

"The Saiva Exegesis of Kashmir’, in Mélanges tantriques à la mé- 
moire d'Hélène Brunner. Tantric Studies in Memory of Hélène 
Brunner, ed. Dominic Goodall & André Padoux. Collection Indolo- 
gie 106. Pondichéry : IFP/EFEO, pp. 231-442. 

"The Saiva Age—The Rise and Dominance of Saivism in the Early 
Medieval Period’, in: The Genesis and Development of Tantrism, 
ed. Shingo Einoo: Tokyo: Institute of Oriental Culture, University 
of Tokyo, pp. 41-349. 


SASTRI, Hara Prasad 
1905 & 1915 A Catalogue of Palm-leaf and Selected Paper Mss. Belonging 10 


the Durbar Library, Nepal. 2 Vols. Calcutta: Baptist Mission Press. 


SCHARFE, Hartmut 


2002 


Education in ancient India. Handbuch der Orientalistik, Abt- 2: 
Indien: Band 16. Brill: Leiden, Boston, Cologne. 


SCHOTERMAN, Jan A. 


1988 


See GOUDRIAAN and SCHOTERMAN 1988. 


Works Consulted 
579 


SFERRA, Francesco 


1999 “The Concept of Purification in Some Texts of L di 
dhism’, Journal of Indian Philosophy 27 (1989. PNE a 

2008 (appeared 2010). Sanskrit Texts from Giuseppe Tucci’s Collec- 
tion Part I, Manuscripta Buddhica I & Seria Orientale Roma 
CIV. Rome, Asien-Afrika-Institut Istituto Italiano per l'Africa e 
l'Oriente/Università degli Studi di Napoli « L’Orientale ». 

SLACZKA, Anna 

2011 "The iconography of the Hindu deities in the Devyamata, an ear- 
ly Saiva pratisthatantra’, in Interrelations of Indian Literature and 
Arts, ed. Lidia Sudyka. Krakow: Ksiegarnia Akademicka. 


forthcoming “The iconography of the Hindu deities in the Devyamata, an early 
Saiva pratisthatantra’, in Tantric Studies 2 (forthcoming). 


SOUTH-INDIAN INSCRIPTIONS IV 


1923 Volume IV. Miscellaneous Inscriptions in Tamil, Telugu and Kan- 
nada (with eleven plates), ed. Rao Bahadur H. Krishna SASTRI. 
Archeological Survey of India, New Imperial Series, Vol. XLIV. 
Madras: Government Press, 1923. 


STEINER, Roland 
1996 ‘Die Lehre der Anustubh bei den indischen Metrikern’, Suhrllekhah. 
Festgabe fiir Helmut Eimer, ed. Michael Hahn, Jens-Uwe Hartmann 
and Roland Steiner. Indica et Tibetica 28. Swisttal-Odendorf: In- 
dica et Tibetica Verlag, pp. 227-248. 


TAGARE, Ganesh Vasudeo 
1948 Historical Grammar of Apabhramáa, Poona: Deccan College Post- 
Graduate and Research Institute. 


TAKASHIMA, Jun 


2005 ‘Pratistha in the Saiva Agamas’, From Material to Deity. a 
Rituals of Consecration, ed. Shingo Einoo and Jun Takashima, 


Delhi: Manohar, pp. 115-142- 


TANEMURA, Ryugen F iud 
2 १५ Kriya: nasika. A critical edition an A annotate 
004 Kuladatta's Kriyasamgrahapan) EN Oriental Es Volume 


translation of selected sections, Gro 
XIX. Groningen: Egbert Forsten. 


TANTRI - E ` 
s termes techniques de 


2000 Tantrikabhidhanako$a I. Dictionnaire de 


a Technical 
la littérature hindoue tantrique- A Die UE Termi- ' 
Terms from Hindu Tantric TEN direction de H. Brunner, 


nologie hinduistischer Tantren, 2०1४ 


580 


2004 


2013 


Nisvāsatattvasamhitz 


G. Oberhammer et A. Padouz. Österreichische Akademie 
Ce Philosophisch-historische Klasse, Sitzungsberichte 
681. Band. Beiträge zur Kultur- und Geistesgeschichte Asiens 
Nr. 35. Vienna: Verlag der Österreichischen Akademie der Wis- 
senschaften. & 

Tantrikabhidhanakosa II. Dictionnaire des termes techniques de la 
littérature hindoue tantrique. A Dictionary of Technical Terms 
from Hindu Tantric Literature. Wörterbuch zur Terminologie 

hinduistischer Tantren, sous la direction de H. Brunner, G. 
Oberhammer et A. Padous. Österreichische Akademie der Wis. 
senschaften, Philosophisch-historische Klasse, Sitzungsberichte, 714. 
Band. Beiträge zur Kultur- und Geistesgeschichte Asiens 44. Vien- 
na: Verlag der Österreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften. 
Tāntrikābhidhānakośa III. T-PH. Dictionnaire des termes tech- 
niques de la littérature hindoue tantrique. A Dictionary of Techni- 
cal Terms from Hindu Tantric Literature. Wörterbuch zur Termi- 
nologie hinduistischer Tantren. Fondé sous la direction de Hélène 
Brunner, Gerhard Oberhammer et André Padouz. Direction édito- 
riale du troisième volume : Dominic GOODALL et Marion RASTEL- 
LI. Philosophisch-historische Klasse Sitzungsberichte, 839. Band. 
Beiträge zur Kultur- und Geistesgeschichte Asiens Nr. 76. Vienna: 
Verlag der Österreichische Akademie der Wissenschaften. 


TOKUNAGA, Muneo 


1990 


1995 


‘Names of the Alphabets in some Pañcarātra Samhitās’, in Tatsuo 
Nishida (ed.), Higashi Ajia ni okeru Bunkakoryu to Gengo Sesshoku 
no Kenkyu | ], Kyoto: Faculty of Letters, Kyoto 
University, pp. 1-64. 

‘Statistic Survey of the Sloka in the Mahabharata’, Memoirs of the 
Faculty of Letters, Kyoto University 34 (1995), PP-1-37- 


TORZSOK, Judit 


1999* 


2003 


2004 


‘The Doctrine of Magic Female Spirits? A critical edition of se- 
lected chapters of the Siddhayogesvarimata(tantra) with annotate 
translation and analysis. Unpublished doctoral thesis sub 
the University of Oxford. 

‘Icons of Inclusivism: Mandalas in some early Saiva 
Mandalas and Yantras in the Hindu Traditions, ed. Gudrun Ded 
nemann, New Delhi: D. K. Printworld, pp. 179-224- 
Re Chapters of Saiva Material Added to the Earliest 
cension of the Skandapurana’, pp.17-39 in: The Orig n 
of the Puranic Text Corpus with Special Reference fo i 
purana, ed. Hans Bakker. New Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass: 


mitted to 
Tantras’ १ 
Known Re- 


d Growth 
Skandtr 


Works Consulted 
581 


2013 ‘The Heads of the Godhead. The N 
० inE CARE umb F. Yooini: 
and Bhairavas in Early Saiva Tantras’, i = sd aces of Yoginis 
(2013), pp. 133-155. snl 

forthcoming “The rewriting of a Tantric traditi 
tion: 4 P o d 
mata to the Timirodghatana and pea a 
in a forthcoming volume in memory of N. R. Bhatt DEDE 
VASUDEVA, Somadeva 


2004 The Yoga of the Malinwijayottara 
Critical Edition, To & Bor brc Td ina 
Pondicherry: IFP/EFEO. Pi HA 
2007 ‘Synesthetic Iconography: 1. the Nadiphantakrama’, in: Mélanges 
tantriques à la mémoire d’Héléne Brunner. Tantric Studies in Mem. 
ory of Héléne Brunner, ed. Dominic Goodall & André Padoux. Col- 
lection Indologie 106. Pondichéry : IFP/EFEO, pp. ता 


VIVANTI, Maria Pia 
1975 Il “Kiranagama”, Testo e traduzione del 4 Vidyapada ». Supple- 


mento n.3 agli Annali: vol 35 (1975), fasc.2. Napoli: Istituto 
Orientale di Napoli. 


WATSON, Alex, GOODALL, Dominic, and ANJANEYA SARMA, S.L. P. 


2013 An Enquiry into the Nature of Liberation. Bhatta Ramakantha’s 
Paramoksanirüsakarikavrtti, a commentary on Sadyojyotih’s refu- 
tation of twenty conceptions of the liberated state (moksa). Collec- 
tion Indologie 122. Pondicherry: Institut Francais de Pondichéry / 
École francaise d'Extréme-Orient. 

WuJASTYK, Dominik 
1985 A Handlist of the Sanskrit and Prakrit Manuscripts in the Library 


of the Wellcome Institute for the History of Medicine, Vo i 1. 
London: The Wellcome Institute for the History of Medicine. 


YANO, Michio 
1986 ‘Knowledge of Astronomy in Sanskrit texts in Architecture (Ori- 
devapaddhati)’, Indo-Iranian 


entation methods in the Isanasivaguru 
Journal 29 (1986), pp.17-29- 


Yokocnt, Yüko 


2012 ‘Triumph of Buddhism 
Kashmirian poem Kappinabhyudaya , Journa 
dhist Studies 60 (2012), pp. 1531100: E 

2013 The Skandapurüna Volume III. Adhyayas आर E beri 
Vindhyavasint Cycle. Critical Edition with an Intro À 
Annotated English Synopsis- Supplement to 5 
tal Series. Leiden: Brill / Groningen: Egbert Forsten. 


:vism?: A Study in the ninth century 
or Saivism | of Indian and Bud- 


In the following index of padas, brackets indicated editorial suppletions and 
प ल pesn, removed; pādas whose beginnings are missing are ordered 
under the first legible syllable; M, N, and U stand for Mūlasūtra, Nayasütra 


Uttarasūtra respectively. 


अंशिरशुद्धविद्या च N 4.2० 
अंशुमान्‌ सुप्रभेदि च 1.264 
अंसारपरिवरत्तिनी N 4.964 
अकथ्यश्च अरूपी च U 1126 
अकर्ता पुरुषोच्यते N 2.970 
अकर्त्ता निर्गुणख्जाहं N 2.702 
अकर्ता निर्गुणख्राहं U 5.138 
अकर्त्ता निर्गुणञ्जैव N 2.962 
अकामस्य क्रिया नास्ति N 2.62 
अकारं तु समालिखेत्‌ N 1.224 
अकार पूर्वचोदितम्‌ N 1.400 
अकारस्त्वक्षरो ज्ञेयः N 1.172 
अकारस्य विनिर्दिशेत्‌ N 1.330 
अकारस्य शरीरतः N 1.240 
अकारस्सर्वेवर्ण्णानां N 1.214 
अकारे च तथैवेह N 1.76 
अकारे त्वक्षरास्सवें N 1.42 
अकारे वद सुब्रत N 1.160 
अकारे संस्थितानि तु N 1.204 
अकारे सर्वतत्त्वानि N 1.32 
अङुटीज्ञियतीं विद्धि N 1.19९ 
अक्रोधम्स्तेयवर्जितम्‌ N 2.644 


अक्ेशात्सिद्धिमोक्षदः N 4.47d 
अक्केशात्सिद्धिमोक्षद: U 5.46b 
अक्षयं हि गणत्वञ्च N 1.910 
अक्षरं परमेश्वरम्‌ N 2.2d 
अक्षरा तत्त्वलक्षाञ्च N 4.682 
अक्षराणां कुतोत्पत्तिः U 118a 
अक्षराणि च सर्वाणि 1 1.29c 
अक्षरे अक्षरे ज्ञानं N 1.16 
अक्षसूत्रकमण्डलुम्‌ N 3.48b 
अक्षसूत्रकमण्डलुम्‌ N 3.52d 
अखण्डितन्तु तत्सूत्रं \ 41466 
अगम्यागमनङ्कत्वा M 7.48 
अग्निकर्म्मश्च कारयेत्‌ M 3.80 
अग्निकार्यं सम्प्रवक्ष्यामि M 3-18 
अग्निदाहं शिरच्छेदं ए 2.38c 
अग्निबीजेन तत्सर्वम्‌ M 3.89 
अग्निर्ज्वलति देहे तु N 4.190 
अग्निर्नैऋतिवायव्ये छ 2.178 
अग्निवज्ज्वलते योगी N 3.478 
अग्निस्थमभिवादयेत्‌ 4-110 


अग्निहोत्राग्निरेव च U 2-224 
N 4.6c 


अग्न्यागारास्तु चत्वारस्‌ ए 2-128 
अग्रमध्यमूलञ्च U 4.36 


584 


अङ्गा तस्य विनिर्दिशेत्‌ M 6.24b 
अदुष्ठजानुद्ददये N 4.126a 
अङ्गुष्ठामध्यतर्जन्या U 4286 
agit मध्यगोपितौ U 4.10d 
अचाल्यस्सर्वभूतानां N 3.3० 
अचेता शीर्यते पुनः N 3.25b 
अजप्तः सिध्यते मन्त्रो \ 1.810 
अजयः बाहुशालिनः N 3.90 
अजय्यः सर्वजन्तुषु N 2.530 
अजिनं ब्रतमेखलम्‌ U 3-180 
अज्ञात्वा कुरुते दीक्षां IN 4.1518 
अज्ञात्वा न तु मुच्यते N 1.290 
अज्ञानभावमापन्नो N 2.80 
अज्ञानादपि मानवाः U 4.460 
अणिमादिगुणैश्वर्यं M 7.19¢ 
अणिमाद्या भवेत्सिद्धिः N 4.372 
अण्डजं स्वेदजन्तथा N 4.494 
अतः परं प्रवक्ष्यामि M 4.12 
अतः परं प्रवक्ष्यामि U 4.15८ 
अतः परन्तु यहूव्यं ए 4.418 
अतः परम्‌ प्रवक्ष्यामि M 6.12 
अतिगुह्यम्प्रकी त्तितम्‌ N 4.840 
अतिस्रेहसमापन्नो N 1.943 
अतीतानागतच्चैव M 7.22 
अतीतानागतश्चैव N 4.143८ 
अतो singet तु U 1.40c 
adhe रुद्रप्रतोद M 5.16c 
अत्र मे संशयो महान्‌ N 1.835 
अत्र मे संशयो महान्‌ N 4.994 
अत्र मे संशयो महान्‌ U 5.20 
अथ पिण्डाक्षरेणेव U 4.48c 


Nisvasatattvasamhitz 


अथवा घण्टशब्देन N ३.552 
अथवा तु निरालम्बम्‌ U 5.442 . 
अथवा पञ्चविंशतिः U 4.26d 
अथवा वह्लिरूपिणम्‌ U 5.28b 
अथवा सप्तविंशति U 4.27d 
अथातस्सम्प्रवक्ष्यामि M 2.18 
अदृष्टविग्रहे शान्ते ए 1.23a 
अदृष्टेषु समदृष्टिर्‌ N 2.87a 
अदृष्टा शक्तिलक्षन्तु N 4.282 
अध ऊद्धंङ्गता या तु N 1.202 
अधः कालः प्रलम्बितः N 1.190 
अधर्म्मेञ्च तथाज्ञानम्‌ N 2.62c 
अधर्म्मताबुद्धिमतो N 2.922 
अधर्म्मनिरयौ न च 1.944 
अघञ्चैवोरुसीमायां N 1.522 
अधिवासञ्चरुच्चैव M 1.10 
अधीत्य ह्युद्धरिष्यति U 5.544 
अधीत्वा चैव निश्चासन्‌ ए 5.506 
अधूमो दहनात्मकः N 4.194 
अधोकृत्वा तु कुञ्चयेत्‌ ए 4.214 
अधोगतौ तथाङ्गुष्ठौ U 4149 
अधोनादस्य क्षीणस्य M. 6.138 
अधोमुखः स्मृतो Syst N 1.56c 
अधोमुखौ करौ कृत्वा U 4.18¢ 
अधोरुलीनविरला N 1.52९ 
अधोलम्ब्य सव्यभुजं N 1.682 
अध्यातो मातृ — N 1.820 
अध्यापनं च व्याख्यानं M 8.160 
अध्यापयित्वा एतं तु M 8.10 
अध्वानं सकलीकृत्वा M 3.9० 
अध्वानव्यापिनो ह्येते U 1.176 
अनधीत्यथ निश्वासं U 5.502 
अनन्तं कालमीश्वरम्‌ N 3.324 
अनन्तं शिवशास्त्रं तु 1.272 


Index of Padas 


अनन्त ह्यासनोत्तमम्‌ M 6.20 
अनन्तपूजां निर्वर्त्यं M 2.2८ 
अनन्तासनमुद्रैषा U 4-192 
अनन्तेशादयश्शिवाः N 4.1584 
अनामा कारणो देवः N 1.252 
अनामा नामकोटीभिस्‌ N 2.52 
अनामा शक्तिसंयुतः ॥ 138b 
अनिर्देश्यमनौपम्यम्‌ N 2.2९ 
अनिर्वाणञ्चतुर्याम्ये ए 2.15९ 
अनिवारितसम्मोही N 2.532 
अनिवार्या सुरासुरैः N 3.3० 
अनुक्रमेण जातानि ए 1.212 
अनुग्रहतिरोभावौ N 1.836 
अनुग्रहनिमित्तये N 1.90d 
अनुच्चार्य शिवं परम्‌ M 7.10 
अनुद्चार्यम्‌ प्रकीतितम्‌ M 6.134 
अनुच्चार्ये तथात्मानं M 5.22a 
अनुच्चार्ये तु संयोज्य U 4.47० 
अनुष्टप्छन्दबन्धेन U 1.25 
अनृशंसत्वकारितम्‌ N 2.85d 
अनेनैव स्वदेहेन N 3.54c 
अनेश्वर्यस्य भावो ऽयम्‌ N 2.832 
अन्तर्धानाञ्जनाकर्ष ° M 77.122 
अन्तस्थं तं विजानीयाद्‌ M 6.13¢ 
अन्त्यजातो ऽपि देवेशे स तु M 1456 
अन्त्रे मज्जे च विज्ञेया N 2.24€ 
अन्धत्वं श्रोत्ररोगं च N 4.123¢ 
अन्नपानप्रवेशने N 2.274 
अन्नपानस्य भक्षणे N 1.390 
अन्यजन्मार्जितम्भवेत्‌ N 1.97d 
अन्यत्तन््रन्नतङ्गह्वेद्‌ N 1.106a 
अन्यथा कुरुते यस्तु M 8.182 


585 


अन्यथा दुष्टम्त्यानाम्‌ छ 5.482 
अन्यथा इुष्टमर्त्यानां N 4-85c 
अन्यथा न कदाचनः N 4.66d 
अन्यथा न गुरुज्ञेयो N 1.28८ 
अन्यथा यः प्रभाषते N 1.924 
अन्यथा साधकास्सङ्घे N 4.29८ 
अन्यशास्त्रप्रयोगिनः N 3.364 
अन्यस्यामशुभं चैव M 3.130 
अन्यान्यपि अयुक्तानि N 2.77 
अन्यान्यपि विशेषतः N 2.474 
अन्यायपथवरत्तिनाम्‌ U 5.484 
अन्यार्थभाषणे विद्या N 1.93 
अन्यास्यमशुभं विद्धि U 2.354 
अन्येषां तु नमस्कारो M 6.26c 
अन्येषान्तु नमस्कारो U 4.23 
अन्योन्यान्तरशाखकौ U 4.17 
अन्योन्यान्तरिताङ्गुली U 4.14d 
अन्योन्यान्तरिताङ्गुली U 418d 
अन्योन्यान्तरिते कृते U 412d 
अन्योन्यान्तरिते कृते U 4.204 
अन्वेष्टव्यं स्वदेहतः N 4.134 
अपश्रंशानुनासिकम्‌ N 2.420 
अपश्रंशानुनासिका N 2.30d 
अपरा दक्षिणोत्तरा U 3:24 
अपरेद्यु्येद्देवं M 5.220 
अपानस्तु करिष्यति N 43280 
अपानो रात्रिरेव च U 5:37 
अपायमुक्तो हि मया शुरूणान्‌ N 4.1600 
अपुण्यजनसंवादन्‌ U 4-442 
अपूर्वं च शिवज्ञानं 8-172 
अपूर्वशास्त्रं यत्किंचिच्‌ N 4206 
अप्राप्य शिवसद्वावम्‌ N 44500 
अब्दत्रयनिवासिने U 5-464 


586 


अभयं सर्वभूतानां N 2.66c 
अभावं भावयेत्सदा N 447b 
अभिचारे तथोत्तरम्‌ U 3.90 
अभिचारे त्रिकोणकम्‌ ए 3.14b 
अभिचारे प्रसिद्धिदः ए 2.17b 
अभिचारे विलोमकाः ए 4.70 
अभिन्नेन शरीरेण N 4.58 
अभिवाद्य गुरु ह्येवं M 412a 
अभिषिश्चे तमात्मनः U 4.31b 
अभिषिष्याष्टकलशैर्‌ M 8.110 
अभिषेकेन्धन छेदं U 4.302 
अभ्यन्तरे सव्यभुजड़ N 1.66a 
अभ्यन्तरेण रेचेत N 44128 
अभ्यसेत्कलुषात्मकः N 4.46d 
अभ्यसेत्परमेश्वरम्‌ N 4.1074 
अभ्यसेन्मातृकाशिवम्‌ U 5.27b 
अभ्यासान्मासमात्रेण N 4.352 
अभ्युक्षये च पात्राणि M 3.42 
agada पात्राणि U 2.256 
अमृतं न प्रकाशयेत्‌ N 4.844 
अमृता तु शिरावस्था N 4.89 
अमृतां वापि योजयेत्‌ M 6.260 
अमेध्यस्य च भक्षणम्‌ ए 2.38 
अमोक्षे मोक्षनिञ्चिताः N 3.374 


अयस्मिण्डो यथा ध्मातश्‌ N 1.92 


अयुक्तकारी पुरुषो N 1.853 
अयुक्तडुरुते बहुम्‌ N 1.844 
अरणीं हस्तमात्रान्तु U 2.184 
अरण्यादौ तु दुस्वप्रे ए 2.412 
र सर्वतत्त्वानि N 4.706 
अरूप शब्दतन्मात्रं N 3.162 
अर्चादीक्षासु निष्कल: U 5.32b 


Nisvasatattvasamhitg 


अर्खनन्तत्र कारयेत्‌ M 3.35 
अर्चयीत यथाविधि U 4.5१ 
अद्ध -- N 1.68b 
अद्ध॑चन्द्रम्प्रसारितम्‌ N 4.144 
अद्धंषोडशमात्रस्तु N 4.90a 
अद्धेषोडशमात्रस्तु N 4.918 
अर्धचन्दन्तु चण्डीशे U 3.14a 
अर्धचन्द्रम्भविष्यति U 31d 
अर्धचन्द्रीश नाद च N 4.93b 
अलब्धानुज्ञो वदे ज्ञान N 11016 
अलाभात्त्वरणेर्वह्लौ U 2.222 
अलेपको विशुद्धात्मा N 3.49c 
अल्पवीर्याल्पबुद्धयः U 1.400 
अल्पायुषाः स्मृता मत्या ए 1.402 
अवर्ण्णा वापि कथ्यते N 3.390 
अवसव्येन पूरेत N 4.1108 
अविदित्वामयं सम्यक्‌ N 4.1520 
अवैराग्यमनैश्वरम्‌ N 2.62 
अवैराग्यान्न खिद्यते N 2.810 
अव्यक्तन्तुगुणं वक्ष्ये N 2.83¢ 
अव्यक्ता कृष्णरेखा तु N 4.732 
अव्यक्तादितृकेषु च N 4.950 
अशक्यः कथितुं वापि N 3-260 
अशितं लीढपीतञ्च N 4.1242 
अशुद्धा विपरीता च M 1.192 
अशुभानि शुभानि च M 3-150 
अशेषपशुबन्धनात्‌ M 4-14 
अश्वत्थप्रभवां वापि U 2.18 
अञ्वमेधायुतस्य च N 3.430 
अष्टतत्वाभिमन्त्रितैः M 8-114 
अष्टधा गुणितं ह्येवं ए 2-14¢ 
अष्टभेदाङ्गसंयुतम्‌ M 6.57 
अष्टवर्गाष्टमं कोटि M 6-142 
अष्टा --- N 4.82b 


Index of Padas 


अष्टाङ्गुलं तु विस्तारम्‌ ए 249a 
अष्टान्तं Teagan M 6.7 
अष्टान्तमेक पूर्वन्‌ qM 6.28 
अष्टाविंशति तन्त्राणि U 1.316 
अष्टाविंशति या प्रोक्ता 5.53a 
अष्टासनानि मुख्यानि N 4.156 
असन्धिगधमविस्तरम्‌ M 8b 


असिद्धो ऽपि शिवो भवेत्‌ N 4.25b 


अस्त्राणि च समभ्यर्च्य M 2.92 
अस्थिमालाभिचारुके U 4.260 
अस्मिंस्तन्त्रे च Tad M 8.34 
अस्मिन्तन्त्रे प्रकीर्तिता U 4.110 
अस्य नाद महेश्वरम्‌ N 4.97 
अस्य रूपस्य सव्यन्तु N 1.582 
अस्वतन्त्रा सदा तनुः N 1.1110 
अहं कर्ता अहं भोक्ता N 2.102€ 
अहं ग्रन्थनिबन्धकः 1.244 
अहं frame भोगी N 2.57९ 
अहङ्कारस्तु बन्धते N 2.61 
Ment च बुद्धौ च N 4.95 
अहङ्कारेण मोहितः N 2.520 
अहङ्कारो भवेद्योधा N 3.60 
अहंकारोड़वा होते N 2.14€ 
अहङ्कुतानि यान्येव N 4.138 
अहञ्ञातो महुत्कुले N 2.574 
अहन्दाता च भोक्ता च N 2.582 
अहम्पापी दुराचारो N 2.596 
अहिंसके दयायुक्ते N 4.64 
अहुतस्तु फलप्रदः N 1.814 
अहोरात्रायनानि च U 5-360 
अहोरात्रायनानि च U 5-4 
अःकारो दृश्यते ध्रुवम्‌ N 1-404 


587 


आ ई ऊं अं अः पञ्च M 6.242 
आकारन्तु विशिष्यते N 1.34 
आकाशं शब्दलक्षणम्‌ N 2.150 
आकाशं सर्वगं यद्वत्‌ N 110a 
आकाशधारणा मूर्ध्नि N 4.1164 
आकाशवायुमारूढा N 3.402 
आकाशस्थं च मे शृणु M 6.104 
आकाशे लिङ्गलिङ्गे वा U 5.312 
आकाशे वीक्षमाणस्य U 5-102 
आकाशेन त्वलङ्कुतम्‌ 6:11 M 6.14 
आकाशेव व्यवस्थितः N 1.12 
आकुञ्चयति वै कूर्मः \ 4129c 
आग्नेयीं नाभिमध्यतः N 4.150 
आचक्ष्व देवदेवेश M 1.112 
आचार्यं च तथा शिष्यं M 1.102 
आचार्यत्वे नियोजयेत्‌ M 8.104 
आचार्यस्य च मन्त्रस्य N 4.1582 
आज्ञां कुर्वन्ति चोदिताः N 1.774 
आज्यभागन्तु होमयेत्‌ M 3.50 
आज्यभागन्तु होमयेत्‌ U 2-264 
आज्यसंस्कारमाघार्ये U 2.26c 
आज्यस्योत्मवनाय वै U 4.420 
आत्मनस्य परस्य वा M 7-150 
आत्मप्रत्ययकारणात्‌ M 7-180 
आत्महानिश्च सततन्‌ U 4.44¢ 
आत्मानश्च तयैव हि N 4-53 
आत्मोत्कर्षबलन्दृष्ठा ए 4.48० 
आदत्ते चातैविस्पृष्टं N 1.1040 
ध्यायेज्‌ N 3.148 
आदित्यमणिवह्लीव U 1.6c 
आदित्यवच्छिवो ज्ञेयः N 2.80 
रुग्माभम्‌ N 3.288 
आदित्यस्य मणिर्यद्वत्‌ N 2.78 


आदिपञ्चस्वरादौ TN 4978 


588 


afena पुनर्योज्य M 6.152 
आदाक्षरेण EAT U 2-410 
आदान्ते च प्रतिष्ठितः ए 4.32d 
आधाराडुल -- U 4-39b 
आपविंद्देव पुष्करे N 3-280 
आपञ्जैव चतुर्गुणाः N 2.16d 
आब्रह्मस्तम्वपर्यन्तं N 4.228 
आब्रह्मस्तम्बपर्यन्तं N 4.50€ 
आभासतालमुत्ताले M 5.59 
आयुख्नैव प्रकुर्वते N 1.96b 
आरोग्यं धनमैश्चर्य M 7-10 
आलिसेत्तत्वमण्डलम्‌ ॥॥ 4.3१ 
आलिखेड्ुवनं शुभम्‌ U 3.15b 
आलिख्य तत्वभुवनं M 8.119 
आलोक्पपदवाचकम्‌ N 4.144d 
आश्चर्याणि च कुरुते N 4.5० 
आसनं चण्डनाथस्य M 6.23a 
आसनन्तु यथासुखम्‌ N 4.32d 
आसनम्पद्यक बद्धा N 4.1052 
आसनार्थे प्रयोजयेत्‌ M 6.25१ 
आसहतस्रास्तु कत्तेव्या U 3.20c 
आसीनश्च यथासुखम्‌ N 4.1054 
आह्झादनोद्वेजनञ्च N 4.127 
इकार एष विख्यातो N 1.34८ 
इच्छया कुरुते क्रियाम्‌ N 4.44d 
इच्छया कुरुते तनुम्‌ N 4.834 
इच्छया परमेश्वरः N 3.61 
इच्छया रमते शतम्‌ N 3.110 
इडा वै दक्षिणायनम्‌ ए 5.370 
इत्यहकारचित्तानां N 2.60 
इत्यतत्स्वरलक्षणम्‌ N 2.380 
इद्या वै रक्तरेखिणी N 4.745 


Nisvasatativasamhitg 


इन्द्रः पाणौमभिध्यात N 3.9० 
इन्द्रगोपकसन्निभः N 4.120b 
इन्द्रियाणाञ्च निग्रहः N 2.654 
इन्द्रियाणि शरास्तस्य N 3.60c 
इष्टमन्त्रेण साधकम्‌ M 4.17b 
ana diets N 2.66a 
ईतिज्वरविनाशनम्‌ N 3.46b 
ईतिभिः परिवर्जिते N 4.103b 
ईप्सिता च भवेत्सिद्धिर N 3.54a 
ईप्सिता तु भवेत्सिद्धिर्‌ N 3.51c 
ईप्सिता सर्वेलोकेषु N 3.55c 
ईर्षालुख् विषादी च N 2.912 
ईशानज़्वनी मही M 1.18b 
ईशानीं तु दिशं नीत्वा M 8.12 
ईशान्याभिमुखः स्थितः M 8.120 
ईश्वरः परमेश्वरः N 2.1004 
ईश्वरं सृष्टिकत्तारं N 2.722 
Sata ततः पश्येत्‌ U 5.30c 
ईश्वर सदाशिवः U 2.290 
ईश्वरस्तु शिरे नित्यं \ 1.192 
ईश्वरस्सृष्टिपाशेन N 1.89 
ईश्वरीसिद्धिकांक्षिणः U 5-3०0 
ईश्वरेण समो भवेत्‌ \ 3.584 
ईश्वरो बलवानहम्‌ N 2.1024 
ईश्वरो हृदि संस्थितः N 3-610 
उ ऊ भ्रवणमध्यस्थौ N 1.358 
उकारान्तप्रतिष्ठितम्‌ M 6.22b 
उक्ता वागेन्द्रिये धर्म्मा N 2.314 
उक्तादनुक्तशब्दानि N 2.438 
उक्ताहङ्कारधम्मास्तु N 2.61c 
उक्तो मोक्षकरः परः N 3.23b 
उक्तो मोक्षकरः परः U 5-114 
उच्छूतं कारयेद्वाहून्‌ N 1.422 
उच्छुतौ तु करौ कृत्वा U 4472 


Indez of Padas 


उच्छुयं चतुरङ्गुलम्‌ U 2.19b 
उत्तरस्यां तु शोभनम्‌ M 3.138 
उत्तरास्यं तथैव च U 2.340 
उत्तरेण निगद्यते ए 5.520 
उत्तरेशानयोस्तथा U 2.16b 
उत्पन्नो वा महेश्वर U 1.44 
उत्सर्गे छर्दिते चैव N 2.342 
उदकादिरसेषु च U 537b 
उदके वा घृते वापि U 5.198 
उदानस्य विचेष्टितम्‌ N 4.1244 
उदीचीदक्षिणे चैव U 3.29 
उदीरते चात्मविमोक्षहेतोर्‌ IN 4.159¢ 
aAa प्रसिद्यति N 4.1164 
उद्धत्याभ्युक्षयेत्‌ पुनः M 3-14 
Tecate मान्‌ -- M 5-24 
उद्धृत्य पञ्चाश कुलानि यो TN 41616 
उद्भूत्याभ्युक्षयेत्पुनः U 2.240 
उद्याने च शिवालये ए 2.40 
उद्दाहयित्वा तां पल्लीं M 6.18c 
उन्मादञ्जैव WIT N 1.1112 
उपरिष्टात्समन्ततः U 5.534 
उपरिष्टाङ्गवेदिह M 5.18d 
उपवासं जपन्तीर्थ N 2.73c 
उपवासं जपम्मौनम्‌ N 2.64c 
उपविश्य च लक्षयेत्‌ N 1.630 
उपशोभा तु — U 3.8b 
उपस्थानन्तु THT U 4.३० 
उपस्थेति च पञ्चमम्‌ N 2.134 
उपस्थो नन्दकारकः N 2.344 
उपाशुः पौष्टिके स्मृतः ए 4.234 
उपास्यन्ते यथा हर N 4.690 
उभयतो ऽपि न शिवा" N 4.152 


589 


उभयोरन्तरं नास्ति N 4.156a 
उभयोरपि धावति N 2.14b 
उभयोरपि संयोगात्‌ M 6.202 
उभाभ्यां जिघ्रते नासा N 2.51 
उल्लिखित्वा तु तत्कुण्डम्‌ ए 2.242 
उल्लिख्य तूद्धरेद्विद्दान्‌ ॥॥ 3.10 
उष्णञ्च पिच्छिलं लोष्ट N 2.44c 
उष्णीषं करत्तरिन्तथा M 833b 
ऊकारः प्रकृतिज्ञया ए 1.10 
Hat कुटिलाकृतिम्‌ U 5.10 
ऊनविंशति मारणे U 4.289 
HEAT प्रसारितम्‌ N 1.354 
ऊद्धेकायककारस्तु N 1.74० 
Haat तु सञ्चरेत्‌ \ 421b 
Hager तु चक्षुषी N 4.174 
ऊद्धबाहुकरौ कृत्वा N 1.434 
ऊद्धंबाहुकरौ कृत्वा N 1.44९ 
Healer तु कारयेत्‌ N 1.57 
ऊद्ध॑मीशानवक् तु ए 2.34¢ 
ऊर्ध्वनादस्य क्षीणस्य M 6.114 
ऊर्ध्व॑न्तु मध्यमङ्कत्वा N 1736 
ऊर्ध्वप्राणो ह्यहञ्चैव U 5.372 
ऋकारं बाहुकारितम्‌ N 1.355 
ऋकारस्सम्प्रदुश्यते N 1.374 
ऋषयो ऽप्सरसो यक्षा M 1.34 
ए ऐ दशनप्किस्तु N 1.380 
एक एव तदा गृह्येच्‌ N 3.700 
एकचित्तस्सुयन्त्रितः N 446d 
एकतस्तु करौ कृत्वा ए 4110 
एकत्वे दर्शनञ्चैव N 4.69¢ 
एकत्वे सर्वतत्त्वानि N 4695 
एकद्वाराधैचन्दरन्तु U 3:128 
एकद्वितृशतुःपञ्च N 4.116€ 


590 


एकपञ्चाशिकं वापि ए 4.278 
एकरूपं चतुर्धा तु N 1:70 
एकलक्षणमाकाशन्‌ N 2-28 
एकविंशति मूर्च्छनाः N 2-380 
एकविंशत्कुलान्देवि U 5.54¢ 
M 4.20 
एकाक्षः पिङ्गलो हंसस्‌ M 5-778 
एकाधिकशतङ्कुयांद्‌ U 4.260 
एकाहमपि योगन्तु N 4.460 
एकीभावगतावेतौ N 1.50 
एकीभूतं विचिन्तयेत्‌ N 4.530 
एकैकन्तु लयन्ध्यायेद्‌ U 5.28 
एकैकाक्षरयोगेन U 5.278 
एकैकान्तरिताडुली U 419d 
एकैकान्तु चतुर्दिशि U 3.40 
एतज्ज्ञानं परं श्रेष्ठ N 1.76c 
एतत्तत्परमं तत्वम्‌ M 74a 
एतत्तत्परम ब्रह्म M 7.1० 
एतत्तत्परमाक्षरम्‌ M 7.10 
एतत्तृगुणमव्यक्त N 2.93c 
एतत्ते परमं तत्वम्‌ M 8.12 
एतत्प्रस्मवरं गुह्यं \ 2.6८ 
एतत्सर्वं समासेन N 4.272 
एतन्मे संशयं ब्रूहि N 1.2८ 
एतस्मात्कारणाद्देवि N 4.882 
एता मालाः प्रकीर्तिताः U 4.254 
एतानि नव तत्त्वानि N 1.20८ 
एतान्यन्यानि जानाति N 2.45८ 
एते कर्म्माः प्रवर्तन्ते N 2 35a 
एत तत्त्वा: समाख्याताः U 1 13a 
एतेषा योजयित्वा qM 5 19a 


Nisvasatattvasamhitg 


एतेषामप्यलाभेन U 2.232 
एतैरेव जगत्सर्वं ए 1.13० 

एभिः पाशैस्सुबद्धाञ्च N 1.112a 
एवं कालं सदा ध्यायेद्‌ N 3.34 
एवं चिन्तयतस्तस्य N 4.59 
एवं ज्ञात्वा च बुद्धा च U 1.8८ 
एवं ज्ञात्वा तु मेधावी M 8.42 
एवं पूज्य यथान्यायं M 4.68 
एवं पूज्य यथान्यायं ए 2.11८ 
एवं वै सूत्रयित्वा TU 3.14c 
एवं वै होमयित्वा q M 5.82 
एवं शिवन्तथात्मानम्‌ N 4.532 
एवं सदाशिवं ज्ञात्वा N 4.32 
एवं सन्न्यस्य कर्म्माणि N 2.97 
एवं समरसो भूत्वा ए 5.43c 
एवं सर्वगतो देवः N 4.522 
एवं हि सर्वभूतानि N 4.53९ 
एवं होमपवित्रैञ्च M 3-134 
एवन्ते अक्षरास्सर्वे N 1.80 
एवन्ते सर्ववर्णास्ते N 1.4० 
एवन्ते सर्वव्ण्णास्तु N 1.210 
एवमभ्यसतस्तस्य N 4.1410 
एवमभ्यसमानस्तु N 3.4० 
एवमभ्यस्यमानस्तु छ 5.16 
एवमालिख्य qd U 3:162 
एवम्पाशगणास्सर्वे NN 1.112 
एवम्पूज्य यथान्यायन्‌ M 2.48 
एवम्प्रमुदितन्दृष्टा M 1.7० 

एष ते ज्ञानसड्रावं N 4.622 
एष ते ज्ञानसद्भावम्‌ N 4.842 
एष ते ध्यानसद्धावं N 4.242 
एष ES प्राकृतो योग N 3.232 
एष ते प्राकृतो योग U 5.11 
एष ते समुदाहृतः N 2-830 


Index of Padas 


एष योगो मया प्रोक्त N 4.476 
एषा सृष्टिर्जगीशस्य शस्य U 1.79 
एषाक्षरसमुत्पत्तिर्‌ U 1.222 
एषान्ते-- U 3-08 

एषामेकतमं बद्धा N 416a 
vat चित्ररेखा तु N 4.740 
ऐश्वरी बिन्दुसिद्धिश्न N 4.810 
vate चतुर्त्थकम्‌ N 2.620 
ऐश्वर्यभावमापन्नो N 2.756 
ऐश्वर्यभावमापन्नो IN 2.782 
ऐश्वर्यार्थी तु साधयेत्‌ N 2.764 
ओंकारेण तु इन्धयेत्‌ U 4.314 
ककारम्पुरुषाकृतिम्‌ N 1.410 
कक्षाबाधे यकारस्तु N 1.622 
कटिरेखा च तिर्यञ्च Nic 
कखा रेखा तु सम्प्राप्ता N 1.712 
कण्टकं वालुकर्द्दमम्‌ N 2.444 
कण्टकावेधसप्रभः N 439b 
कण्टलोष्टुकवालुका N 2.324 
कण्ठ तु योजयेद्धस्तं N 155a 
कण्ठस्थ हि तथैवेह N 4.1392 
कण्योष््चाष्टमं स्मृतम्‌ M 6.64 
avasar स्मृतम्‌ M 6.154 
* क? त क *** U 2.136 
कथं ज्ञेयाक्षरे sat N 1.20 

A ध्येयो हि निष्कलः N 4.914 
केथ बध्यन्ति ते पाशास्‌ N 1.82० 
कथ वर्णास्तु संस्थिताः N 1.15d 
कथञ्चि लभ्येच्छिवतत्त्वमुत्तमम्‌ N 
4.159b 

फेथञ्जीवो न बध्यते N 1.65 
केथन्देव व्यवस्थिताः N 1.15b 


591 


कथमुक्त स्वयम्भुवा M 14b 
कथयन्ति मुमुक्षवः N 1.79d 
कथयस्व प्रसादत: N 2.6d 
कथयस्व प्रसादतः N 4.149b 
कथयस्व प्रसादत: N 4.27b 
कथिताः शिवशासने N 114७ 
कथिता हि समासत: U 1.70 
कथ्य द्वादशभिवरर्षेस्‌ N 4.482 
कथ्यमानानि मे शृणु N 2.460 
कनककन्न च दह्यते N 1.89 
कनिष्ठाङ्गुष्ठलम्वितौ U 419b 
कनिष्ठानामिके ऽप्येवं ए 4136 
कनिष्ठानामिके ह्वे द्वे ए 4.20c 
कनिष्ठिके सृते लग्ने ए 410c 
कपाली सर्पभूषितम्‌ N 3.450 
कपिलं पिङ्गलं बभ्रुर्‌ 2.47€ 
कफासूकूत्रमेदेषु N 2.25 
करणेन्द्रियसंयुतः N 2.690 
करणेन्द्रियहीनत्वाद्‌ N 2.95९ 
करद्वये तु मुष्टिन्तु ए 4190 
करयुग्मविकारकम्‌ U 4.16d 
करवाद्यानि यानि च N 2.410 
कराग्रं विन्यसेत्तत्र N 1.366 
करोति च विहन्यते N 2.780 
करोति विकरोति च N 2.634 
करोत्यनुग्रहेच्छया N 4:784 
करौ तौ भोगसन्निभौ N 1.480 
asp शीतलन्तथा N 2-440 
कर्णिकाकेशरान्तथा U 3-34 
audierit भुजौ कृत्वा N 1.578 
कर्तव्यं दीक्षहोमयोः U 2130 
कर्तव्यं सिद्धिमिच्छता U 3-24 
कर्तव्यं देशिकेन तु 3-234 
«dor सिद्धिमिच्छता M 3-06 


592 


ador देशिकेन तु U 4-404 
N 2.338 
कर्म तेषान्निबोध मे N 4.126d 
कर्मबन्धेन बध्नाति N 3.308 
कर्म्मणा मनसा जपा N 4.78b 
कर्म्मणा मनसा मन्त्री N 4-160 
कर्म्मान्ते दिग्बलिं क्षिपेत्‌ M 2.9 
कलजा शक्तिजा तथा N 4-814 
कलशं रल्लपूरितम्‌ M 2.70 
कलशेनाभिषेचयेत्‌ M 4-164 
कलहम्‌ मुण्डितं नग्नं ए 2.408 
कलां यञ्च न विन्दते N 4.64 
कलाचतुष्टयो ऽप्येवं N 3.720 
ariel खमलङ्कतम्‌ M 6.60 
aaa विजानीयाद्‌ M 6.10c 
कलाद्ये खमलङ्कते U 1.194 
कलाढ्यो जपहोमसु U 5.33b 
कलानि कथितानि वै N 4.84 
कलान्नाहँन्ति षोडशीम्‌ N 4.460 
कलाभेदञ्च कः स्मृतः N 4.10 
कल्पनालक्षमकलं N 4.108 
कल्पयेत्साधकैस्ततः U 2.270 
कषायमिम्रं स्वाइुञ्च N 2.502 
कस्मिं स्थाने श्रुतन्देव्या M 1.10 
का निवृत्तिः प्रतिष्ठा च N 4.12 
कामः क्रोधञ्च लोभस U 2.302 
कामक्रोधञ्च लोभश्च N 1.1092 
कामक्रोधाभिभूतञ्च N 2.90८ 
कामरूपञ्च जायते N 3.410 
कामाञ्च विविधास्तथा M 7.109 
कामिकं योगदं दिव्यं ए 1.26a 


NiSvasatattvasamhitg 


कामी हर्षसमाविष्टो \ 2.892 
कायोद्धकारयेत्तत्र N 1.752 
कारणः स शिवः परः U 1.124 
कारणं जगतः पतिम्‌ N 2.25 
कारणमजितं तथा U 1.26b 
कारितन्न च कामतः 2.54 
कालः कण्ठे समाञ्रितः N 1.264 
कालध्यानविवर्जिताः N ३.334 
कालपाशञ्च मे शुणु N 1.954 
कालमेवमुपास्यते ए 5.214 
कालस्तत्र नियोजयेत्‌ N 2.99 
कालाग्निरुद्रादारभ्य M 5.29 
कालाग्निरुद्रे संयोज्य M 5.39 
कालाभिध्यातचित्तस्तु ए 5.226 
कालो गणन संख्याया N 1.962 
काष्ठायुक्तानि चैव हि N 2.414 
कि स्वयम्भुर्भेवेत्त्वेष U 1.4० 
किञ्चित्कालं विदेहता N 2.994 
किम्पुन हूँष्टलक्षणः N 4.90 
किम्पुनर्ध्यानयुक्तात्मा N 4.258 
किरणं पारमेश्वरम्‌ U 1.30d 
कीर्तितानि समासतः N 4.154 
कीर्त्यमाना निबोध मे U 1.22 
कुङ्कमाभार्धनारीशन्‌ N 3.422 
कुचोद्धंपिङ्गकेशी च N 3.352 
कुमुदोत्पलपस्ानि U 2.37 
कुरुते साहसान्यपि N 2.750 
कुर्याच्छान्तिकपौष्टिके ए 2.184 
कुर्याच्छास्त्रविधानतः U 3.220 
कुर्यात्कर्म्मसहस्राणि N 3.60 
कुर्यादावरणानि तु ए 3.6१ 
कुर्वन्ति शिवशासने N 1.120 
कुर्वन्नपि न लिप्यते ए 5.45b 
कुशाग्रद्वयसंयुक्तम्‌ U 4.428 


Index of Padas 


कुशानास्तीर्य पूर्वाग्रान्‌ M 3.38 
कुशैरास्तरणं कुरु M 3.20 
कूर्मञ्चैकस्तु तिष्ठति N 4.129b 
कुच्छूजीवी च सततम्‌ N 2.818 
कृतं होमं मया तव M 5.250 
विचक्षणः M 1.20b 
कृतज्ञे च दयायुक्ते M 8.150 
कृतस्तीर्थाभिषेकञ्च M 7.9० 
कृतोपकारे कलहे M 8.14c 
कृत्वा कुण्डे प्रवेशयेत्‌ ए 2.21d 
कृत्वा चैव प्रदक्षिणम्‌ M 2.9१ 
कृत्वा चोर्ध्वभुजं भवेत्‌ N 1.460 
कृत्वा Ur भविष्यति N 1.52१ 
कृत्वा योज्येत मध्यतः N 1.66b 
कृत्वा री च भविष्यति N 1.370 
कृत्वा ate शिवात्मकम्‌ M 4.60 
कृत्वा वै मण्डलोत्तमम्‌ M 5.23b 
कृष्ण हरितपाण्ड्रम्‌ N 2.47b 
कृष्णं हरितपिङ्गलम्‌ N 3.69b 
कृष्णरेण्वाकुलो वायुर्‌ N 3.79 
कृष्णवर्णा च रक्ताक्षी N 3.34 
कृष्णा वर्णक्रमेण तु U 2.69 
कृष्णवर्णश्चतुर्भुजम्‌ N 3.320 
केचित्‌ सामानि गायन्ति M 1.58 
केचित्त्वङ्गाकृतीनि तु N 1.304 
केचित्पुष्पां क्षिपन्ति च M 1.5b 
केचित्प्रणत मूर्धनि M 1.44 
केचित्रत्यङ्गरूपाणि र N 1.30€ 
केचित्स्तुन्वन्ति देवेश M 1.48 
केचिङ्गायन्ति हृष्टास्तु M 1.4० 
निरता M 1.5० 


केचिद्यायन्ति 
केचिन्नृत्यन्ति चाग्रतः M 1.4b 


593 


केयूरं कटिसूत्रकम्‌ M 2.6b 

M 1.2 
कोटिमुद्रा विधीयते ए d 
कोटिमुद्रा विसर्जने M 6.26! 
कोटिमुद्रा विसर्जने ए 4.23b 
कोटिवेंदविदां तेन M 7.23८ 
कोटिशश्चाप्यधीतानि U 1.36c 
कोटिहोमे प्रकल्पयेत्‌ U 2.144 
कोणान्तरेषु या रेखा U 3.58 
कोणे विन्दूनि चान्यानि U 3.6 
कौमारं यौवनं जरा N 1.960 
क्रमते सर्वलोकानि N 3.47 
क्रमते सर्वलोकानि N 3.58८ 
क्रमते सिध्यतेति च N 3.4३4 
PA तत्त्वानां N 2.1० 
क्रियां यः कुरुते भिषक्‌ N 4.1524 
क्रीडते क्रमतेति च N 4.440 
क्रीडते दिव्यसिद्धै्च N 4.612 
क्रुद्धः कुर्याच्छतक्रतुः N 4.874 
aca — N 4.58 
क्रोधलोभविवर्जितः U 4-340 
fansa मायया श्रान्ता N 3.37€ 
क्षकारः प्रथमः स्मृतः N 1.720 
क्षकारः स्पष्टलक्षितः N 1-750 
क्षकारं साम्प्रतं शुणु N 1.694 
क्षकारस्तु तृतीयकः N 7.740 
क्षकारस्तु द्वितीयकः N 1734 
क्षकारादि अकारान्त U 4478 
क्षकारो विद्य एव तु ए 1100 
क्षणाच्चैव प्रबुध्यति N 4-14० 


594 


क्षपणे क्षयमन्तस्थे U 1.202 
क्षमते पूर्वेमेकन्तु M 5250 
क्षमादयासमायुक्तो N 2.86a 
क्षिसस्तु जायते भूयो N 2401€ 
क्षीरवृक्षसमोपेते ए 2.3० 
क्षीराभ स्फटिकाभद् N 4120€ 
क्षुतहिक्लाच्छद्विकास IN 4.124€ 
क्षुत्तृषाभ्यां न वाध्यते M 7.21b 
क्षुत्तृष्णा च मदस्तथा N 1.1090 
क्षुतृष्णा मोहमेव च U 2-304 
क्षुत्ृष्णाभ्यान्न वाध्यते N 4.1430 
क्षेमीशे च ततो नीत्वा M 5.120 
खकार एष विख्यातो N 1.42० 
खगस्याभिमुखो भूत्वा N 4.728 
alent प्रकाशयेत्‌ N 4.147 
खम्व्यापि-म्‌-अजरं परम्‌ N 4.1464 
wey — चिन्तयेत्‌ U 5.284 
खरोष्ट्ररोहणम्‌ चैव M 3.160 
खशेखरसमायुक्तं M 6.15८ 
— ख्यं तु ततो विद्वान्‌ N 1.232 
गच्छते शिवमव्ययम्‌ N 3.384 
गच्छते शिवमव्ययम्‌ U ४.434 
गच्छेच्चैव सदाशिवम्‌ N 4.619 
गजगोवृषरोहणम्‌ 2.360 
गजनादो वहुध्वनिः N 4.121} 
गजपर्वतरोहणम्‌ M 3.16८ 
गणपाशानि THT N 1.108८ 
गणपाशानि मे शृणु N 1.100७ 
गणपाशास्तथा चान्ये ए 2.29८ 
गणाः स्कन्दपुरोगमाः M 1.20 
गन्धतन्मात्र गन्धन्तु N 2.542 
गन्धतन्मात्रसंयुक्तं \ 2.12८ 


Nisvasatattvasamhita 


गन्धतन्मात्रसम्भूता N 247a 
गन्धतोयेन वा पुनः M 1.214 
गन्धपुष्पैर्यथाक्रमम्‌ M 4.54 
गन्धोपवीत धूपं T M 2.5० 
गम्यागम्ये Yada N 2.94C 
गरुडेन च धीमता U 1.36b 
mi ह्युत्पतन्ति च M 1.65 
गर्भतुल्यम्भवेद्वारं ए 3.7० 
गर्भेपुन्सवसीमन्तञ्‌ U 3.77० 
गर्भाधान पुन्सवनं M 4.9७ 
गहने च वकारो FU 1.15९ 
गहने विग्रहे तथा M 5.104 
गान्धारम्मध्यमन्तथा N 2.37b 
गायत्रीह qur: M 6.204 
गिरितोयविषाग्निभ्यो N 2.74० 
गीतवादित्रनिघोषिर्‌ M 8.120 
गुग्गुल्वादीनि धूपानि U 4.72 
गुडिकाकाशगमनं M 7-110 
गुणधर्म्मा न चाव्यक्तं N 2.94c 
JUTA महाधनुः N 3.605 
TUT कति स्मृताः 1.184 
NECESE समीपस्थो M 8.16a 
गुरु शिवसमं fag: N 4.10d 
गुरुदेवाग्निपूजकः M 1.150 
गुरुपङ्कित्रयं नयेत्‌ M 5.10b 
गुरुभक्तस्समाहितः N 4.32b 
गुरुभक्तिविवर्जिताः U 5.49b 
गुरुर्भवति पाशहा N 1.77b 
गुरुवाक्यमलंघके N 4.64d 
गुरुशिष्यप्रबोधनम्‌ M 8.16d 
गुरोः स्वप्नान्निवेदयेत्‌ M 3.158 
गुह्या गुह्मतरम्परम्‌ IN 4.101b 
गृहवाहन यद्दसु (?) N 1.934 
गृहे यस्य समझुते M 7.230 


| 


Index of P ādas 


त्वचमाशुतः N 2.55d 
qafa श्रवणेन्द्रिय: N 2.43b 
गृहीयान्मणिसम्भवम्‌ ए 2.22b 
गोपतौ च महाग्रन्थौ M 5.12a 
गोपत्यान्ते च लः स्मृतः ए 1.150 
गोमयेन शुभेन तु M 1.210 
गोमयेनोपलेपयेत्‌ ए 2.64 
गोमांसस्य च भक्षणे M 7.30 
गोमुखतालमेव च N 2.4०4 
ग्रन्थिरेखा भवेन्नीला IN 4.742 
ग्रहणं विजयच्चैव N 2.322 
ग्रहराक्षसनाशनम्‌ M 7-134 
ग्रामाड्गृष्टस्तु लब्धेन N 2.822 
ग्राहकं शब्दतन्मात्रं N 2.568 
ग्रीवास्कन्धे द्विरेखिणी ४४ 1.414 
घकारः शिरसा युक्तं N 1.43९ 
घण्टा कांसञ्च मधुरो N 4.1212 
घण्टानादं सदा ध्यायेद्‌ U 5.308 
घण्टिकायाम्महामाया N 1.26 
घुरुघुरुस्योत्क्रमेति च N 4.1280 
घृतं ताप्य ततोद्वास्य M 3.4० 
घृतक्षीरसमोपेतं M 3.104 
घृतपङ्गानि दिव्यानि U 4.99 
घोषध्यानन्तृतीयन्तु U 5.6० 
घोषध्यानन्तृतीयन्तु U 5.9a 
ङकार हीनबाहूना N 1.43d 
च ण्डीशं य स्तु पूजयेत्‌ M 5.254 
चकारं GHA तु N 1.448 
चेक्रवत्परिवर्त्तन्ते N 3.33¢ 
TH चैकरथस्य तु N 3.590 
NW पश्यति सर्वतः N 2.484 
Wart समारभेत्‌ U 5.310 


595 


चक्षुषञ्चैव कर्माणि N 2.46c 
चक्षुषा यञ्च दृश्येत N 4.12a 
चक्षुषा वाचया स्पर्शा N 4.4०2 
चक्षुषा वाचया स्पर्शा \ 4.782 
चण्डीशः समयाष्टसु N 1.1030 
चण्डीश टङ्कधारिणम्‌ M 5.224 
चण्डीशस्तु स्वयं भवेत्‌ M 6.234 
चण्डीशो वन्धते भूशम्‌ N 1.105b 
चतुरंगुलमुच्छ्रितम्‌ U 233b 
चतुरङ्गुलसंमितां ए 3.3b 
चतुरश्रं चतुद्वोर M 4.34 
चतुरश्रं समाख्यातं U 3.9९ 
चतुरश्रन्ततः कृत्वा U ३.102 
चतुरस्रे नित्यहोमे U 2.17९ 
चतुर्थ पूर्वसूत्रकम्‌ 1.30 
चतुर्थी चामृतामृता N 4.89 
चतुर्थे पूजये ऽस्त्राणि M 4.5¢ 
चतुद्धा तन्तु योजयेत्‌ M 6.214 
चतुर्धा योजयेच्छिवम्‌ M 6.210 
agit भवेद्विद्या N 3.398 
चतुर्विशति तत्त्वानि U 5.7 
चतुष्कलपरिज्ञानी N 4.72 
चतुष्कला बिन्दुमाला N 4-758 
चतुष्पथन्ततः कृत्वा M 3.28 
चतुष्पथाक्षपाटन्तु ए 2.24¢ 
चतुस्सागरमेखला N 3-14 
चत्वरे तु चतुष्पथे ए 2-44 
चत्वारि चैतानि शतान्यधीत्य N 
4.1618 

चत्वार्येतानि शक्तेस्तु \ 4-86 
चन्दनादीनि न्दनादीनि गन्धानि U 48a 
चन्द्रमण्डलसंकाशं N 3.718 
चन्द्रमूर्घोर्डधलिङ्गन्तु N 3-53° 
चरणौ कारयेत्‌ तिर्यग्‌ N 1.37€ 


596 


ae च श्रापयेत्ततः U 227b 
चरुं तेषां प्रदातव्यं U 2.32¢ 
weg श्रपयेत्‌ vera M 3.108 
चलते गच्छते चैव U 5.38€ 
— चान्ततो भवेत्‌ N 449b 
चामरं च वितानकम्‌ M 2:70 
चालनाद्दशंयेच्चैव U 4-170 
चिञ्चिणी पौरुषं शब्दं U 5-144 
चित्रकर्माणि कारयेत्‌ N 3.80 
चित्रास्वात्यन्तरे प्राची U 3-10 
चित्स्वरूपेण पिण्डेन N 3.244 
चिन्तयित्वा हुताशनम्‌ M 3.54 
चिन्तितं तु विजानते N 4.20 
चिन्तितञ्च विजानते N 3.164 
चिन्मात्रः पुरुषः स्मृतः N 2.960 
चिन्मात्रः पुरुषश्चैव U 5.42c 
चुम्वाकारेण वक्तेण M 6.10 
चेता वै 5कर्तृविज्ञानन्‌ ए 5.128 
चेताप्येवं स्थितो नित्यं N 4.52८ 
चेष्टने स्पर्शनेति च N 2.270 
चौरिकानृतडम्भनम्‌ N 2.784 
चौरिकानृतहिन्सनम्‌ N 2.770 


च्छेदो वा नास्ति च्छिद्यतः N 1.60 


छकारं नासिके स्थितः N 144b 
छत्रध्वजगवां लाभं U 2.37 
छरीरे यस्तु विन्दति N 1.754 
छायाचित्तं समालम्ब्य ४.162 
छायाचित्तं समावेश्य U ५.82 
छायाध्यानं द्वितीयकम्‌ U 5.65 
छायालक्षं चतुर्थकम्‌ U 5.12 
छालिषष्टिकतण्ड्लै : M 3.10b 
छिद्यमानस्तु खण्डश: SES 


Nisvasatattvasamhitg 


छिद्वन्दृष्टा तु साधके N 1.1025 
छुलहस्तञ्जटाधरम्‌ N 3.52b 
छेदको योजकञ्चैव N 1.10 

छेदनं भेदनं दानं N 2.31¢ 
छेषान्ये गुणरूपकाः N 3.704 
जगञ्च वशमायाति N 3.43c 
जगच्च सुशिरात्मकम्‌ N 3.85 
जगत्त्सर्वं चराचरम्‌ N 4.67b 
जगत्सम्भवकारिणी N 2.21b 
जगदापूरयेत्सर्वम्‌ N 3.5० 
जगझ्यापी चराचरम्‌ N 4.52d 
जङ्लौ चान्योन्यसंस्थितौ N 1.31b 
जंघौ मन्योन्य दर्शयेत्‌ N 152b 
जंघौ संकुछ्य पिण्डितौ N 1.744 
जनलोके तथैव च M 5.64 
जन्तुरेखा सिता भवेत्‌ N 4.73b 
जन्तूननुग्रहार्थाय N 4.62c 
जन्म निष्क्रमणन्तथा U 3.17d 
जन्म मृत्युस्तथैव च U 2.30b 
जन्मबन्धञ्च पाशानां N 1.132 
जन्ममृत्युभयादिभिः M 5-14 
जन्ममृत्युभयावहे M 1.80 
जन्ममृत्युस्तथैव च N 1.1090 
जन्महरञ्च रुद्रञ्च M 5.182 
जन्मान्तरैः कल्पसहस्रकोटिभिः N 
4.159a 

जन्मे जन्मे विमूढात्मा N 1.862 
जपलिङ्गार्च्चनिष्ठाय N 4.656 
जपस्सर्वेफलप्रदः U 4.29b 
जपहोमन्तथा चान्यत्‌ U 3.198 
जपहोमेन सिद्धते ए 5.354 
जपेत क्षपणात्क्षयम्‌ ए 5.34b 
जरा व्याधिश्न शोकश्च N 1.109€ 
जरा व्याधिम्च शोकञ्च U 2.30€ 


Indez of Padas 


जरामृत्युविवर्जितः N 3.47b 
जराव्याधिक्षुधामृत्यु U 5.34c 
जलध्यानेन पूरयेत्‌ N 3.40 
जलपूरितसर्वांगो N 3.49 
जलबुद्गुदवद्देवं N 4.76a 
जलमध्ये यथा मत्स्या N 1.72 
जल्पितं हसितं गीतं N 4.1222 
जातं स्थावरजङ्गमम्‌ N 2.174 
जातस्संसरते पुनः N 2.1014 
जानुशिरस्तु Wate N 1.62¢ 
जायते कालरूपी तु U 5.232 
जायते चेन्द्रियेण च N 2.124 
जायते चोत्तमे कुले N 1.880 
जायते तन्मयत्वं हि N 4.142९ 
जायते सर्वकामित्वं M 7.20९ 
जिज्ञासाकौतुकालीना U 5.49¢ 
जिज्ञासुरपि योगस्य N 4.462 
जिते प्राणे जितम्मनः N 4.1300 
जिते मनसि शान्तात्मा N 4.130€ 
जितेन्द्रियश्च भवते N 3.7८ 
जितो ऽनिलो भवत्येवं N 4.133¢ 
जिल्ला वेदयते रसम्‌ N 2.50b 
जिल्लायां वरुण स्थितः N 3.14b 
जीवितस्य तु रक्षणं N 2.664 
जुकारो बोधयेन्मन्त्रां ए 4.316 
aver बिन्दुरीश्वरम्‌ N 3.724 
Weer योगिभिस्सदा N 4.1170 
शातो विषुव मोक्षदः N 3.644 
शात्वा तत्त्वान्नवैव तु N 1.274 
Wer नियतिसङ्भावन्‌ U 5.180 
मातृकसद्घाव N 1.778 
शात्वा सर्व शिवात्मकम्‌ N 4.564 


597 


ज्ञात्वैतानि विमुच्यन्ते ष 4.9a 
शान च मुखविम्वकम्‌ U 7.290 
ज्ञानं ते संप्रवक्ष्यामि N 4.48 


ज्ञानभावेन मोक्षते N 2.635 
ज्ञानमोक्षन्न विद्यते N 1.95b 
ज्ञानमोक्षाम्प्रयच्छति N 1.91b 
ज्ञानम्प्रयच्छ॒ति N 1.884 
ज्ञानयोगो मया ख्यात U ४.462 
ज्ञानवान्‌ गुरुरुच्यते N 4.1544 
ज्ञानविज्ञानकुशलस्‌ N 4.153¢ 
ज्ञानविज्ञानपारगः N 2.860 
ज्ञानसिद्धिकुमारिका M 6.189 
ज्ञानसिद्धिकुमारिकाम्‌ 4:12 M 4.124 
ज्ञानान्वेषणतत्परः U 5.240 
ज्ञानौघस्सम्प्रवर्त्तेते N 3.184 
ज्येष्ठया तु विशोधयेत्‌ M 5.4 
ज्योति स्थावरजङ्गमम्‌ N 2.480 
ज्वलन्तो जगदाहकः N 3.60 
ज्वलिते सिद्धयते चैव U 5.26c 
ज्वलिते सिद्यतेति च U 5.314 
ज्वलिते सिध्यतेति च U 5-254 
झकार एष विख्यातो N 1.402 
sare सम्प्रवक्ष्यामि N 1.458 
अकार विश्रुतो ह्येष N 1.480 
अकारञ्च निबोध AN 1-460 
टकार विद्धि विच्छिन्न N 1498 
ठकारस्सम्प्रदूश्येत N 1-496 
ठकारो रन्त्रविग्रहः N 1.494 
डकार एष विख्यातो N 1.50€ 
ढकारं ग्रीवया विधिः N 1.51d 
ढकारञ्च PAMAN 1500 

तं भित्त्वा — M 5.92 


598 


तं वै बच्चाति दुर्म्मतिम्‌ N 1108b 
तकारं कटिना सह 71-53 
qw तानि च तत्समम्‌ M 7.254 
तडिद्वलयसन्तान N 4.1472 
ततः पूज्य दिगीश्वरम्‌ M 2.80 
ततः साधनमारमेत्‌ M 4181 
ततो दीक्षां समारभेत्‌ ए 3.17 
ततो वृत्तन्तु भ्रामयेत्‌ U 3-100 
ततो सिद्धति मानवः U 5.80 
ततोपरि शिवं शान्तन्‌ \ 4.232 
ततोपरिष्टात्पञचाष्टं M 5.9० 
तत्किमर्थं गृहं त्यत्का M 7.266 
तत्क्षणात्स तु शुद्धो हि N 447a 
तत्क्षणादेव मुच्येत N 4.79c 
तत्क्षयात्क्षपणं स्मृतम्‌ M 6.120 
तततन्त्रं परिगीयते U 1.334 
ततत्वं सङ्भावतो ब्रूहि N 4.1८ 
तत्त्वध्यानं प्रथमकं U 5.62 
तत्त्वरूपेण संस्थिताः N 1.824 
तत्त्वविज्ञानमाख्याहि N 2.21८ 
तत्त्ववेत्ता शिवं याति N 4.86८ 
तत्त्वसद्भावमखिलं N 4.26८ 
तत्त्वसम्पूण्णसंस्थिताः N 1.800 
तत्त्वसर्गे च यः स्मृतः U 1.15} 
तत्त्वसृष्टिस्त्वया प्रोक्ता N 2.214 
तत्त्वा देवगणाः सर्वे N 4.148८ 
तत्त्वाभ्यन्तरसंस्थानि N 2.18८ 
तत्वेन तु षडङ्गेन M 3.92 
तचचैरेतै्ंगत्सर्वञ्‌ N 2.17¢ 
तत्त्वेरेतेस्तु लभ्यते N 2.194 
तत्र किच्चिदिहागतम्‌ U 1.39d 


तत्र ध्यानम्प्रकुर्वीत U 5.256 


Nisvasatattvasamhitg 


तत्र योगं समभ्यसेत्‌ N 4.1034 
तत्र संयोजितो मर्त्यो U 4.5०2 
तत्रस्थन्तम्‌ विजानीयाद्‌ M 6.116 
तत्रैकाशन्तु कारयेत्‌ N 1.234 
तत्रैव तु परिश्रष्टो N 1.882 
तत्वजस्तेन तोयेन M 1.19¢ 
तत्वमीकारसंभिन्नं M 6.182 
तत्वविन्नैव लिप्यते M 7.3१ 
तत्वविन्नैव लिप्यते M 7.44 
तत्वसंहित-म्‌-उत्तमः M 8.200 
तत्वसंहितमुत्तमम्‌ M 8.10b 
तत्वसरगे च संयोज्य M 5.10c 
तत्वाङ्गै ञ्च सुसन्नद्धः M 1.20c 
तत्वापहर्त्ुडडबन्ति M 8.3a 
तत्वे चैव सदाशिवे M 5.214 
तत्सर्वं फलमापुयात्‌ M 7.60 
तत्सवं फलमाघुयात्‌ M 7.70 
तत्सर्वं फलमाप्रुयात्‌ M 7.8१ 
तत्सर्वम्परमेशो हि N 4.512 
तथा मुष्टिन्तु कारयेत्‌ N 1.56 
तथा रिषिकुलेषु च M 5.130 
तथा वै शर्करोञ्चये M 5.54 
तथात्मनि निरीक्षयेत्‌ N 1.174 
तथान्ये पुरवासिनः M 1.34 
तदहं श्रोतुमिच्छामि N 4.1452 
तदा तत्वं प्रभेदयेत्‌ M 8.54 
तडुद्घातमिति प्रोक्तञ्‌ N 4.117¢ 
तद्धि वक्ष्यामि तत्त्वतः N 2.284 
तद्यानं तात्त्विकं स्मृतम्‌ U 5-74 
तद्भक्तन्देशिकन्तथा N 1.1034 
तद्योगं शृणु तत्त्वतः N 4.1014 
तद्दज्जीवो न च्छिद्यते N 1.90 
तद्दज्जीवो न दह्यते N 1.84 
तद्दज्जीवो न बद्धते N 1.74 


Index of Padas 


तद्दद्देवस्य चेष्टितम्‌ \ 2.8b 
तद्दण्णानि च वस्त्राणि N 3.29c 
तन मे निगदतः शृणु M 3.7७ 
तन्त्रस्य पारगा ह्येते 1.392 
तन्त्राणां कियती संख्या U 1.18८ 
तन्त्रीवाद्यविचित्राणि N 2.412 
तन्दृष्ठा चामृतीभवेत्‌ N 4.230 
तन्दृष्टा तु विमुच्यते N 3.570 
तन्दृष्टा मुच्यते जन्तुः N 4.766 
तन्मध्ये प्रसृताङ्गुष्ठौ U 4.21 
तन्मात्राणां यथार्थतः N 2.53f 
तन्मात्रेन्द्रियधम्मेण N 2.952 
तन्मात्रेन्द्रियबन्धेन N 1.996 
तन्मात्रेषु च उ स्मृतः N 4.944 
तन्मे निगदतः शुणु U 2.120 
तन्मे निगदतः शृणु U 4.46 
तपः शौच दमस्तथा N 2.864 
तपं aaa मन्त्राश्च N 2.76 
तपते वर्षते चैव N 3.514 
तपा सेवन्ति घोराणि N 2.742 
तपोध्यानजपादिभिः M 8.50 
तपोलोकं ततः प्राप्य M 5.78 
तमस्येतानि चिह्लानि N 2.92c 
तया सह यजेद्यज्ञां M 4.132 
तरणं गिरिरोहणम्‌ ए 2.36b 
तरुजाम्मृन्मयीं वापि U ४.252 
तङ्भावसमायुक्त N 1.846 
तर्जनी वत्तुंला ततः N 1.73b 
तर्जनीमध्यमे युक्ते 413a 
तर्जन्याग्रे --- U 4.21a 
तस्मात्ते तु न मुच्यन्ते N 1.112९ 
समानपशोः N 4.151€ 


599 


तस्मिं सर्वाणि विद्यन्ते N 4.157a 
तस्मिन्‌ समाप्त सूत्रे तु ए 1.3९ 
तस्य तस्य हि नामेन ए 1.33८ 
तस्य देयमिदं शास्त्रम्‌ N 4.66८ 
तस्य देयमिदञ्ज्ञानं N 4.63¢ 
SS N 2.84c 
तस्य पादरजन्देवि N ५.११ 
तस्य पुण्यमवाप्नोति N 3.43a 
तस्य पूजाम्प्रकल्पयेत्‌ M 2.30 
तस्य भोगप्रदा ह्येषा \ 1.982 
तस्य शक्तिः शिवानिर्या ए 1.5० 
तस्य सूक्ष्मतरो जीवस्‌ N 3.27८ 
तस्योपरि सितं TT M 2.28 
तस्योद्धै तु पुनः M 5.154 
तां दृष्टा देशिकेन्द्रस्तु N 4.39 
तां समासेन मे SW M 5-10 
ताडनं च शिखाच्छेदं M 4.15¢ 
ताडनं पूजनञ्चैव U 3.224 
ताडनञ्छेदनच्च यत्‌ \ 245b 
तादृशन्तु सदा कुर्यात्‌ U 416c 
तानान्येकूनपञ्चाश N 2.380 
तानि चैव प्रवक्ष्यामि U 1.4० 
तानि वक्ष्यामि तत्त्वेन N 2-36¢ 
तानि सर्वाणि वक्ष्यामि N 1.302 
तान्दृष्टा तु शिवं ब्रजेत्‌ N 4.34 
तान्येव चाष्टवर्गाणि U 1.20€ 
तापयन्ति तपादिभिः M 7-270 
तापयेच्च qd quM 34b 
तापस्यं च परिव्राज्य M 4436 
तापितो रविरश्मिभिः N 2-70 
तामसो हि स विज्ञेयो N 2-93 
qr कालिकवदाथा N 5 
तारकेव तु लक्षेत N 3:2£0 


600 


तालाठाभूति धार्येत N 41338 
तालुजिह्लो दन्तास्पशी N 41002 
तावत्रकृतिबन्धेन N 2.1018 
तावद्यायेद्विचक्षणः U 5.80 
तिरोभावगतिं ब्रजेत्‌ N 1.86b 
तिरोभावश्च कथितो N 1.860 
तिर्यक्पिण्डीकृतौ gt N 1.508 
तिर्यंगूर्द्धापसव्यन्तु N 1.32€ 
तिर्यग्म --पाणिना N 1.42b 
तिर्यग्योनिमनुप्राप्तः N 1.856 
तिर्यग्वामकरड्डत्वा N 1.336 
तिर्यत्व च पुनः पुनः N 2.68b 
तिष्ठेत्प्रकृतिनिर्म्मुक्तस्‌ N 2.1008 
तु शुष्कदारुप्ररोहणम्‌ M 743b 
तुर्यद्वारं विभिद्यते N 418b 
तुर्यद्वारविनिष्कान्तं ए 5-15 
तुलया शोधयेत्पापम्‌ M 7.154 
तुल्यदशी भवेत्सिद्धो N 4.56८ 
तुल्यदर्शी विशुद्धात्मा N 4.60c 
तुल्यमानाः स्मृता ह्येते ए 3.42 
तुषां क्षोदन्ति मोहिताः N 1.80} 
TIT समुदाहृतम्‌ N 2.934 
तृतीयं प्रथमं नाम ए 1.32 
तृतीयं साधकेभ्यञ्च M 3.114 
तृतीयाङ्गानि चालभेत्‌ ए 4.20 
तृतीये च ध्रुवे तथा ॥॥ 5.19b 
तृतीये चैव आयामे U 5.39० 
तृतीये पश्यते सिद्धां N 3.66c 
qur दाघविनिर्मुक्तस्‌ N 3.5a 

ते तु विद्येश्वराः स्मृताः U 210d 
तजस्तथा समाख्यातो N 2.26c 
तेजस्त्रिगुणलक्षणम्‌ N 216b 


Nisvasatattvasamhita 


तेजस्वी कान्तियुक्तञ्च N 4.21a 
तेजीभूता विशन्त्येते N 1.13¢ 
तेजो दृष्टा तु सिध्यते ए ४.154 
तेन कम्मॅन्द्रियाः स्मृताः N 2.35b 
तेन दत्तं तपस्तप्तं] | 7.92 

तेन सम्पादयेद्रूव्यां ए 4.35 

तेन सर्वमिदं विश्वं N 2.5९ 

तेन सर्वमिदं व्याप्त N 4.1462 
तेनासौ ह्येकलक्षणः N 2.294 
तेनैव जायते Wd U 4.182 

तेनैव सर्वमाख्यातं ए 5.52c 
तेभ्यो मनुजमुख्यानां U 1.39c 
तेभ्यो मर्त्येषु सन्ततिः U 1.25d 
तेषां दोषविशुद्धर्थ M 5.252 

तेषां मन्त्रविभागो STN 4.1492 
तेषां व्याख्या तु कत्तेव्या U 5.53c 
तैलाभ्यङ्गं च-म्‌-उद्दाहं ए 2.392 
तैलाभ्यङ्गं तथोद्वाहं M 3.170 
तोयात्मको हि भवति नियतिन्‌ ए 5-19९ 
त्यजेत्तानि विचक्षणः N 3.70b 
त्रयञ्जाभ्यन्तराणि तु N 4-112 
त्रयोदशैकूनपञ्चाशद्‌ U 4.28 
त्रिकोणं धनुषाकृतिम्‌ U 2.124 
त्रिकोणं साम्म्रतं np ए 3-120 
त्रिगुणा चोत्तरारणी U 2.194 
त्रिचतुःपञ्चभिद्चिप्रे M 8.62 
त्रिचतुर्थस्य भेदेन M 6.3० 
fan वा त्रिकोणन्तु U 3.39 
नेत्रं च चतुर्भुजम्‌ M 3.69 
निनेत्रन्तु चतुर्वेक्त N 3.328 
निनेत्रन्तु जटाधरम्‌ N 3-42 
त्रिपश्चकान्तसप्तादौ M 6.40 
त्रिपञ्चकेन भित्त्वा वै M 6.236 
त्रिपश्चकेन संयुक्त M 6.199 


Index of Padas 


त्रिपुण्ड्रं चाभिवादनम्‌ M 4.10d 
त्रिभिः शुद्धेन — N 4.48b 
त्रिमिर्म्मासैः प्रजायते N 4.214 
त्रिमात्रं स मनः प्रोक्तं N 4.94c 
त्रिमात्रस्तु भवेन्माया HN 4.96c 
त्रिरेखं तु त्रिदैवत्यं U 3.15¢ 
त्रिरेखं Tate वा M 4.३८ 
त्रिरेखम्पञ्चरेख वा U 3.158 
त्रिवर्णकेस्त्रिरेखं स्यात्‌ M 4.48 
त्रिष्कोणन्नात्र संशयः U 32d 
त्रीण्यन्यानि तु रुन्धयेत्‌ U 3.80 
त्रैलोक्यदर्शी सिद्धिश्च N 3.582 
त्रैलोक्ये यः प्रवर्तेत N 3.22९ 
त्रैलोक्ये यः प्रवत्तेत N 4.382 
त्रैलोक्ये यत्प्रवर्तते M 7.220 
त्रैलोक्ये यत्प्रवर्तते N 4.1434 
त््यायुषञ्चाभिवा दनम्‌ U 3-190 
त्वत्प्रियार्थं समाख्यातं M 8.10 
त्वमेव पोतभूतस्तु M 1.8८ 
त्वमेव शरणापन्नो N 3.636 
त्वया गुप्ततरं कार्यम्‌ N 4.84¢ 
थकारो नाभिरुद्दिष्टा N 1.53० 
दकारो दृश्यते qd: N 1.544 
दक्षिणं कारयेत्तिर्यंग्‌ N 1.362 
दक्षिणं योजयेद्धस्तं N 1.67c 
दक्षिणन्तु तथैव हि N 3.440. 
~दक्षिणम्मध्ये N 1.65 
दक्षिणम्पाणि योजयेत्‌ N 1.470 
दक्षिणम्प्रक्षिपेद्धस्त N 1.598 
दक्षिणम्भुजमुत्सृजेत्‌ N 1.65d 
दक्षिणस्य करस्य तु N 1.554 
दक्षिणास्यन्तु चिन्तयेत्‌ N 3.45d 


601 


दक्षिणे qur कारयेत्‌ N 1.69b 
दक्षिणे पश्चिमे चैव U 216a 
दक्षिणे योजयेद्दीजां ए 2.8 
दक्षिणे श्रवणे योज्य N 1.7८ 
दक्षिणेन सिताङ्गा TN 3.29a 
दक्षिणोत्तरमाघारौ M 3.53 
दक्षिणोत्तरसङ्कान्त्या N 3.64c 
दरध्वा चैव शिवाग्निना N 1.139 
दण्ड सन्ध्यामुपासनम्‌ U 3.184 
दण्डादीनाञ्च होमनम्‌ U 3.194 
ददाति च अदीक्षिते N 1.1010 
ददाति च परान्निष्ठाञ्‌ N 1.912 
ददाति च हरेति च N 192b 
ददाति लोभाय कथम्परस्य तु \ 4.1594 
दद्याच्चोत्तरसाधके U 4.344 
दधिक्षीरघृतादिभिः M 2.50 
दन्तकाष्ठपवित्रकम्‌ M 7.114 
दन्तधावन सक्षीरं M 3.120 
दन्तधावनमुत्तमम्‌ U 2.330 
दन्तधावनमेव च ए 2.324 
दम्भो xum मोह्च N 1210€ 
दया क्षान्तिश्न सर्वदा N 2.650 
दयालुः शिवपूजकः M 1.140 
दर्पणे नियतिन्ध्यायेद्‌ U 5.208 
दर्प्पणे ध्यानमालम्ब्य U 5170 
दर्शनं मननन्तथा M 7-200 
दर्शनञ्च यथा तस्य N 4:71 
दर्शनान्मोचयेज्जन्तु N 4-27९ 
दलहीनाष्टाङ्गुला वक्रा U 4-376 
दलाच्चोपदलाञ्चैव U 3-3९ 
दशधा च पुनः ख्यातो N 4-109 
दशधा परिकीत्तिंतम्‌ U 1-27 
दशधा योगमार्गेण N 41076 
दशधा वर्ण्णरूपेण N 3.68 


602 


दशधाक्षेषु धावति N 2.52d 
दशादूद्धं यदि ब्र्याल्‌ N 4.878 
दहते सर्वपाशानि N 1.228 
दहन्ते सर्वपाशानि N 1.818 
दह्यमानेषु पाशेषु N 1.116 
दह्यमानेषु पाशेषु N 1.8¢ 
दातव्यं शिवभक्तिने N 4.62d 
दातव्यं शिवशासनम्‌ M 8.15d 
दातव्यं सुपरीक्षिते N 4.884 
दातव्यन्तु जितेन्द्रिये N 4.654 
दाता चैव सदाशिवः N 1.890 
दानतीर्थव्रतं खान N 4.62 
दारांश्चाप्सरसोपमान्‌ N 2.724 
दिनरात्र्ययनानि च N 3.640 
दिव्यकान्ति शुभो गन्धो IN 4.1348 
दिव्यगन्ध्च जायेत N 4.202 
दिव्यदृष्टि्च श्रोत्रं च N 4.134९ 
दिव्यदृष्टिञ्जतुर्थके N 3.664 
दिव्यबुद्धिप्रवोधकः N 2.870 
दिव्यवुद्धिश्व भवते N 3.192 
दिव्यरूपेण संस्थितम्‌ N 1.67b 
दिव्यवाणी प्रवर्त्तते N 4.200 
दिव्यसिद्धिः प्रजायते N 3.220 
दिव्यसिद्धिन्तथाब्देन N 3.67 
दिव्यसिद्धिप्रदानाच्च ए 5.332 
दिव्यसिद्धिप्रदायकम्‌ N 3.184 
दिव्यसृष्टि प्रजायते N 3.21d 
दिव्या वाचा प्रवर्तते N 4.1344 
दिव्यादिव्यं तु यत्किंचिद्‌ N 4.36c 
दिव्यादिव्यनिवद्धानि ए 1.21€ 
दिशायात्रा च सिद्धते N Sa 
दीक्षकस्तु गुरुश्रेष्ठ: N 1.285 


NiSvasatattvasamhitg 


दीक्षयेत्सर्व॑जन्तूनि N 4.40९ 
दीक्षा निर्वाणगामिनी N 2.22b 
दीक्षां कुर्वन्ति ये नराः M 1.13b 
दीक्षां निर्वाणगामिनीम्‌ M 1.119 
दीक्षाकर्म भवेत्तस्य M 4.82 
दीक्षाकारी न मोक्षदाः N 4.390 
दीक्षाकाले शिवाध्वरे N 1.114 
दीक्षाकाले शिवाध्वरे N 1.229 
दीक्षाज्ञानं गुरुत्वं च M 8.18 
दीक्षादग्धा न रोहन्ति M 5.262 
दीक्षानुग्रहकारकाः U 5.410 
दीक्षाप्रक्रियभेदनम्‌ N 4.680 
दीक्षाभिज्ञो ऽथ तत्त्वज्ञो M 1.142 
दीक्षामण्डलयोजनैः M 8.44 
दीक्षाविधिविधानज्ञो N 44552 
दीक्षासिना तु ताञ्छित्त्वा N 3.38९ 
दीक्षितं तं विनिर्दिशेत्‌ M 7.174 
दीक्षितन्तु तथा दृढम्‌ N 1.1084 
दीक्षितास्ते न मुच्यन्ते M 1.13९ 
दीक्षितो ज्ञानिनञ्चैव M 1.162 
दीप्तं सूक्ष्मं च साहस्रम्‌ ए 1.260 
दीर्घ कालञ्च पद्यते N 4.960 
दीर्घं सर्व्वार्थकर्मसु ए 2.94 
दीर्घकोटिसमायोगात्‌ N 4.1380 
दीर्घदन्ता सुलोमशा N 3-344 
दीर्घमक्षेषु कीर्तिताः N 4.94b 
dAd समाख्यातः N 4.95 
दीर्घेस्तु सकलो भवेत्‌ U 2.90 
दीर्घा वै लोकपालास्तु U 2.114 
दीर्घाक्षरेण तत्‌ सवं U 3.23€ 
दुःखक्षपणमित्युक्तन्‌ M 6.12¢ 
इःखात्तो-म्‌-अटते सदा N 2.89b 
दुःखिताम्च मृयन्त्येते N 1.952 
दुग्गन्धाञ्ज-म्‌- अशोभनाः N 2-510 


Indez of Padas 


दुर्मेधाज्ञानमेव च N 2.91d 
ऽथ ee: कचः U 1.37b 


राक्षसाः N 4.594 
दःस्वन्नस्य च दर्शने M 3.148 
दूराच्छुवणविज्ञान M 7.20a 
दृढं भूतैस्तु वेष्टितः N 1.994 
दृश्यते च सदाशिवम्‌ N 3.684 
ृष्टप्रत्ययसिद्धीनि U 5.35€ 
दृष्टा च सुचिरं TA: M 837b 
ger चक्र भवेत्तत्वी N 4.772 
ger चैव न सिद्धति M 3.17¢ 
दृष्टा चैव न सिध्यति U 4-444 
दृष्टा चैव महालक्ष N 4.280 
दृष्टा चैव महाशक्ति N 4.100 
दृष्टा तु सिद्धयते ए 5-194 
SET मुच्यति बन्धनात्‌ U 5-104 
SET मोचयते जगत्‌ N 4.290 
दृष्ट्रा सर्वाणि रूपाणि N 3.702 
दृष्टा सिध्यति मानवः U 2.384 
दृष्टा सिध्यति स्वप्नान्ते M 3.160 
wary विमुच्यन्ते U 4.22c 
देवं संस्थाप्य विधिना U 4.1० 
देवदानवगन्धर्वा N 4.36a 
देवदेवं जगङ्गुरुम्‌ M 7.260 
देवदेवं तु पूजयेत्‌ ए 2.74 
देवदेवं समभ्यर्च्य N 4.1048 
देवदेवज्लगन्नुरुम्‌ M 1.2b 
देवदेवस्य कीत्तितम्‌ M 6.23b 
देवदेवो सदाशिव: U 1.99 
: M. 5.90 


देवलोकानि सर्वाणि N 3.41¢ 


603 


देवाचार्यद्विजां गावो M aang 
देवानां हीयते हविः N 4861 
देवानान्तु कुटुम्विनः N 486b 

ड : N 4.9७ 
दवाष्टकसमन्वितः N 4.91b 

देवी तेन निवन्धत्ति N 1.106b 
देवी च रश्मयः प्रोक्ता N 4.970 
देवी वचनमन्रवीत्‌ M 1.70 
देवेभ्यः प्रतिपादितम्‌ U 1.25b 
देवो वचनमन्रवीत्‌ M 132b 
देव्यामातृगृहे वापि U 2.4८ 
देशान्तरगमागमे N 2.334 
देशिकः पाशहा भवेत्‌ ए 1.80 
देशिकस्य शिवस्य च N 4456b 
देशिको नरक ब्रजेत्‌ M 1.134 
देहः सन्त्यज्यते क्षणात्‌ N 2.740 
देहङ्कुत्वा शिवात्मकम्‌ N 41070 
देहन्त्यत्का समारुतः 6.80 
देहपाशाः स्मृता ह्येते N 1.1002 
देहमापूर्य यत्स्थितम्‌ N 3-240 
देहलीनौ करौ कृत्वा N 1.318 
देहलीनौ भुजौ कृत्वा N 1.032 
देहव्यापी च नवमो U 1.128 
देहव्यापी तु शत्तयन्ते 1178 
देहे दृश्यति स प्रभुः N 1.70b 
देहेनानेन साधकः M 7-204 
देहेनानेन साधके N 41424 
देत्या विद्याधरास्सिद्धास्‌ M 1.3९ 
gens d लक्षणम्‌ ए 415d 
gerant RA M 8-148 द 
द्रव्ये तृप्ति T गच्छते N 2.75 
द्रव्येण मायया वापि M 8.2९ 
द्रव्येषु च्छिदामानेषु N 7-106 
ष्टव्या तु परा शक्तिस्‌ N 4: 


604 


दृष्टव्यानि पुनः पुनः N 1.244 
दूततारनिभः पीत N 4.1208 
दरेश्याद्वेश्यञ्च यत्स्थितम्‌ N 4.50b 
द्वेश्याद्वेश्यञ्चराचरम्‌ U 113d 
द्वातृंशकः शिवो ज्ञेयो N 4.982 
द्वात्रिशच्चतुषष्टि वा U 3.50 
द्वात्रिशत्तत्त्वसंयुक्तः N 4.91¢ 
द्वत्रिंशत्तत्त्वसंयुक्त N 4.90¢ 
द्वादशदशभिवैंश्ये M 8.6c 
द्वादशभिस्समैः N 4.850 
द्वादशादिसमायुक्त M 6.222 
द्वादशान्तन्ततोपरि M 6.20 
द्वादशाब्दनिवासिने \ 4.634 
द्वादशाब्दां करोति यः M 78b 
द्वादशाब्दां सुयन्त्रितः M 719b 
द्वाभ्या -तु सिद्धति U 3.50 
द्वाभ्यां परतरः शिवः U 4.494 
द्वाभ्यां शिवसदाशिवौ U 3.154 
द्वारमस्त्रेण घट्टयेत्‌ M 4.6b 
द्वाराः पूर्वोक्तका स्मृताः U 3.110 
द्वाराणि तु यथाविधि U 3.7७ 
द्वावेतौ एक एव च U 4.490 
द्विगुणीकृत्य dT बाहुं N 1.474 
द्वितीयं सूत्रमुच्यते ए 1.30 
द्वितीयश्विश्चिणीयकम्‌ U 532b 
तु ए 4.2c 
[ U 1.20 
द्वितीयावरणे योज्या U 2.10८ 
द्विधा च पुरुषः स्मृतः M 4.74 
द्विधावस्थः परः शिवः M 4.7) 
द्विनेज्रमुत्तरं व्रन्‌ N ५.5०३ 
LU 5.39d 


Nigvas atattvasamhits 


द्विभिन्नं ज्ञानमुच्यते M 6.35 
द्विमासेन तु दृश्यते N 4.36b 
द्विमासेन तु पौरुषी N 4.800 
द्विखातस्तु शुचिर्भूत्वा U 3.15. 
द्वे विद्ये तेजसि qd M 536b 
द्वौ पाशौ तु सदाशिवे N 1.834 
हयङ्गुलेन तु वृद्धाया U 3.10c 
धकारं कायवर्जितम्‌ N 1.55 
धरण्यवस्थितज्ञानुं N 1.32 
धर्माधर्ममया परे ए 2.29d 
धर्मेन्द्री वरुणञ्चैव U 135c 
धर्म्म इत्यभिशब्दितः N 2.67b 
धर्म्मं ज्ञानञ्च वैराग्यम्‌ N 2.628 
धर्म्मकर्म्मनिबद्धानां N 2.67 
धर्म्मज्ञे प्रियवादिने N 4.650 
धर्म्मेशीलञ्च गुणवान्‌ N 2.59 
धर्म्मसत्यसमन्वितम्‌ N 2.850 
धर्म्मस्य भावमाख्यात N 2.686 
धर्म्मादीनान्तथाष्टाना N 2.642 
धर्म्माधर्मस्य कत्तृत्वे N 3.632 
धर्म्माधर्म्मनिबद्धस्तु N 2.1024 
धर्म्माधर्म्मनिबन्धक N 2.534 
धर्म्माधर्म्मप्रवतैकः N 2.694 
धर्म्माधर्म्मविनिमुक्तस्‌ U 4.50€ 
धर्म्माधरम्मख्च हिन्सा च IN 1.1110 
धातारे दमनीशे च M 5-146 
धारणादतुलं फलम्‌ M. 8.190 
धारणाध्यानयोगेन N 4.786 
धारणैस्सर्वपापानि N 4.118¢ 
धीगुणः प्रथमो ह्येष N 2.672 
धीगुणांञ्ज निबोध मे N 2-610 
धीहंकारगुणो न हि N 2.944 
धूम लक्षन्तु पौरुषम्‌ ए 535b 
धूमलक्षन्तृतीयन्तु U 5-126 


Indez of Padas 
qur कालात्मिका स्मृता N 4.73d 
ध्यातव्यं बिन्दुरूपिणं N 3-160 


ध्यातो नाशयते क्षणात्‌ N 3-464 
ध्यातो निष्कल मोक्षदः IN 4-90 
ध्यातो वाक्सिद्धिदायकः N 3.90 
ध्यातो विष्णुः प्रदायकः N 3-100 
ध्यात्वा तत्वं तु मेधावी M 7.17९ 
ध्यात्वा पूर्णाहुतिन्ददेत्‌ M 3.60 
ध्यात्वा प्रकृतिबीजेन N 3.212 
ध्यात्वा बीजेन चिन्तयेत्‌ U 5:7 
ध्यात्वा लिङ्गे तु साधकम्‌ M 4.80 
ध्यात्वाद्वैतेन सर्वगम्‌ N 4.108 
ध्यानं चैव पृथत्केन N 4.68 
ध्यानञ्चैवेश्वरं शृणु U 5.294 
ध्यानयोगबलं शृणु N 3.654 
ध्यानाज्ञ्वलति Tet U 5.156 
ध्यानात्तस्य जगत्सर्वं N ३.5० 
ध्यानात्सिद्धिमवाप्रोति N 3.176 
ध्यानात्सिद्धिमवाप्रोति N 3.31८ 
ध्यानात्सिद्धिमिवाप्रोति U 5.14c 
ध्यानात्सिद्धिमवाप्रोति U 5.5० 
ध्यानात्सिद्धियैथेष्सिता N 4.40 
ad: सिद्धिमभ्येति N 3.32 
ध्यायते यस्तु युक्तात्मा M 7.192 
आयते यस्तु युक्तात्मा N 4.3० 
Ms a युक्तात्मा N 4.80a 
युक्तात्मा U 5.114 
“पाये त्वचसि संस्थितम्‌ N 3.130 


605 


ध्यायेचन्द्रं मने स्थितम्‌ N 3.14d 
ध्यायेत्मकृतिवीजेन N 3.8० 
AMAT संयमात्‌ N 4.109१ 
ध्यायेद्देवं सदाशिवम्‌ N 3.68 
ध्यायेद्वीजेन संयुतः N 3.7b 
ध्यायेद्वीजेन संयुताः N 312b 
ध्यायेद्युक्तेन चेतसा N 3.79 
ध्यायेद्युक्तेन चेतसा N 3.180 
ध्यायेयुक्तेन चेतसा U 514b 
ध्यायेन्नित्यम्महेश्वरम्‌ N 3.534 
gata प्रसिद्याति 3-20 
ध्वजादर्शपताकानि M 2.78 

न कालः कलयिष्यते N 3.330 

न कुर्याच्छिष्यसंग्रहम्‌ M 8.160 
न च च्छिद्यत्यसौ ह्यात्मा N 112a 
न च छिनत्त्यसौ afer \ 1.90 
न च तत्वं प्रकाशयेत्‌ M 8.40 

न च तृप्ति गमिष्यामो M 1.9० 

न च नास्तिकनिन्दके M 87b 

न च बन्धुजने तथा M 824b 

न च यान्ति पराङ्गतिम्‌ 5-414 
नच वस्त्वन्तरङ्किचिद्‌ N 2.20€ 
न चेच्छा हन्यते तस्य N 4820 
न चैव याति चोत्क्रान्त्या N 42292 
न जपध्यानहोमभिः N 178d 

न गेत -- पर * * 19 1,390 
न तत्र मृत्युचे जरा M178 

न तस्य कालमाख्यातं M 8.9९ 

न तस्य रूप वण्ण TN 3.268 
न तु विप्राय दापयेत्‌ M 8-66 


न ते लंघयितुं शक्ता N 3:97 
न ते हिंसन्ति हिंसका N 4.59b 


606 


न तेषां यन्त्रणा भवेत्‌ M 7-270 

न त्वगे जायते व्यथा N 3-134 

न दत्तन्न च मे भुक्तम्‌ N 2-602 

न दद्याच्छिवशासनम्‌ M 8.14d 

न दानखानतीर्थेन N 1.780 

न दाहो दह्यमानेषु N 1.6० 

न दीक्षा न च मुक्तिदा N 1.28 

न दृष्टम्पशुबन्धनम्‌ N 1.1124 

न देय तत्त्वामृत यस्य कस्यचित्‌ N 
4.160d 

न देयं तत्वमुत्तमम्‌ M 8.7१ 

न देयं परदीक्षिते M 8.14 

न देयं शिवसङ्भावम्‌ U 5.480 

न देयन्तत्त्वमुत्तमम्‌ U 5.494 

न देयममृतामृतम्‌ N 4.854 

न पुनर्गृह्ृते तनुम्‌ M 6.50 

न पुनन्निश्वसन्ति TU 5.5० 

न भवेत्पाशहा गुरुः N 4.280 

न भूयोजन्मतां व्रजेत्‌ M 7.2 

न भूयोजन्मतां ब्रजेत्‌ U 4.5० 

न मुच्यन्ते ऽन्यतन्त्रज्ञा \ 1.14¢ 

न मुच्यन्ते ऽन्यशासनात्‌ N 1.1120 
न मुच्यन्ते न मोक्षकाः N 4.294 

न मे वन्धो ऽस्ति कर्त्तः N 3-634 
न मे वन्धो ऽस्ति प्राकृतः N 2.70b 
न रवे तत्र कामता N 2.70 

न राज्येन च भोगैश्च N 2.762 

न ferar U पापकैः N 4.7b 

न विद्या मातृकापरा 4.514 

न व्याधिर्न च दुःखिता M 1.7b 

न शक्तिरहिता मर्त्त्या ए 5.41a 

न शोचते न चोद्वेग: N 2,82८ 


NiSvasatattvasamhitn 


न सिद्धयते यदा मन्त्रो 4.29८ 
न हि मुक्तिर्भेवेत्तस्य N 2.99८ 
नकारस्तु भविष्यति N 1.564 
नगोद्धरणमावेशं M 7.146 
नदीनदसमुद्रे वा U 2.362 
नदीसरस्तटेषु वा U 2.3d 
नन्दिर्बधाति वै शीघ्रं N 1303a 
नमस्कारः समाख्यातस्‌ U 4.122 
नमस्कारामलं कुर्यात्‌ U 4.322 
नरकेषु तु योजयेत्‌ M 5.44 
नरकेषु प्रपच्यते N 1.850 
नरनारीपशुमृगं N 2.48a 
नरास्संसारबन्धनात्‌ M. 6.14 
नरेन्द्र श्रेतवाससम्‌ M 3.16a 
नरेन्द्रजनवर्धनम्‌ U 4.43b 
नरेंद्रजनविभ्रमम्‌ U 4.44b 
नवतत्त्वव्यवस्थितः U 1.74 
नवतत्त्वा अकारे तु N 1.152 
नवधा च्छिद्रलक्षणम्‌ N 2.290 
नवशक्तिंसमन्वितम्‌ M 2.20 
नवात्मके स्थितास्तत्त्वाः N 1.14 
नवात्मा — तुलाग्निभ्यो ए 5-352 
नवात्मानं ततोपरि M 2.24 
नवात्मानं नियोजयेत्‌ M 6.24 
नवात्मेन मृदाञ्जघ्वा U 4.29 
नाकाशं च्छेदमहँति N 1.104 
नाख्यातव्यं हितैषिणा N 4-880 
नागगन्धट्वकिन्नराः M 1.30 
नागयज्ञोपवीतिनम्‌ N 3:53 
नागादीनान्तु पञ्चानाम्‌ N 412860 
नागाद्या बहुरूपाञ्च N 4426€ 
नागाद्यां प्राणसंयुक्तां N 4.1328 
नाग्न्युदकसमीपतः N 4-1020 
नाडीसंशोधनं ह्येतन्‌ N 41106 


Index of Padas 


नाडीसंशोधनञ्चैव N 4.100a 
नातुरस्सुखमाम्रोति N 4.153a 
नादः प्रत्यरवज्ज्ञेयः N 4.756 
नादरूपं विनिष्क्रान्तं ए 1.236 
नादरूपस्य शास्त्रस्य ए 1.24c 
नादात्मा ज्योति विग्रहम्‌ N 4.108b 
नानात्वं नैव कुर्वेन्ति N 4.158c 
नानारूपधरो भूत्वा N 4.440 
नानारेखाविचित्रितम्‌ N 4.72d 
नान्यस्त्राता सुरेश्वर M 1.84 
नाभिनन्दन्ति गृह्य च M 8.39 
नाभिन्नीत्वा समुच्छुवसेत्‌ N 4.1140 
नाभिरेखा च मध्यतः N 1.714 
नाभिवच्च शिवो ज्ञेयः N 4.708 
नाभ्यां हृदयसंचारान्‌ N 4.1138 
नाभ्यान्धारेत योगीन्द्रः N 4.137९ 
नाभ्योपरि समाख्यातं N 1.412 
नामन्तत्वी च योगश्च N 2.12 
नामभिः परिकीर्त्यते U 1.20 
नामरूपविवर्जितम्‌ U 5.420 
नासावंशेन दीर्घिका N 1.344 
नासिका च यथाक्रमम्‌ N 242f 
नासिकाग्रेण गृहते N 2.540 
नासिके पृथिवी पीता N 3.14 
नास्ति दीक्षासमो मोक्षो U 4-510 
नास्ति धर्म्मो न च स्वगर्ग N 1.94 
नास्ति धर्म्मो न चाधम्मो N 2.796 
नास्ति मन्त्रमतः परम्‌ U 1.414 
नास्ति योगमलक्षकम्‌ U 4.52b 
नास्तिक्धञ्च तिरोभावः N 1.842 

> नास्तिकाश्चलचित्तता N 2.92b 
गाह कर्ता न मे बन्धो N 2.988 


607 


नाह कर्तो न मे वन्धो ष 3.62a 
निकुच्य वर्तुलीकृत्वा N 1.51८ 
नित्यं युद्धरतः शूर: N 2.902 
नित्यडुःखी परप्रेष्यो N 2.80c 
नित्यप्रमुदितेन्द्रिया: M 1.66 
नित्ययुक्तञ्च सिद्धति N 41060 
नित्यशुद्धो भवेद्देवि M T-5C 
नित्यहोमं च तन्मानं ए 24a 
N 4.127c 
निद्रालस्यमकम्मित्वन्‌ N 2.91 
निन्दते गुरवं यस्तु M 1.16८ 
निंदातङ्कानुवर्त्तिनाम्‌ U 5.480 
निमिषार्धेन मे शृणु N 4.714 
नियतिः काल एव च U 5.30 
नियति पञ्चविंशस्तु N 4.962 
नियतिः पुरुषञ्चैव N 2.10८ 
नियतिं कालमेव च U 2.28 
नियतिकालसिद्धिस N 4.812 
नियतिञ्च ततो पश्यन्‌ ए 5.20९ 
नियतिर्योजयेद्वलात्‌ N 1.980 
नियतिलक्षमभ्यसेत्‌ U 519b 
fafaa ददात्यायुः N 1.96c 
नियतीन्तां विजानीयाद्‌ N 3.30c 
नियत्या चैव मुच्यते N 3-314 
नियत्या सिध्यते ध्रुवम्‌ U 5.204 
नियत्याजयसिद्धिषु U 5-174 
निरञ्जने च संयोज्य M 5:19 
निरालम्बेति विख्यातं N 4-24९ 
निरीक्षयेद्वही रूप N 1.66c 
निरुद्धस्य च यत्कालं N 41326 
निर्गतेन मृतञ्चैव N 3.258 
निर्जिता सा भविष्यति ए 5-184 
निर्बीजं विषसंक्रामं M 7.12¢ 
निबींजेषु WAT ए 5-960 


608 


निर्माल्यभक्षणे वापि N 1.1048 
निर्ममलीकरणस्तु सः U 5-520 
निर्लोकभूप्रदेशे तु N 4-328 
निर्वाणदीक्षां वक्ष्यामि U 4-400 
निर्विधकरणं तथा U 418b 
निर्विषानग्निकरण M 713€ 
निर्वैरपरिपन्थिन्या N 3.368 
निवृत्तिः प्रकृतिज्ञेया N 4.28 
निवृत्तिश्च प्रतिष्ठा च N 3.728 
निवेदयेद्ृष्टमनाः M 8.170 
निश्चयी एकचित्तस्तु N 4.572 
निश्वसन्ति पुनः पुनः U 5.50b 
निश्वास एव विख्यातस्‌ U 5.519 
निश्वासं तदनन्तरम्‌ U 1.28b 
निश्नासोच्छुवसनं भित्त्वा M 6.92 
निश्चासोत्तरसंहिता ए 5.54b 
Frese सप्तमः N 2.374 
निष्कम्पं कुम्भक कुर्यात्‌ N 4.1120 
निष्कलः परमेश्वरः N 4.98b 
निष्कलं तं विजानीयात्‌ M 6.8८ 
निष्कलं ध्यानमारभेत्‌ N 4.1470 
निष्कलं हृदये तस्य M 3.6८ 
निष्कलञ्च ततोपरि M 2.45 
निष्कलस्य भवेन्मुद्रा ए 4.222 
निष्कलाकारविग्रहम्‌ N 1.31d 
निष्कले च तथा शून्ये ए 1.19c 
निष्कामः सृजते कथम्‌ N 2.6} 
निष्कामाः शिवशक्तयः 1.64 
निष्क्रामणन्तथा नामं M 4.0० 
निष्प्रपञ्चनिरालम्बं N 2.32 
निस्त्रिंशञ्चातिलोभी च N 2.88८ 
निस्सर्प्पकीटवल्मीके N 4.1032 


Ni$vasatattvasamhitg 


नीलच्चित्तृकवण्णेञ्च N 3.69 
नीलाम्बुदप्रतीकाशम्‌ N 3.44८ 
नीलोत्पलकरन्तथा N 3.50b 
equgu निबोध मे N 1.864 
नूनं हि सो नेच्छति मोक्षमात्मनो N 
4.1608 

नृत्यं युद्धगतिः कलाः N 4.122} 
नृमलं स्रावयेदधः N 4.123 
नेत्रकं व्याममात्रं तु U 2.20 
नेत्रतारौ तु बिन्दुकौ N 134b 
नैव पापं भवेत्तस्य M 7.20 
नैव पुण्यं तथैव च M 7.20 
नोक्ताः पूर्व हि मे वद U 1.9१ 
न्यासञ्च शिवहस्तञ्च ए 3.21c 
--- न्तु U 1.1८ 

न्यासमालंभनं चैव M 444a 
प-- TUM 746a 
पकारन्तु भविष्यते N 1.57d 
पक्षमासातेवेषु च U 5.21b 
पङ्के चैव निमज्जनम्‌ U 2.40b 
पचने दर्शने चैव N 2.262 
पञ्च बिन्दूस्ततः कृत्वा N 1.220 
पञ्चगव्यं तु पाययेत्‌ U 2.320 
पञ्चगव्यपुरःसरम्‌ M 3-122 
पञ्चगव्येन चाभ्युक्ष्य M 1.210 
पञ्चगव्येन चाभ्युक्ष्य U 2.78 
पञ्चगव्येन पयसा M 2.52 
पञ्चदशाक्रान्त कर्णिका M 6.40 
पञ्चब्रह्मयुतेन च M 3.97 
पञ्चब्रह्मयुतेन च M 5.34 
पञ्चब्रह्मसमायुक्तं M 2.38 
पश्चब्रह्मास्समाख्याता M 6-160 
पञ्चभिः पञ्चवर्णकम्‌ 4-40 
पञ्चभिब्रैह्मभिर्बुधः M 2.8b 


Index of Padas 


पन्चभिद्रेह्ममिखैव M 4.14¢ 
पञ्चमन्यैवतं षष्ठन्‌ N 2.37c 
पश्चवर्ग्गाभिमन्त्रितिः U 2.7b 
पच्चवर्ण्णत्रिभिन्नकाः N 4.92d 
पञ्चविंशस्तु स्तु योनिजः N 4.92b 
पञ्चविंशो ऽथ पञ्चाशद्‌ U 3.5९ 
पञ्चशिष्ये तथाचार्ये M 5.110 
पञ्चसंस्कारसंशुद्धं U 2.21८ 
पञ्चाग्नि जलशायिनम्‌ N 2.734 
पञ्चाङ्गेन समायुक्तङ्‌ M 5.232 
पञ्चानां रूपलक्षणम्‌ N 4.1204 
पञ्चाशत्तत्र संस्थिताः N 137b 
पटहं पणवन्तथा N 2.40b 
पठतो पि हि संहिताम्‌ N 4.1504 
पद्यषण्डतटे चैव U 2.52 
परदारशतानि च N 3.490 
परन्तत्त्वम्प्रकाशते N 4.1304 
परमं योगसद्वावड N 4.1012 
परमन्त्रप्रभेदं च M 74a 
परमन्त्रप्रयोगेन M 7.15¢ 
-— परमसङद्भावं N 4.102 
परसिद्धान्तवादिनः M 8.20 
परसैन्यस्य स्तम्भनम्‌ M 7.14 
परहिंसारतो ऽपि यः M 7.50 
परिज्ञानेन ते मुक्ता M 7.276 
परिधीध्मां तु गृह्णीत U 441€ 
परिधीध्मानि तापयेत्‌ U 2.254 
परिवर्तयति यस्तन्त्रं N 1.1020 
परिवारायुधवाहनैः N 2.760 
पर्वताट्टालरथ्यकाः N 2.33b 
पर्वते चत्वरे तथा M 1.170 
पलाशाश्चत्थजावेतौ U 4.408 


609 


पवित्रं दण्डधारणम्‌ M 410b 
पवित्रं विहितन्तन्त्रे ए 4.426 
पवित्रमाज्यसंस्कारं U 2.26a 
पवित्राणि ततो जप्त्वा ए 4.58 
पशुज्ञानरता नराः N 1.1121 
पशुज्ञानेन मोहितः N 1.1020 
पशुतन्त्रप्रणेतारैर्‌ N 1.112¢ 
पशुयोनिषु जायते N 1.854 
पञ्चात्कर्म्मे समारभेत्‌ M 1.200 
पश्चिमं वदनं ध्यायेद्‌ N 3.48८ 
पश्चिमं वाहयेद्वारन्‌ ए 3.8८ 
पञ्चिमास्येन देवेशो M 3.7० 
पञ्चिमेन पुरस्य तु U 2.150 
पश्यते च महातेजं N 4.33८ 
पश्यते च शिरोपरि N 4.224 
पश्यते दिव्यचक्षुषा N 4.220 
पश्यते विन्दुमालान्तु N 4.726 
पाकाद्यां आसहस्रिका M 433b 
पातालं विशते यदा M 3-172 
पातालमर्त्यसिद्धीनाञ्‌ U 5.342 
पादप्रचारं wg च M18 
पादप्रचारम्पञ्चान्तु N 3-10a 
पादेन्द्रिये गुणाः प्रोक्ता N 2.33¢ 
: N 3.10d 
पायुश्रेष्टति सर्वतः N 2.34b 
पायौ मित्रं सितन्ध्यातः N 3106 
पारमेश्वरतन्त्रो ऽयं U 1.314 
पार्श्वलीनौ तु तौ भुजौ N 1.500 
qn च या भवेद्रेखा N 1.728 
पालाशीं कारयेद्वुधः U 2-180 
पाशजालविमोचकः N 4-1550 
पाशदाहक्षमाः स्मृताः N 1.40 
पाशदाहनिबन्धनम्‌ N 1-24 
पाशधर्म वद शीघ्रम्‌ N 1838 


610 


पाशा जीवस्सूक्ष्मस्स उच्यते N 1.59 
पाशां तत्वेन बन्धयेत्‌ M 3-9 
पाशानाडुन्तनं तथा U 3-210 
पाशान्तत्त्वेन बन्धयेत्‌ ए 2.28b 
पाशाञ्चैव महेश्वर N 110 
पिङ्गश्रूइमश्रुलोचनम्‌ N 3.444 
पिण्ड एष चतुर्विंशत्‌ N 2.692 
पिण्डाक्षरस्य चाद्यन्ते U 1.198 
पिण्डाक्षराष्ट्रभेदन्तु U 5-14 
पिण्डाक्षराष्ट्रवर्गञ्च U 4-492 
पिण्डितम्प्रसृतङ्कायं N 1.45€ 
पितृणाञ्चैव तर्प्पणम्‌ N 2.66b 
पित्तोष्मे तेज संस्थितम्‌ N 2.26b 
पिपीलकण्टकावेधो N 4.1429 
पिपीलिकासमो वापि N 4.199 
पिशिता हिस्रका -- N 4.58b 
पीठं द्वात्रिंशदकुलम्‌ ए 3.40 
पीठन्दत्त्वा तथा छत्रम्‌ M 8.13a 
पीठान्ते सूत्रयेद्रेखाम्‌ ए 3.4० 
पीतक गन्धतन्मात्रं N 3.159 
पीतरक्तसुगन्धिनः U 4.69 
पीतरक्ता तथा कृष्णा N 4.34a 
पीता नियतिरेखा तु [प्र 4.73० 
पुण्यकालेषु सर्वेषु ए 5.21c 
पुण्यदर्शनसंवादन्‌ U 4.433 
पुण्यधम्मिष्ठसंवासे N 4.103¢ 
पुण्यपापैः प्रवर्त्तन्तो 3.61८ 
Ptaa मौक्तिकाः U 4.24d 
पुत्रलम्भ प्रनतैनम्‌ ए 2.39b 
पुनः शिवपुरं नयेत्‌ M 8.70 
पुनरेव हृदिस्थौ हि N 4.138a 


N isvasatattvasamhita 


पुनर्वधाति चेश्वरः N 2.71b 
पुनर्विस्तरशो ब्रूहि N 2.22c 
पुनद्चाभ्यन्तराणि ON 4.1714 
पुनद्चाष्टादशैभेंदे ए 1.27¢ 
पुनस्त्यक्का शिवं व्रतम्‌ N 1.1054 
पुनस्संसरते भूयो N 2.710 
पुनस्स्वग्गः FAFA N 2.688 
पुरुषः कलुषात्मकः N 2.930 
पुरुषः पञ्चमध्यतः N 1.270 
पुरुषच्चाद्धंचन्द्रके N 119f 
पुरुषस्तत्परत्वेन N 3.23¢ 
पुरुषस्त्रिगुणेबेद्धो IN 1.98c 
पुरुषो येन बध्यते N 2.43d 
पुष्करं हस्तसम्मितम्‌ ए 4.394 
पुष्पाणि सुरभीणि च M 2.5 
पूजयित्वा ततो ऽग्निं तु ए 2.25 
पूजयित्वा महेश्वरम्‌ N 4.160 
पूजयित्वा महेश्वरम्‌ N 4.310 
पूजयेच्च यथा शिवम्‌ M 8.174 
पूजयेत्स्तुनतेति च N 1.1074 
पूरयन्तो जगद्देह N 3.7० 
पूरेञ्चाभ्यन्तरेण तु N 4.112b 
पूर्णाहुतिं ततो दत्त्वा U 2-272 
पूर्णाहुत्यान्तु दत्ताया M 3:72 
Wurst ततो दद्याच्‌ M 3-50 
पूर्वध्यानादिरूपकैः N 3-380 
पूर्वेपञ्चिम Sate M 3-124 
पूर्वबीजमभिध्यानाज्‌ N 3.18¢ 
पूर्ववीजमभिध्यानाद N 3-312 
पूर्ववीजविचिन्तकः N 3-50 
पूर्वबीजसमुत्थिता N 3.20 
पूर्ववीजेन संयुतम्‌ N 3.560 
पूर्वमेव मया ज्ञातम्‌ M 8.8० 
ूर्वराज्येव क्रीडते N 2.824 
पूर्ववक्तमभिध्यानाद्‌ N 3-420 


Index of Padas 


पूर्वसंस्कारशुद्धे तु 2.23c 
पूर्वसिद्धान्नमस्कृत्वा N 4.31८ 
पूर्वाचार्यान्नमस्कृत्वा N 4.104¢ 
पूर्वाचार्यान्नमस्कृत्वा N 437a 
पूर्वास्यं दक्षिणास्यं तु U 2.34a 
पूर्वास्यो भक्षयेद्विद्वान्‌ ए 2.332 
qd होमं तु कारयेत्‌ ए 2.154 
पूर्वोक्तं हि शिरः कृत्वा N 1.65८ 
पूर्वोक्तमर्चनम्भवेत्‌ U 3.160 
पूर्वोक्तविधिना qu: M 8.110 
पूर्वोक्तेन विधानेन M 4.4९ 
पूर्वोक्तेन विधानेन M 4.6० 
पूर्वोत्तरखवे देशे U 2.32 
पृथिव्यां यानि तीर्थानि U 4-42 
पृथिव्यादि शिवान्तञ्च N 2.238 
पृथ्वी कठिनरूपेण N 2.230 
पृथ्वी कठिनरूपेण N 3.10 
पृथ्वी पञ्चगुणान्विता N 2.17b 
पृथ्वी पञ्चगुणोत्कटा N 2.244 
पृष्ठे पृष्ठे करौ योज्य U 4.14० 
पैशुन्यं mur तथा N 1.1110 
पौष्टिके दक्षिणं द्वारम्‌ U 3.92 
प्रकाशन्तु भवेत्सत्त्वं N 2.852 
प्रकृतिः कृष्णवर्णा तु N 3-20a 
प्रकृतिः पुरुषञ्चैव U 5.38 
प्रकृतिं पुरुषं चैव U 2.28c 
प्रकृतिर्ध्वंजरूपिणी N 1.200 
प्रकृतिर्न्ञाभिमध्यस्था N 1.276 
प्रकृति्च समासतः N 2.104 
प्रकृतिस्तेन सोच्यते N 2.840 
प्रकृतिस्थं भवेद्धम्म M 6.38 
प्रकृतेद्धिषणा जाता N 2.118 


THAT कर्म कारितम्‌ U ४.130 
प्रकृत्या कारितम्मन्ये N 2.972 
प्रकृत्या ते विमुच्यन्ते 2.98c 
प्रकृत्या येन मुच्यते N 2.70d 
प्रकृत्यादौ शिवान्तञ्च N 4.1098 
TAIT हुत्वा वै M. 5.23८ 
प्रक्रिया गदिता त्वया ए 5.14 
प्रक्रिया च कथन्तेषु N 2.222 
प्रक्रिया न परञ्ज्ञानं U 4.524 
प्रक्रिया शिवदीक्षा च N 2.19¢ 
प्रक्रियां शोधयेद्ुधः U 4.484 
प्रक्रियाध्वानमन्त्रा्च U 1.9c 
प्रक्रिययोगमेव च ए 5.20 
प्रक्रियाव्यापिनो मन्त्रा U 134a 
प्रज्ञा चास्य विवर्द्धते N 4.1340 
प्रणवं किल मोक्षदम्‌ N 4.890 
प्रणवे च विनिक्षिप्य M 5.142 
प्रणीतः सुखडुःखदः M 5.180 
प्रणीतां चोत्तरे न्यसेत्‌ U 2.250 
प्रणीताञ्चोत्तरे न्यसेत्‌ M 3.34 
प्रतिग्रहे प्रायश्वित्ती ए 4.35९ 
प्रतिज्ञाब्रतमारूढो N 1.105€ 
प्रतिमासेन सिद्यन्ते N 4.82a 
प्रतिमोशीरजान्न्यसेत्‌ U 4.30d 
प्रतिष्ठा सकला स्मृता ॥\ 4.20 
प्रतीची तेन सिंद्यति U 3-14 
प्रत्यक्षं तद्भवेत्तस्य M 7.220 
प्रत्यक्षन्तस्य जायते N 3-194 
प्रत्यक्षन्तस्य जायते N 3.22 
प्रत्यक्षन्तस्य जायते N 3-580 
प्रत्यक्षन्तस्य जायते N 4-380 
प्रत्यक्षम्भवते तस्य N 44448 
प्रत्यक्षलिखितानि तु N 1.30b 


611 


612 


प्रत्ययस्तु तदा भवेत्‌ N 4-141d 
प्रत्रः — कानि च N 470d 
प्रत्याहारे ऽक्षसंयमः N 4.118d 
प्रथमं मूलसूत्र तु U 7.20 
प्रथमा तु कला सूक्ष्मा \ 4.7० 
प्रपञ्चातीतगोचरम्‌ N 2-34 
प्रभाते कृतजाप्यस्तु M 3-144 
प्रभिन्नानि सहस्रशः U 1.314 
प्रमाणम्पश्यते क्कचित्‌ N 3.260 
प्रमाणाष्टकविद्याष्टौ M 5-154 
प्रलम्बे चैव विष्णौ तु M 5-202 
प्रवक्ष्यामि निवोधतः N 2.230 
प्रवक्ष्यामि निबोधत N 4.1324 
प्रवत्त॑स्तानि सर्वतः N 2.974 
wade गुणाष्टकम्‌ N 4.1354 
प्रवितते प्रभाते च M 5.20 
प्रवेशये ऽन्नपानानि N 4.1238 
wa गुह्यतरं विभो N 2.220 
प्रसादात्प्रब्रवीहि मे N 4.694 
प्रसादाद्दक्तुमर्हसि M 1.14 
प्रसादाद्दक्तुमहसि N 4.894 
प्रसृतं सर्वकायन्तु N 1.310 
प्रसृतन्दक्षिणं बाहुं N 1.602 
प्रसृता त्रीणि चाङ्गुलीं N 1.720 
प्रसृते च तथा जङ्घे N 1.532 
— प्रसृतिसंयुतैः M 3.10९ 
प्रसृते मध्यमे युते U 4.21b 
प्रहारोइन्धनाशकैः N 2.740 
्राकृतस्स तु विज्ञेयो N 2.69c 
प्राकृता जायते सिद्धिर्‌ N 4.80c 
i TU 5.9b 
प्राकृतन तु वीजेन ए 5.7८ 


Nisvasatattvasamhita 


प्राकप्रतीची स्मृता रेखा U 3.2c 
प्रागुदग्दक्षिणामुखः U 4.24b 
प्राणमेकन्निरुन्धयेत्‌ N 4.139b 
प्राणमेव जयेत्पू्वेज्‌ N 4.1308 
प्राणरोधन्तु कारयेत्‌ N 4.140b 
प्राणरोधे तु सम्पूर्ण्ण N 4.1142 
प्राणव्यानञ्च सर्वेगम्‌ N 4.1314 
प्राणसमानौ च नाभितः N 4.1g1b 
प्राणस्यैव हि चेष्टितम्‌ N 4.1220 
प्राणादीनान्तु पञ्चाना ४४ 4.121¢ 
प्राणाद्यास्संस्थिता ह्येते N 4.119c 
प्राणापाने तु संयोज्य N 4437a 
प्राणापानौ गुदे ध्याये N 4.1318 
प्राणापानौ निरुद्धयेत्‌ N 4.1380 
प्राणायामन्तु मूर्तिना U 4.30 
प्राणायामख्चतुर्थस्तु N 4.1130 
प्राणायामस्तु धारणः U 4.50 
प्राणायामस्त्रयः स्मृतः N 4.1110 
प्राणायामैख्च धारितैः N 4.118b 
प्राणिहिन्सारतो नित्यं  2.78¢ 
प्राणोदानञ्च कण्ठे च N 4.131¢ 
प्रादेशम्मध्यग्रन्थितम्‌ ए 4-420 
प्राप्रोति परमं स्थानं N 1.792 
प्राय्चित्ताक्षमाला च M 4-182 
प्राशनं चूडमेव च M 4-94 
प्राशनच्ूडकर्म्मेञ्च U 318a 
प्राश्य ferar निरीक्षयेत्‌ M. 3126 
प्रासादे वा मनोरमे ए 2.5b 
प्रीतिर्दानन्धृतिमेधा N 2.86c 
प्रेक्षकान्तन्निरीक्षयेत्‌ N 4.72b 
प्रेरकः पुण्यपापाभ्यां N 1.902 
प्रेरको gfe संस्थितः N 3.63 
प्रेषयित्वासमयज्ञा M 1.128 
Were ललितं चैव U 1.302 


Index of Padas 


qd: पुरुष उच्यते N 4.95d 
खुतकोटिसमायोगात्‌ N 4.139¢ 
फकारन्दिव्यविमलं N 1.58c 
फङ्वारेण समायुक्तं M 7.166 
फलाहारो पञ्चतपो M 7.69 
बकारमुरसि स्थितम्‌ N 1.58d 
बध्यते मुच्यते सो हि N 3.25c 
बध्यन्ते जालयोगतः N 1.7७ 
बध्यमानेषु पाशेषु N 1.6 
बध्वा शिवपदं व्रजेत्‌ ए 4.220 
बन्धते तक्कवादिनां N 1.93b 
बन्धते दहते चैव ॥ 1.30 
बन्धते सप्तधा सा तु N 2.632 
बन्धदाहुन्तु HANT: N 1.12 
बलिदाने पशोरपि N 1.1040 
बहुपादभुजानना N ३.2० 
बहुरूपं जटाधारन्‌ N 3.45¢ 
बालाग्रशतभागस्य N 3.278 
बाहुं चोपरिसंस्थितम्‌ N 1.360 
बाहुं संकुच्य लक्षयेत्‌ N 1.580 
बाहुन्दक्षिणमध्यतः N 1.610 
बिन्दु weft संस्थितः N 1.25 
बिन्दु सदाशिवं देवम्‌ N 4.972 
बिन्डुत्रयेण सिद्धेत U 3-120 
बिन्डुन्देवस्य लक्षणम्‌ N 3.714 
बिन्दुरेखा तु स्फाटिकी N 4-744 
बिन्दुषण्नादशक्तिख N 4.920 
बिन्दोख्चेश्वर विद्या च N 2408 
बीजमुद्रान्‌ तथा बद्धा M 6.256 
बीजमुद्रेति विख्याता U 4.112 
बीजान्तेन समालभेत्‌ M 726b 
बुद्धिरध्यवसायेन N 2.63¢ 


613 


वुद्धिञ्चैव विकल्पयेत्‌ N 4.12d 
द्धी न्द्रियाणि पञ्चैव N 2.138 
बुद्धी न्द्रियास्तथा पञ्च N 2.35९ 
बुद्या वैकारिकेण च N 1.984 
बुद्धा भक्तिमयं M 8.08 
बुद्धा भक्तिमयं शिष्यम्‌ M 8.10८ 
वोधनामलदीपनम्‌ ए 4.30b 
ब्रह्मचर्यादिभिर्देहन्‌ M 7.278 
ब्रह्मभिस्तु विसर्जयेत्‌ M 2.10 
ब्रह्मभिस्साधयेच्चरुम्‌ M 3.112 
ब्रह्मवध्यासहस्रेण M 7.3० 
ब्रह्मविष्णुपुरं नीत्वा M 5.7० 
ब्रह्मविष्णुसुराः wd M 1.20 
ब्रह्महा यदि धारयेत्‌ N 4.790 
ब्रह्मा विष्णुञ्च रुद्रश्च N 4.932 
ब्रह्मा विष्णुस्तथा dhat U 1.352 
बरह्माणं दक्षिणे न्यसेत्‌ U 2.244 
ब्रह्माणं वुद्धिसंस्थन्तु N 3-184 
ब्रह्माणं स्थापयेद्यामे M 3.20 
ब्रह्माण्डं भेदयेत्ततः M 5.89 
ब्रह्माण्डे चैव ऊकारस्‌ U 1.153 
ब्रह्मादर्के दिण्डिमुण्डिः M 5.170 
ब्रह्माद्यानि पुनः पुनः N 3-35 
ब्राह्मणः श्वपचस्समौ N 4-560 
बराह्मणे वृत्तिसम्पन्ने ए 5-472 
ब्राह्मणो ऽपि न मोक्षभाक्‌ M 1-164 
ब्राह्मणो मायवान्‌ यस्तु M 8.89 
भकारं कायवर्जितम्‌ N 1.594 
भक्तिप्रह्वेण चेतसा N 4-660 
भक्षाभक्षं तथा शौचं M 4-18 
U 3.०० 
भक्ष्यभोज्यानि चैव हि U 49b 
magg सर्वज्ञ N 1.168 
भगवन्वक्रुमर्हेसि N 4-1450 


614 


भवन्ति निर्मलाः शुद्धाः N 4-54 
भवन्ति पुरुषोत्तमे N 2.874 
भवेद्चाध्म्म चेष्टितम्‌ N 2-790 
भस्मदेहे ततोद्धरेत्‌ M 5240 
M 3340 
भारयानं वहत्यपि N 2.804 
भास्करोदयसन्निभम्‌ N 4-330 
भिक्षां यस्य तु गृह्णाति M 7.24€ 
भित्वा तत्त्वं तु शक्तयः M 6-44 
भिद्यमानैर्न सिद्धति U 2-4०4 
भिन्नदेहे न संशयः U 5-4०4 
भिन्नदेहे शिवं ब्रजेत्‌ M 5-260 
भुजं चैवोद्ध॑दक्षिणम्‌ N 1.454 
भुजमध्ये निकुञ्चयेत्‌ \ 1.540 
भुजान्तलीनजठरङ्]\ 1.46€ 
भुवनानि विचित्राणि N 2.182 
भू कालं रज एव च M 1.100 
भूत तन्मात्र वाजीनि N 3.59c 
भूततन्मात्रवर्जितः N 2.95 
भूतम्भव्यम्भविष्यञ्च N 3.19c 
भूतादिर्धिषणादपि N 2.110 
भूतादेश्शब्दतन्मात्रं N 2.116 
भूतानाम्प्रभृतिक्रमात्‌ N 2.564 
भूतानि आदिवीजस्तु N 4.942 
भूलोके च भुवे तथा M 5.65 
भूल्लोके लिङ्गरूपिणः N 1.910 
भूलम्भं दधिभक्षणम्‌ U 2.374 
भूकुटीकरालवक् N 3.45a 
भेदनम्‌ परमं स्मृतम्‌ M 5.80 
भेदयेत्‌ परमेश्वरम्‌ M 6.169 
मेरीशंखमृदङ्ग TN 2.40a 
भैरवादिगणा मुख्या U 1.34c 


NiSvasatattvasamhitg 


भोजिता तु भविष्यति M 7.234 
भ्रमते घटियन्त्रवत्‌ N 2.102 
भ्रामयन्मन्त्रमुद्राभिर्‌ M 8.4० 
भ्रामयेच्चतुरो TAT U 3.38 
yar: सन्धिं शिरः कृत्वा N 1.348 
भूमध्ये बिन्दुयुक्तेन N 4440a 
मकारः संस्थितो मायां U 1.162 
मकारं कक्षया विधिः च 1.604 
मणिबन्धं शिरः कृत्वा N 1.55९ 
मणिरलप्रदीपेषु U 5.268 
मणेरपि न कामित्वन्‌ N 2.89 
मण्डनानि विशेषतः N ३.294 
मण्डलं पूजनन्तथा M 1.104 
मत्वा चेश्वरविज्ञानं N 3.62c 
मत्समो नास्ति दुःखितः N 2.600 
मदमात्सर्यदारुणः U 2.310 
मदमात्सर्यमेव च N 1.1104 
मदमुन्मादचेष्टवान्‌ N 2.910 
मदमोहेषु संयोज्य M 5.13 
मद्यासूक्पानलेपञ्च U 2.382 
मधुरादौ चतुर्विधा M 1.184 
ATTACH चैव N 2.496 
मध्यग्रन्थ्युपरि स्थितम्‌ N 1.324 
मध्यदेशे यदा पुमान्‌ U 5.384 
मध्यदेशे यदा ह्यात्मा ए 5.382 
मध्यमां योजये Sys N 1.734 
मध्यमे ऽनामिके द्वे द्वे U 4-120 
मध्ये देवं तु पूजयेत्‌ M 4-44 
मध्ये पङ्कजभूषितम्‌ M 4-30 
मध्ये शून्येन सिद्धति U 3-13? 
मनवेषु च तं नयेत्‌ M 5-164 
मनञ्जिन्तयते यानि N 4-126 
मनञ्चेन्द्रियगोचरात्‌ N 4.113b 
मनआैकादशो ज्ञेयम्‌ N 2.148 


Indez of Padas 


मनसा-द्‌-उदकेन वा N 4.40b 
मनस्तु कथितं UAT N 2.53c 
मनस्सारथि चोदितः N 3.59d 
मनेच्छाचिन्तितप्राप्तिः N 4.135¢ 
मन्त्र बिन्दु अतीतञ्च N 4.108a 
मन्त्रकोट्या ह्यनेकशः U 141b 
मन्त्रचर्यासमायुक्ता ए 4.45c 
मन्त्रभाषपदानि तु ए 1.210 
मन्त्राख्ये पञ्चमे und U 1.19 
मन्त्राणां तत्त्वलक्षणम्‌ M 6.15 
मन्त्रातीतमञ्च Wen M 4.7७ 
मन्त्रात्मा चेतनञ्चैव M 4.7० 
मन्त्रास्तस्य वशास्सर्वे N 1.776 
मन्थानं च तथैवेह U 2.19¢ 
मन्दरे गहने तथा M 5.200 
मन्यमानञ्चराचरम्‌ N 4.554 
मम त्वभ्यधिको कुतः N 2.590 
ममत्वमनुवर्त्तिनाम्‌ N 2.604 
ममत्वेनैव संमूढो N 2.102९ 
मया जिताञ्च सङ्गामे N 2.58८ 


मरीची चोपमन्युञ्च U 1.38 
मरुतं कृष्णरूपेण N 3.138 
मर्त्या बहुविधा इष्टाः M 8.22 
ACT प्रका शितम्‌ U 1.404 
मद्दलन्दहर वेणुं N 2.40९ 
मस्तकं बिन्डुरूपन्तु N 140a 
मस्तक षोडशाङ्गुलम्‌ U 2.200 
महागिरिवरे रम्ये U 2.48 
महादेवत्रयेषु च M 5.110 
महानिद्रा विमुच्यते N 4.470 
महाभूतगुणेन च N 2.95b 


615 


महामोहञ्च दारुणं N 1.110b 

च U 5a7a 
महिषोष्टप्ररोहणम्‌ ए 2.390 
मांसे चैव तथास्थिभ्यो N 2.248 
मातापितृसुतान्दारां N 1.93c 
मातृका परमो मन्त्रो U 2.18 
मातृका यैस्तु कथ्यते ए 1.204 
मातृकायागमाख्याहि U 2.1८ 
मातृकायाष्टकञ्च यत्‌ U 5.15 
मातृकाविग्रहं ह्येतच्‌ N 1.756 
मातृकासम्भवाः सर्वे ए 1.41८ 
मातृभिर्गुह्यकैचैव U 1.36a 
मानसं वाचिकद्चैव N 2.96c 
मानी दम्भसमायुक्तो N 2.89c 
मायजा विद्यजा तथा N 4.810 
माया कालस्तथैव च N 240b 
माया ग्रन्थि दुरत्यया N 3.360 
माया तेन विलंघिता U 5.244 
माया विद्या च ईशश्च U 5.3९ 
मायां frase पाशो ऽयम्‌ U 2.292 
मायातत्त्वं मकारस्तु U 1218 
मायाध्यानं समादधेत्‌ U 5-260 
मायाध्यानेन साधकः U 5.264 
मायानृतसहुस्रेषु M 7.59 
मायापाशस्तदुच्छिदः N 1.94b 
मायापाशस्समाख्यात N 1.95€ 
मायाप्रतिम कारयेत्‌ (7) U 5-250 
मायाविने शठे चैव M 8.7० 
माङ्कण्डो ऽगस्ति काश्यपः U 1.384 
माला शान्तिकपौ्टिके U 4.270 

: U 4.28d 

मासमेकं सुयन्त्रितः N 4.80b 
मासाद्ववति रूपस्वी N 3.662 
मासैकेन ततः पश्येत्‌ \ 3.50० 


616 


माहेन्द्रीं कण्ठदेशे तु N 47750 
मुकुटङ्कुण्डलच्चैव M 2.69 
मुक्तः तु N 2.714 
मुक्तिदीक्षामतो वक्ष्ये प 5.18 
मुक्तिमण्डलमुत्तमम्‌ M 4.1b 
मुक्तिरित्यभिशब्दिता N 2.99b 
मुक्तो ऽहङ्कारवन्धनात्‌ N 3.17d 
मुक्का मातृकविज्ञानन्‌ N 1.809 
मुखवाद्यानि रम्याणि N 2.41¢ 
मुच्यते न च मुच्यते N 2.94b 
मुच्यते सर्वबन्धैस्तु N 4.3० 
मुदां द्रव्याकृतिं चैव U 4.340 
मुद्रैषा अमृता स्मृता U 4-140 
मुष्कसूत्र शिरः कृत्वा N 1.642 
मुष्टिन्दक्षिणपाणिना N 1.430 
मुष्टिन्दक्षिणपाणौ तु N 1.57¢ 
मुहुर्तसन्ध्यतिथयः U 5.212 
मूत्रोच्चारविसर्गे च N 2.27¢ 
ूर्ख्चाहन्निराकृतिः N 2.594 
ूत्तिष्वष्टासु योजयेत्‌ M 535b 
मूर्घि चित्तं समालम्ब्य N 4.17८ 
ant द्वारं विभिद्यते N 4.142b 
qf द्वारं समालम्ब्य N 4.1412 
मूधिङ्गत्वा निवर्त्तते N 417b 
मालम्ब्य यत्नतः U 5-44 
मूलयागं प्रवक्ष्यामि U 2.28 
मूलसूत्रं तु नामतः U 1.15 
मूलसूत्र यत्ख्यातम्‌ U 5.522 
मूलाच्छाखा Wet ए 2.10 
TIFT वदेज्ज्ञानं N 1.1012 
मृगपक्षिसमाकुला N 3.2b 


Nisvasatattvasamhita 


मृगो ऽधर्म्मेः प्रकीर्तितः 9 3.600 
मृत्युकाले विचेष्टितम्‌ N 4.1284 
aga कठिनखैव N 2.444 

--मेकं विचिन्तयेत्‌ N 4.584 

— मेखलं कृत्वा U 4.30८ 
मेखलाजिनवासांसि M 4.102 
मेधा कान्तिस्तथारोग्यं N 4.35८ 
मो औकारे निरीक्षयेत्‌ N 1.394 
मोक्षदस्स प्रकीर्तितः N 1.10 
मोक्षदस्सकलो जाप्य U 5.322 
मोक्षदानि भवन्ति च N 1.819 
मोक्षमार्गपथस्य तु N 4.1104 
मोचकस्तु गुरुः ATIN 1.780 
मोहेन लोभेन च यो हि वक्ष्यते N 
4.160b 

मौनकाले तु साधकः U 4.350 
स्ेच्छम्चैव त्वमायवान्‌ M 8.89 
स्रेच्छस्यैव तु दातव्यं M 8.80 

य --- M 7.00 

यः पश्येत्परमं सूक्ष्मं N 4.1488 
यः स्रायीत शिवाम्भसा U 4.44 
यं ज्ञात्वा न तु शोचते N 4.244 
यं ज्ञात्वा मुच्यते जन्तु ए 5-510 
यं ध्यात्वा मोक्षमायान्ति N 4.98€ 
यं यं पश्यति चक्षुषा M 7.17 
यं यं स्पृशति हस्तेन M 7172 
यं विदित्वा विमुच्यन्ते M 6.10 
यं विदित्वा शिवो भवेत्‌ N 1.450 
यं विदित्वामृतीभवेत्‌ 1: 11 M 1.11d 
यकारः पुरुषः स्मृतः ए 1.10b 
यक्षरक्षमहोरगैः U 1.354 

यच्च किंचि व्यवस्थितम्‌ N 4-504 
यच्च रूपेण संस्थितम्‌ N 4-13? 
यजते वैदिकैर्यज्ञैः N 1.1072 
यजेत्‌ यज्ञां सदक्षिणाम्‌ M 6.18 


Index of Padas 


यत्‌ कर्म्म परिकीत्तितम्‌ U 3.23b 
यतः शास्त्राणि वाङ्कयम्‌ U 1.21b 
यतस्सर्वजगोत्पत्तिः N 2.84a 
यत्कर्म परिकीतितम्‌ U 2.41b 
यत्तत्वाद्वातिरिच्यते N 2.20d 
qued श्रूयते भुवि M 6.10b 
यत्त्वया चोदितो ह्यहम्‌ M 1.124 
यत्र तत्र स्थितो देशे N 4.14a 
यत्र तत्राश्रमे रतः N 4.140 

यत्र देशे व्रजेत्सो हि M 7.242 
यत्र नास्ति स तत्रैव N 4.13¢ 
यत्र वण्णो न दृश्येत N 1.23c 
यत्र वा रमते मनः 1:17 M 1.174 
यत्र वा रुचिते स्थाने ए 2.5० 
यथा तस्य शरीरे तु N 117c 
यथा मातृकवेदने N 179b 

यथा विहाय सफलं N 1.829 
यथाकामं समालिखेत्‌ M 4.20 
यथाध्वाने व्यवस्थिताः U 134b 
यथावत्तन्निबोधतः N 2.39d 
यथावदनुपूर्वशः N 2.36d 

यथेष्टं तु ततो होम M 3.8c 
यथेष्टम्भूतले सदा N 4.50 

यथैव परमेश्वरः N 4.250 

यथेव वसुधा भवेत्‌ N 3.3१ 
यथोक्ते कर्म्मणा कृते U 4.33b 
यदन्त परिकीर्तितम्‌ M 6.11b 
यदन्तं परिकीर्तितम्‌ M 6.130 
यदा शान्तं प्रबुद्येत M 8.5० 
यदि देव निगद्यते ए 24b 

यदि यो ऽन्ते --- ष 4.9d 

यदि स्यात्संशयो भवेत्‌ M 7.189 


617 


यदिच्छेत्सिद्धिमात्मन N 3.21b 
यदैव याद्शन्द्रव्य U 4.16 
यङ्गत्वा न निवत्त॑ते N 430b 
यद्येव क्रीडते नित्यम्‌ N 3.612 
यन्दृष्ठा मुच्यते जन्तु M 4.1८ 
कस्यचिदाख्यातन N 4-101c 
यष्टा चैव भवन्ति हि U 2.20 
यष्टा यज्ञा सदक्षिणा M 7.७ 
यष्टा NYAGA तु M 7.73 
यस्तत्वं जपते सदा M 710d 
यस्तिष्ठेत शतं समाः M 7.65 
यस्त्वयोक्तो हि मोक्षदः U 1.45 
यस्मिन्दृश्यति जन्तवे N 2.924 
यस्मिन्नेतानि धर्म्माणि N 2.870 
यस्य तत्वं हृदि स्थितम्‌ M 7.54 
यस्य तत्वं हृदि स्थितम्‌ M 7.94 
यस्य नित्यं गुरोस्सदा N 4.630 
यस्य लेख्ये ऽपि तिष्ठति M 8.204 
यस्याक्षरस्य यागो ऽयं U 2.10 
या च sat भविष्यति M 1.190 
या पातयति भूतानि N 3.356 
यागं योगं जपं ध्यानं U 5.44c 
यागभूमिं प्रलिप्यादौ M 1.214 
यागभूमौ स्वपेद्ुधः M 3.14¢ 
याज्ञिकां सर्वकर्म्मसु ए 4.414 
याथातथ्येन मे शृणु ए 1.40 
यानं Ba गृहं शय्या U 2.40€ 
यानि शब्दानि Ted N 2.36b 
यामवाप्य विमुच्यन्ते M 51c 
याव देवन्न विन्दति N 2.71d 
भवेच्छाया U 5.8० 
यावत्तत्वं निरामयम्‌ M 5:20 
यावत्पञ्चशतङ्गतः N 41330 
qaga तलं गतः N 1.49b 


618 


यावन्न सृजते TAN 21000 
यावन्न सृजतेश्वरः N 2-980 

युक्त वै परमेश्वरम्‌ M 6.22f 

युक्तो ध्यानपरायणः N 4.104d 
gat ध्यानपरायणः N 4.314 

युद्धं दूतञ्च माया N 2.778 

ये चान्य मोक्षवादिनः N 3.अ० 

ये न पश्यन्ति लक्षस्थान्‌ N 4.398 
ये पाशैर्न विमोचिताः N 1.140 
येन जीवति तत्पुरम्‌ N 3-24 
येन बध्यति पुङ्गलः N 2-490 

येन वध्यति पुन्नलः N 2.570 

येन बध्यति स पुमान्‌ N 2.504 
येन यत्‌ कर्म्म वाञ्छितम्‌ ए 3-144 
येन यष्टेन Yat U 2.20 

येन येन श्रुतं तन्त्रं U 1.33 

येन येनावधारितम्‌ 1.330 

येन विज्ञातमात्रेण M 6.5९ 

येन सिद्विञ्ज शाश्वती N 3.340 
येन सिध्यन्ति साधकाः U 4.454 
येनात्मा तु निवध्यते N 2.460 
येनासौ बध्यते क्षेत्री \ 2.522 

यो ऽधीते स महादेवो M 8.19 
यो ऽन्यः परतरो भेदो ए 1.324 
यो ऽब्दमेकन्तु चिन्तयेत्‌ N 3.510 
यो sig: स शिवः स्वयम्‌ M 8.190 
यो दद्याद्देदपारगे M 7.25b 

यो ध्यायेत चतुष्कलम्‌ N 4.4b 
यो निन्दति शिवम्देवन्‌ N 1.103८ 
योग एव तदा सेव्यो M 718c 
योग: ख्यातो महांस्तव N 4.1090 
योगगम्यं सनातनम्‌ N 2.4b 


Nisvasatattivasamhita 


योगञ्चैव कथम्भवेत्‌ N 431b 
योगञ्चैव महेश्वर N 4.26b 
योगपट्टं यथासुखम्‌ N 445b 
योगसद्भावमाख्याहि N 4.99c 
योगसिद्धिमपेक्षते N 4.61d 
योगसिद्धिमवाधुयात्‌ U 5.7७ 
योगसिद्धिमवाप्नोति U 5.45c 
योगस्तु बहुधा ख्यातो N 4.99a 
योगाष्टकञ्च सुशिवं M 5.10a 
योगिनां खमलङ्कतः U 5.33d 
योगी दिव्येन चक्षुषा ४ 3.28d 
LI योगे तु ये पाशा N 1.29 
योगेन च भवेत्सिद्धिर्‌ N 4.48 
योजकस्तु परे तत्त्वे N 4.38c 
योजकस्तु भवेत्सो हि U 5.32c 
योजको fg धनञ्जयः ॥ 4.127 
योजनं जननं तथा U 2.210 
योजयित्वा च शः स्मृतः N 1.650 
योजयेत्सर्व॑जन्तवान्‌ N 1.894 
योज्य ब्रह्मपतौ शिवे M 5-124 
योज्य योज्य पुनस्तत्वाद्‌ M 5.20 
योनिं वै कल्पयित्वा तु 2.20€ 
योनिं स्थाप्याग्निमध्यतः M 4.8b 
योनीषु च ततोद्धूत्य M 5136 
योन्यां मन्थे च सुव्रते U 2-204 
रकार ईश्वरान्ते तु U 1.160 
रकार ईश्वरो ज्ञेयो U 1.11 
रकारं साम्प्रतं शुणु N 1.620 
रकारञ्जङ्कसंयुतम्‌ N 1.624 

रक्त च हृदयन्तस्य N 3.20€ 
रक्तमाल्यानि वस्त्राणि U 2.39 
रजोधर्मञ्च मे शृणु N 2-889 
रल्लानि विविधार्हाणि M 2.6९ 
रसं गृह्णाति संस्थितः N 2.544 


Index of Padas 


रसतन्मात्र जिह्वायां N 2.54c 
रसतन्मात्र शुक्ककम्‌ N 3.15b 
रसतन्मात्रकन्ततः N 242b 
रसतन्मात्रसम्भूता N 2.6c 
रसस्य विषयो ह्येष N 2.50c 
रसस्वेदवसेषु च N 2.25b 
रागद्वेषविवर्जितः N 4.54b 
रागद्वेषौ प्रक्षीयेते N 4.1188, 
राजसं गुणलक्षणम्‌ N 2.900 
राज्यङ्कत्वा तु सामन्तम्‌ N 2.81९ 
fear: सिंहाश्च वानराः N 4.574 
रिचीकोर्वङ्गिरान्तञ्च U 1.382 
रितुकालमनुप्राप्य N 2.92 
रिषिदेवगणां गिराम्‌ U 1.324 
रिषिदेवेषु कीर्तितः U 1.310 
रिषिभिश्च पुनः प्राप्तं ए 1.25c 
रुद्वाक्षशङ्कपद्याक्षाः U 4.24€ 
रुद्रेण परिकीर्तितम्‌ U 1.27d 
रुद्रोङ्कारे च सकले M 5.210 
रूपं गृह्णात्युपागतम्‌ N 2.550 
रूपं शक्तेश्चतुङ्गिधम्‌ N 4.27f 
रूपं शब्दञ्च मे शृणु N 4.1194 
रूपकञ्चैव मे वद N 2.14 
रूपतन्मात्र चक्षुभ्यां N 2.55 
रूपतन्मात्र रक्तन्लु N 3.5० 
रूपतन्मात्रतो ज्ञेयन्‌ N 2.16 
रूपतन्मात्रमेवाहु N 2.12 
रूपयौवनशालिनी N 3.400 
रूपस्य विषयो ह्येष N 2.492 
रूपस्वी बाहुशालिनः N 2.580 
रूपाकृतिविभक्तानि N 2.48 
wT द्वितीयस्तु qd M 5.156 


619 


रूपे शक्तिषु तं नीत्वा ॥॥ 5.16a 
रूपेण च समन्विता N 3.315 
रेखा दन्तान्तरेषु TN 1.38d 
रेखा या च मधोगता N 1.70d 
रेचनात्पूरणाद्रोधात्‌ N gana 
रेतोभूतः प्रविष्टस्तु M 6.17० 
रोचना पाइुके तथा M 7.110 
रोमहर्षश्व स्वेदञ्च \ 4.1252 
रौद्रा चैवोद्धरित्वा तु M 5.4० 
रौरवं माकुटं तथा ए 1.290 
— & वामन्तु कारयेत्‌ N 1.610 
लकारः काल उच्यते U 1.104 
लकारन्दिव्यरूपिणम्‌ N 1.634 
लकारस्य तु यदूपं N 1.694 
लक्षणानि निवोध मे N 2.640 
लक्षध्यानच्चतुर्थकम्‌ U 5.6१ 
लक्षहोमे चतुर्गुणम्‌ U 2.140 
लक्षा प्रोक्ता महेश्वर N 2.10 
लक्षां लक्षान्तु निष्कस्य M 7.258 
लक्षायुतशतानि च U 1.364 
लक्षालक्षं महेश्वर N 4.99 
लक्ष्यालक्ष्यं च देवेश ए 5.2० 
लब्धानुज्ञो न सङ्कामे N 1.100¢ 
ललाट ईश्वर ज्ञेयो N 1.262 
लवणं कटु तिक्तकम्‌ N 2.494 
* ल वृ(?) — याणां M 7.138 
लिकारन्तु रसास्वादि N 1.388 
लिङ्गं वेदीं जपं तथा M 417d 
लिङ्गच्छायाविलङ्घी च N 141058 
लिङ्गद्वयन्तु यो ध्यायेत्‌ N 3-56a 
लीकारं घण्टिका सह N 138b 
लीयते च शिवे देवि U 5406 
लोकपालांस्तृतीयके M 4-50 


620 


लोकानुग्रहका रकः N 4-394 
लोके चानुग्रहङ्करु M 8730 
लोचने aft संस्थिताः N 4126b 
लोभाद्दप्पेण वा पुनः N 4.87b 
लोभेन च समन्वितः N 2.90d 
vies त्रपुसीसञ्च U 4.268 
लौकिकाग्नि तु Tedq U 2.23b 
वंशध्वनिसमप्रख्यः N 3.658 
वकारं पायुरुच्यते N 1.64b 
वकारो नियतिविन्द्याल्‌ U 1.100 
वज्चाग्निञ्चैव दावाग्निर्‌ U 2.226 
वञ्चको दुःखदाता च N 2.798 
वत्सरार्धा सुयन्त्रितः N 4.30b 
वत्सरार्धान्न संशयः N 3.67b 
वने तिष्ठन्ति मानवाः M 7.260 
-वन्दयेत्सन्ध्याम्‌ ए 4.3 
वर्गातीतं षडन्तं च M 6.14c 
** वर्गादिसंयुक्त M 6.19¢ 
वर्गान्त पञ्चकेनैव M 6.16a 
वर्गेण सप्तमेनैव M 6.212 
वर्णषड्डन्नियोजयेत्‌ U 1.20b 
व्ण्णैकैकन्निरीक्षयेत्‌ N 1.23b 
वर्तुलं चतुरश्रं वा M 4.28 
व्तुलञ्चतुरस्रं वा U 3-3० 
वर्तुलीकृत्य भ्रामेत U 4.152 
वर्तुले जनितो ह्यग्निः ए 2.154 
वर्त्तते स त्वनीश्वरः N 2.82} 
तन्ते वुद्धियोगतः N 2.35d 
TUT तेजसन्निभम्‌ M 2.1 
quen निवोध मे ए ५.94 
aimag aT U 2126 


Nisvasatattvasamhita 


वलिरेखासमन्विता N 1.53d 
वशमायात्यसंशयः N 3.50d 
वशमायान्ति भृत्यवत्‌ N 4.60b 
वसिष्ठा --- U 1.37c 

वसेत्तत्रैव शुद्धात्मा ए 2.35c 
वस्त्राणि विविधानि च M 2.60 
af स्थाप्य समूहयेत्‌ M 3.25 
वक्किरूपं प्रजायते U 5.20b 
वहिस्सज्नायते तत्र ॥ 2.7c 
वह्लौ होमं तु कारयेत्‌ U 2.23d 
वाक्पाणिपादपायुक्च N 2.13c 
वागीशस्तु द्वितीयके N 3.66b 
वागीशीति निगद्यते M 6.17b 
वागीश्वर्यां नियोजयेत्‌ M 5.134 
वागेन्द्रियं वदेद्वाणी N 2.302 
वागेन्द्रिये तथा afa N 3.92 
वागेशी जननी मम M 4.110 
वाग्विशुद्धमनक्षरम्‌ N 2.30 
वाङ्कयं सम्प्रवर्तते N 4.364 
वाचनाच्छूवणात्पुण्यं M 8.192 
वाचया यच्च गोचरम्‌ N 4.120 
वाथुलं तदनन्तरम्‌ U 1.284 
वाद्यं गीतं ततः कृत्वा M 2.108 
वाद्यं वाद्यन्ति चापरे M 1.54 
वानप्रस्थान्तभैक्षुकम्‌ U 3-204 
वाम --- N 1.61९ 

वामकक्षे विचक्षणः N 1.590 
वामञ्चैवोद्धंकारितम्‌ N 1.600 
वामतो कृष्णरूपिणी N 3.29b 
वामनासिकया पुटे N 4.1140 
वामबाहुं ततोर्द्धन्तु N 1.372 
वामबाहुन्निकुञ्चयेत्‌ N 1.474 
वामबाहुन्निकुञ्चयेत्‌ N 1.510 
वामबाहुम्प्रलम्बितम्‌ N 1-322 
वामबाहुस्तु मध्यतः N 1-364 


Index of Padas 


वामबाहुद्धकारिते N 1.64d 
वामया साधक बुधः M 5.3b 
वामस्कन्धे विचक्षणः N 1.674 
वामा तु विन्डुसंयुक्ता M 6.172 
वामाङ्गुष्ठात्‌ समारभ्य M 6.24९ 
वामे योनिन्तु कल्पयेत्‌ U 2.85 
वामेन पितृतर्पणम्‌ U 4.34 
वायवीन्धारये syè N 4115a 
वायुः सूर्यश्च चन्द्रमाः U 1.35b 
वायुभक्षाम्बुदस्थितम्‌ N 3.424 
वायुरग्नि ** प्रा * M 6.210 
वायुरूपमहेन्द्राप° U 5.28८ 
वायुरेभिः स्थितो देहे N 2.282 
वायुद्विगुणलक्षणम्‌ N 2.15 
वायुवद्‌ विचरेल्लोकां N 4.1352 
वायुस्पशैसमोपमः N 4-184 
वायूच्छुवासे निरुच्छ्वासे N 2.272 
वायूनाञ्च जयं कथम्‌ N 4.1000 
वारुणीं घण्टिकेषु च N 4.1154 
वालुकाशङ्राहीने N 4.102€ 
वासनादेव मुच्यते ए 5.13d 
वासयेत्समरसख्चाहं U 5.438 
वाससञ्चोपवीतञ्च ए 3.18c 

*** वा हविषन्द्रव्यज्‌ U 4.362 
विंशच्छूद्रेष दापयेत्‌ M 8.60 
विग्रह यो $भ्यसेत्सदा N 3.54b 
fast संलक्षयेद्दुधः U 4.29d 
Frater होममेव च M 4-180 
विध्लेशश्च पुनः पुनः N 4.1040 
विजयं प्रथमं तेषां ए 1.282 
विजया कालिरेव च 1.344 


621 


विजृम्भितः पुनश्चापि M 5.18८ 
विज्ञानं कुहक शिल्पं N 2.198 
विज्ञानध्यानमेवन्तु ए 5-3८ 
विज्ञेयस्तु द्विलक्षणः 
स्तु : N 2.28b 
TU 3.16d 
विदित्वा तु परं तत्वं M 7.182 
विदित्वा प्राकृतैवेन्धैर N 2.942 
विदित्वा वहुभिभेंदैर्‌ M 7.2a 
विदित्वा मुच्यते जन्तु N 1.398 
विदित्वा ह्यष्टभिभेंदैर्‌ M 7.262 
विद्धि कर्म्मेन्द्रियाणि च N 233b 
विद्या च तालुमध्यतः N 1.26b 
विद्या चैव निगद्यते N 4.974 
विद्या दक्षिणरेखिणी N 1.190 
विद्या शान्तिस्तथैव च N 3.720 
विद्या शान्तिस्तथैव च N 4.10 
विद्यादीक्षा भवेद्येषा M 4.16 
विद्यादीक्षासमास्तिके U 3-221 
विद्यादीक्षासमाप्षौ तु M 4-160 
विद्यान्वेषी स्वगर्गगतिः N 1.87¢ 
विद्याभ्यासञ्च लज्जा च N 2.656 
विद्यायां चैव क्षः प्रभुः U 136b 
विद्यायोगं समाख्यातं U 5.296 
विद्यासिद्धिमवाप्रोति N 3-414 
विद्यासिद्धिमवाप्रोति U 5-276 
विदयुत्पुञ्जसमप्रभम्‌ N 3.71b 
विदोशस्तेन वध्यते N 1.100d 
विद्येशाश्ज उमासुतः U 1-340 
विद्येश्वरं ततः पूज्य M 2-8९ 
तु M. 4.52 
विद्वेषी क्रोधनस्तथा N 2.88d 
विद्वेषोच्चाटमारणम्‌ M 7.12b 
विधिनानेन पूज्येत M 2.8a 
— विन्दते N 4-454 


622 


विपरीता तथैव हि U 4134 
विपरीताभिचारुके परीताभिचारुके ए 4.38d 
विपरीताभिचारुके U 4-410 
विपरीताभिचारुके ए 4:64 
विपरीताभिचारुके U 4-84 
विपरीताभिचारुके U 4.91 
विपरीताभिचारे तु U 4.40€ 
विपरीते परस्परम्‌ ए 443b 
बिप्रांब्चैवान्यलिङ्गस्थाँ N 1.1070 
विमले च ततो योज्य M 5.214 
fad वीक्ष्य निमील्याक्षो N 4.332 
वियत्स्थं पश्यते पुमान्‌ U 516b 
विरसं चन्द्रहासं च छ 1.290 
विलोमं गुरुणा सह M 8.180 
विवाहपाकयज्ञाञ्ज U 3.202 
विश्वरूपेण संस्थितम्‌ N 4.510 
विश्वे च तृकले TAT M 5.120 
विषग्रहादिसत्त्वानि N 3.46c 
विषये चेप्सितां सिद्धिज्‌ N 3.16० 
विषयो गन्धलक्षणः N 2.514 
विषसत्त्वानि नाशयेत्‌ N 3.40 
विषसत्त्वानि स्तम्भयेत्‌ N 3.3b 
विषादश्च भयञ्चैव N 7.1102 
Rea भयञ्चैव U 2.312 
विषुवं d faggur: U 5.38b 
U 5.14d 
N 2.77d 
वीणाडमरुकहस्तन N 3.532 
वीरभद्रमिति ख्यातं ए 1 29a 
वृत्त एष समाख्यातो U 3.112 
वृत्तार्धन्तु परित्यज्य 3.11८ 


IN 1.40c 


Ni$vas atattvasamhita 


वेणीबन्धन्ततः कृत्वा U 440a 
वेदशब्दसमन्वितम्‌ M 8.12d 
वेदादौ सर्वशास्त्रे च N 4.892 
वेदान्तं विदितं देव M 1.92 
वेधनं शिल्पकारितम्‌ N 2.314 
वैकारिकस्त दूर्धन्तु N 2.57 
वैकारिके तथा रुद्रो N 3.178 
वैद्यो ऽपि न फलं लभेत्‌ N 4.1530 
वैरागैश्वर्यमुच्यते M 6.30 
वैराग्यन्तु समाशृत्य ॥ 2.753 
वैराग्यात्त्यजते भोगान्‌ N 2.72c 
वैश्ये चैव दयायुक्ते 5.47c 
व्यक्ताव्यक्तानि यानि च N 2.42d 
व्याख्याता हि वरानने U 1.22b 
व्याप्रयज्ञोपवीतेन N 3.52c 

— व्या देशिकेन तु ए 3.69 
व्याधिमृत्युञ्च कालेन N 1.978 
व्यानस्यैतानि कर्माणि N 4.1250 
व्यापयित्वा जगत्सर्व N 4.510 
व्यावृत्तेन तु वक्तेण M 6.129 
व्योमव्यापि निराभासम्‌ N 2.3० 
व्योमव्यापी पिता मह्यं M 4-112 
व्योमेव निर्मलश्शुद्धः ए 4-574 
व्रतन्त्यत्का तु TT येत्‌ M 442b 
ब्रतम्पाशुपतं कृत्वा ए 3-214 
ब्रतम्पाशुपतम्म्रोक्तम्‌ N 1.90€ 
व्रतानि सम्यग्बुद्धा तु M 448e 
शक्ति पच्चे विराजते N 4-754 
शक्ति प्रह्नेन भासते N 4,330 
शक्ति चैव निबोध मे ए 5.39b 
शक्ति gfe महादेव U 5-28 
शक्तिज्ञानविवर्जिताः N 4-420 
शक्तिबीजेन साधकः N 4.28d 
शक्तिभावेन देशिकः N 41550 


Indez of Padas 


शक्तिमध्ये प्रतिष्ठितम्‌ N 4.76b 
शक्तिमूर्धि स्थितं शान्तं N 2.4a 
शक्तिर्मध्ये प्रतिष्ठिता N 4.70b 
शक्तिर्म्मणिरिव स्थिता N 2.80 
शक्तिश्च ---तपया (?) ज्ञेया N 1.256 
शक्तिश्न दशमा ज्ञेया ए 1.82 
शक्तिश्च दशमा स्मृता U 1.120 
शक्तिश्च सप्तमी ज्ञेया N 4.93c 
शक्तिसंस्कारमोदिते M 5.194 
शरक्तिसमरसं शुणु U 5.364 
शक्तिसमरसञ्चैव N 4.61c 
शक्तिसमरसन्तथा U 5.44 
शक्तिहीना न सिद्यन्ति U 5.410 
शक्तेः परतरः शिवः U 1.80 
शक्तेरपि वदेद्रूपं N 4.268 
शक्तेजायति बिन्दुकः N 2.9१ 
शक्तेर्जायति बिन्दुकः U 1.60 
शत्तया निष्कलतां याति U 4.484 
war योज्येत निष्कले U 1.170 
शत्या योज्येत निष्कले U 4.474 
wed विन्दते तु यः N 4.38 
शतधा कल्पितस्य च N 3.270 
शतरुद्रे षु सुव्रते M 5.9 
शतशो ऽथ सहस्रशः N 2.180 
शतशो ऽथ सहस्रशः U 1.39 
शतान्यष्टौ तु होमयेत्‌ M 5.234 
शतार्ध तत्र दृश्येत N 1.243 
शताष्टाधिकजस्तेन M 4.172 
शते द्वे दश स्रोकानां U 5.548 
शत्रवो दंष्ट्रिणो व्याघ्रा N 4.57€ 
Wasa पराजितः N 2.584 
शनैविंमुञ्चयेद्वायुं IN 4.114¢ 


623 


शब्द प्रब्रूहि शंकर 4.1000 
शब्दतन्मात्रसम्भूतम्‌ N 2.152 
शब्दमेतडुदाहृतम्‌ N an 
शब्दस्य विषयो ह्येष N 2.43० 
शब्दात्मकगुणो ह्येष N 2.29¢ 
शब्दान्ते निष्कलः प्रोक्तो ए 2.9० 
N 2.452 
शरीरस्थानि तत्त्वानि N 1.292 
शरीरे तु यथा स्थिताः N 1.294 
शस्त्रतोयविषाग्निभ्यो M 7.21 
शस्त्रदंष्टिणभेदेख N 3.13८ 
शान्तनादस्तु स स्मृतः N 3.650 
शान्ताय शिवभक्ताय M 8.15 
शान्ति मायाविशुद्धिका N 4.20 


` शान्तिकादिक्रमेणैव U 429a 


शान्तिके पौष्टिके ऽपि वा U 4.380 
शान्तिके पौष्टिके गन्धा ए 4.8c 
शान्तिके पौष्टिके चैव  2.16c 
शान्तिके पौष्टिके चैव U 4.25९ 
शान्तिके पौष्टिके तथा U 2.174 
शान्तिके पौष्टिके तथा U 3:13 
शान्तिके पौष्टिके देया U 4.9० 
शान्तिके पौष्टिके धूपा ए 4.7० 
शान्तिके पौष्टिके पुष्पा U 4.60 
शान्तिके पौष्टिके fag: 4-40 
शान्तिके पौष्टिके ह्येतास्‌ U 4.378 
शान्तिके मानसो जाप्य U 4.23€ 
शारीरं कर्म्म यत्कृतम्‌ N 2.960 


शास्त्रं परमडुल्लैभम्‌ U 1-234 
U 1.418 


+ करोति च N 11044 
शास्त्राणि विविधानि च N 2.18d 
शास्त्रा्त्यमन्यथा सत्यम्‌ N 1-920 
शिखया कारयेदुधः M 4150 


624 


शिखाग्रन्थौ च देवेशे N 1.180 
शिखाग्रावस्थितः परः N 1.250 
शिखाग्रावस्थितो देव N 1.182 
Farag eq निर्दग्धन्‌ N 4.1072 
शिखाच्छेदविधानन्तु छ 3.22¢ 
शिर एव शिरे देवि N 1.646 
शिरः शिखा कवचास्त्रै M 6.20c 
शिरः शिरन्तु कृत्वा वै \ 141€ 
शिरः शिरन्तु कृत्वा वै N 1.60€ 
शिरः शिरन्तु विज्ञेयं \ 1.542 
शिरः शिरस्तु कृत्वा वै \ 1.514 
शिरच्छेदन्तु वस्त्रेण N 4.87¢ 
शिरमाक्रम्य संस्थितः N 1.210 
शिरस्याभिमुखो भूत्वा N 1.482 
शिरो देवस्य कीर्तितम्‌ M 6.194 
शिरोयुक्तन्तु ज स्मृतः N 1.444 
शिलोच्चये च d नीत्वा M 5.5 
शिल्पञ्च सर्वेकम्माणि N 4.122९ 
शिव — TM 7.25९ 

शिवः परमकारणः N 4.520 
शिवः aaar महाशक्तिः N 41556 
शिवं याति निरामयम्‌ N 4.34 
शिवं सदाशिवं चैव 1.34 
शिवं सर्वगतं विद्धि U 542a 
शिवं सर्वजगत्पतिम्‌ ए 1.55 
शिवचक्रन्तदा ध्यानात्‌ N 4.712 
शिवज्ञानं परं गुह्यं M 1.19 
शिवज्ञानशिवस्य च N 4.1581 
शिवतत्त्व परं वक्ष्ये-द्‌- M 6.53 
शिवतत्त्वस्य पारगः N 7.289 
शिवतत्वं परञ्चैव M 1.11८ 
शिवतत्वं प्रकीर्त्तितम्‌ M 6.74 


Nisvasatattvasamhita 


शिवतत्वमविज्ञाय M 1.132 
शिवतन्त्रमधीत्वा तु N 1.1062 
शिवतन्त्रस्य चोत्पत्ति U 1.22c 
शिवतन्त्रेषु dad U 1.32b 
शिवतुल्यश्च जायते N 4.136d 
शिवतुल्यश्च जायते N 4.23d 
शिवतुल्यञ्च जायते N 4.30d 
शिवतुल्यश्व जायते N 4.37d 
शिवतुल्यञ्च जायते N 4.45b 
शिवतुल्यञ्च जायते N 4.60d 
शिवतुल्यश्च जायते N 4.774 
शिवतुल्यञ्च जायते U 5.27d 
शिवतुल्यस्त्वमाचायो M 8.13¢ 
शिवतुल्या भवन्ति च N 4.98d 
शिवतेजेन संयुक्ता N 2.9० 
शिवतेजेन संयुक्ता U 1.62 
शिवतेजोपबुंहिता ए 1.5१ 
शिवत्वं लभ्यते कथम्‌ N 4.110 
शिवत्वमायाति स्वरूपतेजसा N 4.1614 
शिवध्यानं समालम्ब्य U 4.5० 
शिवपथप्रणेता च U 5.33c 
शिवभक्तां्च निन्दते N 1.1070 
शिवभक्तिविवर्जि्जितः M 1.160 
शिवभक्तिविहीना ये ए 5.492 
शिवभावसमन्वितः N 4.570 
शिवभावसमन्विताः N 4.544 
शिवमाधाय कर्म्माणि U 5.454 
शिवमेकपशोः परः N 4.152b 
शिवम्पदमनामयम्‌ U 4.480 
शिवयज्ञं प्रकुब्गैते N 1.1064 : 
शिवयागे तु पूजयेत्‌ N 4.1500 
शिववत्सर्वविश्वन्तु N 4.55९ 
शिववत्स्वच्छताम्ब्रजेत्‌ ए 5.234 
शिववडूतले सो हि N 1.788 


शिववद्यो गुरुम्मन्येद्‌ N 4.66a 
हि N 4.542 
शिवशक्तिनिपातेन दीक्षा N 1.88¢ 
शिवशक्तिसमाकृष्टे IN 4.88c 
शिवशक्तिसमुडूतं N 4.672 
शिवशक्तयोपबृंहितः N 4.40d 
शिवशङ्करे ह्यसाध्ये M 5.11 
शिवश्वैव तथाष्टमः N 4.934 
शिवसायोज्यतां ब्रजेत्‌ N 4.50 
शिवसायोज्यतां ब्रजेत्‌ ए 4.510 
शिवसायोज्यतां ब्रजेत्‌ ए 5.454 
शिवसायोज्यताम्ब्रजेत्‌ U 5.290 
शिवसायोज्यताम्ब्रजेत्‌ U 5.50 
शिवस्यार्चनमारभेत्‌ U 2.84 
शिवस्वच्छन्दतां ब्रजेत्‌ M 7.224 
शिवस्वच्छुन्दताम्ब्रजेत्‌ N 4.82 
शिवहस्तं पाशकृन्तनम्‌ M 4-140 
शिवाग्निरिति सिध्यति M 3.7० 
शिवात्मकै्च edu N 4.1508 
शिवाङ्गुरुतरी भक्तिर्‌ N 4.632 
शिवार्चनविधिक्रमम्‌ M 2.10 
शिवार्चनाग्निकार्य च M 7.89 
शिवालये नदीतीरे M 1.178 
शिवीकृत्वा विधानेन U 2-282 
शिवीभूतः प्रसन्नात्मा U 2.8० 
शिवे चैव घने तथा M 5.210 
शिवे चैव निरालम्बे N 4-118 
शिवे परमकारणे छ 1.23b 
शिवेन च्छिन्दयेत्‌ पाशं M 4258 
शिवेन सह Wad: N 4.550 
शिवेन सह संयुतः U 5.430 


625 


शिवो व्याप्य व्यवस्थितः U 5.424 
शिवोत्सर्ग क्षिपेत्तत्र M 4.8८ 
शिश्ने प्रजापतिः श्यामो N 3-112 
“शिष्य U 2.324 
शिष्यं यदि तुष्यति वै गुरुः M 8.90 
शिष्यत्वेनोपतिष्ठते N 4.151d 
शिष्यस्तु मोक्षभाक्‌ M 1.154 
शिष्याचार्यौ व्रजेत्यघः N 4.1510 
शीतोष्णेन न वाध्यते M 7-210 
शुक्रश्चैव दघीचिञ्च U 1.379 
शुक्रे च च सडूहे चैव N 2.25¢ 
शुक्करक्ता विराजते N 3.20b 
शुक्ता रक्ता तथा पीता U 2.62 
शुद्धस्फटिकसंकाशन्‌ N 3.57 
शुद्धा शल्यविहीना तु M 1.18 
शुद्धाशुद्धे व्यवस्थितम्‌ N 4.30 
शुभं वाप्यशुभं यञ्च N 1.97€ 
शुभकर्म्मेसु चेष्टते N 1.870 
शुष्कतक्कांवलम्बनम्‌ N 1.840 

N 4.102d 
शूद्रे PTA U 5.474 
शून्यं तं तु विजानीयाद्‌ 6.9c 
शून्यो ध्येयस्सदा बुधैः U 5.324 
शूलदो ह्यङ्गभञ्जकः N 4.125b 
शण दावि nr 
शुणु देवि परङ्गुह्य M 1.120 
शुणु देहे यथा स्थिता N 2-234 
शुणु ध्यानाधिदैवतम्‌ N 3-1 
शृतपाणिस्तु ग स्मृतः N 1-424 
शृते संहतजङ्कयोः N 2-480 
शोधनं प्रोक्षणं तथा M 4-134 
शोधनं प्रोक्षणं पूजा U 2-212 
शोधनम्प्रोक्षणन्तथा U 3.21b 


626 


शोभा द्वारार्धलम्बिता ए 3.7d 
शोभा द्विगुणकपोलं U 3-82 
शोषणस्त्रासकस्तथा N 4.1270 
शोषये च कलेवरम्‌ N 4-1294 
शौचाचारसमन्वितः U 4-334 
— X सनन्दनः ए 1.374 
शमशाने वा गृहे वापि M 1.17० 
श्रद्धधानानुसूयवे M 8.150 
wea ऽनुसूय्च M 115a 
FEM धर्म्मवतः N 1.872 
श्रद्धामालंव्य यल्लेन N 4.32९ 
श्रीताले च गभस्तिके M 5.50 
श्रुतं विस्तरशो मया N 4.67 
शरुत्वा देवं जगङ्गुरुम्‌ M 6.12b 
श्रुत्वा बुध्वा च मानवः U 5.40b 
श्रुवादीनां प्रतापनम्‌ U 2.260 
श्रूयते च यदा शक्तिः U ४.402 
शरोत्रं त्वक्चक्षुषी जिल्ला N 2.12९ 
ओत्रशब्दत्वमागतः N 2.560 
ओत्रे श्रवणधर्म्मित्व N 2.362 
श्रोत्रेन्द्रिये दिशाश्वित्रा N 3-28 
wares त्रयोदश 1.10 
श्वाससङ्कोचच्छेदे च N 4.128 
श्वेतो TAS वाह्लिकः (?) U 1.38b 
षकारस्य महात्मनः N 1.660 
षट्सप्ताष्टभिः क्षत्रिये M 8.65 
षडङ्गध्यानवर्जितम्‌ N 4.24b 
पडन्तेन समन्वितम्‌ M 6.7७ 
षडन्तेन समायुक्तम्‌ M 6.2८ 
षड्ज च ऋषभच्चैव N 2.372 
षड्भिर्मासैन्न सन्देहो N 3.44a 
षड्वर्णरहितः शिव: M 6.80 


Nisvasatattvasamhita 


षड्विधं च बलिं दद्यात्‌ M 2.7० 
षण्मासाद्यानयोगेन N ३.222 
षण्मासाभ्यन्तरेण तु N 4.370 
षण्मासेन तु जायते N 3.574 
षण्मुखङ्करणङ्कृत्वा N 3.68a 
षण्मुखस्तेन बध्यते N 1.1010 

षष्ठं वै प्रथमस्य तु M 6.150 
षोडशैते प्रकीत्तिंताः N 2.144 

स एव दक्षिणे हस्ते N 1.744 

स एष परमेश्वरः N 1.34 

स कथं दशधा ज्ञेयो U 1.92 

स कथम्मोक्षदो देव N 4.89 

स कालम्पश्यते ऽचिरात्‌ U 5.22 
स गुरुः शिवतुल्यगः M 1.144 

स गुरुब्रह्मवेदिनः N 4.77b 

स गुरुश्शिवतुल्यश्व N 4.292 

स च एकः स्थितो व्यापी N 1.15 
स च ज्ञेयस्त्रिलक्षणः N 2.264 

स च पूज्यो यथा ह्यहम्‌ N 4.410 
सच मां प्रति बोधकः U 1.240 
स च सर्वज्ञतां याति U 5.9 

स च ady संस्थितः N 14b 

स चानन्ताय कल्पते N 3.274 

स चानुग्रहकत्ता च N 4.77c 

स चाष्टभेदो व्याख्यातो U 1.7० 
स चैकादशपर्यन्तं N 4.67 

स चैव परमश्शिवः N 4.1570 

स चैवोङ्कार बिन्दुश्च N 4.1560 
स जीव इति विख्यातो N 3.24¢ 
स तु योज्येत निष्कले M 5.220 
स देशः पूततां ब्रजेत्‌ M 7.240 
स नादो लय निष्कलः N 4.1564 
स मोचयति पाशेभ्यो N 4.1542 
स लेख्यं कर्तुमर्हसि N 4.148 


Index of Padas 


सवै प्रकृतिलक्षन्तु U 5.10c 

स वै संहरते प्रजां N 1.970 

स fara: परिगीयते N 2.5b 

स संसाराद्विमुच्यते N 1.76b 

स सात्त्विकस्तु विज्ञेयो N 2.882 
संयमञ्जपपूजनम्‌ N 4.60 
संयुक्ता येन सिंद्यन्ति U 4.462 
संरुद्धे चैव प्राणे gN 4.117 
संवत्सरेणार्धचन्द N 4.22c 
संविभागी च सततं N 2.85c 
संशयच्छेदकारिणी N 3.19b 
संसारगृहबन्धेन N 2.612 
संसारतारको ऽसौ हि N 441a 
संसारबन्धान्निम्मुँक्तः N 4.1360 
संसारभयबन्धनात्‌ N 4.764 
संसारभयवित्रस्ते N 4.658 
संसारभवबन्धनात्‌ U 5.514 
संसारमनुवर्त्तिनाम्‌ N 2.674 
संसारसागरे घोरे M 1.82 
संसारस्य प्रवर्तकम्‌ N 2.834 
संसारे क्रीडते चैव N 4.25० 
संसारे क्षिप्यते पुनः N 2.1010 
संसारोद्विरनमोक्षार्थी U 5.24C 
संस्कृतं प्राकृतं चैव N 2.422 
संस्कृता प्राकृता चैव N 2.30€ 
संस्थित ईश्वरो भूत्वा N 1.928 
संस्थितानि यशस्विनि N 1.30 
संहतौ च स्मृतौ जङ्घौ N 1.35€ 
सहरन्तन्डुराधर्षम्‌ N 3.326 
सहिताः परमेष्ठिना ए 5.530 
सहितापारगाख्न ये N 4.414 
सकलं निष्कलं शून्यं M 6.69 


627 


सकल विग्रहं ह्येतद्‌ N 1.332 
सकल सर्वदेहस्थं M 6.7८ 
सकल-संस्कारमुच्यते M 6.252 
सकलन्तु भवेद्येवं M 2.3८ 
सकलस्य भवेन्मुद्रा ए 4.208 
सकले निष्कले चैव M 6.262 
सकले योज्यदायिका M 436b 
सकलेनोदकं दद्याद्‌ U 2.7० 
सकार एष विख्यातो N 1.68 
सकारं सम्प्रवक्ष्यामि N 1.672 
सःकारश्छेदने योज्य U 4.326 
सकुलब्चोद्धूतो भवेत्‌ M 7.244 
सकृदुक्तं AIRT N 3.120 
Wege Ted N 4.354 
सकृदुच्चारिते तत्वे M 7.6c 
सकृदुञ्चारिते तत्वे M 7.7० 
सकृदुच्चारिते तत्वे M 7.8० 
सक्षीरं नित्रेणावक्र U 2.33० 
सगोत्रा एव Fad M 8.20c 
संकल्पाञ्च विकल्पाञ्च N 2.526 
aga चतुरोऽङ्गुल्यास्‌ N 1.562 
age वाम agt तु N 1.63¢ 
ag वामक बाहुम्‌ \ 1.596 
सङ्कोचयित्वा तिर्यन्तु N 1.618 
सङ्कमेत्‌ परदेहेषु M 7-214 
सङ्कमेत्परदेहेषु N 4.1438 
सङ्कान्ति विषुवज्चैव U 5-360 
सङ्कान्तिरिति विख्याता U 5.398 
सड्ठान्तिविषुवक्षेव U 5-4० 
सड्डान्त्युत्कान्तिकर्म्मकृत्‌ N 433१ 
age: स तु विज्ञेयो ए 1320 
सञ्ज्ञाचतुष्टयेनैव U 1.28 


628 


सञ्ज्ञामात्रेण उत्तरे ए 4.170 
सतनुर्वितनुञ्चैव N 4.83¢ 
सत्त्वरजस्तमोत्कटान्‌ N 2.84d 
सत्यं शौचञ्च दानञ्च N 2.652 
सत्यलोकं नयेत्पुनः M 5.70 
सत्यवाग (?) न (?) ferr N 4.106c 
सत्यसन्धो ऽप्रतिग्राही U 4.336 
सत्वचास्फाटितास्तथा U 4.364 
सदलन्द्वादशाङ्गुलम्‌ U 2.334 
सदाशिव इति स्मृतः N 1.180 
सदाशिव frase U 5.1० 
सदाशिवसमुद्भवाः U 1.130 
सदाशिवसमुद्भवा U 1.79 
सदाशिवस्तु विज्ञेयो N 3.65c 
सदाशिवस्तु वेत्ता वै U 1.242 
सदाशिवस्य WaT U 4.49 
सदाशिवो ऽष्टभेदञ्च U 5.49 
सदाशिवो ऽष्टभेदस्तु U 1.44 
सदाशिवोष्टधा प्रोक्त U 5.368 
सदाशिवोष्टभेदेन N 3.642 

सद्य एव तु भेदयेत्‌ M 8.90 
सद्य एव प्रजायते M 6.174 
सद्य एवोत्क्रमन्ति ते M 77.160 
सद्योजातः कुमारो 5हम्‌ M 4.c 
सन्ध्याकाले तु सम्प्राप्ते M 1.202 
सन्ध्याजापञ्च होमञ्च M 4.10८ 
सपर्वंतवनाकीण्णा N 3.22 

सप्त स्वरास्त्रयो ग्रामा N 2.382 
सञ्तकोखस्तु मन्त्राणां U 2.2८ 
सप्तमस्य द्वितीयकम्‌ M 6.14b 
नसत्या द्वितीयेन M 6.226 
weet त्रि चतुर्थकम्‌ M 6.1/0 


Nisvasatativasamhita 


ससस्वरप्रतिष्ठानि N 2.42c 
सप्ताधिकशतकङ्कुर्याद्‌ ए 4.27c 
समं शत्रु समम्मित्र N 4.56a 
समको नासदृष्टिगः N 4.106b 
समनिम्नोन्नतानीह N 2.32c 
समयस्य च लङ्घने U 4.354 
समया सम तिष्ठन्ते N 4.59८ 
समयाख्या निरोधकाः U 2.314 
समयाष्टकदोषेण M 5.24 
समये क्षुद्रमेव च M 5.204 
समरसञ्च पुनर्भूत्वा N 4.110 
समरसञ्चैव वण्णितम्‌ N 4.684 
समरसस्तु विज्ञेयः N 4.55 
समानस्समतान्नयेत्‌ N 4.1240 
समाप्ते कर्म्मणि चैव M 2.9c 
समिधा द्वादशाङ्गुलाः U 4.37b 
सम्पूज्य च यथान्यायन्‌ U 3.172 
सम्यगेष समाख्यातो M 8.208 
सरितः सागराणि च U 4.40 
सर्पस्य कवचं यथा N 4.794 
सर्वं तत्त्वेषु दृश्यते N 2.200 
सर्व तत्त्वेषु बोद्धव्यं N 2.202 
सर्वं मिथ्येति वक्ष्यते N 2.800 
Wd सम्पद्यते तस्य M 7.106 
सर्वं हस्तेन्त्रिये स्थितम्‌ N 2.320 
सर्वकर्माणि कारयेत्‌ M 7.154 
सर्वकर्माणि कारयेत्‌ 3.624 
सर्वैकर्माणि कारयेत्‌ U 2.414 
सर्वकर्माणि कारयेत्‌ U 5.444 
सर्वकामफलप्रदम्‌ M 4.20 
सर्वकामफलप्रदम्‌ U 2.344 
सर्वेकामसुसम्पूण्णस्‌ N 4.1368 
सर्वकामान्प्रयच्छन्ति U 4.338 
सर्वकामार्थसाधकः U 4.45b 


Index of Padas 


सर्वकालन्तु कालं हि U 5.22a 
सर्वगुद्योत्तमोत्तमम्‌ N 1.760 
सर्वजन्तुनिबन्धकम्‌ ॥ 2.72b 
सर्वजन्तुष्ववस्थिताः N 2.39b 
सर्वज्ञ: कामरूपवान्‌ N 3.54d 
सर्वज्ञः कामरूपी च N 4.23c 
सर्वज्ञः कामरूपी च U 5.23c 
सर्वज्ञः सर्वगः शुद्धः IN 4.82c 
सर्वज्ञं सर्वकर्तारं N 2.4० 
सर्वज्ञत्वं प्रजायते M 7.194 
सर्वज्ञत्वञ्च जायते N 4.1440 
सर्वज्ञत्वम्प्रजायते U 5.54 
सर्वज्ञभावमापन्नः IN 4.452 
सर्वच्चेश्वरकारितम्‌ N 3.620 
सर्वतत्त्वसमन्वितम्‌ N 4.710 
सर्वतत्त्वसमन्विताः N 1.214 
सर्वतन्त्रसमुच्चयः U 5.51b 
सर्वतोक्षिशिरोमुखम्‌ N 2.44 
सर्वदिक्षु विनिक्षिपेत्‌ ए 4.2७ 
सर्वदृष्टनिबन्धनम्‌ M 7.144 
सर्वदुष्टविनाशाय N 3.462 
सर्वदेवतवन्दने ए 4.120 
सर्व॑दोषविवर्जिते U 2.54 
सवंद्रव्येष्ववस्थितम्‌ N 1.10 
सवैद्वन्द्वविवर्जितः N 4.1360 
सर्वनाथ जगत्पते N 146b 
सर्वेन्यासे व्यवस्थिताः N 4.1484 
सर्वपापविवर्जितः U 4.5०० 
सर्वपाशनिवृत्तास्तु N 1.14a 
सर्वमीतिविवर्जितः N 3.50 
सर्वलक्षणहीनो sfr M 1.14० 
सर्वेलक्षणहीनो ऽपि N 4-154c 


629 


सर्ववर्ण्ण — U 118b 
सर्वेविद्यार्थकोविद: N 4.157d 
सर्वविद्यासुसम्पूर्ण्णस्‌ N 4.1570 
सर्वेशल्यविवर्जिते ए 2.3७ 
सर्वसन्धौ तथैव च N 4-119b 
N 1.79c 

सर्वसिद्धिकरी स्मृता N 4.1160 
सर्व॑स्य हृदि संस्थितः N 1.90 
सर्वाण्येतानि कारयेत्‌ M 4.144 
सर्वानेतान्‌ विदित्वा तु ए 5.58 
सर्वावस्थागतो ऽपि यः N 4.1534 
Wd मन्त्राः शिवात्मकाः N 4.1494 
Wd मन्त्रात्मका देवास्‌ N 4.149 
aanta च विज्ञेयं U 1.30८ 
सलिलन्न च बद्धेत N 1.7८ 
सविसर्ग भवेत्‌ TTM 6.4a 
सविसग्गांस्त्रयोनयः M 6.22d 
सव्यरेखा तु माया वै N 119c 
सव्याबुष्ठेन तर्जनी U 4.22b 
सव्येनैव तु रेचयेत्‌ N 4.1100 
सशब्दञ्चाभिचारे तु U 4.242 
सषष्टियुक्तानि षडाधिकानि N 4.1610 
सहस्रजप्ततोयेन U 4.314 
सा च वाणी चतुर्विधा N 2.300 
सा तु मुद्रा भविष्यति M 6.260 
सांख्यं वै पञ्चविंशकम्‌ M 1.90 
साझ्झाज्ञानम्मया प्रोक्तं N 3-18 
साझूज्ञानम्मया प्रोक्तम्‌ N 2.70€ 
साझुज्ञानम्मया प्रोक्तम्‌ N 2-992 
साझ्झज्ञानेन मोहितः N 2.1020 

सांख्यवेदपुराणज्ञा N 3.36c 
साङ्गं गायत्रिसंयुतम्‌ M 2-30 
साङ्गेन देवदेवेन M 5.30 
साधकस्य विधिः प्रोक्तस्‌ ए 4.458 


630 


साधकान्ये समाख्यातास्‌ N 4,410 
साधके मनसि स्थितम्‌ U 416b 
साधके सिद्धिदायिका N 3-404 
साधको नैव लिप्यते M 5-244 
साधनैयोंगचर्याभिस्‌ M 8.52 
साधयित्वा ततो ह्येकं M 3.7० 
साध्यमन्त्राभिषेकञ्च U 3.244 
साध्योङ्कारे च योजयेत्‌ M 514b 
सापाम्रयं अञ्जलिकं N 445a 
सापाश्रयं योगपट्टम्‌ N 4.105९ 
सामन्ताद्वामिको भवेत्‌ N 2.814 
सामान्याद्वहिरेतानि N 41116 
सायोज्यन्तु द्विरब्दिके N 3.67d 
सिंहनादं प्रमुञ्चन्ति M 1.68 
सिंहासने विमाने वा U 2.36c 
सिक्ता भवति शोभना M 1.190 
सितं रक्तञ्च पीतञ्च N 2.472 
सितं रक्तञ्च पीतञ्च N 3.692 
सितन्त्रिनयनं qqu N 3.482 
सितम्मूर्धि सदा ध्यायेच्‌ N 3.522 
सितरक्तकृष्णपीता M 1.182 
सितरक्तपीतकृष्णन्‌ \ 4.4८ 
सितरक्तपीतकृष्णा N 3.39c 
सितरक्तपीतकृष्णैर्‌ M 2.1० 
सितानि चैव पुष्पाणि ए 4.62 
सितोत्तानमूद्धवक्तं M 3.62 
सिद्धं सन्तानमेव च ए 1.30 
सिद्धञ्चैव maaa N 3.21c 

N 4.37c 
सिद्धस्सवंत्र सङ्कमेत्‌ N 3.410 
सिद्धान्देवांश्च पश्यतति N 4.135b 


Nigvasatativasamhita 


Rada तथा देवा N 4.60a 
सिद्धिः षाण्मासिका भवेत्‌ N 3.55b 
सिद्धि कुर्वेन्ति चेप्सिताम्‌ N 4.434 
सिद्धिं गणपति्हन्याच्‌ N 1.1022 
सिद्धिक्षेत्रेषु पुण्येषु ए 4.19 
सिद्धिभूमिम्परीक्षयेत्‌ U 4-10 
सिद्धिरेव प्रजायते N 3.554 
सिद्धिलिङ्गा भवन्ति हि N 4.350 
सिद्धिश्न मानुषे लोके N 3.57c 
सिद्धिख्राञ्जर्यकम्मेकृत्‌ N 3.74 
सिद्धिश्चैव कथम्भवेत्‌ N 2.214 
सिद्धिसन्दोहलक्षणम्‌ N 2.19b 
सिद्धिस्तु मानुषे लोके N 3.672 
सिद्धिस्तु मानुषे लोके N 4.3० 
fags सह सम्भाष्यं N 4.210 
सिद्यते कालयोगिनः U 5.230 
सिद्धयते च शिवो भवेत्‌ U 5.164 
सिद्धयते तेन रूपेण U 5.298 
सिद्धते शिवताम्ब्रजेत्‌ U 5.3०4 
सिद्यसिद्धि बलाबलम्‌ M. 4.184 
सिध्यते अचिरेणैव U 4.342 
सिध्यते च शिवो भवेत्‌ N 3.47 
सिध्यते च शिवो भवेत्‌ N 3-494 
सिध्यते नात्र संशयः U 4.434 
सीमान्तञ्‌ जातकर्म च M 4.9 
सुकुट्टिमान्ततः कृत्वा U 2.6c 
सुखडुःखं प्रयच्छते N 3.300 
सुखडुःखञ्च विन्दते N 3.254 
सुखबोध्यमविस्तरम्‌ N 4.264 
सुखबोध्यमविस्तरम्‌ N 4.62b 
सुपरीक्षितशिष्याय TAN 4.852 
सुपरीक्ष्य च दातव्यं M 8.79 
सुपरीक्ष्य प्रदातव्यं ए 5.46c 
सुप्रशस्ते भूप्रदेशे N 4.1022 
सुप्रशान्तस्तु विश्रुतः N 4.1134 


Index of Padas 


सुरभीणि विशेषतः U 4.7७ 
सुरभीणि विशेषतः ए 4.8७ 
सुरभीणि सुगन्धानि N 2.512 
सुरापानादिभिद्दोषेस्‌ TM 7.40 
सुशान्तं निष्कलं देवं U 1.52. 
सुशिरात्मकं स्वदेहञ्‌ N 3.85 
सुशिरात्मकन्तु विज्ञेयन्‌ N 2.298 
सुषुप्तं जायते तत्र N 4.1400 
सुषुम्णा उत्तरं ज्ञेयम्‌ ए 5.37८ 
सुषुम्णापदिके स्थिता N 4.750 
सुसिद्धस्तत्वविच्चैव M 7.232 
सुसूक्ष्मा च द्वितीयका N 4.74 
सुस्नातस्तु शुचिर्भूत्वा N 4.312 
सुहून्मित्रधनानि च N 2.730 
सूक्ष्मं सर्वंगतन्देवं N 2.28 
सूक्ष्मलिङ्गन्ततः पश्येज्‌ U 5.31८ 
सूक्ष्मलिङ्गन्ततोपरि N 3.564 
सूक्ष्मश्च देहघारिणः N 3.264 
सूक्ष्मस्तन्मात्रधम्मो हि N 2.56 
सूक्ष्मात्सूक्ष्मतरः परः N 4.830 


सूक्ष्माश्शब्दाः स्मृता ह्येते N 2.39a 


सूचनात्सूत्रमित्याह N 4.145¢ 
सूत्रणादौ शिखान्तञ्च U 3.232 
Tart पदम्परम्‌ N 4.145d 
सूत्रभाम महादेव N 4.144¢ 
सूत्रयेद्धुवनं शुभम्‌ U 3.1b 
सूत्रे मणिगणा इव N 4.146b 
सृजते संहरेति DON 3.510 
Wierd विश्वं N 4-448 
भृताय — मध्यतः U 4.20b 
पृवास्सर्वास्तु युग्मकाः ए 4.110 
: N 2.100b 


631 


सेवाधमेंण वा पुनः M 8.20 
सो Sqme: स्मृतो TIN 1.89a 
सो ह्यनेनेव EETON Mer 
सोमसूर्याग्निमध्यगम्‌ N 4.147d 
सोमादित्यौ स्थितौ नेत्रे N m 
सोष्टधा सुत कल्पयेत्‌ U 2.10 
सौम्ये चैव ध्रुवे तथा M 8.7७ 
सौरभो पावनस्तथा M. 5.170 
सौवर्णा वैदूमास्तथा U 4.25b 
सौवर्णेषु च d प्राप्य M 5.68 
स्तनरेखेन कः स्मृतः N 1.71b 
स्तेयेन कनकादीनां M 7.३७ 
स्थानं कालं सहायं च M 4.176 
स्थानं रूपञ्च कर्म्मञ्च N 4.100c 
स्थापयित्वोत््जवेत्पुनः M 3.40 
स्थावरज्ञंगमं चैव N 4.49¢ 
स्थितन्देहे तु काष्ठवत्‌ M 6.90 
स्थिता ह्यापञ्जतुर्गुणाः N 2.254 
स्थितो व्योमेषु व्योमवत्‌ N 4.514 
स्थिरा पीतकवर्ण्णांभा N 3.20 
स्थूलं सूक्ष्मञ्च यच्चान्य N 4.502 
स्थूलकाया महोदरा N 3.350 
स्थूलरूपाः स्मृताः N 1.5a 
: anb 
भूत्वा N 4.838 
स्थूलान्यपि प्रवक्ष्यामि N 2.39¢ 
चान्ये ए 2.31¢ 
खातव्रतपरित्यागो U 3.19¢ 
खातो भवति सर्वेषु U 4.4० 
स्नात्वा चोद्वाहयेद्वायाँ M 4126 
स्नात्वा त्रिष्कालमर्चचयेत्‌ ए 44d 
स्रानमाचमनन्तथा M 2.40 
स्रायुलोमनखेषु च N 2.24b 
acq निस्पृहो यस्तु U 5.242 


632 


स्पर्शतन्मात्र कृष्णकम्‌ N 3.150 
स्पर्शतन्मात्र स्पशेन्तु N 2.55€ 
स्पर्शतन्मात्रसंयुतम्‌ N 2.170 
स्पर्शेतन्मात्रसम्भूतं N 2.156 
स्पर्शत्वञ्चैव विन्दति N 4.125d 
स्पर्शस्य विषयो ह्येष N 2.46 
स्पर्शेन तु त्वगिन्द्रियः N 2.454 
स्फटिकाभम्मनोरमम्‌ N 3.694 
स्फटिकाभा मनोरमा N 4.340 
स्फाटिका मणिरला्च U 4.254 
स्फाटिताञ्चाभिचारुके ए 4.374 
स्फोटशब्दन्तु तस्यैव N 4.9० 
स्रगदामधान्यवाससाम्‌ U 2.370 
* gat कुर्यात्‌ U 4.39 
स्रुवं हस्तप्रमाणन्तु U 4.398 
स्वतत्त्वम्पुनरेव हि N 1.134 
स्वतन्त्रः कामरूपवान्‌ \ 4.824 
स्वतन्त्रमानसिद्धानि U 3.7 
Maas जायते U 5.94 
स्वदेहे देशिकेन्द्रेण N 1.24c 
स्वघरवृत्तिस्ततो भवेत्‌ N 4.1394 
स्वप्नां वक्षयेन्निशिक्षये ए 2.354 
स्वघराञचैव प्रवक्ष्यामि M 3.150 
स्ववीजकालरूपज्ञो N 3.332 
स्ववीजध्यानयोगेन N 3.382 
स्ववीजेन तु चिन्तकः N 3.60 
स्ववीजेन तु सद्भावं N 3.1०८ 
स्वयं निष्क्रमते देवो ॥॥ 6.85 
स्वयन्देवस्सदाशिवः 1.19b 
N 2.52e 
स्वरैः पञ्चभि्भेदितम्‌ M A 
स्वर्गमोक्षश्च को गतः N 2.79१ 


Nis$vasatattvasamhita 


स्वगर्गलोके तु क्रीडते N 1.874 
cin महलोंके च M 8.6८ 
स्वशरीरोत्थितो dhat N 3.6a 
स्वस्तिकम्पद्यकम्भद्वम्‌ N 4.140 
स्वस्तिकम्भद्वचन्द्रकम्‌ N 4.105b 
स्वस्थानेषुनिरुद्धयेत्‌ N 4.132b 
स्वागतञ्चार्घपादञ्च M 2.4० 
स्वायम्भुवमतञ्चैव U 1.28 
स्वाहाकारेण दीपयेत्‌ U 4.32b 
स्वेदकम्पञ्च जायते N 4.1374 
हकारः सकलावधेः U 1.164 
gana निबोध AN 1.684 
हकारस्तु ततोह्दिष्टः N 1.69c 
हकारस्तु सदाशिवः 1.114 
हःकारो रेत उच्यते M 6.164 
हत्वा प्राणिसहस्राणि N 3.493 
हत्वा लोकांख्र्‍राचरान्‌ M 7.40 
हरिरुद्रे दशेशके M 5.110 
हविर्गृह्णाति नित्यशः M 3.74 
हविर्यज्ञा्च सोमकाः U 3-200 
हविष्यादीनि दृव्याणि U 4.382 
हव्यकव्यप्रदा मर्त्या N 4.86 
हसन्ते किलकिलायन्ते M 1.6८ 
हस्तञ्चैव निकुञ्चेत N 1.546 
हस्तमात्रन्तु कतैव्यं U 2.138 
हस्तयोरुभयोरपि U 4.100 
हस्तसन्धि शिरः कृत्वा N 1.720 
हस्ताद्धस्तप्रवद्धनम्‌ U 3.100 
हस्तेन्द्रियमतः शृणु N 2.310 
हस्त्यश्वरथयानानि N 2.738 
हाठकुष्माण्डरुद्रस्तु N 1.1082 
हित्वा नरकमाङ्चुयात्‌ M 8.184 
हिष्कारन्भ्र शिरन्तस्य N 1.700 
हीनस्य पूरणी ह्येषा M 6.26९ 


Index of Padas 


तु दृश्यते ए 5.22b 
हृत्वा चरुं च देवाय U 2.27c 
देवाय कल्पयेत्‌ 3.11८ 
हुत्वा पूर्णाहुतिं ददेत्‌ M 445b 
हत्वा विज्ञापयेद्देवं M 5-244 
परिधिं स्थाप्य M 3.3० 
हुफङ्कारान्तेन मन्त्रेण M 5.8८ 
हृत्पौण्डरीकमध्यस्थ N 4.147९ 
हृदयं तत्‌ प्रकीर्तितम्‌ M 6.190 
हृदयेन तु भावयेत्‌ M 6.94 
हृदिपचे व्यवस्थितः N ३.234 
हृदिस्था नियतिज्ञेया N 1.27 
qa नाभिकण्ठौ च N 4.119a 
हेमकर्त्ता दहेद्दोषाङ्‌ N 1.89 


633 


होम सिद्धिकरो भवेत ए 2 160 
होमं तत्रैव कारयेत U 2.770 
होमं तस्य शत भवेत M. 3.13¢ 
होमं तस्य शतं भवेत ए 2 35b 
होमं तु कारयेद्विद्वान्‌ M 5.48 
होमङ्कत्वा यथाक्रमम्‌ ए 447b 
होमयेत ततो मन्त्री ए 4.38c 
ह्यहकारे व्यवस्थितः N 2.89d 
ह्यृते शैवादनुग्रहात्‌ M 1.9१ 
ह्येवं वुध्यन्ति ATIN 2.98b 
हस्वकोटिसमन्वितम्‌ N 4.137b 
RUIT वै चास्त्रयोनयः U 221b 
हस्वाक्षर: स्मृतो ऽनन्तो छ 2.98 


GENERAL INDEX 


This is an index to the portions of the book that are set in roman text only (intro- 
duction, translation and notes). We have indexed titles of texts, proper names and 
some important notions. Words that appear in the index in italics may sometimes 
refer to instances in the main text that are not italicised, just as words that appear 
in the main text in italics may sometimes be referred to by entries in the index that 


are not italicised. 


A 
Abhasatala, 290, 296 
abhicara, 92, 93, 257, 350, 383, 
see also krurakarman and 
malefic rites 
abhicaruka, 127, 373, 381, 383 
Abhinavagupta, 17, 26, 27, 448 
abhiseka, 16, 49, 89, 280, 283, 284, 
330, 331, 333, 377, 474 
abhivadana, 87, 271-273, 369 
abhivyakti, 404 
abhyuksana, 357, 358 
acarya, 64, 238, 262-264, 282, 295, 
309, 320, 333, 334, 385 
acarya of, 334 
characteristics of, 85 
consecration of, 47, 49, 90, 283; 
330, 331 
hand of, 32, 50, 279, 283 
one of four classes of initiate, 25, 
48 
predecessors, 99, 101, 469 
. _ Selection of, 89 
acaryavrata, 286 
ACHARYA, 11-13, 15, 35, 41, 58, 264; 
283, 297, 313, 310, 343: 
354, 372, 477, 479, 481 


035 


ACRI, 11, 299, 306, 434 

Adam's apple, 419 

adhara (breath-control 
492, 493 

adharma, 434, 461 

adhivasa, 85, 238, 261, 263, 289, 359 

adisutra, 29 

synonym of Mülasütra, 90, 337 

Agamapramanya, 67 

agaru, 378 

Agasti, 348 

Agastya, 68 

Agence Nationale pour la Recherche, 
12, 13 

aghara, 86, 252-256, 359 

AGHORA, 16, 36, 37, 253, 318, 320, 


practice), 


4 

exoteric nature of, 350 
Aghorasiva, 41, 71, 83, 271, 333, 357 

guru of Dirgha, 53, 54 
Agni, 252, 254-256, 258 
agnihotra, 357 
agnikarya, 92, 260, 359 
agnikunda, 249 
Agnipurana, 348 
Agnistoma, 56 
agnyagara, 353 


636 


ikara, 97, 98, 297; 434, 440-442, 
ahanka a a ii. 408, nnt 
also Bhütadi, Taijasa and 
Vaikarika 
aiga usage, 111, 113-136, 241, 296, 
309, 342, 358, 375: 392 
469, 500 
Aiévarya, 78, 88, 292, 303; 356, 442) 
444, 482, see also animadi 
and gunastaka 
AISVARYA, 312 
Aitareyabrahmana, 256 
ajina, 275, 369 
Ajita, 345, 305, 419 
Ajitagama, 59, 327, 375 
ajyabhaga, 86, 252, 254-256, 359 
akasa, 75, 96, 98, 316, 395, 494 
akasagamana, 77, 78, 81, 83 
Akrtastaka, 290 
aksamala, 22, see also rosaries and 
aksasutra 
aksasütra, 98, see also rosaries and 
aksamala 
alcohol, 363 
Amarako$a, 351, 429 
Amardaka, 55 
Ambika, 429 
Amoghapasgakalparaja, 17, 83 
amrta mudra, 89, 93, 323, 374 
amrtaplavana, 488 
Amsumat, 345 
anacoluthon, 136, 239, 324, 326, 
328, 341, 391, 400, 444, 
_, 449, 467, 473, 476 
anaiSvarya, 445 
Ananta, 291, 428 
on paridhi, 250 
Serpent, 312 
throne, 85, 88, 243, 3n, g12 
352; 353 
a SITS 
idyesa, 303, 428 
ANANTA, 91 
Anantagiva, 53 
Anantasivacarya, 53 


Nisvasatattvasamhita 


Anantavijaya, 286 
Anante$a, 503 
anava-mala, 41, 422 
angamantras, 20, 43, 79, 85, 88, 89, 
263, 267, 320, 352, 353, 
371 
number of, 243, 259 
six, 260 
anger, 97, 322, 360, 380, 430, 442, 
446 
Angiras, 348 
animadi, 78, 327, 473, see also Aig- 
varya and gunastaka 
animal bones, 350 
animals, 448, 461 
in dreams, 265 
rebirth as, 423, 443 
sacrifice of, 35 
anjalika, 99, 469, 487 
ANJANEYA SARMA, 11, 27, 299, 306, 
435 
Anta, 348 
antardhana, 77, 78, 80, 81 
ANTASTHA, 89, 95, 313, 318, 343, 
385, 396 
antelope, 461 
ant-hills, 65, 486 
ants, 470, 500 
anugraha, 96, 361, 478, 481, see also 
Grace 
anunasika 
form of language, 343; 437, 439 
anus, 418, 434, 438, 450; 494, 498 
anusvara, 111, 258, 259, 269, 274 
279, 320-322, 340-34? 
397, 398, 467, 484, 485 
apabhraméa, 296, 343, 437; 439 
apana, 101, 318, 494, 495, 498; 499 
Apararka, 67, 70 
Apastambasrautasitra, 252 
apes, 477 
apparatus criticus, 110 
Apsaras, 236, 443 
arani, 356, 358, 364 
arani, 92, 357, 363 


Indez to Introduction and Notes 


Arcturus, 364 
ardhacandra, 99, 469, 485 
Ardhacandrin, 484 
ArdhanariSa, 98, 286, 352, 457, 460 
ardhanarisvaravrata, 286 
argha, 244, 246 
arghapatra, 244 
arghya, 244 
arsenic, 80-82 
Arthagastra, 78, 82 
Aryagonna, 54 
Aryamaiijusri, 82 
Asadhya, 291, 298 
asana (for yoga), 74, 99, 101, 469 
asidharavrata, 285 
asphyxiation, 494 
ass, 265 
Astadhyay?, 68 
astapuspika, 469 
ASTRA, 63, 89, 243, 250, 253, 254, 
282, 283, 297, 320-322 
Astrasiva, 53, 54 
astrayoni, 322, 353 
aSuddhadhvan, 291, 300, 303, 304 
asuddhamarga, see aSuddhadhvan 
a$vamedha, 278 
asvattha 
leaf-shape, 63 
leaves, 79-82 
wood, 64, 356, 382 
Atharvavedaparisista, 64, 82, 256, 
356, 379 
Atiguhyastaka, 290 
Atimarga, 15, 16, 30, 37, 44 287, 
288, 298, 370, 424; 425 
atmasuddhi, 278 
avairagya, 445 
avyakta, 98, 445-447, 480, 485, see 
im also prakrti 
Ayurveda, 437 


B 

Babhravyas, 69 
Badami, 54 
BAGCHI, 17, 19, 106 


637 


Bahuriipa, 98, 350, 458 
BAKKER, 36, 304, 306, 461 
BALACHANDRA JAIN, 54 
Balarjuna MahaSivagupta, 53-55 
Bale$vara temple, 53, 54 
bali, 80, 86, 247, 248, 429 
BALK, 239 
Bana, 429 
banana-leaves, 270 
BUHLER, 409, 411, 412 
barley, 262, 263 
barley gruel, 378 
bdellium, 373 
bears, 477 
bell-metal, 495 
bells, 95, 99; 395; 460, 461, 494 
bezoar, 80, 81, 325 
Bhagavatapurana, 442, 462 
bhadra, 99, 101, 469, 487 
Bhagavadgita, 477 
Bhairava, 347, 458 

in the plural, 347 

name for Mahakala, 347 
Bhairava-tantra, 17 
Bharata, 266 
Bhasmadeha, 88, 292, 300 
BhasmeSa, 292, 300, 301 
Bhasmiáa, see Bhasmesa, Bhasmade- 

ha 

BHAT, 11, 271 
BHATT, 313, 315, 317, 419 
BHATTACHARYA, 60, 407 
Bhavani, 127, 338 
Bhavasarga, 291 
bhisak, 502 
Bhita, 460 
Bhogahasta, 481 
Bhoja, 265, 349, 430, 508 
bhrgupata, 444 
Bhrngin, 46, 428 
bhukti, 15, 32; 59; 13 
Bhüpendrapandita, 70 
Bhürloka, 273; 290; 296 
Bhütadi, 97, 290, 297, 433: 434 
bhütajaya; 74 


638 


bhütasuddhi, 76, 278, 387 
bhuvana, 43, 44, 288, 298, 304 
bhuvanadiksa, 43 
bhuvanakrama, 342 
Bhuvarloka, 290, 296 
bija (consonants), 351 
bijamudra, 89, 93; 323; 374 
bindu, 42, 97, 99, 101, 319; 338, 340; 
406, 433, 404, 465, 480, 
482, 484, 485, 489, 499, 
503 
anusvara, 484 
as code for the letter M, 75 
binduka, 90, 97 
binduyoni, 75 
birth, 41, 47, 49, 237, 240, 261, 270, 
271, 281, 288, 292, 328, 
360, 368, 385, 404, 423, 
429, 430, 443, 503 
of a son, 363 
BISSCHOP, 11-13, 16, 22, 46, 47, 54, 
55; 236, 256, 351, 352, 386, 
460-462, 490 
black buck, 271, 368 
blood, 363, 381, 437 
menstrual, 79 
blood-vessels, 35 
BLOOMFIELD, 251 
BODEMER, 13 
Bodhayanagrhyasesasütra, 60, 251 
Bodhayanagrhyasütra, 256 
bondage, 40, 41, 43, 311, 339, 389, 
400, 422, 439, 442, 448, 
451, 462, 481, 498, see also 
pasa 
bone, 350, 377, 437 
BOSMA, 53, 54 
BOUCHOIR, 13 
Brahma, 86, 88, 92, 98, 235, 236, 
245, 249, 293, 297, 347, 
357, 358, 451, 455, 470, 
475, 484 
a Rudra, 307 
as A, 484 
688 of, 296, 297, 342 


Nisvasatattvasamhita 


identified with element of prana- 
Và, 101 
karane$a, 34, 368 
on paridhi, 250 
world of, 296 
brahmacarin, 271 
brahmacarya, 87, 271-273, 368, 370 
Brahmaloka, 290, 296 
brahmamantra, 15, 16, 20, 32, 
36-38, 43, 04, 85, 87, 
89, 242, 243, 246-248, 
253, 254, 257, 259, 260, 
263-265, 267, 279, 283, 
294, 295, 319, 320, 352, 
353; 371, 373; 457, 458 
brahmanda, 87, 290, see also Brah- 
ma, egg of 
Brahmandapurana, 442 
Brahmapati, 291, 299, 304 
brahmarandhra, 391, 470 
brahmasthana, 364 
Brahmayamala, 12, 26, 68, 83, 113, 
237, 244, 335, 360, 363, 
365, 379 
Brahmi, 414, 416, 418, 419 
brahminism, 59 
brahmins, 35, 60, 100, 240, 241, 274, 
399; 477 
alone eligible in Atimarga, 16 
feeding of, 328 
in dreams, 265 
initiation names for, 53, 54 
murder of, 27, 323, 481 
naked before upanayana, 271 
non-Saiva, 430 
three years of probation, 329; 
330; 399 
when ineligible, 330 
Brhadaranyakopanisat, 34 
Brhatkalottara, 29 
Brhatsamhita, 62 
BRUNNER, 52, 53, 61-65, 248 
253, 254, 282, 310, 357) 
364-366, 369, 370; 374 
bubhuksu, 263, 265, 281, 289 


Index to Introduction and Notes 


buddhi, 97, 98, 290, 297, 312, 433, 
438, 442, 451, 461, 468, 485 
buddhidharma, 302, 312, 442, 443 
Buddhist commentarial literature, 
466 
Buddhist tantric works, 16, 17, 20, 
32; 76-78, 82-84, 448, 492 
BUESCHER, 491 
buffalo, 363 
bull 
as dharma, 461 
in dreams, 363 
of Śiva, 46, 428 
butter, 82, 252, 359, see also ghee 


C 

caitya, 82 

caksusi diksa, 327 

CALAND, 252 

Calukyas, 54 

Cambodia, 66, 70, 239 

Cambridge University Library, 13, 26 

camels, 265, 363 

Canda, 49 

Candanatha, 322 

Candesa, 46, 309, 322, 367, 368, 
428, 430, 574 

Candia, 46, 88, 89, 92, 97, 235, 281, 
309-311, 322, 361, 429 

candrabindu, 485 

Candrahasa, 345 

candraka, 101 

caru, 19; 85, 86, 92; 238, 253-255 
260-263, 359-362 

carya, 287 

Caryamelapakapradipa, 67 

caryapada, 77 

catoptromancy, 391 

CATUSKALA, 76, 99, 465-468, 472 

Catuhatika, 71 

BU, 249, 350, 358 

Catvara, 240, 350 

chalk, 81, SAA 

chardita, 438 

chāyādhyāna, 94, 388, 390-392 


639 


Chinese translations, 83 
chyle, 437 
Citra, 92, 364 
citravrata, 285 
Cleanliness, 58, 380, 442, 446 
CeDEs, 70, 239 
collyrium, 80, 81 
compassion, 49, 50, 57, 240, 332, 
399; 442, 445, 478 
conch, 376, 439 
copper, 262, 403 
copper-plate, 60 
coral, 377 
Cordia dichotoma, 381 
corpse, 79, 80, 82, 496 
dressing as, 69 
tongue of, 82 
coughing, 495 
courtyard, 351 
crossroads, 350, 351 
of grass, 357, 358 
cudakarman, 87 
CUNEO, 11 
curds, 82, 244, 363, 378 
cvi-formation, 130, 476 
cymbals, 439 


D 

Dadhici, 348 

Daityas, 38, 235, 236 

Daksina, 66 

daksina, 320, see also gurudaksina 

daksinamirti, 52, 79-81 

Daksinasrotas, 17 NDE. 

daksinayam murtau, see daksinamur- 
ti 

Damanega/Damaneésvara, see 
Damanisa 

Damaniga, 73, 88, 292, 300, 301 

damanotsava, 59 

damaru, 98 

Danavas, 473 

dantadhavana, 58, 92, 264, 274 

dantakistha, 264, 275, 325, 362, see 
also tooth-cleaning stick 


640 


dardura, 439 

Darka, 88, 293, 307 

daráapürnamasau, 252; 256 

darvi, 251 

Dattatreyayogasastra, 492 

DAVELLA, 408 

DAVID, 11 

dayavibhaga, 320 

death, 38, 101, 236-238, 288, 294, 
360, 379, 390, 426, 427) 
430, 458, 475, 477, 495, 496 

death-rattle, 495, 497 

death-rites, 47 

deer, 461 

dehasuddhi, 278 

dehavyapin, 90, 91, 339, 340; 342 

DELHEY, 12, 20, 84 

delusion, 92, 360, 421, 423, 426, 430, 
475; 503 

despair, 430 

Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft, 
12, 13 

Devadatta (breath), 101, 495-497 

Devanagari, 104, 108, 109 

Devanathathakura, 68 

devayoni, 322 

devayonyastaka, 87, 290, 298 

Devendravarman, 54 

Devi, 22, 46, 85, 90, 91, 94-97, 
99-101, 235, 430 

*Devitantrasadbhavasara, 31 

Devyamata, 27, 28, 365, 392 

DEZSÓ, 13, 82, 458, 480 

Dhaivata, 438 

Dhanañjaya, 101, 495-497 

dharanas, 75, 76, 93, 98, 101, 279, 


394, 395; 449, 481, 489, 494 
Ina 


buddhidharma, 88, 292, 303, 
442, 443 

meaning “effect”, 445 

transmitter of scripture, 347 


DHARMA, 312, 434, 443 6 
eret , 445, 461 


Dharmamahadevi, 53 


Nisvasatativasamhita 


Dharmaputrika, 491, 496 
Dhatara, 88, 292, 300, 301 
Dhatr, 300, 301 
dhenumudra, 323, 374 
Dhruva 
first, 88, 292, 300-302, 305, 
306 
second, 88, 292, 306 
third, 88, 293, 307 
dhüma, dhümayamane, etc. (smoke 
as a sign of magical accom- 
plishment), 78, 80, 81, 83 
Dhyama$lokannal, 462 
Dhyana (a world), 292, 300, 301 
dice, 444 
digbandha, 279 
diksa (initiation), 15, 16, 20, 50, 
54, 77, 88, 90 259, 
261, 278, 282, 294, 310, 
456, 473, 474, 479, see 
also abhiseka, muktidiksa, 
nirvanadiksa, samayadiksa, 
vidyadiksa, vi$esadiksa 
Diksadarga, 48 
diksadhana, 364 
diksanaman, 266 
DIKSHIT, 55 
Diksottara, 23-28, 30, 34, 48, 46, 
50, 254, 261, 262, 274, 275, 
277, 288, 306, 340, 346, 
347, 349, 352, 448, 506 
Dindi, 88, 293, 307 
Dipta, 345 
disease, 38, 92, 236, 237) 360, 381, 
396, 426, 427, 430, 499: 
502 
dispassion, 442-444 
Divya, 345, 346 
Divya (sage), 346 
divyabuddhi, 446 
divyadrsti, 452 
divyasiddhi, 356, 396 
divyasrsti, 452 
doctor, 502 
dog-cooker, 100, 477 


Indez to Introduction and Notes 


dolls, 377, 379; see also effigies 
donkey, 265 
dravyamudra, 93, 323; 375 
dravyasuddhi, 278 
dreams, 86, 92, 264-266, 287, 363, 
364 
drums, 439 
hour-glass, 459 
drumstick tree, 381 
dualism, 39, 341 
absence in the Nigvasa, 476 
Duhkhada, 307 
Durgaraksita, 55 
Durvasas, 348 
DUSSART, 13 
Dvadasaranayacakra, 490 
dvadasanta, 74, 316, 323 
absence in Ni$vasa, 34 
dvega, 494 
Dvigatikalottara, 41, 71, 259, 313, 
315, 317, 348 
DYCZKOWSKI, 273 


E 
ear, 441 
disease of, 495 
shape inside, 409 
eclipse, 79, 82 
effigies, see also dolls 
of flour, 379 
of maya, 94, 393 
of salt, 32 
of vetiver, 379 
EINOO, 13, 77, 38, 39, 60, 64, 
- 249-252, 331 
Ekaksa, 88, 292, 306 
equanimity, 446 
equinox, 34, 94, 95, 388, 397, 463 
euphonic glides, 115, 126, 133, 274 
296, 335, 363, 452, 454 
euthanasia, 326 
excrement, 437 
eyes, 327, 409, 411, 433, 468, 469 
iva's, as sun and moon, 461 
as locus of breath, 495 


64 


binding, 52 
closed, 472 
closing, 463 
fixed on tip of nose, 487 
functions of, 440, 441 
light in, 437 
of supernatural vision, 453 
on all sides, 432 
opening, 61 
red, of Maya, 455 
sun in, 451 
three of Siva as Time, 454 
three of Ardhanarisa, 457 
turning inward, 99 
eye-salve, 325 
eyeskip, 67 


F 
falsehood, 69, 426, 444 
FARQUHAR, 17 
fasting, 442, 443 
fat, 437 
Ficus racemosa, 381 
FILLIOZAT, 419 
firefly, 494 
fires 
penance of five, 324, 443 
fish, 96, 404 
flatulation, 438 
FLOOD, 70 
flutes, 439, 403 
front yard, 240, 350; 351 
fuel-sticks, 358, 380, 381 


G 
Gabhastika, 87, 290 — 
Gabhastimat, 296 
Gahana, 88, 90, 291, 293, 297, 298, 
307, 308, 342 
synonym for maya, 305 

Gajavaktra, 428 à 
gana (initiation-name-ending), 53 
Ganadhipa, 429, 487 

ganapasas, 92, 301 
Ganapati, 46, 97; 235, 428, 429; 487 


642 


Ganas, 56, 58, 235, 236, 346, 347) 
369, 423, 425; 428, 430, see 
also Ganesas 

circuit of eight, 428 
reward of becoming a Gana, 425 
seven in Nigvasa, 428 

ganavrata, 285 

gandhapavitra, 246 

Gandharvas, 235, 236 

perceiving of, 473 

Gandharva (svara), 438 

Gandharvesvara, 54 

gandhopavita, 246 

Ganesa, 369, 428, see also Vinayaka, 
Vighnesa 

Ganeáas, 46, 248, 360, 361, 425, 428, 
see also Ganas 

Gane$varas, see GaneSas and Ganas 

garbhadhana, 87, 93, 271, 275 

Garuda, 347 

Gautama, 69 

GAYATRI, 85, 89, 243, 259, 272, 321, 
358 

Gayatrisiva, 54 

Eenerosity, 445 

GERSTMAYR, 13 

Ghana, 88, 293, 307, 308 

ghantika, 493 

ghee, 81, 82, 86, 92, 244, 251, 252, 
254, 255, 263, 277, 359, 
374, 378, 383, 392, see al- 
so butter 

ghosadhyana, 94, 390, 392 

GHOSHAL, 54 

ghuraghurayate, 497 

ghurughuru, 495 

Gilgit, 31 

GILLET, 53 

gnosis, 294, 306, 442, 

Uh ai 4 Na 

Bocara, 52, 56-58 

GOEPPER, 80 

gold, 61, 262, 277, 404, 453 

coins, 328 
giving of, 324 


Nisvasatattvasamhità 


rosary of, 377 
stealing of, 323 
golden stylus, 61 
goldsmith, 404 
gomukha, 439 
GONDA, 249, 252 
gong, 494 
Gonnasiva., 54 
GOODALL, 11-13, 15, 19, 21, 25-27, 
29, 34, 35; 39, 41, 42, 44, 
59, 61, 68, 71, 76-78, 82, 
107, 110, 113, 244, 248, 295, 
296, 299, 306, 309, 312, 
313, 325, 345-347, 397, 
422, 425, 430, 434, 435, 
443, 448, 469 
GOPANI, 493 
Gopati, 88, 90, 291, 299, 304, 342 
Goraksasataka, 492 
gorocanà, see orpiment 
gotra, 273, 335 
GOUDRIAAN, 18, 19, 31, 33, 34, 106, 
107, 113, 279, 490 
Government Oriental Manuscripts Li- 
brary, Madras, 13 
Grace, 423, see also anugraha 
Grahas, 325 
grama, 439 
Grantha script, 505 
granthi, 291, 299, 304, 305, 342, 
455, see also mahagranthi 
synonym for maya, 305 
greed, 102, 360, 380, 446, 483, 503 
Grhyasamgrahaparisista, 251 
grief, 92, 360, 430 
GRIFFITHS, 11, 13, 256 
gudika, 82, 325 
Guhyakas, 347 
Guhyasiddhi, 66, 67, 436 
guhyastaka, 290, 297 
Guhyasutra, 16, 20-23, 26, 28, 
30-32, 35-39, 42, 44: 
46-48, 58, 61-66, 70-73: 
75, 78, 80, 83, 84, 104 
115, 123, 128, 235, 241-249: 


Indez to Introduction and Notes 


247, 249, 254, 266, 280, 
281, 284-293, 296-308, 
322, 324, 325, 342-344, 
351, 361, 375, 378, 391, 
394, 395; 400, 423, 428, 
437, 458, 466, 473, 480, 
481, 486, 487 
gunastaka, 498, see also Ai$varya and 
animadi 
GUPTA, 18, 19, 106, 107 
Gupta script, 105-107, 319, 402, 
409-411, 413-415, 419, 420 
guru, 49, 50, 53, 54, 86, 91, 240, 265, 
278, 310, 311, 330, 361, 
363, 370, 400, 471, 472, 474 
accoutrements of, 332 
Siva’s acting through, 16 
as rich householder, 59 
behaviour in presence of, 332, 
333 
criticism of, 240, 330, 429 
entering body of initiand, 283 
going to hell, 90 
greeting, 272, 273, 369 
hand of, 87, 279 
in dream, 265 
incoming, 333, 334 
like Siva, 240, 468, 478, 503 
living beside, 399, 475; 478, 483 
obligation of to transmit knowl- 
edge, 428 
officiating in pratistha, 287 
qualifications of, 99, 102, 339; 
406, 421, 436, 481, 502 
transgressing command of, 478 
gurudaksina, 54, see also daksina 
gurupanktitraya, 88, 291, 298 
gurupuja, 54 
Gurugisyapanktitraya, 291 
guruvaktra, 340 
H 
Hamburg, 11, 12, 36, 459 


Hamsa, 88, 292, 306, 307 
HANNEDER, 344 


643 
HARA, 15 
Hargacarita, 429 
HARIMOTO, 107 
Hathaka, 430 
Hathakusmanda, 46, 97, 235, 428, 
430 


Hathapradipika, 492 

HATLEY, 11-13, 26, 297, 335, 347; 
506 

HAUG, 256 

hautri diksa, 294 

havyakavya, 483 

HAZRA, 47, 70 

heaven, 56, 424, 426, 443, 444 

hells, 87, 90, 238, 295, 328, 334, 
423, 426, 502, see also nara- 


regent of, 430 

Hemacandra, 492 

Hemaraja Sarma, 106 

Hevajratantra, 492 

hiccoughs, 105, 419, 495 

hikka, 419, 495 

hira, 35 

HIRA LAL, 54 

hiranyapada, 277 

hiska, 419 

hita, 34, 35 

homa, 58, 82, 258, 261, 264, 283, 
309, 353; 370 

honey, 82, 378 

horripilation, 495 

Hoshiarpur Vishveshvaranand Vedic 
Research Institute, 13 

HRDAYA, 89, 243, 317, 318, 321, 352 

Hrdayasiva, 26, 29, 59; 60, 251, 288, 
564 

HUMPHAT, 297 

HULTZSCH, 53 

hunger, 92, 327, 360, 396, 430, 500 

hypermetry, 237, 279, 297; 437, 495; 
498 

hypocrisy, 43° 


644 


I 
iconography, 28, 35; 30, 457, 462 
Ida, 33, 34, 95: 254, 255; 397, 490 
IMA RUDRAYA, 63 
immorality, 426, 430, 444, 446 
impure universe, 303-305 
incense, 86, 246, 267, 373, 378 
Indra, 60, 252, 256, 483 

in the hand, 450 

transmitter of scripture, 347 


INDRA, 321 
Indrani, 338 
indriya, 97, 98, 434, 441, 443, 462 
ink, 104, 475 
iron, 283, 377, 404 
189 

as bindu, 484 


ISAACSON, 11-13, 15, 19, 32, 35, 76, 
78, 82, 321, 326, 422 
Igana, 331 
ISANA, 37, 253, 257, 320 
among Lokapalas, 321 
Isanasivagurudevapaddhati, 241, 349, 
354, 375 
istamantra, 266, 284 
istapiirta, 442 
Iévara, 96, 395, 425, 460, 480, 485, 
486 
becoming equal to, 461 
bonds of, 96, 360, 361, 422, 424 
cause of universe, 97 
four powers of, 464 
identified with bindu, 433, 464 
in heart, 99, 462 
in the letter a, 405, 406 
karanesa, 34, 368 
tattva of, 37, 91, 92, 95, 97, 292, 
339, 395; 424, 433 
transmitter of scripture, 85, 91, 
345 
visualised as four-faced, 98, 257, 
f 457-459 
ithyphallicism, 98, 459 


Nisvasatativasamhita 


J 

Jaiminiyagrhyasutra, 256 

JAMBUVIJAYAJI, 490 

Janaloka, 290, 296 

Janmahara, 88, 293, 307 

jata, 98, 457 

jatamukuta, 69 

Jayadrathayamala, 43, 72, 317, 335, 
465 

Jayakhyasamhita, 75, 76, 376, 407, 
437 

Jayaratha, 315 

jealousy, 360, 430, 446 

jihvamiltya, 104, 105 

Jiva, 403, 453, 490, 497 

Jivagosvamin, 454 

jivanmukti, 421 

jivanyasa, 61 

JNANA, 312 

Jnana 

a scripture, 345 
buddhidharma, 88, 303, 442 

jüanadiksa, 280 

Jnanalaksanasamuccaya, 272 

jüanapada, 77 

Jnanaprakaáa, 272 

Jnanaratnavali, 241, 244, 349, 366 

Jnanasiddhanta, 314 

JNANASIDDHIKUMARIKA, 87, 89, 320 

Jnanasiddhikumarika, 273, 320 

JUM, 379 

jvalana,  jvalita,  prajvalati, etc. 
(flames as a sign of magical 
accomplishment), 78, 80, 
81, 83, 395 

Jyestha, 292, 295, 302, 303 

JYESTHA, 87, 295 

Jyestha, 291 

jyotis, 52 

Jyotis, a gocara, 56, 57 


K 

Kaca, 348 

KAFLE, 11313, 21, 36, 37, 71, 288, 
434, 443, 458, 467, 470 


Indez to Introduction and Notes 


500 
Kailasa, 69, 73, 85, 235 
Kailasanatha, 68 
kaivalya, 442 
kala (time), 44, 90, 92, 94; 97, 291, 
299, 339, 340, 342, 360, 
392, 394, 405, 406, 427, 
454, 455, 482, see also Time 
kala 
five powers, 42, 43, 308, 464 
four powers, 42, 43, 77, 99, 293; 
308, 433, 464-467, 480, 
482 
personified, 308 
limited power to act, 40, 44, 46, 
455 
mantra-division, 77, 257, 467 
KALADHYA, 89, 95, 318, 315, 316, 
343, 396 
Kalagnirudra, 87, 288, 295 
Kah, 347 
Kali age, 68, 69 
Kalottara, 41-43, 66, 67, 71, 313; 314; 
320-322, 348, 352, 397, 
398, 496 
kalpa, 20, 73, 458 
kamandalu, 48, 98, 325 
Kamika, 59, 72, 315, 345; 346 
Kamika, Purva-, 30 
Kamika (sage), 346 
Kamika, Uttara-, 241 
Kancheepuram, 53, 68 
kaficukas, 455, 466 
KANTHAUSTHYA, 243, 267, 319, 323 
KANTHOSTHYA, 313, 318, 341; 343 
KANTHYOSTHA, 89, 318, 319 
kapala, 98 
Kapalavrata, 306 
Kapali, 46, 428 
kapola, 365 
Kapphinabhyudaya, 68 
Karana, 59, 345 
Pürva-, 254, 374, 375 
karana (upper-body-posture), 487 
kàranesa, 34, 74, 368, 485 


645 


karman, 41, 260, 261, 281, 295, 310, 
392, 446, 

karmasamya, 483 454 

karmasamjivana, 310 

Karuka, 37, 299 

kasthavrata, 285 

Kasyapa, 348 

KATAOKA, 11, 41, 85 

Kathmandu, 13, 107 

Kathopanisat, 34 

Kausitakagrhyasutra, 256 

Kaundinya, 490 

KAVACA, 89, 243, 321 

Kedara, 22, 73 

Kesar Library, 107 

kettle-drums, 439 

kevalakumbhaka, 492 

Khadiragrhyasutra, 251 

KHAMALANKRTA, 89, 95, 313, 316, 
343; 396 

KHAMALAM, 317 

kila/kilaka, 60 

lalita, 60, 377 

Kinnaras, 235, 236 

Kirana, 34, 42-44, 51, 52; 56, 59, 
60, 62, 64, 65, 71, 19, 77, 
107, 113, 250, 252, 253, 
255, 263, 205, 285, 287, 
299, 303; 304, 309-311, 
341, 345, 358, 364, 366, 
375, 377, 399, 409, 489 

Kiranavrtti, 29, 425 

Kiss, 12, 113, 461 

kotimudrà, 89, 93, 323: 375, 376 

KRAGH, 491 

KREISEL, 457, 460 

Kriyakramadyotika, 357 

kriyapada, 77 

kriyatantra, 16 

Krkara, d 495-497 

astaka, 290 

pu uem 388. see also abhicara 
and malefic rites 

KSAPANA, 89; 95; 377 

KSAPANA-KSAYA, 313 


646 


KSAPANAT-KSAYA, 396 

KSAPANAVIGRAHA, 318 

KSAPANE KSAYA, 343 

Ksatriyas, 53, 241, 329; 330, 399 

KSAYAT KSAPANA, 317 

Ksemaraja, 17, 28, 52, 76, 249, 273, 
277, 280, 299-302, 344, 
357, 369, 390, 391, 437, 
438, 441, 444, 446, 448, 
449, 452, 453, 4557457: 
459, 469, 470, 488-491, 
494, 495; 498, 499, 505 

Ksemisa, 88, 291, 299, 304 

Ksudra, 88, 293, 307, 308 

Kubjikamata, 113, 461, 477 

KUMAR ACHARYA, 11, 12, 71, 362 

kumbhaka, 77, 101, 315, 398, 
489-493 

kunda, 39, 249, 353; 354 

kundasamskara, 358 

Kuram, 53 

Kürma (breath), 101, 496, 497 

Kurmapurana, 442 

kürmàra, 497 

Küsmanda, 430 


L 
laksya, 389, 431, 473, 486, 489 
laksyadhyana, 94, 388, 390-392 
Lakulas, 15, 295 
cosmography ०, 288, 294, 
302-305 
initiation of, 279, 289, 294, 295 
no use of fire, 294 
scriptures of, 302 
Lakuhsa, 37 
Lalita, 345 
laya, 503 
lead, 377 
lemmata, 110 
linga, 20, 27, 50, 59-65, 79-82, 95, 
96, 99, 247, 270, 284, 288, 
395, 396, 425, 457, 460, 
461, 478 
8 gocara, 57 


Nisvasatativasamhita 


stepping on shadow of, 429 
lightning, 92, 99, 464, 501 

fire from, 357 
lingadvaya, 395, 461 
lingamudra, 63 
lingaparigraha, 59 
lingapratistha, 60, 61, 64 
lingasuddhi, 278 
lions, 312, 477 
lion-throne, 363 
Lokapalas, 86, 89, 91, 248, 267, 321, 

322, 353 

Lokatitavrata, 288 
lostukavrata, 285 
lotus-seeds, 376 
love, 97, 360, 430 
lust, 97, 430 


M 
macrocosm, 388, 463 
madamoha, 291, 299 
madder, 80 
madhyadeSa, 33 
Madhyama (svara), 438 
magic, 15-17, 32, 73; 78, 82, 326, 
396, 449, 467 
Buddhist tantric, 80 
spells, 281 
magical fire-oblations, 82 
magical objects, 325 
magical powers, 74, 77, 89 
magical recipes, 20, 32, 78, 84 
pre-tantric, 82 
magical self-control, 78 
magical siddhis, 16 
magical substances, 82, 325 
magical thought-world, 78 
magnets, 97 
Mahabharata, 124, 238, 442, 447; 
450, 451, 477, 490 
Mahadevastaka, 291 
Mahadevatraya, 291, 299 
mahagranthi, 88, 299, 302, see also 
granthi 
Mahakala, 46, 347, 428 


Index to Introduction and Notes 


Mahākāl, 347 
mahamaya, 302, 406 
mahanidra, 475 
mahapataka, 27, 89, 324 
Maharloka, 290, 296 
mahavidya, 292, 302, 305, 466 
mahavrata, 285 
mahendra, 395 
MAJUMDAR, 60 
Makuta, 345 
mala, 40, 41, 43, 260, 405, 422, 423, 
436 
Malaiyalam, 462 
malaparipaka, 41 
malefic rites, 354, 366, 373, 374, 376, 
377, 381-383, see also ab- 
hicara and krirakarman 
Malini, 36, 407, 411, 413, 414, 416, 
420 
Malinivijayottara, 325, 347, 407, 
470, 489 
Mallavadin, 490 
MALLINSON, 13, 74, 471, 492 
manas, 97, 98, 434, 472; 485 
Manava, 88, 292, 306 
Manavagrhyasutra, 256 
Manavasulbasutra, 364 
Mandala, 62 
mandala, 79-81, 85, 86, 88, 92, 
93, 238, 247, 248, 266-268, 
283, 286, 309, 329, 331 
354, 359, 364-366, 368, 
371 
casting flower on, 51, 52, 284, 
372 
circular, 366 
colours, 238, 368 
doors of, 268, 365, 367 
Eastern door of, 366 
for elements, 76, 449 
round, 267 
semi-circular, 309, 367 
Square, 366 
tattva-, 79, 267, 331 
triangular, 367 


647 


Western door of, 366 
mandapa, 64 
Mandara, 88, 293, 307, 308 
Manjusri, 82 
Manjusriyamilakalpa, 12, 16, 20, 31, 
32; 18, 79; 81, 83, 84, 377 
Manonmani, 88, 243, 312 
mantrajapa, 75 
Mantrakaumudi, 68 
Mantramarga, 15-17, 20, 30-32, 37, 
44, 47, 58, 64, 66, 67, 82, 
90, 295; 303, 304, 337 
cosmography, 305 
mantranyasa, 32 
mantras 
seven crore, 269 
mantrasuddhi, 278 
mantroddhara, 75, 311, 395, 465, 503 
Manusmrti, 251, 399, 432 
marddala, 439 
Marci, 348 
Markanda, 348 
marriage, 47, 93, 273, 370 
in dream, 265, 363 
with Jnanasiddhikumarika, 273 
marrow, 437 
massage, 265 
Matariga, 38, 43, 44, 50, 59, 62, 
mi, 253, 255, 287, 288, 
310, 346, 355: 358, 362, 
372-314; 433 
Matasara, 72, 266, 268, 270, 332, 
344 
matha, 334 
Mathura, 457 
matr, see Mothers 
matrka, 91, 93, 94, 286, 302, 343, 
` 849, 371, 386, 421, 436, see 
also syllabary 
MATRKA, 39, 349, 350 
matrkasiva, 386, 394 
matrkayaga, 91, 349 352, 506 
ausulas, 299 
ae 40-42, 44, 50; 90-92; 94; 97 
260, 340, 342, 361, 387, 


648 


394, 405, 420, 433, 456, 
465, 466, 482, 484, 485 
code for I, 317 
effigy of, 393 
exoteric mantra, 350 
in cosmography, 299, 393-395; 
360 
is it primal matter?, 423 
unmentioned in Mülasütra, 260, 
302, 305 
visualisation of, 393, 455, 480 
Medhatithi, 251 
mekhalavrata, 369 
menstruating woman, 429, 430 
MEYER, 13 
microcosm, 388, 463 
milk, 82, 244, 262, 263, 285, 378, 
379 
millet, 262, 263 
fox-tail, 262 
MILLS, 28 
minor Ionic, 238 
MIRASHI, 54 
MIRNIG, 11, 47, 408 
MISHRA, 11 
mithyavrata, 285 
Mitra, 450 
mleccha, 330 
modesty, 442 
Modita, 88, 293, 307 
Mohacidottara, 62 
Mohasurottara, 62, 71 
Moksakarika, 295 
MONIER-WILLIAMS, 114, 127, 250, 
342, 357, 419, 455; 470 
morality, 426, 430, 442-444 
Mothers, 60, 347, 350 
mrdaüga, 439 
mrga, as sacrifice, 461 
oe 38, 42-44, 71, 250-253, 
aoe 30,726 08085, 
: 340, 354, 358, 359, 
304, 369 
Mrgendrapaddhatitika, 48, 71 
Mrgendravrtti, 369, 382 


Nisvasatattvasamhita 


mrtyuüjaya, 379 

Mundakopanisat, 124 

mudras, 63, 89, 93. 94, 237, 282, 
323, 329, 374-376 

Mukhabimbaka, 345 

mukhadarana, 317 

mukhalinga, 59 

MukteSvara, 53 

mukti, 15, 32; 59; 73 

muktidiksa, 47, 50, 51, 87, 261, 280, 
281, 289, 295, 371 

muktimandala, 266, 284 

mumuksu, 265, 281, 289 

Mundi, 88, 293, 307 

murcchana, 439 

Murti (term for VidyeSas), 88, 292, 
301, 302 

murtyastau, 301 

muskasutra, 418 

mustard oil, 381 

mustard seeds, 80, 378 

Mysore, 13 


N 

nada, 91, 101, 479, 480, 484, 485, 
489, 503 

nadanta, 503 

nàdi, 33, 35, 46, 490, see also 
susumna, ida, pingala 

nadisamsodhana, 101 

Nadividyastaka, 291 

Naga (breath), 101, 495-498 

nagakanyaka, 326 

Nagas, 236 

nagoddhara, 325 

nagoddharana, 325 

nails, 283, 437 

NAMAH, 379 

namakarana, 369 

namaskara, 89, 93, 323, 374, 370, 
380 

Nandikeévara, 56, 57 

Nandin, 46, 85, 97, 235, 429 

treated as an i-stem word, 113 
Nandisvaravatara-Nihévasa, 28 


Indez to Introduction and Notes 


Nandivarman, 53 

NARAHARINATHA, 58 

naraka, 87, 290, see also hells 

Narasimha II, 68 

Narayanakantha, 251, 253, 310, 359, 
369 

Naresvarapariksaprakasa, 326, 423 

nasagra, 34 

Natarajapaddhati, 265 

NAVATMAN, 45, 75, 85, 90, 94, 95, 
243, 267, 318, 319, 322, 
323, 339-341, 343, 372, 
385, 386, 396, 403, 405, 
423, 424, 426, 427, 436, 
448, 479 

Naya (a name for the Saivasiddhan- 
ta?), 68 

nayanonmilana, 61 

nayasiddhanta, 68 

Neem, 381 

Nepal-German Manuscript Preserva- 
tion Project, 13, see also 
NGMPP 

nescience, 442, 444 

NETRA, 52, 243, 259; 321, 350; 379 

Netratantra, 271, 328, 350, 379, 505 

Netratantroddyota, 379 

NGMPP, 27-29, 51, 103, 104, 
107-109, 332, 333; 348, 465 

Nihévasottara, 26, 27 

NIJENHAUS, 439 

Nirafijana, 88, 293, 307 

nirbijikarana, 325, 326, 397 

niriksana, 357 

nirmalya, 429, 430 

nirvacana, 68, 314, 425, 501 

nirvanadiksa, 74, 93, 94, 238, 267; 
280 

Nisada, 438 

niska, 328 | 

NISKALA, 89, 91, 95, 100, 243, 313, 
314, 323, 343, 352, 390, 

483, 484 
niskramana, 271, 369 
Nigvasa 


649 


nirvacana of, 95, 400 
Nisvasakarika, 11, 20, 23-27, 29, 30, 
34: 41, 50, 71, 72, 247, 268, 
270, 273, 275, 278, 280, 
295, 306, 393, 400, 435, 
467, 468, 473, 501-503, 
506 
Nigvasakhyamahatantra, 27, 28, see 
also Devyamata 
Nisvasamukha, 12, 20-22, 26, 30, 31, 
35, 37, 38, 44, 53, 71, 73, 
90, 104, 235, 279, 288-292, 
296, 298, 300-302, 304, 
307, 337, 342, 348, 373, 
425, 429, 469, 487 
Nisvasamukhatattvasamhita, 20 
Nisvasasamhita, 21 
Nisvasatativasamhita, 22 
Nisvasottara, 29 
Nisvasottarasamhita, 95, 401 
Nityadisarigrahapaddhati, 28, 56, 379 
nityahoma, 74 
nivrtti 
kala, 42, 77, 99, 404 465 
personified, 293, 308 
niyati, 392 
niyati, 40, 44, 90; 92, 94 90, 97, 291, 
298, 339. 340, 342, 300, 
391, 392, 394, 405, 406, 
427, 433, 454, 456, 480, 
482, 485 
non-dualism, 17 
no fault-line between dualism 
and non-dualism in Nisvasa, 
39, 341 
nose, 409, 411, 412, 487, 493 
locus of visualisation of earth, 


451 
seat of faculty of smell, 433, 440, 
441 
nostrils, 412, 489, 493 
closing, 463 
nullifidianism, 423 
Nux vomica, 381 " 
Nyayagamanusarint, 490 


650 


0 

OBERLIES, 113-125, 130-136 T 
Occlusion, 423, see also tirobhava 
oil-massage, 265 

OLIVELLE, 34; 35; 07 

OM, 75; 253; 257, 379 503 
omens, 49, 58, 265, 266, 362, 363 
OM JUM SAH, 379 

Omkara, 292, 301, 302 
oneiromancy, 265 

orpiment, 80, 81, 325 


P 

padapracara, 77-81 

padapracarika, see padapracara 

padartha, 40, 422 

padas, 77 

paddhati, 17, 59, 74, 283, 295 

padmaka, 99, 101, 469 

Padmasamsthana, 62 

Padmavajra, 66 

padodaka, 474 

PADOUX, 13 

pākayajñas, 93, 274, 275, 278, 370 

palaeography, 28, 35, 36, 54, 104, 
106, 107, 407, 460 

palasa, 64, 356, 382 

Pallavas, 53, 68 

panava, 439 

palicagavya, 78, 86, 92, 263, 361 

Pañcama (svara), 438 

Paricaratra, 75, 76, 358 

Paricarthabhasya, 490 

pancastaka, 87, 290, 297 

pancasuddhi, 278 

paticatattvadiksa, 43 

paincavarana, 248 

Para, 492 

parakayapravega, 328 

Parakhya, 29, 44, 77, 76, 77, 773, 
269, 295, 305, 325, 382, 
s 442: 443, 449, 469, 

Paramaksaradeva, 379 

Paramaéiva, 54 


Nisvasatativasamhita 


Paramatmasandarbha, 454 
Paramesvara, 345, 346, 369 
old manuscript of, 105-108 
recensions of, 29 
ParameSvara I, 53 
Paramoksanirasakarikavriti, 334 
parasol, 331-333, 363 
paridhi, 86, 250, 358, 383 
parthiva, 75, 395 
Parvati, 56, 58 
pasa, 40, 41, 260, 291, 299, 310, 
360, 361, 422, 427, see al- 
so bondage 
pasasitra, 260, 261, 282, 283, 360, 
506 
pasu, 40, 41, 68, 269, 422 
Pasupatas, 15, 16, 69, 70, 283, 302, 
425 
mocking nirvacana, 68 
Paricarthika, 15, 37, 59, 424 
initiation, 16, 294 
no use of fire, 294 
yoga, 68 
Pasupatasutra, 490 
echo of, 327 
pasupatavrata, 93, 256, 370, 424 
pasupatayoga, 68, 497 
Pasupati, 40, 68, 69, 256, 422 
pasutantra, 431 
pasuyoni, 423, 424 
pataha, 439 
Patangasivacarya, 54 
pati, 40, 422 
Pavana, 88, 293, 307 
pavitra, 271, 358, 359, 369, 383 
pavitraka, 246 
Pavitrastaka, 290 
pavitrotsava, 59 
pàyu, 438, see also anus 
penis, 33, 270, 438, 450, 459, 460 
PHAT, 326 
PINDAKSARA, 343 
pilgrimage, 297, 442, 443 
pindika, 61-63 
Pingala 


Indez to Introduction and Notes 


a Rudra, 88, 292, 306 
metrician, 239 
Pingala, 33, 34; 254; 255, 490 
pisacas, 477 
pitha, 61, 62, 242, 365 
pitta, 437 
poison, 381 
pole star, 364 
post-Gupta scripts, 409, 411, 413 
PRASADA, 350 
Prabhasakhanda, 454 
Prabhata, 293, 307 
Prabhava, 88, 293, 308 
Prajapati, 252, 256 
in penis, 450 
prakrantahoma, 309 
Prakritisms, 73, 284 
prakriya, 64, 94, 97, 289, 294, 295; 
385, 386, 435, 436 
prakrta 
language, 343; 439 
made of matter, 443 
prakrti, 42, 44, 46, 75, 92, 94; 97, 
98, 101, 340, 360, 388, 389, 
394, 405, 406, 427, 433 
442, 445, 447, 453, 405, 
480, 482, 483, 485, see al- 
so avyakta 
eightfold, 291 
seed-syllable of, 75, 90, 339; 
342, 388, 449, 450, 452 
visualisation of, 452 
yoga of, 389, 390, 452 
Pralamba, 88, 293, 307 
pralayakala, 447 
Pramanas 
8 Rudras, 88, 292, 301, 302 
scriptures, 37, 302, 305; 306 
Pramudita, 293, 307 
Prana, ioi, 102, 327, 494, 495 
y 497—499 
pranapratistha, 61 
pranava, 34, 88, 100, 101, 269, 301; 
358, 398, 466, 483, 484, 
499 


651 


exoteric nature of, 350 
_ Tebirth as, 292, 300-302, 304 
pranayama, 77, 93, 372, 489-493 
Pranita, 88, 293, 307 
Pranita, 86, 250-252, 256, 358 
prasada 
mantra, 313, 350 
temple, 64, 65 
Praganta, 492, 493 
prasanta-kumbhaka, 489 
prasarita, 99, 469, 487 
prasena, 391 
prasina, 391 
pratima, 32, 378, 379, 393, see also 
dolls, effigies 
pratipadika (used for inflected form), 
115, 126, 132, 134, 135, 236, 
238, 264, 312, 313, 329, 
341, 346, 353, 391; 441, 445, 
471, 478, 481, 499, 503 
pratistha, 20, 28, 59-61, 63-66 
definition, 61 
kala, 42, 77, 99, 464, 465 
personified, 293, 308 
Pratisthalaksanasarasamuccaya, 272, 
364 
Pratoda, 88, 292, 306 
pratyahara, 492, 493 
Pratyatmikastaka, 290 
pravara, 273 
Pravitata, 88, 293, 307, 308 
prayascitta, 26, 27, 58, 59, 284, 309, 
310, 326, 380, 458 
Prayascittasamuccaya of Hrdayasiva, 
26, 59; 251, 288 
Prayascittasamuccaya of Trilocana, 
26, 27, 59; 60, 251, 354 
pride, 49, 69, 360, 430, 483 
prognostication, 92, 361 
proksana, 93; 357 
Puskara-Paramesvara, 251 
udgalatman, 461 
ee 64, 81, 93, 238, 260, 356, 
428, 409 


652 


nitya-, 241 
püraka, 77, 490-492 
pürana, 101, 489, 490 
pure universe, 303-305 
pürnahuti, 86, 92, 258 
purusa, 45, 46, 90, 92, 94, 97, 209, 
339-342, 360, 394, 405, 
406, 427, 433, 435, 480, 
482, 486 
discrimination from prakrti, 442 
meditation on, 94, 98, 389-391 
purvasutra 
synonym of Mulasutra, 90, 337 
puskara, 382 
puspaloha, 79, 82 
pusti, 92, 93, 350, 373; 383 
putraka, 25, 48, 49, 263, 280 
definition, 50 
putranjiva, 376 


R 

raga, 40, 44, 46, 291, 299, 455, 494 

rajas, 98, 445, 446 

rajavrksa, 82 

Raksasas, 325, 347, 477 

Rama, 348 

Ramakantha, 29, 287, 295, 314-319, 

392, 423, 435 

Ramanatha, 265, 327 

Ramayana, 266 

RASTELLI, 76 

Ratnatrayapariksa, 42 

RAU, 455 

Raudra, 70, 291 

Raudra practices, 69 

Raudri, 292, 295, 302, 303 

RAUDRI, 87, 295 

Raurava, 71, 254, 345 
-sutrasarigraha, 41-44, 72, 310, 


343; 348, 502 
Raka, 348 


recaka, 77, 490-492 
Tecana, 101, 489, 491 


recitation, 27, 86, 93, 248, 264, 265, 
271, 284, 329, 331, 334, 


Nis$vasatattvasamhita 


368, 376, 377, 379, 396, 
399, 421, 442, 443, 467, 
478, 481 
RETAH, 89, 243; 259; 319, 320 
rice, 261-263 
wild, 262, 263 
Ricika, 348 
Rodhaáakti, 41, 42, 283 
rosaries, 22, 284, 376, 377, 458, 
459, see also aksamala and 
aksasütra 
ROUT, 11, 505 
Rsabha (svara), 438 
Rsikula, 88, 291, 300-302, 304, 305 
Rtvij, 249 
Rudra, 69, 88, 292, 298, 306, 307, 
see also Rudras 
as M, 484 
as transmitter of scripture, 91, 
345 
creator of false scripture, 68 
identified with element of prana- 
va, 101 
in ahankara, 98, 451 
in linga, 61 
karanesa, 34, 368 
on paridhi, 250 
one of eleven, 88, 293, 307 
Rudragita, 70 
rudraksa, 376 
Rudrani, 338 
Rudrapratisthakalpa, 60 
Rudras, 298, 306, see also Rudra 
becoming a Rudra, 56 
eleven, 293, 307 
gurupaünktatraya, 298 , 
hundred, 297, see also Sataru- 
dras 
named after pramanas, 302 
Rudrasivacarya, 54 
Rudronkara, 88, 293, 308 
Ruru, 348 
RUZSA, 419 


Indez to Introduction and Notes 


S 
gabdarasi, 386 
sadaksara, 350 


Sadasiva, 36-38, 76, 88, 90-92, 
94, 99, 2306, 257, 293, 
308, 319, 339-343, 347, 
385-387, 424, 428, 457, 
463, 465, 466, 477, 485, 


f 486 
Saktis of, 42 


bonds of, 96, 360, 361, 422-424 
eightfold, 22, 90, 95, 99, 338, 
339, 341, 387, 388, 397, 


483 
faces of, 37, 38, 244, 246 
iconography, 53 


iconography absent in Ni$vasa, 


36, 4575 459 


identified with HA, 90, 339; 465 


in the letter a, 405, 406 
karane$a, 34, 368 

on paridhi, 250 

proto-, 37 

seventh-century initiate, 55 
source of tattvas, 90, 341 
tattva, 42, 457 

tenfold, 90, 318, 339; 463 


transmitter of scripture, 344; 


345 
with ten colours, 99 


653 


Sadhyonkara, 88, 292, 300, 302 
Sadja, 438 
Sadyaháivacarya, 55 
SADYOJATA, 37, 63, 253, 317, 320, 
358, 372 
Sadyojata, 272 
Sadyojyotih, 27, 41, 48, 56, 71 
Sahasra, 345 
sahasralinga, 60 
Sahasrika, 274, 277, 370 
sahaya, 48, 284, see also uttarasad- 
haka and sakhaya 
Saiddhantika canon, 345 
SAITO, 13 
Saivasiddhanta, 17, 36, 40, 41, 67, 68, 
341, 422, 442 
absent at the time of the sutras 
of the Ni$vasa, 17, 31 
classical, 288 
Suksmagama, 254 
SAKALA, 27, 89, 91, 95; 313; 314, 316, 
323, 343, 351-353, 396 
sakalikarana, 33, 38, 89, 241, 260, 
322, 352, 488 
sakhaya, 80, see also uttarasadhaka 
l and sahāya 
Sakti, 42, 90, 94, 97, 338, 342, 
384-387, 398, 432, 433; 
471, 472, 474, 481, 483; 484, 
502 
a world, 88, 293; 307 


sadhaka, 36, 48, 59, 64, 65, 74; 77 1 
3०, d 56 $^ 259, 262, as pitha, 61 à 
263, 270, 280, 282, 284, d "a 
295, 309, 327, 359, 37? as S F Ie 
377, 380, 383. 384, 393; Rue) 33 
405, 408, 410-412, 418, 419, iy EU ree 
428, 462, 472, 474, 500 our, 42, 404) 41% 


त hic form of, 91, 339, 341, 
generic term for initiate, 47, 5% grap Sa i : 


ee 372 identity with, 478 
ing, LS. in NAVATMAN, 90 
one of four classes of initiate, 25) in pranava, 101 
48, 280 in yoga, 95, 99 100, 388, 


definition, 50 
personality-types of, 20, 285 
Sadhya, 292, 301 


471-473) 478-481 
mantra, 95; 385; 398 


654 


nine, 88, 242, 295, 302, 312 
tattva, 90, 339-341, 406, 479 
three, 88, 292, 295, 302; 303 
saktidvadasanta, 323 
Saktipata, 483 
Corti. 94, 95; 100, 385; 388, 
399, 468, 478, see also sa- 
marasya 
Salya, 350 
samana, 101, 494, 495: 498 
samarasa, see Saktisamarasa 
samarasya, 95; 399; 468, 476, see al- 
so Saktisamarasa 
Samaya, 88, 293, 307, 308 
samaya (rules), 51, 280, 281, 309, 
361, 430 
samayadiksa, 53, 279-281 
samayajiia, 51 
samayin, 25, 48, 49, 51, 239, 263, 
278, 280, 283 
definition, 50 
SAMBANDHASIVACARYA, 71 
samjivana, 310 
samnyasa, 87, 370 
samnyasin, 93 
sampata, 81 
samsara, 49, 50, 70, 237, 304, 311, 
393, 400, 401, 442, 443, 
445; 446, 448, 455, 471, 474, 
478, 481, 485, 498, 503 
samskaras, 271 
Samskaravidhi, 283 
samskrta, 343, 439 
Samvarodayatantra, 492 
Sanaka, 348 
Sanandana, 348 
Sanatkumara, 55, 57 
sandal, 373 
sandals, 325, 333 
SANDER, 402 
SANDERSON, 11718, 15, 17-19, 21, 23, 
28-31, 37, 40, 41, 44, 51, 
94; 55, 59, 66, 67, 70, 71, 
82, 107, 108, 279, 287-289, 
294, 298-305, 349, 422, 


Nisvasatattvasamhita 


430, 459, 474, 505 
sandha vowels, 311 
sandhyavandana, 373 
Sankara 
on paridhi, 250 
SANKARANARAYANAN, 54 
Sankhyakarika, 434, 442 
Sankhyas, 30, 44, 46, 74, 85, 88, 98, 
237, 288, 298, 340, 342, 
389, 427, 433, 441-444, 
446-448, 456, 486, 492 
sankranti, 95, 397 
Sanmukha, 46, 56, 58, 97, 235, 428 
Santa (breath-control practice), 492, 
493 
Santana, 345 
Santi 
kala, 42, 77, 99, 464, 465 
personified, 293, 308 
purpose of ritual, 92, 93, 257, 
| 356, 373, 383 
Santyadhipati, 256 
Santyatita, 42, 43, 308, 464 
sapasraya, 99, 101, 469 
sapphires, 393 
Saptasatikakalottara, 41 
Sarada script, 413 
Saradatilaka, 364, 466 
Sarasvati, 270 
Sardhaáatikakalottara, 313, 482 
Sardhatrigatikalottara, 28, 34, 41 
43, 71, 72, 76, 238, 259, 
313-315, 318, 320, 325 
326, 330, 339, 348, 364, 
366, 372, 373, 385, 390, 
397, 404, 491, 496 
Sardhatrigatikalottaravrtti, 314-318 
Sarkaroccaya, 87, 290, 296 
SARMA, S. A.S., 11, 462 
arva, 256 
Sarvagamapramanyopanyasa, 435 
Sarvajnanottara, 34, 41-44, 51 62, 
71, 83, 244, 250, 252, 254: 
257, 265, 269, 271, 287, 


Indez to Introduction and Notes 


303, 304, 322, 329, 330, 
333, 364, 366, 371, 375, 
380, 382-384, 386, 435, 
502 
Sarvodgita, 345 
SASTRI, Hara Prasad, 17, 105, 106 
Satapathabrahmana, 35 
Sataratnasangraha, 24, 27 
Sataratnollekhini, 27 
Satarudras, 87, 290, 297, see also 
Rudras, hundred 
Satarudriya, 297 
SATHYANARAYANAN, 11, 26, 59, 288 
Satikakalottara, 72, 325, 397, 398, 
400, 475 
sattva, 98, 445, 446 
Satyaloka, 290, 296, 297 
Saumya, 88, 292, 306, 307 
Saurabha, 88, 293, 307 
Saurasamhita, 338, 366 
sa-vipula, 238, 239 
sayojya, 282, 386, 390, 395, 399 
for sayujya, 73, 127, 284 
scales, 326, 396, 397 
SCHARFE, 399 
SCHMID, 13 
SCHOTERMAN, 113 
Scissors, 282, 283, 331, 332 
Scripts, see also Brahmi, Devana- 
gari, Grantha, Gupta, post- 
Gupta 
Northern, 412, 414-416, 418, 419 
Southern, 412, 414-416, 418, 419 
self-control, 446 
semen, 437 
of Siva, 87, 270 
SERBAEVA SARAOGI, 465 
Serpents, 312, 315, 347, see also 
snakes 
as sacred thread, 459 
slough of, 481 
sesame, 80 
SFERRA, 109, 110, 466 
SHASTRI, 55 
Siddha, 345 


655 


Siddhantasarapaddhati, 265, 349, 


430 
Siddhamatrka, 417 
Siddhantadharma, 67 
Siddhantadipika of Ramanatha, 327 
Siddhantatantras, 17, 21, 43, 48, 71, 
244, 256, 425 
canon of, 345 
Southern, 73 
Siddhas, 85, 99, 100, 235, 344, 463, 


472, 477 
conversation with, 470 


seeing, 498 
sporting with, 477 
Siddhayogesvarimata, 113, 237, 242, 
285, 347, 351, 492 
siddhi, 16, 20, 60, 63, 65, 86, 93, 
99, 100, 258, 281, 284, 
287, 325, 372, 396, 435, 
450-452, 454, 455, 458, 
459, 461, 466, 467, 475, 


482, 489, 493 
threefold, 16, 80-83 
siddhidravyani, 325 
siddhilinga, 65, 384 
SIKHA, 87, 89, 243, 282, 321 
Sikha, a gocara, 56 
Siloccaya, 87, 290, 296 
silver, 262, 494 
Simhasüri, 490 
sinews, 437 
SIRAS, 89, 243, 317, 321 
SIRCAR, 54, 55 
Sirpur, 54 
Sitabhighara, 252 
Siva 
a gocara, 50, 57 
SIVA, 253, 314, 316, 321, 323, 328, 
371 
éivacakra, 100, 482 
Sivadharma, 56, 58 
Sivadharma corpus, 491 
Sivadharmasarigraha, n 
Sivadharmasastra, 46, 47, 55, 50, 58, 
246 


656 


Sivadharmottara, 351 

Sivagamadimahatmya, 272 

Sivagocara, 50, 57 

givahasta, 32, 49, 87, 93: 278-280, 
283, 289, 295; 370 

Sivajnanasiddhisvapaksadrstantasangrahd, 
501 

SIVAMANTRA, 259 

Sivani, 127, 338 

SIVASTRA, 282 

Sivasutravimarsini, 28 

Siva-tattva, 238 

SIVATATTVA, 79, 89, 313; 319 

Sivavrata, 287 

Sivopanisad, 351 

Sivotsarga, 270 

Skanda, 60, 235, 246, 254, 347, 381, 
398, 428 

head of Ganas, 236 

Skandapurana, 239, 347, 429, 488, 

491, 492, 497 
Prabhasakhanda, 454 

SLACZKA, 28 

SLOUBER, 236 

slough, 481 

smarta ritual, 250, 252, 256, 274 

$masanavrata, 285 

smell, 433, 434, 440, 441, 451, 470 

snakes, 65, 98, 235, 326, 412, 458, 
486, see also serpents 

snanapitha, 379 

sneezing, 495, 496 

Sobha, 365, 366 

solstice, 463 

Soma, 252, 254-256 

Somasambhu, 61, 62, 65, 26 4 

Somasambhupaddhati, 53, 61, 2 49, 
250, 254, 256, 260, 262, 
268, 280, 282, 283, 332, 
357, 358, 364, 366, 370, 

Somaáa e ddha 

mbhupaddhatitika, 
soul, see purusa, pa$u ? 350, 357 
South es Temple Agamas, 59, 61, 


Ni$vasatattvasamhita 


sparsadiksa, 327 
érauta ritual, 250, 252, 256 
Srautasiitras, 249 
Srikanthiyasamhita, 344 
Srinivasamakhi, 256 
Sripura, 53, 54 
Sritala, 87, 290, 296 
Srucl, 115, 251, 252 
sruk, 94, 251, 359, 382 
sruva, 94, 251, 254, 359, 382 
steadfastness, 445 
STEINER, 239, 491 
Sthanastaka, 290 
sthanasuddhi, 278 
stupidity, 446 
Susrutasamhita, 450 
SudarSanacarya, 54 
$uddhadhvan, 300, 303, 304 
$uddhamarga, see $uddhadhvan 
Sudras, 399 
excluded from Saiva learning, 
330 
twelve years of probation, 332, 
399 
twenty years of probation, 329 
suicide, 444, see also yogic suicide 
Sukhada, 307 
Sukhaduhkhada, 88, 293, 307 
Sukra, 348 
Suksmagama, 345 
Suksmasvayambhuva, 71 
sun, 95, 271, 324, 338, 368, 397: 
432, 472, 480, 501 
absence of desire in, 97, 432 
as Siva, 373 
as Siva’s eye, 461 
in the eye, 451 
staring at, 100 
sun-stone, 338, 358, 432, see also 
suryakanta 
SUNYA, 89, 95, 313, 315, 316, 343 
396 
Suprabha, 346 
Suprabheda, 310, 374 
Suprabhedi, 346 


Indez to Introduction and Notes 


Suprabhedin, 345 
suprasanta, 77, 101, 491, 492 
suryakanta, 357, 358, see also sun- 
stone 
suryopasthana, 373 
SuSsiva, 290, 297, 298 
Susrutasamhita, 107 
susumna (channel), 480 
central, 33, 34, 254, 255, 490 
northern, 33, 95, 397 
Susumna (goddess), 293, 308, 456, 
480, 481 
susupta, 499 
sutra 
nirvacana of, 501 
SVAHA, 379 
Svayambhuvaparicaratra, 64 
Svacchanda, 30, 43, 51, 52, 66, 
250, 252, 260, 263, 264, 
277, 278, 280, 298, 299, 
302-305, 307, 328, 345, 
390, 394, 399, 437, 464, 
469 
borrowings from Ni$vasa, 17, 37, 
66, 71, 72, 241, 264, 276, 
280, 288, 291, 298-302, 
338, 344, 369, 386, 
393-395, 433, 435, 436, 
438, 440-444, 446, 448, 
450, 452, 454, 456, 457, 
462, 464, 465, 467, 469, 
472, 476, 477, 486, 491 
498, 500, 506 
modifications in sense, 277, 
298, 299, 302, 306, 308, 
339-341, 377, 394, 446, 
455-457, 459-461, 464; 
469, 472, 488, 489, 495, 
496 : 
echoes and parallels with 
Ni$vasa, 37, 242, 244, 249; 
250, 258, 260, 263, 265, 
273, 307, 325, 332; 335) 
348, 358, 363, 364, 309, 
424, 439, 467-469, 488 


657 


influence of, 17, 489 
transmission of, 300, 394, 395, 
433, 440, 441, 445, 447, 
449, 451, 452, 454, 456, 
463, 464, 505, 506 
Svacchandabhairava, 77 
Svacchandatantroddyota, 77, 277, 
280, 299, 301, 326, 357, 
369, 391, 441, 440, 449, 
452, 456, 470, 489, 495, 
< 498, 499, 506 
Svapaca, 477 
Svapnamanavaka, 287 
Svarloka, 290, 296 
svastika, 99, 101, 469, 487 
Svati, 92, 364 
Svayambhu (metrician), 239 
Svayambhuva, 345 
Svayambhuvasitrasangraha, 38, 
41-44, 48, 50, 51, 58-60, 
71, 265, 278, 283, 286, 
287, 303, 325, 326, 330, 
: 334, 353, 354, 357, 358 
Sveta, 348 
Svetasvataropanisat, 432, 453, 476 
sweat, 437, 495; 499 
born of, 475 
on the linga, 63 
syllabary, 39, 74, 77, 91, 349; 353; 
384-386, 394, 408, 421, 
653, see also MATRKA 


T 

tadana, 87, 93; 279, 282, 357, 370 

'TAGARE, 296 

Taijasa, 434 

Taittiriyaranyaka, 15 

'TAKASHIMA, 11, 59, 66 

Taksakavarta, 28, 56, 379 

tala, 498 5 

TORZSOK, 13, 36, 113; 237, 242, 257, 
366, 394, 429, 457, 459, 
491, 492; 495 

tamas, 98, 290, 445; 446 


tana, 439 


658 


TANEMURA, 82 
Tantraloka, 26, 42, 72, 315; 350; 448, 
492, 502 
Tantralokaviveka, 400, 492 
Tantrasadbhava, 17, 72, 261, 273, 
280, 287, 310, 328, 364, 
481, 489, 491, 495, 496 
“Tantrism”, 30, see also Mantramar- 
ga 
Tapoloka, 290, 296 
taptabhighara, 252 
taste, 240, 433, 434, 440, 441, 451 
TATPURUSA, 16, 37, 253, 257, 320, 
372 
Tatpurusa, 457 
TATTVA, 27, 38, 79, 85, 89, 91, 238, 
241—243, 267, 311, 315; 323; 
324, 327-331, 338, 339; 
360, 387 
tattvadhyana, 94, 388-390, 392 
tattvadiksa, 43, 436 
tattvajaya, 74, 75 
tattvakrama, 436 
tattva-mandala, 267, 331 
Tattvaratnavali, 258 
Tattvaratnavaloka, 492 
tattvas, 95, 97, 288, 297, 340, 341, 
347, 360, 387, 392, 394, 
403, 431, 432, 434-436, 
453, 466, 473, 479, 480, 
482, 489, 501 
as complete ontology, 436 
bondage by, 423, 426, 427 
eleven, 340, 479 
emanation of, 341, 431, 436 
evolution of (as system), 21, 44; 
46, 433, 436 
in alphabet, 96, 403 
laya into, 394 
mapped onto bhuvanas, 44, 288, 
298, 302, 342 
meditation upon, 75, 94, 98, 
. 100, 388, 389, 479, 480 
nine, 90, 96, 360, 405, 406, 479, 
483 


Nisvasatattvasamhita 


of Sankhyas, 44, 88, 288, 340, 
342, 388, 433, 443, 486 
path of, 43 
siddhis of, 100, 431 
thirty-six, 25, 44, 46 
thirty-two, 100, 101, 433, 483, 
485 
three, 263 
Tattvasangraha, 326 
tattvasarga, 44, 88, 90, 288, 291, 
297, 298, 342, 436 
Tattvasiva, 53 
Tattvatrayanirnaya, 41 
tattvin, 97, 431, 432, 481 
Tejastaka, 290 
Tejisa, 88, 292, 300-302, 305 
Terminalia bellirica, 381 
theft, 442, 444 
thirst, 92, 327, 360, 430, 449, 500 
tigers, 460, 477 
tiger-skin, 459, 460 
Time, 40, 392, 393, 426, 427, 433, 
454, 455, 480, 485, see also 
kala 


Timirodghatana, 72, 237, 330, 333 

tin, 377 

tirobhava, 96, 361, see also Occlusion 

tirtha, 89, 421 

tiryagyoni, 322, 423, 424 

TOKUNAGA, 238, 239, 407 

tolerance, 442, 445 

TOMABECHI, 67 

tonsils, 493, 494 

tooth-cleaning stick, 58, 86, 264, 
325, 361, 362, see also dan- 
tadhavana and dantakastha 

topknot, 87, 260, 261, 271, 282, 283; 
360, 368, 370, 371, 406 

torpor, 446 

TOURNIER, 239 © 

TRATARAM INDRAM, 63 

Trayodasasatikakalottara, 314-318 

Trayodasasatika, n 

TRISULA, 321 

trickery, 329, 444 


Indez to Introduction and Notes 


Trigala, 299 

Trika, 17, 407 

Trikala, 88, 291, 299 

Trikasara, 400 

Trikona, 62 

Trilocanasiva, 26, 27, 59, 251, 350, 
357 

triparva, 50 

tripundra, 369 

Trivandrum, 13 

trumpets, 439 

truthfulness, 442 

Tryambakasgambhu, 423 

tryayusa, 368, 369 

TUCCI, 110 

tula, 397 

tuladiksa, 326 

Tumburu, 31, 36, 43 

turban, 331-333 

turyadvara, 99, 391, 470 

Tvaritamulasutra, 72, 236, 237 


U 
uccatana, 325, 355, 356 
Ucchusmatantra, 379 
Ucchusmarudras, 70 
udana, 101, 494, 495; 498 
Udanavarga, 239 
udders, 374 
udghata, 76, 101, 493, 494 
Udumbara, 64, 285 
Uma, 61, 347 
Umapati, 347 
Umasuta, 91, 347 
upadhmaniya, 104, 105, 453 
Upamanyu, 348 
upamsu, 93 
upanayana, 87, 270, 271, 368, 369, 
638 

upasobha, 365, 366 
upasthana, 372, 373 
urine, 437 

of cows, 378 
Urmikaularnava, see Bhogahasta 
Urva, 348 


659 


uSira, see vetiver 

usma, Usman (heat as a sign of mag- 
ical accomplishment), 78, 
80, 81, 83 

USNISARAJA, 378 

utkranti, 496, see yogic suicide 

utpavana, 251, 359 

utplavana, 251 

utpuyana, 488 

utsava, 59 

Uttala, 87, 290, 296 

Uttara, 400 

uttara (breath-control practice), 492, 
493 

Uttara-Kamika, 63 

uttarasadhaka, 48, 94, 284, 375; 
380, 411, see also sahaya and 
sakhaya 

uvula, 406, 409, 493, 494 


V 
VageSi, 272, 304 
VAGISI, 89, 270, 272, 320 
Vagisi, 270, 272 
rebirth in, 301 
Vagisvarakirti, 492 
Vagiévari, 88, 292, 299, 303-305 
rebirth in, 300-302 
Vahlika, 348 
Vaikarika, 97, 98, 434, 441 
Vaikhanasagrhyasutra, 249, 256 
Vaimalas, 37, 305, 306 
VAIRAGYA, 312 
Vairagya, 88, 303, 442 
Vairocana, 272 
Vairocanabhisambodhi, 76 
Vai$yas, 53; 329, 330; 332; 399 
vajra, 76, 321, 449 
of grass, 358 
Vajrini, 62 
VAKTRA, 257 
Vaktragambhu, 71 
vaktrabhighara, 254, 257 
vaktraghara, 253 
vaktraikikarana, 253, 257 


660 


vaktrodghatana, 253, 257 
Vakyapadiya, 455 
Vama, 88, 243, 291, 292, 295, 302; 
303, 312, 320 
VAMA, 87, 295, 320 
VAMADEVA, 37, 03, 243; 253, 291 
295, 299; 320, 372; 459 
Vamasrotas, 31 
vanaprastha, 87, 93, 275, 278, 370 
Vandyaghatiyasarvananda, 351 
Vapi, 62 
Varahagrhyasutra, 256 
Varahapurana, 66-70 
Varuna, 347 
in the tongue, 451 
Vasistha, 348 
Vasisthasamhita, 492 
vasikarana, 77, 80, 81, 492 
VASUDEVA, 31, 34, 36, 74, 268, 319, 
332, 333, 391, 402, 407, 
410, 411, 413, 414, 416, 420, 
489, 494, 498 
Vathula, 345 
Vayu, 256, 347 
veda, as antelope, 462 
Vedanta, 85, 237 
Vedas, 67, 328, 483 
vedhasamavesa, 499 
Vedi, 62 
Vedic fire, 92 
Vedic mantras, 16, 63, 64, 265 
Vedic recitation, 331 
Vedic ritual, 69, 82, 274, 370, 430 
Vedic sacrifice, 15, 87, 324, 467 
Vedic studies, 273 
Vedic upanayana, 270 
verdigris, 403 
vetala, 78, 80, 82 
vetiver, 377-379 
vibhitaka, 383 
vidya 
asuddha-, 40, 46, 394, 466 
eight, 302 
kala, 42, 77, 99, 464, 465 
personified, 293, 308 


Nisvasatattvasamhita 


mantra, 280 
mantras, 15, 378, 386 
synonym for JfianaSakti and 
KriyaSakti, 292, 303 
tattva, 90-92, 94, 97, 298, 339, 
340, 342, 360, 361, 387, 
394, 405, 406, 425, 426, 
433, 455, 466, 480, 482, 
485, 486 
called maha-, 394, 466 
yoga of, 395 
two, 302 
VIDYA, 20, 22 
Vidyadharas, 38, 78-80, 236 
vidyadiksa, 32, 47, 50, 74, 78, 86, 
87, 92, 93, 261, 266, 274, 
280-282, 284, 289, 295, 
370-372 
vidyangamantra, 286 
Vidyastaka, 292, 301 
VidyavinitapallavaparameSvaragrha, 


53 

vidyavrata, 66, 285-287 

Vidye$a, 46, 97, 235, 312, 428 

Vidyegas, 86, 89, 91, 247, 248, 267, 
302, 321, 347, 352; 353, 
428 

vighnavinayaka, 429 

VighneSa, 428, 429, 487 

Vigraha, 304 

vigraha (meditation focus), 101, 489 

Vigrahas (8 worlds), 88, 291, 297; 
298, 342 

VigraheSa, 291, 298 

Vijaya, 345, 347 

Vijrmbhita, 88, 293, 307 

Vikramaditya I, 54 

Vimala, 88, 293, 307, 308 

vimana-shapes, 65 

vina, 98, 459 

Vinasikhatantra, 31-33, 36, 38, 78, 
263, 279, 460, 490, 491 

Vinayaka, 46, 428, 429 

vinayakas, 429, 487 

violence, 430, 444, 478 


Indez to Introduction and Notes 


vipula, 239 
Virabhadra, 290, 345 
virakraya, 82 
Virasa, 345 
viravrata, 285 
Virgo, 364 
viSesadiksa, 281 
Visnu, 60, 63, 88, 235, 236, 312, 
390; 450; 462, 484 
another world-regent, 293, 307 
as U, 484 
identified with element of prana- 
Và, 101 
karaneSa, 34, 368 
on paridhi, 250 
world of, 296 
Visnudharmottara, 251, 347, 348, 
376 
Visnupratisthakalpa, 60 
Visnupura, 87, 290 
vi$uddhika, 465, 466 
vomition, 438, 495, 496 
vratacarya, 287 
vratamekhala, 369 
vratanga, 370 
vrataparityaga, 370 
vrsabha, see bull 
vyàna, 101, 494; 495; 498 
Vyapasiva, 53, 54 
Vyoma, a gocara, 56 
VYOMAVYAPIN, 20, 47, 285, 378; 379 
exoteric nature of, 350 
Vyomavyapin, 272 


W 
waterwheel, 448, 455 
WATSON, 27, 299, 306, 435 
Wellcome Institute for the History of 
Medicine, 13, 109 
wheat, 262, 263 
wheel 
linga-base shaped like, 62 
of Siva’s chariot, 461 
visualisation with Siva as navel 
of, 100, 479-481 


661 
water-, see waterwheel 
WUJASTYK, 109 
vv 
yaga, 20, 89, 248, 309, 313, 322, 


349; 350; 352 
yagabhümi, 85, 242, 351, 352, 366 
yagamandapa, 64 
yajnasutra, 271 
Yajnavalkyasmrti, 67, 429 
Yaksas, 235, 236, 347 
Yaksi, 62 
Yama, 70 
Yamunacarya, 67, 68 
YANO, 364, 367 
YaSastilaka, 344 
yathasukha, 101, 469, 487 
yoga, 89, 99, 100, 327, 481, 482, 486 

Saiva, 490 
attainment of, 478 
gnostic, 387 
niralamba, 74, 99; 471 
of prakrti, 389 
of the cosmos, 387 
of vidya, 395 
ogdoad of, 297 
Pasupata, 68, 497 
Patanjala, 74 
pada, 77, 475 
place for practice of, 486 
postures of, 469, 487 
relation to doctrine, 476 
sadanga, 74, 471, 490 
-sadbhava, 486 
salvific, 387 
upper-body-posture for, 487 
Yogabhasya, 440, 490 
Yogabhasyavivarana, 490 
Yogada, 345, 346 
Yogada (sage), 346 ° 
Yogaja, 346 
yogapatta, 99, 101, 469 
yogapitha, 29, 242 
Yogasutra, 74, 78, 490, 491 
Yogasastra, 492 


E Nisvasatattvasamhita 


yogasiddhi, 389, 399, 478 

yogastaka, 88, 290, 298 

Yogayajnavalkya, 492 

yogic suicide, 50, 315, 450, 498 

Yogodbhava, 346 

yojanika, 283 

yojya 

for sayojya?, 284 

YOKOCHI, 13, 41, 68, 133, 238, 415; 
416, 420, 426, 461, 484, 491, 
492, 575 

yoni, 61, 63, 88, 91, 300, 484 

yoni (vowels), 351 

Yuktidipika, 501 


Pit 


EL 


v; 


IN THE SAME SERIES 
DANS LA MEME COLLECTION 


Saiva Rites of Expiation, A First Edition and 
Translation of Trilocanasivas Twelfth-Century 
Prāyaścittasamuccaya (with a transcription of a 
manuscript transmitting Hrdayafivas 
Prayascittasamuccaya). Critically edited & translated 
by R. Sathyanarayanan with an introduction by 
Dominic Goodall, IFP/EFEO, 2015, 651 p. (CI ४९ 
127) 


Contribution to the History of the Wheeled Vehicle in 
India. Jean Deloche, IFP/EFEO, 2014, xiii, 145 p. 
(CI n? 126) 


The Archaeology of Bhakti I: Mathura and Maturai, 
Back and Forth. Edited by Emmanuel Francis & 
Charlotte Schmid, IFP/EFEO, 2014, xiii, 366 p. 
(CI n° 125) 


Mapping the Chronology of Bhakti: Milestones, 
Stepping Stones, and Stumbling Stones. Proceedings of 
a workshop held in honour of Pandit R. 
Varadadesikan. Edited by Valérie Gillet, IFP/EFEO, 
2014, 381 p. (CI n? 124) 


La Bhakti d'une reine : Siva à Tiruccennampünti. 
Charlotte Schmid, IFP/EFEO, 2014, 405 p. (CI n* 
123) 


An Enquiry into the Nature of Liberation: Bhatta 
Ramakantha’s Paramoksanirasakarikavreti, a 
commentary on Sadyojyotib’ refutation of twenty 
conceptions of the liberated state (moksa). For the first 
time critically edited, translated into English and 
annotated by Alex Watson, Dominic Goodall, S.L.P. 
Anjaneya Sarma, IFP/EFEO, 2013, 508 p. (CI n° 
122) 


To order, contact: 
Pour commander, s'adresser à : 


Institut Francais de Pondichéry 

(attn. Library and Publication Division) 

P. B. 33, 11, St. Louis Street, 
Pondicherry-605001, INDIA 

Ph: +91-413-2231660. Fax: +91-413-2231605 
E-mail: library@ifpindia.org 

Web: www.ifpindia.org 


École française d'Extréme-Orient 

PO. Box 151, 16 & 19, Dumas Street, 
Pondicherry — 605001, INDIA 

Ph: +91-413-2334539. Fax +91-413-2330886 
E-mail: shanti@efeo-pondicherry.org 

Web: www.efeo.fr 


THE NISVASATATTVASAMHITA 
THE EARLIEST SURVIVING SAIVA TANTRA 


Transmitted to us in a well-preserved 
ninth-century Nepalese manuscript, 
the Nifvasatattvasambita has come in 
recent years to be recognised as prob- 
ably the oldest surviving complete 
scripture of the Mantramarga. Al- 
though its historical importance has 
been hinted at by a range of scholars 
across the twentieth century, this is the 
first time its text appears in print. 


This volume presents a critical edition 
and annotated translation of the three 
earliest layers of the text: the Miila- 
sūtra, Uttarasutra and Nayasiitra. "The 
topics dealt with include cosmology, 
rituals of worship and initiation, and 
forms of yoga. A lengthy introduction 
sets these suras in context, in particu- 
lar by examining the evidence for 
dating them. There follow a summary 
of their contents, an account of the 
early manuscript and its three twenti- 
eth-century apographs, and a treat- 
ment of the various ways in which the 
language of the Nisvdsa deviates from 
Paninian norms. 


4702057 


ISBN || 0 
788184" 702051 


ISBN (IFP): 978-81-8470-205-7 


Parvenue jusqu'à nous dans un manuscrit 
népalais du IX siècle remarquablement 
préservé, la Nisvasatattvasamhità est re- 
connue aujourd’hui comme ce qui est 
probablement le plus ancien texte révélé 
du Mantramarga conservé dans son inté- 
gralité. Bien que les chercheurs furent 
nombreux, tout au long du XX siècle, à 
mentionner l'importance historique de cet 
ouvrage, c'est la première fois quil est 


publié. 


Ce volume contient l'édition critique et la 
traduction anglaise annotée des trois 
strates les plus anciennes de l'ouvrage : le 
Muülasütra, /'Uttarasütra et le Naya- 
sutra. Les sujets abordés sont notamment 
la cosmologie, les rituels d’adoration et 
d'initiation, le yoga. Une longue intro- 
duction tente de situer ces sütra dans leur 
contexte, en examinant en particulier les 
témoignages susceptibles d'indiquer leur 
date. Suivent un résumé de leur contenu, 
une description du manuscrit ancien et de 
ses trois apographes du XX siècle, ainsi 
qu’un examen des écarts de la langue du 
Nisgvasa par rapport aux normes pani- 
néennes. 


| ||| 
782855" 391519 


ISBN (EFEO): 978-2-85539-151-9 


