roe. Institut Ecole francaise 
= fap Francais d'Extréme-Orient 
| MTT" de Pondichéry 


The Parakhyatantra 
A Scripture of the Saiva Siddhanta 


bo 
a + . 
A 


A critical edition and annotated translation 
by DOMINIC GOODALL 


Collection Indologie - 98 


TTC I aA 


~ 


THE PARAKHYATANTRA 
A SCRIPTURE OF THE SAIVA SIDDHANTA 


COLLECTION INDOLOGIE — 98 


TTT 


~~ 


THE PARAKHYATANTRA 
A SCRIPTURE OF THE SAIVA SIDDHANTA 


A CRITICAL EDITION AND ANNOTATED TRANSLATION 
BY DOMINIC GOODALL 


INSTITUT FRANCAIS DE PONDICHERY. 
ECOLE FRANCAISE D’EXTREME-ORIENT 


Comité de lecture 


Colette Caillat, 

Membre de |'Institut de France 

Francois Gros, ; 

Directeur d’études a |’Ecole pratique des Hautes Etudes, Paris 

Michael Hahn, 

Professeur 4 l’Université de Marburg 

Alexis Sanderson, 

Spalding Professor of Eastern Religions and Ethics, All Souls College, Oxford 
Raffaele Torella, 

Professeur & l'Université de Rome 


© Institut Frangais de Pondichéry, 2004 (ISSN 0073-8352) 
© Ecole frangaise d’Extréme-Orient (ISBN 2 85539-642-5) 


Typeset by the author in ‘Computer Modern’ and Velthuis’ Devanagari using 
TEX, TEX, and EDMAC (macros for the preparation of critical editions created 
by John Lavagnino and Dominik Wujastyk). 


Photo: Pancamukheévara, Kalahasti (Andhra Pradesh). 
Cover design: N. Ravichandran (IFP). 
Printed at the All India Press, Pondicherry. 


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 


My curiosity about the Parakhya was first raised by a quotation of a 
single half-line from its sixth chapter (6:14ab) by AghoraSiva in his Nada- 
karikavrtti, introducing which Aghorasiva suggested that Ramakantha’s 
doctrine of a subtle nada (through which all speech is intelligible) was 
incompatible with Saiddhantika scripture. I was aware that a text with 
the name Parakhya was transmitted in the Mysore codex which I had 
found to transmit the text of the Kirana closest to that presupposed by 
Ramakantha’s Kiranavrtti, but I had supposed it to be likely to be a 
late South Indian composition bearing the early name, as so many of the 
Siddhantatantras preserved in manuscripts in the IFP in Pondicherry are, 
and had not investigated it. Realising that the Parakhya appeared not to 
be transmitted elsewhere, I first returned to Mysore to do so in July 1996 
at the encouragement of Professor SANDERSON and quickly discovered 
with delight that it was largely doctrinal and demonstrably early because 
it contained the large number of verses attributed to it by Ksemaraja in 
the tenth chapter of his Svacchandatantroddyota. 

My enthusiasm subsided when I first made efforts to read the text 
after having transcribed it. Not feeling confident of being able satisfac- 
torily to interpret enough of it to attempt an edition, I announced that I 
was preparing for publication an ‘annotated transcription of the surviving 
chapters’ (GOODALL 1998:xli, fn. 94). My ambitions grew as I understood 
more of the text, and this book is the result. This understanding grew 
largely because I attempted to teach chapters 1, 2 and 4 of the text in 
Oxford and because I read parts of it with a number of people privately. 
Among them I should like first to thank Dr. Harunaga ISAACSON for his 
constant encouragement, detailed and illuminating comments, and very 
many invaluable suggestions. Apart from the countless occasions on which 
he has discussed parts of the text with me, he has written me a veritable 
book of letters of commentary, touching on everything from punctuation 
and paragraphing to the constitution and interpretation of the text and of 
passages adduced in the annotation. That so many blemishes have been 


v1 


removed (many still remain, I am sure) is in large measure because of his 
patient efforts.! I thank Dr. Kei KATAOKA for repeatedly questioning my 
interpretations of a number of the most awkward passages, for his many 
improving suggestions and for the extremely stimulating reading sessions 
of the Parakhya that we enjoyed, together with Dr. Harunaga ISAACSON, 
in the summer of 1999. I am most grateful too to Dr. Diwakar ACHARYA, 
the only person with whom I read through and discussed the whole text 
at a single stretch (in January 2001), which was as illuminating as it was 
pleasurable, as well as to Dr. Peter BISSCHoP and Dr. Csaba DEzso, 
who both read large parts of the book and suggested a number of im- 
provements. I am grateful to Dr. Alex WATSON for illuminating for me a 
ntfmber of passages in chapter 1, as well as to Dr. Charlotte SCHMID, Dr. 
Pascale HAAG-BERNEDE, Dr. Godabarisha MISHRA, Dr. Judit TORZSOK, 
Dr. Eva WILDEN, and Mme Usha COLAS-CHAUHAN, all of whom made 
suggestions (or constructively expressed disagreement) that helped me. I 
thank also Dr. Somdev VASUDEVA, without whose invaluable thesis and 
without whose presence in Pondicherry in April 2001, my ‘understanding’ 
of the chapter on yoga would have been yet more painfully limited, and 
whose alphabetic sorting program saved me weeks of labour on the pada- 
index. The patient criticism of Dr. Gérard COLAS enabled me to see flaws 
in the presentation of a number of arguments relating to the placing of 
the Parakhya in its literary context. I thank Dr. T. GANESAN of the IFP 
and Dr. S.A.S. SARMA of the EFEO for comments and suggestions and 
Isabelle RATIE for her corrections to the résumé. At what seemed like the 
eleventh hour, Dr. Arlo GRIFFITHS most kindly rushed me his numerous 
helpful comments on my introduction. Some of his punctilious and per- 
suasively defended typographical suggestions could not be incorporated, 
but he may be assured that they will influence my practice hereafter. I 
should have loved to have had the precious comments of Dr. BRUNNER, 
had not ill health prevented her from being able to read this book when 
it was at last ready to be read. 

Finally I should like to thank Professor SANDERSON, who first taught 
and encouraged me in the study of Saivism, who has been invariably 
generous with his time and with his knowledge, who has put unpublished 
work of his at my disposal and who has given me many useful suggestions 

‘Where emendations and ideas are attributed to him without reference to a letter, 


this should be because they were not advanced in a letter, but there may be one or two 
written communications that I have mislaid. 


Acknowledgements vii 


for improving the text of this tantra. 

Many of these peoples’ names figure in the apparatus and notes for 
their conjectures and suggestions. But they also often helped me by re- 
moving poor conjectures and showing me how the transmitted text could 
be interpreted, and so their assistance is in many places invisible. 

I am grateful to the various institutions who have allowed me to con- 
sult the manuscripts used for this book: the Oriental Research Institute of 
the University of Mysore; the French Institute of Pondicherry; the Gov- 
ernment Oriental Manuscripts Library, Madras; the National Archives 
of Kathmandu; the Bodleian Library, Oxford; the Akhila Bharatiya San- 
skrit Parishad, Lucknow; the Oriental Research Institute and Manuscripts 
Library, Trivandrum; the Oriental Institute, Baroda; the Hoshiarpur 
Vishveshvaranand Vedic Research Institute; the Cambridge University 
Library; the Shri Ranbir Sanskrit Research Institute, Jammu; and the 
Nepal-German Manuscript Preservation Project. 

A final word of thanks is addressed to Wolfson College, Oxford, who 
welcomed me back as a Junior Research Fellow in Indology to continue 
my studies after my doctoral thesis, and to the Ecole francaise d’Extréme- 
Orient, under whose aegis I have dedicated many months to finishing this 
book. 


Dominic Goodall, 
Ecole francaise d’Extréme-Orient, 
Pondicherry, September 2004. 


CONTENTS 


Acknowledgements Vv 

Preface xili 
Explanatory remarks about the Saiva Siddhanta and its 

treatment in modern secondary literature ... xiii 

Introduction XXXV 

The Parakhyatantra and its place in the Saiddhantika canon xxxv 

Two early Parakhyatantras?............... XXXviii 

Relative chronology. ...........6.-5+2282085 xlii 
Excursus upon the Raurava and the Rau- 

ravasitrasangraha ...........2.-e00-4 xliv 

Dates and the Saivacanon.................4- xlvi 

The sources and the date of the Parakhya .......... xlviii 

Excursus upon the Pauskaras .............. lii 

Parallels with other Siddhantatantras ......... liv 

The lost commentary. ..........20 2.0. ee eee viii 

Acresumé of the text i405 <-4chl me Se ee lxii 

Chapter:l. The: soul. a oo. -6:0 «ie ike See. Sore Lxiii 

Chapter 2. The Lord................. es lxiv 

Chapter 3. Scripture and the pure universe ...... Ixvi 

Chapter 4. The evolutes of primal matter ....... lxvii 

Chapter 5. The cosmos ............002005 xxi 

Chapter 6. Mantras ......... 000 ee vues Lxxii 

Chapter 14. Yoga..............02.-2008. Lxxiv 

Chapter 15. Liberation and the means to its attainment Ixxvi 

The language of the Pardkhyatantra ............. xxviii 


Some remarks on the treatment of metre. ........ lxxxv 


x Parakhyatantra 


Does the Parakhya tell us anything new? .......... Ixxxvii 
The nature of this edition .............--e0 0 Ixxxix 
Sources for the constitution of the text XCV 
The Mysore Manuscript .............2++.22005 XCV 

A niteGedents ocsis aed eee ie Re eB XcVvlil 
Deviant orthography .............-..e-04¢- C 

TY ANSCMIDUION: *s os & Ue & as & 6S hw ee ae OS Ci 
Condition” 4.5% e456 4.8 ee ter a he ek. Os OS Ci 
ADORTEDOS® <9 be ae eee we ee ee a RS ee Cil 
Transcription conventions ...............05000- ClV 
Other editorial conventions ............-0+e44- CV 
Independent testimonia ................-2.4. Cvl 
Sanskrit Text 1 
Chapter One, paSupadarthavicara .............. 1 
Chapter Two, patipadarthavicara............... 17 
Chapter Three, vidyapadarthavicara ............. 37 
Chapter Four, yonipadarthavicara 1 (karyasrstih)...... 47 
Chapter Five, yonipadarthavicara 2 (bhuvanani) ...... 71 
Chapter Six, mantravicara..........00 2.0 ee eee 95 
Chapter Fourteen, yoga ...........2.0000 00 ee 109 
Chapter Fifteen, muktipadartha ............... 123 
Translation 135 
Chapter One. 20. sock he A SS. a GS 137 
Chapter Twos 6c. i a ewe 8) ae Be HO we, Het Hl ee we 165 
Chapter Three ........... 0000 cee ee eee 205 
Chapter Four ati:c oie Ge Se eG ER eS aoe A ee 227 
Chapter Five? 4 6.4 4-64 b-a ew, ce Se e: Hee SS 279 
CHADter SIX, 6c dhe ES Ye Re Sk oe Oe 321 
Chapter Fourteen... .. 2... .. 2... eee ee ee es 347 
Chapter- Fifteen :.+-c v4.4 «ay bwin eS we eae Se Ge 387 
Appendix I. Quotations not found in the manuscript 411 
Appendix II. Diplomatic Transcription 441 


Appendix III. Sataratnollekhini ad siitra 18 515 


Contents 


Appendix IV. Measurements 
Works Consulted 

Index of Padas 

General Index 


Résumé francais 


PREFACE 


Explanatory remarks about the Saiva Siddhanta and its 
treatment in modern secondary literature 


In my preface to the first volume of the Kiranavrtti (GOODALL 1998), I 
alluded with approval to the stand taken by ISAACSON in the eighth of 
his ‘Stellingen’ submitted with his unpublished thesis (*1995). 


Most students of classical India must at some time be made to 
acknowledge that ‘(t]he quantity and quality of the secondary 
literature in many areas of Indian studies is such that bibli- 
ographical completeness has become something that is often 
rather to be avoided than striven for.’ 


When I came to recast this book to be submitted for a degree to a Ger- 
man university, I realised that such a cavalier dismissal of the secondary 
literature would be unacceptable. I do not however intend to spend long 
grazing in these for the most part rather barren pastures; in what fol- 
lows immediately below, I intend to do no more than show why a certain 
number of books purportedly about the Saiva Siddhanta are not amply 
referenced and discussed in the pages that follow. 

Many indologists, if they have heard of the Saiva Siddhanta at all, 
are likely to have been encouraged to suppose it to be a uniquely Tamil- 
ian, Vedanta-influenced theological school with its origins in the twelfth 
century—a school that acknowedged as scripture a body of Sanskrit texts 
called agamas that prescribed the mode of worship in South Indian Saiva 
temples, as well as a body of Tamil devotional hymns to Siva, but that 
was really based on a group of fourteen Tamil theological works, the 
Meykanta-cattirankal, almost all of which are supposed to have been writ- 
ten in the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries. This is, on the whole, the 
picture we find given in a number of widely disseminated general sur- 
veys of ‘Hinduism’, such as, for example, BROCKINGTON (1992:140-5) 


Xiv Parakhyatantra 


and KLOSTERMAIER (1989:253).? This is in fact a very distorted image, 
and what is true in it applies only to a largely post-twelfth-century South 
Indian development of a much older pan-Indian religious school.® 

Even the more specialised survey material presents a rather confused 
picture of the context of this study, namely the early (i.e. twelfth- and 
pre-twelfth-century), pan-Indian Saiva Siddhanta. After finding little help 
in GONDA’s Visnuism and Sivaism: A Comparison (1996; reprint from 
1970) and nothing but extremely brief and uninvestigative summaries of 
what was deemed philosophical in a small handful of randomly selected 
Saiddhantika works offered by DASGUPTA 1955,4 the bewildered indol- 


21It would be unfair to place BROCKINGTON’s rather careful compressed account of 
some essential facts next to KLOSTERMAIER’s treatment without at least remarking 
that the two works are quite different in quality. KLOSTERMAIER will set down almost 
any manner of thing as fact (particularly, it seems to me, if it is to the detriment of 
Saivism), and most pages of his sloppy book contain something to suggest that he 
is not interested in discovering truth. Thus he tells us (1989:247) that the teachings 
of the ‘even now flourishing Saiva Siddhanta’ are ‘largely identical’ with those of the 
Pasupatas; that ‘[b]etween 700 and 1000 c.£., Saivism appears to have been the dom- 
inant religion of India, due largely to the influence of the sixty-three Nayanmars’; and 
that the ritual taught in the ‘Saiva Agamas’ (1989:251) ‘resembles that followed by 
the Vaisnavas, except for the fact that Saivas still observe animal—and occasionally 
human—sacrifices’. A footnote accompanies the last surprising assertion, but instead 
of substantiating it, it only gives information about recent editions of Saiddhantika 
works published by the IFP. And to give just one more example of this sort of crass- 
ness (from hundreds more to be found in this willfully misled and misleading book), 
from KLOSTERMAIER's table of dates we are informed (1989:421) that the ‘[b]eginning 
of the Saivasiddhanta’ is to be dated to ca. 1250. 

3It is perhaps worth drawing attention to two books on ‘Hinduism’ for the ‘general 
reader’ that try to correct this distortion: FLOOD 1996:162-4 and GOODALL 1996. 

‘In this fifth volume of A History of Indian Philosophy, misleadingly subtitled South- 
ern Schools of Saivism, DASGUPTA has briefly summarised works that happened to lay 
to hand and that might be considered all to belong to the Saiva Siddhanta—the Siva- 
jnanabodha (1955:24-7), the Matanga (1955:28-9), the Pauskara (1955:29-37), the 
‘Vatulagama’ and ‘Vatulatantram’ (1955:38-9), the Tamil Tiruvacakam of Manikka- 
vacakar (1955:149-59) and the Tattvaprakaga (1955:159-72)—but there is little in the 
way of synthesis or useful commentary, and a number of the summaries that are offered, 
including that of the only early Siddhantatantra (the Matanga), are the perfunctory 
and unenthusiastic products of a man not interested in the subject. As DASGUPTA tells 
us (1955:39-40), 


A more comprehensive account of the Agamas could easily have been 
given, but that would have involved only tiresome repetition. Most of 
the Agamas deal with the same sort of subjects more or less in the same 
manner with some incidental variations as regards their emphasis on this 


Preface XV 


ogist reader in search of guidance not unnaturally turns to the Harras- 
sowitz series A History of Indian Literature, in which two books are found 
that cover material belonging to the early Saiva Siddhanta, the second 
of them without intending to do so: Jan GONDA’s Medieval Religious 
Literature in Sanskrit (1977) and GOUDRIAAN’s and GuUPTA’s pioneering 
Hindu Tantric and Sakta Literature (1981). Any first attempt at taking 
stock of a large body of largely unpublished literature is likely soon to 
require revision in the light of new discoveries, and so it is no criticism 
to say that GOUDRIAAN’s work could now be bettered in some areas. At 
the outset GOUDRIAAN somewhat confounds the unwary by attempting 
to draw a false distinction between ‘Agamas’ on the one hand—which 
are typically South Indian, or at least preserved only in the South, and 
which he actually wishes to exclude from his survey—and Tantras on the 
other, which are typically North Indian and which he sees as his subject 
(1981:7-9).° It is true of course that the Siddhantatantras (which corre- 
spond to GOUDRIAAN’s category ‘Agamas’) can to an extent be set apart 
from other Saiva tantras in that they form a coherent well-defined group 
and intend to teach a single coherent body of doctrines. But, as GOUDRI- 
AAN also recognises (1981:9), they actually share a common background 
with other Tantric Saiva literature. This GOUDRIAAN later illustrates by 
treating or mentioning a number of Siddhantatantras transmitted in the 
North: the Nisvasa (1981:33-6),° the Sarvajnanottara and the Kalottara 
(1981:21 and 38-9), the Diksottara (1981:48-9), and the ParameSvara 
(1981:21). But we cannot expect to find here introductory remarks about 
the early Saiva Siddhanta, for this was not GOUDRIAAN’s subject and 
he did not recognise these works to belong to it. GONDA’s somewhat 
earlier account of the ‘Sivaite Agama Literature’, by contrast, recognises 


or that subject. 
There are some slight disputations with rival systems of thought, as those 
of the Buddhists, Jains and the Samkhya. But all this is very slight 
and may be practically ignored. There is no real contribution to any 
epistemological thought. We have only the same kind of stereotyped 
metaphysical dogma and the same kind of argument that leads to the 
admission of a creator from the creation as of the agent from the effects. 


5T have attempted to show (GOODALL 1998:xxxvi-xxxix) that this distinction is 
unhelpful and is not used in the primary literature. _ 

°In this case GOUDRIAAN registers doubt about whether this is an ‘Agama’ or a 
‘Tantra’. 


XVi Parakhyatantra 


that ‘the names agama and tantra sometimes alternate’ (1977:202) and 
that some tantras/agamas are found transmitted in the South and the 
North (1977:165-6 and 202); but it presupposes nevertheless an unhelpful 
opposition between the Northern and Southern traditions, in particular 
between a Northern school of non-dualist exegesis and a Southern dualist 
one, and this leads to confusion.” GONDA offers (1977:180-215) a num- 
ber of résumés of agamas, but they belong to rather different currents of 
thought,® and relations between them are not articulated. 

Recent, more specialised treatments in secondary literature of the 
Saiva Siddhanta tend to be disappointingly weak, by which I mean narrow 
in the range of sources consulted and poorly argued,” or to be confined to 
a very particular period and not intended to present historical develop- 


*Thus, for instance, he speaks of the (Kashmirian) Matangavrtti being an attempt 
to present the Matanga as ‘advaitic’ (1977:211), and he echoes (1977:212) DASGUPTA’s 
mistaken assertion that in his Tattvaprakasavrtti the South Indian AghoraSiva has tried 
to read ‘some sort of dualism though that is hardly consistent’ into Bhoja’s (Northern) 
TattvaprakaSa. In point of fact, as is evident to anyone who reads them, the Matanga, 
the Matangavrtti, the Tattvaprakasa and the Tattvaprakasavrtti are all dualist. 

8Only three of the summaries are of early Siddhantas: the Mrgendra (1977:184-5), 
the Kirana (1977:185-9, where GONDA is summarising the summary of BRUNNER 1965), 
and the Rauravasiitrasangraha (1977:189-90; GONDA refers to the text as ‘Chapter I’ 
of the ‘Raurava-Agama’). 

°To provide a complete list would be invidious, but the work of DUNUWILA (1985) 
cannot here escape mention. A glance at almost every page reveals very serious inad- 
equacies; in fact it is so flawed that one would be well-advised to read it, if’ one con- 
sults it at all, not for the wealth of dubious information it purveys, but for the small 
amusement it affords the reader by concealing familiar Sanskrit expressions behind 
unintentionally ludicrous translations (thus ‘Monist Pastoralism’ is code for ‘Lakulisa 
masquerade as ‘Intelligence-Deconditioned Souls’). (The work is also politely censured 
by GENGNAGEL (1996:32), citing DAvIs.) 

Hardly more edifying is Guy L. BECK's Sonic Theology: Hinduism and Sacred Sound 
(1995), pp. 148-171 of which are devoted to ‘Saivism: Sacred Sound as the Energy of 
Siva’. Here BECK recognises that Sadyojyotis through to AghoraSiva are the ‘chief for- 
mulators of Saiva Siddhanta theology in Sanskrit’ (p. 157), and yet he quotes instead 
such later authorities as Mariasusai DHAVAMONY 1971 (p. 160), who relied almost en- 
tirely on later Tamil sources, K. SIVARAMAN 1973 (pp. 160-1), who appears to have 
based much of what he wrote on the late Pauskarabhasya, and N.R. BHATT (p. 153), 
about whom, after quoting a somewhat speculative passage from an interview tran- 
script, in which BHATT characterises ‘the original Saiva Agama culture’, BECK states 
(ibid.): ‘Bhatt presumably drew upon his extraordinary knowledge of a large range of 
published and unpublished Agama texts for this characterization.’ 


Preface XVil 


ment,!° or, because of a current trend in Indian publishing, to be entirely 


unrevised presentations of very old research, often respectable in its own 
time, but now plainly long surpassed in many respects.!! Two ‘new’ works 
of the latter category that have recently appeared are NANDIMATH 2001, 
a wide-ranging and informative thesis submitted, according to its pref- 
ace, to the University of London in 1930 and now published, alas without 
revision, seventy-one years later;!? and Mary LAw’s recent translation 
(2000) of Hilko Wiardo SCHOMERUS’ Der Caiva-Siddhanta. Eine Mystik 
Indiens. Nach den tamulischen Quellen bearbeitet und dargestellt. Since 
so much about the Saiva Siddhanta has been discovered since 1912, ev- 
ery paragraph of the introductory chapter of this latter work, in which 
SCHOMERUS locates in place and time the tradition he examines, cries 
out for commentary;}¥ sadly this new translation offers not one editorial 


10D avis’ clear and useful book on Saiddhantika ritual is, as he himself makes clear 
(1991:19) intended as a synchronic account of Saiddhantika ritual ‘at the high point 
of Saiva ritualism’. Nevertheless, his first chapter (‘Locating the Tradition’, 1991:3- 
21) presents helpful background information about the history of the Saiva Siddhanta. 
SONI’s philosophical study (1989) focusses fairly exclusively on the sixteenth-century 
South Indian writer Sivagrayogin. GENGNAGEL’s study and translation of the Tattva- 
prakaSavrtti (1996) naturally focusses on the twelfth-century AghoraSiva. 

'1Of course I do not mean to imply that all aged secondary literature has so dated 
that it has little to offer us. Moreover, many erudite annotated translations of scholars 
of the nineteenth century have not been bettered since: we must be grateful to Indian 
publishers for offering us reprints of works related to the Tamil Saiva Siddhanta by the 
likes of HOISINGTON (1853-4; reprinted in MUDALIAR 1979) and POPE (1900; reprinted 
1995). 

'2This means, for instance, that almost every one of his utterances about the network 
of relationships between early Saiddhantikas that he has industriously teased out of 
inscriptions, manuscript catalogues and cross-references in Sanskrit works of the school 
that had then been published (2001:79-119) can now be corrected in the light of recent 
scholarship. 

13Consider, for example, SCHOMERUS’ somewhat naive dating of ‘the Agamas’ 
(2000:6, 8-9) to before the fifth century on the strength of their being discussed in 
the Sitasamhita, which claims to be part of the Skandapurana, of which BENDALL 
had found a manuscript in Nepal that he supposed to have been written in the sixth 
century. 

From the work of ADRIAENSEN, BAKKER and ISAACSON (1994 and 1998) we know 
that early Nepalese witnesses transmit a text that is entirely different from what has 
hitherto been printed as ‘the Skandapurana’ and that the Siitasamhita formed no part 
of this Ur-Skandapurana. The Sutasamhita has rather the appearance of a South 
Indian non-dualist work with Vedantic and Saiva/Smarta sympathies. The date of its 
composition is uncertain; HAZRA implies (1940:161), that it must have been written 
before 1300 AD because it has received a commentary by Madhavacarya. 


XViil Parakhyatantra 


remark (nor does it contain so much as a translator’s note).!4 

Yet other recent publications whose authors and titles might lead one 
to expect to find in them some treatment of the history and development 
of the Saiva Siddhanta—N.R. BHATT’s La religion de Siva d’aprés les 
sources sanskrites (2000) and R. NAGASWAMY’s Siva Bhakti (1989)—do 
not fulfil this expectation. N.R. BHATT has contributed much to the 
study of the Saiva Siddhanta through his editions, but in this study, rich 
as it is in references to primary sources, the sources are predominantly 
non-tantric, and it is the mythology, iconography and public worship of 
Siva that he presents rather than Saiva theologies and their history. NA- 
GASWAMY’s work touches on many aspects of South Indian Saivism, but 
it is primarily about the thought-world of the devotee and poet Appar. 

But there have in fact been considerable advances made in the study 
of the early Saiva Siddhanta over the past century, principally by schol- 
ars working in or with the French Institute of Pondicherry, such as 
N.R. BHATT.’® This institution has over the last fifty years amassed 
a manuscript collection that is particularly rich in Saiddhantika works 
and has, often in conjunction with the Pondicherry branch of the Ecole 
francaise d’Extréme-Orient, edited a large number of previously unpub- 
lished Sanskrit works of the Saiva Siddhanta. And francophone scholars 
in some way associated with this institution, notable among whom are 
Dr. Hélene BRUNNER-LACHAUX and Professor Pierre-Sylvain FILLIOZAT, 
have produced several richly annotated translations (sometimes with edi- 
tions). The important work of these scholars is no doubt gradually perco- 
lating down into other secondary and into tertiary literature; but it still 
seems necessary to preface this edition with a rehearsal of clarificatory 
remarks that rebut some fundamental and tenacious misconceptions in 
secondary literature about the Saiva Siddhanta. 

Long before the twelfth century the Saiva Siddhanta was the name of a 
theological school that has only in recent centuries come to be associated 
exclusively with the Tamil-speaking South. Its corpus of literature was 


‘4It is perhaps worth mentioning in passing a book from the following year, 1913, that 
is also regularly reprinted and has also inevitably dated: BHANDARKAR’s Vaisnavism, 
Saivism and Minor Religious Systems (1995 reprint). BHANDARKAR’s brief treatment 
of the Saiva Siddhanta (1995:177-81) is based solely on a chapter of the doxograph- 
ical SarvadarSanasangraha and has been entirely superseded by TORELLA 1979 and 
BRUNNER 1981. 

’®For a slightly fuller treatment of this bibliographical theme, see GOODALL 2000:205- 
6, fn. 1. : 


Preface xix 


entirely in Sanskrit: a body of scriptural texts (agama/tantra/siddhanta) 
as well as a body of exegetical literature, ritual manuals (paddhati) etc. 
It is striking that this literature is today found transmitted almost exclu- 
sively in manuscripts from the far South of India and in the far North, in 
Kashmir and Nepal.!®© But we know from the inscriptional record that the 
Saiva Siddhanta was once (in the second half of the first Christian millen- 
nium) spread across much of the rest of India,!” and two of its scriptures, 


16See GOODALL 1998:xl, fn. 91. 


17Of course a full survey of the evidence for the spread of the Saiva Siddhanta (and 
of other Saiva cults) furnished by the inscriptions is a desideratum. But that would 
be beyond the scope of these introductory remarks; instead, I refer below to a handful 
of inscriptions that testify to a Saiddhantika presence well before the twelfth century 
from the East, West, North and South of the sub-continent. 

Among the earliest inscriptional references to the Saiva Siddhanta, an inscription 
in the Kailasanatha in Kancit (Tamil Nadu) of the Pallava King Narasimha II (also 
called Rajasimha and Atyantakama), who reigned in the last twenty-seven years of the 
seventh century, has been fairly frequently discussed (most recently by DAvis 1991:12, 
FILLIOZAT 1994:xxii—xxiii, fn. 1, and SANDERSON 2002:9, fn. 6). I should just like to add 
that I suspect that there is intended to be a rather more explicit punning allusion to the 
King having received Saiddhantika initiation than I have seen hitherto mentioned in 
print. The half-verse in question reads (HULTZSCH 1890:12, verse 5cd): Saktiksunnari- 
vargo viditabahunayah Saivasiddhantamarge Ssriman atyantakama|[h] ksatasakalamalo 
dhurdharah pallavanam. HULTZSCH's natural interpretation of this is (1890:13-14): 
‘,.. the illustrious Atyantakama, the chief of the Pallavas, who crushed the multitude 
of his foes by his power (or spear), whose great statesmanship was well known and who 
had got rid of all impurity (by walking) on the path of Saiva doctrine’. The allusion to 
the Saiddhantika notion of a material impurity (mala) that is the fundamental fetter 
that binds souls to worldly existence and that can only be removed by initiation is 
plain. But I strongly suspect that the expression Saivasiddhantamarge is intended to 
be a trigger that invites the reader to reconsider the sense also of the preceding two 
epithets, the second of which may be taken to refer to the king attaining knowledge 
of the great (i.e. true) doctrine of the Saiva Siddhanta (as well as alluding to another 
biruda, ‘Bahunaya’, as HULTZSCH suggests (1890:14, fn. 1)), and the first might be 
rendered ‘the group of whose [internal] enemies [i.e. either those of the senses or those 
of the passions] was suppressed by [a descent of divine] power [in initiation]’. (For the 
characterisation of initiation as divine power, see, e.g., Moksakarika 96; for the use of 
the expression arivarga to refer to the senses, cf., e.g. RaghuvamSa 4:60; for the use 
of the same expression to refer to the passions, cf. Raghuvamsa 17:45 and Arthasastra 
1.7.1.) 

SANDERSON (2002:8-10, fn. 6) has referred to and discussed two further seventh- 
century inscriptional references to kings being initiated into the Saiva Siddhanta: that 
of the Eastern Ganga Devendravarman in 682 AD (year 184 of the Ganga era, the 
commencement of which has been established by MIRASHI 1952; the copper-plate 
grant in question has been ‘edited by GHOSHAL (1952) and that of the Calukya king 


XX Parakhyatantra 


the Nisvasa and the Sarvajnanottara, are mentioned in a Cambodian in- 
scription of the tenth-century.'® Although I am not aware of inscriptions 


Vikramaditya I of Badami in 660 AD (see the Amudalapadu Plates of Vikramaditya I, 
ed. SIRCAR (1962). 

Still further North, in today’s Madhyapradesh, evidence of a ninth-century royal 
initiation and of a lineage of Saiddhantika acaryas is provided by two tenth-century 
or early eleventh-century inscriptions edited by KIELHORN (1892; EI I, pp. 251-70 and 
351-61) and also discussed by NANDIMATH (2001:85-8) and SANDERSON (*1996:31- 
2), among others. The initiation in question is that of a certain Avantivarman by 
Purandara, referred to in verse 49 of the Bilhari Chedi inscription (EI I, p. 259; but see 
the text and interpretation as later corrected by KIELHORN in EI I, p.353) and from 
verses 10-13 of the Ranod (Aranipadra) inscription (EI I, p.355). (The following two 
verses record the founding of mathas by Purandara at Mattamayiira and Ranapadra.) 
Many inscriptions of this area from this period up to the thirteenth century mention 
later acaryas with Saiddhantika initiation names: see BANERJI 1931, esp. pp. 110-15, 
developed further by HANDIQUI 1949:337-42 and MIRASHI 1950, then MIRASHI 1955, 
esp. pp. cl-clxi, and PATHAK 1960:28ff. 

Further to the North-West, the Rajor inscription of Mathanadeva of 960 AD testifies 
to the presence of Saiddhantika initiates in Rajasthan (ed. KIELHORN 1897; EI III, 
pp. 263-7). 

In the far West, the Karhad Plates of the Rastrakiita king Krsna III record a gift 
to a Saiddhantika ascetic in 959 AD (ed. BHANDARKAR 1897). And the Kharepatan 
Plates of Rattaraja (ed. KIELHORN 1897; EI III, pp. 292-302) allude to the disciples of 
a Saiddhantika guru called Ambhojasambhu of the Karkaroni-santana of the Matta- 
mayira lineage in the Konkan in 1008 AD (verso of plate 3). My attention was first 
drawn to this inscription by NANDIMATH (2001:88-9), who immediately thereafter refers 
to the composition in 938 AD of a Naimittikakriyanusandhana by a certain Brahma- 
Sambhu (the surviving Nepalese palm-leaf manuscript is in Calcutta and is described 
by Haraprasad SHASTRI 1925:1015-16) who describes himself as belonging to a lineage 
of Karkaroni gurus. The suspicion is not voiced by NANDIMATH, but it seems not 
impossible that the Ambhojasambhu of the inscription should have been the same man: 
it was common practice to vary the elements of initiatory names with synonyms (see, 
e.g., BRUNNER 1998:xlvi), and I think it possible that ambhoja, although we expect it 
to mean lotus, may have been used as a name of Brahma, as are two other words that 
can be analysed to mean ‘water-born’, namely kanja (see, e.g., Parakhya 6:46) and, I 
think, kaja (see Malinivijayavarttika 252c, in which HANNEDER has, however, emended 
kajo ’ghora iti to kajy aghora iti: see 1998:211). Also conceivable, as suggested to me 
by Dr. Somdev VASUDEVA, is that Ambhojagambhu is an error for Ambhojagambhu (cf. 
Pauskara, derived from Puskara, as a name for Brahma). An examination of the MS 
may reveal that the work is that of the Brahmasambhu frequently cited in the paddhati 
literature that postdates the Somasambhupaddhati and that has been assumed lost (see 
BRUNNER 1998:459). 

A number of these references I found with the help of DAvis (1991:168, fn. 24) and 
VAN TROY 1974. 

*8SANDERSON (2002:7-8, fn. 5) has drawn attention to the references to these two 
texts in an inscription from the reign of the Cambodian king Rajendravarman (944-68), 


Preface XX1 


attesting to the existence of the Saiva Siddhanta in Nepal, some sort of 
Saiddhantika presence there from at the latest the beginning of the ninth 
century can be inferred from the evidence of early Nepalese manuscripts of 
Saiddhantika texts.!9 Furthermore it is clear that its most prominent the- 
ologians lived in Kashmir in the tenth century,”? at the same time as the 
most prominent theologians of the group of tantric schools often rather 
misleadingly labelled ‘Kashmir Saivism’, and that these various tantric 
groups (by which expression I intend to include the Saiva Siddhanta) 
exercised influence upon each other. The central fact that characterises 
these tantric cults is that they are private cults for individuals who take a 
non-Vedic initiation (diksa) that uses non-Vedic (as well as Veda-derived) 
mantras and that is the means to liberation, a liberation which consists in 
being omnipotent and omniscient, in other words in realising the powers 
of Siva. 

We may now cloud this picture by presenting a few more details and 
thus also some complications that might seem to conflict with it. The 
evidence we have for reconstructing the character of this early pan-Indian 
theological school is its scriptural canon, together with its commentarial 
literature (into which category we may include here manuals of ritual and 
independent treatises that rehearse and synthesise what is taught in the 
scriptures). Now the commentarial works are explicitly the works of his- 
torical human authors whom we can place and date, often quite precisely. 


where the context is the description of a certain ninth-century Sivacarya (thus FINOT 
1925:354-86) who had received a consecratory initiation using the mandala taught by 
the Nifvasa and knew ‘all the samhitas, the Sarvajnanottara etc.’ (verses 36 and 38, 
FINOT 1925:359). BHATTACHARYA too (1961:49 and 72) is aware of these references and 
of the existence of texts transmitted in India bearing these names, but stops short of 
identifying the surviving texts as being those to which reference is made. He also records 
that references in Cambodian inscriptions to a Paramesvara are to a Saiddhantika work 
(1961:47-8), as indeed they may be (one of them belongs to the tenth century: that 
published by C@DEs 1937:147-56, from the first regnal year of Jayavarman V, 968 AD); 
but in this case BHATTACHARYA rather too confidently assumes them to be references 
to the Matanga (1961:48, fn. 3). Since the name appears unprefixed by a further 
qualifying name (e.g. Matanga-, Pauskara-, Hamsa-, Tilaka- etc.), it is more likely to 
refer, if it indeed refers to a Siddhantatantra, to the ParameSvara partially preserved in 
a ninth-century Nepalese manuscript in Cambridge (MS Add. 1049) and identified by 
SANDERSON as the original Pauskara (see GOODALL 1998:xliii and SANDERSON 2002:4- 
5, fn. 2). 

'®For details of a number of early Nepalese MSS, see GOODALL 1998:xl-xlvii. 

2°For a discussion of the tenth-century lineage of Bhatta Ramakantha II, see 
GOODALL 1998:ix—xviii. 


XXxil Parakhyatantra 


The tantras, however, do not present themselves as the compositions of 
historical human authors, and they do not deliberately leave clues that 
would allow us to locate their place in human history. Among our earliest 
Saiddhantika sources we find a list of the titles of twenty-eight supposedly 
principal tantras, and works with these names survive today. Thus we 
have a large corpus of scriptures of uncertain date, but which we might as- 
sume all to belong in a group to a period earlier than all the commentarial 
literature. But when we examine these tantras and all those that claim to 
be scriptures of the Saiva Siddhanta, we find them to be a very disparate 
body indeed. First of all, among those that treat philosophical matters, we 
find them espousing radically different positions—both dualism, in which 
Siva and souls are fundamentally distinct both from each other and from 
the matter which generates the universe, and non-dualism. Similarly, al- 
though there is a shared terminology for the mantras, the syllables of the 
mantras themselves, even the most fundamental ones, are very various. 
And apart from these differences, some scriptures speak extensively or 
exclusively about the worship of Siva and a Saiva pantheon in the con- 
text of a South Indian public temple, whereas others make no mention 
whatsoever of temple worship, and are concerned instead primarily with 
prescribing practices for a community of initiates. 

Just on the strength of this information a dispassionate person might 
suspect that this scriptural canon was formed at different periods and in 
different places; but without further information it would be difficult to 
prove beyond doubt what was early and what was late and thereby to 
determine a relative chronology of the Saiddhantika canon. 

There are however three firm proofs that a given Siddhantatantra is 
early:— 


1. the existence of early Nepalese manuscripts of the work. Because 
of the cool climate, MSS from Nepal survive many centuries longer 
than in almost any other part of South Asia. 


2. the existence of early commentaries on the work. Commentaries by 
Sadyojyotis, a theologian probably of the seventh century, survive 
on two Siddhantatantras; but the bulk of the surviving exegetical 
Saiddhantika literature of importance appears to have been written 
in the tenth century in Kashmir. | 


3. substantial attributed quotations in the works of early commen- 


Preface XXili 


taries that can still be found in the surviving version of the tantra 
that bears the name to which the quotations are attributed. This 
criterion is arguably less strong than the other two, since the quan- 
tity of labelled quotations to make the idenfication compelling is 
disputable. 


Using the above criteria”! we arrive at a relatively short list of tantras 


which we can assume to have been known to Saiddhantikas in the tenth 
century.2? Most of the twenty-eight listed Siddhantatantras that do not 
meet these criteria are never mentioned by early Saiddhantikas; a few are 


quoted but the quotations are not to be found in the surviving works so 
named.*9 


Kamika 

Yogaja 
Acintya/Cintya 
Karana 

Ajita 
Sudiptaka/Dipta 
Suksma 
Sahasraka 
Suprabha 
AmSumat 


] 
2 
3 
4 
) 
6 
7 
8 
9 


— 
om) 


Vijaya* 
ParameSsa 
Nisvasa 
Prodgita* 
Mukhabimba* 
Siddha 
Santana 


211 may add at this point that these sorts of considerations have relevance in other 
domains of Indian literature too. The one that springs to mind is the corpus of Puranas: 
there too we have what we may suppose to be relatively early lists of eighteen works; 
there too there is considerable dispute about which name refers to which surviving text, 
or indeed whether a number of the unambiguously named surviving texts are the same 
as those in the list; there too there are rival candidates for the same name, the best 
documented case, as of recently, being that of the Skandapurana (see fn. 13 on p. xvii 
above. 

22This is discussed at greater length and with details of manuscripts by GOODALL 
(1998:xxxix—xlvii). 

23Some details are given by GOODALL 1998:xlv—xlvi, fn. 103. 


XXIV Parakhyatantra 


18 j Simha* 

19 | Candra(b)hasa* q 
20 | Bhadra* 

21 | Svayambhuva{(siitrasangraha] | MS | Ccc Q|P 
22 | Virasa/Vira 

23 | Raurava(sttrasangraha] Cc Q | Pp 
24 | Makuta q |p 
29 | Kirana MS | cCcCC | Q | P 
26 | Lalita* 

27 | Agneya* q 
28 | Par[akhya] /Saurabheya C 


In this table, which gives the list of twenty-eight ‘principal’ Saiddhantika 
scriptures—the ten Sivabhedas and the eighteen Rudrabhedas—in the 
version that we find in Kirana 10, the names in bold face are those of 
which demonstrably pre-twelfth century tantras bearing the names in 
question still survive. The nine asterisked titles have, to my knowledge, 
no surviving Saiddhantika works associated with them.74 The entry ‘MS’ 
in the column to the right of the tantras means that an early Nepalese 
manuscript of the text survives. A capital ‘C’ means that a commentary 
survives; a lower-case ‘c’ indicates evidence of a lost commentary.7> A 
capital ‘Q’ indicates the existence of attributed quotations in the works 
of early authors the text of which is to be found in the surviving tantra; a 
lower-case ‘q’ indicates the existence of attributed quotations that are not 
to be found in the tantra that now bears the name in question (or for which 
no Saiddhantika tantra now survives).2° Finally, a small ‘p’ indicates 
that some tantra bearing the name in question has been published; a 
capitalised ‘P’ indicates that there is evidence that the published work is 
ancient. 

There are, of course, complications that the table does not reflect: 
ancient works corresponding to the titles Svayambhuva and the Raurava 
survive, namely the Svayambhuvasitrasangraha and the Rauravasitra- 
sangraha, but some South Indian manuscripts transmit other large bodies 


24We are not concerned here with non Saiddhantika works that have adopted these 
Saiddhantika titles: thus no account is taken of, for instance, the Virasaiva Candra- 
jnana (which corresponds to the Candrahdasa) that has recently been republished by 
Vrajavallabha DVIVEDT. 

*°For details of these see pp. lix ff below and GOODALL 1998:civ—cix. 

*°For references to these quotations, see GOODALL 1998:xlv, fn. 103. 


Preface XXV 


of text with these titles, either separately or variously mixed up with the 
ancient material.?’ 

The following table presents surviving pre-twelfth-century Siddhanta- 
tantras that do not figure in versions of the list of twenty-eight but present 
themselves as derived from one of them. Most present themselves as 
redactions of the Agneya/Vathula;?® but if lost unlisted tantras of which 
pre-twelfth-century quotations survive were also to be tabulated (and not 
just surviving ones), then claimed affiliations to the ParameSvara would 
also be well represented.2° 


Surviving pre-twelfth-century ‘Upabhedas’ 


Sardhatrisati-Kalottara | <= Agneya 
Dvisati-Kalottara < Agneya 
SaptaSatika-Kalottara | < Agneya 
Jnanapancasika < Agneya 
Satika-Kalottara <= Agneya 


Brhatkalottara <= Agneya 
Mrgendra <= Kamika 
Matanga <= Paramesvara 
Sarvajnanottara < Agneya 
Mohacidottara <= Agneya 
Mayasangraha =? 


Now it goes without saying that the paucity of extant early works makes 
it difficult to build a convincing picture of the early Saiva Siddhanta, to 
decide which tantras belonged most closely together, which were marginal 
and to judge how tight was the unity formed by the whole pre-tenth- 
century canon. Nevertheless we may attempt a characterisation of the 
surviving early texts, remaining aware, of course, that what we say is 
tentative.2° 


27See GOODALL 1998:xlviii-li and, for the Rauravasitrasangraha, pp. xliv below, in 
which some account is taken of the views of DAGENS and BARAZER-BILLORET (2000), 
who do not accept this characterisation of the material that forms the Raurava corpus, 
and who may not subscribe to the characterisation here of the rest of the canon. 

281t is conceivable that one of the surviving recensions of the Kalottara is in fact the 
‘original’ Agneya/Vathula; but see GOODALL 1998:xlv-xlvi, fn. 103, quoting SANDER- 
SON. 

29See GOODALL 1998:xiliii, fn. 98. 

3°T am grateful to Dr. Cotas for urging me to caution on this and other similar 
questions. 


XXVi Parakhyatantra 


First of all we may observe that these demonstrably early tantras, 
with a single exception,®! appear to be dualist. Furthermore all the 
early writers of the Saiva Siddhanta of whom works survive—that is to 
say Sadyojyotis, whom we have mentioned above, Srikantha, Narayana- 
kantha, Ramakantha, all of whom belonged to tenth-century Kashmir, 
down to Aghorasiva and his disciples, a group of exegetes who upheld 
the doctrines of the tenth-century Kashmirians in twelfth-century South 
India,°?—are without exception dualists. Early non-dualist works of the 
school could have gone missing, but it appears likely that the old Saiva 
Siddhanta was a broadly dualist school which only after the twelfth cen- 
tury felt the influence of non-dualist Vedanta. The early Siddhantatantras 
are not only not influenced by non-dualist Vedanta, they seem in fact to 
ignore it. It is only among the tantras that cannot be demonstrated to 
be early that we find works which either teach or appear to presuppose 
a Vedanta-influenced non-dualism, notably the Ajitagama,** the Supra- 


31 As SANDERSON has pointed out (1992:291), the Sarvajnanottara is an unambigu- 
ously non-dualist work that survives in an early Nepalese manuscript. For further 
details about the transmission of this text see GOODALL 1998:xlvi and lix—lxi. I should 
add to those remarks that although a small part of that same Sarvajndnottara has been 
published (the chapters comprising the so-called vidyapada have been published with 
a Tamil translation and commentary by Tiittukkuti Po. Muttaiya Pillai, Devakottai 
1923) the doctrine of the early text should not be deduced from this published version, 
since this has been deliberately and very significantly modified, most distortively by the 
insertion in its first chapter of twenty verses discussing and refuting the old doctrine 
that in liberation the soul becomes equal to Siva (7-26). These verses are certainly 
a late interpolation since they are not found in the ancient Nepalese MS of the text 
(National Archives of Kathmandu MS 1-1692, NGMPP Reel No. A 43/12, f. 49°), nor 
are they discussed in AghoraSiva’s twelfth-century commentary on the text, nor do they 
occur in the manuscripts of the text belonging to the collection of the IFP, or indeed 
in any manuscript that I have been able to consult. 

For confirmation of Aghorasgiva’s date, see GOODALL 1998:xiii-xvii, fn. 24. For 
details of two disciples, see GOODALL 2000:208-211. 

°Particularly 2:1-27, in which, as SANDERSON has pointed out (1992:291, fn. 42), 

iva is represented as the supreme soul whose form is being, consciousness, and bliss 
and as the identity of everything, including individual souls. (Many of the same verses 
occur also in a passage of the Vatulasuddhakhya: 9:77-89, quoted in the apparatus to 
the Ajita.) 


Preface xvii 


bhedagama,™4 the Yogaja and the Cintyasastra.*° 

And another clear pattern emerges: the Siddhantatantras that are 
demonstrably early are not concerned with the performance of public 
worship in temples. Again it is only the tantras that we find transmitted 
and known only in the Tamil-speaking South that discuss the performance 
of public temple worship. The tantras that are demonstrably early are 
primarily concerned with teaching a system of worship for private individ- 
uals who have taken liberating initiation and with justifying this system 
of worship with a theology, the salient points of which have been sum- 
marised as follows:*° 


...(1) Siva, (2) souls, and (3) the rest of reality, mental and 
material, are essentially and eternally distinct from each other. 
According to this view Siva is only the efficient cause (nimitta- 
karanam) of the universe. Its material cause (upadana- 
karanam), that out of which it is fashioned, of which it con- 
sists, and into which it dissolves, is not Siva but maya. The 
latter is the single, eternal, and unconscious source of the 


“For the lateness of this work, see BRUNNER 1992a:271 and 1992b:32-3. For its 
non-dualism, see BRUNNER 1967:51ff. It is true that she at one point characterises its 
non-dualism (p.54) as ‘un monisme analogue a celui du Trika’, but note that we also 
find her remark (p. 53): 


... La resonance vedantine de cette déclaration, renforcée par les images 
du cristal coloré par le voisinage d’un objet, de la corde-serpent, du soleil 
reflété dans des vases, est assez surprenante. Etonnante aussi la descrip- 
tion du jivan-mukta, digne de la plume d’un disciple de Sankara. Mais si 
l’on pense a ces passages antérieurs ot il est dit que l’atman vient de Siva, 
on est bien obligé de reconnaitre une certaine cohérence dans la fidélité 
de notre texte & un advaita...qu’il faudrait préciser. 


3SDr. T. GANESAN has pointed out signs of Vedintic influence in these two unpub- 
lished works in a lecture entitled ‘Approaching the Agama’ (2004*). Among the features 
that he pointed to are the following. The Yogaja’s account of diksa is prefaced by refer- 
ences to types of Saivas (which, as BRUNNER remarks [(1992b:32], appear to be referred 
to otherwise only in late South Indian works) the highest of which are the Adigaivas, of 
whom the text says (diksalaksana 19cd, IFP MS T. 24, p. 368): vedavedantatattvajna 
adisaiva itismrtah. The Cintyasastra incorporates meditation upon one of the Vedantic 
mahavakyas (tat tvam asi) into a description of the visualisation of Sadaéiva (18:19ff, 
IFP MS T.13, p.82) and, as further indication of its outspoken Veda-congruence, it 
includes a specific injunction to follow the Baudhdyana (or Bodhayana) tradition for 
sandhya rites (5:3, p. 27). 

*°Quoted (omitting the footnotes) from SANDERSON 1992:282-5. 


XXVill Parakhyatantra 


worlds and everything in them, including the bodies and fac- 
ulties of each soul. To initiate a period of cosmic emanation 
(srstih) Siva relies on a viceregent, the Lord Ananta (Ananta- 
bhattaraka, Anantega) to irradiate maya with his powers and 
sO cause it to give birth to these forms. Siva causes Ananta 
to activate maya in this way in order that souls which have 
not yet been released may have the means of experiencing 
the fruits of their past actions and the possibility of working 
toward their eventual salvation. 

When Siva judges a soul to be ready for release he liberates 
it into a state of omniscience and omnipotence in which it 
is his equal (Sivasamah, Sivatulyah). Even in this state of 
enlightenment and liberation each soul remains distinct from 
every other and from Siva himself. There is no question of the 
soul’s surrendering its separate identity by dissolution (Jayah) 
into some form of transindividual consciousness. 

Liberation cannot be achieved through mere knowledge of 
reality without recourse to ritual. This is because the state 
of bondage, in which the soul fails to realize its innate om- 
niscience and omnipotence, is not caused by mere ignorance. 
The ignorance that characterises the unliberated is the effect 
of an imperceptible Impurity (malam) that acts on the soul 
from outside; and this Impurity, though it is imperceptible, 
is a material substance (dravyam). Because it is a substance, 
only action (vyaparah) can remove it; and the only action ca- 
pable of removing it is that of the rituals of the initiation and 
their sequel taught by Siva in his Tantric scriptures. 


After reading this characterisation of the pre-twelfth-century Saiva 
Siddhanta, the reader might ask: why, if this is really a true portrait, 
it is not widely accepted in our time? Why do publications of today 
present the school as Tamil, philosophically non-dualist (or at any rate not 
strictly dualist) and vedanticizing, largely or entirely post-12th-century, 
and partly based on a group of liturgical Sanskrit tantras teaching the 
mode of public worship in temples? I think that there are a number of 
factors that go some way to explaining how this distorted picture has 
been reached. 


Preface XXX 


1. Firstly, there has been a relative neglect of Sanskritic sources in 
favour of Tamil ones among those claiming allegiance to the Saiva 
Siddhanta in Tamil Nadu today. If only the Tamil sources are con- 
sidered, then a most distorted picture of the history of the develop- 
ment of the cult is inevitable. (Ignoring the Tamil sources is, in my 
view, less distortive, as I shall explain below.) The more so since 
the parlous state of modern scholarship about pre-modern Tamil 
literature means that few dates are secure or even pinned down to 
reliable narrow margins, and, as far as I am aware, no single critical 
edition has appeared of a pre-modern Tamil text.2” The impossible 
dating on slender evidence of one particular Tamil author, namely 
Tirumular, the author of the Tirumantiram, to the fifth, sixth or 
seventh century, gives rise to a highly implausible relative chronol- 
ogy of the Saiva Siddhanta. I would characterise the Tirumantiram 
as a syncretic work of philosophical speculation that may have been 
dated six or seven centuries too early. It is plain that it contains a 
complex of concepts with Sanskrit labels the development of which 
one can trace in Sanskrit (not Tamil) literature that must certainly 


37It is perhaps not out of place to repeat here some earlier remarks on this subject 
(GOODALL 2000:214-15, fn. 38): 


Since this expression is today so variously understood among indologists, 
I must state what I understand by it. A critical edition is an editor’s 
reconstruction of a text as he supposes it to have been at a particular time 
in its transmission (...). Although it is a hypothesis, it is made on the basis 
of all evidence for the wording of the text that the editor can consult (ideally 
all surviving evidence) and by an editor who has striven to understand as far 
as possible the ideas of the author(s) as well as the relationships between the 
sources that make up that evidence, and it is equipped with an apparatus 
that reports all of that evidence that is relevant to the constitution of 
the text (in some cases this means all the evidence). Such editions, as 
yet all too rare, are invaluble tools for all who are interested—from any 
perspective—in texts and their transmissions. 


To avoid confusion, I should add that I do not mean to say that non-critical editions 
cannot be useful or learned. An editor may take trouble collating, weighing the merits 
of readings, making judicious emendations and choices on the basis of discrimination 
and wide reading, annotating, and so forth, and yet not provide the evidence on the 
basis of which the text has been reconstructed; indeed editions of some Tamil works 
are evidently works of very great learning. But it is not possible to find out from them 
both what all the sources were and which source read what for every line of text. This 
means that no one can attempt to understand the relationships between the sources 
without reexamining all the sources. 


XXX Parakhyatantra 


post-date the fifth century.2®> The majority of scholars who claim 
to study the Saiva Siddhanta in South India today ignore the San- 
skrit sources, and those who do study them tend to study relatively 
late South Indian ones: it is symptomatic of a widespread trend 
that, in the recent Madras University anthology of articles Facets 
of Saiva Siddhanta, the only one that acknowledges the early non- 
South-Indian heritage of the South Indian Saiva Siddhanta appears 
to be that of GANESAN (2000), who belongs in fact to the French 
Institute. 


2. The second is the circumstance that the Saiva Siddhanta appears to 
have disappeared from all parts of India except the Tamil-speaking 
South after the twelfth-century. That is to say that, as far as I 
am aware, no evidence has come to light of the composition of 
texts after the twelfth-century and no evidence of Saiddhantika ini- 
tiations having taken place from outside that area after the thir- 
teenth.°? Perhaps it is wrong to characterise this as disappear- 
ance; in some areas of India the old Siddhantas evidently contin- 
ued being transmitted and plentifully quoted in manuals of ritual, 
but along with texts of different religious outlook, and the result- 
ing blend ceased to go by the name Saiva Siddhanta. Thus from 
the Kashmir valley we find Saiva tantric ritual manuals that draw 
largely on Siddhantas, but also on tantras that are philosophically 
less determinate, such as the Svacchanda. The two works that are 
sometimes characterised as serving as the foundations for the syn- 
cretic brand of tantric ritual that has flourished in Kerala in recent 
centuries, namely the Prayogamafjari and the Isanasivagurudeva- 
paddhati, both are rooted in the Saiva Siddhanta,*° but, as far as 
I am aware, the ritual system based upon them is never referred to 
as Saiddhantika. 


38] have drawn attention to this in GOODALL 1998:xxxvii-xxxix and GOODALL 
2000:213, fn. 27 and 28. | 

3°In the North, Saiddhantika initiation names are found in the thirteenth-century 
Dhureti plates of the Chandella king Trailokyamalla, which MIRASHI (1955:369-74) 
has edited, translated and dated to 1212 AD, and in Andhra Pradesh in numerous 
inscriptions from the second quarter of the thirteenth century into the beginning of the 
fourteenth: see SWAMY 1975 and TALBOT 1987. 

4°In the case of the Prayogamanjari, its being rooted in the Siddhantas is evident, 
for instance, in chapter 9 (see particularly 9:1 and 9:8, but see also 1:6 and 1:29). For 
a characterisation of the Isanasivagurudevapaddhati, see p. cix below. 


Preface XXXi 


3. The third factor is that the currents of ritual and philosophical 
thinking that evolved from the old pan-Indian Saiva Siddhanta in 
the Tamil-speaking South did, unlike those in Kerala, continue to 
present themselves as being Saiva Siddhanta. As we have seen 
above, in parallel with the growth of a body of tantras in San- 
skrit that, unlike the earlier Siddhantatantras, laid down the rules 
of public temple worship, there also flourished a school of increas- 
ingly Vedanta-influenced theological speculation whose texts were 
in Tamil, the first of them allegedly from the twelfth-century. 


4. The fourth is that many of the early texts are unpublished, or 
partially published, or published in a minimally edited state that 
leaves them barely comprehensible,*! and much of the worthwhile 
secondary literature is in French, which is a barrier for some indo- 
logists. 


5. The fifth factor is disinterest. The pattern of development that I 
have very crudely sketched seems to me not to be very difficult to 
discern, and I am not the first to believe it to be discernable (see, for 
instance, the works BRUNNER, SANDERSON); but there has been no 
very strong motivation to try to discern it. In the words of Hous- 
MAN, ‘the faintest of all human passions is the passion for truth’.4? 
Indian religious traditions, for obvious reasons, can sometimes ne- 
glect aspects of the study of their own historical development. And 
some indologists seem content to read philosophical texts as expres- 
sions of coherent systems of ideas, without any consideration of their 
development. Assigning dates, in so far as it has any interest at all, 
can become for them no more than an expression of pride in the 
texts: the more ancient they are, the more distinguished. 


An innocent might here pose the question: Why devote so much energy 
to questions of the chronology of texts? Is it of interest to know that 
a certain South Indian exegete composed a particular work in 1157 AD? 
By itself this fact is of course pretty much devoid of interest; but in the 
context of the dates of related literature it is invaluable information. Only 
when we see the chronological relationships between the works of the Saiva 


“See p. Lxxxvil below. 
*2From HOUSMAN’s preface to his edition M. Manilii Astronomicon Liber Primus 
(London, 1903) as quoted in HOUSMAN 1981:43. 


XXX]i Parakhyatantra 


Siddhanta can we then trace the intellectual history of the school and so 
its relationship to other philosophies. 

Now to return to the bibliographical issue With which I started, the 
principal reason why a large number of publications purportedly devoted 
to or treating of the Saiva Siddhanta are not considered here in detail is 
that they treat what we may refer to as the Tamil Saiva Siddhanta, a 
system that is later than and, to some extent, separable from the Saiva 
Siddhanta to which our text belongs. I say ‘to some extent’ because it 
is clear that the school known as the Saiva Siddhanta that developed 
in the Tamil-speaking South and the earliest of whose theological texts 
(the Meykantacattirankal) purportedly date from the twelfth century,’ 
is closely related—it is clear, for instance, from the large body of ter- 
minology shared by its Tamil texts and by earlier Sanskrit literature. 
Indeed some South Indians tell me that it is unconscionable to pretend to 
write about the Saiva Siddhanta without detailed treatment of the Tamil 
sources. But although the Tamil school has plainly been influenced by, in- 
deed has grown out of, the once pan-Indian Sanskrit one, it is self-evident 
that there can have been no influence in the other direction before at least 
the twelfth-century. This book is devoted to the study of a tantra in San- 
skrit written before the tenth century, and so I feel justified in excluding 
from detailed treatment the Tamil school and secondary literature that 
discusses that school. I have, however, consulted many Sanskrit texts 


43 Precise dates are commonly given for each of these fourteen ‘foundational’ treatises. 
All are placed in the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries except the first two, the 
Tiruvuntiyar and the Tirukkalirruppatiyar, which are assigned to 1147 and 1177 ap 
respectively. One work among the fourteen, the Cankarpanirakaranam records the 
occasion and the date of its composition: 1313 AD. I have not been able to discover 
on what authority dates have been assigned to the other thirteen works. Nor am 
I aware of these dates being investigated in recent secondary literature. PRENTISS 
(1996:237, fn.20), among others, refers for her dates to DHAVAMONY 1971, a much 
cited work often given the epithet ‘authoritative’. DHAVAMONY in turn (1971:175) 
refers to IRACAMANIKKANAR 1958 for the date of the Tiruvuntiyar (for the other twelve 
unsubstantiated dates he refers to no authority). But IRACAMANIKKANAR (1958:269, 
n.31) appears not to give any justification for this date. The dates of the Meykanta- 
cattirankal appear already (without evidence being adduced) in the preface (pp. 5-7) 
of the Madras edition of 1897. We should note that S.S. SURYANARAYANA SASTRI 
(1930:22, fn. 31), who appears to have been rigorous in his attempts to date the various 
authors he studied relative to each other, describes 1313 AD, the date given by Umapati 
in the beginning of his Cankarpanirakaranam, as ‘the only date definitely known in the 
history of Tamil Saivism’. 


Preface XXXiii 


written after the twelfth century, many of whose authors had certainly 
felt the influences of the Tamilian school; but I have consulted them pri- 
marily to.mine them for quotations of the Parakhya, in order better to 
reconstruct its text. 

Thus far I think I have nearly justified the exclusion of Tamil sources 
from the history of the pre-twelfth-century pan-Indian Saiva Siddhanta. 
But there is a body of Tamil texts arguably recognised as some sort of 
‘scripture’ by some authors of the largely post-twelfth-century Tamil Saiva 
Siddhanta that may date from our early period: some of the devotional 
Tamil hymns by certain of the Nayanmars may be contemporaneous with 
some of the earliest surviving Sanskrit Saiddhantika writings.“4 Whatever 
the period(s) of their composition, these hymns are not directly relevant 
to us because they were not in their own time in any sense Saiddhantika 
compositions; indeed it is questionable whether any clearly defined the- 
ological positions can be inferred from the hymns of any of the poets. 
It is as literary expressions of devotion that they were cherished by sub- 
sequent Tamil thinkers and so canonised;** the theology of the Tamil 
Saiva Siddhanta was formulated rather in the Meykantacattirankal and 
its commentaries. *® 

I may have seemed harshly dismissive of some of the secondary lit- 
erature in the foregoing pages, and so I acknowledge here that I have of 
course nevertheless derived much benefit from it. I am well aware that my 
own work will before long (and perhaps already does) seem tiresomely de- 
ficient in one respect or another to some readers. And perhaps it is worth 


“‘Dating these Tamil poets is a vexed business and still the subject of debate. An 
impression of the complexity can be gained from leafing through, for example, RAN- 
GASWAMY’s chapter ‘Age of Nampi Arirar’ (1991:114-77 [first edition 1958]) and Gros 
1982 (‘postface’ to the 1982 re-edition of KARAVELANE’s Chants dévotionnels tamouls 
de Karaikkalammaiyar, esp. pp. 96ff) and 1984 (introduction to GOPAL IYER’s edition 
of the Tévaram, esp. pp. viii ff). 

“This appears to be acknowledged even by those who affirm the Tamil charac- 
ter (if not actually Tamil origins) of the Saiva Siddhanta. See, e.g., DEVASENAPATHI 
(1966:273): ‘Tevaram and Tiruvacagam, (like the Prabandam of the Alvars) consti- 
tute, if we may say so, the Tamil upanisads.’ Cf. also RANGASWAMY'’s conclusion, after 
more than a thousand pages devoted to the ‘Religion and Philosophy’ of Ardrar, that 
‘i]t has not been possibly [sic] to label him as belonging to any particular Philosophy’ 
(1991:1265). 

46For a useful treatment of the doctrines of this Tamil Saiva Siddhanta, see DEVASE- 
NAPATHI 1966. 


XXXIV Parakhyatantra 


stating explicitly that there is, as I have implied, some most admirable 
secondary literature.4’ 


47Particularly noteworthy are the voluminous writings of BRUNNER, amongst which 
the introduction to the third volume of her translation and study of the Somasambhu- 
paddhati (1977) provides a good introduction to the early Saiva Siddhanta, and the 
articles of SANDERSON (1985, 1990, 1992, 1995, *1996), which all go some way towards 
articulating the relationships between the early Saiva Siddhanta and its Saiva tantric 
context, touching in some articles on particular aspects: its doctrines (1992), the role 
of ritual within it (1995), and its canon (*1996). 

Shortly before completing this book, I have become aware of DvIVEDI 2000, pp. 235- 
427 of which give a useful account of the principal authors and doctrines of the early 
pan-Indian Saiva Siddhanta. I have two small reservations about this treatment. The 
first is that the presentation of doctrines often takes relatively little account of historical 
development, in other words, does not articulate the relationships between the texts 
that give slightly conflicting accounts of particular points of doctrine or attempt to 
explain or comment on those differences (see, e.g., the treatment of the transmigratory 
body on p.374), and where it is historically more sensitive, it has elsewhere been 
improved upon in a number of details (contrast, e.g., the account of malaparipaka 
and karmasaémya on pp. 357-62 with GOODALL 1998:xxxiii-xxxvi, and 215-220). The 
second is that the account of the relations between most of the authors he discusses 
has also, I think, been improved on elsewhere (this is particularly so of Aghorasiva, 
TrilocanaSiva, and Sarvatmasambhu; see GOODALL 2000). 


INTRODUCTION 


The Parakhyatantra 
and its place in the Saiddhantika canon 


As will be clear from the numerous testimonia that appear in the appa- 
ratus to the text, the Parakhya- or Saurabheya-tantra was once a valued 
authority, much quoted both by writers of the period of the early pan- 
Indian Saiva Siddhanta, i.e. up to and including Aghorasiva, and also by 
thinkers of various of the subsequent South Indian strands of development 
that go by the name of the Saiva Siddhanta. It is curious, therefore, that 
there seems to survive only one incomplete manuscript of the text,4® trans- 
mitting patalas 1-6 and 14-15. The codex in which it is written (hereafter 
M”; I continue to use the siglum to which I assigned it for my edition of 
the Kirana, GOODALL 1998) is of unique importance to our understand- 
ing of the early Saiva Siddhanta because it is also the codex unicus for 
much of the Rauravasitrasangraha,*? which, as I have argued in my intro- 
duction to the Kiranavrtti, is the only part of the printed Raurava early 
enough to have been known to the lineage of Bhatta Ramakantha IT, and 
it is the only manuscript known to me which transmits the complete text 
of the Svayambhuvasitrasangraha with the chapters in the correct order 
(i.e. that preserved in the fragmentary Nepalese palm-leaf manuscript) 
and unmixed with other (later) chapters, as we find in most South Indian 


487 pass over here the other manuscripts listed in Mysore catalogues, MSS B 785 and 
B 811, transcripts on paper in Kannada script (see p.cii ff below). An examination of 
their readings reveals them to be apographs of M”. 

4°Printed as the ‘vidydpdda’ at the beginning and end of the first volume of N.R. 
BHATT’s Rauravagama. A handful of South Indian manuscripts transmit up to 4:41 but 
no further. M” transmits an upodghata and ten chapters. BHATT was not able to use 
M” for the constitution of the text of the upodghata 1:1-4:41. (I intend soon to publish 
a list of improvements to the edition of the Rauravastitrasangraha and especially to this 
part of the text.) 


XXXVi Parakhyatantra 


manuscripts.°° (Although the Mysore edition does not make clear that 
it is based on M”, the errors and gaps therein show that it must be.) 
Furthermore the codex’s text of the Kirana is the closest among those of 
all the manuscripts known to me to the text that Ramakantha had be- 
fore him—closer even than the text of the manuscripts that also transmit 
Ramakantha’s commentary. 


5°For a fuller discussion of the extent of the Svayambhuvasitrasangraha and of 
its clumsy incorporation in South India into a larger text called Svayambhuva see 
GOODALL 1998:xlviii-li, in particular fn. 111. (Neither of FILLIOZAT’s editions of the 
Svayambhuvavrtti discuss the structure or extent of the text of which it is a partial 
commentary, nor does his just published article on Sadyojyotis of the same period, 
beyond a sentence to the effect that the commented chapters, 1-5, appear as chapters 
33-7 in some manuscripts (2001:24).) 

I earlier offered no hypothesis about the relation of these texts to a Suksma- 
svayambhuva of which three padas are cited a few times by early writers (e.g. by 
Abhinavagupta in Tantraloka 15:2c-3b and by Ramakantha in the Matangavrtti ad 
vidyapada 3:23c-25b and 26:63): 


yo yatrabhilased bhogan sa tatraiva niyojitah 
siddhibhan mantrasamarthyat. 


This verse occurs also in the South Indian Svayambuva as 40:2c-3b (IFP MS T. 39, 
p. 148) and equipped with a final pada: syad atroktam avistarat. But, as VASUDEVA 
suggests (*2000:239, fn. 170), 


The whole of the extremely short 40th chapter of the IFI transcript 39 is 
perhaps no more than a later South Indian fabrication specifically written 
to include an earlier, authoritative citation from a lost work. 


Both VASUDEVA (ibid.) and myself (GOODALL 1998:373, fn. 607) mistakenly assumed 
that no other verses survived attributed to the Siksmasvayambhuva. In fact Vaktra- 
Sambhu quotes two and a half verses that he attributes to the Saksmasvayambhuva in 
the Mrgendrapaddhatitika (IFP MS T. 1021, p. 127), and he plainly distinguished the 
work from the Svayambhuvasitrasangraha, for he twice mentions both works together 
in lists, one of which we have quoted above on p. lix, and the other is to be found on 
p. 208 of the transcript. 

A further half-verse is attributed to the Siksmasvayambhuva in the appendix to the 
Sarvamatopanyasa, quoted between C:52 and 53 in Appendix I, and another is quoted 
in the Atmarthapijapaddhati, IFP MSS T.795, p. 78, T.323, p.123, T.321, p.125, 
and T.282, p.116. Note that BRUNNER’s listing (1977:698) of IFP MS T.192 as a 
manuscript transmitting the Suksmasvayambhuvagama and Suksmasvayambhuvavrtti 
is a slip; the manuscript is a transcript of Madras GOML MS R 16797 transmitting the 
first four chapters of the Svayambhuvasitrasangraha (including the verses of chapter 4 
not commented upon by Sadyojyotis) followed by Sadyojyotis’s Svayambhuvavrtti, and 
its readings are reported in FILLIOZAT’s editions marked with the siglum ka. There is 
however other evidence of there having been a Siksmasvayambhuvavrtti: Trilocanasiva 
quotes from it in his Somagambhupaddhatitika (see BRUNNER 1977:419, n. 244e). 


Introduction XXXVIli 


It is true that quotations from the text are not especially common in 
the works of Saiddhantikas up to and including Aghorasiva—Ramakantha 
quotes it by name only once (ad Matangavidyapada 12:25-27b, pp. 347- 
8), Narayanakantha only twice (ad Mrgendravidyapada 2:7, p.58 and 
ad Mrgendravidyapada 11:11, p. 231), and thus Aghorasiva too, who in 
his works on doctrine rarely quotes an authority that has not previously 
been quoted by these important forbears, refers to it infrequently (ad 
Nadakarika 12, Bhogakarika 100c-101b (untraced in M”), and without 
attribution ad Tattvatrayanirnaya 6, Tattvaprakasa 25, 44-5, Ratnatraya- 
pariksa 30ab and Ratnatrayapariksa 180c-182b). 

Is it conceivable that the text’s being taught by Prakasa rather than by 
a form of Siva himself diminished the authoritativeness of the Parakhya in 
the eyes of some? A passage from Ksemaraja’s Svacchandatantroddyota 
(ad 10:516c-517b quoted in fn. 604 on p. 309 below) suggests this, but it 
seems likely that Ksemaraja takes such a position there merely because 
he wishes to find a reason for upholding a teaching of the Svacchanda 
against assertions of the Mrgendra and the Parakhya. Judging from the 
number and range of its quotations, particularly in South Indian works, 
the Mrgendra’s importance in the Saiddhantika exegetical tradition seems 
to have been huge in spite of its being a redaction by Indra rather than 
Siva’s words. 

Whatever be the reason for their relative paucity, these few early 
Saiddhantika attestations, taken together with the very substantial quo- 
tations that appear in the tenth chapter of Ksemaraja’s Svacchanda- 
tantroddyota, serve to prove that this Parakhya is an early work. 
Thus it may join the tiny list of surviving demonstrably early listed 
Siddhantas°!—the Kirana, the Nigvasa, the Rauravasitrasangraha, the 
Svayambhuvasitrasangraha, the [Pauskara-|Paramesvara.°* For although 
it does not figure in the standardized South Indian list that Bhatt tabu- 
lates in his introduction to the first volume of the Raurava, it appears at 
the end of a number of early versions of the list of twenty-eight primary 
scriptures, namely those of the ParameSvara, the Srikanthiya, the Kirana, 


5'For a reasoned account of which Saiddhantika scriptures we may assume to have 
predated the Kashmirian thinkers of the lineage of Ramakantha II whose works helped 
to shape the school’s theology see GOODALL 1998:xxxix—xlvii. 

52Some might include here the non-eclectic recensions of the Kalottara on the grounds 
that they are redactions of the scripture listed as the Vathula/ Vatula (see GOODALL 
1998:xlv—xlvi, fn. 103, quoting SANDERSON). 


XXXVill Parakhyatantra 
and that which prefaces the Jaanapancasika recension of the Kalottara.°? 


Two early Parakhyatantras? 


Our Parakhya does not, however, appear to be the same as that quoted 
in the Brhatkalottara.*4 Professor SANDERSON has kindly furnished me 
with his preliminary edition (*1996b) of the sivabhedapatala and the 
tantrotpattivyakhyapatala’® which purport to give the mila- or adi-siitras 
of the twenty-eight root scriptures. The Parakhya is last on the list, and 
its sutra, and a brief commentary thereon, read as follows (verses 92—5b, 
f.55", lines 2-5): 


athavyaktam mahalingam purusatitavacakam 
jnanam Sivatmakam suksmam Sarvavijnaptikaranam 


adisutram idam jneyam saurabheye parahvaye 
athavyaktamahalingaproktya tattvam gunatmakam*® 


tatha Sivatmakoktya tu Sivam eva padam smrtam 
tasya vacyasya ye mantra vacakah saktirupinah 
ata etatpadenoktam purusatitavacakam 


This sutra appears nowhere in what M” transmits of the Parakhya and, 
although it is possible that it occurred in one of the chapters that was 
not copied, this is unlikely, firstly because adisutras, as the name tells us, 
occur at or towards the beginning of a work and we seem to have what 
must have been intended to be the beginning of our Parakhya preserved 


53See GOODALL 1998:402-17 for a tabulation of these lists, together with rudimentary 
editions of the lists that are drawn from unpublished sources. The list which prefaces 
the Jnanapancasika I treated as belonging to the Joanapancasika in GOODALL 1998:412, 
but Dr. ACHARYA has pointed out to me that in other manuscripts than the one I 
consulted, a division is clearly marked between the account of the canon and the first 
speech of Karttikeya, which in fact marks the beginning of the Jnanapancasika. All 
the verses of this prefatory section from the seventh verse up to and including the one 
before the true beginning of the tantra are to be found in the Pratisthalaksanasarasa- 
muccaya as 2:107-29, which is in fact the list I referred to in GOODALL 1998:417, fn. 
149, but had been unable to see. 

°4This section of the Brhatkdlottara has been discussed at greater length in GOODALL 
(1998:414-17). I repeat here a certain amount of that information since it is relevant 
to the Parakhya. 

55 Brhatkalottara, National Archives of Kathmandu 1-89, NGMPP Reel No. B 24/59, 
‘Kalottara’, ff.47°-55". 

5°runatmakam ] em. SANDERSON; gunatmakam smrtam MS 


Introduction XXX1X 


in M’, and secondly that beginning contains a plausible mulasitra (1:4 
or 1:5 or both).°” It is possible then that the Brhatkalottara knew an- 
other Parakhya, and this is suggested by another passage in the same 
tantrotpattivyakhyapatala in which divisions of the twenty-eight funda- 
mental scriptures are listed (verses 16-30b, f.51", line 6-52", line 1). In 
the last half-verse of this passage the Parakhya is said to be two-fold: 


saurabheyam (em. SANDERSON; °bhedam MS) parakhyam ca 
dvividham ca parahvayam 


This last half-verse may mean then that the redactor(s) of the Brhat- 
kalottara knew of two parts of a Parakhya or of two independent works, 
one known as the Saurabheya and the other as the Parakhya. The adi- 
sutra it quotes must then be assumed to belong to the one not preserved 
in MY. As a source of information about the canon the Brhatkalottara 
must, however, be used with caution: very little of the material in these 
patalas can be verified (only the adisitras of the Rauravasutrasangraha, 
the Kirana, and the Svayambhuvasutrasangraha can be found in surviving 
works) and some of the information does not fit as neatly as might be 
hoped.°8 Furthermore the solution is not entirely satisfactory because 
Saurabheya seems elsewhere to be used as an alternative name for our 
Parakhya (see p. cviii). 

If we are to make sense of what the Brhatkalottara tells us, we might 
assume that what M” transmits is the upabheda of the Parakhya that 
the Brhatkalottara calls Saurabheya, since that name Saurabheya can be 
argued to be appropriate to it, as we shall see below,°? and thus both 
names can be used of it. The lost work from which the untraced adi- 
sutra is quoted might then be the upabheda of the Parakhya which the 
Brhatkalottara actually calls Parakhya. 

As for the appropriateness of the name Saurabheya, I quote SANDER- 
SON’s suggestion (GOODALL 1998:lxv, fn. 156): 


57It is clear that an ddisitra need not be a unit of thirty-two syllables: Ramakantha 
takes Kirana 1:11c—12d to be the adisitra of that work (Kirana 1:13, which is identified 
as the adisitra in the Brhatkalottara (f. 54", lines 3-4) Ramakantha refers to as a prati- 
jnasitrantaram), and for the Vijaya the Brhatkalottara identifies just two padas as the 
adisutra (f.52”, line 2). 

58See, e.g., the information about the subdivision of the Nig¢vasa quoted in GOODALL 
1998:416. 

°°We can assume that the reading saurabhedam is a slip, although this too could be 
appropriate, since the teacher of the tantra is the sun. 


xl Parakhyatantra 


The interlocutors of the Parakhya are Prakasa (the sun) and 
a certain Pratoda, who can be identified with Vasistha,© 
because this information is given when a passage from the 
Parakhya is quoted in Taksakavarta’s digest (f.40", line 15): 
pratodo bhagavan vasistha uvaca .... This connection with 
Vasistha may explain the Parakhya’s other name: since 
Vasistha is closely associated in mythology with Surabhi, 
the ‘cow of plenty’ produced at the churning of the ocean, 
Professor SANDERSON proposes (in a letter of 2.ix.96) that 
Saurabheya means ‘taught to Saurabha’, Saurabha denoting 
Vasistha. 


The same passage of Taksakavarta’s Nityadisangrahabhidhanapaddhati 
identifies Prakasa as the sun, introducing his first speech with prakaso 
bhagavan sirya uvaca, and this identification is confirmed by the speaker 
indication before 4:40 in M”’s text. I give below a translation of Taksaka- 
varta’s quotation, which is to be found as A:1-8 in Appendix I. 


The venerable Pratoda, [that is to say] Vasistha spoke: 
Earlier [you taught that] the five brahmamantras are arranged 
as limbs and subsidiary limbs [of Sadasiva]. What is the point 
of these supposititious limbs that you call ‘heart’, etc.? (1) 

Prakasa, the Lord the sun, spoke: 

These limbs being said to be limbs belongs to a teaching that 
is couched in figurative language (upacaravidhisthitam). For 
even those [mantras] that we call armour and sword [viz. the 
KAVACA and the ASTRA] are here [spoken of figuratively as] 
limbs. And those two are not [in fact] limbs; they become 
(spoken of figuratively as] limbs because they are occasioned 
by [real] limbs. (2-3b) 

The HRDAYA is put on like a protective cloth for the protection 
of the heart; the SIRAS is something wrapped about the head 
as a protection for the head; the CULIKA is a protection for the 
head; and the KANKANA is a protection for the body. (3c—4) 


°°There are precious few instances of verse-filling vocatives in Prakasa’s speeches 
that could confirm this identification. Pratoda is once addressed with mune 4:166b 
and in Sataratnasangraha 61, said in the commentary to be from the Parakhya but 
not traced in M” (see Appendix I.L:128), the address munisattama is used. One might 
also regard the final word of Appendix I.G:93d as a vocative and accept that it once 
formed part of our text. 


Introduction xl 


Once he has grasped the weapons, the mantra-practitioner is 
fearsome, like a soldier; he cannot be vanquished by lower 
creatures; [he is] like [the bird] Tarksya among snakes. (5) 
This fashioning of his ‘limbs’ [is performed] in the same way 
as the fashioning of his body [with the brahmamantras]. A 
making firm [of this body] of the sadhaka, which is produced 
with(?) pride/conviction, is then to be accomplished. Hav- 
ing become Siva internally and externally, as Siva he should 
worship Siva. (6) 

Pratoda spoke: 
Since we see [in worldly interaction] that the relation between 
one who honours and one who is honoured is like [the rela- 
tionship] of an inferior and a superior, if he has become Siva 
and is then literally Siva, how can he be a worshipper? (7) 

Prakasa spoke: 
The Lord is in a palace atop the pure path; to reach Him is to 
become equal to Him. Without becoming equal to Him, the 
[aspirant] cannot worship Him. For we observe [in the world] 
that amity, which results in the [desired] fruit, [takes place] 
between those of like qualities. (8) 


The passage quoted in Taksakavarta’s digest does not overlap with the 
parts of the text that M” transmits; but its style and subject matter 
are certainly characteristic of MY’s Parakhya, and MY omits chapters 7- 
13, so we may suppose that the passage belonged to one of these. The 
same may apply to the numerous quotations, relating principally to ritual, 
which cannot be located in M”’s text. As we know from 6:81, ritual was 
to be treated in the now missing section of text that once followed the 
sixth chapter. 

Now there is in fact other evidence for the existence of more than one 
Parakhya: the twelfth-century Jnanaratnavali of Jnanasambhu (see p. cx 
below) quotes a number of verses on the theme of prayascitta which it 
attributes to a Parasamhita (Appendix I.D:59-77). This label by itself is 
of course not enough to show that he was quoting a different text from our 
Parakhya (Ksemaraja’s quotations regularly use the label parayam, which 
could be an ellipsis of either parasamhitayam or of parasamhitayam, and 
Tryambakasambhu’s quotation of 4:167 is prefaced by the latter); but the 
quotation here follows immediately on from another quotation treating 


xii Parakhyatantra 


the same theme attributed to the Parakhya (Appendix I.D:56-8). The 
first quotation is a brief account that, while not distinctively characteristic 
of our Parakhya, would not seem obviously out of place in it; the quotation 
attributed to the Parasamhita, however, is a relatively prolix account that 
is, I think, not typical of our text. It is possible, then, that it is this lost 
Parasamhita that is the Brhatkalottara’s second Parakhya. And it should 
be borne in mind that some of the untraced quotations in Appendix I may 
belong to this lost source. 

One further work should be mentioned that is confused with M”*’s 
Parakhya, and that is the (Maha-) Karaviramahayaga, a work belonging to 
the Kalikulakrama listed under what is supposed to be an alternative title, 
Paratantragama, in the New Catalogus Catalogorum (Vol. XI, p.201). 
It is clear that the names alone are the source of the confusion. The 
two manuscripts listed under this head that are recorded as listed in the 
Mysore catalogue of 1922 are of our Saiddhantika Parakhya (see p. cii 
below) and the rest®! do not transmit our text. 


Relative chronology 


I suggested in the introduction to the Kiranavrtti that the lists of 
Siddhantas might reflect their chronology. I thought of withdrawing this 
afterwards, because there seemed to be no reason why this should have 
been so (the redactors would surely not have intended to construct lists 
that reflected the order of composition). But here, once again, the rel- 
atively ‘modern’ flavour of the Parakhya, which is last in every list in 
which it appears, supports the idea. (But of course we must not forget 
the possibility that the Parakhya that is listed is not the text transmitted 
in M”, but the other work of the same name known to the redactor of the 
Brhatkalottara.) If the lists grew as the tantras got written, then they 
might unintentionally have come to reflect roughly the order of their com- 
position. A relative chronology of these is extremely difficult to establish, 
since the redactors of scripture try not to leave clues, and there is little 
external evidence. In my introduction to the Kiranavrtti I grouped possi- 
ble kinds of internal evidence under the following heads: cross-references; 


°'MSS 5953, 5954, 5955, and 6822 of the Collections of the Royal Asiatic Society of 
Bengal, described by Haraprasada SHASTRI in Volume VIII, Part I of their catalogue 
(1939:142-7 and 874), as well as Cambridge University Library MS Add. 1477 and 
India Office Library MS 2590. 


Introduction xiii 


discrepant lists of the principles (tattva) with which the universe is struc- 
tured; the structure of the tantras; oddities of doctrine; peculiarities of 
language; positioning within the traditional lists of twenty-eight. We 
have mentioned the last of these, and the first gives us no help with the 
Parakhya. The evidence of peculiarities of language has to be used with 
care: in the case of the Kirana it now seems clear to me that the passages 
which contain most aiSa forms are those giving injunctions and describ- 
ing rituals, for it is in these that the redactor reveals his difficulties with 
constructing correct optatives (forms such as hunet are common) and his 
failure to distinguish when to use lyap and when ktva. In the philo- 
sophical portion of the Kirana relatively few aifa usages occur. Of the 
Parakhya only the doctrinal portions are transmitted and these only in 
one manuscript. With this caveat stated, it is fair to observe that its 
Sanskrit seems in some respects ‘purer’ and is metrically more ambitious 
(each chapter ends with a verse not in anustubh), but see the discussion 
of the Parakhya’s language and metre below. 

The use of developed terminology of the Saiva Siddhanta I have also 
advanced as a criterion for the relative dating of the Parakhya (GOODALL 
2001a:331), but this can be extremely treacherous. The term pancakrtya, 
a term common in commentatorial works for the ancient group of Siva’s 
five cosmic functions (assumed by commentators to be listed in Raurava- 
sutrasangraha 1:15ab), but not, I think, attested in other early Siddhantas 
with the exception of the (also relatively late) Mrgendravidyapada (3:8d), 
is to be found in Parakhya 2:123d. Remarking on this in GOODALL 2001a, 
I alluded also to the mention of pralayakalas in Parakhya 4:20f as being 
perhaps the earliest instance of the use of the term in a Siddhantata- 
ntra (2001a:331). In fact we find it in verse 4 of the fragment of what is 
probably the Ur-Pauskara quoted in the Jnanaratnavali and reproduced 
on p.liii below. Thus it is perhaps that text, rather than the Malini- 
vijayottara (as suggested by SANDERSON, quoted by GOODALL 1998:184- 
o, fn. 71), that was the source of the Saiddhantika classification of akala 

In its list of the constitutive principles of the universe the Parakhya 
is the closest of the demonstrably early tantras to the canonical post- 
scriptural Saiva Siddhanta of the exegetes, for from the bhuvanapatala 
(chapter 5) it is clear that its tattvakrama is exactly that of the Tat- 


xliv Parakhyatantra 


tvaprakasa,°* but for the omission of Sakti. (Since Siva and Sakti are 
ontologically indivisible, it is not clear to me whether this omission need 
be regarded as a significant deviation from the Tattvaprakasa’s list.) In 
this and in other matters of doctrine the Parakhya, like the Kirana and 
the later, still more Sastric Matanga and Mrgendra, is evidently trying 
to present and defend a reasoned, consistent world view. Pratoda’s ques- 
tions, like those of Garuda and Matanga, insistently probe possible doubts 
and inconsistencies and are not, as those of other interlocutors sometimes 
seem, the perfunctory requests for knowledge periodically required by the 
genre. 

We may conclude that the Parakhya is probably the latest or one of the 
latest of the surviving listed pre-tenth-century tantras of the Saiddhantika 
canon. 


Excursus upon the Raurava and the Rauravasutrasangraha 


One further observation should be added to this discussion. Since my 
discussion of the Saiddhantika canon appeared in the introduction to the 
first volume of the Kiranavrtti, one book has been published in this series 
that implicitly challenges the stratification I have proposed, and that 
is the translation of the Raurava by DAGENS and BARAZER-BILLORET 
(2000). They are not of the view that the Rauravasttrasangraha is the 
only part of the text sufficiently early to have been known to Kashmirian 
exegetes of the tenth century, and since this bears on my stratification, but 
I intend instead to leave a detailed examination of their argumentation to 
a later publication. Briefly, my own position is that the many quotations 
attributed to the Raurava in the works of early Saiddhantika authors (i.e. 
up to and including the twelfth-century Aghorasiva and his immediate 
disciples) that are to be traced to the Rauravasutrasangraha demonstrate 
that the Rauravasitrasangraha was the early Raurava known to those 
authors. These same early authors do not quote from the corpus that has 
been published as the ‘kriyapada’ of the Raurava,®’ and this suggests that 


°2The Bhoja who authored this work is, as GENGNAGEL argues (1996:21), probably 
to be placed in between Ramakantha and AghorasSiva. 

°3Qne chapter of the ‘kriyapada’, 58, contains material from Rauravasitrasangraha 8, 
and that material is cited; but chapter 58 is cooked together out of quotations attributed 
to the Raurava, and the overlapping material derives, I believe, from the Raurava- 
sutrasangraha. DAGENS and BARAZER-BILLORET imagined that they had found an 
independent quotation that confirmed the antiquity of the version found in chapter 58 


Introduction xlv 


the early authors did not know that corpus. The arguments of DAGENS 
and BARAZER-BILLORET (2000) for proving the relative lateness of the 
Rauravasitrasangraha and the relative antiquity of the ‘kriyapada’ of the 
Raurava seem to me to amount to a collection of conflicting strategies 
for explaining away the evidence of the many quotations attributed to 
the Raurava that we find in the Rauravasiitrasangraha. They argue, for 
instance, (2000:xiv) that the quotations must be from an earlier Raurava, 
since they are labelled Raurava and not Rauravasitrasangraha (this is 
in fact an exaggeration), and yet on p.xvi they acknowledge that the 
many quotations we find from the Rauravasitrasangraha show that, by 
claiming to be scripture at second or third remove, the Rauravasitra- 
sangraha was not unsuccessful in attaining recogition. Later (2000:xlii) 
we find them suggesting that the Rauravasutrasangraha was a ‘mémento’ 
of the Raurava sufficiently close to its original for subsequent authors 
to get confused about what they were quoting. Later still we find the 
claim (p.1) that the honour in which the exegetes of the tradition held the 
Raurava they quote shows that they could not actually have been quoting 
from so meagre and disorganised a work as the Rauravasutrasangraha, in 
which the quoted lines happen to occur but which is not their source. To 
me DAGENS and BARAZER-BILLORET make the impression of battling 
against rather than using each piece of textual evidence that might have 
helped them to build up a coherent account of the genesis of the Raurava 
‘corpus’. And they have not discussed the earliest and most important 
evidence: the testimony of Sadyojyotis, the earliest Saiddhantika exegete 
of whom works survive. For DAGENS and BARAZER-BILLORET it seems 
that all that was really great about the Ur-Raurava that has survived are 
its name and reputation (2000:1): 


...quant a sa réputation passée elle est attestée moins par les 
citations dont on a parlé que par les innombrables signes que 
ce texte a été (trés certainement & plusieurs reprises) adapté, 
mis au gout du jour et du lieu, pour demeurer une référence 
incontestable. 


Now there may indeed once have been an Ur-Raurava that is now irre- 
trievably lost. But we do not have the evidence to prove whether or not 
(2000:xxviii, fn. 50), but they failed to realise that the quotation in question is in fact 


not independent but one of the quotations that is a principal source for chapter 58 of 
the edition. 


xlvi Parakhyatantra 


such a thing existed. What the evidence of substantial early attributed 
quotations from the Rauravasutrasangraha and the absence of such quo- 
tations from the ‘kriyapada’ allow us to conclude is that the earliest now 
surviving Raurava is almost certainly the body of chapters transmitted 
to us of the Rauravasutrasangraha. 


Dates and the Saiva Tantric canon 


... Concerning the chronology of the early scriptural sources 
of Tantric Saivism we can do little more than assert for most 
of the texts known to us that they predate the citations that 
appear in the works of the earliest datable commentators, that 
is to say, in works of the tenth to early eleventh centuries from 
Kashmir or Malava, and for a few of them, that they go back at 
least to the early ninth century since they survive in Nepalese 
manuscripts of that date... 

Going back further than this we lose sight of titles and can 
only establish that Tantric Saiva texts of certain familiar kinds 
must have been present and that these or some of these were 
probably works among those that were current later. Thus I 
propose that a scriptural corpus of the kind we find later in 
the Saiddhantika.scriptures must have been in existence by 
the beginning of the seventh century. There survive inscrip- 
tions recording the Saiddhantika Saiva initiation of three ma- 
jor kings during the second half of that century, and during 
its first half the Buddhist philosopher Dharmakirti (c. 600—- 
660) goes to the trouble of attacking the Tantric practice of 
initiation as the means to liberation. These facts reveal that 
Tantric Saivism of this relatively public and strongly soterio- 
logical variety was not merely present in the seventh century 
but well established. And this implies the existence of Tantric 
Saiva scriptures.°4 


After his magisterial treatment of the earliest diverse pieces of external 
evidence that pin down the ‘limits before which Tantric Saiva literature 
can be seen to have existed’*> SANDERSON observes (2002:14-15): 


®4SANDERSON 2002:2-11 [footnotes omitted]. 
®SSANDERSON 2002:14. 


Introduction xlvii 


For evidence of what it postdates, we must look to the texts 
themselves. Since they have been composed as scripture, that 
is to say, as transmissions of a timeless revelation, they are 
less than generous in this respect. Their redactors seem to 
have been careful to avoid references to historical persons and 
events that would undermine faith by implying a terminus 
post quem; and the device of prophecy, which would have al- 
lowed reference to the past without this consequence, is rare in 
this predominantly prescriptive literature. So one is reduced 
to trying to get the better of the redactors by identifying ele- 
ments in their texts which they probably considered timeless 
facts but whose introduction can nonetheless be dated, if only 
approximately. 


One such element that SANDERSON goes on to mention and that we find 
in the Parakhya is the use of notions of Greek astrology, in particular 
the listing of the planets in the order of their lordship of the weekdays 
(Parakhya 5:115-27), since ‘[t]Jexts with these elements can hardly be 
earlier than the fourth century AD’ (SANDERSON 2002:15-16). 

VASUDEVA’s illuminating discussion of the nadiphantakrama 
(*2000:xli-lxii) ingeniously makes use of another kind of datable evidence 
that might once have appeared timeless: the graphemes of a particular 
script. He here convincingly demonstrates (particularly *2000:lviii-—lxii) 
that the nadiphantakrama is not an arbitrary sequence of characters but 
one that makes sense if derived from an arrangement of the characters of 
‘the Kusana and early Gupta version of the Brahmi alphabet’ such that 
they make up the body-parts of the goddess Malini.®© VASUDEVA is of 
course aware that this does not enable us to date any particular Trika 
text to between the second and fifth centuries (*2000:1lx). 

Such ingenuity is not required to date the Parakhya, which we can be 
certain does not belong to such an early phase of Saiddhantika literature, 
for we can plainly discern the influence upon it of thinkers of the seventh 
century. It is worth remarking that the author of the Parakhya seems 


69+/1]n the Trika’s Nadiphantakrama the written shape of each grapheme taken singly 
was identified as resembling a certain bodily limb or organ; taken together the whole 
syllabary represented the anthropomorphic body of the alphabet deity. When listed 
in the conventional head-to-toes order of the nyasa-rite a particular rearrangement of 
the alphabet is arrived at, and this is the sequence beginning with NA and ending with 
PHA.’ (VASUDEVA *2000:lxi-Lxii). 


xlvili Parakhyatantra 


not to have been particularly careful in suppressing altogether references 
to historical personages if they seemed ancient enough. In his account 
of the conventionality of language he alludes to metrical terms in order 
to make the point that they are conventions rather than eternal givens 
(6:47). In other ‘words, he implicitly admits that the terms would be 
incomprehensible to someone not familiar with the work of Pingala, and 
this point is made explicitly in the Sabarabhasya, on which, directly or 
indirectly, he is almost certainly drawing at this point. The same passage 
refers to the muni who codified grammar (6:48), and this can surely only 
be Panini. (His position that the Vedas are not authorless, a corollary of 
the position that language is conventional, means that they too are not 
beyond time, but they are perhaps beyond historical time.) In short, the 
author of the Parakhya appears not to have wished to disguise altogether 
that the Parakhya, at least in this redaction, had a place in human history. 


The sources and the date of the Parakhya 


Like the Mrgendra and the Matanga, and unlike most other surviving 
early Siddhantas (Nisvasa, ParameSvara, Kirana, Sardhatrisatikalottara, 
Sarvajnanottara, etc.), the Parakhya treats theological and philosophical 
problems in great detail, is thematically tightly structured, and is written 
(in part) in what aspires to be the style of philosophical karikas. 
Although I have not recognised a very large number of close verbal 
echoes of gastric texts outside the Saiva tradition, the Parakhya very fre- 
quently reproduces the arguments of such texts. It is plain that the earli- 
est Siddhantas (the Nisvasa, the Rauravasiitrasangraha, and the Svayam- 
bhuvasttrasangraha) borrow much of their fundamental ontology from 
Sankhya thinkers. Now the Parakhya, of course, inherits this ontology 
and draws on Sankhya sources;®’ but it evidently belongs to a later (or 
at least conceptually later) phase, in which Saiddhantikas were at pains 
to bring some of their doctrines into line with certain developments in 
Sastric thought that we can trace to the writings of quite different rivals: 
Mimamsakas, Vedantins, VaiSesikas, and Naiyayikas. I have earlier as- 


°7Sankhya ideas pervade the entire text, but for some particular instances see foot- 
notes 141, 144 and 328 on pp.180, 182 and 235 below, and compare 4:4—-5 with 
Sankhyakarika 7, 4:70-1 with Sankhyakarika 12, 4:107-8 with Sankhyakarika 38, and 
4:125 with Sankhyakarika 27. Notice also the echo of Yogasitra 1.23 in Parakhya 
14:12c. 


Introduction xlix 


serted (GOODALL 2001a:332) that Dharmakirti’s insistence on the sadhya 
and sadhana in formal argument being necessarily connected (avinabhava- 
niyama), i.e. related by karyakaranabhava or by svabhava, was probably 
the ultimate source for the pronouncement in Parakhya 2:6. This now 
seems to me impossible, as I will later explain (see fn. 103 on p. 167 be- 
low);®8 but we do find an echo of Dharmakirti in Parakhya 6:49cd, which 
recalls and may be based on Pramanavarttika 1:320ab. 

The influence of Mimamsaka thought is in evidence in almost all the 
Parakhya’s philosophical discussions. We have referred above to one pas- 
sage based directly or indirectly on the Sabarabhasya. I suspect that there 
are a number of conscious echoes specifically of Kumarila’s discussions, 
but this is often difficult to prove. 

I have earlier argued (GOODALL 2001a:332-3) that such an echo is to 
be found in the Parakhya’s treatment of the proof of the existence of a 
creator god. 


The Kirana’s naive presentation of the argument by which 
the Lord is inferred from his effect, the universe,°? shows no 
awareness of Kumarila’s objection that if the Lord’s creativ- 
ity is to be compared with the potter’s, then the Lord should 
be perishable and have other such undesirable qualities of the 
potter.” Ramakantha, of course, is aware of Kumarila’s ar- 
gument, which he quotes ad loc., and his response is that each 
craftsman is omniscient and omnipotent within his own sphere 
of action.’! Now the same line of response is implicit in the 
general rule formulated in Parakhya 2:29-30b: 


°8Cf. Matangavidyapada 3:9abc, quoted in fn. 103 on p.167 below. SANDERSON 
(2002:16) has pointed out a couple of other echoes of non-Saiva gastric texts in the 
Matanga: Sankhyakarika 62 is paraphrased in vidyaépada 6:63c-64b and Dignaga’s 
definition of pratyaksa (pratyaksam kalpanaépodham) given in the pratyaksapariccheda 
of the Pramanasamuccaya is alluded to in Matangayogapada 4:15c-16a (anirdegyam 
asandigdham kalpanapodhagocaram/ pratyaksam). 

°° Kirana 3:12: sthdlam vicitrakam karyam nanyatha ghatavad bhavet/ asti hetur 
atah kascit. karma cen, na hy acetanam. 

70 Slokavarttika, sambandhaksepaparihara 79-80. 

" Kiranavrtti 3:12.26-7 and 30-1: na ca viruddho hetuh ... drstante’hi ghata- 
dav ayam hetuh svasadhye svakaryasarvajnatvasarvakartrt valaksaneneSvaratvena vyé- 
ptah siddho yatas tasyamSenapi vaikalyena ghatadarsanad avinasitvenapi kumbhaka- 
ratmano nityatvat tasyaiva ca kartrtvat. 


] Parakhyatantra 


nimittam ISvarakhyam tad yad drstam_ saha- 
karanam 

upadanam ca yat suksmam sarvakaryesu samhitam 

karananam trayam tena sarvakaryesu samhitam”? 


And the point is reiterated in Parakhya 2:63-4b: 


sadhanangaphalaih sardham vetti sarvam idam tatah 
yatha tantvadikrt karta visayikrtya tani sah 
tasmin pravartate karye tadvat tasmin parah Sivah. 


Some such echoes may be more apparent than real, but one verse con- 
tains what I think really must be an allusion to Kumarila. Consider the 
following objection of Pratoda (Parakhya 3:38): 


tathyam yac codanavakyam agnihotradivacakam 
tasya jnanasamutpattau napramanyam tridha sthitam. 


True statements of Vedic injunction (tathyam yac codana- 
vakyam) that teach such things as the Agnihotra are not non- 
authoritative in [any of the] three ways [in which something 


may be non-authoritative] (tasya ... naépramanyam tridha 
sthitam) when understanding [of them] arises (jfanasamut- 
pattau). 


Now these three are listed in Slokavarttika, codanasitra 54ab: 
apramanyam tridha bhinnam mithyatvajnanasamSayaih. It is true that 
Kumarila is basing himself on a discussion in the Sabarabhasya ad 
Mimamsasitra 1.1.44 (FRAUWALLNER 1968:26), but here Pratoda’s dis- 
tinctive formulation echoes that of Kumarila. 

Other echoes of Kumarila can, I think, be discerned when Prakasa 
refutes vivartavada (1:44) and when the Parakhya adverts to the problem 
of the circularity of God and his scripture proclaiming each other (2:71c— 
72b); and Mimamsé seems even to have influenced the choice of topics: 
much of chapter 3 (3:23ff) is devoted to an incongruous (for a Saiva tantra) 


"The instigating cause is that which is called the ‘lord’; that which is seen [such as 
the stick, wheel, etc.] is the auxiliary cause; that which is the material cause is matter. 
This triad of causes is involved in all effects and can therefore be inferred for every 
effect.’ I have followed here the readings and interpretation of the Sataratnollekhini ad 
Sataratnasangraha 15 (= Parakhya 2:29); but see annotation ad loc. 


Introduction li 


discussion of whether the apauruseyatva of Vedic revelation can be proved 
by any of the six pramanas. 

We find also echoes of philosophical tags from other disciplines. A 
catchy half-line of the Brahmabindupanisat is to be found in Parakhya 
1:42; a much used Carvaka half-line intended to question the validity of 
anumana occurs as Parakhya 2:10cd (though here it appears to be used 
inappropriately to reject arthapatti as a pramana while retaining anu- 
mana); well-known Mimamsaka tags are to be found in Parakhya 2:12 
and 6:14.78 

In many passages, of course, we find what must already have been 
philosophical clichés by the time of the composition of the Parakhya, and 
sO we cannot say that the texts in which they first.occurred were direct 
sources for the redaction of the tantra: notable are the stock discussions of 
sphota in 6:9ff, of the connection between word and meaning (Sabdartha- 
sambandha) in 6:17ff, of the apauruseyatva of Vedic revelation in 3:23ff, of 
the Carvakas in 1:17ff, of ksanabhangavada in 1:28ff. Another difficulty 
in dating the Parakhya by attempting to identifying its literary sources 
and thereby to establish its position in the history of philosophy should 
be at least alluded to here. The Parakhya may treat some philosophical 
themes but it is not a work of philosophy and we cannot therefore expect 
it to give a well-rounded and up-to-date reflection of contemporary Indian 
thought in the course of defending its own theology. 

VASUDEVA (*2000:176) has identified a Vaigesika allusion in Parakhya 
14:95 whose formulation may be an echo not of the Vaisesikasiitra but 
of Candrananda’s vrtti thereon (see fn. 836 on p.380 below). If this is 
indeed an allusion to Candrananda, then this may one day be a piece of 
evidence that could be used further to pin down the date of composition of 
the Parakhya. But the period in which Candrananda wrote is not known. 
ISAACSON (*1995:140-1) reviews the evidence adduced to date and places 
him between c. 600 AD (on the strength of his reference to Uddyotakara) 
and the tenth century (on the strength of what are probably borrowings 
in Helaraja’s commentary on the Vakyapadiya). 

Among other tantras, as we have observed, the closest in style and 
tone appear to be the Mrgendra, the Matanga and the South Indian 
Pauskara. My view that the Pauskara postdates Ramakantha I have ex- 
pressed before (GOODALL 1998:xliii-xlv and again GOODALL 2001a:329). 


73Other non-tantric clichés include 6:44ab, 6:47ab, 14:63cd, and 14:89a. 


lii Parakhyatantra 


Furthermore I have argued (GOODALL 2001a:329-30) that for the por- 
tions that the Pauskara shares with the Parakhya it is the Pauskara that 
was the borrower; indeed it is not improbable, as I have there suggested, 
that the eighth chapter of the Pauskara (in which all the shared portions 
are to be found) is entirely an interpolation. One freshly discovered piece 
of evidence for its date is worth recording here, since it will be useful to 
us below in another context. 


Excursus upon the Pauskaras 


It may be recalled that the famous twelfth-century commentator Aghora- 
Siva appears to be the first author to have cited a number of distinctive 
verses belonging to the South Indian Pauskara, but that he never gives a 
labelled quotation from the text (GOODALL 1998:xliv, fn, 1014). Aghora- 
Siva’s not labelling these quotations, I have suggested, might be accounted 
for if we assumed that he was uncomfortably aware of two Pauskaras, 
and that his predecessors quoted from the other alone. This still seems 
to me a not implausible hypothesis, and indeed we find that AghoraSiva’s 
contemporary Jnanasambhu, a South Indian, but living in Benares (see 
p.cx below), does not quote from the newer Pauskara but only from the 
older one. One of his quotations is of especial interest in part because, 
unlike most other fragments of the old Pauskara that have come to light, 
it overlaps with a teaching found in the new Pauskara (Jnanaratnavali, 
Madras GOML MS R 14466, p. 254, IFP MS T. 231, p. 281-2):” 


4To the list given there of unlabelled quotations from the Pauskara in the works 
of Aghorasiva should be added the quotation of Pauskara 1:91c—92b in the Ratna- 
trayollekhini ad 263-4 (also quoted without attribution by Aghorasiva’s disciple Tri- 
locanaSiva in his Siddhantasamuccaya, IFP MS T. 284, p. 134). 

78 As BRUNNER has indicated (1981:139-40) the first verse alone of this passage is 
cited, evidently from the Jnanaratnavali (since it is followed there by ityadina pra- 
karantaram jnadnaratnavalyadau prasiddham), at the end of the Saiva section of the 
SarvadarSanasangraha (p.189). It is also cited with attribution to the Pauskara by 
Ramakantha in his Sardhatrifatikalottaravrtti ad 1:3. 


Introduction liii 


tatha pauskare ca 

patir vidya tathavidya paSuh pasas ca karanam 
tannivrttav iti proktah’® padarthah sat samasatah”’ 1 
Sivah sadasivas tv 1§ah saha tadbhuvanadibhih 

jneyah patipadartho ’sau. mantramantregalaksana™® 2 
Saktir’? vidya ca bhuvanair vidyakhya§s ca prakirtitah®® 
mayatattvam avidyakhyah karmabhavaih sabhauvanaih®! 3 
pralayakalasamjnanam®? sakalanam tathaiva ca 4 
paSutvamalasamyogat padarthah paSusamjnitah 
prthivyadikalanto yo maylyah paSasangrahah 5 

saha sadbhitabhuvanair mayagarbhadhikaribhih*™4 
padarthah pasasamjneyo™ vijneyah sivayogibhih 6 
tannivrtteh karanakhyah padarthah paramah Sivah 
diksakarmasvarupo ’yam muktyupayah prakirtitah 7. iti 


Now this is recognisably the same list of padarthas that we find in the 
newer Pauskara (1:8-14), but one of the accounts is plainly a reformula- 
tion of the other. Indeed BHATT (upodghata to the first volume of the 
Matanga, p. xlvii) refers to the existence of quotations of the first half-line 
supposing it to be simply a variant of 1:8cd of the printed Pauskara. Its 
relationship with the list of the Matanga (vidyapada 2:14—21) is also un- 
mistakable, and we may assume that it is to be explained because all three 
texts (the Matanga, the printed Pauskara, and the Pauskara quoted by 
Jnanasambhu) see themselves as redactions of the ParameSvara division 
of scripture.86 


78proktah ) conj.; proktam R 14466; prokta T. 231 

“Tpadarthah sat samasatah ] conj. (cf. new Pauskara 1:9b); padarthah sat 
samanasah +(tah)+ R 14466; padartha sat samanatah T. 231 

78°laksana ] conj.; °laksanah R 14466, T. 231 

aktir ] conj.; Sakti R 14466, T. 231 

80prakirtitah ] conj.; prakirtitah/ gaktipadarthah R 14466, T.231 (I assume this 
Saktipadarthah to be an inserted explanatory label.) 

8! sabhauvanaih } conj.; sahovanaih R 14466, T. 231 

823tmanam ) conj.; dtmanas R 14466, T. 231 

83pralayakalasamjnanam | conj.; pralayakalasamvijianam R 14466, T.231 (un- 
metrical) 

8¢mayagarbhadhikaribhih ] conj.; mayadgavatikaribhih R 14466, T. 231 (unmetrical) 

85 asasamjneyo ] em.; pasasamjieyah R 14466, T. 231 

88For what may be another such indication, see 3:56ab and the apparatus and anno- 
tation thereto. 


liv Parakhyatantra 


Parallels with other Siddhantatantras 


Other than the verses incorporated from the Parakhya into the eighth 
chapter of the Pauskara, I am not aware of shared verses between the 
two texts. Nor are there many padas shared between the Parakhya and 
what is arguably the next closest (in spirit) of the Siddhantatantras, the 
Matanga, and such as there are tend to be tantric clichés (Matangavidya- 
pada 17:189d ~ Parakhya 2:21d, Matangavidyapada 4:55d = Parakhya 
2:122d, Matangavidyapada 3:20a = Parakhya 3:56a,°" Matangavidyapada 
23:85b = Parakhya 5:6b, Matangavidyapadda 7:44a = Parakhya 6:27a). 
Although similar in their subject matter, the Parakhya and the Matanga 
are not particularly similar in style. The much longer Matanga tends to be 
more prolix, filled out with frequent vocatives and expressions whose only 
purpose is to pad out the verse. Observe, for instance, that there are more 
than a dozen half-verses in the vidyapada of the Matanga that end with na 
samSayah, asamSayah or natra samsayah,®® and note the very large num- 
ber of padas filled out with mune or mahamune or munipungava. There 
is but a single vocative addressing Pratoda in the transmmtted chapters 
of the Parakhya (4:166b)® and there are no lines ending in any of the 
formulae using the word samsaya. Nor are the particles tu, hi and ca 
used in loose profusion to fill out the verses. Another padding ploy much 
used in the Matanga is that of compounds ending in an otiose -atman 
or -antaratman™ or simply tacking on mahatmanam or mahatmanah as 
an additional qualifier.2! In the Parakhya we find comparable otiose uses 
of atman only in 3:63d and 15:20d, and one instance of mahatmana (in 
3:60d) which might be held to be otiose or nearly so. 

The treatment of one particular topic, the story of the division by 
Ananta of mantras at creation related in Parakhya 3:57ff, may have 
been based on the treatment found in Matangavidyapada 7; but it is 


87See annotation ad loc. 

886:14d, 6:31d, 6:40, 8:45b, 10:28d, 13:29d, 15:13d, 17:62b, 24:14d, 24:34d, 26:73d. 

89See also fn. 60 on p.xl above. 

90g. Matangavidyapada 1:11b, 2:10b, 4:32d, 4:41b, 7:9b, 8:68d, 11:17b, 13:32d, 
17:40b, 17:47b, 17:77a, 17:90d, 17:153b, 25:58d, 26:64d, yogapada 3:15d, etc. 

91 Eg. Matangavidyapada 1:27b, 1:28b, 2:11d, 3:25d, 4:4b, 4:52b, 5:11b, 6:4b, 7:21d, 
7:37d, 16:8d, 16:28b, 17:20d, 17:48b, 17:75b, 17:97d, 17:127b, 17:186b, 22:13d, 23:44d, 
23:59d, 23:72d, 25:1d, 25:42b, 26:45d, etc. This usage is not linguistically remarkable— 
it is common outside tantric literature too—but it is often used here only to pad the 
metre. 


Introduction lv 


not impossible that both were drawing on the same source or on related 
sources. And it is possible that Parakhya 4:27-28b (now corrupt) and 
Matangavidyapada 9:28 go back to a common source. The puzzling treat- 
ment of perception in Parakhya 4:32-4 contains the term dvara apparently 
as a term for the three internal organs, which is an oddity that I have 
elsewhere observed only in the Matanga (see annotation ad loc.) 

I have noticed three half-verses that are shared with the Svayambhuva- 
sutrasangraha: 1:80ab = Svayambhuvasutrasangraha 2:13cd, 4:4lab = 
Svayambhuvasitrasangraha 2:17ab, and Appendix I.G:94cd = Svayam- 
bhuvasutrasangraha 10:3ab; and it seems possible to me that 1:52cd is a 
conscious echo of Svayambhuvasitrasangraha 2:4. A handful of clichés are 
shared with the Rauravasutrasangraha: 2:92ab ~ Rauravasutrasangraha 
10:32cd; 2:121b = Rauravasitrasangraha 1:15d; 2:123ab ~ Rauravasutra- 
sangraha 1:14ab and 2:12ab; 5:144d = Rauravasitrasangraha 3:13b (as 
transmitted in M”). 

The only substantial passage that is almost certainly based on a par- 
ticular Siddhantatantra that I have been able to identify is in the con- 
cluding portion of Parakhya 4 (4:151ff). Here numerous verses echo in 
their formulation the treatment of the same ideas in the Kirana. The 
Kirana’s treatment is distinctive and the Parakhya’s reformulation would 
be extremely difficult to interpret without the Kirana’s account to lay 
beside it. Parakhya 2:102—4 may be a reformulation of Kirana 5:3-6b, 
but a rather distant one. Another echo, of Kirana 6:1-4, is discernible 
in verses attributed to the Parakhya in the Mrgendrapaddhatitika Ap- 
pendix I, C:50-1. But in this case this could equally be an echo of a pair 
of verses ascribed to the Raurava which Vaktrasambhu quotes in the same 
context.92 

The Mrgendra (in vidyapada 2:12-14) and the Parakhya (in 1:42-50) 
appear to be the only early Siddhantas to devote attention to the refu- 


®2The quotation, on p. 189 of IFP MS T. 1021, is as follows: 


Srimadraurave 'pi 
na Sarirasya samskaro na samyogavibhagayoh 
na cotpattivinasabhyaém napi jater vidhiyate 
cetanasyapi Suddhasya ksetrajnasya Saririnah 
jnasvabhavatmano ’kartus tasya samskara isyate. 
The last line is corrected to the reading in Kiranavrtti 1:23.12-13, where the second of 


these verses is quoted (with attribution to the Raurava) by Ramakantha. In T. 1021 it 
reads jnuUbhatmano kartumsta samskara isyate. 


lvi Parakhyatantra 


tation of a philosophical Vedanta.** I have presented and discussed both 
passages elsewhere (GOODALL forthcoming A), and suggested tentatively 
that, since the undated early Saiddhantika writer Sadyojyotis appears to 
have been aware only of a Vedantic parinamavada,"4 it is conceivable that 


°3The Sarvajnanottara, as is well known (see, e.g., SANDERSON 1992:291), is excep- 
tional among the early Siddhantas for upholding rather than refuting a non-dualist 
position, but its non-dualism does not seem to me to be distinctively Vedantic. In his 
(in almost every other detail inaccurate) preface to the Adyar edition, KUNJUNNI RAJA 
helpfully points out (p. vi) what is likely to be an instance of borrowing from what is 
usually accepted to be a Vedantic source. Sarvajnanottara 111-12 (Tanjore edition 
[Er]; 2:51-2 in Devakottai edition [Ep]; 99-100 in Adyar edition (E,]; Nepalese MS 
f.52", lines 4-5 [N,]; IFP MS 47818, p. 44) read as follows: 
ghatasamvrtam akaéSam niyamane yatha ghate 
ghato niyati nakasam tadvaj jivo nabhopamah 
bhinne kumbhe yathaékasam akaSatvam prapadyate 
vibhinne prakrte dehe tathatma paramatmani. 


e ghatasamvrtam akasSam ] 47818 E;; ghatasamvrtam akasam N,; 


ghatasamvrta akaso EpE, e niyati nakasam ] N,; nayati nakasam 
47818; niyeta nakasam Eyz; niyata nakasah Ep; niyeta nakasah E, 
e nabhopamah } 47818 EyEpE,; nabhopama N, e bhinne kumbhe 


yathakasam ] 47818 Ez; bhinnakumbhayathakasam N,; bhinne kumbhe 
yathakaésah Ep; chinne kumbhe yathakasah Ey, 

(There are three aiga usages here: akasa is treated as a neuter noun, 
nabhas as an -a stem, and N,’s niyati is a passive with the final vowel 
changed from an e to give the regular cadence of the pathya] 


Compare these verses with those of Gaudapada’s Agamaégastra, which might have in- 
spired them (Mandikyakarika 3:3-4): 

atma hy akaSavaj jivair ghatakaSair ivoditah 

ghatadivac ca samghatair jatav etan nidarganam 

ghatadisu pralinesu ghatakasadayo yatha 


o — — @ 


In BHATTACHARYA’ edition (p. 50) he quotes the first of our verses (in the form given by 
Er) as being verse 3 of the Tripuratapanyupanisat. It occurs also (with some variation) 
as 32:62c-63b of the Nifvasakarika, IFP MSS T.17, p. 232 and T. 127, p. 286. 

But the source on which the Sarvajnanottara (and the Nisvasakarika) drew may not 
have been a Vedantic one. LINDTNER (1989:vifa], referring to QVARNSTROM 1989:109) 
mentions that the ghatakasadrstanta can in fact be traced back further, to the Buddhist 
Aryasatyadvayavatarasitra. 

°*First noted by SANDERSON (1985a:210, note 41), who formulated the observation 
cautiously, speaking only of Sadyojyotis’s ‘emphasis on transformationism’ in the Para- 
moksanirasakarika being something that ‘suggests his relative antiquity’. 


Introduction lvii 


both the Parakhya and the Mrgendra post-date him.9° This now seems 
to me to have been premature, for I was assuming that in both tantras a 
developed Vedantic vivartavada was what was being discussed, and this 
is not actually clear in the case of the Mrgendra, which makes essentially 
three claims about the non-dualism that it attacks that need not entail 
that that non-dualism is a form of vivartavada. The claims are: that 
non-dualism is devoid of external proof, that, since there is only one soul, 
experience must be unitary, and that, given this view, true liberation 


°5T did not in that article discuss the evident influence of Vedanta upon the Pauskara 
on the grounds that that text did not belong to the ‘early’ canon, which is to say the 
group of tantras known to the Kashmirian tenth-century exegetes. It is worth just 
remarking in passing that that text’s response to Ved&ntic ideas is more detailed and 
more sophisticated than that of either the Mrgendra or the Parakhya. Particularly 
noteworthy in this regard is its discussion beginning with 3:11: 


Prapanco 'yam pramatraédibhedatma naksagocarah 
yatah pratyaksam arthanam vidhatr na nisedhakam. 


The verse is surely an allusion to Mandanamisra’s Brahmasiddhi, the Tarkakanda of 
which famously begins: ahur vidhatr pratyaksam na nisedhr vipaSscitah. 

This heightened awareness of Vedantic ideas (which we find addressed elsewhere in 
the text too, for instance in 4:74ff) is exactly what we would expect to find in the 
Pauskara when we recall that the evidence of quotations (which are to be found in the 
works of authors from the Tamil-speaking South from the middle of the twelfth century 
onwards) and of the distribution of manuscripts that transmit the work (all Southern) 
unequivocally suggests that it post-dated Ramakantha and belonged to a South Indian 
milieu. 

°6 Mrgendravidyapada 2:12-14: 

vedantesv eka evatma cidacidvyaktilaksitah 
pratijnamatram evedam niscayah kimnibandhanah 
atha pramaénam tatratma prameyatvam prapadyate 
yatraitad ubhayam tatra catustayam api sthitam 
advaitahanir evam syan nispramanakatanyatha 
bhogasémyavimoksau ca yau nestav atmavadibhih. 


‘In the Sastras of the Vedanta there is only one soul, known through its manifestations, 
which are sentient and insentient. This is no more than mere assertion. What is the 
basis of this certainty? If you say that there is some valid means of knowing it [viz. 
scripture], then the soul must be the object of the valid knowledge. If you accept 
this pair [of means of knowing and object of knowledge], then all four [i.e. pramana, 
prameya, pramaty, and pramiti] are proven to exist. [And] thus that would be the 
end of non-dualism; either that, or it must be without valid means of knowledge. And 
there would also result [the faults] that all must share the same experience and that 
liberation would be impossible, both which faults are not accepted by any who maintain 
the existence of the soul.’ 


lviii Parakhyatantra 


must be impossible. In the case of the Parakhya, however, I think it is 
some form of vivartavada that is attacked, but the attack itself does not 
help me to determine more precisely what form of Vedanta might be tar- 
geted and it is furthermore reminiscent of a passage in the Slokavarttika 
(see 1:44 and annotation ad loc.), which means that this passage may 
after all not have as much bearing on the dating of the Parakhya as I had 
supposed. 

Nevertheless, it seems to me probable that the Parakhya is among the 
latest (if not itself the latest) of the demonstrably early (i.e. pre-tenth- 
century because known to the Kashmirian commentators of the lineage 
of Ramakantha II) listed Siddhantas to survive. 

The earliest quotations from the Parakhya are probably those of 
Narayanakantha, whom we may date (very approximately) to c. 925- 
975 on the basis of the tentative dating of his son Ramakantha II to 
c. 950-1000 (for which see GOODALL 1998:xiii-xviii, quoting evidence 
given by BRUNNER, SANDERSON and TORELLA), and thus it must have 
been written before the tenth century. SANDERSON (2002:5-6, fn. 3) has 
pointed out that it is conceivable that the Parakhya was alluded to in c. 
830 AD in Ratnakara’s Haravijaya, in verses 6:79-170 of which the seasons 
praise Siva in the terms of Saiddhantikas. In 6:147 an allusion is made 
to five padarthas, which the commentator Alaka elucidates by quoting 
Rauravasitrasangraha 4:48, but, as SANDERSON observes, the other sur- 
viving early Siddhanta that has five padarthas is the Parakhya (see 1:5), 
and the possibility cannot be excluded that it was the Parakhya that 
Ratnakara had in mind. 

We may conclude that the Parakhya may have been composed in the 
eighth or ninth century AD. 


The lost commentary 


A handful of references and two quotations inform us that there was an 
ancient commentary on the Parakhya. About the author of that com- 
mentary we know only that he predated Aghorasiva, who flourished in 
the middle of the twelfth century (see GOODALL 1998:xiii—xvii, fn. 24). 
Evidence of first-hand knowledge of the commentary is found only in 
the works of Aghorasiva and of Aghorasiva’s immediate disciples Vaktra- 


Introduction lix 


gambhu and Trilocanasgiva®” (the only later quotations I am aware of are 
quotations of the same portions to which AghoraSsiva and his disciples 
refer). The largest fragment quoted is a discussion of the sambandhas, 
a Classification of types of transmission of a scripture in accordance with 
the rank of its transmitters. The theme is alluded to at the beginning of 
Parakhya 3, on which this may therefore be commentary, but it may have 
belonged to a sequence of opening verses (Kriyakramadyotika p. 4):%° 


... tatra pare Iisadayah, apare devamuniprabhrtayah, parapare 
anantadayah. tathaé samakhyatam srimatparakhyavrttau 


guravo bahavas tv atra paraparavibhedatah 

codakadivibhedena tatha gurvadibhedatah 

iSah sadaSivah Santo guravah parama matah 

ekam eva param tattvam svecchaya tu tridha sthi- 
tam 

anantah SrigalaS coma skando visnur vidhis tu sat 

parapare ’pare deva munayo nrguruttamah. 


The Parakhya’s transmitters fall into the last and lowest group. For the 
only other quotation known to me attributed to the commentary on the 
Parakhya see Appendix I.L:130 and its context. 

VaktraSambhu actually does not quote from the commentary on the 
Parakhya, but includes it, as Professor SANDERSON has pointed out to 
me, in an interesting list of tantras on which there are commentaries, then 
of uncommented tantras, then of paddhatis (IFP MS T. 1021, p.111): 


api ca sadyojyotihprabhrtibhir? mahadbhir acaryair vya- 
khyatesu._ Srimadrauravasvayambhuvamrgendrakiranapara- 


°7For evidence of these both being Aghorasiva’s immediate disciples see GOODALL 
2000:208-11. I there referred to Vaktrasambhu with the name Nateéaguru, but, as 
Professor Alexis SANDERSON has pointed out to me (letter of 23.v.2002), because of 
the fragmentary transmission of the concluding verses it is not certain whether this is 
a@ name or part of an epithet. Vaktrasambhu, however, a synonym of TatpurusasSiva, 
was evidently his initiatory name. We could therefore call him Tatpurusasiva (after all, 
Aghorasiva sometimes gives his own name in the less common variant form Bahuripa- 
Sambhu: see GOODALL 1998:xv), but I have chosen to retain the only form in which 
the name is attested. 
°8The quoted block of verses appears, shortened and rearranged, as 3:69-70 of the 
aivagamaparibhasamanijarl (see DAGENS’ 1979:117, note 169). 
*sadyojyotih® } em.; sadyojyoti® T. 1021. 


lx Parakhyatantra 


khyamatangasiksmasvayambhuvadvisatisardhatrisaticatuh- 
Satikdsarvajoanottaramohasirottaresu, avyakrtesu!™® srima- 
ttrayodaSaSatikanisvasadisu, $rimatsomasambhubrahmasa- 
mbhubhojarajavarunasivadyair’®! viracitesu paddhatisu ca, 
tattadvyakhyanesu ca... 1° 


As an aside it is perhaps worth spelling out to which commentaries 
on tantras he alludes. On the Raurava they are presumably Sadyo- 
jyotis’s Rauravavrttis, that is to say the Bhogakarika, Moksakarika, and 
Paramoksanirasakarika, Sadyojyotis’s lost Sarvagamapramanya and lost 
commentary on the Mudraprakarana,!** as well as the anonymous lost 
Rauravavarttika (if it was still known in twelfth-century South India), 
which was probably a work of Brhaspatipada.°* On the Svayambhuva- 
sutrasangraha they are the Svayambhuvavrtti and the Tattvatrayanir- 


10° avyakrtesu ] conj. SANDERSON; vivyakrtesu T. 1021. 

1°) °bhojarajavaruna® | conj. SANDERSON; °bhojarajarvaruna® T. 1021. 

102¢a] conj.; om. T. 1021. 

103For a reasoned account of what lies behind this assumption see GOODALL 1998:xx— 
xxvi. I there argued (p. xxv and fn. 57) that the lost Mantravarttika of Sadyojyotis 
might have formed part of this body of exegetical works on the Rauravasutrasangraha 
on the basis of a quotation of a verse and a half in Vidyakantha II’s Bhavacidamani 
prefaced with the attribution. uktam ca rurusamhitamantravarttike. I had failed to 
notice that the quoted unit is in fact to be found in the Rauravasitrasangraha itself 
as verses 6—-7b of what the edition calls the tenth chapter. Presumably the label is 
appropriate because that particular chapter of the Rauravasitrasangraha is in part a 
commentary on the VYOMAVYAPIN mantra. There is thus in fact no strong evidence 
that the Mantravarttika was part of a commentary on the Rauravasutrasangraha, but 
we may recall that Ramakantha may be implying it to have been a continuation of 
the Paramoksanirasakarika in his Paramoksanirasakarikavrtti ad verse 3 (GOODALL 
1998:xxvi). 

10¢-This is the plausible suggestion of DVIVEDT (1983:70 and 63), for which the principal 
evidence is the identifications offered by Jayaratha of two allusions in the Tantraloka. 
1.) The label ity etad gurubhir gitam SrimadrauravaSasane that appears in Tantraloka 
8:101cd is identified by Jayaratha as referring to a work of Brhaspatipada. 
2.) In Tantraloka 8:345ab we read: uktam ca gurubhir ittham Sivatanvadyesu Sasanesv 
etat. Jayaratha’s Tantralokaviveka thereon reads adiSabdad ruruvarttikadi; tad evaha. 
There then follow a series of verses of the Tantraloka in arya (8:345c-355b) which we 
may assume to be a quotation from the Sivatanusastra. Briefly, these outline a notion 
of mahapralaya in which the VidyeSvaras attain liberation one after the other. This 
is contrasted with the position of the Rauravasitrasangraha, for Jayaratha quotes (in 
the Tantralokaviveka ad 8:345c—353b) a verse that the editors of the Rauravasiitrasan- 
graha conjecture may have belonged in between Rauravasttrasangraha 4:21 and 4:22, 
although it is in fact Rauravasdtrasangraha 2:13 in the form in which it appears in MS 
B 776, the apograph of M”: 


Introduction lxi 


naya of Sadyojyotis with their subcommentaries, the lost Svayambhuva- 
vrttitippanaka of Narayanakantha,!®’ and the Tattvatrayanirnayavrtti 
of Aghorasiva, as well as the lost Svayambhuvoddyota of Ramakantha. 
But it is possible that those particular commentarial works of Narayana- 
kantha and Ramakantha were not accessible to VaktraSambhu (I know 
of no South Indian allusions to them), and Ramakantha’s Tattvatraya- 
nirnayavivrti I do not include here because I assume that Vaktrasambhu 
did not know of it, since his guru Aghoragiva evidently did not.!°° For 
the Mrgendra, aside from the well known Mrgendravrtti and Mrgendra- 
vrttidipika, we may count the Mrgendrapaddhati of Aghorasgiva,!°’ on 
which Vaktrasambhu’s work is a commentary. On the Kirana we may as- 
sume that VaktrasSambhu knew Ramakantha’s Kiranavrtti, but he quotes 
also from another vrtti which he attributes to a certain Bhutikantha 


anantoparame tesam mahatam cakravartinam 
vihitam sarvakartrtvam karanam paramam padam. 


This is interpreted to refer to the simultaneous liberation in mah4dpralaya of all the 
VidyeSvaras. Returning to Tantraloka 8:345ab and Jayaratha’s remark thereon, it 
seems possible that it is to be interpreted as follows: ‘And this has been taught as 
follows by a venerable teacher in the Sivatanusastra and in others [of his works]:...’. 
Jayaratha’s remark then might be identifying the Rauravavarttika as another of Brhas- 
patipada’s works. This hypothesis receives support from two parallel discussions of 
which DVIVEDI was unaware in 1983. The first is in Ramakantha’s commentary on 
the Tattvatrayanirnaya (hitherto unmentioned, as far as I am aware, in the secondary 
literature), the Tattvatrayanirnayavivrti, to the sole surviving MS of which Dr. Kei 
KATAOKA has kindly drawn my attention. Here (f.107") Ramakantha distinguishes 
the two views as being those of, among others, the author of the Rauravavarttika (kai§g 
cid rauravavarttikakaradibhih...) and that of Sadyojyotis: tat tv ayuktam, yugapan- 
muktisruter iti darsitam rauravavrttau guruna. proktam hi raurave... [there follows a 
quotation of 2:13, the same verse as Jayaratha quotes]. The passage of the Rauravavrtti 
to which Ramakantha here refers is probably Moksakarika 93: 


ami rudras tu siksmadyaé mantras ca Sivatulyatam 
sanantah svadhikarante yanti muktim hareranat. 


In the commentary thereon we find the second passage that supports DVIVEDI’s hy- 
pothesis, a quotation of three half-lines from the passage of the Rauravavarttika to 
which Jayaratha must have been referring in his Tantralokaviveka ad 8:345ab. 

°5See GOODALL 1998:x. 

108 A ghorasiva, who elsewhere follows Ramakantha so closely, makes no reference to 
the work, not even in his own Tattvatrayanirnayavrtti, comments on readings of a 
number of the verses of the text that are different from those commented upon by 
Ramakantha and differs in his interpretations. 

*°7See GOODALL 2000:209-10 for a brief treatment of the question of the authorship 
of this text. 


Lxii Parakhyatantra 


(IFP MS T.1021, pp.208-9). This might be the same work as the 
Brhatkiranoddyota referred to by Jnanasambhu, one of the gurus of his 
contemporary and co-pupil Trilocanasiva (Jnanaratnavali, Madras GOML 
MS R 14898, pp. 44 and 186) and quoted in the Atmarthapijapaddhati 
(IFP MSS T. 795, p. 78, T. 323, p.125, T.321, p.127, and T. 282, p.116). 
On the Matanga Vaktrasambhu may have known only the Matangavrtti 
of Ramakantha, for I know of no references to the lost commentary of 
Vyakhyaniguru other than that in Sivadrsti 3:14. We have no evidence 
for the authorship of the lost commentaries on the Parakhya and the 
Suksmasvayambhuva (see fn. 50 on p. xxxvi above). 

Commentaries by Aghorasiva survive on the Dvisatikalottara and the 
Sarvajnanottara (the Dvisatikalottaravrtti and the Sarvajnanottaravrtti), 
and we know from Vaktrasambhu’s opening verses!®® that Aghorasiva 
composed a commentary (now lost) on the CatuhSatikakalottara (referred 
to by Vaktrasambhu above as the Catuhsatika), and from the same verses, 
as well as from one of AghoraSsiva’s concluding verses to his DviSati- 
kalottaravrtti,‘°? that he composed another now lost commentary on the 
Mohacudottara. Vaktrasambhu may also have been aware of an older, 
lost commentary on the Sarvajnanottara from which Ramakantha quotes 
in his Sardhatrisatikalottaravrtti ad 22:8-9b. 


A résumé of the text 


Verse 1:5 provides a programme for the treatment of topics in the tantra. 
Thereafter the first chapter discusses the soul, refuting conceptions of 
other schools, notably that of Bauddhas and, exceptionally, of Advaita. 
Chapters 2 and 3 deal with the Lord and with the upper reaches of the 
universe comprehended within vidya. Chapters 4 and 5 present the evo- 
lution of maya and the cosmos within it. Chapter 6 discusses nada at 
some length. Chapters 7-13 have not been transmitted, and it is clear 
that these, at least in part, related to ritual prescriptions and the like: 
as we have observed above (p.xli), we can assume this to have been so 
on the basis of 6:81.!1° Chapter 14 discusses yoga, and finally chapter 
15 investigates the rdle of the four ‘sadhanas’ of jnana, kriya, carya and 


108These are quoted by GOODALL 2000:210, fn. 18. 

10° Quoted by GOODALL 1998:xv, fn. 24. 

“°The scribe of M” has copied almost exclusively what relates to doctrine and to 
yoga: see p. xcvii below. 


Introduction Lxiii 


yoga vis & vis diksa. As I have argued elsewhere (GOODALL 1998:lxiv— 
lxv), it is not clear whether or not the Parakhya was divided into sections 
of text named after these padas. It seems unlikely, for the final colophon 
does not mention a pada to which the final chapter belongs, nor does it 
plainly fit any one of them. But as I have there pointed out, the frag- 
mentary penultimate verse of chapter 6 (6:81) shows that the author of 
the Parakhya either recognised the word pada to refer to such divisions 
of a text (and not just, as in other early sources, to four basic topics with 
which a tantra deals) or used it unselfconsciously in a way that allowed it 
to be so interpreted. BRUNNER (1992a) has demonstrated that the divi- 
sion of Saiddhantika scriptures into four parts bearing the names of these 
padas is neither common nor early; but it is clear that the terminology 
itself—as the Parakhya and the Kirana (e.g. in 1:13), as well as other 
non-Saiddhantika works, tell us—is early.!!! 


Chapter 1. The soul 


Pratoda sees Prakasa in an aframa on the Ganges and asks for teaching, 
which Prakasa, after venerating Siva, begins to give (1-2). 

The tantra is described. Its-five topics (padarthas) of the bound soul 
(pasu), the Lord (ifvara), scripture/knowledge (vidya), the womb (yoni), 
and liberation (mukti) are listed (3-5) and then briefly characterised (6- 
10). 

A (transmissionally corrupt) discussion of techniques of exegesis follows 
(11-14). 

Verse 15 gives a list of attributes of the soul, and this serves as an agenda 
for the remainder of the first chapter.!!? 


Pratoda advances the materialist Carvaka’s refutation of the existence of 
the soul (16-17 and 21), which Prakasa refutes (18-20 and 22-7). 


Pratoda attacks the notion of the self from a Buddhist position that all 
things are momentary (28 and 30); Prakasa refutes this on the basis of 
the evidence of memory (29 and 31-5). 

The all-pervasiveness of the soul is attacked and then defended (36-9). 


Vedantic non-dualism is advanced (40, 42, and 45) and rejected (42, 43-4, 
46-50). 


‘'' For further details see GOODALL 1998:lvili-lxv and 182-4, fn. 69. 
112See fn. 21 on p. 143 below. 


lxiv Parakhyatantra 


Pratoda advances the position that the soul should be free of defilements 
(51), which Prakasa answers with a demonstration of the logical need for 
a category of innate impurity (mala), distinct from passion (raga) or from 
the retributive force of past actions (karman) (52-60). 


Pratoda advances the view that the soul is essentially insentient, but has 
awareness when linked with a body and senses (61), and this Prakasa 
counters with the position that the stimulus provided by the body and 
instruments of the senses only works because of the power of sentiency 
that belongs to the soul (62-71). 


Pratoda questions the view that karman is the cause of the diversity of 
the universe (72) and Prakasa refutes it (74-80). 

Pratoda argues that agency belongs to the body rather than to the soul 
(81 and 85) and Prakasa responds by defending the position that the soul 
is responsible for his karman (82-92) and that the Lord ensures that the 
proper karman is linked to each soul (93-4). 


Summary verse (95). 


Chapter 2. The Lord 


This begins with a list of attributes of the Lord that gives us an agenda 
for the chapter (1). 


That the universe is really an effect, of which the Lord is a cause, is called 
into question and defended (2-11). 

In the course of this defence, circumstantial inference (arthapatti) appears 
to be rejected, or rejected as an independent means of knowledge (9-10). 


The Mimamsaka position that the universe was never not as it now is is 
advanced, and it is mooted that karman might be the cause of the universe 
(12). 

Prakasa responds to both arguments (13-14 and 15-19), insisting that a 
sentient cause is required and that karman is not sentient. 


Pratoda poses the Buddhist dilemma that the activity of creation can 
neither have taken place all at a single moment nor gradually (20-1). 


PrakaSa’s reply reiterates the inescapability of the existence of causes for 
the production of effects, asserts that the Lord’s activity of creation is 
both simultaneous and gradual, and states that all effects are produced 
by a combination of causes of three types: instigating causes, material 
causes, auxiliary causes (22-30). 


Introduction xv 


The possibility of producing effects without resort to instruments is ques- 
tioned (31) and justified by comparison with the sun and moon (32-4). 
The Lord’s power of action is said to be his ‘instrument’ and this, although 
one, is known by many names, in accordance with the functions it performs 
(35-42). 

Nine powers (Saktis) whose names are drawn from the Vedic VAMADEVA 
mantra are enumerated, together with the form of the Lord by whom 
they are controlled, and affective etymologies (nirvacana) of their names 
are given (43-61). 

The Lord is omniscient because he creates everything (62-65b). 


The ‘supportlessness’ of His power of knowledge does not prevent its oper- 
ation, just as the supportlessness of wind does not prevent it from shaking 
branches (65c-67b). 


Just so is the soul’s condition in liberation, as is taught in the last part of 
the Veda (vedanta): consciousness characterised by powers of knowledge 
and action (67c—71b). 

There is no fault of circularity in scripture being that which teaches us 
about the Lord and the Lord being the one who teaches us scripture (71c— 
73). 

What is revealed by one means of knowledge (pramana) does not need to 
be revealed by another (74-75b). 

One cannot argue for the non-existence of something on the grounds that 
one does not perceive it by direct perception (pratyaksa) (75c-76). 

The Lord’s existence is thus proved; conventional usage (rudhi) determines 
that the name Iévara designates him (77-82). 

His body is made up of the five Vedic brahmamantras (83-85b). 

ISvara’s being sakala (equipped with powers/divisions) is not to be un- 
derstood in the same way as the bound soul’s being sakala (linked to the 
evolutes of primal matter); without His form He could not be worshipped 
and so liberation could not be attained (85c—88). 

Affective etymologies (nirvacana) are given of the names of each of the 
brahmamantras (89—-95b). 

The supreme Siva is the same as the Lord who resides in a body; the Lord 
is both sa-kala and niskala (transcendent/devoid of divisions); He is the 
cause of creation, maintenance, destruction and grace (96-7). 

When He is sa-kala, He is called ‘engaged in office’ (adhikarin); he 
teaches the Rudras and others their duties; but the categorisation of the 


Ixvi Parakhyatantra 


Lord as ‘engaged in office’ (adhikarin), ‘engaged in experience/enjoyment’ 
(bhogin), and ‘in resorption’ (layin) is not ultimately real (98—99b). 
Siva’s bestowing His grace depends on the transmission of His scripture 
($astra) from acarya to pupil (99c—101b). 

A descent of divine power (Saktipaéta) comes upon a person, who then 
seeks a guru; this comes about as a result of the person’s suitability and 
not because of Siva’s being partial (101c-113). 


It is for the sake of bestowing grace that Siva sets creation from primal 
matter (maya) in motion; for this He awakens the mantras and the eight 
officiants known as VidyeSvaras (114-17). 


The VidyeSvaras’ names are given and analysed by nirvacana; themselves 
free from the stain of primal matter (maya), they administer the lower 
universe (118-121). 


They are equal in power of action to the Lord, but they are subject to 
Him and perform their duties according to His bidding, these being the 
five cosmic functions (pancakrtya) of creation, maintenance, destruction, 
grace and occlusion (122-4). 

Pratoda asks what need there is of these functionaries if Siva is creator 
and whether it is right to speak of Siva’s power if it is they who perform 
these duties (125). 

Pratoda responds that it would tarnish Siva’s glory if He were to act 
Himself, hence the others are employed (126—128d). 


The discussion of the Lord (iSvaratattva) is thus concluded and reference 
is made to the subject of the next chapter (128e—129). 


Chapter 3. Scripture and the pure universe 


The opening verse giving the agenda defines vidya as scripture, under 
which head it promises a discussion of the transmission and the authori- 
tativeness of scripture, and mantras (1). 


Siva ‘awakens’ Ananta and the other VidyeSvaras at the beginning of cre- 
ation; these in turn ‘awaken’ Gauta and others, who in turn ‘awaken’ 
Bhava and others, and knowledge then passes to Virabhadra, UmeSana, 
the gods, sages (2-6). 

Pratoda questions how the formless supreme Siva can create scripture and 
why it is necessary that he should if Ananta and others are ‘awakeners’ 
(7-8). 


Introduction Ixvil 


Prakaga’s response (9-21) mentions the condensed redactions of knowledge 
that are known in this world (15-16) and gives an affective etymology 
(nirvacana) of the word vaktra, ‘mouth’, from which knowledge issues 
(17-18). 

Pratoda takes the position of a Mimamsaka, questioning the authorita- 
tiveness of Saiva scripture on the grounds that it is authored (pauruseya) 
and asserting that the Veda is authoritative on the grounds that it is 
without author (apauruseya) (22). 


PrakaSa takes each of the six valid means of knowledge accepted by 
Mimamsakas and shows that none of them proves the Veda to be au- 
thorless (23-37). 

Pratoda’s question in response appears to allude to Kumarila’s three cri- 


teria for non-authoritativeness, asserting that none of them applies to the 
Veda (38-9). 


PrakaSa replies that one of them, doubt, is applicable; he then questions 
the Mimamsaka notion that a means of knowledge is authoritative of itself 
(svatahpramanya), and asserts that the use of language, like the use of a 
lamp, depends upon an agent (40-5). 

The passage that follows, which is unfortunately corrupt and badly dam- 
aged, treats of the authoritativeness of Saiva revelation, which in spite of 
differences within it, all derives ultimately from Siva (46-56). 


The genesis of the seven crores of mantras, their sense of revulsion towards 
the created universe and their division by Ananta into two equal groups 
(of officiants and of fully liberated souls) is related (57-72). 

Prakasa gives an account of which of the principal mantras arise out of 
which parts of Siva’s ‘body’ (73-7). 

A nirvacana of vidya. in the sense of mantra is given (78) and the final 
verse sums up the topic of mantras and refers forward to the topic of the 
following chapter: ‘the womb’ (yoni) (79). 


Chapter 4. The evolutes of primal matter 


The opening verse gives a list of epithets of primal matter (maya) that are 
justified in the course of the discussion of the chapter: subtle, perduring, 
formless, all-pervading, the abode of sentient entities, shaken by the Lord, 
producing the effects that are the constitutive principles (tattva) of the 
universe of our experience, ranging from that of limited power to act (kala) 


Ixviii Parakhyatantra 


to earth,!!5 etc. (1-2). 


Pratoda questions whether primal matter (maya) is the material cause of 
the universe and observes that it is beyond our senses (3). 


Prakasa lists factors that prevent our perceiving entities that exist and 
concludes that maya’s extreme subtlety prevents us from perceiving it 
but that it is known from scripture and reasoning (4-7). 


He lists the tattvas, starting from the bottom (8-10), and argues for the ne- 
cessity of there being a perduring material cause that produced them, con- 
cluding that scripture teaches us that that cause is primal matter (maya) 
(11-16). 

It is all-pervading, formless and the cause from which effects proceed and 
into which they are resorbed (17-20b). 


A class of inert souls known as Pralaydkalas are trapped in it in phases of 
resorption of the universe, and for their embodiment the Lord stimulates 
primal matter (maya) into action to produce her effects (20c—23). 


The first of these is the principle of limited power to act (kala), which 
effects a partial revelation of the soul’s power of consciousness (24-9). 


From this evolves the principle of limited power to know (vidya), the 
necessity of which is justified by way of a discussion of the process of 
perception involving the sense faculties (indriyas) thought sufficient for 
the process by Sankhya thinkers (30-6). 


The tattva of passion (raga) is added as the third of the three central 
cuirasses (kancukas), it is distinguished from the disposition of the intellect 
(buddhi) known as ‘lack of dispassion’ (avairagya), and it is explained to 
have a positive and a negative form (raga and viraga), the latter being 
distinguished from true dispassion, which is the absence of both (37-44). 


To these are added the cuirasses (kancukas) of time (45-50) and binding 
fate (niyati), which ensure that the results of a particular soul’s past 
actions accrue to that same soul (51). 


The existence of binding fate (niyati) is questioned on the grounds that 
its function could be performed by karman itself (52), and then reasserted 
(53-4). 

Its power acts upon the tattva of the person (purusa-tattva), which is 
located above secondary matter (prakrti)'!4 and which is the locus of the 


‘\3That is to say the five-fold cuirass (kancuka) that equips the bound soul for em- 
bodiment in the worlds in maya, followed by the twenty-five tattvas of the Sankhyas. 
114The translation is not ideal: historically it is the material cause of Sankhya thinkers, 


Introduction lxix 


group of eight worlds called the yogastaka (55-7). 


From the principle of limited power to act (kala) evolves secondary matter 
(prakrti); etymologies are offered of its names (58-60). 


Pratoda asks about the need for postulating kala and the other tattvas 
above secondary matter (prakrti), since the effects of prakrti would be 
enough to account for bondage (61). 


Prakasa responds with arguments for prakrti being an effect and therefore 
depending on a cause (62-6). 
The Lord links souls to these effects (67-8). 


The tattva of the three constitutive strands of existence (viz. the gunas 
of rajas, sattva and tamas) evolves from secondary matter (avyakta: the 
unmanifest), its existence as a tattva is defended and its functions are 
touched upon (69-73). 


From this evolves the intellect (buddhi), which has the eight properties 
of rectitude (dharma), knowledge (jnana), dispassion (vairagya), control 
(aiSvarya) and the opposites of these; the predominance of one or other 
of these is due to the predominance or otherwise of certain of the gunas 
(74-5). 

The ten moral injunctions and restrictions (yamas and niyamas) are enu- 
merated (without these labels) as proceeding from rectitude (dharma) 
(76-8). 

Knowledge (jnana), which proceeds from different causes and applies to 
different domains (adhyatma, adhibhita and adhidaiva), gives rise to dis- 
passion (vairagya), which in turn motivates a man to engage in yoga and to 
win thereby the eight yogic powers of being able to render oneself minute 
(animan), etc. (79-83). 

The results of a preponderance of the guna of darkness/occlusion (rajas) 
and therefore of non-rectitude (adharma) are touched upon (84-6), then 
of lack of dispassion (anaisvarya) (87-9). 

The last verse of PrakaSa’s speech mentions that the intellect (buddhi) is 
responsible for determinative thought (adhyavasaya) (90). 


Pratoda suggests that the soul must be insentient if all these properties 
reside really in the intellect (buddhi) (91). 

Prakasa explains that they are figuratively described as properties of the 
buddhi and that the buddhi enables perception in that it takes on the 


which is arguably rendered functionless by the Saiva addition of primal matter (maya) 
at a higher level of the universe. 


lxx Parakhyatantra 


form of external objects (92-3). 


The tattva of self-appropriation (ahankara) arises from the intellect (bud- 
dhi). It is of three kinds: Taijasa, Vaikrta and Bhitadi. The first gives 
rise to the five faculties of sense, the second to the five of action and the 
third to the five subtle elements (94-6b). 


The function of each faculty is presented (96c—106b). 


The subtle elements (of hearing, touch, sight, taste, and smell) that have 
arisen from Bhitadi give rise to the five gross elements (106c-108). 


Ether is characterised (109-114b). 

Air, including the vital breaths, is characterised (114-117b). 

Fire and its places in the body are treated (118-20). 

Water and earth and their functions in the body are treated (121-2). 


A summary is given of this creation from the principle of self-appropriation 
(ahankara), in the course of which it is mentioned that the mind (manas) 
belongs to both the Taijasa and Vaikrta groups (123-8). 


Pratoda suggests that the gross elements might be the fundamental! causes 
rather than the grossest effects and questions the position that the faculties 
arise from ahankara (129). 


PrakaSa refutes this objection and demonstrates the involvement of ahan- 
kara in the use of each of the faculties (130-3). 


Pratoda asserts that the material cause should inhere in its effects like 
threads in a cloth (134). 


Prakasa responds by asserting that primal matter (maya) is a subtle, 
partless cause that does not inhere in its effects. He counters the possible 
objection that this subtle power that is m&ya is unknowable by assert- 
ing that it is inferred from its effects much in the way that the atoms 
postulated by Naiyadyikas are (135-8). 


A Buddhist objection is raised and refuted to the effect that the existence 
of the external object cannot be known independently from the knowledge 
of the external object and that therefore one need not posit the existence 
of anything other than that knowledge (139-48). 


In the remainder of the chapter the collection of effects of primal matter 
(maya) is said to make up the subtle transmigratory body (149-51); the 
shaking of maya (to generate creation) is said to be partial, not total, 
since this would otherwise destroy her (152-3); maya is the locus of great 
variety and of deluded souls (154-7). 


Introduction lxxi 


Pratoda asks whether innate impurity (mala) is primal matter (maya), or 
an effect thereof, or a property of the soul (158). 

Prakasa rejects each suggestion, explaining that it enjoys vicariously a 
place on the ladder of constitutive principles of the universe (tattva) in 
that it is inseparable from the bound soul (who occupies the position of 
purusatattva: see 55-7 above) (159-165b). 

Separation from innate impurity (mala) is impossible, but its power is 
blocked and thereby the soul realises his Siva-hood; all this is possible 
when he has been connected to the evolutes of primal matter (maya) 
(165c-170). 

Conclusion, at the end of which the worlds, which are the subject of the 
following chapter, are mentioned (171-2). 


Chapter 5. The cosmos 


The contents of the chapter are listed (1). 


The thickness of the shell of the cosmic egg in the tattva of earth 
(brahm4nda) is said to be ten thousand yojanas, and the yojana is defined 
(2-4). 

Kalagnirudra and his world are located a hundred crores of yojanas above 
the shell at the base (5-10). 

Above that are the hells; thirty-two (groups of?) hells are named and 
aetiologies for their names are given (11-32b). 

Altogether they are said to be 140!!° and their measurements are given 
(32c-34b). 

Ninety lakh yojanas above them is the world of Kismanda, who presides 
over the hells (34c—40b). 

Nine lakh yojanas above that are the seven subterranean paradises 
(patalas), which are listed, given etymologies (nirvacanas) and assigned 
each a Daitya, a Naga and a Raksasa, presumably to serve as regents for 
the three parts into which each is divided (40c-52). 

Above these is the world of Hataka, who presides over them (53-60). 


And above that is our world bhith, whose seven continents and seven 
oceans are listed (61-63b). 


''5The number could be interpreted otherwise; though not explicit on the point, the 
text appears to be following the model according to which the first twenty-nine hells 
are fourfold and the last three eightfold. 


xxii Parakhyatantra 


Among these continents, Jambidvipa’s central mountain Meru, its nine 
divisions, which are bounded by mountains, are described and their names 
explained with aetiological myths (63c-93). 

The surrounding concentric bands of oceans and continents are described 
and their names analysed, until we reach the ring-shaped boundary that 
is the Lokaloka mountain (94-109b). 


Beyond that is the ocean called Garbhoda, then darkness, then the shell 
of the cosmic egg (brahmanda) (109c-111b). 


The overall dimensions of this world are given and it is stated that only 
here is the accumulation of past action (karman) possible (111c—113). 


Above it .is the world known as Bhuvarloka, in which are the sun and the 
planets of the weekdays and the planets Rahu and Ketu; above these the 
stars, the seven rsis, and the pole star (114-29). 

Above are the worlds of Svarloka, Maharloka, Janaloka, Tapoloka, and 
Satyaloka, where Brahma resides (130-138b). 


Four crores above him is Visnu and six crores above him is Sankara, and 
above him the shell of the cosmic egg (brahmanda) (138c-140). 


Ten Rudras who bear the brahmanda are listed (141-4). 


There follows a list of the Rudras who rule over each of the tattvas from 
that of water up to that of primal matter (maya) (145-155b). 


Above maya, in the pure universe, Sambara is placed in the principle of 
pure knowledge (vidyatattva), Ananta in iSvaratattva, Brahma in sadé- 
Sivatattva, and beyond him there is the supreme Siva (155c-161). 
Conclusion (162). 


Chapter 6. Mantras 


The opening verse lists as the topics of the chapter: the raising of mantras, 
the origin of the phonemes (aksara/varna), the connection of words and 
sentences with meaning, the definition and the convention (?) of mantras 
and their particular fruits (1). 

At the time of creation the Lord causes the phonemes to become manifest 
from ‘the drop’ (bindu) (2). Once shaken, the subtle material cause bindu 
produces the syllabary (Sabdarasi) in two groups: vowels and consonants 
(3-5). 

They are the effects, the Lord is the instigating cause, bindu the material 
cause, human effort is an auxiliary cause; with them language, which is 
the basis for worldly interaction, is possible (6-8). 


Introduction lxxiii 


Pratoda suggests that the phonemes make manifest a power sphota that 
is responsible for conveying meaning (9). 

Prakasa responds by asking whether this sphota is the same as or different 
from the phonemes, and then showing that the two alternatives are to be 
rejected: meaning is conveyed by the final phoneme in conjunction with 
a trace left by the utterance of the preceding phonemes, and thus the 
phonemes themselves enable worldly interaction (10—16). 


The nature of the relation between language and meaning is questioned 
(17); Prakasa discounts various types of relation, states that the relation- 
ship is one of something that causes to understand and that which is to 
be understood, and asserts that an artificial convention is required to link 
them (18-24). 

The question of whether this creation of convention was gradual or all-at- 
once is raised (25), and Prakasa responds that it was created at once by 
God’s will, and that the Lord was similarly the creator of the conventions 
that link mantras to their meanings (26-8). 


Using the terminology of grammar, the principal parts of the fundamental 
mantra of the cult (SIVA) are identified (29-31). 


The brahmamantras, angamantras and the mantras of the VidyeSvaras 
are raised (32-4). 
The mantra-endings (jati) are enumerated and their functions explained, 


and OM (pranava) is mentioned as the jati that belongs at the beginning 
of a mantra (35-7). 


Thus power is said to reside in the beginning, middle and end of a mantra, 
in vowels, clusters of consonants, words and sentences (38-9). 


Pratoda asks whether mantras, since they are made up of language, can 
be ‘correct’ and ‘incorrect’ (40). 


PrakaSa suggests the futility of supposing a grammar of mantras and 
points out that both go, the ‘correct’ word for a cow, and gavi, an ‘incor- 
rect’ one, convey their meaning (41-3). 


How, asks PrakaSa, can words convey meaning unless they are governed 
by grammar (44)? 

PrakaSa illustrates the arbitrary conventionality of language, including 
examples of metrical termini used by metricians, in order to show that 
human sages have contributed conventions, and he concludes that mantras 
are similarly governed by conventions forged by Siva (45-50). 


Ixxiv Parakhyatantra 


Pratoda observes that mantras are just words articulated by the parts of 
the mouth, just like other words (51). 


PrakaSa replies that stones and gems both share the common property of 
being stones, but only the latter category has special powers, and so too 
it is with ordinary words and mantras, whose power we can observe in 
the world when they are used to introduce or quell fever, destroy snakes 
(naga) or spirits (bhuta), etc. (52-6). 

An affective etymology (nirvacana) of mantra is offered, and the discussion 
is concluded with an assertion that the relation of them with their meaning 
is forged by Siva (57-8). 

Pratoda introduces the Mimamsaka notion that deities are no more than 
words, and this is rejected by Prakasa (59-64). 


Pratoda wonders whether the deity is formless or corporeal: if formless, 
he cannot be what makes a sacrifice produce results; if corporeal, he could 
not simultaneously be present at many sacrifices (65-6). 


Prakasa resolves this dilemma by asserting that the deity may take on 
embodiments at will and that it is he who is the factor who produces the 
fruit of the sacrifice and not the ritual act itself (67-75). 


As to the objection that the deity cannot be known since he is unseen, 
Prakasa replies that the Mimamsaka’s heaven is also invisible, and he 
concludes that the ritual act is ‘of the Lord’ (aifvari kriyaé), and that 
mantras are to be used in various rites (76-9). 


In the last three verses, it is asserted that the vidyapada, with its four 
topics (padartha)—that is to say the first four of the list given in 1:5—has 
been taught as it was taught by Siva to Prakasa, and the treatment of 
the last padartha, that of liberation, is announced: Prakasa states that 
he will now teach rituals (80-2). 


Chapter 14. Yoga 


The contents of the chapter are listed (1). 


Suitable places for the practice of yoga are described (2) and the ideal 
state of mind (3). 


A small number of postures are listed and described (4-7), one of which the 
yogin should adopt, folding his hands in his lap with their palms upwards, 
spreading out his chest, half-closing his eyes, and focussing them on the 
tip of his nose (8-9). 


Introduction lxxv 


Six necessary auxiliaries of yoga (yoganga) are listed (pratyahara, dhyana, 
pranayama, dharani, tarka, samadhi) (10) and briefly described (11-17). 
Stretching the breath (pranayama) is to be practised to conquer the five 
breaths (prana, apana, samana, ud4&na, and vyana), which are given ety- 
mologies (nirvacana) (18-25). 

Breath-exercising techniques of ‘filling’ (puraka), ‘retaining’ (kumbhaka), 
and ‘expulsion’ (recaka) are described (26-31). 

Having thus conquered the breaths, the yogin should practise the five 
fixations (dharana) of the five elements (32-3). 


That of earth is described (34-5), as well as the results of practising it 
(36ab), then that of water (36c—40b), that of fire (40c-43b), that of wind 
(43c—46), and that of ether (47—-49b). 


With a hundred udghatas conquest of the fixations (dharan&) is achieved 
(49cd). 

An udghata (a timed retention of the breath such that, in the early stages 
of self-asphyxiation, the sensation is produced of a spontaneous upward 
surge of vital energy) is defined (50). 


Having achieved conquest of the fixations (dharands), the yogin should 
practise yoga, for which his body is his base (51-2). 

The variety of vessels in the body is mentioned and their function of 
transporting chyle about the body is adverted to (53-57b). 


Eight principal vessels named after the directions and intermediate direc- 
tions and reaching to the extremities of the petals of the heart’s lotus are 
listed, and it is stated that the soul, by moving into one of these, takes on 
the nature of its presiding deity (57c-61). 


Pratoda asks how the all-pervading soul can move (62), and Prakasa ex- 
plains that ‘movement’ is used in a figurative sense: what is meant is 
‘revelation of knowledge’ (62-8). 


Prana and jiva appear to be given here as terms for (respectively in-going 
and out-going?) breath, without which a body is declared dead (69). 

The left and right channels (mentioned without their usual labels ida and 
pingala) are given as two principal channels above the heart and associatd 


with the moon and the sun respectively; the central channel is in some 
way associated with both (70-1). 

An account of the utterance of a mantra (mantroccara) is given, passing 
from the heart (homologised with Brahma), through the throat (Visnu), 
the palate (Rudra), between the brows (ISvara), to the tip of the nose 


Ixxvi Parakhyatantra 


(SadaSiva), and these are further homologised with the five kalas that 
correspond to five tranches of the ladder of tattvas (72-7). 

Each of these deities is said to be a name of the supreme deity, and their 
names are etymologised by nirvacana (78-80). 

The HAMSA-mantra (81-2). 

‘Movement’ upwards, urged by the necessary auxiliary of yoga ‘discrimi- 
nation’ (tarka), and the attainment of the meditative state of awareness 
(samadhi) (83-5). 

The nature of the supreme tattva is discussed (86-90), on attaining which 
the soul enjoys mastery over the eight yogic powers (91-4). 

The meaning of the term yoga is discussed (95-7). 

Yogins possess supernatural powers which they should use to inspire faith 
in others (98-104). 

Yogic suicide (105-7). 

Conclusion (108). 


Chapter 15. Liberation and the means to its attainment 


Contents verse (1). 

Knowledge (jnana), rites (Kriya), religious observances (carya) and yoga 
have been taught as a group of means necessarily preceded by initiation 
(diksa) (2). 

Pratoda asks which of these is really a means to liberation (3), to which 
Prakasa replies that each of them is a necessary auxiliary (anga) to initi- 
ation (diksa), since they depend on diksé as their basis (4). 

He gives a brief description of each and restates this position, concluding 
with an etymology (nirvacana) of diksa (5-10). 

Pratoda asks again which of jnana, kriya, carya and yoga brings about 
liberation after initiation (diksa) has first bestowed entitlement to follow 
them (11). 

Prakasa explains that samayadiksa, a preliminary initiation for neophytes, 
confers the entitlement to follow them, but that that preliminary initiation 
does not purge the soul of the fruits of past actions (karman) that it is 
to experience in other worlds (in the way that salvific initiation (diksa) 
does), and therefore it is full diksa that is salvific (12-14b). 

None of the other means is sufficient by itself, for they are all dependent 
on each other; the initiating acarya knows them all (14c-19). 


Introduction lxxvii 


Jnana and kriya are for ensuring continued memory, and therefore prac- 
tice, of the Saiva cult (20-1). 

Pratoda asks why this ‘memory’ is not enough to accomplish liberation 
(22). 

Prakasa explains that it is the assemblage of all the factors (samagri) that 
brings about the goal, and that this can be of two types: ‘independent’ 
(nirapeksa), i.e. salvific initiation alone, without dependence on subse- 
quent religious practice, and ‘dependent’ (sapeksa), i.e. salvific initiation 
dependent for its effect on the subsequent observance of the four means 
(24-6). 

If there is ‘independent’ initiation (nirapeksa diksa), then are observances 
of celibacy (brahmacarya) and the like pointless, asks Pratoda (27). 


Prakasa reveals that the observance of social religion is to ensure that 
Saivas are not looked down upon; it has no other particular benefit, but 
is honoured rather as the caste-hierarchy must be respected (28-30). 


The removal of the obligation to perform post-initiatory observances (i.e. 
‘independent’ initiation) only confers liberation on those incapable of the 
subsequent observances, such as children (31). 


How can it be determined that children have received Siva’s grace (Sakti- 
pata)? And how then can they receive initiation (diksa) (32)? 

Their grace they gain indirectly, which is to say they are brought by others 
to be initiated (33-5). 

Pratoda asks whether someone is likely to be reborn if they once had adhi- 
kara (he does not make explicit whether he means adhikara in the sense 
of eligibility for diksa or eligibility, through diksa, for the post-iniatory 
means) (36). 

PrakaSa replies that when diksa has been correctly performed liberation 
will come about (37-38b). 


If diks€ were not performed then the soul in question would become a 
Rudra and attain full liberation subsequently (38c-39b). 

Following any one of the subsequent means after initiation leads to liber- 
ation (39c—41). 

Pratoda asks how any one can by itself produce initiation (42), and Pra- 
kaSa responds that using all together is effortless, but that using only one, 


though requiring effort, is possible; in time blissful liberation will result 
(42-5). 


Ixxvili Parakhyatantra 


Pratoda observes that others hold liberation to be an absence (46), a 
position which PrakaSa rejects; in liberation one should attain the qualities 
of the Lord (47-50). 

Pratoda advances a Pasupata position that the qualities of the Lord are 
transferred into the soul (51), and Pratoda rejects this on the grounds 
that the qualities of the Lord could not then be entirely in the soul or in 
the Lord (52-6). 

Pratoda suggests that the absence of karman is held by some to bring 
about liberation (57), and Pratoda rejects this on the grounds that this 
does not account for the supreme bliss that should characterise liberation. 
(58-60). 

Pratoda advances another PaSupata position: that the qualities of the 
Lord arise in the adept (61), and this too Pratoda rejects, concluding that 
liberation is the revelation (abhivyakti) of the qualities of the Lord which 
were innately present in the soul, these qualities being characterised as 
true rectitude (saddharma), true knowledge (sajjnana), true dispassion 
(sadvairagya) and true control/sovereignty (sadaisvarya), in other words, 
as transcendent ektypes of the first four of the eight properties of the 
intellect (buddhidharmas) (62-7). 

The liberated soul is further qualified (68-71). 


Conclusion, in which PrakaSa recounts that he received this scripture 
(Sastra) from Parvatipati, who received it from Diptesa (72-3). 


The language of the Parakhyatantra 


In my brief account of aiga language in the introduction to the first vol- 
ume of the Kiranavrtti (GOODALL 1998:lxv-lxx) I unaccountably made 
no reference to the lengthy treatment of the language of the Kubjika- 
matatantra in the editors’ introduction (GOUDRIAAN and SCHOTERMAN 
1988:44-109). Mention should now also be made of the substantial and 
impressive discussion of the language and metre of the SiddhayogeSvari- 
matatantra by Judit TORZSOK (*1999:xxvi-lxix). TORZSOK opens her 
discussion (*1999:xxvi) with the following gentle reproof. 


The irregular forms are called Aiga—characteristic of the lan- 
guage of Lord Siva (Isa)—following Ksemaraja’s usage of this 
word in his commentary on the Svacchandatantra. While one 
may hesitate to agree with Ksemaraja that these must be 


Introduction lxxix 


hallmarks of divine style, they perhaps should not be consid- 
ered simply ‘erroneous forms that would make a learned man 
blench’, or ‘grotesque solecisms’ either.!!® This is a language 
with its own rules, whose basis is Sanskrit but which shows 
influence from Prakrit and Apabhramsa. Although Sanskrit 
is a convenient point of comparison to describe what can be 
called Aisa, it does not mean that Aisa is simply ‘erroneous 
Sanskrit’—just as pidgin language is not erroneous English 
or French, even if it may best be described in comparison to 
English or French. 


This seems to me to be truer of the SiddhayogeSvarimatatantra than it 
is of some Siddhantatantras, since that text’s language is much further 
removed from the language of other roughly contemporaneous texts con- 
sidered to be written in ‘good’ Sanskrit. The Parakhya, however, with its 
discussion of other theological doctrines in what aspires to be the style of 
philosophical karikas, is attempting to place itself within the mainstream 
of Sanskritic philosophical debate and, I think, to write ‘good’ Sanskrit. 
Of course this ‘karika style’ is not consistently maintained, and percep- 
tions of style can seem arbitrarily subjective and largely influenced by 
subject matter. The treatment (in chapter 5) of cosmology, for instance, 
would not seem out of place in any Purana (though an observant reader 
might notice the total absence of interjected vocatives and the relatively 
small quantity of other verse-padding material), whereas the discussion 
of the connection between word and meaning in the beginning of chapter 
6 might in most. But the following seem to me features that suggest the 
style of philosophical karikas: dense compression of ideas in certain pas- 
sages (e.g. 6:14ab); awkward enjambements, i.e. having the syntactical 
units spill out beyond the boundaries of the metrical ones (e.g. 2:107cd- 
108a, 4:24-5, 4:140-1, 5:90-1, 6:3-4, 6:27-8, 6:62-3, 14:101-2); paucity 
of metrical padding (see discussion on p. liv above); frequent allusions to 
the doctrines of other schools (see p. xlviii ff above); the fact that, with 
the exception of chapter 5, the entire text takes the form of a debate; 
and the carefully organised and well sign-posted presentation of themes 
throughout the text. 

The morphology of classical Sanskrit is relatively well defined because 
of the importance given to morphology in the grammatical tradition, but, 


116 xpressions quoted from GOODALL 1998:lxvi, fn. 158. 


lxxx Parakhyatantra 


as TORZSOK observes (*1999:xxvi), ‘the rules of the syntax and lexicon 
show much more flexibility’. While it may be more generally regular in 
its morphology than the earliest of the Siddhantatantras, the author of 
the Parakhya displays a number of what strike me as irregularities in 
his syntax and compound formation. I list below a number of stylistic 
peculiarities. 
overuse of hanging relative pronouns:!!" 1:2a, 1:8, 1:36cd, 1:37, 1:52ab, 
1:64a, 2:86cd, 2:100d, 4:75b, 4:109a, 4:110c, 4:120b, 4:123c, 5:33a, 
6:29, 6:31a, 6:40ab, 14:16cd, 15:64, Appendix I.A:2ab and 7ab. 


clumsy use of anaphoric pronouns (i.e. pronouns with no clear refer- 
ent, or referring back to distant words or to words tucked away in 
compounds): 1:31, 1:43, 1:50, 1:69 (see note ad loc.), 2:40c, 4:21c, 
4:23a. 


@ special instance of the last mentioned peculiarity is the repeated use of 
asmin by itself (where we would rather expect iha or atra) to mean 
‘in this Sastra’: 1:50d, 2:10b, 2:19c, 2:28c, 2:44c, 2:61c, 2:66a, 2:80c, 
3:5c, 3:6a, 3:67b, 4:90c, 15:33d, 15:40a. 


a further special instance of this peculiarity is the tendency to use forms 
of the masculine pronoun to refer to the soul even when no words 
for the soul are nearby, e.g. in 1:84b, 4:56a. (Many examples of this 
could be cited.) 


anacoluthon of various kinds: 1:12-13 (vina used once with accusative 
and then supplied with a series of nouns one of which is in the in- 
strumental), 1:61 (in the first half of which a tatpurusa compound 
containing caitanya occurs, and in the second the word must be sup- 
plied in the nominative case, even though no pronoun represents it), 
3:4 (sudden change of construction in a series of parallel statements 
such that ellipsis of a neuter subject must be assumed), 3:5cd (sin- 
gular in a relative clause and plural in the correlative); 2:25a and 
14:6le (attraction of genitive pronoun to the case of a noun with 
which it is in construction). 


1!7SPEYER observes (1886:350) that the correlative pronoun is often omitted when 
the relative clause follows the correlative, and he mentions (1886:349) that it may be 
omitted when the relative clause precedes the correlative (of such an omission he gives 
no example), but it seems to me that the omission of correlatives in the Parakhya is 
much more frequent than is normal. 


Introduction xxx 


ablative for instrumental (expressing the nimittakarana): 1:92d, 4:121b. 
clumsy transferred epithets: 2:37ab. 


somewhat too frequent use of compounds ending in -ga where a genitive 
(or other case ending) would be more normal: 1:13d, 1:41d, 1:68d, 
2:28d, 2:45d, 2:53d, 2:55b, 2:72b, 2:102c, 3:25d, 3:26d, 3:29b, 3:35b, 
3:48d, 3:49d(?), 4:33a, 4:38d, 4:44b, 4:49a, 4:83c, 4:99d, 4:136c, 
5:68a, 5:92d, 5:111d, 5:117d, 5:134c, 5:153a, 5:156d, 6:35b, 14:11a, 
14:15b, 14:28b, 14:33b, 14:45d, 14:48b, 14:57d, 14:7la, 14:75b, 
14:75c, 14:75d, 14:78a, 14:81d, 14:89b, 14:90c, 15:19a, 15:46d, Ap- 
pendix I.A:6d, Appendix I.B:10b. 


a predilection also for compounds ending in -anuga: 2:55d, 2:56d, 2:61d, 
2:112d, 3:26b, 3:35b, 4:105b, 14:38d. 


also not infrequent are words ending in -ja: 1:3b, 1:17e, 1:39d, 1:52b, 
2:14d, 2:26b, 2:41a, 2:103b, 3:74c, 3:75b, 4:53b, 4:66d, 4:82a, 4:82d, 
4:91f, 4:103b, 4:133c, 5:35d, 5:140d, 5:162c, 15:59d, 6:13d, 6:14a. 
Such compounds should perhaps be classed together as manifesta- 
tions of a general tendency of the author of the Parakhya to employ 
short tags of one or two-syllables, usually to get the sense of dif- 
ferent case-endings without spoiling the metre. Apart from -ga 
and -ja, the use of -ka in this sort of way seems to occur (e.g. 
1:89b, 3:44d, 4:66b, 5:14d, 5:150a, 14:87c);1!8 -uttha is not un- 
common (1:3a, 1:43c, 2:49c, 3:76c, 4:82c, 4:133d, 15:10a); -akhya 
is much used (1:7c, 1:8d, 1:47b, 1:80a, 2:15b, 2:19c, 2:29a, 2:35d, 
2:36b, 3:62b, 4:15b, 4:92e, 4:115b, 4:124c, 4:154b, 5:12a, 5:12c, 
5:13a, 5:13b, 5:16a, 5:41a, 5:41c, 5:42c, 5:45a, 5:45c, 5:47a, 5:48c, 
5:72c, 5:78a, 5:86a, 5:90b, 5:101a, 5:133c, 5:143a, 5:145a, 5:145d, 
5:146d, 5:147a (twice), 5:147d, 5:148b, 5:149b, 5:149c, 5:151a, 
5:15lc, 5:152b, 5:152c, 5:155d, 6:19c, 6:20c, 6:31b, 14:13d, 14:21c, 
14:69a, 15:2cd (thrice), 15:3lc, 15:44d, 15:64b, Appendix I.A:2c, 
Appendix I.B:15a),’"" and there are an extremely (and, I think, 


118 And it is relatively liberally used as a metre-filling bahuvrihi-marker (e.g. 1:22a, 
1:66b, 2:15d, 2:35d, 2:39d, 2:71b, 2:94b, 4:14ab, 4:29f, .4:46d, 4:80d, 4:125d, 4:134d, 
4:149b, 4:162b, 5:2d, 5:44b, 5:82d, 5:84b, 5:111b, 5:145d, 5:146b, 5:152b, 6:7b, 14:34d, 
14:36b, 14:73d, 15:7c, 15:17c) and as an otiose syllable-filler in names and some nouns 
(see below under morphological peculiarities). 

‘!8Other forms derived from the root \/khya are also frequent. 


Ixxxii Parakhyatantra 


unusually) large number of words ending in -tah (a list seems un- 
necessary). Such a tendency can of course not be said to be typical 
only of the author of the Parakhya. 


non-bahuvrihi compounds inflected as though they were bahuvrihis: 
1:32d, 3:1b, 4:1b, 4:2b, 4:2c, 4:34d, 4:93d, 6:8b, 6:45b, 14:20d, 
14:37d, 15:19d. Observe that seven instances are of compounds 
ending in asraya, samSraya or samaSraya (1:32d, 4:1b, 4:2b, 4:93d, 
14:20d, 14:37d, 14:58d) and all but one of the rest!?° concern com- 
parable verbal nouns formed with krt suffixes. Perhaps they could 
instead be grouped under the rubric of verbal nouns used as adjec- 
tives at the end of tatpurusa compounds. 


‘split’ or incomplete compounds: 2:73b (dosas tv itaretarah), 6:18a 
(karyakarano yogah), 6:19a (sadhyasadhano yogah),!*! 6:31b 
(sivakhyam mantralaksanam!”*), 


tautologous compounds to fill the metre: 1:52b, 4:103b (compounds end- 
ing in -nimittaja), 15:34c (taddvarayogatah). 


a dvandva compound apparently followed by a ca or a va connecting its 
two members: 4:102a, Appendix I.B:28c.!*9 


the suffix -tah apparently used as though it were -tvat or -tvena: 3:40d, 
4:8d, 4:69d, 5:85c, 15:50d(?). Apart from these rather strained uses 
of tasil, the suffix is, as we have remarked above, extremely fre- 
quently used in its commonly accepted senses. 


aha with past-tense meaning: 1:2c, 1:18d.!24 


120The final member of the compound in 4:34d is gocara. 
121 These last two could perhaps be included under the above heading. 
122The required sense is that of sivakhyamantralaksanam, but that would infringe the 
metre. 
‘23 similar case is noted by TORZSOK (*1999:xlvii) in Siddhayogesvarimatatantra 
8:8: 
sutrayen mandalam divyam sarvasiddhiphalodayam 
caturastakaram vapi... 


'24This usage can be found in good classical authors too; see for instance GOODALL 
2001b for its occurrence in the works of Kalidasa. 


Introduction lxxxili 


present active participles used as main verbs: 2:59c, 4:22b, and perhaps 
14:82d. 


double sandhi: 4:21c, 4:67d, 5:52c, 5:93d, 5:96d(?), 5:132b, 6:79a, 14:50c, 
14:57c, Appendix I.B:30c. 


irregular sandhi of the masculine nominative pronoun sah: 5:87c. 


sandhi applied when endings should be pragrhya: 15:16a, 15:20c, Ap- 
pendix I.A:2d-3a, Appendix I.B:12c. 


hiatus within a pada:!2° in 1:71c, 3:5a,}6 3:69b, 4:52b. 


treatment of vocalic r as equivalent to ri or ru (excluding instances of 
hiatus): 4:101b, 5:15a, 5:20b, 5:132c, 14:98a (and perhaps also in 
4:105d).!2” A special case is 5:129b, rsayo rsubhavanah, which is 
different from the above-mentioned instances of hiatus in that the 
final form of the first word has been modified as though the second 
began with r followed by a vowel. Such a treatment of the vocalic 
r as though it were a combination of a consonant and a vowel is 
common enough in some Puranas: see, e.g., ADRIAENSEN, BAKKER, 
and ISAACSON 1998:27-8. 


the locative of the singular used for the locative of the dual: 2:110d 
(bodhabodhe). 


plural for dual: 5:4a. 


neuter for masculine: 4:83c (utkarsam) 5:95d (udanvat), 14:94d (nija- 
dharmam).!28 


125Hiatus between two padas, such as we find, for instance, between 2:6lc and d, 
14:22a and b, 14:104a and b, etc., seems not to be especially common in this text, but 
it is in any case so common in epic, puranic and tantric literature that it seems hardly 
worth recording here as a peculiarity. 

126 These first two are instances of hiatus where the second word begins with a vocalic 
r. Since hiatus inside a p&da is not a common feature of the style of this text, this 
suggests that in the redactor’s pronunciation (and therefore usage) the vocalic r had 
the phonetic value of ri or ru. There are a number of other indications that this was 
so, for which see next entry. 

'27There are a number of indications that for the scribe too, and not just for the 
redactor, vocalic r was so treated, e.g., his writing krddhah (for kruddhah) in 5:123a. 

1281n this last instance, as well as in 4:83c, the neuter ending appears to be the result 


Ixxxiv Parakhyatantra 


masculine for neuter: 1:79e (cetah). 
simplex for causative: 6:21b and 6:61d (both instances of pratyeti). 
occasional pleonasms: 5:62b, 5:139b. 

The following are morphological peculiarities: 


svakya with the sense, perhaps slightly intensified, of the possessive ad- 
jective sva.'29 


abbreviations of certain nominal forms: 3:3c (gauta for gautama?), 14:4d 
(cara for carana, perhaps to fit the metre), 15:1ld (adhikarika for 
adhikarakarika?). 


meaningless extension of some nouns (particularly names) to pad the 
metre with -ka: 5:5d, 5:14d, 5:48d, 5:68c, 5:69a, 5:112b, 5:118a, 
5:147d, 5:148b, 14:4d, 14:7b, 14:73d.18° 


irregularly formed past-participles: perhaps 14:12d and 14:90b (anusan- 
dhita), and perhaps 14:22d (chindita). 


feminine stem in -r replaced by a stem in -ya: 5:15c (vaitarany4). 


feminine stem in -i replaced by a stem in -1 to suit the metre: 6:69c 
(ahiati). 


the genitive patyuh mistakenly ‘regularised’ to pateh: 14:97c. 


the genitive plural of mirdhan mistakenly ‘regularised’ to murdhanam: 
2:89b (ex conj.). 


Stems in final -s are occasionally treated as stems in -a/-& when at the 
beginning of a compound: 4:89a, 5:133d, 5:134b. 


Stem in final -is treated as a stem in -i to fit the metre: 5:35d 
(udbhutanalajarcibhih). 


of attraction to the gender of aifvarya, the word to which both expressions stand in 
apposition. 

129See fn. 396 on p. 258 below. 

13°This last, an instance of talu-ka, finds parallel in a number of other tantric works, 
e.g., Ni§vasamukha 4:52 (f. 16"), Ni§vasa guhyasitra 1:133 (f. 44°), Svacchanda 4:365, 
5:75, 7:38, 10:1172, 15:25, Kubjikamata 17:75, 25:93, and Tantraloka 32:26. 


Introduction lxxxv 


Accusative for nominative in the masculine plural of stems in n and nt: 
6:6b, 15:73. 


One further observation on my use of the expression ‘aiga language’ is 
worth making. A comparison of the above list with the accounts referred 
to above of deviant usages in the Kirana, Sardhatrisatikalottara, Siddha- 
yogeSvarimata, and the Kubjikamata seems to me to reveal rather sur- 
prisingly little that is common to all those texts. We can observe in all of 
them a tendency (of very varying strength) to transform non-vocalic nom- 
inal stems into vocalic ones, particularly when this is metrically required, 
and a tendency to irregularities of sandhi (hiatus and double sandhi); but 
beyond this, each list tables largely idiosyncracies peculiar to each text. 
Even confusion over lyap and ktva, which one might expect to be uni- 
versally shared, appears not to be a common feature of the Parakhya.'3! 
Certainly the Parakhya, in the form it has been transmitted to us, cannot 
be said to have been written in a distinct language whose basis is Sanskrit. 
Welcome light on arsa (and therefore also aiga) usage is shed by a 
grammar of epic Sanskrit that has just appeared: OBERLIES 2003. 


Some remarks on the treatment of metre 


The Parakhya ends each chapter with a verse in a different metre: chapters 
1 and 6 are concluded with an upajati, 2 and 14 with a vasantatilaka, 3 
with a malini, and 4, 5 and 15 each with a Sardulavikridita. But in 
respect of its anustubh it is almost as remarkably bland as the Kirana 
or the Svayambhuvasutrasangraha, both of which, as I have observed 
(GOODALL 1998:lxxi), not only restrict themselves to the anustubh but 
scarcely deviate from the pathya. The occasional vipulas are these: 


na-vipula 1:18a, 1:60c, 2:76e, 5:35c, 5:104c, 15:65c, and Appendix I, 
verses B:40c, C:54a, and L:126c. 


ra-vipula 6:19d and 6:20d (identical padas, both missing a caesura after 
the fourth syllable). 


131 single instance is to be found in the chapters transmitted by M” (15:60c) and 
one is to be found in Appendix I.L:132a, but see also the apparatus ad loc. But I 
should add the caveat that we possess only fragments of the parts of the text most 
likely to contain plentiful absolutives, namely the parts giving ritual instructions. 


Ixxxvi Parakhyatantra 


ma-vipula 1:66c, 2:11la (er conj. and with the wrong preamble), 3:56a, 
5:95c, 14:10c, Appendix I, verses E:79a (with no caesura after the 
fifth syllable), E:87c, and K:115a. 


Even including the verses in Appendix I, not quite one percent of the 
half-lines have vipulas. Without the verses in Appendix I the percentage 
is yet lower. 

A number of ‘errors’ with the pathya occur when a short vowel in the 
fifth syllable is followed by a conjunct in which the second consonant is 
a semivowel: 5:4c, 5:44a, 5:76c, 5:124a. These could therefore be treated 
as ma-vipulas, irregular because they are not preceded by a ra-preamble. 
But I regard them rather as instances of the pathya in which the weak 
conjunct at the beginning of the sixth syllable was not felt to strengthen 
the fifth. Of course conjuncts with semi-vowels do strengthen the syllables 
they precede; indeed, as we have seen above (see p. lxxxiii), it is clear that 
even a consonant followed by a vocalic r was felt in a number of cases to 
be sufficient metrically to strengthen the preceding syllable. But what I 
am suggesting is that they were felt not necessarily to do so. Occasionally 
we find conjuncts with semi-vowels being similarly treated as weak in the 
cadence of the even pada too: 1:71d, 3:11d, 5:109d, 6:48b, 6:68d. 

Two even-numbered padas might originally have been faulty for being 
entirely iambic: 5:136ef (ez conj.; see fn. 613 on p.312) and 4:86b (see 
fn. 391 on p. 257). 

There are a couple of instances where metrical constraints have been 
entirely abandoned, both to be explained as the result of having to in- 
corporate metrically awkward names: 2:43c, 14:91. Verse 1:14a is hy- 
permetrical, but it belongs to a class of hypermetrical padas that is not 
uncommon in aisa and arsa language: we must treat its two initial short 
syllables as having the value of a single long.!? In 5:58a the hypermetry 
is the result of a conjecture, but one that seems not implausible (see fn. 
541 on p. 294). In the text as constituted there are few metrical solecisms 
in the even padas, and such as there are can for the most part, as we 
have seen, be ‘justified’. Since these give the cadence, they are the most 
inflexible part of the verse. In only a small handful of instances (1:51cd, 
2:38ab, 3:65ab, 15:41ab, Appendix I.B:16cd and 17ab) does a word awk- 


*S2See GOODALL (quoting TOKUNAGA) 1998:lvii, fn. 132. A weak intervening conso- 
nant, such as a nasal or (as in our instances) a semivowel perhaps helps the collapse of 
two syllables into one. 


Introduction kxxxvil 


wardly bridge an odd and an even pada. In two instances the author 
(unless these are transmissional errors) has awkwardly split compounds 
in order to avoid a bad even pada (2:35 and 6:31b). 

The author of the Parakhya was not, we may conclude, a skilled han- 
dler of metre. He may have been very slightly more ambitious than the 
authors of the Kirana and Svayambhuvasitrasangraha, but his verses in 
longer metres, unless the transmission has badly distorted them, are far 
from being smooth compositions. Perhaps their lack of clarity is in part to 
be explained by their being in each case densely packed summary verses. 


Does the Parakhya tell us anything new? 


The rediscovery of a large part of the Parakhya made possible by this 
edition does not provide us with a lot of new or surprising doctrines, 
and it should not radically change our picture of the old pan-Indian San- 
skritic Saiva Siddhanta. It could be said, in other words, to be just 
another scriptural formulation of a body of views that we find (with one 
or two variations here and there) in a number of published works. But 
we should take note that it is one more document of the period before 
the appearance of what seems to have been the most significant body 
of Saiddhantika exegesis in the history of the school, namely the writ- 
ings of the tenth-century Kashmirian lineage of Ramakantha II. It joins, 
therefore, a very small corpus of published pre-tenth-century Saiddhantika 
writings: the Rauravasitrasangraha, the Svayambhuvasutrasangraha, the 
Sardhatrisatikalottara, the Kirana, the Sarvajnanottara, the Matanga, 
the Mrgendra, and the surviving writings of Sadyojyotis. Among the 
scriptures of this already modest list, the Rauravasitrasangraha is badly 
transmitted and, I believe, incomplete;!*% the greater part of both 
the Svayambhuvasitrasangraha and the Kirana is, I maintain, uninter- 
pretable as presented to us by their South Indian editions;!*4 and of 
the Sarvajnanottara only a very small portion has been published, and 
in the only easily accessible edition of that small portion (that of the 


135See p. xcvii below. 

134The incomprehensibility of the Devakottai edition of the Kirana (Ep) is plentifully 
illustrated in this volume: see footnotes 143, 726, 732, 755, 781, 846, and 904 on 
pp. 181, 347, 351, 358, 364, 383, and 402. Fewer illustrations are given of difficulties in 
the South Indian edition of the Svayambhuvasitrasangraha, but see footnotes 522 and 
743 on pp. 290 and 355. VASUDEVA (*2000) draws attention to and repairs a number. 


Ixxxvili Parakhyatantra 


Adyar Library) its text is marred by large distortive interpolations, !*° 


non-sensical omissions,}“© and passages that deviate very widely from all 
the manuscripts I have consulted.!3” The corpus of published early scrip- 
tures is thus small indeed, and the addition to it of the Parakhya makes 
a considerable difference, if only in bulk. And even if it treats many of 
the same themes as other texts, naturally it has different emphases. Thus 
it devotes more attention than the other early published scriptures to 
theories about language, mantras and scripture, and to the relative im- 
portance of diksa and the four padas. The Parakhya’s fourteenth chapter 
is a welcome addition to the small collection of works on early Saiva yoga. 
BRUNNER, in her article on the subject (1994), was obliged to rely (among 
the early Saiddhantika sources) on the in some respects unusual account 
of the Mrgendra, the uninterpretably corrupt account of the Devakottai 
edition of the Kirana, and the difficult treatments of the Matanga and the 
Sardhatrigatikalottara, the latter given piecemeal in a number of chap- 
ters. }38 

In one respect this volume is quite new: it contains the first translation 
of an early Siddhantatantra into English. The only complete translations 
of early Siddhantatantras are those into French of the Mrgendra (HULIN 
1980 and BRUNNER 1985) and the Rauravasitrasangraha (DAGENS and 
BARAZER-BILLORET 2000), the latter being, in my opinion, of limited 
use because of the poor state of the text they followed. Of the Svayam- 
bhuvasitrasangraha only the first three and a bit chapters, out of twenty- 
three, have been translated into French and English (FILLIOZAT 1991a 
and 1994), and of the Kirana the first twelve, out of sixty-four, have been 
translated into Italian (VIVANTI 1975), and the first seven into English 
(GOODALL 1996 and 1998). 

A word about the arbitrariness of the annotation. The criticism may 
be raised that in some places I have quoted a great deal of tangentially 
relevant matter, and in others barely anything at all. The charge is unan- 
swerable. All annotation is likely to be arbitrary to a certain extent, and 
of course I have followed up some things that interested me and not others. 


135One of these forms the subject of GOODALL forthcoming B. 

136One is referred to in fn. 838 on p.381. 

137See footnotes 332 and 348 on pp. 238 and 245 below. 

138] cannot pretend fully to have understood the Parakhya’s treatment of the topic, 
but I have had the enormous advantage of having Dr. Somdev VASUDEvVA’s work (*2000) 
to draw on. 


Introduction lxxxix 


I have on the whole tried to quote most from the most closely related texts 
whenever I found in them matter that helped me to contextualise and to 
interpret what I found in the Parakhya. In other words, I have intention- 
ally referred most to the early Siddhantas, and among those particularly 
the Mrgendra, Matanga, and Kirana, which I judge to be closest in spirit 
to the Parakhya,!%9 and then to exegetical Saiddhantika literature, par- 
ticularly when it contained quotations of passages of the Parakhya and 
commented on them. Relevant passages from texts of other schools of 
thought have been quoted less frequently. 

It may be unfashionable to comment unfavourably on the literary 
quality of something one edits, particularly when it does not belong to 
one’s own culture, but I think some remark on the subject belongs to a 
characterisation of the text. It is not, in my view, a work of beauty. It 
is, as we have seen, less prolix than the Matanga, and yet this does not 
render it as neat and clear as the Mrgendra, nor indeed any clearer than 
the Matanga. It is less lively than the Kirana and considerably less lively 
than the Nisvasa. Metrically it is, as we have also seen, indifferent; indeed 
it seems to me that it does not in its use of metre, diction or any means 
aspire to be poetry. It’s author’s aim was a systematic presentation and 
justification of the principal doctrines of the Saiva Siddhanta in unadorned 
verse. 


The nature of this edition 


Browsing in A.E. HOUSMAN’s classical papers is an absorbing diversion 
for someone who aspires to edit ancient texts, but it is not without its 
stings. I recently came across the following and was uncomfortably re- 
minded of my text and translation of the Parakhya: 


Here then, between poets capable of much and copyists capa- 
ble of anything, is a promising field for the exercise of tact and 
caution; a prudent editor will be slow to emend the text and 
slow to defend it, and his page will bristle with the obelus. 
But alas, it is not for specimens of tact and caution that one 
resorts to the editors of the Culex; it is rather to fill one’s 


13°T should reiterate that this ‘closeness’ may be illusory, given that so few early 
Siddhantatantras are accessible to us. Perhaps they should not really form a group; 
but given what survives, they seem to. 


XC Parakhyatantra 


bosom with sheaves of improbable corrections and impossible 
explanations.}4° 


Fortunately, since this is, as far as I am aware, the first edition of the 
Parakhya, I can reassure myself with the reflection that, by reporting as 
accurately as I can what all the sources for the text read and offering as 
many suggestions for improvement as occur to me and to others to whom 
I have shown the text, I am at least recording what is preserved by what 
appear to be the last, fast-decaying witnesses of the Parakhya, and am 
improving at least some parts of it for future readers. 
And HOUSMAN offers this further consolation: 


Some ancient authors have descended to modern times in one 
MS. only, or in a few MSS. derived immediately or with little 
interval from one ... Others there are whose text, though in 
the main reposing on a single copy, can be corrected here 
and there from others, inferior indeed, but still independent 
and indispensable ... There is a third class whose text comes 
down from a remote original through separate channels, and 
is preserved by MSS. of unlike character but like fidelity, each 
serving in its turn to correct the faults of others... 

If I had no judgment, and I knew it, and were nevertheless 
immutably resolved to edit a classic, I would single out my 
victim from the first of these three classes: that would be best 
for the victim and best for me. Authors surviving in a solitary 
MS. are by far the easiest to edit, because their editor is re- 
lieved from one of the most exacting offices of criticism, from 
the balancing of evidence and the choice of variants. They are 
the easiest, and for a fool they are the safest. One field at 
least for the display of folly is denied him: others are open, 
and in defending, correcting, and explaining the written text 
he may yet aspire to make a scarecrow of the author and a 
byword of himself; but with no variants to afford him scope 
for choice and judgment he cannot exhibit his impotence to 
judge and choose.!4} 


14°Fyom HOUSMAN’s “Remarks on the ‘Culex’ ”, The Classical Review XVI (1902), 
p. 339, as quoted in HOUSMAN 1981:95. 

'41Fyom HOUSMAN’s preface to his edition M. Manilii Astronomicon Liber Primus 
(London, 1903) as quoted in HOUSMAN 1981:34-5. 


Introduction XCl 


There is so much that is noteworthy and quotable that strikes the reader 
in HOUSMAN’s papers, and now that I have started it is difficult to stop, 
but I will restrict myself to just one more quotation, not because it is pithy 
and amusing, but because it illustrates something that must powerfully 
strike students of every branch of Sanskrit literature: 


The Pithoeanus was first applied to the recension of Juvenal 
in 1585 by its godfather Petrus Pithoeus. His text, founded on 
this MS., served in 1613 as a model to Rigaltius, and Rigaltius 
served as a model to editors of Juvenal for near two hun- 
dred years. From 1800 onward, when P had long disappeared, 
Ruperti first, and then Achaintre and Heinrich, produced re- 
censions founded on inferior MSS. But in the middle of the 
century the Pithoeanus was rediscovered in Montpellier and 
‘was restored to its pride of place by Otto Jahn and K.F. Her- 
mann; and in the series of modern editions, Jahn’s of 1851, 
Hermann’s of 1854, Jahn’s of 1868, Buechler’s of 1886 and 
1893, the text of Juvenal has drawn nearer and nearer to the 
text of P.!4? 


Across centuries, generations of scholars, building upon each others’ 
achievements, have gradually worked towards re-constructing many clas- 
sical Greek and Latin texts. In India, commentarial literature written 
from early times up to the present day has played its role in securing and 
rendering interpretable some Sanskrit texts. But it is only in recent times 
that editions of Sanskrit works based upon exhaustive collations of the 
sources have begun to appear, and it is evident that, although it is fash- 
ionable to question the fruits of such endeavours for some texts,!4% there 
is much to be gained from critical editions in every branch of Sanskrit 
literature. 

With this first edition of the Parakhya I have attempted to repair the 
text as much as possible, but I am aware that much of the text is lost, 
much is uninterpretably corrupt, much is suspect, and much that has not 


142FYom HOUSMAN’s preface to his edition D. Junii Iuvenalis Saturae (London, 1905) 
as quoted (with subsequent corrections incorporated) in HOUSMAN 1981:54. 

'43 Asserting the futility of attempting critical editions of Puranas in particular is 
perhaps no longer the dernier cr, but it is still not passé: see, for example, INDEN 
2000, in particular the appendix, entitled ‘Authorism and Contextualism, Empiricism 
and Idealism in the Study of Puranas’. 


XCil Parakhyatantra 


aroused my suspicions may not be in the state its author intended.!*4 
I am also aware that it is unlikely that generations of text-critics will 
follow who will gradually work at improving the text, winning nearer and 
nearer to its original state. And there are few passable editions of the 
surviving texts most closely related to the Parakhya; indeed many have 
not been printed at all. Although I have tried to read related literature, 
reading much of it inevitably involves editing it. There is, I have no doubt, 
much surviving material that I have missed and that I might profitably 
have adduced to repair and elucidate passages in the Parakhya. I could 
therefore allow further years to pass in the study of related material before 
daring to publish. But publishing now means that one further source for 
the intellectual history of Saivism is made available to other students and 
editors of this body of literature. 

Comparing the one surviving MS that transmits the Parakhya with 
the wealth of sources that transmit other Siddhantatantras, for example 
the Kirana, should make us mindful of another reason for being sceptical 
of, indeed inevitably dissatisfied with, the text offered in this edition. In 
the case of the Kirana we can plausibly divide the surviving MSS into 
three groups. It seems likely to me that the Nepalese sources are the 
most ‘sincere’, which is to say that they appear not to have transmitted a 
lot of deliberate modifications, and such deviations as there are from the 
text as it was first composed seem likely in the main to be the result of 
accident, of ‘innocent’ error. The MSS M” and R% reflect the text as it 
was transmitted to and by the tenth-century Kashmirian exegete Rama- 
kantha II (in both cases, but certainly in the case of R%, this may have 
been a South Indian text modified in accordance with the commentary): a 
slightly polished up Kashmirian text, from which a number of awkward- 
nesses had been removed by circumlocution. The other South Indian 
manuscripts transmit a text that has in places also been ‘improved upon’ 
in the interests of clarity—again not, it seems, with a view to modifying 
its doctrines (see GOODALL:1998:369-70, fn. 604)—and which has here 
and there suffered conflation with the other groups. Using these groups 


144In the introduction to my edition of the Kiranavrtti I very briefly defended the 
practice of conjectural emendation (GOODALL 1998:cxiv); here I assume that no such 
defence is necessary, because I imagine that it will be clear to all who attempt to read 
the text as it has been transmitted by M” that it must be corrected if we make the 
minimal assumption that the text once made sense. But it is of course not only where 
it cannot be construed or cannot be plausibly construed that the text may be at fault. 


Introduction XCill 


and the surviving commentaries we can often infer what is likely to have 
been the original wording of a particular verse, and that is often very 
different from what we find in the Mysore codex M”. 

Now in the case of the Parakhya we have only one source, the same 
Mysore codex M’”, and that tells us almost all we can know about the 
transmission. Quotations attributed to the Parakhya reveal deviations, 
but these, as we can discover from comparable quotations in the same 
works of other more reliably transmitted texts, are not likely all to be 
reliable. But it is not improbable that the Parakhya, like the Kirana, 
should have been transmitted with enormous variation, and that what we 
have preserved today is a corrupt and damaged exemplar of one version 
among several of the text. For it should not be supposed that the enor- 
mously varied transmission of the Kirana is exceptional in this genre of 
literature. We have plentiful evidence (in the form of surviving Nepalese 
MSS) for the text of the Sardhatrisfatikalottara that reveals that it too 
was transmitted with huge variation, a great deal of which is not reflected 
in the editions published to date.!4° Even for the Matanga a considerable 
amount of significant variation is not reflected in the apparatus: apart 
from the numerous surviving South Indian MSS not used for the IFP 
edition,!4© Nepalese MSS have not been consulted at all for the first vol- 
ume, and yet the one Nepalese palm-leaf MS that has been consulted 
for the second volume (using a not wholly accurate transcript, IFP MS 
T.970, reported with the siglum ‘ca’) could improve on the text offered 
in the first volume in many places.!4? For much of the second volume 
no Kashmirian source gives testimony, and yet a catalogued Sarada MS 
survives in the BORI (MS No. 235 of 1883-84) which, unlike the other 
Sarada sources, covers the commentary for the beginning of the text and, 
alone among all the sources, covers the commentary for almost all of the 
yogapada (the end of chapter 6 and the beginning of chapter 7 are miss- 
ing) and for the beginning of the caryapada. It also contains portions of 
the commentary on the kriyapada for which BHATT had no source. The 


145Some indication of this was given in GOODALL 1998:lxvi-lxviii; for further evidence 
see, for example, the short quotation with (minimal) apparatus in fn. 793 on p.368 
below. 

1464 few of these are referred to by GOODALL 1998:lxxx, bocxii and xcvii. 

‘47The original manuscript is MS 5-688 in the National Archives, Kathmandu: 
NGMPP Reel No. A 43/2. 


XCiv Parakhyatantra 


manuscript is in some disorder,!4° but it gives a much more complete text 
of Ramakantha’s commentary than any which BHATT actually used.!49 

It is not improbable then that MY might represent but a single strand 
of a multifarious transmission, perhaps a version close to that once trans- 
mitted by the lost classical commentary, just as M*’s version of what it 
transmits of the Kirana is close to the text presupposed by Ramakantha’s 
Kiranavrtti. 


‘481t contains 253 folios divided up as follows: 101 folios labelled ff. 119-219; 18 un- 
numbered; 48 numbered ff. 1-18; 86 numbered ff. 1-86. The commentary on the yoga- 
pada (from which I have cited in the annotation to chapter 14) is covered on ff. 44"-83” 
of the last sequence of pagination. 

M9SANDERSON (1995b:565) mentions the omission of this source in his review, as 
well as of two other catalogued sources in North India that I have not seen: Sahitya 
Samsthana, Rajasthana Vidyapitha, Udaipur, Accession Nos. 205 and 334. In a letter 
of 27.ix.1997, Professor SANDERSON drew my attention to the existence of another 
Kashmirian MS in a collection recently acquired by the Staatsbibliothek in Berlin: it 
is part of a Sammelhandschrift, at that time labelled KA 1436, part of which has been 
consulted for its text of the Malinivijayottara and described by VASUDEVA (*2001:xiii). 


SOURCES FOR THE CONSTITUTION OF THE TEXT 


The Mysore Manuscript 


The principal source for the text is University of Mysore, Oriental Re- 
search Institute MS P 258/9 (i.e. MS P 258, ff. 27"-35"). The last digit of 
the shelf-mark is intended to indicate the place of the text in the codex, 
but the Parakhya appears to be the eighth and not the ninth. This codex’s 
text of the Parakhya is listed by MALLEDEVARU (1987:66-7), as are most, 
but not all, of the other works in the codex elsewhere in the same vol- 
ume. The following account is a modified version of my description of 
the codex in the introduction to volume 1 of the Kiranavrtti (GOODALL 
1998:lxxxix-xci): 


Palm-leaf (talipot). Nandinagari. Folios of 23” x 1/24” with 
eighteen lines to a side. The leaves were numbered (perhaps 
at the time of writing) in Kannada numerals in the left mar- 
gins of each recto and later in Arabic numerals in the spaces 
round the string holes. I have followed the latter. The first 
verse of the text of the Kirana (f.35"!!2l) directly follows the 
colophon to the Parakhya (for which this is the coder uni- 
cus) on f.35” (labelled 35B), line 11. The penultimate folio 
of the Kirana was placed after f.70 of the codex, was no- 
ticed by the second numerator to belong earlier, and was la- 
belled 39B. [...] The whole codex is beautifully written in 
a very small, neat hand and makes an old impression. The 
Parakhya is preceded in the same codex by the Tattvapra- 
kasavrtti (ff. 1-5"); the Prayogasara (ff. 5’-9"); Rauravasitra- 
sangraha [for chapters 5 to 10 and for half of chapter 4 of which 
this is the codex unicus] (ff. 97!6l-127!!5l). Svayambhuvasitra- 
sangraha [for which this is the only South Indian manuscript 
‘known to me in which all twenty-three chapters appear in the 


XCV1 Parakhyatantra 


correct order and unmixed with other material] (ff. 127 115)_ 
18"l'6]). Sardhatrisatikalottara (ff. 18-22"); Kalajriana (f. 22”); 
and the Mrgendrottara (= Mrgendra] (ff. 23-27" [the text on 
f.23 does not follow on from that on f.22]). The Parakhya is 
followed in the same codex by the chapters 1-11 and 58-9 (the 
last two being numbered 59 and 60 respectively) of the Kirana 
(ff. 35"-39"): by the Pauskara (ff. 39"-48); Goraksaviracita- 
prabodha (ff. 48-50") and Yogadipika (ff. 527-53"). On f. 54” 
appears the colophon iti Srimahadevaviracite astamgayogah 
kartikeyasamvadah muktisopanasastram samaptam. Then 
follows the first adhikara of Abhinavagupta’s Isvarapratyabhi- 
jnakarikavimarsini (ff.54"-71"). The last colophon of that 
work is that of the seventh ahnika. F.71” is blank. I could not 
identify what text the last folios, 72-76", transmit. I noticed 
only one colophon-like phrase: iti jainasamayanirakaranam 
(f. 72°31), The same codex was used for its text of the latter 
chapters of the Rauravasitrasangraha (not for the first three 
and half) and cursorily described in BHATT’s edition of the 
Raurava (p.xviii and p.174). It was not used by FILLIOZAT 
for his edition of the Svayambhuvasitrasangraha. The bulk 
of M”’s readings of the Kirana probably coincide more nearly 
with the conjectured text of Ramakantha than those of any 
other independent manuscript of the mula. The text of the 
two patalas it transmits of the yogapada is written without 
break after that of the vidyapada. 


The work called Kalajnana transmitted on f. 22”, of which only the first 
five and a half chapters are given, is an unpublished hundred-verse re- 
cension of the Kalottara that is also transmitted in Nepal,}*° but is un- 
mentioned in BHATT’s list of known recensions./*! Although the text 


1501 is transmitted, for example, immediately following the recension in fifty verses, 
the Jndnapancasika, on ff.4’—-9” (in the first foliation) of NAK MS 5-4632, NGMPP 
Reel No. B 118/7. As I have observed (GOODALL 1998:xc, fn. 184), the names Kalajnana 
and K@lottara are used interchangeably in the colophons of the Nepalese manuscripts 
of the non-eclectic recensions. Here too in M” the name Kalajnana occurs in the 
colophons of chapters 3-5, but Kalottara in that of chapter 2 (f. 22° (71), 

51 By ATT’s list, given on p. xlviii of his upodghata to his edition of the Sardhatrigati- 
kalottara, omits also the Jnanapancasikaé (mentioned in the previous footnote) and the 
SardhaSatika recension, which is transmitted on ff.1°—-6" (in the second foliation) of 
NAK MS 5-4632, NGMPP Reel No. B 118/7. 


Sources for the constitution of the text XCViil 


breaks off in the middle, no folio appears to be missing: the Roman and 
the Kannada foliations (the latter only partially visible here) tally for the 
preceding and following folios, and some blank space has been left at the 
end of the last line of f.22”, as though to indicate that the remainder of 
the text had been missing also in the scribe’s exemplar. The text of the 
Mrgendrottara (=Mrgendra) begins straight away at the top of f. 23". It 
ends (with the colophon iti srimrgendrottare yogapadah samaptah) at the 
end of line 15 of f.27". The manuscript in fact transmits only the vidya- 
pada and the yogapada. The kriyapada and caryapada are not given. 
Thus for a number of texts—the Mrgendra, the Kirana, the Parakhya, 
and probably the Rauravasitrasangraha—the scribe has omitted chap- 
ters. In each case he appears to have retained the parts that focus on 
doctrine and yoga and to have omitted ritual prescriptions. From the 
Kirana, as we have seen, he has copied only chapters 1-11, in other words 
all of what Ramakantha treats as the vidyapada with the exception of 
the twelfth chapter, and 58-9, the two chapters that treat yoga. Of the 
Parakhya, the first six chapters and the last two (chapters 14 and 15) have 
been selected. I have suggested before (GOODALL 1998:xl, fn. 92) that 
M’’s text of the Rauravasitrasangraha may be incomplete, but I failed 
to mention some evidence that bears upon this assumption: BHATT’s ap- 
paratus records that the chapters numbered 7-10 in the edition are not 
so numbered in the manuscript: three are not numbered at all, and the 
eighth he reports as being numbered 10 in M”. In fact even the eighth 
chapter does not appear to be numbered in M”.!°? Since, as we have 
seen, the scribe of M” has omitted chapters of other tantras copied in 
the same codex, it is possible that he might have done the same when 
transmitting the Rauravasitrasangraha. As with the Kirana, Mrgendra, 
and Parakhya, he may well deliberately have dropped passages that were 
not of interest to him. 

Since I have been able to find no other manuscript of the Parakhya, 
excepting its apographs, which will be described below, and since MY” 
is therefore our only source (directly or indirectly) for almost all of the 
text, some more remarks about its script and scribal practices are called 
for than I offered in the introduction to the Kiranavrtti. Unlike in some 


152The colophon to the seventh chapter of Mysore MS B 776, the partial apograph 
of M” that covers the Rauravasiitrasangraha, ends with dharanapatalo dagah, which 
has been corrected to dharanapatalah (f.38"), and this is perhaps the source of the 
confusion. 


XCViii Parakhyatantra 


styles of South Indian Nandinagari, a medial short i is notated as in Deva- 
nagari, that is to say it does not lack the vertical bar that precedes the 
letter to which it is attached (contrast, e.g., R” in which the Kiranavrtti 
is transmitted). This bar in M”, however, is often hooked slightly to the 
right towards its bottom. I mention this detail because it explains why 
I can sometimes with some confidence transcribe a medial i (rather than 
a medial a, o or au belonging to the preceding aksara) in portions where 
the tops of the aksaras are invisible. 

The scribe’s convention for an initial r appears to have a form that 
could be interpreted as rr (or perhaps he consistently wrote rr, even where 
initial r is required).!°> The reader should therefore bear in mind that 
wherever I have transcribed r, this could be interpreted as rr, and vice 
versa. The scribe invariably writes jh for jjh, a habit comparable to that 
of many other scribes of always writing either cha or ccha, regardless of 
which is required. The scribe has marked corrections variously: a single 
aksara is cancelled by a superscript dot (not a small circle, as is used 
for an anusvara or to make up a visarga); a long portion of text can be 
deleted by being enclosed in round brackets or encircled!*4 and, in some 
cases, also drawn through with a horizontal line; part of an aksara (e.g. 
the r of a pra) can be deleted by dense scribbling over it. It appears that 
all the corrections have been executed by the scribe himself. 


Antecedents 


There are a number of indications that there may have been at some 
point in the transmission of the text down to M” an intermediary in 
Grantha script: the confusion of ha and bha (in 1:28d, 4:77a, 4:83a, 
4:102a, 4:164b?, 5:28c, 5:92a, 6:69c, 14:10a); the occasional confusion of 
kr and k@i (in 3:28c, 5:37c);!°° the confusion of va and pa (e.g. in 2:105b, 
2:115c, 4:47d, 4:104d, 4:107c, 4:118d, 4:120d, 4:152b, 5:14d, 5:27c, 5:44a, 
5:95d, 5:109b, 5:114c, 5:149a, 6:36b, 6:43d, 14:27d, 14:37b, 14:58b, 14:98d, 
15:1c, 15:27d, 15:37b); the confusion of dha and ya (e.g. in 4:166b and 
5:137d); the confusion of ta and na in 4:54c; the confusion of ca and pa 


1©3 Occasionally, as in 3:5a, 5:129b and 5:134c, B has actually transcribed rr. 

1°4This is the practice referred to in Naisadhiyacarita 1:11. 

*5There are various styles of writing both of these in Grantha (see GOODALL and 
VASUDEVA, forthcoming), and a graph that in one Grantha hand represents a kii may 
in another represent a kr (and vice versa). 


Sources for the constitution of the text XCiX 


in 4:120a; the confusion of ta and ka in 1:17f, 4:92f and 5:145d; the con- 
fusion of pa and ba in 1:32a and 5:124c; the confusion of rtha and rdha 
in 4:67c; and the confusion of ndha (consistently represented by mdha 
in M”) and ddha (in 1:12b, 2:5a, 2:57d,}°© 4:14d, 4:3la, 4:48a, 4:149c, 
4:156c, 4:165c, 4:170d, 14:21a, and 14:23c). These are all confusions that 
are palaeographically possible when copying from a Grantha exemplar. 
The confusion between pa and ba and that between rtha and rdha could 
also be the result of failure to distinguish voiced and unvoiced stops (par- 
ticularly when they are medial) in Tamilian pronunciation.}°’ To the 
category of phonetic mistakes possible for Tamil-speakers (i.e. those who 
principally use Grantha script) belong the occasional confusions between 
ka and ga, e.g. in 4:46b!°® and 14:53b, between ¢ and d (in 5:27b), be- 
tween t and d (in 2:115d),!°9 between pa and bha (in 5:91a), and between 
tth and ddh (in 4:133d), (these four being examples of confusion between 
voiced and unvoiced stops of the same varga), as well as instances of con- 
fusion between aspirated and unaspirated stops of the same varga, e.g. 
da for dha in 4:82a, 15:10c, and perhaps 5:18d. The writing of iyasa for 
yiyasa in 4:59c would also be a mistake typical of a Tamil-speaker, since 
an initial palatal vowel is commonly pronounced prefaced by a y; but this 
Southern tendency is not exclusive to Tamil speakers. 

There are also confusions in M” that, though they might result from 
copying a Grantha exemplar, are also possible results of copying from 
other scripts: the confusion of ca and va in 4:65c. 

And there are also occasional confusions that are not likely to have 
resulted from a Grantha exemplar but that might suggest an intermediary 
in an early Northern script or Sarada or in the script of M” itself: con- 
fusion between pa and ya (4:44a, 6:36b); ta and bha (4:4d, 4:21d, 4:32a, 
4:106b); confusion of nna with tra in 15:22d. Apart from these, there are 
of course plenty of errors that do not suggest the existence of intermedi- 


‘58Tn this instance (of maddhanat for manthana) ntha was probably first mistaken for 
ndha. 

1577 do not mean to imply that we must assume, as some do in similar cases, that the 
Parakhya must have been dictated at some point in the transmission that reached M”. 
Phonetic similarities obviously colour the way we write down unspoken thoughts: are 
there English-speakers who have never written ‘there’ for ‘their’, or ‘hear’ for ‘here’? 

‘58FEmending ga to ka in this instance may not be strictly necessary. But note that it 
is possible that one or two of the relatively large number of compounds ending in -ga 
elsewhere (see p. lxxxi above) were originally compounds ending in -ka. 

'S9This instance belongs to a special category: see fn. 206 on p. 200 below. 


Cc Parakhyatantra 


aries in any particular script, a number of which will have had nothing 
to do with confusion about the shapes of letters or with local vagaries in 
pronunciation. 


Deviant orthography 


By comparison with other South Indian manuscripts that I have studied, 
this codex appears to be the work of a remarkably careful and accurate 
scribe with remarkably careful and accurate exemplars before him. Many 
of my emendations to the text are no more than corrections of what 
the scribe would probably have regarded as possible orthographies rather 
than as errors: for example, he not uncommonly omits a visarga before 
a ks, sy, sv and other initial sibilants in ligature with semi-vowels or 
nasals—a practice so common among South Indian scribes that it should 
indeed perhaps be classed as a variant orthography,!™ along with the 
permitted omission of the visarga before an initial sibilant in ligature with 
an unvoiced stop (cf. GOODALL 1998:236, fn. 228). It is possible that a 
certain confusion about whether or not omitting the visarga before other 
unvoiced stops in ligature with semi-vowels is permissible may account 
for occasional instances where a visarga is omitted before, e.g., a pra, 
or, as it seems, erroneously supplied before one.!®! Another relatively 
common and easily detected error is the degemination of what should 
be doubled consonants when in ligature with semi-vowels or nasals (e.g. 
1:15d, 2:114a, 4:4b, 4:33c, 4:51a, 4:60d, 4:64a, 4:65a, 4:66b, 4:66c, 4:79b, 
4:95b, 4:114cd, 4:124a, 5:4b, 5:9b, 5:24b, 5:57c, 5:111c, 6:22b, 14:94d) or 
of doubled consonants after a long vowel, e.g. in 2:34b, 2:lllc, 2:113a, 
4:65d, 4:85a, 4:102c, 4:126d, 6:17c, 14:2d, 14:5a, 15:15b.!®? Instances of 
the first of these types of degemination have been corrected silently in 
the case of certain words, since degemination of this kind would probably 
also have been regarded as acceptable orthography by the scribe. By 
this I mean that he would have regarded both budhya and buddhya as 
possible orthographies (though the first is arguably not), just as he would 
have seen no difference between smaryate and smaryyate (which really are 


1606 g. in 2:103c, 2:119b, 3:18c, 3:64a, 4:38c, 4:92f, 4:126cd, 4:133ab, 5:26a, 5:50b, 
5:83a, 5:88e, 5:119a, 5:130a, 5:149b, 5:162c, 6:3a, 6:15c, 6:22a, 6:36a, 6:40c, 14:18b, 
15:10b, 15:64b. 

16le ge, 2:119c, 3:26d, 4:20f, 4:140a, 5:28b, 5:108a. 

162 Many of these concern the past-participle ujjhita at the end of a compound. 


Sources for the constitution of the text ci 


both correct orthographies). But I have not silently corrected instances of 
degemination at the juncture of two words in a compound. By this I mean 
that the correction, for example, of digrahaih in 5:111d to diggrahaih is 
signalled in the apparatus. 


Transcription 


I transcribed by hand M”’s text of the Parakhya from the original in the 
summer of 1996, and returned to Mysore 'to collate my typed up tran- 
scriptions against the manuscript in autumn 1997 (when fever prevented 
me) and again for a week in September 1998, but unexpected holidays 
meant that I had time only to collate chapters 2-6 and 14 against M” 
and chapters 14 and 15 against M”’s partial apograph MS B 811. I re 
turned in October 1999 and checked chapters 1 and 15 against M”, and 
again in October 2001 to read the other partial apograph, MS B 785, 
as well as to check various other small points throughout the text about 
which I had suspicions. Some errors will, of course, still not have been 
eradicated. 


Condition 


The leaves of the codex are strung through their right-hand string-holes 
only. All M’’s leaves of the Parakhya were correctly ordered and correctly 
situated in the codex when I first transcribed the text in 1996, but ff. 27 
and 35 were broken in two by a vertical break through the centre of the 
left-hand string hole and f. 31 was broken in two by a vertical break about 
1.5cm to the left of its centre. When I collated my transcriptions against 
the manuscript in 1998 I found the broken pieces not attached by the 
string were scattered (together with a number of other fragments now 
broken off from other leaves) through the codex. The leaves transmitting 
the Parakhya (ff. 27-35) were still internally correctly ordered in 1998, 
but these leaves had been removed and replaced in the codex in such a 
way that f.27 was now next to f.36 and f. 35 next to f.26. In one or two 
places (parts of) some more aksaras had been lost at the edges of leaves. 


cil Parakhyatantra 


Apographs 


MS B 811 (catalogued by MALLEDEVARU 1987:66 and Appendix I, p. 92) 
is an apograph of M” covering only chapters 14 and 15 of the Parakhya. 
It is clearly by the same hand and copied on to the same sort of pa- 
per as other partial transcripts of M”, such as those of the Prayoga- 
sara, Rauravasitrasangraha and Svayambhuvasitrasangraha (B 776) and 
of the Kirana (B 812).'® Like these, MS B 811 is written in a florid 
Kannada hand with a black fountain pen on paper water-marked ‘GOv- 
ERNMENT OF MYSORE’. Corrections have been made in copper-beech- 
coloured ink. MS B 811 comprises a single signature of 5 sheets (i.e. 
10 folios of 19.5cm x 16cm) bound in pale blue buckram. On f.1” in 
the right-hand margin is written in the copper-beech ink ‘16.5.07’, mean- 
ing presumably that it was copied on 16th May 1907 AD. A stamp on 
the cover reads ‘ORIENTAL RESEARCH INSTITUTE MYSORE FILMED...... ; 
Over the dots is written ‘FN 1093’. As in K, the colophons have been am- 
plified with obeisances to Rama and Krsna. The first speaker indication 
of Tee 14 (prakaSa uvaca) is preceded in MS B 811 by the following 
(fr =4)). 


// Sriramacandraya namah — // Subham astu Sri// atha 
parakhye yogapadah// srikrsnaya namah// 


Another apograph, clearly by the same hand, covers the first six chapters 
of the text: MS B 785. It appears to have been written on the three days 
before MS B 811, for the recto of its first folio has been dated ‘85.07’. 
Corrections have been executed in pale red. Bracketed numeration has 
been added by a later hand—perhaps that of one of the editors of the 
Saivaparibhasa, for see p.cxx below—in blue ink for the first thirty-six 
verses, as have occasional conjectured modifications. MS B 785 was once 
bound in black buckram (the binding has disintegrated) in four signatures, 
also of five sheets, and its text begins on f.151" and ends on f.189". On 
the cover it has been noted that it has been filmed (Film No. 2306). The 
beginning of the tantra is preceded by the following: 


paragamah Srisambasadasivaya namah// Subham astu// 
Srir astu// sri// atha parakhyatantre -+vidyapadah+ 
prarabhyate// sri// Sri// +jnanapadah prarabhyate+ 


1631S B 812, the apograph of M”’s text of the Kirana, is assigned the siglum K, and 
described in the introduction to volume 1 of the Kiranavrtti (GOODALL 1998:xci). 


Sources for the constitution of the text ciil 


I should perhaps have described MS B 785 before MS B 811, but I only 
saw it in October 2001. The existence of MS B 785 is not recorded 
in the same volume (MALLEDEVARU 1987) of the descriptive catalogue 
as that in which M” and B are recorded (the volume which purports 
to deal with agama) but appears under the title Paragamah in a later 
volume that purports to deal with tantra (RAJAGOPALACHAR 1990:298-9 
and: Appendix, pp. 334—-5).'®4 In case others should be interested in the 
valuable testimony of M”, it is worth recording the three other partial 
transcripts of which I am aware: MS B 783, a transcription of M”’s text 
of the Sardhatrisatikalottara; MS B 784 of the Mrgendra; and MS B 813 
of the South Indian Pauskara. 

Although they are apographs of MY, MSS B 785 and B 811 have nev- 
ertheless been collated not only for the few extra lines and aksaras they 
preserve that have since been worn away at the edges of the leaves in 
M”’, but for the whole text. It has been most useful to have somebody 
else’s transcription of the early MS, since its dense, miniature hand is 
often difficult to read. Reading it with confidence from various photo- 
graphic reproductions (the Oriental Institute of the University of Mysore 
twice kindly gave me permission to attempt to photograph M”) proved 
so unsatisfactory that, as I have related, I instead made frequent trips 
to Mysore to verify my transcription. Deviations in B’s transcription 
from my own have frequently alerted me to errors, ambiguities and prob- 
lems. But recording throughout the apparatus what the apographs read 
seemed unnecessary. For the most part B differs from MY” only in acciden- 
tal copying errors and details of orthography (homorganic nasals almost 
consistently replace anusvaras), and its readings are only relevant to the 
constitution of the text where M” is illegible, or where the scribe of B 
has consciously written something different from M” in order to emend. 
Since he does not mark his emendations, we cannot be certain where his 
deviations are willed and where accidental. My policy, therefore, has been 
to report B’s readings in the apparatus to the edition only where M” is 


1647 had long assumed that the two manuscripts in Mysore listed in the New Cata- 
logus Catalogorum (Vol. XI, p.201) under the heading Paratantragama must be M” 
and the partial apograph MS B 811; but I have recently (June 2001) been able to 
examine the Mysore catalogue there referred to (Catalogue of Sanskrit Manuscripts in 
the Government Oriental Library, Mysore, 1922, p.599) and find this is not the case. 
That catalogue does not appear anywhere to record the existence of M’, and the two 
manuscripts it lists of the Parakhya are MS B 811 and MS B 785. 


Civ Parakhyatantra 


damaged and where it seems possible to me that B has deliberately dif- 
fered. But in the apparatus to the unedited transcription of M” I have 
recorded B’s readings throughout: thus a reader who so wishes may gain 
an impression of its faithfulness to its exemplar and of the kinds of errors 
to which it is prone.!© Even in this apparatus, however, I have sup- 
pressed mention of most instances where the scribe miscopied and then 
corrected himself immediately (here the corrections are in black), as well 
as of most instances where he miscopied and corrected himself later, pre- 
sumably while checking his text against that of M’ (here the corrections 
are in copper-beech red). Nor have I recorded instances where B has, 
for example, panca for M’’s pamca, or karyam for M*’s karyyam, or 
other such purely orthographic variants. Suffice it to say that, apart from 
consistently preferring to write homorganic nasals where M” has the anu- 
svara, B generally degeminates consonants in ligature with semi-vowels 
that M” has geminated, and frequently alters a visarga before a sibilant 
to the sibilant in question. 


Transcription conventions 


The above should explain why I decided that it was not worth supply- 
ing images of the leaves of M” with this edition; I have opted instead to 
give a diplomatic transcription of the whole, as well as an edition with 
a critical apparatus incorporating the readings of testimonia. The diplo- 
matic transcription I have tried to keep as faithful as possible, deviating 
from the original only in supplying verse numeration enclosed in double 
dandas. (In the manuscript itself there is no verse numeration and each 
half-verse—with very occasional exceptions—is concluded with a single 
danda.) I have marked the line changes of the manuscript with line num- 
bers in roman numerals enclosed in round brackets. Strings of aksaras 
of which the tops have been severed I have printed widely spaced and I 
have put an entry in the apparatus to draw attention to their tops be- 
ing missing. Gaps left by the scribe I have marked with a U. Where 
the gap is large, I have often marked the number of syllables for which 


165Qccasionally it confuses between bha and ta, and between gra and sa, for exam- 
ple. Some instances of medial and final e are marked long (Kannada, unlike Sanskrit, 
distinguishes long and short e), a point without significance in itself but that perhaps 
goes some way to explaining the occasional confusions between i and 7 (which are 
distinguished from one another in the same fashion in Kannada script). 


Sources for the constitution of the text CV 


space has been left. Thus a gap left for six missing syllables is notated 
thus: ‘U[-6-]U’. Portions that are illegible or broken away have been in- 
dicated by a triple dash (---). Where I wished to indicate the number 
of syllables missing, I have added the number in square brackets: thus 
‘--[-6-]---’ indicates that six syllables are broken off or illegible. Letters 
that are enclosed between plus-signs (+...+) are letters that were added 
subsequently, sometimes in between lines or in a margin. ‘X’s are used 
to bracket text that has been written and then in some way cancelled 
(x... x). 


Other editorial conventions 


The apparatus is divided into three registers. On a page where all three 
registers are present, the uppermost register records testimonia and par- 
allels; the middle register records lacunae or passages where the tops of 
aksaras are damaged in the manuscript; and the bottom register records 
the variants. The apparatus is fully positive. Each entry is preceded by 
the verse number and pada letter (a, b, c and d indicate padas 1, 2, 3, 
and 4 respectively). There follows the lemma, printed exactly as it is 
printed in the teztus receptus, then a lemma sign: ]. After this appears 
the siglum (or sigla) of the source (or sources) that transmits the tez- 
tus receptus, then the variants, separated from what precedes them and 
from each other by semi-colons, and each marked with the sigla of the 
sources that transmit them. A siglum with superscript ac (ante correc- 
tionem) marks the reading of a manuscript before correction (e.g. M***); 
a siglum with a superscript pc (post correctionem) marks the reading of 
a manuscript after correction (e.g. B’*). When a reading is unmetrical, 
this is recorded after the siglum of the source that transmits it. 

No key is given for the abbreviations used in the bottom register of 
apparatus for the titles of the texts from which testimonia are drawn, 
for they have all been formed in the same way from the initial syllables 
of the principal parts of the names: thus SvaU stands for Svacchanda- 
tantroddyota, JnaRa for Jnanaratnavali, SiDi for Siddhantadipika, etc. 
(A glance above at the register that records the testimonia should clear 
up any possible doubt.) 

Repairs to the text about which I feel rather little doubt, typically 
smal] and obvious corrections of common scribal errors, are marked em. 


cvi Parakhyatantra 


(emendation); bolder conjectures are marked conj. (conjecture). The dif- 
ference is of course subjective. It could be argued that in a fully positive 
apparatus there should be no need to signal where I have proposed im- 
provements to the text, but these labels do make it less easy for the reader 
to overlook the fact that all transmitted readings have been rejected and 
they enable me to give some indication of how confident I feel about each 
conjectural restitution. The suggested conjectures of others that have 
been accepted are attributed; conjectures that I have considered and not 
accepted (whether my own or those of others) are occasionally referred to 
in the annotation to the translation, but they are not recorded in the ap- 
paratus. Double angled brackets in the teztus receptus («...>>) enclose 
‘free’ diagnostic conjectures, that is to say conjectures made where the 
transmission is lacunose and that are therefore based rather on diagnosis 
of what the context appears to require than on transmitted aksaras. 

The verse numeration is to some extent arbitrary: for the most part 
the text is summarily divided up into four-pada units. Occasionally con- 
siderations of sense led me to introduce some six-pada verse; reflection at 
the last stages of editing often prompted me to introduce others, but I 
resisted doing so because the required alterations would have cost hours 
of extra work (changing the numeration of whole chapters in the edition, 
diplomatic transcription, pada-index and translation) and increased the 
risk of further errors: the effort and risk seemed not commensurate with 
the gain. 


Independent testimonia 


Some remarks must be made about the use of testimonia. The eight 
chapters that M” transmits comprise 1839 half-verses;!©© for 357 of these 
(a little less than one fifth) testimonia, in the form of quotations and 
borrowings in other works, have been traced. For tracing these, my start- 
ing point was the Luptagamasangraha of Gopinath KAVIRAJA (1970) and 
Vrajavallabha DVIVEDI (1983). The card-index held in the French Insti- 
tute of Pondicherry!®’ enabled me to locate many more in some published 


166Including the five not actually transmitted in M” but that are found in testimonia 
and have been judged to fit into M”’s text, namely 4:101cd, 4:105cd, and 5:78c—79. 

187This useful tool, compiled over many years principally by Messrs. R. SUBRAMANIAM 
and SAMBANDHAN of the IFP, contains an index of topics (principally relating to kriya), 
a half-verse index of a wide range of tantric works, and a small index of quotations in 


Sources for the constitution of the text cvii 


South Indian works, and Professor SANDERSON kindly referred me to yet 
others. The remainder, perhaps a half of those identified, I have come 
across gradually over the last few years. There are doubtless more to be 
found. 

Almost all the quotations of portions of the text can be regarded as 
independent testimonies to its wording, since they have been transmitted 
independently in texts with entirely different transmissional histories. It 
should be noted, however, that there is one exception: quotations in the 
Saivaparibhasa derive from the edition prepared in Mysore, where the 
editors evidently made use of M” or of MS B 785 (see p.cxx below). 
Many of the South Indian texts in which I have located quotations from 
the Parakhya are sadly themselves so poorly transmitted that their value 
as testimonia is not great. The editions of the Sataratnollekhini and Isana- 
Sivagurudevapaddhati, for example, are often garbled and evidently rest 
on poor manuscript evidence. But many other texts (e.g. the Siddhanta- 
samuccaya, the Sivajfanasiddhisvapaksadrstantasangraha, the works of 
Jnanaprakasa, etc.) are yet worse served in that they have never been 
edited. 

A large number of the later (typically sixteenth: and seventeenth- 
century) Saiddhantika works are not just very poorly transmitted, they 
provide no meaningful context for most of their quotations, since they 
take the form of strings of quotations, often with no interconnecting 
material. Into this category fall the Nanavaranavilakkattarumpatavi- 
vekam, the * Diksadarga, the *Sivajfanasiddhisvapaksadrstantasangraha, 
the *Sivagamadimahatmyasangraha, the Saivagamaparibhasamadijari, 
the *Saivasiddhantasangraha, the Sakalagamasarasangraha, and the Siva- 
yogaratna. 168 

Constraints of time and energy have held me back from the vast task 
of looking at all the manuscripts accessible to me of all the texts from 
which I draw testimonia. I know this to be a deficiency; but since the 
task would really be huge, I hope I shall be forgiven. 

Apart from quotations, there is one other mportant source of testimo- 


predominantly South Indian Saiddhantika works arranged by the title of the work to 
which they are attributed. 

168The composite character of this text appears not to have been noticed by its editor 
and translator Tara MICHAEL. A cursory search enabled me to find just less than a 
half of the verses that make up its first and principal section in other sources, among 
which the Sarvajndnottara and the Devikdlottara appear to be the most quoted. 


CViii Parakhyatantra 


nia: the eighth chapter of the South Indian Pauskara, half of which is, I 
believe, drawn from the Parakhya. This has to be used with some caution, 
because its redactor appears to have introduced clarificatory modifications 
here and there; but it is of immense use because two commentaries of it 
survive: the Pauskarabhasya of Umapati and the unpublished Pauskara- 
vrtti of JnanaprakaSa, of the last part of which I have made a prelim- 
inary edition using the three transcripts in the IFP and a manuscript 
from Hoshiarpur. In the annotations to my translation I have quoted 
extensively from these two works, and other commentarial material that 
expounds verses in the Parakhya. 

Highly valued both for their help in constituting the text and for 
the proof they afford of the relative antiquity of the text are the quota- 
tions in tenth-century Kashmirian works: Ksemaraja in his Svacchanda- 
tantroddyota quotes seventy-four half-verses from the Parakhya which 
are to be found in M”’s text of chapter 5; Ramakantha quotes 4:45c—46b 
in his Matangavrtti ad vidyapada 12:25-27b, pp. 347-8; and Narayana- 
kantha quotes 4:35ab ad Mrgendravidyapada 11:11, p.281 and quotes 
4:19abc!®? ad Mrgendra 2:7, p.59. The last of these is significant because 
Nardyanakantha there attributes the quotation to the Saurabheya, which 
is said, e.g., in Kirana 10:27d, to be an alternative name for the Parakhya. 
(Only one other exegete, Ksemaraja [ad Netratantra 13:12ab], uses this 
name,!’° but in this instance the verse quoted is not to be found in what 
M’ transmits.) 

I give below a complete list of the works in which quotations from the 
Parakhya have been traced to date. Unless otherwise stated all quotations 
are attributed. Verses that appear in Appendix I are attributed to the 
Parakhya, but not found in the text that M” transmits. For ease of refer- 
ence these verses have been roughly grouped by theme and consecutively 
numbered. Thus Appendix I is broken up as follows: 


A:1-8 on the brahmamantras 
B:9-40 on snana 
C:41-55 on caste and diksa 
D:56-77 on prayascitta 
E:78-88 on creation and dissolution 
189Tn the Devakottai edition (p.67) four padas are given. 


1797 discount the instance in the Sarvadarsanasangraha (p. 189), since that is evidently 
part of a block lifted from the passage of the Mrgendravrtti just referred to. 


Sources for the constitution of the text Clx 


F:89-91 on mudras 

G:92-4 on gurus 

H:95-110 on miscellaneous matters of ritual 
J:111-14 on pranayama 

K:115—-20 on karman 

L:121-47 miscellaneous 

M:1-3 misattributions to the Parakhya!”! 


Asterisked works are unpublished to date. Of some of the less well-known 
of the works I have made a few remarks about dating, provenance, and 
transmission. 


*Atmarthapijapaddhati probably by the sixteenth-century author 
Vedajnana II (IFP MSS T. 282, T.321, T.323, T.371 T.795): Ap- 
pendix I, verses B:12, 16-17, B:22-4, B:26-27b, 30ab, B:37, B:38- 
40, H:110, L:132-4. As DAGENS’ brief account of the text reveals 
(1979:7-9), the attribution and the transmission of the work are not 
unproblematic. The various transcripts deviate from one another 
enormously; in very many places quotations found in one transcript 
are not in the others. 


Iganasivagurudevapaddhati of Isanagiva: 1:5cd, 1:15, 4:14, 4:15cd and 
Appendix I, verses G:93, H:99, H:108, L:127. This is an eclec- 
tic, literary Saiva ‘manual’ of ritual (it is styled Tantrapaddhati 
in 1.1:1) written principally in verse (in a range of metres) that 
quotes plentifully from a wide range of sources but predominantly 
from early Siddhantatantras and related Saiddhantika works. The 
date and place of its composition are disputed; but it is transmit- 
ted solely in Kerala, as are certain of the works it quotes (e.g. the 
Prayogamainjari and a Narayaniya), and so may well have been com- 
posed there.!’* Its author quotes from the works of Somagambhu, 
Ramakantha, Bhoja, and Narayanakantha, but not from the influ- 
ential Saiddhantika writings of the 12th-century South Indian ex- 
egete AghoraSiva, and from this we might be led to conclude that 


1710 course many of the other verses in this appendix may have been misattributed, 
but these three quotations have clearly been mistakenly ascribed. 

‘72The quotation (which I have not traced) ascribed to Isdinagurudeva in Ananta- 
Sambhu’s commentary on the last verse of the yogapada of the Siddhantasaravali (verse 
125, BGOML XIX.1, p. 74) may be a non-Keralan quotation from this paddhati. 


CX 


Parakhyatantra 


he could not have written much later than that Aghorasiva; but 
he does refer to some Siddhantas of which AghoraSiva seems igno- 
rant and of which the versions known to survive today appear to 
be relatively late South Indian redactions (e.g. Karana, Ajita). For 
further discussion of the author and his work, see UNNI 1987. The 
transmission of the text is evidently poor, for much in the edition 
(of T. GANAPATI SASTRI) is uninterpretably corrupt. 


*Kiranavivrti of Tryambakasambhu (IFP T.1102 and IFP 47658): 


4:24cd, 4:165. This unpublished commentary on the Kirana (surviv- 
ing only on chapters 1-6) is of uncertain date and provenance. As I 
have pointed out in my brief characterisation of this text (GOODALL 
1998:cvii-cix), its author was late enough to know and quote from 
Ksemaraja’s Svacchandatantroddyota, but appears to have been 
ignorant of many important Saiddhantika writings (including, re 
markably, those of Ramakantha II). The work is not well transmit- 
ted. This Tryambakasambhu is certainly not to be identified with 
the late twelfth-century Trilocanasiva who wrote the Somasambhu- 
paddhatitika, among other works.!79 


Kriyakramadyotika of Aghorasiva. Appendix I.C:53. The text in 


question is that published with Nirmalamani’s commentary, the 
Prabhavyakhya. Suspicion about the authorship of the various 
other texts published as parts of the Kriyakramadyotika by the 
South Indian Archaka Association has been expressed by GOODALL 
1998:xiii—xvii, fn. 24, and independently by ISHIMATSU 2000:236. 


*Kriyakramadyotikavyakhya of Sadasiva (IFP MS T. 962, pp. 1-56 


(third numeration]): Appendix I.F:89-91. 


*Jnanaratnavali of Jianasambhu (the author of the Sivapijastava) as 


transmitted in IFP T.231 and Madras GOML MS R 14898, some of 
whose quotations are shared with a manuscript also purporting to 
transmit the Jnanaratnaval but that appears to be a manual based 
upon it: IFP T.106, pp.13-60:'4 2:84c-85b, Appendix I, verses 
B:9-20, B:22-25, D:56—77, L:132-4. This text is a large manual, 


173For a reasoned discussion of which works did belong and which may have belonged 


to that Trilocanasiva’s ceuvre, see GOODALL 2000:208-14. 
174See GOODALL 2000:209, fn. 11. 


Sources for the constitution of the text cxi 


rich in quotations, by a South Indian brahmin living in Benares!’® 
who was, along with the celebrated twelfth-century Saiddhantika 
Aghorasiva, a guru of Trilocanasiva,!”® and who therefore also be- 
longed to the twelfth century. Although of great interest, the text 
is, as BRUNNER has pointed out (ibid.), poorly transmitted. But 
now that further sources have come to light some scholar may feel 
encouraged to respond to BRUNNER’s exhortation (1998:lvi) to edit 
it. The uncatalogued manuscript in the GOML in: Madras is in 
fact very closely related to the previously known manuscript IFP 
MS T.231: the IFP transcript is evidently an apograph of it and 
bears, without explanation, its library number (R 14898) on its 
cover. Shortly before going to press, I became aware of another cor- 
rupt but much less closely related source in the Oriental Research 
Institute in Mysore: MS P. 3801, a palm-leaf manuscript in a cur- 
sive Nandinagari hand that is not easy to decipher. This preserves 
more of the beginning of the work.!’’ An editor would also derive 
much help from testimonia, for the text is very often borrowed from 
and quoted in later paddhati literature.!”° 


Nanavaranavilakkattarumpatavivékam of Velliyambalavanasuva- 
mikal: 1:73c-75b, 2:lab, 2:2-3b, 2:29 (attributed to Nisvasa), 
2:64c-65b, 2:71c-73b, 4:86-7, 4:95c-96b, 4:97ab, 4:98ab, 4:99ab, 
4:100ab, 5:67cd, and Appendix I, verses E:78-81, E:82, E:83-4, 


178See GOODALL 2000:212, fn. 22 (referring to information provided by Professor 
SANDERSON). 

176See GOODALL 2000:209-11. For confirmation of the long-known twelfth-century 
dating of Aghorasiva see GOODALL 1998:xiii-xvii. 

177 Another hitherto unmentioned source is IFP RE 39946, a palm-leaf MS in Grantha 
script. This deviates very considerably from the Mysore MS in the portions I have 
checked. 

178 The relation of this text to the apparently lost Balajnanaratnavali (or Balaratna- 
vali), to which we find references in the same literature (e.g. Sivadiksavidhivyakhyana 
T. 542, pp. 41, 43) is uncertain. The two works are mentioned together in a versified 
list of paddhatis at the beginning of the Atmarthapijapaddhati in such a way as to 
imply that they were by different authors (T. 323, p. 2): 

k]pta jnanaSivena tatra guruna Srijnanaratnavali 
jnanakhyadimaSankarena ca krta sa balaratnavali 
anyah somasivena sadhu racitah satkarmakandakramo 
’py uttungena Sivena paddhatir iyam namanukila krta. 


e racitah sat° |] conj.; racitaé sat° MS. 


cxii Parakhyatantra 


E:87-8, L:126, L:129. This is a voluminous Saiddhantika work in 
Tamil, full of Sanskrit and Tamil quotations, that comments on 
the Nanavaranavilakkam (a work that is in turn in some sense 
a commentary on the Civananacittiyar) of Kurunanacampanta- 
paramacariyar, the sixteenth-century founder of the Saiva matha 
of Dharmapuram (Tanjore district).!79 According to the intro- 
duction (p.15), Velliyambalavanasuvamikal took Sivadiksa and 
Saivasannyasa under the fourth head of the same matha, and took 
jnanadtksa under the fifth.1®° 


Tattvatrayanirnayavrtti of AghoraSiva: 2:42ab (without attribution), 
2:99ab (without attribution). 


Tattvaprakasavrtti of Aghorasiva: 2:99ab (without attribution), 
6:6ab. 


Tantraloka of Abhinavagupta: Appendix I.L:125. The apparent absence 
of quotations of the text in the Tantralokaviveka (and of an iden- 
tification here of Abhinavagupta’s quotation) suggests to me that 
Jayaratha may not have had access to the Parakhya. 


Diksadarga of Vedajnana II (IFP MSS T. 76, T. 153, T. 279): Appendix 
I, verses C:41-44b, 45-8, 54-5, G:94, H:103 and 104. This is char- 
acterised by BRUNNER (1977:liii) as 


‘7®Publications of the Dharmapuram Adhinam often include a ‘short life of Guru- 
gnanasambandha’ (e.g. MUDALIAR 1976:xxi-xxiv) in which a late sixteenth-century 
date is proposed (p. xxiii): 


An inscription of Krishna Maharaya Ayyan, King of Tanjore and daugh- 
ter’s son of Krishnadeva Raya during the times of Sadasiva Maharaya ap- 
pointed Tiruvarur Gnanaprakasa Pandaram as the Superintendent of the 
DEVADANAS OF SIKKI, VADAKUDI, ODACHERI etc. This order bears a date 
equal to 1561 AD. A stanza in the MAZHUVADI PURANA written by Ka- 
malai Gnanaprakasa records the date of the composition as Salivahana 
Saka 1488 (equal to 1566 AD). These two authorities prove that Gurugnana- 
sambandha lived about 390 years ago (in the second half of the sixteenth 
century). 


1897¢ is evident that the conception of initiation here is not the classical one, nor is 
the hierarchy of initiations classical. For the movement away from an indispensable 
salvific ritual of initiation as the central point of the Saiva Siddhanta, see GOODALL 
forthcoming B, in which Umapati’s treatment of the topic is briefly discussed, and see 
also DEVASENAPATHI 1966:238ff. 


Sources for the constitution of the text Cxili 


un assemblage de citations d’origines diverses, groupées 
en chapitres logiquement ordonnés, mais liées entre elles 
par un commentaire insignifiant. L’ouvrage aurait pu 
étre trés précieux pour les nombreux extraits qu’il donne 
de textes totalement ou partiellement perdu, s’il n’était 
désespérément corrompu, et ceci dans tous les mss. qu’on 
en connait. 


DAGENS (1979:6-14) has discussed the ceuvre of Vedajnana II and 
of his guru, Vedajnana I, and established that they both lived in 
the sixteenth century, the latter having died in 1563 or 1564. The 
.transmission of the work is indeed (pace DAGENS 1979:9) atrocious. 


Nadakarikavrtti of Aghorasiva: 6:14ab. 


*Nityadisangrahabhidhanapaddhati of Taksakavarta (Sarada MS: 
Bodleian MS Stein Or.d.43): Appendix I.A:1-8.!8! This is a ‘man- 
ual’ of Saiva (not exclusively Saiddhantika) ritual from the Kashmir 
valley preserved in only one Kashmirian manuscript. It contains 
many lengthy quotations from a wide range of tantras. 


Netroddyota of Ksemaraja: Appendix I.L:124. 


Pauskaragama (none attributed, all in chapter 8): 2:83-86b, 3:7, 3:9- 
10, 6:5c-11 (differently ordered), 6:13c-19, 6:22-3, 6:28c—29b. For 
the lateness of this (probably South Indian) tantra, see GOODALL 
1998:xliii-xlv. All its borrowings from the Parakhya are in its 
eighth and final chapter, which (this and other) evidence suggests 
may be a secondary interpolation (see fn. 654 on p.326, drawn 
from GOODALL 2001a:330). In a number of cases the two commen- 
taries (the unpublished Pauskaravrtti of the Ceylonese Jianapra- 
kasa (IFP MSS T. 110, T. 180, and T. 188, Hoshiarpur MS 4385] and 
the Pauskarabhasya of Umapati (not the fourteenth-century author 
of Tamil Saiddhantika works, for see COLAS-CHAUHAN 2002:305-6) 
support different readings. Such differences have been recorded in 
my apparatus. 


1811 am grateful to Professor SANDERSON (letter of 2.ix.1996) for drawing my attention 
to this passage. 


CXiV Parakhyatantra 


*Pratisthavidhi of a Candrasekharabhattaraka (IFP MS _ T.370, 
pp. 246-302): Appendix I, verses C:41-44b and C:45. It may 
not be right to refer to this section of IFP MS T.370 as a 
Pratisthavidhi. The reason for doing so is that after a colophon 
to the antyestividhi of Aghorasiva’s Kriyakramadyotika on p. 246, 
there follows more manual material, full of quotations, in which 
the first colophon appears to be that on pp. 299-300, which 
reads: iti Srimatkamalalayapuranivasicandrasekharabhattaraka- 
Sisya-tannamadharina aghorasivadesikakriyamanaritim avalambya 
pratisthavidhi(h] krtah. 


Prabhavyakhya of Nirmalamani (a commentary on Aghorasiva’s 
Kriyakramadyotika): 2:78abc, 14:78ab, and Appendix I, verses 
A:8b, B:16c-17b, B:32-6, C:44c-f, C:49, H:96—-8, H:110, L:130. 


*Bhavacuidamani of Vidyakantha II (Kashmirian Nagar: MS: Jammu 
MS 5291): Appendix I, verses H:107, L:121-2, L:135-8. This 
is a commentary by Ramakantha II’s pupil on a pratisthatantra 
called the Mayasangraha. For further remarks about this work see 
GOODALL 1998:xi-xiii. The sole surviving manuscript is full of cor- 
ruption. 


Bhogakarikavrtti of Aghorasiva: Appendix I.L:123. 
Matangavrtti of Ramakantha: 4:45c-46b. 


*Mrgendrapaddhatitika of Vaktrasambhu (IFP T. 1021): Appendix I, 
verses A:8a-d, C:41, C:50—-1, H:100. This is a commentary on a pad- 
dhati attributed to Aghorasiva that bases itself on the Mrgendra. 
I know of only one source for the text, and it is far from be- 
ing free of error. Along with Trilocanasiva (see below s.v. Soma- 
Sambhupaddhatitika), Vaktrasambhu appears to have been a pupil 
of Aghorasiva and so to have belonged to the late twelfth century. !82 


Mrgendravrtti of Narayanakantha: 4:19abc, 4:35ab and Appendix I, 
verses H:105, H:106. 


182See GOODALL 2000:209-10, but for the author’s name see also fn. 97 on p. lix above. 
For a brief characterisation of the text see BRUNNER 1985:xxiv. 


Sources for the constitution of the text CXV 


Mrgendravrttidipika of Aghorasiva: 1:56d, 2:29-30d, 2:42ab, 2:43c- 
44c, 2:79a, 2:99ab (without attribution), 4:79ab, 4:8lab, 4:112ab, 
5:67cd, 5:155d, Appendix I.C:54ab (without attribution). 


Ratnatrayollekhini of Aghorasiva: 2:99ab (twice without attribution). 


Varnasramacandrika: Appendix I, verses B:21, C:41-2, C:49, G:92, 
This is a manual about adhikara largely consisting of quotations 
and composed c. 1600 AD (see Tamil introduction, p.38) by Tiru- 
Ambaladesikendra, the seventh head of Dharmapuradhina, a Saiva 
matha in Tanjore district. 


Sataratnollekhini: 1:29, 1:35, 1:37-9, 1:43-4, 1:49c-50b, 1:58cd, 1:59cd, 
1:60cd, 1:68c—69, 1:77c—79b, 1:86-88b, 1:90c-91b, 1:91c-92b, 2:25- 
26b, 2:29, 2:70-71b, 6:3ab, 6:6c—7b, 15:4cd, 15:5cd, 15:6c-9b. This 
is an anonymous commentary on the Sataratnasangraha (qv.j2> 
As I have pointed out (GOODALL 1998:xxxi-xxxii, fn. 72), the au- 
thor has without acknowledgement borrowed liberally from other 
Saiddhantika writings. His opening verses suggest that he wrote 
in Chidambaram, and he quotes plentifully from a number of late 
South Indian Siddhantatantras. The text of the commentary in the 
Tanjore edition (see p. iii of its Sanskrit preface) is entirely based 
upon the Calcutta one, and its deviations are therefore not reported 
in my apparatus. 


Sataratnasangraha of ‘Umapati’: 1:1, 2:2-3b, 2:29, 2:78. This is an 
anthology of verses culled principally from Siddhantatantras at- 
tributed to an Umapati, who is not uncommonly assumed to have 
been the author of the Pauskarabhasya, as well as of certain of the 
Tamil Meykantacattirankal, including the Cankarpanirakaranam, a 
work which dates itself to 1313 AD. The identification of these three 
Umapatis as one man seems to me impossible. The verses herein 
are attributed by the work’s commentator, and labels of attribution, 
which sometimes differ from those offered by the commentary, are 


183For no reason that I can determine, a number of scholars have identified the com- 
piler of the Sataratnasangraha with its commentator: SIVARAMAN (1973:37); DAGENS 
(1979:41); BRUNNER (1981:122, fn. 107 and 1998:xlix); DAvis (1991:92) and SMITH 
(1996, passim). The anonymous commentator twice distinguishes himself from the 
compiler in the first two pages. THIRUGNANASAMBANDHAN (1973:xix—xx) and BHATT 
(1996:71) have recognised that they are different people. 


CXVl Parakhyatantra 


also found in MSS of the work that do not transmit the commen- 
tary; but it is possible that the compiler did not himself identify 
his sources. Proving beyond doubt that the Sataratnasangraha was 
not compiled by either the author of the Cankarpanirakaranam or of 
the Pauskarabhasya is impossible, for the Sataratnasangraha con- 
sists entirely of verse quotations from Saiva works. But it can, I 
think, be demonstrated that the Sataratnasangraha is extremely 
unlikely to have been compiled by either of them, because both the 
range of sources drawn on as well as the range and character of 
ideas to which the anthology gives prominence would be untypical 
of either of them. 


Fourteen sutras that occur in a seventeenth-century Tamil trans- 
lation of this work (the Catamanimlai) are not in the Calcutta 
edition.!84 These have been traced in a manuscript (of the Sanskrit 
work) in the Tiruvavatuturai Matha by THIRUGNANASAMBAND- 
HAN (1973:xx—xxi and 113-18), and have accordingly been added, 
in an appendix, to the Tanjore edition of 1976. They are also to 
be found in other manuscripts of the work, e.g., IFP MSS T.112 
and T.804. Among these we find: Parakhya 1:92c—94d (see also 
Appendix I.M:1). 


These are the sources that I can determine for the Sataratna- 
sangraha: 


Svayambhuvasitrasangraha 1:1-2 (1-2), 2:1 (19), 2:8 


184The Calcutta edition with the Sataratnollekhint prints a garbled version of Svayam- 
bhuvasitrasangraha 1:10 as sitra No. 39; but a footnote explains that the second half 
is not in the MSS, and has only been inferred from the commentary that follows. The 
same note explains that the commentary on sutras 37 and 38 is missing (pirvokta- 
mrgendrasitradvayasya vyakhya.matrkayam nopalabhyate). From the Tamil transla- 
tion (the Catamanimalai) of Turaimangalam Sivaprakasa-Svamikal that is printed as 
an appendix to the edition (mula only) of THIRUGNANASAMBANDHAN (1973), it is clear 
that more than just this passage of commentary has dropped out. From the 2nd half 
of 39 through verse 52 in the Tamil version is not represented in the Calcutta edition. 

The 39th verse of the Calcutta edition (of which, as we have seen, the second half 
has been supplied by the editor, and of which the first pada looks as if it belongs to the 
tail-end of a passage of prose) is therefore to be expunged. The verses that are missing 
in the Calcutta edition and supplied in THIRUGNANASAMBANDHAN’S appendix have 
here been numbered 40a, 40b, etc., following the numeration in that appendix. I have 
not been able to trace a source that preserves the missing parts of the commentary. 


Sources for the constitution of the text CXvii 


(26), 1:5 (34), 1:6 (35), 2:4 (36), 1:9 (40h), 1:10 (40018), 
1:11-15 (40-4), 1:18 (63), 2:24 (68), 1:19 (73), 2:26 (79), 
2:25 (86); 

Mrgendravidyapada 1:23 (4), 1:1-3b (9-10), 3:4c—5b (12), 
2:2 (17), 4:15 (18), 7:8 (20), 7:11-12 (21-2), 9:2 (27), 10:1 
(29), 8:3c-5 (31-3), 2:5-6 (37-8), 7:2 (40a), 12:32c-33f 
(40e-f), 5:1 (45), 5:4-5b (46-7), 10:3 (55), 7:5 (63), 5:16 
(67); Mrgendrakriyapada 3:41 (11); 

Parakhya 1:3 (5), 2:78 (8), 2:29 (15), 2:1c-3b (16), 1:15 
(18a), 1:92c-94 (40i-k), 1:91¢-92b (56), 1:90c-91b (57); 
Matangavidyapada 3:9 (6), 4:45-8 (48-52), 4:58c-59 
(69c—70); Matangakriyapada 2:3ab (69ab), 7:40 (72); 
Svacchanda 10.1263c—-1264d (24); 

Kirana 3:10 (13), 3:26cd (28), 2:2-4 (40b-d), 2:7 (40g), 
5:6c-7b (59), 4:13cd and variant from 4:20 (60), 2:31c— 
32b (87), 6:20 (88), 6:19 (89); 

Sardhatrisatikalottara 23:5 (76); 

Sarvajnanottara, adhvaprakarana 204 [last verse], IFP MS 
T. 334, p.76 (54); 

Nigvasakarika, jfanakanda 32.81c-82b, IFP MS T.17A, 
p.236 and IFP MS T.127, p.270 (74), jianakanda 33, 
IFP MS T.127, p.283 (77 and 81), jfanakanda 26, IFP 
MS T. 127, p. 257 (85), jaanakanda 61, penultimate verse, 
IFP MS T. 127, p.493 and IFP MS T. 150, p.31 (91); 
Devikalottara 18 (80); 

Moksakarika 111 (75). 


The following I have not been able to trace: 


Devyamata (3, 71, 90);!8° Visvasarottara (7, 23, 30); 
Mrgendra (14); Sarvajnanottara (54); Nisvasakarika (58, 
65-6); Parakhya (61-2); Kalottara (73); unknown (26 
(similar to Ratnatrayapariksa 72], 40) [similar to Ratna- 


'85This verse is omitted by THIRUGNANASAMBANDHAN 1973 but included in IFP MS 
T. 112 (p. 567). 

'86Professor SANDERSON tells me that this is another name for the Nisvasapratistha- 
tantra that is transmitted in a few old palm-leaf MSS preserved in Nepal, e.g. NAK 
MS 5-446 (NGMPP, Reel No. A 41/13) and MS 1-279 (NGMPP, Reel Nos. A 41/15 
and A 42/1). 


CXVili Parakhyatantra 


trayapariksé 82c-83b], 40m [similar to Ratnatrayapariksa 
84c-85b], 40n, 78, 82-4). 


As far as one can judge from his selection, the theology of the com- 
piler seems to have been that of the classical Saiva Siddhanta. A 
very heavy emphasis is placed on the path to moksa consisting of 
Saktipata and diksa, and this theme occupies verses 45 to 73. None 
of these verses expresses the doctrines of the author of the Pauskara- 
bhasya, nor are there verses drawn from some of the scriptures which 
one would most expect the Pauskarabhasya to cite. There are none, 
for instance, from the Pauskara itself, and the non-dualist Sarva- 
jnanottara, upon which the author of the Pauskarabhasya heavily 
relies to support his position, is represented by a single verse assert- 
ing the indispensability of diksa for attaining liberation (Sataratna- 
sangraha 54). As for the Umapati accredited with authorship of a 
number of the Tamil Meykantacattirankal, he too is, I think, un- 
likely to have compiled this anthology, since his positions too on the 
liberated state and how it is reached seem incompatible with the the- 
ology the Sataratnasangraha appears to support. BHATT (1996:70), 
who actually suggests that the ascription of the Sataratnasangraha 
to the same Umapati who wrote the Pauskarabhasya is improbable, 
on the grounds that the conceptions of the liberated state in the 
two works are discrepant,!8” suggests, however, that the Sataratna- 
sangraha is closely parallel to the centum of Tamil verses attributed 
to Umapati called the Tiruvarutpayan. He observes that the themes 
of both works are treated in the same order and he goes so far as 
to suggest correspondences between groups of verses in each work 


(1996:72): 
Sataratnasangraha Tiruvarutpayan 

7-17 1-10 

18 11-20 
19-33 21-30 
34-70 31-70 
71-8 71-90 
79-91 91-100 


This correspondence of themes, which I do not in any case find 


| 187 Tiruvarutpayap (74-5) characterises the liberated state as neither non-dual nor 
dual. 


Sources for the constitution of the text cxix 


particularly close, is, I think, the coincidental] result of the author 
of each work indepently choosing to treat first the familiar Saiva 
topics of pati, pasu and then paSa, and then following this exposition 
with a discussion of liberation and the means to attain it. But the 
manner of the treatment of these themes seems to me not in the 
least similar: diksa, for instance, which appears in 7 sutras of the 
Sataratnasangraha, is not mentioned once in the Tiruvarutpayap. 


Sivajnanabodhavrtti of Jiadnaprakasa: 1:43-4. This is a short San- 
skrit commentary on the Sivajnanabodhasitra by the Ceylonese 
Jianaprakaga of Salivati (in Jaffna). 


Sivajnanabodhasangrahabhasya of Sivagrayogin: 1:94a-d, 2:2-3b. 
This is Sivagrayogin’s shorter Sanskrit commentary on the Siva- 
jnanabodhasitra. 


Siva jnanabodhopanyasa of Vedajiiana II, also known as Nigamajiiana- 
desika: 2:78abc (without macnn » This is a short sixteenth- 
century Sanskrit commentary on the Sivajnanabodhasitra currently 
being re-edited and translated by Dr. T. GANESAN of the French 
Institute of Pondicherry. 


*Sivajnanasiddhisvapaksadrstantasangraha of Vedajiiana II, also 
known as Nigamajnanadesika (IFP T.317, pp. 968-1118, and IFP 
MS T.533, pp. 197-224, which is incomplete and has only a few of 
the quotations listed below): 1:15, 1:39, 1:73c—75b, 1:82ab, 1:83ab, 
1:92c—-93b, 1:93c—94d, 2:lab, 2:2ab, 2:3, 2:15cd, 2:29, 2:70—71b, 2:96, 
4:35ab, 4:96c-97b, 4:98ab, 4:99ab, 4:100ab, 4:10lab, 4:101c—102b, 
4:103ab, 4:104-5, Appendix I verses E:83-6, K:115—20, L:126, L:129, 
L:139-45. This is an anthology of verses culled from Siddhanta- 
tantras and from Saiddhantika works compiled to provide corrob- 
orative authorities for the statements of the svapaksa section of 
Arulnandi’s Tamil commentary (the Civananacittiyar) on the Siva- 
jnanabodhasitra. For Vedajnana II’s sixteenth-century date and 
ceuvre, see DAGENS 1979:6-14. 


*Sivadiksavidhivyakhyana (IFP MS T.542): Appendix I.A:3c-5. An 
anonymous commentary on a Sivadiksavidhi. 


*Sivapijapaddhativyadkhyana (IFP MS T. 962, lst and 2nd pagina- 
tion): 14:78ab, and Appendix I, verses A:8b, H:95, L:130. 


cxXx Parakhyatantra 


Sivapijastavavyakhya: 2:44-60, 6:6ab, 15:69, Appendix I, verses 
H:96-8, H:101-2. This is an anonymous commentary transmitted 
in a number of South Indian manuscripts (e.g. IFP MS T. 962, 3rd 
pagination) on the Sivapijastava of Jnanasgambhu, the author of the 
* Jnanaratnavali (q.v. above). Although the commentator’s name is 
not known, he identifies himself as the great-great-grandson of the 
Trilocanasiva who wrote the Siddhantasaravali (q.v.).1%° 


Sivayogaratna of Jiianaprakasa: 2:70c-71b (unattributed), 15:69.: 
Sivayogasara of Jnanaprakasa: 2:70c-71b, Appendix I.L:146. 


*Sivagamadimahatmyasangraha of Jianaprakasa (IFP MSS T. 281, 
T.372, T.1059): Appendix I.C:41-2, C:54-5, G:92. This is a ni- 
bandha of quotations from Siddhantatantras and other Saiddhantika 
material compiled by the Ceylonese Jnanaprakasa. The transmis- 
sion of the work is not good. The quotations attributed to the 
Parakhya found in one source are not always to be found in the 
others. 


Sivagrabhas a of Sivagrayogin: 1:94a-d and Appendix I.C:43c—44b. 
This is Sivagrayogin’s long Sanskrit commentary on the Sivajnana- 
bodhasitra. Sivagrayogin has been shown, on the basis of informa- 
tion given in the opening verses of his Saivasannyasapaddhati, to 
have written in the sixteenth century. !®9 


Saivaparibhasa of Sivagrayogin: 1:15, 1:19-20, 1:22-3, 1:29, 1:31-5, 
1:94a-d, 2:70, 6:6ab (without attribution), 14:78-79b, and Ap- 
pendix I.C:43c-44f. This is an independent prose work character- 
ising Sivagrayogin’s Saiva Siddhanta. Unless otherwise specified, I 
refer always to the Mysore edition, which was the sole source of 
the Madras edition. The fact that the Mysore editors give verse 
numeration for the quotations from the early part of chapter 1 of 
the Parakhya (e.g. on pp. 44 and 47) shows that they had access to 
an independent text of the work. The readings and the lacuna they 
report on p. 53 for the quotation of Parakhya 1:29-35 and that they 


188See GOODALL 2000:212. 

18°This was observed by S. ANAVARATAVINAYAKAM PILLAI in his introduction to 
the Civanerippirakacam (1936, pp. vii-viii) and later (apparently independently) by 
R. RAMASASTRI (1950, pp. 9-12 of the bhiimika to his edition of the Saivaparibhasa). 


Sources for the constitution of the text Cxxi 


attribute to a manuscript in Mysore (atra hastalikhitaparakhyapu- 
stake) show that the manuscript they had before them was M” or 
the apograph MS B 785. I-suspect the latter, since I suspect that 
one of the editors was responsible for adding the verse numeration 
and the occasional conjectured modifications in blue ink to the text 
of MS B 785 (see p. cii above). The quotations in this work are thus 
not wholly independent of M”. 


Saivasannyasapaddhati of Sivagrayogin: Appendix I, verses B:21, 
B:39-40, L:131. 


*Saivasiddhantasangraha (IFP MS T. 46): Appendix I, verses B: 22c- 
23b, B:26-31, B:37, J:111-14. This is a paddhati made up of quo- 
tations of (predominantly late) scriptures and of other paddhatis. 


Saivagamaparibhasamainijari of Vedajnana II: 1:5, Appendix I.L:126. 


Sakalagama(sara)sangraha: Appendix I.B:16c-17. This is a South In- 
dian Saiddhantika anthology of quotations culled from (principally 
late) Siddhantatantras and paddhatis relating to temple worship. 
The work is transmitted (as are a few other works of the same 
and similar titles) in a number of South Indian manuscripts (e.g. 
IFP T.199, 246, 351, and 374) and has been published by the South 
Indian Archaka Association (Madras, 1974). 


*Sarvajnanottaravrtti of Aghorasiva (Grantha MS: IFP 47818): 
1:5cd, 1:15c, 1:43—4, 2:42ab (without attribution). For remarks on 
the transmission of this work see GOODALL 1998:1xi. 


*Sarvamatopanyasa’s appendix IFP MSS T. 284, pp. 1-23 and 23- 
30 (and T.801, p.1-23, disregarded because it is copied from 
the same source as T.284): 15:2, 15:4-8, 15:9ab, 15:10, 15:14, 
and Appendix I, verses C:52 and C:54-5. The Sarvamatopanyasa 
is a doxographical work in slokas that covers a handful of ri- 
val doctrines, concluding with the Saivamata. After its simple 
colophon (iti sarvamatopanyaésah sampirnah) there follows an ap- 
pendix of confusingly labelled quotations, among which a few are 
from Parakhya 15. This is concluded, on p.30, with the fol- 
lowing pair. of verses: iti sarvamatasthanam uktva siddhantam 
aditah/ pascad aghoraSisyena sarvatmasambhuna maya// gaivanaém 


cxxii Parakhyatantra 


samayasthanam Saivasiddhantadipika/ sadaSivapadasthena cittena 
samudirita// iti Sam. There then follows the familiar (because pub- 
lished, albeit with the title Siddhantaprakasika) Siddhantadipika of 
Sarvatmasambhu, which is either the text referred to in the verse 
just quoted, or a quite different work that merely happens to fol- 
low and happens also to be called Siddhantadipika and to be by a 
Sarvatmasambhu. This seemed to me a remote possibility before 
(see GOODALL 2000:208, fn. 8), and I now think that it can def- 
initely be excluded because of the evidence of a fragmentary and 
disordered text of the Sarvamatopanyasa that is transmitted in an 
uncatalogued MS in the GOML in Madras: MS R 16820 (pp. 14- 
16 of 2nd pagination, pp. 1-8 of 2nd pagination, and pp. 1-12 of 
3rd pagination). This MS has not been mentioned hitherto because 
it does not have the quotations from the Parakhya; but it does 
have the beginning of an appendix tagged on after the final verse of 
the Sarvamatopanyasa, and in the beginning of this appendix there 
is an explicitly labelled reference to an identifiable statement in 
the Siddhantadipika of Sarvatmasambhu.!*° It therefore now seems 
probable to me that the quotations of the Parakhya belong to a pas- 
sage interpolated by someone other than Sarvatmasambhu between 
the Sarvamatopanyasa and the Siddhantadipika, which were once 
strung together by Sarvatmasambhu when he added his Siddhanta- 
dipika to an already existing Sarvamatopanyasa. The above quoted 
verses leave open the possibilities that the latter was a composition 
of his own or of his guru’s or of someone else. The presentation of 
different views in the Sarvamatopanyasa is relatively sophisticated 
in comparison with that of the Siddhantadipika, and this consider- 
ation makes the first possibility seem least likely. 


*Siddhantadipika of Madhyarjuna (IFP MSS T. 112 and T. 284): 2:44, 
2:90cd. This is a catechistic prose work with plentiful quota- 
tions from late South Indian Siddhantatantras (e.g. from the Ajita, 
Makuta, Santana, and Vatulasuddhakhya), which a final verse as- 
cribes to an abbot of a matha in Tiruvitaimarutiir (the Sanskrit 
name of which is Madhyarjuna). The author also quotes (without 


19°C. p.32 (of Dvivep!'s edition) with the following (from p.10 of 3rd pagina- 
tion of the MS): atha sarvatmasambhuviracitayam siddhantadipikayam pasupatamate 
&na<va>>malan nasti.... 


Sources for the constitution of the text CXXili 


always identifying the source he is quoting) the Siddhantasamuccaya 
of Trilocanasiva. 


*Siddhantasikhamani of Jianaprakaésa (Grantha MS: IFP 10871): 
Appendix I.A:8a—d. This is an independent prose work by the Cey- 
lonese author of the Pauskaravrtti presenting the tenets of the Saiva 
Siddhanta. 


*Siddhantasamuccaya of Trilocanasiva (IFP T.284, pp. 127-74, 
IFP T.206, pp.57-111, Madras GOML MS R 14394, and GOML 
MS R 16820, pp. 1-14 in last sequence of numeration): 1:15, 2:1, 
2:25-26b, 2:42ab (without attribution), 2:79a, 2:99ab (without at- 
tribution), 3:74-6, 4:69, 5:153cd, 6:3ab, 6:5c-6d, 6:26—-29b, 6:60—4, 
6:67-68b, and Appendix I.C:43c-44f. This text, still in line with 
the old Saiva Siddhanta, is a useful source of quotations, many 
of which, since they are not all part of a common stock of verses 
found cited in many works, this author seems himself to have chosen 
(unlike the compilers of, for example, the Sivajfanasiddhisvapaksa- 
drstantasangraha and the Nanavaranavilakkattarumpatavivekam, 
whose shared errors—e.g. in their quotations from the beginning 
of Parakhya 2—suggest that they may not have selected their quo- 
tations independently). The other sources he cites are all early: 
old Siddhantas (predominantly Mrgendra, Matanga, Kirana, Sarva- 
jnanottara, Parakhya, Svayambhuvasitrasangraha, Rauravasutra- 
sangraha, MohaSurottara {e.g. on p.143]), and works such as that 
of Somasambhu (e.g. on p.174) and those of the Astaprakarana. 
His conclusion (T.284, p.174) tells us that he was the head of a 
matha in Sitaranya (a Sanskrit translation of the Tamil toponym 
Tiruvenkatu). He may also have been the author of the Siddhanta- 
saravali and of the commentary on the Somasambhupaddhati (q.v. 
below).!9! Sadly this work is badly transmitted. 


Siddhantasaravalivyakhya of Anantagambhu: 1:93c-94d, 14:78-80, 
Appendix I.L:132—4 and H:104. This is a commentary on Trilocana- 
Siva’s Siddhantasaraval, a Saiddhantika ‘manual’ (though, like the 
Tantraloka and the Isanagivagurudevapaddhati, it is actually a lit- 
erary work and not simply a handbook of instructions), of which 
there are numerous South Indian manuscripts. 


191See GOODALL 2000:213-14. 


CXXiVv Parakhyatantra 


Siddhantasiitravrtti of Sadasivasivacarya: 1:93c-94d, 14:78-79b, and 
Appendix I, verses C:44c-f. This is a short Sanskrit commentary 
on the Sivajnanabodhasitra. 


*Somasgambhupaddhatitika of Trilocanasiva (IFP T.170, described 
by BRUNNER 1998:li-lii, and GOML MS R 14735): 2:1c, 2:42ab 
(without attribution), 2:99ab (without attribution), 3:68c, 14:78ab, 
15:10c-f, and Appendix I, verses A:8b, H:95, L:130. Judging from 
their shared range of quotations, both this commentary on the 
SomaSambhupaddhati and the Siddhantasamuccaya may be the 
work of the same author. Trilocanasiva probably belongs to the late 
twelfth century, for he appears to have been a disciple of AghoraSiva 
and of Jiianasambhu, the author of the Jianaratnavali and of the 
Sivapijastava.'% 


Svacchandatantroddyota of Ksemaraja: 5:16c-18b, 5:19-3ld, 5:38a- 
d, 5:42ab, 5:44ab, 5:45cd, 5:47ab, 5:48cd, 5:50ab, 5:51c-f, 5:66b, 
5:71-72b, 5:73, 5:74c-75, 5:77, 5:79-82a, 5:82c-84, 5:85cd, 5:86c— 
88b, 5:89ab, 5:89d-90b, 5:108, 5:134ab, 5:135ab.!94 


I cannot conclude this discussion of quotations attributed to the Parakhya 
without an apologetic remark about my treatment of the quotations from 
portions of the text not transmitted by M” and so relegated to Appendix I. 
They are presented, in most cases, without translation or explanatory 
annotation, and it is certainly true that much more work could have 
been done on them. HOUSMAN’s remarks on Lucilius reinforced my lazy 
reluctance to continue puzzling over them:!4 


The truth is that the difficulties of the text of Lucilius are for 
the most part inexplicable and its corruptions for the most 
part irremediable. What more than anything else enables the 
critic and commentator of an ancient author to correct mis- 
takes and to elucidate obscurities is their context; and a frag- 
ment has no context. An editor of Lucilius or Ennius or Nonius 
or the Reliquiae scaenicae, unless he is grievously self-deluded, 


192See GOODALL 2000:208-11: 

193T have here clubbed together consecutively numbered verses; Ksemaraja has not 
necessarily quoted them together in these blocks. 

1° Fyrom HOUSMAN’s ‘Luciliana’, The Classical Quarterly I (1907), as quoted in Hous- 
MAN 1981:103. 


Sources for the constitution of the text CXXV 


must know that the greater number of his corrections, and of 
his explanations also, are false. There is a simple test, if he 
cares to use it. The bulk of Lucilius’ fragments is preserved 
to us by Nonius only: take Nonius’ citations of an author 
whose works survive, try to explain or emend them, and then 
compare your efforts with the author’s text. 


I have not attempted the kind of test HOUSMAN describes, although it 
could certainly be tried using citations in, for instance, the * DiksadarSa. 
But the bitter-sweet discovery of part of B (Mysore MS B 785) at a point 
when I thought that I had nearly finished my edition gave me a taste of 
the experience he speaks of: only occasionally had I correctly inferred the 
sense of the small fragments missing from the tops of folios in M” that I 
subsequently found to be transmitted in B (e.g. in 5:131d-132a), and not 
one of the restitutions proposed by myself or by friends—stylistically plau- 
sible as the restitutions seemed—was confirmed with the discovery of the 
apograph. In other words, even when equipped with the context, patching 
together the sense and wording of damaged passages of the Parakhya has 
proved not to be straightforward; raising the stakes by removing the con- 
text must make it yet more difficult. The following edition and annotated 
translation of the chapters of the Parakhya transmitted by MY may seem 
to some a monument of incaution, but I am not so recklessly incautious 
as to plunge myself into the task of elucidating all its fragments as well, 
at least not for the moment. 


TEXT 


TTT TATE I 
eT: Tet: ei 


WHIM CATT FET TETHA SATA 
HS: ACA HTT Was: HT: TET I 
WITT TAT Trt Te F TASH 
way: F Ae Aca AA SHE TTI I 
TAA SGA THATS TAT | 
worry cary fasrerestay i 3 I 


weriqen fagaterst srt cota | 
wy: wpa fear artayfareeregar iy 
3. AAA PARA MYATT | 
IR QUILS ES Coe tag fasryprestary quoted in Sataratnasangraha as verse 5, p. 12. 
5. VUTeT ° 
veriqea fate aferart wthta (ate Ms.A  (unmetrical) ) | 
ayantresr frat arfrpfnfcarfear 
Ue SFT (AT Mss.B,C)TAT TS Tearut: ayzatfCar: | Saivaparibhasamadijari 5:10- 
11b, p. 203. 
5cd. TY]: ampere fear ary arertearar | aft BAPTIST | [sanasivaguru- 
devapaddhati Vol. 3, p. 21. Quoted also (prefaced by STACTU ST S FY) in Aghorasiva’s 
Sarvajnanottaravrtti ad ‘vidyapada’ 2:4-5, IFP 47818 p..56. 


La. THT) Wrerarherara AA: ll i TAT MY 3b. AFeT?] SaRaSan; AW- 
ere MY 5a. fagaq] M’; fafa SaiPaBhaMan 5b. TOad)] MY; Tht 
SaiPaBhaMan §=5 c. TY: AMPA] MY, SaJaaVr, [SiGuDePa; Tari 
SaiPaBhaMan 


aq aT aT sah era haa AT | 
qycdarefrarey: & Tard: Tyg: | Il 
aferaraagqeny: ar syafacrerc: | 
eater: Tarat sat whee narers: I 9 I 
TT TAMACAITA AAI AAR: | 

ar oar sfrarce faarer: wRrat sets ic 
TAT AGSARAN ATATITAT STAT: | 
THAT TAT ATL AVSl APTA AH: |B I 


aa aafHearanr: arranitaqgenct: | 
ATI ANTYSTS: WM Tear APTA: Il go I 


[ SATSATH TPT I 
smiqgadate fraraecraa: | 
TOIT TATRA CST T THT: Il 22 I 
qe fear + acater Gareth 
ate ATT AT THT TAT AGA AAT HI 92 Il 
TAIT VT AATITATSeATaNTL Tarehyy | 
faratoratearferart TROTST: STAG: it 23 1 
ACTA Achqaaaser Aarts fe 1 
area fara auranmitag ii ey i 
[TYE | 
tera Svar saat fahrar: aAaAt sas: | 
6 b. TACHAMTAATAT ] conj. Isaacson; TY HATATT MY 7 a. Ufetare- 
aqcHy: ] B; —[-5-]—Jew - MY 7b. Yel SYEe°] conj.; Weary M” 
10 a. ofRaTann: | em. ; oPRaTantT MY 11c. TeaTHTTAT | conj. Isaacson; T- 
ZaTT U MY; cat +&+ B (insertion in blue ink) 12 b. AATATAITGe ] 
conj. Isaacson; @ATaTEIg®? MY 13 ab. MAUIT FT AAraryyeeaqrere: err- 
TT) conj.; TAIT T AAITUTTEATETe TareT MY «13d. TCITAT: ASNT: | 
conj.; TOTS SATEGATT MY 15a. 2QTYT] MY, SaRaSan, SiSa, SaiPaBha, 
SiPuStaVya; AT4T SiJiaSvaDrSan 


Tuy: Yeo: 2 


crane fafaosy: SIT: TY: Il ey I 


faTastHaqar ant afasasated:t | 
Ware Jeary auratacdeatattHa4rsy il ve I 


(STataratertre: | 


watafearer sa fafersy <at> ara: | 
WTA Te Bray adarafayard | 
sary Yaar 8S T FET SeaaTH: TY: Il Vol 
Ue Je: F Wars Ware: caretad¢ | 
EMYAIATIMTL WTS AAT TATAT |i oc I 
Yaar ayaa shi eeeqreaqqarad: | 

que WMT AMS rat SPT Ti evi 


1s Sacer T 

era svTUT sary fahtar: aay sas: | 

HAHN RAT fafray: aT: WY: 1 Siddhantasamuccaya of Trilocanasgiva, 
IFP MS T. 206, p. 90; Saivaparibhasa, (Mysore) p. 44; Sivapijastavavyakhya p.15 
(introduced by Tae); Sivajianasiddhisvapaksadrstantasangraha, IFP T. 317, p. 1140. 
Also quoted (prefaced by parakhye ca) in a corrupt form in [sanasivagurudevapaddhati, 
Vol.3, p. 22. It also appears as the 18th sitra of the Sataratnasangraha. The second 
half alone is quoted by Aghorasiva in his Sarvajnanottaravrtti ad vidyapada 1:20, IFP 
47818 p. 41. 

19-20, 22-3. Uae wfararfed SrreareHcgTeaay: ---“[Pau 4:61c-71b]” --- 
Yaar ayera shy eeeaneaqgqarad: | aeque wader ay, arat sf T 

7 adv stue are ay sfiradl saraaae: | aay seearea: Farafert ay ara: 
MIATA: | 

sar arearfearaer araae wqfaer i whcorafasreer ar fahrar yureque | 
15c. Baw? | SaRaSan, SiSa, SaiPaBha, SaJAaVr, S$iPaStaVya, SiJnaSve- 
DrSan; HY x Hx Bere MY 15 d. fafaoy:] SaRaSan, SiSa, SaiPaBha, 
SaJidVr, SiPaStaVya, SiJniaSvaDrSan; fafas: MY 17 b. fafarer stvant- 
WT: ] conj.; fafrenrantrea: MY (unmetrical) ; fahrenrea ania: B 17¢. T- 
Warque } em.; Woraraae MY 17 f. ger Seas: ) conj.; FereTeNT: M” 


18 a. WaT) x Tx WATT MY) 18c. €Meyfrarawrgy ] conj.; KvafHe- 
ara MY 


7 Gat seet aver ay shrxat s=qece: | 

MAT SAT: YATES AY ATA: AAAS: Il Ro Il 
Ware Tavs | 

7 ge AA at yea ad: fad 

Vad Yaegra: Teorafasrya: ii 2 it 

WATS SATs | 

ser Teaeargewy aTaee Aqieer | 
reoratasreer ar fahrar Jase Fe Il 221 


TTEgT A STAI AAPM WATATA | 

ar sfet erat eqfasrsd Prt zarerPoterri 23 1 
TASTATT A IT AAAI Ia: | 

ad Wal SAtarasas A WaTfeg¥ ii 2¥ i 


T TeHre Woes wer ath FA: | 
wer autaqarasary fataraqar i 2y I 


ated Adee wad A AAAA: | 
Taqerateragar FUT zatht FT AAT 2E Il 


Teneaqewaist AAAs: AA | 
atta Varad Hal Barat aa aT Sta: | 


TUT UT AY syed aaagew marae) ay sfer-enat Sqfagts Hrv yarer- 
Frtaeq | Saivaparibhasa, (Mysore) pp. 45-7. 


20 a. Wel ately) M”; We aval SaiPaBha; WEY &{ST SaiPaBha(vl) 20 
c. RUT: YATE] MY, SaiPaBha; eT: JATAfeT SaiPaBha(vl) 22 
a. QTeUT® | SaiPaBha; ATT? MY 22d. 94 JAR] SaiPaBha; JAR JA: 
MY 28 a. 3-{eQT) conj.; AQTaT MY; AQT AT SaiPaBha 23 cc. fer) 
M” ; fart SaiPaBha 23 ¢. eafaarst | M” ; estat SaiPaBha 24c. Adv ] 
conj. Isaacson; AMAT MY = 24 cd. ome? ] conj.; oHladat? MY 25b. Gt: | 
conj.; JT: M” 25. oararye | conj. Isaacson; oarearye MY 25d. fafa- 
Faqt] em; fafrPaat MY 26 a. SaqRTCeq ] conj.; SARTTeT MY 


Tuy: Weer: y 


oafaarst Weert STU T FeTAT HI XW Il 
[atorTwarefare: | 

Wale Jars | 

arate wear art attracara + far 

7 afea: Taratery ag TATAATT: Il 26 

WHIM Says | 

ane fer art Her Hatt WaT | 

T aeHAwHet ANT Array FreTA 1! 2 1 

Wate Jars | 

Yat AAA AT aT HAGA | 

AI A ATTA <A oayATA TTT I 30 Il 


TAT Jars | 
ar cqar araar wrar fer arfafeacrerorr | 
RAST Ver AT T Aca AAT AIT 22 il 


aear sft feat a ar feast wace}r | 


29. qUuTzgT — 

amnre fart srt TT HaAT NACI T Teste ANE gras frcae 
ad Sataratnasangraha 18, p. 33. 

29, 31-5. SaaS T— 

are fart att Her Hart wa T AcHAHeT ANT array Prcaa 
aT caar aver srear fa arfafeaarerenrr | 

RSI Ber AT FT AI ITATTAT WaT II 

aeartrey fart ar faver waa: | afafeaar Farr Far AATSTTAAP AAT I 
sear faartar gear arerar safattead | TTA aay MTHS ET EAT: I 
WAST sae wTHATPyarfed: | farcer aeaqgatear afaatprare | 
eaarqafaar erate svar ferer fry: i 


Saivaparibhasd, pariccheda 3, (Mysore) p. 53. 


28d. °ARIM: }] conj. Isaacson; “JW ET: MY 29b. HET] MY SalPaBha; 
TW SaRaU 30 cd. QIAMWAT Aer® | conj.; AAQMAT UA? MY 82a. TT 
sft fart 1) conj.; TT ar fr fare 7 MY; Teattry faqs SaiPaBha 


afafegar Farr PAT ATATSTAAAPAAT Il 321 
aur feathcar gear arerat aatatcaret | 
TAPAS Aa MHA T: | 33 Il 
SHTAA Sats wrHATprattad: | 
@wMreat faraex TAT: TSTOY AAT II av Il 
faree aan asfaatyared | 
waagtaar Bratt tr srar fer’ fry: ay i 
[areray fengery] 

Tare Sars | 
av fay: Gaet: ra: HA HNMT: | 
Te Tartear ANT: wercraherehare: | 3E I 
TaN Sars | 
OMat Get At Sarefaycs Her aft: | 
afer ar cafe: yar qatyd fear Ferdi 30 i 
Aided T Het ANT Bar Afdfsracr | 

35. farce agfamar ajfaatprared | erarqufaar erates sar far yfeu 

ad Sataratnasangraha 18, p. 34. 

37-39. AUT ave 

awMracHeraceara afagenr shi ar wafer: (7) 1 

Ader T Het AT aay Ahifarew i 

at rack sare Safacasumerar | 

Md TAHT TIT TE (7) | 

ad wet Preyer fayeare ATarTaL | Kf ad Sataratnasargraha 18, p. 34. 


82c. Haft] SaiPaBha; Afafeate MY 33a. TUT) MY ; Fear SaiPaBha 
33 d. CTEM: } conj. Isaacson; °MTeIT: MY; TEMA: SaiPaBhi 34 cd. }) 
om. SaiPaBha 35a. TTA | MY , SaiPaBha; TAfateT SaRaU(vi) ; TAtd- 
TT SaRaU (unmetrical) 35d. fy: ] MY, SaiPaBha; Yfe SaRaU 36 c. T- 
@) conj. Isaacson; @: MY (unmetrical) 37 a. FWMTeAt | conj.; TWAT? MY”, 
SaRaU 37b. efayee au mf: ) MY; cfageny sfe ay mf: SaRaU 37 cd.] 
MY”; om. SaRaU 


Way: Wee4#: \9 


aqat aad seared Saha SAINTAT | ac 


waatagd A AT AY ATT TEI 
aa wet Praewrer FayeareTanrsry it 22 I 
[STHTAT FECT] 

Wate Jars | 
aTearar aaa: Fgred FT Aarrar: ferar: | 
AGMA AIHA > CAAT HAT: He oll 
WHIT Tavs | 
AAA T AAT AIT’ TET AHA | 
fafereedt Aeaay Far AY ARM FIT II ¥z I 
Waite Jays | 
wa Ug fer aa ee ae qa: | 
USN TENT VT FRAT AAA GACT Il KI 
WHIM Jas | 
Faguearaeacd ager Arena: | 

39. TST 

MIATA TAHT ATH TT: | 


dent fraeerer fnyeascagenrfrerti Sivajiidnasiddhisvapaksadrstantasangraha 
IFP T.317, pp. 1046-7. 


42cd. THUT TRU VA FRI AATsad = Brahmabindipanigat 12cd 

43-44, AUT TIT — 

Fagucardeace aeer ieninte: 1a a der aanter: afer Taree 
aTaafear wafmor qaafer wer aa faenfaarferranrar taafcueE: 1 

ad Sataratnasangraha 18, p.34. Also quoted in Jianaprakaéa’s Sivajndnabodhavrtti 
pp. 75-6 and (prefaced by WVACTRTSA SFT) in Aghoragiva’s Sarvajfidnottaravrtti ad 
‘vidy&pada’ 2:4-5, IFP 47818 p. 57. 


38 c. Tad Saardy ) MY; Frad savy SaRaU 39a. AeaATAAT) MY, Sia 
SvaDrSan; 2e SaRaU (unmetrical) 39b. TIT TE) em.; ATT WE: MY ; AT- 
@ WC: SiJisSvaDrSan; TAT Te SaRaU 30d. fenqearaqanTs | MY, SaRaU; 
Fayercagerhrery SijaaSvaD;Sai 40 c. WACHEAT ] conj. Isaacson; WT U 
MY 


awa weate: afar erere4qaw4r ti 3 11 


weatear wafgar qaAeeIaaT FT TI 
fearfaarfmry war staatere: i x i 


Wate Jars | 
afer araar aar aria: ar ferar aa 
feared fert ad ar fer & Ie: FATT YY Il 


Wars Jars | 
SWea: Maat aupy aed sfaeerwarsta: | 
fearear aa afeer 7 Tar: Teale: il YE I 


Frarey wea aeateareqaqurred ar | 
Tareas Frawtta faesar a faareaci vv i 


Hse ar equat ar ger FACAAT: | 
RII ay aT AfHrtaest T AUT II ve il 


whet 7 em: efacacareagtdd: | 
ferarar adar Fat WaeBe: WATT Il xe I 


49c-50b. ferarar waar Pat Warese: Wasa | 
T afer & WaTSBSeIT FT TRAY AAT: Il ad Sataratnasangraha 18, p.34. Also cited 
(without attribution) in chapter 3 of the Saivaparibhasa, (Mysore) p. 60. 


43c.@ FT AeT)] MY, SaRaU; T BHET SaJaaVvr; T VET ST SiJsaBoVr; F 
WT TET SaRaU(vl) 43 c. AHAfeT: ] SaJiaVr, SaRaU, SiJnaBoVr; TAHA IT 
MY; @@Haty: SaRaU(vl) 44a. Wafer] M”, SaJaaVr, SaRaU, SiJiaBoVr; 
Wafecare SaRaU(vl) 44b. FAAKAHAT TA) SaJnaVr; FANE Teal Tz M”, 
SaRaU(vl); FAAfed Fat AT SaRaU; FAAKAHAT A TF SiJiaBoVr 44cd. °uT- 
Wt Wat] M”, SaJiaVr, SiJfiaBoVr, SaRaU(vl); eAPTATTAT SaRaU 45d. aT 
faaT &] conj. Isaacson; aT aT fear @ M’B* (unmetrical); aT fear aT B° 
46 c. Ufaer]) M’*; Sfafe MY: 47a. 8M°] M’*; AQ MY’ 48a. WIT 
ar] MVS x ATx AT MY 48 cc. EAT] BS; TT > MY (the right half of the 
second aksara is missing) ; fasrt BX 49a. ar: } em.; @ar MY 49 c. fer- 
aqvar}] MY, SaRaU, SaiPaBha, ferarat: SaRaU(vl) 49 d. Woes: ) M”; 
WaTeBe: SaRaU, SaiPaBha 


Wy: Teo: g 


aq afer @ waeseedsy ot Feat Aa: | 
ararfearera eer: ar sRaA-aT Sat AST Ae: Il Lol 


[AaTsdcd TMT: | 
Wate Jars | 
WAYS! TAIT Ad: YE: STAT: | 
aurTey sft agrmy swTHd: Safes FATIH Veil 


THI Sars | 

TeaTST: FT AY UT: earaurytafahras: | 

afe aer Tt aTyleeagy 7 WATS ARI 
aer afatad ca: | 

Father + unr sf qasaty weer farvi y3 it 


at Ur Wager aaratecdar ferry 
Gal aca & taal qfacerMaAwa4r il vv it 
Tadaaatecd wed aT Faraz | 
MATa Taceardaee fevay: i wy 
ud ferdt fart adaart Typed: | 

ay aa fatad at faye aa THAT YE I 
Forredeanetrcarega tatag + fe 

at ceargete frre at ae yo I 


56d. WgM Tired ST ‘fayg aa Twa’ afr Mrgendravrttidipika ad vidydpada 
7:2. , 


50 a. T AIST W] M”, SaRaU, SaiPaBha; TATETA SaRaU(vl) 50a. WaRB- 
ze] MY; Wareaee SaRaU, SaiPaBha 50d. AY SfRI-AT) conj.; ATU 
MY 51 cd. AFM SATHe: ] conj.; TET: WTHa— MY (the right half of the 
final aksara is missing); W¢TT: WTHaT°? B 52 b. KATHT® } conj.; FATHT® M” 
53 b. fare] em.; Whee MY 54¢. ACU A ASAT) conj.; TAT FT ASA 
MY (rightmost portion broken) 57d. @eGd] B; HT ~ MY 


Qo Tet TT 


aT ee: TH Fa AIHA WAT | 
at TeHaU Pry TTA I US II 


aat sHTage: ad: aM HAyGT: | 
aramife aarenraaaed frrerfrag i xe II 


ATTRA TAT TTA 

AATY SR: WCATATITP NTT: 11 Go 
[Faea=ry] 

Waite Fars | 


Ta WS: WHIT Saya: | 
Tat Seat: MTA asd AIT &2 Il 


THT Sars | 
Woe youd Hr HRUTHeaT FUTYAA | 
MITT HSY FW TTT T YTTT I G2 


58cd, 59cd, 60cd. AUT AAT — 
at center irrrart werarongi sraonfe aearrragt faersrfrac i 
TATYS: TYCATAG APA ITAT: | ad Sataratnasangraha 18, p. 35. 


S9ab. tops missing in M”. 
60cd. tops missing in M”. 
6la. JATT WS: Te | tops missing in M”. 


58 ab. HAT Ee: FS F:a AAAI MAT) SAT eee Fa Aaa IaA Ma 
B; —[-1l-J}— eta —[-2]— MY” 58 cd. at THs Kray TTS | 
SaRaU; TAATAAATM TAT TT ACCT HT TO M” (tops missing); 
at contr Array Chraker B; ar cena Prt aT TeTHTUTT SaRa 
(unmetrical) 59a. Tal SHTAGd: AF: ] B; TTT HT AY A: FT: M”; om. 
SaRaU 59 b. BUafamHAgGg: ] BS; AIM A HA A: M”; ar- 
Frent 97: B°; om. SaRaU 59 cd. ATEMfa TATA ) MY; wrarift 
TeNAT Td SaRaU; WITT AaTHTA Ft SaRaU(v!) (unmetrical) 60 ab. ] 
om. SaRaU 60 cd. AAT: TECaTe? |] SaRaU; TAT YS TY vas 
MY; @aTYS: WYCAT U B; AAS TYCATa? SaRa(vl) 60d. equrfire | 
conj.; UW fit MY; u fre B; cgurfre SaRaU; cqurfee SaRaU (vi) 
62 c. A-TeT® } conj.; AUT? M” 


WT: Teer: 22 


Wee ACITST ANAAUAT Aa: | 

We aaSHATeY Tag arash eer ii G3 Il 
faraqeat Acad Preret azar | 

ate at FaTSet Sd Tatcd Wears ii GY I 
aT afer: Garay AT Sac eAaT WMATA | 
afe ad qaeredy fert at Tyaray i &Y II 
Taaary Teasers THTSTHs | 
araasart Vee Teast FATAT | GE Il 

T ATS AIM TACHA AIET ATCT | 

att arfera weary arcarerifaas ii &19 It 


aferearaey srearhet ar wher: wre ferar aa: | 
waar Ad: HPATAATA ST TET I EG Il 
wafaesad Weqrer UTg: whHaTas: | 

at dare Frorte: ated fe T ATT RI 
Tea Sees shred ae TUT | 

Breed SFT BATA AAMAS THAT 90 
aged TTT HTH 

av fe went RMA AT Brea ae WAT: | 92 I 


65 a. QTC] conj.; AT M” 


68c-69. AUT AXA — 


aaard Get: Harare aeQry | wafasaT ATT ATT: AAAS: Il 
at dare Fanta: ata fa 7 Axe | ad Sataratnasanigraha 18, p. 35. 


63 d. iil em.; Gaggia fasfert MY 66 ab. TeTdfewd | 
conj. Isaacson ; Tey MY 66 d. aaa | conj.; TAT MY 67a. HT- 
THATATY | conj.; HMA MY 68 c. Aaats] MY, SaRaU; atarat 
SaRaU(vl) 69b. HTa: Whnaraa: ) M”; He: AclaasH: SaRaU; ATAAHAT- 
Wh: SaRaU(vi) (unmetrical) 69c. facta: |] MY, SaRaU; AaatTa: SaRaU(vi) 
(unmetrical) 71c. WUT Rd] Bo; WaT Ft M”B™ 


&R TUTet at 


(amTefrsattad ar] 
Wile Jays | 
earar anrafas: teoratesryc: | 
ay aattatad gq fareet a Saar: it WRI 
THIN Tas | 
T THOT: CATA Sey aeeaafagaare| 
TQITATT YATAT SOATAT AT FRAT Il 93 1 
THAT HI UTA HW swad Had | 
atettatraratta arqeedttra: HFA or I 
yaeaty epuray ay fH Yrerqaare | 


Se aT ATT Ad SAlege AT A AAAI wx 
AIAN A ASMA FATA | 
Aaeea ATA AT aT FEAT Il 9G I 
Tenlaipead eqtataaray STATA: | 


73c—75b. parakkiyattil 

wqurarfy yarar caquray va seat i aft Aeaead apart aqergead wha 
afeftatrearare agente: sfac yay fe eeray a fe gt: artaqara i 
GATT AAT HTACAATH ANTS: | ATCAATT TAT (AITcAATAAT Ye Sidaa- 
SvaDrSan) Wad: HYYAHAT Nandvaranavilakkattarumpatavivekam Vol. 2, p. 589. 
The same unit is quoted also (prefaced by Tee) in the Sivajfanasiddhisvapaksa- 
drstantasangraha IFP T.317, p.978 and IFP T.533, pp. 205-6 (for the readings of 
which see the apparatus). 


73 b. °faqaard ) conj.; efaveta: MY 73 d. PATaT) NavViVi, SiJiaSva- 
DrSan; TTATE MY 74a. WHEAT) MY; Aft AT NaViVi; TTA SiJiaSva- 
DrSan317; AATAeT SiJiaSvaDrSan533 (74 b. HAW FAT] MYB*, SiJaa- 
SvaDrSan317; FGM Wad Be; HYMGeId NaVvivi; HAV FWad SiJiaSva- 
DrSan533. 74d. °M%T: |] MY; omfe: NaViVi, SiJiaSvaDrSai 75 a. YACatT 
euray AT] MY; Yaeahy Spray FT Navivi; Yay fE Cpa SihaSvaDrSan 
75 b. TACT ZAaTA | MY; JT: HAART NaViVi, SiJaSvaDrSan 76 a. AW- 
T° ] conj.; AAT? MY 76 b. FAfaary{) conj.; Masa MY 76d. °7- 
=T ] conj. Isaacson; °AT MY 


Tey: Yer: 83 


AAMT: FAT: AAT UMTTAT: |i 99 I 
UhET BAA AAT THI TE | 
Mee Tee ead BAIN: li 9c I 
SANT CAAT: HAUT HeyH TW: | 
SANT AAAI WACTHT AA ET: Il 98 I 


HAA ASAT FAA Weraradartedr | 
HAT: Ae <A yas FAG aH ATA Coll 


[HAH HAAS T TAT] 
Tare Jars | 
wer war Ht Pad aca: | 
wien Fafa far Ter TATRA: Il 2 I 


TATI SITS | 

auTearafearsy fg: arta aaftr ferfer: | 
77c—79b. TUT — 
AATFATA GAT: SATA OMA: | THT HASTA EAT TCHTCTTST Il 
AES TATRA A Ad AAI: | AY HAT AT waraaiora farrzis 
ad Sataratnasangraha 18, p. 35. 
80ab. = Svayambhuvasitrasangraha 2:13cd. 
82ab, 88ab. TUT TST 
aurearatear faa: arrar aetfr fara: | 
Talerattedy AAAAPAZAT WT WAI) Sivajfianasiddhisvapaksadrstantasangraha IFP 
T.317, p. 1003. 


77: c. Oday: Fat: ] MY; caWaeay: SaRaU (unmetrical); ePTarae 
SaRaU(vl) (unmetrical) 78 b. THT TT] FT x Shx SAT FT M”; 
TL ATCTTS SaRaU (unmetrical) 79 b. eHaTeTH]) SaRaU; cwahYa M” 
79 e. esa | conj. Isaacson; oar MY  79f. WacT? | BS; MWACT® MYB* 
80 c. W4NAS ] em.; WA U AS MY’; BACAS Be; TACAST BX Bic. Fafa] 
em.; fafa: MY 82a. TuTearafenry] MY; GUTeaafaar SiJnaSvaDySan 
82 b. HAT Ferfa: | conj. ; anu: farfs: MY; aaifr fer: SiJiaSvaDrSan 


aw Ter TT 


afeacst Yt: Betararey Taser | 
darate fart at ware safeareqe: ll G2 I 


Taleetaly Aqnogpeaar AT AT | 
searercarer fase: ator Frerevar ii c3 ll 
aay Faaarr aeraqenataster | 
aha Fe: We: FAG:AaAPTT: i cv it 
WATS Tavs | 
7 aqeafae Ge: wirraatds: | 
eearrentehraenttcnad at FrPaea ri cy 
THIS Says | 
Tena TST: Wear T WMIceyT Fda | 
WITT AAI SATA AIAART AA: ll ck ll 
HT AH: SCAM ATST TATAAT | 
GAAS AUT Aa T Hore TWAT cy ii. 
WT Fal HOME T WUTAMT FeV: Sa: | 
MHUT HAA A: AAMT ae Il 
vafrearamre Sar frarcecaserfeg: | 
afer-arenrates Free: ar car wai ck I 
86-88b. TUT AAT — 
THAT FET: MWR T MAIC Hay | ANAT AWaedenengeaqayed Aa: I 


Hea HCH AA AUTAST MITAAT | FASS TUT Ha T Foret Waa ii 
BT HAT STCHEAT ATU YET: Bye: | ad Sataratnasargraha 18, p. 35. 


83 a. TATE STAT VI] MY; Wateratfed’ Vay SiJiaSvaDrSan 83 b. °eY- 
FSSRT ] conj. Isaacson; °F RAAT MY, SiJiaSvaDrSan 86 c. AeA SIT | 
MY; GaeteT SaRaU 86d. HAAYT Gd: ] MY; HAAG Ad: SaRaU 
87a. HUT: ART) MY; HCY Ag SaRaU 87 c. AAT] BSaRaU; ART MY’ ; 
rat SaRaU(vl) 88a. HUMAT) M”’; BTCA SaRaU 89 b. faarteaw- 
tfaH: ] conj.; frarceg feecrwrefea: MY (unmetrical); faarceg acfea: 
B 


WA: Teor: a4 


wintrad swt caartahrartary | 
raed Shrererd cart aesteta ad Faraz Xo ll 


Qemnlerraaen TWerateatat Ur | 
fag: a arvear sft west afer ar Taq Geil 


fafasredst o art arerararrestare | 
ado teaanit forse FeAl 82 il 
TMH Sa AST APRA HAGA | 
Wate seam: SATA ST T TMT: I A 


90c-91b. Act Sf sas act Netefe ad ferrr 

UTeMlgryaden werateafat WUT ii Sataratnasangraha 57, p.71. Also quoted p. 39 
of Siddhantasitravrtti, prefaced by ag TUT 

91c-92b. ..-TUeagqayr astafa— fy: ay srrear sft was afe az aq 
fafessretaT & wrear ATTA Tea Il Sataratnasangraha 56, p. 71. 


92c-93b. HAT Aeaary fate AeA | 

AMHCACSA ATT ATA PBAAVAT Il Sivajfanasiddhisvapaksadrstantasangraha 
IFP T.317, p.1001. Appears thus also (as 40i) among the sutras of the Sataratna- 
sangraha listed by P. Thirugnanasambandhan (1973:116) that are not in Avalon’s 
edition. 

93c-94d. TITST 

Wate aaga: Stdoag TIM: | ar Fagfer Teas gates | 
Qraa: BF ACMA: TASHAT TtaT-A: | Quoted thus in Siddhantasaravalvyakhya 
ad 1:5, p.50 and on pp. 32-3 ad siitra 5 of the Siddhantasitravrtti (but with pasu- 
tvam) and (prefaced by parakhye) in the Sivajnanasiddhisvapaksadrstantasangraha 


90 c. ohterrad] M”, SiSaVr; eff sree SaRaSan; efT MAA SaRaSan(vi) 
90 d. HeAeta ad ferry] SaRaSan; ART u AT (12) ul-6-Ju MY”; Ae Aete 
aq farrt SaRaSan(vl); AedT Feta ferry sisavr 91 a. UGH) SaRaSan, 
SiSGVr; WSEH MY 91c. AT] SaRaSan; AT MY 91d. Na aft] em; 
wasr af MY; west afe SaRaSan 92 ab. fafeogredst & Wray araurarfae- 
Wate | SaRaSan; fafeq yeaa @ MAY u eeraT u estar MY; fafa gz: 
TF WAY AaUTaeesrATT B (unmetrical) 93a. at] M”; Bal SiJAaSva- 
DrSan 938cd. TYCACEASHM: CATA FT TMA: ) SiSaVya, SiJhaSvaDrSan, 
SaRaSan; Ul-6-]U We: Mae T TMT: MY; U WH: M4 +aae TaN: 
B 


2G Teer at 


ay Fagted wera qeterd | 

aan: F ASMA: MHA TraTaAa: | 

Vata: TY: SATA HererarghCeqT: | Vl 
ward get fercar fared fahrered wftasnira: | 
UTeraraenrard cert aaferd ar shirtedt sx Sr Quill 


wafa Tuer Feds TyVeNifaareafawestet: TA: I 


IFP T.317, p.1015 (see apparatus), and in the Sataratnasanigraha (as 40j and 40k) 
among the sitras listed by Thirugnanasambandhan (1973:116-17) that are omitted in 
the edition; the last four padas only are quoted thus in the Sivajfanabodhasangraha- 
bhasya, p.9, § 1.8.1; the Sivagrabhasya, p.11; and in the Saivaparibhasa, (Mysore) 
p. 31. 


94 ab. fagfea Weavers) SiSaVya, SiABha, SaiPaBha, SiJiaBoSanBha, 
SaRaSan; Fagfecera area MY; faa fe wae SiJnaSvaDrSan 
94b. TINA |] O; AeAMHAY: SaRaSan 94c. BlaH:] MY, SiSaVya, SiABha, 
SaiPaBha, SiJfiaBoSanBha, SaRaSan; GTA SiJnaSvaDrSai 95 c. WEI? | 
em.; (Wert? MY” 


fadia: Ter: Wei 


TAIT Jars | 

adhd All Wah: Ada ASAT: | 

AATST SyTeicate: Wear freterarerea: il 2 it 
[SITT: HT] 

Tat: Aaaay J sat aTarerahese4r: | 


1. STITT SATeY 

Wah ATER: AAA ARWT: | AAT FURTCAe: Wear frererarersg: 
Siddhantasamuccaya of Trilocanasiva, IFP MSS T. 206, p. 90, and T. 284, p. 155. 
TUTer 


Gdadl Aeaaiegaaay ALA: | 

AaHAUT AvaTT AT — Sivajfidnasiddhisvapaksadrstantasangraha IFP T.317, 
p.1076. The first line alone is also quoted (prefaced by parakkiyattil) in Nanavara- 
navilakkattarumpatavivekam Vol.1, p.504; but see also apparatus ad 64c-65b. The 
third pada only is cited, together with 3:68c (see apparatus ad loc.) in Trilocana’s 
SomaSambhupaddhatitika (IFP MS T.170, pp.47-8 and GOML MS R 14735, p. 38). 
2-3b. Agm BAITST 

Wat: araaar & sut arareqaftesgen: | Qraaahwecagheraqqyaay¢: | 
aay Sfea gfenra afadret: anaferd:!  Sivajfanabodhasangrahabhasya, 
p. 11, §1.11.1. The same three lines also appear exactly thus as sitra 16 of the Sata- 
ratnasangraha, pp. 25-6. They are also quoted attributed to the Parakhya in Nanavara- 
navilakkattarumpatavivekam (Vol. 2, p.611), but with Pa ade qearg and followed 
by qtafarer Fratat and then by enavum 

rarraavarfe gead fe 7 Aaa A Acad Maa FE Gearfeacnfaqay | 
MTS HPAI HTS Aaas Ae: | AHHTHTaET HAT TTT TYATMAN: | 
epavum. (Cf. citation in the Sivajnhanasiddhisvapaksadrstantasangraha recorded in the 
next note and see footnote to translation of verse 2.) 2ab and 3ab are quoted together 


prefaced by the above attribution on p. 12 of the Sivagrabhasya. 


la. Wa: ] M’SiSa; faere SiJiaSvaDrSan; “ATHY NavViVi 


¢c Tea TT 


PLATA TAME ETAT ITT: Ul 2 I 

aay sfer afgart afadcrat: aaaferd: | 
ara: STH SFATATYATAT: Il 3 I 
WATS SATS | 
HAART T RtAy ATeTaT: | 

tT TACHI A SATS FTA SAAT Il ¥ I 


THM Tas | 

aay T Tetra aT Hrstarrdreag | 
ard SET Tee THT Wed SHEA | 
asters ardor wat arter Aladii Xl 
T HATAa Hate CaeAtafad: Had | 
arene cena sHhteaeattagranr: i € i 
unr: aratfahrferecser she ara | 
SIet AAI HAAN ANT ATT II 9 il 
AAMT HA ect HY TAT | 


3, 15cd, 2ab. Tea aarsfer afearafadrac: anaferd: | 
afewqerdchdt VWarersd I Sa (Hal u 1533) | 

Stara: cqardur Seararqartd: | WANITFAITEIM AT aacaaaenr | 

War: araaar & sur arareqafcegean: | thafaewer Prater seyarerfacrarr: | 
sme aver fren afetar Her wad | AAA AceHea STAT: TITAN: | 

THT (FUT 1533) TICAvate aratcarqeesta sy | 

T Iehd [:] CaAaese aharcarcr fear 

We Aaa (WHat aya 1317) ard aaad Ad: (em.; Ya: 7317; 
Tae: T533) | TATCHTSAST Focd TTT TITMAYT: | 
Sivajfanasiddhisvapaksadrstantasangraha IFP T.317, pp. 981-2 and IFP T. 533, p. 209. 
(Note that from patir viSvasya this is Vayaviyasamhita, Purvabhaga 6:2c-5.) 


2c. °famecare ) SiJiaBoSanBha, SaRaSan; efaecate MY; e&qeare NavVivVi 
5 a. ATTY | em. ; A MY 7 ab. oft steel ] conj.; oftiryT ser MY 
7c. Ql) conj.; FET MY 


fadrea: veo: aN 


ser Fraser arrearage ic i 
srararaheey SPaT ATT ATAT Tee Stare | 

TT Haters SAAT AATAST: Il 8 II 
fasray seequadat aaar sfert & aeaary | 
fart sarat arat araret fagaremar il 2011 


oT ATATAAY FETSTAT AT FEAT | 
area ereraraey fatraratfener F: il 22 1 


Tate SATs | 

farctateer er a Herheetters | 

Tare: are Ht afegds Ad FHA gz I 
TAIT Says | 


Tact Wage_ jaa afafafaas | 

Clot T HTH AT SATA TAT Feleaaraia: Il 23 I 
qdatetafae ar equa ad | 

Ter PAAR GHAR CH CATA I Oe I 
WeT seeT egal Hatear afhear wed | 
fAGUTFITTAT AT Tata Fafa i ey I 


10cd. fastt sarar avay avareet FATA | This is a much and variably quoted 


Carvaka tag of uncertain provenance: see notes to the translation. 


12b. T Helaesleer “STTcL This too is a much quoted tag: see note to the translation. 


15b. From the last syllable of this pada up to atgarede in 16a the tops are missing 
in M”. 


9b. RATT] conj. Isaacson; ATT? MY°; ATT x: x MY 11d. ] conj.; AT 
MY 12a. Ofer ST | conj.; °fafey MY (unmetrical) 12. THATS: | conj. ; 
Wale: MY 15b. Hatear arfedt way) Be; HATeay —[-4-)—aAq M”; HAreayT 
waTfady AAT BS 15 cd. AAUTYITCAT AT aaed Aafesy) Bs; WTIYO 
TUTMrarTT eT agaar eam’; zanrgwen a ageaaanteay 
SiJnaSvaDrSan 


qfgnredst aaret aearalatiae Fere: | 

aat equacar fe g warherd weer ve | 
qearatag war ceatat warftrar | 
TesMerttaar aq <eaifeay TF FATIH 0 
taaaedeante aeata: aad Tar | 
Fagvearer ceatar: added AAS I ec I 
TaHAeT starar awake: Ae_qar | 

ar she atacrear sfert e@q: ara WRT HI 22 I 
Wale Jars | 

fe aTeMnTeeTer Weeardee ferat | 
KATACa A> WAY FET ANTS SAAT: Il oll 
Tara Jars | 

addcndaded AMICI Tila | 

qT are aronrartefa & frfear afer: ii 221 
ard THaty arate: Wexad | 

Gedy WU MNTAHEIT TF FATA: Il 22 Il 


tt acardaded BIT THAT | 
ader ada: are sete farfaavect i 23 Il 


HEH THeaT far Aa: | 
Facareast aear are aarya FerATH 2¥ II 


aaa Adee ATHTAET FATA: | 
25-26b. agh Tet — 


16 a. GheaTet | B; TTAT ST AMY $ 17 ab. WA Arahat TAMMAT } conj.; 
We Tata awafar arrarforer MY 17c. °Tafaat] conj.; -TIAat MY 17d. ae 
carte FT AAT] conj.; FATS A U HAT MY 18d. ded] B; HL TM” 
20 a. MATINTTATal | conj.; WATIVTATal MY 20 ¢. STAI HAY ] conj. 
Kataoka, Isaacson; Aca WATE MY 20d. ANTI) em.; ane MY” 
25 a. AfaAUTdy Adee] M’SiSa; Afaartgty Tefarq{ SaRaU; afaarat 
Gee SaRaU(vi) 


fedra: yee: 22 


araretst SPE ara se acavareats ll 2y Il 


area qadiarer adaet Preah | 
SEIAATAAN AT HAA TAT FRTAT | 2E I 


aTaATsA Td: AAT ATaT AAA: | 

TeNTATA Nq: SATA Tal eqatsta: i 9 1 

Tadd WAT Ad WAAAY TTUT | 

ware + fart afert aarfafe: wari 2c Il 

FP THPaTeT UES ATA | 
afruradt weatery (aeafery) Adarder AAA: | 
sreretrt SIT are gE (Ee) acHtorcsfs | 
array agerTeT aaKey Preaatre | afd | ad Sataratnasangraha 4, p.8. The same 
unit is quoted by Trilocanasiva in his Siddhantasamuccaya (IFP T.284, p. 138 [=MS A] 
and IFP T.206, p.68 [=MS B], GOML MS R 14394, p. 12 [=MS C].) 
29-30d. fafraHratred aes AeA | 
set FT Aegan adardy afedqs ii 
Sataratnasangraha 15, p.24. But note that the Sataratnollekhini (p. 25) cites and 
justifies a variant: faferetranrer wege aearctate we aegewecareqan: 
aeantcarcayeant | auraqreaqygedt— Ffrapecedryagarert a fa-gue | 
Tae Beat Carenasatgeqes il 
(The editor of the SaRaU identifies this as Pauskara 8:18c-19b, where the verse indeed 
occurs, but the commentator probably intended to refer to its occurrence as Parakhya 
6:6c-7b. The label ATCHAYS eT is odd.) 
The longest unit is that quoted in the Mrgendravrttidipika ad vidyapada 8:3: aah 
Tae 
FPaaPatred wage AeaHtay | TWerst FT Age adaHralyareds 
RROTAT Aa AT Tears satraa i aay T WAS BH ara afar waa 
25 d. achYarettgy |] MY”, SiSa MS B; AcHv IIT SaRaU, SiSa MSS AC 
26 b. dger) M”, SaRaU, SiSa MSS AB; @dpfere SiSa MSC 29 ab. T- 
Wee] MY; Gage MrVrDi, SaRaU(vl); TEE SaRaSan; TEE A NavViVi, 
SiJnaSvaDrSan317 ; 7 AEE SiJnaSvaDrSan533  29b. WEFT) MY, SaRaSan, 
NaViVi, SiJnaSvaDrSan; ARaCAT MrVrDi 


RR Tet ar 


SWearty FT Begqed adaray afeaq i 2° 1 

arora za at Adare sqatad | 

Gal 7 WAH YH ATA altar AIT | 

Fafa at Aah FT TAT: Il Bell 

TAS Jars | 

qT: oat araHee: Hy Fears &: | 

aurea 2 Prats gxaed Hrafaegas I 32 1 

TAT Jars | 

armed fert yt + Fat HITS | 

aaa ad: araHar <ferar> | 32 1 

aarp tag: HATE: | 

fraratpast mat + Arava: Ferg: 33 11 

SETS TUT TET Bed ahoHAreray | 

carey Fear aez ar fear artartrar il ax i 

HATA Tala TAS HT saay | 

TIT HT TET Rarer WHAT HAT IN 3Y I 

ager atone wife: ravear sfayvad | 
Cf. Nanavaranavilakkattarumpatavivekam Vol. 2, p.612: atu niccuvdcattil [= nigvase] 
frParrarer Tee T ASHTON | 
SWert FT acqedt waaay afer 
a wfHeatr ATaT FadAgeieidd| The same unit is quoted in the Sivajnana- 
siddhisvapaksadrstantasangraha (IFP T.317, p.982 and IFP T.533, p.209), where 
T. 317 reads FauTa for Jae? and T.533 reads FEreHT? 
29d. °y ated] SaRaSan, SiJnaSvaDrSan; eyafad MY; eqeafed MrVrDi; 
oy afer NaViVi 30c. Gat 7 WAH BH] MrVrDi; wat 7 WAH U MY ; 
Wer {| WAHSH MrVrDi(vl) 31 b. ACT] conj.; BT MY 32d. far 
aT] conj.; U M” 33 a. GUTYT tfaevs: ] conj.; auryhr the: Wa: MY’; 
aught tf: avs: B 33d. eH: FRTe: ) conj. Isaacson; eH UNfATA: 


MY 35b. HUNPTT em.; HUNfad MY 35d. af ReTe } B° (correction 
in blue); 3 U Age MY B* 


fadra: Yeo: 23 


waaay: ar wie: wavaT Fe SHEATH 3¢ Il 
ATUUTUTRY aT SIT eaete|T fryer: FA: | 
MITA ea MPHSTTAA FT: il 39 I 
TRH HAIPNSTA SAT APS AAT | 
aeeeasy Acad: araatatce FerAl ac 
arar = 7: Pramrte: arnupraataty | 
Tar Hts achpeyq aaanyaateaz ii 3° I 
WHaatan at Hote AAA | 
Wat copayment fareaCsTa TTA Il Yo I 
ast TARAS ATTRA HATS az | 
atte Tar wea sar Arte waa il ve il 
ase: FeMteT TAs: TANT: | 
Tae aE: Wray Way PTT vz I 
(srfafamn: |} 


aepeamtarm sa famr: wfHaa: | 

aTAT TIBT FT Ut FT Arey AcfHeaqes | 
42 ab. Tee: PTS T 7 We: Trond: quoted in the Mrgendravrttidipika ad 
vidyapada 4:2, and quoted without attribution by AghoraSiva ad Tattvatrayanirnaya 6, 
p. 139 and ad Sarvajnanottara ‘vidyapada’ 1:24, IFP 47818 p. 46. Also quoted without 
attribution in Trilocana’s Siddhantasamuccaya (IFP MSS T.284, p. 169, and T. 206, 
p. 106) and in his Somagambhupaddhatitika (IFP MS T.170, p.11). 
43c—44c. MATT SIT aes: FMT FT Ne: TaN: KTH 
‘aay Saar TUS FT areat aafaaror 7 
aafaahor aaa eAaT T AAT I 
aTaacgfateargy war art fret fer 
anteryT aTaT aqresr’ gearte Mrgendravrttidipika ad vidyapada 4:2. 


36 c. UYT: | conj.; TFIYY: MY” 37 a. WaT AT] conj.; RY ATAaT 
MY (unmetrical) 38 b. °@RAT] em.; °HTT MY; CHHA B 41a. ae] 
MYe; aut MY’ 438d. HefHeaaqey |] conj.; HAfHaraey MY; aefaafetr m4 


MrVrDi (unmetrical) 


2 TUS aT 


THaHOT WAMAT FT AAT TF AAA I ¥3 Il 
(arar Fraaartr | 

ad aaeay: we sar ait Frat feraq 

Ae-qTaT AAfEST aTASTaATATAT Il YY I 


aay ar a: waren faqtre: sera: | 
Wad Hed TAT AT AAT AAG hi vy I 
woer Fer: Frarcary ar ANAT: Aer | 
@ Jar SISA wear aT whasteaga4r i Xe Il 


44. THe Toer— aaacgfereany war wt fra ferrt 

afert amraqtest araeqaarfrari xf Siddhantadipika of Madhyarjuna, 
IFP T. 112, p. 181, IFP T. 284, p. 116. 

44—47b. aTATfatT ea TWTeT — 

wer ancafeca aur at rer ferent arfert arar aqfest aaeaearwar i 
aay aT aeaarwarn fartraecqaaray i waft Het Yar AT AAT avast 
TIBT FeaHATTA, BY AT SUIT A FAT TASAT WaT AT aT T Wsa- 
War ii 

WARIAGAAY Wewwsaaited: | Sivapijastavavyakhya, p. 60. 

45. HST WAT 

aay av a: (aTae@q 7.112) waren fagtiaeaeta: (TAT: T.284) | afr 
Hed FAT AT ara Eft Siddhantadipika of Madhyarjuna, IFP T. 112, p. 181 
and IFP T. 284, p. 116. 


43 e. TAfaAHCT WAMAT TW] em. (unmetrical); @fetfaacr WawaT FZ MY 
(unmetrical) ; antaatotr away MrVrDi (unmetrical) 44a. ad aye: 
weuT] MY; aTaacgtexcary MrVrDi, SiDi; Wer aacafAtfa SiPiStaVya 
44 b.at] M”, SiDi; @tf MrVrbDi; at SiPaStaVya 44 c. ATAT] MY”, 
MrVrDt, SiPaStaVya; aT%° SiDr 44d. °aaTPRaT] MY, SiDi; °@ArxaT 
SiPaStaVya 45 b. fava: eauta:] MY; faadraente: sip; farvta- 
RAGA SiPaStaVya; fardra eaasray SiPaStaVya (vl); fartta waqar- 
TI SiPaStaVya 46 a. RTBY FET: ) conj.; FAST FET: M”; WET Ferre 
SiPaStaVya 46 b. TUT: J conj. Kataoka; Tay: Tl: MY; TY sue: 
SiPaStaVya 46 c. Jat] MY; Jat SiPaStaVya 46d. aT wfaeteagar | 
MY; aT a WT TABaFAT SiPaStaVya 


facta: Teo: RX 


wahtaaAan Werternarted: | 
ATUUT TABATA SET TAT TASHA AT: Il v9 II 


CRRA TATU ATT: | 
ar grafag wear aT wat Vgatda4ril ¥c Il 


Us HAT Tar peaTgsHAA teary | 
ar Ug esata Verrarr argu il 8 II 


arad F Sart Aeate FT ATA | 
GT Ale HY Wear ATaTeaT TAM FRAT IH Yo 


aa arereheeae Prfrar Fes 
47c-60. TJ — 


TOUT TISTNA: Far TASyPT: | Tarerarsar SATA UTAHT AT AT: I 
art grafag wer aT weategattay | Ugo HAT GAT MEARE TT I 


aera fafatr ayr awerads aera: ae faaferar afer aeeray ar ac: 
TAT Tl 

WIRGAATCAY AT HATMAAT AIT | AAT Ager apr fafere faad sear 
war Satya Hey FrHT TF AT! seh AT HahaMAIT TTT TT NI 


Tats at Tar Aas VITA | AAA at Aayarhs HET I 
aaa aqacgenican whenever | Ateedeayats Fegargramrfehr: 
eaafafay: SMAI aT eal TUT! aaaes Prorat acd Aahe aT TAATHI 
TAIT FAST AMT MHA | Af | Sivapiijastavavyakhya pp. 60-1. 


47 b. Rrereaerwaifed: | conj.; PAB T Wesifear MY; Werweanatifad: 
SiPaStaVya 47 cd. ATAU FASUTAT SET FAT SreTaTET: ) MY; S-aUT 
TIGATNAY FAT TASyNPTT: SiPaStaVya 48c. WHT] SiPuStaVya; sfrar MY 
48 d. WHT | pe wie MY 49 b. Wearqudattear] M”; wTeagH- 
wafeat SipuStaVya 50 b. AEH FT AMAT) conj.; AAT FT AAT M’;; 
GEHL Ae-AUT SiPaStaVya; Beart TF Ta SiPaStaVya (vl) 50 c. AT 
aret ] MY; €@T &let? SiPaStaVya 


26 Te at 


aclaat ferar Tar arethaetactera¢r il 42 1 
faauTfraareay caaareafisdy | 

Hearal fafa at pA AT TaATAy Ml WI 

fear ay farferar arfersy acehay area: Y:7 | 
TUATSSAALAAT AT BATA WIT V3 I 


AYA Geet =F fates fared seats 
aay Hatgaraey sara fafa _{ ATi vr it 


WMA Get Wad Wetter war Fare: | 
TATA WAUT WAT TATHAAATATT Il WE il 


anitagraaded TarAlrartahyaar | 
Rate It TAT ARNT ATA Il W9 I 


qa at Taya Tey | 
AQT SAAT AT WHeAAT STAT Il Xo Il 


51 c. HAA | SiPaStaVya; ATefaat MY 52 cd. AT WaAAdTaNA] M’; 
ANT AWAIT HAA: SiPaStaVya; AT AMATTANA: SiPuStaVya (vl) 53 a. aT 
farferat ] MY”; feafaraT SiPaStaVya; fafarferaT SiPaStaVya (vl) 53 b. aY- 
vat: Jt: ) MY; AY AT: YATT SiPaStaVya 53 c. °AATTRMTT] MY; °a- 
ATCAY SiPaStaVya 53d. AT HATAAT | conj.; AHATATAT M”; AT AaT- 
yarar SiPaStaVya; QT HATTA SiPaStaVya (vl) 54 a. WET War “aT | 
SiPaStaVya; WAT Wat FT MY 54d. aeaTAT fate } MY; wear fe- 
@UW SiPaStaVya 55 a. aT] MY; &@T SiPaStaVya 55 cd. AT AcHATecay- 
QW FAAIIMTY TT | conj.; ATIAAT THRITEATAIaNMT ANT SiPaStaVya; ArTe- 
Wawa Ul-7-]U MY; ATA AAVIWAIAIAATY MW SiPaStaVya (vl) 
66 a. WMA Aad ATA | SiPaStaVya; UMTAT Aaet ATT MY; EMA Bat 
Wet B 57a. °ARET] MY; CUNT SiPaStaVya 57 b. Taraverfahye- 
aT] conj.; Tarverfehrae MY; fagr omfehrdar (Far (vl)) SiPaStaVya 
57 c. TAT MY SiPaStaVya; WaAUTfe SiPaStaVya (vl) 57 d. ATANeTe | 
MY; Way Sale SiPaStaVya © °ARTAT] conj.; eTEate MB; °ARTATT 
B°(?), SiPaStaVyaé 58 c. FAITH) MY”; SAAT SiPaStaVya 


fadra: ye: 219 


qt: Ceca HeHargramfehr: | 
aaateafay: AMIGA AT SAAT TUT HA Il 
watch Proves act Tata a TTT! 
AAAACT SAST ATH WHFS Il Go Il 
WHAT GATT AT HU TOAST | 
QT Wea WaT TATE TMT ATH GI 
(Sareq aaycrada{e | 
wr: wtatemrr afr: wat wetstar | 
Vag: AAAI AeA TTT HA Il G2 Il 
arearyae: are att aahas aa: | 
GUT decattetacnal favaraer att Fl G3 
afeary waded are agatery oe: fare: | 
AIHA Toad sailed IT AAAI EY I 
FrRecrarrarherearele ag: TAT: | 
FRTaTe FT Aa KHAO Tea I GY I 


ararar a: Terat sfeafarrany sf erga | 

aur wired aT: ATHTC: TAATAHA: Il GE ll 

saree Fray ge: srarfeaerad | 
64c—65b. parakkiyattil 
Adhal AeToarey Aaaay HRW: | AHN Tessa aI At aaa 
fafeorarraritearceaar: TOT: fara: ) amare ..-(see apparatus ad 71c-73b 
below). Nanavaranavilakkattarumpatavivekam Vol. 1, p.504. Note that the Sivajnana- 


siddhisvapaksadrstantasangraha (IFP T.317, p. 1076) also combines 2:lab with 2:64cd, 


for see apparatus ad verse 1. 


69a. AC: ] SiPGStaVya; AT MY 59c. HT] SiPaStaVya; ATTT MY 62 
c. Wag: | conj.; WaT? MY 638c. Acatfefad ] conj. Isaacson; Tales M” 
64a. Td] conj.; STE MY 65 b. TVA: ] MY; TEA: fea: NaVvivi 


2c Tet IT 


qapararerar et Frere + fa feraeri Got 

a7 ata: aferar ar ar ae etwarearc | 

ate ATT Wace APTA UAT TATA Il GS II 

TAT AGagt Fetred Fotafeas | 

wer zat ered afacrarcer Fareate ii 68 I 

qt cer wade Ager TATA: | 

FagraTerar eo gtarertacrfaraa il v0 il 

wTSeTerdeanry caer sa HA | 

ATTAATT AIH, WTATRTA TEMA Il 192 1 
70. SNATTS T 
ad eet acer frat WATT: | 
Frevarcaar eo gfrarerfictery | Saivaparibhasa, (Mysore) p. 30. 
70c-71b. Agm Tet — 
Freaareray eo sheangreferat strecfarncentt ered sfRareras 
Sataratnasangrahollekhint p. 16. Also quoted in the Sivajnanasiddhisvapaksadrstanta- 
sangraha (IFP T.317, p.996 and IFP T. 533, p.221) and incorporated into the Siva- 
yogasara (p. 120) and, without attribution, into the Sivayogaratna (verse 137). 
71c—73b. parakkiyattil 
aaadl AeToardy AaAaT ASAT: | AHA Tears safer At ar-qar 
fafacraTraritcarcerag: Tor: fara: 1 amrearhe easy Porarereaee sarc I 
DIAM ITHAT VHT AMT AAT HTH Ades Wey Achar ade fea: | 
DIGRIRCCIE Cs + artfeadtat: | Nanavaranavilakkattarumpatavivekam Vol. 1, 
pp. 504-5. 


71—78c. tops missing in M”. 


68 d. UMM? | conj.; UNMTT? MY 70a. WadeT) MY; WAAeT SaiPaBha 
70 d. owfaHctfard |] MY; oxfecreoryt SaiPaBha; eToretferay{ SaRaU, SiJna- 
SvaDrSan533, SiYoRa; °c TA SiJndSvaDrSan317, SiYoSé 71 ab. HTTS- 
qfercearfe ezeq sfRarers ] SaRaU, SiJfaSvaDrSan; —[-9]—e 7 ¢ fe 
aT ST WM” (tops missing); HTT SVET TeaT taey sfearearay B; gT4t- 
Sreq wears eaed sfRareTay SiYoRa, SiYoSa 71 c. wTTAATT Adar] 
NaVivi; AT 7 FH AT TT & FT FT M” (tops missing); ANTAaAT Adee B 
71 d. TATETeaeNATd |] B, NaVivi; J 7 AT RT SA =F M ATA M” (tops 


missing) 


fade: veo: 2e 


DAM THT ARAB AIT | 
WITH Add MST achal add Farag: ti 21 


HIMTHAL T AI STATAT: | 
free gearaey cer forstafahaatt ii 93 


wader wary fag wate ade: | 
atea ware aThrtsy TATA I oY It 


ateanre Geeg afer ferdatg ra 
TT et Ade aeqaewr wafeT il oy I 


farqaftatnyqereurtrad: Ferry 
7 VAWAEcaaTs: Bera AIT | 
TT SEUTATA FSTATATURT FS: ll 9G I 


sere: fe gaat fe afear scdifsa: Fe: | 
Ma SET Aaa Ht AhHrayt Arar vig ii 


stRareranad Ger Taras | 


73cd.7 45 © FE AFT ~ TFT BS] tops missing in M”. 
77ab. @T T & @ [RT] tops missing in M”. 


72 ab. PIAA THAT AIA UT? |) B, NaviVi;, TTAMTHAAATT 
eq =UT AT M” (tops missing) 72c¢. 31h Add Wet) B, NaVivi; WIR 
qT TW SM” (tops missing) 72d. add fare: ) B, NaViVi; TT a7 IT a: 
MY (tops missing) 73a. HATHA ) conj.; HT HTT H AT TT M” (tops 
missing); AATMITHANA B; HGHTITHAVT Navivi 73 b. T erefeaarart: | 
B, NaViVi; T eT VTA TTT Tt: M” (tops missing) 73 cd. EE FEA 
aa fasfafafaryt) Bs TAG ETE eT + TA — MY Thad. WAT 
ware fag wate aaa: |) conj.; — & wate ada: MY; ATeraqwaniafagar- 
aft add: B76 f. FATATATURT | em.; FAATAVTRT MB; FeTATATURT B° 
77 ab. gery: fa gaat fe aferay] em.; gert fe yr ar re a rer ay M’; 
sert fa gaat fe afer B 78b. Terayda | MY; aErayaHy SaRaSan; 
TeIGya Hy PraVya, SiJaaBoU; TAGLAR SoSaPaTi 


30 Tae aT 


TUT: AT ST Aecer: MhHagq: WT: il 9a i 


au Sfedt Ter sfee aahfecr | 
AAT Srcarghetay ASAT il 98 It 


autedce Sh aTeafert att fare ue a: | 
ata fe AAT TWAT THRATTT i co I 


aft wgaearq fete wfafsar | 
vadiaaar efethrete fafaPaar i ce it 


aaa waghehagewr asad | 
fUTSTST aa sare ater fadeE:t i oz it 


[PITS AAT: | 
waaay arreicarhaargray: Wy: | 
78. sfgareratedt geq qaraydan Get: at sx ater: ufMaage: w- 


yz: | Sataratnasangraha 8, p.16. The first three padas are quoted in Trilocana- 
Siva’s commentary on the Somasambhupaddhati (IFP T.170, p.54) and in the Prabhé-. 
vyakhya on the Kriyakramadyotika, p.111, lines 17-19 (in both cases prefaced by ity 
uktam Srimatparakhye) and are quoted without attribution on p.45 of Mr. Ganesan’s 
forthcoming edition of the Sivajianabodhopanyasa. 

799a.3h FT MATIN —Lea fear ma efi AghoraSiva’s Mrgendra- 
vrttidIpika ad vidyapada 5:18 and, identically, in Trilocana’s Siddhantarthasamuccaya 
IFP T. 206, p. 70. 

83—86b. Cf. Pauskara 8:29c—32 

aaran art afaar yor aq: wir: i agot ver: qarrararearaeya: | 
tarrafedsst: aT aq: Tae: | ETT Yasarqaryeya: | 
warts tarsa aH: Wad | aad ANAT HOTA AUT: | 
AUIS TEATS eA aaaa Ty | 


79d. Feat) MY; Few MY” 80 b. HT] Ms; APE MY*™ = 81c. &- 
fro] em.; Sé M”*; Sfe: MY°* 82 ab. wagtafite ] conj.; wagtetate MY 
83 a. AATTAY ALIA | conj.; TATA TIA MY; Aaa aay ay 
Pau 83 b. frargureay: wy: ] M”; fro gor aq: wir: Pau 


fadia: Yeo: 32 


aT Yt Taha: TaTaTAT HAAS: fll G3 I 


aaa afetiaedadgq: Taree: | 

aT  Faql Sst AAT: Io I 
aaatas tay SF Fat: Werad | 
AHea AMAA ET HoT A FATT: Il GY I 


ATAU ASAT: CIT AauTStararste: | 
Yard TET al ee: YSAst: War i ck I 


ttaretaHeay SaqrTartatadd: | 

TTT: Prargeatcader: eae: Il oy Il 
we a faaar fee ar Fear fereattear | 
sfearaaaae at aafays Aer: cc I 


Teearattattcarsyqerantae Teal: | 
steaadgqara Tata <A Seder ll 58 | 


amar saferar Fut tararararyeysy: | 


84c-85b. EMTUT F YAPT BWealayeals: | 

aad sy tay SO ae Ieyad il Quoted thus, prefaced by nanu and without 
attributing label, in the Jnanaratnavali (Madras GOML MS R 14898, p.90, IFP MS 
T. 231, p. 100). 

90-95. These verses are comparable with Mrgendravrttividyapada 3:9-13, in which 
similar nirvacanas are given for these names. More closely parallel is the account of 
the Matanga: vidyapada 4:18c-30b. 


83 cd. AT QT Tahrtet: aarararvearat: |] MY; a@yot (ar Yur PauVr) 
Teh: warararartateth: Pau 84 ab. kT Ufedt-tetergq: ] MY”; #- 
wrarafedtst: AT ay: Pau 84c. Sat M)] MY, JnaRa; HMTATTaT Pau 
85 b. Ahet: ] MY, Pau; WHS JidRa 85 c. ATUAETST) Pau; WeiIaIT 
MY 86 ab. aTeata: Sard Adurstaatstea: | conj.; AAAT: VAT AIAATY- 
faaitr: MY; cea aerraatearfefaqaary Pau 89 b. Fatarfaq ] conj.; 
qarafaq MY sed. eMfHadda4ry | conj.; of u WaiatT M” 


32 TUTea aT 


apa Way SHAT TH AsHarsqHa ii Xo 
orien Rraar wet Japedt F Sa: | 
Tear a FSI BET oavegy AT FTA: VI 
HAT: WTSI ST Wala Fea SIA | 
MACACA ARTA AT: I V2 I 
Wal Aeacareary at arrefesad | 

area Afare Wey CST TET TTT: Il AI 
aaa Ceear aT Aaa ATTY: | 
AICI Tt: Hed APTA AT vv i 
ear ar arhrar aft: waratt: & Fad | 
ATAVUS HA ATS TUT EAT AAT: | RY | 


Teed sat we: wet: fafeqhanerRrAr: | 
@ Ud Aaarger: Youd F Ie: FAT VEU 
[ATAe: | 

at fas: Pare: srret aacit farsact: fer: | 
90cd. Th VT BIMTST 
apart WaT aH AelfHaraHy Afr Siddhantadipika of Madhyarjuna, 
IFP T. 112, pp. 175-6 and IFP T. 284, p. 114. 
92ab. Cf. Matangavidyapada 3:23cd: aalal Feat WHAM: Wied Jed! and 
Rauravasitrasangraha 10:32cd” ITT Wea aarar Rea TAT: | 
93 c-94b. Cf. Mrgendravidyapada 3:12c-13b: AAfaAataaea seers CUTaa: | 
aret Urey TT TR Feavat arayeya: | 
96. TUT Tea — Goud award: fafaqhanarhiny: | 
@ Va Feaegey: Youd Sal Te: fara: i Sivajnanasiddhisvapaksadrstantasangraha 
IFP T. 317, p. 1116. 


90 c. Udy] MY; GUT SiDr 94c. Fah: ] conj.; Aft: MY 96 a. AY TT] 
MY ; TCA SiJaSvaDrSan 96 c. AAHTART: ] MY; AACRM: SiJAaSvaDrSan 
96d. Wt: ] MY; °Y Te: SiJnaSvaDrSan 97 a. fas: fara: wTET) Be; 
fas: fare: srrerret MY (unmetrical); FE: (7?) fare: WEY BS 


fadra: Yeo: 33 


ferqerfataararar eqat SyAeeT Ti Voll 
aersy Gat eit at Shrarey Has: | 
TATA F VGA WHTMAT | GI 


shrarey & ANT FT aT SAT_GVarea: | 
feray at samet satfe: Tear Wear: Ak It 


O RTT aa aT Sea APT SAT | 
ATAU THAT ATT: HTRVT AAA Il Roo 
HYVES: FT THAT TM: Aenrsa4nhad: | 
AHS AT SIPEG TT: Il 208 II 
afataar + waray weueafaardd: | 

WAha: Wen we WerfeacatfHmeard il 202 I 
TAIT AITHTST TATCINTSA | 
FHUTAETHATT: CATH AATC HATA SATS: Il 203 I 
qh tT eareqare ateqhaes | 

ay Saez Tea ere4deheary Tadd il ger I 
yatceramnyprsaya aaa | 

THATS A Sred Wate Wafy:STeT: it oy I 


99 ab. ahrardy & NY + Ady SMETated: quoted by Aghorasiva (without 
attribution) ad Mrgendravidyapada 4:15 and 13:5, ad Tattvaprakasa 44-5, ad Tattva- 
trayanirnaya 6, ad Tattvasangraha 44-5, ad Ratnatrayapariksa 30ab and 180c-182b. 
Also quoted without attribution in Trilocanasiva’s Siddhantasamuccaya (IFP MSS 
T. 284, p. 169, and T. 206, p. 106) and in his Somasambhupaddhatitika (IFP MS T. 170, 
p. 11). 

105cd. Cf. Kirana 2:29cd: Frat TeatHarrr Rad wafer :eyE: | 


99 a. SPT F J Aghorasiva (except in the Tattvatrayanirnayavrtti, where he reads 
with M”), Trilocana; atfaatft T MY 100 a. & fars=are ] conj. Isaacson; t4- 
Farsare MY e °Ota@erege |] MY’; coe xe x Te MY 103c. cate: ] em.; 
cary MY 105 b. °HaNE afaarAa4r ) conj.; eTAVa-dtrarar M” 


38 


106 d. T FT Ate? | conj.; 7 At BAtee MY 
110 d. Mararafrareast | conj. Isaacson; AWearary Fraraeay MY 
TaTtaeat | conj. (unmetrical) ; anata MY 


M”Y 


ara: Waraaranied aa area eqayr | 
UTANaay aat TT AAA: Il 208 I 


WATTLE Sqeq T UTM AV Uae ari 

Saat J ST SAWN WITS SATA: Il Qo Il 
qT ated aa a wet aa agtec: fra: 

ate weer at 7 Sat ATaTaT a HY FIT II You I 
saterr: a ady aautataarad: | 

GUTH: TATAY AIT: TATA: Il 20% I 

wtahr: ye eer sf aa: why add | 
SUSTATA TAO ATITATATTIT AT Il 220 Il 


mar saarfadat ar aacper Frartt ar 
a7 Pata wasorfadatcay: yr FRHar 29¢ 


aprary aaedsr frat Ft aaa: | 
anaate varatat Ferar ar FETATSAT Hl 222 II 


afaqraamtfaar: Terr aferat Tar | 
aur afer garage & aur Arve it 293 1 


ava: Tethers feayacy TT: | 


TIT: Aral SET sHAay AY STP WT: 4 Il ger I 


Tatas Ay THAT ASAT: | 
ata Prater PaeqpaEHad: Il Vey II 


TUS at 


108 c. AT] em. Isaacson; it 


llla. 2- 


llic. Warqtfee ] em.; AT 


wtfte MY 113 a. afaqraaaifear: ] conj.; afgyraasr fear: MY 113c. q- 


fart | conj.; TAT TM” (unmetrical) 


114a. dvq: ] B; Wy: M” 


114 b. fa- 


ATH FT: ] conj.; fekvacmvyt: MY 115 b. AGTAVAT ] conj. Isaacson; T- 
CATaTHT MY = 115 c. AVARTA | conj.; FATT MY 115d. eURHAA: | conj. 
Isaacson; °Uefcad: M” 


fadra: Yeo: 34 


sau fafarrared Faery WT | 
TATA STAT TEATS TAAT TACIT: I Vee i 
[arer freer: | 


aatquepearear frarfeetararera: | 
Fratfreraxred set fearers nates: it 2219 1 
Way SAaaarayT Gar: TeatHarag: | 
Fray: frat qatasae PHSHIT: Il ec 1 
wHeg: we Vest art Frafdteraq: wa: | 
srqave: penrerarer:t Peravst yee fear: i 228 I 
aurea: ad wd: TAY | 

aurte farererentatrarege FRTaT: Il g20 11 
Fada ATarsataateran: | 

Wacara aMTEeaeT Faery YGFAT: 11 222 


CUTATTAT CAT CAT ACH APTA HTT TF 
fraqeaqar: ad fa 7 FT VAM: | 22 


at shrart wpdtear wardeataaitedr: | 
117a. Cf. Kirana 4:29e. There, as here, two readings seem equally possible: watqa- 
SHeBld: or TAlAUTEH: Wd: 
118ab. Cf. Matanigavidyapada 4:9ab: AWATAT SAMA FATS ais faayste4rst | 
121 ab. Cf. Matangavidyapada 5:12cd: Fadacaedaah TAA ST | and 
Rauravasitrasangraha 1:15cd: @torgreaere ararssfaaterar: | (Cf. also 
Rauravasutrasangraha 2:4d and 4:20c.) 
122cd. Cf. Matangavidyapada 4:55cd: Aetfaaaar: ad fe q FT VAT Far: | 
123ab. Cf. Rauravasitrasangraha 1:14ab and 2:12ab: ay sfrare Whafed Fara=ar- 
fafrsttear: | 


117 a. AATJUSHSBIa | em.; AAFATEHTSBI-AT MY 118 b. FWA: ] conj.; 
qerTo MY 119 a. UHeF: ] conj.; THRG M” 119b. °TZ:] em.; °F] M” 
119 c. SATA: ] MY’; Sfmt xix Wit: MY 120 b. WT: aaa OTT | 
conj.; TU WaUTeTaT MY 121 b. ATarattaatatar: ) conj.; ATaTaafaa- 
fot: MY 


2G Tet TT 


STAT AeTedN Tanerfacwterd: i 222 I 
TOOT TR TAM TAA OTS : | 
Haeated TUTST Wreared SAT SPTHTPT: |i V2~ it 
Wate Says | 

Frat afe sorerar far ardarartehr: | 

ast fert sfrarited + ofa: sreard ceri 224 1 


THIN Tavs | 

caq atader adtteet YTATIAT A: | 
afaar + mar: war aateater Farrag ii 926 Il 
qeathega ant Friar WaT | 

Arar faamracad ferasraqratear: il 229 Il 
adaraaaated Frafeare at: | 

aa & shaper: ad wreredcerrqr aay | 
oats ata Frarararegarercty it g2c tl 


fearmrareagercncatedta gerard earaarae: | 
Wear: F AraMtaes aad Madea ea HAS MAA AT SIS: | LV Il 


Nata arowrest vata Gfavenifaarenfaaredqeny fata: 1 


128cd. tops missing in M”. 


123 d. THHCT? } em. Isaacson; TAHA MY = 127 b. FARTARAT ] conj.; faer- 
mat. MY 128c. aa & Sfaqpat: Ad) conj.; aAeAT Fat: Ad B; ~ T? HA? 
Fr? Ha: QT MY 128d. WaTeACeUTATAAT |) B; WAT AT Tara 
3 TM” (tops missing) 129 c. wreT° | conj.; Tet? M” 


Wada: Ter: Wait 


fear faareareranr wearayefraar | 
Fray AATAATAMT A CHAMPA TST Il 2 Il 
[ faerrearc: ] 


Get FT WTA: AIHA: | 
arotatasarty Fa WeTTIAT Il 2 
= Frgneraa4n: | 


Travel areas Warery aaah Ti 3 


waTeay SFr ATUL Ava a INT | 
AS AAMT Wyatt AMAT: Il ¥ I 
PIT RIT: WATER AT ACHAT: | 

Ha AATITATRT SFE FEIT STATCAT: Il XI 


feoarfeear Fated sferaracast eratfera:: | 


wurestatayar trator arar sft + 
deh Taal Wanacd Tahsaar i & Il 


Wale Jars | 


wnyfee: Frat saat arhifsateatete: | 
T WAH WH: Gaal arte: Fee: i oil 


7. Cf. Pauskara 8:26c-27b (as read in the Pauskarabhasya): 
mnfes: frat sqat arhrf-sataatite: | 
TMUATHC WH: Adel Sulddt: FT! 


2 a. WTaTATY: ] em.; WTATATY MY 4 a. WaTear]) MY*; wTaTear MY 
4b. Olagite ] Bo; ATa-adiee M’B™ 5a. R09 RI: ] em; MIT RIVA: 
MY; (a BY )QAeT RMIT: Bo 6b. ATUCAAT ] conj.; AMAT MY 7d. ATT: 
fard:] MY’; culated: @ TF Pau 


3c, 


Y SAAMIAT VTE SAOSWATTAT: | 
arraed Fert ay deaeaat fa WaT II I 
WHIT Jays | 
sqdeany taeq SSrarRaAaNTe: | 
quitetaat Aal AT AAMT {HaAT Ii 3 Il 

fer qaeeweared Tact sa fHer wy: | 
AHA TAA WAHATATCAMTCTT Il Ro Ml 
parercaeqery wtrarey cata: | 

BWI HA AAG AA TOT HAT Il 22 I 
Rrasiararstt arrare areatatad: | 
mead at saatet SFT Aerard: BATCRAT: Il 22 Il 
a7 afta Faaqar sat qauaradeqad | 
at Tadaded reer ATA: Il 23 1 

ar sft qeafmafasarry sfaareater | 
UTTAR AT STATED FTCA Il VY I 
Gert: TAMANTAAY RTataM I: | 

Raa at cats ratory referers ii ey 
TUT Had A Fare: Farcaryetad: | 

GHA ATT: ATC: ALAST AE: Il 2G It 


9-10. Cf. Pauskara 8:27c-29b: 
aadeaey taeq eeeararadanre: | antfecsar wal aT waa HAT | 
fa qaewMaded aac: fae WY: | araHeT FT AUT aea aaraeanla awd | 


10cd. Cf. Kirana 9:16cd: faequewetqraret acted F: Fara: | 


8b. ATSSWATTAT: ] conj.; ot VeWaTaaT: MY 


TUea aT 


9d. Wadqe? ] MY; wade 


Pau 10a. °@lqcd] BoPauVr; °alacd MYB”; °hqcd PauBha 10b. AaeyT 


Sa facet) MY; @aet: faet & Pau 


15 c. Bradt ] em.; SATaay M” 


12d. MATL) B; BATT M” (unmetrical) 


qdta: weer: a 


aq arara: fate area freage: | 
QAM SIMA AMT AAGUTPTET Ii V9 I 


THUAT TSM AGATAMe TT: | 
ATAU AAPA: CATEVATHT TAT ATAT Il 8c It 
war THT A Vat: TAT: Caaf: | 
TENTASATUT SAT GUT AST: Il 22 Il 
ASST HY A Was wags | 
TOW > TUT WHAT AIT TAMTAT I oll 
STAT: WHT T ATAU Say TaTeayT AAT | 
JT aareat ater: afaevertufaqrea:s: | 
TAICAT T AIT ATYCAYNAT HAT: ll 22 
(Fararetaeyr + warerfaeyT] 


Wile Tavs | 
Werd wat TeqTewarrafapsds | 
Wearattad <Aldt FATeda> WETTI 221 


THM TaTs | 

av rears aren aca fatrPaas | 
TANT TATA TOUT Ae Tq HST I 23 1 
weuer afte cee ge MT a ya | 

Taal gad Ala AT FAT FT TAA I avi 


17c—18b. Cf. line quoted in Mrgendravrtti ad vidyapada 3:10c—11b: 


TATA SIT eHacapresrad | Kft Fr: 


18 a. THAT | em.; TathH MY 18c. oatd: | em. ; egta MY 19 a. THT | 
conj.; TET MY 19 ¢c. TUTSTT | conj.; WaT BAY MY 20a. HFS | conj. 
Kataoka; AGETAT MYB*; aTgerayr BS? =20 c. AAMT | conj. Isaacson; 7 
U[-3-JU MY 21e. WATTS] em.; WATTAY MY 21 f. CU PAT: ] em.; eM TAT 
MY 22 cd. ATT GTeWedsa } conj. Kataoka; Ul-8-JU MY 24b. JE AT] em.; 
ger Qt MY 24d. FRT A) conj.; FBT TM” 


Yo Tea aT 


aifecaarare FETT ATT: | 

araed THAT SAMA Tearaqrfarary il By I 
atarerfeterar fare: SIUTPT: | 

ar sf fret av fa ger fasre: sfeprrenr: it 26 1 
amar faster ar arrestee Ferd: | 
SqaTaVaT AEATCSAASATEMT TELAT I 219 it 
Ha T SAAT FTAA A HAAI ET | 

ATU HITE A AAT TATA Il 2G I 
Wat art Helleseetend: fe 7 ATE: | 
MAAC ATE AT FEATSTATA AAT: Il 23 It 
TIaatedeqay FrearerarqaAara: | 
WAT TRIMS M TTATHSTASTAT Il 30 I 
AW-aAt SUA AAMAGaretlan AIT | 
garaenarar g fafare +z Tar Ta: It av 
alateadt aU Tare Frag: Sper | 
CatfetaRrecarcar aca grea I 32 It 
eafeararaedar arerar freq: fer: | 
GAT AT Taya aA waar feat 33 I 
waded TAT AEN ATTA: | 
aaATqATAa AS METH SWST TA: Il B¥ I 
T MITA MATT ATSRANTATANT | 


26a. alarerferxearay | conj.; surarerferarear MY = 26c. PIA) conj. Kataoka; 
Arar MY 26d. fasty: ) conj.; fasrre MY 27. DEAT) conj.; AFeTT MY 
28 c. ATH HUTe | conj.; atrHarfee MY 29a. NTA ATT) conj. Kataoka; 
Hay aT AT M”’; Aa aT AT B80 ab. Taaafageqar faearevarsz ) conj.; 
qafeenfereqar frearérant M” 30 cd. Geese TTATHEGARTET J conj. 
Kataoka; JSQTHIaT AAT Aeqe: WaT M” 


Tara: Took: v9 


water : aPSIQIAaT TT Awad | 
tata TUTFT ST i By I 
sarahrorer at fret set fered afc 
THAR: YAS CAAT AT HFaT AAT 3e il 
aTast Tt atcateeder Ag: Sa: | 
weary a ered Teard Ferarea: I 319 I 
[aer:aTATOa TTT: ] 
Wale Tas | 
My TAeqraraah aerated a Hz | 
Ter Waageta araTare Frar Ferri 3c i 
Wey Ta TAS ay | 
AIT T ATS RT TEA HA |! 22 I 
WHIM Says | 
sararee Fear eqetesr Feaqar Yu 
aed fae afer cater Tea: It voll 
aaest aead aT aTATatays TUT | 
AATIICTA ATA ATA Brafaar WAT ¥ I 
SAINTS TAT Ar waves ara + far 
CIT TT TAM CT TAT BT TAT Hi KI 


eqirarsaaed WaTSqar ad: | 
tad Ud Tt Meez afarearagntayr ii 3 I 


qracurgareay AT FETT FT AAT | 


36 a. WUratT ) B; aeuratay? M” (unmetrical) 36c. THAR: ] em.; We- 
Wah MY 37a. Tet T aearad | conj.; ary 7 afcafeet MY (unmetrical) ; 
amr+7+7 TF Tatcatet B (unmetrical) 41b. ofaTT | conj. Isaacson; °faye 
MY 42a. WATT] Bo; WAM M”; WATT BY 43a. Maw] em; eA 
MY 43 b. aq: ] M’'?; At: M’%?7B 43 c. It VA) conj.; SAAT M” 
(unmetrical) 


CR Tet aT 


Tae BTHTIAT Agee Tarfear ii ve it 
WITH HITT MH T eaay grrateray | 
at taay T ahr WaT aafafaaqil YY I 
[SaTTAMTATTaT | 
MMaad AHA TATA 
tad FE TITS WMT BUTT: fH YE I 
Tau tT Aa Yattercar sfT ar 
fer gq agehr: sist: fret sat afratec: il vi 
MAASAI TET 
Tear ar fastertatd ace gage il Xa I 
fad Praveen: fagrt: a fran: | 
Wrara Haas Tal Pretoprar:t il w 8 i 
aatareraarary aarh: at sft adtad | 
TTA ANTA TELA CHITA MTT Il Yo i 
Frarar ay aden fastyer a acta 
ifasrer ay saqerrat sar Wear TF FerAtt ii we 
ge: AY Ssaaretaarar sarge sferartea: | 
fafgararfasrey shy feared: TOPaT WY? 
cate teter area Preity | 
52cd. 7 fe STATA WWM Me BT A: | tops missing in M”. 
58a. 7 CH]. tops missing in M”. 


48 b. °Ufatt] MY; eUfaaT B48. fastetfare ] M*; Fearsrey x Ferx fare 
MY 50 a. °fareTee ] em; ofareTtT® MY 52 b. ot Sferathte: } conj.; 
oyUferantd: B; eyaferatt ~ : MY 52cd. afaatafasrer sfe feat: | 
BS; +t fe aTTaewwimera aa: M’; aAfanataanft faa: Bs 
53 ab. AMMA AUST AAH ) conj.; TW ate TeveT AT U WH M”; aAa- 
ae weer aah B53 b. frarfyasy) B; WT TUT TW x Tx T M” (tops 


missing) 


qdta: Yee: 3 


Varad Waray aa Aortled Ad: il Y3 I 


dfarraagerd araqaaentedd | 

ser ata ara acres SFT Aa ve I 

Sererar FT WTATVe sara aaaterat | 

ast a faye: cat Arey ardtsar aa: ll wy Il 

Waa celery ater aaa ay | 

TeATeraaay Urey aa aferst quar Ferri YE 
[TAT Be area: | 


tt Tareas TAT SSTYATTST: | 
SUCeGlaMan IAT AT AST: VOI 


Ser Afetaar ST F:e aT ese | 
amare Prreahery wae ITT TPT Us 


ATTA UTATST ATAATIT: TL Tey | 


56ab. Cf. Matangavidyapada 3:20ab: WAMTAH agrar TeaAPTOMP TAT | and cf. 
Pau 7:63ab: TAMIA Taree aa Rartahes: Aer | 


53bc. FT T YT TT x Tx T | A AT @T TW] tops missing in M”. 
54cd. tops missing in M”. 

55ab. tops missing in M”. 

55c. T YT 7] tops missing in M”. 

59ab. & AT Pr AT] tops missing in M”. 


53cd. Aare ta Ta Fated Ad: ] conj.; FAT aT T Mas Tx Tx FFT 
a fe aad: MY; Warafayaedd T(A BY) At FT f— TT: B (unmetrical) 
54b. -qauetfead] B; °Y MW a le FT T M" (tops missing) 54 c. BT 
aad ale] em.; 5 BT or fH fF = AT HM” (tops missing); FET safatae 
ah B 54d. Tere ShT Arad) Bs TST Tamar aa M” (tops missing) 
55 ab. g@Telal FT WTA QI aAraateral] Bs F ST AA AAT AT | 
aT WT UW aT & & eT AT OM” (tops missing) + 55c. av + fave: cant] em; 
aur a fava cant B; TAT — MY 55d. BreT) B; —@Y MY 57b. car- 
OT: ] em.; °ATaHT MY” 57 c. CST] conj.; SAT MY 59 a. AAA? | 
conj.; AFIT? MY 59 ab. aUT-avTS ahaa: ] B; wat =a w ar fr aT 
aT: M” 


Cw TTS aT 


Fraratfegaacar: afancar gated TTI ve I 


KTR > HY CMAP AY faerers: | 
wat frererarast aad ARTCAAT I Goll 
eaThrarqeetsy Aes ATA TATA | 
earache eat: Wawra Teh G2 
ad faehrarrst faye ferfrega: | 
TSHUAAATEAT PASAT AY MN SAT It G2 Il 
Tate Ase eager sera | 
apa TAT TATRA CATA AT OAT AL Il G3 Il 
at Fear: Sar fear arcatasraitsrar: | 
HST: AAT AT: AVHTAHITATTAATAT It & ¥ II 


MWR Ady Sad SA-adv STUTETAAA: | 
aifearedat & sacar fafarery<2fart:s | 
«aa ¢ T> feureer fae AaTeTUT aT: It YI 


AIM AA AHTslTarey Fal AIT | 
HACIA IUMA: AdHAIN Td: il GE i 
ar sat Fratreat sferfarqhasane: fern: | 
pearance Te THAT SAA It 19 I 
Frat aaat «ard aeargat> wait Aa | 


59 c. faqrarfagadeat: ] conj.; KaTatfagadenr MY 59d. qafat aT] 
conj.; Fatt aT MY; Fafa ATT BBO a. THATARAT | conj.; URHTERTT M” 
61 d. Whast-ere |] em.; Whayg<ae MY 62 b. ferfatqa: ] conj.; farregq- 
qT MY 62c. °SAT] M’B™; °BAT+T+ Bo 63a. oMTfTaASTSAT? | conj. 
Acharya; SPH: ul-3-JU Bre MY 64a. Fat: )] em.; ASAT MY 65 ccd. °F- 
val fafawerqefart: ] conj.; ea-atfeafarerg u MY 65e.a9 FT FT] conj. 
Isaacson; U MY 66d. @agaT? ] conj.; Waste M” 67 c. FIPTSTCATY | 
conj. ; Farhwaroeny MY 68a. Od TET | conj.; U [-6-] U M” 


qara: Veer: vy 


THTSHATST TT SI Ad FaTTATH ka I 
qeaerferd aft Aras FaNTAy | 
ATUOTATIT Tadd FeAT I Ge Il 
TT aT: Hat fear: warese sree: | 
frat afer ST Tat YS TUTH Il oil 


AAITaICT: SATA ANARTATSTAT: | 
ser amsrtcrar gfe facaredr: facrhaa4s: i 92 I 


grernmgqeriaentery retry | 
Froar arated areqaTa Hane: Il 92 I 


aaa: aafesredar sear + faa 
[frracetatrsatear Aa: | 
Fracertartsared) ATTaTearyaT say: | 93 I 
SUT: BT STaGT TAT ATT AGATA: | 
68c. HATET STMSIRATS Kf THs RATE A T AAT TST | Trilocana’s Soma- 


Sambhupaddhatitika, IFP MS T.170, pp. 47-8 (which actually reads T-ATAT-RTCATS 
ata | adefRaredfa 4), and GOML MS R 14735, p.38 (which actually reads ¥- 
aTirquercare xia aAwEfRATStts FW). The first pada here quoted is 2:1c. 
74-76c. THE TT 

CMa araH Fel TW cary Ye | Weqrarectiorm Pala FeaTeqs: I 
cafe farrern safer aferaree: | forest eeTeay erer eerarfirerr i 
TETFAATAMT ANAT TaHe | Tae_ Fear u Tu | xfer Siddhantadipika 
of Madhyarjuna, IFI T.No. 112, p.158. The same unit of the same text appears thus 


on p. 106 of T. 284: TH VT MAIS 


69d. Wadd | conj.; TA actft MY 70a. fae: ] em.; fast MY” 70 
b. ofercrftar: ] em.; ofartrfvar MY 71d. facenreat: ] farcenT x :x FAT: MY 
72 c. Fryer arfre ] conj. Isaacson; faqaatee MY 738 a. ATa<T-aT: ] B; 
Wasted: MY 74 ab. EMIT: HYTATaH Tar BY :] conj.; €1T- 
al gaan Far Ae taut Ye: MY; eMAraraay are ary Te 
SiDi (T.112); RAT: ETRE TSt STATA YE SDT (T. 284) 


vE Tea dat 


Weqrarastl SH: AACA TEATCYA: Il 9 I 
afare Farcat aaa warts Bherarear | 
Freer SETTRAyY SATE TATTPOTGTT Il 9 I 
TEMP aIeAMT WAT sap wate | 
Ve &¢ Praararenr: araeereaencrarm: || 96 I 
gee waa Area aT Mt: WATT | 
TET THT AAT SS AAT SAAT I 99 It 
we far: aqerar: wareaged afHanre: | 
arar watever? sa faaracre ager | 
fagafayar arear: yar: ye seater ferar: i oc 
afr Wachtel AAT HIATT: 

wate & FT Wend eraewitararend | 


aefy nfeaahery qafrarere4rt 
faa aaray Ga A APTHETT: Il 92 Il 


Wafer Seer Beast fearventafaqrettectegara: i Il 


ceqaurdiet eine saint iene Teenatier is 


75a. Ofara Parca oom] M”; eafercafarcrerm SiDi (T. 112); aferce fareveay 
STH SiDt (T. 284) 75b. Yherarear] MY; Bherarea: SiDi 76 ab. -MRTEaT- 
arr. Way SAT) MY; oMParareta ATMA AT SiDi (7.112); eMyErerar 
ANAT —T SiDi (T.284) 76 b. Taft] Sidi; WAFRT MY 76c. Te AT) MY’; 
Uaeq SiDrT e °CUT:] em.; °RIT MY 77a. Tee VATA ATA] conj.; TT 
CATA AT MY 7b. TTCALT] em.; THVT MY 78a. fae: AGeTAaT: | 
conj.; FaaTeqetar MY 78 ef. AT-aT: Yar: Ye seat ferar: ) conj.; AIT 
yer we vafs ferar MY 


WaT: Ter: We 


TAM Jars | 

ATarT gear ferrqat ear BAATAaT | 

SMM HAAARAT Aetitapafanrsre it 2 Il 

aed AREA Wear AAT <eSgTaet AST 

farraypaareart atad wasrtahr: it 21 
[Gated Hetfeared T ATATAT: | 

Wile Jays | 

ATaTaatae Wea Here: Areor Fact | 

TRO T BT TT ASTI HTT: It 3 I 


AAAS ASAT TEATYTAATT: | 

TPA sens wT gary sfacretrn ¥ 1 
aarert Sfrqet fe tare arar | 
qqend At adesd AT TATA | YI 

qqen a Grant qeraratraterd: | 

Tet AAAITATT AUTAATaAAT SAT: il & 
amaetad Yt dara caer ferry 

warty afe ar arear afe: fe ¢ Tarvarii 9 il 


aad Sets Yah ATATET aay WaT: | 


2b. ATATESTHS ] conj.; AAT U GPHA MY = 3cd. BTS AT MSWord: ] 
em.; BA AC Sewer: MY (unmetrical); BT AT AAS AAeIT: B 
4b. TEUT? ] em.; THATS MY 5a. AATETe SfaqVy ] conj.; TATETATTaT 
MY 5b. TaTYEMNT | conj.; TavatyT? MY 5c. At AdeT] conj.; AT 
aeaded MY; At Aded Bo; AT Nedeg BY 6b. TeAHay? ] conj.; Fat 
arate MY 6c. TET] conj. Isaacson; TIT MY 


CC TUS ay 


arartentded asa FT AAT: I Gl 
wear gfeaqar wr TeareagH AaATEST FI 
aad tetas F Heart ST ATT 8 il 


Udenrst Aa WHAT ACH 

TEAM ATATAT ATAT AAT STAafELAT il Yo I 
Watered Be: aay THe | 

get get T AHS SAATATTA TAA II 22 Il 
ate aw fer were arateatahes wag | 
ger wires aa ger quer fFeTaTT Il 22 11 
THT TT TUT ATO are Ferry 

aster Sit eT Searatetres AIT I 23 I 
aalteh F Aches Get Slt MITA | 
aH: Me ST ASTANA Il ve I 
are TANITA ATATeT Te ATT | 
adara sat atfa Araracafatea Spa it ey It 


ceamnmrateeanray she feather: | 


14, léed. ATAeTRT Hee fereurar aeaaete: | 

aqear faarrer so wert: Sakanrae: il 

Halen 7 AHS TT QT TTT | 

aaa: We Shera il 

aaare aay arf Arar: SAT Il 

ata TUS Isanasivagurudevapaddhati kriyapada Vol. 3, p. 23. 


9a. Afaray | em. ; Gfartar MY 9c. AHA] em.; TAT M”; T++9T- 
¢~ B 10 ab. ire ] conj.; Sree Te MY 10 cd. oud ATAT FAT | conj. ; 
eMdaATaTATaG MY 12a.@A] conj.; aft MY 12d. FRTATT] conj.; Ferar 
MY 138 ab. TUTATAHTCT ] conj.; TeTeTT ATCT MY 14b. Ql MIAH | 
ISiGuDePa; @[TIT U MY «14d. AFA? ] SiGuDePa; WAT? MY 16 ab.) 
om. ISiGuDePa 15 b. ATATSET] em.; ATATEAT MY = 15d. cacatata yay] 
MY; °aeaad: Bjay ISiGuDePa 


qqy: Tee: =X 


@ Hatatearaar ATAVITATTAHTILUT II 2G I 
aay ART. adt Sarat araarys faster | 
ATA THATCH AA CAAA AT Il 219 I 
aaa: adararor wataesr qtactad¢ | 
wheat aratfor aerate Aerers it ec I 
sarHaratted coger eet afeeaar | 
PTAATT AAT TANICH CMT HATA Il 2% Il 
ARTA TAT ATTA ATA AAT aA | 
ATaTacdtactitred frexar: Teal SHAT: | 
Afar afsararer Frfsaar: Weare: il 20 Il 
foster ataead Grader aa: | 
SaATHEITT: FeAT ANTAaNATET: FRTAT: it 221 
[ATarTar: arr: ] 
SITET EGU APTA Tasted: | 
Tearathrqenirag: ary afercrarr: it 22 Il 
aeet ¢ sugedtertatearaed Haar: | 
ae aay setraurdd—aeathedd: ll 23 


18c-19b. TUT BAY 

wher arate aetarhy Aerere | 

faqdt oufanarartar quoted by Nardyanakantha ad Mrgendravidyapada 2:7, p.58 
(KSTS edition). In the Devakottai edition (p.67) a fourth pada is also given: €{4T- 
dur Acer. This portion of the Mrgendravrtti is incorporated in the Sarvadarsana- 
sangraha (p. 189), where this pada reads: AT AW ActiteaT 


18 c. Wheat) MY; wheter MrVr 18d. aeATET) Mrvr; aeteThT 
MY 19 ab. safHararfedr acget crear afe=agar |) M”; fapat oafaararfer 
eaqarayy aetteayT MrVr 20 f. FafeRar: |] conj.; fafmar MY = 21 d. ANTAT- 
et | con) SUAS: MY 22 a. HCA] conj.; FAT M” 23 c. AU 
Satte ] conj.; a&artfte M 


[Serr | 


anmyay Prferar: eeirsapyad | 
TSNTATHT YS SAHIN: BAT AT: | 2¥ I 
acaet fafrfrarar derqer fart eager | 
Frarfer ged fafaeararqaarars ii 2Y Il 
NAVA ALATA AGU TIA HAT | 
AATHET AIT AH AAAMTAUTATAT Il 2E I 
fUubtarart aad Aaranmfahrtcy | 
wittateeg: TT ATH Maths AAT V9 1 
ve aorteanry ant matte area 
HLSW Fal FAT ACTA GEST Il 2c Il 
BPG FT ATA ENT ear | 
saotfaetaary Cacao ACT HAT | 
aarat frrareaet aottaferataghra: it 28 Il 
[ayafear} 
TAIT WAIT Helse: HMAC | 


24cd. Tew TST 
wera yt starmter: erat fF Tryambakssambhu ad Kirana 1:16, 
IFI T. No. 1102, p. 21, lines 1-2. 


29d. & TT] tops missing in M”. 
29ef. T aT aT fa T AT =A WT HAT E let TFT FT) tops missing in M”. 


24d. Het ad: ] M”; Aellad(:] KiViVe 25 c. Feat) B°; frafs M’Be 
25 d. °9dadary{ ] em.; eHTITAT M”’B*; c9dadaT Bo 26 a. Akar 
afte | conj.; weratdtfa MY 27d. watft) em.; sratfo MY; srarhr B 
28 b. walfe] Bo; wamlfe M’B* 28d. °sfeaT] conj.; °FeHT MY 29 
b. eSarefutrur ) conj. Isaacson; eM fafadur MY 29 cd. QTeHdey AT 
ae) B; ST --(-6]— HAT MY 2G9e. carat favarayy] B; Tar ar fa 
T QT = YW M” (tops missing) 29f. Actlafetdgtds:) B; HATT MAT 
faa: MY 


agy: Yeo: L2 


HUTA Aararrar FITAT It 20 il 
Wale Says | 


fatar qfgarrer ert sdue Aer 
+ frarar aar afg: Sererdwa4rtsrawr ii 32 1 


THM Says | 
TRITUTATAT ATICH UTE LAT ETA | 
THA AAT STRICT HT SATETT: ll 32 
a aegq gfant aeedtgacd at: aa 
Teasers fetaerer Frerar i 33 i 
ariter at gfgerenar aerata: | 
TTT CITT ACTA CITA Il Yt 
HT HOTIAAALIAHTATT | 
at fran fete FP PATCH I By Il 
araur fayareaey fata FATS aeT | 
Ter SE TIP TT AH Ir Tar | 
WIAA HATA THIS TT lt 3G Il 


35ab. Th FT WAITS 

ACT HUTA AT AH aa quoted by Naréyanakantha ad Mrgendravidyapada 
11:11, p.231, and in the Sivajnanasiddhisvapaksadrstantasangraha, IFP MS T.317, 
p. 1022. 


30cd. & AT WT A AT TAT TAT [a | tops missing in M”. 


30 c. HUTAT? ) em.;HMTAt MY 30 cd. AAMT Farrarrar fee] Bsa ar 
TF AT TAT TAT TqT° M” (tops missing) 31a. qfaaraar | conj. ; afadaur MY” 
32 a. outa aad | conj. Isaacson ; ovaltaad YTT*® MYB 82b. HCO GT CAT - 
Prt) conj.; HUTT ~ Tara MY; Her areas Bo O83c. eATATHTT] 
em.; “AD ITT MY 35 b. eatfare ] M’B, Mrgendravrtti; ewtfade BS 
35 d. 32] conj. Isaacson; AX MY S36 cd. TMT TT AP At Aer] 
conj.; TAA TT UT (AT M’°*)& Get Tar MY; TMPMAT (AT Be) TT AH 
qaader B36 ef. (IPTPTarfeqaragy } conj.; eT Tatfeaaraay MB; 
TIM TaTSAATASy BS 


YQ Tet at 


[TT] 
ay unt faut Jey F Here: | 
ere sdfayar wr: qermiratfed: i 39 
TAMIA: AT QA CHAT: | 
TAHATATT LNT: SQTCHITST TET TUT | 
aareg fFayauares aanetteyt Wae4r ii 3c | 


Tate Jars | 

fayatere ar wr: at seq aearfacred: | 
faeesate seater uy ay sate Faroe: i 38 i 
WTS TAT | 
aAwaawismn free Wad AT a: | 
asa HA WHT «<atew> Fed Faz ll vol 
aay fafer are warnrmtera Tar: | 
TAIT MTA STAT: Il V2 I 
wane Ye g:aaeq fees: | 
aearara a footer fatrare faenre: ii ¥2 1 
qa: aatrfrar sat fam mr we ar 
tal facwad aeartgcmest Famer il ¥3 | 


Hata aaedt at at UT: & HAT: | 
ayatada tacqenttse aaa il ¥¥ I 


Alab. Cf. Svayambhuvasitrasangraha 2:17ab: 


an afgfee ang aahratera Ta: | 


38 cd. TAATATSTUT: SATEHSTAY | conj.; TAATETSTLT BITCHTIAT MY; |F- 
ATATATCTANT SATCHIT+7+4r Bo 38 e. fayauTy] em.; fayauTar MY 39 
b. @T St] Weare |] Be; AreqeTeare M’B* 39d. frie: | conj.; Fafa: M” 
40 a. HATHA? | conj.; HAPTT® MY 40b. 7 G:) conj. Acharya; T AT MY 
40d. QTg3] conj.; UM" 42a. YF] em.; ed MY 42d. face: ] M”’; 
farnT x Tx &: MY 


wy: Teo: 43 


[Bret] 
aad mraant area ated: WATT | 
areal sf geneween mead fereanre: ily Il 
qara asdfage FeTacwaa4rtas | 
FTA WH AL CATH: HAA Aer: Il KE I 
Udst afd sot AH Feet AAT! 
HAT FEA ATAIMSATAT I ¥19 It 
AIAG AAS TG TIGA: | 
qorare Ferdth AH & Ale: ATATSTSH:! Il ¥G Il 
aay mT: waar FAT Sararea ya: | 
aaa raat aee aead MiyTHAT I ¥e Il 
war wear shi a: area adarar sf gee | 
T Hrearcedy TAP: PATEL Hast | Yo 
(Frater: | 


Frafattaarestar var: aatrartaar | 


sar Fray wear arerar FAA Aer: ll WII 


45c-46b. Fgh MATT 
aray sf qexegen ceud ferxanta: | 
Teaey Tea AeTHcIaaf THA | quoted by Ramakantha ad Matangavidyapada 


12:25-27b, pp. 347-8. 


45 a. mrqany | conj.; YAIR MY 46a. qearer ) MY ; SaToT Matangavrtti 
46 b. °TaTAHH] em.; °TATHT MY; caaTHTHA Matangavrtti 47 d. ATAY- 
Wit° }] em.; Araafare MY” 48a. Mtg} em.; aT M” 50 a. Yar ] em. ; 
Yet MY 51 ab. frafaftaaregar oar: aafrarfrar ) conj.; Frafe fraar + 
x Tx aT Tar: HararsyaT MY = 51 c. WAT] conj.; ART MY 52a. fray) 
conj.; fTaRTY MY 


uy Tea aT 


aeraraar aa raea fe TaSrrTi YR I 


THIN Tavs | 
aad frat ard frau afe aaa | 
aa ate Prerfertrar fae warcrrr i v2 
AAT AACA Tat TA Taq | 
at THAT: Wrea aed ag PaTaaHai vy I 
afertaratrar sf: taret afaraaratey | 
TET WET TIAA CHAT I WY Il 
Teh ATTA AA AH] ETAT | 
TAU WAT VTA TAT VAAAAT: | VE I 
a arfrar sf qer: eat ferat eae | 
qarara qarathrearfaacar Ae Aye |i wo i 
[water] 
HATA AACHIA GHAI | 
THtaredst AT WaT car HOfea Aer: HATH Xa I 
wad: Terar ar earfahatacareray FUT | 
THAR AST FEAL HET Ti VE il 
Tad cat Wes Ta TT FTC | 
area fear art ae gees wail Gol 
Tate Jars | 
wer arcades aferd: fa aarfehr: | 
qaedcnrsaeasracr fe waar FRAT el 
Tare SaTT 
53a. WT) conj. Isaacson; HT M” 54 b. TAM | em.; Yat MY 54d. a- 
THAT: | conj.; Tend: MY 55a. cata] em.; °afaar MY 56 ab. oF - 


AMAYEMACT } conj.; “Teh Wesat MY 58d. Ud: ] em.; Gat: MY (unme 
trical) 61d. TeTUt fE Waa] conj.; TIaTfarat MY 


wa: Yet: Wy 


Weare: ay fate: Heard FerAerheay | 
dfea tt Get Sd aersgantsqerd i 21 
qeneg gerard aera: Fried | 


Sar Wer: Heareay SPT SHAT HIATT Il G3 Il 


gertear suey WT: arg yud | 
HaHa ST TEAQUA IAT: Il GY I 
Ferat aarer Gelraedgesy Hetes: | 
Tay: adaAy aeaal FT TyheAT: il GY It 
TRATT WHATIT: Talgelttear wae | 
geredtaAnermh Gadachaneay il GE Il 
HAUL ALANA CAAT HATA: | 
TI AY SATS: VAM AAITAT: Il G9 Il 
Teaser ar whacbrar anata | 
var gate Acard carhstarsaraeda: Il Gs Il 
[orr: | 
T araat Ya | 
avi aareraraifir pee gerfr aria: WER I 
FEaTeTRATaTaT: HATHA TT | 
69. agah MATT ST 
rEcpreqeanarar aan yatatr 
aver warerararter gue fers ara afer 
Siddhantasamuccaya of Trilocanasiva, IFP T. 284, p. 163; IFP T. 206, p. 99. 


62c. atea] Bo; afeT? MYB* 63c. Hea] B; Herrey— MY” (right half of 
last aksara broken off) 63 d. —{G° | em. . TIet MY Bac. OAT Sz] BS; 
oyeTd MYB 65. c. AAACAN | conj.; ww aot M” 654. aq: | 
em.; T{AT: MY 66d. HefasryT ] conj.; Hetfawt: MY 68a. HCY) conj.; 
AIT MY = 68c.. AcHTa ] conj. Isaacson; TeHTa MY 69d. FBThT] M”; fa- 
aitt SiSa 70 ab. °CaT: WATSHTAPTAMAT | conj.; CATE RATCHET 
M” (unmetrical) ; oT HATCH Aa TA B 


YE Tea TT 


Gq: ATATNT AT CATSIUTAT TAS HTT: Il Vo I 
araTt Feraaeaa oan ardfathe: ferry 
TUATHA HEAT FRAT I 192 | 
qn Frat Canied CAAT IAA | 
TANT TOA ATTA RT TAT ATT It 92 I 
sraarary fa + ey: fa g F ATVET AT: | 
Waray Bert Are Ayr ahatcertqa+r ii 93 It 
[gfa:, TTT war: | 
TATST HATA Saar | 
wal at aaeraaad Ar agai ov I 
SeTASMAeT TAA AT SAAN | 
[wet: —aaT fraare | 
CHETAN FAT ACAAACHES: Il 9 I 
aar HHAATLAY Fe: War afta | 
qaqa: F at Hagar AT FT ATFACTII 9 Il 
Tay Aetatar Aerator add | 
aarqerdar ar sf Hatcnret + HEAAAT | 9 II 
HU TEP MT AA VTaATs | 
arated — way FAeTAT FATT: YATTI Vs I 
[ST | 
71 b. cfafa: |] em.; efafit? MY 73 c. STAT) conj. Isaacson; WIT MY” 
74c. Taf) em.; Te MY” 75a. WIAA IAF | conj.; WIATETHAA AT 


MY 76 a. °AATTAY) conj.; eAATOT MY (unmetrical) 76 c. 7 AT Fe | 


em.; WalegHe MY ?B%; Watch? MY ?7B° 77 a. ATetalay ) conj.; AMT (T?, 
1?) Cera MY; ATaCStaT B 


qq: Teo: L\9 


wat aParadr face Fragen aagfecy 

Madr AT Ad HA HAST FATT: Il 98 I 

Teyemar sary wrearasrat sfr ar 

THATAIT MAA Ael AT STAF Il Go ll 
(TUTaT] 


THTCHAAT SN Mae aA | 
TRATAHMAG ST WAST U TST Il GI 


ley TMA | 
qaderrearer PMTSUS YAH GR I 
[(waaT] 

aTaeretanr ares water | 

SOT AT STA CHIRAC SGT Il G3 Il 
(Sta: ] 

TH AAA CET ACHE TET TT: | 

gTeraatqeny sfert aed addi cy il 

aeararferar cat: whararctaateta: | 

Mrgendravrttidipika ad vidyapada 10:24. 


Blab. Ugh BAITS 
THTCHAAT TATA AU aqTaTad Mrgendravrttidipika ad 10:25. 


84abc. °Aed---°UNT ] tops missing in M”. 


79 a. 31t APAUTAAT | conj.; WATT ANU MY; AT BPBaAY MrVrDi 79 
b. Ugheaet] MrVrDi; fagitd MY 79 c. Heady] M’*; Way xyvx MY 
81 b. °UVed ] MY; eTaTad MrVrDi 82 a. TUTAT? ] em.; AUT Xx fee 
MY 82c. °@atet] em; eealeT MY = 83. a. °TOTETOYSMT | conj. Isaacson; 
oTqeTe ta My” ; oe 84 ab. o ETAT TRRTITACHE WET TH ] 
B; ~oo rea t SA Ue a cH OE A ATT ST: M” (tops missing) 84 c. qeT- 
wage | B; © eT LAT TF TW AT MY” (tops missing) 85 a. WUATATfaTAT | 
conj.; araar atferar MY 


YG TUS IT 


qe Wad saya qe a Hed SHAT cy 


WEA TTA: | 
a Trater Frrararcaratyr aT SAATATT I GG II 
[array] 


saan HET AIT TOT 

afer cencrttersafrararahay er: il cis 
CHACHA TAT TEAM CHS TA: | 
Tar AleaSd Fer AECeAAayT FTI ac il 


Aetaawat Wad FRA IATA | 
qd aT FSI AT AT Saar waved | 
AIA IS: TT WAT Talaqsagy ii a8 


[gtavaararagg | 
wtcehrrearan afguaqranrtaar | 


87-8. parakkiyattil 
araatiee aeted wae ToL aferaerattesefrararadtage: i 
TH ATHACEHT UT aT TEN CHS TT: | TAT ST SAY Aer Arfad: AAA YMA 


Nanavaranavilakkattarumpatavivekam Vol. 2, p. 1185. 


86abcd. tops missing in M”. 
87a. tops missing in M” 
90a. fT TW SAT] tops missing in MY. 


85 c. THT | B; & tH TW MY” (tops missing) 85 d. fray | conj.; PT AT 
MY (tops missing); °FFAT Bo 86a. TTEyaTety) MY; WT Yy 
aT SAT J MY” (tops missing) 86 b. TrTATATathat: } conj.; TTT u AT 
vet ft a: MY; waregfetie: B86 cd. + Tate fequtararerar at 
eqerafe | By TT ee eT ar aT awe OT ar ee a ft MY (tops 
missing) 87 ab. AtWatfeH FEATS Aad TT] B, NaVivi; a 7 WAT fe 
® He —(4-]—(2) WIT MY a7. ahead) Navivi; afert & AT 
MY 88 cd. afaee Wet ATEAEATAAY | conj.; AfTEa Gay AETRAAAT M’; 
@ Cary ayar Arfed: Baa NaVivi 89cd. FSI AT AV] conj.; STRAT AT 
ay MY 90a. °fitxTeare ] B; RT T SAT M” (tops missing) 


way: Ter: AR 


TGA ATAU AAT WAS eATATAPFA Il oll 
Wale Tas | 

GT TIE AT AW Aded TEs: | 
SEAT Ter ar Pergo wed | 

aer Frgvar FT RAT AT Vl ATH WATTS Il RI 


TAT Sas | 


TACATTSTATSAT TUT: carat Prater: 11 2 


qfgat favararer aT are abet | 

WATS Far FhetHanraarza+r i &3 Il 
[AEH ] 

Wea Wadeaeayr: HIE: | 

aaa tHearary wzarfeteta ATT: I VY Il 

ITAA ATU Sag aays ns | 

eater shared TIT AAA WITH VY Il 


YaTe: Te Arar: qatarar ycaferta: | 
[garfyarter } 
ara cara fareer arfear FT aay: 1 VE I 


96c-97b, 98ab, 99ab, 100ab, 101, 102ab, 103ab, 104-5. parakkiyattil 


Met creator TF afaar T AAMT | WetaaleH WT BMP aay il 


92 ab. ositadtt afadare | con). ; ogra Gfaaare M” ; ogitatt afauare B 
92. or: carey faarew: ) conj.; Torearaay faahre: MY 93 b. ArHefer- 
TT] em.; Werder MY 93d. eNPTAArHaT) conj.; eufeTearTaT MY 
94 ab. TATE |] conj. ; TATE T° MY 94.c THTITY | conj. ; aqnar- 
qa MY 96 c. Mae farer] conj.; Way ferear MY; wapforear FT Navivi 
(unmetrical); TH W fal FT SiJhaSvaDrSan 96d. AT: ] em.; AAT: MY; 
TANT NaViVi, SiJiaSvaDrSan 


qe Te aay 


CATIA MAAT ATTA TET AIT I V9 I 


SUMS FIN: SMITA: | 
area afar east afer eqsrferae: i ec 


SUT Gdeh BRC nT HIeaIay | 
AQT ATTA SMT AAC HAT TEs Ae I 


Hea ata gra faeQrt CAATTAA | 
TEd AT T AAT ATATCAAATPTAT Il 200 II 


Tet Wett Term At Wat FT asd | 


atoal Fgwtarcar eaecasarsa: | Sa aed Tatras I 
Heaetetagry fareqret Taearray | Tet Werfs sere aa wear fads 
qe: zat T Tete Teal Gq FATT | Nanavaranavilakkattarumpatavivekam 
Vol. 2, p. 761. (The first line alone is quoted thus in Nanavaranavilakkattarumpatavi- 
vekam Vol. 2, p. 702.) The Sivajfianasiddhisvapaksadrstantasangraha (IFP MS T. 1020- 
1) quotes the same portion and beyond. Its text, from 101, reads: 

TRI Telht TAT BT TAY FT ad | aI FT Neha Wearease AANA | 
are ae wat: Wy: We: BATA aH | aeHAT OMT FT att AVAAPAAT | 
geo sre ceargahsafafrarant | aay ay waeferireesr fra WaT 
qc Teer wfeasarhaaasy | aeNaaaca Hea Aaa Arar fear 
aaa Fre wefsayprr | ee ade Haheroare avatar 


97 a. faarecureh ] MY; Wetnhulehm NaViVi, SiJnaSvaDrSai 97 b. Ate | 
NaViVi, SiJfiaSvaDrSan; Ht° MY 97 cd.) om. NaViVi, SiJhaSvaDrSan 98 
ab. SUM AgGM ATA CIS: CIMEAIONT: | em.; AUMAGMAT AT VeasT- 
camraa: MY; afoat ggettaray eastecaitfsarsae: Navivi; @Verzgey- 
aTAT U SiJA@SvaDrSar 98 cd.] om. NaViVi, SiJiaSvaDrSan 99 a. °Aeh ] 
MY, NaViVi; °Ae4 SiJnaSvaDrSan 99 cd.] om. NaViVi, SiJnaSvaDrSan 
99 d. °pfary conj.; epfrat MS; opft x THx AY MY 100 b. farar- 
at Taaqrray) Navivi; foreretgeatPra MY; fateravaarray SiJfiaSve- 


DrSan 100 cd.] om. NaViVi, SiJfiaSvaDrSan 100 c. Aga) BS; aed M* B** 
101 a. TET] MY, NaViVi; AAT SiJnaSvaDrSan 101 b. 7 APA] conj.; TF 
a Ud MY; faded Navivi; TAT SA B?; TAT wad B* 


wa: Teet: G2 


Kay: at FT Tell WaTergaanrdy> | 
[att sare | 
ATTY TTT AT: ITT: Aah HAATTTHA | 202 I 


AACN aH ITAA AAT | 
aThryareert SEATS ATT MferAT I 202 I 
Tet Are meager | 

ay fareaten Ht wegedraratsta il 03 I 
Waar ay vaateqarrert fear wad 
paral Teser weal salar: Il gov I 


agarcgframts Fre we yaryrr | 
«te War HAAS Aaah saA> 


(AT: | 
TRA HA Ata AWTAT FLAT I Qo Il 
aay ay saretaanredteal Saat: Bd: | 
[earth] 
Wer: SMT ST FT TAT TAT TSS: Il 206 Il 


106cd. Wet: MT FT FT Tal Ware TSA: = Mrgendravidyapada 12:5ab. 


101 cd.] om.MY 101d. TeaT-OGaH] em.; WeaTTA GA NaViVi 101e. 4- 
T:] MY; Wit: NaViVi (unmetrical) 101 £. Wet Hatere ] MY; Ge: Hat- 
w7° NaViVi 102 a. °XTSTH] em.; °RTITA MY; eNTYT F SiJnaSvaDrSan 
102 b. af arreaarParart ] MY; aft a aaPxar SiJiaSvaDrSan 102cd.] om. 
SiJfdSvaDrSan 102.c. athifyatiead | Be; arfifgatfert MYB* 103 a. %- 
TATgq ] MY; WEATS SiJnaSvaDrSan 103cd.] om. SiJfiaSvaDrSan 104c. >aRyr- 
cat] conj.; THe MY, SiJnaSvaDrSan 104d. Whaf-yafTqsrt: ) conj.; 
afeatratrart MY; ofzafsafatray SiJnaSvaDrSan 105 ab. ] Placed 
after 105d in $iJ@@SvaDrSa. 105 cd.] om.MY 105d. Gadxed? ] conj.; TT? 
SiJiaSvaDrSan (unmetrical) 105 f. Fear | SiJnaSvaDrSan; U MY 106 b. q- 


Fear SSIeqT: BT: ] conj. Kataoka; Afedpuaaceyd MY 


GR Tet TT 


THATAMAITAAT ATAT YafeaArar: | 
caudcfafarsteat 7 Ararat SPST: Il Qevs Il 


mreaarcfaqeretcanra Bradt +t: | 


[FENyaTty | 
PAY ALATA WGU TTA TTT HA Il 206; Il 
[ SITATST: ] 


FATT AATSHSH RYT AE | 

QT ATAYT: WATS TAT ATT: Il 20% I 
aTAT ay SeranyaTay Fersrerey: a frag: | 
BMTHTMEATT AIT: META ATATLSST Il 220 I 
sqararey wzarar Ara aera: | 

TTT AEA TA ASIA Il 222 Il 
WAHACTAT FHAILA HN AAT | 

waste aaeratrer safer: Il 222 I 

fa gq waranty arated wea | 

soaryar saarany sf @aer: araerferc: il 293 1 


ATATHMNICMY TEU eeaferd: | 
[arg ] 


ll2ab. MACTUTST SAH 
waaqata Teqyya are azafete | Mrgendravrttidipika ad vidyapada 3:1. 


107 a. °Me<Tarar |} conj.; eMeTsaT MY” 107 b. °MRTAT: ] em.; °MMVAT 
MY 107 c. °fafarsTeat 7] conj.; off fersretre MY 108 a. STTETfay- 
@T° ) conj.; Wat sTaTAeT® MY 109 a. faqeremeacdee | em.; faaareg- 
a7° M” (unmetrical) ; faqa=adgt? B 109b. CRRA | conj.; °s- 
eaTTa MY lll cd. TWAcCaT AEA | conj.; Wrady Wary 
MY 112a. ppapesnin tS em.; WARACIAT THAT MY ; WadaHtsH Aq 
MrVrDi 114 a. °CUTNT] em.; °CUATCNT M” 


wy: Teer: &3 


Tat: SIMAATAT ENT: TAATTH: Il Vee I 
WUT ASAT: TUT TI 
WT: ATTA ATACITAY SATA AAT Il O2Y Il 


QATT: AAA Hatgerar saqedtyate: | 

ara faaTaacagaa: BAPTA: | ge I 

Wat A Weraaradt aerate | 

Weta PTATITT: War: ATAYATAET ii 2200 I 
(af: ] 

aaa ga Aaah AY FA: | 

adatt aferdt at ate fro + THT I Vea | 

AVN SITATM DT: THAMES TT: | 

ATAEATT S=IUT FH: AAPATTAHT AIT Il 222 Il 


gxad Frafrater aqererfetaargaa | 
May SATAATST AAS THATCH: Il 9Reo ll 


[STT: | 


ATIC FAA AAT SATS STG: | 
TAT TAT AY ATTA THAT: tl 222 Il 
Kipcis 


116c. Tat faaTeacayy = Sardhatrigatikalottara 10:12a. 


114 cd. Tat: SAMA ATATEYT: WAATTH: ] em. Isaacson; Taterta-arat 
WaATTh: MY 115 a. °HTeTT? ] conj.; °AATETT®? MY 116 ab. F- 
age] MY*; Har x ax 7° MY” 116 d. oN: ] conj. Isaacson; eA? 
MY 117d. sree | conj. Isaacson; STIYANAS MY ; ara u atae B 
118 b. afar) em.; hap MY) «118d. fad FT WHY] em; fad + afay 
MY 120a. Rrataator | conj.; Frafratr MY ; feafrater B 120 b. WEelaltc- 
Fravgd] ] conj.; waretfefRargg: MY 120d. Teas ] em.; afRarea: 
MY 121 cd. °Y*ATAS]A? ] em; -YaTagTe M’B™ RTARTA BS 


qv Tet ar 


Way TWA AATAT EAT TSTUTTET | 
AIMATATAANLTATATS TTT THAT Il 222 


pitfanaraferrattary | 
UT Sa Uttara: AeA ATT: | 
Aal APAYOTST- ATR EHTS ATA Il 223 Il 
gerette aatfor carat Tarai: | 
Frarear tray ant faate: fraear aa: i gay 
fasqta var SaAAI gaa Ha | 
Teamtaray ahrantt FrarerHa ii gy Il 
Ter :er afqaed Tee HIT | 
TaTATeaT Ta at: Tawarerfarhsare: | V2e Il 
ST YACIMST SNYUT EAI: | 
erearfr athe arf aet ger fe ArT eV Il 
araaatay west aertetataateat | 
Geach HATE H ALTATA AAT Il 22 Il 
[aeantt:gacatatyzarry | 


Fraarfayarrr Sara TF erent: i 228 1 
Tar Jars | 


122 ab. WATAATATEIMHT | em.; WAAATATSRH MY 122 cd. AMTATAAATAT- 
FRTATATS | conj.; AMABNTASTAMTAT MY 123 b. °TTHTLT: } conj.; 
oTaTTh: MY 123c. UT Be) Bo; MIST Tg MM”; oNPTST STE 
B° 124c. fRareay] M”*; farareqy M’** 124d. Aq: ] conj. Isaacson; YT: 
MY 125d. aferarft | conj.; arfrarte MY 126 a. BATT] conj.; arefve4r 
MY 126c. spcllel Sale UR TUASATAAT TT MY 126d. fMar- 
frat: ) Be; ofrarfarr: MYBe? 127d. GBT) Bo; FBT MB 128c. °g- 
h) MS; omy MY*s 129 a. edtfsarfir) B; osfifeartir MY 


wqy: Yee: qx 


seror wtfarancr at erateeaghrarca: | 
FEAAATHS TAA AMT AS HET: Il 230 


We FETKeT BVT very vel 

ME ATHT> TATA WATATATEAT Tl 222 I 
Te THT Wetdte Weds grace | 
WAICATET HAS STUTASHAAT | 232 Il 
Madea: TA NTSTaAAr | 

Ud apd art Ad Teqeriaz ii 233 I 


[STAT TF ITA: | 


TaTeqUUT TAY Aare AACA II 2a¥ I 
THI Tavs | 

FT AI seq BAAS TF Tea | 

ST ATAMTAT AHTOAAYSTTUT Il 232Y Il 
syafemare art eet asset: | 
TacHONTT MPH: FEAT HTAAAETAT i 236 I 
ar wtattta VeEreat HAART SY: WaRsars | 
Aah ay FRU ge HCT AT Il 2309 I 


134a. = Mahabharata supplementary passage 12.18:80a. 


131 b. GBT] em.; FJBT MY = 181 c. FETT BTR) conj. Acharya; FET M” 
131 e. Ie TAT caret) conj. Acharya; TaTeraT MY 1338 a. OMEATT: | 
em.; °SeHTC MY 133 c. TRaeT] conj.; Aaa MY” 133d. Wagamnfr- 
TH] conj.; MAAS MY 134c. TAT) em.; TAT MY 135 cd. TIAA? | 
Bo; ATTY? MY’B* 137 a. Vera] conj. bana Warear MY 


RG Tet IT 


mead Adar Alarcadyr Aaqeqts | 

at ATaTere aaaeteqtae FRAT I 236 Il 
[areerasarszayr: ITATRTHT Ae: | 

Ware Tavs | 

avant Sut av Same TATA Ce eT ATT | 

T_IIUTEHATSA TUT T TATU: | 238 I 

TAIT Sars | 

aamrinegar ar sad a <aranaitefaad > 

HTSUGAAESIAHASIAAT MA: ll Vo | 

yaIdedst A TAY HATH: F UT aT 

a Warr wae aT arearfaa FE ATTTT I ove il 

weg ares aed fear ad ares HUA | 

TRAIAN HATA HATA THA Il OY Il 

Wega u 8] u TI 

erage SFr aay armeareH Gear il gee | 

aqaarctad aferainaar saver We | 

fTCHSAIAAT Hay atforaed ATTIA Il Ve Ii 

aaritear fear mad + aufarar | 

Fryer FT NT CATMTATATTY ATH Oey I 


138ab. ~ aT AT aT ST FT VW A] tops missing in M”. 


138 ab. °deaT ATETCaAaaT Be] B; Y A AT aT MS TF WT A M” (tops missing) 
139 b. °RTATT | conj.; oSTh MY 140 a. TTEITUACTAT | conj. ; areqry: W- 
waar MY 140 b. aveqrurfafererc } conj.;U [-7-] UM” 141 ab. YaaedT F 
VAT HAT? | conj.; YX U eA THAT + HTH 7° MY 142d. caTHA] conj.; 
oats MY 144b. aTaaly SAUET] conj.; ATTAPTURT MY 144d. afrre- 
ct] conj.; attract MY 145 ab. Barhorfear fear WA 7) conj. Acharya; 
aarat ufsarar wad A MY (unmetrical); Aaruratfear W(AT B*)AT 7 
B (unmetrical) 145 d. AAA) conj. Isaacson; & U M” 


aqy: Yee: G9 


CGM WS SHUT ATA AT HTM ATS: | 
Ge ATMA A HA SHEA LE Il 
aq afcnad ar suf afecitrarad: | 
asaqgetatarar ara: Fear ate: ll avy il 
qT FBqegewad at AAAs Ad: | 
acerafar: ar suf aur get afte: ii orci 
[ MTT] 
ATaTaTaTaAS Wr Aaa SATTAT THA | 
WIE TAMIA TACTY TATTAT Il Vxe I 
WTA CAHAHATINTT: | 
AAMT: FET TATASAT: AATATEAAT I Qo I 
farrarcaronaeanarery area ATT | 
Fregare cenrd are WHeTHAT Il 2y2 Il 
[Waew Tt Pad AAT] 
waareq araeq rar amir sft ara: | 
THest Ade AIT ATATAT T A Aa: | WI 
aarterer Feary SEAT ATH: | 
TT Tayad At Sarateataedd: | 2x3 I 
HAT BLT Aca ATaTST ANA | 
fafaa Parador Fraarterarraz ii ey ¥ I 
farrrateent fafraaqege | 
farrararoyfas faraatsae aera il ey 


146 a. F:h BVSHMEATTT | conj.; u (-4-] u HeTeatfrte MY = 148c. efaw: | 

ofar4+:4+ MY 149c. AE] conj. Kataoka; WAT MY 152b. aray 
sff arad: } ou urey faat Wa: MY 158 a. QaAThATBY J em. Isaascon; WaT- 
fafaer MYB°° (unmetrical); Qarfaey Be 154d. Faraarftre ] em.; farasrfere 
MY 155c. fatsararte ] conj.; faFaararce MY 155d. fafattgadaee | 
conj. Kataoka; fafaar u [-2-] u Het M” 


GG TUS TT 


ATIC: Adages TAT MAST: | 

TMT: TMA: {YC MATIAT: 4 Il ONE Il 
fayerera aseqg wnrsarafHarga: | 

ATA TaN ay TYcalarear AIT WW I 
Tate Taye | 

fe TATary acHrTaareray ar Wor: fern: | 
sary vera ver: Haar Frferay war exc 
THM Jas | 

ATaT tq Act: Wat T Teal saafera: | 
aqarar Atfedt ATayT arataraterat Fart: exe it 
CIEHAHCTA I ea Atal T Ala: | 

aoa ae We Wed aap: FATT geo Il 
Wwe afer werd & FT antferct: Ty: | 
ay ataraaedts Tact Farrereraar ii 22 I 
TUYcT Te: cpeq cahqererag | 
ANT TITY ST CATATAY ATHTAAATT: | 2E2 MI 
Fararraaart tt THAT | 

areas Fafrerer acart sera ASTI 263 Il 
aaa At SeaTT WKTHdcded a: | 

wa Wray se aTedfaast: TEs Ta: Il eer I 
a wat sat Fears ot aq fer: | 


156 a. STITT: |] conj.; ATATT MY = 156 c. WMATA: ] em.; WMAUT: 
MY 157b. Wrrsaratere | conj. Isaacson; WirreTafere MY 157 c. Tana- 
J] conj. Isaacson; TYANTY MY 158 a. ATA) em. sali MY 159 

c. AEAT ] em.; reir MY 161 a. afcete ) BS; os 163 c. 3T- 
ROR | conj.; afer MY 164 b. Seat radeega: ] conj.; Aft 
WTHcayed: MY 164d. Tear] conj.; Wear MY 


qq: Tee: GX 


Aaratearaal faafrerteanre: | egy I 
[AefaarTaayra: | 


fran + Fayed earerrydetaer Fo | 
Farr: wrayer aheQrmayr Aq: il 266 Il 
Rrecaarert: We fraarrate oper | 
AHA WATT A ATA STU ATT ll E19 II 
[FeracarRreater: | 
aarcaar wer dfe Ant wate aaay | 
TAT QPHATATST SST RITA: Il EG I 
TactHresaq: We: aarar sf aorta: | 
aa: ATC WAT FE AAAST THT AAI 268 II 
awed TUT Me TT eas WAT | 
ad Aaa are ASS VSM Aq: ll Qo 
Maer: BA eH pacHrsastarcy | 
farrezrarrsy fafrenrre: Ferri 92 


weary: | aeat: race Yat! YagtatRarcer ape fafeai eaq- 
ad? faaaraate acatracare, Peracaranrearel ATTA TOT 
EcqY: | Tryambakagambhu’s Siguhita ad Kirana 1:15, IFP T. No. 1102, pp. 16-17. 


165 cd. -aragl faafare ) conj. Kataoka; cMaaT fagere MY 166 b. SUTgIT- 
JaeTaUy | conj. ; ear aaTydeTaay M” 167 a. °CUT: WE | SiHi; eaTay fae 
MY 167 c. ATHY MAMET | MY; ATH MATE SiHi 168 b. F- 
aT] conj.; At MY 169d. AGAeT] em.; ATAAST MY 170 a. THAT) 
conj.; AwatT MY 170d. ata] con; AY MY 172 a. aT: | conj. 
Isaacson; Tt: MY 


Te At 


HATAM TATA ATAWTAA a See: | 
arearaanrar sanfacdtercaaaarfear 


ay sear ataratard: WHat THT TATYAT II 292 Il 
Wate sawed verast atfrventufagrestecaay: I 


172 b. OMT? | conj. Isaacson; °WTfrTe MY 
son; °?dTaye M” 


172 c. °AT SAM | conj. Isaac- 


Taq: Teo: iil 


WHIM FATS | 
ATTAUSHeTeeT Ararat Fert: | 
werfeeseersy aTand afer arii eit 
[ararreT ATA] 
qaraar<qe> AM AAT area Fe | 
WAAL SHA TASAYATAR: Il 2 
TUT HATH HAT TaTHT Tal SHA | 
TAP greeted ysargvse: Il 3 
devs: Taqwa: RYT aaeaaA | 
Tegtad faArer art dated F> Il vl 
[STAT tes: | 
Kaa > Taare waahr: warfetarr | 
weratfestretraey: arfenerena il ¥ I 
Toaata es: areata fare: | 
TTS CC Al Het TATCATAFT I & Il 
tt atetrey eg: feray se: ofrataerc | 


2ab. Cf. Mrgendravidyapada 13:9ab: HITMAAGS RMCUGMN SoPeT AAT: 


6b. = Mrgendravidyaépada 13:10d and Matangavidyapada 23:85b. 


lb. oolateatt ] MY B%; colaTeat? BS zai ose! conj.; TATAT 
Ul-2-JU MY 2c. eta] em. eee HUA, Bo 3a. ATT] 
conj.; CraT MY 3b. at SE em. _ wane MY 3d. tdqdee } conj.; 
teal eee MY 4b. Pict em. | afcaeae Mv 4c. Tegtad farr- 
RMT) conj.; Tegfra (Ft >) Feererer M” TeafaafemryerB 4d. aged 7] 
conj.; TE Ul-3-]U MY 5a. Aaa Adatat) conj. Acharya; ul-3-]uU waaay 
MY 7b. °aaTH] conj.; eat M” 


\92 Tet TT 
TATTSYA W[-2-]uU Ty U[-8-JU I 9 Il 
dercaraaravsarfetatrsatane: | 
AMAT AH NATL S HAUSA ST: Il G I 


SHCA RITHM AAA STITT | | 
qaeaarfad ec: meratfefadge: ile it 
TEAST CHEAT SHAT TWAT: | 
aTedatarar YAY FIT ATETATAT: Il Qo Il 
(TTT: | 
age Frear arr qfereaqyr: | 
GaHarasyranr ATATS :-aasTea4r: I 22 Il 
UCGTeTETT: MT <TM:> AAMT SIT: | 
TaTeay SM ARTI: ATTA STA Ae: Il 22 Il 
GarTar ST ATA: WRTET: YCITTH: | 
AGUNG: FACT AAT STC: FeTS HT Il 23 I 
aaa WqArarat Preegarar sy ategare: | 
qaqddagyes Meret Ferrara: i ev it 
Fear freay arear ateereare fava: | 
TALVAT AIT: TITAPAASTATAT AS: I OY I 


aaray FaITHTeAY AEretcaatye: | 
10. Cf. Mrgendravidyapada 13:12: 
TI SMTA FATT: AFA TMHST: | Aaa TAHT GT: ATT: FETS: 


8d. °HWAWT? ] em.; “HRATSe MY Ob. oWalHAeT: ] em.; aT TAT: M” 
9 d. ofatgqd: ) conj.; °fAdTett: MY 10. TeTaaray | conj.; Tavate- 
ay MY 11 b. CMQyUT: ] em.; eAqyMT MY 12 b. SW: ] conj.; Uf-2-Ju 
MY 18d. F@TeGe ] conj.; FeTEYH MY 14a. Atay) conj.; FU AT M” 
14 d. faftareaa: | conj.; Ffraraae: MY 15 a. Peet) em.; Preity mM” 
e aT-ar | conj. Sanderson; WTUY MY 15. ad: TST) conj.; a: TaTe 
MYB*; @e: TSTe B 


Tey: Tec: \93 


eerd: aTfray aa Prferaret & TR: Il 26 I 


THAT ARTA SAYA: | 
Wht: MATITCAT: AACA TH THAT Il 29 Il 


TOT SYMTIUCAT: AATTITATTS: | 
MH AA THUT: MATA TCHS: Il LG I 


Tr: TIaATHTT: Frat feraea: | 
TETTTSTUT ST: fae T MAeArae: Il 22 Il 


aragqar shad: wafeargedes: | 


16cd. tera: WTforar aa Frferaaeat TH: quoted ad Svacchandatantra 10:33. 


17ab. TA:Aal ARTARSAAMYTATEH: quoted ad Svacchandatantra 10:43 
17cd. TUT FT AVIWAT 
Mirae: MASALA: AAEITAYTATTHA quoted ad Svacchandatantra 10:46. 


18ab. THY SQTWMTATILAT: AalSafCaTTH: quoted ad Svacchandatantra 10:43. 
18cd. AeaA:Aea THAT: WTATETHAT: XR: quoted ad Svacchandatantra 
10:40bc. 

19-20b. Ud FT MTIIWTAT 

TT: THAATHTT: FMray fear: | 

Rerraeaured: fae Mratearat: | 

areaqar Sfad: Werfearavegeqest: | ad Svacchandatantra 10:34 


16d. »¥ TIT: ] tops missing in M”. 
17ab. tops of all but the last 2 syllables missing in M”. 
19 from °meq: up to and including @TcT° in the next line but one, the tops of all 


aksaras are missing in M". 


16 d. Frferared & Uitte: ] BSvaU; faferar (£.32")-~ TI Ta: MY 17 ab. q- 
Tag AeTAeea UYNAeH: | B, Sal; TA: TTTTET ATE TA Ty 
TT TT eh: MY 17d. AAA {HVG | conj.; TARMAMATHIaAT M”; AAeT- 
TJATHFT SvaU 18d. °H-at:] MY; CHAT: SvaU 19b. Fray fea: | 
B, SvaU; Ositay fea way: MY 19d. fe g Mrafearac: ) B, SvaU; TA 
G@w@wrareg xr at: MY 20ab. eyar Sfaa: Gefen ) conj.; Tar 
fe acrriferactt MY; eqar sfaa: oeferavee SvaU 


\ov Tea art 


Gays: FAANTAT Tal FIPFASST | 2 I 


aretediadepentdanate arnet: | 
agtraate marr egurerahore: tt 22 
TCI PATE FCIAC: | 
AICS STC Adteatsy TIFT Il 22 1 


aaTgrey Siaearat calergrettads: | 
Tae HTTs Ae IIT TT CTC: Il 23 Ml 


Aaa HAH: HA aaa: | 
TIT FITMATIAT YEATES: Il VY Il 


ATATS: AIAHQTATAATATT ATA: | 
20cd. TNT SPT “qaqa: adrenmadtaatares:” 


ata TAT: ad Svacchandatantra 10:34. 


2lab. ATeoeM eae FeMtaanata Achet: ad Svacchandatantra 10:35. 
21cd. agieaata mater agerrafte: sft wear frew: ad Svacchanda- 


tantra 10:35. 


22ab. ACHR YATeAs YCATTPACATT: ad Svacchandatantra 10:35. 


238ab. AAT SAUTE FAeryeaaste | 
aargre, Siren areTerctadat: ad Svacchandatantra 10:35. 


23cd. FeleHavda Megat cyfed: ad Svacchandatantra 10:44. 

24. Faaea IH: Aaettrovratearte: | 

WIE Tareramrearyetare: | afer eraTar Frew: ad Svacchandatantra 10:41. 
25ab. ATATS: AACKRATAAGATATTANA: ad Svacchandatantra 10:43. 


20 cd. {aTeMTUT FAT FIP ATHT | conj.; Frere: FATYTPAS x T: x F: 
MY; Garerragqdrastayeh: SvaU 21 a. Aaa we |] SvaU; ATeAANT? 
MY 22cd. aeatrer seater qdtetst wydd | em.; zatrsratraoy Freres 
6 aptul MIT STITT Fdtretywatfy SvaU 24 a. AAT? | 
; Yate SvaU 24 b. Haetovafetae: ] SvaU; Fae Taferarregt: MY 
25 b. COTAUTATTAYH: | conj., cAraaTarvata: MY; caadararqaya: SvaU 


TEI: Woc>#k: \9Y 


FESSATAT SAAT ASST AT AT: il BY It 


atesare: Baaray PeIeeTHTIAA: | 
QTATSA: HHMTLALTA SMA CH ST: | VE Il 


Were were aveafaytest | 
Faftare: Frovarfdspyarrattseret: il 209 
Feat rae: ora: aactataerea: | 
MSTA TIA ITSHYSATE: | 2G Il 


feequt foeeaorsittureradgem: | 
aaxvar faardad Wee: TAUAT: il 28 Il 


25c-26b. AeBara: BAAITAY fTSEHaTHT AA: | 

FESGATAY SHACTTPAS ATTA: | ad Svacchandatantra 10:42. 
26cd. Farts: HasrVarts: Araki sd: ad Svacchandatantra 10:46. 
27cd. Ugh ATTTAT 


faftrarea: frararftspyendifsaret: ad Svacchandatantra 10:52. 
28ab. Petr fraq: wre: facfaftaea: ad Svacchandatantra 10:46. 


28cd. ASIA Va eTshyetIME: ad Svacchandatantra 10:48. 
29ab. STTUTaT 


Faurar faeFegarsteraureapayer: ad Svacchandatantra 10:51. 
29cd. Tawar feared Were: Yaya: | 
THTSST TAY AAT FAT J Ac AaT ad Svacchandatantra 10:48. 


25 cd. FreSaarar SaatrarfaeeadaraaT: ) SvaU; Presarar eracrar fr- 
Ceara TAaAT: MY B*: Presaray eraenit fresaarearerenr: Bo 26a. aT- 
HATA: | Sva; aregara M’ 26 b. °ETHAT: } conj.; °HIHPAT: M” SvaU 
26 c. GTATSA: aeUTEATT” | conj.; GTATT: SAMRAT: MY; |rAaTig: BH- 
Wats: SvaU 27 b. AVSH? | conj.; ASHE MY 27 c. Parftare: | SvaU;, 
quitara: MY e faqrarfct: ] M’B’, SvaU; faaratftt Be 28 a. Pastor ) 
SvaU; waar MY; fafaot Be; afar Be 28 b. HaeTe ] SvaU; Fa- 
7: MY 28cd. (MleIEHYE? ] SvaU; cMPTITHTASTe MY 29a. facqut ) 

Y; favyat SvaU 29 ab. faefeaorsitrgutergere | Svav; faef=qarrer- 
Mergers MY 29c. daar] SvaU; FawaT MY 


\9& Tet at 


atfraenrar fer: Aaral kare: | 
aUred? saratfraecateartaategye: ll 30 
aaret Haire: Yarqgearfenr: | 
PaTrarar Feqret Farah TIchese: Il 32 Il 
ASUS AY ARTIST WATTH: | 

VaR SMES SATA TNT: Il 32 Ml 
azar & shifear: sed ferar WaAe a: | 
Taueae ser fart cetrarferar i 33 I 
cacrattegar: ad Westy eer: | 

[FAV | 
Teat Tatcrerentor FAMCATEAATASA Il Q¥ II 
Hasey a HAS facgyaqa;et: | 
SETH TCH SSA eS ST: Ml BY 
THATHT: AATATATHAAT AH: | 
fAUSATI AA SST WANTS TAT: 4 Il 3G I 
Gear Have WHETETHAAT: | 
TH_IT: AarpeaqgeyHelde: ll 39 il 
30. afraearar fer: we Cheqrenyat: | 


qured saratraecahnifadtegye: ad Svacchandatantra 10:33. 
Slab. aaifadtfahreaa: Yargeearfehr: ad Svacchandatantra 10:33. 


Sicd. FATIH FEErt: FAtaHraracfoges: ad Svacchandatantra 10:36. 


30 a. TAT] M**B, SvaU; 7 x Tx HAT MY 30 b. Adal eae: | Be; 
adage: MY BS; WaCeqTeATYAT: SvaU 30 c. TUTEYT SATe | Sval; 
aureqnge MY 30d. caf@mfare ] MY; cafnrfadte SvaU 31 a. aleT 
arfahre ) MY; aratfrdtfafite svaU 31 b. Yara? ] SvaU; YaTase MY 
31 ee UE teak lS ] MY; Jegrt: Farag se: Svav 
32 c. VaAT ] em.; WANT M” 34 b. TfaTEe ] conj.; WftTeTr MY 35 a. F- 
CUSED F HOTU | em.; PYASET FT HRATST MY 87 c. AATHE® J conj.; 
WeargHee M” 


Tes: Tec: \9\9 


fate ferfe: aqfeer Tear Ac: | 
GY SUS USEC: FAMVSMAGSE: | 
Freararatasrar fryer: TATSAT Il 3c I 
qareararfat Vs: Haya: | 

U-4JU Fae: AVSTPTAATPTAT: | 38 I 
PUITAITA: Farared SFI: | 


[WaT aT Az | 
FETA WAT AACA ATH Il Yo Il 
are Ttarearet race TF Mfeaqa | 
Weld TATST TF Water AAT AAAI KI 
wan FrRrofee tetegrorerere: | 
aT wgater: Heit frat: ter: ee 
AA Atalay TAT Arafat CRAT: | 
THAT T ACAMTTANTS AT AT SAA II ¥3 Il 


38abcd. fafa fafa: aqfeer Tea: | 

al SoS AggUsH: HPAVSedagec: il xa Arecar Frew: ad Svacchandatantra 
10:94. 

42cd, 44ab, 45cd, 47ab, 48cd, 50ab, 51c-f. 

ane wganter: Ffecit fara: ofr: 1 aecaret sir wegrer arg factfearss: | 
Prov Prepareren: HAT Aes: | MrEeITea AHA: HheT faeweret: i 
Ferd fewarer: ASH T HTH: | Cadet Fear gout Harr eset: i 
yates Pravarft ararahrtercahr: | qaret aferay seedraferenarafaget ii 
ad Svacchandatantra 10:113. 

43. Ugh ATTA 


38 b. TRATTATAY | MY; ACAPTHTYHT? SvaU 38 cd. AY SOS WECUeyrs: 
PAUStdaguc: ] SvaV; AS aaggucts: HRTSetagiwe: MY” 38 ef. Fat- 
arorateerar frgm: ] conj. Sanderson; Fat u orafwerer frger MY 39d. w- 
varere ] em.; HVT? MY 41 c. TATRL) conj.; TATA MY 43 b. UTA 
THe: | MY; GeaereaesT SvaU 43 c. TERA T ACSA] Sva; 
Tara VT Aq CATT MY” 


\9G Te Tt 


qtaret SFT we\rer arafacitfearera: | 
Tataaararar: TOM: TTT: |i ve Il 


at Tata eT TATHapa TCT I 

Facet Farqarerrer: FIAT FACES: Il YY I 
Pree anTaaitedct afer: Ferar | 

at Tadt<At MATA SARTSeys ay Il ¥E Il 
THUD FT HhY: HheT faHerss: | 
THAT: Say ATaeTSgealor FATT: il v9 I 
CET Ve Tees satH THAT | 
Heldet Pevared: FSET HITS: Il ¥c Il 
ARTETA FETT <MAAT HAA | 
FETA eT AEE ASAT A II ¥R II 


Carat Feorn gaat Wrart:eqs: | 
ATATHINLAT AEATSI AST AT AT AT: Il Mo It 


TaTdetatd CATT TATHAGATA | 
ysata fFravstft wrar-ahrtereAr: | 
Wate aferar saedtafereceratrectt it V2 I 


AAAI ATS TET AT IA | 
TSAI T AAT AT ACSA ad Svacchandatantra 10:95c-97b. 


44a. TdTet ] conj.; TCATAT MY 44b. arqtactttedrera: | em.; argar ar- 
fearera: MY; avafacttfearet: SvaU 44 cd. °aTaT: TOM: ) conj.; °aTaT 
TOUT MY 46 c. afAdet SAAT] conj.; AfAT U MY 47 ab. TRUTST 
@ AhY: AHeT] SvaV; MAST F Hhg: AlHeT MY = 48 d. HUTAA: ] 
conj.; HANTH: MY; ATEH: SvaU 49 ab. °UfCeHal TENMTaATHAy |] 
conj.; °WteTs ARTA Ul-5-Ju MY 49 c. HETEAT® ] conj. Isaacson; AGTET? 
MY 49d. datfEe ] conj. Acharya; TATE MY 50a. JegM] M’; Feary 
SvaU 50b. gamut rafr:eet: |] Svau; gate afreqt: MY 50d. ewe: ) 
em.; °UMT MY 5le. Water] conj.; Wetet: MY; Ader SvaU 


TEA: Wet: \9% 


Ud AATeATaSyT AEG: aHHAa: | 
faster frnereper: SArAHeatrsan: i x2 Il 
[aTea: } 

Tena: She ke evenenetsamt | 

fone Ferexitae TATSTY ITS AA Il ¥3 It 

arrays ataenareatednity | 

ICHESTSHIEVS tT I SHE taCISAHA Il Yl 

aafysra ifeny Stet eaten: anfated: | 

epeatragean ta: ad: qafsd: ii xy tl 

Tepeelreh We een: aferay ec: | 

Garear Fle: Meet: TAPTOMTT: i VE I 

et: Aaead aay Agarate Adar | 

Hettgtactteather: F-eORA STAT: I V9 II 

Tehrihireearbteter: ASA | 

SOT Sehr WATS Wate AT AceHSAT II We it 

elenedy fateer pasa gees: | 

AEA AHH ATTA SCA HSAH Il VR Il 

Wasser Sad ereafafed —ry | 

Uhh TAAEA ASAHI AAA Il Go Il 

[yetta: | 

52 b. °HAAT: | conj.; eH: MY 53 b. leh SHeteyy ] M”; eeneqe- 
fey TT B 54 c. oRTeHEUS? | conj. Sanderson ; °eTe HSS? MY 654d. a Og 
qr? ] MY; °aaTe Bo 55 b. leh: ] M”; @loh: Bo 55c. CAFTA] conj.; 
oAGaT MY 55 d.ta: Ad: FafEd: ] conj. Isaacson; taeaagqatad: 
MY 56 a. qe | em. Sanderson; Wo MY’ 56d. outed: | B; °YW: M” 
57 b. HATA | conj.; WaTAT fe MY 57 c. Aafaree | em.; wetgtee 


MY 68a. Tefette ] conj. Sanderson; WEY? MY 60 b. eTeattafed ] B; 
Sf ay 


Go Tet TT 


weed are @ yettar afrgratarec: | 
TIM APM ASM ANAT AT: Il G2 I 
ud gar: Graheeradehrfear: | 
arc: afer afr: @er Frey war sqay ste: GRIM 
ud saeua: aa aferar: Tavs: | 
[wrqerratay | 

WIT wigd Teersforfarz ii &3 I 
waree eft fagd yet wae TT 
TAY HS ASTD ACATAaHAAT TTA Il &¥ I 
THAT TAT WTS WIS T AAT: | 
MATITSAaAe FS ares MT TP:AT I EY I 
mer Ae: qanty: afttararcreds: | 
wae mofesret: aeanrarsct i GE Il 
Prrfyaregtad rearqeng rege: | 
Ta TIPS: HAMS ATaTsa4r: ii Gig it 
auras: yar fresraterar: FT: 1. 
yaacaeaarenr fraeqeteartea4n: il &c 

B6b. AftraTaTCTeTH: ad Svacchandatantra 10:124 

e7cd. SacTTrer Shr ashy Tywew: FurTewarfaar xfer | Mrgendravrtti- 


dipika ad vidyapada 13:60, p.375. The same unit is quoted in a damaged form in the 
Nanavaranavilakkattarumpatavivekam, Vol. 2, p.881. 


61 ab. T Yettar Ahr? ] conj.; Myer Afat MY 61 d. °J®AtT: ] em. 
Sanderson; °J®hT: MY 62d. Frsr | conj. ; a MY 63d. U&° ] em; Te ° 
MY 65b. Welsh TF] em. Sanderson; TAH MY B; TRIB Bo 65d. TTA | 
em. Sanderson; Ty TT MY 66d. onus | conj.; AS MY 67 cd. TTY - 
RIT: AMTe ) MY; WHYS AMT? MrVrDi; WYRE: — NaViVi 67d. °e- 
wae) MY’°B, MrVrDt, NaViVi; °& x x Wate MY 68b. caferat:] em.; 
cafetaT MY 68 cd. Guatadaenr fraeqetaare ) conj.; FWA AaTeAT 
faaeratear 


° MY 


Tea: Weer: C2 


THOMAS TAMA AAT: | 
SACAAATA AAA MA STAT: Ul GS ll 


feaminir Agearer qfearactawe4n: | 
AIUTIH Aa TIURACAHA Il 0 I 


aT avarerer feear erates | 
SET aTAT SIT faced AAS Il 92 I 


YARATATAT WT AAeraayeact | 
Wea WATTS ACAI: Il 92 Il 


JaIeFaT: | sre: arenwatea: | 
aferacte aarar agra AT TT SAT 93 Il 


orafaaa ay Hae AUT <dd> | 
SAAC arett AAIPETT Il 9 


71-72ab. FAT ATATART feear Saatatanterty | 

ser arqaedy feather FATE | 

PAM Mastered | af -AeeTarqeMHA ad Svacchandatantra 
10:211. 

73. 3H FT MITTAT 

TAT ETT: efttrenutyaa: | 

afearatte Aarey HgTe AT AT BAL! ad Svacchandatantra 10:220. 
74c-75. Th TV ATWTAT 

SATYCLOTTAY are BATE | 

MHATTA SCAT AT ATA: ACaNRAT: | 

aT Ser faqur rar: aqaraaa4r ATA | ad Svacchandatantra 10:216. 


69 a. °UMEHTD ] conj. Acharya; °UMEHT TM” 6Ob. efH RAT: ] conj.; eff 
WAT: MY 7c. FANTTAATHA | conj.; FANT aNTMraTH MY 71 b. faaedt 
AATEC | conj.; feather aatre: MY; feather FATE SvaU 72 a. TTT] 
SvaU; TT MY 73a. Sa2FaT: T] em.; THAT: TM”; TSHTATET SvaU 
7T4b. HYATH AUT WAC | conj.; HY x Ax ATH TUT ~ vy MY; Aqwh ATAAaTUT 
B T74c. ary | SvaUB‘; © &T |] M” (the tops of the aksaras are missing) ; 
fearge B° © °TRYT] SvaU; eC MY” 


GR Tet TT 


MHA ACA AT ATA: AeatAa: | 

av ger fagur vrar: ACATSaAAT AAAI Oy Il 
Tae sherrrea aga: | 

Gea Aatgedit ATeAaTATA Tar: Il 9G I 
ger areas feoarfs wereartannd: | 
asa ad: Faguteaaredt FAAP il 9 I 


TATA TUT WITH Taal WATS: | 
KASAM FUT ser Atear faaraey Fee oc 1 
RUT ATCA STATATAT ATeATPaT | 
TIT A ATeAT FANQTHSI AAA ST > Il 198 Il 
agua Alt: WetH Tataar TT: | 
Weadaataeny: Frarardatad: il co tl 
wedt FAtarSst Alay Aletedad: Sa: | 
77, 78cd-79. Udt FT ATTA 
ger areata feearfs aerearniamnd: | aya aa: fagaterarett aad | 
afa aur + 
AeA FT ser arear fear faci wher arcearferararar Areatfaa¢r it 
Tay A ATeay faweqHetq-ATet: | ad Svacchandatantra 10:206. 
8lab, 83. Wiateda Fatanyy Gray Aterecaay Fre: 
Treas Pre: Bay Ga War Hera: | 
Aga weaarar shy cfarca-garterayr | ad Svacchandatantra 10:199. 


77 From atsatta to ated? the tops are missing in M”. 


75 b. TeainaT: | MY; @earferaT: SvaU (unmetrical) 75 c. aT] SvaU; aT 
MY 76c.a@@] em; AA MY 77a. FBT] SvaU; FET MY 77 c. aTts- 
aft] B; TTS aT eM’; Bayatt SvaU 77 cd. Ae: FAAATeaaTe J 
SvaU; CH TPT TT a aM’; Ue: fegaretarad (A BY )T Be FUT] 
em.; FAC (line 2) FAI) MY; AM SvaU 78b. Tdat) conj.; Yaa M* 
78 c-79. HEAT YU FBl-. AAATATET: ] SvaU; om. MY 80 a. “Tet: ] em. 
Sanderson; “tet: MY Bla. GArarer | M’ ; Garay SvaU 81 b. Atte: 
Cyd: ] MY; Aterecaar ffl: Svau 


Vea: Toon: G3 


THTSEIAL Tl YAICae AHA |! 62 Il 


SIM ATT TAT SET aegerar fact | 
Wat Cte Tar TAT CAIATA HA GI 
atta rhe: Sar Ga Way AeTgta: | 
AeqaT TWerarar sf cParra-garterar il 3 
TAU AIT TY CAATWATT A | 

aa Terdqersy THT CAAT ATT GY It 
aaae Payer sigtarararyaes: | 
sare gy Wey fat tareqa: Ferar: i cy 


CTIHCTNSAATAGeey a: | 
pda fra aft aatmedst ape li cE | 


added aretet fryer ara Tad: | 


82. Udete Tear 

TAM ATA AGT FET A-sAAT far 

War tate dererdae Taq ad Svacchandatantra 10:233. 
84cd, a. Tawar q 

at medqeay Tau Maa ae TAT AT AH ad Svacchandatantra 
10:231cd. 

85. Wade Fryer sfedorararqaes: | 

saPrareary Wey fret tareqa: ferar: | ad Svacchandatantra 10:199. 
86. STAcITarT 

UTAH CTU CAAIA-YSey a: | 

jad g fra aft aatHedst Ace | ad Svacchandatantra 10:227. 


81 c. TAT] conj.; ad MY 82 a. TOT] M”; NgT SvaU 82 c. TaTHTCT |) 
SvaU; Wal@t MY 82d. TAATHHA] BS, SvaU; TAATAH M”’B* 83 a. fiT- 
Ft: ] SvaU; fitfo MY 83d. tfetee ] B°, SvaU; Tea? MYB” 84b. Taqay- 
TAM ] em.; TAT TTT MY 84d. TATA) SvaV; TAT MY 85a. Prayer 
Sfet] SvaU; FANATIS MY 85 b. °He4:] SvaU; CHT MY 85 c. AA- 
TAY | MY; waAPraeTy SvaU ¢ YS] Sva; ferry MY s86c. Hda _T fAq] 
SvaU; HeMATAAT MY 86d. Ache] SvaV; AHS: MY 87a. AAT) em; 
arat MY 


Cw TUS aT 


Freer aa aeaed: Ste eqqae: ll cis ll 


TITY CG EY WAHT EMSA | 
aa fraretty tear frarercateqar | 
fer crar yey farar Tare: Teveter ii cc i 


eAHecaar ar sfeaa Taq: WaT: | 
qater AarHet ay eae Til ck lt 


aex afar ah garet TAUTTAT | 
at WI ANT SHATATPATEMNIAT Il Xo Il 


qearey aera: eanyferart taped | 
taraly sf feasraecarat fear Fre: 1 ae 


vefertt weet ured eftatad | 


s7cd. fafrer ar & avet: serfs e-qyae: ad Svacchandatantra 10:199. 


asc-f. ay faarety tear faaracaceqar | 
fer caar Fevecawm Kepear xfs Tear Frewy ad Svacchandatantra 10:239. 


go. eHeeaur ay sfeaa aT: TAI: | 
qatar TeTHet arm wert q | ad Svacchandatantra 10:199. 


90cd. OT ATT WI afcarafraed¢4r i xafa Wrawrar Freeey ad Svacchanda- 
tantra 10:237. 


91bcd. fevary ferHears | 
tarerr sf feasraccareat fesare fife: xf trocar frefaast ad 
Svacchandatantra 10:199. 


87 c. Weaed: |] MY; F aet: SvaU 87d. WE Ege ] M’°SvaU; Waite 
qe M’*; wy fefage BS; waif eateqe B°° 88 ef. yee fray Tare: | conj. 
Sanderson; Jet ferareqarm: MY; YeVeRaw EMT SvaU 89 b. WATT: | 
B°, SvaU; WATT MYB* 90 b. FAST TAMTAA | conj.; FATST ITAA 
MY 90c. HA ANT) MY”; ANT MAT SvaU 91 a. TEATFT] em. Sanderson; 
aqeamhre MY 91b.@iHeqd) MY; feaHeary SvaU 92 b. UIte Aftay- 
qq] Bo; ATC yee afc AXA MY” (unmetrical); TTT Aft: | TAT 
B°° (unmetrical) 


Tet: We: CY 


WaT YI F:S AT FF: FANT VI 

werd wre at aeqtaract: | 

THAIS MATS AGAST ATI! 3 Il 
[SRTRIITSTEIT ATTA Tew AT | 

Talal AIT: ae A: Fa: HTT: | 

wae ted Talal Ga MTA AergA: | 

Seca Saay SET Her: Hherwarhrar i ev i 

aa: aftvagy sferte att qh | 

QUE AHATS AS TAGAT Il BY Il 

HMAIAA Wel HM FAIA | 

APS TeTay a: Tae gurfor: il Re I 

eeateredcaay arar aa qfatafraa: | 

aaeq WT set wre sh ToHATH Vo Il 

Healt TC TeATITaT AST ARTAT: | 

Free: arfdaat ofa farear ARTI Xs II 

Gaeta AA saat Fas AT | 

Wat ented aftedarceds artfia: te I 

TIT: MTeAerSray AT Far: T Mester: | 

afeage SAAT: AHeagt: FLAT: FT: Il goo it 

92cd. WAT YT Gia BT YT: Hany: 1 xf Arecar Frew ad Svacchanda- 


tantra 10:243ab. 


92c. WT Yo) SvaU; Eta T YT MY 92d. FATT: ] SvaU; WANA: 
MY 98a. Weqgrte ] Bo; SqditTe M’B* 93d. °AtgT AC] conj. Sanderson; 
oqtdd MY 95a. act: ] MYB“; AWC Be 95d. °SARTASYAT ] conj.; 
eeTSTA-GaT MY 96 b. HM) conj.; HMI MY 96 c. ETAT RTA: ] conj.; 
WegaT ery MY 97 a. aeqfere ] em. Sanderson; ca MY 97d. q- 
cAdt ) conj.; T x Ex THe MY 98 d. FeTaaryT] MB“; AETaaT B 
100 cd. SOCACAT: AH-egT: FeTAT: | conj.; FWATar: eect eee MY 


ak er at 


TATA eaT THT AAYAAT: | 
Ara Tas aay way fara arcr: ti 208 I 
TAT TT AT Ba MATA: | 
TAT Md Ed AT: WIA TACT AAT! 202 Il 
queedahedst FUIGUMSMAHy | 
aay fearerer Far: Ararat Aafer Ti 203 tl 
daler THtary aa Fearet Azar | 
saa gC FC SPTT TAT i or I 
eargeedeaty ay qeqrenyd faery | 
Frater aa ralor: WAT Se TT: ll Yo I 
mata Wyte f grav: ayer faqur feran: | 
dealer Wraatearmrr asatfetrar farfe: ii 906 i 
ATATCAWATA AT ATATCAGAT ACT | 
ATACATETATAT ATATRAAATHAT Il 2019 II 
taataraist Fer atarerHeaa;r ate: | 
FEAR A AAT STATA TAHA TA OT: Il Qe Il 
[ararearar mips | 
alaretthedad: Wren: ay sft enters: | 
Mee: AY SFr: WataqaTATIS: |! 20% II 


whear & sera: aa aq mifenhiai: | 


102 d. WI | em.; Wd: M” 103 a. qrree | em. Sanderson; Ye? M” 
103 b. Fiz? ] MYB%; ATH? Be 106a. GIA: ] conj.; AIT MY = 106c. T- 
aret | conj.; aged MY 107 c. °YaT? ] em.; “FRAT? M” = 108a. CIA TH ST 
BT | conj.; Mat: mrSt FET MY 109 b. at SFT SathayAyre J conj.; aTfaer- 
We MY 109d. Wage | conj.; ATET? MY 110 b. 2 Mfahiar: | 
MY; @& sv mf aq: ferat: SvaU 


Tess: Teor: C9 


TRraert Ms: AATSATHSITaTSE: Il 220 Il 

THAIS AIT Terragen | 

werey Farad: ard TETRA ATA Il 222 Il 
[TaTvsHeTE: | 

deed Tet suseq arfe: efteard HereH7 | 

AUtat he T TSM HCA SAAT | 

aeqd oat aged ay: Tera Sar ii 222 1 

yotea: ator whacr HAaATSTAT | 

yeas AMI AAT TF PTPT 222 1 

TAT AES YTATAY AISTSIAHTCH: | 

araraar: ferareda SPAT: tITHITAaT:+ | 

Frarattt @ FSTATASD TTT | gee It 
[7a TET: | 

aTpearate Farcar wae Averrererc: | 

TTA TRAST SPAT FET FT UTAH GF ll 22v il 


TIC SIS: ATET: T IFAT: | 
ao: Farad YE afersy Ardtfa FFA: i 226 1 


aferarargaearare Sst AAaTeTar | 


110. agwH Tar 

Theat & sara: aa a sx mf aa: fara: | 

wfuraetat mite: arearfercarag: | ad Svacchandatantra 10:342. 
112b. alfe: QNead HerEeHT = Kirana 8:86b. 


111 ab. os ue) conj.; °wa: TAT: Aaalfew MY 111c. fe- 
Tae: |] Bo; feae: MYB* 112 a. TE STSST] conj.; TET: AH MY 112 

c. Sircate FT] conj. Sanderson; AtrCath MY 112ef. Taea Y: TAISAT | 
conj.; Teeny: WeafsarT: MY 113 a. Yoke: )] M”*; Whats: M’** (unme- 
trical) 118 c. YI] em.; YFIT MY 114 c. ATAPTAT: ] conj.; Warvar 
MY 


GG Tet at 


Ma DT Feesgaraeagsraawrsar: il VgV9 

TA SHIH: Ber BrHat Frage: | 

afeqar GUTS THTST CHT AT: Il 2c Il 

TICS FT: MATL THAT HCH: | 

Tarra Hear SAY FEIT TILT: Il 228 I 

wet geerfatg: AAT Te: | 

a farafraraer gecder WastUr i 220 I 

Gerd aAeed aT aeate: T Teese: | 

THATS: Ae ea aang T x Ax TT Tu Tu atl 
8X8 Il 

waeraae: Bar fate: safa-gec 

at IAT Var sherararrearfarare: it 222 I 

Tt: Wrst: HE: Msfelarss: | 

ares: Rrra Ced Wah ATIC Il 223 

wate RIT ST Wey: WAIT: | 

HLTH: HIAMCMCHART AM CUE: Il V2¥ I 

BATT AA WYAeY AATeA: | 

Gdaeagecarenry Weal Waaray: il V2y I 

ad: HT: T YAST FAA FATT: | 

oer & facta ererequy ATereyga: it 226 I 


waert Sua Aqedal TEeay head: | 


117 d. °Sffrersere ) conj.; osfaerar MY 119a. 94: ] em; FT MY = 119 
c. WaTfe? |] conj.; WaT? MY 121d. Wane TCT UTUNMuUA:) M’; 
aareae TWIT: Bo 122 c. at YA] conj.; AT YR MY 123 a. FE: ] 
B°; FE: MYB% 124 c. HET: ) conj. Acharya; PICT: MY 1265 ab. UT- 
Gwe] em; ware MY 126c. TSTE CATA | conj. Acharya; Tete taymy M” 
126 d. Tal ATETRTRT: } conj.; FAT AreTwTa U FT: MY = 127 ab. Aqeauiy 
TEcayrage: ] em.; Aq*eaay wad AT x Hx fea: MY” 


Tey: Tee: akg 


Way Stace: Frefrararreay: i 229 I 
forerterenteaar: 


[arcar:, AAKT:, FAT] 


ad arcar faqoifegar: | 
FS PASAT AAT SAT ATER UT AUT Il QE Il 
aata: FaraTetagyal WYATIAT: | 
qa 4 sfert tage Tt werk FATT 928 Il 
[eacfecyvar: ] 


Terfrentadr wat: cache: Marea: | 
aa faster wearer tare eanrartas: 1 230 11 


alfega Hacttar Aeleal Ga aPxar: | 
ad: Jar Teaver wTfcertarqaqgeqa4r: tl 232 Il 


aqaterhteaar Warree4ranad: | 
WElIGaay TT TAT AT AAT GT: Il az I 
Waettaradrettar araatfetaaredc: | 
ararea Ahray TMCHE: AAST: Il 233 Il 


130ab, 131ab. ahbir Sib qT Yardy yaotfa: , Tet 
versitfatracte: cacita: carrera: | 


alfeaa Aectar Fetedt aa afewar: il Kf: -- Svacchandoddyota ad 10:516c-517b. 


128 cd. ATHTATAITAT STRAT ONT AUNT | conj.; TAT Arortearcareartay F- 
TF MY 129 b. RYNTAAT: ] conj.; WTAAT: MY 129 cd. wage 7 Wehr 
farcq ) conj.; Taga 7 deaf fart MY 130 a. TeTsfteatfeat ow: } conj.; 
Tarmeareacer MY; Tarettfatadeey: SvaU 130b. Sure |] MY; eate SvaU 
131 a. alfega Aectay | SvaU; afeqarstecfar MY 131 b. Afra: ) M’; 
aferay: SvaU 131c. Jat] B; xJxaT MY 181d. wfcerfafraarar: | B; 

wT -—[-G-] — MY” 182a. aqarteatterar | conj.; —ftfeaear M’; aq- 
ore Teer B 182. TEPIGMAT | conj.; Werferfasrty MY = 133 b. oft- 
Aled: | em.; oftrarac: MY 


se TTT TT 


FIAT eT ASTRA CHET: SANTA: | 
mdtcatfer: acar wer aa wate: il ay I 
Traeds fast cqaraaserec¢: | 
Frefraracrentateetaaaeree4r: il 234 I 


[wer fru ETT] 
TAT Halcaanicageraigel Wad | 
agare wafer: a a arfeaqearc | 
to RST OTM ATM ACT CHAT AOE et Il 93E I 
ysht: a atfehids: sac: aferay at: | 
ad: W Pages TcHUla FT APA: 1 VV Il 
GATT WHC: We: AIITTE ET: | 
Qa FST WAT WaTed F ACITAATAT: Il 2c 
aa fasta MMe areeraegare hs | 
TAY SATACgST F Asad ST WAPHAT: | 238 Il 


get Fett PAT TaaTagaeny: | 
136cd, 137ab. STIWTAT FT 
agar wafauy: a + arfeaquard | 
rsh: a arfehrdd: WE;E: aferar @C: | ad Svacchandatantra 10:549. 


138b. AAITTELY AC: = Mahabharata 3.40:1d. 


134 b. SPT: STATA: | tops missing in M”. 
134cd. tops missing in M”. 
135a. tops missing in M”. 


134 b. °CHET: TANTAT: ] em.; TH BT TT HT FT TT: M” (tops missing); °TPeT 
edd: B 134cd. MGfeRtfeT: Acar Fa aa safer: | em; RM The 
Trem: Farag araay fa fe a: M” (tops missing); RqfeRfereqay Ter 
aa wfafeet: B 135 a. qaaena fash) B; Fa aes fa & fer M” (tops 
missing) 1386 e. @ frwaensragte ] MY; fatwaate Bo ise f. ofrTe) 

. oforrer B 137d. aft: ] conj.; ART: MY 138 c. AST) conj.; ANT 
MY 139 c. TAT SAT-AT? ] conj.; TATaTAT® MY 140 a. et ] em.; Tht 
M” (unmetrica)l) 


Tey: Tee: X2 


Staged WacaileS: HeTE WAPATAT Il eve ll 
waarfesteediiae Teves | 
[AEMTVSATTAT VST: ] 

SM Tatar Vel TMfaey FaTeear: il evi 

quay: ydfarest afaesr sfratefeerd: | 

aay afamrarenr area Asad Ferg: i eet 

yearest sorcrear sfi araet sitar: fer: | 

aaa: Sreafarest Fry: MET We: | 

WAAAY Stet: As fasrath aay: eva 

arnrfaraypar: Satay: | 

VTHTSTAATAT AVSA TATA MTTAT: tl Vv I 

(Sfrendaxteairraa: | 

WMS BeteHey Aar:eAey ferarPrhe: | 

ATATCaT ASCH STATED FRTATAH: Il OEY Il 

TUT) WAIAATA Teel THATS | 

WTTATATA ATA TMT THITUT: Il OWE Il 

WRT FONTAN VATA: Fat I: | 

cast FT Aatey ATTATST THT: I Ov I 

fora xet Feregr aroret + fagqera: | 

Z-airatte afta: Aare: HST Il orc 

Wat + Wags: Weret HAT: Aya: | 
144d. Fusetwarfamrre;r: = Rauravasttrasangraha 3:13b as transmitted in M”. 
140 c. AYE: | conj.; AYfee MY 143 a. WAM Sayre) em.; Wearastare 
MY; WereTTe Bo 143 d. WFTW) conj.; WataT MY 145 d. Feqaa- 


&: ) conj.; FETA: MY 147 b. AVTATT: Fat] conj.; ATATaTTYAT MY 
149 a. Wat] em.; aTaY MY” 149 b. MAT: } conj.; TAT MY 


QR Te TT 


STANT ST TATA: Tea Hats FAT: i eve i 


eqtatth chet ger get wfatec: | 

Freer (OTe TAT T TATA: I Qo I 
Geared TaAAaTSaT WTCHAY FT AAT: | 
Fraret tefearar srafaegq: HATATSH Il 242 I 
Frarrar Praca ATHTSD ATTA ATA: | 
ATATSET WHAM: AIOFGAR ATE: Il WI 


ad & sareamr esr fafaayearsa4n: | 
faFrareroyiaer farrsertaqar: i 43 it 
faFrregarethretarhreargqan: | 
YAIFHTATT: YSCqagATAT: Il Vx ¥ I 
aATareaiteadr Ver: AalqaRHrer: | 
WIC: PSII AAA AT eTET PAT Il WY Il 


cwertara ferar wer fa-gateaarar: | 
TIT: OT Fray Sq: AACA HATHA: Il QUE Il 


qT Teqrcatd: fateeag aT aT TAI 

aTarest Yea a: YaMPHsaE: il gx'9 i 
155cd.. MTTUTeT SFT 
WAT: YAM AAA ATSTeT TTT Ute | 
Siddhadntasamuccaya of Trilocanasiva, GOML MS R 14394, p.44, IFP MS T. 284,. 
p. 167, and T. 206, p. 104. The second of these padas is quoted also in the Mrgendra- 
vrttidipikaé ad vidyépada 13:157c-160b, prefaced by the attribution srimatparakhye 
’pi. 
149 d. Fafa fered: ) conj.; Araferfe: MY 150 c. FRERT) conj.; FRET 
MY 15la.Jeqet] em; Jaet MY” 151d. HTAfay: ] em; Frfa_g M” 
153 a. °SQMT] conj.; °eAT MY 155a. ATT? } conj.; ATaT® MY 157c. Q- 


eamit ] em. Sanderson; Yearat MY 


Tey: Tec: 3 


QUT ATA AUCH TG HET TANT: It BUG Il 
nape fart emafrantresta | 

CMT TATA SCHIST tul-4-J Tit il ES 
eqn Ad: Art ater: Aeq*a: | 

seraenr frarsry ufacer GaeAeT: | 2Go Ml 


WRATH ATATAT: TT: ILE G2 Il 


nate srowet ceraaer arfarvenifaarcfawesrtet: TS: Il 


159 a. wae fart AMT | conj.; HAPS fart amt MY; Heat (eh Bee) 
far BIT’ Bo 159c. awafearcer) Bo; TefaTTeT MYB™ 161 b. °SET- 
T° | conj.; °MATT® MY 162 °WeIe?] em.; WET? MY 


ya: Tee: UG 


Tare Favs | 

Taree SAIS: TeaTearqarsrar | 

FATA SAT: MEA AHAUE: | LI 
[srerqre: ] 


gtearet & Ade: Yew | 
ofa sate ator faeeh: & TPT 


farg: qereaterare: WeUAMOAeT | 
avSsgay GAT: SUT: AVSad: Il 3 


eat: Vemhr: treqateraraae: | 
ATqha Aa ath AMACET ATTAT Il ¥ II 


feariaahrerar arrested: | 
serdar festergur + afeari YI 


Sab. aur Trea—fag: yerecaferara: werafMopde4r! ad Sataratnasan- 


graha 25, p.45. Also quoted in the Siddhantasamuccaya of Trilocanasiva (IFP MSS 
T. 284, p. 157, and T. 206, p.91) and (without attribution) in the Somasambhupaddha- 
titika (IFP MS T. 170, p. 34). 

5c-6d. Ageh BAcIWTSAel— BITeTAAAT (AB; Ut C) fa-sgaenrant a afer | 
Trea (BC; WAEAT A) Sal GS Hater [SATA Ad: (BC; Ad: A) | 
frfrtracedsrqurert a fa-gue(a; faegere Cc; fa-geT B) Il Siddhanta- 
samuccaya IFP MSS T. 284 [=A], p. 156, T. 206 [=B], p.91, and GOML R 14394 [=C], 
pp. 38-9. 

5c-6b. Cf. Pauskara 8:19c—20b: 


sera fa-geenrent + afer agur aferar aot: Hararssaaar Aa: | 


lc. °OSAT: ] conj.; CATT: MY 2b. STAIAATA] conj.; °HaGTAT MY 3 
a. fa-q: ] SaRaU, T206; fase M”SaRaU(vl), T284, SoSaPaTr 4a. We | 
conj.; WTe MY 5c. TWetTaaAalT] MY”, Pau, T284, T206; SITATTAUT 14394 
5d. 7 atgat) Bo, SiSa, Pau; w afeaT MB” 


Xe Tee at 


TEC: SAT AHHicHhdret SAAAT Ad: | 
fFafatracedsrgurert & faega|ei qi 


Tod Veantke ercaasAatyeqes | 
area cacaannete catered |i 9 | 


TeaTeuwdifa: VAreaterqqsyar | 
ade S=aureareyq: Ferarfare Frariicii 


[Pare Parra: | 


Wile Jars | 

qnrar aufaedarc earer seutaqres: | 

atteqeyt faagrter: at st enread faerie 

TAT Tas | 
6c-7b. TUTAaTLAN AIST 
Fafradracetsrgarert & fague i zat agantt aarcamaafyeges | 
Sataratnollekhini ad 15, p.25. 6cd alone are quoted (prefaced by agen Tee) in 
the Sivapijastavavyakhya pp. 8-9, by AghoraSiva (prefaced by agn STITT) ad 
Tattvaprakagsa 25, p.47 and, without attribution, in the second chapter of the Saiva- 
paribhasa (p.85). The whole unit (6c-7b) reappears in the tantravatarapatala of the 
South Indian Pauskara (8:18c—19b). 
7c—8b. Cf. Pauskara 8:20c—21b: 
are cavaarneadte catered | Teeuwdifa: MAesentAaqayrat | 
9-11b. Cf. Pauskara 8:34c—36: 
antat anfrearcenrersumfaares: | wteagyr farfter: dist earead fact | 
qT attogfatay earcearuts-at fer: 1 & a fray a frat ar afear anie- 
frara: | ar we a Wey Tecenver FT frac | 


6a. TERA: SAT TMT | em.; AAT Sa TATA M”SiSa; TET afar- 
aT aut: Pau 6b. HaTeA SAAT Ad: ] MY”, 1206, 14394; Hated Waarad: 
T284; FIHSSAIAT Ad: Pau 7a. JHA] M’SaRaU; 7 HA PauBha; WS- 
YT PauVr? 7b. HTaAafyeqay] BY, SaRaU; HrAAaheqa M’B<; art 
THT ARGHT Pau 8a. dif: ] Pau; ewdtfa MY 8 b. °fAqRrAT] 

M”, PauVr, PauBha; fT AAT Pau eds. (not supported by commentaries) 
8c. SQUAT: | conj.; Tara: MY” 


Ws: Teor: Q\9 


tT atteafatay anreearuteacferte: | 
a fairar + Pray ar afear arvafcera: Il 2011. 


amt we + wey feat aar af: | 
qeattthrera: Garey SUMTAITSS: Il 22 I 


Unettgedt oar: fe 7 ser: WetTe: | 
qteattd: afet ot Sat Age: I a2 


Toews ser AherrearTEr 7 fH 
acer favafear ant: searer auter: Fer: | 23 1 


Yaaquaraeartgar sacar sot shrarag: | 
7 <aut: Geofe afer Ft ACSC AAT I OY Il 


licd. Cf. Pauskara 6:315ab: Wal athchreqay are: Tarewaras: | 

13c—14b. Cf. Pauskara 8:37 (as read in the bhasya): 

anfarataay ant: wearer atte: ferea: | 

Yaarharageareagey Sar sof shraraya: | 

ld4ab. -- SACS 

Yaauaraearcger sacar sof sArerqa: XeTHT Aghorasiva ad Nadakarika 12. 
14c-19. Cf. Pauskara 8:38-43b (as read in the bhasya): 

7 aunt: dete afar Ayr acer vad i afe at afaerer amt fazete | 
aeared safe: earceenrcredtfatared | Peary achat: erent arfatanrare | 
ae wfaacatatgere starae: | wecearft araar: aur ar fafeat wa 
7 Aaa Weegee: caaihrarags: | T ATA ANT Ady sat ar- 
rege: | yarauf ye wer: AAaray 7 afer: | 

TANATAMATAT: F YT TATA: | NAAT ITY AIAN: | 


10 b. SHreearateacferfa: | conj. Isaacson; THreHeeaTa ferfr: MY; q- 
weRceardtetr: B; eareearuf Sart fer: PauBha; SHleerratdafer- 
fa: PauVr? 10 c. fara] MY; + Pray Pau = 10 d. ARYafcerd: ] Pau; 
arvaferd: MY 11a.aut Ud + NOT] M”, PauBha; ATH VA TAIT 
PauVr? 11 b. fastor ear afar: ) MY; Tearcenler + fad PauBha; TSHT- 
wey + fad PauVvr? 11d. oye) x Hx te MY 13b. oTer | em. ; oer 
MY 18c. Act] M”; Sire Pau 13d. Qt: )] PauVr?; ANT: MY; atte: 
PauBha 14c. 4 At: Gated Atha] Pau; FT ul-4-Ju featfr M”’ 


Qa Tet Ie 


afte at aceqfoeret aut fatasafa | 
TATU aT: CATH TEHTRTSUT ANAT It Vy Il 


aeary attanr wf: sear Farransst | 
dt: camfagdattetgenry srarga: il 2G il 


(wreanfaray: | 


qT aati TAB: SATUTPTATATS: B19 A 


THM Sas | 
T AAA ANT Aal SaTaaeqs: | 
yaraul Fe wer: aAaTasT FT FAT: | ec I 


7 ar@arsar ani fraary + araferc: | 
TOTAAL: ATTICS A: Il 89 Il 


fear area at aeargar afefrastat | 
TUAIIT ARTE AY T SATAIT |! 201 


tad Us T Wet saat weterafare: | 
Ferepertur ar are a a aarfet AAT il 22 11 


15 a. AY at] M”; WA Pau 15 b. fafawafa] conj.; fafawafr mY; fa- 
Weft Pau 15 c. TeaTetede: ) conj.; TeTededts MY; aeaTees waft: 
Pau 16 ab. that Wh: wT Aarte |] M”; aurat: erat WfHtaryre PauBha; 
aurar: We: weraanrye PauVr 16c.c: f°] MY; AM Pau 17b. aa- 
AY) MY; SY aT Pau 17 cd. ofeRay Teegqec: | Pau; efady Were 
MY 18b. °aTa-aeqa:] MY; eat amequat: PauBha; eaTattequr: PauVr 
18d. ayaa” 7 Ferd: | conj.; AAaTaT T 7 feta: MY; BAarar 7 afer: 
Pau 19a. 7 OeAaTHAT GMT) em.; FT ANeAATaAT ANT: MY; 7 ArWear- 
WAaIa: PauBha; 7 ATETATIAT Ua: PauVr 19 b. frady + aafarc: | 
MY; @ JY @attatcerq: Pau 19 c. TATA ATEN: ] em.; WaTay- 
COTARTET® MY; WeAINCTaTeaeY Pau 19d. AAATACYdH: ] MY PauBha; 
WAM SITTER PauVr 20 ab. AT GEATEAT ] conj.; TW AATEA M” 


Ts: Weer: RX 


aaa: aad ae sat Terra: | 
T OTA WASHer: TVET ATH: | 22 
qaqa atta <ceatded fara F aaa: | 


aaa + etter Tagarahsta: il 23 
Agar: Haar Fer AHA qEd: | 
T Agated arHerat ward il 2¥ I 


Wile Tavs | 

wedaarTger Agar sh Ferrera | 

T_T Hal WATT ASI BIA Ti 2M 

WHIM SATS | 

wredaur qera=war Barats | 

agar SFT TUT Fer Werte eahesHayr il 2E I 

MITA HTT AT HATT MAA | 
22-23. Cf. Pauskara 8:43c—-45b (as read in the bhasya): 
aah: SA THT Aa Geroartae: | 7 UeraY HASH: YOIAT ATF: | 
ar at: dafacearcedterael & aaa: | aad + Eris Weagaatere: | 
26-29b. agh BATTS 
WTedIgUT FE (B; ge A)PeRar maahsay(B; TA) 1 agar FT aU Aer 
Ws (B; Wl A)aeeeqar aes (B; TT A) WITTE ataray- 
GAT (B; ATL A) LAT AfAagaT Ver AT aal Achar Aa ll aT Ahagerat 
acedad:(B; Gat A) fare: | Faroe aaaredaa oitaferan: i eat 
a fag ATgarvectterar xf | Siddhantasamuccaya of Locanasiva, IFP MSS T. 284 
[=A], p. 158, and T. 206 (=B], p. 93. 


27ab. Cf., in a similar context, Matangavidyapada 7:44: WeAdeaA WTI: 
Tat: 


22 a. UNH: |] Pau; Gath M” 22 ab. TT Adt Fehr? ] MY; Wa aay Feal- 
#° PauBha; OA AY Feld PauVr 22d. YeVeTT] M”, PauBha; TeveRat 
PauVr 23a. Qtqa) M”; GY at: Pau 23 ab. AAfacwaTaeteray J) B, 
Pau; @afa —|-4-|_ferarf tT MY 23a. aTaet) Pau; aratt MY (unmetrical) 
25 c. 1 J] conj. Isaacson; A J M” 25 cd. of] ag | conj. Isaacson; °f] 
dadt M* 


ar arfadgqat Ser aT Gal Achal Aq: ll V9 Il 


qt Agdneaal Areqad: fer: | 
TATA AgaTEd TT TAPE TAT: tl BG I 


[AATSIT: ] 


qeqed ST A fer arqarrvecterar: | 
Tata: Wedaut ST TTA STHMAT: Il VV il 


aT: Taare ataqdeataferc: | 
TIT THT MHA ACA Te Il 30 I 


aaa Detgare: Fraverd Aperery | 
aaa) AAUVATT STARTATHAVE: Il 32 Il 


ud Reaterat Araya aT: | 
waters aren gear: ase THT RWI 


set aa Fat to ages afaegar | 
Freer Aap: Wed ATAfag Parc: |i 33 I 


UN st Aaqearaaa: Te Prar aq: | 
fe aTay atvacet Hagierecaa FRI a¥ II 


Ue aaraar sar ae: faaateran: | 
TA SATETATS HT CATT SG EHC TST TAT: I BY Il 


28c—29b. Cf. Pauskara 8:45c-f: 
agdeda Aaa ave ohratftanr: | teaeds Afar: wet so arfarfes | 


a. UsaHeaal | MY; TAcHaAaT SiSa 28 cd. PATNA AFaTedrag TWe- 
rsa M”, SiSa; aearerse Aaa ata ofeatftar: Pau 29 ab. qeqedt 
sx a fagr ATqarvecterar: ) MY; aeaeaa & fag arqarvectfear: SiSa; 
Teqedy afaar: srex & arfearfes Pau 29d. HMAC: | conj. Acharya; 
SMHaUt: MY 32ab. Afayeare ] conj.; Afters MY 32d. gfear: afa- 
@W) conj.; Gfeae: afarg MY 34c. ATAT) conj. Acharya; TAY MY 35a. @- 
WTaay | conj.; T@atday MY 35 c. TT? | em.; TH° MY” eo °C?) em.; 
om MY 35d. We] M**; Wx Wx +7+ M” 


WS: Weer: 209 


qT: CMey WT ast aystarast fear | 

arye Hetedt & He Wer was sf Ti ac ii 
antigen wadater fagfarar | 

Wed atfahesa grap worar sarTfarfad: ii 39 I 
Welded FT TeahHey whatar WATT | 
rar ar Aararaewr srdear Aewarfehr: ii 3c 
aerated: MHataar aay aT | 
ary qigey vearery @ ferar | 

a ataadd atte preara wera fered: + il 38 I 
Wile Tavs | 

AAT: MATA TATA MET AIT | 
dare: ayer: VATeaTyet ale FMT: Il Yo 
THI FATS | 

Wet: AYA Wad AAMT FTI 

dfen Frrureaer afe et afaerarri ve 
qIaeageret: VATaHarewrarehr: | 

TIT WcqaTAT-AeAT eM TATA I ¥2 Il 
afgar at svar areayerntufaqres: | 
PMaAHreged FE MTT ay: |i 3 I 
Tare Tavs | 


86a. 44: ] em.; TT MY 36b. °ATAT] B; °aTTT MY 87 ab. aurtvatear 
qadater fagfarar ] conj.; aifvqggat wguatien fayare: MY 37 c. aT- 
=a ) conj. eee WT MY 40a. 8-7: ) conj. Anjaneya Sarma; A-T° MY 
40 c. °Mext: ] em.; MT MY 42a. TIT? |} conj. Isaacson; TETa-T° 
MY 43 a. fear GY iced: afgarsry MY e aT=qe ] conj. Isaacson; AT6T 
MY 48 c. SHQTCHTHYest ] conj. Kataoka; DATeNAS MY 43 d. MT- 
f° ] conj.; TreTfT MY 


202 Tet AT 


aq mTeatewrearey t Teurhrarsa4;r: | 
ay ar ate ay aad aeort: warsad il ¥¥ I 


THM SATS | 

ad: UTgtaa: Weal Ventas: | 
aad cat aque Geared: wafers: i ¥y Il 
a at waagdeay aaa Ta ST: | 

saat ATeqaSrat Gal AATTaqar il ¥e II 
ware caartattearrgiene: hrc | 
watarerarard sarfeqasteartt il X19 Il 
aerated Aare ASAT ATH: | 
Frargaerrad aga: fraeafere: ii vai 
AAC: He: Feqratet afer: | 
camiasarfaagar ae shi wfaarted: ii ve it 
wees asd: wer: ad 7 aTtsy | 
agtad: Fraearet Ap: TATRA: It Yo 
Wale Jars | 
raeeatetasa: & FT atta Ad: | 
OT: BATA T AaeASA VT: Il WP I 


TAHITI ST Fear HloxEra | 
oT MPHAATSNTTAI Ta AST HATA I XII 


We weal SH ATAT eae aT AeA: | 


44a. & mrearfee ) conj.; artreatfee MY (unmetrical) 44c. HY AT afe 
aT) conj.; naar afe 44(aT?) MY; Haar afe AT B 46 b. ATAAAT? J conj.; 
aaa aT? MY 46d. Sate ) Be; SavaT® MYB% = 47 ab. ATA? J 
conj.; caattar fare MY; caataa fre B°; caaTtattga® B'S 48 b. aTHT: | 
conj. ; arate: MY 49 a. arate ] conj.; tarqte MY 49c. tante ] em. 
Haag-Bernéde; F@ttt? MY 52 cd. °GMMTAUTAA ] conj.; eUNMTaeraa MY 


Ws: Teor: 203 


ache WAAL FE ACA Fas V3 Il 


WeaHy FATA AMPTATTTCATS | 
TATA aS yA aera TAT Il UY Il 


Tee Ache FE AAT HT IW FA 

fafa + Frar terArare er He YY II 
ea ferrare agacare fe TeAte | 
ible iil cian chili siete 


qaqa het Face FT A-aferc: fags nyc 
[SaaTaT: MexATAAT HATA: |] 


Wile Jars | 
eqaT WeATaT Sta ates: A aaa: | 
Frarg: adareat sho Pravaredeecnerl ii XS Il 


War Jars | 
wears fart At WRATT Get Aer 


57ab. Cf. Netratantra 21:76ab: FATaTTatAcarat AAT Afr Bay: and Ratna- 
trayapariksé 239ab: HAATCAAUTATAT AMMICAATCATTI and the verse Aghorasiva 
cites ad loc. (cited also by Naraéyanakantha ad Mrgendrakriyapada 1:1 and to be found 
as 2:2 in the Pirva-Kamika): TGHA—AAT Vaated AMT TAaTATAE: | AATATT- 
aftrarsaregq gearhead ii xfer 

60-64. Tyh AATTST 

weeara (C; ATT AB)fere Ay Weara(B; ATT AC) Het aura arinted: 


55 a. TEE | conj.; wee M” 55 c. FRAT] em.; Frat MY 56c.q AT) 
conj.; TAY MY 58c. AehHyA ] conj. Isaacson; Ahead MY 60a. WeATS | 
MY, 14394; WeeHTH T284,T206 60 b. Weeds Het ACT] MY; Weanra Get 
TUT T206; WeATARA AUT T284, 14394 


Qo” TIT TT 


qT areca: Wet: TRATATATAA: Il Goll 


Tag adateal taeda | 
Waray t wer: H: weatertafeta: i &2 Il 


tt aT aravarfsat aTear aT tact Yas | 
Fasrqor AaeTeaT: HTSITATIT AHA Il G2 I 


wfara fasrsor teqrererarfae: | 
eqs earaT Beara Hqear arhrzeT WAT &3 1 


war arededear eaarar Fesryury | 
afe qorcardss fare: Haat WaT il &¥ II 


Wate Says | 

Farrar sfer aat Fat eaaT Fad A | 
det TeaNty Aas AT HT TTI EY I 
wat ear aT Aarsartea aha | 

at aT Merear g farregagtad: il && Il 


WATS SATS | 


Wer:(B; Wee AC) WearanrawHa: il Aare araarteal eacurfewexadq | T- 
waaay &t weencaaifaafid: (B; = weawcunifaaftia: A; eayeeag: WIT 
Sifaafitar: C) iat aT ataara (BC; At aT arara A) Prat areqr ar aq- 
ar yar fasrsor aderear( AB; wea: C) ateafraragari sfarar fasreor 
qeqrar (B; taaTat C; tarey A)erurfay: | eae eaar Weare eqear arhr- 
WaT (AB; FH C) Wad sunlaredetear eqarar fasryonq i afe acarwanssy 
Fatrey: aqay (B; aUAY A; a C) WaT Il afa | Siddhantasamuccaya, IFP MSS 
T. 284 [=A], p. 136, T. 206 [=B], p.65, and GOML R 14394 [=C], p.9. 


60 c. Wet: ] MY, T206; Were T284, 14394 6lcd. a We: H: Faantafy- 
a: ] MY; & weaycumifaafiad: T206; * weawermifqafste: T2384; tayreca: 
weaa sifaafetar: 14394 (unmetrical) 62 c. TAeTeAT: ] MY, 14394; ActeT- 
eat 1206, T284 63 b. Ate] M”, T206; Zee 14394; Fe T284 (unmetrical) 
63 c. tatty] SiSa; eqeafy MY 64d. HAAT] M”, 1206; HAY 71284; 
HW 14394 (unmetrical) 66 ab. VATAAT? | conj.; YewaTe? MY” 


Ws: Tec: Yow 


eqar Fad Mea Ad UT Het Ae | 
Aeregraggacaraay Sweats AT Hari G9 ll 
Tereaateay AgQeaeaeIa AE: | 

Front ar aur war caartheearastt tt &c I 
Talsd WARM AAaUT AY TA AUT | 


Aedrataret TT ARTA Il GS Il 

wet ar: Prarrey weg aeaarsrasy 

eqattatedh Aral SaadT ATA Il 90 Il 

aTe-aur fefear are: arararataerterc: | 

Frars: & TF MTaT aT TEMG ha Her 192 Il 

mata feray aT ear Aaeahaysy my: | 

INT Aararar Fear Bt > ST APA: Il WI 

CITI: Tewaed T BGatay aar: | 
67—-68b. @aaT FAI Wer Ad VWs Wet AA (B; Wear va vot Aled A; W- 
eared Ud Fed C) iAeraratyqacaraur erente w wat (B; erect Achat 
C; enfe a Hat A) Aerctareat wagered aque: | eff T (B; Aa- 
eqodecaaque eft A A; Agerededeque «fr TC) | Siddhantasamuccaya, 


IFP MSS T. 284 [=A], p. 136, T. 206 [=B], p.65, and GOML R 14394 [=C], pp. 9-10 
(following on immediately from quotation of 6:60-64). 


67 a. MTEL] MY, 1284, T206; MITEATH 14394pc; MITEATH 14394ac 67 b. AT 
Ue Get HET] T206, 14394; AT Ta At Ae MY; Va er Ae T2384 (unme 
trical) 67 d. @ITeQfa AT Wal] em.; erecta ar Mar M’; ) 
T2384; ereatr & mal T206; Beats Achat 14394 68 ab. WEeaATET- 
WUE: ] conj. Isaacson; Wefeated: MATUE: M”; Aqetateataaque wer 
T284 (unmetrical); GAtt-ades TAGue eta T206; agercaedequr wfs 14394 
68 c. PRATT) conj. Isaacson; PRaTuT MY 68d. °MTAT] M” (unmetrical) ; 
NAT B69 b. ACAATAT] conj. Isaacson; ATRIA MY 69 c. AEA? ) 
conj. Acharya; APTAT? MY 70 c. taarfateay HTaY } conj.; eaarfaway yTar 
MY; @aatfawar xTay Bo 70d. °MAAT) conj.; °MTAT: MY 71a. fafaur] 
conj.; fafaar MY 72 a. TTATHUT | Be; Wat-att MYB* 73 b. AT: | conj.; 
ear MY 


90G TIT TT 


Ade Feqt: Hal Bed ArH: TWAT I 93 I 


a Frat at Fear aT eaqar Herarhaar | 
Wear AW seq ar as fared: oicHfesad: it ov i 


vaca Pravaniy eqaqqe:at: | 

AY SET HCOTAT: ALUTVATATAT: | YI 
dat afaaar + Saralaerealyray eaa4r | 
sTeTsTecaayT eater Prarafrr: PTI we | 


caret aanfaaur ar frfsar a 1 
THATS TAVITA TS: 1! 919 I 


cererettarder Te afewaracy | 
aT ASTSAUTITAT OTe AePaty FRar ii ec 1 


Freasttahra tt AeaT aYsar: warfayy il 68 
[faerraTeearqeere: | 


wehtearhratseqragqaya: | 
FraraTe: QATSATAT AATU GAA Il Go Il 


78c. F =T UT OT MT] tops missing in M”. 

79d. T GT TAT M aT FE YF] tops missing in M”. 

80a. T J HW] tops missing in M”. 

80cd. F AT SAT AT A AT T Of § AT Tet AT] tops missing in M”. 


75 c. HCMNTAT: | conj. Isaacson; ATT: M” (unmetrical) 76 c. TUTE | 
em.; Mt AL MY = 77b. °GUT) conj.; °XaT MY 78 b. AfHaTHAT) B; 
a —(-4]— MY 78c. at AfSAUTAAT ) conj.; —-[-3-J)—- A = UT WT AT 
MY; dt aferrarsarar B79 f. FAT BToaT: Warfey] conj.; ATT AT WAT 
wafg M” ; aT arear warfey B 80a. Tqhiwye | conj. Isaacson; 
wT I RT TW M” (tops missing); TIT B (unmetrical) 80 cd. TATeaTAT 
AATgegaitearay |] B; TAT SAT AT TAT YT 1 FAT et AT M” (tops missing) 


Ws: Weer: 9o\g 


ameay faarda Faarel sever sfaer: | 
aaataye wa ata PearHar ii cei 
daa aaraaaeatad veg yrafagreed: il ce 
afa reed Feast Aaafeareedt: YW: Il 
 feerrare: PATe: It I 


8la. 7 WT TTT A LA TJ tops missing in M”. 


8la. ayers faarda B; AT ATITa Aaa MY 81b. Fatal siver 
Sfaet: ] conj.; Tau e: qyerut fect: MY (unmetrical) 81 c. AAaAfayer IT) 
conj.; AIaAfayasy MY 82a. Taras | Bc; FxadUTT MYB* 82b. a- 
ag agen fraser | conj.; Taga Frac MY (unmetrical) Colophon: 
Tatratqedt: ] conj.; Tafaarventyfawesyet: MY” 


lM TIeT: Ter: eri 


waters Frese ar abet ar firforet 
we qfeors ar ateararcarfeae it 21 
aaTedfert aaToay Fest HATTA | 
qatafaatads Frege faafaari 31 


[ aTaAT HT | 


Taser Hersey sg AeA ay 
EIU aAe aa Tah ATi ¥ Il 
fatrarearqareer fs aferr afer 
TAIT YSar Atcay Aes CaSATATAAT HI Y I 
faye aTqaT Hear Werg=al-aTa Ayr Ii & il 
Taald Faas AstedysaHzy | 

Var AT NATTA ATA PTAT I 9 I 
UMAR Hear eet T aa fara | 
Taalaretdt Hear feCeaNrewret STIG I 
Waa GAled AT F ATAMA AHA | 
Ferctt anranre: CITeTOTaA CHA TAT: Il 8 


1 Wars Jary] Bs; ot @ ut Ut MY MT A x ANTeTx Ware JarTzT M” 
2d. feat) em.; eft MY 7 4b. eee apa 
Waray MY: 5 a. facttarsatye | Be; factraraTqe M” 

5 b. Yfae afar afr] conj. cae shew ui? 7c. a a 


cP 


10 


Tet TT 


WITTY LAT ATT ATA TUT | 

ah: Baraat sx TSRT SHEP Cae FETT: |i 01 

aTarnrer Farrer wf sft aarete: | 

Teed TATHIM SITTATSTETAAAT I 22 I 

THATS ae FATT SATANIC | 

GUT WPA AT AST TATATAATH Il 22 I 

Way Wae_ Telrsy pore eqateercat | 

TIT CATT WUTSTETT SAAT CT: | 23 I 

yar yar Taras: soars: & athe: | 

ATA: HSYS: CATATSHET ATTA: I Vv I 

TSSTATAUSHTATRT ATU THAT: | 

ovat eararay rar Ghaacraatede: ll gy I 

TATHATS BAe We Afr aged: | 

Taed Tar afar AAT aTaTs: Il VG I 

aatted: Tt aed aartyeds atfec: | 

WUTRTe HS CATT WVTATATL TATA il V9 I 
[ STOTT: | 

ot: Saat HFArgay AT: Wl: Sa: | 

WUMTATATATAEI I Slat AE AAT ki 

a ve afster afenartededc: | 


Cf. Rauravasitrasangraha 7:5: TCUTETRETUT CATT WMITATAY SY ATT | Th- 


aq anifugy TSH aN TAP |! For other parallels, see annotation to the translation. 


10 a. WeaTefary ] conj.; Teargfaey MY 138 c. WHET] conj.; TeTST M” 
13 d. esate: ) Be; esatfer: MY; eararfer: BY 16 b. AFT] conj.; 


aft MY 18a. Hatq] Bo; Feary M’*; Fed M’*B 18 b. WY: ] em.; 


ke | 


MY 


TEM: Tee: 228 


GT Tees STAT aAgeHeT FaTTAT hi 22 1 


yar yaerUTTs Tears FT Fears | 

WUT Tot AATSATAT AdsilqTaATAAA il Re Il 
at T Tea geey wT adAes ay | 

Fret TAWTATST SATAY ATA AAT Il 22 Il 
SWAT SA Ad: ArH: arer arhrferat Fe: | 
at Faraday fat earghcare ert tt 22 
aaray saqc:aer: aaer sife fer: | 
tt T UTCaaeyT GATT AAATAT: Il 23 1 
Tart UTLAeHIS Hegay aArac: fere: | 
CATS ATT TS FTITTAT |i 2¥ I 
aaa at setaaTast acye farted: | 
frarder & rege @ arhratear Aa: il 2y il 
ager Target wade a HAA | 
paicper aur arg favshyatag Ferri 26 I 
Waacqaahn Feaarstast FT: | 
TMeaeAtah Basar TET FEATCIT | VW Il 
weed facet & arg: arent sfaet: | 
Farcdedargpreted? TAC HATH PT: STNT I 2c I 


<Prat> qaygersrer gid rafarta:+ ATT 
TASHA Traary Saeaay FT Pra T 28 


21a. dt UTCAGRaY |] em.; TEAGRT M’B*; TErtagreay Bo 22 a. WH: ] 
conj.; WH MY 22d. faf<are] MY; fafeeare B; Feafeare BY 236.7 
WTC? ] em.; TET? M” 24d. JB | em. ; afe MY 25 b. fareearn: | conj. ; 
fattard: MY 26c. aT] conj.; AT]: MY 26d. feTTT] conj.; fare MY 
27 b. FET? ] conj.; FE° MY” 27d. TST faa] conj.; TET faureond 
MY 29a. FORT) conj.; ul[-2-] M” 


222 Tet Ts 


eaaT Taadeg aN arg eaquta: | 
RUATHIAT FE TH THetHaA Il 30 | 
parad Froese iarerenrasarfeac:t | 
CHAT TVA A TMT TAA: Il 32 
Farasrnrgarae: Frfecrrstr ent: | 
Ud Aad Hear MCAT: FA: il 321 
[STCAT: | 
UTMUT: Te afar: BATT ATATATATT: | 
wea aan eral FReTETAVSaT Il 33 Il 
Hat Wat eadtoran gape gare | 
Yat earrad: Teafaeterg eTaray Il BY I 
TUT fear: TaNT:+ AITEVTT | 
WaT Tathyearayr Masaya AAT gy I 
TATA MeaTarhaarteay | 
STAT AT MTT Yat ATISHATSAT II 3E Il 
Yarra aa <order | 
AT SHAHAT Tea Blea: Brarwar: FETA: ii 39 it 
qusgauset aT eadtatcayeyag | 
Te Wetted Wer Mara Il ac I 
daara ¢ der eparaeatygtedt | 
33ab. TUT TUS 
UT: Te afagr: Ae AVATAaSTAMT: | Quoted in a unit of text dealing with 


samadhi, perhaps part of the Sivapijastavavyakhya, on p. 286 [4th pagination] of IFP 
MS T. 962. 


32a. COTA: ) em.; ATA MY = 33 a. Afar: ] T.962; Aferer M’B*; 
afag? Bo 33 b. AATUT) M”; eHaT T.962 35 b. AAAEGUT] conj.; Aaq- 
YT: MY 36a. CACY] conj.; ATT MY 37 b. Frardyare | conj.; Are 
M” (unmetrical) 


TET: Teer: 223 


aaaefraae aad TITTAT HI 3 I 

aus alitee Fat ATaTHay ata | 

BTV ITT yah SPAVSoTAPISAT Il Yo ll 

tar Serearfasr Prrtonpyrrener | 

Frrargar adt ate: Yereatsrartsar ii 2 tl 

CTHaNgdedsy aA Tent AAT | 

wefracte ass at at aT TH vei 

ware Feyaeaq ar HC AT Hes TA | 

frarat eTear arar: FAWeAAAVSAT Il ¥3 Il 

Wha-gaega yar Saealarateaifea+ | 

aq: Fader aeara waterferst arr: i ¥¥ iit 

fa-guear Ferdrat yaray yferyat: | 

qataraly Ad: Hat AAT AT aga ll KY I 

fafarttafey: G7 area eat Teaa4rs | 

PAVS SIMA Wey TaaTaT hi ¥E I 

BATATMYTLAT ITAL AAT AT YAAsAT | 

CIA AAATATRAT ATL TSEAT AAT Il v9 II 

Yay a Waaeqeae sage gT ew | 

CISA AAMAS AHA SAT Il YG Il 

favearrvetd paleseat ar fect ae 
49ab. Id F CAT SX AT AT] tops missing in M”. 
39 d. eared | conj.; Tara MYB“:; Bard B°; Teard conj. Sanderson 40 
b. SQTaTa |] MY; UATE Bo; WATATT B™ 41 d. oferarfgar } conj.; efsrar- 
CTR: MY 44a. VSfaeqesal ) conj. Vasudeva; AfggaTsHat MY 45a. fa- 
Zor Aararat | conj. fag<-aT AeTaTayT MY 46a. fafarte | MY:. fefarg 
M’*B 46 c. HAWS] em; FAVS MY 48a. YAW AT) conj.; Yat ar 
MY 48b. °8UNT] em.; SOUT: MY 48 cd. oMrfHcaTsyere | conj.; °W- 


frat yte MY 49 ab. °VRft HASH AT] conj.; WE Ta F AT wD 
at M”; °Ygfd HalB-T aT B 


We Tey ay 


JETAMAAAT ATTSRUTAT: Il $F I 

STPATA <AMATSATAT ATT alee: | 

WIA AeA QITaAAGeTAa AT: Il Lol 

UIT AA Aca TalaHeATTA: | 

Qn PAAAINT TATH SETAT I VI I 

[ Fearrattrery] 

Prreear tT ani sf waatencsa4rea: | 

aera aperen fawrareragantrcerT it 42 I 

atfada far: err: arfad qearhrqeray: | 

ATSTeaT Weavers MAS SHA SAT: It 3 Il 

afsarenr Sfrrert FApacqewrreys | 

AAT Bed AT AL AATTAA HATH ll V¥ Il 

CAAT HTT ATSIC altar | 

VHA GET CHATTAHET Tl YY I 

faqfe ged aex arstar FT Pree | 

arsar sft a aThrerredae: H-eaTPRAT: 11 WE Il 

qrentaapeny: ater: whratta4n: | 

aTAT AUT TUTATEY TYCTASATAAT: It UV Il 

Uegt aTaray APAT TRCATAT ASAT | 
52ab. TT TT HT WT SH A AT YJ tops missing in M”. 


50 ab. ATJATAMATATAT ATeeY ) conj.; ATFATT u [-2-] TAT AST M”; 
WTYJATA U [-2-] ATAT ATAST B 50c. C@Te? ] MY: C@Ta: MY°B 50d. a- 
wate aT: ] conj. (self and Isaacson) ; anafeerd: MY” 652ab. -mY SfT Nad- 
cacary® ] B; TTT TTT Sh A AT OM” (tops missing) 53 b. °GaTaT: | 
conj.; °Faay: MY” 53d. Sfrere | conj. Vasudeva; areT®? MY 54a. AT- 
FeaTelT | conj.; atfaweir MY 56a. ART) conj.; TE MY 56d. HX? ] 
MYB*; Gare Be 58 ab. STAT ATA AMCITAT | conj.; WitAAaT ATear 
THeaTEaT MY 


WM: Weer: oes 


arady srget arst ferar fereqarsrar: il Xe 1 
ag aad att afttarerr eet ar 

ae fareqanragenreryray WATT: ll VR I 
TearACaTT Ynrg: Ferre: TY: | 

afta yearrarcarty earrarfarfasrec: it Go 


afaranet Ferresfert Rorhenfzater: N GRU 
[RTT ] 
Wats TAT | 


TET BY Mts: MrT Tarcatwarfaar | 
TT OT Tea VaTaareT rH: To fay: ez 


THI SATs | 
aTemear wet fa g Hhaeart vad | 
TeaMtere F Ad Hrarar|d TArfea4r: | G3 it 


faycara wfrerer attoafHeet eer | 

aTararctasrarear srqeatrateawr it &¥ 

Wile Says | 

Gaarcar faa: WAY ATTRA T THT: | 

Fret srt Ferd ter ATATaIT: HT AIT EY I 

TAT Jays | 

Fragen ar ve: & arorfeasreac: | 
58 d. ferar fereqarrar: ] conj. Acharya; FeraT -qaqrqaT: MY 59a. aT” | 
MYB*; +» Bo 89d. ATEMITaY WAT) conj.; AstaTsTTaT MY 61e. a- 
FaraTy ] conj. Isaacson; AfTWTT MY 61f. FRETEATS | conj.; fayaeare MY 
62 a. MTT] M*°; SIRT MY’ 6S a. ATCMAY) conj.; AMA MY” G63b. T- 


add ) conj.; Waftd MY” 63d. HTaTuted] M”*; STAT x Sx uted MY 
64b. cdot At] M”*; chteeT MY’ 


22G Tet at 


Soa TA ATATHTL TRYST &E Il 
sented dfaa eafearrhniedd | 
dad arsar Arar eqanTyea: tl G9 I 
att Prafraprfe + a Arar fercera: | 
sTeterte: Frat ATSTASTOTTSTH Il Gs Il 
ATA: AT WMATA ETAT IG TaN: | 
mare adedst Fear eae AT: GS It 
qTerarer = Paerfaate weate az ar 
TAI ATS Ft TarAaeartH |i 0 1 
aan sean ater atar afarmniranrr | 
AATH ACTA AAT AFATSTYT: ATT Il 92 
a afta aay afer, = | 
Et AVS TAS YAREA ATTRACT 92 Il 
THATa ge Bagel’ erahradd | 
(ACT eaaT: ] 
ate weir ret faery ah VSATAS: Il 93 II 
Sata yarsey arary FT aarfea: | 
eadyead: Wea: Brprey warle: Il o¥ il 
CIEATET NTT AT Save ttatayareann: | 
WATTS TST FEW MATTSTT: I 9 I 
ez: Hletratey: Saray Aes Prorarars | 
verte: eamfrer: TeqaatraAqs: Il 9& | 


68 b. Prat] em.; Arte MY 70 b. TWeafat] em.; Teafa MY 70d. Fer 
Tarratert | conj. ; LU et aareaferty MY 72 c. Fe] em. Vasudeva; & U M” 
72d. We) Bo; YET MY; YET Be 74a. YaTHeT) BS; Yarra MYB™ 
75 d. fq={] em.; fast MY 


Tew: Ter: 99g 


TAIT ATG AUTO: | 
wafer afesrrereaesrnyr: TEI 9 it 
war ar arampfe: fare: & Ta: | 


Geraigencaias AST IT AAAT: | 
fray: mastercard WAT GATT: Ws il 9s il 


CH FTaIad ACTA SFT VT: AAT | 
ASTANA SPAC: FT AAT: Il 98 il 


78-80 gh Tea 

war fe aramfe: fare: & TEPET: | Fecara Feucara wera feaanre: i 
Fray: DTaefracaree MAY TATA DY: | SA FATT DETAT VHT TAT Il 
Siddhantasiutravrtti p.7, ad stitra 1. The same unit is cited in pariccheda 2 of the 
Saivaparibhasa (Mysore, p.29). 

TH T 

AIATLANTCUNYT AAAcAY FA: | Aer AATAYas SAP eTAATCHA I 
TETAATAASTaT Aararaeaya: | Act + eg TarH: ACH ANTS Il 
war ar aramye: Farrer TANT: | Tela THTS TET AT TATANTA: I 
fray: prasttercarcayay TTT: WY: | Va TIAA ACATAT Vs Va: ATT 
UsdaayHY: WITTE ASAT: | AarhMaeqaata: Wear sat aferafwara: | 
ame: farsata Te wWrery:i| fT! Anantasambhu’s commentary on 
Siddhantasaravali 133, GOML Bulletin Vol. XIX, Part II, pp. 16-17. 

aga MATT 

var ar arampfe: eur anaferd: | xfi Prabhavyakhya on the Kriyakrama- 
dyotika, pp. 185-6. Also quoted, prefaced in the same way, in Trilocanasiva’s Soma- 
sambhupaddhati, IFP T.170, p. 122 and in the Sivapijavidhivyakhyana transmitted in 
IFP MS T. 962, p. 117 [second numeration]. 


78 a. T&T aT) M”, PraVya, SoSaPaTi, SiSaVya; TaY fF SiSaVr, SaiPaBha; 
war Sf SiPaViVya 78 a. ATAMAS: ] MY, SiSGVr, SaiPaBhd, PraVya, 
SiPaViVya, SiSaVya; ATARRFS: SoSaPaTr 78 b. felt: @ TAT: } MY”, 
SiSaVr, SaiPaBha, SiSaVya; TeaT atateara: PraVya, SoSaPaTi, SiPdViVya 
78 c. FECAGEH? | MY; FEcATZET? SiSaVr; FEcaTERM? SaiPaBha; WETCAT- 
eth sisaVya 78 d. TET AT TATAVTA: | MY, SiSaVya; welt Ferrara: 
SiSdVr, SaiPaBha 78 f. WTat:) MY, SiSaVya; WaT SiSaVr, SaiPaBha 
79 b. OH] MY, SaiPaBhé, SiSaVya; AT SiSGVr 79 c. °TTAIWT] conj.; 


oT: SITE MY; eyVRMAT SiSaVya 


826, Tea aT 


qerfere: Welrarat: Mredt ar afera: faa: | 
mame: farrtate wt TSN: | ce tl 
q Ud FT Get Wide AeVaATaAAA | 
met sroperd pls AQT HATO: Il ce I 
[ea] 
Farry & tu (2) ahr feegaregetpary | 
7: : Aaeey Sal ea Ao FAT cr 
[Ta ] 
TRENTAPT ATA TATA: | 
TAT TATA CHUGHE TAAL ATT Il G3 
ahorctrer ad ad frarnpregat | 
geet sist get ant Preah Tera cv 
[aarter: | 
r Fer ad SA AAT: FT Teed | 
aaret afe at Fer ad wearers | 
afasret aunts wet orstfer arf cy i 
[ frqaraer ete | 
Wate Jars | 
aa ererraeraautanae saat | 
aya Pe ASAPTAINTSATH: I GE Il 
WaTa STS | 
ad Sera Bq at THIS YA: | 
Gag aes Tasers fe 7 ferterti cio 
aaa HAA TA AKT STATUTE | 
80 ab. araret: MAT aT] MY Aalalea: Miedt aT] M”; AaTMea: Wray SY SisaVya 82d. FAT) 


B; Ja MY 83 °fTaTeHT] conj. Acharya; °fAaTCAT MY 85. AFT] Ms; 
ax fax frM”’ 85c¢..ae) conj.; IT M” 


Wer: Tee: 99% 


ae eettagyqaa At AeA I ac Il 

Was ASU SIATATTETAMT: | 

faateret Tet JA Was TF NATTA IN Vl 

at asad ar suf ear yTarqatewa: | 

TAA ST ITCH APTA II Qo Il 
[arfrarearea | 

<at> TOT Waecqgeraferareyr: WATHCATAT: | 

atftrar afear atear orf: raTeTaTPara4r il &2 I 

atarar aaxare + afear Tearhrar | 

MTA TATA ATTAT TPA: 82 I 

afeaT Feat ararca wTfe: earefaentac: | 

WATS APA ATA MT BMWNA: | 3 I 


wanna Prorat aaa | 
WITHAM STH AAT AATATATT Il 8 I 
Wile Jars | 

ant: WAAT XeqM: T Hareae atfed: | 
MIT: AE AcdtT TaN T freaa: i VAI 
THT Sars | 


atrarfaarahry any ar afar: | 
aarranray ae AAMAveaTay SAA ii XE li 


IN AT AAAI MSA eT STATA | 


90 a. THU |] B; AWHTMAT MY 90c. HT?) B; BT? MY” 90d. WAIT) 
conj.; TM UR MY 91a. TET YT) conj.;U [-2-] FIT MY = 92 b. afe- 
av) MY; afar B 93 a. ATATH] M”B°; ATATT Bo 94 b. TTATT) conj.; 
UAHTAT MY 94c. WAHT | conj. Isaacson; Tadere MY 94d. AGWaAy | 
B°; Ayvdet M”B* 


Qo Tet TT 


Frycara TAHT: WHETS TAT: | V9 Il 
[werent anpafewestar | 
INTRA ZeTOATATALT AT CST | 
agaraad: Ferer atirar anray Aer: i 8a I 
astater a aeaha ated aeafeend: | 
TTETATA TAT CMATATAT Ae 8S Il 
wfafgaranade AeATS aa FVaA | 
WIAA TA FE CMTaehH ATET ATA Il Yoo I 
Taro farsearrarera yas | 
qT afacdaal FET War ar aterarss: I 209 II 
smrrar a a Fear wear astfag farat | 
Fasraracaraearennrar Frereateaed Il 202 I 


STTAaTy ara rsa aa I 

a anil aq: ArST Fala: Il 203 I 

Waast wader aaa Afra | 

werar sf wacaer aNTAHeT BATT: I Qow 1 
[SoaThet: ] 


103ab. °T T TFT ZY OWT FT] tops missing in MY. 
103cd. tops missing in M”. 
104ab. tops missing in M”. 


98a. UTR? | conj.; ANTeT? MY 98d. AT: ] conj.; TT: MY 9c. T- 
CJETA | conj.; ATL AST? MB; ad Were Be 101 b. eATeHaA YARVSAT | 
B; °AT — MY 101c. 7 afaecdddy FBT) em.; — FBT M”; 7 afaceaar 
ZT BB 103b. WaT) Bs oT TTT TM AMY $ 103cd. a at 

AIST HAlAAIeTT: | conj., TA MT TT: A THF ATAT 
eT a: MY; e anit aA: Ars HatereqaeTd B 104 ab. TAIT NAETAT 
Maar Ahwatery | con; TIT TATT +s » » WTI -—~ oT MY 
(tops missing); Waat Wael u —VeafHaranr B 104d. WeTaT SFT] conj.; 
weaar MY” (unmetrical) 


aqew: ver: 02% 


geatfet ante: ar she wHatpasrfaa: | 

SHERIAAANT GAIT TIT ATT Il Vox Il 

aqaeaea JT aagenad Ya | 

HOTEL SHAT pH Frcgepear sr: + i 2o€ 

Scared? Teparges warte fafreafa¢ | 

Ut GNfaUTatgyT ANTATATA ATPTAT i 219 I 

qranteguppratasryeny - 
TOTTI A TMT: | 

anrat: Tactantayryyer: 


araAr Hare frag Hearst AC Il ec I 


Wate SrrTest Feta afarentanmfawreryeata qe: il 


105 a. ofa) conj.; Tentfre MY 105 b. eMfHa:) conj.; ested: 
MY 106d. fatqe] MY; Frege B 107 c.Uet nT?) B; Wa ~» Te 
MY e Colophon: °@nRTafaatet? | conj.; earTvery: MY 


THEM: Ter: Ww 


THIS SATs | 

arert areatlewm: AAAs: | 

afoartamfaerngrerea4rearsteare: it 2 
[Wearey grarfearer Srarrattt | 


WH: AIA GTA AATTATTT AT: | 

fagrarer: Frarereg qatear anreafare: it 21 

Ware Jars | 

ChAT WATACT AIAN TTT | 

WITSATTITATAT HAA FHA TT Il 3 I 

YATM SdITS | 

ara arated Fear Ay aaqeratfaar | 
2, 4-8. Prafaarcirat— war aretegrar srerqergtercr: (Ac; Srargqy-- 
Tem: AC) | fagrarem:(A; & C) frareqeq waren’ ar fe afar: i 
Sra a ayeaT (A; BAY C) AT AAT (C; At Get A) Afar WwA- 
aT AAT ACATAATT ANT: i ATT ATAcIeTUTAT acea(C; Aes A) SaHMrraa: | 
aaa aAdy Aa: avarvearfenaraey: i acaaea Par svat wearer anry- 
Fear. ae: Prafe qeare yoarerarfecrerrr wervar(c; Wa A)warantt 
TarTINTaT (7?) Werererfear TY MTT (A; ATCT C)earrTasre: | Prem 
apa ae fears ar afru aay wafcrarara srnrarrafed: | wear wr- 
Faear: Of CaraTe 11(7) (further garbled verses follow). This passage is to be found 
in Sarvatmasambhu’s appendix to the Sarvamatopanyasa IFP T.284, p.24 (=A) and 
IFP T.801, pp. 18-19 (=C). Both are transcripts by the same hand of the same MS: 
GOML R 6635. 
Scd, 4cd. Cf. TUT WAIST — 
WATSTATATaTAT Spay HTT A 
TYTATHAT Wea AeeT Sets: |i ad Sataratnasangraha 68, p.77. 


1c. Wferatfre | conj.; Wfratfre MY 2c. fasTarer: )] M”*; fax 9x HTATET: 
M” 


Irv Tet ar 


TIA HAT TAT TEATHATTANTT: Il ¥ I 
WT Aaa AceT SATIN: | 
aaa agal Araearaa Sata PRAT HA: I YI 
aed aed Fear arat sare anrafaat | 
ae: Pray weargy Forrerartecrararr it & 1 


WOMAN VASAT INTAT | 
WATER SAT AAT ALITA AAT: | 9 I 


Frere sTpad ee faaree ac ate 

aat weet Pravane: freprratrgted: ic it 

Ter ot caged ster safest wad 
Sed, 6c-9b. Uda Agay NTaeaTaceara PRAT: | 
ad: Prafe aeare qarerarfacrertrr i 
weaaaadrane satecayqIMrayn | Wearercfearny sh acreage: I 
free stg ee acd ata aay vac Pearan: fare are: ferprraregted: | 
TET AT TagcaveeyT AT Tafeay AAT ad Sataratnasanigraha 68, p. 77. 
Gab, l0cdef, 14. TT AT aawes Arar aarhest waa fracrer wars (A; WT 
C) Ot AMT Wedd: (A; Add C) | AAA AATEATAT TEATS AIITT 
farsear i aaree oer ster atarare frarfear.s Fae T NTT FRAT Herar- 
THT I TTA ATAMTT (7) | AT MhHerea aaa A (A; Y C)LAAAVAT | 
acer teq crear fatraa(a; ‘aedravas anreageady cere ae gy | 
Waar anasae Aalas T FAI Aeros afHeg adr ofa (A; 
wfrar We C) l\aearg Rreareagtaedax freate i This passage, though not 


attributed by anything but the garbled line in its middle, consists largely of lines from 


5b. efimrg: ] SaRaU; efaivad: MY 5d. aTaa BIT] MY; aTacearay 
SaRaU 6 ab.] om. SaRaU 7 a. VWeTMCATACTaNY |] MY; Weraataaraky 
SaRaU; BAAaTT Havas SaRav (vl) 7c. Weavercfeay Ay] MY; W- 
cavertitearny sft SaRaU 7d. TUT? } MY, SaRaU; UT? SaRaU (vi!) 
e CORT: ] MY; °AGd: SaRaU 8a. FATT) SaRau; Prey MY 8b. faar- 
ae ad ata) MY; He Afa Ady Wael SaRaU 8c. Tay Nac Parana: ] M”; 
fara: far wre: SaRaU 9 ab. aeged fer sarfete] MY; Tegeardrer 
aT cateat SaRaU; Tewcay AT AAPA SaRav (vi) 


Ter: Geo: 2X 


far Aha: HTeAMTATaTaT TATA HSA I 8 Il 

Get CATH ANeT SATA: FATAL WATATAT | 

Fracqer Wert Ge aI Wadd: | 

TT SAT TATSATAT TETATCATAUTCRTAT Il 20 II 
(arfirarent aradtar; arent 
Fratrérer; ejent arate] 


Wale Jars | 
Wrtat aT waster: Peaar atarrar | 
ayy aT Waearay Starr Taeranwh Tar i 92 I 


TATM TaTs | 
ae: seTRrarey sfer aaarecrera: | 
THHTATAGT TAH: TANTS AAT I 22 Il 


Taq acaagte: aaeearertd: | 


ATaATAT DAT AT SATAANT SAT FT ANT Hi 93 Il 


qarara: Te star sitar FRarfear | 
Haacay TAM SAT HATATTHA Il VY I 


this chapter of the Parakhya (to which I suspect the last two verses might also once 
have belonged, since they are elsewhere attributed to the Parakhya: see Appendix I 
C:54-5), and is to be found in SarvétmaSambhu’s appendix to the Sarvamatopanyasa 
IFP T. 284, p.26 (=A) and IFP T. 801, p. 20. 


10c-f. fracanfrersae | aur (ash T170) Te 

Fracaeq wert ae (feraem crert afer: T170) ear Weed: | 

aT Sa AATSAaT Terarcerarad (7 T170) ferari xfr) Trilocanasiva’s 
commentary on the Somagambhupaddhati, IFP T.170, p.175, and R 14735, p.116. 


9cd. Bf: Herearhtraray ) MY; Afarwcteafeaer Bo 10a. WATATRT] conj.; 
Waray MY 10 b. Starar:).em.; Syear MY = 110 c. fracaer Wert AT) 
R14735; fracter warty ad M”; faraer cra wfer: 7170 10 d. WwTe- 
vad: ] SoSaPaTi; @TWatd: MY 10 f. edd] MY, R14735; aA T170 
12 c. TTHTATEDAT | conj.; TL ATAVATT MY 12d. aqUT) conj.; TT: M” 
14 b. STHATY |] conj.; ATTHTT MY 


Q2q Tel TT 


ad: caprataart acqe + Pratheercz 
arareer Frareare srryat ae: Frari ay 
aay aatHe = sft Herarazaannd | 
qatanrate sreat Prfeaarsrarate ii 26 Il 
FRaTaTeaaT aal Wal ACTA | 
Wearertear IAT: SAAT TAP AT: I 9 I 
tat yrafaferer ar fear zatefcrer | 
arate: Frarart & atfedt efarar aa: il ec 
TUTTE CAT AAT ST AAT | 
SRTATY SET FT AH: THPUSATT: I 22 Il 
vw afHe aa cer aterat as Frafe: | 
sre athe = sh egert aferaresarl 20 
TEN Syfregeq WET TATE: | 
GaeIeaiSad ad yfaaqfHner TA: i 221 

[ Prararra Hare CTW acay 7] 


ararérangaraed + fc art fare wae RI 


TAT Jars | 

area areatrsrharate ay VacGs: | 

AGA HAM AWA WIT Il 23 I 

aad aac arty aa: ate fear ferari 

aaa factear + arta sitar Aarii 2¥ 
15 b. TTA] conj.; TTA MY 15d. Prarfeare] B°; Pravferd M’B™ 17 
d. °@PTT: ] conj.; CART MY 19c.@] em; @: M” i aaee ine 


freteT } conj. Isaacson; AAT ByAeTeT MY 22d. aX] conj.; Ta MY 
23 cd. °OYMT ATW? | conj. Isaacson; eUMTATITT? MY 


WeewT: Weer: 229 


Fretentedrarat araarqeanrad | 
qaerenfe arte Faxterr fasrrfrar ii 2y I 
aaa: AAI: TUrad: | 
TSATM PIAA AT Hea: ll 2E I 
Wale Jars | 
adaacaeiray fear drar ferar qer | 
Facvar aer star sepaattea Tari 209 1 


TATM SITS | 


IAT Tessas Feraz | 
Frear: eqreaur star Prorat PARPAAT: | 26 I 


7 Tencfasrer sfer gfteftaterd: | 

aay afearear sat qfrer fasmfeac i 28 

qgaraaye she werrer + atta: | 

K<Ada> TAs Wea EHF TATA Il 20 1 

aTATAATAT Wr AAT etary | 

SATAY StHRATSAY SAT SATAMEAY AT a: | 

qT area faafar: SaTgaeraraafarar+r Il 32 Il 

[Wea GURY AAT] 

Wile Jars | 

BAPTA FT AeA WRHwratsaatarc | 

qatar: Hf ae steparaty watagT TI az 
25 d. fasttfrat ) conj.; faarfrat MY 26 c. TeaTAMTe | conj.; Te-ATM- 
fre MY 274. qelaaiteh GUT } conj.; waaay WUT MY (unmetrical) ; 
TeacaifeaT WUT B28 b. of | conj.; °f&t MY 28. FTFUT: | conj. 
Isaacson; FACAT MY 29d. fauttfeael) conj. Isaacson; faaTfaat MY 30c. q- 
TH ACATIT ANH] conj.; TH ATTA Wr MY (unmetrical); TATTT WA U 
B $1d.Qlqd?] em; ~aTgt? MY 31e. aver faafe: ) conj.; FT I- 
aT faqfe MY’B<; + aNr fagfH: Bo 31 f. cafstaT] conj.; cafste: M” 
32 c. TafHd: }] conj. Isaacson; Agfa: M” 


92Z TUS TT 


TAIT Jats | 
ATATS TART: WRT HATAT: | 
Teraearar So ay sary aratreque: il 33 1 


WIAA GY AAA: | 
FAT GUT-VaT Het AIAN: Il av I 


aTaqal AarHsr: HoT At Teh | 
Tua Aaa Teed SFT TeHATANTA: I 3¥ I 
(Haar erarrar Arey Saxqarray] 
Tate SATs | 
strat sf aera at oat sfert yiec | 
faraqerart Ter Weer AT SH|SAT II 3g I 
Ta Jars | 
aa ad aret aera ary aa fart: | 
ween: Feel TIT SAHANTT: Il 319 1 
oaferar add ster eagyr Arereder WaT | 
Tet TT WAETAT Veet ATFATTAT Il 3c | 
Set TEPATASSY Fraterrareate | 
arate SP ATTAAISMT AY STATI 38 I 
Waaraaad: ar ser warhadfayqeate | 
Frava: aafaehe Taael T dT Koi 


Freearquesarat sat Sear <at Ferg: | 
APTSSIUTAET TAT ana sr aru vei 


33 b. TC: ] em.; TOM” 34d. TERANTe: ] em.; TAICaNTT: MY 35a. a- 
ATHET: ] em.; AATHET MY 35 c. TUT-d AAAT) conj.; TUTAIAAT MY = 86 
b. Tay SfETT) em.; TaTfeTyT MY 37 b. ATT] conj. Isaacson; BTF- 
a MY 39d. a¥ SAAT) conj.; AeTAT MY 40d. 7] M’*; fre MYoB 
Alb. Het Mead Fara: | conj.; Tet MBI Ul-3-]U MY ; At SVT Ul-3-Ju 
B 41d. Sf¥ aT) B; frarfvar M” (unmetrical) 


Geem: We: 22X 


(wate oer rerarfir: 
Wate SATs | 

arafehraght: career arerer arate | 
Uhatigaa areata: HT AIT I ¥2 Il 

THM FATT | 
anatafechray Rrra wtenhre | 

ahrar sfe Froeatr Prreacarear vt fare ¥3 1I 


Thdt AacHM CHM azarae: | 
tT AQUA sated ATATHA Il ¥¥ Il 
aheararcned Tear soretyrear yfe | 
WTSI Te Vere Frat AeA Il YY I 
[Areeanrracauraar Freear] 

Wire Says | 
AaRP Taya aT HIT H Cr eaayr | 
TACTSTAAT STS FATATATLTAT: Il YE Il 
WHIM FATS | 
MATTSIaT FMT ATI T Tarsraqy | 
AAAI TSI TATA ATTACT FH: ll KI 
aa: TATA IT ate YT TAT 
qe raaaite Preraat HT FT il ¥c I 
ferat + Teardt garaatear svar 
TAT Te HLTA HAA ATH ve i 

44a. -& HAW TT A) tops missing in M”. 

46d—-47a. F 7:10 A WT A VI A AT] tops missing in M”. 


42a. athe? ] conj.; TaTfee MY 44a. What Wacmw? |] Be LH HTT 
& M” (tops missing) 46 c. Tata | conj.; °@STe MY 46d. OTT: | em.; 
eTY AT: MY; eTCHTT Bo 49a. 7) conj.; Fr M” 49 c. THAI | 
conj.; Tart fert M’ 


820 


Ter ar 


TATA STAT AAT AT SAT 
RET AT ataaarat Awedg rad: ll Xo 
[STU AT AAP ANTAT | 
Wate Fars | 
=| 
fTATASAT Uf-4-JUaT Tora ast il We 
WHIT Tavs | 
Hest aT eal Wore cea | 
aes 7 atcafe: earevat fap: Tes ARI 
qeereag qoreate: ate ¢ acatcera | 
agt ad wefetcareaarted afesad ii 43 I 
qeted dene ated afer sefeq AHI | 
qeqdagegr St Tae 7 Pea: i we i 
TT RIAA SAAT ATA TT ATA AT | 
RET ATUtaaqalad: ACAGIAT CAAT IH VY I 
wagiaareatd AGT WH Far | 
aeagaasd aayat Bear ATT VE I 
[Tag AIA Sa AHA AVTAT | 
Wate Jars | 
walcqeayate gs: Tar fer Sper 
qeag:arhcamnafa: APafeetera+r i w9 I 
TAT SATs | 
qeg :aatteamtreaden yfreter we | 


50 c. FET ATT? | conj. Isaacson (cf. 55c); FAT FATA M” = 52 cd. ofate: 
Taicaat | conj.; efafgeacaat MY 55 ab. caatfetcarTate ] M”; caarfer- 
cadre Be; eaarfercdrars B% 55d. AkAGIAT TANT] conj.; FT FT AGIAT 
WaT MY 56 b. qet TL} conj.; TIT M” 


Veer: Ter: 


Frat at at afar: Hay SIAL FAI Yc il 

TIAh Fe TAs Aa: | 

Uh &t TASea eat Pres YS Il 

Rl FENCE Tq FE ACEA AT | 

aed Fret aA arsy Safer | 

aTararrateg at ay sft afer we Ti gol 
[SrMeTET FRAN ATTA | 

Wale Jars | 

aaargarey ard fafetater afar: | 

wed UT TTA fare AT aT TST: it ee MI 

THM SATS | 

egret fasparar yar ar shafted | 

Frgererrad: ad sear FT aT GR I 


TSEAH AIT AACAAT AT: | 

wareq yatny afe ararerarfere: tl &3 I 
[wathreafare afrerery | 

ay averer fager fracarem: Sprrac: | 

ahreafa: Rrararare wetter Prarers: i &¥ I 

Aad TT aeBEe aaarwah qa | 

TE aa adfaya aatarhrate pers &y 

TAA TET TL Ardara | 

aq fava eardteaa at agg: GE I 

aead TAIT ARTA HATHA | 

wtaardateter fergeitad TET G9 II 

ub: wer gar wad fer SATS: | 


58 c. fFaTUT) em.; Freut MY = 64 b. faracaTez: } conj.; faracarer MY 


828 


222 Tet at 


WITT: FATT: Ady: TaHea i a I 
afag: fraacrat 7 aret verarferar | 
add: HaHeacantantters A ATT GR I 
arice TF Ady WTA Adele: | 
Waa At IAS MeN MTGeATeT Tl oll 
WAaTTA A ataete ATA: | 
aTNTaSTaY TEST Perea Fre: ii 98 tt 
[sear AHTEATaATT: | 
waa TC at sea Tada | 
We AQT WAH AAT TTI wil 
[TATRATTTRTT: | 


TTA AAT ATH: TTI 
qt saree: wafer arate ware | 


aire Weereersrey HT:7sS TF KATH 3 Il 


69. TT [scil. TTT] 

afagheadacadr FT are wearfad: | ada: FaHes afegfacasy AY wad Siva- 
pujastavavyakhya p.15. Also quoted as verse 178 of the Sivayogaratna. 

72. Contrast this with Kirana 10:8ab: ate egletaecat q mafas Tay STAT; with 
[Pauskara-| ParameSvara (Goodall 1998:410, verse 22cd): aera eqqauat eq: Far- 
WaT; and with Kirana 10:27cd: FeraTeQTeA ARTHIAT: ATOTT TIBAH, which in 
turn is to be contrasted with [Pauskara-] Paramesvara (Goodall, 1998:410, verse 21ab): 


cast X PrarearaTaerareteg ATAaTT | 


68d. Aas: ] em.; Aaa MY” 69b. TAUfaaT] M”; Waatfad: SiPaStaVya:; 
Tada SiYoRa 69 c. FaHeIeale] MY; FaHeT Aq SiPaStaVya; Fd- 
Reafag SiYoRa 69d. 77 AT Wa] M”, SiPaStaVya; TAT ATSAT SiYoRa 
72a. ] conj.; TAM’; TTB 73c. plete |] MY; eufet? B 73d. F- 
FRET TT | conj.; afe Farewaye MY (unmetrical) e Td} conj.; Yd: 
M” 


VII: Weer: 


nate Soret ceraat afhwaraufawestedt: THe: 1 


N@ welt TTT AATATH ® I 


223 


TRANSLATION 


PARAKHYATANTRA CHAPTER I 


Seeing the stainless Prakasa, who knows [how to achieve both] his own 
aims and those of others (svapararthajnam), in his Ashram on the Ganges, 
the worthy Pratoda,! bowing (pranatah), asked of him the supreme teach- 
ing (jnanam... param): (1) 

‘Lord, tell me the supreme teaching that liberates from bondage.’ 
Thus addressed by him, Prakaga (sa) venerated Siva (natva somam) and 
spoke [the following] clear teaching. (2) 

Take this teaching, a medicinal herb for the soul which springs from 
the ground that is Siva, which is delightful in its ripening, which is sweet, 
which reveals special properties. (3)? 


'For the identification of the Parakhya’s interlocutors Pratoda and Prakasa with 
Vasistha and the sun respectively, see introduction p.x] and following. One could 
consider a conjecture suggested by Dr. ISAACSON: arhah san. This would make explicit 
that Pratoda’s ‘worthiness’ was a condition of his receiving teaching. The author 
might have intended to emphasize thereby that Pratoda was already an initiate, since 
initiation is a prerequisite for the study of scripture. Compare Kiranavrtti 1:10.17—24, 
in which Ramakantha infers that Garuda must be an initiate in order to receive the 
teaching of the Kirana. 

This verse appears as the fifth of the Sataratnasangraha and is commented upon 
in the Sataratnollekhini as follows (pp. 12-13):— 
atmabhesajam etaj jnanam samgrhana. grhyataém ity arthah. ausadhasya sarvasya 
bhimyudbhttatvad asya jnanaripausadhasyapi utpattibhimim darsayati—sivaksmo- 
ttham iti. Siva eva ksma bhimih, taduttham tadutpannam ity arthah. punah kidrsam? 
parinamasukham. parinamah udarkah. uttarakalasukhakaram. svadu amrtasamana- 
tvat. viSesagunadarsakam sarvajnatvadigunanam abhivyanjakam. ausadhapakse vise- 
sagunasya svasthyasya darsakam. anena viSesanatrayenapi jnanasyasya agrahyataSa- 
nka nirasta, loke udarkasukhakaranam amrtaripanam visesagunasampadakanam pada- 
rthanam Ssarvair api grahyatvad iti. atmabhesajam ity asyabhiprayah—yatha caksusah, 
vartamana prakaSanaSaktih paSutvamalaruddha gururupena paramaSivavaidyena para- 
makrpaluna tadbhesajajnanaprayogena paSutvanirasanadvara punar abhivyajyata iti. 
tad uktam Sivadharmottare— 

vyadhinam bhesajam yadvat pratipaksah svadharmatah 
tadvat samsaradosanam pratipaksah Sivah smrtah 
ausadhasya ca samarthyad yatha dosam visarjayet 
tathatmajnanabhaisajyad dosam ca vinivartate 


138 Parakhyatantra 


Now hear from the beginning the [teaching called the] Para, which 
brings about the cutting of the knot that is the connection between bonds 


tasmat sa panditah Santas tapasvi vijitendriyah 
Sivajnanasya sambandhad bhavam alocya mucyate 


Receive this knowledge [that is] a medicinal herb for the soul. ‘Take 
(it]}’ is the meaning. Since all herbs arise from a ground, he shows the 
ground from which this herb that is knowledge arises with the expression 
(iti) Sivaksmottham. Siva himself is the ground (ksma = bhimih); the 
meaning [of the expression] is ‘arising from that [ground that is Siva]’ 
(taduttham = tadutpannam). How [is this knowledge] further qualified? 
(It is] parindmasukham. [Here] transformation (parinaémah) [refers to] 
future time (udarkah). [And so the expression means] ‘which will give 
happiness at a subsequent time’. (And it is] ‘sweet’ because it is like 
nectar. (Its being something] ‘which reveals special properties’ (visesa- 
gunadarSakam) [means] ‘making to appear the properties of omniscience 
and so forth’. When applied to the herb [to which knowledge is likened, 
it means] that which reveals the particular [good] quality of health. By 
all three qualifiers the suspicion that this knowledge might not be some- 
thing that should be taken is cast aside. For in worldly life things that 
subsequently give happiness, that are of the nature of nectar and that 
bring about particular [good] qualities are to be accepted by everybody. 
The intention behind [using the expression] atmabhesajam is as follows 
(... iti): as in the case of an eye [infected by a cataract], the power to 
illumine that exists [in each soul and] that is blocked by the impurity 
that characterises the state of being a bound soul (pasgutvamalaruddha) 
is again made to appear by the supremely compassionate doctor Siva, 
in the guise of the initiating teacher (gururiipena), by casting aside the 
impurity (pasutvanirasanadvara) by the use of the knowledge that is a 
medicinal herb for the soul. This has been taught in the Sivadharmottara: 


Just as medicine is by its nature the remedy to diseases, so 
Siva is known to be the remedy to the ills of the transmigrat- 
ing universe. And just as one may dispel ills (of the body] 
by the power of a medicinal herb, so too [He] averts [worldly] 
ills by the knowledge that is medicine for the soul. Therefore 
the wise man, at peace, practising austerities and in control 
of his senses, sees the truth (bhavam* 4locya) by attaining 
Siva-knowledge and is liberated. 


It is possible that this passage of commentary, like others in this text (see GOODALL 
1998:xxxi-»c9cdi, fn. 71), is copied or adapted from an older source, perhaps from the 
commentary on the Parakhya from which Aghorasiva quoted a few verses in his Kriya- 
kramadyotika, p.4, lines 23-8 (part of the quoted portion appears in a different order 
as 3:69-70 of the Saivagamaparibhasamanjari). For evidence of another trace of this 
commentary see fn. 101 on p. 166 below. 

*Unless we assume corruption of bhavam: ‘sees Siva’. 


Chapter One 139 


and the soul, whose essential teaching is the liberation that is the revela- 
tion? of the [soul’s already] existing [powers of knowledge and action]. (4)4 

In this scripture called the “Supreme” (jaane paranvite’) five topics 
(padarthapaficakam) are established:® the bound soul first (pasuh), the 


3 According to the Saiva Siddhanta, the soul is identical to Siva in all but that the 
soul has been beginninglessly bound. In contradistinction therefore to the views of 
Saivas of the Atimarga, Saiddhantikas hold that the qualities of Siva are innate to the 
soul and are merely revealed in liberation (see fn. 907 on p. 404 below and GOODALL 
1998:180 fn. 63 and 220-1, fn. 186). 

“It is probable that this verse or verse 5 or verses 4 and 5 (or perhaps even 3-5) 
together were intended as a mila- or adi-siitra, a unit of text intended to encapsulate 
the essential message of the tantra and to announce its program. For further discussion 
see introduction p. xxxviii and following. 

>Emending (to parahvaye or parabhidhe) has been considered and decided against. 
Adding -anvita to the end of a name (with the sense of an appended -akhya or -ahvaya) 
must, I think, be possible. Compare Um@pati’s reading of Pauskara 8:42c (~Parakhya 
6:19a): na sadhyasadhananveyah (scil. sambandhah). The reading parerite might also 
be considered, for compare the use of iritam in Moksakarika 152b. 

For jnana in the sense of ‘scripture’ or ‘text’, cf., e.g., Svacchanda 11:188a, the 
opening of the Sarvajnanottara as quoted in GOODALL 1998:1x, fn. 145, and Sardhatri- 
Satikalottara 5:6d (pace Ramakantha). 

®°The number of padarthas in a Siddhantatantra varies: see GOODALL 1998:lxii and 
182, fn. 69. About the number in the Parakhya there has been disagreement—see 
GOODALL 1998:lxii, fn. 151—but it is plain that there are five, and the content of 
the surviving chapters makes clear that they are not to be divided or interpreted as 
DAGENS suggested (1979:202-3) when discussing this verse as it appears quoted in the 
Saivagamaparibhasamanijarit (see apparatus) and again in a discussion of the number 
of categories in the Raurava (DAGENS and BARAZER-BILLORET 2000:xxxvii, fn. 72), 
even though he was then aware of and referred to my citation of the verse in its correct 
form (GOODALL 1998:1lxii, fn. 151). Observe that the verse is there followed by another 
line that mentions that the number of padarthas in the Raurava is also five, which I 
suppose to be an unproblematic reference to Rauravasiitrasangraha 4:48 (which should 
be corrected with the quotation in Kiranavrtti 1:13.36—7). In other comparable verses 
that mention the number of padarthas in different works the Parakhya is consistently 
assigned five: e.g., the verse mentioned in BHATT’s introduction to Matangavidyapada 
(p. xlvii) quoted by Umapati in his Pauskarabhasya ad 1:8: 


pauskare ca matange sat sapta svayambhuve tatha 
pancoktah Sriparakhye ca mrgendradau trayah smrtah 
and in the Saivaparibhasa (p. 28): 
sapta svayambhuve proktah sat pauskaramatangayoh 
Srimatparakhye pancoktah padartha raurave trayah. 
In this last verse the Raurava, however, is assigned only three, and this is, I think, 


because it refers to some part of what I believe to be a later body of material, namely 
that which has been published as the ‘kriyapada’ of the Raurava. 


140 Parakhyatantra 


Lord (igvarah), [pure] knowledge (vidya), the womb (yonih), and, the last 
in this scripture (iha), liberation (muktih).’ (5) 

Where there is (discussion of] the accomplishment of experience caused 
by various past actions (tattatkarmanibandhana),® that is held to be the 
topic ‘bound soul’, afflicted by the faults of impurity (pasutvadosanir- 
dagdhah). (6) 

That in which there is supreme excellence of effects, pure, dissociated 


Much ink has been spilt on the subject of padarthas. I wish to qualify here just 
two remarks of BRUNNER on the subject (1981:140, fn. 198): ‘la répartition des objets 
d’étude en catégories fondamentales est assez arbitraire’ and later ‘la division tripartite 
(pati, pasu, pasa), la plus célébre, semble primaire’. As to the first, it should be borne 
in mind that for the early Siddhantatantras the padarthas are not generally conceived 
of as a fixed list of irreducible ontological categories into which the universe can be 
analysed—which is an impression one can have of them from Mrgendra 2:2, Tattvapra- 
kaSa 5, the opening of Ramanatha’s Siddhantadipika and from some later literature: 
see, for example, Kavirajagekharasiiryabhattaraka’s Saivasiddhantaparibhasa, in par- 
ticular p.13, Civananacittiyar, parappakkam 294 (to which my attention was drawn 
by TOKUNAGA 1981:4-7 and 17), Vayaviyasamhitaé Pi. 5:10ff, and the opening of the 
second pariccheda of Sivagrayogin’s Saivaparibhasa: atha prameyam nirupyate, tac ca 
trividham: patih pasuh pasas ceti. (It should be mentioned, however, that Sivagrayogin 
goes on to explain that other lists of padarthas are scriptural.) The padarthas are in- 
stead various groupings of topics following which the various tantras choose to expound 
their ontology. Their purpose is, in other words, epistemological or didactic. The per- 
haps inadequate translation ‘topic’ has therefore been deliberately chosen to indicate 
that the padarthas are not, as in other branches of learning, fundamental categories of 
Saiddhantika ontology. It is precisely their arbitrary character that makes their simi- 
larity in different tantras suggestive of close relations between those tantras (cf. p. lili 
above). 

As to the second of BRUNNER’s observations, it may be that the Saiva Siddhanta 
can be characterised as a pluralism that sees the world as ontologically tripartite, but 
examination of the earliest scriptural lists of padarthas suggests that the list of the 
three ontological realities was not the starting point for the Saiddhantika padarthas, 
which are, I think, more likely to have been inspired by the similarly non-ontological 
padarthas of the Pancarthika-Pasupatas. 

7 As in the Kirana, the bound soul is the first topic to be listed and treated in depth. 
As in the Matanga (vidyapada 2:21) and in the Kirana 1:13 as interpreted by Rama- 
kantha, the last topic is that of means to achieve liberation (upaya is the name given 
to it in the Matanga). 

Ser conj. ISAACSON (letter of 26.v.2001). One could keep more of M”’s reading and 
emend instead to tatra karma nibandhanam, ‘for that the cause is karman’, but this 
would be syntactically disturbing, since yatra in the first pada correlates with the sa in 
the fourth. But pada b could be treated as a parenthetical aside. Observe that in this 
verse and in the following description of the other topics some of the qualifiers apply 
to the padarthas and some apply to the subjects of the padarthas. 


Chapter One 141 


from what is impure,? is the topic called the Lord, in which an array of 
powers have their seat. (7) 

Where the principal MantreSas, together with the mantras 
(savidyanam) arise, where they are resorbed (tesam layah), and where 
they hold sway (adhikarah),!° that is known as another [topic] called 
‘knowledge’. (8) 

Where the elements (matranam) take on an arrangement which is 
within the range of [experience for] souls (atmagocarah), that, together 
with the Rudras [that oversee it] is [the topic] called the womb (yoni- 
samjnakah), [which is taught] in order to explain the effects of those [ele- 
ments] (tatkaryakhyapanaya).'! (9) 

Where there is the use of rites [performed] with mantras (mantrakriya- 
yogah), augmented by [proper] bathing, worship and so forth, together 
with [adherence to] the rules of the cult, and augmented by yoga (yoga- 
pustangah), that is the most important [topic], namely that of liberation 
(muktilaksanah). (10) 

This group of five matters is to be expounded by [stating the posi- 
tion of] the Siddhanta, attacks [on that position], and by settlements [of 
those attacks] (siddhantaksepaniscayaih),!° using grammar, hermeneu- 


® ez conj. Perhaps one could instead retain the transmitted sSuddhasuddhavilaksitah 
and interpret the half-line thus: ‘That in which there is a transcendence beyond effects 
which is different from [because beyond the distinction of] pure and impure.’ But I 
find no convincing parallel for samutkarsa used in the sence of ‘transcendence’. 

‘These are, I think, non-technical uses of these words, Jaya, bhoga, and adhikara 
being (in order of decreasing ‘purity’) also terms for three aspects of the Lord referred 
to below in 2:99. 

‘' Perhaps also conceivable is the following interpretation: ‘take on an arrangement 
... for the sake of showing [i.e. creating] [further] effects of that [“womb”]’. 

12This translation assumes that acara is used here as a synonym for carya, since this 
verse, like Kirana 1:13 is intended to include mention of the paddas. For a discussion 
of what these were, what they became and how they might have been regarded in the 
Parakhya, see GOODALL 1998:Iviii-lxv and 182-4, fn. 69. 

*3This compound could also be understood ‘by attacks upon and [then] settlements 
of [the view of] the Siddhanta’. This would reflect the usual mode of discourse in 
Saiddhantika texts: each truth is communicated in response to an attack or ques- 
tion that first challenges it. Observe, for example, the presentation of views through- 
out the Kirana, and notice Ramakantha’s frequent formula atha...prasnapurval[ka]m 
prakaranantaram (introducting chapters 2-6 of the Kiranavrtti). And we see this struc- 
ture not just in tantras, but also in independent treatises: Sivagrayogin prefaces, e.g., 
his Sivajfanabodhasangrahabhasya and his Sivagrabhasya with a ‘garland of questions’ 
(prasnamala). But although in the Parakhya too the discussion of each point of doctrine 


142 Parakhyatantra 


tics, and logic (padavakyohaih),!4 with [their] attendant/ instrument]s 
(-paricchadaih) of figurative interpretation and so forth (laksanadi-). (11) 

Without grammar (padam vina) one cannot understand the sandhi 
of words (tatsandhim), compounds [of them] or derivation from verbal 
roots (dhatunirgamam); without hermeneutical science (vakyena [vina]) 
one cannot understand sentence[s]; without logic (pramanam [vina]) one 
cannot understand how to use arguments (hetugamsrayam).’° (12) 

And [without an understanding of] the indirect usages of words 
(laksana) (one cannot understand] the supplying, on the level of words and 
syllables, [of what is not explicitly stated, inferring it] from the meaning 
of neighbouring [passages].!° Without knowing the rules of interpretation 
(paribhasa&h) that belong to one’s own system one does not know [how 
to interpret] hidden meanings (ksiptan [arthan]) and meanings which are 
inferred from the connecting of [widely] separated [words or passages].!’ 
(13) 


is introduced by a question of Pratoda, here these questions are in turn preceded by 
‘programme’ verses (1:15, 2:1, 3:1, 4:1, etc.), and these, as Dr. ACHARYA has suggested 
to me, may be intended to be opening statements of the Siddhanta. 

14 ez conj. ISAACSON (letter of 26.v.2001). The collocation padavakyapramanaéSastra, 
intended to refer to the cornerstones of Sastric learning, Vyakarana, Mimamsa, and 
Nyaya, is widespread and is to be found not uncommonly in Saiddhantika exegetical 
literature (e.g. Kiranavrtti 6:6.4, 6:6.15, 6:7.1); indeed proficiency in them is promi- 
nently mentioned by Aghorasiva as part of his qualification for commenting on tantras, 
for example in the concluding verses to his Sarvajnanottaravrtti and Dvisatikalottara- 
vrtti (quoted GOODALL 1998:xv and xvi). I am not aware of iha commonly being used 
in this sense of pramanaSastra, but 1:12d makes clear that some synonym of pramana 
is intended. That tha was probably the missing word occurred independently to a 
reader of B, perhaps an editor of the Saivaparibhasa (see p. cii above), who has marked 
a conjecture here in blue ink. 

‘5Perhaps a more literal translation, and one that assumes a technical sense of hetu, 
would be more appropriate here: ‘[without an understanding of] logic [one cannot 
have] recourse to logical grounds’. It goes without saying that the interpretation here 
is tentative. 

16 Alternatively samipartham could be retained as an adjective to laksanam: ‘which 
has a(n intended] meaning that is close [to what it directly means]’. An understanding of 
figurative usages enables one correctly to interpret, e.g., ‘the spears entered the citadel’ 
to mean ‘(men with] spears entered the citadel’. For the expression padarnagam see 
p. lxxxi above. 

‘’The translation of this half-verse is far from certain. I have taken the liberty of 
inverting the order established in the previous passage by taking the vina with the 
second element, paribhasah (corrected to a feminine, though the use of the word as 
a masculine could conceivably have been authorial). It is perhaps conceivable that 
13cd is intended rather to give a list of things that cannot be understood without an 


Chapter One 143 


These are the instruments!® of the creator of this [book] (tatkartuh); 
the very same (samani hi) are to be employed by the teacher (acaryasya), 
as is appropriate in order to establish the meaning,!? at the time of ex- 
pounding [the scripture]. (14) 

The bound soul? is different from its body, indestructible, [all- 
pervading, distinct [from God and from other souls], with impurity, not 
[innately] insentient, the experiencer of the fruits of its own actions, an 
agent, partially equipped with the power of knowledge, subject to the 
Lord.”!(15) 

{The yogin [Pratoda], endowed with the power of knowledge, equipped 


understanding of laksana. 

8Note that this pada has too many syllables; but this particular type of hypermetry, 
in which the first two short syllables are probably intended to be read rapidly together 
and must count for one, appears to be not uncommon in this sort of writing (see fn. 
132 on p.lxxxvi above). The interpretation of this verse has been suggested to me 
by Dr. ACHARYA. Also perhaps conceivable would be an interpretation based on the 
assumption that tatkartuh is in apposition to acaryasya and means vyakhyakartuh: 
‘These instruments are to be employed equally(?) at the time of expounding (the 
scripture] by the teacher who does that [expounding]... ’ 

‘This is either a slightly awkward compound with the sense yathayogam arthasi- 
ddhaye (which is the way I have taken it), or yathayoga could qualify artha. 

20 Although I translate here ‘bound soul’, I am conscious that the word pasu may 
here, as elsewhere in this text (eg. in 1:17f), be used as a neutral term for the soul. 

211n the Sataratnollekhini, when commenting on this verse (Sataratnasangraha 18), 
the commentator locates a further discussion of all but the first and last of these epithets 
in the subsequent verses of this chapter. (For the entire passage, see Appendix III.) 
Thus the epithet anaSvarah the commentator finds expanded upon in 1:29ff; vyapi he 
finds expanded upon in 1:37ff; vibhinnah in 1:43ff; samalah in 1:58c ff; ajadah in 1:68c ff; 
svakarmaphalabhuk in 1:77c ff; karta in 1:84c ff; kincijjnah in 1:91c ff. Though the first 
epithet, dehanyah, is not explicitly related to any following verses in the chapter, the 
author of the SataratnollekhinI takes it to be directed against the Carvakas (anena 
carvakasya nirdsah (p.32)), and so it is clear that he saw it expanded upon in 1:18ff. 
The text of the whole of the commentary on this verse is given in Appendix III. 

Thus we see that this verse contains the program for the remainder of the chapter: 
toda in the order given in the verse and is then shown by Prak@Sa to be just:—dehanyah 
is questioned in 1:17 and 1:21; anaSvarah in 1:28; vyap? in 1:36; vibhinnah in 1:40 and 
1:42; samalah in 1:51; ajadah 1:61; svakarmaphalabhuk (perhaps) in 1:81; karta in 1:85. 
The last epithet, seSvarah, is not explicitly challenged by Pratoda; but it is echoed in the 
last word of the chapter (seSah in 1:95d), and it is probable that Prakasa is expanding 
on it in 1:94, hence the translation ‘subject to the Lord’. This interpretation finds 
further support in Parakhya 2:122cd, where the term is so used of officiants of the 
universe: Sivatulyabalah sarve kim tu te seSvaranavah (~ Matangavidyapada 4:55cd). 


144 Parakhyatantra 


with a small amount of reasoning{?* asked PrakaSa briefly (lesat) about 
the distinctness [from the body] of the soul’s power of knowledge 
(tacciteh).?3 (16) 

This body is a transformation of the four elements, distinguished by 
connection with consciousness”4 and possessed of vital breath [even] when 
[it is] not [actually engaged in] cognising anything (agrahe); it displays ac- 
tivity (vijrmbhate) in various ways, such as by movement (vartanadyaih). 
This being the case, we do not [accept that we] experience a controlling 
(adhyaksakah?’) soul inside this elemental body. (17) 

Questioned thus, the lord Prakasa, who knows [how to achieve both] 
his own aims and those of others, through the access of the power of the 


221t is perhaps just possible that all the qualifiers of this line still belong to the 
preceding general statement about the bound soul. If they do, then perhaps something 
is missing from the text, for the next line, without mentioning Pratoda or using any 
epithet that might be applied to him, reports that he asked a question with prakasam 
prstavan. This small difficulty could of course be explained away by the assumption of 
a lost speaker indication of the form pratoda uvaca. But the possibility is remote, for 
none of the attributes of 1:16ab seems to be taken up later for discussion and proof, 
in the way that those of 1:15 all are. Note that yuktilega is used, apparently without 
negative connotations, in 2:77d and that 1:18c might have been begun with the similar 
phrase Isadyukti-. Cf. also Mrgendravidyapada 9:1: 


atha sarvajnavakyena pratipannasya laksanam 
kathyate granthipaSasya kincid yuktyapi leSatah 


‘Now a brief (kificit) definition of the bond of maya is related, such as [that bond] has 
been understood from the teaching of the omniscient (Lord], as well as, to a small de- 
gree, from reasoning.’ Narayanakantha comments ad loc.: yuktyapi legata iti nagama- 
matrena kevalena, api tu stokad anumaénopapannam api taJlaksanam ucyata ity arthah. 

3This translation assumes that vyatirekitam relates only to the first objection that 
Pratoda is about to voice, namely that of a Carvaka. But perhaps we should rather 
interpret it to refer to the querying of all the attributes of the soul that are to follow 
in this chapter and so translate the second half-verse thus: ‘...[Pratoda]...then (tat) 
questioned Prakasa briefly about the sentient| soul]’s having the opposite characteristics 
[to those stated].’ Dr. DeEzs6 has suggested to me the possibility that lesat might be a 
corruption (influenced by the previous line) for dehat. 

24 er conj. (M” transmits a hypometrical pada). Something with the sense of this 
diagnostic conjecture is probably required, for compare Ramakantha’s quotation, in 
a similar context, in the Matangavrtti ad vidyapada 6:5c-6b, p.136: yad uktam 
‘caitanyavisistah kayah purusah’ iti. 

25 ez conj. The confusion of medial ta and ka could suggest that M” had an antecedent 
(or more) written in a South Indian script; other evidence suggests more particularly 
a Grantha intermediary: see p. xcviii. 


Chapter One 145 


Lord’s light,2° spoke this speech, smiling [the while] (hasann iva). (18) 
Even when there is an aggregate of elements,?’ and even though 
the faculty of sight might be unblemished of a body engaged in trying 
to grasp objects determinately [i.e. with its buddhi also engaged] (ad- 
hyavasayatah), there cannot be the expected (abhipretah) grasping of 
external objects when its mind is otherwise directed.?® Since [this is so], 
therefore [we can be certain that] there exists separate [from the body 
and the sense faculties] (anyah) [but] inside it (asmin) a soul, which has 


become absent-minded (sinyamanasah).*° (19-20) 

26 ez conj. M”’s reading Isad-yukti- might, however, be retained (see fn. 22 on p. 144 
above). 

271t is odd to have the presence of a body stated as a condition for that same body 
grasping or not grasping something, for when we unpack this, what it appears to mean 
is ‘a body which is engaged in grasping an object ceases to grasp the external object 
in the way one might expect, if its mind is elsewhere engaged, despite the presence of 
a conglomeration of elements [i.e. the body itself] and a functioning faculty of sight’. 

One could therefore assume that samudaye is here used in the sense of samudaya- 
tve, ‘even though it is an aggregate of the [requisite] elements’, but this is hardly less 
problematic. 

28 Almost all the conditions for perception (following a Sankhya model) are right: the 
external sense organ, which is undamaged, projects its data onto the buddhi (whose 
function is adhyavasaya); but the manas, whose function it is to direct the attention of 
the soul, is not focussing it on what the ‘body’ is ‘seeing’. This is what SURYANARAYANA 
SASTRI (1982:101) makes of this difficult passage when it is quoted in the Saivagama- 
paribhasaémanjart: ‘Even when there exists the aggregate of the elements, for the body 
that sets out to apprehend things determinately there is not (such apprehension) 
even though the sense of sight is pure, since apprehension of an intended object is not 
possible because his mind is directed elsewhere. On this ground, there is a self apart 
from body, with an empty mind (or a mind directed elsewhere).’ 

“CE Sivagrayogin’s paraphrase of the argument in the introduction to his quotation 
of Pauskara 4:61c—72b, which immediately precedes the quotation of our passage (Saiva- 
paribhasa p.45): kim ca nirdosendriyarthasannikarse 'py arthagraho na drsyate. tat 
kasya hetoh? vyasaktatvad iti cet, hanta tarhi cittavyasangaprayojakah stiksma atma- 
bhyupeyah. 

Dr. WATSON has pointed out to me (letter of 4.vi.2001) that Vasubandhu in the 
beginning of the pudgalaviniscaya that forms the end of his Abhidharmakogabhasya 
(p.461) spells out the use of a structurally similar argument—where the absence of 
an effect in some cases but its presence in others enables one to infer an extra cause 
that is present in the latter cases but not in the first—to establish the existence of the 
indriyas, at the end of which he observes that such an argument cannot be constructed 
to prove the existence of the soul. Indeed it might here be objected that all Prakasa 
has really proved is the existence of the manas. But one might reply to this that it is 
possible that the conception of the soul which the Carvaka may wish to reject appears 
to be a conception of it as a mental entity (this is implied by Pratoda’s next question). 


146 Parakhyatantra 


Pratoda spoke: 
No mental entity is ever (yatah kvacit®°) perceived in it by direct percep- 
tion; what is seen is [just] a conglomeration of [the gross] elements [that 
is conscious] because of a special kind of transformation.*) (21) 

Prakasa spoke: 
Now what we observe in the body are four states, beginning with child- 
hood, which are quite distinct, one from another, because of a particular 
kind of transformation. (22) 

There is a rememberer who has a synthetic awareness of one given 
state, even though that has passed, while he is in another. [The Carvaka 
rejoins:| that awareness that is memory is separate [from the body and 


Furthermore it could be argued that to prove the existence of the manas is to prove, 
if one accepts the Sankhyas’ model of perception, the existence of the soul, since the 
manas is not itself the perceiver, but rather that which focusses the attention of the 
perceiving soul. 

3°T assume that this is an expression equivalent to yatra kutracit. 

31Dr. WATSON has pointed out to me that this special kind of transformation of the 
elements that results in a sentient body is referred to extremely frequently in Carvaka 
purvapaksas, e.g. in the Nyayamanjari (vol.2, p. 267), Mrgendravidyapada 6:6 and 
Mrgendravrtti ad loc, the NareSvarapariksaprakaSa ad 1:18ab, p.44 and by Kumarila 
in the Slokavarttika, Atmavada 69. The transformation is special in that it is different 
from the kind of transformation that results in such inanimate things as pots, as Partha- 
sarathimisra makes explicit in his Nyayaratnakara ad loc.: bhitanam hi cicchaktiyoge 
tebhya eva ghatadiparinamad viviktac charirakaraparinamac chaktyabhivyaktiripad 
anugrahad indriyadisahayad buddhir utpadyate... In other words, the point of speci- 
fying the ‘particularity’ of the transformation is to avoid the objection ‘if consciousness 
arises from transformations of matter, why aren’t all such transformations conscious?’ 
The answer is that consciousness arises only in those particular transformations of 
matter that result in functioning bodies with sense-organs. The example of alcoholic 
fermentation is often adduced: if particular ingredients are not mixed in a particular 
way, then the power to intoxicate will not arise. 

Note that, as WATSON has pointed out (*2002:254—5, fn. 69), nowhere in the discus- 
sion which follows does Prakasa answer Pratoda’s objection in the way that Rama- 
kantha might, i.e. by claiming that the soul is a fact of experience which is sva- 
samvedanasiddha: see, for example, NareSvarapariksaprakaSa ad 1:5, p. 14: tatrayam 
sthiraripah prakaéSah sarvadaiva... atmapadapratipadyah pratipurusam svasamveda- 
nasiddhah. Versions of the same sentence are to be found also in the Paramoksanir- 
asakarikavrtti ad 43, p.294 and in the Matangavrtti ad vidyapada 6:34c-35b, p. 172. 
Cf. also Kiranavrtti 2:25.2-3, in which WATSON (*2002:137, fn. 30) proposes emending 
° prakaSataya to ° prakaSakataya. 

Prakasa, by contrast, resorts only to anumana and it seems fair to assume that the 
redactor of the Parakhya, unlike Ramakantha, held that the soul could only be inferred. 


Chapter One 147 


senses but] produced from the body and its senses.*? (23) 

[We know this] because awareness [arises] from the presence of those 
[viz. the body and its senses] and because one does not perceive it [when] 
they are not present (tad asat).5> [We reply that] their existence too 
[though] is inconclusive, [since] cows and such like beasts do not have 
consciousness.*4 (24) 

After all one cannot show [knowledge] to be an effect of them [viz. of 
the body and the senses] in as much as it is a quality [of the soul], and 
one can determine [the existence of] inference, which has as its effect the 
cognition of an object.°°(25) 

And (tu) it is by the use of this [type of cognition known as inference] 
that worldly interaction among men is observed to take place. Since the 
elements in the body are referred to as properties of that [soul] on the 
basis of [observation of] positive and negative concomitance, because we 
observe that those [elements in the body] are concomitant with the same 
thing [viz. the soul], we therefore proclaim [the existence of] a remember. 
Where there is this [rememberer], there there is memory. The cognition 
[that we call] memory exists in him; memory is not [possible] in something 
that is impermanent.*© (26-7) 


32The editors of the Saivaparibhasa have here accepted smrtir jnanam bhinnam bhi- 
taksanirgatam and SURYANARAYANA SASTRI (1982:102) renders this last half-line with 
‘...he is the one who remembers and the remembrance is cognition which is different 
from what arises from the elements and the [elemental] senses’ (as though he had had 
before him bhitaksanirgatat). But the quotation in the Saivaparibhasa ends at this 
point, so SURYANARAYANA SASTRI was not able to consider the full context; in the light 
of what I understand of what follows, I have decided to assume that a Carvaka counter 
attack begins with smrtijnanam. 

33Perhaps the second pada should rather be interpreted ‘it [viz. awareness] is not 
non-existent, because it is experienced’. The interpretation of this verse, indeed of the 
remainder of Prakaéa’s speech is extremely tentative. 

“This is a surprising statement, unless we assume that caitanya is intended in a 
rather strong sense. Could it perhaps be intended to mean ‘articulate self-awareness’ ? 

35Note that the tentative interpretation offered of this half-verse depends on two 
conjectures. Presumably it is intended to weaken the Carvaka’s case by emphasising 
that purely mental cognition exists—cognition that is based only on other cognitions— 
as well as perceptual cognitions that are based directly on the elements and senses, that 
is to say instances of pratyaksa, which depend on there being indriyarthasannikarsa and 
so could be said to be ‘produced from the elements’. This entire speech of PrakaSa’s 
is, it seems to me, a refutation of the Carvaka view that awareness and mental events 
are produced from the elements. 

3°This interpretation is of course tentative. Perhaps conceivable as an alternative is 


148 Parakhyatantra 


Pratoda spoke: 
Since knowledge flows in a stream and since it is (therefore] momentary, 
it is not permanent. There is no soul in this [body] separate from that 
[stream of knowledge], because we do not perceive logical grounds from 
which its existence might be inferred (tallinganupalambhatah*’ ). (28) 

Prakasa spoke: 
If knowledge were momentary, to whom could the [fruits of] accumulated 
past action accrue? The fruits of one’s actions could not be experienced 
if knowledge perishes without continuity. (29) 

Pratoda spoke: 
A trace of an action laid down previously by that (stream of knowledge] 
is brought to fruition (vyajyate) in a separate moment (vyavasthayam), 
just like the colour taken on by the flowers of a thorn-apple [whose seeds 
were stained with lac].°° (30) 


the following: ‘It is because (yatha) the physical elements in the body are [erroneously] 
referred to as properties of this (soul] on the basis of positive and negative concomitance 
that they have [apparent] concomitance with regard to the same thing [viz. memory], 
and that is why (yena ...tenaiva) [we, who recognise that this concomitance is only 
apparent] proclaim [the existence] of a rememberer [viz. the soul]. Where that is, there 
there is memory. Memory must exist in him. Memory is not [possible] in something 
that is impermanent.’ 

37M”’s corruption of this might be explained as the result of the text having passed 
through an intermediary in Grantha script (in which the graphs for bha and ha are 
similar and not infrequently confused), or as a result of aural confusion. 

38ex conj. APTE (1957, s.v. khalah) records ‘3 The thorn-apple’. The same plant, 
referred to by the name unmatta, appears in a passage that I suppose to be discussing 
the same image in the Naresvarapariksaprakaga ad 1:4, p.10: tarhi sa eva samskaro 
nityena dharmina vina nopapadyate iti tatas tatsiddhih. na anityanam evonmattabr- 
‘janam laksadisamskaras tatpusparunimadina siddhah. .. 

But it is not only the unmatta plant that is so treated, for cf. also the description of 
experiments on mango and cotton plants in the following passage from the beginning 
of the Jaina section of the Sarvadarsanasangraha (p. 49): 

yatha madhurarasabhavitanam aémrabijanam parikarsitayam bhimav 
uptanam ankurakandaskandhasakhapallavadisu taddvara paramparaya 
phale madhuryaniyamah. yatha va laksdrasavasiktanam karpasabijadi- 
nam ankuradiparamparyena karpasadau raktimaniyamah. yathoktam 

yasminn eva hi santane ahita karmavasana 

phalam tatraiva badhnati karpase raktata yatha 

kusume bijapirader yal laksady avasicyate 

Saktir adhiyate tatra kacit; tam kim na paSyasi? iti. 


The first half of the second of the quoted verses is Slokavarttika niralambanavada 
200cd, and the first, as Dr. ISAACSON has pointed out to me, is cited in a number of 


Chapter One 149 


Prakasa spoke: 
This trace that you have spoken of, is it not undivided®? (avicchinna- 
laksana)? If it is different [in each moment, then] it could not exist in 
another moment.’ (31) 

If, when that moment (of action] perishes, this {trace] does not per- 


ish, then it is undivided, perduring, one and the locus of various cogni- 
tions. (32) 


earlier sources, for instance Nydyabhdsana (p. 495) and Nyayamanjari (vol. 2, p. 297). 
On the strength of these passages, one could accept the more obvious emendation pha- 
lapuspattaragavat (rather than the khalapuspa- suggested by the NareSvarapariksa- 
prakaSa), since it is clear that fruits as well as flowers are affected; I have not done so 
not simply because I am captivated by the ingenuity of my first conjecture, but for the 
reason that I expect the text to refer to a type of plant. 

The interpretation of the expression vyavasthayam is uncertain. 

539i e. not momentary, but a unitary entity that remains the same through time. 

4°This translation assumes a hanging yada (see introduction p. lxxx) and it assumes 
that ksanadntargata is ungrammatically used as equivalent to ksanantaragata (cf. Rama- 
kantha’s interpretation of malantahstham in Kirana 2:9b to mean malantarastham). 
One might instead interpret ‘...then it could not exist in that [first] moment [of action 
as well as in the moment of bearing fruit]’. 

One could prefer instead assuming a standard use of antargata, understanding tada 
in 32b to correlate with yada, reading tatksanena vinastena in 32a and assuming that 
the alternative paksa is introduced only in 32cd. In that case we might translate 31c—32 
thus: ‘If this (vasana] is divided (into moments], would it not be included in its (own first] 
moment? By that moment's being destroyed, it [too] would then be destroyed. And 
(as for the possibility that it is] one, undivided, stable entity that is the locus of various 
cognitions, considered thus ...’. Both interpretations assume the awkwardness of 1:31c 
ending in a na which belongs to the following pada, but the accepted interpretation is 
perhaps clumsier in that it assumes that this same awkwardness recurs in 1:32b. I find 
it difficult to choose between the two. 

SURYANARAYANA SASTRI’s not wholly satisfactory translation of this difficult passage 
(1:31-5) is as follows (1982:117-18): 


What you call vasana (impression), is it not characterised by perisha- 
bility? If it be not of a different nature, it would be included in that 
instant and when that instant perishes it would also perish. What is non- 
perishable, stable, one, the substrate of diverse cognitions, is to object 
of inquiry by revelation and by reasoning is not different from the soul. 
There is conjunction with another life, etc., because of grief, happiness 
and laughter etc.; similarly the remembrance of another life is from ear- 
lier experience; permanence is to be accepted for that memory; what is 
remembered cannot be in the absence of experience. The one who has 
remembrance and experience is really permanent; therefore one who has 
knowledge (consciousness) is permanent and pervasive. 


150 Parakhyatantra 


Considered thus, it is not logically different from the soul, because [as 
when, in our theory, the soul is connected to a new body], when it [viz. 
your vasana] is connected with a body in a new birth, there is similarity 


[in the reactions] of grief, joy, etc. [with the reactions of grief, joy, etc. 
that adults have]. 4! (33) 

And so when there is memory of a [previous] birth because of previous 
experience—just as one has memories of dead [or] distant relatives—we 
know that [the soul] is perduring because of the memory of that [previous 
birth]. Memory is impossible without experience. [It is only possible 
that] the rememberer is the [same as the] one who had the experiences 
because of the fact that he endures. Therefore the knower is perduring 
and [all-|pervading. (34-5) 

Pratoda spoke: 

You have [by implication] taught that the individual (pudgalah) is not 
all-pervading, since [according to you] he experiences the fruits of his own 
actions,42 and whatever experience one has in the form of happiness and 
such like [emotions] is limited to within the body. (36) 

Prakasa spoke: 


How can [the soul] reach (gatih) whatever fruits of his actions might be 


41 ez conj. ISAACSON. From this it can be concluded that just as the adults’ reactions 
are influenced by memories (of experiences in the same life) so must be those of the 
newborn, and since they have had no earlier experiences, their memories must be of 
experiences in the previous life. As Dr. WATSON has pointed out, 33cd echoes Nyaya- 
sutra 3.1.18: purvabhyastasmrtyanubandhadj jatasya harsabhayaSokasampratipatteh. 

One could instead assume that a sentence is concluded with vyatiricyate and connect 
1:33cd with what follows, the °samyatah giving the reason for the jatisamsmarana of 
1:34a. 

42This is stated in 1:15. In the introduction to the quotation of this passage in the 
Sataratnollekhini ad 18 (=Parakhya 1:15), for the text of which see Appendix III, it 
could be understood to be implied that this question and its response deals with a 
Jaina view: ksapanakavat tasyavyapakatve ... desantaraphalabhogo nopapadyate. ‘If 
this [soul] were not all-pervasive, as [he is not] for the Jainas, then the experience of 
the fruits [of his actions] in another place [than where he performed them] would not 
be possible.’ But it seems to me more likely that what is meant by this is that the 
author of the Sataratnollekhini identified the view that the soul is not pervasive as 
being typical of Jainas but was not sure that this discussion was specifically about a 
Jaina form of this view. And indeed there seem to be no indications in the question or 
the response that it is Jaina. Pratoda’s use here of the distinctively non-Saiddhantika 
term pudgala might have been intended to signal whose view point is being discussed, 


but although pudgala is a Jaina technical term, it designates atoms of matter rather 
than souls. 


Chapter One 151 


in some other place if he is [as you say] not all-pervasive? Or if he does 
reach it (asti va tadgatih) [without being all-pervading], then the soul 
must exist in two ways: with and without form. (37) 

If it were [only] with form, then the fruits [of his actions] could not 
(in a subsequent life] be experienced, since form is subject to destruction. 
If, on the other hand (athava), it is [wholly] without form and not all- 
pervading ,*? then how could it be led [to where the fruit to be experienced 
is] by [the power of] some action? (38) 

How could something that is formless and insentient be skilled in 
leading? Thus the fruits [of past actions] that are situated in another 
place must arise from the connection [of the soul] with a body, [which is 
only possible] because [the soul is] all-pervading. (39) 

Pratoda spoke: 

There are established to be many souls and these are established to be 
all-pervasive. How can [each of] these, [though] overlapping, get the ac- 
cumulated fruits of their own actions? (40) 

Prakasa spoke: 

Things without form have no connection.44 He who has a body, has 
[experience of] the fruits of that [body’s karman]. Therefore we hold that 
there is a special kind of connection of souls with a body. (41) 

Pratoda spoke: 

[But perhaps] there exists only one knower, [situated] in various bodies, 
in accordance with his past actions. He appears both as one and as many, 
like the moon [reflected] in [rippling] water.*° (42) 

Prakasa spoke: 

In as much as [all are] of the form of consciousness they are one; [but] 
they are divided because of their various experiences. And those arise 


43Qne could perhaps instead understand here vyapi (rather than avyapi): ‘If, on the 
other hand, it is formless, then how could it, [being all-]pervading, be led...’. For 
in that case, Prakasa would be assuming the Vaisesika position that if something is 
formless it must be all-pervading. This view is implied, for example, in the Pragasta- 
padabhasya, p. 28, §2.8, [169 (edition of Bronkhorst and Ramseier). 

44Whether there can be conjunction between two formless and all-pervading entities 
is the subject of an old debate. Here PrakaSa sides with the Vaisesikas. Cf. Bhatta 
Vadindra ad Vaisesikasitra 7.2.12 (ISAACSON *1995:73 and 127-8). 

“542cd occurs also as the second half of Brahmabindipanisat 12, the first half of 
which reads eka eva hi bhitatma bhute bhite vyavasthitah. The image of the moon 
reflected in water to appear as many moons is doubtless widely met with elsewhere 
(e.g., for example, Tantraéloka 16:80). This passage of the Parakhya (1:42-50) has been 
quoted and some of its implications discussed in GOODALL forthcoming A. 


152 Parakhyatantra 


from the soul’s own past actions. These are delusion (avidya), which is 
bondage. (43) 

That which cuts away this [avidya] is knowledge; [and so] there are [at 
least] two {entities} and the oneness (of all creation] does not exist. [Your] 
hanging on to non-dualism is finished, because there is a division between 
knowledge and delusion (vidyavidyavibhagena).*® (44) 


46M 's reading of 44b is also possible. Dr. WATSON has pointed out that this thrust 
is reminiscent of a passage in the Slokavarttika: sambandhaksepaparihara 82c—86: 


purusasya ca Suddhasya nasuddha vikrtir bhavet 
svadhinatvac ca dharmades tena klego na yujyate 
tadvaSena pravrttau va vyatirekah prasajyate 
svayam ca Suddharupatvad asattvac canyavastunah 
svapnadivad avidyayah pravrttis tasya kimkrta 
anyenopaplave 'bhiste dvaitavadah prasajyate 
svabhavikim avidyam tu nocchettum kaScid arhati 
vilaksanopapate hi naSyet svabhavik! kvacit 

na tv ekatmabhyupayanam hetur asti vilaksanah. 


And of a pure soul there could be no impure transformation. And because 
dharma and [its opposite] would be under his control, affliction by them 
would not be possible. Or if [you were to argue that affliction] acts (upon 
the soul] (pravrttau va) because of that [karman], then [the undesirable 
corollary] would be entailed that there would be something existing be- 
yond (the one soul] (vyatirekah). Since [the soul] himself is of a pure 
nature and since no other entity can exist, what can cause nescience’s 
acting upon the soul (tasya) (such that it perceives itself erroneously] as 
in a dream or the like? If one admits that the affliction (upaplave) is 
caused by something else, then a dualist position is entailed. Now a ne- 
science (that simply exists] by its very nature [without beginning] nobody 
could destroy [and so liberation would be impossible]. [You might object 
that] in special circumstances (kvacit) [this nescience] that exists by its 
very nature might be destroyed by the occurrence of something of a dif- 
ferent nature. But for those whose [one] remedy is the one soul there is 
no [such] cause that is of a different nature. 


The interpretation of this last verse is uncertain. Parthasdrathimisra introduces it thus: 
yadi svabhaviky apy avidya, Syamateva parthivaniinaém agnisamyogena, dhyanadino- 
cchedyeta; ata aha.... His commentary thereon reads simply na hy agnisamyogavad 
dhyanadyupayantaram &tmadvaitavadinam asti yad avidyam ucchindyat. 
Commenting on this passage of Kumarila, NAKAMURA observes (1983:339): 

Stanzas 82 and 83 attack the most ancient Vedanta philosophy, especially 

the theory of transformation (parinamavada), which agrees with the the- 

ory of an opponent school in the Brahmasitra (II, 1, 4; II, 1, 34 and 

35). So Kumirila is repeating here a refutation of the Vedanta philos- 

ophy which had already been made prior to him. In the next stanzas 


Chapter One 153 


Pratoda spoke: 

All traces [of past action] are delusion; they do not exist for me in reality.‘ 
Everything exists as knowledge. What is knowledge (ya vidya),*® that is 
the supreme soul. (45) 

Prakasa spoke: 

All means of yours [in that case] which wipe away delusion are worthless,“ 
since [the soul is] established to be (nothing other than the one] knowledge, 
[and] there is no bondage at the level of the highest reality. (46) 

Everything must be knowledge. Or if there is something called delu- 
sion, then the [one] soul (sah) binds himself with it and should release 
[himself] by means of knowledge. (47) 

Or [if] this is [all] the play [of the one supreme soul] or (simply His] 
nature (svadharmo va), then [ultimate] liberation is impossible. Or if 
it be required that there is liberation, then it must be partial and not 
total. (48) 

If [you say that it must be] partial (ekadese), (then we reply that] 
there can be no part, since it is formless and therefore without parts.°? 
If there were to be total liberation, then this would entail that worldly 
existence must be cut off. (49) 

And yet there is no cutting off of worldly existence, and so those [souls] 
are taught to be many, blocked beginninglessly by bonds, and that [bond] 
(sah?!) in this [tantra] (asmin**) is the impurity that is taught. (50) 


84-86 he attacks a new form of Vedanta philosophy, i.e. the theory of 
false manifestation (vivartavada). [...] From the stanzas it is clear that 
those people were of opinion that the absolute brahman evolves itself by 
the power of nescience (avidya), the phenomenal world as its effect being 
illusory like dream and illusion. 


47 Alternatively one could emend vasana to vasanah and understand the sA to refer 
to avidya: ‘All traces are delusion; it does not exist for me in reality.’ 

48 ez conj. ISAACSON (letter of 11.vi.2001). 

4°This half-line is comparable to Matangavidyapada 6:76cd: vidyakhya$ capy upayo 
’yam yo 'vidyayah pramarjakah, but in that context the attack is not on Vediantic 
Advaita. 

5°It would have been normal to reverse the order of niramgatvat and amirtitah, but 
this would here have been unmetrical. 

5! er conj. This alteration is not strictly necessary, since sé could be taken to refer 
back to avidya. 

52This use of asmin, where, if I have interpreted the text correctly, we would expect 
iha or atra, is a stylistic peculiarity of the Parakhya: see p. lxxx. 


154 Parakhyatantra 


Pratoda spoke: 

The soul cannot be impure, since it is pure by its own nature. And even 
if it were [to appear] so, then its discoloration (could] not [be] natural to 
it,°3 just as [redness is not natural] in a crystal. (51) 

Prakasa spoke: 

This passion of the soul is born of the cause that is his own impurity.°4 
If he had no impurity, then his passion would not arise.” (52) 

Otherwise there could not of itself arise in him an attachment to the 
enjoyments of what is impure. Nor can passion be without a cause. [If it 
could, then] would it not arise even for liberated souls? (53) 

Or past action might be the [cause of the] soul’s (asya) passion, and 
that is beginningless. But this property of the buddhi (taddharmah) is 
possible only when there is buddhi,°® and buddhi, in turn, arises out of 
matter (avyaktasambhava). (54) 

Disproved (gatam), then, would be its beginninglessness.°’ On the 
other hand, [you might say that] it might exist [beginninglessly, stored 
up] as potential (Saktirupena va sthitam). [In that case] nescience too 


53 ez conj. The example referred to appears to be that of a clear crystal appearing to 


be red when placed next to some red thing, hence the emendation to tadrago ’prakrtah. 
54For the emendation to svakya® (instead of to svaka°, which is perhaps also a 
possibility) see fn. 396 on p. 258 below. 
55Cf. Svayambhuvasitrasarigraha 2:4, of which this discussion is reminiscent: 


yady afuddhir na pumso ’sti saktir bhogesu kimkrta? 

Suddhe pumsi na tadbhogo jaghatiti vipascitah. 
58 er conj. I assume that sa taddharmah refers to the soul’s past action, which, being 
in some sense a property of the soul, would be ‘stored’ in the buddhi as the eight 
buddhidharmas. See, e.g., AghoraSiva’s Bhogakarikavrtti ad verse 60: iha hi buddhau 
vasanatvena sthita dharmadayo 'stau bhava ucyante. The correction of tasyam to 
satyam is not strictly necessary, since one could translate ‘But this quality of the soul 
is stored in buddhi...’; but the locative absolute with satyam is smoother. These eight 
buddhidharmas are jnana, dharma, vairagya, aifvarya and their opposites, among which 
avairagya can be expressed by the term raga. Prakasa’s answer then to the question 
he raised in the first half of the verse assumes a Sankhya (or Saiva) ontology in which 
an entity that can be called raga exists at a relatively low level of emanation of the 
cosmos. 

57It is in fact a tenet of the system that past action is beginningless like a stream 

(cf. Kirana 3:6-7); the point made here is presumably that avairagya, because it is a 
buddhidharma and because buddhi is not beginningless but arises, at a certain stage, 
from prakrti (54cd), cannot be beginningless. Therefore the equation of raga with 
karman (54a) cannot be correct. 


Chapter One 155 


might be like this, and its opposite too, [or indeed anything].°® (55) 

If this is so, then all nescience must arise from the state of being a 
bound soul [viz. from impurity] (pasubhavatah).°* If, on the other hand 
(va), past action were the cause of this (nescience], then it could not have 
influence (rafijakam) upon one who was pure |i.e. not already stained by 
impurity]. (56) 

This [past action] could not have influence upon something all- 
pervading because of its having [i.e. being located in] a single part.® 
Therefore past action cannot serve as the cause of envelopment of the 
soul (tasya). (57) 

By it [viz. karman], when it is present (sata), the body, happiness, 
(and] unhappiness [are engendered); since it is expended in doing just thus 
much, it [then] disappears.°? Therefore nescience,™ which is distinct from 
the soul’s past action (tatkarmanah), is the cause of passion . (58) 

For every soul comes forth from its womb linked to nescience. And 
then (punah) it [viz. nescience] envelopes the soul, [itself] bodiless, like 


58The rhetorical force of this verse is not certain; but I am assuming that 55cd 
is meant as a reductio ad absurdum: why insist that karman (or raga) is the cause 
of impurity if one is then forced to admit that it in turn exists in some latent state 
of potency in order that it be prior to what one wishes it to have caused? Perhaps 
conceivable is that viparyayah here is used not in the sense of ‘the reverse’ but rather 
as the Yoga label for nescience ( Yogasiitra 1.6): 

5°This I suppose to be a preliminary statement of the Siddhanta after the reductio 
ad absurdum of the previous line. The term pasutva can be used synonymously with 
mala, for see Kirana 2:19c (quoted in fn. 464 on p. 276 below). 

5°As we will see from the following verse, it is supposed that the potentially all- 
pervading soul must have some impurity delimiting it if karman, which is limited, is to 
act upon it. 

®! This is not a satisfactory interpretation, for it requires that vibhoh function like an 
accusative depending on ranjayitum. Perhaps tadekadesitvat should rather be taken 
as a compound and as belonging to vibhoh: ‘because the all-pervading entity [viz. the 
soul] would be the whole with respect to that [karman, which would be its part].’ 

ez conj. Perhaps emendation to dehah is not strictly necessary, since one could 
render dehasukham with ‘happiness in the body’. The verb gatam could either be 
understood with the instrumental, or we could assume ellipsis of a restatement of the 
subject in the nominative (karma). The translation is of course a tentative interpre- 
tation: I am assuming that allusion is made here to the notion that karman fulfils its 
functions in giving rise to its fruits and is thereby expended, which means that no other 
functions should be attributed to it. We find the same argument in the same context 
in, for instance, Kiranavrtti 2:17.6-9. 

°S] am assuming that this is here used as another synonym of mala, as in Kirana. 
2:19c (quoted in fn. 464 on p. 276 below). 


156 Parakhyatantra 


the power in poison.™ (59) 

(He is] ‘enveloped’ because of his being occluded by that (tatti- 
raskarat) and because of [his qualities] being overpowered by the qual- 
ities of that [impurity]. The bound soul is therefore impure, the resort of 
[impure] qualities that are not adventitious [but not fundamental to his 
being either].°° (60) 

Pratoda spoke: 

[Then] the soul is insentient by its own very nature, void of the property 
of sentiency, for [this sentiency] comes from outside, being produced from 
the ensemble of the body and its senses. (61) 

Prakasa spoke: 

[The fruits of] past action,®° good and bad, are experienced in the body. 
They are of two kinds: situated in another or situated in oneself. [From 
among the second pair] those which are situated in another are not expe- 
rienced.®” (62) 

Those which are situated in oneself are of two kinds: that which is (di- 
rectly] experienceable and then the other, which is other than that.°® Now 
that which is experienceable, characterised as happiness or unhappiness 
(or the like], exists in the body. (63) 

At the time when the body perishes, of what nature is the karman 
that is the cause of that [which we experience]? If it is subtle, then its 


°4 ez conj. For the idea that the power of poison is something independent of the 


substance in which it resides compare Kirana 2:31c—32b. 

®Ser conj. The absence of distinction between voiced and unvoiced and between 
aspirated and unaspirated stops in Tamil pronunciation probably gave rise to the read- 
ings in the transmission of the Sataratnollekhini. These qualities can be described as 
anupadhi because they are inborn and so not adventitious, but they can be removed 
to reveal the essential purity of the soul. 

6 Prakaga’s reply looks at first unconnected with Pratoda’s question about sentiency; 
but Prakaédga’s intention is presumably to reply indirectly by examining another subtle 
potential, the existence of which all accept, namely karman. He then returns (in 1:66 
and 1:69) to the examination of sentiency. 

°7It is possible instead that two mutually exclusive alternatives are proposed in this 
verse, namely that karman is in the soul or in some other thing, and that the second 
alternative is rejected as an impossibility. 

®81t is not clear what this other category is. Could it be karman the fruits of which 
have already been experienced (but cf. 1:82-4 below)? Or are these the two well- 
known categories of prarabdhakarya (= bhogya) and sancita (= abhogya), i.e. karman 
that is to have effect in this life and that which is stored up for future existences? 
Mrgendravidy&pada 8:4a gives a threefold distinction: janakarn dharakam bhogyam. 
Perhaps anyat could refer to what is janakam and dharakam? 


Chapter One 157 


subtlety must be an existence as mere potential. (64) 

What is potentiality [after all]? It has to be existing in subtle form. 
Existing in subtle form is nothing more than potentiality.’ If this past 
action can exist in subtle form at the destruction of the body, then sen- 
tiency too can therefore be held to exist in subtle form [into the next 
incarnation]. [If it were destroyed at the destruction of the body, it could 
not arise again, for] a thing which does not exist cannot arise.” (65-6) 

It is not an effect, because there is no cause. [You might say that] 
everything is causally connected.’”’ (But all] these causes [that make up 
the ensemble of necessary causal factors for a particular effect] are not 
capable of accomplishing their function [of causing] with respect to this 
[consciousness]. (67) 

For that in respect of which they are powerful is [something which has] 
potentiality that existed before. For with respect to all effects action is 
observed when we see (alocya) that there is the nature of agency (kartur 
bhavam) in the things {in which the effects arise]. That is why (yasmat) 
this nature (sa bhavah) has the name Sakti.’ [So] why do you not hold 
that consciousness must exist before that,’ just as [the latent effects of] 
past action {do]? (68-9) 

From the sun-stone arises fire and from the moonstone [arises] water; 
even though [many things have] the property of being stones in common, 


8°The text is oddly repetitious here and has therefore been cruxed. It is suspicious 
that 1:65bc are similar to 1:64d and c and that 1:64d, 65a, and 65b should all seem to 
be saying the same thing. The reason for including so much within the crux marks is 
that it seems to me possible that 1:64 and 1:65 are two alternative versions of the same 
idea, one of them being a secondary modification (unless both contain modifications). 
A scribe of a manuscript in the transmission from which M” descends may at this 
point in the text have been consulting more than one source and coped with a major 
deviation by copying two versions one after the other or by copying one in the margin. 
This sort of conflation was evidently not uncommon among the Grantha manuscripts 
transmitting the Kirana (see, e.g., the apparatus to Kirana 2:1, 2:2d, 2:9cd, 2:23cd, 
4:7cd, 4:8ab, 4:21cd, 6:5a—6b, 6:25cd). 

For discussions of satkaryavada in other Siddhantas see Mrgendravidyapada 9:14- 
21, Matangavidyapada 6:46—-8, Pauskara 4:80-3 and the commentaries thereon. 

"11f this is, as I suppose it to be, the intended meaning, it is loosely expressed. The 
interpretation of this passage is not beyond doubt. Perhaps 67b might be interpreted: 
‘(Otherwise] anything might be the cause of anything’. 

721n this interpretation Saktivacakah is treated as an unnatural bahuvrihi compound: 
‘whose label is Sakti’. The same usage is to be found in 2:48a. 


73; e. before conjunction with the body and senses; see Pratoda’s question in 1:61. 


158 Parakhyatantra 


this [arising of fire or water] does not occur here in those others. (70) 

We require that arising necessarily comes about from that (potential- 
ity] when [other] causal factors [are present]. For without (there really 
being some] potentiality [already present within the soul] (¢aktya rte)’ 
[people would not have] here [in this world] cognition of [particular things 
as being] causes (of particular effects].”° (71) 

Pratoda spoke: 

The nature of the universe is various because of particular transforma- 
tions; but past action is not its cause; it is various by its very nature. (72) 

Prakasa spoke: 

You cannot say that this [universe] has this nature [only], for [we some- 
times see] the reverse [of that nature].’” Even of [any one of] the four 
[visible] elements it cannot be said that we experience [one immutable] 
nature. (73) 

Without [apparent] cause the earth shakes, water (kam) is sometimes 
observed to be hot, fire goes out, sometimes air rises upwards.’® There is 
no [immutable, innate] nature even in the elements. How then will there 
be one [in them] when [they cause] the arising of bodies?’? (74-75b) 


™The point of the image is to underline the importance of Sakti: other stones do 
not have gakti, and so even when they are provided with the stimuli (the sun and the 
moon) which cause the sun-stone and moonstone to produce respectively fire and water, 
they do not do so. The stimulus provided by. the sun is like the stimulus provided by 
the body and instruments of the senses: it achieves nothing if Sakti is not there to be 
stimulated. 

75T assume that this is a rare usage of rte governing the instrumental. Hiatus inside a 
pada is not a common feature of the style of this text, and therefore the hiatus between 
Saktya and rte suggests that in the redactor’s pronunciation (and therefore usage) the 
vocalic r was equivalent to ri or ru. See p. lxxxiii. 

78The cadence here is unmetrical, strictly speaking, but see introduction, p. baxxvi. 

er conj. If instead we retained the transmitted °viparyayah, it could perhaps be 
construed with vaktavyah: ‘One cannot say that this [universe] has [this] nature (or 
that it has] the reverse of that nature.’ 

78 According to Vaisesikas, among others, these elements have innate properties that 
are the reverse of or different from these. For an account of what their expected 
properties are, see, e.g., the YuktidIpika ad Sankhyakarika 38, pp. 225-6, a passage 
which, as WEZLER and MOTEGI! indicate in their edition, is largely parallelled in Vacas- 
patimigra’s Tattvavaigaradi ad Yogasitra 3:44 as well as in the Yogavarttika ad loc. 

©The purport of the first two and a half verses of Prakaéa’s response appears to be 
merely an admonition to the effect that one cannot generalise about the svabhava of 
things. What now follows is the Siddhdnta’s defence of the proposition that karman is 
the cause of variety in the universe. 


Chapter One 159 


Might that cause [of diversity in the universe] be visible (drstam), 
or do you hold that the cause for these things is invisible (adrstam)?°° 
(75cd) 

For creatures endowed with sense and passion, for those with teeth, 
for those that are radiant, for those differing from each other in having 
bodies that are slow, (fast, small, large] and so forth, [for all these var- 
ious creatures] the seen cause [viz. gross elements] is the same;®! [and] 
that [unseen cause] is understood from its multiform effect by means of 
inference. (76—77b) 

When two men of like qualities and character are engaged on (the 
same] service, [only] one of them will attain the fruit [of that act], and so 
that man’s ‘cause’ is the greater.®? Invisible, because it is a subtle cause, 
it is understood because of its connection with [its] effects. (77c-78) 

That cause is labelled ‘past action’ (karmasamjnam) and exists in the 
form of meritorious and bad action (dharmadharmatmakam). Through 
past action the [soul achieves] connection with a body; through past action 
the bound soul experiences the fruits [of his deeds]; and imbued (vasita$ 
ca) by past action he wanders about here [in this material universe] (itah) 
83 deluded by nescience. (79) 

The latent traces called past action are subtle, implanted (ahita) like 
[the root of] a Jalavasa [plant].84 From past action [arises] all these fruits 


8°As Dr. HAAG-BERNEDE has pointed out to me, the Vaigesika explanation for be- 
haviour of the elements that is contrary to expectations is adrsta. See Vaisesikasitra 
5.2.8, 5.2.14 and 5.2.19, and Pragastapadabhasya p. 80, 4360. In our context it is plain 
that the term adrsta is apposite because it is supposed that it means karman in such 
VaiSesika passages. For a discussion of how adrsta might originally have been intended 
in these and other contexts in the Vaisesikastitra, see WEZLER 1983. 

81 er conj. ISAACSON. The text as transmitted seems uninterpretable and with the 
conjectures offered it is still only just conceivable, particularly since the epithets in the 
genitive plural seem oddly random. The toothed creatures are perhaps beasts of prey; 
the radiant ones might be gods (or such creatures as fireflies?). 

82When quoted in the Sataratnollekhini this is prefaced by the following (p. 35): 
svakarmaphalabhuk. svasya karma svakarma dharmadharmatmakam, tasya phalam 
bhunkta iti svakarmaphalabhuk. yugapat sevakrsyadipravrttayor dvayoh purusayor 
ekasya phalasiddher itarasyadarsanac ca. tatha:... 

8Ser conj. ISAACSON (letter of 15.vi.2001). Otherwise we might assume that the 
transmitted text uses cetas declined anomalously as a masculine, for which cf. Siva- 
yogaratna 170 (if the constitution of that text is there correct), or that what was 
intended was vasitam ceto bhramaty ajnanamohitam? 

“This interpretation may well be wrong. One of MONIER-WILLIAMS’ entries (s.v. 
jalavasa) refers the reader to jalamoda, which he defines as “ ‘water-enjoyer,’ the root 


160 Parakhyatantra 


that are experiences of happiness and unhappiness. (80) 

Pratoda spoke: 

But since these [latent retributive effects of] actions are created only by 
an [already] existing body, how can it be the cause of the body, [since] at 
that time [i.e. at the time when, according to you, a body does not exist 
but is about to be produced] this [past action] does not exist, because it 
is impossible. (81) 

Prakasa spoke: 

Since (yatha) the soul is established to be beginningless [and its] existence 
is dependent on action®°—if, on the other hand, it had had a beginning, 
then the undesirable corollary would be entailed that creation would be 
uniform®’— therefore action is established to be beginningless, since trans- 
migration is beginningless. (82) 

As for its being [beginningless] like a stream (pravaharipata yeyam) 
undisrupted (avyucchinna) in existence after existence,®® [what is meant 
is that] an action (asya) is destroyed by another one’s arising; (this is] the 
eternality of action. And when an action is performed, it then stands by 
to be experienced by the soul (asya). The soul is taught to be the entity 
that creates it, the locus of [its fruits] happiness and unhappiness. (83-4). 

Pratoda spoke: 

The power of action does not belong to the soul that resides in the body, 
since actions are definitely (niscitam) performed by the hands and feet 
and such (other instruments of the body]. (85) 

Prakasa spoke: 

The soul is taught to be the agent of that [bodily movement] (tatkarta); 
the power of action is not the body’s, since that [body] is insentient, [and] 


of Andropogon Muricatus”. I imagine from the name that the plant's roots are invisible 
because below water and that it is their invisibility that is the tertium of the comparison 
here. 

85Or perhaps ‘because it is not connected’. 

88 er conj. The transmitted text could perhaps be retained and interpreted in the 
same way. Also possible might be emendation to sapeksah karmani sthitah. 

8’The diversity of incarnations could never have arisen if there had been one ul- 
timate starting point. Cf. Matangavidyapada 6:97cd: vaicitryam jagatah proktam 
svakarmagunabhedatah. Cf. also Kirana 3:7. Ramakantha’s Kiranavrtti ad loc. 
explains: purus&naém hi sarvadé Sarirabhogadivaicitryanyathanupapattya karmanah 
sattvam srstikdle ’pi pasumrgapaksisarisrpasthavaramanusyadijanmavaicitryasruteh. 

88ez conj. ISAACSON (letter of 15.vi.2001). The transmitted apy ucchinna could 
perhaps be retained and interpreted, assuming the api to be bhinnakrama, to mean 
‘even though disrupted in existence after existence’. 


Chapter One 161 


since the power of action is eternal.®9 (86) 

The power of action [is realised only] by [really] existing instruments 
(karanaih sadbhih); nevertheless it is that [power of action] which is of 
principal importance [in achieving an action]. So too people do not praise 
the axe [as the agent] in the cutting down of a tree. (87) 

The soul, therefore, is held to be the agent, [acting] by means of the 
instruments, because he is of principal importance. Even when he is not 
doing something he has the power of action because of his will, [which is 
directed] towards the objects of desire. (88) 

Thus because of the power of the soul’s will there is transformation in 
[its body’s] skin, hands and so forth.°° This [will of the soul] (sa) will be 
commensurate with the degree to which the power of consciousness has 
been manifested (yadrg bhavet ...cidvyaktih) in the particular body [of 
that soul] (yasmin ...pinde). (89) 

The [soul’s}] power of knowledge (jfianam) is limited by the body, 
linked to the performance of his own actions.?! When [the degree of 
revelation is] small, little [of that power of knowledge] is revealed; when 
large, it is established that a large amount [is revealed].°? (90) 


8°The readings of the Sataratnollekhini in the second half of this verse are also 
interpretable: ‘...since that [body] is insentient. Therefore the power of action [resides] 
in the immortal [soul]. And so...’. 

°° er conj. vikaras tvakkaradikah seems the most economical repair possible. 

®!Or perhaps ‘linked to the decrees of his own action’. 

°2This rendering reflects the awkwardness and tautology of the text, but it may 
not be right. Perhaps also possible is the following interpretation: ‘When [the soul’s 
karman is} weak, little [of the power of knowledge] is revealed; when (the karman is] 
strong, a large amount is established (to be revealed].’ 

The verse is read, and so interpreted, differently in the Sataratnollekhinf. 1:90c- 
91b and 1:91c—92b (verses 57 and 56 respectively of the Sataratnasangraha) appear 
embedded in the Sataratnollekhini thus (p.71): atmasakter vibhutve ’pi tadbhanasya 
vyanjakadhinatvat sarvajnatapi nastiti parakhyasitrena darSsayati 

vibhuh san jnanaripo ’pi pradese vetti yena tat 


_—_ eee 


jnanaripah jnanam eva rupam svariipam yasya sah. jnanartipah vibhuh vyapakah 
sann api pradese kaladivyanjakapradege yena karanena taj jneyam vetti janati, tena 
hetum aha—vyavadhananidarsanat. vyavadhane vyanjakarahitasthale anidarsanat 
nidarganabhavat, jnanabhavad ity arthah. 

jnatvam atmano na syat; vyanjakatvavisesad ity aSankam drstantapiirvam vyanjaka- 
taratamyapratipadakena sitrantarena nirasyati 


162 Parakhyatantra 


svalpe 'pi vyanjake svalpam mahan mahati tat sthitam 
yadrk tadrg bhavet tasya pradipas timire yatha 


tat malaruddham caitanyam svalpe vyanjake svalpe sati svalpam svayam abhivyajyate; 
mahati vyanjake mahati sati mahad abhivyajyate. tatra drstantam aha—yatha timire 
andhakare pradipah arthavyanjakapradipah yadrk svalpavyanjako va mahavyanjako 
va bhavet—tatha tasya caitanyasya vyanjakam ity adhyahaérah—tadrk tathavidham 
alpam va mahad va sthitam vyanjakataya sthitam iti. tatha ca kaladiripad alpad 
vyanjakad diksariipasya mahavyanjakatvam. tatha ca natmanah sarvajnatvanupa- 
pattir ity arthah. 

‘Although the power of the soul is all-pervading, since its appearing is dependent on 
something that reveals it, there is no omniscience [for the likes of us in samsara]. This 
(iti) he shows with a siltra of the Parakhya: 


[Although] being all-pervading [and] although of the nature of conscious- 
ness, since [it is only when he is] in a [particular] place [that] he knows 
this [universe of knowables], he is therefore taught to be parviscient, be- 
cause of the absence of vision when in [a state of] separation [from that 
which reveals his consciousness}. 


[The word] jnanaripah [means] he whose nature (svaripam = riipam) is consciousness. 
Although he is of the nature of consciousness and all-pervading (vyapakah = vibhuh), 
because of the fact that he knows (janati = vetti) the knowable [external world] (jneyam 
= tat) when in [a certain] position, (that is to say] in the position in which kala and the 
others [of the evolutes of maya] act as revealers [of his consciousness], the soul (atma 
= sah) is therefore taught to be (pratipaditah = proktah) parviscient (kincijjfah kincij 
darSanat: because there is no vision (nidarsanabhavat = anidarSanat), which is to say 
that there is no knowledge (jnanabhavad ity arthah), when he is in a position separated 
from factors that reveal (his consciousness] (vyanjakarahitasthale = vyavadhane). 

[Objection:] if the soul is [only] parviscient thanks to factors that reveal [his con- 
sciousness], then the soul could not become omniscient even when there is initiation, 
which is [also just] a factor that reveals [his consciousness], there being no difference 
[between it and kala and the others] qua revealer [of consciousness]. This objection He 
refutes, giving an example, with a further sfitra that explains that there is a hierarchy 
of factors that reveal: 


And when the factor that reveals is small, [then the power of consciousness 
is} small; when (the factor is] great, [then the power of consciousness 
is] great. As is [the factor that reveals] for the soul (yadrk... bhavet 
tasya), accordinly is that [factor] established to be [great or small] (tat 
sthitam...tadrk). So [it is with] a lamp in darkness [viz. if it reveals 
rouch, it is a powerful lamp; if it reveals little, it is weak). 


When the factor that reveals is small (vyanjake svalpe sati = svalpe), that power of 
consciousness, which is blocked by impurity, is itself revealed to a small degree; when 
the factor that reveals is great (vyanjake mahati sati = mahati), it is great. He gives 
an example of this: just as [with] a lamp that reveals objects (arthavyanjakapradipah 
= pradipah) in darkness (timire = andhakare); whether it is a revealer of little or of 


Chapter One 163 


As great [as the degree of revelation is the knowledge] of the soul 
(yadrk tadrg bhavet tasya), as with a light in darkness. Although all- 
pervading and of the nature of the power of knowledge (jnanarupah), 
he is taught to be parviscient when he enters [the subtle body]** through 
that by means of which he knows this [world] (tat)™* [and not omniscient], 
because of the absence of the power of knowledge because of that which 
envelops him. (91-92b) 

The linking of the soul, though all-pervading, with a body because 
of action [comes about] through the [intervention of the] Lord. Because 
the soul is without power he does not of himself have the capacity for 
linking himself to [the consequences of his] actions, and so (atah) the 
bound soul, whose power of consciousness is blocked by impurity, has no 
autonomy. (92c-93) 

[And] action is devoid of consciousness and therefore it depends on 
something that links it [to those to whom it must accrue]. The entity 
that links it is the supreme Lord,?® who does it by His will, since he has 
might. The bound soul has been taught to be thus, [its nature] not free 
of original faults. (94) 

The existence of that which in this system is known as [the soul] 
subject to the Lord, [has been established] by argument,” [as has] its 
permanence, its being all-pervading, that its nature is distinct (from that 
of other souls], the existence of something that blocks it, and its nature 


much (svalpavyanjako va mahavyanjako vé = yadrk)—and here we must supply (... ity 
adhyaharah) ‘so too [it is with] the factor that reveals consciousness’—as a factor of 
revelation it is established to be (vyanjakataya sthitam = sthitam) accordingly little 
or great (tathavidham alpam va mahad va = tadrk). And so the nature of initiation 
is that of a greater factor of revelation than the small factors of revelation of kala 
and the others (of the evolutes of maya]. And so the purport [of this passage] is that 
omniscience is not impossible for the soul.’ 

°3Note that the Sataratnollekhini reads pradese and glosses it with kalddivyanjaka- 
pradese. 

Note that the SataratnollekhinI glosses tat with jieyam. 

°®This far-fetched translation is, I think, close to the interpretation implied by the 
commentary given in the Sataratnollekhint. 

It is usually to the tattva called niyati that the function of linking each soul with 
the consequences of his actions is ascribed. Presumably the text is not here denying 
that, but maintaining that the Lord is ultimately responsible for this because it is he 
who enjoins Ananta to stimulate maya from which niyati then evolves. 

*’Note that the text again (see fn. 31 on p.146 above) speaks of establishing the 
soul’s existence by reasoning and does not maintain that its existence is, as Ramakantha 
maintains, svasamvedanasiddha. 


164 Parakhyatantra 


has been established [as being] in accordance with [that expounded in] 
the teachings of the Siddhanta.%® (95) 


Thus the first chapter, elucidating thoughts about the topic of the bound 
soul, in the great tantra called the Supreme. 


°8For raddhanta in this sense, see, e.g., Amarakoga 1.5:4c: samau_ siddhanta- 
raddhantau. Note that this summary verse reiterates the conclusions of the disputes of 
the chapter in the order in which they occurred, just as 1:15 announced them in order 
at the beginning of the chapter, but it compresses the epithets from ajadah through 
raddhantavakyanugatam as adverbial). Note also that the last word, seSah, as well as 
reiterating se§varah in 1:15d, introduces the topic of the next chapter: the Lord. 


PARAKHYATANTRA CHAPTER II 


Prakasa spoke: 

Creator of all, great, empowered, knower of all is the supreme Lord. His 
body is of mantras, His exertions are for the sake of bestowing compassion, 
He is at rest (Santah), He is the awakener of the vidyegas.°° (1) 

All things that are endowed with form, that are made up of parts, 
that have various forms (naénarupaparicchadah), because they are distin- 
guished by! having gross parts must necessarily depend on a sentient 
cause.!°! (2) 


°°The string of epithets in this verse, like that in the fifteenth verse of chapter 1, 
sets the agenda for discussion for the remainder of the chapter. The first, sarvakarta, 
is expanded upon in 2:2-30; mahan might be taken to mean ‘all-pervading’, in which 
case it is expanded upon in 2:23-4 (still inside the discussion of sarvakarta); Saktah is 
expanded upon in 2:32-62b; the Lord’s omniscience is defended and discussed in 2:62- 
78; the Lord’s body and the mantras of which it is composed are discussed in 2:79—96; 
both the topic of the Lord’s bestowing grace, which is referred to here with anugrahot- 
sahah, and that of his being impartially compassionate to all, which is presumably 
what is referred to with the epithet Santah, are treated together in 2:97-117b; the 
Lord's awakening of the Vidyegas is covered in 2:117-128. 

1007 have adoped -sistatvad, assuming that it has the sense of -visistatvad, because it 
has the support of the SataratnollekhinT (quoted in the next footnote); but it is possible 
that M”’s -vistatvad is original and carries the sense of -samavetatvad. 

101The commentary of the Sataratnollekhini on this verse and on 3ab (Sataratna- 
sangraha 15, p.26) reads as follows: miurttah akrtimantah. savayavah avayava- 
sahitah. nanariipaparicchadah nana bahuvidhai rupaih samsthanavisesaih paricchadah 
avaranam yesam te nanaripaparicchadéh. evambhita ye ’rthah prthivyadayah te (em. 
ISAACSON; ete Ed.) paksatvenopattah. murttadini paksavisesanani karyatvasadhane 
pratyekam hetutvasucakataya upattani, na tu badhadinivarakani. tasya pratijnam 
aha—buddhimaddhetupurvakah. buddhir yasyasti sa buddhiman. sa casau hetuS ca 
so ’yam buddhimaddhetuh pirvah purvavadhir yesam te tathavidhaéh. upadanadi- 
gocaraparcksajnanavatkartrka ity arthah. hetupirvakatvasadhanamatrena karyatva- 
siddhav api kartrvisesasiddhivivaksaya buddhimatpadam prayuktam. tatra hetum 
aha—sthulavayavaSistatvad iti. sthulair asmadadibahyendriyagrahyair avayavaih Sista- 
tvat sambaddhatvat. atra cavayavanam apratyaksataya avayavayuktatvahetor asiddhi- 
pariharasicakatayaiva sthilapadam upattam, na tu vyabhicaravarakataya.  atra 
ghatadivad ity udaharanam adhyaharttavyam. nigamanam a&ha—atah saévayavatvad 


166 Parakhyatantra 


Therefore there exists some sentient [cause]. [And that is] proved to 
be the Lord. He is known, according to this system (atra), by inference, 
because of His effects, which we directly experience. (3) 

Pratoda spoke: 

Since we do not perceive that there is a relation of cause and effect between 
them [viz. between God and the world we see], and [because] there is 
therefore nothing [that we know] to have caused this [world], therefore 
you should not proclaim that we have direct experience of [His] effects 
[since we do not know them to be effects]. (4) 

Prakasa spoke: 

You may argue that (va) a relation [of cause and effect] is not perceived, 
but because of the [connection between] effect and cause [that we directly 
experience] in the world (iha), it is clear that when we perceive [what 
must be] an effect, we understand [that there must have been] a cause of 
it that cannot directly be perceived by us (paroksam).!°* Through such 


eva buddhiman samavasthitah pramanasiddhah kaScid ISvarah kartasti. prthivyadinam 
iti Sesah. tatha vayaviye (Sivapurana, Vayaviyasamhita, Parvabhaga 6:4—5):— 


pradhaénaparamanvadi yavat kincid acetanam 

na tat kartr svayam drstam buddhimat kaéranam vina 
jagac ca kartrsapeksam karyam saévayavam yatah 
tasmat karyasya kartrtvam patyur na pasupasayoh 


anena ca Sakartrkatvasadhanena prthivyadinam karyatvam siddham, atah karya- 
tvasadhanasya sulabhatve ’pi sakartrkatvasadhanadvarena tatsadhanam isvarasiddhi- 
nantarlyakataya nirisvaravadanirakaranartham iti. idam ca pancariipopapannatvad 
anvayavyatireky anumanam. tad uktam Srimatpauskare [7:44c—45b] 


paksadharmah sapakse san (em.; sad ed.) vyavrttas ca vipaksatah 
abadho 'satpratipakso vyatirekanvayatmakah. iti. 


Note that the two verses here quoted from the Vayaviyasamhita appear (with variants) 
as though part of the Parakhya when Parakhya 1:2ab is cited both in the Nanavarana- 
vilakkattarumpatavivékam (Vol. 2, p.611) and in the Sivajfanasiddhisvapaksadrstanta- 
sangraha (IFP T.317, pp.981-2), for which see the apparatus to the text. It might 
be supposed then that these texts borrowed from the Sataratnollekhini and somehow 
managed to confuse verses of the root text with those cited in the commentary. But 
those two sources also share another portion of text (patir vifvasya nirmata...) that 
is not transmitted in M” and that does not occur in the above-quoted passage of 
commentary from the Sataratnollekhini. This suggests that all three texts drew on 
one source, and I propose that this source may have been the lost commentary on the 
Parakhya to which Aghorasiva refers in his Kriyakramadyotika (see fn. 2 on p. 138 
above and see introduction p. lviii and following). 

*°2But we could read aparoksam here, taking it with karyam: ‘...when we perceive 
an effect that is not beyond our senses, we understand [that there must have been] a 


Chapter Two 167 


an effect the creator of the effect is known. (5) 

That [which is to be proved can be inferred] not just from effect(s}, 
but is also sometimes [to be] inferred from [some] property of it, and from 
a cause too its effect [can sometimes be inferred], and sometimes [things 
not directly perceptible may be known] through reasoning based upon the 
utterances of scripture (Sabdoktiyuktibhih) .'°% (6) 

By these inferential marks, such as effects, He may be known even 
though He is not directly perceived (adrsto ’pi).1°4 A gross (sthilam!®) 
effect with parts must lead [one to assume] a cause. (7) 

How [do we understand] past actions to be the cause of the body 
though we do not perceive the causal connection? After perceiving vari- 
ous bodies the existence of [the retributive force of] past action is under- 
stood.!° (8) 


cause of it.’ 

1°3This verse might, at least in its first line, be referring specifically to the proving 
of the creator; but I take it to be a general stipulation of the necessary relationship 
between sadhya and sadhana that is to be added to the five formal Jaksanas required for 
a syllogism (see, e.g., Pauskara 7:44c—45b, which is cited in fn. 101 on p. 166 above) to 
tighten the conditions necessary for inference. Cf. Matangavidyapada 3:9: dharmena 
sadhyate dharm! kvacit karyena kaéranam— karanena kvacit karyam kvacid amnaya- 
darganat. Note that this latter verse is quoted by both commentators on the Southern 
Pauskara ad Pauskara 8:42cd (~Parakhya 6:19ab) because they there interpret the text 
to be stating that the relationship between the logical ground and that which it seeks 
to prove necessarily depends on either a causal relationship or on one of inherence. 

Elsewhere (GOODALL 2001a:332) I have suggested that the Parakhya’s statement 
here might ultimately have derived from Dharmakirti’s insistence on the necessity of 
there being avinabhavaniyama, expressed, e.g., in Pramanavarttika 1:31. 

karyakaranabhévad va svabhavad va niyamakat 

avinabhaévaniyamo ’darganan na na darsanat. 
This suggestion was advanced when I was understanding svadharmena as svabhavena, 
which now seems to me most unlikely; it is clear that the parallel (and probably related) 
unit mentioned above that occurs in the Matanga was not so intended, nor was it 
subsequently interpreted in such a fashion. 

104 ez conj. It seems unlikely that the transmitted na drsto ’pi could be used with this 
sense, which appears, however, to be the sense required. 

Ser conj. M*’s siksmam is an unlikely qualifier for karyam; moreover the word 
order is odd if siksmam is to be taken with karanam, nor does it seem necessary that 
an effect with parts must have proceeded from a subtle cause. 

1°°The variousness of experience is often adduced (e.g. in 1:82) as a proof of the force 
of karman on the grounds that nothing else could account for this variousness. Cf. fn. 
87 on p. 160 above. 


168 Parakhyatantra 


This circumstantial inference (arthapattir iyam) is taught to be a valid 
means of knowledge, [but one] by which you can know general facts.°” 
And there is no special difference between inference [as it is narrowly un- 
derstood] and this circumstantial inference (upapattyanumanayoh).!°8 (9) 

If you maintain that (va) there is some distinguishing peculiarity in 
circumstantial inference, then you should say what that [property] is in 
this [view of yours].!°? This [arthapatti] does not apply to particulars 
[since it relates to general truths];!!° [and] when [it is applied to] general 
truths, what it seeks to prove is already proved.!!! (10) 


107 ez conj. ISAACSON. If the transmitted text were retained, it might be rendered: 


‘This is taught to be circumstantial inference, which displays similarity with inference 
[understood in the narrow sense, viz. anumdana].’ Or perhaps ‘This is taught to be 
circumstantial inference, ‘which shows the same things that inference [understood in 
its narrow sense shows’. | 

108 Prakaéa here appears to wish to accept as valid a wide range of inferences, not just 
those in which the connection between the linga and the lingin is amenable to direct 
perception. He could do so by accepting arthapatti as an independent pramana or by 
rejecting it but subsuming it under anumana. But, as we shall see in the next verse, it 
is not certain which he is doing. 

The use of ayam in conjunction with kagcit in 9c may seem odd (and emendation 
to visesah syad might be considered); but, as Dr. ACHARYA has pointed out to me, 
this appears to be an emphatic idiom: cf. the following rhetorically similar example 
from the Tantralokaviveka: asmaddargane tu jnanavattvam antarena na kascid ayam 
niyama ity aha. This introduces Tantraloka 23:llab: Ssripirvasastre na tv esa niyamah 
ko ’pi coditah. 

109For this use of asmin cf. fn. 52 on p. 153 above and see p. lxxx. 

110This half-verse usually appears with anugamabhavah at the end of its first pada: 
‘there is no vyapti of the saédhya by the sadhana when [anumana is] applied to partic- 
ulars’. But see following footnote. 

111Other interpretations are perhaps possible of this problematic half-verse. Until I 
realised it to be an echo of a much quoted Carvaka tag, I had been interpreting it as 
follows: 


If [it has such a] distinguishing peculiarity (visese), then we would not 
accept it; [but] since [it has] the same nature (sAmanye), it would be 
redundant [to count it as an independent means of knowledge] (siddha- 
sadhyata). 


This would fit our particular context, but it is conceivable only if we assume that the 
author of the Pardkhya incorporated it without any understanding of how the unit is 
usually used. It appears elsewhere invariably to be quoted with visese 'nugamabhavah 
(or ’nugamabhavat) as its first pada, with its second pada ending variously in siddha- 
sddhyataé, siddhasédhanam or siddhasadhanat and with or without various different 
versions of a following half-line. This verse, its variants in different quotations and the 


Chapter Two 169 


Therefore [we know that] He must be (sah!!*) the sentient cause of 
this coarse [body of] effect(s that is the universe], the first of whose effects 
is the effect that is earth,!!* by inference based on [a connection that is] 
known from a general principle. (11) 

Pratoda spoke: 

The form of the earth is thus; it was never not thus.!!4 The cause of 


several interpretations that Jayarasi gives it are helpfully presented and discussed by 
FRANCO 1994:397-401. As FRANCO observes (1994:397), its purport ‘seems to be that 
there is no concomitance between the object of inference and the linga, if the former is 
an individual, and if it is a universal, then what has to be proved is already proved’. 

Thus the verse is rather a potent Carvaka attack on anumana. And we find it so used 
in a Saiddhantika work too: see Kumaradeva’s TattvaprakaSatatparyadipika ad verse 
72 (p.108). (In the NareSvarapariksaprakasa ad 2:9-10 we find only the unit samanye 
siddhasadhyata quoted.) Here in the Parakhya, we seem to find it most inappropriately 
used to refute the acceptance of arthapatti as a separate pramana, even though a 
type of anumana that is functionally indistinguishable from it is accepted as a pra- 
mana. Perhaps after all the author of the Parakhya simply echoed this well-known tag 
without intending that the reader should recall its usual use. Perhaps, in other words, 
the alternative translation offered above in this footnote should be accepted, in which 
case Prakasa would be accepting arthapatti as a sub-variety of anumana. 

11267 conj. The transmitted sa makes no sense here, for it has no obvious referent. 
An emphatic syat (‘there must be a sentient cause...’) would be unmetrical. The 
verse is not free of problems: it is conceivable that M”’s karanam should be emended 
to karanah (cf. 3:2b and Kirana 6:1b). 

113The karya in the compound ksitikaryadikasya is redundant, but it gives emphasis 
to the very point that Pratoda next questions: whether the earth is really an effect. 

14This Mimamsaka notion is similarly formulated in a tag that Ramakantha fre- 
quently quotes (in Kiranavrtti 3:12.5, in the Naresvarapariksapraka$a ad 2:1 on p. 115, 
and seven times in the Matangavrtti): na kadacid anidrgam jagat. It is commonplace 
elsewhere too, for see, e.g., Nyayamanjari Vol. 1, p. 491: 


ata eva niriksya durghatam jagato janmavinasadambaram 
na kadacid anidrgam jagat kathitam nitirahasyavedibhih. 


Jayantabhatta incorporates it also into Agamadambara 4:96. But, as Dr. Kei KATAOKA 
has pointed out to me, the tag is older still, for it appears in 2275 and 3114 of Santa- 
raksita’s Tattvasangraha (2275): 


isyate hi jagat sarvam na kadacid anidrgam 
na mahapralayo nama jnayate paramarthikah. 


Its absence in the Slokavarttika suggests the possibility that it may have formed part 
of Kumarila’s lost Brhattika, which may have been a source of a number of discus- 
sions in the Tattvasangraha: as Dr. ISAACSON and Dr. KATAOKA have pointed out to 
me, the problems of determining where we may assume this dependence (observed by 
FRAUWALLNER) are touched on by KELLNER 1997:81-7. 


170 Parakhyatantra 


bodies and such (tanvadeh!!°) is [the retributive force of] past action. 
Why trouble with some artificial theory (matena!!®)? (12) 

Prakasa spoke: 

Whatever entity is coarse is established to be constructed. If, on the other 
hand, you hold that (va) what is coarse need not be constructed, your 
view is without [corroborative] examples. (13) 

If you say that (va) [the universe] is simply by its nature raised and 
low, it being characterised by mountains and such, then in that case [you 
are accepting that] it has parts that are raised and low; are those parts 
[too simply] by nature [so]? (14) 

Would not the [supposed] cause called past action of this perceived 
[universe] [in that case] rather (va) be disproved [i.e. shown to be not a 
cause]? Or would not (va) forests and the like be exactly the same [as 
mountains, viz. simply by nature the way they are], since one could not 
otherwise account for them?!” (15) 

Therefore it is established here that there is this sentient creator of 


118 62 conj. Cf. 2:16b below. M”’s awkard tad vadeh could have been original, in 
which case the pada might translate: ‘Or that cause of [its] beginning might have 
been [the retributive force of] past action.’ Pratoda’s objection here is raised also in 
Kirana 3:12 and in NareSvarapariksa 2:14. All three verses are perhaps conscious echoes 
of Slokavarttika sambandhaksepaparihara 75, which Ramakantha quotes in Kirana- 
vrtti 3:12.51—-2 and in the NareSvarapariksaprakasa ad 2:14: kasyacid dhetumatrasya 
yady adhisth&trtesyate/ karmabhih sarvabhaévanam tatsiddheh siddhasédhanam. ‘If 
one require just any cause to preside (over the creation of the universe, then let this 
role be performed] because that (viz. adhisthatrtva] of all things is established by [the 
retributive force of] past actions. [And in that case, the fault of] proving what is already 
established [vitiates the argument].’ Cf. Abhidharmakoga 4:1a with the avatarika given 
in the bhasya (p. 192) atha yad etat sattvabhajanalokasya bahudha vaicitryam uktam 
tat kena krtam? na khalu kenacid buddhipirvakam krtam. kim tarhi? sattvanam 
karmajam lokavaicitryam. 

116 mendation to sivena might be considered. On the other hand, matena might be 
intended to express the Mimamsaka view that all other doctrines are created whereas 
their own is an eternal given, since it derives from the eternal Veda. 

‘\7The text is quite uncertain to me here. Particularly puzzling is the rhetorical 
force of the two instances of va. I suppose both half-lines to be intended to point 
to absurdities: the first points out that past action cannot have been the cause of a 
beginningless unchanging universe, and the second I| have in a rather strained fashion 
interpreted as pointing to something which we might wish to account for in the same 
way a8 & mountain or valley and yet that we do observe to change, namely a forest. The 
quotation of the second half in the Sivajianasiddhisvapaksadrstantasangraha does not 
help, since it appears to be out of context in a series of lines that are out of sequence: 
see apparatus ad 2:3. 


Chapter Two 171 


our bodies, [worlds] and so forth. And so (tat) [the retributive force of] 
past action is not the causal agent, but something used by that [causal 
agent]. (16) 

[And yet] if that [karman] can be used [and so is in another’s control], 
then its (own) power is not proved,!!® or if it does have power, then should 
not that [power] itself alone [be sufficient cause] (kevala)?!!% (17) 

If (yatha) you [are ready to] posit the power for this [generation of the 
universe] to belong even to something devoid of consciousness, can you 
not accept that the power for this, the agency, belongs to this sentient 
being? (18) 

The activity of individual souls (jrvanam) depends on their own ac- 
tions, [and] it has a [further] cause (sahetuka); and that cause, who is 
called the Lord over action, is known here!” from [His] effect(s]. (19) 

Pratoda spoke: 

Does this effect [that is the universe] come about at a particular point in 
time or [all] at once in creation (sthitau), according to your system (iha)? 
Because [God is supposed to be] infinite [in time], no sequence [in the 
arising of effects should be] seen;!2! and also if [you maintain that effects 


118 er conj. But perhaps one could instead try tac ced yojayituh Saktis tacchaktir na 
pramanita, interpreting ‘(Now] if that is the power of the one who takes control of it, 
then the power of that [karman]) is not proven’. 

119 er conj. Perhaps also conceivable would be to emend (as suggested by Dr. Kei 
KATAOKA) to saivasman na tu kevalé: ‘then it (must come] from Siva (asmat), it 
cannot alone (be sufficient cause] (na tu kevala)’. 

12°For this use of asmin see p.lxxx. I find no Saiva parallel for the ' expression 
karmeSvara; indeed karman is an inexorable force over which the Lord should have 
no control; the Lord’s emanation of the universe is an elaborate mechanism for allow- 
ing souls to work off their own karman without direct interference from the Lord. And 
yet it is accepted that the Lord in some sense oversees karman, and can and does in- 
terfere in a soul’s karmic deserts when a blockage occurs (karmasamya) caused by two 
simultaneously ripened and equally powerful past actions (this is the theme of Kirana 
5; see particularly Kiranavrtti ad 5:12cd) and also in periods of resorption of the uni- 
verse (pralaya), when he causes the soul’s karman to ripen: see, e.g., the much quoted 
final verse of Mrgendravidydpada 4, of which the first half read (4:15ab) svdpe 'py ste 
bodhayan bodhayogyan rodhyan rundhan pacayan karmikarma. ‘Even in a period of 
resorption of the universe he remains awakening those deserving of awakening, blocking 
those to be blocked, ripening the (retributive force of] the past actions of those who 
have (still to experience the fruits of] past actions...’. Cf. also the Bhattdraka’s speech 
on p.67 of the Agamadambara (Act 3, before verse 31): ...itifvara eva bhagavdms 
tasya yavatah karmaraSer adhisthéta niinam esitavyah... 

121 es conj. Pratoda’s objection may not have been correctly repaired and interpreted, 


172 Parakhyatantra 


are generated] all at once, it is impossible [since it contradicts what we 
observe]. (20) 

Prakasa spoke: 

That a creator creates effects is known by the arising of the effects. An 
effect does not arise without a cause. That is my certain opinion.!?? (21) 

[Now] the arising of effects is directly perceived [in ordinary life] to 
come about both [sometimes] all at once and [sometimes] gradually. Com- 
posite bodies may arise, as also may a single [simple] one. (22) 

Therefore [His] being the creator of effects [is possible] simultaneously 
and gradually. At all times and everywhere [all things that arise] in this 
great area of the earth [are] effects. (23) 

This [earth is] great and born of a cause, {and,] since to be great is to 
be all-pervading, therefore, because of its being all-pervading, the cause 
[too] is proven to pervade all [effects], since all effects arise when it is 
present.!75 (24-5b) 


but it is clear that he is referring to the Sautrantika and post-Sautrantika Buddhist 
position that only things that have efficacity to produce effects (arthakriyakaritva) 
are ultimately real, and that things that have efficacity are necessarily momentary 
(ksanika). Whatever is alleged not to be ksanika and yet to have arthakriyakaritva 
should give rise to its effects either immediately or at some particular point in time, and 
both positions are, according to the Buddhist, impossible. If the Lord is the necessary 
and sufficient cause of everything, then everything should come into being simultane- 
ously with him, and yet we observe that many entities come into being at different 
particular times: therefore we can conclude that effects arise each out of their own 
causal sequence. See YaSomitra’s Sphutartha ad Abhidharmakoga 2:64d (neSvaradeh 
kramadibhih) and bhasya (pointed out to me by Dr. Kei KATAOKA): neSvarader bhava 
jayante. kasmat? krama&dibhih. adigrahanena deSakaladinam grahanam. atha va 
anekakdranatvanavasthaéprasangad anyapurusakalanihnavadinam grahanam. yadi hy 
ekam eveti vistarah. yadi hy ekam eva karanam iSvarah sy&t mahadevo va vasu- 
devo va anyad va purusadi vety arthah. yugapat sarvena jagaté bhavitavyam 
karanasya sadbhavat. na hy etad istam—sati karane karyam na bhavatiti. dr§yate 
ca bh&v4n4m kalaladinam ankuradinam ca kramasambhavah. tasmat svakarana- 
paramparanirvrtta iti ne$varadi karanam iti gamyate. Among Saiddhantika works, 
the Buddhist assertion that arthakriyakarita is only possible of momentary things is 
attacked, for example, by Ramakantha in NareSvarapariksaéprakasa pp.52-6 and by 
Nardyanakantha in the Mrgendravrtti on vidyapada 2:24—5b. 

‘22This is a line-filling cliché that occurs verbatim as the last pada in the Kashmirian 
text of Matangavidyapada 17:189 (BHATT has accepted evam in place of iti), as well 
as fifteen times in the critical edition of the Mahabharata (e.g. 5.177:19d, 5.186:26d, 
etc.; it is also to be found in the expunged ‘additional’ passages), once in the early 
Skandapurana (15:36b), in Saurapurana 3:34d, and doubtless frequently in other texts. 

123We could accept the reading of the Sataratnollekhini, sannidhanena yasyasmin, 


Chapter Two 173 


There is power observed in a magnet)?‘ even though it is devoid of 


the instruments of the senses; so too the Lord has innate power to create 
all effects. (25c—26b) 

[But] this [case of the magnet] is merely an example. The comparison 
lies [just] in (their both] being agents [without the instruments of the 
senses]. Since this [comparison] has been taught to consist only in that 
[viz. in their both being agents], He cannot [be argued to] have all the 
qualities [of the magnet].!2° Since they are absent, there is no logical 


and interpret ‘...in the proximity of whom all effects arise, according to this system 
(asmin)’/ But we have retained instead sannidhane yatas tasmin, which could be in- 
terpreted more literally (‘...since in that presence (viz. of Him] all effects arise’); but I 
suspect it to be an aijSa anacolouthic usage comparable to that in 14:6le and intended 
to be equivalent in sense to yatas tasmin sannihite sati. . 

Note that when this passage (25-6b) is quoted by Trilocanasgiva in his Siddhanta- 
samuccaya (IFP MS T. 284, p.138, IFP MS T. 206, p.68, and GOML MS R 14394, 
p.12), he follows it by quoting Slokavarttika codanasitra 138: anye 'py ahuh:— 
sanniddhyamatratas tasya pumsaS cintamaner iva/ nissaranti yathakamam kudyadi- 
bhyo ’pi deSan4 iti. (I omit the variants of the MSS here.) This may be taken to imply 
a slightly different interpretation of our passage: instead of translating ‘...all effects 
arise’, we could then interpret ‘...all effects are possible’. Taken out of context, the 
verse might appear to be mocking at an impossibility: ‘Merely because of the proximity 
of this person, teachings [would] stream forth at his desire even from walls and the like, 
as from a wish-fulfilling gem.’ I therefore expressed surprise (GOODALL 1998:286, fn. 
381) at Ramakantha’s quoting it as a serious statement of his own positition in the 
Kiranavrtti ad 3:19; but Dr. ISAACSON has since observed to me (letter of 11.iii.2001) 
that the verse is frequently used in this way among Buddhist authors, and that he is 
therefore of the opinion that it is neither mocking nor pointing up a prasanga in the 
Slokavarttika, but that it is rather a quotation (or paraphrase) of an originally Buddhist 
formulation. He has pointed out its quotation in *Tripitakamala’s unpublished * Naya- 
trayapradipa, in the Amrtakanikoddyotanibandha of Vibhiticandra, a sub-commentary 
on the Aryamanjusrindmasaigiti (p. 128) and in Haribhadra’s Abhisamaydlankaraéloka 
(p.992), in *Dharmendra’s *Tattvasarasangraha and in *Thagana’s commentary on 
RatnakaraSanti’s Hevajrasahajasadyoga (the first and last two of which survive only in 
Tibetan translation). 

124The same example is given in Kirana 3:11cd and, in a different context, is alluded 
to in Matangavidyaépada 6:38. 

125Prakaga is here anticipating an opponent who might try to prove the insentience 
of the Lord. It is conceivable therefore that the second half of the verse could be taken 
as the opponent asserting that the argument of the Siddhanta does not work. The 
structure of the passage would then be as follows: a statement of the Siddhanta to the 
effect that the example cannot be used to prove the insentiency of the Lord in 26c—-27b; 
an opponent’s rejection of the Siddhanta position as bad logic in 27cd; and a rejoinder of 
the Siddhanta, in 28, to the effect that the opponent’s stand would entail the undesired 
consequence that all proof by inference of this kind would be inadmissible. 


174 Parakhyatantra 


ground [in the paksa, viz. in Siva]; [and] the subject of an inference should 
not lack a logical ground. (26c-27) 

And thus this proof is destroyed, and so too that which it was to prove. 
When the means of proof is not proved, then, according to this [system] 
(asmin'?®) there is no proof by that [means of proof] (tatprasiddhih) of 
that which is to be proved (prameyaga).'2’ (28) 

The instigating cause is called the ‘lord’; that which is the auxiliary 
cause is something seen (such as the stick, wheel, etc.]; that which is the 
material cause is subtle (matter].!2° (29abc) 


126For this use of asmin see p. 153. 

127For the usage of -ga in the Parakhya, see p.lxxxi above. The pronoun in tatpra- 
siddhih might be considered suspect by some, in which case satprasiddhih might be con- 
sidered as a possible emendation. By reading two instrumentals (pramanena sthitena) 
one could arrive at a different interpretation of the second half, but with the same 
purport: ‘In this [system] the proving of that which is to be proved [is achieved only] 
by a means of proof that holds [good].’ 

128This verse appears in the Sataratnasangraha as verse 15, and is introduced in the 
SataratnollekhinT as follows (p. 24): evambhutasya kartur ifvarasya prapancam prati 
nimittatvam upadanatvam casti, abhinnanimittopadanatvangikarad iti kecid vadanti. 
tan nirakartum sarvasyapi karyasya prthaktaya kaéranatrayasadbhavam parakhya- 
sutrena dargayati. ‘Some opine that such a creator God is both the instigating and the 
material cause with respect to the diversity (that is creation], since they accept [the 
possibility of an) undivided instigating and material cause. In order to refute them, he 
shows, with a sitra of the Parakhya, that there must exist three separate causes for 
each and every effect.’ 

The Sataratnollekhini then comments on the reading tad yad drstam (which I re- 
gard as being smoother than, but not essentially different from the accepted read- 
ing), but also on the variant yad adrstam. The commentary is as follows (pp. 24- 
5): Ifvarakhyam jnanakriyasaktirupaisvaryena ISvara ity akhya yasya tad ifvarakhyam 
yan nimittam nimittakaranam, yac ca drstam dandacakradi sahakaranam sahakari- 
karanam, yac ca siksmam mrdadi upadanakaranam, tat tritayam api sarvakaryesu 
samhitam sambaddham. tatha ca karanatrayam sarvakaryesu samhitam ity etaduttara- 
vacanena sarvakaryasya prthaktaya karanatrayavyaptipratipadanena prapancasyapi 
karyasya prthak karanatrayavasyakataya abhinnanimittopadanatvam nirastam. 

nanu Urnanaébhijantor litatantum prati nimittatvam upadanatvam ca drstam iti cet. 
na, tatrapi tadasyagatalalaya eva tatra upadanatvat. kim ca ifvarasyopadanatve tasya 
Pparinaémitvam acidripatvam ca prasajyate. tadupddeyasya sarvasya prapancasyapi 
cidripatvapattif ca. ata eva tatsamavayisakter api nopadanatvam.  cidvivarta- 
tvangikare jagadasatyatapattih. na cestapattih, sarvapramanasiddhasya jagato 'pah- 
notum aSakyatvat. tad uktam pauskare (Pauskara 2:4c—5, 6cd.) 

nasti éaktir upadanam cidripatvad yatha givah 
parinamo 'citah proktas cetanasya na yujyate 
cito vivarta evoktas tathatve karyaSilnyata 


Chapter Two 175 


sarvapramanasamsiddham cidvivartah katham jagat 


atra ca prapancasya Tévaro nimittakaranam; Saktayah sahakarikaranam; bindur 
upadanakaranam. yathatraiva (Parakhya 6:6cd.) 


nimittam I§varas tesam upédanam sa bindurat 
anyatra 


tapane didhitis candre candrikausnyam ivanale 
samaveta sive Saktih karanam sahakaranam 
svaSakti§ cefvaro maya mrccakrakakulalavat 


tatrapi Suddhe ’dhvani Sivasya nimittatvam bindor upadanatvam. aSuddhe 'dhvani tu 
anantegasya nimittatvam mayaya upadanatvam veditavyam. tathaé ca kirane (Kirana 
2:26cd.) 


Suddhe ‘dhvani Sivah karta prokto 'nanto ’site prabhuh 


$uddhe ‘dhvaniti Suddhasuddhayor bindumayayoh «na» Suddhasuddhakarya- 
vyatyasakaranatvam ucitam. uktam Sripauskare (Pauskara 6:7ab.) 


mayépi natropadanam mohakatvat svatejasa 


atra Suddhe ‘dhvanity arthah. na ca médyakalakarmadinam eva jagannimitta- 
tvam, neSvarasyeti vacyam, tesam acetananam cetanapreranam vina karyakaraka- 
tvanupapattya tatprerakacetanavasyambhave sati asmadadinam niruddhadrkkriyataya 
tatprerakatvabhavena sarvajnasya sarvakartur iSvarasyaiva tatsambhavena sakalapra- 
pancam prati tasyaiva nimittakaranatvaucityat. 

nimittam lis§varakhyam yad adrstam sahakaranam iti pathe adrstasabdavacya- 
karmanah sahakarikaranatvam uktam. yathatrait{ varaneyatpatale (Parakhya 6:6c-7b.) 


nimittam T§varas tesam upadanam sa bindurat 

orkarma sahakari syat karyam etat trihetukam 
tasmat prapancakaryasya nimittadikaranatrayaripatvam isvaraditrayasyeti sarvair ab- 
hyupeyam iti. 

‘Iévarakhyam [means] that whose name is Isvara because of the sovereignty he pos- 
sesses in the form of powers of knowledge and action is the instigating cause (nimitta- 
karanam = nimittam); that which is seen, such as the stick, the wheel and so forth 
[in the case of the creation of a pot], is the auxiliary cause (sahakarikaranam = saha- 
karanam); that which is subtle, i.e. the clay and so forth, is the material cause. This 
group of three is connected (sambaddham = samhitam) with all effects. And by the 
[immediately] following teaching that this group of three causes is connected with all 
effects, [a teaching] which explains that every effect is invariably concomitant with [each 
of] the three causes separately, since the effect that is creation too must [therefore] nec- 
essarily be connected with the three causes separately, its having a single instigating 
and material cause is refuted. 

‘If you object that we observe that a spider is both the instigating and the material 
cause with respect to the threads of his web, [we reply that this is] not [so], since 
even in this [case there is a separate material cause:] the saliva in its mouth is the 
material cause of those [threads]. Moreover, if the Lord were a material cause, it would 
be entailed that He would be subject to transformation and [thus] insentient. And it 


176 Parakhyatantra 


would follow that all creation, being produced out of Him (tadupadeyasya), would be 
sentient. And for the same reason the power that inheres in Him can also not be the 
material cause. [Even] if you accept (the position] that [the universe is no more than] an 
apparent transformation of consciousness, then it would be entailed that the universe 
would not be real. And this would not be a desirable consequence, since one cannot 
refute the universe, whose existence is proved by every means of valid knowledge. This 
is taught in the Pauskara: 


[His] power is not the material cause, since it is sentient, like Siva. Trans- 
formation is taught to be possible of an insentient entity, it is not possible 
of a sentient one. If [you] state that there is no more than an apparent 
transformation of consciousness, then if that is so, the effects would be 
unreal. How can the universe, whose existence is proved by every means 
of valid knowledge, be (no more than] an apparent transformation of con- 
sciousness? 


‘And in this case (too, viz. that of sonic creation, which is the subject of the above 
quoted passage of the Pauskara], the Lord is the instigating cause of [sonic] creation; 
His powers are the auxiliary cause; bindu is the material cause. Just as is the case in 
this same [text, viz. the Parakhya, which is the source of the sitra being commented 
upon]: 


The instigating cause of these [phonemes] is the Lord; the material cause 
is great bindu. 


‘(And] elsewhere (too] 


Like the rays in the sun, moonlight in the moon, heat in fire, power 
inheres in Siva; it is the auxiliary cause. The Lord, His power and maya 
[are respectively instigating, auxiliary and material causes] like the potter, 
the wheel and the clay. 


‘And in that place [too] Siva is the instigating cause in the pure universe (and] bindu 
is its material cause. But in the impure universe one should understand that Ananta 
is the instigating cause and maya is the material cause. So it is in the Kirana: 


In the pure path Siva is the creator; Ananta is taught to be the lord in 
the impure. 


‘With [the expression] “in the pure path” (what is meant is that] it is not appropriate 
that bindu and maya, which are [respectively] pure and impure, be the cause of the 
reverse effects of purity and impurity. This is taught in the venerable Pauskara: 


And maya is not the material cause here, because she deludes by her 
power. 


‘(The word] “here” means “in the pure universe”. And you cannot argue that maya, or 
time, or karman or some other such [factor] can by themselves be the instigating cause of 
the universe rather than the Lord, since these, being insentient, cannot produce effects 
without being impelled to do so by a sentient agent, and because, it being indispensable 
that there should be some sentient agent to impel them, and since the likes of us cannot 
impel them on the grounds that our powers of knowledge and action are blocked and 
because it is therefore only the Lord, who is omniscient and omnipotent, for whom that 


Chapter Two 177 


This triad of causes is connected with all effects and can therefore be 


is possible, it is appropriate for Him alone to be the instigating agent with respect to 
all creation. 

‘In the (other transmitted] reading, “The instigating cause is called the ‘lord’; that 
which is the auxiliary cause is unseen”, it is stated that karman, which is expressed 
by the word ‘unseen’, is the auxiliary cause. Just as [we find] in this same text in the 
ft... fchapter: 


The instigating cause of them is the Lord; the material cause is the great 
bindu; souls’ karman is the auxiliary cause. This effect has three causes. 


‘And so all must accept that the three beginning with isvara are the three causes, 
beginning with the instigating cause, with respect to the effect that is the universe.’ 

If one were to accept the alternative reading suggested by the Sataratnollekhint (yad 
adrstam), then one might interpret the verse thus: ‘The instigating cause is the Lord; 
that which is an auxiliary cause is the unseen [retributive power of past actions]; that 
which is the material cause is subtle [matter], involved in all effects.’ This is (essentially) 
the way AghoraSiva quotes our passage in his Mrgendravrttidipika ad 8:3 (isavidyape- 
ksitvat sahakari tad ucyate/ karma vyaparajanyatvad adrstam siksmabhavatah), the 
subject of which is karman. One problem with this reading is that the passage then 
appears no longer to be a general statement about all effects, but rather to be one 
that is only about non-man-made ‘effects’ which are produced by God (which would 
mean that the -akhya in ifvarakhyam would be given less significance). Aghorasiva 
introduces his quotation thus: ...samastadehadikarye kartrsahakaryupadanalaksanam 
karanatrayam ghatadav ivanumiyate. na tv eko janakah; api tu ghatadidrstantasa- 
tvat(?) kartradisamagry eva karyajanika. 

But it seems to me probable that the redactor of the Parakhya indeed originally 
intended this unit as the Sataratnollekhinf first interprets it (see however the following 
verse and annotation), that is as a general statement about the arising of effects, 
and that he intended to make the point that even a craftsman, such as a potter, is 
‘omniscient’ with regard to his craft. This idea, which recurs in 2:63, is an answer to 
the objection raised in Slokavarttika sambandhaksepaparihara 79-80 that if the Lord’s 
creativity is to be compared with the potter’s, then the Lord should be perishable and 
have other such undesirable qualities of the potter. Ramakantha too deals with this 
objection (citing Kumarila’s words), in his Kiranavrtti ad 3:12 (GOODALL, 1998:73, 
276-7). Here in the Parakhya Kumiarila’s objection has been raised after using the 
example of the magnet in 25c—26b. 

The Matanga also contains an extremely problematic general statement (perhaps 
related to Netratantra 21:50c-51b) about there being three causes (vidyapada 6:99c— 
100b): 


nimittakaranam tv Ifo hy upadanam tu Saktayah 
samavayi tatha maya karyam etaj jagat sada. 
In his Matangavrtti ad loc. Ramakantha interprets upadanam to mean sahakarikarana 


and samavayi to mean the upadana, but not, Ramakantha points out, as Nalyayikas 
conceive it. 


178 Parakhyatantra 


inferred for every effect. And}?9 since one [alone] cannot [alone] generate 


[the universe], the whole group (samagri) must be what generates it.!%° 
And so the instigating cause [of the universe] is the creator, the supreme 
Lord. (29d-30) 

Pratoda spoke: 
The creators we see in the world who bring about effects do not do so 
without [using] instruments.!*! And instruments used to accomplish ef- 
fects are seen to be distinct [from the creator who uses them].!°? (31) 

Prakasa spoke: 
His being the cause has been established above. A creator cannot [be 
a creator] without instrument(s]; [but] a creator’s bringing about effects 
is established [to be possible] (sthita!s*) also by means of an instrument 
that is not separate [from himself]. (32) 

Just as the fierce sun with its rays is the agent that [by rising and 
setting] opens and closes a group of lotusses and of water-lilies, {and] it is 


12°The ca here may be an oddly placed sentence-connecting particle; but it could 
arguably be left untranslated on the grounds that its only purpose may be to yield a 
pathya. 

3°This answers Pratoda’s suggestion in 2:12 that karman might alone be a sufficient 
cause. This is problematic, however, since I am assuming that karman would be the 
auxiliary cause in this case, and yet it is definitely not drsta (as the sahakarikarana 
should be according to the reading accepted in the previous verse). It is possible that 
this consideration might have led to the text being modified in the previous verse (to 
yad adrstam). This too is no solution, as mentioned above, since it does not fit all 
instances of auxiliary cause. It does not even fit 6:6 particularly convincingly, since 
there the sense of nrkarma is more likely to be ‘the human effort [of enunciation]’ than 
‘(the retributive force of] men’s [past] actions’. 

131 ex conj. Cf. Kirana 3:9cd vaikaranyad amirtatvat kartrtvam yujyate katham and 
Slokavarttika sambandhaksepaparihara 50cd, which is quoted by Ramakantha ad loc.: 
na ca nihsadhanah karta kaScit srjati kincana. In further defence of this emendation it 
may be observed that forms of karana and karana are very frequently confused in South 
Indian manuscripts (and probably in other manuscript traditions too). To reformulate 
this in stronger terms, when we have a number of South Indian manuscripts of a given 
text, then we will find that in many places where either karana or karana occurs, the 
other will also be transmitted by one or more of the sources. The sceptical may consult, 
for example, Kiranavgtti 1:13.38, 1:15.50, 1:17.12-15 (4 instances), 2:5.1-2, 2:14.4-5, 
2:19.29, 2:25.7 and the apparatus ad loc. 

2This is to anticipate the answer that Prakaéa in fact returns, namely that the 
Lord contains His own instruments. Cf. Slokavarttika sambandhaksepaparihara 51: 
nadharena vind srstir Urnanabher apisyate/ praninam bhaksanac capi tasya Jala pravar- 
tate. 

133 er conj. Perhaps supplying some weaker filler, such as tv iha, would do as well. 


Chapter Two 179 


not through instruments separate from itself that he is established [to be 
an agent].!94 (33) 

Just as the sun (tasya) of its very nature has the power of action with 
respect to its tasks (tatkriyasthitam), so too the Lord (tasya) has his own 
capacity:!5 [the power of] action (kriya). And this is established to be 
that which brings about effects. (34) 

It is known by the arising of effects: since an effect cannot come 
about devoid of instruments (that produced it], the instrument for this 
(creation of the universe] is what is called His ‘{power of] action’, (His] 
‘power’.138 (35) 

You may object (cet): how can this power known as ‘action’, which we 
cannot see, be understood to exist? But tell me then plainly: how do you 
understand the power of the faculty of your eye (tvakcaksusah)?!5" (36) 

Not otherwise could there be the grasping of large external objects!¥8 
by [this] tiny (svalpasya) [eye]. It is for this reason, then, that [we know 

134 er conj. I considered accepting Dr. ACHARYA’s suggestion to emend to ravi§ 
candrah (‘Just as the sun and the moon with their rays are [respectively] the agents that 
[by rising and setting] open and close a group of lotusses and of water-lilies...'); but 
it is more likely that the transmitted khanthah is or conceals a word further qualifying 
the sun, since, although it is a convention in poetry that the moon opens water-lilies, 
one agent both of opening lotusses and of closing water-lilies seems here more likely to 
have been intended. Cf. Matangavidyapada 6:100c—-101b: 

yatharkarasmayo dipta nirapeksas tapanti hi 
vikasakuncane drste kumudesv ambujesu ca. 


One could consider emending otherwise, for instance, to ravikhagah (a na-vipula] ‘the 
planet that is the sun’, to ravih khetah, or, as Dr. ISAACSON has suggested, to ravih 
khasthah. 

'35Emendation to svasamarthyat (parallel to svabhavena above) might be considered. 

136 briyakhyaSakti- would be smoother, but it is unmetrical. Cf. 6:31b, in which the 
same metrical problem is similarly avoided. The Kirana identifies the Lord’s instrument 
as his desire (3:1lab): icchaiva karanam tasya yatha sadyogino mata. 

137 mendations to tvakcaksusah and to tvakcaksusoh were also considered. The sec- 
ond possibility, involving a dual, is unlikely, since, in the light of the next verse, we 
expect really only the faculty of sight to be here referred to. In considering the first 
possibility, a suggestion of Dr. ACHARYA, I was supposing that tvakcaksuh might be 
intended as a synonym of carmacaksuh, ‘the physical eye’. But usages of this expres- 
sion (e.g., Haracaritacintamani 4:79b and Nyayamanijari, vol. 1, p.271, line 1.) are 
of a bahuvrihi compound with the sense ‘whose eyes are of the flesh’ and they are in 
contexts where a contrast with yogic vision is stressed. 

138 arthagraho ... vipulah literally means ‘large grasping of objects’, but I assume 
that I have conveyed what is intended. 


180 Parakhyatantra 


that it has] this power that is not amenable to the senses, because of 
inference (upapatteh). (37) 

So too, I maintain, there is a power that is not amenable to the senses 
that resides in the creator. And (api) this is established in the Saiva 
Siddhanta (iha) to be the power of the unseen agent of this [universe that 
generates] effects.}%9 (38) 

And this ‘power of action’ can be inferred by us to exist as residing 
in the Cause. By this He creates His effects: bodies, faculties of sense, 
worlds, etc.!4° (39) 

Because He is empowered (Saktatvat) He creates the universe of 
tattvas (tattvikam sargam), together with the bodies [in them], [and] 
the universe of worlds (bhauvanam (sargam]) that those [bodies] use 
to reside in, radiant with its various composition, [and] the universe of 
phonemes whose parts are mantras and that gives rise to many and vari- 
ous fruits!4! (40-41b) 

The power by which He creates is, according to this system (iha), one; 
it is perceived as though separated [into many powers]. Its division is the 
result of the variety of its functions; it is not division at the level of the 
highest reality. And so His division taught in scripture is proclaimed to 
be one that relates to His powers.!4? (41c—42) 

This division of His functions is a division that relates to His pow- 
ers: Vama, Jyestha, Raudri, Kal, and Kalakira,'43 Balavikarana, Pra- 


139°Qr perhaps: ‘Therefore (tat) a power (responsible for the generation] of effects is 
established to exist in this universe (iha), even though [its] agent is unseen.’ 

140This triad in this order is commonly used to indicate the totality of creation. Cf., 
e.g., Kiranavrtti 3:8.7: ...tanukaranabhuvanatmanah pravahandaditvena...; Kirana- 
vrtti 3:9.8; 3:12.2. 

141 Here the text appears to be making use of a Sankhya classification of groups of 
creation (bhitasarga, tattvasarga, bhavasarga) extended by Saivas by the addition of a 
bhuvanasarga (and sometimes also of pratyayasarga), for which see GOODALL 1998:213, 
fn. 165; but observe that the text actually only mentions the sargas of tattvas and of 
bhuvanas and adds to these a varna-sarga. 

42Cf, Kirana 3:13: proktah sa niskalah sthilas tatha sakalaniskalah/ igah sadaSivah 
Santah krtyabhedad vibhidyate. One could consider emending sakto to bhakto (cf. 
2:102c), in order to obviate repetion in the next line, but on the other hand the ex- 
pression in the next line may be intended as an explanation of the expression Saktah. 

43The exact form of this name is uncertain, but it is not impossible that 2:52 is 
intended to support the form chosen, and that the element vi has here been omitted 
to give the required metrical cadence. The following names, however, have, if the text 
is correct, not been modified to suit the metre; but this too is not impossible, for they 
do not fall in the cadence of an even pada, whose metrical pattern is least likely to 


Chapter Two 181 


be violated. In the listing to be found in the Devakottai edition (=Ep) of the Kirana 
too (14:24-5b) the name BalavikaranT yields an unmetrical odd pada, and even an 
unmetrical even pada is conceded to fit in Kalavikarani: vama jyestha ca raudri ca kali 
kalavikarani/ balavikarani caiva balapramathiniti ca/ damani sarvabhutanam navama 
ca manonmani. But it should be observed that Ep’s 14:24-5b are not likely to be 
original. Ep’s 14:24—-5 are omitted in a number of sources, and this might seem to be 
the result of eyeskip, since Ep’s 14:24a and 14:26a are identical; but the Nepalese MSS 
omit only 14:24-25b and reveal that the text was probably originally intended to give 
a list of six powers in 14:25cd, which, when added to Vama, Jyestha, and Raudri listed 
in 14:26a, make up its quite different list of nine. Kirana 14:25cd is rather difficult to 
constitute, partly because it has been omitted in most sources, and so a number of the 
names are uncertain; in the following reconstruction I have produced a half-line the 
same as Malinivijayottara 8:65cd except for the names of the first and fourth saktis, 
for the first of which I have given the form of the name as it appears in Tantraloka 
15:306a: 


vibhvi jnani kriya vancha vagisi jvalinT tatha 

e vibhvi } conj. (cf. Tantraloka 15:306); vibhva N,; vibhur D’ Ep Malini- 
vijayottara e jnani) EpMéalinivijayottara; jia “= N,; jnana D’ 
e vancha ] conj.; vaca N,D’Ep; ceccha Malinivijayottara e vagisi | 
Malinivijayottara; vasikhi N,D’*‘; sikhint D’°; nabhest Ep 


Note, however, that the Parakhya’s list of nine concords with the list of nine Rudras 
iven, e.g., in Kirana 8:131-2b (which, however, in Ep appears, as here, as a list of 
aktis rather than of Rudras). And note that other texts know both groups of nine 

Saktis: see, e.g., Malinivijayottara 8:63-6 (where too metrical rules must be flouted to 

incorporate our list) and Tantraloka 8:338c-339b and 15:305-6 (Abhinavagupta resorts 

to arya to obviate metrical problems). 

The names of the Parakhya’s list are evidently derived from elements of the Vedic 
VAMADEVA mantra, the second of the five brahmamantras that appears in Tait- 
tiriyaranyaka, prapathaka 10 (6 in the Mysore edition with Bhattabhaskaramiéra’s 
commentary), anuvaékas 43-7. (The Tuaittiriyaranyaka may not be the source from 
which they entered the Pasupata and Saiva cults.) The VAMADEVA mantra is usually 
divided into thirteen kalas in the Saiva Siddhanta (see, e.g., Kirana 62:4c-7b, Raurava- 
sitrasangraha 6:2-3 and 6c—7, Raurava ‘kriyaépada’ 2); but the extraction of nine Saktis 
from it is, as we have seen above, also to be found in the Kirana and elsewhere, e.g. in the 
Somagambhupaddhati (BRUNNER 1963:166-71), and became widespread enough to ap- 
pear in (Rajendra Lala Mitra’s version of) “Sayana’s” commentary ad Taittiriyaranyaka 
10:43 (the Anandasrama Press edition of Sayana’s commentary thereon, for which more 
MSS were used, appears to be quite unrelated). The functions of the first three of the 
list are discussed, quoting part of this passage of the Parakhya, by GOODALL, 1998:329— 
30, fn. 491. Dr. ISAACSON has pointed out to me that in the following nirvacanas of 
the names, wherever two nirvacanas are given, the first relates to that Sakti’s cosmic 
function and the second relates to that Sakti’s influence on men. A comparable passage 
(of sixteen verses) is quoted ad Siddhantasaravali 4 (BGOML 17.1, pp. 46-7), in which 
the first eight of the list are homologised with the gross elements, the moon, sun, and 
the soul (the eight aspects of Siva as astamirti). 


182 Parakhyatantra 


mathana, Damani and Manonmani. (43) 

The power by which (He] emits the entire threefold universe down- 
wards,!44 that is here (asmin!*°) taught to be Vama. She resides with 
[the form of Siva called] Vamadeva. (44) 

Or {the name can be accounted for thus:] that contrary (vamah)— 
[that is to say] by its nature perverted—impulse (samarambhah) which 
causes souls to act is this Vama [in as much as it is involved] in perverse 
activity (vamakarmaga). (45) 

The best (jyesthah), [that is to say] most important impulse to act 
(kriyarambhah), which is always aimed at the goal of men [viz. liberation], 
occurs in souls through Jyestha. That power resides with [the form of Siva 
called] Jyestha. (46) 

Undertaking pious acts or impious ones (dharmadharmasama- 
rambhah) [depends on whether the person in question] is impelled by 
Jyestha or not [impelled by] Jyestha (jyesthajyesthapracoditah'®). Not 
otherwise is the highest state, which is where the highest rewards are, 
[possible] for the soul. (47) 

That which has the power to drive away (dravayitum Sakta!4’) the 
disease of souls that is nescience and that is expressed by the word ‘af- 
fliction’ (ruk)!48 is the power that resides with [the form of Siva called] 


144The three groups are perhaps the three divisions of the Sankhyas’ bhautika sarga, 
viz. daivayona, manusayona, and tairyagyona, in each of which one of the three gunas 
predominates (see Sankhyakarika 53-4). It is perhaps unlikely that the division into 
tattvika, bhautika and bhava-sarga is intended, since in the Saiva Siddhanta bhauvana 
sarga is added to them, and this last has been mentioned in 2:40 (see fn. 141 on p. 180 
above). But note that the Paradkhya has perhaps only spoken of three sargas (2:40-1), 
namely tattvika, bhauvana and varnaja (if we consider this last to be intended as a 
sarga), and so it is possible that ‘threefold creation’ here refers to these three. 

145For this usage of asmin see p. lxxx. 

146 ex conj. Other reconstructions are no doubt possible. Since we are dealing with a 
nirvacana we may expect the sense to be strained. 

1471f M’’'s Sila were accepied, it could be treated as an aiga usage: Sila for Sila yasyah 
sa. 

148 Although we expect vacaka to end a tatpurusa compound (‘which expresses ... ay 
it is plain that the author of the Parakhya unnaturally uses it at the end of a 
bahuvrihi (‘whose expressor is the word ruk’). The same usage is to be found in 
1:69b. This is a nirvacana of the word rudra, from which the name Raudri is de- 
rived: rujam dravayatiti rudrah. See Parakhya 4:79 below, and Tantraloka 6:57c: 
dravayitri rujam raudri. Cf. also Matangavidyapada 5:56-7b: rukpaSanicayam bhok- 
tur yeyam dravayitum ksama/ raudram bhayanakam viddhi mayavatasugahvaram/ 
tasmad uddharane raudri rudrasyeyam vasanuga. 


Chapter Two 183 


Rudra. (48) 

{She who delights in deeds of blood and weaponry{ through men’s 
fierce deeds is Raudri, who arises in fierce deeds and resides with [the 
form of Siva called] Rudra. (49) 

That by which He impels to action the material cause and the auxiliary 
cause!49 is Kali, empowered to impel. She is in the power of [the form of 
Siva called] Kala. (50) 

She who, in the realm of action, is discerned in the division of time, 
is the impeller (kalayitr1) of men, known by the marks of time. (51) 

t(The next power, Kalakira (7), is so called] because (... tena) she 
is the dispeller of the faculties (kalanam vikira) in the scattering of the 
limited powers of all souls (sarvapranikalaksepe), which were clustered 
together (?) by their own past actions (paripindite).!©° [One] may discern 
[her] in the destruction of bodiest. (52) 

tAlternatively, however (punah), she is that internal scattering of the 
skill that is learnt in this [world] (asmin'*'),t because of the undertaking 
of other (?) actions. She is in the control of [the form of Siva called] 
Kalaksepa (kalaksepaga’**). (53) 

That by which the limited power of souls [in samsara] (aninam) is 
scattered about in the extensive [lower] path [of the universe and brought] 
in connection with bodies and [the retributive power of past] actions!°% 
is the Scatterer of Forces (balanam vikira). (54) 

Alternatively bala [is] tsouls’ knowledge and discernment that is ever 
increasing (uttarottaragam ?){. Because of scattering that she is (called] 
Balaksepa (sa tatksepad balaksepa'**). She is in the control of (the form 
of Siva called] Balaksepa. (55) 

And the power by which Siva churns up that other force, [viz.] that 
of the bonds, is called the ‘churner up of forces’ (balanam pramatha) and 


14°For the Parakhya’s doctrine that both these are necessary for any effect see 2:29-30 
above. 

150This may have been the intended sense, but it is not expressed by the Sanskrit as 
it stands. 

161 For this use of asmin see p. lxxx. 

‘*2 er conj. Without this conjecture this Sakti would be without a corresponding form 
of Siva. The form of the name may seem insufficiently close to the name in the VAMA- 
DEVA mantra, but note that the form of Siva to whom Balavikaran& belongs is called 
Balaksepa in 55d. 

153Perhaps karmangasambandhe should instead be taken as a locative absolute. 

154 oz con). 


184 Parakhyatantra 


is in the control of [the form of Siva called] Balapramathana. (56) 

The power that churns up forces (balamanthana) t...t is [also] that 
by which [Siva] churns up the forces] of souls by means of faints and 
delusions and by suddenly oppressing with sleep. (57) 

That taming power by which He tames all creatures in phases of cre- 
ation (srstisu) by means of the suffering intermixed with happiness that 
is [the fruit of] their own [actions] is therefore the Taming Power (Saktir 
damanatmika). (58) 

And she is also the Taming Power (damani) because she is that by 
which a soul tames (damayan*’) the elements of his body (svadeha- 
bhitani) through various torments, such as the krcchra and candrayana 
fasts. (59) 

That power which leads the bound soul to the reality-level that is 
beyond mind (amanaskam) and devoid of support is taught to be the 
power Manonmani that belongs to the god Manonmana.!°® (60) 

That which suddenly (akasmat) brings souls in this world to a state 
of mindlessness (unmanavastham) is taught in this [tantra]!*’ to be [the 


155The awkwardness of having the present active participle used as a main verb could 
be avoided by conjecturing damayed, but it is possible that this usage is authorial, for 
cf. 4:22b. 

158Cf the quotation in the Tantralokaviveka ad 8:345c-353b: nayate paramam 
sthanam unmanyé parameSvarah. 

187For this use of asmin see p. xxx. Unmant brings the number of Saktis in this list 
up to the, I think, unwanted total of ten. In the context of nityapuja, these nine Saktis 
are placed on the eight petals, with the ninth on the pericarp, of the lotus on which 
Sadagiva is then enthroned. Nine is therefore standard, as is clear, e.g., from Kirana 
8:131-2b and 14:23-6, from Svacchanda 2:68-71b and 10:1145—6b (in the commentary 
on which a short passage of nirvacanas is quoted from the Anandabhairava), from 
SomaSambhupaddhati 3:55f [BRUNNER, 1963:168-71], and from Trilocanasiva’s Soma- 
Sambhupaddhatitika as cited by BRUNNER 1977:593, note 17a. Note, however, that 
when Rudras with this group of names are listed as the regents of the ten bhuvanas 
of the tattva of kala in Matangavidyapada 9:37-42b they are, of course, ten. This 
is achieved there by reading Manas and Unmanas as the ninth and tenth. Here the 
element unmanas is suspiciously used a second time. Furthermore this verse is not 
cited in the Sivapijastavavyakhya. For these reasons, and because she was not listed 
with all the others in 2:43, Unmani’s presence here is suspicious, and this verse should 
therefore perhaps be expunged as spurious. But it has been retained on the grounds 
that it is possible that Unmana and Unmani were intended as alternative names of 
Manonmana and Manonmani respectively, and that this verse therefore was to give a 
second nirvacana of Manonmani, who would otherwise be exceptional in having only 
one. This solution would be wholly satisfactory if it were not for the two mentions of 
the Rudra. 


Chapter Two 185 


power] Unmani, who is in the control of [the form of Siva called] Un- 
mana. (61) 

All activity is shown [to be accounted for] by this variety of the all- 
powerful Lord’s powers. He must be omniscient, because He is omnipo- 
tent, for power to act (tat) necessarily depends on knowledge (jnana- 
purvakam). (62) 

Therefore He knows all this [universe], along with the means [to ac- 
complish it], its parts, its fruits. Just as a creator who knows the threads 
and the rest [of the accoutrements necessary for making a cloth is first om- 
niscient] with regard to these, [and then] engages in that activity [of weav- 
ing], so too the supreme Siva in this (creation of the universe].158 (63- 
64b) 

For knowledge of those [instruments and causes] (tajjnanam) pervades 
(vyapitam), with positive concomitance (sanvayam), all effects. Therefore 
the supreme Lord is omniscient, since He has (-yogitvat) knowledge of all 


158 or conj. ISAACSON. If the transmitted tantvadikrt karta were retained, we might, 


more awkwardly, render as follows: ‘Just as a weaver or such like creator makes these 
[means of accomplishments, parts, fruits] the object [of his knowledge] and then engages 
in that activity [of making cloth], so too the supreme Siva in this (creation of the 
universe].’ 

As observed above (ad 2:29), this is a response to the charge levelled by Kumarila 
in Slokavarttika sambandhaksepaparihara 79-80. Sadyojyotis appears to be respond- 
ing to the same charge in NareSvarapariksé 2:9-10. The beginning of Ramakantha’s 
NareSvarapariksaéprakasa thereon reads: kumbhakaradinam api svakarye nirmala- 
jnanata sarvajnatvam svecchakaritvady api ceSvaratvam siddham eva, anyatha ghatadi- 
karanasambhavad ity uktam. atha yathabhitam tat tanukaranabhuvanadisambandhi 
sadhyam tathabhutam na drstante drstam ity ucyate. vahnyadir api parvatasambandhi 
mahanasadav adrstatvat na dhumadina sadhya iti sarvanumanaébhavaprasangah. nanu 
dhimamatram vahnimatrena (thus Baroda MS 1829, f.37"; vahnimatre KSTS Ed.) 
vyaptam siddham eva... 

‘With respect to what they produce, potters and the like too are established to have 
faultless knowledge, [which is] omniscience, and sovereignty, which consists, among 
other things, in acting exactly as they wish, because otherwise it would be impossible 
for them to produce pots or whatever. This has been taught [above]. In objection you 
may say that thet which is to be proved [of the Lord] is not perceived in the example 
in exactly the same way [as it is supposed to occur in the Lord, i.e.] connected with 
bodies, instruments, worlds and so forth. [In that case you would have to acknowledge 
that] fire belonging to a mountain too, for example, since it is not seen in, e.g., a 
kitchen, could not be proved by [the presence on the mountain] of smoke, and thus the 
consequence would be entailed that all inference would be impossible. But surely [it is 
in fact the case that] smoke itself [i.e. unqualified by adventitious factors] is proven to 
be invariably concomitant with fire itself...’ 


186 Parakhyatantra 


things. (64c-65b) 

If you object that (cet) knowledge cannot be without a locus [and that 
the Lord is bodiless and therefore not a locus], [we rejoin that knowledge] 
is known from its effect. In this system (asmin!»°”) a thing that has a locus 
as well as one that is without a locus can produce an effect. (65c-66b) 

Just as there is wind, namely breath, that has a locus in the body,!™ 
(and] we experience [also] wind without a locus in the sky that causes 
branches and such like to shake. Is not the form of the soul in its liberated 
state also established to be without a locus? (66c-67) 

[Objection:| Now you may say that (va) that liberated state is not 
well-established, since in the Veda it is dharma that is taught. Now if 
there is something that is of prime importance [in the Veda], then it is 
sacrifice and such [like rites], since they are taught to be dharma (dharma- 
nigcayat).'®! (68) 

(Reply:] [But] from that same [Vedic corpus] (tasmad eva) there: 
arises the knowledge that is established in [its final portion, namely] the 
Vedanta.The nature that is established (to be that] of the soul (tasya) in 
liberation, [when it is] without support, must be the essential nature of 
Siva, the Supreme soul. (69-70b) 

The form of the soul is of the nature of consciousness, characterized by 
the powers of omniscience and omnipotence. He whose form is knowledge 
(ie. the Lord] also (jnanaripasya tasyapi) has [this] essential nature that 
is omniscience and omnipotence.!® (70c-71b) 


159For this use of asmin see p. lxxx. 

160Dr, ISAACSON has pointed out to me that Sarirato here could be a corruption of 
Sarirago. 

161This is a representation of Sabara’s view (expressed in his commentary on 
Mimémsasitra 1.1.2): tena yah purusam nihSreyasena samyunakti, sa eva dharma- 
Sabdenocyate. na kevalam loke, vede 'pi “yajnena yajnam ayajanta devah/ tani 
dharmani prathamany 4asan” iti yajatisabdavacyam eva dharmam samamananti. 
(FRAUWALLNER (ed.) 1968:20). 

162B's reading suggests that M” supported this reading of the Sivayogaratna. If the 
reading jndnartpasthitasyapi were preferred, we might translate: ‘(The Lord] too, who 
has been established to be knowledge, has [this] essential nature that is omniscience 
and omnipotence’. 

Note that the SataratnollekhinT (ad Sataratnasangraha 8, p. 16; quoted below in fn. 
169 on ‘:p. 188) appears to quote Parakhya 2:70c—71b (reading differently in 70d) to 
support the assertion that Siva’s omnipotence and omniscience are natural whereas 
those of liberated souls are not. (How it supports this assertion is not clear to me, 
unless it is intended to do so by deliberately contrasting ripam with svaripam.) For the 


Chapter Two 187 


By scripture too [we know God and the fact that He is] omniscient 
(sarvajnah), because [we] are shown [in scripture] the greatness of his 
qualities [such as omniscience]. (Objection:] But between two things 
that make each other known, there must be the fault of circularity. (71c— 
72b) 163 

id [But] scripture exists as that which makes Him known; its 
creator is Siva. Now between a creator and that which makes Him known 
there is no fault of circularity.!© (72c—73b) 

ft... f.18  (73ed) 


conception that the soul’s sentient nature consists of the powers of knowledge and action 
see fn. 319 on p. 233. The formulation here is similar to 2:15ab in Bhatta Bhaskara’s 
commentary on the Sivastitras: caitanyam atmano riipam siddham jnanakriyatmakam. 

163Perhaps this is another conscious echo of the Slokavarttika (cf. fn. 46 on p.152 
above): sambandhaksepaparihara 60 reads: 


na ca tadvacanenaisa pratipattih suniscita 
asrstvapi hy asau brilyad atmaisvaryaprasadhanat. 


(This is the form in which the verse is quoted in the Matangavrtti ad vidyapada 3:4-6b 
and in Kiranavrtti 3:8.6—7; the edition reads tadvacanenaisam. ) 

‘64The argument seems not wholly convincing to me. Cf. the Matangavrtti ad vidya- 
pada 3:30ab (quoted in the apparatus to Parakhya 3:56) on p. 68, in which we should 
probably read with the Kashmirian MS against BHATT: 


tasmim$ cagame pancamantratanur isvarah pathyata itISvarasiddhih. 
na capitaretarasrayadosah pragukto ’tra, yato ‘vagatikarakatvad 
evagamasyatra prama&nyam. apramanyasanka tv Isvaraprayuktatvena 
pratiksipyata ity avirodhah. 


e pathyata itiSvarasiddhih ] Kashmirian MSS; pathyate iti tata 
iSvarasiddhih BHATT e pragukto ’tra, yato ‘'vagatikdrakatvad 
evagamasyatra pramanyam |] Poona MS and BHATT’s Kashmirian MSS 
(except that the latter are reported as beginning with praguktatrayato); 
iévarasiddhir Sgamapratipadyatvad eva. dgamasyatra BHATT 


‘And in that scripture we read of the Lord whose body is five mantras, and thus the 
[existence of] the Lord is established. Nor is there the fault of circularity that has been 
mentioned above here [in this chapter: ad vidyapada 3:4-6b, p. 50], since scripture is 
authoritative [as a means of knowledge] with respect to Him simply for the reason that 
it causes understanding. [And] as for (tu) the suspicion that it is not authoritative, 
that is refuted by the fact of its having being uttered by the Lord. Thus there is no 
contradition {in our position].’ | 
*®SPerhaps one could consider altering the text to yad drstam drstasambaddhe tat 
syal lingam vinigcitam: ‘A thing that is directly perceived may be determined to be 
an inferential mark [that allows one to assume the existence] (lingam) of something 
connected with the seen thing.’ The following verses (2:74—7) emphasize that direct 


188 Parakhyatantra 


If (something is] wholly proved by one means of knowledge,!© then 
what is the point of having it proved by a number of means of knowl- 
edge? (74) 

What (yad vastu) is proved by this [one proof], even though it is 
[only] one [proof], is still proved.!®’ Nor is it the case in this world that 
establishing the existence of things (vastusamsthaé) must be achieved in 
all cases by direct perception (drstena). (75) 

It is for this reason (atah) that things that are distant, obscured by 
darkness, or hidden, or [for some other reason not directly perceptible]}*® 
can be established to exist. If this were not so, then [simply] because of 
their not being directly perceived their non-existence would be proven. 
So give up this stubborn insistence upon directly perceived objects [as 
though direct perception were necessary to establish their existence]. (76) 

Morever (punah), can the supreme [Lord], who has been proved to be 
beyond the apprehension of the senses, be a directly perceived object? 
And so by a small amount of reasoning His knowledge in all things is 
proven. (77) 

He in whom there is that omnipotence (aiSvaryam) that consists of 
[the unlimited powers of] knowledge and action and that existed without 
having had a creator (dhatrapuirvakam’®®) is here in this system (atra) to 


perception is not the only means of knowledge. 

'68 er conj. Although close to the transmitted aksaras, this is of course a tentative 
reconstruction, for the immediately preceding half-line is obscure. Moreover it might be 
regarded as suspicious that the point this conjectured text now makes is straightaway 
emphatically repeated in the next verse. 

167 Alternatively tena could be taken as a conjunction: ‘Therefore what is proved even 
by [only] one proof is still proved.’ 

'®8Qne would expect vyavadhana to mean ‘concealment’ or ‘that which conceals’, but 
we may assume that it means ‘that which is concealed’ here, for though vyavahita 
would unambiguously have conveyed the required meaning, it would here be unmetri- 
cal. Conditions that prevent things from being directly perceptible are listed in 4:4-5 
below. The locus classicus for the treatment of this topic is Sankhyakarika 7; cf. also 
Matangavidyapéda 6:56 and commentary. 

169Following the Sataratnollekhini, which read datrapdrvakam, we would translate 
‘that existed without having had someone bestow it’. The verse appears as the 
eighth in the Sataratnasangraha and is introduced by the following commentary in 
the Sataratnollekhini (p. 16): evamlaksanapramanabhyam vastusiddhir iti nyayena pra- 
manasiddhasya pater asadharanadharma-(em.; dhama Ed.)-ripam laksanam parakhya- 
strendha. It is followed by this exposition (pp. 16-17): yasya drkkriyatmakam jnana- 
kriyasvaropam aifvaryam Isvaratvam datrapirvakam pirvam na vidyate data yasya tad 
datrapdrvakam: pirvam na kenaépi dattam, svabhavikam ity arthah. sa saktidvaya- 


Chapter Two 189 


be understood to be the Lord (isvarah), all-powerful (prabhuh), equipped 
of two powers. (78) 

He is to be understood to be the Lord (iSvarah) on the strength of con- 
ventional usage of the word (ridhitah), and conventional usage is deter- 
mined by the people. Since[, if the only criterion for determining meaning 
were yoga, the word isvara] might indicate other [souls] too (anyesam api 
deSitvad), it is this conventional usage (rudhir esa) that determines that 
it applies to the Lord (mahesvare).!”° (79) 

Even though there are hands on other creatures, ‘the one with a hand’ 
(kari) is [by conventional usage] only an elephant. Are not white water- 
lilies and other[ plant]s here in this world (asmin) seen to belong among 
things that have their origin in mud (pankajatisu)?'"! (80) 

Nevertheless this conventional usage is established [by which the word 
pankaja is used] only of the lotus (pankajasyaiva). So too a conven- 


yutah jnanakriyasaktiyuktah. jnanaSakteh prayojanam jagadvisayajnanam. kriya- 
Saktis tu jagatkaranam. tad uktam ratnatraye [Ratnatrayapariksa 128cd] 
jnanaSaktya vijanati kriyaya kurute jagat 

iti. prabhuh svatantrah anigvarah iSvarah atra asmin Sastre mantavyah jnatavyah. atra 
svabhavanirmaladrkkriyalaksanasaktimattvam patilaksanam ity uktam bhavati. tatra 
Saktimattvam ity ukte male ativyaptih, tadartham drkkriyalaksaneti. etavaty ukte 
baddhatmany ativyaptih, tadartham nirmaleti. tavaty ukte prasadamukte ’tivyaptih, 
tadartham svabhaveti. tesam Saktinairmalyasya Sivaprasadadhinataya svabhavika- 
tvabhavat. tad uktam parakhye (2:70c—71b] 


cidripam atmano riipam drkkriyagunalaksitam 
jnanaripasthitasyapi svaripam drkkriyatmakam 


vaksyati ca (Sataratnasangraha 55 (=Mrgendravidyapada 10:3)] 


kartrSaktir anor nitya vibhvi ce$varaSaktivat 
tamaschannatayarthesu naébhati niranugraha 


pauskare [not traced] “jnanakriye sive prokte sarvarthe nirmale pare” iti ca. 

179Qne might consider emending 79c to anyesam api cegatvad and translating ‘Since 
other [souls] too are also endowed with power...’. | 

'71 This is not the usual expression, and indeed it may be a corruption for, for instance, 
pankajadisu, where the adi would match that at the beginning of the line and would 
allow us to interpret the unit: ‘Are not, for example, white water-lilies here directly 
observed to be among the [entities to which one might legitimately apply the expression] 
‘mud-born’?’. But I am supposing that a deliberately unusual expression has been 
chosen to mean ‘whose origin is in mud’ precisely so that non-lotusses can here be 
included, which, as the text goes on to tell us, are alone usually denoted by expressions 
meaning ‘born of mud’. On the subject of the distinction maintained in Sanskrit 
literature between lotusses and water-lilies, see RAU 1954. 


190 Parakhyatantra 


tional usage has been determined [by which the word iSvara is used] only 
of the Lord (iSasyaiva), it being [also] the case that He exercises power 
(ifitaya).17? (81) 

If conventional usage (riidhih) were otherwise [i.e. not requiring that 
the word be at least to some extent appropriate by yoga], then the un- 
desirable corollary would result (prasajyate) that it would be baseless.!"4 
tAnd the conventional usage (sapi) (of this word iSvara) is such that it is 
used only] of the one who is thus [viz. the Lord] (tathariipasya), and so this 
(tadayam) is how this name is to be analysed (namni vigrahah)t.!"4 (82) 


172Some would apply the term yogarGdhi, since there is both etymological and con- 
ventional justification for the usage. 

173 et conj. If the transmitted ridhiniravastha were retained, then a possible transla- 
tion might be: ‘If it were otherwise, the undesirable corollary would result that there 
would be a [potentially] unending range [of possibilities of application] of conventional 
usage’. 

174The text and therefore also the translation of this verse are far from certain. The 
expression vigraha in the sense of analysis is usually used of analysis of the members 
of compounds; perhaps it here refers rather to the Lord’s body, which the following 
verses discuss. 

Note that in the context in which the immediately following verses (Parakhya 2:83- 
6b=Pauskara 8:29c—32) are placed in the Pauskara they follow on immediately from 
two other verses adapted from another part of our text, namely Parakhya 3:9-10 
(ssPauskara 8:27c-29b), and so the first of them (Parakhya 2:83) is there taken to 
be a justification for the Lord’s being called sakala. What precedes them here in the 
Parakhya has been a discussion of the name I§vara, which is the sakala form of the Lord. 
The sequence of ideas in the two texts is thus probably the same, but it is much clearer 
in the Pauskara. Umapati’s commentary on Pauskara 8:28c—30 reads as follows:— 
sa prabhuh sadaSiva upadeSakartrtve pranavadibhyah madhyamadivrttya Sastropa- 
deSaracanayaém itarakaryesv iva sarvatmana na niskalah kintu yathakathancit sakalah 
kila sakala iva bhavati. evam tarhi Sivo ‘py asmadadivat kim sakalah? nety 
&ha saékalyam iti. tasya Sivasya yadrsat sakalyad upadestrtvam bhavati tadrsam 
sakalyam vaksyamity arthah. na caivam api yadrgam tadrsam va sakalyam. 
kimartham Sivena parigrhyate? na tavat svartham, avaptasakalakamatvat. napi 
parartham, karmadinaiva tadupapatteh. napi Iilaya, baladivad asamIksyakéritapra- 
sang&d iti. tata aha sarvaérambha iti. yad yasmat karanac chivasya sarvasyapy 
&rambhah narartham pasuprayojanaya. na ca karmana tadupapattih, tasyacetana- 
tvena cetanadhisthanam vind karyatvasambhavat. tah pasuprayojanasiddhaye 
paramakarunikasya Sivasya tantrasyoktopadeSakartrtvaya sakalyaparigraha iti bhavah. 
nijé sahaja pdrné sakalavayavaparipurna. yair avayavaih sampirnaé tan evavayavan 
&ha sampfrneti. sadyojatavamadevaghoratatpurusatmakair anayuktaih pancabhir 
mantrair avayavair ya paripiirna paramesthinah sadaSivasya sa tadrsi tanur ity arthah. 

Jnanaprakésa’s commentary on Pauskara 8:27c—33b is silent about the verses that 
correspond to Parakhya 2:83-5a (unless the remark sesam sugamam refers to this por- 
tion of text) and so is not quoted here, but in fn. 180 on p. 192 below. 


Chapter Two 191 


Because in all His undertakings [He acts] for the benefit of souls, 
the Lord has His own, full body.!”> This body (sa) is full (piarna)!”® 
with [His] five mantras SADYO[JATA], VAMA[DEVA], fAGHORA and 
TATPURUSAT.!”" (83) 

With these mantras, together with IS[ANJA, [is made up] the body 
of the Supreme. This Lord, who has IS[AN]A for His head, TATPURUSA 
for His mouth, [A])GHORA for His heart, VAMA[DEVA] for His genitals,1’8 
and SADYO[JATA] for His form, is taught to be composed of parts 
(sakalah).'’? (84-5b) 

‘78 ey conj. As will be seen from the commentary cited in the previous footnote, 
Uméapati reads the first pada of this verse differently when it occurs in the Pauskara. I 
suspect that the Pauskara’s version is a secondary improvement intended to give clearer 
expression to the same idea. I have therefore chosen to emend in a way that preserves 
as much as possible of M”’s reading. It is of course possible, however, that M”’s text 
is no more than a corruption of what is transmitted in the Pauskara. 

176 Although it is clear from his commentary that Umapati’s text read sampdrna, 
‘complete’, Jnanaprakasa’s probably read sa pirna with M”, for, although he neither 
glosses this part nor offers a pratika, this is how the text appears embedded in his 
commentary in the sources that I have examined (IFP T. 188, p.811; T.180, p. 469; 
T. 110, p. 924). 

177 Although the text here is cruxed on the grounds that the exact wording can- 
not satisfactorily be reconstructed, it is clear that we require names of these last two 
mantras. The last syllables of the verse could be emended to -naraih, which would 
give us the last, but this would leave us with no solution for AGHORA. Besides it is 
not certain that what the Pauskara now transmits might not have been closer to the 
original, particularly since in our text as it now stands, the word mantraih in the next 
pada (84a) might be regarded as an unnecessary recapitulation. Laying aside for a 
moment metrical considerations, it is perhaps not impossible that AGHORA should be 
conveyed by anagha, for aghora appears sometimes to be glossed to mean ‘destroy- 
ing agha’, e.g. in Madhyarjuna’s Siddhantadipika (IFP MS T.112, pp. 179-180 and 
T. 284, p.118): ...yad va aghaSabdenatra papasamithah. uktan ca Sarvokte “agham 
samastam smaranad alam naSyati tatksanat/ (T. 284; naSyanti laksanat T.112) agham 
papasamthas syad (T. 112; °samihasyad T. 284) alam paryaptam isyate” iti. uktan ca 
vyomavyapistotre [verse 21] “dosavihinam aghoram dosaksayakrc ca yasya bhaktanam/ 
hrdayan tatsadbhavo namo ’stu tasmai tv aghorahrdayaya”. [dosavihinam aghoram is, 
the reading of Gottingen MS Schrader 121 (verso of 3rd folio), a manuscript of the 
Vyomavyapistava; IFP MS T.112 reads dosahinam ghoram and T. 284 reads .dosavi- 
hinam ghoram (both being unmetrical).] 

Perhaps TATPURUSA could then be conveyed not by nara, which would be metrically 
problematic, but by anava, which would yield the minimally emended reading sadyo- 
vamanaghanavaih. 

'78That guhya does not refer to the anus is made clear by 3:74b. 

‘79This gives the order of the brahmamantras that is later known as danda- 
bhangi. Cf. Matangavidyapadda 4:14c-15b: isanamutrdha pumvaktras tv aghora- 


192 Parakhyatantra 


His being composed of parts (sakalyam) is not ultimately real, 
as it is with a(n ordinary] soul (yathatmanah), [but] constructed 
(kalpaniyam). (85cd)1}8° 


hrdayah prabhuh/ ucyate vamaguhyoktya sadyomirti§ ca Sasane (thus Kashmirian 
MSS; sadyomi@rtih sthitAd prthak BHATT). Srikantha could be paraphrasing the 
Matanga or the Pardkhya in Ratnatrayapariksaé 281c-282: isa4namirdhé pumvaktro 
daSadigbahumandalah/ aghorahrdayo vamaguhyo jatatandjjvalah/ pravrttiman ayam 
devah sakalah sarvapavanah. Cf. also Parakhya 3:74 below. The Siddhantadipika of 
Madhyarjuna twice attributes part of our passage to the Kalottara: on p.111 of IFP 
MS T.284 we read uktam ca SrImatkalottare—‘Ifamirdha sa pumvaktro ghol[ra)hrd 
vamaguhyakah/ sadyomfrtir itisinamirdhayetyadibhir yutah’ iti. The first of these 
half-lines reappears on p. 126, prefaced by uktam ca kalottare and followed by sadyah 
sarvangasiddhih syat iti. 

180Thus Jnanaprakaéa in his commentary on Pauskara 8:27c—33b, the whole of which 
I quote below (IFP T. 188, pp. 811-12; T. 180, p.470): sakalyat tu tasya Sivasya yathé 
yad upadesadatrtvam tathé tad ity anvayah. yathaétmanah paramarthatah sakalyam 
tatha tasya Sivasya narthatah sdkalyam, kintu kalpantyam. anyathd, yadi kalpaniyam 
sakalyam nasti, tarhy asya Sivasyanakaratvan narcanam. yasméac carmA&sthyadi- 
vivarjanam. Sastrapranetrtvam upadestrtvam pujyatvam ca nopapadyate. tato ‘yam 
sakalah sthitah. kalpitacarmasthyaédimadaeal|[abhih kalabhih]] sakalah suniscitah. 
Sesam sugamam. 
e narthatah ] T180; narthatah paramarthatah T188 e yadi kalpaniyam 
sakalyam } conj.; yadi kalpaniyamasakalyam T180; U T188 e tarhy asya] T188; 
tasya T180 e éastrapranetrtvam upadestrtvam ] em.; U netrtvam upadestrtvam 
T188; Sastrapranetr U padestrtvam T180 @ nopapadyate ] conj.; na copapadyate 
T180, T188 e sakalah sthitah ] T180; U T188 e °madacal|(abhih kalabhih]] 
sakalah ] conj.; °madacalasakalah T180; °macalasakalah T188 [This conjecture is ad- 
vanced because Jnianaprakasa’s avatariké to Pauskara 8:27c-33b reads: tat tu (scil. 
sakalatvam) na calabhih kalabhih kintv acalabhih kalabhir ity aha [IFP T. 188, p. 810; 
T. 180, p. 469].) 

Umapati’s treatment is different (from commentary on Pauskara 8:31-2b (= Parakhya 
2:84c-85]): ...evam ca tasya sadasivatmanah pasor ivopadestrtvasiddhaye arthatah 
Sirahpanyadimattaya sakalyam na kalpanlyam mantratmakasakalyenaivopapatter bad- 
dhartpatmakasékalyam na tasyabhyupagantavyam ata eva ca sadaéSivah sakalaniskala 
iti tantresu ucyate. Note that Umapati is explicit that it is Sadasiva, who is Sakala- 
niskala, that has his body made up of these mantras; but in our text it seems rather to 
be the Sakala form, ISvara, that is spoken of, as in the Kirana (see Kirana 3:16—21) and 
the Ratnatrayapariksa (Ratnatrayapariksa 281c—282, quoted in the previous footnote). 
In the Matanga (vidyapada 4:18c—30) this mantra-body is again dealt with at the level 
of Sadasiva (although this fourth chapter, as declared in its first verse, is an account 
of the Lord as adhikarin, the adhikara level is not in the Matanga, as in other texts, 
homologised with Isvara, but with Sadaéiva, as is implicitly clear, e.g., from 4:54-5). 
Not all accounts of the Lord’s mantra-body make clear whether they understand it 
to be that of the Lord’s Sakala or Sakalaniskala form (see, e.g., Mrgendravidyapada 
3); but the Pauskara is explicit that the body is SadaSiva’s at an earlier stage of the 


Chapter Two 193 


For otherwise He could not be worshipped by all, }®4being devoid of 


text (Pauskara 1:54-5), and this, no doubt, accounts for Umapati’s position here. The 
earlier passage of the Pauskara does not just contradict this passage in this detail, but 
in one other too: Pauskara 1:56ab teaches that ISANA is not the Lord’s head (as here 
in Parakhya 2:84c [=Pauskara 8:31a]), but his diadem: isanasekhari sa [scil. mirtih] 
ca pumvaktra ghorahrtsthala. That the topic has been covered in the Pauskara be- 
fore chapter 8 and with discrepancies strengthens the hypothesis (for which see the 
discussion in GOODALL 2001a:329-30, the essentials of which are reproduced in the an- 
notation to chapter 6, in particular in fn. 654 on p. 326 below) that the eighth chapter 
of the Pauskara, just under half of which consists of verses culled from the Pardkhya, 
is an interpolation. 

‘8! er conj. Once again I have preferred what M” transmits over the reading of the 
Pauskara, on the grounds that the latter is likely to be a secondary modification made 
for the sake of clarity. Once again my decision may be mistaken. This is the point 
where our text ceases to run parallel to that of the Pauskara, which here reads ( Pauskara 
8:32c-33b): 


nanyathasyarcanam yasméc carmaésthyadivivarjanam 
na ca Sastrapranetrtvam tenayam sakalah sthitah 


‘Otherwise He could not be worshipped, since He would lack skin, bone, etc. Nor 
could He be the composer of scripture, and so He is established to be Sakala.’ Jnana- 
prakaga’s commentary (quoted in fn. 180 on p.192 above) is brief and uncertain, 
but implies a natural interpretation of this unit. Umapati ad loc. has this to say: 
yasmat karanad anyathaé sarvatmana niskalatve sati asmadadivat sakalatve va tasya 
sadasivasya sadhakair arcanam pijé na sambhavati, Sastrapranetrtvam Sastropadestr- 
tvam ca na sambhavati. dvitiye carmasthyadivivarjanam (scil. iti pade?| adipadena 
saptadhatuparigrahah. vivarjanam rahityam ca sambhavati. asminn arthe uttara- 
tapaniyopanisadvacanam asti. 

‘Since otherwise, [i.e.] if Sada&siva were wholly formless or wholly embodied in the 
way that we are, He could not be worshipped (puja = arcanam) by sadhakas, [and] His 
teaching scripture (Sastropadestrtvam = sastrapranetrtvam) would also (ca) be impos- 
sible. In the second [verse-quarter] the word adi indicates [that one is to supply the 
rest of] the seven bodily elements. And He would be devoid (rahityam = vivarjanam) 
(of those too]. There is a teaching in the Uttaratapaniyopanisat to this effect.’ 

I have also considered emending M”’s reading to sarvathangavivarjitah, ‘being al- 
together devoid of a body’. What motivated me to do so was the consideration that 
the position of the Kirana (3:22-23b) appears to be that the supreme, bodiless Lord 
is unapproachable by worship or yoga of any kind; but 2:95-6 below suggest that the 
author of the Parakhya may have held a different position. And even in the Kirana, 
although worship and yoga may not enable the soul to reach, in any sense, the supreme 
Lord, Kirana 3:15 is probably conceding that it is possible for the soul to do so (the 
purport of the verse is debatable). Cf. also Moksakarika 109-11, which Ramakantha 
in his Moksakarikavrtti identifies as being a commentary on Rauravasitrasangraha 
4:42c-43, and Tattvasangraha 28-9. In these last passages (perhaps not in that of the: 
Rauravasitrasangraha), ‘seeing’ the Lord is possible directly by means of the soul’s 
power, once it has purified by initiation, without any mediation by the instruments 


194 Parakhyatantra 


a body. [Therefore] this body of that pure (Lord] is fashioned out of pure 
mantras. (86) 

Therefore this contrivance of a body [is adopted] for the sake of wor- 
ship (upacaranimittah);!®? since worship is a necessary part of enjoined 
rites, it must be adopted for the sake of attaining their fruits. (87) 

The fruit is achieved by the rites, and those rites are enjoined by Siva. 
And since that (Siva-principle] is sovereignty (aisvaryam), consisting of 
powers of knowledge and action extending to all things, therefore (tat) 
since that (asya) rests above (uparivartitvat), in the way that heads do 
(murdhanam iva) ,!®* the [mantra] ISANA stands as the head of beings that 
are endowed with sovereignty that consists in the powers of knowledge and 
action [and] that are sentient because of the power of the supreme (para- 
Saktisacetasam!*‘), and therefore He is known as the one with ISA as His 
head (isamirdhakah).!®° (88-90b). 


that derive from matter, since, as Moksakarika 106 makes explicit, 


antahkaranavrttir ya bodhakhyé sa maheSvaram 
na prakaSayitum Sakté paSatvan nigadadivat. 


‘The activity of the internal organs known as ‘knowing’ cannot illuminate the Lord 
because, like fetters and such, they are bonds.’ 

Thus the point of our verse as now interpreted is that some few people would be 
able to worship him even without the body of mantras, but that that body makes it 
possible for ‘all’ to do so. But one could instead interpret: ‘Otherwise He could not be 
worshipped by anybody, being without a body.’ 

182The sense ‘figurative usage’, though we might expect it in a discussion of Siva’s 
body (cf. Parakhya 2:42 and Kirana 3:13), seems not to be appropriate here. 

183 e+ conj. This is particularly tentative because it involves an aiga genitive form; the 
sense too is painfully strained, and perhaps the passage should rather have been cruxed 
than bludgeoned into half sense, but the sense is often strained when a nirvacana is 
given. 

184 6+ conj. Assuming that the syllables that are transmitted are correct and correctly 
placed (which may not be the case) and that no lines of text are missing, there seem 
few short syllables that would be appropriate. pra- and vi- might both do, but (except 
where Pracetas is used as a name) both pracetas and vicetas seem not common outside 
Vedic language. sa- and su- seem both weak solutions, but not impossible. Also 
conceivable would be to take paragaktih as a nominative in apposition with isanah in 
90a and so to supply <s tu or Kh sa->. 

*85Note that this and the following nirvacanas analyse not the names of the mantras 
(ISANA, TATPURUSA, AGHORA, VAMADEVA, and SADYOJATA), but the five related names 
of the Lord listed in 2:84c-85b. 't is also the names of the Lord, not those of 
the five brahmamantras, that are analysed in Matangavidyapada 4:18c—30 and in 
Mrgendravidyapada 3:9-13. The mantras can be transformed for nydasa into similar 
names (om hom Isanamirdhaya namah, om hem tatpurusavaktraya namah, om hum 


Chapter Two 195 


Since it (tat) cleans away (punati) nescience, [and] since (yat) the 
[word] mouth (vaktram) expresses revelation (vyaktivacakam)—it reveals 
through its power Sivahood—therefore He is taught to have PURUSA for 
His mouth (pumvaktrah). (90c-91b) 

Alternatively, He has [the mantra TAT]PURUSA on His face 
ttaccastramt{!®® and therefore He has PURUSA for His mouth. (91cd) 

His essential nature (sadbhavah), [that is His] heart is non-terrible 
(aghorah) [and therefore] peaceful, and that is why because of His essential 
nature the supreme Lord is one whose heart is AGHORA. (92) 

tAlternatively+, He is held to have GHORA as His heart (ghorahrt) 
tthrough mantras or through aghorast. That which is lovely (vamam), 
[viz.] the state of liberation is hidden (rahasyam = guhyam); since that is 
so for Him (?), or because the path to what is vama is hidden, His private 


aghorahrdayaya namah, om him vamadevaguhyaya namah, om ham sadyojatamurtaye 
namah), e.g. in the rite of sakalTkarana as described by AghoraSiva in the Kriyakrama- 
dyotika, p.24. These same datives were incorporated into the 81-word Saiddhantika 
malamantra known as the VYOMAVYAPIN and are accordingly analysed in Raurava- 
siitrasangraha 10 (verses 27-37), which treats the whole VYOMAVYAPIN, and in verses 
18-23 of the Vyomavyd4pistava, a work of ninety-one aryé verses attributed to Rama- 
kantha (IFP MSS T. 128, pp. 22-5, T. 434, pp. 293-7, and T.112, pp. 270-348). 

86Qne might consider emending to tacchastre, ‘in His scripture’. Cf. Matangavidya- 
pada 4:22c—23b: 


calacchaktimayam vaktram tac ca sarvamayam vibhoh 
pumams tatra sthito yasmat tasmat pumvaktra isyate. 


e pumams tatra ] Kashmirian MSS; puman vaktre BHATT 

Ramakantha’s Matangavrtti thereon reads: ...vaktram api tat calacchakti- 
mayam iti. piirvam hi samavetaSaktyabhiprayena vyakhyatam. adhuna parigraha- 
varti§aktyabhiprayeneti bhedah. tatha hi—caladripa parinatidharmint gaktih maha- 
mayakhya parigrahavartini bhagavatah; tanmayam calacchaktisvabhavam eva. na tu 
kitasthanityam. tad vaktram iva Sabdakdranatvat. vyapakam ca sarvasvakaryavadhi- 
vyapter ity uktam. tatas coktah puman vaktre parigraharipe mahamayatmani 
yasmat sthitah tasmad asau pumvaktro bhagavan. 

‘And that ‘mouth’ is made up of mobile power. Now above [the name] was expounded 
with the intention of referring to the power that inheres [in Him]; there is a difference 
in that [it is] now [explained] with the intention of referring to the power that He uses 
as an assistant. To explain, (what is meant is] the mobile—[that is to say] subject to 
transformation—power known as mahamayéa that serves as an accomplice to the Lord. 
[His ‘mouth’] is made up of that; its nature is this mobile power. It is not eternally 
unchanging. It is, as it were, [His] ‘mouth’ because it is the cause of sound. It has 
been taught that it is all-pervading because it pervades as far as to include all its own 
effects. And so, since the Puman resides in the ‘mouth’, which is His accomplice and 
which is mahamaya, therefore the Lord is said to be pumvaktra.’ 


196 Parakhyatantra 


parts are VAMA (tenayam vamaguhyakah). (93c—94b) 

Since He immediately (tatksanatah = sadyah) creates bodies (murtth) 
for souls, or (because His] form is immediately [present in front] of Yo- 
gis,!8’ He is taught to be SADYOMURTI. (94c-95b) 

By the use of ritual gestures, diagrams, the mantras that are His limbs 
(mudramandalamantrangaih), by focussing the mind, concentration and 
yoga (dharanadhyanayogatah) that Supreme, peaceful (Santah) (Lord] is 
worshipped by those who desire the fruits of supernatural powers and of 
liberation.'85 (95c-96b) 

[It is] that same {Lord who] is worshipped residing in the body [made 
up] of His mantras; He is the Supreme Siva. (96cd) 

Therefore Siva is established in scripture (¢astre) to be [at the same 
time]-in two [forms]: Sakala, Niskala.!®9 (97ab) 

_ He who is the cause of the maintenance, creation, and destruction [of 

the universe] and of compassion is the Lord with office (so ’dhikari) in 
this sakala state,!*? made up of the parts [of the mantras that are His 
limbs].!9! (97c-98b) 


187Cf. Mrgendravidyapada 3:13: 


sadyo ’niném miurtayah sambhavanti yasyecchatas tena sadyobhidhanah 
sadyo murtir yoginam va vidhatte sadyomirtih krtyaSsaighryan na 
mirteh. 


Naradyanakantha comments thus on the second half (Devakottai ed., p.139): yad va 
yoginam tattatsamadhibhajam sadyas tatksanam murtir vidhatte. proktavan mantra- 
mayasvamirtisadrsim tanum sampadayatity acirat svasamadhivyanjakatvat sadyo- 
murtitvam. na tu Sighrasanjatasvadehatvad ity arthah. We might therefore emend 
to yoginam mirtth and understand kurute from the previous line: ‘or [because] He at 
once (creates] forms [similar to His own] for yogins’. 

881n Kirana 3:20 these means are enumerated as ways of knowing only the Sakala 
Lord. It is possible that this is not in contradiction with the Kirana, since it may be 
understood to mean that the supreme Lord can be worshipped by way of worshipping 
the Sakala Lord. 

'89°This appears to me to be a reference to Siva’s Sakalaniskala form, homologised 
below (99a) with Siva as bhogin. Cf. the expressions dvisvabhavah and dvisvabhava- 
gatah used of SadaSiva in Kirana 3:14c and 3:21a respectively. 

*9°T see no function for the ca. An ingenious commentator might take it to indicate the 
fifth of the five functions, tirobhava, which is not otherwise mentioned; but note that 
when the Malinivijayottara (1:20cd) refers to the functions assigned to the Vidyesvaras 
it too omits tirobhava. Observe also that the Parakhya lists all five functions just below 
in 2:123-4. 

‘9! The kalas are the thirty-eight divisions of the brahmamantras. Cf. Kirana 3:16c— 
18b and commentary and translation ad loc. 


Chapter Two 197 


He reveals their office to the others, to the Rudras and such. Fig- 
uratively He is [known as] the Lord with office (adhikari), the Lord in 
enjoyment (bhogi), and the Lord in resorption (Jayi). (98c—99b) 

The beginningless compassion upon bound souls that is established [to 
have been bestowed by Him] because of His being the Lord (patibhava- 
tah) [is possible] through the teaching of the injunctions of His scripture 
(tacchastravidhicodanat) through the connection between acaryas and 
their pupils.!9? Not otherwise can the state that is in Him [{viz. Sivahood] 
(tadgato bhavah) [be attained] or that mercy of the guru. (99c-100) 

[You may object that] that [state of] grace accomplished in the soul by 
means of His power as having existed in potential beforehand (satkarya- 
sadhitah) [surely] comes about at random, [or] because of (Siva’s] hatred 
(of others}, [or] because of (His] affection induced by propitiating Siva 
(sivaradhanabhavatah).'*3 (101) 

[We reply that] Sivahood (tadbhavah) cannot be caused by those [fac- 
tors]; it must come about because of a fall of His power (tacchaktipata- 
tah). The linguistic usage (here of ‘fall’] (pravrttih gabdaga!%*) is figu- 
rative (bhaktya), just as in the case of saying ‘karana’ to mean feet and 
such like (padadikaranoktivat). (102) 


192 er conj. ISAACSON (letter of 21.viii.2001). Without this conjecture, the relative 
pronoun in 2:99c is left hanging (but there are of course other instances of this, for 
see p.lxxx above), and the compound svasisyacéryasambandhat, in which sva is a 
possessive adjective that refers forward to a word in the same compound, namely to 
the acaryas, might seem suspect. 

1°3-The text here introduces a ubiquitous and fundamental charge raised against the- 
ist systems, that of God’s arbitrariness in his favouring or not favouring souls. Cf. 
Kirana 4:1-4, in which, as here below (Parakhya 2:109-10), the image of the impartial 
sun awakening lotusses is used as a comparison. (The same image is to be found in 
Matangavidyapada 9:8, but without the impartiality of the sun being made explicit.) 
When the issue (of arbitrariness) is addressed in the Pauskara, we find the use of 
the term nairghrnya (2:54); it seems to me possible that this is a conscious echo of 
Brahmasitra 2.1.11.34 (vaisamyanairghrnye... ). 

1°4This may seem a strange expression, the -ga corresponding to a genitive ending 
(see p. lxxxi above); it seems to me conceivable that the author of the Parakhya was 
here consciously recasting Kirana 5:3-4 (of which I quote here 3abc and 4cd): 


upacarens Sabdanam pravrttir iha drgyate 

yatha puman vibhur ganta [...] 

evam Saktinipato ’pi procyate sopacaratah. 
The text of the final pada that probably underlies the various readings in all the South 
Indian sources is bhaktah proktah Sivagame. 


198 Parakhyatantra 


For because of the fall of that [power of His] there arises fear, [fear] 
born of being connected with worldly existence.!9° The fall is the awak- 
ening of that [fear]; it has the form of a differentiation of worldly existence 
(samsarakalanatmakah).'9° (103) 

Discriminating (paricchidya) worldly existence, the soul (sah), once 
[thus] set on the path [taught] by the guru (guruvartmasthah),!°" seeks 
the means that will grant liberation from it, and then engages in [pursuing] 
that [means]. (104) 

The activity (pravrttih) of [such] souls is in the control of that [power 
of His] (tadvasa); [she] is [therefore] necessarily their controller (tanni- 
yamika). Awakened [then] by His grace, they become devoid of desire for 
worldly existence (bhavanti bhavanihsprhah). (105) 

Those who are fit come to awakening. [They are] fit [because of the 
descent of His grace(?), and] not for any other reason. Or else [if there 
were some other reason] He would be subject to attachment and hatred; 
and those [do] not [exist] for one who is without impurity,!9° (106) 

For God, who is the locus of {the power of] knowledge, neither attach- 
ment nor hatred [are possible]. Since the causes of those faults of passion 
and such are according to this system (atra) by His nature not in Him 
(tasya), therefore Siva is devoid of them. (107-8b) 


'°5But perhaps, as Dr. ISAACSON has suggested (letter of 21.viii.2001), bhayam sam- 
sarayogajam could be interpreted to mean ‘fear of connection with worldly existence’. 
1°6This and the following verse express the same nexus of ideas as Kirana 5:5—6b: 


nipato bhayado yadvad vastunah sahasa bhavet 
tadvac chaktinipato ’pi prokto bhavabhayapradah 
tasmad anyatra yaty eva tathatma desikam prati. 


Compare also Svéyambhuvasitrasangraha 1:17-18: 


tannipatat ksaraty asya malam samsarakaranam 
ksine tasmin yiyasa syat param nihSreyasam prati 
sa desikam anuprapya diksavicchinnabandhanah 
prayati Sivasayujyam nirmalo niranuplavah. 


And cf. Pauskara 4:38-41. 
®7Or one might interpret ‘set on his way towards a guru’. 

198 67 conj. But one could obtain this sense without emending if one were prepared 
to accept that syat might irregularly have been used as a singular verb with a dual 
subject (tau). I also considered the conjecture nasau na tau stav amalatmanah, taking 
the stau as an aiSa dual verb (which is arguably what M” transmits in 2:108c, though I 
have now emended that) and interpreting the verse as follows: ‘Those who are fit come 
to awakening—(because they are] fit, [and] not for any other reason. He is not subject 
to attachment and hatred; those do not exist for one who is without impurity.’ 


Chapter Two 199 


(But, you might say,] if these are not [attributes] of Siva (sarvasya), 
then how can souls have [in some cases] knowledge and [in ather cases] 
nescience? (108cd) 

He is constantly (avasthitah) the same in power (samaSaktih) in the 
matter of awakening (vikasatah) for all [souls], just as the sun is in every 
respect (sarvatah) the same in character (samalaksanah) {in the matter 
of causing to bloom (vikasatah)] for all lotuses. (109) 

The Lord too, pure with His powers, remains (vartate) the same to- 
wards [all] souls. Some cause must be understood for [His] causing to 
descend [upon souls] knowledge or ignorance (bodhabodhanipatane);)*° 
now you may suggest (cet) good birth (subha jatir?™) or good actions 
(dharmo va), or extraordinary rites (samutkrsta kriyapi Va). (110-111b) 

(We reply that] birth or excellence of good actions cannot be the cause, 
nor auspicious rites, because with these [there are cases of] deviation [i.e. 
cases where the result does not follow upon the supposed cause]; and so 
they are not causes. (111c-112b) 

And the soul’s fitness [for salvific grace] is in the seed [i-e. in kar- 
man],?° and that [fitness] is [therefore] in accordance with [that] unequal 


19 ex conj. ISAACSON (letter of 27.viii.2001). We might otherwise assume a use of 
the singular locative for the dual (bodhabodhe), but this would seem odd so soon after 
bodhabodhau (in 2:108d), and some emendation of the last word would still be required 
to yield sense. 

200 er conj. The nominative jatir yields a ma-vipula with a bad preamble, but it gives 
the required sense, and | imagine that it is not impossible that it should have been 
original. 

201The expression is ambiguous; although I have assumed that bija refers here to 
karman, I am aware that it is conceivable that it might refer instead to mala, and 
that the text may therefore be referring in the next verse to the maturation of im- 
purity (malaparipaka). This would be exceptional, for, as I have observed (GOODALL 
1998:xxxiii-xxxvi), no demonstrably early scripture can be said unmistakably to refer 
to this doctrine. The doctrine is attributed to Sadyojyotis and followed by the exegetes 
of the school, but the first scriptural text to refer to it may be, as I have suggested 
(ibid., fn. 80), the Pauskara in 4:37. Malinivijayottara 1:42, as here, uses the ambiguous 
expression yogyata: 


evam asyatmanah kale kasmimscid yogyatavasat 
Saiv] sambadhyate Saktih Santa muktiphalaprada. 


It may be regarded as curious that the text should make no reference to malapari- 
paka, but it is certainly curious that the philosophically investigative Pardkhya does 
not mention karmasdmya, the doctrine mention in Kirana 1:20c-21 and expounded 
at length in Kirana 5, according to which (pace Ramakantha) a salvific descent of 
divine grace (saktipata) occurs when a soul’s capacity to experience is blocked by the 


200 Parakhyatantra 


(karman] (visamanuga). (112cd) 

The conditions [of souls are] various because of the [various degrees 
of] ripening of that (karman]; like a doctor, the Lord (sah) accordingly 
links each particular soul (yasmin nare ... tasmin®°”) with that means 
[that is a descent of His grace] (enam upayam). (113) 

Knowing that [means], He is intent upon effecting separation (vislesa- 
karane parah)”™ from the stains that result from contact [with the world] 
(samparkadosapam). His means towards [accomplishing] that [separation] 
(tadupayah) is that of kala and the others [of the six paths];?% t[it is 
accomplished] through a ritual which depends upon firef.”°> (114) 

Because, being naturally devoid of attachment, He bestows compas- 
sion on bound souls, the Lord is the one who sets this [means of initia- 
tion] in motion (tatprayokta) for all bound souls, according to this system 
(iha).2°6 (115) 


simultaneous ripening of two equally powerful past actions. The Parakhya appears to 
give us no clear account of what must precede Saktipata (though the possibility cannot 
be excluded that the topic is treated in a lost chapter), even though it elsewhere shows 
evidence of having been influenced by the Kirana (see p. lv above). 

202 6z conj. This conjecture may not be strictly necessary to restore sense, but a second 
tatha seems an unlikely corelative to yasmin nare, and we do expect a corelative. 

203 62 conj. Usually para has this sense only at the end of a compound. It may be 
wrong to assume that it carries this sense here. 

2°41 am assuming this to be a reference to the six initiatory paths (Svayambhuva- 
sfitrasangraha 4:2): 


tattvadhva ca padadhva ca varnddhvaé bhuvanatmakah 
mantrétmakah kaladhva ca vigaty ekam Sivam padam. 


205The text may well be corrupt here. Perhaps one could consider emending to yoni- 
samSrayah and interpreting as follows: ‘His means towards [accomplishing] that [sep- 
aration], in accordance with karman, is that of kald and the others (of the material 
evolutes}], which reside in the womb [that is m4y4].’ The problem with such an inter- 
pretation is that the context rather leads us to expect a mention of the descent of grace 
or of initiation than one of embodiment. But perhaps even with this emendation the 
supposition that the verse refers to the six initiatory paths need not be abandoned: 
‘Idots is that of kal& and the others [of the six paths] which rest in [i.e. extend up to 
the [ultimate] source [namely Siva)’. 

295 ez conj. ISAACSON (partly in letter of 27.viii.2001). Two of the conjectures here are 
relatively obvious, and the text could hardly be construed without them. One could, 
however, construe the transmitted pagvanugrahakrtyatah (‘because of [His] function of 
bestowing compassion on bound souls’); but it seems more likely that it is a corruption 
resulting from some scribe having here dissolved the sandhi (this particular dissolution 
of sandhi, involving a final -d, is particularly common in Grantha MSS, sometimes even 


Chapter Two 201 


Since otherwise (the universe would be] engulfed in darkness, like the 
universe deprived of the sun, therefore God, the Lord of bound souls [is] 
accordingly [proven to be] beginningless. (116) 

He bestows grace on all, He is at peace, He is the awakener of 
the overlords of the mantras (vidyavidyesabodhakah). These overlords 
of the mantras (vidyavidyeSvarah) are eight. Below [the level of the 
tattva of pure] knowledge. (vidyadhah) they are emperors (cakra- 
vartinah).?°7 (117) 

Ananta [is so called because he] is of infinitive valour (ananta- 
viryatma); Stiksma has subtle power of action as his body (siksmakriya- 
tanuh) (?);208 Sivottama is just like Siva; and Ekadrk is intent upon the 
one knowledge (ekadrkparah). (118) 

Ekarudra {(is] that [one] Rudra (?)t; Trimirti is taught to have three 
bodies (tritanuh smrtah); Srikantha +... {; Sikhandin has a pure heart for 
his crest (Suddhahrcchikhah) (?). (119) 

Although each of these has only one [good] quality and Siva has all 
[good] qualities, nevertheless they are pure, and so they are invested with 
offices.2°9 (120) 

Devoid [themselves] of the dirt of primal matter, they accomplish 


within a word: e.g. pat ma for padma, and ut bhava for udbhava), to yield °krt yatah, 
and this having been misunderstood by a subsequent scribe. 
207Cf. Malinivijayottara 2:18c—-19b: 


sa sisrksur jagat srster adav eva nijecchayaé 
vijnanakevalan astau bodhaydmésa pudgalan. 


And cf. Moksakariké 72c—73b: 


niskaJan sakalaén astau sargadav icchayé patih 
mantreSvaran anantadin anugrhnati pudgalan. 


2°8 Perhaps, as Dr. ISAACSON has suggested to me, the °tanu might here be being used 
as a metrically expedient synonym of °ripa/°atma: ‘who has subtle power of action as 
his nature’. 

2091 have as#umed here that adhikarapade sthitah means no more than adhikara- 
vantah (cf. 3:61). But it is possible that the text refers to the level of the pure universe 
equivalent to isvaratattva, in which the Lord is involved in the universe. We may recall 
that Jaya, bhoga and adhikara are the names of the highest tattvas in the Matanga 
(see, e.g., vidyapada 2:14). We might therefore translate ‘they are situated at the level 
of adhikara’. | 

In other texts the hierarchy of these Vidyesvaras is emphasised, Ananta being the 
highest and Sikhandin the lowest (see, e.g., Rauravasitrasangraha 2:13, Matangavidya- 
pada 5:15, Pauskara 4:54). 


202 Parakhyatantra 


[the creation and administration of] the sphere below [i.e. of the uni- 
verse evolved of maya].”}° Because [the dirt of primal matter] has to be 
impelled [by them], they are not in its power (na vasas tasya), just as 
snakes are not in the power of (their own] poison.?!! (121) 

Because they perform the duties appropriate to their station 
(sthanadhikarakaritvat), they do this tbhinnakaranatt. They are all 
equal in power of action to Siva (Sivatulyabalah sarve), but they are souls 
subject to the Lord (kim tu te sesvaranavah).?!* (122) 

They perform their office in due order, impelled by His power. 
Their great office is termed the five-fold function (pancakrtyavila- 
ksitah).°"* (123) 

It consists of creation, compassion, destruction, maintenance, and 
obscuration. Since they perform [this five-fold office] as here described 
(tathadripam), they are therefore taught to be office-bearers (adhi- 
karinah). (124) 

Pratoda spoke: 

If Siva be the creator of the universe, then what use has He of office- 


219One could consider emending nivartayanti to nirvartayanti, but the two verbs are 
so often confused in usage that it is impossible to tell which usage was authorial. 
The same applies to Matangavidyapada 5:12cd (quoted in the apparatus); here BHATT 
prints nivartayaty (which is shared by the early Nepalese MS) and records no variation 
in the manuscripts he consulted. 

211 The same image is used of Ananta’s relationship to the impure universe in Kirana 
4:8c—9b. 

212For this attribute see 1:15d and 1:95d and cf. Matangavidyapada 4:55cd. One could 
assume there to be two words here merged in a double sandhi: sefvarah+anavah. 

213 er conj. ISAACSON (letter of 27.viii.2001). Also possible would be emendation to 
pancakrtyopalaksitah; the transmitted text is perhaps improbably awkward. 

It is consistent with its supposed lateness (see GOODALL, 1998:lxxiv) that the 
Parakhya uses here the developed terminology. I am aware of only one other, again rel- 
atively late, Siddhanta that uses the term: Mrgendravidyapada 3:8cd reads tadvapuh 
pancabhir mantraih pancakrtyopayogibhih. Note that here in the Parakhya, as in the 
locus classicus in Rauravasitrasangraha 1:15ab, it is the VidyeSvaras to whom the five 
functions are assigned. It is possible, as DAGENS and BARAZER-BILLORET have sug- 
gested (2000:xxxvii-xxxix and 500) that the RauravasGtrasangraha did not intend to 
refer to the five functions; but it is plain, as they also mention, that the later exegetical 
tradition interpreted the Rauravasitrasangraha to ao so. The argument of DAGENS 
and BARAZER-BILLORET that the Rauravasiitrasangraha probably does not refer to the 
five functions in this verse since it does not refer to them elsewhere seems to me not 
particularly strong: the Parakhya too does not refer to their being five elsewhere and 
the Parakhya too elsewhere gives a list of only four (2:97cd). (For my interpretation of 
Rauravasitrasangraha 1:15ab see GOODALL 1998:173.) 


Chapter Two 203 


bearers? If it be established that they bear office (tesam sthite ’dhikari- 
tve), then it cannot be said that power [is the Lord’s]. (125) 

Prakasa spoke: 

If He acted Himself, then He would incur censure from all and be thought 
low. Without these (office-bearers] the Lord’s effulgence would not shine 
through the whole universe (sarvadhvani). (126) 

His power is raised up in the universe (marge) without support 
(niralamba*"*), like the multitude of stars. It is these [office-bearers], 
filled with Siva’s power, who agitate primal matter. (127) 

These mantras”!* and overlords of mantras (vidyavidyamahes$varah) 
are capable of all tasks. They are all invested with duty to perform these 
(tatra te ’dhikrtah).?)© They have attained to the level of ifvara. That 
reality level (tat tattvam), which is situated above the reality level of 
[pure] knowledge (vidyatattvordhvasamsthitam) has now been dealt with 
(samsiddham) in this scripture (iha). (128) 

He, the first (adyah), has been taught who is known by means of the 
pure wisdom that ‘falls’ when there is contact with His power, who is the 
creator of the means to attain the fruit that is liberation (moksaphala- 
sadhanahetuh),”'" whose distinctive sign is the [texts of] reflection that 
are the rays that issue from the crest-jewel fixed to the high tip of the 
crown upon the head that is (the tattva of pure] knowledge.?!® (129) 


Thus the second chapter, elucidating thoughts about the topic of the Lord, 
in the great tantra called the Supreme. 


214 67 conj. M* transmits nirdlambe, but this seems less smooth taken with marge 
(though perhaps one could understand ‘... like the multitude of stars in the supportless 
path (of heaven]’), and I have assumed that that ending is the result of accidental 
attraction. Of course it is also conceivable that the intended text is niralambaé + 
ibhacakravat (‘like a group of servants’?), but I can make little sense of this. 

2151+ is possible that these are not intended here, for cf. 117c, in which it is evident 
from the astau that despite the lengthy name, only the latter group are intended. 

216 o con). 

217 ex con). 

218Here, although apparently used in the sense of the tattva of Suddhavidya, the word 
vidya also signals the subject of the next chapters, since it is the name of the padartha 
that is next to be examined. 


PARAKHYATANTRA CHAPTER III 


Knowledge (vidya) [means] that which is copious because of the de- 
scent of knowledge and which is the certainty of the [one] true authorita- 
tive teacher (sadaptaguruniscaya).*)9 Knowledge [is also that] which, be- 
cause it enters into mantras, accomplishes what they must perform.?2° (1) 

At creation the Lord God, who is the cause of all causes, awak- 
ened Lord Ananta and the other Vidyegas for the sake of liberating [all 
souls}.221 (2) 

Awakened by His power, acting by pure means, these awaken[ed] 
Gauta and others (gautadin), and those awaken(ed] Bhava and oth- 
ers.22? (3) 

Bhava and others [awakened] yet others, until [knowledge] reached 
Vira, Virabhadra, the Lord of Uma (umeganam). Then the gods obtained 
(it]. (4) 

From them the Rsis obtained [it], and from them the best of men. 
Whoever caused its transmission in this tradition (asmin®*%), those men 
are ‘transmitters’ (avatarakah). (5) 

They are held to be divine and not divine in this system (asmin). 
They are established to be lords (nathatvena vyavasthitah). They are 


21°This translation assumes that this is a non-bahuvrihi compound inflected as a 
bahuvrthi, for which see p.locdii above. Alternatively we could intrepret it ‘whose 
certainty [comes] from the true authoritative teacher’. Details in the interpretation of 
every part of the verse are uncertain. | 

*2°Like 1:15 and the first verses of the other chapters, this verse sets the agenda for 
the rest of the chapter: the transmission of scripture is treated in 3:2-19, its authori- 
tativeness is the subject of 3:20—56; the origin of mantras is discussed in 3:57-79. 

221Cf. Malinivijayottara 2:18c-19b and Moksakarika 72c-73b quoted in fn. 207 on 
p.201 above. For karana used as a masculine to describe Siva, see 6:5b, and Kirana 
6:1. 

222These names are unfamiliar to me. 

223For this use of asmin here and in the following verse, see p. xxx. The anacolouthic 
use of the singular in the protasis and plural in the apodosis has not been emended 
away, for it might be original. For the hiatus between ca and the initial vocalic r see 
p. lxxxiii above. 


206 Parakhyatantra 


gods (girvanah) and sages (munayo ’pi ca) freed from attachment and 
hatred. His teaching, taught by them, is to be received (grahyam) [and] 
is established as scripture (agamatve pratisthitam).?*4 (6) 

Pratoda spoke: 

Earlier you taught that Siva is without form, devoid of the faculty of 
speech. He is not capable of composing scripture (sastrakarane). He is 
established not to be endowed with power to act (sakalah)?*° at the level 
of ultimate truth (arthatah). (7) 

[And] these Rudras Ananta and others, they are awakeners of other 
Rudras. If it be established that they are awakeners, then what need is 
there [for them] of His power? (8) 

Prakasa spoke: 

Even though God is without form, all the [necessary] arrangement of 
syllables etc. [that consitutes composition of scripture] takes place, just 
as though it were the product of a body, by means of the power that is 
His will (svecchaésamarthyayogatah). (9) 

But, [you may object,] if He imparts teaching, then must not this 
omnipotent Lord [after all] be endowed with form (sakalah)? [We reply 


224These verses (3:1-6) are the Parakhya’s treatment of the stock theme of tantrava- 
tara. Other tantras (e.g. Rauravasitrasangraha 3) give an account of the lineage of 
their particular transmission, or of the particular lineages of transmission of the Siva- 
and Rudra-bhedas (e.g. Kirana 10); the Parakhya’s account, however, is of the trans- 
mission of the entirety of knowledge—what Trilocanasgiva classifies as a mahaugha- 
kramalaksanasastravatara (Siddhantasamuccaya IFP MS T. 284, pp. 128-9 [=A]; IFP 
MS T. 206, p.58 (=B]; GOML MS R 14394, pp. 1-2): 


guruparamparakramas ca dvividhah: mahaughakramalaksanah prati- 
samhitagurukramalaksanag§ ca. tatra mahaughakramalaksanah pra- 
darSyate. tatra parameSvarah prathamam vidyesan anugrhya tebhyo 'sta- 
vimSatisamhitah prakaSayati. te ca punah Srikanthadikramena muni- 
manusyantam sarvasamhita avatarayanti. so ’yam mahaughakrama- 
laksanah Sastraévatarah. 


e guruparamparakramas ca] BC; guruparamparakramas catra A e prati- 
samhita® ] C; pratisamhita® AB e °laksanas ca] AB; “laksanas ceti C 
e °laksanah pradargyate | B; °laksanam pradargyate AC e Srikantha® | BC; 
krikantha® A e so ’'yam ] AB; bodham C e “laksanah sastravatarah | B; 
*laksanasastravatarah A; °laksanas Sastravatarakah C 

Some of this is also to be found in Madhyarjuna’s Siddhantadipika, IFP T. 284, p. 107; 
but it is clear from other acknowledged borrowings [e.g. on p. 102] that the Siddhanta- 
samuccaya is its source. Cf. also the Sivajianabodhasangrahabhasya of Sivagrayogin, 
p. 6. 
22°Other interpretations of this label at this point are of course possible. 


Chapter Three 207 


that] this ‘being endowed with form’ (sakalyam tat) was spoken of in this 
way above in a figurative sense. (10) 

Because of His own very nature (a4tmasvaripena) He performs this 
awakening (pratibodham) by means of His own power (svaSaktitah). This 
awakening knowledge (bodhah) is known of because of its effect, [namely] 
the sequence of descent of the scriptures. (11) 

Since it is the case that what is to be accomplished is to be achieved by 
some means (saédhanat sadhyasiddhitah), so, in transmission too (avatare 
’pi), this [awakening knowledge] is known to come step by step from the 
source by means of the light of Siva’s power (Sivasaktiprakagena). (12) 

Just like any thing that comes from a great distance [and that must 
nevertheless have had an original starting point], this [awakening knowl- 
edge] cannot spread (na yati) devoid of a root (chinnamulah). Therefore 
Siva, the Supreme soul, is its creating cause.226 (13) 

And that (awakening knowledge] too, being filled with His power 
(tacchaktisamvistah), expounds that [same] truth (tam artham).?2’ [And 
so] that [too] is—indirectly by this chain of intermediaries (paramparya- 
kramenaiva)—the cause of [further] transmission (avatarasya). (14) 

Then (atho) [there takes place] a contraction of all the scriptures by a 
particular (process of] shrinking (hrasavisesatah),?28 since [only] by this 


226The slightly unusual collocation hetukartr is paralleled in Kirana 7:4 and Tantraloka 
8:402. 

227The text is suspect here: it would be smoother if a person were being described, 
and yet the person referred to immediately above is the supreme Siva, who is unlikely to 
be described as being ‘filled with His power’. It is possible therefore, as Dr. ISAACSON 
has suggested to me (letter of 4.ix.2001), that some text has here dropped out that 
made mention of a god or sage to whom awakening knowledge was first transmitted by 
Siva and who now transmits it further. 

228 The ‘shrinking’ is not arbitrary, since that would involve losing important parts of 
the original knowledge. The theme of scripture being revised into shorter and shorter 
scriptures for the sake of short-lived and limited mortals recurs in many tantras, e.g., 
Sardhatrifatikalottara 1:1-4, Svacchanda 1:5-7, Rauravasitrasangraha 10:103-6 and 
the beginning of the Sarvajnanottara (some of which is quoted by GOODALL 1998:1x, 
fn. 145). See also Nivadsa uttarasitra 1:39—-40, f. 24”: 


tantrasya paraga hy ete SataSo 'tha sahasrasah 
tebhyo manujamukhyanaém tatra kificid ihagatam 
alpayusah smyta martya alpaviryalpabuddhayah 
ato 'rthasangrahoktam tu martyebhyas ca <praka>>Sitam. 
‘These [above-mentioned sages] have reached the further shore [of the ocean] of scrip- 


ture, hundreds and thousands of them. From them a certain amount [from] amongst 
this [scriptural knowledge] has come down to the foremost of men. Mortals are known to 


208 Parakhyatantra 


shrinking does its power (tadviryam) come within the range of under- 
standing of gods and sages (girvanamunidrksthitam). (15) 

This contraction that is taught by summarising teachers (samharaka- 
guriditah?”’) is such that the essence from the root—that is to say the 
collection of the things that are essential (saravastuparigrahah)—can be 
understood [from it] (samjneyah). (16) 

And for [the sake of} men this has come down to the earth from Siva’s 
‘mouth’ (Sivavaktratah), {so called] in this system (iha) because it reveals 
(vyanjanat) all scriptures (sarvasastranam) and because it saves (tranat) 
all souls. (17) 

By the word ‘mouth’ [here is expressed] His power, because that is the 
cause of revealing and saving; not otherwise is His activity that is made 
up of phonemes, sentences and words [i.e. His authorship of scripture] 
possible. (18) 

In this [activity] (tatra)*°° it is He alone, the Supreme Lord, because 
of His power, who is taught to be the speaker. His scripture (tadagamah) 
is in such a form as has been summarised by those [summarising teach- 
ers]. (19) 

How are we to know that these, who have not (themselves] experienced 
(the truth], have authoritativeness? [We reply:] just as it has been taught 
that the Lord has it, so [too] these have authoritativeness. (20) 

They are taught to be authorities (aptah proktah), not [merely] or- 
dinary gods, such as Brahma, [and] not [just] ordinary men; [they are] 
special persons (kecit) who expound the topics [of the tantras] (padartha- 
pratipadakah). They are not deceivers (pratarakah), [but] ones who are 
in every respect endowed with qualities of goodness.73! (21) 


be short-lived, of small strength and small intellect. That is why it has been expressed 
in (the form of] a résumé (?) and revealed to men.’ 
(The above translation assumes double sandhi of alpaviryah + alpabuddhayah.) 

22°One might consider interpreting ‘is taught by the teacher who contracts [the uni- 
verse, Viz. Siva,]’; but this would leave the plural pronouns in 3:19-20 without a referent. 

230Or perhaps this might rather be rendered ‘Of the [teachers and transmitters of the 
tantra]’. 

231By punctuating this verse differently we could arrive at different interpretations, 
e.g., ‘Authoritative persons are not ordinary; [they are] like Brahma and the gods. 
They are not ordinary men; they are special persons who expound the topics [of the 
tantras|.’ Perhaps one could also consider conjecturing pravaktaro (in place of the 
transmitted pratarako) and translating: ‘Teachers [of tantras] endowed with qualities 
of goodness are not to be found everywhere’. 


Chapter Three 209 


Pratoda spoke: 

Since [this] teaching (vacah) is of men, it is not an authority; it is 
uncertain. What is enjoined by [Vedic] injunction (codanacoditam) is 
an authoritative means of knowledge (manam) because this is not of 
men.”3? (22) 

Prakasa spoke: 

Tell me plainly: by which means of knowledge among the six means of 
knowledge [that you acknowledge]% is it determined that this [Vedic 
revelation] is not of men (na paurusam)? (23) 

If this [fact of the Veda’s being not of men] were perceived by direct 
perception, then the person by whom it were perceived would be seen. 
And [yet] such a person is not seen in this world, therefore this is not to be 
known by means of direct perception (tena drstya na gamyate**"), (24) 

And since we perceive no special nature of the composition of 
phonemes and so forth [in the Veda, as compared with the composition 
of phonemes etc. in ordinary speech], its being an effect, which [is a fea- 
ture that] belongs to the various kinds [of such composition], such as 
words, sentences etc. (padavakyadibhedagam), must necessarily be in- 
ferred.** (25) 

As for that differentiating characteristic (yo visesah) in (?) Vedic 
revelation (Sravananugah) that [results] from its division into arthavada 
and the rest [of the categories of Mimamsaka exegesis], is that not also 


232Dr. Kei KATAOKA’s conjecture here is a diagnostic one: the wording .of the orig- 
inal cannot be known; but his conjecture conveys the sense that we expect. Human 
utterances are not reliable (Slokavarttika, codanasitra 144ab): sarvadaé capi purusah 
prayenanrtavadinah. 

233Prakaéa appears to admit the authoritativeness of three pramanas: pratyaksa, 
anumana (see 2:9-11) and agama (see 3:56). Here he speaks of six, because these are 
acknowledged by Bhattas. He now deals with each in turn: pratyaksa 3:24, anumana 
3:25-34, upamana 3:35-36b, arthapatti 3:36c-37b, abhava 3:37ab, agama 3:37cd. 

234 o con). 

35Cf. Ramakantha’s often repeated (with slight variations) formula racana kartaram 
na vyabhicarati (Kiranavrtti 1:12.7; Matangavrtti ad vidyapada 1:30c-33b, p. 18; 
Moksakarikavrtti ad 147c-148b). The formula is reminiscent of Parthasarathimisra’s 
words in his exposition of Slokavarttika, vedanityatadhikarana lab (vacanantara- 
sadharmyat kartuh sémdnyasamplave): ...kin ca, racanadhina padanam vakyata- 
pattih; na ca racayitur abhave racana sambhavati: ato 'vasyam asrayaniyo vedanam 
karta. And cf. Pramanavarttikasvavrtti ad 243, p.123 (to which Dr. KATAOKA (letter 
of 19.x.2001) has drawn my attention): (Buddhist:] na caétra laukikavaidikayoh sva- 
bhavabhedam paSyamah... [Mimamsaka:] nanu vedavedayos tattvalaksano 'sty eva 
visesah. 


210 Parakhyatantra 


found appearing elsewhere (bhinne)? (26) 

Or [we might argue that] such a differentiating characteristic is found 
in the mass of knowledge (that is the Veda, but only] for the reason that 
eulogies are presented in it which have deities as their subject.2°° (27) 

And [you argue that] no creator of it is remembered to have existed, 
[and that] therefore it is taught to be not of men. [We reply: in that case] 
it must undesirably follow that (prasajyate) such things as tanks and wells 
would not be effects [since one does not remember their creators].73” (28) 

But in this case (vatra), do we not know2"® the dying out of the family 
of the creator of that (tank or well or the like] to be an evident [truth] 
(bhasagah); because forgetting [the creators of] other things [is possible]; 
[but] it is impossible of (the creators of] knowledge or the like?2%® (29) 

Even though it is impossible [to forget a creator] for things that are 
(in any case] beginningless (anaddivastinam), such as [Vedic] injunctions 


23°The point, if this interpretation of the verse as a statement of the Siddhanta is 
correct, would be that what distinguishes the Veda from other texts is simply its being 
full of praises of deities, a distinguishing characteristic that is not enough to block 
the inference of its being an effect. One could consider instead treating this verse as 
a statement of a Mimamsaka pirvapaksa: ‘Or [you might say that] there is such a 
differentiating characteristic in the mass of knowledge [that is the Veda], since there 
is found in it eulogy of deities’. But this seems less plausible, because the transition 
between 3:27 and 3:28ab would then be less smooth and both would be expressing 
arguments of the pirvapaksa even though only the objection of 3:28ab seems to be 
answered in what follows. 

237The example probably derives from the Sabarabhasya ad 1.1.5, where the topic is 
the eternality of the connection between word and meaning (FRAUWALLNER 1968:42- 
4): katham punar idam avagamyate ‘apauruseya esa sambandhah’ iti? purusasya 
sambandhur abhavat. katham sambandha nasti? pratyaksasya pramanasyaébhavat, 
tatpurvakatvac cetaresam. manu ciravrttatvat pratyaksasyavisayo bhaved idanin- 
tananam. na hi ciravrttah san na smaryeta. na ca himavadadisu kupaéraméddivad 
asmaranam bhavitum arhati. purusaviyogo hi tesu bhavati desotsadena kulotsadena va. 
na tu Sabdarthavyavaharaviyogah purusanam asti. syad etat: sambandhamatravyava- 
harino nisprayojanam kartrsmaranam anadriyamanah purusaé vismareyur iti. tan na; 
yadi hi purusah krtva sambandham vyavahdrayet, vyavaharakale 'vasyam smartavyo 
bhavet. sampratipattau hi kartrvyavahartror arthah siddhyati, na vipratipattau. na hi 
vrddhigabdena apaniner vyavaharatah adaicah pratiyeran, paninikrtim ananumanya- 
manasya va. tathé makarena apingalasya na sarvagurus trikah pratiyeta, pingalakrtim 
ananumanyamanasya va. 

238 er conj. KATAOKA. The constitution and interpretation of the text here are ex- 
tremely tentative. 

23°In the Sabarabhdsya the examples of Panini and Pingala are adduced, for which 
see fn. 237 on p. 210 above. 


Chapter Three 211 


(vidhyadinam), it would follow (prapyate) that some part [at least] of the 
statements [that make up the Veda] must have been authored by men 
(because they contain historical references] (purusokto ’m$o vacasam), 
since [those parts] cannot be [explained as just] eulogy (astuteh).74° (30) 

Or perhaps a statement [produced] in one man (narantare) might be 
unworldly (alaukikam) for another.?4! [The Mimamsaka might reply:] but 
uncultivated men (asamskrtanam) cannot have [authored] such a special 
teaching (as the Veda]. (31) 

(We reply:] and yet (ca) [although that may be so now], at another 
time (long ago] such a restriction need not obviously have applied. Be- 
cause of [the Veda’s| being distinguished by such features as having com- 
position (racanadivisistatvat), it follows that it is an effect (karyatvam 
upapadyate). (32) 

For these statements [of the Veda] certainty [with respect to their 
authoritativeness] (niScayah) is established (sthitah) in the same way as 
it is for statements of smrti-literature. On the other hand (va) you have 
taught that these (statements of smrti] have authority in as much as they 
have the Veda as their source. (33) 

And everything that arises [including the Veda, since we have proved 
that it is an effect] must have a source, and so (tena) this teaching [that 
is the Veda] is not to be understood by [the means of knowledge that is] 
inference (anumanatah) to be not of men (apaurusam). (34) 

Nor would analogy, which depends on a cognition of similarity 
(sadrsyapratyayanuga), be [applicable] there. If there is some quality 
of something [in something else], then the means of knowledge that is 
analogy can be applied. Therefore analogy would not be [applicable] to 
statements of the Veda [if they are] such [as you conceive them to be] 
(vedavakye tathavidhe). (35) 

And if (va) you wish [to use] arthapatti, since language (Sabde) is 
established (sthite) to be eternal, then let man be that which reveals it 
(tadvyanjakah). [But] in that case (by this ‘revealing’] (tatha) this act of 


240Note that the constitution and interpretation of this passage are extremely tenta- 
tive. PrakaSa’s point appears to be that of the Naiyadyika: in the last pada he preempts 
the Mimamsaka’s response to the suggestion that the Veda has authored passages con- 
taining historical references (namely the contention that such passages are arthavada) 
by asserting (with no reason adduced, but presumably because he believes the historical 
references to be undeniable) that one cannot class such passages as arthavada. 

241Once again the text and interpretation are not secure. For the usage narantare, cf. 
3:46a below, and 14:99d and the annotation ad loc. 


212 Parakhyatantra 


composition is performed [though passing under another name].”4? (36) 
The proof of this [existing eternally] cannot be achieved by [the means 
of knowledge called] abhava, since He [the creator] exists (tasya bhavah) 
by His own nature (svabhavatah).*43 Nor can the eternality [of the Veda] 
be known from Sabda, because it is [part of] the same vakya (tulyavakya- 
tah).744 (37) 
Pratoda spoke: 
True statements of Vedic injunction (tathyam yac codanavakyam) that 
teach such things as the Agnihotra?*> are not non-authoritative in [any of 
the] three ways {in which something may be non-authoritative]?“* (tasya 
. napramanyam tridha sthitam) since understanding arises [as a result 
of them] (jnanasamutpattau).?4” (38) 


2421 assume that identifying vyanjana with racana is the step in the argument that 
is here intended, and that the awkwardly compressed syntax is authorial. Perhaps one 
might instead translate: ‘And if you wish [to use] arthapatti, even though language is 
established to be eternal, you must allow that man is its ‘revealer’ [when he enunciates 
phonemes], and that this ‘composition’ [of the phonemes into arrangements that we 
know as texts] is accomplished in the same way [viz. by men].’ The structure of the 
Mimamsakas’ arthapatti would be: the Veda is eternal and unauthored since one cannot 
account for its existence in any other way (anyatha anupapattya). PrakaSa’s intention 
is to suggest such another way in which its existence can be accounted for and thereby 
demonstrate the inapplicability of arthapatti. 

243Qr perhaps, since it is disturbing that the tat in tatsiddhih should have a different 
referent from the tasya, ‘since it exists by its own nature’. A positive thing can be 
proved by a positive means of knowledge only; only an absence can be proved by 
abhava, which is the absence of other pramanas (cf. Slokavarttika abhavapariccheda 
46). The dismissal here of abhava is of course inadequate. In fact the Mimamsaka 
might have argued for there not having been a purusa as creator by abhava. 

244The suffix -tah is again treated as though it were -tvat (cf. paroksatah in 3:40d 
below). The reason adduced for Sabda not being applicable is the problem of circularity 
(the Veda declaring itself to be eternal). 

45These (which can of couse only be known through the Veda) are dharma as Sabara 
defines it: ... tena yah purusam nihSreyasena samyunakti, sa eva dharmaSabdenocyate. 
na kevalam loke, vede ’pi ‘yajnena yajnam ayajanta devah tani dharmani prathamany 
asan’ iti yajatifabdavacyam eva dharmam samamananti. (FRAUWALLNER 1968:20-1). 

248These three are listed in Slokavarttika, codanasitra 54ab: apramanyam tridha 
bhinnam mithyatvajnanasamSayaih. For a brief discussion of the significance of this 
allusion to the Slokavarttika, see p. 1. Pratoda’s strategy here is that of Sabara ad 1.1.2 
(FRAUWALLNER 1968:18, lines 3-4), where he acknowledges that a laukikam vacanam 
can be true (avitatha) when it derives from pratyayitat purusat or when it is indriyavi- 
sayam and not otherwise. Since dharma is not something that one can know about from 
any other source than scripture, any statement of men about it cannot be authoritative. 

247Instead of taking the tasya as a correlative to yat, one might understand tathyam 


Chapter Three 213 


Since a human teaching rests upon the understanding of the person 
who wishes to make something known (bodhakapratyayasritam), it does 
not serve to make known [dharma] (abodhaya): such [human] sentences 
(tadvakyam) cannot [both] be true and teach that dharma (taddharma- 
codakam) [viz. the Agnihotra etc.].248 (39) 

Prakasa spoke: 

Among the three grounds for non-authoritativeness that you have named 
(uddistah) above (pura’4’), is there not doubt (sandehah) because of 
its object [svarga] (tadarthasya) being beyond the sphere of the senses 
(paroksatah*°’)? (40) 

(It is] just like the knowledge which is possible (yad bhavet) with 
respect to fire (agnyarthe) [and] that has as its object the universal [fire, 
i.e. fire in general] (samanyavisayam), or [like] the cognition of a possibility 
(sambhavapratyayo va); it cannot here have universal application (atra 
nasau sarvatriko bhavet).?°! (41) 

Since there are exceptions [where it does not hold true] (vyabhicarat), 
it is not an authoritative means of knowledge (pramanam no). [You might 
raise the following objection:] Is it not the case that this [phenomenon of 
exceptions] is so even of (things that are generally accepted as] authorita- 
tive means of knowledge (pramanesv api) ? But if [as you Mimamsakas 
hold] it is of itself that something is an authoritative means of knowledge 


to be the predicate of a sentence with an omitted correlative corresponding to yat: 
‘Statements of Vedic injunction that teach such things as the Agnihotra are true; it be- 
ing the case that understanding arises [because of them], they are not non-authoritative 
in (any of the] three ways.’ 

248The second half-line might instead be interpreted as a statement about the Veda: 
‘Statements of this [Veda] do not fail to produce cognition [about dharma]; they are 
true and they enjoin dharma.’ If this interpretation were accepted, then we might take 
the first half-line as follows: ‘Because [it is only] human teaching [that] rests upon the 
understanding of the person who wishes to make something known,...’. But perhaps 
it could also be read with what precedes it. 

249One would rather expect this not to refer to the immediately preceding question, 
and yet Pratoda has not otherwise referred to this group of three. Perhaps, therefore, 
we should understand ‘that you (Mimamsakas] have taught before’. The entire chapter 
is curious in its implicit acknowledgement that Mimamsaka views predate the tantra, 
so perhaps an explicit acknowledgement of Mimamsaka works (with the word pura) is 
not impossible. Those who are very uncomfortable with pura might consider emending 
either to ‘dhuna or to punah, both of which are palaeographically close. 

2501 understand this to be a loose usage in the sense of paroksatvat. 

2511s the sense of this last phrase: ‘it is subject to-exceptions (vyabhicari)’? 


214 Parakhyatantra 


(svata eva pramanatve),*°? then that means of knowledge [should by itself 
be the necessary and sufficient] cause (of correct knowledge].?°° (42) 

Then, for the same reason[?] (taddhetuna), [it would follow that] 
the adducing of a logical ground would be pointless (hetupadana- 
vaiyarthyam). (But] it is not just of itself alone that (the means of knowl- 
edge called] scripture (Sabdasya) is possessed of its function of according 
with (and thereby causing one to understand(?)]?°* its meaning (vrttir 
arthanugamini). (43) 

If, on the other hand (va), you hold*°> that its function of according 
with [and thereby causing one to understand(?)] its meaning [operates 
in the same way] as [the same function] in a lamp, [then reflect that] in 
that case too [the lamp functions in] dependence upon someone using it 
(yojakapeksa): it is the same for language (tadvad eva padadika*®). (44) 

Something which causes to know (jnapakam) does not of itself, de- 
void of knowledge (jnanavarjitam), have the power of causing knowledge 
(jnapane Saktam). Therefore it cannot be said that an authoritative 
means of knowledge is of itself [authoritative]. It (tat) is not certain 
beyond doubt (aniscitam). (45) 

This teaching (vakyam etat), which does not change (nanyatha- 
sthitam) when it is in another place (desantaragatam) is proven, 
teas toe! (46) 


252See, e.g., Slokavarttika, codanasitra 47ab: svatah sarvapramananam pramanyam 
iti gamyatam. 

2°3There could, in other words, be no possibility of vyabhicara. 

254The awkwardness of this formulation reflects my difficulty with the Sanskrit: the 
form is not causative, but the context in which the parallel expression (which is also 
not causative in form) occurs in the next verse suggests to me that a causative sense is 
required. I had accordingly first translated ‘its function of causing one to understand’, 
assuming that this was a further instance of a simplex used with the sense of a causative 
(cf. 6:21b and 6:61d), but such an interpretation would be semantically problematic 
too: ‘understand’ appears not to be an attested sense of anu-gam. 

255The use of manyate as a passive is rare and perhaps suspect. 

2561t is not clear to me exactly how this should be interpreted: padadika could either 
be taken to be agreeing with (an understood) vrttih—'so too [the function] that belongs 
to words and other such [features of language]’— or with apeksa—‘so too there is [a 
dependency] that belongs to words and other such [features of language]’. In each case 
the ‘that belongs to’ would have to be expressed by the -ka, and this is perhaps not 
plausible. One should also consider the possibility suggested to me by Dr. ISAACSON 
(letter of 1.x.2001) that padadika is an error for padadike: ‘so too in words and so 
forth (viz. in language].’ 

257 e¢ conj. The point of the passage as a whole appears to be to emphasise that 


Chapter Three 215 


Otherwise it could not [be taught] in brief (sanksepat) or, on the other 
hand, at length (punar vistarato ‘pi va). And yet (kim tu) His teachers 
(tadgurubhih), endowed with knowledge (prajriaih), have established the 
truth, (setting it forth] together with reasoning (yuktisamhitah) [in vari- 
ous scriptures]. (47) 

Thus whatever particular teaching of a [particular] sage (gurukta 
ya viSesoktih) there might be that [looks as though it] is contradictory 
(parasparavirodhini) because of a division of sentences [within it] that is 
other (than what was intended(?)|—|[that teaching in fact] relates to the 
truths established by Him (tatsiddhavastuga). (48) 

{In the same way an abbreviation of rites (kriyopasamharah) accom- 
plishes its purpose (siddharthah). That [abbreviation] derives from the 
[system of] rites [originally taught by Siva]. Just as [in Vedic religious 
practice] the rituals taught by different branches of the Veda [are valid] 
(Sakhantaroktakarmeva), so too (such an abbreviation of rites] in which 
the sequence [of actions] is accompanied by [appropriate] mantras is es- 
tablished [to be effective] (siddho ’nugakramah)t.?°® (49) 

And (api) since He has been said (yenoktah) by the statements of all 
educated authoritative persons (sarvasistaptavakyena) to be omniscient, 
He understands the relation between the goal and the means of attaining 
it, [and] He understands the union with the highest knowledge (uttara- 
jnanayogavit).2°9 (50) 


authoritative means of knowledge are authoritative because they satisfy conditions of 
truth rather than, as for the Mimamsaka opponents, because whatever is authoritative 
must of itself be automatically authoritative without depending on anything outside 
itself. In the next verse it appears that a connection is to be made with this fact (that 
things are authoritative because they measure up to a reality outside themselves) and 
the fact that Saiva scripture consists of many redactions by various sages of what Siva 
taught. It is possible that in the second half of this verse.a transition was intended from 
the subject of the Veda to Saiva scripture. Emendation of this half-verse, which, as 
transmitted, is unmetrical, could perhaps be considered to tat siddham tantraripanaém 
pramananam yathasthitam: ‘This is established [for Vedic revelation] in the same way 
as it is established for the authorities that have the form of tantras.’ Or instead perhaps 
tat siddham tantraripanam pramanam néanyathasthiteh (where pram&nam would be 
a genitive plural of prama): ‘This is proven for the authorities that are tantras [too], 
since they are established to be not [essentially] different.’ 

*58The syntax of this sentence is odd, but we have seen other instances of statements 
involving comparisons that seem anacolouthic. The interpretation allowed in this text 
of the syllable ga appears, as we have seen elsewhere (see introduction, p. baxxi), to be 
very wide. 

25°Other interpretations of the last compound seem possible. The awkwardly placed 


216 Parakhyatantra 


He is the omniscient one in whom all] distinctions have their rest. 
t(Even] the distinction that is [apparently] without resting point [?] (yo 
‘navasthanah), since it moves [?] (yato ganta) it must come to rest 
(visramet){. (51) 

This {sort of] internal resting (so ’ntaravisramah) {can be] directly 
perceived (drstah) in the flood of rivers [once entered] in the water of the 
ocean.2© + The supreme Lord... {.26! (52) 

That which is composed by Him (tatpranitam) [and] that which ex- 
presses His meaning (tadarthasya vacakam) [are said to be] Siva’s teaching 
(Sivabhasitam). This is to be understood from [their] agreement (sam- 
vadat) [with each other], for they cannot be devoid of a root source.*° 
(53) 

That is certain with respect to what is not directly perceived 
(adrstarthe), just as is the case with the moon, sun, planets and such.” 
Having seen what is manifest in [this] world, we can infer it[s existence] 
also when [that thing is] beyond the range of our senses (parokse ’pi). (54) 

(That which establishes] the authority of direct perception and the 
others [of the valid means of knowledge that are dependent on perception] 
is [their] application (vyaparah) in the functioning of the world (lokasam- 
sthitau); heaven (svargah) and liberation are not within their scope, since 
those are beyond the range of the senses. (55) 

His teaching is the one authority; it is that which overrides all [the 


tu has not been translated because, whether primary or a secondary insertion, its only 
purpose must be to avoid a hiatus. 

260.7 conj. The interpretation is uncertain. The use of antara® with the sense of 
antah is probably possible in this sort of literature. Note that Ramakantha assumes 
the reverse (antah with the sense of antara) in his interpretation of Kirana 2:9. 

261Perhaps the text could be emended to tadvaj jnanavisisto ‘pi vigrantah 
parameSvarah: ‘In the same way the supreme Lord too is endowed with [all] knowledge, 
being rested in by [all knowledge].’ 

26267 conj. No doubt other reconscructions are possible. Moreover other interpreta- 
tions of this rather tentative reconstruction are possible, e.g.: ‘That which is composed 
by Him and expresses His meaning [is said to be] Siva’s teaching; this [i.e. that some- 
thing is Siva’s teaching] is [to be] understood from [its] agreement [with other works 
that are recognised to be Siva’s teaching]; (it is not improper to make such an inference] 
since nothing can be devoid of a root source.’ 

263 Perhaps what is alluded to here is that we know of the existence of the sun, moon 
and other celestial bodies in spite of our not perceiving the sun at night and our not 
perceiving the stars and the moon during the day. Once again the wording of the text 
and the interpretation offered are quite uncertain. 


Chapter Three 217 


others].264 Therefore the teaching of the authoritative person [viz. Siva] 
is to be accepted wherever, with respect to whatever subject and however 
it occurs. (56) 

Therefore one must accept [the existence of] the lords who are 
Rudranus (rudranunayakah)*© on the authority of His teaching. By the 
will of the Lord (ifvarecchavasat) seven crores [of mantras] became man- 
ifest in [the reality level of pure] knowledge (vidyayam). (57) 

Seeing this terrible creation, overrun with troubles and pains (duhkha- 
kleSair upadrutam), they take counsel among themselves (sampradharya 
mithah*®), ttasmint{ and certain (?) [among them] (tathanyas ca), ready 
to enter a Saiva body (pravestum sankarim tanum/ samudyatah),?°" full 


264Or perhaps ‘His teaching is the one authority; it is that which determines all things 
[seen and unseen]’. The close parallel to this that appears in the Pauskara (7:63ab) 
is unaccountably garbled in the Adyar edition (where it reads, nonsensically, ekam 
pramanam ekam tadvakyam Sreyonidhih sada). The form quoted (in the apparatus) is 
that of the Chidambaram edition (which is also the form in which Jn&inaprakaésa quotes 
it towards the beginning of his Sivagamadimahatmyasangraha (IFP T.372, p.1194)). 
The passage of the Pauskara in which this unit occurs is clearly related to that in which 
it occurs in the Matanga: Pauskara 7:6lcd, 62d and 63ab are the same, respectively, 
as Matangavidyapada 3:18cd, 3:19b and 3:20ab. Once again (see introduction, p. liii) 
the Matanga and the Pauskara display their common allegiance to the Paramesvara 
division of scripture. It is conceivable that the Paradkhya has drawn here on the original 
Pauskara-ParameSvara, in which a similar line probably occurred. It is even possible 
that the passage of the original Pauskara-ParameSvara is actually what is cited by 
UmacigisankaraSastrin in his Brahmasitrasankarivrtti (pp. 35-6), though it is possible 
that the quotation is from the South Indian Pauskara: 


pauskarapaérameSvare 'pi 

yatha s& Sankarenokta tathépi Srutir astika 

pramanam sutaram aptatama eva mahesvarah 
suprasannendriyagramah sarvajnah sarvagocarah 
paksapatavinirmukto yathaérthagrahakah sada 

avyayah paripirnaSs ca svatantrah pasupasahaé 

pramanam ekam tadvakyam tathyam Sreyaskaram sada. iti. 


265This compound could of course be analysed variously. Compare Matangavidyé- 
pada 7:3ab: rudranavo mahabhagé mantranam saptakotayah. Ramakantha, in his 
commentary thereon, understands rudranavah to be in apposition to saptakofayah: ye 
caite proktah, te na vidyeSah... api tu ta eta mantranam saptakotayah. In our context 
too it seems likely that it is the seven crores of mantras that are meant. 

266This expression is paralleled (with parasparam sampradharya) in Matangavidya- 
pada 7:14bc, for which see fn. 270 on p.219 below. 

267That this enjambement is intended here is suggested to me by Matangavidydpada 
7:9ab, for which see fn. 270 on p. 219 below. 


218 Parakhyatantra 


of longing, their minds fixed on the will to go to the supreme state (param 
padam yiyasasiddhacetaskah), speak to him [viz. Ananta] with determi- 
nate thought (savikalpah):?6 (58-9) 

‘How can we go to that [supreme] state? Ananta is blocking us.’769 
Then the magnanimous (mahatmana) Ananta, the overlord of the lords 
of the mantras (vidyeSanathena), in the position of his own office 
(svadhikarapadasthena) himself thought (sankalpya manasa) [the follow- 
ing]: (60c-61b) 

‘Because of their duties (svadhikarat) how can these [vidyas] enter the 
imperishable state (acyutam padam)?’ (61cd) 

The overlord of the lords of mantras divided off half [of them] for the 
sake of maintenance (of the universe] (sthitihetutah).?”° (62ab) 


268 One might suspect the conclusion of this verse to be intended as an echo of a famous 
line, Sardhatrigatikadlottara 1:6c-7b (a&gopalangana bala mlecchah prakrtabhasinah/ 
antarjalagatah sattvas te 'pi nityam bruvanti tam); but probably the expression is 
rather intended to convey that the mantras (referred to as feminine plural perhaps be- 
cause the unspoken subject is kotayah, or because they are vidyah) do not ‘speak’ with 
conventional language but address Ananta with their thoughts. That it is Ananta whom 
they address is clear from the parallel account in the Matanga quoted in foonote 270 
on p. 219 below. 

269 er conj. The conjecture gacchamas is supported by Matangavidyapada 7:11lcd 
(quoted in foonote 270 below), which also speaks of Ananta blocking the mantras. One 
might have expected vocatives, but that would render the text unmetrical. 

270The number of mantras being seven crore is universal. It is also typical that 
only half of this number are actually employed in the tasks of the impure universe. 
Other tantras differ about what happens to the other half, and the account here is 
unfortunately corrupt, so that it is not easy to determine what the Parakhya teaches. 
According to Tattvasangraha 32-5 and to Mrgendravidyapada 4:7-8 (quoted below in 
fn. 277 on p. 220 below), half the mantras are involved in the initiation of beings in 
the pure universe. Such initiation does not require an acarya as a locus (adhikarana). 
They accomplish this immediately after creation and are then liberated. The other half 
are employed for the initiation and such of beings in the impure universe. They are 
liberated once they have performed these tasks only at the end of a cycle of creation. 
The account of the Matanga could perhaps be reconciled with this, but its treatment 
of the subject is very different: according to Matangavidyapada 7:6—14 as interpreted 
by Ramakantha, the mantras see and become disenchanted with mpure creation and 
desire to become liberated (as here in the Parakhya and in Ramakantha’s Moksakarika- 
vrtti ad Moksakarika 88-9). Ananta, at Siva's bidding holds them back from this, and 
so they approach Ananta and ask why it is that he holds them back, since they have 
performed the tasks which had up to then been given them. Ananta allows the purest 
(Sobhanah) to attain liberation after bearing office for just a day(?)—a detail that 
Ramakantha’s commentary overlooks—but the remaining half he invests with offices 
after they have first discussed among themselves who is suited to go where. Since 


Chapter Three 219 


Since (yasmat) the attainment of omniscience (jnanapraptih), which 
is known as the attainment of self (atmalabhakhya), and which is its rev- 
elation (tadvyaktih), [being that] in which there is the ‘arising’ of one’s 
own [innate] qualities of sentience (svacaitanyagunodaya), comes about 
through initiation [which is in turn accomplished] by means of knowl- 
edge (vidyadvarena)—as is also (ca) the attainment of the [eight super- 
natural] accomplishments of making oneself tiny and so forth (animadi- 
gunanam) by those who aim to attain that (tatsadhakatmanam)?"!— 


this difficult portion (Matangavidyapada 7:8-14 and commentary) is in some respects 
parallel to what we have here, I quote it below: 


tato 'dhikaram nirvartya svabhavenaiva tah kalah 
pratisancaram apannas tat tejah paramesvaram 8 
pravestum udyatah sadyah karanena mahatmana 

varita viniyogartham anantena Siveranat 9 

tatas tah prastum arabdhah karanam mantranéyakam 
bhagavan yas tvayasmabhyam adhikaro ’tiduskarah 10 
prag dattah sa samasto 'yam samyan nirvartito 'dhuna 
gacchamah svocitam sthanam kimartham vinivaryase 11 
tato ’nantena tah prokta vidya vedyarthadayikah 
bhavatyah svocitam sthanam prayantv ardhena gobhan&h 12 
matpritya viniyogartham dharyatam ekavaésaram 

tatah svacaravartinyo bhartur ajfanupalikah 13 

sthitas tv ardhena senaya gatah Sistah parasparam 
sampradharya mahaviryaé bhartuh sasanatatparah. 


tatas tah mantraripah kalah viraktah, sadyah tam praguktam isvarajnanuripam 
adhikaram svaSaktyaiva nirvartya pratisancarasyadhikaéram pratinivrttyatmano 
hetutvat pratisancaram parameSvarabhyarthananuripam praptah. yatas tatprasadam 
viné tasam api ca param muktim pravestum asamarthyam iti. tas tathabhutah satyah 
parameSvaracoditenanantesenadhikarartham eva dhrtah. 

tatas tabhir ananteSah prstah ‘bhagavan, atyantakutsito 'pi ayam adhikaro 'sma- 
bhih pagacchedaSivatvavyaktyatmakatvena samasta eva Isvaradistatvat krtah. ad- 
huna moksadhisthanapravrttah. tat kimartham vayam varitah’ iti. 

tato ‘nanteSah pratyuvaca—“bhavatisu madhyad yah prakrstataramalaparipaks- 
yuktatvat S$obhanah tah parameSvarajnayaiva moksam yantu. yas tu tadviparita- 
tvad adhikarabhilasinyas ta mahaépralayam yavat tisthantu” iti. “sarvabhitasukha- 
prado hi patih. sa katham asmadadin anabhimate visaye pravartayati” ity upa- 
Srutya, parasparam kasyah kutra ratir iti sammantrya, yah svacaravartinyah adhi- 
kaérakamah, tah saptakotisamkhyayah senayah ardhena sthitah gatah Sistah iti 
ato 'nyardhena ya mahaviryah paramuktibhajah, tah bhartuh Sasanaparah muktim 
gatah iti. 

471For this otiose use of dtman at the ends of words, cf. the Matanga, in which it 
is commonly employed (see p.liv). A translation such as ‘mantra-practitioners’ (for 
sadhaka) would leave the tat unaccounted for. But even with the flatter interpreta- 


220 Parakhyatantra 


therefore (tena) mantras are known as (smrtah) ‘knowledges’ (vidyah), 
(because of their being] connected with the power that is the meaning of 
the verbal root [,/vid].2"? (62c-64b) 

The seven crores that have been spoken of [were spoken of] with the 
intention of mentioning the principal among them: since the grace is 
infinite and those on whom grace is to be bestowed are infinite, they 
too are therefore taught to be infinite, having various designations?/?— 
<and among these> they are of two kinds: vidyas and the others are 
mantras*’4—-since interaction would be impossible [with them] if they 
were without designations. (64c—-66b) 

A means with these as instruments (tatsadhanopayah) has been cre- 
ated by the omniscient [Lord] for the sake of the goal (arthahetutah).?” 
The goal is called nirvana in this [system] (asmin); it is established 
(sthitah) to have the cessation [of bondage] as the way to achieve it 
(nivrttiprakramah).?"° (66c-67b) 

That half [of the mantras],?”’ having accomplished its duties, turns 


tion that has been accepted, it seems probable that the text is alluding here to the 
fundamental Saiva dichotomy between moksa, which is the goal of the mumukgu, and 
bhoga/siddhi, which is the intermediate goal (before attaining full liberation) of the 
power-seeking s&dhaka or bubhuksu. 

272Cf, Matangavidyapada 7:36c (which is in fact giving a nirvacana of vidya in the 
sense of the tattva of Suddhavidya): vidya vedanaSilatvat. Raimakantha’s Matanga- 
vrtti thereon reads: vidanti anaya mantrah sarvam arthajatam, mayatmikayeva maya- 
garbhadhikarina iti vidya. Here we might expand the nirvacana thus: vidanti tabhir 
jnanam sadhakd iti vidyah. 

273 or conj. The transmitted trividha® is not interpretable to me because I see no three 
groups. The weak vividha® could have given rise to such a corruption. It is possible, of 
course, that more is missing from the text, or that some other undetected corruption 
makes interpretation of what is transmitted difficult. 

2741t is not here made explicit here what the distinction is between these. Sometimes 
both terms appear to be used generically, but where the two terms are distinguished as 
sub-groups among ‘mantras’, it is possible that the difference is only one of gender, the 
mantras being the ones with masculine names and the vidyas being ones with feminine 
names. It is probable that this is how the terms are used in Matangavidyapada 7, e.g. 
in verse 30. 

275Others might prefer to assume sadhanopaya to be a fixed compound meaning 
‘means to attainment’ and to interpret this half-line to mean: ‘Therefore (tat), for the 
sake of the goal, the omniscient Lord has created a means of attainment.’ 

276 Perhaps prakrama should be interpreted differently. 

277 ex conj. It is a guess that half of the mantras are again being referred to here. 
Cf. Mrgendravidyapada 4:7-8: prayoktrdehasapeksam tad ardham akhile 'dhvani/ 
krtvadhikaram sthityante sivam visati se{varam/ vinadhikaranenanyat pradhanavikrter 


Chapter Three 221 


aside from duties (adhikaraparanmukham) and; <becoming?”*> equal 
to Siva, it is spoken of as [being] in the body of Sankara.2”9 His. body 
is of the form of [powers of] knowledge and action (drkkriyariipa); that 
[half] has that nature (tatsvaripena tat sthitam). (67c—68) 

They shine having that nature (tatsvaripasthitam bhati) :([having] 
come down [into impure creation] after having, as it were, ‘taken. coun- 
se]’.28° Their ‘taking counsel’ (sampradharanam) must take place (sthi- 
tam) in the path of matter (prakrter vartmani). (69) 

And these vidyas that are given responsibility (adhiropitah). for the 
cutting of bonds are not of matter (prakrtah). +The purpose for which 
a body is consituted {for them] is the same as that (for which] a body is 
taken by the Lordt.?8! (70) 

Therefore it is figuratively that this ‘taking counsel’ (sam- 
pradharanam) of the soul(?)?°? is spoken of. (71ab) 

Having seen creation, which is made up of troubles, they all, it seems 
(kila), become disenchanted (viraktah).?°3(71cd) 

This has been expounded in this [tantra] for the sake of encourag- 
ing dispassion in souls (pumviragapravrttyartham). They are employed 


adhah/ krtvadhikaram Isestam apaiti svadhvasamhrtau. 

278 er conj. ACHARYA. 

279 ez conj. | suppose the text to be alluding back to the expression sankarim tanum 
pravestum (used in 3:58d) and to be explaining that it is a figurative expression for 
supreme liberation. 

280There is an aifa hiatus if this is intended. The term sampradharya occurred above 
in 3:58 and in Matangavidyapada 7:14c (for which see fn. 270 on p.219 above), and 
sampradharanam is expanded upon further in this verse and in 3:71, but I am not 
certain that I have correctly understood the metaphor. What seems certainly intended 
is that literal sampradharana is impossible because the faculties of thought and speech 
as we understand them belong to the lower reaches of the universe. The second half 
of this verse seems to tell us that the mantras must be in the lower universe for this 
activity, and the following verse explains that the faculties which they employ for it 
are not those of physical bodies. 

2811 this is the sense, this verse makes the point that they do not have bodies produced 
by karman, maya and so forth, but a kind of subtle-matter body that they take on at 
will for fulfilling their tasks. It does not have material (prakrta) faculties of sense and 
action. | 

But perhaps artham is once again an error for ardham and the purport {s quite 
different. 

282Should be perhaps emend to atmanam and assume that this refers to the mantra- 
souls? 

?83This disenchantment of the mantras upon their first contact with impure creation 
is spoken of also in Matangavidyapada 7:6-7. 


222 Parakhyatantra 


as office-bearers (niyukta’®4 adhikaritve) by means of the relation be 
tween that which expresses and that which is expressed (vacyavacaka- 
yogatah).*®° (72) 

Now mantras have been taught. They are numberless. They came 
forth from the body of Siva. They express no other meaning [than 
Siva?].286 (73) 

ISANA was revealed (vyaktah) from the head (kat), VAKTRA [viz. 
TATPURUSA] from the face, GHORA. from the heart, GUHA [viz. VAMA- 
DEVA] from the penis (dhvajat),?8” AJA [viz. SADYOJATA] from the two 
feet. SARVATMAN again from the heart, SUSIVA from the head, JVALINI 
arose from the top-knot (culikodbhava), PINGALA from all the limbs, 


284 67 conj. It is possible however that the transmitted niyuktam is intended to agree 


with ardham. 

286 Presumably what is meant is that mantras function in their offices by means of the 
same relation that connects word and meaning. 

78°1t is possible that what is intended is that this particular group of central mantras 
that is enumerated in the following verses express Siva. 

2871 assume that this is intended in this way; Dr. ISAACSON (letter of 5.x.2001) has 
pointed out to me that dhvajagre is so used in the Buddhist Kalacakratantra (5:57c) 
and supported by the gloss lingamukhe in the Vimalaprabha on this verse. As for the 
correlations, they are the same, except for that of SADYOJATA, with those of Parakhya 
2:84-5. 


Chapter Three 223 


GHORASTRA was born from the right hand.?88 (74-5) 
From the two shoulders (bahusrigadvayat) [came] 18A;789 the oth- 


288 After the five brahmamantras, these are the names of the Sivangamantras. In 
the paddhati literature we do not encounter these names, but instead HRDAYA, SIRAS, 
SIKHA, KAVACA, and ASTRA, and, of course, synonyms of these. The Parakhya’s names 
are however shared by the Svayambhuvasitrasangraha (7:19-22) and by the Matanga 
(kriyapada 1:63c—64b), in which they are explicitly identified with the more usual names 
(vidyapada 7:27-28b): 


sarvatma hrdayam mukhyam suSivakhyam Sirah prabhoh 

jvaliniti Sikha jneya kavacam pingalam mahat 

Sivastram ca mahadiptam agnijvalakulam param 
The name AGHORASTRA does not appear in this account of the Matanga, but it does 
in Svayambhuvasitrasangraha 7:22a. Both in this passage of the Parakhya and in 
the above quoted passage of the Matanga NETRA is omitted. It is omitted also in the 
Malinivijayottara (3:61-5) and appears to be omitted again (corruption in the text 
means that this cannot be determined with certainty) when the anga mantras are 
again listed in Parakhya 6:32-3. It is included, however, when the mantras are raised 
in chapter 7 of the Svayambhuvasitrasangraha, but it is then referred to as NETRA 
and given no special name (7:3 and 23). In the Sardhatrifatikalottara it is not an 
independent mantra, but the anusvara that is placed at the top of the other mantras 
(1:10ab): anusvaro bhaven netram sarvesam copari sthitah. 

Some of the names given here by the Parakhya are names that are given elsewhere 
to another group of angamantras called the vidyangamantras. Thus, as BRUNNER ex- 
plains (1986:118), SARVATMAN, BRAHMASIRAS, JVALINI, PINGALA, and PASUPATASTRA 
appear as the vidyangamantras of Bhairava in Svacchanda 1:60c-65b, and these are 
distinct from the angamantras of the niskala deity given in Svacchanda 1:71. But, 
as we have observed above, the Parakhya’s names are given to the Sivangamantras 
in Svayambhuvasttrasangraha 7 and in Matangavidyapada 7:27-28b. The names of 
the vidyangamantras in Matangavidyapada 7:16c-18 (and kriyapada 1:111c-114) are 
instead VIDYADHIPA, BRAHMASIRAS, RUDRANI, PURUSTUTA, and PASUPATASTRA. 

Moreover some tantras, as BRUNNER observes (1986:120-1) do not teach a group of 
vidyangamantras separate from the sivangamantras (e.g. the Kirana and the Sardha- 
trifSatikalottara), and the Parakhya appears to belong to this category. 

The history of the development of these mantras and their terminology would be dif- 
ficult to disentangle: as BRUNNER observes (1986:121): ‘Tel ouvrage, qui semblait avoir 
soigneusement distingué les deux groupes, les confond ensuite, comme s’il oubliait ses 
résolutions. Bref, la confusion est totale et semble méme, & premiére vue, désespérée.’ 
It is perhaps just worth remarking that among the Saiddhantika sources that BRUNNER 
consults for her discussion of the topic (listed 1998:117, fn. 101), only one, the Matanga, 
belongs to the corpus of tantras known to the tenth-century Kashmirian exegetes. This 
is not to say that the distinction is unknown in early Siddhantatantras other than the 
Matanga, for the Svayambhuvasitrasangraha clearly distinguishes the two groups (e.g. 
14:18-21 and 16:24), though it seems only to teach the formation of one, namely the 
Sivangamantras (in chapter 7). 

2891 am not certain which mantra is here referred to. Assuming that the name.is not 


224 Parakhyatantra 


ers290 


were generated forth from [His] hairs. Thus these arose from the 
corrupt, all that is clear is that a female mantra is intended. Possible candidates are 
a GAYATRI, who is raised before NETRA and after the other angas in Svayambhuva- 
sutrasangraha 7:22, or perhaps the eighty-one-syllabled VYOMAVYAPIN, who, though 
usually masculine, is feminine in Matangavidyaépada 7:31-34b, a passage that follows 
closely upon the above quoted list of sivangamantras. Most likely, perhaps, is that 
it refers to the GAYATRI om tam maheSaya vidmahe vagvifuddhaya dhimahe tam nah 
Sivah pracodayat. (Thus, as SANDERSON (*1994) observes, Ni§vasa guhyasitra (15:232] 
f. 109°, line 4, except that we there find no (an instance of frozen sandhi) for nah.) 

SANDERSON (*1994) observes that ‘[a]n inner circuit comprising at least the Brahmas 
and the Siva-auxiliaries is taught in all the Siddhantas but one.’ The exception is the 
Dvisgatikalottara, which, at the beginning of its fourth chapter, teaches ‘a mandala 
populated only by Siva (the milamantrah) and five of the Siva-auxiliaries’. [The one 
omitted is NETRA.] SANDERSON goes on to observe that the GAYATRI is included in the 
inner circuit of the Svayambhuvasutrasangraha (14:21), the Nigvasa mUlasitra (2:3bcd 
(f.19°, line 2]: navatmanam tato’pari/ pamcabrahmasamayuktam sangam gayatri- 
samyutam) and the Sarvajnanottara (Nepalese MS f.7"). In the case of the Sarva- 
jnanottara, the first dvarana actually contains four angamantras (excluding NETRA 
and ASTRA) placed in the cardinal directions, and a second avarana is formed with 
ASTRA in the cardinal directions and GAYATRI in the intermediate ones: 


agneyyam hrdayam nya<sya> isanyan tu Siro nyaset 
nairrtyam tu Sikhan dadyad vayavyam kavacam nyaset 
astram di§asu sarvasu dvitiyavarane sthitam 

purvad arabhya mantrajno gayatrim vidisasu tu. 


e kavacam ] em.; kavace MS e mantrajno gaéyatrim ] em.; mantrajiah gayatri 
MS 

290 Which are these ‘others’? It is conceivable that the vidyangamantras are intended: 
Ramakantha observes in his Matangavrtti ad vidyapada 7:16c-19b that though the 
Matanga regards these as part of the throne, other tantras say that they too make up 
part of Siva’s body: ...samhitantaresu tu sivangabrahmavad vidyanganam api Siva- 
tanutvam uktam. Otherwise the text is referring to other circuits (a4varana) of the yaga, 
which vary somewhat in different Siddhantas. Those of the Somasambhupaddhati are 
tabulated by BRUNNER 1963, Appendice VIII. SANDERSON (*1994) points out that 
the Sardhatrisatikalottara (7:6c—10b) has the Lokapalas and their weapons as its outer 
circuits; the Nifvasa milasitra (2:9-10, f.19") and the Matanga (kriyapada 5:50-71 
and 3:83c-91) have the Vidyesvaras, the Lokapalas, and their weapons; the Kirana 
(25:7-12 and 27:5c-6b) and the Brhatkalottara (13:102c-103) have the Vidyeévaras, 
the GaneSvaras, the Lokapalas, and their weapons; and the Mrgendra (kriyapada 3:20- 
26b) and the Sarvajnanottara (f. 7-7") have the same without the weapons of the 
Lokapalas. (In the case of the Sarvajnanottara the VidyeSvaras, GaneSvaras, Lokapalas 
form the third, fourth and fifth avaranas respectively.) 

SANDERSON (*1994) further observes that additional outer circuits are found in the 
Saivism of the Kashmirian manuals, to substantiate which he quotes from Taksaka- 
varta’s Nityadisangrahabhidhanapaddhati (f.63), which in turn cites the authority of 
a Nandisvaravatara-NihSvasa in 9000 verses. 


Chapter Three 225 


body of Siva. [His] body is characterised by their power (tacchakti- 
laksanah). (76) 

What is called his mantric body (yad angam khyapyate mantram) is 
the power of the supreme Lord (sa Saktih parameSvari). This power of 
His is accepted to be [His] body (angasammata) because it performs His 
tasks (tatkaryakartrtvat). (77) 

Thus the mantras (vidyah) are said figuratively (bhaktiyogatah) to 
have ‘arisen’ (samutpannah). Where they have office that is called the 
vidyatattva. Their scope is knowledge (vivekavisayah)—no others [are 
such] (nanyah)—they are pure; they reside in the pure path.2%! (78) 

Thus the coming into being of the collection of mantras capable of 
granting all rewards (sakalaphalarho mantracakrapracarah),*°* as well as 
the particular place from which they come forth, called ‘pure knowledge’ 
(Suddhavidyabhidhanam), has been taught in this [tantra], [that is to say 
the place from] where these shakings of the matrix [that is maya] (te 
yonikampah) [come forth] produced by the pure instruments [that are the 
mantras).7°3 (79) 


Thus the third chapter, expounding the topic of vidya, in the great tantra 
called the Supreme. 


291 ex conj. This last line as I have emended it is not convincing to me. Instead of 


nanyah (for the transmitted nanya), perhaps nana or vidyah would be better. The 
passage is comparable to Matangavidyapada 7:3c-4b: 

viveko yat susuddhanam mantranam sarvatomukhah 

vivekat tatsvarupena vidyatattvam atah smrtam 


Ramakantha’s commentary thereon is as follows: yad yasmat tasmin vidyatattve 
sthitanam mantranam vivekah sarvatomukhah sarvajnatvam bhavati. Suddhanam 
iti nivrttaSuddhinam. atas ca samalanam vijnanakevalinam (thus Poona MS, f. 135"; 
dham. ato vivekat samanad dhetoh tena mantrasvaripena saha tad vidyatattvam 
ucyate. tattvadiksayam mantraih saha etat tattvam Sodhyam ity arthah. 

2920f course sakalaphalarhah agrees in gender and number with °pracarah, but I 
assume that it is intended to qualify mantracakra. 

2°3This last pada may well not be interpreted properly. One rather expects the con- 
cluding verse to refer forward to the topic about to be treated in the following chapter, 
so perhaps we might understand instead: ‘[there now follows an account of] where 
these shakings of the matrix that are produced by the pure instruments [that are the 
mantras take place]’. 


PARAKHYATANTRA CHAPTER IV 


Prakasa spoke: 
Maya is subtle, stable, without form, all-pervading, the locus of sentient 
beings,?%4 shakeable by parts of the Lord’s power (isasaktikalaksobhya), 
[and] with a range from kala [down to] earth (kaladiksitigocara).?°° (1) 

This tattva is called ‘the thicket’ (gahanam); [it is] large (mahat), the 
locus of various Rudras, the support of various worlds and studded with 
all (manner of] powers (khacitam sarvasaktibhih). (2) 

Pratoda spoke: 
This tattva of Maya is taught, we are told (kila), to be be the cause 
of kala and the rest [of the tattvas of the impure universe]. [But] this 
is not a cause, nor an effect, since we cannot perceive [its] true nature 
(svaripanupalabdhitah). (3) 

Prakasa spoke: 
Indeed the impossibility [of a given thing’s existence] need not [be con- 
cluded] from the fact of that thing not being perceived. When something 
is [extremely] distant, [extremely] close,?°° when the senses fail, when 


294Note that cetanasraya, though not a bahuvrihi, is made a feminine adjective agree- 
ing with maya. I have rejected the possibility of emending to cetanaSrayah, making 
it, as we would expect in standard Sanskrit, a masculine noun in apposition to maya, 
because this anomalous usage appears to be a feature of the style of the Parakhya: see 
introduction, p. ]xxxii. 
2°5This string of epithets, in rather less detail than those of 1:15 and 2:1, sets the 
agenda for discussion in the chapter: maya is subtle (4-7); she is required to be the 
stable cause of the elements (8-16); she is formless and all-pervading (17-19); she is the 
resort of sentient beings (20-1 and 156-7); she has to be shaken by the Lord (22-4); the 
emanation and the character of her evolutes from kala down to earth are the subject 
of the remainder of the chapter. 
7°61 assume that these conditions that prevent perception are intended to be those of 
the Sankhyas enumerated in Sankhyakarika 7: 
atidirat sémipyad indriyaghatan mano’navasthanat 
sauksmyad vyavadhanad abhibhavat samanabhiharac ca 
The Parakhya's list, however, has only seven elements, instead of eight. I am assum- 
ing that mano’navasthanat is omitted, and that the Parakhya’s atirohane is intended 


228 Parakhyatantra 


there is something in between [the thing and the sense organ], when 
the object is overpowered [by something else] (atirohane), when [the ob- 
ject is enveloped as part of] a conglomeration, when [the object is] ex- 
tremely subtle, then there is no perception of the object (naivarthasyopa- 
lambhanam).?9" Since that tattva is extremely subtle,2%° it is therefore 
not perceived. (4-5) 

And what is extremely subtle can be known through what it does 
(kriyagamyam); by our perceiving [less] subtle effects (siksmakaryopa- 
labdhitah)?* we infer from [this] fact, in accordance with probabil- 
ity (yathasambhavato ’rthatah), that there must be a material cause 
(upadanam) of that [body of effects]. (6) 

It has been established before by scripture, therefore this (tattva of 
maya] is taught to be proven to be thus. Nevertheless, if reasoning is to 
be given (yadi sa vacya yuktih), it will still (kim tu) be based upon that 
[scripture] (tadasraya).° (7) 


to correspond to abhibhavat (which Vacaspatimisra illustrates ad loc. with the fol- 
lowing example: yathahani sauribhir bhabhir abhibhitam grahanaksatramandalam na 
paSyati) and the Parakhya’s saméahare is intended to correspond to samanabhiharat 
(which Vécaspatimisra illustrates ad loc. with this example: yatha toyadavimuktan 
udabindin jalasaye na paSyati). 

It is possible that aksabhange is intended to cover both what the Sankhyakarika 
refers to with indriyaghatat as well as what it refers to with mano’navasthanat. It seems 
that the interpretation of this last term is in any case not uniform. Vacaspatimisra, 
whose examples of these factors do not otherwise contradict those of the Yuktidipika, 
illustrates it thus: yatha kamadyupaplutamanah sphitalokamadhyavartinam indriya- 
sannikrstam apy artham apaSyati (if we accept SRINIVASAN’s text, in which he allows 
the main verb to be prefaced by a privative a, for which see SRINIVASAN 1967:42). 
In the Yuktidipika, however, which gives only one-word illustrations of the kinds of 
objects that can exist and not be perceived as a result of the various factors listed, 
we read: tatratidirat tavat tadyatha proddinasya Sakuneh; atisamipyad anjanapra- 
bhrtinam; indriyaghatac chabdadinam; mano’navasthanac chakataédinam... Whereas 
for Vacaspatimisra it is emotion that clouds the mind, the idea here might be that 
fast-moving things, such as chariots, can be unseen because the mind cannot focus on 
them. 

297 ez conj. In the transmitted text there is one negation too many. 

298 or conj. 

299Tf we retained the transmitted text of 6b, perhaps the first half of the verse could 
be interpreted as follows: ‘Extremely subtle things are inferred from their actions; [less] 
subtle things from perceiving their effects.’ But could this make sense? 

3°Tf this is really the intended rhetorical structure, then the particles are misleading. 
Perhaps I have misunderstood the text here, and perhaps it is corrupt. Cf. the odd use 
of kim tu in 4:113. 


Chapter Four 229 


First of all (tavat) there are the gross elements; their causes are the 
subtle elements (matras taddhetutam gatah); ahankara is the cause of 
those and of the senses, as effects.2°! (8) 

Its cause is the intellect (buddhih), [and of that the cause is] the mind 
(manah), [and of that the cause is the tattva] of the gunas. Of that 
(the cause is] unmanifest [secondary matter] (avyaktam), and of that (the 
cause is the tattva of] limited power to act (kala). Of that [limited power 
to act] are born raga and limited knowledge (ragavidye dve). Limited 
power to act and time (kalakalau) are born [directly] from the matrix 
[viz. maya].°°? (9) 

[All] this is taught to be a body of gross effects (etat karyam mahat 
proktam), each with a further cause beyond it (uttarottarakaranam). It 
is established that this maya, which is the [ultimate] material of this, can 
be inferred [from it].9°% (10) 

A creator cannot create without a material cause, since in every cre- 
ation (srstau srstau ca) a truly existing effect (satkaryam)*™ has a cause 
(sakaranam). Therefore a material cause is required. (11) 

If that [material cause] were not enduring (sthiram*°’), then from 
what could these effects arise? Seeing where, for whom and how these 
bodies [of ours] are accomplished, we establish that there must be (sthi- 


3°11 am assuming that karyatah is used as though it were equivalent to karyatvena: 
see introduction, p. lxxxii. 

302Qbserve that niyati is not mentioned here even though it is counted as a tattva 
later in the text (5:152a), just as it appears not to be mentioned in Svayambhuvasitra- 
sangraha 2:9a (tasmat kalakale) even though it occurs later in that text (Svayambhuva- 
sUtrasangraha 4:27). In his Svayambhuvavrtti ad 2:9 Sadyojyotis accordingly interprets 
kalakale to mean kala, kala, and niyati: kala ca kala cety ekaSesah. kalaS ca kala ca kala- 
kale. tatraikah kalasabdo niyatim abhidhatte, dvitiyas tu kalam eva. katham kalasgabdo 
niyatim abhidhatte? yatah sapi kalayati prerayatiti niyatih, karmaphalabhojakatvena. 
It is conceivable that the same is intended here and that we should interpret, ‘Time 
and the [two] factors that impel [viz. kala and niyati] are born from maya.’ Even if one 
takes the view that Sadyojyotis’s interpretation is a sophistic distortion, it is evident 
that it was later accepted as unproblematic: note that Ramakantha, when he quotes 
Svayambhuvasiutrasangraha 2:9a in his Kiranavrtti ad 4:22c—23 evidently presupposes 
Sadyojyotis’s interpretation without mentioning that he does so. 

393 er conj. 

3°4This does not appear here to allude to the position that an effect preexists in its 
cause (a position which the text does accept, for see 1:66-7), but is instead, I think, 
merely intended to exclude the illusory ‘effects’ which some models of creation of the 
universe might allow. 

3°51t is of course possible that this is an error for sthitam. 


230 Parakhyatantra 


tam) an appropriate material cause (tathadanakaranam karanam)*” for 
that person there. Impelled by the Lord by means of [His] power, it 
generates its effects. (12-13) 

Now (tu) its effects are subtle, beginning with limited power to act 
(kaladikam), [and] gross, ending with earth (dharantakam). [This body of 
effects] is inferred (anumiyate) to be connected, in accordance with [the 
retributive force of each individual’s]} own past actions (svakarmatah), in 
this body. (14) 

And the effect is dependent on its cause (karanayattam), and that 
cause is called maya. Since it ‘creates’ (mati) all effects, it is called the 
tattva of maya.°°" (15) 

This too is well established in scripture; and scripture is taught by 


Siva. He is the creator, proven to be beginningless; maya is the material 
cause. (16) 

This cause has to be all-pervading; it rests pervading [its] effects, even 
though it is formless, because of its power (tadviryat). It is bodiless [and 
none the less can produce effects], like the tattva of time.°°8 (17) 


3061 assume that the omission of the characteristic prefix upa- here does not change the 
meaning, and that adanakaranam karanam is a pleonasm. Cf. the similar pleonasm 
karanam sahakaranam in the verse and a half quoted with the label anyatra in the 
Sataratnollekhini ad verse 15 (cited in fn. 128 on p.175 above). 

3°7One could conceivably also interpret ‘since all effects are contained [in it]...’ This 
is how Narayanakantha uses mati when he gives a nirvacana of maya introducing his 
quotation of Parakhya 4:19 (for which see apparatus): maty asyam Saktyatmana pra- 
laye sarvam jagat srstau vyaktim yatiti maya, yathoktam Srimatsaurabheye... (Deva- 
kottai edition p.67). The Parakhya verse that he quotes does not obviously give the 
etymology that Narayanakantha makes, and it would be rather forced to read it in. 
Narayanakantha has to find an etymology of maya because he is glossing a verse of 
the Mrgendra (vidyapada 2:7) in which the four bonds (mala, rodhaSakti, karman, and 
maya) are listed with names that are supposed to express their natures: 


pravrtisabale karma mayakaryam caturvidham 

paSajalam samasena dharma namnaiva kirtitah. 
The nirvacana that Nadrayanakantha gives is to be found elsewhere too, for cf. the 
following verse quoted in pariccheda 4 of the Saivagamaparibhasamanijari, p. 87: 


mati yatra jagat suptau srstva va yati sa tatah 
maya tena samakhyata tattvam uktam gurittamaih. 


But in our verse no word expresses that the karaka relation is one of adhikarana, no 
connection is suggested between the syllable ya and the verb yati, and the context 
emphasises rather maya’s creative role: it is unlikely, therefore, that the nirvacana 
given by Narayanakantha is here intended. 

3°8This is a stock example of a bodiless entity that is responsible for effects. Cf., 


Chapter Four 231 


It is the locus of all effects, just as the sky (suravartmavat) [is the 
locus] of the planets. At the time of a great resorption [of the universe] 
(mahaksaye) its effects exist merged in it (tallinani) as potentials (Sakti- 
ripani). They become manifest with their own forms at its creation by 
His will.3°? And the arising of effects [takes place] everywhere because of 
the all pervading cause that is Siva.3! (18-19) 

Since in a great resorption [of the universe] (mahaksaye) there is 
no other lower tattva than that {of maya], those bound souls who are 
merged in mayatattva are called akala, ‘devoid of kala’. They are sub- 
ject to the bond of innate impurity (malinah), their bodies are dissolved 
(muarcchitakarah), they are without power to act (niskriyah), they are 
pralayakalas.*'! (20) 

Now they remain exactly until their ripeness for a body [comes about] 


for example, Kirana 3:10. But it is conceivable that the intended sense is rather: 
‘,.. though it is formless... like the bodiless entity time’. 

3°°Note that this final pada is absent in the KSTS edition of Narayanakantha’s 
Mrgendravrtti, where 18c—19a are quoted ad 2:7, p. 58, with the attribution yathoktam 
Srimatsaurabheye; but a version of the pada appears at this point in the Devakottai 
edition of the same text: svakaryena kaladina. When the same unit of text is quoted 
in the SarvadarSanasangraha, in a part of the text which is unmistakably cribbed from 
the same passage of the Mrgendravrtti, this pada has been corrupted to sa karyena 
kaladina. The evidence of the Sarvadarganasangraha is nonetheless useful, because it 
suggests that Narayanakantha’s text did include the pada and that he probably read 
svakaryena kaladina. The same idea is similarly expressed in Mrgendravidyapada 9:13: 
tadadharani karyani Saktiripani samhrtau/ vivrtau vyaktiripani vyapriyante 'rtha- 
siddhaye. 

3101¢ may seem odd that the ablative is used of what is not a material (upadana) cause 
but an instigating (nimitta) cause; but cf. Kirana 1:16ab: tasyasuddhasya sambandham 
samayati Sivat kala. It is, however, also conceivable that sivat is intended to qualify 
[maya-|karanat as ‘auspicious’; but it is more usual to see maya described as aSiva (e.g. 
Svayambhuvasitrasangraha 2:8b, Mrgendravidyapada 9:2a), or to see the attribute so 
placed that sandhi makes it impossible to judge whether Siva or asiva is intended, e.g. 
South Indian Pauskara 3:2b and MaAlinivijayottara 1:26c, for a discussion of which see 
SANDERSON 1992:300ff. 

3111 have suggested (GOODALL 2001a:331) that this may be the first surviving usage 
of the term in a Saiddhantika tantra; but see pp. xliii and liii. (My eye skipped over 
this half line when I first copied the text, which is why this instance of the term was 
not taken into consideration in the discussion of its usage in GOODALL 1998:184-5, fn. 
71.) 


232 Parakhyatantra 


(yavat tatpakvata tanoh).3!? The souls, [still] subtle,3!3 drawn by this?!4 
become turned towards experience (bhogayabhimukhah sthitah). (21) 

The Lord, using His powers (svasaktitah),°!° shakes?!® her for the 
sake of [generating] bodies for them. Her becoming turned towards [the 
production of her] effects is [her] ‘shaking’, [which is brought about] by 
[the Lord’s] shaking (ksobhena). (22) 

Once it is shaken, those souls are cast into this [samsara in different 
places} according to [the retributive force of] their past actions. [We 
speak figuratively of] their ‘being cast’ (tesam ksepah) because they are 
placed in bodies (anganiksepat)*!" for the sake of revealing their power 
of consciousness (caitanyavyaktihetutah). (23) 

Cast into worlds where they can experience [the fruits of their past 
actions], they experience their own rewards (svabhogan anubhunjate). 
The Lord first causes to evolve kala, which is the [primary] means for 
enabling their experience.*!® Then that [kala], being by the will of 
Siva then engaged (ayukta) in the creation of that [means to experi- 
ence] (tatsrstau) for [souls], who lack the means [to create it for them- 
selves] (vinimittanam), effects a slight (kincit) opening up of the power of 
knowledge for those {souls} whose consciousness is enveloped by impurity 
(ajnanavrtacetasam).3!9 (24-5) 


312Qf course the wording might allow the reverse: ‘until [their] body becomes ready for 
them’; but it seems more likely that the souls should be said to ripen rather than their 
bodies, since the bodies do not yet exist. Since there is no verb in the second quarter, 
some might prefer to emend to an accusative (tatpakvatam) governed by yavat. 

313 Perhaps what is meant by this is that they still have no gross body. 

314 Assuming an aiga double sandhi of akrstah + anavah. The referent of the tena is 
not clear. Could it perhaps be kalatattva? 

315Qne could understand svagaktitah to refer to the powers of maya and take it in 
conjunction with the following tatkaryabhimukhibhavah. 

316Note the aiga usage of the present participle ksobhayan apparently as though it 
were a main verb (cf. 2:59c). 

317 og con). 

318-Tyvambakasambhu, whose reading is unfortunately corrupt in the crucial place, evi- 
dently understands that Siva causes a partial revelation of a soul’s karman (IFP T. 1102, 
pp. 20-1): atha tasyasuddhasya mayiyakarmabhogartham Sivad iti sivenanujnato bha- 
gavan ananteSabhattdrako mayam viksobhya karyabhimukhim (conj. ISAACSON [let- 
ter of 22.x.2001]; viksobha karyabhimukham MS) krtva tadaiva kimcit karmavyaktim 
utpadayati. tad uktam parakhye ‘tadbhogasadhanam purvam vyanaktisah tkalonnatat’ 
iti tatas tenabhivyaktena karmana karyabhimukhamayaya (conj.; karye ’bhimukha- 
mayaya MS) sahatmano yah sambandhas tasmat sambandhad utpadyate kala. 

31967 conj. For ajnana as a synonym of mala see 4:162c below, Kirana 2:19c—20 


Chapter Four 233 


She is not directly perceptible (alaksya sa)*™ because she is extremely 
subtle, like the faculty of touch, which [in spite of being imperceptible] 
is conjoined with [every part of] the body. [Through her] consciousness 
(samjna) arises (bhavet) to a small degree (manak) for the soul (tasya), 
just as [it does] for someone who has fainted (mircchitanoh) [when they 
are aroused] by water.°2! (26) 

tJust as a man with fever (agniman){, becoming gradually released 
from the fever (Sanair agnyaviruddhah san) tby such means as the ap- 
plication of ceya (?)t,>?? is able [once more] to eat food, so too the soul, 


(quoted in fn. 464 on p.276 below) and Malinivijayottara 1:23c (=Tantraéloka 1:23a). 
Note that when I translate kala, I use the expression ‘limited power to act’, but it 
is common, when speaking of the first function of kala, to talk of its enlivening of 
consciousness (caitanyodbalana), cf., for example, Kirana 1:16, Kiranavrtti 4:28.3, 
Svayambhuvasttrasangraha 1:10, and Haravijaya 6:126. This may seem odd, but note 
that in Mrgendravidyapada 2:5ab the soul’s innate sentience (caitanya) is said to consist 
both in the power of knowledge and in the power of action: caitanyam drkkriyardpam 
tad asty atmani sarvada. The same notion is expressed in the Parakhya in 2:70cd above 
and also in Matangavidyapada 6:33cd: anenaivanumanena citir jnanakriyatmika. Cf. 
also Pauskara 5:3c-4a: 
caitanyam jnatvakartrtvarupam tad balam atmanah 
kalaya vyajyate tat tu tasyaiva hi tiraskrtam. 

320 6 conj. 

321T assume that the addition of anu at the end of the compound adds no shade 
of meaning. It is comparable to the atman frequently added in the same position in 
verses of the Matanga, for which see introduction, p.liv. But perhaps, as Dr. DEzs6 
has suggested to me, we should consider emendation to murcchitanam: ‘for people who 
faint’. 

322The first half-line is hypometrical as transmitted. My translation assumes the 
correction of °bhir naram to °bhir narah, but since the verse as a whole is obscure, I 
have not incorporated this conjecture into the text. It is possible that some substance 
or remedy known to ayurveda is referred to here. It is uncertain to me whether agni 
can refer to fever. 

But it is very possible that the verse once conveyed a quite different image, one 

similar to that found in Matangavidyapada 9:28: 


yathagnitaptam mrtpatram jatundlingane ksamam 
tathanuh kalayaviddho bhogan chaknoti vasitum. 


‘Just as a clay vessel, once heated in the fire, is capable of holding the exudation of the 
Paladsa tree [thus Ramakantha’s gloss of jatu in the Matangavrtti ad loc.], so too the 
soul, once penetrated by kala, is capable of taking aboard (7) experiences.’ 

Here the last pada is essentially the same as our 4:28b, and it is possible that vasitum 
is a corruption for vanchitum or vice versa. 


234 Parakhyatantra 


by being joined with kala and the rest [of the evolutes of maya], becomes 
able to desire experience. (27—28b) 

[Kala] has always (?) the form of the [limited] power of agency of 
Is;325 she increases their strength (tatsamarthyopabrmhika). (28) 
And just as a medicinal herb,°*4 (though it is itself] insentient, because 
of its power [enlivens consciousness] in one who is tormented by poison, 
so too, in the [process of the] soul’s attaining of a revelation of its [innate 
power of] consciousness, an instrument must necessarily be made, [and 
that instrument is:] kala. [Only] then, when he has had his activity 
enlivened by kala (kalodbalitavrttikah) ,°*° does the soul (asau) become 
extroverted towards the objects of experience (visayanvesi). (29) 

Only in such a one [whose faculties have been enlivened by kala] 
(tatraiva) does another instrument arise from kala: limited power of 
knowledge (vidya).32° When joined with [this] other instrument he be- 
comes slightly fitter [for experience] (manag yogyah) and discriminates 
(vivecayet).52" (30) 

Pratoda spoke: 

Discrimination is [ordinarily] understood to be connected with the [fac- 
ulty called] buddhi [and takes place] always [only] when objects have 


sou 


323 Assuming that kartrripa is intended as an equivalent of kartrtvarupa. 

32467 conj. The transmitted text could have been retained, in which case one might 
have rendered vidhir yatha with ‘like a [poison-quelling magical] rite’; but this would 
have meant that acidriipa could only have been taken with kala. 

325The use of the expression udbalita in connection with kala is widespread (see, e.g., 
Matangavidyapada 10:17c and the passages referred to in fn. 319 on p. 233 above). 

326 The word karana is here and in verse 35 pointedly used three times to refer to vidya, 
for in other Saiva literature (e.g. Tattvasangraha 12, Tantraloka 9:183, Matangavrtti 
ad vidyapada 10:4cd, all of which are cited in GOODALL 1998:206, fn. 138) vidya is said 
to be the supreme instrument (param karanam). 

327There is a certain awkwardness in the bald use of yogyah without some further 
qualification. One might therefore consider emending vivecayet to vivecane: ‘...he 
becomes to a small extent (manak) capable of discrimination’. 

It is possible that some text is missing from this passage, for note that in the above 
presentation of kala, the verse that is quoted in the Bhogakarikavrtti 100c-101b is 
missing: uktam ca Srimatparakhyadau 

kartrSaktim vyanakty asya kalasyatah prayojika 
tatah kalasamayukto bhoge ’nuh kartrkarakah. 
TORELLA (1998:62) suggests, supposing the verse to belong to the Parakhya, which 


indeed it might have, that it may be the earliest instance in which a karaka-model, 
calqued from grammar, is used to explain the operation of the kancukas. 


Chapter Four 235 


been perceived. It cannot be connected with limited power of knowl- 
edge (vidyayah),°8 since it is buddhi that illuminates itself and other 


3287 assume that Pratoda is using the genitive here with vidya as parallel to buddhi in 
the compound buddhisambaddhah (er conj.) above: in other words, since the genitive 
expresses sambandha, buddhisambaddhah could have been interchanged with buddheh, 
and therefore vidyayah can be used as syntactically parallel. 

This is a stock objection on Sankhya lines (cf. Mrgendravidyapada 11:9ab and its 
answer in 11:14—15a, as well as the following passages, mentioned by TORELLA 1998:55, 
fn.2: Matangavidyapada 10:5 and 19, Tattvasangraha 14-16, Bhogakarikaé 93c—98b, 
Tattvaprakasa 47). In taking over the Sankhya conception of a tripartite internal organ 
of ‘thought’ and at the same time adding above that in the evolutionary scale a tattva 
vidya the Saiddhantikas have to justify that these things fulfil different functions. As 
TORELLA (1998:55) observes, the kancukas (kala, vidya, raga, kala, and niyati form ‘a 
foreign body with respect to the Sankhya basis of tattvas...’, and further they give 
‘the impression of doubles, having an uncertain status, so much so that not only all 
the Saiva philosophers but also some of the Saiva scriptures themselves feel bound to 
answer the objections they already foresaw in the opponents’ minds and to highlight 
the specificity, for example, of raga ‘Attachment’ and vidya ‘Science’ with respect to 
their seeming doubles avairagya and buddhi.’ 

According to the Sankhyakarika (second half of 37), it is the buddhi that is respon- 
sible for discriminating between prakrti and the soul: saiva ca visinasti punah pra- 
dhanapurusantaram siksmam. The Saiva justification for having vidya as well is that 
buddhi cannot examine itself and therefore the soul must have a further instrument. 
See Sadyojyotis’s argumentation in the Bhogakarika (93c-98b): 


karanam na vina kartuh krtih karmani drsyate 93 

ato ‘sti karanam vidya buddhibodhavivecint 

Pradipavan matis tasya svaparatmaprakasika 94 

vidyate karanam pumso vidyaya kim karisyati 

pradipah karanain pumsah stambhadyarthopalabdhisu 95 
dipopalabdhau caksus ca buddhav apy evam isyatam 
traigunyat sa vivekena Sakta darsayitum na hi 96 
visayakaram atmanam avivikta yatah svayam 

vidya gunapara vedyam vivikta 'to vivekatah 97 

Sakta dargayitum pumso n&atra karyo. ’timatsarah 


‘Without an instrument an agent is not known to act with respect to an object. There- 
fore there must exist an instrument: vidya, which discriminates among the awarenesses 
of the intellect. [Objection:] the soul’s (tasya) intellect is like a lamp that illuminates 
itself and others: (thus] the soul has an instrument; what will he do with vidya? [Re- 
sponse:] A lamp can be an instrument for the soul in perceiving stumps and such like 
external objects, but for perceiving the lamp the faculty of sight [is necessary as a 
further instrument]. We must accept that the same is the case for the intellect too 
(i.e. to grasp that too we require a further instrument]. For that [intellect], being itself 
not separate (from what it illuminates] (avivikta) because of its being made up of the 
three gunas, is not itself capable of displaying itself distinctly (vivekena) when it has 
taken on the form of external objects. And so vidya, which is beyond the gunas and 


236 Parakhyatantra 


separate (vivikta), is capable of displaying distinctly (vivekatah) the objects of expe- 
rience (vedyam) for the soul. There is no need to be excessively niggardly in this [viz. 
in acknowledging the existence of this ‘extra’ tattva vidya.’ 

The argument here in the Parakhya, though less clearly stated, runs along simi- 
lar lines. Like Sadyojyotis’s opponent in 94cd, Pratoda here points out in 4:3ld that 
buddhi illuminates itself and other things; as in Sadyojyotis’s response, here in 4:34 
Prakasa teaches that buddhi cannot take on the form of the object and then perform 
any operation of discriminating upon itself as having the form of that object. Why does 
Sadyojyotis make a point of emphasizing the contrast between buddhi being permeated 
by the gunas and vidya being above the gunas? Presumably the answer is that, as we 
have seen above, viveka in the Sankhya context is the salvific discrimination between 
soul, which is beyond the gunas, and prakrti, which is permeated by them: an en- 
tity which is of the gunas should not be capable of serving as an instrument of seeing 
beyond them. But for Ramakantha and other Saiddhantikas, the viveka that is now as- 
signed to vidya rather than to the buddhi cannot have the same soteriological function. 
It seems rather to be a term that covers experiencing the various modes of knowing 
(discerning, remembering, etc) that the buddhi presents to it. See Ramakantha’s re- 
marks in his Matangavrtti ad vidyapada 10:5: ... kim ca sarvasya bhogabhogyadivyava- 
harasya angam buddhih, adhyavasdéyatmakatvat. tasya &lingane samvedane saiva [scil. 
vidya] ksam& bhavati. etad uktam bhavati: adhyavasayasmrtipratibhadipratyaya- 
bhedabhinna buddhir api yaya vedyate ‘sé vidya tat param karanam’ [Tattvasangraha 
12d]. yatah prakrtisambandhinya buddheh na tatha svatmanam eva grahyatapannam 
karanatvena 4lingane ksamatvam, grahyatvena bahirangatvat. iti vidyasiddhih. (An- 
other passage in which Ramakantha distinguishes the function of vidya and buddhi 
is Kiranavrtti 1:17.10-12, where we should remove a wrong ‘emendation’, for the text 
there should read vinivrttamalasyapi hi pumsah smrtipratibhavikalpadivaksyamana- 
buddhivrttyatmakarthasamvittau avasyam karanantarena bhavitavyam....) Cf. also 
the SivatanuSastra as cited in Tantraloka 9:210ab: sukhaduhkhasamvidam ya vivinakti 
paSor vibhagena. 

An early source that we may assume to have inspired Sadyojyotis’s above-cited de- 
liberations in the Bhogakarika (and so those of others too) is the passage introducing 
kala and vidya and the immediately following tattvas in the Rauravasfitrasangraha 
(1:7-10a). This should probably be reconstituted on the basis of the testimony of M”, 
which was not collated for the edition of the beginning of the text (up to 4:41), and for 
which I am obliged to rely here on its apograph MS B 776 (ff. 27°-28” ): 

kalam utpaédayamasocitém ksetrajnasamsrtam 

yaya yuktah samabhyeti vedanam sukhaduhkhajam 
vidyam ca tattvadharmadikarmasamvedinim param 
vivecayati ya pumsah Subhasubhaparicchadam 
ragam ca ranjakam caiva visayanandalaksanam 
tasmat ksobhat samutpadya pradhaénam asrjat gunat 


buddhyadikaryakaranam. .. 
e utpddaydmasocitam | B 776; utpadayamasa vidyam BHATT e °samsrtam B 776; 
°samvrtam BHATT e tattva® ] B 776; dharma°® BHATT; nanva® BHATT’s MS A 


e pumsah ] B 776, BHATT’s MS A; pumsim BHATT e ksobhat ] B 776; kopat 


Chapter Four 237 


objects. (31) 
Prakasa spoke: 

First of all (tavat)°?9 the perception of an object (arthalocanam)*° ap- 
proaches the soul’s (tasya) gateway [made up] of the [three internal] in- 
struments (karanadvaram asritam).**! The cause for the setting in mo- 
tion(?) of that [perception(?)] is the mind (manas); its [viz. the mind’s] 
volition (tatsamkalpah) takes place for one who [by means of the buddhi] 
discerns (adhyavasyatah). And for this [person] the object is located in 
the buddhi. The mind is [then] capable of conceptual constructions of 
it (tadvikalpe).*°* Buddhi (dhth) presents (arpayet) the object to the 


BHATT 

Partly because I constitute the text differently from the edition, my understanding of 
this passage differs in almost every respect from that offered by DAGENS and BARAZER- 
BILLORET (2000:499-500). I would interpret it, tentatively, as follows: 


He (viz. Ananta] caused kala to arise that is appropriate [to the soul] and 
that accompanies the soul [through samsara]. Linked with this [kala] the 
soul attains experience born of [i.e. consisting of] happiness and unhap- 
piness. And [then he caused to arise] a further [instrument] (param), 
vidya, which makes [the soul] aware of the tattvas and of karman, which 
consists of merit and [demerit. It is she] who causes souls to discriminate 
all the things that are good and bad. And [then he caused to arise] raga, 
which impassions, whose nature is pleasure in the objects of the senses. 
Once He had caused prakrti to arise out of this ‘shaking’, he created out 
of [the tattva] guna [all] the instruments and effects, beginning with (the 
instrument] buddhi. 


329 
330 


ez conj. ISAACSON. 
ez conj. alocana has been preferred to Jocana because it is the term used in this 
context in Sankhyakarika 28 and, speaking of prediscursive awareness, in Slokavarttika 
pratyaksasiitra 112. 

331 et conj. This appears to have been adopted as a technical term from the Matanga 
(or a related source), for see Matangavidyapada 18:83: 


mano garvas tatha buddhir dvaram etat sadatmanah 
bhutaye bhitanathena nirmitam karanam tridha. 


Cf. also Matangavidyapada 18:86 and Matangavidyapada 10:7 (quoted in the next 
footnote). Whether it was really intended as a technical term in the Matanga is perhaps 
open to doubt: note that kala is also so characterised earlier in the text (vidyapada 
9:16cd): sukhaduhkhopabhogasya dvaram etat sada citeh. 

332 4:32d-33b seem problematic syntactically and surprising from the point of view of 
content and we should perhaps assume them to be corrupt or missing some text. In 
Sankhya acounts we expect all three internal organs to be accounted for, the buddhi be- 
ing responsible for discernment (adhyavasaya), ahankara for appropriation (abhimana), 


238 Parakhyatantra 


knower [viz. the soul] (jnatre), [and] he [then] discriminates (vivekas ta- 
sya) by means of vidya. (32-3) 

Coloured by the object (artharakta sat1), the buddhi can be perceived 
as having the object’s form (upalabhya tadakrtih). Like a lamp whose 


and the manas for volition (samkalpa): ... mahato 'dhyavasayo ’hamkarasyabhimanah 
samkalpo manaso vrttih... (thus Vacaspatimi$gra ad Sankhyakadrika 29). Cf. prose 
units 37—40 (the last of which is actually an orphaned half-line of anustubh) of Sarva- 
jnanottara 3 in the edition of Tanjore: 


... manasa sankalpam karoti. 
ahankarenabhimanam karoti. 
buddhyavasayam karoti. 

sa eva manasa yukta indriyaih saha yujyate. 


It may seem surprising that the Sarvajnanottara contains prose, particularly to those 
familiar with its text only from the other (also partial) editions of Devakottai 1923 and 
Adyar 1998. As I have demonstrated (GOODALL, forthcoming B), these two editions are 
fundamentally unreliable and completely mislead the reader earlier in the text (their 
first chapter contains a distortive interpolation composed of 20 verses culled from the 
Sitasamhita on the subject of the role of diksa); their text of this passage is in verse, 
whereas that of all the MSS I have been able to consult, as well as that of the in every 
respect more reliable Tanjore edition of 1933, is in prose. (For a further quotation from 
this prose passage, see fn. 348 on p. 245 below.) 
Cf. also Matangavidyapada 10:6-12b: 


aksarthasangamodbhitah pratyayo yo 'vadharyate 
akrstah sa kasayena bhogakhyenatmavartina 6 
aSayenatitivrena samyag vegavataé bhrsam 
atyutkatabhilasena dvaram 4Sritya garvajam 7 
kramat sancoditam cittam bahirangena vasyate 
vasitam tena bhavena sankalpya ca cikirsaya 8 
sangrhyasu vised garvam garvo 'py aSayagocare 
prapto ’ntarangatam yena svabhimanena garvitah 9 
abhimanayitum Saktah svadharmena baliyasa 
abhimanatmakat tattvat khyatir adhyavasayini 10 
tam alambyatmadharmena bodhakhyena sumedhasa 
tatas taducitam cittam khyatir nyayanuvartini J1 
nivedayati vidyaya bahiscarasupeSala. 


e sangrhyasu ] Kashmirian MSS and Matangavrtti as transmitted by Kashmirian MSS; 
sangrhyanu® BHATT 

Even with the help of Ramakantha’s Matangavrtti I am unfortunately not able to 
arrive at a satisfactory translation of this passage. Cf. also Matangavidyapada 18:90c— 
91b:. 


grhito ’rtho ’bhimanena khyatir adhyavasayint 
nivedayati vidyaya vidyaya vindate puman. 


Chapter Four 239 


[illuminated] objects are [both] itself and other things, it is [itself] the 
object of another instrument (karanantaragocara).*> (34) 

An instrument [can be] dependent on an(other] instrument, just as in 
battle an elephant [uses its] trunk, [which uses] weapons.**4 Therefore, 
because of [the evidence of] discrimination (vivekena), [we know that] 
vidya must be a further instrument [that we exercise] upon what can be 
known (jneye*?*). (35) 

Otherwise there could then be no extroversion towards external ob- 
jects (visayanvesah) and [no] slight [capacity for] discrimination (vivekas 
ca manak). And then experience (would] plainly [be impossible] for the 
soul, and he would then lack the power to be liberated (na ca moktum 
balam tada),°° because all the rest of the tattvas are subordinate (to 
vidya] (Sesatattvagunibhavat), just. as a crane or such like [water bird] in 
the water [depends] on a [submerged] rock.*%’ (36) 


3351f this interpretation is correct, then this is another tatpurusa compound inflected 
as though it were a bahuvrihi (for which see fn. 294 on p. 227 above). For the impos- 
sibility of buddhi taking on the form of the object and then examining itself having 
taken on that form, see Bhogakariké 95c—98b quoted and translated above in fn. 328 
on p. 235. 

°“This half-verse appears quoted in the Mrgendravrtti ad 11:11 introduced by 
...pratyuta karanantarapeksasya kasu cit kriyastpalambhah. uktam ca Srimat- 
parakhye.... HULIN’s translation (1980:254) reads: ‘Au contraire, dans certaines ac- 
tions, on admet qu’un instrument puisse dépendre d’un autre instrument. II est dit 
dans le vénérable Parakhya: “On sait que sur le champ de bataille un instrument, 
éléphant, main ou arme, dépend d’un autre.” ’ It is not explicit in the text that 
there is a chain of dependency between the instruments mentioned in the example, 
and HULIN could perhaps defend not understanding one; the first pada however, he 
has implausibly translated as though it were inside the example, which, without the 
context of the immediately preceding verses, it might be judged to be. But since there 
is no general statement of the principle that an instrument may depend on another 
(such as Narayanakantha supplies in his introduction to the verse), I prefer to interpret 
the first pada as such a general statement. 

335 er conj. The transmitted jneyam is perhaps just possible, but awkward in conjunc- 
tion with syat: ‘vidya should (syat) be understood to be (jneyam) another instrument’. 

336 er conj. Retaining what is transmitted and adding (with B) an accusative ending 
to bhoga might also be considered: ‘And then the soul would plainly not have the power 
to experience his experience’. But in that case the second tada becomes problematic. 
One might also consider emending to na ca bhoktum balantaram: ‘and there is no 
other power [that enables one] to experience’. 

337 er conj. | am far from certain that this is the intended image. If it is, then the 
syntax is problematic, for we must assume ellipse of a main verb such as-adhitisthati 
(with bakadih as its subject) to account for the accusative silam. 


240 Parakhyatantra 


Among those (other tattvas] raga binds the soul. It arises from kala. 
The coarse [worldly] passion (ragah) that is directed at external objects 
(arthavisayah) is nourished by [this] subtle [principle called] raga (suksma- 
ragopabrmhitah).°38 (37) 

Infected by the subtle raga (siiksmaragoparaktah), the coarse [passion] 
is to be known as its effect (sthilas tatkaryalaksitah). This raga of the 
soul is powerful, like red dye (kasayah) in a garment.*°9 [It is that] by 
which there then arises in the soul (asya) a slight tendency to lust (manag 
laulyam) after external objects. (38) 

Pratoda spoke: 

Why not let the soul [just] have (astu tasya) the same attachment (yo 
ragah sah) that we [ordinarily] feel in this world (iha) towards external 
objects (visayesu), since there would be no contradiction [if one were 
to adopt this position] (avirodhatah)?4° [And] the attachment that we 


338The relatively sophisticated account of raga given in these two verses (4:37-8)— 
sophisticated by comparison with what is offered in the Kirana (1:17 and 3:1-5), 
Svayambhuvasitrasangraha (1:10-12) and Rauravasitrasangraha (1:9ab)—is similar, 
even in its vocabulary, to that of the Matanga in vidyapada 11:5-7b: 


yenoparakto laulyena ragi samupalaksyate 

sati tasmin pradhanatma sthilas tam prati yujyate 
ekibhitas tatah pascad balavan jayate ksanat 
yenabhibhito bahyesu pratyayesv anurajyate 
tenayam sukhadah proktas tadviryenopabrmhitah 


‘As a result of which [scil. subtle raga] the soul becomes tainted (uparaktah) by desire 
(Jaulyena) and is characterised as “im-passioned” (ragi). When that [subtle raga] is 
present, then the coarse [raga] that is of the nature of secondary matter (praddhanatma) 
is conjoined with the soul (tam prati). Once united [i.e. once the coarse raga has joined 
the subtle], it then becomes straight away powerful. When the soul is overcome by it 
(yenabhibhitah), he is attracted to external sense objects. Therefore (tena) it is this 
[coarse raga], once it is strengthened with the power of that (subtle raga], that is 
taught to be that which bestows pleasurable [and painful] experience.’ Ramakantha’s 
interpretation, particularly of 11:6cd, is evidently different, but it is not entirely clear 
to me. The interpretation of the anonymous commentary on the Matanga printed as an 
anubandha is different again: yena prakrtarupena abhibhiitah san sa régo bahyesu 
pratyayesu srakcandanavanitadigunagrahanabuddhisu anurajyate atipritido bhavati. 
33°This image for raga and the soul is used also in the Sivatanugastra as quoted in 
Tantraloka 9:210cd: raga ca kalatattvac chucivastrakasayavat samutpannah. 

340 As we saw above with vidya, the text must attempt to explain why there should 
be need of a kancuka raga when we already have other lower entities that might serve 
its function, in particular avairagya, which is one of the eight qualities of the buddhi 
(cf. fn. 328 on p.235 above) and which is sometimes referred to with the label raga 
(e.g. in Mrgendravidyapada 10:24d). 


Chapter Four 241 


observe towards even contrary things (viruddhesv api) [must be.just] ex- 
ceedingly pronounced [attachment].3*! (39) 

The sun (bhasvan) spoke:34? 

Attachment comes about as a result of the accumulation of [the retribu- 
tive force of past] actions (karmaSayavasat); it does not come about for 
something ‘contrary’.*43 It is rather that (punah) the same kind of kar- 
man has to be experienced as is determined to exist. (40) 

And [the retributive force of] past action that the bound soul has to 
experience is of two kinds: dharma and adharma. There is attachment 
that is linked to dharma (dharmanubandhako ragah), and, different from 
it, there is attachment that is connected to adharma (tadanyo ’dharma- 
samsrayah). (41) 

Through the attachment that is the result of dharma the soul en- 
joys pleasure; he has sorrow from the [attachment that results from the] 
opposite of dharma (duhkham asya vidharmatah). It is as a result of 
the destruction of that [karman] (tatksayat...nimittat) that the soul can 
become dispassionate (sa virajyeta), not from viraga.344 (42) 


341 es conj. It is possible that nirnitah is rather an error for nigcitah, which is then an 


invitation for the use of that word in PrakadSa’s reply. The question is not satisfactorily 
interpretable to me, and it is not clear how PrakaSa’s reply deals with it. Nor have I 
been able to find a parallel account that appears to deal with the same concerns about 
raga. In the more detailed discussions of raga elsewhere, we commonly encounter four 
themes: 1) the distinction between coarse raga (abhilasa) and subtle raga (ragatattva, 
abhilasahetu) (e.g. Kirana 3:1-5 and, pregnantly, in Mrgendravidyapada 10:11); 2) the 
distinction between ragatattva and avairagya, one of the eight buddhidharmas [e.g. 
Tattvaprakasa 48 and Mrgendravidyapada 11:15 and commentary]; 3) the argument 
that we cannot appeal to external objects themselves as the causes of attachment, 
because that would entail that no person could ever become dispassionate (e.g. Tattva- 
sangraha 10 and Mrgendravidyapada 11:15 and commentary; and 4) the assertion that 
we cannot appeal to other factors, such as maya or karman, to account for attraction 
(e.g. Tattvasangrahatika ad 10]. (More passages bearing on the treatment of raga are 
adduced by TORELLA (1998:63ff).) But I cannot see how the second part of Pratoda’s 
question might fit into any of these familiar discussions. The account of the Matanga 
too, which seems similar to ours up to this question of Pratoda’s, appears thereafter 
to be of little help. 

342 his is the only instance in MY where Prakafa is identified with the sun, but see 
introduction p. xl. 

343 er conj. ACHARYA. The conjecture is tentative. 

344What I assume is meant here is that, of the two kinds of raga, the positive one that 
is the result of dharma can also be termed viraga, which, in this particular instance, is 
therefore not merely the absence of raga, but a positive entity that is itself a kind of 
raga. (Cf. Yogasutras 2:7 and 2:8: sukhanuSay! ragah and duhkhanuSayi dvesah.) True 


242 Parakhyatantra 


Since this positive attachment (viragah), as well as [the other, neg- 
ative] attachment (raga eva va) are caused by past action, how then 
(kasmat) can a soul who is stained [by them] (raktah) become dis- 
passionate (virajyeta)? [True] dis-passion [is surely possible only] of one 
who is without [any kind of] attachment (viraktasya viragata),°4° because 
these two are dependent on past action (karmayattau). Therefore this at- 
tachment resides in each individual’s past actions. These three ‘cuirasses’ 
rest together in the subtle body.*4® (43-4) 

(The powers that are his self] are [partially] revealed when he is joined 
with a foetus (garbhasamyoge) once he has in due order (kramat) been 
impelled (kalitah) by the tattva of time (kalena). And time too is [a 


dispassion, a revulsion towards all that is worldly, is therefore something that comes 
about when one has neither the raga that is the result of adharma nor that which is 
the result of dharma (here and in 4:43b confusingly referred to as viraga, even though 
viragata in 4:43d appears actually to refer to true revulsion towards all that is worldly). 

345The sense is, I think, ragarahitasyaiva viragah, where we must understand viraga 
in its more usual sense of dispassion, such as we find, e.g, in Mrgendravidyapada 10:12, 
Matangavidyapada 17:75, 78, 147, etc. If the interpretation offered is correct, the idea 
is certainly clumsily expressed. 

346As a term for the subtle body siiksmalinga does not appear to be common in 
Saiva texts, but it is occasionally used, e.g. in Tryambakasambhu’s Kiranavivyrti ad 
2:10 (IFP MS T.No. 1102, p.36). As TORELLA points out (1998:58), kala, vidya, and 
raga form a special inner group among the five kancukas, such that these three alone 
are sometimes referred to with the term kancuka even where the existence also of kala 
and niyati is acknowledged (as here). Cf., for example, Matangavidyapada 11:33c— 
34b, 12:1, 12:25, and 14:2. In the Rauravasitrasangraha they are the only kancukas, 
as we have seen in Rauravasiitrasangraha 1:7-9 (quoted in fn. 328 on p. 236 above), 
which is confirmed by 10:98-101. Accordingly they appear also to be the only three in 
the Sivatanusastra (as cited in Tantraloka 9:208c-12b), for that text may well closely 
have followed the Rauravasiitrasangraha (see fn. 104 on p.lx above). Jayaratha ad 
loc., following the lead given by Abhinavagupta in his avatarika in Tantraloka 9:206ab, 
asserts that the SivatanuSastra too knows six kafcukas (including maya as the sixth), 
arguing that kala and niyati are not mentioned not because they are held not to exist 
but because they are purified (in initiation) when one purifies the other three, and to 
this effect he quotes a prose statement that he attributes to the Ruruvrtti, and which 
therefore may have belonged to a lost section of Sadyojyotis’s commentary on the 
Rauravasutrasangraha (see introduction, p.|x): kaladibhir eva Suddhais tac chuddham 
drastavyam ity abhiprayato ‘nabhidhanam nabhavat. (It would not be surprising to 
find Sadyojyotis reading these missing tattvas into the Rauravasutrasangraha, for, as 
we have seen (fn. 302 on p. 229), he reads them into Svayambhuvasitrasangraha 2:9.) 
In fact the Sivatanusastra does appear to refer to three other entities as karicukas (in 
Tantraloka 9:208ab), but these are mala, maya, and Siva (by which is presumably 
meant his nirodhasakti). 


Chapter Four 243 


constitutive part] in the subtle body (siksmadehasthah). It is known 
(laksyate) through its having characterising signs (lingayogatah). (45) 
Those signs are such [cognitions] as ‘second’, going up to ‘aeon’ 
(tutyadyam. .. mahakalpavasanakam).*4’ They cause one to infer time 
(kalasya gamakam tat), since time is that which ‘divides’ (kalayita). (46) 
Impelled (kalitam) by this [time], the male seed (bijam), joined with 


“7When quoted in the Matangavrtti ad vidyapada 12:25-17b the line begins 
with udajyam, of which I can make no sense. I assume therefore that this 
is no more than an accidental corruption that can be partly explained away 
by palaeography: in Sarad& script the graphs for tu and ta can be confus- 
ingly similar to those for u and da. Cf. Ramakantha’s Kiranavrtti ad 1:18cd 
and cf. towards the beginning of the kdlaprakarana (1.6.68) in the Prasastapada- 
bhasya: ksanalavanimesakasthakalamuhtrtayamahoratrardhamésamasart vayanasam- 
vatsarayugakalpamanvantarapralayamahapralayavyavaharahetuh. 

The smallest division mentioned is the tuti (or truti; but see GOODALL 1998:lxx for a 
defence of the other orthography) also in Mrgendravidyapada 10:14ab, Matangavidya- 
pada 25:12c-13b, MalinIvijayottara 1:29cd and Nisvasa guhyasitra 7:23, f.62”. 


244 Parakhyatantra 


the female seed (sa-raktam), becomes a kalala.34® The kalala (next 


348This is the smallest form of the embryo. According to a quotation in the Abhi- 
dharmakogabhasya ad 3:19abc (p. 130), there are five stages: 


kalalam prathamam bhavati kalalaj jayate ’rbudah 
arbudaj jayate pesi pesito jayate ghanah 
ghanat prasakha jayante keSaromanakhadayah. 


This has the appearance of a Sanskrit rendering of a non-Sanskrit verse (note that 
bhavati renders it unmetrical), and indeed it corresponds to a portion of the Yakkha- 


samyutta (Samyuttanikaya X 1,3) quoted in SUNESON’s useful article on embryological 
terminology (1991:112): 


pathamam kalalam hoti kalala hoti abbudam 

abbuda jayate pesi pesi nibbattati ghano 

ghana pasakha jayanti kesa lomaé nakhani ca. 
The earliest non-Buddhist classification that SUNESON quotes (1991:111) is that of 
Mahabharata 12.308:116—17: 


bindunyasadayo ’vastbah sukraSonitasambhavah 
yasam eva nipatena kalalam nama jayate 

kalalad arbudotpattih pesi capy arbudodbhava 
pesyas tv angabhinirvrttir nakharomani cangatah. 


A number of variant accounts that use overlapping terminology are to be found (see, 
e.g., Bhagavatapuraéna 3.31:2-3, and for others see SUNESON 1991). But the first three 
stages of the above quoted lists are common to a number of early sources. (One 
demonstrably early Puranic account that was not accessible to SUNESON is that of 
Ur-Skandapurana 176:7c-10.) 

In the classification that the Parakhya appears to be using, the second stage is called 
budbuda and the third mamsapesi. Admittedly 4:47d as transmitted in M” reads mase 
pesitvam agatam; but mamsapeSi appears to be the terminology of both versions of 
the Sarvajnanottara, for which see below. The same confusion (mdse for mamsa°) 
is to be found in the secondary verse account given in the Devakottai edition of the 


Sarvajnanottara that has replaced the original prose, for 3:28d-30b of the Devakottai 
edition reads as follows: 


...ekahat kalalam bhavet 

pancaratrena kalalam budbudakaratam vrajet 
budbudam saptaratrena mase pest bhavet punah 
dvisaptahad bhavet pesi raktamamsac cita drdha. 


In the Parakhya it is merely probable that mase has to be corrected to mamsa’, but 
in this just quoted passage it seems to me certain that it must (the Adyar edition has, 
however, reproduced mase): I understand the passage to say that a kalala comes about 
in one day, a budbuda in five, a mamsapesi in seven, and that this same pest [viz. the 
mamsapesi] becomes ‘firm’ in two weeks. I mention this because SUNESON (1991:113), 
when discussing the last two of the above half-lines (reading mamsapeéi bhavet punah 
and raktamamsacita) as they appear quoted in the Sabdakalpadruma from the text 
of the Sukhabodha (which he describes as ‘a late unpublished comprehensive medical 


Chapter Four 245 


koga work probably composed in 1568 by a certain Vaidyaraja’) interprets them as 
explaining mamsapeSi and pesi to be two different stages, the first ‘covering the period 
from the 8th to the 14th day’, and the second, i.e. pei, taking ‘the fourth position in 
the series, usually designated ghana’. This interpretation is not borne out by the con- 
text offered by the Devakottai version of the Sarvajnanottara. Furthermore SUNESON 
(1991:109) characterises mamsapesi as a new term ‘probably coming into use during 
the 16th century’. The evidence of the Parakhya and of the primary prose passage 
of the Sarvajnanottara that is quoted below shows that the term is several centuries 
older. (Dr. ISAACSON, in a letter of 2.xii.2001, has pointed out to me that there is also 
the evidence of Candrananda’s commentary on VaiSesikasutra 5.2.19.) It seems that 
pesi and mamsapesi appear as alternative designations of the third stage, just as (as 
SUNESON observes, 1991:111, fn. 10) arbuda and budbuda do of the second stage. 

The text-units numbered 19-30 in the original prose passage of the third chapter of 
the Sarvajnanottara appear thus in the Tanjore edition: 


ekaratrositam kalalam; pancaratrena budbudam 
saptaratrena mamsapesi sambhavati 
dvisaptaratrena mamsapindakrtir bhavati 

masad abhyantare bahur amso jayate 
masadvayena hastapadangusthadayo jayante 
tribhir masair jarayusnayutvanmarmani bhavanti 
caturbhir masair vamSaprsthe udaram kati§ ca bhavanti 
pancabhir masaih Sirolalatakarnanasa bhavanti 
sadbhir masaig chidrani bhavanti 

saptabhir masaih Sarirasya vyaktir bhavati 
astabhir masaih purnakrtir bhavati 

navabhir masaih samayuktacetano bhavati. 


This prose section has in the Devakottai edition of the Sarvajnanottara (and in the 
Adyar edition that, in spite of its claim to be based on MSS, plainly derives from the 
Devakottai edition) been entirely replaced by the secondary verse passage from which 
we have quoted above and in which all but the first three stages differ (bhitatmapra- 
karana 3:28ff). In this the Devakottai and Adyar editions diverge from all the other 
sources of the Sarvajnanottara that I have been able to consult, including the early 
Nepalese MS (in which only the tail end of this prose portion survives) and the MSS 
of the twelfth-century Sarvajnanottaravrtti of Aghorasiva. Their diverging texts rejoin 
each other with what is the second half of 3:44 in the Devakottai edition and the 
second half of 3:43 in the Tanjore edition. (For a further quotation from this passage 
see fn. 332 on p. 238 above.) Note that this passage provides much earlier evidence of 
mamsapinda being used to designate a stage in the embryonic development than the 
Krsnacaritranataka, the eighteenth-century Nepalese drama to which SUNESON refers 
(1991:119-20). 

Some Saiva sources name only the first two stages, the kalala and the budbuda: 
Matangavidyapada 19:26ff, Vayupurana I.14:17 (quoted by SUNESON 1991:112), and 
Tryambakasambhu’s Kiranavivrti ad 1:18 (IFP MS T.1102, p.23). (The latter two 
give the rarer form kalana for kalala.) 

Note that though the terminology of the first three stages is shared by a wide range 


246 Parakhyatantra 


becomes] bubble-shaped (budbudakaram), [then] it becomes a mamsa- 
pesi. (47) 

It next becomes complete, equipped with [all its] major and subsidiary 
limbs (angapratyangasambaddham). In its rising, its perduring, its per- 
ishing, it is this time that is what impels it (sa kalah kalanatmakah). (48) 

Just as [time] is said to be connected with the foetus, so too it is to 
be understood to be connected from the beginning [i.e. beginninglessly, 
independent of particular embodiments]. Not otherwise can the three 
[modes of time] (nanyathé tritayam), which exist before [the soul is linked 
to] the foetus (garbhapiirvakam),°49 be connected with the soul (tasya 
yujyate). (49) 

Past time, future time, as well as the time that is now passing, (yah 
kalo vartamano ’pi)*°° are connected. Without time [the soul] could not 
be conceived of as thaving any part (?) of action, subtle or gross (suksma- 
sthilakriyamsakah)t.°°! (50) 


of texts (either arbuda or budbuda quite likely arose because of error out of the other, 
and pesi and mamsape3Si are, as we have seen, in origin probably the same), it is not just 
their sequence and the amount of time that each phase lasts that varies enormously. 
Thus in the Astangahrdaya, Sarirasthana 1:49cd, we read: dvitiye masi kalalad ghanah 
peSy athavarbudam. For a brief discussion of these terms in the medical tradition, 
according to which the pesi is the form taken by the female embryo and the arbuda 
that taken by the male, see SUNESON 1991:113-14. 

34°Or perhaps we should interpret ‘which depend (for their operation on the soul] on 
the foetus’. Both interpretations seem conceivable to me. On the one hand the text 
might be asserting that the bound soul is connected with time independently of its 
being linked to a particular embodiment—unless souls are connected with, i.e. subject 
to, time, they could not come to be embodied at all; the very fact that at some point 
in time a foetus starts to arise means a difference for the soul between an earlier state 
and a state in which the foetus first arises. In this case it is not only within the states 
of the foetus that we see temporal differentiation. On the other hand the text might 
be stressing that time does not actually act upon a particular soul unless that soul 
is embodied. Cf. the end of Sadyojyotis’s Svayambhuvavrtti ad 1:10, justifying that 
the tantra there mentions the first three kancukas but not time or niyati: kalaniyatyo$ 
ca pravrttaprayojakatvad atragrahanam. kalo hi pravrttam eva purusam trutyadi- 
bhih kalayati. niyatir api pravrttam eva yatra karmaphalam tatra niyamayatiti. I 
have chosen to assume that the text asserts that time is connected with bound souls 
even when they are not embodied on the grounds that the other possibility appears to 
conflict with the only interpretation of 4:50cd that seems conceivable. 

35° This is a slightly laboured formulation; but it would be over-interpreting to suggest 
that it is intended to hint at the problem that present time is sometimes said to be 
unknowable (for which cf. Matangavidyapada 12:7c—14b). 

35! This follows the suggestion of Dr. ISAACSON (letter of 2.xii.2001), which makes 


Chapter Four 247 


Binding fate (niyati) is to be understood [to be so-called] because of 
the compulsion (that she exerts] (niyamat). She is that which binds to the 
bound soul (the fruits of his particular] past actions. She is empowered to 
bind for [all] three (modes of time]. Not otherwise is [this] binding held 
to be. (51) 

Pratoda spoke: 

In binding past actions (to particular souls] since past action itself [can be] 
the agent of binding (karma eva niyamakam), [determining] what [action] 
(yat) [accrues] to whom (yasmin), how large it is (yavat), and in what 
way, what is the purpose [then] of [positing this imperceptible entity] 
niyati?>>? (52) 

Prakasa spoke: 

If binding were to be produced [as an effect] of past action, then let 
intellection too be an effect of past action (dhisana tarhi karmaja). If the 
revelation of the power of consciousness (cidvyaktih) were to be produced 


by past action, then what need would there be of the mind?°° (53) 
Then it would [in turn] obtain that the eyes and other senses were 
pointless (aksanam caksuradinam vaiyarthyam).*°4 Therefore that which 


sense if 4:49cd indeed makes the point that bound souls must be subjected to time 
regardless of whether they are embodied. Here kriyamsa might refer to degrees of 
manifestion of kriyaSakti, the soul’s power of action. Ramakantha refers to coarse and 
subtle degrees of revelation of the power of action in his Tattvatrayanirnayavrtti ad 
verse 6: ...diksadina...asya...kriyaSakteh sthilasiksmaparabhedena vyaktatvad... 
(f. 109"). 

I had earlier emended gamyah to garbhah and translated: ‘The foetus cannot be 
without time...’. This might fit with the other interpretation of 4:49, but it would 
probably rule out the above interpretation of 4:50d. 

$2 his is a stock objection. Cf. Mrgendravidyapada 10:15: 


sasadhanasya bhogasya karmatantrataya jaguh 
kecin niyamakam karma yad anyad atiricyate 


‘They say that experience, as well as the means [of experience], are in the control of 
[the retributive force of] past actions. Some hold [this retributive force of] past actions 
to be that which determines [which fruits accrue to whom]; as for that other [entity 
that is postulated to perform this function, niyati], it is superfluous.’ 

353There are a number of ways in which this could be interpreted. The word dhisana 
one would expect to refer to buddhi (as below in 4:74b) or to its functions and cidvyakti 
to refer to what is done by either kala or vidya rather than by the manas. Thus one 
could understand 4:53b to refer to a different corollary from 4:53cd, or one could assume 
that 4:53bcd all refers to the same corollary. Fortunately this interpretative decision 
cannot affect the argument, for which see the next footnote. 

354As commonly in defences of the existence of the kancukas, the argument (here 


248 Parakhyatantra 


binds a soul’s past action [to himself] (tatkarmanah... yat tu niyamakam) 
is taught to be a tattva.°°> (54) 

That: on which the controlling power (niyamika Saktih) {that is in time 
as well as in niyatit>°® acts is in this system (atra) [known as] the tattva of 
the [bound] soul (paurusam tattvam)); it ‘fills’ the path of creation below 
it (adhomargavapirakam).**’ (55) 


implicit) is that each imperceptible entity in the tattvakrama actually accounts for 
a different known effect, and that if one were to heap a number of these effects on 
to one imperceptible entity, then there would be no reason to stop the reductionism, 
and the absurd consequence would be that even the existence of the sense-faculties, 
which are not directly perceptible, could not be defended. Cf. Ramakantha’s elegant 
expression of the principle in Kiranavrtti 1:17.6-8: na hi yat karyantaranyathanupa- 
patty& samsiddhasattakam atyantatindriyam vastu tat karyantarakaranatvena Sakyam 
adhyavasdtum anekendriyadikaérandntaraklpter apy abhavaprasangaét. ‘For some ut- 
terly transcendental entity whose existence has been established on the grounds that 
one particular effect cannot otherwise be accounted for cannot be claimed as the cause 
of another; for if it could, one would have to admit that there is also no need to 
postulate any other cause, including the various sense-faculties.’ 

355Here tatkarmanah is taken as a compound, but one could split it and take the tat 
as the correlative to the following yat: ‘What binds past action, that is taught to be a 
tattva’. A more natural word-order would then be: yat tu niyamakam karmanah, tat 
tattvam proktam. | 

These two verses (4:53-4) are comparable to the refutation of the same objection in 

Mrgendravidyap&da 10:16-17: 


bhogo ’rthah sarvatattvandm so ’pi karmanibandhanah 
karmaivastu Sariraédi tatah sarvam aparthakam 

atha dehadisapeksam tat pumarthaprasadhakam 

tato niyatisapeksam astu karma niyamakam 


3The interpretation of this pada is very uncertain. It is just conceivable that the 
text might speak of both kala and niyati possessing a controlling power. Cf. Sadyo- 
jyotis’s justifying what he interprets to be a reference to kala, kala and niyati with the 
expression kalakale in his Sviyambhuvavrtti ad 2:9a (quoted in foonote 302 on p. 229 
above). 
387 nirvacana of purusa is implied; hence this choice of words. Cf. Matangavidya- 
p&da 14:3—4b: 
yasmét pradhaénam utkanthdd apirayati bhavitah 
tasm&t pumbhdvasdmarthyat pancavayavalaksitah 
pusn&ti prakrtim yasm&t tasmat purusa ucyate 
In his Matangavrtti ad loc. Rimakantha interprets this as follows: utkantha vidy- 
ate kdryatvena yasya, asau utkanthah ragah, tasman nimittat. yatag ca pums- 
tattvamalasimarthyena bhavitah kaladipancatattvayukta eva pradhanam bhogya- 
tvena 4pirayati; prakrtim ca pusnati tato ‘pi nimittat sa eva pumstattvam ity ucy- 
ate. The same nirvacana is perhaps intended to be implied in Mrgendra 10:18: 


Chapter Four 249 


This is taught to be the place of the [eight] yogins,*°® the pinnacle 
of the realm of [secondary] matter (avyaktagrhasekharam).*° This is 
also the ‘eternal place’ (viz. the liberated state that can be achieved] 
through ever cultivating consciousness (sada caitanyabhavatah).2© The 


pumstattvam tata evabhit pumspratyayanibandhanam 
apurakam pradhanader bhauvane rudrasamsrayam. 


Also comparable is Matangavidyapada 12:25-27b: 


kalito ’dhomukho jantuh kancukair avagunthitah 
na vijanati ruddhétma mahamayaém yatah pasuh 
paSutvat, kalitah ksipram kalenanantatejasa 
niyatyakhyena tattvena sa ca pascan niyamyate 
yena pumbhavam ayati jagadapuranam prati. 


As Dr. ISAACSON has pointed out to me (letter of 19.xii.2001), the association with 
pdrayati appears already in Yadska’s Nirukta (2.3) and in Mahdbharata 5.68:10 and 
5.160:3. Cf. also the nirvacana of TATPURUSA given in Rauravasiitrasangraha 10:30-1. 

358These are presumably the bhuvanas of the yogins elsewhere called the yogastaka. 
These are commonly placed in gunatattva, but it is not inconceivable that they should 
be here, because the tantras differ about which tattvas they accept at this level of 
the universe (see GOODALL 1998:lii-lv). In the Svayambhuvasitrasangraha (4:38-9) 
they are placed in pradhana; in the Mrgendra (vidy&pada 13:144-148b), the Kirana 
(8:120-121b), the Matanga (vidyapada 16:25-32, where, in 29c, we must either read 
ribhos with the Kashmirian MSS or emend to rbhos, in place of BHATT’s vibhos), 
in the Ur-Pauskara as quoted in the Siddhantasamuccaya (IFP T.No. 206, p.81 and 
IFP T. No. 284, p. 148) and in the Sarvajnanottara (90c-94 of the adhvaprakaranam 
as transmitted in IFP T. Nos. 334 and 760) they are placed in gunatattva. They are: 
akrta, krta, raibhava (often erroneously given as bhairava, but what is intended is a 
derivative from the name Rbhu), brahmya, vaisnava, kaumara, auma, and Sraikantha. 
It is a peculiarity of the Parakhya’s account of the tattvadhvan (chapter 5) that it 
mentions regents of the tattvas (which appear not to be given in other tantras, but 
have passed into the paddhati-literature, for see GOODALL 2000:216, fn. 41) and not 
bhuvanas. Thus in 5:149a we learn that Siksmadeha rules over pumstattva; but it is 
only here that we learn that the yogastaka too is situated herein. For more on the 
astakas, see fn. 620 on p.314 below. 

35%ex conj. I think that the text intends to express that they are located at the 
very top of prakrti, in other words sandwiched between the tattvas of purusa and 
prakrti. Placing worlds and creatures at the tops, middles and bottoms of tattvas 
is not unparalleled, for see, e.g., Kiranavrtti 1:15.46-7; Somasgambhupaddhati vra- 
toddharavidhi 7 (BRUNNER 1977:553); Ramakantha’s Sarvagamapramanyopanyasa 6c 
(GOODALL 1998:xxi); and Siddhdntasamuccaya IFP T.No. 206, p.99 and T. No. 284, 
p.163: ...gunamastakasthakrodhesadibhuvandpddanatvena cavyakté es& prakrtih 
siddhaé. Furthermore the collocation avyaktagrha, used to mean prakstitattva, has 
a parallel in Kirana 8:125ab: tatraiva puruso jneyah pradhaénagrhapalakah. 

360Perhaps my assumption that bhava is irregularly used here as though it were 
bhavana is not warranted; one could render this instead with ‘because consciousness 


250 Parakhyatantra 


ones situated [there] in [this] resort of Rudras*®! are, although they are 
yogins, deluded.2®? (56-57b) 

Because [he is now] a [bound] soul (pumbhavat) by being con- 
nected to the.subtle [body],°°? he moves with binding fate (niyatya saha 
sarpati).°®4 (57cd) 

From kala arises the unmanifest (avyaktam), the cause of [all] mani- 
fest effects (vyaktakaryanibandhanam). She is called prakrti because she 
creates her creation (krtim). (58) 

Or [she is so-called] because the experience (?)(pratyayah) that souls 
have that is of the nature of doubt is derived from prakrti (pra- 
krtah).3®° She is the material cause for bodies and effects, both subtle 


always exists there’. 

36! The label rudrasamsSraya is used of purusatattva also in Mrgendravidyapada 10:18 
(quoted in fn. 357 on p.248 above). Following Narayanakantha’s commentary ad 
loc., Trilocanasiva in his Siddhantasamuccaya does not interpret this literally, for 
he quotes Mrgendravidyapada 10:18 with the following introduction (IFP T. No. 284, 
p. 164 and T. No. No. 206, pp. 99-100): nanu purusatattve ’pi kesu cic chastresu bhu- 
vanani sriiyante. satyam. tadadhipatinim rudranam 4aSrayatvena bhuvanani sriyanta 
eva. tani tu purusasya cetanatvena bhuvanadharatvayogat pumstvamalasambandha- 
samanadeSaragatattva evavasthitani. ata eva Srimanmrgendre... The justification 
offered for locating these worlds in raga is that the Kirana (in 8:125ab, quoted in the 
previous footnote) locates the purusa there. This the Sarvajnanottara also does in verse 
106 of its adhvaprakarana (IFP T. No. 334, p.66 and T. No. 760, p. 48). 

362This seems comparable to the instances in other works of placing the liberated 
states of followers of other doctrines in particular tattvas. Cf., e.g., the beginning of 
the lingoddharaprakarana of the Sarvajnanottara (IFP T.No.334, p.96); South In- 
dian Pauskara 6:68-76 and Somasambhupaddhati vratoddharavidhi 7-8 (BRUNNER 
1977:553). 

363This might be taken as an indication that the Parakhya regards the subtle body 
as constituted of these top tattvas only rather than of all the lower tattvas, as is the 
position of the Matanga and Ramakantha. It seems indeed from 4:62—-4 that Prakasa 
is using the word sthula to refer to the effects below avyakta, and the stiksma to refer 
to the effects above it. The change of subject is surprising, but we are in fact only 
returning, after a digression, to the main theme: the soul being gradually empowered 
for experience after a phase of pralaya. 

3°¢T.e. whatever he does, niyati accompanies him and ensures that he gets his just 
deserts in accordance with his karman. The choice of the verb sarpati may seem odd, 
but cf. Matangavidyapada 13:1cd: Saktir niyamika pumsah saha tattvena sarpita. Else- 
where too (e.g. Matangavidyapada 14:1; Svayambhuvasitrasangraha 1:8 and Aghora- 
siva’s commentary on Sarvajnanottara, bhiitatmaprakarana 7 [IFP MS 47818, p. 115)) 
the verb appears to be used of moving about in samsara in accordance with or for the 
sake of experiencing one’s karman. 

365 This nirvacana is obscure to me. The range of possible meanings for pratyaya here 


Chapter Four 251 


and gross.°©° (59) 

Since she gives forth (pradhatte) her creation, [this] cause is therefore 
[also called] pradhanam.*°’ . Without a cause how could the effects that 
are the buddhi and so forth come into being? (60) 

Pratoda spoke: 

Since that [prakrti] is [both] cause and effects [in the sense that it produces 
effects], what is the use of kala and the others that are posited?°® For 
would not the purposes of the soul be served*®? by the soul’s being united 
with its effects [alone]? (61) 

Prakasa spoke: 

[But] how could the mind and the other (necessary effect]s come about? 
An effect is taught [to be produced] from [another] effect. Therefore that 
which is linked [with the soul] (niyujyate) before what is coarse must be 
different from it (and relatively] subtle.3”° (62) 

And because of that which is subtle [viz. the soul] being connected 
to the subtle [body(?)] (siiksmayogitvat) connection may then [follow] 
(punah) with the gross (body(?)].°”1 For souls the bond that consists of 
kala and those others is like dye in a white garment (svacchavasahkasaya- 
vat).3"2 (63) 


is large. 

368The adi in this compound seems to be otiose. 

387The nirvacana offered in Matangavidyapada 15:5c-6 is as follows: prakrtyaé 
dharitam Sakte svodare vinipatya tu/ tasmat pradhanasabdena tattvam uktam 
sanatanam. 

68 Perhaps the following interpretation is also conceivable: ‘What is the use of kala 
and the others that are posited to stand in a relation of cause and effect to this [pra- 
krti]?’ 

46 er conj. Other emendations could be considered: nararthavirbhavo na kim could 
be interpreted to give the same sense and would be palaeographically closer to the 
transmitted reading. 

37°Dr, ISAACSON (letter of 19.xii.2001) has suggested to me the following alternative 
interpretation of the second half: ‘Therefore there must be a subtle entity, different 
from those [i.e. from buddhi etc.], which is linked [with the soul] before what is coarse 
[can be produced and likewise linked with the soul.’ 

371 The interpretation is far from certain here. It is plain that Prakaéa is distinguishing 
two groups of effects: the relatively coarse group that emanate from prakrti, and the 
relatively subtle group above that. What is not plain is whether he intends to equate 
these with the gross and subtle bodies respectively. The evidence of 4:66a rather 
suggests that he does not, but cf. also 4:57 and note ad loc. a, 

372er conj. Instead of this small emendation, one could consider svacche vase 
kasayavat. But, as Dr. ISAACSON has pointed out to me (letter of 19.xii.2001), the 


252 Parakhyatantra 


The other [bond], which consists of the buddhi and the others, is a 
powerful intoxicant (raégah saéndrah); by it the soul is impassioned (anu- 
rajyate). These are the various effects and causes (karyakaranabhedo 
’yain), divided into subtle and gross (siiksmasthilavibhaégatah). (64) 

The group of kala and the others is there for the soul (asya) in just 
the same way as the group (of effects] beginning with buddhi is: all their 
efforts are for the sake of the soul (nararthah sarvasamrambhah). The 
aims of the soul (nararthah) are impossible [to achieve] (na) without a 
body (tanijjhitah).°”3 (65) 

And for that [body] (tasyas ca) [there must] first [be] connection with 
kala [etc.], and afterwards buddhi and the rest may arise. Just as the 
seed of buddhi and the rest is prakrti, so too (that prakrti] is born of kala 
etc. (66) 

Since [these] effects are insentient (krter acitsvabhavatvat), and be- 
cause of the soul’s [condition of] impotence (pumsas cakartrbhavatah), 
there must be a cause that joins him (with it] (tadyoge karanam): that 
[cause] is proclaimed to be the Lord (khyatah sa isvarah),3"4 for he has 
the power. (67) 

His instrument is His will;>”> it is His power that is inseparable (saktir 
abhinna), like the power [of yogins attained] by yoga.3”° With that [power] 
He unites [each soul] with his body (tatkaye), in order that he may 
consume the accumulated [fruits of his past actions] (svarjitasanahetu- 
tah). (68) 

Since prakrti is the cause of the gunas, the gunas are definitely ef- 
fects, since their own effects (yenatmakaryani) are produced from them 
as effects (karyatah) separately.*”’ (69) 


consonant stem seems to be more widely attested in Saiva texts, and it is used in the 
same image in Matangavidydpada 8:41. 

373Cf. Kirana 4:29ab: na dehena vind muktir na bhogas cit kriyaé guruh. 

374Note the aisa double sandhi of sa+Isvarah. 

375 er conj. The emendation of karanam to karanam is perhaps not necessary, but 
it is preferred for two reasons: the cause has just been identified as the Lord; and 
the Lord’s will is identified as an instrument in Kirana 3:1lab, icchaiva karanam tasya 
yathad sadyogino mata. 

5761t seems to me likely that the power of yogins attained by yoga is intended (cf. 
Kirana 3:11b quoted in the previous footnote), and one could therefore consider emend- 
ing to yogisaktivat. 

577When this verse is quoted in the Siddhantasamuccaya it is introduced thus (IFP 
MS T. No. 284, p. 163 [=A]; T.206, p.99 [=B], GOML MS R 14394, p.39 [=C], and 
GOML MS R 16820, p. 1 of final sequence of numeration [=D)): 


Chapter Four 253 


Awakening, impelling, and blocking—these exemplify, in order, (their] 
effects. Since she ([prakrti] must be common [to them all], just as the ego- 
principle (ahamkrtih) [is common] amongst [all] the faculties [of sense 
and action], their locus (adharam*"®) is established to be the unmanifest 
(avyaktam); that which is manifest is established to be the production 
of effects (karyavidhih sthitam). Since their activities are mutually sup- 
portive (anyonyasrayavrttitvat),°’9 [a single] activity (kriya).of the gunas 
can be [said to be] discerned (Jaksyate). (70-1) 

[Thus] this group of three may fittingly be one tattva, the locus of 
Rudras.**° The name ‘quality’ (gunasamjna) applies to the gunas because 
the soul adopts their qualities (tadgunasamsrayat).**! (72) 

Could they not belong to others too (anyesam api kim na syuh)? But 
they are held to be all-pervading.*°? According to this system, the activity 


tatas ca gunanaém 4caitanye saty anekatvat tatkéranatay& gunamastaka- 
sthakrodhesadibhuvanopadanatvena c&évyaktakhya prakrtih siddha. tad 
uktam Srimatparakhye.... 


e tatkdranatayd ] BCD; karanatayd A e gunamastakasthakrodhe- 
4adi° ] B; gunamstatasthah krogadi®? A; gunamastakasthah/ krod- 
hosadhi° C; gunamastakasthah ko ye sadhi® D e c&vyaktakhya. 
prakrtih ] CD; ca vyaktaghataprakrti A; cavakta esi prakrtih B 


It is then followed (except in MS T. No. 206) by the quotation of Bhogakarik& 88c—-89b 
(cited in fn. 413 on p. 264 below) and, in MSS C and D, 89cd. We might be led to infer 
from this that Trilocanasiva interpreted it to express both that the gunas are effects of 
prakrti and that this can be known because they are plural and insentient. But it is 
the quoted unit of the Bhogakarika that expresses this; with our verse PrakdSa seems 
to intend to emphasize that the gunas form a separate tattva (unlike for the Sankhyas), 
since they produce their own separate effects. 

378 The use of this word as neuter may be an original aisa feature of the language, and 
so it has been retained. One could, however, emend to adharah. 

378The wording echoes the second half of Sankhyakarika 12: anyonyabhibhavasraya- 
jananamithunavrttaya$ ca gunah. 

389Cf. Mrgendravidyapada 10:21: 


trayo gunas tathapy ekam tattvam tadaviyogatah 
elaikaSrutir etesam vrttyadhikyanibandhana. 


‘The three gunas are nevertheless one tattva, because they are inseparable. Their being 
mentioned individually in scripture is occasioned by the predominance of [one or other 
of] their functions.’ 

381Or perhaps ‘because the soul adopts them as qualities’? 

382The point here appears to be that they cannot be ‘possessed’ as ‘qualities’ by 
any non-pervasive entity, but they can be ‘possessed’ by the soul, which is yet more 
pervasive. But their relationship cannot be one of samyoga, for see 1:41 and note 


254 Parakhyatantra 


that belongs to them (vrttir ihanvita) [is directed] towards [respectively] 
awakening, setting in motion, and deluding. (73) 

From that same tattva comes forth buddhi (dhisanaé), with its 
eight constituent parts (astangasamyuta): dharma, jnana, vairagya, and 
ai§varya, through which the sattvika [guna is to be known]; because of 
adharma the rajasa [guna] is to be known, and ajnana is a property of 
tamas (ajianam yat tamogunam).** (74-75b) 

When, because of the suppression of rajas and tamas, (a soul] abounds 
in sattva (sattvasamutkatah), then [that] soul will have a clean mind for 
engaging in dharma (dharmasamarambhe pumsah Suddha matih). En- 
gaged in that [dharma(?)] (tatpravrttah), he will not harm [others], and 
he will speak the truth. (75c—76) 

He will not take others’ property; disciplined, he will observe sexual 
abstinence (nito brahmacaryena vartate) and he will be without confusion 
(akalusyataya so ’pi).°*4 He will not be angry with anyone. (77) 


thereon. If correctly understood, the point is oddly expressed. 

S831f the text and this interpretation are correct, the author’s intention was not 
smoothly expressed. It is possible that a half-line has dropped out between 4:75b 
and c that accounted for avairagya and anaisvarya. Cf. Mrgendravidyapada which, 
as here, connects the positive properties with sattva, but connects all the others with 
tamas with the exception of avairagya, which is presumably therefore connected with 
rajas: 

bhava buddhiguna dharmajnanavairagyabhitayah 
sattvika vyatyayenaite ragam utsrjya tamasah. 


$84Thus far the five yamas have been listed. Hereafter are listed the five niyamas. Cf. 
Matangavidyapada 17:29c-31: 


dharmas ca dvividhah prokto yama§ ca niyamo ’parah 
ahimsa satyam asteyam brahmacaryam akalkata 
yamah pancavidhah prokto niyamas capy athocyate 
akrodho gurususrusé $aucam santosa eva ca 

arjavam ceti niyamah pancadha parikirtitah. 


The Parakhya’s lists are the same as those of the Matanga even in their order. The 
lists of other texts vary considerably both in order and content. See Yogasitra 2:30 
(ahims& satyam asteyabrahmacaryaéparigrahé yamah) and 2:32 (Saucasantosatapah- 
svadhyayeSvarapranidhanani niyamah), and cf., for example, the two verses quoted on 
p. 16 of Kaundinya’s Pancarthabhasya on the Pasupatasitra: 


ahimsé brahmacaryam ca satyasamvyavahaérakau 
asteyam iti pancaite yama vai samprakirtitah 

' akrodho gurusuSsrusa gaucam aharalaghavam 
apramada$ ca pancaite niyamah samprakirtitah. 


Chapter Four 259 


He practises obedience to his guru, purity (Saucam), the cultivation of 
contentment, and he is always morally upright (arjave tu gato nityam). 
Such a man (esa... puman) is intent on dharma. (78) 

And knowledge can be that inferred by one’s own intellect by constant 
practice (abhyasato nityam).®° Or knowledge can be that learned from 
another; or [it may be what is learned] with correct understanding (su- 
bodhatah) from scripture itself (jmianad eva),°** or from the teaching of 
one’s guru (guripadesatah), or from meditation (bhavanavasatah). (79- 
80b) 

By nature (?] (prakrtya) (there can arise] knowledge with regard to 
the self (atmaparam jnanam) or [that] other [knowledge]: the knowledge 
of the things as they are [7] (anyad va tattvariipakam).°°" (80cd) 


Cf. also Lingapurana I.89.24-5: 


asteyam brahmacaryam ca alobhas tyaga eva ca 
vratani panca bhiksiném ahimsé paramé tv iha 
akrodho guruSusriisa Saucam ahaéralaghavam 
nityam svadhyaya ity ete niyamah parikirtitah. 


This belongs to a passage shared with the Vayupurana, where these two verses are 
I.16:17-18. They occur also as Markandeyapurana 38:16-17. Cf. also, e.g., Vamana- 
purana 14:1. Many other passages could be adduced. COLAS (1988:256—60) tabulates 
and discusses some quite different lists. 

385 er conj. Perhaps a genitive of the present participle, abhyasyato nityam, is also 
possible; but parallelism with the other ablative nouns in the list (admittedly a weak 
ground) has led me to prefer this. 

386This interpretation is suggested to me by Mrgendravidyapada 10:28ab (lokadhigu- 
ruSaéstrebhyo bhati vainayiko gunah), which Aghorasiva quotes in his Mrgendravrtti- 
dipika after his quotation of Parakhya 4:79ab, for he follows that with ...ityadi. ihapi 
vaksyati ‘(Mrgendravidyapada 10:28ab]' iti. In other words, he appears to regard both 
passages as giving a list of what can lead to knowledge, and in the Mrgendra’s list we 
find $astra, which might correspond to jnanat here. 

3877 have not cruxed this half-line, because it may well not be corrupt, but it is obscure 
to me. Cf. Bhagavadgita 13:7-11: 

amanitvam adambhitvam ahimsé ksantir arjavam 
a&caryopasanam Saucam sthairyam atmavinigrahah 
indriyarthesu vairagyam anahamkara eva ca 
janmamrtyujaravyadhiduhkhadosanudarganam 
asaktir anabhisvangah putradaragrhadisu 

nityam ca samacittatvam istanistopapattisu 

mayi cananyayogena bhaktir avyabhicarinT 
viviktadesasevitvam aratir janasamsadi 
adhyatmajnananityatvam tattvajnanarthadarganam 
etaj jnanam iti proktam ajnanam yad ato 'nyatha. 


256 Parakhyatantra 


From any one of these kinds of knowledge vairagya can arise. That 
[comes about] as a result of trouble that arises from individual factors 
(adhyatmajaduhkhena)—|(trouble] such as cold, burning, fever—as well 
as from trouble that results from factors determined by nature (adhi- 
bhitajena), [i.e.) caused by such factors as rain, thunderbolts and so 
forth; and so too from factors connected with spirits (tadvat tad adhi- 
daivottham), [i.e.] what is produced by flesh-eating demons, demons that 
possess, and ghosts (pisacagrahabhitajam).°*° (81-2) 

As a result of vairagya [the soul] begins the practice of yoga, from 
which, according to this system (iha), there comes about aisvarya, (that is 
to say] that preeminence that consists in the capacity to make one’s body 
minute (animadigam), and other such powers, |[i.e.] which is accompanied 
by the eight supernatural powers (astadharmaparicchadam).3®° (83) 

When, because sattva and tamas are obscured, rajas is preeminent, 


Here too a distinction which is not clear to me is implied between adhya&tmajnana and 
tattvajnana, and they are placed here at the end of a list which is said to be a list 
of yamas and niyamas in the Gitabhasya attributed to Sankaracarya. In our passage, 
what follows in 4:81c-82b suggests that reference may here (in 4:80cd) be intended 
to adhyatmika and adhibhautika knowledge. 4:82cd then refers also to adhidaivata 
knowledge, but the tadvat that introduces that line suggests that this might have been 
an afterthought which was not referred to above. But we could interpret 4:80cd to refer 
to all three by taking prakrtyatmaparam as a compound: ‘knowledge, whose form is 
truth, that relates to prakrti, to the atman, or that other (knowledge, viz. that which is 
to do with divine beings]’. Further support for this interpretation is perhaps afforded 
by the expression of ekatamaj jnanat in 4:81la, since ekatama should properly mean 
‘one among more than two’, but this is not strong, firstly because confusion about the 
proper use of ekatama is not unknown, and secondly because a number of types of 
knowledge could be said to be referred to in 4:79-80b. 

388Cf. Matangavidyapada 17:77c-85, where these form part of a list of ten tustis 
(17:74-103) that lead to vairagya. 

389In the Matanga a description of these (vidyapada 17:108-25) follows on from its 
account of the attainment of vairagya to which we have referred above. See 14:91-4 for 
the Parakhya’s treatment of them. 

. The expression here is awkward, not only because the suffix -ga is oddly used and 
because we must assume that utkarsa has been attracted to the neuter, but also because 
the qualifiers that bracket it both appear to be referring to the same group of eight 
supernatural powers. This might be slightly less awkward if one were to translate the 
second with ‘[i.e.] that which is the panoply of the eight supernatural powers’; it is true 
that paricchada is commonly used at the end of bahuvrihi compounds, but I think that 
there are occasional uses of the word as a plural marker (i.e. at the end of tatpurusa 
compounds): see, e.g., Rauravasitrasangraha 1:8d, quoted in fn. 328 on p. 236 above. 
(If this interpretation were adopted, one would have to assume attraction to the neuter 
of this the noun paricchada too). 


Chapter Four 257 


then [there will be] craving for adharma in that man (adharmanurago 
’smin), and therefore (tat) he does not have aisvarya (naisvaryena var- 
tate). (84) 

As a result of adharma he becomes a non-believer (nastiko bhitva) 
and abandons rites of purity (Saucacaravivarjitah). Assuredly he becomes 
a thief and murders living beings.?™ (85) 

Because of attachment (ragat) he becomes tainted with the intoxica- 
tion of lust (ragapramadyaranjitah*®') for women who are his relatives. 
He does not regard (the fact that a woman may bel] his father’s wife, his 
daughter or his sister. (86) 

The trouble that consists in being without aisvarya and other such 
[positive qualities] he [wrongly] regards as itself the highest aisvarya. He 
who is intent on that remains one whose property of omniscience is en- 
veloped by nescience (avidyakrantacidgunah). (87) 

When, because rajas and sattva are obscured, tamas is preeminent in 
the soul (tasya), then he remains powerfully deluded by the confusion of 
tamas (midho mohatas tamaso bhrgam).°9? (88) 

As a result of delusion he sees an ugly woman to be beautiful, like a 
celestial nymph (apsaropamaém). A deity or a beautiful woman he grasps 
as the opposite [of what they are]. Deluded by the properties of nescience 


3% er conj. Cf. Matarigavidyapada 17:139-142b: 


tato ’no ratimahatmyat pravrttih parapidane 
himsato 'Tikabhasitvam asméac caurye pravartate 
paradaresv anayasam ato gurvanganagamah 
kalusyam atidaurbhagyam krodha§ caépy anivaritah 
satam vyatikrame pritir apritir gurusantatau 
Saucah&nié§ ca satatam atidauhkhyam pramadatah 
anarjavam ca satatam adharmakuliteksanah. 
391 er conj. This is a modification of a suggestion of Dr. ACHARYA: ragapramada- 
ranjitah. The suggestion has been rejected on the grounds that it would yield an 
entirely iambic pada; but I should add that this is a metrical solecism that is not 
inconceivable here, for see fn. 613 on p. 312 below. 
5°2 ez conj. Instead of emending to the genitive tamasah, one could retain the instru- 
mental and emend mohatah to mohitah, following the testimonium. Or again one could 
retain M”’s reading and interpret: ‘powerfully deluded because of tamas by delusion’. 
Note that in the quotation in the Nanavaranavilakkattarumpatavivekam (see appara- 
tus) the soul in question is deluded by lust; but lust is more appropriate of the man 
in whom rajas predominates, which is indeed what our text says. It is possible that a 
transmitter or editor of the Nanavaranavilakkattarumpatavivékam was faced here with 
a corrupt line which he has emended plausibly but in ignorance of the wider context. 


258 Parakhyatantra 


he sees everything topsy-turvy.2% (89) 

Buddhi, which determines, together with its eight qualities, has been 
expounded. Not otherwise is she to be understood to be, according to 
this Sastra (asmin). She is that which determines (bhaved adhyavasaya- 
krt). (90) 

Pratoda spoke: 

That cannot be how they are in this system (samstha naiveha s& tesém), 
for they must reside in the soul (yatas te purusasrayah). If the buddhi 
(sa dhisna) were thus invested with the eight properties, then there could 
be no sentience [in the soul]*™* if that [sentience]*% is produced from 
prakrti. (91) 

Prakasa spoke: 

Buddhi is that which awakens them, and that is why they are figura- 
tively (referred to as her] properties, for responsibility over them (tesam 
yenadhikaritvam) rests always with the soul (sarvada purusasrayam). The 
quality that is the particular property of (gunah svakyah**) the buddhi is 


3°3More literally: ‘he sees the reverse of everything’. 

3°This seems to be intended. The buddhi is any case not sentient. The argument 
seems to presuppose that the eight properties of dharma etc. are thought of as inte- 
gral parts of the sentient being, and that they cannot belong to buddhi, which is an 
insentient evolute of prakrti. 

3°5But it might be possible to take ga as referring to the buddhi rather than to cid- 
rupata. 

3°6Dr. ISAACSON once suggested considering an emendation to guno vacyo, but I have 
retained the transmitted text (with the insertion of a visarga before a sibilant in ligature 
with a semivowel, which for the scribe of M” would probably not have been regarded as 
an alteration). The anomalous adjective svakya appears to be an aifa form used with 
the same sense as svaka though it is a derivative from it, for cf. Matangavidyapada 
4:5cd: yogo 'sya $aktayah svakya visphuranti samantatah. In the Matangavrtti here 
Ramakantha’s attempt to account for the form is not convincing: svakasya bhavah 
svakyam, tad vidyate bhagavatah sambandho yasam tah svakydh. (Here bhagavatah 
sambandho Is the reading of the Kashmirian MSS; BHATT has adopted the reading 
of his other sources, bhagavatsambandhitayaé, which I suspect to be a clarificatory 
alteration.] Commenting on Matangavidyapada 16:1cd (prabuddho ’harmukhe svakye 
Srikantho ’nantavikramah), Ramakantha appears again reluctant to allow that the word 
is ordinarily used (in scripture) as an adjective, for he remarks: svam eva svakam, 
tasya bhavah svakyam atyantatmlyam; na tu brahmadinam aharmukham ity arthah. 
But no justification of the form is attempted when glossing Matangavidyapada 23:2a, 
which tell us of the property particular to earth: svakyo ’sau gandha evoktah. In the 
Matangavrtti this is glossed with etasyag casadharano guno gandha eva. The same 
treatment is given to the form in Matangavidyapada 22:2c, which tells of the property 
particular to water. Nor does Ramakantha comment on the form (beyond glossing it 


Chapter Four 259 


that called ‘[the faculty of] determination’, which brings about perception 
(vibodhakah).°9" (92) 

This buddhi, which takes the form of the objects of experience 
(visayakara), we hold to be that which the experiencer experiences. Since 
buddhi takes the form of the experienced objects, she is the locus of the 
experiencer’s experience (bhoktur bhogasamasraya) .3°° (93) 

From that [buddhi] arose the I-principle (ahankara), which is three- 
fold in accordance with the [threefold] division of its evolutes (trigunah 
karyabhedatah); by name [its three parts are] Taijasa, Vaikrta, and 
Bhitadi. (94) 

Then (tad) from that Taijasa ahankara there develops the five faculties 
of sense. The [five] faculties of action are born from the Vaikrta [ahan- 
kara], together with the mind (samanah), because of [its] connection [with 
them] (bandhena) [?).°% (95) 


with atmiyam) when it occurs in Matangavidydépada 7:40ab: diksdnalaplustamalasya 
pumsah svakyam balam vyaktim upaiti yogat. 
If svakya differs in sense from svaka it is perhaps only in that it is more emphatic. 

5°7 er conj. Perhaps the transmitted vibodhatah could be interpreted ‘because [it is 
through this function of buddhi that we can account for] perception’. 

5°8For this anomalous agreement of the asraya with buddhi even though it does not 
come at the end of a compound with bahuvrihi structure, cf. fn. 294 on p. 227 above. 
The verse is similar to Tattvasangraha 13. | 

5° A ccounts of this ancient doctrine differ. According to Sankhyakarika 25, all eleven 
faculties derive from Taijasa (the saéttvika aspect of ahankara), and the tanmatras 
derive from Bhitadi (the tamasa aspect). Both groups, however, are said in some sense 
to derive from Vaikrta (the raéjasa aspect of ahankara). Glossing the phrase taijasad 
ubhayam (the last words of Sankhyakarika 25) Vacaspatimisra explains: taijasad 
rajasid ubhayam ganadvayam bhavati. yady api rajaso na karyantaram asti tathapi. 
sattvatamas] svayam akriye samarthe api na karyam kurutah. rajas tu calataya yada te 
calayati, tada karyam kuruta ity ubhayasminn api karye sattvatamasoh kriyotpadana- 
dvarenasti rajasah karanatvam iti na vyartham raja ity arthah. The Kirana itself, as 
well as a number of other early Siddhantas (e.g. the Rauravasitrasangraha and the 
SvayambhuvasGtrasangraha), is silent on these sub-divisions of ahankara and their 
evolutes; but the doctrine of the mature Saiva Siddhanta, as expressed for example 
in Bhogakariké 35-45, in Mrgendravidyapada 12:3-5, in the South Indian Pauskara 
6:140-3, in Aghorasiva’s Tattvaprakasavrtti ad 55, is that the faculties of sense, as 
well as the manas, evolve from Taijasa; the faculties of action evolve from Vaikrta; and 
the subtle elements evolve from Bhiitadi. The above-mentioned Sankhya version is 
something like what TryambakaSambhu intends in his account in the Kiranavivrti 4:23 
(IFP MS 47625, f.58’and IFP MS T.No. 1102, p.91), except that Tryambakasambhu 
holds that Taijasa is rajasa and that Vaikrta is sattvika, and hence presents Vaikrta, 
when impelled by Taijasa, as producing the eleven faculties, and similarly Bhitadi, 


260 Parakhyatantra 


From Bhitadi there arise the five tanmatras;*™ from the tanmatras 


when impelled by Tuaijasa, as producing the elements: tatra taijasena viksubdhad 
vaikrtahankarad ekadasaksanindriyany asrjat ... punas taijasaéviksubdhat bhitader 
ahankaraét pancatanmatrani... As I have observed before (GOODALL 1998:cvii-cviii), 
Tryambakasgambhu appears to have been remarkably innocent, on other points too, of 
the mature Saiddhantika doctrine. But the treatment of Taijasa as rdjasa and Vaikrta 
as sattvika is not unique; it is that of the Matanga (vidyapada 18:44-5b) and may have 
been shared by Bhoja, if we follow the reading of Tattvaprakd&sa 54 that Kumaradeva 
defends (mentioning as a variant that which is evidently followed by Aghorasiva) and 
which Vrajavallabha DVIVEDI has printed in his 1988 edition. Bhoja’s own account in 
Tattvaprakasa 54-5 reads: 


sattvikarajasatamasabhedena sa jayate punas tredha 

sa ca vaikarikataijasa (sa ca_ taijasavaikarika® Aghoradgiva) 
bhitadikanamabhih samucchvasiti 

tajjasas tatra mano vaikarikato bhavanti caéksani 

bhitades tanmatrany es&m sargakramo 'yam etasmat 


The sequence that Kumaradeva first, very naturally, understands from this is as 
follows: taijasakhyad ahankarad rajasac calasvabhévam mana utpadyate; vaikarikat 
sattvikat prakaSalaghavopetam indriyadasakam; bhitades tamasaét tamobahulanam 
tanmatranaém udbhava iti. Note that the MalinIvijayottara (1:31) gives the same ac- 
count as Tattvaprakaésa 55-6 except that it does not specify which of the gunas Taijasa 
and Vaikrta correspond to. 

The Parakhya might appear to differ from all these accounts again, in that it has the 
mind grouped together with the faculties of action and not with those of sense. But 
this difference is more apparent than real, for below in 4:125 the manas is said to be 
ubhaydétmakam. This expression is used of the manas in Sankhyakariké 27 to mean 
that it is both a buddhindriya and a karmendriya (being both receptive and active). 
This liminal status of the manas passed from the Sankhyas into Saiva thought. In 
the middle of its account of the Atimarga the Nisvasamukha-describes the manas as 
ubhayétmakam (4:118, f. 18"): 


pradhanabudhyahankaratanmatranindriyani ca 
bhitadni ca tathé panca mana§ caivobhayatmakam. 


Cf. also, e.g., Nifvasa guhyasitra 7:165 (f.65") and Svacchanda 11:81. In the Parakhya, 
since the preceding verse (4:124) discusses what is tajjasa and what is vaikrta, the label 
means additionally that the manas belongs to both the vaikrta and the taijasa groups. 
The account of the Matanga has manas derive from every aspect of ahankara (vidya- 
pada 18:49c—50): 


samksubdhah karanecchato yada garvas tu sattvikah 
tada samghusya te dve ’nye mithunam sampravartate 
mithunaj jdyate garvan manag caivobhayatmakam. 


‘The word is here feminine. The neuter gender is standard in the commentarial 
literature, but in the tantras themselves both feminine and neuter are possible, and 


Chapter Four 261 


the gross elements arise. The faculty of hearing, of touch and of sight 
(tvakcaksusi) ,*°! of taste, and of smell: this is the group of {faculties of] 
sense (mater ganah). (96) 

The faculty of hearing, which grasps two kinds of sound, is located in 
the ear holes: not otherwise could one grasp distinct and indistinct sound 
(vyaktavyaktasabdanam).*? (97) 

The faculty of touch consists in (such sensations as] rough, hot, soft, 
cold. Touch has as its locus the skin. Not otherwise [i.e. not without 
skin(?)] could a person who experiences touch (sparsavibhavakah) know 
such (sensations of] touch. (98) 

The faculty of sight (caksuh) is that which makes forms known 
(rapanuvedakam); it resides in the [eye]balls of the knower. Not oth- 
erwise could there be perception of [any object’s] size, arrangement, its 
colour and form (manasamsthanatadvarnakrtigah). (99) 


even, occasionally, masculine, for see GOODALL 1998:lxvi, fn. 158. Here in the Parakhya 
it is required to be both feminine, as here and in 4:126 below, and neuter (or masculine), 
as in 4:107, 109-10, 114, 118 and 121-3 

401 6 conj. The dual might have been misunderstood and garbled, and therefore it is 
suggested here as a possible source of the corrupt reading in M”. The dual is paral- 
leled in Mrgendravidyapada 12:3a, which is identical to our pada as now constituted. 
The (unmetrical) reading of the Nanavaranavijakkattarumpatavivékam might also be 
accepted, but that is just perhaps more likely to be itself a secondary attempt at re- 
pair of a corrupt pada, as the reading of the Give: aaniadidth svasakeedssiantasanerahe 
probably is. That the quotations in both these sources have the same omissions for 
the portions from which they overlap suggests either that the Nanavaranavilakkattaru- 
mpatavivékam was drawing on the Sivajnanasiddhisvapaksadrstantasangraha or that 
they were both drawing on a quotation in another source. 

4°2The phrasing in our text might seem to suggest that we need two ears to grasp the 
two kinds of sound, which are vyakta and avyakta. A discussion of types of sound in 
the Nigvasa nayasitra (2:36—42, £.33"= Svacchanda 12:15ff), although it mentions this 
distinction (2:42d = Svacchanda 12:21b), seems rather to take the principal dichotomy 
to be one between siiksma and sthila (2:39 ~ Svacchanda 12:17c-18b). Whoever 
was responsible for the form the quotation took that we find in the Sivajnanasiddhisva- 
paksadrstantasangraha and the Nanavaranavilakkattarumpatavivekam might well have 
recognised there to be a problem of ambiguity in our passage and sought to correct 
it, for they not only omit 4:97cd, but they also read Sabdaikagrahakam (in place of 
dvifSabdagrahakam in 4:97a): ‘which grasps sound alone’. 

Whatever is intended to be the basic two-fold division, we may assume that it is not 
intended that two ears are required, one for each type of sound. If vyakta and avyakta 
are the two basic types intended by our author, then one might render them ‘articulate 
and inarticulate’, assuming that that which is vyakta refers to language and that which 
is avyakta refers to all other sound. It is not clear to me what sense they have in the 
Nigfvasa nayasiitra and Svacchanda. 


262 Parakhyatantra 


The faculty of taste (jihvaksam), {which is] the knowledge of such 
[sensations of] taste as ‘sharp’ and ‘bitter’ (katvamladirasajnanam), has 
the tongue as its locus, since without it there could be no knowledge of 
the various sensations of taste. (100) 

The faculty of smell grasps smells, since without it there could be no 
[sensation of] smell (yena gandho na tadrte).4°3 The eye and the ear grasp 
(even when they have] moved away (from the object of their perception]; 
the other three [grasp only when they have] come close.4™ (101abcd) 

Speech, the two hands, the sexual organ, the anus, the two feet: these 
are the five faculties of action.4° (101ef) 

The faculty of speech (vak), located in the tongue, speaks Sanskrit 
and other languages. For without the faculty of speech, speaking could 
not be voiced in this world (natra Sabditam). (102) 

Grasping and releasing [objects] from oneself are effected by the cause 
that is the faculty of grasping (hastendriyanimittajam). How could such 
activities as craft be possible without the faculty of grasping (hastaksa- 
varjitam)? (103) 

The bliss we have in this [life] (anando yo bhaved asmin) would not be 
possible without the sexual organ (nopasthena vina bhavet). The expul- 
sion of what we eat (bhuktosargah*°®)—an activity of the wind [apana] 
—has as its cause the faculty of the anus. (104) 

Striding, leaping, speed[y movement] and the like are the signs 


493 er conj. Note that for this conjectured reading to be metrically acceptable, it must 


be assumed that the redactor treated ras ru or ri, since only then would the syllable 
tad be long (see p. lxxxiii above). Cf. Ep’s text of Kirana 58:7d and 8d, which end 
with atha $rnu. (The readings of two unrelated and important manuscripts, N, and 
M”, do not however support Ep here.) 

4°41 have repaired and adopted this plausible explanatory half-line given in the quo- 
tation in the Sivajfanasiddhisvapaksadrstantasangraha and not transmitted by M”, 
since, even without some trigger, such as an instance of homoijoteleuton, and even 
when concentrating, I find myself not infrequently omitting half-lines when copying by 
hand. Cf. 4:105cd below. 

4°5 The two duals show that the redactor is capable of mixing up the faculties with the 
places in which they reside. Cf. Mrgendravidyapada 12:4ab: vanT pani bhagah payuh 
padau ceti rajobhuvah. 

406 6+ conj. I am uneasy about this emendation, because M” and the quotation in 
the Si vajnanasiddhisvapaksadrstantasangraha agree with bandhotsargo, which I cannot 
interpret. It seems unlikely that bandha should have been intended as an equivalent to 
vibandha (constipation), since we are not talking about a malady. Palaeographically 
closer to the transmitted aksaras would be the conjecture varcotsargo, in which we 
would have to assume aiga thematicisation of the noun varcas. 


Chapter Four 263 


that cause us to infer a faculty of (movement called] ‘foot’ (cihnam 
padendriyanugam). That which covers all the [organs that are the 
loci of the] faculties of action. throughout the body is the faculty of 
touch.4°” (105abcd) 

External and internal volition (bahyabhyantarasamkalpah) would not: 
be possible without the mind (manasa vina).The external one is the con- 
nection of object with sense faculty; the internal one is taught to be 
different from that. (105e-106b) 

[The sensations of] sound, touch, form, taste, and the fifth, smell, are 
the subtle elements (matrah), also known by the synonymous word tan- 
matra,*** which are born from [the aspect of ahankara called] Bhitadi. 
When not qualified (avisistah) by their properties (svadharmaih), in 
their essential nature (svariipatah) they are not separate. The ef- 
fects of those [tanmatras] are divided by those (properties, namely the 
properties of being] calm, fierce, deluded, and so forth (santaghoravi- 
midhadyaih).4°°From them [viz. from the tanmatras evolve] ether, wind, 


407 e+ conj. Inverting the first and second halves of 4:105, as in the quotation in the 


Sivajnanasiddhisvapaksadrstantasangraha, would not, I think, make good sense, but I 
have repaired and adopted the plausible extra half-line given therein (cf. fn. 404 on 
p. 262 above). 

408 ez conj. Cf. Mrgendravidyapada 12:5: 


Sabdah sparga§ ca ripam ca raso gandhas ca pancamah 
gunavisistas tanmatras tanm&trapadayojitah. 


40% ez conj. The final ddya may be otiose here, for the list is elsewhere only of these 
three members (Sankhyakarika 38): 


tanmatrany avigesas tebhyo bhit&ni panca pancabhyah 
ete smyta visesih santé ghoras ca mddhdé ca. 


Vacaspatimiéra’s commentary ad loc. explains as follows: 


... yasmad akasddisu sthilesu satt vapradhanatay&é kecic chant&h sukhah 
prakasa laghavah; kecid rajahpradhadnatayé ghoraé duhkha anavasthitah; 
kecit tamahpradhadnatayé miidh& visanné guravah. te 'mI paraspara- 
vyavrttyé anubhdyaménd visesa iti sthdla iti cocyante. tanmatr&ni tv 
asmadadibhir anyonyavyavrttani nanubhiyanta ity avigesa iti siksma iti 
cocyante. 

Dr. ACHARYA first suggested emendation to sdntatvaghoramidhadyais, which would 


be closer to what M” transmits, but the accepted text finds support in Svayambhuva- 
siitrasangraha 2:12: 


karmatah parindmo ‘sya jagatas trigunatmakah 
santaghoravimddhatmad nitantavisamas tatah. 


264 Parakhyatantra 


fire, water, earth. Those are the five [gross] elements. (106c—108) 

Ether is that which arises from the subtle element ‘sound’; it is per- 
vasive (mahat),*!° [and] it has sound as its one property (sabdatmaika- 
gunam).411 Since sound is not:the property of anything else, it is said 
to be particularly [‘the’] property of ether, even though it is [in a sense] 
common to the other elements too because it is perceived elsewhere than 
in this [ether]. (109-110b) 

And the arising of ether is necessarily preceded by [that of] the sub- 
tle element ‘sound’. It is different from all four [other] elements because 
of its [providing] space (avakaSatah). Because it has a property, it is a 
substance.*!* It is produced (utpannam); [for that which is] insentient 
[and] plural (anekasamkhyaya yuktam) necessarily leads (one to infer the 
existence of] a cause [that produced it].41° In its form as potentiality 


Sadyojyotis’s Svayambhuvavrtti ad loc. explains: 


sattvadayo hi yathasankhyam Santaghoravimidhaétmanah. ayam 
api santaghoravimidhaétmé trigunatmaksh. tatra dharmajnana- 
vairagyaigvaryakhyah santatma. adharmavairagyanai§varyakhyo 
ghoraétma. ajnadnakhyo vimudhatma. evam siddhitustyakhyah santatma. 
aSaktyakhyo ghor&tma. viparyayaékhyo vimidhatma. 


For the tanmatras being devoid of visesa see also Tatt vasangraha 3 and Mrgendravidya- 
pada 12:5. 

“1°Or should mahat rather be rendered here with ‘(relatively] unsubtle’? 

411 6x conj. 

“1367 conj. Cf. Pragastapddabhasya § 64, p.12: ato gunavattvad anasritatvad 
dravyam, and cf. Vaigesikasitra 1.1.14. But it is possible that this is not the point 
being made here in this half-line and that we should punctuate differently and perhaps 
retain the transmitted gunavat tena: ‘Therefore [i.e. because it arises from éabda] that 
substance arises endowed with properties; it is insentient...’ 

“13 This is intended to be a general statement of this Saiddhantika principle: cf. Bhoga- 
karika 88c—89b: 

acaitanye ’py anekat vasamkhyasambandhahetutah 
tesim k&ranapirvatvam istam buddhighatédivat. 


Note that this is clearer in the version of this half verse quoted by Aghorasiva in the 
Mrgendravrttidipik& ad vidyapada 3:1 (see apparatus), but I suspect this of being a 
secondary quotable version in which the whole principle fits into a single half-line. 

We expect Akasa to be described as one, not as plural. But I assume that it is here 
said to be plural because it is created anew in every creation. This is implied here by 
the next line, with which cf. Matangavidyapada 19:12c—13b: 


na caésyatyantiko 'bhavo na cotpattir ihesyate 
nityatvan munisardila sa tath&épy upacaryate. 


‘In this system we hold that it (viz. akasa] does not absolutely not exist, nor does 


Chapter Four 265 


(Saktiriipena) it is eternal; in its manifest form (vyaktiripatah) it is im- 
permanent. (110c-112) 

But it(s existence] is (not directly perceptible; it is rather] known 
(Jaksyate) through the inferential mark that is its effect, [namely] through 
its [providing] space:4!* even [the providing of] space is [an effect that is) 
dependent on a substance; it resides in [the substance] ether, [and] it is 
known as an effect (karyalaksitah).*!> It resides five-fold in the body: in 
the cavities of the [two] nostrils, the ears and the mouth.*!® (113-114b) 

Wind [arises] from the subtle element ‘touch’; it has two properties, 
and in its nature as breath (Svasanatmakah) it is called prana, apana, 
sama(na], udana, and vyana. Now that same [wind] (sa eva tu) is prana [in 
that it is] the wind that is the life-force (pranamayo vayuh); [as] apana [it] 
draws away impurities; [as] samana [it] creates balance (samatam kuryat); 
and [as] udana [it] goes out upwards (iirdhvanirgatah);*!" [as] vyana [it] 


it arise, since it is eternal, o tiger among sages, but it is nevertheless metaphorically 
spoken of as such [i.e. as subject to arising and perishing].’ The final remark of Rama- 
kantha's Matangavrtti thereon echoes our passage: ... tatha &kAse Saktivyaktyapeksay& 
ndSotpadav upacarenocyete, na tu paramarthata iti. 

“I4The use of particles here is confusing to me, and the text may be in need of 
emendation. Cf. the odd use of kim tu in 4:7. 

“15 All these qualifications of akdéa serve (partly) to distinguish the Saiva position 
from those of other thinkers. Cf., e.g., Aghorasiva ad Tattvasangraha 2: tato ’va- 
k&Sadanaétmana karyena akaéSasiddhes tadabhaévavadinas carvdkas tatpratyaksavadino 
mimamsakas ca pratiksiptaéh. na casya naiyéyikadibhir iva nityatvam isyate, vaksya- 
manavat tanmétrakaryatvad bhuvanédhdratvasruteé ca. 

“l6More cavities are counted in the Nisvdsa nayasitra (2:29ab, f.32" = Svaccha- 
nda 12:8cd): susiratmakam tu vijneyam navadhé cchidralaksanam. Kesemardja's 
Svacchandatantroddyota ad 12:8cd identifies the extra ones as those of the brahma- 
randhra, the eyes, the nipples, the anus and the genitals (linga). 

“\7Cf. Nisvasa nayasitra 4:124 (f.40"): agitam lidhapitam (conj.; Mtapitam MS) ca 
samanah samatam nayet/ ksutahikkacchardiké sa udanasya vicestitam. 


266 Parakhyatantra 


causes the body to bend (vinamayaty angam):*}® it is one, [but] is dif- 
ferentiated [by these various names] in accordance with the functions [it 
performs]. (114c-116) 

Since it is the cause of remaining ‘alive’ (jivane karanam yasmat),*!° 
it is therefore in worldy usage (iha) [said to be] resting (ayattam) in 
the soul.42° And so, according to this system (iha), prana is that which 
supports consciousness (cidadharah) for souls (kayadhrtam).*! (117) 

Fire evolves in manifest form (vyaktam) from the subtle element 


“18This may seem a surprising function for vydna, but the text is correct, for the 
notion is reiterated in 14:25 and occurs also as part of Sardhatrigatikalottara 10:12: 


vyano vinamayaty angam vyano vyadhiprakopanah 
priter vinasakarano vyapandd vyana ucyate. 


Possibly vindmayati is intended to mean something like ‘controls the movement of’. At 
the end of the Matanga's parallel (but more detailed) account of the breaths we read 
(vidyapada 20:33c—34): 


aksepakuficane vyane gamane ca prasarane 
calanasphotane caiva bahi§ cestasu sarvada 
pravrttah kurute vyanah pancamo yo ’nilo mahan. 


Cf. also the damaged verse Nisvasa nayastitra 4:125 (f.40"): romaharsam ca svedam 
ca Slado hy angabhanjakah (conj.; anganjakah MS)/ vyanasyaitani .... (The last 2 
syllables are illegible but are what was transcribed by the Kathmandu apograph.) 

419Cf. 14:18 below. A nirvacana based on \/an is presumably implied here. See 
Dhatupatha 2.60-1, Svasa pranane, and 4.66, ana (ana) pranane. Cf. Mahabharata 
12.315:35cd: praénanac caiva bhitanam prana ity abhidhiyate. Cf. Matangavidyapada 
20:7cd and also Mrgendravidyapada 11:22-23b, part of Narayanakantha’s Mrgendra- 
vrtti on which reads: ayam aSayah—pranayanat prana iti niruktadréa vyaparena prana- 
S$abdo laksitah; prakarsena ananam prananam jivanam, tato ‘pi prana ity ucyata iti 
phalavisayam asya nirvacanam. 

420Tt is not clear to me exactly what is intended with the word ayattam. What we 
might expect is an explanation to the the effect that prana is sometimes used with 
the sense of ‘life-breath’ or ‘soul’, and that this is a metaphorical usage based on 
the observation that breath is a prerequisite for being alive. Is it conceivable that 
ayattam could be a transmissional error for an irregularly formed past participle of 
&+,/da (that is to say adattam, instead of attam) used in the sense of ‘spoken’? We 
might then translate this pada ‘it is used in the world in the sense of “soul” ’. Cf. 
Mrgendravidyapada 11:13cd: city ativahike Saktau pranagabdah kalasu ca. ‘The word 
prana [can be used] in the sense of the sentient (soul], the transmigratory body, the 
power [of the body(?)], and in the sense of the channels of the breath (kalasu ca).’ 
(The uncertain interpretation of the last term is, I think, that of Narayanakantha, who 
glosses kalisu with somasiryadyatmikasu.| 

“21 Also perhaps conceivable is the following: ‘And so prana, among the [various] 
factors that support the body (kéyadhrtam), is here spoken of as ‘the support of the 
sentient [soul]' (cidadharah)’. 


Chapter Four 267 


‘form’; now (punah) this [fire] has three properties. It resides in the 
body [in the following]: in the eye, in the heart, in the bile, and in the 
organs of digestion.422 (118) 

That illumination of forms (ripaprakasah) that is in the eyes is the 
light (prakaSah) that is the property particular to fire. Without it there 
would not be its other (property, viz.) warmth (tapah), pervading the 
entire body of a man.*”9 (119) 

The overflowing of bile (pittaniryanam)‘*4 that we experience is con- 
nected with the activities, such as burning, [of fire]. [And] because of this 
(familiar digestive] cooking of food [we know that there is] fire in the belly 
that effects digestion. (120) 

Water evolves in manifest form at the instigation of the Lord (isat)*?5 
from the subtle element ‘taste’; it has four properties. It resides [in the 
body] in the fluids of fat, pus, tears, semen, blood, urine (vasapuyasra- 
Sukrasrnmutradravaniketanah).*”° (121) 

Earth evolves in manifest form from the subtle element ‘smell’; it car- 
ries five properties (paficagunavaha). Hair, marrow, nails, intestines ,4?? 
bones, flesh, tgunapaficakam}.‘*?° (122) 

This is elemental creation (bhautikah sargah), according to this system 


422Cf. Mrgendravidyapada 12:3lab: hrdi paktau drsoh pitte tejas taddharmadarSanat. 
In his Mrgendravrtti ad loc. Néraéyanakantha explains as follows: taddharmadarsanad 
ity ekaikasmin yojyam. tatra hrdi taddharmasyausnasya, paktau taddharmasya 
pakasya, drsoh prakaSasya, pitte ca santapaujjvalyader upalambhat tejah sannivistam. 
Our text explains this below. 

4237 assume that this is intended to refer to the existence of tejah in the heart, for 
which see the previous footnote. 

424 ox con). 

“251f this is what is intended the usage is certainly odd, but not unparalleled, for cf. 
Kirana 1:16ab, in which the ablative sivat plainly marks the instigating cause, rather 
than the source of emanation. It is possible, however, that the text here is corrupt. 

426The list of the Mrgendra differs (vidyapdda 12:30cd): mitraraktakaphasveda- 
Sukradau vari samsthitam. So too does the list of the Nifvasa nayasitra (2:25, f. 32”, 
s Svacchanda 12:4c-5b): kaphasrnmitramedesu rasasvedavasasu ca (conj.; °srkmitra- 
medesu rasasvadivasesu ca MS; °srgamamitresu rasasvedavasasu ca Svacchanda)/ 
Sukre ca sangrahe caiva sthita hy &pag$ caturgunah. 

427 or conj.: see next note. 

428The list in the Mrgendra reads (vidyapada 12:30ab): dehe 'sthimamsakeSatvan- 
nakhadantesu caévanih. Our list differs in that it adds majjan (unless we choose to 
emend to the more common feminine form majja) and antra (unless this conjecture 
is wrong) and does not include the teeth or the skin. This degree of variation seems 
possible, for the list appears not to be a standard one (cf. 14:55); it differs too in the 
Nigvasa nayasiitra (2:23c—24, f.32" = Svacchanda 12:3—4b): 


268 Parakhyatantra 


(atra), which has as its cause the group of subtle elements.‘?9 All that is 
made up of the three strands [of sattva, rajas, and tamas] is born from 
the principle of ahankara. (123) 

All the faculties of intellection (buddhyaks&ni) are, according to this 
system (iha), derived from Taijasa (ahankara], because of (their function 
of] illumination (prakaSatah). The group of faculties called ‘action’ derive 
from Vaikrta {ahankara], since [they cause] change (vikrtih) by means of 
action. (124) 

You should know that the mind’s activity is in both [groups] (dvistha- 
vrtti mano jneyam); therefore it is of both kinds:4%? by its controlling 


prthvI kathinarOpena Srnu dehe yatha sthita 
mAnse caiva tathadsthibhyo snayulomanakhesu ca 
antre majja ca vijneyd prthvl pancagunotkata 


@ mAdnse caiva tathadsthibhyo ] MS; m&mse’sthisu tatha calva Svacchanda 
e antre majja ca] MS; majjantresu ca Svacchanda 


Gunapancakam may not be corrupt; it is possible that it means that the five proper- 
ties of the earth are in the body. Perhaps just conceivable is that we should emend 
to ganaparicakam (understanding it to mean no more than pancakam) and correct 
°nakhamdra’ to nakhdnta (assuming this to mean no more than nakha). Also perhaps 
possible is that the expression is intended to mark the end of the treatment of the 
group of five elements, in which case perhaps some text is missing before it. 
ez con). 
‘Cf. Matangavidyapada 18:80-82: 

indriyam yat puré proktam mana§ cétrobhayatmakam 

visayas tasya samkalpah somas casyadhidevata 

dvidhadhikari tac cittam bhoktur bhogopapadakam 

bahih karanabhavena svocitena yatah sada 

indriyaném tu samarthyam samkalpenadtmavartiné 

karoty antahsthitam bhiyas tato ’ntahkaranam manah 
‘The sense faculty mentioned before, the mind, is of both kinds. Its sphere [of duty] is 
volition; its presiding deity is Soma. This mind has a two-fold duty that enables the 
experiencer to experience, for externally it at all times produces the capacity of the 
faculties [to function] as instruments by means of its own proper [function of ‘volition’, 
{and] further it [produces the] internal (capacity to function of the ahankara and the 
buddhi] by means of the ‘volition’ that is internal. Therefore the mind is an internal 
organ.’ 

This translation is an attempt to follow Ramakantha’s interpretation; Ramakantha’s 
commentary on this section reads: yad indriyam ubhayétmakam manolaksanam prag 
uktam, tasya visayah kdryam samkalpah avadhdnam ekagrata, tena hi tad visayi- 
kriyate. tathé hi—samnihitesv api indriyarthesu anavahitasya, arthantaravahitasya va 
tadarthavisayam jnanam notpadyate ity avadhanam api jnanotpattau karanatvena sid- 
dham. tasya ca na buddhir hetuh ahamkaro va. drkkriyatmakatvena pratyayaripat vad 


Chapter Four 269 


the sense faculties it is invested with duty as being of the nature of [an 
instrument of] action;**! situated inside (antahstham), endowed with [its 
function of] ‘volition’ (savikalpam), it illuminates the forms of objects [and 
therefore belongs also to the group of instruments of knowing].*3? (125- 
126b) 

The tanmatras** are the group derived from the Tamasa [aspect of 
ahankara, viz. Bhutadi]; they do not have [powers of] knowledge and 
action proper to themselves. They are the cause of the group of gross ele- 
ments; since those [gross elements] have [properties] that are not different 
from their own properties (svagunadvayayogatah), (these subtle elements 
are] the subtle cause of the gross elements. (126c—127) 

Such is the body of effects that comes forth (karyam evamvidham 
gacchet), from kala down to**4 earth. It emerges in stages at the time of 
creation, as a result of conjunction with the three types of cause.** (128) 

Pratoda spoke: 

The faculties might be derived from the gross elements (bhau- 
tikanindriyani syuh), since they are congruent with the properties of those 
[elements] (taddharmanvayayogatah). And ahankara need not necessarily 
(niyamat) be the cause of external objects. (129) 

Prakasa spoke: 

That the faculties should be elemental is impossible, because they are 
never without (the experience of] touch, etc (sparsadyavyabhicaratah) .4%6 
Therefore ahankara, which is the cause of the awareness ‘I’ [in other aware- 


3 


grahyagrahakapratyayor hi tau hetd ity uktam. tato ’nyad eva tv idam kriyatmakam 
avadhanam nameti. yas tasya hetus tan mana iti. tac ca cittam mano dvidheti antar 
bahi§ ca adhik&ri. tatra bahih svocitena avadhaénatmand karanabhdavena indriyanaém 
s&marthyam karoti. yato nanavihitasyarthesv indriyani pravartanta ity uktam. sam- 
kalpenaiva &tmavartinaé &ntarena antahsthitabuddhyahamkaravyaparo 'py upapadyata 
ity uktam. 

‘31 But perhaps, as Dr. DEzS6 has suggested to me, the reading adhikarakriyatmakam 
should be retained and rendered ‘being of the nature of [an instrument of) the action 
of superintending’. 

433 ez conj. 

“S3For the deviant gender here see fn. 400 on p. 260 above. 

‘*Titerally ‘bounded by’. The text may not be correct here. I find no parallel for 
this usage of vdrita to indicate the end of a list. 

“35For these three see 2:29-30. 

“38The point seems to be that one could not explain their connection with the self as 
an experiencer if evolution had taken place ‘upwards’, i.e. starting from the elements, 
rather than ‘downwards’, starting from ahankara. 


270 Parakhyatantra 


nesses], is the cause of the faculties. (130) 

I am the hearer of this sound; I am the toucher of this touched object; 
I am the seer <of what is seen; I am the taster;>>4%” of tastes etc., and 
it is I who am the smeller of smells. (131) 

I am the speaker; I am the grasper; I am the one who goes on a long 
road; I excrete what I have eaten; I am the [agentive] cause in the act of 
[sexual] pleasure. (132) 

Ahamkara is involved in [all] these (tesv anvitah) by means of its 
own nature that abides in it (svadharmenatmavartina).*** Thus, then, 
is the body of effects (karyam) produced from ahankara (garvajam);**® 
all are taught to have arisen [ultimately] from the knot (that is maya] 
(granthyuttham).**° (133) 

Pratoda spoke: 

An effect must follow its cause (karananugatam) because of the inher- 
ence [of the cause] in it (tatsamavayatah), just as, for example, threads 
[inhere in their effect: cloth]. This is not so [here in your model of 
causality] (tatha tan no), and so that which you have said is pointless 
(nirarthakam). (134) 

Prakasa spoke: 

The cause [maya] is partless; it cannot be a substance that inheres [as 
a cause in its effect], We know that cause through its effects (karya- 
gamyam). It is extremely subtle [i.e. not amenable to sense-perception], 
just like the atom [in your model of what causes the universe] (anuvat). 
Just as (yatha) [in your model] after (building up through] a sequence 
beginning with atom-pairs (dvyanukadikramat) an effect that is coarse 
{which is to say perceptible to us], since those [atom-pairs] produce it 


‘371 have assumed that some text has accidentally been omitted here, since the line 
as transmitted could only be interpreted with an unlikely ellipsis. The sense of the 
missing text is clear, but its exact wording can only be guessed at. Dr. ACHARYA has 
made plausible suggestions for part of the missing text, which I have incorporated. 
The parallel passage in the Matanga (vidyapada 18:5ff) is not close enough to be of 
probative value. 

‘38This formulation may seem implausibly clumsy, but compare the use of svocitena 
and 4tmavartind in Matahgavidyapada 18:81d and 18:82b (quoted in fn. 430 on p. 268 
above). 

439 or con. 

440 6 conj. The reintroduction of maya as the ultimate material cause here may seem 
implausible in the light of the preceding argument, but it is clear from the following 
discussion (a ‘refutation’ of the position that the material universe is built up from 
atoms) that it is indeed intended. 


Chapter Four 271 


(tadupapattitah),‘4! so too (tadvat) {according to this system] there is an 
[imperceptibly] subtle power that is in the cause (karanaga Saktih) [and] 
which is present in the body that is its effects (karyatanusthita).44? (135- 
6) 

If you counter, ‘[But] you should explain (then]: what power?’, (then 
we will answer] ‘You should show which [among the things that we can 
perceive] is the atom’. Just as (according to your model] it is the atom that 
is in all effects, so too [in our view] it is this indestructible power. (137) 

It is what is ‘perceived’ (laksyate) in all things by all at all times 
because of the delusion [that is samsara(?)] (mohat). Therefore it is 
proved that in this world (iha) the form of all things is made up of maya 
(mayatmakam sarvam artharipam). (138) 

Pratoda spoke: 

The external object is [perhaps after all] not distinct (avyaktah) from the 
knowledge of it, which has its [viz. the object’s] nature. That [knowledge] 
presents the appearance of being {divided into] perceived and perceiver; 
but this is not true at the level of ultimate reality.“49 (139) 

Prakasa spoke: 

The awareness of the external object is distinct from the external object 
(itself}444 by reason of the solidity, liquidity, capacity to burn, to shake, 
to give space with respect to each element (bhitatah). Therefore this 
(viz. the external object] is to be understood to exist. Or [if you say 
that] it is just of the form of knowledge (jnanakarah sa eva va), then is 
it the means of knowledge or the object of knowledge? For the means 
of attaining something must be different from the object to be attained 
(sadhyad bhinnam hi sadhanam).4*° (140-1) 

[Let] that [knowledge] alone be the means (sadhanam); [but] how can 
it be a means without there being something to which it is the means 
(sadhyam vina)? The external [object] is what has efficacity (arthakriya- 


41Or: ‘since that is logically justifiable’? 

“42Emendation could also be considered, for instance to karyam tanuh sthita: ‘(and] 
the effect is the [perceptibly gross] body’. 

“43Here Pratoda adopts a principal doctrine of the Yogacaras. HATTORI (1968:102) 
refers to Madhyantavibhaga 1:3 and to Mahayanasitralankara ad XI: 32. 

444 o¢ con). | 

44° This is intended as a rejection of the Buddhist view that the means of knowing and 
the fruit of that means of knowing are identical (pramanapramanaphalayor abhedah). 
See, e.g., Dignaga’s Pramanasamuccaya 1:8cd (savyaparapratititvat pramanam phalam 
eva sat) and his commentary thereon, discussed by HATTORI 1968:97-—100. 


272 Parakhyatantra 


kari);44° knowledge is that which causes awareness (of it] within. (142) 

+ oo 
Even to perceive oneself [i.e. one’s own body?] (svasangrahe ’pi) a con- 
glomeration of causal factors (samagri) must be used, first among which 
is light (alokapurvika). (143) 

Until that [conglomeration] comes into being there can be no sen- 
sory perception of the object (asmin).44® +Because of depending on that 
(tatsavyapeksaya), everything{*49 would definitely be momentary. (144) 

(But that] knowledge which grasps all objects (viz. the power of om- 
niscience] succeeds (kramate) [because it is] not momentary.‘ It is not, 
however, possible that knowledge should be without dependence [on its 
objects; in other words it is not possible] that it should be capable of 
presenting (to itself as subject] what has the form of a part of.itself [as 
object] (svamsakararpane).*°! (145) 

Pain {is produced] by thorns, weapons, fire, fetters, anger, beating; 
pleasure is evidently produced by garlands, fragrances, tambula, gar- 
ments, food, women. (146) 


448 According to Sautrantika and post-Sautrantika Buddhists, to be existent is to 
have efficacity (arthakriyakarita): arthakriyasamartham yat tad atra paramarthasat 
(Pramanavarttika 3:3ab). For the Buddhists, but not for PrakaSéa here, this property 
is inseparably bound up with momentariness: asanto 'ksanikas tasmat kramakrama- 
virodhatah (quoted immediately following the above half-line by Narayanakantha in 
his Mrgendravrtti ad vidyapada 2:24): ‘Whatever is not momentary cannot then ex- 
ist, since it would be incompatible with [the performance of any activity,] gradual or 
not gradual.’ For a Saiddhantika refutation of this position, see, e.g., Ramakantha’s 
NareSvarapariksaprakasa ad 1:22cd, pp. 54-5. 

447). ACHARYA has suggested completing this line as follows: bhedadvayam; abhedo 
<hi na tathyam paramarthatah>. This might be interpreted thus: ‘[Thus there is a] 
duality; for [their] identity is not ultimately true.’ 

448 67 conj. But perhaps the transmitted no ’ngagraho bhavet could be retained in 
the light of svasangrahe in the previous line (if that has been correctly interpreted): 
‘... there can be no perception of [one’s own] body’. 

449 Cuessing at an irregular locative: sarve. But a more radical emendation of the line 
is probably required. Dr. ACHARYA has suggested that the opening might be emended 
to tasyaivapeksaya. 

450 67 conj. ACHARYA. This is thus a statement of the position that, although in- 
dividual pieces of knowledge may come and go, the power of knowledge has to be a 
permanent state. 

451 67 conj. ISAACSON. The notion that nothing can do anything to itself appears to be 
not uncommonly accepted as a principle. Cf. Ramakantha’s Kiranavrtti 1:15.20—23, in 
which he refers to his Matangavrtti, probably to the commentary on vidyapada 6:24ab 
(p. 161), quoted GOODALL 1998:195-6, fn. 111. 


Chapter Four 273 


That by which this {sensation of pleasure or pain] is produced is an 
external object which is equipped of efficacity (arthakriyanvitah). By 
(empirical observation of] positive and negative concomitance (anvaya- 
vyatirekabhyam) we grasp that it is permanent (sada) (and] external 
(bahih). (147) 

This [external object] is of small value (tucchah) because it is made 
up of what is of small value [viz. the elements] (tuccharupatvat), for 
everthing is made up of maya. And so the external object is such. 
Like [the branches of] a tree that is outward facing [because of being 
spread outwards(?)],4°* the body of effects that derive from maya, start- 
ing from the principle of limited power to act (kaladyam) and going down 
to earth (ksmavasanakam) has been taught. It is connected by His power 
(tadvasat) to souls; He then brings about [for them] the [ultimate] aim of 
men.4°3 (148-9) 

Since it is by means of being conjoined with something that has the 
shape of a body that souls experience the fruits of their own actions, [and] 
since souls are infinite, so too [i:e. infinite too] are the varieties of those 
[bodies] (tadbheda&h samsthitas tatha). (150) 

From a variegated body of causes a variegated [effect] is accomplished 
(sadhyatam vrajet) in a single entity [viz. in the subtle body]. Al- 
though that body of effects is [internally] contradictory (viruddham api 
tatkaryam), it is an instrument (through which experience is made pos- 
sible] (sadhanam), just like the [very different] parts of a chariot [which 
together form a single instrument: the chariot].4°4 (151) 


452The interpretation of the image is uncertain. Because of the syntax and the verse 
structure we expect it to relate to what precedes it, but the image would then be 
uninterpretable to me. 

4530Or perhaps ‘it then brings about the aims of men’. Cf. Kirana 4:28ab, quoted in 
fn. 454 on p. 273 below. Note that in the remainder of the chapter there are a number 
of echoes of the Kirana distinctive enough to suggest, as I have mentioned above (see 
p. lv), that the passage is a reformulation of passages of the Kirana. 

‘84This might seem at first a rather arbitrary interpretation of an obscure verse; but 
note that the verse is closely paralleled in Kirana 4:27-28b, which may well be its 
source: 


yady apy etan mithah karyam viruddham asitatmakam 
tathapy etat susamSlistam ekasmin vastuni sphutam 
narartham sadhayed bhinnam narasya Sakatangavat. 
Ramakantha ad loc. identifies ekasmin vastuni as ekasmin siksmadehe vastuni. As 


remarked in the preceding footnote, a number of echoes of the Kirana are discernible 
in the closing verses of this chapter. 


274 Parakhyatantra 


Creation (kriya) of this insentient body of effects (acetanasya 
karyasya) is also called ‘shaking’ (ksobho 'pi namatah).*°° The ‘shak- 
ing’ of maya must be partial; it cannot be total, because [that would 
mean] a destruction of the root cause, since [there would then result] an 
unwanted [total] transformation of it (vikaro ’syah).4°® And this root 
[cause] is not destroyed, because it is the cause of the arising of its own 
effects. (152-3) 

The cause of these effects is the principle called maya, the sphere of 
activity of the source[?] (yonigocaram). [It is] manifold with its manifold 
effects (vicitram citrakaryena), the locus of manifold powers, ‘the place 
in which manifold [fruits of past] actions reside, equipped with manifold 
bodies, full of manifold worlds (vicitradharabhiyistham),**’ and rich with 
manifold sense faculties. (154-5) 

It is the basis (adharah) of all [other lower] tattvas (which are created] 
for the sake of souls (pasiinam); bound souls are bound by the bonds 
because of their essential nature (svasvabhavatah); {they have as their 
means the qualities of bound-soul-ness (pasutvagunasadhanah){.*°® (156) 

Deluded they become attached in this way to those experiences [that 
are to be had] there which are appropriate to bound souls through the 
mind (manasa pasuyogyesu):*°? inseparability from impurity arises (pasgu- 
tvaviraho bhavet). (157) 

Pratoda spoke: 

Is that [impurity] maya, or is it an effect of this [maya], or is it a prop- 
erty of the soul?4©° Which view among these three views is correct 
(niscitah)? (158) 


455 ex conj. 

456This same objection is raised and settled respectively in Kirana 4:16cd (vikarat 
sarvanaéSah syad; vikaéro na, jagat katham?) and 4:18ab (vayuvedad yathodanvan 
upary eva vikarabhak). 

48767 conj. We expect a reference to bhuvanas in this list. Dr. Kei KATAOKA’s 
conjecture completes the triad of evolutes (tanukaranabhuvanani) of maya (for which 
see fn. 140 on p. 180 above). 

‘881 am uncertain how to interpret this compound. Is it intended to describe the 
bonds, which have not been stated in the nominative? And is pasutva here a synonym 
for mala? 

459 oy conj. ISAACSON. Perhaps pasubhogyesu is also a possible emendation in pada d. 

‘©°This echoes Garuda’s question in Kirana 2:11: 


tvayanadir malah prokto mayeyo 'syatmano 'pi va 
gunas tadvyatirikto va malo briihi kimatmakah. 


Chapter Four 275 


Prakasa spoke: 

Impurity is taught not to be maya; nor is it established to be a product 
of this [maya] (na tadbhedo vyavasthitah), for maya has been taught to 
be a seductress (mohini*®!) and to be that which awakens the power of 
knowledge of the sentient [soul] (jnanopodbalini) through the embrace 
of the instruments that are her effects: delusion is not produced by her 
herself but through her effects.4®? (159-160b) 

[But then, you may argue,| maya’s effects (tatkaryam) have been 
taught to be everything (on the tattvakrama that there is in the way 
of bondage]. How then is impurity to be established?4™ [It is located 
there] because impurity (pasutvam) is located in that [bound soul], and 
that bound soul is located on the path [of the tattvas]. And this [bound 
soul] is made up of (the evolutes] of maya (sa ca yonimayah). Therefore 


“°! Arguably the transmitted mohanf could be retained as an authorial aiga formation. 
But note how inconsistently such forms appear in manuscripts: in Kirana 2:12c (quoted 
in the next footnote); as well as in 2:15c, M”, along with almost all the other sources, 
gives mohinl. 

2 The ideas and their formulation here are paralleled in Kirana 2:12-13: 


sahajo malo mato; mayakaryam agamiko malah. 
maya no mohinti prokta svatah; karyat prakasika 
yatah svakaryasamsSlista caitanyadyotikétmanah 
malam vidarya cidvyaktir ekadese bhavaty anoh. 


I am aware that the first p&da of this unit is hypermetrical; I have adopted here not the 
readings preferred by Ramakantha, but those that I think the distribution of readings 
suggests to be primary (see GOODALL 1998:236 and 238, footnotes 228 and 235). 

“°3Or ‘Where, then, is mala to be located [in the tattvakrama]?’ This rather obscurely 
formulated question adverts to the problem that mala is believed in by Saiddhantikas 
as a real entity and yet it finds no place on their ontological ladder, the tattvakrama. 
(Cf. Nifvasa nayasiitra 2:20cd, f.32”: na ca vastvantaram kincid yas tattvad vyati- 
ricyate.) The solution that is given here below by the Parakhya and frequently by 
Ramakantha is to state that it is vicariously included in the tattvakrama because it is 
inseparable from the bound soul, hence its synonym pasutva (see Kiranavrtti 1:13.9-10 
and GOODALL 1998:186). The source for the Parakhya seems to me very likely to be 
Kirana 2:18-19b: 


mayaékéryam samastam sy&t; kuto ’nyah sahajo malah? 
&tmastham tat pasutvam syat, pasur apy adhvamadhyagah 
prokto yena matas tena malas tadbhinnalaksanah. 


‘The effects of maya might be all (that there is in the way of bondage]. How [can you 
prove] another innate impurity? That mala must (syat) reside in the [bound] soul. 
And because the bound soul is taught to be situated in (-madhyagah) the path [of the 
tattvas], mala is held to be different from that [path of tattvas].’ 


276 Parakhyatantra 


impurity is that which obstructs the sentient (soul]. (160c-61) 

Impurity (pasutvam) is not the state of being of a bound soul (pasor 
bhavah):4* the nature [of the soul] is [rather] its own power of knowl- 
edge (svaripam svacidatmakam). Therefore impurity (pasutvam) is ne- 
science (ajnanam), or the state of being characterised by ignorance (bhavo 
vajnanalaksanah). Since it obstructs the sentient (soul], is is called in 
scripture ‘nescience’ (ajnanam). The consciousness of the soul is that 
which is to be revealed; her effects are what reveal it.4©° (162-3) 

It being the case that impurity is never separated [from the bound 
soul], and since it is therefore also a cause of the soul’s condition of be- 
ing an experiencer (asyapi bhogakartrtvahetutah) ,4©° it is called, using a 
secondary sense of the word (bhaktya) a ‘property’ of that (soul], for the 
soul (in fact] has sentiency as his [true] property.4®’ (164) 

Since this [impurity] is held (dhrtah) by the soul (tena), therefore 
it is, as it were, a ‘property’ (dharma iva). Impurity is beginninglessly 
connected [to the bound soul]; liberation comes about through its being 


464Prakaéa is making the point that pasutva is here a potentially confusing technical 
term for mala rather than a synonym of pasubhava. It means rather the opposite of 
what we might expect. Since it gives here a list of synonyms of mala, it seems likely 
that the Parakhya is still drawing upon the same passage in the Kirana (2:19c—20): 


malo ’jnanam pasutvam ca tiraskarakaras tamah 
avidya hy avrtir murcchaé paryayas tasya coditah 
sa cavidyadiparyayabhedaih siddho mate mate. 


465Cf, the rhetorically similar half-line 15:38ab. 

46667 conj. This is a very tentative conjecture. When writing this half-line, the 
author of the Parakhya may have had before him Kirana 2:22ab: male sati bhavanty 
eta bhoktrtvam ca na kevalam. ‘These [various processes, such as having to be bound, 
mentioned above]—and not just the condition of being an experiencer—come into being 
[only] when there is mala.’ However the subsequent text of the Kirana is reconstructed, 
this half-line is in all sources followed, as here in the Parakhya, by a consideration of 
the possibility that mala is a dharma of the soul. 

87 er conj. Once again it is probably the Kirana that is here drawn upon, for this 
obscurely expressed discussion is found there too in 2:22c and following, from which I 
quote 2:24c—25b: 


tasya dharmo na; dharmatve, parinamah sphuto bhavet. 

ciddharme pumsi no dharmo; yadi syat, parinamavan. 
As I have suggested (GOODALL 1998:250, fn. 274), it is possible that one of these half- 
lines was a secondary creation intended to replace the other. Since ciddharme is in the 
Kirana unmistakably intended as a bahuvrihi describing the soul, I have assumed that 
it is in the Parakhya too, and I have accordingly emended pauruso to puruso. 


Chapter Four 277 


separated.*® (165) 

[But] since it is all-pervading (vibhutve), separation [from it] is im- 
possible; therefore (tat) there must: be the destruction (vadhah) of its 
activity, O sage.4©? ‘Separation’ is held to be the blocking of [its] powers, 
just as (blocking by means of mantras is known to be possible] in the case 
of the power of fire.479 (166) 

Although pure Siva-hood is plainly to be found in the [bound] soul, 
the realisation of self cannot come about because of that impurity which 
blocks it.47! (167) 

For when that [Siva-hood] is completely [realised], then the impurity 
is destroyed (malo vrajati samksayam).*’* Then liberation comes about 
for that [soul] because of the shining forth of his own inner nature (sva- 
svaripavabhasatah). Just as [the liberated soul is, so too] is the eternal 
Siva (sakrcchivah) taught to be; although He is the same, He is [from the 
very first and independent of anyone or anything else] equipped of power 
(samano ’pi balanvitah).475 (168-169b) 

Mint = Wiaaaa. 
469 


ez conj. KATAOKA. 

ex conj. (for confusion between ya and dha in the transmission, see p. xcviii). The 
conjecture is likely to be correct for vadha is the word used in Kirana 2:27, quoted in 
the next footnote. 

Observe that this is the only place in the chapters transmitted to us of the Parakhya 
where the author has resorted to a line-filling vocative. In this it contrasts markedly 
with most tantras (see p. liv). 

470This again is probably drawn from the Kirana (2:27c—29b): 


vibhor api malasyasya tacchakteh kriyate vadhah 
upayac chaktisamrodhah kathamcit kriyate male 
yathagner dahika Saktir mantrenasu niruddhyate 
tadvat tacchaktisamrodhad vislista iti kathyate. 


(The image is of course used elsewhere and in other contexts, e.g. in Pauskara 4:158ab, 
but its application and expression here recall the Kirana.) 

471The reading suddham in the first pada is that of Tryambakagambhu’s quotation, 
confirmed by the short commentary he offers, in his Sisuhita, for which see the critical 
apparatus. 

472 er conj. malam could be retained, since it can be used as a neuter, and we have 
seen that the gender of at least one other word is not stable in this chapter (see fn. 
400 on p. 260 above); but it seems more likely to me that the transmitted ending is the 
result of accident (e.g. because of attraction to the ending of the following noun) than 
that it is original. 

473 Perhaps this translation reads too much into the text. We might instead translate: 
‘At once he is taught (to have become] Siva, just the same as Him (tadvat): equal [to 
Him] and (api(?)) equipped with power.’ 


278 Parakhyatantra 


As the radiance of the sun is observed to illumine the eye (drstam 
nayanasya prakaSakam), so the radiance of Siva in the same way brightens 
the radiance of the soul (tattejahkhyapakam bhavet). (169c-170b) 

Since all [this] is revealed [only] when the effects that are made up 
of maya are connected [to the soul], therefore this [Siva-hood(?)] is log- 
ically taught to be an ‘effect’, tbecause it is shown to be an effect of 
thatt.4’4 This has been proved to a certain extent (kificit) by direct per- 
ception (drstapramanena) and to a certain extent by means of scripture 
(agamatah). (170c-171) 

This entire sequence of tattvas (tattvakramah) ending in that of 
the earth (ksmantah) has been taught which—by means of [the soul’s] 
close attachment with the instruments and effects (that derive from 
maya], starting with time and kala—brings about the manifestation 
of [the soul’s innate] consciousness (kalakaladikaryakaranavyasangacid- 
vyaktikrt), in which the opportunity that arose was taken for [teaching 
also that it is] the sphere for the consumption of one’s own [experience] 
that is determined by [one’s] past actions, and which arose in the context 
proper to (a discussion] of the ‘womb’ [of maya] (yonisvavasaragatah).*"® 
That other {sequence}, called [the sequence] of worlds, which was created 
by the Supreme [Lord] is now about to be taught. (172) 


Thus the fourth chapter, an exposition of the topic of the ‘womb’, in the 
great tantra called the Supreme. 


The translation ‘eternal Siva’ of the compound sakrcchivah assumes that the element 
sakrt means ‘once and for all time’; it may be paralleled in Svayambhuvasitrasangraha 
18:4lab (evam sampijayed devam niyatatma sakrcchivam...), but it is perhaps more 
likely that sakrt is there an adverb, since this is the concluding verse of the chapter, and 
the second half gives a phalasruti (sa yati paramam sthanam aprapyam akrtatmabhih). 

“The purport of tatkaryadarsanat is not clear to me. Nor is it entirely clear to 
me what the purpose of the entire unit is, unless it be to account for a description in 
scripture of Sivatva being an ‘effect’, since this is arguably in some sense true, while it 
is at the same time held to be an innate property of the self. 

‘781t will be obvious from the awkwardness of the translation that the interpretation 
of this verse is uncertain. 


PARAKHYATANTRA CHAPTER V 


Prakasa spoke: 

The measurement of the shell of the egg (of Brahma], what exists (sthitih) 
within the Lokaloka [mountain ring], the position of the Rudras beginning 
with those in the principle of water (jaladirudrasamsthanam), and all that 
is situated above maya (mayordhvam samsthitig ca).4"® (1) 

That [first mentioned] measurement [viz. that of the shell of the egg] 
is ten million yojanas [in thickness].4’’ First [the length of] the yojana 
is to be determined:*”® The mote that is caught in sunlight in a window 
grill (jalantare ’rkarenur yah) is eight times the dimensions of an atom 
(vasusamkhyanumatrakah).4”® (2) 


478 As in the other chapters, this first verse is a program of topics to follow: the 
measurement of the egg of Brahma is dealt with in 5:2-5; all that it contains is the 
subject of 5:6-144; the Rudras governing the tattva of water up to that of mayd are 
listed in 5:145-155b; the pure path, above maya, is treated in 5:155c-161. 

477 et conj. It is true that arbuda in post-Vedic literature is commonly one hundred 
million, but Naraéyanakantha, in his commentary on the verse of the Mrgendra on which 
I have based this conjecture (vidyapa&da 13:9ab: kapalam arbudam sthaulyad brahmano 
’ndasya yojanaih), appears to understand arbuda to be equivalent to a crore: esam 
yojananam arbudam kotivistrtam brahmandakapalam jneyam. (The decimal value of 
the names for the higher numbers varies, but it appears from the sources that HAYASHI 
has collected together (1995:64-70) that koti is a later name that in some counting 
schemes supplanted the Vedic term arbuda as a designation for 10” and in others pushed 
arbuda up to the next decimal place.) I differ from HULIN (1980:290) in understanding 
the word sthaulyad to be intended explicitly to convey ‘in thickness’. The same usage 
(giving the same measurement) occurs in Parakhya 5:112 below. Ten million yojanas 
is also the thickness of the shell of the egg in Svacchanda 10:3a: kotiyojanabahulyah 
[scil. katahah], and Ksemaradja makes clear that he understands it is thickness that is 
explicitly specified, for he gives the following gloss: bahulyam ghanata. 

‘78This is not such an odd proceeding as it might appear, for units of measure were 
far from standardised. 

47°This differs from accounts that are based upon those systems for which the atom 
is the basic building block of the universe. For the VaiSesikas, two paramanus form a 
dvyanuka and three dvyanukas form a tryanuka, which is the smallest perceptible unit: 
the mote in the sunbeam. The Vaisesika conception is to be found in Pur&nic literature, 
for see Brahmavaivarta 4.96.49cd, which gives this same sequence except that it refers 


280 Parakhyatantra 


[Multiply that] similarly [eight times and you have the dimension of] 
the tip of a hair. (Multiply that] in the same way [and you have] a louse 
egg (liksa);4®° (multiply that in the same way and you have] a louse; 
(multiply that in the same way and you have] a grain of barley; (multiply 
that in the same way and you have] a finger(-breadth]. Then with twenty- 
four fingers (tat prakrtyangulaih) [you have] a hand.*®! With four such 
[hands] (taih... vedapinditaih) [you have] a bow (dhanuh).‘®? (3) 

With two of these (taih...padasamkhyataih)*® [we have] a stick 
(dandah). A kroga is two thousand of those [sticks]. A gavyiti con- 
sists in two krogas, and a yojana is similarly [the length of two gavyitis] 
(tadvad eva ca).**4 (4) 

The all-gold throne [of Kalagni] (asanam sarvasauvarnam)*® is pro- 


to the dvyanuka as an anu: param&nudvayenanus trasarenus tu te trayah. 

But Saiva tantras are far from alone in having the trasarenu consist of eight rather 
than six atoms, for see, e.g. Manusmrti 8:132-3 and the Puranic souces quoted in 
Appendix IV. Commenting on Svacchanda 10:l5cd (jalantaragate bhanau paramanuh 
s& ucyate), Ksemaraja observes in his Svacchandatantroddyota that the paramanu 
spoken of in such accounts is not actually the same as that of the Vaisgesikas: ayam 
ca paramanus tarkikopagataparamanuvilaksanah. For a table presenting the surviving 
accounts of units of measurement (of length) given in early Siddhantatantras (as well 
as in the Svacchanda and in two Purdnic accounts), see Appendix IV. 

480 ez conj. This spelling is not to be found in the dictionaries (liksa, riks& and likhya 
appear to be the only forms they attest); but it should perhaps be regarded as a possible 
orthography: it is accepted as such by the editors of the Purva-Kamika in 16:2d, by 
BHATT in Ajitakriyapada 12:4b and Matangavidyapada 24:2, and it is to be found also 
in some manuscripts of Kirana 53:10 (the latter two passages are quoted in Appendix 
IV). Perhaps, then, we might after all accept the transmitted reading riks&, which is 
reported as being transmitted also among the variants to Ajitakriyapada 12:4b. Note 
that the Kashmirian MSS consulted by BHATT that transmit Matangavidydpada 24 
are reported as both consistently giving the word as rksé. (The Kashmirian MS in the 
BORI, however, has liksa.) 

481 Twenty-four is represented by prakrti since that is the twenty-fourth tattva from 
the bottom in the Sénkhya enumeration. The Parakhya’s inclusion of guna as a tattva 
(5:150) should make it the twenty-fifth; but twenty-four is the unit of multiplication at 
ape stage also in Matangavidy&p&da 24:4 and in Mrgendravidyapada 13:7. 

82 ; 

483In good Sanskrit a dual would be required, unless we were to emend to padasam- 
khy&taih and understand the number four; but two is the number given at this stage 
also in Mrgendravidyapada 13:8. 

48467 conj. Also possible would be taddvayena ca, which is the suggestion of Dr. 
ACHARYA. Strictly speaking, 5:4c is unmetrical, but see introduction, p. lxxxvi. 

48562 conj. ACHARYA. Also possible instead of asanam are perhaps bhuvanam or 
bhavanam, cf. Mrgendravidyaépada 13:9cd: tasyantah kancanam dhama kalagnes tavad 


Chapter Five 281 


claimed to be a hundred of these [yojanas]. One hundred crores below is 
the ten-million[-yojana-thick] egg shell. (5) 

Inside that is the Rudra known as Kalagni. Having the form of fire he 
will burn everything at the time that is known as (the time of] resorption 
(of the universe]. (6) 

Therefore [he is known as] the Rudra ‘Fire of Time’ (kalanalah), 
situated below the surface of the earth. Bearing the egg of Brahma 
fete 7) 

His body is ten million times as bright as the sun at the time of 
resorption of the universe. The palace of the Rudra Kiismanda is touched 
by the shoots of sparks from his flames.4®” (8) 

He flames with the power of the radiance that is thrown forth by (- 
mukha-) sparkling gems(?). And he is surrounded by*® Rudras of the 
same ilk numbering a thousand million. (9) 

His palace is ten million [yojanas] in height; its flames are a hundred 
million; the smoke [above], which is supportless and black, is half of that 
(in height].4°° (10) 


eva hi, and cf. tadgrham in Kirana 8:5. But asanam has been accepted on the grounds 
that the measurement given of a hundred yojanas is inappropriately small for his bhu- 
vana, the height of which is given in 5:10 below as ten million yojanas. And it is 
his throne that is first mentioned in Svacchanda 10:22abc: simhaésanam mahadIptam 
sahasradvayavistrtam/ sahasram ucchritam tasya. 

The expression tasyAntah in the half-line of the Mrgendra just quoted is to be in- 
terpreted to mean inside the egg (not inside the shell). This is more clearly expressed 
here as well as in the Svacchanda (10:2c-3a): atha kalagnirudraédhah katahah sam- 
vyavasthitah/ kotiyojanabahulyah. 

‘861t appears that there was some reference in this damaged line to the Rudras outside 
the egg of Brahma who support it. They are mentioned again in 5:142—-4, when we have 
gone up above the egg, but since they surround the egg, they can be mentioned at its 
bottom too, and in connection with Kal&gni, as they are in Kirana 8:92. 

‘87The spelling Kilsmanda is preferred in Northern sources; Southern manuscripts 
generally prefer Kiémanda, and this is the form that M” consistently uses. I have 
corrected this to the Northern spelling on the (rather weak) grounds that this fits 
better the nirvacana given in 5:38. 

488 ez conj. 

489s we have seen in fn. 485 on p.281 above, the measurement of the height of 
the dsana of Kalagni is only a thousand in Svacchanda 10:22, but the height of the 
bhuvana is given as ten million in 10:28, followed, as here, by the same layers of fire 
and smoke. The Kirana (in Ey) appears to share the same measurements, except that 
it has blackness in place of the smoke (8:5): 


tadgrham kotisamkhyaétam tajjval& dasakotayah 
niralambam tadirdhvam tu pancakotimitam tamah, 


282 Parakhyatantra 


Above that are the terrible hells, thirty-two [in number] (buddhibheda- 
caturgunah).4® They are attained as a result of particular evil deeds; they 


as does the Matanga (vidyapada 24:7-8a). The Mrgendra (vidyapada 13:12) gives no 
measurements for the palace, but shares the Parakhya’s ten crores of flame then five of 
smoke. 

49°This is the most straightforward of the three interpretations of this expression 
that seem to me conceivable (8 x 4 = 32), since what follows is a list of thirty-two 
names. (For this interpretation I am assuming that buddhibheda, by the convention of 
bhitasamkhy4, means ‘eight’.) 

It is worth considering the possibility that we are meant to understand the expression 
to mean at the same time ‘of four kinds in accordance with the variety of mental propen- 
sities [of embodied souls]’, in other words that the hells listed below are each divided 
into four, matching the four negative buddhidharmas, namely adharma, avairagya, 
anaifvarya, and ajnana. In the Svacchanda, 140 hells are listed and named, but the 
text also states that this number can be arrived at by multiplying a basic group of 
thirty-five by four (10:76ab): pancatrimsat tu naraka§ caturbhedah prakirtitah. (This 
passage of the Svacchanda, 10:75c-93, is devoted to explaining that all fifty crores of 
hells are ‘purified’ in initiation whether one follows the list of 140, thirty-five, thirty- 
two or three. Fifty crores is an extremely high number of hells and is not matched, 
as far as I am aware, in the Siddhantas; the Prayogamanjari speaks of five crores in 
9:68. The elsewhere common numbers of hells, namely twenty-one, as in Manusmrti 
4:87-90, and twenty-eight, as in Bhagavatapurana 5.26:7, do not seem to appear in 
early Saiddhantika literature.) 

But in other Siddhantas where the number of hells is multiplied we find the following 
pattern: thirty-two hells are listed (as here), of which three are said to be eight-fold 
and the remaining 29 are said to be four-fold. This gives a total of 140 hells. Thus 
in Kirana 8:6—-12 the total of 140 is mentioned, the thirty-two names are listed, then 
it is stated that the three eight-fold hells are Avici, Raurava and Kumbhipaka, and 
that all the others are four-fold. (These three have a special status, for they are the 
only hells mentioned by the Svayambhuvasitrasangraha (4:87-8], the Rauravasitrasan- 
graha [4:2], and the MalinIvijayottara (5:2); in the Sarvajnanottara the only three to be 
named are Raurava, Maharaurava and Kumbhipiaka [IFP MSS T. No. 334, p. 57, T. 760, 
p.41].) The account of the Matanga (vidyapada 23:73-81) is essentially the same as 
that of the Kirana, except that the three eight-fold hells are there Avici, Ambarisa 
and Raurava. In the Ni§vasamukha (4:99-104, f. 17°-18"), a list of thirty-two names is 
given (differing in order from all others, but sharing the same names as the account of 
the Matanga), concluding with the following damaged text (4:104c-105): 


dvatrim$ad ete naraka maya devi prakirtitah 
[Satastadhikasamyu] <ktaéh>>... samyutah 
savetalam Satam hy etan narakanam prakirtitam. 


e dvatrimsSad ] em.; dvdtrmsSad MS e satastadhikasamyuktah | 
conj.; -— MS; satastadhikasamyu U Wellcome apograph; Ssatastadhika U 
Kathmandu apograph e savetalam |] MS; sacatalam Wellcome apo- 
graph; sacaitalam Kathmandu apograph 


Chapter Five 283 


bestow various particular types of suffering. (11) 

(i) Raurava, [ii] Darkness (tamah), [iii] Cold (Sitah), [iv) Hot (usnah), 
and [v]} Santapaka. Then [vi] Padma, [vii] Mahapadma, and [viii] Kala- 
siitra. (12) 

Then [ix] Needle-mouth (siicimukhah), [x] Tala,49! [xi] Sword 
(khadgakhyah), [xii] Razor-blade (ksuradharakah), [xiii] Ambarisa, and 
after that [xiv] Heated-coals (taptangarah), [xv] Sudahakrt.4*? (13) 

[xvi] Santapta, [xvii] Lac and. [xviii] Flesh-eater (jatumamsadau), [xix] 
Sigh-less (nirucchvasah) and [xx] Full-of-sighs (socchvasah), and [xxi] 
Pair-of-mountains (yugmaparvatasamjfias ca), [xxii] Salmalt, [xxiii] ‘Trir- 
nivasa.*99 (14) 


The damaged line appears to be part of a statement to the effect that a further 108 
hells are to be added to the thirty-two, to make up 140. 

In the Mrgendra’s account (vidyapdda 13:13-21b) these multiplications are not 
stated, but it is not impossible that the same model is presupposed. [HULIN (1980:291- 
2) appears to misunderstand the text to say that there are thirty-three envelopes (puta), 
inside which are the thirty-two named places of torture; what the text actually appears 
to say is that there are thirty-three layers, sandwiched in between which are the thirty- 
two named places of torture.) Only in the Mrgendra are the names given in the same 
order as in our text; but in the Mrgendra they are arranged into four groups of eight 
known as the eight Narakas, the eight Mahanarakas, the eight [Naraka]rajas, and the 
eight RajarfjeSvaras. It is conceivable then, that our expression buddhibhedacatur- 
gunah has been chosen to refer to this structure. 

I suspect, however, that our text intended to follow the model of the Kirana and 
the Matanga, because the number daSastardhadaSa° in 5:32cd below can, I think, be 
interpreted to mean 140 ((10 + (0.5 x 8)) x 10], and because the text singles out the 
three last named hells and calls them the RajamaheSvaras (5:33ab), after or before 
which I suspect some statement has gone missing to the effect that those three are 
eight-fold, unlike all the others, which are in this verse stated to be four-fold, or, more 
explicitly, to the effect that those three are eight-fold and the rest are four-fold (cf. 
Matangavidyapada 23:81cd). And this brings me to one more possible interpretation 
of buddhibhedacaturgunah. It seems to me conceivable that, whether or not some 
such more explicit statement has gone missing later on in the text, we can read the 
information into this epithet: ‘eight|-fold, in the case of the three Rajamahesvara hells, 
and] four-fold [in the case of the twenty-nine others]’.. 

“°!Tn accordance with the reading here, supported by the nirvacana in 5:21 below, we 
should probably emend Mrgendravidyapada 13:16ab to read siicyasyatalakhadgakhya- 
ksuradharambarisak&h. HULIN (1980:292) retains °kalakhadgakhya°, which he takes 
to be a single name, but this would leave this astaka with only seven members. 

492 es conj. It is probable that the name given here was the same as that for which 
the nirvacana is given in 5:23 below. Moreover this is the name we find in Kirana 8:9b. 

493 er conj. The nirvacana in 5:27 below and the parallel in Mrgendravidyapada 13:18b 
had earlier induced me to emend this name to ksutpipasakah, but see fn. 507 on p. 286 


284 Parakhyatantra 


And [xxiv] Place-of-worms (krimiam nicayah),4%4 [xxv] _Iron- 
pillar (lohastambhah), [xxvi] Full-of-excrement (vinmayah), [xxviil 
Vaitaranya.49> Beyond that [xxviii] Tamisra and [xxix] Andhatamasa, 
[xxx] Avici, [xxxi] Kumbhapaka,4% [xxxii] Maharaurava. (15-16b) 

Raurava is that into which are cast weeping souls (rudantah praninah). 
(The hell] called Darkness (tamahsamjnah) is one in which delusion is 
great; it deludes the quality of sentience. Cold (sitah) is [the hell] in which 
there is the onset of cold fever; it makes the whole body to shake.49” (16c— 
17) 

Hot (usnah) is (the hell] in which there is the onset of extremely hot 
fever; it heats all the limbs. [San]tapa [is so called because it] creates inter- 
nal heat; it dries out the cavern of the belly (Sositodarakandarah).**® (18) 

Padma is a mass of very cold snow (susito himakardamah) with the 
form of a lotus (padmasamakarah).4%? Mahapadma has the same form, 
but it has more cold snow (Sitahimottarah). (19) 

K@lasiitra is (a hell in which there is] a black fetter which wraps 
tightly round three times (trigunadrdhavestanah).°° Needle-mouth 


below. 

‘Purists might prefer the orthography krmInam, but it is clear that the redactor of 
the Parakhya elsewhere treated vocalic r as though it were ri (or ru), for see p. lxxxiii 
above. 

4951 cuess that this is an aifa feminine nominative singular, used here as an alternative 
to Valtaranl to avoid the metrical fault of having both the second and third syllables 
of the pada short. 

4°6The more normal form of the name is Kumbhipaka, but that would violate the 
metre here, and so Kumbhapaks is probably authorial. 

497 B+ con). 

‘°8Or, if we accept the reading of the Svacchandatantroddyota, ‘it dries out the belly 
and the throat’. 

4°9Qne could consider emending the last pada to susitahimakardamah to make it a 
bahuvrThi describing Padma: ‘in which there is very cold snow’. I guess that hima- 
kardamah means snow, and that the expression is used instead of just hima, even 
though that word can by itself mean snow, because hima is commonly understood 
also to mean ‘mist’ or ‘fog’ (particularly in South India: cf. the Tamil usages of papi 
and papikatti). But perhaps himakardamah is intended to express ‘a morass of snow 
[into which one sinks’. Padma and Mahapadma are elsewhere conceived of as places of 
unendurable heat, e.g., in Ur-Skandapurana 44 and 45. 

500 ez conj. I can make no sense of the transmitted readings trikarno and trikanta®: 
it seems to me just conceivable that the fetter should wrap round the tortured souls’ 
bodies three times, because this might be intended to suggest the three aspects of time 
(past, present and future), and thus Kalasiitra would be a doubly appropriate name: 
a black thread with three strands. Note that, for the metre to be correct, the vocalic 


Chapter Five 285 


(sicimukhah) is [a hell in which there is] an extremely sharp needle that 
splits men’s faces.°°! (20) 

Tala [is a hell which], as by a palm-leaf (talavat), cuts open (the 
flesh of souls’ bodies] by means of bark garments on their bodies. Sword 
(khadgah), equipped with sword blades (khadgadharaparigrahah), cuts 
the limbs [of the souls’ bodies]. (21) 

Razor-blade (ksuradharo), in which there are razor-blades [every- 
where] without any space free of them (ksuradharanirantarah), cuts the 
limbs. Ambarisa is filled (prapiryate) with very sharp remorse (am- 
barisena).°°? (22) 

Heated-coals (taptangarah) is the colour of fire, it is the repository of 
red[-hot] coals. Sudahakrt is filled with flaming, red-(hot].stones. (23) 

Santapta is taught to be heat-creating, [a hell] in which there is noth- 
ing but flaming fire. Lac-mud (jatupankah) is [a hell] in which [souls’] 
bodies are destroyed by being smeared with flaming lac.°® (24) 


r must once again be treated as r+vowel (see p. bocdii above). In Ur-Skandapurdna 
39, which is devoted to a hell of this name, the sinners’ misdeeds are measured with a 
great black(?) thread, and proportionate(?) bits of their bodies are cut off from them 
(39:9): 


kalasOtrena mahata mitvé mitva tu duskrtam 

chindanty angani jantinam kunthagrair ayudhair bhrgam. 
601 e+ conj. The conjecture may well be wrong. Perhaps what is instead intended is 
that the souls there are embodied with tiny mouths insufficient to take in the food 
they need. This is similar to the notion described in Sisyalekha 40, where having a tiny 
mouth makes it impossible to quench thirst. But we do find the notion that souls are 
tormented by being perforated by needles in this hell elsewhere (Devibhagavatapurana 
8.23:26-27b): 


...8UcImukhe ca narake patyate nijakarmana 


vittagraham ca purusam vayakah iva yamyakah 
kimkarah sarvato 'ngesu sitraih parivayanti hi. 


5021 may be that some other manner of thing was intended by the redactor with 
ambarlsa: a common meaning of the word appears to be ‘frying-pan’ and APTE records 
also ‘war’ and ‘sun’. The version of this half-line quoted by Ksemaraja seems likely 
to me to be a secondary ‘improvement’ composed by a transmitter of the text who 
was also uncertain about the intended meaning of the, as I think, original version. His 
half-verse translates: ‘Ambaresa [is so called] because it rains down very sharp arrows 
from the sky.’ 

503” ’s reading is equally possible: the anacolouthon is paralleled in 5:19b and 5:20d, 
and in M”’s readings of 5:25cd and 5:28b. 


286 Parakhyatantra 


Flesh-eater (mamsadah) tears off mouthfuls of flesh from every part 
of the body. Sigh-less (nirucchvasah) is characterised by the absence of 
breathing as a result of [all(?)] the sense organs being blocked (aksasam- 
rodhat). (25) 

Full-of-sighs (socchvasah) is full of sighs, the place of those wretches 
who are without activity (niscestahatakasrayah).°°4 Pair-of-mountains 
(yugmasmabh) [is a place of torture that is] crushed on both sides by the 
smashing together of mountains of rough rock (karkasasmagasandamSa- 
paripiditah).°°° (26) 

Salmali [is a hell] which splits with its spines ft... ¢.5% 

Trirnivasa [is the hell] in which the bellies [of the souls] are tormented 
with the suffering of thirst and with hunger.” (27) 

Place-of-worms (kriminam nicayah) is taught to be a heap of nothing 
but worms.*8 Iron-pillar (lohastambhah) is where bodies are scorched 


50467 conj. I cannot interpret the transmitted reading. This is not a completely 


convincing guess, for the word hataka is perhaps used only of people for whom one 
feels or wishes to elicit sympathy, and this may not appropriate here. 

505 es conj. The more obvious vocabulary in the reading of Ksemaraja (adri for afma 
and for aga) is probably secondary (the result of an attempt to remove obscurity). In 
both the transmitted readings the syntax is the same, and it is not obvious to me how 
it might be interpreted. 

506- The emendation to kantaka is fitting because Salmali is a name for the spiny silk- 
cotton tree. The middle syllables of the half-line are more problematic. Note that 
this hell is referred to in Mrgendravidyapada 13:18ab as Salma/ilohapradipta. HULIN 
(1980:292) offers the following tentative interpretation (which he follows by a question- 
mark): ‘od brille le rouge (des fleurs) du cotonnier épineux’. Govindaraja, commenting 
on Manusmrti 4:90, offers the following: $almalo yatra $almalikantakais tudyate. In 
the full description of the Salmala hell to which chapter 38 of the Ur-Skandapurana is 
devoted, it is a place full of spiny silk-cotton trees surrounded by an iron outer wall 
and covered with a great net in which the sinners are tormented by people with various 
weapons. But the iron wall and iron net are said to be common to all the hells in the 
first two verses of the following chapter. 

5071 had earlier preferred to assume that the name intended in the Parakhya was, as in 
the Mrgendra, ksutpipasa (‘Hunger-and-thirst’), because the accounts of the Mrgendra 
and Pardkhya are very close, and because this half-verse would then have provided a 
natural explanation of the name, which it does not seem to do for the name Trirnivasa. 
But trirnivasa is the form to be found in Ksemaraja’s quotation of our half-verse and 
Ksemaraja’s version of the name appears better to fit his claim that it is the same hell 
that the Svacchanda refers to (10:52a) as Triravarta. Furthermore, both the corrupt 
versions of the name transmitted in M” (here and in 5:14) look more likely to have been 
corruptions of trirnivasa[ka|h than of ksutpipasah. Neither Trirdvarta nor Trirnivasa 
is an interpretable name to me. 

5°8Once again, M’’s reading seems equally possible: see fn. 503 on p. 285. 


Chapter Five 287 


on flaming iron plates. (28) 

Full-of-excrement (vitpirnah) fills the mouths [of the tortured souls 
therein] with the lumps that fall from the passage that carries excre- 
ment.°°9 In the Vaitarani [river] creatures filled with pus are carried 
(vitaryante).°!° (29) | 

Tamisra is blackly smoky°** on every side [and is] mixed with dark- 
ness. Andhatamisra is the same, but in it the directions cannot be dis- 
cerned. (30) 

Avici is covered with waves (vicibhi§ channah)°!* of pus, blood, mud 
and such like. Kumbhipaka is a flaming-tongued [fire] in a great and 
terrible pot-mouth.°!% (31) 

The one called Maharaurava is extremely fierce and frightening. 
<...>>. Thus these have the number 140 (dasastardhadasasamkhya- 
parigrahah).°!4 The three that have been named at the end are the Raja- 


511 


50°The constitution and interpretation of this half-verse are not secure. I guess that 
Sila might here be used (like Siré/sira) in the sense of a tube or vessel of the body. 
The interpretation seems to me to be just conceivably what Ksemaraja understood, 
for, when he quotes this half-verse to introduce Svacchanda 10:51a, he appears to be 
identifying the hell that the Parakhya calls vitpirna/vinmUtra with the hell that the 
Svacchanda calls arvakSirah. 

5101t is possible that the extra half-line quoted immediately following this one by 
Ksemaraja (ad Svacchanda 10:48), as though they formed a single quotation, belonged 
to the Parakhya. (In this instance Ksemaraja does not indicate the provenance of what 
he quotes.) But since all the other nirvacanas are contained within single half-lines, and 
since the extra half-line has an explicatory function (and is thus the kind of thing that 
might get jotted down in the margin by somebody studying the text and thereafter be 
mistakenly incorporated into the body of the text by a subsequent transmitter) I have 
decided to follow M” in omitting it. It might be interpreted as follows: ‘And that is 
why that terrible river always flows with a bad smell.’ 

511 Perhaps it is possible to treat dhimala as a noun (meaning ‘smoke’) and so to 
interpret this qualifier as a bahuvrihi? 

512Qne might expect the first syllable of the name to be interpreted as a negative 
(which could be rendered by correcting channah to chinnah), but this does not suit the 
following pada, in which the waves are characterised. 

513The fire must be inside the pot, but it is the mouth of the pot spewing forth 
flames that is ‘seen’ from the outside. Cf. Sisyalekha 86, in which the tormented who 
stretch out their necks, presumably beyond the mouth of the pot, are beaten back in 
by tormentors with iron clubs. 

5!4For the interpretation of this number and for the suggestion that some text may 
dropped out here, see fn. 490 on p. 282 above. As Dr. ACHARYA has pointed out to 
me, we could perhaps force the text here to yield the number thirty-two as well: 18 + 
(0.5 x 8) + 10, but to do this we would have to read eight twice. 


288 Parakhyatantra 


mahegvaras. (32-33b) 
The interval [between each] of these is 9,900,000 [yojanas]. Each of 
these [places] that torment evil-doers is 100,000 [yojanas] high.°!° (34ab) 
Going ninety lakhs [above that, we find] the world of Kiismanda, which 
is thirty thousand [yojanas high].°!®© This Kiismanda has a gaping hatchet 
face (vitankamukhakotarah)*!’ with flames from the fire that arises from 


515Thus each hell, together with the empty layer between itself and the next hell, 
takes up one crore (ten million) yojanas. Altogether, then, the hells probably occupy 
a tranche of 320 million yojanas. Svacchanda 10:93 reverses this proportion, giving 
ninety-nine lakhs as the measurement of each hell and one lakh as that of each of the 
gaps. 

Our measurements for the hells are the same as those of the Matanga (vidyapada 
24:8c-9b) and of the Tantraloka (8:27). Beyond those, the Parakhya counts a gap of 
nine lakh yojanas before the world of Kismanda, and that world is then said to be 
30,000 yojanas high. The Matanga reverses these figures, giving 30,000 yojanas as the 
measurement of the gap and nine lakhs as the measurement of the world of Kiismanda. 
Thereafter both texts agree that each of the patalas is nine thousand yojanas and that 
there is a gap between each of a thousand yojanas (Parakhya 5:60 and Matangavidya- 
pada 24:11). Thus both texts have the world of Kiismanda and the patalas (including 
the gaps in between them) take up a further lakh of yojanas. 

The neat measurements of the Mrgendra (vidyapada 13:13) are somewhat different, 
for there the total (up to, but not including, our earth) is said to be 330 million. This is 
composed of thirty-two hells, each measuring one lakh (a hundred thousand), as here, 
plus thirty-three interstices (puta), each of which measures nine million yojanas: so far 
this totals 300,200,000 (as 13:2lab reassures us). There is then a gap of 30,000 and 
then the half-iron, half-golden world of Kusmanda of 900,000 (13:21cd); then six worlds 
of a thousand each, one of 28,800,000, six spaces (vasati) each of 9,000, and a single 
space of 10,000 (13:25-6). This (which reaches up to our earth) makes up 29,800,000, 
and thus altogether (with the previous sub-total of 300,200,000) 330 million. 

The measurements of the Kirana are the same as those of the Mrgendra up to and 
including the world of Kiismanda, if one reads with VIVANTI’s Nepalese MS C in 8:14; 
thereafter the numbers are so different in the three different sources that VIVANTI 
has consulted (e.g. in 8:16a and in 8:21) that little confidence can be invested in the 
constitution of the text. 

516 As is clear from the previous footnote, the Mrgendra, Matanga, and Kirana (read- 
ing with the Nepalese MS) all give the height of the interval as thirty thousand and the 
height of the world as ninety lakhs. It is possible that in the Parakhya too the same 
was Originally intended. 

517 ez conj. The point of comparison with a hatchet blade (tanka) is, I think, that 
it is concave. This is further suggested by the compound pradiptamukhakandarah 
immediately below. The transmitted vitanka would normally mean ‘beautiful’, which 
seems inappropriate here. But vitanka is retained on the assumption that it was used 
in the sense of tanka, or that it referred to some other appropriately shaped object. 
According to Lingayasiirin on Amarakoga 2.2:15, vitanka can designate a piece of wood 


Chapter Five 289 


the rubbing together of the fierce points of his fangs.°!® The cavern of 
his mouth is illuminated by the light from the radiance of these [flames] 
(tatprabhabhih). (34c-36b) 

t...t.°!9 His skeleton is visible behind the surface of his split open 
chest (patitorahkavatantahprakatasthikalevarah); he holds a hatchet in 
his hand; the area of his dense eyebrows is permanently drawn together 
[in a frown] (sadakrstasamkatabhrukutitatah). (36c-37) 

‘Kw’ is taught to mean ‘world’; in it there is usman, which [here] means 
fire. Just as is that terrible-to-look-at [fire] inside the egg [of Brahma] 
(ande), so too (yadvat... tadvat) is the aweful (udbhatah) Kiismanda.°”° 
He is employed by the supreme Lord as the overseer of the hells. (38) 

He is surrounded with Rudras of the same kind, with terrible gaping 
mouths (karalamukhakotaraih), with throat, chest and arms terrible to 
look at f...f. (39) 

They stand there with hatchets in their hands, together with others 
made of iron (krsnalohamayair anyaih). (40ab) After going [up] for a dis- 
tance of nine lakhs [of yojanas| (grahalaksapatham gatva), there are [to 
be found] the seven patalas:°*! (40cd) 

Abhasa, Paratala,°?? Nitala, Gabhastimat, Mahatala, Rasatala, and 


below the vakradaru for birds to rest on. (The vakradaru itself Lingayastirin appears 
to understand to be a crooked piece of wood fixed to the edge (or the top) of a roof 
like a finial, for he explains above that gopanast and valabhi can be ... patalaprante 
Sikheva sthitasya vakradaruno namani.) 

518 arcibhih is an aiga form (for arcirbhih) that is required here by the metre. 

5195 -36d might have been a bahuvrihi qualifying him as one ‘the cavity of whose belly 
is deep’: perhaps one could consider emendation to gambhirajatharodarah. 

520This nirvacana is quoted by Ksemaraja in his Svacchandatantroddyota ad 10:94, 
followed by: iti $riparayam niruktah. asya ca kukarmajananusasakatvat, krirartipa- 
tvam kriranirvrttatvam ca Sriparayam uktam. 

521These are not hells, but subterranean paradises for seekers of otherworldly plea- 
sures. 

522This is also sometimes called Varatala (e.g. in Kirana 8:22). Since para and vara 
can be synonymous, it is possible that the variation in name is not just the result of 
scribal confusion. I have, however, decided to assume that Paratala was consistently 
used in the Parakhya, since that is implied by the nirvacana given in 5:45; but I am 
aware that that verse could be emended to support Varatala, and I am aware also that 
both names could have been used as synonyms by the redactor of the Parakhya. Only 
the Mrgendra (vidyapada 13:27c—28b) shares this list (except that it reads tritala in 
place of nitala). 

The Sarvajnanottara, listing from the bottom, has the following account (IFP MS 

T. 334, p. 57): 


290 Parakhyatantra 


talam ca nitalam caiva vitalam ca tathaé param 
sutalam talatalam caiva patalam ca rasatalam 
nagas ca garuda§ caiva kimpurusa danujas tatha 
agnir vayuh kuberag ca patayas tu prthagvidhah 
e vayuh kuberag ) conj.; vayukuberas MS. 
The Svayambhuvasiitrasangraha gives the following (4:85-86b): 


talam vitalasamjnam ca nitalam sutalam tatha 

talatalam tatha canyad rasatalam iti Ssrutam 

mahatalam ca vikhyatam saptamam fnatisamsitet 
e talam ) conj.; balam Ed. e canyad rasatalam } conj.; caéndrasatalam Ed. (un- 
metrical). | 

This is the same as the list of Malinivijayottara 5:3-4, in which the worlds appear 

listed in the opposite order (as Somdev VASUDEVA has suggested (*2000:120 and passim] 
those two texts are in other respects closely related) and is almost the same as the list 
of the Matanga (vidyapada 23:69c—70): 

talam vitalasamjnam tu nitalam sutalam tatha 

talatalam pancamam syéat tatag canyad rasatalam 

patalam saptamam jneyam balir yatrasuro mahan. 

In the Nigvasamukha, after the list of hells (to which we have referred above in fn. 

490 on p. 282), we read (4:106—111b, f. 18”): 

p&atalani pravaksyami nibodha me yaSasvini 

adau mahatalan nama krsnabhaumam prakirtitam 

rasatalan dvitiyan tu sphatikan tat prakirtitam 

talatalan trtiyan tu raityabhaumam prakirtitam 

tamrabhauman tu nitalan caturtthan tu nigadyate 

<raupya> |[bhau]]/man tu sutalam pancamam paripathyate 

sastham vitalasanjnan tu ratnaSarkarasaficitam 

saptaman nitalan nama sauvarnan tad udahrtam 

kramena kathitas sapta pataladhipatin srnu 

nagé§ ca garuda$ caiva tatha kimpurusandajah 

agnir vayu$ ca varuno hy asurah patayas tatha 


e nibodha me } conj.; nibodhaya MS e raityabhaumam } conj.; raibhyabhaumam 
MS e raupyabhauman | conj.; —-man MS; ~~ bhauman Kathmandu apograph 
e ratnaSarkara® | conj.; ratnasarkkara® MS e pataladhipatin } conj.; pataladhi- 
patim MS e asurah | conj.; asuram MS. 


Perhaps one or other of the two nitalas in this list should be emended to tritala. Note 
that the list is quite different in Nisvasa guhyasitra 5:1-3, f.54”: 

abhasatalam uttalam Sritalam ca gabhastikam 

Siloccayam tato jneyam Sarkaroccayam eva ca 

sauvarnam saptamam tesam p&atalah sapta kirtitah. 
The Svacchanda’s list, different again, is as follows (10:96—97b): 

abhasam varatélam ca Sarkaram ca gabhastimat 

mahatalam ca sutalam rasatalam atah param 

sauvarnam astamam jneyam sarvakamasamanvitam. 


Chapter Five 291 


the seventh is held to be Patala. (41) 

Each of them is occupied by [a regent of the following] three [groups|: 
great Daityas, serpents and Raksasas (daityendroragaraksasaih). In 
Abhiasa [these are the Daitya] Sankukarna, [the serpent] Kutila, and [the 
Raksasa] the lord Vikala.°?3 (42) 

[Because] the rays (rasmayah = bhasah)°"4 of all the jewels shine 
on every side (samantat),°*° as well as of its palaces and of its women, 
therefore this is called Abhasa. (43) 

And in Paratala [there are the Daitya] Prahlada, [the serpent] Vasuki, 
and [the Raksasa] Lohitaksa. There [there] are dwellings in forests of 
[trees made of] the nine gems, supreme pleasures (parabhogah), perfect 
women (parastriyah), and so it is called Paratala, being filled with perfect 
pleasures (paranandavipuritam). (44—45b) 

In Nitala [there are the Daitya] Sigupala, [the serpent] Kambala, [and 
the Raksasa] Yamadamstraka. Since there is in this subterranean paradise 
(tale tasmin) such extreme (nitaram) accomplishment of pleasure, there- 
fore it is called Nitala, being the cause of arising of beautiful properties(?) 
(abhiripagunodbhavam). (45c-46) 

In Gabhasti [there are the Daitya] Karkandhu,°” [the serpent] 


The sequence found in Kirana 8:22-40 gives Varatdla at the bottom, then Ni- 
tala, Tritala, Mahatala, Patadla, Rasatala, and, as the seventh, the world of 
HatakeSvara/Hathakeévara. 

With the patalas we reach a level of the universe of which the Puranas give more 
closely comparable accounts, but to adduce those too would swell the annotation too 
far. Many of the variations of those sources in the form and order of the confusing 
names of the patalas are in any case plainly accidental. Thus in the chapter on the 
subject shared by the Brahmandapurdana (1.2.20) and the Vayu (PG. 50), the names 
are different even though they are embedded in what are essentially the same verses. 

5231¢ is not here explicit which belongs to which group; but it is implicit because of the 
principle of yathasankhyam, and the information is explicit in the Mrgendra (vidya- 
pada 13:29-32), whose list is essentially the same as that of the Parakhya. That of the 
Kirana (8:17-39), by contrast, alots three of each group to each patala. The account 
of Vayupurana Pd. 50:15ff (shared by Brahmanda as 1.2.20:15ff) lists a number from 
each group in each patala, but there is little overlap with the names in our account. 

524The text transmitted by MY might appear to be tautologous, and it is possible that 
Ksemaraja’s version is a secondary ‘improvement’ intended to obviate the tautology. 
But it is clear that we have here a gloss of the element bha in the name Abhasa. Cf. 
5:47cd, 5:115c. 

525This is intended as a gloss of the initial 4 in abhasa. 

®2°Though Ksemaraja’s quotation is printed with sakarkandhuh (rather than sa 
karkandhuh), it is probable that that the first syllable is a pronoun rather than part of 


292 Parakhyatantra 


Karkata, [and the Raksasa] Vikatanana. There are rays (bhasah = 
gabhastayah)°2’ that are known especially [to be emitted from] its palaces 
and from its Rudras and from their women; therefore it is called Gabhas- 
timat. (47-48b) 

In Mahatala [there are the Daitya] called Hiranya, [the ser- 
pent] Kalanga, [and the Raksasa] Karalaka.°*® It has a multitude 
of great palaces (mahaharmyapariskandham),°?° it is full of great 
pleasures (mahabho<gasamakulam>), it has the beauty of great 
women (mahastriripasampannam);>”° therefore it is called (uddistam)**! 
Mahatala. (48c-49) 

In Rasatala [there are the Daitya] Brhadraga,°** (the serpent] Dur- 
darSa, [and the Raksasa] Bhimanihsvana.°** Since there are various kinds 
of taste [there, and since] there are wells (with waters] that are full of°*4 
nectar there, it is called Rasatala, [being] the locus of the pleasure of 
relishing tastes. (50-51b) 

These six tripartite’’> [worlds] are to be enjoyed by those [above- 
named] great souls. Below (adhastat)°*® in Patala are situated [the 


the name, since in Mrgendravidyapada 13:30a this Daitya’s name is given as Karkand- 
haka. 

527Cf. 5:43ab above and 5:115c below. 

528 er conj. The form of the name in Mrgendravidyadpada 13:32a is Karala. The forms 
of the name transmitted by the Svacchandatantroddyota and by M” may both have 
been influenced by the form of the previous name in the list. 

529 ez conj. I interpret this as an awkward bahuvrihi. The transmitted °parispamdam 
seems to me uninterpretable. 

530 er conj. ISAACSON. 

531 67 conj. ACHARYA. 

532TThere seems to be no strong reason to choose any of the three transmitted names: 
Brhadbhoga (in the Svacchandatantroddyota) or Brhadgarbha (in Mrgendravidyapada 
13:30b) seem no less plausible. The Kirana (8:33—-4) locates a Brhadbhoga in Patala 
(which is the sixth in the list in the Kirana) amongst a group which also includes a 
Durdarsgana and a Bhimaparakrama. 

533The name given in Mrgendravidyapada 13:32a is Bhimanirhrada. 

°34For such a usage of uttara see Vallabhadeva’s Raghupancika on Raghuvamsa 
6:50: uttaragabda adhikyam bruvanah sammisratvam éha. See also his discussion 
ad Kumarasambhava 5:25. 

®35Presumably these are tripartite because there are three regents of each, a Daitya, 
a serpent and a Raksasa. 

5361 is not clear to me what this means. Is Patala below all the other six, or is it below 
Rasatala, or is the Daitya Bali below the serpent Taksaka and the Raksasa Pingala? 
Observe that Ksemaraja’s text (see apparatus) replaces pataéle by sutale, presumably 
because there is no Patala in the Svacchanda’s list; instead there is Sutala, which is 


Chapter Five 293 


Daitya] Bali, [the serpent] Taksaka, [and the Raksasa] Pingala. (51cdef) 

These are absorbed in a wealth of pleasures; only the painful {fruits of 
their] past actions are destroyed. They stand there beautiful, preeminent, 
adorned with jewelled diadems. (52) 

Above this is the bright, golden +...¢ of Hataka.°%’ It is beauti- 
ful, full of mountain peaks (sikharaslistam), pale red with silken cloths 
and gems (ratnapattamSupatalam). It is bolted with doors in which 
are set panels of ruby (manikyapattasamvistakavataghatitargalam); its 
walls (°varandakam) are {...{ upright and of excellent gold (utkrsta- 
hatakoddanda’).. (53-54) 

Resting upon that is established a tdikt throne of gold (pitho 
hatakah),°38 which has the radiance of rays of glistening gems, [being] 
beautifully set with jewels of all kinds.°°? (55) 

On that throne of excellent gold sits the Siva (harah) Hataka; [he is] 
kindly (susaumyah), generous (varadah), peaceful (Santah), adorned with 


placed before Rasatala (Svacchanda 10:96). In the Kirana too Ras&tala is placed at the 
top (8:35ab: anyad rasatalam nama sarvesam upari sthitam), below which is Patala. 
Only in the Mrgendra, the Matanga (vidyapada 23:70), and the Parakhya is Patala 
listed last—in fact the Mrgendra alone has the same list (except that it has tritala 
for nitala) and in the same order as the Parakhya (see fn. 522 on p.289)—but the 
Parakhya may be mixing traditions by following a list ending in Patala while pointing 
out here that Patala is not the uppermost of the seven. 

537 The transmitted text of 5:53b appears to me uninterpretable, as does the ‘corrected’ 
text offered by B. One could assume that no more is required than a noun for a world or 
palace and accordingly emend to something like hatakésasya mandiram (= Svacchanda 
10:119b), or one could assume that the number eight is intended, since Hataka’s world 
makes an eighth on top of the seven patalas, as is made explicit in Svacchanda 10:97ab 
(quoted above in fn. 522 on p. 289) and in Tantraloka 8:3lab. In that case the following 
conjecture might be considered: hatakasyastamam puram/grham. Note that the text 
appears to refer to the world of Hataka as a patala in 5:58, even though it refers in 
5:60 to the patalasaptaka. 

Observe that among the other early Siddhantas Hataka and his world is mentioned 
only in the Nisvasa guhyasitra (5:17, f.55"), the Rauravasitrasangraha (4:3), the 
Kirana (8:40) and the Mrgendra (vidyapada 13:32c-34b); he appears also in the Svac- 
chanda, as we have just seen, and in the Malinivijayottara (5:4). (In the Devibhagavata- 
purana (8.19:9) he is the regent of Vitala.) In some places, e.g. in the Nisvasa guhya- 
sitra, his name is Hathaka (cf. the nirvacanas given in verse 58 and in fn. 542 below). 

°38This is usually a neuter noun; its use here as masculine is aiga. 

539 ez conj. ISAACSON. The first of the transmitted instrumentals (if indeed it was 
intended as an instrumental by the scribe of M” ) would be irregular, since mayikha is 
not usually a feminine, and furthermore they could not have agreed with one another 
in gender, nor would they be syntactically fitting. 


294 Parakhyatantra 


all ornaments. a 

This Lord Siva (harah...nathah) is at all times attended by great 
(mahatmabhih) beauties [who attend on him] out of love for their mas- 
ter (bhartrkamad dhi)°*° and who have the playful [gait] of great ele 
phants. (57) 

Hataka is venerated by countless armies (variithinibhih).°4! Since 
this patala, rich in lovely women, shines forcefully (hathat),°4? therefore, 
plainly, it is called Hataka, ta space for meetings for sacrifices, full of 
ponds and Arka shrubs(?), dense with ... pleasurest.°43 (58-9) 

The pure seven patalas, presided over by Hataka, have been taught. 
Each is nine thousand [yojanas high], together with a gap of a thou- 
sand. (60) 

Above that is the world of earth, which contains seven continents and 
oceans.°44 Jambi, Saka, Kuga, Krauiica, Salma, Gomeda and Puskara: 
these are the continents. They contain many further [{sub-]continents 
[within them].°4° (61-62b) 

Brine, Milk, Curds, Butter,°4° Sugar, Liquor and Nectar: these are 
the seven circular [i.e. concentric] oceans. The island Jambi is round and 
divided into nine landmasses (grahakhandavibhajitam): (62c-63) 


540 6 conj. Smoother might be bhartrkamabhih, but this would be unmetrical. 

841 67 conj. This conjecture of Professor SANDERSON is hypermetrical, but this hy- 
permetry (in which we can in reading syncopate the third vowel or rush over the first) 
seems possible (see fn. 132 on p. lxxxvi above) and the sense is convincing. The con- 
jecture varuthibhir (‘guards’) is conceivable, but in that case we would have to emend 
asamkhyabhir to asamkhyatair. 

542Cf. Kirana 8:42ab: hathad bhinatti yantrani tenayam hatako (em.; hathako Ev) 
matah; Svacchanda 10:116c-117b: hathat pravegayel lokams tadbhavagatamanasaén/ 
tenasau hatakah prokto devadevo maheSvarah; and the pair of verses attributed to the 
RauravaSsasana (not found in Rauravasiitrasangraha) paraphrased in Tantraloka 8:31c— 
32b and quoted in the Tantraélokaviveka ad loc.: pratiloke niyuktatma Srikantho bha- 
gavan asau/ karoti hatako bhitva pataladvarapalanam/ hathena bhanktva yantrani 
patalesu mahodayah/ siddhir abhyastasanmantran sadhakaml! lambhayaty asau. 

543 locus desperatus. 

644.6 conj. I assume that muni is used here (like rsi) to mean ‘seven’. Cf. Malini- 
vijayottara 5:5ab: tadirdhvam prthivi jneya saptadviparnavanvita; Matangavidya- 
pada 23:53cd: bhirlokas tadadhastat tu saptadviparnavanvitah; and Sarvajnanottara 
adhvaprakarana 12ab (IFP MS T. No. 334, p.57): bhilokam ca tatha vidyat sapta- 
dviparnavaih saha. 

545Qbserve that anekair bahubhih is tautologous. 

646The Mrgendra too (vidyapada 13:97c) uses sneha here, instead of the more explicit 
sarpis. 


Chapter Five 295 


Bharata, Hari, Kimpurusa, Ramyaka, Ramana,°**’ Kuru, Bhadragva, 
Ketumala, [and] Ilavrta. (64) 

Three [of these] landmasses are square: the one in the East, that 
in the West, and that in the centre; the two South and the two North 
from the centre are long [i.e. oblong]; the remaining two are bow-like [in 
shape].°4° (65) . 

In the middle is the golden mountain Meru, whose top is the shape 
of the calyx of a lotus.™9 It penetrates the circle of the earth to a depth 
of sixteen [yojanas]. Above [the surface of the earth] it is eighty-four 
thousand high.°°? (66-67b) 

And on its top, standing on its three peaks, are the KeSgas (7), filled 
with pride in their sovereignty.°°! On the lower slopes of Meru (meror 


5471n most other Saiva sources this is called Hiranya (eg. Mrgendravidyapada 13:70ab, 
Svacchanda 10:235, Matangavidyapada 24:29, Kirana 8:69-70), but the form Ramana 
is confirmed by the nirvacana given below in 5:84. 

548 oy conj. This appears to be the standard arrangement in the Puranas too. I have 
avoided the translation ‘continents’ for the areas within Jambi, for, as we shall see 
below, they are delimited by mountain ranges rather than by water. The text here 
explains how the landmasses are aranged within the circular Jambiidvipa. Reading 
from East to West, BhadraSva, Ilavrta and Ketumala form a central band of three 
squares. To the North and South of this central band of squares are two successive 
narrower bands, and to the North and South of those are single bow-shaped landmasses 
that fill out the remaining space of the circle. 

549 Although Ksemaraja cites this with approval (ad Svacchanda 10:124), it is not a 
detail that is universally agreed upon. The Kirana, for instance, says that its top is 
the shape of a Sarava (Kirana 8:48b), and WILSON, in his annotation on Visnupurana 
II.2:9, according to which the whole mountain (not just its top) is karnikakarasam- 
sthitah, draws attention to wide discrepancy on this point in various Puranas (WILSON 
1989:250-1). 

5S°The text gives this number in the form thirty, thirty, twenty-four, and it gives 
the depth of penetration into the earth in ambiguous code (dik might represent eight 
instead of ten); but the numbers eighty-four thousand and sixteen thousand for these 
measurements (making up a total of one lakh) are widely shared not only by other 
Siddhantas (see, e.g., Rauravasitrasangraha 4:5cd, Kirana 8:48c-49b, Matangavidya- 
pada 23:64, and Sarvajnanottara adhvaprakarana 20 (IFP MS T. No. 334, p. 58)} but 
also by Puranas (see KIRFEL 1920:93). 

55! The testimony of the Mrgendravrttidipika discourages me from emending to guna- 
Srngastha 1gas. It is at least clear from the introduction to the quotation in the 
Mrgendravrttidipika that (pace HULIN 1980:304) the Parakhya is supposed by Aghora- 
Siva to be giving the same account of the top of Meru as the Kirana (8:49-54), according 
to which there are three (represented in the Parakhya by the word guna) peaks belong- 
ing to Visnu, Brahma, and Sankara, and below this (presumably arranged in a ring 
around these peaks) the eight citadels of the eight Lokapalas. Perhaps then the word 


296 Parakhyatantra 


nitambagah) are eight (vidyeSakalitah) pure citadels. In the East Amara, 
[then] Sutejaska, Vivasvat, Asita, Sita, Gandha, Prabha, and Yagaska [all 
of which are] widely known with the termination -vati.°°? (67c-69b) 
They brighten the sky in [all] the [eight] directions with the light of 
the radiance of their gold and jewels; they contain heavenly pleasures and 
sweet tastes, and in them bodies are happy and pure. Half of [the diameter 
of] Meru and (the land from the outer edge of Meru] up to the edge of 


the continent [of Ilavrta measure respectively] eight and nine thousand 
[yojanas].°°3 (69c-70) 


keSa requires no emendation and is intended to be interpreted ‘Lords of the pinnacle 
(ka)’, or analysed as ka+a+i§a, i.e. Brahma, Visnu, and Siva. 

The most common arrangement in the Siddhantas appears to be slightly different: 
the Matanga (vidyapada 23:56-63) tells us that the Sabha of Brahma (widely known 
as Manovati) is at the top in the centre, that Hara (the speaker teaching the text to 
the sage Matanga) resides on the Jyotiska peak situated in the north-east corner, and 
that below the top is the ring (cakravata) of the eight citadels of the Lokapalas. This 
arrangement is shared by the Sarvajnanottara (adhvaprakarana 32-42b, IFP MS T. 
No. 334, pp. 59-60), the Svacchanda (10:124ff), and the Mrgendra (vidyapada 13:45- 
62). 

Ksemaraja, in his Svacchandatantroddyota ad 10:130, makes mention of the dis- 
crepancy between accounts of the top of Meru: na tv etad evasti Sricandragarbhadau 
‘Srngatrayasamopeta brahmavisnuharalayah’ iti... ’. 

Perhaps both Saiddhantika versions of the geography of the top of Meru are modi- 
fications of a Puranic version (to be found, e.g., in Visnupurana II.2:29-30 and Devi- 
bhagavatapurana 8.7.6-11) according to which the top is occupied only by the citadel 
of Brahma surrounded by the eight citadels of the Lokapadlas (see KIRFEL 1920:94 
and contrast with 1920:175, the latter passage being from his characterisation of the 
‘Kosmographie nach den mittelalterlichen astronomischen Lehrbiichern’). 

552Simply adding -vati to each element of the list will not in every case yield a plau- 
sible name. The names intended are probably Amaravati, Sutejovati, Vaivasvati(?), 
Asitavati, Sitavati, Gandhavati, Prabhavati, and YaSovati. The names of the cities, to- 
gether with their Lokapalas, as they appear in Svacchanda 10:132-136b, Kirana 8:51- 
4, Mrgendravidyapada 13:47-54, Sarvajnanottara adhvaprakarana 34-6 (IFP MS T. 
No. 59), and Matangavidyapada 23:60-3, are as follows: Amaravati of Indra, Tejovati 
of Agni, Vaivasvatl (Samyamani according to the Svacchanda, Mrgendra and Matanga) 
of Yama, Raksovati (Krsnangaéraé according to the Svacchanda, Krsna according to the 
Mrgendra and Matanga, and Krsnavati according to the Sarvajnanottara) of Nirtti, 
Suddhavati of Varuna, Gandhavatl (Gandhavaha according to the Svacchanda) of 
Vayu, Mahodaya of Kubera (of Soma, according to the Svacchanda), and YaSovati 
(Sukhavaha according to the Matanga) of Hara. 

53 ez conj. This conjecture is tentative, but, bearing in mind that the diameter 
at the widest point of Meru is sixteen thousand yojanas, the measurements it yields 
(effectively seventeen thousand yojanas as the distance between the centre of Meru 
and the perimeter of Ilavrta) tally with those of the Kirana (8:67-8), Matanga (see 


Chapter Five 297 


There was a divine Apsaras named Ila, possessed of beauty and youth; 
this lovely one was seen going about by the moon (amrtariipena). [He] 
enveloped her (avrta) [there] in his arms out of lust (ragat). That is why 
[that place] is called Ilavrta.°°4 (71-72b) 

East of the landmass called Ilavrta is Bhadrasva, of thirty-two 
thousand [yojanas across].°°° That excellent horse (bhadro ’évah) 
Uccaihsravas came forth from the churning of the ocean of milk; be- 
cause the horse wanders in this {land mass], therefore it is known as 
Bhadrasva. (72c-73) 

To the west of Ila[vrta] the landmass Ketumala is the same [in di- 
mensions] (tatha). When the fierce onset of a battle between the gods 
and Asuras began, there appeared there suddenly from nowhere garlands 
(malah) of comets (ketinam); seeing these the gods were frightened: that 
is why it is known as Ketumala.°°® (74-5) 


vidyapada 24:19-26 and the Matangavrtti thereon), and Svacchanda (see 10:210c-211 
and the Svacchandatantroddyota thereon). 

554The Parakhya’s nirvacanas of these landmasses are not standard. Elsewhere we find 
(e.g. Visnupurana 2.1:16—24, Kirmapurdana 1.38:26-33 and Nisvasa guhyasitra 6:9-11, 
ff.57°-58") the names of the nine landmasses of Jambiidvipa being explained as being 
the names of the nine sons of Agnidhra, to each of whom one of these landmasses was 
given. lla is associated with Ilavrta in Matsyapurana 12:12-14, but there, as elsewhere 
(e.g. Ramayana 7.80:22-3), it is Budha rather than the moon who makes love to I1a, 
who alternates monthly between being a man and a woman, and out of their union is 
born Pururavas. Different versions of the story are to be found, e.g., in Visnupurana 
4.1, and in Vayupurana U 23 and HarivamSa 9:1-14 (cf. Puranapancalaksana, vamSanu- 
carita 2:1-16), where her name is Ida/Ila when she is a woman and Sudyumna when a 
man, but it is invariably Budha with whom s/he is associated. 

558The three land-masses Bhadrasva, Ilavrta, and Ketumala that form a central band 
across Jambidvipa are square (see verse 65) and, though the information is here in the 
Parakhya only given for BhadraSva, Ketumala must also measure thirty-two thousand 
yojanas across. Ilavrta is, as we can infer from 5:70 (and the other texts cited in 
the annotation thereon), thirty-four thousand yojanas across. Reckoned together with 
the two intervening mountain ranges of Gandhamadana and Malyavat, each of one 
thousand across (information that must be partly inferred from Parakhya 4:76cd), 
this makes the total diameter of Jambiidvipa one lakh yojanas (which is the diameter 
commonly given, e.g. in Mrgendravidyapada 13:40cd, in Sarvajnanottara adhvapra- 
karana 18ab [IFP MS T. No. 334, p. 58], and in Kirana 8:47ab). 

556A different nirvacana, but again associated with such a battle, is offered in Vayu- 
purana Pi. 35:36-41: Indra, at the end of the battle between the Devas and Asuras 
that followed the churning of the milk ocean, hung his crushed garland (mala) upon the 
ASsvattha tree that is the ketu of that landmass, whence the name. Thus also Nisvasa 
guhyasGtra 5:49ab (f.56"): ratnamalam dadec chakro hatva daityan sudurjayan. 


298 Parakhyatantra 


Standing between Ila[vrta] and Bhadrasva and running from North to 
South (daksinottaradinmukhah) is the mountain|[-range] called Malyavat, 
which is one thousand [yojanas] across.°°’ (76) 

Seeing the heavenly garlands (malyani), the Siddhas who had come 
[there] to worship Brahma plucked them (?) (taditani),°°8 and therefore 
it is called Malyavat. (77) 

Similarly, to the West of Ila[vrta] is the mountain[-range] Gandha- 
madana. <It seems there was long ago seen [there] an intoxicated 
Vidyadhari [called] Malya; steeped in fragrance (modabhavita) she was 
smelt there by the sage Narada. He was addressed thus [by her]: ‘O 
brahmin, my scent is intoxicating (gandho me madanah). Therefore [it is 
called} Gandhamadana.>>°*? (78-9) 

To the North of Ilavrta is the mountain[-range] Nila, extending 
from East to West, two thousand [yojanas broad], frequented by Sid- 
dha!celestial beings and Gandharvas. (80) 

Sani became dark-bodied (sunilangah) there, and so it is known as 
Nila.°© Beyond that is another (land-mass], Ramya [by name],°®! which 
is forty-five thousand [yojanas in extent] (bhiitavedasahasrakam). (81) 

It seems (kila) that when the moon beheld [there] the lovely Apsaras 
Urvasi he proclaimed ‘She is lovely’, and this [landmass] is therefore called 
Ramya after that speech. (82) 

(Beyond that to the North] like Nila there is the mountain Sveta, where 
the great sage Sveta, though being devoured by Death, was protected by 


557 er conj. See fn. 555 on p.297 above. The mountains in the North and South are 


two thousand yojanas across, as we are informed in 5:80c below. 

558Qne would expect this to mean ‘struck’, not ‘plucked’ (unless used of the strings 
of musical instruments), but striking seems implausible here. 

559This aetiological myth accounting for the name of Gandhamadana is quoted and 
attributed to the Parakhya by Ksemaraja ad Svacchanda 10:206 (see apparatus), and 
so can with some confidence be inserted here, even though it has disappeared without 
trace from the text of M”. I have not found another account of the legend. 

560Qr conceivably ‘Dark-bodied Sani was born there, and so...’. I have not been 
able to find other references to such a story. Elsewhere we find that Sani (a brother of 
Manu) practised austerities on top of another mountain, Meru, and became a planet 
(Puranapancalaksana vamSanucarita 1:48): 


meruprsthe tapo ghoram adyapi carate prabhuh 
bhrata Sanaiscaras tasya grahatvam sa tu labdhavan. 


861 oy con). 


Chapter Five 299 


Siva.562 (83) 

Beyond that is (the landmass of] Ramana, of the same dimensions as 
the landmass of Ramya,°®? where Ramana was forcibly ravished by the 
foremost of the Gandharvas.*™ (84) 

And {next}, like Sveta, there is the mountain Trigrnga that spurns the 
blasts of thunderbolts (vajrapatopamardanah). [It is so called] because it 
has three peaks (tryasratah). It is said that (kila) [the] three gods reside 
upon those peaks. (85) 

Like Ramya there is [beyond that] the landmass Kuru, where Hara 
told Upamanyu ‘Do (kuru) thus; drink the milk’, and so it is [called] 
Kuru.°© (86) 

To the South of Ilavrta is the mountain called Nisadha, on which 
Garuda had been poised to kill the serpent Sesa and was forbidden.5© (87) 

To the South of that, like Ramya, is the landmass called Kimpurusa,°©" 
where the Vidyadhari Ramya was dropped by the hand of a Vidyadhara. 
The male [Vidyadhara] was then asked by her ‘Did you (kim tvaya), o 


562The same myth (without mention of the mountain) is alluded to in Kirana 1:8ab 
as well as in some Saiva Puranas, notably in the Ur-Skandapurana in chapter 166 (see 
GOODALL 1998:167, fn. 18). 

563Since it is a strip further to the North, and therefore further towards the outside 
of the circle (Jambi being a circle one lakh yojanas in diameter), it would have to be 
slightly less long if the circle is to be a perfect one. I am inclined not to take this 
prescription literally for this reason and also because even Kuru and Bharata are later 
(in 5:86 and 5:92) are said to be like Ramya and Hari respectively, whereas we know 
from 5:65 that they are in fact bow-shaped. 

564 semaraja comments (when he quotes a portion of this verse in his Svacchanda- 
tantroddyota ad 10:231) that Ramana is the name of an Apsaras and that the Gand- 
harva was Citraratha. I have not been able to trace another reference to this legend. 

565This is an allusion to the Saiva myth according to which Upamanyu performed 
austerities because he was disatisfied on the grounds that he could not always obtain 
milk. Siva eventually appeared to him, and his request for milk was granted. The 
myth is alluded to also in the Kirana (without mentioning any connection with this 
particular mountain) in 1:9ab (see GOODALL 1998:167, fn. 19). — 

5667 understand sas to be a metrically expedient aiga sandhi-form of the pronoun. The 
Kirana too contains instances of this sort of usage (see GOODALL 1998:333, fn. 503). 
The vai in Ksemaraja’s quotation is likely to be an alteration intended to obviate the 
need for this aisa usage. Garuda’s enmity towards serpents in general is of course well 
known, but I have not been able to find other allusions to this particular episode. 

871m all other accounts it is Hari that is the landmass immediately to the South of 
the Nisadha mountain, and to the South of that, beyond the Hemakiita mountain, is 
located the landmass Kimpurusa. 


300 Parakhyatantra 


man (purusa), throw me?’, {and so it got the name Kimpurusa].°© (88) 

And [to the South of that is] the mountain Hemakiita, where a great 
heap (mahakitah) of gold was given to Prajapati by Dhanada for the 
sake of a sacrifice.°©9 (89) 

To the South of that is the landmass called Hari, which is like Ramana 
(in dimensions®”° and] in which Hari was propitiated by the serpent Sesa. 
And (tatha) further South from that is the mountain Himavat, like the 
Hemakita. Although it [too] is rich with jewels, it has a great deal of snow 
(himaprayah), and therefore it is [called] the Himavat mountain. (90-1) 

To the South of that is the landmass Bharata, like the landmass Hari. 
Here the suffering was borne (bhrtam) by Bharata because of [his] sons, 
who followed bad paths (kumargagaih).°”! (92) 

[All] this is called the continent Jambu, where the Jambu [tree] with 
large fruits [grows]. Because of contact with the juices that come from 
those arises [the gold known as] Jambiinada.°’? (93) 


568 ez conj. SANDERSON. One could instead understand ‘Why, o man, did you throw 


me?’. I have not been able to find other allusions to or accounts of this legend. 

5691 have not been able to identify the myth to which this refers. 

570 er conj. This is a tentative conjecture. We expect the text here to tell us that the 
dimensions of Hari are similar to those of another landmass that has been described. In 
5:84b, 5:86a and 5:88a above Ramya has consistently been mentioned as the landmass 
with which the other landmasses that stretch from East to West (i.e. those above and 
below the central three) are to be compared, even though, as we have observed in fn. 563 
on p. 299 above, they must actually be of different shapes to fit into a circular Jambi- 
dvipa. We might, therefore, consider also the emendation ramyakopamam, ramyaka 
being then synonymous with Ramya. Once again, I have not been able to identify the 
aetiological myth that is here referred to. 

571The nine natural sons of Bharata born to his three wives displeased him because 
they were bad, and they were killed; Bharata then adopted Vitatha. Versions of the 
myth differ (see, e.g., Vayupurana U 37:133ff, Mahabharata 1.89:17ff, Visnupurana 
4.19, and Puradnapancalaksana vamSanucarita 6B), but it is clear that Ksemaraja’s 
reading of 5:92c is preferable to that of M”. 

57267 conj. SANDERSON. This conjecture involves assuming a kind of double sandhi 
not otherwise found (or at least not otherwise recognised) in.the surviving portions of 
the text: jambinadeva = jambiinadam-teva. 

One could avoid this in various ways by adopting a freer conjecture (that is to say 
one further from the transmitted aksaras), such as, e.g., jatam jambinadam varam: 
‘from the contact with the juices that arise from those [fruits] there arises superlative 
gold’. For this and related notions see Visnupurana II.2:19-22: 


jambidvipasya sa jambir namahetur mahamune 
mahagajapramanani jambvas tasyah phalani vai 
patanti bhubhrtah prsthe siryamanani sarvatah 


Chapter Five 301 


Outside that is the ocean (sagarah) of salt water that was created 
by the sons of Sagara. Outside that is the continent Saka, where the 
great Saka tree (stands]. Because of its length a band was put about it 
(pattabandhah. .. krtah) by Indra (kuligapanina).°”3 (94) 

Beyond that is the ocean called ‘Milk’, in which there is pure milk. 
This ocean was drunk from by Upamanyu as much as he wished.°”4 (95) 

Beyond that is the continent Kusa, where Brahma (abjajanmana) 
grasped Kuga [grass] and began the marriage of Siva with obla- 
tions.°”> (96) 

Beyond that is the ocean of curds, where the creator, for the sake 
of satisfying the whole universe, in a sacrifice (kratau)°” gave this large 
quantity of curds. (97) 


rasena tesam prakhyata tatra jambunaditi vai 

sarit pravartate s& ca piyate tannivasibhih 

na svedo na ca daurgandhyam na jara nendriyaksayah 
tatpanat svacchamanasam jananam tatra jayate 
tiramrt tadrasam prapya sukhavayuvisosita 
jambiinadakhyam bhavati suvarnam siddhabhisanam 


‘This Jambi [tree] is the reason for the name of the continent of Jambi, great sage. 
The fruits of this Jambi are the size of great elephants. They fall, splitting completely, 
on the side of the mountain, and from their juice a river flows there that is famous 
under the name Jambiinadi. And that is drunk by the inhabitants of that (continent). 
As a result of drinking it the people there, who are pure of heart, have no sweat, no 
bad odours, no ageing, no loss of their faculties. The earth of its banks, when it comes 
into contact with its liquid and (then) becomes dried out by sweet breezes, becomes the 
gold called Jambiinada that is the ornament of the Siddhas.’ 

Cf. also Nisvasa guhyasitra 5:45-8 (f.56"), in particular 48ab: tasya samsparsajam 
caiva kanakam devabhtisanam. The ideas are to be found widely elsewhere too, e.g. 
Mahabharata 6.8:21-5; Brahmandapurana 1.2.17.27-30; Markandeyapurana 51:28-9, 
and, in non-Puranic literature, in, e.g., in Bhanujidiksita’s and Lingayasiirin’s com- 
mentaries on Amarakoga 2.9:95. 

5731 have not been able to trace other allusions to or accounts of such a myth. 

574See fn. 565 on p.299 above. The use of udanvat as a neuter rather than as 
masculine noun is irregular. 

575 ez conj. I have assumed here a double sandhi: samudvahah-+indudharinah. Cf. 
the accounts of the marriage of Siva in Brahmapurana 36:130ff and in Ur-Skanda- 
purana 13:129ff. The Mrgendra too accounts for the name and may be alluding to the 
same myth (vidydpada 13:99ab): kuSo ’bhit kancanah kause svayambhuvi yiyaksati; 
‘A golden Kuéa [plant] came into being in the continent of Kua when Brahma wished 
to sacrifice.’ 

578 es conj. Cf. 5:99. But tatkratau could be intended as a compound: ‘his sacrifice’, 
‘sacrifice for them’, ‘sacrifice of that [curd]’. 


302 Parakhyatantra 


Beyond that is the continent Kraufica, where Karttikeya threw his 
spear of great power and slew the great demon Krauiica.*”” (98) 

Beyond that is the ocean of clarified butter, where (the creator], in a 
sacrifice (kratau), placed a great deal of clarified butter to give pleasure 
to the gods; that is why it is known as the ocean of clarified butter. (99) 

Beyond that is the continent Salmal, where the silk-cotton tree 
(vrksah sa salmalih) [grows] in which tree the gods, together with the 
god of Love, resided when frightened by the demons.°”® (100) 

Beyond that is [the ocean] called Sugar-cane juice, where the creator 
put a great deal of juice from the sugar cane to give pleasure to sages 
(muninam). (101) 

Beyond that is the continent Gomedas, where, because of the curse of 
Gautama, a hundred cows were killed, and there then flowed fat: because 
of the profusion (of that fat the continent got its name].°”? (102) 

Outside that is the ocean of liquor which reeks of the perfume of 


5’7The same justification for the name is given in Mrgendravidyapada 13:99c-101b. 
The well-known myth concerns Karttikeya piercing Kraunca the demon, who had taken 
the form of the mountain Kraufica. See, e.g., the account given in chapter 171 of the 
Ur-Skandapurana. Dr. ISAACSON has suggested that emendation to mahabalah could 
be considered: the epithet most usually applies to people and might have suffered 
accidental attraction to the case and gender of the nearest noun. 

578 ez conj. This is no more than a guess. I know of no allusion to or account of such a 
myth elsewhere, unless, as Dr. BISSCHOP suggests (letter of 25.iv.2001), Mrgendravidya- 
pada 13:101c—102b is intended to contain such an allusion: 


Salmale $almalivrkso haimah sahasriko 'rkabhah 
priyo ’maranadm tatketuh sa tadakhyanibandhanah. 


5The story is told in greater detail in Mrgendravidyapada 13:102c—105b: 


gomede gopatir nama rajabhiid gosavodyatah 

yajyo ’bhid vahnikalpaénaém autathyanaém manoh kule 
sa tesu hariyajnaya pravrttesu bhrgiin gurin 

vavre tam gautamah kop&d aSapad agamat ksayam 
yajnavate ’sya té gavo dagdhah kopagnina muneh 
tanmedasa mahi channé gomedah sa tato 'bhavat. 


‘There was a king named Gopati of the family of Manu in Gomeda who was intent on 
performing (the sacrifice called] Gosava; the sacrifice was to be performed by descen- 
dents of Utathya, who were like fire. While they were engaged in a sacrifice to Hari, 
that [king] chose as his gurus the Bhrgus. Gautama, out of anger, cursed him, and he 
perished. His cows in the sacrificial enclosure were burnt by the fire of the anger of 
the sage. The earth was covered with their fat, and therefore this [continent] became 
[known as} Gomeda.’ 


Chapter Five 303 


the blood of gods, intoxicated by which Vidyadharas and Gandharvas 
revel. (103) 

Outside that is the continent Puskara, where [flows] the river 
Puskarini, with sweet waters like those of the ocean of nectar 
(amrtambhodasurasa), frequented by gods and Siddhas. (104) 

Beyond that is the ocean of nectar (svadiidah), in which there is sweet- 
tasting nectar, [and] where the gods (girvanah) drink for the sake of the 
pleasure it gives their bodies (Sariranandahetutah). (105) 

These continents and oceans, starting from [Jambiidvipa], which mea- 
sures] one lakh yojanas [across] are {each in turn] twice the size [of the 
previous].°°° Outside that (tadbahye)**! is a world measuring ten crore 
[yojanas] that has the appearance of gold, bright with the radiance of 
various gems, with various gems, trees and mountains, with various be- 
jewelled pleasure dwellings, full of various jewels. It was created for the 
people of the world svah to play in.°®? (106-8a) 

And beyond that is the Lokaloka [mountain ring]. Ten thousand [yo- 
janas] t...t beyond this, light (lokah) [does] not [extend],°%* and so it is 


580This is not expressed with clarity, but this is the purport, for compare 
Mrgendravidyapada 13:97c—98b: 


ksaraksIradadhisneharasamadyamytodakaih 
laksadidvigunaé dvIp& jambiidvipadayo vrtah. 


(The KSTS edition prints the impossible °madhvamrtodakaih.) The same notion is 
expressed also in Matangavidyapada 24:31c-34. 

581 6+ conj. M” reads tadirdhvam, which could be retained if it can be interpreted to 
mean ‘beyond that’, but not if it means above that, since we are still moving outwards 
from the centre rather than upwards. (It is, however, conceivable that tadurdhvam is 
intended to mean ‘beyond that’, for this is how it appears to be used in 5:112a below.) 
Cf. Mrgendravidyapada 13:109c-110b: 


tato hiranmay! bhimir nanératnadrumécala 
kridartham vedhasa srst&é devanam daSakotikI. 


and Matangavidyapada 24:35: 


daSakotipravistirnaé svadidat paratah sthita 
SuddhahemamayI bhimir devanam kridanaya tu. 
582 er conj. One could retain the transmitted text and interpret ‘for [the inhabitants 
of the worlds of] svah and janah to play in’, but it seems to me more likely that only 
the inhabitants of the next level, svah, are intended (as in 5:109b below), and that the 
visarga is the result of confusion (see p.c of introduction). 
583 Although the text of this half-line is corrupt and it is not obvious how it should 
be repaired, it is clear what information it contained: that the mountain ring is ten 


304 Parakhyatantra 


called Lokaloka; it too is the abode of gods. (108c-109b) 

Beyond that is the ocean Garbhoda, which has the dimensions of all 
the [other] oceans put together (sarvarnavapramanakah).°84 Since the 
seven oceans that have been spoken of above are contained within the 
Garbhoda (garbhodagarbhitah), therefore it is well-known as Garbhoda, 
bearing the essences of all the oceans. (109c-110) 

Beyond that is supportless darkness extending for 351,194,000 [yo- 
janas].°®° (111) 

Beyond that°®® is the shell of the egg of Brahma, one crore in thick- 
ness.°°” And on the near side of Meru®®® (the radius of the earth is] fifty 
crore [yojanas]; on the far [i.e. northern] side, to the East of it, [and] to 
the West it is the same [in radius]. Thus is the earth measured (evam 
bhiah paripindita). (112) 


thousand yojanas wide (?), which information is given also in Matangavidyapada 24:36, 
Mrgendravidyapada 13:11lab and Kirana 8:83, and that beyond it there is either no 
light or no people (cf. Kirana 8:84ab and Mrgendravidyapada 13:111-112). 

684-7 conj. The transmitted text yields no sense. The conjecture is based on 
Matangavidyapada 24:37: 


krtsnarnavapramanena lokaélokasya bahyatah 
cakravat sa tu boddhavyo garbhodaS ca samudrarat. 


The conjecture is strictly speaking unmetrical, because the third and fourth syllables 
should not form an iamb, but I think that they need not have been felt to form an 
iamb, for see introduction, p. lxxxvi. 

585 More literally ‘of five times seven crores together with nineteen lakhs on top of five 
times eight thousands’. The elements of the bhitasamkhya for nineteen (diggrahaih) 
are in this case not inverted. This measurement is the same as that given in Kirana 
8:85-6, in Mrgendravidyapada 13:112c-113b and in Matangavidyapada 24:38-9. The 
curious number is doubtless intended to round up the total diameter of prthivi to one 
hundred crores, as is made quite clear by the following verses of the Matanga (vidya- 
pada 24:40-1): 


sardham andakatahena kotayo 'rdhena medini 
pancasad anyat tadvat syad ardham meros tu purvavat 
evam kotigatam proktam parthivam tattvam atra tu 
tasmad dasagunam toyam toyad agnis tato ’nilah. 


‘Together with the egg-shell, the earth measures fifty crore half-way; the other half, on 
the East side of Meru, is the same. Thus the tattva Earth is in this system taught to 
be one hundred crore [yojanas across]. That of water is ten times that; that of fire [is 
ten times] that of water; that of wind [is ten times] that [of fire].’ 

586For this translation of tadirdhvam cf. fn. 581 on p.303 above. 

°°7For this usage and this measurement see fn. 477 on p.279 above. 

588This means, from our perspective, to the South. 


Chapter Five 305 


Earth (bhirlokah) is a place for those:to whom karman accrues 
(Karminaém bhimih); it is here that karman can be accumulated (atra 
karmasamarjanam). On the remaining continents and worlds the good 
and bad [results of past actions] can [only] be experienced (bhujy- 
ate).°89 (113) 

Above that is Bhuvarloka, [a place] which causes amazement (ascarya- 
karakah). There there are clouds that rest on the winds (vatasrayah) and 
{that purify evilt°% and [there are] celestial vehicles of the Siddhas, as 
well as others among those who move about in the heavens (anye ca 
svargacarinam).°?! (114) 

There the sun (bhanuh), who is all (visvatma),°°* shines. He whose 
rays (bhanavah = rasmayah)°* shine (diptah) for a lakh of yojanas is 
here [known as] the sun (bhanur atra sah). (115) 

Beyond that is the white, gentle moon (candramah). Loveliness 


589In Mrgendravidyapada 13:92c—93b it is the landmass of Bharata that is the only 
place where karman can be accumulated (rather than the whole of bh@rloka): 


guna eko yadudyukto: nestam kincin na sadhayet 
sarvasam phalabhiminam karmabhth kaéranam yatah. 


‘There is one quality because of which it (scil. Bharata] is superior [to the others]: 
there is nothing that, if one desires it, one cannot obtain, because this is the cause, the 
place [of the accumulation] of karman for all the places where the fruits [of karman are 
reaped].’ The same notion is taught in Svacchanda 10:246-7, where it is ‘explained’ 
that, whereas in Bharata] there are four yugas, the inhabitants of other land-masses 
know only one, namely krta. 

But in the passage of the Mahabharata from which Narayanakantha here (in his 
commentary on this unit of the Mrgendra) quotes a verse (3.247:35) it is implicit 
(though not made explicit) that the whole of bhih is the karmabhimih. Although in 
the Parakhya bhirlokah is first said to be the karmabhumih, the next line speaks not 
just of other worlds but also of other continents (dvipasesesu) as being places of reward 
only, and so it is probable that it agrees with the Mrgendra and the Svacchanda on 
this point. 

590 67 conj. Both attributes are pure guesses—the latter presupposes emendation to 
papapavakah—for which I can adduce no support. 

5°! Those who find the syntax questionable here may wish to consider emending either 
the first syllables to anyesam or the last to svargacarinah. 

592The point of this qualification is not clear to me. Perhaps it should rather be 
understood ‘who is [as it were] the soul of everything [at this level of the cosmos]’. But 
it may be corrupt. 

Note that we have here and in the following verses a list of the nine planets beginning 
with the seven planets after which the days of the week are named and in the order of 
the days of the week (see introduction, p. xlvii). 

5°3Cf. 5:43ab and 5:47cd above. 


306 Parakhyatantra 


(candrah), [that is to say] pure nectar, resides in it (tasmin mati) and 
so [it is called] Candramas. (116) 

Because of the sweet taste of nectar in it it obtains [also the name] Sky- 
Ganges (khagangeti samaérita).°°4 And [there there are] other [beings] 
moving in celestial vehicles that are as cool to the touch as snow, white 
jasmine and the moon (himakundendusitaspargavimanagah).°*° (117) 

Beyond that is cruel Mars (angarakah), of cruel deeds, a grasper of 
treasure (nidhigrahah).°*® He is red-bodied, red-eyed, like charcoal [glow- 
ing] with fire. (118) 

And beyond him is resplendent Mercury (budhah sriman) with the 
radiance of heated gold. He awakens good deeds (prabodhitasukttyo ’sau), 
and therefore [he is known as] Budha, the awakener. (119) 

Above is the god Jupiter (brhaspatir devah), who is Guru for all 
(sarvasadharano guruh). He is [called] Brhaspati in as much as he is 
the lord (patih) of abundance (brhattvasya), [which is to say] of the dif- 
fusion of discrimination (vivekavikasasya), or this brhattva is ‘greatness’ 
(gurutvam) and he is lord of that (tatpatih). (120-121b) 

Beyond him is at all times the Daitya Sukra, +... +.597 Sukra came 
forth by nature spotless, like a drop of semen (Sukrabinduvat). That 
is why he is [called] Sukra, since (his coming forth is like] the com- 
ing forth of seed to begin producing its effects (bijakaryarambhavinir- 


594 Svacchanda 10:172-7 could be interpreted as offering, incidentally, a different jus- 
tification of the name. 

595 ez conj. Or, if the transmitted °sparga is retained, ‘And [there there are] other 
[beings] cool to the touch as snow, white jasmine and the moon, travelling in celestial 
vehicles’. 

596Qr perhaps ‘the planet of treasure’. 

5°77 cannot reconstruct the entire half-line. It seems conceivable that daitya was 
compounded with loka, since Sukra was not himself a Daitya but the preceptor of the 
Daityas, and that -pesalah might have formed the end, referring to gukre’s cunning 
in this capacity. But Sukra might after all be characterised as a Daitya because of 
his connection with them, and the last pada might perhaps instead be repaired to 
something closer to what B has written: lokordhve ca nabhascarah. The half-line 
might then mean: ‘And [further] above the earth from him [viz. Brhaspati] is always(?) 
the planet Sukra, the Daitya.’ 

But it must be borne in mind that the three gaps marked by M” might be meant 
to suggest that more text than this is missing. The half-line that follows alludes in a 
very incomplete fashion to a version of a myth according to which Sukra entered the 
body of Siva and was given permission to leave by the penis. More details of this might 
once have been supplied in a half-line that is now missing. Cf. Ur-Skandapurana 150, 
in particular 150:17-18: 


Chapter Five 307 


gamah).°98 (121c-122) | 

Beyond is angry Saturn (Sanaiscarah), furious-eyed, terrible, who 
gradually (Sanaih) mounts to wrathfulness (aridhah krodhakaritve) and 
does not back down (navarohate). Because he moves slowly in his anger 
(Sanai§ carati krodhena), he is called Sanaigcara. (123-124b) 

(The next planet] has a grey body (karburangah),°® his mouth is 
fanged, the limbs of his body are severed (chinnakayaparigrahah). Since 
the root [,/ra] expresses ‘taking’; since it is taught (samudahrtah) in the 


siksmaripas tato’ bhdtvaé sa Sukro munisattamah 

Sukravan nihsrto lingad devadevasya dhimatah 

Sukravan nibsrto yasmac chisnad bhargavanandanah 

tasmac chukra iti khyatim gato gatimatam varah. 
Cf. also Mahabharata 12.279. 

One could, however, consider making the following half-line a more nearly complete 
allusion to the myth by emending the last word to sukrabindutah: ‘Sukra came forth by 
nature spotless from a drop of iSiva’s semen’. Although in the above quoted passage 
of the Ur-Skandapur4ana he is said to have emerged ‘like semen’, in the commentaries 
of Lingayasirin and Bhanujidiksita on Amarakoga 1.3:25a (for instance) he is said to 
come from Siva’s semen. 

588-The syntax here is awkward and it is possible that the text here should be further 
emended. 

59967 conj. ACHARYA. The colours of the planets do vary somewhat: according to 
an anonymous Grahayajna transmitted on pp.97-101 of IFP MS T. 537, the sun and 
Angaraka are red (the sun is actually said to be the colour of a lotus bud: padma- 
garbhasamadyutih); the moon and Sukra are white; Budha and Brhaspati are yel- 
low; Sanaigcara and Rahu are black (Sanaiscara is indranilasamadyuti and for Rahu 
no colour appears to be specified but he bears a black standard: krsnasiirpadhvaja- 
patakin); and Ketu is grey (dhimra). This colour-scheme is compatible with that of 
Yajnavarxyasmrti 1:296—7, where, rather than colours, the substances from which im- 
ages of the planets should be made are listed (these being, in order of the weekdays, cop- 
per, crystal, red sandal, gold, gold, silver, iron, lead, and bell-metal (?) (kamsya]), and 
which belongs to a passage describing a navagrahasanti which BUHNEMANN (1989:1) 
believes to be ‘the model of all santi rites in the medieval ritual texts’. Somasambhu- 
paddhati (2:16-17, BRUNNER 1963:87) also shares this colour scheme, except that Sani 
is said to be rajavartanibha, ‘of the colour of lapis lazuli’ (for this identification see 
BUDDRUSS 1980), as does the Uttarakamika, except that there Ketu is black (81:6-7b): 


bhaskarangarakau raktau S§vetau Sukranisacarau 
somaputro gurus caiva tav ubhau pitajau smrtau 
krsnam Sanaigcaram vidyad rahuketi tathaiva ca. 
The iconographic prescriptions for the planets given in the Saiddhantika Moha- 
cidottara are as follows (NGMPP Reel No. A 182/2, f.8”): 


308 Parakhyatantra 


sense of ‘grasping hold of’ (grahane), therefore he is called Rahu;®™ or 
he is called Rahu [being] chief among Raksasas. (124c-125) 

Next is Ketu; he is of smoke-coloured body, whose distinguishing ‘flag’ 
is marked by a garland of smoke (dhumamalankaketanah). On his head 
(ke = Sirasi) are clear|ly discernible] fleet (tiirnah) streaks of mist (nthara- 
panktayah).©! Or [the name] ‘banner’ (ketuh) [is applied because it] is 
used in the sense of something that inspires fear: he is raised up like a 
banner (to inspire fear in enemies]. (126-127b) 

Siddhas, Vidyadharas and others have their positions beyond these 
(ebhyo ’nantarasamsthanah), all at a height of {...{ lakh [yojanas| 
(tlaksatlaksocchritah sarve).°°? The stars (tarakah) are twice as high 


saksasitram sitam somam suripam sakamandalum 
raktaksam raktavarnan ca kujam Saktyaksamalinam 
budhan capadharam pitam rupadhyam santalocanam 
vrddhakaran gurun gauram saksasitrakamandalum 
daksekaksam sitam Sukram kundikajapamélinam 
bhanuputram adhodrstim vakrapadam subhisanam 
kriram mahabhujan caiva khinkhirijapamélinam 
rahum vyattananam ghoram krsnam arddhangabhusanam 
arddhacandradharam sadho kathitam rahurupakam 
tribhogabhisitam dhimran naranagarddharipinam 
khadgakhetadharam ketum kuryad vatha krtanjalim. 


[These follow upon a rather longer (and therefore omitted) description of the sun, who 
is said to be suraktangah.] 

Later Saiddhantika accounts include Sakalagamasarasangraha 1:412-422 (which is 
labelled as being quoted from the Kirana, but which is in fact quite different from 
the treatment of the planets in Kirana 29) and Isanasivagurudevapaddhati, kriyapada 
12:6-15. 

600 er conj. ACHARYA. Dhatupatha 2.48 and 49 read: ra dane (adane) and 1a adane 
(dane). 

6°l ez conj. This is a speculative conjecture for which I have no support. At the 
beginning of 5:126d any word beginning with tu (or tu, or tva, etc.) might do to 
complete the nirvacana of Ketu. Perhaps conceivable is that the pada should read tusa 
niharapanktayah, the second word being then a gloss of the second: ‘tusah, which is to 
say streaks of mist’. The word tusa is not attested in this meaning by the dictionaries 
(which record it in the senses of ‘chaff’ and ‘husk’), but, because of its similarity to 
tusara, it seems to me not impossible that it should have been used with this sense. 
Also perhaps conceivable is that tuna could be retained: ‘by [the syllable] tu [that 
suggests the word tusara are expressed] the clearly visible streaks of mist’. 

6°2The transmitted measurement does not seem possible: in the Mrgendra (vidya- 
pada 13:114), the Matanga (vidyapada 24:14) and the Kirana (8:87) the height of the 
pole star from the the earth is only fifteen lakh yojanas. We could therefore consider 
emending to tithilaksocchritah here (following Mrgendravidyapada 13:114c); but we 


Chapter Five 309 


(dvigunocchritah). Because they have crossed (tirnah) beyond sorrows, 
beyond darkness, they are Tarakas; [and] because they cause men to cross 
[oceans when navigating] (taranan nrnam).® (127c-128) 

So too (tadvat) the [constellation of the] seven sages are situated 
[there]; they are sages (rsayah) of great powers of meditation (rsu- 
bhavanah). Also the pole star (dhruvam) stands firmly (prasthitam) 
[there]; [it is called] firm (dhruvam) [because] it does not move, it is 
stable.©4 (129) 


seem not yet to have reached the height of the pole star, so perhaps an emendation 
to daSaJaksocchritah would give an appropriate height for these stars. Dr. ACHARYA 
suggested to me that one could consider emending to laksya laksocchritah sarve: ‘they 
are each to be understood to be one lakh [above one another]’. 

In the Puranic sources tabulated by KIRFEL (1920:128) we find the heights of 
the planets, which are given in a different order, clearly specified: the sun is one 
lakh yojanas above the surface of the earth; the moon two lakhs above that. Each 
planet or group of stars is then two lakhs above the last: after the moon, the 
naksatra (‘Fixsterne’), then Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, the Great Bear 
(saptarsayah), and ending with the pole star, which is thus fifteen lakhs above the 
earth. 

603 es conj. 

60467 conj. The pole star is here and in Mrgendravidyapada 13:114 at the top of 
bhuvarloka, but it is in svarloka in Matangavidyapada 23:50 and in Kirana 8:87. Ksema- 
raja draws attention to this discrepancy in his Svacchandatantroddyota ad 10:516c— 
517b and ‘resolves’ it in an interesting fashion: 


evam ihatyaprakriyaya siryanto bhuvarlokah, dhruvantah svarlokah, 
tadurdhvam sapancasSitilaksam kotidvayam maharlokah. Sripara- 
mrgendradau tu dhruvanto bhuvarlokah, tadiirdhvam 


pancasitimitair laksaih svarlokah svargasamsrayah 
kotidvayam maharloko mahanto yatra samsthitah 


iti [Parakhya 5:130ab, 131ab]. 


tithilaksair bhuvarloko dhruvapranto mahitalat 
tadiinakotih svarlokah 


[Mrgendravidyapada 13:114c—-115a: note that this improves upon the text 
of the KSTS edition of the Mrgendra.] 

iti prakriyabhedo drSyate, tadgranthasamgrahakartrbhis tathanibaddha- 
tvat. idam tu saksat paramesvarenoktam. 


bhir bhuvar svar dhruvantam syéal tlaksani... 
...f{ mahan kotidvayam bhavet [Kirana 8:87] 


iti kiranadigranthena bhagavaduktena ca sasamvadam ity ayam eva 
kramo yuktah. 


310 Parakhyatantra 


Svarloka, the locus of the ‘self-born’ (svajasamsrayah), is eighty-five 
lakh [yojanas] high.©® [It is] where Sakra and so forth, as well as the 
[other] gods who inhabitant heaven (devas ca svargavasinah), dwell. (130) 

Maharloka is two crore [yojanas high], where the great resort (mahanto 
yatra samsritah), the [ten mind-born] sons of the creator [Brahma], the 
first of whom is Marici, who are responsible for the maintenance of the 
universe.©°© (131) 


Above that (tatordhvatah)™” is Janaloka, measuring eight lakh [yo- 
janas high]. [It is called] Jana [because it is] where the ancestors Jahnu 


‘Thus, following the cosmography* of this text; Bhuvah ends with the sun, Svah ends 
with the pole star; above that is Mahah of two crores and fifty lakhs. But in the 
Parakhya and Mrgendra and other texts Bhuvah ends with the pole star; above that, 
“(Paraékhya 5:130ab and 131ab]”; “Bhuvah going up to the pole star, fifteen Jakhs from 
the surface of the earth. Svah is eighty-five lakhs...”. Thus we find a discrepancy in 
sequences. This [is there] because it has been so constructed by those who summarised 
those scriptures. But this [passage of the Svacchandal] is what the supreme Lord Himself 
has taught. And it concurs with passages in the Kirana and other scriptures which were 
taught by the Lord: “Bhih, Bhuvah, (then) Svah, which ends with the pole star t...t 
Mahah is two crore,”** and so it is this cosmography [given in the Svacchanda] that is 
correct.’ 

*This translation assumes that prakriyd is here a Saiva technical term for ‘cosmos’ 
or ‘cosmography’: see, e.g., Nisvasamukha 4:96, f.17°, Nivadsa uttarasitra 1:9 and 
1:14, f.23°, and Nisvasa guhyasitra 4:4, f.51"; Matangavidyapada 16:13; probably 
Sarvajnanottara sadaétmaprakarana 67-8 (in Tanjore edition); Svacchanda 11:198-9; 
Moksakarika 76 (and Moksakarikaévrtti ad loc.); Tantrasara, p.64; Tantraloka 8:5 and 
8:11. 

**This quotation is probably damaged rather than left thus deliberately incomplete 
by Ksemaraja, since the missing portions would confirm the measurements he requires; 
but I have not corrected the quotation because it seems to me likely that Ksemaraja 
knew the verse in a different form from that given in the sources I have so far collated. 

60567 conj. Other conjectures are possible (e.g. pancasityocchrito or paficasitya mi- 
tair), or the reading of the Svacchandatantroddyota could be adopted, but the mea- 
surement of eighty-five lakhs is almost certainly correct, for it is shared by the Matanga 
(vidyapada 24:15), the Mrgendra (vidyapada 13:115) and the Kirana (8:87). Instead 
of svaja°, the Svacchandatantroddyota reads svarga®, which could be interpreted as 
‘those who reside in Svah’, but it might make the next half-line awkard. (The graph 
for rga in Sérada can closely resemble a Devanagari ja, and so rga for ja is an easy error 
to make when transcribing from Sarada to Nagari, and this might explain the reading 
of the KSTS edition.) 

6°6-The Mrgendra too (vidyapada 13:115) locates these sages here and shares the same 
measurement; the Kirana (8:87), Matanga (24:15), and Svacchanda (10:516c-517b), 
which locates Markanda and other sages and Siddhas here, make it two and a half 
crores high. 

607 An aiga sandhi. 


Chapter Five 311 


(and others reside] (jahnupitrjano yatra),©°® or the people of the Vasus 
(vasiinam va janah). (132) 

Beyond Janaloka, by a distance measuring twelve crore [yojanas], 
is Tapoloka, where [resides] the sage called Sanaka, {and] Sanan- 
dana, superior because of [the power accumulated through] austerities 
(tapotkrstah),©® as well as great-souled ancestors who, because of their 
nature, are.rich in (the power accumulated through] austerities. (133- 
134b) 

Satyaloka is sixteen crore [yojanas in height], where Brahma is es- 
tablished. There reside sages who vaunt themselves with the pride 
in their own powers (svaviryamanasoddhatah),®!© having the divine 
sovereignty and power of Siddhas, Vidyadharas and other such [exalted 
beings]. (134c-135) 

Brahma [is his name] because he possesses the property of being 
brahman (brahmatvayogatvat), and brahman [is so called] because it is 
great (brhattvat).®'! Above this Brahma is Visnu, and he is [above] by 
four crore [yojanas].°'? {He [is called Visnu] because he habitually lies 
on a lotus (abjasayanaSilatvat), and [because] he has come forth from 
samsarat.°!3 (136) 

608 er conj. The measurement is again common to the Mrgendra, Kirana, Matanga, 
and Svacchanda, and the formulation is here similar to that of Mrgendravidyapada 
13:116ab: jano 'stakotyavacchinnah pitrjahnujanaSrayah. 

6°°Internal aiga sandhi. Sanandana, Rbhu, Sanatkumara and Sanaka are placed here 
according to Mrgendravidyapada 13:116-117 (which again, along with Kirana 8:88, 
Matangavidyapada 24:16, and Svacchanda 10:520 gives the same measurement). The 
same group of four, with the addition of Sanku and Trigadku, are also placed here by 
the Svacchanda (10:521), and it is possible that some text should have dropped out of 
the Parakhya here that mentioned Rbhu and Sanatkumara. 

6107 am assuming that °manasa is here used with the sense °manena. 

611Cf, Parakhya 14:78ab. 

612The Kirana (8:89) places Brahmi three crore yojanas above Satyaloka, Visnu three 
crore above that, and then Hara four crore above that. The Mrgendra (vidy&pada 
13:117-19), as in the Para&khya, places Brahma in Satyaloka and then gives four crore 
and six crore yojanas as the measurements up to Visnu and then Hara (tripuravidvis). 
The Svacchanda places Brahma one crore above Satyaloka (10:533), Visnu two crore 
above that (10:538) and Rudraloka seven crores above that (10:547). The Matanga 
(vidyapada 24:17) only specifies that Srikantha is ten crore above Satyaloka, thus re- 
maining consistent with all three accounts. 

6131 am provisionally translating so 'bjasayanasilatvat samsaranirgamac ca sah, which 
is unlikely to be what was written but may convey what was expressed in the now 
garbled hypermetrical half-line that is here transmitted. It evidently contained an 


312 Parakhyatantra 


Six crore [yojanas above] is situated the god Sankara, Hara. Since 
Sam is taught to mean ‘bliss’ (sukham), [and] he is of such a kind that he 
creates that (tat karoti sa tadvidhah), therefore he is called Sankara; [he is 
called] Hara [because he] removes all evils (sarvapapaharah). (137-138b) 

Those people who are devotees of these [three gods] reach their par- 
ticular places [when they die]. There they remain, rich in pleasures, as 
long as the moon and the stars.®!4 Then, in a phase of intermediate cre- 
ation (avantarasrstau),°!° they are born in this world as popular people 
(janapriyah) in some great family and endowed with wealth, food, sons 
and so forth. (138c—140b) 


etymology of Visnu, but perhaps without the name originally having been reiterated: 
I guess that in the course of transmission a scribe added (perhaps in the margin) the 
identifying label visnuh, which became corrupted to jisnu and then inserted into the 
text. (The initial sah could also have been part of the identifying marginal label.) 
The activity of lying on the lotus is perhaps intended to be expressed by the root 
J vis (‘to pervade’) which underlies the formation of the word Visnu (thus Dhatupatha 
3.13: visa vyaptau). The second half might refer to the suggestion in the syllable vi of 
the ‘stepping beyond’ (vikramana) associated with Visnu as Trivikrama. (Cf. Maha- 
bharata 5.68:13: visnur vikramanéad eva jayanaj jisnur ucyate.) The translated text is, 
however, also unmetrical, since the first pada has four shorts in a row and the second 
is wholly iambic. That such a metrical solecism should occasionally have slipped from 
the author’s pen is of course not totally impossible, for cf. the reading of Kirana 3:26b 
that can be inferred to be orginal because of its distribution among the South Indian 
and Nepalese sources (this is not the reading that has been accepted into the text with 
Raéamakantha’s commentary). 

Dr. ACHARYA has suggested an emendation which would obviate the problem and 
yield a na-vipula: sa visnur abjaSayanaSilatvan nirgunas ca sah. One might also con- 
sider abje Sayanasilatvat samsaran nirgata$ ca sah. But no wholly convincing solution 
occurs to me. 

It is of course possible that the line did not originally belong to the text, for it 
contrasts with the nirvacana given in 14:78 and it is not quoted by Ksemaraja as 
Svacchanda 10:549, where he quotes the half-line preceding and following it; but both 
of these are extremely weak arguments, since different nirvacanas of the same word are 
not thought contradictory, and many quotations are similarly modified. Moreover we 
are given nirvacanas here of the preceding and following names. 

614This expression could perhaps be classed as an aiga pleonasm, since it contains 
yavat and 4a, both of which appear to be performing the same function. The same 
pada occurs in a part of the Santiparvan rejected from the critical edition of the Maha- 
bharata: Vol. 16, Appendix I, 29A, line 58. 

®°'5That is to say after a partial resorption (pralaya) of the universe. For a discussion 
of total and intermediate pralaya see, for example, Mrgendravidyapada 13:180-93. 
(Total pralaya, or mahapralaya, is discussed, e.g., in Mrgendravidyapada 4:15, at the 
conclusion of NareSvarapariksaprakasa 2, in the Matangavrtti ad vidyapada 2:30-2, 
and in the Kiranavrtti ad 4:17.) 


Chapter Five 313 


Above Hara is, [extending] one crore [yojanas], the egg shell of gold. 
Thus the egg of Brahma is taught to extend one hundred crore [yojanas]. 
Ten Rudras, who have taken up their positions in the ten directions, are 
its bearers.°!® (140c-141) 

Surapa is in the East; the Rudra Vahni is situated in the South-East; 
Samyama is in the South; Marana stands in the South-West;'in the West is 
the one called Abjala;®!” in the North-West stands Sighraga; Saumyada is 
in the North; Pinga is in the North-East (¢ankaragam gatah);*!8 above is 
Sambhu; below is Ananta: all are capable of driving away (sarve vidravane 
ksamah).°!9 (142-3) 

They are free of old age and sickness; proud in the power of their own 
sovereignty; surrounded by retinues of crores of Rudras; skilled in the per- 
formance of worship with ritual diagrams (mandalejyavisaradah). (144) 


®!6Here ten names are given in total; in the Svayambhuvasitrasangraha (4:58-81), the 
Sarvajnanottara (adhvaprakarana 46-61, IFP MS T. No. 334, pp. 60-2), in the Matanga 
(vidyépada 23:13—44), in the Mrgendra (vidyapada 13:125-35) and in the Kirana (8:93- 
108) one hundred Rudras are listed, ten for each of the directions. Although there are 
variations between the lists, they are extremely similar, and there are a number of 
half-lines common to two or more versions. Other tantras may not list them, but they 
do mention them (e.g Rauravasiitrasangraha 4:10, Sardhatrisatikalottara 8:3, NiSvasa- 
mukha 4:116, f. 18", Malinivijayottara 5:12). The hundred Rudras supporting the egg 
of Brahma are, in short, an archaic and almost universally shared feature of the cosmos, 
and the Parakhya’s treatment is anomalous. It is possible that the Parakhya’s is a list 
of the ten principal Rudras, each of whom oversees the other nine of his group, or that 
each, for ritual purposes, stands in place of his group (cf. Malinivijayottara 5:13-15b); 
but it is odd then that this is not made explicit (as in the Ma@linivijayottara): instead 
each is said (in 5:144c) to have a retinue of a crore of Rudras. 

17This tautologous name may be corrupt. One might consider emending to balakhyo 
’pi, or, since we require a watery name (it being the direction of Varuna, and since 
all the other names are associated with the Lokapala of the direction to which they 
belong), jalakhyo ’pi. The Matanga (vidyaépada 23:28a), Mrgendra (vidyapada 13:129) 
and the Svayambhuvasitrasangraha (4:70c) all include a Bala, and the Matanga (vidya- 
pada 23:26d) and the Mrgendra (ibid.) include a Jalantaka, who in the Svayambhuva- 
sitrasangraha (4:71b) appears as Balantaka. Although IFP T.334’s text of Sarva- 
jnanottara (adhvaprakarana 54 (p. 61) also reads Balantaka, the text probably originally 
had Jalantaka, which is the reading of the early Nepalese MS (f. 16") and of IFP T. 760 
(p. 45). 

It is in fact possible that what has been transcribed here from M” as the ligature 

bja should rather be interpreted as a ba that has been corrected to a ja. 

6'8 er conj. This is an instance of the noun go used in the sense of a point of the 
compass and not of the final -ga of which the author of the Parakhya is so fond. 

61° This is an allusion to the nirvacana of the word Rudra given in Parakhya 2:48 and 
14:79. 


314 Parakhyatantra 


In the tranche of Water is Jalega; in the tranche of Fire is Tvisamnidhi:; 
in the tranche of Wind is Matarisvan; in that of Ether is Siksma.®?° (145) 


620We have now left the realm of prthivItattva and are ascending the ladder of the 
remaining tattvas, naming for each one a Tattvega. I have cited part of this list before 
(GOODALL 1998:liv—lv, fn. 121) and suggested that the Parakhya may be unique in this 
list of Tattveéas. I. have since come across no other scriptural source that gives this 
list. BRUNNER (1998: Planche 1) reproduces the same list, collated from a number of 
secondary Sanskrit works (including Trilocanasiva’s Somagambhupaddhatitika), and | 
have proposed (GOODALL 2000:216, fn. 41) that it is the Parakhya that is the scriptural 
source for those secondary works. It is conceivable on the strength of this evidence 
that the Parakhya followed a tradition according to which the principal diksa involved 
purifying the overlords of each tattva. (Cf. Mrgendrakriyapada 8:156ab: bhuvanany 
atha coktani tadifan va vifSodhayet: ‘Or he may purify the above taught worlds or 
their overlords’.) An entirely different list of Tattvesa is given in Vimalasiva’s Atyanta- 
nirmalatattvaratnavall (unnumbered folio). 

The table that BRUNNER has constructed can help us to repair the text of the 
Parakhya in one or two details, and the reverse is also true: here the Tattveéa of 
Ether is given as Siiksma, whereas in the majority of BRUNNER’s sources it is implau- 
sibly Stiksmanada, a name that is about to be given (and more appropriately) to the 
Tattvedsa of the subtle element of sound. 

The Parakhya is odd here not only because it gives a unique list (unique, that is, 
among extant scriptures) of Rudras that rule over these tattvas, but also because it 
makes no mention of the astakas, the groups of eight worlds that are placed (with 
considerable variation) in this region of the cosmos by virtually every Saiva scripture. 
These are groups of eight worlds, among which the lowest five groups of eight worlds 
(the pancastaka) are supposed to have the same names as forty pilgrimage sites here 
on earth. Many of these sites are no longer identifiable. 

Dying on earth in one of those pilgrimage sites was held to ensure that the departed 
soul ‘bursts through’ the brahmanda and is reborn in the world with the corresponding 
name. Thus the lost Brhadd&adhica quoted by Ramakantha in the Matangavrtti ad 
vidyapada 18:112c—113b: 


ye tyajanti svakan pranan sthanesv etesu manavah 
brahmandam te vinirbhidya yanti pancastakam padam. 


The same doctrine is alluded to, e.g., in Matangavidyap&da 18:112c-113b, 19:38b—39c, 
and 22:16, as well as in verses 78-81 of the passage of the Sarvajnanottara referred to 
below. 

These five and other astakas are listed and placed in particular tattvas in Svayam- 
bhuvasitrasangraha 4:38-55, in Mrgendravidyapada 13:135c—149, in Sarvajnanottara 
adhvaprakarana 63-109 (IFP MS T. No. 334, pp. 62-7), in Kirana 8:109-122, in Malini- 
vijayottara 5:15-25, in Svacchanda 10:853ff and in Matangavidyapada 18:109-111, 
19:34-8, 20:51c—-55, 21:17-19, and 22:13-15. They are also included in a list of sixty- 
eight ksetras attributed to the Skandakalottara in the Jnanaratnavali that is quoted 
by BHATT on pp. 186-7 of his appendix to his edition of the Sardhatrigfatikalottara. In 
Rauravasitrasangraha 4:12-20 they are mentioned and, as I have remarked elsewhere 
(GOODALL 1998:liv), they are not explicitly located in the tattvakrama. 


Chapter Five 315 


BRUNNER’s annotation on this subject (1977:299-303) draws on sources that, with 
the exception of the Mrgendra and the Svacchanda, postdate Somasambhu, and it is 
for this reason that she has so few variations to record. Furthermore she speaks of all 
the texts she consulted as having fifty-six worlds divided into seven groups of eight. I 
suspect that forty worlds divided into five ogdoads is an earlier, not exclusively tantric 
structure, since there is some evidence that might support that hypothesis. 


e Although they all contain more than five groups of eight, the Nisvasa mi@lasftra 
(5:9, f.21°), the Nisvasa guhyasdtra (1:115, 6:22 and 7:111ff (ff.44", 58", 64”, 
64”), the MalinIvijayottara (5:15cd), the Svayambhuvasitrasangraha (4:47ab), 
the Rauravasiitrasangraha (4:12) and the Svacchanda (10:891, 976) all speak 
of five ogdoads, which the Rauravasitrasangraha names pratyatmaka, gubya, 
atiguhya, pavitra and sthadnu, which the Malinivijayottara (5:16—-22) and the 
Svayambhuvasitrasangraha (4:47-55) name pratyatmaka, guhyatiguhya, guhya, 
pavitra and sthanu, and which the Svacchanda names guhya (10:854), atiguhya 
(10:873), guhyaéd guhyatara (10:884), pavitra (10:888)-and sthanu (10:890). 
[Not paying sufficient heed to parallels here perhaps led DAGENS and BARAZER- 
BILLORET to misinterpret the relevant passage of the Rauravasitrasangraha 
(2000, vol. 2, p. 512).] 


e The nature of the five groups is also clearly distinguished from that of the other 
ogdoads in the Sarvajnanottara, for it is only of them that the text asserts (as we 
have mentioned above) that they are also the names of tirthas on earth. (Cf. the 
verse Ksemaraja attributes to the Deviydmala in the Svacchandatantroddyota 
ad 10:245c—246.) 


e The Sivadharmasastra speaks of five ogdoads (12:68) and lists only five (12:57- 
67, IFP MS T. No. 32, pp. 147-8). (Dr. BISSCHOP has pointed out to me [let- 
ter of 25.iv.2001] that this corresponds to ff.37’-38" of Cambridge MS Add. 
1645.) Its list of ogdoads is the same as that of the MalinIvijayottara and the 
Svayambhuvasitrasangraha, but the names of the ksetras in each group do not 
tally. Furthermore, as in the Skandakalottara, these are not here said to be the 
names of bhuvanas. As the introduction to the list tells us, they are simply 
sacred places on this earth, and if devotees die in them, they become Rudras 
(12:56): rudravatarasthandni punyaksetrani nirdiget/ mrtanam tesu rudratvam 
Sivaksetresu dehinam. 
Their not being mentioned here in the Pardékhya may not mean that the cosmos of 
the Parakhya did not contain the asfakas: as we have seen above (fn. 358 on p. 249), 
4:56 appears to make reference to the yogastaka, an ogdoad beyond the ‘original’ five 
ogdoads. On each level eight worlds could have been arranged around the central 
Tattvega, just as we find in the Sarvajnanottara, e.g. in the description of the level of 
water in adhvaprakarana 63 (IFP MS T. 334, p. 62): 


tatraste bhagavan devo varuno ’mrtasambhavah 
$uddhasphatikasamkasi adiguhyastakavrtah. 


One might be tempted to hypothesise on the basis of this verse that the number eight 
is to be explained as the result of the ‘upper’ levels of the cosmos still being spatially 
conceived; on each level the worlds were arranged, like the Lokapalas, in the cardinal 


316 Parakhyatantra 


Gandhanga is in the subtle-element of ‘smell’; Jalada is in ‘taste’; 
Bhanumat is in ‘form’; Balavattara is in ‘touch’ (sparsakhye).®*! (146) 

In ‘sound’ is Siksmanada; in the faculty of hearing is Vyomacara;®2? 
in the faculty of touch is Sarvanga; in that of sight is Prakasaka. (147) 

In the faculty of taste is Mahavaktra; in that of smell is Vilumpaka;®% 
in speech Dundubhi is embraced; in the faculty of grasping (karendriye) 
is Samadana. (148) 

In the [tattva of the] anus is the Rudra Tirnakrt;®*4 in that of move- 
ment (padakhye) is Kramana;® in that of pleasure (upasthakhye) is 
Ghanananda; in the manas is Samkalpa. (149) 

Hamkrti is in the tranche of ahamkara; Buddha is located in buddhi; 
Trideha is in guna; in [secondary] matter (pradhane) is Pradhanaka. (150) 

In the tattva of the [bound] soul is Siksmadeha; in raga is Kamada; 
in [impure] knowledge (vidyakhye) is Vedavijnana; in limited power to 
act (kalatmake) is Jnanabindu. (151) 


and intermediate directions. But it should be noted that they are arranged above and 
below one another in each group in the Matanga (this is clear from, e.g., vidyapada 
18:110 and 19:38). Furthermore it is possible that the account of the Sivadharma- 
Sastra is archaic, that is to say that it lists ksetras without any mention of a link with 
bhuvanas beyond for the reason that that text predated such a conception, and not 
simply because it did not share tantric notions of the upper reaches of the cosmos. 

621M” is wrongly reported as reading sparsakhyo in GOODALL 1998:lv, fn. 121. As I 
have remarked (GOODALL 1998:liv), placing anything at all in this group of tattvas— 
those of the five subtle elements and the eleven faculties—is anomalous. No tantra 
places worlds in them. The Matanga, however, (vidyapada 18:56ff) does assign them 
adhidevatas, but this list is not that of the Parakhya’s TattveSas. And the account 
of the adhipatis of the tanmatras in Svacchanda 10:896—-909 is quite different again, 
it being part of a homologisation of the eight names of Siva as astamurti with the 
corresponding aspects: the five elements, the sun, the moon and the yajamana. 

62267 conj. The transmitted reading, which I previously printed without apparent 
hesitation (GOODALL 1998:lv, fn. 121), is uninterpretable. 

®23 RUNNER (1998: Planche 1, fn. 4) explains the appropriateness of the name thus: 
‘... “le Voleur”, bien trouvé pour le nez qui “dérobe” les aliments’. 

®24The reading of the manuscript here again was wrongly reported (as vayai ca 
tirnaka) in GOODALL 1998:lv, fn. 121. Note that BRUNNER (1998: Planche I) records 
the variant trnakrt, which might make sense in this context: ‘he who makes (manure 
and thereby] grass’. 

6257 conj. This emendation is perhaps unnecessary, but Kramana seems a more 
appropriate name than Ramana for a Rudra of this tattva; the Dhatupatha entry for 
/kram reads (1.502): kramu padaviksepe. The name is missing from a couple of the 
sources consulted by BRUNNER (1998: Planche 1), and she reports the others as giving 
the form Ramana, which is still less likely. 


Chapter Five 317 


In binding fate (niyatyahve) is Niyamaka; in time is Kala;®”® in primal 
matter (mayakhye) is GahaneSana, the overlord of all the Rudras. (152) 

All these Rudras who are in the lower path®?’ inhabit various worlds, 
are rich in various forms, are endowed with various powers, are surrounded 
by many crores of various Rudras, have pure bodies and places of support 
for their faculties (Suddhangakaranadharah), and are caused [viz. their 
embodiments are caused] by a pure cause.°? (153-4) 

They are enjoined [to perform tasks] below the level of maya; they 
bestow salvific grace on all. In pure knowledge (Suddhavidyayam) is 
Sambara;®”9 and Ananta is in Ivaratattva. (155) 

In Sadasivatattva is Brahma, the locus of bindu, nada, and kala. 
Beyond that is the Lord Siva, who is at the culminating point of all the 
tattvas and of the kalas (sarvatattvakalantagah).°*! Beyond that there is 
no further entity that is pure[r], [more] pervading. (156-157b) 

Above maya is the pure path (Suddhamargah), in which pure powers 
are made use of (suddhasaktiparigrahah).** Creation (prapaficah) in 
that [pure path] is brought about by those [pure powers] (tatkrtah);° it 


626Observe that here the order of the five kancukas is different from that implied 
elsewhere. Of course it is well known that their order varies and that, as I have 
observed (GOODALL 1998:209, fn. 151, referring to Aghorasiva’s commentary ad Tat- 
tvaprakasa 41), the variation can be justified by assuming that they can be listed not 
just in srstikrama or samharakrama but also in pravrttikrama or in an order showing 
which derives from which. Although the Parakhya elsewhere frequently implicitly refers 
to kala as the first of the evolutes of maya (e.g. 4:1d, 4:3b, 4:14a, 4:28a, 4:61b, 4:63c, 
4:65b, 4:128a, 4:149b), there is one other place in which it is implied that kala is in 
some sense at the top of the ladder of the impure universe, and that is in 14:76. 

6271 e. in or below maya. 

628The point is, I think, that, as with Ananta, their embodiment is not caused, as it 
is for us, by the impure cause that is karman, nor is it made up of the coarse elements 
of which our bodies are made up. Cf. the discussion of Ananta and his body in Kirana 
4:5c-14. 

629We need not emend here to gambarah and translate ‘mantras’: Sambara is simply 
the name of the next Tattveda. 

630 As we shall see in fn. 648 on p. 323 below, it is not clear how this is to be interpreted. 

631 The interpretation of this expression is also not certain. I guess that kala might 
refer to the five kalas that, like the tattvas, form a path (adhvan) which can be followed 
and purified in initiation. 

632That is to say that Siva himself does not directly make use of maya, which is 
also sometimes described as a Sakti (e.g. Kirana 4:19c) or as replete with Saktis (e.g. 
Parakhya 4:154). 

633Or ‘is brought about by Him’. 


318 Parakhyatantra 


is expanded for the sake of enjoyment (prathito bhogahetutah).**4 (157c- 
158b) 

‘Positions’ {in this pure path] (sthanam) are [said metaphorically to 
be] situated higher and higher (airdhvam urdhvam sthitam) in accor- 
dance with their excelling other ‘positions’ (sthanantarotkarsat), [that 
is to say] in accordance with their having yet higher qualities (utkrsta- 
gunayogatah).®* [Such] a ‘position’ refers to an office (with which a soul 
is invested by the Lord] (adhikaranidarsakam). (158c-159b) 

This ‘position’ is [thus] the investiture (samskarah) with [a given] office 
(adhikarasya) ¢...t.°°® Since a position has a cause, its destruction must 
have a cause, for there must be destruction of whatever arises, and so it is 
that same omnipotent Lord (prabhuh) who has been presented at length 
above (piirvam praparicitah) who is the creator and destroyer. (159c— 
161b) 

(He is] the Lord who resides in every tattva (sarvatattvasrayah), the 
cause of every cause (sarvakaranakaranam). He is the agentive cause 
in this [world], the fruit to be attained through all mantras and ritu- 
als. (161cdef) 

This creation—which is the locus [of the activity] of mantras, (and 
whose nature has been] determined by the means of knowledge that is 
[constituted by] the teachings of scripture, which has issued forth from the 
lotus-like mouth of the Lord, the controller of matter and souls—has been 
taught tattva by tattva (skandhat), in as much as it exists in divisions that 
proceed from the variety of ‘palaces’ that are particular tattvas (skandha- 
vigesaharmyavibhavaprasyandabhagasthitah), [and] position by position 


64 This is ambiguous, for bhoga commonly refers to the experience of the fruits of past 
actions. But here it probably refers to Siva’s ‘enjoyment’ and is the second member of 
the triad of laya, bhoga, and adhika&ra (for which see, e.g., 2:99). 

635 As Dr. BISSCHOP has suggested to me (letter of 25,iv.2001), this could be taken 
literally to mean ‘A position is situated higher and higher in accordance with its ex- 
celling other positions, on account of its having yet higher qualities’. But I prefer 
to assume it to express the notion that height in these ‘upper’ reaches of the cosmos 
is metaphorical. Cf. M@linIvijayottara 2:60ab: yo hi yasmad gunotkrstah sa tasmad 
drdhva ucyate (quoted by Sadyojyotis at the end of his Svayambhuvavrtti on 3:11 and 
by Abhinavagupta in Ma4linivijayavarttika 213). Our discussion also recalls the Lord’s 
reply to Garuda’s question in Kirana 4:5c-7b. 

°56Perhaps one could consider sthanavad adhikarasya samskaras ta<dgunasra> yah: 
‘Investiture with office is like a ‘position’ [in as much as it is] endowed with the prop- 
erties of that [i.e. of a position]’. 


Chapter Five 319 


(sthanat), in as much as it is replete with®” states of being in which there 
is the use of the rays of the powers of the soul when it is in [particular] 
positions (sthanagatatmasaktikiranavyaparabhavottarah).*8 


Thus the fifth chapter, an exposition of a consideration of the topic of the 
‘womb’, in the great tantra called the Supreme. 


°°7For such a usage of uttara see fn. 534 on p. 292 above. 

°$8It goes without saying that the interpretation of 5:162ab is extremely tentative. 
Note that the very last word of the verse, mantrdSrayah, obliquely refers forward to 
the topic of the next chapter. 


PARAKHYATANTRA CHAPTER VI®® 


Prakasa spoke: 

(The topics of this chapter are:] the raising of mantras (mantroddharah), 
the arising of the phonemes, the connection of words and sentences with 
meaning, the defining characteristic of mantras and their convention 
(mantralaksanasanketah),®° how the fruits of particular mantras are at- 
tained. ®4! (1) 

At the time of creation that omniscient one, the supreme Lord, makes 
manifest from the drop (bindoh) the seed sound|(s]**? (and this making 
manifest is] for the sake of [enabling the attainment of] the goal of souls 
(purusarthaprayojanam).*43 (2) 

The bindu was shaken because of his will; then there came into being 
the totality of sounds. It came into being in two parts, [that is to say] as 
vowels and [as consonants]. Through its division into [two] parts (khanda- 
bhedatah) 44 with its sixteen vowels and with its remaining thirty-three 


°39The text and annotated translation of the first twenty-eight verses of this chapter 
appeared in GOODALL 2001a, from which they have been incorporated here, with such 
modifications as now seem necessary. 

640 6x conj. But perhaps the transmitted °samvesah could be retained and interpreted 
as °samniveSah: ‘the definition and the structure of mantras’. 

411 ike 1:15 and the initial verses of subsequent chapters, this verse gives an agenda 
of the topics that are next to be discussed; this time, however, the list is neither 
comprehensive nor in order: the raising of mantras is covered in 6:29-39, the arising of 
the phonemes in 6:2-8, the connection of words and sentences with meaning in 6:9-24, 
the characteristic of mantras and their convention (i.e. that they have a convention) in 
6:40-50, how the fruits of mantras are attained covers from 6:51-80, after which there 
are two verses that conclude this chapter and introduce the next. 

642 hijarnam could perhaps be emended to byarnan in view of the possibility that bya 
is here a technical term for the vowels and arna for the consonants. For this use of 
bija see Ma4linivijayottara 3:10 Ajita 1:15c, 1:21-2, and Svayambhuvasitrasangraha 5:3 
(quoted in fn. 648 on p. 323 below) and for this use of varna (=arna) compare 7c and 
45c below and see fn. 650 on p. 325 below. 

64362 conj. Also possible would be emendation to °prayojanat, suggested by Dr. 
ACHARYA. 

64This enjambement now seems preferable to me to taking the expression with the 
rest of verse 3 as a clumsy repetition of what has already been conveyed with khanda- 
dvayena, as I did in GOODALL 2001a:340. 


322 Parakhyatantra 


consonants,° this is [known] in the world [as] the “mother”, [being] the 
matrix of the utterance of sounds.®*® (4) 

It is made manifest out of bindu because of the will of the supreme 
Cause. And so the material cause is bindu, since phonemes [{can]not [exist] 
without a material cause (tad vina). (5) 

Since they are taught to be plural, and since they are insentient, these 
[phonemes] are effects.°4” The instigating cause of them is the Lord; the 


645 er conj. It is more usual to count ksa too and thus arrive at a total of fifty. Cf., 


for example, Svayambhuvasutrasangraha 5:3 (quoted in fn. 648 on p.323 below) and 
Kirana 11:4-5: 


navakhandayutas cadyah punah sodaSabhih svaraih 
dasardhaksaranisnatah panca khanda vyavasthitah 
khandadvayam caturvarnam §esam kitakhyaya sthitam 
evam jneyam Satardhatma varnaSaktivibhedatah. 


‘Then (punah), together with the sixteen vowels, [this] primordial [group of sounds] [be- 
came] divided into nine divisions: there are five groups [viz. velars, palatals, retroflexes, 
dentals and labials] that are complete with five sounds [in each]; two groups [viz. 
semivowels and the sibilants with ha] have four sounds [each]; and the remainder [viz. 
ksa] is called the anvil (kitakhyaya sthitam). And so you should know that, because 
it is divided into the powers that are the [individual] sounds, it is fifty-fold.’ Cf. also 
Pauskara 8:13ab: tabhyah [scil. ambikadibhyah Saktibhyah] sarve samutpannas trimSad 
varnah savimSatih. Note, however, that Umapati ad loc. (p.572) understands the fifti- 
eth letter to be not ksa but Ja: atra Jakarasyantarbhavabhiprayena pancasattvam bod- 
dhyam, ata eva paniniye Sivopadiste aksarasamamnaye JakarasyopadeSo na krtah. yady 
api paniniye ksakarasyapy upadeSo nasti, tathapi ‘akaradiksakaranta varnah pancaéSad 
eva tu’ ity akara evesvarenopadistatvat ksakarasya prthag varnatvam boddhyam. The 
letter Ja is also reckoned as the fiftieth elsewhere, e.g. in Ajitagama 1:20c. 

646 Accounting for the name matrka in this fashion is commonplace in such contexts: 
compare, for example, Kirana 11:6a mateva matrka saiva; Pauskara 8:21cd sarvajna 
matrka jneya jagato matrvat sthita; Pauskara 8:24cd jnanaSaktis tatha jneya matrka 
lokamatrka. In the light of the first two of these parallels one might consider emending 
either to matrkeva mata loke or to matrkeyam yatha loke. 

6471t is clear that the text here speaks of the supposed invariable concomitance of 
plurality and insentience with the fact of being an effect, which is a tenet of the Saiva 
Siddhanta. Cf., for example, Mrgendravrtti ad vidyapada 2:15ab, p. 72: yac cacaitanye 
saty anekam, tat karanantarapirvakam and Mrgendravidyapada 9:6ab (and commen- 
tary ad loc.), p. 190: yad anekam acit tat tu drstam utpattidharmakam. JnanaprakaSsa 
offers no commentary on this half-verse when it occurs in the Pauskara (8:20ab), but 
Umapati interprets it in this way, and one might consider adopting his reading into the 
text here: bahudha samsthita varnah krtaka ’cetana yatah (this reading’s aiga double 
sandhi is an awkwardness that is in its favour). Umapati comments as follows (p. 575): 
varnah krtaka ity arthah. supam sulug ityadina jaso luk chaéndasah. yatah yasmat 
bahudha anekatvena samsthitah acetanas ca ata ity arthah. varnah krtakah, anekatve 
sati jadatvad ity anumanaprayogo drastavyah. I have nevertheless hesitated to adopt 
Umapati’s reading, because I suspect that it is a clarificatory improvement (krtakah 


Chapter Six 323 


material cause is the great bindu (bindurat).°48 (6) 
The effort of the individual {[speaker] (nrkarma) is an auxiliary cause. 


being clearer than krtah) of what we find in M” and the Siddhantasamuccaya. (The 
reading cetanavatah of IFP MS T. 284 transmitting the Siddhantasamuccaya I had ear- 
lier accepted, assuming it to be a nominative plural, but the distribution of the reading 
cetana yatah shows the reading of IFP MS T. 284 to be unlikely to have been primary.) 

6481n the developed accounts of the emanation of sound of Saiva exegetes (e.g. Sri- 
kantha’s Ratnatrayapariksa, Nardyanakantha’s Mrgendravrtti ad vidyapada 13:160c- 
162b, Ramakantha’s Kiranavrtti ad 3:23cd) this label is ambiguous, because there 
are two bindus: from the supreme bindu (also referred to variously as kundalinigakti, 
mahamaya, paranada, aghosé vak—these, and other synonyms, are listed in Nadaka- 
rika 16c-17) there first evolves nada, and from that in turn there evolves a further 
bindu (for a fuller discussion see GOODALL 1998:290-6). The sequence is succinctly 
delineated in Ratnatrayapariksa 171c-173b—and this, along with Mrgendrakriyapada 
1:2, may be one of the first Saiddhantika works in which it appears: 


jnanam paramytopayahetuh parikarah pasoh 
tac ca Sabdanuvedhena Sabdaraser abhid asau 
SabdaraSi§ ca binduttho bindur nadad asav api 
bindor anahatad esa karanam sguddhavartmanah 


‘For the bound soul scripture is the wherewithal that is the cause of [understanding] the 
means to [attain] the supreme nectar [of liberation]. And that [scripture], because it is 
permeated by language, arose from the alphabet, and that alphabet arose from bindu, 
and bindu arose from nada, and that (as&v api) arose from the unsounded bindu. That 
is the [material] cause of the pure path [of the universe].' 

In what survives of the Parakhya, however, there seems to be no clear evidence of 
such a progression. The possibility cannot be ruled out that the Parakhya presupposed 
knowledge of the progression (Parakhya 5:156ab might be supposed to suggest this: 
sadasive sthito brahma bindunaédakalasrayah); but Parakhya 6:3 leads one to under- 
stand that there is a single bindu from which the varnas directly evolve, and there is no 
statement in the rest of the chapter or in the rest of the surviving text that contradicts 
this. 

Moreover the accounts of the emanation of sound in other demonstrably early listed 
Saiddhantika scriptures are similarly bald and do not obviously display knowledge of 
this progression. While the account of the Parakhya makes no mention of nada, that 
of the Sardhatrifatikalottara (chapter 1) makes no mention of bindu, and that of the 
beginning of Kirana 11, though difficult to interpret in all its details, plainly does 
not have the classica] progression. That of the Svayambhuvasitrasangraha makes no 
mention of either bindu or nada (Svayambhuvasitrasangraha 5:1-5): 

athadav abhavac chabdah karanad aksaram tatah 

karanam moksadam, brahman, ‘brahma’ brahmavido viduh 1 
tasmat sarvaprado devo Sabdarasir iti Srutah 
navaparvasatardhatma yonibijatmakah parah 2 
akaradivisargantam bijam tat sodasaksaram 

Ses@ yoni§ catustrimsad avyaya hy aksaratmika 3 

sa Saktir devadevasya taya vyaptam idam jagat 


324 Parakhyatantra 


This effect [that is the totality of sound thus] has three causes.°9 And 


jianam Saivam param siksmam yat tat tarakam uttamam 4 
vedadijnanabhedena Sivajnanavibhedatah 
cintamanir ivatrasau sthitah sarvasya karanam 5 


e 4c Saivam ]) M”; caivam Ed. e 5c ivatrasau ] M”; ivatrasmai Ed. 
(Immediately following this is the account of the Saiddhantika canon 
quoted in GOODALL 1998:412-13.) 


It would be wrong to conclude from this, however, that the Svayambhuvasitrasangraha 
does not know of the pair, for it is included in its chapter on yoga, where it is taught 
that the sadhaka can aim for different achievements by meditating upon Siva as six 
different things (Jaksya): vigraha, bhuvana, mantra, bindu, nada, and, at the highest 
level, vyoman (Svayambhuvasitrasangraha 20:38-43). (For further discussion of the 
six laksyas see VASUDEVA *2000:188-223.) The pairing of bindu and nada is indeed 
unquestionably old; I am observing only that it is not found in early Saiddhantika 
accounts of the emanation of sound. It is not impossible that its appearance in later 
accounts of emanation results from understandable systematising attempts to harmo- 
nize accounts of, for example, mantroccara (in which bindu and nada might once but 
need not now be interpreted quite differently) with accounts of emanation. 

In the elaborate uccara of Kirana 58, for example, the first sound of the mantra 
begins (in the heart) with brahman (32), in the course of enunciation it then passes 
through Visnu (37), Rudra (44), Sureévara (45), bindu and nada (56), Kundalini (59), 
Sakti (61) and culminates in niskala (63). 

The account of the opening verses of chapter 11 of the Svacchanda, however, though 
it speaks of the first stage as vyoman (11:4b) and does not use one of the more usual 
synonyms, and though it elaborates the other stages, may be considered to reproduce 
a version of the emanation of sound that came to be accepted by the post-scriptural 
exegetes of the Saiva Siddhanta. 

The Pauskara’s account of the emanation of sound is more difficult to reconstruct 
with certainty. Pauskara 7:72cd charts a course of development typical of late sys- 
tematised accounts: nadasya bindoh prasrtih, Sabdanam nihsrtis tatah. In its eighth 
chapter, however, it begins with brahman (8:2), which is probably here to be under- 
stood to be identified with karanam parameSvarah (8:3d), then Sastra as nada (8:6b: 
Sastram nadasvaripatah), then a (four-fold) bindu (8:7), from that a power called 
Ambika (8:8ab), from that Vama, Jyestha, and Raudri and a group of sixteen other 
powers (8:9-12)—Jaya, Vijaya, Ajita, Aparajita, Nivrtti, Pratistha, Vidya, Santi, Ind- 
hika, Dipika, Rocika, Mocika, Vyomariipé, Ananta, Anatha, Anasrita; from these arise 
the fifty phonemes. 

Considerations of space restrain me from quoting and discussing here the archaic 
accounts of the emanation of sound to be found in the Sarvajndanottara (‘mantra- 
tantrotpattiprakarana’ IFP T.334, p.23) and in Nivasa uttarasitra 1 (f. 24”). 

°“°The necessity of there being three causes for an effect was taught in 2:29-30. 
Observe also that in the passage of the Sataratnollekhini that comments on that unit 
(quoted in a note to the translation ad loc.), it is implied that nrkarma here refers not 
to the human effort of enunciation, but, improbably, to the retributive force of past 


Chapter Six 325 


these consonants (varna$ ca) [become] word|s] from conjunction with the 
vowels;®°° and with these [words] we maintain [that] sentence[s arise]. (7) 

From these [sentences] (tasmat) comes about the understanding of 
meaning, which is the basis for worldly interaction.®°! Worldly interaction 
otherwise, [i.e.] without the act of uttering words, cannot be accounted 
for (anyayyah). (8) 

Pratoda spoke: 
Since phonemes perish in an instant, sphota must be that which effects 
the understanding of meaning. This all-pervading, eternal entity, man- 
ifestable by the phonemes, is, they say (Kila), what makes the meaning 
clear. (9) 

Prakasa spoke: 

Sphota does not exist as another entity (arthantarasthitih®°*) separate 
from the phonemes. [If such a thing exists] it [must be either] distinct 
(from them] or not distinct. [If it is] separate from them, it is not es- 
tablished to exist [as an ontologically independent thing] in the way that 
external objects {exist]. [Therefore] there are just the phonemes. We do 
not hear (a word] separately as two things [both sphota and phonemes] in 


actions. 

65° he use of varna to refer only to consonants as opposed to vowels may seem anoma- 
lous; but both commentators on the Pauskara also interpret the line in this way: varnag 
ca k&daya§ ca svarasamyogad akaraédisambandhat. S$esam sugamam. (Pauskaravytti 
ad loc.); kakarédaya eva varnah acah samyogavaSat prayogabhajah arthapratyayakah 
santah padavyapadesabhajo bhavanti. tany eva akanksddiyuktani vakyam ity ucyante. 
tato vakyaéd arthapratitir bhavatIty aha... (Pauskarabhasya, avatarika to Pauskara 
8:20c-21b). Furthermore the usage is paralleled in the Sarvajnanottara in the fifth and 
in the last and eighth verse (in numeration of IFP T. 334) of its mantratantrotpattipra- 
karanam and in verses 1-2 of the following sthd/avarnamantroddharaprakaranam (IFP 
T. 334, p. 23). Cf. also Kirana 12:6, in which svaras are distinguished from arnas. 

°51 The feminine ending leads us to expect that this word is a bahuvrihi, but the sense 
requires that it be used adjectivally as a tatpurusa. Cf. 6:45b and see introduction, 
p. Lxxxii. 

652 er conj. The reading ascribed to the Pauskaravrtti (on which this conjecture is 
partly based) is that of the MSS B and C that transmit the Pauskaravrtti; it receives no 
commentary from Jnanaprakaga. Following the text and (somewhat forced) interpreta- 
tion of Umapati, we might translate: ‘There is no purpose in there being, separate from 
the phonemes, a sphota that is in the middle, (between the grasping of the phonemes 
and the grasping of the meaning]’. The Pauskarabhasya ad loc. reads (pp. 581-2): 
vamavyatirekena varnan vinaé antare varnapratityarthapratityor madhye abhivyajya- 
manasya sphotasya narthah prayojanam na. madhye sphotangikaro vyarthah, artha- 
pratipadanasya varnair eva sambhavad iti bhavah. kim canupalambhabadhas cety aha 
sa ceti. sa ca sphotah varnebhyo bhinno va na bhinnah abhinno vety arthah... 


326 Parakhyatantra 


the same way.®? (10-11b) 

(Objection of a sphotavadin opponent:] It is sphota manifested by the 
many sounds that conveys meaning. Do we not directly experience that 
many things can be revealed from a single lamp? [Just] by the phonemes 
when uttered we would not grasp the meaning in another place [than their 
place of utterance]. (11c-12) 

[Reply of the Siddhantin:] Do we not experience that perceiving the 
smell of rain [is possible] in another place (than where the rain has fallen|? 
Admittedly the phonemes perish [as soon as they are enunciated]; [but] 
there is a trace that is born of the phonemes. The final phoneme, to- 


gether with the traces born of the previous phonemes, conveys the mean- 
ing.°°4 (13-14b) 


°531f this interpretation is correct, the text is awkward here. Prakasa seems to intend 
a refutation of sphota, which is what the clearer (and therefore probably secondary) 
reading of the Pauskara here expresses: varna eva na bhedena tasmat sphoto na vidyate. 
‘(Otherwise] it is just the sound itself without any difference, and so there is no sphota.’ 

654 This is a paraphrase of a well-known statement in the Sabarabhasya (p. 38, line 13): 
purvavarnajanitasamskarasahito ‘ntyo varnah pratyéyakah. This Mimamsaka view 
runs counter to Ramakantha’s position as outlined in the Nadakarika (see particularly 
verses 11 and 12). Although Aghorasiva goes to some length in his Nadakarikavrtti ad 
6-7 to refute sphota, Ramakantha’s theory of nada as the entity that conveys meaning 
is a sort of sphotavada, and indeed both JianaprakaSa (as is clear from his Pauskara- 
vrtti on Pauskara 8:35c—36) and Umapati (for example, in his alternative interpretation 
of Pauskara 8:20ab (=Parakhya 6:7cd], p.575: svarasamyogad iti varnavyangyanada- 
ripasphotadvarety arthah) appear to understand the terms nada and sphofa to be in- 
terchangeable. AghoraSiva is aware of the discrepancy, for he cites Parakhya 6:14ab in 
his Nadakarikavrtti ad Nadakarikaé 12: katham punah srimatparakhye “pirvavarnaja- 
samskarayukto 'ntyo 'rno 'bhidhayakah” ity uktam? nadabhivyanjakatvenopacarad ity 
adosah. ‘How is it then that the venerable Pardkhya teaches that “The final phoneme, 
together with the traces born of the previous phonemes, conveys the meaning”? There 
is no fault (in the position here], because [the Parakhya speaks] figuratively (of the final 
phoneme being that which conveys meaning] because of the fact that it makes nada 
(which is in fact the conveyer of meaning] manifest.’ In fact Aghorasiva is misrepre- 
senting the position of the Parakhya, according to which the varnas are emanations 
of bindu which themselves convey meaning. Aghorasiva’s characterisation of the view 
of the Parakhya is exactly that of the opponent in 1lcd above, and it is exactly the 
view of an earlier portion of the Pauskara: tato varnair abhivyakto nadah syad artha- 
viécakah (Pauskara 6:315b)...samskrto ’rnas tu pascimah/ arthanaém vacako bhiyad 
iti cet tan na Sobhate (Pauskara 6:316c—317b)...tatah sthilais tatha varnair vyakto 
n&das tu vacakah. The eighth chapter of the Pauskara, however, does not clearly sup- 
port this view, and, as has been mentioned above, the chapter has long been regarded 
as suspect, for JndnaprakaSsa prefaces his commentary on it by observing that prede- 
cessors of his had wished to expunge it on the grounds that it repeats much from the 


Chapter Six 327 


(Rejoinder of the sphotavadin opponent:] [But] the phonemes do not come 
together into a unit in such a way that memory of them would be possible. 
If memory of this [previously enunciated group of phonemes] is not pos- 
sible, how will it [viz. the final phoneme] release the meaning? (14c-15b) 
(Reply of the Siddhantin:| Therefore [we know] by an arthapatti-type 
inference (arthanirnayat) [that] understanding of the meaning must come 
about through a trace [of the previously enunciated phonemes]. (15cd) 

The trace is a power born of the phonemes through which they are 
empowered to achieve the (revealing of the] meaning. By means of these 
phonemes, which are equipped with their own powers and which convey 
meaning, worldly interaction is possible. (16) 

Pratoda spoke: 
Which [among the various types] is determined to be the connection be- 
tween word and meaning? For devoid of a connection words cannot denote 
their meanings.®°° (17) 

Prakasa spoke: 
It is not the connection that exists between cause and cffect,°”® since 
meaning (asau) has another cause [than the word].°°” [Since] the object 


text of a chapter of the Kamika: 


punaruktibahulyat na pauskarapatalah, kin tu kamikat vaktarattantrava- 
tarapatala evatra kaiscit praksipta iti sphuratiti guravah kathayanti. 
praSnottaroktih kathancit kincitprakarantaragitimatiti na punaruktitvam 
ksamata iti punah kathayanti kecit. 
e kamikavaktara® ] BD; kamikavartara® AC e = sphuratiti ] 
BCD; spurantiti A e praSnottaroktih ] ABD; prasnoktaroktih C 
e °prakarantara® ] ABC; °prakarantara°® D 
JnanaprakaSa’s manner of phrasing this remark suggests that he might not himself have 
been aware of the overlapping passage, and indeed I have not located such a passage 
in the various versions of the Kamika at my disposal (Ptirva-Kamika, Uttarakamika or 
in the two transcripts of the so-called Kamikavidyapada (both in IFP T. 830)); but the 
chapter is certainly plagiaristic, for it draws half of its 45 verses from the Parakhya (see 
introduction, p.cxiii). It is unlikely, but perhaps just conceivable, that the Parakhya 
in turn was drawing on the now lost Ur-Kamika known to us only from quotations in 
the works of Kashmirian commentators (see Goodall 1998:xlv, fn. 103). 
®5The ensuing discussion derives (directly or indirectly) from the Sabarabhasya 
(pp. 36ff). 
®56Both the commentators on Pauskara 41c are aware of the awkwardness of the 
syntax of this pada and both explain it away in the same fashion: bhavanirdeSa iti 
karyakaranabhavah (Jnanaprakaga); ayam ca bhaévapradhano nirdeSah; karyakarana- 
bhava ity arthah (Umapati, p. 584). The construction recurs in 6:19a. 
®57] assume that this pada is intended to formulate the same idea as Pauskara 8:41d, 


328 Parakhyatantra 


denoted is on the ground and the word is in the [speaker’s] mouth, [it 
cannot therefore be the connection of samyoga]. And it is not the relation 
of inherence.®°8 (18) 

It is not the relation of that which proves and that which is proved, 
[since the connection between word and meaning] is not established to be 
invariable.®°? [Now] the relation of that which causes one to understand 
and that which is to be caused to be understood®™ depends on a further. 
connection, since without a relation (vind bhavena®®*') [between the two] 


as read and understood by Umapati: yato ’sau narnahetujah: ‘since that [meaning] 
is not born of the cause that is the sounds.’ Jnanaprakasa’s odd reading (yato 'sdv 
arnahetujah) he interprets as follows: yato ‘sau arthah na varnajah, kin tv arnahetujah: 
varnanimittakasavayvadijanyah, ‘Since the object is not born of the phonemes, but is 
rather born of the causes that give rise to the phonemes, [i.e.] born of [the elements], 
starting with ether and air, which are the causes of the [gross] phonemes.’ 

658Cf, Sabarabhasya, p.36, line 23-p.38, line 1: mukhe hi Sabdam upalabhamahe, 
bhimav artham. ‘“Sabdo 'yam na tv arthah, artho ’yam na Sabdah” iti ca vyapa- 
diganti. rdpabhedo ’pi bhavati. “gaur’ iti imam gabdam uccarayanti, sasnadimantam 
artham avabudhyante. 

65°Cf. Slokavarttika sambandhaksepavada 16-19. The same idea lies behind the 
versions of our half-verse that are transmitted in the Pauskara: instead of niy- 
ato na vyavasthitah, the Pauskara reads sa tu bandhanavatsthitah. Uméapati’s 
Pauskarabhasya comments (p. 585): sa tu sambandhah bandhanavatsthitah pirvokta- 
sambandhadvayavatsu sthitah. tad uktam (Matangavidyaépada 3:9abc] ‘dharmena 
sadhyate dharmi kvacit karyena kéranam/ karanena kvacit karyam’ iti. Jnanaprakasa’s 
Pauskaravrtti here is essentially the same and concludes with the same quotation: sa 
tu bandhanavatsthitah piirvoktadvisambandhavatsu sthitah. tad uktam ‘dharmena 
sadhyate ...’. I understand the commentators to mean that the relationship in a for- 
mal argument between the hetu and the sadhya must always in turn depend either on 
a relationship of cause and effect (thus smoke, which is caused by fire, allows one to 
infer the presence of fire) or on a relationship of inherence (thus the taste of a mango, 
which inheres in a mango, causes one to infer that the fruit one eats in pitch darkness 
must be a mango). (Although the two commentators seem throughout the rest of the 
chapter to diverge so much from each other and without ever referring to each other’s 
interpretations, here one suspects that there may have been some relationship between 
their texts.) 

66°This pada (19c), as well as 20c, has a ra-vipula but without the required caesura 
after the fourth syllable. This perhaps accounts for the alteration of the corresponding 
half-verse in the version of the Pauskara. 

°61This is an anomalous use of bhdva to mean ‘relation’, extrapolated presumably 
from such usages as karyakaranabhava, which comes to be used in the sense of ‘the 
relationship between cause and effect’, but literally means ‘the being cause and effect 
(with respect to each other of two things|’. This passage is not in the Pauskara, but 
the same usage occurs in Jianaprakaéa’s reading of Pauskara 8:42c (+ Parakhya 6:19a) 
above. 


Chapter Six 329 


smoke could not be a pointer to the existence of fire. This (particular 
instance of a] relation of that which causes one to understand and that 
which is to be caused to be understood is not [direct] like [that between] 
sight and form.®? (19-20) 

Words do not of themselves without their having been connected cause 
one to understand®* objects [that they denote]. (21ab) 

[Objection:] But if you say that (va), (one might reply that] under- 
standing can arise from a written letter and there is no link (with the 
meaning] in that. (21cd) 

[Siddhanta:] In that case (of writing] we know that there was a creator 
of a connection. Since [the connection of word and meaning is] created 
by the intellect, the creator of the connection cannot have been the word; 
the creator of the connection between them is a person. (22) 

Until someone has declared that (a particular word] is used to denote 
a [particular] meaning, (another person,|] who does not know the other’s 
convention, does not grasp the meaning. (23) 

[Such] convention we know from direct experience in worldly interac- 
tion can be artificial. Without convention people cannot understand a 
particular meaning. (24) 


62Prakdéa is acknowledging that this is the kind of relation between word and mean- 
ing, but asserts that it requires convention to link it. Jnanaprakaéa is happy to ac- 
cept this straightforward interpretation: tarhi paryavasitah sambandhah ka ucyate? 
antarapOrvakam samketadivivekapOrvakam pratyeyapratyayakhyas tu jnépyajnépaka- 
laksanas tu sambandhah. Umipati, however, wishes to have the text accept sanketa 
itself as a distinct fifth type of sambandha, and so interprets as follows (p. 585): turlya- 
paksam disayati pratyeyeti: pratyeyapratyayakhyo hi jnapyajnaépakabhdvah. sa ca 
sambandhantarapirvakah hastihastipakader iva sambandhantaram antarena jnapya- 
jnapakabhavadrster iti bhdvah. evam paksantarani nirdkrtya pauruseyasamketa eva 
sambandha iti vaktum tatra lokadrstam hetum aha: yojaka iti.... The recognition of 
sanketa as the crucial factor that links words and meaning allies the Parakhya with the 
Naiydyikas and Vaisesikas (see Vaisesikasiitra 7.2.15-24 [Candrananda’s text) quoted, 
discussed and translated by HOUBEN, 1995:48-53). 

63 This anomalous use of pratyeti with causative sense is paralleled in 6:61d below. 

6°47 iterally ‘In that case (of writing] a connector is remembered’ or perhaps ‘com- 
memorated’; but it seems unlikely that the text refers to a tradition or myth about 
a particular creator of writing. Presumably the redactor was familiar with the use of 
a variety of scripts and regarded it as obvious that script was conventional (as it is 
accepted to be by Kumirila, for see Slokavarttika Sabdanityatadhikarana 9), and so 
what must instead be meant is that there must have been a creator. Note that the 
Pauskara’s text has dropped verses 20-1, so that it cannot help us here to reconstruct 
the intended argument. 


330 Parakhyatantra 


Pratoda spoke: 

The world has [always] been just as it is; convention too must [always] 
have been just as it is. Now a [supposititious] creator of convention could 
not (have created it] cither gradually or all at once.® (25) 

Prakasa. spoke: 

Just as this universe was created all at once by the will [of the creator], 
so too was the convention created; people learnt it by His will. (26) 

Since creatures (jagat) are not capable of independent action, being 
occluded by the darkness of the bonds, whatever action is found in them 
is produced by Him, and so (yatah tena) Sarva was the creator of the 
convention [that connects words with their meanings in language], since 
he is established to be the root cause. And the conventions of mantras 
too were forged by Him alone. (27-8) 

These many [conventions] which are established in this system (atra) 
are indicated by the word ‘matrix’ (matrkapadalaksitah).°°© The base 
(prakrtih) [of the central mantras] in this system (atra) is the final 
phoneme [namely HA];°°’ the suffix (pratyayah) is that by which the 
head-ornament is formed [i.e. it is the anusvara or candrabindu]| (vya- 
ktasekharah);*® the infix (agamah) is that which stands upon the end of 


665 67 conj. ISAACSON. This is presumably a compressed reformulation of the line of 


attack that Kumarila begins in Slokavarttika sambandhaksepaparihara 13: samayah 
pratimartyam va pratyuccaéranam eva va/ kriyate jagadadau va sakrd ekena kenacit. 
In our text, however, these problems are not followed up, for Prakasa responds with a 
dogmatic statement of the Saiva position. 

60In the following section (up to 6:34), the composition of mantras is homologised 
with grammatical analysis of worldly language. The details are not entirely clear to 
me, but I assume that the text is describing the central bljamantras of the cult, viz. 
the Sivamantra and then HIM, HEM, etc. for the brahmamantras, and HIM, HAIM, etc. 
for the angamantras). This is assuming that their base (prakrti) is H, as in the Sardha- 
trifatikalottara, but see the next footnote. 

6671 assume that the last phoneme is HA on the grounds that the grounds that 6:4 
speaks of their being forty-nine phonemes. But it is possible that KSA, although not 
counted earlier, was held to be the final phoneme by the author of the Parakhya. The 
base for the principal bijamantras is commonly H, following the Ka4lottara tradition 
(see, e.g., SardhatriSatikalottara 1:9); but in the Kirana these central bijas are built up 
from KSM (or KSMY) in 12:4-9 (see fn. 674 on p. 332 below). 

6687 conj. ACHARYA. The transmitted vyaktase$varah could perhaps be defended: 
‘the suffix is that by which [the particular anu] which is subservient to the Lord is 
made manifest’. In other words it could be a statement to the effect that the base 
is invariable but the suffix is what distinctively expresses the various mantras. But if 
it were such a statement, it would not add any element to the sivamantra, which is 


Chapter Six 331 


i.e. after] the fifth, which [in turn] is placed upon the sound that is the 
result of the action [upon itself] of vrddhi (vrddhivrttadhvanisthitah) .°°° 
Going beyond that is the power;®”° disappearance of sound (lopah) is that 
ultimate state. (29-30) 

Compounding (samasah) is the enunciation of: the mantra 
(taduccarah). (This is the] definition of the mantra which is called Siva.®7! 


what 6:31 tells us is here being described. It would also mean that no reference would 
be made to the nasalisation of the mantra, though this need not be problematic since 
the addition of nasalisation could be treated as self-evident (cf. Sardhatrigatikdlottara 
1:10ab anusvaro bhaven netram sarvesam copari sthitah). 

°69This is the suggestion of Dr. ACHARYA. The sound after the fifth is the sixth vowel, 
U; it is followed by the vowel produced by vrddhi of itself, namely AU. Thus the milla- 
mantra or Sivamantra that results is probably either KSUAUM or HUAUM. One could 
understand paficamantasthah to mean ‘the phoneme at the end of the fifth [group of 
consonants, viz. M]’, thus giving us a base of HM or KSM (as in the Kirana), but this 
would leave us without vowels for the Sivamantra, unless one is somehow contained 
in vrddhivrttidhvanisthitah. The ma@lamantra HUAUM is what results from one of the 
more natural interpretations of Sardhatrigatikalottara 1:11 mentioned and rejected by 
Ramakantha: 


sastham trayodasantam ca paficame viniyojayet 
Sivam tat tu vijaniyan mantram®@rtim sadasivam. 


The interpretation in question is as follows (Sardhatrigatikalottaravrtti pp. 21-2): 


anye tu ‘pancamam akasam, tadvacakatvad yat pancamam hakarablijam 
uktam, tasmin sastham Ukaéram trayodasantam ca sodaSakalasankhye- 
yaukaéram niyojayet. bindus tatra “sarvesam copari sthitah” ityanenaiva 
siddhah’ iti vyacaksate. 

Others comment as follows: ‘The fifth designates ether [viz. H], because 
it expresses that. He should join the sixth (vowel, namely] 0, and the 
one after the thirteenth, [namely] Au, {as} numbered among the sixteen 
divisions (that are the vowels, and not thirteenth in the list from which 
the ‘neuter’ vowels have been removed] onto that fifth, which is taught to 
be the bija H. It is proven that the anusvara is [to be joined] to that by 
(the teaching] “and it rests upon them all” (Sardhatrigatikalottara 1:10b].’ 


670 Here I cannot identify some category of grammar that is being homologised with 
something in the mantra. The text appears to be describing a further ascent in the 
course of the resorption of the sound back into its subtle cause. Other tantras present 
more complex sequences: ...bindu—-nada—nadanta—Sakti and beyond, but, as we 
have seen above (6:1-6 and fn. 648 on p.323), the Parakhya’s account of the up- 
per reaches of sound appears archaic in its simplicity. For more complex accounts 
see Svacchanda 4:263-7a and Somasambhupaddhati nirvanadiksavidhi 231-7, richly 
annotated with parallels by BRUNNER (1977:380—-96). See also PADOUX 1992:404-11. 

°71This is I think the intended sense, but sivakhyam actually qualifies laksanam. I 


332 Parakhyatantra 


Defined (laksitah) by this ‘grammar’ (laksanena), [it is] He [that] grants 
all desires. (31) 

(The base] thus (mentioned above] placed upon the short vowels be- 
comes SADYOMURTI (mirti),°’? VAMADEVA (guhya®’*), AGHORA, TAT- 
PURUSA (nara), ISANA.°"4 Placed upon the long [vowels]®” it becomes 
the angamantras: the HRDAYA , the SIRAS, together with the SIKHA and 
the KAVACA, and the ASTRA. §76 (32-33a) 


suppose that the author wished to write sivakhyamantralaksanam, but that he split it 
in the middle to avoid the metrical solecism of a string of iambi. Cf. 2:35d. 

672 er conj. Note that SADYOJATA is said to be the Lord’s marti in 2:85a, and that 
the name SADYOMURTI is preferred (over SADYOJATA) in Parakhya 2:94c—95 and in 
Mrgendravidyapada 3:13, in both of which a nirvacana of the name is given. 

673 er conj. Cf. Parakhya 2:93c—94b. 

°74We may assume that the text is referring to the brahmamantras, for compare 
Sardhatrifatikalottara 1:9cd brahmdni hrasva proktani dirghé hy angani sanmukha 
(where hrasvad and dirgha may have been intended as neuter plurals) and Kirana 12:9a, 
for which see below. The short vowels are not here those ordinarily considered short by 
grammarians but the odd-numbered vowels, excluding the so-called ‘neuter’ ones (r, fF, 
J and /). This is discussed at length by Ramakantha in his Sardhatrisatikalottaravrtti 
ad 1:9c-10b (pp. 18-20) and is made implicitly clear by Kirana 12:8-9a (though here, 
as remarked in fn. 667 on p. 330 above, the base is KSM not HA): 


dvitiyena caturthena sasthadvadasakena tu 
sodasena vibhinno ’yam bhavet kito 'ngapancakam 
hrasvé brahmani vijneyaé 


‘The kdta [viz. KSM*] combined (vibhinnah) with A (dvitIyena), I (caturthena), U 
(sastha-), Al (-dvaédagakena), and AH (sodasena) gives the (bijas of the] five anga- 
mantras. [The] short [versions of these, viz. the kita combined with A, I, U, E, O} are 
the [bIjas of the five] brahmamantras.’ 

*Though the kita has been defined by Kirana 11:5b to be ksa, Ramakantha explains 
(in his Kiranavrtti ad 12:8) that it has been redefined for the purposes of this chapter 
of the Kirana as KS$M by 12:4cd: karnikaéyam nyaset kdtam kaélayugmantasamsthitam. 
Here kala is code for makara; but Ramakantha’s analysis of -yugmantastham has been 
damaged in transmission (IFP MS T.290, p.149). Professor SANDERSON, aware of 
Ramakantha’s interpretation (in the damaged form in which it survives) has proposed 
(letter of -14.xi.98) that it is more natural to divide kalayug (‘with M’) mantasam- 
sthitam (‘on that which is after M [viz. y]’), and so to interpret the mantra-base to be 
KSMY rather than KSM. 

©75 Ag will be clear from the previous footnote, just as the short vowels are not those 
usually called short by grammarians, so too the long vowels are not those ordinar- 
ily called long. The vowels in question here are those listed in Kirana 12:8, quoted 
immediately above. 

678 ex conj. Slightly closer to our transmitted syllables would be hrc chikha susivam 
balam (where SUSIVA would be a synonym for the ‘head’-mantra, as in 3:75, and bala 


‘Chapter Six 333 


(The base] together with R placed below it (adho yuto rena) and with 
the fourth (vowel, namely 1] with an anusvara: this is the mantra of the 
VidyeSvaras when expanded by [adding their respective] names at the 
end.®”" (32-3) 


stands, as in Mrgendrakriyapada 3:10 and 3:20, for KAVACA); but this order would give 
us the wrong vowels for the arigamantras. Dr. ACHARYA has pointed out to me that 
what we have is comparable to a compressed list of angamantras in the unpublished 
ancient Saurasamhita of which he is preparing an edition (2:30c): hrc chirah sagikha- 
varma. On the strength of this parallel, I could perhaps also have adopted hrc chirah 
saSikhabalam. A further problem with this listing is that it is implicit that the ASTRA 
is assigned a long vowel, whereas we expect it, on the basis of parallels, to terminate 
in ah (see Sdérdhatrifatikalottara 1:10: savisargam bhaved astram anusvaravivarjitam, 
and see also Kirana 12:8). It is possible that the redactor of the Paradkhya intended this 
too but thought that it did not need specifying, or that he considered ah to be one of 
the long vowels, or that the following syllables (caédho) mask a corruption that would 
have specified that ah should be the termination of the ASTRA (but see the following 
note for the interpretation offered of adhah). 
°77Cf. Kirana 12:10c—11b: 


vyapakam rephasamyuktam caturthasvarasamyutam 

binduyuktam anantasya vacakatvena samsthitam 
In the Kirana this mantra (HRIM) alone is that of Ananta only, and different mantras 
for each of the remaining VidyeSvaras are given in the subsequent verses. My 
interpretation—that the Pardkhya uses only the seed-syllable HRIM and then adds the 
name of the intended VidyeSvara, presumably in the dative—is a guess, but it is similar 
to what we find in Mrgendrakriyaép&da 1:6ab: svaébhidhanam caturthyantam vagisa- 
patidigbhrtam. .., ‘[The mantras] of the VidyeSvaras (vagisa), the GaneSvaras (pati), 
the Lokapalas... (consist of] their own name(s] ending in the dative’. In the Matanga 
(kriyépada 1:64c—69b) we find padas 6-13 in its word-division of the VYOMAVYAPIN 
mantra (all of which have dative endings) assigned to the Vidyeévaras. 

One might have expected some such core mantras of the Saiddhantika cult to be the 
same in all the early Siddhantas; but this appears not to have been the case. As Tri- 
locanasiva remarks in his Siddhantasamuccaya (IFP T. 206, p.94): ... mantradhv& tu 
kvacin netravarjitangabrahmasivamantraétmé, kvacin navavyUhamantraripah. sivadi- 
mantra$ ca pratitantram bhidyante. na ca mantrabhedah kriyabhedaS$ ca tantravi- 
rodhasya hetuh... In fact the central mantra-system varies not only from tantra to 
tantra but also from part to part of the Nifvdsa: thus the main mantra-system of the 
Rauravasitrasangraha, the Svayambhuvasitrasangraha, the Matanga and the Nisvasa 
guhyasitra is that of the VYOMAVYAPIN, a malamantra; but the Nisvasa guhyasitra 
(16 and 17, ff. 110ff) also teaches a mantra-system of which the ten-syllabled VIDYA is 
the central mantra. The mantra-system of the Nivdsa uttarasitra is the NAVATMAN, 
a mantra consisting of nine seeds (bija), while in the Ni§vasa md@las@tra it is that of 
a bijamantra that the text refers to by the name TATTVA (e.g. in 1:19 and 7:7, ff. 19° 
and 20") but that may be the same as the PRASADA (also called PRASADA), the central 
mantra of the Kalottara scriptures, whose mantra-system has been adopted in the 


334 Parakhyatantra 


This mantra (manuh®’’) in this system (atra) is one, five, and three 
of the principal mantras (?). May it not be accepted to be expressive of 
meaning (kim napto®”? vacakatvena) like the [ordinary non-mantric] word 
‘cow’? (34) 

Thus these [mantras] are to be understood to be equipped with in- 
flections (sajatayah®®°), made up of phonemes (varnagah), created by 
Siva. They end in the words NAMAH, SVAHA, VASAT, VAUSAT, HUM and 
PHAT. (35) 

NAMAH and SVAHA are suited [respectively] for recitation and for obla- 
tion; VASAT is fitting (hita) for filling (apyayane);®*! vausaT is for great 


paddhati-literature. (Note that both Nifsvasa mdlasitra 6 and Sardhatrisatikalottara 
19 share verses detailing eight inflections of the basic bljamantra.) 

The use of adhah (unless cadho is an error for ca+atho or for something else) recalls 
the way bija-mantras are written (at least in Nepalese MSS), successive consonants 
in these clusters being written beneath one another. The usage is to be found in 
Kirana 12:15 (which, as reconstructed by VIVANTI partly on the basis of Ramakantha’s 
commentary, gives the mantra YLOM for the Vidyeévara Trimirti): 


bhantadhah sthito ranto dvadasantena bheditah 
binduné bhisito murdhni trimirter vacako matah. 


®78For other instances of such a usage of the term see, e.g., Kirana 26:7b, 29:7b, 
56:54b, Svayambhuvasitrasangraha 21:21c and 27d, and Mrgendrakriyapaéda 1:1 and 
commentary ad loc. It is possible however that it is code for the number fourteen. The 
verse is obscure to me. The first half-line could be speaking about the same base being 
used to form the all the principal bijamantras, the ‘one’ being the sivamantra and the 
‘five’ referring to the two groups of five brahmamantras and five angamantras; but the 
eight VidyeSvaras and the trikah are left unaccounted for, unless we read ‘five’ a third 
time and add it to the three. No more likely is the possiblity that the half-line speaks 
only of HRIM: ‘This is the one mantra among the principal mantras which is five and 
threefold [i.e. which is used eight times, once for each of the VidyeSvaras.' 

679A tentative conjecture of Dr. ACHARYA. 

680 67 conj. Jati is a technical term usually reserved for words such as namah that are 
added to the ends of mantras (e.g. in the end of the description of the damanotsava in 
the I[ganasivagurudevapaddhati quoted by BRUNNER 1968:345), but here, as is evident 
from 6:37, to be applied also to elements that are added to the beginning. 

Here one could consider emending instead to sad jatayah, since this is a standard 
list of six mantra terminations. (The reading of MSS C and E reveal that we must 
correct svadha to tatha to yield a list of six in sasthavarga 21 of the Saivagamapari- 
bhasamanijart. ) 

68! For B’s correction to this form, proposed independently by ACHARYA, cf. Svac- 
chanda 6:96a vasad apydyane Sastam, 6:96a, which is quoted in the Tantralokaviveka 
ad 1:117-22 with the reading Sastah. In our passage VASAT is treated as feminine, 
presumably because that is the gender of the noun jati. (In Pirva-Kamika 2:165ab, it 


Chapter Six 335 


oblation; HUM is for recitation (Sastre) and PHAT for the destruction of 
enemies. (36) 

Since it nourishes the sounds of the mantra, therefore it causes its 
sounds to ‘open’.682 These are known as the final jatis; OM is the jati 
[that is placed] at the beginning. (37) 

In due order (kramat) [a mantra has] its power®* at the beginning 
and at the end and in the middle [too] is situated its power. This [power] 
that is in the body of the mantra is known by those who know mantras 
to be [thus] threefold. (38) 

This power, together with its functions(?), is yoked by the practitioner 
(sadhakena) at the beginning [of a ritual act(?)] (aditah). It is in seed- 
syllables, in clusters of phonemes, in words and sentences. The power does 
not increase because of its sounds (?), ttasyatra phalasamsthiteht. (39) 

Pratoda spoke: 

Since a mantra is of the nature of language (Sabdatmakah), that which 
defines language [viz. grammar] must be a property of that (mantra] 
(tatsvam Sabdasya laksanam). Therefore {a mantra] may be said to be 
one in which the words are correct (sédhuSabdah), or [it may be] incorrect 
(asaédhuh) [if] devoid of those [scil. correct words] (tadbahihsthitah). (40) 

Prakasa spoke: 

If words are known to be correct or incorrect on the basis of something 
that defines them (viz. grammar] (Jaksanena), then is that [a property that 
is] innate in them or is it something else [outside them] (tat kim nijam 
athanyad va)? If it is {an innate property of] their own (yadi svam), then 
it would be pointless (tan nirarthakam).®*4 (41) 

If it is something else outside, then it would have to be (defined] by 
other words, which have bases and suffixes and so forth. And since these 
[other words] share the common property of being words [and would there- 
fore themselves require defining], an infinite regress would result. (42) 

Otherwise [you might accept that] (athava) without (having to be 


is implied that VASAT is masculine: svahaé nama§ ca sesa§ ca striklibapurusatmakah. ) 
For other lists of the functions of these jatis see Kirana 16:41-2 and that quoted in 
GOODALL 1998:xxvi, fn. 58. 

682 os conj. 

°83The reading tacchaktir could however be an error for tajjatir and the result of 
confusion because of the proximity of the word Saktir. 

°84Perhaps what is meant is that it would be pointless to postulate the existence of 
some invisible property inseparably part of each word that validated it. One might as 
well instead concede each word to be self-validating. 


336 Parakhyatantra 


validated by] that [which defines it] (tad vina) a word (sah) may cause 
one to understand the meaning that it is intended to express (vacya- 
padarthapratipadakah). We directly observe that both the [correct] word 
go and the [incorrect] word gavi convey their meaning.®® (43) 

Pratoda spoke: 

These words go, gavi, etc., how can they be denoters of their meaning for 
us®®° if it is not because of that [i.e. because of the grammar that defines 
words] (yadi no tena) that meanings are properly conveyed? (44) 

Prakasa spoke: 

All words that are the basis of worldly interaction (vyavaharani- 
bandhanah®®’) are linked with conventions. Some meaning(s] may be con- 
trived from a [single] vowel [or phoneme beginning with a] consonant®*® 
[as a] word. (45) 

This [meaning, then,] can be understood from the [particular word] 
that expresses it (vacakena®®’) in accordance with different contexts 
(anyasangatah). [The words] ‘a’ and ‘ka’ have the meanings [respectively 
of] Visnu and Brahma; [the words] ‘ka’ and ‘kha’ have the meanings ether 


685 e7 conj. Gavi is the first example in a list of apasabdas of the word go given 


in the Paspasahnika of Patanjali’s Mahabhasya: ekaikasya Sabdasya bahavo 'pabhra- 
mSah. tadyatha gaur ity asya Sabdasya gavi, goni, gota, gopotaliketyevamadayo bahavo 
’pabhramSa&h (vol. 1, p.2, lines 23-5 of KIELHORN’s edition). Metre requires that we 
read gavi and not, as in the Mahabhasya, gavi. 

The same example is discussed in later literature too; cf., e.g., Sabarabhasya 
1.3.8.24 (with Tantravarttika ad loc.), Part 1, p.252-3: gaur gavi gon! gopotalika 
ityevamadayah Sabda udaharanam. gogabdo yathaé sésnadimati pramanam, kim tathaé 
gavyadayo ’py uta neti sandehah. kim atraikah Sabdo ’vicchinnaparamparyo ’rthabhi- 
dhay}, itare ’pabhramsah, uta sarve ’naédayah? sarva iti brimah. kutah? pratyayat. 
pratiyate hi gavyadibhyah sasnadiman arthah. Cf. also Slokavarttika Sabdanityatadhi- 


ex conj. Instead of conjecturing katham no, we could assume corruption of 
katamah: ‘which of them are [really] the denoters of their meaning?’ Whether katham 
or katam4h is more appropriate depends on how one interprets PrakaSa’s reply: is he 
stating that it is by sanketa that a given word conveys a given meaning, or is he giving 
examples of particular words that are conventionally linked to certain meanings and 
then pointing at those to say that they are instances of denoters of meaning? 

687Cf. fn. 651 on p. 325 above. 

88 For this usage of varna in the sense of consonant see fn. 650 on p. 325 above. 

689 er conj. Without this emendation (retaining M”’s vacako na) the sentence might 
perhaps be interpreted: ‘That then, unaccompanied by anything else, is to be under- 
stood to be that which conveys meaning.’ But the point of the following examples 
seems to be to underline the arbitrariness of the meanings which convention can assign 
to particular sounds: the meanings can be conveyed by other words. 


Chapter Six 337 


and water. (46) 

But ‘a’, ‘ma’, ‘no’ and ‘na’ (amanonah) {can be used] in the sense of 
a negation (pratisedhe); [and] sometimes®™ [na is] three short (syllables, 
and ma is] three long [syllables] (trilaghus triguruh kvacit). +... t.°9! (47) 

Its grammar (tatsvalaksma) has been taught by a sage; he has ex- 
pounded [its] convention|(s].°°? In the same way the conventions of the 
Sivamantra, the angamantras and the brahmamantras were created by 
Siva. (48) 

It was established with consonants together with vowels (sasvarair 
aksaraih), with consonant clusters [without vowels] (kitaih), with words, 
with sentences. Even in the Veda such conventions are set forth as [those 
of] svarga and Urvasi.°83 (49) 

We can create conventions linking words to meanings; t[but] this is 
not possible in the case of elements of mantras (na jatisu)t.©94 Mantras, 


6901 e. in metrical literature. The example probably derives from the Sabarabhasya ad 
1.1.5 (p. 181 of Brhatt edition): ...tatha makarena apingalasya na sarvagurus trikah 
pratiyeta. 

691Dr. ACHARYA has suggested to me that this line could be speaking about technical 
Mimamsaka senses of prakrti and pratyaya. If we were to emend to prakrtipratyayau 
’nyarthau vedédimatacoditau (assuming a double sandhi), it might be interpreted thus: 
‘(The words] prakrti and pratyaya are taught by Mimamsakas to have other meanings 
[than those which are common].’ The reason for choosing to mention the Mimamsakas’ 
technical senses of these words (for after all other thinkers, for instance the Sankhyas, 
have technical senses of these particular words) would be that it is the Mimamsakas 
who contest the conventionality of language. 

6°2The expression muni and the use of the singular pronoun tena suggest that the 
text is referring to Panini, which is an odd thing for a Saiddhantika scripture to do 
(see introduction, p.xlvii). And yet, if the muni here is not Panini, who is it?: Note 
that the cadence is unmetrical, but see introduction, p. lxxxvi. 

683Cf. Pramanavarttika 1:320ab: svargorvasyadigabda$ ca drsto ’ridharthavacakah. 
‘We find [in the Veda] words such as svarga and Urvadéi that [according to exegetes] 
express meanings that are not [the] conventional [ones known in the world].’ This may 
be the source of Parakhya 6:49ab, which may appear to be saying the reverse, but 
Dharmakirti’s auto-commentary reveals that he is speaking of the use in the Veda of 
words that are interpreted as having senses that are unknown in worldly usage. 

6947 suspect the text to be corrupt here but am not sure of what was intended. One 
could consider emendation to na jantubhih and interpret: ‘The convention linking a 
word with meaning could not have been created by [ordinary] creatures.’ Or, assuming 
a contrast to have been intended between ordinary language in the first half of the verse 
and mantric language in the second, one might consider emending to nrjatisu: ‘The 
convention linking word with meaning can be created [in ordinary language] among 


’ 


men. 


338 Parakhyatantra 


which have been defined above, [are used] in the sense of what they mean 
(arthe) because of Siva’s convention. (50) 

Pratoda spoke: 

Mantras are produced from the palate and such [other places of 
articulation in the mouth], and since they are [thus] composed of 
phonemes (varnaétmakah), they are the same as [words,] which share 
the same phonemes. Mantras are not distinct from those (na mantras 
tadvisesatah). (51) 

Prakasa spoke: 

The same quality of having solid form®° is observed in both a gem and 
a rock; nevertheless one of them has (the power to give] great rewards 
(mahaphalam) because it is possessed of fiery power (tejahSaktisama- 
yogat). (52) 

In the same way [the quality of being a] word®*® is common [to both 
a mantra and to an ordinary word of the language], and yet (tathapi) 
one of them has [the power to give] great rewards. Its rewards are in 
many functions (bahukrtyesu), since those are directly observed to be 
accomplished by it.°°” (53) 

In pulling out splinters, in possession by fevers, in subduing Nagas, 
spirits and fevers (nagabhitajvaraksaye), in subjecting others to one’s 
will, attracting others, inspiring hatred, dispelling, and destroying poi- 
son (vasyakarsanavidvesaproccatavisanaSane)—and so we see its fruit in 
visible cases (tad drste tatphalam drstam) and therefore we can infer 
(meyam) [that mantras can accomplish also] the supreme reward [of lib- 
eration]. (54-55b) 

If it is sometimes®®® true (tathyam) and [sometimes] false (mithya) [i.e. 
if mantras sometimes produce results and sometimes do not], then, since 
there is [then] discrepancy (vyabhicare), the [mantra’s power to produce 
its] reward is disproved (gatam). For what is established [sometimes] to 
hold true {and sometimes] not to hold true (tathyam sthitam atathyam 
yat) cannot be the result of that [mantra] (tatphalam), because of the 


®°5The compound kathinyardpata seems to contain an illogical bahuvrihi and one 
could consider emending to kathinaripata. 

6961 have translated gabdah as though it were sabdata, because that is what the 
argument seems to require. 

°°7More literally ‘since they are directly observed to be things which have that [viz. 
mantra] as that which accomplishes them.’ 

©°8Understanding kincit as if it were kvacit, which may not be possible. 


Chapter Six 339 


insufficiency [of the mantra as a cause] (vaikalyat). (55c—56b) 

But it is not observed to be random (kadacitkam) as a result of in- 
sufficiency |i.e., if there is insufficiency, then the result is not achieved], 
just as in the case of the appeasement of a spirit that possesses someone 
(grahasantivat).©°9 (56cd) 

The property of being a mantra (mantratvam) that belongs to Siva 
(Sivasamsrayam) is [to be accounted for] because it has the properties of 
causing to think and saving (mananatranadharmitvat).’© Because they 
are conjoined with Him and with [His] power, their mantratva is of two 
kinds (ubhayatmakam).’°! (57) 

The connection between that which is expressed and that which ex- 
presses [viz. the mantra] (vacyavacakasambandhah) is created by Him 
(tatkIptah) for the sake of accomplishing the fruits [of mantras] (phala- 
hetutah). And [so], since the fruit has Him as its agent, Siva resides in 
the mantra (mantrasthitah).’°? (58) 

Pratoda spoke: 

The deity must be no more than the word; that which [purportedly] ex- 
presses is not [in fact] different from it. And all words (sarvasabdo ’pi) are 
necessarily auxiliaries to the rite (kriyangah). The fruit (therefore—e.g. 
svarga—lis that of the rite.”°5 (59) 


6997 assume that Prakasa means that no randomness is perceived in appeasing spirits 
(they are appeased if the right procedure is correctly followed, but not if there is any 
deficiency), but it is conceivable that he means that randomness is indeed perceived 
when such appeasement is attempted. 

700For similar nirvacanas, see the apparatus here. The list is not exhaustive. 

7011t seems most likely here that the expression ubhayatmakam refers to mantras 
being connected with Siva and with his sakti, but other interpretations are conceivable 
(it could refer, for instance, to the two functions of manana and trana, or to the two 
aspects of vacya and vacaka). In Kirana 7 and in Netratantra 21 we find a threefold 
division into mantras that are Siva, mantras that are Sakti and those that are anu. 

702One might also consider the possibility that mantrah sthitah (of which the trans- 
mitted form is an orthographic variant) is intended: ‘Siva is established to be the 
mantra’. . 

3This Mimamsaka objection is to be found in the Mrgendravrtti ad vidyapada 1:7 
and is presented in greater detail by Trilocanasiva in his Siddhantasamuccaya, after 
which follows his commentary on PrakaSa’s response which I have quoted in the next 
footnote. Since Trilocanasiva’s statement of the objection appears to be a commentary 
on Pratoda’s question, I quote it below (IFP MSS T. 284 [=A], p. 134-5, T. 206 [=B)], 
pp. 63, and GOML R 14394 [=C), pp. 7-8): 


nanu devataiva tavan na siddha. tatsambhave hi tadvisesasyeSvarasya 
siddhih. sa tu Sabdamatraiva. tatha hi karmanusthanad eva phalam, 


340 Parakhyatantra 


Prakasa spoke: 
If the mantra is established to be no more than sound, then its fruit 
(viz. svarga] would be no more than sound.”4 And sound (sabdah) that 


na devatayah, tadvacakatvenabhimatarudrendradigabdabhedena prama- 
nantarair asiddheh. ata eva tena saha sambandhagrahanasambhavad 
agamenapy asiddhih. tata eva ca sambandhagrahane itaretarasrayato 
’siddhir eva. tatas ca raudram carum nirvapet svargakama ityadav udde- 
Syakarakataya visistakarmangatvena sa eva devataSabdah pratiyata iti. 
kriyata eva phalam yuktam; na devatata iti jaiminiyah. 


e nanu devataiva tavan na] B; devataiva tavatava na A; nanu deva- 
daivatatvaica C e sé tu] BC; sanu A e phalam, na deva- 
tayah ] B; bhalam na devatayaém A; phaladevatayah C e tadva- 
caka® |] AC; tadbadhaka® B e °rudrendra® ] AB; °rudraindra® C 
e itaretarasrayato ’siddhir eva] conj.; ksitaretarasrayatom siddhir eva 
ca A; tv itaretarasrayato ’siddhir eva BC e carum nirvapet ] AB; 
carahirsibhevat C e ityadav uddeSyakdrakataya visistakarmanga- 
tvena sa eva devataSabdah pratiyata | B; ityadav uddeSyakarataya visi- 
stakarmangatvena sa eva devatasabda eva pratiyanta A; iti devatadav 
uddesya(devatandaptadedasya C°°) kdrakataya(tatha C°°) visistakarma- 
Ngatvena +sa+ eva devatasabda eva prakriyata C e kriydta ] B; 
kriyatmaka AC e na devatata |] B; na devatah A; taddevatatah C 


704Before his quotation of this passage in the Siddhantasamuccaya (for which see 
apparatus), Trilocanasiva gives a detailed paraphrase of it (IFP MSS T.284 [=A], 
p. 135, T. 206 (=B], pp. 63-4, and GOML R 14394 [=C], pp. 8-9): 


atrocyate—evam hi devatayah Sabdamatratve phalam api sabdamatram 
eva syat. yato jyotistomena svargakamo yajetetyadau svargadyatma- 
kam phalam api tad eva pramanantarasiddham. atha yadi Sabdadiyo- 
gam vinapi nartharahitah tpaparaht sabdah sambhavatiti puranetiha- 
sadiprasiddham visistam evartham atra S§vargasabdah phalatvenabhida- 
dhatity ucyate. tad ihapi samanam, iti na Sabda eva devata, api tu tad- 
vacyo 'rthavisesa eva svavacakaéd bhinno, devadattadigabdavacyarthvad 
iti. saiva phalada&, na tu karmamatram, tasya krsyddikarmavat phala- 
jananamatra eva samarthyad, acetanatvena ‘idam phalam asmai dasyé- 
mi’ti vivekabhavat. Sabdo hi viditapadarthapratyayakatvena bhavato 'pi 
siddha, iti indradifabdanam api Sabdatvenaivarthapratyayakatvasiddheh 
tatpratyeyo devatalaksanarthah svargalaksanaphalavat siddha eva. anu- 
manadisiddhatvam api§varalaksanadevataéyah prag evoktam iti na pra- 
manantarasiddhih. napitaretarasrayadosah. yad ahuh 


‘Srutisiddhyartham aSrutopalabdhau yatnavata bhavitavyam; 
na Srutisiddhau yatnavisesaSaithilyam acaraniyam’ iti. 


tata ca ‘somapah Satakratur’ ityddisrutisiddhasya devatavisesasya 
karmano ripasya ca ‘vajrahastam sahasraéksam indram ide caturbhujam’ 


Chapter. Six 341 


ityadifrutisiddhasya Sabdamatrasyasambhavat tattadvisesanavisista de- 
vata siddhaiva. stutir api tasya visesanavisistayaé devataya atra drSyate. 
yathé ‘indro diva indra ise prthivya’ ityadi [Rgveda X.89:10]. na ca 
devataya mirtatvad asmadadivad anekadeSayagasannidhir anupapanna 
iti vacyam, asyaé animadyaisvaryayogena vasudevasaubharyadivat praka- 
myaSaktya yugapad anekadeSasannidhir yujyata eva yatah. tad uktam 
Srimatparakhye... 


e hi devatayah ] AB; hi devataya C e svargadyaétmakam phalam 
api tad eva ] AB; svarSarasca LU C°°; svargakaimas ca U C’* @ pra- 
manantarasiddham ] conj.; pramanantarasiddham AB; pramaénantaram 
siddham C e vinapi nartharahitah tpaparaht Sabdah ] A; vinapi 
nartharahitapaparah Sabdah B”‘; vinapi nartharahitapascarah gabdah 
B°°; vindvinartharahita U ghaparasabdah C e puraneti® ] BC; 
puranetiti® A e visistam evartham atra] AC; visistam evatra B 
e svargasabdah ] BC; svargasabda A e phalatvenabhidadhatity ] 
B; phalatvenabhidhanam ity A; phalatvenabhidhanam ity C e tad 
ihapi ] AB; tadahapi C @ api tu tadvacyo 'rthavisesa ] B; api tu 
tadvacyo rthavisesyaviseSasa A; api krtavacyo visesa C @ svavaca- 
kad bhinno devadattadisabdavacyarthavad [...] karmamatram ] conj. 
ISAACSON, SARMA; svavacakad bhinna devadattadisabdavacyatmavad 
[...] karmamatram }] AB; svavacakat abhinnah. devadattadisabdava- 
cyartha U C e phalada, na tu] B; phaladanunta A e vidi- 
ta° |] conj.; viditapada°AB; vihitapada® C e °pratyayakatvena | 
BC; pratyadyayakatvena A e °pratyayakatvasiddheh ] B; °pratya- 
yanasiddheh A; °pratyayasiddheh C e tatpratyeyo devatalaksano 
’rthah ] B; tatpratyayo devatalaksanartham A; tatpratyadyato devata- 
laksanarthah C e siddha eva] AC; siddha evam B @ pra- 
manantarasiddhih ] AC; pramanantarasiddham B e Srutisiddhya- 
rtham aSrutopalabdhau yatnavata | conj. (cf. NareSvarapariksaprakasa 
ad 3:93cd, pp. 318-19); Srutisiddhyartham srutopalabdho yatnavata BC; 
Srutisiddham éruter apalabdho dhattannavata A e yatnaviSsesaSai- 
thilyam ] AB; yatnau éesasaidhilyam C e karmano riipasya ] conj.; 
karmane nirusya A; karmano niripasya BC e sahasraksam in- 
dram ide caturbhujam ityadi] B; sahasraksam itindriyam ide catur- 
bhujam itityadi A; tam sahasraksam iti indram Ide caturbhujam ityadi 
Cc e tattadvisesanavisista devata siddhaiva] B; tattadvisesanavi- 
Sista devata siddhyaiva A; tattadvisesena visista(sta C°°)devata sid- 
dhyai vastu® C e stutir api tasya viSesanavisistaya devataya atra 
dréyate |] conj.; stutir api ta visesaya devamaitra dréyate A; Srutir api ta 
vigesaya devamaitra dréyate B; stutir api tat viSesayat devamaitraU hate 
C e indro diva indra] B; indrad iva indra A; indro dittava indri 
C e devataya mirtatvad ] B; devataya mirtitvad A; devataémirta- 
tvad C e anekadeSayagasannidhir anupapanna | B; anekadesayaga- 
sannidhir upapanna A; yugapad anekadeSas sayagas sannidhi XripaX 
rupapanna C e asyé anima | B; tasyanima® A; tasya anima® C 


342 Parakhyatantra 


is ordered in words and sentences (padavakyagatakramah) {can|not [be] 
devoid of meaning (artharahitah). (60) 

And [so] that which is denoted (vacyah) {must be] separate from that 
which denotes it (vacakad bhinnah), just as is the case with words like 
‘Devadatta’ (for which there are corresponding entities that are denoted]. 
And what denoting word, according to you (te), could cause understand- 
ing (pratyeti’°>) [though being itself] devoid of [a corresponding] mean- 
ing? (61) 

Therefore the deity is certainly what is denoted (vacya) [and] that 
[is] distinct from that which denotes it (sa vacakad bhinna), since we un- 
derstand words that qualify it (visesanam yatas tasyah...pratipannam), 
expressing its actions and form (karmarupabhidhayakam). And the deity 
is especially praised in such sentences of the Veda because [it is] through 
praise [that] the deity (sa) becomes attentive (abhimukhi bhavet).’°© (62- 
3) 

You may say that [such] qualifying words applied to the deity are 
because of arthavada. [But, we reply, even] if these [qualifying words] 
(tat) [were understood to be] absolutely true (paramarthena), what sort 
of contradiction would arise? (64) 

Pratoda spoke: 

There is a contradiction, since the deity, in [your] doctrine (mate), is 
taught by scripture (sriiyate) to be corporeal (miirta): since it is corpo- 
real, how can it then be close by (sannidhyam sé katham vrajet) in many 
sacrifices?’°” (65) 

[And] if this deity is not corporeal, then it cannot be that which ac- 
complishes the purpose of the worship. Therefore it must be of words 
because of the arguments based on these two contradictions (virodha- 
dvayayuktitah). (66) 

Prakasa spoke: 


e °saubharyadivat ] AC; °saubharyadivat B @ yugapad aneka® ] 
BC; yutabataneka® A 


705 As above in 6:21b, this form is used with causative sense. Alternatively one could 
emend kah to kam and understand ‘And what [object], according to you, could a 
denoting word that was devoid of [a corresponding] meaning cause one to understand?’ 

76The enjambement is awkward, but we have seen elsewhere that the author of the 
Parakhya occasionally aspires to the high karika style of which this would be typical 
(see introduction, p. Lxxix). 


7°7Cf., for the argumentation here, Mrgendravidyapada 1:8ff. 


Chapter Six 343 


The [existence of the] deity is attested in scripture. From that (deity one 
attains] the great reward. Because of his being endowed with great power 
he will accordingly be present (sthasyati) at [every] sacrifice. (67) 

Just as for the followers of the Vedanta (vedantavadinam) His em- 
bodiments are infinite,”°8 so too {here in the Saiva Siddhanta] He has the 
power to shine forth His embodiments for the sake of [accomplishing] the 
rituals (kriyartham).’°9 (68) | 

That strength [of His continues to be a part] of [the deity] who has 
taken on the form of sound (tad viryam Sabdasamsthayah). His own 
nature does not alter (tatsvabhavo na hanyate). He approaches those 
[sacrifices] (tatra sannidhyatam iyat) [when called] by means of a word 
that expresses a summons (ahitivacigabdena)."!° (69) 

And so the fruit is produced by the rite (kriyajanyam), [but] in fact 
(tathyam) it is dependent on the deity (tad devatasrayam): the action [of 
the rite] (bhavah) is produced by the deity (devatavihitah)’! [and] the 
deity resides in the mantras (mantrasamSraya). (70) 

Otherwise there would not be the two types of action (nanyatha 
dvividho bhavah), one directed towards the attainment of a goal and the 
other not (kamakamavilaksitah)."!* Now if this action (sa ca bhavah) is 
an auxiliary to [the principal] action (kriyangah), then the fruit appro- 
priate to it is of that [principal action] (tasyas taducitam phalam). But 
if it is the principal [rite] (pradhanyena sthito va syat), then it is [itself] 
in control (prabhuh) with regard to the whole [body of subsidiary rites] 
(sarvasva-visaye). (71-72b) 


708 ex conj. ISAACSON. The conjecture is tentative, but seems to me preferable to, for 
example, anantatvat tanugrahah, ‘because of the infinitude [of His power].He takes on 
bodies’, or anantas tadanugrahah, ‘His grace is infinite’. Another possibility, suggested 
to me by Dr. ACHARYA, was to read anantatvam tanugrahah and to interpret: ‘{[He 
is both] infinite [and yet He] takes on bodies’. Such ideas would not be particularly 
distinctive of Vedantavadins. 

70°The final cadence is unmetrical,and one could therefore consider emending, with 
B, to °vibhajane, but see introduction, p. lxxxvi. 

710 ey conj. ACHARYA. The confusion of ha and bha is typical of Grantha MSS. The 
noun ahuti is attested in our dictionaries, and I assume that it is here treated as a 
noun in -7 to avoid a metrical solecism. 

71) ex conj. | 

712The difference between a mukhya and a gauna rite (bhava) depends on whether 
the bhava is or is not directly connected with the fruit. What might be meant here, 
therefore, is that a bhava may be kamya if it is mukhya, but if it is subservient to 
another bhava (i.e. if it is gauna) then it is not kamya. 


344 Parakhyatantra 


The one who coordinates these [actions] (tesam samyojakah) is the 
most important (factor in the attainment of the fruit], since it is by him 
that these are employed (yena te tena yojitah). They are demonstrated 
to have their own particular functions (svavyaparah pradrsyante); they 
are not capable of [performing] the coordination which belongs to the 
creator. The world praises (prasamsati) Him who is the creator (karta) 
of all things. (72c-73) 

Therefore the action is not the most important [factor in the attain- 
ment of the fruit]: the deity is the one who joins (the soul] to the fruit [of 
the rite]. (Someone might argue:] let rather the [individual] soul be the 
crucial factor in this (mukhyo naro ’stu va tatra): why bother with other 
supposititious [entities]? (74) 

(We answer that:] one factor that links the rite with that [fruit] (ekas 
tatra kriyayogah)’! is dependent on the agent who is the cause; another 
is bound by the instruments [required in the rite]; another depends on 
the causes.’!4 (75) 

Therefore (tena) if you say (atha) ‘we do not perceive the deity’, for 
(the existence of] which there is no compelling ground (yanniyamo nasti), 
[we reply:] how then do you perceive the heaven (svargah) that is [ac- 
cording to you] brought about [as the fruit] by a ritual? (76) 

Just as pleasure of him [who performed the rite] (tatpritih) [which 
you claim to be referred to by] the word svarga (svargaSabdena) is not 
established as certain fact for you (niscita na te), [so too,] then, there is 
no certain knowledge of the Creator, of His body, of His senses. (77) 

The fruit of that rite, which is not amenable to the senses (paroksam), 
must be believed in (pratipattavyam) in accordance with His word (tad- 
vakyat), and therefore this (deity] (sa) must be understood to be exactly 
as has been taught there [viz. in scripture, which is His word].’!° Thus 
the ritual (of the cult] is of God (ity aisvari kriya). (78) 

[Since] all [mantras] that are characterised as divya and adivya 
(divyadivyopalaksitah)’!® [and that are used] in [everyday rites, such as] 


713] am not convinced by my translation here of kriyayogah. 

714T¢ is not clear to me what other causes are intended since the agent and instruments 
have already been mentioned. Perhaps one should consider emending 74cd to read: 
anyo 'dhikarandyattah karan&peksaydparah. ‘another depends on the locus; another 
on the instruments’. 

715 ex conj. The interpretation of this verse is tentative; the pronouns could be under- 
stood differently. 

716Tt is not clear to me what these labels signify. 


Chapter Six 345 


removing demons, fevers, poisons [and] in other power-seeking rites of 
adepts (?) (siddhayogesu)"!" (have been] directly perceived together with 
the tasks that they perform,”!® therefore (tena) mantras should be used 
(yojyah) in [the performance of] regular and occasional obligatory rites 
(nityanaimittike) [too] tplavadisut.”'® (79) 

[Thus] the vidyapada was taught to me by Siva (aparnendumaulina), 
complete with the four pieces of jewellery that are its padarthas (artha- 
manikyaih),’2° which are clusters of the gems that are its realities (vastu- 
ratnasamcayaih). (80) 

Now this topic called ‘liberation’?! is to be investigated in its en- 
tirety. And I shall [now] describe the procedure of rituals (kriyakramam), 


™171¢ is not clear to me what this label signifies. 

18This assumes an aiga double sandhi of savydparah and akhilah. Cf. introduction, 
p. lxxxiii. 

719Dr. ACHARYA has suggested to me that one could consider emendation to savddigu, 
‘in sacrifices and so forth’. 

720 ez conj. ISAACSON. These are pasu, Isvara, vidya, and yoni, the first four padarthas 
of the list of five given in 1:5. The fifth, mukti, is to be the subject of the next chapters, 
as the next verse tells us. The dictionaries do not attest manikya in the sense of ‘piece 
of jewellery’, but is evident from the qualfication that follows that they cannot here be 
single gems. As I have argued (GOODALL 1998:lxiv—lxv, where I have quoted this verse, 
but at a time before I had been able to return to Mysore to puzzle out a crucial akgara) 
this usage of the expression vidyap&da may reflect that the Parakhya was divided into 
padas or may have been unconsciously used in a way that allows this interpretation. 
Since the immediately following chapters are missing, we cannot tell whether they were 
once organised into a kriyApada and caryapdda. Chapter 14 by itself might have formed 
the yogapada (a single chapter in the Mrgendra is so intended), but chapter 15 does 
not obviously belong to any of the padas. What is evident is that the Pardkhya has 
very systematically grouped the bulk of its doctrinal teachings in the first six chapters 
in such a way that they form a ‘p&da’ in the developed sense (of ‘one of four large text- 
divisions’) that we find implicit in the Matanga and the Mrgendra. For a full discussion 
of the term p&da and its apparently earlier sense (of ‘group of topics related by theme 
but not necessarily organised into a single text unit’) see GOODALL 1998:lviii-lxv and 
182-5. 

721 er conj. The transmitted text makes good sense but the cadence (the metrical 
unit whose laws are least frequently broken) is impossible. My conjecture assumes 
the use of the unfamiliar arthapada with the same sense as the familiar padartha, by 
which it was then supplanted by some transmitter of the text. I know of no such usage 
elsewhere. If the text really used the expression arthapada, it is perhaps conceivable 
that it was a conscious echo of Nydya terminology, for the fourth in the group of artha- 
padas enumerated in the Nydyabhdsya is adhigantavyah [apavargah] (ad 1.1.1, p.2 
of THAKUR’s edition): heyam tasya nirvartakam hanam atyantikam tasyopayo ‘dhi- 
gantavya ity etani catvary arthapadani samyag buddhva nihsreyasam adhigacchati. 


346 Parakhyatantra 


together with the occasions for use of [particular] mantras (samantra- 
visayam). (81) 

Since (yat) this own definition of theirs has [now] been taught in full, 
therefore (tena) all these rites that are to be performed by means of 
mantras (mantrair vidhénam nikhilam vidheyam ... tat) (and) that re- 
quire little intellectual power (alpacittam) are here [i.e. in the following 
chapters] determined (atra ... niscitam);’*? they are the cause of the 
purification of souls’ natures (bhavavisuddhihetuh). (82) 


Thus the sixth chapter, a consideration of mantras, in the great tantra 
called the Supreme. 


722 er conj. Both the interpretation and constitution of the text are most uncertain 


here. Perhaps particularly strained is the interpretation of the compound alpacittam. 
But it would not be inappropriate that the text should here imply that ritual is an 
easier path to liberation than the path of knowledge, which is for the gifted. Although 
Ra&makantha’s commentary distorts the passage, this is plainly what is intended in the 
introduction to the kriya4pada of the Matanga (kriyapada 1:1-2). 

723 e¢ conj. Reporting an emendation of the colophon may seem to suggest that I 
regard the colophons as a primary part of the text. I am aware that the form they 
have in M” may be largely or entirely secondary. I have here expunged °pad&rtha- 
pratipadana® on the grounds that it must have been mechanically supplied by someone 
copying the structure of one of the other colophons: mantravicara is not one of the 
pad&rthas enumerated in 1:5. A similarly garbled colophon has been corrected at the 
end of the fourteenth chapter. 


PARAKHYATANTRA CHAPTER XIV 


Prakasa spoke: 
The series of injunctions about the places, postures, means of yoga, and 
about its practice; the excellence of the knowledge possessed by yogins; 
the description of the attainment of its fruits.’24 (1) 

In a lonely place (ekalinge),’?> or a grove, or in an agreeable mountain 
cave, or in an earthern hut”6 that is thoroughly secluded (suvibhakte) ,’?" 
free from insects, draught and damp. (2) 


74Some might prefer to take the first line as an irregular (because not neuter) 
samaharadvanda: ‘The places, postures, means of yoga, and the sequence of injunctions 
about its practice’. As in other chapters, we open with a programme verse: the places 
for yoga are covered in 14:2-3; the postures in 14:4-9; the treatment of ‘means’ may 
here refer to the definitions given of the angas in 14:10-17b; the injunctions about its 
practice cover 14:17c and following. The supreme knowledge of yogins is spoken of in 
14:83 and following. As for the account of the attainment of the fruits of yoga, that 
could be considered to begin with 14:90, or perhaps to the discussion introduced by 
Pratoda’s question about the meaning of the expression ‘yoga’ in 14:95. 

725This prescription is shared by SiddhayogeSvarimatatantra 6:2 and Kubjikopanisat 
7.99. Dr. ISAACSON has pointed out to me that it is found incorporated in Buddhist 
tantric texts: see Sadhanamala No. 101, p.209 and Guhyasamaja 12:34b and 14:54c. 
According to APTE (s.v.), it is ‘a place in which for five kroga’s there is but one linga’. It 
is possible, however, that a particular kind of (small?) Saiva shrine might be intended, 
since in other texts a Saiva shrine is commonly recommended (cf. SivasamSraye in 
Kirana 58:4, quoted in the next footnote). 

726 According to Mrgendrayogapada 17», this should have three walls: trikudyavestite 
grhe. For a comparison with the accounts of other tantras as to appropriate places 
in which to perform yoga see VASUDEVA’s annotation on the beginning of MaAalinT- 
vijayottara 12 (*2000:184-7). I repeat here only the prescription of the Kirana 
(58:4abcd), since VASUDEVA comments on its brevity and quotes it from Ep, which 
is here defective; the text immediately after the verse listing the angas (for which see 
fn. 735 on p. 351 below) should read: 

girikandaradurge va vijane sivasamSraye 
grhe vapi Subhe sthane yogi yogam samarabhet. 


e girikandaradurge va vijane sivasaméraye] N,.M”; om. G3Ma2Ep 
e éubhe ] N,M”; diva’ GsM2Ep 


727This could perhaps mean ‘well-partitioned’ instead and refer to a similar notion 


348 Parakhyatantra 


There yoga is to be undertaken by one who is free of dualities and 
who is self-possessed (krtatmana), who has engaged his-decided mind(?), 
who is free of cravings, who is discerning. (3) 

His posture should be comfortable in the lotus pose, or the svastika, 
danda, or half-moon.’ In the lotus pose he should have his feet rest- 
ing on either thigh (parasparorusamslistau), [with the soles] facing up- 
wards.’29 (4) 

[Starting] in reverse order [i.e. beginning with the left leg(?)] (vilomat) 


to that expressed in Mrgendrayogap&da 17b quoted in the above footnote. VASUDEVA 
(*2000:186, fn. 14) reproduces the unconscious emendation of my first transcription, 
Sucibhakte, which he renders ‘smeared [so as to be] pure’. [VASUDEVA’s quotations from 
this chapter are drawn from my first transcription, and so deviate in a few instances. 
728Saiva sources for yoga tend to give a relatively narrow repertoire of simple poses, 

since the emphasis is not on physical exercise (as in popular conceptions of yoga today) 
but on being comfortable for the purposes of meditative exercise. The lists are, how- 
ever, quite various: Matangayogap&da 2:13cd lists four: paryankam kamalam bhadram 
svastikam cécalam drdham, and these are then discussed in the following verses; Kirana 
58:4e-5 (following on immediately from the prescription cited in fn. 726 above) lists 
eight: 

baddhvdsanam yathabhistam svastikam padmam eva va 

ardhacandram ca virdkhyam yogapattaprasaritam 

paryankam ca yathdsamstham dsanastakam ucyate 
The Kirana too discusses these in subsequent verses. The Sarvajnanottara lists six 
postures (yogaprakarana 9: N,, f.48"; IFP MS 47818, p.5; Adyar edition, pp. 217-18. 
I am missing the relevant pages of the Tanjore edition.): 


padmakam svastikam v&pi upasthanjalikam tathé 
pIthardham ardhacandram vé sarvatobhadram eva va 
A&sanam ruciram baddhvéa. 


e upasthdijalikam | Ni; upasthapy 4njalim 47818 Ey, 
e pithardham } N,, 47818; pithartham E,. [Note that this passage is 
quoted at greater length by VASUDEVA (*2000:306-7).] 


Of these the text provides no description (as AghoraSiva not very helpfully remarks 
([IFP MS 47818, p.5], padmadydsanalaksanam samhitantarad avadheyam). Essentially 
the same list as that of the Sarvajridnottara, but with the addition of dandayata, is 
given by Kaundinya in his commentary on Pasupatasitra 1:16. The Svacchanda too 
provides only a list without details of execution (7:290c-291b): 


&sanam svastikam baddhv& padmakam bhadram eva va 
sipaésrayam sardhacandram yogapattam yathasukham. 


The MalinIvijayottara and the Mrgendra’s yogapada, by contrast, list no postures at 
all. 


729Thus too other sources, e.g. Matangayogapada 2:18-19b: 


Chapter Fourteen 349 


he should bend the left knee, [which should remain] resting on the ground, 
(such that the left foot comes] towards the right [leg’s inner thigh]; that 
(namely the right foot] he should bring in the same way onto the upper 
surface (of the left leg] (prsthatah).”2° That is the svastika posture. (5) 


daksinorugatam vamam p&édam vamorusamsthitam 
daksinam tu samavidhya tajjanghe tu parasparam 
etad dhi kamalam nama vidh&v aésanam uttamam. 


This position is illustrated in Fig. 11 in the back of the volume (the position of the 
hands in the picture is described in Parakhya 14:8). 

78° ex conj. Heavy emendation and rather free translation of the terms vilom&t and 
prsthatah allow me to reach this interpretation. I think that the posture is the same 
as that of the lotus, except that only one foot, the right, is raised up upon the other 
leg; the left: foot is to remain on the ground. This may or may not be what Ksema- 
raja describes in his Svacchandatantroddyota ad 7:290c-9lab: paryankasthasya jangha- 
vyatyasat svastikam (unfortunately Ksemaraja does not there discuss the’ paryanka), 
but this interpretation is, I think, borne out by the Matanga and the Kirana. 

The Matanga’s account of the svastika is as follows (yogapada 2:20c—22b): 


samkocya vamapadam tu tatparsnim ca sphicaévadhim 
krtvadho daksinasyettham dharanyam janumandalam 
vamat krtvetaram paéadam vamajanghorupiditam 
svastikam nama vikhyatam caturtham idam asanam. 


e ca sphica° ] em.; ca sphija®° Poona MS, Nepalese MS; tu sphica° 
BHATT e krtvidho] Poona MS, BHATT; krtvé vo Nepalese 
MS (misread by BHATT) e vadmat krtvetaram pddam] conj.; 
vamam krtvetaram paddam Nepalese MS; vamapadetaram pido Poona 
MS; savyam krtvottaram padam BHATT e °piditam ) BHATT; 
°samsthitam Poona MS. [For the Poona MS to which I refer here, BORI 
MS 235 of 1883-84, a Saradaé manuscript of the Matangavrtti which 
BHATT did not use, see introduction p. xciii.] 


A tentative interpretation of this rather tentatively repaired text is as follows: ‘Drawing 
in the left leg and [making] its heel [reach] up to the buttocks, he should put it thus 
below the right [leg], [and he should keep] the knee on the ground. He should place the 
leg other than the left [in such a way that it is) pressing upon the thigh and calf of the 
left leg. This fourth posture is called the svastika.’ | 
Ramakantha’s commentary on the above quoted passage reads (Poona MS, 

f.49° of last pagination): vdmapadam ca samkocya tadagram vamabhagam nitvety 
arthah. tad aha ‘tatparsnim ca sphicavadhim (em.; sphijavadhi MS) krtva’ iti. 
ttatas tam daksinasyettham eva daksinabhagasamkocitasyadhah krtva tam padad 
itaram{ daksinam eva vamajanghopari sthitam krtva janudvayam ca dharanydm kytva 
svastikam badhniyad ity uktam Srimatkirane (58:6): 

dvigunam prsthato nitva vamapade tu daksinam 

tiryak tad dvigunam krtva janghalagnam tu svastikam. 


350 Parakhyatantra 


Stretching out the thighs (prasaryoruyugam) [in such a way that they 
are] touching one another (samslistam) [and keeping] one’s [upper] body 
[stretched out too] is the dandaka posture.’3! Folding both knees and 


e vamapade tu daksinam ] Kirana MS M”; vamapadan tu daksinah 
Kirana MS N,; vamapadam tu daksinam Kirana Ep; vamapadasya 
daksinam Poona MS of Matangavrtti e tiryak tad] conj.; tiryak 
tam N,, Poona MS of Matangavrtti; tiryak ta M”; tiryakstham Ep 
e °lagnam tu] N.iM”, Poona MS of Matangavrtti; °lagnam ca Ep 


I cannot pretend to understand Ramakantha’s analysis of the Matanga’s prescription, 
but it is clear that he wishes it to be understood to be the same as the Kirana’s, and 
that might be translated as follows: ‘Drawing the right [leg], bent in two [at the knee], 
onto the upper surface on the left leg, he should put that [left leg], bent in two [beneath 
the right leg and with its foot] pressed against the buttocks.’ 

I think it unlikely that any of these accounts of the svastika describes the (for me) 
uncomfortable posture depicted in BHATT’s Fig. 13 in the 2nd volume of the Matanga 
(a sort of kneeling posture in which one squats upon one’s heels with the lower legs 
crossed at the ankles). The prescriptions are of course difficult to interpret, but one 
reason why BHATT may have avoided understanding the svastika in the way I have 
(that is to say as similar to the padmasana, with the difference that the left leg is for 
its entire length on the ground and the right foot only is raised up on to the left thigh) 
is that in later non-Saiva yoga such a posture came to be known as the siddhasana (see, 
e.g., Gherandasamhita 2:7). The svastika is then in later non-Saiva yoga understood to 
mean having the legs crossed with both feet underneath rather than on top. This we 
find, e.g., in Vacaspatimigra’s Tattvavaisaradi ad Yogasutra 2:46: savyam akuncitam 
caranam daksinajanghorvantare daksinam cakuncitam vamajanghorvantare niksipet; 
etat svastikam. (Cf. also Gherandasamhita 2:13). 

In fine, it seems possible to me that the Saiddhantika sources, the Matanga, the 
Kirana, and the Parakhya, do all mean the same posture when they speak of the 
svastika, but it is clear that the posture is elsewhere understood otherwise. 

731This uncertain interpretation requires that we assume unnatural word order and 
that we supply a ca. The name might seem to suggest that the whole body should 
form a straight line, but of course the posture names usually describe in some way the 
position of the legs only. It seems to me that three possible interpretations fit this verse: 
1) the body is fully stretched out upon the ground, 2) the body forms an L-shape with 
the legs stretched out on the ground and the upper body ‘stretched out’ perpendicular 
to them, 3) the upper body is stretched out prostrate over the legs, which are stretched 
out upon the ground. The first two possibilities are covered by the translation offered 
above. For the last possibility one might emend to svangasamSlistam or one might 
interpret the half-line thus: ‘He should stretch out the thighs, {and bring] his own 
upper body in contact (with them]; that is the dandaka.’ 

The second possibility seems to me the most likely, and it is supported (by the 
use of upavisya) in Vacaspatimisra’s Tattvavaisaradi ad Yogasitra 2:46: upavisya 
Slistangulikau Slistagulphau bhimislistajanghoruh pddau prasarya dandasanam ab- 
hyaset. 


Chapter Fourteen 351 


joining the [soles of the] feet to one another; that is the half-moon pose. "3? 
By this (adopting of a pose] he is at all times fit for dhyana and the others, 
and therefore he should adopt [one]. (6-7) 

He should adopt one of these (four],’* placing his hands with the 
palms arranged [facing upwards] in his own lap,. expanding his chest 
evenly.’34 (8) 

Slightly closing his two eyes, he should focus on the tip of his nose. Re- 
maining thus he is fit for yoga and he should then begin its sequence.’”*° (9) 

Withdrawal (pratyahrtih), then dhyana,.and control of the breaths, 
and dharana, tarka, samadhi; these are yoga; and this whole that has six 


™32This appears to be the same as the Kirana’s conception of this pose (58:8abc): 


tadvat padadvayam talanyonyasusamsthitam 
ardhacandram bhaved evam 


e  talényonyasusamsthitam ] N,;  svatalanyonyasamsthitam Mv’; 
svaralolyonyasamsthitam Gz; svaralolo 'nyasamsthitam Ep 
e ardhacandram ] M” GsEp; ardhacandra N, 


I imagine that what is meant is that both legs are in contact with the ground for their 
entire length, and that the feet are pressed against each other sole to sole. But note 
that Ksemaraja’s account of this pose ad Svacchanda 7:290c—293b is plainly different: 
etac cardhacandraviSesanam: bhimisthaikacaranoruprsthanyastottanadvitiyacaranam 
ardhacandram. 

733 Other texts concur in allowing the yogin to adopt any of the prescribed postures he 
chooses. Cf. Matangayogapada 2:12ab, Kirana 58:12cd, Sarvajnanottara yogaprakarana 
6a (quoted in fn. 728 on p. 348 above). 

7341 4:8c-9 teaches what is in the Matarga referred to as karana (Matangayogapada 
2:14 and 22c-28), which describes a state for beginning yoga that is neither entirely a 
posture nor a mental attitude but in between the two. My interpretative translation 
of the opaque hastau ca talasamsthitau is based on Matangayogapada 2:23: 


ubhayor janghayor madhye hastav aniya tiryagau 
krtvottanau samau vidvan vaémasyopari daksinam. 


‘The wise man should bring his hands [so that they are arranged] cross-wise [i.e. not 
pointing out away from the body] in between his thighs [viz. in his lap], placing them 
together face upwards, the right above the left.’ 

735 Observe that the description of asanas is here regarded as a preliminary to yoga and 
not as one of its angas. Early Saiva sources generally transmit an archaic sadangayoga, 
rather than the astanga system of Patanjali (GRONBOLD 1983 has drawn attention to 
sadangayoga; but for more about its treatment in Saiva sources see VASUDEVA *2000, 
particularly his annotations to Malinivijayottara 17, and see also SANDERSON *1992), 
and none includes asana as one of the angas. The one apparent exception is the 
Kirana, in the edition of which dsana is listed among the angas, but it is plain from 
the distribution of readings that it was not originally part of the Kirana’s list, which 
should probably read (Kirana 58:2c—3): 


302 Parakhyatantra 


parts is itself [to be counted as an extra entity].”°* (10) 
There is repeated (prati prati) withdrawal (samahrtih) of the mind 


sadangah sa ca boddhavyas tasyangani Srnusva tat 
pratyaharas tatha dhyanam pranayamo ‘tha dharana 
tarka$ caiva samadhi§ ca yogangani tu sad viduh 


e tasyangani srnusva tat ] Ep; tenangani émnusvatah N,; tasyamgani 
érusananusva hi M”* (unmetrical); tasyangani Srnusva tu G3M,z 
e dharana] M”; dharanam N,G3M2Ep e tarkas caiva] N,M’; 
asanan ca G3M2Ep e yogangani tu sad viduh ] conj. SANDERSON 
(in VASUDEVA *2000:287, fn. 12); yogangani sad eva tu Ep; yogangani tu 
sadvidhah N,; yogangani sthitani tu M”; sadamgogani sthitas ca sah Gs 
(unmetrical); yogangani sthitaS ca sah M2 


Only late South Indian sources transmit the reading asanan ca, and it is clear that 
the other reading was known in South India in the twelfth century, for Vaktrasambhu 
cites the verse with tarkas caiva in his Mrgendrapaddhatitika (IFP MS T. No. 1021, 
p. 67). VASUDEVA suggests (*2000:288) that the incorporation of asana may have been 
‘an attempt to approximate the yoga of the Kirana to the classical system of Patanjali’. 
VASUDEV<~’s useful table 17.1 (*2000:289) tabulates the yogangas listed in or inferred 
from a wide range of Saiva and non-Saiva sources. As Dr. BISSCHOP has pointed out 
to me (letter of 7.xi.2001), the early Skandapurana too makes reference to a yoga with 
six angas: 27:50 and 179:36. 
738Somdev VASUDEVA has pointed out to me that this is probably what is intended, 
because the corresponding list of the Mrgendra is as follows (yogapada 3): 


pranayamah pratyaharo dharana dhyanaviksane 
japah samadhir ity angany angi yogo ’stamah svayam. 


This is also comparable to, but probably not the same as, the idea expressed in 
Matangayogapada 1:6-7b: 


pratyaharas tatha dhyanam pranayamas ca dharana 
tarkas caiva samadhis ca sadango yoga ucyate 
angebhyo ’nyo ’tiriktah san yoga ity upavarnyate. 


The term yoga is of course ambiguous, since it can refer to the process or the result. 
Where yoga appears tagged on to lists of constituents of yoga in this fashion, it is used 
in the sense of the result, a particular kind of ‘union’, according to AghoraSiva in his 
Sarvajnanottaravrtti ad yogaprakarana 1-2 (who there quotes the above quoted unit of 
the Matanga) and later ad yogapada 23-24b (part of a group of verses clumsily omitted 
from the Adyar edition, for see fn. 838 on p.381 below): angi tu yogo dhyeyavastu- 
saksatkaratmako visesasambandhah... (IFP MS T.985, p.7). The Parakhya’s own 
discussion of the term is to be found in 14:95 and following. 

Note that AghoraSiva’s remarks in the Sarvajnanottaravrtti ad yogaprakarana 1- 
2 are quoted by BRUNNER (1994:429)—from Nirmalamani’s quotation of them (Pra- 
bhavyakhya, pp. 361-2)—under the mistaken impression that ‘[i]n all likelihood, the 
commentator of the Sarvajnanottara has introduced the present formulation in order 
to bend the agamic teaching towards the position which is characteristic of the Tamil 
school of Saiva Siddhanta, according to which the difference between the worshipper 


Chapter Fourteen 353 


(cittasya), which goes out to external objects; that [mind] is drawn 
(ahrtam) into the space of the heart (hrdakase): because one establishes 
[the mind there, this process] is called ahrti.”3” (11) 

Because of being withdrawn into that [heart] (tatsamaharanat) the 
mind becomes firm and a suitable locus for yoga (yogagocaram). (12ab) 

And [as for the next on the list, viz. dhyana, it is] reflecting upon what- 
ever one desires (yatha cabhimatadhyanam),"°® tand therefore (tena), if 
it is reflected upon (yady anusandhitam)tagain and again, it is (called] 
dhyana. t...¢./99 (12c-13b) 


and the Worshipped can never be suppressed.’ AghoraSiva’s Sarvajnanottaravrtti is in 
fact, in the main, a rather far-fetched attempt to read the non-dualist Sarvajnanottara 
as though it were duailist. 

As for the other yogangas, they are stated here in the order of application, which 
may seem surprising to some. The order of practice in Patanjala yoga would be yama, 
niyama, asana, pranayama, pratyahara, dharana, dhyana, and samadhi (see Yogasttra 
2.29). That of the Malinivijayottara, by contrast, is: pranayama, dharana, tarka, 
dhyana, samadhi, and pratyahara. It is evident that with such variation, if the various 
orders are meaningful, pratyahara must be understood differently in different texts. As 
VASUDEVA observes (*2000:286-7), 


While the majority of surviving Saiva scriptures generally agree on which 
these six auxiliaries are, there is no consensus as to their order, their defi- 
nition, or even their subdivisions. Such disagreement reflects doctrinal di- 
vergences in the various Saiva Tantras and also indicates deliberate shifts 
of emphasis. ...these systems are not simply indiscriminately reshuffled 
versions of an original ‘correct’ order. 


The various differing sequences in Saiva sources are tabulated by VASUDEVA (*2000:289) 
in his annotation to the MaAlinivijayottara, the logic of whose order he defends 
(*2000:284-7). VASUDEVA speaks of a lack of a consensus in their order, but we may 
observe that the sequence we find in the Parakhya, excluding the addition of yoga 
at the end, is the commonest among the early Siddhantas, and VASUDEVA’s fn. 12 
on p. 287 (which draws upon SANDERSON *1992) shows that it is shared by a large 
number of sources, all using essentially the same formulation: Rauravasitrasangraha 
7:5 = Wrhaspatitattwa 53; Matangayogapada 1:6 = Brhatkalottara yogapada 1c-3b = 
Srikanthiyasamhita 40; Ganapatitattwa 3; and Kirana 58:3. 

737 All this is by way of justification by nirvacana for the name pratyahrti. Perhaps one 
could instead understand ahrtam as a noun: ‘The drawing of that [mind is pratyahrti; 
because one establishes the mind in the space of the heart (after drawing it in there], 
it is called ahrti.’ 

8 VASUDEVA (*2000:188, fn. 23) points out that this echoes Yogasitra 1:23: yathabhi- 
matadhyanad va. 

3®°The text appears to be corrupt. Perhaps emending to yac canusandhitam or to 
yad dhy anusandhitam might be considered. 12c—13a might then be rendered: ‘The re- 
peated reflection by that [mind] in whatever way concentration is desired(?) is dhyana.’ 
The aiga past participle anusandhita may be authorial, for cf. 14:90b and M”’s reading 


354 Parakhyatantra 


The repeated stretching ( bhiyo bhiuyo ya ayamah) "4° of the entity 
inside the body that moves to and from the [heart] lotus (abjacarinah) 
called the breath (pranakhyasya), once it is controlled (yatasya),’41is 
called pranayama. (13c-14b) 

By [these] stretchings the inner spaces are purified (kosthasuddhih); by 
this purification one conquers the fixations (dharanajayah). The fixations 
(dharanah) have their own mandalas, seed-syllables, and locuses (svabija- 
mandaladharah)"** and they are associated with (?) the [characteristic] 
functions of the [five] elements (bhitakarmagah). (14c-15b) 


of 2:29d. But it may also be the noun anusandhi with the‘suffix tasil. 

The last corrupt phrase (14:13b) might have been intended to distinguish smarana 
from dhyana (smaranam bhedatah sthitam) or to suggest that smarana, perhaps in 
the sense of iSvarasmarana, must be its cause (smarane hetutah sthite, or smaranam 
hetutah sthitam): ‘remembering [Siva] is established to be its cause’. 

749In this neutral definition the Parakhya’s position is close to that of Mrgendrayoga- 
pada 4, which defines pranayama as a stretching and exercising of the breath: 


pranah prag udito vayur; ayamo ’sya prakhedanam 
preranakrstisamrodhalaksanam kratudosanut. 


As SANDERSON points out (*1992:1), Narayanakantha reiterates this notion in his 
Mrgendravrtti ad kriyapada 3:4-5, where he glosses pranan ayamya with dairghyam 
nitva. Elsewhere, as VASUDEVA points out (*2000:292-6), it is control of the vital 
breath that is stressed (see, e.g., Matangavidyapada 2:11cd). 

74) eg con}. 

742The mandalas and seed syllables are given below, but the ddharas are not. One 
might therefore wish to render this compound ‘have as their locuses their own mandalas 
and (they have their own] seed-syllables’. But I assume that adhdra refers to the places 
in the body where it is held to be possible to retain the breath. Cf. Malinivijayottara 
17:13-14b: 


pratyangadharanad vayum na ca caksusi dharayet 

nabhihrttalukantasthe vidhrte maruti kramat 

catasro dharana jneyah Sikhyambvisamrtatmikah. 
VASUDEVA (*2000:310 and 317) translates: ‘One should not retain the air in the eyes 
after holding it in a minor limb. According as the air is retained in the region of the 
navel, the heart, the palate and the crown of the head there are four fixations: Fire, 
Water, Sovereign and Nectar’. 

Cf. also Svayambhuvasitrasangraha 20:4-7b: 


agneyim dharanam pascad dharayen nabhimandale 
yaya dahati papani bhramSakarani susthitah 
hrdaye dharayet saumyam sada somasamasrayam 
apyayayati sarvatra yaya yogapathi sthitah 
dharayen mirdhanisanim sarvesanim vicaksanah 
yaya tu yoginah sarve prayanti paramam padam 
amrta dharana ya tu 5a sarvatra vyavasthita. 


Chapter Fourteen 355 


Judgment (tarkah) is realisation (lokah) which takes place within 
meditation (dhyanagatah) {and] is accompanied by reasoning and resolve 
(yuktikalpasamanvitah). It is because of his judgment (tadihatah) that 
(the soul] does not get stuck in [any] blockage that arises from that resolve 
(?] (tasmat kalpat)."43 (15c-16b) 


I quote here the text established by VASUDEVA (*2000:319, fn. 115; 320, fn. 119; 322, 
fn. 122, and 324, fn. 125) on the basis of a collation of the Mysore edition, the early 
Nepalese manuscript, and IFP MS T.39. The places assigned to each dharanaé corre- 
spond to those given in Rauravasitrasangraha 7:6—9. 

As VASUDEVA mentions in his annotation (*2000:315-16), the Isanasivagurudeva- 
paddhati lists eighteen such places (yogapada 3:57-9) and the Saradatilaka sixteen 
(25:24-5). 

Our text does not specify what the adharas for the individual dharanas are, and for 
a list of five there seem to be three possibilities. We may follow Ramakantha’s Sardha- 
trigatikalottaravrtti on 2:2-3b, where he associates them, starting from that of earth, 
with the five granthis in the heart, throat, palate, forehead and dvadasanta. These are 
the loci of the five KaraneSvaras, which our text will list in 14:73-4. In this Rama- 
kantha may be following a paddhati by his guru (perhaps Naraéyanakantha) which he 
here quotes; but he observes both here and in the Sardhatrifatikalottaravrtti ad 8:38c— 
39 that other commentators understand the sequence of adhdras for the dharanas in 
bhitasuddhi to begin with the kanda. (He does not make explicit how this sequence 
would continue.) A third anomalous list of loci is provided by Svacchanda 7:299c—300: 


vayavi dharanangusthe agneyi nabhimadhyatah 
mahey! kanthadeSe tu varuni ghantikasraya 
akasadharana mirdhni sarvasiddhikari smrta. 


‘The dharana of wind is in the big toes; that of fire is in the navel; that of earth is in 
the throat; that of water has the uvula as its locus; the dharana of ether is in the head. 
It is taught to bestow all powers.’ 

Note that not all of these adharas are located along the susumna, as they are asserted 
to be in definition 3 (s.v. adhara) in Tantrikabhidhanako§ga, p. 191. 

743-This is not clear to me. Should kalpa be understood in the sense of vikalpa, ‘option’ 

instead? In that case we might interpret thus: ‘... accompanied by dilemmas [that must 
be resolved by] reasoning. It is because of his judgment that the soul does not get stuck 
in any blockage that arises from such dilemma|s].’ 

For the function of tha/tarka being ensuring that the soul does not get stuck, cf. 
Svayambhuvasttrasangraha 20:30: 


cittavrttim sthitam marge nudann thah pravartate 
prapayitva param sthanam tho ’gre vinivartate 


e nudann thah ] em. VASUDEVA (this pada quoted in the Mrgendravrtti 
ad yogapada 8); nudanitha Ed (Mysore). 


VASUDEVA’s quotation of the passage in which this verse occurs (*2000:327-8) omits 
(even in his apparatus) the awkward second half of the verse. In this he follows the 
Nepalese MS (NGMPP Reel No. A 30/6, f. 46”); but it is probable that the half-line is 


306 Parakhyatantra 


Samadhi, in which there is dissolution into the supreme reality level 
(paratattve), is what accomplishes union (yogasadhakah). [The soul is] 
‘placed’ (samahitah) in the supreme reality level, and that is why (tena) 
it is called samadhi. (16c-17b) 

Once withdrawal has been performed (pratyahare krte), {and then] 
meditation (dhyane),’44 he should perform the stretchings of the vital 
breath (pranayaman). (17cd) 

With these he conquers the breaths (samirajayam kuryat). Of those 
[breaths] prana is taught to be the chief, since by the controlling of 
prana (pranayamat) their life-force (tesam jivanam) is restrained (sam- 
hrtam).”4° (18) 

It is [really] that [prana] alone [that is the various breaths when differ- 
entiated] because of the various tubes (nadibhedena) and then because of 
the variety of its functions.’4© Therefore [i.e. because the chief breath is 
prana|"4" his heart is [its] locus. He should draw [the prana] out (utkrsya) 
and void (virecayet) the heart (tat). And having then filled it (apurya), 
he should hold that [prana] in the chamber of the heart, [and this se- 
quence of voiding, filling and holding should be performed] again and 
again. (19-20b) 

The prana is known to be the force in which all life resides.”48 There 


original and has dropped out in the Nepalese text because of eyeskip, since both half- 
lines end with °vartate. Note that //uh means ‘push’. One might interpret as follows: 
‘Discrimination (hah) acts by impelling the mental processes that are stuck on the 
path. Having caused them to reach the highest level, discrimination ceases [being no 
longer necessary] thereafter.’ 

744The syntax here is awkward, if correctly understood. I assume that krte is taken 
both with the word which precedes it and then with that which follows (dehalidipa- 
nyayena). 

745Cf. 4:117 above. 

746The syntax is awkward here. It is possible that a half-line or so of text has dropped 
out here that stated that the breath was fivefold, or various. It is possible also that the 
transmitted text should be emended. The short i in nadi is permitted in compound, 
and it yields a pathya; nevertheless it could be emended to nadij, for that would yield a 
ma-vipula with the correct preamble. It is also possible that eva is an error for evam (in 
which case nadi would be metrically required), and that it be interpreted thus: ‘This 
[pranayama functions] like that because of...’. 

47The tena is awkward here, and perhaps it is here that some portion of text has 
dropped out. And perhaps it is to be connected differently with 18cd: since by control 
of the prana one controls the others, therefore we start here with the prana. Nor is the 
interpretation of tena the only awkwardness in the line. 

48 For the treatment of samasraya as though it were at the end of a bahuvrihi agreeing 


Chapter Fourteen 357 


fore he should then keep that prana, the source of all the breaths (sarva- 
marudbhavam), in the heart. (20c—-21b) | 

Having in the same way mastered that [breath] that is called the apana 
he should, similarly, keep it in his navel.“49 This [breath] is [called] apana 
since it is taught to be situated in the navel, below (adhah) the heart.’°° 
Therefore he should restrain [apana], twith its flow first broken and then 
swollen (?] (chinditapiritavaham)t,’*! in the navel. (21c-22) 

This [breath called] samana is located in the chest: [it is so called 
because] it resides in equilibrium (samasthah) in the chest. Therefore he 
should hold this [samana] there in equilibrium [?] (samabhavatah). (23) 

The udana he should hold in the throat: it is [so called] (sthitah) 
because of its movement upwards (iirdhvato yanatah).’>* (24ab) 

After expelling and filling the vyana he should hold it in the back. 
Vyana [is so called] since it is that which, by bending [a man’s] body 
(angavinadmena),’°* bends his back. It should be held in his back; [then] 
it is considered to be controlled by the yogin. (24c-25) 

First he should draw together all his limbs; thus, like a tortoise, he 


with bala even though the structure of the compound is not that of a bahuvrihi see fn. 
294 on p. 227 above. 

Note that the breaths, treated here and in the following verses, were briefly discussed 
above in 4:114-16. 

749 Alternatively: ‘Having thus conquered that [prana], he should hold [the breath] 
called apana in his navel.’ | 

7901 have supplied a visarga after prokta and assumed hiatus between the padas on 
the grounds that this seemed more likely than that the redactor should have resorted 
to an unusual aisa sandhi (prokta adhah for proktah + adhah). The reason for the 
separation between adhah and hrdah (which is the word it governs) is presumably that 
this line is giving a partial nirvacana: PrakaSa is accounting for the sounds a and na 
(in apana) by the juxtaposition of adho nabhisthitah. But this interpretation may 
be wrong; note that Matangavidyapada 20:13ab seems to specify that apana is below 
the nabhi: nabher adhastad yo vayus tena sandhuksyate ’nalah. Perhaps we should 
therefore consider emendation, possibly to adho nabheh sthito hy atah. 

751 The form chindita is anomalous, and the intended sense eludes me. I assume that, 
if it is correct, it is intended to be a past participle of ,/chid erroneously formed from 
the weak present stem of the 3rd person plural, chindanti. Is the compound intended 
to refer simply to recana and piraka? As Dr. ISAACSON has pointed out to me (letter of 
16.vii.2001), one could consider emending to the regular optative chindita: ‘he should 
cut [it] off [once] its flow has been swollen(?)’. One could also consider emending 
sandharayen to tam dharayen, in parallel with 14:21a and 14:23c. 

”52But perhaps one could consider emending to drdhvatah pranatah sthitah: ‘it is 
situated above the prana’. 

53This is a nirvacana justifying the sounds vi and na in vyana. Compare 4:116cd, in 
which the same nirvacana appears, and see fn. 418 on p. 266 above. 


308 Parakhyatantra 


should make {himself} hunch-backed’*4 and [he should make his] breath 
[remain] fixed, as though gathered together into a lump (pindibhitam iva 
sthiram).’°° (26) 

Then the yogin should let (the breath] expand out through the hole 


754This seems more likely than that he should make his breath hunch-backed. Dr. 
VASUDEVA has suggested to me that the posture referred to here may be similar to 
that which is prescribed for kumbhaka by Svatmarama in Hathayogapradipika 2:46, a 
posture in which one lowers the chin, tightens the anus and sucks in the stomach in 
order to force the breath into the central nadi: 


adhastat kuncanenasu kanthasamkocane krte 
madhye pascimatanena syat prano brahmanadigah. 


The translation (in the Adyar edition) of Srinivasa IYANGAR, as revised-by A.A. Ra- 
MANATHAN and Radha BuRNIER reads (1972:30): ‘Contracting the throat [in the Jalam- 
dhara-bandhal], and the anus [in the Miila-bandha] at the same time, and by drawing 
back the abdomen [in the Uddiyana-bandha], the Prana flows through the Sugumna 
(Brahma-nadt).’ (Cf. Gherandasamhita 3:10-12.). 

75 ex conj. Although they are not named at.this point, puiraka and kumbhaka are 
here being described, to be followed, in the next verse, by recaka. The three all belong 
together as one process (cf., e.g., Sardhatrigatikalottara 11:11-15b). Thus from here to 
14:32b the text is describing the conquest of the breaths by pranayama, i.e. by piraka, 
kumbhaka and recaka. With piuraka he not only draws in breath, but all manner of 
negative things, which he then blocks or paralyses by means of kumbhaka and then 
expels by means of recaka. Cf. the similar account, but with the labels, in Kirana 
58:16—18b: 


krtva dhyanam punah karyam pranayaématrayam Sanaih 
pUrakah kumbhakas caiva recakaS ca trtiyakah ~ 
purakah piiranad vayoh kumbhakas tannirodhatah 16 
recanad recakah proktah pranavenabhyaset trayam 
godohamatrakam yavad abhyasad uttamo matah 
abhyase sati cakrstir nirodho moksanam bhavet 17 
dravyasya kalahasyaivam siddhayogi sada bhavet. 


e krtvé dhyanam punah karyam pranayamatrayam fanaih ] N,M”; 
om. G3M3Ep e pirakah kumbhakas ] M"G3Ep; piirako kumb- 
hakas N,; piirakam kumbhakas M, e pirakah piiranad vayoh | 
N,M”; piranat piirako vyapi Gs; piranat pirako vapi M3Ep 
e kumbhakas tannirodhatah ] conj.; kumbhakah sannirodhatah N,M”: 
yo kumbhasthannirodhakah GsM.; yah kumbhas tannirodhakah Ep 
¢ pranavenabhyaset trayam].M”; pranavenabhyaset trayah N,; 
pranayamatrayam kuru G;Bp; pranayama U M, e godoha- 
matrakam ydvad abhydsad uttamo matah] em.; godohamatrkam 
yavad abhyasad uttamo matah N,; godohamatram yavad abhyasad 
uttamotamah M” (unmetrical); om. G3M3Ep e abhyase sati 
cakrstir] N,M”; abhasestatacikrste Gs; U se sati cakrste Mz; 
abhyase sati cdkrste Ep e nirodho moksanam ] N,M”’M,;; niradho 
mokganam Gs; nirodhan moksanam Ep e kalahasyaivam ] Ep; 


Chapter Fourteen 359 


of the principal channel (mukhyanddibilena).”°*> When [the yogin has] 
control (vidharana) of the breath (tasya) for such measure of time as it 
takes to milk a cow (godohamatrakam yavat),’>” [then] all the breath 
in his inner chambers (vayuh kosthago ’khilah) becomes thus thereby 
conquered. Because of these winds being conquered his body is light, 
without desire for tother ...¢.’°8 (27-8) 

Urine, excrement and bad [substances] are voided (rikta);"°° gradu- 


’ 


ally ¢plutigatiht is [put] at a distance (dirat). He may of his own will fill 


kalasasyeva N,; sakalasyaivam M”; kalahasyevam G3M3, e siddha- 
yogi sada ]} N,Gs; siddho yogi yada M”; siddhayogi yatha MzEp 


‘After performing meditation he should then gradually perform the three types of con- 
trol of the breath: ‘filling’, ‘holding’ and, as the third, ‘expelling’. ‘Filling’ (is so called] 
because one fills [oneself] with air; holding because one blocks that [air inside oneself]; 
expelling is so called because of the expulsion [of the air]. He should practise this triad 
with the pranava mantra. By practising it until [one can hold one’s breath for] as long 
as it takes to milk a cow, [one achieves breath control that is] thought to be supreme. 
After repeated practice, there is the drawing in, the holding and blocking and the ex- 
pulsion of [bad] substances, (and] in the same way of strife; and he becomes at all times 
an accomplished yogin.’ 

It will be clear from the above (and from almost every passage about yoga that I have 
occasion to quote) that the edition of the Kirana (Ep) is no less woefully inadequate 
for these later portions of the text than it is for the earliest chapters. 

For further discussion of pranayama see VASUDEVA’s annotation to Malinivijayottara 
17 (*2000:292-305). 

738 eg conj. 

57This length of time is also specified in Kirana 58:17 quoted in the previous foot- 
note. The unit godoha is explained in the Sataratnollekhini (ad Sataratnasangraha 84) 
as follows: godohah gaur yavata kalena duhyate so ’yam kalo godohah tanmatram. 
Presumably the entire cycle of pUraka, kumbhaka and recaka is to take this long. 

*S8No satisfactory emendation has occurred to me for the cruxed portion. I have 
translated as though the cruxed element were the first part of a tatpurusa, but per- 
haps also possible would be a compound such as avyadhinihsprha, ‘free of disease and 
without desires’. 

759 er conj. Cf. the expulsion of ‘[bad] substances’ in the Kirana’s account (in fn. 
755). The suspicious element -agha (if it is not an error for, e.g., -adya), or perhaps 
the mysterious plutigatih, could be referring not to substances but to other negative 
things, such as, in the Kirana, strife. But the Kirana’s variously transmitted account 
is itself suspicious at this point, and one could assume kalahasyaivam to be an error 
(by metathesis compounded with further confusion) for M”’s sakalasyaiva, which one 
could then construe with dravyasya, understood in the positive sense of ‘wealth’. In 
other words, it is possible that both here and in the Kirana the yogin is said to have 
control by means of pranayama of positive things, and not just the power to expel 
negative ones. But it is with purification that pranayama is associated in a wide range 
of other works. Cf., for example, Pasupatasitra 1:12-17. And cf. Sarvajnanottara, 


360 Parakhyatantra 


(purayet) [himself with] air; of his own will he may block it [inside himself] 
(tam nirodhayet); and (evam) the yogin may of his own will expel the air. 
To the best of his ability (svasaktitah) he should draw together (akarsayet) 
(into himself bad] substances from afar, {and, once they are] formed into 
a round lump (vartulikrtam) in the process of piiraka (purane), he should 
block them (nirodheta) by means of kumbhaka, tnirodhagatasgaktitaht.’™ 
By recaka he should expel everything, since by expulsion he will be strong 
(balavan). His power to do so having been kindled by the power of 
Siva (SivaSaktiddhasamarthyah), he is capable of sending forth everything. 
Having thus achieved the conquest of the breaths (vayujayam), he should 
next perform the fixations (dharayed dharanah punah). (29-32) 

Five fixations (dharanah) are established, starting with [that of] earth 
and ending with [that of] ether.’°! The fixation of earth (parthivi) should 


yogaprakarana 18: 


pranayamair dahed dosan dharanabhis ca kilbisam 
pratyaharena samsargan dhyanenani§varan gunan. 


I quote this verse in the form that VASUDEVA gives it (*2000:296-7). VASUDEVA there 
shows that it occurs in a number of other works too (including in the Markandeya- 
purana, as 36:10, to which Laksmidhara’s early twelfth-century Krtyakalpataru at- 
tributes it) and quotes also other sources that express the same notion (including 
Manusmrti 6:71). Note that the verse also forms part of a passage quoted in the 
Ratnatika (see HARA 1982:194). 

769Dr. ISAACSON (letter of 16.vii.2001) has suggested to me the emendation nirodho 
gataSaktitah: ‘(Their] “being blocked” [is spoken of] because their power has gone’. 

761The Parakhya’s dharanas are simply those of the gross elements. The Malini- 
vijayottara starts with these five (chapters 12 and 13) and then moves on to give 
many more; other Siddhantas commonly prescribe four dharanas: thus Rauravasitra- 
sangraha 7:6-10 and Svayambhuvasitrasangraha 20:4-7 (quoted in fn. 742 on p. 354 
above) give Agneyi, Saumya, Aisani, and Amrta; Matangayogapada 2:36-64 teaches 
the same four in the same order, but with Varun’ and [sani as the labels for the second 
and third; the Malinivijayottara too, though it prescribes many other dharanas in 
earlier chapters, gives this same group of four in 17:14cd when presenting its account of 
sadanga yoga. The Kirana 58:19-26 gives the same four but reverses the order of the 
last two. The Mrgendra, whose yogapada appears to be the least conventional, speaks 
of twelve dharanas (verse 49). 

In short, the above-mentioned four dharanas are evidently typical of the early 
Siddhanta. But VASUDEVA (*2000:318, fn. 114) points out that, aside from in the 
Parakhya, the five fixations of the coarse elements are taught in Svacchanda 7:299c 
300, and in Sardhatrisatikalottara 2:2-4b (where they are part of the process of bhita- 
Suddhi). 

A fairly full treatment of the topic of dharanas, including quotations of relevant 
parallels from published and unpublished literature, is to be found in VASUDEVA’s 


Chapter Fourteen 361 


be meditated upon (dharya) as having a mandala that has the form of 
earth (prthiviripamandala) . (33) 

Earth is yellow, adorned with its seed-syllable, square, marked by 
thunderbolts.”©? It is heavy by nature: since this is a characteristic of 
earth (prthivivisesat), [the mandala] has heavy thunderbolts (guruvajra- 
ka)."®3 (34) 

It is square {davamjambhah sarvamgaht;’® it is in all objects (sarva- 
vastuga). It is yellow [on account of its] being largely heavy with gold 
(svarnagurupraya);’© being equipped with the strength of its own seed 
mantras (svabijanubala)’® it can paralyse immediately (atyasu)’®’ the 
movement of elephants, horses, chariots and so forth (vrttam. .. gajavaji- 
rathadikam). (35-36b) 

The water fixation should be performed as having as its only diagram 
a half-moon [and is] marked by white lotusses; [it is] soothing (saumya), 
accompanied by its own seed-mantra (nijabijaparigraha) .’°°(36c-37b) 

Since water is nectareous (amrtamayah), soothing, the locus of the 


discussion of Malinivijayottara 12, 13, and 17 (*2000). His re-editions of the relevant 
passages of the Sva4yambhuvasitrasangraha, which in the Mysore edition are often 
unintelligible, are especially useful. 

76? This corresponds, as VASUDEVA points out (*2000:236, fn. 157), to the meditation of 
oneself as the svaripa of earth in Ma4linivijayottara 12:22bcd: ...dhyayed ananyadhih/ 
svadeham hemasankaésam turyasram vajralanchitam. These characteristics of earth 
and of the other elements that follow are standard attributes that are to be found in 
accounts of bhiitasuddhi: see, e.g., the account in Aghorasiva’s Kriyakramadyotika, 
pp. 57-8 and in the Somagambhupaddhati (BRUNNER 1963:120-7). 

763 Perhaps one could instead split at the pada-break and interpret: ‘Earth is by nature 
heavy; because of this particular characteristic [its mandala] has heavy thunderbolts’. 

764What we expect here is some justification of the mandala’s being square. 

765Or is this perhaps interpretable as ‘about as heavy as gold’? 

766The compound is clumsy but conceivable, and its structure is repeated in 14:42b 
below. We are not told what the seed mantra is. The elements are widely homologised 
with the semi-vowels: earth, water, fire, air, and ether are associated respectively with 
I, v, r, y, and h. It is possible that here, as in the accounts of the dharanas in other 
Siddhantas, slightly elaborated seed-syllables involving these sounds are intended. In 
AghoraSiva’s Kriyakramadyotika (p.58) the bijas are HLAM, HVIM, HRUM, HYAIM, and 
HAUM respectively. 

187 er conj. This guess may be quite wrong; perhaps the element agma should be 
retained and the intention is to say that movement can be paralysed and the moving 
object is rendered like a stone; but if so I cannot see a way to emend the text. 

788 er conj. Cf. svabija in 14:34a and 14:35d above. Other forms would be possible, 
such as svaka- or svakya- (for which see fn. 396 on p. 258), but the omission of nija- is 
most easily explained (by haplography) and is paralleled in 14:41b below. 


362 Parakhyatantra 


moon/nectar (somasrayah),’®* therefore [it has a] crescent-moon-shaped 
mandala (khandendumandalam tena), which displays the excellence of its 
powers. (37c-38b) 

The lotus is born from water, cool, [and so] conforms with cool nectar 
and water (sitamrtajalanugam). So too is its bija; it [viz. the dharand] is 
rich in those;’”° filled with its powers it can shower upon those afflicted 
with heat (secayed agnisantaptam), and can sustain those afflicted by 
disease (ksayartam).’”! By being meditated upon (dhyanat) it can make 
[to grow] anew a stick [such that it becomes] a tree, {or it can make to 
grow] a seed (bijam).’’* (38c—40b) 

The fire fixation (agney! dharana) should be meditated upon as be- 
ing marked by a triangular mandala (tryasramandalamandita). It is 
red, marked by zig-zag shapes (Srngatakavista),’"° strong with the qual- 
ities of its own seed-syllable (nijabijagunotkata). Since fire has flames, 
[the dharana] is marked by flames that are zig-zag shapes (srngataka- 
Sikhankita).’"* (40c-41) 


769For this type of compound see introduction, p. lxxxii. 

77°For the bijas of these dharanas see fn. 766 on p.361 above. 

771 67 conj. Another possible conjecture, proposed by Professor SANDERSON at a time 
when my transcription erroneously read ksmayattam, is yaksmartam. 

772 Perhaps one could here consider an emendation to jivad, treating it as in apposition 
to dandam: ‘it can make a stick (to grow such that it becomes] a living tree’. 

Note that, as in the other parallel cases (e.g. 14:35d-36b and 14:42b—43b), it is the 
dharana that is made the subject of the exercise of special powers. Of course it is likely 
that the logical subject is in all cases nevertheless intended to be the yogin. A possible 
motivation for this mode of expression is to convey the yogin’s complete identification 
with the element in question. This self-identification with the object in a dharana is 
not made explicit in the Parakhya, but this is clearly the way dharandas are conceived 
in the Malinivijayottara, for see 12:22 (quoted above in fn. 762 on p.361), 13:2, 13:21, 
13:34cd, 13:44cd. 

™3The intended meaning of the term Srngataka in this context is doubtful. APTE 
(1957, s.v.) records the meanings ‘A mountain with three peaks’, ‘A place where four 
roads meet’, ‘A kind of pastry’ (perhaps a tetrahedral samosa: Dr. ACHARYA informs 
me that a cognate-sounding modern Nepali expression for a samosa is simgada], and 
‘A door’. Fire is commonly said to be marked by svastikas (e.g. in the passages of the 
Kriyakramadyotika and Somagambhupaddhati referred to in fn. 762 on p. 361 above). 
It is conceivable, therefore, that these are what are meant here, but since 14:41cd 
justifies this marking by adducing as a reason for it that fire has flames, it seems more 
likely that a zig-zag shape, perhaps three-peaked, is intended, or a triangle. (APTE’s 
omission of the well-attested sense ‘triangle’ is no more than a slip; we find it duly 
recorded by BOHTLINGK and ROTH (1855-75).) 

"74 ez conj. A feminine ending is required, as in the parallel construction in the 


Chapter Fourteen 363 


(Since fire] is red (raktavarnayutah), therefore [this fixation] has that 
[colour] (tadyukta); when it has the power of that [fire] (tadbala sati), 
it can reduce to ashes a towering mountain, a forest, a wood, a city, 
a palace, an enemy army or a cruel wish-fulfilling tree (kriram kalpa- 
padapam).’’ (42c—43b) 

He should perform the fixation, of wind, whose mandala for visuali- 
sation is round, marked by six drops (sadbindulafichana),’”® grey, [and] 
empowered by its seed-syllable (svabijaparitosita). (43c—44b) 

[Its form is such] because wind is round, being capable of surrounding 
all [one’s(?)} limbs (sarvangalingane ksamah). [The wind] is lovely with 
drops, (because it is] of great strength;’”’ it [viz. wind] has the colour of 
smoke, being grey with dust. Since the whole [of the fixation] is filled 
with the seed-syllables that belong [to wind], tit is proper that it should 
partake of the strength of wind (yukta sa vayuviryaga)t+. (44c-45) 

It can toss aside a hostile army, it can move demons and Raksasas 
(calayed bhutaraksasan), [even] Kismanda, together with his flesh-eating 
demons and other[ attendant]s (sapisacadi), [as well as] trees and even 
mountains.’’® (46) | 

The fixation of ether should be meditated upon; [its mandala is a] void 


following half-line, and the 4tmakah is not appropriate in the context, so emendation 
to °sikhatmika would be insufficient. 

7751 suppose that this last item refers to the circumstance in which a tree that ordi- 
narily grants people’s desires, or that has the power to do so, ‘cruelly’ refuses to grant 
one. Of course it is possible that the text here is corrupt. 

778 es conj. VASUDEVA (*2000:244) proposes this emendation, which is widely sup- 
ported, e.g. by the parallel prescription given in Malinivijayottara 13:34 and by the 
two accounts of bhutasuddhi referred to in fn. 762 on p.361 above. Those two ac- 
counts differ, however, in specifying a black, hexagonal mandala rather than a grey, 
round one. 

7 ex conj. This is probably intended to be a justification for six drops being the 
marks that distinguish the mandala. Perhaps we could consider emending instead 
to mahavayur, which might be intended as a synonym for the bindu from which the 
phonemes emanate in 6:3. (I know of no other such usage, but cf. the expression 
paramakaSa used of a level of subtle sound, e.g., in Kiranavrtti 3:23.11.) The intended 
sense might then be: ‘it is [said to be] lovely with drops (for the drops are appropriate 
because] bindu [can also refer] to the ‘great wind’ (that is subtle sound]’. 

™8 As VASUDEVA points out (*2000:245), this parallels Malinivijayottara 13:37c-38b: 


cUrnayaty adrisanghatam vrksan unmilayaty api 
kruddhas calayate gakram sabhrtyabalavahanam. 


364 Parakhyatantra 


marked by nothing (siinya Siinyalanchana),’’® the pure support of its own 
seed-syllables (svabijavimaladhara). It is held to be the fifth fixation. (47) 

It is void (Siinya sa), because it [viz. ether] is an empty entity (Stinya- 
vastutvat). It is located in a form [i.e. a mandala] which is marked by 
the same [viz. emptiness] (tenaivankitardpaga). Because it has the power 
of its seed mantras,’®° it exerts itself in the tasks of emptiness (Siinya- 
karmakrtodyama): it can effect the removal of poison or making void of 
the entire universe. (48-49b) 

By performing a hundred udghatas the conquest of these fixations is 
achieved: a matra [is measured] by circling [the knee or something with] 
the measure of the knee [once with the hand]; now a tala is [this unit] 
multiplied by twelve (talas tu dvadasahatah); next, the time-span of an 
udghata is of a hundred talas (talasatas tato ’dghatasamayah).’*+ With 


778 Contrast Matangayogapada 4:59-60b, which does not allow that one can focus on 
nothing: 
matanga uvaca—yad amirtam anadharam avikaritakaranam 
anadyakaranam yasmat tat katham sadhyate vibho 
parameSvara uvaca—avakasena dharmena Sabdenatmagunena ca. 


780 
761 


eZ con). 

ez conj. To arrive at this interpretation no doubt other conjectures are possible: 
pada a, for example, might read instead janum avestya tan matra; pada b might be read 
talas taddvadasahatah: ‘a tala is a multiplication by twelve of that’; and some might 
prefer to avoid the aisa sandhi in padac. Furthermore one might wish to emend to reach 
an entirely different interpretation, for the figures vary considerably for these units. 
VASUDEVA has shown in his annotation on Malinivijayottara 17:11-13b (*2000:310-16) 
that even the early Siddhantas differ widely. The Mrgendra, for instance, agrees that 
twelve circuits about the knee make a tala, but holds that twenty-four and forty-eight 
talas constitute middling and superior udghatas respectively (yogapada 27c—28b). The 
Sarvajnanottara, however, agrees about the number of talas making up the inferior, 
middling, and superior levels, and it stipulates that twelve matras make up a tala, but 
it differs in defining a matra as being one circuit about the knee followed by a snap of 
the fingers (chotika). (This definition of the matra is shared by the Skandapurana as 
cited by Brahmananda in his commentary on Hathayogapradipika 2:12.) The Malini- 
vijayottara’s counting of all units is entirely different. One early account VASUDEVA 
does not cite, perhaps because in the edition it is barely recognisable as a discussion 
of the same topic: the Kirana’s treatment appears, at least in the verse transmitted 
by M”, to be essentially the same as that of the Parakhya as I have reconstructed it 
(Kirana 58:27-8): 


Chapter Fourteen 365 


these he conquers those [dharanas].’®? (50) 
Having [thus] achieved the conquest of the fixations, [and being 


udghato dvividhah proktah saémanyo ’'tha visesakah 
hastena janusamyogabhraman matra bhavaty atha 
tabhir dvadasabhis tala udghatas tacchatad bhavet 
samanyo ’py upayujyeta sadasau dharana jayet 


e udghato dvividhah ] M”; udghato vividhah N,; utpato vividhah 
Ep e tha visesakah ] conj.; nyo visesatah N,; tha viSesatah 
M”; pi vigesatah Ep e hastena janusamyogabhraman matra bha- 
vaty atha | M”; samanyo janusamyogah bhraman tala bhavaty atha 
N,; samanyo jatusamyogad dahanam karma ucyate Ep e tabhir 
dvadasabhis tala udgh&tas tacchatad bhavet ] M”; tabhir dvadaSabhir 
matra hy udghatas tat sphuto bhavet N,; samadhibhavanantastha na 


jarasvanvita bhavan Ep e sadasau dharana jayet ] conj.; sada 
sadharanam japet N,; saddsau dharana jape M”; sadasau dharana yajet 
Ep 


Udghata is of two types: ordinary and special. Now a matra is [measured] 
by circling the knee with the hand. A tala is made up of twelve of these; 
an [ordinary] udghata is [measured] by a hundred of those. [This] ordinary 
type should be used. Invariably he will [then] conquer the fixations. 


It will be observed that in the Kirana and the Parakhya the amount of time taken for 
an udghata is thus vastly greater than in other sources. What my reconstructions of 
their accounts prescribe may be impossible to practise. 

As for the nature of an udghata, this too is variously conceived. Once again VA- 
SUDEVA’s annotation on the same passage of the Ma4linivijayottara (17:11-13b) is in- 
valuable because it quotes a number of accounts. The account of Ramakantha in the 
Sardhatrifatikalottaravrtti ad 2:3c—4b is as follows: 


Urdhvam ghato vayor udghatah dvadasantam tyavan nadavrttyat 
preranam. yad uktam trayodaSaSatike 


pranenoccaryamanena apanah pidyate yada 
gatva cordhvam nivarteta etad udghatalaksanam. 


The uninterpretable cruxed portion is a conjecture of the editor, whose negative ap- 
paratus ambiguously reports the readings of the two manuscripts as being yannada- 
puja... piranam (MS A) and yannada pratya°® (MS A). BHATT was not able to consult 
IFP MS RE 47635, which reads (f. 152"): yannaédam vrajatya (and which has apane 
for apanah in pada b of the quotation). 
VASUDEVA concludes his discussion of the topic of udghata thus (*2000:316): 
To summarise, “eruption” appears to be the yogic term for the sensation 


of a spontaneous upward surge of vital energy brought on in the early 
stages of self-induced asphyxiation. 


782 er conj. Cf. Kirana 58:28cd, which is quoted in the previous footnote. 


366 Parakhyatantra 


thereby] successful in achieving the rewards that are the strengths of those 
[fixations] (tadviryaphalasadhakah), the yogin should engage in yogal- 
meditation] (samyojayed yogam) upon the cage that is (the earthly] body 
(dehapanjare), {and which is for his practice of yoga] the most important 
element (pradhane). (51) 

Even yoga cannot accomplish its fruits if it is devoid of a support 
(niralambah). Its support is the body, which is covered with a network 
of tubular vessels (sirajalavatanitam). (52) 

Some among these are gross vessels; others are subtle and extremely 
subtle. They are called nadis; in those take place the movements of the 
wind in this body. (53) 

The wind in the vessels (nadikastho ’nilah) kindles the fire in the 
belly.’°3 +That [fire in turn] troubles (badhate) the eater, and therefore 
that (tat)"®4 is brought into equilibrium by [the wind called] samana 
(samanasamikrtam)t{. (54) 

It moves about (sarpitam) in the form of rasa (rasatmakena 
bhavena)"*> in the tubes that are these channels (nadirandhresu). It 
constantly causes the increase of the group of substances semen, marrow 
and bone (Sukramajjasthisanghasya), and also of blood, flesh and phlegm 
(raktamamsakaphasya ca), as well as of its (tasya) "°° tubes. (55-56b) 


783 ez conj. The conception here may not be the same as that of the Astangahrdaya, 
but cf. therein Sarirasthana 3:56: 


sandhuksitah samanena pacaty amaSayasthitam 
audaryo ’gnir yathaé bahyah sthalistham toyatandulam. 


‘The stomach’s fire, kindled by samana, cooks [the food] that is in the upper stomach, 
just as an external [fire cooks] the water and rice that is in a pot.’ 

784Perhaps the change of gender means that we are now talking about the ingested 
food (anna) rather than the fire. The text is obscure to me. 

785Perhaps what is meant is rather that the air moves about together with whatever 
has been eaten and transformed by the first stage of decoction into the nutrient fluid 
rasa. 

786 ex conj. Or could the pronoun refer back to attaram? We may again refer to the 
medical conception, as represented by the Astangahrdaya (Sarirasthana 3:61-3b): 


kittam sarag ca tat pakvam annam sambhavati dvidha. 
tatraccham kittam annasya mitram vidyad; ghanam Sakrt. 
saras tu saptabhir bhiyo yathasvam pacyate ’gnibhih 
rasad raktam tato mamsam mamsén medas tato 'sthi ca 
asthno majja tatah Sukram Sukrad garbhah prajayate. 


‘The cooked food becomes two: waste matter and essence. Of these, the liquid waste 
matter of the food one should understand to be urine; the solid is excrement. Now 


Chapter Fourteen 367 


The tubes that are located in the navel (nabhisthah) reach below that 
to the bulb above the testicles (kandam asritah).’®’ The tubes that are 
located there (tatrasthah) [viz. in the kanda’®*] spread outwards in all 
directions: sideways, upwards, downwards. Among these there are eight 
principal ones that go to the extremities of the petals of the lotus of the 
man’s heart (taddhrtpadmadalagragah)."®° (56c-57) 

Aindri, that in (the direction of] Agni, Yamya, Nairrtya, Apya, that 
in [the direction of] the wind, Kauber, and the tube Sankar; they are the 
locuses of the deities of the directions (sthita digdevatasrayah).’™ (58) 


the essence is cooked again by seven fires individually. From the nutrient fluid [arises] 
blood, from that flesh, from the flesh fat, from that bone, from the bone marrow, from 
that semen; from the semen arises the foetus.’ 

The Parakhya here names five of this standard list of seven dhatus, starting in the 
reverse order, omitting medas (rasa has of course already been mentioned) and adding 
kapha (the humour ‘phlegm’) to the end of the list. The author of the Parakhya may 
have followed a different tradition about the transformation of nutrients into bodily 
substances, or he may have followed this same medical tradition but corruptions in 
our text have obscured his intentions. As Dr. MEULENBELD has kindly pointed out to 
me, a handful of variant lists are cited by JAMISON (1986:175-7), but the Parakhya’s 
corresponds to none of them: it is possible also that the Parakhya’s is no more than a 
randomly selected and ordered group of bodily substances (cf. 4:122). 

787Ramakantha glosses kanda thus in his Sardhatrisatikalottaravrtti ad 10:1¢-3b: 
muskaprsthe yat kandam milam... 
788But this could be interpreted to mean ‘in the nabhi’. Cf. Svacchanda 7:7c-8b: 


nabhyadho medhrakande ca sthitva vai nabhimadhyatah 
tasmad vinirgata nadyas tiryag urdhvam adhah priye. 


Here the referent of the pronoun (tasmat) is probably nabhi, but note that Ksema- 
raja refers to another interpretation, following which tasmat refers back to the kanda: 
kecit tu nabhicakrata iti patham pirvatraiva yojayitva, tasmad ity anena kandapadam 
pratyavamrstavantah. 

7891 assume that pradhandstau is an aiga double sandhi for pradhanah + astau. Ac- 
counts of the nadis are very various indeed, and the Parakhya’s appears not closely 
to parallel any that I know of. Three principal channels, ida, pingala, and susumna, 
are almost invariably encountered, either on their own or—as in Sardhatrisatikalottara 
10:34 and Svacchanda 7:13-16, which list ten principal channels—counted among oth- 
ers. The Parakhya makes no mention of these names, but it does give an account below 
of a central, left, and right channel that rise above the heart (14:70c-71). Here it gives 
as its eight principal channels ones which appear to reach from the kanda to the ex- 
tremities of the eight petals around the heart, perhaps passing through the karnika. 
These are named after the eight cardinal and intermediate directions, names given in 
Sardhatrisatikalottara 10:25-7 to the petals of the lotus of the heart. 

780 er conj. ACHARYA. Equally possible would be the conjecture sthitas taddeva- 
tasrayah. 


368 Parakhyatantra 


In these [tubes]’9! the soul (ksetri), [usually] situated in the pericarp 
[of the lotus of the heart] (karnikasthah) moves about from petal to petal. 
Whatever be the nature of the deity of the direction, he then |i.e. upon 
moving into that direction] becomes of the nature of that [deity].”°? By 
moving into the gaps between those petals the bound soul becomes empty- 
natured (sinyabhavah sthitah):’° he thinks (vetti) himself to be as it 


791 We could assume here that tasu refers rather to the directions (which would presup- 
pose that the emendation in 14:58d must be correct), since it is not clear whether the 
tubes run directly from the kanda to the extremities of the heart petals, or whether they 
pass through the heart. (See previous footnote.) That they should not pass through 
the heart might seem the most natural interpretation of 14:57, and so the movement of 
the soul among the petals of the heart might therefore not be movement in the tubes; 
but it is implied that it is in the tubes in 14:67 below. I am assuming therefore that 
the ‘petals’ are the openings of the tubes, and thus that when the soul is conceived of 
as moving about from petal to petal this can be described as moving about among the 
tubes. 

792 er conj. But the transmitted text of 14:59cd could be accepted as authorial (after 
correction of the sandhi). 

7°3This same doctrine appears in Sardhatrisatikdlottara 10:25—28b: 


... pragdalasamstho nrpavalepi syat 

tejasv! ca bubhuksa pida samjayate ‘'gnidikpatre 25 

yamye yamyam bhavam nairrtye raksasam samuddistam 
varunapatre varuno marutapatre gato marudbhavam 26 
saumye yaksam bhavam Ise ifam samakhyatam 

brahme brahmam bhavam {tadadha uragendra samuddistamt 
yam yam digam abhigacchati tadbhavam nikhilam ayati 27 
patrantaralayogac chinyam ivatma tato bhati 


e °stho nrpavalepi ] BHATT, TORELLA; °sthe (°stho Nac) nrpavalepi 
N e ca bubhuksa ] BHATT, TORELLA; trd bubhuksa N (unmetri- 
cal) e samjayate 'gnidikpatre ] Npc; samjayate 'gnipatre Nac (un- 
metrical); va samjayate ’gnidikpatre BHATT (unmetrical); °van jayate 
gnidikpatre BHATT’s MS I; va safijayate/ agnidikpatre TORELLA (un- 
metrical) e yamyam bhavam] N (aisa usage); yamyo bhavo 
BHATT, TORELLA @ nairrtye raksasam samuddistam ] N; nairrte 
nairrto vinirdistah BHATT (unmetrical); nairrtyo nirrto vinirdistah 
BHATT’s MS I; nirrtyo nirrto vinirdistah BHATT’s MS I; nairrtyo 
nirrto vinirdigtah BHATT’s MS U; nairrte nairrto/ vinirdistah TORELLA 
(unmetrical) e varunapatre varuno] BHATT; varune varunam 
samsthe N (unmetrical); varune patre varuno TORELLA (unmetri- 
cal) e miarutapatre gato marudbhavam ] BHATT; marutapatre 
gate marudbhdvam N; marutpatre/ marutabhavam TORELLA (unmetri- 
cal) e yaksam bhavam ige ifam samakhyatam } N (aiga usage); 
saumyo bhavas tv aise tv aisah samakhyatah BHATT; saumya ai§fas 
tv aise samakhyatah TORELLA (unmetrical) e brahme brahmam 


Chapter Fourteen 369 


were empty because he appears to be qualified by the adventitious quality 
of emptiness (Sinyopadhivisesatah). (59-60) 
Thus, located in the centre of the lotus of the heart, the soul (jivah) 


bhavam ttadadha uragendra samuddistamt ] N (the uninflected form is 
perhaps an acceptable aisa usage); omit BHATT, TORELLA e¢ yam 
yam digam abhigacchati tadbhavam nikhilam ayati] BHATT; yasyam 
digam vigacchaty akhilam bhavam tasya samyati N (unmetrical); yam 
yam disam abhigacchati tadbhavam samastam ayati TORELLA (unmetri- 
cal) e °yogac chiinyam ivaétma tato bhati ] BHATT; °sarpyogac 
chiinya +va+ matmanam abhati N (unmetrical); °yogac chfinyam ivatma 
bhati TORELLA (unmetrical) 


The readings of the Nepalese manuscript N (NAK MS 54632, f.7” of third sequence 
of foliation) are all reported; but for the sources used by BHATT I have given an 
incomplete apparatus, and that only for the portions which have been corrected on 
metrical grounds and so differ from BHATT’s accepted text. A number of TORELLA’s 
divergences from the text of BHATT are merely the result of TORELLA’s not having 
recognised that the metre is arya (and upagiti). The text and the apparatus in both 
editions are at this point not free of faults (it is not clear how their sources read), 
and Ramakantha’s commentary, as so often, does not reveal how he read. In short, 
as already implied in a sketch of the aisa language of the Sardhatrisatikalottara as 
preserved in a single Nepalese manuscript (GOODALL 1998:lxvi-Ixviii), it is clear that 
more could be done towards establishing the text of this tantra: in particular the 
surviving Nepalese manuscripts have yet to be collated. I interpret the above passage 
(which I must acknowledge that I have not properly edited) as follows: 


Situated in the eastern petal (of the lotus of the heart, the soul] has the 
pride of a king [i.e. takes on the nature of Indra} or [he becomes] fiery; 
there arises [for him] a desire to devour, [or] pain, in the petal in the 
direction of Agni. In the southern [petal he takes on] the nature of Yama; 
in the south-western [petal it] is taught (that he takes on the nature] of 
a Raksas; in the western petal [he takes on the nature of] Varuna; in 
the north-western petal he takes on the nature of Marut; in the northern 
[petal he takes on] the nature of Kubera; and in the north-eastern [petal 
it] is taught [that he takes on the nature of] Iga. In the upward direction 
(he takes on the nature] of Brahma; tbelow it is taught [that he takes on 
the nature of] the prince of serpentst. Whichever direction he goes to, 
he takes on entirely the nature of that [direction’s presiding deity]. [And] 
from being located in any of the spaces between the petals his self then 
appears as though it were emptiness. 


Observe that when the Sardhatrigatikalottara earlier in this chapter (10:16) speaks of 
the movement of the soul (jiva), Ramakantha (ad loc.) interprets this to refer to the 
movement of the subtle body. This is a response to the implicit problem that the soul 
is all-pervading and so cannot be said to move. Pratoda states this problem explicitly 
below (14:62), but PrakaSa’s resolution is, as we shall see below (in 14:63-9), quite 
different from Ramakantha’s. 


370 Parakhyatantra 


‘moves about’ (carati) in all directions, since, when situated there, the 
individual (pudgalah) observes (alocayati) everything. For when it is 
situated there (sannidhane sthitas tasmin),’%4 [the soul] is said to be es- 
pecially all-pervading. (61) 

Pratoda spoke: 

The soul’s (tasya) ‘going’ (carah) is stated to be [a kind of] movement 
(gatih), [since] that is well-known as the meaning of that root (tad- 
dhatvarthaprakasita).’°° And his moving is impossible (na ca sa tasya), 
since this soul has been taught above’®® to be all-pervading. (62) 

Prakasa spoke: 

The word cara [is used] in the sense of ‘movement’ (gatau); but in certain 
places it is used in the sense of ‘knowing’ (jfane pravartate). In such 
a place (tatra) all words that have the: meaning ‘movement’ are taught 
{also} to have the meaning ‘knowing’.’?” (63) 

Since he is all-pervading, the soul cannot be said to move: [in fact what 
happens is that] in each petal (dale dale) [there occurs] the revelation of 
(a particular] ‘knowledge’ (jianavyaktih)’°> that informs the knower of 
its object (jnatur arthanivedika) and that can carry various particular 
forms (nanakaravisesarha). (64) 

Pratoda spoke: 

First the soul was taught to be all-pervasive, of the nature of knowledge, 
indestructible; his knowledge exists eternally. How can he have various 
forms? (65) 
Prakasa spoke: 
The divisions [that are perceived to occur] within the eternal knowledge 
(nityajnanasya yo bhedah) are [merely] the result of adventitious qualifiers 
(upadhivasat), and so [the soul’s knowledge] should be understood to 
be [only] superficially (bahirmukham) of various forms’99 as a result of 


794 et conj. ISAACSON. This conjecture is made on the assumption that this may be an 
aifa construction equivalent in sense to sannidhdne sthitas tasya, for which cf. 2:25a. 
75See Dhatupatha 588-91: abhra, vabhra, mabhra, cara gatyarthah. 

76See Parakhya 1:15 and 1:36-9. 

’°7This idea is widely known and very variously expressed, and so it probably cannot 
be regarded as an allusion to a particular work. Hemahamsagani’s Nyayasangraha 
(ABHYANKAR 1967:110) includes the following as his 110th grammatical paribhasa: 
gatyartha jnanarthah. 

7°8Or perhaps ‘(there arises] a particular “knowledge” ’. 


°Or perhaps ‘should [only] be understood to be of various forms when it is externally 
directed’. 


Chapter Fourteen 371 


adventitious qualifiers. (66) 

That [knowledge] is [thus superficially] various (bhinnam) because of 
the variousness of faculties of sense, just as a crystal [appears to be differ- 
ent only] because of adventitious qualifiers (sphatikopadhibhedavat).°© 
Similarly these tubes are various in accordance with the variousness of 
the natures of the deities [in whose directions they belong]. (67) 

Knowledge appears to be differentiated (bhinnam ivabhati), and [yet] 
it is not differentiated, since it perdures [eternally] (sthiratvatah). {For 
the perception [of variety(?)] (upalabdhih) that can be produced (karya) 
[is something that] has as its sphere the ‘movement’ inside the tubes 
(nadisancaragocara)t.°°! (68) 

It is that wind called prana and jiva;®9? because of the movement 
of that (taccarat) we speak figuratively of movement [of the soul] (upa- 
caratah/ gatir ukta), since without it we say that [a body is] dead (pra- 
khyapyate mrtah). The manifestation of consciousness (cidvyaktih) has 
that [breath] as its locus (tadadhara); where [the breath] goes, there it 
(viz. the manifestation of consciousness] will be.8°% (69-70b) 

Above the lotus of the heart there are two principle channels to the 
left and right of it.2°4 That which passes on the left (vamaga) is mild 
[and] belongs to the moon (candraga); that which passes on the right 


8°0The crystal, which is of itself clear, appears red when it happens to be placed next 
to some red object and blue when placed next to a blue object. Its ‘redness’ is thus an 
adventitious ‘property’ that belongs to something to which it happens to be, but need 
not be, connected. 

8°1The second half is obscure and perhaps corrupt. Prefer perhaps: ‘The [various] 
perceptions that must [in order to account for the facts of experience] be produced 
belong to [i.e. are to be explained by] movement [of the the soul] in the tubes.’ 

8021t is also conceivable that the text means to distinguish prana as a name for the 
ingoing breath and jiva as a name for the outgoing breath, or vice versa. We find prana 
as a name for the ingoing breath in Svacchanda 4:257, and we find the terms paired 
together as opposites in Vijnanabhairava 24ab (quoted in fn. 821 on p.376 below), 
where prana is, however, the ingoing breath. 

8°3Cf. Svacchanda 4:357: 


tisthet sa yatra vai prana atma tadgatim apnuyat 

tat tad ripam bhavet tasya sthanabhavanuripatah. 
804 6+ conj. Note that here and in the ensuing account of the control of the movement of 
the ‘breath’ attention is focussed on the three principal tubes and on the region between 
the heart and the dvadasanta; all the tubes below this are ignored. In Tantraloka 
6:46c-51 and in the Tantralokaviveka thereon, movement in the lower tubes is said to 
be automatic (svarasika); guided breath is possible only above the level of the heart. 


372 Parakhyatantra 


(daksinaga) is fiery [and] belongs to the sun (arkaga).®°° Adorned with the 
moon and the sun (somarkakalpita)®°® is the central channel (madhya), 
which is foremost among all the channels (sarvanadipurahsara). (70c-71) 

That [breath] moves—by the middle course (madhyacarena) or (ca) 
by the right [or] by the left—to the heart, the throat, then the palate the 
middle of the brows, the tip of the nose (nasikantaram). (72) 

From there it travels up twelve digits (masangulam yavat) and returns 
from that place. Brahma is in the heart, Visnu in the throat, Rudra 
in the palate, and Isvara is between the brows, and at the tip of the 
nose is Sadasiva.%°’ [Thus] the various places are taught in accordance 


®°SThese correspond to idé and pingala respectively. Cf. Sardhatrisatikalottara 
10:24ab: saurah savyo margasS candramasa§ cetarah samakhyatah. The association 
of these two channels with the moon and the sun is in turn connected with the associ- 
ation of the ingoing and outgoing breaths with the moon and the sun respectively, as 
taught, e.g., in SardhatriSatikalottara 11:9: 


ayamo dehamadhyasthah somagrahanam isyate 
dehatitam tu tam vidyad adityagrahanam budhah. 


8061 suppose this to be a way of referring to its having the mild and fiery channels to the 
left and right of it. But perhaps the intended sense might rather be ‘not formed by sun 
and moon’, The central channel is commonly associated with fire (see, e.g., Svacchanda 
7:148), and with ud4ana, the rising breath. For the association of udana, the breath that 
rises in the central] channel, with fire, see, e.g., I$varapratyabhijnakarika 3.2:20. Cf. 
also Ksemaraja’s comment on Netratantra 1:30ab (siryacandramasau vahnis tridhama- 
parikalpana): siryeti: icchadifaktitraya eva madhyadaksinavamamargesu vahnisirya- 
somakalpana; antar bahir api cecchadisaktisphararipa eva stiryadayah. 

8°7These are the five Karanegvaras, though it should be noted that this terminol- 
ogy (karana, karaneSvara, karaneSa) is not used and appears to occur only once in 
the early Saiddhantika canon (Mrgendra kriyapada 8:202). It may have entered the 
Saiddhantika paddhati-tradition (see, e.g. Somasambhupaddhati 1.3:19ff [KSTS 134ff]}) 
from the Svacchanda (e.g. 4:205, 207). 

Cf. Sardhatrifatikalottara 23:9c-12b: 


brahma visnus ca rudras ca igvarah Siva eva ca 
pancadha pancadaivatyah sakalah paripathyate 
brahmano hrdayam sthanam kanthe visnuh samasSritah 
talumadhye sthito rudro lalatastho maheSvarah 
nasagre tu Sivam vidyat tasyante tu param padam 
parasmat tu param nasti iti Sastrasya niscayah. 


e nasagre ] TORELLA, BHATT’s MSS I, I, U; nadante BHATT 


The same passage occurs without substantive variation also in the Dvisatikalottara 
(Trivandrum MS 4509, f. 29” and IFP MS T. No. 176, pp. 45-6). 


Chapter Fourteen 373 


with [their] various deities (devatabhedatah), for the purpose of [gradual] 
resorption. (73-4) 

The deities each pervade their own paths (svasvadhvavyapaka 
devah),®°® extending up to the limits of the range of their pervasion 
(tadvyaptivisayantagah): Brahma extends up to Praja (prajaparyanta- 
gah); Visnu extends up to the limit of (the tattva of] raga (ragavasana- 


As VASUDEVA has argued (*2000:217-19), the reading nasagre is to be accepted 
rather than BHATT’s n&dante, for the Sardhatrigatikélottara, the Kirana, and the 
Parakhya appear here to represent an alternative tradition. It is however not beyond 
dispute what the term means. VASUDEVA interprets it as being ‘at the external limit 
of twelve (bahyadvadaSanta-)’ (i.e. in contradistinction to the ‘ordinary’ dvddaSAnta, 
which is identified with the brahmarandhra). He explains (*2000:218-19): ‘As the 
breath curves back down towards the nose, the jiva- descends with it and exits through 
the nostrils, coming to a standstill at the external dvadasanta-, twelve digits from the 
tip of the nose.’ In support of this VASUDEVA adduces Sardhatrisatikalottara 23:14cd: 


dehatitam tu tad vidydn nas&graéd dvédasangulam 


e@ nasdgraéd ] conj. VASUDEVA; ndsaégre BHATT, TORELLA; nas&gra 
BHATT’s MS A; ndsdgram BHATT’s MS A 


VASUDEVA translates (ibid.) ‘One should know that [manifestation of Siva, which is] 
beyond the body, [located] twelve digits from the tip of the nose.’ As VASUDEVA there 
points out, this interpretation is also supported by Kirana 58:72c—73b: 


athava bhavayec chambhum tkhandehan tu kalatmakamt 
kham a&kaSam param santam nésagrad dvadaSangule 


e chambhum] M”Ep;  chambhuh N, e khandehan tu 
kalatmakam ] N,; khe dehasukalatmakam M”; svadehdnutarétmakam 
Ep e kham akdéséam] N,; samakasam M”; svamatiacca Ep 
@ nasdgrid dva° ] Ep; nasagradvi° N,; nasigradva® M” 


Aghorasgiva, however, in his Dvisatikalottaravrtti (Trivandrum MS 4509, f.29° and 
IFP MS T. No. 176, p. 46) wishes to understand the nasagra to be synonymous with 
the brahmarandhra): ...nasagrasya brahmarandhrasya ca samanatvat (176; samaéna- 
manatvat 4509) nasdgragabdena brahmabilam ucyate. VASUDEVA explains (*2000:217 
and fn. 107) that the two terms can be identified because nasa can refer to the central 
channel, but it is not clear to me that this was in AghoraSiva’s mind. 

808 ey conj. The notion appears to be that each occupies a tranche of tattvas. The 
term adhvan (particularly in the collocations Suddhadhvan and asuddhd&dhvan) conveys 
this meaning: see, e.g., Kirana 3:26cd. 

809] interpret this to mean that Brahma’s range is from the lowest tattva (earth) up 
to that of purusa. I am not aware of any other passage in which praja is used to refer to 
purusatattva, but it seems to me conceivable that the name should have been employed 
here on the grounds that it resonates with a possible name of Brahma: Prajapati. 


374 Parakhyatantra 


gah); Rudra extends up to [the tattva of] kala;®!° Maheéa is located in his 
own abode (nijadhamani).°!! Sadasiva resides in his own power (svasakti- 
sthah): his body is the five brahmamantras (pancamantraniketanah).®!? 
(75-6) 

By passing higher and higher (uttarottarasancarat) one attains (bha- 
vanti) higher and higher worlds (uttarottarabhimayah), which are located 
in particular places in (the paths of] these (deities(?)|®!5 (tadvisesasthah), 
possessed of (saha) their particular properties (tadvisesagunaih). (77) 

Or rather (va) there is but one supreme Lord who has different forms 
(bhedaih sthitah) that are (different] in (no more than] their names (nama- 
gaih): [He is called] Brahma because he is great (brhattvat), because 
He fills (brmhakatvat), or because He possesses brahman (va brahma- 
yogatah). [He is called] Visnu because it is His nature to be powerful 
(prabhavasilatvat), because He is the source of the universe (prabhavo 
jagatah), He is omnipotent (prabhuh).®!4 (78) 

Because He drives away affliction (rujam dravayate) He is called 
Rudra, since the affliction is destroyed (rujah ksayat).8!° Because He 
possesses all the attributes of sovereignty (sarvaigvaryagunaslesat)®'® the 
sovereign Lord (i§varah) [is called] Mahesvara. (79) 

He is Sadasiva [because He is] always favourable (sadakantah), or [be- 


810ln Parakhya 5:151-2 raga is placed immediately above purusatattva and kala is 
placed immediately below maya (see fn. 626 on p.317 above). Thus Visnu would 
extend across ragatattva alone, and Rudra would cover (in ascending order) the tattvas 
of vidya, kala, niyati and kala. 

811 This must refer to iSvaratattva; what is unclear is whether or not the text intends 
that he should also extend across the tattvas that intervene between him and Rudra, 
namely maya and pure vidya. 

812 erhaps the choice of words here is partly intended to convey that Sadasiva’s ‘place’ 
is not to be conceived of spatially. 

813But perhaps we must supply yogins as the subject of the second half of the verse. 

814More common is the etymologisation of Visnu cited by APTE (1957, s.v.): 

yasmad visvam idam sarvam tasya Saktya mahatmanah 

tasmad evocyate visnur vifSadhatoh praveganat. 
Here vistam, as we find in a couple of the versions of this verse cited by TRIPATHI 
(1988:166-7), would make better sense. Cf. also Hevajratantra I.v.13b: visanad visnur 
ucyate. 

515This nirvacana has been alluded to twice above: in 2:48 and in 5:143. 


816 e< conj. Emendation to °gunaih Slesat (suggestion of Dr. ISAACSON) is perhaps 
equally likely. 


Chapter Fourteen 375 


cause] Siva [means] situated in rest.8!7 Thus there exists, [called] with 
various names, only one Lord of the universe. (80) 

It is He who bestows the fruit, and that depends on the goal [at which 
the yogin aims(?)] (Jaksyasamasritam).°!8 The goal is located in the 
breath; tit is the ‘soul’ (jivam) in the breath (vayugam) of the embodied 
person (sakalatmanah)t.8!® (81) 

The [individual] soul (atma), it seems (kila),°2° tis He (sah) U 
jomgo bindukaraputikrtamt.®?! He resides in all bodies saying ‘hamso 


817Or perhaps ‘in Santi(-kala]’. 

818) do not understand the text here. 

819-The accusatives are not accounted for, but, since I have no confidence in my having 
understood the text, I am reluctant to emend. Perhaps the text assumes a distinction 
between prana as ham and and jiva as sa, which might have been alluded to in 14:69ab, 
and which is to be found in Vijnanabhairava 24ab (quoted in fn. 821 on p. 376 below). 

820For the (for me) unexceptionable, though not particularly common, use of kila in 
the first position in a sentence see GOODALL 1998:169, fn. 26. At the time of writing 
that footnote I was not aware that Gopendratippabhipala understands kila to have 
been intended in the list of particles adverted to by Vamana in Kavyalankarasutra 5.5 
(na padadau khalvadayah) as words that should not be used in initial position. This 
shows that initial kila was known to but frowned upon by Gopendratippabhiipala and 
possibly also Vamana. It is presumably added here to emphasize that this is a yogic 
exercise rather than a doctrinal statement of truth. 

821 Because of what follows we may suppose that the text is here offering an interpre 
tation of the ‘mantra’ hamso hamsah based upon its similarity to a repeated assertion 
of the form aham sah! aham sah!: ‘I am that! I am that!’. The inward breath is the 
sound ham (ending in an anusvara) and the outward breath is the sound sah (ending 
in a visarga). This is explained by Sardhatrifatikalottara 23:3 and by Ramakantha’s 
Sardhatrifatikalottaravrtti ad loc., which is corrupt in the text offered by the edition, 
but can fortunately be at least partly repaired with the help of Dvisatikalottara 7:3 and 
AghoraSiva’s Dvigatikalottaravrtti (IFP MS T.176, pp. 43 and Trivandrum MS 4509, 
ff. 27”-28"), which is nearly identical: 


hamsa hamseti yo briiyad dhamso devah sada$ivah 

guruvaktrat tu labhyeta pratyaksam sarvatomukhah. 
pranagamagamasya hamkarena pranavrttyatmana sakarena capanavr- 
ttirupenanvayad vagvrttyavinabhavasiddheh tadgamagamapravrttyaiva 
pratiksanam yo ‘hamsa hamsa’ ity amantranapadena bruyad iti sambha- 
vanayam—yad ahuh ‘samkoce ca vikase ca hamsa ity aksaradvayam’ iti— 
tena visistenaiva vagatmapranasaktidvayajnanavata purusena sada$ivah 
sakalas taval labhyate... 


e sarvatomukhah ] BHATT; sarvatomukham 4509, T176, BHATT’s 
MSS e praénagamagamasya hamkarena] 4509, BHATT; —-ham- 
karena 47622 pranagamagamasya hamkaro T176 @ capanavrtti- 
ripenanvayad vagvrttyavina® ] conj. ISAACSON; capanavrttiriipenanva- 


376 Parakhyatantra 


yavagvrttyavina°4509, T176; sa canvanavrttiripenanvayavrtyavina® 
Buatt’s MSS A and A, 47622; sahanvayavrttiripenanvayavrtya- 
vind’ BHATT (conj.) e °gamavrttyaiva ] T176; °gamapravrttyaiva 
BHATT; °gamapravr— 47622; °gavrtyaiva 4509 e pratiksanam yo 
‘hamsa hamsa’ ity ] conj.; — so —- ty 47622; pratiksanam ‘yo ham so 
‘ham sah’ ity BHATT; pratiksam praguktajapakramena hamsa hamsety 
4509; pratiksanam praguktajapakramo hamsa hamsety T176 e ama- 
ntranapadena briiyad] conj.; amantranapadatvena bhiiyad BHATT’s 
MSS A and A; dmantranapadatvena briiyad 47622; amantranapra- 
kdrena yo briyad 4509, T176; amreditapadatvena briyaéd BHATT 


(conj.) e sambhavanayam | 47622, BHATT; sambhavanarthe 4509, 
T176 e ity aksaradvayam | 4509, BHATT; ity a — 47622; U dvayam 
T176 e iti—tena visistenaiva |] 4509, BHATT; -—stenaiva 47622; 
iti tena vinastenaiva T176 e “dvayajnanavata purusena sadasivah 


sakalas ] 47622, BHATT; °dvaya-(°dvayam T176)-japajnanavata puruse- 
na (°sena T176) hamkdrena sivavacina sakarena gaktivacina vacyatvad 
dhamsakhyad eva sadasivah Saktisarirah sakalas (°Sivasaktih Sarirah saka- 
lam T176) 4509, T176 


Rdmakantha’s reading of the verse is not straightforward, as the later part of the 
commentary reveals, but the portion of the commentary cited may be interpreted as 
follows: 


Since, with the sound ham, which is the motion of the inward breath, 
and with the sound sa, which is the motion of the outward breath, the 
movement to and fro of the breath is established, because of invariable 
concomitance, to be inseparable from the action of speech, [therefore] he 
who by its mere movement to and fro may at every moment speak—l[and 
here the optative is used] in the sense of [stating a] possibility—with a 
word that is an address in the vocative ‘hamsa, hamsa’ ((for] as they say, 
‘in contracting and expanding there are the two sounds ham and sa’), 
such a special person alone, who knows the two powers of the breaths 
that are words, attains at first Sadasiva, (the) Sakala (Lord). 


In BHATT’s text there is an explicit analysis: ... “yo ‘ham so ’ham sah” iti... (‘This 
“I” is “He” ’); but this is impossible if the ensuing identification of what precedes the 
iti as a vocative (4mantrana) is correct. This analysis is also implicit in the discussion 
in the svatmasaksatkaropadesaprakarana of the Sarvajnanottara that culminates with 
the following (13cd, IFP MS 47818, p. 64): yah Sivah so ’ham eveti advaitam bhaévayet 
sada. See also Sivayogaratna 4-5 and 27. But such a notion is of course widespread 
outside the Siddhanta too, for see, for example, Ksemaraja’s Sivasitravimarsini ad 
3:27, and see PADOUX 1992:140ff and 1987:145-7. 

Perhaps just conceivable as an emendation of our line is the following: kilatma 
<hamsabijango> bindukaraputikrtah; ‘The soul, it is said, is embodied in the seed 
syllables ham and sa contained between two dots.’ As for the two dots, could these 
perhaps be the two end points of the pranacara, namely the heart and the bahyadva- 
dasanta? Cf. Vijnanabhairava 24ab: trdhve prano hy adho jivo visargatma paroccaret. 
SINGH (1979:19) interprets this as follows: 


Chapter Fourteen 377 


hamsab’ 82? (82) 

His thoughts intent on this goal (tallaksyagatacittatma), his breath 
having the attribute of ‘movement’ towards that goal (7?) (tatsancara- 
gunanilah) ,®*5 he will, [by moving] from [one] ‘place’ [to another] by ex- 
celling other [lower] ‘places’, attain a superlative reward (utkrstam pha- 
lam).824 (83) 

By (the yoganga of] discrimination (tarkena) [the yogin] should discern 
(alocya) all this [lower universe] to possess the property of transience 
(vinaSagunasamyutam); he should [then] first abandon [this lower] path 
that is divided into parts (samsam...margam) and he should resort to 
the partless tattva (niramsam tattvam). (84) 

When that is supportless (niralambam yada tat syat),8*° then that 
state of meditative awareness (samadhih sah) is the highest possible 


Para devi or Highest Sakti who is of the nature of visarga goes on (cease- 
lessly) expressing herself upward (iirdhve) (from the centre of the body 
to dvadaSanta or a distance of twelve fingers) in the form of exhalation 
(prana) and downward (adhah) (from dvadasanta to the centre of the 
body) in the form of inhalation (jiva or apana). 


In his annotation he remarks (1979:20): 


In Sanskrit, visarga is represented by two points or dots one above the 
other. One point in this case is dvadasanta where prana ends and the 
other is the Art or centre of the body where apana ends. It is because of 
these two points also that ParaSakti is known as visargatma. 


8221t may seem odd that the practitioner is not made the subject; but cf. Srikanthiya 
4-5b, (HANNEDER 1998:240): 


jantiinam hrdayabjastho vadate nadaripakah 
Agopalanganabala mlecchah prakrtabhasinah 
jalecara$ ca ye sattvas te 'pi nityam bruvanti tam 
nadariipam hakaram tu hamsa hamseti suvrate. 


The second and third half-lines, which may appear to confirm the choice of the verb 
here, are actually drawn from the Kalottara text-tradition (+ Sardhatrigatikalottara 
1:6c-7b); and one might consider the possibility that bruvan could be a corruption of 
sphuran, for cf. Tantraloka 4:136cd: tat punah pibati pritya hamso hamsa iti sphuran. 

®23Qne could consider emendation to tatsancaragatanilah. 

824Qbserve that this echoes 5:158cd (for which see fn. 635 on p.318 above). The 
syntax here is awkard and the text may be corrupt. 

525The referent of the tat is not made immediately clear; one might expect it to refer 
to the yogin’s ability to remain ‘in’ the partless tattva, but then its gender would need 
to be accounted for. It probably refers after all to the ultimate tattva, since Pratoda’s 
question below (14:86) implies that he understood it in that way. 


378 Parakhyatantra 


(parah). In [that] state of meditative awareness (samadhau) he is not 
aware of all external objects (vetti no vedyam sarvam) that belong to the 
sphere of sound and the rest [of the sensations] (Sabdadigocaram). When 
he accomplishes this (tannispattau) that knower of yoga attains whatever 
fruit he desires. (85) 

Pratoda spoke: 

That (supreme tattva] is by nature supportless (svardpaniralambam), be- 
yond the forms of all external objects (arthakarabahiskrtam). How then 
(katham evam) can the yogic meditator attain the Sivatattva? (86) 

Prakasa spoke: 

If that nature is formless, [you say,] how then can it be known? [But] 
do we not experience knowledge of happiness, unhappiness and such like 
[feelings that are] similarly [devoid of form] (tadvat)?° (87) 

Knowledge of such [a feeling] (tajjmanam) we know (gamyam) from its 
effect, because we can determine the nature of that [feeling] (tatsvarupava- 
dharanat). Now (atha) a cognition of [His] nature (svaripavijnanam) 
does arise through which [He, although formless,] is known (laksyate): 
the cognition (of the form] ‘the nature of brahman is bliss’ (anandam 
brahmano ripam)®" has that (nature of His] as its object. (88-89b) 

For something that is [supposed to be] ‘knowable’ that is supportless 
could not then generate [knowledge]. That by which that [knowledge] is 
generated is a knowable object, because one has a synthetic awareness of 
knowledge [of it].9?® The blissful form (of God], which is devoid of bonds 


826This translation assumes that the suffix -ka in sukhaduhkhadikam is intended to 
convey what would normally have been expressed by a genitive. The assumption is 
perhaps unnecessary, but see p. Laxxi. 

827This pada is perhaps a Vedic quotation. Note that it appears quoted thus (in a 
similar context) in Bhasarvajna’s Nyayasara (3.65, p. 144): anandam brahmano ripam 
tac ca mokse ’bhilaksyate/ vijnadnam anandam brahmeti The third pada is probably 
an independent quotation (of the end of Brhadaranyakopanisat 3.9.28) and we should 
probably correct ’bhilaksyate to 'bhivyajyate, since that is what the editor prints when 
he quotes the same unit in his introduction (p. 12) and since that is what is printed when 
the half-line is quoted by Kumaradeva in his TattvaprakaSatatparyadipika ad verse 3 
(p.9). Ramakantha quotes the single quarter-verse anandam brahmano ripam in his 
Paramoksanirasakarikavytti when introducing verse 50. Cf. the verse that appears in 
Taittiriyopanisat 2.4 and 2.9: 


yato vaco nivartante aprapya manasa saha 
&nandam brahmano vidvan na bibheti kadacana 


(In the second instance the verse ends with kutagcana.) 
828 es conj. The interpretation and constitution of the text are uncertain here. If I 


Chapter Fourteen 379 


(pasariktam)®?9 and utterly pure, can be known. (90) 


In him [viz. in the soul who has attained that state] (tasmin)®° 
there arise (bhavanti) the eight [yogic powers] beginning with miniaturi- 
sation (animadyah); in order they are (kramat sthitah): miniaturisation 
(anima), weightlessness (Jaghima), massiveness (mahima), attainment 
(praptih), wish-fulfillment (prakamyam), power (isita), control (vasita), 
and dwelling wherever one wishes |i.e.] being linked to [whatever] place 
(one wishes] (yatrakamam ca vasita padayogita).°3! (91-92b) 

Miniaturisation [is so called] because of having minuteness (anutva- 
sambandhat); weightlessness because of the state of being light (Jaghu- 


have understood what is intended, we infer from our experience of them the existence 
of things that have no form, such as happiness, and therefore our knowledge of them 
is not strictly speaking supportless: happiness exists. 

The form anusandhitah could perhaps instead be an aisa past participle of the verb 
anusan,/dha (rather than the noun anusandhi with the suffix tasil): such a form is 
used in 14:12d above, and may have been intended in 2:29d (where, however, another 
reading was preferred), and such a past participle appears in Ma4linivijayottara 19:65, 
perhaps in the sense of ‘meditated upon’. 

829 or con). 

83067 conj. But palaeographically closer to what is transmitted would be tasmad, 
which could be rendered with ‘From that [knowledge]...’. 

83! Observe that the interpretation of individual terms in this list (which is common to 
a large range of texts, including Vyasa’s Yogasitrabhasaya ad Yogasitra 3:45) is not ev- 
erywhere identical. The account in Kirana 58:48-55, for instance, differs in its interpre- 
tation of mahiman (which it understands as receiving great honour, which is admittedly 
also a just conceivable interpretation of Parakhya 14:93a). In the Matanga’s account of 
these powers (vidyapada 17:108c—-125), mahiman includes both honour and huge body- 
size. Cf. also Svacchanda 10:1072c-1073 and Ksemaraja’s Svacchandatantroddyota 
thereon, and Yajnavalkyasmrti 3.4:302-3, referred to by VASUDEVA (*2000:280). Some 
texts omit the last member and include instead gariman in fourth place: e.g. AmSumat 
53:25c-26b and 70:22 (IFP MS T.3, pp. 233 and 333). BRUNNER has referred to this 
alternative list (1977:506, fn. 7), but was unaware that it appeared in Saiva literature. 

The last member of the list is indeed the most problematic, for not only its inter- 
pretation but also its names are variable. BRUNNER (1977:507) accepts into her text 
kamavasayita te bhavatu, which, extrapolating from the gloss satyasankalpata given in 
the Yogasitrabhasya, she analyses as follows (1977:508, fn. 14): ‘fait, pour les désirs 
(kama) relatifs & telle ou telle chose (yatra) d’avoir une fin (avasaya)—c’est a dire d’étre 
exaucés.’ But she also comments (ibid.): ‘Certains dictionnaires, prenant avasaya dans 
le sens de “demeurer”, en donnent la traduction suivante: “pouvoir de se transporter 
14 of on le désir”. .. Mais nous n’avons jamais trouvé une interprétation semblable dans 
les Agama, ni dans les texts du Yoga’. It seems possible, but far from certain, that the 
Parakhya intends this sense, and so I have retained M”’s vasita in the text. Unfortu- 
nately what appears to be the gloss given below (14:94b) on the last member of the 
list is unclear and may be corrupt. 


380 Parakhyatantra 


bhavatah); massiveness because of great size (mahato manat); attain- 
ment because of attaining everything (akhilaptitah); wish-fulfillment is 
the procuring of one’s desires (kamyasampraptih); and power because it 
is the state of being a lord (isabhavatah). (92c-93) 

Control [means] total control (vasita sarva);*3? [the power of being] 
wherever one wishes (yatrakamam)®*5 [is so called because this is dic- 
tated] exactly according to one’s desire (yathecchaya). Thus the radi- 
ant (samujjvalam) sovereignty that consists in these eight powers (asta- 
gunaisvaryam) ,®*4 and which is one’s own nature (nijadharmam),®*° be- 
comes gradually revealed for the yogin by the practice of yoga (yoga- 
sevanat). (94) 

Pratoda spoke: 

Yoga has been defined as contact. That [contact] of the soul (asya) is 
taught to be with what, according to this system? It cannot be union of 
the soul with a tattva, because (the soul is] all-pervading.&® (95) 


832Qr perhaps the sense is rather ‘Control [means that] every woman is under one’s 
control’. 

833 er conj. As we have seen above (in fn. 831 on p. 379), the name and interpretation 
of this last member of the list are problematic. 

834 er conj. ISAACSON. The transmitted Ifagunaigvaryam could be retained and ren- 
dered with ‘sovereignty over these powers of the Lord’. 

835Since this is in apposition to the subject, we expect the nominative nijadharmah, 
but this form has been retained on the assumption that it might be an instance of aifa 
usage, the neuter ending being perhaps the result of attraction, or of the expression 
being treated as an adjective to aifvaryam. 

836VaASUDEVA (*2000:176) holds this to be an allusion to the Vaisesika conception 
of yoga given in Vaisesgikasdtra 5.2.16-17 but as formulated by Candra&nanda in his 
commentary (the earliest surviving) thereon. VASUDEVA refers to WEZLER’s article on 
the interpolation of the definition of yoga into the Vaisesikasiitra (1982), in the course 
of which WEZLER defends (1982:650—-1) Muni JAMBOVIJAYA’s constitution of Vaisesika- 
sitra 5.2.17 (ending with ...sa yogah) with Candrananda’s commentary (containing 
the phrase samyogo yogah). Thus it may have been Candrananda who was the first 
Vaigesika to use the expression samyogo yogah in the context of defining yoga. If this 
is so, and if Pratoda means here to allude to a Vaisesika, then this might be an allusion 
to Candrananda’s commentary, which might one day help us further to pin down the 
date of the Parakhya (see introduction p.li). But, although the earliest surviving 
commentary, that of Candrananda, commented on a text of Vaisesikasitra 5.2.17 that 
did not contain the phrase samyogo yogah, it is also possible that a contemporaneous 
or earlier version of that interpolated sutra did, or that another Vaisesika used the 
expression before Candrananda. 

It seems to me also possible that it was not a Vaisesika position to which Pratoda was 

alluding, for cf. Kaundinya’s bhasya ad Pasupatasiitra 1.1 (p.6): atratmesvarasamyogo 


Chapter Fourteen 381 


Prakasa spoke: 

It is connection with (the eight supernatural accomplishments of self- 
)miniaturisation and so forth. Or yoga [comes about] because of the union 
with [Siva’s] power (Saktiyogatah), or yoga is something that is in the in- 
tensive practice of yoga and that [arises] from the attainment of samadhi 
(samadhiyogatah).®8’ Or yoga is immersion into Him (tatsamavegah) aris- 
ing from the contemplation of His nature (tatsvarupabhavanat). [In fact] 
union with the Lord is impossible, because He is all-pervading. [When] it 
is spoken of [in scripture], then [it is spoken of] in a figurative sense (tad 
upacaratah). (96-7) 

Success in yoga (yogarddhih), accompanied by the eight [supernatu- 
ral] properties,®¥8 {is achieved] by the intensive practice of that [viz. yoga] 
(tadabhyasat). By the means taught above for achieving this (taduk- 
topayatah) yogins become possessed of supernatural powers (siddhah), 
supreme because of yoga (yogato varah).*°° (98) 

And they can demonstrate their power in special circumstances 
(kvacit) before certain special persons (kasyacid agratah) when it is de- 
manded by those persons (tatprstam).*4° (Such power] must be accepted 
[to have existed too] at other times and places and in other men (deSa- 


yogah... The idea is frequently repeated later in the text by Kaundinya (see HARA 
1992:221, fn. 16) and is briefly discussed by HARA (1992:212-14). And cf. also Ahirbu- 
dhnyasamhita 31:15ab: samyogo yoga ity ukto jivatmaparamatmanoh. (My attention 
was drawn to the latter by COLAS 1988:246.) 

To avoid potential confusion, I should add that I do not suppose that the Ahirbu- 
dhnyasamhitaé could have been the Parakhya’s source. MATSUBARA’s dating (1994:22- 
7) of the Ahirbudhnyasamhitaé to c. 600 AD—on the strength of his perceptions of 
the date of certain usages in the text and of the unattributed ‘quotation’ by Utpala 
Vaisnava of a single verse found in it but also in many other works of different disciplines 
is unconvincing. SANDERSON (2002:35-8) has since convincingly demonstrated that the 
text postdates Ksemaraja (fl. c. 1000-1500 AD). 

837 VASUDEVA (*2000:176) translates this half-line as containing two possibilities: ‘Or, 
yoga (arises) from the attainment of samadhi- or resides in the practice of yoga.’ 

838The above-mentioned properties of self-miniaturization, etc. The compound yoga- 
rddhih illustrates that for the redactor of the Parakhya vocalic r was pronounced as 
an initial consonant r followed by the vowel j or u (see p. lxxxiii and fn. 403 on p. 262 
above). The same compound occurs in Sarvajnanottara yogaprakarana 25ab in the 
text of the old Nepalese MS: yogarddhir iti jneya Sivena paramatmana. (South Indian 
sources read yogasiddhir iti, e.g. IFP MS 47818 p.11. The sloppy Adyar edition here 
omits 7 verses.) 

839 er con). 

840 ez con). 


382 Parakhyatantra 


kalanarantare).°4! (99) 

Now you may say (cet), ‘([But] this is just popular belief (prasiddhi- 
matram evedam), [for] why is it not directly observed (kasmat...tan na 
drsyate)?’*42/To this we reply:] Does everything you have not yourself 
seen not exist on the surface of the earth? (100) 

The circle of the earth is a repository of manifold variety (prakaranam 
vicitranam alayam): no person can see or hear everywhere. The non- 
existence (abhavah) decided upon by such [a person] (tadviniscayah)*% 
of wondrous things (citranam) on earth cannot be proved. (101-102b) 

We know about (pratiyate) the consciousness (cit) that yogins 
have because of the power [they have] that exceeds [our] knowledge 
(vijianottarasamarthyat). Through scripture too (agamenapi) we know 
of (mitam) the state of being a yogin (yogitvam), together with its limit- 
less powers (aparyantagunaih). Such a yogin (sa yogi) should play about 
with his powers for the sake of inspiring faith (pratyayahetutah). (102c— 
103) 

Because of faith (pratyayena)*“4 other seekers after liberation will get 
initiation. Such a yogin engaged in yoga (tasya yogayuktasya yoginah) 
will also [himself] have faith (pratyayo ’pi).*4° (104) 

And he should perform yogic suicide (utkrantim) by means of yoga 
(yogatah) when his [bodily] powers fail (gatasaktikah).“45 By enunci- 


841 Compare this usage with those in 3:3la and 3:46a. It appears to be characteristic 
of Buddhist pramanaSastra (it occurs, e.g., in Tattvasangraha 2806, 2876, 3022, 3086, 
3117, and in Nyayamanjari, vol. 1, p.438 and p.606, verse 58). 

842Qr ‘Now you may say, “(But] this is just popular belief. Why? This (supernatural 
power] is not directly observed.” ’ Or perhaps emend to kasmac caitan na drsyate: 
‘fYou may say, “But] this is just popular belief; and why is it not directly observed”.’ 
For such a use of prasiddhimatra, see Nyayamanjari, vol. 1, p. 491, verse 157. 

843-This could belong instead to the last half-line as an otiose asseveration: ‘this is cer- 
tain’. But if that is what is intended then it is awkward that tad and viniscayah do not 
agree in gendes. If such a sense is to be preferred, then perhaps an emendation should 
be considered, for example to tad dhi nigcitam? The present interpretation is also not 
without awkwardness because of the enjambement and because of the positioning of 
the ca in 14:102a. 

8““Or perhaps again ‘because of [inspiring with] faith’. A pratyaya in Sardhatrigati- 
kalottara 21 (which is devoted to the subject of pratyayas) is something that inspires 
faith. The epithet moksakanksinam is perhaps used proleptically: ‘others [once they 
have thereby become] seekers after liberation’. 

Sex con). 

846 6+ conj. This is no more than a guess because I cannot see an obvious sense in the 

transmitted gatagaktitah. But perhaps the yogin’s bodily powers are supposed never 


Chapter Fourteen 383 


ation of the mantra SADYOJATA ending with HUMPHAT for as many as 
eight thousand times he certainly achieves yogic suicide (utkramate dhru- 
vam).®47 By performing [this] (karanat) he splits (sphotayet) {...t. (105- 


to fail. According the Svayambhuvasitrasangraha’s account of utkranti (22:1-8), the 
motivation for yogic suicide is supposed to be either that the yogin feels weariness for 
the world or that he has enjoyed the pleasures that he wished to enjoy; he should not 


kill himself to obtain things or because he is in trouble (Svayambhuvasiitrasangraha 
22:1-2): 


athaétmano vadham mantri na kuryat phalavanchaya 
na ca duhkhasamutpattau kamato deham utsrjet 
yada nirvedam &pannah praptabhogo 'thava punah 
dhyanadharanayogena Sivalinamanas tyajet. 


Disaffection is also the motivation in Matangayogapada 7:41a (virakto va tyajed deham) 
and in Malinivijayottara 17:25: 


sarvam apy athavé bhogam manyamano virlpakam 
svaSariram parityajya $a§vatam padam rcchati. 


But the account of Rauravasitrasangraha 9 seems to contradict that of the Svayam- 
bhuvasutrasangraha, for it prescribes yogic suicide precisely when the yogin is troubled 
by bad omens, protracted disease, imprisonment (9:lc-3). In the Kirana it is a yogic 
awareness of time (described at length in the verses preceding the treatment of yogic 
suicide) and of how to cheat his future death that appears to motivate the yogin (59:27): 


kalajno yo bhaved yogi jnatvé mrtyum anagatam 
vancanam S&stradrstena tanmargenaébhyaset punah 


e kadlajio yo] D'M”; kalaksepo Ep e anagatam] D'M’; 
anamayam Ep e vaiicanam | D’; pacanam M”; pafcanam Ep 


‘The yogin who gains an understanding of time, having known his future death then 
practises the cheating (of death] by [following] the path for doing so that is known 
through scripture.’ (Observe that Ep’s text is once again unintelligible.) 

For certain non-dualist Saivas yogic suicide is not as obviously desirable as for 
Saiddhiantikas; for a discussion of Abhinavagupta’s views of utkranti, see VASUDEVA 
*2000:344-8. 

847The mantras and methods prescribed by the various scriptural accounts of utkranti 
referred to above appear to be more various than the reasons for undertaking it. No 
other account involves SADYOJATA with HUMPHAT. The Ma4linIvijayottara prescribes, 
among other things, repeated enunciation of the mantra SKRK, but repetition in huge 
numbers of mantras seems not to be enjoined in the other accounts. To those accounts 
we may add that of Sardhatrigatikalottara 11:15c-19b, which says nothing about the 
yogin's motivation. Most similar to each other are perhaps the accounts of Raurava- 
sitrasangraha 9:8ff and Matangayogapada 7:41-8, in which the yogin begins with the 
visualisation of a lunar disc within a solar disc within his heart and then cuts his 
way upwards using the ASTRA mantra. (This is very roughly paraphrased in order 
to avoid a discussion of the corruptions and problems, particularly in the account of 


384 Parakhyatantra 


106) 

Once he has achieved yogic suicide (utkrantau), he who understands 
what is taught (vidhivedavit) becomes joined with brahman (brahma- 
sayujyam prayati).*48 Thus the one who understands the performance 
of yoga (yogavidhanajnah) achieves the eternal union (yogam apnoti 
$asvatam).*49 (107) 

I have taught you the supreme yoga (yogeSvarah) ,®°° the most impor- 


the Rauravasitrasangraha.) In the Kirana’s account, the yogin begins by venerating 
SadasSiva with an astapuspika rite, then proceeds to perform puraka and kumbhaka, 
bursting through the granthis along the central channel. Corruption masks a number 
of details, including which mantras are to be used. Bursting through granthis, often 
explicitly as the culmination of some sort of pranayama, is the common factor in the 
Saiddhantika accounts, and it is probably what is intended to be alluded to in our text 
in the corrupt half-line 14:106cd. Compare Sardhatrigatikalottara 11:15c—19b: 


yat tad dhrdi sada padmam adhomukham avasthitam 15 
vikasaty etad Urdhvam tu purakena tu puritam 
Urdhvasroto bhavet padmam kumbhakena nirodhitam 16 
recakena tathé ksiptam sadyahpranaharena tu 

muktva hrdayapadmam tu urdhvasroto vyavasthitam 17 
recito gacchati hy urdhvam granthim bhittva ksanena tu 
bhittva kapaladvaram tu jivo hy irdhvam tu recitah 18 
sadaSivapadam gatva na bhiyo janma capnuyat. 


There are some ambiguities here, but I interpret this tentatively as follows: 


The lotus in the heart that always remains downward-facing [and so 
closed] blossoms [and turns] upwards, filled out by [the performance of] 
puraka. That upward-tending lotus is [next] fixed by [the performance 
of] kumbhaka and [then] it is thrown(?) by [the performance of a] recaka 
that instantaneously takes away life. Leaving the lotus of the heart that 
[now] remains upward-tending, [the soul,] voided [from the heart] goes 
upwards and straight away breaks through (each?) knot. Being voided 
upwards, the soul breaks through the gateway in the skull, and reaching 
the level of SadaSiva he is never again reborn. 


On the strength of this parallel, one could consider emending spharam to dvaram, but 
the half-line remains problematic. 

848The next phrase suggests that this is intended as a reference to ultimate liberation, 
even though the expression chosen might seem to suggest otherwise. I have taken 
sayujya in its literal sense of ‘union’, but one could understand instead ‘liberation as 
Brahma/brahman’, for see 15:39, fn. 889 on p. 397 below, and 15:71. 

849 What is presumably intended is the ‘union’ of the soul with his own innate powers. 
Cf. 14:95-7 above. 

850The epithet of the first two padas rather implies that this could refer to a person, 
but the epithet that follows suggests that it may not. I suppose it to be a karmadharaya 
(or tatpurusa) comparable to tantraraja. 


Chapter Fourteen 385 


tant among all teachings of yoga (sakalayogavidhanamukhyah),®°! ripe 


(-pragalbhah) with the power (-prabhava-) of the wealth (-vibhava-) of 
happiness attained from [the realisation of]®°* those innate qualities (- 
dharma), which are distinct from (-bhaktavisesa-) the qualities well known 
as (the first four of the eight dispositional qualities] of the buddhi (buddhi- 
prasiddhaguna-):5°? now [will be] determined (niyatam) that which is 
the means to the attainment of the fruit [of liberation] (phalasadhanam 
yat).°54 (108) 


Thus the fourteenth chapter, an exposition of yoga,®°> belonging to the topic 
of liberation, in the great tantra called the Supreme. 


85!Qr perhaps ‘important with all the teachings of yoga’. 

852One could consider emending to -samprapti-: ‘...the happiness resulting from the 
attainment of...’ 

853 These are the eight qualities (of jiana, vairagya, dharma, aigvarya and their oppo- 
sites) referred to above in 4:90 that reside in the buddhi and determine the disposition 
of the bound soul. But note that in 15:63-8 the yogin attains perfect qualities with 
the names of the first four (prefixed by sat-) when he attains Siva-hood. Thus buddhi- 
prasiddhagunabhakta- (assuming that bhakta is not a corruption) may be intended to 
have been interpreted ‘distinct from (though correlated with, the first four of] the gunas 
famous as belonging to the buddhi’. 

854This leads into the next chapter, which is largely taken up with a discussion of the 
function of initiation and the four sadhanas of kriya, carya, yoga, and jnana. 

855 6 conj. Cf. fn. 723 on p. 346 above. 


PARAKHYATANTRA CHAPTER XV 


Prakasa spoke: 
In the [treatment of the topic] of means (to liberation] (sédhane), the nam- 
ing of [each of the particular] means,®°® the settled view of [the function 
of] the means, the rejection of the liberation taught (by us] being the same 
as those (notions of liberation] well-known [as those] of opponents.®” (1) 

A group of means has been taught that is preceded by initiation 
as their basis.°® (There are: the group of means] called knowledge 
(vijnanakhyah), that called action (kriyakhyah), that called carya, and 
that called yoga. (2) 

Pratoda spoke: 
Each of the means [to liberation] has been presented as the principal 


8861n this chapter sadhana is the term used for the four means of jana, kriya, caryé, 
and yoga. For the Mrgendra and Matanga, and possibly also for this text, these are 
also the titles of sections of text, but they need not be (see introduction, p. lxiii). 

As in the preceding chapters, the opening verse is a list of the topics that are to be 
treated. The first is dealt with in 15:2; the discussion of the réle of the four saédhanas 
(or padas) vis & vis dIksa& covers 15:3-45; opponents’ views of the nature of liberation 
are discussed in 15:46—60; and the Siddhanta’s view of liberation as a condition of being 
equal to Siva is treated in 15:61-73. 

857Perhaps one could consider emending to prativadiprasiddhokté muktih samyapa- 
rigrahah: ‘...(the views of] liberation taught as well-known § by [various] opponents 
[and] the attainment of the condition of being identical to [Siva].’ 

58 As we shall see below, the Parakhya teaches that there is an obligation to follow 
the samayaéd (i.e. the sddhanas) after an initiation that is sapeks& (see 15:23-6), and in 
teaching this it is in line with the Kirana (6:5-12 and GOODALL 1998:360-75). But the 
Parakhya also teaches that the sédhanas are necessary to prepare people for salvific 
initiation (15:4-10) and so can actually precede it. In this the Parakhya is not in 
line with the Kirana, whose position is that it is diks& that provides the adhikara for 
their practice (Kirana 6:8cd). The problem of attaining the adhikara to perform the 
sddhanas is solved in the Parakhya by allowing that this is attained just by samayadiksa 
(15:12). The Paraékhya allows the sadhanas to have a very little force even when no 
salvific initiation is bestowed (15:38c-39b), and it allows diksa followed by the pursuit 
of just one of the sadhanas to be salvific (15:39c-41), but it is clear that the ideal route 
to liberation, according to the Parakhya, is that of dIksa followed by all four of the 
sadhanas (15:43-4). 


388 Parakhyatantra 


one. {But] which among the (four] means of knowledge, [action, carya,] 
and [yoga] (bodhadinam upayanam) is the means to liberation (mukti- 
sadhanam)? (3) 

Prakasa spoke: 

Now it is this initiation which is primary, since it is faught to be the 
‘root’ of those (tanmilacoditam).®°9 The four [means] are taught to be 
necessary auxiliaries (that contribute to it], since it is for it that they are 
useful (tasyam evopayogatah).5© (4) 

Now (tavat) knowledge (jnanam) is [knowledge] of the topics, distin- 
guishing their respective natures (tatsvarupavibhagatah). Until there is 
understanding of it (yavan na tadgato bhavah), there can be no perfor- 
mance of ritual action (kriyakramah). (5) 

Ritual action [in the course of initiation] has to be performed in 
each tattva (tattve tattve), beginning with [bringing about] birth [in 
each tattva] and ending with (bringing about] the union [of the soul 
with the divine state (7?) or with the next tattva up] (yogapascima), 
and so ritual action too (kriyapi), that is to say worship, oblations and 
so forth (pujahomadilaksana), is a necessary auxiliary to that [diksa] 
(tasyangam®®), (6) 

And carya too, which-consists of such observances as lying on ash, 
also serves as a necessary auxiliary [to initiation]. And yoga [too], which 
consists of pratyahara and such, and is held [to include also] dharanas 
and meditation: when the physical body (prakrte dehe) has been burnt, 
and a ‘mantra-body’ has been created (vidyadehe krte sati),°°* then (the 


859T suppose this to be an awkward syntactic compound intended to be interpreted 
as if it were tanmilatvena uktam. 

860In line with my understanding of Kirana 6 and Ramakantha’s interpretation of 
that chapter, I previously translated the second half of this verse ‘The four are taught 
to be auxiliaries because they are used only when that [initiation has been performed].’ 
(GOODALL, 1998:362, fn. 558). But after further wrestling with the corrupt text of the 
remainder of the discussion, it now seems to me that this cannot be the point. See fn. 
858 on p. 387 above. 

5°)T am assuming that the pronoun is intended to be a feminine (referring to diksa) 
and that the feminine genitive ending has been swallowed up in a double sandhi. This 
may seem circular, for, since I am supposing that the text is referring to the ritual 
linking in initiation of the soul of the initiand with each tattva in which he might be 
reborn in order to cause him to experience all that would accrue to him, ritual and 
initiation are here effectively identified. But there is presumably held to be more to 
diksa than puja and homa. 

862Mr. SUBRAMANIAM of the IFP observed to me that this term was typical of late 


Chapter Fifteen 389 


soul], filled with the nature of Siva (Sivabhavopabrmhitah) becomes ready 
for the ritual (of initiation]; therefore (tena) this [yoga too] is a necessary 
auxiliary [of initiation]. And thus (tena) initiation is the whole to which 
subsidiary parts belong (angini). (7—-9b) 

t...¢.86 Therefore the fruit arises from that which is the principal 
factor (pradhanottham);®™ [and] it is initiation which is. the principal 
factor. (9c—10b) 

Because (yat... tena) of [its] bestowing (pradanam) Siva-hood [and] 
destroying (ksapanam) of all the (soul’s] bonds (paSasantateh) it is called 
di-ksa—so established because of its giving and destroying (taddanat 
ksapanat).®® (10c-f) 


South Indian Siddhantas, which seems indeed to be true (it seems to be particularly 
common in the Sahasratantra, IFP MS T.33), but we do find it in some early works 
too. See SiddhayogeSvarimatatantra 19:3cd: tato nirdagdhakayas tu vidyadeham pra- 
kalpayet, and Vinasikhatantra 72-3. The term is also in nirvanadiksavidhi 14 and 
antyestividhi 24 of the Somasambhupaddhati (BRUNNER 1977:183 and 597) and in the 
quotation attributed to the Raurava in the Mrgendravrtti ad kriyapada 7:14. This 
expression is used of Siva in Matangavidyapada 3:31cd. If the argumentation has been 
rightly understood here, we must assume that the ‘burning’ of the physical body and 
the creation of a mantra-body are regarded as achieved by yoga. 
863Could this perhaps mean: ‘A statement about the whole to which subsidiary parts 
belong is one in which we are taught about the fruit; that [whole to which subsidiary 
parts belong] is taught to be what accomplishes [the fruit].’? Emendation might be 
considered to yatra Srutih phalasyangajaétam tatsadhakam smrtam: ‘The group of parts 
brings about that [whole] which is taught [to give] the fruit’. (Loosely paraphrasing 
the yatra clause, the structure would be yena sadhanena phalam bhavisyatiti griyate, 
tatsadhakam angajatam smrtam.) 
864 or conj. 
865 This nirvacana is to be found throughout Saiva literature: e.g. Matangakriyapada 
2:2—3b: 
danam nama paré k&sthé mantrapradhvastakarmanam 
paSor ya vyaktim ayati praksInakalusasya ca 
anayoh Sasane siddh& diks& ksapanadanayoh. 


It is referred to again in Matangakriyapada 5:99c-101. Cf. also the verse quoted in 
the SataratnollekhinI ad 69ab: diyate jnanasadbhavah ksiyate ca malatrayam/ diyate 
ksIyate ceti diksasabdo dvidhocyate. The first line of this verse appears as Cintya- 
Sastra 32:lcd (IFP T.13, p.177). Cf. also the similar verse quoted in the Tantraloka- 
viveka ad 1:43: diyate jnanasadbhavah ksiyante paSuvasanah/ danaksapanasamyukta 
diksa teneha kirtitaé. Dr. Judit TORZSOK has pointed out to me that it is also quoted 
(with small variations) in the Svacchandatantroddyota ad 5:88 and by Yogaraja ad 
Paramarthasara 3 (a version of the first half-line only). And cf. the verse quoted in the 
Mrgendravrtti ad kriy4pada 8:1 (and in the Mrgendrapaddhatitika, IFP MS T. 1021, 
pp. 186-7): 


390 Parakhyatantra 


Pratoda spoke: 
[Surely] liberation may arise through knowledge (jnanena), through kriya 
or through carya; or liberation might come about through yoga. (In any 
case] initiation [surely only] creates the eligibility for these [means] (tad- 
adhikarika®®®)? (11) 

Prakasa spoke: 


diyate jnanasadbhavah ksiyate karmavasana 
danaksapanayogya hi diks& Suddhih krtatmanam. 


Cf. also the following verse from Bhatta Bhaskara’s commentary on Sivasiltra 3.28: 


taddanat ksapanam samyak pasanaém syat paSos tatah 
diksaSabda iha prokto danaksapanalaksanah. 


Yet further instances are quoted by BRUNNER (1977:3-4), and the nirvacana is dis- 
cussed, together with Ksemendra’s irreverent parody in DesopadeSa 8:3 (dinara-ksaya- 
karanad diksety ukta...), by KAHRS 1998:93-5. 

In the garbled passage quoted in the apparatus from the appendix to the Sarva- 
matopanyasa it seems likely that the string of gibberish following the quotation of 
Parakhya 15:14 consists of the first words of three quotations: anayosSasane is from 
Matangakriyapada 2:3a (=Sataratnasangraha 69a); sa gaktis tasya is from Sataratna- 
sangraha 70a; and diksanalaplustam is from Matangakriyapada 7:40a (=Sataratna- 
sangraha 72a). The last two verses of the passage (from dharmadharmaksayakari 
to sarvatra siddhyati) are cited, prefaced by tad uktam parakhye, in JnaénaprakaSa’s 
Sivagamadimahatmyasangraha, as well as in the Diksadarga (see Appendix I, C:54-5). 
They may therefore have belonged to the Parakhya, perhaps even to this chapter. If 
they did belong to this chapter, the most likely place to insert them might be here, 
just before Pratoda’s question of 15:11. They might be interpreted thus: 


This diksa of the supreme Lord destroys the [accumulated rewards of] 
good and bad action. Liberation is not attained through knowledge 
(jnanatah), through yoga, or through carya; it is through diksa, according 
to this system (atra), that liberation [is to be attained] for all living be- 
ings in this universe (iha). By that power of Siva, liberation is [something 
that can be] achieved (?) for all souls (sarvatra). 


Pratoda’s question in 15:11 would be a plausible rejoinder to this. Three considera- 
tions could be said to speak against its inclusion into the text: its overuse of otiose 
particles is an awkwardness that is not characteristic of our author; the text makes 
sense without it; and there are no obvious triggers (such as homoioteleuton) that could 
have caused its omission. Of course there are responses to these considerations: no 
trigger is required for omission; the text can often be construed even when it is wrong; 
and poor transmission in the testimonia might account for what may be judged to be 
uncharacteristic particle usage. But the first consideration has persuaded me to leave 
this unit out of the text. 

This. is an odd expression if it is intended as I have translated, and one could 
consider emending 11d to diksaé tadadhikarakrt, but I prefer to accept the transmitted 
text and regard it as aisa usage. 


Chapter Fifteen 391 


Before that [salvific initiation] there is [already] eligibility (adhikarah)— 
[bestowed] in the form of rite of induction into the cult as a neophyte 
(samayikaranatmakah) ,—which is taught to be for the regular recitation 


of scripture relating to that [salvific initiation(?)] (tajjfianadhyayane), 
and for the being taught and for the memorising (of scripture].®°” (12) 

In that (rite of induction] there is no cleaning out of [all that a soul has 
to experience in] the tattvas. It concludes with the laying on of the [Siva- 
)hasta (samaptir hastadanatah).°°8 When this [initiatory rite] goes only 
that far (tavanmatra yada sa syat), then the initiation is not salvific. (13) 

Therefore the means is supreme initiation, together with knowledge 
or with action and the others [of the means]. Knowledge by itself is not 
seen to produce results, since, when [objects of desire such as] women or 
food are cognised, enjoyment of them is not possible without action. So 
too action depends on knowledge, for action is necessarily preceded by 
knowledge. (14-15) 

Therefore both (dve ’pi*®*) knowledge and action come together as 


887 es conj. Here I have emended the final tatah to a connective tatha on the grounds 


that neither a sequential ‘then’ nor another ablative ‘from that’ seems appropriate. 
This half-line is unclear, not just because it is not obvious what the intended referent 
of the initial tat is (perhaps we should rather interpret ‘belonging to Him’), but also 
because the intended sense of the three terms is not certain. Where just the terms 
Sravana and adhyayana are juxtaposed (e.g. in Tantraloka 2:46), they may be assumed 
to refer to being taught and to svadhydya respectively. Svacchanda 4:79 also gives 
three terms: 


samay! samskrto hy evam; vacane ’syarhaté bhavet 
Sravane 'dhyayane home pijanadau tathaiva ca. 


Ksemaraja’s Svacchandatantroddyota thereon explains these three as follows: vaca- 
nam buddhyarohayavartanam; sravanam arthabodhah; adhyayanam vedavat satata- 
patha agamagranthasya; adisabdena japadhya&nadayah. The Pardkhya’s smarana may 
then correspond to the Svacchanda’s vacana and the other two terms be understood 
as Ksemaraja interprets them. 

8681t is exactly at this point that samayadiksa is concluded in the Somasambhu- 
paddhati (samayadiksaévidhi 115, BRUNNER 1977:109). Cf. also Ramandatha’s 
Siddhantadipika 136cd (IFP MS T.914, p.9) Sivahastapraddinena samskrtah samayI 
krtah. The interpretation I previously offered of Parakhya 15:13 (GOODALL 1998:362, 
fn. 588), in which I had assumed that hastadanatah referred to salvific initiation and 
that the text was contrasting gnosis with ritual, now seems quite impossible. This 
mistake seems especially foolish, but less foolish misunderstandings of the same kind 
are inevitable when we examine passages from poorly transmitted unedited texts, since 
it is often impossible to understand enough of their context. 

5°°Note that this is an aiga usage, since dve should be pragrhya. The same usage 


392 Parakhyatantra 


the means to attain the fruit (phalopayasamagate). And carya and yoga 
too are taught to be subsidiary to knowledge and action (citkriyanugatav 
api).87° (16) 

All carya, which consists of observances (caranalaksana), depends on 
(7?) the performance of kriya (kriyacaragraha). Yoga, which consists of 
pratyahara and other [constituents] is dependent. on the knowledge of 
meditation (samadhijnanasamsritah). (17) 

tTherefore, since one who is endowed with knowledge about doc- 
trine and about ritual action (jaanavan yah kriyavan) is taught to be 
a guru (desikah),®”! [the obligation to perform] homa and worship is 
slight (svalpam) for one who enjoys the assistance of that kriya which 
(ya kriya...tatparigrahagasya) is accompanied by carya and equipped 
with knowledge of doctrinet.2”? (18-19b) 


appears again below in 15:20c, as well as in Appendix I.A:2c—3a. 
87° Both ideas seem oddly expressed, and it is possible that the verse has been wrongly 
constituted and interpreted. 
S71Cf., e.g., Matangakriyapada 5:3—-4c (in place of 4cd BHATT has marked a lacuna, 
but 4c can be supplied from the quotation of these padas ad Matangavidyapada 26:63, 
p. 567): 
vidyapadarthakuSalah kriyapadagatakramah 
yogapadakrtabhyasa§$ caryapad&nuvartakah 
gurur diksam prakurvita. 

Cf. also the verse Ksemaraja quotes in his Netroddyota ad 16:77c-78b(?): 


na kriyarahitam jnanam na jnanarahita kriya 
Cf. also the following verse cited (as a piirvapaksa) by Sivagrayogin in the 5th pari- 
ccheda of the Saivaparibhasa (Madras edition, p.311 and by Umapati in Pauskara- 
bhasya 4 on p. 229): 
jnanam pradhdnam na tu karmahinam karma pradhanam na tu_ bud- 
dhihinam 
tasmat tayor eva bhavet prasiddhir na hy ekapakso vihagah prayati. 


872The rhetorical structure and so also the sense of this entire unit are uncertain to 
me. One might also attempt it thus: 


Therefore (since they are all thus interlinked,] that kriya that is qualified 
by jnana is [also inevitably] accompanied by carya. He who [truly] has 

,, knowledge is taught to be [inevitably at the same time] a disciplined 
(yatah) teacher endowed with kriya. And one who has that [teacher] to 
help him has [relatively] little homa and worship to perform. 


Chapter Fifteen 393 


Such a one has the authority [to-initiate] (adhikaro ’sya); he is taught 
to be the cause of grace for bound souls (pasvanugrahakaranah®"*). (19cd) 

For him ritual action (krtam) is not salvific (muktidam), since it is 
through initiation that [he receives] liberation. Both (dve ’pi®”4) knowl- 
edge and action for initiates are [only] to keep them mindful [of the 
Lord].8”° (20) 

Through these [viz. knowledge and action] they remain mindful of 
that supreme Lord over all (tasya parasya paramesthinah). For (yatah) 
from Him [come] all fruits, [that is to say both] supernatural pleasures 
and liberation (bhuktimuktiphalam), for the bound soul. (21) 

Pratoda spoke: 

If that is so, then all fruits can be accomplished through being mindful 
of Him, for bathing [in the manner enjoined for initiates] and other such 
[post-initiatory practices]®’© would not be established to be means towards 
those [fruits]. (22) 

Prakasa spoke: 

If, however, the accomplishment of the goal (sadhyanispattih) comes 
about [entirely] through [the one] means (that is initiation] (sadhanat), 
then use of ritual action subsequent to that (taduttarakriyayogah) would 
not serve any purpose (nopayatvam prapadyate). (23) 

Or {a goal is accomplished not by one means but] because (yatah) the 
totality of necessary factors (samagri) is complete. That in turn (sapi) 
is established to be of two kinds: that which is independent (nirapeksa) 


873Some might prefer to emend to °karakah. I have chosen not to do so because it 
appears to be a common feature of the style of the Parakhya that certain nouns at the 
end of tatpurusa compounds are treated adjectivally (see p. locii). The half-line could 
perhaps be interpreted: ‘He has the adhikara which is the cause of grace [in the form 
of diksa bestowed] upon bound souls.’ But cf. the verse quoted in the Netroddyota in 
fn. 871 on p. 392. 

874See fn. 869 on p.391 above. 

875 As we shall see below, the Parakhya does not leave this radical stance unqualified, 
for PrakaéSa proceeds to distinguish two varieties of initiation: one which is by itself 
salvific and one which is salvific only when the post-initiatory rules of the cult (i.e. the 
four padas) are followed. Cf., e.g., Kirana 6:7-9. 

8761 is possible that snanadinam is a corruption of jaanadinam, which would then 
refer to the four padas. But it is not impossible for snana to stand at the head of a 
list of duties enjoined for followers of the cult, for it is usually treated first, e.g. in the 
SomaSambhupaddhati and in Kirana 13, the first chapter after the so-called ‘vidya- 
pada’ (see BRUNNER 1992a:265 but also GOODALL 1998:182—4 for the secondariness of 
the pada divisions in that text). 


394 Parakhyatantra 


and that which is dependent (on other factors] (sapcksa). That which is 
dependent (on other factors] is held to be for the wise (jnaninam), and 
that which is independent is taught to be for the ignorant, as [easy as] 
getting pleasure with a lover (kaminisukhayogavat).°” (24-25b) 

So too initiation as well is dependent [on post-initiatory observances] 
(sapeksa), (or] independent (nirapeksa). [It may be] cleansed of the [obli- 
gation to follow the] rules (samayaih), [i.e.) the following of observances 
(samayacaraih) that consist in worship and so forth (arcanadyaih) that 
have been taught above.°”8 The other [dependent type functions] together 
with these [observances] not having been cleansed away. Therefore [initi- 
ation is] of two kinds [which are distinguished] in accordance with what 
precedes the fruit [of liberation].°’9 (25c-26) 

Pratoda spoke: 

If initiation is established to be of two kinds, dependent and not [depen- 
dent], then when the independent kind [is employed], celibacy and such 
(like observances] must be pointless. (27) 

Prakasa spoke: 

Celibacy [and other observances] are (sthitam) for the sake of the 
[continued] functioning of social institutions and practices (asramacara- 
vrttyartham). Otherwise Saivas would be reviled as being without correct 
practices (niraécarah) and without social groupings (nirésramah). (28) 

There are no particular benefits of those [practices and so forth to be 
derived] from the variety of practices that can be chosen (vikalpitaih); 
but still this variety of practices (vrttibhedah) must be protected (pari- 
palyah), just as [the caste hierarchy of] brahmins and the other castes 
(must be respected] (dvijadivat).°®° (29) 

So too, even though there is a variety of asramas, no {corresponding} 


877From the following sentence it becomes clear that the text is making a general 
statement. The idea appears to be that simple means and instructions are usually 
given to fools, more complex ones to the intelligent 

878 Presumably they were taught in one of the missing chapters 7-13. 

57°1f the text is correct here, then Prak&sa’s speech concludes with what is perhaps 
a deliberately obscure statement of the doctrine that there is no difference in the fruit 
attained by salvific initiation, thus providing a natural context for Pratoda’s question 
on this point. 

880 e+ conj. ISAACSON (letter of 22.vi.2001). The transmitted dvijativat is also inter- 
pretable: ‘just as brahmins (must]’; but with this conjecture the verse is more pointed, 
since it now offers another instance of variety, that of caste groupings, which has no 
ultimate soteriological value. 


Chapter Fifteen 395 


variety of results is taught. <Therefore,> as a means to accomplishing 
the fruit [of liberation] the supreme Soul has taught knowledge and action 
(prokte drkkriye). (30) 

And for children and others [incapable of following the post-initiatory 
observances of the cult] He has taught the cleansing of the post-initiatory 
observances and such®®! (samayadivigodhanam), by which the activities 
referred to as knowledge and action (vyaparo drkkriyakhyah) are therefore 
(atah) excluded (vyavrttah) for them (tesu). (3labcd). 

And the others®®? [viz. those capable of following post-initiatory ob- 
servances] cannot have liberation without [recourse] to means that are 
subsequent [to initiation]. (3lef) 

Pratoda spoke: 

Children are not entitled [to receive initiation] (adhikaro na balanam), 
because they are without divine grace (Saktipatavarjanat).5> By this 


851T¢ is not clear to me what else might be included by the adi, for I would expect the 
term samaya to cover the p&das, but perhaps yoga is meant to be excluded, as in Rama- 
kantha’s gloss when explaining Kirana 6:1lab (samayam$ canganadindm aSaktatvad 
vigodhayet): ... ye samayaSabdenoktah kriyajnanacaryatmaka upayas tan vigodhayet 
(Kiranavrtti 6:11.3-4). Commenting on Svacchanda 4:87c-88b, 


balabalisavrddhastribhogabhugvyadhitatmaném 

esam nirbljika diksaé samayAdivivarjita, 
Ksemardja’s Svacchandatantroddyota offers the explanation: adisabd&t pavitrak&di- 
vidhih. 

Note that a natural interpretation of the above quoted verse of the Svacchanda allows 
for the eligibility for initiation of idiots, the aged, women, hedonists and the sick. For 
Raémakantha’s rejection of such a literal understanding, see fn. 883 below. 

882This translates the conjecture na cAnyesam. If one eschews such a conjecture, then 
it would be necessary to suppose the loss of some text between 15:3ld and 15:3le. 

883The guru should only perform initiation when he can infer that Siva has bestowed 
grace on the initiand in a saktipata. He infers this by such signs as devotion to Siva and 
dispassion in the face of setbacks or successes. The problem with initiating children, 
therefore, is not really that they could not have received Saktipadta but that it cannot be 
inferred even if they should have received it. When gaktipata takes place is discussed at 
length-in Kirana 5 and in RAmakantha’s Kiranavrtti thereon (the Kirana’s teaching that 
it takes place when there is a blockage in a person’s experience known as karmasémya 
is distorted by Ramakantha, for whom malaparipaka is the essential prerequisite—see 
GOODALL, 1998:xxxii-xxxvi, 215-20 and chapter 5). What initiation effects for different 
kinds of initiates is the subject of Kirana 6, and here Ramakantha attempts to show 
that each term in the well-known lists of relatively incompetent initiands who are to be 
given nirapeksa initiation actually refers to a class of persons sufficiently mature and 
sane that it would be possible for the guru to observe in them the signs from which 
he could infer that they had received a salvific Saktipata; thus bala he reinterprets to 


396 Parakhyatantra 


reasoning how can children be recipients of initiation? (32) 

Prakasa spoke: 

One kind of grace is direct, the other is through an intermediary chain 
(paramparyakramat parah). The grace that is direct, according to this 
system,®*4 is that which comes from sitting down at the guru’s feet 
(guripasadanat).®®° (33) 

The other [kind] that is through an intermediary chain is the grace 
that is bestowed on children and such [others as are incapable]. As their 
being invited depends on others, so the fruit is brought about through 
those [others]. (34) 

Since they are drawn towards (samakrstah) that fruit by a rite [of 
initiation] (karmana) that is caused by those [others] (taddhetuna), ac- 
cordingly (tatha) these souls too (cetanah) are in the end (ante) happy 
(hrstah) by attaining the fruit of that [initiation] (tatphalayogatah). (35) 

Pratoda spoke: 

Is it the case that once eligibility (adhikare)**® has been attained one 
cannot become reborn in this world? Or can he have some further rebirth? 
Tell me plainly. (36) 

Prakasa spoke: 

It is proven through scripture (agamatah) that there is [ultimate] bliss 
for the person for whom that means [of initiation] has been correctly 
(samyak) performed (vyaprtam), since it connects with what reveals [the 
true nature of] souls (nrnam vyanjakayogatah). (37) 

[When] initiation, which is that which reveals (vyanjika), occurs, then 
liberation, which is that which is revealed, comes about (vyangyo moksas 
tada bhavet).®°” When [in spite of a candidate’s being eligible to receive it] 


mean a juvenile (see Kiranavrtti ad 6:5-6 and GOODALL 1998:360-5). 

884For this use of asmin see p. lxxx. 

885 What is meant is that the aspirant himself turns to a guru and receives instruction 
from him and then initiation. The word anugraha can be used to refer to initiation 
or to the Saktipata that precedes it, but here it seems to refer to the whole process 
(including both of these) that brings about the soul’s liberation by Siva. Turning to a 
guru is presented as the natural reaction to receiving Siva’s salvific Saktipata in Kirana 
5:5-6 and as the next step thereafter in Svayambhuvasitrasangraha 1:17-18 (both of 
which are quoted in fn. 196 on p. 198 above). - 

886Pratoda’s question is ambiguous, for he might mean the eligibility to receive salvific 
initiation or the eligibility for liberation that initiation confers. Prakaga’s reply gives 
answers to both possibilities. 

887Cf. the rhetorically similar half-line 4:163cd. 


Chapter Fifteen 397 


there is no initiation, then (that candidate] becomes a Rudra (rudratvam 
prapnuyat) [after death].8® (38) 

Then (tat), when liberation as a Rudra (rudrasayujye®*®) has come 
about, he will again be liberated [but this time ultimately]. (39ab) 

And he who, though he has eligibility [for the practice of all four padas 
attained through initiation], cultivates (abhyaset) [only] that knowledge 
(taj jfanam)®™ in accordance with (Saiva] teaching (upadegena) even- 


888Cf. Malinivijayottara 12:41-2: 


yo yatra yojitas tattve sa tasman na nivartate 
tatphalam sarvam asadya Sivayukto ’pavrjyate 

ayukto ’py adhvasamSuddhim samprapya bhuvaneSatah 
Suddhah Sivatvam ayati dagdhasamsarabandhanah. 


889 Properly sayujya should mean ‘union’; but I assume that it is here loosely used as a 
synonym for moksa even though the conception of liberation is not one of union with a 
deity. The same usage Is to be found, e.g. in Svayambhuvasitrasangraha 1:18 and 9:14, 
even though it is clear, for instance from 4:1, that the Svayambhuvasitrasangraha’s 
conception of liberation is of release from bonds and revelation of the soul’s innate 
Siva-hood. It is common in other early Saiddhantika sources too, e.g., Kirana 61:34; 
Sardhatrigatikalottara 8:29, 22:4; Rauravasitrasangraha 10:84 and in the quotation 
ascribed thereto in the Mrgendravrtti ad kriyapada 7:64; Moksakarika 89. Cf. also 
Parakhya 14:107a, where it may, however, be used in its literal sense. 

8907 had earlier interpreted: ‘He who, though he has eligibility (for initiation is not 
initiated, but] cultivates that knowledge...’ The immediately preceding sentence and 
the api suggested this interpretation to me. But if we were really to understand this 
and the following verse to be talking about cases of grace attained through practice 
of the four padas by those who have not had initiation in spite of being eligible for it, 
then the Parakhya’s position would be unusual for the early Saiva Siddhanta. For the 
Kirana (and the Kiranavrtti) and the Svayambhuvasttrasangraha (2:24), for example, 
(both of which express their position on this issue clearly), initiation is vital. In some 
later South Indian texts the importance of initiation is diminished and greater stress 
is placed on relying on knowledge and/or devotion. See, for example, Ajita 18:2-5: 


sarvajnah paripurnag ca Sivo jneyah sivagame 
dikkaladyanavacchinno vahmano’titagocarah 

niskalo 'niskala$ caiva sarvagah sarvadrk sada 
tajjnandd eva muktih syad bhaktanam ca janardana 
tatpujapi dadaty eva phalam indrapadadikam 

pUjito devadeveso bhaktim jnanam prayacchati 
jianena bhaktiyogena vinanyaih karmakotibhih 
prapyate na kvacin muktis tasmal lingarcanam param. 


Cf. also Suprabhedagama IV, 1:2-5b, quoted in BHATT’s apparatus thereto: 


jnanam pravartate vatsa bhrantinirnaSanaya ca 
adhvaSrenivinaSaya Sivavyaktikaraya ca 


398 Parakhyatantra 


tually attains liberation (kraman nirvrtim rcchati) by the power of his 
cultivation [of knowledge] (bhavanabalatah), according to this system (as- 
min). (39c—40b) 

So too when past actions are cut off by means of ritual action [alone] 
(kriyatah), he does not remain bound. Because of Siva’s will to bestow 
grace <he will rest in the pure body, free of mala>>.89! In the same way 
too he may receive grace through caryd or also by means of yoga. (40c-41) 

Pratoda spoke: 
Must it not be initiation, together with the group of four [padas] headed 
by knowledge, that is the means to accomplish liberation? How can the 
goal be accomplished by using only one among the auxiliary parts [of this 
composite cause]? (42) 

Prakasa spoke: 


andhak&ravad ajnanam jnanam dipavad ucyate 
jneyam bhaskaravat proktam pascaj jnanam vinaSyati 
pagajalani vicchedya diks&di jnanam ucyate 
pasupaSapatitvam ca jnanenésrayate budhah 
jianenaiva tu kaivalyapraéptis tatra na samSayah. 


Also Devikdlottara 79ab: jnanenaiva yathé moksas tatha siddhir nirarthika. 

It might be supposed that the lessening in importance of salvific initiation was an 
inevitable corollary of the non-dualism adopted by the authors of these texts; and 
indeed the two phenomena are almost certainly not unrelated at this later period. 
But, as I have attempted to demonstrate (GOODALL, forthcoming B), the one indis- 
putably early Siddhantatantra that is trenchantly non-dualist, the Sarvajnanottara, 
still insists upon the centrality of salvific initiation. As I have demonstrated in the 
same article, two of the partial editions that have been published of this work (that of 
Devakottai, 1923 and that of the Adyar Library Bulletin of 1998) are fundamentally 
unreliable and completely mislead the reader on this point. The hard-to-come-by edi- 
tion of BRAHMANANDASVAMIN (Tanjore, 1933) is in every respect more reliable. For 
a further example of the Devakottai and Adyar editions deviating from all the MSS 
available to me as well as from the Tanjore edition see footnotes 332 and 348 on pp. 238 
and 245. 

The one early Siddhantatantra which famously does allow the observance of one or 
other of the padas independent of initiation to lead to liberation is plainly dualist: 
the Matanga (see vidyaépada 26:63 and kriyap&da 1:1-2, for a discussion of which see 
GOODALL [drawing also on SANDERSON *1996a] 1998:371-3, fn. 607 and 366-7, fn. 596). 

The point that the Parakhya is making, as becomes clearer in 15:42—4 below, is rather 
that initiation followed by the application of all four padas together is a relatively 
effortless route to liberation, but if someone takes initiation and then follows only one 
of the pa&das, that person will still eventually, and with effort, attain liberation. 

891 ex conj. Cf. 3:58 and 68 for liberation being expressed by the notion of entering 
Siva’s body. 


Chapter Fifteen 399 


The accomplishment of a goal can be achieved by an undivided [composite 
cause] (abhinnena); [but] it can also sometimes come about by a divided 
[part of that composite cause] (bhinnena). Now undivided it requires no 
effort (abhinno ’pi nirarambhah); divided can it not accomplish the same 
[goal] (bhinnas tatsadhako na kim)? (43) 

By a single (divided part] the fruit [can be attained] with trouble; 
(it is attained] without trouble by the combination [of all the parts] 
(samudayatah). With this [combination] (tena) this root cause, called 
initiation, is complete.®9? (44) 

Its fruit arises through maturation, just as [fruit arises} from sowing 
seeds in the ground. That fruit is Siva-hood, which releases [from the 
bonds] (muktidam), (and] which is of the nature of bliss. (45) 

Pratoda spoke: 

Some hold that this liberation is empty of the existence of all things 
(sarvarthabhavasunya), since it is when the existence of those has reality 
(tadbhavasadbhave)®** that the soul is involved in what characterises 
samsara (samsaradharmagah).®4 (46) 

Prakasa spoke: 

If liberation were not real (abhavariipaya muktya), a means [to accomplish 
it] could not reach it (sadhanam na tadasritam),®*° since its nature should 
be to accomplish a [really existing] goal (sadhyasadhanarupatvat). [And] 
who would use a means [to such a goal] (prayokta sadhanasya kah)? (47) 

Everybody requires motivation (sarvah prayojanapeksi).°°® If the mo- 

tivating goal were empty (SUnyam), then how would they practise carya 


8°2One might instead interpret ‘Therefore it is this whole that is the root cause called 
initiation.’ 

893 or conj. 

894For the expression samsaradharma, cf. Mrgendravrtti ad 2:12 (p.63): manasam hi 
samsaradharmaih sukhaduhkhadibhir yogah... (Cf. also Bhagavatapurana 11.2:49.) 

It is not clear to me whether or not a particular rival’s conception of liberation is 
intended here. I am inclined to think not, because in the discussion that follows, only 
the notions of the nature and attainment of liberation of close rivals, various groups of 
PaSupatas, are recognisably discussed. 

895 Derhaps this is too awkward and one should consider emendation to sadhanam na 
tada sthitam: ‘By liberation not being real, a means [to accomplish it] could not then 
be established, since...’. 

886 This recalls Kumarila’s famous maxim prayojanam anuddigya na mando 'pi prava- 
rtate (Slokavarttika, sambandhaksepaparihara 55ab); but the formulation is not par- 
ticularly close and there is no strong reason to suppose dependence on the Slokavarttika 
here. 


400 Parakhyatantra 


and so forth for its sake? (48) 

Or if observances, carya and so forth were not established to be ulti- 
mately real (sthita na paramarthena), then tell [me] what thing would be 
established to be ultimately real? (49) 

If you declare (that liberation must be] ‘empty’ (Sinyabhdsane) on the 
grounds that all the sufferings of the cycle of rebirth do not exist [in it] 
(sarvasamsaraduhkhanam abhavat), then this ‘liberation’ that you claim 
[is a label that you use] with the intention of speaking about something 
else (ista sanyavivaksato muktih),®%” since [real liberation is not empty, 
for in it] there exist His qualities (tadgunabhavatah).5°° (50) 

Pratoda spoke: 

Other disputants, who wish to attain His qualities, claim [that liberation 
is when there is] a transference of [God’s] qualities [into the soul]. f ... 
pee (51) 

Prakasa spoke: 


897 6+ conj. ISAACSON. The wording of this awkward conjectured line is suggested by 


the parallel below in 15:55. To paraphrase: ‘You use the word ‘liberation’ to refer to 
something else that is not true liberation, since true liberation means having God’s 
qualities.’ | 

8°8-This has to be construed as though -tah had the same force as -tvat (see p. lxxxii). 

89° This is the viewpoint ascribed to Pafcarthika Pasupatas. See Moksakarika 129c— 
131b, Paramoksanirasakarika 6-41, Matangavrtti ad kriyapada 8:10c—12b, p. 162, and 
see Umapati’s Pauskarabhadsya ad 4:48, pp. 231-4, and the partly identical discussion 
in the fifth pariccheda of Sivagrayogin’s Saivaparibhasa, p.156. Umapati (pp. 231- 
2) quotes a group of verses that neatly summarise what are well-known as the thrée 
Pasupata views: 


tad uktam abhiyuktaih 

yathé kasturikamodah patadisu tathatmani 
Sivasya tadguna muktau sankramanti tathaé svayam 
iti pasupata muktim svakiyam paramam viduh 
nijaSrayasthitair eva tadanim aisvarair gunaih 
svayam avisyate siddhah purusas tu grahair iva 
ittham caiva tu kapalas tatsamyam muktim Ucire 
Sivatulyam pirvam eva samutpadyata ity atah 
utpattisamatapakso mahavratibhir ucyate. 


The damaged second half of our verse could perhaps be restored as follows: tasmat 
tadgataripah syat sankrantya gunasadhakah. ‘Therefore he who aspires to attain the 
qualities [of the Lord] becomes endowed with the form that is in Him by transfer- 
ence.’ But the transmitted aksaras suggest a reference to observances, and so perhaps 
one might consider tasmat tadvratacaryadir bhaved yo gunasadhakah: ‘And so the 
performance of observances and so forth would be the factor that brings about (the 
attainment of the Lord’s] qualities.’ Neither suggestion is satisfying to me. 


Chapter Fifteen 401 


Is this transfer of qualities which they desire to attain total or partial? 
If [you say that it is] partial (ekadese), then attainment of those (qual- 
ities] would not (fully] take place (na tatsiddhih syat); [if you say that 
it is] total, [then] the supreme [Lord would end up being} devoid of [all] 
qualities.9°° (52) 

[You might, however, argue that] the attainment of (His] qualities 
[takes place while those qualities remain] situated still in Him (tat- 
sthasyaiva gunasyaptih). Now this (attainment] (sapi), do you hold it 
to be established as real or not real (sadasatsthita)? You require (isyate) 
[that] this form of His (tadripam), which is real, because it exists, does 
not exist, being unreal.?9! (53) 

How can what exists not exist? If something does not exist, how 
can it exist? This position is self-contradictory (parasparaviruddho ’yam 
paksah), and it is therefore not conclusive (na niScitah), because [these 
qualities] are really existent in as much as they are His nature or they 
are not, being non-existent. This [‘liberation’) that you claim [is a label 
that you use] with the intention of speaking about something else (ista 
sanyavivaksatah), since you hold it to be both real and not real.°°? (54-5) 

His form, which is supreme bliss, you have spoken of as though it 
were non-existent (asadripam ivakhyatam). Thereby (anena) you have 
[effectively] asserted (codita) that this liberated state of His (tanmuktau) 
is both existent and non-existent (sadasadripata). (56) 

Pratoda spoke: 

It is clearly established that souls experience happiness as a result of 
dharma and unhappiness as a result of adharma. Some people in this 
world wish to attain® liberation by abandoning happiness and unhap- 


900 ey conj. The last pada must be intended to advance the second alternative, that 


transference is total, since the subsequent discussion appears to be assuming it. Cf. 
Umapati’s Pauskarabhasya ad 4:48cd (p. 233): Isvarajnanasya muktau jive sankramana- 
svikare, iSvare jnanam na syat, tadiyajnanasyanyatra sankrantatvat. niramSasya 
jnanasyamSena sankramanayogac ca. Cf. also p.157 of the Saivaparibhasa (§ 35 on 
p. 343 of the Madras edition). ‘In what follows, Prakasa has the opponent attempt 
to side-step this problem by suggesting that the qualities are wholly transferred while 
somehow remaining also in God. Prakasa cannot accept that they could really exist in 
two places, both in the liberated soul and in God. 

°°! This sentence could no doubt be otherwise interpreted. 

902 o¢ con). 

8037 nsita might also have been used as an equivalent of ista: ‘some people in this 
world hold’. Again it is not clear whether this is intended to be the view of a particular 
identifiable group. The view is not particularly distinctive. Cf. Mahabharata 12.212:45- 
9. And Dr. BISSCHOP (letter of 7.xi.2001) has drawn my attention to the parallel in 


402 Parakhyatantra 


piness. (57) 

Prakasa spoke: 

If liberation came about [simply] as a result of abandoning happiness and 
unhappiness, then (tena) that liberation would be pointless. From where 
does that other supreme bliss come (that is supposed to characterise the 
liberated state]? (58) 

One happiness is produced (janyam) from [this or] that [particular 
thing]; another is said to arise of itself (anyat proktam svabhavatah). 
One [piece of] gold is {produced as result of copper or the like being] 
touched by [alchemical] liquid (rasasprstam); another occurs naturally in 
the earth (anyad bhimau nisargajam).°4 (59) 


the Buddhacarita (12:57): 


tatra kecid vyavasyanti moksa ity abhimaninah 
sukhaduhkhaparityagad avyaparac ca cetasah. 


The final pada of 15:60 might be considered to be evidence for the view being under- 
stood to be that of a group whose scriptures were held to be authored by Siva. 

°04These are the last two of the eight types of gold listed in Arthasastra 2.13.3: 
jambinadam gatakumbham h&takam vainavam Srngasuktijam jatardpam rasaviddham 
akarodgatam ca suvarnam,. The conception that gold can be created out of copper with 
an alchemical preparation is, as Dr. ISAACSON has pointed out to me, commonly used 
in tantras as an image for the irreversible transformation that takes place in diksa. See, 
e.g., Kirana 59:36c-38b (incomprehensible, as often, in Ep): 


rasaviddham yatha tamram tamrabhavad vimucyate 
suvarnena sahaikatvam gatam tad yati hematam 
jnanaviddham tatha tattvam pasubhavad vimucyate 
Sivenaiva sahaikatvam gatam tattvam tu tatsamam 


e rasaviddham ] N,D'*M”;  rasasiktam Ep e = sahaikatvam ] 
N,D’M”; tu hematvam Ep e tad yati hematam] N,D'M’; 
tajjatihemavat Ep e °viddham tatha tattvam ] conj.; °viddham 
yatha tattvam N,D'; °viddham tatha siddham M”; °viddhah sa tad- 
vac ca Ep e §sivenaiva sahaikatvam gatam tattvam tu tatsamam | 
M” Ep; sivena tat sahaikatvam gatam tatsamayam bhavet N,D' 


And cf. Sarvajnanottara 1:5-6 (in the numeration of the Devakottai edition): 


tamrasyaiva tu hematvam antarlinam yatha sthitam 
antarlinam tatha jneyam Sivatvam pudgalasya tu 
rasaviddham yatha tamram hematvam pratipadyate 
tathatma jnanasambandhat Sivatvam pratipadyate. 


Cf. also Haravijaya 6:137: 


parimrstakalikam avapya hematam na yathaiti tamram iha tamratam 
punah 


Chapter Fifteen 403 


This is visible; that is invisible. That visible one is produced by visi- 
ble means (drstam tad drstasadhanam). And so accordingly (tad evam), 
taking common features into consideration (cintya simanyam), an infer- 
ence is drawn up (vyavasthitam)}.%° Alternatively (va) this is established 
by scripture taught by an authoritative person [viz. Siva] (tad aptagama- 
siddham). And this [scripture taught by Siva is something that] is firmly 
established for you (so ’pi samsthita eva te). (60) 

Pratoda spoke: 

Once the destruction of the retributive force of all bad deeds has come 
about (sarvapaépaksaye jate), supernatural power (siddhih) comes about 
through liberation. jIs not everything through which this*® arising 


vimalikrtam sad anutattvam icchaya tava natha narcchati tatha 
svavasanam. 


In his commentary thereon Alaka cites the following verse: 


rasaghrstam yatha tamram na bhiyas tamratam vrajet 
evam yuktah Sivatvena na bhiyah pasutam vrajet. 


Dr. ISAACSON has drawn my attention to two examples in Buddhist tantric texts: verse 
51 of the Cittavifuddhiprakarana attributed to Aryadeva, 


rasaghrstam yatha tamram nirdosam kancanam bhavet 
jnanasuddhya tathaé klefah samyak kalyanakarakah, 


and a verse cited in Vajragarbha’s commentary on the Hevajratantra (NGMPP Reel 
No. C 14/6, f. 50"): 


rasaviddham yatha tamram na punas tamratam vrajet 
jnanaviddhas (conj. ISAACSON; °bindus MS) tatha kayo na punah pasu- 
tam vrajet. 


With this last verse cf. Kubjikamatatantra 3:104 and Sekoddega 134. 

In the transmission of these various works we find the compounds rasasiddha, rasa- 
viddha, rasasikta, and rasaghrsta. Our reading, rasasprstam, is not paralleled, and 
it is curious that our verse contains no mention of copper. To obviate this oddity, 
emendation could be considered, e.g. to rasat srstam, ‘created from an alchemical 
preparation’, or to rasaghrstam, ‘rubbed with an alchemical! preparation’. 

*°5The passage is uncertain. The use of Iyap for ktva does not occur elsewhere in 
these chapters and it is conceivable that we should read cintyasamanyam as a com- 
pound and interpret ‘an inference is drawn up in which common features are taken 
into consideration’. Dr. ACHARYA has suggested to me that what might be meant by 
this expression is an inference of the type more usually called samanyato drstam; but 
is it one that allows us to determine what is the sadhana in the case of the supreme 
happiness of the liberated state? 

°Tt is just conceivable that the yo in 15:61c is an unpaired relative pronoun agreeing 
with siddhagunodayah (see introduction, p. lxxx). But this would be especially clumsy 
here and seems therefore unlikely. Perhaps emendation to no is possible: ‘All means 


404 Parakhyatantra 


of [God’s] qualities in the adept comes about (siddhagunodayah) a 
means? }*? (61) 

Prakasa spoke: 
The liberated soul who becomes an overlord of pure Rudras and such 
like [souls] can be said to be ‘Siddha’ for the reason that (tasmad yatah) 
everything that is to be accomplished (sadhyam) has been accomplished 
(sadhitam) by him.9°° (62) | 

[You might object as follows: the soul] is linked with (yutah) the 
Lord’s (tad-) qualities of [true] dharma, [true] knowledge, [true] dispas- 
sion, and true power (-sadaigvarya-),9°? and so if indeed (the soul] is 
changed [as he passes into the liberated state] (yadi namanyathasthitah), 
[then] let [us admit] there [to] be a joining (yogah) [of the soul] with [these] 
qualities. (63) 

[We reply:] This true dharma (yo dharmah ...saddharmasya)*'® of 


are [of] no [use], since the qualities [simply] arise in the adept.’ Or perhaps it is a 
corruption of ’sau? But no emendation has been attempted because the intention of 
the verse is so unclear. 

®°7The connection of Pratoda’s question with the previous does not seem to me 
smooth. He seems on the one hand to be suggesting that the term upaya could apply 
to any factor that leads to liberation (and not just to initiation or the padas)—and to 
this Prakasa apparently makes no response beyond the pointed use of the expression 
Sivopayat in 15:64c—and on the other to be advancing another old MaheSvara notion 
of liberation: that ascribed (e.g. by Ramakantha ad Matangakriyapada 8:10c-12b) to 
the Kalamukhas (also called Kalamukhas). This is the view that the qualities of God 
arise (samutpatti) in the soul at liberation (they are not transferred, as for the Pasu- 
patas, or ‘revealed’, as the Saiddhantikas maintain). As I have observed (GOODALL 
1998:220, fn. 186), the non-Saiddhantika term siddha tends to be used in discussions 
of these MaheSvara views of liberation. Prakasa’s response deals both with what is 
implied by the term siddha and, by asserting the Saiddhantika abhivyaktivada, with 
the view that qualities arise in liberation that were not previously in the soul. 

®°81n other words the term Siddha is not used for a soul who has achieved or perfected 
supernatural qualities that were not in him before, as the Kalamukhas are supposed to 
maintain. 

°°9This is evidently a list of the four bhavas or positive buddhigunas (for the eight 
buddhidharmas see 4:74-90) but transformed into perfect qualities of the liberated soul 
(and not of the buddhi, since those must cease in liberation, as is mentioned in Bhoga- 
karika 56). (This half-line unit need not of course be taken as part of the objection 
given in 15:63cd, and the tad- could be interpreted differently, for instance to refer to 
the soul, or perhaps emended to sad-, as suggested by 15:64-7.) 

®101t seems possible that Prakasa in this verse intends inventively to interpret the 
dharma in the above list of divine qualities in the here unexpected sense of ‘[innate] 
property [which is Siva-hood]’. 


Chapter Fifteen 405 


that ‘Siddha’ which is called Siva-hood (sivatvakhyah) [and which is] be- 
cause of his very nature [present in the soul] (svabhavatah)?"! is revealed 
(in liberation] (abhivyaktih) for the soul who is [a] Siva (sivatmanah)?!” 
by Siva’s means?!3 (givopayat). (64) 

He has (tasya) that true knowledge (sajjnanam) which is left, all 
bonds [having] fallen away from it (sarvapasaparicyutam).°'4 It is pure 
(Suddham tat), has everything as its object (sarvavisayam) and is devoid 
of all limitations (sarvopadhibahiskrtam). (65) 

He has true dispassion (sadvairagyam) ¢ asatvortham }{.°!° It relates 
to all desires (sarvakamikam), because the root of [attraction towards all] 
objects is utterly cut off [in it]. (66) 

And true power (sadaisvaryam) with respect to everything, which con- 
sists in omniscience and omnipotence (mahajnanakriyatmakam), which is 
beyond all obstacle (pratighatabahirbhutam, eternally alight (nityam ud- 
dyotitam), supreme (param). (67) 

Eternally linked with these qualities he becomes a ‘Siddha’ devoid of 
all defilements (amalatmakah). He becomes disengaged from acting (apra- 
vrttah), utterly complete (susampirnah), all-knowing, omnipotent. (68) 

He is established to be an agent like Siva; (but] in the liberated state 
there is no partiality [and therefore no rivalry] (na mokse paksapatita): 
since he has completely performed [all] that he had to perform (sarvatah 
krtakrtyatvat), there can be no change in him.9!® (69) 


®11T am aware that this looks a forced interpretation, but I can just imagine that 
something of the kind might have been intended. 

®121¢ might seem smoother to understand this as as Sivatvatmanah and to take it to 
agree with saddharmasya, but I have not done so, for dharma has already been qualified 
as Sivatvakhyah. 

®*!3Other analyses of this compound are probably possible here. Cf. Ramakantha’s 
analyses of Sivajnanam in Kiranavrtti 1:10.7-8, 2:33.4-8, and 3:14.1 

°14Or perhaps ‘It is taught (sistam) that he has that true knowledge from which all 
bonds have fallen away’. But cf. 15:73d. 

°15Dr, ACHARYA has suggested that one could consider emendation to asattve ’rthe, 
‘with respect to all objects that are not of [ultimately] real’? 

*!6This verse is justifying the attribute apravrttah used in the previous verse. Cf. 
Svayambhuvasitrasangraha 2:25-6: 


Sivadhamarpitasydsya bhogabhoktur na jatucit 
bhoktrtvam adhikaritvam patikrtyanukéarita 
bhavodbhavapadatito niskamparcir iva sthitah 
mukto vyaktaSivatvo ’sau krtakrtyo yatas tatah. 


For this agent of experience who has been raised to Siva-glory [there] 
never [recur] the condition of being an experiencer, the condition of being 


406 Parakhyatantra 


[His] fullness [means that] all [these above mentioned] qualities are 
forever awakened [in him] (sarvesam gunanam sarvadodayah).9!" [He has 
all] this (idam) because he is empty [of duties? of partiality?] (Sunyata 
yena tena...).?!® (70abc) 

And because one who is in this state of peace (Santabhavasthitasya 
ca) is conjoined with the quality of bliss (anandagunasamyogat), he is 
steeped in bliss alone (anandenaiva bhavitah). He is established (sthitah) 
in this system (asmin) to be like Siva: a ‘Brahma’ who has attained the 
enjoyment of bliss.9!9 (70d-71) 

Thus this supreme/‘Para’ tantra (evam etat param tantram), which 
reached (praptam) Parvatipati from Diptega, [and then reached]??? me. 
Having summarised the Sastra, I have taught it to you. (72) 

May that state of the [highest] good of yours be praised (Sreyahpadam 
te stutam®*!) which is brahman, which is beyond all the waves of the 


invested with office, [nor] the obedient performance of duties [assigned] 
by the Lord. That liberated soul, his Siva-hood revealed, rests like an 
unwavering flame, beyond the realms of Bhava and Udbhava, because he 
has performed [all] that he had to perform. 


I have not quoted either of FILLIOZAT’s unexceptionable translations (1991:67-8 and 
1994:61 and 63) because they have been made to fit Sadyojyotis’s Svayambhuvavrtti, 
the interpretation of which is slightly different, for instance in that it takes the first 
word as an inverted bahuvrihi. Sadyojyotis there tells us that Bhava and Udbhava are 
names respectively for all that is below and all that is above Suddhavidya. 

®°!7This half-line, and perhaps the whole verse, is a commentary on the attribute 
susamptrna in 15:68c. 

9'81f the text is correct here, then there is perhaps an ellipsis, and it is not clear to me 
what is to be supplied. Furthermore I am not certain that there should be the division 
in sense that I have understood after idam, although it is suggested by the ca. Perhaps 
we can interpret Sinyataé as meaning Santata or consider emending it to Santata. 

519C£. 14:107. 

®20We have to read praptam twice (kakaksinyayena). The text first reached Uma- 
pati from DipteSa and then reached Prakasa, who summarised and taught it to Pra- 
toda. In the apparatus here I have drawn attention to the fact that early accounts 
are discrepant here. According to the Kirana (10:8ab) Diptarudra teaches the Acintya 
(not the Parakhya) to Gopati, who teaches it to Ambika. The Parakhya is there 
taught by Sivakhya-(rudra] to Mahakala (Kirana 10:27cd). According to the [Pauskara- 
]Paramesvara, however, it is the Tantraja which Sivakhya taught to Mahakala, and the 
Parakhya was taught by Devapati to Dharma (GOODALL 1998:410, verses 21 and 22). 

®21This does not seem to me particularly smooth, but I hesitate to emend further. 
The first two of the last three syllables could be interpreted as te ‘stu, ‘may there be 
for you’, but this would leave the final syllable (tah in M” ) unconstrued. A corruption 
of tat is unlikely, since that would unnecessarily duplicate the tat at the beginning of 


Chapter Fifteen 407 


deceptive defilements [that are born of] the network of the bonds, which is 
taught to be the great union (brhadyogoktam), which is supreme because 
it consists in the [divine] properties left behind (when all else that is 
adventitious has fallen away],°?? —that eternal state which those too, 
skilled in discerning, daily meditate upon who by yoga have cast off all 
the defilements of their faults and who are men of illustrious names.9”4 
(73) 


Thus the fifteenth chapter, expounding what is accomplished in liberation, 
in the great tantra called the Supreme. 


15:73c. A corruption of the plural vah (referring to future recipients of the text) is 
possible, but that would render the te (referring, presumably, to Pratoda) superfluous. 
Perhaps one could consider correcting the last syllable to the indeclinable particle gam. 
Cf. the final half-line of the Svayambhuvasitrasangraha, 23:16: svayambhuvam idam 
viprah samaptam; svastir astu vah. One more possibility, suggested to me by Dr. 
ISAACSON (letter of 25.vi.2001), is to emend the final syllable to tat and the tad at the 
beginning of 15:73c to yad. 

®221 am aware that this must seem very bold, not only because this is a very free and 
interpretative rendering of parisistadharmaparamam, but also because the expression 
itself has been introduced by conjectural emendation. It may well be wrong; but I 
consider it just conceivable that it was intended, for note that it may echo 15:65ab. Dr. 
ACHARYA has suggested to me ca visistadharmaparamam as a possible emendation, 
which might be interpreted ‘which is supreme because of the special properties [of the 
Lord that characterise it]’. 

923 pbrakhyatanamnabh is intended as a nominative plural. 


APPENDICES 


ATTHTATAASTATAT: TRSTET ATT: Il 


A. ON THE BRAHMAMANTRAS: 


The following passage appears quoted in the *Nityadisangraha of Taksakavarta, 
f.40"-41": 


ae shade © aerate 
TT S$ sParacd Md Aages | 
weg Tatar aAvsqartea i 3 il 
free aarcear free: teeer 
Gta ACTHATA SA T AUT II ¥ Il 
ee ee ee 


Dak & ok mene eis 


gare: cad aeat geraaryagn xfs! Quoted thus on p.33 of an 
anonymous *commentary on a *Sivadiksavidhi transmitted in IFP MS T. 542. 


Lab. °WeURT: Ta AHA ] conj.; Merge Ys Acar NiSan 2c. Te } conj.; 
wT? NiSai 3a.T T) conj.; ATT NiSan 3b. AATHRTH] conj.; AATFR- 
gr NiSan 83 cd. geatcary atysaqartent | conj. ; geatrary waqsaarteny 
NiSan; Uta TErETeTEAy 542 4a. TPATRATT] NiSai; ARACATT 
542 4d. 5] NiSan; HFET 542 5 ab. HA Werae Aaat WPAN] em. 
Acharya; ga Wee avait rey Nisan; HC MEA Yala TF YH 542 


412 Parakhyatantra 


GTA: Car eat SETTATAAT ty I 
GUT WOAH AAU TATAHCTAT | 

araeder seg: BHATT: | 

ar sedate: Prahye: farary year fare aera & 
Ware Jay 


TIA HATa Weer PAT AA | 
Frapye: fare: arerceeArreray AST 9 It 


WATM SATS | 


afr: qernarerer: wf: earcaaarey J | 
OTTA ACTA ATASATTATLTT A aT: | 
Get: AATAM A FE TET HAAG TI G Il 


The quotation is followed in the Nityadisangraha by:— 
ity uktam tu parayam (em.; paraya NiSan) yadaéruruksujanam prati 
arudhanam punar vaksye prameyam cangasatkagam. 


6f. Cf. Kriyakramadyotika p.59: --- farenya fare aatfefer yaw... 


Oran ACA, BTaeaATTesT art fT! Thus Nategaguru’s *Mrgendra- 
paddhatitika, IFP MS T.1021, p.87. The same verse is quoted by Jnanaprakasaguru 
in his *Siddhantasikhamani (IFP MS 10871, f. 79"), prefaced by pardkhye. The second 
pada only is also cited in Trilocana’s *Somasgambhupaddhatitika IFP MS T.170, p. 170, 
in the Prabhavyakhya on p. 188, and in the *Sivapdjavidhivyakhyana transmitted in 
IFP MS T.962, p.119 {2nd pagination]. The third and fourth p&das only are cited 
without attribution on p. 118 of Nirmalamani’s Prabhavyakhya. 


Bc. SFTMTATYST: | em.; YSMTAIY (7): NiSan; YSTTATTET: 542 6 
a. Hate ] em.; °Ofenft? NiSan 6c. FSPTT: ] conj.; FST UTM: NiSan 8 
ab. eter: Whe: SATCAAATET FJ) conj.; eKATAT TTA EIRTATETAT NiSan; 
Rater: AeA AAATET FT SiSi; RTA WT: AT AAATET JF MrPaT7; 
. SATA AATET JF PraVya; .- fear ar Far Sure 7170; .- -wifHear 
WAATELATY 962 (unmetrical) 8 c. AAN ACTAY) SiSi, MrPaTi, PraVya; 
UWaaAAcaAT NiSai 8d. aT:) NiSan, SiSi, PraVya; TT MrPaTi 


Appendix I. Quotations not found in the manuscript 413 


B. ON SNANA: 


* Jnanaratnavali IFP T. 231, pp. 7-8, collated against Madras GOML MS R 14898 
(=M), pp. 5-6, and against T. 106 (a transcript pp. 13-60 of which give something 
entitled *‘Jnanaratnavalr that is probably a manual based thereon), pp. 26- 
7. Verses 12, 16 and 17 are cited in IFP MS T.323, p.47, transmitting the 
* Atmarthapijapaddhati; 12ab only is cited in IFP MS T. 795, p. 32, a MS trans- 
mitting the same text. In both the quotation is prefaced by tad uktam parakhye. 
Verses 16c—17b only are quoted in the Prabhavyakhya on the Kriyakramadyotika 
(prefaced by tatha Srimatparakhye), p.18, and verses 16c—17d are cited (pref- 
aced by parakhye) in the Sakalagamasarasangraha (p. 40 of the 1974 edition and 
pp. 26-7 of IFP MS T. 199). 


agnH BINS T 
araaaadrf sat fr: frrerg afar 
SAITTATeL TL ACI THAATTA: Il il 
av aferaeer: araatecreanty | 
agaat Ter aa aE: TATAAT | 20 1 


faye fe at cara Praret & agar: | 

at water faspereq Werrafwaryqur: ii ve 
aes gat sehr Farr Ta aarheaes | 
arasar wea ah Ferarveqstetay Se: Il 22 I 


Wal: raat eavTequr ear Tear | 


9.agm MTWTSt ZT) M, 1231; TH FT Mee T16 9 a. AATAH- 
ware | M, 1231; aTaategadnry T106 (unmetrical) 9 c. @WUTfTaATAT | 
M, T231; earfr JF T106 (unmetrical) 10 b. HTaAFeCIVNT) T106; FT 
U Afecrean: M, 1231 10 c. afEMTAAT TST) conj.; TACATAATET M, 
T231; afawaataer T106 10d. afE: Te) 7231; afgre M; fA: wre 
T106 11a.a4 Sq] M, 1231; earsferq T106 «11 b. PrareT & age- 
WT: ] em. Acharya; Pravat & aga: M, 1231; Prat & aq: 1106 
llc. fayereg] M, 1231; fayer: Sy: T106 11d. ey: ) M; ey: 1231, 
T106 12 b. 7H Aatfas) APoPa; ATX Aarfas: M, 1231; 7X aarfear 
T106 12c. MYX SAY Rea air) conj.; WIS Fest ahr M, 1231; Ararat 
Rea ahr T106, 7323 12 d. FRATETSTT) conj.; Feravevet M, 1231: u erat 
T1066 13a. Yar: uray] M, 1231; u 1106 


414 Parakhyatantra 


pater srafrerar erat: Breeds: ii 23 i 
amaey fat: ert arduseaqrry Teer | 
THAT ATT ATT AAMT SAT I Vv I 


FASAAPAT: QT TET FMI: | 
aAT: mead aay: eye: BPTI ey i 


TATA FATT: ATA SFSTHAT | 
WAST: ASTFBY SATAT ATATTAT HAT Il VE I 


TATHAGATA SUTAATATEAAT AAT | 
wafer afcrarad: PRarararygea4: tl 29 I 
«Wale Jas b> 

aerate ait: ofa: TRrear afectt 7 


13 c. Hath Where] T231; Haft Wee M; Haat rv T106 13 d. - 
atut: yfetaa: | conj.; erutut yfetag: M; om. T231; everd yferec: 
T106 14a. $qex fA: ] M; om. T231; sure fret T106 14 b. ATdvs- 
cafe ] 1231, T106; Avatesearfy Ms 14c. ATA CMAT) T106; ATafca- 
ay M, 1231 14d. 3d aafemr Ter] conj.; We AafemuEey M, 1231; 
ara wafer WeEx Tx : T1066 15 b. PMaAT: ] T23lac, T106; FTIaT- 
7: M, T23lpe 15 ed. ATA: WaTTAtaahr: | em.; aAhrrarafate Bhr M; 
ahr marefate Shr: T231; any warradtaahr T106 16 a. ATT ATHaAeT- 
W: ] APaPa; aarvaraeqey: M, 1231 (unmetrical); AATAANTACJE: T106 
16 b. Hea SF ) APaPa; area oq: M, 1231; 

T106 16 c. : Were? ] M, PraVya, SaSaSan, APaPa; WaetsT: AerTe 
T231; Wadler: Ware T106 16 d. SATAT ATATAAT) PraVya; ATATATAYYAT 
M, T231; ATATATAYaT T106; satfrararqaT SaSaSan; ATATATATYAT APaPa 
17 ab. TATYATCHAT - PUTA ATeCGATAAT | APGPa; TATFATHAT Fay aryqd- 
TATEGATAaT PraVya (unmetrical); TAT YATCTAT aT YIPATRTATA aT: M; 
TUT YATSTAT SAT: YATAT: TTHTHAAT: T231; TUTATATSTVAT Fear ATaAadea- 
araqarT T106; TAVTATSTAT FAT HAGATETATTAT: SaSaSan Ed.; TUPYATSTAT 
ay YATRA: T199 17 cd. Wate afomarag: PRITIT® | M, 1231, 
SaSaSan; Waeq afewarg frarire 1106 (unmetrical); Wafer afenarad Fr- 
amie APaPa 17d. °¥eal:] M, T231, T106; °9fear: SaSaSan; °FETaT: 
APiPa 18a. aeraty | T106; aerate M, T231 18b. Jfxear) M, 1231; 
ghrear: T106 


Appendix I. Quotations not found in the manuscript 415 


SUAS: {Taha vaarhaad:t il ec 
<AFTM SATA t> 

fary taraeypen We waft Tas: | 
Yat ATA Ya: AFCA AY ATAAT I 24 1 


Yergerasy Ye MAST TH | 
ad wd froaraeeferafentcad: il 201 afr 


This iti must mark the end of the quotation from the Parakhya, but it is worth 
recording the next three lines in M and T. 231: ittham dvidha samacamya krta- 
nyasah prasannadhih/ grhastho brahmacari ca pirvam vandeta vaidikim (em.; 
vaidikam MSS)/ punah Saivim yati yad va sandhyam eva Sivatmikam/ uktam 
Srimatsvayambhuvadau—snanam 4 Sirasah krtva samacamyodaganananh. - etc. 
(This last line is in fact Mrgendrakriyapada 2:9ab.] T.106 does not appear to 
have this; it continues instead with a mantra: om hah astraya hum phat/ vama- 
karam varadvayam.: : - 

In the Sakalagamasangraha the quotation of 16c-17 is immediately followed 
(without intervening iti) by these verses: 

bharati rasanagrastha pranavaés costhasampute (Ed.; castasampute T.199) 

nasaputadvaye pranas caksus! Sasibhaskarau 

Srotrayo§ ca digah sarvah nabhau brahma Sivo hrdi (Ed.; nalau hrdi T. 199) 

Suddhyartham mastake visnur amsayor aSvinau sthitau 

purvoktavidhina pundram dhrtvacamya nyaset tatah. 
Since these lines overlap in content with 14 and 15 (and since the * Jnanaratnavali 
transmits other verses following 17) I have assumed that they do not belong to 
the Parakhya. 


Varnasramacandrika, p.31 and Saivasannyasapaddhati, p. 19: 


Taer shri 
TheMITaeqar art Wer Afar Mar! ATi Vil 


18 d. Uafayanrfetr: ] M, 1231; ware fawatferar T106 (unmetrical) 19 
b. waft ] T106; HTatfe M, T231 19cd. Yer AAAT Ya: Age AY Waar | 
T231 ; Yat TET Yara a waTETy M; aa: Yet AAT Yerarranie: 
T106 20b. YE] T106; Ya: M, T231 20cd. eaA=Bfertaferccad: xa ] 
em.; CMTS ENTS: farce xf M, 1231 (unmetrical) ; oMTAT Yautd- 
ferccad: aff T106 21. Tet SFT] VaCa; TST SaiSaPa 21 b. WETAT 
afaat ) VaCa; AdvAT WETAT SaiSaPa 


416 Parakhyatantra 


The following four verses appear in IFP MS T. 106 *‘Jnanaratnavalr, p.17, and 
the first three of them in IFP MSS T. 282, pp. 17-18, T. 323, p. 24, and T.371, 
p.695, which transmit the *Atmarthapujapaddhati: 


MITT T 

Waqgy Fart at ArT ATIVE | 
WAqas AS SATA ACTA: WATT 22M 
Weled BWaucaret: Aerd ATT | 
AUT FT: HAS ATMA: Il 23 Il 


mmarated sarge fread | 
AAMT WT TAT ETI RY I 


aaaregerd WAL WIT: Tray FITT | 
AT: AAAI AAD FETT: Il RY il 


The following six verses are to be found in a * Saivasiddhantasangraha, IFP MS 
T.46, p.15. Among them the first three half-lines are cited, with the same at- 
tribution, in the *Atmarthapijapaddhati (IFP MSS T.795, p.9, T.371, p. 687, 
T. 323, p. 14, and T. 282, p.10), followed by the ninth (30ab). [Between the sec- 
ond and third half-lines the author of the *AtmarthapUjapaddhati has inserted 
the comment atra ksalane dinniyamas cintye ca darsitam yatha ---; in IFP MS 


22c-23b. TUWST 

WATTS AAS Bry ATA WATT | 

Weed A TT BAM AYela AUT i! Saivasiddhantasangraha, IFP MS T. 46, 
p. 28. 


22. MTTeT J) T106; TTT 1323, 371; TST T282 22a. FET) T106, 
T282, T323; FETT T371 22b. ATT] T106, T282, 7323; WIT? T371 22c. W- 
AASTS FTA MA] T106, T282, T323, T371; WTATSTT HAT T4146 22 
d. farce: |] T106, 7323; farcaT 146, T371; Frfierce T282 (unmetrical) 23 


ab. Gauealaet: Aeld ] conj. (unmetrical); ATAMTATSTAYelt T106 
(unmetrical); QT TI @TatTat AYeld 146; OAT ATT AAAI SIT 1323, T371; 
aad: Bary AT Ayerd T282 23 c. YT: ] T106, T282, T323; Yr 1371 
23d. oaTfarra4r: | T106; emafrmrry 1323, 7371; ewrfrfrerrry T282 


24a, WTTgfere ] T106, T282, T371; TTEFA 1323 24b. Warghet | T106, T323; 


warafa T282,T371 24d. TAA} 1323, conj. 1282; Talat T106; @ATAT 


T282 25 a. atfvaregeld ] em.  afrarssayert 1106 


Appendix I. Quotations not found in the manuscript 417 


T.323 this reads atra ksalane +sati katham+ dikniya+ma+ acintye darSitam. 
But none of the following half-lines appear to be in the CintyaSastra as trans- 
mitted in IFP MS T. 13.] 


Tet 

Froare ger att fayraarst wae | 

at aeareart 7 afestsa fates 26 
ST STS: ATTACH AT AH THAT ATTA: | 
Fer FT afar Wes aA aATAAT | WI 
ATAUTS Ad: ACTA FAVS AHA | 
TTUTACAT AT TCHET TeTete: i 26 I 
Wet water AArNfered Weaware: | 
SMT OTa FAM: ATTA PLATA Il 22 Il 
THT MII TAT WET WWSMHATC | 
wreyeregyar ary casey fafrHarerit 30 i 
Ta SIT SATATA Tt Featrqstaqarsy | 
Gaat: GATE TAM AATAT ST Il 32 I 


Prabhavyakhya on the Kriyakramadyotika p. 16: 


aay AIT ee 


HH GA T A Weal TIT AT: Wa: | 
frqa: Adearay AaTHST STAT I 32 I 


T Faaaar asr fawrarafy area: | 


26 a. Gel) 1323, T795, T371; AAT T46; AeT T282pc; WaT T282 26 b. fa- 
Tvactst ] em. Acharya; faywact 146; fawgaecrt 1323; faygect 7371; 
faqeqaert 1795; fawatat T282 (unmetrical) 26c. TT Tere | T46, T795, 
T371; — ay — cee 1323; TAY Tee? T282 27a. WTAPa: ] T46, 7795; AT- 
GA 1323, T282, 7371 27 b. AH KeATGeqTe: | 1795, T371; 

T46; THEE Joga: 1323; THERMTGTEA: T282 30 b. WEY Wsrw- 
ATE] 146, 323, T371; WHET Wes: BATA 1795; MVS -- Wg: WATT T282 


31 ab. °STAQUMT ] em.; °aTe qmir T46 


418 Parakhyatantra 


at afentcafery fawstcarcr Fai 33 1 


Atay aT T HHACATAMMA SATA: | 
Fareatettst: are: are atta HATA BY I 


adriagd Taratersy Aral Saat AT | 
aferorarrfaay at: AAAI TST: Il BY Il 


tt TENA AT A ATMS: AT Il ae il Att 


The following unit appears, prefaced by parakhye, in the *Atmarthapujapaddhati 
(IFP’ MSS T.795, p.17, T.371, p.699, T.323, p.29, and T.282, p.22). Its 
last half-line only, also prefaced by parakhye, appears in the * Saivasiddhanta- 
sangraha, IFP MS T. 46, p. 37. 


Tet 

serersy fradhh prear areghorarctt | 
quer frt are farce: wafer este 
Wered AAWIIT Alt Hathesararte ii a9 1 


Of the following three verses, the first five half-lines are quoted (prefaced by 
parakhye) in the *Atmarthapujapaddhati (IFP MSS T. 282, p. 11, T.321, p.15, 
T. 323, p.16, and T.371, p.688) and the last four (also prefaced by parakhye) in 
the Saivasannyasapaddhati p. 14: 


TTS 
ATATS PAT AATATCA A UAT AT 


TAIT Fe Ta TST Il 3c II 


37 a. Fradrt | 1795; fare art 1323, T282, 7371 37 b. TeaT ATEVPOMATE | 
T795; HeaT ATSIAATA 1323, T371; Prat ATEGCTHATE T282 37 c. WAT] 
1323, T795, T371; Teta T282 37d. faces: ] 1323, T795, T282; farce 371 
eCTMT | 1795, T282, T371; WAT 1323 37 e. Weleda HAITI ] T46, T323, 
T371; WetaT — AWAATW 1795; Wel-ataTaaIW T282 38a. 

GTeT? ] 1371; AATSPMAATATEST® 1323; AATSSPRAAATATET? T2832 (unme- 
trical); (FART) ATAU ATAATA ST 1321 (unmetrical) 38 b. eTACT] 1282, 
T321, T323; °MTAW: T371 38 c. TAQTSMA ) 1323, T321; AAW 1371; 
Talartd T282 (unmetrical) 38 d. Wttfe° ] T323, 7321, T371; Tartfee T282 


Appendix I. Quotations not found in the manuscript 419 


Taarataernead fagperte | 
TPA TAHT ALT VATHHSAT: il 3% 


sees Yaeqhes WT waresaaszsa | 
Tessas ahr AFSC i wo aT | 


C. ON CASTE AND ON DIKSA 


Of the following, verses 41-44b appear in Vedajnana’s *Diksadarga (IFP MSS 
T. 76, pp. 25-6, T. 153, pp. 41-2, and T. 279, pp. 22-3) and also a *Pratisthavidhi 
of a Candrasekharabhatta (IFP MS T.370, pp.249-50). Verses 41-2 appear 
(with the attribution parakhye) in Jianaprakaga’s *Sivagamadimahatmyasan- 
graha (IFP MS T. 372, p. 1249 and T. 281, p. 164) and (with the attribution tatha 
parakhye) on p.60 of the Varnasramacandrika. The first verse only (prefaced 
by yad uktam Srimatparakhye) is quoted in the *Mrgendrapaddhatitika (IFP 
MS T.1021, p.223). Verses 43c-44b are quoted on p.76 of the Sivagrabhasya 
(with the attribution tatha hi Srimatparakhye). The units 43c-44b and 44c-44f 
(with an intervening line of prose) are quoted without attribution on p. 134 of 
the Mysore edition of Sivagra’s Saivaparibhasa. Verses 43c—44f are quoted con- 
secutively in Trilocanasiva’s *Siddhantasamuccaya (IFP MS T. 284, p.141 and 
IFP MS T. 206, pp. 71-2). The unit 44c-44f appears (prefaced by the attribu- 
tion tathaé Srimatparakhye) in Nirmalamani’s Kriyakramadyotikaprabhavyakhya 
(p. 268, lines 24-5): 


Tet 
adautatar fax: afraterre ye: | 
qwaygt ga ta crerdefRarifaci ve i 


39 a. CTATRT® | SaiSaPa, T323, T321, T371; evarTe T282 39d. AT FT- 
Teraltehr: | 1323, T321, T282; HMPA SaiSaPa; HVATETATaTfehr: 
T371 40 a. FES Yeates) conj.; afee yfadfee 1323, 7321; Afee 
Qaqhee SaiSaPa; fee wife aie T371; afee wheats T282 (unme- 
trical) 40 b. MOT TATAAATA ) conj.; WL WaTAAATA 1323, T282, T32Ipc, 
T371; WY WaTeadty T32lac; FF WaTeT Aad: SaiSaPa 41 ab. A¢aut- 
aay fam: afro) VaCa, T279; adautaar fast: afzare 176; Adautqar 
fax: afrare 1153; awaty autrar fax afaae MrPaTi; adauttay fast 
afar 1370; aaantrat faw: afare 1372; adanifadr faw: afrre T281 
41 c. YWAYST} DIA, MrPaTz, 1370, 1372; ARAVYST VaCa; AWA: WF 281 
41 cd. AE eteraefRanifad | MrPaTi, T153; Va crertefwarifaq 176; WH 


crertefearifad VaCa, 1372,T279; YH creraggfHarifad 1370 (unmetrical) ; 
we creraufcmarifad 1281 


420 Parakhyatantra 


AAT: AAA aA AalqaTeH: Sd: | 
TIANA TAATST AAT: MAT FIST: | ¥2 Il 


Fry aety & gered FT cattery aa: | 
arar arate aaer aeaahentahrarhrarest it 3 I 


aarorarey salar TT Wetecasntay | 
MTIWET J AST: MararHarecae: | 
Frerars & asr ater aratenrr 7 fee 


Verse 44b is followed in the Diksadarga by: etat parakhyoktavacanam (T76, 
T153; parakhyavatta” ~~ ~~ T279) asacchidravisayam (T76; -vidhanam T279; 


44cdef. This unit also appears quoted without attribution in the Siddhantasitravrtti 
amongst other lines which may not belong to the Parakhya (p. 42, ad siitras 8-9): 
ST FATS ATA 

qqary aare: wrersraPrera: | fHarafanter sfgaretfaaraer il 
Teminad? + wear frutagrears | PATA FT HFA Years aaa 
Aad TEPRITaA eres: | Tamara: w free: wicattta: 1 
aaIIe_ FT YsTeMrararchyarecr: | frenrare J ser sear arateaur 7 fe 
adaag frearmrahrarsr yor yoy) ufafeararsrer qatarareaterta: | 

El Mfg: aA AT TUT MT AT: Fer Haar arewa wer fererex frac | 
Farsarar St TaTT: & ATA A A WATT AT: 1 Af | 


42 b. AeTqUTEH: Sa: | T279, 1281; AarqulEeh Sa: 1372; AalqUepceye: 
VaCa; AsTJUTEHSAST T153; ASYAUTRACAT | Sf: | T76 (unmetrical); ATq- 
WESTT: T370 (unmetrical) 42c. “MTA ] £; eMTH T153 42d. TA: WAT 
TWeT: | T279; TA: WATT FATET: VaCa; WAVMVHT FIST: T76; TAMA 
JWeT: T153; TARNITAIET: 1370; Taye Arey xfs 1372; FI: WT 
-- @q: T281 43 b. T aaferay war: ] T76; + aefray aa: T1593; Tangfe- 
al Ad: T279 (unmetrical); VT AANA We: T370 43 c. Brat erenfT] siSa; 
erat arar fe SiABha, SaiPaBha; She Hrat JF 1279; sravarad { 176, T153, 
T370 43d. Teahatahrartrary ] 1206, SiABha, SaiPaBha; Teafafafrar- 
frarq T284; aawferaatrary pid; aeefesraarirary 1370 44 b. YgT- 
wa? | SiABha, SaiPaBhaé, SiSa, T76; WFTeTe T153; YgT-T° T279 44 cd. ] 
om. DiA 44. N97: ] PraVyé, SaiPaBha, SiSdVr; 5T: SiSa 44d. wr- 
BTaTt?® ] PraVya, SaiPaBha, SiSiVr; WaTAaTT® SiSa 44 e. WHE F 2- 
ST] PraVyé, SaiPaBha, SiSaVr; °XHTS AW AT T206; orMTaasT & 1284 
44 f. ATAT-UUT 7) PraVyé, SaiPaBha, T206; ATAT-AUT] 1284 


Appendix I. Quotations not found in the manuscript 421 


-visam T153) eva. tathoktam vayavyasamhitayam --- In IFP MS T.370 verse 
44b is followed by: vayavyasamhitayam. - - 


* Diksadarga (IFP MSS T. 76, p. 26, T. 153, p.42, and T. 279, p. 23) and Candra- 
Sekharabhatta’s *Pratisthavidhi, IFP MS T. 370, p. 250 (in the latter the quota- 
tion is prefaced only by parakhya): 

aT Tet FT 

WAIT: Hotes Prerrszqwyayr: | 

Wg: afraasye: wer Preareqar yr yl Rte I 
* Diksadarga (IFP MSS T.76, pp. 188-9, T. 153, pp. 268-9, and T.279, pp. 150- 
1), in samskaradiksavidhi: 

STATS TST — 

. : : Fae 

ATISHGAACT CATS AsaTat T AeHA: Il ¥E I 

arfaarate ay fawr weqrey Wars: | 

BAT: A ACTA AAA AT AST W9 Il 

at aeareqeaca ae sft wfrarfear | 

fee qa: frases sferatanrcted TT vc I 


This is followed by: tatas tatsamskaren&tra prayojanam nasti. yatah (yat T. 279) 
tasmin vaidikadvijatve saty api karmayatta gatir iti. 


VarnaSramacandrika p. 15 (prefaced by tad uktam Srimatparakhye) and Prabha- 
vyakhya on the Kriyakramadyotika p. 201 (followed by iti Srimatparakhyasruteh 


45 a. TAIT: ] T370; ATI? DiA  « HATA) 1370, T76, T279; FATT 
T153 45 b. faere ) 1370, T76, T153; Fae 279 45. YS: afTAAeRT: | 
T279; WF: afraaq FT 7370; qeutractarsy T76; Wgataaad FAT 1153 
45 d. Pre LT] 7370, T279; frear wat yart 176; Frat aay WaT 
T153 46 c. °QACT RMN) conj.; °ATeTET DIA 47a. fF AT) T76, T279; 
eTUT T153 47 b. AEST) conj. Isaacson; TWITATA T76; ATA T153; 
GETTT T279 eMITHT: | T279; CAIWMATH: T76; KAWHT T153 47 c. HAT: 
@ AATATA | conj. Isaacson; BVACEAAATATT: T76; ATACEAAAT ATCA T153; 
HTAaeaeaT- - T279 48a. FIT) T76,T153; Fer T T2779 48b. fT] 
T76, T7279; f° T153  48c. °MTEX] T76,T279; °ATEX T153 


422 Parakhyatantra 


atferar ay shrarty Sareea: BATSafeg il ¥e I 


* Mrgendrapaddhatitika of NateSaguru, IFP MS T. 1021, p. 189: 

nanv esa diksé manvadyuktavat (em.; manvadyuktavat MS) kim Sarirasya sam- 
skaram karoti, uta jateh, ahosvid atmano va. 4tmana eveti briimah; tatha (conj.; 
eveti tatha bramah MS) Srimatparakhye— 


dearer a: Br: Mat a favs sath | 
aearar ara asartaatfarsrs fear T ATI Yoll 
vafert adalat AEH: AtHaT AAT | 
Frrarer + aenrat: arerarfsetatear: | 
Uenraadaedad Hera & Ate: ll WPI 


Appendix to the *Sarvamatopanyasa IFP MS T. 284, p. 27: 
Faye: AT star Her: Hrcar AIT | 
HAT ASMA: TEAAARTAT: I WI 


This quotation is preceded by Sivatvavyaktisampurnah samsari na punas tada/ 
kirane/ atha diksadhvasuddhatmasaéngasabrahmapancakam/ siksmasvayambhuve 
[sic.] and it is followed by parakhye/ diksayé mandale puja tatpraveSavidhih 
kramah/ tatvasuddhir anutkarso muktir ekena janmana |sic.| Thus the labels in 
this portion of the text, as is clear from the Kirana quotation (Kirana 1:22ab), 
probably usually follow the quotations to which they belong. 


Kriyakramadyotika of AghoraSiva, p. 365: 
pa — 7 
acat Ft: Fare arta ferasfHasrad: | 
ve Ata: Rarearar weehst TATA I YS I 


This quotation is followed by the tag parakhye and then by another quota- 
tion: evam yo ’nantavijaye sarvadhvavidhidiksaya/ diksitah so ’dhuna bandhan 


49 b. GTATWAT® | PraVya; RITATHAT® VaCa 50a. ET: WAT] conj.; PHT 
T1021 50c. @eATaT ary THATAT | conj. Acharya (cf. Kirana 6:3-4); @@hT- 
Teaqeay aR T1021 51 cd. eenrat: ararefeefafear: | conj.; AeAT- 
at arara fwetafwar T1021 51e. °@aqte ] conj. Acharya; eda? T1021 
51. atfed: | em.; Waafafs T1021 52 b. HET: FCAT] conj.; APRTHT- 
Th T284 52 c. HEMT: ) conj.; ARWTT T284 


Appendix I. Quotations not found in the manuscript 423 


na bibheti bhavatmakat/ svayambhuve. Since this latter quotation is Svayam- 
bhuvasttrasangraha 14:46, the label parakhye must belong to what precedes it. 


* Sivagamadimahatmyasangraha of Jianaprakasa, IFP T.372 (pp. 1192-1261), 
p. 1216: 


Waa anda Vales TF FAT YY I 


aterar ara afweq ade wterartag | 
weary Rrrarratafa: aaa fererfer i xy i xfer 


The same unit is quoted in the * Diksadarga (IFP MSS T. 76, p.3, T. 153, p. 4, 
and T.279, p.2), where it is prefaced by parakhye and followed immediately 
(without an intervening iti) by the much cited verse beginning asmat pravitatad 
bandhat, which is Svayambhuvasutrasangraha 2:24. Note also that it appears in 
a larger block of verses quoted (without attribution) from the Parakhya in the 
appendix to the *Sarvamatopanyasa (IFP MS T. 284, p. 26 and IFP MS T. 801, 
p. 20), for which see the apparatus to 15:9ff. It is possible that this unit should 
be incorporated into the text before Pratoda’s question in 15:11. 

I have not found this in the other transcript of the * Sivagamadimahatmya- 
sangraha of Jnanaprakasa (IFP MS T.1059), but that transcript does contain 
the following passage of unattributed quotations (IFP T. 1059, pp. 27-8): 
tad itthambhutam Sivasastram proktaprakaram diksitair eva Srotavyam pathita- 
vyam ca. diksavihine tu jnanadikam sarvam vyartham syat. jnanader asva- 
tantryad diksangatvenaiva jnanadikam moksasadhanam nanyatha. tad uktam 

tasya tena tadangatvam diksa sato ’ngini bhavet 

Sivadiksam tu muktvaikam sapatravyahatam param 

jnanato yogatas capi caryata$ ca na mucyate 

jJnanadinam tu samarthyam tatrapi svar na vidyate 

balabaligavrddhastribhoginam sarujam tatha 


54ab. y Mapper sar’ xfs | Mrgendravrttidipika ad vidyapada 3:5c-6b 
rg [ 


(p.30). But note that Aghorasiva quotes the same unit ad Ratnatrayapariksa 165c— 
166b attributing it to the Svayambhuva (in which it seerns not to occur). 


54a. °HU ] 1372, T76, T279, T284, T801; eHFT T153 54 b. WTA) 1372, 
T76, T153, T284, T801; TEL T2794 a. UTA) 1372, T76, T279, T284, 
T801; Tass T153 54 b. WAtaT) 1372, T76, T284, T8301; AAAS T153; 
Waredeq T279 55 a. Saar ATT) 1372, T76, 7153; ~-AT ATT T279; erer- 
QTSaTaA T284, T801 


424 Parakhyatantra 


jnanadina na mokso ’sti tasmad diksaiva mociniti 
Though no attribution is given here, the first of these half-lines is Pardékhya 
15:9ab, and the third occurs in the passage just cited above. But observe that 
this same third half-line elsewhere belongs closely to the half-lines that follow 
it: see the two-verse fragment of the Ur-Pauskara cited in Goodall 1998:361, fn. 
588 as constituted by Sanderson (*1996a:43). 


D. ON PRAYASCITTA: 
Jianaratnavali IFP T. 231, pp. 256-8, and GOML MS R 14989 (=M), pp. 231-3: 


ay Wwe 


watery addy aatastyst fear 
Hag Weary wore at Farag: i vE I 


wat Reagan F Aaya WT | 
HUT AYART Hay FEAMT AIT II VI I 
TAA AAT aaa Ter VT | 
Vay FT VST WATCAATUT SS TAT | 
WATeTA ea Tear Wrafadt WANT: ll UG It 


Taatedrany 

WITT Feat AAEM AIT | 

aTerntrar ate ar sRhoreay atfarr: xe it 

far: aremd Wear TeTSANITaySa | 

afrar fareta teaeq Prerett Fi Got 

WSst Seay searte araesg Feraraa: | 

THUAN YT TATA AT AAT It G2 Il 

aeq warherat weagrentt ar gaterae | 

Marewd wear areaqeter Shfare: 1 G21 
57 b. ARQTATS ] T231; AATATS M58 a. CMAIARTATT ] conj.; eWar- 
SeSraryT M, 1231 60 c. AFTAT) conj. T231; fafear M™*, 1T231; freer 


MP 62b. HefeTayT) T231; FeoferarT M 62d. AVIA | conj. T231; 
awa M, 1231 


Appendix I. Quotations not found in the manuscript 425 


Hatay: TATST FTSTATATAT | 

aMTAeT Me TeaT TeaTyRVa fafeTaTeT |i G3 I 
WUSTAA ACTH AT AAT ATG ELAT | 
FAAS SVS ATA SINT THEA | 

AC THACANT HEAT FR AATACT | GY il 
YSRT STATA HTAT (7?) TAHSHIT: AC | 
ANC ay Wear Tareay Yar i &y 
HATTA PEST FA FBT HHH | 
THAT Tad Wald AT ATT! GE Il 

Wear Wear Fat Hret Tarat TCAAT AAT | 
carat Ttaret ar eye ar afeat Ferg: i G9 il 


YVS CATT AGT GAARA SARA ATT | 

MHA FAT SBT YRS WITT |! Gc Il 
STATA EIT ac HAINMCAAT AC | 

HATATSS TAT fAATACT ATT Ht G8 

Tet ATegray HAA TaTAgT (?) Were | 
qeeataar anr: Aare: HAA Atel ol 

Ter VTegray are are Hatt TI 

ATared ----fay: Sarega HV T RTAAT | 92 1 
arsrautarer: SAY WATTS: | 

wage ae Hatcard seqaarz i 92 I 


64 a. en ene oTAT M, 1231 64 b. TTA AMT | M™; weafearany 
M*, T231 65 b. TAPMHYT:ACA | T231; TAP (ATT) Teal M 
66 c. TACTAT | 1231; ACT WT Mo 67 c. THAT WATT] conj.; Wr- 
ay Wary M, T231 68 a. eUMTTEuTMBlEe] M; ccanmaur yfe: 1231 
68 b. °HRAATA |] conj.; -TRASTT M, T23lpc; "ARAMA T23lac 69d. F- 
ata? ] M; @araTe T231  7lc. QT? ] M; @lre T231 72d. SARAa AAT | 


conj.; Frawathart M; frawarfaert (Far) T231pce; Pragrarfway T231ec 


426 Parakhyatantra 


Ee AH AARAT AE SATARATA: | 

Ud FE: TATSA: AHesad: YT Il 93 Il 
afticer Frat wet ferartafasrta | 

sae TATRA TH YY ATH I OY I 
aremre frerert: Tear saqettea: | 
afapegaeay Prete Fur Pari oy I 
aad seth OTe Aeahet Ter: | 
qareathr fearsapaatrardcarrady il 9& Il 
sett Sth TH carharere: Fravacyy | 
strpeagraurt t PTATATCH ASE AAI 99 tl SFT 


E. ON CREATION AND DISSOLUTION: 


Nanavaranavilakkattarumpatavivekam Vol. 1, pp. 255-6; Vol. 2, pp. 660, 679, 
685, 829, 1060-1, 1107, 1117: 


SAAT T 

aaer afaut aad weate featte 
Rreeq ataat caer gery fag] il 9c I 
frarrateraryar aaa ferrat wer: | 

Te aca Aare Aare aA SHT: 11 193 It 
Weeadagaanre Praacte FN | 
Way WaUTeT TIA TTT: Il co ll 
aererygeyrearcararareat ad: Fare: | 


73 a. 4] conj. T231; eT M; FANT (&) 1231 73d. afapegay YT) 
conj. (unmetrical) ; ahaa ear: IM; afrpeaay yy 1231 «74d. fe- 
TaTrHtaMary | conj.; feararratasfs: mM’, 1231; feararerafasfa: mM’ 
744.99] 1231; FM 75 b. Ta] em. | qray M, T231 76a. 3at- 
QTd] conj. T231; afar M, 1231 76d. oaeaThan | M’?, T231; °w- 
STeaea MP 77 ce. CfaaTe FY) 1231; efaaTaT M = 80 a. MI<adlayU- 
QTT ] MUTA HATATT vi. = 81 ab. °OTTATATSITET® | conj.; UATAaTET 
NaViVi; CTT aTATaTeTe vi. 


Appendix I. Quotations not found in the manuscript 427 


MATA TATA ETS TATT ASTM: 1 oe Ul 


This group of verses is indeed much cited in the Nanavaranavilakkattarumpata- 
vivekam, for, aside from the instances cited above, the first 5 half-lines only are 
quoted in Vol. 2, p. 1104; the last 4 half-lines only are quoted in Vol. 2, p. 1065; 
the first 4 half-lines only are quoted in Vol. 2, pp. 1088-9; the passage is quoted 
missing out the half-line beginning Santyadi in Vol. 2, p. 1069; the last 6 half- 
lines only are quoted in Vol. 2, pp.647 and 668; the fifth and sixth half-lines are 
quoted in Vol. 2, p.625 and again on p. 1063; and the third, fourth, fifth, seventh 
and eighth half-lines are quoted in Vol. 2, p. 675. 


Nanavaranavilakkattarumpatavivekam, Vol. 2, p.602, prefaced (in Tamil) by atu 
parakkiyattil: 


araY AST Sa FT Bassa FA: | 
aang +7 ada 7 Wscaraaraat: | 
TS AAA FT HT TNS: Il G2 


Nanavaranavilakkattarumpatavivekam, Vol. 2, p.590, prefaced (in Tamil) by 
parakkiyattil and with epavum intervening between verse 83 and 84, and Siva- 
jnanasiddhisvapaksadrstantasangraha IFP MS T. 533, p. 206, prefaced by parakhye 
and with uttaram intervening between verses 83 and 84: 


aad Vqyd adged Het: | 
weawetatd WH wHlacHat TAT PENI 
yaragqeareatar: fereqeafactar: Fert | 
aaeatedt to: Saar sr AteTath cx It 


This is followed immediately in the Sivajnanasiddhisvapaksadrstantasangraha 
(IFP MS T. 533, p. 206) by the following: 


Tet 

arrae fasrtor yaaa Wea | 
yatteara arator afer adie areas cy I 
aay: BTTATATy Aeateta fartac: | 


83a. TP] NaViVi; AYA SiJnaSvaDrSan 84a. °SATAT: ] NaViVi; °SaT- 
aT SiJnaSvaDrSan 84c. %4:] NaViVi; 4 SiJ#aSvaDrSan 84d. SFT Arr- 
eqay |] NavVivi; faatrerat SiJaaSvaDrSan 86 b. fayfad:] em.; faafae: 
T533 


428 Parakhyatantra 


jaseqverawarag arateratea frac | 


TUTET CATT ATAU Far: HaAtShCcahyyt ll ok I 


Nanavaranavilakkattarumpatavivekam, Vol. 2, p.607, prefaced (in Tamil) by 
parakkiyatttl: 


Frorferdt arar Frer fanart sretferar | 
aear: wes fap qaatetat Ti ci 


ATM MPH AAT eT AAT ARATE: | 

Hatedcaaed FT AtheaH YoateHy | 

AITCegraTa FAT HATATCA: Il GG it 
F. ON MUDRAS: 


Sadasiva’s *commentary on AghoraSiva’s Kriyakramadyotika, pp. 1-56 [third nu- 
meration] in IFP MS T. 962, p. 13: 


qoaetacr ad arate aah ck | 


and also p. 35: 
ATTAASTAA TH TST 
Hear ataneedy Ae seat Ac: | 
ASTM THAT TANT TST Til Lol 
wrartastat 3S Ter weareay wag | 
ANAT AATSAT AST ferqarHayfrr i v2 1 


This is followed by: mahamudraém dargayed iti mahamudralaksanam. samana- 
tantre: - - 


87d. YARSAAT } conj. (cf. Kiranavrtti ad 4:20); FAHESWAT NaVivi 88 e. F- 
TTT? } conj.; AAYCAT® NaViVi 89 b. efeit) em. Acharya; earT T962 
89 c. AETANAT ) em.; ATARAT T962 


Appendix I. Quotations not found in the manuscript 429 


G. ON GURUS: 


VarnaSramacandriké, p.83 (prefaced by nanu parakhye) and Jnanaprakaga’s 
* Sivagamadimahatmyasangraha, IFP MSS T. 281, p. 165 and T. 1059, p. 64 (pref- 
aced by tad uktam parakhye): 


Teer: adaey Isr Teeergd: | 
afsaearar sar atfrHeq fasrea: i 821 


I$ana$ivagurudevapaddhati Vol. 3, p. 99: 
seer Tear fret fawgergarferr | 
UUs add Tay Tea T Tee: Il 83 
TIS TTS | 


The final word is treated as a vocative in the edition, but since we have only one 
other in the entire text (4:166b), it seems more probable, if this is indeed a verse 
from the Parakhya, that it should have been a nominative. 


*Diksadarga, IFP MSS T. 76, p. 18, T.153, p.29, and T. 279, pp. 15-16: 


TUT TUTST 

aye: Prarraerauerar ye: | 

wert: Yfrcatererarettara: Fer: | 
aqarat SArfyRe_ sarard: TYITWAT | V¥ il 


H. ON MISCELLANEOUS MATTERS OF RITUAL: 


Trilocanagiva’s *commentary on the Somagambhupaddhati IFP MS T. 170, p. 111 
and Madras GOML MS R 14735, p. 76, as well as an anonymous * Sivapijjavidhi- 
vyakhyana: naivedyavidhi (pp.1-127 [second numeration] of IFP MS T.962) 
p. 102: 


94cd. AEUTT: Yfrearfererareifera: AMt: = Svayambhuvasitrasangraha 10:3ab. 


92 b. Teale: | SiMaSan; TReTgd: VaCa (unmetrical) 94a. Wea: Qs: | 
conj. Acharya; WAC T76, T153; AA T279 94 ab. 

Te: ] conj.; Pravrar Fact Taar ye: T76; Pravrar Facey ger Te: 7153 
(unmetrical); frartar aavd sapaar ye: T279 94 c. TETT: YFaeAT | 
T279; =TeENrt: Yfaeer: T76; were Yfsaarsy 1153 94 ef.] om. T279 
94 f. ATATY: ] em. Acharya; ATATY T76, T153 


430 Parakhyatantra 


faraant warced fare: tarsraferc: | 
parr: wRtere ager: anttscaferd: | 
afraers wal SO VeeT: WMA: 1 OY tet 


In IFP MS T. 170 this is preceded by atra and followed by iti ca Srimatparakhye/ 
$rutibalat “vahnikundarcitam devam mandalabhyarcite Sive/ nadisandhanartipena 
vidhin&é yojayet tatah”. (This latter verse belongs to Somasambhupaddhati, 
pavitrarohana 78c-79b (Brunner 1968:129).) In GOML MS R 14735, however, 
the quotation is followed immediately by iti $rimatpauskarabalad, and then by 
the verse of the SomaSambhupaddhati. The ascription to a Pauskara is almost 
certainly secondary and an accident, since this prescription is again referred to 
in what follows (IFP MS T.170, p. 112 and GOML MS R 14735, p.77) as being 
a teaching of the Parakhya. In the anonymous *Givanijavidhivvakhvana the 
unit is preceded by: yagaSabdena mandalam ucyate. kumbhasthandilavahnisu 
pujitaih Sivaih atmané svena saha nadisandhanam karyan tad uktam parakhye. 


Sivapijastavavyakhya p.48 and IFP MS T. 962, p.307 (3rd pagination] (where 
the quotation is prefaced by (tad uktam parakhye) and Prabhavyakhya on the 
Kriyakramadyotika p. 100 (where it is prefaced by tatha Srimatparakhye): 


aay: Yad: Wd TF fewer 
WAST THA STATA CPA Tl VE I 


TST shah sat FAH elses | 
ATT BTACAT TH HICHCHTSMTT | V9 I 
ag waeatenmy fare Terearayi ia i ate 


Just 97cd is quoted again in the Prabhavyakhya on p. 232, prefaced again by 
tatha Srimatparakhye. 


ISanasivagurudevapaddhati Vol. 3, p. 140: 


95 a. farqart aarcey | 7170; faraant aarcey T962; Ferqart AATTH R14735 
95 b. feta: ] em.; efera:1 xf 1170; efera aff R14735; fara T962 
95e. Wal] conj.; Wat R14735, T170, T962 95d. THAT: WMATA: | R14735, 
T962; WHATAH T170ac; WMATAH+T: Bjt:+ T170pc 96 ab. Yana: | 
PraVys; Wentafa SiPaStaVya ed.; YeAT SiPaStaVya T962 96 c. THT) 
SiPaStaVys; WA PraVya 97 b. FMAAHeFeTAT | PraVya, SiPaStaVya 
ed.; PUTAATHACMAT SiPaStaVys 962 97c. AVATAT TH ] PraVya, SiPaStaVya 
ed.; WataH SIMNd SiPIStaVya 962 


Appendix I. Quotations not found in the manuscript 431 


wean ae aay aertererad TT | 
TATA SAAN FATT AATZMT | XS I 


* Mrgendrapadahatitika of NateSaguru, IFP T. 1021, p. 104: 


STATS 
maqacysAscMigegqa: frsyrrTad | 
Wa FrqeTeT METH It Yoo i 


Sivapijastavavyakhya p. 79: 


at Aadat AAT WAH AATATAT: | 
GATT: TATA AACA AT HATS: Il 202 I 
afar Tet 


Sivapijastavavyakhya p. 86: 


Frqprscrarts Haass: Il 202 Il 
ata Tee 


* Diksadarga IFP MSS T. 76, p. 149, T. 153, p. 219, and T. 279, p. 118: 


TH T TST 


vehrregerargqda4n qyethea4r 
MAT HATA FAT feergafaerrerh 203 || 


The text then continues with kirane— sadangulaparinaho dandah syad vimSad- 
angulah (em.; -naho dandasyatividangulam T76; -nabho dandasya tividumgulam 
T153; -nahe dandah syad dvimSadamgulam T279] (which is Kirana 16:32cd), and 
this is then followed by: 


TUT Wrest — 


99c. °9-<iht] em.; °F-etft iSiGuDePa 100. faraeqeT] T1021pc; Fraeq- 
eq x fara: TRTx T1021 «103 b. CTAT FYSITAT | conj.; eWAT AYEltar 
T76; OAT Byethray T153; ews Byelhtay T279 103 c. TAT) T76, 1279; 
THOT T153 103 d. or, Mie conj.; faargefagrrar T76; fe aye- 
fagrrar 1153; faargefaerra: 2 


432 Parakhyatantra 


TTATSTATT TF AVS: TATAM THT: Il ov I 


The last half-verse (104) is also quoted, with the same label, in AnantaSambhu’s 
commentary on Siddhantasaravahi 67-8 (BGOML 18.2, p. 14). 


Contrast this with Narayanakantha’s quotation ad Mrgendrakriyapada 6:40c- 
41b (p. 68): 


agen BATTS 
TSAR BTS: KATES MTG: Ml Vox it AFT | 


And note that on the previous page ad kriyapada 6:38-40b what may be the 
second pada of this same unit appears differently: 


qui AACS — avs eT feearger atc | 
Narayanakantha ad Mrgendrakriyapada 4:5 (p. 42): 
TUT Sra BATTS 
aster WT: arat ATSAT SRPRATTATH: | 
syeateareal Saya: | 
Qe: Tat are: fered ATA WT: Il 206 tl Ser | 
(The first three padas of the above are also cited ad caryapada 1:75-7 (p. 232.) 


Vidyakantha II’s *Bhavacidaémani on the Mayasangraha, Jammu MS 5291, 
f.61°: 


Teer Fr 
GS THAT OMA LATA i Qos I 


Isanasivagurudevapaddhati Vol.1, p. 99: 


TACT YTATEAT Ul OU, II 
att TSA AAS WYTAAT AT Tee | 


Prabhavyakhya on the Kriyaékramadyotika p. 109: 


104 b. as: TUTE Me YT: ] conj. Acharya; @US [ T76; avs: CaT- 
SMeYAT T153; ave: Affe T279; avs: eartecerge: SiSaVya 106 
e. #TY: ) em. Brunner (1985:78, fn. 2); #TT* Ed. 107 b. YaqaTyMgye ] 
conj.; JataTAMIte MS 


Appendix I. Quotations not found in the manuscript 433 


TT SAAT T MPS: Il 28 It 
aft PHS: ASUTTAMATST - MPM TAT - 


*Atmarthapujapaddhati, IFP MSS T.795, pp. 149-50, T.371, p.908, T. 323, 
p. 294, and T. 321, pp. 242-3: 


STITT ey 
CAT: TTA ST TITAS STAT Il RRO I 


In IFP MSS T. 323 and 795 this is preceded by 
sarvajnanottare 
proksayitva pura prajnah (T323; jndne T795) kundamastrodakena tu 
punar ullekhanam kuryat astrabijena sanmukha. 
And it is followed svatantre ’pi 
vajrikaranam astrena rekhas tisras tu purvagah 
yamyat saumyamukha tv eketi. 
In IFP MSS T. 321 and T. 371 it is preceded by the verse attributed to the Sarva- 
jnanottara, then tatha kalottare—astrenollekhanam kunde varmanabhyuksanam 
matam. It is there followed by 
tatha somasambhuSivacaryair apy uktam (T321; °caryair uttara T371) 
rekhatrayam udak kuryad ekam purvananam atha 
kuSena Sivamantrena yadva tasam viparyayah. 
The latter is verse 6 of Somasambhu’s agnikaryavidhi (Brunner 1963:235). 


J. ON PRANAYAMA: 

*Saivasiddhantasangraha, IFP MS T. 46, pp. 158-9: 
Tet — 
THT TT: Hear Preeeqmareqc | 
TAA GAT TMATAT FLAT Il 222 1 
aamaraay ta set: Harte FT 
ad Acts GMreq PTACATATt ATCAT Il 2221 
aaa Aah wae VAT | 
WTI HAATSATA SEATED HMA AA: Il 223 Il 


110 a. tar: APITTATFaTay | 1323, 7321; Tar wpTTaateqay 1371; ATAAT- 
ferat T795 (unmetrical) 110 b. TITeHTYSRTAY | 1323, T371, 7795; THAT 


STSQPAT STAT T321 (unmetrical) 112 b. Hed: FPATAAT] conj.; wzeargfar- 
aAT T46 


434 Parakhyatantra 


Cea Baeegy SMATAT WAT | 
atararaar ta Hard cet HE! 
ffaarcaraart VT ATAATEAT VAST Il Ve I 
K. ON KARMANN: 
Sivajnanasiddhisvapaksadrstantasangraha, IFP T.317, pp. 1001-2: 
Tet 
a - aria: 7 
ateAT YOM CATS YATYAA Il 224 
jrea-a cara fe aceanrataqa: | 
UhETON F:h FATA AT TARAS II 22¢ Il 
qe clh Feareart veal fer Fer Far 
aed F:atet YaeHetaaar ATi eg I 
HUARAA SAT AAA AA: | 
GICATR ATT TRY SHSTEHLOTTT Tey t | Vc I 
mallee Ha HT Fag:arte Yad | 
THAT [eRdts Ader Ada: TAT: il Vee il 
TAIT Te AT Tag:are ya | 
jars BATA YH Il Qe ll 
L. MISCELLANEOUS: 


Vidyakantha II’s *Bhavacudamani on the Mayasangraha, Jammu MS 5291, 
f.61": 


arrerred SFT 
adt fasrraoany fate 
wa-q faga: vat: arrHer aaesar | 
aT: Hrbaataay ATH ATM Wese_ aT: TAT zz 


121 f. WAT] conj.; TAT: MS 


Appendix I. Quotations not found in the manuscript 435 


eqTeA wag aMrHey FI: WNATAT | 
ua fare caer aerate F gece 22 11 Efe 


Aghorasiva ad Bhogakarika 100c-101b, p. 227: 
gH T AAcITeArat — 
HM ATTRA HATA: TASH | 
Te: HATAATTAY ALT SY: ALHTTH: ll 923 il AFT | 


Ksemaraja’s Netroddyota ad Netratantra 13:12ab: 
aga ae 
ar Framarceta afr: ada areas | 
WHT aTaNTaT A TEATAAT SAT AAT Il Vv AFT | 


Abhinavagupta’s Tantraloka 9:134c-135b: 


TH T BIT SaAerst: Haas: | 
Teaaee as WIAHA FATIH zw I 


Saivagamaparibhasaman jari, p.223 (pancamavarga 89), Nanavaranavilakkatt- 
arumpatavivekam, Vol. 2, p. 1175 (prefaced, in Tamil, by parakkiyattil) and Siva- 
jnanasiddhisvapaksadrstantasangraha, IFP T.317, pp. 1036 (prefaced by parakhye): 


Searqd FUT Geq: fercar fercar feraryar | 
aaa @ PP aTercaT Hatparhay i V2 I 


Note that the attribution given in the Saivagamaparibhasaman jarl is based (ac- 
cording to fn. 191 on p.223) on that in the Nanavaranavilakkattarumpatavi- 
vekam. The verse is obscure. I doubt that Dagens’ valiant attempt at a transla- 
tion (1979:222) of the text he accepts is possible: ‘Comme un porteur de torche, 


122 b. JI: ] conj.; Jifr* MS 125c. Ad] em.; AT KSTSed. 126 a. T- 
waIgd GUT Weq:] NaVivi; Ioanrgft Ae-dy SaiPaBhaMan; IewTaaTeTUr 
Aq SiJiaSvaDrSan 126 b. FeratsraT) NaViVi, SaiPaBhaMan, SiJnaSvaDrSan; 
TeaTskaT SaiPaBhaMah MSC 126 c. MlHaAd] NaViVi, SaiPaBhaMan; AYaT- 
Yat SiJiaSvaDrSan 126 cd. FAPAYTeTEAT | SaiPaBhaMan MS A; fafeeratcat 
SaiPaBhaMan ed.; fAfTYT ATCAT SaiPaBhaMan MS B; fafeere Wer NaviVi, 
SiJiaSvaDrSan = 126 d. HAlgartfasy | SaiPaBhaMah; HATRFATTAT NaviVi, 


SiJnaSvaDrSan 


436 Parakhyatantra 


l’ame se tient constamment aux limites [des domaines des liens] et sur l’ordre de 
Siva elle traverse en un instant les trois mondes.’ 


I$anasivagurudevapaddhati, Vol. 3, p. 23 (where the verse is followed without in- 
terruption by Parakhya 4:14 and 15cd, and then by the attribution iti parakhye): 


WTacqgar aearaa faretedt acaaete: | 
qear frawrer sa wert: Safar: Il e209 Il 


Sataratnasangraha 61-2: 


Fracargead aret wycargyerd gat | 
arate + aratcnsy Afra | 
SAU SATHTATA CAA AL ATS A: ll VAT Il 


This is introduced in the Sataratnollekhini by: parakhyasardhasutrena na ke- 
valam asyatmano moksa eva SivaSakyapeksa kintu dehabhogayogayor apity aha: 


Nanavaranavilakkattarumpatavivekam, Vol. 1, p. 228 (prefaced, in Tamil, by para- 
kkiyattil) and Sivajnanasiddhisvapaksadrstantasangraha IFP MS T. 317, p. 1077 
(prefaced by parakhye): 


Fratfe sade SAAT TAA | 222 Il 


Prabhavyakhya on the Kriyakramadyotika, p. 92, a *Sivapijapaddhativyakhyana 
IFP MS T.962 [lst pagination, p.59] (in both prefaced by tad uktam Srimat- 
parakhye), and Trilocana’s Somasambhupadahatitika, IFP MS T.170, p. 143, 
and GOML MS R 14735, p. 35 (prefaced by Srimatparakhye): 


aeq ur fafesr oer aravenrfor fear AAT: Il 230 Il 


All sources follow this quotation with the following: iti. ‘tasyety anantasya bhah 
(bhasah R 14735) tejasah (tejamsi T962) vidiSém adhisthayakah Saktayah padah 
digam adhisthayakah gatrakani’ iti (gatranani iti R 14735, gatrakaéni T170) tad- 
vrttau kathitam. 


Saivasannyasapaddhati, p. 95: 


129 b. WaaANTAGEAA | conj.; Weant Weary Navivi; Aagrreqfary Siaa- 
SvaDrSan_ 180 ab. fafesr qret mraarfr fest) PraVya; fafesrr Wer ma- 
artor fextr SoSaPaTi, T962 


Appendix I. Quotations not found in the manuscript 437 


Tet 

aay rated art afear fraaeqar | 

Prarie ese ararenqer Area: | 

GATS SS HTT TSAR: WT: 23211 ae | 
The following three verses (which are almost identical to Parva-Kamika 4:349c- 
352b) appear in the *Atmarthapujapaddhati (IFP MSS T. 323, p. 223, and T. 282, 
p. 203, and T. 371, p. 879), in the Siddhantasaravalivyakhya ad 50 (BGOML 18.1, 
p.44), and in the Jaanaratnaévali (Madras GOML MS R 14898, p.96, IFP MS 


T.231, p. 207), where they follow an unattributed quotation of Rauravasitra- 
sangraha 4:34c—35: 


TTT eT 

Ud MH AT: HT eT WAST | 

TT WAT AIHA TS ATA It 232 Il 

ATH Adda ATA AAT AA I 

ATaAaTaHATey ASAT ATTA TT Il 233 Il 

ah paar Preat Padiatr | 

Tearetaege Praaatra aT ll av i aT | 
Vidyakantha II’s *Bhavaciidamani on the Mayasangraha, Jammu MS 5291, 
f. 65": 

agen Satenreamad Tet + 

TIAA ASNT: TRAPATT: | 

TIMI TH TAA RAT AC: Il 23y I 
132. Sawer) APaPa; ATTST TUT M; -ATTTATS TUT 1231; TUT WrT- 
Wer SiSéVyé 1320. ITH AY: HT) T323; WeeITy: AeD JiaRa; WH 
TY HET 371; WHY: FAT 1282; Wed AY: HA Sisavya 182 c. WT- 


Wd Get? )] JnaRa, T371; WTA AT 1282; Wredeger 71323; wrad facrt 
SiSaVya 133 b. OTT | JaaRa, SiSaVya; °YTAT APoPa 133 cd. ATX- 
araadiere ATS AAA ACT J SiSaVya; areqaraatted ATS AA ATT | 
JiaRa (unmetrical); ATTaTTHCeAT SAA A NACT T323ac, T282 (unmetr- 


ical); @TeATaTA HC eAaT SATA ANAT +T323pc (unmetrical) ; ATTA HTT 
aT STATHAM ACT T371 (unmetrical) 184 a. GH Hate] ©; FR Fare 1371 


1384 c. Tale? |] APaPa, SiSéVya; TaTa® M; IXaTee T231 


438 Parakhyatantra 


aac ferar seat yaratearearicaaey | 

acara Safed At: THT STAT TUT I 236 Il 

ATH FRMCAIT Met: WTATSATAPT | 

ert: aaa ener VT Yartey fara 30 I 

taeq erstarere wer yarfey Ferd: ti 93 it 

zeae: at alar wetcarverar + ferfear: | 
Sivajnanasiddhisvapaksadrstantasangraha IFP MS T.317, pp. 1035-6: 

Ter 

ATararad ¢ ATarar: HAtal WhTaarsy | 

saca strat ater fateatgret ATI 238 i 

TTS 

aTarara F ATaAs aT FT Arar Fe fag: il evo 


Sivajnanasiddhisvapaksadrstantasangraha IFP MS T.317, p. 1036 (immediately 
following the quotation of L:126 above): 


Ter 
GQ THAA A Wad [aH il ve I 


Sivajnanasiddhisvapaksadrstantasangraha IFP MS T. 317, p. 1040: 


TUT Tee 

Taraer: FATT HT: Fat FT AeA | 

TEMAS WAG ata azee TA Il VY? il 

futalina vécayirenat 

WT targa area geet Read yA | 

Calsdt FVGed ASAI TF Salacil v3 
138 a. TARY) conj.; THEY MS 139 ab. HTS JF ATATAT: HAA] conj.; 
oH ATATAT HAA SiJisSvaDrSan 139 c. ACT FHT) conj.; WAT- 
~gfaartr SiJiaSvaDrSan 139d. YY) em.; FT SiJssSvaDrSan 140 b. AT ZT] 


conj.; & ATSAT SiJiaSvaDySan (unmetrical) 143 b. RAT] em.; RAC RAT 
SiJniaSvaDrSan 


Appendix I. Quotations not found in the manuscript 439 


Tey 
aisaear frente afe ta FT Ua | 

Tat ANT FAT AAT Tala Hed WaT | 

ar ear faar am frat fe + frerctii eve it 


Sivajnanasiddhisvapaksadrstantasangraha IFP MS T. 317, p. 1042: 


Tet 

AT HUH Pegs frat | 
fayvararfe tage ayer carcass: | 
ada stehracareataeqrenitenta:t il gvy i 


Sivayogasara, p. 182: caturvedarthatatparye parakhyayam ca bhasitam 
advaitam agamaSirobhir upaésanayaém uktan taveti paramarthataya na vacyam 
bheda(h] sphuto garudamantrikayor alikan tadatmyabhavanam athapi visam pra- 
marsti 


a wWeatafrpar researsy favera: | 
Frarreaatcears & arte Tear afr | 
wara-ee Of: earfete arcat FFT: Il ove i 


This is followed by aropitasivadvaita ity uktah paddhatav api. But the quotation 
from the Parakhya may have ended already with paramam gatim. The first 
verse cited is Srutisuktimala 135. The name Caturvedarthatat paryasangraha, 
although used in the edition only of a commentary thereon, is evidently also 
a title of the Srutisaktimala of Haradatta, which is transmitted with the title 
Caturvedarthatatparyasangraha, e.g., in IFP MS T. 374, pp. 2168-96 (where the 
verse quoted is numbered 133). 


Somasambhupaddhatitika GOML R 14735, p. 38 (prefaced by Srimatparakhye), 


and Nirmalamani’s Kriyakramadyotikaéprabhavyakhya (prefaced by tathé copa- 
deSah), p. 96: 


Met Ba TF ht wwerehsery xr evs 


This is followed in both sources by the following unattributed quotation iccha- 
Saktimayim murtim kalpayet karanasya tu. iti. 


147 b. °SfANT |] PraVya; ° STITT SoSaPaTi 


440 Parakhyatantra 


M. MISATTRIBUTIONS 


There follows a short list of quotations attributed to the Parakhya that seem to 
me very unlikely to have belonged to it. 


1.) prayoktryadi mahiprantam etad anvarthasadhakam 
pratyatmaniyatam bhogabhedato ’py avasiyate/ 

This appears in the Sataratnasangraha labelled as belonging to the Parakhya. It 
does not appear in Avalon’s edition, but is one of the thirteen sutras (No. 40e) 
missing from his manuscripts of which P. Thirugnanasambandhan provided a list 
in the appendix to his translation (1973:114). Thirugnanasambandhan based his 
text of these missing verses on a 17th-century Tamil translation of the text by 
Turaimangalam Sivapraka$a-Svamikal (which he supplies in an appendix) and 
on a manuscript of the Tiruvavatuturai Matha. Other MSS of the Sataratna- 
sangraha (e.g. IEP MS T.112, pp. 558-576) also have these verses. Both Thiru- 
gnanasambandhan’s MS and IFP MS T. 112 (p. 565) label this verse as belonging 
to the Parakhya, but it is in fact Mrgendravidyapada 12:32b—33b. 


2) yatha parakhye— 

kanthodvalitacaitanyo vidyadarsitagocarah 

ragena ranjita$ capi buddhyadikaranair yutah 

mayadyavaniparyante tattvabhitatmavartmani 

bhunkte tatra sthitan bhogan bhogaikarasikah puman 
Thus Siddhantasitravrtti ad sitra 5, pp.33-4. But these verses are famously 
from the Svayambhuvasitrasangraha (1:10-11). We must of course correct the 
first word to kalodbalitacaitanyo. 


3) tathaé Srimatparakhye 
$uddhayonimayam tasya vapur uktam akarmajam 

Thus the Prabhavyakhya on the Kriyakramadyotika, p.3. This is probably just 
@ confusion of sources, for this half-verse is Kirana 4:7cd. Exactly the same 
misattribution occurs in Trilocanasiva’s *Somasambhupaddhatitika (IFP MS 
T.170, p.44) and in an anonymous *Sivapijavidhivyakhyana (IFP MS T. 962, 
p. 58 [1st pagination], where the same unit is quoted prefaced by tad uktam Sri- 
matparakhye). It is not unlikely that the mistake is originally Trilocana’s and 
that the other sources have followed him (as they appear to have followed him 
in other cases, e.g. fragment L:130 above). 


TRANSCRIPTION OF PATALA 1 


(16)srererferara AT: it 

WHT CATT SET MTT AT | 

MS: ALA ATT Was: TTT: TT 1:1 

WaT TIT HTT ale F TIA | 

Vay: 8 Ate Aca AA Spe Ta 1:2 
_ a = 

qhonage carg fasrequreste ii 1:31 

MUTCTTY (17) TATA SRSHT TCS | 

aelfeghmarnnt qaararfad: TT 1:41 

qeniqaan fagafert srt Tufad | 

wy: mmtpenr fear arfaryfetcarfaar 1:50 

aq ar untatderg afar | 

qycaarstrarer: & Ferd: WYATT I 1:6 

(f.27")-—[-6-]-4Jew ~ yarypatfactferc: | 

freq: Terufat wfwegeparera: i 1:71 

aq FaMqearar afaarar AAwa: | 

aar wathrarce frareq: (B, f.151")TfUaTeT: 11:1: 81 

GT MACATON ATITMTATTNN AT: | 

TH BAACATTATATSY HRs ATTA ays: i 1:9 


aa safe(2)jaranr arrannfegeact: | 
Aare ANTYENT: H Fear AfHewae: 1: 100 
7ab. ] Thus in 1996; tops missing from entire line in 1999. 
c. °fYsTTT ] Thus in 1996; this portion broken off in 1999. 
10c. Between GnT and Jerr: there is a raised fibrous horizontal line on the leaf 
which would have been awkward to write on. The scribe has covered most of it with a 
wiggly line running the length of 6.5 padas. 


1 Sreerferara Aw: ] M”; om.B (for B’s preamble, see description of B in introduc- 


tion) LTP AT] MY; Wea B 7 —[-6)—AeH ~ Yargafactare: | 
MY; aferareagent: Yaryatachar: B 10a. °anT) MY; ean B 


442 Parakhyatantra 


amiqwarae frarareatre: | 

TANT TATA (3)U AAPA: 1:11 
qe fear + acaht aararargr@rrr | 

afar ararst ar aver ware, Raa 1:12 
THU DT AAT ALATETT AeTIMT | 
faraTsratear farary TROT SAEGAT TI 1:13 
HUOTVafst TeHGearater aah fF | 
aarearare Frarsarht aurar(4rmerfaga i 1:14 
Vera TAT sare fahrsr: areas: | 
earned fafay: Awe: TY 1:150 
aTaafegqar ani gfacargqeted: | 

sbi ue ahaa bla 


wepfafrarcre 

ica ey ale 

TAPSTT (Ska A T Ferg: TY: 12170 

(B, f.152")Ue Je: FT wTary Warr: warmed | 

Krapfwacraared Ae aver Carag 1:18 

yaar aqerafy eReaTNeqaarad: | 

aque wader ays aArsafT Ti 1:190 

T TarTTEr aver AAAI: | 

MANTA: FAAS A ATT: YTAT(6)TA: tt 1: 201 

TAS Jars | 

T FE AAS TT Tea ae: HAT 

ead yaaara: Teorreafaxree: it 1:21 

THIN Jas | 

ser arefearaer araee wafer | 

afonrafesrvor ar fahrar Gere Ft: 1: 221 

MUTA WFHNA AAT TATA | 
llc. Tea) MY*; ST xxx +BX4+ TM” (SP isin margin); AMT B 
ecaTagy UU] MY; carey +&+ B (insertion in blue ink) 15 c. @RTHA? | 
M’°B; eat xx Wr MY 16d. Tq]: ] MB; Ty: Mee 17 fafer- 
errr ) MY; fafwerye ant: Bo 18a. TTaTT]) MB; W x Fx TAT 


Appendix II. Diplomatic Transcription 


afer erat epferart Ait yarer(7) Prete 1: 231 
TAASTATS AY ATT ASAT AMT: | 
WaT UTA aH a T TafEyn 1: 241 
Tre Hed qos wer estfag Ye: | 
wet arutaarmrmsars fathead 1:25 
AAT VARTA FWAT A HATA: | 
saaeafatanar aur wzartr F (8) TAT 1: 261 
TeAUIeVarsy ATTA (B, £.152°)T: ATI 
ate CATA Sat Taray TT AT Sif: | 
eafagrt waar Src Tt farat 1: 271 
Wale Jars | 
uaerane adr srt aftracara = fart 
a afer: garsfert afeerrgect er: i 1: 280 
Warsr J(9)aTs | 
anny Fert sty HET HAT WaT | 
TAT HAHA WT array Freq 1:29 
Wale Tavs | 
Yahe AACA AT aT HAATSAT | 
asad AT ARITA UW AFATACTTaT il 1: 301 
THIN Taya | 
aT caar araar wrer fer arfafea(10)terercrr | 
RTSAT BAT AT A AT AMAT AAT 1:31 
ad anfafare + ar faster wader 
sfafeat fart Var AATHTAAAPTAT | 1: 321 
aur faarftar gear arerar satatteare | 
HAITIAN MHSMAMSTeT: 1:33 
aTfaaercareayg (11) weNaTyarted: | 
aMat farser AMT: FETCH TUT 1:34 
faret aq ayentar aqfrarprange | 
Sratqufaar arate rr sar ferer fry: i 1:350 
Tale Jars | 

24a. Tae? ] MY; AMAT? B 


444 Parakhyatantra 


av fey: Geet: sre: (B, f.153") Sat Herma: | 
q: gearfear aor: erércraferfarc: it 1:36 it (12) 
Warr Jara | 
MACH AT SaTetayea HT The: | 
afer ar anfa: gar gata far Ferri 1:37 
Ader T Get INT aa Ahifsrec | 
aryat fradeardy Sahay HATTA i 1:38 
HIATT A AT BT TTT Tei I 
aa wet Arseerer fr(13)yearaqanreé i 1:39 
Wave SATs | 
arearay wea: fasret FT aarrar ferar: | 
ager Aa U eather HAT: Hert 1: 401 
WATS Java | 
ayaa T Aa TINT TET Ache | 
fafreert aaar sar ay ee FTW 1:41 I 
WAS Jars | 
wa ve feray Far ae (14) &F ata: | 
UHM FEW VT FRA AeAZAT I 1: 421 
TAS Jars | 
Faqucardeacea arer Rrninra: | 
aT aex aantanr afer MeTar i 1: 43 
aafear wafgor gaater wet aT 
frarfrarfeormry marker: 1: 44 i 
(B, f.153") weave Jars | 
afar araar aat ania: ar ferar ar 
fr(isjores fart at ar ar fear & Te: Jarqi 1: 451 
TH Tavs | 
SWgT: Baar aut qerfaarwansrs: | 
Prarcar at afeer tT oer: Tania: 1: 461 
frored wae, waaferareqsurted ar 
38 c. fadeardy | MY; fradenfe B 45d. ararfaara) M”’B™; ar fear 
QT Bo 46 c. afaer) MB; afafe MY 47a. 44°) MB; Aa MY 


Appendix II. Diplomatic Transcription 445 


avareart frawifa fearar @ faareaci 1: 471 
ASG AT CIMA AT TAT FHC: | 
TT—(16)F are ar AhatHay FT TAUTH 1:48 n 
caer 7 eaearfacarcareyda: | 
ferarar adar yar Wawa: Was 1: 490 
T Wer F VACA FT AKA AAT: | 
MASITMASST: ASTaray HAY Ae: i 1: 50H 
Wale Jars | 

AYA T WAST Aer: Ya: Sra: | 
TUTSAT TINT: WrHa—(17)eafes AUT 1:51 
THIN Java | 

TeATCTA: T AY WT: Kararylafataaa4r: | 
afe qer + aryfaedgrny FT Varah 1:52 
AIT yay Te wha Aa: | 
Friar a cenhe seeate weer far 1:53 
aya waarer (B, f.154") wTeratfeaar fers 
Gal Tear F TSA(18) FfacerMaray ii 1:54 
TaAaAAecs MHewr ar fer | 

array Taq eaTdges faqs: 1:55 
ue fert fart aaaart Tyrac: | 

ay ax Pfr ar faye ae cara 1: 5601 
fatreaeaeircaran carfag + fri 

at aeargdta Farrar at Het <0 1:571 

(f. 287) -—[-11-]—sara —[-2-]— 


48c. €{— | The right half of the akgara is missing. 
51d. Whd— } the right half of the aksara is missing. 
54c. Tat | The rightmost portion was broken off when first read, so that the r of 


taddharme is part guess. All these aksaras were entirely missing by 1999. 
57d. AcT~ | This unit had been broken off by 1999. 


48a. MIST AT) M’°B; MYST x ATx AT MY” =48c. €Y— TF] M”; CIT Be; 
fawrt Be 51d. 9THt—] M”; Ware B 57d. HoT ~] MY; HIT B 
58 ab. —|-11-|—TWa —[-2]—] MY; Adv cage F:a AaaATAAA Ta B 


446 


TTT RATATM TT TTTCTITT SST Ti 1:58 


TTTVTATaAT ee SIT RAAT: 
argmrfea aarenrrage faverfrag i 1:59 

| | 
TTY S TYE CTA TY WM JT: 1:60 
Tacs aT 


TAT FS: T H(2vAe Braap: | 
TaUe: META T AAT 1:61 i 


WHIM JaTT | 

Wet yrad Ht frereer :rypy | 
TUAANATAY A AMET TF YTAT I 1:62 
MAY AEMTSET ATTA AAC AT: | 

we aasirer gaya faster 1:63 
TAGYAT TB, f.154" Hy faeret Tyas 

(3) afe at Garey ear gated wfarrarh 1: 641 
aT wife: qatar aT aT qatar WMATA | 

afe at gered fer at Tyzerari 1:65 
VA-UAT ATAAAT Freya | 
afasart Gaeq Teacahat MAT hi 1:66 i 

T aret HMMA AS AAT FTCT | 

afer srfeerar aremrfar (4) arcoranefeTee 1:67 
aferearayr safer ar afer: sve ferar ae: | 
BAH WHI: AGHAST TEP T Il 1:68 
WEASLAT TET TTT: WMATA: | 


60cd. The tops of the letter in this half-line are missing in M”. 


6la. J ATT WS: T Fe | The tops of these letters are missing. 


Paraékhyatantra 


Bcd. TTT HAATM TT TT TCC THT tT) M’; at aca 


RraraTt thrarfcr B 


S9ab. TATHTAT ST: To: SATIAMA AT 
el T:) MY; Gat arg: aa: arty + + YT: B 


60 cd. AT YT 


a TYtCa Tu We yop: ] MY; aaya: TATA U Wwe: B 
Tae Tart) MY; wae wT B 6la TAT AS: TF) MY’; 


JaTT Ws: THe B 


61. 


Appendix II. Diplomatic Transcription 


at ad wre Facita: artad far + aaa 1: 6911 


ee eee 7 
sreteahe avareaey Aathae TeIT I 1:70 


(5) qeafattsad cearraara arcarfey | 
av fe waar ed ay areas Wea 1: 710 


caurar sorafea: tfeorafasrea: | 
an aatfatad g fafer ac erred: 1:72 
WaT Jars | 


447 


qT aMeq: TANT (B, f.155 aver acl carafaqeda: | 

TITAS YaTaT STS Ae FAT 1:73:11 

TH (6) HIT UAT HAT gad Hfac | 

afafrarrararta arqecare: hac 1:74 

yasaty caqurar ar fa yrerqenra | 

SE aT HU Ad VArege AY A ATi 1:75 
an aa Feat 

Tefeeehrarerany FEHTOT | 1:76 

acHreagiprad eqtatsarearyarrd: | 

(7) Sarwar: Far: Aarnporsrerar: i 1:77 

THET BAIA T THT FT | 

Mee TAe aA Ad HAAN: it 1:78 

ary adda ad wareArra ferc | 

SAT MAAN: SAT HNYFIT: | 

aan afaagar waerararaited: il 1:79 

HAT (8)SAT ATAAT FeNT Teravaaeantedt | 

ad: Aa U at FaG:aysH Hetil 1: 801i 


Wale Jars | 


mito war ay Pad acqaeda: | 


70 b. °HTaT? | M*‘B; 


omfdT? M’*% 71c. €d] MYB%; Rd Bo 72c. a- 


afatad 7] MY; aatht+f+Aeq B 74b. HTM] MYB“; AGW Bo 76 


a. WaT? } MY 


° 


’ 


ayere B 


78 b. Teh | MB; & x CHx CHIT M” 


79 f. WaeT? ] MYB“; WAeTe Bo 80c. Ad U ae] M”; Added Be; Ade- 


qq Bx 


448 Parakhyatantra 


wircer fafa: far var TATETaNTe: i 1:81 11 
TAIT Tavs | 

auTerratfenrt Fare: aTeaT (B, f.155") wae: fester: | 
arfenet Ft: BfE(O)tararer Tava | 

aarate Fert at ware arfeareae: ii 1:82 
Wareera Aaa wa As | 

sareqearer fasta: arr Frere wa4r i 1:83! 
anaity fraser at wrarenrafaste | 

THAT FET: AH: FAP:AAAPTT: tl 1:84 
TAS Tas | 

7 (10) aqeafe Ga: worrraates: | 
eeaarerferaenttcnad at farfacdri.1: 85 
THT Jas | 

achat Fer: Mer T WaICeT Har | 

HIAT AHA CATT AAA Ae: il 1:86 
ager Hh: SAKAI AET TIAA | 

GAPHS TUT ANY T Hare T(11) Mater 1:87 0 | 
OT HAT ACHAT ATAU TET: Sj: | 
AHGUT Aca: BTATNTT it 1: 88 i 


vafeearamre Jar faarceg feecasrerfea: | 
aferargnrafers Frerfar+:+ @T TUT WaT 1: 890 
witttrad art eradfafrartirc | 

cacahiegead KAT ART U AT (12) Uf-6-JUN 1:901 
ATSHISNTader Warafeapae AUT | 


fay: ag arreate was afar Ar TT 1:91 
fafaq year & WTR U SaUMTAT U aatAre | 
SANT SHA (B, f.156")arT Ferree seg 1: 920 
AMHA Ia ATT STA HAA | 


87c. WET] MY; MYATB 88b. F8T:] MY; JET B_ Bob. faeries: | 
MY (unmetrical; this may have read fE&KARUEH:*° before correction) ; HUtea: 
B 90d. 4@T U ATU] MY; Fert UB 92 ab. fafar Fert & MAT u 
Say u ata) MY; fafeq a: 7 a oA caurarfeestarey B 


Appendix II. Diplomatic Transcription 449 


U[-6-]U Sa: Se (13)5F TF TMT 1: 931 

ay fagfededd areata Tava | 

aaa: & FAM: SBA AtaTA: | 

vata: FY: waar Aerevarafe=qa: il 1:94 11 

ware gar fercar fayca fahrrey afaaenira: | 
Teardararyrd caer aaferd arfedra (14) Fr 1:950 


wafa Tuer Heras TyVerifearwfawettedt: WA = N® =i 
TRANSCRIPTION OF PATALA 2 


THM Fars | 
adHal Fert WH: Adaa ASA: | 
HaMquercare: May faererarera: i 2:11 
Wal: ArTaaay AUT ATATSTAN CHAT: | 
eeraaataecarg her aqyda}4: il 2:21 
arated (15) qfeara afadrac: anaferd: | 
wafaqsy: crane searaT arta: ti 2:31 
Were (B, f.156) Jars | 
HATTA FT Telay Area: | 
TT ACHUITATATA CATT BTCA AMT I 2:4 
TIT Jays | 
dal T etal aT Hreaarcnraheag | 
HTT SET TUT AHI MA Spe | 
argfaey (16) aretor Hat areter Aya 2:51 
qT dacnat Freate equnrafad: ahad 
aay acarey Hfaeaeatfaafahr: i 2:61 
unr: arearfehriersy serte ota | 
93d. deat 7) MY; M4+T+AeaA B 94e.9Y:] MY; T]B 95a. q- 
maT] MY; Qe B e Colophon: aft] MY; BT AT aft B ecGet: TAA: | MY”; 


ST Geo: TUR: Save: FT TB 1. Ware sara] MY; BWrsagres AF Il 
Mraerheaara AT: BT THT TaTsyT B 


450 Parakhyatantra 


Gat aaa HARA FT AMT Il 2:7 
aaaTeEt Ht eqcdt HT AAT | |] 

ser Feast, acrearhrreare it 2:81 

(17) aratefatee srear arrarar-aerarar | 

vw afafasrsraqraeaqaraar: il 2:91 
Fasrerecguadar adarert & Reaayr | 
fasresrar arat arar-a fergareqar ii 2: 101 
aT aTaradrgereqaray gfeArt | 

ary ererareaer fataareatrfener aril 2: 111 
Wate Tas | 
ferdta(18)fafhired + aarhretterr | 

aare: BI AY Heads AdsT fai 2:12 
TAI Jars | (B, f. 1577) 

Tad Bet Haae_d gaa atfatafacr | 

Qt T HIH A CTT Ta Fercahate: 2:13 
qaatfefafare at errata | 

wer Praradegarar epee il 2:14 11 

weg geeq eqat Haret (f.28") -—[-4-]---a 
TIwer~T I MIATTACT TTA H 2:15 
qe aT es aatat aearerarfhe fer: | 
aar eqvacat fa gq catheter weit 2: 161 
qearrtag we ceahH arwartrar | 
THHMCITA al AAA U HAAT I 2:17 
Sauceceane aeaf: Heard TUT | 
Fagvearen avatar: FY (2) Tt AGATA | 2:18 


15b—16a From 4 up to FfgAre the tops are missing. 


9b. ATTaTAT=Te | M**; ATT x: x ATA? M”; ATACAAT-Te B13b. afg- 
fafed] MY; afatfaqae BO 15 b. HATea —[-4-]—aT] MY; Hareay ar (ur 
B<)fadt WAT B cd. TAIT TTISMIragr¢agaarfes] mM’; 
WUUTIICA A qaed aafeh# B 16a. T TE AT AT] M’; gfanredst B 
17a. 38H] MY; THB 18d.H + TW] M”; Aer B 


Appendix II. Diplomatic Transcription 


TaHAIeN Brava Tawgfa: Ak_qay | 

are atereatersy eq: areder mega 2: 191 
Tate Jars | 

fe mATeMTaerer Weeararfae ferar | 
WUT MHATS FEY ANTTA AMT: || 2: 2011 
WTS Jars | 

RAH Aad BAIA Was | 

aq aret arcomirar(3)fefa & Frfear afer: i 2:21 1 
arya saRoty areaterha: we(B, f.157")eae | 
Ged MEAT AHIMA TF AV: I 2:22 1 

qt acHaaged BIT THATS | 

aaer aaa: aret aefe farfarrscr i 2: 2311 
Tech Uaa ated fayar aa: | 

faycardt adder are saya ferci 2: 2411 
afrarsy aaed (4)fery adareter Nr: | 
aay Brat se aAcHtaresghr i 2: 251 
ara aadtrer adqer rate | 
SeAATANAA Agceaarqar ferar i 2: 260 
aTaATT Ae: AVHT ATA AAP AA: | 
TATA A Sq: CATA TAT Aqatata: ii 2:27 
TAA WATT ad TAaAy AUT | 

T(s)anr + fered afert cafafe: Tra 2: 2811 
Pafarrared GAEe AEA | 

Tey T AeA aaanradqafad it 2:29 it 
STITT AA AT Aaaregyqaiad | 

Gal 7 Was U aaa afar wa | 
PrPaarecer At HAT FT TCPAT: ll 2:30 

WATS Jas | 

aT: Hut HreaHEE: HIT (6)t fears a: | 
Hts] ZT (B, £.158") rath grad areata gai 2:31 
TAT Tas | 


27c.&q:] M”; &¢ B 


451 


452 Parakhyatantra 


are fart yt + HAT HUNG | 

sThTTH UAT aA: HaHa U i 2:320 
auryht tf: Wa: HATA: | 
faarataat sat + Arracorfere: il 2:33 
TUTat GUT wea added afonarferc | 

eaqara (7)et Pear ver ar fear aretrarfear il 2: 341 
araterear welad FT aret aconiferc | 
Tach ACT PHATET WU ATH 2:35 
aTset Scan wfa: Prarear wfavad | 
carayy: au af: wfavar ae SHS i 2:36 
ATIUNAE ATaT SAT Carter fay (ser: FA: | 
aaecadifsar wHeTTAS YA: tl 2:37 
Tararpaarne4wcifsar AAAs | 

ageeany dcaq: arearfater ferarit 2:38 0 
anar a a: Grarafe: arcisaatecty | 

Tar Ha AcHer aaeryarfew i 2:39 
Wacdratcah Bt Ahr ATA(9)TT | 

Wat acparat fafaacaareses il 2: 401 

aot iafitain p 7 
Htidle Tar waar Bar (B, f.158") Arve wear 2:41 
aed: yet Te: TAN: | 
qureanraratag: rar Yer Frere 2:42 
at pantera fm: whrqar(10)e: | 
arar Saar VT UST FT Brel BefHerryes | 
afatancr TAUAT T SAAT TF AATHATAT HW 2:43 
ad aneaey: waut war at fren fara | 
AS-ATAT AAEST ATHSTAATPRAT Il 2: 4411 


amar at @: aRTory faqde: uaa: | 
33.a.8o:] MY; US: B 33c. Fat] MY; Frat B 35d. TU aan] M’; 


w+ far + aa B (correction in blue ink) 38 b. FGAAT | M” ; agar B 
39d. °Yaatfen ] MY; oyaatfyat Bo 41a. atte] M’*B; att MY 


Appendix II. Diplomatic Transcription 


Wd Fed Far AT Arar (11) AHA 2:45 
wast Fer: Praroy ay amt: Get: Fer 

W Sa TaSsaT Wear aT MPHesGSara4r ii 2: 461i 
TATA AATON TAB T TISASST | 

ATUUT FIBATAST FAT RISHATAT: | 2: 4711 
CERT TAT : | 

ay & srafag (12) stro ar wf egatdarn 2:48 
UST BAIT Tar wearqedarfedt | 

ar User egaatear esrrarrehry |) 2: 4911 
Hae A TWeT Bead FT AAT | 

OT Brey HCY MAT HreTeaT a ferari 2:50 
aq areraftede fafear Femme | (B, £159") 
arataar ferar F(13)aT aretfaetacrerar it 2:51 11 
aauiraaary cadres | 

aaa fafarr at AAAAT TAA Il 2:52 11 

ae ar farferar arferet Tay alact: FT: | 
WIA AAATONT AHATARTAT AAT | 2:53 
AAT Gat Tt fafersr faaceats | 

aay aabraay (14) aarar fafa — ari 2:541 
aot aT Ha AQaAT TT | 
arerqraaerertradt U [-7-JU 2:551 

U MTAT Geet BT Weert war fare: | 
TATA WAUT AVA TAWAVATYAT Il 2:56 it 


amifagraaed Tarvrertahraect | 

WRAT Tt TAT AA AITATA RATT Il 2:57 1 
MYalatg:(15)ar ahyats Fey | 

SAU AAAS AT WHSAATT TAHT I 2:58 
Tt SaeQarhs FeHargraurfehr: | 
yeatafay: HMA AT AAT TUT 2:59 


49 b. eo? ] MY; cMHe Bo 49d. eT? ] MY; vate B 
MY; 3A B O57 d. CHEAT] MB; °FRTATe Be (?) 


453 


56 a. U STAT | 


454 Parakhyatantra 


waaee Prose acd vata ar oy! 

AAA ATT SAT MHAATHAT | 2: 60 it 

THATS AAT EIT AT Hts THE | 

(16) aT arferqaray (B, f.159") SPAT SATATST TMTGPAT Nt 2:61 
mor: wfafemr afr: vat veteran | 

TAHA AYA TIAA HATS il 2:62 

areanraet: art afa aafae aa: | 

aur acaifeqecnar fardraesr art a: 2:63 

afer waded aret agafersy oe: Fare: 

AIGA Ad HT(17)F aed At AAT 2:64 1 
Frfarsrrarrrcare aaa: TOIT: | 

Frere T Ie ATT Caparo csead Il 2:65 i 
ararar a: verutferfarea4nate Ferg | 

GUT MUAY ATA: ATSC: WAATSTH: Il 2: 66 il 

safcer Frerarer ge: sratfearadt | 
aayHTaretay ST FTA (18)t 7 fae fere 2:671 

av afe: aferar ar ar ae waren | 

ate ary WaTacd UNMIS Tsar i 2: 68 1 

TaaNeT WAC Ast Aart GoutatEd | 

wer Gar cred afacrercen faeata i 2:69 

TT TST WaT raeqT WATT: | 
Fagaaresay eo sfgarerfrcterd ii 2:70 

(f.297) —(-9]—e TT RRaas 

ATT ATMTATT YT TA eee T MA 2:71 
JW (B, £160") AAT TH ST aT YT ee AMT TM aq | 


71b. & TF FE AT A F] tops missing 
71cd.] tops missing. 
72ab. TTA MTF AAT AT FT KF AT AT) tops missing 


63d. faydre |] MY; fasfae BB 67d. feta) M’; fera: B 7lab. —eT 
g fe ar wt H] MY; Ft BIST Tea Seed sta B71 cd. BT 
THAT ATHY Ta a aes wT a) M”; arate aamner- 
eWa B 72ab. TW AM TH ST TT Se AM TM Nad) M”; 
+A +H THAT WITT MT WaT B 


Appendix II. Diplomatic Transcription 455 


WATT AM & ach TT TM Tl 2:72 
HPMTHAACTTA ATTRA 
Tas ese ag + ag et —l-15-] — 2:73 
~-(2) gE wafa aaa: | 

afee WaT ST ATTA WATSTT I 2: 7411 
araarte qaeq afer fardate ari 

TT SOT Hae aeGAeM afew 2:75 
farqufatnyqeraurarad fer | 

T WeaAgEcqenra: aferay wad | 

at serifaea Feaaranyey Fs: ll 2:76 

gery fe ot aT re & rer (3)aretfea: Te: | 
MAST Aaa st Ahcrasr arr it 2:77 


sfeareratraedt wer aerayas | 

fat: AraT Adeg: wlHgayd: Wy: Il 2:78 

faa efear man eee aahafear | 

aay efacargfater sea il 2:79 
autedcaty araferyt ae fare ve a: | 
ataretft far (4) arfert gvad TaHarfay i 2: 800 
aunfe qaaere efetar ofafwar | 


72c.3T TF IAT AT WMT S|] tops missing 

724.4 a4 & fF FT: ] tops missing 

73ab.@ T WTH ACTA TTA A Cd iT: | tops missing 

73c. 7 qg © F © A] tops missing. Note that in first transcription two following 
syllables were thought to be visible: @7 7 

77ab. ATT & & TRI] tops missing 


2cd. IT THAATA M & Acad Ta TW a: |] MY; HH Add Wer 
dena: add fa: B Tab TTMWIIRACTIATIR TTT 
tT) MY; BdeTTHare + erefeartat: B Wcd TU ETE —] 
MY; Gee gearaay ae fosfafafead Bo 74 ab. — | Vata) M”; Aa- 
Amanatagatatd B 76d. afer) MY; afent B76 f. FAATATTRY | 
MYB*; Qeqararael B77 ab. JT AT le a ret ay] M”; Frat fe aferary 
B 79b. °fafeaT] MY; cfafeaTe BO 79d. Hea] M’B; ABW MY 
80 a. HUfedea |] MY; Hefeqet Bo; Heafe—aet BX 80 b. HY] MB; 
atc MY° 


456 Parakhyatantra 


vadiaaar eertereta fafafear i 2:81 
(B, f.160") wearaur wegte frteer Wasa | 
TUTEIET ATA Aart aah fas: ii 2:82 
aaron amicahaagTrayq: Wy: | 

aT Tay Fahy: TIAA TaTAT: ll 2:83 
aa afe(sjreterq: tates: | 

Ma  Tapr SiCearayera: ll 2:84 1 
aargfae cara aac: wesad | 

ATH ANAT ATA T ATTA: It 2:85 
AT-UUT arate: Sar adearitaatsra: | 
YET TET AY Ae: YAAT: THAT | 2: 86 il 
atanttqaeay aqrarctafrada: | 

sTare: Fa (6)aniearcader: Hete_qd: il 2:87 
wet + Praar fag ar fear feraatfear 
stearate at aafayad aa: ii 2:88 
THEA aacarsyqUraag Tad: | 
gteaacaaerar Torte U Waar il 2:89 
TMAaeray TAT AATATATMTTS: | 

gears adres ae UehHarss it 2:90 
oat (7) faraat eT Janet F Sd: | 
year ar Fa Det (B, f.161") TSTeT AT FAN 2:91 1 
MNT: MTSNT Waray Fea Ae | 
AACA TASTE AT: Il 2:92 

Ger Facartar at arcetesad | 

ary afare Wey Cet TET Aa: Il 2:93 
araarit teear aT (8) TATA ayers: | 
Aaedd array Bhd: ab atin aie” 94 1 
war ar array aft: wart: e Fad | 
YSTASAAATAT EAT AAT: | 2:95 
qeader ot: sre: fafaqfanerhihe: | 


81c. 64. ] M’°B; @fe: M’* 


Appendix II. Diplomatic Transcription 


q Ud aaHTaey: Your F Ie: Farag: 2:96 
aa fae: Fara: sr(9) erred aay react: fara: | 
ferqeafafaamnar tqatyarer Ti 2:97 1 
TTS AHet RTT Arar Aakers: | 
MUTATE FT SSTSTAT WHTMAT HW 2:98 
safrarty jon + away SITgTarea: | 
ferar arquerrfe: tyar ofarrad: ii 2:99 
cafrarareardg (10) errsareafatastreare | 
ATAU THAT HTT: HTRVT APUTT it 2: 100 
AAS: T THMT TMT: AeareaTarhaa: | 
MHA SAT AW Prareresrsyrad: tl 2: 1011 
(B, f.161") afafray + Tarar Wadeafaarad: | 
Mofo: wean wear srerfeacontfracd ii 2: 1021 
TATAT VATA (11) ST FATCaNTT | 
POTATO SAT PATCH AT ATTA: Il 2: 103 
ghar + wargarae afaqhac 
AGT PRAHA ATM TT TAIT tl 2: 104 
wofdedcayparaasad rata | 
THATeA aed Water WafTEzAT: i 2: 105 
QVayT: TAVITAT (12) aha Wray ATBsT e_qar | 
WTAIGay aay T AY QATSAATA: | 2: 106 
WATSTLET SqET T UMM AV Va ArT 
eda BT ST MTA STAT: It 2: 10711 
a afa at a cea aa asfea: fara: | 
afte weer at TA MATa HT FT| 2: 10811 
safer: & Ady a(13)aerfHtaarac: | 
GUT: AATAY FAT: TATA: i 2: 1091 
wfarr: ye ety ae: wfory acta | 
eqedarancear ararard Praag 2: 1101 
97 a. fas: fara: sreey] MY; fas: (ge: Be?) 
ab. °GaUTa? |] CHANT xxx We MY; cate B 
MY; @{1gAeT® B 


457 


fara: 3ret B- 100 


106 d. QTAAAT? | 


458 Parakhyatantra 


yar Saarfaeat ar aygeper rats ar 

a fafa ve orfasatene: eprr rari 2:111 1 
aahrarcey aereder (14) frrarr + area: | 
anaanrte tairdter ferar ar favargar i 2:1121 
(B, f.162") afaaraasr Frat: wear aferat azar) 
UT TUT TA AaMrA_IS F Aur Arya 2: 1131 
Te: TTHSTITT FETHCOTTTT: | 

q_*a: HeaTaeT HAA Arras: i 2:1141 
TAS Ae AAA AKA: | 

rawr (15) Prato waqueqerd: i 2:1150 
araur fataaraard Faery SATSUT | 

AUTAT SAAT ASATA TAT Tatra: i 2:1161 
watrqareanrearay frarfaersrarra: | 
frarfaeratreter faarersmafast: it 2:1171 
MAA ATA TOA aA Haas : | 

fararet: Ferat Tgrageyagaqe: il 2:1181 
U(l6ejnegaesy ar Fryftferaryq Bye: | 

Mao: spread: Rrast yagteae: i 2:1190 
GUAR: FET U AATOTAUT | 

aurfe farearerentefrarege FeTar: i 2:1201 
fradacara aTarsrafaafard: | 

Wacara awreder fevers Yona: ) 2:12 
CITA HTT CAT AH (1 7)AT TTT 
fraqeaaqar: af far g F Haag: i 2:1221 
afrart wpdfa aaraeahasttean: | 

aerarey Fear (B, f.162°)erar Taqear facrfare: i 2:123 1 
TOUT TUE SAAT ATTA TH: | 

HATET TUTST AHS ATE: |) 2: 1240 
Wale Sars | 

ferar af snrerar fe aredairar(13)FoRr: | 


114a.09:] MY; T+T+H: Bo 119c. Wes: ] MB; WHT x: x Aiea: 
M” 


Appendix II. Diplomatic Transcription 459 


aur ferahrarhtee a afar: read geri 2:1251 

THT Jars | 

cag afrder adfter srearsay Aa: | 

dfaar 7 wir: ser aateafy farrarey i 2: 1261 
aeafRega ant free wand | 

aTar faetpraere frasreqagfear: ii 2: 1271 
aaaratanuied frarfearaeann: | 

(£.29") -Ter Fa: TTT Tae Tata eT 
adeatae afag fraracahedaferc it 2: 1281 


frarraanrtrgercnd alert ayer searaanrare: | 
We: FT TATA AeY Ue aa oaaaaegey: i 2:1291 


= I @ i= xfer reed Hera (2)> haventfrarcufaareavectt fadra: i= it 
ST i= it 


TRANSCRIPTION OF PATALA 3 


(B, f.163") fae frarearranr aereryetrea4r | 
Faery FAAATAMTA CHAMPA ITS ST it 3: 11 

Fer T MTATANT AIHA: | 
aaamfetaaart Ferd wea AT il 3:21 


aoatastrgered fasgatwr(3)Frar: | 
Maret aeageard warery Maa Ti 3:31 


WaATEaT AAU ATIC INTT | 
aS GaMs ATVs FTAA: 3:4 il 


128cd. tops missing 


128cd. <T STM Fa: TIM A ACAI TA TT) M”; BAeahy Far: 
Ad WAIT ATATWT Be Colophon: eft) MY; Pru Pern Pru Pru Porn Par 
tia B oe fadta: ] MY; fadta: aare: Bo 1a. faa] M”; spraequ 3rees- 
IHTT AA WATT UAT B 3c. aVrerTeq | MY mirery Bo 4a. WaTear] 
M’‘B; HTaTeay MY** 4b. Glaedte ] MYB*; ATaale BS 


460 Parakhyatantra 


NIT RIT: WAP AT ACATAT: | 

Hal AATAATSTT FEMA TAT: 1 3:5 
fecarfecat naTedferaracast srafera4n: | 
uTrenfafr(4) year fratorr qararfe TI 

aewH Tear UTEAnTaca Wafer ii 3:61 
TAS TATT | 

wmfes: Prana aritfsataatste: | 
TWMATHUOY WH: SHAT AUT: Ferg: i 3:71 
VAAMTSAT VETEAA VFAATAT: | 

armacea fart rar aegeur fe wars 3:81 
THT Jas | 

ad ear (B, f£.163")FF eaer Sar (S)arRaaNTa: | 
afecaar Wal AT Had HTAaT | 3:91 
far WWeweracd aaa far Wy: | 

AHA TAU WMHATACAMCTT il 3: 101 
Halereverery whrarey cashed: | 

@ AA ATA HASSE aa CHAT ll 3: 111 
Frasfararrt arara areatatad: | 
AeId AAATeT T(6)ATaTA: HATHA: Wt 32121 
v7 ofa Paaqereat qquardaeqad | 

TT TaGaqed (MTT TATA: 32131 
afy asafaafarerrt sfrareac | 

TRI HANT AAATCET ATCT | 3: 141 
SET: TAMTATITATUT RATAN: | 

eared At adres Hratrafrge Ferg 3:15 
TUT (7A A ART: Tercaryeted: | 

AIA Ya: AT: ALAST TCA: Il 3: 161 


a arara: fart araacror feraage: | 
AAA TAMA ATT AAPA | 3:17 


5a.MUT MIT: |) MY; A(T BY) AUT RIT: Bo 10a. °aTACT] MB; 
°aIqed B 12d. HAT] MY; MATE B 17a. fafo] M’; fad B 


Appendix II. Diplomatic Transcription 461 


TPMT Teal Mae: | 
ATaUrT aerate SUrarttararqanfearar ii 3: 181 
TaA(8) THT FT TarH: THM: TAB, f. 164") erfe: | 
TENTASTRNT SAT AUT ASTRA: Il 3:19 
ASAT BMT AIT WAT wavs | 
FT Ul-3-JU FUT WHAT AI WATTAT | 3: 201 
STAT: WAT T ATAU Var Ha<ay GUT | 
T Aaa AT: SaeteNIafaqyresy: | 
TAT (OTH T AIT AYA] TA TAT it 3: 210, 
TAS SATs | 
Wer war qeqreranratafac | 
Tearsrfad uUl-9-Ju Mer 3: 221 
WHIT Fars | 
7 Create aver aaa fafafec | 
WATT TATTAT VOUT AV AS SHS 3: 231 
Taw afe aEe z(10)jer Ar FT Fad | 
T TAY Bad ArH AT FET T MAA I 3: 241i 
anifaraarare Fasrargrenre: | 
HAT MAT TVA Tearafararr ii 3: 251 
arurarerferrarar fase: TAIT: | 
afte Bray + fae ger fasrenferrren: i 3: 2611 
aun Faeyr ar Hrrer(11)aca fer: | 
eqart favar afer eqfredear wewad ii 3: 271 
Hat T STAT WATKAT HAAS | 
ardraarte(B, f. 164° )aeqarrarater ATTA il 3:28 
Hay aT acHeteBeedend: fa tT ATEN: | 
MSACAae_ay FAITETATAT HATA: 11 3: 291 
aafecarfeqeqar Fr(12)earérarrenra: | 
ATA FIM Ta AEG: AAT 3:30 
ATUAUAT AMATI ah TAT | 
18d. cavaye ) MY; caTNT® Bo 20a. HZBT° ] M”B*; Agere Be? 29 
a. Slav] MY”; WTaT Bo 31a. aTare] M”; aTHT° B 


462 


qaraeparar ¥ fafere + aur aa: 3:31 
aleat AMPA TF AeA Fray ape | 
caartefafrecarcareaeaygqryad il 3: 321 
asfrareraeayr arear(13)ar Free fare: | 
ANT aT Aaya WATTs wadtfad ti 3:33 
ufader + ArT Adeareafaarhrs: | 
daar AS MEAT WET TT: 3:34 

T VITA NAMA ATEVAWAATAMNT | 

wated : Baga av Feud | 

SATTAT aqur(14)faer i 3: 351 
aeurgfronenr ar fret seer ferd afer 
Teas YATE CAAT AT Fat AUTH 3: 361 
array a adhafgedeq ure: Sra: | 
weranty + reared Tread Fourarara: il 3:37 
Tile Tavs | 

may wareqrararatraerantearaa | (B, f. 165") 
TED MAA aware frar Fercgéi 3:38 
Geer TAY DEAT (15)eraTeTarpPar | 

MAI T T Aga RMT TEtaegF ii 3:39 
THM Jays | 

sararey frat &qeteer aecaar FT| 
aeeeaa fa afer aaver Teer: i 3: 401 
sara aEad HTT aTAT-afayas Fur | 
MTA ATT ATA arafaary AAT 3: 411 
SRR TAIT AY waTersaTAyT (16) 7 Fe 
CAT UT TAM CT TAT FTL AAT 3: 421 
SUasseanNat AITaGay Td: | 

cay T Weer qharcarpnasr i 3: 430 
afacarprar ar ware Xe AUT | 


Parakhyatantra 


86 a. TeEure } MY; arate Bo 37a. eT T adfafaa) MY; Wr4+A+TT 
adtearet B 40b. 57) MY; TTB 42a. TAT] M”; WATT BS; WAT 


B°° 43 b. Ad: ] M”°?; Ad: M’°*7B 


Appendix II. Diplomatic Transcription 463 


TAT USTHAIAT Agee TaTfear ii 3:44 11 

WI ATT WH A Sar gTaraterd | 

ay Cady T aMeT Warr aefafad i 3: 4511 

SWMTAC (17) ATAAAT AT AUTEM | 

ae fag ATS WTA Aarfercge: i 3:46 
AAU AT HRA Frfseacarky ar | 

fe x agefr: ors: fraret gferafeer: 0 3:47 1 
MAAN TETTHATTAT(B, f.165")4T | 

Teer ar fasrerx ferx fata aq faarequri 3: 481 
wad Prarveaere: fearh: (18) @ rant: | 
WraraHHse sad Freroprsey: i 3: 491 
aafaercararsy sare: afr aafac | 
TTA Ca TATA il 3: 501 

frrrar ax waer fasrrer @ aafac | 

fase arareeray aat war ¢ farsi 3:51 1 

Be: atactaaray TATTUPSTaTHT(F. 30") ~s 1 
TRI TAM WT WM ST: TET 325211 
ao dre aevet ATU AH TTA xax Tg 
ear ar © Whaat ax Ax H Ae AT FE Tag 3:53 


afafsarserf arr gow aera 


52cd. 7 fe IT TTA WM WIT Is AW G: | tops missing 
53a. T CT] tops missing 

53b. RT FT UT TY F(T: M*°°?) | tops missing 

53c. F AT aT T]} tops missing 

54b. FJ A] TW ET TE FT) tops missing 


47d. fagraf] MY; faareafB 48b. other) MY; ctfraT B48 c. fa- 
MeTx ferx fare] MY; fasretfre BO 51a. faTar) MY; faaTaT B) 52 
a. adc? ] MY; @earee Bo 52b. carftr:] MY; atta: Bo 52ca.7 f& 
WTAM WT Aas: | x tx +7+fesrfarer sh fast: B 58 ab. 7 
om dra aetler atu AH rT TAT x ax a) M’; aatdia qever aaa 
Rremfert B 68cd. & a at a Wad ax Ix HAT) Aareatataat T (7 


B*) WTB 4b aT TAWA Mertqsi M; anqauertcad B 


464 Parakhyatantra 


sera faeraarraa Tae ag gi 3:54 
TS ATA TAT ATATIT AAA a ATI 
aT WT —[-6-]-— (2) at ardifear Aer: 3:55 
Waa carer adder afaama | 
aearereaay Wer ax aferyz aur Ferri 3:56 
GT TalaTay TAT VSTYATTAT | 
QCA sar faerar aaar|ea: ii 3:57 11 

ger gfefaar ant F:aAHNeT EAT | 
iii All age a 58 Il 
ay(B, f.166" )areaar =a & ar fr aT(3)9T: TT Te I 
qarar fagacdear afaacar gata aT 3:59 
LOA HY eager ar farrers: | 
adl faereraryst aad AeA 3: 601i 
CarhyranyeeRyyq AHeAM AAA TAT | 
carhrarnieney aa: Wfrayageregd Ter 3:61 1 
art feersrarrt frye feratqac | 
CePA AIA (4) TAT it 3: 621 
araatfe: Ul-3-JU earfgerearter Syerar | 
atfrarfaqrrayr FT APTRTCATAATSTAT I 3 : 63 I 
av Fat Syar fear arcatasrartarar: | 
HT: BMA UT: AAAs aAfaaqerar il 3:64 ti 


> aatidrid <a 


54cd. tops missing 

55ab. tops missing 

55c. 7 YW A) tops missing 
59ab. FT AT Rr “IT | tops missing 


s4cd. FET Ofc a aeT aT TATA aa) M’; ser catatte ars 
aque fr Frade B 55 ab TST AAT AIA MATT A AA a 
aT] MY; gerelarea (AT FT Be) WraTve sara’? araaferd? Bo 55cd. 7 
7 — ar) MY; ara faya cant are BB Ooseab. TUT AT Tar hr ar: | 
MY; qurare area: B 59d. 9dft) MY; Fafa B_ 60b. facrea: | 
MY; fatfrs: Bo 62c. °CaT] MB; °SUT+T+ Be 62d. yMTeaT] 
MY; °ITUTTeaT B 


Appendix II. Diplomatic Transcription 465 


afearedst atarferfareret u [-7-Ju | 
Ufgureear fare FATETUT(5)ART: It 3: 651 
AIIM AAT BATSIaay Fat Aa | 
HATA ATA: Aagy ALITA: it 3:66 il 
art Fratrasiterfagharaaterd: | 
patra cefrarcigye Ti 3:671 
Fret aaat u [-6-]U vat ayer | 
aaqstRar(B, f.166")Sar TaeTSt ad Ferri 3:68 1 
Tacaeqert uf Aware TaN | 
SWTT (6) TAIT TH atts Ferg 3:69 
TT aT: wrHar fear weresefaxitear | 
get afer BT Tare YT TUT 3: 70 
TATAICT: CATT ATARI: | 
ser auitcrar ofe facareat: faarhaa4r: i 3:711 
gfaxrrrqenrifrentarsy wetstc | 
Fromafrarted areararsaanre: il 3:72 
aasasat: aqtea(7)stecar Fear 7 fae | 
Rracertaftsarar aTararearyara ar: 1 3: 731 
AWMATH SAlaHr Far A edit Ye: | 
Weqrarestl ofa: AAT FATA: Il 3:74 1 
afere farcat aaa varfertt aferarsar | 
Rare Farrar arrest zerarforsr i 3:75 11 
TEP TEATTMT WT (8A TART | 
Ue & Prearaten araerea face: 1 3: 761 
aay ware AT aT MH: Tea | 
TET ArH aca ea pHtanraaa¢r il 3:77 
vd fear ager eared vfwannra: | 
arat warfare faaract (B, f.1677) TZ | 
71 d. faceted: ] MY°B; Facer x sx RT: MY 72 c. MTA] MY; O*T- 
ReqB 73a. aaa: ] MY; aaa: Bo 77 b. TOAPTAT) MY; Toate 


B e Colophon: #ft]) MY; Bri efa B e qdta:] MY; Gdtaeqaraz nh Brn 
BTN ATW B 


466 Parakhyatantra 


faaafavar at-ar yaryaeatt (9) ferari 3: 781 


faroracorarat oF X MPSA: i 3: 79 Il 


l= I @ul= u efe ArecTer serase fearventafaqresteceqdra: i= I 


TRANSCRIPTION OF PATALA 4 


taufacapar aerfefefarraees i 4:11 

Tea ARET We AAT U SPIT HET | 
fafrayaararc afad aaerfhr: 4:21 

WAS Tavs | 

ATaaAcaaeS Wr Hare: Bre far | 

T AT T HA (11) AT Vea era: | 4:31 


ATANAL NAAT AFUTTTAAT: | 
ANAM Fagard TT 4:41 

Aare Bar fe sararyz TEs | (B, f. 167") 
Gaat at avaesh AT TATA I 4:5 

gaat wT Pranret ges aratectera: | 
TeATAAAW ary (12) TUTHTaAT: 1 4:6 
ame Is Ys sare aur farce | 

aurfe afe ar arear afer: fe 7 wervari 4:71 


aad arentr yarhr Arareraqear Tar: | 
TATAEH Ae asarny V HAT: i 4:81 


1. WATT) MY; STAT A | ETT ETH ST AT WaT Bo 8 cd. Tet 
Te eIqfera: | MY; art ap acerengqedferdt: Bo 5c. acwaet) MY; 


Tact Bo; UcdeesT BX 


‘Appendix II. Diplomatic Transcription 467 


wear gfatat thor wearer Heer TI 

Tard Mrfse F H(13)ATarey T Arai 4:91 
Uaenreat FEL We TAMA CATT | 

TEAATAT NYA TATATAT ASA aTETAT I 4: 10 
aerated Oe: aay THT | 

Ger ger a aenred aararerasiheaag | 4: 111 
afe afafart werg arateafatta wed | 

ser wiretar(14)ft wa Geq Far ferari 4:12 
TET TT Tare HTT Are ferg | 

tar aia ren eranreateares wag 4:13 
aolfen JT acHTet Gay eWTIT LU | 

aate: MOST ATA A it 4: 141 

Hea T ATNTAT ATATSAT TS HTT | 
Aadar(B, f.168")eat Way arf Avaracatate By 4:15 
Tea paeaTAay(15)fr Ferarfee: | 

WT HAraeahagy ATATATATTATCTT ti 4:16 
AAT FTC AT SAT HreaaTyey fasta | 
amqdary adratcarctacafaarergy it 4:17 1 
arg: Taare RAAT Fracta¢ | 
wtmeate arate, aatents warara i 4:18 11 
cafearara ad ger eet afeeaar | 
arateqy re ion) mani 4:191 


afer afesarare fateRar weraractr: i 4: 2011 

fasta arated avaderanay Far: | 

TATHSIT +4: + Baa ATatazer ferar: i 4:21 1 

eet wegen apa eaafe: | 

aeHTarPTya Ts: NTT ap ferer(17)aer: 4: 2211 

ayer aracaferarad cate: | 
9c. aglt] MY; T+T+Ht B 10b. Fare] M”; FAT? B llc. -F- 
EMT +a:+ ) MY; sperma B 


468 Parakhyatantra 


aer aanifawredaeatHeda: il 4:23 
anmray frferar: ee pyaAT | 
TST Ysa SAAT: HAT Aer: il 4: 24 

aa ger fafafrarar qer(B, £.168")qer Feraeaar | 
Frafar ped fatreataradsaa4r il 4: 251 

TARA FCA CATAAT TTATAT | 

T(18)aTHeT WaT Aa AhAarireaayNyAayr ii 4: 261 
mia afad aaarmfeprtt | 

wittafaeg: at At Matta Yar 4: 271 

Ve aarfearrsy nT vaatter ata | 

HSI Fel FAT Ad ATALATFST I 4: 281 
afagar + aravatfgrrder fafrer | 
snfagtaeanrr Ba (f.30") —-[4-]— Far 
TaafrvraaqaTaaciana Fg foan4:291 
qaqa wafgaT Held: HCITAT | 

HOTA HF AT WT A AT TAT ray re Aaa it 4: 30 
Wale Says | 


farar gfaaaur marine Fer | 
at faarar adr gfe: carerdrarferar it 4: 3111 


TAS Jays | 
qeanieast ATs HT 72) ~ Tarr 
THA AA Seas HegraAqeaa: Il 4: 321 


29d. & oT] tops missing 

29ef. 7 aT aT fa F UT TW A AT FIT A FT] tops missing 
30cd. 4 AT TA AT TAT TAT Tq |} tops missing 

32b. H T WT] tops missing 


25 c. Frat [ M’B*:; faerfar Bo 25d. eat? ] MYB*; egg? Be 27a, T- 
uftaart ated] M’BS; @arfaapesx +7+ afextx +T+ B 27d. T- 
alfa ]-MY; WHT B 28b. capatfr] M”’B*; Walft Bo 29cd. AT —F 
aT] MY; Qiendeat a aeT B wert aTafraaWT AAT 
It at a fom: ] MY; aereat favored? actefeaghrs: B 30cd. TAT TA 
aT ray rar fa AMA |) MY; Hant Aararar faeqay Bo 32 ab. Wa HT 
1(2) < waht) MY; ATaHCr area B 


App 


endix II. Diplomatic Transcription 


a arez gfamt aeatanct Aa: arr 
areaya war farweret faerari 4: 331 
smite adt gfaerear aerate: | 

STAT FATT (B, £. 1697 )UTFT BCT TNT Il 4: 34 
HUT ACTIATHA ATH MAAT | 

at faa fart FF (3) CATT HMA 4: 351 
araur fayareasr fata Fare Ter | 

wer eae oii tT Wg get eT 
WrdcaqynrantwBmaasey Tareq il 4: 36 

ay uy frawife yey & acre: | 
emritarar wr: gered: i 4:37 1 
GEA: AT QloretcHyeaeearé: | 
TAATATOTUT (4)I7 CATCHY TEAM AUT | 
wared favaaray Aaresteg AAMT I 4:38 1 
Ware Jays | 

fayahag ar ter: areqedearfarred: | 
faraxate syaaq uty ardtrafafta: i 4:39 


TET IATS | 


Saraaaaigrny fares Wad 7 ATI 


arest ay urMHeg U fafa Fr: 1 4: 401 
aay fafer are (5) wahratere Tar: | 
GATTITHT WISTS AIA TT: 4: 41 Il 


we Fa YSsd F:aner fata: | 
ad aare a facete frfrara facta: it 4: 421 


aa: aafrhrar(B, f.169")ar farnty wT Ue ar 
tal faread aearfgcmer famra4rii 4:43 


aaa adedy at at UT: & AMT: | 


469 


35 b. cuTfante ] MY B*; eaftfame Bo 36 c. TAPTAT] M’B*; TINIAT B 
ie We at Tear] M”*; oe talnaek 36.e. WT? | 


; are B36 ef. Peary] MBS faa Bo 38 c. Fre | 


2 


Gar? B38 d. ATYaT] MB“; iar BS 


39 b. ARG? | 


BY; eq aeare Bo 42d. farted: ] M’°B; famnT x Tx T: M” 


470 Parakhyatantra 


Haqatada (6) Va TaaferraarPrd i 4: 441 

areas MEIN arest afd: WATT | 

arate Fateeey saad Ferrante: i 4:45 
- aceatein - 

HAT WAH Ad AicHret: Hefaar Aa: i 4: 461i 

Ud ated ae ACH Feet VAT | 

Hered FRITH ATAAMcCAATTT | 4: 471 

pred (7a aye ARIEL: | 

THATS Farah AY H Alo: HeeATH: lt 4: 48 

aUrfy mpnT: earay Harararfeanra: | 

aa frre wer goad MTyawH i 4: 4901 

yar wearrsT a: arety adarahsy Arad | 

T ATACeAT WHT: Fae PHA: W 4: 5011 

(8) Frafe Fraar sar var: atfrarrar | 

sary Fray ae aTeaur Fraay Aer: 4: 510 

Wile Tavs | 

aro fraar wend ae va Pras | 

afer-araagur we fracar fe warerri 4:52 1 

THI Tavs | 

ata frat sre firsor af ator 

#4 (9)(B, £170") afte Frarfentrar far waver 4:53 

MATT AYUMI ATTY Tay | 

aa dent: Wee aed ag Pravrai 4:54 11 

afeafarahtrar safe: aret afaaarate | 

TAT WET AAMAS It 4: 55 1 

age @hreaeraayorm (10) WESaT | 

TAU WIT AMTT Aa MIAMI: Il 4: 56 

a arate yar: wd ferar eyes | 

Para Fararhrcarfaacayr HE Aya i 4:57 11 

HATA AAAI GHAI 


46b. °aarat] M”; °MalyT Bo Sia. HAT] MB; F x Ax UT MY 


Appendix II. Diplomatic Transcription 471 


wpfaert aT wrar car Hote ae: Heri 4:58 

Wa: Weaar ar eart|a(11)Fefacararar FT I 

WHitedqgaraer qererteneyr Wi 4:59 

weed aH Ter TAT FT ATCT | 

arcry faar aret ar gearfee wai 4:60 

Wale Jas | 

TST STUTHTae aBfead: fe Kerfahir: 

JACACH ASSIA (12) Fars +t fa 4:61 1 

THT Jas | 

aeere: ay fate: gear Heaqetfeer | 

aeaet Get aI Aad wfFqeaes il 4:62 

Geer VAAN hier SAAT: FRAT | 

Far WT: HAI ASS ATH: HWATT Il 4:63 

gearfear TY TT: ATFeAAT WA | 

HVAT (13) ATLMTAT FAAELATAANTT: | 4: 64 i 

ferat qureq qeareredgen Hertea: | 

TOT: & T TON seas 7 ayhea:  4: 65 

TRATES WTHATIT: TaTgearfear wad | 

Geared Wadgentewt: ll 4:66 

= 

TANT BT(14)TT VAT: HA AAATHT: Il 4:67 

TASS BCT whchrar anrsanfHasc | 

Tar qatH Acard earfetarsarae qa: il 4: 681 

rT araarT ya 

aT sarerareafer yas gery Freda: il 4: 69 il 

F —_ as 

UT: STAT AT SATITUTA MTR H (15) fer: tl 4: 700 
6l cd. HUM? |] MY; oH (T B)TYe BO 62c. afet°] M’B“; afaw 
B 63 b. After TRIIT B has written and then crossed out gourfirdtarreaee a 


Raf. 170" eHcttesr: | Fathaceauracareyaaragurad: | 63c. HATay] B; 
aera — M” (right half of last aksara broken off) 64c. °Y@TT] M’B*; tere 


Bo 65d. aqfed:] MY; Taftt: Bo 70b. faery] M”; om B 


472 


amet fertern arn areafatafearc | 
AAAI TATA MUTT RAT 4:71 
qe Frrata CaTaced CFAATAT | 

TAT YOMAT CATT AEA TATA ll 4: 72 1 


(B, £.171")areararate fae + ey: fe J F BATITAT Aa: | 


wary sry Are ayy gfatcerfaar ii 4:73 11 
TeTeT Waear (16) FEvTEerraga+r | 
wast aurea ay areasg i 4: 74 i 
_—— ; >TO | 
CHETAN Wer Aaa AHS: it 4:75 
wer UAAATOY Fe: Yer afotaci 
aaAMGT: AAT (AT?) Harsgar Acer T ATTA Il 4: 7611 
get ann (a?, &?) ray aaaethr ada | 
Tarqead(17)ar ae Hata Arey T HEAAT 4:77 11 
Huta Tees MT AATVATAAT | 
amare FX wat Frere waa: FATT 4:78 il 
ast wad rer frorqear fagtyc | 
TTA AT Wea AT AAT FATA: it 4:79 
Terese yraarasrarte ar 
WHCATCTIT WTAT(18)AAsl ACTSTH Il 4: 801 
TAHA HATTA | 
ATRATAIAG: ar Wraelesautea4y ii 4:81 il 
qurTfayararanty Tears Gar | 
Tacdetyedrerfeaaare(B, f.171")PTAs i 4: 821 
Maegan Areas waTeg | 
sthorarfarrTcn eae aC eRSs It 4: 831 


TTL 31) LOTT CST UTAH eT aT 
84ab. GT It TAT UT a YY ch ET aT T TF: | tops missing 
76.c. AAlepe |] M” ?B°; WalcHe MY 7B (M”’s reading is here uncertain) 


Parakhyatantra 


77 


a. AMTT? | MY (uncertain); ATat® Bo 79c. AMAT] M’°B; Weta xe x M” 


82 a. TUTfee |] M’°B; AUT »~Yx fee MY 


83 a. Ata |] MY; Aurare B 


84ab. Ti+ TTC ATC ey HE TTT) M”; wer (ane 
B° ) Acadia AAHE WET TH: B 


Appendix II. Diplomatic Transcription 473 


Tatar yz a mr feet awed adr 4: 84 1 


araay atferar Year wrararctaatere: | 
TH UW Aad ag ay FT Hed MT ATH 4: 85il 


TITTY AAT asa T Tua seth ag 
TUMMMM TM Aaa a Ta Saray fen 4: 86n 


wT wafe a aH Ee -—-[4-]—-(2) SII 
aay & ae Teheasetrarararag yr: i 4:87 
CH ACA ACEH TAT AEA CHS TA: | 

Tet Stas Fel AEACATAAT YT I 4:88 1 
rergarat Tad FRITAAITAT | 

eqar aT MTSU aT Altea wtavead | 
WHATS: AT Wad Aafayay ii 4: 8911 


TATE PT UT ear (3)aT afgreaagantaar | 

agar Aaa arTferaraaraqaragd il 4: 901 
Wits Says | | 

FEU AIS AT AI Aded FEIPAAT: | 
MEGAN Tar ar ery war | 

der Fagaat T QT AT Ve AMAT WATTST Hl 4:91 


Tara Jara | (B, f. 172") 
TWAS FEMA eared: | 


84c. T eT | AT J UW NT) tops missing 
85c. T FA] tops missing 

85d. RT AT] tops missing 

86abcd. tops missing 

87a. 7 TO UT fe & HE) tops missing 
90a. PT WT SAT] tops missing 


84c.7 a aT 7 a or fez] M’; aeraatqomferny BO 8S cc. T HT) 
MY; AeA Bo 85d. Hed MT AT) MY; HFedfsaT B s6aboT TTY T 
TaryurTua cache] MY; Teeprrrery waagifecha: 
B 86cd.7 TMM TWA Ta waar aA fT] M’; + 
wate frquiatarcsar ar eararafy BO osTab. MAW AT fe HH & —(4-]— 
ad TC] MY; arpratfes Herat aad TOT B89 b. eCHUTAT] MY”; 
eCIUTAT Bo 80a. OR NT T SAT AT) MY; cehreTearaT Bo 80 c. ATEAT ) 
MY; ater Bo 92a. °S@TeT] MY; cafe B 


474 Parakhyatantra 


aer Barhwar(4)texr eearT FeITraT | 
Facagarareay yorearaay frayed: ii 4:92 
afaat favarerer ar are ann ditearc | 
wWrarar aay Ffarhitraqarwa4r i 4:93 
AEA AAAS GYT: ANAT: | 

atwear sHarere yarfetcfer ATs: il 4:94 1 


AHATHLEATU SAG ARIS | 

B(5)arer WHaranrad FIT HAA WAT 4: 951 

yore: TT Arar: eqatanar yoaterta: | 

mT eae fergr atfear T Taye: i 4:96 i 

Farexures AT Hrareperawras | 

TSHR AHA ATHUUT UY WAT 4:97 

DIMA AAT STATA: | 

arerur afew erst 8(6)fe eqstfenires: tl 4:98 11 
= a 

AT-UUT ATARI AATaM Hara WE: i 4:990 

HeaeaTfecagry fargrarsaahre | 

AEA BT T HTT ATATCAAAT PAT It 4: 1001 

wm Were agrr ar TT TAT UT 

amir (B, £.172") Wer wr: Tq: Wey Halas i 4: 101 1 

AEH (7)ACRTAT ST Ah AMAA | 

afitrarferdt Terraryver ary wafers 4: 1021 

WEN Ara errgedtsaraae | 

au facaea ar wageareratete il 4: 1031 

araer ay waeferarrert fear wag | 

aN Soul eeeer Staessen 
aia (8)tregfaamfatag wefears | 

WEN AAT HY 


Wan ATA U 4:1050 


92 f. JUeaTRY ] MY; YORATSAT B o4ab. fee] M”; eft’ B 96a. AT- 
aT:] MY; ATATB 99d. pian | Mee: eHtt x THx AY MY 100a. °T- 
We] MY; eTaTe B 100c. AFT] M’B™; AFT Bo 101b.aAT UA] M’; 
ae ead B?; Aq wat BY 102 outfit | M’B*; oar B 


Appendix II. Diplomatic Transcription 475 


ATR AAT ANT eA SAN AALS | 

wer eae ST T TAT ST TAA: Il 4: 106 
TATAMIATAyT ATAT aATfEMTAay | 

erate farereatafirerct Sere: | 4: 1071 

(9) wrerel saercqarerercaret Arar TF: | 

PAY AAT UTM TAT TH Il 4: 108 0 
FaATSHA AAT HHA HI TET | 

OT ATA: MATS TAA: it 4: 108 

ara area faretarey a Prager: | 
ATHTMEANT BCT: MELO ATTGTST it 4: 1101 
asrrate wera Airy aeararercd: | 

WTIAT TATA ETS (B, £173") AAT 4: 1110 
MARAT FMA ATCT TAC | 

whew afacaaticr oaferege: i 4:1121 

fe q Taraarsrt areata aed | 
seaTIaraarars (11) weer: Hrererfareg: 4: 1130 
ATATHOTEATWY TINT @rafewd: | 

AAT ROTeAT AG ATTA AT TS: i 4 1141 

IMT TAA TAA AeT: TUT TI 

ATT: ATTAAL STATI ANITA ATT Ht 4: 1151 

WATT: AAA Pargertreageafaya: | 

saray (12) faaraaenrraantfarerr: i 4: 1161 
HAT ALOT AAT ARTA APART AT | 

waredty FRATATT: wre: Brea yaTA i 4: 1171 

: ener 

aaat afers ax gfe fad aw afwyn 4: 11381 
TANT SITHTM FT: THTMEAMAT TT: | 
AT-T(13)RATA TUT FH: AahTearvay AAT 4: 1191 


109a. °FAT°? |] M”; °Mddt? B 113a. TeTT? ]) M”; TSTY B 115b. After 
this B has again written 4:112cd and crossed it out. 116 ab. Halge ]) M”°; Har 


xax ge MY 117d. aretgaae] MY; are u afar B 


476 Parakhyatantra 


gad faatrarr aarerfefraraa: | 
MAATIAT SAAS THATCH: ll 4:1201 
WII gad ATATa Meader: | (B, f. 173") 
TATYAT AY ATA AGA THAT: it 4: 121 

aT FT TIAA STHTSTUTRT | 

(14) Ara raretemareasy WITH i 4: 1221 
Ware AH: AAALAC: | 

wat AAT CATS ATT HST Il 4123 11 


paeniie aarfor torah arsed: | 
Frarear &pat ant fapfea: fraar ger: 4:1241 
fasqta aay TaAAAgGUHaTSTS | 

aeamtacaeyst sfrare(15)ravere it 4: 1251 
aver afancd Tees | 


TaTASAT Aa A cawrarerfaarferd: ii 4: 1261 

STL YAAET CANTATA: | 

erates arr art var ger fe are 4: 12711 

aranafay Tea aentefarferartee | 

Qearet WAH ATCTATAAATT ll 4: 128 i 

Wat (16)= Tavs | 

dfrarttearts eapergaraaannre: | 

Fraarfayarnr cara Jf eqcegta: ti 4: 1291 

WAIST Jas | 

area wtfracd AT eratesoghrarca: | 

MEMAUAPS Tera AEH a: il 4: 1300 

We RaATET (B, f.174") Wereqy Ser SyeeT AGA: | 

Te FBT CATS AT WH ATATS(17)AT Ti 4: 1311 

Me TAT Jelate Ware Facts 
120 a. fee ] MY; fate Bo 121 a.qaT°}] M”; @eT° B= 121 ab. -aq- 
T°] M*B*; ° ° Bo 123 c. °T FAT? ] M”; STAT SIT? BS; CoTSWT? 
B 124 a. ioe MY; eaMile B 124 c. PraTeqy) M*°B; fRarear 
MYec 126d. °fHatfed: |] MYB<; efHatfeara: Be 127d. Get] MB; 
qet Bo 128c. gH] M’*; "Op M’*; egPFB 129a. estfyarfr] M’; 
oftfsarfr B 131 c. JT] M”; ZBI B 


Appendix II. Diplomatic Transcription ATT 


WMT HAS SqQuAeHAHT | 4: 1320 
afadedsaea;rt caqesareyrafaar | 
Ud aaa Heat a TUT SAT | 421331 


HOTA HAL AAATCHTAT A: | 
acaeqar war sara afaera i 4: 1341 
THIN Jays | 

Fr(18)tar are gor aHafa FT ASAT | 

BTU AAT AHA IAYATUT Il 4: 1351 
ayatemard aret eet Agata: | 
Teche Wher: eA Areaaqferar i 4: 1360 
ar wfatcfa Sarear Haary: Wexdta4r | 

TAH AYA TEM CT AT Il 4: 1371 
mead @ (f.31") Lar ar ar eae aw a aaeghr 
av ATaTeta Taatrecthe fer il 4:13381 


Tea BWAATHAAT TATRA STS | 
THTAIUTSHTATS TT TANT: 4: 1390 
THI Jars t (B, f. 174”) 

aqeqry: werar are a v-7-]u | 

AILS -ATFAATETRT AM HIT AITAT (2) MAT: 4: 14000 
Ya Ut & XA ++ ATH: F UT aT) 
a wary waa ar arearfsst fe are 4:1410 
aeq aret aed fear aq aTest He | 
areatmarante sraraataar here ii 4: 142 
Wegawyer U[-8-]U qT: | 

TaaUely ATAU AHA H yaar it 4: 1431 


138ab. &T AT &T CT FT WT A] tops missing 


135 d. acqgye ] M’B™; aayqerTe Bo 137 a. VereaT] MY; AGT=AT B 
138 ab. @ LAT AT aT AT TT a a] OM”; Ader Ararat Ade Bo 141 
ab. TGV +37+47T° ] MY; HaQtHAT® Bo 142 c. ofRararfe] MY; efRar- 
arty B 


478 Parakhyatantra 


ATAATATY Afar (3)eaTaHTAeY AAT | 
TTI AS HHT TAFT il 4: 1441 
wanat arfearar Had W aITSTAT | 
Faretat FT NTT CATAMTSTTTNY ar UN 4: 14511 
[-5-JU BRITA TAMAR TAT SA: | 
Get anageraeartreatgd Spe ii 4: 146 
aa afenae aut afecifrartac: | 
q(4-aaeafatanar wearer: war whe: 4: 1470 
FT TAQ ast Aas A: | 
arereranfat + :+ arat aur gar afeeper: ti 4: 1480 
ATATHTaAS AH HATS SATTATTH | 
GOT AAMCTAT TACT TATTAT i 4: 14911 
WENTHTCaNTT EAHA (B, £175") HATANTT: | 
Ara: FR Weare: (5) Aferavequr i 4: 1501 
fafrarcarcorfasraratert aneaar aar¢q | 
fasgnte aenrat anrt waenraqi 4: 1511 
aTaarer Hreater Pravarer fear ser: | 
THEM aT ayy ATATAT T A AAT: i 4: 1521 
warhrfaer Frarerear FTAA ATT: | 
TT aNVad Fo erarateafaega: ii 4: 153i (6) 
RAT BT Acs ATATST AAMT AT | 
fafa Frrareer Frerarfirerresre ii 4: 15411 
paPrqeniererre fap _ 
fafrararozfas fafrar ul-2-JU eer 4: 1550 
ATT AAAATAT TAT ATTA: | 
TMT: WMATA: TYAN: I 4: 156 i 
faryerera Tee (7) WHeerafwargqd: | 
ATA TYAN TYCAACeyT HAT i 4: 157i 
Tae JaTT | 
far ft ATary aearedarearar ar yor fare: | 
145 a. Panay] MY; May Bo 145b. WAT) MBS; WIAA Be 188 a. Z- 
atfafaey | MY’ Bc; aarfaer Be 


Appendix II. Diplomatic Transcription 479 


atfert Taree gar: Haar farfedr wai 4: 1581 
WHIM Jars | 

Arar ta Aer: THY T TRAY safer: | 

AarHT AYE (8)4T AT(B, f.175")ar Hrararatersty Fret: wy 4: 1590 
CIATAALUTAI aA AVEY T BAT: | 

THe HTS AH WH Wed Aches ferdéi 4: 1601 
wee afer wera aT Aniferd: TW: | 

wT afaraaeds Tact Fafa 4: 1611 

tT WYcT TNs: eer eafsqares(9)H | 

MATT AAYCT CATSTAY ATHT AAA: i 4: 1621 
Fafararatart tt TaTRANTs | 

aircon Fafrerer acnret arate WaT 4: 1631 
aearmhrt At ay wTadcated: | 

eT Mra cetfrat: esr Wer: i 4: 1641 
OT at Yar Ted (10)7 wet xe fara: | 
AaTeTteaaey fapweatganre: ii 4: 1651 
Feary + fanget ar aarydedeay FF 

fran: wfc afesrmheaur Ae: i 4: 16611 
Fracaateray fare faerarrate ape | 

AAA TATA AAT ASAT ATT Il 4: 167 
aarevar (11) wer afe act wate aa | 

Ter AfHyarey CCT SITSaN Ta: it 4: 168 
TactHregag: We: Taare sera: | 

at: BC TUT FE ATAAST THT 4: 169 il 
IAT TUT Me AAMT: wT AIT | 

ad ATareta are (B, £176") THY ETS Aa I 4:1701 
Teer (12)RRt: Het Tree AcHreaerar¢ | 
fafagemanrs farrentaed ferti 4:1711 

ad: HrerHeaiteanreara regret seltagpd 
HAAA SATAN ATA AAA Ta: | 


161 a. afer) M’B*; T+7+ferr Bo 166 b. ATI? ] M”; =ATIdTe B 


480 Parakhyatantra 


WARSI aa a ea HAT eT 
aay wt(13)atafaar: Tepay THT TATYAT | 4:172 1 


N= 0 @i= uate Wreewedr eraey arrvenivfaseaqedagqT: l= il @ l= i 
TRANSCRIPTION OF PATALA 5 


THI SATs | 

WAnsHeleeyr aArarevarae Fert: | 
werfeegeeur(14)t ATared aferfrs arn 5:11 
Tara Ul-2-JU Art Bry AeA FAT! 
WAAAY AY TY ASATYATAH: | 5: 2 

TUT HasH Creat Taqat Wanyct | 

TAP seaedaay Tafsfser: 5:31 

(B, £.176") Aes: Yereared: MrT aagas | 
Teqfedfamrerer art (15) 7 Ul-3-JU 5:41 
U-3-Ju areratterarahr: carte | 
waarfenfactrraer: arfenerea i 5:51 
TOBaAta ee: areata faze: | 

TTS Fea Ast Bley AETCATAFT HW 5:6 

at areata eg: Ferare: oferdrearet | 
WNsysH U[-2-JU We U[-8-]U 5:71 
(16)aercareraratsarfetafsatawe: | 

CAMA THATS RLATSAST: il 5: 8 il 


CHC aT ATH MATA Ta: | 
greaurfar eg: maarfetsaragt: il 5:91 
TRUTH ATCH CHAKA SMHS: | 


172 d. Wate] MY; @lat® Be Colophon: ft] MY; rn Brn rn AT 
arn aru xf Be caqy:)] MY; cagqy: Aare: ft B 1. Warsr] M”; 
slabs lS te lh a ele 1b. °maTeatt }] MB; 
omaTate Bo 2c. Ato] MYB; cH S Bo 4c. Meqfadte }] M”?; 
Teqfate MY?B 10b. ofSRRT | MY; faa B 


Appendix II. Diplomatic Transcription 


aedatecdy gar FPreeraeqayraa: 15: 101 

aa(17)et Frear arr afereaqyr | 
qrafRarfasryran ATATg :afasyve4n: 5:11 
CMrarererst: Mte: Ul-2-JU TATTHTTT: | 

TATEINT ARTIST: AlTYATT Ae: 5:12 
Gara ATHTST: ARTET: YCUTTH: | 

AIT: FACTATAATMNT: FeTRYF I 5:13 

(18) U aT WqArarel fresgararr areaae: | 
Gaya ays Wey (B, £1777) TerarasH: i 5:141 
Fatty frat aTar ateepre fava: | 

qaway aa: TarTeaaaarrarras: 5: 151 

aay PTITHTea Farecaaya: | 

eed: aTforar ase Frferag (f.327)Y Y TTT TNS: 16H 
TH TTTTETATT TT VATA eH: 
Wr: MATa: AACA HITT |! 5:17 

TON MSTTT: TATA AT TA: | 

AIAATTHPaAT: WyAetHekl: 5:18 

Ter: TraArart: aMtar fer ws A: | 

TAT TSM eT STM TRA 5:19 
ar ot oar fe aear(2)sferant seaEs: | 

aarqe: adem: qarygagrrew: 5: 201 
Meret aanreatsaratr THe: | 
agisaate mara agarerafeae: 5: 210 


481 


16d—17b. The tops of all the letters in the first line of f.32" are missing up till °@#: 


17ab. tops of all but the last 2 syllables missing 


19b—20a. from °He7: up to and including @TcT°? the tops of all aksaras are missing. 


14a.4q°] MY; Wte Bo 15a. Patty) MY; Peta Bode. Ma: Tae) 
MYB*; @e: TET] Bo 16d. ff ~~ treta:) MY; frat ae a(a 
B“)t: B WabTA ATTA TTATe TA BAT AT eH:] M”; 
Taal AeMslesd-ayNaes: B 19b. fer wz A:) MY; feaaer: B 


19¢ced. TAT TAS ST ATM Tear at: |] MY; Aervaenres: 


faeg sfrafearat: B 20d. etaq:) We x T: ik HM” 


482 Parakhyatantra 


GAY TATRA FLTATTALAT: | 

sacra adres TTA it 5: 221 

TATU ASAT AAT T ATA: | 

Fale Hard (3)TMSMIMTA CLT: 5:23 

AAA THAH: Atay TAferarter: | 

ATTA FATMTATAAT YSU: it 5: 2411 

ATaTS: WACKeIATA(B, £.177’)UTATTHTH: | 

FreSaray eracrey Freeareasrereaer: 5: 251 

aegaea Taararar PreeHaarea: | 

GATT: HAMLALT: TEMA SA: 5: 26 

(4) IIeaet HeQirercarsafaytesr | 

qeirara: frorarhtspyerstfsaret: ti 5: 271 

marr fraa: tra: aac: Patera: | 

AY TAAMPTIS HTS: 5: 28 i 

facqut faefeqarrrenitryterger: | 

saa faarae wera: yayfrar: 5: 291 

afrarerrar fier: (5) aataratrprc: | 

qTUTSITa rarest tag regye: it 5 : 300 

aart afirss: yaraearfefr: | 

HANIA FeQrt HATH TaToHes it 5:31 1 

Hea AY AST WATTS: | 

TANT TMTETHSMASATA ANT: Il 5:32 

aay afitfear: ote ferar Weraeaee: | 

sare (6)e var fare warrarfes ii 5:33 

Taereantegar: Aa WAST Wag: aeT: | 

Tear Tafa orator Frere aTeaaTeag 5: 3411 

HMAVSCT AF FATS (B, f.178") facayrarec: | 
23 c. lee] MY; cMiT? Bo 25 c. Presaray] MYB™: freegarar Bs 
25 d. frewagrete ] M’B*; freegareye Be 26d. oft?’ ] MY”; °qTe B 
27 b. ofarfett) MY; efodfety B27 c. Frovathte |] M’B™; faararfit 
Bo 28a. maT) MY; fafor Be; far Be «9b. ogre] MY; eye 
B 30a. °CaHaT] MB; ee x Tx WAT MY 30 b. Aaareatere ] M’B*: 
Wadl alate B 


Appendix II. Diplomatic Transcription 


awrrareanytregdaaant apy: i 5:35 


THM: AAAS TTA YATHST: | 


SSATIAA EM MATAST AT: | 5: 36 i 


(7) Whearc:nateta:waerferactac: 


cH: AerpoaHeypelde: il 5: 371 


a dese 38 Il 


GaeaUay EF: HIATAHC: | 


8) Ul-4-JU FTAs: HerQTaaPATAT: i 5: 39 1 


FMT AICY Farad SHITTT: | 


USATAI WaT WACTATAT AAS Il 5: 4011 
amare wearer Pract +t aera | 


Tela Care VT Wate AAA ATH 5 


wha fahrofae tetgrorerera: | 


aT (oe Mparer: Hear faacr: 


: Al il 


ofa: 5:42 


AAA AACATAT ATAY UTA TAT: | 
Maca FT Ad AMTANITS AT AT ST 5: 4311 


AAT Wearer argar ctfecrera: 


Tata (B, £.178")arTar TOM Tee: 5:44 


It AICaATHTST Tafayle# | 


Fraet Farey(10)arerrer: HaSAT WASH: 5:45 
Frat wnTaatetet afer ferar | 

at atadt Ul-3-]U area i 5: 4611 
TIUEST T HH: Brey faneras: | 

Mag: Sar yTaeareearar fasqe4r: i 5: 471 
Ser Va Aces AH aera | 

TEtTdet (11) feared: STenTS AANTH: | 5: 4811 


Tees ces FATA Ul-5-JU | 


36a. CUTPT: ] M’°B; oNTAT+:+4+ MY 
46 b. TfaTT |] MY; cafeTT B 


37 b. oHeTfere |] M”; 


483 


Heed? B 


484 


AeA eTaTs AATAE ANT ll 5: 491 
Carat FegeTy gitar Mra Tr: | 
Si ee 501 


Oat: oi feereinerecrraferemeratiireth i 8: 511 
Ud MATTATaST AKG: VHHTay: | 

foster faaerener epcsregeatsar: il 5:52 11 
weed: Bye et ate Sega | 


fare feracrfae taysry(B, f.179")WeeT | 5:53 


arfrarys ata (13) enareateantet | 
ICHESICAT SSG SHSISSH I 5:54 il 
cefusta fea frat atea: aufated: | 
Spraragany taaaqarad: il 5:55 
ScHeRleh We leg: Aferay eet: | 

Garay ate: Mit: AAPTUNTTT: 1 5: 56 
et: Maes ATI war(14)arfeader | 
Tefatectreapr: FethAercahy: 5:57 
Weqriraeahteea: AM | 

Sorel SHEA Wael Water Vt AceHeT | 5: 58 
alent fafeer aTaasTes: | 

PACA A HTH SAT ST HS TAH! Il 5: 59 
Waar Sard erearfarsd y—pr | 

Uhh AAMaCSA Aar(15)aCaA i 5: 60 
ree Rare Setar Grrahartayec: | 
ia ells N5:61N 

Qk: afrat afi, sty pan N5:621 


Parakhyatantra 


52 b. HUT: ] MY; cafttar: B 53 b. een SHefsepy] M”; aTeneare- 
TT] B 54d. aT? ] M”; °aT®? Bo 55 b. &leh:] M”; aH: B 


reey 


56 d. 


fer 


TT: ] MY; oT: B 58b. °cH:] MY”; 
) MYB™; areatfafed Bo 62c. af: ] M”; 


och B 
afr B 


60 b. eleartey- 


Appendix IJ. Diplomatic Transcription 485 


wayena: aa afer: esa: | 
WaT Wage Yeastaurfsrd il 5:63 i 
wITTe Eft fags (B, £179") Te(16)¥ TarH IW 
TAY He ArT AgGarafaargey ii 5:64 
THAT TIS GATS Wea AeA: | 
Mave & X SS WY TP MATH 5:65 
may ae: Gauhr: afilararcsre4s: | 
was mgfenrer: aRNPAASeT I 5: 661 
Arfqeregard agargedgtaga: | 
aTaahy Tr(17) spre: Sarpqenraa4n: i 5:67 
yaftacanr: your frersaferar Fe: | 
aarcayedareartaaeaataataa4n: il 5 : 68 i 
TITAT AMET FT AMAA: | 
PATAMAT ATA AA MATa: Wt 5:69 i 
feanimr Ageater AfeaTactfawe4n: | 
Aaa anrrarsH TYICAC ASH il 5: 701 
Ral ATAT(18)<aer feoar Kraraaatertt | 
ser arqgaean faattea Fare: tl 5:71 
YANATATAFAT WAT AAT ATTA | 
Were WTATSTST ARATE: 1 5: 721 
gaara: gre: efraaatga: | 
aferatha Fara Vere AT TT STN 5: 730 
(B, £.180") xearafarar at Aq x Hx Arey TUT (£.32") ~~ 1 
Sal COTO are aqufard i 5:74 11 
AHATT ACA AT ATaT: ARAFAT: | 
ar ger fager rar: Hqarevaay Aer 5:75 
regret afarnrachegye: | 
74c.2 OT FY] tops missing 
65 b. Wea] MYB; WMH Bo 66c. MT? ] MY; We B 67d. Fae | 
MY'B; °&x Ux Wate MY 71a. ATATRT) MY; AAT B 74b. AY 
x Hx Ate TUT Ys] MY; SqaH Alaa Bo 74.7 TT FT] M’; 


zargte Be; feargte Bx 


486 Parakhyatantra 


TRAUMA EAT ATSAATATT Tae: i 5: 76 


3eT ateas feoar seraarrane: | 
TISATM Aa: MATT asl aT T FA! (2) FAI 5:77 


CATT TUT WITH Yaa WATT: | 


Uergucdy tet: WIG Taraay AT: | 
aeaaataediy: fagreaafad: i 5: 801 
Wear FATA Bray Areva: Bla: | 
THATS UAC Ad YAIACAS Il 5: 81 il 

Tay ATA Tear ser AeAaT Fae | 

Wrear Tafa aarear AAS CAAT (3)TH It 5:82 
fraae ff er ar War TATaPA: | 

FTA WEA TAATSSAH TAT i 5: 83 
TAT AAT at Teayay WATTS | 

(B, f.180") wa WeTeaT THT TAT TAT HI 5: 84 
Wade faypNsaaqrayqaes | 

sardedy ferry fact tarera ferar: il 5:85 
CAH CAUSA YTATET A: | 
HESAA(4)gT aC TAME AcHe: 1 5: 861 
eergden apreay Fryar ary Va: | 
fafrer aa aearet: ware Eqyasea: 5:87 
TITY Caagy NafH SMe | 

aa faarrty tear fasracategar | 


77cd. From aifsatft to ATet® the tops are missing. 


80 The numbering skips here because 6 padas have been supplied here in the accepted 
text between 78b and 80a. 


maT TSATTAee MET Ts aT Tt Fad! Fad) M’; 
afsatt aq: frgareaard (= B*)T Fad) Feat Bo Bl b. Aleve: | 
MY; aietetd B 82b. fat] MY; fear Bo 82d. cATaH] MB"; caTe- 
aq Bo 83d. teat?) M’B; There Be 84b. After this pada B has written 
and then crossed out 5:88a-e’. 87 d. Wate eq ] MY’; Srerte qe M”*; 
we fefag ° Bo; wifey : ° Bex 


Appendix II. Diplomatic Transcription 487 


far caar yee fararearewr: Feredari 5:88 

eagcera areas se: WATT | 

Greg aw(5)eTHer army wares Ti 5:89 

wer efarrar at eearer srraarae | 

aa Wor any afcarearfirage4qu4r it 5: 901 

weahrarad: anyferart tagea¢ | 

tarante feawraedarat fesrare firfe: 1 5:911 

wefarr weet Ure ace efe Trae 

Rta T YT F:F TT TT: WANTT: 5:92 

(6) wagrafas sree ar TEAR: | 

TZAACACTM(B, f. 181" )RATT AAACTT | 5:93 

Tal ATT: ATT FT: Ht: ATT: | 

WITHA TERT TA MAT ARTETA: | 

HTT STAT Fa: HlegTwarforawr i 5:94 it 

TIT: aftcesnferdsr att gfe | 

GUEATAT ASATSTS TAA ll 5: 95 1 

PMAIT(7)\AAY AY HAT WATSHAATAT | 

UyRT TETAT BVT AAaeGVICT: i 5: 96 

feoarferercaey uray aa ofafahaera: | 

AaeT WTA SA My ah T x |x Sar 5:971 

MITE TC Tes BY ARTTT: | 

fread: arfaaast wife fareat FaTaArT i 5:98 11 

FaAeeAcT (8) TH SAAT FAS AAT | 

wae anfedr aftyareedst sree: 5:99 0 

TIT: MICAH ATY GT gar: A Weather: | 

afergar Fasaranr: AHeay FART: FT: 5: 1001 

TATA LATIT SAT THT TIAA: | 
89b. TaTTd ] M’B; Tadd: Bo 90b. ReQTST) M”; BAST B 92b. AT- 
t ured eft ava) MY; weet eftataq Be; corey Ee lavaq Be 
92d. HATTA: ] M”; wATTaTB 93a. uh as ; Wale Be 98c. °RT- 
wre] MY; °eaare Bo 95a. TIT: ] M”B" . aert BS 97 b. ofatahrec: | 
MY; gfafifiraag: B 98d. FETAAT | MYBe ETAT BS 


488 Parakhyatantra 


Aaa gaa ara war fafrafare: 5: 1011 
TY (9)ASSTAAT AT TH AAMT: | 

Tat Ma KA AS: WET: TFTATAT HW 5: 1021 

(B, £.181") queedafeats Gerry | 
qar faarenr Far: arear vets TN 5: 1031 
TAY FHA TT Feary Tar | 
aganregqran qiaafattaa4r it 5: 1041 
waTgeeregey (10) aa qeareaye fer 
Frater on trator: serrate: 5: 1051 
arate sopfer & ghar age fae fara: | 
aqeea wraarrnrr asrarfetear farfer: 5: 1060 
ATATCAWATAT AT ATATCASAT ACT | 

ATATCA RATATAT ATA TA AAT HAT Ut 5 : 107 il 
CITT AMIS (11)F FET ArHretrHeau4r ate: | 
FERACATATATAT AAT HeACTU TF A: 5: 1080 
MaTea Hea: AH: AT faeaCaaraa: | 
mifceteat: afer: TTSIMAMT: 115: 109 i 
Theat wera: aa At mifarhrar: | 
wfucert mite: areafercarar: tl 5:1100 
q(12)Ferenfaaists: Tart: arate | 

aee feat: ant Tareanaearr 5:11111 
aged TET: ae arfeaneard eres | 
TUATHA BIS ATETS AAT | (B, f. 182") 
aeyd ofa aaeny: heafsar: 1 5:1121 

Y x frx ofa: ator yc HAA (13) FF | 
yrs AeA aay T PATYPPT HW 5:1131 
Teas yaar waeTTATHrsH: | 

Warxar ferarera SPLAT: WAIST: | 
faararht + fagrarat oT earrarieor i 5: 1141 


101 d. caf: ] MY; ease: B OA ie a quae Be 104 


b. Tare] MY; JH B 111 ¢. Frag: ) MrB , frat: Bo 118 a. Y- 
ote: | -M’°B; x fx af: M 


Appendix IJ. Diplomatic Transcription 489 


aTqedata Ferarcar Te Arar: | 

Wray Tear AT(14)aT GET FT ATCT M2 5: 115 
TAC SI: APAST: TAZA: | 

ao: Garqd YE afersy arditfer AAT: 5: 1161 
aeraargdearend wtf eAarzar | 

Wey T eAHegMraeTM fears: 5: 1171 
TITS: HU Hraar Frame: | 

afaqar wane CHT C(15)HearaT: 5: 1180 
TACT TNA AAATATH TMT: | 

TAIT FRAY FEIT TANTS: 15: 1191 

He Wea: ACAI YE: | 

a farataaraer gecaer ofaragu4ri 5: 12011 

Ged aAeet aT Teas: F TEE: | 

TSH: FAT Mea aHranes T x TX TT UTU MU AN 5:1211 


(16) Tactarret: at Frte: ypafaged 
at YR BUT AMorararorfafarsy: 5: 1220 


Tt: Wet: HE: Aashntars: | 

are: MTA ted Wrataravred il 5: 123 11 
wratte RIT AT WH: WST: | 

HIMT: RIAA RHTHTAICTME: lt 5: 124 
aera aa YAS (17/7 BATE: | 
TARTS CAH Cea TATA: tl 5: 125 1 

at: AT: T YANN YAATeHATA: | 

aver & farce eqereqar arareg UW: 5:1260 
waaay Aqeaay Gad ayfeaa: | 
warraraer: frafrarraeg: i 5:12711 


cacaitegat: ad arcar farenfegar: | 
F:AA(1L8) SATA ATTA CATES FTW 5: 128 


115 a. Herat] MY; wyedette Bo 1zid. mand | x Tx TT UT 


UW uU w:) MY; aarede mye: B 123 a.FE:] MYB*; FE: Be 


127 b. Ayfeaa: ] M**B;. AT x x Peageg: MY 


490 Parakhyatantra 


wate farareqagyay WTA: | 

ya wv wferd cage 7 defer fardn 5:1291 
Taraeaeaay ata: AAT: | 

aa fasta srnrar zara earrarfas: 15: 1301 
arfeqgaraectar Fetal TT APaa4: | 


ug: x Tx aarrearan sr (f.33") —[-6-] — 5.1310 
—|-4-] —4(B, £.183")FeReaar artetraedareae: | 
wer ferfasray ae aqar at WAY eT: 5: 1320 
Wasvrarattenrar Aaah Task: | 
AAR HPAGT AW eHE: WAST: 5: 133 
aCe ARTA OH ST ST ATC 
ma ofexrenm ear Aaa eT fa fe T:5:1341 
yaace FT fas (2)fr waaataraa: | 
Ferafrarrcrentefeetacrargen: it 5: 13511 

TET TAIT VI | 
aeived ortficer: aT afeageard | 
D Rrra MTT ATU ATE AT: 5: 136 
waht: a arfefirds: wat: aferay et: | 
aa: w gages acHote a afea: i 5.1370 
TAT(3)A MAT: WH: FAITE ET: | 
AAT BH HAT Weed J ACI ATATTT: | 5: 138i 
aa fasta Wnreir UaaTazaTTs | 
TATATATASY TF ATAIT Aaya: i 5: 139 
age Fela ATT WrMTaTgartehr: | 


134b—135a. From CHeT to the beginning of line 2 the tops are missing. 


129 b. MYATT: ] MY; MNT: Bo 131 d. WT—[-6-] —] M”; Wr- 
feeafafraarar: B 132 a. —[-4-] —aftfeaar) M”; aqeie ofthat B 
134 b. TU CH ST ST UT TT: ) MY; AWeHeT Sad: Bo 1384cd. WT 
ferret faTeragzs fe fe a:)] mM”; sgfesrfereqar agr 
ay wfafet: B is5aqgartaea 7 fas fr) MY; Frees fasta B 
135 b. °SdT: ] MY; °gaT: B 186 e. & frwasrwate |] MY; frwaate B 
136 f. °fatrer) MY; cfatred B 137b. afer] M”; aferaT B 


Appendix II. Diplomatic Transcription 


RUged wacatfene|e WeagMwwrwyr i 5: 1401 
Waanrentasdtrye TaIT(B, f. 183") saree | 
aM T(4)arcanr Ver awfeay Harevar: 5: 1411 
guy: yaferes afeesitateg fer: | 

aaa afarnrsarenr Arey Awd Ferg: 5: 142 
Teurewerareate araex sitet fra: | 
arae: ateafaras far: ETAT Me: | 
meagre: at fagrath arar: 5: 1430 
airentfafryer: Spreraennta(5)ar: | 
Searterrannr ATasarraarce4r: i 5: 1441 
HAMTSAY SeeHey saree ferarfarhir: | 
ATaACaT AeAeHeY VATED TAA: | 5: 1451 
TANT WIAA Weer THATS | 

ATFATATA ATA FAMPST THTATT: it 5: 1461 
Wealed FaTAMTATSAY SATATATTYAY IT: | 
caffea 2 aahtr araare® (6) warsra: 5: 14711 
faatee veragr arrest = fara: | 
gahratfe afew: anrert: Htfsan 5: 14811 
aay THT: Weed TT BI: | 

TTT Gate: THA Araferfe: 5: 149 1 
enfatad Her Ter gel whats: | 

Freer oreerrt (B, f.184") WaT T WATTH: 5: 1501 
Faced FEIETEAT TT (7H T AA: | 
faarer aefagrar srafag AeTeTaH HN 5: 1511 
Fraser Fracarey FTATED ATHATTS: | 
ATATeT TEAMIT: AIEGAR UT: | 5: 1521 

ad aanany var fafaayaarran: | 
faferararoyfasr fafasraregqar: 5: 1531 
fafarerarer(s)irerarhrearga4: | 
YJEMTHOMTART: YSU TAWA: il 5: 1541 


148 a. “ATM? |] M”; FAT? B 


492 Parakhyatantra 


ATarrerfedr est: Aatqueawrer: | 
WAT: YSCTTTATAATATSTET AIT tt 5: 155 il 
warfare feray war fagateacrsa: | 
Teac: & fear eq: AdacaHerar: i 5: 156i 
tT Terertd: fafr(9) sR aT TTS TW! 
arane yenrat a: yesfncfeoe: i 5: 1571 
TTA eHaeneysy aya wWTeqd: | 
RMT ATA AHA gcHEYTANTT: it 5: 1580 
wat far ant afrartrests | 
RTT etyarcey AeHTCeTT U[-4-JU 7 i 5: 159 
Aes Ad 2MT(10)+ afEarwe: aeqa: | 
serten faarsra vfacet adeda: i 5: 1601 
J(B, £.184")4 wefac: arte qfecargpary: | 
AAACATAAY ST: ATHTCTATCT | 
eqadt a vartery aaaatwaract: il 5: 1611 
sare RUPE a 
RIA BIT (11 TTA TTP CTSA ATTA TT: 


SY aay TATAT Sa aaa 
Wreanraareayraratsrad: We: T TAPAT il 5: 16211 


l= @ t= ete Bowed varase Afrventfeareufaqreatedt: TAF: il= il 
@ t= Ww eTn= i 


TRANSCRIPTION OF PATALA 6 


(12) Sarsr Jara | 
Taare ater: Tearearyaera+r | 


156 b. 3A: ] MY; ea: Bo 159 a. Heat ferd aT) MY; Hedmph (ed 
B°) far eit? Bo 159 c. qee ] MYB*; TT° Be e Colophon: eft] M”; 
Sn Mn Arn Brn ee B e Tay: ) MY; Ver: Bare! Wi Bo 1.5- 
ara) MY; STAs AT Tae a AEG Tn Bprs|eqn ri 
SPT aT: VATS OTERTAAT aT: | ATCET TATE B 


Appendix II. Diplomatic Transcription 493 


TaTeaATsaaT: PMSTTHATAE: I 6:11 

gfearet & Ade: TEIWayayr | (B, f. 185”) 

sate vate drat feet: & TET: 6: 211 

fag qarcaterare: weecePOTTeT | 

SSEAT Aalst: MATS: WI(13)FeT: 6:31 

wat: Tewhr: wreraferaferar: | 

Ahad AAT alas ATfSrceT ATTST I 6:41 

feeraaitorar arcrsartafrad: | 

SWeraaar fageengr + afeari 6:5 

TESA SAT ATeHATeT AAA Aa: | 

Pafarertpacetarqarert & fags 6:61 

(14) Jat agate ancareaaaaega | 

aS Aaa Sarah As i 6:7 i 

TATUM A SATSTARTUT TAT | 

SAqaTAY AUT =a: Terarcfafe fear i 6:81) 

Wile Jars | 

aura antares earer eafaares: | 

avfearay fanyfter: ar t eareae faer 6:91 

WaT Jats | 

T T(15)teafatanr ae SHreeara ferfe: | 

a fahrar a Arar ar afear arvafera: il 6:10 

ant va + Nea feet aar Afar: | (B, f. 185”) 

agatthrerm: eareriatayes: il 6:11 1 

waeneear samt: fe + ser: weloa: | 

atest: afxt et =a age: 6:120 

agemar ger aferrenyer + fa 

aea fa(i6)eafaar aur: aearer any fara: 6:13 

yaautarrearcaerear of Araraey: | 
5d.0] MYB*; TB 6c. faftracre |] MY; fafafte Bo 7b. ofaeqa) 
M’B“; °fg&ga Be od. fae] MY; fact B lob @taueray et faer- 
fa:] MY; etfarfa: Bo 10c.7 Arty) M”; 7 fahrar BO o11d. eHrerte |) 
MY°B; @hrer x Wx Ye MY 


494 Parakhyatantra 


7 Ul-4-Ju foratfr a7 ae BCT WaT 6: 1411 
afe ar aq epfrerer eet fafasater | 
Tae SIT AeHTTAU HAs i 6: 151 
Geary aay whe: wear Aanvanss | 

tT: eaufageadttetaarey &(17)aTas: tl 6: 1611 
TAS Jas | 

weearia aa: waar ffear waq 

tT aad Terese cararhraras: i 6: 1711 
WHIT Java | 

T ATATHTUMN AMT Ady ATAARTA: | 
yaraut yer wer: aAaray FT 7 fereg:  6:181 
7 araearray ant: Fraar + aqaferc: | 
ee 6:191 
faar ara wr 

TaOTATCaT(B, f. 186" )warear He T FATA T I 6: 201 
wad Ta T weer oat yetorarhara: | 
feraqarter ar areay 7 FT carter aera il 6: 2111 
Gan SA TT Tay Feahrarhara: | 

T OVARY VASAT: TEVA WTS: | 6: 221 
UTaA HAfa(f.33") —-[-4-|--feraf +7 area: | 
arat + yerfr Teesaraherer: tl 6 : 231 

WhT: HTH FEY ATHACARTL: | 

tT ahared area waver 6: 2411 

Tale SATs | 
wredaurder waar Fr fercera4r | 

WT Har RAMEY Taq WITT Ti 6: 251 
THM Jays | 


23a-—d. fetarf + area: | aTat 7 Teltt Tash ] For this portion the tops are 
now missing (1998). 


17c. Fauiferay | MY; @aanfaar B 19d. WITT) MY; Wearqe B20 
d. TeUTET ] MY; Feat? B23 ab. Safa — feref) MY; Fafee q+ 
VATdaaearay B 


Appendix II. Diplomatic Transcription 495 


wMredeasur geraeqay Way (2)atste | 

Ghar FT AUT Fer Wergtaeafesgqar ii 6: 2611 
MAA MTITSATCHAITM AAT | 

aT aad ABr AT Aal Achy Aer: ll 6: 271 
at ahapeaal qaeqad fer: | 

TaAMTAT Ahavedsa Weateswan: it 6: 28 i 
qeaed FT & fear arqar Teerfara4r: | 

wata: wreath TF TeTaY SA (3)HAT: 6: 291 
wMTy: (B, £184") Tearrerr afgqdeafaferc: | 
TIT WAT MHA TE 6: 30 

GaTay Aetgere: Favret Tawa | 

afetal AAAS ASAT HAWS: Il 6:31 1 

Ve Reaferar sferreqrearcsear: | 

wacamtay dreary efege: ahyre ATI 6: 3211 
rer aa Tat tr aqua (4) afagar 
fears se: art arafaghre: i 6:33 

Ui FT Aaya: Te rar aq: | 

fa 7 AY aTaancat wapgrsrecam fai 6: 341 

Ve eauraar sar avr: feraafesa+: | 

TT CATET AVSHTU AVS GH x Wx +24 Terferar: 6:35 
TT Cavey We ary aesTeaTasy fear | 

arye Aetedt Ewe (5) Wer wy Fr Ti 6:36 


autrgear agaater faspra: | 
arasttatee srear worar srfaxrfed: i 6: 3711 


sarerad FT aeahater whatar HAT | 

Frar ar sraraewr sreear Ararfehr: i 6:38 
a sararated: whHathrar arra(B, f.187")T aT | 
anergy ateey yearary wT ferar 


26ab. °SaTUT FEtA=we | For this portion the tops are now missing (1998). 


26 b. cafetr] MY; cafetaT Bo 35d. oH x Wx +24 erfrar: ] M”; 
oHeTaliedh: Bo 36b. aT] M”; CUTat B 


496 Parakhyatantra 


a wfmad(6)t athereara Heraferd: | 6: 3911 

Wile Jars | 

TAMA TATA MT TAT | 

aareH: AY Wer CUTeaTyetate Ferg: i 6: 401 

WaT Tavs | 

Wer: AYCATYST TTA TANT WI 

afea Frarurarer afe ee afrorai 6:41 

GeUyeywer: MIATA Pfarcaqanreny: | 

AAT MAA (7)ATAT ATS ATE HAST Il 6 : 421 

afgarar wat aver vertvtaqres: | 

BWaArehr aca FE raf] Weeay: i 6:43 

Wale Jars | 

ann sarfesearegd aeurhraraar: | 

Haar afe ar (ar?) at aerh: THAT i 6: 441 

THI Tavs | 

aa: arataa: weet SaRrehy(8)TIT: | 

afad cat ais gear: wafer: 6:45 

a at ofardear aravay ATTenre: | 

sar aTeaaaTelt Par Ararqarsvar il 6: 46 i 

afar carta frorgferye: fra 

wafamerarart serfesastfearz it 6: 47 it 

THT CART (B, £187") Afra TA(9)TerT arate: | 

Franragurae aaa: faraatere: ti 6: 48 I 

ART: Fe: Teatareqaferc: | 

eantaxarfeaaar ae fr wfrarfea: 1 6: 491 

wecearty Gad: WNT: Sy T aay | 

aatard: Farreard Far: Tp ACTATT: 1 6: 5011 

Tale Jars | 

ATR (10)rarhefrsrst: T T anteray Aa: | 
43a. aTeT) MY; QTSQT BB 44c. 4T(AT?)AT] MY; ATATB 46d. VAT? ] 
MY B* . aarate Be 47 ab. Saratat Fre ] M”; aaarie fire Be: CAAT TATE T° 
Bs 


Appendix II. Diplomatic Transcription 
aa: Aareazautar 7 WASTES ye: | 625111 


TAITIMTATSST Fea HiSaATSqar | 

aot: WHaATaNIT aaa as AKTHeT 6:52 

Ue weal FE aTaTseperureray FaT Hee: | 

Teh WHAT (11)ZE AT AHH Ae: 1 6:53 

MOUS TITAN ATTYTTATAA | 

TVATHIOT PARI aS fa TAT MT Il 6:54 I 

TEs Ache FE ASTAT WT Fer | 

fafaoeer = rar Sehrart we Heri 6:55 

ang farang agacart fe acact | 

aretaeh TAT (12) FE THraTgewifrad il 6: 561 
Be iy 

TAT TAHA AACA MATS Il 6 57 11 

TIA HAaeAeHar: Hee_qd: | (B, f. 188") 

dengded Wet Wea a FT Aatera: fara: i 6:58 

Ware TaTs | 

Sq WeATAT CATA ASA: A AT(13)TH: | 

Frant: aasreet fo Pravarersadenct il 6:59 

WATS Jars | 

weenra fart FX Weare Het AeqT | 

a aricted: Wee: TearTenraa: il 6: 6011 

awa aaatsd eqeaeread | 

TOTaaeS F Wee: H: Weacatafster: i 6:61 11 

OT AT aTaaHThS(14)AT ATA AT Aaa FTI 

fay acedcear: HTSqraraysy il 6 : 6211 

afar fasreor acaratequrfae: | 

Rens eqar wera eGear arya wal 6: 631 

TUraredearear SqaTar Farsr | 

afe acreants fatrr: HrAT WaT 6: 641 

Wits Jars | 

Farrer fer aay Far taar W(15)ad AT | 


498 Parakhyatantra 


qdet aearry are aT HT ATT! 6: 65 il 
aay eqar aT Vadarver arherar | 
at aT Mezrear gq facregaafad: il 6: 661 


WaT Jars | 
eq FAI Met Ad Us act Ae | 
Terdrearyeacaraur eureata aT ay il 6: 671 
qetdarteat agteatd: CaAaqUE: | 
FRrarar (B, f.188") AT (16) TUT eT SAaercayTa#s i 6: 68 1 
Tald WTQMTAKI TANTS T FUT | 
amy arf weet aa arfreaarrarcil 6:69 
Ger ald: Peantey Ra aeaqaraa | 
Saalfanar ATay Saay AAG WAT: 1 6: 70 
aTaaur fafaanire: arararatacttera: | 
FRant: & VT ATay aT Tearedgtad (17) Wer 6:71 
waar fart aT Bard aaeafaysy my: | 
TNT Aaa Fear Ar ay ar Atha: i 6: 7211 
CITI: Wea T AQatady ar 
WIN AKG: Hal Ted ova: werafe ii 6:73 
+ Prat Ft FRAT aT saa Hears | 
year a ey ar aa fant: aicafere: i 6:74 11 
where (18) Pravant eqadye:at: | 
Tay FE RTT: BLCTTIATA|TAT: Il 6: 751i 
at afaaar 7 MATa aI Aaa} | 
sTersaTeaay eat ae Prarafrar: eri 6: 761 
eagrecsy acttfagar at fafeat + T 
THAT SAT TUTTE: | 6:77 i 
Tart ara Te T (f.34") —-[-7-]— 
— TUT OT BT Ue Arad PHaril 6: 7811 
78c. H -J UT AT MT | tops missing 
68d. CMTaT)] MY”; eNTaT B eet) Me, aMyaT B70 c. efa- 
War) MY; efawar B ees ate - WaTIT Bo 7b. Tt —] 
MY; afcpaTactl B 78c, TSE UT aT BT] MY”; at Ufet-aUTATAT B 


Appendix II. Diplomatic Transcription 499 


PUTIN AaAayT FET (B, £189") yaovatfayersy | 

aay faganry feearfeearrerfera4r: | 
Freatfafra at aa rar sar w ar fe yu 6:79n 
T_T rr wy arfranrdeqragqaaa: | 

faarqre: BAT SMT A TAT LT TZ AT ret ATH 6:80 


aT aera a waa (2) Faure: Terut fac: | 
anataraay ata Paar 6:8111 


aaaqurg fafa fara aage Proce ad | 
dara afafeaacatad vaqur urafagfeeg: i 6: 821 


l= 1 @l= ete Arewet sarasyt Fafearqendsfaqeatet: VW: il 
un Faerrare: Pare: it 


TRANSCRIPTION OF PATALA 14 


(3)0 0 @ W wat Wr AT x Anew 


WATT Jays | 
QNTRUTATA AAT AAO AA: | 
VTA TACHA HATA TANT Ut -14: 11 
wafer rast ar area ar Prorat 
ye Afar ar Hrearcrearfareg it 14:21 
GnTeeary AATOAY Peet HATA | 


79d-80a. TT A TAT DW a fe FIT | NT] tops missing 
80cd. F AT BT AT FATT Tg AT Ie AT] tops missing 
8la. 7 FT AT TTT WT A TW) tops missing 


Toff aaTrTarswarawarfe gy] MY; Far awarsaheyB soa TIM VW) 
MY; AqhreT BB 80cd. TAT AT ATT ATT TZ ATMs AT] M”; AATeaa4r 
maTgigiaay B sla ay ayaewawaaqd mM’; ane faa B 
82 a. Waa? |] M’B*; Aeafse Be e Colophon: Ra] MY; Wri Mri Bru xfe 
B e YS:] MY; YS: Sara: il STi BT B oe aTe:)] MY; AAAS ATH BT 
ST TSS TT POT oe i Wada Hes ac ea ay A: HT it 
STW AOAS TTA BTN B Ov ne vt user A Wi x AVTeWx]) M’; 
om.B 2d. fad] MY; ~ a Be; °Pad B* 


500 Parakhyatantra 


(4)gatafaatadst Freqeor faataari 14:31 


TaeaeTHe STH TA PATTATSs | 

Tea aaa Tas TN 14:41 
fatrararqaraer yfas afar ac | 

TANT FEAT Areay Tea Caferaras i 14:51 
w(5aratear cant afae esa wag 
faper argh Hear WerasarTaTAy 14:61 
Teale HAAS ATAU | 

Wear aA T NAAT TAY LATATANKAT SHAT HW 14:71 
UWTARAT Heal FEN FT Acaeray | 
cadlarandt Hear fadearreyret ATH 14:81 
WATS Aiea AT F AT(6)aTIAAeA HAT | 
farctad GnTarag: CAeTOTa CHA TT: 14:9 
WANA ATT ATTA ITT I 

ae: aarfaatne wat tag fera: i 14: 100 
aTarnrer Farer of afer aareta: | 
Aled Fela QTE Casa i 14:11 1 
TAA FAT SATIN TTT | 

a(7)ar ahraceart at waar i 14:12 
yar Wae_ Test Srey *qaaferc | 

GIET CAACTOUET ATTA SAT ATE: It 14:13 0 
yar yar 7 arars: wrorars: & Alfa: | 
ATA: BSYA: CATASGHEAT ATLTAT: i 14:14 1 
CAGIAASATATRT ATRIT (8) YAH: | 

oat eararay arar afracwaateaa: il 14:15 
TAT CHIT AAT trey Afr aged: | 


4b. ferdarad |] M’B; eferaarady MY? 4d. Tera TAR TTT ) MYB°; 
oguial Traay BY 6 a. facrararge |] M”; faciarnage Be; factar- 
Faq? BY 5b. YAS] MBS; YAM BS 7b. TeaT | MY BE; aeage 
B° 8b. etl] MBS; HRY B Oc. oa: ) M”; ae B 11d. ett 
aT] MYB°; °HAaT B 18d. esTatfer: ) MY; osTaTFOT: Bo; esata: 
BS 14a. 7 STQTe: ] M”B*; FATaTe: B* 14d. oT: | M’ BE: ; aT: Bee 


Appendix II. Diplomatic Transcription 501 


Wtaed Tar afery aarhrahrarss: il 14: 161 
aarfed: Tt aa aarfueas arfea: | 
WeAelet Het FATT AMTATAT] AATACAT | 14:17 
o: (9) arcane Feary wr: wy aya: | 
WUMTATATATAEA ST Mat FET HATH 14: 1811 

a ua afster afcrartededd: | 

at Teed art ageper farsa 14:19 
War yaeraryged Feary TF fearrac 

WUT aot AATSATA Adalaa(1OATTT i 14: 2011 
aT AENAZeT AMT AAAS | 

Rarer TIATED SAY ATTA TUT | 14: 2111 
TWAT Ae: Wren sey ahrferay Ee: | 

at auraamy fafearghrarag il 14: 2211 
warraqcaer: amex sa fer: | 

aT Taaatery AAT (11) PATA: i 14: 23 
Sat UCAcHS Heddy Aaa fera: | 
area art ofe frag 14: 241 


ara anitfaaadt age fara: | 

feared & acge a arretcay Aer: i 14:25 

o impr watt wt atae | 

Hatcher TUT ar(12)q: fespyatae ferrin 14: 261 
TAA Faearsarsy a: | 


Traearah Bayer Aer Fart 14: 271 

waeq frcedy & avg: aremtfact: | 

Rarcrecrarghretedy Tyt-UrTerfTegeyr ii 14: 281 

Ul-2-agcrarar gid yates: HATH | 

Tag (13)aT Yraaryg waar F Frmrra¢qii 14: 2911 

Vega Maaeg anit arg caqurhwc: | 
18 a. FETT MY’*; FeaT MB; Fal Be la. Ger] MB; eg- 
cer Bo 22d. fafeare |] M”; fafeare B°; Feafeare B* 26a. THAT) 
M’B'; AgeT Be 26b. Faq] MY; PART Bo 27d. TST) M*B; TT 
B 28d. Tq{t-aTe ] M’; A{e-awyre B 


502 Parakhyatantra 


RUTHIN FE TC Aas i 14:30 

ered froea Frerenrersrfard: | 

CAAT WHAT AS TIT TATAT: t 14: 311 
frasrergarra Frere ert: | 

Ua (14) AAAA Fear ATCA: FA: I 14:32 
UU: TT aferar sara SATATaAaTaAM: | 
ard arear erat gfrgreqasa4r i 14: 331 
wat Sar eadtaranr gqarar aarerferar | 

yet erat: PearfasreTg eaaT ST It 14: 34 I 
TCM: FAINT: AAgeGy: | 

Gar eqehnypenrar cadtaryae4r (15) Adri 14:35 1 


TIM Ag AAA Taarharcantes | 

ATAT AT YT wal ASACHASAT Il 14: 3611 
Yaroratsad sear sash Ter | 

AA FTAAaT Tea Arar: Aarvrar ferar: |) 14:37 
orig Sar TEPC | 

Te Heed Mtr Waray it 14: 38 
ager J Ata epar(16)eatrgfear | 
aaah etard WCITTAT I 14:39 

as aires sor araiepeaanrgars | 
ANQay YT Yat =eAsAaafSsar il 14: 401 
THT ypearfasr frartranyenrcner | 
farataer wat ate: sprreaferarcra: tt 14:41 11 
CHANGE TY Tact adr | 


wera PT(7 fe Tt ar HTT FTN 14:42 

wate Foyear aT HC AT HeTIyeET | 

Frarat STU aTay: FIMeATAASAT I 14: 43 

atagaraar yar caataratcantear | 
80c. 7] MY; FT Bo 33 a. Aferer] M’B™; Afar Bo 37. HAT) 
MY; °aar Bo 39 b. cate] M’B*; carats Bx 39 d. AAT) 
M’B*; Ward Bo 40 b. arr) M”; Qated Be; ArT B® 


Appendix II. Diplomatic Transcription 503 


avg: Hage Beary Aabfery aT: 14: 44 i 
fagt-ar aerarar wanrr yferyat: | 

aaa At: Fal FHT AT arqararT i 14: 4511 
(18) fafatt+a+ fafer: Aap sreageera4rt | 
gears afearate weary Taearafen 14: 461 
ATATMATLAT. ATLA UT AT YTATSAT | 

CIMT AAAATATAT ATR TAHT AAT HW 14: 47 
Way AT Yaaeqeareranaaeri: | 

CITA TMH, YATAAHATSAT I 14: 48 1 
Faqeareg (f. 34") te H car aye =r ar fafact aT 
TETAMAANT AATSAUMTAT: i 14:49 
GTYATA U [-2-]) STAT ATeveTaTeMTeT: | 
WedTesetdtard + :+ AAaeAAA Ferg: 14:50 
UOT AT FCAT ARIAT HAATHS: | 

ant AAAAINT MATT SETAC 14:51 11 


Prosar T AMT T TTT Ha AT (2)h 
atat aygerer Farranretrraarhte ii 14: 521 


atfada fa eager: arfad qearagqean: | 
ATSITSAT TSATET A MATT ALTA ATT: 14:53 
atfanenr Frrery AyUcqawrsc | 
BATT ATI AT A AATTaAT aH Il 14:54 11 
THITST UTST ATS afer | 
PRATT C3) HATAHHET Til 14:55 
faqfg Hed wer arstat + Prat 
49ab. Id f “AT SX A AT tops missing 
Bled. °HAINT TATA SSTAT | fT] This was legible when first collated, but the 


tops of the letters are now broken off in M”. 
52ab. 1 4IdW Hh A AT € tops missing in M” 


46 a. fafartc] MY; fafery M’*B 40 ab. °UR ft HF QT BHAT aT) M’; 
Tait Pale aT B 50a. 4TaT] MY; ATATB ob2ab. TIT aT oH 
wt AT & M” (tops missing) ; mfr waaeRTANT B 53a. fart] MY; fara 
B 54c. aT] MY; TET B 


504 Parakhyatantra 


ATSOT T AHMET: HEATPTAT: I-14: 56 
qenferanparr: aaa: wferaftar: | 

ATA AAT TMTATSY TS CTATATAATT: 14:57 
Csr arfraaar area THCUTEAT WeAAT | 
aragr sracr aver ferar - Fqarrar: i 14:58 
aT (4) Hated ast aftraresy zor eer | 
UTSHrareqararaeaaerarerqzaad: ii 14:59 tt 
TEATATANY Youre: Farr: TY: | 

afa y-afrarears seararfafasrre: it 14: 6011 


sifreraferaeatert Prepeafc(s) er N14:611 
Waite Jars | 

aer are afar: rar wareawarfarar | 

TW AT Tea Aaraarenr ArH: Fer fy: 14:62 
Warsr Jars | 

weret Tat fa g whee art wate | 
Teauteda & ad srarured warfear: it 14: 6311 


fnycaray mfaeder srtoutTetet zr | 

ATATHTUAR ITE TI CUFT (6 )AP THT I 14: 64 

Wile Jars | 

qaarear feng: crear srrear 7 TAT: | 

fret art fart Ter aATATaTT: HY WaT 14: 6511 

THTS Jars | 

freasrvez ay ve: & arorfwaeread: | 

SUaAMA FF ATATHTC afeyeT i 14: 661 

amanied afet eafcarrhnraad¢ | 

Tad arsar Arar Feanrrnr(7)aeg: 14: 671 
56d. Hee ] MYB*; ehaTe Be 58d. faraT- ] M”; feTaTUB 59a. aT- 
Y) MYB’; ~>+ Bo 59b. at St] MY; aS B COa. TEMA?) M’; 
TESTA? B 61d. fyaenre | conj.; fyteate MYB 62a. TT] MB; 


Sra MY) 63d. STATUTE | HAT x Bx UTET MY 64 b. OR ET) OM”; 
ofeteet Me; ct ea B 


Appendix II. Diplomatic Transcription 505 


at Rrafranifa + a Rrafercera: | 
STAAL: BTAY ATSVAATOTAT I 14: 681 
AT: AH ATTA ASTI STT GTA: | 

Threw Gaede fear Wea Fer: i 14: 6911 
jer + Frafaarsr weafs ar ar 
RTACUaAA ATS U VAAAT(8)Tafarr i 14: 701 
ara sear atear ear afer | 

MATH HAA ASAT ASATSTYT: AT Ml 14: 711 
a ara sear afarrargeyr TI 

RU RS ade Ws arfaarac i 14: 7211 
TATA WaAeaT Sraaads | 

ate wer ed faspeareys (9) SATS: i 14: 731 
HacT YarHey arary FT aearfara: | 

eqasyed: ArH: STs yNy Tas: 14:74 11 
CATIA THT SATEATSITATATATATT: | 
Target rE Faw MTs: i 14: 751 
es: arevafe: waray sew Fram 
aerfera: caf (10jer: Tara raat: 14: 761 


FAUT g aU OAT: | 

wafer afasrrerredtasreyy: AEN 14:77 11 
var ar araipfe: fara: & TPIT: | 

Foca geHcaS ART AT TTANTA: | 

fray: mrasitercare MTaY WATT: WY: 14:78 
CH FIAH AST (11) AT VEY Vo: aATT | 
asa: MITPIT: A ARATE: il 14:79 
aeartaae: Aerara: Wet ar afera: fara: | 
agree farreata TF MTS: | 14:80 
WUE T Get SIS HATS | 

mer were Tre aT AHATSTT: | 14: 8111 
fRarcar & (12) u [-2-] airy fagarcyérae | 


72d. eT) MY; YT BS; YT BS 74 a. Ya) MY’ BS; yay 
Bo 82b. WT] M’; aint B 


906 


Parakhyatantra 


aferd: adeey ear fa eft FAT 14: 821 
TMUEDTAPTATAT ACHAT eT: | 

AMAT QMTATA UHV Gehe HATATTATE Il 14: 8311 
THINS A ae faarnpragé | 

AeA are Fe ant Farce AeTAT (13) AT 14:84 
Protea Fer at Fare aah: T TAT | 
aardd afer ay ar ad weather 

afarsrdy aunire wer wratfea ana 14:85 1 
Wale TaTs | 

TH CPST TISAI aTCa eH | 

nung fre acaaraaan sas: Il 14 : 861 
WHIM FaT(14)T | 

qe aera Be RT A Had FA: | 
qag:attes aad srt fa 7 farrere i 14: 8711 
TL AT HAA WT AT AA SIWSNTT | 

amy aeragaqeat It AeA Il 14:88 
AAS AN STATA IEATAMT: | 

frat Ter HA ArH T WATT: | 14:89 

at TATA Brat H(15)ay arargaread: | 
RaaTAaT ST WMT Uw Afrseri 14:90 

U [-2-] gor waereraforarar: ware fever: | 
afrar afear afear afer: srareatrferari 14:91 
afar arare = afaar yeartrar | 

MMA SATATAAT TYATAT: i 14:92 
afear aeay arava arf: earefer(16)erhaa: | 
WRT ATTA MT VMAS: 14:93 
afaree aferat wat Ga Fray WSgaT | 
vat Front ays | 


g2d.9a7] MY; FAT Bo 85c. aft] & x fax fe MY” 90a. THAT] 


M” ; 


Iaaud B 90c.24°] MY; RT B 92b. afaaT] M”; afar B 


93a. ATT] | M’B; HTATE Be 93b. ATe*] MBS; HUTee BY 94d. A- 
qvaet ] M’B*; aye Be 


Appendix II. Diplomatic Transcription 507 


VATA Se BATA ANTASATT | 14:94 


Wale Tavs | 

GnT: FHT Keg (17)H: FT Aavete Atfea: | 
Met: Ae Acat HAT T free: i 14:95 1 
TAT Jas | 
atfrarfareratry ante ar sfanre: | 
SATHANA ANAT AAMATAHTATAT i 14: 96 tt 
any aT Ad AArTawMedd VSetaraar¢ | 
faycara TAHT: WeHeIGTATT: Il 14:97 1 
UNTER RTS (18) PUATATREMA TSAR | 

agaraad: fear array array TAT: i 14:98 i 
asafe + avatar wfaq aeatqerd: | 

TH WETATATSAT SMHTTT ATT It 14: 99 tt 
WraftgnTanas ASiSda FWA | 

AIA GT FE CUTaten afer Aetacy i 14: 1001 
ware farrarrar(f. 35") — 

— ZeT War av afafrea: ii 14: 1011 

amar tT a Fearon wear esifag fara 
fasTaracarrararhrar Frardract it 14: 1021 
amarante aire TT FATT TTT 

TUT TFT: AT ST HAH TT ET Ti 14: 1031 


THETTTaT LY yy wera —~ (2) mT 


102a. AaTat 7A ZT FATT) This was legible when first transcribed, but the tops of 
the letters are now broken off in M”. 

103b. °F T 4 FT YT OW A T] tops missing 

103ed. 4 aT WT Tg OT: aT ST FAA TAS T T: ) tops missing 
104ab.7T AT ATAWA + ~ ~ ST_H ~ ~ Wd) tops missing 


99c. WET° ] MYB*; WeT® B® 100b. HTS? ] MY; HTT? B 100d. F- 
tract] MY; Felas Bo 101 ab. fafearorar —] MY; fafearraree yie- 
AUST Bo 101 c. — FBT) M”’; 7 Ffactaal SBT B 103 ab. OH TAA YT 
TTT) MY; HUAN Bo 10scd. TAT MTT FT: HT ITH AT 
Te TT: ) MY; & anit age: Ater Hatweae_qd B 10d ab. T AT T 
TWAT LY Y YAW AH -—~ WT] MY; wera val u VarafHarhanr B 


508 Parakhyatantra 


Weqay waaed GNTqMeD Ars: i 14:1040 


somrtaanra: afr wHatrererfacd: | 
SHRUIAAIN TGA TIGTAHTA ll 14: 105i 
Uaeeaea JF Adgewmad Ys | 

HOTT SHleag Sarre Pregepey afer: 14: 1061 

genta werargear warfe fafrrafaer | 

wa < (3)Mfarrsy anrarsrf wed i 14: 1071 

afarte granary ayaa aa MTAT: | 

arat: gwacarifaursayqgeq: We Fare Frat Herarsy Feil 14: 1081 


= W =i afe Srewrer aerase Ahavertanrqentyecragqers: lt tl @ 


TRANSCRIPTION OF PATALA 15 


(4) WATS JaTT | 

at ATHANAT: AIH Aare: | 
srrarfawfererny rarer: 15:11 

WH: AMAA STATA T TAT: | 

fasTareq: Prarereq zateat anata: 15:21 


Taney WTAced aTesearqerad | 
RaTeTAaATAATaTaT (5) HART Ffrarrvr i 15:31 
THIN Jay | 

Sra arafer year as (B, f. 7 )aayerarfear | 
TYITTAT ATH TeATAAT TANT: 15:41 
WT aAacweayrar at eeatorrad: | 

aan apdy Waedvaa Sar Para: 15:51 


106 d. fatge] MY; frege Bo 107 c.Ua + Te] MY; We Ayre B 
108 b. “STAT: ] MYBS; eM: B 108d. Carat] MBS; ean Be 
e Colophon in B: Ti — xfer rowed aeraest Afarventanr i veriqect- 
WqTewT: | BT AT B 1: Before the chapter begins, B has | SYWTAA-STaA AA: I 
MT - Mts 1c. Waratfewre |] M’Be; Sfaafemwe Be 2c. fagTarer: | 
MY‘B; fax 3x HTATeEqT: MY” 


Appendix II. Diplomatic Transcription 509 


aed aca rar aay searar anrafear | 

ata: Farah Tear Yar (6) evar facet 15: 6 
TAMA INT TANTATINTAT | 
Wearercatear AVY MTTEar aa: 15:71 
fot spa ee faaree ae afer 

aay wat Pravare: ferararcgfed: i 15:81 
wer at aera Sar aarhrsty vag 


aa afa: weeartrarar ad aes STN 15:91 
Get TAT (TAMIA ATA SAT WATT | 
Praca WATT AL TIT aad: | 
TT aT AATSATAT Tera ataTa Feral 15:10 
Wate Jars | 
Wert aT waster: Peaar szararvar | 
ary aT waaay ster Taferarhear i 15:11 
THT TaTs | 
aa: WTS) rarer AAMT: | 
TH ATANAIT AH: ATSC Ta: i 15: 121 
7 aa acaayte: (B, £7") warfaterertc: | 
aTa-ATAT Wer AT SATaay Tay FT AeT|T HW 15:13 
qarara: TT sar sTrarafHartear | 
adateat A Mt FMA Hears tl 15: 141 
(9) aeetprefaatt aape Tt ratte 
ararvanr Pearearg srryat ac: rari 15:150 
aay safe are werrareraanne | 
watanrrare sret Proafrarprarafe ii 15: 161 
FRaTarcuer war Val VTA | 
Weareretear Avr: Aarheagarsray(10)FHTW 15:17 
at arafaterer at fear zatatcaer | 
Werarea: Pravart & atfear aferar ad: 15:18 
TUTTE MIT ATT NAT | 

9 cd. Afar: wereTfTaTaT ] M” 5 sfraceafsarr B15 b. Pratferd) 

Prarie B 


M” B®; A 


510 


SATE ST: TH: THYURATCT: it 15: 191 

av fae pr aes Saray at Frgter: | 

wre safes aft ay(iijerd stfarareva4r nt 15: 2011 
qa Saree Teer Tae: | 
qaederread ad yfnafernet Tar: 15:21 
Tare Tava | 

aad ad afaanid set Prvadctact | 
ararerargarace (B, £.8") + fe aa fare wag 15:22 
Warsr Java | 

arrare areata] (12) arr Wace: | 
TAZA HATA AAT ACT ATTA Il 15:23 

aad waar ate aa: arfe faer ferar | 
array Freterr ST arvanr srfrar Vari 15: 2411 
Freninfearsrar arhrirgeanrad | 
aaerahe arta Fret faarfrarn 15: 251 
AAT: AAA CAT (13): Toad: | 

Te-UIM PIAA TT HATA: i 15: 261 
Wale Jars | 
arretarvaeurar fear dra ferar aer 

facyerr ager dra wacarter Turi 15:27 11 
Wars Jars | 

aparece aaa fare | 

Frear eqeeaur sar Prorat 15: 2811 
7 (14) tencfasreifer giorefaatere: | 

aurfe wftarearat afarer faorfoaci 15: 291 


qeeraaiefy Henrer + atfed: | 

Te ATT Tre shHA TATSTAT | 15: 301 
arearerararey Sra aaarfefawmss | 
SATAY SFRATRATAT SATTTETY BT A: | 


Parakhyatantra 


23a. ATA | M”; ATHATB 26d.a7] MY; YTB 27d. TACATHT WUT |] 


M”Y 


- Felaaifear WUT B 


myo) MY; ageraye Bo 30c. Wh] MY; WH UB 


28d. frersar: ] MY; faxTaaT: Bo 30a. WaaT- 


Appendix II. Diplomatic Transcription 511 


TT aT fa(B, £.8")qfer Sagaeraraafer(15)eT: 15:31 


ahrarey FT aera whwardtaastrare | 
aghad: HT aan sear Naf T.15: 320 
WHIT Jas | 
AAT SIU EAH: WRIT | 
TETAS AST AvaIe TUE: it 15: 330 
WIA ARTS UY ATASTATA TUE: | 
FRAT GUTHAAT Het Tara: 15: 34 i 
(16) TAQaT AaTHeT HAT Ar Ache | 
AUTASIAAT FETA TeHATANTA: | 15: 35 i 
Wate Tavs | 
arate aurea tT arate Trad | 
faPrqerat Tet wear ATT SHS i 15: 36 
WHIT Jars | 
aa ad atest aes aga aa fagfa:. 
waanrad: Fer PIT aaTHANTT: i 15: 371 
(17) oxfstear ace fret oaray arererer wad | 
Ter AT MACAT eed ATFATT|T HW 15: 331 
aed aeeaTger Faaterrareate | 
atranrry al HAGAN A ASTI 15:39 
WaTaedd: Aer WAT(B, £.9")Fadfaqeate | 
Prave: aafaede aagar T ade 15:40 
fraearquesarar Act (18) AeRT Ul-3-JUt 
APTS TAATATATaTTAT it 15:41 
Wate Jas | 
ararfehraght: career arerer ares | 
waders aneafafe: He wa 15: 421 
WHIM Jars | 
anatatachrrr irratt wacnhac | 

31 c. faqfe] M’B; fagfR: Bo 40d.7] M’*; fre MY*B 41 b. Aer] 

MY; ACB 41d. eftarfyar) MY”; eff aT B 


912 


Parakhyatantra 


athrarfe Fro Arvedee arear + far 15:43 
(f.35°) <HR TT TT H WMeMHMcayqaad: | 
TT AAAS SaATST FoTATTT 15:44 il 
afcararenet wear srarerarearur yfa | 
ater ad eaeaacd Aft Her 15: 451 
Wale Jars | 
warnyrageayr ar aytaayfacteara4r | 
TACTRTAARTS FATA FT: 15: 461 
Targa Tz 
OT UT 4(2)8IaT Fey ares TF Teh | 
ANASTASIA TAHT ATAAET Fi: ll 15: 471 
ad: waraareet ate YT WaT | 
aey ravatfe fread eer F721 15: 481 
feratfr tranty aaqawarear(B, f.9")war | 
Tay fer req Raa HAF WAT 15:49 i 
WAAAY AAT AATAT SAAT AY 
gear cara faaer(3)ar qhrengonrad: 15:501 
Wile Jars | 

Tl | 
THTAgTT U[-4-JLAT Toran: tt 15:51 i 
THIN Jaa | 
THetst ar sar qoreartarofearar | 
wast ac fatgerat oat fryer: ve: 15:52 
qereag qoreate: aft 7 acaaferar | 
TET Ud Ae(4)fercareaarter afeerg i 15:53 
qefer aca afer ater Sefer aca | 


46be. For h¥PAAT° and efTaT | AAETSTAM® the tops were visible in MY” when 


first read, but had disappeared by 1999. 
46d—47a. FT 7:10 @ WT A VI A AT] tops missing in M”. 


44a.-H RT TATT A) M” (tops missing); That Hach? Bo 45a. TIT) 
MYB’; TATA Bo? 46d. 7 TT: ) MY; HTT Bo 49d. HIT] M’; 
UA Bo 51c. TT? ] M”; Teller? B 


Appendix II. Diplomatic Transcription 


M 


qreatfaegre Tarcad + fafa: i 15:54 


TH EIA eaAcaT ATA TT aT 

eer aTataaera: FT Away AAT 15:55 
: _— 

aeagIaay AapH VfeaT WaT it 15:56 

Wale Sars | 

(5) Att qaaunte g:a Tar fart ape 

qag:auteamn-aafe: afafeeferar it 15:57 0 

THI Favs | 

Gag :aarccanir(B, f.10")awer afweder wad | 

Frcut ar ar gf: HATA FHI 15:58 

TIA FH TAS TaAH UTA: | 

Un Fo Caegeaaeat Frazer 15:59 

(6) &¢ EAE TEE TEEATNT | 

qeq Frererareraqart araferd | 

qeranrateg ar arte afert va Ti 15:60 

Wale Jars | 

waqraera ard fafetata afc: 

aq wa sarar ay ay fegyrea: ii 15:61 

WHIM Jays | 


grat Prgrat gar atfrailac 


(7) fagerenraed: ad wear as arfaed it 15: 6211 


TEANAIT AAC AT AAG: | 
waneg mera afe ararerarferd: i 15: 631 
ay utecer fager fracarereqrac: | 


athroafer: farararara water Ferarcrt: il 15:64 1 


aa wt aet afeae (8) adaraattaqa | 
Ya aa adfava aatarfrafesaa i 15:65 
Aatraqacary TET ad aaarhas | 


55 ab. °daTfetcdtare ] M*; caarfercarare B°; caarfercarare B* 
b. TEITT ) MY 3) AGT x Ax TH Bo 60 a. CATATT® ] M’°B; COTATI 
Yac 


513 


56 


514 Parakhyatantra 


aaqet fayar(B, f.10")0r earafeat ar Aaa: ti 15: 661 
Teed FT AAT ARTATAPHATSTS | 
sfowrcateye Freagenrfad TT 15:67 
whr(a)yer: wer ger vad fagrrarers: | 
amMgd: FA: Ade TAHeIq i 15:68 
afag: frraacHatl + Aer verarfca4r | 
aaa: FAH UeItanaersy A WAT 15:69 
agica + ager Worayr adearaq: | 
Wad at ate Mara (10)ferrer Ti 15: 701 
; = er TPE: | 
arora Efery feraaad Ferg: 15:71 
Tada Tt ar sara wads | 
We AAT ECT MATH AAT TT 15:72 
UTTAR: TATA 
Tasrary (11) sear: wafer vara Warr | 


qe - 
ane afe ferewtge Ra:7e F yas it 15:73 


W=0@ W =n ete Mewed Aeras Ahearavfawesqet: TACT: Il = il 


aft Wed AAT Hi I 


69 d.a9] MY; aq B 720.0%] MY; GX B (anusvara crossed out with 
different ink and then replaced) 73 c. ontet® | M” ; omfeeT?® Be Colophon: 
ee: |] MYB; cS: Bo e MATA) MY; AAT MTA Apogee ii 
aT - - aT -B 


] WAAAY ea ET ET qaq l 
\ watealahe-ar afer 


eer Tfarcraorgent afacrereaar wreret Toeqgan war 
ater 


werear stTaer sara fahra: aAay sas: | 
aang Hal fatsoy: PHT: TY: Il VG | 
area 2erea: atrreafafem: | aaa aratees fara: | wer fe 


arater aefea par se erat sefafa wie warencraer set 
TaltatcR ATA ITAA | 

HITASAC ecItsd AFATAA AT TATA | AayHT | TEIICAT- 
TaterTarararsy Weare: | T NIT Wereteaard fafa wary | 


This commentary on sutra 18 of the Sataratnasangraha (= Parakhya 1:15) follows in most 
respects the text of the Calcutta edition (Ec). I have reported the variants given in that 
edition, as well as the two editions of the Mrgendravytti for the passages that the commentator 
has drawn from chapter 6 of that work, and also the ‘readings’ and conjectures of the Tanjore 
edition (Ex), whose Sanskrit preface (p. 3) tells us that, for its text of the Sataratnollekhini, it 
was based exclusively upon the Calcutta edition. The readings marked Ey! are either variants 
recorded in footnotes or those incorporated into the text of Ev but followed by corrections in 
brackets. A number are simply mistakes in the copying of Ec. 


4-15. 3a ToureyUeT:...egeafafow srr TART ) Note that this entire passage (as 
Brunner has remarked, 1981, p. 122, fn. 107) is cribbed from the Mrgendravrtti ad 6:4ab. 


1 eqwar afgcramrdar ] Er (conj.); yward fefereoaar Ec 2 eer fe) Eo; wet fF 
wear Ev!; ger fe s1ert Er (conj.) 4 Wace) EcEr, Mrgendravrtti; AWTS 
EveEy! 4 waaree ] Ec, Mrgendravrtti; GTATs* Er (conj.) 6& ewrearfecrtt aye | 
Ec; °RIaeAT aT AT? Mrgendravrtti; ewIcatfe atarze Ev; esacarfafa ar aye Er 
(conj.) 8 TdyRT] EcEr; FT YW Mrgendravrtti 


516 Parakhyatantra 


Freraty aqaaeareaar eqeuead Wed waste | ad fae e- 
q WHIM, T CATT | cerareaed Tet ate fafawmaarey gear ey 
THMATACNT AU SAIIMT FT AA! GHz 

BTCA Ale AIA GETET ATAT AACA: | 

Te Mca Tart ST F TA Beg Arad 
war 

Wad afaqear Wey TaTVad | 

Tara + wacHe ae Har fear Hern afer 
THaTAaATqarss eeeatatta AAT saead | AT ewer WarIM1T- 
west aeaTcaatea area favarfegeateart wemaqaahrad 
aqyataart ee sf atagearc 

ary 4 aferqufad wenrvag:,, weqad aT aqag:, ad c- 
STH | GUT ASTI TAA RTA ATTA THT IAA | TUT 
VeTeaoraraendeqar T eearatsrrgqqsqanqsara Hag 
foarte @earTevaaeg | stay ee Ue Vat arte 


10-11. areqr afe.. WT Haq Source unknown. Also quoted (with yadi drSyate instead of 
yas tu miyate) in the Saiva section of the Sarvadarsanasangraha (p.181 of Poona edition), 
where it also derives from the Mrgendravrtti. 


13-14. Tard afacar ...te sat fear Hq Source unknown. 


16-17. .favarfegerfaart. . -afagzar¢g | Cf. Mrgendravrtti from above in the same passage: 
Shreanteapyatrart smear miet afagaa: favarfegoufeart vemeqgerfeac | 
18 -21. aferqufad wenreaa:..-faare aterevata) sat ee Va Wa) Cribbed from 


Mrgendravrtti ad vidyapada 6:4c. 


7 apenas ) EcEr; wPaarteacswat Mrgendravrtti (KSTS); aTgtraaeancsay 
Mrgendravrtti (Devakottai) 7 Tavrd | Ec; Wasad Mrgendravrtti, EVEr 8 & Wat- 
aT] EcEr, Mrgendravrtti (KSTS); @ ATT Mrgendravrtti (Devakottai) 9 °TTRIT) 
EcEr; °taIt Mrgendravrtti 12 aur] Ec; om. Er; «ft AUT Mrgendravytti 13 ata- 
aT) Ec; afearar Ex 13 warsad) Ec; Wart Er 14 Hat) Ec, Mrgendravrtti; 
aq Er (perhaps a misunderstanding of the unmetrical variant reported in a footnote to this 
word in Ec: AYCUTATT ° ) 15 Teratye ] EcEr, Mrgendravrtti; SaTaT{® Ey! 16 g- 
qTeaewd ) EcEr; INU Mrgendravrtti 16 favare } EcEr, Mrgendravrtti; #vare Ev 
16 Fawegehre ] EcEr, Mygendravytti; Temfacgeare Ev! 19 aRIwarrwaarey- 
] Mrgendravrtti (KSTS); 

Mrgendravrtti (Devakottai); TYIWAITaTAPTeReway Ec(eyeskip)Er 20 aur aaq- 
anfrorarrdente? )] EcEr; dartentronerragat®e Mrgendravrtti 


12 


15 


18 


21 


24 


27 


30 


Appendix III. Sataratnollekhini ad sitra 18 517 


aqeqay | aur fe teaat: aerhea waa Araceae feart<- 
cae a aaa fearhor: won arare, A a aaa FT: | 
GUT Yereg: & ear saafarerenta Fat: | 

TZ agateharacatataary | aad sf wardtaqaamr4r- 
ae) aTtarherary | cetoer teeta wWracard! aele Froffoeq 
eed Se ANT: | Wate Teqenfed BT: Reqere:, 7 
Tt: aledie: | ataearaqenrar saargewraawdtaak(casy a- 
VACANT | TAPAHLAT | 

Hatapar H TeICAY Hraaea: Herat: | gets 
ve marareraty sat Tea feratae feats acars e- 
CITA a, wadtcara Trea | aT ATTA AeTMesT HIT 
seta” carfemeaaarey: | ‘aen ee” afa Yenrfenrerast WaT | T 
WTA STAG Wed Sartete AeA | TET IAA SANT: 
fasfava sta sfaareariRarqarsarnd | Tt ATqaTawrarvatey- 
Teedst WT: HA | TeqATAVITATVaAUT AHA Faraday 
22-32. 2eeart: werhaw.. -TreTeaehe | Cribbed from Mrgendravrtti ad vidyap&da 6:4c-5b. 
30. Raa aS HW TATAY HATA HETAT: | HIATT: HATE HT eT PHY yaaa: | 


Ec gives this in a footnote and ascribes it to the Santisataka of Silhana. It is to be found as 
verse 7796 of the Mahasubhasitasangraha. 


24 Tere: ] EcEr, Mrgendravrtti (KSTS); WeT<a: Mrgendravrtti (Devakottai) 24 ¥- 
qt: ]} EcEY!, Mrgendravrtti; I TT Er 26 TeITET | EcEr, Mrgendravrtti; ateqer 
Ev 26 ade Froffaer] EcEr, Mrgendravrtti; wiafanrer EY 27 ar ArHiT: | 
EcEr, Mrgendravrtti; aUaTDINT: Evy 27 aeaferdfad) EcEr, Mrgendravrtti; 7<q- 
enfad EY 28 -arar a-uraenaaadtte ] Ec; eemar aaraerawadtd: ~Mrgendra- 
vrtti (KSTS); °@imaaaadtt: Mrgendravrtti (Devakottai); °R@ITaT a-aT argeracuratee 
Er (conj.); °RTaT aur aqemauaatee Ex = 29 frcrcaege ] EcEy!, Mrgendra- 
vrtti; apreaege EVE; 29 agfmcte] EcEr, Mrgendravrtti (KSTS); agw Mrgendra- 
vrtti (Devakottai) 30 HadaRe ] Ec, Mrgendravrtti (KSTS); tawaRe Er, Mrgendra- 
vrtti (Devakottai); Hadagpe Ex! 30 W aewte) EcEy!, Mrgendravrtti; Hfaewee Ey 
Er 30 °adTeat:} EcEr, Mrgendravrtti; eaaTeat: Ey! 30 seta: | eearfe)] EcEr, 
Mrgendravrtti (KSTS); serat aferfreafaht: Mrgendravrtti (Devakottai) 31 MaruTeT- 
ary Way | EcEr, Mrgendravrtti (KSTS); ToareTey + Faso Mrgendravrtti (Devakottai) 
32 aadteare Traatfe ) Ec; aaa memafata Mrgendravrtti; FATTeRATT T- 
fafe Ev; ataa=re torifefe E-; aeateare toefafe Ey! 33 ereraaw: ] EcEy; 
oTeuaTaTW: Er (conj.) 36 Wa: fT] EcEy!; ward AGT Er (conj.); wet wy Ey! 
36 aeqarasaraye ) EcEY!; aeqarammeye BY; aqaMer waa Ex 36 °ATAaaT | 
Eo; °aTadar ag Ey; eaTadar det Er 


518 Parakhyatantra 


qT: Wal STATATET: AAT Aaa y I 

Tasqalad AIA stratus | 
ary + ay a: aed:, w Aet:, Tar waarfe | Geass FaNT- 
asaat: acereate urpr ufaceatate sfyacatatcennaca- 
fate: | 

ara: freer: wer fe abratfead atftrace faarfared ar- 
UTA HAST HAIN Mes YAP esh FT ATTA | 
COLE Cs 


ans Ferd srt aT Hats Ae 
tT aeHdhe ANT aay fareeasr i 
fared cathe ataatprarsd | 
wadqataay erate at grat Ferry fay: u xfer 
ATT ATTH: ATH Tear HA CHeT afa4rgy T- 
ReRaarenyT FF MMA AI, Tea Adwarswret- 


43-45. aitfyar ees. .gradufrestary Matanigavidyapada 6:17-18b. 
62-55. aoe ferd art-.-tt star fare feny: Pardkhya 1:29 and 1:35. 


37 efeutfacd ) EcEy!; efauraaed E,; efawrae® Ey 37 ahmed) EcEr; ahr 
Ev. 38 efatward] EcEr; cfracr Ey; cfwarwa Ev 39 cawaT aerafanre ] 
Ec; °aaad atetarre EVE, 39 °mtet) EcEr; -ma EY! 40 afete] EcEr; afe- 
ye Ey 42 wT aT AdF) Ec; [TT] Er 47 WET] EcEr; WT Ey 54 apr) 
Er; afore Ec; agiata EY 65 eratprfaat Baie] EcEr; erarprfaar tatq Ey! 
55 feng: 4 aft} em.; yf. xfer EcEr; fate Ev (unmetrical) 656 amet) Ec; arty 
Ev 66 arediteer) Ec; areait (alee Ep; aredivetae Ev! 87 eereaee ) EcEr; 
Zeraee Ey! 567 AWA] Ec; WV Er; Awad Ev! 


42 


45 


48 


81 


57 


60 


63 


69 


75 


Appendix III. Sataratnollekhini ad sitra 18 519 


added SANT AT MWredwsaaaaraad; mecataaes Aary- 
faarauttce ar ofrfrearsaarcatearswaere | cur Tag 
wMreacHe Ae earatayed He mf: | 
Ades T Get ANA Bar Afafasae 
aa Arad are Fafa HATA | 
MIATA GH Ta HT ATT TSI 
ad wet Praewrer fayeare aqanreny xfer | 
fahra: ata: 1 a 7 aercareataa wa, cer Tania Vad 
qaaeranataanaaraynty aT: | VaqMl Ahraresare- 
BT Wrarearfearywa gras | TIT TIT 
Fagucatd deacd ager Premera: | 
a Tae arian: afear TAA I 
aeatear udfgar gaater det aq | 
fearfearfarnry reat kaahae: I 
feraTat adar Fat Walesa: WaeTd | 
aq ated & wareseedst F seal Aa: | 
ATTA 


qahra 7 ade arpfhredaer wat | 
60-64. FMA? -- -ATANTM Parakhya 1:37ab, 38-9. 


68-73. fAydeary TeHAT---AT FT WEAY AAT: Pardkhya 1:43-44, 49c—50b. 
75-77. wahra 7 ager. .-Arvectefer feraqt Paugkara 4:86cd, 85c-86b. 


88 cea Aduarmeaarasyt HAUT ay) Ec; Tea eTaWetaIaty HAAT Er; TEIN F- 
dearrarreaaraaarat amor ar Ey! «659 cfaerae) Ex; cfrarre Eq 60 @aradtaet WF 
earafnget ar nfa:) em.; ewracHerad aa ataqer sfr aria: EcEx; FAHacHaT 
earefaret gar mfr: Er (conj.) 62 aqat trae art aafaq) em.; wat frag ane 
aah Ec; wafdttat afr eafaq Er (conj.); azat frae are EY 63 aat- 
aqd Ut) em.; AMT WY EcEY; AIAG Waa Er (conj.); WT aq Ex (conj. ) 
63 AT HY AAT YE] Ex (conj.); TT HV Tat GWE Ec; Ad HY WA YE Ey! (unmetrical) 
66 offerfearfaimtat ] EcEr; °faerfanfarms Ev? 67 owaewagTd) EcEr; *ae- 
Taare EY 69 a + wer enter: ] EcEY; 77 wer enfe: EYE, 70 aeafear 
wafgat ) EoEr; aeafaar vafacar Ev! «670 ganfer aar aa) BYE;MY; qaafer ver ae 
Eco 71 out may] Evey!; omtanray EcEy; ome gat Er = -72 feravaT) EcEr; 
ferarar: Ev! 73 47 wife @] EcEr; 7 Wet & BY; 7 afer ae Ey! 


520 Parakhyatantra 


wreaftear TeHer We SRITET Til 
aeq qeqred-a Prrewatr Ser 
GAT: Atty Atad: | AAMT WAAC HARTA WTA T- 


ar more fata: aaa fart eT eh 
Saas | CaN SF east waht, Ter tet yg sft 
HAHA S | BIT Aarpearfewquaraar: Yeyvartner eta- 
Sateare stare | TUT 


80-82. Tt AcHAMT:-- PHT: Pardkhya 1:58cd, 59cd, 60cd. 
85-87. TadaTay--- That Pauskara 4:60-61b. 
89-91. adare aa:-.-fe 7 Aaa Pardkhya 1:68c-69. 


76 MrefaAsar] Eo; eafrear Ew 77, aka Tee) EcEy; TWavere E;; atarare 
Ey; afareqre Pauskara (ed. with bhasya); AY@ATST® Pauskara (Adyar ed.) 77 °fi- 
fr ayry] EcEr; fafa ferat Pauskara (ed. with bhasya); °f¥4 Paugkara (Adyar ed.) 
80 ArvrTsTt ) EcEr; firt srt Ex!(unmetrical) 81 sTqunfe azsraaqd) EcEr; se- 
orf werart Ft Ev'Ey!(unmetrical) 82 °YE:] EcEr; °Me Ev! 82 caquifve] Ey 
(conj.); exgquifre Ec; eaquifes Ey! 82 cyared:) Ec; eyorea:1 eff Er 85 @- 
etfewe ) EcE;, Paugkara; %etfete Ev! 86 wafayeaeare ] EcEr, Pauskara (Adyar 
ed.); TYRTARAT® Pauskara (ed. with bhdsya) 86 Tetfarq] EcEr; Werfead Ey! Pauskara 
89 Adare ) EcEr; aderaf Ev! 90 wre: arr?) EcEr; 4aawe Ev! (unmetrical) ; 41a: 
wens Ex! 91 faite: ) EcEr; tre: Ey!(unmetrical) 93 AaTgware ) Ec; aggure 
EG 


102 


105 


111 


Appendix III. Sataratnollekhini ad siltra 18 521 


VaagUdar: Far: AArayyrsreagay: | 

URED HAA THT TAI 

Mee TeAedcanad Haga: | 

arr aay aeatatera fer 
qt 

rar: arrare sft afeegreants treater i 

v7 fafecacerer at area fear: 1 xf 
Hat alter Har: aeqretaar, wader wees: Hearanna 
HAT: HUOTATIacs ST HOrefeqeuMeTaay FEVERT WYTHUTs | 
TUT WaT 

Tchat Tet: War T MITT Har | 

WII TAA HICAAA Ae: I 

Hed Ht: AeA AeT TATA | 

GASHS FUT Arar T Hore warate ii 

T HAT HMCTT WTI Fey: Siar: | afer | 
fafacs: fafeerr ararcifer fafass: 1) weet fafacaed ‘fey: 
at’ Rees TACT Weare wa aeuta) Hae: Hat Mra 
ated: |T Agiatad Mast Fert: | ‘Mtr ee afer TIT 
95-08. darwaaate ...watuntare Pera Parakhya 1:78-79d. 
100-101. rar: fraree sfy.. ay areore fRaT: Pauskara 3:32c-33b. 
105-109. achat FeV: ATHY: - TMU YET: Bj: Parakhya 1:86-88b. 


111. fay: AT] This is a reference forward to Parakhya 1:91c-92b, quoted as siitra 56 of the 
Sataratnasangraha. 


112. ator 2eentear This is a reference forward to Parakhya 1:92c-93b, which appears quoted 
in the Sataratnasangraha, but belongs to the portion of text that is missing in the Calcutta 


95 oryMay: gar: ] em. omaaareay: EcEr(unmetrical); oxqeay Ge Ey! (unmetrical) 
96 AcHTCT TH] em. TR TE Er; AAI Ec(unmetrical) 100 career sf] 
EcEr; sere Palislars 100 eater.) Ec; moafr Er ( conj. ); qaafr Er Pauskara 
102 amqrefaaT) EcEr; aeafear EvEY! 106 °9a) EcEr; °9a Ex! 107 acm: 
afeg ] em.; HTH afE EcEy!; HH af Er (conj.) 109 HtrHeAT) Ex (conj.); FT- 
Wet Eo 110 ararditfa fafeos: ] EcEr; arardifa fafasey Ev! 111 Tavart) Ec; 

Er 111 €Wty StaT) Ec; FT ENT WHT Er (conj.); ST ETT warty Ev! 
112 HAUT ee) Ec; Keay Hur ae E; 


522 Parakhyatantra 


aeatt | TY: WYCAAATH: , FHT TYCATARTATT | TUT Wet 
TY: WYSaI ay TH: WA | 

ae TTY: fagrracweraracraaated fafar: 1 T HAH E- 

Farrar water | 
THA SHAT HATS SAAPAT: | 
aarrateare: ger: fraqereraterd: ii xfer | 

fatasred FT TAITT GTS TaPATT I ec II 


edition. It is No. 40i in Thirugnanasambandhan’s appendix and 47 in IFP MS T. 112 (p. 567). 
114. Ty: TycaHaTT YR: TSA Paugkara 4:1lab. 

117-118, Tereeagigarenrc.. .weraferd: Paugkara 4:1c—2b. 

119. fafgorer T sacy qwartor Tafa This is probably a reference forward to Kirana 2:2, 
which appears quoted in the Sataratnasangraha, but belongs to the portion of text that is 


missing in the Calcutta edition. It is No. 40b in Thirugnanasambandhan’s appendix and 39 in 
IFP MS T. 112 (p. 565). 


114 WwWycre } EcErPauskara; TYcaTe Ev! 115 Wy: FrstTte | EcEr; seit fasTr Ey! 
117 eargfgrarercst ) Paugkara; exgfqrararty EcEr; eagfmarerfr Ev! 119 FATT] Ec 
Er; gave EvgeEy! 119 seftry)] Er (em.); wafttr: EcEv! 


114 


117 


APPENDIX IV. MEASUREMENTS 


8 param&ou 
mahtiraje 
(8 trasarenu) 


hasta 
24 atgulea 


dhanurdanda dhanub/dang eeneael 


néllké/yOpa peihdaans asdik yore 
4 hasta 


ote e Gohanu 
Gabanup) | (aah ae Se AT 
@dnanvyy | Gidbeousy | 
(500. Ld 
a ee es es ee ee 
vy Sghata 
as a Be ee 


(2000 ro 
dhanurdagda 
roéa gavy ait 
Sete eo 


gavyat gavyit gavyQOt 
(a'irogay | CS'irosay | Pirosey || rey | 
(2000 
geo | Ggeyor | eyo | |_| fe 000 ahanuhy | ft hrode 


This is of course not intended as a comprehensive comparative account 
of measurements of length in tantric sources. I have gathered together 
and tabulated the accounts of units of measurement found in the early 
Siddhantas, all of which are given in the context of cosmography with the 
exception of the account of the Kirana (which gives units of measurement 
for its prescriptions on the making of images and accordingly stops with 


524 Parakhyatantra 


the vitasti). To these I have added the account from the beginning of the 
Svacchanda’s cosmographical chapter, which may well have been based on 
Saiddhantika accounts, and two Puranic accounts (see KIRFEL 1920:331ff 
for a fuller treatment of this topic in non-tantric sources). I have not 
quoted and tabulated the accounts of units of measure for building and 
making images that are to be found in what I believe to be relatively late 
South Indian Saiddhantika works (Pirva-Kamika 16, Dipta 6, Ajitakriya- 
pada 12, Pirva-Karana 7, Mayamata 5, etc.). Nor have I tabulated the 
measurements of other early sources such as the Arthasastra (2.20) and 
the Bakhsali MS (for which see HAYASHI 1995:114-6). A number of these 
passages can be compared in the apparatus to Ajitakriyapada 12 and 
in DAGENS’ annotation to Mayamata 5 (1970:56-60). My reason for not 
incorporating these sources is that they introduce irrelevant classifications 
(such as that of the three types of angula), my purpose here being to set 
the brief account of the Parakhya (5:2—4) in context. 

A number of these passages quoted include variations upon the for- 
mula jalantaragate bhanau..., which may derive from Manusmrti 8:132 
(~ Vayu U 39:118, for which see below). In the Manusmrti the verse 
marks the beginning of an account of units of volume rather than of 
length. Since the passages below contain such verbal echoes of each other, 
and since the names of the stages are almost everywhere taken from the 
same objects and it is the degrees of multiplication in which we see the 
most variation, we may assume that the deviations are unlikely to have 
arisen from independent empirical attempts to establish units of measure- 
ment. They are likely rather to have arisen from redactors reading and 
then recasting passages of text describing the units with slightly differing 
misunderstandings. An account such as that of the Parakhya allows a 
rich variety of such misunderstandings, since most of its numbers are not 
named but expressed through riddling bhitasamkhya, the conventions of 
which vary. 

As I have observed above (see fn. 479 on p. 279 above), the accounts 
presented below evidently do not assume a Vaisesika ontology, in which 
atoms are the basic building blocks of the cosmos, and, as Ksemaraja 
has observed (quoted in the same footnote), the atoms spoken of are not 
Vaisesika atoms. 


Appendix IV. Measurements 525 


Mrgendravidyapada 13:6-8. 


The account that appears to be closest to Parakhya 5:2-4 is that of the 
Mrgendra. 


rajo Vilokyate tiryag jalavistarkarocisam 
tadastastagunasthane trtiye syat kacagrakam 6 

liksa yika yavo ’py evam angulam tattrisamgunaih? 
tair eva gunitam panir dhanus tadvedalaksitam 7 
dando dve dhanus! jneyah krosas taddvisahasrakam 
dvikrogam ahur gavyiltim dvigavyiitim ca yojanam 8 


Matangavidyapada 24:1c—6b. 


The Matanga’s account diverges at the beginning, but from the Iiksa 
onwards it agrees in essentials with the Parakhya and the Mrgendra. 


parthivanucatuskena tutir? ekabhidhiyate 1 

ltksa tuticatuskena® dve likse kanika bhavet 
kanikanam catuskena siddharthas cabhidhiyate 2 
siddharthakacatuskena yavamatrabhidhtyate 
yavastakena vijneyam angulam munisattama 3 
angulanaim caturvimSo hasta ity abhidhiyate 
caturhasto dhanur jneyah Sastre ’smin parameSvare 4 
dhanvantarasahasrena vyaghatah samudahrtah 
vyaghatanam catuskena kroSsa ity abhidhiyate 5 


krosanam ca catuskena yojanam parikirtitam 


Kirana 52:9-11. 


The Kirana’s account of measurements is to be found in the context of 
its discussion of icononography rather than that of cosmography, and so 
its scale goes up only as far as a vitasti. The text of Ep by itself is, as for 
many parts of the work, incomprehensible. | 


1HULIN’s translation (1980:290) suggests that he understood tantrisamgunaih. 

*tutir } emend; trutir BHATT. For this orthography see GOODALL 1998:1xx. 

3tuti®? ] emend; truti®? BHATT. For the orthography liksé see fn. 480 on p.280 
above. 


526 Parakhyatantra 


jalantaragate bhanau‘ siiksmam yat trasarenukam® 
renukam castadha krtva ttatpramanad anukramatt® 9 


astabhis taih kacagram syal liksa’ syad astabhis tu taih 
liksabhir astabhir yuka® tabhis tadvad yavo matah® 10 


angulam yat tatha proktam!® dvyangula!! tu kala bhavet 
tabhih syat sat}? pramanabhir vitastir namato bhavet 11 


Svacchanda 10:13c—21b. 


The opening of the Svacchanda’s account is closest to that of the two 
Puranic sources cited below. The Svacchanda’s account is in turn a mod- 
ified version of Nigvasa guhyasutra 4:15ff (f.51”), which is so damaged and 
corrupt that it would be hard to interpret with the Svacchanda to lay be- 
side it. The modifications that are to be found in (at least the printed 
version of) the Svacchanda consist in clarificatory rephrasing that avoids 
aiga usages. 


avyaktad dasabhir bhagair mahan sthiilo vibhavyate 13 


dvipancabhago mahato bhitadih sthiila ucyate 
bhiitadeh parimanam ca bhavagrahyam na caksusam 14 


bhitader yad dasagunam aniyo dréyate rajah 
jalantaragate bhanau paramanuh sa ucyate 15 


astanam paramaniinam samavayas tu yo bhavet 
trasarenuh sa vikhyatas tat padmaraja ucyate 16 


‘jalintaragate bhinau ] D'Ep; jalantaragate bhino M, 

Ssiksmam yat trasarenukam } conj.; sikgsmam mattrasarenukam D’; tatra yadr 
~ sonuké Mj; tatra yadrajaso ’nukdé Ep ; 

Srenukam cdstadhd krtva tatpramandd anukramét] D'; anukaé costagunitam 
ratharenupramdnatah M,; anukéés castagunitas trasarenupramanatah Ep 

"taih kac&gram syal Iiksa ) conj.; taih karégrah syal lksa D'; taikaratrai syat daksah 
M;; taih kardstraih sy&l liksi Ep 

SitkeSbhir astabhir yiika ] D’; liksabhir astabhir yukta M3; liksabhir agtayuktabhis 
Ep 

®matah ] D'; bhavet MzEp 

1°angulam yat tathdé proktam ) Ep; amgula yas tatha prokta D'; amgulam yat tatha 
prokta M; 

1 dvyangula } D'M,; dvyangulaét Ep 

‘syat sat] D'Ep; sa sa Mz 


Appendix IV. Measurements 


trasarenavas ca ye tv astau!? balagram tu vidhiyate 
balagrani tatha tv astau likseti parikirtita 17 


liksa castau vidur yikam yiikas castau yavo bhavet 
astau yava vararohe parvangustham athangulam 18 


dvadasangulamanena vitastis tala ucyate 
taladvayam bhaved dhastas caturvimSatikangulah 19 


caturhasto dhanurdando!4 nalika yiipa eva ca 
dhanuhsahasre dve piurne krosah samabhidhiyate 120 


krosadvayena gavyutir gavyuti dve tu yojanam 


Vayupurana U 39:115-26 


O27 


This has been collated against Brahmandapurana 3.4.2:115—26, where the 


same passage Occurs. 
etad vo ’ham pravaksyami srnudhvam me vivaksitam 
avyaktad vyaktabhago vai mahan!> sthiilo vibhasyate 115 
dasaiva mahatam!® bhaga bhiitadih sthila ucyate 
dagabhagadhikam capi bhutadih paramanukah’’ 116 
paramanuh sustiksmas tu bhavagrahyo na caksusa 
yad abhedatamam loke vijneyam paramanu tat}® 117 
jalantaragatam bhanor?? yat siiksmam dréyate rajah 
prathamam tat pramananam paramanum pracaksate 118 
astanam paramaninam samavayo yada bhavet 
trasarenuh samakhyatas tat padmaraja ucyate 119 


13The pada is hypermetrical; the initial two short syllables are to be tripped over 
quickly as though they were one. Cf. below verse 120 of the account shared by the 


Vayu and the Brahmanda. 


14 semaraja appears to understand this as the wooden frame of a bow: dhanusa eva 


dandah... 
‘®mahan Brahmanda; maha Vayu 
‘Smahatam ] Vayu; mahato Brahmanda 
‘’bhiitadih paramanukah ] Vayu; bhitadiparimanakam Brahmanda 
1Btat ] Vayu; vat Brahmanda 
19°>atam bhanor ) Vayu; °gate bhanau Brahmanda 


528 Parakhyatantra 


trasarenavas ca2° ye ’py astau ratharenus tu sa smrtah 

te py astau samavayastha balagram tat smrtam budhaih 120 
balagrany asta liksa syad yuka liksastakam?! bhavet 
yukastakam yavam?* prahur angulam tu yavastakam 121 


dvadasangulaparvani vitastisthanam ucyate 

ratnis cangulaparvani vijneyo hy ekavimSatih 122 

catvaro?* vimSatis caiva hastah syad angulani tu 

kiskur dviratnir vijneyo dvicatvarimSadangulah 123 
sannavatyangulam caiva dhanur ahur manisinah 

tetad gavyitisamkhyayam adanam dhanusah smrtamt?4 124 


dhanur dando yugam nal tulyany etany athangulaih?® 
dhanusam?® triSatam nalvam ahuh samkhyavido janah 125 


dhanuhsahasre dve capi gavyitir upadisyate 
astau dhanuhsahasrani yojanam tu vidhiyate 126 


Markandeyapurana 46:37—40. 


paramanuh param siiksmam trasarenur mahirajah 
balagram caiva liksim ca yiikam catha yavodaram 37 


kramad astagunany ahur yavan astau tathangulam 
sadangulam padam tac ca vitastir dvigunam smrtam 38 


dve vitasti tatha hasto brahmyatirthadivestitah 
caturhastam dhanur dando nadika yugam eva ca?’ 39. 


krogo dhanuhsahasre dve”® gavyitis taccaturgunam 
proktam ca yojanam prajnaih sankhyanartham idam 
param 40 


?°trasarenavas ca] Vayu; trasarenavo 'tha Brahmanda. For this hypermetry cf. 
Svacchanda 10:17 above. 

*'likgastakam ) Brahmanda; tac castakam Vayu 

22vavam ) Vayu; yava Brahmanda 

*Scatvaro ] Brahmanda; catvari Vayu 

*4°samkhyayaém addanam dhanusah smrtam ] Brahmanda; °samkhyayam p&dénim 
dhanusah smrtah Vayu 

**dando yugam nali tulyany etdny athangulaih}] Vayu; danayugam nal 
tulyanyastais tathangulaih Brahmanda 

*®dhanusam ] Brahmanda; dhanusas Vayu 

27Fmendation could be considered to: caturhasto dhanurdando. 

*8dve ] emend; dvau Ed. 


WORKS CONSULTED 


Abbreviations 


BORI Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute 
EFEO Ecole francaise d’Extréme-Orient 
EI Epigraphia Indica 
GOML Government Oriental Manuscripts Library, Madras 
IFI Institut Francais d’Indologie (misnomer used in old publications) 
IFP Institut Francais de Pondichéry/French Institute of Pondicherry 
KSTS Kashmir Series of Texts and Studies 
NAK National Archives of Kathmandu 
NGMPP Nepal-German Manuscript Preservation Project 
T Transcript 


Manuscripts of works other than the Parakhya 
ATYANTANIRMALATATTVARATNAVALI of Vimalasiva. NAK MS 11-1697 7/6, NGMPP 
Reel No. B 26/16. Palm-leaf, Nagart. 


ATMARTHAPUJAPADDHATI of Vedajnana II. IPF MSS T. 282 and T. 321, T. 323, T. 371, 
T.795, paper transcripts in Devanagari. 


KALOTTARA non-eclectic recensions (i.e. excluding the Brhatkalottara). NAK 
MS pra 1114, NGMPP Reel No.B 25/7. Palm-leaf, Nagari. Also NAK MS 5- 
4632, NGMPP Reel No. B 118/7. Paper, Devanagari. 


KIRANA For an account of the manuscript sources consulted of this work, see GOODALL 
1998: lxxxiv—ciii. 

KIRANAVIVRTI of TryambakaSambhu (SISUHITA). IFP MS 47625. Palm-leaf, Grantha. 
Also IFP MS T. 1102, a paper transcript in Devanagari. 


KRIYAKRAMADYOTIKAVYAKHYA of SadaSiva, pp. 1-56 [third numeration] in IFP MS 
T.962, a paper transcript (of IFP MS RE 43328) in Devanagari. 


GRAHAYAJNA, pp. 97-101 of IFP MS T. 537, a paper transcript in Devanagari. 
CINTYASASTRA, IFP MS T.13, a paper transcript in Devanagari. 


930 Parakhyatantra 


JNANARATNAVALI of Jnanasiva. GOML MS R 14898 and its apograph IFP MS T. 231, 
as well as pp. 13-60 of IFP MS T. 106 (the latter giving the text of what is prob- 
ably a manual based upon the JNANARATNAVALI, for see GOODALL 2000:209, fn. 
11), paper transcripts in Devanagari. Also Oriental Research Institute, Mysore, 
MS P.3801. Palm-leaf manuscript in Nandinagari script. 


TATTVATRAYANIRNAYAVIVRTI of Bhatta Ra&makantha II. Akhila Bharatiya Sanskrit 
Parishad, Lucknow, MS 2390. Paper manuscript in Sarada script. (Catalogued 
on pp. 18-19 and 362-3 of A Catalogue of Manuscripts in The Akhila Bharatiya 
Sanskrit Parishad, Second Series, vol. IV. Lucknow: The Akhila Bharatiya 
Sanskrit Parishad, 1995.) 


DIKSADARSA of Vedajnana. IFP MSS T.76, T.153, and T.279, paper transcripts in 
Devanagari. 


DVISATIKALOTTARAVRTTI of AghoraSivacarya. Trivandrum MS 4509. Paper, Tanjore 
style Devanagari. Also IFP T.176, a paper transcript in Devanagari. 


NARESVARAPARIKSAPRAKASA of Ramakantha. Baroda, Central Library MS 1829. Pa- 
per, Sarad& script. Catalogued in BHATTACHARYA 1950: 1406-7. 


NITYADISANGRAHABHIDHANAPADDHATI of Takgakavarta. Bodleian MS Stein Or.d.43 
(codex unicus). Paper, Sarada script. 


NISVASAKARIKA IFP MSS T.17 and T. 127. Paper transcripts in Devanagari. 


NISVASATATTVASAMHITA NAK MS 1-227, NGMPP Reel No. A 41/14. Palm-leaf, early 
Nepalese ‘Licchavi’ script. Described by Hara Prasad Sastri (1905:lxxvii and 
137-140). Two apographs are known to me, both in Devanagari and on paper: 
NAK MS 5-2401, NGMPP Reel No. A 159/18, and Wellcome Institute for the 
History of Medicine, London, Sanskrit MS I.33. 


PAUSKARAVRTTI of (Salivatipuranivasi-] Jianaprakaéa. IFP MSS T.110, T. 180, and 
T. 188, paper transcripts in DevanagarI. Also Hoshiarpur Vishveshvaranand 
Vedic Research Institute MS No. 4385, a palm-leaf MS in Grantha script. 


PRAYASCITTASAMUCCAYA of Hrdayasiva. Cambridge University Library MS Add. 2833. 
Palm-leaf, early Newari script. Copied in Bhaktapur in the reign of Ananda- 
deva and dated 1157/8 AD (samvat 278). Described by Bendall (1888:550-1). 
Also NAK MS 4-1854, NGMPP Reel No. A 149/6; NAK MS 1-76, NGMPP Reel 
No. B 133/8; NAK MS 1-796, NGMPP Reel No. A 1303/26 (paper manuscripts 
in Newari script); and NGMPP Reel No.C 29/7 (paper manuscript in Deva- 
nagar). 

BRHATKALOTTARA NAK MS 1-89, NGMPP Reel No. B 24/59. ‘KALOTTARA’. Palm- 
leaf, Newari script. 
See also SANDERSON *1996b. 


BHAVACUDAMANI Described by Stein (1894) as MS No. 5291 of the Shri Raghunath 
Temple MSS Library in Jammu (now in the collection of the Shri Ranbir San- 
skrit Research Institute in Jammu). Paper, Kashmirian NagarT (codex untcus). 
(A commentary on the MAYASANGRAHA by Ramakantha II’s only known pupil, 
Vidyakantha II.) 


Works Consulted 531 


MATANGATANTRA National Archives, Kathmandu, MS_ 5-688. NGMPP Reel 
No. A 43/2. Palm-leaf, Nagari. 


MATANGAVRTTI _BORI MS No. 235 of 1883-84. Paper, Sarada. 


MAYASANGRAHA NAK MS 1-1537, NGMPP Reel No. A 31/18 (codex unicus). Palm- 
leaf, Newari script. 


MRGENDRAPADDHATITIKA of Vaktrasgambhu. IFP T.1021. Paper transcript in Deva- 
nagar. 

MOHACUDOTTARA NAK MS ca 1622, NGMPP Reel No. B 27/18. Palm-leaf, Newari 
(Bhujimol). Also NAK MS 5-1977, NGMPP Reel No. A 182/2. Paper, Deva- 
nagar. 

YOGAJATANTRA IFP T.24. Paper transcript in Devanagari. 


RAURAVASUTRASANGRAHA Oriental Research Institute, Mysore, MS B 776, ff. 26"-47". 
Paper, Kannada script. Partial apograph of M”. 


VYOMAVYAPISTAVA of Bhatta Raimakantha II with the commentary (LAGHUTIKA) of 
Vedajnanarsindra. IFP MSS T. 128, pp. 22-5, T. 434, pp. 293-7, T. 112, pp. 270— 
348. Paper transcripts in Devanagari. Also Gottingen MS Schrader 121, palm- 
leaf, Grantha. 


SATARATNASANGRAHA of Umapatisivacdrya. IFP MSS T.112, pp. 558-76 and T. 804, 
pp. 1-62 (with Tamil commentary). Paper transcripts in Devandgari. 


SIVAJNANASIDDHISVAPAKSADRSTANTASANGRAHA of Nigamajidnadesika. IFP MSS 
T. 317, Part 2, pp. 968-1118, and T. 533, pp. 197-224. Paper transcripts in Deva- 
nagari. 

‘STVADIKSAVIDHIVYAKHYANA. IFP MS T.542. Paper transcript in Devandgart. 


SIVADHARMA TEXTS (SIVADHARMASASTRA, SIVADHARMOTTARA, SIVADHARMASAN- 
GRAHA, SIVOPANISAT, UMAMAHESVARASAMVADA, UTTAROTTARAMAHASAM- 
VADA, VRSASARASANGRAHA, DHARMAPUTRIKA) Cambridge University Library 
MS Add. 1645 (dated 1136 AD (samvat 256)) and Cambridge University Library 
MS Add. 1694. Both palm-leaf, early Newari script. Also (for the first of these 
texts) IFP T.32, a paper transcript in Devanagari. 


STVAPOJAPADDHATIVYAKHYANA. IFP MS T.962, Ist pagination (pp. 1-92) and 2nd 
pagination (pp. 1-127). Paper transcript (of IFP MS RE 43328) in Devanagari. 

$IVAGAMADIMAHATMYASANGRAHA of (Sélivatipuranivasi-] Jidnaprakasaguru. IFP 
MSS T. 281 (pp. 114-74; text very damaged), T. 372 (pp. 1192-1261) and T. 1059 
(pp. 1-75, the whole transcript). Paper transcripts in DevanagarT. 

SAIVASIDDHANTASANGRAHA. IFP MS T. 46 (pp. 1492, preceded by pp. 1-48 of con- 
tents) a paper transcript in Devanagari. 

SAIVAGAMADIMAHATMYASANGRAHA. See SIVAGAMADIMAHATMYASANGRAHA. 


SAKALAGAMASANGRAHA IFP MSS T. Nos. 246, 351, and 374. Paper transcripts in 
Devanagari. 


SARVAJNANOTTARATANTRA NAK MS 1-1692. NGMPP Reel No. A 43/12. Palm-leaf, 
early Nepalese ‘Licchavi’ script. Described by Sastri (1905:lxxiv—lxxv and 85-6). 
Also IFP T. Nos. 334, 760, paper transcripts in Devandgart. 


532 Parakhyatantra 


SARVAJNANOTTARAVRTTI of Aghorasivacarya. Oriental Research Institute and 
Manuscripts Library, Trivandrum MS 6578, palm-leaf (palmyra) manuscript 
from Madurai in Grantha script (listed by BHASKARAN, 1986:6). Also IFP 39818, 
palm-leaf (palmyra) manuscript in Grantha script; IFP 47818 and IFP 47828, 
paper manuscripts in Grantha script; Hoshiarpur MS 5987, palm-leaf (palmyra) 
manuscript in Grantha script; and IFP T. Nos. 83 and 985, paper transcripts in 
Devanagari. 

SARVAMATOPANYASA and appendix. IFP MSS T. 284, pp. 1-30, T. 801, pp. 1-23, and 
GOML MS R 16820, pp. 14-16 of 2nd pagination, pp. 1-8 of 2nd pagination, and 
pp. 1-12 of 3rd pagination. Paper transcripts in Devanagari. 


SAHASRATANTRA IEP MS T.33, paper transcript in Devanagari. 


SARDHATRISATIKALOTTARA (ADHYUSTASATA- in the colophons). NAK MS 5-4632. 
NGMPP Reel No. B 118/7. {entitled KALOTTARATANTRA]. Paper, Devanagari. 


See also TORELLA 1975 and s.v. SARDHATRISATIKALOTTARAGAMA among printed 
sources. 


SARDHATRISATIKALOTTARAVRTTI of Ramakantha. IFP MSS 47635 and 47662. Palm- 
leaf (palmyra) manuscripts in Grantha script. 


SIDDHANTADIPIKA of Madhyarjunasiva. IFP MSS T.284, pp.89-127, and T.112, 
pp. 125-205. (Also T. 801, pp. 67-97, but this has not been used on the grounds 
as it is a transcript of the same manuscript as T.284: GOML MS R 6635.) 
Paper transcripts in Devanagary. 


SIDDHANTADIPIKA of Ramanatha. IFP MSS T.914, pp. 1-25, and T.284, pp. 48-89. 
Paper transcripts in Devanagari. 


SIDDHANTASIKHAMANI of Salivatipuranivasi- Jidnaprakasaguru. IFP 10871, ff.71"- 
122’. Palm-leaf (palmyra) manuscript in Grantha script, [Note that this is to 
be distinguished from the ViraSaiva work of the same name.] 


SIDDHANTASAMUCCAYA of Trilocanagiva. IFP MS T. 284, pp. 127-74, IFP MS T. 206, 
pp. 56-111, Madras GOML MS R 14394, pp. 1-52, and GOML MS R 16820, 
pp. 1-14 in last sequence of numeration. Paper transcripts in Devanagari. [The 
text of IFP MS T. 801 (pp. 97-103) has not been considered, since it is a tran- 
script of the same palm-leaf, Grantha MS in Madras as that from which IFP MS 
T. 284 was transcribed, namely GOML MS R 6635.] 


SOMASAMBHUPADDHATIVYAKHYA of Trilocanasiva. IFP MS T.170 (described by 
BRUNNER 1998:li-lii) and GOML MS R 14735. Paper transcripts in Devanagari. 


SAURASAMHITA Manuscript edition. See Diwakar ACHARYA [forthcoming]. 
SVAYAMBHUVATANTRA IFP MSS T.39 and T. 247. Paper transcripts in Devanagari. 


SVAYAMBHUVASUTRASANGRAHA NGMPP Reel No.A 30/6. NAK MS pam 348 vi 
jyautisam 80. Palm-leaf, early Nepalese ‘Kutila’ script. Also M” (see description 
of manuscripts of Kirana). 


Works Consulted 533 


Printed Sources 


AJITAGAMA, ed. N.R. Bhatt. 3 Vols. Publications de l’IFI No.24. Pondicherry: IFT, 
1964, 1967 and 1991. 


ABHIDHARMAKOSABHASYA of Vasubandhu, ed. P. Pradhan. Tibetan Sanskrit Works 
Series vol. 8. Patna: K.P. Jayaswal Research Institute, 1967. 


ABHISAMAYALANKARALOKA of Haribhadra, ed. U. Wogihara. Tokyo: Toyo Bunko 1932 
{reprinted by Sankibo Buddhist Book Store in 1973]. 


AMARAKOSA. Amarakoga with the unpublished South Indian Commentaries, ed. A.A. 
RAMANATHAN. 3 vols. The Adyar Library Series, Volume 101. Madras: Adyar 
Library and Research Centre, 1971; 1978, 1983. 


. with the commentary (VYAKHYASUDHA or RAMASRAMI) of Bhanujidiksita, 
ed. Sivadatta Dadhimatha and rev. Vasudeva Laksmana PanaSikara. Brajajivan 
Prachyabharati Granthamala 1. Delhi: Chaukhamba Sanskrit Pratishthan, 1997 
(3rd impression). 


AMRTAKANIKODDYOTANIBANDHA Aryamarijusrinamasangiti with Amrtakanika-ti- 
ppani by Bhiksu Ravisrijnana and Amrtakanikoddyota-nibandha of Vibhuti- 
candra, ed. Banarsi Lal. Bibliotheca Indo-tibetica XXX. Varanasi: Central 
Institute of Higher Tibetan Studies, 1994. 


ARTHASASTRA of Kautilya. See KANGLE 1960, 1963 and 1965. 


ASTAPRAKARANA, ed. Krsnasastri. Devakottai: Sivagamasiddhantaparipalanasangha, 
1923 (TATTVAPRAKASA, TATTVASANGRAHA, TATTVATRAYANIRNAYA, with the 
commentaries of AghoraSivacarya) and 1925 (RATNATRAYAPARIKSA, BHOGA- 
KARIKA, NADAKARIKA with the commentaries of Aghorasivacarya, and MOKSA- 
KARIKA and PARAMOKSANIRASAKARIKA with the commentaries of Rama- 
kantha IT). 


——., ed. Vrajavallabha Dvivedl. Yogatantragranthamala Vol.12. Varanasi: Sam- 
purnananda Sanskrit University, 1988. 


ASTANGAHRDAYA of Vagbhata with the commentaries (SARVANGASUNDARA) of Aruna- 
datta and een aisha of Hemadri, collated by Anna MoreSwara 
Kunte and Krsna Ramacandra Sastri Navare and ed. Harisastri Paradakara 
Vaidya. Jaikrishnadas Ayurveda Series No. 52. Varanasi: Chaukhambha Orien- 
talia, 1982 (reprinted from the Bombay Nirmaya Sagar Press edition of 1939). 


AHIRBUDHNYASAMHITA, ed. M.D. Ramanujacarya under the supervision of F. Otto 
Schrader, revised by V. Krishnamacharya. The Adyar Library Series 4 (2 vols.). 
Madras: Adyar Library and Research Centre, 1986 [reprint of second edition of 
1966]. 


AGAMADAMBARA of Jayantabhatta, ed. V. Raghavan and Anantalal Thakur. Mithila 
Institute Series Ancient Text No. 7. Darbhanga, 1964. 


ISANASIVAGURUDEVAPADDHATI of Isanagivagurudeva, ed. T. Ganapati Sastri, 4 Vols. 
Delhi: Bharatiya Vidya Prakashan, 1990. (Reprinted, but with a substantial 
new introduction dated to 1987 by N. P. UNNI, from Trivandrum Sanskrit Series 
Nos. 69, 72, 77 and 83, Trivandrum, 1920, 1921, 1922, 1925.) 


534 Parakhyatantra 


ISVARAPRATYABHIJNAKARIKA of Utpaladeva with the commentary (VRTTI) of Utpala- 
deva. See TORELLA 1994. 


ISVARAPRATYABHIJNAKARIKA of Utpaladeva with the commentary (-VIMARSINI) of 
Abhinavagupta, ed. Mukund Ram Sastri, vol. 1, and Madhusudan Kaul Sastri, 
vol.2. KSTS 22 and 23. Bombay, 1918 and 1921. 


KATHOPANISAT. See LIMAYE and VADEKAR 1958. 


KARMAKANDAKRAMAVALI of Somasambhu, ed. Jagaddhar Zadoo. KSTS 73. Srinagar, 
1947. 


See also SOMASAMBHUPADDHATI and BRUNNER 1963, 1968, 1977. 


KAMIKAGAMA, PURVABHAGA and UTTARABHAGA. No editor accredited. Published by 
C. Swaminatha Gurukkal. Madras: South Indian Archaka Association, 1975 
and 1988. 


KIRANATANTRA, ed. Ti.Ra&. PancapageSaSivacarya and K.M. Subrahmanyaégastri. 
Sivagamasiddhantaparipalanasangha Vol. No. 16. (=Ep) Devakottai, 1932. 


. See also GOODALL 1998. 
KUBJIKAMATATANTRA. See GOUDRIAAN and SCHOTERMAN 1988. 


KUBJIKOPANISAT. See GOUDRIAAN and SCHOTERMAN 1994. 
KURMAPURANA, ed. Anand Swarup Gupta. Varanasi: All-India Kashiraj Trust, 1971. 
, For the VIDYAPADA only see VIVANTI (=Ey) 1975. 


KRIYAKRAMADYOTIKA of AghoraSivacaérya with the commentary (PRABHAVYAKHYA) 
of Nirmalamani, ed. RamaSsastrin and AmbalavanajnanasambandhaparaSakti- 
svamin. Chidambaram, 1927. 


GHERANDASAMHITA. The Gheranda Samhita Translated into English by Rai Bahadur 
Srisa Chandra Vasu. Delhi: Munshiram Manoharlal, 1980 (reprinted from an 
edition of 1914-15 from the Panini Office, Allahabad). 


CANDRAJNANAGAMA kriyapada and caryapada, ed. Vrajavallabha Dwivedi, trans. 
Rama Ghose. Research Publications Series 5. Varanasi: Shaiva Bharati Shodha 
Pratishthanam, 1995. 


CIVAPPIRAKACAM of Arulnandi. In MEYKANTACATTIRANKAL. 
JATINIRNAYAPURVAKALAYAPRAVESAVIDHI. See FILLIOZAT 1975. 


JAIMINISUTRA with the commentary (BHASYA) of Sabarasvamin and the sub- 
commentary (TANTRAVARTTIKA) of Kumarila Bhatta, ed. Tirthahalligramabhi- 
janasubbasastrin. Anandasramasamskrtagranthavali No.97. 5 Parts. Poona:. 
Anandaérama Press, 1929-34. 


NANAVARANAVILAKKAM of Kurunanacampanta-mamacariya-cuvamika] with the com- 
mentary (MAPADIYAM) of Velliyampalavanacuvamikal, ed. by 25th head of 
Tirukkayilaya paramparait tarumapura atinam, Cuppiramaniya tecika nana- 
campanta paramacariya cuvamikal. 2 Vols. Dharmapuram, 1957 and 1959. 


TATTVAKAUMUDI. See SRINIVASAN 1967. 


Works Consulted 535 


TATTVATRAYANIRNAYA of Sadyojyotis with commentary (-VRTTI) of Aghorasivacarya. 
In ASTAPRAKARANA. 


See also FILLIOZAT 1991b. 


TATTVAPRAKASA of Bhojaraja with commentaries (-vRTTI) of Aghorasivdcarya and 
(-TATPARYADIPIKA) of Kumaradeva. In ASTAPRAKARANA. 


TATTVAVAISARADI. See YOGASUTRA. 


TATTVASANGRAHA of Santaraksita with the commentary (panjika) of Kamalasila, ed. 
Embar Krishnamacharya. Gaekwad’s Oriental Series No. 31. Baroda, 1926 
(reprint 1984-8). 


TATTVASANGRAHA of Sadyojyotis with commentary (-TIKA) of Aghorasivacarya. In 
ASTAPRAKARANA. 


See also FILLIOZAT 1988. 
TANTRAVARTTIKA of Kumarilabhatta. See JAIMINISUTRA. 
TANTRASARA of Abhinavagupta, ed. Mukunda Ram Shastri. KSTS 17. Srinagar, 1918. 


TANTRALOKA of Abhinavagupta with commentary (-VIVEKA) of Rajinaka Jayaratha, 
ed. Madhusiidan Kaul Sastri. KSTS 23, 28, 30, 35, 29, 41, 47, 59, 52, 57 and 
58. Bombay and Srinagar, 1918-38. 


TIRUMANTIRAM of Tirumiiar: see NATARAJAN 1991. 


TAITTIRIYARANYAKA with the commentary (BHASYA) of Bhattabhaskaramisra, ed. A. 
Mahadeva Sastri and K. Rangacarya with an introduction by T. N. Dharmadhi- 
kari. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1985 (reprint of Mysore Government Oriental 
Library Series Nos. 26, 27, and 29, published 1900~2). 


TAITTIRYIYOPANISAT. See LIMAYE and VADEKAR 1958. 


DEVIKALOTTARAGAMA with the commentary of Niranjanasiddha, ed. and trans. (into 
Hindi) by Vrajavallabha Dwivedi. Research Publication Series 21. Varanasi: 
Shaiva Bharati Shodha Pratishthanam, 2000. 


DEVIBHAGAVATAPURANA. Delhi: Nag ‘Publishers, 1986. (Reprint of Venkateévara 
Steam Press edition, but with introduction added by Pushpendra Kumar and 
verse index by NagaSarana Simha.) 


DHATUPATHA. The numeration of N. L. Westergaard’s text has been followed: pp. 61*- 
84* in BOHTLINGK 1887. 


NARESVARAPARIKSA of Sadyojyotis with commentary (-PRAKASA) of Bhatta Réma- 
kantha, ed. Madhusiidan Kaul Sastri. KSTS 45. Srinagar, 1926. 


NADAKARIKA of Bhatta Ramakantha with the commentary of Aghorasivacarya. In 
ASTAPRAKARANA. 


See also FILLIOZAT 1984. 


NIRUKTA of Yaska. Yaska’s Nirukta and Nighantu with Transliteration and Transla- 
tion into Tamil. Part I., ed. Agnihotram Ramanujatatachariar. Tanjore Saras- 
vati Mahal Series No. 145. Thanjavur: The Tanore Maharaja Serfoji’s Sarasvati 
Mahal Library, 1973. 


536 Parakhyatantra 


NETRATANTRA with the commentary (UDDYOTA) of Kgsemardja, ed. Madhusudan Kaul. 
KSTS 46 and 61. Bombay, 1926 and 1939. 


NYAYAKANDALI of Sridhara with three sub-commentaries, ed. J.S. Jetly and Vasant G. 
Parikhu. Gaekwads Oriental Series No. 174. Baroda: Oriental Institute, 1991. 


NYAYACANDRIKA of Anandapimamunindra with the commentary (NYAYAPRAKASIKA) 
of Svariipanandamunindra, ed. N.S. Anantakrishna Sastri and K. Ramamurthi 
Sastri. Madras Government Oriental Series No. CLIV. Madras: Government 
Oriental Manuscripts Library, 1959. 


NYAYADARSANA comprising the NYAYASUTRA with the BHASYA of Vatsydyana, the 
VARTTIKA of Uddyotakara, the TATPARYATIKA of Vacaspatimiéra and the VRTTI 
of Vigvanatha, ed. Taranatha Nyayatarkatirtha and Amarendramohan Tarka- 
tirtha, Calcutta Sanskrit Series No. XVIII. Calcutta: Metropolitan Printing 
House, 1936. 


NYAYABHASYA of Vatsyayana. Gautamiyanyayadarsana with Bhasya of Vatsyayana, 
ed. Anantalal Thakur. Nydyacaturgranthika Vol. 1. Delhi: Indian Council of 
Philosophical Research, 1997. 


See also NYAYADARSANA. 


NYAYABHUSANA of Bh&sarvajna, ed. Svaml Yogindrananda. Saddaréanaprak&éana- 
granthamala 1. Varanasi, 1968. 


NYAYAMANJARI of Jayantabhatta with a TIPPANI (NYAYASAURABHA) of the editor, ed. 
K.S. Varadacharya. 2 Vols. Oriental Research Institute Nos.116 and 139. 
Mysore: Oriental Research Institute, 1969 and 1983. 


NYAYASARA of Bhadsarvajna with the commentary (-VICARA) of Bhatta Raghava, ed. 
Uma Ramana Jha. Jammu: Sri Ranabir Kendriya Sanskrit Vidyapeetha, 1976. 

NYAYASUTRA. See NYAYADARSANA. 

PADARTHADHARMASANGRAHA See PRASASTAPADABHASYA. 


PARAMARTHASARA of Abhinavagupta with the commentary (-VIVRT1) of Yogaraja, ed. 
Jagadisha Chandra Chatterji with the co-operation of the Pandits of the Re 
search Department the Kashmir State. KSTS 7. Srinagar, 1916. 


PARAMOKSANIRASAKARIKA of Sadyojyotis with commentary (-VRTT1) of Bhatta Rama- 
kantha. In ASTAPRAKARANA. 


PARIBHASASANGRAHA. See ABHYANKAR 1967. 


PASUPATASOTRA with the commentary (PANCARTHABHASYA) of Kaundinya, ed. Anan- 
thakrishna Sastri. Trivandrum Sanskrit Series No. CXLIII. Trivandrum: The 
Oriental Manuscript Library of the University of Travancore, 1940. 


PURANAPANCALAKSANA. Purana Pafcalaksana (A collection of Puranic Texts bear- 
ing on the Five characteristic Topics of the Puranas) Compiler Willibald Kir- 
fel, ed. [‘Edited into Devanagari’) Suryakant Shastri. Krishnadas Prachyavidya 
Granthamala 1. Varanasi: Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series Office, 1979. 


PAUSKARAGAMA, JNANAPADA with the commentary (-BHASYA) of Umapatisivacarya, 
ed. Ambalavanavalajnadnasambandhapardéaktisvimi. Chidambaram, 1925. 


Works Consulted 537 


, ed. (without commentary] Pandit K. Ramachandra Sarma. The Adyar Library 
Pamphlet Series No.50 (reprinted from the Adyar Library Bulletin, Vol. 58, 
1994). Madras: Adyar Library and Research Centre, 1995. 

PRATISTHALAKSANASARASAMUCCAYA, ed. Damodarasarman and Babukrsnasarman. 
Kathmandu: Nepala Rajakiya Pustakalaya, 1962, 1966 and 1968 (Vikram 
Samvat 2019, 2023 and 2025). 

PRAMANAVARTTIKA of Dharmakirti with the commentaries (SVOPAJNAVRTTI) of the 

author and (PRAMANAVARTTIKAVRTTI) of Manorathanandin, ed. Ram Chandra 

Pandeya. Delhi: Motilal Banarsi Das, 1989. 

See also GNOLI 1960. 


PRAMANASAMUCCAYA of Dignaga. See HATTORI 1968 


PRAYOGAMANJARI of Ravi, ed. Si. Ke. Raman Nampiyar with Ke. Acyutappotuvat. 
Trivandrum, 1953-4. 


PRASASTAPADABHASYA of Pragastapada with the commentary (NYAYAKANDALI) of Sri- 
dhara, ed. Vindhyeévarl Prasad Dvivedin. Reprint: Sri Garib Dass Oriental 
Series 13. Delhi, 1984. (First published Benares 1895.) 


See also BRONHORST and RAMSEIER 1994. 


BRHATI of Prabhakara. Brhati of Prabhakara Misra [On the Mimamsasitrabhasya of 
Sabarasvamin] with the Rjuvimalapancika of Salikanatha [Tarkapadal, ed. S. K. 
Ramanatha Sastri. Madras University Sanskrit Series, No.3, Part 1. Madras: 
University of Madras, 1934. 

BRHATSAMHITA of Varahamihira with the commentary (VIVRTI1) of Bhattotpala, ed. 
Sudhdkara Dvived{. 2 Parts. Vizianagaram Sanskrit Series No.12, Vol. X. 
Benares: E. J. Lazarus & Co., 1895 and 1897. 

See also BHAT 1981-2. 


BRHADARANYAKOPANISAT. See LIMAYE and VADEKAR 1958. 
BRAHMAPURANA. See SCHREINER and SOHNEN 1987. 
BRAHMABINDUPANISAT. See TUBINI 1952. 


BRAHMAVAIVARTAPURANA, ed. J.L. Shastri (with an introduction and verse index by 
Satkari Mukhopadhyaya). 2 Vols. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1984 and 1985. 


BRAHMASUTRASANKARIVRTTI of Umacigisankarasastrin, ed. Kedarnath Tripathi. Re- 
search Publications Series 15. Varanasi: Shaiva Bharati Shodha Pratishthanam, 
1998. 


BRAHMANDAPURANA, ed. J.L. Shastri. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1973. 


BHAGAVATAPURANA with the commentary of Sridharasvamin, ed. J.L. Shastri. Delhi: 
Motilal Banarsidass, 1983. 


BHOGAKARIKA of Sadyojyotis with commentary (-VRTT1) of Aghorasivacarya. In ASTA- 
PRAKARANA. 


MATANGAPARAMESVARAGAMA, VIDYAPADA, with commentary. -VRTTI of Bhatta 
Ramakantha. ed. N.R. Bhatt. Publications de l’IFI No.56. Pondicherry: IFI, 
1977. 


538 Parakhyatantra 


MATANGAPARAMESVARAGAMA, KRIYAPADA, CARYAPADA and YOGAPADA, with the 
commentary (-VRTT1) of Bhatta Ramakantha up to KRIYAPADA 11:12b, ed. N.R. 
Bhatt. Publications de ’IFI No.65. Pondicherry: IFI, 1982. 


MATSYAPURANA, Anandasramasamskrtagranthavali 54. Poona: Anandasrama Press, 
1907. 


MADHYANTAVIBHAGA of Maitreyandtha with the commentary (-BHASYA) of Vasuba- 
ndhu. Madhyantavibhagabhasya. A Buddhist Philosophical Treatise edited for 
the first time from a Sanskrit Manuscript, ed. Gadjin M. Nagao. Tokyo:Suzuki 
Research Foundation, 1964. 


MANUSMRTI with the MANUBHASYA of Medhitithi, ed. Ganganadtha Jha. Bibliotheca 
Indica No. 256. 2 Vols. Calcutta: Royal Asiatic Society of Bengal, 1932 and 
1939. 


with nine commentaries by Medhatithi, Sarvajnandrayana, Kulltika, 
Réghavananda, Nandana, Ramacandra, Maniréma, Govindaraja, and Bharuci, 
vol. 1, ed. J.H. Dave. Bharatiya Vidya Series Vol. No. 29. Bombay: Bharatiya 
Vidya Bhavan, 1972. 


MAYAMATA, ed. and trans. Bruno Dagens. 2 Parts. Publications de l’IFI No. 40. 
Pondicherry: IFI, 1970 and 1976. 


MAHABHARATA, ed. V. Sukthankar, with the cooperation of S.K. Belvalkar, A.B. 
Gajendragadkar, V. Kane, R.D. Karmarkar, P.L. Vaidya, S. Winternitz, R. 
Zimmerman, and other scholars and illustrated by Shrimant Balasaheb Pant 
Pratinidhi. (Since 1943 ed. S. Belvalkar). 19 Vols. Poona: BORI, 1927-1959. 


MAHABHASYA. of Patanjali. The Vyakarana-Mahébhasya of Patanjali, Vol. 1, ed. F. 
Kielhorn (1st edition, 1880; 2nd edition, 1892). Revised and furnished with ad- 
ditional readings references and select critical notes by K. V. Abhyankar. Poona: 
BORI, 1985 (4th edition). 


MANDUKYAKARIKA of Gaudapada. See BHATTACHARYA 1989. 
MALINIVIJAYAVARTTIKA of Abhinavagupta, ed. Madhustidan Kaul Sastri. KSTS 31. 
Srinagar, 1921. 
See also HANNEDER 1998. 


MALINIVIJAYOTTARATANTRA, ed. Madhusiidan Kaul Sastri. KSTS 37. Srinagar, 1922. 
See also VASUDEVA *2000. 


MARKANDEYAPURANA with Hindi translation of Kanhaiyalalaisarman. (Reprint of 
Vemkatesvara Steam Press edition, but with the addition of a preface by Rajen- 
dra Nath Sharma and a Sloka-index by Nagasaranasimha.) Delhi: Nag Publish- 
ers, 1989. 

MIMAMSASUTRA. See JAIMINISUTRA. 


MRGENDRATANTRA, VIDYAPADA and YOGAPADA, with the commentary (-VRTT1) of 
Bhatta Ndrayanakantha, ed. Madhusfidan Kaul Sastr. KSTS 50. Srinagar, 
1930. 


MRGENDRAGAMA [= MRGENDRATANTRA], KRIYAPADA and incomplete CARYAPADA 
with the commentary (-VRTT!1) of Bhatta Nardéyanakantha, ed. N.R. Bhatt. 
Publications de l IFI No. 23. Pondicherry: IFI, 1962. 


Works Consulted 539 


MRGENDRAVRTTIDIPIKA of Aghorasivacarya. ed. Na. Krsnagastrin and K.M. 
SubrahmanyaSastrin. Sivagamasiddhantaparipalanasangha Publication No. 12. 
Devakottai: Sivagamasiddhantaparipdlanasangha, 1928. 

MEYKANTACATTIRANKAL. meykantacattiram milamum urai-y-um, ed. Kanci Naka- 
linkamudaliyar. Cennai (=Madras), 1897. 


MOKSAKARIKA of Sadyojyotis with commentary (-VRTTI) of Bhatta Raémakantha. In 
ASTAPRAKARANA. 


YAJNAVALKYASMRTI of Yogiévara Yajiavalkya with the commentary (MITAKSARA) of 
Vijnanesvara, ed. Narayan Ram Acharya. 5th edition. Bombay, 1949. 


YUKTIDIPIKA. Yuktidipika. The Most Significant Commentary on the Samkhyakarika, 
ed. Albrecht Wezler and Shujun Motegi. Alt- und Neu-Indische Studien 44. 
Hamburg: Institut fiir Kultur und Geschichte Indiens und Tibets, 1998. 


YOGASOTRA of Patafjali with the YOGABHASYA of Vyasa, the TATTVAVAISARADI of 
Vacaspatimisra, the PATANJALARAHASYA of Raghavanandasarasvatl, the YOGA- 
VARTTIKA of Vijnanabhiksu, and the BHASVATI of Harihardnand&ranya, ed. 
GosvimI Damodara Sastri. Kashi Sanskrit Series 110. Varanasi: Chaukhambha 
Sanskrit Sansthan, 1998 (3rd edition). 

RATNATRAYAPARIKSA of Srikantha with commentary (-ULLEKHINI) of Aghorasivacarya, 
In ASTAPRAKARANA. 

RAURAVAGAMA, ed. N.R. Bhatt, Publications de l’IFI No. 18. 3 Vols. Pondicherry: 
IFI, 1961, 1972 and 1988. 


LINGAPURANA with the commentary (SIVATOSINI) of GaneSanatu, ed. J: L. Shastri. 
Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1985 (reprint of edition of 1981). 


LUPTAGAMASANGRAHBA. See KAVIRAJA 1970 and DVIVEDI 1983. 


VARNASRAMACANDRIKA of Tiruvambaladesika/Ambaladesika. No title page. ed. 
RANGASVAMISASTRIN, A.K. NARAYANASASTRIN and others (information 
gleaned from pp. 38-9 of Tamil introduction and from p.19 of upodghata). 
Dharmapuram: c. 1930 (deduced from information on p.38 of Tamil introduc- 
tion). 

VAMANAPURANA. The Vamana Purana with English translation, ed. Ananda Swarup 
Gupta and trans. Satyamsu Mohan Mukhopadhyaya, Ahibhushan Bhattacharya, 
N.C. Nath, and V.K. Verma. Varanasi: All India Kashiraj Trust, 1968. 

VAYAVIYASAMHITA. See SIVAPURANA. 

VAYUPURANA (no editor accredited). Delhi: Nag Publishers, 1995 (first edition 1983, 
in turn reprinted from VenkateSvara Steam Press edition, but with corrections 
incorporated). 


VIJNANABHAIRAVA. See DVIVEDI 1984. 


VISNUPURANA, critically ed. M.M. Pathak. 2 vols. Baroda: Oriental Institute, M.S. 
University of Baroda, 1997 and 1999. 


See also WILSON 1989. 
VINASIKHATANTRA. See GOUDRIAAN 1985. 


540 Parakhyatantra 


VAISESIKASUTRA of Kanada, with the commentary of Candrananda. ed. Muni Sri 
Jambuvijayaji. Gaekwad Oriental Series 136. Baroda: Oriental Institute, 1961. 
See also ISAACSON *1995. 


SATARATNASANGRAHA of Umapatisivacarya with an anonymous commentary (-UL- 
LEKHINI), ed. Pancanan Sastri. Arthur Avalon’s Tantrik Texts XXII. Calcutta, 
1943. 


, ed., with Tamil translation, A. Sundaregasivacarya. Tanjapurl Sarasvatima- 
halaya Granthamala 257. Tanjore: Saraswati Mahal Library, 1976. 


SABARABHASYA See JAIMINISUTRA and FRAUWALLNER 1968. 


SIVAJNANABODHAVRTTI of [Salivatipuranivasi-]Jianaprakasacarya, ed. M. Muttuk- 
kumaracuvami Civac&riya. Published and given a preface by Nalliir Ta. Kailaca- 
pillai. 1920 (Kaliyuga 5021). 


SIVAJNANABODHASANGRAHABHASYA of Sivagrayogin, ed. B. Balasubramanian, 
V.K.S.N. Raghavan, and G. Mishra. Madras University Philosophical Series 
49. Madras: University of Madras, 1992. 


SIVADRSTI of Somanandanatha with the commentary (-VRTT1) of Utpaladeva, ed. Mad- 
husudan Kaul Shastri. KSTS 54. Poona, 1934. 


SIVAPURANA, ed. Ramatejasastrin Pandeya. Benares: Panditapustakdlaya, 1963 (sam- 
vat 2020). 


SIVAPOJASTAVA of Jianasambhu with an anonymous commentary (VYAKHYA), ed. 
K.M. Subrahmanyaédstri. Sivigamasanghaprakasitagranthasankhya 19. Deva- 
kdttai: Sivagamasangha, 1935. 

SIVAYOGARATNA of [VindgdnadedSasthasalivatipuranivasi-] Jianaprakasa. See 
MICHAEL 1975. 


SIVAYOGASARA of [VinadganadeéasthaSalivatipuranivasi-| JnanaprakasSa. Transcript in 
the IFP of the edition (with the same author’s SIVAYOGARATNA) of Muttuk- 
kumaracuvami Civacariar, printed in Paruttitturai Kalanitiyantiracdlai by 
Nalliir Ta. Kailacappillai, 1929 (Kaliyuga 5030). 


SIVASUTRAVARTTIKA of Bhatta Bhaskaracarya, ed. Jagadisha Chandra Chatterji. 
Delhi: Sharada Publishing House, 1993 [reprint of KSTS 4 and 5 of 1916}. 


SIVASUTRAVIMARSINI of Ksemardja, ed. Jagadisha Chandra Chatterji. Delhi: Sharada 
Publishing House, 1993 [reprint of KSTS edition of 1911, KSTS 1). 


STVAGRABHASYA of Sivagrayogin, ed. Krsnagastrin. Kumbakonam, 1921 (Kaliyuga 
5022). 


SISYALEKHA of Candragomin. See HAHN 1999. 


SAIVAPARIBHASA of Sivagrayogindrajiianasivacarya, ed. H.R. Rangaswamy Iyengar 
and R. Ramasastri. Oriental Research Institute Series No.90. Mysore: Ori- 
ental Research Institute, 1950. 


SAIVASANNYASAPADDHATI of Sivagrayogindrajianasivacarya, ed. Ramasastrin and 
Narayanasastrin. Kumbhakonam, 1932. 


Works Consulted 541 


SAIVASIDDHANTAPARIBHASA of Kavirajasekharasiiryabhattaraka, ed. Krishna Dikhsit. 
Bangalore: Prabha Mudranalaya, 1958. 


SAIVAGAMAPARIBHASAMANJARI of Vedajnana. See DAGENS 1979. 
SRIKANTHIYASAMHITA. In HANNEDER 1998. 


SRUTISUKTIMALA of Haradatta with the commentary (CATURVEDATATPARYASAN- 
GRAHA) of Sivalingabhipala, ed. and trans. (into Tamil) by Vi. Cidambara 
Ramalinga Pillai, Madras, 1925. 


SLOKAVARTTIKA of Kumiarilabhatta with the commentary (NYAYARATNAKARA- 
VYAKHYA) of Parthasarathimigra. ed. and rev. Svami Dvarikadasa Sastri. 
Varanasi: Tara Publications, 1978. 


SAKALAGAMASANGRAHA. Sakalagama Sara Sangraha. A Collection of Essential Quota- 
tions from All Saiva Agamas for Temple Worship. No editor accredited. Madras: 
South Indian Archaka Sangham, 1974. 


SARVAJNANOTTARA [‘vidyapada’ only), ed. with Tamil translation and commentary by 
Po. Muttaiyapillai. Devakdttai, 1923. 


éd. Vi. Brahmanandasvamin (edition only of the ‘yogapada’ and ‘vidyapada’ 
in Devanagari with a Tamil translation). Tanjore, 1933. 


‘Sarvajndnottardgamah vidyapada and yogapada’, ed. K. Ramachandra Sarma 
and revised by R. Thangaswami Sarma, pp. 181-232 in Adyar Library Bulletin 
62, 1998 [appeared 1999). 


SARVADARSANASANGRAHA. Sarva-dargana-samgraha of Sayana-Madhava edited with 
an original commentary in Sanskrit by the late Mahamahopadhyaya Vasudev 
Shastri Abhyankar. Government Oriental Series Class A, No.4. Poona: Bhan- 
darkar Oriental Research Institute, 1951 (2nd edition). 


SANKHYAKARIKA. See YUKTIDIPIKA and SHARMA 1933 (with commentary of Gauda- 
pada) and SRINIVASAN 1967 (TATTVAKAUMUDI). 


SADHANAMALA, ed. Benoytosh Bhattacharya. 2 vols. Gaekwad’s Oriental Series 
Nos. 26 and 41. Baroda: Oriental Institute, 1968 (reprinted from first editions 
of 1925 and 1928). 


SARDHATRISATIKALOTTARAGAMA with commentary (-VRTT1) of Bhatta Ramakantha, 
ed. N.R. Bhatt. Publications de l’IFI No.61. Pondicherry: IFI, 1979. 


See also TORELLA 1975 and s.v. SARDHATRISATIKALOTTARA among manuscript 
sources. 


‘SIDDHANTAPRAKASIKA of Sarvatmasambhu, ed. T.R. Damodaran in Vol. XXXIII 
(1984) of The Journal of the Tanjore Maharaja Serfoji’s Sarasvati Mahal Li- 
brary. 

—. ed. Vrajavallabha Dwivedi. Research Publication Series No.9. Varanasi: 
Shaiva Bharati Shodha Pratishthanam, 1996. 


SIDDHANTASARAVALI of Trilocanasivacirya with the commentary (VYAKHYA) of 
Anantagivacarya, published in five parts in the Bulletin of the Government Ori- 
ental Manuscripts Library Madras Vol.17.1, pp. 29-68 (ed. A.A. Ramanathan 


542 Parakhyatantra 


and T.H. Viswanathan); Vols.17.2, pp. 1-48; 18.1, pp. 1-64 and 19.1, pp. 53- 
84 (ed. R.K. Parthasarathi and T.H. Viswanathan); Vol. 19.2 pp. 1-48. and 
Vol. 20.2, pp. 49-71 (ed. T.H. Viswanathan, P.G. Seetharaman and R. Gane- 
san). Madras, 1965-1968. 

SIDDHANTASUTRAVRTTI of SadaSivacarya, ed. A.A. Ramanathan and T.H. Viswa- 
nathan, in Bulletin of the Government Oriental Manuscripts Library Madras 
Vol. 16.1 (1963), pp. 1-56. Madras, 1963. 

SUPRABHEDAGAMA, printed by Mayilai-Alakappa Mudaliyar (no editor accredited). 
Madras (Cintatiripéttai): Civananapotayantracalai, 1908 (Kaliyuga 5009). 

SEKODDESA. ‘Sekoddegah (Edition of the Sanskrit text]’, ed. Raniero Gnoli, in Dhih 28 
(1999), pp. 143-66. 

SOMASAMBHUPADDHATI, ed. K.M. SubrahmanyaSastrin. Devakdttai: Sivagama- 
siddhantaparipdlanasangha, 1931. 

See also BRUNNER 1963, 1968, 1977 and KARMAKANDAKRAMAVALI. 

SAURAPURANA, ed. Kaginathagastrin Lele. AnandaSrarnasamskrtagranthavali 18. 
Poona: Anandaérama Press, 1889 (Salivahana 1811). 

SKANDAPURANA. See ADRIAENSEN, BAKKER, AND ISAACSON 1998. 

SKANDAPURANASYA AMBIKAKHANDA, ed. Krsnapraséd Bhattaral. Kathmandu, 1988. 

SVACCHANDATANTRA with the commentary (-UDDYOTA) of R&janaka Ksemaraja. ed. 
Madhusiidan Kau! Sastri. KSTS 31, 38, 44, 48, 51, 53, and 56. Bombay 1921-35. 

SVAYAMBHUVASUTRASANGRAHA, ed. VenkatasubrahmanyaéastrI, Mysore, 1937. 

with the VRTTI of Sadyojyotis, see FILIOZAT 1991. 

HATHAYOGAPRADIPIKA of Svatm&rama. The Hathayogapradipiké of Svatmarama 
With the Commentary JYOTSNA of Brahmananda and English Translation, ed. 
Srinivasa Iyangar (revised by A.A. Ramanathan and S. V. Subrahmanya Sastri) 
and trans. Srinivasa lyangar (revised by A.A. Ramanathan and Radha Burnier). 


Adyar Library General Series Volume 4. Madras: Adyar Library and Research 
Centre, 1972. 

HARACARITACINTAMANT of Rajanaka Jayadratha, ed. Pandita Sivadatta and Kasinath 
Pandurang Parab. Kavyamala 61. Bombay, 1897. 

HARAVIJAYA of Rajdnaka Ratnakara with the commentary (-TIKA) of Rajanaka Alaka, 
ed. Pandit Durgaprasada and Kasindth Pandurang Parab. Kavyaméla 22. Bom- 
bay, 1890. 

HARIVAMSA The HarivamSa, being the Khila or Supplement to the Mahabharata, ed. 
Parashuram Laksman Vaidya. 2 Vols. Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental Research 
Institute, 1969 and 1971. 


-HEVAJRATANTRA. See SNELLGROVE 1959. 


Secondary Material 


ABHYANKAR, K.V., ed. 1967. Paribhasaésamgraha (a collection of original works on 
Vydkarana Paribhasas) edited critically with an introduction. Post-graduate 
and Research Department Series No.7. Poona: BORI, 1967. 


Works Consulted 543 


ACHARYA, Diwakar, [forthcoming]. Critical edition of Saurasamhita. 


ADRIAENSEN, R., BAKKER, H.T., and ISAACSON, H. 1994. ‘Towards a Critical Edition 
of the Skandapurana’ in Indo-Iranian Journal Vol. 37, pp. 325-331. 


. ed. 1998. The Skandapurana Volume I Adhyayas 1-25 Critically Edited with 
Prolegomena and English Synopsis. Groningen: Egbert Forsten. 


ANAVARATAVINAYAKAM PILLAI, S., (ed.) 1936. Sri Sivagra-yogin’s Siva-neriprakasam 
with the commentary of Sri Nandi-Sivagra-yogin. Madras University Tamil Se- 
ries No. 7. Madras: University of Madras. 


APTE, Vaman Shivaram. 1957. The Practical Sanskrit-English Dictionary, Revised 
and Enlarged Edition. Poona. 


BAKKER, Hans. 1994 and 1998. See ADRIAENSEN, BAKKER, and ISAACSON 1994 and 
1998. 


BANERJI, R.D. 1931. The Haihayas of Tripuri and Their Monuments. Memoirs of the 
Archaeological Survey of India No. 23. Calcutta: Government of India Central 
Publication Branch. 


BARAZER-BILLORET. See DAGENS and BARAZER-BILLORET 2000. 


BECK, Guy L. 1995. Sonic Theology: Hinduism and Sacred Sound, Delhi: Motilal 
Banarsidas. 


BENDALL, Cecil. 1888. ‘Notes on a collection of MSS. obtained by Dr. Gimlette, of the 
Bengal Medical Service, at Kathmandu, and now deposited in the Cambridge 
University Library, and in the British Museum.’ in The Journal of the Royal 
Asiatic Society Vol. 20, pp. 549-54. 


BHANDARKAR, Ramkrishna Gopal. 1897. ‘Karhad Plates of Krishna III.; Saka-Samvat 
880’ in EI Vol. IV (1896-97), pp. 278-90. 


. 1995 (first published 1913). Vaisnavism, Saivism and Minor Religious Systems. 
Delhi/Madras: Asian Education Services. 


BHASKARAN, T. and K. Visweswari AMMA, 1986. Alphabetical Index of Sanskrit 
Manuscripts in the Oriental Research Institute and Manuscripts Library, Trivan- 
drum. Vol. IV (Sa-Ha). Trivandrum: University of Kerala. 


BHAT, M. Ramakrishna, ed. and trans. 1981-2. Varahamihira’s Brhat Samhita. 2 
Parts. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass. 


BHATT, N.R., 1996. ‘Pasgu and Paga in Sataratna-sangraha’, pp. 70-82 in JANAKI 
1996. 


. 2000. La Religion de Siva d’aprés les sources sanskrites. Palaiseau: Editions 
Agamat. 
BHATTACHARYA, B. ed. 1950. An Alphabetical List of Manuscripts in the Oriental In- 


stitute, Baroda, Vol. II. Gaekwad’s Oriental Series No. CXIV. Baroda: Oriental 
Institute. 


BHATTACHARYA, Kamaleswar, 1961. Les religions brahmaniques dans l’ancien Cam- 
bodge d’aprés I’épigraphie et l’iconographie. Publications de l’Ecole frangaise 
d’Extréme-Orient Vol. XLIX. Paris: Ecole francaise d’Extréme-Orient. 


044 Parakhyatantra 


BHATTACHARYA, Vidhushekhara, ed. and trans. 1989 (reprint of 1943). The Agama- 
sastra of Gaudapada. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass. 


BOHTLINGK, Otto and Rudolph Rotn, 1855-75. Sanskrit-Worterbuch. 7 Vols. St. 
Petersburg. (Reprint of 1990 by Motilal Banarsidass, Delhi.) 


BOHTLINGK, Otto. 1887. Pdanini’s Grammatik herausgegeben, tibersetzt, erldutert 
und mit verschiedenen Indices versehen. Leipzig: Verlag von H. Haessel. 


BROCKINGTON, J.L. 1992. The Sacred Thread. A Short History of Hinduism. Delhi: 
Oxford University Press. [First published 1981 in Edinburgh.] 


BRONKHORST, Johannes and RAMSEIER, Yves, ed. 1994. Word Index to the PraSasta- 
padabhasya. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass. 


BRUNNER, Héléne, ed. and trans. 1963, 1968, 1977, 1998. Somasambhupaddhati. 4 
vols: Premiére Partie. Le rituel quotidien dans la tradition Sivaite de I’Inde du 
Sud selon Somasambhu; Deuxiéme Partie. Rituel Occasionnels dans la tradition 
Sivaite de I’Inde du Sud selon Somagambhu I : Pavitrarohana, Damanapija et 
PrayaScitta; and Troisiéme Partie. Rituels occasionels dans la tradition Sivaite 
de l’Inde du Sud selon Somagambhu II : diksa, abhiseka, vratoddh4ra, antyesti, 
$raddha; and Rituels dans la tradition sivaite selon Somagambhu. Quatriéme 


partie : rituels optionnels : pratistha. Publications de l’IFI No. 25. Pondicherry: 
IFI. 


. 1965. ‘Analyse du Kiranagama’, in Journal Asiatique Vol. CCLIII, pp. 309-28. 


. 1967. ‘Analyse du Suprabhedagama’ in Journal Asiatique Vol. CCLV, pp. 31- 
60. 


. 1981. ‘Un chapitre du Sarvadarganasamgraha: le Saivadargana’ in Tantric and 
Taoist Studies in honour of R. A. Stein. Vol. 1 ed. Michel Strickmann. Mélanges 
Chinois et Bouddhiques Vol. XX, pp. 96-140. Brussels. 


. trans. 1985. Mrgendragama Section des rites et section du comportement avec 
la vrtti de Bhattanarayanakantha. Publications de l’IFI No.69. Pondicherry: 
IFI. 


. 1986. ‘Les membres de Siva’ in Asiatische Studien/Etudes Asiatiques XL.2, 
pp. 89-132. 


. 1992a. ‘The Four Padas of Saivagamas’ in The Journal of Oriental Research, 
Madras. Dr.S.S. Janaki Felicitation Volume Vols. 56-72. 1986-92, pp. 260-78. 
Madras: Kuppuswami Sastri Research Institute. 


. 1992b. ‘Jnana and Kriya: Relation between Theory and Practice in the 
Saivagamas’ in Teun Goudriaan (ed.) Ritual and Speculation in Early Tantrism: 
Studies in Honor of André Padoux, pp. 1-59. State University of New York Press. 


. 1994. ‘The Place of Yoga in the Saivagamas’, in P.S. Filliozat, S.P. Narang, 
C.P. Bhatta (eds.) Pandit N.R. Bhatt Felicitation Volume, pp. 425-61. Delhi: 
Motilal Banarsidass. 


BRUNNER, H., OBERHAMMER, G., and PADOoux, A. 2000. Tantrikabhidhanakoéga I. 
Dictionnaire des termes techniques de la littérature hindoue tantrique...sous 


Works Consulted 545 


la direction de H. Brunner, G. Oberhammer et A. Padoux. Osterreichis- 
che Akademie der Wissenschaften, Philosophisch-historische Klasse, Sitzungs- 
berichte, 681. Band. Beitraége zur Kultur- und Geistesgeschichte Asiens Nr. 35. 
Vienna: Verlag der Gsterreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften. 


BupprRuss, Georg, 1980. ‘Zum Lapis Lazuli in Indien. Finige philologische Anmerkun- 
gen’ in Studien zur, Indologie und Iranistik, Heft 5/6, pp. 3-26. 


BUHNEMANN, Gudrun. 1989. ‘The Heavenly Bodies (Navagraha) in Hindu Ritual’ in 
Sambhasa Vol. 11, pp. 1-11. 


C@pDES, G. 1937. Inscriptions du Cambodge. Volume I. Collection de textes et docu- 
ments sur |’Indochine III. Hanoi: Ecole francaise d’Extréme-Orient. 


CoLas, Gérard. 1988. ‘Le yoga de |’officiant vaikhanasa’ in Journal Asiatique Tome 
CCLXXVI, pp. 245-83. 


COLAS-CHAUHAN, Usha. 2002. ‘Umapati on Pramanya. An annotated translation’ in 
Journal of Indian Philosophy 30, pp. 305-38. 


DAGENS, Bruno, ed. and trans. 1979. Le florilége de la doctrine Sivaite—Saivagama- 
paribhasamanjari de Vedajnana. Publications de  IFI No. 60. Pondicherry: IFI. 


DAGENS, B., and BARAZER-BILLORET, M.-L., trans. 2000. Le Rauravagama: un traité 
de rituel et de doctrine Sivaites. 2 Vols. Publications du département d’indologie 
No. 89.1 and 89.2. Pondicherry: Institut frangais de Pondichéry. 


DASGUPTA, Surendranath. 1955. A History of Indian Philosophy. Volume V: Southern 
Schools of Saivism. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 


DAvis, Richard, 1991. Ritual in an Oscillating Universe: Worshiping Siva in Medieval 
South India, Princeton: Princeton University Press. 


DEVASENAPATHI, V.A. 1966. Saiva Siddhanta as expounded in the Sivajnana- 
siddhiyar and its six commentaries. Madras University Philosophical Series 
No. 7. Madras: University of Madras. 


DHAVAMONY, Mariasusai, 1971. Love of God according to the Saiva Siddhanta: A 
Study in the Mysticism and Theology of Saivism. Oxford, Oxford University 
Press. 


DUNUWILA, Rohan A. 1985. Saiva Siddhanta Theology. A context of Hindu-Christian 
Dialogue. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass. 


DVIVEDI, Vrajavallabha. 1983. Luptagamasamgraha Part II Yogatantragranthamala 
Vol. 10. Varanasi: Sampurnanand Sanskrit Vishvavidyalaya. 


. 1984.  Vijnanabhairavah anvayartha-rahasyarthavyakhyaé (samskrta-hindi) 
samvalitah. Varanasi: Motilal Banarsidass. (Reprinted from an edition of 1978.) 


. 2000. Tantragamiya dharma-dargan. Vol. 1. Research Publications Series No. 
24. Varanasi: Shaiva Bharati Shodha Pratishthanam. 


FILLIOZAT, Pierre-Sylvain, 1975. ‘Le droit d’entrer dans les temples de Siva au XI¢ 
siécle’ (Edition and translation of JatinirnayaptirvakalayapraveSavidhi] in Jour- 
nal Asiatique Vol. CCLXIII, pp. 103-117. 


546 Parakhyatantra 


— . ed. and trans. 1984. ‘Les Nadakarika de Ramakantha’ in Bulletin de !'Ecole 
Francaise d’Extréme-Orient 73, pp. 223-225. 


. ed. and trans. 1988. ‘Le Tattvasamgraha “Compendium des Essences” de 
Sadyojyoti’ in Bulletin de I’Ecole Francaise d’Extréme-Orient 77, pp. 101-163. 
(I do not follow Filliozat’s verse numeration). 


—. ed. and trans. 199la. Le Tantra de Svayambhi, vidyapada, avec le commen- 
taire de Sadyojyotih. Geneva: Librairie Droz S.A. 


See also FILLIOZAT 1994 below. 


. 1991b. ‘Le Tattvatrayanirnaya <La Détermination des Trois Essences>> 
de Sadyojyoti avec le Commentaire d’AghoraSivacarya’ in Bulletin de l'Ecole 
Francaise d’Extréme-Orient 78, pp. 133-58. 


——.. ed. and trans. 1994. The Tantra of Svayambhi vidyApada With the commen- 
tary of Sadyojyoti. Kalamiulasgastra Series 13. Delhi: Indira Gandhi National 
Centre for the Arts and Motilal Banarsidass. [Where page and line references 
are given, they are to the 1991 edition.] 


. 2001. ‘The Philosophy of Sadyojyoti’ in V. Kameswari, K.S. Balasubra- 
maniam, and T.V. Vasudeva (eds.) Saiva Rituals and Philosophy, pp. 19-58. 
Madras: Kuppuswami Sastri Research Institute. 


FINOT, Louis. 1925 (appeared 1926). ‘Inscriptions d’Ankor’ in BEFEO 25 (1925), 
pp. 289-407. 


FLOOD, Gavin. 1996. An introduction to Hinduism. Cambridge: Cambridge Univer- 
sity Press. 


FRANCO, Eli, ed. and trans. 1994 (2nd edition). Perception, Knowledge and Disbelief. 
A Study of Jayara$i’s Scepticism. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass. (1st edition: Alt- 
und Neu-Indische Studien Nr. 35. Stuttgart: Franz Steiner Verlag, 1987.) 


FRAUWALLNER, Erich, ed. and trans. 1968. Materialien zur 4altesten Erkennt- 
nislehre der Karmamimamsa. Osterreichische Akademie der Wissenschaften, 
Philosophisch-historische Klasse, Sitzungsberichte, 259. Band, 2. Abhandlung. 
Veroffentlichungen der Kommission fiir Sprachen un Kulturen Stid- und Os- 
tasiens Heft 6. Wien: Kommissionsverlag der Gsterreichischen Akademie der 
Wissenschaften. 


GANESAN, T. 2000. ‘Sadasat: A unique feature of the Pasu’ in Facets of Saiva 
Siddhanta, ed. P. Krishnan, pp. 178-83. Madras: University of Madras. 


. 2004*. Unpublished talk entitled ‘Approaching the Agama’ given in the ‘Na- 
tional Seminar on Agamas’ held from 20th to 22nd August 2004 at the Rashtriya 
Sanskrit Vidyapeetha, Tirupati. 


GENGNAGEL, Jorg. 1996. Maya, Purusa und Siva. Die dualistiche Tradition des 
Sivaismus nach AghoraSivacaryas TattvaprakaSavrtti. Beitrage zur Kenntnis 
siidasiatischer Sprachen und Literaturen 3. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz. 


GHOSHAL, R.K. 1952. ‘Two Eastern Ganga Copper-Plate Grants from Sudava’ in El 
Vol. XXVI (1941-42), pp. 62-8. 


Works Consulted 547 


GNOLI, Raniero. 1960. The Pramanavarttika of Dharmakirti. The First Chapter with 
the Autocommentary. Text and Critical Notes. Serie Orientale Roma XXIII. 
Rome: Istituto Italiano per il Medio ed Estremo Oriente. 


GONDA, Jan. 1977. Medieval Religious Literature in Sanskrit. History of Indian 
Literature Vol. II, 1. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz. 


. 1995 (reprinted from edition of 1970). Visnuism and Sivaism: A Comparison. 
Delhi: Munshiram Manoharlal. 


GOODALL, Dominic. 1996. Hindu Scriptures. London: Phoenix and California Uni- 
versity Press. 


———.. ed. and trans. 1998. Bhatta Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra. 
Volume I: chapters 1-6. Critical edition and annotated translation. Publications 
du département d’indologie 86.1. Pondicherry: Institut francais de Pondichéry/ 
Ecole francaise d’Extréme-Orient. 


. 2000. ‘Problems of Name and Lineage: relationships between South Indian 
authors of the Saiva Siddhanta’ [a review article of BRUNNER 1998] in Journal 
of the Royal Asiatic Society, Series 3, Vol. 10, Part 2, pp. 205-16. 


. 200la. ‘The Saiddhantika Parakhyatantra, its account of language, and the 
interpolation of the eighth chapter of the published Pauskarégama’ in Le Pa- 
role e i marmi. Studi in onore di Raniero Gnoli nel suo 50° compleanno, ed. 
Raffaele TORELLA, with the collaboration of Claudio CicuzZA, Marino FALIERO, 
Bruno Lo TURCO, Francesca SFERRA and Vincenzo VERGIANI, pp. 327-50. Serie 
Orientale Roma XCII. Rome: Istituto Italiano per |’Africa e ]’Oriente. 


. 2001b. ‘Bhute ‘aha’ iti pramadat: Firm Evidence for the Direction of 
Change Where Certain Verses of the Raghuvam/Sa are Variously Transmitted’ in 
Zeitschrift der deutschen morgenlandischen Gesellschaft 151 (2001), pp. 103-24. 


. forthcoming A. ‘The Saiva Siddhanta and the Vivartavada of the 
Aupanisadas’. (Paper delivered at the National Seminar on Saptavidha- 
anupapatti organised by the Radhakrishnan Institute for Advanced Study in 
Philosophy of the University of Madras, August 1998.) 


. forthcoming B. ‘Initiation et délivrance selon le Saiva Siddhanta (et d’une 
poignée d’auteurs qu’on nomme Umapatisiva)’. (Paper delivered in the series 
‘Rites et transformations’ at the Maison de Sciences de |’Homme, Paris, 7th 
December 2000). 


GOPAL IYER, T.V. ed. 1984. Tévaram. Hymnes givartes du pays tamoul. édition 
établie par T. V. Gopal Iyer sous Ia direction de Francois Gros. volume I Nana- 
campantar. Publications de l’IFI No.68.1. Pondicherry: IFI, 1984. 

GOUDRIAAN, Teun and GuPTA, Sanjukta. 1981. Hindu Tantric and Sakta Literature. 
History of Indian Literature Vol. II, 2. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz. 

GOUDRIAAN, Teun, ed. and trans. 1985. The Vinasikhatantra A Saiva Tantra of the 
Left Current. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass. 

SSOUDRIAAN, T. and SCHOTERMAN, J.A., ed. 1988. The Kubjikamatatantra. Kula- 


likamndaya version. Critical Edition. Orientalia Rheno-traiectina 30. Leiden: 
Brill. 


948 Parakhyatantra 


GOUDRIAAN, T. and SCHOTERMAN, J.A., ed. and trans. 1994. The Kubjika Upanisad. 
Groningen Oriental Series 10. Groningen: Egbert Forsten. 


GRONBOLD, Ginter. 1983. ‘Materialien zur Geschichte des Sadanga-Yoga. I. Der 
Sadanga- Yoga im Hinduismus’ in Indo-Iranian Journal 25, pp. 181-90. 


Gros, Francois. 1982. See KARAVELANE 1982. 
. 1984. See GOPAL IYER 1984. 


HAHN, Michael. 1999. Invitation to Enlightenment: Letter to the Great King Kaniska 
by Matrceta, Letter to a Disciple by Candragomin. Translated with an Intro- 
duction and Notes. Berkeley. 


HANDIQUI, Krishna Kanta. 1942. Yasastilaka and Indian Culture Or Somadeva’s 
YaSastilaka and Aspects of Jainism and Indian Thought and Culture in the 
Tenth Century. Jivaraja Jaina Granthamala No. 2. Sholapur: Jaina Samskrti 
Samrakshaka Sangha. 


HANNEDER, Jiirgen. 1998 [appeared 1999]. Abhinavagupta’s Philosophy of Revelation. 
An edition and annotated translation of Malinislokavarttika I, 1-399. Groningen 
Oriental Series Volume XIV. Groningen: Egbert Forsten. 


HARA, Minoru. 1982. ‘Quotations found in the Ratnatika of Bhasarvajna’, in Indo- 
logical and Buddhist studies. Volume in honour of Professor J. W. de Jong on 
his Sixtieth Birthday. Ed. L. A. Hercus, F.B.J. Kuiper, T. Rajapatirana, E.R. 
Skrzypczak. Canberra, pp. 187-209. (Reprinted Delhi: Sri Satguru Publication, 
1984.) 


. 1992. ‘PaSupata Studies (1)’ in Teun Goudriaan (ed.) Ritual and Speculation 
in Early Tantrism: Studies in Honor of André Padoux, pp. 209-26. New York: 
State University of New York Press. 


HATTOR!I, Masaaki. 1968. Dignaga, On Perception, being the the Pratyaksapariccheda 
of Dignaga’s Pramanasamuccaya from the Sanskrit fragments and the Tibetan 
versions. Harvard Oriental Series 47. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard Uni- 
versity Press. 


HAYASHI, Takao. 1995. The Bakhshalr Manuscript. An ancient Indian mathematical 
treatise. Groningen Oriental Studies XI. Groningen: Egbert Forsten. 


HAZRA, R.C., 1940. Studies in the Puranic Records on Hindu Rites and Customs. 
Dacca: University of Dacca. 


HOISINGTON, H.R. See MUDALIAR 1979. 


HOuBEN, Jan E.M., 1995. The Sambandha-samuddega (chapter on relation) and 
Bhartrhari’s Philosophy of Language. Gonda Indological Studies II. Groningen: 
Egbert Forsten. 


HOuUSMAN, A.E., 1989. The Name and Nature of Poetry and Other Selected Prose, ed. 
John CARTER. New York: New Amsterdam Books (reprinted from Cambridge 
University Press edition of 1961). 


HuLIN, Michel, trans. 1980. Mrgendragama: sections de la doctrine et du yoga, avec 
la vrtti de Bhattanarayanakantha et la dipika d’AghoraSivacarya. Traduction, 
introduction et notes. Publications de l’IFI No.63. Pondicherry: IFT. 


Works Consulted 549 


HULTzsCH, E. ed. and trans. 1890. South Indian Inscriptions, Tamil and Sanskrit, 
From Stone and Copper-plate Edicts at Mamallapuram, Kanchipuram, in the 
North Arcot District, and other parts of the Madras Presidency, chiefly collected 
in 1886-87. Vol. 1. Madras: Archaeological Survey of India. 


INDEN, Ronald. 2000. ‘Imperial Puranas. Kashmir as Vaisnava Center of the World’ 
in Ronald Inden, Jonathan Walters, and Daud Ali (eds.) Querying the Medieval. 
Texts and the History of Practices in South Asia, pp. 29-98. New York: Oxford 
University Press. 


IRACAMANIKKANAR, 1958. Caiva Camaya VaJarcci. Cennai (=Madras): Auvai 
Niilakam. 


ISAACSON, Harunaga. 1994. See ADRIAENSEN, BAKKER, and ISAACSON. 


. *1995. Materials for the study of the VaiSesika system. (Unpublished doctoral 
thesis submitted to the University of Leiden.) 


. 1998. See ADRIAENSEN, BAKKER and ISAACSON. 


ISHIMATSU, Ginni, 2000. ‘Aghorasivacarya: Author of the Pararthanityapijavidhi?’ in 
The Journal of Oriental Research, Madras Vols. LX VIII-LXX (Dr. S.S. Janaki 
Commemoration Volume), pp. 231-246. 


JAMISON, Stephanie W. 1986. ‘Brahmana syllable counting, Vedic tvdc ‘skin’, and 
the Sanskrit expression for the Canonical Creature’ in Indo-Iranian Journal 29, 
pp. 161-81. 


JANAKI, S.S., éd. 1996. Sri Umapati Sivacarya, His Life, Works and Contribution to 
Saivism. Chennai (=Madras): Kuppuswami Sastri Research Institute. 


KAHRS, Eivind, 1998. Indian Semantic Analysis. The ‘nirvacana’ tradition. Univer- 
sity of Cambridge Oriental Publications 55. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press. 


KANGLE, R.P. 1960, 1963, 1965. The Kautiliya Arthasastra. 3 vols.: Part I. A crit- 
ical edition with a glossary; Part IJ. An English translation with critical and 
explanatory notes; Part III. A Study. University of Bombay Studies—Sanskrit, 
Prakrit and Pali Nos. 1-3. Bombay: University of Bombay. 


KARAVELANE. 1982. Chants dévotionnels tamouls de Karaikkalammaiyar. Edition et 
traduction par Karavelane. Introduction par Jean Filliozat. Nouvelle édition. 
Postface et index-glossaire par Francois Gros. Publications de VIFI No.1. 
Pondicherry: IFI, 1982. 


KAVIRAJA, Gopinath. 1970. Luptagamasamgraha Part I Yogatantragranthamala 
Vol. 2. Varanasi: Varanaseya Sanskrit Vishvavidyalaya. 


KELLNER, Birgit, 1997. Nichts bleibt nichts. Die Buddhistische Zurtickweisung 
von Kumarilas Abhavapramana. Ubersetzung und Interpretation von Santa- 
raksitas Tattvasangraha vv. 1647-90 mit Kamalasilas Tattvasangrahapanjika 
sowie Ansatze und Arbeitshypothesen zur Geschichte negativer Erkenntnis in der 
indischen Philosophie. Wiener Studien zur Tibetologie und Buddhismuskunde 
39. Vienna: Arbeitskreis fiir tibetische und buddhistische Studien, Universitat 
Wien. 


550 Parakhyatantra 


KIELHORN, F. 1892. ‘Bilhari Stone Inscription of the Rulers of Chedi’ and ‘A Stone 
Inscription from Ranod (Narod)’ in EI Vol. I (1892), pp. 251-70, and 351-61. 


. 1897. ‘Rajor Inscription of Mathanadeva; [Vikrama-]samvat 1016’ and 
‘Kharepatan Plates of Rattaraja; Saka-Samvat 930’ in EI Vol. III (1894-95), 
pp. 263-7 and 292-302. 


KIRFEL, Willibald, 1920. Die Kosmographie der alten Inder. Nach Quellen dargestellt. 
Bonn-Leipzig: Schroeder. 


. See PURANAPANCALAKSANA. 


KLOSTERMAIER, Klaus K. 1989. A Survey of Hinduism. New York: State University 
of New York Press. 


KUNJUNNI RAJA, K., VEEZHINATHAN, N., and SUNDARAM C.S., ed. 1983. New Cata- 
logus Catalogorum. An Alphabetical Register of Sanskrit and Allied Works and 
Authors. Volume 11. Madras: University of Madras. 


LAW, Mary. See SCHOMERUS 2000. 


LIMAYE, V.P. and VADEKAR, R.D., ed. 1958. Eighteen Principal Upanisads Vol. 1. 
Poona: Vaidika SamSodhana Mandala. 


LINDTNER, Christian, 1989. Foreword (pp. vi[a]-vi{d]) to BHATTACHARYA 1989. 


MALLEDEVARU, H.P., ed. 1987. Descriptive Catalogue of Sanskrit Manuscripts Volume 
XV, Agama and Nighantu. Oriental Research Institute Series No. 163. Mysore: 
Oriental Research Institute of Mysore. 


MATSUBARA, Mitsunori. 1994. Pancaratra Samhitas and Early Vaisnava Theology 
With A Translation and Critical Notes from Chapters on the Theology in the 
Ahirbudhnya Samhita. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass. 


MICHAEL, Tara, ed. and trans. 1975. Le joyau du Siva-yoga, Sivayogaratna, de Jiana- 
prakaSa. Publications de IFI No. 53. Pondicherry: IFI. 


MIRASHI, Vasudev Vishnu. 1950. “The Saiva Acaryas of the Mattamayiira Clan’, in 
Indian Historical Quarterly 26, pp. 1-16. 


. 1952. ‘Epoch of the Ganga Era’ in EI Vol. XXVI (1941-42), pp. 326-36. 


—. ed. 1955. Corpus Inscriptionum Indicarum, Vol.IV. Inscriptions of the 
Kalachuri-Chedi Era. 2 Parts. Ootacamund. 


MONIER-WILLIAMS, Monier. 1899. Sanskrit-English Dictionary. Oxford, Clarendon 
Press. 


MUDALIAR, N. Murugesa, trans. 1976. Sankarpa Nirakaranam of Sri Umapati 
Sivacarya. A Comparative Study of the Outer and Inner Schools of Philos- 
ophy with reference to Saiva Siddhanta as the End of Ends. Dharmapuram: 
Dharmapuram Adhinam. 


. 1979. Siva Gnana Pétham of Sri Meykanda Deva (13th Century). The Saiva 
Siddhanta Sutras & Commentary Translated into English by H.R. Hoising- 
ton, Edited with Preface, Notes and Text Appendices in Tamil, Sanskrit, Kan- 
nada and French. Dharmapura Adhinam Publication No. 750. Dharmapuram: 
Dharmapura Adhimam. 


Works Consulted 551 


Mysore, 1922. Catalogue of Sanskrit Manuscripts in the Govt. Oriental Library, 
Mysore. [No editor accredited.] Mysore: Government Branch Press. 


NAGASWAMY, R. 1989. Siva Bhakti. Delhi: Navrang. 


NAKAMURA, Hajime. 1983. A History of Early Vedanta Philosophy. Part One. Trans- 
lated into English by Trevor Legget, Sengakul Mayeda, Taitetz Unno and others. 
Religions of Asia Series, Number 1. Delhi, Varanasi, Patna: Motilal Banarsidass. 


NANDIMATH, S.C. 2001. Theology of the Saivagamas. A Survey of the Doctrines of 
Saiva Siddhanta and Veerasaivism. Thiruvananthapuram: International School 
of Dravidian Linguistics. 


NATARAJAN, B., ed. and trans. 1991. Tirumantiram, A Tamil Scriptural Classic. 
Madras: Sri Ramakrishna Math. 


New CATALOGUS CATALOGORUM. See KUNJUNNI RAJA, VEEZHINATHAN, and SuN- 
DARAM 1983. 


OBERHAMMER, G. 2000. See BRUNNER, OBERHAMMER and PADOUX 2000. 


OBERLIES, Thomas. 2003. A Grammar of Epic Sanskrit. Indian Philology and South 
Asian Studies Volume 5. Berlin/New York: De Gruyter. 


PADoux, André. 1987. ‘Contributions 4 l’étude du mantrasastra, III: le japa’, in 
Bulletin de I’Ecole Francaise d’Extréme-Orient, Vol. LX XVI, pp. 117-64. 


. 1992. Vac. The Concept of the Word in Selected Hindu Tantras (trans. 
Jacques Gontier). Sri Garib Dass Oriental Series No. 155. Delhi: Sri Satguru 
Publications (reprinted from State University of New York edition of 1990). 


. 2000. See BRUNNER, OBERHAMMER and PADOUX 2000. 


PARAJULI, Buddhisagara, ed. 1963 (Nepalese year 2020). BrhatsiicIpatram Vol. 4,1. 
Kathmandu: Virapustakalaya. 


PATHAK, V.S. 1960. History of Saiva Cults in Northern India From Inscriptions (700 
A.D. to 1200 A. D.). Varanasi: Ram Naresh Varma. 


Pope, G.U. 1900. The Tiruvacgagam or ‘Sacred Utterances’ of the Tamil Poet, Saint, 
and Sage Manikka-vacagar. The Tamil Text of the fifty-one Poems with English 
Translation, Introductions, and Notes, to which is prefixed a Summary of the Life 
and Legends of the Sage, with Appendices illustrating the Great South Indian 
System of Philosophy and Religion called the Gaiva Siddhantam, with Tamil 
Lexicon and Concordance. Oxford. (Reprinted in 1995 by Asian Educational 
Services, Delhi/Madras.] 


PRENTISS, Karen Pechilis, 1996. ‘A Tamil Lineage for Saiva Siddhanta Philosophy’ in 
History of Religions 35.3 (February 1996), pp. 231-57. 


QVARNSTROM, Olle. 1989. Hindu Philosophy in Buddhist Perspective. The Vedanta- 
tattvavini§caya Chapter of Bhavya’s Madhyamakahrdayakarika. Lund Studies 
in African and Asian Religions Vol. 4. Lund: Plus Ultra. 


RAJAGOPALACHAR, K., ed. 1990. Descriptive Catalogue of Sanskrit Manuscripts Vol- 
ume XVI, Tantra Mantra Sastram Part 1 (a to ba). Oriental Research Institute 
Series No. 175. Mysore: Oriental Research Institute of Mysore. 


502 Parakhyatantra 


RAMSEIER, Yves. See BRONKHORST and RAMSEIER 1994. 


RANGASWAMY, M.A. Dorai. 1990. The Religion and Philosophy of Tévaram With 
special reference to Nampi Arirar (Sundarar). Madras: University of Madras. 
(First edition 1958.] 


RAU, Wilhelm, 1954. ‘Lotusblumen’ in Asiatica. Festschrift Friedrich Weller, pp. 505- 
13. 


ROTH, Rudolph, 1855-75. See BOHTLINGK and ROTH 1855-75. 


SANDERSON, Alexis. 1985a. ‘Purity and Power among the Brahmans of Kashmir’ in 
The Category of the Person, ed. Michael Carrithers, Steven Collins, and Steven 
Lukes, pp. 191-216. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 


. 1985b. Review of N.R. Bhatt’s MatangapadrameSvaragama (Kriyapada, 
Caryapada et Yogapada), avec le commentaire de Bhatta R&émakantha q.v.; 
Idem, Rauravottaragama: Edition critique, introduction et notes. (see above un- 
der MATANGAPARAMESVARA.) in Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African 
Studies 48, pp. 564-68. 


. 1990. ‘Saivism and the Tantric Traditions’ in Friedhelm Hardy (ed.) The 
Worlds Religions: The Religions of Asia, pp.128-72. London: Routledge. 
(Reprinted from The World’s Religions, ed. S. Sutherland, L. Houlden, P. Clarke 
and F. Hardy, London: Routledge, 1988, pp. 660-704.) 


. 1992. ‘The Doctrine of the MA@linivijayottaratantra’ in Teun Goudriaan (ed.) 
Ritual and Speculation in Early Tantrism: Studies in Honor of André Padoux, 
pp. 281-312. State University of New York Press. 


. *1992. ‘The Yogapada of the Matangaparameévara’ (an unpublished critical 
edition). 


. *1994. ‘Purpose and Meaning in Ritual. Lecture 2, 24.1.94: Handout’ (un- 
published lecture handout). 


. *1996a. Bhatta Ramakantha, Matangavrtti ad kriyapada 1.1-3b, Critical 
Edition, Translation and Commentary. (Unpublished draft.) 


. *1996b. Edited transcription of the Sivabhedapatala and Tantrotpatti- 
vyakhyaépatala of the Brhatkaélottara (from NAK MS _ 1-89, NGMPP 
Reel No. B 24/59. (Unpublished draft.) 


. 2002. ‘History through Textual Criticism in the Study of Saivism, the Paiica- 
raétra and the Buddhist Yoginitantras’, pp. 1-47 in Les sources et le temps. 
Sources and Time. A colloquium. Pondicherry 11-13 January 1997, ed. Francois 
Grimal. Publications du département d’indologie 91. Pondicherry: IFP/EFEO, 
2001 [appeared 2002]. 


ScHOMERUS H.W. 2000. Saiva Siddhanta. An Indian School of Mystical Thought, 
Presented as a system and documented from the original Tamil Sources. Trans- 
lated from German by Mary Law. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass. (Original German 
version published in 1912.] 


SCHOTERMAN, J.A. See GOUDRIAAN and SCHOTERMAN 1988. 


Works Consulted 553 


SCHREINER, Peter, and SOHNEN, Renate, 1987. Sanskrit Indices and Text of the 
Brahmapurana. Purana Research Publications, Tiibingen, Vol. 1. Wiesbaden: 
Harrassowitz. 


SHARMA, Har Dutt, ed. and trans. 1933. The Sankhyakarika: ISvarakrsna’s Memorable 
Verses of Samkhya Philosophy with the Commentary of Gaudapadacarya. Poona 
Oriental Series No.9. Poona: The Oriental Book Agency. 


SHASTRI, Haraprasada. 1925. A Descriptive Catalogue of Sanskrit Manuscripts in the 


Government Collection under the care of the Asiatic Society of Bengal, Volume 

III. Smrti Manuscripts. Calcutta: Asiatic Society of Bengal. 

. 1939. A Descriptive Catalogue of the Sanskrit Manuscripts in the Collections 

of the Royal Asiatic Society of Bengal, Volume VIII, Part I. Tantra Manuscripts. 

Revised and edited by Chintaharan Chakravarti. Calcutta: Royal Asiatic Soci- 

ety of Bengal. 

SIRCAR, D.C. 1962. ‘Amudalapadu Plates of Vikramaditya I, Year 5’ in EI Vol. XXXII 
(1957-58), pp. 175-84. 

SIVARAMAN, K. 1973. Saivism in Philosophical Perspective: A Study of the Formative 
Concepts, Problems and Methods of Saiva Siddhanta. Delhi/Patna/Varanasi: 
Motilal Banarsidass. 

SMITH, David, 1996. The Dance of Siva: Religion, art and poetry in South India. 
Cambridge Studies in Religious Traditions 7. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press. 

SNELLGROVE, D.L., 1959. The Hevajra Tantra. A Critical Study. London Oriental 
Series Vol. 6. London: Oxford University Press. 


SOHNEN. See SCHREINER and SOHNEN 1987. 

Soni, Jayandra. 1989. Philosophical Anthropology in Saiva Siddhanta With special 
reference to Sivagrayogin. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass. 

SPEIER, J.S. 1886. Sanskrit Syntax. Leiden. 

SRINIVASAN, Srinivasa Ayya, 1967. Vacaspatimisras TattvakaumudT!. Ein Beitrag zur 


Textkritik bei kontaminierter Uberlieferung. Alt- und Neu-Indische Studien 
Nr. 12. Hamburg: Cram, de Gruyter & Co. 


STEIN, M.A. 1894. Catalogue of the Sanskrit Manuscripts in the Raghunatha Temple 
Library of His Highness the Maharaja of Jammu and Kashmir. Bombay. 

SUNDARAM, C.S. See KUNJUNNI RAJA, VEEZHINATHAN and SUNDARAM 1983. 

SUNESON, Carl, 1991. ‘Remarks on some interrelated terms in the ancient Indian em- 


bryology’, in Wiener Zeitschrift fir die Kunde Stidasiens, Band XXXV, pp. 109— 
21. 


SURYANARAYANA SASTRI, S.S., 1930. The Sivadvaita of Srikantha. Madras: Univer- 
sity of Madras. 
. trans. 1982. The Saivaparibhasa of Sivagrayogin. (Ed. R. Balasubrahmanian 


and V.K.S.N. Raghavan.) Madras University Philosophical Series 35. Madras, 
University of Madras. 


See also SAIVAPARIBHASA. 


504 Parakhyatantra 


Swamy, B.G.L. 1975. ‘The Golaki School of Saivism in the Tamil Country’ in Journal 
of Indian History 53, pp. 167-209. 


TALBOT, Cynthia. 1987. ‘Golaki Matha Inscriptions from Andhra Pradesh: A Study 
of a Saiva Monastic Lineage’ in Vajapeya: Essays on Evolution of Indian Art 
and Culture. Prof. K. D. Bajpai Felicitation Volume, Vol. 1. ed. A. M. Shastri, 
R. K. Sharma, Agam Prasad, pp. 133-46. Delhi: Agam Kala Prakashan. 


THIRUGNANASAMBANDHAN, P., 1973. Sataratnasangraha of Sri Umapati Sivacarya. 
Madras: University of Madras. 


TOKUNAGA, Muneo. 1981. ‘Civananacittiyar, Parappakkam sts. 264-301’ in Indolog- 
ical Review (Indogakuhd) No. 3, pp. 1-18. 


TORELLA, Raffaele, 1975. ‘Sardhatrifati-kalottarégama (edizione critica e intro- 
duzione a cura di Raffaele Torella)’ in Rivista degli studi Orientali Vol. L, fasc. 
III-IV, pp. 279-318. 


. 1979. ‘Due capitoli del Sarvadarsanasamgraha: Saivadaréana e Pratyabhijiié- 
dargana’ in Rivista degli studi Orientali Vol. LIT, fasc. I-IV, pp. 361-410. 


. 1998. ‘The kajicukas in the Saiva and Vaisnava tantric tradition: a few consid- 
erations between theology and grammar’ in Studies in Hinduism II: Miscellanea 
to the Phenomenon of Tantras, ed. Gerhard Oberhammer. Vienna: Verlag der 
osterreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften. pp. 55—86. 


—. ed. and trans. 2002. The Isvarapratyabhijnakariké of Utpaladeva with the Au- 
thor’s Vrtti. Critical edition and annotated translation. Delhi: Motilal Banar- 
sidass. (Revised edition of Serie Orientale Roma LXXI. Rome: Istituto Italiano 
per il Medio ed Estremo Oriente, 1994.) 


TORZSOK, Judit, *1999. ‘The Doctrine of Magic Female Spirits.’ A critical edition 
of selected chapters of the Siddhayoge$varimata(tantra) with annotated trans- 
lation and analysis. (Unpublished doctoral thesis submitted to the University 
of Oxford.) 


TRIPATHI, Sivasdgara, 1988. Itihasa-puradna-nirvacanakosah. Jaipur: Devanagara 
Prakaganam. 


TUBINI, B. trans. 1952. Brahmabindipanisad. Publiée et traduite par B. Tubini. Li- 
brairie d’Amérique et d’Orient. Les Upanishad XII. Paris: Adrien-Maisonneuve. 


UNNI, N.P. 1987. See ISANASIVAGURUDEVAPADDHATI. 
VADEKAR, R.D. see under LIMAYE, V. P. 


VAN TROY, Joseph. 1974. ‘The Social Structure of the Saiva-siddhantika Ascetics 
(700-1300 A.D.)’ in Indica 11, pp. 77-86. 


VASUDEVA, Somdev, *2000. The Yoga of the Malinivijayottara (unpublished doctoral 
thesis of the University of Oxford). 


VEEZHINATHAN, N. See KUNJUNNI RAJA, VEEZHINATHAN and SUNDARAM 1983. 


VIVANTI, Maria Pia, ed. and trans. 1975. II] “Kiranagama”, Testo e traduzione del 
< Vidyapada>>. Supplemento n.3 agli ANNALI: vol.35 (1975), fasc.2. Napoli: 
Istituto Orientale di Napoli. 


Works Consulted 555 


WATSON, Alex. *2002. Bhatta Ramakantha’s Arguments against the Buddhist Doc- 


trine of No-Self (anatmavada) (unpublished doctoral thesis of the University of 
Oxford). 


WEZLER, Albrecht. 1982. ‘Remarks on the definition of ‘yoga’ in the Vaisesikasutra’, 
in Indological and Buddhist studies. Volume in honour of Professor J. W. de 
Jong on his Sixtieth Birthday. Ed. L.A. Hercus, F.B.J. Kuiper, T. Rajapati- 


rana, E.R. Skrzypczak. Canberra, pp. 643-86. (Reprinted Delhi: Sri Satguru 
Publication, 1984.) 


. 1983. ‘A note on concept adrsta as used in the Vaisesikasitra’, in Aruna- 
Bharati. Prof. A. N. Jani Felicitation Volume, ed. B. Datta et al. Baroda, pp. 35— 
58. 


WILSON, H.H., trans. 1989 [reprinted from an edition of 1980, in turn reprinted from 
an edition of uncertain date]. The Visnu Puranal,] a System of Hindu Mythology 
and Tradition[:] text in Devanagari[,] English translation[,] Notes and Appen- 
dices, etc. Translated from the original Sanskrit and illustrated by notes derived 
chiefly from other Puranas. Said to be ‘enlarged and arranged’ by Nag Sharan 
SINGH: presumably this refers primarily to his having added a version of the 
Sanskrit text. Delhi: Nag Publishers. 


INDEX OF PADAS IN THE TANTRA 


Some variant padas, mostly those whose beginnings differ from those of the ac- 
cepted versions, have also been included and marked ‘(vl)’ (varia lectio). Entries 


marked ‘App.’ are to be found in Appendix I. 


a arere afar e3r App. H:97a 
AYA TET FF 2:54a(vl) MACSARAT 2:92c 
saTeaaPrar: BT App. B:15a AFA TZ AFT App. A:4d 
THTHT HICH 1:88c AAIayT: qt App. A:la 
AHA HIT WAT 1:748 WENT MAE 4:488 
AHA AA ACA 5:75a AFIT AHA App. F:90c 
ea eee agenarpy aut App. F:89a 
WHASate WT 2:101c _ 214d 
tT et EIET App. D:G8e afagar ¥ ATRaty 4:29a 
ISG. a De 00e TAIT AAEM FATT 1:86c 
MHTUCT TATA 3:28d 
sadataah We 4:112a(vl) 
sarqedar ar sf 4:77c 
Tar ATWaAHAUT 6:46c WATTAAT AT 1:39 
arenied afew 14:67a AAT TTA 4:75b 
arerery SPT ATRUF 2:25c HITT TTS 1:58d 
MATT WAYTAITAT 4:54a AM AYTITTS: WL 4:89e 
sero witfaacd AT 4:130a FATT area Pree 4:798 
MANY SITHTMY T: 4:119a HITT AIYST PUTT 4:162c 
aan FeaT App. D:59a aaTTArT TaceATe 1:55¢ 
are eet AT 5:6c AAT TATAT: 1:56b 
afiagrarfearaary 3:38b WMAATFATATATA 4:25d 
areas UXAT ATT 3:41a MPA AAA 14:92c 
SAAT: WMTTeay ST 2:92a afrarfarrqea ey 4:83c 


aTart atgd weat App. D:65c 


afrarfarar FT 3:63c 


508 


atforarfaryeraty 14:96a 
arforararr: ATFERTAT: 14:91b 
aforar afear afear 14:91c 
AYA Wet AT 2:54a 
aitfasfany Brg 4:29c 
ata: PRrathy TRI 15:6c 

ar: Wt FT fared App. H:96b 
aT TT FaraTary App. B:20c 
MACAU: BY SUP 4:148c 
aaedgyfed: Are 4:171a 
Taeadt sar WAT 2:37c 
afapesy AaTeard App. D:74c 
afagegad: YI App. D:73d 
afagegtaart X App. D:77c 
atrHARAeaT App. D:75c 
aay sTafHa & SFT 15:16a 
aay ear faar aH App. L:144e 
AAT SATAAMSHAT 4:120c 

atdy S=TT AATATAT App. B:3la 
aay Sfer afeara afeq 2:3a 
May SEAT: FATAFETT 1:20c 
aay SEIT AAA FTA 2:77 
AAC AA AT 14:54c 

AA HAAATATT 5:113b 

aq eere-aT areetfe App. L:143a 
ay PTSTAHTAT 14:88c 
WUIMIMAATAT? 1:4a 

MUTT ATSTETEAT 6:64a 

SU FTatawved: 3:15b 

AE AKAM 2:29b(vl) 

AEE KWAK 1:78c 

age ay aT Ay 1:75d 
AZECANT Ach: 2:38c 

BASET Beh WM: 2:36a 


Parakhyatantra 


arger sft wdlae 2:7b 
afse yasyfee App. B:40a 
AGEN HT TAT 3:20a 

ara: arfeaereny 5:5d 
seATeTaa TAA 4:75a 
aTeATATeTHY YCAT 4:85a 
atfaart qaTetHy App. C:53b 
arfrarcfrastary 5:159b 
arfrareqe feratT: 2:120d 
APTATTIT STA 3:67d 
athrartt Pravetary 4:125d 
ahrarty a wnty FT 2:99a 
arferartr aerfera: App. E:8ld 
arrart sho AsHTTAT 15:39c 
arferart sf& AeaTe 15:36a 
ARTSY FT ATATAT 15:32a 
APTA, ARTETA 2:123c 
STAY SET & WM: 15:91c 
arey athrferay Fe: 14:22b 
STUTAT TACHA 4:55d 
STeATETE TEMAT 1:13b 
AATMETTJUe: 6:68b 
AAA: TRI ACATe 4:150c 
MAMAS 5:155d 
MAA MeITIATT 3:2c 
TAA SAaa acy 2:11la 
aateay ay farreaa: 3:60b 
MAD FERICM 1:76d 
MATa WAsad 6:42d 
WATSITMA SET: 1:50c 
aaATAaT eae: App. B:16a 
aargd? T WITS: App. H:109a. 
after safrete: 4:112d 
AWE: FT THAMT 2:10la 


Index of Padas in the Tantra 


AITUSCAUTAET 15:41¢ 
ATUET Tal SAAT 3:65a 
ayNTaT sitfrareq App. G:94e 
APMP ITAT: 1:60d 

argart fafafager 1:25d 
argart sraferay 15:60d 
ATATAT FFEATT 2:11b 
agave Zelft App. D:70b 
AAPACAAT FMA 4:112a 
ATHPT SIT GAT: 5:154b 
araaehtfear: 5:62b 

WTUA eh HET 4:87a 

WoT HCY Iq App. L:145a 
aed: Hfaraya ZT App. J:112b 
aa :amfawra: App. B:23d 
Was: YE: Prarraey App. G:94a 
WMT AAATTAUTT: 5:18c 
area:er afaacd WT 4:126a 
WaIMIetae AIT 5:33c 
aaateer Frerarey 2:67a 
WURAAATCANT 2:53¢ 
WGA aT Far HTT 4:79c 
ATA CINTAT: 15:59b 
aTaatitah AIT 3:31b 
SUUT RIHTNAY 2:47c(vl) 
areaur fafawrared 2:116a 
WUIUTTTICAT aT 2:15¢ 
TUT TT PAWN 3:47a 
AUIeMyay FET 6:13a 
Wagar frasnry 15:59d 
WUE ATETHA 4:80d 
aTTaTHAUTNT 3:48 a 
WIAA AHTET AT 1:62c 


TIE VB STAT 1:23a 


509 


Tet T Caarhery 5:114F 


aed FT ferHeey 5:117c 
aaa qfrartgery 14:104b 
AMAIATHTT A 2:98c 
aTaerary far T Ey: 4:730 
Taare afaeare 2:79c 
aay fraanry 6:79c 
MUTATE FARHT: 1:83c 
aargeadtst fad App. L:145b 
MU UAAGhAcaTs 4:71 
aay SFT HMA: 6:75c 
WAIGNAChPAT 1:26c 
WIqegatsnray 4:147¢ 
Mae SSATT: 4:133a 
AIA AYA AMT 14:103b 
MITA SUAAAAT 4:115d 
AIA SW Ae: Wr: 14:22a 
arated Tt App. C:48d 
aTeSeAT WS WT 1:83b(vl) 
aaTafafaMry 3:22b 
AMAGAATTATL App. L:133b 
Wd: FAP: 15:68c 
smarTarey FUT FFT 3:40a 
SAITA T ACA 3:39c 
MATTSTAT FRIT 15:47 
wmrg: aferay wad 2:76d 
SMUTATSHATUTMY 15:50b 
mired 7 afcaferd 3:37a 
amar TT FRAT 14:102a 
AATAHRCPAMTT 2:32 

athrar anrerfHad 4:68b 
athrar sto FrRTTAir 15:43c 
HRrenyTsay 5:46d 
areata: farararare 15:64c 
ahroggyr Fataerer 4:163c 


960 


AIT: HeltT App. C:45a 
WATWMeY F YET: App. C:44c 
WATCH FARTAET 2:60a 

arg farerfract 1:59d 
aqdary aérate 4:17c 
WTTEINT STET 3:9a 

arqdt Faq aT WT 6:66a 
MAA T AANA 1:41a 
arqat Arad SaardT 1:38c 
AATATAHNSATAT 5:104c 
WAHT: FACT 5:13c 
MAST STACI 5:22c 
MACY STAT ATEN 5:22c(vl) 
sareareanteaue App. L:136b 
aher afadt Gad App. E:78a 
aaarer: Fofed: 15:26b 
seq HAatE” 1:lla 

art reterarhard: 6:21b 
ariver adl fat 4:34a 
MISIWHM HT 4:126b 
arnreatie Fert 4:138d 
aarenfererar 3:26a 
srUraratespary 14:86b 
sTUTrahT Oren 3:36a 
SUAahCaT WAT 2:9a 

ary faerranyy 3:62a 

We: ACA HTT 1:1c 
AAU AAGaAcae 4:26a 
MITTETaAMNT: 14:89b 

WIT ACT AAT 2:7d 

VaVT AIT AMT 4:112b 
ary aATAAASyT 2:105b 
safer: & Ady 2:109a 
afateaar fart Var 1:32c 


Parakbyatantra 


afaaart ARey 1:66c 
afrararatage: 4:87d 
afqareqaunfedr aT 1:47b 
arfaelr aTaar War 1:45a 
afayee ar mf: 1:37b 
TST FAMITHTEAY 5: 16a 
aay arfahreer: 5:31a 
TOME MACT 4:56b 
agregar Wa WF 1:83b 
MEIATINTTAT 4:91c 

MEUAT CAH 4:83 
AEMTAGTAHAT 14:98b 
acai CAAT ATET 1:93a 
AYSl T VARTA 1:51a 
TAA aay App. D:76d 
arParard SIENA App. D:76a 
araepaer farer App. C:46a 
Maca FAH ATT App. L:139c 
MACTHATSATAH 15:56a 
aaarter afer 15:53d 
sTaTyetate Fern: 6:40d 
afer ar apt: Tar 1:37c 
Tet WT Tat TW 6:33a 
Tansy UU App. H:99a 
afert sit Tafa 1:5b 
aery TAT War: 4:158c 
MAC UIELAT 3:29c 

WET FECT Rat 2:15a 
WAIT WIA 6:27a 
Wada adeq &: App. L:128f 
ae AMT TEATS 4:132a 

BIE AAT WET 4:131a 
AeA ad 4:123d 
AEH AATEATA 4:94a 


Index of Padas in the Tantra 


We FETT SITET 4:131c 
sefacaearterfa: App. L:145f 
MENAAPSTa 4:130c 

Ee MAT CTATEIAT 4:131e 


ater atfor Te FATT App. D:77a 


ie 
STATS fares App. L:137a 
ATATMATLUNT ITA 14:47a 
araTMyedad: Yat App. H:96a 
BATATMEAT ABTITHT: 4:110c 
ITT: TATA 6:30a 
amrace wfafeary 3:6f 
amet Yr 4:70 
BMA Atay 14:103a 
SMTAAT Adar 2:71c 

amar sf feratfecr: 4:16b 
ATV ALI IAT 14:40c 
arava’ Areutfaat 5:79b 
araraaadryt say App. B:9a 
BTaTa: TIME App. G:94f 
sraraen aarter fe 1:14b 
WAT FAVS AT -ATHA App. B:28b 
WTA IPTHUTATT 4:35b 
BIA AT SAATATT 4:86d 
WAT: WE Aa 14:95c 
MAT WA FE CATT 14:100c 
WMA aT TT: Fae: 4:158b 
WcTe AGYTST 1:63a 

BTA HaAlgartay App. L:126d 
waTcaray aed: Fagreg 1:40a 
STAT wre: Ter fry: 14:62d 
WTETAAT TAY YUTAT 5:125a 
arelaed FT TealAT 6:38a 
afeaeet qT: fet 1:82c 


aea-attedl @4: App. E:84c 
BITC: AAAATAT 4:156a 
arert ferreorm 4:71a 
WAacaTA WAT FBT 2:20c 
WMTATAYTAANTT 15:71a 
WAINTASTAY 15:71c 
AAS AAT BUT 14:89a 
ATS AT ATT 15:45 
saWaetg Ufa: 15:71b 
MTTer AT AaaaTT 4:104a 
MIAFAA AAS 4:121a 
BT SFAAAT WEAN 14:37c 
STAT: WAT T ATAT-UT 3:21 
ATA AT IIT WAT 14:36c 
BMT TT ATL BAT 5:43d 
SMTA WaTaTes 5:41la 
AMT WAITS: 5:42c 
BTA: HSYPE: FATT 14:14c 
BMTOTMSHA Ad: 14:9d 
Bes: MTA 5:123c 
Aa IT Tar FPreany 4:78c 
arena farce: WATT App. B:22d 
aad TPETET 14:52c 
aaa YPAAVSAT 14:101b 
areraatea Gre: 14:61d 
ATMS TATA 1:59c 
ATAAeA ACEH 1:60a 
array faster App. E:85a 
APHATATTGTAY 15:28a 
BPTI AAA: 14:86d 
Wey ATT J App. L:147a 
wast Ararat 5:5a 

areta faafac: App. E:86b 
redrarfawaert 6:69¢ 


961 


562 


r 
KGa WAAL 6:26b 
Qld: BANAT 1:88d 
afa arent ffra: App. L:146f 
afa & fafear afe: 2:21d 
afr wa g fava App. H:96b(vl) 
afa aarHc4et AATHTATT: 3:79a 
qeurtee Gf: TUTe App. L:146e 
CGH: TEVA 5:88i(vl) 
Ke seASe Aq 15:60 
weatert Tafeaay 3:72b 
CseararacsPasyT App. H:96d 
fsa FT Aad: 4:8d 
wfesteae facet App. L:144a 
CATT TUT WeTH 5:78 
Kogatar Alet: 5:80a 
Kar avararcr feear 5:71a 
corafanar at 5:74 
KANTSTeaeTely 5:76a 
RATTTET ATT 5:878 
RET aTafaaated: 15:55 
eT ar-ataaetray 15:50c 
HUI aT aT Aer 1:48c 
RII TeTeTH 1:66b 
KE ATA Wee App. K:117a 

t 
weg BWhirad: 14:93d 
kwyAIAaMNTs 1:18c 
EMT T FART 2:84c 
taafHAaTeNAyr 4:1c 
twene fafafear 2:81d 
EMH: 4:121b 
CMAN FAY 2:84c(vl) 
WMATA: 2:84a(vl) 


Parakhyatantra 


CMTACT We AAT App. D:63c 
EMT: BATATaH! 3:74 
Mar syaHMTA: App. B:34b 
tary saferay Fat 2:90a 
tA Ais MAT 4:13c 

eT affects 2:84a 

WaT WMd WAT App. D:62c 
Cat: F ARWT: 14:79d 

CUT: AAafaWMd: 2:3b 

€UT: BT ST Ada: 2:78c 
CITT YAN 14:74a 
Suceaareatnmd 4:22 
freq: Teruf sar 1:7c 
Srafufsarerrara App. L:128e 
CUSATANTEMAT 3:57c 

fac fear Way 2:79a 


= 
THC AAMAS T: 5:79d 
TSU AIGAATT 14:105d 
Toa: FT AST: 5:73a 


Jeatfed Une: Ar Sf 14:105a 
TRAY WETATYTT 14:107a 
saarfexarr FT App. H:104a 
saar ayerftar App. H:103b 
TATACTHTOMT 4:10b 
TINA TIT 2:55b 

TANT OTAT: 14:77b 

TATATA ATU 14:77 

TAUVAT Aaa 15:31f 

Taray Tera AY 14:4d 


Index of Padas in the Tantra 


ICTCTPUR AT? 2:124a 
STA AT AVA 14:88d 
ITA TAIT 4:111d 
TeTACT FAATAMT 5:160c 
gedat fagperf App. B:39b 
serery faradrt App. B:37a 


geqya: fasTtaq App. H:100b 


JOG TA-GAT 5:95d 
TEST TRAY 4:46a(vl) 
TTT UTTACHIS 14:24a 
Jeray Saag: 4:116b 
TETAMATANTT 14:49¢ 
Sheer WAIT FT 3:40b 
TaATAATAART: 5:35d 
IAAT TAFT 2:61d 
Tae: Praryearey 2:87c 
TTaTafraAdT: 2:87b 
TTATCAMCTAT 3:10d 
srartataferry App. A:2b 
TIANA AY STAT 15:39d 
ITTAT FA: 2:37d 
ITTCAGATTAT: 2:9d 
ITA-QEUT F: 5:86b 
STAT TH YA 3:35d 
TTA SFT ATATD 1:70 
ITAAMEAAT SANT 6:76c 
Jef IIdT: AAT 14:68c 
TTIMUAT Tages: 4:34b 


JTEAMNST WATTS: 5:149c 


saryseafaarar App. H:106c 


saert & fa-grr|e 6:6d 
TWAT T AcqUyT 2:29c 
TWATAHAY fa-ZT 6:5c 
safwardy XT 14:66c 


SWaT: Aacit ue 1:46a 
swe a aur rye 2:113d 
sare afagfmery 2:104b 
TWAIAATATT 3:50c 
DTATOPT Yes 6:43c 
DAT THAT 2:728 
TAM ATS TAT 5:82a 
SeHTEM AUT Weg: App. L:126a 
Seargre Ae-dy App. L:126a(v!) 
SOT: AaTTAY SIT: 5:12b 
SUT STTMTTAIUTTAT: 5:18a 

wr 
Heady Ulta: FTA: 14:24b 
aed fart QT 5:159a 
meat geerfada: 5:120a 
Hat Tar SAGaTaIT 14:34a 


: 

mofemifer: Acar 5:134c 

RITA WYPWAAT: 5:129b 

MATT ATCAATFETA 5:79a 
> 


Uh UF MTWY: 14:80d 
Ua Ud ferar Far 1:42a 


wa: arfarerr: 4:116d 
wa: te frar Aq: 6:34b 
Uh &F TaPeA 15:59c 
UhSh WHEHIT: 2:118d 
THest T afeatE: 15:52c 
THe T eT: CATT 1:49a 
THe T AAU 1:48d 
THe Wad ayy 4:152c 
TheMT aT AAT 15:52a 
UHM TENT WF 1:42c 
Tatranyar Year App. D:61c 


964 


Uhesg: A Sst AT 2:119a 
vacatfegar: ae 5:34a 
waters fraser aT 14:20 
Chet FRaraniy 6:75a 
TaeaTeeal SMT: 6:12a 
watert adaurat App. C:5la 
Tater ana AAT 4:151b 
Tae BAIAUATa 1:78a 
Taeany FT Aare: 2:22d 
UHEATOU F:h App. K:116c 
UATATT TATA 1:82d 

waa frhrofae 5:42a 

Uhh TIAA 5:60c 

Tah TUTACT 15:3a 

Chadd Waceh3Tq 15:44a 


Thhalwartd 15:42c 

THY ar aTamee: 14:78a 
Uderte Fed WHT 4:10a 

Uda gyarerary 4:125b 

Uda ATAU 3:46b 
vatayaarfstr: App. B:18d 
Ud grav: FrafAeT 5:62a 

Uda aft FT 4:478 

Ud SQeuq: AA 5:63a 

Ud ANTIATABT 5:52a 

Ut: AYerd aed App. B:23b 
whr: aaah 2:78 

ur: eye: yfyacr App. B:15d 
uhryr: wer Tar 15:68a 

WI SAACARIMAT: 5:127c 
we anifaartar 14:107c 

Ud AGAT Feat 14:32c 

wa faye eaer App. L:122c 
wa fear: AYevar: 3:78a 


Parakhyatantra 


afar: TY: SATAy 1:94e 
Wa wear SFT ATATIA 6:53a 
Ue Th ay: Hea App. L:132a 
Ue AaTday TAT 6:35a 
wa fered fart aay 1:56a 
Ve FAINT 14:6la 
va Reatard afte 6:32a 
Us Hefearysy 4:28a 
Ue HZ: AATSATA: App. D:73c 
wa afergaeqriyr 3:48d 
Ua apa Fe 4:133c 
wa & PraaraTew4r: 3:76c 
Ue AWW FAMTAT 3:20d 
wang faster: App. B:25d 
Warr 14:94c 
waneq Wray 15:63c 
WafTearasrd FAT 1:89a 
watered 14:94c(vl) 
Wadtadar Set 2:81c 
WayM: F Aare 1:2c 
qaqe aE Fatt App. D:72c 
vaqget FETT App. B:22a 
Vata WC Aw 15:72a 
Vad FMT? 5:32c 
Ud JE: FT WATT 1:18 
Ue TENVSA TAT 5:141b 
Ue afm: Ferearer App. C:53e. 
UT FATT: FATT 4:78d 
UWTAHAT Fea 14:8a 
UT ST WifarH: ATA 4:123a 
Ul ST AAGRATAA 6:34a 

t 
UST AT TAT ATEUT 14:58 
wed ar arfcany 4:74d 
wat WId TT 4:87b 


Index of Padas in the Tantra 


A 
aH: Weacwwatsd: 6:61d 
HHBI T AT Wer App. B:32a 
ayevelawaarygy App. E:86c 
ayatade Tat 4:44c 
HTS MIAHPATHAT 5:140d 
afesra fartrad App. B:26d 
HeaaTetagrsy 4:100a 
afSal F_erateayr 4:98a(vl) 
HVSITNAM IMT: 5:39d 
aaayt fafaranry 3:23b 
HAA SY: TERAATH 4:137b 
Haar frfear weer 4:158d 
aaa fafear Wael 6:17b 
aaa Afar 15:3d. 
adayr Sar FT RAAT 2:10b 
aw fareartes at 4:103c 
ay asatged: App. E:82f 
SY TseHTaAd FA: 14:87b 
aw ar fafaar wae 6:17b(vl) 
HY aT afe AY at 6:44c 
aUA-aIHaeag: App. B:18c 
aun fafaeafer 6:15b 
Hua aY Wat App. A:7d 
HUA fer ATH 14:86c 
ay Tentew aq 4:60d 
aur AyAaT Feat App. D:57c 
RAAT HAT WA 15:49d 
aera: Wareay App. D:63a 
Hea fear App. D:56b 
HAMA ed: 2:33b 
ager gxad Haq 1:74b 
Hae AAT: 5:45d 
HUT ACMTMN 4:35a 


965 


HUTSICAN AAT 4:32b 

HUNT SHAT SHIT 14:106c 
aunts + Ararfr 2:31c 
HUTT UNALT 4:34d 
HUTAACAAN 4:30c 
HUTA Ache 1:14a 
act faart A: 2:31b 
HUIATARST: 5:39b 
HUteded SIT ATU 2:80a 
air fare Ud a: 2:80b 
Hla TePTI 4:78a 

HUta ALATA 2:40b 
Htrdte AAT WAT 2:41c 
aaher fanertt: 5:47b 
atreprataraay 4:97b 
aftrararcaedah: 5:66b 
afirareny eet eet 14:59b 
adeg: Heedd: 2:87d 

Hdd ACT Acil 4:29d 

dear Sy¥BqRar App. B:16b 
mat araeq Arad 2:5f 

Hdl T BAT ARITA 3:28a 
Hat FT WAT: 2:30t 

aq: arafaar ferat 2:32d 
Aqacnlaaqed 2:21a 

Hat WHT 4:11b 
HIKTTHAT 2:73a 

aed HY: AST 1:87a 
aged amare 2:34b 
aed Aaa 2:18d 
ajeayd ad: 1:86d 
aqgeaarqar fear 2:26d 
HYSA Ae FAT 4:28c 
agate aaaeT App. L:123a 


066 


ager: BIT TIT App. C:52b 
HIF: HUTA 5:124c 
ay Ua frarrary 4:52b 

ay fagted Tare 1:94a 
HAUT eeaan: 1:79c 

HAUNT AAA 1:92c 

HAT HeYH TY: 1:79d 
aa afe Frerfat 4:53c 
BAIT BW Achet 15:35b 
aan afadaear 1:79e 
aaa fray GAT 4:52a 
ate +t adfa App. E:82c 
aay Frereqar 1:83d 
aay afTawy App. L:128d 
aud: WANA 1:80c 

aay aa frfret ar 1:56c 

ay aafatad J 1:72c 
ada rae ated 4:53a 
addy wTa=rsey App. L:139b 
addy ay sfrrerre: 2:114d 
HAITMAA TA 6:27b 

at TT Weare 1:54a 
HTSITPTTAHT 6:62d 
aad fa 7 Aza 1:69d 
adeataead 2:8d 

HA THATS 4:95c 
HATSAT ATAAT FAA 1:80a 
HATSA afar WAT 2:15b 
aaa fRaAT TT 1:84 
aate fafar wre 4:41a 
SAA aM PMA... 4:172b 
Hardy Wdeat gl 4:44a 
HAMMAM 4:40 
actaat ferat Jar 2:51c 


Parakhyatantra 


aaa A TWAT 2:50a 
HAM F_eTATTC 4:47c 
Harare FT arfaat 4:9d 
HATA: ACINTAC 4:30b 
Bead VTAAATMH 4:58a 
Hatem f AcHTs 4:14a 
aeatteretamraey 4:1d 
Hettatertranhery 4:128b 
aciteadcauttad WT App. E:88c 
Sate: Ale fHer 4:3b 
HATA SATAATATAA 4:149b 
aera fafart at 2:52c 
aera farferat arfery 2:53a 
aealedia: Warfsrat App. L:123b 
idle gh i 4:29f 

ATA DUTTA: 2:85d 
aferdt ads fa 2:12d 
afere: fa aerfefr: 4:61b 
HATS ASAI 5:54b 
HWaaAY TEAM AUT 4:38d 
afad cat af 6:45c 
Aad aA FI 14:100b 
Heq HAA WAT 1:29b 
alfoargaarerared 4:140c 
aletach J AT FE 6:56c 
aradacageen App. D:66a 
aad: W Tarartay App. C:47c 
arararattactterd: 6:71b 
aTATa Ey aad App. D:69a 
afaarge@anidd 15:25b 
arantecranr App. B:10b 
ATACT SAMAR: 3:76d 
arr sara fered 2:24d 
ALY QUTHAET 2:1 1c 
AY AAG Aq 1:79a 


Index of Padas in the Tantra 


CHU BTU FEAT 4:13b 
AO HTT AT 4:135c 
CRTC TEI Her 2:5d 
BILTATA AAT 4:128d 
areca fart YF 2:32a 
HY YTAMTET 4:127a 
HUTA AA Ag 2:30a 
STITT ATS 4:134a 
HUT-UUAZs 1:67d 
ATTA ATIT: 6:75d 
arersraatday 2:39b 
arereatataded: 6:5b 
array faat art 4:60c 
BIA AHA 2:6c 
arUfae WIT: 1:71d 
Heo ae 2:100d 
alher fanertt: 5:47b(vl) 
afta FcraTawtg App. K:115b 
SAAT A eae 2:5b 
HUAATUMASNYT ST 4:64c 
ATARI ATTAT 2:40 

art TATA 4:15a 
alaed MA SAT 3:25c 
HAAG 3:32d 

ard TMA ATH 6:7b(vl) 
are RAIA App. D:72d 
ard SET Teer TL? 2:5c 
araarqa fasta 4:17b 
aan Fegan 6:7b 
Hara ay WHT 4:128a 
Has T AVA 4:113b 
arasitatte FeTaT 2:38d 
aTaeteal Fslyta: App. A:6c 
HAST AIL Ara 4:154a 


567 


arar dranfe adder App. C:43c 
MTA CIapaNa: 5:122d 
arate: TERI 2:22b 
arateataheae Wag 4:12b 
HTateTCaT Wearae 2:21b 
SAACIT WATAT 2:35a 
araterata faad App. E:86d 
arafeay aT 4:19c 

ale: Heafaay Ad: 4:46d 
aretaafacttarar 2:51d 
aletdeataardy 4:17d 
aTeaaqay STW Ae: 5:12d 
arerqar Sfaer: ITNT 5:20a 
HIATT WHA AL RAT 4:46c 
areaeagd ar ferar 2:50d 
BATS ATTATAH: 5:152b 
areteatead faarer: 5:6b 
HAST Heh: 5:48d 
Haat AUNTY 3:32a 

Alay AAHUIAe 2:43d 

are afaaaraty 4:55b 

alot ASICATATT 5:6 

alert ated: MATA 4:45b 
arety SIT FaAeReIy 4:45c 

aT Mf: qavaT AT Tq 1:64 
ar wfafcfa Sarew 4:137a 
arfad qeataqaray: 14:53b 
arfardte fart: TAT: 14:53a 
fReret TTA 1:64b 

fer aranfrarfehr: 2:125b 

fer WATINTVITEY 2:20a 
fatacy: Met: Ty: 1:15d 
fafaasretat & WAT 1:92a 
fafacarey Weparare App. C:53a 
fatter + fear 3q 6:55c 


568 


fafeataret I App. L:139d 
fafrenrra: ferent 4:171d 
fafaqeaedt TET 15:36c 
fatrEEwATet 4:171c 

fa T-ATaNT ACHAT 4:158a 
fa { TSTaaAIT 4:113a 

fer q aqefr: se: 3:47 
fa-q weTaayperr App. B:19a 
fa gq aeanfid wad 2:16d 

fa ¢ F SATTAT AAT: 4:73b 
fe 7 & VT: 2:122d 

fa ¢ sfrafearac: 5:19d 

fa Trwewergcy 3:10a 

fer caar Tey FeraT 5:88e 

fer + er: Wed: 6:12b 

fe ATAT aTAaHcaT 6:34c 

far arfafeaarctartrr 1:31b 
fart: oftafere: 6:74d 
Feahr: HeaAT ST App. A:lc 


far gt: Ferasrret sfera App. C:48c 


fr JTeTTARTs 1:75b 

fret Zareqa: feat: 5:85d 
fRaTcaT & — TNT 14:82a 
Hreardrenihraed 14:2d 
gfear faaer: ofa: 5:42d 
Hay S-UTCH FAA 15:58d 
Hatfacrewy App. H:97d 
Harast Frc 14:31a 
PATA TIBIA: 5:31d 
PaTer: ae Tere App. H:95c 
fart eet He App. J:114d 
PFANITA FEIT 5:31c 

Hed APfrar we: 2:94d 
PFUlcHead TUT AY 14:26c 


Parakhyatantra 


HarcHresy T HeAhad 4:77d 
HAlAAUe_d: 14:103d 
HATHA 3:11la 

Haeded AWTST 2:124c 

gaa g fra eftt 5:86c 

Het Feld AHTAT 5:140a 

PM DATTA AAT 5:96b 
PMATAAT ATRY 5:96a 

gas afamrante 14:46c 
PAVSAEG we: 5:38d 
PAVSY FT FANVST 5:35a 
FRBRA-sramtahy: 2:59b 

Ha: HretMafra4r 5:94f 

ade atafrfady 2:13b 
FIATSSAAAT Ad: 6:6b(vl) 
HaTed SAAAT Ad: 6:6b 

aft: war Tetsrar 2:62b 
eHdaadUT Ate App. K:117d 
HAC AANTACAT, 4:67a 

at weawe Far App. A:5a 
Fal Barada, SFA 3:5c 
PTT PIYSATMT 4:62b 
HeaAPcady SAAT App. K:118a 
HA Hegtapegny App. D:66b 
Hear afareedsy App. F:90a 
pearfrarcad rq 3:67c 

Rear ot: fare arf App. C:52c 
Hear areahTHared App. B:37b(vl) 
Frag Wears App. D:56c 
Hea FATATTA: App. B:9d 
PMIAaTHeseraa App. H:97b 
PMNACAICY: 9:40a 

HACIA ANATA: 3:66c 

patsy wrafasrar App. B:13c 
AGarea AUT Wad 5:74b 


Index of Padas in the Tantra 


aGareaad AAT 5:75d 
aGqaatacrady 5:64d 

SAAT HANTTAT 1:38d 
dactataaEa: 5:28b 
aaaead A NTT 15:14 
Hactsratadacdt: 5:24b 
AMARATATATET? 4:122c 
awaed fat: BITT App. B:14a 
amreawantadr: 5:67d 
apa eaar 15:46b 
acarettt fa afar 2:80c 
aya wacarter: App. B:39d 
alea: AA UT: Wears 3:64c 
NCAA STAC 5:112d 

ate: ANAT ReTHRT 5:112b 
arfega aectar 5:131la 
calfetatvsataue: 5:8b 

araey MTEC ATST 14:58c 
Harefy AewMTsT: App. C:52c 
PAT TA AIT Aay 4:145b 
WATCH ASMAT 4:70b 

PATA SAHASaT: 2:123b 
mates Fr FeT App. K:119a 
waTagtaryzeaty 15:40b 
Fatror fara: orev: 5:288 
far Frvar ator 5:15a 
Frav ast farfearr 1:85d 
Fad acq7ad: 1:81b 
fRaarer der wre App. B:26a 
FRaar FyaTwaT 15:11b 

FRar arr sfr arze: 4:152b 
Frarer wfwesa 2:35d 
Frarear afaverd 2:36b 
fararear agar amt 4:124c 


Frame: & FT TaY aT 6:71c 
Frary: wasreat SFT 6:59c 
Fraret & agar: App. B:11b 
far VarafCWerT 15:18b. 
FRararcaer war 15:17 
Frave: aafaete 15:40c 
fRatfe sTqqad=t App. L:129a 
FRaniTarygeayr: App. B:17d 
PRATaTET RACH 6:59d 
FRraranr: fare are: 15:8b(vl) 
Frant at aur MAT 6:68c 
Mise aT equa aT 1:48a 

HC AT ACTWST 14:43b 
pcear frfrae: 5:118b 
MISE A AH: 5:123b 

amare affacaney 5:4b 

MYSAIT TC ACTS 5:98a 
afreagetfagtapr: 2:6d 
wlavart Tadd 14:63b 
wfacadly TAT He App. E:83d 
afad aeataeud: 14:99b 
fanfer farfer: aqfeer 5:38 
apres fart TT 1:29a 
anrfardfaay aut: 6:13c(vl) 
aire attr Fat App. B:34d 
aifagraated 2:578 

afirancd Wagay 4:144d 
aftracart FT FarCy 1:28b 
afraterta ye: App. C:41b 
afaar fasta App. D:60c 
aq Weaeaedd: 15:10d 
aratata & aeq App. L:122d 
at: AATAIWATaA App. B:25c 
aad TWITaT 14:39d 

ec: efrxr afr: BRT 5:62c- 


569 


570 Paradkhyatantra 


aTaaearayaery App. B:29d TANT WAM AT 2:28a 


farfraratfeaer Ff: 2:11d TaAAAAece 1:558 
faretafaw €7 2:12a MHASH AeA 14:69c 
farca-aT acaaete: App. L:127b Te WaTWe Ia App. A:3b 
farat-oaafearherary 1:13c Tar skaafae: 1:44d 
afrcer fraet Wt App. D:74a Teaqutede TF 14:63c 
afttrenuated: 5:73b TeaT Tatearerarfr 5:34c 
agfeer arr: arf App. H:106a TRATAGAATTATL 4:101d 
ygmTaqyey: App. A:5c TIT areata App. B:37b 
QCA CaAT: 5:22b Tear BuTarfaadd 14:73b 
QIN FATeTy 5:22a Tear & SHIT: AAT 5:110a 
araedt Saafed: 4:22b TATE FCAT 4:132b 
airy afferent: 4:22d TATWTATEAT T 4:131f 
SATIT SAATAATATT: 14:33b TAT Ter ATT 4:101a 


BATT: AlAHASHIAHCT?. ..4:172a TATATA ESTE 5:698 
TATAWITAT App. B:40c 


= 
— 5 TATE Wed aTe 5:146a 
se mr yarfey ferr: App. L:138b 
Sagi Saas 1108 dri nies aiet ian 
afaad aaurfeahr: 4:20 eee 
or MII: SAT ATA 5:47c 
ibd : aS pays MIU 7 ape 5:47a 
TAT TET TAATHSTMT: 5: 
BATT: YCHTTH: 5:13b 
Tad HAAN: 1:78d 
QVUSEUT AAId: 6:3c 
on TIA FTAA: 3:37d 
phic ARTETH TEI SIT AT: 3:34d 
USAT aT 14:38 
on mae suaet Aer 4:31b 
ares aA ee Tesearsy faye: App. L:146b 
pik be lbh el Be mifeerert: ar 
S : OY Sfar: 5:109c 
ayararte caste App. L:145c rat wae EX Ae: 5:102c 
PATI HAHA: 3:78b mrxarfor few sar: App. L:130b 
aT rata feray 3:15d 
THETHRT AY CUT ATT 3:60a rarer FATayT sfT ZT 3:6d 
Terarharurfeny 14:36b TT: carey fears: 4:92f 


TUST WssHRATT App. B:30b TTARTUEMATT 2:71d 


Index of Padas in the Tantra 


WTI AMT 4:111¢ 
TAA ea CET-AT 15:51a 
Ta aaa 15:52b 
TTAHT YOTAT FAT 4:72c 
TOTAT HTAAT FAT 4:69b 
TOTAaT aead far 4:71d 
Tat Aaereq: 15:70b 
Teer ay fasrarfnc 3:48c 
Teed SUTfT 4:80a 
TetTaearayr ST 15:33c 
Tat CINTaT: pare 14:34c 
STRITCH: 6:32b 
Teew: waaay App. G:92a 
Tela wfasraa: App. B:29b 
TRUITASAAT MTT App. B:2la 
MAIEATAR ATAE 14:27c 
TASETCTT AIT 5:102a 
MATerT FIT 3:3c 
oUfafaegearcHy 1:4b 
Uearstanhary 5:63d 
WET Ae SPAT 4:103a 
Wet AyetEd: 5:125b 
VEAAIT WaT 5:40c 

ure seater gf: App. D:76b 
aren aeaey Rar 6:78d 
gantetat gq App. E:87d 
GaAeereae AT §:99a 
Gareedst aAlferer: 5:99d 
QE ATTRA: 2:84d 
UNTeT TAIT 3:75d 
mre + fagera: 5:148b 


z 
TY: WT T WETks 4:101c 
WS acHAtT Set App. H:107a 


O71 


WSTTeA AATHTATT App. D:64a 
TYCM TAM: 14:35a 

TY ATAT TAT 15:4c 
WIMNATT YATAT 1:73c 
agrary warat 4:111a 

wget afa-gar 6:33b 
aqPrararfirere 6:80a 
aqeafaa4rtyr st 1:17 

To: FAAT YS 5:116c 
Testa ate AUT 1:70b 

oT ITAleMIATAAT 14:4b 
wafearfefqaary 2:86b(vl) 
waar anrar sft ar 15:41d 
warear anata: 15:2d 
WATHATIMTAT 15:7b 

TAT WTA 15:17b 
warraw T Fea App. C:54d 
wararnrafy wrer 15:16c 
aT-sTaufafir: tray App. D:72a 
aTumrear Tat fa J 14:63a 
ATARATAATT 14:46b 
Faferarpraraty 15:16d 
Fassrfad? Arar App. E:87a 
Frasrfrerararary 4:154d 
Free: Jest We: 4:164d 
Fagucarteaee? 1:43a 
FrETATAT BT 2:70c 
Frgvearer aeafe: 2:18c 
fagfe: ar aur Taq 1:89d 
Faarfer pee fates 4:25c 
Fafarreaaaart 4:163a 

Fre wWefsargry 4:105b 
Tsar Ae aTe: 2:129b 
LI HFATCT: 5:29b 

afeorar verHarry App. A:4c 


972 


WAIANMEHTAT 4:27b 
VAMYPTAEH: 5:17b 
Jaa yas: 1:61b 
Tae T WaTfeY 1:24d 
Ta-UaHT TESNTAT 1:66a 
TAU ATEATT 2:188 
Ta-aTSaMHe YT: 4:23d 
Wearafed ATT 3:22c 
Wearedyt FT SAAT 3:65c 
afear aferay Wer: 15:18d 


a 
oh tatag T fe 1:57b 
Slmrcanrara4r 3:77d 
Bm yoare fa-giae App. E:78d 
Ba: CAUhwrasH: 6:17d 
BVH ART 4:109b 
BGRATAACTHATT 3:11d 
fafeargfraraer 14:22d 
fasraraqfore: 5:124d 
Parra varices 4:36f 
Faace afae wery 15:45d 
ferarrrmirad: 2:101d 
BA FX T ETAAT App. D:71d 
Ba AT LTH TWA 5:157b 
Bleorrafancda: App. B:20d 
Ba at fafact wg 14:49b 
BasAHaraga;4 14:48d 

wT 
wTfcertafTaqarar: 5:131d 
WTSATIUTA eT 6:25a 
WTAATUT FEA 6:26a 
WSt Wears: 4:120d 
WAYIFT TATMTT? 5:24c 
Wh T WANT: 14:89d 


Parakhyatantra 


Wiearaedal Sta: 5:132b 
WAaaTaAg aA 5:133a 

WaT AEM PZAT 6:26d 

Weare: Taya: 5:29d 

WATIT qT far App. K:120a 
WATT ANTIPSAT 15:6b 
HAAITAANT 1:33c 

HUNK FH AST 15:59a 

WITT THASHT: Mt: App. L:131f 
WaT FSH AATAta App. D:64f 
wegeraaye wren 5:93a 

Weary waged 0:63¢ 

WMH PMAT® 5:61c 
airenararyer: 5:144a 

Weer THAN 5:146b 
WeavTaaenteay 1:80b 
WALTSWSAaMT §:1c 
Weeauetiera: App. D:72b 
WaT Wad Ta App. B:30a 
Wet WOW Wiest App. K:11l5a 
WAM WeeHAy 5:145a 


WEhIGaay wT 5:132c 

Wet WAST TT 5:93d 
wifaarafe ay fast App. C:47a 
BATTS SAT 1:34a 

Wet AFATYTT 15:39a 

Gray Aree: BT: 5:81b 
STJATATWAT-ATAT 14:50a 
Wad SX Wafwar: 5:139d 
Wat yan: App. L:141b 
WAAC SHAT 5:2c 
Farcrecrarg hirer ea? 14:28c 
FHT TAITATET 14:21 
Foregret THAPTAT 4:100b 


Formate FeTaRT 5:148a 


Index of Padas in the Tantra 


PLAT: WAIT: 5:114d 
wat Fed Aad 14:18d 
Wat ANT WATT 4:117a 
wraattea Aad: 14:61b 
yraear A=TaTtehy: 6:38d 
aTqrefratear 14:64d 
aTifarHaTAy 4:99b 

Wear AT Ferregeay 3:29a 
year year Fat Freq App. D:67a 
ata fa a farted 14:87d 
wrray @NTAMs App. C:54c 
Wararsat fFaCeqT 1:29d 

Wt AaCTeTUTAT 15:5a 
arvyat ae: fear 15:15d 
TAIT ages 3:63a 
Weatld-g: AeieTsH 5:151d 
waaay 4:142d 
Waa AIBA} 1:3a 

art firafiranmte 14:68a 
arate Fale: 3:27b 
WTS ewaeaey 2:7 1a(vl) 
Weer TEAHT 2:71a 
TTTSW TA TAT: 14:65b 
Wrrareq: PRarary F 15:18c 
aiareatHect Ft 14:64b 
ararafagqear ant 1:16a 
WaTHe: W UT aT 4:141b 
WATes Fal: 4:79d 
TIATATLET SAET 2:107a 
oMATTaqareiHy App. L:132d 
Wrareayr PRavaygT 15:15¢ 
ararated Warfear: 14:63d 
Vary aT Waa: 15:lla 
aitare fRatfear 15:14b 


aTararetersty Fare: 4:159d 
WTVH HTT WH 3:45a 
WIA Add MET 2:72c 
Wad wary VW 6:41b 
TAATTAIT BT. 14:90c 
TAT VITYATAAT: 3:57b 
TA QTCHOTACH 4:35d 
Var HATTafaTer: 14:90b 
war sararfeaye: 4:49b 
PISTTISTIA ed: 2:47b 
TST Feq: PRATTAMY 2:46a 
THAI FLATT 4:18b 
TaThersy Beararear 3:75b 


z 
SHIT: AeTHE® 5:37c 

T 
Te AEAAAPTAT 14:81b 
waratedar ferary 1:54b 
TANIGIAIT: 14:69b 
wared AT PA: 2:91d 
afaceatatfaary 1:16d 
Taadatad Wet 2:17a 
aera eure fe App. K:116a 
ToatR: Head AUT 2:18b 
aeafarfagerer 3:3a 
TeaahRegay ant 2:127a 
Toatet Tarftrar 2:17b 
aweahnfafirariitart App. C:43d 
ceatmapiteramcdaedey: 2:129d 
THAT AA 2:17 
Team fa TAT 3:8d 
TAT_al TAY SIA 3:68b 
THAT APTATSATT 2:100b 
aay TMH: 5:10b 
ateaa AT Add: 15:66d 


573 


O74 


TAHT WCITAT: 14:14d 
THT Taq: Fear App. J:llla 
auataar water 1:44a 
anata Ufa FT 4:9c 

ToT: ASTHSTATNT 2:114a 
aera BTA WaT 14:88a 
TINATA RA STATA 4:139b 
AaaTareaay We: 15:12c 

TT TH Het AKL 6:67b 

at: HATAATYMY App. L:123c 
aa: AT: T YAH 5:126a 
aa: arrfarer sfer 15:12a 
TASACATAT AT WM 15:30c 
aqaredtery wade 2:104d 

Tay TerHarhacdr: 6:22b(vl) 
aay gera afar: 6:22b(vl) 
war Wat PRATATE: 15:8c 
aay rarest art App. L:13le 
Tay SATATABY FT 5:139c 

aay FasTraanpy App. L:121b 
Tay FAAWMANTT 3:60c 
Tenvenrarfery 5:27b 

TT HT TUT TT 1:39b 
TeHUta W afar: 5:137d 
Tena TET: Wev: 1:84c 
aeha Tet: WAY 1:86a 
Tena Ade Fae: 2:72d 
aenq: far T MTENT: 3:29b 
THY RATA CET 6:77 
TeHdh Het AAT 6:58c 
aeanrad Arert ZA: 4:108b 
Teas SAH WAT 4:163d 
Tents AHet WMH 4:160c 
ACHUSATTATATAY 1:9¢ 


Parakhyatantra 


aeHlatprad qT 1:77a 
TcHAPTTANATT: 4:22c 
afea afer wetearet 14:100d 
afc Frorrureaer 6:41c 
Tew TATA 2:74c 
ATHIMHAALUTT 2:122b 
acHeawmfawrfegy 3:1d 
AcHeawwMaynny ST 2:43a 
aTcHT: HARTA: 6:58b 
apy TTTHA App. Azlb 
at Praraftr: aerz 6:76d 
afRaederg: 14:19b 
TAM AtAT AAT 1:31d 
aeery ST faTe FT 1:32a 
TAIT FT farsTT 4:42c 
TAIN ATA: FT: 2:53b 
TAHAATATAT 1:6b 
TAA BAS 2:128e 
TAUT RA Ad: App. L:135d 
TAUT Fea ATCAT 14:5c 
TAUT MPA PITA 4:56c 
TAT FATSAT 3:68c 

aaat afar AT 4:118c 
aint aeatq App. B:35a 
THM :SATTH WAT 4:170b 
area ag fray 4:54d 
Ta VFAATIA 4:72b 

Ta AAet Wer 4:2a 

ae Tats AT TAA 2:60b 
aarar feraa Aer: App. E:79b 
Iced Aca Rar Fray 15:6a 
acter: & geese: 5:121b 
TAT: arTaAy SferT 5:95a 
TIT: WIAA 5:100a 
avert: @& feray ta: 5:156c 


Index of Padas in the Tantra 


TTT MAT MPHT 6:30c 
TACT FY: BATT 5:119a 
TCT RAPER: 5:116a 
Teo STeaTFT 15:19a 
Torey SFr Arad 3:54d 
TITY SHH: Pr 5:118a 
aqearah safer ast: App. L:136c 
acaratfawg-attt App. H:99c 
TATAT AAAS 2:103a 
aegis Aart SHTT 2:90c 
aeqd wat TeeT 5:113e 
ACETAYATAT 14:99c 
aeqgs farted: 14:25b 
TAPIA 5:3c 
THNT TAT 3:53a 
THATAATAT 3:64d 
THM: AAT 5:36a 
THAT AAT: 2:115b 
THGT: TAT Fale 4:76c 
THAGA AAT FTA 4:32c 
AHASTAF EE 2:105¢ 
aafafe: TaaNT 2:28d 
dent HAY 6:53c 

aL Het PraAeWe4P 1:39c 
TeHATAT ATA 14:1d 
aa fosfer wrireir 5:139a 
aa tT (ATARI 3:65¢e 
aa & sfirpat: ad 2:128c 
TA Watsceatd: 5:115b 

qa TAT FT TarM: 3:19a 
at AWllat AAT App. H:10la 
aa afaeaattare 6:69d 
aqremferayeary: 14:57a 
TANT AATHTAT 3:44c 


aTATeT wWafEelT 4:30a 
THA STITT: 4:32d 
TATU: 14:83b 
ACTSTATT A HTT 1:24a 

ad AATATAA HAT 14:54d 
ACTATS Cad 14:128 
acaare fFeray ATH 4:48c 
Ta Aafays Wr: 2:88d 

TH AMMA Ad 4:144c 
TeaTRATE EAT 4:28d 

at fag ACTRIMT 3:46c 
acqe + Pratfrerdy 15:15b 
acger fataraarar 4:25a 
TACIT TOCA: 15:53a 
aceqwMestag: aa: App. B:36b 
aceHeearedey ferfa: 6:10b(vl) 
Tea Wee AAMT 6:40b 
acarafayda: App. K:116b 
AMMA AITAAT 1:73b 
AKAMA T TAA 6:69b 
TT STTAT Aca 15:55a 
TL SIA AT 14:86a 
ad MAeTaqd Vr 14:87a 
TL TST HATET 2:70a 
TITS P.MTTA: 15:5b 
AKTSIUAAT TATE 14:97b 
acaatierd Aft 3:69a 
TRABWTAMT LITT 14:88b 
axaeqy ad Ferry 3:68d 
aceacesy Afar 6:48a 
TUT HATH AAT 5:3a 

TUT TAlaAhmcaAT App. A:6b 
aar afer Faw 2:113c 


TUN AMAT 4:82a 
TUTATeTaT AAT 2:116c 


9795 


576 


TUTd AAA TATA 15:35c 
TUT TRS 2:81a 
auTke TITEaT SAY 15:29c 
aura afe aT ateaq 4:7c 
aunty fararedeare 2:120c 
TUTAET TITTAT 1:87b 
AUTH ARTHAT 6:52d 
TUTAA ATH: 6:53b 
TUT wad @ Aart: 3:16a 
aunyar fFaxrsy aT 3:27 
TUTSTET ATA 2:82c 
aUTEt SFT Tey 1:51c 
TUTSA SATATAA 5:30c 
aur faarftar Fenr 1:33a 
TUT eITatsy TTAT App. B:13b 
TUT erent AT Wart 6:67d 


TUTET LIT HTA-UTT App. E:86e 


TUTSIMTAA AE: 2:42c 
MT TATATATATA 3:38a 
@Mag feraadt a 6:56a 
MT AaAATAAH 6:70b 
RA EAA eH 3:39d 
Ma T TAM: 4:139d 
TeaMtad Art 4:125c 
TeVTTAtTTa: 6:77d 
Te_TaT Tey App. A:2a 
TET WET ATH 4:55c 
TET: HAP TAT: 14:56d 
aefusra feedrar 5:55a 
TRATHAG AA 4:81c 
Te-—TaATeAfeIag: 4:109d 
qe-—TeT 7 ywA 1:62d 
TS-UTMPITATHTT 15:26c 
Teal SNAGAT: 4:41d 


Parakhyatantra 


aefe nfeanfera spefaare...3:79¢ 


TAUNTS TST 4:16a 
TeATATA Rq: CAT 2:27c 
AMNBaCay SF: 5:6a 
eamaratateyny: 14:1b 
aed araqarfe 15:48c 
TeYET TTT: 3:40d 
aTevaTaray YAY 5:10c 
TAA AT: 1:24b 
aTeearatcafacary 2:89a 
TENTAGIUTSAT 3:19c 

aqev AlsTay Ars App. D:71la 
TeT AT-gTaM BTA App. D:70a 
ver FagvaT T RUTe 4:91le 
TAT TATEATANTT: 1:81d 
Ter SAT T AT 15:13d 
TAT WHAATTAY 4:76a 
aqeraarqeny SPRL 4:84c 
verarer + fFrerfet 14:70a 
wer Praradyary 2:14c 
aerTanrafag aT 15:60e 

aver Aftarer 4:168c 

deal TATA: 1:48b 
aera atfa fawe: 2:82d 
Teradtaaretts 4:117b 
aTerqenT faasHar 4:25b 
Tet Afar Fer 4:88c 

TAT FT GAY Aer 4:88c(vl) 
Tearay ACTA Tad App. D:67b 
weray favaT-ayT 4:29e 
qeT SAE TINT 4:36c 
Teed FaTATS 14:11c 
Teresa Yo AUT 3:70d 

agen ahTaersy 4:56a 
agaraad: Faeyr 14:98c 


Index of Padas in the Tantra 


ageper fatqad 14:19d 
AZaCHATaMAY 15:23 
TZAACASTMT 5:93c 
aga: Actlay SET 2:114c 
aged WaAHAMIT 5:106c(vl) 
Teed Sa a year 5:61a 
award Facar ST 5:lla 
Teed HEY SUBST §:112a 
agd WT T HTT 4:100c 

aed Freer ATATI 15:60c 
aed ATT ATED 4:142a 


dAdedeaay Wad App. C:47d 


TATA ATS 1:60b 
T_reATEH ATS 4:139c 
wefertr wagt 5:92a 
AEATACATUT 14:60a 
TETATCRTANT ETAT 15:10 
TEE ASAT 2:29b 
aes ache FF 6:55a 
TEATYTAATT: 4:4b 
TET SfaereT 15:21a 
afgwaadt TET App. B:10c 
TSEANAIUITT? 15:63a 
TSH IeIasT 1:278 
TSEATAAUNTT: 4:129b 
TRUS ATcHees 5:10a 
Terao fasryd: 5:47d 
THAI DV ACAI 5:43c 
TErcaqUywMaAfaay 14:62b 
aE: 14:57d 
Tadcat AH 1:64a 
TaQqqa AATHST: 15:35a 
Talel JACarT 5:104a 
Talal MIAAAITT 5:106c 


O77 


Talal ANT: ay 5:94a 
agalactiae pect ®. .. 15:73c 
Tgalred WAT 5:136c 
aead caferarayry 14:5d 
aedIeds-gTHT 14:7b 
afer at Tet ATT 4:62c 
afear arrafcerd: 6:10d ° 
aRAT SBAT: BT: 4:106b 
Tee: FMI 2:42a 
Teer: AfFRTATETUT 4:150d 
aeer Arena: 1:43b 
TAMTATHT Yr 4:24c 
TIP Carag 5:88a 
TyAT Taal Ady 14:42b 
aafHd: HL Wel 15:32c 
TINT BIT CATT: 4:67c 
TAIAATTS ATT 5:2a 
agMiy 7 Vader 1:52d 
TET A Aefeatcars 15:53c 
TET TH FAA 15:56b 
AgeaHCTHU 4:137d 
TEES HAAPHST? 2:38a 
qecareyny Mh: 4:136c 
Tad Prarveere: 3:49a 
Tarefyeagre># 4:82c 
Tater Te: Fee: 2:64b 
Tadt aATsar PAT 14:67c 
Tecra: Wear: 4:169a 
Tad fagroptanr: 3:49d 
Tact Heitesh: 4:65b 
Tearaaye SFT 15:30a 
qTaed Terfear 3:44d 
qacd aatfenry 2:15d 
aged faq: 1:55d 
TaEraty ATIAT 15:25¢c 


578 


qeaal T Ade 15:40d 
qachat IT AUWaIT 14:39a 
Taatt Havas 14:7a 
TATA Ta SFMT 5:3b 
aetter faafarar 6:37b 
oTeMH aM We: 4:99d 
TalNTAta TdT 6:78a 
ware Pet WAT App. L:144d 
afgaet At: AAT 4:33b 
afaarafasray sft 3:52c 
afaare: A@qa: 5:160b 
afgar at Sat aT=Te 6:43a 
afaqrHasmifsar: 2:113a 
ofan: We 14:77d 
qaret WARM 6:69a 
TATAHATATTH: 14:51b 
TelHTAM Mela 4:97c 
TeRUCTARITEAT 3:62c 
THAR: FAME 3:36c 
aTeltafayaready: 14:75b 
TYCATAITT :STRT 14:28d 
T<aNeIMUT AAT 4:134c 
Tay Tarra 4:149d 
afafaar 7 STAT 2:102a 
afafaaagert 3:54a 
afasrd? Tune 14:85¢e 
aaradur add 4:84d 

TAY FPryacHy 2:16c 
aaraterar Fr App. B:14c 
TATATTATLT: 4:123b 
AATAMSSTAAT 4:107a 
TAATEMAAY TT: 4:126c 
TTHAICTA ST 2:67c 
aager atfear weet 15:56d 


Parakhyatantra 


TAU! TFET: 5:67c 
araenyaareny 2:39d 
aeareraae fere: 2:16b 
THATS: ATCT AA 2:12c 
TWNCHE: WAST: 5:133d 
TWCHET: EPATAT: 5:134b 
TAhABTC:AT] App. D:65b 
TAATATHTMT: 5:119b 
TATHTC: FaleFcl 5:13d 
TATETU STATA 5:23 
aot ofavert 6:24d 

art fraser 3:14b 
TAR ATATEM 5:17a 

TH ATAATEATUT ET 4:84 
TARAS PATA 5:1 11a 
aqar note THT 2:39c 
wareart frawrter’ 1:47c 
TAYATSTAT SouTe App. B:17a 
TAT GahH AcHTA 4:68c 
TAH: TEVA 5:88F 

aah: aarhratiy st 14:10c 
THT TT At 14:84a 
wat eararar ATayY 14:15¢ 
TrrAraraurfetr App. F:89b 
at afer: ferar 5:46b 
THEMTATATCAT 14:83a 
afaEgTYTATATT: 1:28d 
aMrathr WeTes 4:18d 
TERT Tat App. K:118d 
TEAL BTA SAT 4:85c 
THAR: Aa WUT 5:12lc 
THTAGTT -— 15:51c 

THAT CHAT AYIA 14:16a 
TATA AAA AC 4:20b 


aeAardarsay AWA App. L:124d 


Index of Padas in the Tantra 


TTT Rrearrary App. C:55c 
TeaTeITIAGead App. D:60b 
TATA Aad App. D:6ld 
TAT qanare App. K:119c 
TeaTcenrer T fad 6:11b(v!) 
ACNS-UAIC CTT §:8lc 
TeaTeuAd hat: FAH 6:15c 
TeaTeuAdiat: FATS 6:8a 
aearett TAFT: 6:15c(vl) 
aeareay TET SAT 5:29e? 
TST A eefad App. L:143d 
TSATATHT AY ATET 3:56c 

THATS CATITSaY 5:101a 
THAT Yacitay 5:114a 
TeTSHAAT SNAG 4:81a 
ToNTeeT WasHlT 2:69a 

TeANTST HATTATS 4:74a 
Teaser T fret 6:11b(vl) 
THT ATA eT avag 14:73a 
qearsyead faferatr App. D:63d 
TATAA TC Wer 6:55b 

afeare eat MTT 2:98a 
aferactta Garay 5:73c 

afer YT WacTeTT 14:91a 
aferadt & aaa: 6:23b 
afeTAATTACaTaT eT 5:117a 
afary TTHSTUNT App. L:132b 
afary wade are 2:64a 

afer ardtiat Asa: 5:116d 
TTT AEACTUABT 4:87 
afeary wray sadt wad App. B:35b 
TET ATCTHTUca 4:61a 

aver & fate STETe 5:126c 
Ter Tey Whe: WAT 14:62a 


O79 


TET WAAYCTAYT 3:38 

TST AT ATearhHyT 15:66b 
TT THAR CAT 3:77c 

TET AT ATUTSTT®? 4:13a 

TET AT Sik Tal 15:9a 

wer afarreay at 5:90a 

aex ur fafesr qrer App. L:130a 
TET MTT: SANTA: 3:37b 

TET THY MST WT 2:69c 

TET AAAI 4:6c 

wer forrfatrfaay 2:73d 

wer afartad tac: 1:53b 
wear: weer faetpar App. E:87c 
TEAC: F AY MT: 1:52a 
aqeara Heratercd: 6:39f 

TeaT ATH: WaA_: App. B:32b 
Teaty AIT: SINT 5:9la 
Tear Afesar M7 4:9a 
TRATTHATAA Ad: 5:38b 
TRATAATTGNTT: 15:4d 

TAU AAT ATA 4:32a 
TRATIMH AcaTeT FT 4:9b 
THATS ATHATAVT: 4:66a 
Tearedghad RereL 6:71d 
TRASH HUT WHT 4:68a 
TAIT AAaTAT 1:66d 
TEAITATAYAS 4:10c 

TeaNaeg: SPE A 5:53a 
afsatst ad: FRAT 5:77 
aifcan yaatfeaey App. E:88d 
aretaray Wadd: 14:59d 
arettayt ATA 2:5e 

TSM BY ATHET 4:40c 
TSMC TAT qwad App. L:142c 


980 


av ger faqur rar: 5:75c 
att arfera waif 1:67c 
AAT TATAFT 1:23b 
aaa: 5:15d 
aTfraertar fier: 5:30a 
arcar faxyorrf gar: 5:128b 
AIXATEAT UIT AMITT 5:128d 
TIAMAT TIT TeNT 5:21a 
aaa Beet: 14:50b 
ATH CFA: 14:73d 
aaeasaacd Fate App. C:46c 
aad lethr Warf 4:8a 
araet 7 Terfer 6:23c 
aagewad Yat 14:106b 
aaee Aqfrur 1:22b 

aan are Fara: 15:5d 
aaa aT: App. A:8d 
aaa SUSY Wad 4:144b 
aa AT: AAfEares 3:73a 
AWaAATARA WAT 1:58b 
ATaEATAT FeT AT SMe 15:13c 
aTaATH AT: AVA 2:278 

a @ aT ar a T FAVA 3:53c 
aTaAT AD TATATEY 14:57c 
avay GAahyarty ST 3:78c 
aTaTae Hlae dc 4:8c 

aTY WATT AAT 14:59a 
fasta aTaead 4:21a 
faster fanereper: 5:52c 
oat saT ATAAAT 2:38b 
qeara tsatay 4:46a 

Gar areca -—- F: 5:126d(vl) 
qardrayere de App. L:142d 
qarar tateteHar 14:34b 


Parakhyatantra 


Tear AiS-—TETAT 6:52b 
qetrara: fraratfte 5:27c(vl) 
TataTrTanntad 3:50d 

quart arereag a: 5:126d 

quit wearedraary App. B:31b 
a WT aaftrar war: App. C:43b 
a WT Aarar: ferar: 1:40b 
aor MPHAATANIT 6:52c 

aa: AT AUT FE 4:169c 
aar:ent ferarfafer: 5:145b 
TaIT TUT Wer 4:170a 
TART IA ATATE 4:118a 

d TeUTHTYTTST: 6:44b 

a sw mf aa: ferar: 5:110b 
a sfrare saat 2:123a 

aq AAMT SF: 5:7a 

at Fete 2:93b 

aa stat fer fay: 1:35d 

at sratfaferer ar 15:18a 

AT TASHA: Wr 4:54c 

at gender Arey 1:58c 

TT TCH TET 1:78b 

AT ACHUITATATT 2:4¢ 

at acHrdagced 2:23a 

at aeereart J App. B:26c 
TT AACATATET 5:45a 

at gaara Fara: 1:69¢ 

TT AATHANTH 4:163b 

aq afenrar ar Ja App. B:36a 
at afenrcafert App. B:33c 
at ate: TATA AT App. B:10d 
aT TET RMT 14:19c 

at TaTaIeH 3:13c 

aa acted: fara: 2:108b 

aT Tala 3:57a 


Index of Padas in the Tantra 


aT T UCAUMETT 14:23c 
at FT MAG 14:218 
at aad FT CATH 5:46c 
at TATA 4:5d 

TT ALSTAUTATAT 6:78 
qt TeATGdtg 1:57c 

av od Fear AAT: 1:50b 

at Ser AATSATAT 15:10e 
at Zerefayy 2:76e 

aT FRAT T MAA 3:24d 
av fas: fara: wer 2:97a 
at at eq FATT: 4:165b 
at Wee: WAT: 5:124b 
at War: SyaT fear 3:64a 
at ATA AA 4:138c 
at Gaqatearay 14:12d 
at afaaar 7 RA 6:76a 
at UT: BF AMT: 4:44b 
aT gl Sa: FATT 14:79b 
TT AT AAATAAT 1:30b 

aq faar faaét 4:35c 

at WAT BUT sre 5:122c 
at yfearaeadt: App. B:10a 
at AeRTCASAcT App. C:48a 
at AAP at 6:28a 

IT TAICAATHY 14:22 
at AEWA 15:44c 

av AT araarteat 6:62a 
at AT Were J 6:66c 
at ATATAMaT FeTe 2:11a 


at Wt AaTIey App. B:22b 


at aat 7 THT 3:45c 
TATHETTT: FRAT 4:21c 
aqaremTaeHta: 4:130d 


581 


dara afafaraeahadt 6:82c 
aarate Fert Hy 1:82e 
TATYATAAT A 3:34c 

aare aay aT: 2:94b 
aaTa Wart: Wey: 5:138a 
TATY SE: TYCATT 1:60c 
TATATATST TS : 2:90b 
aaret fear firfe: 5:91d 
Tater Yast FF 1:17e 
att TIAA AH 5:82d 
aAtaT{ayAe 5:72b 
athe Aaeq 2:75a 

ated CATA Bat 1:27c 
ata Iftafe war: 6:28d 
AAT SAGICET 1:26a 
ara geT ey 14:48b 
atargytaacay SAT 2:87a 
date: ATYMer: CATE 6:40c 
cara waar feray 4:7b 
aah aPUfedad 5:48b 
aaren afaerary 4:134d 
TATHAAT ETT 3:28b 
aafee Wea 5:49d 
TATTAINT: CATH 3:71a 
TATTAT HAATETT 3:35e 
TAIT STARA 4:11d 
TAIT: TT ST 15:14a 
T SARZWANTAT: 3:8b 

ot Sf aeAATaNTT: 15:35d 
a siergeaantd App. A:2d 
at Saretraatereanr: wafer... 15:73b 
a wafer faxgreq App. B:11c 
WUT WIT: ATATA 3:5a 
NIT ACTATAT: 3:5b 


Pay aaa aT? 4:108c 


582 


a arfrar sf& Yer: Sqet 4:57a 
dF AceMAATTT: 5:138d 
TET AATSTHTATPT 4:69 
Ta Aakash Ce#P 4:92c 

aar war shrarce 1:8 
VW AT ASTATAT 3:33 

at afattarfaar 4:73d 
TUT WercIalATUTe 6:42c 
aT aararar FRAY 6:72c 
TW Bear A frag 3:73b 
aa get fe areory 4:127d 
aar fered sfrarhte? 2:125¢ 
aT AI Sehr ITT 4:23c 
AIT TeahHMAAMITT 6:57c 
aur av faye: cart 3:55c 
awrqaitutt gfat 4:92a 
AIT AMT: MY: BT: 14:18b 
ay wr Frewrft 4:37a 
ASTM T SIT T° App. E:8la 
ot: AAAs HaAtyT 14:18a 
at: camfHadatt 6:16c 
AGATACEATUTS 4:95 
Torah TATeTeT: 4:124b 
aay apacary 4:94c 

qh Taal UTA 3:6e 
AeUS: TRACATA: 5:4a 
waydefafise: 5:3d 

afaat A WAT: MNT 2:126c 
ae wfHgqdattt 6:16c(vl) 
TeTT: TATST: 2:84b 

7a: WAT FWTeT: App. C:42d 
TOPAMPS TAT: 6:4b 

aaron rae wear 4:51c 
TaMMTAY AItAT App. C:44a 


Parakhyatantra 


azar & sfitfear: wed 5:33a 
AMT AAMAS 3:17d 

Fr: freeny af=rrqt App. B:9b 
Prrfisragqrasrd 5:67a 
FITCATR GATT 5:34d 

Faryor: area: 4:94b 
Faryresaet: 5:20b 

Frfrerrér fare: qr: App. G:94d 
Freer Torre art 5:150c 

Fray AT A-THTARIT 6:38c 
Pryftferayq: Ayer: 2:119b 
fasfare: frararfcte 5:27c 
frrgfenye: afar 6:47b 

fay ary x gare App. C:43a 
Taufyaar Te: App. G:94b 


STACI YF 5:85c 
SPAAVSAAUSAT 14:40d 


SIE SAT-arearaagt: App. D:73b 
sae AH ATAATT App. D:73a 
—aeTaeaeasia App. D:68b 
cattise + Warer 5:147c 
TATGUT TTARAT 4:26b 

CASYT: HT WR: 2:36c 
cafapeaay yo App. D:73d(vl) 
cahnitaafeaye: 5:30d(vl) 
wafarfacteaye: 5:30d 


z 

SBA eHINT 5:35¢ 
BwWATeaT TIAA App. J:113b 
aaaread afaecr App. J:114a 
SVU aTeaPr aq App. B:9c 
eerery frat ara App. B:37c 
aferorarfirar et: App. B:35c 
SITTATIVI J 14:72b 


eferrreacheaye: 5:76b 


Index of Padas in the Tantra 


aus: eatery: App. H:105b 
gus: Patera yer: App. H:104b 
aus alee stot 14:40a 

ausen fgearger af App. H:105b(vl) 
wareatqegyary App. H:110b 
SAAIeTIUY ATAT 5:97a 
zaeTatatatd App. B:3ld 
SAAT VT AAA 2:43f 

SAU AAACN 2:58c 
eaatarar: BAT 2:59c 
asafea 4 quate 14:99a 
emartefrar ferfe: 5:106d 

SM Waltal Ver 5:141c 

emfeay FaTeAagT: 5:141d 
SMATAT FLAq App. J:111d 
SMATAT FLAT App. J:114b 
CSMACATAU MET: 5:32d 

SeACT WA Ad: App. J:113d 
eeeayTaTeAy App. H:108a 
eat: AASYcaT: App. L:125b 
arety ayafe4rd 5:74d 
feeaRadarerater 5:108c 
ferReavsaTaree App. H:102a 
feratratasrtaey App. D:74b 
feamimntr F_earer 5:70a 
froarfeear vated SfaTT 3:62 
feeatfeearrefarar: 6:79d 
ofeatrydacreen: 5:135d 

ererar ATT ahaey App. C:55a 
craraefgardtaqd App. C:41d 
rar aratequr 7 fF App. C:44f 
STATeT FATA 15:44d 

fra aefiranrfcar 15:11d 

ara avafed Fear 15:4a 


583 


Star aarfaety wae 15:9b 
Sraray ar Frgfer: 15:20b 
Samira wafer FT 15:32d 
ATTA AT: 15:2b 

Sar ArereT ATTANT 15:42b 
Srarar: EAT TATAAT 15:10b 
Shar aT wafer wad 15:9b(vl) 
Srfarary ar sfiraréy fare App. C:49a 
arta were App. C:54b 
rad CATUTUHT 4:34c 

arar starrer 14:71b 
Srey wad aferey 15:72b 
SICAT ASAT SET 5:94d 

arf MY WT:AyT 5:65d 
F:AANMITTAT 3:58b 

Sia HUCAMEATTT® 4:146a 
grater frat: 4:42b 

ga Jar fart Spey 15:57b 
7 MACATATAT AA 5:128c 
gghraiy afae: 5:148c 
Tay J AKL AAT 5:29f? 
stray Arataeat: 5:50b(vl) 
geart ref :eart: 5:50b 

RTE Gras: WaTeg 14:29b 
AUWawnyagq set 14:30c 
RMA Say T 4:4c 
stRaryereearary 2:70d(vl) 
sfgraretaaet 2:78 a 
sfRareratTt 2:88c 
estRaTavsctited: App. H:102b 
stgarsafactfarrt 2:70d 

SfRA TATSTAT 15:30d 
STRACITATAT 2:89¢ 

Baeq RAT HUA App. L:143b 


084 


ge: Mrattearagd 2:67b 
SE: AY Sata aay 3:52a 
ge UT FT FWaAd 3:24b 

SE A AT Aq RANG 1:75c 


se Aer HetleatHy App. A:8f 


ge mrifasecar: 6:43d 
gE Achat 2:25d 
Ze aca Ad: 6:53d 
ge AEA AT 15:60b 
SETETAT J ATA 3:55a 
SETAATAAATT 2:26c 
ZeT Aearteargesr 1:22a 
sere: fa yaar fe 2:778 
SET ATATSIT 5:71c 
SPATATYATAA: 2:3d 


Vad YACA_ A: 1:21c 
Zxwad FT WATT: 1:26b 
Sxaed HATARA 2:31d 
gwaed TEatay 2:80d 
aqaT aT FIT AT 8:89 
eal Hetaitarar 6:74b 
waanirayad: 14:67d 


Parakhyatantra 


zqanred: Wer: 14:74c 

eqdl AAAAAT 6:70d. 

eqarar fasryrey 6:64b 
eaqafayar WET 3:27c 
eaattatedt ATaT 6:70c 

qa WetATAT FATT 6:59a 
eqar WAd Ad 6:65b 

eqaT FAT NTE 6:67 
eqeuifesecdd 6:61b 

earaT JA Ady 5:99b 

Zar Aellear AUT 3:21b 

zara eartartat: 5:130d 
SATACUMNLAY 5:74 
MWalstaqtede 14:99d 
WMATA ATA 3:46a 
@Wreadurd far: App. B:29c 
SMAt Hel Ad PATE 1:37a 
WwWMat faTAET 1:34c 
afaraere waft ST App. H:95e 
2e Wetter Aad: App. B:40b(vl) 
eeemgd FAT App. L:125d 
eeaNeATayad: 1:19b 
elect FRa-at App. L:143c 
Ser-ay STA BTA 1:15a 
efear eager App. K:115c 
ae ee caer: 1:42b 

@e Aaa HART? 4:105c 
SUSU: 5:42b 

AIA AMT AAT 2:72b 
aaa arferr: App. D:62d 
GI<aa WaTSMT App. H:99d 
FouTyary STATI SFT 4:113c 
geer yeur fact App. G:93a 
ZaAeaha TF 7 1:44b 

Sal: AUTATAT IL App. E:86a 


Index of Padas in the Tantra 


aifas-araar Yq App. J:112a 
alfas-araar Ya App. J:114c 
aremre fatratt: App. D:75a 
feqyer: WaATeTH: 4:114d 
faayer SITqAT Hear 14:6c 

OR RICCE Cs App. H:103d 
fear at Hered: 15:26d 
far rar ferar wer 15:27b 
faaTe er PPTI|PMT 1:62b 
faator war afer: 6:11b 
faaght Aart JOA 4:125a 
fasrecure dh ATT 4:97a 
esyatenare ATS 4:136a 


wT 

wT Aaah: 5:140b 
UMA aITITHT 4:108d 
uavedenedat App. A:3d(vl) 
TAIT eT YS 4:42a 
yareapaqdare 15:57a 
waraagaty App. C:54a 
UAT AATTAM 2:47a 
warIAa Ts TN: 4:41b 
wArArera ferry 1:79b 
UATTIATAT TMT 4:41 c 
TATA ATAT CT: 4:92b 
TATERTITSATAT 4:90a 

wat aT AIT ay 4:74c 
aatcay: yp frat 2:111d 
ud sarrrasy 4:103b 
UT: YA ACATaT 5:131c 
Ucayagaaiadyr: 3:64b 


uTtaca ferar yeay App. L:136a 


Urey: Te afee|4>: 14:33a 
URUITATAU NTA: 2:95d 


UTUTATAA AAT: 15:7d 
UIA AD Heat 14:5la 
UT THAT AAT 14:47d 
UIT YIHANT: 14:15b 
ULAR: YT: 14:32d 
wate Adal Ht 1:28 
Arar act FT NTTAT 4:76d 
Rrrart *rHead 5:91b 
Frey ate AAT 4:53b 
RIVUTSTSEGAT 4:74b 
UAT ATT 4:33 
Yaa ghd: 5:126b 
WAY afafresty 6:20b 
yay eferyat: 14:45b 
AAT HAlcyatay 14:40b 
aTaTeeday AAA 14:7d 
ya a wferd aa 5:129c 
ya a ctf feree 5:129d 
aay agearqtege: 5:127b 


7 

T HeaeatsMT 2:12b 
T Hal ACIISa 2:32b 
aq aqatat aa4: 6:73b 
T Hcdtae Ya: 1:85a 


T HT Geant Bd 6:7a(vl) 


7 afacdddl FET 14:101c 
TAT THA Td 4:3c 
T HTS HNP AAT 2:35b 
T HTS AMMA 1:67 
qT ard ACMA 2:21c 
T HAA AMI 6:18a 
qT areattedy MT: 4:50c 
T Hort Warate 1:87d 

7 FATAL Hate 2:6a 


585 


586 


qT HaaAaY ANT App. B:33a 
av fRaT at Fear AT 6:74a 
TAWA TE App. B:38c 

T CATT HTAaMAT 2:4d 
ATTUTARAT aT App. B:28c 
T TRAY WdieTay: 2:4b 

TT HAAN SAT 2:9¢ 
TT TAMPET ANTAT 6:21d 
TT TAWA For 4:153c 

TT aT: WTHar fear: 3:70a 
TT S¥ Swurae#wd App. A:3a 
TT AAAATSTT: 2:106d 
TT PT AAT 2:75c 

av @ fra fercera: 14:68b 
TT ANH Wet AeT 4:36d 

TT AT AEM AATAT 14:62c 
7 wear faafa: Caz 15:3le 
T aa fray: Serr 3:32b 

T InNictear: We: 6:60c 

T WAY FWA ATH 3:24c 

qT ated & Waeaee 1:50a 

T WIWAGEATT 2:76c 

T WIA VATT 3:35a 

7 Wsearaarear: App. E:82d 
T WTaT SFRTT FIAT 15:36b 
T THAT ATT 1:29c 

T AcHs YC 1:25a 

T TeHcttawey SET 15:29a 

qT aa Acaaye: 15:13a 

aT afer: Jarafery 1:28c 

tT afew: & aTaTsH: 6:59b 

7 Tear Bafarad: 4:159b 

T aentTertd: Fahey 5:1578 
TT Rat WAMPT 6:25c 


Parakhyatantra 


TT WeTeeratagy App. C:44b 
TT eqcegta: 4:129d 

T AY CAAT: 2:106d (v1) 
ACT AA Spe FT: 1:2d 
TaZe SfarankTsr: 3:52b 

tT ge OA WW 1:21la 

T BY Sea: TY: 1:17F 
T ger SfX Wdlae 2:7b(vl) 
7 2M S=IT Age: 6:12d 

T SVAfKAAAT: 2:73b 

av fafird wacurfat 2:111¢ 
oArA STUTETAAA: 3:65b 
T Tal Xqateter: 2:27d 

T TWYct TMNT: 4:162a 

7 Tata fagqurary 4:86c 

7 favs aaafara App. C:50b 
T Wes aTaT 3:23a 

T AAT: THT: 1:46d 

aq fraed feta: 4:107d 

av firwacth: fere: 2:33d 

T We: TNT: 2:42b 

AT: FATET WT EV 6:368 
TAT EATRTAVE HTC? 6:35c 

T Tae: 6:51d 

av afew: aferat aT AT 2:68a 
wv afHe Hd TET 15:20a 

wT Wetted Ad: 3:53d 

7 Aret THITfAAT 15:69b 

7 Wat SUUEY FEY 1:20a 
ATACT THM 4:169d 

7 arf Feary sat 3:13a 
T AAS WAHT: 6:22c 
AT: TACHTATT 2:59a 

qt Teaearttr App. D:64e 
T WMT BW Ua AT 2:107b 
Ta FraaHd: 3:17b 


Index of Padas in the Tantra 


AWTeITt SUA ATANT 3:31a 
TUM: AAA 4:65c 
TuUet + TyheRT: 4:65d 
auUut fe wear faq 4:61d 
T THT: CPTAT SET 1:73a 
AACAAATATAT: 5:44 

T atpeufatarr 6:10a 

tT aur: aefa AT 6:14c 
av faarar aear ofa: 4:31c 
av fay: Jpet: wher: 1:36a 
av wife: Mead Tar 2:125d 
tT wfaare ae 6:39e 

tT WOCET HAT 1:86b 

T MTAHOY MH: 3:7c 
AZ: AHHAT: 5:52b 

A AXASA AHA 6:24c 

T fed Gt FT TET 2:108a 
T WAAAY ATT 6:17c 
T ANAATTATAT: 6:19a(vl) 
T ANAATIAT ANT 6:19a 

T AAA ATT: AAT 3:21c 
T Paar Hrrafstay 3:45b 

a fe amr fara wae 15:22d 
wT fe WNT Rd AT 1:71c 
ATTY ATITAA 6:54b 


arsar sf + aThrene 14:56c 


atfsarerr sfaereqe 14:54a 
arsrar FT FATT 14:56b 
arsicarg aftay 14:55b 
ATSTA STUNT 14:68d 
ATSIEAT WheaveTaH 14:53c 
ATTA AACA 1:33b 
ACTA WATE 4:167c 
aca BAferar: 3:6b 


587 


arfasra faar t aT App. C:50d 
ATATHTC: HM WAT 14:65d 
aTaTare afer 14:66d 
ATATATRLAT ARATE 5:50 
ATATATUAMATT 14:64c 
AAMT AT HANSA 2:41b 
ATATHTAAAT HAT 1:32d 
ATATy tava: 5:11d 
ATATCAZATAAT 5:107b 
ATATCAWATATAT 5:107a 
ATATCAAATHAT 5:107d 


ATAICAGaTaTAT 5:107c 

AAT AAAT AAT 4:100d 
AMATRSTHA ART 4:2b 
ATATEATT CARAT: 2:2b 
ATUUT WET WAT 4:97d 
ATIUT FABNTAY SET 2:47c 
ATUUT THAT: CATT 3:18c 
AT-UUT AAT ATT: 2:100c 
ATIUT aft STs 4:98c 
aT-aur frre TET 4:49c 
ar-aur fafaar ure: 6:71a 
aT-aur fraay Ae: 4:51d 
ATUUT ATTCRIMTT® 4:99¢ 
ATUUTETRT AT CATT 2:37a 
ATUUT THAT: CATT 2:86a 
ATUUT FATAT-ARY 4:36a 
ATAU SAMY 1:53a 
ATIUTEATAT GATT 2:86a(vl) 
ATTATSATY ATA HT: 3:73d 
ATAEATAT S=IUT JH: 4:119c 
araTavea Frat FRTEHT 3:38d 
ahr: waTadtay App. B:15c 
eaTAT ATATYAT Hey App. B:16d 
aTaacat AWaT App. B:32d 


988 


ANTAET AATSAT App. F:9lc 
ATAATUET ATHTAT 6:66b 

arid: av fara AT 1:45b 

ATM Weg aT: TAY App. L:12I1f 
arsarafacteer App. E:88a 


ATACITAATAAT 15:55b 
ATAATaY WAATH 4:4a 


ATATAINTITANT 4:114a 
ATATAAAAT HAT 14:9b 

aTaTy WV AearfMd: 14:74b 
atfaar FT ANT: 4:96d 
afaargred Seq App. F:89d 
TASER App. B:39a 
ATaY AANA: 2:27b 

aay arafaar wae 3:41d 
atfer adfa Stead App. E:85d 
atfer Veer aTcHNT 15:54b 
Aer Z:aIsat Tre App. K:117c 
Fr:egeur faafaar 14:3d 
Frfercr=t @ tite: 5:16d 
Frferaret FANT: 4:23b 
Frfactarrarrrcaret 2:65 
Frfaarer emp: 14:32b 

Frmat ayparaery 14:94d 
Frrgreay: MY: 2:83b 
Prorftronyerremer 14:41b 
FIOATAITIPCMAT 14:37b 

Frorgarr fagfeery 4:79b 

Fray ANTATTT 5:46a 

Prov a mrferre 5:41b 

Fraet FarspaTeTem: 5:45c 

Frer faedy orstferar App. E:87b 
FrersTrer ay We: 14:66a 
Frer att fart TET 14:65c 


Parakhyatantra 


Frenrtatrar: App. C:45b 
Freastafaa a7 6:79e 
Frengeprfad TCT 15:67d 
Frsr armferaar 2:57b(vl) 
PrRaTeraqTa anys: 3:30b(v1) 
FIST ATATTRY. Fe: 2:126b 
Frat: SQTAUT WAT 15:28c 
FITS: SITET 2:103c 
FRAT AUTART 15:34c 
FP THT FT 2:30e 
Fret at sere 1:57d 
Prrarevreyary 6:6c 

PrP TaPret I 2:29a 
Fateh + ata: 2:112b 
Faferara face: 4:42d 
Frafaftaaresar 4:5la 
Fraay tT sqafa%d: 6:19b 
Fracar far wararry 4:52d 
Fracar ae ade 4:57d 
Fran, arcarfey 1:71b 
Fraarfayarnr fart 4:129¢ 
Frarray fFraeatey 5:152a 
Fram: ATS 5:38f 
Frye: aaearat App. B:32c 
Fryer atfrarhtce 3:72c 
FCM ACU FET 4:135a 
Fatsrcaventcted: 1:49b 
Fr ACTATTAT 14:84d 
Frcgeper afer: 14:106d 
Fact & T NTT 4:145c 
Facveir wat eter 15:27c 
frcverr farsrrfrar 15:25d 
Frcaenfearsrar 15:25a 
FATATUTATYBETAT 5:38e 
Fret at ar afer: 15:58c 


Index of Padas in the Tantra 


FATTRIT WATT 2:82b 
Frorarer FrePrar: 15:28d 
Farrart at fa feray 2:67d 
FRATT T ATA 2:65c 
Frrarcer faeafer 2:69d 
Fran FT aearar: App. C:51c 
Farrar sf& FerHe 2:66b 
Frrctet eT Ad PATe 14:85a 
PRItaqeTaaa: 5:10d 
FRIST WHAT 2:127b 
Prerear 7 anny sft 14:52 
Frtrate: Prareacy App. D:77b 
FrRSHTAT TAT: 5:25d 
FreSFATAY SAAT 5:25¢ 
Fresaarar SY areaae: 5:14b 
Frernrasrfacd: 14:31b 

Fate: spafa-gaet 5:122b 
Frere sTped ee 15:8a 
Freeeasparsad App. J:111b 
Frexar: Twar SHAT: 4:20d 
FEST FATSAT 14:3b 
Fafafarar + ur sf 1:53c 
fFrada-caeyyh 2:121a 
Frofasranr: fered: 3:67b 
fafaat Fee 2:51b 
Freaeedarxa: 5:26b 

Fryar AT Tad: 5:87b 

Fafeer aa Aeaqvet: 5:87c 
Frta-d HY YT: 15:48d 

Frat Aacreats App. L:134b 
Fafenar: WeaTaeT: 4:20f 
fred: alfdhast 5:98c 

arerae Prt: WaT 5:83a 

zat aeatt SIM 6:72 


TIT aaRINTT: 15:37d 
TUT ATA: 2:48b 
TI: ATYAAT App. L:122b 
aattae Tea 1:70d 
TRUTAT AepaAT 14:58b 
TANTRA TART AT 4:5b 
Afsaeayar UY App. G:92c 
ATA SAAT 6:76b 
avert frat wae 4:104b 
AITeTATSA ATE: 4:1la 
AVWACT ATA 15:23d 

T 
qaedadt wv fafa: 15:54d 
WaT gerdateted: 2:13d 
qepeatactad: 2:123d 
Terert Yelft App. D:65d 
Te aca arares App. E:79c 
Tsu eater: 4:114b 
Te avaferd: 14:78b(vl) 
TaA-attadt: 14:76d 
TAaAAeTIT: App. C:52d 
qTeaanarfeany 5:111b 
Ter: Wararaa: App. H:95f 
TeryaTTtrrey App. H:105a 
TTT: FATT wa: App. L:142a 
Terstrenfedr wer: 5:130a 
Teenaqeaney 5:11ld 
°TehYSlaUe: 5:28d 
afer: WarageTyer: App. A:8a 
qe fear + acafay 1:12a 
qe catered 6:7d 
VWeaTarrdwha: 6:60d 
qeararfayemy 3:25d 
Tearagryarayay 6:1b 
Tearnry wT ferar 6:39d 


589 


590 


qTeniqga faa 1:5a 
Terdyfawieayr: 3:21d 
oqarmtaaieh: 6:43b 
gear: watedd: 6:45d 
qeqraregagfeRqd: 6:49b 
qerarctafer faa4r 6:8d 

TT: TIAATATT: 5:19a 

Ter Wares Mire 14:38c 
TaeaeTHAVSTY® 14:48 
Tareay SW ARTA: 5:12c 
TT: MIG: WE: 5:123a 
Watred ad Adaqy App. D:66d 
Ward aay Bey 14:16c 
Ttatet SIT Wesrer 5:44a 
TATU, aad App. D:58d 
TOMI: WheTT: 5:44d 

TT Md AT? App. L:132c 
qanriferd aeq 15:49¢ 
Wear: CaufHd: 3:19b 

TUM MAATATA 2:89d 
TWagdatad: 6:23d 
TETAS ST 15:54 
Teeqfawrysy 3:48b 

TTI SAAS 14:4¢ 

Teer TAET: 15:21b 

TWA Wy Aerts App. D:74d 
TiaaAr Sayqetttdr: App. D:75b 
TUAarayhCAT 5:45b 

Tad AEH Tay 4:77a 
TwaredtacqwH App. L:134c 
Uf tHeT Teale: App. B:28d 
afta T TATTT 2:104a 
afcrrafasryd: 1:21d 
aforafasrye: 1:72b 


Parakhyatantra 


afcrearfasreer 1:22c 
WTA ATG 1:3c 
afcararenet TEA 15:45a 
FONT: AGT: 1:13d 
Tetra afewarHersy 6:78b 
qaarfafafere ar 2:148 
Tear WAAATET: 5:78b 
weafary af¥y App. D:56a 
Vat: CIMAATATT 4:114c 
Tat Catt AUT App. L:136d 
TMT: WMAART: 4:156c 
Ty: wna fra 1:5c 
TY TATTAT: 4:156d 
qyed Fafa trary 4:161d 
TWYcaarwtazary: 1:6c 

Wyeast aepa: feray 4:160d 
Weed afcerd FATT 4:161a 
WcaeahawHM: 1:93c 
Wearysad Tat App. L:128b 
Tycafaxrer WAT 4:157d 
TAT CACqNTaT: 4:156b 
TyAT wferwragd4r: 2:99d 
Ta Wearrwet: 2:116d 
Watae Atay 2:115a 

Gar: Harare; 4:51b 
TMT: AcHrsanrfeyd: 2:101b 
TaTgantear wad 4:66b 
Wwad adfarqay 4:89f 
TTYARATCT: 15:19d 
THUeHTT: 2:115d 
Wedre:HaveTat:° 5:37 
Gave At aAceperx 5:58d 
Wate Way Ady 5:41d 
Wearetaarh Sata 5:60a 
Were Berar SWEATS 5:52e 


Index of Padas in the Tantra 


Weary TeaTatsy 14:46d 
Wegqrareal STM: 3:74c 
GTeret AAT: Sq: 5:149b 
qrerfencuifHad 2:102d 
Welt Aadeatate App. B:23a 
Ulett AAI App. B:37e 
Wera-atwawdr 14:6d 

Get aAyEHy 4:101f 

Great Water TAaAT App. B:29a 
We aaa att App. B:24d 
WafHafasya4rar 5:11c 

Waw: War yar App. B:25b 
UifteEatAg:aea4l: 5:34b 

ara + WrHgs: 5:149a 
ufeatsattqart: 4:104d 
WAG HATAT: 15:33b 
WT HATS-Uy 15:34a 
ITT HANT 3:14¢ 

ahaT UIT YTAT 14:33c 
qrareae sfircfrar: 3:70b 
atte after 14:90d 
WearaT wufe4rct: 3:46d 
TMTAT Uget ATA 2:56a 
OUTTA CAT: 5:23d 

fry: WHET TdT: 5:143d 
Faget FaTITMAy 3:75c 
Fooshyatre fare 14:26d 
PRATT AST 5:134a 
Frafar aa ifraturr: 5:105c 
PreTaaeryaary 4:82d 

Gra FAUNTENTAT 14:35c 
Fapedy F Sa: 2:91b 
qfamnmgrarnry 3:72a 

ga: Yar afntad 4:76b 


JaaTaqu4rad: 4:67b 
FaMeHaaa INT 4:61c 
Goat TA TATE 4:72d 

yar HATA: App. E:88f 
Jar Wer: Hearsay SFT 4:63c 
qaraadeharar J 3:31c 

Far FASHAPHT: 2:47d 
Geared FeACaTEAT 5:151a 
yaaa: WaTaeqT App. B:3lc 
qaaterrareata 15:39b 
qgafaercar sft at 3:47b 
qGredurfar eo: 5:9¢ 
qgaeater fearezaey App. D:76c 
FATT TS: WHAT 1:61a 
JATAATCANT: 15:46d 
YATateL eA 4:57c 
GUAT AMeAT 5:68c 

Tey Tih WH 5:64b 

Fer FT Hels: 4:37b 
Teresa AAH: 6:22d 
TeIMAAAAT 6:2b 
Feared SAaaT: 3:5d 
Tey aT FH AT 2:91c 
qareratfecer 15:6d 
qead w It: fea: 2:96d 
qead Sat Wt: MTT: 2:96a 
TayTMay FE App. A:7a 
FaryReatehy: 5:31b 

Ger ageradesy 14:30d 

Yady WHATS: 5:78b(vl) 
qanrear fany: rer 14:65a 
Fata AACS 1:30a 

qa wafer: ar sft 5:161la 


Yaqarasreathefr App. H:107b 
TaaTTAeATT? 6:14a 


591 


092 


gua gery ara: 4:69d 
ofrdreqarse4 14:33d 
yfyear ateaett FT App. B:18b 
Par FT WATAATATE 4:122a 
QreIaT TAT WEATE 3:22a 
TeIa TAY TENS 3:39a 
THe ATH: 5:37b 
THEITEARTMT: 4:140d 
Tarr fafrarmy 14:101a 
Warr: Marwfad 1:18b 
THT TITTY Ila 

TAM JET AMT 1:16c 
Ta Mtayarnraet: 5:9b 
THMCIAAT WT: 4:119b 
OTH MAeTEAT: 5:69d 
WHatpdwMtHa: 14:105b 
Tafa: Wedant ST 6:29c 
wpfarerantehr: 6:42b 
wfaweqar-uret 6:47c 
WHACTTHTAET 4:59c 
THldergt AT WAT 4:58c 
THAYMTeTATT 4:69a 
Whedettet Farry 3:69d 
THUTAIT FAT 4:80c 
WHAT: PR 5:122a 
wherraatsyT YS App. F:9lae 


WaITIcTAAVStMe App. H:100a 


Tit anftdr atTT 9:99c 

war fafrafere: 5:101d 
TATIIATY AT 14:75c 
weg ad fard: App. D:56d 
wre fracer App. H:100c 
wrar warfarfed: 6:37d 
WALA FT AAT 3:2le 


Parakhyatantra 


sfaruraafeyed 15:67c 
afaqn: aer aff: 4:147d 
Wate: Mara 2:3c 
wfava fasreor 6:63a 
OITA Ae Sper 2:36d 
ate ofa aarefe: 14:11b 
wfrarr caerfet: 3:11b 
afaarfenfaarere 15:1c 
WAM AAAATH 6:47a 
Ware: Wore: TT 1:1d 
WeaUH Yalaay AT: 5:80b 
wear afe aEe 3:24a 
WeaaIwy wd: HFA 1:21b 
Wearey sorcrear sft 5:143a 
Weauay WaeTaT 14:104a 
weaaufaatad: 6:61d(vl) 
Weaar SFY WaTET 14:104c 
Weaqay STMHMAT: 6:29d 
WaTITHT A Wee: 6:61c 
TUTTI ATCT: 6:19 
TUTTI TATA 6:20 
Wearerafear GT: 15:17c 
Weareratear Ay 15:7c 
WUT Far ATT 14:17c 
TeATETACY kQTT 14:10a 
WUIITATSAeY 6:19¢(vl) 
whraetay MPs: 5:110c 
wfrar weed: 5:158b 
TAIT XT AU 3:44b 
werafeqfat DUT 1:91b 
WEA AAAT: 5:36b 
Wed cage GATT 4:60a 
ITT IT ATCT 4:60b 
WITS VB WITH: 5:150d 
WaT SETHE 14:51d 


Index of Padas in the Tantra 


WeCAcHIMHSrT 5:158a 
warfragHear SAY 5:119c 
WaT ATT ATS 4:73c 
mrate FT GANT NT... 3:79b 
MTT MTT: WY: 14:78F 
wy afr aerdt 5:97d 
mir: wfafnmrsr 2:62a 
Wand Ir TAT 2:57c 
wavatfa war fare: 2:56b 
WAM FTAA 1:12d 
TAM ACT TT 3:42d 
war aetafaary 3:45d 
Waa aera 3:56a 
TAIT TAMA 3:23c 
wary + fart afery 2:28c 
warren + fA 3:42b 
TATeTAed? eat App. D:58e 
TAGAPT ATUT 2:28b 
wart fafreetacg 14:107b 
WAHT ATHAST FH: 15:47d 
MATTE: 5:24d 
WAS STAT AAT 1:83a 
ama TET 3:61d 
wae mgferret: 5:66c 
WW WFMTAeT 5:102d 
Tafa: WMT WRIT 2:102c 
Watt Hed FAT 2:45c 
Wafasxad TT 1:69a 
WafTHTEMTIATT 2:105a 
Tae MTS ATA 3:58d 
way afa ar Aq 1:91d 
WATLACTATaAy 14:27 
WaTategy CATs 14:6a 
wfafgATaras 14:100a 


993 


WATE FTEATAFATAT 14:93c 
Wad: TTaAy aT FATT 4:59 
Spd: Sates AUT 1:51d 
aTMHATT rather: 1:34b 

smyfer: ferar saat 3:70 
wifrezqargt ae App. H:96c 
wae: aTaaearer App. B:27a 


oTeyaregyar ary App. B:30c 
ITT: ATTAAY ATYT 4:115c 

WMT AAHVSAT 14:21b 
WMTAAINS ATAY 1:17c 
amrgfatawest App. B:24a 
WTSI FHATATT: 4:117c 
WUTSAENT EAST: 14:13d 
WUTAT TAA TT? 4:115a 
wars: @ atfda: 14:14b 
WTA FT: Hale App. B:23c 
WMTANTE YT 14:10b 
WMTATATAAETAT 14:18c 
WMTATATT AATAtA 14:17d 
WOT Tot AATSATA 14:20c 
WATATT FR: Sq: 1:88b 
WeTat ferdy ar Tare 6:72a 
Wet Afar AAT 6:37c 

Wed aAatagfarcd: 6:33d 

WA AATIAET 15:72c 
WATE CRU ATCT 2:128d 

aif: wrarearstirferar 14:91d 
What: AT AAaTeST _T App. A:8b(vl) 
wifes: FaeaaaTeT J App. A:8b 
otf: carefacfad: 14:93b 
Wgqated Wedd: 3:4d 

WAT FEIMISM 3:30c 
ware wfatad 3:20b 

waa wadifedy 3:33d 


994 


wratedt Ter IT App. D:58b 

srafady waae: App. D:58f 

Ware: TET: App. L:135b 

arava FOYT aT 14:43a 

We arar wafag 1:18d 

WUCATA TMTETET 2:121c 

WMT aMer: 14:31d 

Wer: araygatae 4:117d 

WH: T ATAHTAWART WaT 2:129c 

Grew: ATTA RTA 15:2a 

We AH AMAT 4:171b 

Wmedgyatd: 14:97d 

WAT TAS AAT 5:82c 

wrared sar sfirarfcor: 2:124d 

Wry sata & SFT 15:20 

rar sare fragt Were... ..14:108d 

oSrarefavarary 6:54d 

WTRANTAATHAT AAA: : 5:162d 
7 

wer @ faaar fag 2:88a 

Get Ba: RATA 6:70a 

he aAgreantd: 15:34d 

Get ACTS ATeT 15:10a 

wet frerad sfaeryt 15:22b 

WATATAMTAT 1:30d(vl) 

wewmeatatad We App. E:83c 

Heyer T BtfEdr: 15:30b 

Berar F Atte: App. C:51f 

wet was Brrfacr 14:85f 

WaAMAaaanted 15:16b 


g 
qarsaertert App. A:3d(vl) 
oTATATHIMA ST: 4:146b 
qT AAA WaT 4:95d 


Parakhyatantra 


TAT: ASIC TUT 1:34d 
Tarcant ASPET 4:104c(vl) 
aot aT HTAafagTay 2:55a 
TARTAN YT 2:55d 
TAMAUVAT YN 2:56d 
AAAACLMNT: CATT 4:38c 
WAAHT TAWVAT FT 2:43e 
WATAT TAUT WMT 2:56c 
wera fafarr = AT 2:54d 
afcrecatafire 5:51f 
qeaed ST WT FAST 6:29a 
WaT AAS: 6:29a(vl) 
afecifrarfad: 4:147b 
ageatear art: App. D:70c 
agat fet eet Fe App. K:117b 
qeatchrerm: 6:11c 
AEA: SAT ASNT 6:6a 
ATATEVATA YUE: 15:34b 
QTATeTATATT Are 15:31a 
TEN WAASINT 3:76a 

TEA HATH 4:142c 
TEINAACa ACA 4:105e 
arene FTeT 14:11a 
arereiaceaar ay Sa 4:140a 
aerate aay: wf: App. B:18a 
aTeIy AY SaTTAAVTs 4:106a 
ave Sut ay SaEMMHT 4:139a 
fary: YO ePATT: 6:3a 
fa-qarcyeraery 14:82b 
FaqaTenarae: 5:156b 
fa-gcear weravat 14:45 
fare: & TTT: 6:2d 
fa-erfraairemar 6:5a 

aT ITAIUT YT 15:45b _ 
SAT Way 6:39c 


Index of Padas in the Tantra 


gtanfraqrrmfasreny: 14:108a 
gfareagqyr: 5:11b 
gfaraqydar: 2:2d 
qfaaredt Favay 2:16a 
afaceaqaarfaa4y 4:90b 
gfegtoqmaArayn 1:54d 

gfaat favarant 4:93a. 
GACAAATATSAY 4:92e 

gal Fer shafted: 5:150b 
Gal Aca H ASAP 1:54c 
Terartre Aarfer 4:124a 
Getear STW WT: 4:64a 
Geregtsarewwm 4:66c 

ued Tarra: 5:119d 
oMyATafsdret: 5:27d 
FEA TFET AT 5:121a 
geraer WeraqUr 5:120d 
FEAEeAATS 14:78c 
FEAR AeA 5:136b 
NEAT ATIUT AST 4:90c 
arraee fart at 3:8c 
WTHACATAN AAT 3:39b 
ararfehraghy: ary 15:42a 
AATETATTAATAT 15:3¢ 
arararafarardt 2:110d 
VTA HT FIT 2:108d 
weet Ferry 15:28b 
TEA A TA SATT App. D:58a 
weraaites FUT 15:27d 
TETANY Add 4:77b 

welfad a yetasr: App. G:93d 
WETAATMANTA: 5:77b 
FEVSYR — WT 5:7c 

TET TECAUNTCATS 5:136a 


WET aT Wafer: 5:134d 
WET aT WeTANTaT: 14:78d 
renter feraae fare: 15:71d 
were Feraarrer: 14:78d(vl) 
MET: MAsTdaT App. C:42a 
aTEMty ar HerferayT App. D:62b° 
aremttaarcwr aft App. D:59c 
ate F TaAraraTay 1:2b 

i 
WMI ATHY ST ASA 4:164c 
WTI GIT HTT 1:2a 
WET AT A Bary 5:73d 
WerT WPTATSTET 5:72c 
WT TANITA 2:103b 
WAM STAT AKT 5:127a 
WAIT YT F:A 5:92c 
waratte AaAaT 5:57b: 
WARS: WaT 1:49d 
wactetft 4TAIr 6:32c 
wafar aferatad: App. B:17c 
wafer afasryveRTey 14:77¢ 
water Watt: EIRT: 2:105d, 
ct Cal fear: wat: App. L:121c 
warear SPT ATA-UTT 3:4a 
warery Arafat F 3:3d 
Wradcer T THT 3:34a 
wfacrer WeeTeT: 5:160d 
wacanrafar ferdt 2:20b 
WATCH SMMAT 5:88b 
WAT SHHITAT: 2:102b 
VATHAM SAH 14:94e 
WITHA: 14:52b 
WATAATAT: 4:134b 
WATSUTAT: 14:49d 
WATAGAT Te: 3:43b 


096 


WACMTATT ATH 5:40d 

wad fagy sacTetsH: 15:68b 
wacareafwarre: App. H:101d 
WaeeATaT AFA 4:90d 
waenmad: f|r 15:37c 
NASNTIAHT CH: 5:114b 

waders: wenyer App. B:16c 
WAHT Waar App. C:53f 
waeg FTeAT 14:28a 
wagiareaa fart 6:34d 
Wage ahAnyT 4:103d 
WAGaAITTHA 4:95b 

Waal AIT Spey 15:36d 

was ATaT fray 4:105f 
way urafayfae_: 6:82d 
weraT affat Aer App. B:21b 
WEIMATAATAITT 15:7a 
wetracta FHS 14:42c 
WVScuMTeatwgled App. D:68a 
WTA TWHAY SAT 5:115c 
WTFATATA-ATT 5:146c 
wert fara 5:115a 
UIT att faye 9:64a 

wrted Eftavad 5:92b 
WTaATaeta: AY SFT 15:40a 
wearer SFT aT 4:80b 
WARTS ARPT 1:68d 

TAT ATHTTAAMT: 4:162d 

WTI ATA Wherry 4:102d 
YTAY sxpraurerae: App. H:106b 
War Urata TWAT: 5:43b 
WTA WefgUrecamesry 5:43b(vl) 
Arararae avuse App. L:131c 
Art Teatareed: 4:111b 


Parakhyatantra 


Arar yarerfrtay 1:23d 
APTS WaT AT FT 1:3lc 
Rrrercarerar = fart 15:43d 
Rrrarty waenfad 15:43b 
reer weafeerr: App. A:5b 
yfayfanet Ter: 15:21d 
YRC Hale 4:132c 
YMC ASVET 4:104c 
YRATATT wrete App. D:68d 
Yan araraaray App. D:65a 
YANATATAAT Weg 5:72a 
ysad AAV 5:113c 

y: Thefafesa4r 5:112F 

Wye yf apr 14:2c 
YaraTTHATAA 6:79b 

Yate F FAT 4:141a 
Yaaeaeaay 5:81d 
yYarkeara Bratt App. E:85c 
yarfettfar arte: 4:94d 
Yas: TE ATAT: FIT 4:96a 
YaTaT Byers SFT 1:19a 
Yarargead WAT App. E:85b 
WaTTyearearar: App. E:84a 
yaeary Sra AT 1:75a 

Yar wear SFT WT: Arey 4:50a 
yearaee fairer App. B:30d 
yaraut FH Wek: 6:16c 
yfae afar wf 14:5b 

Yar YAETUTTT 14:20a 

YAY YAY TENTT 14:13a 

Tay YAY TW BATaTy: 14:14 
Yetta: afr ye 5:113a 
WeRaMyeY — 4:143a 

WP maf WATT 4:27d 
WrETATAAPTAT 4:93d 


Index of Padas in the Tantra 


MT walt aTeAGy 4:28b 
wWNTH aed: 4:164b 
WTdcaeaay AFATT App. E:8l1c 
army Frferar: 4:24a 
wTrarhrpe4r: ferear: 4:21d 
wT sy: HpartH: App. L:123d 
wry arTaquar Art App. L:124c 
wary T ara App. L:128c 
wrrearafHargqg”: 4:157b 
WIT APTSHATeT 1:63c 
WAAATAC Td: 1:63b 
MARSA ABl A 1:84b 
WTATSHNT AAY FET 4:93c 
WraTah aT: 5:51d 
wWHaHE_ faster: App. G:92d 
wirarhtyarfr Spe 4:129a 
Wat AcHATHTT 2:40c 
wacaaTrartEd: 1:79f 
yearn ahaaredey 14:72d 

7 
AVeaTafaMcea4y: 5:144d 
Aa By ear TTT 1:41d 
AAT FU FST 5:78c 
TeAAT A-WTaT FAT App. H:103c 
TIANA Frawrara App. F:89c 
MIATITAAt FF 5:65c 
meat Fe: TaUTH: 5:66a 
mea wfhattar MATT 6:38b 
FATATA HCA 6:57a 
TTA far TANGA 4:53d 
ATA Waray 4:157c 
WATMHET UAT AAT 4:26c 
Wah Aled AT J 14:9a 
Aaanayr farsa 4:30d 


TATA NATAT 4:38F 
WATAAST FAST 2:60c 
aargfafawesysy App. B:24c 
arate frrraq App. B:24b 
Aa: AT HAA: 6:50d 

AT: Wereyway ASAT 6:40a 
Tater Peraerary 6:57b 
WACAHNGIH A 6:57d 
Tada AeAt: App. E:88b 
TATATTST: 6:1c 
TaTeaTeanetqMa: 6:5la 
Tare STURICATE: 2:1c 
TAMTATT AAA 6:28c 
Aareraguresg: App. E:79d 
WaT Gear: W ar fe F 6:79f 
yaafaart Freer fare 6:82a 
WATSI Sait: 6:la 
A-aeeteprarary 1:76c 
Ofet aerafaray App. D:64b 
AATYA-garfaar 6:80d 
AATaANaeTS 4:165c 
WATAAT THT 4:167d 
afar APASATHTAT 4:20e 

Ne ead fered: 15:41b 
Aa Tala AAA 4:168b 
rete farfanvsct 2:23d 
ARCH T AT 2:24a 

Rea fayar Aer: 2:24b 
weere: aw fate: 4:62a 
Aesetd ad ferry 1:90d 
TETHUTATTHA 4:46b 
TETasd Way AMT 4:20a 
ARTs THATCH 15:67b 
Weld TaTed FT 5:41c 


Tera ferwareq: 5:48c 


597 


998 


merfarectreatht: 5:57c 
Tera GA APAar: 5:131b 
TRTTAEAUT ET: 5:19 
TEPMTAAT HAT 5:49b 
AETUST VAT: 5:32b 
WeTUcaa tated: 5:16b 
ARTA AY 5:32a 
ARTETAtTTACaTE 6:67c 
TETATSETaT a 5:49c 
WET CeHAT 5:49a 
afear AeaT TATA 14:93a 
AEMET GUT WAT 3:20c 
Ream Frorarafy 14:76b 
oOTAUTaTTH YH: 5:25b 
ATTAIN CAANTAH 4:47d 
Tavs: WACTeT? 5:25a 
oATaTS TITTAY 4:122d 
aifirqrasafare 5:54a 
ATaCaT WeceHAT 5:145c 
ATT ATIecterayT: 6:29b 
ATGaq AAT ATH 6:4c 
ATATITATSATTNAT: 1:9b 
ATaT Warfeaarar: 4:107b 
ATapar zaraferfr: 4:96b 
ATATET ACA) IAT: 4:8b 
ATT ATATATeTaAT 2:9b 
ATTAVSHCTeeT 5: la 

aTar faemra<aer 2:127c 
Aravara ¢ Avarar: App. L:139a 
arararad q Ara App. L:140a 
ATaTaratad Wray 4:149a 
ATaTed aaa 4:154b 
ATI TST ATCT 4:15b 
ATATST TEAM: 5:152c 


Parakhyatantra 


ATaraataafstar: 2:121b 
aTaracatata Bye 4:15d 
ATaTacatae Wher 4:3a 
ATaTa cata aed 4:20c 
ATanTarfedr Ser: 5:1558 
Tar Va Act: WAT 4:159a 
arar war araferwar 4:10d 
ATaTaT FT A Add: 4:152d 
aTar gear ferrgqar 4:1a 
ATacqer HeaTaaA App. L:127a 
RATATAT 4:16 
Aad Penrith qT: 5:157c 
arana aferfrs ar 5:1d 
ATU yaad Fer: 5:142d 
ATAvSearhy BAHT App. B:14b 
Aaa FAI 5:77d 
ATCUATATA Tae: 5:76d 
arear faereaty facet 5:78d 
aTeattefaaredt: 5:133b 
nrare — faz: farqt App. D:71c 
fast Felt SHAT SIT: 5:62d 
yf: afafeeterar 15:57d 
ata: aaa fererfa App. C:55d 
eofHmararatiae: 15:1d 

: 15:50d 
mHrare war fart 1:53d 
yar ar sfratntad 15:62b 
yet werarrad 3:2d 
AWTel siaer sfeer: 6:81b 
AeA ATM FU AT 14:84c 
qerarstatst FT: 14:27b 
Fer Tarzeferh 14:70d 
Fea ATT Sq AT AA 6:74c 
TaaTaTUeNl Fe: 2:76f 
yfearrefawe4r: 5:70b 


Index of Padas in the Tantra 


yt ferqararfor App. F:91d 
AGTASAHAATST 2:95¢ 
yraedsa fasted 5:135a 
yfrerarrarat: 5:61b 

AAMT Faas UTayr 5:101c 

yfe seat ad: App. F:90b 
qedtfaeecrs App. L:125c 
HAGA TATA: 4:121d 
rararerfefudar 2:57b 
APAATHNAUTATAT 4:26d 

Ader T Get TT 1:38a 
Tact TANT 6:65c 

Wat: aTaaar suf 2:2a 
yaryd fat fered 1:37d 

aft srfererefactry App. L:147b 
qr Tad: 2:89b 
ATH: 4:153b 
ASTI a: 1:94f 
Waedad: ferag: 6:28b 
qerard: RaTfcerg: 3:12d 
yVaaite ATES App. D:64c 
oydgaredaaqar App. B:17b 
FGA WMATA SFT 5:83c 
qT IT afer We App. B:27c 
AUalrs T TEMA 5:112c 
TOT AT: Far 5:68a 
Radataared 5:70c 

arey ardif-gar ad: 3:55d 
Aedeaqaay FMT 4:88d 
arettgerat Tray 4:89a 


7 

aq: Hal HAHEE: 2:31a 

T: FI: WRICWH: 5:94b 

q Wa add a-a1 App. G:93c 


ae murfettrt App. B:38d 
GWage Meh: 5:59b 
aa: aafafirar say 4:43a 
aq: WM FAAEe 5:137c 
ad: Ya: Sad: 1:51b 
aq: Barra App. A:8e 
Gd: ATATIT AT FATT 4:70 
aq: aft fawr ferar 15:24b 
aq: eanrafagry 15:15 
TACTTNITYIHA 2:62d 
TASH ACT 2:35c 
aqdeda fart: WaT 14:61c 
TACTETAMETA 15:46 

5:128c 
GAeTeAT SAT Aa 15:21c 
Uded YRITFAT: 4:91b 
GIT CAA JRIET 14:13c 
afaar FProaaega4r App. L:131b: 
adrat WeTaT WaT App. B:21b(vl) 
at eat X farted 3:51d 
aat SIUTTYT: Wa: 1:59a 
Gal T WAH Wh 2:30c 
Gay ANAT wed App. C:46b 
Gay See: Weare 1:61c 
wat Ferhrarfard: 6:22b 
wat aftfa-rarer 1:38b 
at TAIT ST App. A:2c 
Tal SATAAULYH: 6:18b 
Gat SATave quar: 6:18b (vl) 
Tar Say aAMeqar: 6:18b(vl) 
TATH WIR FT AAT: 5:65b 
GAA BTASHAT 14:94b 
aa wert Tea: 5:98b 
aa att after 5:95b 
aq weafr TT AT 14:70b 


TT WATE 5:84 


599 


600 


OT MAAMNAT: 5:102b 
UT WAAeTHeT: 5:93b 
Ut Ad AMT AATF 15:37a 
aa fester warar 5:130c 
aa qfatafreacd: 5:97b 
OT Fd: WATTA: 5:89b 
Gat ATT MIT 5:90c(vl) 
aT YX: FANT: 5:92d 
aT gentry TET 5:104b 
Ga A-atHarvany: 1:10a 
Tq AAMT 1:88 


aa afert aur ferry 3:56d 


ar aeq aur ferary 4:12d 


aa antedt Aar App. L:144c 


aa frarrey TAa4r 5:88c 
aq ger: W Werte: 5:100b 
Wa WAY ARIZA: 5:94d 
Ga WIT ANAT 5:90c 

aa afr: wereaihte 15:9¢ 
aq Wal ARAFAT: 5:83b 
GT AFSATTA 1:9 

aay aT anthro 1:6a 
aarat Ta aT Safe: 1:27d 
Tae TAcHe 5:86d 
aearee at arfrery 15:62d 
aur tfrevs: 2:33a 
VUTATUNTAC HA: 4:70d 
WUTTATATT FIT — 4:27 
QUT APAAEATT 14:15¢ 
GUT acartefacaadd 2:63c 
GUT ASHE: 3:19d 
qUTearateart FE: 1:82a 
aurrey mNAT: Saray 4:49a 
GUT: Ae 2:120a 


Parakhyatantra 


aur wartt & at 1:26d 
GUTTA 1:4d 

GUTd: TATA 2:109c 

GUT gar afeye: 4:148d 
GUT WaT ATT: 2:66c 
aur witicagraa App. A:6a 
WUTAaTaa SU: 4:6d 

aur at fafear + & 6:77b 
GUEST AHA 5:95c 
Gey CATA ATH 3:77a 
get afar FF 3:70c 
efter acne afer 15:54a 
wer aex faa 14:27d 
Wet AEAcHS WT: 4:88b 
Ger TT MAETAT 15:38 

aer AfMeder Waq 15:58b 
Tey Wearear wag App. F:91b 
WaT AaaAYohe: 4:75d 

aar ar firqorr wae 4:91d 
ate 3a T wa+adq, App. L:144b 
ate TT FaTeT PUTT 1:64c 
afte AT TeTeMT 1:65c 
ate TATATET 6:64c 

afe aa apfreret 6:15a(vl) 
afe aw fart FETT 4:12a 
ate TeX T ATYPAA 1:52c 
afe APT WATACT 2:68c 

afe ATT WacyA: 15:23b 
ate aTaTe<qurferd: 15:63d 
afte ar aceqraeret 6:15a 
afte weer at T Rit 2:108c 
ate Yt TaATAAT 15:48b 
ate ee afacrart 6:41d 
TErerefMargry 4:120b 
WEE AEA 2:29b(vI) 


Index of Padas in the Tantra 


WEE FEAT 2:73 
WIT WAReT 2:13a 
qauraferd ax App. L:135c 
TI-UUr wagtst 2:82a 
GIqaqwyet: CATT 6:42a 
TIAA CAETAT 3:30a: 
qelter aa: afae 3:35¢c 
TIAT WATT 2:74 

wae aceefagrieg 15:22a 
WadacHentawny 4:66d 

Tel AATATAT 2:93a 

aaqet fray FUT 15:66c 
Way HATA 2:54c 

aar frareart FAT: 5:103c 
qar at farar Ferry 2:44b 
WaT AT AAT AUT 2:59d 

ae _arfear WNT: 1:36c 
aed ara: WMAta 6:73d 
aeq warfrar 7eBq App. D:62a 
aed Sfearmarste: 1:46b 
Tereda Wey 3:22d 
Geet 7 Aatgar 6:5d 
GeTee WIATHT: App. C:47b 
aferear-aet SAT 1:68 
aferareageny: 1:7a 
uferfaarhrar sf: 4:55a 
OPSTUTENTAFAVS 1:89c 
UfAAUTIUT WH 4:52c 
Uea-qGa SYTIRAT: 5:100c 
GEN TETATTHA 2:78b(v1) 
TEX TETATAHA 2:78b 

Geq FT ATCT A: 5:115d 
qear faster Sm App. L:127c 
TEAS TET THAT 1:41b 


aT: arfeeraar ara App. L:12le 
ar auta FAR 2:61b 

aT Alifadeay ABT 6:27c 
UMTS TTA 2:68d 

ammy waet J 5:89d 

ar fagrarceta App. L:124a 
ar & srafag_ MAT 2:48c 

QT Clay ATaAT WAT 1:31e 
UTeelstyaded 1:9la 

are fereaarrag 14:59¢ 
ares fafa Yt: 4:40d 

aT Ale: ACAlAAT: 5:75b 
arareayjer Aree: App. L:131d 
araarat 4 Wepa: App. C:46d 
QTaATeTHAT TAT: 4:21b 
Waceaea FJ 14:106a 
QVASTASATCHA 5:139b 
UTHRICTIPTAT 3:4b 

Qaa AAAceATAT 6:23a 
Qaa ACTA wate App. A:8c 
TaN TAAay ATAT 15:5¢ 
WAATIS ATT 4:1448 

ar faar @ Ft: FATT 1:45d 

ar fahrar gee Jue 1:22d 

aT aT FT TASAKAT 2:46d(v!) 
FraTarfagaaea4r: 3:59c 
qatatwataat 14:3c 

qe fraate Faq 4:72 

GMT AT arqaranir 14:45 

gfe: fa 7 Terra 4:7d 

af: aa7 areesry App. L:124b 
gfmacraatad: 14:15d 
gfactargared: 1:16b 
ghar arfidy 2:77d 


602 


ogmY Scar Sot sAhraraa: 6:14b 
GNI THATETT 2:23b 
GTI WHATTET 2:22a 
qraqadagy ae 5:14c 

Grants: HAMS: 5:26c(vl) 
GTATRA: HAMTRATT® 5:26c 
qead Myra 4:49d 

@ mrrearfesrearey 6:44a 
OT WAY FT AF 4:101b 

aa mifarhyar: 5:110b 

at ANU aT Sut 14:90a 
aq afcmad ar suf 4:147a 
UT AAC WaT 6:14d 

at Aperatfear 15:4b 

at FX at arfrar: 6:72d 

IT AMT: WT 4:109c 
YT SAMA VT 3:8a 
aq frayed: 15:61d 
aarfaey fararey Sea 4:153a 
Waveq FETAUT 4:38e 
QAWTAAT: HT 1:27b 
are wafer 4:83b 

aan: ay sf wafad 3:50b 
aaa AEAT ATAT 4:159c 
VT FACT 2:5la 
OWT J ST WAT WHT 5:138c 
@ ferat egqaT 4:57b 
GHATS HAT 4:143d 
VT: GANT KTH: 14:95a 
UNTHPGETOATATS 14:98a 
QVTNACHAACTAN THAI :. .. 15:73a 
anrarstfa PTA 14:107d 
anrqmer arfits: 14:104d 
OTA AATORY 14:3a 


Parakhyatantra 


UVTRITATAAITST © 14:18 
UNMAraATar SWAT 14:96d 
arfirgrragenye 14:1¢ 

arfirar Frardtrad 14:102d 

array anray AT: 14:98d 

GTA BNTRAATT 14:94F 

ant arg casi: 14:30b 

aM Farag 14:51c 

any aT AAT 15:11¢c 

GWT: TATA AMTATST: 14:108c 
OUMNH WME I. .. 15:73d 
aM aT ACHATAMA 14:978 

arty ar wfHarre: 14:96b 

arg: a@rarsatey App. C:49b 
araary THAT 2:112c 

arrar: Warwararfedr 2:106a 

WAT AAT KYAT 2:106b 

Gah: FT ARMA: 1:94c 

Gah: WGI TT 6:22a 

aah ATA 1:94b 

arat ANAT FAT 5:2b 

OAT Wate TW 5:4d 

GY Wie: YAATe: 1:20d 

arfaar AMAT AT 6:39b 
arcareane er SYA App. K:118c 
ar wearer fager 15:64 

ar tT syvartea 6:20d 

GY AUMNIT: AeT 2:46b 
arfrfattertaar 1:5d 
UAaearaatnTa SAMA’... 4:172c 
Gear AAT App. L:14la 

ay sar Wrarasya: THA... 4:172d 
ay shorty afar: App. D:59d 
ar shrvtay sarade: 1:20b 

ay at: AafAceayrag ey 6:23a(vl) 


Index of Padas in the Tantra 


QTY SAMA: 2:20d 


. 
THATAHHET T 14:55d 
THANGIET 14:420 
THIN THAT: 5:118d 
THT BATCH 14:410 
THY fawsTs HATS 4:43c 
Charra-satferar 5:83d 
Taatatafwecare 3:32c 
THAT AT FaT AUT 3:36d 
TH ACAACEATUTT 4:88a 
Taal Zrarey aT App. D:67c 
THETA 4:75¢ 
TaHISTY ISAT 5:53d 
THITIMTAYSET 6:52a 
Taran str feAWTae 5:91c 
Te: AG: ated: 5:55d 
TAY HF WITT 5:64c 

THT AIT At 5:84a 

Tay CeaaT Ferrel 5:84d 
CTIACH STII 5:86a 
TAIATTATT RT 5:84b 


Taeg eastareere App. L:138a 


Taracttafr Sata 5:51a 
Talat FESTA 5:50a 
TATA AT UAT 14:55a 
TATRATA AT HA 5:51b 
TAY WATT TSE: 4:106d 
THY TRYAAT: 5:101b 
Tet FET AMA: 2:93d 
TEVA aTAT 2:106c 
trTaNfafrypar 3:6c 
TTA: 4:86b 
TTA TAMAS: 5:151b 


603 


TTaTAT STAT: 2:107d 
WMEAATNTY 4:86a 

Tr ay sara fatter: 4:39d 
war HeaTgarmt | App. D:57a 
WErTaNI PTT eT 1:95c 
TBAT WaarAT: 5:125d 

Frat {a7ererar 14:29a 
CFHRAARY SATTT 2:48 - 
SH TATA TENT 14:79a 
Card: APTA WT 5:16c 

BT: BATA: BATAY 14:76a 
eearfereraney 5:144c 

CECT ATFATTeT 15:38d 

VAT VA ACAUT 5:48 
ereray faxErar 15:62a 
VSTATAT WHTMAT 2:98d 
VerAApTT Ay 2:49d 

efater wfafsar 2:81b 

Slater ARwWt 2:79d 

efee safafaar 2:79b 

et qarfey fart App. L:137d 
Srataranferst 5:71b 
SWNYAeH WIT 4:99a 

tar: smrvarferar App. H:110a 
aaTanvad at 14:31c 
THATS 14:24c 
eTafaryTaMyT App. B:38b 
Tre Afs AE: 14:16b 
WMA S=T WaFAT 3:76b 
UST HAIT FAT 2:49a 
UATE: MTT 5:128 


- 
AMI T AATATUTS 1:13a 
omMMUTSACSHE: 111d 
MAA TAA 2:52d 


604 


mercrenfegay: AF 5:128a 
maT Myf F AAT: 5:106a 
Afar AW WATT 6:31c 
Tae ferat: art 5:1llc 
mex sorferd srt 14:81c 
mead ferranred: 4:45d 
mead AAT AVETT 4:138a 
mead AY SaaTe SFT 3:12c 
afaar AyNTad: 14:92d 
i 4:105a 

WAY SASTATA: 2:99b 
Ta WAAyAT T App. E:82e 
APTEACHITATCHATT 3:63 
ATATSPAAATATEAT® App. B:38a 
feorararttr aT Qi 6:21c 
OMIT PaeAI Sa 5:54d 
araaa + fafa App. L:126c 
AYHAAMARTL: 6:24b 
MAVHEACATU TA: 5:108d 
aVaTahedeat: WH: 5:109a 
ATATAIHEAUT AfE: 5:108b 
ararealateatt ferfa: 5:1b 
MAY VT MUTI 5:113d 
aray FEY SAAT T App. E:82a 
aaNe FCT TT WM A: 5:121d 
AVTATSD TAT: 5:147d 
TTT TET 6:30d 
areearare fav: 5:15b 
AIRSET TAMMIE? 5:28c 
Meet hast: 5:23b 

a 

afer araeaarfrar 4:102b 
aM aelfmaraay 2:90d 
ah eeaTgzqya: App. B:27b 


Parakhyatantra 


AHN IIH eT App. B:39c 
AHMeeT THT 3:18a 
ATATAETAETT 3:30d 
TAITATAST: 5:85b 
adtwreatafaryzar: 5:69b 
ay a Hed SfAry 4:85d 
at aT HIATT FCT 14:42 
atarey SIT weSTeT 5:44a(vl) 
Teresa earyy 5:58a 
aunty: faraateqar: 6:35b 
ata AARTATH 2:41a 
anfasy fRaTHAy 6:81d 
ANAT TeNTHT 3:18d. 
atrerayy fayfter: 6:9c 
ant Ue 7 Yet 6:1la 
anifEcaar WaT 3:9c 
anifecaqarary 3:25a 
autar arpa eatery 6:9a 
arT KICAAMMN 6:7c 
ateatet: afer 6:12c 
qufsTCeT ATT 6:4d 
aunrtvafear Wad 6:37a 
adareafagard 1:17d 
adarar sf Arad 4:50b 
aaqsaertedsyt App. A:3d 
aad AIAN 5:65a 

AM M-UNte Gar 4:82b 
aysTarat frat 6:36b 
afaat UAGTH TF 14:92a 
atace afsrar war 14:94a 
awarayutaey? 6:54c 
TATYATAY AAS 4:121c 
afaar Tearfirar 14:92b 


-agarferttteaar 5:132a 


AqUeae as 5:70d 


Index of Padas in the Tantra 


ATAeIYATAH: 5:2d 

aqaT aT WaT Wet: 5:132d 
aeqae WITET 1:19c 
AYCATATA: 6:80b 

qeqaen wafer 2:75d 
AeA Ha SHE 4:146d 
afaQqur GUTSTee 5:118c¢ 
afeeest sfrafefrerd: 5:142b 
afte fratrararte 1:74c 
afemmhaur Ad: 4:166d 
afeer: erfvscaferr: App. H:95d 
oaTR ACTTHSTAT 15:9 
arearat Fram: fered: 3:33b 
arif-sataatita: 3:7b 

anf sareard AAT 4:102c 
argyardramnacy App. L:133d 
aaa ferenafyery 3:53b 
AIHA UAHA: 6:46b 
afqraregerd arate, App. B:25a 
areaqataadteta App. L:133c 
arAaTAHANTT: 3:72d 
areaqataantted App. L:133c(vl) 
AAA AHAAATT 6:58a 
Wag asafsar 6:6la 
aay AT @aqaT YAH 6:62b 
arr aetr wr: Wea: 4:101f 
araraar: fFeTaTerst 5:114c 
aTfefrengereaghr: 15:51b 

at fret wee fart afer 3:36b 
aH Iteqeqary 3:28c 
AAT ATAT AT: 5:50d 

ara A-gTT AAT 14:71a 
ary Aratar TH App. H:97c 
araed fararad: App. D:61b 


qaqa et dad App. D:66c 
araeaad Ftd App. D:59b 
aTaeaaaipxar 2:44d 

ATTA EIT TIAT App. J:114f 
ararareaad afa-ct App. J:1lic 
AAAS AT: aTeay App. B:28a 
avant TREAT aT.2:94a 

are AfRIe WaT 2:93c 
aTaaegrATeaTy 2:44a(vl) 
aTaecdy atetad App. B:27d : 
CATATHI TAU TH: 2:83d (vl) 


oaTATaTeatara: feta: App. E:81b 


amar saer aT Trey FT 2:43c 
avay aT FW: AATTAY 2:45a 
araeat sitar: fete: 5:143b 
aq: A WTTSAATETH 14:69a 
arg: AaAGay WENT 14:44c 
ay AAAITT: 14:81d 
argarart aq App. J:113a. 
argecaira: wifaer 1:74d 
afer Hactt JT App. D:71b 
atfeor 4fxfesad App. B:40d 
aratacttfearera: 5:44b 
faa]e Frrercifare 5:53c 
Frartereranyar App. E:79a 
faarxaraat YH App. J:114e 
faarcaraer arta App. J:112d 
Faartecamirfeg: 1:89b 
faaratget Fat 2:33c 
FERTATLATARINT: 4:70a 
fagfa: FRraar qq: 4:124d 
faptrera AT Wat 15:69d 
Faget safmararfer 4:19a(vl) 
fafertfafer: AT 14:46a 
fafere face svat 2:54b 


606 


Farrearcer WaT App. B:33d 
fasrarafe ara: App. B:33b 
faawedt SATETT 5:71d 
fafafacaretar FUT 4:59b 
fafraarteert 4:155a 

fafas Fasrareor 4:154c 
fafraayayay 4:155b 

fafar ac enrad: 1:72d 
faFaryaarery 4:2c 
fafraryaarra4r: 5:153b 
farce 2:40d 
fafaresarerhre 9:154a 
faFraTaroyfasr 5:153c 
fafrarcarcorrfasy 4:151a 
fafrareay STATA: 1:77b 
Fafaarerorfre 4:155¢ _ 
fateh yaagery 4:155d 


faust fare Posersfttts 5:29a(vl) 


Fraearceret TAT 14:8d 
faarcafe aac: 5:21b 
fereret fe a faert App. L:144f 
faarartate ep|ery 4:167b 
faaar @ faataad 1:47d 
faarer: ofar SUT: 1:8d 
frarer aefaarar 5:151c 
fraraet aga 3:78d 
fraracaredafercay 2:128f 
faarcar ar afer 1:46c 
Frarérarraare: 3:29d 


Parakhyatantra 


faaret acd afer 15:8b 
faarartur diera4r 3:63b 
fraratHteqar 5:88d 
faarnrgnatdt: 2:117d 
fararare: AATSATAT 6:80c 
faar A-aTAATAMTT 3:1¢c 
faery AATETUTTRAT: 3:65f 
faarar ae area: 3:57d 
feared Wael Way 1:47 
faarey ferd ad 1:45c 
faarfaerae arr: 2:128b 
fear freraarerelr 3:1a 
faanfaarfemrr 1:44c 
frarfaersrarra: 2:117b 
faarfaerated Ser 2:117c 
farersraferat: JC: 5:68b 
faaMTaTay AT: 6:33c 
frarcarsagercncarecdtt? 2:129a 
faarat arcrr arar: 14:43c 
feud & Acyw 14:25c 
foyer ferfatdd: 3:62b 
FaeaTeraTaaeAyq: 3:30b 
Faat a ATT BUA 4:142b 
fear weaTerd Far: 14:69d 
faar Tat AY AWeATE 6:20a 
faaTette TeT AT 14:89c 
FeaTenpragay 14:84b 
fate: cate: 2:45b 
faw: ares WaT App. D:60a 
farpefamyde 2:76a 
faraqearyarter App. G:93b 
fagyaeat wad App. B:26b 
fam: where: 2:43b 
fata: Waar SAS: 1:15b 
fahtared wfaatenireg: 1:95b 


Index of Padas in the Tantra 


fry: GT HTTSAT SFT 1:91c 
fayearaqanrary 1:39d 
fayearet Aet4r 2:24c 
fycara heer 14:648 
faycara Fatah: 14:97c 
fayrertesrye: 14:61f 
Fenircfe sews 1:92d 
forreaenefarcary 1:57a 


fare aerate App. H:98b 
FaTracrarar aa & arfrHear: 3:79d 


fearatfr + ferarargy 5:114e 
fagfacafganta: 4:165d 


faye: arcer der App. C:52a 


faqerera asda 4:157a 
faaaeaedATATy 4:109a 
faanr: whRrarer 4:166c 


faantr + faced BITE 4:166a 


facwer farmtar 4:43d 
facateat: faethe: 3:71d 
Farry TT Ua aT 4:43b 
fasgafe aeart 4:151c 
fase Wad 7 a: 4:40b 
faxgrafe gxaAT 4:39c 
fawre: aaa WaT 6:64d 
farrrgaaferd: 6:66d 
facrar sfer wat Far 6:65a 
FaaTATRATYATHET 14:58 
faaeqefaarfaar: 5:68d 
fafarogqefart: 3:65d 
faqtg Hed TET 14:56a 
faratayar ATT: 3:78e 
faqHe AATH Tat 4:36b 
fataerea faaar 4:33d 


favar afaaravrar 4:3la 


fararacr afr a: 2:62d 
faqafeare at UT: 4:39a 
fayearcetr Fary 14:49a 
faverag YSWAT: 2:121d 
ferarereareferur 4:29b 
fray: rasitcrcare 14:78e 


fasy: & + afewquare 5:136d 


fray WaTeTaTAT: 14:75d 
fafere + TUT Ae: 3:31d 
fafereeat araiy 1:41c 
fafersy starrer: 1:17b 
faygacfRar: 3:3b 


faye Te THR 1:56d 


faye fe at Fare App. B:1la 


fasry: awfirenr: 3:26d 
fasry: WAINITPT: 3:26b 
Fasreorestary 1:3d 
fasrqor WPRTEIT: 6:62c 
fasrver @ aafad 3:51b 
Ferarerey ef farager: 4:110b 


FARA ETAT 14:34d 
FARA YIATATT: 3:25b 
fart samar Ava 2:10c 
fasrer ay SATAY 3:51c 
Fasrer SEIITAAT 2:10a 
Frater: TPIT: 3:52d 
foaTar ax AaeT 3:5la 
FATHCOY TT: 2:114b 
aac Frater 2:115c 
STOSAAMTT 3:4c 
TWIVS GUT arar 1:87c 
GaeaUrray SF: 5:39a 
qharefraterc: 15:29b 
gfrer fasfead 15:29d 
qfacurgr-ar ar 3:44a 


608 Parakhyatantra 


afacurprfasy 3:43d ofa vata sat 6:2c 
gfaqmeafaferd: 6:30b oafRAratfed AcqBY 4:19a 
qysrenrarata App. D:63b ora Aretetey Wee 15:38b 
qferaraer 7 fart 6:13b saead mMrAany 4:45a 

ata araryt ar aray 1:12c asad AT ATTA 1:30c 
afar yeafrarcart 14:60c AATAMe Td: 3:18b 

afar aafae ar: 2:63b AAT FAMAMT 3:17c 
af casifairaga: 4:98d oaferar act <TaT 15:38a 
qearay aUTfaY 3:35f otter Farad MaUT 2:91a 
TeqTRETUTTT: 6:63b THM: Heat Ad: 4:24d 
aerfenastfeart 6:47d AIIM AAT AAT 3:66a 
deredateat Faq 6:68a APTN TAM AT 3:42a 
dered Totaheay 2:69b sahTaTt We Hey 6:55d 
TS GTATATSATT 2:68b APART TATA 2:112a 
ae sfo sfaarfed: 6:49d caauTaTad: farrT 2:76b 


ae sf wfrarfery App. C:48b AIUATACMATE 1:92b 
azar T GVat Tae App. D:58c aaraersy Sharer 4:4d 


Tacragewmt-dard 6:56d adfert ar shifear st Sr: 1:95d 
qaeara fe THT 6:56b AIAIAIT: 6:45b 

awa fratded 5:29¢ AIUATAIAT 6:8b 

TAWA Ae: TATA 5:15c AIEINY S=AUTUTAT: 6:8c 
mat WTS TeT 4:54b SITE Sarah: 6:16d 

aM aAITd 4:81b | Adee Fal AA 3:66b 
TUTTATATCAINT 4:83 oaTeararey Frarrarfy 1:14c 
aye caresetese: App. L:145d BATRA Tae lle 
awayet gt WaT App. C:41c coaTTaTeT: F UT _ 4:115b 
ayaeq fasrat & App. D:60d art oS faurcaey 14:24d 

aye Feledl F Wz 6:36c oaTay ay SEfaarey 14:25a 
oaTTSgeHeyelfeaq a4: 6:35d sara faaTracayy 4:116c 
HAA ATATAT 4:58b aT Aaacarary App. L:133a 
are arafafr: feraty 4:71b SATIN ATHAeTAT 3:55¢ 

orm Hatfeawr App. L:134a SATAY SfHATEAY SAT 15:31c 
am aby Ft: 4:118b ated IT ATA 2:64d 


MAT TSUNA 4:122b saga amt frdfa: 15:37b 


Index of Padas in the Tantra 


ATCA Ft 4:166b 
ooaTe Adeattt-gary 4:105d 
aTGaedy AT A: 15:31d 
qatar TAT 1:71a 
AVAATT: Fay TW: 5:147b 
SATATSD FUAATAH: 5:145d 
TATaeay SUAaT 15:49b 

WT 


we tatag 7 fe 1:57b 
WHAT ah At 2:40a 
WaT TarTATHsy 6:16b 
WHTaAH MATT 6:16b(vl) 
afer farear FeTaeTy 5:98d 
whRgagd: WY: 2:78d 
whnwrafaastare 15:32b 
wfahr: ya er sft 2:110a 
wheeater ararfer 4:18c 
wheter ararftr 4:18c(vl) 
whew ahrery 4:112c 
wheter at fernrt 1:55b 
WPRtaATTsy 6:16b(vl) 
WhRtaTe astray 3:77d 
winoqepdreqe: 1:7d 


wer aerg fa-gie App. E:78d 


wereq farqdcad: App. E:80d 
wer: aq T ATfATy 6:50b 

wey AuUlsaTaNHAT 1:25¢ 

wear astfag Yt: 1:25b 

wer astfag fart 14:102b 
Wat: Aalay FT: 5:137b 
weir --- App. H:100d 
weraremfaehony 5:141a 
werartertretreny 9:0C 
waanrtefaddd: 5:9d 


Wadieteddtard® 14:50c 
waahry: Tatar 5:5b 
wheat qararsy 9:8la 
wrthtafreg: WL 4:27¢ 
weat aTatted 5:123d 
WrsTtha AIT 5:124a 
Wet: Weareqaty App. L:137b 
Wet: ATYTATYar 6:41a 
Wer: SIT ST FT 4:106c 
Wee: Tarurhrarasg: 6:17d 
WAIATIGTST 4:110d 
WeeAiTaA Het TeT 6:60b 
weenTsa fart AF 6:60a 
WMATA 6:3b 
wera? Agd: 6:50a 
weeeanty arqay: 6:17a 
Weared FBAATATEAT 5:147a 
WRTHATT FET 4:109b 
weantey + Freaed 3:37c 
WetHnaleh BWA 4:97a(v!) 
Wat: Yaragrarsy 5:155c 
WATEATUT SAT: 5:143e 


wontrad st 1:90a 


witcer fafa far 1:81c 
werrarranrsy 4:150a 
WeNTa<egqd: 5:105d 
wirrafreaterd: 1:36d 
womsaaafat: 1:85b 
WER Far Hy 1:8la 
Woe sfrragetr: 14:53d 
Wt youd BA 1:62a 
Wet: AAYPWMEAUT 2:120b 
WahATAYat: 5:30b(vl) 
Weare TATA 6:54a 
Wagar Ae aT App. B:22c 


609 


610 


WATTRAA AT 2:49b 

wer wyera sft T 6:36d 
WHaIey Tarey 5:94c 

wre wer freed 2:42d 
WTATAUMMHAAT 3:49¢ 
Wearearrraqeraed 4:108a 
WreaTaterger FW 15:70d 
Wray fraerarra: 2:1d 

Wed Sat afera: Fare: 14:80b(v!) 
Wed ar afera: fara: 14:80b 
WIAA AT TATT App. E:80a 
WecateNyaTaTITe App. E:80c 
OMTNATT AT: 5:61d 
wreaett Paftarga: 5:14d 
Wears AEN 5:278 
WeAgHAA SAT 2:49b(vl) 
WeaqMH AAT Tz 15:72d 
WTEATAACCTAHATH 3:11d 

wrex & arftrarfes 6:29b(vl) 
frravst yagfeae: 2:119d 
feraraey aay afe: 14:41c 
Ferareqsteday sata: App. B:12d 
farce afearearr App. A:4a 
Facer: qftaery App. A:4b 
Farce: myer CNT App. B:37c 
Farey 4 Aarfaay App. B:12b 
Farearaey atarfead 4:36f 

fara: TeTsrafere: App. H:95b 
faded Frag App. E:80b 
Fraqeaaeanr: a 2:112c 
Fracqarert: YE 4:167a 
Farace fare werey 15:45d 
Fraceer WATT AT 15:10c 
Feracarer: Sra: 15:64b 


Parakhyatantra 


frracaTeysaet Arey App. L:128a 
Feracertafaear-ar 3:73c 
Frenraras 2 aT App. C:44e 
Fraurarrgfec: 15:8d 

faranre aur aur App. D:75d 
Rraa-afra-ared App. L:134d 
ferrarey aareer App. H:95a 
Farasrfawarsrr 3:12a 
frasrfasrdd: App. C:53d 
Frasrnrgarrey: 14:32a 
Frasraqygfedr: 2:127d 

FTST TLATSTT: 2:70b 

Fraer TATSTT: 3:13d 

fraea afaret aay App. E:78c 
FIACATTUR SAAT 15:41a 
Fare FATT 6:31b 
Fare aErrAyy 6:48c 
Frrara-eafeeart App. L:146c 
Franrerayrad: 2:101d 
Ferfrya: fare: are App. A:7c 
Frat Atay UTd 3:68a 
fareatettfse: arr: App. B:34c 
fararas: Ferat Age 2:118c 
Feray wear fare ast App. A:6f 
frray afe SNTETaT 2:125a 
Fren-aHeTUE: 6:1d 

Mra: WravaTy: 5:17c- 
Wrererewa ear 4:81d 
wtroreqsifaaranr: 5:117d 
Wargasaargry 14:38d 
oMMTQUTETYLT: 5:29b(vl) 
YRARATATAGET 14:55¢ 
YaretatsAar BAT 14:37a 
Wah PUT > Raa App. D:71d 


Ye a UT TT 5:157b 


Index of Padas in the Tantra 


Ya Tt Aafays 15:65c 
yentafaanqr: App. B:11d 
We wTarfa AeA App. B:20b 
Ya watt a7: App. B:19b 
Watmrwreae: 5:157d 
Yargetanrt App. B:20a 
Yard AT AY WE: 2:86c 
Yaeqtarar: 5:154d 

yar: ye seats ferar: 3:78f 
War: STaay Tate App. B:13a 
QSNPHUITETRT: 5:154c 
yfeurafertcad: App. B:20d 
yer A7aT Ya: App. B:19c 
Yart: THA 2:86d 

Yar SYatacerd: 1:7b 

yar anarfadat ar 2:111a 
Wg: afraacaa: App. C:45c 
ysl weary acarfe App. D:6la 
yea ar Frfaet Tg 14:49b 
YTRAHATIAT 14:48d 

Waar At Ate 15:70c 
ware: ferar: TY: 14:60b 
Wal AT YUASA 14:47b 
Ya AT WAaeaTeT 14:48 
yearafafasrrd: 14:60d 
yateatsratgar 14:41d 
WATATUATATT 4:36e 

War Frearetat YWL App. C:45d 
WaT WATT IT TT App. B:40b 
Wate ey yad: 5:87d 
yaantaqeay App. L:129b 
WaAeIMearsd: 1:33d 
MPTaetH-aT: 5:18d 

Wwe RAATSITd App. J:113c 


611 


WT AA MTIATT 4:78b 
WrararefaHarerr: App. C:44d 
wrararctaatard: 4:85b 

TENT T: afaeere App. G:94c 
TANTS AUT 15:12d 

Save: Wired: 2:119c 
yaarated: TET 1:4d 

MS: MAT ATs: App. H:106e 
Ber Weeered: App. G:92b 
war av afatavese: 14:101d 
ST TAPIA ForeRyT 4:96c 
ara Sat Tea ah App. B:12c 
MX Bafa yey App. B:14d 
CLES Frayer sfeq 9:85a 


T 
vefawegerTartry App. H:103a 
TSH SHI eae fer: 14:10d 
watt FravstFt 5:51c 
WSa-garegay YAT 14:44a 
waht: ao arfehrdd: 5:137a 
WUT Mey AT EHery 3:23d 
Wy HT eg App. F:89e 
a 
Aaa saATAMrewyr’ §:142c 
AQHA WacHeATT 1:40c 
warn + faycad: 14:95d 
WAT ATA TT 3:53c 
afaearesrarente® 5:59c 
aye aay sft 7 1:19d 
afae avsaq Tag 14:6b 
wanioad XT: App. E:82b 
WANAATAAH: 2:103d 
TAT ANTeT FT: 5:136F 
Pa SAAATH-Ag: 1:82F 
afaa: Fraacact 15:69a 


612 


UeHTC: AeHal WAT App. C:51b 
WeATCeIT — 7: 5:159d 
UeHTTeUpAMAT 6:15d 
aeHrey FT: FT: WAT App. C:50a 
AeA Attar: fere: 6:13d 
Gear aay wh: 6:16a 
denlaadaeda App. C:5le 
GeaTa ary TRATAT App. C:50c 
ACHAT OWT 4:102a 

Taw WIE AT ANT 4:91a 

Tew AETAT AUT 2:113b 
aferd: Waeey 14:82c 

afer ferata ad 2:75b 
aferat: WeAVsaT: 5:63b 
afer sdifga: TT: 2:77b 
weywe Tay Sehr App. B:12a 
Weary WAATVMLT 2:22c 

Wat: TAMA 3:15a 
Weltahyeled: 3:16b 
WSICHIAATAUVS? 5:88 

WUT T Het THe 14:81a 

W Ua Ayer 14:19a 

W Ud TAHT: 2:96c 
waaay: FaTAT: FT: 5:100d 
WT Hal HUT 1:88a 

W adtateatae"r 4:16c 

wad: fat F MY: 3:10b(vl) 
wae: WIA 2:85b 

wae arid: fern: 3:7d 
Wael FrspAct: fer: 2:97b 
waar Sa fRer WY: 3:10b 

WM Alert: HeraletH: 4:48d 
aParMmcaaratd App. D:69b 
WT Hareae Ahad: 14:95b 


Parakhyatantra 


area Fete F 5:103d 
eaeeyHelde: 5:37d 

aged aate fare: 5:149d 
aEeay ay wader App. B:19d 
UXT ATAT CAAA 3:61b 
AReT YAH 14:26a 

asd: PAHT ser 6:24a 

aga: fraafere: 6:48d 
USAedT THA: 6:48b 
AFAeTA AAV 6:28c(vl) 
asta: Farvearef 6:50c 

WFI FTTH TF 6:25d 

wear SFT TUT Fr 6:26c 
agar sfi fercery;r 6:25b 
afartarerac aft App. H:99b 
MAYS FT SACHS 4:23a 


AYEMMSNTAT 1:3b 

ayer Weyat ETT: 5:96c 

a WT aeq eqaatar: 1:43c 
WT at Ya Tee 4:165a 

a av Arar + Arar ar 6:10c(vl) 
a a Aaatera: fea: 6:58d 

a FT aniferdr: Ty: 4:161b 

a FT afaaaest 4:161c 

WT Anya Aa: 6:51b 

aw aaa: fart ara 3:17a 

qT areq sfanr Ere 4:33a 

@ warfwasrad: 14:66b 

eT frwqerwraqir4rcare 5:136e 
Aeay TET APHS 15:65a 
Waa: Ardy afs App. D:70d 
TaTdedearay App. D:69d 
aaMe: farrsxT 14:80c 
GAA YA: ATT: 3:16c 

Tar 2e: 7a ga 1:58a 


Index of Padas in the Tantra 


aqJ ararfatatypear App. L:146a 
@ XT arsatceya: 6:19b(vl) 
WM Tee OTA 4:148a 
a av wharwear 6:46a 

Gal ATA SAATATHA 1:24c 
ware Gear fercar fares 1:95a 
aca faeafaay aur: 6:13c 
Weary FAaaryT 1:76b 
WeagIaT CAAT 15:55d 
Weagral aay 15:56c 

Weal Wa ATaT: 4:56d 

deal AT AATMAY 14:7c 
Walyuleh: jd: App. C:42b 
Waray ezPaAT 3:1b 

aeamray At SeaTT 4:164a 
Warfaaq: Alara: 14:80a 
aertaag: CaMfMe>: 14:76c 
aerfara feray Tar 5:156a 
Mea NYd: 15:63b 

wea TZ ATaT 15:67a 
aener Fararett: 15:64d 
USTATACHAT: 2:92d 

Walal Fe CAA 2:92b 

ae oeafenmr App. H:98a 
AITeAATA Ff: 2:94c 

AAD SATAAAATAT 2:57d (vl) 
Gar ar arhrar Aft: 2:95a 
aaratd: A Tad 2:95b 
aaatdsT say SA 2:85a 
PaAaTATAaT At: 2:83d 


Gea: watefecafr App. E:86f 
Aaa THAN: 5:24a 


Geaay WyATarey 5:14a 
CMS MICS: 5:26d 


aeReay fa APET 3:40c 
AAA et aay 14:54b 


aaaqraragd AI App. D:57b 


afarary TAeAeTT 2:25a 
afarart feraeafary 14:6le 
afaaragy TATE 2:25a(vl) 
@ Terry: TAT: 1:6d 

WT FAT FASAT WUT 2:46c 
wave: ferdredag 5:129a 
WT FATT TAM AT 4:141c 
AMATNTATATAT 1:76a 

a araqrurfafarsac 4:140b 
WT May Wad AAT 3:11c 


a waceteaarve: App. H:101b 


@ Te: Whaarasg: 1:69b 
ay: MPTy Add 2:110b 
GT: AATUTANTAT 6:51c 
WAM AACATAT 5:43 
aAATAIT WT 6:81c 
eaAGeMAaE AT: 14:50d 
ararfefamreyry 15:31b 


AAAS: 15:12b 


aaa: AAATAIT 15:26a 
anmarae 7 fered: 6:18d 
aaa T TWAT 4:135b 
aAarar T afer: 6:18d(vl) 
aautafsarad: 2:109b 
AACTATTH AH 5:17d 
TASHA ge: 5:110d 
arer sifa feted: 14:23b. 
aarert: Htfga 5:148d 
AAT: FT TEAST 14:85b 


614 


aarfeststapad: 15:17d 
aarferanrar any 14:96c 
aartuafranta: 14:16d 
aaifaedt aifedt: 14:17b 
aarey afer ar Fer 14:85c 
WAT: AAA Hare 4:116a 
GATT AANA: 14:23d 
AAA TMA: 1:77d 
aaray Sf acta: 4:169b 
WATAT SAAT:AET: 14:23a 
aataeetalsad: 15:13b 
WaTaTcayqetTae day App. D:77d 
TATA AUT GP ery 1:12b 
AaTal AAgae: 6:31a 
warert Sfarqet fe 4:5a 
aarted: Tt act 14:17 

@ Fear Gfecratr: 1:10d 
AACHE WET Ct: 4:84b 
aqeper frarfy ar 2:111b 
AATAAUT-UTST 3:59a 
ayer ferprr ferar: 5:106b 
AAale-gureyr: 5:96d 
Ae APACTA: 4:48b 
arytcy VT AFIT 15:70a 
aT Tehr: Tare 2:83c(vl) 
ayeay frarde 6:81a 
AIILTATATT: 3:71b 
AWATUTAAIT 3:69 

AAU KANTAT 3:69b 
ame fUCatary 3:58¢ 
GUTTA TaAMTAMTAT: 14:108b 
WA TEMCTAT 4:149c 
Aaa tNad 4:14d 

Was Mead Ad: 4:170d 
WAIVE HT 2:8a 


Parakhyatantra 


AAMT ATTSH: 6:19d 
WAY SaITTTHA 6:19d(vl) 
Way T YRTAT AT 2:5a 
WATANICTAY ATT 3:4 lc 

Wag AGM frac AW 6:82b 
AAAI ATT: 15:1b 
wearer TST T App. F:90d 
aay: THTeAd 6:44d 

@ anf Tear mfrq App. L:146d 
@ Aft AAARY 14:72a 

a arfrsfrar Wer: 14:25d 

a antr aA: MYST 14:103c 
WH Hetet AAT 4:47b 

Veg AtTawysH: 1:9d 

WT: eAETT TATTT ET. ..5:162c 
aa: Taraarsely 15:48a 

aa: argfan: Weer 6:45a 
Wa AACIW: WHT 2:44a 

ae wearamraey 14:85d 

ae AFT BINT 1:67b 

wae Vs TWAY AY 15:61c 
waadr AeTT WH: 2:1a 
WARTAHANE: 6:31d 
TAARILTATCT: 3:2b 
AARTTATLT 5:16 1d 
aaarad war arf 4:15c 
AWARTUAAUTET 2:128a 
WaHTaeT AAW: 2:25b 
waar sara 2:30b 
waar aa: FIT 1:68c 
waaay afeny 2:29d 
aaaeaysad 4:137c 
WAR HicIa: App. E:83b 
wae Pratsry 2:26b 


Index of Padas in the Tantra 


WAFAUT WIT 2:64c 

THT BLT AT SANT 4:17a 
TAT AAAPHAT 4:1b 
TANTCHTLITFPRATT 4:19d 

we Wagqerifenry 4:133d 
TAMA AAAT HAT 14:20d 

Mag: TMT: 2:65b 

aay: ATHAIcaATT 2:62c 

Wag: AAPRAT 15:68d 
WaTATUR YT: 3:66d 

Waa: FAFCICAT 15:69c 
aaa: Thraftanr: 14:57b 

Wad: AAA: 2:109d 
Waa AAT aT: 5:156d 
aaacayar Weary App. L:135a 
WaAear aay FT: 5:161c 

Waa ATAYAT: 5:30b 

addr sf Htreray App. E:84d 
WaUTetaatstad: 2:86b 

Waa FRITAAT 4:92d 

Waer Wad: Ars 2:23 

aaer aad: TM: App. K:119d 
ASATSTT:AT 14:71d 
MAMTA ATs 15:6la 
AAITIEU ET: 5:138b 
WaITITGETTH: App. B:35d 
AAIMMCSAT 15:65b 
AaafrAaATNT 2:52a 

aayagqe eT App. L:13le 
waza fey 2:58b 

aa atHarHe: 5:161f 
waqearearara’ App. E:88e 
aa sents are App. J:112c 
Wad ATATSTH Ad: 4:148b 


ae ATA BE 4:170c 
AACSAR TT: §:152d 
AASIWANMTH: 5:109d(vl) 
aaantarar far: App. C:4la 
Gaad ARWT: 2:1b 
WAPMETAATNT 3:50a 
WATATTG ATA 15:50a 
ATATATTMY YR: 5:120b 
WaT MTA TT 5:97c 
RdeT FET: Hal 6:73c 
AAR AAAMATT: 3:34b 
RAMA WY: 6:72b 
aanr: AAT 14:35b 
WAH ICATTH: 5:18b 
WarwWoarTaY AA 4:119d 
Warertawsy ary: 14:44d 
Wavagd FT HFTAT 14:26b 
AAlTAT WET APS 4:168a 
WAT CATCYA: 3:74d 
aanate farerter 2:126d 


wart antaray far: App. C:4la(vl) 


WAYURHM CT: 5:155b 

Wa PUEP Tay 2:1178 
WaPTTMT Ta: 5:56d 

warrcay TUN 2:838 
WAATATTH: 5:109d 
wartarfear faer 4:145a 
WANNA AT 15:46a 

wad FT SUMAN VET 5:153a 
wa fagracy aay: 5:143f 
waar aferarray 3:56b 
adver sfefiracare App. L:145e 
agar wrftrarfire App. C:55b 
aaNT Aaaeghy 4:138b 
ASWTAYMIT 14:79¢ 


616 


wat AEAVOTAT FATT 4:123c 
waturfratesaay 15:65d 

WT aq: Brey Sfaer: 14:28b 
afanear Fated AA 3:59d 
afar AYE: 1:8b 

a fahrar + Prat ar 6:10c 
a farafaareet 5:120c 
ATAUTIWAMAAyT FBT 6:79a 
weararfed: WAT 6:39a 

a Rrearardataqareg. 2:100a 
aearte fanofa F App. E:78b 
AAT: He: 6:49a 
Geant V Agar 2:50b 

wea ATafgedit 5:76c 
UeaGA aA: 5:80c 
Weavyqyraga: 5:67b 
WeaTaAtarATa 5:60d 
aeantfaavsct 5:66d 

WeaAT tes: 9:72d 

Bert: warfamrat: App. L:127d 
aes Wd: QT 5:160a 

AT HARI We 2:53d 

QT HATIAT Had 2:53d(vl) 
GHA TTUT We 3:10c 
QHD AMAT 2:85c 

QT Alay ACH WAT 2:50c 

aT Prat fareatfear 2:88b 
ATA TUREAH: 15:33a 
TRAIT ATS 2:55c(vl) 
aT FT ATat Fu fag: App. L:140b 
ATAU GPTYETH: 1:10c 

aT Weary WAT 2:61c 
OT Ve AVHT TATA 4:91f 


QT ARITA 2:55c 


Parakhyatantra 


OT aq: TATA: 2:84b(vl) 
ATSLAACAaATANT 3:35b 
QTITHET TASHA App. L:121d 
araHearaa ay: App. A:6d 
ast TF Tara 15:47b 
ae Whelsdd 4:151d 
ATAACAT TSA MAT 15:3b 
ATA Ee Het: ATS 2:63a 
aaa aTEAHTSFAT 15:23a 
area areatatgd: 3:12b 
aTaIsT ATTA: 15:1a 
ATYTC: WAATSTH: 2:66d 
ararifsetafsar: App. C:51d 
aay a: verut sferq 2:66a 
arhadst WaT 2:74d 
AYIA FAT: 3:21f 
ANAATHTSICATA 15:47 
anafafe: ar wad 15:42d 
areafargrhray 15:43a 
arear + 7: fRarerfar: 2:39a 
areaitant fe area 4:141d 
AFeda gq cea 4:64b 
aia AT HY Auld 6:65d 
ATAAIAH UAT 2:57d 
ane & Aeafeeawa4r 15:53b 
aT Yt Tehrt-s: 2:83c 
ATIAAT TAHA 2:55c(vl) 
area aftr ferfe: 1:82b 
aTIUT AAAT AAT 15:24d 
area Facey FT 15:24c 
ATIRACA RITA 15:27 
APMATIT: TL TWAT 3:59b 

aT Wad qTHadd 3:9d 

aT We wrHhearary 4:93b 
aaa aftar wae 2:30d 


Index of Padas in the Tantra 


eaTaMatad Wad 1:61d 
aaa Aaa ats 15:24a 
array HAA 1:93b 
aay AgeTAET 2:26a 
AAT-AtaAa AUT 3:41b 
arava fagareaa4r 2:10d 
ATATAY SAAMYATAT 4:110a 
ALAC IAS: 3:16d 

aT Ut VHA 2:49c 
AAT SHAVSAT 14:36d 

QT aay araaHeniy 2:45d 
ataay TATA 1:43d 
ar fastest water 1:32b 

ar wafH: Wrest 3:77b 
ar wife: ste ferar ac: 1:68b 
ar whasdeawar 2:46d 

aT wafmeaartarar 2:58d 
aT WH Veatdar 2:48d 
QTIT: AAATAMT 4:18a 
aT Aal Achar Ad: 6:27d 
ar fear areartcar 2:34d 
TST-ATAT AATEET 2:44c 
Ferenraraafad: 5:80d 

fag wafa Waa: 2:74b 
fagfaanrded: 5:127d 
faagfaarercreatfee 5:135¢ 
fageretrard: At 15:62c 
Ferararaafree: 1:11b 
feart: @ Frante: 3:49b 
Fateqhaaehthr: 2:96b 
fafatate afer: 15:61b 
fear sut gfmated: 3:47d 
ferarrey ATTAY GT: App. H:106f 
Farraretraattteaq 14:52d 
GA ANTATATEGeT® 4:146c 


Gag ACU 15:58a 
Gag: ACI 15:57c 
Gag :atathynry 1:63d 

Gag: AaATAa: 1:84d 

Gag: areaqhH Herz 1:80d 

Gag :ateh TEN 14:87c 
qeag:ane yard App. K:119b 
qag:arfe wad App. K:120b 
Garay ay aaTsy App. K:116d 
GAAS THOM: 5:24a(vl) 
Yar ARTA SYA 5:52e(v1) 
qdrers ryt 5:22d 
qdreryaaqite 5:22d(vl) 
FeIEHssac4Mye® 5:23c 
Fevaedaeqad 3:13b 
qachrtercahr: 5:57d 

ar T Aeitcard App. L:142b 
qifaafattaar 5:104d 

Hat: Yaferew 5:142a 
TU_*VTAntarsy 5:103b 
TRUTARAUIAT 4:89b 
queedateasy 5:103a 

Gateq AETHFer 5:89c 
GIMATATATSAT 14:43d 

afera farcat oa 3:75a 
gsirar fern: 5:19b 

Gqat AT TUT 4:5c 

qyqedt FT Paneer 4:6a 
FIAAAYaTIUyT 4:135d 

Farear Ate: MTT: 5:56c 
qearenyd feray 5:105b 
Gar: TaafHarey: 2:118b 
Get let MTTH 4:14b 
Gerara reed: 4:6b 
gery WeaRarray 1:65b 


617 


618 


Gated WHATAAT 1:64d 
FeTUMMNIGed: 4:37d 
FATIH: AT 4:38a 
qeafawaarharay 4:44d 
Fare wmarash: 4:50d 
aT MINTT: 4:64d 
qaTeaweneheyxy T 4:59d 
Gare FaqTaeard 4:63a 
Waa AAA {erTAaT 4:136d 
Gay YaRATHT 5:20d 
Gaye: FAANTAT 5:20c 
Garay SU aATATET: 5:13a 
qatacfater: 5:20d(vl) 
Gaara eaetrarwy 1:70a 
Qaersy GTTUT 2:116b 
afearet WATE 4:128c 
afearet & aay: 6:2a 
qfeqercgpany: 5:161b 
Fer FT WATATT: 3:20 
ger ger WT Acard 4:11c 
awaaeaaaTa 14:39¢ 
VaIAGUar: Far: 1:77c 
AW Aral-Ad: 4:67d 
ear irxe werd 2:41d 
aa eatcH T HaAAT 2:17d 
arear wfhatarerar 2:60d 
GTA: WHAATAT 5:26a 
BY Svs TEETH: 5:38c 


ay Sfirargty HATATH: 2:98b 


ay Sadar: Ferenyer: App. A:6e 


ar s=rur wfaderd 4:89d 


ay seer yeactereg 2:104c 
ay sft aatarear SfRTT 2:19¢ 


ar sft avafmatard 3:14a 


Parakhyatantra 


ar sfo Art + fa ser 3:26c 

ar sft afera va & 15:60t 

ay SFr Sarararaa: 5:109b 
aMTqauEnrtead 3:54b 
arararateday Akay 14:71c 

ar st enread fret 6:9d 

ar sut Fratorasy sfert 3:67a 
AY SAAT ATCT 3:14d 

ar sfer erat ayfagrt 1:23c 

ay sty aearfatrad: 4:39b 

ay Sfert aretaque: 15:33d 

ay sfer-ar sat Aer Ae: 1:50d 
ATeTH STARS 5:59d 

ararad: TAATCAT App. H:101c 
area: areaferest 5:143c 
WET: A AAT: 5:116b 
arar: araprar: ferar: 14:37d 
arear ay J HPACATT App. B:34a 
arr ar firforet 14:2b 

CHAT SHAMAN VIE UIT? ...5:162a 
TAATARAACUTY 14:36 

eqanrsy eqaT WATE 6:63c 
Rfareqear Tera 3:27d 

ear arhryar wad 6:63d 

QMTT RATATAT eH ANG 5:158c 
RNA TAhIATTET 5:159c 
erryer warts: 14:74d 

RITA QT AT ATTA MHPHUT?. ..5:162b 
RATA AMAT AEH AN 14:83 
RITA HTTA CAT 2:122a 
RNAS fasaT 14:11d 

fart: & TOPIT: 14:78b 

fara murratfesny 5:33d 

fart at Tyee 1:65d 

ferat fareqarxar: 14:58d 


Index of Padas in the Tantra 


Ferar 1 TTARFT 15:49a 
feraT UAAS RT: 5:33b 
ferarar addr FMr 1:49c 
ferat ar fawargur 2:112d 
Ferated SFIMTT: 5:40b 
ofarfaaieTatets: 2:124b 
ferar sex: ofratarere 5:7b 
feray aurer Ferg 4:65a 
feray ay sqaer safe: 2:99¢ 
Farcgeafacrar: wet App. B:84b 
farcqerfataararar 2:97¢ 
fercat fercar fararsraT App. L:126b 
fare anrara: Fare 14:9¢ 
Fart SATEIMMNTC 14:12b 
Fartcd aceTHTT 1:35a 
RIT ATaIT FTA 2:7c 
Slt AIM AeA: 4:136b 
Rot T Fas AT AMT 2:13c 
Blan: yrrad 4:63b 
Qleredenaetad: 4:38b 
RATT SINS ArIT 4:62d 
erat art Yarhr 4:127c 
QUA ATa MEATS 2:2c 
ere Safeway MT: 4:37¢ 
ica ANT ae App. D:64d 
warrant araatefs App. F:89f 
art parfeaararte App. B:37f 
wrranMfegenet: 1:10b 
MTaTeraTT aA acd 15:22c 
eat: Hrarageened App. L:137c 
CIT: CMAN: 4:98b 
Sawaal gzarszag: 4:98b(vl) 
PIMPS TATA: 5:146d 
SIMI AAT: 4:130b 


619 


errr: yfaeda: App. B:13d 
CCCP SAaC: 5:8d 
Pye ar aft fera: App. D:67d 
CET PJLST AEGA: 4:131b 
eafearaeyead 14:67b 
CHCA HFEAMVSAT: 5:52d 
SHCATATEMY 5:55c 
CHCA RTET® 5:98 
eareeauread cena: 6:10b 
SHrer SUMtaqes: 6:11d 
earer SUMfaITeH: 6:9b 
ere +t faret 1:27f 
BITTY Fqafeeraqyz 14:13b 
watqufaar Bary 1:35¢ 
eyfasrt WaeT 1:27e 
wafrarprarge 1:35b 
CATATATASAAT 3:33a 
Seay Arfararevany 15:20d 
earareat sexaTattaa App. A:5d 
eareear fryer: TT: 15:52d 
Taga: WAT SferT 4:14c 
TITHAT CAHVUSA 2:52b 
HARTY RAT 1:15c 
SAH TTT: 1:36b 
TITHAHATANTT: 4:150b 
ranntatTarharesry 1:90b 
waaay Aeae KATd 6:7a(vl) 
TAFATIEN GATATAT 2:19a 
TIHTAACTAI 4:160a 
TIATAY Hellaay 4:19b(vl) 
CIATSMNTAVA 2:65d 
raaratcafaegd: 4:153d 
Taaraicaeh Wad 4:13d 
TARAS MTA FEAT 14:8c 
CAM GAANTT: 4:127b 


620 


AAU MNEAy 3:62d 
CIPHATS -HIUTAAT 4:63 
eaarfayaarararea App. C:42c 
CAT Us T WAT 3:43c 
Cad Va 7 Wear SAA 6:21a 
CAT VS TAMMY 3:42c 
Talay AVEY TF BTA: 4:160b 
CAAT TAT: wfac 2:6b 
Cau TaTataay4r 4:133b 
Tas cfafaeredr 4:107c 
CAAT UTTATUT 14:21d 
CATUTUTATMTAT 4:31d 
TAWA IM Hae: 4:126d 
Tangta: ARTA 2:19b 
SSAA TCaTPTAT 14:44b 
CAATAAVSATATUT 14:15 
CATT AM MATT 14:48c 
CASGATAAATTRT 14:47c 
MSTA Ad: Wat 14:45c 
Sagas Ady 14:35d 
CANTATA AAT 2:14b 
CANTAT GUT ACT 2:34a 
COMTAT PITIPTT App. K:115d 
STAY SATAPST: 1:72a 
eMTar AT FRAT 1:73d 
SMNTAP AA 4:24b 

wag afader war 2:126a 
Tqang Aqyd App. E:83a 
aaeayaaye: App. K:118b 
CAAT AAT: 1:59b 
SAU: AVSNAT: 6:3d 
CAST CAPAATAT HA 4:162b 
St SfRATSTHT 2:71b 
PASM TIAMAT: 4:3d 


Parakhyatantra 


CTSq AAFAT 4:19b 
eat: Great: WIT 6:4a 
eaMest ASAT 6:77a 
earfaxarfeagar 6:49c 
Cat Hlst FET 5:108a 
Tactta: CAMAPAT: 5:130b 
CaIed RATS WaT 15:19b 
raraeg fazer: JA: 2:37b 
eaey SHrsawad KaeT 1:90c 
TaqaAATaT EAT: 5:135b 
eadrateatetary 14:38b 
CISATATAT: WERAa 6:73a 
Tamir cfautary 6:68d 
caferanttararraTee 5:8c 
MAAS TAT 2:100a(vl) 
aaa yeas: App. H:106d 
erage sit TAU 4:143c 
Taare Frat TET 2:34c 
erarraregear 14:39b 
CATA Ag aT 2:58a 
TACT RATATAT: 4:168d 
CIETETNT TAT SATA 14:75a 
CATMTATATAY ATA 4:145d 
Caray fafahraa: 1:52b 
ear Hua ae: Hr 4:58d 
CAAT TA TMT: 1:93d 
CAT eeTCTA AT 5:105a 
CAPTAIN 3:61a 
Taha eHe RAT: 3:61lc 
Carhart BAT: Here 1:40d 
caristarearaedd: 4:68d 
Taq Wag araeq App. L:122a 
aeSaar FT Frerqaa 14:29 
CISHAT TAIT 14:29c 
SHAT TAAT-A: 1:94d 


Index of Padas in the Tantra 


SHAT TAASNT 14:30a 
MSSTATRAMNTT: 3:9b 
caaaaeifadnr: 5:144b 


5 
Sar ea Rat Fat 14:82d 
epiatdd CHT 5:150a 
Sore SHtta WaT|d 5:58c 
et: Aad ATU 5:57a 
Ua wacarfe: 5:140c 
BTOTAPRTASAUT 5:90d 
SaTST TANITA 5:90b 
ReaITaehyAATT 1:85¢ 
eect -satatraary 4:103b 
Beat FT ATareIay? 14:8b 
Bream: Aferay at: 5:56b 
alten: ayfatsd: 5:55b 
elem: ATTA 5:58b 
BTeaeds fateey 5:59a 
eTeHeHe say 5:53b 
eteatared ET 5:60b 
fear acer T UTVad 4:76d 
ferart eAHedd 5:91b 
events 14:105¢ 


great: afer Fer 6:32d 


genet of fared 14:20b 
EaaeNagar ATS 14:70c 
Et HVS Adee 14:72c 
Read Zeta App. A:3c 
eeq PMNIT: App. B:15b 
eearafhrarad: App. A:ld 
gfe fre = ofry 4:118d 
gfe wer wet fase 14:73c 
Rear ary ABTAE: 3:74b 
ZalaMd AIT App. D:57d 
eaar Y ST SIM 2:107c 
eq: ardor weg 2:19d 
eqaar F Tater 5:16le 
RTHIYCAT: 6:75b 

eit HT TAT 2:8b 
STUTASHAT 4:132d 
eqat syweer FT 2:97d 
Reta aTaTeay 2:110c 
SUIMaTATMA 3:43a 
eAHeCTUT AY SFT 5:89a 
2ATAWAT HTH? 5:69c 
Wadt AETSTAT 3:60d 
Fredy AT Ag 3:15c 


621 


GENERAL INDEX 


No manner of indexing seems quite without flaws. I have opted here to give a 
pada- or quarter-verse- index to the tantra, and a general index (ordered by the 
Roman alphabet) to the translations, annotations and introductory material. 
Liberties have been taken, in some places in an effort to get single concepts 
indexed under one term, in other places in an effort to break up large entries 
(typically those for much quoted works and authors). 

It will be noticed that in some cases I have chosen to index under a Sanskrit 
term (e.g. buddhi) and in others under an English one (e.g. water). The former 
proceeding makes better sense when no English translation is quite adequate 
or when more than one has been used. The latter proceeding makes better 
sense when the same thing may be referred to by many words in Sanskrit (jala, 
ap, salila, udaka, vari, toya, ka, etc.). The principal disadvantage of such an 
approach is a rather high degree of arbitrariness. 


Abhasa, 289, 291 

abhava, 209, 212 

Abhidharmako§ga, 170, 172 

AbhidharmakoSabhasyg, 145, 244 

Abhinavagupta, xxxvi, xcvi, cxii, 
181, 242, 318, 383 

Abhisamayalankaraloka, 173 

abhivyakti, Ixxviii, 146, 404 

ABHYANKAR, 370 

Abjala (Rudra bearing egg of 
Brahma), 313 

acarya, Ixvi, lxxvi, 143, 197, 218, 
255, 392 

ACHARYA, Vi, xxxviii, 142, 143, 168, 
179, 221, 241, 257, 263, 
270, 272, 280, 287, 292, 
307-309, 312, 321, 330, 
331, 333, 334, 337, 343, 


345, 362, 367, 403, 405, 407 
Acintya, xxiii, 406 
action, see karman 
adhara, 354, 355 
adharma, 241, 257, 401 
buddhidharma, \xix, 254, 282 
adhikara, |xxvii, cxv 
aspect of Siva, 141, 318 
for initiation, 395 
for liberation, 396 
in pure path, 318 
level of, 201 
of mantras, 141, 218-220, 222, 
225 
of Mantresas, 202, 218 
for padas, 387, 390, 391 
tattva, 192, 201 
to confer initiation, 393 


624 


adhikarin, 202 
aspect of Siva, Ixv, lxvi, 192, 
196, 197 
adhvan, 200, 275, 317, 373, 397 
universe, 203 
adhyavasaya, |xix, 236-238, 258 
adhyayana, 391 
Adigaivas, xxvii 
adisutra, xxxvili-xxxix, 139 
ADRIAENSEN, xvii, Lxxxiii 
adrsta, 159 
Advaita, |xii, see also non-dualism, 
Vedanta and vivartavada 
Vedantic, 153 
agama (pramana), 209 
Agamadambara, 169, 171 
‘Agamas’, xv 
Agamaéastra, lvi 
aged people (as initiands), 395 
AGHORA, 191, 194, 195, 222 
AghoraSiva, v, xvi, xvii, Xxxiv, 
XXXV, XxXvil, xliv, lii, lviii, 
lix, Lxi, Ixii, cix-cxv, cxxi, 
cxxiv, 138, 142, 154, 166, 
177, 195, 245, 250, 255, 
259, 260, 264, 265, 295, 
317, 326, 348, 352, 353, 
361, 373, 375 
date of, xxvi 
disciples of, xxvi 
AGHORASTRA, 223 
aghosa vak, 323 
Agneya, xxiv, xxv, see also 
Kalottara 
Agneyi (dharana), 360 
Agni, 290, 296, 369, see also fire 
nadi of, 367 
Agnidhra, 297 
Agnihotra, 1, 212, 213 
ahankara, lxx, 229, 237, 259, 260, 
268-270 
Bhiitadi, lxx, 259, 260, 263, 269 
Taijasa, xx, 259, 260, 268 


Parakhyatantra 


Vaikrta, lxx, 259, 260, 268 
Ahirbudhnyasamhita, 381 
Aindri (a nadi), 367 
air, Ixx, 328, see also Vayu and 
wind 
homologised with y, 361 
rising of, 158 
aifa language, Ivi, Ixxviii-lxxxv, 
221, 262, 380, 526 
Aigani (dharana), 360 
alsvarya, 297 
buddhidharma, \xix, 154, 254, 
206 
sad-, Ixxviii, 404, 405 
AJA, 222 
Ajita, xxili, xxvi, cx, cxxii, 280, 321, 
322, 397, 524 
Ajita, 324 
ajnana, see also avidya 
buddhidharma, 254, 282 
akaga, see ether and vyoman 
akrta (a bhuvana), 249 
aksa, see faculties 
Alaka, Iviii, 403 
alchemical liquid, 402 
alcoholic fermentation, 146 
Alvars, xxxiii 
Amarako§a, 164, 288, 301, 307 
Amaravati (citadel on Meru), 296 
Ambaladesikendra, cxv 
Ambaresa (a hell), 285 
Ambarisa (a hell), 282, 283, 285 
Ambhojasambhu, xx 
Ambika, 324 
Ambika (tantravataraka), 406 
Amrta (dharana), 360 
Amrtakanikoddyotanibandha, 173 
Amsumat, xxiii, 379 
Amudalapadu, xx 
anaisvarya 
buddhidharma, \xix, 254, 282 
Anandabhairava, 184 


General Index 


Ananta, xxviii, liv, lix, lxvi, lxvii, 
163, 176, 201, 202, 205, 
206, 218, 237, 317, 333 
a Rudra bearing egg of Brahma, 
313 
regent of iSvaratattva, boi, 317 
Ananta, 324 
Anantasgambhu, cix, cxxiii 
Anasrita, 324 
Anatha, 324 
ANAVARATAVINAYAKAM _ PILLAI, 
CXxX 
Andhatamasa (a hell), 284 
Andhatamisra (a hell), 287 
Andhra Pradesh, xxx 
Andropogon Muricatus, 160 
angamantras, 223, 224, 330, 332- 
334, 337 
Angaraka (Mars), 306, 307 
anger, 272, 302 
animan, ]xix, 219, 256, 379 
anugraha (compassion/grace), lxv, 
Ixvi, 146, 165, 189, 196- 
198, 200-202, 220, 317, 
343, 393, 396-398 
anumana, |i, 146, 168, 169, 209, 211 
anus, 262, 265 
faculty of, 262 
tattva of, 316 
anustubh, lxxxv 
Apabhraméfa, Ixxix 
apana, Ixxv, 262, 265, 357, 377 
Aparajita, 324 
apauruseyatva, li, 209-212 
Appar, xviii 
Apsaras, 297-299 
APTE, 148, 285, 347, 362, 374 
Apya (a nadi), 367 
Aranipadra, xx 
arbuda 
embryo, 244-246 
number, 279 
arivarga, X1x 


625 


Arka, 294 

arna, term for consonants, 321, 325 

arsa language, lxxxv, lxxxvi 

arthakriyakaritva, 172, 272, 273 

arthapada, 345 

arthapatti, li, 168, 169, 209, 212, 327 

ArthaSastra, xix, 402 

arthavada, 211, 342 

Arulnandi, cxix 

Arirar, xxxiii 

Aryadeva, 403 

Aryamanjusrindmasangiti, 173 

Aryasatyadvayavatarasitra, lvi 

asana 

yoganga, 351-353 

ash, 388 

Asitavati (citadel on Meru), 296 

asramas, 394 

astakas, 249, 314-316 

astamurti, 181, 316 

Astangahrdaya, 246, 366 

astapuspika, 384 

ASTRA, xl, 223, 224, 332, 333, 383 

aSuddhadhvan, 373 

Asuras, 297 

ASvattha tree, 297 

atiguhyastaka, 315 

Atimarga, 139, 260 

Atmarthapijapaddhati, xxxvi, lxii, 
Cix, CXi 

atoms, Ixx, 270, 271, 279, 280 


Atyantakama, xix 


Atyantanirmalatattvaratnavali, 314 
auma (a bhuvana), 249 
avairagya 

buddhidharma, 235, 241, 254, 

282 

Avantivarman, xx 
avarana, 224 
aveSa, see under mukti 
Avici/Avici (a hell), 282, 284, 287 
avidya, 152, 153, see also ajnana 
avinabhavaniyama, xlix 


626 


avyakta, see prakrti 
axe, 161 
ayurveda, 233 


Badami, xx 

Bahurtipasambhu, lix 

BAKKER, xvii, 1xxxiii 

Bala, one of the Satarudrah, 313 

balagra, see hair 

Balajnanaratnavali, cxi 

Balaksepa, 183 

Balaksepa, form of Siva, 183 

Balamanthana, 184 

Balantaka, one of the Satarudrah, 
313 

Balapramatha, 183 

Balapramathana, 184 

Balapramathini, 181 

Balaratnavali, cxi 

Balavattara (head of sparSatattva), 
316 

Balavikarana, 180, 183 

Balavikarani, 181 

Bali (a Daitya), 292, 293 

BANERJI, xx 

BARAZER-BILLORET, xxv, xliv, xlv, 
Ixxxviii, 139, 202, 237, 315 

barley grain (yava), 280, 523-528 

Baroda, vii 

Baudhayana, xxvii 

BECK, xvi 

bell-metal, 307 

belly, 267, 284 

Benares, lii 

BENDALL, xvii 

Berlin, xciv 

Bhadra, xxiv 

Bhadrasva, 295, 297, 298 

Bhagavadgita, 255 

Bhagavatapurana, 244, 282, 399 

Bhairava, 223 

bhakti (devotion), 255, 395, 397 

BHANDARKAR, xviii, xx 


Parakhyatantra 


Bhanujidiksita, 301, 307 
Bhanumat (head of ripatattva), 316 
Bharata, 300 
Bharata (landmass), 295, 299, 300, 
305 
Bhasarvajna, 378 
BHATT, xvi, xviii, xxxv, lili, xciii, 
XCiV, XCVi, XCVli, CXV, 
cxvili, 139, 172, 187, 192, 
195, 202, 225, 236-238, 
249, 258, 280, 314, 349, 
350, 365, 368, 369, 372, 
373, 375, 376, 392, 397, 525 
Bhatta Bhaskara, 187, 390 
Bhattabhaskaramisra, 181 
BHATTACHARYA, xxi, lvi 
Bhatta Vadindra, 151 
Bhava, lxvi, 205 . 
realm below Suddhavidya, 406 
Bhavacudamani, |x, cxiv 
bhavas, see buddhidharmas 
bhavasarga, 180 
Bhimanihsvana (a Raksasa), 292 
Bhimanirhrada (a Raksasa), 292 
Bhimaparakrama (a Daitya), 292 
bhoga 
aspect of Siva, 141, 318 
contrasted with moksa, 220 
tattva, 201 
Bhogakarika, xxxvii, lx, 235, 236, 
239, 253, 259, 264, 404 
Bhogakarikavrtti, cxiv, 154, 234 
bhogin 
aspect of Siva, Ixvi, 196, 197 
Bhoja, xvi, xliv, cix, 260 
Bhrgu, 302 
bhuh, |xxi 
bhutas, see elements and spirits 
bhutasamkhya, 282, 304, 524 
bhutasarga, 180 
bhutasuddhi, 355, 360, 361 
Bhutikantha, Ixi 
bhuvana 


Genera! Index 


laksya, 324 
bhuvanadhvan, 200 
bhuvanasarga, 180 
Bhuvarloka, lxxii, 305, 309 
bija 
term for vowels, 321 
bijamantras, 330, 333, 334, see also 
under mantras 
bile, 267 
locus of fire, 267 
Bilhari, xx 
binding fate, see niyati 
bindu, |xxii, 176, 177, 317, 321-324, 
326, 363 
laksya, 324 
in mantroccara, 324 
BISSCHOP, vi, 302, 315, 318, 352, 
401 
blood, 183, 267, 287, 303, 366, 367 
Bodhayana, xxvii 
body, lxiv, lxx, xxv, 144-148, 151, 
156-161, 163, 167, 170- 
172, 180, 183-186, 196, 
201, 206, 221, 229-233, 
250, 252, 256, 263, 266, 
267, 272-274, 284-287, 
296, 303, 357, 359, 373, 
375, 377 
dead, 371 
destruction of, 156, 157 
ether in, 265 
experience only within, 150, 
156 
fire in, 267 
four states of, 146 
gross, 232, 251, 271 
ills of, 138 
in yoga, 350, 351, 354, 366 
mantra-, xli, 165, 192, 225, 388 
new, 150 
of Ananta, 201, 317 
of Kusmanda, 281 
of Malini, xlvii 


627 


of mantras, 221 
of Rahu, 307 
of subtle matter, 221 
pure, 317, 398 
soul different from, 143, 144 
subtle, lxx, 163, 242, 243, 250, 
251, 266, 273, 369 
the Lord’s, lxv, lxvii, 165, 190- 
192, 194, 196, 217, 221, 
222, 224, 225, 306, 343, 
344, 374, 398 
transformation of four ele- 
ments, 144 
water in, 267 
yogic burning of, 388, 389 
BOHTLINGK, 362 
bone, 193, 267, 366, 367 
BORI, xciii, 280 
Brahma, xx, Ixxii, 208, 295, 296, 
298, 301, 310, 311, 317, 
336, 369, 373 
nirvacana of, 374 
citadel of, 296 
egg of, Ixxi, bxxii, 279, 281, 289, 
304, 313, 314 
in mantroccara, |xxv, 372 
nirvacana Of, 311 
regent of sadaSivatattva, Ixxii 
term used of liberated soul, 406 
Brahmabindupanisat, li, 151 
brahmacarya (celibacy), Ixxvii, 394 
brahmamantras, xl, xli, lxv, eviii, 
191, 194, 223, 332, 334, 
337, 374 
bija, 330 
brahman, 153, 324, 378, 384, 406 
in mantroccara, 324 
Brahmanadi, 358 
Brahmananda, 364 
BRAHMANANDASVAMIN, 398 
brahmanda, see Brahma, egg of 
Brahmandapurana, 291, 301, 527, 
528 


628 


Brahmapurana, 301 

brahmarandhra, 265, 373 

Brahmasambhu, xx 

Brahmasiddhi, l|vii 

BRAHMASIRAS, 223 

Brahmasitra, 152, 197 

Brahmasitrasankarivrtti, 217 

Brahmavaivartapurana, 279 

Brahmi, xlvii 

brahmins, 298, 394 

brahmya (a bhuvana), 249 

Brhadaranyakopanisat, 378 

Brhadbhoga (a Daitya), 292 

Brhaddadhica, 314 

Brhadgarbha (a Daitya), 292 

Brhadraga (a Daitya), 292 

Brhaspati, 306, 307 

Brhaspatipada, Ix, lxi 

Brhatkalottara, xxv, xxxviii, xxx1x, 

_ xiii, 224, 353 

Brhatkiranoddyota, Ixii 

Brhattika, 169 

BROCKINGTON, Xili, xiv 

brows, lxxv, 372 

BRUNNER, vi, Xvi, Xviii, xX, xxvii, 
XXxi, XXxXiv, xxxvi, lii, lviii, 
xiii, lxxxvili, cxi, cxii, 
CxiV, Cxv, cxxiv, 140, 181, 
184, 223, 224, 249, 250, 
307, 314-316, 331, 334, 
352, 361, 379, 389-391, 393 

bubhuksu, 220 

buckram, cil 

budbuda, 244-246 

Buddha (head of buddhitattva), 316 

Buddhacarita, 402 

buddhi (intellect), lxviii-lxx, 145, 
154, 229, 234-239, 247, 
251, 252, 258, 259, 268, 
316, 385 

with its eight qualities, 154, 

240, 254, 258, 385, 404, see 
also buddhidharmas 


Parakhyatantra 


buddhidharmas, )xxviii, 154, 241, 
282, 404 

buddhindriyas, 260, see also facul- 
ties 

Buddhists, lvi, Ixii-lxiv, lxx, 172, 
173, 209, 271, 272 

tantric, 222, 347, 403 

BUDDRUuSS, 307 

Budha, 297, 306, 307 

BUHNEMANN, 307 

BURNIER, 358 


caksuh, see eye and sight 

Calukyas, xix 

Cambodian inscriptions, xx, xxi 

Cambridge, vii, xxi, xlii, 315 

Candra, see moon, Candramas and 
Soma 

Candrabhasa, xxiv 

Candragarbha, 296 

Candrahasa, xxiv 

Candrajnana, xxiv 

Candramas, 306, see also moon and 
Soma | 

Candrananda, li, 245, 329, 380 

CandraSekharabhattaraka, cxiv 

candrayana, 184 

Cankarpanirakaranam, xxxii, CXv 

Carvakas, li, lxiii, 143-147, 168, 169 

caryaé (pada), lxii, lxxvi, 141, 385, 
387, 388, 390, 392, 398-400 

caste, lxxvii, cviii, 394 

Catamanimalai, cxvi 

CatuhSatikakalottara, Ixii 

CatuhSatika, )xii 

celibacy, see brahmacarya 

chaff, 308 

Chandellas, xxx 

Chidambaram, cxv 

children (as initiands), 395, 396 

chotika, 364 

chyle, lxxv 

Cintya, xxiii 


General Index 


Cintyasastra, xxvii, 389 

Citraratha, 299 

Cittaviguddhiprakarana, 403 

Civananacittiyar, cxii, cxix, 140 

clay, 176 

clay vessel, 233 

clouds, 305 

C@DES, xxi 

COLAS, vi, xxv, 255, 381 

COLAS-CHAUHAN, Vi, Cxiii 

conflation, xcii, 157 

conjectures, Cvi 

consonants, bxxil, lxxili, 321, 322, 

325, 331, 336, 337 

clusters of, 334, 337 

continents, 294, 295, 301-303, 305 
seven, Ixxi, Lxxii 

copper, 307, 402 

cotton, 148 

cows, xl, Ixxiii, 147, 302, 334 
time taken to milk, 359 

crystal, 154, 307, 371 

Culex, Ixxxix 

CULIKA, xl 


DAGENS, xxv, xliv, xlv, lix, lxxxviii, 
cix, CXill, cxv, cxix, 139, 
202, 237, 315, 524 

Daityas, Ixxi, 291, 306 

Damani, 181, 182, 184 

danda (punctuation), civ 

danda (unit of measure), 280, 523- 
528 

dandabhangi, 191 

danda(ka] (asana), 348, 350 

Danujas, 290 

darkness, 201 

DASGUPTA, Xiv, XVi 

DAVIS, xvi, Xvil, XIX, XX, CXV 

death, 383, 397 

DeSopadeSa, 390 

Devapati (tantravataraka), 406 

DEVASENAPATHI, XXxXill, Cxil 


629 


devata 
Mimamsaka conception of, 
339-342 
Devendravarman, xix 
Devibhagavatapurana, 285, 293, 296 
Devikalottara, cvii, cxvii, 398 
Deviyamala, 315 
Devyamata, cxvii 
DEzsO, vi, 144, 233, 269 
Dhanada, 300 
dhanuh (unit of measure), 280, 523- 
528 
dharana, |xxv, 351-353, 355, 360— 
362, 365, 388 
of earth, 360 
of ether, 355, 363 
of fire, 362 
of water, 361 
of wind, 355, 363 
dharma, 152, 212, 213, 241, 255, 
401, 404 
buddhidharma, lxix, 154, 254 
sad-, lxxviii, 404 
Dharma (tantravataraka), 406 
Dharmakirti, xlvi, xlix, 167, 337 
Dharmapuram, cxii, Cxv 
Dharmendra, 173 
Dhatupatha, 266, 308, 312, 316, 370 
dhatus, 367 
DHAVAMONY, Xvi, XXxii 
Dhruva, see pole star 
Dhureti plates, xxx 
dhyana, \Ixxv, 351, 356, 360, 362, 
391 
yoganga, 351-353 
Dignaga, xlix, 271 
diksa (initiation), xxi, xxvii, xlvi, 
Ixiii, Ixxvi, lxxvii, lxxxviii, 
Cvili, Cxil, CXVill, Cxix, 137, 
162, 163, 193, 200, 218, 
219, 238, 242, 282, 314, 
317, 382, 385, 387-391, 
393-399, 402, 404 


630 


nirapeksa, lxxvii, 394, 395 
samaya-, |xxvi, 387, 391 
sapeksa, \xxvii, 387, 394 
DiksadarSa, cvii, cxii, cxxv, 390 
Diksottara, xv 
Dipika, 324 
diplomatic transcription, civ 
Dipta, xxili, 524 
Diptarudra (tantravataraka), 406 
Diptesa (tantravataraka), \xxviii, 
406 
doctor, 200 
double sandhi, Ixxxv, 202, 208 
drk-gakti, see jnana-Sakti 
Dundubhi (head of vaktattva), 316 
DUNUWILA, Xvi 
Durdar§a (a serpent), 292 
Durdarsana (a Daitya), 292 
dvadaSanta, 355, 371, 373, 377 
bahya-, 373, 376 
Dvisatikalottara, lxii, 224, 372, 375 
Dvisatikalottara, xxv 
Dvisatikaélottaravrtti, Lxii, 142, 373, 
375 
DVIVEDA/DVIVED!I/DWIVEDI, 
Vrajavallabha, XXIV, 
xxxiv, Lx, Ixi, cvi, cxxii, 
260 
dvyanuka, 270, 279, 280 


ear, 261, 262, 265 
earth, Ixviii, Ixx, 169, 208, 264, 269, 
273, 301, 302, 308 
area, 172 
characteristics of, 361 
circle of, 295, 382 
dharana of, Ixxv, 355, 360, 361 
evolved from smell, 267 
gold in, 402 
homologised with ], 361 
karmabhumi, 305 
measurements of, 304 
our, 288, 294 


Parakhyatantra 


pilgrimage sites on, 314, 315 
property of, 258 
shaking of, 158 
surface of, 281, 295, 310, 382 
tattva of, 227, 230, 278, 304, 
314, 373 
Ekadrk, 201 
Ekarudra, 201 
elements, 141, 227, 260, 269, 328 
gross (bhita, mahabhita), |xx, 
145-148, 159, 181, 184, 
229, 260, 261, 263, 264, 
266, 268, 269, 271, 273, 
316, 317, 354, 361 
dharanas of, |xxv, 360, 362 
four visible, 144, 158 
homologisation of with semi- 
vowels, 361 
innate properties of, 158 
subtle (matra, tanmatra), |xx, 
229, 259, 260, 263-265, 


268, 269, 316 
elements (seven dhatus of body), 
193 
elephant, 189, 239, 294, 301, 361 
embryo, 244 
female, 246 
male, 246 


emendation, xcii, Cc, Ciil, cvi 
enjambement, lxxix, 217, 342, 382 
Ennius, cxxiv 
ether (aka§a), lvi, lxx, 263-265, 328, 
336, 364, 373 
dharana of, Ixxv, 355, 360, 363 
level of subtle sound, 363 
plurality of, 264 
tattva of, 314 
the letter H, 331, 361 
excretion, faculty of, see anus 
eye, Ixxiv, 179, 262, 265, 267, 278, 
351 
-balls, 261 
faculty of, 179, 247 


General Index 


infected, 138 

locus of fire, 267 

retaining breath in, 354 
eyeskip, 181, 231, 356 


faculties (senses, instruments, in- 
driya, karana), lxiv, lxviii, 
Ixx, 138, 145-147, 156- 
158, 173, 180, 185, 212, 
221, 227-229, 234, 237, 
238, 247, 248, 255, 259, 
260, 262, 263, 268-270, 
274, 286, 316, 317, 344 
beyond, 180, 188, 213, 216, 344 
non-material, 221 
objects of, 237, 240, 263 
of action, lxx, 160, 253, 259, 
260, 262, 263, 268 
of sense, |xx, 253, 259-261, 268, 
371 
fat, 267, 302, 367 
feet, 160, 197, see also movement, 
faculty of 
faculty of action, 262, 263 
of the Lord, 222 
positioning of in yoga, 348-351 
fetters, 272 
fever, Ixxiv, ci, 233, 256, 284, 338, 
345 
subjection of by mantras, 338 
FILLIOZAT, xviii, Xix, XXXvVi, 
Ixxxvili, xcvi, 406 
finger-breadth, 280 
FINOT, xxi 
fire, lxx, 157, 158, 176, 185, 200, 
213, 233, 264, 266, 267, 
272, 281, 285, 288, 289, 
302, 306, 328, 329, see also 
Agni 
associated with udana, 372 
associated with central channel, 
372 
between nether worlds, 281 


631 


dharana of, lxxv, 354, 355, 362, 
363 
going out, 158 
homologised with r, 361 
in belly, 366 
in the body, 267 
of anger, 302 
of time, 281 
on mountain, 185 
power of blocked by mantras, 
277 
property of, 267 
seven internal fires, 367 
tattva of, 304, 314 
fireflies, 159 
flesh, 267, 366, 367 
FLOOD, xiv 
foetus, 242, 246, 247, 367 
fog, 284 
forehead, 355 
form (rupa) 
subtle element, 263, 267 
tattva of, 316 
FRANCO, 169 
FRAUWALLNER, I, 169, 186, 210, 212 


Gabhasti, 291 

Gabhastimat, 289, 292 

GahaneSana, 317 

GANAPATI SASTRI, cx 

Ganapatitattwa, 353 

gandha, see smell 

property of earth, 258 

Gandhamadana (mountain range), 
297, 298 

Gandhanga (head of gandhatattva), 
316 

Gandharvas, 298, 299, 303 

Gandhavaha (citadel on Meru), 296 

Gandhavati (citadel on Meru), 296 

GANESAN, Vi, XXvil, XXX, CXix 

Ganesvaras, 224, 333 

Ganges, Ixiii, 137 


632 


Sky-, 306 
Garbhoda, Ixxii, 304 
gariman, 379 
Garuda, xliv, 137, 274, 299, 318 
Garudas, 290 
Gaudapada, lvi 
Gauta, lxvi, 205 
Gautama, 302 
gavyuti, 280, 523-528 
GAYATRI, 224 
gems, Ixxiv, 293, 303, 345 
nine, 291 
radiance of, 281, 293, 303 
wish-fulfilling, 173 
GENGNAGEL, xvi, xvii, xliv 
genitals, 265 
ghana, 244, 245 
Ghanananda (head of upastha- 
tattva), 316 
ghatakaSadrstanta, lvi 
Gherandasamhité, 350, 358 
GHORA, 222 
GHORASTRA, 223 
GHOSHAL, xix 
Gitabhasya, 256 
godoha, 358, 359 
gold, 307, 402 
eight types of, 402 
heated, 306 
Gomeda(s) (continent), 294, 302 
GOML, vii, xxxvi, lii, Lxii, cx, cxi, 
Cxxli-cxxiv, 173, 206, 252, 
339, 340 
GONDA, xiv-xvi 
GOODALL, v, xili-xv, xviii, xix, 
XXl, XXII-—XXvVi, XXIX, XXX, 
XXXiIV—-XXxXix, xliii, xlix, li, 
lii, Ivi, Iviii-bxiii, bxxviil, 
Ixxix, bxxxil, Ixxxv, Ixxxvi, 
Ixxxvili, xcii, xcill, xcv— 
XCVill, C, Cll, CX-—CXV, Cxx— 
cxxiv, 138, 139, 141, 142, 
151, 167, 173, 177, 180, 


Parakhyatantra 


181, 193, 199, 202, 207, 
231, 234, 238, 243, 249, 
260, 261, 272, 275, 276, 
299, 314, 316, 317, 321, 
323, 324, 335, 345, 369, 
375, 387, 388, 391, 393, 
395, 396, 398, 404, 406, 525 
GOPAL IYER, xxxiii 
Gopati (tantravataraka), 406 
Gopati (king of Gomedas), 302 
Gopendratippabhupala, 375 
Goraksaviracitaprabodha, xcvi 
Gosava, 302 
GOUDRIAAN, xv, Ixxviii 
Govindaraja (commentator on 
Manusmrti), 286 
Grahayajna, 307 
Grantha, xcviii, xcix, 144, 148, 157, 
200, 343 
granthi, 384 
five along central channel, 355 
grasping 
faculty of, 262 
tattva of, 316 
Great Bear, 309 
Greek astrology, xlvii 
GRIFFITHS, vi 
GRONBOLD, 351 
GROS, xxxili 
GUHA, 222 
guhyatiguhyastaka, 315 
guhyad guhyatara, 315 
Guhyasamaja, 347 
guhyastaka, 315 
gunas, lxix, 182, 235, 236, 252-254, 
260 
gunasankranti, see under mukti 
gunatattva, Ixix, 229, 237, 249, 253, 
316 
GUPTA, Xv 
~guru, lxvi, cix, 198, 392, 395, 396 


HAAG-BERNEDE, vi, 159 


General] Index 


hair, 267 
dimension of tip of (kacagra, 
balagra), 280, 523-528 
Hamkrti (head of ahankaratattva), 
316 
HAMSA, Ixxvi, 375 
Hamsaparamesvara, xxi 
HANDIQUI, xx 
hands, 160, 161, 189, 289, see also 
grasping, faculty of 
faculty of action, 262 
of a Vidyadhara, 299 
of the Lord, 223 
positioning of in yoga, 349, 351 
unit of measure (hasta), 280, 
523-528 
HANNEDER, xx, 377 
Hara, 296, 299, 311-313 
nirvacana of, 312 
HARA, 360, 381 
Haracaritacintamani, 179 
Haravijaya, lviii, 233, 402 
Hari (landmass), 295, 299, 300 
Hari (Visnu), 300, 302 
Haribhadra, 173 
Harivam§a, 297 
hasta, see grasping and hands 
Hataka, Ixxi, 293, 294 
HatakeSvara, 291 
Hathaka, 293 
Hathayogapradipika, 358, 364 
HATTORI, 271 
HAYASHI, 279, 524 
HAZRA, XVii 
head, 194, 355 
of the Lord, 191, 193, 194 
hearing, 270 
faculty of, 261 
tattva of, 316 
heart, xl, lxxv, 324, 353-357, 367- 
369, 371, 372, 376, 383, 384 
locus of fire, 267 
of Sikhandin, 201 


633 


of the Lord, x], 191, 195, 222 
hedonists (as initiands), 395 
Helaraja, li 
hells, lxxi, 282-290 
Hemahamsagani, 370 
Hemakitta (mountain range), 299, 
300 

hetu, 328 

hetukartr, 207 

Hevajrasahajasadyoga, 173 

Hevajratantra, 374, 403 

hiatus, Ixxxiii, lxxxv, 158, 205, 216, 
221, 357 

Himavat, 300 

Hiranya (a Daitya), 292 

Hiranya (landmass), 295 

HOISINGTON, Xvil 

homa, 388, 391, 392 

homoioteleuton, 262, 390 

horses, 297, 361 

Hoshiarpur Vishveshvaranand Vedic 
Research Institute, vii, 
CVili 

HOUBEN, 329 

HOUSMAN, xxxi, lxxxix—xci, cxxiv, 
CXXV 

HRDAYA, xl, 223, 332 

HRIM, 333, 334 

HUAUM, 331 

HULIN, lxxxviii, 239, 279, 283, 286, 
295, 525 

HULTZSCH, xix 

HUM, 334, 335 

HUMPHAT, 383 

hypermetry, lxxxvi 


iccha (Sakti), 179, 201, 252, 372 

Ida, 297 

ida, lxxv, 367, 372 

idiots (as initiands), 395 

IFP, v, vii, xxvii, xxxvi, lii, ly, 
lvi, lix, lxii, xciii, cvi, cviii, 
CX-CXIV, CXV1, CXIX-—CXXIV, 


634 


166, 173, 191, 192, 195, 
206, 217, 232, 242, 245, 
249, 250, 252, 259, 282, 
289, 294-297, 307, 313- 
315, 323, 325, 333, 339, 
340, 348, 352, 355, 372, 
373, 375, 376, 379, 381, 
388, 389, 391 

Ila, 297 

Ilavrta, 295-299 

impurity, see mala 

INDEN, XCi 

Indhika, 324 

India Office, xlii 

Indra, xxxvii, 296, 297, 301, 369 

indriyas, see faculties 

initiands, 388, 395 

initiates, 137, 393, 395 

initiation, see diksa 

initiation names, xx, xxx 

instruments of sense and action, see 
faculties 

intestines, 267 

IRACAMANIKKANAR, Xxxii 

iron, 307 

Ifa, 369 

ISA, 223 

ISAACSON, V, vi, xiii, xvii, li, Ixxxiii, 
137, 140, 142, 148, 150, 
151, 153, 159, 160, 165, 
168, 169, 173, 179, 181, 
185, 186, 197-202, 207, 
214, 222, 232, 237, 245, 
246, 249, 251, 258, 272, 
274, 292, 293, 302, 330, 
341, 343, 345, 347, 357, 
360, 370, 374, 375, 380, 
394, 400, 402, 403, 407 

ISANA, 191, 193, 194, 222 

ISana$ivagurudevapaddhati, xxx, 
Cvli, cix, cxxiii, 308, 334, 
355 

[sani (dharana), 360 


Parakhyatantra 


ISHIMATSU, cx 
isita, 379 
ISvara, lxv, 192 

in mantroccara, |xxv, 372 
ifvara (padartha), lxiii, 140, 345 
I§varapratyabhijnakarika, 372 
I$varapratyabhijnakarikavimarsin}, 

XCVvl 

iSvaratattva, Ixvi, |xxii, 201, 317 
IYANGAR, 358 


Jahnu, 310 

Jainas, xcvi, 148, 150 

Jalada (head of rasatattva), 316 

Jalamdharabandha, 358 

jalamoda, 159 

Jalantaka, one of the Satarudrah, 
313 

Jalavasa, 159 

Jalega (head of jalatattva), 314 

Jambi (continent), lxxii, 294, 295, 
297, 299-301, 303 

Jambi (tree), 300, 301 

Jambiinada (gold), 300, 301 

Jambiinadi, 301 

JAMBUVIJAYA, 380 

JAMISON, 367 

Jammu, vii, cxiv 

Janaloka, lxxii, 310, 311 

japa, 391 

japa (yoganga), 352 

jasmine, 306 

jati (mantra inflection), Ixxiii, 334, 
335, 337 

functions and genders of, 334 

jatu, 233 

Jatu (a hell), 283 

Jatupanka (a hell), 285 

Jaya, 324 

Jayantabhatta, 169 

Jayarasi, 169 

Jayaratha, lx, lxi, cxii, 242 

Jayavarman V, xxi 


General Index 


jiva, 375 
as name for ingoing or outgoing 
breath, Ixxv, 371 
jivanmukta, xxvii 
jnana, see also vidya 
buddhidharma, \xix, 154, 254 
saj-, xxviii, 404, 405 
jnana (Sakti), 161-163, 174, 185- 
189, 219, 221, 233, 275, 405 
jnana (pada), Ixii, lxxvi, 385, 387, 
388, 390-392, 395, 397, see 
also vidyapada 
jnana (padartha), 388, see also un- 
der vidya 
Jnanabindu (head of kalatattva), 
316 
Jnanapancasika, xxv, xxxviii, xcvi 
Jnanapraka§a, cvii, cviii, cxili, cxix, 
Cxx, cxxili, 190-193, 217, 
322, 325-329, 390 
Jnanaratnavali, xli, xliii, lii, lxii, cx, 
CxXx, cxxlv, 314 
Jnanasambhu, xli, lii, lili, Lxii, cx, 
CXX, CXXI1V 
Jupiter, 306, 309 
JVALINI, 222 
Jyestha, 180-182, 324 
Jyestha, 182 
Jyotiska (peak on Meru), 296 
jyotistoma, 340 


kacagra, see hair 
KAHRS, 390 
Kailasanatha temple, xix 
Kala (form of Siva), 183 
Kala (head of kalatattva), 317 
kala (time), lxviii, 175, 176, 183, 
229, 230, 235, 242, 243, 
246-248, 278, 284, 317, 374 
kala | 
38 divisions of the brahma- 
mantras, 196 
channel of the breath(?), 266 


635 


group of five, lxxvi, 317 
limited power to act, ]xvii-lxix, 
162, 163, 200, 227, 229, 
231-237, 240, 242, 247, 
248, 250-252, 269, 273, 
278, 317, 374 
bhuvanas in, 184 
tattva of, 316 
of VAMADEVA mantra, 181 
Kalacakratantra, 222 
kaladhvan, 200, 317 
Kalagnirudra, !|xxi, 280, 281 
Kalajnana, xcvi, see also Kalottara 
Kalakira, 180, 183 
Kalaksepa, form of Siva, 183 
kalala, 244, 245 
Kalamukhas, 404 
kalana, 245 
Kalanala, 281 
Kalanga (a serpent), 292 
Kalasutra (a hell), 283, 284 
Kalavikarani, 181 
Kali, 180, 183 
Kalidasa, lxxxii 
Kahkulakrama, xlii 
Kalottara, xv, xxv, xxxvil, xcvi, 
cxvil, 192, 330, 377 
Brhat-, see Brhatkalottara 
Devi-, see Devikalottara 
fifty-verse recension of, xcvi 
hundred-verse recension of, 
XXV, XCVI1 
mantra-system of, 333 
Saptasatika-, see SaptaSatika- 
kalottara 
SardhaSatika-, xcvi 
Sardhatrigati-, see Sardhatriga- 
tikalottara 
seven-hundred-verse recension 
of, xxv 
Skanda-, 314, 315 
synonymous with Kalajnana, 
XCVi 


636 


Kamada (head of ragatattva), 316 
Kamadeva, see Love 
kamavasayita, 379 
Kambala (a serpent), 291 
Kamika, xxiii, xxv, 327 
Purva-, 280, 327, 334, 524 
Ur-, 327 
Uttara-, 307, 327 
vidyapada, 327 
Kanci, xix 
kancukas, Ixviii, 234, 235, 240, 242, 
246, 247, 249, 317 
kanda, 355, 367, 368 
KANKANA, xl 
Kannada script, xcv, xcvii, Cii 
kapha, 367 
Karalaka (a Raksasa), 292 
Karana, xxiii, cx 
Purva-, 524 
karana, see faculties 
Kéraneégvaras, 355, 372 
KARAVELANE, XXxxiii 
Karaviramahayaga, xlii 
Karhad Plates, xx 
Karkandhaka (a Daitya), 292 
Karkandhu (a Daitya), 291 
Karkaroni, xx 
Karkata (a serpent), 292 
karman (past action), xlix, lxiv, 
xviii, bexvi, lxxviii, cix, 
140, 151, 152, 154-156, 
158-161, 163, 167, 170, 
171, 176-178, 199, 200, 
221, 230, 232, 237, 241, 
248, 250, 293, 305, 317, 
325, 390, 398 
place of accumulation of, lxxii, 
305 
praérabdhakarya, 156 
sancita, 156 
karmasamya, xxxiv, 171, 199, 395 
karmendriyas, 260, see also faculties 
karmeSvara, 171 


Parakhyatantra 


Karttikeya, xxxviii, 302 

Kashmir, xxii, XXx, Cxiii 

Kashmirian manuscripts, xix, Xciii, 
249 

Kashmirian text, xcii 

Kashmirians, xxi, xxvi 

KATAOKA, vi, Ixi, 169, 171, 172, 
209, 210, 274, 277 

Kathmandu, xciii, 282, 290 

National Archives, vii 

Kauberi (a naédi), 367 

kaumara (a bhuvana), 249 

Kaundinya, 254, 348, 380, 381 

KAVACA, xl, 223, 332, 333 

KAVIRAJA, Cvi 

Kavirajasekharasuryabhattaraka, 
140 

Kavyalankarasttra, 375 

KELLNER, 169 

Kerala, xxx, xxxi, cix 

Ketu, Ixxii, 307, 308 

Ketumala, 295, 297 

Khadga (a hell), 283, 285 

Kharepatan Plates, xx 

KIELHORN, xx, 336 

kila, position of in sentence, 375 

Kimpurusa (landmass), 295, 299, 
300 

Kimpurusas, 290 

Kirana, v, xvi, xxiv, xxxv—-xxxvii, 
xxxix, xlix, Ilxi, — Ixiii, 
Ixxxvii-lxxxix, XCV—-xcCvil, 
Cli, CVvili, Cx, CXvil, CxXxdil, 
137, 140, 141, 149, 
154-157, 160, 169-171, 
173, 175, 176, 178-181, 
184, 192-194, 196-200, 
202, 205-207, 216, 223, 
224, 231-233, 240, 241, 
249, 250, 252, 259, 262, 
267, 273-277, 280-283, 
288, 289, 291-297, 299, 
304, 308-314, 317, 318, 


General Index 


322-325, 330-335, 339, 
347-353, 358-360, 364, 
365, 373, 379, 383, 384, 
387, 388, 393, 395-397, 
402, 406, 523, 525 
parallels with other Siddhantas, 
lv, 275, 276 
style of, xliii, xliv, xlviii, lxxxv, 
Ixxxvii, lxxxix, 141 
translations of, lxxxviii 
transmission of, lxxxvii, xcii- 
XC1V 
Kiranavivrti, cx, 242, 245, 259 
Kiranavrtti, v, xiii, xxxv, xlii, xliv, 
xlix, lv, Lxi, Ixxviii, xcii, 
XClV, XCV, XCVll, XCVIil, Cll, 
137, 139, 141, 142, 146, 
155, 160, 169-171, 173, 
177, 178, 180, 187, 209, 
229, 233, 236, 243, 248, 
249, 272, 275, 312, 323, 
332, 363, 395-397, 405 
KIRFEL, 295, 296, 309, 524 
KLOSTERMAIER, Xiv 
Konkan, xx 
Kramana (head of padatattva), 316 
Kraunca 
continent, 294, 302 
demon, 302 
mountain, 302 
krcchra, 184 
Kriminicaya (a hell), 284, 286 
Krishna Maharaya Ayyan, cxii 
Krishnadeva Raya, cxii 
kriya (Sakti), 174, 179, 187-189, 
221, 231, 233, 247, 405 
kriya (pada), Ixii, Ixxvi, 385, 387, 
388, 390-393, 395, 398 
kriya (padartha), 388 
Kriyakramadyotika, lix, cx, cxiv, 
138, 166, 195, 361, 362 
Kriyakramadyotikavyakhya of 
SadaSiva, cx 


637 


kro§a, 280, 523-528 

Krsna, cii 

Krsnacaritranataka, 245 

Krsna III, xx 

Krsnangara (citadel on Meru), 296 

Krsnavati (citadel on Meru), 296 

krta (a bhuvana), 249 

krtayuga, 305 

Krtyakalpataru, 360 

ksanabhangavada, li 

Ksemaraja, v, xxxvii, xli, Lxxvili, 
Cvill, Cx, Cxili, Cxxiv, 265, 
279, 280, 285-287, 289, 
291, 292, 295, 296, 298- 
300, 309, 310, 312, 315, 
349, 351, 367, 372, 376, 
379, 381, 391, 392, 395, 
524, 527 

Ksemendra, 390 

ksetras, 314-316 

ksobha, 274 

Ksuradhara(ka) (a hell), 283, 285 

Ksutpipasa(ka) (a hell), 283, 286 

ktva, xliii, Ixxxv, 403 

Kubera, 290, 296, 369 

Kubjikamatatantra, |xxviii, |xxxiv, 
Ixxxv, 403 

Kubjikopanisat, 347 

Kumaradeva, 169, 260, 378 

Kumarasambhava, 292 

Kumarila, xlix, 1, Ixvii, 146, 152, 
169, 185, 329, 330, 399 

kumbhaka, lxxv, 358-360, 384 

Kumbhapaka (a hell), 284 

Kumbhipéka (a hell), 282, 284, 287 

Kundalini 

in mantroccara, 324 

kundalinisakti, 323 

KUNJUNNI RAJA, lvi 

Kurmapurana, 297 | 

Kuru (landmass), 299 

Kurunanacampantaparamacariyar, 
Cxii 


638 


KuSa (continent), 294, 301 

Kuéga (grass), 301 

Kusana, x\lvii 

Kusmanda, lxxi, 281, 288, 289, 363 
spelling of, 281 

kuta, 332 

Kutila (a serpent), 291 


lac, 285 
Jaghiman, 379 
Laksmidhara, 360 
laksya, 324 
Lalita, xxiv 
LAW, xvii 
laya 
aspect of Siva, 141, 318 
tattva, 201 
layin, Ixvi 
aspect of Siva, 197 
lead, 307 
liberation, see mukti 
liksa, 280, 523-528 
orthography of, 280 
LINDTNER, lvi 
Lingapurana, 255 
Lingayasurin, 288, 289, 301, 307 
liquor, 302 
Lohastambha (a hell), 284, 286 
Lohitaksa (a Raksasa), 291 
Lokaloka mountain, lxxii, 279, 303, 
304 
Lokapalas, 224, 295, 296, 313, 315, 
333 
lotus, xx, 189, 197, 199, 361, 362 
calyx, 295 
colour of, 307 
distinguished from water-lilies, 
178, 179, 189 
locus of Visnu, 311, 312 
of the heart, Ixxv, 354, 367-369, 
371, 384 
posture, 348, 349 
shape of Padma hell, 284 


Parakhyatantra 


louse (yiika), 280, 523-528 
louse egg, see liksa 

Love, god of, 302 

Lucilius, cxxiv, cxxv 
Lucknow, vii 
Luptagamasangraha, cvi 
lyap, xliii, xxxv, 403 


Madhavacarya, xvii 

Madhyapradesh, xx 

Madhyarjuna, cxxii, 192 

Madhyarjuna (place name), cxxii 

magnet, 173, 177 

Mahabharata, 172, 244, 249, 266, 
300, 301, 305, 307, 312; 401 

Mahabhasya, 336 

mahabhuta, see elements 

Mahadeva (author of Muktisopana- 
$astra?), xcvi 

Mahakala (tantrévataraka), 406 

mahaksaya, 231 

mahamaya, 195, 323 

Mahanarakas, 283 

Mahapadma (a hell), 283, 284 

mahapralaya, |x, |xi, 312 

Maharaurava (a hell), 282, 284, 287 

Maharloka, Ixxii, 310 

Mahatala, 289, 291, 292 

Mahavaktra (head of jihvatattva), 
316 

mahavakya, xxvii 

Mahe§Svaras, 404 

mahiman, 379 

Mahodaya (citadel on Meru), 296 

Makuta, xxiv 

Makuta, cxxil 

mala (impurity), xix, lxiv, Lxxi, 137, 
138, 140, 143, 153-156, 
162, 163, 198, 199, 230- 
232, 236, 242, 248, 274- 
277, 398 

malamantra, 333 

malaparipaka, xxxiv, 199, 219, 395 


General Index 


Malini, xlvii 
malini, lxxxv 
Malinivijayavarttika, xx, 318 
Malinivijayottara, xiii, xciv, 181, 
196, 199, 201, 205, 223, 
231, 233, 243, 260, 282, 
290, 293, 294, 313-315, 
318, 321, 347, 348, 351, 
353, 354, 359-365, 379, 
| 383, 397 
MALLEDEVARU, XCV, Cli, Cili 
Malya, 298 
Malyavat (mountain range), 297, 
298 
Mamsada (a hell), 283, 286 
mamsapesi, 244-246 
maémsapinda, 245 
manas, Ixx, 145, 146, 218, 229, 237, 
238, 247, 259, 260, 263, 
268, 274, 316 
Manas, a Rudra, 184 
mandalas, 354 
Mandanamisra, lvii 
Mandikyakarika, lvi 
mango, 148 
taste of, 328 
Manikkavacakar, xiv 
Manonmana, form of Siva, 184 
Manonman}, 181, 182, 184 
mantra-body, 192, 388 
mantradhvan, 200 
mantras, xxii, xxxvi, xl, liv, lxvi, 
Ixvii, lxxii-lxxiv, lxxxviil, 
141, 180, 201, 203, 205, 
215, 218, 220, 222-225, 
317, 318, 321, 324, 330, 
331, 333-335, 337-340, 
343, 345, 346, 359, 383 
awakening of, Ixvi 
base of, 332 
blocking fire by, 277 
connected to meanings, bxxili 
distinguished from vidyas, 220 


639 


divya and adivya, 344 
etymologisation of, lxxiv, 339 
for suicide, 383, 384 
genesis of, Ixvli 
grammar of, Ixxiii, 321, 330, 
331, 335 
in lower universe, 221 
in pure universe, 218 
inflections of, 334, 335 
laksya, 324 
non-Vedic, xxi 
numberlessness of, 222 
of body of Siva, 165, 187, 191, 
192, 194, 196, 374 
of VidyeSvaras, Ixxili, 333 
raising of, Ixxii, 321 
seed-, 361, 364, see also bija- 
mantras 
seven crores, 217, 218, 220 
terminology of, xxii, 223 
that are Sakti, 339 
that are Siva, 339 
that are anus, 339 
their disenchantment with cre- 
ation, 218, 221 
mantra-systems, 333 
Mantravarttika, lx 
mantroccara, lxxv, 324, 331 
mantroddhara, 321 
Manu, 298, 302 
Manusmrti, 280, 282, 286, 360, 524 
Marana (Rudra bearing egg of 
Brahma), 313 
Marici, 310 
Markanda, 310 
Markandeyapurana, 255, 301, 360, 
528 
marrow, 267, 366, 367 
Mars, 306, 309 
Marut, 369 
Matanga, xiv, xvl, xxi, XXv, XXXvil, 
xlix, lili, liv, Lxii, bexxvii- 
Ixxxix, CXvii, cxxill, 139, 


640 


140, 153, 157, 160, 167, 
172, 173, 177, 179, 182, 
184, 188, 191, 192, 194, 
195, 197, 201, 202, 217- 
221, 223-225, 233-235, 
237, 238, 240-243, 245, 
246, 248-252, 254, 256- 
260, 264, 266, 268, 270, 
280, 282, 283, 288, 290, 
293-296, 303, 304, 308- 
311, 313, 314, 316, 328, 
333, 345, 346, 348-354, 
357, 360, 364, 379, 383, 
387, 389, 390, 392, 398, 
404, 525 
anonymous commentary on, 
240 
echoes of other works in, xlix, 
143 
parallels with other Siddhantas, 
liv, lv, 223, 237 
style of, xliv, xviii, li; liv, 
1xxxix, 233 
transmission of, xciii 
Matanga, xliv, 296 
Matangavrtti, xvi, xxxvi, Ixii, cviii, 
cxiv, 144, 146, 169, 177, 
187, 195, 209, 220, 224, 
233, 234, 236, 238, 243, 
248, 258, 265, 272, 297, 
312, 314, 349, 350, 400 
Matarigvan (head of vayutattva), 
314 
Mathanadeva, xx 
matra, see elements 
matra, time-unit, 364, 365 
matrka, 322 
MATSUBARA, 381 
Matsyapurana, 297 
Mattamayiira, xx 
Mattamayira lineage, xx 
maya (primal! matter), xxvii, xxviii, 
Ixii, Ixvi-lxxii, 144, 162, 


Parakhyatantra 


163, 176, 200, 202, 221, 
225, 227-232, 234, 241, 
242, 270, 271, 273-275, 
278, 279, 317, 374 
tattva of, 227, 317 
Mayamata, 524 
Mayasangraha, xxv, Cxiv 
medas, 367 
memory, ]xiii, xxvii, 146-150, 327 
Mercury, 306, 309 
Meru, Ixxii, 295, 296, 298, 304 
metre, lxxxv—Lxxxvii 
metricians, Lxxiii 
MEULENBELD, 367 
Meykantacattirankal, xiii, xxxii, 
XXXIll, CXV, CXV]ll 
MICHAEL, cvii 
Mimamsa, |, 142 
Mimamsakas, xlviii, xlix, li, Ixvii, 
Ixxiv, 169, 170, 209-213, 
215, 326, 337, 339 
Bhatta, 209 
Mimamsasitra, |, 186 
MIRASHI, xix, XX, XXX 
MISHRA, Vi 
mist, 284 
Mocika, 324 
Mohacidottara, xxv, lxii, 307 
Mohasurottara, cxxiii 
moksa, see mukti 
Moksakarika, xix, lx, xi, cxvii, 139, 
193, 194, 201, 205, 218, 
310, 397, 400 
Moksakarikavrtti, 193, 209, 218, 310 
MONIER- WILLIAMS, 159 
moon, lxv, lxxv, 158, 176, 179, 181, 
216, 297, 305-307, 309, 
316, 362, 371, 372, see also 
Candramas and Soma 
associated with ingoing breath, 
372 
half- (a yogic posture), 348, 351 
mark of diagram of water, 361 


General Index 


reflected in water, 151 
moonlight, 176 
moonstone, 157, 158 
morphological peculiarities, bocxiv 
mote in sunbeam, 279 
MOoTEGI, 158 
mouth, 265 
of the Lord, 191 
movement 
faculty of, 263 
tattva of, 316 
Mrgendra, xvi, xxv, xxxvii, xiii, li, 
lv, lvii, Lxi, bxxxvii-lxxxix, 
XCV1, XCVil, Cili, Cviii, Cxiv, 
Cxvii, cxxiii, 140, 144, 146, 
156, 157, 171, 189, 192, 
194, 196, 202, 218, 220, 
224, 230, 231, 233, 235, 
240-243, 247-250, 253- 
255, 259, 261-264, 266, 
267, 279-283, 286, 288, 
289, 292-297, 301-305, 
308-315, 322, 323, 332- 
334, 342, 345, 347, 348, 
352, 354, 360, 364, 372, 
387, 525 
parallels with other Siddhantas, 
286, 291 
style of, xliv, xlviii, lxxxix 
translations of, lxxxviii 
Mrgendrapaddhati, lxi 
Mrgendrapaddhatitika, lv,  cxiv, 
352, 389 
Mrgendravrtti, |xi, cviii, cxiv, 146, 
172, 231, 239, 266, 267, 
272, 322, 323, 339, 354, 
355, 389, 397, 399 
Mrgendravrttidipika, |xi, cexv, 177, 
255, 264, 295 
Mrgendrottara, xcvii 
mud, 287 
MUDALIAR, xvii, Cxii 
Mudraprakarana, 1x 


641 


mudras, cix 


Mukhabimba, xxiii 
mukti (liberation), xlvi, lx, Lxi, xv, 
Ixxiv, lxxvi-lxxviii, cxviii, 
139, 141, 152, 153, 182, 
186, 195, 196, 198, 203, 
218, 220, 221, 276, 277, 
382, 384, 385, 387, 388, 
390, 393-404, 407 
abhivyakti, 404, 405 
absence of rivalry between souls 
in, 405 
as Rudra, 397 
aveSa, 400 
padartha, Ixiii, lxxvi, 140, 141, 
345, 385, 387 
samutpatti, 400, 404 
sankranti, 400, 401 
Muktisopana§astra, xcvi 
Mulabandha, 358 
mulamantra, see Sivamantra 
miulasiitra, see adisiitra 
mumuksu, 220 
Mysore, v, cvii, Cxxv 
Oriental Reseach Institute, cxi 
Oriental Research Institute, vii, 
XCV 
MY” (=Mysore MS P 258), xxxv- 
xlii, lv, lx, lxii, Ixxxv, xcii- 
xciv, xcvi-xcix,  cli-civ, 
CVi-Cvili, CXxi, CXXiV, CXXV, 
140, 144, 145, 152, 157, 
165-167, 169, 170, 182; 
186, 191, 193, 198, 208, 
236, 241, 244, 257, 258, 
261-263, 275, 281, 285- 
287, 291-293, 298, 300, 
303, 306, 313, 316, 323, 
324, 336, 346, 347, 350— 
353, 358, 359, 364, 365, 
373, 379, 383, 402, 406, 
531, 623 
apograph of, cii, ciii 


642 


condition of, ci 

Grantha antecedent of, xcviii, 
xcix, 144, 148 

transcription of, ci, ciii 


nada, v, |xii, 317, 323, 324, 326 
laksya, 324 
in mantroccara, 324 
relationship to sphota, 326 
Nadakarika, xxxvii, 323, 326 
Naédakarikavrtti, v, cxiii, 326 
nadi, 356 
nadiphantakrama, xvii. 
Nagas, Ixxi, 290, 338 
NAGASWAMY, xviii 
nails, 267 
Naimittikakriyanusandhana, xx 
Nairrtya (a nadi), 367 
Naisadhiyacarita, xcviii 
Naiyayikas, xlviii, lxx, 177, 211, 329 
NAKAMURA, 152 
naksatra, 309 
NAMAH, 334 
Nanavaranavilakkam, cxii 
Nanavaranavilakkattarumpatavivéekam, 
cvii, cxi, cxxiii, 166, 257, 
261 
NANDIMATH, xvii, xXx 
Nandinagari, xcv, xcviii, cxi 
Narada, 298 
Narakarajas, 283 
Narakas, 283 
Narasimha II, xix 
Naradyanakantha, xxvi, xxxvii, lviii, 
lxi, cvili, cix, cxiv, 144, 
172, 196, 230, 231, 239, 
250, 266, 267, 272, 279, 
305, 323, 354, 355 
Narayantya, cix 
Nare§varapariksa, 170, 185 
NareSvarapariksaprakaSa, 146, 148, 
149, 169, 170, 172, 185, 
272, 312, 341 


Parakhyatantra 


Nateéaguru, lix, see also Vak- 
traSambhu 
NAVATMAN, 333 
navel, 355 
Nayapmars, xiv, xxxiil 
Nayatrayapradipa, 173 
nectar 
dharana of, 354 
neophyte, lxxvi, 391 
Nepal, xvii, cxvii 
Nepalese manuscripts, xix, xxi, 
XXVi, XXxv, XCli, xciil, 181, 
245, 288, 312, 313, 334, 
349, 355, 369, 381 
NETRA, 223, 224 
Netratantra, cviii, 177, 339, 372 
Netroddyota, cxiii, 392, 393 
NGMPPFP, vii, xxxviii, xciii, xcvi, 
cxvii, 307, 355, 403 
NigamajnanadeSika, cxix 
Nila (mountain range), 298 
nipples, 265 
Nirmalamani, cx, cxiv, 352 
Nirrti, 296 
Nirucchvasa (a hell), 283, 286 
Nirukta, 249 
nirvacana, \xv-lxvii, bei, lxxiv— 
Ixxvi, 182, 184, 194, 220, 
230, 248, 250, 266, 281, 
283, 287, 289, 297, 312, 
313, 339, 357, 390 
Nisadha (mountain range), 299 
Niskala, lxv, 180, 196, 223, 397 
in mantroccara, 324 
Ni§vasa, xv, xxiii, xxxvil, xxxix, 
xviii, Ixxxix, cxi, 333 
guhyasitra, \xxxiv, 224, 243, 
260, 290, 293, 297, 301, 
310, 315, 333, 526 
inscriptional reference to, xx, 
XX] 
-mukha, |xxxiv, 260, 282, 290, 
310, 313 . 


General Index 


mulasutra, 224, 315, 333, 334 
Nandi§varavatara-, 224 
nayasutra, 261, 265-267, 275 
uttarasutra, 207, 310, 324, 333 
Ni§vasakarika, lvi, cxvii 
NisSvasapratisthatantra, cxvii 
Nitala, 289, 291 
Nityadisangrahabhidhanapaddhati, 
xl, cxiii, 224 
nityapuja, 184 
Nivrtti, 324 
Niyamaka (head of niyatitattva), 
317 
niyamas, \xix, 254, 256 
yoganga, 353 
niyati (binding fate), lxviii, 163, 
229, 235, 242, 246-248, 
250, 317, 374 
non-dualism, xvi, xxii, xxvi, lvi, 
152, 353, 383, 398, see 
also Advaita, Vedanta and 
vivartavada 
Vedantic, xvii, xxvi, xxviii, Lxili 
Nonius, cxxiv, Cxxv 
nose, 373 
tip of, lxxiv, lxxv, 351, 372, 373 
nostrils, 265 
nutrient fluid, 366. 
nyasa, xlvii, 194 
Nyaya, 142 
Nyayabhasya, 345 
Nyayabhusana, 149 
Nyayamanjarl, 146, 149, 169, 179, 
382 
Nyayaratnakara, 146 
Nyayasangraha, 370 
Nyayasara, 378 
Nyayasutra, 150 


obelus, bxoxxix 

OBERLIES, lxxxv 

occlusion, see tirobhava and rodha- 
Sakti 


643 
ocean, lxxii, 304, 309 
Garbhoda, 304 
of clarified butter, 302 
of curds, 301 
of liquor, 302 
of milk, 301 
churning of, xl, 297 
of nectar, 303 
of salt water, 301 
of sugar-cane juice, 302 
seven, lxxi, 294, 303, 304 
ogdoads, see astakas 
OM, Lxxiii 
Oxford, v 
Bodleian Library, vii 
pada, see feet and movement 
padadhvan, 200 
Padarthadharmasangrahasee Pra- 
Sastapadabhasya 556 
padarthas, liii, lviii, lxiii, 139-141, 
345 


padas, I|xii-lxili, bcxiv, booxviii, 345, 
387, 393, 395, 397, 398, 404 
paddhati-literature 
mantra-system.of, 334 
padma (asana), 350 
Padma (a hell), 283, 284 
PADOUX, 331, 376 
PalaSa tree, 233 | 
palate, Ixxv, 338, 354, 355, 372 
Pallavas, xix 
panicakrtya, lxvi 
Pancarthabhasya, 254 
pancastaka, 314 
Panini, xlvili, 210, 337 
Parakhya, see passim 
alternative title of, xxxv, socxix, 
x], cviii 
commentary on, lviii, lix, Lxii, 
138, 166 
dating of, xliii, xliv, xlvii, xlviii, 
li, lv, lvii, lviii, 380 


interlocutors of, xl, lix, 137 

manuscripts of, xcv—xcvii, xcix, 
ci-ciii 

misattributions to, cix 

other works so called, xxxviii, 
xxxix, xli, xii 

pada-division in, Ixiii, 141, 345 

parallels with other Siddhantas, 
lii, liv, lv, cviii, cxiii, 139, 
167, 217, 223, 275, 276, 
286, 291, 327 

position in lists of Siddhantas, 
XXXVili 

quotations of, xxxiii, 1, lviii, 
Ixxxix, xcCiii, Cvil, Cvili, 
Cxii, CXVi, CXVli, CXX-CXXIV, 
162, 166 


sources of inspiration for, 


xlviii-li, 167-169, 197, 
293, 381 
style of, xli-xliv,  xlviii, 
liv, bxxix—lxxxii, boxy, 
Ixxxvii, lxxxix, 141, 153, 
174, 182, 202, 227, 261, 
277, 284, 342, 381, 393 
transmission of, lxxxix—xciii, 
CXXV 
according to tradition, 406 
paramanu, 279, 280 
Paramarthasara, 389 
ParameSvara, xv, xxi, xxiii, xxv, liii, 
217, see also Pauskara, Ur- 
Paramoksanirasakarika, lvi, lx, 400 
Paramoksanirasakarikavrtti, lx, 
146, 378 
paranaada, 323 
ParéSakti, 377 
Parasamhita, xli, xlii 
Paratala, 289, 291 
Paratantragama, xlii, ciii 
parinamavada, lvi, 152 
Parthasdrathimisra, 146, 152, 209 


Parakhyatantra 


Parvatipati (tantravataraka), 
lxxviii, 406 

PaspaSahnika, 336 

passion, see raga 

past action, see karman 

pasu, see also under soul and 
purusatattva 

padartha, Ixiii, 139, 345 

Pasupatas, xiv, bexviii, 140, 181, 

399, 400, 404 
Pancarthika, 400 

PASUPATASTRA, 223 

Pasupatasitra, 254, 348, 359, 380 

paSutva, see mala 

Patala, 291-293 

patalas, lxxi, 288-294 

Patanjali (author of yogasiitra), 351, 
352 

Patanjali (grammarian), 336 

PATHAK, xx 

pathyé, boxv 

Pauskara, xiv, li-liv, lvii, xcvi, ciii, 
Cviii, Cxiii, cxviii, 139, 145, 
157, 167, 174-176, 190- 
193, 197-199, 201, 217, 
231, 233, 250, 259, 277, 
322, 324-329 

Pauskara, xx 

Pauskarabhasya, xvi, cviii, cxiii, 
CXV, CXVi, Cxviii, 139, 325, 
328, 392, 400, 401, see also 
Umapati 

Pauskara, Ur-, xxi, xxvii, xiii, lii, 
lili, 217, 249, 406 

Pauskaravrtti, cviii, cxiii, cxxiii, 
325, 326, 328, see also Jna- 
naprakasa 

pavitrastaka, 315 

payu, see anus 

pericarp, 184 

pest, 244-246 

PHAT, 334, 335 

phlegm, 366, 367 


General. Index 


phonemes, Ixxii, Ixxiii, 321, 322, 
325, 330, 338 
pidgin, Lxxix 
Pinga (Rudra bearing: egg of 
Brahma), 313 
Pingala (a Raksasa), 292, 293 
Pingala (metrician), xlviii, 210 
PINGALA, 222 
pingala, lxxv, 367, 372 
pisacas, 256 
planets, xlvii, lxxii, 179, 216, 231, 
298, 305-308 
heights of, 309 
iconographic prescriptions for, 
307 
pleonasm, Ixxxiv, 230, 312 
poison, 202, 234, 338, 345, 364 
power of, 156 
pole star, xxii, 308, 309 
Pondicherry, vi 
Poona, 187, 225 
POPE, xvii 
potter, 176 
Prabhavati (citadel on Meru), 296 
Prabhavyakhya, cx, cxiv, 352 
Pracetas, 194 
Pradhana (head of prakrtitattva), 
316 
pradhana, see prakrti 
Prahlada (a Daitya), 291 
Prajapati, 300, 373 
prakamya, 379 
Prakasa, xxxvii, xli, 1, lxiii, lxiv, 
Ixvii-lxxi, = Lxxiii—Lxxviii, 
137, 143-151, 153, 154, 
156, 158, 160, 165, 166, 
168-170, 172, 173, 178, 
203, 206, 209, 211-213, 
227, 236, 237, 241, 247, 
250, 251, 253, 258, 269- 
272, 275, 276, 279, 321, 
325-327, 329, 330, 335, 
336, 338-340, 342, 347, 


645 


357, 369, 370, 378, 381, 
387, 388, 390, 393, 394, 
396, 398-402, 404, 406 
identified with sun, xl, 137, 241 
Prakagaka (head of caksustattva), 
316 
Prakrit, lxxix 
prakriya (‘cosmography’), 310 
prakrti (matter), lxix, 154, 235-237, 
248-253, 256, 258, 280 
pralaya, 171, 250, 312 
pralayakalas, xliii, lili, xviii, 231 
pramana, li, 209, 212, 213 
catustaya beginning with, lvii 
six of Mimamsa, li 
Pramanasamuccaya, xlix, 271 
Pramanavarttika, xlix, 167, 272, 337 
Pramanavarttikasvavrtti, 209 
Pramathana, 182 
pramatr, lvii 
prameya, lvii 
pramiti, lvii 
prana, \xxv, 265, 266, 356-358, 371, 
375, 377 
as name for ingoing or outgoing 
breath, 371 
pranacara, 376 
pranava, Ixxiii, 359 
pranayama, Ixxv, cix, 352-354, 356, 
358-360, 384 
prapti, 379 
PRASADA, 333 
PRASADA, 333 
prasakha, 244 
PraSastapadabhasya, 151, 159, 243, 
264 
Pratistha, 324 
Pratisthalaksanasarasamuccaya, 
XXXViii 
Pratisthavidhi, cxiv 
Pratoda, xl, xli, xliv, 1, _ liv, 
Ixdii, lxiv, Ixvi-bxxi, bxxiii- 
Ixxviii, 137, 142-146, 148, 


646 


150, 151, 153, 154, 156- 
158, 160, 166, 169-171, 
178, 202, 206, 209, 212, 
213, 227, 234-236, 240, 
241, 247, 251, 258, 269- 
271, 274, 325, 327, 330, 
335, 336, 338, 339, 342, 
347, 369, 370, 377, 378, 
380, 387, 390, 393-396, 
398-401, 403, 404, 406, 407 
identified with Vasistha, xl, 137 

pratyahara (withdrawal), lxxv, 351- 
353, 356, 360, 388, 392 

pratyaksa, xlix, lxv, 147, 209 

pratyatmakastaka, 315 

pratyayasarga, 180 

pravrttikrama, 317 

prayascitta, xli, cviii 

Prayogamanjari, xxx, cix, 282 

Prayogasara, xcv, Cii 

PRENTISS, xxxii 

primal matter, see maya 

Prodgita, xxiii 

prthivitattva, see under earth 

public worship, xviii, xxii, xxvii, 
xxviii, xxxi 

pudgalaviniscaya, 145 

puja, 193, 388, 391, 397 

puraka, lxxv, 357-360, 384 

Puranapancalaksana, 297, 298, 300 

Puranas, xci 

Purandara, xx 

Pururavas, 297 

purusatattva, Ixviii, lxxi, 248, 250, 
see also soul and pasu 

etymologisation of, 248 

PURUSTUTA, 223 

pus, 267, 287 

Puskara (continent), 294, 303 

Puskarini (river), 303 ' 


quotations, xciil 
QVARNSTROM, lvi 


Parakhyatantra 


raga (passion), lxiv, lxviii, 154, 155, 
159, 229, 235, 237, 240- 
242, 250, 316, 373, 374 
as synonym for avairagya, 154 
Raghupancika, 292 
Raghuvam$Sa, xix, 292 
Rahu, Ixxii, 307, 308 
raibhava (a bhuvana), 249 
rain, 206, 326 
of arrows, 285 
smell of, 326 
RAJAGOPALACHAR, Cili 
Rajamahe$varas (hells), 283, 288 
RajarajeSvaras (hells), 283 
rajas, lxix, 254, 256, 257, 268 
Rajasimha, xix 
Rajasthan, xx 
Rajendravarman, xx 
Rajor, xx 
Raksas, 369 
Raksasas, lxxi, 291, 308, 363 
Raksovati (citadel on Meru), 296 
Rama, cii 
Ramakantha II, v, xxxvi, xxxvii, 
xxxix, xliv, xlix, li, lii, lv, 
lvii, lx—Lxii, xcii, xciv, xcvi, 
XCVii, Cvili, cxiv, 137, 139— 
141, 144, 146, 149, 160, 
163, 169, 170, 172, 173, 
177, 178, 185, 193, 195, 
199, 209, 216-218, 220, 
224, 225, 229, 233, 236, 
238, 240, 243, 247-250, 
258, 265, 268, 272, 273, 
275, 312, 314, 323, 326, 
331, 332, 334, 346, 349, 
350, 355, 365, 367, 369, 
375, 376, 378, 388, 395, 
404, 405 
date of, lviii 
lineage of, xxi, xxvi, XXxv, 
Xxxvii, lvili, boxxvii, cxiv 
ceuvre of, lxi, cix, cx, 195 


General Index 


Ramana (head of padatattva?), 316 
Ramana (an Apsaras), 299 
Ramana (head of padatattva?), 316 
Ramana (landmass), 299, 300 
Ramanatha, 140, 391 
RAMANATHAN, 358 
RAMASASTRI, cxx 
Ramayana, 297 
Ramya (a Vidyadhari), 299 
Ramya (landmass), 295, 298-300 
Ranapadra, xx, see Aranipadra 
RANGASWAMY, XXxxiil 
Ranod, xx 
rasa, see also taste and alchemical 
liquid and nutrient fluid 
dhatu, 367 
Rasatala, 289, 291-293 
Rastrakiitas, xx 
RATIE, vi 
Ratnakara, Iviii 
Ratnakarasanti, 173 
Ratnatika, 360 
Ratnatrayapariksa, xxxvii, cxvii, 
cxviii, 189, 192, 323 
Ratnatrayollekhint, lii, cxv 
ratni, 523-528 
Rattaraja, xx 
Rau, 189 
Raudri, 180-183, 324 
Raurava, xxiv, xxxv, xxxvii, xliv—- 
xlvi, lv, lx, xcvi, 139, 181, 
389 
-sutrasangraha, xxxv, xxxvii, 
xxxix, xiii, xlviii, lviii, Lx, 
Ixxxvii, xCvii, Cii, Cxxiii, 
139, 181, 193, 195, 201, 
202, 236, 240, 242, 249, 
256, 259, 282, 293-295, 
313-315, 333, 353, 355, 
360, 383, 384, 397 
commentaries on, lx, 193, 242 
parallels with other 
Siddhantas, lv 


647 


relationship with the Rau- 
rava corpus, xvi, xxiv, XXxv, 


xliv—xlvi 

translation of, lxxxviii 
transmission of, XXXV, 
lxxxvii, xcv-xcvii, 206, 
207 


Raurava (a hell), 282-284 
Rauravavarttika, lx, lxi 
Rauravavrttis, lx, Lxi, 242 
Rbhu, 249, 311 
recaka, lxxv, 357-360, 384 
Reliquiae scaenicae, cxxiv 
Rgveda, 341 
rice, 366 
Rocika, 324 
rodhasakti, 230, 242, see also tiro- 
bhava 
ROTH, 362 
riudhi, lxv, 189 
Rudra, 374 
nirvacana of, 374 
form of Siva, 183 
in mantroccéra, lxxv, 324, 372, 
374 
Rudrabhedas, xxiv, 206 
Rudraloka, 311 
RUDRANI, 223 
Rudranus, 217 
Rudras, lxv, lxxii, lxxvii, 141, 181, 
184, 197, 201, 206, 227, 
250, 253, 279, 281, 289, 292 
bearers of the egg of Brahma, 
lxxii, 281, 313 
becoming, 397 
etymology of, 313 
in lower path, 279, 317 
liberation as, 315, 397, 404 
Tattveégas, 314, 316, 317 
Ruruvrtti, 242 


Sabara, 186, 212 


648 


Sabarabhasya, xlviii-l, 210, 326, 
328, 336, 337 
Sabdakalpadruma, 244 
S$abdarthasambandha, li 
Sadasiva, xxvii, 184, 192, 193, 196, 
374, 376, 384 
nirvacana of, 374 
body of, xl, 374 
in mantroccara, |xxvi, 372 
tattva, Ixxii, 317 
SadaSiva, author of commentary on 
Kriyakramadyotika, cx 
Sadasiva Maharaya, cxii 
Sadasivasivacarya, cxxiv 
sadhaka, xli, 220, 324 
Sadhanamala, 347 
sadhanas, |xii, 387 
sadhya, 328 
SADYOJATA, 191, 194, 222, 383 
Sadyojyotis, xvi, xxii, xxvi, xxxvi, 
xlv, lvi, lx, Lxi, lxxxvii, 185, 
199, 229, 235, 236, 242, 
246, 248, 264, 318, 406 
SADYOMURTI, 196 
Sagara, 301 
Sahasraka, xxiii 
Sahasratantra, 389 
Saiva Siddhanta, xiii-xix, xxi, xxii, 
XXVi,  XXix-xxxv,__ xiii, 
Ixxxvii, lbxxxix, cxii, cxviii, 
cxx, cxxiil, 139, 140, 
180-182, 259, 322, 324, 
343, 397, 623 
Tamil, xiii, xvii, xviii, xxviii- 
XXxlil, xxxv, 352 
Saivagamaparibhasamaiijari, lix, 
cvii, cxxi, 138, 139, 145, 
230, 334 
Saivaparibhasa, cvii, cxx, 139, 140, 
142, 145, 147, 392, 400, 401 
Saivas (used as identifying label for 
followers of the Parakhya), 
394 


Parakhyatantra 


Saivasannyasapaddhati, CXX, CXXi 
Saivasiddhantaparibhasa, 140 
Saivasiddhantasangraha, cvii, cxxi: 
Saka (continent), 294, 301 
Saka (tree), 301 
Sakala, Ixv, 190-193, 196, 206, 372, 
376 
sakala, bound soul, lxv, see also un- 
der soul 
Sakalagamasarasangraha, cvii, cxxi, 
308 
Sakalaniskala, 180, 192, 196 
Sakra, 310 
Sakti, xix, 154, 157, 158, 171, 174, 
175, 195, 199, 207, 225, 
227, 231, 232, 248, 252, 
265, 271, 277, 317, 331, 
339, 374, 381, see also 
jnane and kriya 
list of nine, lxv, 181, 183, 184 
mantras that are, 339 
in mantroccara, 324 
tattva, xliv 
varna-, 322 
visarga, 377 
Saktipata, Ixvi, Ixxvii, cxviii, 197- 
200, 395, 396 
Salivati (Jaffna), cxix 
Salma (continent), 294 
Salmala (a hell), 286 
Salmahi (a hell), 283, 286 
Salmali (continent), 302 
Samadana (head of hastatattva), 
316 
samadhi (yoganga), \xxv, Ixxvi, 
351-353, 356, 377, 381, 392 
samana, |xxv, 265, 357, 366 
samayadiksa, see diksa 
samayas (post-initiatory obser- 
vances), 393-395 
samayin, 391 
SAMBANDHAN, Cvi 
Sambara, Ixxii, 317 


General Index 


Sambhu (Rudra bearing egg of 
Brahma), 313 

samharakrama, 317 

Samkalpa (head of manastattva), 
316 

samosa, 362 

samsara, 137, 162, 183, 198, 232, 
237, 250, 271, 311, 397, 
399, 400 

samsaradharma, 399 

Samyama (Rudra bearing egg of 
Brahma), 313 

Samyamani (citadel on Meru), 296 

Samyuttanikaya, 244 

Sanaiscara, 307 

Sanaka, 311 

Sanandana, 311 

Sanatkumara, 311 

sandal, 307 

SANDERSON, Vv, Vi, Xix-xxi, xxv- 
XXVil, XXX1, XXXIV, Xxxvil- 
xl, xtiii, xlvi, xlvii, xlix, 
lvi, Iviii-lx, xciv, cvii, cxi, 
cxiii, cxvii, 224, 231, 294, 
300, 332, 351-354, 362, 
381, 398 

sandhya, xxvii 

Sani, 298, 307 

Sankara (Siva), lxxii, 221, 295 

nirvacana of, 312 

Sankaracarya, xxvii, 256 

Sankari (a nadi), 367 

sanketa, 329, 336 

Sankhya, xlviii, Ilxviii, 145, 146, 
154, 180, 182, 227, 235- 
237, 253, 259, 260, 337 

Sankhyakarika, xlviii, xlix, 158, 182, 
188, 227, 228, 235, 237, 
238, 253, 259, 260, 263 

sankranti, see under mukti 

Sanku, 311 

Sankukarna (a Daitya), 291 

Sanskrit and other languages, 262 


649 


Santana, xxiii, cxxii 
Santapaka (a hell), 283, 284 
Santapta (a hell), 283, 285 
Santaraksita, 169 
Santi, 324 
saptarsayah, 309 
SaptaSatikakélottara, xxv 
Sarada, xciii, xcix 
Saradatilaka, 355 
Sardhatrisatikalottara, xxv, xlviii, 
lxxxvii, lxxxviii, xcvi, ciii, 
cxvii, 139, 207, 218, 223, 
224, 266, 313, 314, 323, 
330-333, 358, 360, 367- 
369, 372, 373, 375, 377, 
382-384, 397 
language of, lxxxv, 369 
mantra-system of, 334 
transmission of, xciii 
Sardhatrifatikalottaravrtti, lii, lxii, 
331, 332, 355, 365, 367, 375 
Sardilavikridita, lxxxv 
sarga 
bhautika, 180, 182, 267 
bhauvana, 180 
bhava-, 180, 182 
pratyaya-, 180 
tattvika, 180, 182 
varna-, 180, 182 
SARMA, Anjaneya, 341 
SARMA, S.A.S., vi 
SARVATMAN, 222 
Sarva, 330 
Sarvadarsganasangraha, xviii, _ lii, 
cviii, 148, 231 
Sarvagamapramanya, |x 
Sarvégamapramanyopanyasa, 249 
Sarvajnanottara, Xv, XXV, XXVi, 
xl viii, lvi, Lxii, lxxxvii, cvii, 
Cxvil, cxvili, cxxiii, 139, 
207, 224, 245, 249, 250, 
282, 289, 294-297, 310, 
313-315, 324, 325, 348, 


650 
351-353, 359, 364, 376, 
381, 398, 402 
inscriptional reference to, xx, 
xxi 


lost commentaries on, lxii 
partial editions of, xxvi, 
Ixxxvii, 238, 244, 245 
transmission of, 244 
Sarvajnanottaravrtti, lxii, ood, 142, 
245, 352, 353 
Sarvamatopanyaésa, xXxXxxXvi, Cxxi, 
CXX1l 
appendix to, 390 
Sarvanga (head of tvaktattva), 316 
Sarvatmasambhu, xxxiv, cxxii 
Sarvokta, 191 
Sataratnasangraha, xl, J, exv, cxvi, 
cxviii, cxix, 137, 143, 161, 
165, 174, 186, 188, 189, 
359, 390 
authorship of, cxvi, cxviii 
Sataratnollekhini, l, cvii, CXv, CXxvi, 
137, 143, 150, 156, 159, 
161, 163, 165, 166, 172, 
174, 177, 186, 188, 230, 
324, 359, 389 
Satikakalottara, XXV 
satkaryavada, 157 
Satsahasrika, see Brhatkalottara 
sattva, 254, 256, 268 
Saturn, 307, 309 
Satyaloka, Ixxii, 311 
Saumya (dharana), 360 
Saumyada (Rudra bearing egg of 
Brahma), 313 
Saurabha, xl 
Saurabheya, xxiv, xxxv, xxxix, x, 
cvlil 
Saurapurana, 172 
Saurasamhité, 333 
Sautrantikas, 172, 272 
Sayana, 181 
sayujya, 198, 384, 397 


Parakhyatantra 


SCHMID, vi 
SCHOMERUS, xvii 
SCHOTERMAN, Lxxviii 
SekoddeSa, 403 
semen, 267, 306, 366, 367 
senses, see faculties 
serpents, 291, see also snakes 
prince of, 369 
Sesa, 299, 300 
sexual organ, 262 
SHASTRI, xx, xlii 
sick people (as initiands), 395 
Siddha, 345, 404 
celestial beings, 298, 301, 303, 
305, 308, 310, 311 
in sense of liberated soul, 404, 
405 
Siddha, xxiii 
Siddhantadipiké of SarvatmaSa- 
mbhu, cxxii 
Siddhantadipika of Madhyarjuna, 
cxxil, 191, 192, 206 
Siddhantadipika of Ramanatha, 
140, 391 
Siddhantaprakasikaé, cxxii 
Siddhantasamuccaya, lii, cvii, cxxiii, 
cxxiv, 173, 206, 249, 250, 
252, 323, 333, 339, 340 
Siddhantasaravali, cix, cxx, cCxxiii, 
181 
Siddhantasaravalivyakhya, cxxiii 
Siddhantasikhamani, cxxiii 
Siddhantasutravrtti, cxxiv 
Siddhantatantras, xiv-xvi, xxi, 
XXVi, XXvii, xxx, = xiiii, 
xlviii, liv—lvi, lviii, lxxxix, 
XCil, CIX, CXV, CXIX—CXXI, 
cxxiii, 139, 140, 157, 202, 
223, 224, 259, 280, 282, 
293, 295, 296, 333, 353, 
360, 361, 364, 398 
coherency of, xv 
criteria for antiquity of, xxii 


General Index 


language of, Ixxix, lxxx 
lists of, xxiii, xxxvil-ocxix, xlii 
South Indian, xxxi, cx, cxv, 
cxxii, 389 
translations of, lxxxviii 
unlisted, xxv 
siddhasana, 350 
SiddhayogeSvarimatatantra, Ixxviii, 
lxxix, bocxdi, bxxxv, 347, 
389 
siddhi, contrasted with moksa, 220. 
Sighraga (Rudra bearing egg of 
Brahma), 313 
sight, 329 
faculty of, 145, 179, 235, 261 
tattva of, 316 
SIKHA, 223, 332 
Sikhandin, 201 
silk-cotton tree, 286, 302 
silver, 307 
Simha, xxiv 
SINGH, 376 
SIRAS, xl, 223, 332 
SIRCAR, xx 
Siguhité, 277, see Tryambakasa- 
mbhu 
Sisupala (a Daitya), 291 
Sisyalekha, 285, 287 
Sita (a hell), 283, 284 
Sitdranya, cxxiii 
Sitavati (citadel on Meru), 296 
iva, Xill, XVill, XXi, XXil, XXV1, XXVil, 
xliii, viii, Lxiii, 137-139, 
174, 176, 181-186, 194, 
196, 200, 201, 203, 207, 
208, 218, 222, 224, 232, 
278, 316-318, 331, 339, 
354, 360, 373, 375, 381, 
389, 390, 395, 398, 405 
agent of grace, xxviii, lxvi, 
Ixxvii, 395, 396 
as doctor, 138 


651 


body of, lxvii,. 194, 222, 224, 
225, 398 
creator, xxvii, xxviii, kxvi, 171, 
176, 202, 205, 231 
of mantras, lxxiii, xxiv, 334, 
337, 338 
formless, 206 
impartiality of, xvi, 197-199 
in myth, 299, 301, 306, 307 
as kancuka, 242 
-knowledge, 138 
language of, Ixxviii 
mouth of, 208 
on Meru, 296 
parity with, xxvi, xxvili, xli, 
139, 202, 221, 277, 387, 406 
six laksyas, 324 
supreme, lIxv, Ixvi, lxxii, 185, 
186, 196, 207, 317 
tattva, xliv, 317 
teaching of, xxviii, xxxvii, Lxvii, 
lxxiv, 137, 138, 187, 207, 
215-217, 230, 345, 402, 403 
worship of, xxii, xli, 197 
Sivabhedas, xxiv, 206 
SivadharmaSastra, 315, 316 
Sivadharmottara, 138 
Sivadiksavidhivyakhyana, cxi, cxix 
Sivadrsti, xii 
Sivagam&dimahatmyasangraha, 
‘ evii, cxx, 217, 390 
Sivagrabhasya, cxx, 141 
ivagrayogin, xvii, cxix—cxxi, 140, 
141, 145, 206, 392, 400 
Sivahasta, 391 
Siva-hood, lxxi, 195, 197, 277, 278, 
385, 389, 397, 399, 404-406 
Sivajnana, 405 
Sivajfdnabodha, xiv 
Sivajfanabodhasangrahabhasya, 
cxix, 141, 206 
Sivajfanabodhasitra, ‘CXiX, CXX, 
CXXIV 


652 


Sivajianabodhavrtti, cxix 
Sivajnanabodhopanyasa, cxix 
Sivajrianasiddhisvapaksadrstanta- 
sangraha, cvii, cxix, cxxiii, 
166, 170, 261-263 
Sivakhya (tantravatdraka), 406 
Sivamantra, 224, 330, 331, 334, 337 
Sivangamantras, 223, 224 
Sivapiijapaddhativyakhyana, cxix 
lvapijastava, CX, CXX, CXXiv 
Sivapiijastavavyakhya, cxx, 184 
Sivapurana, see Vayaviyasamhité 
SIVARAMAN, Xvi, CXV 
Sivasitra, 187 
Sivasdtravimarsini, 376 
Sivatanusastra, Ix, lxi, 236, 240, 242 
Sivayogaratna, cvii, cxx, 159, 186, 
376 
Sivayogasara, CXX 
Sivopaya, 405 
Sivottama, 201 
Skanda, lix 
Skandakalottara, 314, 315 
Skandapurana, xvii, 172, 364 
Ur-, xvii, 244, 284-286, 299, 
301, 302, 306, 307, 352 
skin, 161, 193, 261, 267 
SKRK, 383 
sleep, 184 
Slokavarttika, 1, 146, 148, 169, 173, 
209, 212, 214, 237, 329, 
336, 399 
sambandhaksepaparihara, xlix, 
lviii, 152, 170, 177, 178, 
185, 187, 328, 330, 399 
smarana, 391 
smell, 302 
bad, 287 
faculty of, 261, 262 
tattva of, 316 
of rain, 326 
sensation of, 262 
sense object, 262, 270 


Parakhyatantra 


subtle element, 263, 267 
tattva of, 316 
SMITH, cxv 
smoke, 287, 329, 363 
between nether worlds, 281, 282 
colour of Ketu, 308 
in syllogism, 185, 328 
smrti (literature), 211, see also 
memory 
snakes, xli, 202, see also serpents 
snana, cviii, 393 
snow, 284, 300, 306 
Socchvasa (a hell), 283, 286 
Soma, 268, 296, see also moon and 
Candramas 
Somasgambhu, cix, 315 
Somasambhupaddhati, xx, xxxiv, 
cxxiii, cxxiv, 181, 184, 224, 
249, 250, 307, 331, 361, 
362, 372, 389, 391, 393 
Somasambhupaddhatitika, xxxvi, 
Cx, cxxiii, cxxiv, 184, 314 
SONI, xvii 
soul, xxii, xxvii, Lxii-lxiv, Lxviii, lxix, 
Ixxi, lxxvi-lxxvili, 137- 
139, 141, 143-148, 150, 
152-156, 158-163, 171, 
177, 181-184, 189, 191, 
192, 196-200, 205, 208, 
221, 232-237, 240, 241, 
246-248, 250-254, 256- 
258, 266, 273-278, 282, 
305, 318, 319, 344, 355, 
356, 370, 375, 376, 379, 
380, 384, 388, 389, 391, 
396, 399-401, 404, 405 
aims of, 252, 321 
all-pervading, Ixiii, 151, 155, 
369, 370, 380 
attention of, 145 
awakening of, 199 
beginningless, 160 
being linked to body, 163 


General Index 


bound, lxv, lxxi, 138-140, 143, 
144, 155, 156, 159, 163, 
164, 184, 197, 200, 201, 
231, 241, 246, 247, 250, 
274-277, 385, 393 

beginninglessly, 139 

characteristics of listed, 143 

impotence of, 252 

tattva of, 248, 316 

vicarious inclusion in tattva- 
krama, 275 

Buddhist refutation of, 148 

capable of experience, 233, 234, 
237, 239, 250, 273 

Carvaka refutation of, Lxiii, 145, 
146 

connection of with a body, 151 

deluded, lxx 

departed, 314 

dispassion of, 241, 242 

enveloped by impurity, 232 

existence of must be inferred, 
146 

fitness of for grace, 199 

identical to Siva, 139 

immortal, 161 

innate purity of, 156 

invested with office, 318 

knower, 238 

liberated, lxv, Ixvii, lxxviii, 154, 
186, 277, 401, 404-406 

life-breath, 266, 375 

limited power of, 183 

movement of, lxxv, 150, 370, 
371, 384 

among the petals of the 
heart, lxxv, 368, 369 

nature of, 276, 396 

need for defilements of, lxiv, 
152, 154, 155 

omniscience and omnipotence 
of, 186 

omniscient, 162, 163 


653 


parviscient, 162 
perduring, 150 
plurality of, 151, 153, 273 
referred to by isolated mascu- 
line pronouns, lxxx 
rememberer, 148 
responsible agent, lxiv, 160, 161 
revelation of consciousness of, 
162, 163, 234, 276, 278, 397 
sentiency of, lxiv, 153, 156, 187, 
233, 276 
subject to the Lord, 163 
Supreme, 153, 186, 207 
svasamvedanasiddha, 146, 163 
tainted, 240, 252 
torment of, 284-287 
will of, 161 
sound 
property of ether, 264 
subtle element, 263, 264, 314 
South India, lx, 284, 352 | 
South Indian Archaka Association, 
CX, CXxi 
South Indian editions, Ixxxvii 
South Indian manuscripts, xix, xxiv, 
xxxv, lvii, xcii, xciil, xcv, Cc, 
CxxX, Cxxl, cxxili, 281, 312 
South Indian scripts, xcviii, 144 
South Indian Siddhantas, xxxvi, 
cxiil, cxv, cxxii, 389 
South Indian temples, xiii, xxii 
South Indian text, xcii, 197, 352, 
381 
South Indian works, v, xv, xxvii, 
Xxx, xxxvii, lvii, cvii, cx, 
cxxi, 397 
South Indians, xvii, xxxii 
sparsa, see touch 
speech 
faculty of, 206, 221, 262 
tattva of, 316 
SPEYER, |xxx 
sphota, li, lxxiii, 325, 326 


654 


relationship to ndda, 326 
spirits (bhita), 338 
Sphutartha, 172 
Sraikantha (a bhuvana), 249 
Sravana, 391 
Srigala, lix 
Srikantha, 201 
Srikantha (author of Ratnatrayapa- 
riksé), xxvi, 192, 323 
Srikanthiyasamhita, 353, 377 
SRINIVASAN, 228 
Srotra, see ear 
srstikrama, 317 
stars, 308 
sthanvastaka, 315 
SUBRAMANIAM, Cvi, 388 
Siticimukha (a hell), 283, 285 
Sudahakrt (a hell), 283, 285 
§uddhadhvan, 373 
Suddhavati (citadel on Meru), 296 
Sudipta, xxiii 
Sudyumna, 297 
suicide, see yogic suicide 
Sukhabodha, 244 
Sukhavaha (citadel on Meru), 296 
Sukra, 306, 307 
Siksma, xxiii 
Suksma (head of akaSatattva), 314 
Siiksma (VidyeSvara), 201 
Suksmadeha (head of purusatattva), 
249, 316 
Siiksmanada (head of sabdatattva), 
316 
Suksmasvayambhuva, xxxvi 
commentary on, xxxvi, Lxii 
sun, xxxix, xl, lxv, bxxii, xxv, 137, 
158, 176, 178, 179, 181, 
201, 216, 278, 305, 307- 
310, 316, 372 
associated with 
breath, 372 
identified with Prakasa, xl, 241 
impartiality of, 197, 199 


outgoing 


Parakhyatantra 


sun-stone, 157, 158 

SUNESON, 244-246 

Suprabha, xxiii 

Suprabhedagama, xxvii, 397 

Surabhi, xl 

Surépa (Rudra bearing egg of 
Brahma), 313 

SureSvara 

in mantroccara, 324 

Siirya, see sun 

SURYANARAYANA SASTRI, xxxii, 
145, 147, 149 

SUSIVA, 222, 332 

susumna, 355, 358, 367 

Sutala, 292 

Sutasamhita, xvii, 238 

Sutejovati (citadel on Meru), 296 

Svacchanda, xxx, xxxvii, bxxxiv, 
cxvii, 139, 184, 207, 223, 
260, 261, 265, 267, 268, 
279-282, 286-288, 290, 
292-298, 305, 306, 310- 
312, 314-316, 324, 331, 
334, 348, 351, 355, 360, 
367, 371, 372, 379, 391, 
395, 524, 526, 528 

Svacchandatantroddyota, v, xxxvii, 
Ixxviii, Cv, Cviii, cx, Cxxiv, 
265, 280, 284, 289, 292, 
296, 297, 299, 309, 310, 
315, 349, 379, 389, 391, 395 

svadhyaya, 391 

SVAHA, 334 

svakya (an aia adjective), 154, 258— 
259 

svarga, 213, 216, 305, 310, 337, 339, 
340, 344 

Svarloka, Ixxii, 309, 310 

svastika (asana), 348-350 

svatahpramanya, 214 

Svatmarama, 358 

Svayambhuva, xxiv, xxxvi 

South Indian, xxxvi 


General Index 


Svayambhuvasttrasangraha, xxiv, 
XXXVi, XXXVii, xXxxix, xviii, 
lxxxvii, cxvi, cxxiii, 154, 
198, 200, 223, 224, 229, 
231, 233, 240, 242, 249, 
250, 259, 278, 282, 290, 
313-315, 321-324, 333, 
334, 354, 355, 360, 383, 
396, 397, 405, 407 
commentaries on, lx 
manuscripts of, xxxvi, xcv, 
Xcvl, Cil 
parallels with other Siddhantas, 
lv, 223, 263, 315 
relationship with Svayambhuva 
COrpus, XXIV, XXXVI1 
style of, boxy, Lxxxvii 
translations of, boxxviii 
transmission of, xxxv, lxxxvii, 
361 
Svayambhuvavrtti, xxxvi, lx, 229, 
246, 248, 264, 318, 406 
Svayambhuvavrttitippanaka, lxi 
Svayambhuvoddyota, lxi 
Sveta (mountain range), 298, 299 
Sveta (sage), 298 
SWAMY, xxx 


Taittiriyaranyaka, 181 

Taittirlyopanisat, 378 

Taksaka (a serpent), 292, 293 

Taksakavarta, xl, xli, cxiii, 224 

Tala (a hell), 283, 285 

tala, time-unit, 364, 365 

TALBOT, xxx 

talipot, xcv 

tamas, 254, 256, 257, 268 

Tamas (a hell), 283, 284 

tambila, 272 

Tamil, xvili, xxvii, xxix—xxxil, cxix, 
284 

speakers, xcix 


655 


Tamil devotional literature, xiii, 
XXxiil 
Tamil sources, xxix, xxxii, xocxiii 
Tamil theological works, xiii 
Tamisra (a hell), 284, 287 
Tanjore, cxii 
tanks, 210 
tanmatras, see elements 
Tantraja, 406 
Tantraloka, xxxvi, Ix, lxi, lxxxiv, 
cxli, cxxili, 151, 168, 181, 
182, 207, 233, 234, 236, 
240, 242, 288, 293, 294, 
310, 371, 377, 391 
Tantralokaviveka, 1x, lxi, cxii, 168, 
184, 294, 334, 371, 389 
Tantrapaddhati, cix 
Tantrasara, 310 
Tantravarttika, 336 
Tantrikabhidhanako§a, 355 
Tapoloka, Ixxii, 311 
Taptangara (a hell), 283, 285 
Tarakas, 309 
tarka (yoganga), lxxv, Ixxvi, 351- 
353, 355 
Tarksya, xli 
tasil, lxxxii 
taste, 270, 292, 296 
faculty of, 261, 262 
tattva of, 316 
of nectar, 306 
relishing of, 292 
sensation of, 262 
subtle element, 263, 267 
tattva of, 316 
TATPURUSA, 191, 194, 195, 222, 249 
TatpurusaSiva, lix 
TATTVA (a mantra), 333 
tattvadhvan, 200, 249 
tattvakrama, 275, 314 
TattvaprakaSa, xiv, xvi, xxvii, xliv, 
140, 235, 241, 260, 317 


656 


TattvaprakaSatatparyadipika, 169, 
378 

TattvaprakaSavrtti, xvi, xvii, xcv, 
cxili, 259 

Tattvasangraha, 193, 218, 234-236, 
241, 259, 264, 265 

Tattvasangraha of Santaraksita, 
169, 382 

Tattvasangrahatika, 241 

Tattvasarasangraha, 173 

tattvasarga, 180 

Tattvatrayanimaya, »ocxvii, bxi 

Tattvatrayanirnayavivrti, |xi 

Tattvatrayanirnayavrtti, bd, cxil, 
247 

Tattvavaisaradi, 158, 350 

TattveSas, 314 

tautology, Ixxxii, 161, 291, 294, 313 

tears, 267 

teeth, 267 

Tejovati (citadel on Meru), 296 

temples 

worship in, Xilil, xxii, Xxxvli, 

XXV1l], XXX1 

testimonia, xxxv, civ—cxxiv, 257, 
390 

Tévaram, xxxiii 

Thagana, 173 

THAKUR, 345 

THIRUGNANASAMBANDHAN,  CXv- 
Cxvi 

thorn-apple, 148 

thorns, 272 

throat, lxxv, 284, 355, 357, 358, 372 

thunderbolts, 256 

Tibetan, 173 

TilakaparameSvara, xxi 

time, see kala 

tirobhava, 196, see also rodhagakti 

tirthas, 315 

Tirukkalipruppatiyar, xxxii 

Tirumantiram, xxix 

Tirumilar, xxix 


Parakhyatantra 


Tiruvacakam, xiv, xxxiii 


-Tiruvarutpayayp, cxvili, cxix 


Tiruvavatuturai, cxvi 
Tiruvenkatu, cxxiii 
Tiruvitaimarutiir, cxxil 
Tiruvuntiyar, xxxil 
toes, 355 
TOKUNAGA, bxxxvi, 140 
tongue, 262 
TORELLA, xviii, lviii, 234, 235, 241, 
242, 368, 369, 372, 373 
TORZSOK, vi, lxxviii, box, bLxxxii, 
389 
touch, 270 
experience of, 269 
faculty of, 233, 261, 263 
tattva of, 316 
sensation of, 261 
subtle element, 263, 265 
tattva of, 316 
Trailokyamalla, xox 
trasarenu, 280, 523-528 
Trideha (head of gunatattva), 316 
Trika, xxvii, xlvii 
Trilocanasiva, xxxiv, xxxvi, lil; lix, 
lxii, x, Cxi, ‘Cxiv, CXX, 
cxxiii, cxxiv, 173, 184, 206, 
250, 253, 314, 333, 339, 340 
Trimirti, 201, 334 
TRIPATHI, 374 
Tripitakamala, 173 
Tripuratapanyupanisat, lvi 
Triravarta (a hell), 286 
Trirnivasa (a hell), 283, 286 
Trifanku, 311 
Trigrnga (mountain range), 299 
Tritala, 291 
Trivandrum, vii, 372, 373, 375 
Trivikrama, 312 
Tryambakasambhu, xli, cx, 232, 242, 
245, 259, 260, 277 
tryanuka, 279 
Turnakrt (head of payutattva), 316 


General Index 


tustis, 256 

tuti (unit of length), 523, 525 

tvak, see skin and touch 

Tvisamnidhi (head of agnitattva), 
314 


Uccaih§Sravas, 297 
Udaipur, xciv 
udana, lIxxv, 265, 357, 372 
Udbhava, realm above suddhavidya, 
406 
Uddiyanabandha, 358 
Uddyotakara, li 
udghata, Ixxv, 364, 365 
uha, 355, see also tarka 
Uma, lix 
UmacigigankaraSgastrin, 217 
Umapati 
author of Pauskarabhasya, 
cviii, cxii, 139, 190-193, 
322, 325-329, 392, 400, 
401 
author of Tamil works, xxii, 
Cxvlll 
compiler of Sataratnasangraha, 
CXV 
discussion of mistaken identifi- 
cation of three Umapatis, 
CXlil, CXV, CXViil 
Umépati (tantravataraka), 406 
UmeSana, Ixvi ; 
Unmana, form of Siva, 184, 185 
Unmanas, a Rudra, 184 
Unmani, 184, 185 ; 
unmatta (thorn-apple), 148 
UNNI, cx 
upajati, Ixxxv 
upamana, 209 
Upamanyu, 299, 301 
upaya, 140, see padas 
urine, 267 
Urvasi, 298, 337 
Usna (a hell), 283, 284 


657 


Utathya, 302 

utkranti, 383, 384 

Utpala Vaisnava, 381 
Uttaratapaniyopanisat, 193 
uvula, 355 


vacana, 391 
Vacaspatimisra, 158, 228, 259, 263, 
350 
Vahni (Rudra bearing egg of 
Brahma), 313 
Vaidyaraja, 245 
valragya 
buddhidharma, \xix, 154, 254, 
206 
sad-, lxxviii, 404, 405 
Vaisesikas, xviii, li, 151, 158, 159, 
279, 280, 329, 380, 524 
Vaisesikasutra, li, 151, 159, 245, 264, 
329, 380 
vaisnava (a bhuvana), 249 
Vaisnavas, xiv 
Vaitarani (a hell/river), 287 
Vaitaranya, 284 
Vaivasvati (citadel on Meru), 296 
Vajragarbha, 403 
vakradaru, 289 
VAKTRA, 222 
vaktra, nirvacana Of, lxvii, 208 
VaktraSambhu, xxxvi, lv, lix, lxi, 
Ixii, cxiv, 352 
Vakyapadiya, li 
Vallabhadeva, 292 
Vama, 180-182, 324 
Vamadeva, 182 
VAMADEVA, Ixv, 181, 183, 191, 194, 
222 
Vamana, 375 
Vamanapurana, 2595 
VAN TROY, xx 
Varatala, 289, 291 
varna 
term for consonants, 321 


658 


varnadhvan, 200 

varnasarga, 180 

VarnaSramacandrika, cxv 

Varuna, 290, 296, 313, 369 

Varuni (dharana), 360 

vasantatilaka, lxxxv 

VASAT, 334 

Vasistha, xl, 137 

vasita, 379 

vasita, 379 

Vasubandhu, 145 

VASUDEVA, vi, XX, XXXvi, x\lvii, 
li, bexxvii, lxxxviii, xciv, 
xcvili, 290, 324, 347, 348, 
351-355, 358-361, 363- 
365, 373, 379-381, 383 

Vasuki, 291 

Vasus, 311 

Vathula, xxv, xxxvii 

Vatulasuddhakhya, xxvi, cxxii 

VAUSAT, 334 

Vayaviyasamhita, 140, 166 

Vayu, 290, 296, see also air and 
wind 

Vayupurana, 245, 255, 291, 297, 
300, 524, 527, 528 

Veda, xlviii, li, lxv, Ixvii, 170, 186, 
209-213, 215, 337 

recitation of, 391 

Vedajnana I, cxiii 

Vedajnana II, cix, cxii, cxiii, cxix, 
CXXI1 

Vedanta, xiii, xvii, xxvi, xXvii, 
xxxi, Ivi-lviili, Ixv, 152, 
153, 186, see also Advaita, 
non-dualism and vivarta- 
vada 

Vedantavadins, xlviii, 343 

Vedavijnana (head of vidyatattva), 
316 

Velliyambalavanasuvamikal, _—_cxi, 
Cxii 

Venus, 309 


Parakhyatantra 


verse numeration, civ 
Vibhiticandra, 173 
Vidhi (Brahma), lix 
Vidya, 324 
VIDYA (& mantra), 333 
vidya (Suddha-), 406 
tattva of, lxxii, 201, 203, 217, 
220, 225, 317, 374 
vidya (padartha), liii, xii, xiii, Lxvi, 
140, 203, 205, 225, 345, see 
also under jnana 
vidya (limited power of knowledge), 
Ixviii, 229, 234-240, 242, 
247, 374 
tattva of, 316 
vidya (mantra), lxvii, 218, 220, 221, 
225 
sub-type distinguished from 
‘mantras’, 220 
vidyadeha, 388 
Vidyadharas, 299, 303, 308, 311 
Vidyadhani, 298 
VIDYADHIPA, 223 
Vidyakantha II, lx, cxiv 
vidyangamantras, 223, 224 
vidyapada, \Ixxiv, 345, see also un- 
der jnana 
VidyeSvaras, lx, lxi, lxvi, lxxiii, 165, 
196, 201-203, 205, 218, 
224, 333, 334 
vigraha, see also body 
laksya, 324 
Vijaya, xxili, xxix 
Vijaya, 324 
Vijnanabhairava, 371, 375, 376 
Vikala (a Raksasa), 291 
Vikatanana (a Raksasa), 292 
Vikramaditya I, xx 
Vilumpaka (head of ghranatattva), 
316 
Vimalaprabha, 222 
Vimalasiva, 314 


Genera! Index 


Vinasikhatantra, 389 
Vinmaya (a hell), 284 
vipulas, Ixxxv, lxxxvi, 179, 199, 312, 
328 
Vira, xxiv 
Virabhadra, Ixvi 
visarga, 377 
Visnu, lix, bcxii, 295, 296, 311, 336, 
373, 374 
in mantroccara, lxxv, 324, 372 
nirvacana of, 311, 312 
Visnupurana, 295-297, 300 
ViSvasarottara, cxvii 
Vitala, 293 
vitasti, 523-528 
Vitatha, 300 
Vitpirna (a hell), 287 
VIVANTI, lxxxviii, 288, 334 
vivartavada, 1, lvii, lviii, 153 
Vaivasvati (citadel on Meru), 296 
vowels, Ixxii, lxxiii, 321, 322, 325, 
331, 333, 336, 337 
long (in tantric sense), 332, 333 
neuter, 331, 332 
short (in tantric sense), 332 
vyaghata, 523, 525 
Vyakarana, 142 
Vyakhyaniguru, lxii 
vyana, lxxv, 265, 266, 357 
Vyasa (author of commentary on 
Yogasutra), 379 . 
Vyomacaéra (head of Srutitattva), 
316 
vyoman, see also ether 
laksya, 324 
in mantroccara, 324 
Vyomarupa, 324 
VYOMAVYAPIN, Ix, 195, 224, 333 
Vyomavyapistava, 191, 195 


water, lxx, lxxii, 157, 158, 160, 264, 
337, 361, 362, 366 
dharana of, \xxv, 354, 355 


659 


homologised with v, 361 
hot, 158 
reflection in, 151 
tattva of, 304, 314 
water-lilies, 178, 179, 189 
WATSON, vi, 145, 146, 150, 152 
weapons, 272 
weaver, 185 
weaving, 185 
weekdays, xlvii, 305, 307 
wells, 210, 292 
WEZLER, 158, 159, 380 
WILDEN, vi 
will, see iccha 
WILSON, 295 
wind, 262, 263, 265, 363, see also air 
and Vayu 
dharana of, Ixxv, 355 
in the body, 186, 359, 366 
nadi of, 367 
supportlessness of, Ixv, 186 
tattva of, 304, 314 
women, 257, 272, 291, 292, 294, 391 
as initiands, 395 
Wrhaspatitattwa, 353 


yajamana, 316 
Yajnavalkyasmrti, 307, 379° 
Yakkhasamyutta, 244 
Yama, 296, 369 
Yamadamstraka (a Raksasa), 291 
yamas, |xix, 254, 256 
yoganga, 353 
Yamya (a nadi), 367 
Yaska, 249 
YaSomitra, 172 
YaSovati (citadel on Meru), 296 
yava, see barley grain 
yoga, xii, lxix, lxxv, bxxxviil, xcvil, 
202, 206, 324, 347, 351- 
353, 366, 379-381, 384, 
385, 388, 389 
angas of, Ixxv, 351-353 


660 


astanga-, 351 
meaning of, lxxvi, 380 
pada, lxiii, lxxvi, 141, 385, 387— 
390, 392, 395, 398 
Patanjala, 155, 353 
process, 352 
result, 352 
sadanga-, 351, 360 
union, 356, 381, 384, 388, 404, 
407 
Yogacara, 271 
Yogadipika, xcvi 
Yogaja, xxiii, xxvii 
Yogaraja, 389 
yogarudhi, 190 
yogastaka, 249, 315 
Yogasitra, xlviii, 155, 158, 241, 254, 
350, 353, 379 
Yogasutrabhasya, 379 
Yogavarttika, 158 
yogic suicide, lxxvi, 383, 384 
yogin, lxxv, Ixxvi, 252, 380, 383-385 
yojana, definition of, lxxi, 280, 523- 
528 
yonipadartha, Ixiii, lxvii, 140, 141, 
345 
yuga, 305 
unit of length, 528 
Yugmaparvata (a hell), 283 
Yugmasma (a hell), 286 
yuka, see louse 
Yuktidipika, 158, .228 


Parakhyatantra 


RESUME FRANCAIS 


Le lecteur trouvera dans le présent ouvrage |’édition critique et la tra- 
duction annotée du Parakhya, précédées d’une introduction de 120 pages, 
et suivies de quatre appendices, d’une bibliographie et de deux index. L’in- 
troduction vise 4 situer le Parakhya au sein du canon d’écritures révélées 
(tantra) du Saiva Siddhanta et tente de dater le texte, concluant qu’il a 
probablement été rédigé au huitiéme ou au neuviéme siécle. Elle examine 
briévement la question du commentaire perdu du Parakhya, donne ensuite 
un résumé du contenu des huit chapitres du texte qui nous sont parvenus: 
dans leur intégralité, fait quelques remarques a propos de |’usage particu- 
lier de la langue sanskrite dans ce texte et dans d’autres textes tantriques, 
souligne la rareté de ]’ceuvre et donc son importance, et s’achVe sur une 
discussion détaillée des sources et de la méthodologie employées pour la 
constitution du texte. 

L’édition critique se base sur le coder unicus de ]’Oriental Research 
Institute de Mysore (M”), qui transmet les chapitres 1-6 et 14-15, 
ainsi que sur deux apographes partiels du vingtiéme siécle—provenant 
également de Mysore—qui conservent parfois des legons récemment per- 
dues'du manuscrit ancien. Elle présente aussi les citations du Parakhya 
disséminées dans nombre d’ouvrages Sivaites : un cinquitme du texte 
transmis dans M” se trouve en effet cité dans divers commentaires, ma- 
nuels de rituels, recueils et traités théologiques indépendants. L’auteur 
en présente. & la fin de |’introduction une liste annotée qui tente de ca- 
ractériser briévement les ouvrages inédits ou peu connus. 

Les notes substantielles qui accompagnent la traduction du texte jus- 
tifient le choix des lecons transmises et le cas échéant celui des nom- 
breuses corrections conjecturales proposées, et discutent des problémes 
d’interprétation. Chaque’ hypothése; qu’elle soit admise ou rejetée, y fait 
objet d’une présentation et d’un examen exhaustifs : le lecteur est 
ainsi mieux & méme d’évaluer la portée des arguments et' de formuler 
d’éventuelles critiques constructives. 


662 Parakhyatantra 


L’appendice I rassemble les citations recueillies dans d’autres textes 
qui sont attribuées au Parakhya mais ne figurent pas dans le manuscrit de 
Mysore. Elles sont présentées avec leurs variantes et avec diverses propo- 
sitions de corrections. L’appendice II offre une transcription diplomatique 
du manuscrit ; les divergences des deux apographes sont présentées en bas 
de page. L’appendice III contient le texte du commentaire anonyme (Sata- 
ratnollekhini) au verset 18 du Sataratnasangraha (= Parakhya 1.15), une 
anthologie de passages tantriques. L’appendice IV compare le systéme 
d’unités de mesure du Parakhya avec ceux que |’on trouve dans d’autres 
tantra et purana. 

La teneur du texte—ou plutot des parties du texte que transmet 
le manuscrit de Mysore—est principalement théologique. Si le chapitre 
14 concerne la pratique du yoga, tous les autres traitent de questions 
théoriques telles que celle de la nature de l’ame et du Seigneur, de leur 
relation, de l’origine et de la nature du langage et des mantras, de la com- 
position matérielle de ]’univers, de la cosmographie ou encore du but des 
rites qu’enseigne Siva. La description pratique de ces rites fait enti¢rement 
défaut. Les chapitres 7 & 13—qui constituent la partie perdue la plus im- 
portante de l’ouvrage—devaient décrire, entre autres, les rites quotidiens, 
les rites d’expiation, les initiations et les regles de comportement que les 
initiés doivent respecter. 


Voici le résumé du Parakhya : 


Au début du premier chapitre (« L’ame »), Pratoda appercoit Pra- 
kaSa dans un asrama sur le Gange et lui demande de lui dispenser un 
enseignement. Cet enseignement, qui prend la forme du Parakhya, est 
défini, et les cinq sujets (padartha) du tantra sont énumérés et décrits 
(1-10). Faisant suite & une évocation des techniques d’exégése (11-14), le 
vers 15 donne une liste des attributs de l’ame qui tient lieu de programme 
au reste du chapitre. 

Pratoda avance la réfutation de l’existence de l’Ame formulée par 
les Carvaka; Prakasa la rejette (16-27). Pratoda attaque la notion de 
lame depuis la perspective bouddhique selon laquelle toute chose est mo- 
mentanée. Prakasa rejette cette position en arguant du phénoméne de 
la mémoire (28-35). L’omniprésence de l’Aame est mise en question puis 
justifiée (36-9). Une sorte de monisme védantique est alors proposée puis 
rejetée (40-50). Pratoda suggére que l’Ame doit étre dépourvue de toute 


Résumé francais 663 


sorte de souillure. Prakasa répond en démontrant la nécessité de postuler 
l’existence d’une souillure innée qu’on appelle mala et qu’il convient de 
distinguer d’autres souillures comme la passion (raga) ou le karman (51- 
60). Pratoda propose de considérer que |’ame est par nature dépourvue 
de connaissance, mais qu’elle l’acquiért quand elle est liée au corps et 
aux organes des sens. En réponse, Prakasa explique que c’est grace a la 
connaissance innée de l’ame que celle-ci répond au stimulus du corps et des 
facultés (61-71). Pratoda met alors en question la position selon laquelle 
le karman est la racine de la diversité de )’univers; PrakaSa la réaffirme 
(72-80). Pratoda demande si ce n’est pas le corps qui est responsable de 
ses actions plutot que |’ame; Prakasa explique que |’ame est bel et bien 
responsable de ses actes et que le Seigneur fait en sorte que chaque ame 
obtienne les fruits de son propre karman (81-94), puis conclut (95). 

Le deuxiéme chapitre (« Le Seigneur >) s’ouvre sur la liste des at- 
tributs du Seigneur (1). L’univers est-il un effet? Prakasa affirme que 
oui (2-11). Pratoda mentionne la position des Mimamsaka selon laquelle 
lunivers n’a jamais changé, ainsi que la possibilité que le karman puisse 
etre la cause de l’univers; Prakasa rejette les deux positions en insis- 
tant sur le fait qu’une cause sensible est requise et que le karman n’est 
pas sensible (12-19). Pratoda présente un dilemme formulé par les boud- 
dhistes : l’activité de création n’a pu avoir lieu ni tout 4 la fois ni de 
facon graduelle; PrakaSa réitére |’affirmation selon laquelle chaque effet 
est précédé par une cause, affirme que la création du Seigneur est 4 la 
fois simultanée et graduelle et enseigne que les effets sont produits par 
une combinaison de trois types de causes : la cause efficiente, la cause 
matérielle et les causes auxiliaires (20-30). La possibilité de produire des 
effets sans instrument externe est mise en évidence par les activités de la 
lune et du soleil; l’« instrument » du Seigneur n’est autre que son pouvoir 
d’action ; bien que ce pouvoir (Sakti) soit singulier, i) est connu sous de 
trés nombreux noms selon ses nombreuses fonctions (31-42). Neuf puis- 
sances (dont les noms dérivent du mantra VAMADEVA) sont énumérées, 
ainsi que les Rudra qui les possédent, et leurs noms sont « expliqués » par 
des étymologies affectives (nirvacana) (43-61). Le Seigneur est omniscient 
puisqu’il crée tout. Que son pouvoir de connaissance n’ait pas de support 
corporel n’empéche pas son exercice effectif : de méme, le vent, pour- 
tant sans support, secoue des branches (62-67b). L’ame libérée accéde au 
méme état de connaissance pure, autrement dit 4 ]’omniscience et & l’om- 
nipotence (67c—71b). C’est le Seigneur qui dispense ]’enseignement grace 


664 Parakhyatantra 


auquel on Le connait, mais Prakasa insiste sur le fait’ qu’il n’y. a aucun 
probléme logique de circularité. Selon lui, ce qu’on apprend 4a partir d’un. 
moyen valide de connaissance (pramana) n’a plus besoin d’étre démontré 
par,un autre pramana. Si nous ne.connaissons pas quelque chose par la 
perception directe, cela-ne veut pas dire que cette chose n’existe pas : 
l’existence du Seigneur. est donc établie; on Le désigne par convention 
sous le nom Iévara (71¢-82). Son corps est constitué par les cinq brahma- 
mantra; la forme:qu’il adopte nous permet de !’adorer (83-88). Les noms: 
des brahmamantra sont expliqués par des étymologies affectives (89-95). 
Les distinctions entre le Dieu sans.et avec-forme (niskala/sakala) et entre le. 
Seigneur engagé dans ses fonctions (adhikarin), .engagé dans l’expérience 
(bhogin) ou au repos (Jayin) ne sont'pas réelles au niveau de. la réalité 
ultime (96—99b). La. libération par le Sejgneur. dépend de la transmission 
continue de ses enseignements; une « chute » de grace divine descend 
sur une personne qui en est digne (et non pas parce que Siva se montre- 
rait partial-A son égard) et celle-ci se met en quéte -un maitre initiateur 
(99c-113), Siva met en branle la création de l’univers pour pouvoir faire 
bénéficier de sa grace les ames liées.: il-« réveille » les mantra, ainsi que 
huit officiants nommés VidyeSvara; par leur pouvoir d’agir, ces étres.purs: 
sont égaux au Seigneur, mais ils Lui sont assujettis et c’est en suivant Ses 
ordres qu’ils créent et: maintiennent l’univers impur (114-28), Prakasa 
conclut (129).. 

Le troisitme chapitre (« Les textes révélés et l’univers pur») s’ouvre 
sur une liste des sujets qui .y sont abordés (1).: Siva «< réveille » les 
huit VidyeSvara' au début de la création; ceux-ci, a. leur, tour,, 
« réveillent> le groupe. des ames dont la.premiére s’appelle Gauta; ce 
groupe < réyeille > un groupe dont la premiére est nommé Bhava; le savoir 
passe ainsi jusqu’aux dieux et aux hommes (2-6). Le Seigneur peut. pro- 
duire un enseignement bien qu’Il soit essentiellement dépourvu de forme ; 
les agents de la transmission de ce savoir en abrégent: le contenu afin qu’il 
devienne compréhensible aux étres humains (7-21). Pratoda évoque la po- 
sition de la Mimamsa selon laquelle le Veda. fait aytorité puisqu’il existe 
depuis toujours et n’a donc pas d’auteur (22). Prakasa montre qu’aucun 
des six.moyens de connaissance reconnus par les Mimamsaka ne prouve 
que le Veda soit sans auteur (23-37). En.revanche, l’un des trois critéres 
qui permettent d’invalider l’autorité de quelque chose, & savoir le. doute,. 
s’applique au Veda (38-45). La littérature Sivaite fait autorité et dérive 
tout-entiére de la révélation de Siva (46-56). Prakasa raconte l’histoire de 


Résumé francais 665 


la genése des sept myriades de mantra, leur répugnance devant |’univers 
et leur division par Ananta en deux groupes, dont |’un s’occupe de la 
gestion de l’univers tandis que |’autre atteint la libération-absolue (57- 
72). Prakasa explique quels mantras viennent de telle partie du corps du 
Seigneur (73-8) puis conclut (79). 

Le quatriéme chapitre (« La matiére primaire et ce qui évolue & partir 
d’elle >) énumére d’abord les attributs de la matiére primaire (maya) (1— 
2). Celle-ci, extrémement subtile, ne peut étre percue directement, mais 
les textes révélés et la raison nous permettent de la connaitre : elle est la 
cause matérielle des tattva (3-20b). Au début d’une phase de création, 
le Seigneur la secoue pour qu’elle produise ses effets (20c—23). Le pre- 
mier de ces effets est le pouvoir limité d’agir (kala), qui ne permet qu’une 
révélation partielle du pouvoir inné de l’ame (24-9) ; & partir de cet effet 
évolue a son tour le pouvoir limité de savoir (vidya) (30-6). Le troisitme 
effet est la passion (raga), qu’il faut distinguer de la qualité de ]’intellect 
nommeée avairagya (37-44). Le quatriéme et le cinquiéme effets sont: le 
temps (kala) et la-nécessité morale (niyati) ; cette derniére fait en sorte 
que chaque ame éprouve les conséquences de ses propres actions (45- 
54). Cette nécessité agit sur l’ame liée, qui constitue la catégorie suivante 
(en tant que purusa-tattva) dans cette série de tattva (55-7). Du pou- 
voir limité d’action (kala) procéde une matiére secondaire (prakrti) (58- 
66). Le Seigneur joint les ames avec ces effets.(67-8). La catégorie guna 
(constituée par rajas, sattva et tamas) est le tattva qui procéde de prakrti 
(69-73). De ce dernier nait ]’intelligence (buddhi), dans laquelle résident 
les huit dispositions morales que sont la rectitude, le savoir, l’absence 
de passion, la maitrise et leurs contraires (74-93). L’ « orgueil » (ahan- 
kara) dérive de l’intelligence ; il est divisé en trois types nommés Taijasa, 
Vaikrta et Bhutadi, dont le premier est la source des facultés des sens, 
le deuxiéme, la source des facultés d’action et le dernier, la source des 
cing éléments subtils, d’ou procédent les cing éléments grossiers (94-128). 
Pratoda évoque la possibilité que l’univers soit une transformation des 
éléments grossiers et non pas de maya; Prakasa répond en réaffirmant la 
position Sivaite (129-38). Une objection bouddhiste. consistant & affirmer 
que l’existence d’un objet externe ne peut étre connue indépendamment 
de la connaissance de |’existence de l’objet externe et qu’il n’est donc pas 
nécessaire de postuler ]’existence d’une réalité au-dela de la connaissance 
est €voquée puis rejetée (139-48). Les effets de maya constituent un corps 
subtil qui permet la transmigration (149-51). Quand maya est secouée, 


666 Parakhyatantra 


elle ne se transforme que partiellement (152-3). En elle réside un grand 
nombre d’ames (154-7). Prakasa expose la différence entre la souillure 
innée (mala) et maya ainsi que leur relation (158-70) puis conclut (171- 
2). 

Le cinquiéme chapitre s’attache a décrire le cosmos. L’épaisseur de 
la coquille de l’ceuf cosmique qui contient tous les mondes—y compris le 
notre—dans le tattva de la terre est de dix mille yojana. Les mesures de 
longueur sont définies jusqu’au yojana (1-4). Le monde de Kalagnirudra 
est situé un milliard de yojana au-dessus du fond de la coquille de l’ceuf 
cosmique (5-10). Au-dessus de ce monde se trouvent les trente-trois 
groupes d’enfers (il y en a 140 au total) (11-34b). A leur téte, neuf mil- 
lions de yojana au-dessus des enfers, regne Kismanda (34c—40b). Les sept 
paradis souterraines (patala) se trouvent neuf cent mille yojana au-dessus 
du monde de Kiismanda et au-dela& s’étend le monde de leur seigneur, 
Hataka (40c-60). Au-dessus de celui-ci se trouve notre monde (bhiah), 
divisé en sept continents séparés par des océans concentriques, dont le 
dernier s’étend jusqu’a la frontiére que forme le Lokaloka, la montagne 
circulaire au-dela de laquelle la lumiére du soleil ne passe pas (61—109b). 
Cette montagne est elle-méme entourée par l’océan du blanc de |’ceuf 
(Garbhoda) borné par la coquille (109c-111b). Les dimensions de notre 
monde—seul endroit de |’univers ot il soit possible d’accumuler les fruits 
de ses actions, tandis qu’ailleurs, on ne peut qu’éprouver ces fruits—sont 
spécifiées (111c—113). Le Bhuvarloka s’étend au-dessus de notre monde; 
le soleil, Ja lune et les autres planétes s’y trouvent, jusqu’a l’Etoile polaire 
(114-29). Au-dessus se trouvent les mondes de Svar, Mahar, Jana, Ta- 
pas et Satya, ol régne Brahma (130-138b). Quarante millions de yojana 
au-dessus de Brahma se trouve Visnu; soixante millions au-dessus de ce 
dernier réside Sankara; vient ensuite le sommet de la coquille de ]’ceuf 
(138c-140). Les dix Rudras qui portent ]’ceuf sont nommés (141-4). Pra- 
kasa donne une liste des Rudra qui régnent sur chacun des tattvas & partir 
de celui de l’eau jusqu’au tattva de maya (145-155b). Aprés maya, dans 
l’univers pur, Sambara préside au tattva de la connaissance pure, Ananta 
a l’isvara-tattva, Brahma a celui de sadaSiva et au-dela de ce dernier régne 
Siva (155c-161). Prakasa conclut (162). 

Le sixiéme chapitre est consacré aux mantra. Aprés une évocation du 
contenu du chapitre (1), Prakasa explique qu’au moment de la création, 
le Seigneur secoue la < goutte» (bindu), une matiére subtile sonique qui 
produit le syllabaire ; avec celui-ci—divisé en voyelles et en consonnes—le 


Résumé francais 667 


langage, base de communication, devient possible (2-8). Pratoda présente 
la position selon laquelle les sons de la parole produisent une puissance 
nommée sphota qui est le véritable agent de la transmission du sens (9). 
Prakasa rejette l’existence de ce sphota : selon lui, le dernier son, ac- 
compagné des traces des sons précédents, révéle le sens; ainsi, ce sont 
les sons mémes de la parole qui permettent la communication mondaine 
(10-16). En réponse aux questions de Pratoda, Prakasa précise que la 
relation entre la parole et le sens est sui generis, qu’une convention ar- 
tificielle les lie et que Siva a créé cette convention, non seulement pour 
le langage quotidien, mais aussi pour lier les mantra avec ce qu’ils < si- 
gnifient » (17-28). Recourant a une terminologie calquée sur celle de 
la grammaire, Prakasa explique la morphologie des mantra et donne les 
formes des mantra principaux du culte, ainsi que les inflexions (jati) (29- 
39). Nous ne saurions qualifier la forme d’un mantra de « correcte > ou 
d’« incorrecte » : de méme qu’il est possible dans l’usage mondain de 
créer de nouvelles conventions, de méme Siva a créé les conventions qui 
concernent les mantra (40-58). Pratoda introduit la thése des Mimamsaka 
selon laquelle les divinités ne sont que des mots; PrakaSa la rejette (59 
64). Pratoda présente un dilemme : si la divinité possede un corps, elle 
ne peut pas assister simultanément 4 plusieurs sacrifices; mais si elle n’a 
pas de forme, comment peut-elle assurer le résultat d’un sacrifice (65-6) ? 
Prakasa répond en affirmant que le Dieu peut prendre corps selon Son 
désir et que c’est bien Lui qui assure |’efficacité des rites (67-75). Quant 4 
l’objection selon laquelle la divinité est invisible et donc inconnue, Prakasa 
l’écarte en répondant que le paradis des Mimamsaka |’est tout autant. I 
conclut que le rite sacrificiel appartient au Seigneur (ity aisvari kriya) et 
requiert l’utilisation des mantra (76-9). Aprés la conclusion de ce chapitre 
et du vidyapada, Prakasa annonce qu’il entend traiter des rites (80-2). 
Le quatorziéme chapitre traite du yoga. A la liste des sujets du cha- 
pitre (1) succéde l’évocation des lieux appropriés 4 la pratique du yoga, de 
l’état d’esprit requis, des positions possibles des jambes et de la posture 
de la partie supérieure du corps (2-9). Six auxiliaires nécessaires au yoga 
(yoganga) sont nommeés (pratyahara, dhyana, pranayama, dharana, tarka 
et samadhi) et caractérisés (10-17), aprés quoi la discipline des souffles 
est décrite (18-31). Ayant conquis les souffles, le yogin doit pratiquer 
les fixations (dharana), c’est-a-dire des méditations sur chacun des cinq 
éléments accompagnées par de rétentions mesurées du souffle (udghata) 
(32-50). Ayant maitrisé les souffles, le yogin doit pratiquer le yoga (51-2). 


668 Parakhyatantra 


La variété des tubes du corps est évoquée et les tubes principaux situés 
autour du coeur sont nommés selon les protecteurs des directions corres- 
pondantes : quand |’aAme se déplace du cceur dans |’un de ces tubes, elle 
prend la nature de la divinité de la direction dudit tube; mais le < mou- 
vement>» de |’4me n’est pas un mouvement au sens. propre du terme et 
c’est en fait le souffle (prana) qui se déplace (53-70b). Les trois tubes 
principaux sont mentionnés (sans les termes techniques bien connus : ida, 
pingala et susumna) et associés respectivement 4 la lune, au soleil et aux 
deux planétes (70c—71). Suit la description de ]’énonciation d’un man- 
tra : le souffle part du coeur (siége de Brahma), passe ensuite par la gorge 
(siége de Visnu), par le palais (siége de Rudra), par l’espace entre les sour- 
cils (siége d’ISvara), et parvient jusqu’au bout du nez, siége de Sadasiva 
(72-82). Sont ensuite décrits les deux auxiliaires (yoganga) de la discrimi- 
nation (tarka) et de la concentration mentale (samadhi) (83-85). Quand 
le yogin atteint au tattva supréme, il maitrise huit pouvoirs surnaturels 
yogiques, dont il peut se servir pour inspirer la foi (86-104). A la des- 
cription du suicide yogique (utkranti) (105-7) succéde la conclusion du 
chapitre (108). 

Le quinziéme chapitre, consacré & la délivrance et au moyen de |’obte- 
nir débute par une annonce de son contenu (1). Les quatre moyens post- 
initiatiques pour obtenir la délivrance—le savoir (jnana), les rites (kriya), 
les observances religieuses (carya) et le yoga—sont énumérés (2-10). Pra- 
toda demande lequel est salvateur (11). Prakasa explique d’abord qu’une 
‘premiére initiation introductrice (samayadiksa) autorise un néophyte a 
suivre ces moyens, mais que cette premiere initiation n’a pas le pouvoir 
de libérer ]’4me. On comprend par conséquent que l’initiation [principale] 
((nirvana-|diksa) soit le véritable moyen d’obtenir la délivrance : elle peut 
soit l’assurer seule (nirapeksa) soit étre secondée par des moyens post- 
iniatiques (sapeksa) (12-26). Si elle peut opérer seule, les autres moyens 
ne sont-ils pas inutiles (27)? Prakasa répond que ces moyens protégent 
l'image des Sivaites dans la société : seuls les initiés qui sont incapables 
de suivre ces moyens, tels que les enfants, sont libérés de l’obligation de 
les observer (28-31). En réponse & une question de Pratoda, Prakasa ex- 
plique que les enfants, méme s’ils ne manifestent pas eux-mémes les signes 
d’avoir regu une chute de grace divine, peuvent bénéficier de |’initiation 
si d’autres personnes les font initier (32-5). Une initiation, correctement 
accomplie, méne toujours a la délivrance; celui qui ne la regoit pas mais 
en est digne obtient la délivrance aprés étre rené sous la forme d’un Ru- 


Résumé francais 669 


dra (36-39b). Chacun des moyens post-initiatiques peut mener a terme A 
la délivrance, mais les suivre tous les quatre est une voie facile (39c—45). 
L’état de libération n’est pas une simple absence, puisqu’on y obtient les 
qualités du Seigneur (46-50). Celles-ci ne sont pas transférées dans ]’4me 
au moment de la libération (51-6). L’absence du karman n’est pas suffi- 
sante pour donner lieu a ]’état de libération, lequel doit étre caractérisé 
de surcroit par un bonheur supréme (57-60). Les qualités du Seigneur ne 
surgissent pas non plus dans |’ame : innées, elles s’y trouvent déja et y 
sont seulement révélées au moment de la libération (61-7). L’ame libérée 
est pure, complete, sans parti pris, sans rivalités, pleine de paix et de 
bonheur (68-71). Prakasa raconte qu’il a recu ce tantra, le Supréme, de 
Parvatipati, qui lui l’avait regu de Diptesa (72) puis conclut (73). 


WR dA, 
The Parakhyatantra 
A Scripture of the Saiva Siddhanta 


The rediscovery of a large part of the Parakhyatantra made possible by this edition 
furnishes one more document of the pre-tenth-century thought-world of the Saiva 
Siddhanta, a religion that was spread across and beyond the Indian subcontinent at 
the probable time of this work's composition. For our text dates from the period 
before the appearance of the most significant body of theological exegesis in the 
history of the school, namely the writings of the tenth-century Kashmirian lineage 
of Bhatta Ramakantha II. The addition of the Parakhya to the still small corpus of 
published early Saiddhantika writings should be a welcome event to the student of 
classical Indian religions. 


What is presented here, however, is not the whole text but only those chapters of it 
that deal with doctrine and yoga. Those on ritual and other aspects of religious 
practice were left aside by the unknown compiler responsible for the selection of 
materials found in the unique codex - a beautiful palm-leaf manuscript in minute 
Nandinagari script - and are therefore lost. Many quotations from the text have 
been located in later literature, and a fully positive apparatus reports the readings 
of all sources. A diplomatic transcription records features of the manuscript that 
the apparatus cannot contain (its orthographies, page- and line-breaks, etc.). 


A complete English translation - the first to appear of an early siddhantatantra - 
accompanies the Sanskrit text. Copious notes discuss textual difficulties and 
problems of interpretation. In doing so, they draw on parallels with other 
Saiddhantika writings, both published and unpublished. The introduction places 
the Parakhya in its context, gives a résumé of the work, characterises its language 
and concludes with a detailed discussion of the sources and of how they have been 
used, 


Dominic Goodall studied Sanskrit at Oxford (BA 1990, DPhil. 1996) and in Hamburg 


(Habilitation 2002). He is currently head of the Pondicherry Centre of the Ecole francaise 
d'Extréme-Orient, where he is engaged in editing Saiva texts. 


