A Saiva Utopia: 
The Sivadharma's Revision of 
Brahmanical Varnasramadharma 


UNIVERSITÀ DI NAPOLI L' ORIENTALE 
DIPARTIMENTO ASIA, AFRICA E MEDITERRANEO 


Tue SIVADHARMA PROJECT 


Studies on the History of Saivism 
I 


Editor-in-Chief 
Florinda De Simini 


Editorial & Scientific Board 
Peter C. Bisschop (Universiteit Leiden), Dominic Goodall (École Francaise 
d'Extréme-Orient), Kengo Harimoto (Università di Napoli L'Orientale), 
Csaba Kiss (Università di Napoli L'Orientale), Krishnaswamy Nachimuthu 
(École Francaise d'Extréme-Orient), Annette Schmiedchen (Humboldt- 
Universitàt zu Berlin), Judit Tórzsók (École Pratique des Hautes Études), 
Margherita Trento (Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique), 
Yuko Yokochi (Kyoto University) 


(OBrvannanmā E 
ROJECT 


UNIVERSITA DI NAPOLI L'ORIENTALE 
DIPARTIMENTO ASIA, AFRICA E MEDITERRANEO 


THE SIVADHARMA PROJECT 


Studies on the History of Saivism 
] 


A Saiva Utopia: 
The Sivadharma's Revision of 
Brahmanical Varnasramadharma 
Critical Edition, Translation & Study 


of the Sivasramadhyaya of the Sivadharmašāstra 


Peter C. Bisschop, Nirajan Kafle, Timothy Lubin 


@ 


š 
UniorPress 
Napoli 2021 


UniotPress 
Via Nuova Marina, 59 - 80133, Napoli 


uniorpressQunior.it 


This work is licensed under a Creative Commons 
Attribution 4.0 International License 


ISBN 978-88-6719-215-1 
Stampato in Italia 


Il presente volume è stato sottoposto al vaglio di due revisori anonimi 


Table of Contents 


FOfEWOfd: «z.s ——————— kaya VII 
e ET IX 
IntrodūctlONi c "—————————— ās 1 
The Sivadharma’s Revision of Brahmanical Varnasramadharma ..... 3 
1. The Literature and Religion of the Sivadharma................. esse 3 
2. The Sivadharmasastra’s Conception of Dharma and Its Antecedents... 5 
3. The Great Observance (Mahavrata) of Sivadharma............... eee 10 


4. The Sivadharma's Version of the ‘Laws on Class and Discipline’ 


(Varnasramadhatma) csi 17 
4.1 The Four Asramas in the Dharmasütras and in the Mahabharata..... 18 
4.2 The Four Asramas According to the Sivadharmasastra ..................... 20 
4.3 The Südra Sivasramin .......... iii 24 
4.4 Women in the Sivasrama............. iii 31 


5. Guest-Reception, Madhuparka, and Post-Sacrificial Feeding Directed 
toward Sivabhaktas................ ii 32 


6. Differing Approaches to Dharma in the Sivadharma 


amd. the: Vismudharma. i... ee a 39 
6.1 The Visnudharma's Asramadharma ............... i 39 
6.2 The Visnudharma on Guest Reception ............ eee 41 
6.3 The Visnudharma’s Diatribe Against Heretics (pasandas) ............ 42 

Ti 67 Ly1 ccc 44 

Edition: and Translat e 47 

Introduction to the Edition... uie iced certet reris 49 


1. Sources for the Root Text... .... aii eee tette teh etant sees 49 


Table of Contents 


2. The Transmission in Neal. 55 
2.1 The Transmission in N88... 56 
2.2. The Transmission in Nš, Compared with Other Sources ................ 56 
2.3 The Transmission in Other Nepalese Sounces.................................. 58 

3. The Transmission in Kashmr....................................................... 59 

4. The Transmission in the South ............ cesses 59 

5. Concluding Obseroeiions..... e 62 

6. Editorial Policus iiie E Eed 62 

7. On the Translation and Accompanying Notes.................................. 65 

8. Symbols and Abbreviations in the Apparatus ................................... 65 

EAE REELE UTI SEITE Li 67 

Translation of Chapter Eleven... 107 

The Commentary asserere eon pterea tote ertt iere ree ed 129 

Introduction to the Commentary ............ iii 131 

t Lhe Manus p E 131 

2. On the pratīkas of the Commentary EEN 132 

3. Editorial Policies for the Commentary ............ eese 133 

WT 133 

IEEE ESSE SE EA E: LR 135 

‘Translattoni of the. Conimentaty,.....ee nennen rt er virare nisi nani 147 

ADB qu ale 155 

A Parallel in Bhavisyapurana 1.171... 00 157 

BiDMORTAP IY? e ——————— dāsaloitas 173 

lloro u su ——Ó————Á——— Á— 185 


vi 


Foreword 


With this volume, we are pleased to be launching a new, fully open access, 
Indological monograph series at the University of Naples L'Orien- 
tale, Dipartimento Asia, Africa e Mediterraneo. This series was primarily 
conceived to publish the results of two research projects hosted at 
our university and financed by the European Research Council: the 
SHIVADHARMA project (Translocal Identities. The Sivadharma and the Making 
of Regional Religious Traditions in Premodern South Asia, GA no. 803624); 
and the DHARMA project (The Domestication of Hindu Asceticism and the 
Religious Making of South and South-East Asia, GA no. 809994). At the 
same time, and as this first volume perfectly exemplifies, we would like 
this series to present publications from our wider research network, 
thus being an instrument to disseminate knowledge, as well as to 
strengthen and create connections among scholars. 


On this occasion, I would like to personally thank all the scholars who 
decided to join the board of the series, along with the local staff who 
helped us typeset and revise this first volume. I also wish to express my 
gratitude to the three authors of A Saiva Utopia for their willingness to 
publish with us and for the patience required to be the first. I hope 
the final result meets their expectations, as well as those of the readers. 
More volumes are planned for the near future, and we look forward to 
seeing all of them printed, and many more. 


Panthānah santu nah sivah! 


Napoli, dicembre 2021 
Florinda De Simini 


Preface 


This book has multiple origins just as it has multiple authors, includ- 
ing the anonymous composers, teachers and scribes of the past. 

Tim Lubin first presented his views on the Sivadharma's revi- 
sion of varnasramadharma in 2010, in a talk given at the University of 
Texas, Austin. Independently, in the same year, Peter Bisschop gave a 
presentation on the Sivadharma at Hamburg University, at the Third 
International Workshop on Early Tantra. In 2016 our paths con- 
verged, when Bisschop was able to organise a workshop dedicated to 
the Sivadharma at Leiden University, to which Lubin was invited as 
well. Nirajan Kafle, meanwhile, had been appointed as a postdoctoral 
researcher at Leiden University to work on the Sivadharmasastra. On 
learning that Lubin had already prepared a working translation of the 
Sivasramadhyaya, of which Kafle had started preparing a critical edition, 
we decided to join forces. The present publication is the outcome. 

Farlierversions of all the various parts of the introduction were presen- 
ted by Lubin in talks given at the University of Texas, Austin (2010), 
Cambridge University (2012), and Leiden University (2016), as well 
as in several conference papers, most recently in panels organised for 
the American Oriental Society (2017), the Deutscher Orientalistentag 
held in Jena (2017), and the World Sanskrit Conference held in Van- 
couver (2018), benefitting from the comments of various colleagues, 
especially Donald Davis, Florinda De Simini, Dominic Goodall, Nina 
Mirnig, Patrick Olivelle, Marion Rastelli, and Yuko Yokochi. He grate- 
fully acknowledges the American Philosophical Society, the National 
Endowment for the Humanities, the U.S. Department of Education 
(through the Fulbright-Hays program), and the Lenfest Foundation 
for grants that supported the research and writing at various stages. 


Preface 


His final revisions were made as a collaborator on the DHARMA pro- 
ject, ERC no. 809994. 

The critical edition was prepared by Kafle as researcher in the 
Netherlands Organisation for Scientific Research (NWO) project 
360-63-110 (‘From Universe of Visnu to Universe of Siva’), headed 
by Bisschop. The draft edition was read and discussed in reading ses- 
sions with the latter at Leiden University. Along the way, Bisschop 
revised the translation and expanded the accompanying notes in ac- 
cordance with our growing understanding of the text. The edition 
and translation were shared with Lubin for feedback and further revi- 
sion. The Leiden readings were occasionally joined by others as well. 
We would like to thank in particular Elizabeth Cecil, Sanne Mersch, 
and Somdev Vasudeva in this regard. 

Kafle furthermore prepared an edition of the commentary on 
Sivadharmasastra 11, to which Lubin added a running translation. Pho- 
tographs of selected folios of this commentary, preserved in a unique 
manuscript in Trivandrum, were kindly shared by S.A.S. Sarma (Pondi- 
cherry). 

The appendix, which addresses the intriguing parallel and revi- 
sion in the Bhavisyaburāņa, was prepared by Bisschop, who has also 
been responsible for putting the various sections of the book togeth- 
er and streamlining the whole. 

We thank Florinda De Simini for accepting and overseeing the 
publication in the series Studies on the History of Saivism of the Uni- 
versità degli Studi di Napoli L'Orientale, and we acknowledge the 
support of her ERC starting grant project ‘Translocal Identities: The 
Sivadharma and the Making of Religious Traditions in Premodern 
South Asia’ (SHIVADHARMA; project no. 803624) for publishing and 
distributing the book. We are also very grateful to the two (initial- 
ly anonymous) reviewers, Judit Tórzsók (École Pratique des Hautes 
Etudes) and Yuko Yokochi (Kyoto University). Both have provided us 
with many valuable suggestions for improvement. 

Finally, why ‘Saiva Utopia’? As discussed in the introduction, in 
its eleventh chapter the Sivadharmasastra promotes a radical model 
of institutionalization of lay religion in society. Its vision is manifestly 
utopian, providing a blueprint of a society bound by nothing but Si- 
va-devotion and adherence to Siva’s laws, the Sivadharma. 


April, 2021, 


Peter Bisschop, Leiden 
Nirajan Kafle, Kathmandu 
Tim Lubin, Lexington, Virginia 


Introduction 


The Sivadharma's Revision of Brahmanical 


Varnasramadharma 


1. The Literature and Religion of the Sivadharma 


The Sivadharmasastra (‘Treatise on the Religion of Siva’) is the oldest ex- 
ample of a work addressing a lay audience oriented to the worship of 
Siva as supreme deity and venerating ascetics of the Pasupata order as 
his earthly embodiments. This anonymous Sanskrit work, composed in 
anustubhverse, presents itself as instruction in the religion of Siva, uttered 
by Nandikesvara, Siva's favorite acolyte, to Sanatkumara at his request. 
This religion involves worship of the deity in two central modes: in rites 
involving a linga (the phalloid symbol of Siva's manifest presence and 
power) or an anthropomorphic image; and through the veneration and 
ceremonial feeding of those deemed ‘devotees of Siva’ (sivabhakta) in 
whom Siva is also said to be present. The latter category includes ascetics 
but is more encompassing and was intended mainly as an ideal of lay pi- 
ety available to any or all who were attracted to the worship of Siva. Unlike 
the older Pasupata sources, which addressed the deity by his older names 
Rudra and Pasupati, the Sivadharmasastra, and the doctrine taught in it, 
favored the auspicious epithet ‘Siva’ (meaning, in fact, ‘auspicious’ or 
‘gentle’) as a euphemism for the deity known for his often austere and 
even frightful aspect. And the doctrine presents itself here for the first 
time as ‘dharma,’ that is, a religion of the disciplined householder who 
is equal in merit and spiritual attainment to the ascetic—a concept intro- 
duced in the Brahmanical Dharmašāstra literature. The Sivadharmasastra 
prescribes a number of virtues and practices conducive to Siva-devotion, 
some of them adapted from or modeled on those of Pasupata ascetics: 
using Siva’s sacred ash to ‘bathe’ and mark the body, the use of rudraksa 
rosaries, various ritual observances (vrata), and a ‘Great Observance’ 


A Saiva Utopia 


(mahāvrata) that is the cultivation of eight moral virtues. In this way, the 
life of a layperson can come to constitute a religious discipline compara- 
ble in sanctity and spiritual potential to that of the professional ascetic. 
In order to delineate this discipline, the author(s) appealed explicitly to 
the concept of ‘householder-discipline’ (grhastha-asrama) as it had earlier 
been formulated in the early Dharmašāstra. This is the particular focus of 
the eleventh chapter, the Sivasramadhyaya. 

Within the following century, this text was given a sequel, the 
Sivadharmottara (‘Supplement on the Religion of Siva’). In Nepal, 
where the oldest manuscripts survive, twenty old palm-leaf manu- 
scripts (ninth to fourteenth centuries) as well as younger paper man- 
uscripts transmit a corpus of eight texts,' including: 


Sivadharmasastra (‘Treatise on the Religion of Siva") 
Sivadharmottara (Supplement on the Religion of Siva’) 
Sivadharmasamgraha (‘Compendium on the Religion of Siva’) 
Umamahesvarasamvada (‘Dialogue Between Uma and Mahešvara') 
Uttarottaramahasamvada (‘Great Dialogue of Questions and Answers’) 
Sivopanisad (‘Mystery of Siva’) 

Vrsasarasamgraha (‘Compendium on the Essence of the Bull [of 
Dharma]’) 

8. Dharmaputrika (‘Daughter of Dharma’)? 


SE NOE 


All but the first two are found only in Nepalese manuscripts and re- 
flect elements of the Tantric theology and ritual which became the 
norm in Saivism in the last centuries of the first millennium. The 
first two texts, however, circulated widely in the Indian subcontinent, 
as attested by the survival of a large number of manuscripts from 
Nepal and Kashmir in the north, Bengal in the east, and across the 
peninsular south, totaling more than eighty containing the Sivadha- 
rmasastra. This, together with references to the text and its recitation 
in inscriptions even in Southeast Asia,* show that the work was very 
popular and important in the early development of Saivism. So it is 
surprising that it is only in recent years? that this important work has 


! See De Simini 2016b on the Sivadharma corpus. 
2 N}, a Nepalese palm-leaf manuscript of the eleventh century, has a text 
called Lalitavistara, * Uma and Siva's] Playful Talks in Detail’ (not the Buddhist 
work of that name) as eighth in the corpus; see De Simini and Mirnig 2017. 

5 De Simini 2016a, 64. 

t For an overview of inscriptions, see Sanderson 2013 and Bisschop 2018b, 18-19. 

5 The most important earlier discussions of the Sivadharmasastra and Sivadha- 
rmottara are Hazra 1953 and 1956, and Bonazzoli 1993. A non-critical edition of 
the Sivopanisad based apparently on a single Devanagari manuscript held in the 
Adyar Library was published in Kunhan Raja 1933, 324-378, and a nonccritical 


The Sivadharma’s Revision of Brahmanical Varnasramadharma 


attracted sustained attention and that critical editions of its chapters 
(and of other texts in the corpus) have begun to be prepared.° 


2. The Sivadharmasastra's Conception of Dharma and Its Antecedents 


It has been shown that the Sivadharmasastra was likely composed in 
north India toward the end of the sixth or early seventh century CE, re- 
flecting three aspects of religious life at the time.’ First, during the pre- 
ceding centuries, Brahmanical dharma ideals expounded in the early 
Dharmasastras came to be regularly invoked in wider literature and in 
inscriptions, with Brahmins and Brahmanical institutions winning a 
larger and larger share of public patronage. Second, from around the 
beginning of the Common Era, bhakti devotion to a single personal 
god had been presented as a model of religious life ‘in the world,’ 
in contrast with the world-renunciation advocated by the ascetic and 
monastic orders. Third, material evidence shows that lay Siva worship 
had already been widely practiced since early in the Common Era by at 
least the second century cE, and Saiva asceticism of the sort that would 
later be classed as the Atimarga (the ‘Outer Way’) had emerged; from 
the fourth century at least, ‘members of some Saiva ascetic groups that 
were originally at the margins of society had started to increasingly ap- 
pear in public and institutionalised religious life as temple priests and 
recipients of religious donations in epigraphical records.’ 

The Sivadharmasastra reflects probably the earliest systematic effort 
to canonise a form of Saiva religion for laypeople as opposed to ascet- 
ics, and it does so pointedly in response to Dharmasastra. This is evi- 
dent from the very decision to characterise the precepts as dharmas, 
and the doctrine as a whole as dharma (in the singular), and the work 
itself as a Sivadharmasastra. By contrast, neither the Pasupatasütra nor 
Kaundinya’s commentary, which prescribe the modes of discipline for 
ascetics, uses the term dharma in this way.’ An examination of the Siva- 


edition of the Sivadharmasastra based on a single manuscript in the Adyar Library 
was published in Jugnu & Sharma 2014. A printed version of the full Sivadharma 
corpus appeared in Naraharinath 1998. 

6 Bisschop 2018b, a critical edition and translation of the sixth chapter of the 
Sivadharmasastra (the Santyadhyaya) and De Simini 2013, a critical edition and 
translation of the second chapter of the Sivadharmottara, are the first fruits of this 
new text-critical work. 

7 For the most recent discussion of this dating, see Bisschop 2018b, 10—27, 
and Mirnig 2019, 471-472. 

* Mirnig 2019, 473, citing Sanderson 2013, 225. 

? The Pasupatasütra employs forms of the term in two other senses: 'characteris- 
tic, property’ (in the suffixed form dharmitva, ' [having] characteristics’ [1.26] and 


A Saiva Utopia 


dharmasastra, and especially of its eleventh chapter, shows how its author 
or authors framed 'Sivadharma' in contrast to corresponding aspects of 
Smārta Brahmanical dharma—.e., that described in the Smrtis (the 
Dharmasutras and versified Dharma$astras) —adapting and redefining 
key aspects of the earlier formulation of Dharmasastra itself. 

Since the early history of that tradition is at present coming into sharp- 
er focus," it will be worthwhile to recapitulate that formulation before 
returning to the Sivadharma. Dharmašāstra, ‘teaching on what is right’ 
as expounded in Sanskrit treatises (sūtras and sastras) and commentar- 
ies of the Smarta tradition, established rules defining Brahminhood as a 
religious and social status, along with rules for other groups defined in 
relation to Brahmins and Brahmanical norms, all under the rubric of an 
overarching ideal of dharma. The oldest and probably original work in 
this new genre, the Apastambadharmasütra, seems to have been composed 
to present a Veda-based discipline that could compete with alternate 
forms of dharma taught by the sramana movements, Buddhist, Jaina, and 
Ajivika, by articulating a distinctively Brahmanical conception of dharma. 
In fact, Asoka’s edicts (presumably taking their cue from contemporary 
Buddhist or broader sramana discourse) may represent our oldest surviv- 
ing examples of the word dharma used to denote a comprehensive reli- 
gio-ethical doctrine and a corresponding code of conduct—a usage that 
seems unprecedented in the older texts of the Veda." 

Dharmasastra claimed a general applicability, at least within the 
ideally conceived ‘territory of the Aryas’ (aryavarta). Although com- 
posed by Brahmins to record Brahmanical norms, Dharmasastra works 
prescribed rules applicable to other strata of society as well, including 
Sudras and other groups, whose social and religious roles were cir- 
cumscribed in various ways. This was a period of great innovation in 
Brahmanical religiosity as well, including the first tentative steps toward 
accommodating ascetical professions under a Vedic umbrella that oth- 
erwise favored a home-based religious order. The older social model of 
four classes (varnas) with complementary functions, defined by birth, 


in the compounds godharma and mrgadharma [5.18]), and ‘virtue’ (in dharmatman 
[5.31]). Kaundinya employs the term dharma in the same two senses. In the latter 
sense, it figures as a universal moral standard or ideal, including in the form ofa 'set 
of four' goals, a concept otherwise attested in late additions to the Mahabharata and 
in Manavadharmasastra. Neither use it to denote either the system as a whole, or the 
particular precepts that compose it, which are typical of the Dharmasastra usage, or 
in the plural usage, of the Vedic ritual codes that were precursors of Dharmasastra. 

? Olivelle 2019a; Lubin 2019. 

" Brereton 2004 (partly contra Horsch 2004 [1967]) and Olivelle 2004 docu- 
ment this and review earlier scholarship on this question. 


The Sivadharma’s Revision of Brahmanical Varnasramadharma 


was paired with a classification of four religious disciplines, which includ- 
ed three that rejected worldly, home-based piety. The term asrama (‘dis- 
cipline’), originally associated with ascetical endeavors denoting a place” 
set aside for ascetical practice (srama), is adopted in the Dharmasütras as 
a rubric for a range of possible religious vocations, one of which could 
be undertaken at the end of one's Vedic studies. At first, the Dharma- 
sutras clearly assumed that this was a matter of choosing once and for 
all; the authorities differed only on which vocations were approved or 
favored. The Manavadharmasastra made the further innovation of struc- 
turing the theoretically ideal religious career as a sequence of asramas. 
In this new sequential model, the older dsrama of permanent (naisthika) 
brahmacarya was elided and replaced by the period of brahmacarya ob- 
served in youth (yauvana) as the first drama in the sequence, though the 
latter had not earlier been counted as one of the asramas. 

To this picture we can now add another crucial clue first noticed by 
Stephanie Jamison and elaborated by Patrick Olivelle: Asoka’s juxtapo- 
sition of grhastha and pravrajita as subclassifications of pasanda (“sect 
in a neutral sense: group of religious professionals) around 255 BCE in 
Rock Edicts twelve and thirteen, and fourteen years later in Pillar Edict 
seven.? This suggests that he regarded groups adhering to a distinctive 
dharma as potentially being subdivided into practitioners *who stay at 
home' and those *who have gone forth' into a homeless life. If the Dhar- 
masutras’ gradual incorporation of ascetic asramas as legitimate alterna- 
tives to traditional Vedic piety took place in the context of the rise of the 
sramana movements and the patronage they received from Asoka and 
later rulers, the representation of the Vaidika home-based religious life 
as a ‘grhastha āšrama had the aim of elevating that religious practice as 
equal if not indeed superior to the more austere discipline of ascetics. 

Other innovations of this period’ contributed to this project: ini- 
tiation (upanayana) and Veda study were for the first time stipulated 
as a formal requirement of the three upper varnas and could thus 
serve as a criterion for Arya social status, as well as a prerequisite for 
choice of asrama (or, in Manu’s model, for progressing to the next 
āsrama). This shift is reflected in the appearance of the term dvija 
or dvijati as a social label applicable in theory to members of those 


? Classically, this implies a sort of household, more or less remote from soci- 
ety, but potentially including a husband and wife, where a combination of fire-of- 
ferings and austerities are performed (Olivelle 1993, 19-24). 

5 See the discussion in Jamison 2019 and Olivelle 2019a. 

^ [ntroduced in the Grhyasütras (codes of Vedic domestic ritual) and syn- 
thesised in the Dharmasütras; see Lubin 2005 for more details on this process. 


A Saiva Utopia 


classes (although in practice it seems to have meant only Brahmins).5 
Beyond brahmacarya and the complex requirements of daily ritual, 
an ever-expanding repertoire of disciplinary regimens (vratas) , both 
expiatory and supererogatory, served to constitute householder piety 
within the Brahmin enclave as a religious profession worthy of royal 
patronage on a par with monastics. The last few centuries BCE also ap- 
pear to be the period when the feeding of Brahmins became routin- 
ised as a merit-making duty for householders, again, setting ritually 
observant Brahmins, including grhasthas, on a par with mendicants.'* 

In many ways, the formulation of Sivadharma parallels that of Dhar- 
mašāstra's grhasthadharma. In the Sivadharmasastra, Nandikesvara ‘who 
knows all dharma(s)’ (sarvadharmajna) expounds a teaching (sasana) 
establishing a ‘supreme dharma’ (param dharmam) that integrates as- 
pects of Pasupata asceticism into a householder ideal adapted from 
an early form of varnasramadharma. This Sivadharma is dharma pri- 
marily in the sense of ācāra, virtuous conduct as a model for gener- 
al practice: an ‘unexcelled worldly dharma for the sake of the four 
varnas’ (caturvarnahitarthaya lokadharmam anuttamam, 1.8ab, in sever- 
al early Nepalese manuscripts). The juridical and political aspects of 
classical dharmasastra—vyavahara (legal procedure) and dandaniti (gov- 
ernance)—are not addressed at all. 

‘Devotion to Siva’ (sivabhakti), the central ideal around which this 
dharma is oriented, incorporates many elements of the doctrine and 
discipline of Pasupata asceticism. Rudra, the most common name for 
the deity in the Pasupata system, is here most often referred to by the 
auspicious epithet Siva, ‘the kindly one’ which is also applied adjectiv- 
ally with double meaning to many things and states deemed ‘holy’ or 
‘blessed’; the titles Mahadeva (‘great god’) and Bhagavat (‘bestower of 
blessings’) are also used. The less commonly occurring titles Pasupa- 
ti (6.177, 10.24), its synonym Pasubhartr (5.212), Lakulisvara (12.119, 
alluding to the legendary incarnation and founder of the Pasupatas), 
and Pasupasarnavatita (‘he who is beyond the sea of bonds that bind 
the soul,’ 3.85) explicitly signal the connection with Pasupata doctrines. 
Chapter eleven includes a long section praising the practice of bathing 
in ashes, a hallmark of Pasupata practice." Two stanzas in chapter ten 
allude to duhkhanta and yoga, the dual goals of Pasupata discipline. For 
example, in explaining the reward for an act of piety, the compound 


5 On earliest usage of the term dvija, see Lubin 2005, 86-89, especially fn 23 
and 24; Olivelle 2012. 

^ Lubin 2016*. 

7 Bisschop 2018, 20. 


The Sivadharma’s Revision of Brahmanical Varnasramadharma 


jnanayoga occurs (10.45). Lest we mistake it for the first type of yoga 
defined by Krsna in the Bhagavadgita, our text explains it in the very 
next stanza (10.46), invoking the categories of Pasupata theology: 


trisaptakulajaih sardham bhogan bhuktva yathepsitan | 

jūānayogam samasadya sa tatraiva vimucyate || 10.45 || 

yogad duhkhantam apnoti jūānād yogah pravartate | 

sivadharmad bhavej jūānam sivadharmah sivarcanat || 10.46 || 

ity esa vah samākhyātah samsārārņavavartinām | 

sivamoksakramopayah sivasramanisevinam || 10.47 || 

10.45 Having enjoyed enjoyable things as he pleases [in Siva's paradise] 
with twenty-one [generations of] kin, he attains the union [that comes 
from] knowledge (jūānayoga), and gets liberated then and there. 
10.46 From union (yoga) one attains the end of suffering (duhkhanta); yoga 
proceeds from knowledge (jūānāi); knowledge arises from [observing] 
Sivadharma; and Sivadharma [comes] from praising Siva (stvarcanat) . 
10.47 Thus has been declared to you who are roiling in the sea of 
samsāra a progressive means of attaining Siva's liberation for those who 
practice Siva's discipline (stvasrama). 


The progression (krama) mentioned in 10.47 is not the sequence of 
Dharmašāstric asramas, for in the Sivadharma version of the system 
they are evidently not considered to be sequential. Rather, it refers to 
a salvific progression suggested in verse 10.46: sivarcana > sivadharma > 
jnana > yoga > duhkhanta. 

The first step is ritual veneration of Siva, presumably through linga- 
worship, which is the central topic of the work; sivadharma is a compre- 
hensive mode of life premised on that veneration. Such a mode of life 
yields insight, which in turn makes possible yoga, i.e., union with Siva. The 
definition of yoga offered in Kaundinya's Panicarthabhasya on the Pasupa- 
lasütra applies here as well: atratmesvarasamyogo yogah (Here, yoga is the 
conjunction of the soul and the Lord, ad 1.1.43; cf. rudrasayujyam: saksad 
rudrena saha samyogah sayujyam, ad 5.32.3). Duhkhanta, the transcendence 
of suffering, is unmistakably the end goal of the Pasupata path. 


5 Compare the later expansion of this idea in the Sivopanisad, in reference 
to the reward for making fire-offerings to Siva: evam ajyahutim hutva sivalokam 
avapnuyat | tatra kalpasatam bhogan bhunkte divyan yathepsitan || ... asesakulajair 
sardham sa bhrtyaih parivāritah | ābhūtasamplavam yavad bhogān bhunkte yathepsitan 
Il tatas ca pralaye prapte samprapya jūānam uttamam | prasādād isvarasyaiva mucyate 
bhavasagarat || (SiUp 4.50, 53-54). Likewise, a gift of a mountain of grain to Siva or 
to one's guru yields the following reward: kalpakotisatam sagram bhogan bhunkte sive 
pure | samastakulajaih sardham tasyante sa mahipatih || SiUp 6.69 || (similarly, 6.67). 


A Saiva Utopia 


Another passage, in the long description of the umamahesvaravrata 
(a vow prescribed for women to win a lordly husband), concludes with 
a similar progression whereby a woman, after enjoying the rewards 
of her piety for many lifetimes, will eventually conceive a disgust for 
worldly aims and attain the same liberating knowledge: 


euam sa sarvalokesu bhogan bhuktva yathepsitan | 

kramād agatya loke min rajanam patim apnuyat || 10.109 || 

yuvānam rūbasampannam asesaprihivipatim | 
dharmārthakāmamoksajūam ittham asadya modate || 10.110 || 

tato dharmavasesena bhavatisvarabhavita | 

svakarmavasanayogat punah prarabhate subham || 10.111 || 

subhac ca punar apy evam yonim yati sahasrasah | 

yavan napnoti nirvanam tavad bhramati karmana || 10.112 || 

tannirvedac ca vairagyam vairagyaj jūānasambhavah | 

jnanat pravartate yogo yogad duhkhantam apnuyat || 10.113 || 

10.109 Thus, having enjoyed whatever enjoyments she wished in all worlds, 
she will return accordingly to this world and obtain a king as her husband. 
10.110 She will rejoice when in this way she has obtained a young, hand- 
some lord of the whole earth who knows virtue, material gain, sensual 
gratification, and liberation. 

10.111 Then, with the rest of her dharma, she becomes devoted to the Lord; 
by reason of the traces of her past karman, she will undertake what is good. 
10.112 And due to that good work, she will again enter the womb a 
thousand times. So long as she does not obtain nirvana, she will wan- 
der by [the force of] karman. 

10.113 From disgust for [all] that comes dispassion, from dispassion 
knowledge arises, from knowledge proceeds union, from union she 
attains the end of suffering. 


Hence, in this version: tannirveda (disgust for samsara) > vairāgya > 
jnana > yoga > duhkhanta. We may have here two alternate routes to 
sivajūāna: in the first, it is cultivated through ritual observances di- 
rected toward Siva; in the second it arises as a consequence of an 
inward disaffection for worldly rewards.'? 


3. The Great Observance (Mahavrata) of Sivadharma 


The latter half of the eleventh chapter (11.46-118) defines the gener- 
al principles of Sivadharma, the features common to all the šivāsra- 


? Note that both routes involve five items, which may point to a connection to 
the term Pancartha. See Bisschop 2014 for an early conception of Pancartha that is 
different from the one advocated by Kaundinya and involving a five-fold path as well. 


10 


The Sivadharma’s Revision of Brahmanical Varnasramadharma 


mas, as a ‘great observance’ (mahavrata) —one that differs from the 
mahavrata of the Lakulisa Pasupata system.” This mahāvrata consists 
of adhering to eight principles: 1. bhakti, 2. ksānti, 3. ahimsa, 4. sama, 
5. samtosa, 6. satya, 7. asteya, 8. brahmacarya: 


mahavratastakam dharyam īsenoktam sivarthibhih | 

sarvavratanam paramam asmin dharmah samapyate || 11.46 || 

sive bhaktih sada ksantir ahimsā sarvada samaļ | 

samtosah satyam asteyam brahmacaryam tathastamam || 11.47 || 

11.46 The great eightfold observance, spoken by the Lord, the best of 
all observances, should be practised by those aiming for Siva. The law 
is accomplished in it. 

11.47 Devotion to Siva, constant forbearance, non-harm, calmness at all 
times, contentedness, truthfulness, not stealing, and chastity as the eighth. 


Devotion (bhakti) heads the list as the hallmark of householder piety. 
Here this eightfold observance is declared to be the fulfilment of 
sivadharma; earlier, in the first chapter, it is said to constitute the very 
definition of sivabhakti: 


narudrah samsmared rudram narudro rudram arcayet | 

nārudraļ kīrtayed rudram narudro rudram apnuyat || 1.24 || 
sivadharmasya saro yam sive bhakti suniscala | 

sā castangi sivenokta karya nityam prayatnatah || 1.25 || 

1.24 One who is not Rudra cannot call Rudra to mind; one who is not 
Rudra cannot worship Rudra; one who is not Rudra cannot praise 
Rudra; one who is not Rudra cannot attain Rudra. 

1.25 This is the essence of stvadharma: unwavering devotion to Siva. 
And this eight-limbed [bhakti], taught by Siva, should be performed 
constantly with all one's might. 


The first of these stanzas is the earliest version of what becomes a 
common maxim of Saiva religion: that one must become Siva to wor- 
ship Siva (sivo bhūtvā sivam yajet).” 

Similar lists of observances are propounded in other Indian tradi- 
tions. The third and the last four items in the list in 11.47 correspond 
to the Jaina mahavrata and the yamas of Patanjali's Yogasütra (2.30, 32) 


2° See TAK IV, s.v. mahavrata. Cf. also De Simini 2016, 53ff. 

2! See Bisschop 2018, 8 and Mirnig 2019. Utpaladeva explains that maxim as a 
reference to becoming a sivabhakta: sivo bhūtva yajeteti bhakto bhūtveti kathyate (Si- 
vastotrāvalī 1.14). Furthermore, Judit Tórzsók points out that 1.25b reappears in 
the form rudre bhaktih suniscala as first sign (pratyaya) of possession by Rudrasakti 
(rudrasaktisamavesa) in the Mālinīvijayottara (2.14b) and the Siddhayogesvarimata 
(2.6b), indicating another point of continuity between lay and Tantric Saivism. 


11 


A Saiva Utopia 


if we understand samtosa as expressing a householder's milder version 
of aparigraha (‘being free of possessions’). The other four are also part 
of the Buddhist ‘five precepts.’ Patanjali’s further set of five nzyamas in- 
cludes samtosa, along with tapas (‘ascetic practice’) and isvarapranidhana 
(‘contemplation on the lord’), which might be paralleled by bhakti in the 
Sivadharma’s list. Ksanti (‘forbearance’), though not figuring in these 
other lists, is in any case a highly regarded Buddhist virtue or perfection. 

Just as with the progression to duhkhānta, the discussion of the 
umamahesvaravrata proposes its own list of general features of the 
vrata (SiDhS 10.137-138), where rather than describing them as con- 
stituting ‘the best of all observances’ (sarvavratanam paramam) they 
are said to make up ‘the ten-part rule common to all observances’: 


ksama satyam daya danam saucam indriyanigrahah | 

sivapūjāgnihavanam samtoso ’steyabhavana || 10.137 || 

sarvavraleso ayam dharmah samanyo dasadha sthitah | 

visesam api vaksyami pratimasam vratam prati || 10.138 || 

10.137 Forbearance, truthfulness, compassion, generosity, purity, re- 
straint of the senses, Siva- -worship, offering in [Siva's] fire, content- 
ment, and not [even] thinking of stealing: 

10.138 This is the ten-part rule common to all observances (vrata). 
[Next] I will explain also the special [rule; sc. dharmam] relating to 
the observance of each month. 


The two lists overlap to a great extent, although the order and word- 
ing differ, reflecting the different aims of the presumed practitioners 
(and perhaps metrical limitations). 

Worship of Siva is itself also praised as the best form of dharma: "Here 
in the three worlds, there is no dharma to match Siva-worship.'? In Smarta 
contexts, too, despite the emphasis placed on diverse norms for different 
statuses, one can find claims for dharmas that apply to all in common, 
regardless of status. For example, Mānavadharmašāstra 10.63 proclaims: 


ahimsa satyam akrodhah saucam indriyanigrahah | 
etam sāmāsikam dharmam caturvarnye 'bravīn manuh || 10.63 || 


10.63 Abstention from injuring, truthfulness, refraining from anger, 
purification, and mastering the organs—this, Manu has declared, is 
the gist of the Law for the four classes.” 


A tenfold version was proposed at the end of Manu’s sixth chapter 
(MDh 6.91-93), immediately after completing the rules for the fourth 


22 SiDhS 5.209cd: na sivarcanatulyo sti dharmo ‘tra bhuvanatraye. 
23 All translations from the Manavadharmasastra are from Olivelle 2005. 


12 


The Sivadharma’s Revision of Brahmanical Varnasramadharma 


and final asrama, that of the yat, the wandering ascetic. The message 
here is not that this is a universal ethic (in the sense of being applicable 
to all four classes, as in Manavadharmasastra 10.63)—in fact, verse 93 
speaks only of Brahmins (vipra) observing it^^—but the ten ideals do 
apply to all four disciplines (asramas): 


caturbhir api caivaitair nityam asramibhir dvijaih | 
dasalaksanako dharmah sevitavyah prayatnatah || 6.91 || 
dhrtih ksama damo ’steyam saucam indriyanigrahah | 

dhir vidya satyam akrodho dašakam dharmalaksaņam || 6.92 || 


dasa laksaņāni dharmasya ye viprah samadhiyate | 
adhitya canuvartante te yanti paramam gatim || 6.93 || 


6.91 Twice-born men belonging to all these four orders must always 
observe the ten-point Law diligently. 


6.92 Resolve, forbearance, self-control, refraining from theft, per- 
forming purifications, mastering the organs, understanding, learn- 
ing, truthfulness, and suppressing anger: these are the ten points of 
the Law. 


6.93 Those Brahmins who learn the ten points of the Law and, after 
learning, follow them, attain the highest state.?5 


And a very similar verse in the Yaj&avalkyadharmasastra (1.121) lists 
nine items: the five from MDh 10.63 plus dama, ksama, arjava, and 


24 The term dvija in MDh 6.91 probably likewise was understood to imply 
Brahmins. 

25 Appended to these stanzas are three more (MDh 6.94-96, also the ‘tran- 
sition verse’ 6.86) introducing another of Manu’s innovations: a fifth status of 
samnyāsa (‘retirement,’ in Olivelle's translation), which is something distinct 
from any of the asramas and not yet understood as an alternate name for the 
discipline of a yati (Olivelle 2005, 243, 292). The concept of samnyāsa there is 
akin to the concept put forward in the Bhagavadgītā (5.1-6; 6.1-3); in both works, 
a ‘casting off’ of ritual performance of fire offerings is meant (samnyasa sarva- 
karmāņi, MDh 6.95—96; sarvani karmani samnyasya, BhG 3.3, 6.27, samnyasam 
karmaņām, 5.2, etc.), although the Gta extends karmāņi to include all kinds of 
worldly actions, considered metaphorically as offerings. That this was Manu's 
adaptation of the Bhagavadgītās concept is reflected in its association with 
karmayoga (the yoga theme being the central metaphor of that work) in MDh 
6.86, which introduces the concept of the householder who has retired from rit- 
ual practice without becoming a forest hermit or homeless ascetic. Though both 
works validate a form of householder asceticism, they differ in that the Gita dis- 
tinguishes karmayoga (i.e., mentally renouncing the fruits of action) as a superior 
refinement of karmasamnyasa (BhG 2.2), i.e., the mere rejection of performing 
the rites or actions themselves, whereas for Manu the cessation of ritual perfor- 
mance (after fulfilling one's spiritual debts) is itself karmayoga. 


13 


A Saiva Utopia 


dana, affirming that these constitute ‘the means for all to attain dha- 
rma (sarvesam dharmasadhanam) .?° 

Hence, Dharmasastra had already introduced the idea that there 
is a higher dharma comprising a set (larger or smaller) of general 
precepts (sāmānya or sadharana dharmas) applicable to all, distinct 
from the particular rules (visesa dharmas) specific to each class or 
discipline. These lists have many parallels, and the Sivadharmasastra 
propounds its own version of them as well, though the only distinc- 
tively Saiva element in its two lists is devotion to Siva. 

There is also a parallel in the Pasupata ascetic tradition of which 
the Sivadharma may be said to provide the householder version. 
Kaundinya in his comments on Pāsupatasūtra 1.9 quotes two stanzas 
containing a list of ten divided into two sets of five yamas and niyamas 
(as in the Yogasütra) "77 


ahimsa brahmacaryam ca satyasamvyavaharakau | 
asteyam iti paficaite yama vai samprakzrtitah || 
akrodho gurususrüsa saucam āhāralāghavam | 
apramadas ca paūcaite niyamah samprakirtitah || 


Not causing injury, chastity, truthfulness, not engaging in business, 
and refraining from theft—these are praised as the five yamas. 


Refraining from anger, obeying one's teacher, purification, eating 
lightly, and vigilance—these are praised as the five niyamas. 


Kaundinya goes on to explain each one, rejecting the binary distinc- 
tion, since he views all ten observances as mandatory to practice un- 
til death, whereas in the Pasupata system the term niyama designates 
special fixed-term (kalantarita) practices, like the special vratas.?* 


26 Not causing harm, etc., constitute universal dharma. The universal dharma “one 
should not seek to harm any creature" applies even to the Candala’ (sadharamadharmo 
himsadih; na himsyat sarva blvūtāni ity acandalam sādhāraņo dharmah, ad Yājūavalkya- 
dharmasastra 1.1). 

27 Pasupatabhasya ad Pasupatasütra 1.9, p. 16. 

28 Virtually the same stanzas appear in Sankhyavrtti 23, p. 36, and in the Vra- 
tisasana and the Vrhaspatitattva from ancient Java (cf. Nihom 1995): ahimsā bra- 
hmacaryah ca satyam avyavaharikam | astainyam iti paūcaite yamā rudrena bhasitah || 
akrodho gurususrusa Saucam aharalaghavam | apramadas ca paricaite niyamah parikī- 
rtitah || Vratisasana 29, 31 = Vrhaspatitattva 60-61). The Javanese commentators of 
both texts call the full set the dasasila, ‘ten forms of virtuous conduct’ and both 
gloss susrūsā as bhakti. In these verses, avyavahārika stands parallel to aparigraha 
in the Yogasūtras yamas. The Javanese paraphrases offer renderings of the term 
avyavaharika based on the range of meanings of Sanskrit vyavahara. Vrhaspatitattva: 
‘avyavaharika means not engaging in (legal) disputes, (or) not selling and buying, 
(or) not making judgments of right and wrong’ (avyavahārika naranya tan avivada, 


14 


The Sivadharma’s Revision of Brahmanical Varnasramadharma 


Table 1 illustrates the parallels between the various items in the 
lists of ethical ideals in the texts discussed above.?? 


Table 1: Parallels between lists of ethical ideals 
SiDh$ SiDh$ MDh 10.63 |MDh 6.91-93 | YoS 2.30, 32 PBh ad PS 1.9 
11.46-47 10.137-138 
sive bhakti sivapūjā — — isvarapranidhana (n) | gurususrüsa 
sada ksanti ksama [var.: akrodha] | ksama, akrodha | — akrodha 
ahimsa daya ahimsa — ahimsā (y) ahimsā 
sarvada sama | — — dama tapas (n) apramāda 
samtosa samtosa — — samtosa (n) aharalaghava 
satya satya satya satya satya (y) satya 
asteya asteyabhāvanā | [var.: asteya] asteya asteya (y) asteya 
brahmacarya indriyanigraha | indriyanigraha | indriyanigraha | brahmacarya (y) brahmacarya 
dāna — — aparigraha (y) asamvyvavahāra 
sauca sauca Sauca Sauca (n) Sauca 
agnihavana — = = = 
vidya svadhyaya (n) 
dhi 
dhrti 


Further on in the Sivasramadhyaya, ahimsa is singled out as ‘the su- 
preme dharma for those capable of it’: 


ahimsaikā paro dharmah saktanam parikirtitam | 
asaktanam ayam dharmo danayajnadipurvakah || 11.92 || 


natah param prapasyamah kvacid apy agame vayam | 
yasmad abhayadanena danam adbhutam uttamam || 11.93 || 


11.92 Non-harm alone is taught as the supreme law for those who are 
capable of it; for those who are incapable this law gives priority to 
giving, sacrifices, and so on. 


11.93 We can see nothing higher than this, in the entire tradition, 
since the gift of safety is the highest, wonderful gift. 


tan adolavalya, tan pagunadosa; the Vratisasana omits the first gloss). These interpre- 
tations are quite in keeping with Kaundinya’s explanation of asamvyavahara: ‘Busi- 
ness is of two kinds: the business of buying and selling, and the business of court. 
Now one who engages in either of these cannot avoid injuring either himself or 
others’ (samvyavaharas ca punar dvividhah | tad yatha krayavikrayasamuyavaharo 
rajakulasamuyavaharas ceti | ata ekatarenapy atradhikrtasyatmapida parapida cavarjaniye 
bhavatah | (PBh ad PS 1.9, p. 22; translation Hara 1966, 199). Compare also the pa- 
rallels in Vayupurana 16.17-19, Lingapurana 1.89.24-25, and Visnudharma 100.2-3. 

29 The row of Manavadharmasastra 10.63 gives two alternative versions indi- 
cated by ‘[var.].’ Olivelle's edition accepts ahimsā satyam akrodhah, but a very lar- 
ge number of manuscripts read ahimsa satyam asteyam. The latter is also what 
Yajnavalkyadharmasastra 1.121ab has. In the row of Yogasütra 2.30, 32, ‘y refers to 
yama and ‘n’ to niyama. 


15 


A Saiva Utopia 


Ahimsa (the commitment not to cause harm), when fully realised, is 
the defining virtue of the stvayogin; other sivasramins who cannot give 
the ‘gift of safety’ (abhayadana) compensate by making other acts of 
piety. This is just another way in which the Sivadharmasastra strives to 
fashion a dilute form of Pasupata asceticism that is within reach of 
laypeople—laypeople who are subject to other rules and observances 
(‘giving, sacrifices, and the like’) that substitute for the gift of safety, 
and compensate for the harm unavoidable in worldly domestic life. 
Non-harm remains the ultimate ideal, but other more accessible vir- 
tues take priority for those observing Siva's dharma at home. 

The close association of dharma and bhakti in the Sivadharmasa- 
stra may in part have been influenced by that of the Bhagavadgita. In 
the Gūā, most mentions of dharma refer to status-specific dharmas: 
those of caste and family (BhG 1.40—44, 4.1-13), or one's own dharma 
in contrast with that of another (BhG 2.30—33, 3.35, 18.47, 18.66).3° 
But where bhakti is presented as a substitute for the discipline of the 
yogin, thanks to Krsna's signature precept of renouncing the fruits 
of action, the dharma is one involving ascetic virtues like those of the 
Sivadharma mahavrata (e.g., BhG 12.13-20) ?' which are said to arise 
merely from the ‘yoga of devotion’ (bhaktiyoga, BhG 14.26). And just 
as in the Sivadharmasastra, this dharma is explicitly made available to 
women and Südras, at least in one passage: 


api cet suduracaro bhajate mam ananyabhak | 
sadhur eva sa mantavyah samyag vyavasito hi sah || 9.30 || 


ksipram bhavati dharmatma sasvacchantim nigacchati | 

kaunteya pratijanthi na me bhaktah pranasyati || 9.31 || 

mam hi partha vyapasritya ye "pi syuh papayonayah | 

striyo vašyās tatha sūdrās te “pi yanti param gatim || 9.32 || 

9.30 If a man of even very bad conduct is devoted to me and to no 
other, he should be deemed good, for he has made the right resolve. 


3° The hemistich BhG 3.35ab = 18.47ab closely parallels MDh 10.97ab. 

3! advesta sarvablvūtānām maitrah karuna eva ca | nirmamo nirahamkarah sama- 
duhkhasukhah ksamī || samtustah satatam yogī yatātmā drdhaniscayah | mayy arpitama- 
nobuddhir yo madbhaktah sa me priyah || yasman nodvijate loko lokan nodvijate ca yah | 
harsāmarsabhayodvegair mukto yah sa ca me priyah || anapeksah sucir daksa udāsīno ga- 
tavyathah | sarvarambhaparityagt yo madbhaktah sa me priyah || yo na hrsyati na dvesti 
na socati na kānksati | subhasubhaparityagi bhaktiman yah sa me priyah || samah satrau 
ca mitre ca tatha manavamanayoh | sttosnasukhaduhkhesu samah sangavivarjitah || 
tulyanindastutir mauni samtusto yena kenacit | aniketah sthiramatir bhaktiman me priyo 
narah || ye tu dharmyamrtam idam yathoktam paryupasate | sraddadhana matparama 
bhaktas te 'tīva me priyah || (BhG 12.13-20). 

3? BhG 9.30-32 = MBh 6.31.30-32. 


16 


The Sivadharma’s Revision of Brahmanical Varnasramadharma 


9.31 He quickly becomes dharma-minded (dharmātman), and attains 
perpetual peace. Know, O son of Kunti, that one who is devoted to 
me does not perish. 

9.32 For when they rely on me, O Partha, even those of evil birth, 
women, Vai$yas, and Sudras reach the Ultimate Goal. 


Hence, both the Bhagavadgità and the Sivadharmasastra employ the 
concept of bhakti to provide non-renunciates access to what is other- 
wise the otherworldly dharma of the yogin. 


4. The Sivadharma’s Version of the ‘Laws on Class and Discipline’ (Varnasra- 
madharma) 


It is precisely the desire to define a discipline of Siva-devotion that 
can be practiced at home that led the author(s) to attempt a sys- 
tematic superimposition of Saiva principles over the Dharmasastra 
framework of varna and asrama, to generate a new template for 
Māhešvaras. It has been observed that other, later Saiva works aimed 
at lay devotees tend to affirm the socio-ritual precepts of Smarta 
Brahmanism in some form: 


So he should not transgress (na laūghayet) the practices of his caste- 
class and discipline (varnasramacaran) even in thought (manasapi). 
He should remain (tisthet) in the discipline (asrame) in which he was 
when he was initiated into the Saiva religion (diksitah sivasasane) and 
[at the same time] maintain the ordinances of Siva (stvadharmam ca 
palayet) 2 


By contrast, the Sivadharmasastra invokes the central categories of the 
Dharmasastra social model—the social classes (varna) and disciplines 
(asrama)—only to superimpose over them a set of Siva-oriented prin- 
ciples and observances that neutralise the distinctions between them, 
dissolving them in an overarching sivasrama open to all, allowing re- 
ligious agency to Südras and other groups normally classified outside 
the pale of the ‘twice- born’ society, as well as to women. 

The eleventh chapter, titled Sivasramadhyaya (‘chapter on Siva’s 
discipline’) or Sivasramacaravidhi (‘rule of conduct in Siva’s disci- 
pline’) in the manuscripts, is where the Sivadharmasastra sounds most 
like a Dharmasastra in the Smarta sense. It lays out a set of sivasramas 
parallel to the āšramas of classical Dharmasastra, but here redefined 
through the prescription of such acts as tending the fire used in Si- 


33 From Sanderson 2015, 172; the passage is quoted by both Bhatta Narayanaka- 
ntha (ad Mygendratantra, Vidyāpada, p. 63, 11. 13—15, attributing it to the Bhargavottara) 
and Bhatta Ramakantha (ad Naresvaraparīksā 3.76). 


17 


A Saiva Utopia 


va-worship (sivarcagni) or bathing in ash, the most distinctive feature 
of Pasupata practice. The four varna classes of the Smarta social mod- 
el are mentioned, suggesting that the author expected his audience 
to view society through that lens, but the Sivadharma model under- 
cuts the exclusionary implications of the hierarchy by making Saiva 
piety available to all on the same terms, including to Südras and to 
women (and in one verse, even to foreigners, SiDhS 1.28) through 
devotional observances, and through the generalization of acts of 
generosity and hospitality which, though prescribed in Dharmašāstra 
only for high-status recipients, are here directed to Siva-devotees of 
any status, an act which is equated with serving Siva himself. 


4.1 The Four Asramas in the Dharmasütras and in the Mahabharata 


The very notion of speaking of a grhasthasrama as religious vocation? 
was a bold conceptual gambit: it asserted that the domestic setting 
could serve as a context for holy discipline equally as well as life- 
long service under a preceptor, life in a wilderness hermitage, or the 
itinerant existence of a mendicant. It was the Apastambadharmasutra, 
the very first work composed to preach a Brahmanical conception 
of dharma, that introduced the idea that the household could be a 
place of religious vocation, on a par with modes of celibate, ascetical 
discipline that were attracting attention (and patronage) in that peri- 
od. Apastamba, followed by the later Vasisthadharmasütra, presents the 
grhasthāšrama as equal in dignity to the celibate āšramas of lifelong 
student, hermit, and wandering mendicant. The code of Gautama 
and the older code of Baudhayana treat Apastamba’s model as a view 
to be refuted (a pürvapaksa) , and reject the celibate vocations. 

As Patrick Olivelle has lately pointed out, the term grhastha was 
not in the first place simply a synonym for ‘head-of-household’; it 
was a designation for a formal religious status on a par with ascetic 
sramanas, attested already in this sense in Asoka’s twelfth and tirth- 
eenth Rock Edicts (ca. 255 BCE), and in the seventh Pillar Edict (ca. 
241 BCE). The grhastha was being presented as a particular sort of 
religious sectarian (pasanda, in a neutral sense)—one who, unlike 


34 Olivelle's gloss of āšrama in this context (1993, 78). There was no ‘Vedic 
grhastha’ (i.e., prior to the Dharmasutras); the central religious figure (or pair) 
in the Vedic world was the grhapati/patni and the role of yajamana. The term 
grhastha was coined (perhaps in ascetic circles) to designate a person (appar- 
ently, a member of a religious order, pāsaņda) who did not leave home. The 
Dharmasūtras are the bold innovators here in appropriating this as the label for 
the yajamana’s mode of life, calling it (for the first time) an āšrama. 

35 See Olivelle 2019a. 


18 


The Sivadharma’s Revision of Brahmanical Varnasramadharma 


a sramana, does not have to leave home. In this early phase of the 
doctrine, the grhastha was not just presented as an equal to the more 
explicitly ascetic professionals; he was eulogised as the root or basis 
of all the other āsramas, because he helps to sustain them with food 
and other gifts. 

In the Mahabharata, the word asrama most often denotes a place, a 
physical residence, set aside for ascetic discipline and pious ritual obser- 
vance. Outside of the didactic material in Mahabharata 12—14, nearly all 
the mentions of asrama in the Mahābhārata as a religious profession (as 
opposed to a place) occur in interpolated verses. The didactic sections 
do refer to the 4sramasystem, but sometimes it is the old, non-sequen- 
tial asrama model taught in the Apastambadharmasütra?* including the 
grhastha-first order of presentation, and even when the sequential model 
is explicitly presented (12.233—237 and 12.313.10-19), it is still with the 
grhastha-best ranking. 

A line from the Nārāyanīya section (MBh 12.321.25ab) asserts that 
‘all four āšramas have garhasthya as their root” (catvāro hy āšramā deva 
sarve gārhasthyamūlakāh); it recurs in almost the same words in the 
Asvamedhikaparvan (MBh 14.45.13), preceded by a list of the four 
asramas that places the grhastha first: 


grhastho brahmacārī ca vanaprastho ‘tha bhiksukah | 

catvāra asramah proktah sarve gārhasthyamūlakāļ || 14.45.13 || 

The four disciplines (asramas) are called ‘householder,’ ‘celibate stu- 
dent,’ ‘hermit,’ and ‘mendicant’; they all have the householder state 
as their basis. (cf. MBh 12.321.25ab) 


The greater value of the householder-state is expressed with another 
metaphor early in the Santiparvan: 


asramams tulaya sarvan dhytan ahur manisinah | 

ekatas te trayo rajan grhasthasrama ekatah || 12.12.11 || 

Wise men say that when all asramas are placed in the balance, the 
householder asrama is on one side, and the (other) three on the other. 


Further on (MBh 12.65), Bhisma teaches Yudhisthira that proper 
kingly discipline is equivalent to fulfilling all sorts of asramas, with the 
grhastha-asrama at the pinnacle. What is very interesting here is that 
more than three other asramas are mentioned, and they have names 
not seen elsewhere: bhaiksa-, ksema-, diksá-, vanya-, and brahma-asramas. 
This list culminates in a series of verses praising various royal policies 
as fulfilling ‘all the asramas’ or gárhasthya—the two options appear vir- 
tually equivalent. In any case, there is no indication here of a temporal 


3° Olivelle 1993, 73ff. 


19 


A Saiva Utopia 


progression of asramas. Hence, the Mahābhārata sometimes seems to 
preserve an older, pre-Manu attitude toward the asramas. 


4.2 The Four Asramas According to the Sivadharmasastra 


In the Sivasramadhyaya, however, the term asramais deployed in its tech- 
nical Dharmasastric sense to name four modes of life structured by such 
discipline, and ‘sivasrama’ thus becomes a general label for a Saiva ad- 
aptation of those modes. This sivasrama, a condition open to all varņas 
and both sexes, is the focus of the opening section of Adhyaya eleven: 


nandikesvara uvaca 

sarvesam eva varņānām sivasramanisevinam | 

sivadharmah sivenokta dharmakamarthamuktaye || 11.1 || 
brahmanah ksatriyo vaisyah stri sudro va sivasrami? | 
vanaprastho grhastho và yas canyah syac chivasrami || 11.2 || 
svasramad uttare kuryat pusparamam susobhanam | 
agnyagarasamayuktam aisanyam īsvarālayam || 11.3 || 
Nandikesvara spoke: 


11.1 Siva has declared the Laws of Siva (sivadharma), so that those of all 
classes (varna) who adhere to Siva's discipline (sivasrama) may attain 
virtue, material gain, sensual gratification, and liberation. 


11.2 A Brahmin, a Ksatriya, a Vai$ya, a woman, or a Sudra who ob- 
serves Siva's discipline (sivasramin), a forest-dweller or a householder, 
and whoever else might observe Siva’s discipline (sivasramin), 


11.3 should make, to the north of his residence (svāsrama), a beauti- 
ful flower garden, furnished with a fire-shed [in the southeast and] a 
temple of Isvara in the northeast. 


That the Dharmasastric sense of ‘religious discipline’ is present can 
be seen in the fact that Manu also uses the verb nisev- with asrama in 
this sense (MDh 6.87-88), just as in verse 1 here: 


brahmacari grhasthas ca vānaprastho yatis tatha | 
ete grhasthaprabhavas catvārah prthagasramah || 6.87 || 


sarve "pi kramasas to ele yathasastram nisevitah | 
yathoktakarinam vipram nayanti paramam gatim || 6.88 || 


37 A notable but poorly supported variant reading for the second sivasrami is 
grhāsramī in N£, and Nf, which might have meant ‘...or [any] other who has a 
holy residence at his house.' As noted in the translation (fn. 3), this variant may 
have originated in an effort to avoid repeating the word sivasrami or in anticipa- 
tion of the end of v. 10; or it may have been intended to exclude the stvayogin, 
who would not have had the house or fire-shed mentioned in the next stanza. 


20 


The Sivadharma’s Revision of Brahmanical Varnasramadharma 


6.87 Student, householder, forest hermit, and ascetic: these four dis- 
tinct orders (āsramāh) have their origin in the householder. 


6.88 All of these, when they are undertaken (nisevitah) in their proper 


sequence as spelled out in the sacred texts, lead a Brahmin who acts 
in the prescribed manner to the highest state. 


The sivasrama order encompasses all four of the Dharmasastric āsra- 
mas, Saiva versions of which are briefly described. Sivadharmasastra 
11.10-14 mentions first** the sivagrhasramin, corresponding to Dhar- 
mašāstric grhastha. Although engaged in worldly affairs, his discipline 
takes the form of observing particular restrictions: 


Sivarcagniparo nityam tadbhaktanam ca püjakah | 
parvamaithunavarjī syāc chrīmām sivagrhāsramī || 11.10 || 
devagnyatithibhaiksartham pacen naivatmakaranat | 
atmartham yah pacen mohan narakartham sa jroati || 11.11 || 


devartham pacanam yesam santanartham ca maithunam | 

svargartham jīvitam tesam narakartham viparyaye || 11.12 || 
vittatyttyabhagena prakurvīta sivarcanam | 

kurvita va tadardhena yato ‘nityam hi jīvitam || 11.13 || 

nyāyopārjitavittah syad anyayam ca vivarjayet | 

anyāyopārjitair vittair narakartham sa jīvati || 11.14 || 

11.10 Constantly devoted to worship of Siva (sivarcá) and the fire, and hon- 
ouring His devotees, the illustrious Siva-householder (sivagrhasramin) 
should refrain from having sex at the days of the moon's changes. 


11.11 He should cook for the gods, Agni, guests, and food for alms, 
but never for his own sake. He who out of delusion cooks for his own 
sake, lives destined for hell. 


11.12 Those who cook for the sake of the gods, and have sex for the 
sake of children, their life is destined for heaven, but if they do other- 
wise, they are destined for hell. 


11.13 With a third of his wealth, he should perform worship of Siva, or 
he may do so with half of that [i.e., a sixth], for life is impermanent. 


11.14 He shall acquire wealth with lawful means, but unlawful means 
he should avoid. With riches acquired by unlawful means he is des- 
tined for hell. 


These broad observances allow the householder to fulfill the vratas of 
brahmacarya, asteya, samtosa, stvapūjā, agnihavana, and dana. Acquir- 
ing wealth only honestly (nyayena) and never dishonestly (anyayam) 
and giving up a third (or a sixth) of his wealth for worship demon- 


38 Cf. pusparamam in Sivopanisad 2; later, this comes to designate a Siva temple. 


21 


A Saiva Utopia 


strate his lack of undue attachment to worldly wealth. Sexual self-con- 
trol is exercised by maintaining chastity (brahmacarya) at changes of 
the moon, and at other times engaging in sexual activity only for the 
purpose of procreation—a conception of householder chastity that is 
further explained in 11.111-115, but expressed already by Manu (MDh 
4.128). AII his food should be prepared first for making offerings and 
ritual feeding of holy men, and never just for his own sake, an idea 
traceable to early Dharmasastra, as will be shown below. 

The sivabrahmacarin comes next (11.15). This would seem to be 
out of order according to the sequence established by Manu, but 
this stvabrahmacarin is not conceived of as observing the period of 
studentship in youth, preliminary to marriage. Indeed, no mention 
is made of Veda-study, its ratson-d ētre in the Smarta system. Rather, 
the term is probably used to mean nothing more than a vow to 
refrain from sex?—'whether permanently (naisthika) or temporarily 
(bhautika, i.e., for securing material prosperity [bhaiz]).’4° The third 
mentioned is the sivavaikhanasa, using a common synonym for 
vānaprastha hermit (11.16). The defining feature of this discipline is 
to be ‘free from all social contact, eating bulbs, roots, and fruits,’ that 
is, to live on edibles found in the wild. 

Finally, a long passage details the practices of the ‘best of Siva-vota- 
ries’ (sivavratindra), i.e., the figure otherwise called yogin (11.23, 44, 
48; 12.25, 34) or yati (11.40), ‘ascetic.’ Of these, the definitive one 
is lying and bathing in ash (bhasmasnana), the hallmark of Pasupata 
ascetics, prescribed in 11.21-34. The status itself is defined in 11.17: 


nivrtiah sarvasangebhyah sivadhyanaratah sada | 

jneyah sivavratindro yam bhasmanistho jitendriyah || 11.17 || 

11.17 Withdrawn from all social contact, ever inclined to meditate on 
Siva, one is known as the foremost of Siva-votaries (sivavratin), lying in 
ash (bhasmanistha) , with his senses conquered. 


The following twenty-seven stanzas seem mainly to pertain to this status, 
although some of them may have been meant (or later understood) to 
extend to sivasramins more generally.” 

The cursory manner in which the stvabrahmacarin and sivavaikhana- 
sa are presented, with just one stanza each, no doubt reflects the fact 


39 This is what brahmacarya usually denotes outside a Vedic or Dharmasastric 
context, e.g., in Buddhism. 

4 The pair of terms naisthika and bhautika has been interpreted variously. See 
TAK III, s.v. naisthika. 

4 Such is the case at 11.18, which the author of the commentary thinks applies 
to all the sivasramins. 


22 


The Sivadharma’s Revision of Brahmanical Varnasramadharma 


that they are included only for completeness and are irrelevant for the 
purposes of the chapter. The real focus is to demonstrate the comple- 
mentarity and ultimate equivalence of the householder and the yogin 
within Sivadharma. 

It is interesting to observe that although four asramas are enumer- 
ated, they are listed with the householder first, as in Apastambadha- 
rmasütra, and with no hint that the author had Manu's sequential 
model in mind. Although it is perfectly possible that the Dharmasütras' 
nonsequential understanding of the dsramas might have persisted for 
a while in some circles outside the Smarta fold, Manu's model seems 
elsewhere to have completely supplanted the older one in most San- 
skrit discourse fairly soon after its promulgation around 200 CE, so it 
is a matter of surprise to find the older version reflected in a work 
of the sixth century, especially one that pointedly if subversively cites 
the orthodox Smarta categories. This leads one to wonder whether 
this section of the chapter, or even the chapter as a whole, might have 
been composed substantially earlier.” 

There is one seeming parallel with Manu (MDh 6.46), a stanza 
also quoted by Kaundinya on Pāsupatasūtra 1.9:43 


bhavaputam carec chaucam vastrapūtam jalam pibet | 
drstiputam nyaset padam satyaputam vaco vadet || 11.38 || 


11.38 One should practice cleanliness with a purified disposition; one 
should drink water that has been purified by [straining through] a 
cloth; one should set down one’s foot purified by sight; one should 
speak words purified by truth. 


However, this need not imply direct dependence of the Sivadharma- 
sastra on Manu; the order of the quarter-verses differs, and the max- 
im circulated widely.^ 


+ Bisschop (2018b, 21) notes that v. 11.24 appears almost verbatim in 
Kaundinya's commentary (fourth or fifth century) on the Pasupatasütra; this 
need not be a case of Kaundinya quoting the Sivadharmasastra, since both works 
may quote from a common source. However, the fact that the whole asrama 
discussion in our chapter reflects the Dharmasütra model rather than the one 
that supplanted it does seem to raise the possibility that it was composed earlier 
than the sixth century. 

4 Cf. MDh 6.46 (PBh ad PS 1.9, p. 18): drstipütam nyaset padam vastrapūtam 
jalam pibet | satyaputam vaded vacam manahpūtam samacaret ||. 

^ Hara (2002 [1974], 250) collected several other loci, including parallels 
in Visnusmyti 96.14—17 and three Puranas (Vayupurana 16.6cd—7ab, Lingapurana 
1.89.7, Kūrmapurāņa 2.28.18). 


23 


A Saiva Utopia 


In any case, Sivadharmasastra 11.45 states explicitly that devotion to 
Siva and observance of the precepts of Sivadharma constitutes a higher 
asrama that redefines and transcends all Dharmasastra’s asramas: 


sivadhyanaparah santah sivadharmaparayanah | 

sarva evasrama jneyah sivabhaktah sivasramah || 11.45 || 

11.45 Those who are focused on meditation on Siva, peaceful, and ded- 
icated to Sivadharma— [practitioners of] all the disciplines, [when] 
devoted to Siva—should be considered practitioners of the Siva discip- 
line (sitvasramah) .5 


4.3 The Südra Sivasramin 


Another distinctive aspect of the Sivadharmasastra's subversion of va- 
masramadharma is its conditional acceptance of Sudras within the fold: 


yah sarvasamganirmuktah Sūdraļ sivaparayanah | 

yo 'pīha vapanam krtvā yogindranucaro bhavet || 11.42 || 

vased āyatane nityam saganah sivadharmikah | 

pusparamaikakarmatma puspavatikriyaparah || 11.43 || 
trisnanapujasamyuktah kaupīnācchāditah sada | 

yoginam bhaktiyogena yogasthanam avapnuyat || 11.44 || 

11.42 Free from all social contact, devoted to Siva, even a Sidra, if he 
gets shaven, may become a servant of a great yogin here. 

11.43 He should always reside in a temple, together with his attendants, 
following the Sivadharma, occupied with tending the flower-garden, 
dedicated to the rites of the flower-garden. 

11.44 Engaged in the three bathings and worship, covered by a loin- 
cloth at all times, he attains the state of union by means of the yoga of 
devotion to yogins. 


Here we meet a Südra who, provided he meets the moral criteria and 
undergoes the rite of shaving, may engage in a form of discipline 
alongside yogins. But his yoga appears to consist only in tending the 
garden and serving the yogins. Even if we were to interpret yogīndra in 
v. 42 as an epithet of Siva, the fact that the Südra's role is described 
as anucara, ‘servant,’ echoes his servile status in the Smarta vision of 
society.*° 


^ Asrama appears to be used in this stanza to designate by metonymy those 
who practice a discipline. 

4 Later works in the Sivadharma corpus however tend to offer more con- 
ventional prescriptions reaffirming the impurity of the Südra. Thus, Umamahe- 
švarasamvāda 1.43ff. 


24 


The Sivadharma’s Revision of Brahmanical Varnasramadharma 


Elsewhere in the work it seems to be implied that the 'Siva-con- 
secration’ (sivasamskāra) renders a Südra pure enough to partake of 
the milk of the brown cow—a litmus test of minimal purity by ortho- 
dox Brahmanical norms: 


kapilam? yah pibec chüdrah sivasamskaravarjitah | 

pacyate sa mahāghore suciram narakarnave || 5.14 || 

5.14 That Südra who drinks [the milk of] the kapila cow without hav- 
ing had Siva-purification (sivasamskara) will be boiled for a very long 
time in a most dreadful hellish sea. 

kapilam yah pibec chüdrah sivasamskaravarjitah | 

sa prayati mahaghoram narakam natra samsayah || 8.50 || 

8.50 That Sūdra who drinks [the milk of] the kapila cow without hav- 
ing had Siva-purification (sivasamskara) will go to a most dreadful 
hell, without a doubt. 


It is an old Dharmašāstric principle that Südras must not drink the 
milk of the brown cow (the best of all cows) or eat from a palasa leaf, 
due to these being choice materials for use in Brahmanical worship: 
kapilāksīrapānena brāhmaņīgamanena ca | 
vedāksaravicāreņa sudras cāņdālatām iyāt || Parasarasmryti 1.67 || 
By drinking the milk of a brown cow, going [to bed] with a Brahmin 
woman, and inquiring into the words of the Veda, a Sudra would ac- 
quire the status of a Caņdāla.** 


A number of stanzas in the Sivadharmasastra likewise praise the brown 
cow (or its products) as an offering to Siva (5.1014, 7.28, 8.47-50, 
10.38, 10.82). Sivadharmasastra 5.14 and 8.50 attest to the persistence 
of concern with Südra impurity even in the context of Sivadharma, but 
they do offer the prospect of a remedy, though it is nowhere explicitly 
stated what the sivasamskara consists of.^? 

The qualified embrace of Südra participation would go on to 
become a feature of Saiva Siddhanta. Sanderson (2009, 284ff) has 
documented how ‘the Saiddhantikas opened initiation to candidates 


47 kapilam | PZ; kapilyam EX. 

45 This is the variant reading of pada d in the 1890 Bibliotheca Indica edition of 
Tarkalankara (p. 423), who adopts stidrah patati tatksanat. Krsna Sesa's Sūdrācārasi- 
romani p. 41, 44, 178, quotes this (with the variant: südrah caņdālatām vrajet), and 
similar verses from the ‘Skandapurana’ and Padmapurana (Benke 2010, 233-49 
discusses the expanding scope assigned to sacchüdras by Dharmašāstrins from the 
fourteenth century onwards). Also: Vrddha Gautama, p. 568. 

^ [n his Nepali translation, Naraharinath (1998, 13 [second pagination]) 
glosses the word with sivadīksā; he likely had a Tantric initiation in mind. 


25 


A Saiva Utopia 


from all four caste-classes,' including women and even persons with 
disabilities, excluding only those of impure habits. Several Saiva texts 
endorse the principle that certain, ‘pure’ Südras may be accepted. A 
stanza attributed to the Parākhyatantra is quoted in the Diksddarsa of 
Vedajnana II (Chidambaram, d. 1564/4): 


amadyapah kulinas ca nityam dharmaparayanah® | 

sudrah ksatriyavaj jneyas sesa nindyas tato bhrsam || 

Those Südras who do not drink alcohol, who are of good family, and 
are always devoted to their religious duties should be looked upon as 
Ksatriyas. All the rest are completely to be condemned 3 


Another quotation of the Parakhya is found in a manuscript of the 
twelfth-century Prayascittasamuccaya:* 


yad uktam srimatparakhye 

kāryā diksapi sarvesam tacchaktividhiyoginam | 
trayanam api varnanam na tu sudrantyajatisu || 
amadyapas tu ye Sudrah saivacarakriyadarah | 
sivabhaktas ca tesam sa dīksā kāryānyathā na hi || 
As has been taught in the Parakhya: 


Initiation should be done for all who have received the action of [the 
descent of] his power, for all three caste-classes but not for [ordinary] 
Sudras and the lowest-born [below them]. 


One may initiate Südras, but only those who do not drink alcoholic 
liquor, who revere the disciplines and rites taught by Siva, and are 
devoted to Siva themselves.*4 


5° This hemistich appears also in Hrdayasiva’s Prayascittasamuccaya 43.65cd. 

5 As provisionally edited and translated by Sanderson (2009, 283, n. 685) 
on the basis of two manuscripts, A (IFP Transcript 76), p. 26; B (IFP Transcript 
153), p. 42: *amadyapah (em.; amadyapa A, amadyapa B) *kulinas (corr.; kulinas A, 
kūlinaū B) ca *nityam dharmaparayana (em.; nityadharmaparayanah AB) | * sudrah 
(em.; südra AB) ksatriyavaj jneyas sesa nindya<s> tato bhrsam |. 

5 Neither of these passages is part of the Parākhya edited by Goodall; they 
likely belonged to the portion of that work (chapters seven to thirteen) not trans- 
mitted in his manuscript, or they might rather belong to another work by the 
same name (Goodall 2004, xxxviii- xlii, lxii). The second passage, moreover, does 
not appear in Sathyanarayanan's 2015 edition of Trilocanasiva’s work, though (as 
noted in the next note) a variant of one of the hemistichs is found twice in Hr- 
dayasiva’s work of the same name, transcribed in the same volume. 

5 Cf. Hrdayasiva’s Prayascittasamuccaya 2.10cd and 42.9cd: amadyapas ca ye 
sudrah saucacarasamanvitàh |. 

54 Cited and translated by Sanderson 2009, 284, n. 681 on the basis of IFP Tran- 
script 284, p. 141: yad uktam srimatparakhye: kāryā dīksāpi sarvesam *tacchaktividhiyo- 


26 


The Sivadharma’s Revision of Brahmanical Varnasramadharma 


By contrast, though, the Sivapurana's Vayaviyasamhitahas a chapter (2.15) 
explaining the sivasamskara, which it equates with the dīksā (2.15.5). 
This rite is allowed for widows and unmarried girls, with permission 
of the family, but restricted for Südras, especially the lowest castes, the 
degraded (patita), and mixed-castes, for whom cleansing of the adhvans 
through the diksà is not ordained (2.15.63-65ab). The sincerely pious 
among them may have their sins cleansed instead by giving foot-washing 
water (padodakapradanadyaih kuryuh papavisodhanam). 

There is also this passage from Trilocanasiva’s Prayascittasamuccaya 
(584—85ab):5 


ye ca mahesvarah Sūdrā bhasmarudraksadharinah | 

tesam pancadasahena suddhih sutau mrtāv api || 584 || 
tathaiva rudrakanyayam pancacarye "pi sammata | 
hinanulominam tadvat bhasmarudraksadharinam || 585 || 
sivaganavidam tadvac chivasramanisevinam | 

dinair vimsatibhih suddhir devadasyam prakīrtītā || 586 || 
tatha devalaye karmaratah sudrah prakirtitah || 587ab || 


584 As for lay-devotees of Siva who are Südras and who wear ash and 
rudraksas, they are purified after fifteen days, both in the case of birth 
and death. 

585 The same is agreed upon for a rudrakanya and for a [temple-] mu- 
sician, and for those of low birth but born from an anuloma-marriage, 
if they wear ashes and rudraksa-beads. 

586ab Also for those who are specialists in singing for Siva, who follow 
Siva's asrama.5° 

586cd Purification is declared [to take place] after twenty days in the 
case of a devadast. 

587ab So too Südras who are engaged in work in the temple [must be 
understood to obtain purification after the same period].5? 


Sathayanarayanan (2015, 304) seems to interpret sivasramanisevinam 
to mean persons residing in a ‘Saiva asrama,' but the occurrence in 
Manavadharmasastra 6.87-88 of asrama in the sense of ‘discipline’ 
as the object of nisev- should rule out reading it here in the sense 


ginam (tacchakti- corr.; tacchaktir Cod.) | trayanam api varnanam na tu sudrantyajatisu 
| amadyapas tu ye sudrah saivacara*kriyadaràh (corr.; -kriyadirah Cod.) | sivabhaktas *ca 
(corr.; cai Cod.) tesām sa dīksā * karyanyatha na hiti (em.; karyannyathanuhiti Cod.). 

5 Translation Sathyanarayanan 2015, except where noted. 

5» Sathyanarayanan 2015, 304, translates 'so too for those who live in a Saiva 
asrama. 

57 Cf. Sanderson 2003-2004, 399-400, n. 181. 


27 


A Saiva Utopia 


of a residence. In any case, the other persons discussed in this pas- 
sage are distinguished not by their residence but rather by their 
religious profession. All of them have low-status functions in the 
temple. Here, sivasramanisevinam modifies sivaganavidam, just as bha- 
smarudraksadharinam in the preceding hemistich, which has the same 
structure, modifies hīnānulominām. Thus, we have a concrete example 
of someone who follows a sivasrama: a temple singer. It is evident from 
these Saiva Siddhànta sources that the Saiva sphere continued to 
accommodate at least some Südras on certain conditions, but they are 
not able to throw light on what the Sivadharmasastra meant. 

We may get some clues about a Südra as a sivagrhasramin from the 
Sivopanisad, a later text of the Sivadharma corpus, in the second of 
two stanzas that contrast the ash-bath of an ascetic and that of a holy 
householder: 


grhasthas tryayusomkaraih snanam kuryat tripundrakaih | 

yatih sarvangikam snanam apadatalamastakat || 5.20 || 

sivabhaktas tridha vedyam bhasmasnanaphalam labhet | 

hrdi mürdhni lalate ca sūdrah sivagrhasrami || 5.21 || 

5.20 A householder should perform the [ash-]bath by applying the 
triple lines while reciting the #ryayusa mantra and the syllable om. An 
ascetic [should perform] a bath of the whole body from the soles of 
the feet to the top of the head. 

5.21A Südra who is a sivagrhasramin, devoted to Siva (stvabhakta), will 
obtain the fruit of the [full-body] ash-bath [if he marks the body with 
ash] thrice in the fire-altar (vedi) at the heart, on the head, and on 
the forehead. 


The Sivopanisad is later than the Sivadharmasastra, and shows a strong 
Vedicising tendency, as its very name suggests. In its precepts on 
the ash-bath, the Sivopanisad has the householder recite a mantra 
from Apastamba Mantrapatha 2.7.2 (trayusam jamadagneh kasyapasya 
trāyusam>* yad devanam trayusam tan me astu trayusam, "The threefold vi- 
tality” of [the sage] Jamadagni, that of [the sage] Kasyapa, that which 
is the gods—may it be mine!’). In the Vedic domestic ritual codes, this 
is the mantra to be recited over the razor or over the student who is 
about to be shaven before bathing at the end of his studies.® In that 


58 [n parallel texts the words agastyasya trayusam rsinam trayusam are added. 

5 Trayusam is variously interpreted as ‘threefold vital power’ or the ‘three 
phases of life’ (childhood, youth, old age, together signifying a full lifespan). 

% Hiranyakesigrhyasütra 1.9.6, Bhāradvājagrhyasūtra 1.28.1-2, Baudhayanagrhya- 
paribhāsāsūtra 1.13.20; Baudhayanagrhyasesasütra 2.11.9 uses it rather in the shav- 
ing that precedes the Vedic initiation rite (upanayana). 


28 


The Sivadharma’s Revision of Brahmanical Varnasramadharma 


rite, the next act is to give the razor to the barber while reciting: sivo 
namasi svadhitis te pita namas te astu mà ma himsth (ApMSP 2.7.3: ‘You 
are named “Gentle” [Siva]. The axe is your father. Honour to you! Do 
not harm me!’). The mention of stva here was likely sufficient to trans- 
fer these mantras into a Saiva ritual context, for the similar purpose of 
purifying the body, thus ritually marking a new religious status. 

In the Sivopanisad passage, the Vedic mantra is used to mark the 
body in several places: the forehead, the heart, the right and left 
shoulders, the back of the neck, and the head. The Südra (per SiUp 
5.21) should mark himself only in three places; it is not clear whether 
the Vedic mantra is to be used; in Vedic rulebooks, Vedic mantras are 
often not permitted for Südras and women.” 

In any case, although this Vedic mantra is not mentioned in the 
Sivadharmasastra's rules for the ash-bath, the fact that the Sivopanisad 
considered it appropriate for applying ash may indicate that for the 
author of the Sivadharmasastra the purifying ash-bath was conceived of 
as having the character of a samskāra, as rites for consecrating a person 
were called in the Smarta tradition. Given that the Südra is required to 
be shaven before engaging in the ash-bath (per SiDhS 11.42), it seems 
safe to conclude that the sivasamskāra mentioned in Sivadharmasastra 
5.14 and 8.50 was a purificatory rite involving shaving and bathing (or 
anyway marking) the body in Siva's ash. This supposition is further 
reinforced by a stanza coming just before those dealing with the Südra: 


jatakalapadhari syat paksad và vapanam bhavet | 

yad eva punyam diksayam tat punyam vapane punah || 11.39 || 

11.39 One should wear the hair-tuft in a mass, or one should shave 
every fortnight; whatever merit there is in the rite of initiation that 
same merit one obtains by shaving [every fortnight]. 


This stanza is in the genre of many others that promise all the fruits of 
various Vedic or Smarta rites to those who adhere to the Sivadharma. 
The dīksā rite mentioned here is probably the Vedic dīksā consecration 
prescribed for the sponsor of a Soma sacrifice. That dīksā involves a 
shaving (as do the upanayana rite that commences the period of study, 


* In one stanza, even Manu allows for Südras of good conduct to pursue 
dharma, so long as Vedic mantras are not involved: ‘Those who know the Law 
and yearn to follow it, however, incur no sin and receive praise when they imitate 
the practices of good men, without reciting any ritual formulas’ (dharmepsavas 
tu dharmajnah satam vrttam anusthitah | mantravarjyam na dusyanti prasamsam 
prapnuvanti ca || MDh 10.127 ||). See also MDh 2.172, where an uninitiated Brah- 
min is prohibited from pronouncing Vedic mantras in most contexts, because 
‘he is equal to a Sadra.’ 


29 


A Saiva Utopia 


and the snana bath that concludes it). By the logic of pars pro toto, the 
shaving recommended here is said to confer all the merit of a Vedic 
consecration to offer Soma. The fact that some manuscripts, including 
our oldest dated witness (N 5),* read yajūānām (or a similar form) in 
place of diksayamis more evidence that the merit of offering Vedic sac- 
rifices is what transmitters had in mind. But the word dīksāis also some- 
times used as a synonym of upanayana or samskara in Vedic ritual texts. 

Periodic shaving together with the marking of the body with the 
three lines of ash (even employing the old Vedic shaving mantra, in 
the Sivopanisad's more Vedicised version) thus seem to have consti- 
tuted the sivasamskara that ritually transformed a layperson—even 
(or especially) a Südra—into a sivasramin. 

It should be emphasised that while the Brahmanical Dharmasa- 
stra's class distinctions are cited as the conventional norm in the 
world, the Sivadharmašāstra asserts that Saiva observances overwrite 
and neutralise those distinctions to a great extent. Indeed, the au- 
thor does not stop at validating Südra participation. In a hyperbolic 
statement in the opening chapter, ‘The Definition of Siva Bhakti’ 
(stvabhaktilaksanam), the doors of sivabhakti are flung open literally 
to all: 


bhaktir astavidha hy esa yasmin mlecche "pi vartate | 

sa viprendro munih sriman sa yatih sa ca panditah || 1.28 || 

na me priyas caturvedo madbhaktah svapaco ‘pi yah | 

tasmai deyam tato grahyam sa ca pujyo yatha hy aham || 1.29 || 

1.28 When this eight-fold bhakti is present even in a barbarian, he 
[may be deemed] the best of Brahmins, an illustrious sage, an ascetic, 
a scholar! 

1.29 A four-Veda [Brahmin] is not dear to me, [but] even a Dog- 
Cooker is, if he is devoted (bhakta) to me. One should give to him, 
one should receive from him, and he is to be worshipped like me. 


Taken together, these passages show that the religious group that 
produced and endorsed such sentiments encouraged Südras (and 
even more despised groups) to practice as sivasramins.9 The social 
inclusiveness and relative leveling intended here were signalled by 
repurposing a simple rite of consecratory purification whose name 
(samskara) and prime features (shaving and ‘bathing’) hearken back 


& (Nepāla) samvat 156 (1035-36 CE); on palaeographic grounds, has been 
judged the oldest surviving manuscript, from the first half of the tenth century. 

% Notably these particular verses count among the most frequently attested 
citations from the Sivadharma by Virasaiva works (Fisher 2017, 30). 


30 


The Sivadharma’s Revision of Brahmanical Varnasramadharma 


to Smarta models that had heretofore been used to register exclu- 
sive social statuses. However, we must also recognize that the social 
leveling was not total in this case: Südras seem to have been subject 
to a 'glass-ceiling': they were promised the same ultimate rewards as 
everyone else, but were assigned a role that translated their servile 
status into a notionally higher sacred form of service. As sivabhaktas 
they might be served, but their own role in the asrama was to serve 
the yogins. 


4.4 Women in the Sivasrama 


Women, too, are given scope to practice, especially through the per- 
formance of special vows (vratas). The umamahesvaravrata (SiDhS 
10.90—141), prescribed specially for women, promises them a variety 
of worldly rewards, including a good husband in this life and/or the 
next. It is true that whereas all four pursuits of humanity (the catu- 
rvarga: virtue, material gain, sensual gratification, and liberation) are 
said to be fulfilled for male devotees, this women's regimen mentions 
only the trivarga (i.e., omitting liberation): 


sivabhakta tu ya nari dhruvam sa puruso bhavet | 

strituam adhyuttamam sa cet kanksate srnu tad vratam || 10.90 || 
umamahesvaram nama sada pritinivardhanam | 

adhiyogakaram santam dharmakamarthasadhakam || 10.91 || 

10.90 But that woman who is a sivabhakta, she would certainly become a 
man; if she aspires to the supreme womanhood, hear about this regimen. 
10.91 The umamahesvaravrata always increases gladness, brings about 
supreme union [with Siva], is peaceful, and conduces to dharma, kama, 
and artha. 


Nevertheless, there are hints that duhkhanta might be attainable to 
them directly, as at 10.113 (mentioned above) and 10.35: 


pratimasam pravaksyami sivavratam anuttamam | 
dharmakamarthamoksartham naranaryadidehinam || 10.35 || 

I will expound the unexcelled sivavrata month by month, for the sake 
of dharma, kama, artha, and moksa of men, women, and other embod- 
ied beings. 


Women, then, might perform Sivadharma observances (vratas) on 
the same terms as men. Yet there is no mention in the Sivadharma- 
sastra of women undergoing something like the sivasamskara men- 
tioned in connection with the Südra. The Vayaviyasamhita will later 
consider women eligible for its Tantric sivasamskara, but cautions that 
‘women are not autonomously entitled to the rite of stvasamskar@ 


31 


A Saiva Utopia 


(nadhikarah svato naryah sivasamskarakarmani), but rather require 
their husband's permission (or their son's, if widowed; or father's, if 
unmarried; Vayaviyasamhita 2.15.62—63). This imposes limitations for 
women similar to those that apply to Smarta samskaras: women must 
have the consent of a male relative to undergo the rite, and it should 
be performed without Vedic mantras.° This is an endorsement of 
‘orthodox’ status disparities that is typical of later Saiva sources on 
householder religion. 


5. Guest-Reception, Madhuparka, and Post-Sacrificial Feeding Directed toward 
Stvabhaktas 


Another important innovation of the Sivadharmasastra is that it re- 
directs Smarta practices of ritualised feeding and guest-reception to 
sivabhakta recipients. In the Smārta system, there were two distinct 
contexts for such feeding: the ceremony of receiving a guest; and 
the feeding of Brahmins after a Vedic offering rite. Several services, 
including provision of argha water and the madhuparka (*honey-mix- 
ture’), should be offered to a guest, an honour that is reserved for 
a short but varying list of dignitaries. Although in older lists, a king, 
senior relations, and a bridegroom are accorded this treatment, the 
individuals most often mentioned are worthy Brahmins: an ācārya 
(Veda-teacher), an rtvij (Vedic priest), a srotriya (Vedic polymath), 
and especially a snātaka (a Brahmin who has completed the stu- 
dent's regimen and is subject to further strict rules of piety). The 
other main occasion in the Smarta tradition for ritualised feed- 
ing of Brahmins was at the conclusion of an offering to ancestors 
(sraddha), a practice then extended to offerings of any sort. In those 
contexts, a preference for learned or ritually observant Brahmins is 
usually stated. 

In the Sivadharmasastra, lay Saivas are enjoined to venerate indi- 
viduals deemed sivabhakta with the various elements of the guest-re- 
ception ceremony. The fact that these stvabhaktas must take pains to 
avoid impurity such the one that comes from contact with death or 
menstruating women reminds one of the similar taboos to which the 
snatakas were subject.® There is a general principle that a Siva-devotee 


4 MDh 2.66: amantrika tu karyeyam strīņām āvrd asesatah | samskarartham Sartrasya 
yathakalam yathakramam ||; ‘For females, on the other hand, this entire series (of 
samskaras) should be performed at the proper time and in the proper sequence, but 
without reciting any Vedic formula, for the purpose of consecrating their bodies.’ 

65 A bhakta cannot touch food from cremation ceremonies, etc., or what is 
touched by a menstruating woman (12.10). 


32 


The Sivadharma’s Revision of Brahmanical Varnasramadharma 


is to be regarded and treated as Siva in person, so that whatever a siv- 
abhakta receives may be considered an offering to the deity: 


sivabhaktaya yad danam bhaktya kimcit pradīyate | 

tad aham tatra grhnami tenanantam tad ucyate || 

(interpolation after SiDhS 1.29)** 

Whatever gift, however small, is given with devotion to a Siva- devotee, 
I there accept it, by which it is considered an infinite [gift]. 


This stanza is not included in all manuscripts, but the sentiment is 
echoed in a passage from the twelfth chapter of the Sivadharmasastra 
asserting that Siva-devotees are the best sort of recipients of feeding 
at an ancestor-offering: 


sivabhaktam dvijam srestham yah sraddhadisu bhojayet | 

kulasaptakam uddhrtya sivaloke mahzyate || 12.57 || 

bahunatra kim uktena sivabhaktam tu bhojayet | 

sivabhakto yada bhunkte saksad bhunkte tada sivah || 12.58 || 

dvijanam vedavidusam kotim sambhojya yat phalam | 

munaye vitaragaya bhiksadanena tat phalam || 12.59 || 

tasmac chraddhe visesena punyesu divasesu ca | 

sivam uddisya viprendram sivabhaktam tu bhojayet || 12.60 || 

12.57 He who feeds a Siva-devotee, the best twice-born, in ancestor 
offerings (sraddha) and other rites rescues seven generations of his 
family, and will be honoured in Siva’s paradise (stvaloka). 

12.58 What more is there to say about it? One should feed a Siva-devotee! 
Whenever a Siva-devotee eats, Siva is there eating in person! 

12.59 The fruit [obtained] by giving alms-food to a dispassionate sage 
is the fruit of having fed ten million Veda-knowing Brahmins. 

12.60 Therefore, especially at an ancestor offering, and on auspicious 


days, one should feed a Siva-devotee, the best of Brahmins, after des- 
ignating Siva [as the recipient]. 


By 12.60, it is clear that the srāddha ritual is just one exemplary occasion 
for feeding holy men; it is something that can be done on other holy 
days as well, and in each case, the very best sort of Brahmin recipient is a 
stvabhakta. Similarly, the best place to perform such a rite is a sivasrama: 


grhe sraddhasya yat punyam aranye tac chatadhikam | 
Sivasramesu vijneyam tat punyam ayutadhikam || 12.64 || 


°° This stanza is found in NZ (pada b: bhaktā; pada c: tadantam tatra grhņāti) 
and Nia (pada c: tad aham tat pragrhnami), but lacking in several other manu- 
scripts that we have checked. Naraharinath’s printed version (1.31cd) reads: tad 
ahan tattri (sic) grhņāmi tenananta (sic) tad ucyate. 


33 


A Saiva Utopia 


12.64 The merit of [performing] the ancestor offering in the forest is a 
hundred times more than that of [performing it] at home. One should 
realise that the merit of doing it in stvasramas is ten-thousandfold more. 


This stanza ingeniously depicts the stvdsrama as a site that embeds 
the sanctity of the forest hermitage in a domestic setting—not a 
conventional Smarta one, but one sanctified by Sivadharma, where 
sivasramins are to be the recipients. Moreover, the main concern is 
not the offerings to the ancestors per se, but the practice, dating back 
to the Vedic ritual sütras, of feeding the rice balls, or the remainder 
of the rice, to virtuous Brahmins after the sraddha ritual proper had 
ended. Similar ritualised feeding was extended by analogy to other 
Vedic offering rites as well. This seems to have been a development of 
the Maurya period,” perhaps by analogy with the ritualised feeding 
of members of the non-Brahmanical sramana orders. 

The precept announced in Sivadharmasastra 11.6 that one must never 
prepare food only for himself but with an eye to making offerings 
(which includes feeding sivabhaktas) is a likewise direct adaptation of 
an idea first voiced in the Āpastambadharmasūtra, in a digression that 
interrupts the rules for performing sraddha, to opine that pious Brah- 
mins should be fed at all offerings: 


sucin mantravatah sarvakytyesu bhojayet | desatah kalatah saucatah samyak- 
pratigyhitrta iti danani pratipadayati | yasyagnau na kriyate yasya cagram 
na diyate na tad bhaktavyam | ApDhS 2.15.1113 

At all rituals one should feed individuals who are upright and learned 
in the Vedas. He should offer gifts in proper places, at appropriate 
times, on the occasion of purificatory rites, and to proper recipients. 


He should not eat food from which a portion has not been first of- 
fered in the fire or given to a guest. 


The precepts on sivabhakti in the Sivasramadhyaya include a passage 
on the merits of feeding and otherwise serving stvabhaktas as if they 
were Siva in the flesh: 


yathasambhavapujabhih karmaņā manasa gira | 

sive bhaktih sada karya tadvac ca sivayogisu || 11.48 || 
svadehan nirvisesena sivabhaktams ca palayet | 
bhayadaridryarogebhyas tesam kuryat priyani ca || 11.49 || 


67 The Srauta pindapitrmedha ritual did not normally include feeding the balls 
for the ancestors to human recipients, though some later codes include as one 
option feeding them to a single Brahmin (or a cow). The sraddha rite, with feed- 
ing of Brahmins at the end, appears only in the Grhyasutras. 

68 Translation Olivelle 1999. 


34 


The Sivadharma’s Revision of Brahmanical Varnasramadharma 


Sivasya paripurnasya kim nama kriyate naraih | 

yat krtam sivabhaktanam tat krtam tu sive bhavet || 11.50 || 
sudūram api gantavyam yatra mahesvaro janah | 

sa ca yatnena drastavyas tatra sannihito harah || 11.51 || 


mahesvarasya bhaktasya sivarcanaratasya ca | 

ajnam krtvā yathanyayam asvamedhaphalam labhet || 11.52 || 

nityam sivakathasakto nityam sivaparayanah | 

arcayitvā yathanyayam ganapatyam labheta sah || 11.53 || 

sivasramam gatan bhaktya sivabhaktan prapujayet | 
svāgatāsanapādyārghamadhuparkādibhojanaiļ || 11.54 || 

yah svāgatanamaskāraih kuryac capy abhivādanam | 

dasavarsasahasrani so gniloke mahiyate || 11.55 || 

prāptāya sivabhaktaya yo dadyat suakam asanam | 

vimsadvarsasahasrani purandarapure vaset || 11.56 || 

sivabhaktam grhe drstvā tustim vrajati yo narah | 

varsakotisahasrani vased vaisravane pure || 11.57 || 

srantaya sivabhaktaya padau praksalya bhaktitah | 

ghrienabhyajya tatpadau visnuloke mahīyate || 11.58 || 

prāptāya sivabhaktaya pādyācamanapūrvakam | 

yo 'rgham nivedayed bhaktya suryalokam sa gacchati || 11.59 || 

sivabhaktam dvijam praptam madhuparkādy anukramai | 

bhojayitva yathanyayam sivaloke mahīyate || 11.60 || 

11.48 Devotion to Siva should always be carried out in act, thought, 
and word, by performing worship however one can, and likewise [de- 
votion to] sivayogins. 

11.49 And one should protect Siva's devotees, no differently from 
one’s own body, from danger, poverty, and disease, and please them." 


11.50 What can men actually do for Siva who is [already] fully com- 
plete? Whatever is done for Siva's devotees is done for Siva. 


11.51 One should go the place where there are people (janah) devot- 
ed to Mahesvara, even if far away. One must strive to see them, for 
there Hara is present. 

11.52 And if one obeys correctly the command of a devotee of Mahe- 
$vara, who delights in the worship of Siva, one obtains the fruit of a 
horse sacrifice. 

11.53 If one performs worship [of Siva's devotee] correctly, listening 
fondly to stories of Siva every day and being intent on Siva every day, 
one will become a leader of [Siva's] hosts. 


% The implicit audience of this stanza is the king, whose responsibility it is to 
provide safety and welfare for his subjects in general, but especially for holy people. 


35 


A Saiva Utopia 


11.54 One should offer worship devotedly to the devotees of Siva who 
have come to the stvasrama with a guest's welcome, a seat, a foot-bath, 
guest water, and food such as honey and curd (madhuparka). 

11.55 One who greets [a Saiva guest] with the words ‘welcome!’ and 
‘homage!’ will be honoured in Agni’s world for ten thousand years. 
11.56 One who spontaneously gives a seat to a devotee of Siva who has arrived 
will dwell in the city of [Indra] the city-smasher for twenty thousand years. 
11.57 One who derives satisfaction from seeing a devotee of Siva in 
his home will dwell in Kubera's city for thousands of crores of years. 
11.58 If one devotedly washes the feet of a weary devotee of Siva, 
anointing his feet with ghee, one will be honoured in Visnu's world. 
11.59 One who with devotion offers guest water, preceded by water 
for the feet and for sipping, to a devotee of Siva who has arrived goes 
to Surya's world. 

11.60 If one correctly feeds a visiting Brahmin devotee of Siva with 
honey and curd (madhuparka) and so forth in proper sequence, one 
will be honoured in Siva's world. 


This elaborate ceremonial is modeled on the Dharmašāstric guest-re- 
ception rituals, as is particularly evident in stanzas 54, 55, 58, 59, and 60, 
which enumerate the classical set ofofferings for guests: seat, foot-bathing 
water, argha water, and madhuparka (the honey-and-curd mixture). The 
general message of the Sivasramadhyaya is that birth status is irrelevant 
in Siva-devotion, but here in the context of guest-reception practices, 
the Siva-devotee is at least once explicitly identified as a Brahmin: he is 
called dvija in v. 60, and vipra is found as a variant in seven manuscripts 
in v. 58. The term dvija technically might apply to a Ksatriya or Vaisya 
who has undergone Vedic initiation, but in general practice a Brahmin 
is always understood; either way, the Vedic criterion of Arya varna status 
is implied, which is out of keeping with the principle that Siva-devotion 
creates an overriding status accessible to all. Is this merely the result of 
an element unwittingly retained when the author adapted a Smarta pas- 
sage to fit the Sivadharma theme? Or is there some residual deference to 
the ritual efficacy of the Brahmin as recipient of hospitality? 

Evidence from elsewhere in the Sivadharmasastra might point toward 
the latter explanation. In a passage ofthe Sivadanadhyaya (8.22—28), Brah- 
mins figure in a rite involving a dough-figurine of Siva that is ‘endowed 
with a white sacred thread’ (upavita [8.22c], the emblem of a Brahmin): 


bhojayec chivabhaktams ca saktya viprams ca tarpayet | 
priyatam me sivo nityam ityuktvotthapayed dvijan || 8.26 || 


7° tarpayet | N&; daksayet EN. 


36 


The Sivadharma’s Revision of Brahmanical Varnasramadharma 


tair eva tu dvijaih sardham tad rapam tu sivalaye | 
nītvā samarpayed vedyam” sivalingasamipatah?? 


8.27 || 
sarvayajnaphalam prapya sarvadanaphalani ca | 

surüpo rupadanena sivaloke mahīyate || 8.28 || 

8.26 One should feed vipras (Brahmins) who are Siva-devotees, and 
fortify them as well as one can; saying ‘may I please Siva always,’ one 
should invigorate dvijas. 

8.27 Having brought that [dough-]figure into the Siva temple, along 
with those dvijas, one should deposit it in the altar before the stvalinga. 
8.28 By means of giving a [dough-]figure, one obtains the fruit of all 
fire-offerings and the fruits of all donations and is honoured with a 
beautiful figure in Siva's world. 


Further on, there is an injunction to feed a stvabhakta dvija (8.34) and 
for a vipra to receive a vessel (8.36). These and similar passages re- 
late to rites of feeding and gifting adapted from Smarta models, and 
the final chapter reproduces the praise for the king who practices 
bhamidana, the granting of fertile lands to dvijas (12.42—43). Yet such 
intrusions of reverence toward Brahmins have the look of a formula- 
ic holdover. Elsewhere, after all, the (non-sivabhakta) Brahmin—even 
the most learned or enlightened—is relegated to a status below the 
sivayogins (12.35-36). It may be that stanzas like 11.60, 12.57, 12.60 
that place stvabhakta and a word meaning ‘Brahmin’ in apposition 
really mean to say that if one performs a ritual at which Brahmins 
are supposed to be fed, one should take care that they are sivabhakta 
Brahmins, who are the very best sort. 

In Sivadharmottara 12.205ff (reappearing almost verbatim in the 
Revakhanda of the Skandapurana) we find a similar but not identical 
Sivadharma adaptation of the Dharmašāstric āsrama model in the 
discussion of feeding Siva-devotees. An important difference here 
is that Manu's ordering of the asramas has been adopted (though 
there is still no indication that individual Saivas are meant to proceed 
through the whole sequence) :7 

bhojayec chraddhaya saktya yah sivabrahmacarinam | 

sa bhogaih kridate divyaih sivaloke vyavasthitah || 12.205 || 


yah sivasramadharmastham grhastham bhojayed budhah | 
vipulaih sa mahābhogaih kridan sivapure vaset || 12.206 || 


? vedyam | NË; visam EX. 

7 -samipatah | N&; -samipagah E^. 

73 Text adopted from the provisional edition in De Simini 2016, 52, fn. 151; 
these verses have a parallel in Revakhanda 59.21cd-26ab. 


37 


A Saiva Utopia 


sivasramavanastham yah kandamüladibhir yajet | 

sa divyān prapnuyad bhogān tsvarasya pure sthitah || 12.207 || 

ekam pasupatam bhaktya bhojayitua pranamya ca | 

nanavidhair mahabhogaih sivaloke pramodate || 12.208 || 
mahavratadharayaikam bhiksam yah pratipadayet | 

sa divyaih sumahabhogaih sivaloke mahtyate || 12.209 || 

12.205 He who faithfully feeds a sivabrahmacarin to the best of his abil- 
ity will revel in heavenly delights when he has been settled in Siva’s 
world (sivaloka). 

12.206 And the wise man who would feed a grhastha who observes the 
dharma of the stvasrama, will dwell in Siva's city (sivapura) reveling in 
copious delights. 

12.207 One who worships a sivasramavanastha (one who lives in a for- 
est sivasrama) with bulbs, roots, and the like will obtain heavenly de- 
lights when he reaches the city of the Lord.” 

12.208 Having fed and bowed down to a single pasupata with devo- 
tion, he makes merry in Siva's paradise with various delights. 

12.209 He who makes a single offering of alms-food (bhiksa) to one 
who adheres to the Great Observance (mahāvratadhara) will be re- 
galed in the Siva’s paradise with very great delights. 


As in the Sivadharmasastra’s account, a sivabhakta can on principle 
belong to any of the asramas. A householder sivabhakta evidently sur- 
passes an ordinary layman in so far as he ‘observes the dharma of Si- 
va's discipline’ (stvasramadharmastha) , and on that account he merits 
feeding and reverential treatment modeled explicitly on what is pre- 
scribed in the Dharmasastras for a snātaka or srotriya Brahmin guest. 
There are analogies, too, with the Buddhist upasaka in the technical 
sense of a layman under supererogatory (yet sub-monastic) vows," 
but the Dharmašāstra is the explicit frame of reference. The Sivadha- 
rmasastra’s innovation was—at least in principle—to extend to any 
Siva-devotee, regardless of social rank, a form of reverential treat- 
ment that the Smarta tradition had reserved mainly for learned or 


74 The term sivasramavanastha, on the face of it, is ambiguous, but the fact that 
he is to be offered ‘bulbs and such’ shows off that the Sivadharma's sivavaikhana- 
sais meant. 

75 The stvayogin or yati category is treated in two stanza referring to the 
pasupata bhakta and the mahavratadhara. In the latter stanza, the fact that the 
food offered is called bhiksā confirms that a mendicant is meant. 

7° Sanderson (2012, 10-14) points to a parallel with the Buddhist and Jaina upā- 
saka (lay-devotee), noting the use of this term to describe non-initiate Mahesvaras 
in later Saiva Siddhànta discourse. The term does not occur in the Sivadharmasastra. 


38 


The Sivadharma’s Revision of Brahmanical Varnasramadharma 


pious Brahmins. In what is perhaps a moment of hyperbole (SiDhS 
1.28-29), it is stated that Südras, ‘Dog-Cookers,’ or even foreigners 
can qualify as stvabhaktas worthy of reverential feeding. But when 
feeding of sivabhaktas is the main topic of discussion, the Südra dis- 
appears and the sivabhakta to be fed is repeatedly called a Brahmin 
or ‘twice-born’ (dvija). Here again, this may be an artifact of the 
guest-reception language imported from the older ritual and dharma 
codes, not consistently reconciled with the claims made elsewhere in 
the work that social distinctions were elided in the Siva-discipline. 

In further contrast with Smarta ritual and dharma literature, the 
Sivadharmasastra (11.61—79) generalises the scope of these services by 
suggesting that they be offered to anyone in need of them—the weary, 
the ill, the fearful, the destitute, regardless of social status (especially 
verse 70). This generalised charity, though, does not displace the spe- 
cial reverence reserved for sivabhaktas. Although it is clear that stva- 
yogins are the holiest of all, the author wishes to show that sivabhaktas 
of the other asramas also practice an exemplary form of discipline that 
makes them worthy recipients of receiving the rites of hospitality—as 
inheritors of the mantle of the srotriya or snātaka Brahmin. 


6. Differing Approaches to Dharma in the Sivadharma and the Visnudharma 


The oldest texts presenting themselves as teaching Sivadharma and 
the work transmitted under the name Visnudharma” seem to have 
been composed in roughly the same period, and outwardly resemble 
each other in so far as both present themselves as sastra (VDh 105) 
or even dharmasastra (SiDhS 12.102), and self-consciously appro- 
priate numerous doctrinal and normative elements from Dharma- 
šāstra proper, adapting them to a theology and social ethos shaped 
by particular religious movements (Pasupata, and Bhagavata and/ 
or Pancaratra, respectively). Both traditions position themselves 
among other šāstras as well. Yet in certain ways, they differ funda- 
mentally in approach. What did the authors of the Sivadharmasastra 
and the Visnudharma mean when they used the word dharma, and 
how do their interpretation of Dharmašāstric concepts differ? 


6.1 The Visnudharma' s Asramadharma 


Unlike the Sivadharmasastra, the Visnudharma adopts the sequential 
conception of the four asramas that was introduced in Manu s code 
(ca. 200 cE). The brahmacarin is listed first and, unlike in the Sivadha- 


7 Edited by Grünendahl 1983-89. 


39 


A Saiva Utopia 


rmasastra and Sivadharmottara, he is not just someone under a vow of 
chastity but an actual Vedic student living with his guru: 


devebhyo ‘pi hi pujyas tu svagurur brahmacarinah | 

tasyapi yajfiapuruso visnuh pujyo dvijottama || 4.32 || 

striyas ca bhartaram rte püjyam anyan na daivatam | 

bhartur grhasthasya satah pūjyo yajūapatir harih || 4.33 || 

vaikhanasanam aradhyas tapobhir madhusüdanah | 

dhyeyah parivrajakanam vasudevo mahatmanam || 4.34 || 

euam sarvasramanam hi vasudevah parayanam | 

sarvesam caiva varnanam tam aradhyapnuyad gatim || 4.35 || 

VDh 4.32 For one’s own teacher should be worshiped by a celibate 
student (brahmacarin), more even than the gods, and he should also 
worship Visnu the Soul of the Sacrifice, O best of the twice-born. 
VDh 4.33 Nothing else divine is to be worshiped by a woman besides 
her husband, (and) a good, home-dwelling (grhastha) husband should 
worship Hari, Lord of the Sacrifice. 

VDh 4.34 Madhusūdana should be propitiated by vaikhanasas by means 
of ascetic practices, and Vasudeva, the Supreme Self, is to be meditated 
on by wandering mendicants. 

VDh 4.35 For thus, Vasudeva becomes the Ultimate Aim of people of 
all asramas, and by propitiating him, those of all classes (varnas) reach 
the goal. 


Since the āšrama system understood here does not deviate substan- 
tially from the classical Dharmasastric one (apart from identifying 
Visnu as the deity), there was no reason to rename the āšramas as the 
Sivadharmasastra did (as sivabrahmacarin, etc.). 

One striking detail here is that the author gives special attention 
to the householder's wife, who should worship only her husband. 
The idea, here only implicit, is probably that the husband stands in 
for god, a notion known from other sources (e.g., MDh 5.154). Itis re- 
inforced by the parallel structure of the preceding stanza, where the 
student worships the teacher as the teacher worships Visnu. In both 
of these home-centred āsramas, the deity is described as the Lord of 
Sacrifice (Yajnapati), an epithet that emphasises Visnu's personifica- 
tion of the Vedic ritual. Recall that the Dharma literature is fond of 
seeing an analogy between the relation of the student to the teacher 
and that of the bride to the groom (for example, by employing sim- 
ilar rites and mantras in the Vedic initiation and wedding rites).7 In 


78 MDh 2.67: vaivāhiko vidhih strīņām samskaro vaidikah smrtah | patiseva gurau 
vaso grhartho 'gniparikriyā || ‘For females, tradition tells us, the marriage ceremo- 


40 


The Sivadharma’s Revision of Brahmanical Varnasramadharma 


any case, we do not see a larger, more religiously autonomous role for a 
woman comparable to the female stvabhakta of Sivadharmasastra 10.90. 
The student-first pattern is affirmed elsewhere in the Visnudharma too: 


tathasramesu sarvesu brahmacarivratadikah | 

sthāpayitvā tatah sarvah prajah saddharmavartmani | 

kalkirüpam parityajya divam esyamy aham punah || 66.81 || 

VDh 66.81 Thus after establishing all people who perform the obser- 
vances beginning with that of the brahmacarin in all the asramas, on 
the path of the true dharma (sad-dharma), I will give up the form of 
Kalkin, and return again to heaven. 

brahmacarigrhasthadya na cyavanty āšramāc ca ye | 

svadharmato haris tesam pritiman eva sarvada || 73.4 || 

73-4 Those beginning with the brahmacarin and the grhastha do not 
slip from (their) asrama; Hari has affection for them because they 
ever follow their proper dharma. 


But it is not merely Manu's order of listing the asramas that has 
been adopted; it is also the idea that they should be practiced in 
sequence—an idea not evident even in the Sivadharmottara (which 
does however list the stvabrahmacarin first). VDh 101.21—53 presents a 
detailed description of the rules for how a man should proceed from 
one dsrama to the next in Manu's sequence: brahmacarin, grhastha, 
vānaprastha, and bhiksu.? The only exception is the option to skip 
the householder state and proceed directly to hermit or mendicant 
(VDh 101.29). 


6.2 The Visnudharma on Guest Reception 


In contrast to the Sivadharmasastra, the Visnudharma mentions the 
elements of the guest reception only as part of the orthodox Bra- 
hmanical rites for honoring weary venerable visitors (1.1-3, 27.11, 
etc.) or for worshipping deities (e.g., 5.5—9, 13.14, 20.7). Indeed, this 
sets the tone in the very opening stanzas of the work: 


krtābhisekam tanayam rājūah pārīksitasya ha | 

drastum abhyayayuh pritya saunakadya maharsayah || 1.11 || 
tan agatan sa rajarsih padyarghyadibhir arcitan | 
sukhopavistan visrantan krtasamprasnasatkathan || 1.2 || 


ny equals the rite of Vedic consecration; serving the husband equals living with 
the teacher; and care of the house equals the tending of the sacred fires.' 

79 Stanza 101.50, toward the end, lists the four with bhiksur vaikhānasas tathā 
for the last two, but this is evidently metri causa. 


41 


A Saiva Utopia 


tatkathabhih krtahladah pranipatya krtarjalih | 

satānīko ‘tha papraccha narayanakatham param || 1.3 || 

1.1 In delight, Saunaka and the rest of the great sages approached to 
see the son of King Pariksita when he had been consecrated. 

1.2 When those who had come had been honored with footwashing 
water, scented drinking water, etc., when those weary ones, greeted 
with polite inquiries and conversation, had been seated at ease. 

1:3 Then, delighted by their words and joining his palms, that sage- 
king Satanika bowed reverently to them, and asked to hear the sub- 
lime account of Narayana. 


There is no parallel to the Siva-devotee introduced in the Sivadharma- 
sastra as a replacement for the learned or snātaka Brahmin who was 
the model Smarta recipient of food and other service. 


6.3 The Visnudharma’s Diatribe Against Heretics (pasandas) 


Most notably, the Visnudharma (especially in chapters 24-25, 66, and 
105) enters into sectarian polemic against the threat posed to ortho- 
dox Smarta dharma in this decadent Kali age by ‘heretics’ (pasandas) 
of many stripes, including Buddhists, Jains, Sankhyas, skeptics, and 
false ascetics.?? 


srutismrtyuditam dharmam varnasramavibhagajam | 

ullanghya ye pravartante svecchaya kutayuktibhih || 25.4 || 

Those who willfully, with false reasoning, transgress the dharma ex- 
pressed in the Veda and the Tradition, which arose from the division 
into varnas and asramas, ... (those wicked pasandas go to hell). 


Avoiding interactions—especially conversation (ālāba) —with pasandas 
is one of the first-mentioned requirements of various votive observances 
(vratas): e.g. 5.1, 7.4, 8.2, 14.2, 15.4. 

The last chapter returns to the theme of heretics. Predicting the 
dreadful state of the world in the Kali Yuga, the degenerate age Di we are 
warned that ‘false ascetics'—mostly Südras, but also many Brahmins, 
Ksatriyas, and Vaisyas—will lead the world astray through the use of logic 
and disputation (hetuvada), attracting people to become Sravakayana 
or Mahayana Buddhist monks, or Jaina munis, or Kapila (i.e., Sankhya) 
bhiksus. Arguments framed in foreign languages (hetuvadair ... mleccha- 
bhasanibandhaih) are singled out for condemnation (105.44). Südras 


8° Bisschop (20182, 207-8) briefly notes this difference between the Sivadharma- 
sastra and early Vaisnava works including the Visnudharma. 
* This theme is taken up also in the Visnupurana; see Eltschinger 2014, 57—66. 


42 


The Sivadharma’s Revision of Brahmanical Varnasramadharma 


who become ascetics and go about without caste-markers provoke par- 
ticular concern. 

The Sivadharmasastra, on the other hand, makes no reference to 
pāsandas. The word mahāyāna appears frequently, especially in the 
tenth chapter, but only to describe heavenly conveyances that one 
can enjoy in Sivapura. The only exception may be two stanzas occur- 
ring in a series of similar ones in chapter three describing how various 
deities attained their position through worshipping one or another 
sort of linga. These two stanzas slip the Buddha and the Arhanta (i.e., 
the Jaina Tirthankara) into the series: 


buddhenapy arcitam lingam jambünadamayam subham | 

tena buddhatvam apnoti sada santam avasthitam || 3.31 || 

arhantas tu sadakalam puspalingarcanat param | 

tenarhattuam avapnoti yogam vapi sudurlabham || 3.32 || 

3.31 A linga is worshipped even by the Buddha, bright, made of gold. 
Thereby he obtains the state of Buddha, always remaining at peace.?? 
3.32 The Jina (arhanta), after worshiping a linga of flowers, thereby 
attains arhat-hood, or a [divine] union (yoga), which is very hard to 
reach. 


As Bisschop has observed,? this pair of stanzas differs in tense from 
the surrounding stanzas, is absent in some manuscripts, and occurs 
in a different position in the one Sarada manuscript. Whatever a 
fuller understanding of the transmission of this passage may tell us, 
these irregularities in the transmission—along with the interpola- 
tion in two manuscripts after 6.32 of another pair of stanzas, again 
positing that the Arhat and the Buddha worshipped Siva—suggest 
that Buddhism and Jainism lay outside 'the perceived boundaries of 
Brahmanical religion' in a way that the cults of other deities did not, 
but that the stanzas reveal an inclusivist attempt to encompass them. 

This subordinates Buddhism and Jainism by portraying their ‘gods’ 

as devotees of Siva and reframing their spiritual attainments in Saiva 
terms, rather than condemning them as corrupt or false.** 


8 Text and translation from Bisschop 2018a, 406, where he notes: ‘The gods 
mentioned include (in order of appearance): Brahma, Indra, Kubera, the Visve- 
devas, Vayu, Visnu, the Vasus, the Asvins, Varuna, Agni, Surya, Buddha, Arhat, 
and Soma. The mention of the Buddha and Arhat [the Tirthankara of Jainism] 
in this otherwise strongly Brahmanical list is noteworthy.’ 

83 Bisschop 2019a, 518, 523-4. 

84 This issue has been discussed in Bisschop 2019a; see also Sanderson 2015 
on religious tolerance in mediaeval India. 


43 


A Saiva Utopia 


7. Conclusions 


Comparing the Sivadharma's revisionist appropriation of Dharma- 
Sastric concepts with the way the same concepts appear in the Visnu- 
dharma is a good way of highlighting what is distinctive and inno- 
vative in the Sivadharma religion. In both traditions, the sectarian 
theology was presented in terms calculated to win over Smarta Brah- 
mins, the kings who patronised them, and/or others who emulated 
their religious norms. They sought to raise the prestige of their own 
religious ideals, to attract patronage, and thereby to institutionalise 
their religions on a broader basis. In doing so, they endorsed ascetic 
and yogic ideals on principle, but they framed their precepts for 
laypeople in terms of the concepts most distinctive of the dharma of 
the Dharmašāstra, especially those related to varna, āšrama, and the 
rites of domestic piety, including observance of vratas, performance 
of puja, and the ritual feeding of Brahmins. 

The Saivas and Vaisnavas of this period, though, approached 
these matters quite differently. The Visnudharma's conception of 
Visnu-bhakti pointedly defended classical Smarta status hierarchy and 
its prerogatives, forgoing the Sivadharma's radical moves in the direc- 
tion of social inclusion and the flattening of hierarchies.85 The differ- 
ence is that Vaisnava bhakti, having already won acceptance from the 
gatekeepers of Vedic and Smarta orthodoxy, defended that status by 
echoing orthodoxy social exclusivism, whereas Saivism still needed 
to win wider acceptance, and therefore opted for an inclusivist ap- 
proach in order to win legitimacy for the new tradition.** Certainly 
the Pasupata order had been classed by prominent orthodox the- 
orists such as Kumarila (the seventh-century Mimamsaka) and Me- 
dhatithi (the ninth-century commentator of the Manavadharmasa- 
stra) with Pancaratras, Buddhists, Jainas, and other Veda-rejecting 
groups as unworthy of receiving the guest-reception.*7 In that con- 


55 This difference between the Sivadharmasastra and the Visnudharma may fore- 
shadow a broader pattern in the later Saiva and Vaisnava spheres. Vaisnava move- 
ments have tended to adhere more strictly to Brahmanical purity and hierarchy 
standards. The Bhagavadgita’s emphasis on adhering to svadharma, ‘one’s proper 
dharma according to status, already tacks in that direction, despite the leveling 
possibilities of bhakti. 

8° This is the explanation of inclusivism proposed by Wezler 1983, discussed 
by Bisschop 2019a. 

87 Kumarila, Tantravarttika ad Pūrvamīmāmsāsūtra 1.3.3-4 and Medhātithi ad MDh 
2.5-6; see Sanderson 2015, 159-169, who also discusses the similar view of Aparadi- 
tya (the twelfth-century commentator on the Yajnavalkyadharmasastra). Sanderson 
goes on to show how the Saiva tradition broadly adopted the inclusivist model. 


44 


The Sivadharma’s Revision of Brahmanical Varnasramadharma 


text, the logic of Sivadharma as presented in the Sivadharmasastra 
(and in the Sivasramadhyaya in particular) was intended to undercut 
such criticisms by appropriating key Smarta ritual and social catego- 
ries, redefining them in relation to Siva at every step. 

The particular genius of the Sivadharma was the way it overlaid 
the Dharmasastric social model of dharma with a specially tailored 
form of ascetic discipline. In an earlier period, the Dharmasastra it- 
self had recast everyday household life as a religious profession by cir- 
cumscribing it with strenuous ritual observances, social restrictions, 
and purity rules, and by putting forward the highly learned (srotriya) 
or highly disciplined (snataka) householder Brahmin as a figure em- 
inently worthy of ritualised feeding and public patronage through 
royal endowments analogous to those bestowed upon the ascetic or- 
ders. The Sivadharma subsequently appropriated and adapted that 
model as a way of allowing uninitiated Mahe$varas to more closely 
emulate Pasupata ascetics. The stvabhakta status, bestowed upon ex- 
emplary stvagrhasthas and sivayogins alike, likewise provided a para- 
digm for validating the pious householder as a religious professional 
worthy of royal patronage. 

Dharma as an upgrading of household life and dharma as a down- 
grading of ascetic rigor thus converge in the middle. Dharmasastra had 
earlier located that middle in the household by defining a more rig- 
orous model of domestic piety centered on the Brahmanical grhastha. 
The Sivadharma’s sivasrama-sivabhakti ideal is a further reconfiguration 
of the householder-ascetic. Like the Bhagavadgītā, the Sivadharmasastra 
made devotion the overriding criterion of value, beyond birth status 
and beyond conventional ritual attainments; the bhakta is promised 
the same rewards as the ascetic, and even more than those of non-dev- 
otee laity however ritually observant they may be. 

But the Sivadharmasastra goes still further by redirecting the Smar- 
ta practice of ritualised hospitality for especially pious learned Brah- 
mins and other venerable persons so that the favored recipients are 
Siva-devotees. In this way, the devoted 'Siva-householder' becomes 
an object of devotion for others, on the principle that devotees em- 
body the divine presence of Siva directly, just as does the Siva-ascetic. 
Like the Dharmašāstras, the Sivadharmasastra defines a religion of 
the household that, while giving due recognition to the virtuosic 
discipline of the ascetics, appropriates some of their charisma for 
householders with a discipline of their own, creating an asrama in 
both senses of the word, which allows them to play the roles both 
of worshipper and of worshipped. In doing so, the Sivadharmasastra 
flattened hierarchical differences of social rank, and closed the gulf 


45 


A Saiva Utopia 


between the householder and the ascetic by accommodating them 
within a single sivasrama, with both figures recognised as vocations 
worthy of respect, worship, and patronage precisely because the deity 
becomes present in both. 

This was conveyed through an innovative and sometimes even 
subversive rewriting of Smarta precepts and categories, a rewriting 
directed no doubt at the target audience of the Dharmasastra trea- 
tises themselves, as a way of giving shape, coherence, and legitimacy 
to lay religiosity inspired by Pasupata ascetics in terms that would 
have resonated in mid-first-millennium India, particularly among 
Sanskrit-literate social and political elites. The boldness of this vi- 
sion in the Sivadharmasastra is partly undercut by vestiges of Smarta 
deference to Brahmin status, especially where ritualised feeding is 
concerned, and in references to the ritual use of the Brahmanical 
sacred thread. Mirnig is certainly correct when she observes that the 
Sivadharmasastra’s ‘ideals oscillate between a conformity to and the 
transcendence of Brahmanical norms, just as they do between those 
of the ascetic and the householder.’** 

But the boldness of those ideals stands out when we compare the 
Sivadharmasastra to early works of lay-oriented devotional Vaisnavism 
such as the Bhagavadgita and the Visnudharma, and even later works 
of the Sivadharma tradition beginning with the Sivadharmottara and 
the Sivopanisad, not to mention the Saiva Siddhanta. The authors of 
all of these works engaged in adaptation and reconceptualization of 
Smarta rituals and social norms, but all of them affirmed Dharma- 
$astric social status and gender disparities to a greater degree than 
does the Sivadharmasastra. In particular, we perceive in the details 
of the Sivadharmottara' s and the even later Sivopanisad’s presenta- 
tion of the āšramas a growing inclination to adhere more closely to 
Smarta orthodoxy, even (in the latter case) using Vedic mantras. In 
this respect, the radical sociology of the Sivadharmasastra’s model of 
lay religion seems to have been tempered as the tradition matured, 
probably to help encourage wider acceptance by conservatively in- 
clined elites as the tradition was carried along with other products 
of Sanskrit cosmopolitanism into new markets.*? In this respect, the 
early Sivadharma fell victim to its own success. 


88 Mirnig 2019, 474. 
89 Evidence of this widening ambit is found in the epigraphic record, recently 
summarised by Bisschop 2018b, 18-19. 


46 


Edition and Translation 


Introduction to the Edition 


1. Sources for the Root Text 


The text of the Sivadharmasastra has been preserved in a very large 
number of manuscripts. Of these, at least twenty palm-leaf manuscripts 
survive in Nepalese sources, including the earliest, which hails from 
the tenth century ce. If we take into account the paper manuscripts 
from Nepal as well, the number is at least doubled. Similarly, more 
than twenty palm-leaf manuscripts exist in South Indian sources, writ- 
ten in Grantha, Telugu and Malayalam scripts.” There are also other 
manuscripts of the Sivadharmasastra written in Bengali and Sarada 
scripts—and there are, no doubt, more manuscripts yet to be dis- 
covered. 

For this edition of chapter eleven, which bears the title ‘ Sivasrama- 
dhyaya, a representative selection of twelve sources from what we es- 
timate to be over ninety in total has been made. These include some 
of the oldest available manuscripts, but also a selection of manuscripts 
from different parts of the subcontinent in order to represent the re- 
gional variation of the text. Out of the twelve sources used for the critical 
edition of the present chapter, six are Nepalese palm-leaf manuscripts 
ONS, NĒ, NĒ. NE, NES, and N$); four are from South India: three 
palm-leaf manuscripts (GF, Më and G4.) and one transcript (P+); fur- 
thermore, one Kashmiri paper manuscript (S%,) has been included, as 
well as the editio princeps of Yogi Naraharinath (E?).*' 


9 See De Simini 2016b and Bisschop 2018b, 26. 
% For the sigla we follow the system set out in Bisschop 2018b, 50—51. 


A Saiva Utopia 


Manuscript Nžs 


Thisis a palm-leaf manuscript microfilmed by the NGMPP, which bears 
the reel number A 1028/4 (acc. no. NAK 6—7) and is preserved at the 
National Archives, Kathmandu. It is written in Kutila script. Though 
undated, this manuscript, being a Sivadharma corpus manuscript, 
provides the earliest material evidence for the existence of the cor- 
pus. Its script can be dated to the first half of the tenth century.” It is 
written in a clean hand and contains relatively few scribal errors. The 
manuscript is incomplete and consists in its present state of 157 folios 
in total. Each folio contains generally five lines. It has two binding 
holes: one in the centre-left and one in the centre-right. Foliation is 
recorded in the middle of the left-hand margin of the verso in Newari 
letters. The manuscript contains the following Sivadharma texts: 


1. Sivadharmasastra (fols 34-48") 

2. Sivadharmottara (fols 48-109") 

3. Sivadharmasamgraha (fols 109-162") 
4. Umamahesvarasamvada (fols 162—191") 
5. Šivopanisad (fols 1°-13") 


The Sivasramadhyaya covers folios 40" to 44". 


Manuscript Nš, 


This is a palm-leaf manuscript microfilmed by the NGMPP, which 
bears the reel number A 1082/3 (acc. no. 3/393) and is preserved at 
the National Archives, Kathmandu. It is written in Newari script and 
dated to [Nepāla] Samvat 189 (1069 ce). It contains 274 folios, each 
folio generally containing six lines. It has two binding holes: one in 
the centre-left and one in the centre-right. Foliation is recorded in 
the middle of the left-hand margin of the verso and combines Newari 
letters and numbers. It is written in a clean hand and contains very 
few scribal errors. It marks colophons in orange colour. This manu- 
script is a multiple-text manuscript and contains: 


1. Sivadharmasastra (fols 1-417) 

2. Sivadharmottara (fols 1"—52") 

3. Sivadharmasamgraha (fols 1-57") 

4. Umamahesvarasamvada (fols 1"—32") 


5. Šivopanisad (fols 1-19") 


?? See also De Simini 2016b, 219, and Bisschop 2018b, 50, n. 212. 


50 


Introduction to the Edition 


6. Vrsasarasamgraha (fols 1—46") 
7. Dharmaputrika (fols 1-12") 


8. Uttarottaramahasamvada (fols 1"—24") 


The Sivasramadhyaya covers 34'3-37°2. 


Manuscript Na 


This is a palm-leaf manuscript microfilmed by the NGMPP, which 
bears the reel number NGMPP B 12/4 (acc. no. NAK 5-841) and 
is preserved at the National Archives, Kathmandu. It can be dated 
to the eleventh century ce on palaeographical grounds. It contains 
142 folios, each folio consisting of five lines in general. The folios 
are not held in the proper order. It has two binding holes: one in 
the centre-left and one in the centre-right. Foliation is displayed in 
the middle of the left-hand margin of the verso in Newari letters and 
numbers. It is written in a clean hand and contains few scribal errors. 
The manuscript is damaged on the margins, which has led to a con- 
siderable loss of text. This manuscript is a multiple-text manuscript 
and contains: 


1. Sivadharmasastra (fols 147") 
2. Sivadharmottara (fols 48-109") 
3. Sivadharmasamgraha (fols 110—150") 


The Sivasramadhyaya covers 40'1—43"1. 


Manuscript NS, 


N is a multiple-text palm-leaf manuscript written in Newari script 
and preserved as part of the collection of Sylvain Lévi, housed in the 
Institut d'études indiennes of the Collége de France. The manuscript 
number is: MS. Skt. 57-B. 23. It may be dated to the eleventh century 
cE on palaeographical grounds.” It contains 249 palm leaves, each 
folio consisting of six lines. The following folios are missing: 3, 8, 47, 
48, 135, 197, 214, and 216. Foliation is recorded on the verso side: in 
the middle of the left-hand margin in combination of Newari letters, 


9 Two dates are recorded in Nepala Samvat. These appear in the manuscript 
after the Dharmaputrikā: one on exposure 494 (Samvat 415 = 1295 CE) and the 
other on exposure 497 (Samvat 611 = 1491 cE). The first date is related to the 
Sivadharma manuscript and concerns the use of the manuscript on that date. 
The second date rather relates to the Visnudharma, of which one folio is included 
in the bundle, with its colophon written in a different hand. 


51 


A Saiva Utopia 


and in the middle of the right-hand in roman numbers by a second 
hand. There are two binding holes: one in the centre-left and one 
in the centre-right. The manuscript is damaged in the margins, with 
considerable loss of text. The text is written in a clear hand and con- 
tains few mistakes. The manuscript contains the following texts: 


= 


. Sivadharmasastra (fols 1°-40°) 

. Sivadharmottarasastra (fols 40'—937) 

; Sivadharmasamgraha (fols 93"—141") 

. Umamahesvarasamvada (fols 1427-172") 
: Sivopanisad (fols 173—188”) 


. Uttarottaramāhasamvāda (fols 189—210") 


N AUN BW N 


. Vrsasārasamgraha (fols 211—251") 
8. Dharmaputrika (fols 251-260") 


The Sivasramadhyaya covers fols 33'-3773. 


Manuscript NS 


5 is a palm-leaf manuscript numbered G 4077/1 and preserved at 
the Asiatic Society, Kolkata. It is written in Newari script and dated to 
[Nepāla] Samvat 156 (1035-36 cE). It contains 355 folios, each folio 
consisting generally of five lines. The colophon is marked in red ink 
by a second hand. 

It has two binding holes: one in the centre-left and one in the cen- 
tre-right. The original foliation is given in the middle of the left-hand 
margin of the verso in conjunction with Newari letters and numbers. 
Two secondary foliations in roman script can be traced: one near the 
original foliation and the other above the centre-left binding hole. 
The manuscript has a somewhat blurred appearance and contains nu- 
merous scribal errors. It is damaged on the margins, resulting in con- 
siderable loss of text. The manuscript contains the following texts:?* 


1. Sivadharmasastra (fols 1-47) 

2. Sivadharmottara (fols 1-65) 

3. Sivadharmasamgraha (fols 1-58) 

4. Umamahesvarasamvada (fols 1-35) 

5. Šivopanisad (fols 1-23) 

6. Umottara or Uttarottaratantra (fols 23—42 and 46—49) 


% Note that folios of this manuscript are not consecutively numbered. Cf. De 
Simini and Mirnig 2017, 597. 


52 


Introduction to the Edition 


7. Vrsasarasamgraha (fols 1-52) 


8. Lalitavistara (40; fols 1-25° and 1-17) 


The Sivasramadhyaya covers 39'1-43'1. 


Manuscript Ni 
NG is a palm-leaf manuscript which is preserved at the University Li- 
brary of Cambridge, bearing the number Add. 1645. It is a palm-leaf 
manuscript dated to [Nepala] Samvat 259 (1139-40 CE) written in 
Newari script. It contains 247 folios, consisting of six lines per folio. 
It has two binding holes: one in the centre-left and one in the cen- 
tre-right. The foliation on the left-hand margin consists of Newari let- 
ters and numbers. On the right- hand margin there are Devanagari 
numbers. The manuscript contains many scribal errors as well as cor- 
rections by a second hand. The following texts are included: 

1. Sivadharmasastra (fols 138") 
. Sivadharmottara (fols 38—87") 
: Sivadharmasamgraha (fols 87-132") 
: Sivopanisad (fols 132—150") 
. Umamahesvarasamvada (fols 150—180”) 
. Uttarottaramāhasamvāda (fols 180—201”) 


. Vrsasarasamgraha (fols 201°-238 ") 


O N AUN dA Lu N 


. Dharmaputrika (fols 238 '-247") 


The Sivasramadhyaya covers fols 31°2-34°3. 


Manuscript Sb 


This is a paper manuscript written in Sarada script and preserved 
at the Oriental Research Library, Srinagar, under the number 1467. 
It has thirty-eight folios, each folio containing thirteen to fourteen 
lines. Foliation is given in the lower left-hand margin of the verso 
under the abbreviation si. dha. in Sarada numbers. The title on the li- 
brary catalogue card is reported as Sivadharmacarita and it is classified 
under ‘Purana.’ It is written in a clear hand and contains few scribal 
errors. The Sivasramadhyaya covers fols 32'3—34'10. 


55 Two folios of this part—namely exposures 23B/24A and 24B/25A—con- 
tain the text of the Umottarasamvada (De Simini and Mirnig 2017, 594). 

°° The manuscript is available online at: http:/ /cudl.lib.cam.ac.uk/view/MS- 
ADD-01645/1. 


53 


A Saiva Utopia 


Manuscript G“ 


This is a palm-leaf manuscript preserved at Sri Nataraja Gurukkal, 
Kilvelur. It is written in Grantha script. It has fifty-three folios; each 
folio contains seven lines in general. Although this source contains 
some scribal slips, it may be the best among the South Indian man- 
uscripts consulted for this chapter. The foliation is given on the left- 
hand margin of the verse in Grantha letters, on top of which there 
is a roman foliation written in a late hand. There is damage by in- 
sects throughout, causing loss of text. The manuscript has two bind- 
ing holes: one on the centre-left and one on the centre-right. The 
Sivasramadhyaya covers folios 45'3—4872. 


Manuscript Më, 


Mó, is a palm-leaf manuscript preserved at The Oriental Research 
Institute and Manuscripts Library in Trivandrum (No. 12763). It is 
written in Malayalam script, in a clear hand and contains few scribal 
errors. There is considerable loss of text due to damaged margins. 
Each folio contains six lines in general. The manuscript has two 
binding holes: one on the centre-left and one on the centre-right. 
The foliation on the left-hand margin is in Malayalam letters. The 
colophons are marked by red ink. The manuscript is accompanied 
by a commentary, a separate edition of which is included below (pp. 
1451f). The beginning of each verse commented upon by the com- 
mentary has been underlined in blue ink and sometimes in grey ink 
by a second hand. The Sivasramadhyaya covers fols 54"5—60'5. 


Manuscript Gio 


Gis a manuscript preserved in the Leiden University Library. The 
text is written in Grantha script. Each folio contains six lines (except 
157', which has seven lines). It seems to have been originally part of a 
multi-text manuscript, since the foliation starts from number seven- 
ty-seven. The foliation is given in the middle of the left-hand margin 
of the recto. There are two binding holes: one in the centre-left and 
one in the centre-right. The manuscript has some small damage but 
without much loss of text. 

On the leaf preceding the beginning of the text proper, the title of 
the text, the number of chapters, and the name of the main interlocu- 
tor is mentioned in Devanagari in the following way: Sivadharmasastra 
11 a namdikešvara After this, the folio numbers are provided in roman 
script, numbering 77-167 (ninety-one pages). The manuscript num- 
ber is 11.40. The Sivasramadhyaya covers folios 154'5-159"5. 


54 


Introduction to the Edition 


Manuscript P; 


P7; is a Devanagari paper transcript of manuscript 75425, preserved 
at Institut Francais de Pondichéry (IFP), T 72b.% The original is writ- 
ten in Grantha script and belongs to the Adyar Library, Chennai. It 
has 155 folios, each page containing ten verses. The transcript men- 
tions the number of the folio (both recto and verso) of the original 
text. The foliation on the right-hand side corresponds to the original 
number of leaves, while the foliation on the upper-right hand margin 
gives the page number of the transcript. The Sivasramadhyaya covers 
pp. 128-140. This, according to the transcript, corresponds to 33'-36" 
of the original manuscript. 


Edition: EN 


Yogi Naraharinath, Sivadharma Pasupatimatam Sivadharmamahasastram 
Pasupatinathadarsanam, Kathmandu, Samvat 2055 (1998 cE). The S?va- 
sramadhyaya chapter in this volume also contains a rather liberal Nep- 
alese translation by the editor. The volume is both hand-written and 
typeset. The texts are published in the following order: 

1. Sivadharmasastra 
; Sivopanisad 
. Sivadharmottara 
š Sivadharmasamgraha 
. Umamahesvarasamvada 
. Uttarottara 


- Vrsasarasamgraha 


O N AU AU N 


. Dharmaputrika 


The Sivasramadhyaya covers pages 143-161. 

In what follows we share some observations on individual charac- 
teristics of manuscripts regarding the question of the regional trans- 
missions of the text and their possible relations.’ 


2. The Transmission in Nepal 


Since the Nepalese manuscripts predate all the other consulted 
sources by several centuries, it is likely that they transmit an over- 


? Online at http://muktalib7.org/IFP_RooT/IFP/transcripts_data/T0072/ 
PDF/ Too72.pdf. 
98 Compare also Bisschop 2018, 54—63. 


55 


A Saiva Utopia 


all earlier version of the text. Within the Nepalese transmission of 
the present chapter, the two earliest manuscripts (Ns and N£) each 
seem to go back to a different source that had already developed the 
character of a recension—the reason being that the two manuscripts 
differ in important readings on many occasions. 


2.1 The Transmission in N5s 


As the earliest manuscript for this chapter, this manuscript deserves 
special attention. Compared to the other manuscripts, it is marked 
by several scribal errors, such as omission of visarga, omission of 
anusvara, dropping of syllables, dropping of repha, and others. There 
are also cases of dropping of the final tin the third person optative 
singular,” but these can be defended as authorial, as such conven- 
tions commonly occur in early Saiva Tantras. No lines appear to 
have been added through textual accretion. On two occasions, a por- 
tion of text is uniquely missing: 


1. SiDhS 11.28b-30a 
pavitram naiva vidyate | 

ukivaivam munidevebhyah snato yena sivah svayam || 28 
tadaprabhrti brahmadya munayas ca sivarthinah | 
sarvaparvasu yatnena bhasmasnanam pracakrire || 29 
tasmād etac chivasnanam 

2. SiDhS 11.67-68 
kālāt punar ihayatah samastajiianaparagah | 
surüpah subhagah srtman nīrujah suprajah sukhī || 67 
Saranagatam udvignam aghratam riputaskaraih | 
mā bhair iti samasvasya sivaloke mahiyate || 68 


These two omissions are most probably scribal. The first may have 
been caused by eye-skip from snanain 28a to snānain 30a; construing 
28a and 30b as one sentence does not make good sense. The second 
omission is almost certainly due to eye-skip, because 66d and 68d 
(stvaloke mahīyate) are identical. 


2.2. The Transmission in Nk, Compared with Other Sources 


Read in juxtaposition with Ns, this manuscript is important for un- 
derstanding the developmental history of the Sivadharmasastra in the 
Nepalese transmission. As mentioned above, N£ and Nšs show many 
variations suggesting that they represent two different lines of trans- 


"7 For instance, at 4b: syā for syat, and at 15a: bhave for bhavet. 
"9 See, for example, Goodall et al. 2015, 132 and Kafle 2020, 135. 


56 


Introduction to the Edition 


mission. The manuscript provides an overall grammatically correct 
form of the text and has very few scribal errors. It has no omissions of 
any of the text adopted in our edition. 

Judging on the basis of the text of the present chapter, N£, N& 
and E belong more or less together. They share the same reading 
in twelve distinct cases (only one of these, 67d nzrujah, has been ad- 
opted in the main text): 28d snāto devah svayam sivah; 36a gandha- 
lepavisuddho; 42a sarvasangavi^; Sod. krtam hi sive; 53d. labhen narah; 
64ab ?madhvasramasu^; 67d nirujah; 71d karunyad datta^; 73a nedrsam 
sva°; 75b dhyapa®; 82c vaca yo "vikrtah; 95d °manuttamam. 

It deserves notice that Nf and Ein particular are very close to 
each other, agreeing in sixteen instances in sharing a variant not ad- 
opted in the main text: 4b sambhavo bhavet; 5c trisandhyam ekakalam; 
6d seso bhavati bhavitah; 7a samrodha?; 7b madyadinakakadisu; od hi- 
msyat tu himsakas tada; 15d. bhütiko ’thava; 33a tasmāt; 34a vidhivat 
toyam; 63c dattvambhasa tatha snanam; 70a patite, 73c ^yusyam; 86c sva- 
rgasya moksasya; 101b prityà caiva matena; 103b tenaptam; 115a. parva- 
varjyam vrajet so pi. 

The above-mentioned three sources (N£, Ns, and E^), together 
with two South Indian manuscripts (G4, and P7;), include the follow- 
ing two extra lines on the significance of ashes after 32d:'” 


rudragner yat param bījam tad bhasma parikīrtitam | 
dahakam sarvaduhkhanam tasmad bhasmeti cocyate || 


The inclusion of this etymology of the word bhasman would have 
been an easy addition to make in the context of the praise of ashes. 
The same three sources, together with one South Indian manuscript 
(G^), omit verse 59 about guest-reception: 

prāptāya sivabhaktaya pādyācamanapūrvakam | 

yo ‘rgham nivedayed bhaktya suryalokam sa gacchati || 
It is unclear why this verse should have been omitted in these sources. 
Furthermore, N£, and N$, together with P?2, add the following line 
on offering water for bathing after 62ab: 


datvambhasa tatha snanam saubhagyam buddhivardhanam | 


Finally, N£ and E", together with P4., omit 107ab (possibly due to 
eye-skip): 


asvamedhayutam purnam satyam ca tulitam pura | 


"' For translations of the additional passages referred to in the following 
pages, see the notes ad loc. in the main translation of the text. 


57 


A Saiva Utopia 


The above examples, especially the inclusion of additional lines 
shared by some Nepalese and South Indian sources, could indicate 
that the South Indian transmission of the Sivadharmasastra may have 
branched off from an earlier North Indian source. 


2.3 The Transmission in Other Nepalese Sources 


The manuscript in the Asiatic Society of Bengal (N55) is the oldest 
dated source for the text (1035/36 CE), which makes it by definition 
an important manuscript by furnishing a solid dating. This manu- 
script is, on the other hand, in many ways also the most problematic 
one used for this chapter. It contains numerous scribal errors, in- 
cluding omission of visarga, omission of anusvara, dropping of sylla- 
bles, dropping of repha, dropping of ekāra, dropping of aikāra, etc. 
The manuscript has no additional lines for this chapter. It has one 
unique omission (79cd): 


sivam bhavatu sarvatra prabrayat sarvakarmasu || 
Furthermore, it has one omission shared with NÉ, and Sì, at 112ef: 
ye sthità brahmacaryena te nityam samsthitah sive || 


Another manuscript from Kathmandu (N5,) also does not include 
any additional text. In two instances it omits text shared with two 
other manuscripts. It omits—possibly due to eye-skip—a single line 
on bathing in ashes (27cd), shared with the Sàradà manuscript (Si) 
and one South Indian manuscript (OM): 


bhasmasnanam niseveta mucyate sarvapatakaih || 


Furthermore, Nf. omits the two lines comprising verse 57. In this 
case, the omission is shared with two South Indian sources: GA; and 
MÄ The omission seems to be due to eye-skip. The verse concerns 
the satisfaction (tusti) a man obtains upon receiving a devotee of Siva 
at home: 


sivabhaktam grhe drstvā tustim vrajati yo narah | 
varsakotisahasrani vased vaisravane pure || 


The Paris manuscript (N$,) too has no additional lines, but drops one 
line (41cd): 


upavasat param bhaiksam ekannam grhinam malam || 


"? This has also been noted by Bisschop 2018b, 55, in relation to chapter six. 


58 


Introduction to the Edition 


3. The Transmission in Kashmir 


The Sarada manuscript ($2) preserved in the collection of the Ori- 
ental Research Library in Srinagar contains few trivial mistakes but 
it offers about 150 unique readings. In other words, this source has a 
distinct identity from all the rest. 

In comparison with the other manuscripts used, Š$, shows most 
affinity with NĒ, sharing six unique variants: 15d bhautiko ‘pi và; 51c 
prayatnad api; 67d suvratah sukhi; 101d sa santosah pra’; 107a °medhayutam 
pürnam; 116d etad apy āšramatrayam. In four instances it shares variants 
with NZ: 10b pūjakāh; Goa prapya; 70a °sasta°; 56c °koti°. In four other 
instances, NĒ, N$ and Sj, together have a shared reading, including 
one accepted in the main text: 59c yo ‘rgham (accepted); 90c na ca; 116c 
ahimsaka; 117b °naghah. S; also has four shared readings with Nšs; 65a 
santama’; 98c °kotyayutam sagram (accepted reading); 99c nakārye sam”; 
105a sudrstam. Si inserts the following two lines after 105b: 


tad asatyam iti proktam vaiparityena satyata | 
svānubhūtam svadrstam srutam aptan na labhyate || 


This verse is an extension on the concept of truth treated in the pre- 
ceding verse. 

The manuscript contains many omissions which may be due to 
eye-skip. That the scribe of this manuscript or its ancestor was sloppy 
is indicated by verses 59c-60d which are repeated after 74b. The fol- 
lowing unique omissions occur in St 3b-4a; 16c-17; 23d-24a; 27cd; 
32c-34b; 43c-44b; 52c-53b; 57d; 64; 108ab; 115ab. 

On one occasion, at 106ab, it shares an omission with MZ: 


satyam satyam punah satyam etavat satyalaksanam | 


4. The Transmission in the South 


Compared to the Nepalese manuscripts, the South Indian ones are 
much later, but this does not exclude the possibility that they preserve 
older readings. The three palm-leaf manuscripts (G^, Më and CG) and 
one transcript (P4.) that we have used reveal that they do not go back 
to the same hyparchetype.'? In the entire chapter there is only one 
instance where they have a uniquely shared variant (54a: sivasrama?). 
Two manuscripts (G* and Më) have nine uniquely shared variants. 
7d vacikair và japadibhih; 14c °dravyair na^; 39d vapanāt bhavet; 61a 
Joke: 79b °mamgalavacane; 93c pumsam abhayadānāt tu; 98c °kotisatam 


*3 The same has been noted by Bisschop (2018b, 62) with regard to chapter six. 


59 


A Saiva Utopia 


sagram; 101d sa tosah pari°; 102b sarvada; 109b ca sambhramat. Further- 
more, G^ and G% have five uniquely shared variants, including the 
speaker indication srinandikesvarah and the colophon sivasramacaro 
nama ekadaso ' dhyāyah. The other three instances are: 64ab °madhva- 
nasrama®; 111d °samyamam; 116b (kuryat ka”). G* and P7. together 
have eight uniquely shared variants: 10a sivarcanaparo; 19b dharayeta 
yah; 40d santamanas ca; Sob janaih; 61d bhavet; 96d narakagnisu; 
99d santi°; 117b samudyutktas sada. M, and G4 have three uniquely 
shared variants: 35a ācāmet; 59c yo rghyam; 63b sihasana?. Gio and P, 
finally, have five uniquely shared variants: 27c tu seveta; 31b yo và ko 
vanyalaksanah; 37a ° sahasraistu; 43d. °kriyanvitah; 65a šāntamā”. These 
commonalities indicate individual lines of transmission in the south. 

In what follows we concentrate on the additions and omissions 
encountered in the South Indian sources. 

In six instances, G^ includes additional passages. In four cases 
these additions are unique and in two cases they are shared with oth- 
er sources. The first unique addition (after verse 4) is an extension of 
the description of the sivasrama: 


nairrtyam ca samiddesam varunyam udakasrayam | 
vayavyam dhanyadesam vai kauberyam bhandagudhakam || 


The second addition (after verse 12) adds one more item to the du- 
ties of a sivasramin, viz. the worship of Siva, the fire and the teacher: 


stvagnigurupujabhih papair etair na lipyate | 

anyais ca patakair ghorais tasmat sampujayet trayam || 
The third addition (after verse 18) is about wearing the rudraksa beads 
on different parts of the body: 

sirasa dharayet kotih karnayos ca sahasrakam | 

Satakotih gale baddham sahasram bahumadhyatah || 


apramanaphalam haste rudraksasya tu dharanat | 
ucchisto vapi kanthena yukto và sarvapatakaih || 


haranti sarvapapan ca rudraksasparsanena tu | 
rudraksam kantham asritya svano ‘pi kriyate yadi || 


so ‘pi rudratvam apnoti kim punar manavadayah | 


The fourth unique addition is an extra line after verse 43b. It 
states that one obtains the state of union (yoga) by offering food 
to yogins: 


yoginām annadanena yogasthanam avapnuyat | 


After verse 36, G adds seven extra lines. Among these lines, the first 
two are an extension of the laudation of bathing in ashes. The five 


60 


Introduction to the Edition 


lines that follow are shared with MZ and Go, and concern five differ- 
ent types of bathing found in certain Saiva Tantric texts, namely: 1) 
Varuna, 2) Agneya, 3) Divya, 4) Vayavya, and 5) Manasa: 


bhasmasnanena yat purvam papam amaranantikam | 
janmantarakriam yat tad dahaty agnir ivendhanam | 
snanam varunam agneyam divyam vayavyamanase | 
paūcasnānāni vipranam vihitani ca suddhaye | 
varunam varina snanam agneyam bhasmana bhavet | 
vrslya satapaya divyam vayavyam rajasā gavam | 
manasam dhyānamātreņa vihitam sivayoginam | 


After the final verse (118), G*, GA; and P7; add two lines concerned 
with the srutiphala of this chapter: 


yah patheta sive bhaktya acaradhyayam uttamam | 
trisaptakulajaih sardham sivaloke mahtyate || 


The manuscript from Trivandrum (MZ) does not add any unique 
extra text. It has one unique omission (27cd), concerning the fruit 
of bathing in ash: 


bhasmasnanam niseveta mucyate sarvapatakaih || 


Furthermore, it replaces 45cd (sarva evasrama jneyah sivabhaktah siva 
sramah), concerning the ‘discipline of Siva, with the following line: 
bhavaputa[h] sivasyaite sivasramasamasritah. 

The manuscript preserved at Leiden University (Ga) also shows 
no signs of unique textual accretion. It stands out, however, by having 
the largest amount of textual omission for this chapter. We assume 
that the omissions which are particular to G4, must have resulted in- 
advertently during the process of copying. The omitted lines are the 
following: 9cd, 19cd, 45c-55d, 76c-84b, and 105c-111b. 

The Pondicherry transcript (P72), finally, includes two additional 
text passages. The first (after 24d) states that ash should be made from 
cowdung: 


svatassuddhakula gavah sambhutam tasu gomayam | 
sivāgninā punah paktam pavitram bhasma tat smrtam || 


The second instance (after 66d) introduces the subject of taking spe- 
cial care of a sick Siva devotee. This passage has been added presum- 
ably with the intent of facilitating the formation of the community of 
Siva worshippers: 


sivabhaktam visesena rogartam yas tu palayet | 
bhaisajyair vrttidanena sivalokam vrajed dhruvam || 


61 


A Saiva Utopia 


sarvayatnena mahata yan tu kuryad aroginam | 
stvalokakutumbi syat tasya punyam anantakam || 


P7; has three unique instances of omission. The first (36cd) is a line 
on the teaching of pure intention. The second (59a-61b) concerns 
three lines on the reception of Siva's devotees as guests. The omission 
of these lines may have been caused by eye-skip if we assume that the 
exemplar of this manuscript had mahiyate in 61b (the reading in the 
Southern manuscripts). The third (67cd) is a line about one's rebirth 
on earth after having been honoured in Siva’s world for a long time. 


5. Concluding Observations 


The copious number of additions and omissions, the considerable di- 
versity in variant readings found in the multiplicity of extant sources, 
combined with the fact that the Sivadharmasastra has continued to be 
copied until the twentieth century," evince that the Sivadharmasastra 
was actively used and constituted a living text for a very long period 
of time. As a consequence, the history of transmission of the Sivadha- 
rmašāstra is complex and presents the editor with major challenges. 
The Nepalese as well as the South Indian sources consulted for this 
chapter indicate that there were multiple lines of transmission within 
them. Furthermore, the manuscript from Kashmir displays its own 
distinct transmission. As the Sivadharmasastra shows itself to be part 
of a living tradition, a study of the different lines of transmission of 
this chapter—if not the whole text—may shed more light on regional 
as well as intra-regional use of the Sivadharmasastra. 

In the next section we address the policies that have guided us in 
editing the text. 


6. Editorial Policies 


The twelve sources used in our edition are presented in the appara- 
tus in the following order: Nis, Ng, NS, N&, N, N%, Bis G*, MZ, 
Gio, Pia, and E^. 

As a matter of principle we have given more weight to the read- 
ings of the Nepalese palm-leaf manuscripts as these are the oldest 
sources for the text and are most likely to preserve an earlier form of 
the text, and in order to avoid conflation of different manuscript tra- 
ditions. Among the Nepalese manuscripts, Nîs has been singled out 
specifically because it is our oldest surviving source. As a matter of 


"4 See De Simini 2016b, 215. 


62 


Introduction to the Edition 


principle we have adopted the reading of Nšs, provided the reading 
is supported by at least one more source. There are, however, many 
occasions where a reading of NÉ may meet the criterium but we have 
nevertheless decided to reject it. Such exceptions take into account 
larger considerations of likelihood of the originality of a particular 
reading. In other words, readings have not been adopted mechani- 
cally but each reading is critically assessed and considered on its own 
merits. An element of subjectivity is unavoidable in the critical edi- 
tion of a text of the kind edited here.'5 In cases where we felt it to be 
appropriate, the choice for a particular reading is discussed in the 
footnotes accompanying the translation. 

The constituted text is presented as the running text on each page. 

The apparatus is a fully positive one and divided into three regis- 
ters. On pages that display all three registers, the upper register re- 
cords testimonia and parallels. That is to say, this register contains 
references to actual testimonia as well as to other sources, which may 
be older or younger, that display textual parallels and are sufficiently 
close to our text to merit our attention. The entry first lists the verse 
number. Testimonia are preceded by 'cf.' if the passage is sufficiently 
similar to the textus criticus of the Sivasramadhyaya, or can contribute to 
its elucidation. When quoted text is approximately identical with the 
main text the testimonium is quoted with the ‘approximate-sign’ (=) 
at the end of the verse, or of the two padas if only two padas are quoted 
inside the double round brackets. If only a part of a pada is identical 
with the root text this is indicated with the ‘equals-sign’ (=).'°° 

The layer below the upper register (i.e., the second register from 
the top) reports omissions and additions in individual sources of one 
or more padas in comparison to the main text of the edition. If there 
are more variants to note for the same verse, the additional variants 
are separated by a bullet (e). The same register also reports the loss 
of folios in individual sources. 

The bottom register (i.e., the third register from the top) records 
the variants found in the manuscripts. Each entry begins with a chap- 
ter-and-verse number in boldface (e.g. 32). This is followed by the 
textual segment as adopted in the main text, capped by a lemma 
sign (]). Immediately thereafter, the sigla referencing the sources of 
this reading are displayed. At this point, a semicolon separates the 
preferred (and adopted) reading (to its left) from the variants (to 


"5 For further considerations of the manuscript transmission of the Sivadha- 
rmasastra, see also Bisschop 2018, 49-63. 
"6 For example, see verse 22ab in the edition. 


63 


A Saiva Utopia 


its right). The variants to the right are again separated from each 
other by semicolons. To save space and to make the apparatus more 
readable, sigma-signs have been used to indicate where different 
manuscripts belonging to the same group share the same reading: 
Z indicates that a reading is found in all sources with a maximum of 
two variants; S* indicates that all readings of the South Indian sources 
are congruent. 

Any siglum that is followed by superscript acindicates the reading 
of a source before correction («ante correctionem) while a siglum fol- 
lowed by superscript pcindicates the reading of a source after correc- 
tion (=post correctionem). 

When a reading is unmetrical, this is recorded after the sigla de- 
noting the source. 

When a portion of text is lacunose, this has been marked thus: ---. 

When the text is omitted in one particular source, this has been not- 
ed with om. just before the siglum of that source; for example: om. Nš. 

When we are not certain if a reading has been correctly deci- 
phered, this has been indicated by the insertion of a question mark 
(?) after the reading. 

Where there is a gap in a manuscript and there is a possibility of 
counting the number of letters lost, an underscore-mark has been 
printed to indicate a hypothetical letter slot. For SES if five let- 
ters are lost, this is presented in this way: _____ 

If there are more than one lemma for the same pada, these lem- 
mas are separated by bullet signs (°). 

The sign 8 (puspika) stands for ornamental signs in manuscripts 
written before or after colophons. A list of all these symbols is provid- 
ed at the start of the edition, on p. 65. 

Corrections that we feel relatively confident about have been re- 
ported as emendations marked em.; ‘bolder’ corrections are marked 
conj. (conjecture). Of course, the difference is somewhat subjective. 
If an avagraha is missing in our sources, we have silently supplied it. 

As a rule, the verses are divided into four padas. In one case, how- 
ever, we have adopted a six-pāda verse as it forms a syntactic whole 
(verse 112). 

In the first and second layer of the apparatus proposed correc- 
tions and actual readings of the quoted texts are displayed between 
two arrows. 

In general, variation in spelling by the different manuscript sourc- 
es has been normalized. Thus we have silently supplied avagrahas, 
corrected homorganic nasals, geminations and degeminations, as 
well as trivial variations in sibilants. 


64 


Introduction to the Edition 


7. On the Translation and Accompanying Notes 


The translation follows the text as constituted in our edition. To pro- 
vide the reader insight into the various changes introduced in the dif- 
ferent lines of transmission of the text, we have also included transla- 
tions of the many additional passages in the notes accompanying the 
translation. These also include other observations of a philological 


nature. 


8. Symbols and Abbreviations in the Apparatus 


+ asa # 


Enclosed text has been added later by the same or 
by a different hand. 


Enclosed text has been first written but cancelled later. 
A number of letters are lost in the manuscript. 

Loss of text marked in the manuscript. 

Text placed between cruxes is beyond repair. 


A question mark indicates uncertainty about the read- 
ing in a manuscript. 

Reading in all sources, with only one or two variants. 
Reading in all Southern sources. 

A bullet separates different lemmas within the same 
pada. 

Ornamental sign written in a manuscript before or 
after the colophon. 

conjecture 

emendation 

before correction 

after correction 

folio 

conferatur 

recto 

verso 

omit(s) 

based on conjecture 

metri causa (=as dictated by metre) 


accession number 


pages 


65 


PITTA TET VATENTSCATTI: |] 


Aga JATT | 

aAa aiar fsrars af sfavmm4 | 
Rean: Targater SARA AA Il 9 UI 
ara: glaat dog: ett aer ar fSrarmdi 


1 Cf. Bhavisyapurana 1.171.3: aAa aotar TTA TI | HTH- 
Hu gute TANT UTET Il e Quoted in Ātmārthapūjāpaddhati p. 582: 
Few ferum FINI durt TARANTA] rat 
Radar HAATATŪYA ahs | (x SD 1) 

2 Cf. Bhavisyapurana 1.171.4: ATEJUT: glaat Qua: SAT aer dT omg. 
Aria: garafa arts «our gear "art e Quoted in Ātmārthapūjā- 
paddhati p. 582 as srTRqUr: array aye: AT sat ar FsrqT=a | AETATT 
Teeat AT dresser repe: 


1 "4WT* is illegible in NI... 


1 Interlocutor: aAa 3aTT] NENSNE NLNE*NZSZE'; At- 
lege, GGL; At leger: Mis; cafa gare Pr, 
1b AAA ] NENE G GAME PRE”; Wh NANENG; efa- 
TA NÉ; oqa $i Le Paaeat: Brae] NS GD: ferauat 
fsramtar NENE°; SC Raar NENĻŠŠMVE"; Brat: 
Rana NES Tagvrgäfoargatet GLPL Torgvrgfaaragater MIT 
2a ATR]: ] E; ATEI NENZ, o FIT:] NÉNZSLNC"PLE'; Wr 
NX; Zeg NEÉ,NZ?^NZUGÉGLMZ  2b Et or] X; ger NĒ 
(unmetrical); TZ eat NE^ ear fsrarsmir] NX (tops of the letters are 
missing) NE MITPIEN; at yermi NĒNĒ,; maaa NÉ; ar 
Raai NC; ar Taarang d. ar fara --T G*; afssrarst Gr 


Presser 


ATT THEM AT TINTI: SIT SSHATSHAT I 211 
CqDHHISUY HATTA FATA | 
TINT CAAT HATTA TATA I 3 I! 
Temas HATTA CTTATAT Ya: | 

fsrare fare: KAT TTATATTA db V lI 


3 Cf. Ātmārthapūjāpaddhati p. 582: ATG GATT FAA | 
(© SD 3ab) Vleit. (e SD 8d) aT Arete: | arq3fsafafs=q: 
gifs qsi=q4fsiq: | ara Tate ars era bea | 


3 Ss omits from 3b to 4a. 

4 After verse 4, G adds the following text: TREAT q afeesr KKK 
Staat | Ted? AIT d qui meter e The lower part of 
4d is damaged in NZ, 


2c ATTIVIT] %; great NÉ. supr G* adem em 
PemrHI] em.; X qa Afgans NĒ; were WT yer 
NENZEN; at arg: eaaa NÉ. at grat ar Taaragr 
NÉ? Tar: Sears NS ; Ufa qp q+ $2; ATAUCUTSI 
Rra: G”: at great ar firgradr vim, gr gtt ar Fsrarmár 
Mi grat at Ram GAPI 3a CHDHHT?] NX; ter: 
$2; FATA GL 3b TMT] X; Warm N.GA o QATA] E; 
HEAT CL  3c SHHIBIDORHDTm ] NENENE NE NANO MIE; 
wares Ch". AEREA Gi; WIN Ha 
PI, 3d Ta PTA] NÉNZLNGMZPL:; CST 
NEE”; RISTRETTA NENG; MATA parry 
Gi,  4aWSST*] X; Wës GL; gë: PL — 4b] cmq] 
NGGFGLPLSSMI': get €um NĒ; tat: NÉNLG TT SHT NĒ,; 
IET NE^; JAT EN è TATAT WI: ] NAENZNA NÉ NIG ME GH ; 
aat NdT NLE'; sepa $5; gg vg Pt, 4c Arar- 
afaa: ] NÉNE,NENZMEZPZLEN; fsrarefēmda: NX; fsrarafamma: 
Nä: Toracfauret Ss. ; Rae afar Gi: Raefa Gt, (unmetrical) 
Ad sust: ] NÉNÉNA,NLNZ^GÉ'MEPLEN; «mi^ NY; "Tm 
$2; ETO GL e Mantas ] NNNÉN. NENG GLMZE"; 
eEHHDGIGUIH NS; Berner Wee ($5; CAT unen PIS; set 
AIRAA PIS 


Ha 


WHET SATA: 


fast T sii: 
faeere dT qSrq== Fc: Sr 3 l! 
aa ford AIETA yest Hea | 
UN vg: gr IT: MIT Hata aT TAT kl 


HAMA ATTA TT ATTA | 

FAST TASS WETCSICHAG ST AT Il 9 I 
5 Cf. Bhavisyapurana 1.171.5a-6b: eendag Rana < ofa: | 
Hara ARTATET AGA Aaa: Ragam aT Tae 
Tar il 
6 Cf. Bhavisyapurana 1.171.6a-7d: HAJAT Ue METT YST TW Il 
UN Wi: Te iD: SUNT Hata ATAF: | agafäeat pesar [HET ys + 
qd HT: | 
7 The lower part of Tab is damaged in Niha. 


5a MAN | %; MASA NĒ, Baram NI 5b ?H- 
figo] X; Her? GL e TÈ F] X; ^mm NS e UA: ] 
NEÉNEÉNÉ,NLNg£$$G*GLEN; “fd: NEMI; Pres: PL 5cfg- 
aaa |] NENENE NE*NZ^S2MITGLPT, ; frercorirategrert 
Nos’; hamaan NIE). Gëtt at Or" 5d afaa: ] 
X; “find: MZPZ 6b FTT] X; paaa: NENG" Ge HA: ] X; 
UT NEGRI è IT:] X; TIT Miir 6a WNT Mate aT + GT] 
NENENIONS,; TY Wate ar + aT vi. AN vlt vīfad: NEE”; 
farà aa vmget (?) $2,; ANT > qq aT > aT G^'; SINT Mata aT + 
q --- MÄI: ar wate ATaar Gh: Avrà: feda: PI, (there are dots 
under NT and T at 6d) 7a mataa. ] NEÉNZLNCOC"MIZGLPLEN:; 
erum NÉ; Hat --- Te NÉ; PP — NÉS; girl: Ns; 
IAT (get: d, «rad GA è care] NEO: era 
NĒ; arte NEE”; ging NS,; — NÉ et NG; caer: 
m "HIE GL; FATE MĢPL 7b E IPIEEKSTIESWM NENG? ; 

ara fagrarfey NX; mahaina NÉS maaana NĻE"; 
i. NE^; Are fagearfey: vu, Gort ATA gä SS; 
mham G^; afufagtamy Mi; <caqfaqarfas GL; 
MEEIEECETIES PI ` "e HAT TRIS | X; YA SÉ 
7d graas ar] NSE"; arataa g fr ar NX; der 
rers ar NEGA; eeravacaasft ar NÉ NÉS; Sëtdräteäzchr 
at NS; mee sfata ar $i; arfadat varetu: Guy; affe 
ar srqrfzfa: PI, 


KR 


ECK) 


Raama: var add Fafsr: ger 
HOT THAI qSISDCUSPA: l G II 
A getto qudm fees: 
"eeu repr feud fewer 2 N 
FsraratfzcW xr fae Agata cw ga: 


8 Cf. Bhavisyapurana 1.171.8: Sg *HTPXd: var mder fahr: gert 
HAUT THAIN YSTHTTUT*DI: Il 
9 Cf. Bhavisyapurana 1.171.9: tart qwfeWrar + vader fea: | IT- 


erate aan) ea Eana | 
— ani] corr; FATT? E, + 


9 9cd is missing in Gi. 


8a Haat: | X; | OAT: AT: GL sbadeaa fuhr aa] 
NANEN NG; FEAT TAM: NENE; get afanar 
$2; get yaa Gf; RAAT AAAA MID; RAAT 
afha GL; «dem aae PL. RAAT aad: ger EN 
8c HAT] X; WT He SS e THAT] X; > Wee MZ Gorate GL 
eanit] x; FAT GL 8d oqma" ] NENS. NE NGG MZ GRE” ; 
ogne NĒNK; ` ovefae $5; xm PL 9a Fara] 
NANE,NĻN$G" Mi; fani NENZOSLGLPLE'; Tara NG” 
e "fënt! NENENE,NENZMEGEÉPLEN; fara NES fem 
$2; ser ar GL 9b AAA q] NENZNZMZGLPLEN; Wat 
a NK; Wdd at NX; Vë WA NES; Wawa Ši; NdT a Or 
e EAT: ] NENNE NE, SS GMZ Gae PPE"; om. Ni (unmetrical); 
feat: NZNÉ^ 9e getouft ATT ] NS NGCGÁMID equ 
ATTŪ NENE°; SE ATA NÉNLPLE'; enm feaar 
gm: s 9d feat Eara] NENK NÉ'G*PL; Prater 
Rara NS; EE Kaa NEE”; n Karma NS; 
wi forrest $2; feet a q Bag: MV 10a Brantam ] 
NENE NENG SS MEG; Barna Ni. far — m fsrardaust 
GPL; Baratha EN effet] x; fret GL ` 10b NATAT 


T] NENENENGGHPREY; WRT — NG; oaae NEG. 
oaae $2: orafa ME e qune] NÉNG; ID 
NENEPREY; — Nia; YAM: NESE; TAR — MÉI. MR: G, 


WHET SEATS: 


TASTI EAT TETARÌ 9o Il 
&anrerfaBnreun: TAIT | 
ATTATÌ FT: WuedrEDDAPE g strate 9? I 
Gant qu ANT ARTA s Ban) 
canti fw get am SPEO 92 I 


10 Cf. Bhavisyapurana 1.171.10: marha Test asatsfafugara: | 
mmya: ATSB ATA NTARÌ li 

— ATT] conj.; AT E, — 

11 Cf. Bhavisyapurana 1.171.11: larh aeaf va TAR ATTA | 
ATCATĪ T: TATTO TT Ath Sr ll e Quoted also in Sakalagama- 
sarasangraha T. 351, p. 184-5: Frater —agrrufafuframri qxar- 
a | ATCT Gp: FARE a strate | 

12 Cf. Bhavisyapurana 1.171.12: Tart Tat ANT Faas q Bag | AUT 
arai fast ave fe fau 


12 After verse 12 G^ adds the following text: Para TT] ER Guer 
farà AG AGA TTT Il 


10c AÀA] NANANZNGGÉMIGLPL; -- NÉ; mAN- 
Hus NE; adas $i; Ayaat: EN oem] D; 
VID NE 10d SATA ] > >; ATT dors Qu GF e *ITET- 
war] x; emanar NE; ETA) NÉ la ùrar" | 
NENE NESS, GMZ GĻPLE" ; TaTfaafafa o vis Raat NENG 
e det] NNN NGG ME GO PRSE" ; eunp NA. based 
NS; OTÈ $S 11b WWW? ] NENK NZNGÉSMITGEPLE": 
TW Fart? NA. Teed gien: Mi: vadam» G^ è rëm 


NANAZNZ NŚ GME PRP; TC NÁÉONLGALE"  1lc AT- 
mart] X; aT NK; AMA GLoeG TAT] X; MAT 


GL 11d afa] >; frere NE; estafa EN 12b v ri 
NENENE N5*NCG"'M1rGLP7,; * Baam NOU; T gan NE SS EN 
12c sitfad qur] NÉNENE,NZNZGÁ'PZLEN:; fs HST Nie; sifad 
ANT So; fed ast MIS; Aaaa GIF; sqq «qe 
Gi;(unmetrical, correction marks above qç) 12d sg Fd | 
NANANEZ,NZNZGGAMZPZ; of Rm — NÉS cdBReEPBBT( Ss; 
esfaqad GL; Aaa EN 


9? 


Preset 


faran nadia Praia | 

Hata gr dada aars fe Saar 831 
araturfstataT: ani d fgastad | 
srerararfsiadfeaueenr a strate 92% N 

=: BATT ATT TTT mam z: | 
vaste: sear fer eere ag i 


13 Cf. Bhavisyapurana 1.171.13: Staqdraanrste + gäier qmm fa- 
ATS gedd get free fe sf n 

14 Cf. Bhavisyapurana 1.171.14: arahia: Sareea WC | 
aarahi HAATHATIATT Il 

15 Cf. Bhavisyapurana 1.171.15: IAF agram d: WE TSITH GC: Il 
wWeqResdfes: sar afer atferarsht ari 


3a faqaq ° |] NENZPLEN; faaamadtao NX; fad gät: NE. 
saat: Mi: Raama. GM. Raga. NGG“; 


— Gh, è "TTT ] NSNENGSSGSM2GLPLEY; TT g 
NX; WHITE NK ; omg Ni 13byHdit] X; wate Ss, 
e radar] %; frat — NS, 13cd Hala at ada gata 
NÉNÉNÁÉ'NZ$SG* GLEN; — NÉ; Hala gedd gt fret NF 
au agir mci ari Mz ; adia ar qati get fer 
PI, e fr] q Ss 14a sgtätutbäalgeg. a] $i; Ah 
afaa em cea Mi; IRA àfa aa NENEGS'GLED ; 
amua cm NE. ahaaa ana Wu, À- 
arate Rep pi 14b seat sg fs] NANZGL; ccm afro 
NÉNLN/ASLG*MIZPZLEN; sara df NĒ, 14e AAA ] 
NENENS NZNÉ'NZSZPLEN; sende GME Gh è fu] 
NENENĻNENC$5PLE"; fad Te NÉGL; egte GUME 
1444] X; fe $$, 15am: Brae ] NENENE,NENCPSSGFMITEN ; 
Ee MR NÉ*NS*PL:  uzs3T* GL 15b "ar  fsraratifi ] 
NENS,NESSMEGLEN; ` sfearateta:, NX; cr Raah. 
NEN$eG*i, ofegarat nae N^; ofaa. PL 15c 4- 
qw | X; wae NĒ; ud NÉ? e IAAT | X; M Wi, Sal Ss 
15d WifeerswarT] NANGA; fato ar NEQSL; faasa 
NEE"; ea NE°GFIMI7; utfaearsrat NS; afanta ar P7, 


\92 


URENT SATA: 


aaa: PAARA: i 

fra pereat spp: Raratan YIT I 95 Il 
Bru: Adana: fam: ger 

sa: fraadtatsa rafa Para ear: 1 99 II 
EARE Tet TA WORT | 


16 Cf. Bhavisyapurana 1.171.16: åta fafan: ASAT HAMA: | MT- 


SHIT dI: TeV ATT: I 

— AT? | corr.; HH E, + 

17 Cf. Bhavisyapurana 1.171.17: Frat: amag TERT GT: sari Ñ- 
g: dtadtfats garfast fsrdfgar: l 

> *udi-rsu ] corr. ; "3419013 E, — 

18 Cf. Bhavisyapurana 1.171.18: AUSTIATAT ft Beare: safe: | 
a ASTANA MAAT: è 18ab Cf Agamapramanya, p. 99: 
"DAP HET eed ST dal s ATA | 


16 $$. omits from 16c to 17b. 


16a «fanum: | NEN&NZSZLMIPLE*N; — NE; vgl 
NGR; emmae: NG; eaa: G^! — 16b meu- 
TRATTA: ] NÉNENE, NE ŚS GME PLEN;  — WMA: NÉ; 
HaHa: NG; PAARA: GL 16c Rra. ] x; Fsrar PI, 
err Hat: ] NÉNÉNEÉ, NZGA'MZEN; cara? AAT Mi, oÑ- 
WTITAAT AT: NS, (unmetrical); eHaTTAT ATT GL d HAAT HT: PI, 
16c NdT ] X; dt MZ 17a fra: ] =; Pri: NEM è mir: ] 
X; oa: Or 17b ota: SGT] X; cua: PI, 17e NT: ] 
x; art $$, o raaa] NANEÉNZNESNNZEN; fsmudreps 
NE, ; fmasdesu $i; Raads > Gt; Raada a MY; 
Raadt arse GL; fswdiersy PL 17d Wete ] X; were Ni 
18a *sTa ° ] X; KOR GioP7» e Staat aed | N3% ENE, pone 
GAP; ME «Ur eet Ni ARST: RIT NZ ; © BTITOT aed Mēs ; 
staut K EN 18b EITAITAT T] Nga; ewe Y NĒ; 
wear da NANZGÁEN; IT HART Ww Wi set tar s NGH; 
egnexeper T Wi. eg $2; e-peserocwder MZ wet s fe 
ples. Wet da PI (unmetrical) 


93 


Pressey 


fos Rearen METAT + Tags zc) 
aed Hedudid art eer arate a: 
ATT: Heuer esee a IE i 92 I 


19 Cf. Bhavisyapurana 1.171.19: TATANT HENT NATE ATA: | A- 
TET: Aaa Gaels A Tali 
> STITSNT] corr; TATA E, e ATT: | corr; WT E, — 


18 After verse 18, G: adds the following text: TTT aTeaeatfe: mura 
negen Idae: Wet TE AeA ARA: | AMAT SET VGA 
g werd | zeegt ats omues Sail dT dato: aca sqáqrqra 
q eëtgcigtded gl egret avea aratsty fad ufa gc 
egeaarsita Te WHITE: | 

> AE: ] corr.; atfe GN è gar ar ] COTT.; agant G“: < 


19 Gi omits 19cd. 


18c fre Taaraearat! NLNZMZUPLCEN; fag Rearmament 
NANENS,; fe Framer em Vi, uwrermperemsdt Ss; 
feu — 2 Hurt G*; fen Ario MI7^* (unmetrical) ; 
fog Mama PL 18d HERAT] X; WERHAT PI, e faTUSAA ] 
NNE SS GMG GKPI E”;  ggggstt NNK; qatsayq NES; 
qqv$«4H NG; f Marga Pres (unmetrical) 19a eT] X; --- 
NÉ, ; EMT NE ede pw at] NASLMZIGL; Hi waz ar NĒ; 
on NÉS mii ar Ni; WW a ar NS’; yadi + 
NI CCO IENEI Vir: miria ar G^; q yR PL; 
saper AT EN (unmetrical 19b EST] X; *S9THTW Mi; — 
NÉ, 19b mT Y:] NĒNENS; ragi NE“; areagdr 
NEMAT ad: NÉS MAT a: (SLMZI; mAT a: GÉPL; 
UTTÀAT: GL 19c IWT: ] NÉUNEONLSL; ATA: NĒ; ATA 
NÉNI; ageet: NG; ANTA GX; AET: Mg; MT: PL; 
ATEI: (FT) EN è WWATAT] NÉNK.NE NENGGE”; &dTWHT NK; 
oyat SZMZDPL 19d egere 8 "el! x. foraafaatafa si: 
saag "Tester MI 


ye 


WHET SEATS: 


eam: RAAR erat BERT ger 
Meat degt SHDSSRTETST Il 20 Il 
fact wera ATA uaque | 


21 Verses 21 to 30, except 24ab, are quoted in Kriyasara, vol.2, p. 81-82: 
forrest Ree waqar eat gaus | + aiarad: far- 
galà AAA eerste dti aset wars edu gäg grat 
aiaa ur fe «abge FRATTRIANAIAR | PATA 
Paca up adaa: PATATE TREAT "lat | eT 
Gkkikikukeek Kl TMA | THES T BAAS | M4 - 
driy TUT wadhiy sene ache Mad Wd GTEHISTW SAT: | 
Aaa HT gar aT ATT Sl WEA gend aaa 
FITTI WeSC ATA Wf cp fear sed giaa: amat 
aq: fara: va aerate ware quan frat ewe dad 
Wee TATA | Tee STATA AAT AT N 
vg Sgt ATT AT: | Feet: Mraz aT UT T Al ar UD: ll 
yaaa: g SHT taggt) 


20a SEH: ] NÉNL"NÉ'NZMZGLPZLEN; EA: NESS; ele: 
Nia; Së: NL? (unmetrical); Seu o Gi e RART ] em.; Rr- 
TART NANÉNLSZLMZEGL; fBraenrp NS; Raa NÉNG; — 
amat GA. Raa (?) PL: BRAR E" 20b at *gster "- 
aT] NENKNENIONGSS MZE”; ITTÀGGAT ger NĒ; SEAT eT: 


STAT: G^'; at egoet ger GL; aT *eseqar PI, 20c A- 


at] X; erat PL è MAGETAT | NENÉNZNZ NŚ, GEY; WqdggTT 
NS; Wagar GL; SEAT MI; Wdg:WI4i PI 20d EFAT- 


wur] NANG; Seger anaga NĒGĻE"; aged WISIN 
NÉ, ; EFATATRASIAIAT NZ; egerersrargared Vi. Breenpertaer 
SE: ui. szama G^; gaa qurnqunp Ms; EF garg: 
amt PL a RAT enar gula] NÉP NENE, NENG GME PZE“ ; 
fads aT uai Ni" (unmetrical); face wear mut vi. F- 
Ad vetat Had Ši; fat gegart Hata GL (unmetrical) 21 
b A= ] NENENKNENIOGSGL PLE’: Prasat NS; Bene 
— Mi; Wdd $i, è afero |] x; ur fae NG; > fete MZ è fag- 
USARE | NENLPF$SGFMITGLEN; EVER Nino (ni qqvs- 
mHNANAONZUNZ: geng PL 


93 


Preset 


adurgfafmaa: Pract SEDI. 221 
Ende ae qaem PUR | 
FUT FASS Wa WII sIe-9 Il 22 I 
anit dalfgà ATTATTEMA ATA | 
Pasar aay, ANTHATIATA Il 23 lI 
q: Brae aaa dudf gu: | 
aerate A TESNITAT TTI RY I 
TTT TTT ATT THA | 


22ab = Brhajjābāla Upanisad 5.17ab and Šivapurāņa Vayaviyasamhita 1.33:9. 
e 22cd Cf. Bhavisyapurana 1.171.20ab: AAT W4gETWT FIITINATIZN | 
24 Pāšupatasūtrabhāsya p. 30: TEATTATATĪAATĀT FAG: | F- 


marae A TTT TTT N 


23 $3. omits from 23d to 24a. NS 
24 P7, has following verse added after 24cd: «dd IA SHAT II: Add TT 


TATA | fsrarfiraT qu: wm dad get Aga ! 


21c Wdurufg* | X; M gënt: NĒ, 21dforaatà Feta] x; 
fra ae mad OM 22a rdc] NENE SS G*'MEGLPLEN ; 
TÀT ONE; AAT NK NES; erty qz NS «dn x; di 
NE^; dti Or 22b qae oats | NANN $s GRIMIFPE,; 
— 7H NS; AKT WP Ne; gent satana NS; 
hasni GL; eger Rhia E“ 22c Aa] X; AT 
Ne; and GL e FESTA ] NENENS,,NE, SEN MATAT 
S STAT G"GioP72 23a fg] N2s Ns Nis NN «Nas G MES ; 
së: GLPL; "Ya EX e QTE] U; AAT NE; ETÀ NK 
23b HEH] X; MART NX; OMAA Vi 23c OHANA ] 


Ns Niga N Pose GEME GÉPRE” ; HIA NN; ; °H qt NS 
23cd CATA] NNi NENI G M3s Gioi "ATA Ni: ATO Nç; cH]? 
Pi; "ATA EN 24b — NEÉNENE,NZS$GFMIZPZEN; 


°H Wi: oma NS; "nn: GL eaae] X; F- 
"d EN 24c PARAIT” ] NENANLSZLGÉMIZGLPLEN; 

w -fasge NĒ; o defaedg^ NENG 24d TAT Tung 
NENS NENS $$, Mi GLEN; TA TE NLPLNÁÉ 25a WTA ] 
X; WAST? Gi e SAAR | NENP NS SS MI PLEX; Weary 
NENEN: Ki. NI Wet Um GL 25ab "ads" | x; — 
NK; HT. NÉ? 


EK 


WHET SEATS: 


rrnTéTegtg CST STT YI 2% di 
addy uequa FIATI ACRA | 

TERA AAT Ad VETS SAT: I ƏŠ I 
AETITA FATA] FHT GHIWWITA: 

UETATT FANTI geg aANT: I| 29 Il 
WEHNDSGTUTY ATT glad a Bru i 

sare ufq: STAT dA fara: STATI ac l 


25 Cf. Pūrvakāmika 5.53c-54b: AMAT PEATE THAIS | T- 
FATE RISI ATIANAAIAZAIOT | e Cf. also Pūrvakāmika 5.59ab: 


WERDE FAATATATEIUANOI CH | 

26 Cf. Sivapurana Vidye$varasamhita 24.77: GEGIERI "equa ady J= 
FRATI FORA AAAS METATATA TT AT: | and Cf. Jūānaratnāvalī T 
231, p. 3: aAA ueque aAa ARA || den aera NETAT- 
IAAT: | 

27 $$, NÉ, and MẸ omit 27cd. 

28 NX omits from 28b to 30a. 


25c TEATET® ] X; gengt: GL 26a "V ] X; eaa NĒ; 
Re Gati 26b aJ] X; dy NENE, 26c TT ] X; 
"dt $$ 26d NETATATI ] NÉNZNA,NZLSGGLPZLEN; YAT- 
d NÉGAMI; aAA NS o FAT]; HA MẸ 
27a eg | WENNT, NENEPNS SS MITPZEN; eaat dT GT Mēs Gio 
27b ANTT: | NĒ; dr WHdWWdá:  NÉNÁ,NZLSLMZEN; aT 
at) vd: NZGL; at Hd — Ni ar Hd — è: Or: "Tm: 
aaah: PI,  27c dar] >; g dat GLP 28a HATATA ] 
NEP"NENEÉ,NLNÉ*$2G*'Gh PLE“; omat ITO NS; CHGTTTT 

Kes, oma: UW MI 28b faa] x; fafud NO e qa] X; 34 
NK? 8c RT Area: ] NA. gaara at? NS; Irda 
afte: pod sha gaa: NĒ; gāg glagger: NS; afar 
Afafrāa: $2; saga Alatau G^. gend glagguat wm". guhud 
giaa: Mī" (unmetrical); JAT gfagguat GL; dm qada: 
PL; dm dagfa: EN 28d wat da fara: ep] Nä, HTAT 
aq: equo BS NĒNĻE"; -- Tam NÉS Stat aa faq caua 
NÉ'Gí; ATATSAT fsrqeqa G^; ard Wafsspeepu MIS. WTdT 
aa fora: equ PI, 


\9\9 


Preset 


carte sara Hex Prater: 
qaqa Fat TERIS Wate ll 22 II 
TATA SIA AS FT: FATA | 
Ada Wo E eet ATT ANT II 30 Il 
gaa: SMART ar UT dT grat: 
YAMA THAT "rage 39 I 
TITAS TTS TAT | 
wrest peAa faat STHTSIUT d 32 I 


32 SÉ, omits from 32c to 34b. — e After verse 32, NENZG5 PT, and EN 


adamata wart] NÉNGGA^MZEGL; at: waft waar 
NN, BEI. Ter waft AKTA NÉ. wes aerea PL 
29b Rari: |] x; feather: NĒ 29c qáqdq |] x; ud agg 
GL 29d "wBnr] NENEC4NZNZÉ$ZG*MQEGLPLE'"; MPA 
NN (unmetrical) 30a zëgfeeg: | NE NGS G MEE”; aq 
fart NAGZLPZL; eddfgd? NX; udfaq? Ni: 30b «Hn du] X; > 
— NÉ? e: HHT?] X; UY Aare Ni"; HT° NĚ (unmetrical); --- 
Ni: 30c WENT |] NIPENENIS NE?NC" $5 GMT GI PIE" ; ITT 
Kee. NERA NE; UT NE (unmetrical) 30d ATT] X; * 7 GF 
Sia Eier, siaaa aT | NENG iy Msg Gi PRSE" ; zu sirga? 
AT NANG; g:sfrer sf aT NENG; gosaat ar G^' (unmetrical) 
31b HT ar artsarrafàa: ] NENĒNS,NĻNENCE"; cmo gaer 
viet: $2; WT AT at areata GI; AT WT at are AT: MI; 
UT ar at HIeTeEUD: GLPL 3lc *HANTITA] NĀNĒNSNĢŠSPLE"; 
war — NES warm Ni: cda: GMG, 3148 Tar 
TAYATT] NANE SS GEME; T Gear rage NK; — rage 
NS; WWW Tecra NK; quur wate VISAM NŠ ; a eat HD 
amg: GL; AJ taggt bi: HT TAA Pis Ww WaT 


TIT dG E~ 32a TTI TI TSATAT | NENT, NEZ N GM PRE” ; 
TUTI CITA NATAT NA; TTICITISNTAT NE; pagea cara $2; Oa- 


AATA Ch 32b TAAT" | em.; ARATNI. NĒ; grat 
DHT? NENZG'MITEN: Aaa. NENENG GE; aafaa. 
$2; T Ama. PZLequm] X; SH DSL; cuum: PZ, 
32c WAT] X; AAF NĒ; M — "W Gf 32cd cafes] X; 
oaf NÉ? ° RATIT ] x; Brar — NE? 


sū 


WHET SEATS: 


Prarsrgsrareatatresar water fera: | 
ATA TTT TT GATT I 33 ll 
GATT fe ar ve ATSTĀTI | 
arse ar ferrata: + at ag av ii 
ATTRATTI fatear Brew: fsreeremar | 
Teer aera Ek m ATT ota 3 Il 
maaar maga + Welt | 


36 ab Cf. Bhavisyapurana 1.171.2lab: ede Tae STAT ATA era ATE | 


add the following: FNAaAe dra MET Sfida | TRA gë stat 
TTS pen | 

> ta] EV; dt” CPI è TE ] corr. ; algdd E"; WATT GL; 
Te: PL e ogia. ] PLE"; ega. Gh + 

34 OT omits 34ab. 

36 After verse 36, OP" adds the following seven lines, while MZ; and G£, add 


33a fsraraqsrara ] NÉENENAS,NENSGÉMZEN; — AT NÉ? faraTaT- 
qur GL; Rrarrdt TATA PZ, e ATATA ] NENANAZ, NC GA'MIrGLZPL; 
WTHT NÉ: geng NĻE" 33b aft: ] X; Toft NX, 33c H- 
besate: ] >; ahaaa. GL: Magegafa EN edem] 
X; FEAT Wb 33d sq] X; YT NĒ? 34a WT] 
NAN Ny NZ NZ GPS EY; AAA. NX; BAT. NZ; &UHST 
Mi? 34b fq] X; wht PI, 34c aT] X; "T NG 3447 aT] 


N3 N3 NEN sG% Ms Gao Pr E" y FE Niba ; TD Nä ; UT OC, e JS srt. $ 
aa s, a — Nija; wade $2; garde Mi 


5a ATTAT |] NENAZNLNÉ'NZSZLE"; INT. NX; - — Hq Gf; 
Se MiG; BATT? PI e TT faf ] em.; dtafafuam 
NEÉNEÉNÉ,NÉ'N£ZS2MZ GL; afra NLE"; - afafua co”, 
eda fafaat PZ, 35b [eb] NÉNEÉONÉGÉEUMZE'; freer NĒ; 
Tag Wi: frett NEGR; faglie NZUPL Priam $$ fm] 
X; gg Sì 35c Gere] X; gëtt: NG 35d of ] NS $$; 
enfefacaq. NAN‘; Rhema. NAE"; egen 3° ND; "HT 
Feat: NE aange G*MZPL; Bewufere* GL 36a IT- 
Rat] NENE NB MI7G5 PT; mere NENZEN; — 
at Mi, ma > Ufatat Or 36b *g9T] NEĒNENE GMT GRE” ; 
"BUT NÉ NÉ; qu NS; et BEE ss] X; — G 


EN 


mager geg. TENTICIAT HIT | 3% I 
FERITE FelSHAAT TI 
aft WWE age + gebr asi 


> oaaae ] corr; emafadtarsfe E, + e 36cd Cf. Bhavisya- 
purāņa 1.171.20cd: TaT "ders fatal. 


only the last five lines: WETATTT ACTS TTA OTe | AT Ud 
aaea hahaaa | AT ATA freer grgetgragt | Tah 
fast fafeatts = aal aren aro grande HEAT HAT | FUIT 
arava fed reg var MATA | ATA CATA fated feraarhr- 
ATT | 

> ACT] PL; T - G e Hm] GML; Wm Gh è fear] 
crm; fear G5 e° oat] GAMĘ; > alfa GS. fafaaro ] 
GOMZ; fafeate GL e T saq] Gch; aaen MI è qer 
arr | GML; STAT are: Gt, e Gear HTATUT | GML; art 
TIT GL e fer] GML; feet GL TaraT MATA |] GMa’; ST 
YSTAT WaT Mēs" (unmetrical) ; TDCGPRIT GL e ATAT] GTM; 
Han GL e mAT] Or menfe? MI; menm GL è fated 
Raana ] em; fated Raana G^; fafaa ragarbrar MIS. 
graat ahead GL — 

36 $$, omits 36cd. 

37 SET (37d) to UTITT (38a) or equivalent is lost in NĒ,. 


36c NET] NENENE, NENG MEE”; *War NÉ; omer $5625 

e Wars: | NANANLSLGAE'; Wass NE; wd ga: NG; 
geste: N.G ME 36d omadi NdT] X; caTasggianida GL, 
37b ARAN] X; oag GPL 37b ger: | NÉNENZS,NENAE- 
NEP SS GGKE”; Wate NG; Ware MZ; Wet PZ, e ems T] 
NENEÉNEÉ NENE. NCSZ; °TRAdAT dT GN; IMITA T MI; 
WIESE PZ, (there are two dots under the word Ta carrara +Í 
GL; °ERIdT F E" Ate att aYagat ] ATAITTTTT 
Stat MZ — 37d 4Tq^] X; Td MZ; Te Che vest +] 
NÉNZNLNEÉENSGÉMQSZQE'; — NS; eM el GAPI, esr]; 
— NK .; gate Ss, 


WHET SEATS: 


WaT Wears qexqd Tet PTS i 

gf acs Ae FAT gënt aa l 
Weary EHTCTHITST ATT HAT | 

TRI qua STATAT geg gud FA: 39 Il 
wer guër Prey arte fraai faaeega: 
Att yaaa < ate: smermfa- vod 


38 Cf. Bhavisyapurana 1.171.21c-22b: ATAT + weg Terr wet fa- 
sq zfEWd acs FATTA Fal qud e Cf e.g. Manusmrti 6.45: 
geyr ace qergd et Mad (gedet aca ATT WHTWA II 


40 From gtt to the end of the line is lost in NÉ. 


38a "qd We ] NANÉ'NO"S5G*MZPZLGAE"; eyfa X NĒ; — 
NÉ; Meee NL; Ae 1° Mir 38b ae frat] x; Raw- 
a GL 38c AAA | NENENE,NPPNCS SS MVGLPLE"; AAAA- 
= Ni" (unmetrical) ; AAA NK*, zäiëeutg — Gi 38d od | 
X; qd: GX eq ur dat] NANÉNLNGGÁMIGLPZEN; ger NdT 
NENE; ade: $5, 39a *AeTTUT UTT ] NENP NG SSG MIE"; 
epa SAT NĒ; *AMTTATT eq NÉS FAT — Fear; 
RATTUTRT Ww GL; erranti) + eat PI, 39b *WHTST F°] 
NENENE NENGSE GZ?" ; — aTETET d» NE°; TÀ dT de GMG GHSS, 
qar T° PL; Tarelao EN eT] X; NT PL 39c TÈT KÉ 
vq rara] NENDNSEN; saq quq rara NK; ART TĀ agat 
NEPI; ARI ya agra NX; Zigar qgqequq Ši; aca qua 
Ui G^; TT aa qvaefamab MIS "aq quq data GL 39d d- 
quq] x; geg NE° e qq? Ya: ] NENENSNENGEN; gud Ya: 
NES; — T $2; TTATT wat GM; TTT Ad PLC 40a F- 
ér] X; Wet GL eat] X; at GL (unmetrical) 40b PreīmsīT ] 
D: mr NE; hrama fa frerrsīr MY (unmetrical) 40c dr] 
X; AN NY è carga] NÉNENE NENG? SS MPRE”; TT — 


- NĒ; CAT gam Ni; campane GX; eatqadt Gi, 40d T- 
fq: ] NÉNENZNZ"G'"MQGLPZE"; — Ni: aft NINE; wd Ss, 


e Masta? | NENEN MZE”; manaa. NENG SS; — NÉS 
manfa we Wi. MTA” GPL: SmTePHATD Ww GL 


5? 


ECK) 


ATJAIT niea qFrqsiqde | 
FTATATAIT Waras TPT ATT 9 di 
Ria e 
g: aaah: wu: Brew: 
arse gud mer INARIIA HAT I ez 
La t 
qaaa Feat eum Parara: 
c 

TINTA AAA TT TTT TAUTA: H eat 

Parga: «pred: War 
41 NL omits 41cd. 
42 JF: SIqWYT? or equivalent is lost in NX 
43 After verse 43b, G^* adds the following text: ATRTSTH ae INTEIT- 
FAHATAATA | e 43ab,except °TUTAIA: is lost in NÄ.. e Š omits from 
43c to 44b. 

la NTq«fT] MIO EI. MART NÄMĘ Gh; TAT NÉ; TETTI 
NE: TIA NENGŠŠ: et PZ e fear] NEP NESS; W- 
"ën NEPIPMIFEN ; KR Fra NE EET IE NX; MÈ- 
Kum NÉ at eg NS; Tala GU. weet GLO NREM 
PI? 41b *HaTW] X; Herb NĒ; "feig Vi Alec CATT] 
NANEÉNSZG^'MZPZLGZAE'; CMH NK; sg Ni: cma $$ 
41d *HaTW] NANS,S5G'"PLGLE"; ARTA Mi, "HW NENG 

I E T ] Ns Niba Mos GigE” ; Ji Su NX; Ji E NZ ; Ji E NĒ; 

R = So P7, ; I € GF: ° Hot! NX ENSMIPPLE”; AT: Niba; 
HT: NE; waa Ši; RIA GU; WI(Dd Mit HAN GLO 42a T: Wd- 


aye | NĚNENE NGS G MG GLP; Tdagfao NĒNĻE" 42b I- 
Gi] NN. Nae Mes DÄ, aa NSS NZ ; Ta: NÉ SSS GRE” ; T4 Ns; 


Psp G*' e TAT: ] X; eos: Gh 42c arse] X; Fsrzr s= 
$5 42d "QW ] NANN NENI SE GP MG PRE”; "WT NG; 
eq uer GA; eqWr GL 43a AĀaT* | X; Gare $$, 43b WITUT: ] 
X; IT: GL, (unmetrical) e caf: ] X; cuffia: NI 43c "Tr 
RAIT | NENSNE ND NFNSMITPILEN: * — padit Ok": ex- 
aera Glee; oaaae GL* 43d ogrete] X; oaee 
Vi: arate GL e Raamaa: ] x; fat: GAPI, 44a aT- 
smdqm:] NP GRPLE” ; EEGEN NENG: Prssrqaiamn:: 
NENE; SMAI NS; Sisgdatfiadstasg NÉ; PAT --- ST- 
aan Gt; fregata tata AA: MI? 44b ARAT. ] X; «pm NX 
° warf: T° | NENENSNEPONG Mi E" ; egg mo Ng; GI 
fat He NÉS osaa. GX: GL PEZ, 


T3 


WHET SEATS: 


ITRTAT fmm SHDeITDHSTQun ll X V ll 
TATA RIT: STRAIT: PTTWYTAUIT: 
Wd UqTHHT sar: (Krava: PSTSTSTHT: I ey di 
HgTgdTES sura forati: 
Badd TAA: SATA eg H 
fard af: wur amferY eT sar SE | 
45 Cf. Bhavisyapurana 1.171.22c-23b: TIT SATATAT: Street: ATĀTITT- 
UT: l Aa Garant TAT MTHS SAT: | 
46 Cf. Bhavisyapurana 1.171.23c-24b: ATTATEAT rd vaut N 
aaa WA SICH | 
47 Cf. Bhavisyapurana 1.171.24c-25b: Strale: ger amfedxf8ur adar 
45 45c-55d is missing in Gjo. Instead of 45cd, M$; has: vmggertfaracäeg 
Rrra aar: | 
46 46ab is damaged in N, except RrarRiar for FaraTRrhr: . 
47 47b is damaged in OT, 


44c ART] X; 3T — AT GN: uniti ME 45a °T" ] X; 
säit: NK: CUIR MĀJU e W3T:] NENE,NGMETGKPREN; sgr 
NK; ° Ud: NĒ: eta Ne: var: Si: TA GE: e Wal] 


NNN BZ MI GioPĻ EE"; Wet: NEGA; Bet — NL"; fat 
Nim": SIT=T NÉ° (top of the letters are missing) ` 45b fITTUTTTTAUT: ] 
NENEN. SS MIGLPTEN; FITTA TRITATI NL; © = — BATT: 


Viz, Rasia: NS; Raada: G°: 45cHd] X; T + 
NK, e UATSIAT] NÉNENZ,NLNZ"GA'PZE'; tat NÉ°; uag- 
AT» NOS": arabe Šš, è Har: ] NSNS,NENGSS PLEX; Dar NĒ; 
ST Ni’; SW — Gr 45d ger: ] NENGAN GSS PRE”; WRT NA 
ower: N; ower NG; wate GX è Rara: ] X; efsratterar: 
Ss; far — xr: G^ 46b CHAT? ] X; eaae NI; > 
TATA GX efr] NANZNZUSLMZEPLEN; fahr NE: 
faraTRrat NINE: fsrarfafa: NOS; < aTRiAr: G* 460 °FATAT] 
X; AAAA Ni e THA? ] NENE ŚM Ph; WATT? NENF; 
garg: NE; wat ae E"; qYHH^ NS; Wate Oh 46d HR: | 
X; 8H NENG 47a ft] NENENEONLNSGEMZPL; Tag: 
NEMSZE* è WaT] X; ger NS; Prt oy — 47ab Tato] 
NENENENGPSSME PEED ; attr sto NENG; cater: ate NG; 
mfa: ae GA! 47b otfeat] X; fe NĒ” (unmetrical); *Yfgur 


NK? e HdaT] X; Ader: NĒ, e WH: ] X; WT PI, 


c3 


Preset 


ATS: AMATU gerad TISAI Vl 
TITINITATAI: gegart gaart ARTI 
farà vie: ger aat dux AAT 1 «c ti 
eacettatasrso fsrewrenpg SARTI 
Tanta RT muere Ti ve I 
fra freet far are Pun at: 
achd Tatta" geg g Tag NATI ue 
gënt weet Wu ATA HA: 
TWAT: UOTE gerad AUT | 
> "ufm: ] corr. ; orm E, — 
48 Cf. Bhavisyapurana 1.171.25c-26b: TITTHITATAT: HAT AAAT ANTI 
atta: ger grat draég fas: | 
49 Cf. Bhavisyapurana 1.171.26c-27b: aderfafdstu fe vraatoateäg - 
sr: wares pala, d | 
50 Cf. Bhavisyapurana 1.171.27c-28b: dër hyt fe ar Prac 
AT: est ATH d gend Cum | 
51 Cf. Bhavisyapurana 1.171.28c-29b: ETAT Tar ANTAT FT È ITT: N 


47c Aa: ] NENENKNEGS'MEPLEN; eat N%* (unmetrical); 
ATT NI: Alf SS 0 CHEAT] og NS 47d gäil X; 
oma NĒ? e TUBAL] NANKSSG* MIEN; TIERA NN NÉPI, ; 
FUISHT NG 48a gibt: ] X; STATI vi: asb ĒTT] X; 
FTT: NE 48c fare afar: ] NENS.NĻNSG"MZPLE"; farà af 
NX; feraufā vi. farai Ši, 0 HAT Te] X; Braver? NENG 
48d qg] X; Taq Ni e °sirfirs ] DE eiaa $5 49a °è- 
afafa ] NENSNE GMT PLE"; — NE, aaa 
Viz ogaao NG —49bfzerm] x; ferm NĒ; — 
U vi Raa NING e ITARÀT] X. «rm NÉ; [ra Ss 
49c T° | X; Tae NK è arfegre ] NENE, SSG MG PRE”; are 
NIENI, NN e OUTS ] E; Fado NX 49d dW3T] X; AST NG 
50a THIET ] x; VT NX (unmetrical) ; TRL NÉ 50b5*:] 
NENENSNENGSS MIE"; AT NK; we: GAÁUPL 50d md q ag 
NANG; «d fe fard NENZ EX; He eae NS; we rar Tag 
Leet ar SLPL; ad ow fard of; fra 44 MZ e NdT] 
NENE NE MOES G MIES; IT Nia N Y ; «dar Pr 51a Tart? ] X; 
A AG" e TAA] X; "fett NÉ 


Ce 


URENT SATT: 


€ q Ws gaa afafa aes vl 
maea NAT harina F| 

ATAT HAT AAA AR THT 3 1 
fa franareat aea Rama: 
waaay aAA TTT ea get T: 9231 
Tara maara Pea | 
ATTATAATATĀ ATA PE ATST: Il 2 UI 


TT ATARI afafgat vf: | 

52 Cf. Bhavisyapurana 1.171.20c-30b: Mfr q YA YŪTTTET 

TI ATH HAT UTAH He TAT | 

54 Cf. Bhavisyapurana 1.171.30c-31b: łaa mnta] AIT FATT TAT Il 
: ; 7 


52 Except HTE*-IY ... W is lost in NI. e $$, omits 52c-53b. 


51c q + IAT] NS; aA NNE GPZ; Www WAT NES; 

q gäer NS; Mast NZ. $S; d T Wurm MI: Wess EN 
e FIAT | NÉNÉNE,NLNZSSLGS PL: FIATO NÉ; SITT: 
Mi; gës: E"  51dqW4] X; aa SZ; dy Mi egt]; 
fara: $5; AT: EU 52a MMT] X; WHET WHET NS (unmetr- 
ical); AT Wi: Mir 52b CUTEST +] X; *Yd*H4T Mi?  52c al] 
NENE NEEN, Bat NNK; ATT NS; Bat MPI, e eJ- 
MATE] X; wares NEO; AUTAITAIA NG, 53a MT] x; B 
CT NE è -— a espe NĒ; "Ha NÉ, °R- 
m NE^ "Mat NS 53e sráfacar] X; TAT Hear Ši, è «TT ] X; 
OFITIT Ni": erage x 53d IUITIeT] NÉNZNSZPZLEN; mT- 
TT; NENG, TUTTI NX; TTT SS ML e MAA q: ] NANG; 
FAT: NENZEN; cum ART NS,; AJAT N&’SSG ME; T- 
Wat: PL 54a oH] NENENEONGSS EN; OATS NĒ,NĻ; ons 
S? e MATAT? ] NENĒNĒ, NLG"; Wear we Mi: mete $2; md we 
NPPMITPIEN; ARTO NPI e YAT] X; NAT Ni 54b "MATS" ] 
NENENE.NĢŠŽG*!; wm W^ NLMZPZE'; Sms Mi 54c T- 
Te] X; eT? NK e carte | NENENZEN: carte NÉ; WITH NS ; 
cateto NESS GPL; egre MI 


GH 


Pressey 


T: SANTA: HAST ATA | 
aasaga ATSRARTÀ mere us Il 
ATATT [Sram UT A97 ATA T | 
Tore tati, TTT FAT YE I 
fra Tè ser ate ata dr ar 
qwarfewgwr quas FT uw 
STRATI frre org ware wf: | 


56 After Teed N7? is damaged up to the end of 56b. 
57 57d is missing in Ś$,, while 57 is missing in NÉ,, GL, MZ? and Ph. 


58 vs: in 58b ... ACI? in 58c or equivalent is lost in NI, 


55a T: Saga? | NE NE, SS; uw: patt NANÉNZMZ; T TANTA? 
Vi, alter or. wanted PI; TAI EN e SARERTT: | NK; 
TAER NANAENÉONLSSMIDEN; TART NG; TUTAITT Oh". eW4- 
eat PZ, 55b alare |] NAÉNZ,NGCMZ; Hatee NAZNLPZEN; paT- 
are NE^; Hatare $5; T: mule G^ e CUA] X; wd: NĒ; cea 
pie 55d archaea FETTA | X; sec Adload GX; atstaat 
M; Areta Feta PZ 56b aT] X; 2 GL e&X3ITc Hur] 
NÉNZSLMZGLPLEN'; TOTCeTHAT? NÉ NZ; WII NĒ; T- 
FITTE RATTO NINO; «WI — NĒ; BAATe OC" 56c [asm] 
NANENA,NLGI'MZEGLPZE'; Të: NE; fasadg* NG (unme- 
trical); INT° $$, e *qY*] X; eaeoe Wäi, 56d qt] X; aT- 
T Gi, (unmetrical e TAT] X; > Aq G^' 57a faa mR FET] 
NĒNĒNĻE" ; Tage E eT NG; garg [DROP Vir 57 
b qf ] NANENE NESE GE; TENG 57c géife: ] x; sf T- 
To NĒ 57d 488^] X; Fd d^ NE e Up qr] X; cura NX; 
PUT GA 58a STATI Tagung ] em.; Weare AAT NENG: 
Franaa fanta NANESONZNZSGLPLEN; Brora mede SS ME ; 
farma farmer GX 58b WA] X; TY GÁ e HT] X; "mper 
NĒNĻ ewfmad:] NENENG SS G GLEN; geg: NÉNZPZ; — NÉ; 
sima: ME 


ER 


WHET SEATS: 


seen FONT fasta AAT I ws tl 
ATATT Prenat Weary | 

arse Prae adora uw orem 29 i 
farauà fast ot ATH HAT | 
vralateat TUTTI frere «Satu II Gell 
arada HAT AATANATT UTT Il 
wrasse A ENT Tg ARTI 82 I 


60 Cf. Bhavisyapurana 1.171.31cd: WTSTRITAT TUTA gett HEP II 
61 Cf. Bhavisyapurana 1.171.32ab: AfTATITAÀAT "rat wate GITE I 


59 °= Rana or equivalent is lost in NX’. e NXN?G"' and EN omit 
verse 59. PZ,, omits from 59a to 61b. 

61 $3. omits Glab e BH Go TT? or equivalent is lost in NE? and ony 
(61c) ---5T (62a) or equivalent is lost in Niga- 


58c FAAP ATT FONT] NANG; Ada Ags NG; — at Niba; 
TOAST ATT Nie; Wwdanzpesr giërd NL; Wwdsncner at wet 
$2; gamma TIE G^'; FARA eddy grat MIS; WdSDGDW E- 
a GL; Tease Glee, SaaS Glee (unmetrical) ; 
gata West EY 58d fasypette ] x; Rra GL e EDU ] X; 
gg T: Mi? 59a aTa Trauer! NANA,NSGZ; mara fare rer 
— NE^; Pavāru STATA Ši; ATT — Tags MIS 59b eT- 
HT? ] NÉNÉ,NÉ^MZGh;*wHd* NS; wp $2  59cuUrsW] 
NNSS; TH NA; arse NS; Te MIGE 59d TATA | 
NNK SME; MANR NE: MANAT NG; Wats Gi, 60a us! 
NÉNZNE,NLSZMZQE'; "Wm NÉ; sust NG; WAIT GF; some 
Gi e fast] NANENS.NGS3MeGHEN; fest Nf; fast NG; Team 
G*i e ATT] NÉENENZ,NZ; HT NEMZE”; ATT NI2$2,; WATT Or: 
Y —H GL 61a ATT" ] X; Wet: Na; UTT” GL e HART]: 
"418 TT Mi: 61b OARA] NENESNS,NENZEN; ora NG; AT- 
È GML; Wn GL è manum] NANANZ,NLNÉNSEN; HETTT 


G*MiGL 610 IRAT. ] X; gënt: G^ 61d Bu AT T] 
NÉNZMZPZEN; RW Ef Te NĒ; SAT eat ee NG; — Te NÉS 


— wait ta Te $5; fermu» Cor, Be eat Te GL e cmm] 
2; NdT GÉPT, 


Gg 


Preset 


AT GI eat FIAIATHATIATAI | 
TEMATA TATA gR UI 
agaaa Paene | 

Seat: AMAT ASU ATHATTATT Il 43 l 


ag T GTA ATT 
qm ra m S risi 


63 Cf. Bhavisyapurana 1.171.32cd: WT FATT TAT MTT ae ATHATY- 
ATT | 
64 Cf. Bhavisyapurana 1.171.33: dafs g TTT AAA | qál- 


ST RIF upper HEP II 
> ere | COIT. ; So: E; — 


63 63ab occurs in G^* as 69cd. e NĒ, NZ, and PZ, add the following verse 
after 63ab: &TITNAT TAT ATA Wh fau | 
> calo] NÉNG; HeaTe Ph e gfg*] NÉNI; «fe Gh — 


64 $$. omits verse 64. 


62a TA Y* ] X; We g E" e sitet] X; "ST -- GL 62b age ] 
X; Walt $5Gf e oHTATT? ] NENK NENENG SSG ME Gh; °#T- 
WA? NSPLEN e qg] X; eaga GL 62c oMa ] X; eN- 
atta F NI" (unmetrical) 62d ett] NÉNZLGÉMIGLPZEN:; 
"TATA NA; ota Ga: Wi Ni. ota ea NG; staffa: $i, 
63b iaraa". ] x; Paga? MZrGL e sqft? ] x; vais NE; T- 
fate NS 63c TTATAT: Stdäftard | NÉNG; ET ATATA tant 
NÉ; Seat: ATA gland NÉ ; Segtugt aalt ATT WIEN. Sat. 
art tard vi, grat ven dg ani Ši; are fafsrqaram PL; gr 
agaat ATA VU. aTAT — Waray GA oäd ATE] X; TEU 
NS, 64a °UttaT#aHe ] X; Tag Wi: glaten: NG 64 
a HT TAN" | NENEN NGP; mAsa. NĒNĻE"; °HAAT- 
We GG; HT gn: MZ 64b "ada |] NĒNE,NĻNGG"E"; 
Wear NA; catia: NE; cafum MI; "add GL; "Jar: 
fra PZ (unmetrical) 64c FAST ] x; UA NK è q«i | Di 
cada NL 64d cote AEMT ] NĀNKNĻNGG"ML7GĻE"; seem 
warg --- NS; ON — NE; oana PI, 


uu 


WHET SEATS: 


afeqqrarq > ATTATĀ gaart 
qarar FATT gd: TST d 4% I 
dar fora HAT ATÀ: WAT: | 
arated Wn Pract ATTĀLI 4% I 
ATATCĻATTETATA: ASTI OT: | 
geg: ENIT: STATE: AIT: TAT zua 


65 Cf. Bhavisyapurana 1.171.34: «fergrargt sme fer fg qanmi 
marar FATT AATKTATTATJ TA Il 


65 AICTITATA u AT*AHTY or equivalent is lost in NIS. e ICT or 


equivalent is lost in NE^. 

66 P7, has the following extra verses after 66d: Fera fasrsor Tr ACT 
TATA AAR araa FARINI ATTRA HET qeq Fal 
AR fraA TTT quq +=] l 

+ gerat | COIT. ; opga] Pi — 

67 Verses 67-68 are missing in NS. e GWT: qur or equivalent is lost in 


NZ. 67cd is missing in P7». 


65a "feat: |] NÉENAENZSZGEMZGALPZLEN; — NENE ; sagt: 


NE, e °ATdt ] NANÉNLSZNGGÉGLPZE"; — NK; Age: NX; 
ewmfr Mi esq] NÉENLNZGAEN; sme? NÁGLPL; ST 
$2: — NÉ; Set NÉ^ 65b °ATT Haag: ] NAÉNZGLPZLEN; "Hd 
glaat: NĒ; — d Häss NES SHT HÍe NÉS; oraa AT. NS ; 
oane Wo $i; cHfezEg MI e curt] X; eth NX 
65c "START ] NÉNÉNÉ, NZGA'MITGLPLEN; MT Wir ärer 
NZ; *stt Si 66a nme] X; TATA NG; TA --- 
GE 66b Y^] NENENE NĚ NSPE”; We NZ ŚS GMI GH 
66c "äi AMT] X; "MA E NĒ, (unmetrical); eagar MI 
67a HIT? ] X; AT Te NÉ; «rt ge Šš, è RETTA: ] X; 
'Prgnreg NE^ 67b anq" | X; SHNTHDPI? MI 67c FST: ] 
NENS NE, NE GMZ E”; ET: NG; ETET: $5; FET GL, e WT: ] 
x; WW Gio (unmetrical) e STATA ] X; EIE NS 67d NEF: ] 
NENZEN; far: NK. ; fear: NI; Beer NESS G: dm: 
Mi; > Foo GL e TIT: gr] NÉNLNSE'; gaq: TAT NÉS. 
Renga: G^; gar NdT MID; gar WE GL, 


GR 


Preset 


AT Affi AATATET fsradtā EUG I sc il 
R a F ed kā = 
a x | 
Lal 
UTET UTI TIAINTTATIATT Il 8 Il 
c 
Herat ayaa èIHA CANTA: Il 90 Il 
T š 

70 Cf. Bhavisyapurana 1.171.35: TTT VSTATETAT Tay | 
Hevea yaa Sons rafe: 
68 Except SIXUITST, everything is lost in N15, for 68ab. 
70 *S3rfmd: or equivalent is lost in NX’. 


68a "farduT^ | NENENG SS G GRPREY; -- NENS,;  efan1- 
are NE; ofaragare MV 68b *HTATA | NENESSGLEN; — 
NANK,; *94THRTH NÉ; eHTATT NS; HDI GIIPI, è figo | 


NoNe Bad  GLPLEY. pum NN, afro NM; ea Nä" 
68c Hef] NENZMZPZE'; di NENENG; — NX; A- 
Rf $5G5; > NAT G* e aTa ] NONE MIEN; gust 
NS; -—— NÉ,; NAT NĒ,; HANU NĒ, ATATET SL. 


PHI O GÉGLPI 69a aTfxgr? ] NÉNÉNZNCS SAGE GE PIE"; 
sier: NE. NES; gare MI è cU] X; CU? NĒ e °H- 
TA] X; opd NEG,  69bg8TETI*] X; HET? GL e "ATA ] 
NÉNZNZESLGÜMEQEGLPLE"; WAIT NK; FITTA NE; OHA- 
AAA NS 69c JGA] E; WHWOINS: > IET GE: e °T] X; 
omaT NS; st: SS 69d gé: ] NEĒNENENENSMYGŅPLE"; 
gg: NS; Walt BO" è °mTHTTqT° ] NÄNN PAME GHOSE ; 
sat: NENK°G EN: empHS4dD? NS; *wIHDMH? MI 70a T- 
Far? ] NÄNN NISS MZ GR; Tare NE; wad NE, EY; glaat: 
GF; lag PL e oeme ] MZ"; compete NENĒNZG"GLPLE"; 
ofiqe’ Ni.  (unmetrical) ; ofiare. NS (unmetrical); °- 
Eder NES; "Nen? Mge è OHRT ] NEN GaN Mgs Gio; 
stat NG; Wan NĻPLE"; Wal Wäi, 70b «w- 
verfa. ] NÉNĚNK.NE NE GMG; eaea NS; ^ Huss 
qe Si; esmetattepe GL; SWWuUSDW? PI; — "EHWUST- 
ate? EX e*wfammq] x; wf NS 70c AEAT” ] 
NÉNZSGGÉMIZGLPLEN; tegt H^ NANG; UT Seite: NÉ NAE? 
e EHE] NANEN GaN NASEM; “ATA MOLEN, gem 
Or" 70d èTT° ] Sans NK 


Ro 


WHET SATS: 


ATA mpeuurE Hata amgang | 
qEHTCHdY AIT FIEVATEIA TAN Il 99 I 
TS TAT Ta We AT | 
acanrara frat: ent aTF= fr ari 920 
+ ERRATA FUT té fre aa: 
71 Cf. Bhavisyapurana 1.171.36: AAT areae wafer gra) 


T*HTCHdY YdY da PETAT II 
72 Cf. Bhavisyapurana 1171.37; grat? gr Tera FTI T- 


canara woe: ent fa fear aru 


— AAT" ] corr.; TH TT? E, — f 
73 Cf. Bhavisyapurana 1.171.38: T Slggraitararg FUT ata frst aa: | 
SED dei ST aay AAT Hail 


71 QI or equivalent is lost in NZ, 


Tla AAT. | X; Uer? Gh 71b WATA] X; qadar GL 
Tic Hd] NÉNE,NI?NGSLG*GL; X wd* NĒNĻPLE"; g 
age MẸ eWdy] X; way Šš; AAT MI 71d FTEVATET- 
+° ] NE,NENZ$SGF'GLPL; ATT T NĒ; — SteguTëe: 
NENZEN; TENTATO MI, e HAHA] NE NESS MI GL PI; "paren 
NENENZNZEN; 2 THA Gf 72a ANT] X; > ATA GF e HT 
Ep] E; "FTAT- NĒ; spät: Wi 72b gës ] NKAN ŚS MZY ; 
eyrfe NĒ; eam? NANLGAGLE'; curd? NG; WWW PI e epp] 
NANÉ, NINGS ME; get: NÉNLGÉGZLEN; ATT PI, e "mam? 
NÉNZÉNA,NLNÉ'GÉ'GLPLEN'; sett NS (unmetrical); FAT Šš; 
om — ft MẸ e aT] NÉNZSS; T NÉNÉ,NZNÉ'G*MIEGLPZLEN 
72c &FANTATI | NÉNAÉ,NLZNÉ?*NZGAPZ; amata NĒ; Banas 
$2; Fade MZ; Frame] GL"; gearen PI; ETATTATAITO 
EN e "X PART: ] conj; *T fort NEN‘; e maS NENE G: ; 
og Frm: NÉ, em Frou NG; em uda $25; cae Mi; Smp 
wheat GL; °% great PI; car aratsfe EX — 72d rat are 
RAT ar] NANENE,NEZNA^G''MIGLPZEN; at ur Br ar 
NG; frd maA Si, 73acT Floro |] NANN SEME Gi: 
des eat: NENZE'; + algal: Nia; Wéhpesi GX; Zeg 
sait: Pl, 73b ata] X; "a $5; da GL e fra geg: 
NENS,NE NESS. GLEN ; frd equ Ni, faq ae NEG: ttgaa 
— Mir; aaar pi, 


S2 


Preset 


SERT gg AI AAMT HYT UTI 93 1 
aaaea «p ASAT ATT | 
saa AAA ATJUTT Il 9Y Il 
AT urb Tage aart AT | 

ee g: TATA dad get: l 93 I 


74 Cf. Bhavisyapurana 1.171.39: ACSA AT ARACIIINTATA | 


satay AKAAHAZATAUTT Il 
75 Cf. Bhavisyapurana 1.171.40: Wet IAT ITS TTT T HT | g€ 


ener ATT daag aa: tl 


74 Verses 59c-60d are repeated after 74b in Ss. e Top part is damaged 
in N77 at 74a for the letters NA. 
75 44 d: Fait: is damaged in OI", 


73c "HT | X; cup NLE" eq] X; War NÉ" — 73d NdT] 
Ds ATEÀNT P?, (there are dots under the letters =Ñ) e °T Hat] 
NKNK NZSSMIIGL; "YET NENĻG"E"; oC War Mi: st SRT 
P5 74a fat] NENDENI SEM PREN; sf NÄNENG Gio; 
ov at GX è cart] NENE? SE GOME GEPRE”; ATaT NX; TW 
NS; dT NZ?* (unmetrical); ATT Ni: oqat NZ 74b °ZAEIIT® ] 
X; AAT. NES; oaa. SS è NAAT] X; "SIT NENE? 
74c aa aae] x; aa AAT NE ; AAT qar SICUT 


GL  T4d gmail mud $5; > qum Or 75a STAT] 
X; SO Mag eme] NANÉNLNSSLGCEGLE'; IAT N.P; 
ageet NA°; — dr ME 75b aae] NANE NE NGS G Mg GL»; 
gra: — NÉNZPZLE' è tte | NASSQNIG'MGGLPA; em 
NENZEN; T° NENG ear] 5; w SS; - Gt  "75c&84] 
X; qq Š5 eg: en] NENEÉ,NLNZSZE"; w: ete NĒ; od: 
ire NÉ (unmetrical) ; qe Mi; TIT o — €T Gh; vq PI, 
75cd ANNA] NÉNE,NZ"NCS2G*'MITGLPZEN:; odHHe NĒ; 
o A HT Nim" (unmetrical); °F AAA NÉ? 75d oatere ] >; T: fre 
NIN e TT: ] >>; TT NŠ 


%3 


WHET SEATS: 


IGT Dor qu: 
Taras ste: Wege tāda: l RI 
anesan Cmm TATIT: (RAS 
TATSAÀT quer TIT: geet od TAT: l II 
fare wag at HOST TATA | 


76 Cf. Bhavisyapurana 1.171.4lab: Yorn se: Ada ee: | 
77 Cf. Bhavisyapurana 1.171.41c-42b: SERES HEISE Hl! HAT SHIRTS II 
TA qp THT TTT: Ged d marg 

78 Cf. Bhavisyapurana 1.171.42cc-43b: TT eq d fret arm YIT | 
amate ae qq rs gäer 


76 Lower part of ENTRATA: is damaged in NÉ^. e GL, omits from 76c to 
84b. 


a WTC ATT? ] NANI NENENG GME PHE” ; T- 
aah. NĒ”, yeee NK" (unmetrical); 
Terin. NZ (unmetrical); Sem ahna. $5: Y- 
AAT. GL 76b °HITSIT] NÉNLNZSNSMZS OHJAT 
NÉNE.$2,; eWqwut G"' (unmetrical); oHdgdsY PL: MERERI Gh; 

°OHFIFAGAIT EN equ] NÉNZONLNZSSMZGLPLEN; TT NENK?G* 

6c qarhraTWET] NANZNZNÁEÉ'NGZE'; yaho NE. Fair 
ars SLMZ; > at > gr of; yano PL e fe: | 
NENSNENENGPDEN: gf NE Ss qms Si. qe e”. ger MẸ 
76d «U emp] x; gs equ NS sms — Mi 77a APTS? ] 
X; Wo Tse NÉ Weër NĒ 77b Beara: Bras] vn: 
araara NE TATA FANTA att NAZNLNZEN; ATATIT 
Raan NE Tagdegegmteg: SS; amd em quq GX. CANTA 
Fr g MID; MAATAAN PL, 77c osa ] NĒNĻNĢĻE"; 
egre NENFGRIMIT; oF — SP NK. ; oF caer $5; Wea 
pire, iw - Ga PIS è TT] X; dm GI 77d gesit 
X; Wart NK; WaT © GN eag] rg GT]; d$; 
efsar:] x; fora NANE 78a 4T ] X; d MĢPL deeg x; 
frat NĒ 78b eure] X; "at NK? e FATTA] X; jade 


T 
35. ege PZ 
Ser H 9 Pi, 


33 


Preset 


Atala "Dem FIATI «wears Il 
TRRINIBTSTSN PTA era as: 

fart Wad AIT Nauru II 92 Il 
waurfafsrararea42ra Taaragr 
sara: freres Wer Il co Il 
frana urorfmersm: Grad at: 
farà wafa ar fret ufentāmdg—fēam ii co u 


79 Cf. Bhavisyapurana 1.171.43c-44b: THER aT SATA TAT ST ll 
fara vag od fret d Tareas | 

80 Cf. Bhavisyapurana 1.171.44c-45b: UdH VT FATA ASTI Fart II 
aera: Tae AST | 

81 Cf. Bhavisyapurana 1.171.45c-f: Gath A AT Aha: Aah: Tag FÈ: | 
aa finan free omm faafaa 


79 NX? rewrites 78ab after 79ab and leaves out 79cd. 


78c ATAT. |] NENS NE°NG MT; smi NENE ŚS, GPE” 
e area | NENE NE, NE GME: arg” NĒŠŠĻE"; oq NS; STW: 
PL 78d °FIÎY] NENS,NEONGG PLEX;  emdy NĒ; FAT 
$35; — ME è Ader] NENSNENGSSG'MEPLEY; gét NE NES 
79a AMT? | XY; «4T? NĒ, (unmetrical) e EIE | NENGNE SS - 
GF'MZPZEN; *qTdN MIMI, Ni: 79b CHEATS: | NGNĻPLE"; 
giga: NK; ongoa: NĒ; RIA: NE. NES, caret 
Wwe: SL; AmA GUME 79c AAA] NENGNE PRE”; WaT: 
NANK,; K fret $2G"ME at bet NÉ 79d again | 
NÉNZNLMZPLE'; gain NA; Waunmmep NĒ,; 
SISINTIWHTERH NE: o WaurWdeudm $i; adaig gäer GW: 
80b *ETT] X; Ex NA; "ES MZ e Ramat] x; Braad ss 
80c *mm:] X; tUm NE la fray | x; fra > "y NK; — 
Y ME 81b qz: frad | alās "NEP"; asta Lan NI: 
caste: Frag $5; asā gor Bead fe qar MID; aaa: 
Baud E" eat: ] X; Wet: Or sic fd] x; fara NY è wate ur 
Bre] NENNEN SOT MEN; Watt Worm NÉ; Hata gett 
Viz: wRmrafa ur PZ, 81d feto ] NENENGŠĒ GOMZE”; fm 
We NXNK NEPI, e WAT? ] X; mdp GX: 


ex 


URENT SATA: 


arpeeatsat ate ar aaa asad | 
amaf: Mer: arf t8r AAT cs I 
aJa Aar det ATA WDT: 
ATT TTT dpi X arar: emfemarfvum n3 
TINTA TAT aT CHAT: | 
TRISTE TUT dritte [asp d cx i 
82 Cf. Bhavisyapurana 1.171.46: HT atts aly dt ATA ASAT | 
aerated: Mer: gre Pupegd I 
+ eaa: | COIT. ; safar: E, — 
83 Cf. Bhavisyapurana 1.171.47: Adee Ararat amer: TAGAT | 


getti Was afer: eat Pare dI 
84 Cf. Bhavisyapurāņa 1.171.48: 3 Ta Tea YET agara afena | 


TRISTE gar aeaaea aA i 
82 "ët: GET: or equivalent is lost in NZZ. 


82a HET. | NÉNÉNZNAÉNGGAMZPZEN; omgee NENE; 
opera? Or qf] >; ur ar Šš 82b UT IRANE ] 
NE NÆG PIPEN: AT ATRIA  NANÉ UD AMAMI NĒ”; 
Eu biji Viz, WWW sg Ss; UT ATATSĪA TA PT (unme- 
trical)  82c ATMTaIfa Ra: ] NNSS MZ; antrafanad: NS; grat 
ES. NENĻE"; ammafa — NE; arma RAT G^; ATAT 
T FAfT PI e RT: ] x erem GC. eqep PI, 82d fata] 
NÉNÉNZ,NELN£S5G*:; ante Nä Po NT Mēs ; amieta Pi; 
aaea EN e afta] NENENENENGSS GEN; ` PTAC: 
NX; aoa fadtad PL 83b dpi] x; dtī NX ent 
X; Wort G°: 83c tai dpi] X; drive dnī ox 83d T 
WT: ] NENENSPREY a qd NE; geg NEGU ME; T qd 
NE: X Yat: ($$ e camur] X; sarun Wi 84a HTT? ] 
NENENE NZNÉ'ND'SSG*MIPZEN; STAT Miz: (unmetrical) ; 
ATT MZPL è cant? ] X; UNDO NÉPI, è oqqf° ] X; SET NĒ; c 
Gr GF! è curo ] NENENENIONGSS GEN; T NĒ,; AT 
MPI 84b catatfaatenar: ] NENK NE NGP; oaran- 
fear NENEN; aaar: aar: $5; ° — Tegfaar Mi. 
oaia glaat: E^" 84c ARTET] NININI,. NENEN MZE” ; 
arse $$ (unmetrical) ; alee GF'GZPL € FATT? ] X; om. NÉ 
but a second hand adds «T at the end of the pada metri causa; "Ware 
$2 84d TT] X; HTT NE NK? 


WI 


Preset 


quifenm«eud aiaa wu: 

AT anatra: ics tl 
aay TW AT: WOW RPEHTÍESHT AAT FINI 
EAT CUTS Aa FAZI TATA G II 
ag: great Gara avedt diee: 
AAT aÍ PITT: II oi i 


85 Cf. Bhavisyapurana 1.171.49: FAlferattRaa Fësch ae: | wur 
aha TENTA gro: i f f l 
86 Cf. Bhavisyapurana 1.171.50ab: AAT att feay: ge &HTIEHTA EGIT | 


85 DEL T° or equivalent is lost in NE 
87 "37 dfafst* or equivalent is lost in NĒ 


85a NAT ] X; © Ate GL è HT ] X; omire SS ç ogag] X; 
ogag NÉ GL 85b free | NENI, NZ G MIEGLPLEN,; Fila 
T NES. Free Ni"  (unmetrical) ; IGES NS; fe Ss 
eqq:] X; TT Ni  85c "HT |] X; cafu GL 85cd d*HT- 
Faa: ] x; weather NĒ,; wenfeaen® 85d AAAS: | 
NENE*$5.G"GLE"; we fas: NENĻPL; Afaa: NK NS ; 
àf — d: Mir — 86a NHT at] X; alert NĒ; mT- 
feat Mg eat: M] NENE NENENG SSG GLEN; at 
NÉ; FTT gei NÉ; AT gei MŅPL 86b aarsfear] X; 
ST at MZ e AT AAA] X; "ug ad $i; MAT WaT GL 
86c MTT | NG MT GKP; ta NENE,NE*NEÉS, ; TT 
NĻE" è HISS ] NANZÉNÁZNASLG*MIGLPL: om. NS; Hiara 
NĻE" 86d BTW TETA] NANZSNZONZNZPLEN; ` Sgr 
ATEI NÉ; armādas T 4d A SiG. MZ; aW gea Brie: GL 
8Ta T: ] X; We: Šš è faar] NENSNE NANO SAMI PIE"; 
far ow NE, KATE G*'; fama GL sma avedt Br] 
NÉNLNÉNSG*MIGLPLEN; qqedpb Hu» NE; game a Fa: 
NK ; geréit a Sì  87c CAAT] X; X — DON MIS "SWISS GL 
e EST] NENE NESS EN; ora NÉNLNZGÁGLPL; eam 
Mi; 87d "mrwsfd*] $;2G^MZ"E'; SQ NĒNĒNĒ,NG; 
WIE — Wi: eaae vir. rand Fre GL; santa) fae 
PI, è cfafafira: | NENENZ,NLSLMEZEGLPL: — NE faf: 
NS GD: EN 


Xe 


WHET SEATS: 


Fer: atrata: AHA estar: 
ze ateamaratta wow Taart of «c l 
armadara ur fear forata wi 


Baar add [erg feug i s I 
WAIT, ger INTÀNT q: TAA | 
a + att quart dem qua grut ool 
Jan dt aafaa vene | 
nan aar +T dupeWHfeWu Il 89 I 
fewer TTT wu: STAT Theatr | 

88 SE is damaged in G”. 

90 After AJT > the end of pada b is lost in NA", 


88a "Jade: ] X; ofa NEGA o cafa: ] NENNE ŚS G MOPT, 
N; efe NA ON/OGLNSZ 88b ARATE. | NENK. NS; WHTVIT- 
at? NÉNZGLEN; MATU ° oo ant +° PL 88 
aTa F] X; AA w Ni" (unmetrical) e e Taart! x; TATA Nos; N- 
at Gi? 89a °HaTaT] NX NEN, NENGMIPGEPLEY ; AMATAT NES; 
ewdy GSS 89b AT] X; € NZ e feara Rara +] x; AT 
Mi; 89d HANT | NENENS, NE NANO SS MTF" ; a aur G*'; Wd4T 
ex WdWT PI, 89d *H«4T&dT] X; °Hergar Vi, gege GL 
Oa Tatto] NÉNÉ NENA"NGSMEGLEN; SAT NĒ; omari. 
i "TEN Or". MTU PI, e dara] NNS. NE, NENS GKE” ; 
der NEPI; Ware $5; Fey G^; Feary VI — 90b agràs 
g U] NEĒNĻNĢE"; aerate geb: NX: Fal at wae Fe 
NS; gt — We NÉ; gea vid we SEM; gë T- 
ome G^; garg q UM” GL; assured geb: PI, 90c7 
T] NÉENÉNZNZGZLPZE"'; + + MEN, dT Y GUME efa- 
fa] NENENEZ,NÉNZGZLPZLE"; fēafa NL$LGCMEZ 90d geg 
NANISQN 77 re S GE MAY: ; KU NGP RNI E” . qva | 35 qua NA 91 
a det” | X; Tellaro NG 91b ouf tae] X; cafe gg 
Viz ea Yd? MEL 9lc Te |] X; qT T° NE e TTT | X; TUT- 
fa NY 91d qe] NENSNE NP.NS GEN. d qe NES; T- 
CAN Ši; TATA" GLP? 92a PET Ww] NANZ SZ wfeü- 
aT TTT NE; fedi NÉNEGLPZEN: afaa TT NS; afar 
gear G^; agara: gr MIS è TH: ] X; TH NANA 92b °RIfT- 
TT] NENENENAONGSS GLEN; sfd: NEG Mg Ph 


219 


Preset 


WTA TAT artggīfagda: I %2 UI 
ATT: To Wasa: Hea gu | 
TAATA AAAS AAA 9.3 ll 
Aaya ys grat GEDUCREDSTHTS: | 

RT TINTA, NT ger + fard ge l 
TT fear ware mata, far F | 
a yg sfata: NT IMA TT TA |d 9% Il 
UTIT wafer ITTY AAT SXTHHT: | 


93 FATTA 49H or equivalent is lost in Nä. 


96 gray A SEA or equivalent is lost in NF”. 


92c oH7 ] Da TT Ss, e TAÎ] 215 war NS 92d oda: | 
NÉNANE,NLG*MZPLE'; YARA NENG; *ufenar $5; dar: 
Gi, 93a IT: ] NENZNE?NSSLGC*GLPLE"; ATTI NS; "TT NÉ; 
— ME è VC NIIATH:] NEÉ"NZNZGÉMEPLE'; Wat wa NĒ; 
qe ugang NĒ"; UT fe Weare: NK; WX fe Wart NĒ; geet Sg 
$5; TT gun GL, 93b ATA ] X; JT: $j,; «ME Gh 93c W*HT- 
TUAGTÀT] NS; FATAUAGTÀT NL; yarmaa q NANLGLPZEN; 
JATEA NINE: aiana Si; Tarai 


` x 
[x 


OU 93d HET? ] Sid qu? $7 e mem] X; casa 
MẸ 94b IT] X; ST NE^. rette: | X; ESTRATTA 
NS; SATA: GL 94e HAT] X; N — MZ 94d T 
ge T] NENENG; T NT AT NENP, NGS GPE; -- 
qe T ME 95a T] NENENGGS'GLEN; AT NENK. NE SS MIT PT, 
e featet | NENENE,NENE'NSGEEN; feather $ZMZPL; aana 
Or"  95c " yaga: |] NANKNENK?; T ges gafea: 
NENS PT; gg ëss: Now; Wow giga $5; "dgW- 
fata: G*i; a adigaia: MID; @ yh galaa: GL; T 
Yad gad: EN 95d TT] X; W Na; WX NĒ? è °HaTIATA ] 
NAN Ga NB OTM GLP, "MATA NANZE^; gaang NS 
96a ITIT] X; WT MOIE" è MAF] NENANZNGCSSLGLPLEN; È 
UTITA Nia; mAsa (?) G** (unmetrical) ; Te MI 96b afam 
AITYAT:] NENENENE NE NGG SSE”; afaa nt: GL; 


AA — T: MI; ART TT: PI, 


SG 


WHET SATA: 


BAIA ATT ATHT dii 

TI dr AT: gatorna aT | 

TIT: Fe SIA end fewer 99 l 
èET d HETĪTĪT: FAGIANO: | 

ara ATT rae Ad ll c 

grat T TT ar aed aaa: | 

TAA Cd TATE: MATA 11 9.9. Il 

T: WSUEHPSRENUTH: sar sega: 

F gär T SMT STAT: STRA STAT dd 200 ll 


98 T. - £ AT or equivalent is missing in Nž7. 


96c ANT? ] NANI, SG EME GžoP72; AET? MN NE NG EN 
e TIT 1%; arate Wi ATT: Te GL 96d ved] X; FIT 
NÉ? erën d] Eu C Tram $2: wur 
Rag GÉPL; ATHY + GL 97a AT] X; EMT NĒ, 97c HE] 
X; € NI (unmetrical) ; gé pa e &3I3 | X; Sg NX, 97d T- 
=t] X; ated OC" è fandfao ] NENĒNENS "NE$SMIYPLE" ; 
farafre NE; fa > fee or Ber GL 98a gr gl 


ei Sud € NENENSGLEN; — RT F ME 
e OUT: ] Ott NE^; ewnfD $2 98b 04T: ] X; ATT NENE? 


98c A ATY ] NS; «rend Wm NES; cafenea 
NEÉNLNZGLPZEN; arr ATT NK; ales NP G^ Mir 
99a TET eqni ] NSNPNGGE PLEX; YET TĀ NÉ; YET 
NE i — *p NĒ; uem: Gr, q err ch. dega 
Mi e TÌ] x; wet Šš — 99b sg: ] NÉNÉNZSZGEMIZEN; 
SEI NE NE: cae: GL; FAT: PI 99 ad Fe] 
NÉNEÉ.NENZMZ'GLE'; Tart To NESS: Avera To NE: and 
+ Gf; ATA a: PI e vada |] NÉNÉNZNZS$LGFS'MIPLEN; 
ogu NEN; Wadd Gi, 99d *HTg:] X; ?HTg Mi, oag: 
Mēs e 9[[= ° ] N2s NNK NE NIGHE” ; ade Ni; fara Ss, ; 
swift? GPL; sm Mi? 10007: ] >; om. cgt e OUT: | 
NN EE EE °H Nas "unm Niba ; eUTAT Nä" 
100b aT] X; M F SS egie] X; ëmt: NÉ 100c gl 
NANNE NGS G Mg GPE; W* SN om MW“ ° e Wr] 
x; R^ G*; qv ME"; VA More eet] X; emp NX 
100d Met: ] X; Sed Ni ÙT PI, e AAT] X; Wd" GL 


SS 


Preset 


Tae Tas F | 

ICTATTÌAT DEAT: ATV: s AAT: Il 299 
STĀTATATTATĀY AdATĀ + zait 
ATTRACT AAT SAA STE: Il 992 Il 
at WWE quar Ww gegen 

FAT ATS éiert ATi: ARTA: | 203 Il 


101 IS: " or equivalent is missing in NZ". 


101a TAT* ] X; AAT PL e «wed yw] NENE NZNÁA'NGPLEN; 
eWSHITWWS NK; CmDHDPTWEH Ši; it > V > T GS; eRT- 
Tq M; °ATATITAY Gi, 101b ATT TĀ |] NENG"; 
grasa T NK; qaan NEPI; Sa da Ada NG; 
AT TĀ A $25; TATA MY;  ghrennms GL; 
fata nà PL": dm da HdI NEEN 101c "ARĪ ] 
NÉNÉNEZ,NLNZNZSSMI'PLEN; TAT Gi"; omy GF; og- 


` 
c 


dat GLSe.ednW:] NEANAÉNAONLNZMIE'; Gad: SLGLPL. 
YET Chr" 101d Beaty: "W We] NANENLPZEN'; Hale: HW? 
No; W WIN we NESS; — ATS: we NÉ € dU 


ge OrMI W MAY we GL 102a "ATT |] X; cad 


Nisas OMAY Pi 102b mm +] NANSNZNGE'"; om 
NÉZ,NÉNZSLG*MgGA4P5; HTT J Ee eta] MN: 


fale NSNENGGLPLEY; wur NS; Wad: $5; Ader GME 
102c ATA] NENSNS,NENCE; oada Ne; of agata 
$2; *crdtarata G^; mrefwup vlait MI aoai GL; 
ecqdidita PI, 102d *NTSHaTEd:] NENS NE, NG, ŚS, GPE” ; 
"NTSSHMTRG: NX;  CNDSTQSTRGH Mi, curse Va: MZ; 
overated: GL 103a HANS] X; mW - E G^; gëf PL 
103b daTart ] NANA,NÉ^NGSSMIGLPL; AT NE; T = © W GN: 
ddr NEEN (unmetrical) e + AAH ] NXNGNz Mos Gio; T gegen 
NENG; X AT: NX; gi qaq $5; TORA OH, aT: HAA PL; VT 
egent E" 103c TT] X; dA PL è °F] X; SHE $5G^ è FAT] 
X; cm NEG 1034 sr: ] NENK NENÉM GASPLEN; A 
wired: NX; Al WI (unmetrical); a° $2; "eI GC 
e WEnDnBER:] NENENÉONLNÉ'NZGAMZPLEN; qaaa SS; 
ard: GL, 


200 


URENT SATA: 


Aaa AA APS mAT | 
GATUIAASATAT mu: IST ATS Il 20% Il 
FTTIT SEE d I: Gert + fel 
TARA AIA AACA IATA II 90. Il 
Ad At IT: SATA | 
oera aree ns PSU 20% Il 
aaga wr ged + qíed gr 


105 SR adds the following verse after 105b: aaa groe quen 
ATT | SATA ASE d grat FITTI e GL omits 105c-111b. 
106 $$. and MZ omit 106ab. 

107 NPZ, and E” omit 107ab. 


104a "Tux | NENENE,NZSSGFÉ'ME PLE” ; Ce NE; 
Serate NC; C3 GL è ARTT]; ger > G 104b 7- 
N^] X; Ti Ye NÉI e Qaa] X; d — NE; sg GL 
104d TRIAT] NÉNÉNZ,NLNZSZMZPLE*; + gen NE; g- 


` 
S 


og GT; TAT Go 105a am: ] X; ATT? GL è Hae | 
NNK NENENG MG PRE”; GEE NESS; km] Gi, 105b Y: 
YET |] NE.NGG MI; U: gerd NS; ay gend NENĻPLE"; 
aq yer NĒ; ag at aa Ši; at GEI Ghea IET] 
NÉNZLNZUGE'; + Ted NENG; + Tere SMe; TTT or 
(Mat GL; Mefr PL 105d Brem] x; tege NES 
°F NS 106a TT get: ATH? ] X; setā NES 
TATA "W^ PL  106ab *Hardedcger? | X; Aae NS 
(unmetrical); ACTA TAT? PI 106c We ] X; Whee NE^ è bn 
x; Tage PL 106d mamaaa [sep] NĀNĒNS,NĻNĢPZLE"; 
ara euge femp NE ; alfas Spr Ss; WATTS (? wat INA 
G*'; aaea feet MID 107a HUTA TH] NÉS; Rara 
FAST NENE; tHuwpDId gf NANG; > WDId ya Gk; "virge 
qva ME 107b TT 7 ga PT] NG; whew qid gr NK; 
aria < < > TT Niba; afar afer AUT NZ, (unmetrical); T --- 
NE; gei + rr Va $LMg; gei + - FAT geng G“: 


20? 


Preset 


AAA TTT Ta TERNI: u 9e i 
ad afsat svat YA: wer ofatec: 

at golt sta ad wer wfafgg 11 gor i 
FATfHAT CREWHIVITHTHCOHETST + TUTI 
FTA ATT RAEE aT ATA ll 902 Il 
TARA KTV UT FANTI add | 

BHT ATAT grat 4 Ta: Praat TAT II 92o |! 
TIERRA | 


108 $$. omits 108ab. 
110 KESERI "T HAT? or equivalent is lost in NX’. 


107cd °HATAATCACAH? ] NENKNENGMZEX; Aga ` gg: 
NK;  *HWDQdTHOTH? Ni: PRURITO Si; e34 > 
IAT GS;  *HWTWg gege ag: PL 107d ofaa gefor: ] 
NÉNZNEZNSGPLE'; emfqem «sup? NE MIMI: adatta Te 
$2; onga gen - T^ GX 108a Rq] X; së NE e: ] 
NENE NEOG MIPE“; qm NENĒ,; UT NENE? 108b *f&w:] 
NENĻNSPLE"; ofa NÄNN GME 108c AT Yfafsd 
Sta] NENEÉNZNZSLGEPLEN; step w unm + NÉ sid 
T Innata wo vi ad ufafsd sta MY 108473 "Gi 
NÉNÉ NLE'; Wed HIT NĒ; Wd "cp NENG; ma: Year 
$LG*'PL; wer Are: ME è cfafea] NENENK.NĻNĒNĢE"; 
ofaa: $2,G*'MITPZ 109a eiar] X; eaa ar, 109ab °T- 
A3 ATUTATA* |] NENNT, MINA ` HAAAT. NA°; "ent 
2: W° GX; "ëmm: Pr, (unmetrical); «T8 HTUTATq?^ E" 
109b + BAT] NENĒNĻE"; T AWA NÉNZPL; T RAT NX; 
werd $2; s gutt OM  109c °EATATHAT® ] X; CEPIT 
$2; TATA PI 110a T APT] NENSNENEONGEN ; 
wart NEG M; Toma Ši; aay PI, 110b ur Fay 
add] X; — wh add Ni: HAUT geet War Šš, 110c HAAT] 
x; ©°WIUAT OC, e dd] X; ata PZ (there are two dots after T) 
110d JF: ] X; TH NĚ 111a Bgsteat: ] NENE, NGG MIPE” ; 
KAT Ni. Gp NENE SS, 1llab °AATATTERT® | 
NÉNEÉNZNZS$SGEAMITEN; 4 ATATĪT ges NX; T ATATA deo NE; 
eHATATT AT PZ, 111b "Pte ] x; fem Ss; ofaa no MV 


203 


WHET SEATS: 


FRAU SEDSGDOH AHEA FAAS: Il 999 Il 
SED Berg svt sep Ferqr gur 

a erar Add q free ferar farà 99211 
tarata ur Taranto | 

fef: WT + FATE STAT ANNA 993 11 
a: ug WHOqua Ta ere: 

aer fear: SPARATI: Pert 99% i 


112 N5,, NX? and $$, omit 112cd. 
113 UAA. or equivalent is lost in NX’. 


OLCK X; FAm NÉ 111d CHA: ] NENK, NE NENG SS ME 
EN; eqq NK; oga GGL; Bg: PZ 112a RT] x; 
RaT NE e NE] NENLNZGLPLEN; Sa NĒ; geg Wi: Wed 
NÉ $2G*'Miz  112cferar] x; fed NZGLesmur] x; "fe: 
NÉ 1123 fe] x; è fem NE, Fret NES ufenr: 
X; «fera Nf e fort] x X; M4 GL 113a TANA | 
NÉNENLZNZGLPZLEN'; unaa NÉ; — aft NES cv 
Raaen OM. exem arfe Cor 113b AT] X; UT GF 
113c Theft: AT + ANTE] NANANZONLNSE'; TRIM: gr gg 
are vi, fef: AT aa awe $4; aT Weert gut Or. Weert 
+ gr ant Mi; yethrearad ATA GL; "fuer oft wre PI, 
113d NAT "I3? ] X; Wet gät: NĀ,; wre Ust? MZ e sm] 
X; ome: tf NE; omeddfe PI, 114a Y:] NANZNLÜUNZSL; T 
NX,NK°EN; om. NE; GF; geg MZ; TT GL; W PI e UT 
AAAA | NENG MÄ, RIT NS, (unmetrical); TUT "T9 


„dā 


NE; gud WHcper NGNE EY; THT UuUqeper $5; TIT THAIOT 
GL; aAA PL 114b cured ] X "HUE NE°GE, è Rr: ] 
NANE*NSSZLPL; fret SENGER) fg NÉ; FTT 


GL 114c HET] X; wat Ss 114d SEAT: Feraqdt] NX; 
Haar Ferarqar NS. arr: Per df NĒ; maaar Ragat 
NL; Maa feragdt NĒ; «wawareruürngdt NS; Maa TAg 
ferry $2; wwwwure Raa edt GL (unmetrical); anfa fend 
Tat GA; aoaaa cat Raa M; argarfa afamat P (there are 
three dots under FT ); vqequar Raadt EN 


$93 


Preset 


dari sur fe vernfaafād: | 
samahan: ATSĪT ger: PSTEHTETSRHT i 993 I 

ñ rss zent aa: 

afam: a fair veer s= Fardl l 996 I 
Rahang - sqm: ger AT: | 

ver Frater sar gear fafaa Ti 9919 1 


115 $$, omits 115ab. 


e id 


115a Ydgrd sp fg] NE; Yeast aaarsfe NENE; dari 
aars NE ONG Teast quer NĻE"; qdew qued G: ; 
qdipTauuó a: MID; Wu AA (?) FAASfT GL? (unmetrical); 
qå GAIT PL 115b manfaate: ] NNK. NEG MI GH ; 
qanar: NENP NCE’: atererfaaftta: PL 115c *"H: 
ASR] NANÉNEZ.NZNZSLMZPLE"; eg > — NE ears 
GF'  (unmetrical) ; ewHredsh GL 115d Ha: Rre ] 
NNN. NËNGBZM EN: — Terr Mi, du: fs G 
(unmetrical) ; EPHEIZEEESECE Gio; farae farant PI, 116a Brat- 
rutattre | x; Ranana. GL; Rarna. PI (unmetrical) 
e qf] E; cat NE 116b Fdh° | NÉNENE,NENS, MGE ; 
Hane NÉ; qup a $2; quien G*G5; Hache PI e HAT] x; 
Hat NÁÉGZeuwdg:] X; Var: NS; Ader G^'  116c AEA: ] 
NENSNANSGIMI GEPLEN ; AER NENESE eT fadut ] 
NANZNLNZG*GLPLE"; MATA NEL; W SHEET NE; © 
aT Si; gäe MID 116d #79 ng fadt] NÉNSGAE'; 
Vasa TTT NK; zemā fadt NL; UAFATAAJA NES; 
UqWUIDEHH NESS; UMG MID; TA ae > D 
G^ (unmetrical); *Xcd reg fardt PZ — 117a ATA TEA ] 
NÉNZNGZGFGLPZLEN; Ammen NA; "web ata Ss; 
aAa NENE; MATA q MID 117b T Sqpm: HAT ] 
NÉNLNZ; SIGH qar NAE"; Bry qar NENE; Arse xp ger 
$2; JJa GUPI; sy ger MZ "qq ger GL e AT: ] 
NÉNENLNZGÉMZGLPLE'; HT: NÉ NÉ'S$ 117c rafa F- 
HINT] NE&NENE,NENE^NZGAEN; fara matr SME, «erat 
Rafa PO, 117d Paferarft q] NAÉNZNRZ,NLNZ'NZSSMIE; 
fafaa G: GL Ps 


908 


WHET SEATS: 


VN ven: SATANA: Tears: 
+ T PRATT |1 996 lI 


te wate frau atecote PSTHISEHTEHTAO VARIA: Il @ Il 


118 Cf. Bhavisyapurana 1.171.50cd: T Sat frereana qSsrq +f" | 


118 ?ESIT: Pasa: or equivalent is missing in NÉ^. e G*', GL, and 

PZ, have the following verse after 118: Y: gét fart wear ATATTEATIT- 

wae | Faqet: ard EIE ERE OE SE E C | 

> Ti] G*PL; Y MITGL è Yer] G*PL; var MVG è a- 

wT | GG bP; WHT MI e ATT. ] GÉMZEGL; erate PI 
Raa Feta | GG! pt; Bradta aster d ME e 


118a ?*$48:] X; °F: NZ? (unmetrical); "gg Gi, 118ab ° exar ] 
X; XT Vi ^ 118b eure: ] NÄNN NENG MIŚ E“; — 
NE°; oto GL; STAT PZ efsrargq:] X; Ni: Jaren 
GL  118c WHT] X; wer $5; Mat E" o faertae |] x; fren- 
sain NAE"; Tase: Wi 118d *SITHT^ | X; OST: NL; "ëmge 
EN e «iqq: ] X; cuted: GL Colophon: ēfa frau af | 
NE; ēfa hamira aeute NEN? xf Ramie NES; «fa 
forrest NF; afa frana +TFzagrerar NS ; eft Sarà 
aart haaie $2; «fa foraudigmeà G^; af ele Bada 
Mz; 3? ēla Madame ara GL; aft Raate 
arenas PREY è Fsrarmdareara Qaras: ] NX; Fsrarmdareara 
BATT: NINS; BTATATATTEITŪATGSA: NS; Raana U- 
ares: WHTH: NL; Rarna aA ATATCATI: Wares FATA: NK’; 
rr Ra Tita: $i; PSTHTSEHTWTYT ATA Veto sal SEATS: 
OO: URTEINTSEATT: ME; FATA TATEAAO ATH URENT SEATA: 
PL; fsrarmHT ATĀGTGSTSATT: EN 


$ed 


Translation of Chapter Eleven 


Introduction 


Nandike$vara spoke: 

1 Siva has declared the Laws of Siva (sivadharma),"" so that those 
of all classes (varna) who adhere to Siva's discipline (sivasrama) ^? 
may attain virtue (dharma), material gain (artha), sensual gratifi- 
cation (kama), and liberation (mukti). 


On worship and the place of worship 


2  ABrahmin,a Ksatriya, a Vai$ya, awoman, or aSudra who observes 
Siva's discipline (sivasramin), a forest-dweller or a householder, 
and whoever else might observe Siva’s discipline (sivasramin) ,^? 


"7 The manuscript tradition is divided. In accordance with our editorial po- 
licy outlined above, we have opted for the reading of the plural, but there is also 
very strong support for the singular stvadharma. 

18 On the specific use of the term sivasrama in the text, see the Introduction. 

!°9 This verse emphasizes the inclusivistic model of the sivasrama: it is an ove- 
rarching concept that integrates all people in a Saiva-Brahmanical society. In 
essence, with the term sivasramin the present chapter defines what it means to be 
a Saiva, a term that is, however, not used in the text. Several variant readings in 
the manuscripts seem to have arisen in an effort to get rid of the repetition of the 
word sivasramin. Since sivayogins (the followers of the fourth discipline) cannot 
own property they are probably not included among the sivasramins here. They 
should also not tend the fire, a duty of the sivasramins specified in verse 5 and 
again in the concluding verses. 


A Saiva Utopia 


3 should make, to the north of one's residence (svasrama), a 
beautiful flower garden, furnished with a fire-shed [in the 
southeast and] a temple of Isvara in the northeast."? 


4 TIn case there is no space for it, he should make it wherever 
land is available. To the south of Siva he should make a 
guest house for his devotees. 


5 One should worship ISa at the three junctures of the day and 
[perform] fire-service, to the best of one's ability; or at the 
two junctures, or once [a day]. One should perform worship 
to Siva to the best of one's ability. 


6 One should never, out of carelessness, eat without first wor- 
shiping Siva—this should be known as the highest law, wheth- 
er there be something beyond or not.'? 


7 One may worship devotedly in thought, if one is intoxicated, 
distressed, etc.; likewise when one is ill or in danger, in order 
to prevent the transgression of one's duty [of worship].'? 


8 The three [i.e., celibate, householder, forest-dweller] resort- 
ing to Siva's discipline should always perform this worship, 
[while] a yogin may perform worship in thought, or with such 
flowers as grow in the forest."4 


ue The word agnyagarain the compound may be elliptical for agneyyam agnyagaram, 
which occurs as a variant for pada c in GE. In any case, the southeastern direction 
(āgnejī dik) for the fire-shed is a standard feature of the layout ofa Siva temple, and it 
should be understood here. An additional verse inserted at this point in Gf expands 
this section, spelling out the features of the other directions: ‘In the southwest is the 
place for firewood, in the west the water tank, in the northwest the place for grain, in 
the north the store-room.’ The idea underlying the present verse is that one makes 
one's domestic home into a sivasrama by providing it with the features of a Siva tem- 
ple complex. In this sense the stvasrama is not only the discipline (asrama) followed 
by the devotee of Siva but it also designates the residence (asrama) of Siva. For other 
descriptions of the layout of a Siva temple complex, see, e.g., SiDhU 2.131-134 (De 
Simini 2013, 225-226; 252-253), SiUp 2.16—19, and GdP 1.46.14-17. 

" The intended meaning is to the south of the Siva temple mentioned in the 
previous verse. 

'? Literally, ‘whether there is a remainder or not” (seso bhavati và na và). In 
other words, whatever other precepts there may be, they do not compare to the 
highest law of worshiping Siva. 

‘3 The word karya here refers to the regular duty of material worship. 

"4 A sivasramin as described above is someone who makes a temple for Siva at 
his own residence, which is materially possible only for the first three of the four 
asramas. The yogin can perform worship mentally, or with wild flowers. Note that 
the text nowhere uses the term samnyásin. 


108 


Translation of Chapter Eleven 


9 In harming flowers for the sake of Siva one does not become 
harmful, but if he does even a little harm for his own benefit, 
then he is harmful.'5 


The Siva-householder 


10 Constantly devoted to worship of Siva (sivarca) "9 and the fire, 
and honouring His devotees, the illustrious Siva-householder 
(stvagrhasramin) should refrain from having sex at the days of 
the moon's changes.!7 


11 With a third of his wealth, he should perform worship of Siva, 
or he may do so with half of that [i.e., a sixth], for life is im- 
permanent.'? 


14 He shall acquire wealth with lawful means, but unlawful 
means he should avoid. With riches acquired by unlawful 
means he is destined for hell. 


The Siva-celibate 


15 He who is a Siva-celibate (sivabrahmacarin)—whether perma- 
nently (naisthika) or temporarily (bhautika) ?—should be de- 
voted to the worship of Siva and the fire, with his senses tamed, 
and tranquil. 


us Cf. also LiP 1.78.14: sivartham sarvada karya puspahimsa dvijottamāh, ‘Harm 
of flowers may be done at all times for the sake of Siva, o best of twice-born!’ 
This contrasts with the Atimārga view expressed in NiMukh 4.73cd: sustrnapa- 
titaih puspair devadevam samarcayet, ‘Let him worship Devadeva with flowers that 
have withered and fallen.’ 

16 We take arca in the sense of arcana. Cf. SiDhS 8.116d, 11.16d, etc. 

47 Compare MDh 4.128: amavasyam astamim ca paurnamasim caturdastm | bra- 
hmacārī bhaven nityam apy rtau snatako dvijah ||; "The new-moon day, the eighth 
day of a fortnight, the full-moon day, and the fourteenth day of a fortnight—on 
these days, a twice-born who is a bath graduate should always remain chaste, even 
if his wife is in her season.’ (tr. Olivelle 2005). 

"5 Cf. SiDhS 4.17 tasmāt tribhagam vittasya jrvanaya prakalpayet | bhagadvayam 
ca dharmartham anityam jrvitam yatah ||; ‘Therefore he should reserve a third of 
his wealth for sustenance, and the other two parts for religion, for life is imper- 
manent.’ Compare also SiP Vidyesvarasamhita 13.72ab: atmavittam tridha kuryad 
dharmavrddhyatmabhogatah, ‘He should allocate his wealth threefold: for religion, 
for investment, and for his own enjoyment.’ 

"9 See TAK III, s.v. naisthika, for the different interpretations of this set of terms. 


109 


A Saiva Utopia 


The Siva-hermit 


16 Free from all social contact"? eating bulbs, roots and fruits, 
one is known as a Siva-hermit (srvavaikhanasa) ; he should be 
devoted to the worship of Siva and the fire. 


The Siva-ascetic 


17 Withdrawn from all social contact, ever inclined to medi- 
tate on Siva, one is known as the foremost of Siva-votaries 
(stvavratin) ,"' lying in ash, with his senses conquered. 


The mark of the Sivasramins 


18 He should have the bracelet of rudrāksa-beads [tied] around 
the hand, and the single matted mass of hair atop the head;"? 
[this] is the mark (ga) of those who follow Siva’s discipline 
(sivasrama), together with the triple line made with ash."? 


12° We take sanga in the sense of ‘social contact’ here, but ‘attachment’ is also 
possible. The parallel in the Bhavisyapurana has gandha here, but in the next ver- 
se, where the same word reoccurs, it has been replaced by samgama. 

121 Or alternatively: ‘the foremost follower of the observance of Siva.’ For the 
sivavrata, see Goodall 2015, 16—18. 

122 The first line of this verse is quoted by Yamuna in his Agamapramanya 
and ascribed to the ‘Saiva Agamas’ (prasiddham caitat satvagamesu): rudraksam 
kankanam haste jatà caikà ca mastake. 

23 This is one of the earliest attestations of this set of three marks of the Saiva 
ascetic. Among various available sources, see e.g. SiP Vidyesvarasamhità 25.49, ye 
tribuņdradharā loke jatadharina eva ye | ye rudraksadharas te vai yamalokam prayanti 
na ||; "Those who wear the triple line made with ash, those who wear matted 
hair, those who wear rudraksa-beads, they do not go to the world of Yama.’ See 
also TAK III, s.v. tripundra(ka), and TAK IV (forthc.), s.v. rudraksa, where it is 
observed: ‘The association of the rudraksa with Siva and his followers seems not 
to be attested to in the epics or in the works of Kalidasa, but we find it in the 
seventh-century works of Bana, the rosary of rudraksa beads being, for instance, 
one of the attributes mentioned in the description of the Bhairavacarya in the 
Harsacarita, who holds a rosary (HC 1, p. 156), and who also has rudraksa-beads 
tied to his topknot (p. 155).’ For the Sivadharma’s treatment of the rudraksa, or 
rudraksamala, which is to be worn on the head, tied around the hand, or on the 
sacred thread, see SiDhS 12.85-91 (edition De Simini 2013, 294-295). 

After the present verse, G^ adds four more verses: ‘He [will get] a crore [of 
fruit] if he should wear it on his head, a thousandfold [fruit] on his ears, a hun- 
dred crores [of fruit] if he has tied it to the neck, and a thousandfold [fruit] on 
the middle of his arms, but one obtains immeasurable fruit because of wearing 
the rudraksa around one's hand. Whether there is a remainder of food (ucchista) 
in one's throat, or one is saddled with all sorts of sins—they remove all sins by 


110 


Translation of Chapter Eleven 


19 One who should wear rudraksa-beads [tied] around the hand, 
on the head, or on his sacred thread, becomes invincible to 
all creatures and will reach the world of Rudra. 


20 Rudra's devotees"* should always wear Rudra's single mass of 
matted hair on the head, which destroys all sins and grants 
union with Rudra. 


21 He who makes the triple line with white ash at the three junc- 
tures of the day will be released from all sins and be hon- 
oured in the world of Siva."5 


Bathing in ash 


22 Thatwhich is the supreme potency of the fire of Rudra (rudragni) 
is praised as ash, destroying all taints, cleansing away all sins." 


the touch of the rudraksa. If even a dog wearing a rudraksa on the neck attains the 
Rudra-state, how much more so humans and other [beings]? 

124 It is not clear to what extent this refers to all Rudra's devotees or only to 
the ascetics. The text appears to allow for typical ascetic practices and ideals 
to be followed by other sivasramins as well. Note that the commentary on the 
Sivadharmasastra indeed takes the three characteristics mentioned in verse 18 (the 
rudraksa-beads, the matted hair, and the triple line of ash) to be shared by all si- 
vasramins: sadharanan dharman aha ‘In verse 18, he states the general rules.’ Cf. 
also Mirnig 2019, 486: ‘While the authors may in fact have originally envisaged 
the ascetic practitioners when speaking of these characteristics, they —at least the- 
oretically—extended these practices to the householder devotee, who now is also 
recommended to carry rudraksa-beads or smear himself with ashes. Thus, aspects 
that are considered core elements of the antinomian practices on the Pasupata 
path also form part of the practices of lay householders in the context of the SDh.’ 

5 This verse has a parallel in SiP Vidyesvarasamhitā 24.20. The section on 
ashes that starts here is quoted in the Kriyāsāra of the Vīrašaiva author Nila- 
kantha Sivacarya (ca. 1400-1450; see Fisher 2017, 331). 

26 22ab = Brhajjabala-Upanisad 5.17ab = SiP 1.33.91ab. Cf. also LiP 2.18.52 = 
SauP 54.72, which makes explicit the procedure of gathering the ashes from 
the fire of Rudra: upasamhrtya rudragnim grhītvā bhasma yatnatah | agnir ityadina 
dhīmān vimyyangani samsprset ||; ‘Having extinguished the fire of Rudra and ga- 
thered the ash with effort, the wise one, rubbing his limbs, should touch [them] 
with the words ‘Agni [is ash]’ etc.’ In the subsequent verses, this practice is 
identified as the Pasupata vrata taught to different groups: Brahmins, Ksatriyas, 
Vaisyas, Yatis, Vanaprasthas, Grhasthas, and Brahmacarins. LiP 2.18.57cd = SauP 
54.77ab concludes: viryam agner yato bhasma viryavan bhasmasamyutah; ‘Since ash is 
the potency of Agni, one who is joined with ash becomes vigorous.' This passage in 
the Lingapurana is closely related in context and indicates that the use of ash was 
prescribed for others than yogins as well. The commentary states that the ashes are 
consecrated with the Siva-mantra (sivamantrasamskrta), i.e., om namah sivaya. 


111 


A Saiva Utopia 


23 A yogin should daily (nityam) observe the bath of the whole 
body, from the soles of the feet to the top of the head," at 
the three junctures of the day; he will quickly attain union. 


24 He who daily observes Agni's bath with his senses in check 
will rescue his lineage to the twenty-first generation [and] 
reach the highest state.'* 


25 The ash-bath has countlessly more virtues than the water-bath; 
therefore, he should give up Varuna's bath and practice Agni's 
bath.” 


26 Whatever merit there is in all holy places, whatever fruit there 
is in all sacrifices, one gets that whole fruit from bathing in 
ash, without a doubt. 


27 He whois burdened by a major sin, or by minor sins,’ should 
have recourse to the ash-bath; [thus] he is freed from all sins.' 


97 Cf SiUp 5.20: grhasthas tryayusomkaraih snanam kuryat tripundrakaih | yatih 
sarvangikam snānam āpādatalamastakāt ||; ‘A householder should perform the [ash-] 
bath by applying the triple lines while reciting the /ryayusa mantra and the syllable 
om. An ascetic [should perform] a bath of the whole body from the soles of the feet 
to the top of the head.’ On the procedure of applying the tripundrawith the tryayusa 
mantra, see Kane II, p. 674. The verse from the Sivopanisad, and the ones cited in 
the previous note, introduce a Vedic element that is lacking in the present text. 

28 This verse is quoted by Kaundinya in his commentary on Pasupatasütra 1.9, 
in the section on ahimsa, with a variant reading uddhrtya instead of uttirya. It is 
uncertain whether the Sivadharmasastra is the original source for this quotation. 
See Bisschop & Griffiths 2003, 336, n. 109, for references to the dgneya bath in 
comparison to other kinds of baths. After this P7; adds: ‘Cows are of pure lineage 
by themselves. Cow-dung is produced by them. Once it is cooked by the Siva fire 
it is held to be pure ash.’ This looks like an attempt to domesticate the tradition 
and align it with a more orthodox Brahmanical perspective. 

29 The commentary states that this only means that one should give up the 
thought that the water-bath is enough. One should not, however, give up the 
water-bath entirely, for it is needed for the removal of perfumes and unguents, as 
specified in verse 35: vāruņam utsrjya suddhena varunam eva paryaptam iti buddhim 
utsrjyety arthah | na tu varunam utsrjya gandhalepavisuddhyartham nityam adbhir upa- 
sprsed iti | varunasya snanasya vidhasyamanatvat |; “Having given up Varuna’s” 
means having given up the thought (buddhi) that the bath alone is sufficient for 
purification. But giving up Varuna’s [bath] is not [what is meant], since Varuna’s 
bath will be prescribed in verse 35cd: “for the purification in case of perfumes 
and unguents, let him wash himself with water." 

5” Most manuscripts refer to being burdened by all sins (sarvabātakaih), but 
we follow the reading of N5s (with support from some other manuscripts). 

5' For ash’s power to release from the worst of sins, see, e.g., PBh ad PS 
1.9: madyam pītvā gurudarams ca gatva, steyam krtva brahmahatyam ca kytvā | 


112 


Translation of Chapter Eleven 


The ash-doctrine 


28 There is no bath more purifying than the ash-bath, in which 
Siva himself bathed, having taught it to the sages and gods.'3? 


29 Thenceforward Brahma and the other [gods], and the sages, 
seeking Siva,'? practiced the ash-bath diligently at all the days 
of the moon's changes (parvan). 


30 Therefore, the one who observes the fiery Siva-bath is a Rudra 
in this very body, without a doubt.'4 


31 One who is depraved or who is virtuous, or one who has no 
character; through adherence to the ash-doctrine he will be 
honoured like a prince." 


bhasmoddhvasto bhasmarasau sayano, rudradhyayt mucyate patakebhyah |: “Even if he 
has drunk wine, has slept with his teacher's wives, has stolen, and killed a Brah- 
min, the man who covers himself in ash, lies down on a pile of ash, and meditates 
upon Rudra is released from [these] sins.' See also Hara 2003, 260ff. 

5? Or alternatively: “There is no bath more purifying than the ash-bath," ha- 
ving taught the sages and gods thus (evam), Siva himself bathed in it (yena).’ For 
snáto yena sivah svayam, cf. AVPari$ 40.4.2cd = 40.4.5ef tena snanena snāmy aham 
yena snáto mahesvarah , ‘In that bath do I bathe, in which Mahe$vara is bathed.’ 

53 The word siva has a double meaning here, referring both to the god 
Siva and to the quality of goodness. See SP IIB, 45-46, for episodes in the Ska- 
ndapurana in which Siva teaches the ash-bath to the gods. 

54 The notion of the existence of Rudras on earth is introduced in the ope- 
ning chapter of the text and forms a core element of the Sivadharma’s teachings, 
ye "rcayanti sada rudram na te prakrtimanusah | rudralokāt paribhrastas te rudra natra 
samsayah ||; "Those who always worship Rudra are no ordinary men. They are 
Rudras who have come down from Rudraloka. There is no doubt about this.’ 
(SiDhS 1.16). See Bisschop 2018b, 7-8, and Mirnig 2019. 

55 The intended meaning of bhūtišāsanasamyogāt may be that Siva resides in 
the ash-bath that he himself has taught. Note the significant switch in vocabu- 
lary from bhasman to bhüti, carrying with it the connotation of 'riches' and thus 
very apposite for the simile. For the identification of bhüti with various gods, see 
AVPariš 40.5.1: bhütis tu pingalo babhrur bhütir visnuh sanātanah | bhütir brahma 
mahendras ca bhütir devah saha rsibhih ||; ‘Ash is Pingala, Babhru, ash is Visņu, 
Sanatana, ash is Brahma, Mahendra, ash are the gods together with the sages.’ 
(Bisschop & Griffiths 2003, 336, with accompanying notes). The compound 
bhütisasanasamyuktah appears in SiP Vidyesvarasamhitā 24.24b and 24.26b, no 
doubt under the influence of the Sivadharma’s usage of the term. The commen- 
tary on our text discusses two interpretations of bhütisasana: 1) the injunction of 
ashes, and 2) the injunction of the rudraksa-beads. The commentator advances 
the position that it refers to both: bhütisasanayuktah bhütir eva sasanam iti kecid 
vadanti | anye tu sasanasabdena rudraksam āhuh | ubhayor api sasanatvam sivajnasi- 
ddhatvad iti mantavyam |; ‘Adhering to the ash-precept: some say that ash alone is 


113 


A Saiva Utopia 


32 When honour is given to a worthy recipient that amounts 
to honour of the doctrine;** therefore, one should honour 
the doctrine unhesitatingly, in accordance with Siva's com- 
mand 


33 Byhonouring Siva's command, Siva is worshiped directly; there- 
fore, one should honour Siva's ordinance without hesitation. 


34 For one who upholds Isvara's ash-doctrine, even as a guise, 
will reach a state which one does not obtain even through 
hundreds of sacrifices. 


On purity 


35 Let him sip water according to the rule, rendered stainless 
(nirlepa) by Siva's ash; for the purification in case of perfumes 
and unguents, let him wash himself with water.'^? 


the precept. Others refer to the rudraksa-beads with the word sasana. One should 
consider that the precept entails both, in fact, since that is established by Siva's 
command.’ 

56 Some manuscripts have tasya (‘His’ ordinance) instead of tat syāt. The pro- 
per recipient is the topic of Sivadharmottara chapter four (satpatrapradanadhyaya) , 
which identifies the stvayogin as the best recipient, since he represents Šiva. SiDhS 
12.55 identifies three categories of stvapdtra: sivayogi Swajnani sivadharmaratas ca 
yah | ity etat trividham jūeyam sivapatrasya laksanam ||; “The Siva-yogin, the Siva-knower, 
and the one who delights in the Sivadharma. This should be known as the threefold 
definition of the Siva-recipient.’ See also De Simini 20162, 59-61. 

!37 The underlying logic of this and the following verses is that by following Si- 
va's doctrine of bathing in ash Siva himself is worshiped (33b). The different steps 
are as follows: bhütisasanasamyoga (31c) > gunavatpatrapuja (32a) > šāsanapūjā 
(32b) > stvapuja (33b). The idea expressed in 32cd and 33cd is that by ‘honouring’ 
Siva’s command (i.e., by bathing in ashes) the ascetic who follows Siva’s command 
receives worship and as a consequence Siva himself is worshiped. The reason for 
the ascetic to engage in this practice then is to function as a vehicle for the worship 
of Siva. After this, several manuscripts add: ‘That which is the sublime seed of 
Rudra’s fire is declared to be ash. It burns all sorrows. That is why it is called ash.’ 

55 Could this refer to the false ascetic? Even though his motives may be 
wrong, still, by following Siva’s command and bathing in ashes, the honour he 
receives is actually worship of Siva, and so he gains the merit from that worship. 

5? Note the commentary's remark that sipping should be done according 
to one’s own domestic tradition: sivabhasmana nirllepah apapo bhūtvā toyavidhina 
svagrhyoktācamanaprakāreņācāmed ity arthah |; "Being stainless," i.e., having become 
sinless, “by Siva’s ash,” one should sip [water] “in accordance with the water-rule,” 
i.e., in the manner of sipping prescribed by one’s own domestic ritual tradition.’ 

After this Gf adds seven verses (GA only the last five): ‘Whatever evil one has 
committed in the past, up to one’s death, or in another birth, that one burns away 


114 


Translation of Chapter Eleven 


36 One of bad disposition, even if he is free from perfumes and 
unguents,'^ is not purified; one becomes purified by the pu- 
rification of one's disposition (bhava); then one becomes one 
of pure disposition. 


37 Someone with a bad disposition is not purified by a thousand 
pots of water, a hundred heaps of earth, even in a thousand 
years.!4 


38 One should practice cleanliness with a purified disposition; 
one should drink water that has been purified by [straining 
through] a cloth; one should set down one's foot purified by 
sight; one should speak words purified by truth.'* 


Hairdress and shaving 


39 One should wear the hair-tuft in a mass, or one should shave ev- 
ery fortnight; whatever merit there is in the rite of initiation’? 
that same merit one obtains by shaving [every fortnight]. 


40 Either with matted hair, full tonsure, or a topknot—eating 
only almsfood, devoid of desires, observing silence, compas- 
sionate to all beings, an ascetic should go with a quieted mind. 


41 He should seek alms like a bee [i.e., from many houses]; he 
should avoid food from just one [house]; almsfood is better 
than fasting; single food is the stain of householders.'^* 


with the ash-bath, just as fire burns fuel. Varuna's bath, Agni's bath, the Divine 
bath, Vayu's bath and the Mental bath, [these] are the five types of bath prescribed 
for Brahmins for purification. Varuna's bath is [done] with water, Agni's is with 
ash, the Divine with rain accompanied by the sun, Vayu's with the dust of cows; the 
Mental bath with meditation is prescribed for the sivayogins.’ The Divine (divya) 
bath is also known as Aindra or Mahendra (Bisschop & Griffiths 2003, 336, fn. 109). 

4° Le., even if he is nirlepa as defined in 35. 

14 Compare the following verse quoted by PBh ad PS 1.9, p. 30, in the bhāvasauca 
section: myttikānām sahasrena jalakumbhasatena ca | na Suddhyanti duratmano papopa- 
hatacetasah ||; ‘Evil persons, their minds struck with sin, do not become pure by a 
thousand lumps of mud or by a hundred pots of water.’ 

142 This verse is modeled after MDh 6.45 (with many parallels, including Kau- 
ndinya ad Pasupatasitra 1.9), but has been rewritten in such a way that it intro- 
duces the notion of bhavaputa. This has a Pasupata background; see the section 
on bhavasauca in Kaundinya's commentary ad Pasupatasitra 1.9 and Hara 2002. 

^5 The underlying idea must be connected to the shaving of the head that for- 
ms an intrinsic part of the diksé ceremony. Some manuscripts have yajianam—or 
a related reading—instead of dīksāyām, but this looks secondary. 

44 The meaning of the final line is that the yogin would incur the taint of 
home-dwellers by relying on a single household for sustenance. 


115 


A Saiva Utopia 


The Südra's yoga 


42 Free from all social contact, devoted to Siva, even a Südra, if 
he gets shaven, may become a servant of a great yogin here." 


43 He should always reside in a temple, together with his atten- 
dants, following the Sivadharma,'** occupied with tending the 
flower-garden, dedicated to the rites of the flower-garden. 


44 Engaged in the three bathings and worship, covered by a 
loincloth at all times, he attains the state of union by means 
of the yoga of devotion to yogins. 


Siva's discipline 
45 Those who are focused on meditation on Siva, peaceful, 
and dedicated to the Sivadharma— [practitioners of] all the 
disciplines (āsrama),'*7 when devoted to Siva—should be con- 
sidered practitioners of Siva's discipline (sivasrama) . 


The great eightfold observance 


46 The great eightfold observance,’ spoken by the Lord, the 
best of all observances, should be practised by those aiming 
for Siva. The law is accomplished in it. 


47 Devotion to Siva, constant forbearance, non-harm, calmness 
at all times, contentedness, truthfulness, not stealing, and 
chastity as the eighth. 


Devotion to Siva 


48 Devotion to Siva should always be carried out in act, thought, 
and word, by performing worship however one can, and like- 
wise [devotion] to sivayogins. 


145 [tis worth noting that although the text reaches out to a broader audience, 
the servant nature of the Südra remains in place. 

14° After 43ab, GF adds: ‘by offering food to yogins he obtains the state of union.’ 

47 Asrama appears to be used here with reference to a person. 

148 Mahā- either governs the whole compound or should be taken with -vrata 
alone. Is this an attempt to open up the meaning of mahāvrata to all Siva-devotees? 
The eight parts involve some of the traditional yamas and niyamas, headed 
by Siva-devotion. The list may have been influenced by the list of eight types 
of conduct of the sistas, found in several Puranas, for example GdP 1.213.5: 
satyam danam dayalobho vidyejya pujanam damah | astau tani pavitrani sistacarasya 
laksanam ||. Variants of this verse, but with differences in the individual items 
listed, occur in BdP 1.32.41cd-42ab, VaP 59.37, and MtP 145.38. Several of the 
definitions in the following section have a parallel in these Puranas. 


116 


Translation of Chapter Eleven 


49 And one should protect Siva's devotees, no differently from 
one's own body, from danger, poverty, and disease, and please 
them.'4? 


50 What can men actually do for Siva who is already complete? 
Whatever is done for Siva's devotees is done for Siva. 


51 One should go the place where there are people (janah) de- 
voted to Mahe$vara, even if far away. One must strive to see 
them, for there Hara is present.!5° 


52 And if one obeys correctly the command of a devotee of Ma- 
hesvara, who delights in the worship of Siva, one obtains the 
fruit of a horse sacrifice. 


53 Ifone performs worship [of Siva’s devotee] '5' correctly, listen- 
ing fondly to stories of Siva every day and | being intent on Siva 
every day, one will become a leader of [Siva’s] hosts. 


Devotion to Siva’s devotees 


54 One should offer worship devotedly to the devotees of Siva 
who have come to the sivasrama'* with a guest’s welcome, 
a seat, a foot-bath, guest water, and food such as honey and 
curd (madhuparka) .'53 


55 One who greets [a Saiva guest] with the words ‘welcome!’ 
and ‘homage!’ will be honoured in Agni's world for ten thou- 
sand years.'5* 


^? Although not explicitly mentioned, the unstated subject of the verses in 
this section seems to be the king. He is responsible for looking after the well- 
being of Siva's devotees in his kingdom. 

5? The verse has been reworked in Kularnavatantra 9.95 (I$vara speaking): 
sudüram api gantavyam yatra mahesvaro janah | drastavyam ca prayatnena tatra sa- 
nnihito hy aham ||. 

is! We follow the interpretation of the commentary and take sivabhakia to be 
the object of arcayitvā. 

5? Following the gloss of the commentary, we take stvāsrama to refer to the 
abode of Siva as defined in verses 3-5. This abode of Siva is a place of residence 
of Siva's followers (Mahesvaras): sivasramam mahesvaravasadesam, ‘the sivasrama, 
which is the dwelling-place of devotees of Mahe$vara.' An alternative interpreta- 
tion ‘who have resorted to Siva’s discipline’ is also possible. 

153 This list announces the different actions relating to the reception of guests, tre- 
ated in detail in the following verses. The actions are dealt with according to the order 
of the guest reception; each action is connected to one deity, whose world one reaches. 

55 The notion of the guest as the equivalent of Agni is an old one. See, e.g., 
Katha Up 1.7 vaisvanarah pravisaty atithir brahmano grhan | tasyaitam santim ku- 
rvanti hara vaivasvatodakam ||; ‘A Brahmin guest enters a house as the fire in 


117 


A Saiva Utopia 


56 One who spontaneously gives a seat to a devotee of Siva who 
has arrived will dwell in the city of [Indra] the city-smasher 
for twenty thousand years. 


57 One who derives satisfaction from seeing a devotee of Siva in 
his home will dwell in Kubera's city for thousands of crores of 
years. 


58 If one devotedly washes the feet of a weary devotee of Siva,55 
anointing his feet with ghee, one will be honoured in Visnu’s 
world. 


59 One who with devotion offers guest water, preceded by water 
for the feet and for sipping, to a devotee of Siva who has ar- 
rived will go to Surya’s world. 


60 If one correctly feeds a visiting Brahmin devotee of Siva'*? 
with honey and curd (madhuparka) and so forth in proper 
sequence, one will be honoured in Siva’s world. 


Charity for all'57 


61 Massaging the body of a weary person, one attains Soma’s 
world. By providing shelter, he gets a golden house in heaven. 


62 If one gives very cool water, one will obtain all one's desires. 
By providing a lamp, one obtains the extrasensory power 
[that is] the eye of knowledge.'5? 


all men. Bring water, O Vaivasvata, that is how they appease him.’ (tr. Olivelle 
1998). 

55 We have corrected santaya to srantaya. Guests receiving welcoming offerings 
are often described as being ‘wearied’ from the road. Cf. e.g. ViDh 1.2: tan agatan 
sa rājarsih padyarghyadibhir arcitān | sukhopavistan visrantan krtasamprasnasatkathan ||. 
The pada santaya sivabhaktaya occurs in Nisvasamüla 8.15a (Goodall et al. 2015), but 
in an unrelated context (referring to the one to whom the sivasasana should be 
given). 

56 This is the only time that the guest is identified as a Brahmin. This is no 
doubt because food offering is intrinsically related to Brahmins. Cf. SiDhS 8.34cd: 
sivabhaktam dvijam samyag bhojayitvā vidhānatah; 10.37cd: bhojayīta dvijān astau si- 
vabhaktān sadaksinan; and 12.57ab: sivam dvijasrestham yah sraddhadisu bhojayet. 

57 From here the Siva-devotee is no longer explicitly the subject, although he 
is presumably still implied. 

5 For a similar idea connecting the gift of a lamp to the attainment of the 
eye of knowledge, cf. TVK 2.173ab (attributed to the 'Brahmapurama ): tatra 
dipapradanena jūānacaksur atindriyam; and TVK 2.569ab: tatra dipapradanena 
jnanacaksur bhaven narah. 


118 


Translation of Chapter Eleven 


63 By providing a soft bed, one becomes a lord of the lion 
throne [i.e., a king].'° By giving water for the sake of bathing 
and cleansing, one will attain Varuna’s world. 


64 By fanning with a palm-leaf a man exhausted from the road'*? 
whose body is covered in beads of sweat, one will be hon- 
oured in Vayu’s world. 


65 By doing whatever one can to care for someone suffering 
from hunger and thirst, who is exhausted, afflicted, dirty and 
Sick, one is freed from all sins. 


66 By diligently making the sick well (siva) with medicines, etc., one 
will be honoured in Siva's world for more than ten kotis of yugas.!9! 


67 Coming back eventually here [to this world], he reaches the 
farthest shore of all knowledge, will be beautiful, fortunate, 
resplendent, healthy,’ with many offspring, and happy. 


68 If one reassures someone who comes for protection, fright- 
ened, hounded by enemies and robbers, by saying ‘Fear not!’ 
one will be honoured in Siva’s world. 


69 If one does everything one can to rescue someone drowning 
in a sea of destitution, who is desperate and senseless, one 
will obtain all one’s desires. 


70 One should give food, to the best of one’s ability, out of com- 
passion for all beings, to those fallen from caste (patita), those 
who are cursed (asasta), those of mixed caste (samkirna), 
dogs, Candalas and other [low beings], and birds.’ 


5? After this, three of our manuscripts add: ‘And by giving a bath with water, 
[one will obtain] good fortune and increase of one's intellect.’ 

160 We have kept the reading adhvana- at the beginning of the compound adhva- 
nasramakarsitam. Although this form (an a-stem formation of adhvan) is not known 
from the dictionaries or any other source, the reading receives strong support from 
various manuscripts; the variant readings appear to be different attempts at cor- 
recting it. 

19: After this, P7; has two more verses: ‘One who takes care in particular of a 
sick person who is a Siva devotee, by granting support with medicines, he goes 
to Siva's world for certain. He who makes him healthy with utmost effort, he will 
become a member of Siva's world; his merit is endless.’ 

12 The reading nīrujah is probably original. The -a stem may have led to the 
variant readings. 

13 The commentary explains that by giving food to the beings mentioned 
in the present verse Siva is pleased because in his compassion he also inclu- 
des them: sivo hi svakāruņyād akrtarthan patitàdin atisayena parigrhnātīti tesam 
pūjayāpi sivah prinaty eva; ‘For since Siva, because of his own compassion, utterly 


119 


A Saiva Utopia 


71 Even the tiniest gift made out of compassion becomes imper- 
ishable. Therefore, what is given out of compassion for all 
beings is the best [gift]. 


72 By giving, in the absence [of anything else], grass, earth, wa- 
ter, leaves, fuel, or fruits to a guest, [people] go to heaven, 
free from debts,'° or by means of kindness. 


Kind speech 


73 There is no stairway to heaven in this world like a kind word. 
Those who always have sweet speech enjoy happiness here 
and in the hereafter. 


74 Ifone speaks speech flowing with nectar, cool as contact with 
sandalwood, not opposed to the law, one will attain imperish- 
able happiness. 


75 Enough of giving, o best of Brahmins!^ Enough of sacrifice or 
recitation! This is your stairway to heaven: untainted, kind speech. 


76 Getting up, going forward [to greet], accompanying [upon de- 
parture], [using] kind speech, looking [at the guest] before ad- 


dressing [him]:'* each of these is a cause of [reaching] heaven. 


77 One should ask the guest, with devotion: ‘Have you arrived 
safely (sivena)?*'*7 And at his departure one should say: ‘May 
your paths be favorable (siva)! 


embraces those who have fallen from caste and the like—people who are fai- 
lures (akytārihān)—he takes pleasure in their worship too.’ Cf. also ViP 3.11.57: 
svacaņdālavihamgānām bhuvi dadyat tato narah | ye canye patitah kecid apatra bhuvi 
mānavāh ||; ‘A man should provide [food] on the ground for dogs, Candalas, 
birds, and other unworthy men on earth who have fallen from caste.’ 

4 Difficulties with the spelling of nirrņāļ as well as the absence of a proper 
subject may have led to the variant readings, including naryo i according to 
which 'also women' can reach heaven this way. The commentary follows this 
reading and states that women are not qualified to perform the dharma because 
of their lack of independence: asvātantryena dharme ‘nadhikrtà api; ‘even though 
they are not qualified to perform dharma on account of their lack of autonomy.’ 

'65 The vocative viprendra is noteworthy. Sanatkumara is never addressed like 
this in the text; in fact vocatives referring to the dialogue between Nandikesvara 
and Sanatkumara are not used anywhere else in the text. This may be an indica- 
tion that some of the verses in this section originally stem from another source. 

166 We take pada c in the sense of drstipurvabhibhasanam. 

167 The variant cayate svāgatam vadet, ‘and when he has arrived he should wel- 
come him,’ was probably intended to remove the problematic sandhi sivena ši, 
which may be due to versification of colloquial Sanskrit. Note the parallel betwe- 
en pádas ab and cd (arriving/departure). 


120 


Translation of Chapter Eleven 


78 ‘May everything for you always be favorable (stva)!’ This bene- 
diction, accomplishing all aims, should always be pronounced 
in all affairs. 


79 Inallactions of respectful salutations, along with expressions 
of benediction and blessing, he should say: ‘May it be auspi- 
cious (siva) in every respect!" 


Devotion to Siva: conclusion!99 


80 The sivasramin who performs auspicious conduct (sivācāra) 
such as this is freed from all sins and will be honoured in Si- 
va’s World. 


81 That devotion towards devotees of Siva which is performed 
by men devoted to him [Siva], that devotion performed by 
[those] devotees always goes to Siva [himself]. 


Forbearance 


82 If one, though insulted or beaten, will not insult and will 
not strike [back], remaining composed, unchanged in his 
speech, etc.—this is the most flawless forbearance.’” 


83 He who has crossed to the far shore of knowledge is the tīrtha 
of all tzrthas; those who bathe in the water of forbearance are 
a trrtha even higher than the tzrtha of knowledge." 


84 Since good acts such as the yoga of knowledge (jūānayoga), 
austerity, mantra-repetition, sacrifice, and giving are done 
in vain by one who is angry, therefore one should avoid 
anger. 


8 The commentary explains that the phrase ‘stvam bhavatw should also be 
spoken in response to the benedictions and blessings of others: evamadisu ka- 
rmasu paraih krtesu sivam bhavatu yusmakam iti brūyāt | pratibrūyād ity arthah; When 
such acts are performed by others, he should say: “May it be auspicious (siva) for 
you all!” In other words, he should say that in response.’ 

19 Here ends the section on devotion to Siva, the first item of the great ei- 
ghtfold observance, commenced at verse 48. 

1 There are several parallels for this definition. C£, e.g., BAP 1.32.49 = VaP 
59.44 = MtP 145.45. 

17! Cf. also SiUp 5.37: prthivyam yāni tīrthāni saramsy āyatanāni ca | tesu snatasya 
yat punyam tat punyam ksantivarina ||; “The merit which there is for one who has 
bathed in [all] the tzrthas, ponds and sacred places on earth, that merit [one 
obtains by bathing] with the water of forbearance.' 


121 


A Saiva Utopia 


85 Unkind speech burns up the tender points, bones, breath, 
and heart, therefore no unkind [words] should be spoken, 
especially not by Siva devotees.'7? 


86 Forbearance is giving, austerity, truth; forbearance is non- 
harm; forbearance is scriptural learning; forbearance is heav- 
en and liberation both; by forbearance the world is borne. 


87 He is a hero, pure and wise, he is an ascetic with his senses 
tamed, by whom the enemy 'anger' is quickly defeated with 
the sword of forbearance. 


88 Bymeans ofthe untainted waters of forbearance, whose cool- 
ness refreshes the people,'? one obtains happiness here, and 
a good (siva) state in the hereafter. 


Non-harm 


89 If one lives constantly in every way for the benefit and the 
good (siva) of all beings as for oneself—this is proclaimed 
‘non-harm.’!74 


90 Whatever the fruit of all scriptures, the Vedas, and sacrifices, 
the merit of those who do not harm living beings is greater 
than that. 


91 Evenifone gave the whole threefold world filled with jewels and 
observed all ascetic practices that would not equal ‘non-harm.’ 


92 Non-harm alone is taught as the supreme law for those who 
are capable of it; for those who are incapable this law gives 
priority to giving, sacrifices, and so on.!75 


172 Aside from causing pain to the addressee, the unkind word burns up the 
one who speaks it. See MBh 1.82.7 = 5.36.5 = 12.288.16: akrusyamano nākrosen 
manyur eva titiksatah | akrostaram nirdahati sukrtam casya vindati ||; ‘If one is pro- 
voked one should not get angry. It burns up the one who gets angry and the one 
who endures the anger acquires his good merit.’ 

173 loka-m-ahladasitalaih is a bahuvrīhi compound with a sandhi -breaking -m. 

74 Non-harm (ahimsa) is given an active meaning here, as becomes clear also 
from verse 93. Compare BdP 155.44, defining ‘compassion’: ātmavat sarvabhitesu 
yo hitaya subhaya ca | vartate satatam hrstah kriya srestha daya smrta ||; ‘If one con- 
stantly lives delighted for the benefit and well-being of all beings as for one- 
self—the supreme course of action is regarded as “compassion.” Variants of this 
verse are found in BdP 1.32.48, LiP 1.8.12 and LiP 1.10.19cd-20ab. None of them, 
however, has sivaya. 

"5 The first line refers specifically to stvayogins, who are able to live com- 
pletely according to the principle of ahimsā. The second line makes the yogic 
ideal expressed in the first line accessible to the sivagrhasramins, by including 


122 


Translation of Chapter Eleven 


93 We can see nothing higher than this in the entire tradition 
(agama), since the gift of safety"? is the highest, wonderful 
gift. 

94 If one goes about with a quiet mind, providing safety to all 
beings, he will face no danger from any beings in this world. 


95 They!” who do not harm beings, whether stationary or mov- 
ing, enjoy sublime peace, being devoid of the pain [caused 
by the suffering] of [other] beings. 


96 The sinful, the very cruel, the lowest of men delight in sins; 
they will be cooked in hells until the dissolution of all beings. 


97 The king who prevents the injury of living beings in his coun- 
try, that king will revel in wealth for a long time, together with 
his country. 


98 And at death, he will be honoured with great pleasures in 
Siva's world together with his whole family for more than ten 
billion ages. 


Calmness 


99 He who, keeping all his senses in check, does not get involved 
in wrongdoing,"? whether for his own sake or for the sake of 
others—they call him a ‘peaceful one.’ 


100 He who has calmed all his sense faculties, who is always stain- 
less as a moonbeam, he attains the highest place, being at 
peace, with a placid mind. 


acts that they can undertake to make up for any potential lack in ahimsā, without 
devaluating the ideal. This principle of opening up the yogic ideals to all stva- 
sramins can be seen at work throughout the text. The commentary appears to 
take it oppositely, although we fail to understand exactly what he intends with the 
second option: saktanam himsitum ksamanam ahimsaiva paro dharmah | asaktanam 
himsitum samarthanam danayajnadidharmah |; ‘Non-harm alone is the supreme law 
for those who are capable, i.e., able to harm; for those who are incapable, i.e., 
unable to harm, this law consists of giving, sacrifices, and so on.’ 

75 The principle of ahimsā is defined more specifically as abhayadana. Cf. 
MBh 12.254.28: tapobhir yajūadānais ca vākyaih prajūāsritais tatha | prapnoty abha- 
yadanasya yad yat phalam ihasnute ||; "Whatever fruit one obtains by austerities, 
sacrifices, gifts, wise advice, one obtains in this world by the gift of safety.' 

77 As in 11.90 above, there is a mismatch between the subject of the relative 
clause and the main clause (ye ... sa). 

178 Or ‘what is not his business.’ 


123 


A Saiva Utopia 


Contentedness 


101 Satisfaction with what happens to be at hand, with legitimate 
income from one's occupation, or with [whatever] wealth 
one finds, that is called ‘contentedness.’!79 


102 One does not cling to past or future matters in the present, 
[and] does not mull over what is past—this is what is called 
'contentedness.' 


103 He who fully embraces ‘contentedness,’ having abandoned 
the state of thirst, he has sacrificed with all sacrifices and he 
has reached the [supreme] state. 


104 That happiness which belongs to those of a quieted mind 
who are furnished with the sovereignty of contentedness, 
how can Devas, Asuras, or men find that happiness, even in 
[their] dreams? 


Truthfulness 


105 If one does not conceal a matter one is asked about, whether 
it was experienced by oneself or witnessed with one's own 
eyes, but gives an account of things as they happened, this is 
the definition of ‘truth.’!8° 


106 True, true, and once more true. The definition of truth is 
such that speech should be devoid of harm of others [and so] 
good (siva) 18! 


179 The commentary's interpretation of this and the following verse is slightly 
different. See ad loc. 

180 After this, $$, adds the following verse: ‘This is called ‘untruth’—truth is 
the opposite—if it has not been experienced by oneself, witnessed by oneself, or 
heard from a credible person.’ 

‘8! This calls to mind MDh 4.138: satyam brūyāt priyam brūyān na briyat sa- 
tyam apriyam | priyam ca nanrtam brūyād esa dharmah sanatanah ||; ‘He should say 
what is true, and he should say what is pleasant; he should not say what is true 
but unpleasant, and he should not say what is pleasant but untrue—this is the 
eternal Law.’ (tr. Olivelle 2005). The commentary makes the reasoning behind 
the present verse explicit, arguing that truth has to be devoid of harm of others 
because falsehood can be appropriate if telling the truth would involve killing a 
living creature: yathabhütarthakathane pranivadhapraptav asatyasya sadhutvat para- 
pidavinirmuktam eva satyam ity aha; ‘In verse 106, he states that [speech is] truth 
only as long as it is devoid of harm of others, for untruth is good when giving an 
account of something as it really happened will result in the slaughter of a living 
creature.’ In other words, the principle of ahimsa overrides that of satya. 


124 


Translation of Chapter Eleven 


107 In former times truth and a full myriad of horse sacrifices 
were weighed: truth was many times greater than a myriad of 
horse sacrifices." 


108 Wisdom is established in truth; law is established in truth; 
purity is established in truth; everything is established in 
truth.!83 


Not stealing 


109 The definition of ‘not stealing' is not taking other people's 
possessions, whether they are being looked after by the own- 
er or have been left by chance.!84 


110 One who does not experience even a glimmer of greed for 
others’ possessions—whether in deed, in thought, or in 
word—satisfied, he reaches the Siva-state. 


Chastity 


111 The definition of ‘chastity’ is not engaging in coitus, nor 
thinking about it, nor speaking about it, being in full control 
of all one's faculties.'85 


112 Purity is based on chastity; austerity is based on chastity; wis- 
dom is based on chastity; forbearance is based on chastity. 
Those who stand by their chastity are constantly established 
in Siva.'** 


' Cf. MBh 1.69.22 (and parallels): asvamedhasahasram ca satyam ca tulayà dhy- 
tam | asvamedhasahasrad dhi satyam eva visisyate ||; ‘A thousand horse sacrifices 
and truth together were put on a weight: truth indeed excelled a thousand horse 
sacrifices.’ 

83 This verse has many parallels with variations. 

‘84 The first case refers to goods actively guarded by the owner, the second 
case suggests a situation in which the owner has accidentally dropped something 
or unintentionally left it behind. This verse has a parallel in several Puranas, rea- 
ding sambhrame (‘in haste’) instead of sambhave, a reading that is also attested in 
some of our manuscripts. Cf. BAP 1.32.50 = MtP 145.46: svāminā raksyamananam 
utsrstanam ca sambhrame | parasvanam anādānām alobha iti kīrtyate ||. Another va- 
riant is found in VaP 59.45, which reads mrtsu ca instead of sambhrame. 

‘85 For variants of this verse, cf. BdP 1.32.51, VāP 59.46 and MtP 145.47. 

186 Cf. the quotation by Kaundinya in PBh ad PS 1.9, p. 21: brahmacarye sthitam 
dhairyam brahmacarye sthitam tapah | ye sthita brahmacaryena brahmana divi te sthitah 
||. This has parallels in other sources, such as HV 35.38 and MtP 175.38. In accor- 
dance with the text's teachings, the word divi has been changed to siva and the 
specification of Brahmins has been left out in the Sivadharmasastra. 


125 


A Saiva Utopia 


113 The goal reached by one who is chaste for even one night 
cannot be attained by [ordinary] householders even with 
hundreds of sacrifices. 


114 He who sits undisturbed in his mind, having abandoned [the 
thought of sex], oh, he is the best of ascetics, he is blessed, who 
does not go to his wife during her season on [special] occasion.'87 


115 For if he goes to [his wife], except on the days of the moon’s 
changes (parvan),'* avoiding other men's wives, that person, 
the Siva-householder, is to be known as the equal of a celibate. 


Conclusion 


116 Performing the rites for Siva, the fire, the guest, and the 
teacher in all respects, he should be known as one who does 
not cause harm and as a Rudra going about on earth.'?? 


57 To make pada d metrical, striyam rtau should be read as striyam ritau. The 
text of the final two padas is doubtful, showing much variation in the manuscripts. 
This reflects two different interpretations of rtukala, referring either to the period 
of menstruation or to the period when a woman is fertile. The commentary reads 
ratau, taking it to mean that one should not approach one's wife out of passion. 
Our interpretation of rtau as referring to the woman's fertile period is based on 
the premise that there should be something special about the situation. Since not 
approaching a woman during menstruation is a very basic idea of sauca and in 
principle is prohibited to all householders there would not be much particularly 
praiseworthy about it. We take sambhave to refer to special ritual moments in time 
such as the parvan days mentioned in the next verse. In such a case the househol- 
der, foregoing his usual duty of having sex with his wife when she is fertile, is not 
condemned but instead praised as a true renouncer. A few manuscripts have the 
variant sambhavam, which provides an object for samutsrjya (‘having abandoned 
intercourse") and as such is the easier reading. It is somewhat problematic, howe- 
ver, because a householder who completely ceases to procreate can hardly count 
as a householder at all. The present verse should be read together with the next 
verse, as is also suggested by a closely related passage in MDh 3.45: rtukalabhigami 
syat svadaraniratah sada | parvavarjam vrajec cainam tadvrato ratikamyaya ||; ‘Finding 
his gratification always in his wife, he should have sex with her during her season. 
Devoted solely to her, he may go to her also when he wants sexual pleasure, except 
on the days of the moon’s change.’ (tr. Olivelle 2005). Note, however, that Manu 
rather stipulates rtukalabhigami syāt. In our text the same notion is expressed ne- 
gatively from the perspective of the Siva-householder as renouncer, a teaching 
characteristic of the entire chapter. Compare in this regard also verse 10 above. 

88 We have kept the manuscripts’ reading parvavarjyam, against the expected 
regular expression parvavarjam. 

!89 Although the Siva-householder has to engage in manifold activities, which 
might be thought of as involving harm to other creatures, he is in fact free from 


126 


Translation of Chapter Eleven 


117 A man who is always engaged in the ritual duties of Siva, the 
fire, and the teacher, [whatever] actions he conceives in his 
mind succeed. 


118 This is the glorious eight-branched tree of Law, sprouted 
from Siva. One cannot give a full account of its ramification 
in [all] its smaller branches.'?? 


harm, like a yogin, by virtue of his devotion to Siva. For the concept of Rudras on 
earth, which is central to the theology advanced by the Sivadharma, see SiDhS 
1.16: ye "rcayanti sada rudram na te prakrtimanusah | rudralokat paribhrastās te rudrā 
nātra samsayah ||; "Those who always worship Rudra are no ordinary men. They 
are Rudras who have come down from Rudraloka. There is no doubt about this.’ 
The Brahmanical system of Dharmasastra and the Pasupata ascetic ideal of the 
yogin are collapsed here into the category of the sivagrhasramin. He represents 
the true target audience of the Sivadharma and is told that he can be a yogi-like 
householder, a veritable Rudra on earth. 

"? The eight branches refer to the eightfold Mahavrata. The Sivadharma is 
implicitly likened to the Vedic tradition through the reference to its sākhās and 
upasakhas. After this verse there is a srutiphala in the Southern manuscripts: ‘He 
who would read the excellent chapter on conduct, with devotion to Siva, will be 
honoured in Sivaloka together with 21 generations of his family.’ 


127 


The Commentary 


Introduction to the Commentary 


1. The Manuscript 


A commentary on the Sivadharmasastrais preserved on a unique palm- 
leaf manuscript in the Oriental Research Institute and Manuscripts 
Library in Trivandrum under the title ‘Sivadharma’ (No. 12763).'”' 
This manuscript is written in Malayalam script. The commentary 
on the Sivasramadhyaya covers fols 103-108". For further descriptive 
notes on the manuscript MZ, see p. 54. Each folio has six lines. The 
foliation is given in the middle of the left margin of the recto. There 
are two binding holes: one in the centre left and one in the centre 
right. The manuscript is beset by small damages but without much 
loss of text. The chapter colophon is marked with red and pratikas 
(only those starting of a verse) are marked by green ink. 

The chapter colophons do not provide a name ofthe commentary. 
After the final chapter colophon, the manuscript only states 'this 
has been completed' (samaptam idam). The commentary is brief and 
written in a pratīka-like manner 97 The manuscript is relatively free 
from scribal errors. 


!9! We are grateful to S.A.S. Sarma (Pondicherry) for providing us with photo- 
graphs of the commentary and the root text of chapter eleven of this manuscript. 
See also Bisschop 2018, 195-200, for a first edition and translation of a portion 
of this commentary. 

192 We use the term pratika in a loose sense, to indicate the brief quotation 
of words and/or phrases from the mula text in general, not just to abbreviated 
quotations followed by iti signifying entire verses or syntactic units. 


A Saiva Utopia 


2. On the pratikas of the Commentary 
Unique pratikas 


In nine instances the commentary attests to a reading that is not found 
in any of the consulted sources. This suggests that the root text of the 
commentary was different from any of the ones attested in our sources, 
including, importantly, the root text preceding the commentary in the 
very same manuscript. The following unique readings are found in the 
commentary: 


° yogisthanam for yogasthanam (44d) 

° Sivásrama prayojanah for sivadharmaparayanah (45b) '*5 

° pūjām for ajnam (52c)'* 

° sa pūjayet for prapūjayei (54b) 

° mukhavāsanam for svakam āsanam (56b) 

° him istam for agatam (772) 

° svastimangalayor vadane for svastimangalavacakath (79b) °° 

° atmartham và parartham va for yas tu svartham parartham và (99a) 
° parvavarjam for parvavarjyam (115a) 


Pratīkas Found in MẸ, and Other South Indian Manuscripts 


The above instances indicate that the commentary is not based on 
the root text—namely Më— which has been transmitted in the same 
bundle of manuscripts that transmits the commentary. There are, on 
the other hand, three instances where a pratīka is attested in M$; and 
supported by one more South Indian manuscript. Two pratīkas are 
found in Më and P4: vrttinyayagatena (101b) and bhavatu te’ (78a), 
and one pratīka is shared between M$; and GF: yathakalopapannena 
(101a). Furthermore, one pratīka is found in M2, along with two other 
South Indian manuscripts (CH and G5): pakse'? (39b). 


Pratikas Found in Other South Indian Manuscripts 


Although the commentary thus seems to be based on a source 
different from the ones we have been able to consult, the pratikas 
largely conform to the readings of the South Indian transmission 


!9 Here we assume that the reading has been slightly modified in its cited 
form by the commentator (sivāsramatvaprayojanam). 

194 M$; has a synonym, arcām. 

95 Unmetrical. CH, MÄ, and Bhavisyapurana 1.171.43d have a closely related 
reading, which is probably intended: svastimangalavādane. 

59 Note that the commentary reverse the order of bhavatu and te. 

!97 The adopted reading is paksād. 


132 


Introduction to the Commentary 


of the text. In the following two cases, the pratitkas quoted by the 
commentary are found only in G*: bhandagüdhakam (after 4d) and 
jnanaparagam (83b). Furthermore, the following is a pratika found 
only in G and G*4: santilaksanam (99d). There is also an instance 
where the quoted pratīka is shared by two South Indian manuscripts 
(CH, Më) as well as one Nepalese manuscript (N): ratau (114d). 

In another case, the pratikais found in one South Indian manuscript 
(G*) and three Nepalese sources (N£, N$, and E"): naryyo’ pi (72c). 
Furthermore, another pratīka is found in two South Indian sources (G* 
and P7;) and in the Kashimiri manuscript (S%,): moksah satye pratisthitah 
(108d). The commentary furthermore provides two pratikas that are 
not found in any of the South Indian sources, but which occur in two 
Nepalese sources (NÉ and N$,): gühate (105b). Similarly, the following 
prattka only features in one Nepalese source (N{s): sivakathabhaktah (53a). 


3. Editorial Policies for the Commentary 


The critically edited text is presented as the running text. The apparatus 
is divided into two registers. On pages that display both registers, the 
upper register records testimonia and notes while the bottom register 
reports the variants found in the manuscript. Each entry begins with a 
line number in boldface (e.g. 21). Then follows the reading adopted 
in the main text, followed by a lemma sign (]) and the source of the 
adopted reading. A semicolon separates the adopted reading (to its 
left) from the variants (to its right). Any siglum that is followed by 
superscript ac indicates the reading of a source before correction 
(«ante correctionem) and a siglum followed by superscript pc indicates 
the reading of a source after correction (=post correctionem). 

The title of the commentary and everything supplied between 
double square brackets is from the editors. The verse numbers of 
the verses that are commented upon in the commentary are given 
between double square brackets; the beginning and end is also 
indicated by double square brackets. Similarly, line numbers of the 
manuscript are given in double square brackets. The pratikas of the 
root text are marked in bold. Application of sandhi rules are silently 
standardised here. In general we follow the placement of the dandas 
by the manuscript, but we have occasionally placed them according 
to our own understanding as well. 


4. A Note on the Translation 


In order to make the commentary accessible to a broader readership, 
we have included a running English translation of it. In translating 


133 


A Saiva Utopia 


the text, we have adopted a policy of putting all words quoted from 
the mila in bold, using quotation marks only around those words and 
phrases for which the commentary explicitly addresses the phrasing or 
grammar, or when the words ity arthah call attention to the expression 
being explained, or when a longer passage is quoted and explained 
in the subsequent discussion. Where pratikas are woven into the 
paraphrase, expanded with unmarked glosses, we have refrained from 
using quotation marks in order not to clutter up the page needlessly. 
Furthermore, it should be noted that we have not translated pratīkas 
that consist only of the first word(s) of the stanza and that are quoted 
only to identify the stanza, and not to explain the words themselves. 
Such pratikas are equivalent to saying ‘Verse 1,’ etc., given that the 
Sanskrit tradition does not rely on numbering. 


134 


[1-2] 
aafaa [4] Frorearqarg aa gat | 
[3-5] 
AI vearaartata 


10 The verse referred to by the pratika MILENCE is attested in G^* after 
the fourth verse. 

4 ahri ] em; Ahead M, 8 THAT? ] Mee; FRATE T- 
He MI" 11 °ITtfafa ] em.; °FTTAfA M, è WITT | em. ; 
WUT M. 


7a-8b| 
FRATTA] FIAT Arata urna | 
8c-9] 
"IBI: WSIDRDCHTE Aah ATH | 20 
10-14] 

Teereqparerr[1071]& Rafa atri qasi faar- 
seni: | farsa ufafgaastaata i 

[15] 


gerot HTATTATE faf 1 die: sapato eft — 
aa | 


16] 


ATTIE E HS | 
17] 
Tata [2]eare Free sf 30 
18 | 
ATATUTIATATE ergi | 
19-30 | 

Baratta wer sft gn) gm: 
AT [3] ataga | ay were a aset we | 
anit wear MATA MATS | AMATO emreb- 
IT: | WreUnmpeqwa Yat are [4] Tae Vatafafa gqfaqor- 
Igt: TI asa Wegen spent ferta ep- 
25 far: | em. ; ur: M, 28 adfa | conj; om. M”; - aft 


M$ 32 AAMUA. | em.; ATHTUT GT? M, 35 qe dräi M?*; 


om. M! e Safa] em.; ATAET M. 


EK 


UIS SATA: 


o Affi arenes crew harena | Fida w[5]4Y 


Afs aaaf ura | 
[31-34] 
yeas dru Teeter afr aghi: 1 ger: 
maag: | Tata sreatata atageted | A q ATAT- 
a[o] aa *gTarnTg: | Seay aa fraramfergearfatar 
HTS | ITAGIIOIOT: | a? THEIR: fora: raus. 
RITI Yaa ya: | 
[35] 
ay METHT [1041 TATA T fae ATATT- 
Refa 1 Fsraaraar faig: samt year drafafaar nat 


qa frames wer ler set wrereerWTSTUT F- 
[3] av adam Weta | vat qar ver ef favere 
FETT: | 
[40-41] 
gare KĀTA gaia fere wér gu |i 
[42-44] 
ser meer free. wupme Y [4] sf ahr: (emma: 
garan: | QSHTXTHRBHICHT qsqr<rafas= UsfPenem- 
40 Tatari PaaS teres is 35cd, but the word order of req. 


and fg: is reversed. 
59 OFT. Mg; and Gi’, have Tat instead of TATE in 39b. 


239 


rera p 


HUATCHT HAT ARTT aah: | Fare Harae: | garét os 
grr: [5] yna aad eat ur Taart grate- 


S a 


TTT ATT: we vatefa we aer arent 
aRar grat Curam: | 

[45] 

ser aqur[6jarator ware frafri wd wa F- v 

KTATTAAT: fsravarqrfgar gust Hag: | ag ATAT- 
ad: ferr farsa agata nat feraumt 
8r [10471 | aT: | furarsrerea ratore. asa: | 

[46] 
GOIN 


47 | 


aAa Tag Tata | 
48 | 
faraufa faata aà [2]fer i 80 
49-52 | 

Raana gat sagata tarato utens: 
ASSET ALA GUT qua diem. Heat GEHT: 
Radar qub [3] TOT TSIT FOT HATTA uw - 
AAGIIAH TT aA enn | 85 


67 The root text (44d) reads ATTEITTA instead of IATEITAA . 


73 The following gloss suggests that, most likely at 45b, the commentary was 


based on the reading Praa AIAST: |. 


85 TT is not attested in any of our sources. MÄ and P7,, however, have 


the synonymous STAT at 52a. 


83 °fasrfg:] em; Aafa M, 84 VET] em; TET M, 


93° 


90 


100 


PAT MITITIATIATAI | 
[54- 56 | 
Raamaa. sre HTESYWISASD TATA ATATA Rr- 
WWE M RAT: Saray [5|fehr: Korda dem RATA 


9TH | ETEDRId HET STATI: € I afta: fatta at 
ay [105"1]T9: | ANT: Set: | eA: ant fsra- 
arya cup STATISTA dur araara | 
frat fe erarevareqarart wfeaarérafea [2] sz STAT 
ate ast gorarht fora: STATI set: Fsradlersi sr 
vfeaareursfa Gorter: | ATTATU frana TTT gear 
ATZĪS cana [3] saaa af ent are 


89 Rarna: is the reading of NS at 53a. 

90 NTTITIANTIATT is attested in NE°$$,G%* and MZ? at 53d. 

93 The commentary seems to be based on a root text *T yaad in 54b 
instead of ATAÀT m 

97 ESIUTAT WATT: Astādhyāyī 1.4.33. 

99 Yada seems to be a pratīka, which is not attested in any of our 


sources at 56b. i 
105 ATZATSĪT (72c) instead of PART: is the reading of: NĒNĒ,G"'E". 


93 HTE3T:] em.; AAT M, 94 Y: FTA" ] em; TUTI FATTA 


M, 100 sg: Me; sët: M? 102 °FATUTA ] em.; °FATUTT 
M, 103 gren ° ] em.; ovtegū: mo M, 104 AMATA | em.; ATI 
> OM, 


238, 


rera p 


te qatar germs: iqurérmaveratest tra br- 
eer ent ure i 


[73-79] 


fra rta Rate + gier) [4] set if 
cr: ATTI Tage set WYwdq | fafrefate agēfav- 
d: | ATITAT (4 att add | TOT TRASI Wem: s= 
d Rar sī [5 Gbmme ween Eër. 
réparer | fara quu $ afafa wdeqanirqré Hate a- 
menhang THEA [6 ata Hares TATA | 
ay eaftoagsrdigiesd wa vantfay mu wt: acy fra 
wag urea sum wfagarfeces: | 
[80] 
saat Wate [10571] Fr i 
[81] 
ahatedtad | +, Hage: seemed: f 
fra niggar qara Pree vleit Ze ary: | 
fra IRT qd TTT [2] T | Aa gar: 
d facrrgierra q+: amala arafa i 
[82] 
ay att fasque arpe afa wate: | arar fra: 
111 fafs is not attested in any of our sources for 77ab. 


113 Ñ is the reading of MZ” and PT, (78a). 
115 ATG TTT is the reading of Bhavisyapurāņa 1.171.43d. None of 


our sources have this reading at 79b. 
122 Cf. 50a: Tage 


[Sy 


106 ARTT ] em.; PA 112 TRA ] em.; THA M, 114 °F- 


BUE] em.; HEAT > M, E em.; UdHÍ«Y M, 120 °H- 
FIA ] em.;* = TIT M. 123 gem a Tera M, 123 Y- 
T:] em. E M, 125 ATHE] em.; A x. M, 


200 


110 


120 


130 


140 


URENT SATA: 


atfed ar q+: ag antfēfaar far: (aer [3] ga ar: 
gddgadt grat TATA ATHIMAA ATSĀGT FAATATSTAATSĀT 
ant: (ger gladet srar ara: | 


[83] 


ATA TIUTIATE detta [4] cafes (erger dTXTST "rer: 
arr serge ahi sien: (aerer gi | fra 
ar oot anteater | arfrearáraar ameer w: T [5]: 
sam: | 


aaa AT arma: pad acad EE E RT- 
entri: | Sat nie ater) tanu dega vate 
aaran aAa rearea [1061] T: | guäesamtg- 
am ienaa: fsrasre: | 


[87-88 | 


131 Cf. the reading of G^*: HTA4TUTA at 83b. 

138 WWAEATeHASTT: is based on Astādhyāyī 2.4.2: FET ITradàAT- 
Ei H . 

143 ATTENTA is the reading of M37 at 86d. 

126 Tt: ] em.; Nt M, e qif?" ] em.; ms. 127 gdgadT | 
em.; Y M. e ATA ] em.; ATRAÀA M. 132 [RAAT | em.; 
FRAIA M. 135 ARTA ] em. °ANTA M, 140 RTTÉIDT ] em.; ~ 
aA M. è GUT] em; JM, 141 ATA] M”; Faery Mec 


SES 


rera p 


aq a ous qTfcas=rfari-=qeq: | 


[89-98] 


fear maafa amara [2]|fafe «xri fēaru sa- 
a serae fen dure Tara sr FATA Uudd Fads iso 
Wr steer | eared: mg. dè: ordtà: gäe g [3] T: Wem- 
eb GHaqua q: 1... 
wad! Nar fefe samt arf Td A: sc 
ERa [4] AA TA T arragrfestst: | qrqr: qrfqgr: feure- 
ATI TST: sh<T APT grat: UT Cater AT ATTI s: 
AA AT FATT | Jarar «fat aderfea arate | 
d ATA AAT ATHY SITW Verep Was Tas 
Tè ferr: gedet grote [6] Tata KP | 


[99-100 | 


AT art fanta areartfafa GT arent ar VO 160 
ar urere states fra dur afadir | uqq- 
è mefa [106 1] g$ fawafsatezaasravt-mararg — ga: 
afaale | sr TRARRE SARAI 
146 BITÍ-dSUERUWT is the reading of NNG G'G} and PI, at 87c. 
152 4st: ... The instrumental ending is also found in NÉ and PI, at 90b. 


i52 at T feafa is the reading of G** and M$7 at 90c. 
153 The commentary seems to based on the reading A ERA. None of our 


e 


sources have this reading at 92a. 

155 ART ATT TAAT: appears to be a variant of 96b. 

155 om is the reading of NZ" and G“ at 96a. 

161 ATA aT TTT AT is not attested in any witness of the root text at 


99a. 
163 maraa is the reading of G“ and P7, (at 99d) instead of SIT«T- 


146 äer: ] Mec; fafaa: M°° 149 fed] em; fe = M. 
153 area | em. ; fear M, 156 Fifa ] em.; ardafa Ms 
157 Ted] em.; TAT M, 158 FARI] em.; MATT M, 


pes 


165 


170 


180 


URENT SATA: 


[101-104 | 


ATS Wwuuwukr Baraca IA: | TATATATTT [2] AT 
IT DAT Tey WE ag ARA: d ARAA T 
IGTITÀT WISI ahead Gem mat qF0=aTa: 
suea: de an [l Aana Salsa IATA - 
TIT Zeite di TA: g TANI Urga 
gerad fran attra ar | STATATAT [4] any adistar: 
Tay ATTI AA epe req WR gdatdg dor 
"dd gëdd geg HAAS [5] day ag Gur 
Aes FETT AT SAT: | qWIDWS ASTEITATT- 
ory: | 

[105-108 | 

ay act Toart earaqyatata waht: | amg A- 
ATS [6] TA | SPAT FET ETA 
aea ofertas eagefate | usum wi: ye aa YET 
egent. SHTESDER EUNT Y [10771] rm qamresrearferdtic 


qrercara [2] fa sawam ss aor glat atsarad:1| 
mierina | at ua Pert ugs UGTRCHCHWDRUUD eat: 
"ran. 

165 ITUTAIATTTÀ? is the reading of MZ? at 101a. G: appears to have the 


same reading as Mes. 
167 Aff =ITATNTÀA is the reading of Ns and P7?* at 101b. 
179 Ted is the reading of NZ and Ns at 105b. 


165 W-dlY] em.; MAT M, 172 oa ] em.; qari- 
TY M, 173 H444^] MY; FATT? M° 176 gff: ] em; agf 
M, 177 &F34urdi^] em; Se = AIT M. 180 WIA Te ] conj.; 
maiae Mee; mrata. Mt 181 ag) Me; ATE MT 
183 TTT] em.; TIT M. 


3 


freu p 


fea | aaea SIAUTAT qa [latae aata 
aadA [Wer aa unaa qana i gr. 
qah + ad sfafšqrf+ i dira aceasta Medem: | 
via wen [4] TI Tass eren FENTATA | Aa: AST 
water: | Aa Ad TATA rre rare | 


[109-110] 


areca faamnifa ware gas | K (5]Y HAT F- 
HT grat + FRA MATTI qr owudd qur grat faraat 
TAT | KET Ter gäer: 


[111-114] 


gerad IT [6] gafa Cis ice ISEE CR ZIO: LE 
Afya gerad rd dad FA | Wert 
wat gerad ferar: | TTT qa [1071] STATA WT 
jeer: aad ad FARSI qur TARANTA s= < 
afrat: | tat sry asti cxfewareer Kad graat 
FT: | 
[115] 


ay eere [2] NGN «rey aaraa ang- 
Tata vdasifafa i 


iss Hier: ad wWfgfEd: is the reading of GF, PI, and $2, at 108d. 

195 eT? is the reading of N3NZ^$2,G^? and MẸ at 112 instead of sir. 
198 Ydt is the reading of NZZ^, G** and Mäi at 114d. 

198 Aaa TAM refers to Astādhyāyī 2.3.38: NET aara. 

199 The commentary is based on the reading EIE ferarat in 114d. 
202 Teast is not attested in any of our sources at 115a. 


185 Ew pdf THAT | conj; Rafa Hast 188 qeqrsss- 
fard ] em; WcHTwdfed?^ M, 191 °Tdd ] em.; "add M, 195 T- 
affare: | em; gra: M. 198 IAAT: ] em.; luc: M. 
199 fera Aaaa ] conj; fe aana M. 202 «fw ] em; 
^fawar? M, 


9 


190 


200 


UIS SATA: 


[116-117 | 


205 afearfasa ste vfaweaare fafaa frargdt antr 
Wad: ada Haas ww [3]«r fase: vasta seraralen- 
sa? | ated gary + HA | HASTA TER AAdATTET 
pana Ste | 


210 [118: STARA: | 
aage ww ghi 


[Sea mersa: | 


215 sreugr[4]zwresem ANTE d Teeter | 


W TU gf UeRTRSITSEHTAT: Il BT 


208 A pratika from the beginning of verse 117 seems to be missing here before 


215 The phalasruti verse of the chapter in the root text, ye pathanti -> , 


is only found in the Southern sources. 


206 fasta: | em.; frag: M. 207 waft] M”; qafa M* 208 
aft] em.; fafa M, 215 °WSHET] em.; "ger M, 


IY 


rey 


Translation of the Commentary 


Om! Now, those who are qualified to practice Sivadharma and their 
norms of practice are set forth in the eleventh and twelfth chapters. 

First, with regard to that, in verses 1-2, [Nandike$vara] states who 
are qualified. Then, in verses 3-5, to explain their norms of practice, 
he states the manner for laying out an āšrama: ‘In a place’ completes 
the expression ‘north of his residence.’ But [expressions like] ‘in that 
of Agni’ [imply] ‘in the direction’ [of Agni, etc.]. A ‘temple of Isvara’ 
means a place of worship. A ‘storeroom’ (in the interpolation after 
verse 4), that is, a storehouse. 

Then, in verse 5, he explains the worship of Siva, the principal 
among the norms of practice, just as it is ordained. In verse 6, he 
illustrates the supreme importance of that [worship]. 

In verses 7-8ab, he states one's obligation when in a state unfit 
to perform worship with one's body. In verses 8cd-9, he states the 
yogin’s manner of worship. In the five verses 10-14, he states the 
practices of the householder. “With half of that’ means ‘with half of 
one’s wealth.’ By the use of the word hi (‘indeed’) he shows that this 
is well-known. 

In verse 15, he states the practices of the celibate. Bhautika is the 
same as to say ‘offering service.’ In verse 16, he states [the practices] 
of the hermit. In verse 17, he states [the practices] of the wandering 
ascetic. In verse 18, he states the general rules (sādhāraņān dharmān). 

In the twelve verses 19—30, he states the fruits of wearing the rudraksa 
beads and other [general practices]. That which is the supreme 
potency of the fire of Rudra (v. 22a), i.e., of a fire consecrated with 
the Siva mantra. For the fire has many powers that are [produced 
as] its effects, such as coals, etc. Among those, the supreme power 
is that which is praised as ash. A yogin should observe the bath of 


A Saiva Utopia 


the whole body 'Agni's bath’ means bathing in ash. ‘Having given up 
Varuna's' means having given up the thought (buddhi) that the bath 
alone is sufficient for purification. But giving up Varuna's [bath] is 
not [what is meant], since Varuna's bath will be prescribed in verse 
35cd: 'for the purification in case of perfumes and unguents, let him 
wash himself with water.' 'At all the changes of the moon' means at 
all prescribed times. 

In the four verses 31-34, he states what makes those who adhere 
to the ash-doctrine worthy of worship. Adhering to the ash-precept: 
some say that ash alone is the precept. Others refer to the rudraksa- 
beads with the word sasana. One should consider that the precept 
entails both, in fact, since that is established by Siva's command. 
Honoured like a prince: in this [verse 31], Siva corresponds to the 
king, and one who adheres to the ash-precept corresponds to the 
prince (i.e., the son of the king). 

Next, in verse 35, he ordains sipping water after applying the 
ash. ‘Being stainless,’ i.e., having become sinless, ‘by Siva’s ash,’ one 
should sip [water] ‘in accordance with the water-rule,' i.e., in the 
manner of sipping prescribed by one's own domestic ritual tradition. 
It ordains Varuna's bath. ‘He should wash’ means he should bathe. 

In the three verses 36-38, he states that one should also cleanse 
the internal organ. Cleansing one's disposition, i.e., one's mind, 
is not thinking about the property or wife of another. Earlier, the 
hair-tuft of the Siva-devotee was ordained. Now, in verse 39, he states 
the duty to wear the hair-tuft in a mass, or to shave it. One should 
consider ‘at the fortnight’ (pakse) to mean ‘fortnight after fortnight’ 
(pakse pakse) by [the grammatical rule of] omitting a repetition. 

In the two verses 40-41, he once again ordains the other rules 
(dharma) of the wandering ascetic. Next, in the three verses 42-44, 
he states the rules for a Südra devoted to Siva. "Together with his 
attendants’ means ‘together with assistants’ (sa-barikara). ‘Occupied 
with tending the flower-garden'—one so designated has a soul, i.e., 
mind that is directed to a single activity pertaining to the flower 
garden. 'Dedicated to the rites of the flower-garden': flower garden, 
i.e., flower bed, flower board. He should in all cases be dedicated to 
the activity [performed] in that [garden] such as making garlands— 
that is how the phrase should be construed. '[By giving food to yogins, 
he will attain] the condition of a yogin,’ meaning ‘the condition that 
yogins seek to attain.’ 

Next, in verse 45, he states the rule of those adhering to the four 
disciplines (āsrama). [Practitioners of] all the disciplines, the celibate 
and the rest, should be endowed with meditation on Siva and the 


148 


Translation of the Commentary 


like. Hence, the Sivadharmas should be known by the sivasramas’ 
connection with and distinction from the established (i.e., Smarta) 
asramas, which they share in common. In other words, the purpose 
of adhering to Siva's disciplines is the observance of the Sivadharma. 

Next, in verse 46, he mentions observances to be perpetually 
followed by sivasramins of all four classes. In verse 47, he lists those 
observances. In verse 48, he describes Siva-devotion. 

In the thirty-three verses beginning with verse 49, he elaborates on 
worship directed to stvayogins. If one performs worship of a devotee 
of Mahe$vara, i.e., [of one who is] comparable with Mahešvara the 
deity, of one who is devoted, i.e., of someone full oflove for that very 
same Mahe$vara, for whom the worship of Siva is paramount, i.e., for 
whom worship of that [god] is paramount, he will obtain the fruit of 
a horse sacrifice, i.e., the merit equivalent to the merit that would be 
generated by a horse-sacrifice. 

In verse 53, he mentions the fruition of merit of that sort. If one 
who is devoted to stories of Siva and intent on Siva correctly worships 
a devotee with the afore-mentioned characteristics, he will become 
a leader of [Siva's] hosts by means of the merit equivalent to that 
of a horse-sacrifice. That devotee of Mahe$vara should offer worship 
with a welcome and other [offerings for a guest] to Siva-devotees 
who have come to the sivasrama, i.e., who have reached the sivasrama, 
which is the dwelling-place of devotees of Mahesvara. 

The fruits he obtains are explained in verse 55. With ‘homage’ (namah) 
and 'a salutation,' a distinction is to be understood between clasping the 
feet and not doing so. In the phrase ' [one who] attains satisfaction for a 
devotee of Siva who has arrived’ (v. 57ab),"* the use of the dative case is 
rightly seen because it marks the beneficiary (sampradana) according to 
[Panini's] rule ‘[the person in a beneficiary-relation] of [verbs] meaning 
‘to please’ is the one who is being pleased.’!99 

A perfuming of the mouth, i.e., a mouth-cleanser, an aromatic 
substance.^? ‘Someone who is desperate’ (v. 69b) means someone 


55 The commentary reflects a variant reading in v. 57a that is found in mss. N$, 
Si, G*, the latter of which is the manuscript whose readings are closest to those of 
our commentator. This variant, identical with v. 56a, is difficult to make sense of in 
the context of v. 57. 

199 Astādhyāyī 1.4.33. 

?? It is evident from this passage that the commentator’s version of the work 
deviated in vv. 56-57 from anything found in any of the Sivadharmasastra ma- 
nuscripts that we consulted. It appears to treat our quarter-verses 56a and 57b 
as comprising one syntactically continuous, perhaps even uninterrupted, string, 
which he clearly found to be perplexing since he had recourse to a grammatical 


149 


A Saiva Utopia 


who has met with a grievous fate. Fallen from caste, i.e., unfit for the 
rites ofthe 'twice-born';?" accursed, i.e., inauspicious; of mixed caste, 
i.e., produced from a union with one fallen from caste (v. 70). In 
the discussion of worshipping sivayogins, those fallen from caste and 
the like are included on the basis of Siva's all-encompassing embrace 
of them. For since Siva, because of his own compassion, utterly 
embraces those who have fallen from caste and the like—people 
who are failures (akrtartha)—he takes pleasure in their worship too. 
For this reason, even those fallen from caste and the like should be 
worshipped with food in order to please Siva. 

Merely by giving grass [as a seat] to a Siva-devotee who has come, 
women too?" go to heaven (v. 72) even though they are not qualified 
to perform dharma on account of their lack of autonomy. The point 
is, [if women go to heaven,] how much more so do those qualified 
for dharma? And even in the absence of grass, etc., they go to heaven 
by means of kindness, i.e., by just a kind word. 

In verse 73, he explains the power of a kind word. [Such a word is] 
'untainted,' (v. 75), which means 'not opposed to the law (dharma)' 
(v. 74). ` 

When one sees a guest who is a Siva-devotee, he should ask, meaning 
he should ask “What would you like?’ (v. 77). He should say to him as 
he arrives, "Was your arrival good?’ And likewise at his departure the 
devotee of Mahesvara should say: ‘May your paths be favorable (siva)! 
[He should pronounce a benediction (v. 78) ] accomplishing all aims, 
i.e., to realize all things of benefit to men (purusārtha).”*> 

He should on every occasion utter the blessing, ‘May it be for 
you favorable (siva),' i.e., auspicious (v. 79). 'In all expressions of 
homage and salutation': the plural number is used because numerous 
instances of homage and salutation are meant, and also in expressions 
of benediction and blessing. When such acts are performed by others, 
he should say: ‘May it be auspicious (siva) for you all!’ In other words, 
he should say that in response. 

In verse 80, he summarizes [the worship directed to Siva-devotees, 
vv. 54-79]. [Is the goal] ascended to different? No, beginning with 


clarification. The word mukhavasanam, glossed here as if it were quoted from the 
text, is otherwise unattested for it. 

?" Technically, this label applies to those of the upper three classes who have 
undergone Vedic initiation, but it normally simply designates a Brahmin. 

202 The constituted text reads ‘free from debt’ in place of ‘women too,’ lea- 
ving the subject (people) implicit. 

29 See Olivelle 2019c on this concept. 


150 


Translation of the Commentary 


one thing, one arrives at the other: for first [Nandikesvara] sets out 
to speak of devotion to Siva, but afterwards he discusses devotion to 
a Siva-devotee. This is not a flaw [in the teaching], since the words 
here provide an answer [to the question posed in v. 50]: ‘[What can 
men actually do] for Siva who is already complete?’ 

In verse 81 ['devotion towards devotees of Siva... always goes to 
Siva'], he reminds us again of the meaning of those words in order to 
remove the [apparent] contradiction. 

Next, in the seven verses 82-88, he gives an exposition on 
forbearance. Insulted, i.e., reviled with words, or beaten by others, 
he remains himself unchanged in his speech, etc.. He is for this 
reason [said to remain] composed, i.e., remaining just as before that 
[offence], in return for which he will neither insult nor beat—in 
other words, when there is no insulting or beating [in return]—this 
is the most flawless, i.e., pure, forbearance. 

In verse 83, he describes the power of forbearance. That which 
has crossed to the far shore of knowledge is the *tirtha, meaning 
the purifier, of all tīrthas, such as the Ganges. There is a tīrtha 
higher even than that. Of what is it made? It is filled ‘with the water 
of forbearance,’ meaning one who is filled with forbearance as one 
might be filled with water. 

In verse 84, he prohibits anger as being opposed to forbearance. 
In verse 85, he prohibits unkindness, i.e., unkind words, which are 
the effect of anger. The tender points, bones, breath, and heart are 
treated as a single entity due to their being the subsidiary parts of a 
living creature. 

Forbearance is giving and the other [virtues mentioned in v. 86]. 
Whatever good comes about by practicing virtues such as giving, all 
that is accomplished by forbearance alone. ‘Forbearance is heaven 
and liberation’: this means that whatever happiness will arise from 
heaven and liberation is ensured in the present by one who has 
forbearance. By forbearance the world is borne, i.e., because of Siva’s 
Power (sakti), which supports the world. That person by whom one 
who shows anger is defeated with the sword of forbearance—for 
he embodies forbearance—he is a hero (v. 87). He alone is to be 
considered pure and [wise, etc.]. 

Next, in the ten verses 89-98, he expounds on non-harm. Non- 
harm is when one lives for fruits that are beneficial (hitaya), i.e., 
favourable even in the future—and happy (Jaya), i.e., pleasant at 
that time—that mode of living (v. 89). 

Whatever the fruit, ie., whatever merit, [is produced] by all 
scriptures that are known, the Vedas that are recited, and sacrifices 


151 


A Saiva Utopia 


that are performed, the merit of him, on the other hand, who does 
not harm living beings will be greater than that, i.e., than the earlier 
merit [of scriptures, Vedas, and sacrifices] (v. 90). 

Non-harm alone is the supreme law for those who are capable, 
i.e., able to harm; for those who are incapable, i.e., unable to harm, 
this law consists of giving, sacrifices, and so on (v. 92). 

The sinful, the most sinful, whose sinful behaviour is marked by 
harm, and the cruel, too, the lowest of men delight in sin.?°4 

With the word api (‘too’), he indicates that one should not enjoy 
the pleasure of those cruel ones who are soon to fall into hell. They 
will be cooked in so many hells, i.e., in all hells, until the dissolution 
of all beings (v. 96). 

In this connection, he states in verses 97-98 that [the king] should 
banish harm in his country by his command. 

Next, in the two verses 99-100, he expounds on calmness. [Calmness 
is] when one desists from wrongdoing, i.e., forbidden things that are 
done whether for one's own sake or for the sake of others "2" 

Once he has said this, [Nandike$vara], finding occasion to explain 
the restriction of the sense faculties to objects not opposed to scriptural 
teaching, speaks of ‘one who keeps all his senses in check.’ And on this 
basis, being one who has controlled his sense faculties is the definition 
of ‘peaceful. >$ 

In the four verses 101-104, he elaborates on contentedness. 
Contentedness is satisfaction with wealth such as grain that has 
come about, i.e., been produced by fields and the like, obtained 
at the proper time, i.e., coming to a person not beyond that time 
which is appropriate to the fields and the like—[wealth] of what 
sort?—Aas legitimate income from a livelihood, i.e., income received 
in a legitimate manner such as a Brahmin's accepting [gifts] as his 
legitimate mode of livelihood (v. 101). 

Inverse 102, he clarifies the meaning of the words yathakalopapanna 
(‘obtained at the proper time,’ in verse 101). Insofar as one does 
not mull, i.e., when there is no mulling, over the mode of life that 
one lives, when past or future things (artha), i.e., things that have 


24 The commentator corrects the nonstandard active verb ramanti to ramante. 

?5 The commentator's version of the sastra differs slightly from the versions 
attested in the manuscripts. 

?* Given that one expects a quotation from the root text between dha and 
iti, Yuko Yokochi called into doubt the manuscripts’ reading samyatendriyavrtti- 
tuam as likely a spurious anticipation of those words in the next sentence. We 
have emended the text to reflect the words of pada b of verse 99: samastendriya- 
samyama|A]. The similarity of wording likely gave rise to a copying error. 


152 


Translation of the Commentary 


passed or are yet to come due to the ripening of their proper time, 
are presently existing for him, not in fact having passed due to the 
passage of time, this is contentedness. 

Next, in the four verses 105-108, he explains truth. Experienced 
by oneself, i.e., experienced oneself with the sense faculties. 

Because what is seen by the eye is more manifest than what is 
experienced by the other senses, he specifies *witnessed by one's own 
eyes' due to that difference. 

The definition of truth is not concealing, i.e., that one does 
not conceal a matter as it happened when it is asked by others. 
[Nandikesvara] considers that the essential character of not concealing 
is ‘giving an account of things as they happened’ (v. 105). 

In verse 106, he states that [speech is] truth only as long as it is 
devoid of harm of others, for untruth is good when giving an account 
of something as it really happened will result in the slaughter of a 
living creature. When one will speak about a matter, one swears an 
oath: ‘Truth, truth, and more truth!’ What sort of matter is that? 

‘Devoid of harm to others'—the definition of truth should be 
speech that is such and is for this very reason ‘good’ (siva). 

In verse 107, he depicts an historical event that occurred in the 
assembly of the gods to show the power of truth. 

[In verse 108,] the singular-number word (‘knowledge,’ ‘purity’) is 
meant to express the plural: forms of knowledge and forms of purity 
are established in truth. This means that whatever merit [comes 
about] through those is accomplished only by truth. And dharma is 
nothing but truth, because it is lacking in one who has the habit of 
speaking untruth. Liberation""is established in truth, for liberation is 
caused by knowledge that has been kindled by truth. 

In the two verses 109-110, he explains not stealing. One who does 
not experience even a glimmer of greed for others’ possessions—in 
deed, in thought, and in word—becoming satisfied, he reaches the 
Siva-state (v. 110). This means that he will attain a purified character 
by means of knowledge. 

In the four stanzas 111-114, he elaborates on chastity. Chastity is 
total restraint of all one’s sense-faculties from [having] women as 
their object: this is the complete definition of ‘chastity’ (v. 111). The 
rules (dharmas) of truth and the rest are based on chastity (v. 112). 
Because one who is under the sway of a woman cannot perform 
those [rules], he, i.e., that householder (cf. v. 113), who, when there 
is an occasion, sits undisturbed in his mind, having abandoned [the 


27 The commentator’s text has moksah satye pratisthitah in pada d. 


153 


A Saiva Utopia 


thought of sex with his] wife—he surely is the best of ascetics! ‘For 
sexual pleasure’: the locative case is used to convey disparagement 
(v. 114). For, disparaging sexual pleasure, a disciplined man does not 
go to his wife [for sex]. 

Next, in verse 115, he authorises a householder to engage 
[sexually] with his own wife at times that are not forbidden. 

In verse 116, he states an exception with regard to the rule of non- 
harm. Even when he is performing the rites for Siva, etc., in all respects, 
i.e., in all cases, he should be known as one who does not cause harm— 
this [applies] moreover in the three disciplines (asrama) beginning with 
the celibate. But the ascetic should not do even that. 

In verse 117, he finds occasion to state the fruit of one who engages 
in the ritual duties to teacher. 

In verse 118, he summarizes. A final verse beginning ‘those who 
recite ...' states the fruits of reciting [the chapter]. 


268 This comment explains ratau, which occurs as a variant in three manu- 
scripts for rtau (‘during her season’). Note that the interpretation offered by the 
commentator, and consequently also our rendering of the source text, differs 
because of this variant reading. 


154 


Appendix 


A Parallel in Bhavisyapurana 1.171 


The Sivasramadhyaya has a parallel in chapter 171 of the Brahmapa- 
rvan of the Bhavisyapurana. This forms part of a large-scale textual 
reuse of the Sivadharma by this Purana. The Bhavisyapurana has in- 
corporated the Sivadharmasastra as well as the Sivadharmottara, but 
with the text revised in such a way that it teaches ‘Sauradharma’ in- 
stead. The parallel with the Sivadharmasastra starts in Bhavisyapurana 
1.151." Concretely, all references to Siva have been removed and / 
or turned into references to Surya, while instead of the community 
of Siva devotees the Sürya-worshipping Magas are praised. The 
changes are, however, by no means restricted to mere rephrases of 
individual words or names; the text of the Bhavisyapurana also in- 
cludes more extensive retellings of text portions, as well as additions 
for which there is no parallel in either text.” The present parallel 
stays comparatively close to the source text, but it introduces a num- 
ber of significant changes to make it fit the Saura teachings of the 
Bhavisyapurana. 

The first two verses have no parallel in the Sivasramadhyaya. 
They make reference to the different setting of the teaching in the 
Bhavisyapurana, which involves a dialogue between sage Sumantu and 
king Satanika. The latter asks Sumantu to teach him about the Law of 
the Magas and its benefits. Sumantu tells him that what he has taught 


2° For a discussion of the first five verses, see Bisschop 2019b. For the parallel 
between Sivadharmasastra 6 and Bhavisyapurana 1.175180, see Bisschop 2018b, 21-25. 

210 See, for example, Bisschop 2020, on the remarkable transformation of the 
Lingodbhava myth into a myth of the origin of Surya’s vyoman, a mysterious object 
presented as the supreme form of the Sun god in the Bhavisyapurana. 


A Saiva Utopia 


as the Law of Surya is the same as the Law of the Magas, in other 
words that the Magas should follow the rules taught by Sürya, which 
consists in the worship of Sūrya.”*' After this introduction follows the 
extensive parallel with the Sivadharmasastra. Instead of the key terms 
sivadharma and sivasrama, the redactor of the Bhavisyapurana has 
introduced the parallel terms magadharma and magasrama. This in- 
volves a slight semantic change in comparison to the more obvious 
candidates süryadharma and sūryāšrama, as the first part of the com- 
pound refers to the practitioners (Magas) rather than to the subject 
of the teaching (Sürya)?". This corresponds to the use of the syn- 
onym sauradharma, which is also used in the text. The names ‘Maga’ 
and ‘Bhojaka’ seem to be used more or less interchangeably. 

The text of the Bhavisyapurana follows the general outline and par- 
adigm of the Sivadharmasastra but some significant changes have been 
made to make it fit the teaching of Magadharma. For a start, several 
key practices of Zoroastrian worship are inserted, such as covering the 
mouth with a mouth-veil, wearing of the avyaūga girdle, and wearing 
the white robe. These replace characteristic Saiva practices like bath- 
ing in ashes, wearing the tripundra, or carrying bracelets of rudraksa- 
beads. On the other hand, more general Brahminical features of the 
text are kept in place, for example the practice of cooking for gods, 
Agni and guests, the division of the four asramas, and wearing the sa- 
cred thread. The important but somewhat enigmatic passage about the 
layout of a sivasrama ( Sivadharmasastra 11.3—4) is omitted. As a conse- 
quence, the use of the term dsrama is less ambiguous. A number of 
verses are dropped and there is a major omission towards the end 
(Sivadharmasastra 11.86cd—118ab). This is almost certainly accidental, 
for Bhavisyapurana 1.171.23cd—25ab announces the eightfold Bhojaka 
observance, but only the first two items of the observance (devotion to 
Surya and forbearance) have been dealt with before the chapter comes 
to its premature end. There are several other clear cases of uninten- 
tional omission as well—most probably due to eye-skip—which are in- 
dicative of weaknesses in the textual transmission of the Bhavisyapurana. 


The synoptic edition below presents the text of the Bhavisyapuranain 
the left hand column, in accordance with the text of the Venkatesvara 
Press edition but incorporating some of the corrections indicated in the 


?! According to Bhavisyapurana 1.151.15 the Sauradharma was originally taught 
by Surya to Aruna. See Bisschop 2019b, 169. 

212 Note, however, that magadharma and magasrama scan in conformance to st- 
vadharma and sivasrama, which may have made the rewriting of the verses easier. 


158 


A Parallel in Bhavisyapurana 1.171 


register of testimonia in our edition of Sivadharmasastra 11. The right 
hand column gives the parallel verse in the Sivadharmasastra (verses that 
have no parallel in Bhavisyapurana 1.171 are not reported). To facilitate 
comparison, differences between the two texts are highlighted in italics. 
The synoptic edition is followed by a translation of Bhavisyapurana 1.171. 


Synoptic Edition of Bhavisyapurana 1.171 


Bhavisyapurana 1.171 


satānīka uvāca | 


magānām brūhi me dharmam 
samasavyasayogatah | 

phalam ca kim bhaved brahman 
magadharmanisevaņāt || 1 || 


sumantur uvāca | 


ya esa dharmah sūryeti 
tavākhyāto mayānagha | 
magadharmah sa evoktah 
sarvapapabhayapahah || 2 || 


sarvesam eva varnanam 
magadharmanisevanam | 
magadharmas ca samprokta 
etesam bhavamuktaye || 3 || 


brāhmaņāh ksatriyā vaisyah 
strī šūdro vā magāšramī | 
yah püjayati martandam 

sa yati paramam gatim || 4 || 


trisamdhyam arcayed bhanum 
agnikaryam ca Saktitah | 
kuryan mago mahabaho 
mukham āvrtya yatnatah || 5 || 


trisamdhyam ekakalam va 
pūjayec chraddhaya ravim | 


Sivadharmasastra 11 


nandikesoara uvaca 


sarvesam eva varnanam 
Sivasramanisevinam | 
stvadharmah sivenoktah 
dharmakamarthamuktaye || 1 || 


brahmanah ksatriyo vaisyah 
stri Sudro va sivasrami | 
vanaprastho grhastho và 

yas canyah syāc chivasrami || 2 || 


trisamdhyam arcayed ¿sam 
agnikaryam ca Saktitah | 


dvisandhyam ekakalam và 
pūjayec chaktitah sivam || 5 || 


159 


A Saiva Utopia 


asampūjya ravim mohan 
na bhunjita kadacana || 6 || 


esa dharmah paro jneyah 

$eso bhavati manavah | 
apüjayitva bhunijano 

vistham bhunkte ca vai magah || 7 || 


devam samasritaih puja 
kartavyeyam tribhih sada | 
manasa pujayed yogi 

puspais caranyasambhavaih || 8 || 


devartham puspahimsayam 
na bhavet /asya himsakah | 
yady alpam api catmartham 
nihanyad dhimsakas tada || 9 || 


magas cagniparo nityam 
tadbhakto tithipūjakaļ | 

magi maithunavarjyah syac 
chriman grhamagasrami || 10 || 


devagnisv atithau bhaktam 
pacante nàtmakaranat | 
atmarthe yah pacen mohat 
sa mago narakam vrajet || 11 || 


devarthe pacanam yesam 
santanartham tu maithunam | 
artho danartham uddisto 
narakam hi viparyayat || 12 || 


jivatrüyabhage ‘pi 

na prakurvita varcanam | 
villārjane tadardhena 

yato 'nityam hi jivitam || 13 || 


nyayoparjitavittah syad 
anyayam parivarjayet | 
anyayarjitavittais tu 

kurvan narakam apnuyat || 14 || 


asampujya sivam mohan 
na bhufjīta kadacana | 


esa dharmah paro jneyah 
$eso bhavati và na va || 6 || 


sivasramasritaih puja 
kartavyeyam tribhih sada | 
manasa pujayed yogi 

puspair varanyasambhavaih || 8 || 


sivartham puspahimsayam 
na bhavet sa tu himsakah | 
yady alpam api catmartham 
himsate himsakas tatha || 9 || 


stvarcagniparo nityam 
tadbhaktanam ca püjakah | 
parvamaithunavarjisyat 
šrīmān sivagrhasrami || 10 || 


devagnyatith ibhaiksyartham 
pacen naivatmakaranat | 
atmartham yah pacen mohan 
narakartham sa jrvati || 11 || 


devartham pacanam yesam 
santanartham ca maithunam | 
svargartham jroitam tesam 
narakartham viparyaye || 12 || 


vittatrtīvabhāgena 
prakurvīta sivarcanam | 
kurvita và tadardhena 

yato 'nityam hi jivitam || 13 || 


nyayoparjitavittah syad 
anyayam ca vivarjayet | 
anyayoparjitair vittair 
narakartham sa jīvati || 14 || 


160 


A Parallel in Bhavisyapurana 1.171 


vacorthe brahmacari yah 
suryapujagnitatparah | 

bhavej jitendriyah santo 
naisthiko bhautiko ‘pi va || 15 || 


sarvagandhavinirmuktah 
kandamulaphalasanah | 
magavaikhanaso jneyah 
suryapujagnitatparah || 16 || 


nivrttah samgamebhyas tu 
suryadhyanaratah sada || 
jneyah saurayatindro 'yam 
pūjānistho jitendriyah || 17 || 


mundopanayano ‘vyangi 
suklavāsahsamanvitah | 
jneyam tadarcanasthanam 
etat karyam prayatnatah || 18 || 


athavyangam maharaja 
dharayed yas tu bhojakah | 
agamyah sarvasattvanam 
suryalokam sa gacchati || 19 || 


dhvamsanam sarvadustanam 
sarvapapabhayapaham | 
bhavasuddhena satatam 
arcaniyo divakarah || 20 || 


gandhalepavihino "pi 
bhavasuddho na dusyati | 
bhavesu ca carec chaucam 
vastraputam jalam pibet || 21 || 


drstiputam nyaset padam 
satyapütam vaco vadet | 
sauradhyanaratah $antah 
sauradharmaparayanah || 22 || 


sarva evāšramā jneya 
bhaskarangasamudbhavah | 


yah stvabrahmacari syāt 

sa Sivarcagnitatparah | 

bhavej jitendriyah santo 
naisthiko bhautiko ‘thava || 15 || 


sarvasamgavinirmuktah 
kandamulaphalasanah | 
sivavaikhanaso jneyah 
stvarcagniparo bhavet || 16 || 


nivrttah sarvasamgebhyah 
sivadhyanaratah sada | 

jūeyah sivavratindro vam 
bhasmanistho jitendriyah || 17 || 


rudraksakankanam haste 

syāj jataika ca mastake | 

lingam s?vasramasthanam 
bhasmana ca tripundrakam || 18 || 


haste mürdhny upavite va 
rudraksam dharaytta yah | 
agamyah sarvasattvanam 
rudralokam sa gacchati || 19 || 


dhvamsanam sarvadustanam 
sarvapapavisodhanam | 22cd | 
bhāvašuddhyā bhaved suddhah 
suddhabhāvas tato bhavet | 36cd | 


gandhalepavihino 'pi 
bhavadusto na suddhyati | 36ab | 
bhāvapūtam carec chaucam 
vastraputam jalam pibet | 38ab | 


drstiputam nyaset padam 
satyapütam vaco vadet | 38cd | 
stvadhyanaparah santah 
sivadharmaparayanah | 45ab | 


sarva evasrama jneyah 
sivabhaktah sivasramah | 45cd | 


161 


A Saiva Utopia 


bhojakastavratam dharyam 
ravinoktam anaupamam || 23 || 


sarvavratanam paramam 
dharmalayam anuttamam | 
saurabhaktih sada ksantir 
ahimsa sarvada Samah || 24 || 


santosah satyam asteyam 
brahmacaryam tathastamam | 
yathasambhavapujabhih 
karmana manasa gira || 25 || 


saurabhaktih sada karya 
bhojakesu visesatah | 

svadehan nirvisesam hi 
bhojakan palayed budhah || 26 || 


bhayadaridryarogebhyas 

tesam kuryat priyani vai | 
sūryasya paripürnasya 

kim nàma kriyate naraih || 27 || 


yat krtam bhojakanam vai 

tat krtam sydd raver nrpa | 
suduram api gantavyam 
maganam yatra vai ganah || 28 || 


sa ca prayatn ad drastavyas 
tatra sannihito ravih | 
bhojakasya tu bhaktasya 
suryapujaratasya ca || 29 || 


ajnam krtva yathanyayam 
asvamedhaphalam labhet | 
devāšramagato bhaktya 
devārcām pūjayen nrpa || 30 || 


svagatasanapadyargh ya- 
madhuparkadyanukramat | 
bhojayitva yathanyayam 
süryaloke mahiyate || 31 || 


mahāvratāstakam dharyam 
isenoktam sivarthibhih | 46ab | 


sarvavratanam paramam 

asmin dharmah samapyate | 46cd | 
sive bhaktih sada ksantir 
ahimsa sarvada šamah | 47ab | 


santosah satyam asteyam 
brahmacaryam tathastamam | 47cd | 
yathasambhavapujabhih 

karmana manasa gira | 48ab | 


sive bhaktih sada karya 

tadvac ca sivayogisu | 48cd | 
svadehan nirvisesena 
sivabhaktams ca palayet | 49ab | 


bhayadaridryarogebhyas 

tesam kuryat priyani ca | 49cd | 
stvasya paripurnasya 

kim nama kriyate naraih | 50ab | 


yat krtam sivabhaktanam 

tat krtam tu sive bhavet | socd | 
sudüram api gantavyam 

yatra mahesvaro janah | 51ab | 


sa ca yatnena drastavyas 
tatra sannihito Aara | 51cd | 
mahesvarasya bhaktasya 
Sivarcanaratasya ca | 52ab | 


ajnam krtva yathanyayam 
asvamedhaphalam labhet | 52cd | 
sivasramam gatan bhaktya 
stvabhaktan prapūjayet | 54ab | 


svagatasanapadyargha- (54c) 
madhuparkadyanukramat | 60b | 
bhojayitva yathanyayam 

sivaloke mahiyate | 60cd | 


162 


A Parallel in Bhavisyapurana 1.171 


pratisrayapradanena 

raja bhavati bharata | 

dattva sthanam tathā saucam 
varunam lokam apnuyat || 32 || 


svedabinduparitangam 
dhyanasramavikarsitam | 
samvijya talavrntena 
vayuloke mahiyate || 33 || 


ksutpipasaturam srantam 
malinam rogiņam tatha | 
palayitva yathasaktya 

sarvan kaman avapnuyat || 34 || 


patitāšastasankīrņa- 
candaladinam paksinam | 
kāruņyāt sarvabhūtānām 
deyam annam svasaktitah || 35 || 


atyalpam api kāruņyād 
dattam bhavati cāksayam | 
tasmāt sarvesu bhūtesu 
devakarunyam ucyate || 36 || 


abhave trnabhumyannam 
patrendhanaphalani ca | 
dattvagataya pranatah 
svargam yati priyena va || 37 || 


na hidrksvargayanaya 

yatha loke priyam vacah | 
ihamutra sukham tesam 

vag yesam madhura bhavet || 38 || 


amrtasyandinim vacam 
candanasparšašītalām | 
dharmavirodhinim uktva 
sukham aksayam apnuyat || 39 || 


alam danena rajendra 
pujayadhyapanena va | 


pratisrayapradanena (61c) 
simhasanapatir bhavet | 63b | 
dattvambhah snanasaucartham 
varunam lokam apnuyat | 63cd | 


svedabinduparitangam 
adhvanasramakarsitam | 
samvijya talavrntena 
vayuloke mahiyate || 64 || 


ksutpipasaturam šrāntam 
artam malinaroginam | 65ab | 
palayitva yathasaktya (65c) 
sarvakaman avapnuyat || 69d || 


patitāšastasankīrņa- 
svacandaladipaksinam | 
kāruņyāt sarvabhūtānām 

deyam annam svašaktitah || 70 || 


atyalpam api kāruņyād 

dattam bhavati cāksayam | 
tasmāt sarvesu bhūtesu 
kāruņyād dānam uttamam || 71 || 


abhāve trnabhümyambhah 
patrendhanaphalāni vā | 
dattvagataya nirrnah 

svargam yānti priyeņa vā || 72 || 


na hidrksvargasopanam 

yatha loke priyam vacah | 
ihamutra sukham tesam 

vag yesam madhura sada || 73 || 


amrtasyandinim vacam 
candanasparšašītalām | 
dharmavirodhinim uktva 
sukham aksayam apnuyat || 74 || 


alam danena viprendra 
yajanadhyayanena va | 


163 


A Saiva Utopia 


idam svargasya sopanam 
acalam yat priyam vacah || 40 || 


pujabhibhasanam drstih 
pratyekam svargahetavah | 
samprcched agatam bhaktya 
kusalam prasnam adarat || 41 || 


gamane tasya vaktavyam 
panthanah santu te &ivah | 
sukham bhavatu te nityam 
sarvakāryakaram bhrsam || 42 || 


āšīrvādam idam vakyam 
sarvakalesu sarvada | 
namaskaradivakyesu 
svastimangalavadane || 43 || 


sivam bhavatu te nityam 
tam brūyāt sarvakarmasu | 
evamadi ca vacaram 
anusthaya sadasrami || 44 || 


a$esapapanirmuktah 
süryaloke mahiyate | 
süryabhakte tu ya bhaktih 
sadbhaktaih kriyate naraih | 
sürye bhaktisama nityam 
bhakte bhaktir anusthita || 45 || 


akruste tadite vapi 

yo nakrosen na tadayet | 
vakyad avikrtah svasthah 

sa duhkhat parimucyate || 46 || 


sarvesam eva tirthanam 
ksantih paramapūjitā | 

tasmat purvam prayatnena 
ksantih karya kriyasu vai || 47 || 


jnanayogatapo yasya 
yajhadanani satkriya | 
krodhanasya vrthà yasmat 


tasmat krodham vivarjayet || 48 || 


idam vah svargasopanam 
amalam yat priyam vacah || 75 || 


pūrvābhibhāsaņā drstih 
pratyekam svargahetavah | 76cd | 
samprcched agatam bhaktya 

apy ayatah sivena ’si| 77ab | 


gamane py evam vaktavyam 
panthanah santu te sivah | 77cd | 
stvam bhavatu vo nityam 
asesarthaprasadhakam | 78ab | 


āšīrvākyam idam vacyam 
sarvakaryesu sarvada | 78cd | 
namaskarabhivadesu 
svastimangalavacakaih | 791b | 


Sivam bhavatu sarvatra 
prabrūyāt sarvakarmasu | 79cd | 
evamadisivacaram 

anusthaya sivasrami | 80ab | 


a$esapapanirmuktah 

sivaloke mahiyate | 80cd | 
stvabhaktesu ya bhaktis 
tadbhaktaih kriyate naraih | 

sive bhavati sa nityam 

bhaktir bhaktair anusthita || 81 || 


akrustas tadito vapi 

yo nakrosen na tadayet | 
vagadyavikrtah svasthah 
ksantir esa sunirmala || 82 || 


sarvesam eva tirthanam 
tirtham jūānasya paragah | 
jūānatīrthāt param tirtham 
ye snatah ksantivarina || 83 || 


jnanayogatapojapya- 
yajhadanadisatkriya} | 
krodhanasya vrtha yasmat 
tasmat krodham vivarjayet || 84 || 


164 


A Parallel in Bhavisyapurana 1.171 


marmasthipranahrdayam marmasthipranahrdayam 
nirdahed apriyam vacah | nirdahed apriyam vacah | 

na vaco hy apriyam tasmad na vácyam apriyam tasmac 
bhojakesu visesatah || 49 || chivabhaktair visesatah || 85 || 
ksama danam tvisah satyam ksama danam tapah satyam 
ksamahimsarkasambhava | ksamahimsa ksama srutam | 86ab | 
na šakyā vistarad vaktum na Sakyo vistarad vaktum 

api varsasatair api || so || upasakhaprabhedatah | 118cd | 


Translation of Bhavisyapurana 1.171 


Introduction: The Magadharma 


Satanika spoke: 


1 


Tell me the Law of the Magas, succinctly and comprehen- 
sively. And [tell me] what fruit there is, o Brahmin, by 
serving the Magadharma. 


Sumantu spoke: 


2 


The Law called Surya, which I have taught to you, o 
faultless one, this is called the Law of the Magas (maga- 
dharma). It destroys all sins and dangers. 


Verily all caste-classes should observe the Law of the Ma- 
gas (magadharma); and the Law of the Magas has been 
declared for the sake of their liberation from existence. 
A Magasramin can be a Brahmin, a Ksatriya, a Vaišya, 
a woman, or a Sudra. The one who worships Martanda 
reaches the supreme state. 


On worship 


One should worship Bhanu at the three junctures of the 
day and [perform] fire-service, to the best of one’s abili- 
ty. The Maga should do it, o great-armed, having zealou- 
sly covered his mouth?! 


23 As noted by Humbach 1978, 248, Bhavisyapurana 1.139.59 prescribes cove- 


ring the mouth with a mouth-veil (patidana) for Bhojakas, which reflects Zoro- 
astrian practice (Avestan: paiti.dana). Cf. also Bhavisyapurana 1.117.59ab (Aditya 
speaking): mukham āvrtya yatnena püjaniyo ‘ham adarat. 


165 


A Saiva Utopia 


6 At the three junctures, or once [a day], he should per- 
form worship to Ravi with faith. One should never, out of 
carelessness, eat without first worshiping Ravi. 


7 This should be known as the highest law, the rest is hu- 
man. If he eats without first worshiping, a Maga verily 
eats excrement.?!4 


8 The three [i.e., celibate, householder, forest-dweller] 
resorting to Deva should always perform this worship, 
[while] a yogin may perform worship in thought, or with 
such flowers as grow in the forest. 


9 In harming flowers for the sake of Deva?5 he does not 
become harmful, but if he does even a little harm for his 
own benefit, then he is harmful. 


The Maga-householder 


10 The Maga, constantly devoted to the worship of the fire, 
devoted to Him, honouring guests, the illustrious Ma- 
ga-householder (grhamagasramin), should refrain from 
having sex [...].2!9 


11 They cook food for the gods, Agni, and for guests,?!” but 
not for themselves.” The Maga who out of delusion co- 
oks for his own sake, goes to hell. 


12 They who cook for the sake of the gods, and have sex?! 
for the sake of children, [their] wealth is taught to be for 
gifting. By doing otherwise, [they are destined for] hell. 


13 ... for life is impermanent.??° 


214 The second half of this verse has no parallel in the Sivadharmasastra. 

?5 Correct devarthapuspahimsayam to devartham puspahimsayam. 

26 Sivadharmasastra 11.10c reads parvamaithunavarji, while Bhavisyapurana 
1.171.10c has mag? maithunavarjyah. The reading magi seems highly unlikely. We 
have considered the possibility that the composer of the Bhavisyapurana might 
have changed the Sivadharma's parva to maga, in the sense of a day dedicated to 
the Sun, since the phases of the moon have no place in the Maga system. A subse- 
quent scribal error maga — magi would be conceivable. However, maga does not 
by itself mean sun and so it is quite a stretch to have maga mean ‘day dedicated 
to the Sun.’ At best it could mean ‘day of the Magas.” 

217 Note that the reference to cooking food for alms has been omitted. 

218 Correct catmakaranat to natmakaranat. 

219 Correct maithanam to maithunam. 

22° The first three padas do not make sense and are almost certainly corrupt. 


166 


A Parallel in Bhavisyapurana 1.171 


14 He shall acquire wealth with lawful means, but unlawful 
means he should avoid entirely. Making his life with ri- 
ches acquired by unlawful means he will go to hell. 


The celibate 


15 He who is a celibate (brahmacarin) in the true meaning 
of the word—whether permanently (naisthika) or tem- 
porarily (bhautika) —should be devoted to the worship of 
Surya and the fire, with his senses tamed, and tranquil. 


The hermit 
16 Free from all fragrances, eating bulbs, roots and fruits, he is 
known as a Maga-hermit,””' devoted to the worship of Surya 
and the fire. 
The ascetic 
17 Withdrawn from all social contact, ever inclined to me- 


ditate on Surya, he is known as the foremost of Saura- 


ascetics,” intent on worship, with his senses conquered. 
The mark of the Bhojakas 
18 Being shaven-headed, wearing the sacred thread, the 


avyanga girdle, and a white robe** this should be known 
as what is to be observed zealously by those who are enga- 
ged??4 in his worship. 


19 The Bhojaka who should wear the avyanga girdle,” o 
great king, becomes invincible? to all creatures [and] 
will reach the world of Surya. 


? Correct mama vaikhānaso to magavaikhanaso. 

222 Correct saurayatindraya to saurayatindro ‘yam. 

?5 Avyanga is the name of the sacred girdle of the Magas and has a Zoroa- 
strian origin (Humbach, 237). The white robe likewise belongs to the Zoroa- 
strian tradition, but the shaven head and the sacred thread rather fit the Brah- 
manical model. All the Saiva attributes listed in the parallel in Sivadharmasastra 
11.18 have been written out of the text. 

224 Correct tadarcanasthānam to tadarcanasthanam. 

?5 Correct athāvyango to athavyangam. 

?* Correct agamyam to agamyah. 


167 


20 


21 


22ab 


22cd-23ab 


23cd-24ab 


24cd-25ab 


25cd-26ab 


26cd-27ab 


27cd-28ab 


A Saiva Utopia 


On purity 


Destroying all taints, removing all evils and dangers—one 
should constantly worship Divakara with a pure disposi- 
tion. 


One of pure disposition, even if he is not free from per- 
fumes and unguents,*?7is not defiled. One should practi- 
ce cleanliness in disposition and one should drink water 
that has been purified by [straining through] a cloth. 


One should set down one's foot purified by sight; one 
should speak words purified by truth. 


Bhāskara s discipline 


Those who delight in meditation on Sūrya, peaceful, and 
dedicated to the Sauradharma—all disciplines (asrama) 
should be known as originating from the limbs of 
Bhaskara. 


The eightfold Bhojaka observance 


The eightfold Bhojaka observance should be practised, 
spoken by Ravi, unparalleled, the best of all observances, 
the supreme receptacle of the Law. 


Devotion to Surya,2 constant forbearance, non-harm, 


calmness at all times, contentedness, truthfulness, not 
stealing, and chastity as the eighth. 


Devotion to Sürya 


Devotion to Surya should always be done in act, thought, 
and word, by performing worship however one can, in 
particular to Bhojakas. 


The wise one should certainly protect Bhojakas, without 
distinction from one's own body, from danger, poverty, 
and disease, and please them. 


What can men actually do for Surya who is already com- 


plete? Whatever is done for Bhojakas that is done for 
Ravi, o king! 


227 Correct gandhalepavihino to gandhalepāvihīno. 
228 Read saurabhaktih instead of saurabhakte. 


168 


A Parallel in Bhavisyapurana 1.171 


28cd-29ab One should go to the place where there are Magas, even if far 
away. One must strive to see them, for there Ravi is present. 


29cd-30ab And if one obeys according to rule the command of a 
Bhojaka devotee, who delights in the worship of Surya, 
one obtains the fruit of a horse sacrifice. 

30cd One who resorts to Devas discipline?” should worship 
the image of Deva with devotion, o king. 


Charity for all 


31 If one correctly feeds [someone], after [providing] a wel- 
come, a seat, a foot-bath, guest water, honey and curd, and so 
forth, in due order,” he will be honoured in Surya’s world. 


32 By providing shelter, he becomes a king, o Bharata.?' And 
by providing a pure place, one will attain Varuna's world. 


33 By fanning with a palm-leaf a man exhausted from medi- 
tation (dhyana) whose body is covered in beads of swea- 
t, one will be honoured in Vayu’s world. 


34 By doing whatever one can to care for someone suffe- 
ring from hunger and thirst, exhausted, dirty and sick, 
one attains all desires.?33 


35 One should give food, to the best of one's ability, out of 
compassion for all beings, to those fallen from caste (pa- 
tita), those who are cursed (asasta), those of mixed-caste 
(samkirna) , Candalas and other [low beings], and birds. 


36 Even the tiniest gift made out of compassion becomes 
imperishable. Therefore, o king, it is taught [that there 
should be] compassion towards all beings. 


37 By giving, in the absence [of anything else], grass, earth, 
food, leaves, fuel,*3+or fruits to a guest, referentially, one 
goes to heaven, or by kindness. 


229 The original object of the verse has been changed into the subject. 

23° The passage corresponding to Sivadharmasastra 11.54d—60a may have been 
lost due to eye-skip, from madhuparkadibhojanaih (Sivadharmasastra 11.54d) to ma- 
dhuparkadyanukramat (SiDhS 11.60b). 

23 The passage corresponding to SDhS 11.61d—63a may have been lost due to 
eye-skip, from pratisrayapradanena (61d) to mrdusayyapradanena (63a). 

?? Reading sveda- instead of sveta-. 

23 The passage corresponding to SDhS 11.65d—69c may have been lost due to 
eye-skip, from sarvapapaih pramucyate (65d) to sarvakaman avapnuyat. 

234 Reading patrendhana- instead of patram dhana-. 


169 


38 


39 


40 
41ab 


41cd-42ab 


42cd-43ab 


43cd-44ab 


44cd-45ab 


45cf 


46 


A Saiva Utopia 


Kind speech 


There is no such way to reach heaven in this world as 
a kind word. They who always have sweet speech enjoy 
happiness here and in the hereafter. 


If one speaks speech flowing with nectar,” cool as con- 
tact with sandalwood, not opposed to the Law, one will 
attain imperishable happiness. 


Enough of giving, o best of kings! Enough of worship or te- 
aching! This is the stable stairway to heaven: kind speech. 


Honoring, addressing [and] looking [at the guest]:^?? 
each of these is a cause of [reaching] heaven. 


One should respectfully inquire the guest, with devo- 
tion, about his well-being. At his departure one should 
say: ‘May your paths be favorable (siva) !' 


‘May everything for you always be pleasant!’ This is the 
benedictory statement, powerful and accomplishing all 
affairs, always, at all times. 


In all actions [such as] greeting with ‘namah’ etc., in the 
expression of benediction and blessing, one should say 
to him: ‘May it be auspicious (siva) for you always! 


Devotion to Sürya: conclusion 


The follower of the true discipline (sadasramin) who per- 
forms such and other conduct is freed from all sins and 
will be honoured in Surya’s World.?37 

That devotion towards a devotee of Surya which is per- 
formed by men who are true devotees is always equal 
to devotion to Sürya. Devotion is practised towards the 
devotee [of Surya]. 


Forbearance 


One who, though provoked and beaten, is not pro- 
voked and does not strike [back], remaining compo- 


235 Correct -syandini to -syandinīm. 

23° A parallel for Sivadharmasastra 11.76ab is missing. 

237 The translation follows the printed text, but it seems quite likely that the 
text originally had magācāram for ca vācāram (pada a) and (pada d) magasrami for 
sadasrami. The Sivadharma parallel has sivacaram and sivasrami respectively. 


170 


47 


48 


49 


50 


A Parallel in Bhavisyapurana 1.171 


sed, unchanged in his speech,” he is released from 
suffering. 


Forbearance, highly revered, is the tīrtha of all tzrthas. 
Therefore, one should first engage in forbearance in all 
activities with effort. 

Since knowledge, yoga, austerity, sacrifice, giving, and 
hospitality are in vain for one who is angry, therefore 
one should avoid anger. 


Unkind speech burns up the tender points, bones, breath, 
and heart, therefore there should be no unkind speech, 
especially not towards Bhojakas. 


Forbearance is giving, splendour, truth; forbearance is 
nonharm; it has its origin in the Sun.?3° One cannot give 
a full account of it, even in a hundred years.?^ 


238 Correct adhikrtah to avikrtah. 
39 Reading -sambhava instead of -sambhavah. The subject of this verse is ksama. 
24° A large section of text has dropped out between 50ab and 50cd, correspon- 


ding to Sivadharmasastra 11.86cd—118ab. The ending -sivodbhavah in Sivadharmasastra 
11.118b, no doubt changed to arkasambhavah in Bhavisyapurana 1.171.50b, suggests 
that this is due to eye-skip. Since the lost passage is quite extensive, it may be due to 
loss of a folio, or to careless skipping of a folio or one side of a folio bya scribe. That 
a section like this must have been originally there follows from the definition of the 
Bhojaka observance in 23cd-25ab above. Only the first two items of the eightfold 
observance (devotion to Surya and forbearance) have been treated so far. 


171 


Abbreviations 


ApDhS 
AVParis 
BdP 
BhavP 
BhG 
GdP 
HV 
Katha Up 
KuP 
LiP 
MBh 
MDh 
MtP 
NiMukh 
PBh 

PS 
SauP 
SiDhS 
SiDhU 
SiP 
SiUp 
SP 

TAK 
TVK 
VaP 
ViDh 
ViP 
YDh 
YoS 


Bibliography 


Apastamba Dharmasütra 
Atharvavedaparisista 
Brahmandapurana 
Bhavisyapurana 
Bhagavadgita, see Mahabharata 
Garudapurana 
Harivamsa 

Katha Upanisad 
Kūrmapurāņa 
Lingapurana 
Mahabharata 
Manavadharmasastra 
Matsyapurana 
Nisvasamukha 
Pancarthabhasya 
Pasupatasiitra 
Saurapurana 
Sivadharmasastra 
Sivadharmottara 
Sivapurana 

Sivopanisad 
Skandapurana 
Tantrikabhidhanakosa 
Tirthavivecanakanda 
Vayupurana 
Visnudharma 
Visnupurana 
Yajnavalkyadharmasastra 
Yogasütra 


A Saiva Utopia 


Primary Sources 


Agamapramanya 
Agamapramanya of Yamunacarya. Edited by M. Narasimhachary. Baro- 
da: Oriental Institute, 1976. 


Apastamba Dharmasūtra 
(ApDhS) See Olivelle 1999. 


Astādhyāyī 
See Bohtlingk 1887. 


Atharvavedaparisista 
(AVParis) The Parisistas of the Atharvaveda. Edited by George Melville Bolling & 
Julius von Negelein. 2 Parts. Leipzig 1909-1910. 


Baudhāyanagrhyaparibhāsāsūtra, Baudhayana Grhyasesastitra 
Bodhāyanagrhyasūtram / The Bodháyana Grihyasutra. [Edit. by] R. Shama 
Sastri. Oriental Library Publications, Sanskrit Series 32/55. Mysore: 
University of Mysore/Government Branch Press, 1983. (Reprint of 
the edition of 1920). 


Bharadvaja Grhyasütra 
The Domestic Ritual According to the School of Bhāradvāja. Edited in the 
original Sanskrit, with an introduction and list of words, by Henri- 
ette J.W. Salomons. Leyden: Brill. 


Bhavisyapurana 
(BhavP) Bhavisya Mahapurana, satippant mūlamātra. [Edit. by] Khemaraja 
Srikrsnadasa. Bombay: Venkatesvara Press, 1959. 


Brahmandapurana 

(BdP) Sri-Vyasa-maharsiproktam Brahmandapuranam. With Introduction in 
Sanskrit and English and an Alphabetical Index of Verses. Edit. by 
J. L. Shastri. Delhi etc. 1973. (Reprint of the Venkatesvara edition 
of AD 1912). 


Bhogahasta 
Electronic transcription prepared by Diwakar Acharya based on Na- 
tional Archives of Kathmandu reel no. B115/9 and B 135/36. 


Brhajjabala Upanisad 
See Sastri 1950. 


Garudapurana 

(GdP) The Garudamahapuranam. [Edited with an Introduction] by Raje- 
ndranatha Sarman, [with a] Slokanukramani. Delhi: Nag Publishers, 
1984. [= Venkatesvara Press edition 1906.] 


174 


Bibliography 


Harivamsa 

(HV) The Harivamsa: Being the Khila or Supplement to the Mahabharata. For 
the first time critically edited by P. L. Vaidya. Poona: Bhandarkar 
Oriental Research Institute, 1969-1971. 


Hiranyakesi Grhyasütra 
The Grihyasütra of Hiranyakesin, with Extracts from the Commentary of 
Matridatta. [Edit. by] J. Kirste. Vienna: Alfred Holder, 1889. 


Katha Upanisad 
(Katha Up) See Olivelle 1998. 


Kularnavatantra 
Kularnava Tantra. Introduction: Arthur Avalon (Sir John Woodroffe), 
Readings: M. P. Pandit, Sanskrit Text: Taranatha Vidyaratna. Madras: 
Ganesh Co., 1965. 


Kūrmapurāņa 
(KūP) The Kūrma Purāna. Crit. Edit. by Anand Swarup Gupta. Varanasi: 
All-India Kashiraj Trust, 1971. 


Lingapurana 

(LiP) Sri-Vyasa-maharsiproktam Šrī-Lingamahāpurāņa, with the Sanskrit Com- 
mentary Sivatosint by Ganesa Natu. [Edit. by] Gangavisnu (son of 
Krsnadasa). Bombay: Venkatesvara Press, V.S. 1981 [=AD 1924]. 
Reprinted, with a Slokanukramani by Nagasarana Simha, by Nag 
Publishers, Delhi 1989 (2nd ed. 1996). 


Mahabharata 
(MBh) The Mahabharata. For the First Time Critically Edited by V. S. 
Sukthankar and Others. Poona 1927-1959. 19 vols. 


Manavadharmasastra 


(MDh) See Olivelle 2005. 


Matsyapurana 

(MtP) Šrīmad- -Dvaipayana-muni-pranitam Matsyapuranam, etad pustakam 
Anandasramasthapanditaih samšodhitam. [Poona] 1981. Ananda 
Ashrama Sanskrit Series 54. (Reprint of the ed. of H. N. Apte AD 


1907.) 


Mālinīvijayottaratantra 
See Vasudeva 2004. 


Mitāksarā 
Yajnavalkyadharmasastra with the Mitaksara of Vijūānesvara Yājūavalkya- 
smriti or the Institutes of Yajnavalkya, together with the Commentary Called 
the Mitāksharā by Šrī Vijnanesvara. Edit. by J. R. Gharpure. Collections 
of Hindu Law Texts. Bombay: n.p., 1914. 


175 


A Saiva Utopia 


Nisvasamukha 
(NiMukh) See Kafle 2020. 


Nisvasatattvasamhita 
See Goodall et al. 2015. 


Pancarthabhasya ad Pasupatasütra 

(PBh/PS)  Pasupatasütras, with the Pancarthabhasya of Kaundinya. Edit. by R. 
Ananthakrishna Sastri. Trivandrum: Oriental Manuscripts Library, 
1940. 


Parakhyatantra 
See Goodall 2004. 


Prayascittasamuccaya 
See Sathyanarayan 2015. 


Revakhanda 
Brhat Šrī-Narmadāpurāņam Revakhandam. (Edit. by] Onkārānanda 
Giri. 3rd edition. Hoshangabad: Jūānasatra Prakāšana Nyāsa, 1994. 


Sāmkhyavrtti 
Sāmkhya-Vrtti (V2). Edit. by Esther A. Salomon. Ahmedabad: Gujarat 
University, 1973. 


Saurapurana 
(SauP) Saurapuranam Vyāsakrtam. Poona: Anandasrama Press, 1980. Ananda- 
$rama Sanskrit Series 18. 


Siddhayogesvarimata 
See Torzsok 1999. 


Sivadharmasastra 
(SiDhS) See Naraharinath 1998; Mirnig 2017* (ch. 1); Bisschop 2018 (ch. 6); 
Kafle 2020* (ch. 10); this edition (ch. 11); De Simini 2013 (ch. 12). 


Sivadharmottara 
(SiDhU) See Naraharinath 1998; De Simini 2013 (chapter 2). 


Sivapurana ` 

(SiP) Sri-Sivamahapuranam, |edit. by] Khemaraja (Son of Krsnadasa). Bom- 
bay: Venkatesvara Press, V.S. 2011 [=AD 1954]. 

Sivastotravali 


The Šivastotrāvalī of Utpaladevacarya with the Sanskrit Commentary of 
Ksemaraja. Edited with Hindi Commentary by Rajanaka Laksmana 
[Lakshman Raina, Swami Lakshman Joo]. Varanasi: Chowkhamba 
Sanskrit Series Office, 1964. 


176 


Bibliography 


Sivopanisad 
(SiUp) See Kunhan Raja 1933. 


Skandapurana 

(SP ITB) The Skandapurana. Volume IIB. Adhyayas 31-52. The Vahana and Naraka 
Cycles. Critical Edition with an Introduction Annotated English Syn- 
opsis by Hans T. Bakker, Peter C. Bisschop and Yuko Yokochi, in 
Cooperation with Nina Mirnig and Judit Tórzsók. Leiden/Boston: 
Brill, 2014. 


Tantravarttika 
The Tantravártika, a Gloss on Sabara Suámi's Commentary on the Mimámsá 
Stitras, by Bhatta Kumārila. Edit. by Gangadhara Sastri. Benares 
Sanskrit Series 5, 7, 16, 23, 27, 29, 32, 34, 36, 39, 60, 62, 72. Benares: 
Braj B. Das Co, 1903. 


Tirthavivecanakanda 
(TVK) Bhatta-sri-Laksmidhara-viracite Krtyakalpatarau Astamo bhaga. Tirthavive- 
canakanda. Baroda: Oriental Institute, 1942. 


Umamahesvarasamvadah 
See Naraharinath 1998. 


Vayupurana 

(VaP) Mahamuni-srimad-Vyasa-pranitam Vayupuranam. [Edit. by] Hari Narayana 
Apate. Ānandāšrama Sanskrit Series 49. Pune: Anandasrama Press, 
1905. 


Vimalavatipaddhati 
Electronic transcription prepared by Anoopraj Paudyal based on 
National Archives of Kathmandu reel no. A 187/1. 


Visnudharma 
(ViDh) See Grünendahl 1983-1989. 


Visnusmryti 
See Olivelle 2010. 


Visnupurana 

(ViP) The Critical Edition of the Visnupuranam. Edit. by M. M. Pathak. Pada-In- 
dex prepared by Peter Schreiner. Baroda: Oriental Institute, 1997, 
1999 [2 volumes]. 


Vrhaspatitattva 
Wrhaspati-Tattwa. An Old Javanese Philosophical Text. Critically Edit- 
ed and Annotated by Sudarshana Devi. Sata-Pitaka Series (Dvipa- 
ntara-Pitaka) 1. Nagpur: International Academy of Indian culture, 


1957. 


177 


A Saiva Utopia 


Vratisasana 
Wratisasana. A Sanskrit Text on Ascetic Discipline with Kawi Exegesis. Edit. 
by Sharada Rani. Sata-Pitaka Series (Dvipantara-pitaka), 20 (5). New 
Delhi: International Academy of Indian Culture, 1962. 


Yajnavalkyadharmasastra 

(YDh) See Olivelle 2019b. 

Other Literature 

Benke, Theodore. 

2010 The Sudracarasiromani of Krsna Sesa: A 16th Century Manual of Dharma 


for Südras. Doctoral dissertation, University of Pennsylvania. 


Bisschop, Peter C. 


2010a ‘Once Again on the Identity of Candesvara in Early Saivism: A 
rare Candesvara in the British Museum?’ Indo-Iranian Journal 53: 
233-249. 

2010b ‘Saivism in the Gupta-Vakataka Age.’ Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society 
(Series 3) 20(4): 477-488. 

2014 ‘Pancartha Before Kaundinya.’ Journal of Indian Philosophy 42: 
27-37. 

2018a ‘Buddhist and Saiva Interactions in the Kali Age: The Sivadharma- 
Sastra as a Source of the Karandavyühasütra.' Indo-Iranian Journal 61: 
396-410. 

2018b Universal Saivism. The Appeasement of All Gods and Powers in the Santya- 
dhyaya of the Sivadharmasastra. Leiden: Brill. 

2019a ‘Inclusivism Revisited: The Worship of Other Gods in the Sivadha- 


rmasastra, the Skandapurana, and the Nisvasamukha.’ In: Tantric 
Communities in Context, ed. by Nina Mirnig, Marion Rastelli and Vin- 
cent Eltschinger. Vienna: OAW, 511-537. 

2019b "Vyāsa's Palimpsest. Tracking Processes of Transmission and Re-cre- 
ation in Anonymous Sanskrit Literature.’ In: Perspectives on Lived 
Religion. Practices — Transmission — Landscape, ed. by N. Staring, H. 
Twiston Davies, L. Weiss. Leiden: Sidestone Press, 165-172. 

2020 ‘Vyoman: The Sky is the Limit. On the Bhavisyapurana’s Reworking 
of the Lingodbhava Myth.’ In: Framing Intellectual and Lived Spaces in 
Early South Asia: Sources and Boundaries, ed. by Lucas den Boer and 
Elizabeth A. Cecil. Berlin: De Gruyter, 75-104. 


Bisschop, Peter, & Arlo Griffiths 
2003 "The Pasupata Observance (Atharvavedaparisista 40).’ Indo-Iranian 


Journal 46: 315-348. 


Bohtlingk, Otto 

1887 Pánini's Grammatik. Herausgegeben, übersetzt, erläutert und mit 
verschiedenen Indices versehen von Otto Bóhtlingk. Leipzig 1887. 
(Reprint, Delhi, 1998). 


178 


Bibliography 


Bonazzoli, Giorgio 
1993 ‘Introducing Sivadharma and Sivadharmottara.’ Altorientalische For- 
schungen 20.2: 342-349. 


Brereton, Joel P. 
2004 ‘Dharman in the Rgveda.” Journal of Indian Philosophy 32.5/6: 449—489. 


De Simini, Florinda 

2013 Ritual Aspects of Manuscript Transmission in Premodern India: A His- 
torical Study of Vidyadana Through Textual Sources. With a First Critical 
Edition and English Translation of Sivadharmottara's Chapter Two 'On 
the Gift of Knowledge". PhD thesis, Università degli Studi di Torino. 

2016a Of Gods and. Books: Ritual and Knowledge Transmission in the Manu- 
scribt Cultures of Premodern India, ed. by Michael Friedrich et al. Stud- 
ies in Manuscript Cultures (8). Berlin: De Gruyter. 

2016b 'Sivadharma Manuscripts from Nepal and the Making of a Saiva 
Corpus.’ In: One-Volume Libraries: Composite and Multiple-Text Man- 
uscripts, ed. by Michael Friedrich, Cosima Schwarke. Berlin: De 
Gruyter, 207-260. 


De Simini, Florinda, & Nina Mirnig 

2017 ‘Uma and Siva's Playful Talks in Detail (Lalitavistara): On the Pro- 
duction of Saiva Works and their Manuscripts in Medieval Nepal. 
Studies on the Sivadharma and the Mahabharata 1.’ In: Indic Man- 
uscript Cultures through the Ages, ed. by V. Vergiani, D. Cuneo, C.A. 
Formigatti. Berlin: De Gruyter, 587-653. 


Eltschinger, Vincent 

2014 Buddhist Epistemology as Apologetics: Studies on the History, Self-under- 
standing and Dogmatic Foundations of Late Indian Buddhist Philosophy. 
Wien: Verlag der Osterreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften. 


Fisher, Elaine M. 

2017 ‘Remaking South Indian Saivism: Greater Saiva Advaita and the 
Legacy of the Saktivisistadvaita Virasaiva Tradition.’ International 
Journal of Hindu Studies 21: 319-344. 


Goodall, Dominic 
2004 Parakhyatantra: A Scripture of the Saiva Siddhanta. A Critical Edition 
and Annotated Translation. Pondicherry: IFP/EFEO. 


2013 ‘The Throne of Worship: An Archaeological Tell of Religious Rival- 
ries.’ Studies in Indian History 27.2: 221-250. 


2015 ‘On K. 1049, A Tenth-Century Cave-Inscription from Battambang, 
and on the Sectarian Obedience of the Saiva Ascetics of Non-Roy- 
al Cave Inscriptions in Cambodia.’ UDAYA, Journal of Khmer Studies 
13: 3-34. 


179 


A Saiva Utopia 


Goodall, Dominic, et al. 

2015 The Nisvasatattvasamhita. The Earliest Surviving Saiva Tantra. Vol. 1. A 
Critical Edition & Annotated Translation of the Mūlasūtra, Uttarasūtra 
& Nayasutra. Pondicherry, Paris: IFP/EFEO. 


Griffiths, A., A. Lepoutre, W.A. Southworth, and T. Phan 

2012 'Stela from Khué Trung’ [C. 211]. In The Inscriptions of Campa at 
the Museum of Cham Sculpture in Da Ning. Hó Chí Minh: VNUHCM 
Publishing House, 263-70. 


Grünendahl, Reinhold 

1983-89 Visnudharmah. Precepts for the Worship of Visnu. Part 1: Adhyayas 1-43. 
Part 2: Adhyayas 44-81. Part 3: Adhyayas 82-105 (with a Pada-index 
of Adhyayas 1-105). Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz. 3 vols. 


Hara, Minoru 


1966 Materials for the Study of Pasupata Saivism. Doctoral dissertation, Har- 
vard University. 

2002 "Pāšupata Concept of Purity.’ In: Minoru Hara, Pasupata Studies, ed. 
by Jun Takashima, Vienna: Sammlung de Nobili, 57-66. 

2003 ‘Ashes.’ Cracow Indological Studies 4-5: 251-267. 


Hazra, Rajendra Chandra 

1953 ‘The Problems Relating to the Siva-Purana.’ Our Heritage [Bulletin 
of the Department of Postgraduate Training and Research, Sanskrit 
College, Calcutta] 1(1): 46-68. 

1983 ‘The Siva-Dharmottara.’ Purana 27(1): 181-210. 

1985 ‘The Siva-Dharma.’ Purana 27(1): 282-299. 


Horsch, Paul 

2004 ‘From Creation Myth to World Law: The Early History of Dharma,’ 
trans. by Jarrod L. Whitaker. Jowrnal of Indian Philosophy 32.5/6: 
423-448. Originally published as "Vom Schópfungsmythos zum 
Weltgesetz,’ in Asiatische Studien 21 (1967): 31-61. 


Humbach, H. 
(1978) ‘Mithra in India and the Hinduized Magi’, Etudes Mithriaques, Actes 
de Congrès 4, 229-253. 


Jamison, Stephanie 

2019 "The Term Grhastha and the (Pre)history of the Householder.’ In: 
Grhastha: The Householder in Ancient Indian Religious Culture, ed. by 
Patrick Olivelle. New York: Oxford University Press, 3-19. 


Kafle, Nirajan 

2017* ‘Critical Edition of Sivadharmasastra Chapter 10.’ Draft June 2017. 

2020 The Nisvásamukhatattvasamhita. A Preface to the Earliest Surviving Saiva 
Tantra (on non-Tantric Saivism at the Dawn of the Mantramarga). Crit- 
ical Edition, with an Introduction and Annotated Translation, and 


180 


Bibliography 


an Appendix containing Sivadharmasangraha 5-9. Pondicherry, 
Hamburg: IFP/EFEO, Universitat Hamburg. 


Kane, P. V. 

1930-62 History of Dharmasastra (Ancient and Mediaeval Religious and Civil Law 
in India). Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute. 5 vols. Gov- 
ernment Oriental Series, Class B, No.thinspace 6. [= Kane I to V.] 


Kropf, Marianna 

2005 Rituelle Traditionen der Planetengottheiten (Navagraha) im Kathmandutal: 
Strukturen, Praktiken, Weltbilder. Inauguraldissertation, Heidelberg Uni- 
versity. 


Kunhan Raja, Chittenjoor 

1933 Un-published Upanishads. Edited by the Pandits of Adyar Library un- 
der the Supervision of Dr. C. Kunhan Raja. Madras: Adyar Library. 
(Sivopanisad: PP. 324-378.) 


Lubin, Timothy 

2005 ‘The Transmission, Patronage, and Prestige of Brahmanical Piety 
from the Mauryas to the Guptas.’ In: Boundaries, Dynamics and Con- 
struction of Traditions in South Asia, ed. by Federico Squarcini. Kykéion 
studi e testi. I, Scienze delle religioni, 3. Firenze: Firenze University 
Press, 77-103. 

2016* ‘Feeding Monks, Feeding Brahmins: Competing Idioms of Religious 
Semiotics in Early India.’ Unpublished paper for the 45th Annual 
Conference on South Asia, Madison, Wisc., 20-23 October 2016. 

2019 ‘The Late Appearance of the Grhastha in the Vedic Domestic Ritual 
Codes as a Married Religious Professional.’ In: Grhastha: The House- 
holder in Ancient Indian Religious Culture, ed. by Patrick Olivelle. New 
York: Oxford University Press, 95-106. 


Magnone, Paolo 

2004 'Sivadharmottara: Spigolature da un tardo upapurana settario. In: 
Atti dell’Undicesimo Convegno Nazionale di Studi Sanscriti (Milano, 22—23 
novembre 2002), 115-128. Torino. 

2005 ‘Sivadharmottarapurana: A Survey.’ In: Epics, Khilas, and Puranas: 
Continuities and Ruptures. Proceedings of the Third Dubrovnik Interna- 
tional Conference on the Sanskrit Epics and Puranas. September 2002, 
Zagreb, ed. by Petteri Koskikallio. Zagreb: Croatian Academy of Arts 
and Sciences, 575-596. 


Mirnig, Nina 

2017* ‘Critical Edition of Sivadharmasastra Chapter 1.’ Draft February 2017. 

2019 “Rudras on Earth” on the Eve of the Tantric Age: The Sivadharma- 
$astra and the Making of Saiva Lay and Initiatory Communities.’ In: 
Nina Mirnig, Marion Rastelli, Vincent Eltschinger (eds), Tantric Commu- 
nities in Context, Vienna: Austrian Academy of Sciences Press, 471—510. 


181 


A Saiva Utopia 


Naraharinath, Yogin 


1998 Sivadharma Pasupatimatam Sivadharmamahasastram Pasupatinatha- 
daršanam. Edit. by Yogi Naraharinath. Kathmandu, samvat 2055 
(1998 CE). 

Nihom, Max 

1995 ‘Sankhya and Pasupata Reflexes in the Indo-Javanese Vrhaspatitattva.” 


Wiener Zeitschrift für die Kunde Südasiens 39: 203-220. 


Olivelle, Patrick 


1993 The Asrama System. New York: Oxford University Press. 

1998 The Early Upanisads. Annotated Text and Translation. New York: Oxford 
University Press. 

1999 Dharmasütras. The Law Codes of Apastamba, Gautama, Baudhayana, and 
Vasistha. Translated from the Original Sanskrit and Edited. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press. 

2004 ‘The Semantic History of Dharma the Middle and late Vedic Periods.’ 
Journal of Indian Philosophy 32.5/6: 491—511. 

2005 Manu's Code of Law. A Critical Edition and Translation of the Manava- 


Dharmasastra. With the editorial assistance of Suman Olivelle. New 
York: Oxford University Press. 

2010 The Law Code of Visnu. A Critical Edition and Annotated Translation of 
the Vaisnava-Dharmasastra. Harvard Oriental Series 73. Cambridge, 
Mass.: Harvard University Press. 

2019a * Grhasthain ASoka's Classification of Religious People.’ In: Grhastha: 
The Householder in Ancient Indian Religious Culture, ed. by Patrick 
Olivelle. New York: Oxford University Press, 43-57. 


2019b Yajnavalkya. A Treatise on Dharma. Edited and translated. Murty Classi- 
cal Library of India 20. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press. 
2019c ‘From trivarga to purusartha: A Chapter in Indian Moral Philosophy.’ 


Journal of the American Oriental Society 139.2: 381—396. 


Sanderson, Alexis ` ` 
2003-04 ‘The Saiva Religion among the Khmers (Part D.” Bulletin de l'Ecole 
Francaise d'Extrēme-Orienl 90/91: 349—462. (pp. 422—423). 


2004 'Religion and the State: Saiva Officiants in the Territory of the 
King’s Brahmanical Chaplain.’ Indo-Iranian Journal 47: 229-300. 
2009 ‘The Saiva Age—The Rise and Dominance of Saivism during the 


Early Medieval Period.’ In Genesis and Development of Tantrism, ed. 
by Shingo Einoo. Tokyo: Institute of Oriental Culture, University of 
Tokyo, 41-320. 


2012 'Saivism and Brahmanism, Handout 5.’ Unpublished handout 
available at the author’s Academia page. 

2013 ‘The Impact of Inscriptions on the Interpretation of Early Saiva Lit- 
erature.’ Indo-Iranian Journal 56 (3/4): 211-244. 

2015 ‘Tolerance, Exclusivity, Inclusivity, and Persecution in Indian Reli- 


gion During the Early Mediaeval Period.’ In: Honoris Causa: Essays 
in Honour of Aveek Sarkar, ed. by John Makinson. London: Allen 
Lane, 155-224. 


182 


Bibliography 


Sastri, A. Mahadeva i 
1950 Saiva Upanisads. With the Commentary of Sri Upanisad-brahma-yogin. 
Madras: Adyar Library. (Brhajjābāla Upanişad: pp. 87-128). 


Sathyanarayanan, R. 

2015 Saiva Rites of Expiation: A First Edition and Translation of Trilocanasiva’s 
Twelfth-Century Prayascittasamuccaya. With an introduction by Dom- 
inic Goodall. Pondicherry: IFP/EFEO. 


Tāntrikābhidhānakoša 

(TAK III) Tāntrikābhidhānakosa III. T—PH. Dictionnaire des termes techniques de la 
littérature hindoue tantrique. A Dictionary of Technical Terms from Hindu 
Tantric Literature. Wörterbuch zur Terminologie hinduistischer Tantren. 
Fondé sous la direction de Héléne Brunner, Gerhard Oberhammer 
et André Padoux. Direction éditoriale du troisiéme volume: Dom- 
inic Goodall et Marion Rastelli. Wien: Verlag der Osterreichischen 
Akademie der Wissenschaften, 2013. 

(TAK IV) Tantrikabhidhanakosa IV. B-L. Dictionnaire des termes techniques de la 
littérature hindoue tantrique. A Dictionary of Technical Terms from Hindu 
Tantric Literature. Wörterbuch zur Terminologie hinduistischer Tantren. 
Fondé sous la direction de Héléne Brunner, Gerhard Oberhammer 
et André Padoux. Direction éditoriale du quatriéme volume: Dom- 
inic Goodall et Marion Rastelli. Wien: Verlag der Osterreichischen 
Akademie der Wissenschaften, forthc. 


Tórzsók, Judit 

1999 ‘The Doctrine of Magic Female Spirits’. A critical edition of selected chapters 
of the Siddhayogesvarimata(tantra) with annotated translation and analysis. 
D.Phil. thesis, Merton College, Oxford. 


Vasudeva, Somdev 
2004 The Yoga of the Mālinīvijayottaratantra. Chapters 1-4, 7, 12-17. Pondi- 
cherry, Paris: IFP/EFEO. 


Wezler, Albrecht 


1983 ‘Der Inklusivismus-Begriff Paul Hackers.’ In: Inklusivismus: Eine indische 
Denkform, ed. by G. Oberhammer. Wien: Institut für Indologie, 61-91. 


183 


Index 


acarya, 32. 

Agamapramanya, 110n. 

Agni, 21, 36, 43n, 111n, 112, 115n, 117, 
117n, 147-148, 158, 166. 

ahimsa > non-harm, 11-12, 14-16, 112n, 
116, 122, 122n, 123n, 124n, 151-152, 
162, 168. 

akrodha, 12, 15, 15n. 

alms, alms-food > bhaiksa, bhiksā, 19, 
21, 33, 38, 38n, 58, 115, 166n. 

ancestor-offering > sraddha, 18n, 32—34, 
34n, 118n. 

aparigraha, 12, 14n, 15. 

Apastambadharmasütra, 6, 18-19, 23, 34. 

apramada, 14, 14n,15. 

argha, 32, 36. 

Arhat, 43, 43n. 

artha, 31, 107, 152. 

Arya, 6, 7, 36. 

a(sam)vyavaharika, 14, 14n. 

ascetic, 3-5, 7, 12-13, 13n, 14, 16, 18, 
18n, 19, 21-22, 28, 30, 40, 42-46, 
110, 110n, 111n, 112n, 114n, 115, 122, 
126, 127n, 147-148, 154, 167. 

ash > bhasman, 3, 8, 18, 22, 27-30, 57-58, 
60—61, 110, 110n, 111, 111n, 112, 112n, 
113n, 114, 114N, 115n, 147-148, 158, 161. 

ash-bath > bhasmasnana, 22, 28—29, 56, 
58, 61, 112-113, 113n, 115n. 

ash-doctrine > bhütisasana, 113—114, 148. 

Asoka, 6, 7, 18. 


asrama, 

as discipline, 4, 7, 9, 13, 13n, 17, 18, 18n, 
19-21, 23, 23n, 24, 24n, 27, 27n, 31, 
37-42, 44-46, 108, 108n, 116, 116n, 
147-149, 154, 158, 161, 168, 170. 

as residence, 7, 19-20, 27, 108, 108n, 
117n, 147. 

asteya > not stealing, 11, 14, 15, 15n, 21, 
116, 125, 153, 162, 168. 

Atimarga, 5, 109n. 

avyanga, 158, 167, 167n. 


bathing > sndna, 8, 18, 22, 24, 28-30, 
36, 56—58, 60—61, 111—112, 112n, 114n, 
116, 119, 121n, 148, 158, 163. 

Baudhāyana(dharmasūtra), 18. 

Bengal, Bengali, 4, 49, 58. 

Bhagavadgītā, 9, 13n, 16—17, 44n, 45—46. 

bhaiksa, bhiksā > alms-food, 19, 21, 33, 
38, 38n, 58, 115, 166n. 

bhakti, 5, 11, 11n, 12, 14n, 15—17, 24, 30, 
44. 44n, 162, 164, 168n. 

Bhanu, 165. 

Bhaskara, 168. 

bhautika, 22, 22n, 109, 147, 167. 

Bhavisyapurana, 110n, 132n, 157, 157n, 
158, 158n, 159, 165, 165n, 166n, 
171n. 

bhiksu, 41, 41n, 42. 

bhojaka, 158, 165n, 167—169, 171, 171n. 

Brahma, 19, 43n, 113, 113n. 


A Saiva Utopia 


brahmacarin > celibate, 18-19, 39-41, 
108-109, 111n, 126, 147-148, 154, 
166-167. 

brahmacarya > chastity, 7, 8, 11, 14, 14n, 
15, 21, 22, 22n, 40, 58, 116, 125, 153, 
162, 168. 

Brahmanism, Brahmanical, 3, 5-6, 17-18, 
25, 30, 34. 41, 43, 43n, 44n, 45-46, 
107n, 112n, 127n, 167n. 

Brahmin, 5-6, 8, 13, 13n, 20-21, 25, 29n, 
30, 32-34, 34n, 36-39, 42, 44-46, 107, 
111n, 113n, 115n, 117n, 118, 118n, 120, 
125n, 150n, 152, 165. 

Buddha, 43, 43n. 

Buddhism, Buddhist, 4n, 6, 12, 22n, 
38, 38n, 42-44. 


Candala, 14n, 25, 119, 120n, 160. 

caste, 16-17, 26-27, 43, 119, 120n, 150, 
165, 169. 

charity, 39, 118, 169. 

class > varna, 6-8, 12-14, 17-18, 20, 
26, 27n, 30, 36, 40, 42, 44, 107, 149, 
150n, 159, 165. 

cleanliness > sauca> pure > purity, 12-15, 23, 
25-26, 34, 44n, 45, 112n, 114-115, 115n, 
122, 125, 126n, 151, 153, 163, 168-169. 

cow, brown cow > kapila, 25, 34n, 42, 
112n, 115n. 


dana, 12, 14-15, 21, 33-35, 37, 40, 116, 
163-165, 165n. 

Devanāgarī, 4, 53—55. 

dharma, 3-6, 6n, 7-8, 10, 12, 14, 14n, 
15-18, 29n, 31, 38-42, 44, 44n, 45, 
107, 120n, 148, 150, 153. 

Dharmaputrikā, 4, 51, 51n, 52—53, 55. 

Dharmašāstra, Dharmašāstric, 3—6, 6n, 
8—9, 14, 17—18, 20—22, 22n, 25, 36-40, 
44-46, 127n. 

Dharmasūtra, 6—7, 7n, 18, 18n, 23, 23n. 

dīksā, 19, 26-27, 27n, 29-30, 115n. 

domestic ritual, 7n, 28, 114n, 148. 

duhkhanta, 8—10, 12, 31, 

dvija, 7, 8n, 13, 13n, 33, 35-37. 39, 40, 
109, 118. 


eightfold observance, 11, 116, 121n, 171n. 


fast, fasting, 115. 

feeding, food » bhojana, 3, 8, 19, 21-22, 
32, 32n, 33-34, 34n, 35-38, 38n, 39, 
42, 44-46, 60, 110, 115, 116n, 117, 
118n, 119, 119n, 120n, 148, 150, 166, 
166n, 169, 169n. 

fire, 7n, 9n, 12, 13n, 17, 20, 20n, 21, 28, 
34, 37, 60, 107-108, 108n, 109-111, 
111n, 112n, 114n, 115n, 117n, 126-127, 
147, 165-167. 

flower-garden, 20, 24, 108, 116, 148. 

flowers, 43, 108, 108n, 109, 109n, 166. 


gender, 46. 

gods, 21, 28, 40, 43, 43n, 113, 113n, 153, 
158, 166. 

Grantha, 49, 54—55. 

grhastha » householder, 4, 7-8, 11, 13n, 
14, 18, 18n, 19-23, 28, 32, 37-38, 
40-41, 45-46, 107—109, 111n, 112n, 
126, 126n. 

guest, guest reception, 32, 34, 36, 39, 
41, 44, 57, 108, 117, 117n, 118, 118n, 
120, 126, 149-150, 169-170. 

guru, gurususrūsā, 9n, 14, 14n, 15, 40, 60. 


hairdress, 115. 

Hara, 15n, 35, 113n, 115n, 117. 

hell(s) » naraka, 21, 25, 42, 60, 109, 
123, 152, 160, 166-167. 

heretic > pasanda, 7, 18, 18n, 42-43. 

hetuvada > logic, 30, 42, 45, 114n. 

hierarchy, hierarchical, 18, 44, 44n, 45. 

householder > grhastha, 4, 7-8, 11, 13n, 
14, 18, 18n, 19-23, 28, 32, 37-38, 
40-41, 45-46, 107-109, 111n, 112n, 
126, 126n. 

Hrdayasiva, 26n. 


impure, impurity, 24n, 25-26, 32. 

inclusivist, inclusivism, 30, 43-44, 44n, 
107n. 

Indra, 36, 43n, 118. 

inscription (s), 4, 4n, 5. 

Isa, Iévara, 20, 108, 117n, 147. 


Jainism, Jaina, 6, 11, 38, 42—43, 43n, 44. 
Javanese, 14n. 


186 


Index 


Kali Yuga, 42. 

kama, 10, 31, 107. 

Kashmir, 4, 49, 59, 62. 

Kaundinya, 5, 6n, 9, 10n, 14, 15n, 23, 
23n, 112n, 125n, 115n. 

kind speech, 120, 170. 

Kriyasara, 75, 111n. 

Krsna, 9, 16. 

ksanti, ksama > forbearance, 11-13, 15, 
116, 121-122, 125, 151, 158, 162, 164, 
165, 171n. 

Kubera, 36, 43n, 118. 

Kumarila, 44, 44n. 

Kūrmapurāņa, 23n. 


Lakulisvara, 8. 

law, 11-13, 15, 17, 20, 29n, 107, 108, 
108n, 116, 120, 122, 123n, 124n, 125, 
127, 150, 152, 157—158, 165, 166, 168, 
170. 

lay (person), 3-5, 11n, 16—17, 27, 30, 32, 
38, 38n, 43-44, 46, 111n. 

linga, 3, 9, 43, 110, 161. 

Lingapurāņa, 15n, 23n, 111n. 

logic > hetuvada, 30, 42, 45, 114n. 


madhuparka, 32, 35-36, 117-118, 162, 
169n. 

Mahabharata, 6n, 18-20. 

Maga(s), 157-158, 165-166, 166n, 167, 

167n, 169. 

Magadharma, 158, 158n, 165. 

Mahadeva, 8. 

mahavrata > Great Observance, 3-4, 

10-11, 11n, 16, 38, 116n, 127n. 

Mahesvara, 4, 35, 113n, 117, 117n, 149, 

150. 

Mahesvaras, 17, 38n, 45, 117n. 

Malayalam, 49, 54, 131. 

Malinivijayottaratantra ( Malinivijayot- 
tara), 11n. 

mantra, 28-30, 32, 40, 46, 111n, 112n, 121, 
147. 

Manu, Manavadharmasastra, 12, 13n, 
15, 16n, 20, 22—23, 29n, 32, 40, 40n, 
44n, 109n, 115n, 124n, 126n. 

Medhatithi, 44, 44n. 

milk, 25. 


Mimamsaka, 44. 

mleccha > foreigner, 18, 39, 42. 

moon, 21, 22, 109n, 113, 123, 126, 148, 
166n. 

mouth-veil, 158, 165n. 

mukti, 107. 

muni, 30, 42, 56. 


Nepal, Nepalese, 4, 4n, 8, 49, 55-56, 
58-59, 62, 133. 

Newari, 50-53. 

naisthika, 7, 22, 22n, 109, 109n, 167. 

Nandikešvara, 3, 8, 20, 107, 120n, 147, 
151—153, 159. 

niyama, 12, 14, 15n, 116. 

nyāja, anyaya, 21, 160. 


orthodox, orthodoxy, 23, 25, 32, 41-42, 
44, 46, 112n. 


palasa, 25. 

Pancaratra, 39, 44. 

Parakhyatantra, 26. 

parvan, 113, 126, 126n, 166. 

pasanda > heretic, 7, 18, 18n, 42-43. 

Pasupata, 3, 8—9, 11, 14, 16, 18, 22, 38, 
38n, 39, 44, 45-46, 111n, 115n, 127n. 

Pasupatasiitra, 5, 5n, 9, 14, 14n, 23, 23n, 
112n, 115n. 

Pasupati, 3, 8. 

Patanjali, 11-12. 

Prayascittasamuccaya, 26, 26n, 27. 

pure, purity, purified > pita, sauca, 
12-14, 14n, 15, 23, 23n, 25-26, 26n, 
27, 34, 44n, 45, 61-62, 112n, 114-115, 
115n, 122, 125, 126n, 151, 153, 161, 
163, 168-169. 


Ravi, 166, 168-169. 

Revakhanda, 37, 37n. 

rite, ritual, 3, 4, 6n, 7n, 8-10, 13n, 17, 19, 
22, 24, 27-29, 29n, 30-34, 34n, 36-37, 
39-40, 41n, 44-46, 114n, 115, 126n, 127, 
148, 154. 

Rudra, 3, 8, 11, 111, 111n, 113, 113n, 
114n, 126, 127n, 147. 

rudragni, 111. 

rudraksa, 3, 27, 60, 110, 110n, 111, 111n, 
113n, 114n, 147-148. 


187 


A Saiva Utopia 


sacred thread, 36, 46, 110n, 111, 158, 
167, 167n. 

sacrifice, sacrificer > yajūa, yajamana, 15, 
29, 35, 37, 40, 112, 114, 117, 120-122, 
123n, 124-125, 125n, 126, 149, 151-152, 
164, 169, 171. 

sages, 42, 113, 113n. 

sama > calmness, 11, 15, 116, 123, 152, 
162, 168. 

samskara, 29-30, 32, 32n, 40n. 

samtosa > contentedness, 11-12, 15, 21, 
116, 124, 152-153, 168. 

Sanatkumara, 3, 120n. 

Sankhya, 42. 

Saiva Siddhanta, 25, 28, 38n, 46. 

Saivism, 4, 111, 44. 

Sarada, 43, 49, 53, 58-59. 

Satanika, 42, 157, 159, 165. 

satya > truthfulness, 11-14, 14n, 15, 15n, 
57, 59, 116, 116n, 124, 124n, 125n, 
162, 165, 168. 

Sauca > pure, purity, purified, cleanliness, 
12-14, 14n, 15, 23, 25-26, 26n, 27, 44n, 
45, 62, 112n, 114-115, 115n, 122, 125, 
126n, 151, 153, 163, 168-169. 

Sauradharma, 157-158, 158n, 161, 168. 

sex, 21, 109, 126, 126n, 154, 166. 

shaving, 24, 28n, 29, 30, 115, 115n. 

sin (s), 29n, 112, 115n, 152. 

Siva, 3-5, 8, 9, 9n, 10-12, 14, 16-18, 20-21, 
21n, 22, 24, 25-39, 42-43, 45, 56-58, 
60-62, 107, 108, 108n, 109, 109n, 110, 
110n, 111, llln, 112n, 113, 113N, 114, 
114n, 116, 116n, 117, 117n, 118, 118n, 119, 
119n, 120-121, 121n, 122, 122n, 123-125, 
125n, 126, 126n, 127, 127n, 147-151, 
153-154, 157, 159—162, 164, 170. 

stvabrahmacārin, 22, 38, 40, 41, 109. 

Siva-devotion » sivabhakta, sivabhakti, 
3, 8, 11, 11n, 24, 26, 27n, 28, 30-35, 
37-39. 41, 45, 57, 58, 61, 117n, 118n, 
161, 162, 164. 

Sivadharma, 3, 4n, 5n, 6, 8-11, 11n, 14, 
16-18, 20, 23-24, 24n, 25, 28-30, 
30n, 31-34, 36-39, 44-46, 50, 51n, 
107, 107n, 110n, 113n, 114n, 116, 116n, 
127n, 131, 147, 149, 157-158, 158n, 
159, 161, 166n, 170n. 


Sivadharmasamgraha, 4, 50, 51-53, 55. 

Sivadharmasastra, 3-4, 4n, 5, Sn, 8, 14, 
16-17, 20-21, 23, 23n, 24-25, 28-34, 
36, 38, 38n, 39, 40-42, 42n, 43, 44n, 
45-46, 49—56, 58, 62, 63n, 111n, 112n, 
125n, 131, 149n, 157, 157n, 158-159, 
166n, 167n, 169n, 170n, 171n. 

Sivadharmottara, 4, 4n, Sn, 37, 40-41, 
46, 50—53, 55, 114n, 157. 

stvadīksā, 25n. 

sivagni, 60—61. 

sivagrhasramin, 21, 28, 109, 127n. 

stvagrhastha, 45, 45n. 

Šivapurāņa, 27. 

stvarca, Sivarcana, 9, 12n, 18, 21, 35, 60, 
109, 160—162. 

sivasamskara, 25, 27, 29—32. 

stvasrama, 9, 17, 20—21, 24, 27—28, 31, 
33—38, 45—46, 59—60, 107, 107n, 108n, 
110, 116, 117n, 132, 149, 158, 158n. 

Sivasramadhyaya, 4, 15, 17, 20, 36, 45, 
49-55, 63, 131, 157. 

stvāšrama, Sivasramin, 9, 17, 20—21, 24, 
28, 30-31, 33-34, 36, 38, 45-46, 59-60, 
107, 107n, 108n, 110, 116, 117n, 121, 132, 
149, 158, 158n. 

stvavaikhānasa, 22, 38n, 110. 

Sivayogin, 16, 20n, 34, 38n, 39, 45, 61, 
107n, 114n, 115n, 116, 122n, 150, 
162. 

Sivopanisad, 4, 4n, 9n, 21n, 28-29, 30, 
46, 50, 52—53, 55, 112n. 

Skandapurana, 25n, 37, 113n. 

Smarta, 6, 12, 17-18, 22-24, 29, 31-32, 
34. 36-39, 42, 44-46, 149. 

snana > bathing, 8, 18, 22, 24, 28-30, 
36, 56—58, 60-61, 111-112, 112n, 114n, 
116, 119, 121n, 148, 158, 163. 

snataka, 32, 38-39, 42, 45. 

social rank, 38, 45. 

Soma, 29—30, 43n. 

South India, South Indian, 49, 54, 57-60, 
62, 64, 132, 133. 

Southeast Asia, 4. 

srāddha > ancestor-offering, 32—34, 34n, 
118n. 

Srotriya, 32, 38—39, 45. 

status, 6—7, 12, 13n, 16, 18, 22, 24—25, 
28-29, 31-32, 36-37, 39, 4446. 


188 


Index 


Südra, 20, 24, 24n, 25, 26n, 27-29, 29n, 
30—31, 39, 107, 116, 116n, 148, 165. 

Sumantu, 157, 165, 

Surya, 36, 43n, 118, 157, 157n, 158, 
158n, 161-162, 165, 167—170, 171n. 


Tantra, Tantric, 4, 11n, 25n, 31, 56, 61. 

Telugu, 49. 

Tirthankara, 43, 43n. 

Trilocanasiva, 26n, 27. 

tripundra > triple line, 28, 110, 110n, 
111, 111n, 112n, 158, 161. 


Umamahesvarasamvdda, 4, 24n, 50, 52—53, 
55. 

umamahesvaravrata, 10, 12, 31. 

upanayana, 7, 28n, 29-30. 

upavita » sacred thread, 36, 46, 110n, 
111, 158, 167, 167n. 

Utpaladeva, 11n. 

Uttarottaramahasamvada (Uttarottaratan- 
ira), 4, 51-53, 55. 


vaikhānasa, 40, 41n. 

Vaisnava, Vaisnavism, 42n, 44, 44n, 46. 

vanaprastha > forest dweller, 19-20, 22, 
41, 111n, 159. 

varna > class, 6-8, 14, 17-18, 20, 30, 36, 
40, 42, 44, 107, 159. 

varnasramadharma, 8, 17, 24. 

Varuna, 43n, 61. 

Vasisthadharmasütra, 18. 

Vayaviyasamhità, 27, 31-32. 

Vayupurana, 15n, 23n. 

Veda, Vedic, Vaidika, 6, 6n, 7, 7n, 18n, 
22, 22n, 25, 28, 28n, 29, 29n, 30, 32, 
32n, 33-34. 36, 40, 40n, 41n, 42, 44, 
46, 112n, 122, 127n, 150n, 151-152. 


vipra, 13, 20, 36-37, 61. 

Vīrašaiva, 30n, 111n. 

Visnu, 36, 40, 43n, 44, 113n, 118. 

Visnudharma, 15n, 39, 41-42, 42n, 44, 
44D, 46, 51n. 

Visnusmrti, 23n. 

vrata » observance, 3, 8, 10-12, 14, 19, 
21, 24, 31, 38, 42, 44, 59, 111n, 116, 
116n, 121n, 149, 158, 168, 171n. 

Vratisasana, 14n, 15n. 

Vrhaspatitattva, 14n. 

Vrsasarasamgraha, 4, 51-53, 55. 

vyavahara, 8, 14, 14n, 15n. 


wealth, 21-22, 109, 109n, 123-124, 147, 
152, 166-167. 

white robe, 158, 167, 167n. 

wife, 7n, 40, 109n, 126, 126n, 148, 154. 

woman, women, 10, 16-18, 20, 25-26, 
29, 31-32, 32n, 40-41, 107, 120n, 
126n, 150, 150n, 153, 165. 


Yajnavalkyadharmasastra, 13, 14n, 15n, 
44n. 

yama, 11, 14, 14n, 15n, 16n, 110n. 

Yamuna, 110n. 

yati, 13, 13n, 20, 22, 28, 30, 38n, 111n, 
112n, 161, 167n. 

yoga, 8-10, 13n, 16, 24, 43, 60, 116, 121, 
132, 164, 171. 

Yogasütra, 11, 14, 14n, 15n. 

Yogi Naraharinath, 5n, 25n, 33n, 49, 
55. 

yogin, 16-17, 22-24, 31, 37, 70, 108, 
108n, 111n, 112, 114n, 115n, 116, 127n, 
147-148, 166. 


Zoroastrian, 158, 165n, 167n. 


189 


IL TORCOLIERE * Officine Grafico-Editoriali d'Ateneo 
Università di Napoli L'Orientale 
prodotto nel mese di dicembre 2021 


