^5*SSIS* 


JAK  GOXDA 


VEDIC  LITERATURE 


A HISTORY 

OF  INDIAN  LITERATURE 


EDITED  BY  JAN  GONDA 


VOLUME  I 


Ease.  1 


1975 

OTTO  HARRASSOWITZ  • WIESBADEN 


JAS  GOXDA 


VEDIC  LITERATURE 

(SAMHITlS  AND  BRAHMAN^AS) 


1975 

OTTO  HARRASSOWITZ  • WIESBADEN 


A HISTOBY  OF  IXDL.4Y  LITERATURE 


Contents  of  ToL  I 


Fol.  I:  Veda  and  Upaniskads 

Fasc,  1:  J.  Gonda 

P.  Roiland 
J.  Taxenne 


Tedic  Literature 
Ritual  Sutras 
IJpaiiisads 


© Otto  Hanassowita,  Wleslmdea  1975 
Aite  Eechte  vorbelialleji 

Hiotc^mpMscIse  nBd  plsotofmecfcaiilsclie  Wiedergabe  ntir  mit 
aasdrticklicbfflr  Ge’nehinlgimg  des  Verlages 
G^mz^tbentcEmg:  Ml^mi  Zeitim^verlag  GmbH,  Eemptea 
Printed  la  Qemmny 
ISBH  3 447  5 


COXTEXTS 


Editor’s  Introduction  . . . . . . . . , . . . . . 1 

Chaptee  I Introduction  to  the  Ycda  in  general  and  the  Rgveia  in 

particular 

1.  General  introductory  definitions.  Composition  of  tlie 

JRgveda  . . . . 7 

2.  The  text  of  the  Rgveda  15 

3.  Chronology ; environment  and  culture  20 

4.  Development  of  ‘schools’;  appendices  and  ancillary 

literature 26 

5.  Commentaries 39 

6.  Survival  of  the  Veda  43 

7.  Study  of  the  Veda 55 

Chaptee  II  Poetry,  poet,  poem 

1.  Inspiration  and  poetry 65 

2.  The  poet 74 

3.  Sociology  and  performance 79 

4.  Ritual  application . • 83 

Chaptee  III  Contents  of  the  pgveda 

1.  Introduction ^3 

2.  Invitations  and  invocations ..  101 

3.  Apri  hymns  104 

4.  Praise  105 

5.  Prayers  - 108 

6.  Myths  - "114 

7.  Legends  a"*  .y  . 123 

8.  History • • • • 128 

9.  Riddles  ..  ..  ..  132 

10.  Speculative  hymns - 136 

11.  Magic  • ' 1^2 


YI  J.  Gouda  • Vedio  Literature 

12.  Ecstatic  practices . . . . 149 

13.  Erotic  poetry  . . 151 

14.  Morals  and  maxiiiis  153 

15.  Lyrics;  emotions  156 

16.  So-called  ballads  159 

17.  Xatnre  161 

18.  Ammais 166 

19.  Labour  songs . . 167 

20.  Irony;  bnmoTir  168 

21.  Danastutis  . . . . 170 

Chafteb  IV  T}i€  structure  of  the  Rgvedic  poems 

1.  Stanzas  and  metres  173 

2.  Structure  of  the  soktas 178 

3.  Introductory  and  final  stanzas  . . . . 185 

4.  Groupings  of  stanzas  189 

5.  ‘Composite’  hymns  191 

6.  Similarities  and  repetitions 193 

7.  Monologues,  dialogues,  the  akhyana  theory  . . . . 198 

Chapteb  V The  style  of  the  Vedic  hymns 

1.  The  Rgveda  from  the  stylistic  point  of  view  . . . . 211 

2.  Formulas,  parallelism  and  its  corollaries,  variation  221 

3.  Epithets 231 

4.  Brevity  236 

5.  Ambiguity  240 

6.  Imagery 248 

7.  Similes  . . . . 254 

8.  Other  stylistic  features 261 

Chapteb  VI  The  AtJmrvamia 

L Names  and  position  267 

2-  Genesis  and  recensions  of  the  Atharvaveda-Samhita  272 

3.  The  magical  sukt.as  277 

4.  Ritual  and  speculative  sukt-as  288 

5.  Style  and  st-nicture  298 

6.  AnciUaiy  and  exegetical  literature  ^ , . . . . 307 


Conter.ts  TH 

Chapter  VII  The  liturgical  Satnkita-e 

1.  Tne  Samaveda  . , . , . . . . . . . . , . . » 313 

2.  The  Yajiirreda  . . . . . . . . , . , , , . . . 323 

ChaftebYIII  The  Brahmans 

1.  General  introduction  . . . . . , . . . . , „ » - 339 

2.  The  texts , . . . . , . . 344 

3.  Chronology  . . . , , . . . 357 

4.  The  brahmanas  as  historical  sources  . . . . . . 361 

5.  Interpretation  and  argumentation  . . . . . . « . 3§8 

6.  Disputations . . . , 379 

7.  Mjdhs,  legends  and  ri,aiTative  episfxles  . . . . . . 384 

8.  Style  and  structure  . . . . . . . . 410 

Chapter  IX  The  Aranyahas  . . . . . . 423 

Glossary 433 

Abbreviations 437 

Index  , . . . 445 


EDITOR^S  IXTRODUCTIOX  TO  THE  HISTORT 


One  of  tlie  main  reasons  why  Indian  thought  and  Indian  civilization  make 
so  fascinating  a field  of  stndv  and  researek  lies  in  their  unique  historr  and 
remarkable  stnictiire-.  Indian  ciTilization  has  its  roots  in  an  aneient  heritage, 
in  that  pattern  of  culture  wMeh  is  sometimes  called  archaic  or  semi-priiriltive, 
sometimes  also  x>re-  or  non-modem.  This  cnltiire,  or  rather  stmcdnre  of  the 
human  mind,  is,  in  the  main,  characterized  fey  presenting,  in  some  essential 
features,  striking  contrasts  to  our  modem  ‘mentalite.’  Without  l':>eiiig  onesided]}’ 
intellectual,  it  gives  free  scope  to  the  emotional  and  imaginative  sides  of  hiiinari 
nature;  our  distinction  between  the  subjective  and  the  objective,  our  contrast 
between  reality  and  appearance  are  almost  meaningless:  the  realm  of  nature 
and  the  realm  of  man  are  hardly  distin,giiished ; thought  often  appears  wTappecl 
in  imagination;  logical  reasoning  is  by  no  means  lacking  but  blended  v&ith 
affective  and  irrational  tendencies : the  men  of  light  and  leading  have  a bent  for 
the  speculative,  more  or  less  visionar}-',  mode  of  apprehension,  transcending 
experience : they  are  preferably:  concerned  vvith  man  himself,  Ms  nature  and 
destiny.  On  such  a basis,  reflected  in  many  products  of  their  literature,  and 
without  denying  these  origins,  the  Indians — anthropologically  a mixture  of 
immigrant  Aryans  and  ‘autochthonous^  peoples  of  other  descent — ^gradually 
elaborated  a many-sided,  highly  developed  civilization.  This  civilization  is  in 
no  small  measure  characterized  by  unity  in  diversity,  by  homogeneity  not- 
ivithstanding  the  utmost  variety  and  complexity  of  its  ethnic  composition ; by 
a multitude  of  languages  and  a wealth  of  different  cultural  patterns ; charac- 
terized also  by  considerable  diversity  in  mental  character  and  enormous 
differences  in  religion  and  social  customs,  beliefs  and  practices  varying  widely 
both  regionally  and,  within  a given  region,  from  class  to  class.  Tiliiie  preserving 
the  cohesion  of  its  cultural  provinces — ^religion,  art,  literature,  social  organi- 
zation— to  an  unusual  degree  and  on  the  other  hand  acquiring  full  scope  for 
intellectual  effort  and  pursuits  it  can  glory  in  remarkable  achievements  in 
various  fields. 

Owing  to  the  integration  of  a large  variety  of  heterogeneous  elements  the 
Indian  civilization  constitutes  a very  complex  and  as  to  its  main  current 
remarkably  continuous  whole.  As  it  covers  the  whole  of  life  it  has  social  and 
religious,  economic,  artistic  and  literary  aspects.  From,  the  religious  point  of 
view  it  is  an  utterly  diverse  conglomerate  of  cults,  practices,  doctrines  and  ways 
of  life.  Viewed  from  the  angle  of  sociology  it  is  a stratified  system  of  social 
classes  w’Mch  is,  at  least  in  traditional  India,  not  only  given  religious  sanction 


2 Editor's  Introduction  to  the  History 

but  also,  liie  fnaiiy  other  £eids  of  human  effort,  impregnated  by  a eharaeteristic 
Tiew  of  life  and  the  world.  The  more  or  less  constant  elements  of  this  conglom- 
erate. the  main  features  of  the  Indian  'great  tradition’  are.  to  a considerable 
extent,  the  belief  in  an  eternal,  fundamental  principle  (brahman),  the  ultimate 
source  and  goal  of  all  existence,  the  One  that  is  the  All  and  sole  reality:  the 
reco'^mition  of  a pristine  body  of  religions  literature  as  an  absolute  authority, 
howeTer  "anknoriii  its  contents : a deep-rooted  want  for  assniniiig,  mainlining, 
and  clinging  to  eontirmity : a eraTing  for  a firm  foundation  on  which  to  build 
orif/s  life  and  ideals,  and  the  eoniderice  that  one’s  own  existence  and  the  culture 
of  the  eommiinlty  to  which  one  belongs  are  founded  on  an  eternal  and  iofailible 
basis:  the  belief  in  karman,  and  its  compiement,  the  almost  generally  accepted 
doctrine  of  tTaii,smi,gratioii ; the  conviction  that  man’s  best  endeavour  should 
be  directed  towards  escaping  from  impermanence  or  final  emancipation ; a com- 
'plex  px)hthdsm’  subsumed  in  a fundamental  monotheism;  a tendency  to 
mysticigin  and  monistic  philosophy ; a propensity  to  assimilate  rather  than  to 
excludes  or  to  abandon  what  once  has  been  adopted. 

This  cdviikation  is  expressed  and  reflected  by  an  unintemipted,  immense  and 
utterly  varied  literary  production  from  the  JRgveda  onward  w’Mch,  while 
continuaUy  transfc^rnimg  and  rejuvenating  itself,  has  always  been  subject  to 
processes  of  adaption  and  a&simiiation,  A more  than  superficial  study  of  many 
chapters  of  this  literature  requires  of  the  reader,  to  some  de,gree,  familiarization 
with  a non-modem  'mentality’ : with  a dynamic  conception  of  the  cosmic 
events ; with  reli,gious  convictions  indissolubly  associated  with  social  life ; with 
a more  or  less  pronounced  tendency  to  be  in  conformity  with  tradition  and 
socio-reMgious  norms  and  ideals;  with  m^i^hical  formulations  of  thought  which, 
though  pjrodccts  of  imagination,  are  far  from  being  mere  fantasy ; with  various 
forms  of  si^cuktion  that,  as  a rule  unrestricted  by  disciplined  confrontation 
with  the  results  of  objective  and  analytical  investigation,  found  unlimited 
possibilities  for  development.  He  wiB  be  impressed  by  a iunuiant  imagmation 
and  a great  narrative  po'wer ; by  a sense  of  the  beauty  of  nature  as  w’ell  as  rec- 
opiition  of  spiritual  values : by  the  consciousness  of  man’s  close  and  intimate 
relation  with  his  natural  surroundings  in  general  and  his  fellow^sMp  with  the 
other  living  creatures  in  particular.  If  he  is  not  a professional  Indologist  he  will 
le&ra.  that  India  has,  throughout  many  centuries,  not  only  tended  to  the  practice 
of  selTdeiiial , quic-tism  and  asceticism,  but  also  to  addiction  to  the  pleasures  and 
luxuries  of  life : that  she  delighted  in  the  things  of  the  senses  no  less  passionately 
than  in  the  thirigs  of  the  spirit:  that,  w’hile  aspiring  to  noble  ideals  of  conduct, 
tedemnee  and  humanity,  shewusnot  averse  to  extracting  all  happiness  possible 
from  mrthlj  existence.  He  will  hear  about  cunning  and  unscrupulous  statecraft 
&•;>  w eh  as  cocasional  strenuous  effort  in  the  province  of  applied  knowiedge  and 
p’t-at  aeiiievements  in  art  and  mathematics.  Acquainting  himself  with  the 
‘mratm  .^teratures  he  will  comprehend  the  impact  of  Islam,  of  the  West,  the 
sairdi  '.a’'  modem  ideas,  the  influence  of  western  ways  of  life;  witness  also 


Editor’s  IrAtrodiietion  to 


3 


Hist c 13: 

remarkable  oistbursts  of  iBtelleetiial  aetiTitj,  trarisformations  in  soeial  and 
religion, s ideas,  graflnal  transitions  firom  a traditional  to  a mrxlem  societv,  a 
critical  outlook  on  the  past,  new  aspirations  for  the  future,  a zeal  for  reform  and 
remifidelliiig  of  the  orth'odox  beliefs  and  traditional  habits.  In  short,  when  placed 
in  the  context  of  the  cultural  inheritance  this  iiniquelv  rich  and  manj-sicled 
literature  wiE  introduce  him  to  the  development  of  the  hmrmniias  indim  in 
all  its  aspects. 

However,  the  reader  will  also  have  to  aeeustGin  himself  to  an  unfamiJiar 
Mstorieal  baek,groimd,  to  books  of  unusual  length,  to  poems  and  prose  works  of 
uncommon  structure,  frequent  repetitions  of  themes  and,  not  infrequently, 
richness  of  material  and  detaE  and  elaborateness  of  style.  In  traditional  India 
the  identity,  biography,  and  eircumstanees  in  life  of  the  ant, hors  and  the  dates 
of  the  composition  of  their  works  are  as  a rule  not  so  important  as  in  the  West. 
In  the  majoritir  of  cases  d,ates  are  only  known  approximately.  The  |>ers:C)iis  of 
the  authors  or  compilers  are  not  infreqi2e,nti,y  obliterated,  or  even  fated  to  remain 
anommons  for  ever.  Where  we  wnuld  like  to  base  our  historical  research  on 
reliable  facts  the  obIj  information  given  to  a student  of  Indian  literature  often 
consists  of  a mythologized  biography  or  some  vague,  general  and  contradietoiy 
statements.  This  is  not  only  due  to  the  fact  that  most  literary  w’orks  are  little 
historically  conditioned  but  also,  and  in  many  cases  primarily,  to  the  well- 
known  tendency  of  pre-literate  and  traditional  societies  to  subordinate  the 
individual  to  the  group ; to  the  static,  and  theoretically  unchangeable  nature  of 
the  tradltionai  Indian  society  and — under  the  mfluenee  of  an  agelong  belief  in 
the  secondary  reality  of  all  empirical  existence,  in  the  almost  absolute  depend- 
ence on  the  power  of  karman  and  the  continuous  divine  interference  in  mundane 
affairs — ^to  a comparatively  weak  sense  of  individuality. 

With  a few  noteworthy  exceptions  aH  other — medieval  and  modem — Indian 
literatures  depend  on,  or  are  largely  influenced  b}”,  the  ancient  Sanskrit  back- 
ground. To  say  that  Sanskrit  literature  alone  exceeds  that  of  Greece  or  Rome 
is  an  error.  It  is  almost  boundless,  in  the  sense  that  nobody  know^s  its  extent 
and  the  number  of  its  WTitings.  In  the  course  of  its  prolonged  literary  existence 
Sanskrit — cultivated  for  literary  purposes  long  after  it  had  ceased  to  be  a spo- 
ken language — underwent  various  and  important  changes.  l^Tiile  many  great 
authors,  fond  of  displaxing  their  erudition,  always  endeavoured  to  comply 
with  the  recognized  standards,  striving  after  grammatical  correctness  aii,d 
stylistic  elaboration,  there  is,  especially  in  technical  or  non-brahminicai  works, 
abundant  evidence  of  a mixed,  or  popular,  incorrect  Sanskrit.  It  will  be  seen 
that  the  origin  of  most  of  the  ‘modem’  literatures  of  the  Indo- Aryan  languages 
which,  through  a Mddle  Indian  fPrakrit)  stage,  developed  from  Old  Indian, 
is — ^like  that  of  the  Middle  Indian  Pali  and  Ardha-Magadhi^ — connected  with 
the  spread  of  religious  ideas.  Whereas,  after  the  arrival  of  Islam,  Mus^Iim  and 
Persian  influence  extended  to  ail  major  linguistic  areas  calling  into  existence 


4 


Editor’s  Introduction  to  the  History 


some  Muslim  literatures,  the  earliest  phase  of  the  ‘modem’  literatures  repre- 
sent, in  their  devotional  poetry  and  allied  productions — much  of  which  strongly 
influenced  by,  or  even  translated  from,  Sa-nskrit — ^Hindu  revivalism.  In  course 
of  time  new  literary  genres  were  developed.  The  earliest  literature  of  the  Tamil 
South — which  next  to  the  Sanskrit  North  may  claim  one  of  the  longest  literary 
traditions  of  the  world — ^was,  with  a specifically  south  Indian  character  and 
secular,  independent  of  Sanskrit.  However,  in  all  four  great  Dravidian  languages 
the  influence  of  the  dominant  classical  language  of  the  North  increased  con- 
siderably, leaving  traces  not  only  in  the  language  but  also  in  the  themes  of  these 
literatures. 

The  plan  of  this  work  reflects,  not  only  the  increase  in  factual  knowledge 
and  the  wdening  of  our  horizon,  but  also  the  changed  attitudes  of  the  last 
sixty  years.  While  much  space  is  allotted  to  Sanskrit  literature,  the  literary 
works  written  in  the  Mddle  Indian  languages  receive  extensive  treatment  and 
much  more  importance  than  was  possible  in  Winternitz’  days  had  to  be  given 
to  the  modem  literatures.  A considerable  part  of  the  incorporated  material  has 
never  been  described.  Those  sections  which  already  found  a place  in  the  works 
of  our  predecessors  are  generally  much  enlarged;  old  matter  had  to  be  brought 
up  to  date  and  a wealth  of  fresh  information  to  be  included. 

The  dissimilarity  of  the  contributions  in  size  and  character  can  easily  be  ex- 
plained. Their  length  has  to  depend  on  the  scope  of  the  particular  subjects 
themselves  and  their  relative  importance ; on  the  ambit  and  the  state  of  pre- 
servation of  the  sources,  the  progress  of  modem  research,  and  the  extent  of  the 
relevant  secondary  literature.  It  should  however  be  realized  that  every  contrib- 
utor has  to  make  his  choice,  because  the  literature  of  India  is  on  a gigantic 
scale  and  many  of  its  provinces  are  insufficiently  investigated.  Since 
it  may  be  expected  that  a large  class  of  reader  will  require  more  information, 
whether  factual  or  critical,  in  richer  detail  than  the  size  of  this  History  per- 
mits, contributore  are  not  sparing  with  footnotes  and  bibliographies  directing 
to  the  textual  or  historical,  primary  or  secondary  sources. 

Unity  of  method  and  approach  would  be  unrealizable  in  an  enterprise  under- 
taken by  more  than  forty  collaborators,  first  because  research  has  not  to  the 
same  extent  made  progress  everywhere,  and  in  the  second  place  because  it  is 
impossible  to  insist  on  so  many  scholars  adhering  to  one  and  the  same  school  of 
literary  study.  Modem  principles  of  literary  research  have  as  yet  hardly  been 
applied  to  Indian  literature  and  the  application  of  methods  that  have  proved 
to  be  appropriate  and  to  the  purpose  in  English  or  other  modem  literatures  of 
the  West  cannot  be  expected  to  lead  to  any  considerable  result  if  they  are 
slavishly  imitated,  in  any  case,  they  should,  in  prolonged  preparatory  work  of 
small  compass,  be  put  to  the  test  and  adapted  to  the  study  of  Asian  literatures 
before  they  can  give  us  the  lead  in  producing  a comprehensive  handbook.  So, 


Editor’s  Introduction  to  the  History 


5 


each  author  has  been  encouraged  to  deal  with  his  subject  in  the  manner  he 
feels  is  most  appropriate.  Some  collaborators  will  not  be  able  to  omit  technicali- 
ties peculiar  to  the  branch  of  knowledge  they  are  dealing  with,  others  will  have 
to  enter  into  philological  particulars.  But  many  of  them  will  take  the  opport- 
unity to  dwell  on  style  and  structure  of  the  poems  and  prose  w^orks  under 
examination ; to  focus  attention  on  their  imagery  or  narrative  procedures ; to 
study  them  from  the  aesthetic  point  of  view;  to  discuss  questions  of  authorship 
and  borrowing  or  to  evaluate  some  literary  text  from  the  standpoint  of  an 
historian;  to  enlarge  upon  the  cultural  significance  of  a genre  or  a particular 
work  or  on  the  important  influence  exerted  by  the  social-religious  structure 
of  the  Old-Indian  society  upon  the  motivation  of  many  poems,  narrative  works 
and  a wealth  of  other  texts  as  well  as  upon  the  characters  of  the  authors' 
personages,  the  sort  of  stories  and  subjects  on  which  they  play  their  parts,  the 
scenes  of  action  and  the  atmospheres  in  which  the  stories — ^in  the  broad  sense  of 
the  term — ^take  place. 

While  including,  without  regard  to  their  standard  of  merit  and  without  any 
other  limitation,  many  works  and  ‘genres'  that  do  not  satisfy  any  modem 
Western  criteria  the  present  editor  is  fully  aware  of  the  fact  that  those  scholars 
who  study  so-called  modern  literatures  of  the  West  often  exclude  all  non- 
connotative  usage  of  a language  from  the  sphere  of  their  interest,  or  limit 
themselves  practically  to  lyrical  poetry,  novels  and  other  forms  of  fiction. 
However,  while  dealing  with  ‘genres’  and  subjects  which  are  nowadays  in  the 
W^est  not  generally  included  in  surveys  of  literature  we  have  not  departed  from 
what  in  describing  Indian  literature  is  long  since  usual.  That  is  to  say,  it  has 
been  our  endeavour  to  give  an  account  of  the  whole  written  cultural  heritage  of 
the  Subcontinent  not  even  omitring  occasional  references  to  oral  traditions.  The 
works  on  various  religious  and  scientific  subjects,  which  in  Sanskrit  outnumber 
the  helles-lettres  many  times,  have  had  a greater  cultural  value  than  the  latter. 
Religious  hymns,  ritual  handbooks,  special  works  on  arts  and  sciences, 
complicated  philosophical  treatises  discussing  transcendent  reality  will 
arrest  no  less  attention  than  epics,  dramas,  fables,  narratives  or  grand  court- 
poetry,  over-elaborated  prose  novels  or  records  of  the  past  composed  by 
men  who  were  more  interested  in  the  patterns  of  events  than  in  the  events 
themselves. 

All  this  is  by  no  means  a disadvantage  because  any  onesided  procedure, 
especially  the  exclusive  appHcation  of  an  ahistorical  method,  would  entail  the 
serious  risk  of  over- emphasizing  formal  points  of  view.  Most  ‘modem’  definitions 
of  literature  would,  when  applied  to  the  Indian  literary  inheritance,  involve  an 
enormous  amputation  and  mutilation.  They  would  imply  ignoring  many  of  the 
most  representative  works ; isolating  literature  from  the  other  provinces  of  the 
Indian  culture  and  from  the  life  of  the  Indian  peoples;  neglecting  historical 
connexions  and  ecMpsing  the  significance  which  the  literary  works  have  from 


6 


Editor’s  Introductioa  to  the  Historj^ 


the  point  of  view  of  the  history  of  civilization ; disregarding  the  conditions  under 
which  they  were  produced,  the  status  of  their  authors  as  poets,  scholars,  devo- 
tees of  religion,  their  function  in  the  social  and  religious  life  of  the  Indian  con- 
tinent. Mterature — ^in  the  broad  sense  of  the  term — being  one  of  the  most 
important  products  of  a people’s  intellectual  activity,  will  always  remain  by 
far  the  most  essential  source  of  knowledge  of  a civilization.  Indian  literature, 
taken  as  a whole,  is  a unique  approach  to  the  study  of  human  evolution  in 
general,  and  of  the  development  of  religious,  artistic  and  philosophical  ideas  in 
particular. 


January  1975 


Jan  Gonda 


Jan  Gonda 


VEDIC  LITERATUBE 


Chapteb  I 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  VEDA  IN  GENERAL  AND  THE  RGVEDA 

IN  PARTICULAR 


2.  General  introductory  definitions.  Composition  of  the  Rgveda 

The  literature  of  the  Veda  is  one  of  the  most  original  and  interesting  pro- 
ductions of  human  endeavour.  Extending  over  many  centuries  and  consisting 
of  numerous  works  dealing  with  a variety  of  subjects  it  bears  an  exclusively 
religious^  stamp.  The  very  name  Veda,  primarily  signiljing  “Elnowledge/* 
designates  the  ‘Sacred  Lore’  which,  traditionally  considered  to  be  etemaP,  was 
believed  to  enable  the  experts  to  know  the  superhuman  powers  and  the  methods 


^ The  term  religious  taken  in  a wider  sense  including  also  outlook  and  ‘Welt- 
anschauung.’ 

2 As  might  be  expected  there  was  some  difference  of  opinion  as  to  the  content  of 
the  doctrine  of  the  divinity  and  eternity  of  the  Veda.  'IVhereas  according  to  !RV. 
10,  90,  9 the  main  elements  of  the  Veda  proceeded  from  Puxusa  (Prajapati)  (see 
p.  137f.),  some  ancient  authorities  (cf.  SB.  6,  1,  1,  8)  taught  that  it  was  in  the  be- 
ginning created  by  that  god,  to  whom  it  became  a firm  foundation — “hence  brah- 
man — the  (threefold)  Veda  is  the  foundation  of  everything” — , or  (SB.  11,  5,  8,  3; 
CJhU.  4,  17,  Iff.)  preferred  to  view  the  sacred  scriptures  as  being  extracted  by  the 
same  High  Being  from  the  three  deities  representing  the  threefold  universe  (Agni, 
Vayu,  Aditya);  according  to  BAU.  4,  5,  11  the  Veda  is  the  breath  of  the  Supreme 
Spirit,  to  AV.  19,  54,  3 it  came  into  being  from  Time.  See  e.g.  Kane,  H.Dh.  II, 
p.  352.  In  the  post-Vedic  period  the  doctrine  of  the  eternity  became  an  unassailable 
truth  which  the  ‘orthodox’  philosophers  tried  to  establish  by  means  of  logical 
arguments  (see  v.  GiiASENAJPP,  Lit.  Ind.,  p.  41).  Eternity  and  superhuman  origin 
imply  sanctity  and  supreme  authority;  the  orthodox  hold  that  nothing  is  cited  in 
the  Veda  from  history.  For  other  particulars:  J.  Mum,  Original  Sanskrit  texts,  HI, 
London  1873,  p.  321  (Index,  s.v.);  R.N.  Danbekab,  in  Univ.  of  Ceylon  Review  11 
(1953),  p.  135. 


8 


J.  Gonda  • Vedic  Literature 


of  mfluencmg  them®.  The  many  works  constitating  this  Hteratiire  are  as  to 
contents  and  outward  form  very  different.  They  comprise  the  fundamental 
'Collections’  (samhiid)  mostly  in  verse,  the  prose  explanations  (hrahmana),  in 
addition  to  these  the  more  esoteric  dranyakas  and  uyanisads,  and  finally  a 
considerable  number  of  ritual  handbooks  ( sutra ) and  ancillary  works.  The  term 
Veda  is  also  used  in  the  plural  to  denote  the  four  different  types  of  samhitd, 
those  of  the  laudatory  stanzas  (rc:  Rgveda),  of  the  sacrificial  formulas  {yajiLs: 
Yajurveda)^,  of  the  chants  to  be  sung  to  certain  fixed  melodies  {sdman:  Sama- 
veda),  and  the  Atharvaveda  comprising,  inter  alia,  magical  texts.  The  last  cor- 
pus, which  was  only  at  a later  date  recognized  as  canonical,  was  often  excluded. 
In  that  case  the  terms  “three  Vedas”  or  “threefold  Veda”  (trayl  vidyd)  denote 
the  three  types  of  sacred  texts  collected  in  the  other  sarnhitds.  The  term  Veda 
applies  to  all  works  belonging  to  one  of  these  four  divisions  {sarnhitds,  hrdh- 
manas  etc.)  in  general®  as  well  as  to  the  sarnhitds  in  particular.  Nowadays  we 
are  no  longer  inclined  to  assume®  as  more  or  less  self-evident  that  this  whole 
body  of  literature  came  into  existence  in  three  successive  periods  or  as  “three 
well-defined  strata.” 

In  the  only^  recension  preserved  to  us,  the  Rgveda-Samhita’ — “methodically 
arranged  collection  of  Vedic  verses  in  praise  of  deities” — ^as  a rule  hriefty 
Rgveda,  consists  of  1028  'hymns’  including  the  eleven  so-caUed  Valakhily-as 
which  are  inserted  after  hymn  48  of  the  eighth  book.  These  'hymns’  [sukta 
“well-recited  (text),  good  recitation”)®  are  grouped®  in  ten  'books’  {mandala 


® According  to  an  Indian  belief  worded  by  Sayana  (Introduction  to  AiB.)  the 
Veda  gives  man  information  on  the  supermundane  means  of  attaining  what  is 
desired  and  avoiding  what  is  evil  (undesirable).  Haug,  Ai.  B.  I,  p.  51  not  improb- 
ably surmised  that  the  frequency^  of  the  phrase  “who  knows  thus”  (ya  evam  veda ) 
in  the  hrdhmanas  etc.  has  contributed  to  the  general  application  of  the  name. 

* The  ancient  Vedic  texts  themselves  often  use  the  shorter  terms,  by  preference 
in  the  plural  (rcah,  yajuinai  etc.),  Rgveda  etc.  do  not  appear  before  AiB.  5,  32,  1. 

® Cf.  e.g.  Kaus.  1,  3 “The  sacred  tradition  (comprises)  mantras  and  hrdhmanas 
For  other  definitions  see  e.g.  Medhatithi  and  Kuiluka  on  Manu  2,  6,  Suresvara  on 
BAU.  2,  4. 

® With  F.  Max  Muxleb  (see  below,  p.22);  Macdonell,  H.S.L.,  p.  28  and  others. 

^ The  main  editions  are:  F.  M.  Muixeb  (with  Sayana’s  commentary),  Rig-Veda- 
Sanhita,  6 voL,  London  1849-1874,  2“^  ed..  The  hymns  of  the  Rig- Veda,  4 voL, 
London  1890-1892,  ^Varanasi  (Benares)  1966;  Th.  Aotbecht,  Die  Hymnen  des 
Ri^-eda  (in  transcription,  without  Sayana),  2 vol.,  Berlin  1861-1863,  ^Bonn  1877; 
WViesbaden  1955;  "^1968;  Rgveda-Samhita  published  by  the  Vaidic  Samshodhan 
Mandal  (editors  N.  S.  Soxtakke,  C.  G.  Kasheeab  and  others),  4 voL,  Poona 
1933—1946;  L.  Sabup,  !Rgarthadipika  (Rgveda-Samhita  with  Madhava’s  commen- 
tary^; see  below,  p.  41),  Lahore  1939—;  Vishva  Bandhxt,  Rgveda,  with  padapatha 
and  the  available  portions  of  the  commentaries  by  Skandasvamin  and  Ddgitha, 
the  vydkhyd  by  Venkata-Madhava  and  the  vrtti  by  Mudgala,  8 voL,  Hoshiarpur 
1963—1966. 

® Already  at  an  eazrly^  date  some  suktas  were,  in  accordance  with  their  contents 
or  rfuer  the  name  of  their  reputed  poet  or  their  initial  words,  given  names:  1,  164, 
beginning  asyd  vamdsya,  asyavamlya  (sukta)  (VasDhS.  26,  6);  8,  46,  an  Indra 


Introduction  to  the  Veda  in  general  and  the  ;^g\"eda  in  particular 


9 


‘‘cycle”)  winch  vary  in  length,  except  that  mandala  X contains  the  same  mim- 
ber  of  hymns  (191)  as  mandalu  one  of  the  facts  indicating  the  artificial 
character  of  the  arrangement.  The  number  of  stanzas  is  10462,  an  average  of 
about  ten  stanzas  to  each  hymn,  the  shortest  hymn  (1,  99)  comprising  only  one 
stanza,  the  longest  (9,  97)  fifty-eight;  the  number  of  words  165.007^K  In  bulk 
the  whole  samhitd  is  equivalent  to  the  surviving  poems  of  Homer. 

Whereas  the  division  into  ten  mandalorS — ^invariably  followed  in  the  West  in 
quoting  from  these  texts — ^is,  as  vdll  be  shown  presently,  an  historical  one,  there 
is  for  didactic  purposes  another,  later  and  purely  mechanical,  division  in 
“eighths”  ((istaJca)  of  about  equal  length.  Each  astaka  is  subdivided  into  eight 
“lessons”  (adkydya)^^,  each  of  the  latter  into  “groups”  (varga)  of  five  or  six 
stanzas.  Besides,  the  mm}4<^las  are,  likewise  for  practical  purposes,  mechanic- 
ally divided  into  “recitations”  (anuvdka). 

Rix  mandulas,  II  to  YU,  are  homogeneous  in  character  and  traditionally 
regarded  as  the  centre  of  the  whole  collection,  the  hymns  of  each  book  being 
composed,  or  rather  ‘seen’^^,  by  poets  of  the  same  family  which  handed  them 
down  as  its  heritage^^.  Mandcda  11  contains  the  hymns  of  the  Grtsamadas^^, 
HI  of  the  Visvamitras^®,  IV  of  the  Vamadevas,  V of  the  Atris,  VT  of  the 
Bharadvajas,  VII  of  the  Vasisthas^^.  The  tradition  is  bom  out  by  internal 
evidence:  there  are  some  typical  refirains^®;  the  names  of  the  ‘seers'  (rsi)  are 
not  infrequently  mentioned  in  the  hymns^®.  The  suJdas  contained  in  these 


hymn  ascribed  to  Vasa:  va^a  (sukta)  (AiA.  1,  5,  1);  10,  30,  directed  to  the  Waters 
( Apah)  or  to  Apam  Xapat : aponaptriyam  (SB.  1, 4,  9) ; 10,  90  sahasra^lrsasukta  (more 
commonly,  purusas^ukt^i)  (GautamaDhS.  19,  12  etc.). 

® See  e.g.  also  Macdonell,  H.S.L.,  p.  39;  Wintehnitz,  H.I.L.,  p.  57. 

Mandala  II  etc.  comprise  43,  62,  58,  87,  75,  104,  103,  114  auktas  respectively. 

P.  PoiJCHA,  in  ArchOr  13,  p.  105. 

H.  Oldenbeeg,  ui  ZDMG  41,  p.  508;  42,  p.  362  (=  K.S.,  p.  555;  563);  A. 
Beegaigne,  in  JA  1887  I,  p.  211;  1887  11,  p.  488. 

See  p.  65  ff. 

H.  OLDEisnEEG,  tiber  die  Liedverfasser  des  Rigveda,  ZDMG  42,  p.  199  ( = 
K.S.,  p.  568);  P.  L.  Bhaegava,  India  in  the  Vedic  age,  Aminabad  1971,  p.  166 
(tradition  on  the  families).  We  shall  hav'e  to  revert  to  the  importance  of  family 
traditions,  the  occurrence  of  ‘family  hymns,’  and  the  differences  in  tradition,  as 
apparent,  for  instance,  from  the  dprl  hymns. 

Cf.  A.  Wbbee,  in  SB  Berlin  1900,  p.  601  (in  part  antiquated  or  disputable); 
V.  G.  Rahijekab,  in  Vol.  Kaviraj,  Lucknow  1967,  p.  29  (poetic  merits,  stylistic 
devices,  relations  with  Indra) ; M.  K.  Vaeivia,  in  Centre  of  Adv.  Study  in  Sanskrit, 
Univ.  Poona  1 (1972),  p.  83.  M.  D.  Pakdit,  in  J.  Univ.  Poona,  Hum.  Sect.  25  (1967), 
p.  135  tried,  with  uncertain  results,  to  determine  the  interrelations  between 
Grtsamada  and  other  poets  of  the  family  books. 

Cf.  Beegaigne,  in  JA  1889  I,  p.  196;  U.  Ch.  Shaema,  in  Fel.  Vol.  Charudeva 
Shastri,  Delhi  1974,  p.  149. 

H.  Oldexbeeg,  tJber  die  Liedverfasser  des  Rgveda,  ZDMG  42  (1888),  p.  199 
(=  K.S.,  p.  568). 

See  p.  195. 

Cf.  Geassaiaistj.^,  RV.  iibers.  I,  p.  1. 


10 


tJ.  Gonda  • Vedic  Literature 


TatnUy-books’^®  are  arranged  on  a Tiniforta  plan  differing  ffom  that  of  the 
other  ma^idas.  The  first  gronp  of  suktas  is  invariably  addressed  to  Agni^^,  the 
second  to  Indra,  and  those  that  follow  to  other  gods^^.  Within  these  deity 
gronps  the  himins  are  arranged  according  to  the  decreasing  number  of  their 
stanzas^®.  Thus  the  Agoi  group  of  ma^^ala  11  begins  with  a sulda  of  sixteen 
stanzas  (2,  1)  and  ends  with  one  of  only  six  (2,  10)^^.  If  two  or  more  successive 
hymns  have  the  same  number  of  stanzas  those  in  a longer  metre  have  preced- 
ence. The  series  of  the  h3rmns  within  each  mandala  are,  in  principle,  likewise 
arranged  according  to  the  diminishing  number  of  their  hymns.  The  mandalcis 
II- VII  themselves  follow  each  other  according  to  the  increasing  number  of 
their  suktas,  if  allowance  is  made  for  obvious  later  additions^®.  These  facts 
combined  with  the  general  character  of  these  books  render  it  highly  probable 
that  they  formed  the  nucleus  of  the  whole  samJiitd.  Occasionally  this  principle 
of  arrangement  did  not  how’‘ever  prevent  the  redactors  from  grouping  together 
hymns  in  accordance  wdth  their  metrical  structure  or  their  more  special  con- 
tents'^. 

On  the  other  hand,  mandalas  I,  VIII,  and  were  not  composed  each  by 
a distinct  family  of  rsis,  but  consist  of  groups  of  hymns  based  on  identity  of 
authorship®®.  The  second  part  of  maMala  I (51-191)  is  held  to  be  the  earliest 
addition  to  the  nucleus  formed  by  the  family  books,  the  internal  arrangement 
of  -which  it  follows®®.  It  consists  of  nine  shorter  collections  each  of  which  is 


The  term  is  not  too  felicitous,  because  maridala  I and  part  of  X consist  also 
of  Tamily  collections.’ 

« One  should  not  (with  V^beb,  SB  Berlin  1900,  p.  617)  suggest  co-ordinating 
this  order  to  a successive  cult,  importance  or  precedence  of  the  gods  concerned. 
Agni  owes  this  position  to  his  being  the  purohita  “domestic  priest”  (RV.  1,  1,  1; 
KXn-e,  H.  Bh.  n,  p.  40)  whose  task  it  was  to  ward  off  evil  and  fulfil  other  priestly 
functions  by  bemg  “placed  before”  (cf.  Gowda,  in  Festschrift  Kirfel,  Bonn  1955, 

p.  ili  i ). 

, ““‘Z  details  see  A.  Bebgaigot,  Recherches  sur  I’histoire  de  la  Samhita 

du  5g-V^  I,  JA  1886  n,  p.  193 ; 1887 1,  p.  191 ; 518;  F.  Pbtcott,  On  the  arrange- 
ment  of  the  of  the  Rgv^eda,  JRAS  1884,  p.  381;  Oldenbebg,  H.R.  I,  p.  191  • 

VVebeb,  SB  Berlin  1900,  p.  603.  ^ 

RV  onT  particular  hymns  see  e.g.  also  Geldnee, 

.on3,o3;6,47;  /,33;  103;  VEiA>«:AE,at  JTJB  ll,2,p.  64(correspondenoeinmetre). 

617,  m ^’^5^*4  of  mandala  IV  the  numbers  of  their  stanzas  (429, 

34^3^i^rea’  20-23;  7,  12-14;  1,  165ff.,  and  especially  169-171;  4, 

6^2  6?fn  of  of  hymns  which  belong  closely  together 

6,  62-63;  10,  51-o3.  See  also  below,  p.  139;  201f.  J"  6 - 

For  a brief  surv-ey  see  Geldnee,  RV.  I,  p.  XTV. 

for*  nW  “ tlie  assumption  of  eclecticism 

tor  ntual  purposes);  Beegaigne,  JA  1887  Jl,  p.  488  (accordW  to  whom  some 
hy^  are  combmations  of  fragments).  to  wnom  some 

B^CT^il^RmTITTs/f  ^y°^;B==GAiGEE,  in  JA  1886  H,  p.  268;  A. 
ABTH,  in  RBM  19,  p.  134  Oeuvres,  n,  Paris  1914,  p.  8). 


Introduction  to  the  Veda  in  general  and  the  Rg\’eda  in  particular  11 


assumed  to  he  the  work  of  one  author  (or  family).  Their  names  are,  according 
to  tradition,  Savya,  Nodhas,  Para^ra,  Gotama,  Kutsa,  Kaksivat,  Parucchepa, 
Dirghatamas,  Agastya.  They  are  distinct  from  the  poets  of  the  family  books®®. 
The  jSrst  part  of  — ^which  must  have  combined  with  these  collections  at  a 
later  date — shows  considerable  affinity  with  maindala  VIII.  More  than  half 
its  suUas  are  attributed  to  members  of  the  Kanva  family,  to  which  belong  VUE, 
1-66®®.  There  are,  moreover,  in  both  collections  many  parallel  and  identical 
passages,  and  some  of  the  hymns  of  I are  in  the  favourite  strophic  metre 
(pra^dtha)^^  which  is  so  prevalent  in  VUE.  llandala  VIII  differs  in  other 
respects  jfrom  the  family  series:  it  does  not  begin  with  Agni  hymns  and  the 
hymns  67-103  are  ascribed,  not  to  Kanvas,  but  to  other  poets.  It  has  fewer 
hymns  than  VTE  and  consequently  infringes  the  rules  of  the  arrangement®*. 

Book  IX,  comprising  114  hymns  ascribed  to  more  than  sixty  poets,  consists 
entirely  of  suhtas  addressed  to  Soma  while  its  juice  is  in  process  of  clarif^dng 
(hence  soma  pavamdna).  Since  the  poets  belong  to  the  same  families  as  the 
authors  of  the  mandMas  II-VEI — ^typical  refrairis  peculiar  to  those  families 
re-appear  in  IX — and  the  family  books  include  not  a single  hymn  to  soma 
pavamdna — ^there  are  only  some  suktas  invoking  the  god  Soma  in  his  general 
character®® — ^it  cannot  be  doubted  that  this  mandoda  contains  the  soma  pava- 
mdna  hymns  gathered  for  liturgical  reasons  into  a single  collection  which  was 
added  after  the  books  I-VIII.  This  means  that  the  very  core  of  the  Vedic 
ritual  texts  is  separated  from  the  rest  which  is  on  the  whole  less  ritually 
oriented®®.  This  does  not  imply  that  the  hymns  of  IX  themselves  were  in  their 
entirety  of  recent  origin.  Some  of  them  are  probably  early  as  accompan3dng 
the  soma  ritual  which  goes  back  to  the  prehistoric  period®^.  It  is  however  very 
difficult  to  distinguish  chronological  stages  in  this  collection.  It  can  be  divided 
into  two  parts,  the  first  being  almost  exclusively  composed  in  the  gdyairl 
metre,  the  second  mainly  in  other  metres.  The  hymns  1-60  follow  each  other 
according  to  the  decreasing  number  (10-4)  of  their  starrzas,  an  arrangement 
not  adopted  in  the  second  part.  As  a whole  this  mandala,  concentrating  upon 

For  a not  wholly  successful  attempt  at  establishing  the  chronological  relations 
between  the  authors  of  book  I and  those  of  II-VII : A.  K.  Cbcakravobtv,  in  Cal- 
cutta Review  179  (1966),  p.  271. 

RV.  1,  1-50. 

On  the  Kanvas:  V.  G.  Rahtjbkab,  at  22  AIOC  31,  p.  32. 

3®  See  p.  lll,*n.  43 

3*  On  the  special  position  of  VUI — ^which  is  also  apparent  from  some  myths, 
e.g.  8,  77 — see  Hopeuns,  at  JAOS  17,  p.  23;  Bbunkhofeb,  at  KZ  25,  p.  367; 
Bebgaigne,  at  JA  1889 1,  p.  175;  HiuLEBBAmoT,  V.  M.  I,  p.  438;  Rbnoij,  in  Comm. 
Vol.  Nobel,  New  Delhi  1963,  p.  176. 

3®  Rbnou,  E.  V.  P.  IX,  p.  67;  120. 

33  For  mandala  IX  compare  p.  156  and  see  Geedxeb,  RV.  Ill,  p.  1;  Renou, 
E.  V.  P.  IX,  p‘.  1 (see  also  VEH,  p.  1) ; M.  Patel,  at  BhV  1,  p.  11 ; 2,  p.  1 ; E.  Gebow, 
in  JAOS  88,  p.  312;  translations  in  Renott,  o.c.;  S.  S.  Bhaw^,  The  Soma-hymns  of 
the  Rg\-eda,  3 vol.  (9,  1-70),  Baroda  1957-1962. 

3^  Cf.  Goi<rDA,  Dual  deities,  p.  363. 


12 


J.  Gonda  • Vedic  Literature 


one  particular  subject,  reducing  mythological  references  and  invocations 
of  other  gods,  and  consisting  of  almost  endless  variations  and  combinations 
of  the  same  or  similar  phrases,  is  still  more  uniform  in  character  than  most 

other  parts  of  the  samhita^^. 

Scholars  are  long  since  in  entire  agreement  on  the  supplementary  character 
of  nmndcda  X®®.  It  must  indeed  have  been  the  final  addition  after  the  nine 
other  books.  It  consists  of  three  main  collections  the  first  and  second  of  which 
have  much  in  common:  1-60  comprising  thirteen  series  of  'family  groups’ 
61-84  constituting  twelve  groups  of  two  hymns  each  which  are  often  ad- 
dressed to  the  same  god  and  similar  or  even  complementary  in  content ; 85-191 
(the  most  recent),  being  a considerable  number  of  isolated  hymns"^^.  In  arrang- 
ing these — very  often  anon3rmous — ^texts^^  the  principle  of  the  diminishing 
numbers  of  the  stanzas  has  on  the  whole  been  followed^®.  That  this  book  begins 
vith  eight  Agni  hymns is  hardly  due  to  chance but  there  is  in  the  other 
books  nothing  that  resembles  the  Yama  and  fimeral  texts  of  the  second  series 
(10,  10-19).  The  large  majority  of  the  hymns  of  the  third  group,  while  showing 
some  affinity  vith  the  younger  and  additional  elements  of  I-VIII — ^with  IX 
it  has  hardly  anjd-hing  in  common — exhibit  marked  deviations  jfiom  the  usual 
contents  of  the  corpus:  speculation  on  the  origia  and  the  mysteries  of  the 
universe  and  on  the  ultimate  principle,  the  occurrence  of  ‘atharvanic’  matter 
and  family  rites — the  wedding  hymn  10,  85 — ^are,  besides  the  presence  of  gods 
unknovTi  to  the  other  mar^alds,  its  most  striking  characteristics. 

Although  it  has  often  been  said^®  that  'irhandala  X displays,  both  in  subject- 
matter  and  linguistic  detail,  signs  of  more  recent  origin  than  the  bulk  of  the 
collection,  it  is  generally  conceded  that  it  also  contains  hjmms  quite  as  old 
as  the  average  of  those  in  other  books.  These  texts  may  have  found  a place 
here  because  their  subjects  were  alien  to  the  purposes  of  the  other  collections, 
because  their  final  redaction  was  posterior  to  the  completion  of  the  earlier 
books  or  because  at  a later  date  it  seemed  expedient  to  include  them  also. 
Ascriptions  to  poets  (families)  known  from  other  parts  of  the  Rgveda — especial- 

For  the  contents  of  mandala  IX  see  also  Bergaignb,  R.  V.  I,  p.  148;  HrLLE- 
BBANDT,  V.  M.  p.  193. 

« See  also  Bloomfesud,  at  JAOS  21,  p.  42;  Wintebkitz,  H.  I.  L.  I,  p.  59; 
J^Iacdoneix,  H.  S.  L.,  p.  42;  v.  Glasenapp,  Lit.  Ind.,  p.  52;  Renotj,  E.  V.  P.  II, 
p.  1.  Of.  e.g.  also  GRASSitfAisnf,  RV.  ubers.  H,  p.  288;  Oldenbebg,  H.  R.  I,  p.  268. 

For  details:  Bebgaigne,  in  JA  1887  I,  p.  191. 

For  a sur\’ey:  Geldnee,  RY.  I,  p.  XYHI;  in,  p.  121. 

Many  names  of  poets  were  made  up  by  later  interpreters. 

Many  exceptions  in  the  first  collection. 

As  to  10,  8 see  Renotj,  E.  Y.  P.  X,  p.  7;  XIY,  p.  7. 

See  above,  p.  10. 

Since  R.  Roth,  in  Tubinger  Universitatsscbrift  1856,  5,  p.  18;  see  e.g.  Mac- 
DONEix,  H.  S.  L.,  p.  42;  J.  X.  Fabqijhab,  An  outline  of  the  religious  literature  of 
India  Orford  1920,  p.  153;  Keith,  R.  Ph.  Y.  U.,  p.  2 and  others  mentioned  in 
noto  44ff.  of  J.  Y ACKEBNAGEL,  Altuidische  Grammatik,  Introduction  generale  by 
L.  Renou,  Gottingen  1957,  p.  50. 


Introduction  to  the  Veda  in  general  and  the  Rg\"eda  in  particular 


13 


ly  Vn  and  III — ^are  not  infrequently  corroborated  by  internal  eiddence^^.  On 
the  other  hand,  there  is  room  for  the  supposition"^®  that  the  different  character 
of  'many  hjnnns  contamed  in  this  book  might  be  due  to  their  originating  in 
other  milieus — ^tending  to  philosophical  speculation,  the  worship  of  other  gods 
or  atharvanic  ideas — ^rather  than  a distance  of  time. 

As  to  the  later  additions  to  the  whole  corpus,  the  possibility  of  which  cannot 
be  denied,  there  has  been  a controversial  dispute  between  Bergaigne  and 
Oldenberg^®.  The  latter  was  inclined  drastically  to  reduce  the  number  of 
interpolations  adopted  by  the  former,  also  because,  he  argued,  these  are  not, 
in  style  etc.,  strildngly  different  from  the  rest.  'Violation  of  the  principles  of 
arrangement’  has  since  been  a recurrent  argument  in  discussions  of  inter- 
polation®®, relative  chronology,  possible  combinations  of  shorter  hymns  so  as 
to  constitute  a whole,  genuineness  of  refrains,  and  allied  problems®^. 

In  particular  cases  doubt  has  indeed  been  thrown  upon  the  correct  dehmita- 
tion  of  two  successive  hymns.  Thus  RV.  7,  55,  1,  w’-hich  in  the  ritual  is  grouped 
together  with  the  three  stanzas  of  7,  54  and,  like  these,  invokes  Vastospati,  the 
genius  of  the  homestead,  may  have  originally  made  up  one  text  with  the 
preceding  sukta^^. 

On  the  other  hand,  there  are  many  hymns  which,  while  following  each  other 
immediately,  are  more  or  less  closely  connected  with  one  another.  A reference 
to  a motive  or  theme®®,  similarity  in  style  or  the  use  of  identical  phrases  in 
dealing  with  the  same  subject®^  obviously  led  the  redactors  to  place  two  hymns 
in  close  proximity  also  when  they  are  addressed  to  different  deities®®.  The 
smaller  Agni  hymn  1,  150,  which  (in  stanza  1)  resumes  two  words  of  the  final 
stanza  of  the  preceding  sukta^^  dedicated  to  the  same  god,  creates  the  impres- 


For  details:  Renou,  E.  V.  P.  II,  p.  9. 

See  also  HrLUEBBAypT,  at  GGA  1889  I,  p.  400. 

See  above,  note  12. 

For  the  possibility  of  interpolations  see  e.g.  Bebgaione,  in  JA  1889  I,  p.  163. 

See  e.g.  BEBGAiG]srE,  in  JA  1886  11,  p.  199;  205;  1887  I,  p.  211 ; Hiulebbak'bt, 
in  GGA  1889  I,  p.  399;  Oldexberg,  H.  R.  I,  p.  242  (comparing  parallel  texts  in  the 
Atharvaveda) ; Vedic  hymns,  p.  17  (on  1,  27,  to  be  divided  into  some  minor  hymns) ; 
Arnold,  in  KZ  37,  p.  209;  K.  C.  Chattopadhyaya,  at  8 AIOC,  p.  31  {inter  alia  on 
RV.  3,  51-53). 

V.  M.  Apte,  in  Comm.  Vol.  S.  Varma,  I,  Hoshiarpur  1950,  p.  119.  See  MG.  2, 
11,  19;  AsvG.  2,  9,  9;  “7,  55,  2-8  are  traditionally  held  to  be  lullaby  stanzas” 
(Brhaddevata  6,  2);  cf.  AV.  4,  5. 

See  e.g.  Renou,  E.  V.  P.  IV,  p.  22  (on  1,  105  and  106);  8,  28-30. 

E.g.  1, 162  and  163;  2,  25,  1 and  2,  26,  1 (both  addressed  to  Brahmanaspati) ; 
cf.  H.  P.  Schmidt,  Brhaspati  und  Indra,  Wiesbaden  1968,  p.  115.  See  also  1,  44  and 
45;  1,  116  and  117  (Geldner,  RV.  I,  p.  156;  Renou,  E.  V.  P.  XVT,  p.  15);  4,  1 and 
2;  4,  13  and  14  (Renou,  E.  V.  P.  XHI,  p 103);  4,  38-40;  5,  67  and  68;  6,  15  and  16; 
6,  64  and  65  (Renou,  E.  V.  P.  Ill,  p.  85);  10,  67  and  68;  83  and  84  (Ch.  Malamoud, 
in  Melanges  Renou,  p,  493. 

See  e.g.  RV.  1,  24  and  25  (compare  the  final  stanzas). 

Cf.  8,  29,  *1  and  28,  5. 


14 


J.  Gonda  • Yedic  Literature 


sion  of  being  a continuation  of  tbe  latter®"^.  Siinilar  observations  can,  for  in- 
stance, be  made  in  connection  vitb  2,  36  and  37  wMch,  being  composed  in 
the  same  metre  and  consisting  of  the  same  number  of  stanzas  (sis:)  are,  like  1, 15 
(twelve  stanzas)  to  accompany  twelve  libations  to  various  gods  (rtugraha^^). 
Associations  of  this  description  were,  rightly  or  wrongly,  also  ascertained  by 
the  ancient  interpreters®®. 


and  S';  IS'  P-  26 

1 ->  fnw  P-  I®’  P-  XVI,  p.  77.  Compare  also  RV. 

1,  2 md  3 (ef.  Beegaigne,  m JA  1889,  p.  123;  Oidenbbeg,  R.  V.,  m 452).  ' 

t anul-ramamM  on  2,  42  and  43.  The  above  observations  are  not 

fit  between  non-suecessive  hymns;  see 

r^ilA  h \ o P-  “ 10,  121  there  ar^^listic 

reminiscences  of  2,  12;  compare  also  7,  34  and  56. 


Introduction  to  the  Yeda  in  general  and  the  Rg\'eda  in  particular  15 


2,  The  text  of  the  Bgvedu 

It  is  mostly  assumed  that  some  hundreds  of  years  must  ha-Te  been  needed 
for  the  hymns  found  in  the  oldest  corpus,  the  Rgveda — and  for  those  which 
have  been  lost — ^to  come  into  beings.  In  any  case,  they  were  collected  and 
preserved  by  oral  tradition  in  the  families  of  their  poets^.  There  is  much  to 
be  said  for  the  h3rpothesis  that  at  a given  moment  the  Tamiiy  books’  (II-VII) 
came  to  constitute  a collection  taught  to  members  of  all  contributory  families®. 
Although  a number  of  undeniable  corruptions  must  belong  to  this  period^ — 
memorization  did  not  exclude  the  preservation  of  w^hat  had  become  unintelli- 
gible— , the  texts  maintained  a remarkable  high  level  of  authenticity.  At  a 
later,  undefinable  date — but  in  ail  probability  before  i 600  BC® — ^they  w^ere 
finally  arranged  and  codified.  There  may  be  some  truth  in  Yaska’s®  statement 
that  this  took  place  when  the  power  of  oral  reproduction  began  to  decMne.  The 
codification’  involved  in  some  cases  an  archaization,  but — ^as  appears  also 
from  the  metrical  schemes  of  many  verses — mostly  a modification  of  the 
phonetic  form  of  the  words — ^mainly  an  application  of  other  sandhi  rules — 
which  was  modernized  so  as  to  agree  with  the  prommciation  prevailing  in  the 
times  of  the  redactors®.  As  to  the  exact  procedure  of  these  redactors  we  grope 
in  the  dark,  but  we  may  be  sure  that  they  guarded  the  verbal  integrity  of  the 
text  with  extreme  care®.  Apart  from  some  minor  recasts  and  additions^®  the 


^ Cf.  e.g.  HmLEBBAypT,  at  GGA  1889,  I,  p.  405. 

2 See  W.  D.  Whitney,  at  JAOS  4,  p.  245.  ‘Family’  not  to  be  taken  in  the 
narrower  sense. 

® Cf.  e.g.  VoN  Glasenapp,  L.  I.,  p.  52.  That  this  unification  was  effected  on  the 
initiative  of  a powerful  chieftain  (J.  Y.  Fabqtjhab,  An  outline  of  the  religious 
literature  of  India,  Oxford  1920,  p.  9)  is  a mere,  and  improbable,  guess.  K.  R. 
PoTDAB,  at  Oriental  Thought  3 (1957),  p.  62  and  18  AIOC,  S.P.,  p.  13  tries  to 
distinguish  three  or  more  stages  ( ?).  See  also  Bebgaigne,  in  JA  1889  I,  p.  172  (uni- 
fication of  family  rituals) ; D.  D.  Kosambi,  at  JBBRAS  27,  p.  12. 

^ See  also  H.  Oedenbebg,  Vedaforschung,  Stuttgart-Berlin  1905,  p.  44. 

® Geldneb,  V.  S.  m,  p.  144  (contra  Oudenbebg,  H.  R.  I,  p.  370);  Scheftelo- 
wiTZ,  Apokryphen,  p,  5f.;  C.  G.  Kashikab,  at  13  AIOC,  p.  44. 

® Yaska,  Nir.  1,  20. 

’ Undertaken  under  the  influence  of  external  circumstances  ? (cf.  J.  Bloch,  Les 
debuts  des  litteratures  dans  I’lnde,  Hommage  L.  Febvre,  11,  Paris  1953,  p.  3). 

® It  is  possible  that  then  also  some  standardization  of  language  took  place. 

^ Cf.  R.  Roth,  at  KZ  26,  p.  52;  ZDMG  48, p.  101 ; Oldenbbbg,  atZDMG55  (1901), 
p.  267 ff.  (=  K.  S.,  p.  726,  on  RY.  6,  1-20:  negligence  ?);  cf.  Y.  M.  Apte,  Textual 
imperfections  of  the  extant  Rg\^eda,  Comm.  Yol.  S.  Yarma,  I,  p.  119;  Yishva 
Bandhu  Shastbi,  at  15  AIOC,  Bombay  1949,  p.  69.  The  views  published,  with 
much  repetition,  by  A.  Estelleb,  in  many  articles  {inter  alia  in  The  Indian  Hist. 
Research  Inst.  Silver  Jubilee  Comm.  Yol.,  Bombay  1953,  p.  103;  Proc.  26  Int. 
Congress  of  Or.,  Poona  1969,  IH,  1,  p.  45;  19  AIOC  II  (1959),  p.  13;  25  AIOC 
(1969),  p.  15;  ABORI  48-49  (1968),  p.  1 ; 50  (1969),  p.  1 ; 51  (1970),  p.  59),  according 
to  which  the  redactor  has  wilfully  and  purposely  changed  the  word-  and  verse- 
order,  rhythm  and  meaning  of  the  texts,  and  his  attempts  at  restoring,  on  the  base 


16 


J,  Gouda  * Yedic  Literature 


corpus  has  since  been  preserved  'with  marvellous  accuracy  even  in  the  smallest 
details.  There  is  much  to  be  said  for  the  assumptions^  that  after  the  redaction 
of  the  Rgveda  the  practice  'w^as  brought  into  vogue  to  combine,  for  liturgical 
purposes,  portions  taken  from  the  heritage  of  different  families. 

Although  four  other  recensions  are  mentioned^^ — ^those  of  Baskala,  Asvala- 
yana,  Sanjkhayana  and  Mandukeya — ^and  there  may  have  existed  different 
collections  for  ritual  use^^,  the  obviously  most  authoritative  recension,  the 
only  one  vrMeh  sur'vived^^,  is  that  which  a later  tradition^®  ascribes  to  the 
legendary  Vyasa,  who  is  also  supposed  to  have  arranged  the  other  Vedas,  and 
modem  scholarship  to  Sakalya^®,  the  same  man  who — ^according  to  some, 
simultaneously^’ — compiled  the  fadapdtJia^^.  In  this  pidapdtha,  or  'word-text’ 
prepared  for  purposes  of  study^®,  mnemonics^®  and  a correct  preservation  of 

of  our  present  Rgveda — which  he  thinks  is  no  more  than  a palimpsest — ^widely 
divergent  texts  of  the  poets,  are  completely  untenable. 

Geassmajstx,  RV.,  was  mistaken  in  regarding  about  one  tenth  of  the  corpus 
as  spurious  or  additional. 

Olbenbeeg,  in  ZDMG  42,  p.  246  (=  K.  S.,  p.  615). 

In  the  Carana\^yuha.  The  differences  from  Sakalya’s  recension  seem  to  have 
consisted  mainly  in  the  number  and  order  of  the  hymns  included;  see  Scheftelo- 
wiTZ,  O.C.,  p.  11.  For  these  recensions  see  Hxllebbakdt,  at  BB  8,  p.  195;  ZDMG  40, 
p.  712;  V.  ScHEOEDEE,  at  WZKM  12,  p.  277;  Scheftelowitz,  o.c.,  p.  8.  According 
to  S.  K.  Belvaleae,  in  2 AIOC  (1922),  Pres,  address,  p.  5 there  existed  texts  of 
other  recensions  up  to  the  end  of  the  18^  century.  For  traditions  or  lost  ‘copies’  of 
the  5'g^"®da:  P.  S.  Sastei,  at  Prabuddha  Bharata  1947,  p.  209.  For  deviations  from 
Sakalya’s  recension  in  the  see  W.  Cal  and,  Sankhayana-Srautasutra,  Nagpur 
1953,  p.  XVII;  for  mantras  cited  in  the  Aitareya-Brahmana,  below,  p.  345. 

Cf.  Apte,  o.c. 

For  the  possibility  of  other  losses:  A.  K.  Chakeavoety,  Seer  Kasyapa  and 
Ms  mining  hymns,  Calcutta  Review  180  (1966),  p.  31. 

The  name  Vyasa  “the  Disposer,  Arranger”  occurs  at  TA.  1,  9,  2.  According  to 
an  epic  and  puranic  legend,  which  is  foreign  to  the  Veda,  he  was  called  Veda-Vyasa 
because  he  divided  the  original  Veda  into  four  samhitds  and  distributed  them 
among  his  four  pupils.  See  e.g.  IVIbh.  1,  57,  73  and  K.  M.  Shembhavanekae,  at 
ABORI  27,  p.  114.  For  an  attempt  to  co-ordinate  traditions:  R.  Moeton  Smith,  at 
Parana,  7,  p.  221. 

According  to  Oldenbeeg  (H.  R.  I,  p.  384)  and  Keith  (at  JRAS  1907,  p.  226) 
Sakaiya  must  be  placed  at  the  end  of  the  hrdhmaria  period,  according  to  Geldnee 
(see  note  18)  he  was  a contemporary^  of  Arum  (mentioned  in  Vedic  prose  texts) 
and  Yajhavaikya  and  lived  earlier,  Ms  iahha  (the  Sakala)  being  as  old  as  the 

Vajasaneyi-SaiiiMta. 

See  already  Wbbee,  in  I.  S.  XIII  (1873),  p.  1. 

« Both,  at  KZ  26,  p.  45;  Geldxee,  V.  S.  m,  p.  144;  B.  Liebich,  in  S.  B. 
Heidelberg  Acad.,  ph.  Mst.  Kl.  1919, 15,  p.  20;  P.  K.  Nakayan  Pillai,  at  BDCRI  2 
(1941),  p.  247;  C.  G.  Kashtbae,  at  13  AIOC  n (1951),  p.  39;  cf.  also  the  same,  at 
ABORI  28,  p.  301;  C.  K.  Raja,  at  14  AJLOC,  S.  P.,  p.  3;  K.  Chattopadhyaya,  in 
PO  1,  4,  p.  49;  K.  P.  Jog,  at  NLA  m,  3 (1969),  p.  56. 

For  grammatical  study  of  the  Veda  see  J.  Waceeenagel,  Altindische  Gram- 
mat&,  I,  Gottingen  1896,  p.  LXII  (French  transL:  L.  Renou,  Gottingen  1957, 
p.  35)  with  bibliograpMcal  notes. 

2®  For  some  technical  details:  Kashieae,  in  13  AIOC  (see  above). 


Introduction  to  the  Veda  in  general  and  the  Rg^^eda  in  particular  17 


the  text,  all  the  words  of  the  contmuoiis  text  (samMtdpdika ) are  separated  and 
given  in  their  original  form,  unaffected  by  the  rules  of  sandhi  (euphonic  coali- 
tion of  words  etc.);  moreover,  most  compounds  and  some  derivatives  and 
inflected  forms  are  analyzed.  For  instance,  RV.  3,  59,  1 c reads  in  the  safnhitd 
text:  mitrdli  krstir  dnimisabhi  caste  ‘‘Mtra  regards  the  settlements  of  men 
without  blinking,”  in  the  pada  text:  mitrdh  krsHh  dni-’misd  ahhi  ca>sfe;  9 a 
mitrS  devesv  dydsu  '‘Mtra,  among  gods  and  privileged  men  . . : mitrdh  devlsu 
dyusu.  This  ancient  analysis  of  the  text,  virtually  the  earliest  rudimentary 
exegesis  of  the  Rgveda,  is  notwithstanding  some  obvious  inconsistencies  and 
misinterpretations^^,  the  product  of  a remarkable  comprehension  of  the  struc- 
ture of  the  Vedic  language.  As  a means  of  preserving  the  sacred  text  and 
ascertaining  its  meaning  it  was,  already  at  an  early  date,  complemented  by  the 
kramapdtha^^  or  ‘step  by  step  arrangement  of  the  text/  in  which  every  word  of 
the  pada  text  occurs  twice,  being  connected  both  with  that  which  precedes  and 
that  which  follows.  On  this  arrangement  was  in  its  turn  based  the  form  of  the 
text  called  jatdpdtha^^  ‘the  twisted  hair  arrangement/  because  each  pair  of 
w’-ords  was  repeated  three  times,  one  repetition  being  in  inverted  order  (ab,  ba, 
ab,  be,  cb,  be  . . .).  The  cKmax  of  complication  to  secure  the  text  from  all 
possible  error  is  reached  in  the  ghanapdtha  ‘the  compact  text’  in  which  the  order 
is  ab,  ba,  abc,  eba,  abc,  be,  cb,  bed  etc. 

Another  safeguard  of  Vedic  texts  are  the  prdtiidkhyas  which  were  composed 
for  the  purpose  of  exhibiting — in  oral  instruction — all  the  changes  necessary 
for  constituting  the  samhitd  text  on  the  basis  of  the  padapdtha.  In  particulars 
there  are  considerable  differences  between  these  manuals,  but  in  their  generaity 
they  may  go  back  to  the  same  class  of  ancient  repertories.  The  versified^ ^ 
Rgveda-pratisakhya^^,  rightly  or  WTongly  attributed  to  Saunaka  of  uncertain 
date,  is  the  most  important  of  this  class^®  of  practical  aphoristical  handbooks 
compiled  ‘in  every  (Vedic)  school’  which  deal  with  sandhi,  quantities  and 
lengthening  of  vowels,  accentuation  and  some  questions  of  grammar  and 
metrics,  not  with  semantics  or  exegesis,  which  in  the  eyes  of  their  authors  must 
have  been  less  important  than  a correct  pronunciation.  The  others  belong  to 
the  Taittiriyas,  the  Madhyamdinas  and  (two)  to  the  Atharvaveda^^.  They  are 

See  e.g.  Roth,  in  KZ  26,  p.  45;  Oldenbebg,  ISToten,  I,  p.  430;  II,  p.  381; 
Geldxeb,  Auswahl,  11,  p.  241;  S.  K.  Belvaekab,  at  2 AIOC,  Pres,  address,  p.  6; 
B.  Bhattachabya,  at  IC  12,  p.  123.  For  discrepancies  between  the  samhitd  and 
pada  texts:  K.  V.  Abhyaxkab,  at  ABORT  52,  p.  211. 

For  details:  L.  Renoij,  Terminologie  grammaticale  du  Sanskrit,  III,  Paris 
1942,  p.  55;  Roth,  Zut  Litteratur  und  Geschichte  des  Weda,  Stuttgart  1846,  p.  16. 

Cf.  G.  Thibaxjt,  Das  Jatapatala.  Lehrbuch  des  Jatapatha  fur  den  Rigveda, 
Leipzig  1870-  There  are  not  less  than  eight  varieties  of  the  hramapdtha. 

H.  Oldenbebg,  at  ISTG  1919,  p.  170  {=  K.  S.,  p.  867). 

Edited  and  translated  by  F.  M.  Muxleb,  Rig-Veda,  I,  Leipzig  1856;  and  Leip- 
zig 1869;  V.  K.  Vabma,  Banaras  Hindu  XJniv.  1970. 

REXOLi-FiLLiozAT),  I.  C.  I,  p.  305;  M.  Ghosh,  at  IHQ  11,  p.  761;  L.  Renotj, 
La  forme  et  Farrangement  interne  des  Pratisakhya,  JA  248  (1960),  p.  1. 

For  the  Samaveda  see  p.  321. 


18 


J.  Gonda  • Vedie  Literature 


on  the  whole  of  greater  interest  to  the  grammarian  than  the  student  of  litera- 
ture ; that  is  why  the  problem  of  the  relations,  chronological  and  other,  of  the 
RgpratMakiiya  with  the  great  grammarian  Panini  cannot  be  considered  here^s. 

The  date  at  which  the  Pgveda  was  put  in  writing-®  is  uncertain^®.  Statements 
such  as  “not  before  the  2^"^  century  B.C.”  are  hardly  more  than  guesses,  but 
there  exists  some  information  on  comparatively  late  initiatives  taken  in  this 
respect®^. 

Although  after  Sakalya  the  text  of  the  Rgveda  has  for  many  centuries  remain- 
ed unaltered — ^there  are  no  variants®- — ^the  fact  that  before  assuming  its 
present  form  it  had  been  subject  to  human  frailties  explains  that  there  never- 
theless is  occasion  for  criticism®®.  The  fortunate  circumstance  that  a consider- 
able part  of  its  contents  are  found  also  in  the  other  Vedic  texts— which  however 
had  been  more  open  to  alteration  and  were  less  accurately  banded  down  after- 
wards®^— enables  us  so  to  say  to  use  these  as  sources  of  ancient  variant  readings 
and  differences  in  the  order  of  the  verses®^,  or  at  least  to  form  an  opinion  of 
ancient  interpretations  of  JRgvedic  passages.  There  can  on  the  other  hand  be 
no  doubt  that  many  of  these  Variants’  owe  their  existence  to  the  desire  for  a 


See  e.g.  P.  Thteivib,  Paj^i  and  the  Veda,  Allahabad  1935;  at  IHQ  13  (1937), 
p.  329;  K.  Chattopadhyaya,  ibidem,  p.  343;  S.  P.  Chaturvedi,  at  ISTIA  1,  p.  450 
and  2,  p.  723. 

On  WTiting  and  written  texts  in  general:  Wacxerxagel-Penou,  o.c.,  p.  32 
(with  the  notes).  The  manuscripts  show  that  the  assumption  that  a written  text  is 
less  liable  to  corruption  has  no  general  validity. 

For  some  details  see  Renou,  Ecoles,  p.  33;  Wackerxagel-Renoxj  (above,  n. 
19),  p.  33;  47;  ill.  Among  those  who  unconvincingly  argue  that  the  Vedic  Indians 
were  conversant  with  the  art  of  writing  is  V.  M.  Apte,  at  BDCRI  4 (1942),  p.  269; 
see  also  Roth,  at  KZ  26,  p.  56  (antiquated);  G.  Pertsch,  Upalekha,  de  Krama- 
patha  libeUus,  Berlin  1854;  L.  Sarxjp,  8 AIOC,  p.  21  (untenable);  and  compare 
Ludwig,  RV.  Ill,  p.  XTV. 

The  Arabian  author  al-Birunl  (11th  cent.)  mentions  a Veda  recently  written 
down  in  Kashmir  (for  details:  Renoij,  E.  V.  P.  VI,  p.  46).  For  some  notices  on  Vedic 
manuscripts  w^liieh,  generally  speaking,  are  not  old — e.g.  L.  vox  Schroeder,  at 
S.  B.  Vienna  Acad.  133  (1896),  11,  p.  30  and  ZDMG  51,  p.  666. 

F.  M.  MtmLEB,  Rig- Veda,  I,  Vorrede.  The  number  and  arrangement  of  the 
^mns,  and  even  the  numbers  of  syllables  of  our  modem  editions  are  identical  with 
those  given  by  Saunaka.  For  a Kashmir  manuscript  which  is  an  exception  see  v. 
Schroeder,  at  WZKII  12,  p.  277;  Scheetelowttz,  o.c.,  p.  32  and  at  WZEAI  21 
p.  85. 

« See  Ch  R.  Laxiiax,  at  PAOS  1884  (JAOS  11,  p.  CXCI);  Grassmaxx,  RV. 
libers.  I,  p.  Oldexberg,  H.  R.;  at  ZDMG  55  (1901),  p.  726  (=  K S p 267)- 

P-  Bloomfield,  at  JAOS  27,  p.  27 f.;  at 
77  e.g.  on  1,  56;  173,  4;  2,  39,  4;  5,  29,  1;  38,  2;  41- 

M;  6 6.,  7 etc.;  Kashikar,  at  NIA  1,  p.  750;  V.  K.  Rajwade,  at  IHQ  19,  p.  153. 
-Not  all  emendations’  were,  however,  justified. 

“ A.  Ludtog,  at  Abh.  Bohmische  Ges.  d.  Wiss.  1889-90,  VH,  3,  but  compare 
OLDEis-BERG,  j^oten,  I,  p.  IV;  see  also  Oldenbbbg,  at  ZDMG  38  (1884),  p.  472 

1=  Iv.  fe.,  p.  u46). 

“ Cf.  e.g.  Oldeeberg,  H.  E.  I,  p.  513  (on  ^IV.  1,  52;  9,  13-15;  10,  18,  7). 


Introduction  to  the  Veda  in  general  and  the  Rg\’eda  in  particular  19 


reading  that  was  better  adapted  to  a special  litnrgicai  purpose.  From  the  point 
of  view  of  the  employment  of  Rgvedic  material  for  sacrificial  purposes  these 
various  readings  are  indeed  highly  instructive.  One  should  however  take  full 
account  of  the  probability  that  the  liturgists  had  selected  Rgvedic  material 
before  Sakalya’s  times®®  and  of  the  possibility  that  the  compilers  of  the  other 
sarnhitds  had  dravTi  part  of  their  material  from  the  same  traditions  as  the  poets 
of  the  Rgveda®’,  traditions  whose  exponents  must,  to  a certain  degree,  have 
thought  in  terms  of  fluidity.  Moreover,  the  tradition  of  the  other  safnhitds^ 
the  hrahmanm  and  sutrcLS  is  far  less  sound  than  that  of  the  Rgveda.  The  authori- 
ty of  the  latter  seems  to  have  increased  after  its  codification:  the  younger  a 
mantra  in  the  Yajurveda  is  the  more  it  resembles  its  Rgvedic  counterpart®®. 

It  may  finally  be  emphasized  that,  although  we  cannot  follow  Bloomfield®®^ 
in  considering  all  hymns  of  the  Rgveda  to  have  been  liturgical  from  the  very 
beginning  and  in  regarding  the  hymns  and  hrakmanas  as  largely  contempora- 
neous modes  of  literary  expression,  there  is  no  doubt  much  truth  in  his  as- 
sumption that  the  mantras  and  the  brdhmanas  are  in  the  main  based  on  the 
same  tradition  and  general  conceptions.  The  redactors  of  the  h^’^mns  in  their 
present  arrangement  must,  on  the  whole,  have  preceded  the  redactors  of  the 
hrdhnmnas. 


®®  According  to  V.  M.  Apte,  o.c.,  there  probably  existed  a recension  of  the 
Rg\^eda  for  ritual  use.  Cf.  also  Vishva  BAmoHU  Shastri,  in  15  AIOC,  Pres,  address, 
p.  96. 

37  For  internal  borrowings  etc.  see  also  BnooMFrEUD,  Repetitions  and,  e.g., 
Geldneb,  RV.  on  7,  54,  2;  55,  1;  10,  131,  3;  170,  4;  177,  3;  Goioda,  Dual  deities,, 
passim. 

38  Cf.  Renotj,  at  JAOS  68,  p.  82. 

3s  Bloomfieed,  at  JAOS  15,  p.  144. 


20 


J.  Gonda  • Vedic  Literature 


3,  Chromlogy;  environmeni  arid  culture 

At  tMs.  point  our  account  of  the  history  of  the  Rgveda  and  the  study  of  its 
text  must  be  intemipted  in  order  to  give  that  minimum  of  historical,  geo- 
graphical and  cultural  information  which  is  indispensable  for  a right  under- 
standing of  what  will  follow. 

The  chronology  of  the  Veda  ha  general  and  the  Rg-Samhita  in  particular^ 
has  given  rise  to  much  controversial  discussion.  We  must  distinguish  between 
absolute  and  relative  chronology  on  one  hand  and  between  the  date  of  individual 
hyams  or  component  parts  and  the  redaction  of  the  collections  on  the  other. 
As  to  the  former  problem  we  can  only  be  certain  that  the  Rgveda  is  anterior  to 
the  other  collections  because  it  does  not  presuppose  their  existence,  whereas 
the  authors  of  the  latter  are  more  or  less  acquainted  with  it^.  Most  scholars  are 
moreover  also  in  agreement  as  to  the  terminus  od  quern  of  the  main  component 
parts  of  the  Vedic  literature  in  its  entirety.  The  sarnhitds,  brdhmamis,  dranyakas 
and  the  earliest  upanisads  must  for  the  greater  part  have  existed  in  their 
present  form  before  the  rise  of  Buddhism  in  the  second  half  of  the  6^  century 
B.C.  and  before  the  spread  of  the  Aryan  culture  and  the  establishment  of 
Vedic  ‘schools’  in  the  South  of  India.  The  canonical  writings  of  the  Buddhists 
refer  not  only  to  the  Veda,  but  also  to  Buddha’s  conviction  that  a mere 
knowledge  of  that  literature  does  not  lead  to  a transcendent  goal®. 

The  determination  of  the  terminus  a quo  is  closely  connected  with  the  be- 
ginning of  the  Indo-Aryan  civilization  and  the  vexed  problem  of  the  time  at 
which  the  Aryans  arrived  in  India  There  is  indeed  no  conclusive  evidence  of 
an  earlier  origin  of  any  Rgvedic  hymn®.  Suggestions  to  determine  the  date  of 
the  Rgveda  on  the  strength  of  presumed  anti-Zoroastrian  allusions  iu,  or 
striking  literar}’  parallels  betw^-een,  some  of  its  texts  and  passages  in  the  Avesta® 
which  would  point  to  proximity  and  a close  chronological  and  cultural  rela- 
tionship^ are  based  on  quicksand,  because,  besides  the  uncertain  date  of  the 


^ For  a s^-ey : Wintebnitz,  H.  I.  L.  I,  p.  290  (partly  antiquated) ; A.  B.  Keith, 
in  Comm.  Vol.  Woolner,  Lahore  1940,  p.  137;  E.  J.  Thomas,  in  Mem.  Vol.  L.  Sarup’ 
HosMarpur  1954,  p.  80;  v.  Glasexapp,  Lit.  Ind.,  p.  48;  T.  Ja.  Elizarenkova! 
Kigveda,  Moscow  1972,  p.  9. 

® In  view  of  the  oral  transmission  of  this  literature  little  reliance  can,  for  chrono- 
logical purposes,  be  placed  on  cross-references  and  mutual  quotation. 

® Cf.  e.g.  Digha-Kikaya  I,  p.  235ff. 

* Questions  which  have  no  bearing  upon  the  history  of  Vedic  literature,  for 
inst^e  the  probability  of  the  existence  of  pre-Vedic  Aryans,  cannot  be  considered, 

completely  untenable  assumption  that  the  Rgveda  or  part  of  it  was  com- 
posed in  the  period  of  the  Indo-European  unity  (e.g.  Geippith,  H.  RV.  I p.  VII) 
was  nghtly  combatted  by  Pischel-Geldnbb,  V.  S.  I,  p.  XXn. 

• Cf.  e.g.  RV.  2,  12,  8:  Vast  10,  47;  9,  7,  7:  Yasna  10,  8;  9. 

Major,  6 p.  377;  IF  41,  p.  188;  Die  Zeit  Zoroasters,  Leipzig 
- , p.  o8,  6.W  H.  C.  Seth,  at  ABORI 23,  p.  451  (relying  on  fantastic  identifications 

^j«^ns  such  as  Susravas  = Cyrus  the  great);  13  AIOC,  p.  91;  W.  P.  Schmid,  at 

U?  t>4,  p.  1.  X 5 


Introduction  to  the  Veda  in  general  and  the  Rg\’eda  in  particular  21 


Avesta,  the  cases  of  cultural®,  stylistic®*  and  lexicographicaF®  parallelism  be- 
tween texts  of  this  description  do  not  necessarily  point  to  simnltaneil^'^^h 
Moreover,  the  distance  in  time  between  Rgveda  and  Buddha  ca-nnot  have 
been  so  short  as  this  theory  would  have  us  believe.  Nor  can,  in  the  opinion  of 
the  present  author,  reliable  evidence  be  produced  in  favour  of  the  supposition^^ 
that  certain  parts  of  the  Rgveda  were  composed  in  Iran  or  in  the  Indo-Iranian 
borderland.  The  attempts  at  drawing  chronological  conclusions  by  the  aid  of 
astronomical  data,  simultaneously  and  independently  from  each  other  made 
by  Jacobi^®  and  Tilak^*  who  came  to  date  at  least  part  of  the  Veda  back  to 
iii4500B.C,  and  even  i bOOO  B.C.,  rightly  met  with  violent  opposition^®:  the 
relevant  passages  in  the  Vedic  texts  are  not  unambiguous  and  some  of  the 
exegetical  assumptions  upon  which  these  speculations  rest  are  wholly  improb- 
able^®. Hypotheses  concerning  a polar  origin  or  even  polar  reminiscences^®’ 

® Cf.  e.g.  OuDEimBBG,  R.  V.,  p.  24. 

® Cf.  B.  Benveniste,  in  Melanges  Renou,  Paris  1968,  p.  73. 

For  criticism:  B.  Geigeb,  in  ZDMG  84,  p.  *96. 

See  also  A.  B.  Keith,  at  IHQ  1,  p.  4 and  in  Comm.  Vol.  A.  C.  Wooiner,  Lahore 
1940,  p.  137. 

E.g.  H,  BBumsTHOFEB,  in  BB  26,  p.  76;  E.  Fobbeb,  in  S.  B.  Akademie  Berlin 
1919,  p.  1029;  G.  HiisrNG,  in  Prace  iinguistyczne  J.  Baudouinde  Courtenay,  Cracow 
1921,  p.  151;  A.  Hillebbaxpt,  Axis  Alt-  xmd  Neuindien,  Breslau  1922,  p.  3; 
J.  Bloch,  L’Indo-aryen,  Paris  1934,  p.  2;  and  especially  J.  ELebtel,  at  IF  41  (1923), 
p.  188;  Die  Himmelstore  im  Veda  xmd  im  Avesta,  Leipzig  1924,  p.  7 ; Die  Methode 
der  arisehen  Forschxmg,  Leipzig  1926,  passim  (for  criticism  see  e.g.  W.  Wust,  at 
GGA  1934,  1-2,  p.  1);  P.  K.  Bhattachabya,  in  Calcutta  Re\dew  174  (1965),  p.  1. 

H,  Jacobi,  at  Festgruss  Roth,  p.  68;  NGGW  1894,  p.  105;  Proc.  10*  Int. 
Congress  of  Orientalists  (1894),  I,  p.  103;  ZDMG  49,  p.  218;  50,  p.  69.  Compare  also 
A.  Ludwig,  at  S.  B.  Bohmische  Ges.  d.  Wiss.  1885,  p.  76,  and  S.  B.  Dekshit-  at  lA 
24,  p.  245. 

B.  G.  Telak,  The  Orion  or  Researches  into  the  antiqxiity  of  the  Vedas,  Bombay 
1893,  and  at  lA  24  (1895),  p.  85. 

However,  in  India,  Tilak’s  views  have  ever  since  foxmd  adherence.  According 
to  L.  Sabuf,  at  8 AIOC  (1935-1937),  p.  1 the  Rgveda  must  have  been  anterior  to 
the  Indus  civilization  (±  2800  - zt  1500  B.C.);  see  also  J.  Ch.  Ray,  at  IC  1939  (61, 
p.  77);  P.  C.  Sengxjpta,  at  JRASB,  Letters,  16  (1950),  p.  1 (4000-2450  B.C.); 
N-  N.  Godbole,  at  ABORI  42  (1961),  p.  1 (25000-15000  B.C. I);  cf.  v.  Glasenapf, 
L.  I.,  p.  48-  The  Indian  tendency  to  date  the  Veda  back  to  very  remote  times  is 
closely  boxmd  up  with  the  belief  in  its  being  eternal.  (See  Agehakajstda  Bhabati, 
in  Religion  and  Change  in  contemporary  Asia,  ed.  by  R.  F.  Sfenceb,  Minneapolis 
1971,  p.  99).  For  Indian  traditional  history  see  A.  D.  Pusalkeb,  in  R.  D.  Majumdab 
and  A.  D.  Pusalkieb,  History  and  Cxiltxire  of  the  Indian  people,  I,  The  Vedic  age, 
London  1951,  p.  267.  Greatly  xmder  the  influence  of  the  Indian  tradition  Exiropean 
pioneers  such  as  F.  Schlegel  or  A.  Webeb  were  also  inclined  to  ascribe  hoary 
antiquity  to  many  Indian  literary  works.  However,  to  employ  traditional  (epic  and 
puranie)  evidence  for  these  chronological  pxirposes  is  idle.  Others  were  inclined  to 
believe  that  the  hymns  were  produced  by  unsophisticated  primitive  men  (H. 
Bbetniehofeb,  tiber  den  Geist  der  indischen L3nik,  Leipzig  1882,  p.  3;  6;  H.  Zimmeb, 
Altindisches  Leben,  Berlin  1879,  p.  245). 

For  detailed  discxission  and  a bibliography — compare  Oldenbebg,  at  ZDMG 
48,  p.  629;  49,  p.  470;  50,  p.  450  (=  K.  S.,  p.  643;  663;  28) — see  Wintebottz,  H.  I. 


22 


J.  Gouda  * Vedic  Literature 


belong  in  the  realm  of  fancy.  Neither  the  as  yet  imsettled  lingnistic  problems 
connected  ^th  the  pre-historic  presence  of  Aryans  outside  India^^  nor  the 
conclusions  dra^wn  jfroin.  archaeological  finds  iUnminating  their  migrations  and 
possible  relations  ^th  other  peoples  seem  to  compel  us  to  assign  to  the  Aryan 
invasion  a date  earlier  than  about  1500  B.Cd®.  The  question  as  to  how  much 
time  elapsed  between  the  invasion — ^which  in  all  probabilit}"  took  a long  time — 
and  the  first  composition  of  hymns  in  their  present  form  or  even  the  first 
redaction  of  collections  has  given  rise  to  divergent  guesses. 

Max  Muller’s^®  chronological  estimate,  though  not  devoid  of  weak  points, 
has,  without  the  author’s  reservations,  often  been  more  or  less  tacitly  regarded 
as  nearest  to  the  mark^^.  Assuming  that  the  veddngas  and  sutras  might  be 
approximately  synchronous  with,  the  origm  of  Buddhism,  that  the  (earlier) 
hrahma'^s  could  not  possibly  be  compiled  in  less  than  200  years,  that  the 
composition  of  the  samkitds  must  have  taken  at  least  a similar  period  he 
tentatively  arrived  at  the  conclusion  that  the  hymns  of  the  Egveda-Sainhita 
must  have  come  into  existence  in  1000  B.C.  at  the  latest  and  the  hrdJimanas 
between  800  and  600  B.  C.  As  far  as  the  JRgveda  is  concerned  this  computation 
is  not  unreasonable,  but,  as  may  appear  from  the  following  chapters,  the  ideas 
of  chronological  succession  of  ^literary  genres’  and  of  corresponding  forms  of 
religious  interest  can  no  longer  be  maintained.  Latterly  a sort  of  tacit  agree- 
ment came  into  vogue  to  date  the  composition  of  the  Egveda  a few  centuries 
earlier^®.  For  an  approximate  determination  of  the  origin  of  its  oldest  compo- 
nent parts  this  period,  say  13*  century  B.C.^^,  may  indeed  have  much  to 


L.  I,  p.  294  and  N.  N.  Law,  Age  of  the  Rg\^eda,  Calcutta  1965  (supplement  to  IHQ 

36  and  37). 

B.  G.  TrLAK,  Arctic  home  in  the  Vedas,  Bombay  1903  (Poona  1925;  1956)* 
D.  R.  ilAXKAB,  at  ABORI 12,  p.  260;  V.  M.  Apte,  in  19  AIOC,  p.  106;  R.  V.  Vaidya’ 

Asya  vammya  suktam  (RV.  1,  164),  Indore  1961. 

See  J.  Goxda,  Old  Indian,  Leiden  1971,  p.  21;  R.  N.  Daxdbkab,  in  Proc.  10 

Iiid.  Hist.  Congress,  p.  24. 

Of.  S.  PiGGOTT,  Prehistoric  India,  Harmondsworth  1950,  p.  255;  V.  Gaimpert, 
in  ArchOr  20,  p.  572;  H.  D.  Saxkalia,  at  Artibus  Asiae  26,  p.  330  (i  1700-1300) 
There  are  reasons  for  doubting,  with  S.  K.  Diksit,  at  ABORI  31,  p.  185  the  identity 
of  the  Aryan  mvaders  and  the  people  or  peoples  who  contributed  to  the  rum  of  the 

incius  civilization. 

Muller,  History  of  ancient  Sanskrit  literature,  London  1859  (1860* 
19H;  1926),  p.  70  etc.;  Physical  religion,  London  1891,  p.  91. 

Cambridge  History  of  India,  I,  Cambridge  1922, 

p.  112.  For  vedunga  see  p.  34. 

Wheeleb,  Five  thousand  years  of  Pakistan,  London  1950, 

!’  T P-  B^ham,  The  wonder  that  was 

4a,  London  1954  (19o6),  p.  28;  Hobsch,  V.  G.  L.,  p.  472  (±  1200).  About  1500 

£ipz5^887‘  p Is  ^ SCHBOBDEB,  Indiens  Literatur  und  Cultur, 

p 009^  Martin  Luther  Univ.  HaUe,  GR.  14  (1965), 


Introduction  to  tlie  Veda  in  general  and  the  Rg\"eda  in  particular  23 


recommend  it^^.  AnyhoTr,  it  is  hardly  possible  to  assign-^  a comparatiTeh"  late 
date  to  the  Rgveda  on  the  strength  of  references  to  definite  sacrificial  cere- 
monies, because  these  probably  were  in  process  of  development  and  had  in  the 
times  of  the  poets  and  compilers  not  yet  reached  the  elaborated  form  knovn 
to  the  authors  of  brdhmanas  and  sutras.  On  the  other  hand  there  is  much  to  be 
said  for  the  supposition  that  a good  deal  of  the  contents  of  the  Rgveda  is 
separated  from  the  remaming  Vedic  literature  by  a comparatively  vide  chro- 
nological distance  and  for  the  correctness  of  the  impression  that  many  peculiari- 
ties of  the  former  point  to  a long  period  of  poetical  activity precednig  the 
transmitted  texts  that  are  known  to  us. 

The  geographical  area  recognized  in  the  Rgveda-Samhita  is  large.  It  is 
generally  assumed  that  the  Aryan  invaders  entered  by  the  western  passes  of 
the  Hindu  Kush  and  proceeded  thence  through  the  Punjab  to  the  east-’.  That 
advance  itself — ^w^hich  in  all  probability  covered  some  centuries — is  not  re- 
flected in  the  hymns-®,  most  of  which  seem  to  have  been  composed  in  the 
country  round  the  Sarasvati  river,  in  the  hilly  and  best  parts  of  the  Punjab^®. 
Although  there  is  some  difference  of  opinion  regarding  the  identification  of 
rivers  mentioned  in  the  texts,  also  because  their  courses  have  since  considerably 
changed  and  their  names  have  varied®®,  the  abundant  references  to  mountains, 
the  streams  of  the  Indus  system,  etc. allow  us  in  any  case  to  say  that  the 
Rgvedic  hymns  have  their  origin  in  a region  that  was  at  a considerable  distance 
from  the  Ganges-  This  river  is  mentioned  only  once,  in  a hymn  in  mandala  X, 
viz.  75  (see  stanza  5)  which  significantly  is  devoted  to  the  laudation  of  the 


For  divergent  opinions:  e.g.  A.  KAegi,  Der  Rig-Veda,  Leipzig  1878,  p.  16;  31; 
144  (2000-1500);  WiNTEKisUTZ,  H.  1.  L.  I,  p.  310  (2500  or  2000-750  or  500  B.C.), 
followed  by  L.  de  la  VALufe  Poussrx,  Le  Vedisme,  Paris  ^1909,  p.  30;  L.  Renou, 
Les  iittfratiires  de  ITnde,  Paris  1951,  p.  5 (invasion  and  oldest  hymns  ± 2000  B.C.); 
A.  S.  Alteeajei,  in  Proc.  22  Ind.  Hist.  Congress  (1959). 

E.g.  with  K.  C.  Chattopadhyaya,  8AIOC,  p.  31.  Deducing  chronological 
criteria  from  a preference  for  definite  gods  (Manelal  Patel,  11  AIOC,  Pres,  address, 
p.  9)  may  easily  involve  circular  reasoning;  moreover,  other  factors  than  chronology 
may  come  into  play  here. 

No  sound  argument  can  however  be  adduced  in  favour  of  a hj’pothesis  that 
the  Rg\-eda  was  composed  in  the  course  of  twelve  or  even  sixty -four  ( !)  gener^-tions 
(thus  H.  R.  PrwEELAB,  at  Saradapithapatrika  8 and  6,  Dwarka  1968,  p.  1;  1966, 

p.  1). 

A.  D.  Pusaleteb’s  view  (at  Comm.  Vol.  R.  K.  Mookerji,  II,  Allahabad  1947, 
p.  551):  the  Aryans  were  autochthones  in  India,  is  completely  untenable. 

For  dissentient  views  see  above  n.  7 and  e.g.  A.  Hillebbandt.  Aus  Alt-  und 
Neuindien,  Breslau  1922,  p.  1;  Pusalkeb,  in  H.  C.  I.  P.  I,  p.  244;  D.  S.  Tbivedi, 
at  ABORT  33,  p.  229  (imcritical,  in  part  imtenable).  See  also  W.  Kibfel,  in  Comm. 
Vol.  tl.  Nobel,  New  Delhi  1963,  p.  Ill  (a  questionable  suggestion  to  derive  infor- 
mation from  definite  similes). 

29  Hopeuxs,  at  JAOS  19,  p.  19;  A.  C.  Woolxeb,  at  BSO(A)S  6,  p.  549. 

20  For  the  names  see  Macdonell  and  Keith,  V.  I.,  s.  s.  v.  v. 

For  a survey:  P.  L.  Bhabgava,  India  in  the  Vedic  age,  Lucknow  1956;  ^1971, 

p.  60. 


24 


J.  Gonda  • Vedic  Literature 


Indus  and  its  tributaries,  Tbe  great  stream,  frequently  mentioned,  made  a 

deep  impression  on  the  poet : 

(3)  “On  eartb  ber  roar  is  strndng  to  reach  the  vault  of  heaven; 

^ With  brilliant  light  she  dashes  up  unending  surge. 

As  if  the  streams  of  rain  pour  thunderi^  from  the  cloud, 

The  Indus  onward  rushes  like  a bellowing  bull”^®. 

To  the  east  the  Aryans  had  not  expanded  beyond  the  Yamuna  (Jumna)  which 
is  mentioned  three  times.  They  knew  the  high  mountains  in  the  north,  but  not 

the  Vindhyas. 

Onlv  a few  words  can  be  said  on  the  political  and  cultural  environment  of 
the  poets®^.  The  indigenous  inhabitants  (ddsa  or  dasyu) — often  but  without 
sufficient  evidence  identified  “^uth  the  survivors  of  the  Indus  culture  ^were 
graduallv  subjugated.  Against  these  enemies,  not  always  distinguishable  from 
demoniac  beings,  there  w'as,  underlying  the  intertribal  rivalry  of  the  Aryans,  a 
sense  of  solidarity  springing,  not  only  from  common  interests  but  also  from  a 
conscious  view  of  common  Aryan  religion  and  culture.  Yet  a process  of  amal- 
gamation of  invaders  and  aborigines  was  in  all  probability  going  on  steadily. 
Whereas  in  Rgvedic  times  the  Aryans  were  warlike  herdsmen,  stockbreeders 
and  agriculturalists,  organized  in  tribes  luled  by  chiefs  rather  than  in  kingdoms, 
they  had  not  developed  anything  like  a city  civilization®^.  Their  technique  was 
rather  advanced,  their  priestly  schools  had  already  risen  in  special  estimation, 
their  rituals  became  gradually  more  extensive  and  complicated,  their  poetry 
had  reached  a state  of  marked  elaboration  and  formalization.  Most  hymns  are 
replete  with  mythology,  but  allusions  to  ‘religious  life’  and  the  daily  cult  are 
much  less  in  number.  The  texts  are  silent  on  some  of  the  most  typically  Indian 
doctrines,  e.g.  that  of  transmigration.  The  chiefs  and  noblemen®®  were  leaders 
in  war  and  were  expected  to  order,  and  defray  the  cost  of,  the  more  expensive 
sacrifices.  In  their  tribal  structure  there  was  no  doubt  inherited  class  division : 
we  hear  of  nobility  (ksatra ),  of  the  ordinary  tribesmen  ( vis ) and  the  traditional 

Compare  also  the  two  poems  addressed  to  the  Sarasvati  7,  95  f. 

33  For  further  information:  H.  Zimmeb,  Altindisches  Leben,  Berlin  1879  (too 
idyllic  a picture,  with  caution  still  useful);  Macdonell,  H.  S.  L.,  p.  140;  A.  B. 
Keith,  o.c.,  p.  77;  Basham,  o.c.,  p.  31;  U.  N.  Ghoshal,  A history  of  public  life, 
Calcutta  1945;  P.  L.  Bhabgava,  o.c.  For  particulars  see  also  A.  Lxjdvug,  Der 
Rigveda,  VI,  Prag-Leipzig  1888  (Register);  Macdohelu  and  Ejeith,  V.  I.;  W. 
Ruben,  at  JOIB  15,  p.  314;  Geldneb-Kobel,  RV.,  IV. 

However,  19^  century  Europeans  (see  also  A.  Wbbeb,  Akademische  Vor- 
iesungen  uber  indische  Literaturgeschichte,  ^Berlin  1876,  p.  5)  were  greatly  mis- 
taken in  speaking  of  a primitive  and  innocent  pastoral  people.  S.  S.  Bhawe,  20 
AIOC  (1962),  I,  p.  36  has  completely  misimderstood  my  earlier  opinions  on  this 
point.  It  is  one  thing  to  argue,  as  I did,  that  the  outcome  of  research  in  the  field  of 
cultural  anthropology  may  be  helpful  in  understanding  certain  aspects  of  the 
ancient  Indian  culture,  it  is  quite  another  thing  to  say  that  Vedic  culture  has  not 
gone  beyond  the  so-called  primitive  stage.  (Compare  also  H.  C.  Rat,  at  IC  6,  p.  241 
contra  Macboneie,  H.  S.  L.,  p.  391). 

B.  ScHLEBATH,  Das  Konigtum  im  Rg-  und  Atharvaveda,  Wiesbaden  1960. 


Introduction  to  the  Veda  in  general  and  the  l^gvedA  in  particular  25 


system  of  four  classes — addition  to  the  above  the  brahmins  (the  first  order) 
and  the  lowest  class  (sudra) — ^was  crystallizing  throughout  this  period.  The 
basic  unit  of  their  society  was  the  family®®.  To  what  size  a family  might  grow 
and  yet  keep  together  we  do  not  know.  A group  of  patrilinear  families  formed  a 
grdrm,  a term  which  in  course  of  time  came  to  denote  a settlement  or  village. 
Marriages  seem  to  have  as  a rule  been  monogamous,  the  position  of  the  wives 
being  less  subordinate  than  in  the  post-Vedic  period®^.  Child  marriage,  so  usual 
in  later  times,  was  evidently  unknown.  Of  their  domestic  life  we  have  a few 
details,  but  our  knowledge  of  'civil’  and  'criminal’  law  is  very  scanty.  The  hymns 
seem  to  allow  us  to  sketch  the  above  cultural  situation,  but  it  must  be  recalled 
that  their  outlook  is  generally  limited  to  the  interests  of  the  leading  groups  and 
classes,  that  the  poets,  veiling  their  thoughts  in  mythical  imagery®®,  did  not 
intend  to  describe  their  social,  religious  or  political  life  or  to  supply  us  with 
objective  information  on  concrete  facts®®. 

The  obscurity  of  considerable  parts  of  the  Veda,  and  especially  of  the  Rgveda, 
is  largely  due  to  our  ignorance  of  the  Vedic  age  in  a general  sense  of  the  term, 
that  is  to  say  to  our  deficient  knowledge  of  the  cultural  circumstances  behind 
the  texts  and  the  intellectual  equipment  of  the  poets,  their  view  of  the  world 
and  religious  beliefs,  the  current  mythology  and  ideas  of  the  cosmos  and  tran- 
scendent reality,  the  intricacies  of  the  contemporaneous  ritual  and  the  hieratic 
idiosyncrasies  then  in  vogue.  Unfounded  opinions  and  prejudiced  ideas  intro- 
duced by  former  generations  into  Vedic  exegesis  are  not  yet  completely 
eradicated. 


D.  N.  Shastbi,  15  AIOC,  p.  260. 

B.  S.  Upabhyaya,  Women  in  Rgveda,  Benares  1941;  J.  B.  Chaudhaiu,  The 
position  of  women  in  the  Vedic  ritual.  Thesis  London  1934  (and  elsewhere:  DAm>E- 
KAB,  V.  B.  I,  p.  167). 

This  point  was  much  emphasized  by  Renou,  e.g.  H.  P.,  p.  2. 

Cf.  also  Bloomfield,  at  JAOS  21,  p.  45. 


26 


J.  Gonda  • Yedic  Literature 


4,  Development  of  ‘schools';  appendices  aifid  ancillary  literature 

Biooinfield^  was  no  doubt  in  the  main  right  in  drawing  attention  to  the  poets’ 
awareness  of  the  fact  that  Rgvedic  composition  stretched  over  a long  period^ 
preceding  their  own  time.  “The  Rgveda  is  the  jSnal  expression  of  its  own  type 
of  composition”  and  it  is,  consequently,  often  easy  to  point  out  signs  of  relative 
lateness,  but  extremeh"  difficult  to  jSnd  any  hymns  which  show  positive  signs  of 
coming  from  the  period  w'hen  hymns  of  the  Vedic  variety  were  first  composed. 
It  is  therefore  also  doubtful  that  the  hymns  ascribed  to  a definite  poet  or 
collected  in  the  same  mandala  are,  as  a whole,  anterior  or  posterior  to  other 
such  collections.  There  is  a great  chance  that  any  collection  contains  older  and 
ne-wer  matter  brought  together  without  regard  to  either  absolute  or  relative 
chronolog}^®.  The  language  on  which  the  decision  of  the  problem  as  to  which 
hymns  are  earlier  and  which  later  should  chiefly  rest  varies  not  only  according 
to  the  age  of  the  texts  but  also  according  to  their  purpose,  to  the  milieu  of 
their  origin  and  to  the  artistic  leanings  of  the  poets  Matters  are  complicated 
because  even  within  the  same  hymn — ^for  instance  RV.  1,  164 — there  is  room 
for  distinguishing  ‘early’  and  ‘advanced’  levels  of  Vedic  thoughts 

In  the  19^*^  century  questions  concerning  the  relative  chronology  of  Rgvedic 
hymns®  were  discussed  with  reference  to  the  violation  of  the  order  of  arrange- 
ment^— is  it  a conclusive  proof,  or  only  one  of  the  reasons  for  regarding  certain 
hymns  as  of  later  date?® — ; to  suggestions  based  on  an  ‘unpolished  style,’ 
‘poor  imagery’  or  a presumedly  earty  stage  of  m3rthological  thought® ; to  differen- 
ces in  the  presentation  of  mtyhical  themes  and  to  mythological  traditions^® ; 
to  likewise  disputable  conclusions  drawn  from  lexicographical  data^^.  The 
thesis  wns  defended^-  that  those  hymns  which  have  an  immediate  bearing  upon 
rituals  are  younger. 


^ Blooi^ifield,  Repetitions,  p.  20. 

2 Cf.  p.  74.  According  to  C.  Kuxhak  Raja,  Poet-seers  of  the  Rgveda,  Vedic  and 
pre- Vedic,  Madras  1963  (speculative)  there  were  about  300  seers. 

E\eii  Arxold  spontaneously  admitted  (KZ  38,  p.  495)  that  any  division  of  the 
Rg\’eda  into  periods  is  artificial. 

^ See  Goxda,  Old  Indian,  p.  8. 

® Cf.  XoBiMAX  Bbowx,  in  JAOS  88,  p.  203. 

® Cf.  Bloomdeld,  at  JAOS  21,  p.  42. 

’ See  above,  p.  13. 

® Cf.  Oldexbeeg,  H.  R.  I,  p.  196;  GRASSiMAinsr,  RV.  libers.  I,  p.  552. 

® See  e.g.  Haug,  Ai.  B.  I,  p.  12  (on  RV.  1,  162).  * 

See  e.g.  Weber,  in  SB  Berlin  1900*,  p.  601. 

For  instance,  Hopkes'S,  at  JAOS  17  (1896),  p.  23  attempted  to  determine  the 
relative  age  of  wandofa  \TII  on  the  strength  of  the  fact  that  it  has  many  words  in 
O books  F IX  and  X.  For  criticism:  B.  Geigee,  at 
f at  KZ  37,  p.  207  argued  in  favour  of  a later  date 

ot  KV . , because  it  contains  many  words  that  are  characteristic  of  the  ‘popular 
language’  of  the  Atharvaveda. 

Ludwig,  Rigveda,  m,  p.  X. 


Introduction  to  the  Yeda  in  general  and  the  Rg\’eda  in  particular 


27 


Oldenberg^®,  adopting  the  method  of  statistical  calculations  in  order  to 
delimit  the  so-called  popular  portions  of  the  Rgreda,  found  that  also  those 
parts  of  the  corpus  which  were  not  in  his  view  later  additions,  showed  some 
peculiarities,  for  instance  in  their  metrical  structure.  After  him  Amold^^  took 
upon  himself  to  examine  these  metrical  differences.  In  doing  so  he  assigned,  in 
the  mistaken  conviction  that  the  components  of  the  Veda  constitute  a continual 
chronologic  succession,  the  hrmns,  in  fairly  homogeneous  groups,  to  four 
successive  periods  to  arrive  at  the  conclusion  that  the  formal  scheme  reached  in 
Ms  investigations  is  “a  true  adumbration  of  the  historical  development  of  the 
whole  literature.”  His  conclusions  did  not  vtdn  general  acceptance.  It  was 
rightly  observed^ ^ that  they  take  no  account  of  the  fact  that  the  so-called 
popular  hymns  contain  much  that  is  old;  that  they  did  not  recognize  that 
poems  antique  in  form  may  yet  be  late  in  date^®;  that  they  are  not  free  from 
discrepancies  and  not  always  consistent  uith  other  evidence  They  were 
moreover  not  in  all  respects  borne  out  by  later  statistical  investigations.  Those 
instituted  by  Wiist^® — who  basing  himself  on  grammatical  and  stylistic  forms 
or  phenomena  (including  epithets  etc.)  of  'tjq^ologicaF  value,  arrived  at  the 
conviction  that  mandala  IX  is  the  oldest,  IV  very  old,  I young  and  VIII  very 
controversial® — ^are  no  more  final  than  Belvalkar’s^®  attempt  to  detect  literary 
strata  with  the  help  of  strata  in  the  lists  of  difficult  words  in  the  Xighantu-^. 

Oldexberg,  H.  B.  I. 

Abnold,  at  Festgruss  v.  Roth,  p.  145;  XZ  34,  p.  297;  37,  p.  207;  429;  38,  p. 
491;  JAOS  18,  p,  2;  22,  p.  309;  Vedic  metre  in  its  liistorical  development,  Cam- 
bridge 1905.  It  must  be  added  that  Arnold  did  not  “for  a moment  suggest  that  the 
materials  permit  of  any  accuracy  in  details”  (Vedic  metre,  p.  X).  The  metrical 
peculiarities  must  be  left  undiscussed. 

Bloo:meield,  at  JAOS  21,  p.  47. 

K.  C.  Chattofadhyaya,  8 AIOC,  p.  35. 

Keith,  at  JRAS  1912,  p.  726. 

W.  WusT,  Stilgeschichte  und  Chronologie  des  BS’^'^eda,  Leipzig  1928,  -1966. 

19  With  regard  to  mamlala  VIII  there  has  been  much  disagreement.  It  was  argued 
(Hopkins,  at  JAOS  17  (1896),  p.  84ff.,  discussing  comparatively  frequent  allusions 
to  sheep,  plougMng  (agriculture)  in  VEII,  and  regarding  many  of  the  proper  names 
occurring  in  it  as  ‘late’;  “the  geography  of  VIII  takes  us  across  the  Indus  to  the 
West  more  often  than  to  the  Punjab,  whereas  in  II-VII  the  converse  is  the  case”) 
that  there  are  many  differences  between  this  book  and  II~VII  in  time  and  habitat. 
VTiereas  some  scholars  (Ch.  R.  Lanman,  at  JAOS  10,  p.  576;  Arnold,  at  KZ  34, 
p.  297)  are  on  the  strength  of  linguistic  arguments  of  the  opinion  that  it  was  on  the 
whole  the  earliest  book,  others  held  an  opposite  view  (see  e.g.  Brunnhofer,  at 
KZ  25,  p.  329;  374;  Bloosifield,  Repetitions,  p-  21;  according  to  Hopkins,  in 
JAOS  17,  p.  26  mandala  VHT  sides  more  with  I,  IX  and  X;  in  JAOS  16,  p.  275  tMs 
scholar  relied  on  occurrences  of  numerical  formulae.  According  to  IV-  IVtiST,  at 
IVZEjVI  34,  p.  214;  35,  p.  165  mandala  VHI,  without  being  the  oldest  part  of  the 
Rgveda,  gives  evidence  of  the  relations  with  the  preMstoric  ‘asianic’  culture  of  the 
14*  cent.  B.C.).  According  to  Hopkins  mandala  V has  an  intermediate  position 
between  VIH  and  the  other  family  books. 

S.  K.  Belvalkar,  in  2 AIOC  (1923),  p.  11. 

2^  See  p.  32. 


28 


J.  Gonda  • Yedie  Literature 


Basing  htniself  on  a coiaparison  between  obsolete  and  productive  words 
Pouclia®®  arrived  at  conclusions  which,  though  perhaps  probable  in  some  of 
their  in,ain  lines,  cannot  claim  finality  in  many  particulars^®.  These  investiga- 
tions are  invalidated  by  the  fact  that  the  statistics  of  the  different  criteria  are 
not  always  in  harmony  with  one  another,  in  the  second  place  by  the  difference 
of  opinion  as  to  the  relative  weight  of  the  criteria®^  and  last  but  not  least  by 
the  stereotyped  literary  form  of  the  Rgveda  and  the  probability  of  recasts  and 
mutual  borrowings.  Bloomfield’s^®  suggestion  to  distinguish  between  inferior 
repetitions  pointing  to  a later  date  of  the  h3mms  in  which  they  occur  and  more 
authentic  and  older  text-places,  while  introducing  an  element  of  subjectiveness, 
cannot — despite  the  probability  of  part  of  his  chronological  conclusions — 
obviate  this  difficulty. 

Attempts  at  determining  the  date  of  Vedic  hymns  with  the  help  of  puranic 
passages,  ■whether  or  not  dealing  ■with  Vedic  persons®®,  or  at  finding  support  of 
a relative  chronology  in  the  few  passages  which  might  refer  to  historical 
events®^  can,  because  of  the  unreliability  of  legendary  traditions,  hardly  be 
expected  to  lead  to  acceptable  results.  Conclusions  about  contemporaneity  or 
difference  in  generation®®  are  hazardous. 

Most  western  scholars  are  nevertheless  agreed  that  the  Rgveda  contains  a 
number  of  hymns  w^hich  by  their  special  characteristics  in  subject,  metre  and 
language  differ  from  the  mairi  body  of  the  poems  and  associate  themselves 
instead  with  the  Atharvaveda®®.  They  are  generally  described  as  'popular’  and 
regarded  as  later  additions,  which,  too,  might  have  been  spread  over  a long 
period  of  time®®.  Among  these  hymns  are  the  last  parts  of  certain  collections 
which— like  those  of  many  other  Sanskrit  works— notwithstanding  the  care 
bestowed  on  a well-considered  arrangement,  assume  the  character  of  appen- 


T * 1 Schichtung  des  Rgveda.  Bestimmung  des  relativen  Alters  der 

Lieder  des  Rg\^eda  mit  Hilfe  zahlenmaBiger  Berechnung,  ArchOr  13,  p.  103;  225; 
15,  p.  65.  The  author  disregards  possibilities  of  recast  and  individual  preference  of 
poets,  specific  characteristics  of  oral  poetry  and  differences  in  milieus  and  traditions  • 
bases  lumself  in  determining  the  meaning  of  words  on  Grassmann’s  antiquated 
draws  unconvmcing  conclusions  from  cases  of  repetition  of  words. 

^ literature  see  Wackebnagel-Renoij,  Introduction  gen^rale  (above, 
p.  n.  ly],  p.  o2. 


Cf.  e.g.  also  BnooMFELD,  Repetitions,  p.  636. 

Re^titions  p.  634;  cf.  p.  13.  It  may  be  recalled  that  after 
Bloomfield  our  maight  mto  the  significance  of  formulaic  diction  and  oral  poetry 
m gener^l^  considerably  deepened.  How  are  we.  generaUy  speaJdng,  to  knowS 
defin^e!^  T ^ is  imitative  and  Siwed  from  a 

£ wl  ^ verses  which  could 

be  freely  u»d  by  any  poet  for  new  purposes  ’ 

eH"pS  V “ ““8“ 

•*  41-42,  p.’™'. 


Introduction  to  the  Veda  in  general  and  the  Rgi^eda  in  particular 


29 


dices®h  j^Iany  of  these  are  also  linguistically  strongly  suggestive  of  the  Athar- 
vaveda:  1,  191;  4,  58;  5,  87^2.  7^  59^  22=^^.  7^  204^^;  8,  103®^*  9,  10'9-114^®. 
It  was  however  wisely  observed^’  that  the  difference  between  the  hieratic  and 
the  popular  hymns®®  is  not  necessarily,  or  exclusively,  one  of  date,  but  also,  or 
even  largely  one  of  dialect,  style  or  subject-matter,  and  (we  may  add)  of  origin 
(social  or  religious  milieu).  Turning  for  a moment  to  the  ‘atharvanic’  passages 
we  do  well  to  distinguish  two  groups.  The  pertinent  hymns  or  places  are  either 
in  language  and  subject-matter  reminiscent  of  the  phraseology  and  contents 
of  the  Atharvaveda  or  recur  with  or  without  important  variations  in  that 
corpus®®.  A discussion  of  the  latter  must  be  postponed  to  chapter  VI,  but  here 
attention  may  be  dravn  to  the  charm  against  poison  and  other  destructive 
influences  addressed  to  the  gods  and  goddesses  in  general  7,  50,  the  Manyu 
hymn  10,  83 ; the  so-called  praise  of  the  medicinal  herbs  10,  97 ; the  ‘battle 
hymn’  10,  103^®;  the  hymn  to  counteract  the  disease  called  yaksma  10,  161 
(cf.  AV.  3,  11)^^,  etc.  Sometimes  the  atharvanic  features  are  Hniited  to  a flnal 
stanza : 10,  36,  14  (invocation  of  four  points  to  which  the  person  speaking  can 
look)  or  to  a group  of  stanzas  at  the  end  of  a hymn:  1,  23,  16-24^®;  9,  113, 
10-11. 

Already  at  an  early  time  the  contents  of  the  Rgveda — ^like  the  other  Vedas, 
a subject  for  oral  instruction  to  male  children  of  the  three  higher  classes — ^must 
have  been  transmitted  in,  and  to  a certain  extent  have  developed  as,  independ- 
ent traditions  or  “branches”  (mkhd)^^.  Tradition  has  it  that  this  name  is 
given  to  those  ‘schools’  which  possess  a recension  of  the  samhitd  of  their  own, 
sn  contradistinction  to  the  subdivisions  called  carana  which  are  not  in  pos- 
tession  of  such  a text.  However,  the  former  term  applies  first  and  foremost  to  a 
iext  or  recension  which  formed  the  subject  of  study,  the  latter  to  those  following 
it,  those  brahmins  who  recite  a definite  text  or  studied  it  in  small  ‘colleges’ 

Cf.  e.g.  OiiDEXBEBG,  H.  R.  I,  p.  196;  K.  Geldner-A.  KIaegi,  Siebenzig  Lieder 
des  Rigveda,  Tubingen  1875,  p.  12;  Arnoud,  in  KZ  37,  p.  209.  For  differences  in 
phraseology  (baroque):  Rexotj,  E.  V.  P.  XIII,  p.  159  (on  RV.  8,  103). 

OLDEiUBEBO,  Noten,  I,  p.  368;  Rexou,  E.  V.  P.  X,  p.  *96. 

This  stanza  belongs,  wdth  1,  99  (,  1);  10,  121,  10;  10,  190  (,  1--3)  to  the  six 
stanzas  which  were  obvioxisly  not  recognized  as  genuine  by  Sakalya,  w’ho  left  them 
without  a padapatha. 

Oluenbebg,  Noten,  11,  p.  68. 

Renott,  E.  V.  P.  XIII,  p.  159. 

PISCHBL,  V.  S.  I,  p.  107;  Gelbneb,  RV.  IH,  p.  115;  Renotj,  E.  V.  P.  IX,  p.  6. 

BLOoaiEiEm,  at  JAOS  21,  p.  47 ; cf.  A.  V.  G.  B.,  p.  46. 

Cf.  Goistda,  Old  Indian,  p.  17. 

Cf.  e.g.  ?.V.  10,  128:  AV.  5,  3;  10,  137:  AV.  4,  13  and  6,  91,  3;  for  10,  109  cf. 
AV.  5,  17  (see  S.  S.  Bhawe,  at  Festschrift  W.  Kirfel,  Bonn  1955,  p.  17), 

Cf.  Geldneb,  RV.  m,  p.  320. 

See  Renou,  E.  V.  P.  H,  p.  19. 

Rexou,  E.  V.  P.  IV,  p.  17. 

L.  Rexou,  Les  ecoles  vediques  et  la  formation  du  Veda,  Paris  1947 ; B.  V.  P. 
‘VrE,  p-  28. 

For  particulars:  Rexou,  o.c.,  p.  220;  Ludwig,  Rigveda,  HI,  p.  32;  V.  S. 


so 


J.  Gonda  • Vedic  Literature 


Tliey  were  in  all  probability  the  men  who  possessed  or  knew  many  rc  verses 
(bahirca)  mentioned  in  bralinmnas^^.  Many  particulars  regarding  the  origin  of 
these  Schools’  and  the  development  of  Vedism  in  its  entirety  will  escape  us  for 
ever  because  the  texts  are  silent  on  many  points  w'hich  we  v/ould  like  to  know. 
T\Tiat  seems  certain  or  may  reasonably  be  conjectured  is  that  in  that  space  of 
time  in  which  the  Vedic  ritual  was  taking  the  form  which  is  known  to  us  spe- 
cialists in  the  m}i:Mco-ritnal  speculation  and  ceremonial  practices  and  observ- 
ances must  have  collected  their,  largely  non-Rgvedic,  formulas;  that  the 
mantras  of  these  groups  were  distinctive ; that  to  the  activity  of  these  promul- 
gators— ^after  whom  the  schools  were  called — and  their  descendants  and 
foflowers^®  we  owe  the  large  collections  of  the  Taittiriyas,  Ivathas,  Maitrayani- 
yas,  followed  by  the  Vajasaneyins,  which  they  needed  with  a view  to  ritual 
practice  and  instruction;  that  the  later  texts  follow^ed  this  scission  mainly  with 
a view  to  utiHzmg  the  respective  mantras;  that  this  fourfold  Yajurveda  seems 
to  have  become  the  model  for  the  constitution  of  schools  of  other  Vedas  w^hich 
not  infrequently  differed  only  in  minor  details ; that  divergences  in  textual  or — 
no  doubt  in  most  cases — ^ritual  particulars  as  well  as  the  spread  of  Vedism 
over  larger  regions  led  to  further  divisions  which  often  differ  from  each  other 
only  in  insignificant  details^’;  that  in  this  way  also  the  followers  of  the  isolated 
Rgveda  came  to  be  equipped  with  the  different  ritual  works  attributed  to 
Asvalayana  and  Sahkhayana^®;  that  the  increasiag  authority  and  influence  of 
the  Rgveda  Samhita,  the  arrangement  of  the  mantras  and  the  dosage  of  Rgvedic 
and  foreign  elements  led  to  the  compilation  of  new  sutras,  that  is  to  new  car  anas. 
This  means  that  these  schools  are  mainly  characterized  by  the  more  or  less^® 
faithful  conservation  of  definite  texts.  Nevertheless  the  Mimamsa®o_and  the 
orthodox  in  general— taught  that  the  Veda  is  present  in  every  iakhd^^. 

It  w'as  a custom  of  brahminical  families  and  castes  to  trace  their  descent 
from  a \ edic  rsi  and  to  claim  to  be  hereditary  students  of  the  sacred  literature 
and  its  auxiliaries  A brahmin  never  belonged  to  more  than  one  school,  either 

Ghate,  lectures  on  the  Rg\^eda,  Bombay  21925,  p.  44;  M.  Ghosh,  in  IHQ  11,  p. 
761;  S.  K.  Gitpta,  in  PO  16,  p.  48;  G.  Sagab  Rai,  at  Purana  15  (1973),  p.  IZ3; 
P.  D.  Chandbatbe,  in  Bulletin  Chunilal  Gandhi  Vidyabhavan  15  (1970),  p.  1.  One 
^ould  not  follow  V.  V.  Dixit,  Relation  of  the  epics  to  the  brahmana  literature, 
Poona  J 950,  p.  47  in  regarding  these  ‘colleges’  as  something  like  our  academies.  See 
also  Kasikavrtti  2,  4,  3.  The  assembly  of  scholars  is  a cultural  institution  of  great 
antiquity  m India. 

See  e.g.  AiB,  2.  36,  6;  6,  18,  7;  SB.  10,  5,  2,  20. 

See  also  Eggelixg,  Sb.  I,  p.  XXY. 

Of.  also  Rexoit,  ha  JA  240,  p.  140;  Macdoxeel,  H.  S.  L.,  p.  51. 

The  sole  distinction  betwreen  these  was  that  the  former  recognized  the  Vala- 
hvn^  mtegrahy  as  canonical,  the  latter  rejected  a few  verses  of  these 

« Of.  ViSBXA  Baxdhu,  at  VIJ  2,  p.  1. 

See  below,  p.  49. 

“ Rexou,  O.C.,  p.  219. 

“ J.  Beotoh,  The  early  brahmanieal  system  of  gotra  and  pravara,  Cambridge 


Introduction  to  the  Veda  in  general  and  the  Rgveda  in  particular  31 


through  family  tradition  or  initiation,  bnt  a learned  man  also  study  texts 
belonging  to  different  car  anas.  Although  authorities  strongly  dissuaded  from 
adopting  customs  of  those  who  followed  other  sdkhds,  there  is  a rale  that  “what 
is  not  stated  in  one’s  otiii  sdkJid  may  be  taken  from  others,  if  it  is  not  found 

contradictor}"” 

Of  tile  history  and  geographical  distribution  of  the  Vedic  schools  we  have 
only  a radimeiitary  knowledge.  The  only  comparatively  ancient  source  dealing 
vith  them  as  a whole  is  the  metrical  Caranavyuha  “Exposition  of  the  (Vedic) 
schools”®^,  an  in  any  case  post- Vedic  anonymous  work  of  little  importance.  It 
is  reckoned  among  the  appendices  (parimsfa)  of  the  White  Yajurveda — in 
another  recension,  of  the  Atharvaveda^^ — and  gives  an  (incomplete)  enumer- 
ation of  the  Vedic  schools,  leaving  us  almost  in  the  dark  about  those  “branches” 
that  became  extinct  at  an  early  date.  The  author’s  statement  that  a pregnant 
woman  who  hears  this  text  vill  give  birth  to  a son  who  is  thoroughly  conversant 
vdth  the  Veda  (§47)  betraj-s  the  character  of  the  treatise^®.  WTdle  the  Maha- 
bharata  overflows  vith  m}"thical  and  legendary  details  on  the  Veda,  any  precise 
information  on  the  Mkhds  and  car  anas  is  in  the  large  majority  of  later  works 
lacking.  Although  several  purdnas  and  other  works  know  the  genealogies  of 
Vedic  teachers^’  only  a few  commentators — among  whom  Sayana  and  Maha- 
deva — pay  some  attention  to  the  geographic  situation  of  the  schools.  Even  such 
traditionalists  as  the  followers  of  the  Purva-^Iimamsa  rarely  give  names  or 
other  factual  information.  The  Vedic  texts  themselves  seldom  mention  where 
they  were  composed  or  in  which  region  their  authority  extended.  Moreover,  the 
place  of  origin  of  the  different  schools  is  not  identical  vith  that  of  the  samhitas. 
On  the  other  hand,  all  Yajurveda  sarnMtds  and  several  hrdhmanas  refer  to  the 
region  of  the  Kuru-Pancalas  (in  the  Mddle  Countr}',  Madhyadesa,  the  KSV. 
and  W.  of  the  Ganges- Yamuna  region)®®  so  that  the  conclusion  is  v^rranted 
that  the  Yajurveda  and  perhaps  the  ‘classical’  Vedic  ritualism  had  their  origin 
in  that  region ; but  certain  schools  existed  elsewhere,  even  in  the  South.  The 
inscriptions,  though  making  frequent  mention  of  brahmins  versed  in  the 
Rgveda,  contain  only  short  notices  of  the  schools.  Two  of  these,  Asvalayana 


1953;  IJ.  ISr.  Ghoshal,  The  position  of  the  brahmanas  in  ancient  Bengal,  ABORI  46 
(1965),  p.  67. 

Kane,  H.  Dh.  II,  p.  328. 

A.  Webeb,  Carana\^uha,  at  I.  S.  Ill  (1855),  p.  247;  W.  Seegling,  Die  Re- 
zensionen  des  Carana^wiiha,  Thesis  Berlin,  Leipzig  1906. 

Athar\-aveda-Parisista  49. 

For  some  details:  L.  Renou,  The  Vedic  schools  and  epigraphy,  Comm.  Vol. 
Siddheswar  Varma,  Hoshiarpur  1950, 11,  p.  214;  D.  Bhattachabya,  The  condition 
of  Vedic  studies  in  ancient  and  medieval  Bengal,  OH  3,  p.  211. 

Cf.  G.  Sagab  Rai,  Sdkhds  of  the  Rgveda  as  mentioned  in  the  purdnas,  Purana 
6,  p.  97. 

For  particulars  see  IVLacdoneix  and  Ejeith,  Vedic  index,  I,  p.  165.  Cf.  AiB.  8, 
14,  3. 


32 


J.  Gonda  • Vedic  Literature 


and  SanMiayana,  survive,  but  tbe  latter,  localized  in  Kanauj  and  Malva — ^in 
modem  times  only  in  Gujarat^® — ^always  remained  far  behind,  a fact  confirmed 
by  the  rarity  of  iSankhayana  manuscripts.  The  A^valayanas,  held  in  higher 
esteem,  were  widely  dispersed:  Bengal,  Jodhpur,  and  especially  in  the  South. 
The  oft-mentioned  non-specified  Egvedins,  extending  over  large  parts  of  the 
subcontinent,  are  no  doubt  adherents  of  the  latter  tradition®®. 

In  the  preceding  pages  we  had  occasion  to  observe  that  aheady  at  an  early 
date  the  Rgveda  was  subjected  to  interpretation.  A good  deal  of  the  oldest 
comment  is  contained  in  the  ritualistic  discussions  of  the  hrahmamis^^ , Although 
this  class  of  literature  explains  the  Vedic  stanzas  mostly  with  reference  to  the 
rites,  it  has  preserved  some  reminiscences  of  other  principles  of  exegesis  (ety- 
mological, legendary,  metaphysical)  behind  which  there  still  was  an  essential 
unity®®.  Apart  from  the  hrdhmaruis  the  only  exegesis  originating  in  the  Vedic 
period  is  that  of  the  Nirukta®®.  This  work,  compiled  by  Yaska — ^who  may  have 
lived  not  later  than  500  B.C. — and  the  sole  representative  of  the  veddnga 
dealing  with  et3rmolog5^  (nirukta)  is  a commentary,  handed  down  in  two 
recensions,  of  an  older  work,  the  Nighantu  (usually  in  the  plural,  Nighantavafi) 
or  Naighantuka,  w'hich,  likewise  in  two  recensions®^,  consists  of  lists  of — almost 
exclusively — Rgvedic  words : groups  of  synonyms,  difficult  vocables  (naigama ), 
a classification  of  divine  names  (daivata).  Yaska®®,  furnishing  his  readers  with 
a considerable  number  of  et3miological  interpretations  of  these  words,  accom- 
panies them  with  a sort  of  continuous  explanation  of  the  stanzas  in  which  they 
occur®®.  Besides  showing  that  the  Rgveda  had  in  its  time  a very  fixed  form 
\ aska  s work  is  of  interest  in  that  it  gives  evidence  of  the  author’s  purpose  in 
composing  it  : 


On  the  gaiikhayanas  (Kausitakins)  see  e.g.  PB.  17,  4,  3;  for  differences 
between  the  two:  A.  D.  Sixgh,  at  25  AIOC,  S.  P.  (1969),  p.  24;  26  AIOC  S P 
(1972),  p.  380.  » • • 

Occasionally  we  hear  of  ‘colleges’  (matha),  teachers  and  students,  e.g.  in  the 
Ewayiram  inscription  of  Rajendra  I (1014^1044  A.D.),  of  kings  protecting  Vedic 
^notos,  of  such  scholars  reciting  the  Vedas  at  the  times  of  worship  etc. ; for  other 
details:  Rexoxt  E.  V.  P.  VI,  p.  18;  B.  Nagaswamy,  Vedic  scholars  in  the  ancient 
Tamil  country,  VTJ  3,  p.  192. 

“ See  p.  368fF. 

M schools  of  Vedic  interpretation,  JGJRI  16,  p.  143 

The  hiighaptu  and  the  Nirukta,  edited  by  L.  Saeup,  Univ.  of  the  Paniab  1927 ; 
the  analysis  m R.  Roth,  Jaska’s  Nirukta,  Gottingen  1847-1852  is  stiU  worth  con- 

Nighantu  and  the  Nirukta, 
Oxford  1920  (Dehu  1962).  Of.  e.g.  also  H.  Skold,  The  Nirukta,  Lund  1926;  Sieo, 
Sagemtoffe  p.  10.  For  Yaska’s  significance  in  general  see  H.  Schaem:,  in  Vol.  IV 


Introduction  to  the  Veda  in  general  and  the  Rg\''eda  in  particular  33 


^‘The  seers  had  direct  mtuitive  insight.  By  oral  instruction  they  handed  down 
the  hjTuns  to  later  generations  who  were  destitute  of  this  insight.  The  later 
generations,  declining  in  (power  of)  oral  communication,  repeated  (compiled) 
this  w’ork,  the  Veda,  and  the  auxiliary  Vedic  treatises  from  memory,  in  order  to 
illustrate  (comprehend)  their  meaning”  (1,  20). 

Of  Yaska’s  cominentators®^  the  most  important  is  Ihirga,  of  uncertain  date®®, 
who,  repeating  every  word  of  Yaska,  seems  to  have  written  his  work  in  order  to 
meet  the  demand  for  a good  text,  elucidation  of  obscure  passages,  and  amplifi- 
cation of  Yaska’s  arguments®®. 

Another  important  work,  historically  wedged  in  between  the  Xirukta  and 
the  Sarvtoukramam,  is  the  Brhaddevata’®,  the  ‘Extensive  (repertory)  of  the 
gods’  (4*^  cent.  B.C.  ?).  Vliile  borrowing  largely  from  the  former,  w^hich  is  in 
many  places  repeated  verbcdim,  this  metrical  text  is  borrowed  from  still  more 
abundantly  by  the  latter  which  in  its  wording  is  in  all  that  concerns  the  deities 
of  the  Rgveda  based  on  that  of  the  Brhaddevata.  VTiereas  owing  to  its  very 
nature  the  connexion  of  this  wnrk  with  the  Rgveda  is  very  close  and  other  Vedic 
texts,  among  which  the  Aitareya-Brahmana,  occasionally  throw  light  on  it, 
several  of  the  forty  legends w'hich  it  contains  are  historically  linked  with  those 
of  the  Mahabharata^^.  These  very  valuable  narrative  passages^® — approximately 
one-fourth  of  the  whole  work  or  about  300  slokas,  constituting  the  oldest 
systematic  Sanskrit  collection  of  legends — ^are  inserted  to  explain  the  circum- 
stances under  which  the  Rgvedic  hymns  they  are  connected  with  were  corn- 
posed^^.  The  main  object  of  the  Brhaddevata — ^which  is  quite  mechanically  divi- 
ded into  eight  chapters  ( adhydyas ) — ^is,  indeed,  to  state  the  deity  for  each 
hjmm,  stanza’®,  hemistich  and  quarter  or  fada  (1,  1);  1,  2f. : 

‘Tn  every  formula  one  should  know  the  divinity  with  exactness,  for  he  who 
knows  the  div^inities  of  the  mantras,  understands  their  object.  He  is  capable  of 
giv^ing  an  (authoritative)  opinion  as  to  the  intentions  (of  the  mantras)  which  were 
contained  in  them  at  the  time  when  the  mantras  were  revealed  to  the  rsis  (and) 
as  to  their  correct  understanding  and  (that)  of  the  various  ceremonies  (connected 
with  them).” 


Sajruf,  The  Nighantu  (transL),  p.  49. 

But  in  any  case  before  1387,  the  date  of  a manuscript  of  his  commentary, 

®®  Edited  (with  the  Nirukta)  by  P.  Sivadatta,  Bombay  1912. 

The  Brhad-devata  attributed  to  Saunaka,  edited  by  A.  A.  Macdoneul  (with 
a translation,  introduction  and  notes),  2 vol.,  Cambridge  Mass.  1904,  -Delhi  1965. 

Almost  all  Rgvedic  stories  are  amplified  with  an  epilogue  which  is  not  based 
on  the  Samhita. 

Part  of  the  pertinent  material  has  been  studied  by  Sieg,  Sagenstoffe,  who 
erroneously  supposed  that  the  Brhaddevata  is  posterior  to  the  Mahabharata;  cf. 
also  S.  F.  Michauski,  in  RO  24  (i961)  p.  29. 

See  e.g.  below,  p.  126  f. 

Cf.  Macdois^ell,  at  DLZ  1903,  2302. 

“A  stanza  is  held  to  belong  to  that  deity,  to  whom  a seer  addresses  his  eulogies 
with  a particular  desire  and  from  whom  he  wishes  to  obtain  his  object”  (Yaska, 
Nir.  7,  1). 


34 


J.  Gonda  • Vedic  Literature 


However,  tJie  Rgveda-SamMta  and  its  hrdhmanas  do  not  supply  us  with  a 
comprehensive  account  of  all  the  circumstances  under  which  the  hymns  were 
revealed  and  the  deit^r  is  not  alway’s  known^®.  The  interpretations  given  are 
therefore  often  neither  historically  reliable  nor  such  as  to  satisfy  the  require- 
ments of  modem  scholarship’^.  The  book  conta^ins  also  other  information  such 
as  an  enumeration  of  the  rsis  (2,  129-131 ; 3,  55-57),  of  female  rsis  (2,  82-84), 
of  the  mounts  of  the  various  gods  (4,  140-142),  a discussion  of  the  character  of 
the  Yaisvadeva  hymns  (2,  132-134;  3,  41-52),  and  an  account  of  the  Apri 
hymns  (2,  158-3,  32).  There  is  a very  long  introduction  (1-2,  125)  which  con- 
sists mainly*  of  a classification  of  the  deities  as  well  as  of  grammatical  matter’® 
and  at  the  end  a section  dealing  with  the  gods  who  preside  over  various  kinds  of 
ritual  verses  and  over  the  different  tones  on  which  they  are  sung  (8,  104-123). 
The  -work  is  traditionally  attributed  to  Saunaka,  but  the  fact  that  this  authority 
is  not  less  than  fifteen  times  mentioned  by  name,  generally  with  other  author- 
ities among  ivhom  Yaska,  when  mention  is  made  of  different  views,  whereas  the 
writer  several  times  uses  the  first  person  to  indicate  himself  makes  us  hesitate 
to  affirm  that  the  authorship  was  Saunaka’s  rather  than  somebody  else’s  who 
belonged  to  Ms  school  (Asvalay^ana  ?)’®. 

No  more  than  passing  mention  can  in  this  context  be  made  of  the  six  so-called 
“members  of  the  Veda’*  (veddnga),  the  auxiliary  subjects  of  study,  wMch  in 
course  of  time  were  to  develop  into  separate  branches  of  science.  They  are 
phonetics  ( iiksd),  metrics  ( chmdas ),  grammar  ( vydkarana ),  etymology  (niruk- 
ia),  ritual  or  religious  practice  (kcdpa)  and  astronomy  (jyotisa).  Originating  in 
the  Vedic  period,  probably  between  the  8*  and  4^  centuries  B.C.,  they  were 
to  promote  a better  reciting  and  understanding  of  the  Vedic  texts  and  their 
proper  ritual  employment.  In  contradistinction  to  the  latter  wMch  are  regarded 
as  “heard’*  or  “revealed,**  and  from  the  beginning  orally  transmitted  (the 
eternal  and  infallible  ^ruti,  later  including  also  the  upanisads)  they  were — like 
the  epics,  purdnas  and  especially  the  dharma  texts — looked  upon  as  remem- 
bered and  handed  down  by  human  intermediaries  (smrti).  As  such  they  are 
authoritative  as  long  as  they^  are  not  contradicted  by  the  iruti. 

The  anukramanls^^ , though  not  belonging  to  the  veddngas  proper,  cannot  be 

separated  from  these  auxihary  sciences.  These  succinct  versified  indexes 

*^uvakanukramani,  Arsanukramani®i  and  three  others®^ — ^provide  us  with 
Hsts  of  rsis,  metres,  deities,  sections  of  the  Rgveda  and  (the  Chandanukramani) 


Cf.  V.  Gh.  Bhattachabyya,  in  OH  2 (1954),  p.  337. 

” Cf.  e.g.  Geldneb,  RV.  I,  p.  227  (on  RV.  1,  164). 

Cf.  Macdonell,  in  Aihum  Kem,  p.  333. 

Cf.  A.  Kuhx,  in  Webeb,  I.  S.  I,  p.  101. 

«a  C.  KirxHA^r  Raja,  The  Anukramani  literature,  in  6 AIOC  (1930),  p.  541  • H.  G. 
^ ^AHABi,  Pada\ndhana  of  Saimaka,  Adyar  Library  Pamphlet  22  (Madras’ 1950), 

« Festgrnss  v.  Eoth,  p.  107.  The  text  comprises  292  ^lokas. 

jor  details  see  Macdonell,  H.  S,  L.,  p.  273. 


Introduction  to  the  Veda  in  general  and  the  in  particular  35 


the  iminhers  of  the  stanzas  of  the  hymns®®.  Belonging  to  the  last  centuries  of 
the  Vedie  period  ( i 5^3^'^  cent.  B.C.)  they  are  attributed  to  iSaunaka  except 
the  more  recent  and  qrstematic  prose  aiZ^m-work  called  Sarvanukramani,  a 
‘'General  Index”  {±  350  B.C.),  which,  combioing  the  data  contained  in  the 
metrical  anukramams,  is  held  to  have  been  composed  by  Katyayana,  the  famous 
teacher  of  the  Yajurveda®^.  With  the  Srautasutra  of  the  White  Yajurveda  by 
the  same  author  it  has  the  concise  character  of  its  style  in  common®®. 

A number®®  of  appendages  {khila^'^  “supplement,”  properly  a piece  of  waste 
land  situated  between  cultivated  fields,  “that  which  fills  a gap”)®®,  as  obviously 
more  recent  material,  never  found  admission  into  the  padajMtha  and  anukrama- 
ms.  Although  they  occur  in  the  manuscripts  which  follow  the  asiaka  grouping 
as  annexes  to  some  particular  suktas  or  mandcdm^^  always  in  the  same  places, 
they  are  in  the  adhydya  divisions  regarded  as  non-existent  and  not  commented 
upon  by  Sayana.  Two  groups  can  be  distinguished,  those  viiich  show  affinity  in 
contents  with  the  preceding  sukta^^  and  independent  texts.  Belonging  to  Vedic 
times  they  reach  back  to  different  periods;  most  of  them  seem  to  be  contempo- 
raneous with  the  compilation  of  the  samhitds  other  than  the  Rgveda.  They  must 
have  belonged  to  a recension  different  from  Sakalya’s,  but  it  is  not  possible  to 
say  to  which.  The  whole  mass  of  them  constituted  already  in  Sayana’s  time  a 
separate  collection  (Khilagrantha)®^,  including  also  the  Kuntapa  hymns  at  the 
end  of  the  last  book  of  the  Atharvaveda.  This  collection  must  have  been  made 
at  a much  earlier  date,  because  it  has  a khila-anukrarmnl  of  its  own.  Several 

They  do  not  comprise  indices  of  the  ritual  application  of  the  mantras. 

Die  Sarvanukramani  des  Katyayana  zum  Kigveda,  herausgegeben  von  A.  A. 
MACDONELii,  Thesis  Leipzig,  Oxford  1885;  Katyay ana’s  Sarvanukramam  . . . with, 
extracts  from  Sadguru^isya’s  (12^  cent.)  commentary,  edited  by  A.  A.  Macdonell, 
Oxford  1886;  cf.  also  Scheftelowitz,  at  ZII  1,  p.  89.  IVIacdonele,  Brhad-devata, 
p.  XXI.  Some  anukramanls  of  later  origin  need  not  detain  us;  see  IlENOij(-FrLLio-^ 
zat),  I.  C.  I,  p.  306;  B^gvedanukramani  of  Madhavabhatta,  ed.  C.  Kunhan  Raja, 
Madras  1932;  some  editions  by  Vishva  Bandhij  and  others,  Hoshiarpur  1966 
(Da^tdeeab,  Bibliography,  m,  p.  14). 

The  information  given  by  these  texts  should  of  course  be  critically  evaluated; 
see  e.g.  Geldkee,  AuswahJ,  11,  p.  155;  RV.  I,  p.  6;  Rexou,  E.  V.  P.  IV,  p.  34. 

In  the  tradition  and  editions  the  number  varies  considerably : the  Brhaddevata 
mentions  37  (Macdonell,  Brhad-devata,  p.  XXX,  with  particulars;  116),  in  Max 
Muixeb’s  edition  there  are  32  of  them  (®rV,  p.  519);  in  Atjfbecht’s  edition  there 
are  25  (^II,  p.  672).  The  most  important  and  extensive  collection  is  preserved  in  a 
Kashmir  manuscript  of  the  Rgveda  (1575  A.D.  ?);  it  has  been  edited  and  studied 
by  Scheftelowitz  (see  below,  n.  88). 

The  term  khila  does  not  appear  before  the  Anuvakanukramam  and  Arsanu- 
kramam  attributed  to  Saunaka. 

J.  Scheftelowitz,  Die  Apokryphen  des  Rgveda,  Breslau  1906;  ^1966;  Keith, 
at  JRAS  1907,  p.  224;  C.  G.  EAshikab,  in  B^'^da-Samhita  ed.  by  Sontaxke  and 
EIashieab,  IV,  p.  891 ; K.  Pabameswaba  Aithal,  khilas  and  the  sutras  oF 

Asvalayana,  ALB  33  (1969),  p.  82. 

It  is  customary  to  publish  them  as  a supplement  to  the  Sakala  recension. 

Cf.  V.  M.  Aptb,  at  VIJ  3 (1965),  p.  17. 

Cf.  Sayana,  on  AiB.  6,  32,  1. 


36 


J.  Gonda  * Vedic  Literature 


kMlm  are  also  included  in  other  samhitds,  either  in  an  identical  form  or  with 
variants.  Occasionally,  hrdh7rmm,s  quote  them  for  liturgical  use  and  the  hotar 
recites  from  them  during  the  performance  of  minor  ritual  ceremonies®^.  They 
do  not  however  stand  in  close  relation  to  the  rites  in  which  they  are  used  and 
were  obviously  handed  down  with  less  care®®.  On  the  occasion  of  a sacrifice  in 
honour  of  the  defunct  Ichilas  should,  according  to  Manu  3,  232,  be  recited 
together  with  the  Yeda,  books  on  dJiarma,  legends,  tales  and  ‘purd'ms/  In  some 
regions  of  India  females  of  brahmin  descent  were  allowed  to  read  them®^. 
Khilm  are  not  peculiar  to  the  Rgveda  alone;  AV.  20,  127£r.,  some  of  which 
identical  with  Rgveda  Ichilas^  and  VS.  26ff.  are  of  the  same  supplementary 
character®^. 

To  these  apocrypha  belong  also  the  small  collections  of  sacrificial  litanies  of 
comparatively  high  antiquity  called  praisasuJctdni,  i.e.  suktas  containing 
directions  or  invitations  addressed  to  the  hotar  in  order  to  have  him  recite 
definite  consecratory  texts  (ydjyd j®®,  and  the  nividas.  The  latter  represent  the 
oldest  prose  preserved  from  the  period  of  the  Rgveda®’^.  Most  of  them  begin 
with  an  invitation  to  enjoy  the  oblation,  e.g.  “Indra  must  together  with  the 
Maruts  have  a drink  of  Soma’’.  The  so-called  'pwrorucas^^,  formulas  recited  in  the 
morning  before  the  principal  hymn,  seem  to  be  of  the  same  age.  Some  places  in 
the  praisasuktas  are  closely  related  to  definite  passages  of  the  Rgveda. 

Special  mention  must  be  made  of  hhila  2, 6®®,  the  well-known  Srisukta  addres- 
sed to  the  goddess  Sri.  Its  central  part  reaches  back  to  the  Vedic  period;  it 
supplies  us  with  highly  valuable  information  about  this  goddess  of  prosperity, 
fertility  and  happiness  and  guardian  deity  of  the  farmers,  who  does  not  appear 
before  the  Vajasane^u-Samhita.  This  hymn,  which  is  also  handed  down  sepa- 
rately in  many  manuscripts  and  has  more  than  once  been  commented  upon,  is 
recited  from  olden  times^®®.  Three  very  small  texts,  called  Sarnjnanam  (on 

Rbnou,  in  JA  250,  p.  163. 

Gargya  Narayana,  on  AsvS.  1,  1,  1 makes  a distinction  between  the  well- 
studied  and  carefully  transmitted  texts  (the  sarndniTidya)  on  one  hand  and  the 
khilm  on  the  other. 

On  Central  India:  F.  E.  Haul,  JASB  28  (1859),  p.  121. 

« See  also  B.  H.  Kapadla,  The  relation  of  the  Khilani  with  the  RVSamhita 
and  their  position  in  Indian  literature,  JUB  N.  S.  29  (1960),  p.  19. 

Gf.  also  Oldexbebg,  in  ZDMG  42,  p.  244  (=  K.  S.,  p.  61*3).  ' 

” the  texts  see  Scheftelowitz,  Apokryphen,  p.  142  and  136;  for  a discus- 
sion: Scheftelowutz,  at  ZDMG  73,  p.  42;  Sontaxke  and  Kashikab,  Rgveda- 
S^ita  (see  above,  p.  8),  IV,  p.  902.  See  below,  p.  109  f.  The  term  occurs  already 
RV.  1,  89,  3;  96,  2;  175,  6 etc. 

Cf.  Scheftelowitz,  at  ZDMG  74,  p.  204. 

” SCMFTELOWTTZ,  O.C.,  p.  72;  the  same,  grlsukta,  ZDMG  75,  p.  37.  See  G.  Habt- 
Beitrage  zw  Geschichte  der  Gottin  Laksmi,  Thesis  Kiel  1933;  J.  Gonua, 
Asp^te  of  early  Visnuism,  Utrecht  1954  (^Delhi  1969),  p.  212;  Hall,  o.c.,  p.  123- 

U.  E.  Bhise,  at  ABORI  53,  p.  27.  » P 

, Pot  stanzas  belonging  to  the  aukta  edited  by  Scheftelowitz, 

- po  ' en,  p.  1 and  used  in  the  ritual  of  the  prauga^mtra  see  Scheftelowitz, 

Die  sieben  Puronicas,  ZDMG  74,  p.  204. 


Introductioii  to  the  Veda  in  general  and  the  Rgveda  in  particular  37 


concord  and  harmonj),  Xairhastyam  (an  imprecation)  and  Pradhvaranam  (a 
glorification  of  Brahman)  were  sometimes  combined  so  as  to  constitute  a 
separate  hhila,  which  according  to  the  commentary  on  the  Caranavyiiha  was 
the  final  hymn  of  the  Baskaia-SaipMta^®^. 

Properly  speaking  the  ValakMIyas,  of  later  composition — eleven  (8,  49-59) 
in  number  in  the  Sakalya,  seven  in  the  Baskala  recension^®- — ^are  Miilas  which 
found  entrance  into  the  Rgveda-Sainhita^®^.  They  are  real,  though  insignifi- 
cant, Vedic  hymns  but  are  considered  to  be  inferior  and  half-apocryphal.  They 
are  in  the  Sakalya  recension  inserted  between  the  sixth  and  seventh  annmJca 
of  mandalu  Vm  but  do  not  belong  to  either  group.  Although  they  were  recog- 
nized as  part  of  this  book  in  Sakalya’s  padapdfha  they  were  not  commented 
upon  by  Sayana.  The  first  four  pairs  (1-8),  which  run  in  a curious  way  paral- 
lel®*, are  older,  the  last  three  are  identical  vith  material  belonging  to  the  so- 
called  Sauparna  hjrmns,  Ichilas  inserted  after  RV.  1,  73^®^. 

A small  ritual  text  associated  with  the  Rgveda  and  probably  borrowed  from 
an  ancient  work  on  domestic  ritual  ( grhyasutra ) is  the  late  Utsarjanaprayoga^®® ; 
dealing  with  a ceremony  in  connection  with  the  cessation  of  the  annual  study 
of  the  Veda,  it  contains  many  quotations  from  the  Rgveda,  and  some  from 
other  Vedic  works. 

A whole  collection  of  ‘magicaF  effects  ascribed  to  the  recitation  of  li3?mns  or 
stanzas  of  the  Rgveda  is  contained  in  the  metrical  Rgvidhana^®^.  The  very 
existence  of  these  ‘Precepts  regarding  the  Rgveda’  shows  that  in  the  Vedic 
literature  there  is  no  hard-and-fast  line  between  a ‘magic’  and  a ‘religious’ 
domain.  Rgvedic  matter  was  not  only  used  for  what  we  call  sacrificial  rites,  but 
also  for  predominantly  magic  purposes.  The  four  chapters  of  this  work  pretend 
to  be  a concise  manual  for  those  who  wish  to  utilize  texts  of  the  Rgveda,  as  an 
accompaniment  of  practices  widely  divergent  from  the  rites  described  in  the 
irautasutras,  in  order  to  be  freed  from  disease  or  enemies,  to  possess  a son  or 
“thousandfold  gain,”  to  acquire  special  abilities  or  a celestial  life  hereafter. 
Since  the  authors — ^according  to  the  tradition  again  Saunaka,  but  more  prob- 

J.  ScHEFTELOWiTZ,  at  ZII  1,  p.  50.  For  the  Mahanamni  verses  see  below, 
p.  317;  426. 

102  <1^0  Brhaddevata,  6,  84,  refers  only  to  Val.  1—8. 

^0®  For  particulars  see:  Axjfbecht,  H.  R.  H,  p.  VII;  Oudekbeeg,  Prolegomena, 
p.  494;  at  GGA  1907,  p.  230;  Bloomfield,  Repetitions,  p.  13;  Geldnee,  RV.  II, 
p.  370;  Rekoij,  in  JA  250,  p.  163;  E.  Pabameswaea  Aithal,  at  ALB  33  (1969), 
p.  188.  The  name  is  unexplained;  for  a pseudo-etymology  see  KB.  30,  8;  SB.  8, 
3,  4,  1. 

AiB.  6,  28;  KB.  30,  4 are  aware  of  this  parallelism. 

105  particulars:  Scheftelowitz,  at  ZDMG  74,  p.  192;  for  the  Dadhyanc 
myth  of  1,  117,  22,  ibidem,  p.  200. 

106  g00  Scheftelowitz,  at  WZKM  35,  p.  59;  for  the  utsarjana : KIane,  H.  Dh.  II, 
p.  815. 

10’  Edition:  R.  Meyeb,  Bg^dhanam,  Berlin  1878;  J.  Goxda,  The  Bg^idhana, 
English  translation  with  an  introduction  and  notes,  Utrecht,  1951 ; on  the  language 
and  composition  of  the  text:  M.  S.  Bhat,  at  J OB,  X.  S.  33,  39,  p.  56. 


38 


J.  Gk)iida  • Yedic  Literature 


ably  teacbers  belonging  to  Ms  school — ^had  a certain  predilection  for  definite 
purposes  they  did  not  deal  ‘with  the  Rgveda  in  its  entirety.  Their  work  shows 
on  the  one  hand  many  points  of  resemblance  to  the  Brhaddevata,  on  the  other 
an  tmdeniable  similarity  to  other  texts  dealing  with  rites  of  the  above  variety, 
e.g.  the  Samavidhana^®®,  some  of  the  Atharvavedaparisistas  and  definite  parts 
of  the  gTjiymUtras,  However,  parts  of  it  show  the  infiuence  of  post-Vedic  and 
even  post-epic  Visnnite  rites  and  practices,  some  stanzas  being  even  reminiscent 
of  tantric  ceremonial.  So  the  Rgvidhana  must  be  regarded  as  the  product  of  a 
long  evolution^®® : it  is  one  of  those  works  that  bear  witness  to  the  process  of 
penetration  of  Vedic  with  younger  Hinduistic  belief  and  ritual  and  throw  light 
on  the  adaptation  of  Yedic  subject-matter  to  the  requirements  of  the  Hindu- 
istic  period. 


ill  m Samavidhanabrahmana,  Halle  1893. 


Introduction  to  the  Teda  in  general  and  the  Rgv’eda  in  particular  39 


o.  Commentaries 


The  study  of  the  Veda  was  for  a long  time  an  important  factor  in  the  intel- 
lectual activities  of  the  brahminsh  In  later  centuries  the  Indian  interpreters  of 
the  Rgveda  produced  a number  of  'explanatory  works’  (hhdsya)^.  However, 
the  practice  of  commenting  upon  the  ancient  sacred  texts,  which  continued  till 
late  in  the  17^  century®,  must  have  had  its  beginnings  at  an  early  date.  We 
grope  in  the  dark  as  to  how  far  the  commentators  may  have  utilized  unbroken, 
genuine  traditions^.  Devoid  of  a sense  of  historical  development,  they  often  err 
in  giving  anachronistic  interpretations,  in  hinduizing  the  Vedic  texts,  and  in 
supplying  explanations  which  are  otherwise  incorrect.  They,  moreover,  had, 
generally  speaking,  a bias  in  favour  of  ritualistic  interpretations.  Nevertheless 
their  work  is  not  devoid  of  value.  We  should  read  it  critically,  rejecting  what  we 
know  to  be  impossible,  adopting  that  which  is  consistent  with  knowledge 
gathered  from  other  sources  and  noting  for  reconsideration  the  information 
which  might  be  correct  or  valuable  but  cannot  for  the  moment  be  checked®. 
Each  suggestion  that  a commentator  may  have  recorded  a really  ancient 
tradition  deserves  consideration  on  its  own  merits. 

These  commentators  may  be  divided  broadly  into  two  groups,  one  comment- 
ing upon  particular  samhitas  and  the  other  explaining  select  mantras  occurring 
in  Vedic  texts.  To  the  second  group  belongs  Halayudha,  one  of  the  great 
talents  at  the  court  of  king  Laksmanasena  of  Bengal  (1178-  i 1205)®.  One  of 
his  many  works  is  the  Brahmanasarvasva’  in  which  he  explained  all  the  Vedic 
mantras  (not  more  than  400  in  number)  prescribed  for  recitation  in  the  domestic 
rites  as  performed  by  the  followers  of  the  Kanva  recension  of  the  Vajasaneyi 
Yajurveda.  Most  of  these  mantras  are  accordingly  prescribed  in  Paraskara’s 
Grhyasutra.  Apart  from  being  a commentary  on  these  mantras  the  book  is  also 
a ritualistic  digest,  containing  a large  number  of  authoritative  statements  from 
hrakma'nm,  sutras,  dharmaidsiras  and  other  literature.  In  its  often  highly  ritual- 
istic explanations  it  does  not  only  take  the  stand  that  the  mantras  came  into 
being  only  for  ritual  purposes,  but  adapts  their  meanings  also  to  the  require- 
ments of  even  the  minor  rites,  and  that  in  different  contexts  in  different  w^ays. 


^ Rexou,  Vedic  schools  and  epigraphy;  D.  BHATTACHAB.3rrA,  Brahmana-sar- 
vasva,  Introduction  (see  n.  6). 

® For  a brief  survey:  R.  N.  Daivdekae,  Vedic,  Sanskrit,  and  Prakrit  Studies, 
published  on  the  occasion  of  the  26^  Int.  Congr.  of  Orient.,  New  Delhi  1964. 

® Cf.  D.  Bhattacharya,  at  21  AIOC,  I,  p.  61. 

^ It  is  interesting  to  notice  that  generally  speaking  Indian  authors  based  them- 
selves on  predecessors  and  often  lavishly  incorporated  earlier  literature.  See  V.  M. 
Apte,  in  19  AIOC,  I,  p.  103. 

® For  other  opinions  see  p.  57. 

® Brahmana-sarvasva  edited  (with  a long  introduction)  by  D.  Bhattachabyya, 
Calcutta  1960;  see  the  same,  in  OH  1,  p.  141;  2,  p.  1;  17  AIOC,  S.  P.,  p.  5. 

^ See  also  EAjste,  H.  Dh.  I,  p.  298;  D.  Bhattachabyya,  Little  known  Vedic 
commentators  of  Bengal,  OH  2,  p.  1;  and  at  OH  3,  p.  211. 


40 


tJ.  Gonda  • Vedic  Literature 


It  nevertheless  fulfils  the  requirements  of  a good  Yeda  commentary  as  laid  down 
In  the  Brhaddevata  (2,  99  f.):  it  lays  emphasis  on  the  sense  and  purport  of  the 
wmntrm,  elaborates,  when  necessary,  the  half-expressed  ideas  of  the  seers  by 
introducing  words  of  its  own  and  indicates  the  relation  between  the  parts  of  a 
stanza  by  bringing  them  into  a more  intelligible  order. 

We  now  proceed  to  those  commentators  who  dealt  with  the  Rgveda-Samhita 
as  such.  Although  the  discovery  of  some  pre-Sayana  works  of  this  class,  in  1926®, 
did  not  reveal  the  existence  of  any  really  new  view  or  interpretation  of  the  cor- 
pus, it  showed  that  there  was  before  the  14^  century  a continuous  tradition  of 
Vedic  studies®.  It  is  therefore  no  longer  possible  to  suggest  that  Sayana — ^who 
howrever  does  mention  predecessors — had  no  authority  to  follow  except  Yaska. 
How  long  this  tradition  was  and  whether  it  reached  back  to  the  Vedic  period 
proper  we  do  not  however  know.  Indian  scholars^®  have  attempted  to  determine 
the  date  of  Skandasvamm^^,  who  left  us  a fi'agmentary  commentary,  at  ± 600 
or  650  A.  D.^^.  TMs  author,  who  mentions  predecessors,  wrote  also  a commentary 
on  the  Nirukta  and  seems  to  have  borrowed  j&rom  Uvata,  the  compiler  of  a 
valuable  commentary  on  the  Vajasaneyi  Samhita.  Just  like  Yaska  and  Ma- 
dhava,  but  unlike  Sayana,  these  authors  try  to  preserve,  in  their  explanations, 
the  word  order  of  the  Rgveda  text.  A scholar  of  repute  was  Sadgurutisya  who 
wrote  in  the  last  decades  of  the  12^  century.  BQs  commentary  Vedarthadipika 
“The  lamp  of  the  meaning  of  the  Veda’’  and  another  work,  a commentary  on  the 
Sarvanukramam^®,  furnish  us  with  interesting  information. 

The  chronological  problems^^  are  complicated  by  the  existence  of  namesakes. 
There  have  been,  before  Sayana,  at  least  two  commentators  called  Madhava^®. 


® By  C.  Kunhajs-  Raja,  see  5 AIOC  (1928-1930),  I,  p.  223. 

® Cf.  C.  KmmAs  Raja,  in  12  AIOC,  H,  p.  30;  JOR  10  (1936),  p.  256. 

Cf.  :VlANGAL  Leva  Shastei,  in  6 AIOC,  p.  595;  Kctnuan  Raja,  in  JOR  10 
(see  above);  A.  Vexeatasijbbiah,  in  JOR  10,  p.  201. 

Edited  by  R.  Vaema,  The  Rk-Samhita  with  the  bhdsya  of  Skandasvamin  and 
the  dlpika  of  Venkatamadhava,  3 vol.,  Trivandrum  1929-1942.  On  Skandasvamin: 
M.  M.  Paotuua,  at  Gurukula  Patrika  20,  p.  412;  501 ; 582;  21,  p.  361  etc.  (Haridwar 
1968;  1969). 

“ A relative  chronology  can  in  cases  such  as  that  before  us  be  established  on  the 
basis  of  quotations,  references  and  polemics  in  the  pertinent  works : an  author  who 
IS  quoted  by  nobody  else  stands  a good  chance  of  being  the  youngest.  However, 
these  commentators  do  not  always  indicate  that  they  are  quoting  from  predeces- 


“ See  above,  p.  35. 

^ See  e.g.  A.  Vexeatasijbbiah,  Skandasvamin  and  Madhavacarya,  at  JOR  32, 

R above),  and  in  his  edition  of  the 

Rg\  edavyakhya  Madhavakita,  Adyar  Library  Series,  2 vol.  1939-1947*  A 
_bkkatasusbiam,  in  JOR  10,  p.  115;  A.  J.  Joshi,  The  problem  of  Madhava  in  the 

P-  (^cording  to  whom  the  commentary 
s\-arriin’«  ^ Madhava,  the  author  of  anuhramania,  is  older  than  Skanda- 

rokZi.LT?;i,  Sives  information  about  himself  in  the 

colopnons  (of  the  chapters)  of  his  work). 


Introduction  to  the  Veda  in  general  and  the  Rgveda  in  particular  41 


Of  Madhavabhatta^®,  son  of  SrI-Vehkataiya,  who  is  snpposed  to  have  lived  in 
the  10^^  century,  we  possess  a complete  commentary,  the  Rgarthadipika^^ 
‘The  lamp  (illustrator)  of  the  meaning  of  the  Rgveda-/ 

The  best  knovn  and  up  to  some  decades  ago  the  only  one  known,  hut  actually 
not  the  best,  of  these  commentators  is  Sayana,  a brahman  of  Dravidian  des- 
cent^® who  lived  in  the  second  half  of  the  14^  century  (t  1387}  in  Vijayanagara. 
He  was  a brother  of  the  famous  philosopher  and  author  Madhava  vith  whom 
he  was  sometimes  confounded.  He  was  a prolific  author  who  besides  his  bhdsya 
on  the  Rgveda^®  composed  other  ‘explanations  of  Vedic  texts’  ( veddrthapra- 
Izasa),  among  which  commentaries  on  the  Yajurveda,  the  Samaveda  and  the 
Pancavimsa-Brahmana^®.  Western  pioneers  such  as  Wilson  were  of  the  opinion 
that  he  had  a knowledge  of  the  Rgveda  far  beyond  the  pretensions  of  any 
European  scholar  contemporaneous  with  themselves,  and  he  has  indeed  ren- 
dered good  services  in  facilitating  the  comprehension  of  the  Rgveda.  Others 
however  were  inclined  to  reject  his  interpretations  altogether^b  first,  because, 
it  was  assumed,  being  too  far  removed  from  the  period  of  the  composition  of  the 
h3nnns,  he  could  not  have  drawn  from  an  uninterrupted  tradition^^,  and  in  the 
second  place  because  he,  like  his  compatriots  in  general,  did  not  view  the  Veda 
in  its  historical  perspective.  The  second  objection  is  well-founded,  but  we  now 
know  that  Sayana  was  no  isolated  figure.  This  does  not  however  prevent  him 
from  proposing  many  anachronistic  misinterpretations,  defending  wurong 
etymological  or  grammatical  explanations,  failing  in  the  coherent  explanation 
of  stanzas  and  sentences  as  wholes,  and  inserting  unnecessary  discussions.  A 
good  many  of  his  explanations — ^in  principle  he  explains  every  word — are  of 
course  acceptable^®,  some  of  them  even  valuable®^;  in  many  other  cases  he 
however  gives  his  readers  the  option  between  two  possibilities®^,  explains 

Cf.  L.  Sabup,  in  VoL  B.  C.  Law,  H,  Poona  1946,  p.  34. 

Edited  by  L.  Sabup  (and  others),  4 voL,  Lahore-Banaras  1939—1955  {mandcda 
I-VII). 

M.  Maybhofeb,  Zum  Namen  Sayana,  Anzeiger  Akad.  d.  Wiss.  Wien  108,  3 
(1971),  p.  79. 

On  manuscripts  of  Say  ana’s  work  etc. : MunLEB,  at  JR  AS  2,  p.  426. 

See  his  own  notice  in  Introduction  to  PB.  st.  5.  Other  exegetical  works  are  in 
all  probability  wrongly  attributed  to  him;  Subyabanta,  in  16  AIOC,  Pres,  address, 
p.  105  even  spoke  of  “an  association  of  pandits  known  as  Sayana.” 

See  p.  57  and  R.  Roth,  tJber  gelehrte  Tradition  ...  in  Indien,  ZDMG  21 
(1867),  p.  3.  For  Sayana  see  e.g.  also  J.  Muib,  at  JRAS  1866,  p.  399;  Gbippith, 
H.  RV.  I,  p.  VH;  C,  G.  Kashikab,  Sayana  and  the  text  of  RVSamhita,  RXA  1, 
p.  750. 

It  was  however  known  that  he  referred  to  other  authorities. 

23  See  e.g.  his  notes  on  RV.  2,  30,  2;  7;  4,  1,  14;  5,  8,  7;  29,  10;  48,  1;  4;  56,  7; 

59,  3;  60,  5;  85,  8;  6,  8,  6;  11,  2;  16,  47;  42,  3;  45,  22;  63,  8;  72,  5;  7,  1,  23;  6,  1; 

7,  4;  18,  2;  6;  10;  11;  26,  1;  32,  12;  46,  2;  9,  16,  5;  33,  5;  10,  5,  1;  see  also  GELDisrEB 
— who  often  quotes  Sayana — on  these  and  other  places. 

2^  See  e.g.  1,  144,  4;  2, *18,  1;  3,  4,  5;  7,  1;  2;  5;  6;  31,  12;  4,  1,  13;  5,  23,  1. 

23  See  e.g.  1,  64,  10;  145,  1;  160,  1;  176,  1;  2,  23,  2;  4;  4,  1,  16;  5,  31,  4;  59,  8; 

6,  58,  1 ; 7,  32, 16 ; 97,  3 ; 9,  85, 2 ; 10,  8,  3 ; it  is  not  always  possible  to  make  our  choice. 


42 


J.  Gonda  • Vedic  Literature 


nutaeroiis  words  differently  in  different  places^®,  or  proposes  completely  im- 
probable solutions ; very  often  be  is  obviously  mistaken^^  or  in  any  case  not  to 
be  followed  unreservedly-^.  The  pertinent  'frame -stories’  of  bynms  wbicb  be 
by  way  of  introduction  or  interwoven  in  bis  notes  quotes  from  hrahmanas  are  on 
tbe  whole  less  reliable  than  the  many  valuable  indications  concerning  the  ritual 
application  of  the  texts^®.  He  even  preferred  such  explanations  as  would 
suit  the  ritual  application  of  the  stanzas  and  more  than  once  quotes  from  other 
worksj  e.g.  Udgftba’s  commentary®®,  that  which  could  serve  this  end.  Like 
almost  all  other  commentators®^  Sayana  indeed  maintains  mostly  the  ritualistic 
tradition  of  Veda  interpretation®®,  although  be  also  adopts  symboHc,  allegorical 
and  legendary  explanations®®. 

Xo  more  than  passing  mention  can  be  made  of  the  numerous  "elucidations” 
(mvara'm,  dipika  etc.),  collections  of  h3rmns  or  verses,  handbooks  for  the  use  of 
officiants  and  other  minor  •works  most  of  wbicb  have  remained  unpublished®^. 


There  is  a large  mimber  of  ‘difficult  words’  of  which  neither  Yaska  nor  Sayana 
had  any  certain  information.  Tbe  explanations  furnished  in  the  different  exegetical 
works  written  by  or  attributed  to  Sayana  are  not  always  consistent;  cf.  e g RV 
2,  27,  11:  TS.  2,  1,  11,  5;  3,  20,  2:  TS.  3,  2,  11,  1;  10,  2,  1:  TS.  4,  3,  13,  4. 

See  e.g.  Geudnee,  RV.  I,  p.  173  (on  RV.  1,  125);  1,  156,  5;  2,  19,  2:  3,  55,  14- 
4,  18,  7;  7,  55,  7;  101,  2. 

« Cf.  e.g.  1,  153,  3;  166,  11;  189,  5;  2,  15,  2;  3,  16,  2;  38,  9;  54,  7;  4,  16,  3;  5, 

f 

/ 9,  6.  This  IS  not  to  say  that  the  at  first  sight  unconvincing  notes  should  be  ignored 
(cf.  e.g.  3,  17,  3;  34,  4;  38,  5).  ® 

2®  Not  all  quotations  found  in  Sayana’s  work  are  traceable  (C.  G.  KASHiEiAja, 
at  12  AIOC  I,  p.  261);  sometimes  he  does  not  mention  his  sources  by  name  or 
refers  to  them  in  his  own  words,  sometimes  he  quotes  from  texts  that  are  lost  or 

unknown  to  us. 

” compaxative  study  of  Udgitha’s  bhasya  on  the  Rgveda, 

, P-  KromAiT  Raja,  in  6 AIOC,  p.  635; 

(partial)  edition:  Rgvedabhasya  of  Udgitha,  Lahore  1935. 

H.  G.  Naeahaei,  at  The  Aryan  Path  22,  p.  211. 

Cf.  also  J^Iax  Muller,  A history  of  ancient  Sanskrit  literature,  p.  460-  V Ch 
Bhattachaeya,  at  OH  2,  p.  153.  ^ v,  v . v^xt. 

In  his  general  introduction  to  the  Rgveda  he  devotes  many  pages  to  a systema- 
gart  of  Indian  apologetics  {H.  Oebtel,  Zur  indischen  Apologetik!^  Stutt- 

For  some  particulars:  Renou,  E.  V.  P.  YI,  p.  36.  Among  the  works  describing 
(vedalaksar^J  are  numerous  treatises  on  compound 
ed  words  etc.  (amngyam),  one  of  which  has  been  edited  in  IHQ  7,  add^,  p.  1. 


Introduction  to  the  Veda  in  general  and  the  Rg\"e£ia  in  particular 


43 


6.  Survival  of  the  Veda 

As  already  intimated  the  Veda-  has  for  many  centuries — even  when  manu- 
scripts and,  in  modem  times,  printed  editions  were  available — been  handed 
down  by  word  of  mouth  ( dmndya).  The  right  and  duty  to  preserve  the  tradition 
— an  unbroken  succession  of  teachers  and  taught  (satnpraddya ) — ^fails  solely 
to  the  brahmins  w^ho  have  transmitted  this  heritage  with  unparalleled  accur- 
acy. This  conscientiousness  is  identical  with  the  exactitude  with  which  they 
acquitted  themselves  of  their  ritual  duties.  The  brahmins’  task  is  indeed  two- 
fold : the  sacrificial  performance  in  w’'hich  recitation  of  Vedic  hymns  and  stanzas, 
appropriately  arranged,  is  an  important  element  (prayoga)  and  study  and 
recitation  in  the  order  in  which  the  hjnnns  appear  in  the  great  collections 
(adhydya)'^.  Through  this  recitation — ^ivhich  makes  the  inherent  power  of  the 
mantras  efficacious — brahmins  gain  merit  and  perfection^  and  contribute  to  the 
preservation  of  the  sacred  order  of  the  universe.  Hence  the  belief  that  any 
mistake  results  in  calamities  and  the  preference  for  oral  transmission  wrhich 
was  regarded  as  a safeguard  against  profanation  and  divulgement  among  the 
unqualified  and  uninitiated.  The  instruction  of  brahmin  boys  by  a qualified 
teacher  ( guru,  dcdrya,  upddhydya ) is  elaborately  described  in  grhyasutras  and 
other  ancient  texts®.  ISTowadaj^s  prayoga  is  almost  extinct  while  many  forms  of 
svddhydya  have  become  very  rare. 

A thorough  study  of  the  Veda  requires  an  insight  into  the  tradition  of  this 
literature  in  later  times  and  its  reception  by  the  Indian  posterity^.  And  this 
notwithstanding  the  paradoxical  situation  that  the  Veda,  though  highly  re- 
vered, was  already  at  an  early  date  very  imperfectly  known  and  understood. 
For  an  objective  judge  this  tradition  is  also  a history  of  attempts  at  explanation 
from  preconceived  points  of  view.  The  practice  of  oral  instruction  and  exegesis 
co-existing  with  the  tradition  of  the  texts  involved,  on  the  one  hand  the  danger 
of  contmuous  obscuration  of  the  original  meaning  of  the  latter  and  on  the  other 
the  impossibility,  in  many  cases,  of  knowing  w'hether  a certain  doctrine  or 
interpretation  had  not  existed  long  before  its  first  occurrence  in  wnriting.  VTien 
used  for  ritual  purposes  the  texts  had  to  be  recited  without  any  deviation  from 

^ A distinction  was  made  between  a “general  or  ordinary  application”  (sdmd- 
nyaviniyoga),Le,th.e  study  (recitation)  of  the  text  in  the  codified  order  and  the 
“special  application”  (viiesaviniyoga)  in  rituals  as  taught  in  the  stitras.  The  latter 
regards  suktas,  trcas  (see  p.  189)  and  verses  (rc).  See  Sayana,  on  RV,  1,  1 and 
compare  Smo,  Sagenstoffe,  p.  2 ; below,  p.  83. 

2 See  e.g.  gB.  11,  5,  7,  1;  Manu  2,  107;  3,  66;  11,  246f.;  cf.  also  4,  147. 

® For  sources  and  particulars  see  Kane,  H.  Dh.  II,  p.  268;  cf.  also  R.  K-  Moo- 
EEBJi,  Ancient  Indian  education,  London  1947,  p.  174;  Vidbcusekhajeia,  at  6 
AIOC,  p.  483;  V.  M.  Apte,  at  BDCRI  4,  p.  269;  G03st>a,  R.I.  I,  p.  119.  The  aversion 
to  writing  down  a Vedic  text  appears  e.g.  from  an  occurrence  in  the  year  1742 
communicated  by  Webeb,  in  ZDMG  7,  p.  235. 

^ L.  Renoxj,  Le  destin  du  Veda  dans  Tlnde,  E.  V.  P.  VI  (1960;  Engl,  transl.  The 
destiny  of  the  Veda  in  India,  Delhi  1965);  J.  Gone  a,  Change  and  continuity  in 
Indian  religion.  The  Hague  1965,  ch.  I. 


44 


J.  Gonda  • Yedic  Literature 


what  was  supposed  to  be  their  original  form.  Without  exactitude  in  the  pro- 
nunciation of  accents,  quantities  etc.  a recitation  is  not  only  null  and  void,  but 
even  detrimental  to  the  one  who  pronounces  it^.  As  the  texts  were  intended  for 
the  deities,  the  sacrificial  priests  were  not  interested  in.  interpreting  them  for 
men.  This  neglect  of  the  meaning  of  the  Veda®,  condemned  though  it  was  by 
various  authorities’,  led  many  modem  orthodox  brahmins  to  indulge  in  the 
thought  that  the  meaning  of  the  sacred  corpus  cannot  be  known®.  Yet  there 
are  some  stray  references  to  interpretative  study  of  the  Veda®,  which  however 
do  not  inform  us  about  particulars  as  to  which  Veda  or  which  texts  roused  the 
interest  of  those  who  “appropriated,  discussed,  studied  and  recited”  the  Veda, 
or  of  those  who  meditated  on  its  meaning  or  tried  to  understand  it  with  a view 
to  obtaining  final  emancipation^®. 

Until  recently  it  was,  moreover,  difficult  for  Western  scholars  to  obtain 
reliable  information  on  the  manner  of  studying,  reciting  and  chanting  as  prac- 
tised by  the  brahmins^^.  Restricting  ourselves  to  the  Rgveda  we  now  know 
that,  while  the  texts  themselves  remained  as  good  as  unchanged,  there  exist,  in 
different  parts  of  India,  different  styles  of  recitation^^  ^tdch  sometimes  coincide 
with  what  w^e  know  of  the  geographic  distribution  of  the  Vedic  schools  in  ancient 
times.  There  is  a tradition  of  the  Sakala  recension  in  the  West  of  India  with 
extensions  to  the  Xorth  (Maharashtra,  Saurashtra,  Uttar  Pradesh)  and  one, 
which  is  purer  and  probably  richer,  in  the  South  (Madras,  Andhra  Pradesh, 
Mysore)^®.  Outside  these  two  main  traditions  there  exist,  in  comparative  iso- 
lation, some  others,  the  most  interesting  of  which  is  that  of  the  Nambudiri 

® Cf.  Webee,  I.S.  I,  p.  5,  and  see  TS.  2,  4,  12,  1;  SB.  1,  6,  3,  8.  In  reciting  it  is 
a general  practice  to  extend  the  ending  portions  of  a verse  with  unbroken  continu- 
ance into  the  initiai  portion  of  the  following  verse  (cf.  SB.  1,  3,  5,  13;  14;  GB.  2,  2, 
9;  Bandhit,  in  15  AIOC,  p.  72).  This  practice  is  (at  least  it  originally  was) 

to  avoid  an  ominous  mterruption. 

® “In  the  regular  perusal  of  the  Veda,  which  ...  is  much  practised  by  Mahrattas 
and  Telingas,  the  student  is  required  to  notice,  especially,  the  author,  subject, 
metre,  and  purpose  of  each  invocation.  To  understand  the  meaning  ...  is  thought 
less  important”  (H.  Th.  Colebeookb,  Miscellaneous  essays,  London  1837, 1,  p.  20). 
For  Sankara,  cf.  also  R.  B.  Athavale,  at  15  AIOC,  S.  P.,  p.  2.  Tradition  indeed 
has  it  that  the  man  who  teaches  or  learns  the  Veda  without  knowing  the  rsis, 
metres,  gods  and  application  runs  the  risk  of  being  reborn  in  an  inferior  state*  of 
life  (cf.  P.  S.  S{h)astei,  in  QJMS  37,  p.  84).  In  general:  Renotj,  E.  V.  P.  VI,  p.  37. 

’ E.g.  Nimkta,  1,  18;  Sankara,  Bhasya  on  Vedantasutra  1,  3,  30;  cf.  H. 

Dh.  II,  p.  356,  and  places  such  as  Manu  12,  103. 

» Cf.  Kaxe,  H.  Dh.  n,  p.  358. 

* Cf.  Rexotj,  Destin,  p.  39. 

Daksasmrti  2,  34;  VaikhSm.  8,  3;  Yajnavalkya  3,  156. 

“ Cf.  M.  Hatjg,  in  ZDMG  17  (1863),  p.  799.  The  knowledge  of  the  viUagers,  in 
whose  possession  important  manuscripts  remain,  about  these  possessions  is  often 
very  ha^  (see  D.  Bhattachabyya,  Fundamental  themes  of  the  Atharvaveda, 
?■  scholar  brought  to  hght  many  unknown  manuscripts). 

V\liich,  however,  resemble  the  predominant  Yajurveda  recitation. 

“ In  some  regi^  of  the  South  ^auia  rituals  continue  to  be  performed.  In 
kastem  India  the  Vedic  tradition  is  fast  dying  out. 


Introduction  to  the  Teda  in  general  and  the  Rg\'eda  in  particular 


45 


brahmans  of  Kerala^ Their  Rgveda  belongs  to  the  Baskala  recension,  and 
they  follow  either  the  Kansitak!  (Sahkhayana)  or  the  Asvalayana  school, 
reciting  also  the  brahrmnas,  dramjakas  and  upanisads  of  the  Rgveda.  The 
recitation  of  these  brahmins  is  rhyt<hmical  rather  than  nmsical ; they  pay  mnch 
attention  to  time  units  and  intervals,  and  prefer  a swinging  or  trembling 
pronnnciation  of  final  vowels,  nasals  etc.  Some  minor  characteristics  are  no 
doubt  influenced  by  their  mother  tongue,  Malayalam^^. 

In  the  course  of  the  Vedic  period  it  must  have  become  clear  that  the  sacred 
literature  generally  speaking  dealt  with  gods,  rites  and  metaphysical  matter, 
the  latter  subject  being  mainly  discussed  in  the  upanisads.  Already  at  an  early 
date  the  doctrine  found  acceptance  that  the  Veda  as  a whole — and  consequently 
a given  passage  of  the  Rk-Samhita  etc. — ^admits  of  a threefold  interpretation, 
viz.  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  performance  of  rites  (adhiyafna);  with 
reference  to  the  deities  (adhidaivata)  and  's^dth  reference  to  the  ‘Soul’  (adliy- 
dtma)'^^.  The  choice  between  these  three  views  became  left  to  the  judgement 
of  interpreters.  Ritualists,  for  instance,  became  much  inclined  to  take  non- 
ritual  matter  somehow  to  be  indicative  of  ritual  acts.  Since  etymological  inter- 
pretation was,  in  certain  circles,  much  in  vogue,  the  Indian  study  and  exegesis 
differentiated  into  four  main^^ — non-exclusive  and  non-inimical — currents  or 
modes  of  access,  viz.  a ritualistic,  a philosophical,  an  et3miological  and  a le- 
gendary and  m37thological  one^®.  According  to  the  first  approach  the  deity  of  a 
mantra  should,  in  case  it  is  not  mentioned  expHcitly,  be  inferred  from  the  ritual 
application.  Since  this  often  was  the  result  of  a later  development,  the  poet’s 
intentions  were  easily  missed.  According  to  those  who  prefer  the  second  and 
more  influential  approach  the  mantras  are  philosophical  allegories  which  admit 
of  a speculative  interpretation  on  the  basis  of  the  monistic  doctrine : all  Vedic 
deities  are,  in  fact,  aspects  of  the  one  Atman  [adhydtma  view) ; in  later  times, 
most  interpreters  of  the  Veda  were  Vedantins,  and  philosophers  often  tried  to 
corroborate  their  arguments  with  quotations  from  the  Veda.  In  many  cases 


J.  F.  Staal,  N'ambudiri  Veda  recitation.  The  Hague  1961  (for  a survey  of  the 
geographical  distribution  of  the  idkhda,  see  p.  18).  For  the  Nambudiris  Staal,  in 
Art  and  Letters,  32,  p.  1. 

See  also  J.  E.  B.  Gray,  An  analysis  of  Rgvedic  recitation,  BSOAS  22  (1959), 
p.  86;  An  analysis  of  Nambudiri  Rgvedic  recitation,  ibidem,  p.  499;  V.  Ragibavan, 
The  present  position  of  Vedic  recitation  and  Vedic  Vakhas,  Kumbhakonam  1962; 
R.  ]Sr.  Dandekab,  at  ABORT  28,  p.  138.  In  1956  the  Indian  Government  decided 
on  a more  systematic  search  for  surviving  centres  of  traditional  transmission  of 
the  Veda. 

Compare  e.g.  Nirukta  10,  26;  11,  4;  Mann  6,  83  and  the  commentaries  on 
this  place. 

For  some  other  ‘approaches’:  S.  K.  Gtjpta,  Ancient  schools  of  Vedic  inter- 
pretation, JGJRI  16,  p.  143. 

For  particulars:  Seeg,  Sagenstoffe,  p.  7.  Compare  e.g.  the  explanations  of  the 
name  and  the  personalities  of  the  Asvins  in  Yaska,  Hir.  12,  1 : called  after  their 
horses  (o4va) ; or  they  are  heaven  and  earth,  or  two  virtuous  kings. 


46 


J.  Gonda  • Vedic  Literature 


tMs  interpretatioii  involved  serious  loiisapprehensions.  Tlie  tMrd  approacli, 
that  of  the  elroioiogical  exegetes  (nairukta)^^,  embraces  more  than  its  name 
suggests : it  reduces  the  many  gods  of  the  Veda  to  three — viz.  the  representatives 
of  heaven,  earth  and  intermediate  space — and  propagates  a traditional  exe- 
getical  doctrine  on  the  basis  of  the  Naighantuha^®.  The  belief  in  the  conclusive 
force  of  the  (often  untenable)  etymologies  was  combatted  by  the  adherents  of 
the  fourth  method,  the  Aitihasikas®^,  who  base  their  interpretations  on  the 
traditional  beHef  that  the  gods  are  individuals  figuring  in  legends  and  narratives 
(itiMsa):  thus  the  Asvins  were  devout  kings,  Vrtra  an  asura  and  so  on;  in 
corroboration  of  their  views  they  often  refer  to  the  stories  in  the  hrahmanas.  It 
is  clear  that  a modem  philologist  will  in  innumerable  cases  disagree  with  all 
these  principles  of  exegesis^^ 

Vedic  learning  never  became  the  common  property  of  the  masses.  Circulating 
only  among  the  more  intellectual  classes  of  society  the  ancient  texts  escaped 
literal  interpretation.  But  instead  of  this  they  did  not  escape  the  prestige  of 
perfection.  The  conviction  that  the  Veda  contains  everything's  led  many 
authors  to  cite  it  in  order  to  justify  their  own  opinions,  anachronistic  or  even 
surreptitiously  reinterpreted  though  they  might  be.  In  doing  so  they  readily 
availed  themselves  of  the  traditional  distinction  between  three  ‘semantic 
aspects,’  viz.  the  expressed  sense  (ahJiidhd),  the  implied  sense  (laksand)  and 
the  allusive  or  suggestive  sense  ( vyanjand In  innumerable  cases  one  believed 
oneself  to  be  in  the  wake  of  this  literature  which  is  ‘the  main  sign  of  Indian 
orthodoxy/  whilst  actually  turning  one’s  back  to  it.  Contradiction  of  the  Veda 
became  the  maia  criterion  of  heresy^^.  While  almost  any  doctrine  might  com- 
bine with  professed  allegiance^®  and  lip  service  enabled  certain  religious  groups, 
such  as  the  Sivaite  Pasupatas  and  the  Visnuite  Pancaratrins,  to  remain  within 
the  Hindu  fold,  explicit  denial  of  the  Veda  stamped  Buddhists,  Jains  and  Ma- 
terialists (Carvakas)  as  heretics.  However,  an  adequate  understanding  of  this 


See  e.g.  Yaska,  Nir.  2,  8;  3,  13;  19  etc. 

See  p.  32. 

21  For  details:  Sieg,  Sagenstoffe,  p.  13ff. 

^ In  the  view  of  the  orthodox — or  rather  traditionalists — ^the  true  meaning  of 
Vedic  texts,  whose  obscurity  is  often  admitted,  can  be  explaiaed  by  the  qualified 
with  the  help  of  other  revealed  ( irauta)  texts,  or,  subsidiarily,  by  means  of  works 
based  on  these  and  transmitted  by  human  memory  (smrti),  as  well  as  with  reason- 
ing (iarha),  the  help  of  the  veddhgas  being  a matter  of  course.  (For  particulars: 
VIDUVSEKHABA  Sastei,  in  6 AIOC,  p.  483). 

Cf.  Mbh-  1,  62,  33  ‘ that  which  is  found  in  (the  Veda)  exists  elsewhere;  that 

which  IS  not,  is  nowhere.” 


Cf.  V.  M.  Apte,  in  19  AIOC,  p.  105. 

‘‘  That  ^eady  in  Yaska’s  days  there  were  sceptics  appears  from  a well-known 
p^s^e  (Yaska,  Nir.  1,  15;  on  this  Kautsa  controversy:  Renou,  Destin,  p.  68)  in 

II  Mmed  Kaut^  questions  the  authority  of  the  Vedas  and  maintains 

tnat  tlieir  stanzas  are  meaningless. 

for  iMtance  Kautihya  Arthasastra,  ch.  2 and  3 (H.  G.  Nabahaei,  at 

15nV  10,  p.  49). 


Introductioia  to  the  Veda  in  general  and  the  Rg\’eda  in  particular  47 


body  of  literature  was  lost  at  an  early  date,  a 'pMIoiogical  study’  atrophied  in 
course  of  time,  and  the  commentators  give  ample  evidence  of  ignorance  and 
false  notions. 

The  upanisads,  while  emphasizing  the  philosophical  value  and  adhydtma 
view  of  the  Veda,  consider  its  study  an  antidote  against  the  miserable  con- 
dition of  the  individual  soul  and  man’s  ultimate  refuge^’.  They  moreover 
already  give  evidence  of  the  tendency  to  co-ordinate  (IdentifH-’)  the  divisions 
of  the  sacred  literature  vith  macrocosmic  and  microcosmic  entities^®  and  make 
them  the  subject  of  various  esoteric  speculations^®.  On  the  other  hand,  quo- 
tations from  Vedic  texts  are — ^in  contrast  with  the  Brhadaranyaka — already 
absent  in  the  Chandogya  and  not  very  frequent  in  later  upanisads^^. 

In  later  upanisads^^  there  are  however  besides  quotations,  imitations  in  a 
sort  of  hybrid  Vedic  idiom®^;  an  instance  is  the  Baskalamantra-Upanisad. 
Among  these  imitations®®  is  also  the  Suparnakhyana®^,  a poem  in  pseudo- Vedic 
style  dealing  with  the  story — ^well  known  from  Mbh.  1,  a.  14  etc. — of  Kadru 
and  Vinata,  the  daughters  of  Dak^  and  wives  of  Ka^yapa  who  became  the 
mothers  of  the  serpents  and  of  the  bird  Garuda  or  Tark^^a.  This  bird  is  the 
hero  of  the  story:  he  frees  his  mother,  the  victim  of  her  sister’s  strategems, 
promising  to  give  the  soma,  for  which  he  goes  to  the  heavenly  regions,  to  the 
snakes ; he  does  not  however  hand  it  to  them,  and  Indra  allots  them  to  Mm  as 
his  food.  The  theme — ^inspired  by  the  hostility  between  snakes  and  birds  of 
pi.0y — ^naay  be  very  old,  but  the  poem  itself  cannot  go  back  to  the  brdJiTnana 
period®®.  Although  it  is  for  the  greater  part  composed  in  the  form  of  a conver- 
sation between  the  principal  figures  it  should  not  be  described®®  as  a drama. 
Nor  is  it  a sort  of  extract  from  the  more  fluent  Mahabharata  story  wMch  for  a 


MaitriUp.  4,  3;  ChU.  1,  3,  8f.;  1,  6-7. 

28  See  also  H.  G.  Nabahahi,  at  Comm.  Vol.  M.  EQriyanna,  Mysore  1952,  p.  115. 
Modern  scholars  have  rightly  differed  in  opinion  from  interpretations  offered  by 
upanisads  (cf.  e.g.  BlU.  1,  4,  10  on  RV.  4,  26, 1 ; Nabahabi,  in  Pres.  Vol.  C.  Kunhan 
Raja,  Madras  1946,  p.  336). 

See  e.g.  BlU.  3,  1,  7;  ChU.  1,  3,  4;  7,  Iff.;  4,  17,  2;  KausUp.  1,  5;  2,  6. 

30  Cf.  KaUp.  4,  8:  RV.  3,  29,  2;  4,  9:  AV.  10,  8,  16;  5,  2:  RV.  4,  40,  5;  AiUp. 
4,  5:  RV.  4,  27,  1 etc.  (Rej^-otj,  Destin,  p.  32). 

31  ck.  N.  TsuJi,  in  Vol.  Miyamoto,  Tokyo  1954,  p.  3;  Rexou,  in  J.  Ind.  and 
Buddhist  Studies  3,  p.  782. 

32  For  the  Mtimanjari,  a sort  of  (late)  Rgvedic  anthology,  see  F.  Kjelhobn,  at 
lA  5,  116;  NG  1891,  p.  182;  Keith,  at  JRAS  1900,  p.  127. 

33  Some  other  details:  Renotj,  Destiu,  p.  33. 

3^  J.  Chabbeisttieb,  Die  Suparnasage,  Uppsala— Leipzig  1920  (with  a German 
translation);  see  also  E.  Gbube,  Suparnadhyayah,  Thesis  Leipzig  1875  and  at 
Webeb,  I.  S.  XTV,  p.  1;  Oldenbebg,  at  ZDMG  37,  p.  67  (=  K.  S.,  p.  454);  J. 
Hebtel,  at  WZKM  23,  p.  273;  Indische  Marchen,  Jena  1919,  p.  344  (^Diisseldorf- 
Koln,  p.  357)  with  a German  translation. 

33  As  was  Chabfextieb’s  opinion  (o.c.,  p.  395). 

38  With  Hebtel,  o.c;  see  A.  B.  Keith,  in  JRAS  1911,  p.  979;  1912,  p.  434; 
Oldenbebg,  in  NG  1911,  p.  460  (=  K.  S.,  p.  1414)  and  1919,  p.  79  (=  K.  S.,  p. 
1495). 


48 


J.  Gonda  • Yedic  Literature 


right  understanding  of  the  abrapt  and  badly  transmitted  text^’  must  in  places 

The  authoritative  writings  on  dharma  are  in  agreement  on  the  doctrine  that 
the  Yeda  is  their  first  source : “whatever  rule  Mann  has  ordained  that  has  been 
filly  declared  in  the  Yeda’’"®.  Generaly  speaking  the  smrti  often  develops 
ideas  expressed  in  older  texts  or  enshrines  interpretations  of  Yedic  passages 
which  then  already  were  traditional.  Moreover,  after  the  oldest  dharma  works, 
the  dkarmasutrm,  Yedic  texts  no  longer  seem  to  be  quoted^^. 

It  is  at  first  sight  less  snrprising  to  see  that  a considerable  amount  of  pre- 
epical  literature  is,  through  citations,  adaptations,  allusions  or  imitations, 
absorbed  in  the  Mahabharata^o  than  to  find  that  purdnas  in  several  places  quote 
Yedic  texts^^.  We  should  however  remember  that  the  practice  of  quoting  Yedic 
passages  in  support  of  statements  and  arguments  adopted  by  the  authors  of  the 
earlier  upanisads^^  was  pursued  not  only  by  philosophers  but  also  by  the 
authors  of  religious  and  ritualistic  works  who  pretended  to  buld  their  doctrines 
on  the  foundation  of  the  Yedic  tradition. 

Moreover,  some  Yedic  personalities  and  mythical  themes  did  not  fail  to 
appeal  to  these  poets  who  generally  speaking  addressed  themselves  to  large 
audiences.  The  figure  of  king  Pururavas  and  especially  his  being  a son  of  Ila^^ 
was  in  many  variant  versions  well  known  to  epic  and  puranic  authors  according 
to  whom  his  mother  was  also  his  father  (or  a woman  of  changing  sex)  and  the 
daughter  of  Manu.  Agastya,  the  fsi  of  RY.  1, 165  ff.  and  one  of  the  interlocutors 
of  1, 170  and  1, 179^h  was,  as  a teacher  and  otherwise,  to  have  a great  future  in 


37  Cf.  W.  Ratj,  at  ZDMG  117,  p.  353, 

See  e.g.  Manu  2,  6ff.;  Ap.Dhs.  1,  1,  1,  2;  Yajn.  1,  7.  For  references  to  the 
Yeda  in  smrti  texts  see  J.  Mum,  Original  Sanskrit  texts,  III,  London-Edinburgh 
1861,  31868,  passim;  KAnu,  H.  Dh.  I,  p,  4;  JBBRAS  26,  p.  57. 

3*  For  details:  Renou,  Destin,  p.  13. 

According  to  Y.  M.  Apte,  in  Yolume  of  studies  in  Indology  P.  Y.  Kane, 
Poona  1941,  p.  27  there  are  19  references  to  Rgvedic  passages  in  the  Mahabharata, 
9 of  which  in  book  XTT.  For  a complete  list  of  references:  S.  Sorensen,  An  index 
to  the  names  in  the  Mahabharata,  London  1904,  ^Delhi  1963,  p.  722;  for  other 
details:  Renou,  Destin,  p,  14.  For  relations  between  Rgveda  and  Mahabharata: 
SiEG,  Sagenstoffe,  passim;  Geldner,  RY.,  on  1,  158  etc. 

41  Y.  EAne,  Yedic  mantras  and  legends  in  the  pur  anas,  Yolume  C.  Kunhan 
Raja,  Madras  1946,  p.  5,  quoting,  inter  alia,  Brahma  Pur.  140,  22:  RY.  2,  12,  1; 
152,  34:  RY.  10,  109,  6 (quotations), and  151,  4;  12:  RY.  10,  95,  16;  15  (paraphrase); 
Kane,  H.  Dh.  Y,  p.  919  (other  purdnas).  More  quotations  could  be  found. 

*»  See  e.g.  AiUp.  4,  5:  RV.  4,  27,’l;  KausUp.  2,  8:  RV.  1,  91,  16;  18;  SvetUp. 
4,  6 = RV.  1,  164,  20;  4,  8 = ?,V.  1,  164,  39;  KAsnE,  H.  Dh.  V,  p.  918. 

*3  Cf.  also  Geldner,  RY.  II,  p.  42  (on  RY.  5,  41,  19),  and  see  e.g.  YiPur.  4,  1; 
MarkPur.  Ill;  see  A.  B.  Keith,  The  birth  of  Pururavas,  JRAS  1913,  p.  412  com- 
bating J.  Bertel,  at  WZK3I  25,  p.  153. 

See  p.  200  f. ; Y.  G.  Rahurkar,  The  role  of  Agastya  in  the  Yedic  and  post-Yedic 
literature,  PO  22,  p.  40  (cf.  18  AIOC,  S.  P.,  p.  14);  A.  Holtzmann,  Der  heilige 
Agastya  nach  den  Erzahlungen  des  Mahabharata,  ZDMG  34  (1880),  p.  589;  J. 
Gonda,  Agastyaparwa,  The  Hague  1936,  p.  99. 


49 


Introduction  to  tlie  Veda  in  general  and  the  Rgveda  in  particular 

the  same  genres  of  literatiire  which  also  preserved  the  memory  of  Ahgiras  and 
other  rsis^®.  The  stories  about  Vasistha  and  Visvanoitra  and  their  contest  are  in 
post-"V  edic  literature  often  narrated  and  alluded  to  as  if  they  were  real  historical 
tradition,  but  sometimes  also  mixed  up  with  marvellous  incidents  and  other 
material^®,  no  doubt  as  a result  of  secondary  manipulation  of  the  Vedic  tra- 
dition. This  led  to  two  traditions,  an  epic  which  may  resume  a late  Vedic  theme 
and  a puranic  story  that  in  its  kernel  is  totally  different  from  the  Vedic  account 
of  the  enmity  between  the  two  priests^’.  Finally,  certain  passages,  among  which 
those  dealing  with  Kanva’s  hermitage  (l^Ibh.  1,  a.  65)  and  Astavakra  (3,  132ff.) 
are  full  of  Vedic  memories. 

In  the  so-called  orthodox  (traditional)  view  the  infallible  Veda^«  is  the  ex- 
clusive source  of  higher  knowledge  and  of  socio-religious  duties^®.  The  fact  that 
in  Indian  logic  the  so-called  verbal  testimony  (of  the  Veda)  came  to  be  one  of  the 
means  of  valid  knowledge  contributed  much  to  safeguarding  its  authority.  The 
Mimamsakas — ^i.  e.  the  adherents  of  the  Purva-mimamsa,  that  so-called  orthodox 
school  of  philosophical  thought  which  originally  devoted  itself  to  the  systematic 
interpretation  of  the  Vedic  ritual  and  injunctions  but  in  course  of  time  elabo- 
rated, inter  alia,  an  epistemological  technique — believe  that  the  Veda  has  no 
other  purpose  than  the  performance  of  sacrifices®®.  This  led  to  a preponderance 
of  the  Yajurveda  over  the  Rgveda®b  According  to  them,  the  mantras  are 
instruments  of  offering;  the  gods  are  nothing  but  recipients  of  oblations  and  a 
basis  for  the  eulogies  which  are  a subsidiary  of  the  sacrifices ; the  scripture  in  its 

V.  G.  Bahubkiab,  at  20  AIOC,  S.  P.,  p.  25;  E.  W.  Hopkins,  Epic  mythology, 
Strassburg  1915,  Index,  s.  v.  For  other  information  see  Danbekab,  V.  B.  II,  p.  129. 

See  p.  129  f. ; F.  E.  Pabgiteb,  Visvamitra  and  Vasistha,  JHAS  1913,  p.  885 ; cf. 
A.  B.  Keith,  at  JBAS  1914,  p.  118. 

See  further  R.  Gopal,  Vedic  sources  of  the  Sarhgaka  legend  of  the  Maha- 
bharata,  JGJRI  25  (1969),  p.  397;  for  Namuci  (RV.  1,  53,  7 etc.):Mbh.  3,  276,  4 
(also  confused  with  Vrtra:  Hopkests,  o.c.,  p.  129);  Ram.  3,  29,  28. 

In  Madhusudana  Sarasvatfs  (16^  cent.)  survey  of  the  ‘orthodox’  brahminical 
literature  the  four  Vedas,  the  six  Vedahgas,  the  four  upangas  (purdna,  nydya, 
mimdmsd,  dharma^dstra ) are  said  to  constitute  the  fourteen  basic  collections,  which 
together  with  the  four  so-called  upavedas,  medicine  (dyurveda),  the  science  of 
archery  (dhanurveda) , music  (gandharvaveda)  and  political  science  (arthaddstra) 
complete  the  typical  and  significant  number  eighteen.  See  Webeb,  I.  S.  Ij  p*  1. 

It  would  take  too  long  to  dwell  upon  various  possibilities  of  agreement  with 
reservations.  Among  those  who  rejected  the  theory  of  the  eternity  of  the  Veda  was, 
for  instance,  the  illustrious  exponent  of  the  ‘orthodox’  I^Iyaya-Vaisesika  philosophy 
Udayana  (±  1000  A.D.);  in  his  opinion  the  Veda  is  authoritative  because  the  Lord 
alone  is  its  author.  (Cf.  G.  Chempaeathy,  An  Indian  rational  theology,  Thesis 
IJtrecht,  Vienna  1972,  p.  24;  H.  Ch.  Joshi,  JGJRI  22,  p.  177).  For  a dogmatic 
orthodox  view  of  the  authority  of  the  Veda  see  e.g.  R,  K.  Teipathi,  at  Anviksiki 
3 (1970),  p.  34.  For  doubts  about  the  dogma  of  infallibility  e.g.  Vivekananda, 
Complete  works,  ^Calcutta  1964,  VI,  p.  202. 

See  e.g.  Jaiminisutra  1,  2,  1. 

D.  T.  Tatachaeya,  Rgveda  and  Purvottaramimamsa  methods  of  interpreta- 
tion, JSVOI  1948,  p.  25;  63.  Cf.  also  Sayana,  Introd.  to  Rgveda-Bhasya  and 
Y ajurveda-Bhasya. 


50 


J,  Gonda  * Vedic  Literature 


entirety  is  the  sole  means  of  knowing  man’s  ritual,  religions  and  secular  duties 
a collection  of  injunctions  to  (mostly  ritual)  actions However,  when  the 
teachings  of  tins  school  crj-stalKzed  the  hymns  and  many  portions  of  the 
hrahnmnas  disappeared  beyond  the  horizon  and  the  original  meaning  of  many 
stanzas  w'as  no  longer  preserved;  their  axiom  that  a ritual  act  is  particularly 
effective  when  it  is  consecrated  by  a Vedic  text  conveying  an  appropriate  and 
favourable  meaning  led  to  misinterpretations 

From  the  standpoint  of  the  most  influential  Vedanta  or  Advaita  (‘Monism’) 
the  whole  Vedic  literature,  of  superhuman  origin  and  supposed  to  express  one 
homogeneous  doctrine,  that  of  “the  oneness  of  the  dtman,’’  is  to  initiate  its 
students  into  higher  secrets,  to  aid  them  in  experiencing  transcendent  reality. 
The  Veda  reveals  truths  which  man  could  discover  by  the  exercise  of  his  own 
faculties — ^viz.  in  meditative  experience — ^though  it  is  to  our  advantage  that 
they  are  revealed  because  not  all  men  are  able  to  embark  upon  such  an  enter- 
prise. Being  a faithful  adherent  of  the  Vedanta  practically  means  remaining 
true  to  the  principles  of  the  Veda.  Restoring  the  Rk-Samhita  to  its  foremost 
place  among  the  Vedas  this  school  teaches  that  this  collection  is  as  much  con- 
cerned with  Brahman  as  the  upanisads  and  that  the  names  of  the  individual 
gods  really  refer  to  that  Ultimate  Principle.  Hence  the  predilection  for  meta- 
physical interpretation  of  Rgvedic  passages.  Yet  Vedic  hterature  preceding 
the  upanisads  was  of  much  less  systematic  interest  to  the  adherents  of  this 
school — which  concentrates  upon  the  speculative  portions  ( jvdnakdnda ) of  the 
Veda — ^than  the  latter  collection  of  writings,  in  which  all  the  relevant  wisdom 
of  the  Veda  has,  in  their  opinion,  been  embedded,  the  mantras  being  considered 
something  subordinate^^  For  instance,  Ramanuja  (1050-1137),  while  regarding 
all  Vedic  texts  as  equally  authoritative  and  speaking,  in  his  Vedarthasamgraha, 
of  the  Veda  in  its  entirety,  actually  limits  himself  to  the  upanisads. 

The  attitude  towards  the  Veda  adopted,  already  in  earMer  upanisads,  in  those 
circles  which  do  not  recognize  the  Vedic  sacriflcial  rites  as  the  sole  way  to  wel- 
fare and  salvation  has  two  aspects^e.  The  Veda  is  on  the  one  hand  highly  rev- 
ered, regarded  as  authoritative  and  embodying  eternal  truth  cited  also  to 
demonstrate  \edic  affiliation,  but  on  the  other  hand  considered  to  contain 
lower  wisdom,  to  require  for  a proper  understanding  knowledge  of  other  works 

Cf.  e.g.  Gakganatha  Jha,  at  Annals  of  the  Sri- Verikates vara  Oriental  Insti- 
tute Tirapati  1,  1,  p.  a;  D.  V.  Gauge,  at  BDCRI  3,  p.  531;  4,  p.  315. 

« According  to  Gaege,  at  BDCRI  4,  p.  329  Sahara  (probably  5^  cent.  A.D.) 
cites  nearly  2000  passages  from  Vedic  texts,  over  200  of  which,  being  unidentifiable, 
may  be  supposed  to  have  been  quoted  from  texts  lost  to  us. 

Cf.  VelainISae,  at  13  AIOC,  p.  10. 

See  also  Renou,  Destin,  p.  54. 

See  K.  Bhattachabya,  Le  Vedisme’  de  certains  textes  hindouistes,  JA  255, 
p.  199;  a discussion  of  the  anti-Vedic  attitude  of  Jainas  etc.  and  of  the  semi-Vedic 
tendencies  in  definite  religious  communities  Hes  outside  the  scope  of  this  work 
See  Rexou,  Destin,  p.  2;  41,  and  passim. 

Mami  12,  94ff.;  MarkPur.  102.  Cf.  J.C.  Heestee- 
aiAX,  DieAutontat  des  Veda,  in  Offenbarung,  herausg.  v.  G.  Oberhammer,  Wien  1974. 


51 


Introduction  to  the  Veda  in  general  and  the  in  particular 

(e.g.  purdnas)  which  often  claim  equality  with,  or  even  a priority  of,  the  Veda. 
Although  the  muttering  of  its  mantrcis  destroys  all  sins,  it  can  be  dispensed 
with  by  devout  worshippers  of  Siva  or  Visnu^^.  Moreover,  the  four  divisions  of 
the  Veda  came  to  he  elements  of  the  speculations  of  particular  groups^®;  they 
were,  for  instance,  intimately  associated  with  the  great  divine  figures  of 
Hinduism®®.  In  tantric  rites  ancient  material  was  even  adapted  to  the  cult  of 
gods  unlmown  to  the  Veda®V-  for  instance,  RV.  1,  99,  1,  though  addressed  to 
Agni,  is  used  for  invoking  Durga.  Particular  Vedic  mantras  became  associated, 
not  only  with  the  worship  of  Visnu,  Siva  and  other  gods,  but  also  with  various 
ritual  ceremonies,  the  link  between  mantra  and  rite  often  being  far-fetched. 
Authors  of  ritual  handbooks  and  passages  emphasized  the  practical  use  and 
significance  of  the  texts,  generally  appreciating  and  interpreting  these  from  the 
point  of  view  of  their  applicability  to  their  own  particular  purposes  and  extend- 
ing their  ritual  employment  (viniyoga)  to  a wider  circle  of  ceremonies.  In 
domestic  rites,  ceremonies  for  purification  or  acquisition  of  special  merit  or 
benefit  some  of  the  Vedic  hymns  or  mantras  continued  to  have  a function  beside 
the  Hinduist  formulas  which,  aftei  the  beginning  of  the  Christian  era,  gradually 
came  to  the  fore®®.  That  means  that  many  ancient  mantras  have  tended  to  be 
relegated  to  personal,  that  is  mainly  magic,  use. 

Whereas  in  the  post- epic  period  the  performances  of  srauta  sacrifices  have 
gradually  become  less  frequent®®,  certain  hymns  gained  a special  vogue  and 
significance®^,  because  their  mere  recital  is  believed  to  be  an  act  of  merit.  These 
Vedic  texts  could  not  have  survived  if  they  had  not  been  regarded  as  absolutely 
sacrosanct,  as  the  imperishable  Word®®,  as  a manifestation  of  Brahman  itself. 
Some  outstanding  examples  of  popular  and  surviving  hymns  are — apart  from 
some  post-Rgvedic  texts — RV.  10,  90®® — ^the  famous  purusa  hymn,  in  course  of 
time  re-interpreted  as  a key-stone  of  Visnuite  philosophy — and  the  Srisukta, 
the  Visnusukta  (1, 154)®^.  The  most  famous  of  the  isolated  Vedic  mantras  that 
remained  in  ritual  use®® — however  much  the  spirit  of  the  cult  has  changed — ^is 


Cf.  e.g.  MuU.  1,  1,  5;  BhG.  11,  8;  53;  Mbh.  18,  5,  43;  Manu  11,  264;  VisnuRur. 
6,  8,  12;  KurmaPur.  2,  46,  129;  Kane,  H.Dh.  IV,  p.  44;  V,  p.  914;  915;  917. 

Cf.  e.g.  BlU.  1,  5,  5;  MarkPur.  29,  6;  42,  9;  Laksmi-Tantra  29,  16ff.;  36,  16. 
Cf.  e.g.  BhC.  9,  17;  Mbh.  3,  187,  14;  12,  330,  32. 

Ch.  Chakbavahti,  Applications  of  Vedic  mantras  in  tantric  rites,  JASBL  18 
(1952),  2,  p.  113;  Kane,  H.  Dh.  V,  p.  1100. 

For  particulars  see:  Conda,  The  use  of  Vedic  mantras  in  the  ritual  texts  of 
the  Vaikhanasas,  IIJ  14  (1972),  p.  1;  Kane,  H.  Dh.  V,  p.  920;  D.  Bhattachaeya, 
in  OH  8 (1960),  p.  75. 

C.  C.  EIashtkab,  The  Vedic  rituals  through  the  ages,  IA,  3’^‘^ser.  1 (1964),  p.  77. 
K.  CuPTA  published  (Aligarh  1955)  an  anthology  of  Vedic  mantras  for  children: 
Bala-Vedamrta. 

Cf.  e.g.  I^Ane,  H.  Dh.  U,  p.  353. 

Conda,  at  WZKSA  12-13,  p.  101;  V.  S.  Agrawala,  in  Sri  Venkatesvara 
Univ.  Orient.  Journal,  5 (1962),  p.  1 (partly  untenable);  cf.  e.g.  BhagPur.  2,  6,  30. 
See  Conda,  in  OH  (forthcoming). 

For  some  particulars:  Renou,  Destin,  p.  19. 


52 


J.  Gonda  • Vedic  Literature 


RV.  3, 62, 10,  tie  Gayatri  (because  it  is  composed  in  the  metre  of  that  name)  or 
Savitri  fit  is  dedicated  to  Savitar,  the  Snn):  “That  we  obtain  that  desirable 
(excellent)  radiance  of  god  Savitar  who  is  (may  be  expected)  to  stimnlate  onr 
visions”®®.  The  muttering  of  this  most  sacred  mantra—to  be  ceremoniously 
imparted  by  the  gum  to  a ‘student’  of  the  Veda’®— forms,  from  remote  times 
to  the  present  day,  a vital  part  of  a brahmin’s  daily  worship.  Already  at  an 
early  moment  it  became  an  object  of  esoterical  speculation  and  mystic 
explanation,  of  re-interpretation,  modification  and  adaptation  to  the  require- 
ments of  post-Vedic  religious  currents’^. 

Some,  partiv  unproved’®,  observations  have  been  made  on  the  influence 
exerted  by  the  Veda  on — or  to  express  ourselves  more  cautiously,  on  the  con- 
tinuation of  Vedic  characteristics  in — later  Indian  literature,  inter  aha,  royal 
panegjTics’®  and  hdvycif  poems’^.  It  is  true  that  the  later  generations  inherited 
many  stylistic  and  some  structural  features  (various  similes,  the  metrical 
variation  at  the  end  of  a poem)  from  the  Vedic  poets,  and  that  the  eulogistic 
literature  (panegyrics  and  stotras  “hymns  of  praise”)  continued  Vedic  fea- 
tures’^; however,  neither  the  hymns  nor  the  prose  of  the  hrdhmanas  were  in  the 
classical  period  sources  for  the  renewal  of  literary  art.  It  can  generally  speaking 
be  maintained  that  the  more  profane  the  literary  works  the  rarer  the  allusions 
to  the  Veda  proper.  Whereas  Kalidasa’s’®  poems  and  dramas  show  hardly 
anything  worth  mentioning  in  this  connection,  Magha  has  a certain  predilection 
for  Vedic  mythology.  Bhavabhuti  (±  730),  who  claimed  to  he  a scion  of  a 
family  of  teachers  of  the  Taittiriya  iakhd  of  the  Black  Yajurveda”,  shows 
traces  of  familiarity  with  the  Vedic  sacrificial  phraseology’®.  Interestingly 
enough,  later  kdvya  poets’®  seem  to  have  been  more  inclined  to  displaying  their, 
superficial,  it  is  true,  knowledge  of  Vedic  rehgion  and  hterature®®.  The  Veda 
was  not  unknown  to  the  ancient  Tamil  authors  either®^.  Their  works  reflect  a 

See  below,  p.  65  ff. 

For  many  details:  Kane,  H.  Dh.  11,  p.  300. 

See  Gonda,  at  Oriens  16,  p.  284. 

One  should  not,  with  P.  L.  Bhajrgava,  India  in  the  Vedic  age,  Aminabad- 
Lucknow  1971,  p.  351,  attach  conclusive  force  to  places  such  as  Bharatiya  Natya- 

festra  1,  16. 

L.  Renou,  in  Journal  de  Psychologie,  1951  p.  283. 

S.  K.  Gupta,  at  17  AIOC,  S.  P.  p.  31  (Kalidasa’s  Meghaduta). 

See  p.  264  f. 

See  Bh.  S.  Upadhyaya,  India  in  Kahdasa,  New  Delhi  1947,  p.  274;  279;  297. 
I would  not  say  that,  for  instance,  RV.  4, 7, 11  has  been  the  model  for  Rtusamharal,  25. 

” See  Todab  Maul,  Mahavira-caritam,  Oxford  1928,  p.  XXIV*. 

A.  B.  Keith,  at  JRAS  1914  11,  p.  729;  V.  Raghavan,  JASBombay  31-32, 

p.  218. 

The  treatises  on  poetics  did  not,  generally  speaking,  pay  much  attention  to 
the  Veda.  There  is  on  one  hand  a tendency  to  archaizing  imitation  in  Raja^ekhara’s 
Kavyammamsa  (±900)  and  on  the  other  an  inclination  to  regard  its  literary 
value  as  inferior  to  that  of  kdvya  (Renou,  Destin,  p.  25;  76). 

®®  For  some  details:  Renou,  Destin,  p.  24. 

J . Fuxiozat,  at  Melanges  Renou,  Paris  1968,  p,  289. 


Introduction  to  th©  Veda  in  general  and  the  Rgveda  in  particular 


53 


pan-Indian  culture  in  ■wMch  this  sacred  literature  ranked  among  the  main 
elements.  They  give  us  also  valuable  information  on  its  social  and  religioas 
position : beside  the  younger  Hindu  vorks  ( dgama ) which  could  pave  the  way 
for  final  deliverance  the  ritual  set  forth  in  the  Veda  remained  a means  of 
attaining  woildly  happiness  and  prosperity. 

Generally  speaking,  the  decline  of  Vedic  Hterature  must  be  ascribed  to  the 
difficulty  of  style  and  language  of  the  mantras;  its  esoteric,  specialized,  abstruse 
or  antiquated  contents ; the  use  of  isolated  stanzas  or  fragments  of  hymns  in.  the 
ritual ; the  dispersion  of  those  studying  it  over  various  regions,  groups  and 
schools ; the  emphasis  placed  upon  mechanical  recitation ; the  rarity,  onesided- 
ness and  inaccessability  of  commentaries ; and  last  but  not  least,  the  fact  that 
the  Vedic  religion  had  already  at  an  early  date  ceased  to  appeal  to  the  feelings, 
and  to  attract  the  attention,  of  large  groups  of  the  population.  In  the  1 9th 
century  many  prominent  Indians,  among  whom  for  instance  Vlvekananda 
(1862-1902),  knew  so  little  of  the  contents  of  the  Veda  that  they  mixed  them  up 
with  beliefs  of  Buddhist  and  Rindu  origin^^.  Or  calling  Vedas  what  really  be- 
longs to  the  upanisads  they  combined,  like  Gandhi®^,  ancient  lore  with  tenets 
of  other  provenance. 

This  lack  of  first-hand  information  did  not  however  prevent  many  Indians 
from  eulogizing  the  literature  exuberantly.  The  Vedas,  “the  word  of  God  and  in 
some  respects  even  godlier  than  God  himself”®^,  “nothing  less  than  the  basis 
of  our  entire  religious  and  social  organization’’®^,  are  “the  medium  through 
which  the  gospel  of  the  life  beyond,  the  super-sensual  existence,  the  longing  for 
the  summum  honum  has  been  most  convincingly  revealed”®®;  “Vedic  literature 
has  preserved  for  us  the  whole  story  of  the  growth  of  our  spiritual  and  philo- 
sophical thought”®^.  There  is  moreover  a pronounced  tendency  to  idealize  the 
contents  of  the  Rgveda  “which  breathes  an  air  of  happiness  and  blithe  charm”®® 
and  to  propose  extravagant  anachronistic  interpretations  and  unfounded 
idealistic  views  of  the  Vedic  past  and  of  the  poetry  of  the  hjmns®®,  some 
authors  exhibiting  also  tendencies  to  euhemerism®®.  To  mention  only  some 
random  examples:  the  frog-hymn  RV.  7,  103®^  has  been  explained  as  bearing 
testimony  to  "progressive  social  consciousness’  in  a "critical  and  sceptical 


®“  Rnisrou,  Destin,  p.  5. 

M.  K.  Gaotdhi,  Autobiography  (quoted  after  the  Washington  edition  1954),  ch.  22. 
®^  S.  K.  Belvauel^,  in  2 AIOC,  p.  3. 

Bankim  Rachanavali,  Collected  writings,  Calcutta  1969,  p.  150;  cf.  P.  R. 
Deshmxtkh,  Proc.  26  Int.  Congr.  of  Orient.  IH,  1,  Poona  1969,  p.  156- 
®®  P.  Tarkabhijshak,  in  10  AIOC  (1940),  Pres,  addresses,  p.  1. 

H.  D.  Veiaitxajb,  in  13  AIOC  (1946),  p.  6. 

®8  P.  S.  S(h)astbi,  inPO  10(1945),p.  97;cf.thesame,inABORI  38  (1957), p.  67. 
See  e.g,  P.  S.  Sastbi,  in  QJMS  40,  p.  47. 

S.  Pbadhant,  at  ABORI  12,  p.  57.  We  leave  unmentioned  those  publications 
which  intend  to  show  that  the  Vedic  poets  had  a knowledge  of  modern  techmcs 
including  even  nuclear  physics. 

See  p.  143. 


54 


J.  Gonda  • Yedic  Literature 


society*®^;  the  famous  hymn  to  the  earth  (AV.  12,  1)  as  a patriotic  glorification 
of  the'^^motherland’^^;  RV.  10,  101  as  advocating  co-operative  farming^h 
In  a moderriiziiig  interpretation,  the  Veda,  but  in  reality  the  ufanisads^ 
became,  in  the  19th  century  renaissance  of  Hinduism,  an  element  of  living 
faith  among  the  followers,  limited  in  number,  of  Rammohan  Roy  (1772—1833), 
Rabindranath  Tagore  (1861-1941)  and  S.  Radhakrishnan  (born  1888).  The 
hvmns  themselves  came  decidedly  to  the  fore  in  Hayananda  Sarasvati  s ( 1 824— 
1883)  Axya  Samaj,  where,  however,  they  are  given  a socio-politic,  by  no  means 
scientific,  interpretation®^.  There  is,  moreover,  a vddespread  tendency  to  read 
into  the  Veda  esoteric  implications  based  upon  later  usage  of  defimte  terms,  a 
tendency  also  to  interpret  it  symbolically®®  and  to  discern  its  spiritual  and 
aesthetic  significance  by  means  of  a study  of  the  occurrences  of  these  terms  in 
later  reKgious  literature®^.  Aurobindo  (1872—1950),  one  of  the  foremost  modem 
exponents  of  an  esoteric,  psychological,  mystic  and  sjonboKcal  interpretation, 
views  the  Veda  as  a book  of  esoteric  symbols,  almost  of  spiritual  formulae 
* Vhich  masks  itself  as  a collection  of  ritual  poems.’’  Being  much  more  than  ‘‘a 
superficial  liturgy  the  Veda  is  the  supreme  infallible  authority  for  spiritual 
knowledge,  revealed  only  to  the  initiated.”  Its  central  teaching  is  a truth  higher 
and  deeper  than  that  of  outward  existence,  a truth  which  makes  us  unite  our- 
selves with  God  and  pass  from  mortality  to  immortality.  The  gods,  taken 
allegorically  and,  as  living  realities,  representing  essential  powers  of  God  and 
as  such  standing  for  psychological  functions,  are,  if  properly  called  upon  by 
means  of  the  mantras,  our  helpers:  for  instance,  Agni,  the  Divine  Will-force,  is 
“the  hmer  flame,  our  leader  and  path-finder”.  The  mantras,  bearers  of  spiritual 
power,  have  an  esoterical  meaning  known  only  to  the  initiate  who  have  learned 
to  perform  the  ‘inner  sacrifice.’  The  sacrifices  also  are  symbolic,  namely  of  an 
inner  exchange  between  divine  power  and  men.  On  the  world-stage  and  in  the 
individual  soul  the  same  drama  is  enacted  with  the  same  personages,  gods  and 
demons®®. 

” P.  S.  S(h)astbi,  in  EHQ  32  (1956),  p.  394. 

V.  S.  Agbawaia,  in  lA,  III,  1 (1964),  p.  154. 

M.  R.  jAMBmvATHAN,  at  20  AIOC,  S.  P.,  p.  16. 

Dayananda  was  also  among  those  spiritual  leaders  who  shared  the  view  that 
the  Veda  deals  mainly  with  the  Supreme  Soul.  See  S.  K.  Gupta,  at  14  AIOC, 
S.  P.,  p.  130. 

Ram  Gopal,  23  AIOC,  Pres,  address,  p.  40;  V.  S.  Ageawala,  Sparks  from  the 
Vedic  fire,  Banaras  1962;  Vedic  Symbolism,  at  Bharati  6,  p.  95;  and  in  Proc.  26 
Int.  Congress  of  Orient.  HI,  p.  1;  S.  A.  Dajstge,  Pastoral  symbolism  from  the 
Rgi^eda,  Poona  1970. 

A.  C.  Bose,  19  AIOC  S.P.,p.  25  and  compare Bloomjteld,  at  JAOS  15,  p.  145. 

See  e.g.  Aueobixdo  (Ghose),  Hymns  of  the  Atris,  Arya  2;  3;  4 (Pondicherry 
1915-1917);  The  greatness  of  Indian  literature,  Calcutta  Review  58,  March  1936; 
Hymns  to  the  mystic  fire,  Pondicherry  1946,  Introduction;  The  Vamadeva  hymns 
to  Agni,  Sri  Aurobindo  Mandir  Annual  10  (1951),  p.  9;  On  the  Veda,  Pondicherry 
1964;  T.  V.  EIapali  Sastey,  Lights  on  the  Veda,  Pondicherry  1947 ; A.  B.  Pueani, 
Studies  in  Vedic  interpretation  on  the  lines  of  Sri  Aurobindo,  Varanasi  (Benares) 


Introduction  to  the  Veda  in  general  and  the  Rg\"eda  in  particular 


55 


7,  Study  of  the  Veda 


In  the  19th  century  and  the  first  decades  of  the  20th  century  Indian  con- 
tributions to  modem  Vedic  research  were  scanty^.  Indian  scholars  have  repeat- 
edly complained  of  the  fact  that  interest  in  Vedic  studies  is,  in  universities  as 
well  as  in  the  traditional  schools,  on  the  decline^.  Yet  many  hithert-o  unknown 
commentaries  and  other  works  were,  in  the  course  of  the  last  century,  found 
and — ^unfortunately  not  always  critically — edited®,  learned  societies  founded^, 
periodicals  and  several  important  enterprises  started®,  vith  the  result  that  in 
the  last  decades  Vedic  research  is  in  a modernized  form  winning  ground.  The 
publication  of  studies  and  translations  uTitten  in  modern  Indian  languages 
shows  that  nowadays  the  circles  of  those  interested  are  widening®.  Many  Indian 
scholars’,  for  whom  the  Vedas  often  have  a vital  and  emotional  interest  and  who 
often  find  it  difficult  to  be  objectively  critical,  feel  inclined  to  emphasize  the 
beauty  of  their  language  and  the  majesty  of  their  thought®;  their  unparalleled 
significance  for  religious  life® ; the  devout  fervour  of  mystic  communion  which 
they  breathe^®.  Others^^  vindicate  the  old  adhydtma  exegesis  of  the  orthodox 

^ Cf.  H.  LtinEBS,  at  ZDMG  83,  p.  1.  For  philological  work  done  by  Europeans 
and  Indians  in  India:  E.  WrtmiscH,  Philologie  und  Altertumskunde  in  Indien, 
Abh.  Kunde  d.  Morgenlandes  15,  3,  Leipzig  1921. 

2 Cf.  also  S.  K.  Belvalkar,  at  2 AIOC  (1923),  p.  4;  C.  G.  Kasheear,  24  AIOC 
(1968),  Pres,  address,  p.  27.  There  is  on  the  other  hand  merit  in  promoting  Vedic 
learning : the  whole  expense  of  the  second  edition  of  Max  Muller’s  edition  of  the 
Rgveda  was  borne  by  the  maharaja  of  Vijayanagara  (E.  J.  Thomas,  at  IHQ  26, 
p.  91), 

2 See  e.g.  C.  Kunuant  Raja,  in  12  AIOC  (1947),  11,  p.  25;  S.  S.  Bhawe,  m 20 
AIOC  (1959),  Pres,  address,  p.  25. 

^ Bhandarkar  Oriental  Research  Institute  (Poona);  Tilak  Vaidic  Samshodana 
Mandal  (Poona);  Vishveshvaranand  Vedic  Research  Institute  (successively  in 
Lahore  and  Hoshiarpur) ; International  Academy  of  Indian  Culture  (successively  at 
Lahore,  Yagpur,  Delhi),  etc. 

® See  e.g.  Surya  EIaxta,  at  16  AIOC,  p.  1. 

® Most  of  these  publications  are  hardly  known  outside  their  own  region.  It  is 
with  great  regret  we  have  to  note  that  many  Indian  scholars  are  at  a disadvantage 
because  they  are  insufficiently  abreast  of  what  is  going  on  in  the  West  and  especially 
of  literature  written  in  languages  other  than  English.  Too  often  IVIax  Miilleb  and 
hifi  contemporaries  are  still  quoted  as  representative  authorities  whose  opinions 
may  be  generalized.  Fortunately,  however,  few  will  in  this  respect  equal  Kewal 
Motwani,  India’s  ancient  literature,  Proc.  27  Int.  Congress  of  Orient.  1967  (Wies- 
baden 1967),  p.  300  (and  a book  under  the  same  title,  Madras  1956). 

’ In  general,  see  e.g.  D.  Bhattacharya,  Thoughts  on  aspects  of  Vedic  studies, 
OH  8 (1960),  p.  73. 

® C.  KxjNHAisr  Raja,  in  The  Aryan  Path  17  (1946),  p.  262. 

9 S00  0,g.  Y,  RAGHAVAjsr,  The  Vedas  and  Bhakti,  Vedanta-Kesari  42,  p.  330; 
S.  K.  Belvalkar,  in  2 AIOC,  Pres,  address,  p.  3. 

P.  S.  Sastri,  in  PrBr  63,  p.  193. 

E.g.  V.  S.  Agbawala,  The  Vedas  and  adhyatma  tradition,  IC  5 (1938),  p.  285 
(not  free  from  circular  argumentation  and  untenable  interpretations  of  texts); 
the  same,  JOIB  13,  p.  95. 


56 


J.  Gonda  • Yedic  Literature 


traditioii.  Contendiag  tliat  the  hrahmancis  already  regarded  the  Veda  as  ‘docu- 
ments of  spiritual  culture’  and  inclining  to  an  intuitively  ‘mystic’  interpretation 
they  sometimes  tend  to  exaggerate  the  presence  of  upanisadic  and  monistic 
doctrines  in  the  Rgveda^^.  In  their  eyes  “the  approach  to  the  deeper  meaning 
of  the  Veda — ^the  words  of  which  are  mere  symbols — must  be  with  faith, 
spiritual  rather  than  humanistic”^®.  “The  lauds  are  means  to  happiness  rather 
than  to  pleasure,  and  it  would  be  an  affectation  to  speak  of  them  as  literature 
That  is  not  to  say  that  the  East  is  inaccessible  to  new  methods  and  approaches. 
Some  scholars  for  instance  favour  a ‘socio-semantic’  method  of  interpreting  the 
ancient  texts,  attempting  to  glean  information  regarding  prehistoric  develop- 
ment from  a ‘social’  analysis  of  the  m3d}hs  and  legends^®. 

It  may  be  useful  very  briefly  to  characterize  the  work,  points  of  view  and 
methods  adopted  by  those  western  scholars  who  have  contributed  most  to  the 
study  of  the  Veda.  Even  from  this  resume  it  will  appear  that  the  history  of 
Vedic  researches  has  first  and  foremost  been  a struggle  for  the  most  adequate 
methods  and  that  attention  has  been  focussed  mainly  on  problems  of  strictly 
philological,  linguistic,  religious,  ritual  interest.  Up  to  the  middle  of  the  19th 
century  the  West  was  very  badly  informed  on  Indian  literature  in  general. 
Some  short  and  inaccurate  references  are  found  in  the  works  of  Portuguese, 
Dutch^®,  French^’,  Danish  and  English^®  authors  who  had  stayed  or  travelled  in 
Ladia^®.  The  scientific  study  of  the  Veda  was  founded,  in  Paris,  by  Eugene 
Bumouf  (1801-1852)®°.  To  his  pupils  Rudolph  (von)  Roth  (1821-1895,  Tubin- 
gen) and  F.  Max  Muller  (1823-1903,  after  1850  at  Oxford)  we  are,  among  many 


“ Thus,  e.g.  A.  K.  Coohabaswamy,  A new  approach  to  the  Vedas,  London 
1933  (cf.  p.  52),  inaccurate  and  unreliable  in  many  details  (cf.  e.g.  W.  Pbintz, 
at  ZDMG  88,  p.  356);  J.  B.  Chethimattam,  in  Int.  Philos.  Quart.  10  (1970),  p.  4?! 
A.  K.  CooMABASWAMY,  in  Comm.  Vol.  Woolner,  Lahore  1940,  p.  53. 

“ CooMABASWAMY,  l^ew  approach,  p.  88. 

Cf.  0.  H.  de  A.  WiJESEKEBA,  in  Verhandlungen  Indoloeen-Tammff  1959, 
Gottingen  1960,  p.  233, 

Mention  may  be  made  of  A.  Pogebius,  De  Open-deure  tot  het  verborgen 
heydendom,  Leyden  1651,  translated  into  French  and  German,  re-edited  by  W. 
CALA^m,  ’s-Gravenhage  1915,  and  Ph.  Baxdaeus,  Afgoderye  der  Oost-mdische 
heydenen,  Amsterdam  1672,  re-edited  by  A.  J.  de  Jong,  Thesis  Utrecht  1917  (see 

p.  176), 


F.  Bebniee,  Histoire  de  la  derniere  revolution  des  £tats  du  Grand  MoroI  and 

three  other  volumes,  Paris  1670-1671. 

18  H.  Th.  Coibbrooke,  On  the  Vedas  or  sacred  writmgs  of  the  Hindus,  Asiatick 
Be^arches  8,  p.  369  (also  separately  Calcutta  1805;  and  in  Miscellaneous  essays, 
I,  London  1837;  ^1873;  German  translation  by  L.  Poley,  Leipsic  1847).  He  was 
tJie  tat  to  attempt  a sketchy  survey  of  the  Vedic  literature  known. 

” For  general  information:  W.  Caland,  Ontdekkingsgeschiedenis  van  den  Veda, 
-^terdam  Acad.  1918;  A.  C.  Btonell,  at  lA  8.  p.  98;  J.  Chabpentiee,  at  JIH 

PWi'.!  i’  f P-  WnnJiscH,  Geschichte  der  Sanskrit- 

l^ologie  und  indischen  Altertumskunde,  2 vol.,  Strassburg  1917;  Berlin-Leipzig 


For  the  period  between 
philologie  v^dique,  Paris  1928. 


±1840  and  1920  see  L.  Penoxt,  Les  maitres  de  la 


Introduction  to  the  Veda  in  general  and  the  Rg^’eda  in  particular 


57 


other  things,  indebted  for  the  compilation  of  the  Vedic  element  in  the  so-called 
Petersburg  Dictionary^^  and  the  first  edition  of  the  Rgreda^^.  Roth — ^to  whom 
Europe  owed  the  first  clear  information  on  the  Veda^s — ^rightly  taught  that  the 
aim  of  Veda  interpretation  is  not  to  ascertain  the  meaning  wMch  Sayam  or 
even  Yaska  attributed  to  the  hymns.  Very  much  inclined  to  call  their  authority 
in  question  he  was  the  first  European  to  emancipate  himself  from  the  tradition 
they  represented.  In  this  he  was  followed  by  Grassmann,  Bergaigne,  Olden- 
berg.  Considering  the  metrical  parts  of  the  Veda,  not  as  products  of  theological 
speculation  or  liturgical  practices,  but  as  ancient  ijrical  poetry misunderstood 
by  later  generations,  he  tried  to  view  it  as  a coherent  whole.  The  conviction  that 
there  were  hardly  connections  between  the  Veda  and  later  literature  and  the  beMef 
that  there  was  a long  distance  in  time  between  the  hymns  and  the  ritual  texts 
were  two  of  Ms  errors.  Whereas  Hermann  Grassmann  (1809-1877}^®  had  no 
opinions  on  Vedic  mythology  and  ritualism,  Alfred  Ludwig  (1832-1912), 
following  Weber^®  and  reacting  against  Roth,  tried — ^not  very  successfully — ^to 
form  an  idea  of  the  social  and  Mstorical  reality  of  wMch  the  poets  are  the 
exponents.  It  was  to  be  Abel  Bergaigne’s  (1838-1888)  task  to  show"  that  the 
interpretation  of  the  Rgveda  is  much  more  complicated  and  difficult  than  was 
assumed  by  Ms  predecessors.  His  ambitious  attempt  at  explaining  the  contents 
of  tMs  corpus  as  a harmonious  and  systematic  whole^^ — and  that  without 
relying  on  comparative  m3rfchology  and  evidence  drawn  from  the  later  liter- 
ature— led  to  an  insight  mto  the  indissoluble  relations  between  cult  and  myiih 
and  the  belief  of  Vedic  man  in  the  identity  of  cosmic,  ritual  and  moral  order. 
Though  often  overshooting  the  mark  he  also  contributed  to  a better  under- 
standing of  Rgvedic  diction  and  phraseology.  However,  Ms  ‘structuralist’ 
approach  did  not  appeal  to  Ms  contemporaries  who  thought  in  terras  of  Mstorical 
evolution. 

The  activity  of  Richard  Pischel  (1849-1908)  and  Karl  E.  G^ldner  (1852- 
1929)^®  in  Ms  younger  days  was  a deliberate  and  polemical  reaction  against  the 
prevailing  opinions.  In  their  eyes  the  Rgveda  is  a purely  Indian  document  to  be 
interpreted,  not  with  the  help  of  comparative  linguistics  or  mythology,  but 
with  the  later,  even  the  classical  Sanskrit  literature  of  the  subcontinent. 
Consequently,  in  interpreting  the  hymns,  myths  were  replaced  by  legends, 
Sayana  and  other  commentators  were  continually  consulted,  anything  Indian, 

O.  BoHTnnsrGK  and  R.  Roth,  Sanskrit- Worterbuch,  St.  Petersburg  (1852) 
1855-1875. 

22  See  above,  p.  8. 

22  R.  Roth,  Zur  Litteratur  und  G^schichte  des  Weda,  Stuttgart  1846. 

2^  Roth,  in  the  Worwort’  of  the  Petersburg  Dictionary,  I. 

22  See  below,  p.  60. 

2«  See  below,  p.  58. 

27  Bebgaigne,  R.  V. ; Observations  sur  les  figures  de  rhetorique  dans  le  Rig-Veda, 
MSL  4,  p.  96;  Quarante  h37inns  du  Rig-Veda,  MSL  8,  1 etc. 

28  Pischel  and  Geldnee,  V.  S.;  K.  E.  Geldnee,  Auswahl;  R.  Pischel,  Die 
indische  Literatur,  in  Kultur  der  Gegenwart,  I,  7,  Berlin— Leipzig  1906,  p.  160. 


58 


J.  Gonda  • Vedic  Literature 


including  even  modem  religions  and  folk-lore,  could  be  utilized  in  elucidation 
of  the  Rgveda  which,  in  PischeFs  opinion,  reflects  a culture  that  is  not  widely 
different  from  that  of  the  epic  and  classical  periods^^.  Whereas  the  Vedische 
Studien  did  not  fail  to  make  some  appeal  to  the  judgment  of  the  American  schol- 
ars M.  Bloomfield  (1855-1928)^°  and  Ch.  R.  Lanman  (1850-1941),  they  did  not 
meet  vith  much  appreciation  in  Germany^^  until,  in  later  years,  Geldner  him- 
self rightly  mitigated®^ — ^and  in  many  particulars  even  abandoned — ^the  one- 
sided and  often  hazardous  method  advocated  in  that  collection  of  studies^^. 

Hermann  Oldenberg  (1854-1920)^^,  less  one-sided  in  his  views  than  most  of 
his  predecessors  and  contemporaries,  was  perfectly  right,  not  only  in  detecting 
the  weaknesses  of  the  Vedische  Studien  but  also  in  resorting  to  ail  reliable 
resources  which  might  contribute  to  the  understanding  of  the  Veda.  Regarding 
the  other  Vedic  texts  as  a sort  of  commentary  on  the  Rgveda  he  had  a keen  eye 
for  the  possibilities  offered  by  two  nascent  branches  of  learning,  cultural 
anthropology  and  the  comparative  study  of  religions.  In  the  latter  respect  he 
was  in  the  congenial  society  of  Willem  Caland  (1859-1932)  who  as  a worthy 
successor  of  Albrecht  Weber  (1825-1901)  focussed  ids  attention  mainly  on  the 
brahmanas  and  sutras,  leaving  us  numerous  first  editions  and  translations®®. 

After  Oldenberg  the  study  of  the  Rgveda  was  for  some  decades  almost 
stagnant — ^textcritical  studies  all  but  completely  discontinued®®  — and  Caland ’s 
death  deprived  the  ritual  texts  of  their  most  prolific  interpreter.  It  was  after 
World  War  11  that  it  became  clear  that  representatives  of  a younger  generation 
had  resumed  the  threads,  often  however  neglecbing,  like  their  predecessors,  the 
purely  hterarj^  aspects  of  the  ancient  Indian  literature  for  linguistic  and  rehgious 
problems.  Louis  Renou  (1896-1966)®’  was  an  honourable  exception:  in  his 
many  valuable  publications  there  is  much  that  has  deepened  our  insight  into 
the  style,  diction,  phraseology  and  literary  significance  of  the  Vedic  hymns®®. 
Emphasizing  the  formulaic  character  of  the  hymns  and  eschewing  clarijfication 
by  means  of  external  facts,  he  tried  to  understand  them  first  and  foremost 


2**  Cf.  e.g.  PiscHEL  and  Geudnee,  V.  S.  I,  p.  XXU. 

” observed  that  “Pischel  and  Geldner  are  notoriously 

^ considerable  part  of  the  Rgveda  consists  of  fairy-tales” 

(ZDMG  48,  p.  543). 

« m only  work  which  adopted  Pischel’s  points  of  view  is  Sdsg,  Sagenstoffe. 
Jispecially  in  his  translation  (Geldnes,  RV.). 

One  can  hardly  object  to  the  many— and  sometimes  critical— references  to 
baja^,  Yaska,  the  anukramanls  etc.  found  in  the  notes  to  his  translation. 

hi.  f . =hort  review  of 

iei^S  ““ 

“ Bandhu,  at  16  AIOC,  p.  69  and  RO  21,  p.  466 

exegetieal  tradition,  JAOS  88,  p.  310. 

over  ^ philological  facts  attested  Renou  however  tended  to 

o\  er-estimate  the  argumentum  e silentio, 

Rexou,  E.  V.  P.;  H.  P.;  H.  S.  and  many  other  works. 


Introduction  to  the  Veda  in  general  and  the  Rg^^eda  in  particular  59 


by  internal  comparison.  After  the  wholesome  Anglo-Saxon  scepticism  of  W.D. 
WMtney  (1827-1894)  and  A.  B.  Keith  (1879-1944)  his  French  lucidity,  reserve 
and  soundness  of  judgment  as  well  as  his  anti-dogmatism  are  a welcome 
counterpoise  to  prejudiced  and  not  infrequently  speculative  'systematic’  views 
of  the  Veda. 

Recently,  an  important — ^though,  of  course,  one-sided — attempt  has  been 
made  structurally — ^more  exactly,  from  the  view-point  of  a semiotic  approach — 
to  describe  part  of  the  contents  of  the  Rgveda  on  the  basis  of  formal  features  in 
such  a way  that  a body  of  facts  comes  to  stand  out  "in  their  systematic  relations 
beyond  the  ranges  of  any  obligatory  interpretation”®®.  It  seems  beyond  dispute 
that  a complete  collection  of  partial  descriptions  of  this  t3rpe  would  be  greatly 
helpful  as  materials  for  forming  a comprehensive  idea  of  what  the  Rgveda 
really  is.  A thorough  understanding  of  the  literary  peculiarity  and  signifrcance 
of  the  Veda  will  however  require  supplementation  by  historical  methods. 
Besides,  the  poems  of  the  Vedic  sages  are  no  treatises  of  logic  or  grammar  and 
we  can  hardly  expect  them  to  give  exact  answers  to  all  our  questions.  We  would 
probably  not  be  far  wrong  if  we  rehed  as  far  as  possible  upon  material  found  in 
the  Rgveda  itself  and  in  the  second  place  on  those  Vedic  texts  which  are  com- 
paratively close  to  it,  drawing  on  later  sources  only  as  confirmatory,  rather  than 
primary  evidence^®.  Internal  comparison  and  reconstruction  should  be  supple- 
mented by  data  and  h3q)otheses  furnished  by  other  branches  of  learning 
From  the  very  beginning  of  Vedic  studies  in  the  West  scholars,  while  neg- 
lecting the  literary  and  aesthetic  aspects  of  the  literature  in  their  learned 
publications^®,  were  strongly  mclined  to  deal  with  these  subjects  in  works 
intended  for  a wider  circle  of  readers^®.  In  these  the  literary  mheritance  of 
ancient  India  was  in  most  cases  dealt  with  as  a source  of  information  on  the 
history  of  Indian  civilization^^  rather  than  for  the  sake  of  its  own  value  and 


39  T.  Elizahenkova,  in  Melanges  Renou,  Paris  1968,  p.  255. 

^9  Cf.  also  Bloomfield,  in  JAOS  15,  p.  153;  W.  Noeman  Bbow:5T,  in  JAOS  88, 
p.  201  (contra  V-  S.  Agbawala,  The  thousand-syUabled  speech,  I,  Varanasi^l963 
(on  RV.  1,  164));  the  confused  argument  to  the  contrary  by  the  latter  in  Purana  1 
(Varanasi  1959)  overlooks  the  fact  that  the  puranas  and.  similar  writings  of  the 
later  period  are  not  identical  with  the  purdrui  mentioned  in  Vedic  literature. 

The  relevance  of  some  theories  claiming  to  explain  the  Vedic  view  of  life  and 
the  world  from  a single  principle — such  as  Dumezil’s  theory  of  the  t^ee  functio^ 
(e.g.  Gr.  Dumezel,  L’ideologie  tripartie  des  Indo-Europeens,  Bruxelles  19o8)  ^to 

oiu*  subject  is  not  immediately  apparent.  . i t -x 

42  Cf.  e.g.  A.  Webeb,  Akademische  Vorlesungen  iiber  mdische  Literaturge- 

schichte,  Berlin  1852,  ®1876.  See  also  I.S.  I,  p.  26-  . 21007 

43  M.  WiNTEENiTZ,  Geschichte  der  indischen  Literatur,  I,  Leipzig  1905, 

(1968)  was  explicitly  intended  “not  for  learned  circles,  but  for  the  educated. 

44  A perusal  of  the  pertinent  publications  shows  that  scholars  discussed  not  only 
strictly  linguistic  and  philological  problems  but  also  the  question  as  to  boy  to  form 
an  idea  of  the  Vedic  civilization  and  bow  to  interpret  the  texts  on  the  basis  of  su^ 
an  idea  (cf.  e.g.  A.  Ludwig,  tJber  Methode  bei  der  Interpretation  des  ?,gvyia,  Abb. 
Bobmische  Ges.  d.  Wiss.,  7,  4,  1 (Prague  1890));  problems  connected  with  lege^ 
and  other  post-?.gvedic  traditions  in  their  relations  to  the  ?,gveda  (e.g.  in. 


60 


J.  Gonda  * Yedie  Literature 


interest^®.  Whereas  L.  von  Schroeder’s  lectures^®  frankly  admitted  their  double 
interest j the  books  on  Indian  literature  by  A.  Kaegi^^,  A.  A.  Macdonell^®,  V. 
Henryk®  paid  touch  more  attention  to  religion,  toythology  and  history  of  civili- 
zation than  a Modem  reader  would  expect  to  find  in  them.  In  our  days  this 
tradition  is  continued  by  Krishna  Chaitanya’s®®  idealizing  book.  Authors  of 
other  works  on  Indian  literature  are  more  interested  in  the  post-Vedic  liter- 
ature^^. 

The  now  completely  antiquated  work  of  those  pioneers  who  enthusiastically 
undertook  to  translate  the  whole  of  the  Egveda®^,  Langlois®®  and  Wilson®^, 
suffered  much  from  the  defect  that  they  were  based  on  the  (not  always  correctly 
understood)  cototoentary  of  Sayana.  Ludwig’s®^  stiff  and  abrupt  style  and 
Grasstoann’s^®  wholly  inadequate  Gertoanization  and  often  highly  arbitrary 
attempts  to  replace  an  exact  rendering  of  the  texts  as  they  have  cotoe  down  to 
us  by  the  results  of  what  he  considered  to  be  higher  criticism  seriously  detracted 


Bexfey,  in  BB  7 (1883),  p.  298);  with  the  light  shed  on  the  texts  by  the  ritual  (e.g. 
BnooaiFiELD,  in  AJPh  11  (1890),  p.  319;  nowadays,  after  80  years,  it  can  be  said 
that  the  study  of  the  ritual  has  contributed  largely  to  the  understanding  of  the 
samhitm);  with  the  peculiarities  of  ancient  Indian  thought  (cf.  e.g.  P.  Begnaijd,  in 
RHR  21  (1890),  p.  63).  Controversies  upon  the  character  and  ‘originaP  or  functional 
significance  of  gods  and  myths  wiU  continue  for  many  years  to  come  (see  e.  g.  the 
literature  mentioned  in  Goi^a,  R.I.  I;  Dual  deities;  S.  F.  IVIichalski,  at  RO  24 
(1961),  p.  7). 

Even  F.  Max  Mulleb’s  History  of  ancient  Sanskrit  literature,  London  1859 
{*1860,  1912,  1926)  paid  hardly  any  attention  to  the  literary  value  of  the  Veda. 

L.  vox  ScHBOEDEE,  Indiens  Literatur  und  Cultur  in  historischer  Entwicklimff 
Leipzig  1887  (1922). 

A.  Kaegi,  Der  Rig\-eda,  Leipzig  1881. 

A.  A.  JVIacdonell,  A history  of  Sanskrit  literature,  London  1900  (1925;  ISTew 
York  p29;  Indian  editions  in  1958,  1961,  1965,  1971;  also  New  York  1968). 

V.  Hexby,  Les  littfratures  de  ITnde,  Paris  1904. 

Keis^-a  Chaitaxya,  a new  history  of  Sanskrit  literature,  London  1962. 

E.g.  V.  Pisaxi,  Storia  delle  letterature  antiche  dellTndia,  Milan  n.d. 

For  translations  in  languages  other  than  English,  French  and  German  the 
reader  may  be  referred  to  the  bibliographies  and  to  V.  M.  Apte,  in  19  AIOC  (1957) 

Pres,  addresses,  p.  104. 

« A.  Laxglois,  Rig-Veda  ou  Livre  des  hymnes,  4 vol.,  Paris  1848-1851  (in  one 
volume,  ^1870;  new  edition  by  P.  E.  Foucaijx,  1872);  a wholly  deficient  work, 
inferior  to  V ilson’s  and  F.  Rosex,  Rigveda  Sanhita,  Liber  primus,  London  1838. 

T 1 ’ Rig-Veda-Sanhita.  A coUection  of  ancient  Hindu  hymns,  6 vol. 

^ndon  18o0-1858  (vol.  IV-VI  edited  by  E.  B.  Cowell  and  W.  F.  Websteb,  new 

Bangalore  1925-1928,  with  an  introduction  which  was  also  separately 

published:  Calcutta  1852). 

« A.  Luuvug,  Der  Rigveda  oder  Die  heiligen  Hymnen  der  Brahmana,  6 vol., 
Prag  Leipzig  1876-1888  (with  a commentary,  a long  introduction  and  a register). 
Xw  Ludwig,  at  Yearbook  1964,  Max  Muller  Bhavan, 

^ Leipzig  1876-77  (mainly  intended  for 
specialists),  ^s  translation  often  deviates  from  the  Worterbuch  zum  Rig-Veda  by 
the  same  author  (Leipzig  1873,  republished  1936:  a useful  repertory  of  places* 
semantically  unreliable,  antiquated  and  methodically  defective).  ^ 


61 


Introduction  to  the  V eda  in  general  and  the  Rgveda  in  particular 

from  the  reliability  and  readability  of  their  otherwise  premature  work.  Up  to 
the  present  day  English-speaking  non-specialists^^  unjustifiably  prefer 
Griffith  translation,  partly  based  on  Sayana,  to  more  recent  renderings. 
Geldner,  whose  work^®  unfortunately  was  published  only  thirty  years  after  its 
completion,  went,  with  clear  and  sound  judgment,  bis  own  w’ay ; without  being 
much  concerned  wdth  the  results  of  comparative  philology  and  the  dissentient 
views  of  his  colleagues  he  took  neither  the  side  of  those  who  disregarded  the 
Indian  tradition  nor  that  of  those  w^ho  followed  it  uncriticailv-  However,  though 
superseding  his  predecessors,  he  missed  the  exact  meaning  of  many  w’ords, 
often  and  wdthout  apparent  reason  offering,  in  similar  contexts,  different  trans- 
lations for  the  same  term.  The  uniformity  of  his  style  and  choice  of  words 
obliterates  the  considerable  stylistic  differences  between  the  original  texts. 
Henou  had  to  leave  his  translation®® — ^the  most  recent — ^unfinished;  although 
agreeing,  m some  respects,  with  Geldner®^  he  tried  to  take  full  account  of  the 
publications  of  others  on  points  of  major  and  minor  interest.  The  many  in- 
sertions in  brackets  are  partly  to  bring  out  the  meaning  of  the  text  more  clearly, 
partly  due  to  his — often,  it  is  true,  justified — conviction  that  the  poets  liked 
ellipses,  ‘double  meanings’,  and  obscurity®^. 

The  problem  of  translating  this  untranslatable  corpus  has  almost  continually 
been  discussed.  Roth®® — ^who  was  followed  by  Kaegi,  Geldner®"^  and  others — 
optimistically  argued  against  Max  MuUer  in  favour  of  the  possibility  of  an 
exact  and  readable  metrical  rendering  which  can  speak  for  itself;  those  parts 
which  prove  untranslatable  should,  he  thought,  be  omitted.  Oldenherg®^  was 
likewise  of  the  opinion  that  when  an  adequate  and  reliable  translation  of  the 
greater  part  had  come  within  reach,  the  incomprehensible  remainder  could  be 
disregarded.  Whereas  Roth  did  not  object  to  omitting  epithets,  Windisch®® 
justly  observed  that  the  apparent  insignificance  of  many  words  can  be  most 

See  e.g.  J.  B.  AnPHONSO-KlAitKAiiA,  An  anthology  of  Indian  literature,  Har- 
mondsworth  1971,  p.  16, 

R.  T.  H.  Griffith,  The  hymns  of  the  Rig- Veda  translated  with  a popular 
commentary,  4 voL,  Benares  1889-1892  (2  voL,  21896-1897;  ®1916;  Waranasi 
(Benares)  1963). 

®®  K.  F.  Geldner,  Der  Rig- Veda  aus  dem  Sanskrit  ins  deutsche  ubersetzt  und 
mit  einem  laufenden  Kommentar  versehen,  3 voL,  Cambridge  Mass.  1951  (vol.  1, 
mandala  I-IV  also  Gottingen  1923);  see  e.g.  the  recension  by  L.  Renou,  at  GGA 
195*3;  p.  182. 

®°  Published  in  E.  V.  P.  between  1955  and  1969;  beside  A.  A.  Macdonell’s 
(somewhat  antiquated)  Vedic  reader  for  students  (containing  only  thirty  hymns), 
Oxford  1917  (more  than  once  reprinted)  the  most  recommendable  for  purposes  of 
study  and  reference. 

cf.  renou,  e.  V.  p.  xn,  p.  1. 

®2  Cf.  Renoij,  E.  V.  P.  V,  p.  1;  XH,  p.  1. 

R.  Roth,  in  ZDMG  24  (1870),  p.  301. 

®^  K.  Geldner  und  A.  Kaeot,  Siebenzig  Lieder  des  Rig\^eda.  Mit  Beitragen  von 
R.  Roth,  Tubingen  1875  (cf.  also  p.  VI). 

®®  Oldenberg,  Vedaforschung,  p.  45. 

®®  E.  Windisch,  in  Festgruss  Roth,  Stuttgart  1893,  p.  139. 


62 


J.  Gk)nda  • Vedic  Literature 


deceptive.  WMIe  soMe  scholars  were  right  in  making  Mgh  demands  upon  the 
translator’s  knowledge  of  realia  and  the  cultural  background  in  general®’  as 
well  as  upon  the  intelligibility  of  his  work®®,  many  others  discussed  the  extreme 
difficulty  with  which  any  translator  is  conhonted  who  with  the  help  of  a 
modem  language  tries  to  express  the  meaning  of  the  numerous  wm'ds  for 
concepts  relating  to  Yedic  man’s  view  of  life  and  the  world®®.  We  can  even  say 
that  the  Veda  teems  with  rather  common  w^ords  which  we  can  understand  only 
to  a certain  point  with  the  result  that  our  translations  often  are  vaguely  general 
or  even  more  or  less  conjectural.  The  distance  in  time,  space,  and  cultural 
environment  between  the  authors  of  the  Veda  and  modern  iridologists ; the  in- 
completeness of  our  sources;  the  reinterpretation  suggested  by  the  Indian 
traditionalists  and  the  prejudices  and  limitations  of  modern  scholarship  itself 
have  contributed  to  a deplorable  state  of  affairs.  The  very  plurality  of  meanings 
so  frequently  given  in  our  dictionaries  shows  that  a modern  language  cannot  in 
many  cases  offer  one  single  equivalent  of  an  ancient  Indian  term— intehigibly 
enough,  because  the  speakers  of  different  languages,  whilst  organizing  through 
their  semantic  sj^stems  the  world  of  experience  in  which  they  live,  traditionally 
define,  analyse  and  categorize  this  experience  differently.  The  arrangement  of 
the  ‘meanings’ — often  no  more  than  inadequate  attempts  to  give  an  idea  of  one 
aspect  of  an  Indian  concept— gives  rise  to  many  pseudo-problems  and  false 
impressions,  e.g.  of  historical  developments  of ‘meanings’’®.  Connotations  and 
emotive  value  of  many  words,  moreover,  eluding,  in  various  cases,  our  obser- 
vation, a ‘literal’  rendering  of  a w-ord  may  not  less  pervert  the  meaning  of  a place 
than  a guess  at  what  had  been  the  author’s  choice  of  words  if  he  had  spoken 
English.  That  in  any  translation  the  beauty  of  the  original  metre,  the  word 
music  and  much  of  the  imagmative  fervour  are  lost  is  not  in  doubt,  but  the 
question  as  to  how  to  present  a translation  remains  in  dispute.  There  is  much  to 
be  said  for  the  thesis  that  the  general  reader  makes  other  demands  than  the 
professional  scholar’^;  for  the  desirability  of  keeping  the  hemistiches  apart— 


V.  Calaxd,  in  Archiv  fiir  Religionswissenschaft  14,  p.  509  (ritual)*  A K 
CooMAEASWAMY,  in  Indian  art  and  letters  7 (1933),  p.  19.  ^ 

M ^ approach  to  the  Vedas,  London  1933,  p.  VII 

See  e.g.  H.  Oldenbesg,  in  NG  1918,  p.  36  (=  K.  S.,  p.  831)  preferring  “eine 

Wortiibersetzung  nicht  fafibare  Beschreibung  des  Vor- 
Suelliingsbildes  t-o  a plurality  of  approximations. 

discussion  of  these  points  see  J.  Gonua,  Some  notes  on  the  study 
terminology,  History  of  Religions  1 (Chicago  1961),  p 
semantic  difficulties  e.g.  Oldenbeeg,  o.c.,  p.  48  (843)*  R 

5m  A«,l.go«g  d«  Rigved.,  ml;  s! 

A.  A.  ]^fr.CDOXELL,  The  IJsas  hymns  of  the  Rsveda  TT?A^  w-i, 

nietricaUy  translated.  cita-LoS 
( aonfiemg  a litde  of  verbal  exactitude  to  the  taste  of  the  general  reader). 


63 


Introduction  to  th©  Veda  in  general  and  the  Rgveda  in  particular 

this  is  generally  possible— T^dthoiit  aiming  at  representing  the  form  of  the 
original  in  the  rh3rt}hna  and  length  of  the  lines;  for  the  translator’s  right  to 
deviate  from  the  conventions  of  his  own  language  in  order  to  reproduce  more 
closely  the  effect  of  the  original  Sanskrit^^  Indian  Vedists,  who  on  the  one  hand 
have  to  hold  their  own  against  the  traditionalist  school  of  interpretation  and  on 
the  other  find  much  difficulty  in  coping  with  the  mass  of  Western  critical 
literature,  are  often  inclined  to  interpret  mjrthology  as  figurative  language  and 
so  to  modernize  traditional  symbolical  interpretations;  they  believe  a trans- 
lation which,  while  meeting  the  requirements  of  modem  scholarship,  is  justified 
in  the  light  of  the  results  of  the  traditional  interpretation  and  classical  Indian 
thought to  be  the  ideaP^.  Although  it  is  true  that  both  approaches  have  often 
ignored  each  other,  there  will  however  always  be  a serious  clash  of  view’s’^. 


We  do  not  mention  the  special  drawbacks  of  non-Anglo-Saxons  writing 
English. 

73  M.  Patel,  in  11  AIOC  (1943),  p.  9. 

74  In  this  publication  the  short  translations  printed  in  the  text  are  meant  to  give 
an  exact  rendering  of  th©  contents  of  the  original ; the  indented  passages  are  often 
somewhat  freer. 

75  Mention  may  also  be  made  of  some  anthologies  or  translations  of  groups  of 
hymns:  F.  Max  Muller,  Vedic  hymns,  I (Hymns  to  the  Mamts,  Rudra  etc.), 
Oxford  1891,  ®Delhi  1967  (wdth  a commentary  justifying  every  word  of  the  trans- 
lation); H.  Oldexbebg,  Vedic  hymns,  II  (Hymns  to  Agni,  book  I-V),  Oxford  1897 
(with  a commentary) ; A.  Hillebraxdt,  Lieder  des  Rgveda,  Gottingen-Leipzig  1913 
(about  140  hymns,  wdth  notes,  literal  prose  translation,  like  the  two  preceding  works 
hardly  recommendabl©  to  the  general  reader) ; A.  A.  Macdoxell,  A Vedic  reader 
for  students,  Oxford  1917  (often  republished,  i.a.  ®1965);  Hymns  from  the  Rigveda, 
Calcutta-London  1922;  E.  J,  Thomas,  Vedic  hymns,  London  1923;  E.  Schwtentkeb, 
Lieder  des  Rigveda  in  metrischen  tJbersetzungen,  Hagen  in  Westf.  1923  (from  an 
aesthetic  point  of  view);  L.  Renou,  Hymnes  et  prieres  du  Veda,  Paris  1938;  La 
poesie  religieuse  de  ITnde  antique,  Paris  1942;  Anthologie  sanskrite,  Paris  1947; 
Hymnes  sp^culatifs  du  Veda,  Paris  1956;  Ch.  Mantsting,  Hjunns  of  the  Rig-Veda, 
Calcutta  1952  (a  collection  of  older  translations,  antiquated);  H.  Lommel,  Gedichte 
des  Rig-Veda,  Miinchen  1953  (with  notes);  V.  Raghavax,  The  Indian  heritage:  an 
anthology  of  Sanskrit  literature,  Bangalore  1956  (31958);  Prayers,  praises  and 
psalms,  Madras  n.d.;  D.  R.  Chaxaxa,  Rg-bhasya-sahgraha,  Delhi  1961;  P.  Thieme, 
Gedichte  aus  dem  Rgveda,  1964;  Rgveda  mandala  VH,  II,  III  translated  and 
annotated  by  H.  D.  Velankab,  Bombay  1963,  1966,  1968;  J.  Vabexxe,  Le  Veda: 
anthologie  d©  textes  traduits,  Paris  1965;  Le  Veda  (series:  Le  tresor  spirituel  de 
rhumanite),  Paris  1967;  T.  Ja.  Elizabbxkova,  Rig\^eda  (selected  hymns,  translated 
(with  notes)  in  Russian),  Moscow  1972.  N.  Tsuji,  Veda  to  Upanisad  (in  Japanese), 
Tokyo  1967,  contains  translations  into  Japanese. 


Chapter  II 


POETRY,  POET,  POEM 


1.  Inspiration  and  poetry 

The  Indian  spiritual  gmdes  have  always  been  convinced  of  the  necessity  of 
having  a direct  experience  of  that  transcendent  reality  which  is  the  ground  and 
essence  of  all  empirical  existence.  Hence  the  continuous  effort  to  transcend  the 
empirical  level — one  of  the  most  striking  characteristics  of  Indian  cultural 
history — ^and  the  belief  that  there  are  men,  such  as  seers  and  yogins,  who, 
owing  to  a special  gift  or  a wonderful  exertion  of  will-power,  have  access  to  the 
realm  of  the  Unseen.  The  ancients  were  weU  aware  of  the  resemblance  betw^een, 
and  in  many  cases  practical  identity  of,  poets  and  visionary  sages,  the  rather 
extensive  terminology  in  this  field  often  admitting  of  both  translations^.  A 
Vedic  poet  is  a seer  (rsi)^,  a gifted  man  who  with  his  inner  or  spiritual  eye  sees 
things  divine  and  transcendental,  and  who  through  the  power  of  his  vision 
brings  the  past  into  the  present*.  The  hymns  are  indeed  ascribed  to  individual 
rsis,  whose  very  function  was  already  at  an  early  date  explained  in  connection 
with  their  faculty  of  ‘seeing’^.  A rsi  seeks,  or  enters  into  contact  with,  divinity 
or  transcendent  reality® : he  associates  with  gods ; he  may  address  them,  and 
has  an  insight  into  the  nature  of  their  greatness;  he  invites  them  to  do  some- 
thing on  behalf  of  those  who  have  his  poem  recited.  He  is  inspired  and  even 
regarded  as  ‘born  of  the  gods’’,  with  whom  is  the  origin  of  the  ancient  m‘5®,  his 


^ For  details,  Gonda,  Vision,  p.  18;  60;  69  etc.  and  De  ‘inspiratie’  der  indisch© 
dichters,  in  Forum  der  Letteren  1963,  p.  1;  P.  S.  S(^h^astbi,  Rigvedic  theory  of 
inspiration,  QJMS  37,  p.  72;  151  (whose  interpretations  are  partly  anachronistic  or 
based  on  questionable  presuppositions) ; S.  S,  Bhawe,  at  JUB  19,  p.  19  (question- 
able). 

2 See  e.g.  also  P.  S.  Sastbi,  in  QJMS  40,  p.  55;  M.  Das,  in  AP  22,  p.  555. 

3 Por  “seeing”  in  the  sense  of  “having  an  insight  into  problems  which  are  beyond 
normal  human  understanding”  see  e.g.  1,  22,  20;  139,  2;  164,  44;  3,  38,  5;  4,  13,  5; 
5,  61,  Iff.;  7,  76,  2;  10,  130,  6;  for  his  eye  10,  82,  1. 

* Cf.  V.  Raghavaist,  Studies  on  some  concepts  of  the  Alamkara  Sastra,  Adyar 
1942,  p.  118. 

® x^upamanyava,  in  Yaska,  Nirukta  2,  11,  the  text  adding:  “Because  the  self- 
born  Brahman  manifested  himself  to  them  while  practising  austerities  they  became 
seers”;  and  TA.  2,  9. 

® Cf.  e.g.  1,  68,  5;  139,  2;  159,  4;  164,  4;  5;  38;  3,  54,  5;  8;  6,  9,  2;  5. 

’ RV.  5,  52,  13f.;  1,  23,  24;  10,  90,  7;  8,  23,  24;  10,  54,  3;  5,  29,  1;  3,  53,  9.  Cf. 
also  7,  88,  4. 


66 


J.  Gonda  • Vedic  Literature 


predecessors.  The  presentation  of  Ms  subjects  and  the  phraseology  of  Ms  hymns 
stamp  many  of  these  as  products  of  ‘revelation’®.  These  views  of  r^^’ship  were 
at  the  root  of  the  belief  in  the  non-,  i.e.  super-human,  origin  of  the  Vedai®. 
‘Registering  the  intuitions  of  these  perfected  souls’ the  Veda  is,  like  the  in- 
tuitive knowledge  of  its  poets,  believed  to  be  free  from  errors  and  imperfections, 
eternal,  above  the  limitations  of  time  and  space. 

The  Vedic  poets  are  not  chary  of  information  regarding  the  ‘vision’  or 
‘intuition’ — ^that  is  their  inspiration — ^wMch  was  their  only  possibility  of  enter- 
ing into  communication  with  the  transcendental  reality^^.  Like  their  colleagues 
in  other  countries  they  were  conscious  of  receiving  inspiration  and  recognized 
the  importance  of  tMs  inspiration  as  an  indispensable  factor  in  the  creation  of 
literary  art^® — ^wMch,  in  their  eyes,  was  not  however  an  onesided  production  of 
beauty.  They  also  understood  the  character  of  inspiration,  its  sudden  appear- 
ance, revealing — ^not  creating — ^ideas  regarded  as  real  and  already  existent: 
the  poet  of  1,  88,  4 compares  himself  to  a vulture  circling  and  waiting  (for  an 
opportunity  to  snatch  away,  suddenly  and  unexpectedly,  a prey  that  comes 
into  its  range  of  vision) ; in  the  same  way  he  himself  circles  round  the  Maruts, 
vision  (dhi)  and  Ms  own  ‘Muse’^^  or  ‘patron  saint’^^.  Stanza  2 of  the  short 
hymn  10, 177  addressed  to  the  Bird — ^that  is  the  inner  light  of  visionary  insight 
— states  that  tMs  deity  bears  or  cherishes  in  its  ‘mind’  or  ‘heart’  (manas ) in- 
spired Speech  (Vac)^®  qualified  as  radiating;  and  this  speech  being  inspired 
thought  or  wisdom  ( manisa ) is  guarded  by  the  seers  on  the  seat  of  Rta : that 
is  the  celestial  source  of  inspiration  considered  to  be  microcosmically  re- 
presented by  the  ‘heart’ 

The  poets  are  moreover  deeply  convinced  of  the  existence  of  an  interplay  of 
factors,  reciprocity  or  rather  cyclical  process  with  regard  to  inspiration  and  the 
suprahuman  power  inherent  in  inspired  poetry.  They  expect  to  receive  intuition 


® See  RV.  1,  139,  9. 

® Cf.  e.g.  the  cosmogonicai  hymns  10,  90  etc. 

“ Yaska,  o.c.;  see  V.  S.  Bhandabi,  Yaska  and  Vedapauruseyatva,  20  AIOC 
(1959),  p.  28.  ^ 

S.  Radhaxbishxan,  The  Bhndu  view  of  life,  London  ’1948,  p.  17. 

“ Compare  also  places  such  as  5,  30,  3;  52,  12;  61  (with  Geldner’s  introductory 
note,  RV.  11,  p.  68);  10,  124,  9.  l^ow  compare  also  B.  L.  Ogibenin,  Sur  le  symbo- 
lisme  du  tjpe  chamanique  dans  le  Rgveda,  Tartu  Univ.  1968. 

See  e.g.  1,  37,  4;  105,  15;  2,  9,  4;  23,  2;  3,  31,  18;  34,  5;  7,  36,  1;  8,  59,  6;  88, 
, (100,  10;)  101,  16;  10,  98,  7.  Paying  too  much  attention  to  Ms  own  inspiration 
maj  interfere  with  a poet  s spontaneity  (P.  Emmaiujel,  La  creation  poetique. 
Journal  de  psychologie  44  (1951),  p.  261). 

It  has  not  without  reason  been  surmised  (Geldner,  RV.  I,  p.  113  and  394; 
see  RV.  3,  53,  15f.;  Brhaddevata 4, 113f.)  that  Sasarpari,  the  daughter  of  the  sun — 
or  Erahma—being  Speech  was  the  ‘Muse’  of  the  Visvamitras 

See  also  2,  38,  10. 

“ Vac  is  the  poetess  as  well  as  the  deity  of  ?,V.  10.  126.  See  also  1,  164,  39ff.; 
45fi.  and  in  general,  Rekou,  E.  V.  P.  I,  p.  1. 

Cf.  also  6,  9,  4f.;  9,  1,  6;  10,  189,  3;  Renou,  E.  V.  P.  I,  p.  21. 


Poetry,  poet,  poem 


B7 


or  inspiration  from,  or  tliroiigli  tlie  intermediary  of,  the  divine  powers,  which 
are  supposed  to  remain  concerned  with  them  also  after  the  moment  of  *visioii’^®. 
This  inspiration  enables  them  to  compose  hymns’  which  conform  to  the  re(|iiire- 
ments  of  religions  formulas  and  compositions,  that  is  to  say,  wMch  may  be 
expected  to  influence^®  the  deities  presiding  over  the  powers,  phenomena  and 
provinces  of  the  cosmos  on  which  man  feels  himself  dependent  and  to  contribute 
to  the  preservation  of  their  specific  might.  For  all  practical  purposes  this 
means  maintaining  nmversal  Order  and  keeping  the  powers  of  nature  operative. 
Strengthened  by  the  h3nnns  of  the  poets  the  gods — caressed  by  them  like  hus- 
bands by  their  amorous  wives  (1,  62,  11)20— will  continue  furthering  their 
inspirations®^.  This  cyclical  process  is  indicated  with  all  clearness  desirable  at 
RV.  4,  11,2  ‘‘{0  Agm,)  give  us  that  abundant  (or,  mighty)  inspired  thought  by 
which  thou  with  all  the  other  deities  wilt  be  pleased”®®.  Thus  Indra®®,  Agnd®^, 
the  divine  pair  Vanina  and  Mitra®^  and  other  gods  are  said  to  mediate  a poet’s 
vision,  or  to  be  its  source ; they  are  implored  to  favour  or  further  inspiration, 
to  give  the  eulogist,  together  with  the  vibration  of  (the  poet’s)  consciousness, 
the  inspired  emotional  thought  (manlsd),  to  make  the  product  of  poetic 
vision  perfect  and  successful  or  to  cause  it  to  go  straight  to  its  goal,  and  also  to 
protect  the  poet  or  reciter  cum  suis^^.  Soma  is  called  “Lord  of  vision”  (dM)^ 
no  doubt  because  he  was  supposed  to  be  willing  to  dispense  inspirations®’.  It 
is  a poet’s  hope  that  Sarasvati,  the  river  goddess  who  in  the  course  of  the  Vedic 
period  comes  to  be  identified  with  Speech  (Vdc)^^,  will  bestow  'vision’  (dhl) 
on  him. 

Of  special  interest  are  those  places  which,  no  doubt  founded  on  fact,  give 
significance  to  the  early  morning  as  the  moment  which  was  especially  proper 
to  the  manifestation  of  visions,  that  is  to  receiving  inspiration.  Addressing 
Dawn  (Usas)  the  poet  of  7,  79,  5 implores  her  “to  impart  to  us,  while  shining,, 
visions  (dhiy’  and  in  3,  39,  2 “this  our  ancestral  inspired  poem  (dhl),  bom. 
before  daylight,  (is)  recited  when  the  sacred  functions  are  performed,  dressed  in 
auspicious-and-beautiful  white  clothes”®®.  That  the  divinities  concerned  with 

IS  Cf.  1,  80,  9;  90,  5;  2,  23,  19;  3,  3,  8;  62,  8;  6,  49,  8;  cf.  Gokua,  Vision,  p.  65; 
86;  89;  91  etc. 

The  eulogies  are  said  to  “turn  to  the  goda  (and  influence  them)” : devayant 
(J.  Gonda,  in  JOIB  15,  p.  307). 

®®  See  also  Bebgaione,  R.  V.  II,  p.  268;  Geldneb,  V.  S.  II,  p.'134. 

Cf.  1,  61,  16;  5,  12,  If.;  10,  25,  1. 

Goistda,  Vision,  p.  51;  64;  66;  154;  see  e.g.  4,  11,  2. 

®s  See  3,  34,  5;  6,  24,  6;  34,  1;  6,  35,  5;  7,  18,  1;  8,  3,  9;  88,  6. 

See  2,  9,  4;  4,  6,  1;  11,  2;  3;  8,  102,  8.  See  also  6,  9;  10,  5,  11. 

®s  For  Varuna  see  1,  105,  15;  Indra  and  Varuna  8,  59,  6. 

See  1,  79,7;  94,  3;  4,  56,  1;  8,  5,  6;  also  8,  71,  12,  and  1,  2,  7;  7,  66,  3,  also  5,. 
66,  4. 

9,  99,  6,  cf.  also  9,  2,  7. 

®s  Gokda,  R.  I.  I,  p.  96;  see  RV.  6,  49,  7. 

®s  See  also  3,  39,  1;  10,  172,  2;  6,  50,  10  (Gonda,  Vision,  p.  81);  8,  8,  2;  5;  7’ 
(ibidem,  p.  80);  26,  25;  35,  2;  3 0,  20,  1. 


68 


J.  Gouda  • Yedic  Literature 


ligM  and  the  early  morning®®  (besides  Usas  the  Asvins,  Savitar,  Surya)  acted 
as  mediators  is  therefore  perfectly  intelligible.  Visions  often  consist  in  ‘light 
visitations  are  attended  with  luminous  apparitions  and  in  order  to  be  effectuated 
intuitive  knowledge  needs  ‘light’.  So  we  hear  also  in  the  Rgveda  of  an  ‘inner 
light’  as  a medium  of  revelation  and  supranormal  insight®®.  Agni  is  said  to  bring 
the  lights  of  the  tremblings  of  inspiration  (3, 10,  5),  and  elsewhere  Brhaspati  is 
besought  to  put  the  poet  in  possession  of  the  bright  substance  which  procures 
brilliant  light,  shines  powerfully  and  is  resourceful  among  men  (2,  23,  15).  Best 
known  is  the  famous  stanza,  recited  up  to  the  present  day  3,  62,  10,  the  so- 
called  Savitri  (i.e.  addressed  to  Savitar)  or  Gayatri  (after  its  metre) : “We  hope 
“fco  obtain  that  desirable  (excellent)  radiance  (brightness)  of  god  Savitar,  who 
will  (is  expected  to)  stimulate  (inspire)  our  ‘visions’  ”. 

The  conviction  which  is  shared  by  other  peoples — ^who,  to  mention  only  this, 
attribute  poetic  inspiration  to  ancestors  appearing  in  dreams®® — ^the  conviction 
that  the  divine  father  of  the  speaker  or  a Muse,  possessed  of  supranormal 
knowledge  enables  his  descendants  to  compose  songs,  seems  also  apparent  from 
AV.  2, 1,  3 where  the  father,  the  Gandharva®^ — ^a  genius  of  conception,  in  later 
times  a celestial  musician®® — ^is  said  to  function  as  such  an  intermediary. 

The  well-inspired  rsi  had  so  to  say  to  give  shape  to  his  vision,  to  ‘translate’  it 
into  stanzas  and  suUas  of  liturgical  applicability,  to  transform  his  vision  and 
creative  inspiration  into  powerful  words  which  could  successfully  appeal  to  the 
gods®®.  That  in  developing  inspiration  into  intelligible  speech  he  had  recourse, 
not  only  to  his  language  but  also  to  the  traditional  style,  imagery,  metres  and 
phraseology  hardly  needs  saying®’.  The  process  which  the  visions  undergo  in 
the  poet’s  heart®®  is  expHcitly  described  as  a purification  or  clarification : “Like 
streams  (probably,  of  ghee)  the  words  of  religious  inspiration  flow,  in  the  inter- 
ior, together  clarified  by  heart  and  ‘mind’  (rmnas j”  (4,  58, 6)®®.  Although  RV. 


Cf.  also  1,  23,  3 (Vayu  as  the  mornuig  wind);  35,  2;  8,  35,  16;  10  172 
T ^ speakiiig  of  the  idea  of  “shining”  and  that  of  “seeing”  BERoiiONE,  R V 

f ® ^ and  gaze  in  the  Veda,  Amsterdam 

Acaa.  1969,  p.  5.  There  is  a constant  use  of  terms  denoting  “light,  shining,  bright” 
the  sacral  word  and  the  state  of  bliss:  J.  GoIda,  Loka!  Amfter- 

^ 02  3 » o,  0,  D,  5,  9,  9,  o,  lu,  177,  1 etc.,  and  compare  also 

" Srv:  fo,^23® 

Gonda,  R.  1. 1,  p.’ioi.’ 

!!  5^'  1’  7;  Gonxia,  Vision,  p.  106. 

not  eTMtlv°r^fif'^’  ™ j'  remarks  in  JAGS  88,  p.  311  do 

r^Tp'"!  '• 

« Cf.  also  6,  16,  47;  8,  76,  8.  • P- 

. P-  278;  Renoh,  E.  V.  P.  I.  p.  24.  See  also  3,  26  8-7  85  1- 

. an  , in  general,  C.  M.  Bowra,  Primitive  song,  ISfew  York  1962,  p.  44. 


Poetry,  poet,  poem 


69 


4,  58  is  not  completely  clear*®  tMs  atharvanic  laudation  of  the  ghee,  considering 
this  important  sacrificial  material  in  its  various  aspects,  iTiier  (dia  as  soima  and 
the  sacred  word*^,  leaves  no  doubt  that  the  ghee  of  the  liturgical  word,  which 
the  gods  produce  from  the  seer  (st.  4),  flows  from  the  ocean  in  his  heart*^.  Since 
this  ghee  has  come  from  another  ocean,  which  may  have  been  believed  to  be  in 
heaven,  three  ideas  have  in  all  probability  coalesced:  the  heavenly  origro.  of 
sacred  speech,  the  intermediary  of  the  gods,  and  the  ‘heart’  (or  ‘mind’)  as  the 
place  where  inspiration  is  received  and  from  which  sacred  speech  originates*®. 

This  process  of  transformation  was  assumed  to  be  parallel  or  identical  with 
that  which  on  the  sacrificial  ground  took  place  in  connection  with  the  soma 
juice  and  so  was  Soma  regarded  as  a clarifier  of  poetic  thought : “In  the  strainer 
which  discharges  a thousand  streams  the  inspired  poets  clarify  their  words” 
(9,  73,  7)**.  The  clarification  by  which  the  soma  passes  into  an  intoxicating 
beverage  was  on  the  one  hand  accompanied  and  viewed  as  promoted  by  the 
activities  of  the  poets  and  reciters*®,  and  on  the  other,  with  much  variation  in 
phraseology,  regarded  as  stimulating  and  furthering  their  inspiration*®. 

From  the  most  interesting  ‘Hymn  of  higher  knowledge’  (jhdnasukta,  10, 
71)*’  it  is  perfectly  clear  that  the  poets  themselves  were  completely  conscious 
of  the  different  stages  through  which  the  process  of  liturgical  composition  had 
to  pass  and  of  the  functions  for  which  the  productions  of  their  genius  were 
intended.  This  suJcta,  in  which  according  to  tradition*®  the  divine  prototype  of 
priesthood  Brhaspati,  who  is  the  reputed  poet,  praises  that  knowledge  “which 
is  immortal  light  and  by  union  with  which  one  attains  to  brahman"'  discusses, 
in  an  archaic  and  unsystematic  way,  it  is  true,  the  problem  of  sacral  speech,  its 
origin,  secret  and  production.  Sacral  speech*®  has  been  ‘invented’  by  the  ancient 
seers  (st.  2)  and  when  it  was  located  among  them  discovered  by  the  wise  and 
given  to  many  seers  in  historical  times:  “0  Brhaspati,  when  they  (the  mythical 
seers)  started  instituting  name-giving,  the  first  and  foremost  part  of  Speech 
( Vac ) ®®,  which  was  the  most  excellent  (of  what  they  possessed)  and  pure,  (that) 

40  g00  LtinEBS,  Varmm,  p.  269f.  against  GtELDNEb,  RV.  I,  p.  489;  Gonda,  Vision, 

p.  281. 

**  The  materialized  inspiration  is  not  only  like  ghee  but  also  accompamed  by  an 
oblation  of  ghee  (Gonda,  Vision,  p.  132);  see  e.g.  1,  2,  7;  7,  5,  5;  85,  1. 

*2  Cf.  also  10,  5,  1. 

*®  Cf.  also  10,  5,  1 (and  Geedneb,  RV.  HE,  p.  126);  10,  177,  1. 

*«  Cf.  also  4,  58,  1;  5,  44,  9;  9,  69,  2;  72,  5;  96,  17;  10,  94,  1 and  9,  73  in  its 
entirety;  Renoij,  E.  V.  P.  I,  p.  26. 

*®  Cf.  e.g.  1,  91,  11;  135,  5;  9,  8,  4;  10,  4;  17,  4;  33,  5;  37,  6;  61,  14;  64,  16; 
65,  16;  71,  3;  72,  1;  97,  22;  105,  2 and  see  GbldisUJB,  RV.  HI,  p.  1. 

*®  Cf.  e.g.  9,  21,  2;  7;  40,  5;  47,  4;  61,  23;  64,  26;  69,  2;  72,  5;  90,  6.  For  Soma 
and  the  Vena  hymn  10,  123  see  the  bibliographical  note  in  Gonda,  Vision,  p.  349, 
n.  1,  and  Renoh,  E.  V.  P.  XVI,  p.  167. 

*7  Gonda,  Vision,  p.  107;  B.  Essebs,  Vac,  Thesis  Gronmgen  1952,  p.  97;  Mac- 
DOKEin,  H.  S.  L.,  p.  129;  Rehou,  E.  V.  P.  I,  p.  22. 

Brhaddevata  7,  109;  cf.  112. 

*^  See,  in  general,  also  Renott,  E.  V.  P.  I,  p.  14. 

Cf.  8,  100,  10. 


70 


J.  Gonda  • Yedic  Literature 


being  concealed  became  manifest  through  their  sympathetic  disposition.  Where 
the  -wise  seers  (those  possessing  dM),  cleaning  it  like  ground  meal  with  a sieve, 
produced  Speech  by  means  of  their  intentional  thought  (mancbs),  then  the 
partners  (in  a collective  interest)  became  conscious  of  their  partnership  ...  By 
means  of  worship  they  (the  historical  seers  or  next  generation,  being  interested 
in  the  liturgical  function  of  speech)  went  the  way  of  Speech ; they  discovered 
her  that  had  entered  the  rsis  (mentioned  in  st.  2) ; they  fetched  her  and  distrib- 
uted her  over  many  places  (persons) . , However,  those  who  see  and  hear  Vac 
do  not  alw’-ays  perceive  her,  but  to  another  she  ‘unfolds’  (i.e.  reveals)  herself, 
like  a willing  wife  to  her  husband.  Others  are  not  encouraged  to  join  in- the 
ceremonies  because  their  words  have  become  sterile.  The  man  who  has  deserted 
a partner®^  has  no  longer  a share  in  Speech  and  does  not  know  the  way  of 
meritorious  acts  (st.  5-6).  The  true  brahmans,  on  the  other  hand,  worship 
together  wMe  the  impulses  of  their  minds  (manas)  are  fashioned  in  their 
hearts,  one  of  the  chief  officiants  developing  (mcreasing)  the  sacred  verses  in 
praise  of  the  gods,  another  singing  a hymn,  a third  “enxmciating  the  knowledge 
of  what  exists”  (st.  7-1 1)^2^ 

It  is  essential  that  the  power  inherent  in  inspired  speeches,  the  materialized 
vision,  should  be  fresh  and  vigorous.  The  vision  and  its  mythical  subjects  must 
be  quickened,  furthered,  resuscitated kept  alive.  Hot  infrequently  emphasis 
is  laid  on  the  newness  of  a sulcta^\  Whereas  the  theme  may  be  familiar,  nay, 
must  be  borrowed  from  the  current  myths  relating  to  the  god  or  gods  addressed^ 
the  text  itself  must  be  fresh^®.  It  is  not^?  to  give  expression  to  the  pride  he  felt 
at  Ms  acMevement^s  or  at  the  originality  of  the  stylistic  devices  introduced  into 
his  works®  that  a poet  draws  special  attention  to  tMs  newness  but  because  a 
new  text  is— not  only  in  ancient  India— a means  par  excellence  of  exercising 
influence  upon  the  much  desfred  renewal  of  nature  and  of  the  powers  wMch  are 
opposed  to  be  active  ia  it  or  responsible  for  it— ‘^Start  tMs  new  (hymn)  that 
im  (Indra’s)  vigour  increases  of  as  of  old”  (2,  17,  l)-a  means  also  of  inaugur- 
ating a new  penod®®.  TMs  is  of  course  not  to  imply  that  the  hymns  were  used 
only  once.  Every  performance  was  in  a way  a renewal  of  the  power  inherent  in 


Comp^  also  clearly  describedin  8,  6,  32f. 

“ See  e.g.  i,  12,  n-  3.  n.’l;  ’18.  3;  24,  1;  6.  32,  1;  7,  26,  1-  8 95  5-  9 Q 8 

aad  QMsTtVS  ^ 'hQ  34  p.  8 

;;  Or  perhlp?;'r2y 

» Lebea,  Berlin  1879,  p.  340. 

p.  10.  Les  fleurs  de  rhetorique  dans  I’Inde,  Thesis  Paris  1930, 

compare,  in  the  Old  Testament,  Psalm  33,  1-3-96  1-98  1 • in  th« 
J.ew  Testament.  Apoe.  5,  9;  14,  3,  the  Greek  tragedies,  id  so  on  ’ 


Poetry,  poet,  poem 


71 


the  inspired  word®^,  a eulogiuni  of  whicli  is  in  10,  125  put  in  the  month  of  the 
goddess  Vac  (Speech,  Word)  herself®^. 

It  seems  expedient  briefly  to  discuss  some  terms — difficult  of  translation  and 
to  a certain  extent  used  promiscuously — ^which  shed  some  light  on  the  ideas  the 
poets  themselves  had  of  their  art.  A priest,  sage  or  reciter  could  be  called  a 
vipra  when,  distinguished  for  his  fervency  and  enthusiasm,  he  had  experience 
of  spiritual  rapture,  of  religious  and  artistic  inspiration  materializing  in  the 
vibrant  and  exalted  speech  of  the  moved  poet;  this  word  also  qualihes  a god  as 
a furtherer  of  rapture,  enlightenment  and  inspiration®®.  Sometimes  it  accom- 
panies words  such  as  rsi  “a  seer”  of  Jcavi  “an  inspired  sage  who  possessing 
esoteric  wisdom  sees  (things  hidden  horn  others)  with  his  mental  eye”®'*.  The 
Jcavi  guards  the  place  (or  trace)  of  Rta,  eternal  Order  and  Truth  (10,  5,  2)  and  is 
supposed  to  know  answers  to  mysterious  and  difficult  problems  (7,  86,  3).  The 
term  Mm®®  seems  to  have  been  preferred  to  denote  the  ‘spokesman,’  the  oral 
poet  who  was  also  a performer  or  eulogist®®  on  the  sacrificial  ground ®h 

For  ‘praising’  the  gods  verbs  of  various  connotations  and  implications,  such 
as  those  of  ‘solemn  qualification  or  description  of  characteristics’  (sams-)  or 
‘praise,  strengthening,  confirmation’  (stu~)  are  in  frequent  use.  VTdie  by  the 
term  dhl  the  ancient  Indians  understood  something  in  the  nature  of  vision 
or  inspiration  - the  exceptional  faculty  of  acquiring  a (sudden)  knowledge  of 
transcendent  truth  or  reality — ^and  its  materialized  form,  that  is  a piece  of 
eulogistic  poetry®®,  manisd,  tentatively  rendered  by  poetic  inspiration®^  or 
wisdom,  expressed,  like  other  derivatives  of  the  root  man-,  a modification  of 
the  idea  of  inspired  emotional  and  efficacious  thought’®;  in  10, 177,  2 it  is  quite 
intelligibly  characterized  as  a flash  of  light’h  From  the  same  root  derives 

Gonba,  Vision,  p.  64f,;  125,  144. 

A.  Webeb,  I.  S.  XVIII,  p.  118  (misunderstood);  F.  S.  IVIichaxski,  in  Scientia 
87  (1952),  p.  127.  Cf.  also  G.  Dumezil,  in  Bull.  Cl.  Lettres  Acad,  de  Belgique  1961, 
p.  272. 

Cf.  H.  OnuENBEBO,  in  ZDMG  63,  p.  298  (==  K.  S.  p.  314);  Renou,  E.  V.  P. 

1,  p.  5 ; Gonda,  Vision,  p.  36,  According  to  RV.  8,  3,  14  not  every  vipra  w-as  a rsi. 

Gonda,  Vision,  p.  42;  for  one-sided  views:  L.  Renou,  in  JA  241,  p.  167 ; 180; 
in  Journal  de  Psychologie  44  (1951),  p.  284;  R.  Otto,  Varuna-Hymnen  des  Rig- 
veda,  Bonn  1948,  p.  11  (cf.  e.g.  ?.V.  7,  86,  3);  L.  Selbubn,  Instant  et  cause,  Paris 
1955,  p.  21;  H.  D.  Velaneab,  in  23  AIOC,  p.  253;  P.  R.  Ray,  in  lA  HI,  3 (1969), 
p.  177.  For  kavi  see  SB.  1,  4,  2,  8. 

J.  Gonda,  at  JGJRI  25  (1969),  p.  479. 

Cf.  RV.  1,  31,  8;  3,  33,  8;  39,  7;  7,  68,  9;  8,  3,  18;  46,  3;  10,  110,  7. 

See  also  P.  Thieme,  in  Festschrift  Weller,  p.  656. 

®®  I refer  to  Gonda,  Vision,  p.  360.  Cf.  e.g.  RV.  1,  95,  8;  112, 2;  135,  5;  139,  2; 

2,  11,  12;  5,  41,  5;  6,  23,  8;  8,  3, 1;  18; 6, 28;27, 8; 42, 3;  9, 75, 2;  10,  53,  6;  143, 3 etc. 

Renou,  E.  V.  P.  I,  p.  3.  , 

70  Cf.  RV.  1,  9,  11;  186,  1;  4,  5,  3;  6,  1;  11,  2;  6,  47,  3;  and  P.  Tbxbme,  in  Fest- 
schrift J.'POKOBNY,  Innsbruck  1967,  p,  99  (=  Kleine  Schriften,  Wiesbaden  1971, 
p.  239);  S.  A.  Upadhyaya,  in  21  AIOC  11,  p.  21. 

71  Cf.  also  Renou,  E.  V P.  EDl,  p.  34;  69  (on  arka). 

72  R.  Rauschild,  in  Festschrift  Weller,  p.  259;  263. 


72 


J.  Gronda  • Vedic  Literature 


tMs  thouglit  materialized.  Tlie  etymologically  related  manmavP^  denotes  a 
‘hymn’  as  the  product  of  this  thought,  sometimes  in  a context  from  which  it 
appears  that  it  has  been  memorized.  The  likewise  allied  mantra,  emphasizing 
the  idea  of  instrumentality,  is  up  to  the  present  day  in  use  for  all  units  com- 
posing the  Yedic  sarphitas  which  on  the  grounds  explained  in  these  pages  are 
traditionaUy  regarded  as  sacred,  eternal  and  inherently  powerful’^.  Provided  it 
is  pronounced  in  the  proper  way  a mantra,  generally  speaking,  becomes  eifec- 
tive  when  the  consciousness  of  the  one  who  possesses  it  achieves  its  union  with 
that  Consciousness  which  manifests  itself  in  that  ‘text’  or  formula,  and  being 
so  a Vedic  mantra  can,  according  to  the  context,  be  corroborative  or  minatory, 
exert  beneficent  influence  in  the  cosmos,  and,  of  course,  bring  about  communi- 
cation vith  the  Unseen’®.  If  the  meaning  or  the  use  of  a mantra  results  from  its 
content  alone  which  is  explicit  by  itself  because  it  contains  a characteristic 
element  (linga),  the  mantra  is  ‘defined’  (niruJcta),  in  other  cases  it  is 
‘undefined’’®.  One  other  word  needs  mentioning,  viz.  the  utterly  important 
and  much  discussed  brahman'^'^.  Expressing,  in  the  present  author’s  opinion, 
the  in  our  eyes  perhaps  vague  idea  of  ‘inherently  firm  or  fundamental  support- 
ing principle’  this  term  assumed,  in  definite  contexts,  more  specific  connotations 
such  as  the  fundamental  power  inherent  in  the  holy  word  and  ritual’®  and  in 
the  vocabulary  of  the  poets  their  products  considered  in  one  of  their  character- 
istic aspects.  The  gods  are  strengthened  or  stimulated  by  brahman ; it  can  gain 
the  victory  ui  battles,  protect  the  people,  give  offspring,  dispel  darkness’®. 

It  is  not  surprising  that  such  important  and  indispensable  requisites  as  the 
eulogies  received  various  qualifications  and  other  contextual  particulars  which 
give  us  some  additional  information  on  the  ideas  the  poets  formed  of  their 
products.  The  adjective  somya  may  point  to  their  being  inspired  by,  or  arising 
together  with  or  like,  the  divine  draught,  bfhat  to  their  inherent  firmness ; they 
are  above  criticism,  shining,  charming  and  sweet,  matchless,  well  adorned, 
protective,  efficacious  and  bom  from  the  Universal  Order  (rta 


S.  A.  Upadhyaya,  m BhV  28  (1968),  p.  88;  Renoij,  E.  V.  P.  VII,  p.  29.  Cf. 
e.g.  1,  131,  6;  154,  3;  162,  7;  2,  4,  8;  4,  3,  3;  6,  1;  6,  52,  14;  68,  9;  8,  41,  2;  10,  57,  3. 
J.  Gonua,  The  Indian  mantra,  Oriens  16  (1963),  p.  244.  Cf.  1,  67,  4-  5*  74  1* 

147,  4;  152,  2;  2,  35,  2;  6,  50,  14;  7,  7,  6;  10,  14,  4;  50,  4;  88,  14. 

In  the  ritual  application  the  deity  addressed  is  recognizable  by  his  name  etc. 
which  in  later  times  is  regarded  as  the  “characteristic”  (linga)  of  the  mantra, 

’®  L.  Renou  in  Mem.  Volume  L.  Sarup,  p.  68. 

” For  a survey  of  opinions  and  theories  up  to  1950  see  J.  Gonda,  Notes  on 
brahman,  Utrecht  1950  and  in  History  of  Religions  1 (1961),  p.  243;  for  other  views 
e.g.  Renou,  E.  V.  P.  I,  p.  12;  11,  p.  55;  81;  G.  Dumezil,  in  RHR  138,  p.  255;  139, 
p.  122;  P.  Thieme,  at  ZDMG  102,  p.  91;  H.  P.  Schmidt,  Brhaspati  und  Indra, 
Wiesbaden  1968,  p.  16  and  at  ZDMG  109,  p.  445;  S.  MiCHALsiu,  at  ArchOr  25,  p. 

ia  Melanges  Renou,  p.  519;  M.  Mayrhofer,  Kurzgefasztes 

etym.  W orterbuchdesAltindischen,n,  Heidelberg  1963,  p.  452.  Compare  alsop.  134. 

As  to  the  ritual  see  3,  13,  6;  9,  96,  10. 

To  Iv  5,  40,  6. 

^ 33,  5;  51,  1;  31,  13;  4,  56,  1;  5,  43,  8;  7,  18,  3;  1,  114,  6; 

5,  11,  o;  I,  43,  1;  32,  13;  3,  53,  12;  5,  52,  13;  10,  49,  1;  138,  2. 


Poetry,  poet,  poem 


73 


For  the  poets’  technique  the  hymns  often  use  T^ords  which  are  primarily 
applied  to  the  work  of  artisans  or  manual  labourers  (carpenter,  weaver,  chariot- 
i^ker)-;  I have  faslnoned  for  thee  (Agni)  this  eulogy  like  the  gifted  artisan  a 
chariot  (5,  2, 11)»^  This  should  by  no  means  be  taken  to  point  to  depreciation 
on  the  part  of  the  authors.  These  verbs  have  a wide  range  of  ‘metaphorical’ 
meamngs  and  are  used  also  of  superhuman  creative  activity*^;  any  specialized 
industry  presupposed  uncommon  skill,  talents  and  giftedness,  nay  inspiration 
and  m this  respect  specialized  artisans,  artists  and  poets  were  in  archaic  societies 
regarded  as  similar;  “gifted”  in  the  above  quotation  renders  dhlra  i.e.  ‘pos- 
sessed of  dU;  an  adjective  applying  also  to  sages,  poets,  gods,  demiurges^* 
Moreover,  both  ‘chariots’  and  poems  were  means  of  establishing  relations  be- 
tween  inen  and  gods®®. 


E.  W.  Hopkins,  in  JAOS  15,  p.  274;  Bebgaigke,  R.  V.,  IT,  p.  283;  Hille- 
BRANDT,  V.  M.  Ill,  p.  150;  P.  S.  Sastbi,  in  QJMS  40,  p.  55. 

See  also  1,  61,  4;  130,  6;  3,  38,  1;  7,  34,  1;  10,  130. 

Cf.  3,  38,  2;  10,  46,  9. 

Gonda,  Vision,  p.  209. 

See  below,  p.  81;  Bergaigne,  R.  V.  I,  p.  VII  n.;  F.  Edgerto>t,  in  AJPh  40. 
p.  175;  Renotj,  B.  V.  P.  I,  p.  14;  GELDNER-lSroBEL,  RV.  IV,  p.  219;  J.  Gonba, 
Adhvara  and  adhvaryu,  VIJ  3 (1965),  p.  163;  cf.  also  RV.  2,  18,  1;  5,  35,  7f.;  60,  1; 
66,  3;  10,  26,  9 etc. 


74 


J.  Gonda  • Vedic  Literature 


2.  The  ‘poei 

As  aiready  intiiiiLated  fresii  inspiration,  the  impulse  of  inner  necessity,  and 
compliance  ^th  the  traditional  ‘literary  forms’  of  the  ‘genre’  are  by  no  means 
mutualy  exclusive^  however  detrimental  to  the  inventiveness  of  the  productive 
artist  traditionalism  may  be.  The  art  of  these  poets  was  traditional* ; they  stood 
upon  the  shoulders  of  their  predecessors  and  were  indebted  to  these,  not  only 
for  metrical  or  syntactic  units®,  but  also  for  their  subject-matter,  phraseology 
and  poetical  technique  in  general.  These  predecessors  are  sometimes  quoted  or 
mentioned^.  The  poet  of  8,  41,  2 praises  Varuna  at  once  with  his  own  eulogy 
and  the  poetical  product  of  the  Fathers;  in  8,  15,  6 it  reads:  “This  the  reciters 
continually  say  in  praise  (of  thee)  this  very  day  just  as  in  former  times”®. 
Visvamitra,  the  author  of  3,  39,  2,  seems  to  express  the  opinion  that  the  vision 
he  qualifies  as  ‘ancestral’  which  comes  to  him  at  daybreak  is  identical  with  that 
which  manifested  itself  to  his  ancestors.  This  may  be  taken  to  imply  that  in  his 
view  all  ‘visions’  (dJn)  are  reproductions  of  one  and  the  same  archetype®.  In 
the  eyes  of  Vedic  man,  the  heredity  of  the  gift  of  poetry’  and  eulogistic  activity 
seems  to  have  been  quite  natural:  “On  account  of  our  descent  from  the  ancient 
father  we  are  speaking”  (1,  87, 5)®.  The  Visvamitras  claim  to  have  fulfilled  their 
function  from  generation  to  generation®  and  Vasistha  prides  himself  on  re- 
ceiving his  inspiration  from  the  immortal  generations  of  yore^°.  The  seven 
divine  rsis  who  were  associated  with  the  gods^^  are  at  4,  42,  8 spoken  of  as  “our 
fathers”;  this  no  doubt  pomts  to  the  conviction,  on  the  part  of  the  poets,  that 
there  has  been  an  xmbroken  tradition  from  the  mythical  archetypes  of  priestly 
poetical  art  until  their  days^®.  The  references  to  this  tradition  and  the  divine 
origin  of  their  art  were  no  doubt  to  enhance  the  efficacy  of  their  products. 

One  can  say  that  this  avowed  traditionalism  is  in  consonance  with  what  is 
long  since  a common  opinion  of  modern  Indologists : this  poetry  which  is  so 
polished  and  so  highly^  developed,  is  “not  the  earliest  production  of  the  genius 

^ Cf.  e.g.  F.  Boas,  Primitive  art,  !N'ew  York  1955,  p.  155. 

2 Cf.  e.g.  1,  1,  2;  87,  5;  118,  3;  139,  9;  4,  50,  1. 

® Cf.  p.  193  ff. 

^ Cf.  e.g.  1,  24,  12 f.;  106,  6;  118,  3;  3,  58,  3.  Transmitters  of  oral  traditions  often 
emphasize  the  exactness  of  their  performances  (A.  B.  Lord,  The  singer  of  tales, 
Cambridge  Maas.  1960,  p.  28). 

* Cf.  also  8,  3,  8;  13,  7. 

® Cf.  10,  67,  1. 

’ Gom)A,  Vision,  p.  60;  cf.  e.g.  1,  87,  5;  91,  1;  109,  3;  cf.  8,  43,  10. 

® For  7,  84,  5 compare  Geldner,  RV.  II,  p.  256  with  Renotj,  E.  V.  P.  V,  p.  101: 

vn,  p.  86.  > 

® RV.  3,  1,  21  and  cf.  3,  18,  4;  as  to  the  Ku^ikas,  e.g.  3,  26,  3;  29,  15;  30,  20; 
42,  9 (Kusika  was  Visvamitra’s  father:  3,  33,  5).  See  in  general  also  Geldnbr,  RV. 
I,  p.  412;  II,  p.  1;  277;  RV.  7,  56,  23;  (8,  15,  6). 

RV.  9,  97,  5;  of.  also  10,  67,  1. 

See  1,  139,  9;  7,  76,  4;  9,  62,  17;  92,  2;  10,  109,  4;  130,  7. 

See  also  1,  71,  2;  109,  7;  3,  39,  2;  4,  2,  16;  37,  3;  5,  25,  2;  6,  22,  2. 


Poetry,  poet,  poem 


75 


and  devout  niiiid  of  tiie  ancient  Indians”^®.  Generations  of  poets  and.  ^family 
schools  must  have  preceded  those  to  whom  we  owe  the  present  collection ; snanv 
old  hymns  must  have  been  replaced  and  sunk  into  oblivion,  for  it  may  be 
supposed  that  the  poets  imitated  the  themes  and  techniques  of  composition  of 
their  masters  rather  than  faithfully  copied  their  poems. 

A few  lines  may  be  inserted  about  a point  of  which  we  know  next  to  nothing, 
namely  the  songs  which  are  assumed  to  have  been  the  basic  form  of  all  other 
forms  of  poetry^  It  would  appear  that  in  ancient  India  also  sung  or  recited 
poetic  productions,  exerting  a hold  on  the  reciters  and  listeners  through  their 
sounds,  sense  and  rhythm,  evoking  a feeling  of  mystery  and  abating  troubling 
thoughts  and  obsessing  anxieties,  were,  historically  and  sociologically,  the  basis 
of  the  type  of  hymn  preserved  in  the  Veda,  winch  doubtless  does  not  represent 
the  whole  scope  of  the  contemporaneous  'literary'  activity. 

It  would  not  be  warranted  to  dwell  too  long  on  what  may  be  called  the 
psychology  of  these  poets  of  whose  innermost  thoughts  and  feelings  we  have  no 
knowledge  other  than  the  little  that  can,  perhaps,  be  inferred  from  their  work. 
Thatthey  were  fully  imbued  with  a sense  of  their  ovm  importance  or  indispensa- 
bility and  were  conscious  of  criticism  may  be  taken  for  granted  and  is  apparent 
from  the  claims  they  lay  to  fame,  recognition  and  adequate  rewards^®.  There  is, 
of  course,  evidence  of  enmity,  emulation  and  jealousy : "The  mountains  must 
press  down  that  man  who  despises  us  or  wishes  to  blame  our  powerful  hymn 
(brahman)  which  is  in  process  of  completion;  the  heavens  must  consume  by 
their  glow  the  one  who  hates  the  brahman''  (6,  52,  A place  such  as  1,  27, 

13  "Homage  to  the  greater  and  the  less  important,  to  the  young  and  old  (gods) ; 
we  would  like  to  worship  the  gods  if  we  shall  be  able"  is,  perhaps,  due  to  the 
author's  devout  modesty.  As  to  the  psychological  insight  they  evince^^,  it  has 
been  suggested  that  Vi^vamitra  in  his  dialogue  with  the  rivers^®  took  advantage 
of  their  feminine  vanity^®.  The  assurance  that  the  Goddess  of  the  Jungle  has  no 
murderous  intentions  put  into  the  mouth  of  the  one  who  is  forced  to  pass  the 
night  in  that  solitude  (10,  146,  5)^0  makes,  psychologically,  a clever  hit.  Some- 
times a poet  devotes  a line  to  his  own  problems  or  difficulties — ^we  take  cogni- 
zance of  an  apology  for  an  infraction  (1,  31,  16),  of  an  oath  of  purgation  (7,  104, 
15)21 — these  always  founded  on  actual  fact,  on  recent  experiences  ? 


Haxjg,  Ai.  B.  I,  p.  29. 

Bowba,  Primitive  song,  p-  254. 

For  these  dahsinas  see  79;  see  e.g.  6,  17,  14;  1,  31,  8;  2,  11,  12;  1,  9,  7; 
5,  44;  62,  9;  6,  1,  1*2,  cf.  also  1,  147,  2;  7,  32,  13;  for  an  oratio  pro  domo  7,  21,  5. 
Cf.  6,  15,  12;  7,  1,  15;  56,  19;  94,  3;  7;  12;  8,  21,  11;  66,  14f. 

For  an  exaggerated  opinion:  A.  K.  Coomabaswamy,  in  Indian  Art  and  Letters 
7 (1933),  p.  19. 

18  Seep.  146;  201. 

1®  Geldneb,  RV.  I,  p.  373. 

For  10,  146  see  P.  Thteme,  Studies  F.  B.  J.  Kuiper,  p.  383  (=  K.  S.  p.  268); 
S.  G.  Kantawala,  in  JOIB  20  (1970),  p.  1. 

21  Cf.  also  1,  105,  18f.;  120;  152,  6;  158;  5,  2,  3f.;  7,  86;  104;  8,  42,  3.  Seep.  153 f. 


76 


J.  Gouda  • Vedic  Literature 


At  tMs  point  we  must  turn  to  the  mdividnal  poets-^.  Poets  are  qualified  as 
knowing,  skilled,  inventive,  eloquent,  as  being  or  acting  in  consonance  with 
Rta-®  but  only  rarely  do  we  come  into  relation  with  a personage  or  an  identifi- 
able individual.  If  so  minded  one  might  except  Vasistha  and  Visvamitra^^  in 
their  legendary  animosity.  It  is  true  that  the  lists  of  rsis  have,  especially  in 
India,  been  more  than  once  regarded  as  “not  unhistorical  and  rmscrupulous^^s^ 
but  there  is  no  denying  that  the  Indian  tradition  does  not  provide  us  with 
reliable  information  on  authors  or  reciters.  And  what  is  worse,  the  Indians  have 
never  been  much  interested  in  the  poetic  personality  by  which  a work  of  art 
attained  its  individual  character^®. 

Our  sources  of  information  are : first,  stray  communications  of  the  authors 
themselves: — e.g.  “I,  Vi^vamitra,  have  praised  Lndra,  my  materialized  brah- 
man protects  this  people  of  the  Bharatas”  (3,  53,  12)^^ — , but  these  names  are 
in  part  obviously  what  we  would  call  fictive — ^the  word  nema  ('one,  several’)  in 
8,  100,  3 followed  by  '(he)  says’  has  occasioned  the  author’s  name  IsTema; 
Dharuna,  the  reputed  author  of  5,  15,  owes  his  name  (and  existence!)  to  the 
homonymous  w^ord  for  'bearing,  bearer’  which  occurs  four  times  in  this  short 
text®® — or  rightly  suspected  of  being  deduced  from  the  context : the  words 
rdtaJmvyasya  . . . stomaik  in  5,  66,  3 may,  it  is  true,  mean  “with  the  eulogies  of 
Ratahavj^a”®® — and  a man  called  Ratahavya,  descendant  of  Atri,  is  according 
to  the  Sarvanukramani  the  poet  of  5,  65  and  66 — but  also  “with  the  praise  of 
the  one  who  offers  the  oblation”®®.  Secondly:  incidental  communications  in  the 
later  Vedic  texts  and  the  more  or  less  reliable  traditions — ^founded,  not  on 
historical  data  concerning  the  real  poets,  but  mainly  on  combination,  family  tradi- 
tion and  the  above  texts — ^in  the  ancillary  literature  {anukramanl  etc.)®^.  For  in- 
stance, a certain  Kavasa  Ailusa  who  was  abandoned  by  other  seers  and  afflicted 
by  thirst  in  the  desert,  ‘saw,’  according  to  AiB.  2, 19,  RV.  10, 30,  the  Hymn  to  the 
Waters®®.  In  the  third  place,  technical  names  of  chanted  texts  (sdmans)^^ 

H.  Oldexbesg,  tiber  die  Liedverfasser  des  Rgveda,  ZDMG  42  (1888),  p.  199 
(=  K.  S.  p.  568);  P.  Regnaud,  Recherches  sur  le  point  de  depart  des  noms  des 
poetes  vediques,  JA  10-5  (1905  I),  p.  77. 

R\ . 2,  24,  /;  3,  34,  7;  5,  46,  1;  6,  7,  7;  7,  87,  4;  9,  17,  6 (also  1,  71,  10)  and 

see  Gonda,  Vision,  p.  44. 

See  Geudnee,  RV.  I,  p.  395  (on  3,  53,  21ff.);  Macdonell  and  Keith,  V.  I.  H, 
p.  274;  H.  D.  Velanxae,  in  JBBRAS  18,  p.  13  (speculative). 

S-  K.  Belvaleae,  in  2 AIOC  Pr.  p.  6. 

S.  K.  De,  Sanskrit  poetics  as  a study  of  aesthetics,  Berkeley  1963,  p.  72. 

See  also  6,  16,  33;  8,  19,  2;  35,  19;  10,  20,  10;  23,  7 (cf.  6).  Very  often  poets 

remain  anonymous. 

Rt.  5,  87;  9,  35;  10,  34;  38;  41;  135  offer  similar  cases;  (see  also  10,  126,  cf. 

St.  8)  see  also  Geassmanx,  RV.  I,  p.  2. 

” P-  See  also  5,  19, 1;  10,  100,  12;  cf.  R.  Hauschud, 

m Festschrift  Weller,  p.  248. 

E.  V.  P.  V,  p.  81. 1 also  refer  to  Lotwig,  EV.  in,  p.  XI. 

Cf.  Aueeecht,  Ait.  Br.,  p.  422. 

See  also  I^Iacdonell  and  Keith,  V.  I.,  p.  143. 

See  p.  314  f. 


Poetry,  poet,  poem 


77 


pointing  to  the  authors  of  the  corresponding  melodies  who  were  considered 
identical  with  the  poets®  Lastly,  some  supplementary  information  is  given  by 
the  so-called  pravard  lists®®,  viz.  stereotjTped  lists  of  names  of  ancient  Tsis  who 
are  assumed  to  be  the  remote  founders  of  brahmin  families®®. 

N^ames  of  poets®’  occur  sometimes  in  the  singular  to  indicate  a member  of  a 
family,  sometimes  in  the  plural,  denoting  the  whole  family  which,  descended 
from  a seer,  possessed  defimte  suktas  and  guarded  this  inheritance.  For  instance, 
while  the  second  TYUind^a  of  the  Rgveda  makes  only  mention  of  the  Grtsama- 
das  (in  the  plural)®®,  not  of  individual  poets,  other  works®®  speak  of  a poet 
called  Grfcsamada^®.  The  weak  sense  of  individuality  and  the  strong  conscious- 
ness of  family  unity  and  solidarity  prevent  us  from  having  more  than  hazy  and 
confused  notions  of  ‘authorships’  and  guardianships*^.  It  is  a legitimate  suppo- 
sition that  in  many  cases  later  generations  have  either  asserted  their  author- 
ship where  there  was  none  or  attributed  poems  of  later  origin  to  a famous 
legendary  ancestor*®.  This  has  not  deterred  scholars  from  attempts  at  deter- 
mining the  ‘authorship’  of  part  of  the  hymns  and  stanzas  by  a comparison  of 
their  contents,  style,  similes  used,  phraseology  and  grammatical  forms*®. 

We  shall  here  confine  ourselves  to  mentioning  some  famous  names  in  addi- 
tion to  those  which  in  a former  chapter  we  saw  associated  with  the  divisions  of 
the  corpus.  The  Manas,  descendants  of  Mana,  are  in  several  passages  alluded 
to  as  singers**.  Medhatithi,  sprung  from  Kanva’s  family,  is  held  to  be  the  author 
of  various  hymns*®  and  so  is  Dirghatamas*®.  Kaksivat  appears  as  a celebrated 
Tsi — ^the  poet  of  1,  18  wishes  to  be  a second  Kaksivat — an  eloquent  eulogist, 
reciter  and  soma-presser ; mentioned  frequently  in  the  Rgveda,  he  must  have 
been  a Pajra  by  family  and  enjoyed  the  special  favour  of  the  Asvins*’.  Ka^yapa, 
the  legendary  sage  of  9,  113  and  114,  occurs  in  that  corpus  only  once,  but  is  a 

®*  OLDENBERG,o.c.,p.222(591);  cf.also8,71:  JB.l,  151;  10,  38,  5:  PB.  9,  2,  22; 
21,  14,  5. 

J.  Beough,  The  early  brahmanical  system  of  gotra  and  pravara,  Cambridge 
1953. 

These  lists  are  regularly  recited  at  specific  points  in  the  sacrificial  ritual - 

See  also  Renoxt  (and  Fjxliozat),  I.  C.  I,  p.  272. 

RY.  2,  4,  9;  19,  8;  39,  8;  41,  18.  See  Geldner,  RV.  I,  p.  275. 

88  idB.  5,  2,  4;  KB.  22,  2 etc.;  AiA.  2,  2,  1;  Sarvanukramani. 

*0  Cf.  also  A.  Weber,  in  SB  Berlin  1900,  p.  618. 

**  Cf.  e.g.  Yasistha’s  name  in  7,  88,  4;  96,  3;  10,  181,  1.  For  attempts  at  disen- 
tangling see  e.g.  R.  S.  Satyasrayi,  in  JBOES  26,  2;  K.  G.  Chapbkar,  Atri,  ABORI 
43  (1962),  p.  109  (disfigured  by  imtenable  opinions). 

*®  See  e.g.  GELDinER,  RY.  II,  p.  91  (intr.  note  to  mandala  YI)  and  N.  G.  Chape- 
KAR,  Bharadvaja,  ABORI  31,  p.  292. 

*®  See  S.  K.  Gupta,  in  FO  18  (1953),  p.  22. 

**  RY.  1,  169,  8;  171,  5;  182,  8;  184,  5;  cf.  Ludwig,  RY.  m,  p.  116;  Sibg, 
Sagenstoffe,  p.  106. 

*®  RY.  1,  12-23;  8,  1-3;  32;  33;  9,  41-43. 

*®  RY.  1,  140-164  are  traditionally  attributed  to  him;  see  however  Oldenbebg, 
O.C.,  p.  221  (p-  590). 

*’  See  e.g.  1,  18,  1;  51,  13;  112,  11;  116,  7;  117,  6;  4,  26,  1. 


78 


J.  Gonda  • Vedic  Literature 


cominoii  figure  in  tlie  later  samJiitds  and  other  works  Interestingly  enough, 
references  to  blind and  itinerant®®  poets  and  eulogists  are  not  lacking®^. 

Although  a hymn  is  generally  ascribed  to  one  seer  only,  in  several  cases 
authorship  was,  according  to  the  ancient  sources,  collective — 9,  66  was  com- 
posed by  ^the  hundred  Vaikhanasas’®^ — or  attributed  to  two®®  or  more®* 
sages.  In  other  cases  tradition  offers  a choice  between  two  authors:  1,  105  Trita 
Aptya  or  Kutsa®®.  At  times,  an  identical  stanza  occurring  in  different  suktas  is 
ascribed  to  two  different  seers®®.  Exceptionally  a woman  could  receive  inspira- 
tion and  become  a seer®^.  Our  sources  mention  a number  of  human  and  divine 
figures  among  whom  the  maiden  Apala  of  8,  91  and  Ghosa  whose  words  are 
quoted  in  10,  39  and  40®®.  Moreover,  the  goddess  Vac  is  regarded  as  the  seer  of 
10,  125,  and  Sri  as  the  poetess  of  the  Srisukta.  Deities  could  indeed  also  figure 
as  seers:  Indra  Vaikuntha  praises  himself  in  10,  48-50®®;  Manyu  is  seer  and 
deity  of  10,  83  and  84  and  Hiranyagarbha  is  the  ‘author’  of  10,  121,  the  snake 
Arbuda  of  10,  94. 


“ RV.  9.  114,  2;  cf.  AV.  1,  14,  4;  2,  33,  7;  MS.  4,  2,  9;  VS.  3,  62  etc.  For  other 
names  also  M.  Patel,,  Die  Danastuti’s  des  Rigveda,  Leipzig  1930,  p.  54,  and  for  a 
complete  list  Aupeecht,  RV.  11,  p.  461. 

See  1,  116,  14;  147,  3.  As  is  well  known  the  profession  of  a *bard’  is  often 
aviated  with  blindness  (see  e.g.  C.  M.  Bowba,  Heroic  poetry,  London  1962, 


See  1,  no,  2;  117,  6;  6,  6,  8. 

For  long-haired  seers  etc.  see  Gokda,  Vision,  p.  95. 

**  Also  1,  100;  9,  107  (the  seven  rsia);  109;  10,  108.  Cf.  1,  100  17 
« Thus  3.  23;  5,  1;  9,  110;  10,  61;  53;  cf.  also  1,  170;  8,  71.  ’ 

“ Thus  1,  126;  165;  5,  24;  8,  1;  9,  67;  86;  10,  67-59. 

Cf.^also  3,  31  and  cf.  3,  38;  54£f.;  62;  5,  2;  27;  9,  67. 

“ (Visvamitra)  = 7,  2,  8-11  (Vasi^tha)! 

Dwt'  tt?'  N.  Dandekar,  lA  in,  3 (1969),  p.  41.  A.  Ktjmaei 

®®®rs  of  ancient  India,  Calcutta  (between  1931  and  1946)  was  in- 

accessible  to  me.  ' 


Brhaddevata  2,  82-84  and  the 
mentioned  in  a hymn  and  the  poet. 

Cf.  Brhaddevata  7,  50ff.  and  Geldnee,  R,V.  in,  p.  262. 


Sarvanukramani  identifying  the  speaker 


Poetry,  poet,  poem 


79 


3.  Sociology  and  'performa'nce 

The  genius  of  a poet  cannot  expand  without  the  co-operation  of  his  environ- 
ment^, and  Vedic  poetry  required  an  audience  comprising  men  initiated  into 
its  deeper  sense.  It  is  however  highly  improbable  that  about  interest  in  their 
work  these  Vedic  poets  had  any  complaint  to  make,  because  in  archaic  and 
more  or  less  primitive  ^ societies,  w’here  ceremonies  provide  a focus  for 
social  life,  the  composition  of  poems  is  a communal  affair;  besides,  in  ancient 
India,  as  in  other  traditional  societies,  the  poets  enjoyed  the  patronage  of  the 
noble  and  the  wealthy®.  A considerable  part  of  the  hymns  may  have  been  made 
to  order  and  the  wealthy,  though  sometimes  stingy^,  patrons  iigure  largely  in 
them.  They  reward,  or  are  expected  to  reward,  the  services®  of  the  poets  who 
pray  for  their  well-being  and  prosperity®;  interestingly  enough,  part  of  the 
prayers  remembering  a patron  do  not  overlook  the  poet  himself^  Since  the 
emplo3nnent  of  mantras  for  the  sake  of  a livelihood  was  already  in  Vedic  times 
forbidden,  the  relations  between  poets  and  patrons  were  of  a ceremonious 
rather  than  economic  nature®.  The  material  aspect  of  the  daksind — ^not  to  be 
translated  by  “fee” — ^has  often  been  too  much  emphasized  in  European  books. 
The  patrons  who  are  desirous  of  divine  favour,  have  sacrificial  ceremonies 
performed  and  earn  the  ritual  and  religious  merits  resulting  from  these®,  are 
of  course  commended  for  their  support,  assisted  in  difficulties,  for  instance  with 
imprecations  against  enemies^®,  provided — ^it  is  sometimes  added^^ — ^they  back 
the  poet’s  words  unreservedly.  A patron  is  compared  to  Indra,  because  both  of 
them  are  expected  to  bestow  their  favours  upon  those  who  assist  them,  in  the 
god’s  case  with  worship,  in  the  patron’s  with  support^®.  Although  we  have  no 
data  about  the  poet’s  activities  in  other  surroimdings  it  may  be  surmised  that 
their  hymns  were  enjoyed  also  by  others  than  the  patrons  and  their  dependents : 
Indians  have  always  been  anxious  to  derive  merit  from  attendance  at  religious 
ceremonies. 


1 K.  Shastbi,  in  Volume  P.  V.  Kane,  Poona  1941,  p.  438. 

2 ‘Primitive’  is  used,  neither  as  an  equivalent  of  “belonging  to  the  earliest  ages” 
nor  to  suggest  the  ideas  of  rudeness  or  backwardness  but  to  denote  what  is  characteris- 
tic of  a culture  or  society  that  is  not  markedly  infused  with  ‘modem’  rationalism 
and  intellectualism. 

® M.  Patel,  Die  Danastuti’s  des  Kigveda,  Thesis  Marburg  1929,  p.  76;  English 
translation  by  B.  H.  Kapadia,  Vallabh  Vidyanagar  1961. 

^ See  e.g.  8,  26,  10;  39,  2;  71,  4f. 

® E.g.  1,  48,  4;  73,  5;  122,  8;  192,  16;  5,  27,  2;  33,  8;  8,  49,  10;  10,  62,  11. 

« E.g.  1,  54,  11;  73,  5;  9;  97,  3;  125,  7;  5,  34,  9;  79,  2;  8,  68,  19. 

7 E.g.  1,  51,  15;  2,  2,  12;  4,  9;  4,  29,  5. 

® See  p.  170  £ 

® See  1,  153,  2;  8,  19,  18  and  cf.  1,  122,  11;  1,  22,  20;  31,  7;  8,  74,  4. 

See  5,  34,  9;  AV.  3,  19,  3. 

RV.  7,  1,  10;  cf.  7,  6. 

12  RV.  7,  21,  8;  cf.  7,  27,  2. 


80 


J.  Gonda  • Vedic  Literature 


We  now  come  to  a point  of  considerable  difficulty  wMcb  seems  to  have  given 
rise  to  serioiis  misunderstanding.  Throughout  the  Rgveda  mention  is  made  of 
verbal  contests  for  which  German  authors,  consciously  or  unconsciously  calling 
to  mind  “associations  with  the  Nuremberg  mastersingers  and  the  minnesangers' 
tournament  of  song  on  the  Wartburg”^®,  sometimes  used  expressions  such  as 
‘Dichterwettkampfe’^S  in  French  ‘joutes  oratoires’^^  Moreover,  the  impression 
is  sometimes  created^®  that  the  hymns  were  primarily  designed  for  what  may 
be  called  literary  contests.  However,  in  places  such  as  the  following  there  is, 
as  far  as  I am  able  to  see,  no  question  of  two  poets  or  performers  competing 
for  prizes  or  recognition : “I  (row,)  so  to  say,  to  thee  (Indra)  the  ship  of  eloquence 
in  the  contests’’^’  (2,  16,  7);  “With  thy  (Indra’s)  help  I (the  poet)  always  run 
a race  about  (the  materialized)  brahman  (the  hymn),  striving  after  generative 
power  (vaja  (8,  53,  8).  Part  of  these  texts  may  be  elucidated  by  a reference 
to  the  rivalry  of  sacrificers  mentioned  in  some  hrahmanas^^:  since  the  gods 
were  not  supposed  able  to  be  present  at  several  sacrifices  at  one  and  the  same 
moment,  sacrificers  felt  themselves  compelled  to  take  measures  in  order  to 
secure  their  presence.  Among  these  measures  were  the  recitation  of  the  explicit 
Invitation:  “Come  to  my  sacrifice,’’  invitations  and  captations  such  as  “Come 
to  our  Soma  festivals”®®;  “The  liberal  Indra  will  never  refuse  us  the  vdja  of 
Ms  gift  because  of  simultaneous  invocation”  (7,  27,  4);  hence  no  doubt  also 
“In  the  past  and  nowadays  the  words  of  praise  and  hymns  of  the  rsis  have 
competed  for  Indra”  (6,  34,  1)®^.  These  attempts  to  bring  a god  over  to  one’s 
side  are  sometimes  coupled  with  disparagements  of  rival  eulogists. 

This  is  not  all.  like  riddle  contests,  gambling,  races  and  other  exMbitions 
of  mental  and  physical  strength  contests  between  two  sages  or  eulogists®®  as 
to  who  possesses  the  greater  knowledge  or  more  effective  formulas  are  widely 

P.  Thteme,  at  JAOS  77  (1957),  p.  53;  cf.  also  H.  P.  Schmidt,  at  ZDMG  109 
(1959),  p.  446;  Rexotj,  E,  V.  P.  I,  p.  18. 

See  e.g.  K.  F.  Geldiobk,  V.  S.  H,  p.  154  and  in  Festgabe  Jacobi,  p.  242. 

Renou  (and  Filliozat),  I.  C.  I,  p.  275. 

E.g.  by  Geldneb,  RV.  and  Renou,  E.  V.  P.  passim. 

Geldneb,  ?,V.  I,  p.  297:  “Wettbewerb”;  Renou,  E.  Y.  P.  XYII,  p.  207: 

“competition.” 

See  e.g.  J.  Gonda,  Aspects  of  early  Visnuism,  Utrecht  1954  (^Delhi  1969), 
p.  48. 

TS.  7,  3,  11;  5,  5;  AiB.  2,  2,  18;  see  M.  Bloomfield,  Religion  of  the  Yeda, 
New  York  1908,  p.  186;  EIeith,  R.  Ph.,  p.  251. 

E.g.  2,  18,  7;  4,  9,  7;  8,  26,  20. 

See  also  1,  102,  5;  2,  31,  Iff.;  3,  8,  10;  5,  33,  1;  35,  6;  6,  52,  Iff.;  66,  11;  67, 
9ff.;  7,  23,  1;  28,  1;  33,  If.,;  70,  6;  82,  9;  85,  2;  8,  1,  3;  66,  15;  92,  29;  10,  89,  16; 
128,  1 and  compare  Geldneb,  Y.  S.  I,  p.  144;  256;  RY.  I,  p.  140. 

22  p,  Kulpeb,  in  HJ  4,  p.  217  ingeniously  attempts  to  show  that  ‘word- 
duels  etc.  were  closely  associated  with  a New  Year  festival  of  a type  which  has  not 
however  left  clear  traces  in  the  Y eda.  In  his  opinion  the  nucleus  of  the  Rgveda  was 
a textbook  for  that  ritual.  Compare  also  B.  L.  Ogibenin’s  book  on  the  Structure  of 
the  mythological  texts  of  the  Rgveda  (in  Russian),  Moscow  1968;  Structure  d’un 
mythe  vedique.  The  Hague,  Paris  1973.  See  alsop.  164. 


Poetry,  poet,  poem 


81 


believed  to  produce  beneficial  results  and  to  generate,  or  set  in  motion,  useful 
power.  The  prospect  of  success  held  out  to  a ruler  can  also  in  the  Veda  be 
attained  by  means  of  race-horses,  eulogists  or  valiant  warriors  (8,  19,  10).  In 
cases  such  as  6, 45  the  parallelism  between,  and  equivalence  of,  races  and  verbal 
contests  is  quite  clear:  ‘‘With  inspired  poems  (dhl)  and  race-horses  we  will, 
0 Indra,  (conquer)  the  race-horses,  manifestations  of  vuja,  with  thee  (with  thy 
help)  the  price  of  the  contest ...”  (st.  12)-®.  In  view  of  the  preceding  words  “in 
the  contest  (vivdc)  of  the  many  eulogists”  (st.  29)  it  seems  therefore  legitimate 
to  suppose  that  the  prayer  addressed  to  the  same  god  “Our  eulogy,  0 Indra 
must  be  that  which  carries  farthest  and  comes  nearest”  (st.  30)  expresses  the 
wash  to  win,  with  the  assistance  of  the  god  who  is  a protector  and  helps  over 
enmities^^,  the  desirable  things  mentioned  in  the  hymn^®.  Since  the  ‘price’ 
fell  to  the  share  of  the  reciter  who  proved  himself  superior  to  others,  evidence 
of  rivalry  is  here  also  not  lacking:  “0  Lord  of  Speech,  keep  these  down  that  in 
speaking  they  are  inferior  to  me”  (10,  166,  3),  the  victor  identifying  himself 
with  Indra,  the  slayer  of  his  rivals  (st.  2)^®.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the 
significance  of  the  solemn  word  contributed  much  to  inflaming  a competitive 
spirit  among  poets  and  performers,  which  in  its  turn  awakened  the  desire  to 
achieve  literary  perfection. 

The  performers  are  also  to  make  these  products  of  the  poets’  inspiration  a 
means  of  exerting  influence  upon  the  gods  or  overcoming  difficulties:  “Make 
them  so  as  to  sound  pleasantly,  extend  them;  construct  a ship  that  ferries 
across  by  means  of  oars;  hold  the  weapons  (which  will  conquer  the  evil  powers) 
in  readiness,  lead  the  worship  forw^ards  (i.e.  promote  it),  0 companions”  with 
these  words  the  poet  of  RV.  10, 101  (st.  2)  after  invoking  some  of  the  matutinal 
deities  arouses  the  reciters  to  activity^’. 

The  poets  themselves  are  almost  reticent  about  the  details  of  the  ceremonious 
performances  of  their  productions^®.  The  texts  were  not  sung^®,  but  rather — as 
in  other  traditional  societies — ^recited  in  some  form  of  singsong  recitative.  It 
would  be  hazardous  to  draw  any  conclusions  as  to  general  customs  from  the 
fact  that  the  priest  who  in  the  Aitareya-Brahmana  (7,  18,  12)  tells  the  story 
of  Sunabsepa  to  the  kmg  after  his  consecration,  is  seated  on  a golden  cushion. 
The  ritual  handbooks  are  much  more  explicit  on  this  point,  but  their  indications 
refer  to  the  fully  developed  Vedic  ritual.  The  stanzas  of  the  Rgveda  are  recited 


23  Cf.  st.  2;  11;  13;  15;  1,  27,  9;  113,  17;  178,  3f.;  2,  31,  Iff.;  6,  9,  2;  52,  16;  8,  2, 


36;  19,  10;  53,  8. 

2^  Cf.  st.  14;  19;  5;  6;  see  also  4,  17,  16;  6,  32,  3. 


26  Translators  (e.g.  Geldxbr,  in  6,  5,  7;  Renou  on  6,  52,  16:  E.  Y.  r.  V,  p.  38) 
sometimes  inserted  “competition”  where  there  is  no  such  indication  in  the  original. 


Compare  also  Renoxj,  E.  V.  P.  II,  p.  109. 

27  See  Gonda,  Vision,  p.  114;  Geldneb,  RV.  HI,  p.  314f. 

28  RV.  9,  73,  6;  92,  1 do  not  help  us  much  farther.  For  1,  38,  14  (39,  1;  83, 
aoka)&ee  Renou,*E.  V.  P.  X,  p.  62.  See  also  1,  164,  24;  8,  12,  5;  10,  78,  4. 

23  As  was  J.  Hjebtel’s  opinion,  in  WZEGM  18  (1904),  p.  59. 


6 


82 


J.  Gonda  • Yedic  Literature 


audibly,  except  for  those  cases  where  the  contrary  (whispering,  inaudibly)  is 
expressly  stated.  The  words  of  a stanza  are  prononnced  with  the  same  pitch, 
insertions  and  other  foreign  elements  otherwise®®.  Some  strikingly  complicated 
particularities  of  the  srauta  performance — recitation  and  song,  audible  and 
inaudible  utterance — are  eliminated  in  the  domestic  ritual,  which  in  all  prob- 
ability required  a muttered  recitation  (japa).  Texts  pronounced  for  magical 
purposes  are  recited  in  a low  tone®^. 

From  a place  such  as  1,  173,  1 “He  will  start  the  song  (sdman)  . . , ; let  us 
sing  the  swelling  (song  of  praise)  that  is  like  the  sun”  it  has  been  inferred  that 
in  the  poet’s  times  an  individual  singer  and  a choir  executed  ritual  hymns  by 
turns,  to  be  relieved  of  their  task  by  the  hotar  who  had  to  start  a recitation®®. 
Some  stropMc  hymns  have  made  the  impression  of  being  intended  for  alternate 
recitation®®.  Although  it  is  not,  indeed,  difficult  to  imagine  that  a sukta  such 
as  6,  15  was  to  accompany  the  ignition  of  several  fires,  we  grope  in  the  dark 
about  the  performance  at  the  time  of  the  poet  himself.  However,  there  existed 
rites  in  which  oblations  were  presented,  by  a succession  of  individual  priests 
and  in  a fixed  order,  to  a definite  number  of  individual  gods  (the  so-called 
Ttugrahas)  and  there  is  no  doubt  whatever  that  RV,  1, 15  was  specially  composed 
for  this  purpose®*. 


®®  1,  1,  28ff.;  SAsv.  1,  2,  8ff.  Other  particulars  must  be  omitted  here  (see 

e.g.  AiB.  3,  44;  IsvS.  8,  2,  12f.).  See  Renoxj,  m JAOS  69  (1949),  p.  11  and  in  JA 

250  (1962),  p.  172f.  ^ 

Caland,  Altmdisches  Zauberritual,  Amsterdam  Acad.  1900,  p.  87;  cf. 
also  K.  Roxxow,  in  MO  25,  p.  279. 

Geudneb,  RV.  I,  p.  250,  and  see  ZDMG  71,  p.  322;  Oldenbekg,  R.  Y.,  p.  393. 
33  GriLDNEB^e.g.  RY.  n,  p.  106  uses  the  term  “(strophischer)  Rundgesang.”  See 
also  6,  48;  9,  67  (according  to  the  anukramani  the  first  seven  triplets  were  composed 

by  different  poets);  86;  97. 

For  particulars  see  Cai^akd  and  Hexby,  L’agnistoma,  p.  224ff. 


Poetry,  poet,  poem 


83 


4.  Ritual  application 

The  ancient  ancillary  literature  comprises  no  index  of  the  ritual  applications 

of  hymns  and  stanzas.  This  deficiency  was  at  a much  later  time  made  up  by 
Sayana,  whose  method  deserves  a brief  characterization^.  The  famous  com- 
mentator distinguishes  two  applications,  viz.  the  recitation  of  one’s  particular 
Veda  as^obligatory  ‘study’  (the  so-caUed  general  appfieation)  and  the  special 
use  of  mHas  or  portions  of  suJctas  to  accompany  ritual  acts=.  In  determinino- 
the  latter  Sayapa  is  greatly  indebted  to  the  Aitareya-Brahmana  and  Asvalat 
yana’s  Srautasutra,  although  he  sometimes  quotes  also  domestic  rites  or  in- 
cantations and  exorcisms  (abhicara)^.  If  mantras  are  not  ritually  prescribed  in 
the  irauta  literature,  their  use  must  be  learnt  from  smarta  texts,  including  the 
Rgvidhana  etc.  Some  hymns  found,  indeed,  appHcation,  not  in  drauta,  but  in 
domestic  rites,  e.g.  10,  166,  which  is  to  destroy  rivals.  In  those  cases  in  which 
no  ancient  text  gives  any  information  about  the  ritual  use  Sayana  adopted  the 
theory  that  this  use,  though  not  transmitted,  is  to  be  understood  from  the 
‘characteristics’  of  the  stanzas  (the  so-cafied  Ungay.  There  are  however  many 
Hturpcal  suktas,  especiaUy  among  those  oimandala  IX,  which,  though  ritually 
applied— this  appears  from  the  Samaveda  literature — ^are  left  without  the 
pertinent  comment,  because  the  ‘orthodox’  Sayana  does  not  consider  other 
Vedas  or  Mkhds  than  his  own.  Nor  does  he  take  account  of  the  differences, 
between  his  sources,  which  sometimes  point  to  the  obsolescence  of  rites.  His 
presupposition,  shared  by  the  tradition  of  the  ‘orthodox’®,  that  aU  hymns  and 
stanzas  were  used  in  some  ritual  is  however  incapable  of  proof'  because  many 
mantras  are  quoted  in  no  other  text. 

If  ritual  acts  and  ceremonies  are  to  be  performed  successfully  the  consecra-^ 
tory  word  is  an  indispensable  requirement.  It  is  part  of  a eulogist’s  functions,, 
not  only  to  stimulate  divine  activity — ^for  instance  to  awake  the  goddess  Dawn 
(4,  52,  4)  ^but  also  to  infuse  man  s sacred  activities  with  the  power  generated 
by  solemnly  speaking  about  powerful  things,  and  so,  for  instance  advantageous- 
ly to  influence  the  preparation  of  the  soma  draughts  The  problem  of  the  ritual 
use  of  the  Rgveda-Samhita  and  its  component  parts,  of  the  relations  between 
the  hymns  and  stanzas  on  one  hand  and  the  contemporaneous  and  later  sacrifi- 


^ S.  Biswas,  Elritik  der  rituellen  Bemerkungen  Sayanas  uber  die  Hymnen  des 
Rgveda,  Akten  24.  Intern.  Orient.  Kongr.  Miinchen  1957  (Wiesbaden  1959),  p.  570. 

® See  e.g.  Sayana  on  RV.,  introd.  sections. 

® E.g.  on  6,  53;’ 54;  75;  7,  46;  10,  169. 

^ Hence  Sayana’s  technical  term  goto  viniyogdh  (e.g.  10,  186)  lit.  “the  ritual 
application  has  gone  lost,”  but  practically  = laingikah  “to  be  learnt  from  the 
linga(s).^"  See  e.g.  Sayana  on  RV.  1,  40;  82;  90  etc. 

^ Cf.  e.g.  V.  Ch.  Bhattachabyya,  in  OH  3,  p.  89. 

® BloomfieIiD  also  (JAOS  15,  p.  144)  was  “incapable  of  believing  that  even  a 
single  Vedic  hymn  was  ever  composed  without  reference  to  ritual  application.” 

" See  e.g.  9,  26,  3;  60,  1;  64,  10;  97,  22. 


84 


J-  Gonda  • Vedic  Literature 


eial  ritual  on  the  otlier  cannot  be  left  out  of  consideration.  Bergaigne®.  at  the 
time  ventured  tbe  opinion  that  a certain  nninber  of  hymns  are  collections  of 
essentially  incoherent  stanzas,  composed  to  be  used  at  different  moments  of 
one  and  the  same  ceremony  or  of  successive  ceremonies  in  a way  not  different 
from  the  use  of  mantras  in  the  ritual  described  in  the  brdhmanas  and  sutras  of 
a later  period.  Nay,  most  of  the  hymns  were  made  for  soma  sacrifices  such  as 
the  jyotidoma^  of  the  sutras.  This  opinion,  which  was  received  with  reserve  and 
scepticism^®,  was  refuted  by  Renou^^.  The  thesis  that  all  Rgvedic  hymns  were, 
at  least  in  their  present  form,  written  primarily  for  definite  sacrifices'^  is  not 
only  hazardous  but  also  untenable^®.  The  ritual  as  we  know  it  from  the  sutras 
does  not  even  in  the  task  allotted  to  the  hotar  and  his  assistants — ^the  priests 
entrusted  with  the  Rgveda — agree  with  the  Samhita^^.  The  ritual  known  to 
the  poets  of  the  hymns  was  not  identical  with  the  very  complicated  ceremonies 
of  the  later  period^®.  It  -was  no  doubt  growing  even  wMle  the  hymns  were 
composed  and  the  corpus  was  in  process  of  completion,  and  the  later  sacrifi- 
cial ceremonies  do  not  give  an  adequate  idea  of  the  employment  of  component 
parts  of  the  Samhita  in  earher  times^®. 

There  is  ample  evidence  that  the  poets  were,  generally  speaking,  very  well 
acquainted  with  a variety  of  rites^’.  References  to  sacrifices^®,  sacred  fires,  the 
kindling  of  the  ritual  fire^®,  officiants^®,  priestly  offices^i,  'instituters’  (yaja- 
mdna),  ritual  performances^^^  oblations^^,  requisites'^,  the  sacrificial  ground — 


® A.  Beegaig20e,  Recherches  sur  Thistoire  de  la  liturgie  vedique,  JA  1889  I 
(8-13),  p.  1;  121;  similarly,  Macdonell,  H.  S.  L.,  p.  64.  For  some  general  remarks 
see  also  Ludwig,  RV.  TV,  p.  XU. 

® This  is  a general  name  of  the  soma  festivals  that  last  one  day. 

A.  Babth,  (Euwes,  H,  Paris  1914,  p.  12;  Oldenbbeg,  H.  R.  I,  p.  518. 

L.  Renoxj,  Recherches  sur  ie  rituel  vedique:  la  place  du  Rig -Veda  dans  Tor- 
donnance  du  culte,  JA  250  (1962),  p.  161. 

“ Thus  S-  D.  Atkiks,  in  JAOS  58,  p.  419. 

See  already  W.  Calanu),  in  WZKM  22,  p.  437.  The  methodological  problem 
of  how  to  evaluate  the  Bgvedic  evidence  m its  relation  to  the  later  Vedic  literature 
■cannot  be  discussed  in  this  book. 


See  Gonda,  R.  I.  I,  p.  10;  108;  Renou,  Recherches,  p.  162;  178.  On  special 
occasions  the  hotar  had  to  recite  texts  from  other  collections. 

» P.  S.  Sastbi’s  opinion  (IHQ  30,  p.  308),  viz.  “the  poets  had  very  little,  if 
anything  to  do  with  the  rituals”  cannot  be  defended. 

See  also  A.  B.  Keith,  in  JRAS  1911,  p.  979. 

K.  R.  PoTDAE,  Sacrifice  in  the  Rgveda,  Bombay  1953  (in  many  respects 
mconvinciag);  Go3sda,  R.  I.  I,  p.  108;  C.  G.  Kashtkar,  m JAIII,  1 (1964),  p.  77. 
For  the  mteresting  sukta  8,  72  see  also  Geldnbb,  RV.  U,  p.  397,  for  10, 13  Geldneb, 

-KV.  Ill,  p.  140. 

« E.g.  1,  45,  7;  4,  9,  3;  7,  56,  14;  103,  7. 

E.g.  2,  6,  1;  10,  1;  4,  12,  1. 


« E.g.  2,  1,  2;  4,  2,  14;  19;  7,  60,  12;  83,  7;  8,  58,  1. 

“ ]’  2;  2,  5;  4,  9,  3ff.;  8,  60,  16;  10,  107,  6 etc. 

“ E.g.  1,  142,  3;  2,  48;  3,  56,  5;  8. 

116  ^^24  6^ete  ®’ 


Poetry,  poet,  poem 


85 


or  the  house  of  the  liberal  patron^® — ^and  the  holy  grass  strewed  on  it-®  and  to 
certain  ritual  acts^^  are  very  frequent  throughout  the  corpus.  In  a considerable 
number  of  details  this  Rgvedic  ritual  is,  however,  different  from  the  ‘classicaF 
Vedic  rites^®,  and  the  precise  meaning  of  the  many  technical  terms  occurring 
in  the  poems  cannot  always  be  determined.  Like  any  institution  the  historicai 
sacrifice  presupposed  an  origmal  and  exemplary  mythical  sacrifice  of  wMch  it 
is  a reproduction**® : Looking  back  upon  the  path  of  the  ancestors  the  wise 
(inspired)  ones  have,  like  charioteers,  taken  hold  of  the  reins”  (10,  130,  7).  The 
relation  between  the  gods  and  the  rites®®,  the  results®^  and  the  significance®®  and 
symbolical  value®®  of  the  latter  are  likewise  among  the  favourite  subjects  of 
these  poets.  RV.  1,  9o  deals,  partly  in  riddles  and  mysterious  imagery,  with 
the  ritual  fire,  especially  with  its  origin  and  Agni’s  exploits®"^.  In  10,  2 the  same 
god  is  requested  to  arrange  the  sacrifices  and  make  good  the  mistakes  committed 
by  the  officiants®®.  The  difficult  hymn  1,  151  which  contains  several  allusions 
to  the  ritual  begins  with  a stanza  addressing  the  sacrificial  fire.  Although 
technical  terms  pertaining  to  the  ritual  are  rare,  the  corpus  includes  sequences 
of  stanzas  which  when  used  ritually  bear  definite  names®®.  There  are  unambig- 
uous indications  of  performances  and  moments  of  sacrificial  rites : “Bom  before 
the  day,  awake  (watchful)  recited  in  the  sacrificial  ceremony;  clad  in  fine 
(auspicious),  white  garments  is  our  iuspired  hymn  here”  (3,  39,  2).  The  stanzas 
4—6  of  3,  52, 1 beginning  with  “0  Indra,  accept  at  daybreak  our  gift  of  fried  bar- 
ley” make,  in  the  right  order,  mention  of  the  three  offerings  of  soma,  in  the 
morning,  at  midday,  and  in  the  evening.  The  order  in  which  gods  are  addressed 
is  sometimes,  at  least  in  part,  in  harmony  with  a definite  ritual  order®’.  Ac- 
cording to  expectation  the  ritual  practice  and  technique  as  such  remain  in 
comparative  obscurity®®.  J£  we  knew  these,  large  portions  of  the  Rgveda 
would  no  doubt  be  less  obscure. 


RV.  1,  162,  6;  8,  12,  4;  10,  101;  105,  10  etc. 

E.g.  7,  74,  4;  8,  13,  10;  22,  3. 

RV.  1,  13,  7;  9;  26,  4;  84,  4;  8,  102,  14  etc. 

RV.  5,  15,  4. 

See  A.  Hxllebbanut,  RituaUiteratur,  Strassburg  1897,  p.  11. 

B.V.  1,  83,  4f.;  cf.  1,  164,  50;  10,  65,  7;  66,  2;  67,  2;  10,  130. 

®®  E.g.  1,  3,  10;  135,  3;  4,  42,  10;  47,  1;  4;  6,  68,  10;  8,  20,  10. 

E.g.  1,  83,  4;  4,  2,  5;  10,  1;  42,  10;  5,  15,  2. 

E.g.  1,  83;  10,  65,  7;  66,  2;  67,  2. 

®®  Cf.  1,  164,  34f. 

For  1,  73  Geldneb,  Auswahl,  11,  p.  12;  for  1, 163,  p.  28;  for  3,  29  see  Gelbkeb, 
RV.  I,  p.  362. 

See  e.g.  H.  B.  Veianear,  in  JOB  27  RS  (1958),  p.  1.  For  1,  151  Renou, 
E.  V.  P.  VII,  p.  34. 

See  e.g.  8,  68,  1-3  (praivpad);  8,  2,  1-3  (anucara)  in  the  midday  service  of  a 
soma  sacrifice  (Caiahd  and  Henry,  L’agnistoma,  p.  300).  For  3,  28  see  Bergaigne, 
Recherches,  ia  JA  1889  (8-13),  p.  20. 

Cf.  e.g.  1,  1;  2;  139. 

Cf.  E.  W.  HoFEms,  in  PAOS  1895,  p.  CCXXXIX. 


86 


J.  Gonda  • Vedic  Literature 


Some  suldas  are  so  clearly  recognizable  as  litanies  or  sacrificial  hymns  that 
there  can  hardly  be  any  doubt  that  they  were  from  the  begmning  intended 
for  the  cult  of  the  gods.  For  instance,  7,  35  “Let  Indra-and-Agni  be  propitious 
to  us  by  their  favour;  let  Indra-and-Varuna,  to  whom  sacrifice  is  offered,  be 
propitious  to  us,”  and  2, 14,  beginning  with  a call  to  offer  to  Indra,  whose  deeds 
are  enumerated  in  the  following  stanzas^®. 

Quotations  deriving  from  the  Rgveda  are  frequent  in  the  fire  rituaP®.  As 
to  the  soma  sacrifices'^,  in  the  Agnistoma  47  hymns  were  utilized  in  their 
entirety.  Among  these  are  for  instance  RV.  1,  2 and  3 which  constitute  the 
second  recitation  in  the  morning-service  {th&  fraugcbicbstraY^,  and  10,  30  recited 
when  one  goes  for  the  water  that  is  required  for  the  ceremonies.  The  ritualists 
did  not  always  make  the  same  choice^®.  Whereas,  for  instance,  1,  1,  addressed 
to  Agni,  the  divine  priest  who  is  to  invite  the  gods  and  to  direct  the  sacrificial 
activities,  and  1,  74,  praising  the  same  god,  form  part  of  the  morning  Htany 
of  both  Aitare3dns  and  Kausitakms,  1,  75  praising  Agni  and  1,  112  addressing 
the  Aivins  were  adopted  by  the  former  only,  1,  34  and  116  invoking  the  Alvins, 
1,  48  and  49  addressing  LFsas  and  1,  150  directed  to  Agni  by  the  latter.  In 
addition  to  these  far  over  300  isolated  stanzas,  triplets  or  groups  of  stanzas 
came  to  be  utilized  at  different  stages  of  the  ritual  procedure.  However,  the 
great  recitations  of  portions  of  the  Rgveda  take  place  on  the  day  on  which 
the  soma  is  pressed  out.  The  recitations  of  complete  hymns — twelve  in  number 
in  the  agnistoma — are  a striking  deviation  from  the  usual  liturgical  practice 
which  is  characterized  by  the  use  of  isolated  mantras  belonging  or  adapted  to 
the  several  ritual  acts.  Because  of  their  special  importance  they  were  in  the 
hrahmanas  made  a subject  for  symbolical  explanation  and  ritualistic  discussion. 
Among  the  texts  prescribed  in  domestic  rites^^  are  e.g.  6,  53  and  54,  directed 
to  Pusan,  the  god  of  the  paths  who  helps  to  recover  lost  objects.  These  texts 
are  useful  in  case  one  is  going  out  on  business  or  wishes  to  find  something 
lost. 

The  ritual  application  of  stanzas  (viniyoga)  deriving  from  the  Rgveda- 
Samhita  is  in  many  cases  not  in  harmony  with  their  contents^®.  The  acts  may 
even  run  counter  to  the  sense  of  the  mantras.  For  instance,  the  motivation 
given  of  the  use  of  a stanza  addressed  to  the  Waters  in  the  morning  litany 
does  not  impress  us  as  historically  correct.  Not  infrequently,  however,  a stanza 
quoted  in  a ritual  handbook  does  not  contain  more  than  one  name  or  word 

Cf.  also  3,  21  (Bebgaignb,  at  JA  1889  (8-13),  p.  22);  4,  6,  11;  5,  7,  1;  10,  88,  7. 

The  quotations  are  not  equally  distributed  through  the  books  of  the  B>gveda. 

See  also  Renou,  Recherches,  p.  169. 

« Geldnee,  BF.  I,  p.  2;  Caland  and  Henby,  o.c.,  p.  239;  Gonda,  Dual  deities, 

p.  209. 

Cf.  Cajqand  and  Henby,  o.c.,  p.  505. 

IsvG.  3,  7,  9f.;  see  7;  10;  3,  6,  4ff.  etc. 

Brhaddevata  5,  95  (and  see  94 ; the  appHcation  is  the  more  important) ; Renou, 
Recherches,  p.  177. 

AiB.  2,  16,  1;  RV.  10,  30,  12. 


Poetry,  poet,  poem 


87 


which  can  be  regarded  as  suitable  for  the  occasion.  There  is  no  evidence  that 
once  all  mantras  did  make  appropriate  words  of  consecration^^.  We  cannot 
enter  here  into  a discussion  of  more  or  less  original  or  secondary  uses  of  the 
same  mantras  in  different  ritual  contexts.  One  instance  may  suffice : since  RV. 
10,  57  was  clearly  intended  to  bring  back  the  soul  of  someone  who  has  died, 
this  suhta  goes  better  with  a rite  in  honour  of  the  deceased  than  with  a ceremony 
in  connection  with  a Journey^®.  On  the  other  hand,  verses  dedicated  to  a deity 
whose  cult  had  in  later  times  become  less  popular  may  be  supposed  to  have 
belonged  to  a h3nDan  which  has  not  been  included  in  the  Rgveda^®. 

As  already  intimated,  many  parts  of  the  Rgveda  were  not  used  in  ritual 
practice^®.  Some  places®^  in  the  hymns  themselves  might  possibly  supply 
argument  for  the  supposition  that  a poet,  being  dissatisfied  with  his  work,  did 
not  consider  it  good  enough  for  ritual  purposes,  but  words  such  as  “How  can 
an  act  of  worship  be  successful?’’  may  also,  and  more  probably,  voice  the 
author’s  modesty.  The  comparatively  infrequent  occurrence  of  soma  hymns 
belonging  to  manMa  IX  in  the  soma  rites  finds  its  explanation  in  the  fact  that 
these  rites  are  not  to  worship  god  Soma.  The  texts  were  to  promote  and 
consecrate  the  production  of  the  juice.  Many  hymns,  for  instance  a considerable 
part  of  those  contained  in  the  second  half  of  mandala  X,  were  too  divergent 
or  specialized  in  contents  to  be  ritually  utilizable. 

In  reading  the  allusions  to  the  contemporaneous  ritual  in  the  Rgveda  one 
should,  moreover,  be  aware  of  its  chiefly  eulogistic  nature:  these  hymns  are 
widely  different  from  ritual  handbooks  and  allude  to  the  ceremonies  almost 
exclusively  in  their  mythical  and  laudatory  framework.  How  far  those  h3rmns 
which  are  not  employed  in  the  ritual  were  intended  to  accompany  it  at  a 
distance,  or  were  in  some  way  or  other  associated  with  it,  is  dificult  to  decide : 
that  many  of  them,  though  addressed  to  definite  gods,  were  purely  literary 
without  any  ‘application’ is  improbable:  like  innumerable  hymns  made  in 
the  post-Vedic  period  they  Tvere  no  doubt  highly  valued  by  any  adorer  and 
worshipper  of  the  gods^®.  They  may  have  been  used  on  various  occasions  of 

As  was  Ludwig’s  opioion:  RV.  HI,  p.  71. 

lsv§.  2,  19,  36;  5,  4. 

A.  IlmLEBBAKDT,  in  GGA  1889,  p.  407  (on  Aryaman  andTS.  2,  3,  14  t and  u). 

E.g.  1,  151  and  153  (Mitra-Varuna) ; 171  (Maruts  and  Indra);  10,  168  (Yata, 
Wind);  171  (Indra);  182  (B|-haspati) ; 6,  72  (Indra-Soma).  See  also  Rexou,  Recher- 
ches,  p.  164. 

Cf.  1,  120,  1 ; 7,  29,  3.  Potdab,  Sacrifice,  p.  20  goes  too  far.  IRV.  10,  88,  8 stating 
that  the  gods  created,  in  this  order,  the  recitation  of  texts,  the  (ritual)  fire,  and  the 
oblation,  cannot  (with  Potdab,  o.c.,  p.  37)  be  taken  to  point  to  a period  in  which 
the  texts  existed  alone. 

Thus  L.  Rekou,  at  JA  243  (1955),  p.  420.  Wintebnitz,  H.  I L.  I,  p.  93  un- 
warrantably distinguishes  ‘hyrnns  valued  as  works  of  poetic  art  from  sacrificial 
songs  put  together  in  a workmanlike  fashion.” 

For  hymnic  poetry  in  general  see  F.  Heileb,  Erscheinungsformen  und  Wesen 
der  Rehgion,  Stuttgart  1961,  p.  322;  for  a similar  difference  of  opinion  in  connection 
with  Egyptian  hymns:  S.  Mobexz,  Agyptische  Religion,  Stuttgart  i960,  p.  96. 


88 


J.  Gonda  • Vedic  Literatiire 


wMcb.  we  have  no  cognizance.  Tradition  indeed  distinguishes  between  Vedic 
and  (otherwise)  customary  rites®^  and  we  would  not  be  far  wrong  in  assuming 
that  in  performing  these  ceremonies  texts,  recited  or  sung,  were  a mighty 
means  of  expressing  emotions. 

Since  the  stanzas  of  many  Rgvedic  h3rmns  are  only  loosely  connected  and — 
at  least  in  our  eyes — ^more  or  less  arbitrarily  combined  it  is  not  surprising  to 
see  that  the  later  Vedic  texts  often  present  texts  taken  from  the  oldest  corpus 
in  an  order  of  stanzas  and  hym.ns  which  is  different  from  the  order  in  the  extant 
Egveda-Samhita.  These  differences  are  not  only  explicable  from  the  require- 
ments of  the  ritual  which  they  often  serve  very  well,  in  many  cases  they  also 
represent  a more  natural  and  satisfactory  compilation  of  the  mantrcbs.  These 
facts  supplied  argument  for  the  h37pothesis®^  that  there  has  existed  a Rgveda 
for  ritual  use  in  a sacrificial  system  of  which  we  have  no  exact  knowledge,  a 
Rgveda  which  was  superseded  by  the  text  preserved  down  the  centuries. 
Anyhow  the  formulas  recited  at  the  morning  oblations  before  the  principal 
hymn  ( puroriic),  the  inserted  formularies  (nivid)^^  and  the  summons  addressed 
to  priests  to  commence  their  parts  of  the  ceremony  ( 'praisa ) collected  in  chapter 
V of  the  Khilas  must  belong  to  the  earlier  period  of  the  development  of  the 
Rgvedic  corpus.  Being  closely  connected  with  the  ritual  they  were,  parallel 
with  the  Rgveda  proper,  handed  down  together  with  the  sacrificial  technique®^. 

It  has  often,  but  incorrectly,  been  taken  for  granted  that  the  chronological 
priority  of  the  Rgveda  implies  that  the  subsequent  elaborate  specialization  of 
the  ritual  and  its  concomitant  literature  derived  or  developed,  directly  or 
completely,  from  that  collection.  However,  the  Rgveda,  in  a way,  occupies  an 
anomalous  position:  though  chronologically  older  and  the  source  of  most  of 
the  formulas  contamed  in  the  Yajurveda,  it  was  peripherical  to  what  became 
the  main  tradition  of  ritualism  into  which  it  was  intercalated  only  at  a later 
date^®.  In  some  cases  a comparison  between  contents  and  structure  of  one  or 
more  passages  of  the  Samhita  on  one  hand  and  of  their  occurrence  in  the  ritual 
texts  on  the  other  affords  evidence  for  the  assumption  that  hymns  or  groups  of 
stanzas  preserved  in  the  ritual  go  back  to  a period  anterior  to  the  redaction  of 
the  Samhita  and  that  such  hymns  were,  in  another  order  and  even  in  different 
places,  incorporated  in  the  latter.  The  stanzas  accompanying  the  ritual  con- 
nected with  the  sacrificial  post  (yupa)  may  furnish  an  example®®.  In  some 
hfdhwMTMS  they  constitute  a coherent  whole  in  a logical  order,  but  in  the 
Samhita  they  appear  not  only  distributed  over  two  hymns,  but  also  in  different 


lauhya:  “usual  in  the  world”  (Brhaddevata  1, 4) ; cf.  Renoij,  at  JAOS  69,  p.  15. 
1950^*  ^ Siddha-Bharati,  Volume  Siddheswar  Varma,  I,  Eoshiarpur 

See  p.  109  f. 

ScHEFTELowiTZ,  Apokryphen,  p.  8. 

Rexoh,  Ecoles,  p.  210. 

« AiB.  2,  2;  MS.  4,  18,  1 etc. 


Poetr\%  poet,  poem 


89 


order  and  amplified  ivitb.  other  matter  or  included  in  another  context®®.  On 
the  other  hand,  it  has  also  been  supposed  that  the  so-called  djijmukta  (4,  58), 
extolliag  the  sacrificial  butter  in  its  various  manifestations,  was  not  composed 
for  the  purpose  mentioned  in  the  sutra^^  but  for  an  uncomplicated  soma  and 
fire  service®^.  RV.  10,  11  may  have  belonged  to  a matutinal  soma  service. 

The  most  interesting  text  10,  98,  no  doubt  a rain  charm®®,  representing  itself 
as  composed  for  the  benefit  of  a certain  Aulana  who  is  remembered  in  some 
more  comprehensive  final  prayers®^,  begins  (st.  1-4)  with  a dialogue  in  which 
Devapi,  after  imploring  god  Brhaspati  to  see  that  rain  will  come,  receives  from 
the  latter  that  eloquence  which  will  enable  him  to  officiate  as  a priest  in  a 
sacrifice  for  rain.  Thereupon  Devapi  becomes  a hotar  and  the  purohita  of 
Santanu  and  succeeds  in  producing  a shower  of  rain®®.  The  sacrifice  meant  in 
this  text — ^the  fire  is  kindled  in  st.  8 and  Agni  praised  with  the  following  stan- 
zas— ^must  have  been  one  of  those  uncomplicated  rites  performed  by  the 
domestic  priest  without  assistance  on  behalf  of  Ms  patron®®. 

The  suktas  10,  94,  76  and  175,  addressed  to  the  stones  used  for  pressing  out 
the  soma  are  in  the  midday  service  of  the  soma  ritual  as  described  in  the 
sutras^'^  recited  by  a special  functionary.  These  suktas  are  no  doubt  appropriate 
to  the  occasion — ^the  potent  stones  are  stimulated  into  a display  of  useful 
energy — and  there  is  no  good  reason  for  doubting  that  they  were  composed 
for  practical  use.  However,  before,  between  or  after  these  texts  the  reciter 
inserts  hymns  directed  to  Soma  Pavamana  (Soma  in  process  of  clarification) 
as  many  as  he  can,  in  order  to  fill  up  time®®  and  protect  the  hearers®®.  These 
obviously  are  more  loosely  associated  with  the  ritual  act. 

In  contradistinction  to  the  few  isolated  soma  hymns  in  other  books  of  the 
Rgveda^®  which  emphasize  the  effect  of  the  intoxicating  draught  upon  those 
who  drink  it  the  soma  h3mns  of  mandola  IX  deal  with  its  ritual  preparation. 
They  are  already  at  9,  67,  31  f.  regarded  as  a special  class  of  hymns,  '‘the 
essence  collected  by  the  rsis''  There  is  however  no  question  of  any  detailed, 
systematic  and  chronological  accompaniment  or  description  of  the  ritual  acts 
as  supplied  in  the  handbooks,  for  which  at  a later  date  suitable  mantras  were 


RV.  3,  8,  1;  3;  2;  1,  36,  13;  14;  3,  8,  5;  4.  In  RV.  3,  8 there  follow  6;  there  are 
18  other  stanzas  not  used  in  the  ritual. 

AsvS.  8,  6,  6. 

GEumsTER,  RV.  I,  p.  488;  and  at  ZDMG  71,  p.  340. 

See  p.  143.  See  st.  1;  3;  5;  6;  7;  8;  10;  12. 

See  st.  10-12,  rain,  heaven,  health  etc. 

For  the  story  see  Brhaddevata  7,  155 ff.;  Geudner,  RV.  Ill,  p.  308. 

Cf.  KS.  10,  3:  127,  ioff.;  W.  CAiiA]5n>,AltindischeZauberei,  Amsterdam  Acad. 
1908,  p.  13,  n.  18. 

Calakd  and  Henry,  o.c.,  p.  269. 

®8  See  also  Renou,  Recherches,  p.  176.  Cf.  e.g,  SS.  7,  15  and  for  texts  needed  to 
fill  up  pauses  in  the  sacrifice  M.  Wintebnitz,  in  WZKIM  22,  p.  132. 

10,  94  was  supposed  to  destroy  eyesight. 

RV.  1,  91;  8,  48;  79;  10,  25  and  1,  187;  8,  72;  10,  144. 


90 


J.  Gonda  • Yedic  Literature 


taken  from  tins  masala.  The  poets  speak  in  a general  way  of  the  clarification 
and  mixing  of  the  scmm,  of  the  sounds  accompanying  these  operations  and 
other  particulars  and  in  doing  so  they  create  a sphere  that  is  favourable  to 
their  main  purpose,  viz.  the  laudation  of  the  soma  during  the  process  of  its 
clarification,  that  is,  the  furtherance  of  this  process^^:  “Our  words  shall  rear 
Mm  like  cows  that  have  calves”  (9,  61, 14).  Siuce  however  Soma  is  also  the  vital 
element  in  nature,  identical  with  rain,  the  juice  in  the  plants,  the  essence  of 
all  Mfe-bearing  moisture,  of  drink  and  food,  the  draught  of  life  and  of  the 
continuance  of  life^^^  the  importance  of  this  process — ^wMch  ritually  reproduces 
and  so  furthers  the  circular  course  of  the  stream  of  life  in  the  universe — 
transcends  the  immediate  ritual  needs.  Hence  also  the  phraseology:  not  only  is 
the  preparation  described  as  a magnificent  religious  festival,  the  images  borrow- 
ed from  natural  phenomena  such  as  raining  and  thunder,  from  the  process  of 
milking,  from  semen,  bull  and  cow,  are  more  than  suggestive^^. 

In  tMs  connection  the  three  stanzas  of  RV.  10,  179  are  of  special  interest. 
The  ritual  authorities  prescribe  the  use  of  this  suJcta  in  connection  with  the 
so-called  dadhigharma  libation’^,  wMch  is  an  episode  of  the  midday-service  of 
a soma  sacrifice.  Stanza  1 calls  upon  the  officiants  to  prepare  the  oblations, 
stanza  2 is  the  invitatory  mantra  addressed  to  the  gods  ('puronuvdkyd ),  stanza 
3 the  consecratory  mantra  (ydjyd).  These  two  stanzas  are  at  the  same  time 
the  priests’  answer  to  stanza  1.  In  tMs  case  the  use  in  the  ‘classical’  Vedic 
ritual  is  coincident  with  the  poet’s  intention. 

Among  those  suUas  wMch  seem  to  have  been  composed  for  ritual  purposes  are 
no  doubt  the  funeral  hymns  10,  14-1  S’®,  wMch  in  their  entirety — but  not 
without  obvious  exceptions^ — ^seem  to  present  a ritualistic  continuity,  almost 
every  sulcta  and  group  of  stanzas  taking  up  the  thread  of  events  where  the 
preceding  section  dropped  it:  adoration  of  Yama,  (the  first  of  the  deceased 
and  their  ruler);  leave-taking  of  the  person  who  died;  rituals  in  honour  of  the 
Fathers;  cremation  rites;  appeasement  (purification)  and  extinction  of  the 
fire  and  a neutralization  of  the  contagion  of  death ; the  collection  of  the  bones 
of  the  deceased;  mantras  preluding  the  kdddka  rites  of  the  later  period  wMch 
were  primarily  to  assure  a place  in  the  realm  of  the  Fathers  and  the  security  of 
the  survivors.  The  post-Rgvedic  ritual  does  not  however  use  more  than  some 
single  stanzas  and  growps  of  stanzas  of  these  hymns.  It  hardly  needs  comment 
that  the  presence  in  these  hymns  of  passages  of  great  poetic  beauty  and  of 
some  expatiations  in  wMch  the  author(s)  voice(s)  noble  sentiments,  is  not 
incompatible  with  their  presumably  ritual  purpose. 


See  Goxda,  R.  1. 1,  p.  62;  Renou,  E.  V.  P. 
hjTBiis  of  the  Rgveda,  3 vol.,  Baroda  1957-1962 
See  e.g.  9,  74,  4;  107,  14. 


IX,  p.  8;  S.  S.  Bhawb,  The  Soma- 
;M.PATEL,inBhVl(1940),  p.  185. 


See  e.g.  9,  34,  3;  41,  3;  65,  5;  74,  1;  84,  3;  86,  28;  89,  3 
Cajdand  and  Henby,  o.c.,  p.  283;  cf.  Asv§.  5,  13  4f 

P-  WimNiTk  H.  I.  L.  I.  p.  96;  Eenou, 

J±.  b,,  p.  o9;  239;  Poesie  religieuse,  p.  74.  See  also  p.  139. 


Poetry,  poet,  poem 


91 


Stanzas  of  10,  85,  tlie  nuptial  hymn,  traditionally  ascribed  to  the  archetypal 
bride^®,  Surya  the  daughter  of  Savitar  (the  Sun),  are,  either  directly  or  through 
a ritual  collection  of  Tmntras,  used  in  the  wedding  ceremonies,  to  which  they 
are  most  appropriate’^ : “Be  not  of  evil  eye,  nor  bringing  death  to  y^our  husband, 
(but)  bring  luck  to  the  cattle  (and)  be  kindly  disposed  and  full  of  splendour ; 
give  bhth  to  heroic  sons,  love  the  gods,  be  friendly,  bring  luck  to  (our)  men 
and  animals”  (st.  44). 

RV.  10,  97’®  may  be  quoted  in  answer  to  the  question  as  to  how  an  atharvanic 
or  otherwise  unespected  sukta  could  have  gained  access  to  the  coi’pus.  This 
'praise  of  medicinal  plants’  applicable  to  the  cure  of  a serious  iUness’®  is  quoted 
in  SB.  7,  2,  4,  26,  where  in  a ritual  context  it  is  related  that  the  gods,  being 
about  to  consecrate  the  ritual  fire-place,  healed  Agni  by  means  of  medicine 
and  fifteen  stanzas — beginning  with  “The  herbs  first  grown  . . — accompanied 

the  same  number  of  libations  and  a fifteenfold  sowing.  It  may  be  supposed  that 
this  particular  ritual  use  of  the  text  led  to  its  insertion  into  maniula  X®®.  There 
is  even  room  for  the  observation  that  some  hymns — ^for  instance  those  addressed 
to  the  Visve  Devas®’ — ^give  evidence  of  ritualistic  symbolism  and  speculation. 
Some  philosophical  speculations  are  quite  intelligibly  couched  in  terms  belong- 
ing to  sacrificial  performances®^  or,  rather,  expounded  by  means  of  ritual 
concepts.  Some  passages®®  can  be  interpreted  as  pointing  to  a ‘mental  sacrifi.ce, 
so  well  known  from  later  works. 


76  See  also  S.  Kkamrisch,  in  JAOS  81,  p.  116.  , _ rm.  • 

77  For  bibliographical  references:  M.  J.  Dbesden,  Manavagrhyasiitra,  Tnesis 

Utrecht  1941,  p.  24. 

76  See  p.  168. 

7»  Cf.  Brhaddevata  7,  154. 

66  See  Gonda,  Secular  hymns,  p.  341. 

Renotj,  E.  V.  P.  IV,  p.  7.  Cf.  also  9,  10,  8;  110;  10-. 

88  E.g.  10,  81,  2;  10,  90;  see  also  130;  K.  R.  Potdae,  m Bh’V  12,  p.  163. 

88  Cf.  8,  102,  16;  19. 


Ghaptee  in 


CONTENTS  OF  THE  RGVEDA 


1.  Introduction 

In  tMs  chapter  it  will  be  our  endeavonr  to  stndy  the  contents  of  the  Rgveda, 
that  is  to  say,  the  subjects  dealt  with  in  its  component  parts  and  the  'genres" 
or  varieties  of  the  hymns  as  far  as  these  can  be  determmed  by  criteria  derived 
jfrom  their  contents.  Although  the  whole  of  the  Rgveda  consists  of  what  may 
for  convenience  be  called  'religious  hymns’^,  some  of  them  were  already  in  the 
times  of  the  Sarvanukramani  given  special  names  such  as  'eulogy"  (praise, 
stuti),  'account  of  the  (universe)  coming  into  existence’  (bMvavrttam),  'advanced 
or  esoteric  doctrine,  to  be  communicated  by  one  single  (teacher)  to  one  single 
person  who  wants  to  be  instructed’  ( upanisad)^.  There  seems  to  be  no  objection 
to  extending  this  classification  and  to  surveying  a considerable  number  of 
hymns  or  passages  under  separate  headings,  paying  attention  to  their  function 
and  main  characteristics.  In  doing  so  we  are  well  aware  of  the  ‘mixed’  character, 
the  lack  of  homogeneity  of  the  majority  of  the  suklas,  and  of  the  similarity  of 
many  passages  and  the  almost  obligatory  recurrence  of  topics  and  motives 
which  should  properly  find  their  place  under  other  headings. 

Vedic  thought,  the  view  of  life  and  the  world  of  the  poets  and  their  audiences, 
may  briefly  be  defined  as  based  on  the  belief  in  an  inextricable  co-ordination 
of  what  we  would  call  nature,  human  society,  ritual  and  the  sphere  of  myth 
and  the  divine;  on  the  belief  also  that  these  spheres  influence  each  other 
continuously  and  that  men  have,  by  means  of  the  ritual,  to  play  an  obligatory 
part  in  the  maintenance  of  universal  order  and  the  furtherance  of  their  common 
interests. 

In  the  Rgvedic  bytnns^  reality,  mundane  or  supramundane,  is  almost 
exclusively  \n.ewed  through  the  eyes  of  the  male,  intellectual  and  'educated’ 
aristocratic  interest.  Their  personneP  consists  first  and  foremost  of  the  more 
or  less  prominent  higher  and  lower  and  in  many  cases  very  incompletely 


1 Some  authors  (among  whom  MACDONEin,  V.  R.,  p.  XXV  and  P-  L.  Bhabgava, 
India  in  the  Vedic  age,  Ammabad-Lucknow  ^971,  p.  340)  erroneo^ly  assumed 
that  hymns  such  as  10,  34  (the  lament  of  the  gambler),  10,  8o  (weddmg  hymn), 
10,  173  (consecration  of  a king)  are  secular.  See  GoinU)A,  Secular  hymns. 

® SadguruMsya,  on  RV.  1,  50. 

3 See  Macdonell  and  Keith,  V.  I.;  Keith,  R.  Ph.  Y.  IT.,  p-  58. 


94 


J.  Gonda  • Vedie  Literature 


personified  gods*,  then  also  of  demons,  demoniac  or  dangerous  beings,  of 
heroes,  legendary  or  contemporaneous  kings  or  noble  patrons  of  the  poets,  of 
the  poets  themselves  and  their  mythical  or  legendary  ancestors,  priestly 
figures,  the  blessed  deceased,  some  animals®;  occasionally  also  of  what  we  would 
consider  a concept  or  entity  (e.g.  &addha  ‘Faith’  in  10,  151)  represented  as  a 
divine  being®.  In  some  cases  there  are  no  clear  lines  of  demarcation  between 
these  categories.  Female  figures  are  in  the  minority^  Some  deities  are  believed 
to  appear  in  groups.  A peculiar  feature  is  the  celebration  in  pairs  of  some  of  the 
greater  gods,  their  names  forming  dual  compounds®.  The  scenes  of  the  myf  hical 
events  are  left  undefined  or  vaguely  laid  in  terrestrial  environments  or  in 
supermundane  and  sometimes  widely  remote  regions ; very  often  somewhere  in 
the  universe,  that  is — since  some  of  the  main  gods  are  thought  to  function 
mainly  in  the  atmosphere — ^in  some  indefinite  regions  between  heaven  and 
earth.  Almost  everything  is,  in  this  ‘mythical  sphere,’  immemorial  and  present 
at  the  same  time,  and  the  divine,  supermundane,  natural,  mundane,  mythical 
ritual  and  social  ‘realities’  are,  in  our  eyes,  incessantly  intermingled.  The  gods — 
not  in  the  fiffst  place  conspicuous  by  ‘holiness’  or  morality — exist  mainly  in 
their  functions  and  make®  their  influence  felt  in  those  special  events  in  which 
they  are  interested  or  in  the  particular  provinces  of  nature,  moral  standards,  or 
social  relations  over  which  they  preside.  That  is  why  in  the  hymns  their  activity 
is  more  emphasized  than  their  persons,  abodes  or  manner  of  life.  It  was  not  the 
task  of  the  poets  systematically  to  describe  their  characters  and  qualities^® — 
which  were  of  minor  religious  interest — but  rather  to  elucidate  their  power, 
functions  and  beneficial  activity.  This  does  not  alter  the  fact  that  we  do  dis- 
tinguish characters,  made  up,  it  is  true,  of  a few  essential  qualities,  clearly 
recognizable  in  the  prayers,  in  the  favours  asked  from  the  gods — ^for  instance, 
Varuna  is  implored  to  forgive  and  release  from  sin,  never  to  give,  Rudra  is 

* The  translation  of  deva  by  ‘god’  is  somewhat  misleading,  because  for  instance 
the  ‘deity’  of  1,  187,  in  praise  of  food,  is  food;  of  7,  103  the  frogs. 

® J.  Gonda,  Mensch  und  Tier  im  alten  Indien,  Studium  Generale  20  (1967), 
p.  105. 

* Cf.  e.g.  also  RV.  1,  24,  1;  10,  83  and  84  directed  to  Manyu  ‘Psychical  tension 
inducing  furj^  etc.’:  see  Ch.  MAiAnouD,  in  Melanges  Renou,  p.  493, 

^ Untenable  views  of  0.  H.  de  Wijesbkeba,  in  Pres.  Vol.  C.  Kunhan  Raja, 
Madras  1946,  p.  428. 

® Gonda,  Dual  deities;  Renotj,  E.  V.  P.  VII,  p.  1. 

® As  ‘personifications’  of  the  divine  forces  behind  the  phenomena,  cf.  V.  Ra- 
CHAVAN,  The  Indian  heritage.  Bangalore  ®1958,  Index.  For  juxtaposition  of  a ‘god’ 
and  his  ‘substratum’:  5,  51,  9.  Less  felicitously,  Macdonell,  H.  S.  L.,  p.  68.  See 
also  Lommel,  Gedichte,  p.  21  and  Renou,  Poesie  religieuse,  p.  13.  Especially  in 
the  hymns  directed  to  Agni — ‘the  god  to  be  honoured  with  fuel’  (8,  44,  1) — the 
poets  hardly  distinguish  between  the  god  Fire  and  fire. 

The  main  characteristic  features  of  the  gods  are  far  from  standing  out  in 
every  passage  devoted  to  them  or  from  being  equally  delineated  in  every  hymn. 
Moreover,  a god  may  play  the  part  of  a colleague  (see  e.g.  1,  156,  4).  ‘Henothe'istic’ 
tendencies  or  addresses  to  anonymous  gods  are  not  lacking  (1,  24,  1 ; 101,  3:  2,  38, 
9;  6,  SO,  4). 


Contents  of  the  Rgveda 


95 


asked  to  save  and  spare  men  and  their  cattle,  never  to  come^^ — comhined  with 
others  which  are  proper  to  divinity  in  general.  Nor  was  it  the  poets’  intention  to 
provide  ns  with  exact  information  about  the  regions  or  localities  in  which  they 
lived  themselves^^.  Very  often  a vague  ‘here’  (referring  to  the  sacrificial  place), 
‘in  (onr)  house,’  in  (our)  village,’  or  ‘in  the  forest’^®  was  ail  they  needed.  Even 
the  brief  allusions  to  wars  and  predatory  expeditions  are  hardly  pictured  in 
their  natural  setting^^,  and  the  many  references  to  cattle  and  agriculture  are 
confined  to  similes,  set  or  proverbial  phrases  and,  above  all,  prayers^®.  Portraits 
or  characterizations  of  persons  are  lacking  and  the  occasional  use  of  the  same 
name  for  members  of  a family  and  their  ancestor  or  for  the  chief  and  his  people^® 
reflect  the  communal  character  of  ancient  Indian  society. 

The  relations  between  men  and  the  divine  powers  can  best  be  characterized 
as  one  of  mutual  dependence:  the  former  have  to  strengthen  the  gods  with 
praise  and  oblations  lest  their  potency  diminishes:  “The  oblations  are  ready, 
extend  your  protection  with  remedies  that  are  far  and  near”  (8,  9,  141); 
“Favour  the  one  who  praises  thee;  drink  the  soma”  (8,  36,  2)^^  That  man  will 
be  happy  and  fortunate  who  satisfies  the  gods^®.  Men  and  gods  are  friends^®,  but 
“one  does  not  win  the  friendship  of  the  gods  without  effort”  (4,  3, 11) ; they  are 
guests  expected  to  bring  goods  and  blessings^®.  Especially  with  Agni,  the  divine 
priest  who  conveys  the  oblations  to  the  gods,  the  family  friend  and  lord  of  the 
clan,  the  sacrificers  are  on  an  intimate  footing®!.  The  unquestioned  faith  in  the 
gods  and  in  the  efficacy  of  the  solemn  words,  the  consciousness  of  the  divine 
presence  and  of  the  power  of  the  ritual  technique  go  a great  way  towards  under- 
standing the  directness  of  speech  and  the  frankness  and  exactitude  with  which 
wishes,  prayers  and  mutual  obligations  are  so  often  stated  and  formulated®®. 


!!  T.  Ya.  Elizakeistkova,  in  Melanges  Renou,  p.  255.  Some  of  the  authoress* 
interpretations  are  disputable.  In  modem  eyes  Indra’s  actions  may  seem  destructive 
(p.  263),  Vedic  man  certainly  was  not  of  that  opinion. 

!®  For  names  of  rivers  (7,  18,  9;  19;  8,  26,  18;  10,  75,  5 etc.)  etc-  see  p,  23  f. 

See  e.g.  RY.  1,  24,  11;  28,  5;  35,  1;  36,  2;  38,  15;  60,  4;  114,  1;  174,  3;  2,  1,  2; 
7f.;  7,  1,  19. 

Cf.  9,  47,  5;  10,  50,  2;  61,  23;  84,  7;  131,  3;  147,  2. 

Cf.  e.g.  1,  23,  15;  117,  21;  2,  14,  11;  4,  57;  5,  83,  8;  6,  54,  5ff.;  7,  77,  4;  8,  78, 
10;  10,  34,  13;  101,  4. 

E.g.  Atri,  Druhjni. 

See  also  4,  2,  7;  22,  1;  5,  3,  5;  6,  24,  7;  7,  21,  1;  8,  7,  19;  8,  1;  17;  32,  16;  33, 
2f. ; 34,  5f.  etc. 

See  e.g.  4,  4,  7;  8,  27,  16. 

See  e.g.  2,  29,  3f.;  4,  10,  8;  8,  2,  39;  8,  4;  45,  37;  72,  2;  cf.  Oldenbebg,  Lit., 
p.  32. 

20  See  e.g.  7,  70,  4;  81,  5;  8,  5,  19;  20;  31;  44,  1;  9,  21,  and  compare  places  such 
as  8,  2,  13;  18. 

See  e.g.  1,  26;  3,  25;  35,  5;  4,  1,  3;  5,  1,  8f. 

®®  Cf.  e.g.  1,  102,  10;  4,  23,  5f.;  5,  32,  12;  45,  11;  7,  32,  18;  8,  14,  If.;  40,  9;  61, 
7ff.;  62,  4. 


96 


J.  G-onda  • Vedic  Literature 


Snrreyiag  the  hymns  addressed  to  the  greater  deities^^  we  are,  as  might  a 
priori  he  expected,  struck  by  differences  in  themes,  motives,  phraseology  etc. 
wMch  are  closely  connected  with  the  characters  of  the  deities  and  the  main 
features  of  the  m3r6hological  and  speculative  ideas  to  which  they  gave  rise^^.  In 
the  case  of  no  other  divinity  do  we  find  so  plastic  a figure  and  so  pronounced  a 
tendency  to  anthropomorphism  as  in  that  of  Indra,  the  most  popular  god, 
whose  huge  size,  impetuosity,  generosity,  exploits,  readiness  to  fight unerring 
weapons  and  mighty  horses  the  poets  are  never  weary  of  describings^.  In  one 
and  the  same  h3rmn“^  they  may  picture  him  as  great,  terrible,  mighty,  fond  of 
soTm,  heroic,  gracious,  destructive,  generous,  indomitable  and  a source  of 
afflictions  as  well  as  of  blessings^s.  Neither  his  birth  and  infancy^^^  nor  his 
various  metamorphoses  fail  to  attract  their  attention.  Agni®“,  second  in  im- 
portance to  Indra  only  and  rudimentanly  anthropomorphized,  is  on  the  one 
hand  connected  with  the  sacrificial  aspect  of  fire — ^then  he  may  be  described  as 
flame-haired  and  butter-backed^^  or  be  compared  to  various  animals^^ — , with 
the  light  of  heaven  and  that  in  the  atmosphere,  his  mythology  being  mainly 
concerned  with  his  various  origins,  forms  and  abodes.  His  threefold  birth 
corresponds  to  the  structure  of  the  universe.  He  is  on  the  other  hand  more 
closely  connected  with  human  life  than  other  gods,  because  he  lives  among 
men®^.  Consuming,  as  fire,  the  oblations  and  conveying  them,  as  priest,  to  the 
gods®^,  he  is  also  the  deity  in  whom  the  divine  and  human  spheres  most  nearly 
coalesce.  This  led  the  poets  to  assume  various  interconnections  between  the 
human  world  and  superhuman  reality^s.  His  are  moreover  many  spiritual 


There  are  no  grounds  for  holding  that  each  god  had  his  exclusive  following. 
The  poets,  priests  and  reciters  address  their  worship  to  single  deities  or  groups  of 
deities,  usuaUy  mentioning  also  other  gods  more  or  less  closely  associated  with 
these.  In  the  pantheon  there  is  no  hierarchy  in  the  proper  sense  of  the  term. 

2^  For  the  gods  in  general  see  Gonda,  R.  1. 1,  p.  48;  R.  C.  Zaehner,  Hinduism, 
London  1962,  p.  24;  for  surveys  of  their  main  characteristics  also  the  introductory 
notes  m A.  A.  Macdoneix,  A Vedic  reader  for  students,  London  1917  etc.;  for 
particulars,  Geldneb,  RV.  IV  (Register  von  J.  Nobel). 

23  H.  Lommel,  Der  arische  Kriegsgott,  Frankfurt  1939. 

2«  E.  D.  Pekby,  at  JAGS  11,  p.  136;  193  and  PAOS  1880  (JAOS  11),  p XLVII* 

E.  W.  Hopkins,  in  PAOS  1895  (JAOS  16),  p.  CCXXXVI.  ^ P- 

E.g.  5,V.  1,  55;  see  also  Renou,  Poesie  religieuse,  p.  53. 

47**1?  ^ 

” W Nobman  Bboivn,  in  JAOS  62,  p.  93  and  Comm.  Vol.  Siddheshwar  Varma, 

X,  p.  lol. 

JOTP^i  1 n M?'  aspects  of  the  Agni-mythology  in  the  Veda, 

i ^ symbolism:  V.  S.  Ageawala,  Fire  in 

tile  Rgveda,  EW  11  (1960),  p.  28. 

E.g.  1,  45,  6;  127,  2;  3,  14,  1;  cf.  also  4,  1,  8 etc. 


Contents  of  the  Rgveda 


97 


qualities  such  as  wisdon,  visioiij  omniscience®®.  Generally  speaking  Ms  hymns, 
less  vigorous  than  those  addressed  to  Indra,  are  characterized  by  a certain 
simple  warm-heartedness®^ 

In  spite  of  the  bewildering  variety  of  interests  and  activity  of  some  of  the 
greater  gods,  the  forms  they  assume  and  the  functions  they  fulfil  will  in  many 
cases  not  seem  incoherent  if  we  keep  their  central  conceptions  clearly  before 
our  mind.  Varuna  is  the  guardian  of  Rta  (Cosmic  Order,  Law,  Truth,  Reality) 
and  as  such  the  representative  of  the  static  aspects  of  kingship,  the  enemy  of 
falsehood,  the  punisher  of  sin,  lord  and  upholder  of  the  vratas  (feed  and  regular 
behaviour,  functions,  observances®®),  the  god  who  holds  heaven  and  earth 
apart  and  made  a path  for  the  sun.  Pusan®®  may  answer  to  the  qualifications 
solar  and  pastoral,  he  may  be  a good  shepherd  and  a psychopompos,  these  are 
neither  exhaustive  nor  characteristic  of  his  nature ; the  main  image  in  wMch 
he  is  invoked  is  that  of  his  path,  he  is  a wanderer,  always  on  the  move^®.  The 
Maruts,  viewed  as  a clan^S  are  represented  as  young  men,  singers  vith  a sense 
of  rhythm,  noise-makers  and  that — ^in  our  eyes — ^in  the  different  spheres  of 
nature,  religion  and  warfare.  The  forces  of  nature  are  their  weapons,  their 
spears  the  thunderbolts,  as  ornaments  they  bear  lightning  or  lustre ; they  are  a 
formidable  hut  splendid  spectacle.  Essentially  however  they  are  the  gods  of 
lightning,  rain,  wind  and  thunder-storm^®. 

There  are  among  the  personages  some  typical  inimical  figures,  viz.  the  snake 
Vrtra,  the  representative  of  the  unformed  world  who  prevents  the  cosmos  from 
coming  into  existence,  the  great  antagonist  of  Indra  who  combats  him  by  force 
of  arms,  and  Pani,  more  often  in  the  pluraP®,  enemies  of  Indra,  Brhaspati*^, 
the  Ahgirases  and  overthrown  by  the  sheer  power  of  words.  The  Panis  are  the 
mythical  prototypes  of  the  reprehensible  and  detestable  wealthy  niggards  who 
do  not  give  offering  to  the  gods  or  daJcsinds  to  the  priests^®. 

Special  mention  must  be  made  of  the  Fathers^®,  the  early  or  first  ancestors. 
They  are  more  or  less  deified,  receive  oblations  and  almost  divine  honours,  are 


E.g.  1,  144,  7;  188,  1;  3,  19,  1;  23,  1;  5,  3,  5;  8,  39,  7f. 

37  E.g.  3,  1,  21;  2,  6;  4,  1;  27,  6;  6,  16,  25. 

33  H.  P.  Schmidt,  Vedisch  vrata  xind  awestisch  urvdta,  Hamburg  1958  (incor- 
rectly: “vow”);  cf.  also  W.  WtiST,  in  ALB  50,  p.  414;  H.  Lefevee,  The  idea  of  sin 
in  the  Rgveda,  8 AIOC,  p.  23. 

3®  S.  *A.  Upadhyaya,  Hymns  to  Pusan,  in  BhV  25  (1965),  p.  38. 

S.  Keamrisch,  in  JAOS  81,  p.  109  (with  a symbolical  explication). 

RV.  1,  39,  5;  7,  56,  5;  8,  12,  29. 

42  Renoij,  E.  V.  P.  X,  p.  1.  See  e.g.  1,  37,  9. 

43  RV.  6,  13,  3;  33,  2;  7,  19,  9 etc. 

44  H.  P.  ScHMXDT,  Brhaspati  und  Indra,  Wiesbaden  1968;  Goxda,  Dual  deities, 
p.  310  ff. 

43  For  particulars  see  Macdohell  and  Ejeith,  V.  I.  I,  p.  471;  see  e.g.  6,  33,  2; 
45,  31;  7,  6,  3;  8,  6,  10;  64,  2. 

48  See  e.g.  1,  106,  3;  6,  52,  4;  7,  35,  12;  10,  14,  2f.;  7;  15;  15,  6;  8;  10;  6,  75,  9 
(praise). 


98 


tT.  Gonda  • Yedic  Literature 


inYoked  for  aid,  but  are  rarely  praised,  rather  presented  as  examples  of  human 
behaviour,  as  prototypes  or  institutors. 

We  must  for  a moment  revert  to  what  is  often,  but  inexactly,  called  per- 
sonification. While,  generally  speaking,  not  even  the  natural  phenomena  devel- 
oped into  completely  personal  or  abstract  gods^’,  there  is  in  the  hymns  no  more 
a fixed  line  of  demarcation  between  person  and  non-person  than  between  our 
concrete  and  abstract  ideas.  The  poets  are  much  inclined  to  interpret  events 
and  occurrences  as  caused  by  persons  or  more  or  less  personal  forces^®,  and  to 
apply  terms  of  consanguinity  to  relations  existing  in  the  cosmic  and  super- 
human spheres  (Dawn  daughter  of  Heavens  etc.).  Agni’s  (fire’s)  flames  are 
described  as  seven  sisters  whom  the  god  exhibits  as  a spectacle  (10,  5, 5).  Indra’s 
faculties  and  potencies  are  represented  as  his  satellites  (1,  52,  4).  A eulogium 
can  like  a bird  go  to  Indra  (6,  22,  5).  Rivers  and  sources  make  their  appearance 
as  women*®.  Samsa  ‘favourable  appreciation’  is  at  7,  35,  2 ‘half-personified’ 
between  the  deities  Bhaga  and  Puramdhi,  whose  names  are  however  also  found 
as  an  adjective  or  a common  noun.  Soma  is  not  only  the  divine  draught  but  also 
a great  god;  not  only  Indra’s  favourite  beverage  but  also,  as  a heroic  figure,  his 
friend  and  helper®*.  As  a male  par  excellence,  bull  or  stallion,  the  same  deity  is 
surrounded  by  females,  mothers,  sisters,  daughters  including  Heaven  and 
Earth  as  well  as  by  the  fingers  of  the  one  who  prepares  the  draught®®. 

Notwithstanding  the  almost  general  preference  of  the  poets  for  an  episodic 
presentation  of  the  myths,  sagas  and  legends  with  which  they  deal  in  their 
hymns,  for  a non-exhaustive  treatment  of  their  subjects;  for  frequent  changes 
in,  and  alternations  of,  the  themes  and  for  interspersing  their  eulogistic  and 
recollective  passages  with  stray  motifs  reminiscent  of  themes  or  cycles  foreign 
to  the  main  subject  broached  in  a passage,  it  is  in  many  cases  possible  to  say 
that  a hymn,  in  substance,  concentrates  on  one  idea  or  grouping  of  ideas. 
Lea-^g  unmentioned  those  numerous  h3?mns  which  mainly  consist  in  praise 
and  characterization’  of  an  individual  god  and  those  likewise  numerous  special 
suMas,  which  are  not  intended  for  the  usual  laudation  of  the  prominent  gods®®, 
we  deem  it  expedient  here  to  insert  a few  observations  on  some  themes  dealt 
with  in  the  h^mins  addressed  to  some  of  the  greater  deities.  The  central  part  of 
many  Indra  hymns  coi^ists  of  an  episode  of  a combat  between  this  god  and  a 
demon®* ; the  main  subject  of  others  is  his  cosmic  activities  and  other  important 


Eigenart  des  indischen  Denkens,  Tubingen 
48^  tE*  Geldnbk,  RV.  II,  p.  168  (introduction  to  6,  66). 

Inat  IS  not  to  say,  anthropomorphicaliy. 

49  c’  instances  see  5,  41,  5;  6, 

Vt’  i’ 23;  10,  6,  6;  103,  12;  107,  7. 

. EBGAiGNE,  at  MSL  8,  p.  272;  of.  also  Geldneb,  I,  p.  161  (on  1,  119, 

“ W-  9.  61,  22;  64,  15;  96.  12;  97,  43;  98,  6;  101,  6 etc. 

“ Resou,  E.  V.  P.  IX,  p.  15. 

“ TM;T3r^  «iiscussion  in  the  following  pages. 


Contents  of  the  B^yeda, 


m 


feats®®,  Ms  power,  greatness,  resources  and  excellent  qualities®®  or  Ms  fondness 
of  soTYhOf^^ . Whereas,  for  instance,  the  poet  of  RV.  2,  38  endeavours  to  draw 
attention  to  many  aspects  of  Savitar®®,  4,  53  creates  the  impression  of  being  an 
evening  hymn,  and  10,  170  centres  on  the  sim  as  the  source  of  light.  The  suMa 
9,  113  is  different  from  other  Soma  texts  in  that  it  pays  much  attention  to  the 
celestial  joy  given  by  the  draught.  The  A§vin  hiTmn  4,  45  makes  the  gods* 
chariot  the  centre  of  interest,  the  Usas  hymn  1,  123  the  perioclicity  of  Dawn. 
Of  the  two  hundred  odd  Agm  hymns®®  1,  58  deals  with  forest-fire;  1,  95  and  3, 
29  with  the  sacrificial  fire ; 1,  14  with  the  god’s  birth;  2, 1 with  his  many-sided- 
ness ; 4,  4 views  the  god  mainly  as  the  destroyer  of  demons  and  enemies ; 5,  12 
associates  him  with  Rta,  the  fundamental  Order  and  Truth ; 5,  23  emphasizes 
Ms  overwhelming  power  (sahas)^^-  3,  2;  6,  7,  8 and  9;  7,  5 and  6 Ms  aspect  as 
Vai^vanara,  the  Universal,  6,  9 being  a profound  glorification  of  Agni  as  the 
great  immortal  conceived  as  the  mner  light  and  placed  among  the  mortals  to 
guide  them  in  the  mysteries  and  intricacies  of  the  ritual  3,  7,  esoteric  and 
dwelling  on  the  god’s  associations,  seems  to  be  a morning  hymn ; in  7,  4 Agni 
is  eulogized  as  the  god  who  can  give  a son;  in  10, 1 there  is  a tendency  to  assi- 
milate him  with  Visnu;  in  10,  2 he  fulfils  priestly  duties.  The  Varuna  hymn®^ 
1,  24  dwells  on  the  god’s  mysterious  power,  attempts  to  propitiate  Mm  and 
prays  for  a long  life;  the  most  successful  classical  hymn  5,  85  describes  Ms 
might,  majesty  and  cosmic  activity®®.  RY.  1,  151,  addressed  to  Yanina  and 
Mitra,  contains  various  ritual  allusions,  but  the  next  one,  1,  152®^  attempts  to 
explain  the  nature  and  function  of  the  double  deity;  5,  62  deals  with  the  gods’ 
Rta;  5,  63  reminds  us  that  rain  and  thunder-storm  are  a concern  of  theirs®®; 
7,  61  emphasizes  their  cosmic  sigmficance.  On  the  other  hand,  the  eleven  hymns 
dedicated  to  the  Rbhus®®  who  have  obtained  divinity  through  their  wondrous 
skill,  speak  with  uniform  frequency  of  their  great  feats  of  dexterity,  for  instance 
their  making  one  cup  into  four,  or  fasMoning  Indra’s  two  bay  steeds®’. 

®®  See  e.g.  RY.  2,  12;  4,  17;  19. 

®®  RY.  2,  21;  22;  4,  20. 

®’  RY-  3,  36;  6,  39;  10,  112. 

S.  D.  Atexnts,  in  JAOS  81,  p.  77  and  see  Wintebnitz,  in  ArchOr  3,  p.  296. 

Renou,  E.  Y.  P.  XII-XIY;  H.  D.  Yelankab,  in  JTJB.  24,  2 (1955),  p.  36,- 
A.  KAegi,  Der  Rig-Yeda,  Leipzig  ®1880,  p.  50. 

®°  J.  Goistda,  ‘Gods’  and  ‘powers’  ia  the  Yeda,  The  Hague  1957. 

For  6,  9 see  Geiffith,  H.  RY.,  II,  p.  319:  ‘Agni  is  the  priest’s  guide  and 
teacher.’ 

Renou,  E.  Y.  P.  Y,  p.  65;  YH. 

For  a comparison  between  the  Yaruna  hymns  and  the  Psalms  of  the  Old 
Testament  (RY.  7,  86-88;  1,  25,  13;  5,  85,  2-4:  Ps.  104,  19  etc.)  see  L.  von  Schboe- 
BEB,  Reden  und  Axifsatze,  Leipzig  1913,  p.  10. 

®^  See  L.  Renou  and  L.  Silbubn,  in  Journal  de  Psychologie,  1949,  p.  266  {= 
BhY  10,  p.  133). 

®®  R.  Otto,  Yaruna-Hymnendes  Rigveda,R6hrscheid  1948,p.21  (‘Gewitterpsalm’). 

®®  S.  Kbambisch,  The  Rgvedic  myth  of  the  craftsman,  in  ArtAs  22  (1959),  p.  113^ 
(subjective);  S.  A.  IJpadhyaya,  at  BhY  22  (1962),  p.  63. 

®’  Macdonell,  Y.  M.,  p.  131;  Renou,  E.  Y.  P.  XY,  p.  77. 


100 


J.  Gonda  • Vedie  Literature 


Cases  present  themselves  in  which  a hymn  deals  with  two  or  even  more 
mythical  themes.  The  poet  of  1,  72  deals  with  Agni’s  flight  and  his  being  found 
again,  with  the  stolen  herd  of  cattle  and  with  the  activity  of  the  gods  and 
‘patriarchs’  in  connexion  with  the  renascence  of  the  world Not  infrequently 
two  or  more  subjects  are  combined  and  intertwined : when,  for  instance,  Agni  is 
described  as  fire,  his  other  aspects — ^vital  glow,  spiritual  principle — ^may  be 
meant  implicitly  or  alluded  to  incidentally®®.  In  the  repertories  of  these  poets 
major  themes  can  of  course  take  several  forms.  Thus  the  important  problem  of 
the  origin  of  the  universe’^®,  or  the  combats  between  Indra  and  his  chief  antag- 
onists are  described  with  much  variation.  As  oral  literature  never  reproduces 
mytMcai  or  narrative  matter  in  exactly  the  same  words  we  are  not  surprised 
at  finding  hymns  identical  in  contents,  but  varied  in  outward  form.  The  suktas 
9,  104  and  105,  dealing  with  the  same  subject  and  attributed  to  the  same  poet, 
do  not  repeat  a single  quarter  of  a stanza  in  the  same  form’^.  In  reverting  to  the 
same  subject  this  poet  was  not  alone^®. 

The  above  considerations  should  not  however  prevent  us  from  observing  that 
a study  of  a great  number  of  hymns  of  average  contents  leads  to  the  conclusion 
that  these  contents  can,  in  the  main,  be  classified  under  two  headings.  They 
are  chiefly  concerned  with  praise  and  characterization  of  a deity  or  some 
deities  on  the  one  hand  and  with  invocations  and  prayers  on  the  other^®.  As  to 
the  former,  ‘descriptive,’  passages,  these  are,  of  course,  though  often  more  or 
less  stereotyped,  far  from  uniform,  but  less  varied  than  the  number  of  mytho- 
logical figures  would  have  us  believe,  because  gods  may  have  epithets  and 
characterizations  in  common.  The  precative  passages  may,  in  the  mam,  be 
reduced  to  the  two  variants  of  positive  and  negative  requests,  the  former 
expressing  the  wish  to  obtain  what  is  desirable,  the  latter  aiming  at  the  dissi- 
pation or  destruction  of  ail  that  is  evil  or  mimical.  Very  often,  but  not  neces- 
sarily, the  prayers  follow  the  eulogies  or  characterizations.  There  are  also 
eulogistic  hymns  without  prayers.  In  the  ddTiastuti  hymns’^  there  is  no  praise 
of  gods  or  mythological  description’®. 


68  Pqj.  ry  0^  4Y  Geldneb,  Auswahl,  n,  p.  96  and  RV.  11,  p.  143. 

Lommel,  Gedichte,  p.  16. 

See  further  on,  p.  136  ff.  and  compare  also  C.  S.  Venkateswabak,  in  BDCRI  2 
<1941),  p.  258;  Renou,  Hymnes  speculatifs,  p.  12. 

BnooMFiEnD,  Repetitions,  I,  p.  12. 

See  e.g.  1,  116  and  117. 


See  also  Elizabe^’eiova,  Eig\-eda,  p.  36. 

See  below,  p.  170  f. 

In  this  book  no  attempt  can  be  made  to  draw  up  an  inventary  of  themes  and 
?gveda.  The  reader  may  be  referred  to  Geldneb -Nobel, 
RV.  iV,  p.  143 ff.  and  A.  Ludwig,  Der.Rigveda,  VI,  Prag  1888. 


Contents  of  the  Rgveda 


101 


2.  Invitations  and  invocaiiom 


One  of  the  commonest  genres  or  subjects  is  the  invitation  addressed  to  one, 
or  more  than  one,  divine  gnest^.  A hymn  is  sometimes  described  as  refreshment 
or  an  invigorating  drink^.  In  some  cases  a hymn  is,  practically  speaking, 
nothing  else  than  a long  and  varied  siiccession  of  invitations.  After  eight  stan- 
zas offering  hospitality,  only  the  concluding  stanza  of  1,  16  asks  Indra  to 
comply  with  the  speaker’s  wishes.  In  the  ten  stanzas  of  1,  47,  addressed  to  the 
Asvins,  repeated  requests  to  come  and  diink  alternate  with  assurances  that 
the  soma  has  been  prepared,  and,  quite  intelligibly,  some  prayers  for  the  gods’ 
kindness  and  benevolence®.  In  the  large  majority  of  cases  these  invitations  do 
not  however  come  so  much  to  the  fore,  and  are  either  added  to  or  followed  by 
praise,  references  to  the  god’s  exploits  or  such  expatiations  as  are  more  or 
less  appropriate  to  the  circumstances^ — for  instance  Indra  already  drank  soma 
when  he  was  a new-born  child;  after  having  drunk  soma  he  made  the  sun 
sMne — or  they  are  inserted  between  eulogies,  statements  of  the  poet’s  intentions 
and  other  subject-matter®. 

Some  suktas  (1,  15;  2,  36  and  37  which  belong  together)  are  to  accompany 
the  so-called  rtugrahas^,  libations  offered  to  the  twelve  months.  They  accord- 
ingly consist  of  twelve  somewhat  varied  stanzas  addressed,  in  a fixed  order, 
to  Indra,  the  Maruts,  Tvastar’,  Agni  and  other  gods  and  pronounced  by 
different  officiants.  The  seven  triplets  of  1,  2 and  1,  3,  w-hich  form  a unity,  are 
in  a similar  way  distributed  over  seven  deities,  invited  to  come  quickly  to 
the  soma  offering,  and,  in  the  Classical’  Vedic  ritual,  used  in  the  praugcdastra, 
the  second  laud  recited  at  the  morning  libation®. 

The  efficacy  of  a prayer  is  widely  believed  to  be  dependent,  not  only  upon 
its  correct  repetition,  but  also  upon  its  accuracy  and  completeness®.  This 
accounts  for  the  occurrence  of  circumstantial  invocations  such  as  “K  thou,  0 
Indra,  hast  turned  aside,  or  art  in  thine  own  residence,  oi  wherever  thou  art ...” 
(6, 40,  5) ; ‘‘K you  are  in  the  West,  or  in  the  East,  or  with  Druhyu  . . .,  I call  you” 
(8,  10,  5);  ‘‘Whether  thou  art  far  away  or  near  ...”  (8,  97,  4).  No  possibility 
should  be  overlooked  lest  the  invitation,  or,  rather,  the  summons,  remain 


^ P.  Thxeme,  at  ZDMG  107,  p.  195  spoke  of  ‘Gastmahlspoesie.’ 

2 7,  36,  2;  8,  7,  1;  69,  1. 

® See  also  1,  34;  107;  3,  35;  41;  43;  47;  4,  32;  5,  71;  6,  23;  8,  94. 

^ See  e.g.  1,  130;  3,  32;  36;  5,  66;  6,  16;  8,  36. 

® See  e.g.  1,  153;  2,  16,  4;  6;  7,  22;  8,  4. 

® Cai^ajstd-Heniiy,  L’agnistoma,  p.  224;  Eggeling,  SB.  II,  p.  319;  Geudiveb,, 


RV.  I,  p.  15. 

* K.  Ammeb,  in  Die  Sprache  1 (1949),  p.  68. 

® Cau A -ND -Henby,  O.C.,  p.  239;  Goivda,  Dual  deities,  p.  403. -—Compare  also  1,  23; 
2,  41  for  which  see  Gonda,  1.  c. 

® H.  Lommel,  Eine  arisehe  Form  mags^^^  Gottesannifuag,  AO  10,  p.  372. 
See  also  p.  181. 


102 


J.  Gonda  • Vedic  Literature 


InefFective^®.  TMs  circumstantiality  should  not  however  be  put  on  a par  with 
the  mention  of  the  different  moments  at  which  a god  is  expected  to  come: 
call  thee  at  sunrise,  I call  thee  at  noon’’  (8,  13,  13). 

Whilst  an  exhiMtion  of  one’s  knowledge  of  a god’s  abodes  or  sojourns  means 
Tsialririgr  an  urgent  demand  and  exercising  one’s  influence  upon  him,  the 
enumeration  of  many  names  of  deities  helps  to  reassure  the  performer  with 
regard  to  the  evil  consequences  of  omissions  and  negligence.  Hence  invocations 
such  as  5,  46,  2 : 

“O  Agni,  Indra,  Varuna,  Mitra,  ye  gods,  host  of  the  Mamts  and  Visnu,  extend 
(your  s^^mpathy).  Both  Nasatyas,  Rudra  and  the  wives  of  the  gods,  Pusan,  Bhaga, 
Sarasvati  must  be  pieased”^^. 

As  might  be  expected  these  enumerations  are  especially  frequent  in  the  hymns 
dedicated  to  the  Visve  Devas,  a name  denoting,  now  the  gods  in  general  (All 
the  gods),  now  a separate  class  of  deities  (the  All-gods) Irrespective  of  these 
enumerations — ^moulded  into  a definite  syntactic  structure^®  or  ending  abruptly 
or  elMptically^^ — ^these  hymns — which  are  scarcely  less  formulaic  and  ritualistic 
than  the  dpri-suktas^^ — consist  of  separate  invocations,  in  principle  of  a com- 
plete stanza^®  or  sometimes  of  two  or  three  stanzas^^’,  of  deities,  among  whom 
mountains,  rivers  and  ritual  entities  considered  divine.  We  would  probably 
not  be  far  wrong  if  we  regarded  these  suktas  as  originating  in  enumerations 
composed  for  liturgical  purposes^®  comparable  to  the  nivids^^,  which  in  the 
course  of  time  were^®  amplified  and  remodelled  upon  the  majority  of  the  hymns. 


See  also  1,  101,  8;  5,  73,  I;  8,  8,  14;  10,  1;  12,  16;  17;  97,  4.  There  are  paraUels 
in  the  Avesta,  e.g.  Yt.  12,  9-37. 

See  also  1,  136,  6;  6,  50,  1;  13;  7,  44,  1;  59,  1;  8,  28,  2;  10,  35,  10;  64,  3;  65,  1; 

66,  11. 

Rekoij,  E.  V.  P.  IV,  p.  1 and  in  Comm.  Vol.  Rfobel,  p.  176.  In  fact  the  name  is 
traditionally  given  to  the  addressees  of  a variety  of  hymns  including  e.g.  1,  164; 
5,  45 ; 7,  37  (dedicated  to  Indra,  the  Rbhus,  Savitar) ; 42  (where  Agni  comes  to  the 
fore;  cf.  3,  20)  and  many  hymns  of  book  X.  The  addressees  are  in  principle  the 
whole  (cf.  6,  52)  and  part  of  the  whole.  Most  of  the  lesser  families  contributing  to 
the  books  I,  VIII  and  X have  left  no  hymn  of  this  type.  In  the  ritual  the  Visve 
Devas  were  a distinct  ‘deity’  and  in  a way  regarded  as  a single  personality. 

« See  e.g.  1,  90,  4;  107,  3;  2,  31,  1;  4;  6;  3,  20,  5. 

See  e.g.  1,  14,  3;  186,  10;  4,  55,  10;  10,  36,  1;  65,  9. 

See  p.  104. 

See  e.g.  1,  186;  6,  49;  50;  7,  39,  5;  8,  29  (where  the  gods  remain  anonymous; 
cf.  5,  47). 

” See  e.g.  5,  43,  13-15;  45,  9-11;  6,  52. 

This  might  also  account  for  the  fragmentary  character  of  some  of  these  hymns 
(e.g.  5,  48)  and  for  the  mediocre  arrangement  and  banal  phraseology  of  others  (e.g. 
5,  51;  6,  51;  7,  35). 

Rbxou,  in  Comm.  Vol.  Nobel,  p.  177. 

In  some  cases  in.  a very  artless  manner;  7,  35  is  hardly  more  than  an  enumer- 
ation of  names,  amplified  by  some  epithets,  and  requests  for  bliss  and  welfare, 
preceded  by  an  ever  repeated  iaw  (“auspicious”).  It  is  a ^dnti  htany  ritually  used 
to  appease  evil  (Gonda,  ^.gvidhana,  p.  57). 


Contents  of  the  Rgveda 


103 


Wbile  they  exhibit  a preference  for  speculation  rather  than  mythologyj  their 
more  or  less  enumerative  stmcture’^^  remains,  in  most  cases,  very  clear. 

It  seems,  further,  warranted  to  suppose  that  the  tendency  to  couch  descriptive 
matter  and  references  to  collections  of  persons  in  catalogue  form^®  was  not 
foreign  to  the  structure  of  these  hjmms.  The  closely  related  suktas  1,  116  and 
117^®  attributed  to  the  same  poet  commemorate  in  the  form  of  an  enumeration, 
amplified  by  brief  statements  of  the  circumstances,  the  names  of  many  legend- 
ary persons  to  whom  the  Alvins  had  given  help  and  relief  in  various  difficulties. 
Enemies,  fiends  and  demoniac  beings  are  often  mentioned  in  groups,  along 
with  other  wicked  antagonists^*.  The  ‘Waffensegen’  6,  75  famishes  us  with  a 
probably  complete  list  of  the  equipment  of  a warrior — ^welcome  information 
for  historians.  The  component  parts  of  the  house  which  in  an  atharvanic  rite®^ 
is  given  to  a brahman  so  that  the  giver  would  in  the  hereafter  have  a firmly 
built  mansion  are  (AV.  9,  3)  as  minutely  described  as  the  wnnderful  structure 
of  man  in  AV,  10,  2.  Even  in  a simile  underlining  the  wish  to  be  escorted  as  it 
were  by  a swift  conveyance  not  less  than  four  parts  of  a chariot  are  serially 
specified  (2,  39,  4). 

The  tendency  to  minute  description  and  attention  to  all  contingencies 
imaginable  culminates  in  ‘magical’  texts  such  as  10,  161,  which  in  an  enlarged 
form  recurs  in  the  Atharvaveda  (3,  11).  Invoking  the  dual  deity  India  and 
Agni  to  cure  a patient  from  an  illness  the  poet  takes  three  possibilities  into 
account:  the  patient  suffers  either  from  ‘royal  consumption’  or  from  the 
‘unknown  consumption’  or  he  may  he  ‘seized’  by  the  female  demon  called 
‘Seizer’2®  (st.  1).  He  tries  to  recover  the  patient’s  health  irrespective  as  to 
whether  his  life  goes  to  an  end,  or  he  has  already  died,  or  even  reached  the 
presence  of  Death  (st.  2).  He  should  live  a hundred  autumns — ^the  usual 
prayer — , a hundred  winters,  a hundred  springs  (st.  4).  In  the  final  stanza  the 
performer  declares  that  he  has  found  and  recovered  the  patient  and  that  the 
latter  has  come  back,  sound  and  safe  of  body,  eye  and  life. 


Seep.  180 f. 

22^  See  e.g.  2,  14,  5;  5,  46  (Rbnou,  E.  V.  P.  IV,  p.  72). 

See  also  1,  118,  5ff. 

E.g.  RV.  1,  101,  2;  103,  8;  2,  14,  5;  6,  18,  8. 

Goiuda,  Savayajnas,  p.  107;  376. 

For  these  terms  see  J.  Filliozat,  La  doctrine  classiqne  de  la  medeeine  indienne 
Paris  1949,  p.  36;  81;  83;  87. 


104 


J.  Gonda  * Yedic  Literature 


3.  A‘prl  hymns 

Annexed  to  the  Agni  hymns  are  the  so-called  Apri-suktas^,  the  “hymns  of 
propitiation”  of  certain  deities — among  which  the  three  goddesses  Bharati, 
Ba  and  Sarasvati,  and  the  pair  Dawn  and  Dusk,  who  no  doubt  were  wanted 
to  come  at  the  regular  and  auspicious  moments — ^and  sacrificial  requisites 
regarded  as  divine,  for  instance  the  holy  grass  on  which  the  gods  were  supposed 
to  sit  down  (barhis ) and  the  tree  serving  as  the  post  to  fasten  the  victim  ( yupa)^. 
Being  constructed  on  the  same  pattern  and  characterized  by  fixed  key  words 
in  corresponding  places,  they  invoke,  in  as  many  stereotyped  stanzas,  eleven 
deities.  These  appear  in  the  same  order,  with  some  variation  with  regard  to  the 
second  deity,  which  in  some  of  them  is  Tanunapat,  but  elsewhere  Narasamsa 
or  Tanunapat  and  Nara^msa.  Thus  RV.  1,  13  consists  of  twelve;  1,  142  (in- 
voking also  Indra)  of  thirteen,  and  each  of  the  others  of  eleven  stanzas.  From 
the  literary  point  of  view  these  sulctas  are  insignificant — ^in  their  totality  they 
are  almost  a collection  of  Jchilas — but  for  the  history  of  Vedic  religion  their 
importance  is  bej^ond  dispute.  Accompanying  the  ten  preliminary  offerings 
(praydja)  of  the  animal  sacrifice  as  consecratory  texts  (ydjyd),  they  must, 
though  individually  largely  imitative,  belong,  as  a t3?pe  of  sukta,  to  a comx^ara- 
tively  early  period,  in  w’hich  the  ritual  had  not  yet  assumed  its  later  pro- 
portions. There  are  serious  reasons  (for  instance,  lack  of  internal  evidence)  for 
doubting  that  they  were  originally  intended  for  the  animal  sacrifice.  They  were 
rather  composed  for  ritual  purposes  centering  round  Agni.  Their  popularity 
may  have  been  due  to  a sort  of  family  ritual  associated  with  them;  most 
families  indeed  possessed  one  for  their  own  use.  Their  use  at  the  animal 
sacrifice  does  not  exclude  the  belief  that  they  possessed  an  autonomous  capacity 
to  effect  propitiation  or  to  confer  much  desired  qualities  on  the  sacrificer®. 


^ MtTLUEB,  Skt.  Lit.,  p.  463;  BERGAiG2!m,  R.  V.  I,  p.  124;  and  in  JA  1889,  p.  19; 

J.  Heeteu,  in  Ber.  Sachs.  Akad.  90  (1938),  p.  145;  Kajstb,  H.  Dh.  II,  p.  1118;  K.  R. 
PoTDAE,  in  12  AIOC,  Benares  1947,  ni,  p.  211 ; 19  AIOC,  Delhi  1957,  p.  1 ; JUB  14, 
Sept.,  p.  29;  15,  2 (1946),  p.  39;  V.  S.  Agrawala,  at  JOIB  13,  p.  93  (subjective); 
Renou,  E.  V.  P.  XIV,  p.  39;  Gom^A,  Dual  deities,  ch.  IV. 

^ There  are  nine  of  them  in  RV.  I,  D,  III,  V,  VTI,  X,  and  an  imitation:  9,  5; 
RV.  10,  110  recurs  as  AWulg.  5,  12  and  VS.  29,  25-26;  28-36;  MS.  4,  13,  3;  5;  KS. 
16,  20;  TB.  3,  6,  3;  there  is  a secondary  half-metrical  dpri  hymn  in  VS.  27,  11-32; 
TS.  4,  1,  8;  MS.  2,  12,  6;  KS.  18,  17;  KapS.  29,  5,  occurring  also  as  AVS.  5,  27;  (cf. 

K.  R.  PoTDAR,  at  13  AIOC,  p.  47). 

® AiB.  2,  4;  KB.  10,  3;  PB.  15,  8,  2;  SB.  6,  2,  1,  28ff. 


Contents  of  the  Rg\'eda 


105 


4.  Praise 

It  has  often  and  rightly  been  said  that  the  hjmns  of  the  Rgreda-  are  largely 
eulogistic,  that  the  poets  whilst  inviting  the  gods  to  the  sacrificial  feasts  enlarge 
upon  their  beneficence,  greatness  and  glorious  deeds.  It  would  however  he  a 
serious  mistake  to  regard  these  sastras,  this  continual  glorification  and  Magni- 
fication, as  mere  poetical  effusions,  and  smaller  eulogistic  passages  as  adorn- 
ments and  digressions.  Praise — ^that  is  laudatory  mention  of  characteristic 
deeds  and  qualities,  comtaeinoration  of  powerfulness,  exploits  and  services 
rendered,  enumeration  of  names  and  epithets — ^is  a confirmation  of  a god’s 
power,  in  the  literal  sense  of  this  term:  a consolidation  of  the  power,  of  the 
will,  with  which  man  finds  himself  confronted^.  Far  from  being  cordial  or 
beautiful  superfluities  or  nothing  more  than  description^,  these  commemorative 
statements  strengthen  the  gods  (or  persons)  addressed,  influence  their  situation, 
replenish  their  resources.  Hence  such  statements  as  1,  1,  1;  1,  35,  3;  5;  10;  2, 
12,  3: 

“I  praise  Agni,  who  is  placed  in  front®,  the  god  who  is  the  ministrant  of  the  sacri- 
fice, the  liotar,  best  bestower  of  treasure”;  “God  Savitar  comes  from  a distance, 
driving  away  all  discomfort.  For  ever  the  settlers  and  all  inhabitants  of  the  earth 
rest  in  his  lap.  Chasing  away  demons  and  sorcerers  the  god  has  stood  (there) 
tow^ards  the  evening,  being  lauded”;  “TMio  ha\dng  slain  the  serpent  released  the 
seven  streams;  who  drove  out  the  cows  by  unclosing  Yala;  who  between  heaven 
and  earth  has  produced  fire,  victor  in  battles;  he,  O men,  is  Indra”; 

and  one  of  the  many  other  lines  dedicated  to  the  same  exultingly  praised  god : 
1,  32,  1;  10,  168,  2;  2,  33,  8;  12;  4,  51,  7: 

“He  slew  the  serpent,  then  discharged  the  waters,  and  cleft  the  caverns  of  the 
rugged  mountains”;  “(I  will)  now  (proclaim)  the  greatness  of  Vata’s  (Wind’s) 
chariot.  Its  sound  goes  shattering,  thundering,  Touching  the  sky  it  goes  producing 
ruddy  hues,  and  it  also  goes  over  the  earth  scattering  dust”;  “For  the  ruddy- 
brown  and  whitish  bull  (Rudra)  I pronounce  a mighty  eulogy  of  the  mighty 
one  ...  We  proclaim  the  terrible  name  of  Rudra.  I extol  the  true  lord,  the  giver 
of  much;  (when  thou  art)  praised  thou  givest  remedies  to  us”;  “Those  indeed, 
those  Dawns  have  formerly  been  auspicious,  splendid  in  superiority,  truly  born 
from  Rta,  at  which  the  strenuous  sacrificer,  praising  with  recitations,  lauding 
(i.e.  stating  their  qualities  according  to  fact:  ^arp^an),  has  at  once  obtained 
wealth”^. 

Being  first  and  foremost  confirmatory  these  eulogistic  and  panegyrical 
passages  influence  the  'situation’  of  a divinity,  so  as  to  determine  it  to  some 
result  or  other.  When  the  poet  of  1,  160,  2 states  that  Heaven  and  Earth,  as 
Father  and  Mother,  are  far-extending,  great  and  inexhaustible,  adding  that 
they  protect  all  iahabitants  of  the  world,  his  emotional,  though  traditional, 

^ See  G.  VA3^  deb  Leeijw,  Religion  in  essence  and  manifestation,  London  1938, 
p.  430  and  compare  RV.  7,  91,  1 “the  gods  who  grow  (are  fortified)  by  homage.” 

® This  term  was  used  by  Renoij,  E.  V.  P.  VII,  p.  57  (on  7,  61);  p.  89  (on  2,  27). 
® Purohita:  see  J.  Gonda,  in  Festschrift  W.  Kirfel,  Bonn  1955,  p.  107ff. 

^ See  e.g.  also  4,  1,  6ff.;  4,  6;  5,  66;  6,  9;  7,  61,  4;  10,  22,  4. 


106 


J.  Gonda  * Yedic  Literature 


utterance  is  no  sentimental  assertion,  but  a contribution  to  the  maintenance 
of  those  important  processes  and  phenomena  which  are  controlled,  directed 
or  presided  over  by  these  deities.  As  long  as  man’s  rites  and  eulogies  succeed  in 
supporting  and  mamtaining  life  and  order  in  the  universe,  nature  will  continue 
to  meet  his  wants.  Praise  is  a form  of  truth  which  should  be  always  repeated, 
and  this  repetition  is  also  psychologically  motivated : the  performer  convinces 
himself  and  his  audience  of  the  existence,  unalterability  and  reliability  of  that 
power.  Whether  the  statements  made  are  foimded  on  experience  or  sensory 
perception,  or  on  traditional  convictions  is  a matter  of  indifference;  1,  35,  9; 
2,  12,2: 

“Golden-handed  Savitar  . , . goes  between  both  heaven  and  earth.  He  drives 
away  disease,  he  guides  Surya.  Through  the  dark  space  he  penetrates  to  heaven” ; 
“Who  made  firm  the  quaking  earth,  who  set  at  rest  the  agitated  mountains;  who 
measures  out  the  air  more  widely,  who  supported  heaven:  he,  O men,  is  Indra”. 

In  praising  a god  a poet  sets  himself  no  limits  other  than  those  conditioned  by 
the  character  of  the  god  itself:  “Without  whom  men  do  not  conquer,  whom 
they  when  fighting  call  on  for  help,  who  is  a match  for  every  one,  who  moves 
the  immovable : he,  0 men,  is  India”  (2,  12,  9)  draws  attention  to  the  military 
aspect  of  the  god  who  elsewhere  is  lauded  as  the  slayer  of  Vrtra  and  the  estab- 
lisher  of  the  cosmos.  And  so  we  find  banal  and  self-evident  statements — “"While 
some  (waters)  flow  together,  other  flow  to  the  sea”  (2,  35,  3) — beside  well- 
considered  descriptions:  “(Parjanya,  Raia  associated  with  thunder)  shatters 
the  trees  and  smites  the  demons.  The  whole  world  fears  him  . . . Even  the 
sinless  one  flees  before  him,  when  thundering  he  smites  the  evil-doers”  (5,  83, 
2)®  or  attempts  to  fathom  the  god’s  essence  such  as  in  the  Varuna  hymn  7,  87. 

It  would  be  a misconception  to  regard  such  passages  as  adornments  or 
embellishments,  as  mere  flattery,  or  mechanical  repetition  of  familiar  epithets 
and  references.  Being  from  the  religious  point  of  view  a turning  away  from 
oneself  and  towards  the  divine®,  continual  praise  of  the  gods  was,  in  ancient 
India  not  less  than  elsewhere,  regarded  as  an  exceedingly  important  religious 
duty.  Divine  service  was  almost  entirely  the  offering  of  praise.  “To  thee,  0 
Agni,  day  by  day  we  come  with  an  inspired  hymn,  bringing  homage”  (1,  1,  ly. 
Or  a reference  to  the  actual  oblation  is,  as  in  the  sacrificial  ceremonies,  in  the 
very  hymn  preceded  (or  followed)  by  praise : “Mitra  he  names  himself  (because) 
he  marshals  men  in  their  proper  position;  Mtra  supports  heaven  and  earth; 
Mitra  regards  the  settlements  of  men  without  blinking;  to  Mtra  pour  out  the 
oblation  rich  in  sacrificial  butter”  (3,  59,  1).  And  passages  such  as  2,  33,  9 
The  Mighty  one,  with  firm  limbs  and  many  forms  has  adorned  himself  with 
bright  gold  ornaments.  From  the  ruler  of  this  great  world,  from  Rudra,  let 
not  divine  dignity  depart’  attest  to  the  poet’s  more  or  less  conscious  conviction 

® The  images  and  similes  cannot  be  considered  in  this  chapter. 

® G.  YAJ^  DEB  LeETJW,  O.C.,  p.  430. 

Cf.  also  2,  35,  15.  For  the  Agni  hymns  in  RV.  I see  H.  D.  Velaiokab,  at  JUB 
N".  S.  32,  2,  p.  1. 


Contents  of  the  Rgveda  107 

that  praise  contribiites  to  the  raainteiiance  of  the  powers  presiding  over  the 
provinces  of  the  universe®. 

Many  instances  of  praise  are  exact  statements  of  a god’s  task,  function  and 
behaviour:  '*'0  Agni,  the  worship,  the  sacrifice  that  thou  encompassest  on 
every  side,  that  goes  to  the  gods”  (1,  1,  4)®.  But  these  laudations  may  also 
induce  the  poet  to  an  expatiation  on  the  significance  and  salutary  results  of 
the  god’s  activity:  ‘‘The  winds  begm  to  blow,  lightnings  shoot  down,  the  plants 
sprout;  heaven  overflows.  Nurture  is  bom  for  the  whole  world,  when  Parjanya 
quickens  the  earth  with  seed”  (5,  83,  3)^®.  We  should  remember  that  the  solemn 
spoken  word  possesses  decisive  power  in  its  repetition.  There  is,  indeed,  neither 
in  form  nor  in  content,  a strict  line  of  demarcation  between  praise  and  its 
effects:  “The  assistance  of  Mtra,  the  god  who  supports  the  cultivators,  assures 
(us)  gain,  illustriousness  (which  brings)  most  brilliant  fame”  (3,  59,  6).  The 
poets  have  no  objection  whatever  frankly  to  admit  that  they  expect  their 
praise  to  be  rewarded  : “That  king  vith  his  impetuosity  and  heroism  overcomes 
all  hostilities,  who  . . . honours  and  praises  Brhaspati”  (4,  50,  7yK 


« Cf.  also  2,  21,  1;  3,  59,  5;  7,  61,  6. 

» Cf.  e.g.  also  1,  162;  5,  81;  7,  61,  3;  10,  75;  the  Soma  hymns  in  book  IX. 

See  e.g.  also  7,  63,  4. 

See  e.g.  also  2,  42;  43;  6, 13,  6;  17, 15;  7,  61,  2;  9, 110,  7. 1 cannot  foUowRENOU 
(and  FnmiozAT),  I.  C.  I,  p.  273  in  deriving  the  praise  of  gods  from  eulogies  upon 
earthly  rulers. 


108 


J.  Gonda  • Vedic  Literature 


5.  Prayers 

Often  praise  ends  in  prayer^:  “So  being  Janded,  0 great  ones,  Heaven  and 
Earth,  bestow  on  us  great  fame  (and)  firm  dominion”  (1,  160,  5);  “0  Rudra, 
being  praised  be  gracious  to  the  eulogist ; let  thy  missiles  lay  low  another  than 
us”  (2,  33,  10).  Or  the  object  in  view  is  formulated  right  at  the  beginning: 
“(Because  I am)  desirous  of  generative  or  creative  power  (vdja)  I emit  this 
piece  of  eloquence”  (2,  3o,  1) ; “Praise  Parjanya.  Seek  to  win  him  with  homage. 
Roaring,  the  bull  of  quickening  gifts  places  seed  in  the  plants  as  a germ”  (5, 
83,  1)^.  These  addresses,  invocations  and  requests  to  listen  are  of  com’se  largely 
conditioned  by  the  tendency  to  viewing  the  gods  as  persons : “So,  O brown  one, 
bull,  be  listening  here,  0 Rudra,  to  our  invocation,  inasmuch  as  thou  art  not 
angr^^  . . (2,  33,  15).  So  are  questions  without  answer:  “Will  he  perchance 
take  note  of  it  ?”  (2,  35,  2). 

Many  hymns  can  indeed  be  said  to  consist  for  the  greater  part  of  praise 
alternating  with  prayers  and  references  to  the  god’s  deeds®.  Sometimes  the 
poet  is  quite  explicit  on  his  intentions : “I  will  now  proclaim  the  heroic  deeds  of 
Visnu  . . .”  (1,  154,  1)^  and  forms  of  verbs  of  praising  are  frequently  inserted 
in  order  to  show  that  he  is  in  earnest,  to  remind  the  audience  of  the  character 
of  the  text®,  to  stimulate  them  into  joining  in,  but,  mainly,  because  ‘praising,’ 
taking  the  place  of  sacrifice,  means  confirming  and  strengthening  the  god’s 
power®.  Some  suktas  are  traditionally’  known  as  ‘laudations’  (stuti).  Being 
addressed,  not  to  the  greater  deities,  but  to  other  potent  beings,  they  likewise 
purpose  their  compliance  with  the  performer’s  wishes  or  the  exigencies  of  the 
ritual.  In  cases  such  as  2,  38,  dedicated  to  Savitar’^,  the  poet  has  succeeded  to 
do  justice,  in  a comparatively  limited  number  of  stanzas,  to  the  main  features 
of  the  god’s  character  and  to  the  influence  he  exerts  upon  the  doings  of  men. 

Yerj  often  the  desire  to  emphasize,  by  means  of  epithets  and  allusions,  a 
god’s  own  nature  fuses  with  the  well-known  tendency  to  henotheism  which  is 
so  characteristic  of  religious  hymns.  See  2,  40: 


^ This  distinction  was  made  in  the  Brhaddevata  1,  7:  “Praise  is  expressed  by 
means  of  name,  form,  action,  and  relationship,  but  prayer  by  means  of  objects  such 
as  heaven,  a long  life,  wealth,  and  sons.’’  See  V.  Ch.  Bhattachabya,  in  OH  2 
(1954),  p.  337. 

2 Cf.  e.g.  also  2,  35,  6;  3,  59,  3;  4;  7,  49,  1;  71,  1. 

® See  e.g.  1,  102  (Indra);  154  (Visnu);  155  (Indra-and- Visnu) ; 160  (Heaven  and 
Earth);  2,  16  (Indra);  21  (Indra);  3,  22  (Agni);  25  (Agni);  5,  84  (Earth);  10,  170 
(Surya). 

‘ Cf.  also  1,  102,  1;  2,  16,  1. 

® See  e.g.  1,  154,  2;  loo,  4;  160,  5;  2,  20,  4;  3,  22,  1;  6,  12,  4;  5. 

' Cf.  J.  Goiiba,  in  Oriens  2,  p.  195. 

’ San.-anukramani  (Brhaddevata).  RV.  1,  162  and  163  (praise  of  the  sacrificial 
horse) ; 187  (of  food) ; 2,  42  and  43  (of  an  ominous  bird) ; 4,  27  (of  the  eagle) ; 10,  75 
(of  the  rivers);  96  (of  Indra’s  horses);  173  and  174  (of  the  king). 

” Cf.  S.  D.  Atkins,  at  JAOS  81,  p.  77. 


Contents  of  the  Rgveda 


109 


(1)  “O  Soma-and-Pusan,  creators  of  treasure, 

Creators  of  Heaven,  and  creators  of  Eart^li, 

Ye  two  bom  herdsmen  of  the  whole  world 
The  gods  made  the  navel  of  the  immortaL 

(2)  The  gods  rejoiced  in  the  birth  of  these  deities. 

These  two  covered  the  unfortunate  dark. 

With  Soma-and-Pusan  Indra  made  cooked  food 
In  the  cows  who  yield  the  unboiled  milk. 

(3)  Ye  mighty  bulls  urge  on  the  chariot 
That  measures  the  space,  has  seven  wheels, 

That  rolls  to  both  sides,  yoked  by  mind. 

The  exclusive  car  that  has  five  reins. 

(4)  The  one  (Pusan)  has  made  his  dwellings  in  heaven. 

The  other  (Soma)  on  earth,  up  in  midspace. 

They  should  release  us  abundant  wealth. 

Granting  riches,  rich  in  food  . . . 

(5)  The  one  (Soma)  has  created  all  the  worlds, 

The  other  (Pusan)  travels,  beholding  all. 

Soma-and-Pusan,  further  my  vision. 

With  you  two  may  we  win  all  battles”®. 

A considerable  part  of  these  hymns  or  stanzas  of  praise  are  like  many  stanzas 
of  different  content  more  or  less  traditional  and  subject  to  the  tendency  to 
formulaic  diction.  It  is  here  also  difficult  to  decide  how  great  was,  in  individual 
cases,  the  element  of  personal  emotion.  That  many  of  them  express  what  has 
been  called  ‘community-consciousness,’  reflecting  the  general  sentiments  and 
attitude  of  mind  of  the  whole  community®  of  poets  and  audience  may  be  taken 
for  granted. 

According  to  expectation  part  of  the  tribute  paid  to  the  gods  consist  in 
captationes  benevolentiae:  “The  creatures  are  wise  ovdng  to  the  greatness  of 
him  who  keeps  apart  even  the  vast  heaven  and  earth”  (7,  86,  1)^°.  Cases  are 
not  absent  in  which  this  element,  intermingled  with  supplications  and  intro- 
ducing a prayer  for  a privilege,  stands  out  so  clearly  that  one  fiinds  some  diffi- 
culty in  istinguishing  the  eulogy  proper^h 

Like  thank-offerings  traces  of  real  expressions  of  thanks  to  tne  gods  are 

scanty.^2 

Some  suMas—e.g.  3,  47  and  less  evidently  1,  160— create  the  impression  of 
being  versified  and  amplified  adaptations  of  nivid  formulas.  Nivid  (“proclama- 
tion”)^® is  the  technical  name  of  eleven  prose  formularies  consisting  of  a series 
of  short  sentences  and  containing  about  65  wwds  each^^.  With  the  exception 


8 Compare  S.  Kbambisch’  translation  in  JAOS  81,  p.  111. 

® S.  Dasgijpta,  in  BDCRI  20  (1960),  p.  348. 

10  See  e.g.  also  1,  24,  Iff.;  2,  38,  10;  5,  4,  10.  -.r  o t i 

11  E.g.  6,  67;  Rbnotj,  E.  V.  P.  VH,  p.  51;  for  3,  1,  1 see  Gebdnbb,  V.  S.  I,  p.  15  k 

1®  See  e.g.  1,  100,  16f.  ^ 

13  The  term  occurs  in  the  Rgveda  (e.g.  1,  96,  2;  17o,  6;  4,  18,  0- 
1^  Edited  by  Scheftelowitz,  Apokr3phen,  p.  136.  See  the  same,  at  ZHMG  tS 
(1919),  p.  30;  S.  Niyogi,  A critical  study  of  the  nivids,  Calcutta  1961,  Renou, 
E.  V.  P.  lY,  p.  11;  18. 


110 


J.  Gonda  • Yedic  Literature 


of  the  last  they  begin  with  the  name  of  a deity  (Ladra  and  the  Maruts,  Indra, 
Savitar  etc.)  followed  by  an  invitation  to  partake  of  the  soma,  by  epithets, 
laudatory  names  and  short  invocations  or  references  to  the  god’s  main  deeds 
and,  except  for  the  last,  end  with  a prayer  for  help.  In  performing  divine 
service  they  were — ^in  order  to  enhance  the  effect  of  the  recitation — ^inserted 
in  definite  places  of  the  suktas  recited  in  praise  of  the  gods  (iastra),  to  be 
precise,  in  the  morning  before  the  sulcta,  in  the  afternoon  in  the  middle  and 
in  the  evening  at  the  end^®.  This  oldest  Indian  prose^®,  contemporaneous  with 
the  Egveda-Samhita  and  no  doubt  older  than  many  a sukta,  was  regarded  as 
‘the  embryo  of  the  litanies’  and  as  constituting,  in  each  of  their  sentences, 
counterparts  of  Egvedic  stanzas^’'.  In  view  of  these  connections  it  is  not  sur- 
prising that  already  at  an  early  date  the  hymn  RV.  3,  47,  addressed  to  Indxa- 
with-the  Maruts^®,  was  associated  with  the  nivid  dedicated  to  these  deities. 
The  Visve  Devas  nivid  may  be  said  to  resume  the  main  phraseological  peculi- 
arities of  the  hymns  dedicated  to  these  deities^®. 

The  ancient  authorities  qualified  some  hymns  or  parts  of  hymns  as  self-praise 
(dtmastuti ),  That  is  to  say,  in  a case  such  as  10,  48-50  Indra  is  not  only  the 
deity  to  whom  the  texts  are  addressed,  but  also  their  reputed  seer  or  poet,  and 
in  10,  48,  1-19,  10  he  is  represented  as  addressing  the  people  of  the  Purus  and 
the  gods  and  as,  unrestramed  by  modesty,  singing  his  own  praises^o. 

Though  usually  cast  in  standard  shapes  the  many  prayers  contained  in  these 
hymns  often  have  a conciseness  and  dignity  of  their  own.  Being  composed  to 
meet  practical  needs,  the  very  sense  of  these  needs  give  them  their  directness, 
force  and  distinction.  When  properly  pronounced,  prayers,  like  blessings  and 
curses,  were  believed  to  be  practically  operative,  because  man’s  solemn  word 
exercises  potent  influence  over  men,  gods  and  unseen  powers. 

Although  some  of  the  smaller  hymns^^  are  in  their  entirety  a chain  of 
petitions,  alternations  of  summons,  prayers,  expressions  of  wishes,  invitations, 
laudations  and  references  to  divine  power  and  exploits — “Save  us;  thou  art 
the  protector” — are  most  usuaP^.  Yet  the  poet  of  RV.  1,  189  does  not  wind  up 
with  two  other  stanzas  before  he  has  strung  together  six  supplicatory  strophes. 
R\' . 4,  41  (eleven  stanzas)  is  not  unjustly  known  as  a request  for  victory  in 
battle^® — but  the  prayers  proper  are  introduced  by  and  intermingled  with 


For  particulars  see  AiB.  3,  lOf. 

Oldenbbbg,  Prosa,  p.  9. 

AiB.  3,  10,  1;  11,  9. 

For  the  ritual  application  see  Calaku  and  Bjenby,  L’agnistoma,  p.  299. 

« See  also  RV.  1,  89,  3 (with  Geudneb,  RV.  I,  p.  114;  Rexoxt,  E.  V.  P.  FV,  p. 

18).  * ^ 

Cf.  Sarvanukramani  on  RV.  10,  47;  151;  Brhaddevata  7,  57.  For  4,  26,  1-3 

see  Geldneb,  RV.  I,  p.  453. 

E.g.  5,  70!  6,  53;  74;  7,  84. 

« e.g.  RV.  1,  31;  2,  27;  5,  65;  7,  60;  61;  64;  82;  84;  8,  47. 

« We  do  not  however  know  if  it  ever  was  recited  when  Aryan  troops  were 
actually  marching  to  battle. 


Contents  of  the  IR-gveda 


111 


other  material — , 5,  31  as  a prayer  for  assistance,  8,  75  as  a petition  for  help 
and  protection®^.  Or  the  prayer  is,  hj  way  of  refrain,  repeated  to  conclude 
every  stanza  (10,  47).  Sometimes,  the  supplication  proper  does  not  appear 
before  the  end  of  the  suMa.  The  poet  of  10,  147  prefaces  his  supplication  for 
the  army  that  goes  to  war  (st.  5,  the  last)  with  references  to  Indra's  victory 
over  Vrtra,  his  function  as  the  chosen  god  of  raiders  and  the  indispensable 
reliance  placed  on  him®®. 

Many  precatory  passages  reflect  the  ftmdamental  needs  of  the  poets  and 
their  patrons  and,  although  they  of  course  bear  the  colour  of  their  social 
setting,  these  needs  mostly  are  of  an  economic,  social  and  religions  nature.  The 
large  majority  of  prayers  relate  to  temporal  desires,  many  of  them  having 
well-defined  concrete  purposes®®:  “Both  (groups),  eulogists  as  well  as  patrons, 
we  might  be  under  thy  protection,  0 Agni  Jatavedas.  Exert  thyself  to  (give) 
ns  possessions,  resplendent  wealth  which  increases,  (and)  is  attended  vith 
children  and  good  offspring”  (2, 2, 12) ; “Aryaman,  Aditi,  worthy  of  worship  . . ., 
save  us  from  getting  into  childlessness ; our  path  of  life  must  be  rich  in  children, 
rich  in  cattle”  (3,  54,  18);  “ . . .0  Agni,  give  us  offspring  possessed  of  vital 
power  . . . May  we  (live)  a hundred  winters,  rich  in  vigorous  (sons)”  (6,  13,  6); 
“Bring  us  wealth  attended  with  vigorous  (sons),  0 (Agni)  Jatavedas,  slay  the 
demons,  0 resourceful  one.  Protect  us  from  distress,  from  the  one  who  intends 
to  injure  (us) ; protect  us  . . .”  (6, 16, 29f.) ; “Let  these  two  (messengers  of  Yama, 
the  lord  of  the  deceased)  give  us  back  here  today  auspicious  life  that  we  may 
see  the  sun”  (10,  14,  12).  The  poet  of  5,  64,  5 prays  for  spiritual  illumination®’. 
Prayers  of  a more  general  character  are  however  not  lacking:  “(Agni)  Vais- 
vanara  must  favour  us  that  we  are  protected”  (6,  9,  7);  “Since  we  choose  thy 
inspiration  (involving  thy)  benevolence,  be  gracious  to  us,  protecting  three- 
fold” (6,  15,  9)®®.  Some  of  the  most  frequent  petitions  tend  to  recur  at  the  end 
of  hymns,  not  rarely  in  stereot3rped  phrases:  “May  we  be  lords  of  wealth” 
(4,  50,  6)  is  not  less  than  five  times  used  in  the  Rgveda  to  occur  very  often  in 
other  works,  and  the  famous  final  prayer  “Do  ye  protect  us  evermore  with 
blessings”  is  repeated  in  more  than  seventy  hjmns. 

A prayer  may  combine  with  a corresponding  statement  of  divine  power  or 
activity:  at  5,  63,  6 Parjanya  (the  god  of  rain)  raises  his  thunderous  voice, 
0 Mitra- Vanina  let  the  sky  rain!  Or  it  may  follow  or  precede  a declaration  of 
homage  or  worship.  “Then  to  the  father  to  whom  belong  all  the  gods,  the  bull, 
we  would  offer  worship  with  sacrifices,  obeisance,  and  oblations.  0 Brhaspati, 
with  good  offspring  and  heroes  we  w^ould  be  lords  of  ivealth’  (4,  50,  6) ; To 
Yama  offer  an  oblation  abounding  in  ghee  . , . ; he  must  (may)  guide  us  to  the 


Geld  NEB.,  Auswahl,  II,  p.  76;  80;  130.  See  also  3,  16. 
See  e.g.  also  10,  24,  6;  43,  9. 


112 


J.  Gouda  • Vedic  Literature 


gods,  that  we  may  live  a long  life’’  (10,  14,  14).  The  deceased  ancestors  are 
implored  to  help  their  descendants:  ‘'Ye  Fathers  . . . (come)  hither  vith  aid; 
these  offsprings  we  have  made  for  yon,  enjoy  them  . . . ; then  bestow  on  ns 
welfare  and  happiness  free  from  hnrt”  (10,  15,  4)^®;  “Being  praised,  fulfil  onr 
desire”  (7,  62,  3). 

Not  infrequently  the  gods  are  indirectly  implored  to  answer  man’s  prayers ; 
6,  68,  6 the  wealth  which  Indra  and  Vamna  bring  to  others  may  fall  to  onr 
share.  Or  a general  prayer  is  immediately  followed  by  the  expression  of  a 
particular  wish:  7,  82,  1 “Protect  ns;  we  wish  to  gain  the  victory.”  The  poets 
may,  moreover,  clothe  their  thoughts  in  varied  language  and  avail  themselves 
of  different  phrases  and  grammatical  means  expressing  many  delicate  distinc- 
tions and  gradations  in  their  modes  of  address : imperatives  of  the  second  or 
the  third  person,  optatives  and  other  verbal  forms  expressing  a wish  or  pos- 
sibility, expressions  of  the  wish  to  be  under  the  god’s  protection,  requests  put 
into  the  form  of  a reference  to  his  beneficent  activity,  statements  of  the  success 
of  those  men  who  have  won  his  favour®®.  Mythical  and  actual  reality  beincr 
closely  interwoven,  and  the  divine  and  the  human  spheres  interpenetrating, 
the  poets  often  stand  on  a familiar  footing  with  the  gods  and  are  not  afraid  to 
tell  them  that,  if  they  were  gods,  they  would  shower  gifts  and  blessings  on 
their  worshippers^^  On  the  other  hand,  there  is  also  the  lamentation  of  Vasistha 
bemoaning  himself  because  his  friendship  with  Varuna  has  come  to  an  end 
(/,  88).  A personal  touch  is  not  foreign  to  other  Varuna  hynms  either®®:  there 
are  lamentations  of  patients  and  a complaint  about  calumny. 

Prayers  may  alternate  with  deprecations®®,  and  in  some  cases  the  latter 
come  decidedly  to  the  fore — “ward  off  the  enmities;  have  mercy;  far  must  be 
(your)  fetters,  far  suffering!”  (2,  29)— and  a deprecation  may  be  followed  by  a 
veiled  curse  (6,  48,  17)®^  Sometimes  however  avowed  hatred  compels  a poet 
to  lay  an  enemy  under  a malediction®®.  The  curse  contained  in  3,  53,  21-24  is 
an  undisguised  attack  against  an  anonymous  enemy®®.  It  is  often  impossible 
for  us  to  draw  any  clear  distiction  between  prayers  and  entreaties  on  the  one 
hand  and  spells  or  imprecations  on  the  other®^  2,  23,  9 “Through  thee  we 
would  receive  enviable  goods;  crush  the  mahgn  misers.”  In  7,  61,  4 they  follow 
each  other  complernentally : “The  moons  shaU  pass  without  sons  for  those  who 


See  e.g.  also  5,  55,  10;  7,  84,  5;  97,  9;  8,  11,  10 
6ff.;  ?62.^*  6,  54;  68, 

Q^lllo,  p.^4V^"  ^ 

X^T,^p*  n4^(T^4)  ^ Schubring,  p.  26  (1,  25;  10,  34) ; Eenotj,  E.  V.  P. 

- 2ff.;  87,  7. 

“ See  6,  52,  Iff.;  7,  94,  12. 

See  Geldi«teb,  RV.  I,  p.  395;  n,  p.  273. 

" For  these  see  e.g.  1,  147,  4,  for  a veHed  imprecation:  4,  2,  9. 


Contents  of  the  Rgveda 

do  not  worship ; lie  who  bends  Ms  mind  to  worsMp  will  save  the  circle 
family.’’  Every  stanza  of  the  eulogies  npon  Agni,  Indra  and  Vanina  8, 
ends  with  the  refrain:  *‘The  others,  whoever  they  be,  mnst  burst!’’®® 


113 

of  Ms 
39-41 


38  Cf.  also  Renou,  E.  V.  P.  H,  P- 


114 


J.  Gouda  • Vedic  Literature 


d.  Myths 


Erom  the  above-mentioned  forms  of  praise  commemoration  of  mythical  feats 
is  not  essentially  different  because  the  essence  of  myth  also  lies  in  its  being 
repeatedly  spoken  anew:  ''Thou  (Indra)  slowest  the  serpent  showing  his  power 
as  he  lay  around  the  flood”  (3,  32,  11)^.  The  living  myth  is  the  parallel  of 
celebration ; it  is  itself  verbal  celebration,  closely  related  to  the  ritual,  winch  it 
certifies:  “As  with  hlanu  drink,  0 Indra,  enjoying  the  pressed  oblation.  Thou 
causest  the  waters  to  flow”  (3,  32,  5)^. 

A myth  refers  to  the  past  when  a sacred  action  was  first  executed.  It  is  no 
pseudo-historical  tale,  not  necessarily  a subject  for  contemplation  but  the 
reiterated  presentation  of  some  event  replete  with  power®.  It  is  for  those  who 
believe  in  it  a true  story  and,  beyond  that,  sacred,  significant  and  exemplary. 
Told  in  satisfaction  of  religious,  moral,  social  wants  or  even  practical  require- 
ments it  is  a narrative  resurrection  of  a primeval  reality,  also  if  it  explains  the 
course  of  natural  phenomena  and  leads  the  believers  to  abide  the  issue  of  these 
with  confidence*.  The  rivers  flow  today  because  Indra,  in  the  mythical  past, 
made  them  their  bed  (6,  30,  3).  A mythical  event  is  re-iterated  in  history: 
“(Indra)  struck  Vrizra” — ^the  power  of  obstruction  which  would  prevent  him 
from  establishing  the  cosmos — “fatally;  the  powerful  one  has  conquered  in 
(the)  battles”  (10,  104,  10);  “I  entreat  Indra,  the  much  invoked  one,  that  he 
slay  Vrtra,  that  he  secure  vdja  in  the  battles”  (3,  37,  5).  The  mythical  and 
historical  actions  run  parallel,  are  identical:  “Bom  for  strength  and  dominion 
he  drove  away  the  enemies  and  made  ample  room  for  the  gods”  (10,  180,  3)®; 
“When  thou  throwest  down  (timeless  present)  the  trees  on  the  head  of  l^usna 
(a  mythical  antagonist)  . . .,  when  thou  wilt  do  that  today,  who  will  inter- 
fere ?”  (1,  54,  5).  Recollection  of  a myth  enables  man  to  repeat  what  the  gods, 
heroes  or  ancestors  did  'in  the  beginning.’  The  central  mythical  feature  of  the 
Rgvedic  Visnu  consists  in  the  three  strides  he  takes  traversing  the  universe, 
and  the  time-honoured  Indian  view  of  this  god  as  representing  spatial  exten- 
siveness—and  especially  that  pervasiveness  which  is  essential  to  the  establish- 
ment and  maintenance  of  our  cosmos  and  beneficial  to  the  interests  of  gods 
and  men  seems,  in  the  main,  a successful  interpretation  of  this  mythical 
imagery®.  But  aU  beings  are  said  to  dwell  (present  tense)  in  these  three  strides, 
and  the  steps  themselves  are  full  of  honey  and  bliss  and  it  is  the  poet’s  hope  to 
reach  (in  the  future)  the  god’s  highest  domain,  where  those  who  seek  the  pre- 
sence of  the  gods  rejoice’. 


! See  also  1,  62,  4«.;  103,  2;  3,  31,  8;  4,  50,  5;  5,  11,  6;  7,  63,  2;  71,  5 etc. 

- See  also  3,  47,  4;  5,  31,  3fF.;  32,  Iff. 

religiose  Gehalt  der  Mjdhen,  Tiibingen.  1933,  p.  7; 
V AN  DEK  LeEXTW,  O.C.,  p.  413.  ° *> 

* See  5,  40,  5ff.  (sun  eclipse). 

® J.  Gonda,  Loka,  Amsterdam  Acad.  1966,  p.  21. 

' J.  Gonda,  Visnuism  and  Sivaism,  London  1970,  n 5 
' RV-  1.  154,  2;  4;  5;  cf.  1,  22,  20.  ^ 


Contents  of  the  Rgveda 


115 


FnMUing  an  indispensable  function  these  liTing  mirths  express  and,  in  their 
way,  formulate  belief-  The  soma  draught  offered  to  India  is  believed  to  be 
identical  with  the  m3rtMcal  beverage  which  fortified  Mm,  when  he  was  to 
slay  Vrfcra  and  combat  Sambara;  it  will  enable  him  to  defeat  the  present 
enemies  (3,  47)®.  The  soToa  prepared  for  ritual  use  is  taken  on  earth  wMle  its 
birth  is,  according  to  the  myth,  in  heaven  (9,  61,  10).  The  one  who  re-enacts 
a myth,  or  has  it  re-enacted,  reproduces  its  reality  for  his  own  benefit.  In  a 
prayer  on  behalf  of  the  poet’s  patron  the  latter  can  simply  be  identified  with 
a m3d;Mcal  figure,  Kutsa,  who  was  India’s  associate : ‘"Strike  once  more  for  the 
benefit  of  Kutsa!”  (8,  24,  25).  Or  an  allusion  to  a mytMcal  event  is  followed 
by  a prayer,  addressed  to  a god,  for  a repetition,  on  behalf  of  those  speaking, 
of  his  glorious  deed  (1,  104)®.  Recurrent  events  are  seen  as  belongmg  to  cycles, 
the  nature  of  wMch  was  clarified  by  means  of  myths  or  mytMcal  examples. 
The  sacrifice  of  Manu,  the  institutor  of  sacrificial  rites,  is  the  protot37pe  of  the 
present  sacrifice^®.  However,  the  belief  in  the  gods  and  in  the  effectiveness  of 
texts  and  rites  does  not  prevent  a poet  from  expressing  some  doubt ; is  India 
still  able  to  perform  Ms  feats 

Myths  can  also  vouch  for  the  efficiency  of  ritual  and  the  legitimacy  of  the 
customs  and  institutions  of  men.  The  Suryasukta,  RY.  10,  85,  describes,  in  the 
form  of  a loosely  knit  account  of  a variety  of  incidents,  the  wedding  of  Surya 
and  Soma,  the  prototype  of  any  marriage  on  earth — ^ia  st.  20  the  m3rtMcal 
Surya  is  addressed,  but  any  human  bride  can  be  meant — adding,  in  its  second 
part,  a number  of  pertinent  formulas  wMch  recur  in  the  ritual  manuals  to  be 
used  at  the  marriage  of  ordinary  mortals^^.  The  supposition  that  these  formulas 
to  be  recited  at  the  various  stages  of  the  ceremony  w^ere  part  of  the  text  from 
the  very  begimiing^®  has  much  to  recommend  it.  Or  rather,  the  introductory^ 
story  may  serve  to  found  the  collection  of  mantras  on  mjd^Mcal  fact. 

The  myths  were  no  doubt  also  to  enlighten  Yedic  man  on  matters  wMch 
could  not  be  made  intelligible  to  him  by  analysis  or  abstract  reasoning.  They^ 
serve  in  a way  to  explain  cosmogomc,  cosmological  and  meteorological  pro- 
blems or  traditional  convictions  and  their  principal  figures  have  special  rounds 
of  duty  in  connexion  with  various  events  in  human  life,  for  instance  the  cycle 
of  procreation,  birth,  growth  and  decay:  Pui^n,  the  god  who  knows  the  ways 
and  is  bom  on  the  far  path  of  heaven  and  of  earth,  is  invoked  to  conduct  the 
dead  (10,  17,  4ff.).  The  most  important  and  remarkably  predominant  myth  of 
India  and  Vrtra  —the  cMef  adversary  of  the  great  god,  who  is  said  to  have 


® See  also  3,  51,  8. 

® For  wMch  see  Geudneb,  in  ZRMG  71,  p.  310. 

10  See  6,  68,  1;  10,  61,  15. 

11  Cf.  3,  30,  3;  4,  30,  7;  6,  18,  3.  . . . . 

12  See  J.  Ehni,  in  ZDMG  33  (1879),  p.  166  (whose  explanation  of  the  symbolism 

of  this  text  is  completely  antiquated);  Pischbl,  V.  S.  I,  p.  14;  H.  Oldenbbsg,  m, 
GGA  1880,  p.  7. 

12  WnSTTEBNITZ,  H.  I.  L.  I,  p.  107. 


116 


J.  Gonda  • Vedic  Literature 


been  bom  for  tbe  very  destruction  of  this  snake^"*  who  obstracts  the  waters 
and  opposes  the  establishment  of  an  inhabitable  world^^ — ^is,  as  we  know  now^®, 
no  commemoration  of  a victory  over  drought,  but  a mythical  accotint  and 
explanation  of  how  Indra  established  a well-ordered  world  by  separating  heaven 
and  earth^^  and  opening  up  the  space  between  these,  so  that  the  sun  could  rise 
and  the  light  and  rain  of  the  heavens  could  reach  and  fertilize  the  earth^®.  The 
purport  of  a myth  may  be  explicitly  mentioned  in  the  form  of  a sort  of  ‘moral/ 
In  RY.  10,  109  Soma  who  had  apparently  abducted  Brhaspati’s  wife  gives  her 
back^®.  According  to  Sayana — ^whose  explanation  may  to  a certain  extent  be 
harmonized  with  the  sukta — she  was  however  deserted  by  her  husband  because 
of  some  ‘sin’  or  defect;  this  was  expiated  by  the  gods  who  restored  her  to 
Brhaspati.  Says  the  poet  in  st.  6 “The  gods  gave  her  back  and  so  (should) 
men  do/* 

Being  representatives  of  the  superhuman  world  gods  are  portrayed  as  ideal 
figures,  which  are  above  deceit  and  ‘mortality,’  need  no  sleep,  are  never 
careless  and  do  not  end  their  day’s  work^®.  They  stand  on  firm  ground,  have 
fixed  rules,  are  lords,  are  possessed  of  the  sun-eye  and  extend  their  protection 
to  their  worshippers^^  A god  shows  his  power  and  fulfils  his  mission  already 
as  a baby.  As  soon  as  bom,  Indra  drinks  the  soma,  seizes  his  bow,  surpasses 
the  other  gods  and  reduces  heaven  and  earth  to  a state  of  panic ; as  soon  as 
bom  Agni  is  an  adult  so  as  to  go  at  once  the  great  way  of  his  message^^^ 

Awful  admiration  for  the  cosmic  miracles  is  one  of  the  distinctive  qualities 
•of  this  poetry:  Visnu  alone  supports  heaven  and  earth  and  all  beings®®.  Not  a 
few  descriptions  of  the  gods’  incomprehensible  power  (mdyd ) were  well  suited 
for  arousing  a seTisus  ThwuiTiis  and  making  the  audience  conscious  of  the  presence 
of  divine  will-power.  Over  the  trees  Varuna  has  spread  the  atmosphere,  in 
the  race-horses  he  has  placed  vigour,  in  the  cows  milk,  ia  our  hearts  inventi- 
veness, ...  in  the  sky  the  sun”  (5,  85,  2)2^.  Gods  are  capable  of  doing  what  is 
beyond  the  reach  of  men : Dawn  finds  good  paths  even  in  the  mountains  and 
crosses  windless  waters  (6,  64,  4).  Their  origin,  birth  and  adventures  are 


See  e.g.  8,  78,  5;  10,  55. 

See  e.g.  IMacdoxell,  V.  M.,  p.  58;  152;  158. 

W.  Noemax  Beowx,  in  JAOS  62,  p.  85;  Gonda,  B.  1. 1,  p.  55. 

See  Geldnee,  RV.  I,  p.  379  on  RV.  3,  38,  3. 

. S5,  9;  165,  8;  2,  12,  2f.;  14,  2; 

^ BApadia,  in  JOIB  21  (1972),  p.  283. 

^-n  1?  ^ IHQ  33,  p.  177;  S.  S.  Bhawe, 

,in  Festschrift  W.  Kirfel,  p.  17.  xr  > , 

« i o’  IS:  13,  3. 

S.  t’  8;  1,  89,  7;  7,  66,  10;  1,  90,  3. 

RV.  3,  48,  1;  8,  45,  4;  1,  63,  1;  10,  115,  1. 

6,  7,  ^ ^ (ladra);  3,  5,  10; 

” Ctoo.  Va^a-Hymnen  des  Rig-Veda,  Boim  1948,  p.  9.  For  similar  stanzas 
m conneotmn  with  Van^a:  6,  70,  1;  7,  86,  1;  8,  41,  10.  Sometimes  the  prodigies  of 

-nature  are  simpiy  stated  as  such:  5,  47,  5.  P & 


Contents  of  the  Rgveda 


117 


lunisiiaP^,  they  possess  iniraciiloiis  weapons®®  and  travel  through  the  atmos- 
phere in  marvellous  vehicles®^.  They  are  physically  powerful  and  able  to  bring 
about  prodigies®®.  Feats  of  unusual  dexterity  are  so  much  characteristic  of 
divinity  that  the  Rbhus,  who  originally  had  no  divine  nature,  became  gods 
by  their  wonderful  manual  sMU®®.  Well-known  motifs  do  not  fail  to  occur: 
when  Indra  was  horn,  heaven  and  earth  trembled,  the  mountains  shook,  the 
plains  sank  down®®. 

The  intimate  relations  between  m3rthical  reality  and  the  present  situation 
of  the  poet  and  his  patron  in  which  this  reality  is,  or  may  be,  re-enacted  and  in 
which  these  persons  are  seized  by  the  exalting  power  of  the  events  recol- 
lected, explains  the  sudden  transitions,  within  some  hymns,  from  the  myth  to 
those  events  which  were  the  immediate  cause  of  the  composition  of  the  poem. 
Thus,  after  praising  Indra  and  commemorating  the  god’s  victory  over  Namuci 
— ^the  characteristic  feature  of  this  conflict,  viz.  Indra  twirling  off  the  head  of 
his  antagonist,  is  not  omitted — ^the  poet  passes  on  to  the  clan  of  the  Ru^mas 
who,  after  offering  to  Indra,  had  with  his  help  recovered  their  cows®^.  Oc- 
casionally, transitions — and  even  practically  imperceptible  transitions — ^from 
the  mythical  past  to  actuality  add  substantially  to  the  obscurity  of  a suMa^^. 

A shift  to  another  verbal  form,  the  aorist,  allows  the  poet  to  present  a 
m3d}hical  event  as  actual  past  or  actuality®®.  Or  he  may  use  the  present  tense : 
“The  well-matched  counterpart  of  all  that  exists,  standing  in  front  of  all,  he 
(Indra)  knows  all  generations:  he  slays  Susm”  (3,  31,  8) — a demon  whose 
conflict  with  the  great  god  is  elsewhere®^  fought  out  in  the  m3rthical  past®®.  The 
scene  of  a myth  is,  indeed,  often  laid  in  the  present  or  a god  is  requested  to  do 
now  what  he  is  known  to  do  in  the  myth : “0  Agni,  manifest  yourself  to  Matarii^- 
van”  (1,  31,  3)®®.  Or  words  put  into  the  mouth  of  a m3fthicai  figure  are  at  the 
same  time  significant  for  the  present  circumstances  (4,  16,  8). 

Hence  also  the  addition  of  a request  addressed  to  a god  to  perform  his  mythi- 
cal deed  once  again  immediately  after  mention  has  been  made  of  it®’.  Or  the 


See  e.g.  1,  37,  9;  5,  53,  1;  6,  66,  4;  7,  58,  2 (Marats);  1,  181,  4;  5,  73,  4 (Aivins). 
See  e.g.  RV.  5,  86,  3. 

See  e.g.  1,  118,  Iff. 

®8  See  e.g.  RV.  1,  121,  2;  4,  19,  4ff. 

Macdonell,  Y.  M.,  p.  132;  e.g.  RV.  4,  33,  5f.;  8;  36,  If. 

RV.  1,  61,  14;  63,  1;  4,  17,  2;  22,  4. 

Cf.  Geldkeb,  RV.  n,  p.  28  on  st.  10.  See  also  1,  7,  7;  4,  1,  18ff.  and  3,  1,  15ff. 
See  e.g.  1,  121.  Divine  and  human  reality  may  in  a way  coincide  so  that  the 
poet  feels  justified  in  omitting  grammatical  indications  of  the  changing  subjects 
(see  e.g.  1,  72). 

®®  See  2,  11,  7. 

RV.  1,  51,  11;  8,  1,  28;  96,  17;  cf.  1,  130,  9.  See  also  Geld]j?eb,  in  ZDMG  71, 
p.  332  (on  10,  22). 

Cf.  e.g.  1,  117,  3. 

®®  Cf.  1,  143,  2,  and  see  Macdootxe,  V.  M.,  p.  71. 

See  8,  1,  28. 


118 


J.  Gkrnda  • Vedic  Literature 


occurrence  of  quotations  in  direct  speecli  in  mythical  passages®®  contributes  to 
the  actuality  of  the  events  narrated  or  emphasizes  those  elements  of  the  myth 
which  are  of  immediate  practical  interest,  because  they  are  well-formulated 
prayers  (10,  22,  7ff.).  Or  the  poet  goes  so  far  as  to  identify  his  own  words  with 
the  laudation  or  prayer  pronounced  by  his  mythical  predecessors®® ; it  is  self- 
evident  that  these  words  help  him,  for  instance,  to  overcome  distress  and  difficul- 
ties. 

It  seems  convenient  to  distinguish,  in  principle,  between  myths  proper  and 
stories  about  gods,  or  mythical  narratives,  that  is  tales  or  stories  in  which 
marvellous  events  are  enacted  and  gods  and  (or)  other  superhuman  beings  are 
the  leading  figures^®.  As  a heroic  figure  Lndra  became,  for  instance,  embroiled 
in  hostilities  with  various  uncanny  beings,  among  whom  the  demoniac  Namuci 
whose  head  the  god  twisted  off  with  the  foam  of  water  (8, 14, 13),  a motif  which 
was  elaborated  in  the  hrdhma'ms^^.  Many  places  in  the  Rgveda  contain  allu- 
sions to  deeds  or  adventures  of  gods  which  are  otherwise  unknown  or  only 
imperfectly  known : at  6,  44,  23  lndra  is  said  to  have  found  the  divine  draught 
among  Trita  and  his  brothers  in  heaven’s  bright  firmament^®.  At  7,  1,  7 Agni  is 
related  to  have  burnt  one  Jarutha  who  may  have  been  a demon,  although 
others — in  view  of  7,  9,  6 mentioning  Vasistha — ^preferred  to  regard  him  as  a 
human  enemy^®.  Some  of  these  fragmentary  tales  have  long  since  given  rise  to 
various  explanations  or  been  a matter  of  dispute for  instance  that  of  lndra, 
Drapsa  and  Krsna  in  8,  96,  13-15:  the  god  seems  to  have  helped  the  former  in 
combatting  the  latter  demon. 

These  myths  and  mjdhical  tales  are  as  a rule  narrated  in  an  incomplete  and 
fragmentary  way^®  and  often  only  alluded  to"*®,  the  events  of  these  episodes 
being,  in  a particular  context,  incompletely  given  A hymn  such  as  1,  32, 
which  makes  us  acquainted  with  the  main  incidents  of  Indra’s  combat  with 
Vitra  described,  as  usual,  in  heroic^®  proportions,  is  exceptional.  In  most  cases 


See  e.g.  1,  61,  12;  121,  10;  12. 

Cf.  5,  45,  3;  6, 11.  For  this  poem  see  Geldnee,  RV.,  II,  p.  50;  Ludbes,  Varuna, 
p.  325. 


E.g.  10,  17,  1-2  (see  below). 

M.  Bloomfield,  in  JAOS  15,  p.  143. 

See  e.g.  also  1,  121,  8;  8,  77,  5f.  Part  of  these  obscure  allusions  are,  indeed, 
rather  to  sagas,  e.g.  1,  33;  6,  26,  6;  8,  45,  26;  72,  6. 

Cf.  Brhaddevata  6,  109ff.;  Sayana  on  RV.  8,  96,  13;  Geldner,  RV.  11,  p.  422. 
See  e.g.  Geldxee,  RV.  I,  p.  190  (on  1,  135,  8). 

Cf.  e.g.  4,  21,  6ff.;  5,  29,  4;  6,  20,  4f. 

Cf.  e.g.  1,  6,  5;  32,  14;  51,  1;  4,  21,  6;  26,  1;  30,  20;  6,  30,  5;  7,  97,  4;  8,  2,  39; 
40,  5;  10,  32,  6. 


‘’  Instances  are  the  stories  of  Agni’s  flight  and  of  Namuci  (Bloomtield,  l.c.; 
H.  Oldimbeeg,  at  NG  1893,  p.  342  (=K.  S.  p.  635)  who  is  right  in  pointing  out 
that  for  the  poets  themselves  not  all  m;^’thical  themes  may  have  been  equally  im- 
portant). See,  in  general,  K.  F.  Geldnee,  in  Festgabe  Jacobi,  p.  242. 

^8  One  shoifid,  however,  not  (with  R.  N.  Dandekae,  in  ABORI  31,  p.  1)  regard 
lndra  as  a deified  human  hero. 


Contents  of  the  Rgveda 


119 


the  poets  Hirdt  themselves  to  one  or  a few  typical  or  characteristic  details  or  to 
a decisive  event.  As  far  as  the  missing  elements  do  not  remain  iinknovTi  thev 
have  to  be  found  in  other  hymns  and  the  ancillary  literatiire^^  and  in  some 
cases  to  a certain  extent  and  cautiously — ^in  other  Vedic  texts.  Readers  of  the 
Rgveda  must  try  with  the  help  of  indices  and  cross  references  to  form  a notion 
of  the  facts  and  events  the  poets  are  speaking  of,  and  in  this  they  vdll  not  always 
be  successful.  The  poets  are  moreover  not  averse  firoin  sudden  changes  or  com- 
binations of  mythical  themes^o  and  the  possibility  that  a taboo  may  have 
compelled  them  to  omit  certain  inauspicious  names,  events  or  aspects  of  a god 
should  not  be  precluded^^. 

Thus  the  Rgveda,  though  abounding  in  mythical  themes,  does  not  furnish 
us  with  complete  expositions  of  these  themes— for  even  the  above  I,  32  is  a 
torso — ^to  say  nothing  of  systematic  mythology.  This  does  not  however  mean 
that  there  is  in  these  myths  nothing  like  a trace  of  harmony  and  that  thev,  as  a 
whole,  constitute  a confused  mass  of  inconsistent  beliefs^^  ^ 
almost  innumerable  detached  allusions  and  incidents  is  remarkably  consistent, 
even  when  they  occur  in  different  collections  of  hymns.  This  may  point  to  the 
existence  of  a comparatively  homogeneous  oral  tradition,  that  comprised  also 
parallel  or  ‘duplicate’  myths  the  main  events  of  which  follow  a similar  pattern : 
between  Indra’s  conquest  of  Vrtra  and  his  overthrow  of  Vala  there  is,  for 
instance,  much  similarity^^.  It  would  therefore  seem  a likely  supposition  that 
the  myths  as  we  possess  them  in  the  Rgveda  represent  an  advanced  stage 
stamped,  in  a long  process  of  selection  and  amplification,  by  the  successive 
generations  of  poets  as  more  or  less  representative  of  their  view  of  life  and  the 
world ; that  within  a large  range  of  variability  their  oral  substrata  constituted, 
in  their  main  features,  a fairly  consistent,  though  diversified,  whole 

Some  themes  must  have  been  very  popular  for  a long  time,  because  they  are 
also  handed  down  in  much  later  versions.  The  at  first  sight  not  completely  clear 
two  initial  stanzas  of  RV.  10,  17^®  referring  to  the  wedding  of  Tvastar’s  daugh- 
ter, the  disappearance  of  Vivasvat’s  wife,  the  creation  of  a woman  of  the  same 
appearance,  and  to  a woman  becoming  pregnant  with  the  Asvins  is  a condensed 
form  of  a longer  story : Saranyu,  Tvastar’s  daughter,  barely  married  to  Vivas- 


See,  e.g.,  for  Indra  and  Dadhyanc  GELDxneR,  RV.  I,  p.  108  (on  1,  84,  13—15), 
Needless  to  say  that  in  individual  cases  allusions  are  obscure,  ambiguous  or  ques- 
tionable; see  e.g.  on  RV.  6,  49,  8 Pischel,  V.  S.  I,  p.  11;  Geldneb,  RV.  n,  p.  150; 
Renou,  E.  V.  P.  V,  p.  32. 

Cf.  2,  11,  7f.;  84,  15;  24,  6f.;  4,  1,  13ff.;  2;  5,  31,  3f.  and  st.  8-11;  9,  108,  6; 
10,  46,  3 as  well  as  cases  such  as  1,  73,  6. 

S.  Levi,  La  doctrine  du  sacrifice  dans  les  brahmanas,  Paris  1898,  p.  167. 

As  was  the  opinion  of  A.  C.  Buenell,  in  lA  13,  p.  19. 

Goistda,  R.  1. 1,  p.  57 ; LtiDEBS,  Varuna,  p.  537 ; A.  Vexkatastjbbiah,  in  ZDMG 
115  (1965),  p.  120. 

For  the  poets  see  also  S.  EmAMBiscH,  in  JAOS  81  (1961),  p.  104. 

®®  See  Bloomfield,  in  JAOS  15,  p.  172;  H.  Lommel,  in  ZDMG  99,  p.  243,  and 
compare  Harivamsa  1,  9,  Iff.;  ViPur.  3,  2,  2ff. 


120 


J.  Gouda  • Vedic  Literature 


vat,  is  displeased  with  him  and  deserts  him,  giving  birth  to  the  twins  Yama« 
and  Yami.  The  gods,  siding  with  her,  construct  her  counterpart  to  take  Sa- 
ranyu’s  place  in  Vivasvat’s  affections.  With  her  he  begets  Mann,  but  after 
detecting  the  deception  practised  upon  him  he  follows  Saranyu  and  begets  with 

her  the  Asvins. 

The  closely  connected  hymns  4,  26  and  27  famish  an  example  of  a Rgvedic 
myth  that  is  distinctly  different  from  the  presentation  of  the  same  theme,  viz. 
the  rape  of  Soma,  in  later  works”.  About  the  interpretation  scholars  differ  in 
opinion:  according  to  one  view  the  suUas  emphasize  the  falcon’s  mission  to 
fetch,  by  order  of  Indra,  the  soma  from  the  heavens  and  meanwhile  to  afford 
Indra — who  is  the  god  of  4,  26 — an  opportunity  to  fly  so  that  men  have,  up  to 
the  present  day,  to  offer  the  soma,  his  due,  to  this  god”.  On  the  in  itself  not 
improbable  assumption  of  the  existence  of  an  ancient  Soma  ritual  a more 
recent  explanation  rightly  regards  the  soma  as  both  juice  and  person:  hence 
the  double  imprisonment,  in  the  stems  and  in  the  womb  and  the  twofold  libera- 
tion, viz.  when  it  is  pressed  out  and  when  it  is  taken  from  the  celestial  strong- 
hold, where  it  was  imprisoned  by  the  enemies  of  the  Aryans.  The  one  who 
initiates  the  liberation  through  the  falcon  is  Manu,  the  first  man,  who  estab- 
lishes the  Soma  sacrifice  and  so  founds  a bond  between  the  Aryans  and  Indra, 
the  drinker  of  soma^^. 

It  is  ail  but  impossible  to  arrive  at  satisfactory  conclusions  in  regard  to  the 
question  as  to  how  far  popular  and  priestly  versions  of  the  same  theme  existed 
beside  each  other  and,  if  they  did,  to  what  extent  they  have  influenced  one 
another.  The  possibility  of  penetration  of  originally  non- Aryan  themes  and 
motifs  is,  in  principle,  not  to  be  rejected,  but  in  concrete  cases  difficult  of 
demonstration®®.  Prehistoric  transformations  of  m3d;hical  themes  lie  beyond 
our  scope  ®^.  Nor  can  we  enter  into  a discussion  of  the  possibility  of  historical 
elements  in  the  Rgvedic  mjrths®^.  Suffice  it  to  say  that  attempts®®  at  seeing 
some  reflexions  of  the  historical  events  in  the  stories  related  in  connexion  with 


For  Yama  and  Vivasvat  see  also  10,  14,  1;  21,  5;  58,  1 etc. 

For  the  Vedic  places  see  Bloomfieli),  at  Festgruss  v.  Roth,  p.  149.  Of.  the 
Supamadhyaya;  Mbh.  1,  a.  28. 

E.  SrBG,  in  Festgabe  Jacobi,  p.  228. 

U.  Schneider,  Der  Somaraub  des  Manu,  Wiesbaden  1971.  For  various  details 
and  the  historical  background  see  Gk)NDA,  Dual  deities,  p.  363. 

For  Indra  and  the  boar  in  1,  61,  7 see  F.  B.  J.  Kijxper,  An  Austro-asiatic  myth 
in  the  Rigveda,  Amsterdam  Acad.  1950  (basing  himself  mainly  on  linguistic  argu- 
ments). For  Rudra  as  an  aryanized  Dravidian  god  (or  less  hazardously,  a god 
showing  non-aryan  influences):  R.  hT.  Dandekar,  in  JIJPBCS  1,  p.  94. 

See  e.g.  S.  Wikandeb,  Vayu,  Uppsala  1941. 

The  absence  of  lines  of  demarcation  between  myth  and  reality  should  not  lead 
us  to  follow  B.  R.  Sharma,  Rgvedic  rivers,  in  The  Ind.  Hist.  Res.  Inst.  Silver  J ub. 
Comm.  VoL,  Bombay  1953,  p.  377,  in  holding  the  Vedic  rivers  to  be  mythic  streams 
and  the  Veda  to  be  devoid  of  any  historical  content  whatever. 

V.  G.  Rahubbiab,  in  PO  22  (1957),  p.  40. 


Contents  of  the  Rgveda 


121 


the  disputed  figure  of  Agastya®^ — ^whose  greatest  feat  was  the  reconciliatioii  of 
Indra  and  the  Maruts,  dealt  with  in  three  h%nnns«5~are  far  from  convincing. 

The  Indo-European  origin  of  Vedic  mirths  has,  since  the  days  of  A.  Kuhn 
and  M.  Muller  ^in  the  last  decades  especially  in  numerous  publications  by 
G.  Dumezil  often  been  argued  and  doubted.  Xo  attempt  can  be  made  here 
even  to  survey  the  main  results  of  the  debate.  The  Greek  m^^h  of  fire,  celestial 
in  origin  but  brought  to  earth  by  a human  being®® — Prometheus  stole  it  when 
Zeus  had  hidden  it  from  man — ^has  given  rise,  not  only  to  a discussion  of  Indo- 
European  origins,  but  also  to  a comparison  between  a Greek  and  an  Indian 
expression  of  a similar  mythological  theme®^  It  is  however  highly  uncertain 
and  not  capable  of  textual  proof®®  whether  the  complex  and  enigmatic  Vedic 
Matarisvan  may  be  considered  Prometheus’  Indian  counterpart.  Inconsiderate 
allegations  and  hazardous  conclusions  are  in  this  field  no  rarities®®.  The  question 
as  to  how  far  the  V edic  portraits  of  those  gods  who  were  already  recognized  or 
worshipped  in  prehistoric  times  were  retouched  by  the  ancient  Indian  poets’® 
should  be  the  concern,  not  only  of  those  interested  in  the  history  of  religion  but 
also  of  students  of  Indian  literature.  So,  too,  should  be  the  problem  of  the 
influence  or  survival’  of  a (tripartite)  organization  of  the  Indo-European 
society  on  the  structure  of  the  Vedic  myths  and  some  of  the  forms  in  which  they 
were  fijsed  in  verbal  expression,  an  influence  fervently  vindicated  by  Ihimezil’h 
unconditionally  rejected  by  some’^,  critically  judged  by  others.  Are  places 
such  as  RV.  9,  2,  10  describing  Soma  as  winning  cows,  men,  horses  and  gener- 
ative power  ( vd]a ) really  conclusive  evidence,  the  last  element  combining  the 


See  Macdonell  and  Keith,  V.  I.  I,  p.  6. 

5’V.  1,  165;  170;  171;  the  story  is  also  often  mentioned  in  the  brahmanas  (e.g. 
TB.  2,  7,  11,  1;  PB.  21,  14,  5). 

®®  A.  Kuhn,  Die  Herabkunft  des  Feuers  imd  des  Gdttertrankes,  Gutersloh  1859 
(21886). 

A.  K.  CooMABASWAMY,  in  Comm.  Vol.  G.  Sarton,  X.  York  1947,  p.  465; 
Ludbbs,  Varuna,  p.  521  mentions  a Finnish  parallel  of  the  Vala  myth. 

F.  B.  J.  Kuiper,  in  AsSt  25  (1971),  p.  85.  Cf.  RV.  1,  93,  6;  3,  5,  10;  3,  9,  5. 

We  should,  for  instance,  be  highly  sceptical  about  E.  V.  Arnold’s  (in  KZ 
37,  p.  215)  assumption  of  an  Indo-European  myth  concerning  birth  without  a 
mother  on  the  strength  of  the  birth  of  Pallas  etc.  in  Greece,  and  of  Vasistha  in 
Vedic  India. 

For  the  AlSvuis  see  Gonda,  Dual  deities,  p.  42,  for  Varuna,  ibidem,  p.  145; 
for  Indra  and  Varuna  (4,  42),  ibidem,  p.  229  and  Xobman  Bbown,  at  C.  Kunhan 
Raja  Comm.  Vol.,  Madras  1946,  p.  38 ; for  Mitra,  Varuna  etc.,  inter  alia,  G.  Dumezil, 
Ouranos-Varuna,  Paris  1934;  Mitra-Varuna,  Paris  1940  (21948);  Le  troisieme 
souverain,  Paris  1949;  P.  Thieme,  Mitra  and  Aryaman,  New  Haven  1957 ; Gonda, 
Mitra;  for  Sarasvati  H.  Willman-Gbabowska,  in  RO  17,  p.  250. 

E.g.  in  G.  Dumezil,  L’ideologie  tripartie  des  Indo-Europeens,  Brussels  1958. 
Dumezil  takes  no  account  of  the  very  frequent  occurrences  of  cosmic  and  ritual 
triads. 

’2  See  e.g.  J.  Brough,  in  BSOAS  22,  p.  69;  M.  Boyce,  in  BSOAS  32  (1969), 
p.ll. 


122 


J.  Gtonda  • Tedic  Literature 


three  others  which  represent  DmneziFs  'trois  fonctions/  that  are,  in  his 
opinion,  so  characteristic  of  the  three  classes  of  society^®  ? 

On  the  other  hand,  that  Vedic  mythology  was  merely  a product  of  poetic 
phantasy  and  had  come  into  existence  as  soon  as  the  poets  themselves  (and 
their  audiences)  took  their  words  seriously’^  is  an  untenable  thesis,  however 
much  they  may  have  been  responsible  for  imagery,  variants  and  amplific- 
ations^^. 


P-  ( ?) ; p.  56  on  9,  8,  8 ( ?) ; 

p.  94  on  9 63,  1;  K,  p 94  on  9,  86,  8;  p.  110  on  9,  98,  1 ( ?);  p.  121  on  1,  91.  20;  X, 

m v°'P  -inTT  Elsewhere  he  queries  himself 

(Ji.  V.  R p.  ol  on  9,  3,  5;  IX,  p.  107  on  9,  97,  17).  The  classes  of  society  re- 
present rehgioi^  w^are,’  production.  The  present  author  deals  with  this  problem 
at  gTMtOT  length  m Triads  in  the  Veda,  Amsterdam  Acad,  (forthcoming). 

F.  Thjleme,  in  Festgabe  Lommel,  p.  142. 

” For  the  ritual  use  and  purpose  of  the  mythical  texts  see  chapter  n,  p.  83  ff. 


Contents  of  the  Rgveda 


123 


7.  Legends 

Legends,  in  the  Rgveda  often  hardly  distinguishable  from  mythical  tales, 
are  Mkevise  as  a rule  referred  to  vaguely  or  indirectly  or  recounted  in  some 
essential  details  but  never  narrated  minutely  and  systematically.  Casual 
references  to  the  same  legend  are  far  from  rare.  In  many  cases  there  is  much 
truth  in  the  supposition  that  this  fragmentary  presentation  did  not  interfere 
with  comprehensibility  because  the  audience  was  not  uninfonned  of  the  out- 
lines of  the  main  legends.  Resides,  is  complete  knowledge  of  a storv  indispen- 
sable when  the  listeners  seek  edification  and  a renewed  confixination  of  divine 
power  ? Already  in  this  early  period  a legend,  being  more  typical  and  exemplary 
in  content,  was  more  appreciated  than  an  historical  account.  ISTor  is  there  any 
dispute  over  the  possibility  that  in  many  cases  legendaiy  matter  has  been 
rehandled  and  adapted  to  the  view  of  life  of  those  who  transmitted  it  and  to  the 
ritual  and  literary  purposes  of  the  poets. 

We  shall  not  enter  here  into  a discussion  of  problems  concerning  the  historic- 
ity or  identity  of  the  legendary  characters,  for  instance  the  question  as  to 
whether  there  have  been  one,  two,  three  or  four  persons  bearing  the  name  of 
Atithigva^.  Apart  from  the  possibility  of  namesakes,  we  must  take  into  account 
the  existence  of  family  names ^ — ^the  custom  of  calling  the  descendants  after 
their  common  ancestor — and  the  propensity  to  identify  a distinguished  descend- 
ant with  the  founder  of  the  family,  to  regard  the  former  as  a sort  of  represen- 
tation of  the  latter.  Too  often  we  have  no  information  on  the  facts  underlying 
the  references  to  legendary  persons — ^if  there  have  been  any — ^wMch  w'ould 
enable  us  to  distinguish  between,  for  instance,  inaccuracy  or  licence  on  the  part 
of  the  poet  on  one  hand  and  differences  in  tradition  on  the  other^.  Nor  shall  we 
discuss  the  mostly  abortive  attempts  at  naturalistic  explanations  of  legendary 
personages^,  or  the  suppositions  ventured  with  regard  to  the  Aryan  or  non- 
Aryan  descent  of  some  of  these®. 

Legends  may  constitute  the  main  theme  of  a sukta,  or  what  is  more  common, 
be  an  incident  amid  praise  and  prayer.  Or  beside  a short  reference  in  one  part 
of  the  Rgveda  a longer  treatment  of  the  same  legend  may  he  found  in  another 
hymn:  the  story  of  Ghosa,  the  spinster,  to  w^hom  the  Asvins  gave  a husband 


^ See  e.g.  Gbassmaistn,  W.  RV.,  29;  Bergaigke,  R.  V.  II,  p.  342;  Macdoneul 
and  Keith,  V.  1. 1,  p.  15;  H.  D.  Velanhab,  in  ABORI  23,  p.  657  (unconvincing), 
and  N.  G.  Chapekab  on  Sudas,  in  OT  3,  p.  8. 

2 J.  Bboijgh,  The  early  brahmanical  system  of  gotra  and  pravara,  Cambridge 
1953. 

® Is,  for  instance,  RV.  1,  53,  10  irreconcilable  with  st.  8 as  is  maintained  by 
Velankar  ? 

^ Thus  Cyavana  (on  him  and  RV.  10,  61  see  S.  A.  Dange,  at  JIH  45,  p.  369) 
has  been  identified  with  the  sun  (N.  G.  Chapekab,  in  PO  24,  p.  42). 

® See  e.g.  the  highly  improbable  assumptions  about  Agastya  published  by 
M.  R.  Jambukathan  in  17  AIOC,  S.  P-  p.  8;  18  AIOC,  S.  P.  p.  9;  19  xlIOC,  S.  P. 
p.  15. 


124 


J.  Gonda  • Vedic  Literature 


(1,  117,  7),  Ms  the  greater  part  of  10,  40.  It  is  however  a usual  practice  of  the 
poets  to  give  also  in  these  legend  hymns’  not  all  the  events  of  a story  or  even 
of  the  episode  as  conceived  by  them.  RV.  8,  86  is  a prayer  of  Visnapu’s  father 
for  his  son’s  safe  return®,  without  any  further  information  worth  mentioning. 

That  the  succouring  power  of  the  divine  physicians,  the  Alvins’,  is  illustrated 
by  quite  a number  of  legends  is  not  surprising®.  No  less  than  seven  times® 
mention  is  made  of  old  and  decrepit  Cyavana  to  whom  they  restored  youth  and 
strength  with  the  result  that  he  became  acceptable  to  his  wife.  The  story  most 
often  referred  to^® — and  occasionally  reported  with  some  particulars — ^is  that 
of  the  rescue  of  Bhujjui  who,  being  abandoned  in  the  midst  of  the  ocean  or  in 
the  water-cloud,  invoked  the  aid  of  these  twin  gods.  They  took  him  home  in  a 
hundred-oared  ship,  or  with  animated  ships  which  traversed  the  air,  or  also 
with  an  animated  winged  boat  or  with  chariots  assisted  now  by  birds,  now  by 
winged  horses^^.  These  differences  in  detail  are  common  to  many  legends  and 
seeming  contradictions  occur  even  in  successive  stanzas^®.  When  a prominent 
ancestor  was  a leading  figure  in  such  a story  it  could  become  a family’  legend: 
according  to  a tradition  handed  down  by  Sayana  in  explanation  of  a passage 
in  the  Rgveda  the  Manits  once  poured  out  a spring  for  the  benefit  of  the  rsi 
Gbtama  who  was  tormented  by  thirst^®. 

Some  motifs  must  have  been  popular:  rejuvenation^ the  old  man  who 
through  divine  help  obtains  a young  wife  (Indra  and  Kaksivat;  Alvins  and 
Kali)^^;  recovery  from  blindness  and  lameness,  rescue  of  a foundling  (Indra, 
Soma,  Asvins)^®;  services  rendered  to  animals^’,  among  which  the  story  of  the 
quail  saved,  by  the  Asvins,  from  the  mouth  of  a wolf^®.  Popular  stories^®  may 
be  mentioned  several  times,  for  instance  that  of  Turviti  whom  Indra  aided  over 


® See  further  on,  n.  21. 

^ See  Gokda,  Dual  deities,  p.  48  (with  a critical  discussion  of  the  main  pertinent 
publications);  Ch.  IVIajusing,  Hymns  of  the  B'gveda,  Calcutta  1952,  p.  17;  R.  F.  G. 
MiiiXER,  in  Asia  Major  6,  p,  321;  F.  S.  Michauski,  in  HO  24  (1961),  p.  7 (unsatis- 
factory); on  RV.  1,  118  etc.  Th.  BAUisrACE,  at  ZDMG  50,  p.  263. 

® Seee.g.  1,  117;  118;  119.  For  Indra  as  a helper  e.g.  4,  19,  9;  6,  20,  6;  10,  49,  6; 
cf.  10,  24,  4. 


» RV.  1,  116,  10;  117,  13;  118,  6;  5,  74,  5;  7,  68,  6;  71,  5;  10,  39,  4. 

RV.  1,  112,  6;  20;  116,  3ff.;  117,  14;  119,  4;  158,  3;  6,  62,  6;  7,  68,  7;  69,  7; 
10,  40,  7;  65,  12;  143,  5. 

See  1,  116,  3ff. 


Compare  the  story  of  Rebha,  another  protege  of  the  same  gods,  who  saved  liim 
from  the  waters  and  from  imprisonment:  RV.  1,  112,  5;  116,  24;  117,  4;  118,  6; 
119,  6;  (181,  1;)  10,  39,  9. 

Sayana,  on  B,V.  1,  85,  10;  cf.  st.  11  and  88,  4. 

See  also  1,  119,  6f.;  4,  33,  3;  36,  3;  10,  59,  1;  143,  1. 

« RV.  1,  51,  3;  1,  112,  15  and  10,  39,  8. 


« See  e.g.  1,  112,  8;  116,  16;  117,  17ff.;  2,  13,  12;  15,  7;  4,  30,  19;  8,  79,  2;  10, 

25,  11. 

RV.  1,  116,  15;  22;  118,  8;  7,  68,  8;  10,  39,  8. 

See  1,  116,  14;  117,  16;  118,  8;  10,  39,  13. 

Compare  e.g.  also  1,  116,  8 with  10,  80,  3. 


Contents  of  the  Rg\’eda  125 

a flood^*^,  or  thau  of  Visnapn  who  when  lost  was  restored  to  his  father  by  the 
Asvins^^. 

In  some  cases  we  are  not  sure,  whether  a person  played  an  important  part  in 
a legend  or  was  the  principal  figure  of  a saga^^.  Although  it  is  not  always  clear 
who  is  meant^s  the  merchant  Birgha^avas  Ansija,  who  was  able  to  fly^^  may 
have  belonged  to  the  latter  category's.  While  epic  compositions  are  completely 
lacking  in  the  Rgveda,  reminiscences  of,  or  rather  models  for,  heroic  sagas  may 
perhaps  with  some  reason  be  found  in  part  of  the  passages  mentioning  brave 
warriors26  or  conquering,  victorious  and  sacrificing  kings®?.  Thus  there  may 
possibly  have  existed  a more  or  less  coherent  story  of  Kutsa,  the  hero  who  is 
associated  with  Indra  in  the  exploit  of  defeating  the  demon  Susna®®. 

Too  little  is  known  of  the  complete  legends  and  sagas  to  say  which  character- 
istics of  these  genres  came  into  prominence  and  which  remained  in  the  back- 
ground or  were  completely  wanting.  The  sphere  of  the  numinous,  direct  contact 
with  gods  and  divine  or  demoniac  power,  unexpected  vicissitudes  are  common 
features  and  miracles  or  unheard-of  events  practically  indispensable®®.  Gk>ds, 
be  it  the  Asvins  or  the  Maruts®®,  produce,  for  the  benefit  of  their  favourite,  a 
well  where  there  was  none ; the  founder  of  the  Vasistha  family  was,  as  a son  of 
Mitra-and-Varuna,  bom  of  Urva^i,  not  in  the  natural  way,  but  out  of  her  mind 
(7,  33,  When  we  take  the  dialogue  between  Visvamitra  and  the  rivers®® 

for  a saga,  we  may  say  that  the  rsi  inducing  the  waters  to  subside  performed  a 
human  miracle®®.  The  exceptional  deeds  of  the  mighty  seers  and  sages  of  the 
past  are  more  than  once  emphasized,  also  to  intimate  that  their  descendant, 
the  poet,  is  able  to  repeat  them®^. 

Whereas  it  is  beyond  doubt  that  there  is  some  story  (itihdsa,  traditional 
account  of  former  events)  at  the  back  of  a definite  hymn,  it  is  not  always  easy 
to  determine  what  it  has  been.  W^as  there  nothing  wrong  with  the  rsi  Sara 
(1, 116, 22)  except  his  being  thirsty  mentioned  in  the  text  ? And  why  did  Ba^- 
vrajaneed  the  protection  of  the  Asvins  (8, 8,20)  ? It  is  moreover  highly  probable 


2®  RV.  1,  61,  11;  2,  13,  12;  4,  19,  6,  and  cf.  9,  68,  8. 

2"  RV.  1,  116,  23;  117,  7;  8,  86,  3;  10,  65,  12. 

22  For  Atri  in  RV.  5,  40  see  Ch.  R.  Lanmak,  in  Festgruss  v.  Roth,  p.  187. 

22  Macdonbul  and  Keith,  V.  1. 1,  p.  130. 

2^  RV.  1,  112,  11;  5,  45,  6;  6,  4,  6. 

26  Qqq  Q 9^  102,  13. 

2«  E.g.  9,  1,  10;  3,  4;  10,  69,  5f.;  78,  4;  103,  11. 

2?  E.g.  3,  53,  11;  4,  50,  7ff.;  10,  34,  12;  75,  4. 

28  RV.  1,  63,  3;  174,  5;  4,  30,  4;  6,  20,  5;  7,  19,  2. 

22  B.  A.  Pabab,  The  miraculous  and  mysterious  in  Vedic  literature,  Bombay 
1952. 

®®  RV.  1,  85,  lOf.;  116,  9. 

See  Goistda,  Mitra,  p.  4;  12 Iff. 

22  See  p.  201. 

2®  B.  A.  Pabab,  Human  miracles  and  hymns  of  will-power  in  the  Rigveda,  15 
AIOC,  S.  P.  p.,  12  (not  in  all  respects  convincing).  Cf.  also  5,  40. 

See  4,  4,  11. 


126 


J.  Gonda  * Vedic  Literature 


that  tlie  current  legends  and  sagas  were  not  handed  down  without  change  or 
variation.  This  lack  of  uniforinity  may  to  a certain  extent  account  for  incidental 
variants  concerning  the  names  of  persons  and  similar  inconsistencies®®. 

In  other  cases  we  are  rather  under  the  impression  that  stories — be  it  legends 
or  sagas — ^narrated  in  ancient,  but  post-Bgvedic,  works  were  based  on  a sukta 
of  the  Egveda®®.  Then  it  is  not  always  easy  to  decide  whether,  or  how  far,  the 
authors,  presenting  variant  forms  of  the  stories,  drew  on  an  oral  tradition  or  on 
their  own  imagination®’.  It  is,  for  instance,  almost  impossible  that  the  refer- 
ences, in  book  V and  VUT,  to  Syavasva  who  is  also  the  reputed  author  of  5,  52-61  ; 
81-82;  8,  35-38  and  9,  32  and  who  is  the  main  human  figure  in  5,  61,  do  not 
reflect  some  form  of  legend  current  in  the  times  of  the  poet®®,  but  it  is  on  the 
other  hand  too  hazardous  a supposition®®  that  the  obscure  references  in  the 
Rgveda  put  the  identity  of  this  presupposed  legend  with  a story  narrated  in  the 
Brhaddevata  beyond  doubt.  RV.  5,  6P® — o,  hymn  of  uncommon  style  and 
composition — ^relates,  in  st.  1-4,  a vision  of  the  poet : he  sees  some  wonderful 
horsemen  without  horses  whom  he  does  not  at  once  recognize — ^they  remain 
anonymous,  but  may,  on  the  strength  of  st.  13  (“that  was  the  host  of  the 
Maruts”),  be  taken  to  be  the  Maruts.  The  poet,  Syavasva,  after  advising  them 
to  go  on,  speaks  highly  of  a woman,  his  benefactress,  who  had  introduced  him 
to  Purumilha  and  Taranta,  his  future  patrons,  who  remembered  him  hand- 
somely. According  to  the  long  legend,  found  in  the  Brhaddevata  iSyava^va 
was  the  son  of  the  domestic  priest  of  Rathaviti  Darbhya,  a noble  patron  (men- 
tioned in  the  h3mn,  st.  17ff.).  When  his  father  was  at  one  time  sacrificing  for 
Rathaviti  he  saw  the  latter’s  daughter  and,  in  agreement  with  his  son,  w^anted 
her  to  become  his  daughter-in-law.  Rathaviti  did  not  object,  but  his  wife,  being 
herself  bom  in  a family  of  royal  seers,  would  not  give  her  daughter  to  a man 
who  was  not  a seer.  The  father  and  son  met  on  their  way  home  their  former 
patrons,  Taranta  and  Purumihia.  The  former’s  wdfe  gave  J§yava§va  manifold 
wealth.  Afterwards  he  w^as  so  fortunate  as  to  meet  the  Maruts  in  the  jungle  and, 
after  asking  them  ‘WTio  are  ye  V (RV.  5,  61, 1),  he  recognized  them  and  praised 


See  e.g.  GELmsTEB,  RV.  on  1,  116,  9 (the  same  miraculous  deed  now  ascribed 
to  the  Asidns,  now  to  the  Maruts) ; 8,  73,  9. 

See  also  Renou,  E.  V.  P.  IV,  p.  130  (on  10,  109)  and  Geldner,  RV.  II,  p.  3 

(on  o,  2).  . ’ F 

After  Roth,  Max  MiiUer,  Aufrecht  and  Oldenberg  (at  ZDMG  39,  p.  81)  who 
put  very  little  faith  in  what  in  their  opinion  was  quasi -traditional  ‘book-making,’ 
GEUDisrEii  (V.  S.  I,  p.  243),  Pischel,  Bloomfield  and  others  were  more  or  less  strongly 
inolmed  to  ^d  valuable  material  even  in  comparatively  late  texts.  Every  case  must, 
without  prejudice,  be  judged  on  its  own  merits.  The  material  was  collected  by  Sieg, 
SagenstofFe. 

For  this  point  see,  in  general,  also  J.  Charpentier,  in  WZKM.  25,  p.  308. 
This  supposition  was  advanced  by  Sieg,  Sagenstoffe,  p.  50;  see  also  Geldner, 
V . S.  m,  p.  148;  H.  Loioiel,  in  ZDMG  99,  p.  225. 

See  also  Geldiusr,  RV.  II,  p.  68. 

“ Briiaddevata,  5,  50-81;  for  other  sources  see  MACDOiranL,  Brhaddevata,  p. 


Contents  of  the  Rgveda 


127 


them  with  ‘They  that  ride  . . / (5,  61,  II),  an  act  which  made  Mm  a seer.  There- 
upon he  commissioned  the  goddess  Xight  (who  is  addre^ed  in  5,  61,  17),  on  a 
message  to  Hatha vlti  with  the  stanzas  17  and  18  with  the  result  that  the  noble- 
man right  willingly  offered  his  daughter  to  him. 

There  are  more  instances  of  an  at  &st  sight  suitable  exegesis  w^Mch  can  be  a 
product  of  secondary  concoction.  RV.  1, 125  and  126  deal,  according  to  Sayana, 
with  Kaksivat  who,  returning  home  and  resting  at  night,  was  found  by  king 
Svanaya.  TMs  king,  after  inviting  him,  gave  him  many  presents  w^Mch  Kaksivat 
coining  home  showed  to  his  father^^^  Whereas  the  first  sukta  is  no  doubt  a 
general  laudation  of  the  man  who  has  lodged  a foreigner  and  dismissed  him  with 
some  gifts,  it  is  uncertain  if  the  second  containing  the  proper  names,  but  seemingly 
foreign  to  this  theme,  was  in  fact  closely  connected  with  it.  However,  in  whatever 
state  of  uncertainty  we  may  be  tMs  should  not  prevent  us  from  consulting  post- 
Rgvedic  sources  and,  if  feasible,  cautiously  supplementing,  in  particular  cases, 
an  incomplete  reference  to  a story  with  their  help  or  from  regarding  it  as  being 
perpetuated  in  ritual  formulas  or  other  later  texts.  The  comments  given  in  some 
5raAmams^^  upon  the  Subrahmanya  formula — ^an  invitation  addressed  to  Indra 
and  others  containing  the  name  MedhatitM— recited  w^hile  the  soma  is  being 
conveyed  within  the  sacred  enclosure  may  be  connected  with  RV.  8,  2,  40 
where  Indra  is  said  to  have,  in  the  form  of  a ram,  carried  off  MedhatitM^*. 

Among  the  more  or  less  synonymous  terms  for  ‘story’  w'Mch  were  already  at 
an  early  date  in  use  in  the  ritualistic  and  exegetical  literature  the  above  iiihdsa 
was  the  most  common^®.  Although  we  find  considerable  difficulty  in  determin- 
ing the  exact  meaning  attached  to  this  term  by  those  who  introduced  it — ^the 
commentators  are  far  from  sharing  the  same  opinion — ^it  is  not  unjustly  re- 
garded as  an  indicium  of  the  existence  of  those  kinds  of  sagas  and  heroic  tales 
from  wMch  in  the  course  of  time  developed  much  material  wMch  entered  into 
the  composition  of  the  Mahabharata.  That  is  why  modern  authors  apply  it  also 
to  suldas  such  as  1, 105^®  (the  story  of  Trita  in  the  well)  and  5,  61  (Syavasva)^’. 


For  critical  remarks  see  Geldnub,  Auswahl,  II,  p.  23;  IRY.  I,  p.  173. 

IB.  2,  79;  SB.  1,  1,  15;  SatB.  quoted  by  Sayana  on  RV.  1,  51,  1. 

H.  Oertel,  On  the  legend  of  Indra’s  visit  to  Medhatithi,  in  PAOS  1895 
(JAOS  16,  p.  CCXL)  and  in  JAOS  26,  p.  194;  Weber,  I.  S.  IX,  p.  38. 

Cf.  SiEG,  Sagenstoffe,  p.  17;  33;  Horsch,  V,  G.  L.,  p.  12;  52;  284f.;  308f.  etc. 
See  e.g.  SB.  11,  1,  6,  9;  13,  4,  3,  12. 

See  p.  199.  Cf.  Geldner,  AuswaM,  H,  p.  1;  RV.  11,  p.  68;  Renou,  E.  V.  P.  IV, 

p.  22. 

Sometimes,  however,  the  term  is  used  in  a wider  sense  (see  e.g.  Geldner,  Aus- 
wahl,  n,  p.  1;  166;  292). 


128 


J.  Gonda  * Vedic  Literature 


S.  History 

Judged  on  their  own  merits  and  dissociated  fi'om  the  contexts  or  collections 
of  which  they  form  part  several  passages  could  be  taken  to  reflect  some  form 
of  heroic  or  historical  narrative  poetry.  There  are  no  serious  reasons  for  doubting 
that  this  genre — ^in  oral  tradition  of  course — existed,  be  it  in  some  elementary 
form,  although  it  probably  was  not  kept  rigidly  apart  from  sagas  and  narrative 
poetry.  The  themes  treated  may  have  been  similar  to  those  found  in  the  heroic 
narrative  poetry  of  other  ancient  peoples : raids,  theft  of  herds^,  combats,  reven- 
ge, sports^,  especially  chariot-racing^,  wooing,  adventures,  heroic  as  well  as 
supernormal  in  inter twinement.  There  was  no  doubt  free  scope  for  exaggeration^, 
imagination  and  one-sided  interpretation  of  facts.  However,  although  what  we 
know  may  to  a certain  extent  reflect  such  heroic  poetry,  it  essentially  is 
laudatory  poetry  and  firmly  embedded  in  religious  traditions.  Mention  is  made 
of  battles  and  victories  but  these  are  won  by  Indra  or  other  gods  on  behalf  of 
an  Aryan  nobleman  or  chieftain  or  of  the  Aryans  in  general®,  or  it  is  Indra  who 
by  his  help  makes  some  chief  victorious®,  just  as  it  is  this  great  god  who  led  the 
Aryans  to  new  abodes  abounding  in  water’,  a fact  commemorated  in  praise  of 
the  god,  not  in  memory  of  human  heroes.  And  reminiscences  of  the  gods’ 
former  assistance®  are  made  a means  of  urging  them  to  new  efforts : Assist  us, 
ye  gods  (the  Asvins),  with  the  same  assistance  which  you  lent  to  Kanva, 
Medhatithi  and  Go^rya  (8,  8,  20) : a formal  declaration  of  fact  followed  by  a 
prayer®,  no  resume  of  a piece  of  heroic  poetry.  That  is  why,  e.  g.  in  6,  26,  prayers 
for  booty  and  victory  are  in  the  same  hymn  followed  by  references  to  feats  of 
arms,  which  in  their  turn  alternate  with  the  assurance  that  ‘"this  hymn  of 
praise  will  strengthen  the  god”^°.  By  means  of  hymns  in  praise  of  Indra  Rji^van 
broke  open  Pipru’s  enclosure;  when  the  word  of  praise  radiated  he  (the  god), 
changing  his  form,  attacked  the  stronghold  (10,  99,  11). 

From  the  heroic  point  of  view— historiography  is  altogether  out  of  the 
questional— there  are  some  outstanding  heroes— especially  Sudas  who  with 


1 Cf.  e.g.  RV.  4,  17,  16;  7,  32,  23;  83,  1;  10,  48,  2. 

« Cf.  e.g.  9,  47,  5;  10,  50,  2;  61,  23. 

® Cf.  e.g.  1,  73,  9;  4,  16,  21;  5,  66,  3;  86,  4. 

^ Cf.  e.g.  1,  53,  9 (60099  men  are  defeated);  6,  26,  6;  7,  99,  5. 

I See  e.g.  6,  26,  4;  27,  4f.;  7,  5,  6 (Agni);  99,  5 (Indra  and  Visnu);  10,  49,  3fr. 
« See  1,  53,  9f.;  117,  21;  1,  131,  5;  8,  8,  20. 

’ RV.  10,  99,  8. 


I^ere  are  many  aUusions  to  acts  of  heroism,  be  they  known  from  other  places 
(e.g.  7,  60,  9;  8,  3,  3;  8,  4,  7)  or  umdentifiable  (6,  26,  3-  6) 

®Seep.  145f.  » » ^ 

Compare  also  10,  69  addressed  to  Agni. 

A Bg^^da  ^ an  historical  source  see  Oldenbekg,  Vedaforschung,  p.  48; 

Prfr.  ml^e  Cambridge  History  of  India,  I,  Cambridge  1922,  p.  77;  A.  D. 

Ji^SAiXER,  in  H.  C.  I.  P.  I,  p.  245.  » r » 


Contents  of  the  Rgveda 


129 


divine  lielp  won  a famous  victory  over  a confederation  of  ten  kings^® — ^and  a 
number  of  figures  pictured  in  vague  ontline,  and  there  are  the  traditional 
enemies^®,  be  they  the  godless  non- Aryans^* — ^the  black  foes  whose  strongholds 
are  forced  and  who  have  to  retire  leaving  their  possessions  behind — or  inimical 
Aryan  tribes^® ; there  are  also  relics  of  traditions  regarding  the  eastward  pro- 
gress of  the  Aryans  in  the  north-west  of  India^®.  It  is  not  always  possible  to 
decide  whether  a definite  name  belongs  to  an  aboriginal  enemy  or  to  a demon. 
Sambara,  for  instance,  seems  to  be  a demon  in  part  of  the  corpns^b  but  may 
elsewhere  be  a human  chiefs®.  No  criterion  exists  by  which  human  beings  can 
be  distinguished  in  every  case  from  non-human  powers,  but  so  much  is  clear 
that  Indra’s  victories  over  historical  or  legendary  chiefs  could  be  put  on  a par 
with,  i.e.  regarded  as  a reiteration  of,  his  greatest  feat,  the  Vrtra  combat^®.  The 
centre  of  interest  and  sympathy  does  not  however  shift  from  the  own  group  to 
the  antagonists.  The  situation  is  exhaustively  described  in  the  brief  prayer: 
“The  gods  shall  appease  the  fury  of  the  non- Aryan  ( ddsa),  they  shall  guide  our 
race  to  prosperity’’  (1,  104,  2).  On  the  other  hand,  the  main,  almost  only,  con- 
sciousness of  ‘national  identity’  is,  as  far  as  appears  from  the  texts,  based  upon 
the  belief  in,  and  cult  of,  the  same  gods  and  upon  the  common  experience  of 
their  favours®®. 

When  mention  is  made  of  battles — ^the  most  important  being  the  contest 
between  Sudas  and  the  ten  kings®^ — the  military  operations  remain  largely 
obscure®®.  There  are  in  7,  18  many  vivid  details,  but  many  of  these  are  varied 
repetition,  emphasiziug,  not  generalship  or  splendid  strategy — ^the  only  strategic 
initiative,  on  the  part  of  the  enemies,  ends  in  failure — but  Indra’s  victorious- 
ness®®. Through  his  help  and  intervention,  to  which  he  has  been  roused  by 
Vasistba’s  mighty  priestly  words®^,  the  victory  is  won,  and  it  is  king  Sudas’ 
priest,  the  founder  of  the  Vasistha  family,  who  is  greatly  glorified.  For  these 
poets  the  religious  interest  outweighs  the  historical  or  legendary  interest  and 

^2  Cf.  e.g.  1,  63,  7;  7,  19,  3;  6;  20,  2;  83,  1;  4;  6-8  and  see  Veuankab,  RV.  YU, 
p.  45. 

For  both  categories  of  enemies,  dasas  and  dryas,  see  6,  22,  10;  33,  3 etc. 

See  e.g.  1,  117,  21;  7,  5,  3;  10,  38,  3. 

See  e.g.  6,  27. 

Some  of  the  places  regarded  by  Geldneb  (e.g.  1,  165,  8;  6,  61,  9;  7,  56,  24) 
or  others  as  relevant  are  disputable. 

See  e.g.  1,  51,  6;  54,  4;  101,  2;  103,  8. 

Cf.  Hillebbaiu>t,  V.  M.  I,  p.  103;  108;  III,  p.  273;  Macdoneel  and  Ejeith, 
V.  I.  II,  p.  355. 

RV.  10,  49,  6;  cf.  48,  8 and  1,  103,  8. 

See  e.g.  1,  96,  3;  117,  21;  7,  5,  6;  10,  65,  11. 

RV.  7,  18;  33;  83.  For  7,  33  see  Geldneb,  V.  S.  II,  p.  129;  S.  A.  Dais^ge,  in 
QJMS  55,  p.  83  (speculative);  R.  N.  Daisdekab,  in  Comm.  29  Int.  Congr.  Orient. 
Paris  1973. 

Cf.  Keith,  in  Cambridge  History  of  India,  I,  p.  81;  K.  Chattopahdyaya,  in 
IHQ  6,  p.  261,  and  as  early  as  1846,  Roth,  Lit.  u.  Gesch.,  p.  87. 

23  See  also  K.  M.  Muistshi,  in  BhV  4 (1943). 

RV.  7,  33,  3. 


130 


J.  Gonda  * Vedic  Literature 


their  works  show  no  sign  of  social  or  really  political  consciousness.  Vi^vamitra, 
who  seems  to  have  held  the  priestly  office  before  Vasistha^s,  passes  to  the 
inimical  camp,  but  we  are  kept  in  the  dark  about  the  political  background  of 
this  step.  The  personages  in  these  passages  are  aristocratic  or  make  their 
appearance  clanwise.  From  6,  27  it  is  clear  that  a chief  called  Abhyavartin 
conquered  the  Vrcivants  on  the  river  Harijnipiya,  but  here  also  it  is  Indra  who 
has  won  the  victory  for  his  proteges,  it  is  Indra  who  has  given  an  exhibition  of 
his  overwhelming  power  and  to  whom  long  laudations  are  due^®.  Details  con- 
cerning the  battle  are  few;  the  low  number  of  enemies  killed,  130,  should  not 
tempt  us  to  suppose  that  the  tradition  is  reliable. 

It  is  no  part  of  our  task  to  consider  the  'historical  data*  contained  in  the 
Rgveda  in  their  relation  to  puranic  and  other  later  Indian  traditions^^.  What 
however  we  want  to  signify  is  our  utter  scepticism  about  the  prospects  of 
success  of  attempts  at  reconstructing  real  historical — ^we  do  not  say,  legend- 
ary — ^incidents  on  the  strength  of  the  recurrence  of  Rgvedic  names  in  epics  or 
purdnm^^.  Such  a solution  was  proposed  for  RV.  10,  102,  a hymn  which  “will 
figure  in  the  final  irresoluble  remnant  of  the  Veda,  unless  a new  accession  of 
material  should  enrich  our  present  apparatus  for  its  reconstruction”^®.  If 
Geldner®^  was  right  this  sukta  deals  with  a chariot-race,  undertaken  by  an  old 
gentleman,  Mudgala,  in  an  ordinary  ox-cart  drawn  by  one  single  steer.  Instead 
of  the  second  ox  he  puts  the  yoke  upon  a block  of  wood  which  also  appears  to 
smash  up  the  competitors.  As  Mudgala  himself  is  too  old  to  drive,  his  young 
wife  holds  the  reins ; she  wins  the  race.  Rather  than  a reflection  of  a historical 
event®2,  a personal  satire®®,  or  a cosmic  drama®^  this  sukta  may  perhaps  be 
regarded  as  the  description  of  an  achievement  during  a race  or  raid®®  under 
enormous  disadvantages®®,  and  hence  as  a charm  to  arrive  at  the  goal  of  a race 
or  a chariot-expedition  in  spite  of  impediments  of  any  kind®h 

RV.  3,  53,  9,  and  cf.  Macdoisusll  and  Keith,  o.c.,  II,  p.  274;  H.  Lommel,  at 
Oriens,  18-19,  p.  200. 

See  6,  27,  1-4. 

A.  D.  PusALKEB,  in  Melanges  Renou,  p.  581. 

See  J.  Gonda,  in  WZKSA,  12-13,  p.  104. 

For  !RV.  10,  102  see  F.  E.  Paegiteb,  at  JRAS  1910,  p.  1328;  (compare  already 
R.  Roth,  in  Webbb,  I.  S.  I,  p.  457) ; R.  0.  Fbanhe,  in  WZKM  8 (1894),  p.  337  drew 
attention  to  the  Pali  Jataka  28  (I,  p.  191):  ? 

Bdoomfiedd,  in  ZDMG  48,  p.  541. 

Geldneb,  V.  S.  II,  p.  1;  see  also  RY.  Ill,  p.  316.  For  another,  in  part  wholly 
improbable  explanation  see  P.  S.  Sastbi,  in  IHQ  33,  p.  182. 

Thus  ancient  interpreters,  Pargiter,  Sastri. 

P.  VON  Bbadee,  in  ZDMG  46,  p.  445. 

VoN  SCHBOEDEB,  Mysterium,  p.  346. 

BLOOMiTEnD,  I.C.,  regarding  the  sukta  as  an  Indra  myth,  believes  the  theme  to 

be  a serious  battle. 

The  wooden  ox  may  have  been  a mascot : the  commentator  Durga  speaks  of 
its  supernormal  power. 

Gonda,  Secular  hymns,  p.  345.  See  also  G.  Dumezu.,  in  NouveUe  Clio  5 (1953), 
p.  255  who  draws  attention  to  a 'magical’  interpretation  of  st.  4-6. 


Contents  of  the  Rg\'eda 


131 


Antiquarian  speculation  on  the  origin  of  the  race,  or  of  special  tribes, 
very  common  among  other  peoples,  is  not  lacking  in  the  Rgveda.  It  is  howcTer 
only  in  harmony  with  the  general  character  of  this  corpus  that  the  poets  are 
interested  in  their  own  ancestors  rather  than  in  founders  of  djmasties®®.  Most 
diascenasts  of  the  family  books  have  included  in  their  collections  a hjmn  in 
which  the  praise  of  some  extraordinary  and  characteristic  deed  of  a great 
ancestor  is  sung  and  the  family  is  glorified®®.  The  ancestor  had  direct  contact 
with  one  of  the  chief  gods  or  performed,  with  divine  help,  some  wonderful 
exploit.  That  these  family  hymns  invariably  occur  among  the  Indra  hymns  of 
the  collection  is  not  surprising:  this  god  is  the  chief  inspirer  of  extraordinary 
achievements.  Thus  RV.  5,  40*°  deals  with  the  rescue  of  the  sun,  by  Atri,  from 
the ' demon  Svarbhanu , who  had  enveloped  this  heavenly  body  in  darkness. 
When  all  creatures  looked  bewildered  and  Indra  had  begun  to  attack  the  demon 
the  great  ancestor  rendered  help  and  succeeded  in  recovering  the  sun  and  in 
placing  it  again  in  the  heavens.  In  the  family  hymn  of  the  Bharadvajas  (6,  47) 
it  is  Indra  whose  praises  are  sounded,  because  he  has  helped  king  Bivodasa  to 
the  victory  over  two  fiends,  Varcin  and  Sambara*^.  It  does  not  however  seem 
too  bold  a supposition  that  the  last  six  stanzas  of  the  sukia,  which  are  a war 
spell  in  the  Atharvan  style*®,  were  regarded  as  the  contribution  of  Bharadvaja, 
Bivodasa ’s  purohita,  to  his  patron’s  victory*®.  Since,  moreover,  this  victory  is 
described  as  taking  place  in  the  present  time,  it  does  not  seem  impossible  either 
that  a contemporaneous  king  was — or  could  be — ^identified  with  the  legendary 
Bivodasa,  his  (reputed)  ancestor,  and  that,  according  to  the  usual  practice,  Ms 
enemies  also  were  regarded  as  identical  with  the  wicked  antagonists  of  the 
legend**. 


Oldenbebg,  Lit.,  p. -49;  H.  B.  Velankae,  in  JBBRAS  18  (1942),  p.  1;  12* 
AIOC  III,  p.  223. 

RV.-3,  53;  5,  40;  6,  47;  7,  33.  For  1,  165;  4,  18  and  3,  33  see  Velankae, 
0.0.  c.c. 

Y.  G.  Rahuekae,  in  Comm.  Vol.  Umesha  Mishra,  Allahabad  1970,  p.  511. 

See  IVfACDomEix,  V-  M.,  p.  161.. 

*^  It  actually  recurs,  as  6,  125f.,  in  the  Atharvaveda  and  is,  in  Kau^.  15,  11  and 
16,  1 used  in  a battle-rite. 

*®  Of.  PB.  15,  3,  7;  JB.  3,  244ff.  (CAnAmD,  Auswahl,  p.  284). 

*^  For  these  identifications  with  the  mythical  prototjq)e  see  e.g.  M.  Eliajde,  Le^ 
mythe  de  Fetemel  retour.  Archetypes  et  repetition,  Paris  1949,  p.  63;  152. 


132 


J.  Gronda  • Vedic  Literature 


9.  Riddles 

The  propensity  to  elliptic  diction  and  veiled,  indirect  or  paraphrastic  ex- 
pression of  thoughts  which  is  so  obvious  in  many  parts  of  the  Rgveda^  led  the 
poets  sometimes  to  suppress  an  essential  element,  for  instance  the  subject,  of  a 
stanza  or  a succession  of  stanzas  with  the,  no  doubt  in  many  cases  intended, 
result  that  they  became  enigmatic.  When,  for  instance,  two  female  (beings)  of 
different  colour  are  said  to  wander  about,  day  and  night  are  meant  which,  as 
appears  from  the  following  words,  are  represented  as  two  cows  (1,  95,  1)^.  This 
stylistic  peculiarity  meets  the  demands  of  those  poets  who — driven  by  curiosity 
in  the  presence  of  the  unknown  and  in  conformity  with  a ‘literary’  convention 
which  is  found  to  be  common  in  many  archaic  milieus — ^like  to  insert  puzzling 
metaphors,  paraphrases  or  riddles  in  their  productions.  Thus  there  is  an  im- 
perceptible transition  to  regular  riddles  which  as  a rule  are  clearly  recognizable 
and  often  occur  in  succession^.  It  is  however  important  to  remember  that  in 
these  milieus  the  asking  and  answering  of  riddles  was  traditionally  regarded  as 
a test  or  ordeal  applied  to  people  of  intellectual  pretensions.  Riddle  contests 
were  frequently  held  among  various  peoples^. 

This  type  of  enigmatic  poetry  must  have  been  very  popular.  Among  the 
strophes  of  6,  75,  which  is  a blessing  of  a king’s  implements  of  war,  are  many 
riddles  of  the  descriptive  type,  solved,  it  is  true,  in  the  very  context : “He  is 
the  father  of  many,  numerous  are  his  sons  . . .;  the  quiver  wins  the  battles” 
(st.  5).  The  poet  of  8,  29  describes  various  gods  without  mentioning  their 
names ; their  identity  must  be  understood  from  some  characteristic  key  words 
(Unga)  or  other  indications:  “One  of  them” — of  course  Agni,  Fire — “is  seated 
shining  in  his  place  of  origin”  (st.  2)®.  The  same  tendency  to  enigmatic  expres- 
sion can  be  noticed  in  other  hymns  addressed  to  the  Visve  Devas : in  5,  47®  no 
god,  except  Mitra-Varuna  and  Agni  in  the  last  stanza,  is  mentioned  by  name. 
While  the  audience  is  left  to  guess  the  names  and  persons  of  the  gods  themselves, 
the  secrets  of  divine  power  and  influence  are  clothed  in  riddles,  paradoxes  and 
allegories’.  Elsewhere  the  end  of  a very  difficult  suhta,  5,  44®,  creates  the  im- 
pression of  offering  the  solution  of  the  long  sequence  of  ambiguities  and  ob- 
scurities of  the  preceeding  stanzas.  Before  actually  describing  Indra’s  exploits 


^ See  p.  252. 

2 Cf.  e.g.  also  1,  145,  4;  152,  3;  3,  5,  5;  57,  4;  8,  41,  6;  10,  61. 

® Renou,  E.  V.  P.  I,  p.  11. 

^ See  e.g.  N.  K.  C3a:ADwiCK  (and  V.  Zhermunsky),  Oral  epics  of  Central  Asia, 
Cambridge  1969,  p.  129;  187. 

® See  Geldneb,  Auswahl,  II,  p.  125;  Renou,  E.  Y.  P.  IY,  p.  109.  Compare  also 
1,  87, 1.  In  general:  H.  G.  ISTabahabi,  at  The  Aryan  Path  21,  p.  403;  Renou,  at 
Riogene  29,  p.  37 ; D.  Bhaovat,  The  riddle  in  Indian  life  and  literature,  Bombay 

.1965. 

* Cf.  Rej^ou,  E.  Y.  P.  IY,  p.  74. 

’ See  e.g.  3,  55  (GELD]EnEB,  RY.  I,  p.  399);  3,  56;  10,  114;  and  compare  1,  152. 

® See  GEimsTEB,  ]R,Y.  H,  p.  46. 


Contents  of  the  Rgveda 


133 


the  poet  of  2,  13  delineates,  in  the  manner  of  a riddle,  the  soma  sacrifice  which 
essentially  is  a creation  of  that  god,  who  receives  all  his  strength  from  it ; stanza 
1 alludes  to  the  plant,  2 to  the  water  nece^ary  for  the  preparation  of  the 
draught,  3 to  the  officiants,  4 to  the  ritual  fire®. 

While  many  poets  know  how  to  formulate  the  riddles  in  varied  ways,  for 
instance  by  giving  them  the  form  of  questions,  they  are  not  always  original  in 
devising  them,  because  the  same  idea  may  recur  in  another  part'  of  the  Rgveda. 
Thus  the  solution  of  6,  59,  5 : WTiich  mortal  is  able  to  understand  that,  0 gods  ? 
One  of  you  drives  in  the  same  chariot  after  yoking  the  horses  so  as  to  turn  to 
both  directions,  is  offered  at  10,  79,  7 Agni  is  meant  who  on  the  same  vehicle 
carries  the  oblations  to  heaven  and  brings  the  gods  to  the  sacrificial  place  . 

A favourite  species  of  riddle  is  the  ‘ZahlenratseF : “The  one-footed  has  walked 
farther  than  the  two-footed;  the  two-footed  overtakes  the  three -footed  from 
behind;  the  four-footed  comes  to  (obey)  the  call  of  the  two-footed,  attending 
and  having  his  eyes  upon  the  herds”  (10,  117,  8)^^.  Cryptic  numerical  state- 
ments^^ of  the  type  10,  27,  15  “Seven  men  went  up  from  the  south,  eight  from 
the  north,  nine  from  the  west  . . .,”  which  puzzle  us^®,  were  no  doubt  often 
intended  to  convey  esoterical  information.  Elnowledge  possessed  by  the  few 
is  a key  to  mysteries  and  an  avenue  to  success^^:  “Vanina  told  me  (the  poet), 
the  wise  one : ‘Thrice  seven  names  does  the  cow  bear.  The  one  who  knoivs  the 
word  (of  the  enigma — ^the  word  poda  denoting  also  the  trace  of  the  cow),  should 
pronounce  it  just  as  secrets  (are  revealed),  if  he  wishes,  as  an  inspired  one,  to 
effect  (something  useful)  for  the  future  generation’”  (7,  87,  4)^^. 

That  part  of  these  riddle  sequences  were  preoccupied  with  the  sacrificial 
ritual  and  its  supposed  correspondence  with  the  natural  phenomena — a domain 
in  which  the  penetration  of  mysteries  was  indispensable — appears  for  instance 
from  10, 114  in  which  various  ambiguities  alternating  with  questions  of  the  type 
‘Who  can  tell . . .’  or  ‘Who  has  observed . . .’  are  subservient  to  an  interpretation 
of  the  ritual  and  its  cosmic  correspondences^®.  Hence  also  the  ritual  use  of  these 
enigmas.  The  three  stanzas  of  RV.  10,  189^^  alluding  in  a cryptic  way  to  the 
three  provinces  of  the  universe,  are  as  VS.  3,  6ff.  recited  to  accompany  the 

® H.  D.  VeLlAistkab,  at  JUB  1940,  2,  p.  76. 

Compare  also  10,  88,  18  and  8,  58,  2.  Partial  solutions  given  in  the  text  are  not 
however  always  clear:  cf.  e.g.  10,  85,  18. 

The  sun,  a man,  an  old  man  leaning  on  a stick,  a dog.  We  are  reminded  of  the 
Greek  riddle  of  the  Sphiox  solved  by  Oedipus:  “What  . . . walks  on  four  legs  in  the 
morning,  two  at  noon,  and  three  in  the  evening?”  See  also  1,  152,  2;  3,  56,  2;  5, 
47,  4;  10,  114,  5ff. 

p’or  the  occurrence  of  numerals  in  Vedie  poetry  see  E.  W.  Hopexnts,  in  Oriental 
Studies,  Boston  1894,  p.  141. 

See  Geijdneb,  RV.  Ill,  p.  167;  Veilaneab,  in  JUB  22,  2,  p.  7. 

See  also  1,  164,  16  “Who  understands  these  will  be  the  father  of  the  father.” 

1^  For  explicative  notes;  Geedneb,  RV.  H,  p.  258;  Renou,  E.  V.  P.  VII,  p.  23. 

16  Por  an  attempt  to  explain  this  h3?Ton:  V.  S.  Agbawai^a,  in  VIJ  1 (1963),  p.  40; 
275. 

17  K.  Ronnow,  in  MO  25  (1931),  p.  269,  esp.277;  cf.  also  Geedneb,  ]RV.in,p.403. 


134 


J.  Gonda  * Vedic  Literature 


establishment  and  worship  of  Agni  represented  by  the  sacrificial  fixes — ^which 
are  homologizeci  with  earth,  air  and  heavens — , a ritual  act  by  which  one 
obtains  "'all  one’s  desires”^^.  The  prodigies  of  nature  lend  themselves  admirably 
to  enigmatic  formulation  (5,  47,  5),  but  their  successful  solution  means  pene- 
trating nature’s  mysteries,  which  m its  turn  can  lead  to  some  form  of  control 
over  one  of  its  forces. 

More  or  less  enigmatic  passages^®  call  themselves  hrahman — ^translated  by 
‘Geheimwort’  or  Tormule  incomprehensible’ — , no  doubt  because  they  are  not 
only  founded  on  hrahman  or  are  materialized  hrahman,  but  also  because  they 
reveal  some  aspect  or  effect  of  that  fundamental  and  omnipresent  power 
concept^®,  because  they  are,  by  implication,  a manifestation  of  it  . and  for  him 
who  understands  the  passage  a disclosure  of  its  mysterious  essence.  Between 
these  enigmas  and  the  hrahmodyas  of  post-Rgvedic  literature®^  there  is  no  break 
in  continuity  and  an  obvious  specimen  of  this  dialogic  ‘disputation  regarding 
the  nature  of  hrahman^  with  a preference  for  ritual  or  cosmic  problems  occurs 
already  at  RV.  1, 164, 34f.®®:  ‘T  ask  thee  the  earth’s  extremest  limit ; I ask  thee, 
where  is  the  navel  of  the  world  1 , , , This  sacrificial  bank  is  the  earth’s  extremest 
limit;  this  sacrifice  of  ours  is  the  world’s  navel . . .”®®.  There  are  more  fully 
developed  hrahmodyas  in  the  Atharvaveda®^. 

The  long  and  much  discussed  suhta  l , 164®®  has  indeed  long  been  considered 
a series  of  hardly  connected  riddles  (hrahmodyas  in  a wider  sense),  part  of  which 
defy  any  attempt  at  solution:  “Nothing  here  is  directly  described,  the  language 
being  always  symbolical  and  mystical”®®.  “The  prodigies  of  nature  and  of 
human  life,  speculations  on  time  and  (poetic)  speech  are  clothed  in  allegories 
and  enigmatic  questions”®^.  Whereas  it  is  immediately  clear  that  some  of  the 
problems  stated  as  enigmas  have  a bearing  upon  the  ritual  or  the  divisions  of 
time — ^the  wheel  with  twelve  spokes  in  st.  11®® — others  attest  to  an  ability  to 
express  philosophical  thought  in  the  outward  form  of  beautiful  parables.  The 


« gB.  2,  1,  4,  29f. 

E.g.  1,88,4;  152,  5;  7;  10,  61,1.  SeealsoTniEME,  atZDMG  102, p.  102  (=  K.  S. 

p.  111).  . . . 

J.  GnisTDA,  Notes  on  hrahman,  Utrecht  1950. 

See  L.  Renoij  and  L.  SmsuaN,  in  JA  237,  p.  25;  for  1,  152  the  same,  in 
J.  de  Psychologie  1949,  p.  266  and  cf.  p.  353  etc. 

« Compare  also  RV.  10,  88,  17ff.  (Renotj,  E.  V.  P.  I,  p.  11);  10,  90,  Ilf.,  and  see 
also  10,  61,  18f. 

These  stanzas  occur  also  at  AV.  9,  10,  13f.;  VS.  23,  61f.;  SB.  13,  5,  2,  21  etc. 
See  AV.  11,  8,  If.;  5f.;  8f.;  14f.;  16f. 

M.  Haug,  Vedische  Rathselfragen  und  Rathselspriiche,  SB  Munchen  1875,  II, 
p.  457;  P.  Rbgnaub,  in  Annales  Lyon  38,  1;  R.  Roth,  in  ZDMG  46,  p.  759;  O. 
BdHTLrN'GK,  Ber.  Akad.  Leipzig  45,  p.  88;  C.  Kukhajst  Raja,  Asya  vamasya  hymn, 
!MMras  1956;  P.  S.  Sastbi,  The  vision  of  Dirghatamas,  PrBh  62  (1957),  p.  63; 
W.  Norbojn'  Brown,  in  JAOS  88,  p.  199;  see  also  Renou,  E.  V.  P.  XVT,  p.  88. 

®®  I^Iacdonell,  H.  S.  L.,  p.  131;  see  also  Winternitz,  H.  I.  L.  I,  p.  117. 
Geldner,  RV.  I,  p.  227. 

E.  WiNDiscH,  in  ZBMG  48,  p.  353. 


Contents  of  the  Rgveda 


135 


stanzas  20-22,  the  allegory  of  the  two  intimately  imited  birds  of  prey,  perching 
on  the  same  tree,  one  of  them  eating  its  fruit,  and  the  other  looking  on — “where 
eagles  (in  the  plural)  invoke  a share  in  continued  life,  there  the  wise  herdsman 
of  the  universe  has  entered  me,  the  simple  one”^® — ^was  to  have  a great  future  in 
Upanishads  and  Vedanta  where  the  birds  were  re-interpreted  as  the  embodied 
and  the  higher  self  or  supreme  spirit.  Following  Xorman  Brown's  interpretation 
we  may  in  this  hymn  distinguish  three  main  themes,  viz.  Agni,  the  Sun,  and 
the  sacrifice,  all  closely  interconnected,  the  treatment  of  them  being  augmented 
by  statements  about  Speech  (Vm)  as  the  absolute  (st.  39-46).  While  the  pos- 
sibility of  the  continued  operation  of  the  cosmos  and  the  welfare  of  mankind 
lies  in  the  activity  of  the  sun,  Speech  is  the  One  Real  from  which  emanated  the 
unorganized  material  of  the  universe  and  the  sacrificial  ritual  needed  to 
organize  it®° ; even  the  sun  was  brought  into  being  and  is  reborn  every  morning 
by  the  celebration  of  the  sacrifice,  the  ritual  of  w-hich  Agni,  after  learning  it 
from  Vac,  taught  to  the  first  sacrificer.  The  rsi  Dirghatamas  learned  all  this  in 
mystic  vision. 


The  so-called  tree  of  knowledge  (Geldner).  According  to  the  bold  explanation 
proposed  by  P.  Thteme,  Untersuchungen  zur  Wortkunde  iind  Auslegung  des 
Rigveda,  Haile  S.  1949,  p.  55,  the  tree  is  the  night  sky,  the  two  birds  are  the  waxing 
.and  waning  moon,  the  plurality  of  birds  the  stars,  the  fruit  (the  fig)  light.  S.  Sen, 
in  Felic.  VoL  J".  Banerjea,  Calcutta  1960,  p.  125  tried  to  show  that  the  parable 
is  based  on  a didactic  animal  tale. 

For  the  function  of  the  ritual  see  Gonda,  R.  1. 1,  p.  104. 


136 


J.  Gonda  • Vedic  Literature 


10.  Speculative  hymns 


We  are  imperceptibly  led  to  the  speculative  hymns’-.  Some  passing  references 
to  the  One  in  the  form  of  the  Unborn  (st.  6),  the  One  which  the  inspired  (poets) 
call  by  different  names  (st.  46),  show  that  sukta  1,  164  also  belongs  to  those — 
mainly  younger — ^parts  of  the  Rgveda  which  already  disclose  the  development 
of  a monistic  trend.  A clearly  monotheistic  tendency^  is  found  in  the  hymns  to 
Viivakarman  (10,  81  and  82)®  who  is  eulogized  as  the  creator  of  the  world.  His 
activity  is  (in  10,  81)  described  in  four  images — ^the  second  of  which  is  moulded 
into  the  form  of  a question — ^viz.  those  of  the  sacrificial  priest,  of  the  potter,  the 
smith  and  the  architect.  In  the  second  poem  this  primeval  creator  is  identified 
with  the  Unborn,  the  first  germ  borne  by  the  primeval  waters,  in  which — ^in  the 
view  of  this  author — ^is  fixed  the  One,  the  source  of  all  worlds  and  their  in- 
habitants. 

Of  greater  reputation  are  some  other  hymns  of  the  tenth  manMa.  The 
cosmogonic  hymn  10,  129^ — one  of  the  six  or  seven  which  deal  with  this 
subject — ^has  rightly  been  called  the  least  incomplete,  and  most  profound  and 
coherent  Rgvedic  text  of  its  genre.  Succinct  and  carefully  worded,  yet  bold  and 
poetical,  it  heralds  highly  important  and  systematically  elaborated  ideas  of  the 
later  periods.  Tracing  ail  things  to  one  principle  and  declaring  opposites  such 
as  day  and  night,  death  and  continuance  of  life  to  be  the  self-unfoldment  of 
this  One  it  expresses  the  quintessence  of  monism®.  The  origin  of  the  universe  is 
explained  as  the  evolution  of  the  truly  existent  cosmos  (sat ) from  the  undiffer- 
entiated chaos  (asat):  “.  . . There  was  not  space,  nor  the  firmament  which  is 
beyond.  What  moved  intermittently  ? Where  ? Under  whose  protection  ? Was 
there  (or,  what  was  . . .)  the  (primordial)  water,  the  deep,  unfathomable  V’ 
These  questions,  suggestive  of  the  riddle  style,  are  not  answered,  but  the  poet 
continues:  “There  was  not  death  nor  (continuation  of)  life  then.  There  was  no 
appearance  of  (distinction  between)  day  and  night.  That  One  breathed  without 
■wind  (breath)  by  its  own  nature.  Other  than  that  there  was  nothing  else. 
Enveloped  in  darkness  was  this  universe  in  the  beginning,  indistinguishable, 


" L.  Renou,  Hynmes  speculatifs  du  Yeda.,  Paris  1956;  Poesie  religieuse,  p.  100; 
C,  Ktjxhax  Raja,  Poet-philosophers  of  the  Rgveda,  Madras  1963  (very  subjective); 
St.  Michalski,  iix  Istorija  kultury  drevnej  Indii,  Moscow  1963,  p.  189. 

^ Cf.  e.g.  also  1,  164,  6;  8,  41,  10. 

® See  Macdoxell,  V.  M.,  p.  118. 

^ W.  B.  Whitxey,  in  PAOS  1882,  p.  CIX;  A.  Lunwio,  m SB  Prague  1895,  14; 
1.  Sahoda,  m Ritsumeikan  Univ.  50^  Anniv.  Comm.  Vol.  1951 ; S.  F.  MiCHAnsxy, 
S (Como  1952),  p.  123;  H.  D.  Veuankab,  The  creation  hymns  in  RV. 

i ^ ^ Uas,  in  AP  22,  p.  556;  V.  S.  Agbawala,  Hymn  of  creation, 

Benaxes  1963;  J.  Gont>a,  m Tijdschrift  voor  Filosofie  28  (Louvain  1966),  p.  670; 
^OBMA2f  Bsovra,  in  JAOS  61,  p.  80;  85,  p.  33;  Rbnoit,  E.  V.  P.  XVI,  p.  168; 
R AMBEOsm,  Studia  A.  Pagliaro,  Rome  1969, 1,  p.  95;  W.  H.  Maueeb,  Communi- 
cation 29  IntCongr  Or.  Paxis  1973;  V.  X.  Topobov,  in  Acta  et  commentationes 
umv.  Taxtu  284,  1971,  p.  9. 

‘ T.  M.  P.  Mahadevan,  in  C.  KunLan  Raja  Pres.  VoL,  Madras  1946,  p.  319. 


Contents  of  the  Rgveda 


137 


sometMiig  waving.  The  virtualj  viz.  the  One,  which  was  covered  by  the  void, 
assumed  individual  existence  by  the  greatness  of  internal  heating  ftojxw  J 
After  asking,  in  st.  6,  “Who  knows  for  certain  ? "Who  can  declare  here,  whence  is 
this  creation-in-differentiation  . . — ^because  “even  the  gods  did  not  exist 
before  creation’’ — ^the  poet,  who,  according  to  tradition,  is  Prajapati,  the 
Creator  himself — ^the  only  one  qualified  for  solving  these  problems — , concludes 
this  hhdvavTtta  (‘process  of  evolution’) — as  it  is  traditionallv  called® — ^in  a 
sceptical  mood:  “This  creation,  whence  it  has  arisen,  whether  it  is  the  result  of 
an  act  of  founding  or  not,  he  who  surveys  it  in  the  highest  firmament,  he  only 
knows — or  else  he  (also)  does  not  know.”  What  strikes  us  in  this  beautiful  poem 
is  first  that,  though  resoirting  to  some  unavoidable  metaphors,  it  is  free  from 
allegorical  symbolism  and  in  the  second  place  that  (with  one  exception)  it  has 
hardly  any  contact  with  other  portions  of  the  corpus.  In  view  of  the  form  into 
which  the  poet  has  moulded  his  speculation  it  is  inconceivable  that  he  does  not 
stand  on  the  shoulders  of  predecessors,  who  had  likewise  rejected  some  simple 
‘theological’  or  m3rfchological  solutions  of  the  problem,  such  as  were,  for  instance, 
proposed  in  10,  72  where  after  various  contradictory  h3q>o theses  no  synthesis  is 
attempted:  first  the  world  vras  forged  together  by  Brahmanaspati,  then  the 
gods  were  produced,  and  lastly  the  sun. 

Of  the  other  cosmogonic  hymns  the  Purusasukta  (10,  90)’  was  to  exert  a 
powerful  and  permanent  infiuence  upon  the  m3rthical  and  speculative  thought 
of  the  hrdhmanas  and  upanisads  and  in  later  times  to  become  the  foundation 
stone  of  Visnuite  philosophy®.  It  is  the  first  expression  of  the  idea  that  the 
creation  of  the  universe  is  the  self-limitation  of  the  transcendent  Person 
( Purusa),  “who  is  this  All”®,  manifesting  himself  in  the  realm  of  our  experience. 
The  act  of  creation  is  here  treated  as  a sacrificial  rite^°  in  which  the  Purusa — 
who  may  perhaps  faintly  re-echo  old  popular  notions  about  a primeval  giant — 
was  the  victim  whose  members  became  the  portions  of  the  universe : 

* It  may  be  remembered  that  archaic,  like  more  or  less  ‘primitive’  cultures 
attached  much  importance  to  the  knowledge  of  what  happened  in  the  primordial 
Time ; see  e.  g.  M.  Eliade,  Birth  and  rebirth.  New  York  1958.  Tor  tapas : L.  Mabena, 
at  24  AIOC,  p.  227. 

’ Norman  Brotvn,  in  JAOS  51  (1931),  p.  108;  St.  Schayer,  in  ArchOr  7 (1935), 
p.  319  (discussing  also  the  problem  of  the  origin  of  the  theme);  A.  K.  Coomaba- 
SWAMV,  in  JAOS  66,  p.  145  (speculative);  Renoxj,  in  JA  243,  p.  436;  P.  Mus,  in 
Hommage  L.  Febvre,  Paris  1953,  II,  p.  11  (speculative,  on  possible  relationship 
with  primeval  giants  in  other  literatures) ; the  same,  in  Studies  W.  Norman  Brown, 
p.  165;  V.  S.  Agbawala,  Sri  Venkateshwar  Univ.  J.  5 (1962),  p.  11  (speculative); 
A.  P.  KIarmarkar,  in  JBBRAS  18  (glorification  of  human  sacrifice : untenable) ; 
J.  Varenne,  in  CJonferenze  1st.  IndoL  Univ.  Torino,  III  (1969),  p.  6.  For  cosmogonic 
speculation  in  general  also  F.  B.  J.  Kutper,  at  HLB  10,  p.  91;  Eliade,  Le  mythe 
de  Fetemel  retour. 

® See  e.g.  J.  Gonda,  in  WZKSA  12-13  (1968),  p.  101;  Visnuism  and  Sivaism, 
London  1970,  p.  25;  57. 

® Of.  also  3,  38  with  the  motif  of  the  androgynous  primeval  being  (st.  7). 

See  K.  K.  Potdar,  Sacrificial  setting  of  the  philosophical  hymns  in  the 
Rgveda,  BhV  12,  p.  163. 


138 


J.  Gonda  * Vedic  Literature 


(11)  “When  they  divided  the  Purusa,  how  many  parts  was  he  made  ? 

What  was  his  mouth,  his  arms  ? What  called  his  thighs  and  his  feet  ? 

(12)  His  mouth  was  the  brahmin,  his  arms  the  man  of  royal  descent. 

TTir  thighs  were  the  vai^ya,  from  his  feet  the  ^udra  was  born. 

(13)  Prom  his  mind  the  moon  was  born,  from  his  eye  the  sun. 

Prom  his  mouth  Indra  and  Agni,  Wind  (Vayu)  from  his  breath.” 

And  so  we  are  informed  that  the  air  was  produced  from  his  navel,  the  sky  from 
his  head  and  so  on.  Being  conceived  in  the  spirit  of  the  hrdJiManas  and  theo- 
panistically  coloured  this  sukta  no  doubt  belongs  to  the  most  recent  period  of 
the  Rgveda. 

The  so-called  hymn  to  the  unnamed  god  (10, 121)^^ — every  stanza  except  the 
last  ends:  ''To  what  god  shall  we  pay  homage  with  oblation 
example  of  tentative  monotheism.  While  perhaps  containing  verbal  remini- 
scences of  the  'henotheistic’  Indra  hymn  2, 12,  it  gives  an  impressive  description 
of  a demiurge  who  is  the  creator,  animator  and  ruler  of  the  universe.  "In  the 
beginning  was  evolved  the  Golden  Germ  (Hiranyagarhha);  bom,  it  (he)  was 
the  sole  lord  of  all  existence.  He  established  heaven  and  earth  . . . Who  is  the 
life-giver,  the  strength-giver;  whose  command  all  attend,  even  the  gods;  of 
whom  life  and  death  are  the  reflexion;  . . . who  by  his  greatness  has  ever  been 
the  sole  lord  of  the  world  that  blinks  and  breathes;  who  rules  over  these  two- 
footed  and  four-footed  beings  . . To  the  repeated  question,  which  does  not 
fail  to  inspire  a sense  of  mystery,  the  last  stanza  (10)  gives  Prajapati’s  name  as 
the  answer.  It  is  however  ignored  in  the  padapdtha  and  almost  generally  re- 
garded as  a later  addition^®. 

Thus  many  hymns  in  the  tenth  mandala,  while  developing  various  lines  of 
speculative  thought  paved  the  way  for  the  cosmogonies  and  the  philosophic 
doctrines  of  the  Atharvaveda,  the  hrahmaym  and  the  upanisads^"^.  That 
special  attention  was  paid  to  cosmogony  is  easily  explicable : the  origin  of  the 
universe  is  continuously  repeated  in  any  act  of  creation^®  and  its  commemora- 
tion is  necessary  to  keep  this  process  going. 

Whereas  continuance  of  life  is  eagerly  desired^®,  death  and  life  in  the  here- 
after are  hardly  themes  of  the  poets  of  the  manias  I-IX^^.  Even  a passage 
such  as  2,  27,  14  ‘T  would  like,  0 Indra,  to  reach  the  broad,  secure  light,  let 


F.  Edgebton,  The  beginnings  of  Indian  philosophy,  London  1965,  p.  96; 
Horman  Bbowit,  in  JAOS  85,  p.  32;  P.  S.  Sastri,  in  PBh  53,  p.  162;  Varenke, 
O.C.,  p.  8;  J.  Gonda,  The  background  of  the  Hiranyagarbha  concept,  in  Comm. 
YoL  Raghu  Vira,  Hew  Delhi  1973,  p.  39. 

Interestingly  enough,  the  manuscripts  of  the  Paippalada  Atharvaveda  found 
in  Orissa  have  the  reading  ‘To  that  god  . . (D.  Bhattacharyya,  The  fundamental 
themes  of  the  Atharvaveda,  Poona  1968,  p.  57). 

Otherwise:  Vidhusekhara  Sastri,  in  6 AIOC,  Patna  1933,  p.  502  (un- 
convincing). 

Renou,  E.  V.  P.  H,  p.  26. 

£liade,  Le  mythe  de  T^temel  retour,  p.  38. 

Cf.  e.g.  1,  23,  19;  125,  6;  4,  35,  3;  5,  2,  3;  7,  57,  6;  10,  30,  12. 

See  also  p.  12;  Rexou,  H.  S.,  p.  238. 


Contents  of  tbe  Rgveda 


139 


not  tlie  long  darknesses  attain  us”  is  a rare  occurreiice.  In  masala  X it  is 
otherwise^®:  froin  five  successive  hymns  of  this  final  man^Ia  (14r-18)^*  it 
that  the  poets,  while  concerning  themselves  with  funeral  ceremonies, 
the  crematory  fire,  the  blessed  deceased  and  rites  to  be  performed  on  their 
behalf,  in  no  way  rule  out  a life  beyond  cremation.  Yama,  the  first  human 
being  and  the  archetypal  defunct,  who  became  the  chief  of  those  who  followed 
him,  has  found  the  path  to  the  hereafter,  which  has  been  trodden  by  the 
ancestors;  to  Yama  homage  is  due,  from  the  ancestors  favour  expected  (14, 
1—6).  The  deceased  are  expected  to  meet  their  forebears  and  periodically  to 
return  to  the  sacrifices  in  their  honour  (14,  7-12). 

The  kind  of  knowledge  which  the  authors  of  the  speculative  hymns  and 
passages  considered  important  is  metaphysical  knowledge  regarding  the  origin^® 
and  operation  of  the  universe  and  in  connexion  with  this  the  investigation  of  the 
attaiument  of  individual  transcendence,  which,  it  is  believed,  may  be  won  in 
mystic  sight  and  vision^^.  The  hymn  10, 154  is  a bhdvavrtta,  attributed  to  Yam!, 
the  sister  of  Yama,  the  ruler  of  the  deceased.  Recurring  among  the  funeral 
stanzas  of  the  Atharvaveda^^  describes  the  various  classes  of  blessed  Fathers, 
into  whose  midst  the  deceased  sacrificer  will  be  reborn,  and  their  situation  in 
the  hereafter.  RV.  10,  130,  another  bhdvavrtta,  deals  vith  the  origin  of  the 
sacrifice  under  the  well-known  image  of  a texture;  this  mythical  sacrifice  is 
repeated  in  all  ever  recurrmg  actual  celebrations-®.  Other  passages  raise  the 
question  of  the  path  that  leads  to  the  gods  and  attest  to  a vision  of  man’s 
descent  from  the  great  Father  (3, 54, 5 ; 9)  or  admit  man’s  ignorance  of  the  ways 
of  the  gods,  that  is  of  the  powers  presiding  over  the  provinces  of  the  universe 
(10, 12,  7).  The  poet  of  10,  5,  after  making  an  attempt  to  fathom  the  mysterious 
character  of  Agni,  arrives  at  the  conclusion  that  there  is  a limit  to  speculation®^. 
“Wrapped  in.  mist  they  walk  about,  the  twaddling  reciters  of  verses”  (10,  82,  7). 
According  to  10,  149,  2 Savitar  alone  knew  the  source  of  that  cosmic  ocean 
from  which  arose  earth  and  space®®. 

However,  not  all  poets  concern  themselves  with  the  same  problems®®.  While 
eulogizing  the  sacrificial  horse®’  the  author  of  1,  163  makes  it  a cosmic  entity 
identical  with  the  ‘original  horse’  and  symbolizing  the  sun;  it  is  also  regarded 


^8  Renoxj,  E.  V.  P.  n,  p.  26. 

Cf.  also  Brhaddevata  1,  8. 

Cf.  e.g.  8, *41,  10;  10,  190. 

See  XoBMAisr  Bbowx,  in  JAOS  88,  p.  208. 

®®  AV.  18,  2,  14-18. 

For  other  ritualistic  speculation  see  10,  181. 

Ludebs,  Vaxuna,  p.  100  etc.  Compare  also  6,  9,  2. 

Some  philosophic^  hymns — e.g.  10,  71;  125-are  discussed  elsewhere.  Some 
authors  (e.g.  H.  D.  Veuaistkab,  in  18  AIOC,  p.  18  on  RV,  3,  18  and  4,  9)  go  too  far 
in  assuming  the  ‘philosophicar  character  of  definite  texts. 

®®  Cf.  also  7,  34,  2;  10,  138,  1;  149. 

See  CoNDA,  R.  I.  I,  p.  168. 


140 


J.  Gonda  * Vedic  Literature 


as  the  prototype  of  all  race-horses,  whose  self  ( atman ) is  the  sun-bird^®.  Some 
hymns  are  concluded  with  a speculative  statement  which  does  not  appear  to  be 
intimately  connected  with  what  precedes.  Thus  1,  89,  10  theopanisticaUy 
declares  Aditi  to  be  everything  existent  and  4,  40,  5 eulogizing  the  horse  Da- 
dhikra  ends  with  a comprehensive  definition  of  Rta  in  the  garb  of  Agni  termi- 
nology; it  is  much  quoted  in  later  works  which  affirm  the  identity  of  the  whole 
world  with  the  Supreme.  Not  infrequently  ‘mystical’  speculation  is  indeed 
closely  interlaced  with  the  traditional  laudations,  cosmogony  and  philosophy 
with  mythology  and  theology^®.  The  poet  of  the  partly  obscure  sukta  4,  5, 
whilst  eulogizing  Agni,  refers  to  certain  secrets  revealed  to  him  by  the  god,  viz. 
the  value  of  the  inspired  word,  which  he  now  in  enigmatic  wordings  hesitates 
to  divulge^®.  In  the  comparatively  profound  svMa  10,  88,  the  poet,  beginning 
with  the  sacrificial  jSre,  inserting  eulogies  and  commemorating  Agni’s  func- 
tions, relates  that  the  birth  of  Agni  Vai^vanara  (Universal  Fire)  meant  the 
appearance  of  the  sun,  which,  identical  with  Agni,  is  the  centre  of  the  world, 
giving  light  and  warmth  to  heaven  and  earth.  In  the  last  three  stanzas  he  raises 
the  question  of  the  relation  between  the  many  manifestations  of  fire  and  the 
one  Universal  Fire,  intimating  that  this  is  only  one  aspect  of  a wider  problem®^. 

It  is  difficult  to  decide  whether  all  passages  which  Geldner  and  others  stamped 
as  ‘mystic’  really  have  an  inner,  secret  meanbig®^;  part  of  them  may  simply  be 
ambiguous  or  incomprehensible^^.  In  other  cases  the  poet  has  resorted  to 
metaphorical  phraseology  in  order  to  give  his  audience  an  idea  of  religious 
truths  or  psychological  processes,  for  instance  when  he  describes  poetic  speech 
as  proceeding  in  the  form  of  ghee  from  the  ocean  in  his  heart  (4,  58,  5 ; cf.  1 1)^^. 
Or  he  may  wish,  without  indicating  the  alternation  of  the  subjects,  to  focus 
attention  on  parallelism  between  divine  and  human  action  (1,  or,  while 
dealing  with  Agm’s  ‘births,’  to  describe  mimdane  and  celestial  events  at  the 


For  similar  exaltation  of  the  sacrificial  butter  see  4,  58. 

« See  e.g.  3,  38;  10,  5,  7;  149. 

Renou,  E.  V.  P.  II,  p.  55. 

Although  many  themes  could  suggest  an  unknown  background  to  the  poets 
and  induce  them  to  speculate  concerning  the  miracles  of  nature  or  the  relations 
between  the  seen  and  the  Unseen  (see  e.g.  1,  24,  10;  62,  9;  180,  3;  2,  4,  7;  4,  13,  5; 
5,  85,  6)  these  observations  must  suffice.  It  is  not  my  present  task  to  evaluate  Vedic 
literature  from  the  points  of  view  of  philosophy,  history  of  religion  etc.  or  to  discuss 
those  p^sages  which  are  of  interest  with  regard  to  the  history  of  ideas  or  termi- 
nolo^^  that  h^^e  a bearmg  upon  the  views  of  life  and  the  world  of  Vedic  men  (see 
also  Kenou,  Poesie  religieuse,  p.  8).  For  some  basic  concepts  the  reader  may  be 
refeired  to  H.  Oebtel,  in  NIA  I (1938),  p.  317  (on  mat) ; Renou,  in  JA  252,  p.  159 
^n  dharman);  R.  Haxjschild,  in  Festschrift  F.  Weller,  p.  250  (on  manas);  Ch.  J. 
Rlair,  Heat  m the  Rig  Veda  and  Atharva  Veda,  New  Haven  Conn.  1961 ; J.  Gokda, 
hoka,  Amsterdam  Acad.  1966;  Dhaman,  Amsterdam  Acad.  1967 
« Cf.  e.g.  Geldneb,  RV.  I,  p.  57  and  Renott,  E.  V.  P.  XVI,  p.  5. 

Compare  e.g.  portions  of  1,  140;  141;  3,  56. 

Cf.  Ludees,  Vamna,  p.  269.  See  e.g.  also  10,  101 
” Cf.  GsASsitijrtT,  ?,y.  n,  p.  72. 


141 


Contents  of  the  'Rgveda, 

game  time  (3,  1)®®.  Or  the  audience  is  invited  to  make  sense  of  a diversity  of 
names  and  allusions  (e.g.  9,  83).  Cases  are  on  the  other  hand  not  lacking  in 
which  fresh  light  thrown  on  a hymn  forbids  the  assumption  of  intended 
mystic  obscurity®^.  These  few  remarks  should  not  however  be  misunderstood. 
There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  poets  were,  generally  speaking,  men  of  special 
spiritual  knowledge  who  were  used  to  inquire  into  the  relations  between  the 
ritual  and  the  natural  phenomena,  to  speculate  about  origins  and  connexioiis, 
to  investigate  the  relations  between  this  world  and  the  Unseen  which  is  the 
Beal,  and,  without  establishing  integrated  systems,  to  study  all  that  has  a 
bearing  upon  man's  existence  in  this  world  and  the  beyond,  poets  who  then 
already  handed  down  their  knowledge  and  methods  of  interpretation  in  more 
or  less  esoteric  instruction®®.  It  is  possible  that  sometimes  Western  scholars 
believe  they  encounter  mysticism  where  there  is  none ; it  is  almost  certain  that 
we  overlook  secret  meanings  which  were  intended  and  easily  understood  by  the 
initiated®®. 


« Gjxdker,  V.  S.  I,  p.  157;  P.  Eegnato,  at  RHR  11  (22),  p.  302. 

Cf.  e.s.  GBASSKAiw,  RV.  I,  p.  378  and  Noema:s'  Beowi«-,  at  MA  2,  p.  115. 

» For  some  ideas  of  the  poets  in  their  relation  to  ‘philosophy,  cosmogoi^^  and 
ritual  see  T.  Sahoda,  in  Ritsumeikan  Bungaku  50*  Anniv.  Comm.  ’V  ol.  19.9. 

See  also  p.  240  ff. 


142 


J*  Gonda  • Yedic  Literature 


11.  Magic 

Tie  presence  of  about  a dozen  poems,  occurring  almost  exclusively  in 
maMala  X,  wMcli  are  concerned  with  what  modem  men  prefer  to  qualify  as 
magical  notions^  is  less  surprising  if  we  realize  that  we  should  not  distinguish 
between  Religion’  or  ‘official  ritual’  on  the  one  hand  and  witchcraft  on  the 
other®,  but  rather  betw^een  dignified  and  complicated  ceremonials  stimulating 
the  gods  into  a display  of  their  power  to  maintain,  in  the  interest  of  the  sacii- 
ficer,  the  normal  and  desirable  state  of  affairs  in  the  universe,  to  safeguard  his 
health,  wealth,  cattle  and  offspring  and  simple  rites  serving  the  limited  and 
immediate  interests  of  an  individual.  It  is  trae  that  the  proper  place  of  ‘magic’ 
texts  is  the  Atharvaveda,  but  it  is  not  less  certain  that  mmdo^la  X contains 
many  atharvanic  elements,  diverging  also  in  other  respects  from  the  rest  of 
the  Rgveda®.  Moreover,  suspicion  might  fall  upon  an  individual  poet  so  that 
he  has  to  defend  himself  against  calumny:  “Unassociated  with  the  evil  spirits 
I invoke  the  gods  . . .”  (7,  34,  8)^.  And  indeed,  the  activities  of  sages  such  as 
Vasistha  who  with  the  help  of  a deity  secured  uncommon  results  (7,  9,  6)  could 
easily  be  construed  as  identical  with  the  harmful  witchcraft  of  the  non- Aryan 
‘magicians’  and  other  enemies  who  are  under  various  names  mentioned 
throughout  the  Rgveda®:  “If  I have  worshipped  false  gods  or,  0 Agni,  have  a 
vain  conception  of  the  gods  . . . this  very  day  I would  die  if  I am  an  employer 
of  demons”  (7,  104,  14f.). 

Thus  there  are  two  incantations  to  preserve  the  life  of  one  lying  at  the  point 
of  death  (10,  o8;  60,  7-12),  the  former  characterized  by  a refrain  and  an  enume- 
ration of  possibilities  which  are  so  typical  of  texts  of  this  genre : “If  your  spirit 
has  gone  far  away  to  Yama  (. . . to  the  heavens,  the  earth,  the  points  of  the 
compass  . . .),  we  bring  it  back,  that  you  will  dwell  and  live  here.”  And  10 
60,  11: 

“Downward  blows  the  wind,  downward  shines  the  sun, 

Downward  milks  the  cow,  downward  must  your  disease  go.” 

The  purpose  of  10,  162  is  to  destroy,  “in  umson  with  Agni,”  the  demon  who 
injures  an  embryo®,  that  of  1,  191-— the  last,  ‘atharvanic’  sma  of  mandala  I— 
to  render  venomous  animals  inoffensive;  it  is  called  an  upanisad  or  esoteric 
text^;  10,  87  is  an  exorcism,  directed  against  somebody  possessed  by  an  evil 
spirit.  . 10,  145,  which  as  3,  18  occurs  also  in  the  Atharvaveda,  is  directed 


^ Macdoxell,  H.  S.  L.,  p.  120.  Cf.  e.g.  also  cases  such  as  10,  97. 

* See  also  Renou,  Poesie  religieuse,  p.  16. 

® Rexou,  E.  Y,  P.  II,  p.  1;  19;  Geldner,  RY.  Ill,  p.  221  (on  10,  57ff.). 

^ S'©e  also  5,  12,  2;  7,  21,  5;  85,  1;  104;  10,  87. 

® H.  D.  YEnA^-KAB,  Magicians  in  the  Rgveda,  Mem.  Yolume  L.  Sarup,  Hoshiarpur 

1954,  p.  85.  ^ ^ 

® See  also  RY.  7,  55  (to  induce  sleep);  10,  183  (a  charm  to  procure  offspring); 
161  and  163  (exorcisms,  against  disease);  10,  159. 

’ See  above,  p.  93. 


Contents  of  the  Rgveda 


143 


against  a rival  wife  and  according  to  the  Aniikramanl,  ascribing  it  to  Indra's 
wife,  a means  of  disposing  of  her  by  means  of  a potent  herb®:  10,  166  serves 
the  interests  of  a man  who  wants  to  have  the  upper  hand  of  his  equals : “Here 
I bind  yon  Jnst  as  the  tw'o  ends  of  the  bow  with  the  string/^ 

The  well-known  and  often  misunderstood  sukta  7,  103®,  the  so-called  frog- 
h3nHi,  is  neither  a satire  on  the  brahmans — “The  frogs  that  have  been  quiet 
dnring  a year  (like)  brahinans  devoted  to  a priestly  fimction  . . (st.  1) — ^nor 
a comic  intermezzo,  nor  a joke  or  parody^®,  bnt  a serious  rain-charm^^.  After 
describing  the  behavionr  of  the  frogs  at  the  beginning  of  the  rains  and  so 
farthering  the  natural  phenomenon  in  producing  w^hich  these  animals,  like 
priests,  are  believed  to  be  instrumental  or  to  play  a mediatorial  part  the  poet 
asks  a blessing:  “By  means  of  their  croaking  the  frogs  have  given  us  riches: 
the  frogs  giving  (us)  hundreds  of  cow^s  shall  extend  (our)  life  at  the  end  of  a 
thousandfold  ^owa-pressing,’’  w^hich  means:  “You  have  helped  us  till  now*,  w*e 
have  praised  (i.e.  strengthened)  you  once  more:  so  you  shall  continue  to  help 
us.” 

Several  hymns  have  an  apotropaeic  purport.  RV.  1,  133  — “Both  heaven 
and  earth  I purify  with  the  Rta,  I bum  down  all  great  fiends”  (st.  1);  “Drive 
away,  0 benevolent  one,  the  troop  of  the  witches  . . (st.  3) — ^invokes  Indra  to 
destroy  various  kinds  of  evil  beings:  “muttering  these  stanzas  one  kills  the  evil 
demoniac  powers  and  subdues  one’s  rivals”^^.  37  Agni  hymn  of  un- 

common tone  and  vocabulary,  directed  against  evil  spirits  and  their  human 
instigators^® — “Cut  off,  0 Agni,  with  thy  glow  the  heads  of  the  one  who  smears 
himself  with  the  bloody  flesh  of  men,  who  takes  away  the  niilk  of  cows  ...” 
(st.  16) — ; 10,  155  exorcises  evil  represented  by  a witch.  The  sukta  7,  50  is  one 
of  the  few  Rgvedic  texts  which  were  supposed  to  have  the  pow*er  of  healing^ 
in  casu^  of  counteracting  the  effects  of  poison^® ; this  pow*er  how*ever  derives  from 
Varuna  and  Mitra  who  are  invoked  in  the  beginning.  In  2, 42  and  43  an  ominous 
bird  is  invoked  to  give  auspicious  signs;  a traveller  may  also  use  these  texts 
when  he  does  not  see  the  bird,  because  they  perplex  robbers^*. 


« Cf.  RV.  10,  159. 

® Go]srDA,  Secular  h^unns,  p.  313. 

See  e.g.  Geldxeb,  Auswahi,  II,  p.  117;  compare  also  Wixtebnitz,  H.  I.  L. 
I,  p,  109. 

Bloomfield,  in  JAOS  37,  p.  186;  Nobmak  Bbowtn,  in  NIA  2,  p.  115  (on  7, 
101-103)  and  see  also  H.  H.  Bendeb,  in  JAOS  37,  p.  186;  some'what  hesitating: 
Rexotj,  H.  P.,  p.  75.  For  popular  belief  in  connection  with  frogs:  S.  T.  Moses,  in 
QJMS  30  (1939),  p.  13;  for  parallels:  K.  Th.  Pbeitss,  in  Globus  95,  p.  41;  for  an 
untenable  ‘sociologicar  \iew  of  the  h^unn:  P.  S.  Shastbi,  in  IHQ  32  (1956),  p.  394. 
Rgvidhana,  1,  25,  2. 

Lomaiel,  Gedichte,  p.  77.  Cf.  also  7,  104. 

Compare  also  1,  50,  11-13.  The  Sarvanukramani  characterizes  these  stanzas 
as  well  as  10,  145  as  upanisad.  See  also  Lommel,  Gedichte,  p.  42. 

Velaxkab,  Mandala  VII,  p.  117. 

Rgvidhana,  1,  31,  5. 


144 


J.  Gonda  • Vedic  Literature 


However,  tMs  is  not  all-  Just  as  the  utterance  of  a name  suffices  to  make  its 
bearer  present,  just  as  speaking  about  powerful  things  generates  power,  just  as 
a word  of  consecration  dedicates  the  man  addressed  to  the  good  or  evil  condi- 
tion to  which  it  refers,  in  the  same  way — ^that  is  even  automatically  and  without 
the  intervention  of  gods  or  spirits — a word  of  benediction  allocates  fortune's 
gifts  to  a person  and  in  the  same  way  a mythical  tale  or  holy  story  possesses 
decisive  power  in  its  solemn  repetition  which  confirms,  renews  and  reiterates 
its  inherent  truth  or  the  events  replete  with  power  that  form  its  content. 

Thus  RV.  4,  57  is  a blessmg  of  the  field,  6,  28  and  10,  169^’  are  blessings  of 
the  cows^®  and  6,  75  has  rightly  been  called  a “Waffensegen"^®,  a benediction 
of  the  king's  weapons  of  war  in  order  to  secure  victory  in  battle : 

(1)  “Like  a thunder-cloud  the  mailed  (warrior)  looks, 

If^Tien  he  plunges  into  the  lap  of  battle. 

Be  victorious  without  injury  to  your  body. 

Let  the  strength  of  the  armour  protect  you!” 

Wintemitz’s^®  view  of  this  sulda — originally  it  may  have  been  a war  song, 
which  has  been  changed  into  a battle  charm — ^is  unconvincing,  his  argumenta- 
tion— some  verses  are  distinguished  by  great  poetic  beauty,  others  show  only 
the  dry  inartistic  language  of  incantations — ^not  free  from  subjectiveness.  The 
standpoint  that  the  metrical  texts  of  the  Veda  are  either  hymns  of  high 
literary  merits  or  dry  and  artless  magical  formulas  is  untenable,  because  for 
instance  many  ‘magical'  texts  of  the  Atharvaveda,  among  which  battle  charms, 
are  characterized  by  vigour  and  outstanding  aesthetic  merit^b  Nor  can  the 
thesis  be  substantiated  that  those  h3rmns  which  were  used  for  so-called  magical 
purposes  or  in  which  a magical  element  seems  to  predominate  were  in  their 
generality  recast  afterwards  or  enlarged  by  the  addition  of  charms  and  in- 
cantations. It  is  hardly  probable  that  the  possibility  of  magical  application  of 
Rgvedic  texts,  which  is  onesidedly  expounded  in  the  Rgvidhana,  does  not  date 
from  an  early  period,  or  even  from  the  very  beginning.  There  is  no  hard-and- 
fast  line  between  the  magic  and  religious  domain.  Just  as  in  invoking  the  gods 
and  in  offering  sacrifices  to  them  words  could  be  pronounced  which  shew  the 
belief  in  man's  mastery  over  powers  and  natural  forces  without  divine  inter- 
vention, so,  in  sorcery  and  incantations,  the  help  of  personal  gods  was,  not 
infrequently,  implored.  Moreover,  sacred  texts  could  as  such  arouse  and 
exercise  power,  either  dangerous  or  beneficent.  Since,  finally,  the  brahmans  in 
their  solemn  ceremonies  often  borrowed  and  sanctioned  popular  rites  conse- 
crating these  by  mantras,  the  occurrence,  in  the  Rgveda,  of  ‘popular  magic' 
and  the  references  to  uncomplicated  popular  rites  is  far  from  surprising. 


3, 


See  IsvG.  2,  10,  5f. 
See  p.  83. 


" 


Contents  of  the  Rgveda 


145 


The  popular  sukta  8,  91  may  be  mentioned  as  a ca^se  in  point It  is  a mono- 
logue of  the  maiden  Apala  introduced  by  the  statement  that  once  a girl  found 
soma.  With  this  and  a cake  she  trieSy  in  a naive  way,  to  come  into  contact 
with  Indra  and  implores  Mm  to  cure  three  defects  wMch,  far  from  being 
world-shaking,  are  of  great  moment  in  her  domestic  circle,  viz.  the  bald  hair  of 
her  father,  Ms  obviously  infertile  field,  and  her  hairier  abdomen.  Whereas 
the  commentator  Sadgurusisya  identified  the  girl  mentioned  in  the  mtroduction 
and  the  person  speaking,  JB.  1,  220^®  tells  the  story  of  Apala®  ^ who  wanted  to 
get  rid  of  a skin-disease,  had  a vision  of  this  text  and  praised  with  it  with  the 
result  that  she  found  a soma-stalk;  she  chewed  it,  Indra  approached  her  and 
she  recited  the  whole  sukta.  This  difference  of  opinion  is  as  unessential  as  the 
disagreement  betw^een  Yaska®^,  who  regards  the  sukta  as  an  itiMsa,  and 
Saunaka,  according  to  whom  it  is  a hjTnn  addressed  to  Indra.  Since  the  text 
pretends  to  relate  an  historical  event  and  girls  who  were  in  the  unfav^ourable 
condition  meant  by  it  could  probably  then  already  find  no  husband®®,  there 
can  hardly  be  any  doubt  that  the  recitation  of  the  sukta  accompanied  by  the 
simple  gifts  mentioned  in  it  and  the  popular  rite  referred  to  in  the  concluding 
stanza — she  is  three  times  purified  by  means  of  (water  sprinkled  through)  the 
holes  of  a chariot,  a cart,  and  a yoke®’ — ^was  supposed  to  bring  about  the 
miraculous  cure  of  girls  who  were  in  similar  circumstances.  The  final  stanza 
is  indeed  used  in  the  domestic  rite  of  sprinkling  a bride®®. 

There  are  many  other  instances  of  this  t3rpe  of  sukta^^,  wMch  may  be  called 
'legend  spelF — P.  TMeme®°  coined  the  term  ‘Legendenzauber’ — ; up  to  recently 
they  were  not  however  always  duly  recognized  as  such,  and  some  more  are  no 
doubt  awaiting  detection.  The  story  of  Agastya,  who,  succumbing  to  Lopa- 
mudra’s  entreaties,  broke  Ms  vow  of  chastity®^  is  concluded  by  tW'O  stanzas 
that  according  to  tradition®®  were  'seen’  by  a student  of  the  Veda — who  had 

22  Th.  Autbecht,  in  Weber,  I.  S.  IV,  p.  1;  Oldenbebg,  at  ZDMG  39,  p.  76  ( = 
K.S.,  p.  498);  Von  Sohroedeb,  in  WZIQVI  22,  p.  223;  Gonda,  Secular  hymns,  p. 
328;  A.  K.  Coomabaswamy,  in  Speculum  20,  p.  391;  R.  Gopae,  A non-legendary 
interpretation  of  the  Apala  Sukta,  in  VIJ  2 (1964),  p.  55  (=  Proc.  26  Int.  Congr. 
Orient,  m,  1,  p.  127)  (misunderstood). 

22  See  H.  OEBTEii,  in  JAOS  18,  p.  26.  Sayana  quotes  a longer  version  from  the 
SatBr.  For  a variant  in  wMch  Indra  is  said  to  have  fallen  in  love  with  her : Brhad- 
devata,  6,  99 ff.  and  Macdonell’s  notes. 

2^  Apala  is  traditionally  regarded  as  the  rsi  or  poetess. 

22  Cf.  Brhaddevata,  6,  107;  Geldneb,  V.  S.  I,  p.  292,  and  AuswaH,  II,  p.  132. 

2«  See  GG.  3,  5,  3;  Mann,  3,  8. 

27  For  particulars  see  M.  J.  Dresden,  Manavagrhyasutra,  Thesis  Utrecht  1941, 
p.  43,  and  Th.  Aufbecht,  in  Webeb,  I.  S.  IV,  p.  8. 

2s  M.  WiNTEBNiTZ,  Das  altindische  Hochzeitsrituell,  Denksehriften  Vienna  Acad. 
40  (1892),  p.  43.  Cf.  AV.  4,  1,  41;  MG.  1,  8,  11. 

2®  E.g.  5,  78,  for  wMch  see  p.  191. 

P.  Thieme,  Agastya  und  Lopamudra,  in  ZDMG  113,  p.  69  {=  Kleine  Schriften, 
Wiesbaden  1971, 1,  p.  202). 

See  p.  202. 

®2  Sarvanukramam  1,  12;  compare  .also  Sayana’s  introductory-^  note. 


146 


J.  Gronda  • Vedic  Literature 


to  practise  cliastity^after  taking  cognizance  of  the  preceding  dialogue  (st. 
1-4)  Since  st.  5 contains  a petition  for  deliverance  from  sin  directed  to  Soma 
whom  we  know  to  charge  himself  with  the  purification  of  students  who  broke 
their  vow  of  chastity  such  people  were  advised  to  have  recourse  to  it^^  The 
'truth’  or  rather  the  'mythical  example’  inherent  in  the  story  which  makes  it 
a means  of  purification  may  be  formulated  as  follows : the  ascetic  who  breaches 
Ms  vow  for  the  sake  of  his  languishing  wife  is  excused  provided  he  rituaUy 
purifies  himself®^.  There  is  something  to  be  said  for  the  supposition®^  that  the 
dialogue  between  Sarama  and  the  Panis®®,  who  had  Mdden  the  stolen  cattle  she 
was  directed  to  recover  (10,  108),  is  likewise  a 'legend  spell’:  the  words  "Go, 
0 Fanis,  as  far  as  possible;  the  cows  must  come  forth”  can  indeed  be  taken 
to  point  in  that  direction®’.  As  to  3,  33  there  can  hardly  be  any  doubt  that  tMs 
dialogue  hymn  could  from  the  very  beginning — or,  if  one  would  express  oneself 
with  certain  reservations,  at  least  as  long  as  the  final  stanza,  in  a different 
metre,  belonged  to  it®® — could  serve  a similar  purpose.  After  recounting  how 
the  great  sage  Visvamitra  stopped  two  mighty  rivers  at  their  confluence  so 
as  to  allow  the  army  of  the  Eharatas  to  cross  them  with  all  their  luggage  and 
booty  the  suMa  expresses,  in  its  final  stanza  unconnected  with  the  legend,  the 
wish  that  the  waters  shall  not  prevent  the  cows  and  veMcles  of  the  army  from 
passing  over  safely.  Here  also  a spell  receives  its  power  from  the  truth  of  the 
preceMng  story  wMch  is  analogous  to  the  effect  desired.  Geldner’s®®  earlier 
interpretation— the  general  prayer  in  the  last  stanza  is  the  point  wMch  w’as 
given  greater  prominence  by  the  reference  to  the  preceding  legend — ^was 
modified^®  to  the  effect  that  the  ‘truth’  immanent  in  the  legend  was  made,  by 
means  of  the  final  stanza,  an  autonomically  effective  formula  to  be  utilized 
under  circumstances  similar  to  those  narrated  in  the  sukta.  The  final  stanza 
was  indeed  prescribed  in  case  a bridal  train  had  to  pass  over  a deep  river  or  a 
man,  in  the  midst  of  a stream,  wished  quickly  to  gain  the  opposite  bank^^. 

Wintemitz  was  certainly  right  in  calling  RV.  10,  34,  the  soliloquy  of  a 
penitent  gambler,  a most  beautiful  poem,  but  hardly  convincing  in  character- 


33  SYB.  1,  7,  9,  and  compare  Rg\ddhana  1,  26,  5.  In  the  hymn  Agastya  also 
purifies  himself  with  a drink  of  soma  (st.  5). 

For  previous  interpretations  see  e.g.  Oldenberg,  in  ZDMG  39,  p.  65;  v. 
ScHROEDEB,  Ind.  Lit.  u.  Cult.,  p.  34;  SiBG,  Sagenstoffe,  p.  120;  HiLLBBBAisrDT,  Lie- 

der,  p.  136. 

Thieme,  Lc.,  p.  71  (204). 

See  p.  201. 

Compare  also  Schmidt,  Brhaspati,  p.  187.  For  10,  108  cf.  also  G.  Montesi,  R 
valore  cosmico  dell’Aurora,  in  Studi  e materiah  di  storia  delle  religioni,  24-25  (Bo- 
logna 1955),  p.  111. 

Cf.  Geldneb,  RV.  I,  p.  374.  See  also  L.  Alsdobf,  in  JOIB  13  (1964),  p.  206. 
Geldneb,  Auswahl,  11,  p.  55. 

Litdebs,  Vanina,  p.  19;  Thieme,  o.c.,  p.  70  (203). 

§G.  1,  15,  20;  Rgvidhana,  2,  2,  3f.  Now  see  P.  Kweela,  Flufluberschreitung 
im  Rigreda.  RV.  HI,  33  und  Verwandtes,  Wiesbaden  1973. 


Contents  of  the  Rg^’eda 


147 


mug  it  as  non-religions  Xor  skonld  it  be  described  as  didactic  or  Moralistic 
however  iniicli  it  may  strike  modem  Westerns  in  that  light.  The  hymn  is  never 
prescribed  in  solenoi  ritnals  and  its  magic  use  as  a means  to  come  off  victorious 
in  the  gambling-place*®  can  hardly  be  founded  on  a serious  interpretation  of 
the  text.  The  final  stanza,  requesting  the  dice  to  make  friendship  and  to  be 
gracious — . . do  not  forcibly  bewitch  ns  with  magical  power.  Let  yonr 
wrath,  your  enmity  now'  come  to  rest.  Let  another  now'  be  held  in  the  pow'er  of 
the  brown  ones**” — admits  also  of  another  interpretation:  the  gambler  adjures 
the  dice  to  release  Mm  from  their  uncanny  power An  application  of  the  hymn 
to  some  form  of  exorcism,  its  recitation  as  an  ‘act  of  truth’*®,  would  be  in 
harmony  with  its  content : The  dice  make  the  gambler  unable  to  resist  their 
fascination  (st.  1)  and  bring  nun  on  him  and  Ms  household: 

(2)  She  (my  w'ife)  wrangles  not  with  me,  nor  is  she  angry. 

To  me  and  my  comrades  she  was  ever  kindly. 

For  a die  that  was  too  high  by  one*®, 

I have  driven  away  a devoted  wife. 

(3)  Her  mother  hates  me,  she  herself  rejects  me. 

The  man  in  distress  finds  no  one  who  pities. 

I find  a gambler  no  more  useful 

Than  an  aged  horse  that  is  for  sale. 

(7;  9)  The  dice  incite  (the  gambler),  are  piercing  and  deceitful. 

They  bum  the  player,  causing  Mm  to  bum. 

They  overcome  the  man  wdth  hands,  though  handless. 

Though  cold  themselves,  they  bum  the  heart  to  ashes. 

The  assertion,  in  st.  12,  that  the  person  speaking  has  gambled  away  all  his 
possessions  may  indeed  be  regarded  as  a formal  declaration  of  fact — “TMs  is 
truth  I say” — ^with  the  unspoken  prayer  for  deliverance  from  the  power  of  the 
dice.  His  hope  is  realized:  god  Savitar  releases  Mm:  “Do  not  play  with  dice! 
Cultivate  your  field!  Be  content  with  your  possessions.  There  are  your  cows„ 
there  your  wife.” 


WiNTESXiTZ,  H-  I.  L.  I,  p.  112.  Similarly,  A.  B.  KIeith,  in  JRAS  1911,  p. 
1007;  P.  L.  Bhaugava,  India  in  the  Vedic  age,  Lucknow  1971,  p.  340  (‘entirely 
secular’)  and  compare  Renoit,  H.  P.,  p.  90. 

Macdonell,  H.  S.  L.,  p.  128. 

**  Bebgaigne,  R.  V.  HI,  p.  177. 

45  Rgvidhana,  3,  9,  5-10,  3. 

4®  Yiz.  the  nuts  used  as  dice. 

47  Cf.  Hillebba55T>t,  Lieder,  p.  109.  Cf.  also  V.  Heney,  Les  litteratures  de- 
ITnde,  Paris  1904,  p.  36. 

XoRMAN  Bbown,  in  Fel.  Vol.  K.  M.  MunsM,  Bombay  1963,  p.  8f.  For  the  ‘act 
of  tmth’  io  general:  E.  W.  Bublingame,  in  JRAS  1917,  p.  429;  Nobman  Bbowhst, 
Review  of  Religion,  5 (1940),  p.  36;  H.  Ludebs,  in  ZDMG  98,  p.  1.  Basing  Mmself 
upon  the  perfect  performance  of  his  function  (vrata)  a man  pronounces  a formal 
declaration  of  fact  accompanied  by  a command,  resolution,  or  prayer  with  the 
result  that  Ms  purpose  shall  be  accomplished. 

If  of  the  number  of  dice  thrown,  divided  by  four,  one  remains  over,  the  throw 
is  most  imluckj^ 


148 


J.  Gronda  • Vedio  Literature 


Tradition®®  has  it  that  10,  142  deals  with  the  epic  story  of  some  yotmg  birds 
which  succeeded  in  escaping  destruction  when  Agni  was  burning  a forest®^.  This 
is  improbable,  but  the  situation — ^not  unknown  from  other  Indian  literature — 
is  similar.  After  describing  the  destructive  force  of  a conflagration  the  poet 
prevents  the  god  of  fire  from  going  on  by  declaring  that  “here  is  a receptacle  of 
water,  the  dwelling  of  the  sea,’’  to  conclude  the  poein,  not  with  the  wish,  but 
with  the  imperative:  “there  grass  must  grow  again!”  It  is  therefore  most 
probable  that  the  text  was  to  counteract  forest-fire. 

It  is  therefore  perfectly  intelligible  that  the  immanent  power  of  the  mythical 
or  legendary  event  referred  to  in  a suhta  was  also  turned  to  profitable  use  in  the 
hauia  ritual:  “The  hymn  E.V.  1,  165  produces  agreement  and  continuance 
(of  Mfe),  (for)  by  it  Indra,  Agastya  and  the  Maruts  came  to  agreement.  Thus, 
in  that  he  (the  officiant)  recites  this  (hymn),  (it  serves)  to  produce  agreement. 
It  also  gives  a full  duration  of  life.  Therefore  he  should  perform  this  hymn  for 
him  who  is  dear  to  him”  (AiB.  5, 16,  14f.).  A story  may  however  have  several 
aspects:  in  1,  165  the  Maruts  who  were  enraged  because  Indra  had  taken 
a-way  their  sacrificial  animal,  were  through  Agastya’s  intervention  appeased 
and  so  this  suUa  came  also  to  serve  the  purpose  of  appeasement.  As  it  contains 
a recognition  of  Indra’s  might  (st.  9)  it  could  also  be  recited  in  case  one  would 
prevent  the  god  from  going  to  the  sacrifice  of  one’s  rival® 2.  Dealing  with  the 
reconciliation  of  Indra  and  his  chief  friends  and  allies,  the  Maruts,  it  could, 
outside  the  solemn  ritual,  be  a means  of  realizing  the  ambitions  of  a man  who, 
“together  with  kinsmen,  sons,  allies  and  friends”  wished  to  establish  a king- 
dom®®. 

Instances  could  easily  be  multiplied  from  which  it  appears  that  often  a 
single  word  occurring  in  a stanza  sufficed  to  make  it  suitable  for  a definite 
ritual  use.  Thus  JRV.  1,  120, 12  stating  that  a dream  disappears  in  the  morning 
— ^the  sukta  in  its  entirety  has  nothing  to  do  with  dreams,  sleep  and  awakening — 
is  among  the  texts  to  be  recited  at  the  beginning  of  the  day,  removing  the 
consequences  of  an  evil  dream  ®^. 


®®  Brhaddevata  8,  54,  Aniikraiiiainika  and  Sayana. 

Mbh.  1,  a.  220f.  See  R.  Gopal,  in  Vol.UmeshaMishra,  Allahabad  1970,  p.  397. 
See  PB.  21,  14,  5f.;  9,  4,  17. 

“ Rgvidhana,  1,  26,  3. 

SG.  1,  4,  20;  Rg\ddhana,  1,  25,  1.  See,  in  general,  also  Rbnotj,  Hymnes  spe- 
culatife,  p.  10;  for  the  pertinent  terminology  Vela^txapi,  in  Mem.  Volume  Sarup 

(see  above). 


Contents  of  the  Rgveda 


149 


12.  Ecstatic  ■prmticm 

A few  suMas  in  masala  X attest  to  what  may  broadly  be  called  ecstatic 
practices  or  asceticism.  About  10,  119  the  opinion  has  long  prevailed  that  this 
text,  which  describes  the  experiences  of  a person  who  has  dnmk  soma,  is  a 
monologne  of  Indra  pronounced  when  one  day  he  had  consumed  too  snnch  of 
the  beverage^.  Some  authors^  even  added  that  the  poet  wanted  to  make  fnn 
of  the  god.  Others,  while  rightly  rejecting  this  interpretation  unconvincingly 
regarded  the  suMa  as  a profane  drinking-song®,  as  describing  the  experiences 
of  a bird^,  or  as  a monologue  and  self-praise  of  Agni  as  the  sacral  &e^.  It  would 
rather  seem  that  the  poet  describes  Ms  own  ecstatic  drunkenness®  in  wMeh  he 
has  reached  a supernormal  state  of  being,  a sort-  of  bliss  and  omnipotence^ : in 
this  state  he  deems  himself  able  to  fly  or  soar,  to  dominate  nature,  to  create  or 
destroy,  Ms  ‘soul’  becoming  released  from  the  clog  of  earth.  The  traditional 
explanation® — ^Indra  praises  himself  having  assumed  the  form  of  a quail 
(Juba ),  hence  Laba  Aindra  as  the  reputed  author  and  Labasiikta  as  the  name 
of  the  text — ^may  have  been  based  on  Indra ’s  fondness  for  soma  on  one  hand 
and  a word  for  ‘wing’  on  the  other®.  RV.  10,  136  is  to  a great  extent  similar 
in  Mm  and  tendency.  This  sukta  of  the  long-haired  one  (keMn)  deals  mth  a 
‘medicine  man,’  the  precursor  of  the  doctor  as  well  as  the  priest  who  in  the 
state  of  ecstasy  possessing  a power  that  is  superior  to  himself,  is  filled  with  the 
god,  can  soar  into  the  atmosphere  and  becomes  united  -with  the  gods^®.  In 
this  connection  mention  may  be  made  of  8,  48,  a glorification  of  the  sofna  as 
a producer  of  ecstasy  and  to  give  “room,  freedom,  comfort”  {mrivas,  st.  2): 
“We  have  drunk  soma,  we  have  become  immorta-ls;  we  have  attained  to  the 
light,  we  have  found  the  gods.  What  (trouble)  can  now  enviousness  cause  us, 
what  injury  devised  by  a mortal,  0 thou  that  art-  immortal !”  (st.  3)^^ ; “Weak- 

^ See  e.g.  Wixtebnitz,  H.  I.  L.  I,  p.  85;  Geldneb,  AuswaM,  II,  p.  202  (cf.  also 
p.V.  m,  p.  344);  J.  Heetel,  in  WZKM  18,  p.  152;  A.  B.  Keith,  in  JRAS  1911, 
p.  1004;  Rekou,  H.  P.,  p.  98  (with  ?);  for  particulars  see  Goxua,  Secular  hymns, 
p.  331. 

^ P.  Deussen,  A.  G.  Phil.  I,  1,  p.  99;  Von  Schboebeb,  Mystemm,  p.  364. 

® H.  Oldenbebg,  Xoten,  11,  p.  339,  combatted  by  WinteenitIz,  in  WZK3f  23, 
p.  114. 

* P.  Tbedeme,  Vortrag  Orient. -Tagung  der  Deutschen  Morgenl.  Ges.  1972. 

* HAuschixj),  in  Festschrift  Weller,  p.  247  (the  adjective  “bearing  the  oblation  * 
in  st.  13  is  elsewhere  used  of  Agni);  cf.  also  J.  Heetel,  Die  a'westisehe  Herrschafts- 
und  Siegesfeuer,  ASAW  41,  6 (Leipzig  1931),  p.  161. 

® Cf.  Bbegaigne,  R.  V.  I,  p,  150. 

^ Gonda,  Secular  hymns,  p.  332. 

® Sadgurusisya,  Sarvanukramani. 

® See  also  H.  D.  Velankae,  in  JUB,  X.  S.  23  (1954),  2,  p.  7. 

Olbenbeeg,  R.  V.,  p.  404;  J.  W.  Hauee,  Die  Anfange  der  Yogapraxis,  Stutt- 
gart 1922,  p.  168;  Gonda,  Secular  hymns,  p.  333. 

According  to  R.  G.  Wasson’s  (Soma,  Xew  York  1968;  Soma  and  the  fly- 
agaric, Cambridge  Mass.  1972)  disputed  theory,  was  no  alcoholic  drink  but  a 
drug,  prepared  from  the  fly  agaric. 


150 


J,  Gkmda  • Yedic  Literatm-e 


ness  and  disease  stand  aloof;  they  fled,  the  oppressing  ones;  they  have  become 
afraid.  The  mighty  soma  has  entered  ns;  we  have  come  (there),  where  one 
prolongs  one’s  life-time”  (st.  11).  In  the  second  part  of  RV.  9,  113,  which  was 
called^®  "a  prayer  for  a blissfnl  life’ — ^the  poet  intuitively  foresees  superhuman 
joy — ^the  desire  is  expressed  to  be  put,  through  Soma’s  intermediary,  in  the 
‘immortaF  and  imperishable  world,  in  eternal  light,  in  the  interior  of  heaven, 
where  one  moves  according  to  one’s  wishes,  where  are  bliss  and  delight,  joy 
and  pleasure^®. 


GsASSMAmf,  3?,V.  n,  p.  286. 

“ Renou,  Hymnes  speciilatifs,  p.  51;  236. 


Contents  of  the  Rgveda 


151 


IB.  Erotic  poetry 

For  a clear  apprehension  of  RV.  7,  55  we  Mnst  anticipate  a point  which  will 
be  dealt  with  more  elaborately  in  the  section  dealing  with  the  contents  of  the 
Atharvaveda.  The  stanzas  5-8  are  in  that  corpus  expanded  into  a text  of 
seven  verses,  viz.  4,  5.  In  both  collections  these  stanzas  are  intended  to  put 
to  sleep  the  inmates  of  a house^.  The  stanzas  2—1  of  the  Rgveda  version  ad- 
dressed to  the  house-dog  may  have  been  used  by  others  than  the  lover  for 
whose  benefit  this  ‘unequalled  soporiferous’  text®  was,  like  AV.  4,  5,  no  doubt 
recited.  In  the  Kau^ikasutra  we  become  acquainted  with  manifold  kindR  of 
love-magic  and  “rites  in  connection  with  women’’  for  which  these  spells  and 
formulas  were  employed.  It  would  therefore  be  incorrect  to  speak  of  love  poetry, 
for  the  emotions  and  sentiments  of  those  w'ho  are  supposed  to  use  the  stanzas 
are  not  revealed.  The  speakers  remain  anonymous  and  the  formulas  can  be 
recited  by  anyone  who  is  similarly  circumstanced.  We  read,  for  instance,  “I 
languish  and  yearn  for  love”  or  “I  shall  pierce  your  heart,”  not  “Your  un- 
faithfulness is  on  my  mind.”  Any  reflection  on  the  poet’s  or  speaker’s  inner  life 
is  suppressed.  True,  the  sacra!  character  of  these  verses  makes  the  occurrence 
of  love  poetry  a priori  improbable®  and  the  romance  told  by  later  interpreters'^ 
in  connection  with  RV.  5,  61  about  young  Syavasva®  “w'hose  heart  was  fi:sed 
on  a princess”  is  without  foundation  in  that  text.  Places  such  as  10,  86,  6 — 
Indra’s  wife  boast-ing  of  her  charms — , or  an  incidental  mention  of  a lover 
hastening  to  a woman  (9,  101, 14)  cannot  be  regarded  even  as  indications  of  the 
existence  of  love  poetry.  The  Yama  and  Yami  (10,  10)®  and  the  Pururavas 
and  Urva^i  (10,  95)  dialogues’,  though  no  doubt  reflecting  human  emotions, 
deal  with  extraordinary  circumstances  and  relations  in  the  mythical  sphere. 

Women  are  a rare  subject;  they  are  mainly  mentioned  in  metaphors  and, 
as  a collectivum,  in  similes®. 

Erotic  passages  such  as  the  above  10,  86,  6 are  few  in  number  and  those 
which  occur  are  no  more  than  reproductions  of  reality®.  Says  the  wife  of  the 
man  who  has  recovered  his  virility : “You  wear,  my  lord  and  master,  an  excel- 
lent object  of  enjoyment”  (8,  1,  34).  A girl  urging  the  reciter  to  whom  she  was 


^ For  particulars  see  Th.  Autbecht,  in  Webeb,  I.  S.  IV,  p.  337 ; PisciacEii,  V.  S. 
n,  p.  55;  Geldnee,  RV.  II,  p.  229. 

2 Rg\idhaiia  2,  26,  5. 

® This  is  not  to  say — ^with  H.  Lommel,  Die  Liebe  in  vedischer  DicMung,  Pai- 
deuma,  3 (1944-49),  p.  102 — that  Vedic  man  had  not  psychologically  reached  that 
stage  of  maturity  which  makes  this  genre  possible. 

* B|*haddevata,  5,  50-81;  see  Sieg,  Sagenstoffe,  p.  50;  Geldxtee,  RV.  II,  p.  68. 
® See  above,  p,  126. 

® See  below,  p.  153. 

’ See  p.  203  ff. 

* E.g.  8,  17,  7 ; 9,  61,  21;  10,  21,  3;  110,  5.  Compare  Bowba,  Prim,  song  (see  p. 
156,  n.  6),  p.  174. 

® See  also  Ren-ou,  E.  V.  P.  11,  p.  25. 


152 


J.  Gonda  • Vedic  Literature 


presented  and  who  hopes  to  enjoy  her  a htmdredfold,  does  not  leave  him  in 
doubt  about  her  puberty : “I  am  all  hairy  like  a Gandharian  sheep”  (1, 126,  7)^°. 
The  greater  part  of  the  pert-inent  passages  occur  in  ma'^ala  However,  an 
exclamation  such  as  10,  38,  5 addressed  to  Indra,  “(A  god)  like  you  will  not 
squat  bound  by  his  testicles,  I suppose”  has  nothing  to  do  with  sexual  love, 
but  no  doubt  much  with  a painful  form  of  confinement^^^  There  is  no  reason 
whatever  to  regard  such  passages^^  as  spurious.  Nor  should  we  take  offence  at 
10,  61,  5ff.  giving,  in  a mythical  context,  a detailed  description  of  a halfway 
interrupted  incestuous  coition:  “when  his  (member),  performing  the  manly 
deed,  stood  erect,  swinging,  the  male  (partner)  drew  it  away,  when  it  was  at 
work ; he  pulled  it  back  again  out  of  the  maiden,  (his)  daughter,  when  it  was 
inserted  . . In  contradistinction  to  later  authorities  who  saw  incest  in  the 
primal  embrace  of  the  Father  and  the  Daughter^®  the  poet  did  not  yet  apply  a 
moral  rule  to  this  ‘ontological  symbol.’  These  subjects  were,  moreover,  no 
taboo  in  the  poet’s  society^®  and  that  is  why  we  should  not  put  in  an  unfavour- 
able light  places  such  as  1, 140,  6 and  7,  where  the  poet  compares  Agni,  bending 
over  the  wood  which  he  is  to  bum,  to  a bull  about  to  cover  his  cows : though 
erotic  in  a broad  sense,  they  are^^  far  from  indecent^®. 


Geldneb,  RV.  I,  p.  175. 

T>  ‘obscene’  is  not  applicable  to  9,  112,  4 and  10,  101,  12;  cf. 

il'o  ■ P-  Lommel,  in  Comm.  Vol.  Nobel,  p. 

139;  on  . 1,  28;  cf.  Geldneb,  ^V.  I,  p.  30.  ^ 

“ See  also  Geldnes’s  note,  ?,V.  ni,  p.  190f. 

“ With  Ludwig,  in  ZDMG  40,  p.  713. 

“ Cf.  also  10,  10,  7f.;  10;  86,  6f.;  16f.;  95,  4f. 

“ Cf.  SB.  1,  7,  4,  3;  AiB.  3,  33,  Iff. 

“ Cf.  also  1,  48,  5f.;  92,  6;  10,  142,  5. 

W- 1,  p.  195;  Renotj,  E.  V.  P.  XII,  p.  100. 
obLnr  ^ ^ reference  to  genitals  (1,  28,’ 2)  or  the  theme  of  1,  179 


Contents  of  the  Rgveda 


153 


M,  Morals  and  nMzims 

Only  a few  passages  in  the  Rgveda  can  be  said  to  be  moralistic  and  morals  as 
such  are  hardly  cMscnssed.  The  well-known  dialogue  between  the  twins  lama 
and  Yam!  (10, 10)  has  been  quoted  as  a case  in  point.  With  all  tricks  of  feminine 
passion  and  dialectics  Yami  endeavours  to  win  the  love  of  her  brother,  but  he 
gently  and  deliberately  repels  her  advances:  (2j  ‘‘blood-relationsMp  should 
not  be  considered  something  different : (4)  why  should  we  do  now  what  we  have 
not  done  formerly;  (8)  they  do  not  rest,  nor  clo^  their  eyes  wbo  as  spies  of  the 
gods  wander  on  earth.”  The  contrast  between  the  sister  and  the  brother  is  as 
striking  as  the  poetic  beauty  and  dramatic  strength  of  the  poem  as  a whole. 
These  two  characters  are  no  doubt  the  first  pair  of  human  beings^,  but  at  the 
same  time  the  mjdMcal  prototype  of  any  pair  of  twins^.  It  has  been  maintained® 
that  the  poet,  whilst  intending  to  combat  the  belief  that  the  human  race  owes 
its  existence  to  an  illicit  marriage,  left  the  problem  of  its  real  origia  unsolved'^. 
This  does  not  however  interest  him  at  all.  The  sukta  should  rather  be  regarded 
as  belonging  to  a ritual  ceremony  w’hich  was  to  secure  a pair  of  twins  of  different 
sex  against  the  danger  of  incest  and,  in  addition  to  this,  even  to  purify  them 
of  antenatal  incest^.  In  this  case  also  the  myth  w'as  exemplary. 

This  is  not  to  say  that  there  is  no  rnoralism  in  the  Rgveda:  “A  mortal  man 
should  disregard  wealth;  he  should  desire  to  win  it  along  the  path  of  Order, 
paving  homage”  (10,  31,  2);  “The  gods  know  how  to  distinguish  between  the 
honest  and  the  dishonest”  (8,  18, 15).  jVlitra,  w^ho  will  aid  that  mortal  man  who 
exerts  himself  for  him,  beholds  men  with  unwinking  eye  (3,  59,  1)®.  'Sin,®  or 
rather  offence,  and  forgiveness  are  often  motives  in  the  lofty  and  truly  inspired 
hymns  addressed  to  Vanina’,  w^ho  as  a moral  governor  stands  above  any  other 
deity®.  Poets  express  the  wish  to  appear  free  from  ‘sin’®  for  \ aruim  “who  may 

^ See  Geudner,  RV.  Ill,  p.  132,  and  compare  also  the  same,  in  Festgabe  A. 
Weber,  p.  19  (foUowmg  Sayana);  Auswahl,  II,  p.  145. 

® According  to  Hjollebrandt,  Rigveda,  p.  139  they  were  “a  sister  and  a brother” 
(not  the  ‘m5i}hiGal’  Yama  and  his  sister). 

® Geldner,  RV.  Ill,  p.  133. 

^ WiKTERNiTZ,  H.  I.  L.  I,  p.  105  is  likewise  of  the  opinion  that  the  sukton^-which 
hardly  is  '‘only  a torso’ — deals  with  an  old  myth  of  the  origin  of  the  human  race. 
See  also  S.  Kramrisch,  IndoL  studies  Norman  Brown,  p.  118  and  S.  G.  Kaxta- 
WAiA,  at  JOIB  15,  p.  509. 

5 U.  Schneider,  in  IIJ  10,  p.  1. 

® J.  Gonda,  ^iitra,  p.  59  etc. 

’ Cf.  e.g.  1,  24,  15;  25,  21;  5,  85,  8;  6,  74,  4;  7,  86,  6f.;  89,  5.  Similar  passages 
occur  also  in  h\Tnns  addressed  to  other  deities  (6,  74,  3 Soma-Rudra;  7,  51  Adityas; 
cf.  10,  164).  For  Varuna  see  also  Renou,  E.  V,  P.  V,  p.  65;  YU,  p.  1.  See  also  A.  P. 
in  ABORI  22,  p.  120. 

® For  the  omniscience  in  human  affairs  of  Vanina,  IVIitra-and-A  anma,  for 
Suiy-a’s  (the  Sun’s)  all-seeing  eye  etc.  see  R.  Pettazzoni,  The  all-knowing  god, 

London  1956,  p.  118.  . . 

® The  idea  of  ‘sin’  comprises  any  transgression  or  pollution,  be  it  consciously  or 
unconsciously  contracted.  For  other  places  see  S.  Rodhe,  Deliver  us  from  evil, 
Lund-Copenhagen  1946. 


154 


J.  Gonda  • Vedio  Literatwe 


be  gracious  also  to  the  one  who  gives  offence’’  (7,  87,  7).  “0  Vanina,  if  he  who 
is  thv  true  and  dear  companion,  if  thy  Mend  commits  ‘sins’  against  thee,  may 
we  not  atone  for  it  as  ‘sinners’”  (7,  88,  6);  “If,  0 Vanina,  we  have  committed 
sin  against  a Mend,  a comrade,  a brother,  an  inmate— be  he  a native  or  a 
foreigner-Ioosen  this  (from  ns)”  (5,  85,  7).  However,  errors  of  commission 
and  omission  resnlt  in  evil  and  disaster:  a king  should  not  abduct  the  wife  of 
a brahman  becanse  she  is  fearful,  bums  up  the  kingdom  and  causes  discomfort 
arise  in  the  highest  firmamenti®.  The  man  who  discharges  his  moral  obHgations 
will  fare  well:  the  in  itself  most  satisfactory  eulogy  upon  charity  (10,  117)  was 
used  as  “a  fulfiller  of  all  wishes,  giving  food  wherever  one  is  and  preventing 
evil  from  noticing  one”^h  A psychology  of  those  who  commit  offences  cannot 
be  expected,  yet  it  is  worth  observing  that  e.g.  1,  25,  1-3  and  7,  89,  though 
evidencing  consciousness  of  guilt,  do  not  attest  to  any  personal  sense  of  shame 
before  the  god.  The  fear  of  punishment  is  predominantly^ 

In  view  of  the  great  talent  of  the  post-Vedic  Indians  for  aphoristic  and 
sententious  poetry  it  is  no  great  surprise  to  find  some  forerunners  of  this  genre 
in  this  oldest  corp^si^.  Proverbial  phrases  and  maxims  voicing  the  feelings  and 
experience  of  the  worldly-wise — part  of  which  may,  as  ‘floating  verses,’ 
have  been  common  property — are  adduced  in  a dialogue:  “Scanty  adroitness  (of 
the  performer)  spoils  the  music”  (4,  24,  9)  or  inserted  as  an  admonition : Not 
without  exertion  one  wins  the  gods  for  friends”  (4,  33,  11) ; ‘ Many  a woman  is 
better  than  a godless  and  niggardly  man”  (5,  61,  6);  “Like  a cloud  old  age 
alters  one’s  outward  appearance”  (1,  71,  10).  There  is  also  the  statement  that 
the  gods  bewilder  the  man  at  whom  they  are  aiming  (2,  30,  6).  The  man  who 
provokes  the  enmity  of  a mightier  opponent  plans  a frontal  attack  on  a moun- 
tain (8,  45,  5)1^.  Truth  resists  even  vehement  assailants  (8,  86,  5).  Consecutive 
series  of  maxims  are  however  very  rarei®.  RV.  10,  117i®  “in  praise  of  food  and 
‘money’”  is  a collection  of  maxims  exhorting  the  wealthy  to  be  generous  to 
the  poor  and  hungiy : 

(1)  “To  kill  a man  the  gods  inflict  not  hunger. 

Death  often  falls  upon  the  satiated. 

The  charitable  giver’s  wealth  melts  not  away, 

The  niggard  never  finds  a pitiful  man. 


“ RV.  10,  109;  cf.  51,  4;  AV.  5,  17,  cf.  st.  4;  6. 

Rgvddhana,  4,  4,  Iff, 

H.  Lefbveb,  The  idea  of  sin  in  the  ^-gveda,  8 AIOC  (1935—37),  p.  23;  S.  N, 
Shukla,  Morality  in  the  Avesta  and  the  Rgveda,  lA  HI,  3 (1969),  p.  139.  In  10,  2 
Agni  is  requested  to  make  good  ritual  errors  and  defects. 

Cf.  KAegi,  Rig-Veda,  p.  113f. 

See  PiscHEL,  V.  S.  I,  p.  311;  ZDMG  44,  p.  499. 

Some  h3nnns  (9,  112;  10,  71)  were  (e.g.  by  MAcnoMii,  H.  S.  L.,  p.  129) 
mistakenly  regarded  as  such. 

Cf.  WiKTEBNITZ,  H.  I.  L.  I,  p.  115. 


Contents  of  the  IRgveda 


155 


(5)  Wlio  has  the  power  should  content  the  needy. 
Regarding  well  the  many  yeara  hereafter: 

Fortune,  like  two  chariot  wheels  revolving, 

Kow  to  one  man  comes  nigh,  now  to  another. 

(6 1 Useless  is  the  food  gained  by  the  foolish. 

I speak  the  truth : it  will  be  the  death  of  them. 
Friends  and  comrades  will  they  never  have: 

The  man  who  eats  alone  will  meet  mishap  aione^^.” 


Cf.  SiEG,  Sagenstoffe,  p.  9. 


156 


J.  Gonda  • Vedic  Literature 


15.  Lyrics;  emotions 

It  has  Mainly  been  the  lyricaF  aspect  of  Sanskrit  literature  which,  in  the 
he^innin^  of  the  century,  attracted  some  of  the  greatest  minds  of 

Europe^,  who  found,  or  believed  to  find,  in  it  a happy  blend  of  phantasy, 
nninediate  clearness,  an  appeal  to  senses  and  feelings,  and  an  intertwinement 
of  personal  emotion,  impressions  of  nature  and  religious  experience.  However, 
this  lyricaF  element  was,  also  in  later  times,  often  exaggerated^  and  the  view 
of  the  Rgveda  as  consisting  for  the  greater  part  of  religious  lyrics^  can  no  longer 
be  subscribed  toh  Not  all  emotional  poetry  is  lyric  and  much  of  what  at  first 
sight  seems  to  be,  in  the  Veda,  expression  of  a poet  s sentiments  is  another 
reproduction  of  traditional  effusions  according  to  more  or  less  fixed  patterns 
or  an  impressive  expression  of  thoughts  and  desires  tinged  with  emotion 
intended  to  prevail  upon  the  human  and  divine  audience. 

This  is  however  not  to  contend  that  for  instance  the  Soma  hymns  of  nmndcda 
IX®  were  devoid  of  any  feelings  or  excitement®.  Although  tradition  and  the 
requirements  of  the  genre  have  a considerable  range  and  relevance,  they  are 
no  doubt  often  infused  with  emotion,  simply  because  the  poet  believed  in  what 
he  said  and  wanted  his  poem  to  be  effective.  It  was,  moreover,  his  sentiments 
which  in  the  last  resort  enabled  him  to  distinguish  between  the  essential  and 
points  of  secondary  importance,  to  emphasize  the  former  and  to  omit  the  latter. 
The  emotional  impulse  behind  a poem  was,  further,  largely  responsible  for  its 
imagery  even  if  it  was  for  the  greater  part  borrowed  from  the  works  of  his 
predecessors.  Nor  is  it  probable  that  the  poets  of  the  Soma  hymns  were  not 
moved  by  the  ritual  and  mythical  correspondences  between  the  terrestrial  soma 
and  its  divine  form  as  Soma,  that  they  felt  no  dehght  in  the  outward  appearance 
and  the  unseen  qualities  of  the  plant  and  the  divine  draught  produced  from 
it — ^the  procurer  of  renown,  happiness,  wealth  and  continued  life’ — , that  they 
could  not  be  transported  vith  genuine  joy  when  they  described  the  stages  of 
the  process  of  clarification  as  the  adornment  of  a race-horse  or  a beaming 
youth,  as  a perching  falcon,  as  a kind  of  married  woman,  or  as  a bachelor 
meeting  some  girls®.  Their  sensitive  eyes  must  have  seen  the  beauty  of  the 
soma  enveloped  in  sunbeams,  the  brightness  and  golden  brilliance  of  Dawn, 


^ See  e.g.  B.  BLeimanis^,  Studien  zur  Eigenart  indischen  Denkens,  Tubingen  1930, 
p.  275. 

® For  instance,  by  H.  Bbunisthofeb,  Uber  den  Geist  der  indischen  Lyrik,  Leipzig 

1882. 

® JVIacdonell,  H.  S.  L.,  p.  63. 

^ See  also  S.  Basgupta,  The  lyric  in  Sanskrit  literature,  BDCRI  20  (Felic.  VoL 
S.  K.  Be),  p.  347. 

® Which,  with  many  otheM,  were  largely  regarded  as  lynrical  poetry  by  P.  S. 
Sastbi,  in  IHQ  30  (1954),  p.  301,  and  QJMS  40,  p.  41.  For  Soma  see  also  E.  B. 
Pebby,  in  JAOS  11,  p.  164. 

« Compare,  in  general,  C.  M.  Bowba,  Primitive  song,  New  York  1963,  p.  249. 

’ See  GEUDNiER-NoBEn,  RV,  IV,  p.  228. 


Contents  of  the  Rgveda 


157 


the  young  woman  clad  in  wMte,  who  with  her  rays  opens  the  gate  of  heaven*. 
But  what  they  composed,  and  purposed,  is  no  hidcal  poetr}%  but  reli,gioiis 
hyinoB  intended  for  practical  ends.  With  this  reserve  it  may  l}e  conceded  that 
there  is  a tinge  of  l3rricar  rapture  in  other  himms  too,  for  instance  in  5,  58  or 
7 , 55,  addressed  to  the  Maruts,  and  in  10,  40,  the  story  of  the  maiden  Ghosa 
who,  growing  old  in  her  father’s  house,  implored  the  Asvins  to  give  her  a hus- 
band. The  seeming  concreteness  of  the  pictures  too  easily  misleads  a modem 
reader,  making  him  assume  that  the  emotional  connotation  which  he  would 
require  in  poetry  must  be  absent.  It  seems  however  safer  to  suppose  that, 
notwithstanding  their  traditional  phraseology,  the  emotional  settings  of  the 
pictures  were  for  the  reciters  and  their  audience  the  essential  poetic  element, 
not  the  objective  wordings  which  alone  appeal  to  those  who  are  not  familiar 
with  the  emotions  of  the  poets’  audiences. 

Another  oft  recurring  topic  is  the  mainly  economic,  partly  political  need  of 
the  Aryans  of  sufficient  room  to  live  in,  of  pastures  and  possibilities  of  expan- 
sion. The  Aryans — more  than  once  simply  contrasted  with  the  inimical 
autochthons^® — ^w^re  preoccupied  with  fear  of  what  they  called  amhas^'^j  that 
is  narrowness,  oppression,  distress  in  various  senses  and  applications  of  these 
terms.  Being  often  dislodged  from  their  fields  and  pastures^®  they  eagerly 
longed  for  broad  space  and  anything  representing  broadness,  i.e.  wealth  and 
happiness,  possibilities  of  expansion.  Various  statements  may  be  taken  literal- 
ly as  well  as  metaphorically:  “0  gods,  we  have  reached  a tract  of  land  without 
good  pastures  for  our  cattle ; the  earth,  though  (otherwise,  usually)  broad,  has 
become  narrow”  (6,  47,  20);  '*{0  Rudra,)  bring  us  successfully  to  the  opposite 
side  of  distress,  ward  off  all  assaults  of  the  injurious  powers”  (2,  33,  3).  After 
imploring  Soma  as  the  herdsman  of  those  praying  the  poet  of  10,  25,  8 exclaims : 
“0  Soma,  do  Thou  that  art  more  familiar  with  localities  than  man  protect 
us ffominjury  and Similar  emotional  associations  were  induced  by  the 
ideas  of  light  and  darkness.  Whereas  metaphors  such  as  “We  would  not  take 
our  leave  of  light”  (2,  28,  7)  and  the  inner  Hght  of  inspiration  occur  according 
to  expectation,  and  the  wish  to  attain  to  light  eternal  (9,  il3,  7)^®  is  easily 
intelligible,  the  special  connections  of  the  Aryans  with  light  and  the  claim 
they  lay  to  it,  which  are  for  instance  apparent  from  the  Siirya  hynm  10,  170, 
2 — the  light  of  heaven  is  said  to  kill  enemies,  Vrtra(s)  and  the  unbelieving 
(demons  and  autochthons)^* — should  not  be  left  unmentioned;  the  sacrificial 
god  Agni  is  a light  for  the  Aryan  (1,  59,  2),  and  even  the  sun  is  explicitly  called 
“the  Aryan  light”  (10,  43,  4)^*. 

* RV.  9,  14,  5;  38,  4;  43,  1;  56,  3;  61,  21;  82,  1;  4;  86,  16;  91,  1;  93,  2;  96,  1;  20. 

® RV.  9,  86,  32;  I,  48,  9;  92,  12;  113,  7;  14;  4,  51,  2 etc. 
kg.  1,  51,  8;  117,  21;  3,  34,  9. 

J.  Goxba,  in  nj  1,  p.  33. 

1^  See  also  3,  54,  21;  7,  36,  24. 

1®  Cf.  also  2,  27,  41;  14;  7,  101,  2;  10,  185,  3,  and  see  9,  4,  2. 

1*  Of.  10,  87,  12. 

15  Cf.  also  1,  117,  21;  2,  II,  18;  7,  33,  7f.  etc. 


158 


J.  Gonda  • Vedic  Literature 


The  keen  insiglit  into  limiian  nature  fostered  by  tbe  bard  calls  of  life  largely 
depended  on  emotions  wbicb  in  places  are  rather  violent : curses  directed  against 
the  envious  and  avaricious,  imprecations  against  the  bad  intentions  of  enemies, 
against  slanderers  and  malevolent  enemies  are  far  from  rare^®.  On  the  other 
hand,  the  lame  and  the  blind,  though  typical  objects  of  divine  pity^^,  do  not 
eMcit  any  emotional  adjective.  The  difficulties  of  a girl  vp'ho  lacks  the  protection 
of  a brother  are  likewise  mentioned  objectively,  not  emotionally^®. 


19:  10,  84, 

i ; iz8,  o;  4;  152,  5. 

" See  e.g.  1,  112,  8;  2,  13,  12;  4,  30,  19. 

10>  10, 11.  Otherwise  D.  N.  Shastri,  in  15  AIOC  (1949), 
p.  200.  Cf.  also  places  such  as  9,  96,  22. 


Contents  of  the  ^gveda 


159 


16,  So-called  ballads 

In  order  to  characterize  certain  suktus  some  modem  authors  have  used  the 
term  ballad^.  And  indeed,  if  we  understand  by  that  term  a genre  of  narrative 
recitation  perpetuated  by  oral  tradition,  simple  and  concrete  in  diction,  fairly 
uniform  in  metre,  with  stanza  structure  and  occasional  refrains,  objective  but 
more  or  less  dramatic  in  presentation,  compressed  and  mainly  episodic  in 
narrative  scope,  suggestive  rather  than  explanatory  and  not  infrequently 
proceeding  by  dialogue  interchange,  the  term  is  not  infeMcitous.  Furthermore, 
Geldner's  ballad  theory,  as  compared  to  other  explanations  of  many  hjmns®, 
has  the  advantage  of  forgoing  comprehensive  h3rpotheses.  But  it  cannot  be 
said  that  the  most  common  subject  of  these  “lyrical  poems  with  epic  subject 
matter  and  dramatic  layout’’ — as  Geldner  called  them — is  that  of  the  European 
ballads,  viz.  love.  Nor  is  there  any  preference  for  gloomy  or  tragic  themes. 
And  irrespective  of  whether  the  Vedic  Indians  told  stories  of  the  ballad  genre 
for  amusement  or  transmitted  them  as  a form  of  heroic  poetry,  the  function 
of  the  Rgvedic  ‘ballads’  is  no  doubt  widely  different. 

It  must  be  conceded  that  a sukta  such  as  1,  32  impresses  us  as  reading  like 
a piece  of  heroic  poetry  in  the  outward  form  of  a ballad : 

(1)  “Now  shall  I prcKslaim  the  heroic  deeds  of  Indra, 

’V^Tiich  first  he  performed,  wielding  the  bolt. 

He  slew  the  snake,  split  open  the  waters. 

He  also  slit  the  bellies  of  the  mountains. 

(2)  He  slew  the  snake  which  was  resting  on  the  mountain 
— The  resounding  bolt  Tva^tar  had  forged  him — , 

Like  lowing  cows  rapidly  running 

At  once  the  waters  went  down  to  the  ocean. 

(3)  Acting  like  a bull  he  chose  to  drink  the  soma; 

He  drank  of  the  pressed  (draught)  in  threefold  w’ood. 

The  generous  one  took  ids  missile. 

He  slew  him  that  was  the  first-bom  of  snak^. 

(8)  When  as  a broken  reed  there  he  was  lying, 

Over  him  flo'wed  the  waters  for  Man. 

Those  whom  Vitra  had  obstructed  by  his  greatness 
At  their  feet  the  snake  now  was  recumbent.” 

Hcwever,  it  seems  hardly  open  to  doubt  that  the  powerful  and  conquering 
force  of  its  theme  w’liich  enabled  the  one  who  recited  it  to  drive  one’s  enemies 
back  without  effort  and  to  win,  in  imitation  of  the  poet  Hiranyastupa,  the 
highest  world  after  going  to  Indra’s  presence®,  w'as  felt  to  be  inherent  in  it 
from  the  very  beginning. 


^ GiEiiDNEB,  Die  indische  Baliadendichtung,  in  Festschrift  Univ.  Marburg  1913, 
p.  93;  compare  also  Festgabe  Jacobi,  p.  242,  and,  e.g.,  B.  K.  Ghosh,  in  H.  C.  I.  P. 
I,  p.  340;  for  P.  S.  Sastbi  see  below'.  See  also  M.  WENTDEsniTZ,  in  Some  problems 
of  Indian  literature,  Calcutta  1925,  ch.  II. 

® See  p.  207. 

® Rgvidhana,  1,  18,  1;  AiB.  3,  24,  10;  cf.  also  KB.  15,  4 (15,  5,  26). 


160 


J.  Gouda  • Yedie  Literature 


This  practical  use  and  ritual  function  is,  in  the  concluding  stanza  of  1,  105, 
explicitly  asserted:  “May  we  by  this  h5roin  with  India  as  an  ally,  all  our  men 
safe,  have  the  upper  hand  . . This  suJda,  for  the  greater  part  a monologue 
of  a man  who  has  been  thrown  into  a pit  or  well  and  abandoned  by  his  com- 
panions^— about  his  identity  and  circumstances  there  is  much  difference  of 
opinion^ — ^has,  on  the  one  hand,  some  qualities  which  may  justify  the  characteri- 
zation ‘beautiful  l3nical  ballad  of  choice  diction  and  poetic  imagery  opening 
with  an  enchanting  background  (moonlight  on  the  water)  of  the  entire  situa- 
tion’®— there  are  other  poetic  merits,  e.g.  the  references  to  the  passage  of  time 
(st.  1 ; 10;  12),  parallel  with  the  lamentation  and  suggesting  the  long  duration 
of  the  straitened  circumstances;  the  contrasts  between  now  and  then  (st.  7f.) 
and  here  and  there  (st.  2).  However,  it  strikes  us,  on  the  other  hand,  as  an 
unmistakable  legendary  commemoration  of  a man  who  in  an  evil  plight  is 
mindful  of  his  religious  duties  (st.  13f.)  and  invokes  divine  assistance  (st.  15ff.) 
with  the  result  that  he  is  delivered  from  suffering  and  captivity. 

In  those  suktas^  which,  with  or  without  good  reason,  have  been  regarded  as 
t3,-p}ifying  the  genre  under  discussion’  the  poets’  prime  concern  was  the  narra- 
tion of  sometimes  quite  unconnected  incidents.  Always  episodic,  these  texts 
give  full  scope  to  imagination.  These  facts  do  not  however  exclude  the  existence 
of  cycles  of  ‘ballad-like’  compositions  which  in  the  course  of  time  may  have 
given  rise  to  dkhydnas  or  itihdsas  of  greater  length  or  complication®.  The 
distribution  of  component  or  complementary  parts  of  the  same  mythical, 
legendary  or  historical  narrative  over  several  hjrnms — e.g.  Cyavana’s  rejuvena- 
tion (in  1,  116,  10;  10,  39,  4)  or  the  battle  of  the  ten  kings  (in  7,  18;  33;  83)® — 
may  point  in  this  direction.  In  this  they  do  not  differ  from  the  mythical  stories. 
Besides,  stray  references  to  the  same  incident  or  the  experiences  of  a legendary 
person— e.g.  to  ^unaljsepa  bound  -wdth  fetters  (1,  24,  12f.;  5,  2,  7)— seem  to 
evidence  the  existence  of  ballad-like  tales,  especially  when  such  an  assumption 
is  supported  by  post-JRgvedic  sources. 


H.  Oebtel,  in  JAOS  18,  p.  18;  Oldenberg,  Noten,  p.  100  (lamentation  of  a 
sufferer);  Geldner,  Y.  S.  Ill,  p.  168;  RY.  I,  p.  136  (the  story  of  Trita  in  the  well, 
related  in  IMbh.  9,  a.  35);  cf.  also  JB.  1,  184  and  Yaska,  Nir.  4,  6;  Lubers,  Yaruna, 
p.  576  (a  spell  against  sun  eclipse);  Rexou,  E.  Y.  P.  XYI,  p.  81. 

® K S.  Sastbi,  in  IHQ  33,  p.  180,  who  in  PO  10,  p.  97  calls  this  sukta  a ‘lyrical 

tragedy. 

-.1  *5?  dialogue  hymns  regarded  as  ballads  are  discussed  on  p.  207.  Geldner, 
7 * o'  S*  «^^aracterizes  RY.  10,  34  as  a ballad  in  the  form  of  a monologue. 

Rg^-edic  baUads,  PO  10  (1945),  p.  92  is  ready  to  concede 
tnat  a l^edic  ballad  is  no  ballad  in  the  modem  sense  of  the  term;  nevertheless,  he 
applies  t^  tern  (also  at  IHQ  32,  p.  393)  too  often  (e.g.  also  to  2,  15;  19;  4,  38; 
t),  /o;  8,  69  ; 10,  103).  It  is  useless  to  distinguish  a class  of  martial  baUads  or  ballads 
of  superstition  (e.g,  7,  103). 

® Sastri,  in  PO  10,  p.  95  and  compare  Sieg,  Sagenstoffe. 

® A.  B.  Keith,  in  JRAS  1911,  p.  979;  Sastri,  in  IHQ  33,  p.  170. 


Contents  of  the  ]5g\’eda. 


161 


17.  Nature 


\edic  man  had  an  extensive  knowledge  of  nature  becanse  he  lived  in  it^ 
vith  it,  by  it.  In  his  hymns  the  forest  or  jungle  outside  the  village,  rivers  named 
and  tmnamed,  snn,  moon,  and  atmospheric  phenomena  are  no  rare  occurrences. 
Being  in  close  touch  with  his  natural  snrroiincLmgs  he  is  well  informed  on 
all  phenomena  and  po^ibilities  which  concern  him  and  Ms  search  for  food 
and  straggle  for  existence.  He  is  strongly  inclined  to  value  the  profitable 
aspects  of  nature — ^large  and  grassy  pastures^,  broad  lands  to  cultivate  and 
live  in^,  the  light  of  heaven® — ^to  fear  and  appease  its  adverse  sides — drought, 
dangerous  animals^.  When  a rare  epithet®  occurs  it  is  one  of  utility®  or  of 
aversion,  rarely  one  of  beauty’,  a concept  wMch,  moreover,  is,  as  a rale,  a 
connotation  of  the  good,  auspicious  and  useful®.  It  is  interesting  to  notice 
that  the  great  mass  of  colour  ivords  express  the  lighter  shades,  especially  the 
glaring  colours  red  and  yellow;  the  opportunity  to  contrast  the  brightness  of 
dawn  with  the  darkness  of  night  was  however  not  missed^ 

But  nature  is  not  only  man’s  home  and  hunting-ground,  it  is  also  the  seat 
of  supernatural  powers  whom  he  attempts  to  understand,  to  assuage,  to  control. 
He  knows  that  there  is  much  more  in  nature  than  meets  his  eye,  and  this  forces 
him  to  look  on  its  phenomena  with  wonder  and  uneasy  awe,  because  they  are 
divine  in  character — ^wMch  not  necessarily  means  distinct  divine  individuals — 
and  the  proper  sphere  of  many  great  gods  'who  make  their  influence  felt  always 
and  everywhere^®.  Lightning^^  is  viewed  as  an  accompaniment  of  rain^®  and 
as  a weapon  of  Indra.  The  connexion  between  the  great  god  Agni  and  fire, 
between  Surya  and  the  orb  of  the  sun  is  never  lost  sight  of.  The  sun  rises,  but 


" See  e.g.  1,  91,  13;  102,  2;  5,  53,  16;  7,  93,  2;  10,  25,  I;  99,  8;  100,  10. 

2 See  e.g.  5,  12,  6;  65,  4;  6,  47,  8;  7,  84,  2;  8,  68,  12;  cf.  10,  180,  3 and  see  J. 
Gonba,  Loka,  Amsterdam  Acad.  1966,  esp.  p.  20. 

® See  e.g.  1,  23,  21;  48,  8;  50,  1;  4,  10,  3;  13,  1;  6,  47,  8;  10,  36,  3. 

« See  e.g.  1,  190,  3;  191;  2,  6,  5;  28,  10;  6,  51,  6;  10,  86,  22;  98,  3;  180,  2. 

® For  a qualificatory  epithet:  7,  36,  3 (whirling  wind). 

« Cf.  also  1,  55,  3;  103,  5. 

’ ‘grassy’  (2,  27,  13);  ‘dreadful’  (1,  190,  3;  10,  180,  2);  ‘inoffensive’  (1,  55,  6; 
10,  36,  3);  ‘rich  in  . . .’  (10,  75,  8).  Compare  E.  W.  Hopkins,  at  PAOS  1882,  p. 
GXXI. 

® E.g.  iucii  clear,  pure  (also  in  a ceremonial  sense)  of  water:  2,  35,  3;  4,  51,  2; 
7,  47,  1;  49,  2;  3;  10,  124,  7.  This  point  was  not  sufficiently  noticed  by  H.  Olden- 
BEKG,  Die  vedischen  Worte  fur  ‘schon’  . . .,  in  XG  1918,  p.  35  (=  K.S.,  p.  830). 
See  also  E,  W.  Hopkins,  in  PAOS  1882,  p.  CXXI. 

® EY.  1,  62,  8;  113,  2;  cf.  8,  41,  10. 

S.  F.  Michaeski,  in  Scientia  87  (1952),  p.  123.  In  general:  B.  B.  Chatbev, 
Treatment  of  nature  in  the  Rgi-eda,  Hoshiarpur  1970  (subjective);  B.  Schxebath, 
Die  ‘Welt’  in  der  vedischen  Dichtersprache,  HJ  6,  p,  103. 

For  lightning  and  thunder  in  connection  with  Indra  and  other  gods : H.  Lom- 
aiEL,  in  Oriens,  8,  p.  258;  cf.  e.g.  RY.  2,  13,  7;  5,  54,  3;  6,  18,  10;  7,  104,  19;  10, 
99,  2. 

RY.  1,  39,  9. 


162 


J.  Gonda  • Yedic  Literature 


is  also  tlie  roiiser  of  men  and  their  guardian^®.  He  shines  for  all  the  world,  for 
men  and  gods,  dispels  the  darkness — rolls  it  up  as  a skin — but  in  so  doing  he 
triinnphs  over  witches  and  spirits  of  obscurity^ and  so  he  is  implored  to 
drive  away  evil  and  illness^®.  All  creatures  depend  on  him;  to  live  is  to  see  the 

Sun  rise^®. 

Vedic  man  is  able  to  deal  with  the  forces  of  nature  on  two  levels,  the  natural 
and  the  supernatural  and  so  are  his  poets.  When  the  context  gives  occasion  to 
do  so  they  speak  of  cows  drinking  water,  of  water  home  in  a jar^^,  but  in  four 
hymns  and  a few  scattered  stanzas,  the  Waters  (Apas)  are  lauded  as  mothers 
or  young  wives  who  bestow  boons,  who  cleanse  and  purify,  and  bring  remedy 
and  a long  life,  and  whose  aid  and  blessing  is  often  implored^®. 

One  should  not  expect  the  Vedic  poets  to  have  composed  hymns  simply  from 
delight  hi  nature  for  its  own  sake — still  they  are  deeply  rooted  in  their  natural 
setting  and  have  almost  always  some  religious  purpose  ia  mind  so  that  their 
senses  work  at  full  stretch  and  they  choose  their  words  carefully.  A rudimental 
description  of  nature  is  given  in  the  hymn  to  the  river  Sarasvati,  7,  95:  “With 
her  nourishing  stream  this  Sarasvati,  a stronghold  (against  the  enemy),  has 
flowed  forth.  The  river  rushes  forward,  as  on  a road,  surpassing  all  the  streams 
by  her  greatness”  (st.  1).  However,  the  river  is  (in  st.  4)  invited  to  the  sacrifice, 
and  (in  5)  implored  for  protection.  Prayer  and  invitation  are  absent  in  10,  75, 
mainly  addressed  to  the  Sindhu  (Indus)  but  from  the  last  stanza  it  appears 
that  the  river  is  praised  because  it  is  the  poet’s  hope  that  the  horses  bred  on  its 
banks  will  win  a race®®.  It  is  very  improbable  that  the  poet  of  10,  127,  the  only 
hymn  invoking  Night  (Ratri),  did  not  find  pleasure  in  the  aspects  of  the  bright 
starlit  nocturnal  scene  which  he  pictures  so  attractively: 

(1)  “Night  approaching  has  looked  forth 
In  many  plaoes  with  her  eyes; 

All  her  glories  she  has  put  on. 

(2)  The  immortal  goddess  has  pervaded 
The  wide  space,  the  depths,  the  heights; 

With  light  she  drives  away  the  darkness. 

(4)  So  to  us  today  (be  gracious). 

At  whose  approach  we  have  come  home. 

As  birds  to  their  nest  upon  the  tree. 

(5)  Home  have  gone  the  villagers, 

Home  creatures  with  feet,  with  wings. 

Home  even  the  busy  hawks.” 


7,  60,  2;  63,  2-4. 

» ?,V.  1,  50,  5;  191,  8f.;  7,  63,  1;  104,  24;  10,  37,  4. 

“ RV.  1,  50,  11;  10,  37,  4. 

“ ?,V.  1,  164,  14;  4,  25,  4;  6,  52,  5. 

^84,  40;  191,  14;  tlien.  water  is  udaham. 

“ See  e.g.  RV.  1,  23,  16;  6,  50,  7;  7,  47,  4;  10,  9,  2;  5,  7;  17,  10. 
Olbei?berg,  O.C.,  p.  66  (861). 

80,  dealing  witli  sunrise,  is  a charm  against  jaundice. 


Contents  of  the  Rgveda  163 

But  this  admiration  is  Informed  by  considerations  of  safety  and  of  the  necessity 
to  secure  XigM's  .kindness : 

(6)  “Ward  off  the  she- wolf  and  the  wolf. 

Ward  off  the  thief,  O Xight; 

Then  be  easy  for  ns  to  pass.” 

So  this  apparent  nature- song  is  a charm,  ritually  applied  in  case  one  hears  a 
crow  in  the  dead  of  night  or  has  a bad  dream^h  In  10,  168,  addressed  to  the 
storm — and  likewise  free  from  m\i:hica!  imagery — the  "description’  of  the 
phenomenon  actually  is  an  introduction  to  the  intention  expressed  in  the  last 
words:  ""Let  ns  worship  Storm  with  a saeridce.” 

It  should  not  be  forgotten  that  a poet  w’ho  wishes  to  control  the  forces  of 
nature,  to  prewail  upon  the  deities  presiding  over  them  should  evince  Ms 
knowledge  of  their  characteristics  and  his  comprehension  of  their  essence  and 
function.  But  this  does  not  prevent  true  poets  from  showing  that  they  are 
deeply  impressed  by  the  pow'er  or  violence  of  nature  and  understand  the  hidden 
Significance  behind  the  actual  events.  So  the  Parjanya  hymn  5,  83  is,  it  is  true, 
a picture  of  Rain  and  the  rains,  a prayer  for  sufficient  rain  and  the  expression 
of  the  desire  that  rain  will  cease^^,  but  it  is  more : it  evidences  the  poet’s  pro- 
found insight  into  the  significance  of  the  phenomenon^®. 

The  twenty  hymns  addressed  to  Usas®^  (Dawn)  deserve  special  attention. 
They  are  almost  generally®®,  and  not  without  reason,  regarded  as  the  most 
beautiful  of  the  whole  Rgveda.  Although  the  physical  phenomenon  of  dawn  is 
never  absent  from  the  poets’  mind  the  morning-light  becomes  a feminine  figure, 
which  again  dissolves  in  the  coloured  sky®«.  Being  the  only  female  deity  to 
whom  with  any  frequency  entire  hymns  are  addressed,  Usas  is  described  as  a 
most  charming  and  graceful  maiden  borne  on  a shining  car.  Young  and  radiant, 
proud  of  her  body,  decked  in  gay  attire,  clothed  in  light,  she  appears  in  the  east 
and  unveils  her  charms®^  There  is  no  denying  that  the  poets  were  impressed  by 
the  glories  of  dawn,  but  one  should  not  argue  that  it  was  only  its  beauty  which 
they  described : certain  adjectives  (irestha  etc.)  do  not  only  mean  "beautiful’  but 
also  "prosperous,  beneficial,  auspicious.’  In  short,  not  even  in  these  hymns  are 
the  natural  sinxoimdings  seen  solely  as  such  and  described  for  their  own  sake. 

» SG.  5,  5,  9;  Ail.  3,  2,  4.  RY.  10, 142  dealing  with  Agni  in  his  destractive  aspect 
is  a charm  agakist  forest  fires. 

Thus  Geldkkb,  l^V.  II,  p.  86. 

For  the  hymn  to  Savitar  (the  sun  in  its  dynamic  aspect)  2,  38,  see  Wintek- 
NITZ,  at  ArchOr  3 (1931),  p.  29k 

A.  A.  MACDOXELn,  The  Usas  hjmns  of  the  Rg\"eda,  JRAS  1932,  p.  345; 
Renou,  E.  V.  P.  Ill,  p.  1 ; G.  Montesi,  in  Studi  e materiali  di  storia  deile  religioni 
24-25,  p.  Ill;  J.  R.  Josm,  in  lA  III,  3 (1969),  p.  157. 

See  e.g.  MAcnorrEin,  H.  S.  L.,  p.  80;  and  see  JRAS  1932,  p.  345;  'Wixteenitz, 
H.  I.  L.  I,  p.  91;  V.  Glasbxapp,  L.  I.,  p.  57;  Ghosh,  in  H.  C.  I.  P.  I,  p.  342. 

26  Oldenbebg,  O.C.,  p.  62  (857).  Cf.  e.g.  1,  92,  12;  5,  80,  4;  7,  76,  3. 

One  should  not,  on  the  strength  of  !RV,  1, 124, 7,  follow  Pischee,  V.  S.  I,  p.  196 
in  flamiTTimg  her  to  be  depicted  as  a courtesan  (P.  Coetnet,  in  Mus4on,  9,  p.  258 ; 
Renou,  E.  V.  P,  m,  p.  8). 


164 


J.  Gonda  * Tedic  Literature 


Tile  scarceness  of  mytliological  allusions,  the  absence  of  MnastuUs  and  of 
priestly  subtleties  and  reminiscences  of  the  ritual,  the  comparative  simplicity 
of  language  and  style,  their  absence  in  mandola  and  last  but  not  least,  the 
independence  of  their  many  formulas  of  hymns  dedicated  to  other  gods  make 
us  strongly  inclined  to  subscribe  to  the  view  that  these  Usas  h3nniis  constitute 
the  oldest  stratum  of  the  Rgveda.  Does  it  follow  that  these  hymns  are  mainly 
‘literary’  in  character  and  are  preserved  because  of  their  ‘lyric  beauty’  and  ‘the 
love  of  nature’  of  their  poets  whose  only  desire  it  was  ‘simply  to  please  the 
deity  by  flattering  songs’  This  is  highly  improbable.  They  should  rather  be 
regarded  as  reflecting  the  archaic  view  of  the  daily  return  of  light,  not  as  a 
matter  of  course,  but  as  the  subject  of  perpetual  hope.  They  were  made  in 
glorification  of  the  returning  light  of  heaven  with  a view  to  securiag  its  un- 
broken sequence®®.  The  ever  repeated  assertion  that  Dawn  has  appeared  on  the 
horizon  and  shall  continue  to  do  so,  that  the  goddess  is  always  reborn®^,  is  a 
confirmation  of  Dawn’s  power  and  willingness  to  perform  her  indispensable 
task.  Her  daily  reappearance  means  continuation  of  life:  “Hisel  The  spirit  of 
life  has  come  to  us.  Darkness  has  gone  far  away,  light  approaches  . . . We  have 
come  (there)  where  (men)  prolong  their  term  of  life”  (1,  113,  16)®®.  Man’s  life 
indeed  is  boimd  up  with  the  sun  in  its  rising,  and  although  every  Dawn  brings 
him  nearer  to  death — “the  always  renascent  (goddess)  causes  man  to  grow  old” 
(1, 92, 10) — Dawn  is  every  day  a triumph  over  darkness  and  inimical  powers®® — 
“Driving  away  malignity  and  darkness,  Dawn,  daughter  of  Heaven,  has  come 
to  us  with  lustre”  (5,  80,  5) — and  a bringer  of  the  light  of  heaven®^ — Oman’s 
salvation — , fortune  and  felicity®®.  She  is  implored,  not  only  for  this  wealth  and 
happiness®®,  but  also  for  continuance  of  life  and  the  unbroken  existence  of  the 
family®’.  “Flushing  far  and  wide  with  rays  and  lighting  up  the  whole  bright 
sky”  (1,  49,  4)®®,  and  awakening  men,  Usas  has  them  perform  their  ritual  du- 
ties necessary  for  the  maintenance  of  the  cycles  of  days,  seasons  and  years  and 


And  in  the  ritual  maridcda  VTTT. 

Ghosh,  l.c.;  cf.  MAcnoisTsm,  H.  S.  L.,  l.c. 

And  interpreted  as  Neujahrslieder  by  Hillebbahdt,  V.  M.  T,  p.  28  (otherwise 
Gldenhebg,  R.  y.,  p.  243)  and  F.  B.  J,  Ktjipeb,  in  HJ  4,  223;  see  also  Elizaheh- 

HOVA,  Rigveda,  p,  40. 

See  e.g.  RV,  1,  48,  3;  14;  92,  10;  113,  11;  13;  123,  8f.;  124,  9;  4,  51,  1;  cf.  6, 
65,  6.  Hence  also  the  frequent  occurrence  of  Dawns  (in  the  plural). 

Cf.  also  1, 1 13, 1 1.  The  method  adopted  by  T.  Elizabehhova,  Melanges  Renou, 
p.  262  has  not  allowed  her  to  see  this  point.  These  requests  (‘shine!’)  etc.  are  really 
•connected  with  the  addressee. 

E.g.  1,  48,  8;  15;  92,  5;  4,  51,  9;  5,  80,  5;  7,  75,  1;  80,  2. 

See  1,  48,  8;  3,  61,  4. 

E.g.  1,  48,  1;  9;  13;  92,  14. 

“ See  also  5,  79,  3;  7,  77,  4. 

1,  92,  13;  113,  17;  4,  51,  10;  6,  65,  6;  7,  77,  5;  80,  2. 

33  Apte’s  view  (19  ^OC,  I,  p.  106)  according  to  which  Usas  cannot  be  the 

: shortlived  dawn  of  the  tropics  is  completely  untenable. 


Contents  of  the  l^gveda 


165 


of  the  stability  of  the  imiTerse®* : “Come,  O Dawn,  with  thine  auspicious  rajs 
from  the  Inroinons  expanse  of  heaTen.  The  mddy  (horses)  must  bring  thee  to 
the  house  of  the  one  who  offers  somaV'  (1,  49,  1)^-. 


»»  See  1,  48,  9;  11;  113,  4;  5;  9;  4,  51,  5;  7;  5,  79,  1;  80,  2;  cf.  also  1,  123,  2. 

4t  Phenomena  visible  at  daybreak  are  also  mentioned  in  the  ‘morning  hymns’ 
(1,  6;  69;  4,  13;  10,  35;  189).  For  evening  hymns  see  2,  38  (R.  Roth,  in  ZDMG  24, 
p.  301);  10,  127. 


166 


J.  Gi3n<ia  • Vedic  Literature 


18.  Aninuds 

Animals  are,  as  quadrupeds,  on  a par  with — ^and  not  subordinated  to — ^men, 
as  bipeds,  remembered  in  prayers  and  eulogies^.  Some  animals  play  a more 
important  part  in  the  hymns,  especially  the  cow^,  the  falcon^  and  the  racehorse. 
Often  appearing  In  similes  and  metaphors^  cows  are — ^for  economic  as  well  as 
religious  reasons — ^appreciated  because  of  their  products^  and  hence  a most 
eagerly  desired  possession.  It  is  not  surprising  to  see  that  the  poets  know  the 
habits  of  these  animals  very  well  and,  watching  them  with  expert  eyes,  have 
developed  feelings  of  sympathy  about  them.  Their  love  for  and  care  of  their 
calves®  and  their  daily  stay  on,  and  return  from,  their  pastures’  are  repeatedly 
mentioned.  The  horse® — ^in  India  as  in  other  ancient  Indo-European  countries 
the  favourite  animal  of  the  nobility — ^is  often  praised  as  a valuable  and  victori- 
ous winner  of  prizes.  Famous  w^ar-horses  of  ancient  Idngs  were  even  deified — 
among  them  are  Dadhikravan  and  Tarksya  eulogized  in  4,  39  f.  and  10,  178 
respectively,  the  latter  being  the  tutelary  deity  of  those  who  compete  in 
running.  They  were  regarded  as  able  to  ward  off  dangerous  animals,  demons  and 
diseases®.  Dreadful  and  noxious  are,  first  and  foremost,  snake^®  and  wolfr^,  the 
lamb  or  sheep  as  the  latter’s  victim  appearing  twice  in  a simile^^.  The  ‘Serpent 
of  the  deep’  (Ahi  Budhnya)  was  a deified  snake  mentioned  solely  in  hymns  to 
the  Visve  Devas^^. 

Alan  has  often  presented  some  point  about  Ms  own  kind  wMch  excites  his 
wonder  or  amusement  in  a tale  about  animals.  Eeferences  to  such  tales,  more 
or  less  in  the  form  of  proverbial  sayiugs  occur  in  10, 28,  9f.^^  “The  hare  swallow- 
ed the  razor  in  the  opposite  (wrong)  direction,”  etc.  Fables  proper  do  not  occur 
in  the  Rgveda,  but  knowledge  of  the  ways  and  habits  of  animals  is  apparent 
from  their  occurrence  in  similes^®.  Whether  such  a recognition  of  a certain 
kinsMp  between  men  and  animals  as  the  comparison  of  brahmins  to  croaking 
frogs  in  7, 103, 1 may  point  to  the  existence,  in  Rgvedic  times,  of  real  fables^®  is 
utterly  uncertain. 

^ W-  h 114,  1;  121,  3;  157,  3;  5,  81,  2;  6,  74,  1 etc. 

^ MAcnoNBLL,  H.  S.  L.,  p.  109. 

^ E.g.  1,  33,  2;  118,  11;  4,  38,  5. 

^ See  p.  241  etc. 

® E.g.  4,  1,  16;  6,  45,  7;  10,  43,  9;  64,  12;  87,  17;  133,  7. 

® See  1,  38,  8;  1,  164,  9;  27f.;  9,  104,  2. 

’ See  3,  45,  3;  4,  34,  5;  6,  28,  1;  cf.  4,  51,  8. 

® RV.  1,  27,  1;  3,  22,  1;  4,  3,  12;  10,  1;  6,  12,  4;  8,  102,  12;  9,  6,  5 etc. 

® RV.  7,  38,  7f.;  40,  6. 

H,  P.  ScHMEDT,  Die  Kobra  im  Bgveda,  at  KZ  78  (1963),  p.  296. 

“ RV.  1,  105,  11;  18;  2,  28,  10;  7,  38,  7;  10,  16,  6. 

RV.  8,  34,  3;  66,  8. 

” See  e.g.  l^V.  1,  186,  5;  2,  31,  6;  7,  35,  13;  Macdonell,  V.  M.,  p.  72. 

PlSCHEU,  V.  S.  I,  p.  181. 

E.g.  2,  34,  3;  3,  53,  10;  7,  103,  2ff. 

Cf.  A.  B.  Keith,  A history  of  Sanskrit  literature,  Oxford  1920  (1948),  p.  242. 


Contents  of  the  Rg\'^a 


167 


19.  LahouT  songs 

A few  suMm  were  not  without  reason  classified  as  labour  songs’^.  We  can 
indeed  easily  imagine  that  a recitation  of  1,  28  describing  the  rapid  and  simpli- 
fied preparation  of  the  soma  accompanied  this  aetiTity.  TMs  does  not  imply 
that  they  were  ^quite  secular  poems  that  had  got  mixed  among  the  sacrificiai 
chants’^:  labour  songs  are  helpfiil,  not  only  in  carrying  out  rhythmical  activ- 
ities^— ^they  lessen  the  feelings  of  exertion — but  also  in  biingiiig  about,  by 
their  rhythm,  refrain  and  content,  the  success  of  the  useful  work.  The  wish  that 
the  mortar  should  sound  like  the  kettledrum  of  the  victorious  points  in  the 
same  direction  (st.  5).  As  to  9,  112*  and  some  other  Soma  hymns®,  while  we 
feel  an  objection  to  their  serving  as  an  accompaniment  to  any  Mud  of  "work, 
they^  mair  be  adaptations  or  imitations,  for  a ritual  purpose,  of  popular  labour 
songs®. 

The  sukla  10,  lOP  is  no  labour  song,  but  a poet’s  address  to  his  colleagues 
whom  he  awakens  from  sleep  and  arouses  to  activity*.  The  many*  similes  and 
metaphoricai  expressions  in  which  he  couches  his  stimulation  are  however 
boiTO-wed  from  manual  labour  and  therefore  of  historical  interest : 

“Yoke  (plural)  the  ploughs;  spread  out  the  y'okes;  sow  here  the  seed  in  the 
womb  that  has  been  prepared.  If  the  response  be  in  harmony  with  our  invoca- 
tion, the  ripe  (fruit)  will  approach  the  sickles  very  near.  The  inspired  poets  yoke 
the  ploughs ; they  spread  their  jrokes  one  by-  one,  the  wise  ones,  in  order  to  (earn) 
benevolence  among  the  gods.  Set  (plural)  the  buckets  in  order;  fasten  the  straps 
together.  Let  us  draw  from  the  well  filled  with  water,  which  flows  well  without 
failing.  From  the  well  where  the  buckets  are  set  in  order  with  good  straps,  wMch 
flows  well  and  is  filled  with  water  I am  drawing:  it  does  not  fail.” 

Social  life,  occupations,  amusements,  possessions  and  so  on  are  often  passing- 
ly mentioned,  but  nowhere  made  the  exclusive  subjects  of  even  a single  passage 
in  a hymm®.  In  view  of  the  fact  that  a literature  such  as  this  will  only  embrace 
what  is  within  a limited  horizon  this  is  far  fiom  surprising.  However,  much  of 
what  in  our  eyes  seems  to  be  a mere  amusement  was  for  the  ancient  Indians  no 
doubt  first  and  foremost  a religions  act  or  ceremony,  however  diverting  and 
exciting  it  could  at  the  same  time  be.  The  references  to  races  and  contests® 
should  not  figure  under  the  heading  sport,  but  under  sacred  actions.  They  were 
to  generate  beneficial  energy^®  or  continually  to  reiterate  divine  primordial  acts. 

^ E.  ScHWENTNEB,  in  ZDMG  90,  p.  444;  P.  S.  Sastbi,  in  IHQ  30,  p.  303;  cf.  also 
P.  PoucHA,  in  ZII  10,  p.  288.  For  1,  28  see  Lomimel,  in  Yol.  Nobel,  p.  133. 

2 Thus  WcOTEBimra,  H.  1.  L.  I,  p.  111. 

® Renou,  Po&ie  religieuse,  p.  69. 

* See  p.  169;  Pischel,  Y.  S.  I,  p.  107;  Renou,  o.c.,  p.  70;  H.  P.,  p.  97. 

* ;B,Y.  9,  1;  2;  8 etc. 

® The  perfect  performance  of  Ms  vrata  (‘personal  function,’  9,  112,  1)  moreover 
enables  an  ^ent  to  bend  cosmic  forces. 

^ Gokba,  Yision,  p.  114;  S.  A.  Dange,  in  Nagpur  Univ.  Journal  17  (1967),  p.  158. 
® H.  ZiMMEB,  Altindisches  Leben,  Berlin  1879 ; Y.  M.  Apte,  in  H.  C.  I.  P.  I,  p.  384. 
® E.g.  1,  179,  3;  3,  53,  23;  5,  35,  7;  41,  4;  86,  1;  6,  66,  11;  9,  66,  8;  110,  2. 

J.  Gom>A,  A^eets  of  early  Yisnuism,  Utrecht  1954  (-Delhi  1969),  p.  46. 


168 


J.  Gouda  • Vedic  Literature 


20.  Irony  \ humour 

Thougli  covering  a wide  field  of  techniques,  irony  always  includes  some 
element  of  stating  or  implying  the  reverse  of,  or  more  than,  the  literal  meaning 
of  the  words  used.  As  long  as  these  and  the  situation  in  which  the  poet  and  his 
audience  found  themselves  are  not  sufficiently  known  ironical  interpretations^ 
stand  a good  chance  of  proving  serious  mistakes.  There  is  certainly  no  ironical 
reference  to  the  wolf  in  RV.  1,  183,  4^  because  this  animal  was  notorious  for  its 
viciousness:  the  poet  wishes  to  keep  him  from  attacking  the  Asvins^.  The 
stanzas  8,  70,  13-15,  an  expression  of  thanks  for  a small  present,  seem  to  admit 
of  this  interpretation^,  but  even  here  we  may  be  in  error. 

Overlooking  the  distance  between  the  culture  of  Vedic  India  and  modern 
Europe  as  well  as  the  variety  of  meanings  attached,  not  only  in  different  lan- 
guages, to  the  terms  ‘humorous’  and  ‘comic’  some  authors^  propagated  mis- 
interpretations of  a number  of  hymns.  For  instance,  RY.  10,  97,  an  address  of  a 
‘doctor’  to  his  herbs,  was  regarded  as  a sort  of  facetious  intermezzo.  Since  how- 
ever nobody  calls  in  question  the  serious  character  of  AV.  8,  7,  which  contains 
a number  of  parallel  statements  of  the  divine  power  inherent  in  the  medicinal 
herbs  and  prayers  for  their  help  in  “saving  this  man’s  life,”  we  should  rather 
join  the  native  tradition®  in  characterizing  this  suJcta  as  a solemn  praise  of  the 
plants,  applicable  to  the  cure  of  a serious  disease’.  Although  in  Geldner’s 
translation,  preferring  “feasting”  or  “banqueting”  to  “eating,”  a text  such  as 
RV.  1,  82® — ^a  farewell  address  to  Indra  after  the  sorrha  oblations — may  impress 
a modem  reader  as  amusing®,  it  has  no  doubt  never  appeared  in  that  Kght  to 
the  ancients  themselves.  I fail  to  see  why  8,  19,  25f.  “If  you,  0 Agni,  wert 
mortal,  and  I immortal,  I would  not  give  thee  up  to  malediction  and  misery”  is 
a specimen  of  “humour  based  on  a contrast”^®.  It  is  likewise  very  dubious 
whether  certain  affirmations  in  connection  with  wealth  or  women — ^who  are 
“indocile”  (8,  33,  17),  or  with  whom  “friendship  is  impossible”  (10,  95,  15) — 

1 Such  as  were  proposed  by  A.  Ludwig,  in  Festgruss  Bohtlingk,  p.  86. 

® Griffith,  H.  RV.  I,  p.  318.  Cf.  Rehou,  E.  V.  P.  XVI,  p.  21. 

* Incorrectly  also  Geldner,  e.g.  on  RV.  5,  30,  15;  questionably  7,  18,  19. 

^ PiscHEL,  V.  S.  I,  p.  5.  Cf.  also  1,  120,  3;  1,  176,  4. 

Roth,  in  ZLMG  25  (1871),  p.  645:  “Eine  Probe  der  heiteren  Gattung,  welche 
zu  unserer  Erfrischung  da  und  dort  in  den  Veda  Eingang  gefunden  hat”;  Voh 
SCHROEDEE,  Mysterium,  p.  369;  P.  S.  Sastri,  The  Rgvedic  poetic  spirit,  ABORI 
38  (1957),  p.  60;  A.  Ya.  Syrkih in Materialy  po  istorii  i filologii  Tzentr.  Asii  3 (1968), 

p.  66. 

■ Brhaddevata  7,  154. 

■ Goi.-DA,  Secular  hymns,  esp.  p.  339;  S.  K.  De,  Wit,  humour  and  satire  in 

ancient  Ind.  Lit.,  in  OH  3 (1955),  p.  157. 

® See  also  Geldneb,  Auswahl,  11,  p.  5. 

® Similar  interpretations  were  e.g.  proposed  for  RV.  7,  33,  2 (Geudner,  V.  S.  11, 
94  30^^’  (Geldnee,  RV.  m,  p.  lis);  10,  94;  10,  119.  See  also  8, 

Sastri,  l.c.  and  in  ESQ  30,  p.  307. 


Contents  of  the  Rgveda 


169 


may”  be  called  cynical.  As  to  9,  112 — “Different  indeed  are  our  sMIl  and 
talents  . . the  carpenter  wants  a thing  that  is  broken,  the  phi’sician  somebody 
who  is  wounded,  the  brahman  one  who  presses  oot  the  ^sor/Ki” — this  is  no  more 
a merry  song^®,  a piece  of  moralizing  mild  humour^®,  “a  capital  or  “a 

satirical  poem,  which  derides  the  manifold  desires  of  mankind”^ ^ — on  the 
contrary,  the  author  requests  the  god,  in  a popular  way,  “to  give  eTerj^body’ 
the  things  he  longs  — ^than  10,  102^’^,  the  stoiw  of  Mudgaia’s  race  mth  an 

ox-cart«  or  the  Trog  song’  7,  103^®.  The  words  added  in  RV.  1, 124,  10;  4,  51,  3 
to  the  prayer  “Awake,  0 Dawn,  those  who  give”:  “Let  the  misers  sleep  never 
to  wake  up”  are  an  imprecation  rather  than^^  a sample  of  the  poets’  sarcasm. 


With  Db,  O.C.,  p.  158. 

^2  B.  K.  Ghosh,  in  H.  C.  I.  P.  I,  p.  346. 

MAcdoneul,  H.  S.  L.,  p.  129. 

P.  S.  Sastbi,  in  ABORI  29,  p.  164. 

WiNTBBNITZ,  H.  I.  L.  I,  p.  111. 

Goisda,  O.C.,  p.  325. 

P.  vox  Bbadke,  Ein  lustiges  Wagenrennen,  ZDMG  46  (1892),  p.  445;  Vox 
ScHBOEDEB,  0.0,,  p.  346 ff.:  “Biirleske.” 

See  above,  p.  130. 

WiXTEBXiTZ,  H.  I.  L.  I,  p.  110;  Geldxeb,  Auswahl,  II,  p.  117;  Deussex,  A.G. 
Phil.  I,  1,  p.  100.  See  above,  p.  143. 

2®  With  P.  S.  Sastbi,  in  ABORI  38,  p.  60. 


170 


J.  Gonda  • Yedic  Literature 


21.  Bdnastidis 

There  are  about  forty  hymns  which  contain  a ‘Praise  of  generosity’  ( ddna- 
sMi in  most  cases  in  the  form  of  three  to  five  concluding  stanzas-.  These 
stanzas  express  the  poet’s  gratitude  for  the  favours  received  from  his  noble 
patron  or  patrons.  In  cases  such  as  1, 126  or  5,  27  we  may  speak  of  a ddruistuti 
hymn.  The  poet — and  after  him  the  reciter — upraises  the  man  who  has  presented 
him  with  cows — sometimes  to  the  number  of  ten  thousand — bulls,  horses, 
other  animals,  chariots,  gold,  women  and  other  wealth®.  The  supposition  is 
legitimate  that  these  hymns  were  composed  at  the  request  of  the  donor,  a 
prince  or  important  man,  whose  name  is  as  a rule  mentioned.  Many  of  these 
hymns  are  addressed  to  Indra,  but  in  the  ddruistviis  proper  Agni  is  often  in- 
voked: e.g.  “I  invoke  this  (Agni)  of  yours,  whose  radiance  is  long-lived,  with 
(this)  word  of  praise  (addressed)  to  the  benevolent  ones  whose  chariot  gets  off 
safely,  0 giver  of  horses”  (5, 18, 3) ; ‘T  extol,  0 Agni,  Satri,  Agnivesa’s  son,  who 
grants  a thousand,  a shining  example  of  a host.  For  him  the  waters  shall 
abound  uninterruptedly;  with  him  must  remain  mighty  brilliant  dominion” 
(d,  34,  9).  a god  may^  be  represented  as  the  real  giver  of  donations  which  are  to 
hold  the  patrons  captives  with  a view  to  future  occasions:  “0  friends,  satiate 
this  friend  of  yours,  the  bountiful  Indra,  with  soma.  He  will  no  doubt  help  us  to 
gain  that  (gift).  Indra  will  not  fail  to  assist  the  one  who  presses  5oma”  (6,  23, 
9)^.  The  generous  patron  and  Indra  share  the  epithet  maghavan  “benevolent, 
liberal.”  This  is  not  to  say  that  a hymn  such  as  1, 10  containing  the  words  “He 
is  the  powerful  one ; that  he,  Indra,  exert  his  power  for  us  distributing  posses- 
sions” is  in  its  entirety  a prayer  for  a daksina^,  which  is  the  technical  term  for 
these  ceremonial  gifts®.  Invoking  Usas  to  “bring  us  wealth  and  other  gifts”  the 
poet  of  5,  79  stands  up  for  his  patron  as  much  as  for  himselff . Nor  should  we 
interpret  any  passage  on  gods  allotting  booty  as  an  allusion  to  a dahsind. 


^ M.  Patel,  Die  Danastuti’s  des  Rigveda,  Thesis  Marburg  1929  (Engl.  transL 
by  B.  H.  Kapadia,  Vallabh  Vidyanagar  1961);  Oldenbebg,  in  ZDMG  39  (1885), 
p.  83  {=  K.S.  p.  505);  Hopbuxs,  in  JAOS  15,  p.  258;  B.  H.  Kapadia,  in  JGJRI  17 
(1961),  p.  203;  J . C.  Hjeestebman,  at  BDCRI 19,  p.  320;  J.  Goistda,  Gifts  and  giving 
in  the  ^gved&,  VIJ  2 (1964),  p.  9. 

® Although  there  is  some  difference  of  opinion  between  the  Brhaddevata  and  the 
Anukramani  about  individual  cases,  they  are  agreed  that  a ddnastuti  is  either  a 
complete  hymn  (cf.  8,  55;  56)  or,  normally,  the  final  part  of  a ‘hymn,  and  that  it 
should  be  addressed  to  kin^.  Not  all  groups  of  stanzas  which  we  would  regard  as  a 
ddnmtuti  are,  however,  traditionally  recognized  as  such.  Differences  of  opinion 
exist  e.g.  about  1,  100,  16;  1,  126;  5,  18;  5,  27;  8,  24,  28ff. 

® See  e.g.  RV.  1,  122,  7f.;  5,  27,  1;  2;  5;  30,  12;  33,  9;  36,  6;  6,  27,  8;  63,  9f.; 
7,  18,  22f.;  8,  1,  32f.;  3,  21ff.;  19,  36;  46,  33  and  compare  e.g.  1,  125;  126.  The 
exaggeration  is  obxuous. 

^ Cf.  also  4,  32,  19;  5,  33,  6;  41,  16;  42,  7. 

® Thus  Gelbxeb,  RV.  I,  p.  10;  cf.  also  RV.  1,  48. 

® Gokda,  R.  1. 1,  p.  43. 

’ Cf.  also  W-  7,  1,  20. 


Contents  of  the  p«g\"eda 


171 


because  a conquering  god  is,  like  a king,  supposed  to  gire  all  Ms  supporters, 
worsMppers  or  adherents  a share  In  the  spoils  of  war®.  On  the  other  hand, 
references  or  allusions  to  this  concluding  element  of  the  sacrificial  ceremonies 
are  not  rare®.  It  was  even  represented  as  a goddess^®  to  receive,  in  RT.  10,  107, 
a hynni  of  its  own ; being  ori.ginally  intended  to  aceompany  the  gift  the  suMu 
praises  tMs  as  a presentation  made  to  the  gods  and  as  the  most  essential  element 
of  the  sacrifice,  by  wMch  the  sacrificer  himself  will  benefit  most.  The  fragment 
of  a dialogue  between  the  guest  leaving  in  the  morning — perhaps  an  itinerant 
reciter  who  tenders  his  services — and  the  wealthy  host,  to  whom  the  former 
holds  out  a prospect  of  almost  unlimited  worldfr  and  celestial  reward  fl,  125)^^, 
illustrates,  not  only  the  relation  between  patron  and  priestly  eulogist,  but  also 
the  Mgh  merit  and  efficacy  attaching  to  tMs  ceremonial  gift^^.  However,  the 
hope  of  a dahsina  is  not  alivaj's  realized:  1,  120,  12  ‘"Therefore  I will  have 
nothing  to  do  with  a dream  and  a rich  man  who  show's  no  gratitude ; they  both 
disappear  ha  the  morning’'^®. 

The  view  that  the  ddnastuiis  are  generally  speaking  additions^  ^ is  untenable : 
in  part  of  the  cases  they  are  more  or  less  closely  connected  with  the  other  parts 
of  the  suMa'^^.  In  style,  language  and  sometimes  also  in  their  metrom  they  tend 
to  deviate,  showing  a preference  for  certain  words  and  turns  of  speech^®.  As 
poetic  products  they  are  negligible.  It  has  been  suggested^^  that  hymns  of  praise 
addressed  to  a noble  patron  have  furnished  the  model  for  the  glorifications  of 
deities,  but  it  is  difficult  to  see  how  such  a thesis  could  be  proved. 


® Cf.  RV.  1,  27,  4-9;  8,  2,  39. 

® See  e.g.  RV.  1,  113,  18;  128,  5;  4,  16,  21;  42,  10;  5,  10,  1;  36,  3;  7,  76,  6. 

« ^V.  1,  1*23,  1;  5,  1,  3;  6,  64,  1. 

See  Thieme,  Fremdiing,  p.  82.  Compare  also  10,  107,  8ff. 

J.  C.  BfeESTEEacAisr,  at  II J 3,  p.  241. 

The  dakmm  was  usually  presented  in  the  morning:  GEunmEB,  RV.  II,  p.  363; 
cf.  e.g.  RV.  i,  123,  1;  6,  64,*‘l. 

Thus,  e.g.,  GBASSMA^niv  in  his  translations;  EoGEi.ns'G,  §B.  I,  p.  XI;  Hopkins, 
in  JAOS  15,  p.  258,  and  Keith,  H.  S.  L.,  p.  41;  otherwise,  Oudbnbebg,  Lc.; 
PiscHEL,  V.  S.  I,  p.  4;  Pateu,  Lc.,  p.  30. 

« cf.  e.g.  8,  23,  28. 

See  e.g.  also  4,  15,  9;  5,  27,  6;  34,  9;  6,  45,  33;  8,  6,  48. 

RENOiJ(-FimiozAT),  I.C.  I,  p.  273, 


Chafteb  IV 


THE  STRUCTURE  OF  THE  RGVEDIC  POElfS 


1.  Stanzas  and  metres 

The  ‘hymixs’  (sulda)  of  the  Rgveda  consist  of  stanzas  ranging  in  mimber 
from  three^  to  fifty-eight  (9,  97),  but  usually  not  exceeding  ten  or  ttrelve^.  The 
stanzas  of  all  Vedic  metrical  texts  are  almost-  always  complete  in  themselves 
and  are  composed  in  some  fifteen  different  metres,  only  seven  of  which  are 
frequent®.  Three  of  them,  nsed  in  about  four-fifths  of  all  stanzas  in  the  Rgveda- 
Samhita,  are  by  far  the  commonest,  viz.  the  anmMk  stanza  consisting  of  four 
‘feet’^  (fdda)  of  eight  syllables  each®;  the  trisiubh,  consisting  of  four  times 
eleven;  and  the  ja^atl,  composed  of  four  times  twelve  syllables*.  Stanzas  are 
sometimes  formed  by  combining  units  of  different  length.  From  the  point  of 
view  of  syntax  and  contents  a half- stanza  (verse  or  line)  is  very  often  a distinct 
urdt^;  that  means  that  a large  majority  of  the  stanzas  is  essentially  bipartite®. 

^ There  are  some  fragments,  e.g.  1,  99  (consisting  of  one  stanza);  perhaps  also 
10,  176  and  some  other  short  hymns. 

® For  a certain  predilection  for  eleven  stanzas:  Oldenbesg,  in  ZDMG  38,  p. 
456  (=  K.  S.  p.  530). 

® In  this  section  all  technical  details,  in  part  very  complicated,  must  for  reasons 
of  space  be  omitted.  For  an  introduction  see  A.  A.  I^Iacdoneill,  A Vedic  grammar 
for  students,  Oxford  1916  (®1953),  p.  436.  The  only  comprehensive  work  of  greater 
compass  is  in  some  respects  antiquated:  E.  V.  Abnold,  Vedic  metre  in  its  historical 
development,  Cambridge  1905,  ^Delhi  1967.  For  some  particulars  see,  inter  cdia, 
Arnold  in  KZ  37,  p.  213;  Bloomfield,  in  JAOS  27,  p.  72;  Repetitions  p.  523; 
H.  N.  Randle,  in  BSOAS  20,  p.  459;  V.  K.  Rajwade,  at  IHQ  19,  p.  147.  For 
references  to  metrics  in  the  Vedic  texts:  Webeb,  I.  S.  VII,  p.  1, 

^ Not  to  be  confused  with  the  feet  of  Greek  metrics;  pMa  (sometimes  translated 
by  ‘verse’)  means  ‘quarter’  (from  the  foot  of  a quadruped). 

. ® Pada  etc-  were  already  mentioned  in  the  Nidanasiitra  (Webeb,  I.  S.  VHI, 
p.  115). 

® The  number  of  syllables  is  not  always  strictly  observed.  Stanzas  may  also 
contain  more  or  fewer  quarters  than  four;  the  well-known  gdyatrl  for  instance 
consists  of  three  padas  of  eight. 

^ J.  Gonda,  Syntax  and  verse  structure  in  the  Veda,  IL  1958  (R.  Turner  Jubilee 
VoL),  p.  35;  Syntaxis  en  versbouw  voomamelijk  in  het  Vedisch,  Amsterdam  Acad. 
1960;  The  anustuhh  stanzas  of  the  !^gveda,  ALB  31—32,  p.  14. 

® For  syntactic  and  stylistic  aspects  see  p.  2 1 Iff.  Like  the  formation  of  longer  units 
by  the  accumulation  of  single  lines,  the  line  as  an  individual  unit  seems  to  have 
been  widely  normal  in  songs  and  poems  which  are  not  accompanied  by  a dance. 


174 


J.  Gonda  • Vedic  Literature 


In.  illustration  of  the  processes  adopted  by  the  poets  to  construct  stanzas  firoin 
lines  and  quarters  containing  short,  single,  condensed  statements  an  analysis 
of  the  first  half  of  EV.  1,  10,  chosen  at  random  may  be  inserted  here.  Stanza  1, 
a and  b®  constitute  two  sentences,  stating  that  the  eulogists  praise  Indra  and 
start  a hymn ; cd  are  one  sentence,  which  paraphrases  the  same  idea  in  poetical 
imagery.  Two  telescoped  subordinate  clauses  in  2a  and  b are  continued  by  a 
main  clause  (2c) ; 2d  is  a short  independent  sentence.  Stanza  3ab  and  cd  con- 
stitute two  sentences  connected  by  “then.”  The  line  4ab  consists  of  four  short 
sentences  (imperatives)  equally  distributed  over  the  quarters;  cd  are  one 
sentence,  the  verb  of  which  is  likewise  an  imperative.  Stanza  5 constitutes  one 
compound  sentence — cd  are  subordinate — ^both  parts  of  which  are  of  equal 
length.  In  6 the  first  pada  is  a complete  short  sentence,  supplemented  by  the 
S3uitactically  incomplete  second;  a similar  structure  recurs  in  the  second  Hne. 
Occasionally  two  stanzas  are  S3nitactically  connected  by  means  of  a particle 
(“for,  because”  etc.) ; instances  of  enjambment  beyond  a line  are  comparatively 
infrequent;  beyond  the  stanza  they  are  very  rare  and  sometimes  wrongly 
assumed^®. 

In  studying  Vedic  verses  scholars  have  too  often  had  a bias  in  favour  of  the 
implicit  assumption  that  they  are  the  natural  continuation  of  ‘original  Indo- 
European’  verses  which  in  their  opinion  were  characterized,  like  those  of  the 
ancient  Greeks,  by  a more  or  less  fixed  arrangement  of  long  and  short  sylla- 
bles^^. However,  the  mam  principle  governing  Vedic  metre  is  isosyllabism;  the 
systematic  alternation  of  short  and  long,  or  of  stressed  and  weak  syllables  is  an 
incompletely  realized  secondary  characteristic.  Such  a fixed  alternation  is, 
moreover,  in  all  metres  more  rigidly  determined  in  the  latter  part  of  the  unit 
than  in  the  earlier  part.  So  there  is  much  to  say  for  the  supposition  that  in  the 
Indo-Iranian  period — as  is  the  case  in  the  Avesta — ^the  principle  was  the  num- 
ber of  syllables  only  In  India  the  quantities  tended  to  become  more  and  more 
fixed^®.  The  ‘popular’  and  freer  anustvhh  of  the  Atharvaveda-Samhita  and  the 
grhyasutras — ^in  which  the  process  of  fixing  the  quantities  is  in  a more  rudi- 
mentary state — may'  be  regarded  as  structurally  and  chronologically  earlier 


* The  quarters  are  mdicated  by  letters. 

Cf.  1,  8,  If.  (one  compound  sentence);  7,  65,  2;  66,  4-5;  10-11;  cf.  1,  10,  6f. 
Questions  of  syntactic  and  stylistic  interest  will  be  discussed  in  chapter  V. — ^In  oral 
poetry  of  other  peoples  also  a thought  is  rarely  incomplete  at  the  end  of  a line 
which  is  marked  by  a pause  for  breath. 

See  e.g.  A.  Mbtllet,  in  JA  1897,  2,  p.  300;  Les  origines  indo-europeennes  des 
metres  grecs,  Paris  1923. 

This  is  not  to  say  that  this  versification  was  ‘primitive’;  compare  e.g.  also 
C.  M.  Bowha,  Primitive  song,  New  York  1962,  p.  87 ; even  a ‘bard’  in  the  Yugoslav 
tradition  might  not  be  able  to  tell  how  many  syllables  there  are  between  pauses 
(A.  B.  Lobd,  The  stager  of  tales,  Cambridge  Mass.  1960,  p.  32). 

H.  Oldenbeeg,  Zur  Geschichte  des  gloka,  NG  1909,  p,  219  (=  K.  S.  p.  1188); 
Zur  Geschichte  des  Tristubh,  NG  1915  (1916),  p.  490  (=  K.  S.  p.  1216);  ZDMG  37, 
p.  54  (=  K.  S.  p.  441). 


The  structure  of  the  Rgi’edie  poems 


175 


than  the  more  strictl3r  regulated  'hieratic’  octosrllabie  rerses^*  of  the  Rgreda 
wMch  however  did  not  fail  to  infinence,  in  course  of  time,  the  'popular’  form  of 
the  metre. 

Very  often  a h^rmii  of  the  Rgreda  consists  of  stanzas  in  the  same  metre 
througlioiit.  A typical  divergence  from  this  rule  was  then  already  to  mark  the 
conclusion  of  the  poem  ^ith  a stanza-  in  a different  metre  In  the  Atharvaveda 
the  metres  vary  in  the  same  hymn  more  than  is  cnstoma-ry  in  the  Rgveda^*.  It 
has  not  without  reason  been  supposed  that  this  variation  was  to  a certain 
extent  made  a stylistic  device In  2, 24  the  only  stanza  in  a different  metre  (12| 
constitutes  the  culmination  of  the  poet’s  address.  In  part  of  the  cases — especiai- 
iy  those  in  which  a hymn  consists  of  two  metrically  different  sets  of  stanzas^® 
— the  alternation,  or  rather  interruption  of  the  continuity,  may,  especially 
when  there  is  at  the  same  place  a break  in  the  context  or  a change  in  the  subjects 
dealt  with^®,  be  made  a serious  argument  in  a discussion  of  the  structure  or 
genesis  of  the  hymn.  An  unmistakable  predilection  for  one  and  the  same  metri- 
cal form  in  the  poems  ascribed  to  the  same  poet  or  family  of  poets  is  indeed  not 
absent for  instance,  outside  the  Atri  hjmms  of  book  V the  anmtuhh  hjmins 
are  very  rare®^. 

In  a considerable  number  of  instances,  recurrence  of  otherwise  identical 
jpadas  is  accompanied  by  changes  in  the  metre  which  are  mostly  effected  by 
extensions  or  abbreviations^^.  There  moreover  exists  a structural  relationship 
between  iristvthh  and  jagati  because  in  many  cases  lines  composed  in  these 
metres  are  identical,  except  that  they  add  or  subtract  a last  syllable^®.  The  very 

BLOOMrrcnD,  A,  V.  G.  B.,  p.  41,  but  see  also  Oldexbebg,  at  ZDMG  54,  p.  181 
(=  K.  S.  p.  85). 

IS  OnDEXBERG,  H.  R.  I,  p.  140.  See  e.g.  RV.  1,  64;  82;  90;  143;  158;  2,  8;  13; 
5,  55;  59;  64;  65;  6,  8;  7,  104;  8,  78  etc.  The  tendency  to  conclude  a series  with  a 
longer  or  ‘heavier’  end  is  well  known  also  in  other  arts  and  among  other  peoples. 
In  part  of  the  cases  the  two  last  stanzas  are  in  a different  metre:  1,  51;  141;  157; 
166;  5,  44;  8,  17;  10,  9;  elsewhere  the  last  and  the  third  last:  1,  52;  182;  the  last 
and  another  stanza:  1,  85;  2,  23;  or  the  second  last  one:  1,  179;  4,  50;  or  the  first: 
7,  41;  44;  8,  37;  92;  another  stanza  5,  36;  8,  48,  96;  10,  34. 

Hymns  with  two  or  more  different  metres  are  ^T.  1,  54;  84;  88;  89;  120;  3, 
53;  4,  7;  7,  55;  8,  26;  30  etc.  In  many  hymns  two  metres  are  used  alternately:  1,  36; 
39;  7,  74;  81 ; 8,  20;  27  etc.  The  hymns  5,  53  and  8,  46  are  examples  of  a considerable 
degree  of  variation. 

Broomfield,  Lc.  and  in  JAOS  17,  p.  176;  21,  p.  46. 

Cf.  IRV.  1,  50;  58;  2,  32;  7,  1;  34;  56;  9,  5.  Cases  are  not  lacking  in  which  the 
metre  changes  more  than  once:  5,  51;  8,  89;  103,  and  compare  1,  91;  3,  52. 

« Cf.  1,  101;  5,  27;  6,  71;  8,  42;  10,  32. 

See  e.g.  1,  65-70;  137-139  (with  curious  predilection  for  interrupted  repetition 
of  the  type  . . . jMdvedasam  vipram  nd  jatdvedasam;  cf.  AiB.  5,  11,  1);  10,  1-9  (8); 
compare  also  the  three  hymns  7,  1;  34;  56  and  see  Bebgaigxe  in  JA  1889  (I  = 
8-13),  p.  151. 

There  is,  in  the  Veda,  no  narrati%’e  metre  such  as  its  successor,  the  epic  Moka. 

22  Bloomfiblb,  Repetitions,  p.  523;  Bloomfield  and  Edgebtox,  Variants, 
m,  p.  22. 

Bloomfield,  o.c.,  p.  529;  Laivma:x,  in  JAOS  10,  p.  535. 


176 


J.  Gonda  • Vedic  Literature 


extensive  intercliange  between  octosyllabic  and  long  metre  lines  should  not 
however  tempt  ns  to  consider^ ^ the  latter  to  have  originated  from  the  former. 
The  diction  of  the  Vedic  poets  is  so  imitative  and,  at  the  same  time,  so  free  in 
all  matters  of  form  as  to  preclude,  in  most  cases,  any  decision  as  to  the  chrono- 
logical precedence  of  a definite  metrical  type. 

There  is  ample  evidence  that  metre,  style  and  contents  of  stanzas  or  groups 
of  stanzas  usually  foiin  a harmonious  whole^^.  The  comparatively  rare  dvipadd 
virdj  stanza — ^two  decasyllabic  units  which  because  of  a rest  in  the  middle 
consist  of  two  pentads  each — ^is  for  instance  very  well  adapted  to  the  ‘chopped’ 
style,  Jumping  thought  and  sudden  transitions  of  the  Agni  hymns  1,  65“-73 ; (1, 
66,  3): 

dadhAra  ksemam  oho  nd  ranvo 
ydvo  nd  pakvo  jetd  jdndndm, 

“Guarding  peace  and  rest,  pleasant  like  one’s  home 
(Is)  ripe  like  barley,  victor  of  peoples.” 

The  complex  and  emphatic  phraseology  of  the  Vayu  hymn  1,  134  and  its  many 
repetitions  at  the  ends  of  the  successive  padas  are  in  harmony  with  the  com- 
plicated atyasti  strophes  (12,  12,  8;  8,  8;  12,  8)  of  which  it  consists^®: 

(3)  vdyur  yunkte  rohitd  vdyur  arunA 
vayu  rathe  ajira  dhuri  vollmve 
vdhispm  dhuri  volhave  . . . 

“Vaw  (Wind)  yokes  the  two  chestnut  horses,  Wind  the  two  tawny  ones, 

Vajni  puts  to  the  chariot  the  two  agile  (ones)  in  the  yoke  to  draw. 

The  best  (draught-horses,)  in  the  yoke  to  draw  . . 

It  is  perhaps  no  accident  that  the  Vedic  wedding  hymns  are  prevailingly  in 
anmtubhs,  the  funeral  stanzas  in  tristubhs^’^ . 

Since  the  verses  are  largely  flexible  and  adaptable  to  the  different  themes^s, 
a change  of  mood  or  subject  is  not  infrequently  marked  by  a change  of  metrical 
form.  In  tins  connection  it  is  worth  noticing  that  already  some  of  the  Rgvedic 
poets  not  only  had  a sensitiviness  to  the  metrical  structure  of  their  produc- 
tions®® and  were  acquainted  with  some  technical  terms®®,  but  also  attributed  a 
wonderful  creative  power  to  them:  “by  means  of  the  jagatl  stanza  and  melody 
the  Creator  placed  the  river  in  the  heavens”  (1,  164,  25).  They  moreover  made 
an  attempt  to  attribute  them  to,  or  co-ordinate  them  with,  definite  deities : the 
virdj  is  said  to  belong  to  the  double  deity  Mitra-Varuna,  the  tristubh  to  Indra, 
the  jagatl  to  the  Visve  Devas®^.  These  tendencies  became  more  pronounced  in 

With  W.  Haskell,  at  PAOS  11  (1881),  p.  LX. 

See  also  Bloomeield,  A.  V,  G.  B.,  p.  41. 

Cf.  e.g.  also  1,  139;  9,  111;  Arnold,  o.c.,  p.  237;  Renotj,  E.  V.  P.  n,  p.  33; 

42  etc. 

RV.  10,  85;  AV.  14  or  against  RV.  10,  14-18;  AV.  18. 

See  also  p.  227  etc. 

Cf.  1,  186,  4;  8,  12,  10;  10,  114,  9;  130,  3. 

See  e.g.  1,  164,  23ff. ; 2,  43,  1;  10,  14,  16.  Compare  also  10,  90,  9 mentioning 

the  creation  of  metres  and  melodies. 

RV.  10,  330,  4f.;  cf.  10,  124,  9. 


The  straetnre  of  the  Rg\’edie  poerns 


177 


the  Atharvaveda — where  a larger  number  of  teehnical  terms  appears  to  be 
knoi^ii®^ — to  be  developed  into  a more  STstematic  whole  by  the  authors  of  the 
hrakrmnm  and  aranyakas^'^.  As  far  as  they  are  attached  to  the  Rgverla  their 
works  are  perhaps  in  a third  of  all  their  speculative  pas.sages  more  or  less  con- 
cerned with  the  metres  which  are  ^-stematically  co-ordinated,  not  only  nith 
the  gods,  but  also  uith  other  important  concepts,  such  as  the  social  classes, 
animals,  parts  of  the  body,  the  provinces  and  C|iiarter5  of  the  universe®^.  The 
gdyatrl,  symbolizing  the  social  order  of  the  brahmins,  is  Agnils  metre®®,  the 
trisfubk,  the  heroic  metre  par  exceUejice,  is  Indra’s  and  co-ordinated  with 
nobility®®.  The  metres  become  deities  themselves®",  instruments  of  creation, 
and  are  even  raised  higher  than  the  gods®®.  Being  believed  to  exert  vaiioiis 
forms  of  power  and  influence®®  they  impart  certain  qualities  or  characteristics 
to  their  user*®;  they  moreover  came  to  be  closely  assodate-d  with  definite 
divisions  of  the  ritual : the  gdyatrl  is  at  the  moming  service  of  the  sorm  sacriflee 
allotted  to  Agni*^  and  the  Vasus,  the  iristubh  at  the  midday  service  to  Indra  and 
the  Rudras,  the  jagcdl  at  the  third  pressing  in  the  evening  to  the  Visve  Devas 
and  the  Adityas*®.  The  tristubh,  moreover,  is  the  chief  metre  of  the  hotar,  the 
gdyairl  and  the  pragdtha^^  of  the  udgaiar^^.  The  Rgveda  shows  traces  of  this 
distinction  between  recitative  and  song;  beside  hjmns  in  simple  metres  are 
found  strophic  effects  made  up  of  various  combinations  of  series  of  eight  and 
twelve  syllables*®  intended  for  sdman  singing*®. 


AV.  8,  9,  14;  20;  10,  25;  11,  7,  8;  12,  3,  10;  19,  21  etc. 

Rex-ou,  in  JA  250  (1962),  p.  173. 

Cf.  e.g.  TS.  1,  7,  5,  4;  SB.  1,  2,  5,  6;  1,  3,  2,  16;  I,  4,  I,  34;  1,  7,  2,  13ff.;  10, 
3,  2,  Iff.  For  a survey  see  Siddheswab  Yabma,  in  Proc.  16  AJOC  II,  p.  10. 

E.g.  TS.  2,  2,  5,  5. 

” Haug,  Ai.  B.  I,  p.  76. 

This  great  significance  of  the  metres  and  metrical  speech  in  general  depends 
largely  on  the  number  of  the  syllables  of  which  they  consist  and  the  belief  that 
objects  and  concepts  are  closely  connected  with  another  by  their  numerical  values 
and  proportions.  Cf.  e.g.  AiB.  1,  1,  7.  (See  also  p.  373). 

SB.  1,  8,  2,  14;  8,  2,  2,  8;  cf.  8,  2,  3,  9.  Elsewhere  they  are  associates  of  the 
gods,  e.g.  AiB.  4,  5,  2. 

” See  e.g.  TS.  2,  2,  4,  8;  SB.  1,  3,  4,  6;  1,  8,  2,  8;  4,  4,  3,  1. 

*0  See  e.g.  TS.  3,  3,  7,  If.;  4,  4,  12,  Iff. 

See  also  BEBOAioms,  m JA  1889  (8-13),  p.  134. 

*®  AiB.  3,  13,  1;  see  Bebgaigne,  in  JA  1889  (8-13),  p.  13;  166,  who  was  of  the 
opinion  that  most  Rgvedic  hymns  were  composed  for  a soma  sacrifice  that  was  not 
essentially  different  from  that  d^cribed  in  the  hrdhmanm  and  sutras. 

Pragdthm  are  formed  by  combination  of  units  of  8 and  12  syllables. 

**  For  details  see  Olbejcbeeg,  in  ZDMG  38,  p.  439  {=  K.  S.  p.  513). 

*®  Cf.  P.  D.  Chan-dbatse,  Longer  metres  in  Rigveda,  at  Bulletin  Chunilal  Gandhi 
Yidyabhavan  14  (1969),  p.  1. 

*®  E.g.  1,  127;  5,  87;  9,  111.  After  the  obser\’ations  made  in  chapter  II  the  moot 
question  as  to  what  portions  of  the  corpus  were  from  the  beginning  intended  to 
serve  liturgical  purposes  and  the  problem  of  the  character  of  ritual  and  liturgj’  in 
the  early  Rgvedic  period  must  be  left  undiscussed  here. 


178 


J.  Gonda  * Vedic  Literature 


2,  Structure  of  the  sulMs 

At  first  sight  many  Rgvedic  hymns  impress  ns  as  consisting  of  isolated,  self- 
contained  stanzas  of  restricted  scope,  each  of  which  presents— even  without 
any  perceptible  inner  connection — a single  aspect  or  a single  situation^.  In 
some  cases  this  impression  is  no  doubt  correct : many  stanzas  could  be  inter- 
changed or  even  transferred  to  another  suhta  without  detriment  to  the  intelli- 
gibility of  the  context;  there  are,  in  our  eyes,  many  interniptions^ ; there  are 
disorderly  and  badly  composed  or  otherwise  structurally  unsuccessful  hymns^. 
On  closer  investigation  it  however  appears  that  in  many  cases  unity  in  a hymn 
is  more  clearly  observable  than  continuity,  which  is  not  infrequently  difficult  to 
trace  because  of  a certain  amount  of  repetition  and  the  insertion  of  digressive 
materiaP.  The  elaboration  of  the  theme,  while  contributing  much  to  the  unity 
of  the  hymn,  was,  as  far  as  we  are  able  to  see,  largely  the  task  of  the  individual 
poet,  who  no  doubt  was  acquainted  with  a great  variety  of  models  to  choose 
from®.  A thorough  examination  will  indeed  often  show  that  many  times  abrupt 
transitions  find  their  explanation  in  a certain  vivacity  of  expression®  and  that 
an  at  first  sight  rather  incoherent  hynan  constitutes  a well-considered  whole.  In 
1,  F Agni  is  invoked  as  the  divine  priest  presiding  over  the  sacrifice  who  is  most 
lavish  in  bestowing  treasures  on  his  worshipper  (st.  1).  Lauded  by  sages  of  old 
as  well  as  of  today,  he  is  adjured  to  bring  the  other  gods  to  the  sacrificial  place 
(st.  2) ; through  him  the  sacrificer  can  gain  prosperity  (st.  3).  Only  that  sacrifice 
will  be  successful  that  is  encompassed  by  Agni  (4) ; he  will,  indeed,  hear  the 
prayer  (5) ; that  will  come  true  (6).  The  final  stanzas  (7-9)  express  the  allegiance 
of  those  speaking  and  implore  Agni’s  benevolence. 

A great  number  of  Vedic  suktas,  indeed,  are  to  a remarkable  degree  character- 
ized by  an  obviously  preconceived  plan,  by  one  chief  underlying  idea  or  the 
elaboration  of  one  definite  theme,  which  give  them  unity®.  Not  infrequently  the 
initial  stanza  contains  an  invitation,  exposition  or  some  reference  to  the  main 
subject  of  the  poem,  the  next  stanza  an  explanation  or  elaboration  of  the  theme. 
At  the  end  some  conclusion  or  recapitulation  and  a final  prayer  are  very  com- 
mon- The  more  or  less  recapitulative  recurrence  to  the  theme  (or  the  subject  or 


^ See  e.g.  Oldenbebg,  Vedaforschung,  p.  14. 

= After  dealing,  in  stanza  1,  with  the  birth  of  the  primeval  horse  the  poet  of  1,  163 
proceeds  to  mention  those  gods  who  harness  the  animal  etc.  before  saying  (in 
stanza  3)  that  it  is  identical  with  other  deities,  a statement  which  we  would  have 
expected  to  follow  mimediately  after  stanza  1.  For  other  interruptions  see  1,  164, 
12-14  (st.  13  continuing  12a;  14,  12  in  general);  2,  27,  13-15;  3,  7,  5-7. 

® See  e.g.  1, 139  (Renou,  E.  V.  P.  IV,  p.  31) ; 4,  55;  5,  43;  10,  77;  93.  The  repeated 
reference  to  Dabhiti  in  2,  15,  9 (cf.  4)  is  incomprehensible. 

* Cf.  NoB^iA>f  Bbowx,  in  JAOS  88,  p.  201. 

® Cf.  LoaniEL,  Gedichte,  p.  23. 

® See  e.g.,  RV.  1,  92,  6;  113,  16;  8,  48,  3;  11;  10,  31,  3. 

^ Cf.  Norzmdlx  Beowx,  in  Congr.  VoL  Gonda,  p.  63. 

® In  the  second  half  of  the  mandUHa  X there  are  many  exceptions. 


179 


The  Etnictiire  of  tbe  Rgveciic  poems 

situation  of  tbe  initial  stanza)  brings  about,  in  rarions  cases,  a certain  relation- 
sbip  between  the  beginning  and  the  final  part  of  the  poem®. 

There  are  of  coarse  many  possibilities  of  variation  or  complication:  the 
eulogy  may  for  instance  pa^  into  a long  prayer,  or  into  invocations  and  re- 
quests, alternating  with  a confirmation  of  the  god’s  favour^'®.  The  invitation  at 
the  beginning  is  not  infrequently  followed  by  a prayer  in  one  of  the  next 
stanzas^h  In  the  Asvin  hymns  {e.g.  1, 116-119)  the  introduction  (invitatioiis)  is 
normalk”  followed  by  a litany  listing  the  gods'  deeds  in  the  same  metre.  The 
theme  is  not  necessarily  indicated  in  the  first  stanza it  may  follow  the 
exordium^®. 

Very  often  the  theme,  though  obvionsly  viewed  as  a unit,  is  throughout  the 
hymn  broken  into  smaller  parts,  the  poet  selecting  or  emphasizing  some  aspect 
or  incident,  or  dwelling,  in  varied  wordings,  on  the  same  motives  or  episcxies^^. 
ffinor  themes,  subsidiary  to  the  larger  themes,  can  assame  various  forms 
suitable  to  different  situations.  Or  some  motives  or  secondary  themes  combine 
or  alternate  with  the  main  theme  so  as  to  form  a varied  whole : in  9, 61  eulogistic 
and  precatory  references  to  the  process  of  Soma’s  purification  succeed,  in  these 
passages  in  the  middle  of  the  hymn,  to  references  to  Indra’s  Vrtra  combat  in 
w’Mch  he  was  assisted  by  Soma — ^in  st.  22  both  themes  combine — , digressions 
on  the  draught’s  significance  for  man  and  other  matter.  So  a himm  may  expand 
and  modify  its  theme  as  it  proceeds^®  and,  although  many  poets  show  con- 
siderable skill  in  treating  a subject  without  losing  anything  that  is  essential  to 
them,  they  sometimes  are,  especially  when  the  subject  matter  is  complex, 
forced  to  leave  the  poem  a fragment  or  torso  or  to  resume  the  theme  in  another 
hymn^®. 

There  is,  in  the  elaboration  of  the  themes  and  the  distribution  of  the  descrip- 
tive elements  over  the  poems  an  unmistakable  difference  between  hjnnns 
addressed  to,  for  instance  Agni,  Usas,  Maruts  and  other  deities.  The  poems  in 
praise  of  the  Maruts^^  are  in  these  respects  more  varied,  more  precise  and  de- 
tailed. They,  moreover,  insist'  on  definite  characteristics  of  these  gods.  In  using 

* B.  ScHLEBATH,  in  Akten  24.  Intern.  Orient.  Kongr.,  Miirichen  1957  (1959),  p. 
532.  Compare  e.g.  RV.  1,  6;  17;  35;  140;  145;  2,  16;  19;  24;  3,  32  and  see  also- 
2,  28;  7,  87;  10,  40.’ 

See  e.g.  2,  23;  27;  48. 

See  1,  5;  3,  40.  Some  hymns  consist  of  one  long  invitation  and  a very^  short 
prayer  (e.g.  3,  41).  Compare  also  shorter  hymns  such  as  1,  138. 

As  e.g.  also  10,  15,  1;  23,  1;  25,  1. 

« E.g.  4,  24,  2;  6,  9,  2;  10,  31,  3;  88,  3f. 

See  e.g.  5,  2;  30;  32;  6,  39;  7,  4.  Compare  also  the  beautiful  and  well  arranged 
Usas  hymn  1,  113.  See  Hexbv,  Les  litteratures  de  ITnde,  Paris  1904,  p.  29. 

Compare  also  addresses  and  invitations  such  as  4,  4 ; 32. 

For  4,  24  see  Sieg,  Sagenstoffe,  p.  90;  for  i,  165;  169-171,  Geubneb,  RV.  I,  p. 
249;  for  4,  18,  ibidem,  I,  p.  441.  It  is  impossible  to  say  if  all  hymns  which  may^  give 
modem  readers  the  impression  of  fragments  (e.g.  5,  66;  8,  58;  9,  58;  5,  48:  Renoi:> 
E.  V.  P.  IV,  p.  76)  are  really^  torsos. 

” Rexou,  E.  V.  P.  X,  p."l. 


180 


jr.  Gouda  * Vedic  Literature 


tile  term  theme  we  should  not  forget  that  in  many  hymns — and  now  we  think 
iSrst  and  foremost  of  the  Soma  h3naQns  of  7mnd<da  IX — ^there  is  no  question  of 
any  clear  time-sequence  or  even  of  a thematic  development  proper.  Many 
poems  do  not  progress  and  their  composition  could  in  a sense  be  described  as 
cyclical  in  that  they  usually  recur  to  the  same  minor  themes  and  make  use  of 
the  same — ^it  is  true  somewhat  varied — ^images.  The  beautiful — ^almost  ‘epic/ 
yet  essentially  eulogistic — h3Tnn  1,  32  states,  in  st.  2, 4,  5 that  Indra  slew  Vrtra, 
inserting  flashbacks  in  3,  6,  11  and  12,  and  mentioning  some  details  of  the  fight 
in  6 and  7,  and  its  results  in  2,  4,  5,  7,  8 etc.,  to  return  in  the  final  stanzas  to  the 
varied  statement  that  the  god  was  triumphant. 

There  are  instances  of  special  skill  in  constructing  transitions  &om  one  theme 
or  aspect  of  a subject  to  another.  After  praising  Agni  in  the  stanzas  6-10  the 
poet  of  4,  1 proceeds  to  relate  the  Pani  myth  (13-17),  but  before  doing  so  he 
dwells,  in  two  stanzas,  on  the  god’s  birth,  adding  that  among  those  who  were 
bom  at  the  same  time  were  also  the  Angirases,  “our  human  fathers”  who  (in  13) 
are  said  to  have  taken  away  the  cows  from  the  Panis^®.  In  the  long  Indra  hymn 
8,  4 an  apostrophe  to  Pusan  (st.  15-18),  the  god  who  guides  the  travelling 
eulogist,  connects  the  hymn  proper  and  the  ddncbstuti,  A closer  connection 
between  two  successive  stanzas  can  be  achieved,  for  instance  by  continuation 
of  the  same  syntactic  structure ; by  parallelism  or  close  similarity  in  contents^®. 
Occasionally,  and  especially  in  passages  dedicated  to  a dual  deity,  a stanza  is 
followed  by  its  duplicate^®. 

On  the  other  hand,  the  poet’s  technique  made  also  possible  short  episodic 
references  to  a legendary  event,  interrupting  a definite  sequence  of  more  or  less 
•coherent  statements-^.  Another  practice  is  the  insertion  of  a larger  resume  of  a 
defimte  m3rthical  event  in  a series  of  shorter  allusions : the  poet  of  4, 33,  whilst 
enumerating  the  various  achievements  of  the  Pbhus,  needs  two  stanzas  (6f.) 
for  the  most  frequently  mentioned  exhibition  of  their  skill,  viz.  their  having 
made  one  cup  into  four^^. 

The  structure  of  a confirmation  of  divine  power  may  be  illustrated  by  the 
Indra  hymn  2, 12 : st.  1-3  recall  the  great  feats  of  the  god — the  worlds  trembled, 
he  made  firm  the  quaking  earth,  slew  the  serpent,  released  the  waters — , 5-10 
(after  a transition  in  4)  his  activities  in  the  mimdane  sphere;  11-12  refer  to 
legends;  after  a short  recapitulation  and  transition  (13)  the  poet  states  that  the 
god,  strengthened  by  the  faithful  worshipper,  will  help  him  (14f.).  The  essential 
traits  of  Visnu’s  character  are,  in  1,  154,  presented  in  a still  more  condensed 
form-®.  Other  hymns  consist  almost  exclusively  of  an  enumeration  of  the  god’s 


” For  transitions  see  also  2,  35,  10;  3,  31,  3;  7,  18,  21;  10,  56,  5. 

Cf.  e.g.  1,  164,  17 f.  (questions);  7,  66,  lOf.  (relative  clauses);  7,  1,  8f. 
E.g.  1,  108,  9f.;  8,  40,  lOf.  (Renou,  E.  V.  P.  XIV,  p.  129). 

E.g.  1,  19,  6 (Geldueb,  Auswahl,  n,  p.  69);  6,  64,  7-9. 

« Cf.  4,  16,  9-12;  30,  8-11;  10,  17,  7-9.  See  also  1,  104;  5,  85,  3f. 
Compare  also  the  typicaUy  Rudra  hymn  2,  33,  the  Agni  hymn  3,  1. 


The  stnietiire  of  tlie  Rgi’edic  poems 


181 


cosmic  and  legendary^ ^ deeds,  or  of  general  statements  of  Ms  power,  alternating 

nith  epithets  or  injimetions  to  worsMp  Mm^^. 

RV,  L 16  is  an  example  of  what  may  be  described  as  a manifoldly  varied 
inTitation.  In  stenza  i Indra's  hoi^es  are  requested  to  convey  Mm  to  the  sacri- 
ficial place:  in  2 this  request,  clothed  in  other  descriptive  words,  is  repeated; 
in  3 it  is  stated  that  In'dra  is  called  upon  in  the  morning,  in  4 and  5 he  is  invited 
directly  to  be  urged,  in  6 and  7,  to  drink  the  sofm:  st.  8 states  that  the  god 
(usually)  comes:  the  final  stanza  is  a prayer.  RT.  2,  IS  is  more  complicated: 
after  informing  the  hearer,  in  figurative  wording,  that  now,  in  the  morning,  the 
god  is  prepared  to  eome  {st.  1£),  the  poet,  continuing  the  same  imagery,  pro- 
ceeds to  invite  him  (3),  to  address  him  (in  4-6)  with  three  times  repeated 
‘“come,”  varied  vith  a climax — "‘with  two,  twenty,  eighty  bay  horses” — , and 
to  be  quite  explicit  in  7 : ‘‘come  to  my  hymn,  to  this  sacrifice” ; st.  8 is  a prayer, 
9 a stereotyped  final  stanza.  RT.  S,  25,  called  a “tj’pe  of  a static  hymn”^*, 
invokes  Varana-and-(Mitra  in  1-9;  13;  17  and,  betireen  these  addresses,  Aditi 
and  other  gods  in  10  (and  11|,  Visnii  and  Sindhn  in  12;  other  deities  in  14  (and 
15),  to  refer  again  to  the  dual  deity  in  the  dunastuti  fst.  23). 

Intelligibly  enough,  special  or  uncommon  subjects  may  require  deviations 
from  the  above  patterns  and  tendencies.  The  cosmogonic  hymns  10,  90;  121; 
129  quite  rationally  start  their  expositions  at  the  beginning  of  the  evolution 
wMch  they  try  to  describe.  The  difficult  and  complicated  hymn  1,  164  may  be 
resolved  into  three  closely  linked  divisions  each  of  wMch  purports  to  be  a part 
of  the  poet's  transcendental  visions®".  RV.  10,  127  describes  the  phenomena 
attending  the  approach  of  Xight  imploring  the  protection  of  this  goddess.  RV. 
7,  104,  wMch  the  poet  ‘‘saw  for  the  destruction  of  the  demons”®®  and  indeed 
essentially  is  a long  exorcism,  invoking  the  help  of  the  dual  deity  Indra-Soma 
against  demons  and  their  adherents,  the  ‘sorcerers,’  includes  a smaller  passage 
(14-17)  in  wMch  the  poet  clears  himself  from  the  charge  of  malpractices.  The 
composition  of  the  hymns  addressed  to  the  Visve  Devas®®  is  remarkable  in  that, 
generally  speaking,  each  stanza  is  directed  to  a different  deity,  wMch  is — in  8, 
29  even  anonymously — eulogized  by  means  of  appropriate  characteristics  and 
references.  A stracturai  principle  wMch  some  Vedic  passages  have  in  common 
with  the  Avesta  and  therefore  are  regarded  as  inherited®®  consists  in  an  enu- 
meration of  various  abodes  or  places  of  residence  of  a deity : the  well-known 
tendency  to  completeness  lest  the  deity  or  demon  addressed  can  excuse  himself 
from  coming  and  answering  the  prayer. 

Compare  e.g.  2,  15  (the  final  stanza  is  a stereotvped  request). 

« E.g.  2,  21;  3,  46;  47. 

2®  Renou,  E.  V.  R.  tTI,  p.  67.  According  to  the  anuhramaniha  the  dual  deity  is 
addressed  in  1—9  and  13-24,  the  Visve  Deva^  in  10—12. 

Nobman  Bbowx,  in  JAOS  88  (see  above). 

2®  B|*haddevata  6,  28. 

®*  See  p.  102  andcf.  REXou,inComm.  Vol. Kobel,  p.  178;  RV.  1, 186;  6, 49;  50  etc. 

« Avesta,  Yt.  12,  0-37;  RV.  1,  108,  7;  8,  12,  I6f.;  97,  4f.;  see  Lommel,  at  AO 
(L.),  10,  p.  372. 


182 


J.  Gk)nda  • Yedic  Literature 


AlthoBgli  in  ’hymns  directed  to  the  same  deities  the  same  topics  tend  to 
— a certain  monotony  has,  iTiter  cdia  in  the  Soma  hymns  of  rryandala  IX, 
more  than  once  been  noticed®-^ — examples  are  far  from  rare  in  which  two  hymns 
which  consist,  for  instance,  chiefly  of  prayers  and  invitations  addressed  to  the 
same  gods,  differ,  also  in  their  stnicture,  on  many  points.  Thns  7,  97  (Indra- 
Brhaspati)  presents  a greater  variety  of  contents  than  4,  49  (directed  to  the 
same  dual  deity);  moreover,  in  the  latter  the  deity  is  invoked  in  every  stanza, 
whereas  in  the  former  the  compound  expressing  the  name  does  nor  occur®^. 
Even  the  Apri  hymns  are  not  wholly  stereotyped.  On  closer  examination  we 
can  indeed  subscribe  to  Macdonell’s  opinion:  “When  we  consider  that  nearly 
five  hundred  hymns  of  the  Egveda  are  addressed  to  two  deities  (Indra,  Agni) 
alone,  it  is  surprising  that  so  many  variations  of  the  same  theme  should  be 
possible.”  From  a comparative  survey  of  six  successive  hymns  dedicated  to 
Varuna-and-Mtra  and  traditionally  ascribed  to  the  same  poet  (7,  60-65)  it 
appears  that  all  of  them  begin  with  paying  homage  to  the  Sun  (Surya),  the  ‘eye' 
of  the  dual  deity.  In  part  of  the  hymns  this  homage  expanded  into  a larger 
eulogy^  upon  this  divine  luminary  or  a prayer  for  Surya's  mediation.  Whereas, 
in  63,  the  double  deity  recedes  into  the  background,  it  is  in  the  other  hynnns 
circumstantially  praised.  In  60  and  62  other  gods,  especially  the  Adityas,  share 
in  this  praise.  In  60  and  64 — ^which  is  largely  precatory — ^the  poet  introduces 
prayers  on  behalf  of  king  Sudas. 

A comparison  between  a shorter  and  a longer  hymn  dedicated  to  the  same 
deity®®  and  dealing  with  the  same  subject  matter  may  show  how  in  the  latter 
this  is  elaborated  and  expanded  with  new  ideas ; 7, 102  (in  gdyatrl  metre,  stanzas 
of  24  syllables) : 

(1)  “Start  singing  to  Parjanya,  son  of  heaven,  the  bounteous! 

He  must  get  us  pasturage ! 

(2)  (He)  who  places  the  germ  into  the  plants,  the  cows, 
the  mares,  the  women,  Parjanya, 

(3)  In  his  mouth  offer  the  oblation,  the  sweetest  one. 

That  he  will  give  us  refreshment  without  check” ; 

and  in  7,  101  (in  tristubh  metre,  stanzas  of  44  syllables) : 

(1)  “Speak  out  the  three  voices  preceded  by  light,  which  Tmilk-  this  sweetness- 
yielding  udder.  Making  as  his  calf  the  germ  of  the  plants,  he,  the  bull,  bellows 
as  soon  as  (he  is)  born®"*. 

(2)  That  he  who  increases  plants,  and  waters,  the  god  who  rules  the  entire  world, 
provide  a triple  refuge  as  our  shelter,  threefold  light  for  our  protection. 

(3)  In  that  he  is  now  sterile  and  now  gives  birth,  he  makes  himself  what  he  wishes. 

« E.g.MACD020Ein,  H.  S.  L.,  p.  65;  Renotj,  E.  Y.  P.  I,  p.  46;  Elizabenkova, 

Rig\"eda,  p.  37. 

See  Gonda,  Dual  deities,  p.  322. 

Cf.  Nobmait  Bbowx,  in  XIA  2,  p.  115. 

“Speak”:  either  the  god,  or  more  plausibly.  Soma  is  addressed,  the  three 
voices  being  those  which  rise  when  the  soma  draught  is  pressed.  “Udder” : the  soma- 
press  and  the  rain  cloud. 


The  stractnre  of  the  f»g\"edic  poems 


183 


The  'mother  accepts  the  juice  of  the  father.  By  it  the  father  increases  and  the 

He  in  tthioin  all  worlds  fand  their  inhabitants]  stand  (firmly fandi  the  three 
heavens,  (from  whom'i  the  waters  fio^v  triply.  On  all  sides  the  three  vessels, 
pouring  out,  drip  abundance  of  sweetness"®. 

These  words  must  lie  in  the  heart  of  Parjanya,  the  autonoinous  king;  that  he 
will  take  delight  in  them.  Kain,  bringing  refreshinent,  must  be  ours;  the 
plants  .guarded  by  the  g.od(si  (be.*  fruitful. 

,“6  i He  IS  the  bull  impregnating  ail  female  beings.  In  him  is  the  soul  of  all  that 
rno’res  and  stands.  This  manifestation  of  the  universal  Order  must  preserve 
me  for  a hundred  autumriS®".  Preser-re  us  evermore  (,  0 gods.)  with  fortune 
and  well-being ! " ’ 


Cases  are  not  rare  in  which  these  structural  tendencies  are  made  obvious  by 
essentially  stTitaetie  or  stylistic  means  and  processes.  The  unity  of  a hymn  can, 
for  instance,  be  more  conspicuous  if  the  same  word  recurs  in  the  greater  part  of 
its  stanzas“h  In  the  Indra  hymn  I,  7 the  god  is  invoked  or  in  different  case 
forms  mentioned  by  name,  at  the  beginning  of  the  stanzas  1~5  and  10  (the  last) 
and  after  the  caesura  in  1,2  and  9 ; the  conclusion  of  this  hymn  is  not  marked 
by  a different  metre®®.  AH  stanzas  of  10,  SO  begin  with  a ease  form  of  the  name 
A.giii.  Most  stanzas  of  1,  63  begin  with  “thou”  (tram).  All  stanzas  of  10,  78, 
except  the  last  (S),  the  prayer,  consist  of  three  or  four  similes;  2-5  are  moreover 
stuitaetically  similar. 

The  poets  can  also  resort  to  grammatical  means  when  they  wish  to  distinguish 
between  the  present  time,  the  actual  past  and  the  remote  past,  which,  w^'hether 
mythical  or  historical,  they  set  almost  ahways  outside  the  normal  temporal 
scheme^®.  Sometimes  they  transfer  themselves  mentally  to  the  past  introducing 
a divine  speaker  or  addressing  a mpdhical  figure  Shifts  and  differer.ees  in  time 
are  quite  common^®.  Often  an  author  starts  his  poem  in  the  mythical  past  to 
continue — in  a prayer,  invitation  or  allusion  to  a recent  event — ^in  the  present^®. 
Or  he  returns  to  the  present  time  of  the  first  stanza A m3i:hical  fact  is  also 
transferred  to  the  present,  said  to  take  place,  that  is  to  be  reiterated,  in.  the 
present  situation^®.  This  actuality  of  a mythical  fact  can  however  also  lead  to 


Juice:  the  rain.  The  son : the  vegetable  kingdom;  the  mother  is  the  earth.  Tlie 
rain  first  increases  the  plants,  later  it  returns  to  the  clouds,  increasing  the  'father.’ 

Vessels:  the  clouds;  sweetness:  the  rain,  the  terms  aliuding  to  the  soma  vessels 
and  the  soma, 

I.e.  years. 

See  e.g.  5,  63;  6,  26  {repeated  addre^ss  with  “thoff’j;  and  cf.  1,  8,  8-10;  9,  3; 
15;  37. 

See  e.g.  also  6,  72;  74;  7,  87  (Vanina). 

For  grammatical  particulars:  J.  Gonda,  Old  Indian,  Leiden  1971,  p.  129. 

« E.g.  6,  26,  8;  31,  3. 

*=  Cf.  REXor,  E.  V.  P.  n,  V.  24. 

« E.g.  1,  104,  7;  3,  1;  5,  30,  10. 

Cf.  1,  104;  Geedxeb,  at  ZDMG  71,  p.  319. 

E.g.  3,  5,  10;  ef-  also  1,  121  and  places  such  as  2,  11,  19. 


J.  Gouda  • Vedic  Literature 


1 S4 

tlie  reverse  identification : at  o,  15,  5 the  fire,  that  has  been  kindled  while  the 
potm  is  recited,  is  said,  to  have  assisted  the  legendary  Atri^®.  Or  the  myt-hical — 
arid  legendary — events  are  presented  as  actual,  seen  so  to  say  from  the  point  of 
view  of  those  who  witnessed  them*".  The  long  address  inserted  in  10,  22  (st. 
4-14)  contains  mainly  prayers  which  are  also  ntilizable  in  the  present. 


Cf  _ako  5,  45,  3;  6.-  11;  6,  17,  3.  For  1.  6 see  A.  Veneatasubbhiah,  in  ALB 
E.g.  S,  40,  8f.  and  cf.  6,  18,  5;  13;  8,  73,  8;  6,  47;  8,  86. 


The  straeture  of  the  R,g\'edie  poems 


185 


f3.  Introdmtonj  and  firml  sianzm 

Special  attention  may  be  invitea  to  the  initial  and  final  stanzas  of  Many 
average  suktas.  The  introductory  stanza,  in  which  the  poet  enters  into  com- 
mnnicatioii  with,  the  deity,  Terr  often  contains  an  InTocation^  or  inTitation®,  a 
combinatioii  of  invocation  and  prayer®,  sometimes  only  a prayer*:  often  an 
injunction  to  start  the  hymn^  or  the  statement  that  *'we  call  on  the  god”^  or 
that  the  reciters  invoke  or  have  invoked  him’ ; or  that  the  poet  has  made  the 
hymn®  or  that  he  (the  reciter)  mtends  to  pronoiinee  it,  proelaiming  the  god's 
glorioiis  deeds®,  that  he  ‘‘brings”  or  offers  it^®;  there  are  also  references  to 
sacrificial  ceremonies^^,  to  the  moment  or  occasion  of  reciting^^  often  clothed  in 
suitable  imagery ; to  general  and  appropriate  truths^® ; sometimes  the  deity  is 
roused  to  activity^*,  or  Ms  presence  or  activity  is  stated^®.  Elsewhere  the  author 
begins  with  a statement  of  the  god's  functions,  power  or  significance^®;  signifies 
Ms  intention  to  proclaim  a god's  deeds^’ ; puts  one  or  more  questions  about  the 
latter’s  origin  or  identity^®. 

There  are  of  course  many  possibilities  of  variation.  The  poet  of  10,  61^* 
created  a very  successful  poem  in  wMch  the  thought:  “This  will  be  a hymn 
approved  of  by  the  audience,  wMch  will  lead  producers  and  priests  to  their 
goal”  is  expressed  in  solemn  and  suitable  wording.  The  single  ^da  at  the 
beginning  of  10,  20  imploring  felicitous  inspiration  preludes  the  indications  of 
the  topic  to  be  dealt  with  f adhikdra ) of  the  later  suira  style.  The  exordium,  as 
a rule  comparatively  short,  is  sometimes  expanded  into  a long  introduction: 
in  2,  21  (six  stanzas)  it  covers  just  the  first  half  of  the  hiunn,  but  the  author 
knows  how  to  introduce  an  amount  of  variation:  “. . . offer  soma  to  Indra; 
. . . pay  homage  to  Indra ; 1 shall  proclaim  Indra’s  heroic  deeds”®®.  The 


1 E.g.  RV.  1,  1;  12;  4,  20;  cf.  2,  23. 

* E.g.  1,  2;  3;  9;  14;  19;  4,  16;  10,  44. 

® E.g.  1,  8;  13;  4,  9. 

* E.g.  1,  17;  18;  10,  38. 

« E.g.  1,  5;  2,  17;  10,  42. 

® E.g.  1,  4;  cf.  2,  28. 

^ E.g.  1,  7;  10. 

» E.g.  1,  20;  cf.  10,  43. 

» E.g.  2,  15. 

E.g.  2,  16;  27;  4,  10;  33. 

E.g.  2,  19,  20;  21;  22;  3,  19;  5,  34. 

« E.g.  1,  6;  2,  18;  22;  4,  10;  10,  35;  7,  60ff. 

» E.g.  2,  25;  26. 

E.g.  4,  4;  6. 

E.g.  in  the  Agni  li.ym.ns  4,  7;  11;  13;  14;  in  the  Soma  hymns  9,  5;  9;  12. 

E.g.  2,  40;  3,  5;  11;  14;  16;  25;  46. 

E.g.  2,  15;  3,  2;  cf.  3,  39;  51;  61. 

“ E.g.  5,  53,  If.;  61,  Iff.;  10,  40,  1. 

Cf.  Haug,  Ai.  B.  I,  p.  23;  Pischel,  Y.  S.  I,  p.  71;  S.  A.  Daxge,  at  JIH  45, 
p.  369. 

*0  Cf.  e.g.  also  3,  55,  1-3;  6,  68;  7,  34;  10,  31,  1-5. 


1S6 


J.  Gonda  * Yedic  Literature 


poet  of  10,  89,  after  expressing,  in  a long  exordium  (st.  1-4),  Ms  intention  to 
praise  Indra — ^in  which  however,  suiting  the  action  to  the  word,  he  anticipates 
the  eulogies  which  are  to  follow  in  st.  5-7 — ^passes  (in  st.  8)  over  to  an  appeal  to 
the  god  in  Ms  capacity  of  an  avenger  willing  to  bring  the  wicked  to  justice. 
Words  of  praise  are  however  in  the  eleven  stanzas  of  the  second  part  not  lacking. 
In  10,  62  the  stanzas  1-7,  addressing  the  Ahgirases,  constitute  a prologue  to 
the  dMnmiuti  in  st.  8-11. 

There  are  however  also  h3rinns  without  an  exordium.  Thus  1,  6 and  7,  33 
be.giii  abruptly  and  1, 152,  directed  to  Yaruna  and  Mtra^^,  begin  with  a eulogy 
wMeh  fin  st.  2)  changes  into  a series  of  enigmas,  the  solution  of  wMch  is  (in  5) 
said  to  depend  on  the  two  gods  who  recompense  the  one  who  finds  it ; the  final 
stanza  is  a prayer®^.  Cases  are  not  absent  in  wMch  the  poet,  omitting  any  intro- 
duction, brings  Ms  hearers  in  medias  res-^,  or  in  wMch  he  repeatedly  returns  to 
his  starting  point,  India’s  Yrtra  combat^^.  In  1,  104,  2 the  transition  between 
the  invitation  in  stanza  1 and  the  mytMcal  story — commemorated  to  urge  the 
god  to  helpfulness — is  abrupt. 

It  would  take  too  long  to  make  an  attempt  at  describing  all  structural 
features  of  the  final  portions  of  the  hymns,  hut  some  of  them  may  be  worth 
mentioning,  the  more  so  as  there  is  an  unmistakable  tendency  to  mark,  in  some 
way  or  other,  the  conclusion  of  a composition.  RY.  1,  115  is  an  instance  of  a 
sulia  which  at  the  end  returns  to  the  idea  expressed  in  the  beginning : it  opens 
and  closes  with  emphasis  upon  the  rising  aspect  of  the  sun^^.  A repetition  of  the 
addre^,  prayer  or  invocation  of  the  beginning  of  the  poem  in  the  last  stanza  is 
rather  frequent^*.  Elsewhere  the  closing  of  a hymn  is  a sort  of  recapitulation  or 
repetition  of  some  thoughts  expressed  in  the  preceding  staMas^^.  Or  the  char- 
acter of  the  poem  and  the  aim  of  its  maker  are,  after  various  words  of  praise, 
references  to  the  god's  acMevement  etc.,  mentioned  in  the  last  stanza  or  stanzas 
and  followed  only  by  a prayer-®.  If  a hymn  is  to  be  recited,  or  at  least  utilizable 
for  the  fulfilment  of  special  desires,  the  final  stanza  formulates  that  wish : 5,  78, 
addressed  to  the  divine  helpers  and  physicians,  the  Alvins,  which  consists  of 
three  triplets  constituting  an  invitation,  praise  and  prayer,  ends  in  a prayer  for 
a pros'perous  deliver}’  after  a normal  pregnancy^®.  Xot  infi-equently  the  final 
stanza  mentions  a larger  number  of  gods  than  the  preceding  parts  of  the  sulda^^. 


feee  L.  Rexou,  in  Journal  de  psychologie  1949,  p.  266  (=  BhY  10,  p.  133). 

” See  e.g.  also  2,  25;  5,  32;  38;  55;  63;  7,  87;  10,  78. 

» E.g.  7,  33,  1. 

“ Cf.  e.g.  1,  32  (cf.  Renou,  H.  P.,  p.  9). 

S.  D,  Ateins,  in  JAOS  58,  p.  419.  Cf.  also  2,  33;  3,  16;  10,  61 
« E.g.  1,  7;  2,  35;  7,  60;  10,  122. 

4ft*  l^J  cf.  6,  49,  15.  RY.  5, 

9 IS  an  explanation  of  the  arikavMa  type. 

E.g.  1,  51;  3,  11;  cf.  also  2,  35;  4,  38;  6,  28. 

« See  below;  Geldneb,  Auswahl,  H,  p.  87;  Gonba,  Rgvidhina,  p.  49.  For  a 
mmetre  of  final  ‘spel  stanzas’  (e.g.  3, 33, 13)  see  Ausdobf,  in  JOIB  13,  p.  207. 

±^.g.  2,  32;  40;  3,  20;  4,  54;  7,  82. 


Tlie  stracture  of  the  Pfe:gvedie  poenis 


187 


That  is  not  to  say  that  a simple  prayer,  addressed  to  the  god  of  the  hymii,  is  a 
rare  occurrence®^.  This  prayer  may,  in  varied  wording,  be  a request  to  accept 
the  hj’imi®-,  a renewed  invitation^®,  the  statement  that  it  is  welcome  to  the  god. 
Or  it  mentions  the  god’s  activity  or  benevolence®^.  The  &ia!  stanza  sometimes 
addresses  the  reciters  or  the  audience  or  stimulates  them  into  a display  of  their 
eulogistic  ability®®.  As  to  its  outward  form,  mention  must  be  made  of  the 
ert-ension  put  to  it,  sometimes  by  means  of  a repetition  of  some  of  the  preceding 
words,  e.g.  5,  21,  4 . . . rtdsya  yoram  dsGdah,  sasmya  yoram  isaiah}^. 

Thus  final  stanzas  often  intemipt  the  order  in  which  the  subject  mattcT  has 
been  expanded;  deviating  from  it  they  can  bring  abont  a 'destmctnration’®". 
In  many  hymns,  however,  the  last  stanza  cannot  be  said  to  have  any  tt'jiical 
feature ; the  poem  has  simply  reached  its  close.  The  poet,  who  could  have  added 
more  stanzas  of  a similar  character,  ends.  Instances  are  the  ennmeratit'e  h^/inns, 
such  as  the  Apri-suktas  and  those  addressed  to  mamr  gods  addressed  individ- 
ually®®. 

Some  hymns  end  in  a real  epilogue.  The  Agri  hymn  3,  6,  after  praising  the 
god  in  general  terms,  in  particular  (st.  1-6)  as  the  mtermediary  between 
worshippers  and  gods,  proceeds  to  implore  him  to  convey  the  gods  who  approve 
of  Ms  activity  to  the  sacrificial  place  (st.  7-10).  The  last  stanza  of  3,  31 
whilst  expressing  the  wish  that  this  poem  be  identical  with  its  mythical  proto- 
type, states  its  intentions,  viz.  the  winning  of  the  god’s  favour*®.  An  epilogue 
may  be  recognizable  by  the  absence  of  features  common  to  the  preceding 
stanzas,  for  instance  a refrain*^,  by  a different  metre*®  or  in  general  by  a 
^destructiiration.’  In  2,  12  the  elaboration  of  the  theme  continues  in  st.  13, 
which  is  structurally  different  jfrom  the  preceding  stanzas  describing  India’s 
feats  and  character;  st.  14  expresses  the  poet’s  confidence  in  Ms  help;  the  last 
stanza  is  without  refrain. 

Mention  has  already  been  made  of  the  ddnastuiis  as  concluding  portions*®. 
Another  peculiarity  of  some  Rgvedic  hymms  is  an  atharvanic  ending,  that  is  the 

E.g.  1,  1;  5;  6;  7;  12;  16;  21;  2,  21;  23;  34;  4,  36,  8f.;  5,  49,  5. 

E.g.  1,  8;  10;  12;  17;  3,  12. 

E.g.  1,  19;  3,  40;  41;  42;  47. 

3^  E.g,  1,  2;  3;  2,  26. 

E.g.  1,  4;  9;  cf.  also  6,  45,  33  and  5,  45,  11  (see  Renou,  E.  Y.  F.  IT,  p.  72). 

Cf.  e.g.  5,  7;  16;  18,  20ff.;  6,  42;  10,  166. 

Renou,  E.  V.  P.  IV,  p.  6;  cf.  e.g.  1,  29,  7;  4,  55,  10;  5,  41,  20;  42,  17f.;  6,  49, 
15  (no  names  of  gods). 

E.g.  1,  13;  22,  5,  46;  51,  and  see  1,  28;  33;  41,  42;  5,  48;  6,  46.  For  1,  103  see 
Geldneb,  at  ZDMG  71,  p.  319. 

Cf.  also  Geedneb,  AuswaM,  EL,  p.  48. 

See  also  3,  30,  15-22;  4,  16,  20-21;  5,  61,  17-19;  6,  51,  13-16  (in  other  metres); 

10,  15,  12-14. 

« See  1,  185,  9-11. 

« E.g.  1,  101,  8-11. 

« See  p.  170. 


1S8 


J.  Gonda  • Vedic  Literature 


aclciltioii,  at  the  end  of  a suMa,  of  a stanza  or  a group  of  stanzas  whicli  are 
either—be  it  witli  some  differences— found  also  in  the  AtharTaveda^*  or  are 
athsrvanic  in  contents^®.  In  the  first  case  the  stanza  may  have  been  quoted  or 
feorrowed  by  the  other  corpus.  Some  final  stanzas,  whether  they  are  of  this  t37pe 
or  more  eonformable  to  the  rest  of  the  hymn,  may  create  the  impression  of 
being  additions  or  supplements^®.  The  tendency  to  variation  or  amplification  at 
the  end  of  a division  {*song’)  was  to  characterize  many  poetic  compositions  of 
later  times. 


3 **>  ® 1 (TS. 

s’  B8  inf  A®'  stanzas  of  AV.  7,  58  are  RV. 

S,  68,  lOf.  (see  GoiroA,  Dual  deities,  p.  261)  , oo  nr 

“Cf.l,23.I6ff.;8,47,  13ff. 

“ E.g.  1,  135,  9;  7,  59,  12. 


Tile  structure  of  the  Rg^'edic  poems 


18§ 


4,  Groufings  of  stanzas 

Many  hymns'  ia  praise  of  one  or  more  gods  show  a consistent  grouping  of 
stanzas.  The  most  common  grouping  is  that  in  triplets  the  htmin  con- 

sisting of  any  mimber  of  units  composed  of  three  stanzas.  Sometimes  this 
, grouping  is  easier  to  determine  by  the  number  of  stanzas  being  a multiple  of 
three  or  by  changes  in  the  metre  after  each  third  stariza  than  bir  disturbanees  of 
the  continiiity  of  the  subject-matter  dealt  with  disconnected  as  it  usually  is®. 
Yet  cases  present  themselves  in  which  the  same  syntactic  or  stylistic  features 
recur  In  every  third  stanza  so  as  to  mark  a grouping  in  triplets^.  Or,  what  is  more 
usual,  three  successive  stanzas  stand  out  by  a common  feature,  fox  instance 
identity  of  or  correspondence  in  their  initial  words  or  by  the  use  of  the  same 
metre®.  In  some  suktm  a final  triplet  difters  in  this  respect  from  the  preceding 
part  of  the  hymn,  which,  then,  may  in  itself  also  be  composed  of  groups  of  three 
stanzas’.  In  other  suktm  all  or  some  successive  triplets  are  dfrected  to  different 
deities®. 

Not  infrequently  the  other  samkitds  and  the  hrahmana  texts  quoting  from 
the  Rgveda-Samhita  furnish  us  with  valuable  information  on  this  fioint.  The 
large  majority  of  the  triplets  quoted  in  the  Rgveciic  hmhmanm  are  clearly 
recognizable  as  such  in  the  Samhita®,  and  interestingly  enough  these  works 
sometimes  apply  the  term  sulM  to  parts  of  the  hymn  which  in  our  Samhita  text 


^ See  e.g.  1,  12;  25;  4,  30;  32;  7,  15;  8,  9;  12;  13;  23;  98.  Cases  are  not  lacking  in 
which  only  part  of  a hymn  consists  of  triplets  (e.g.  1,  4;  26;  84;  6,  52;  8,  15;  80). 

® The  term  was  already  used  in  the  B|*haddevata  2,  17;  126. 

3 For  particulars:  Auxold,  o.c.,  p.  234;  Renou,  E.  Y.  P.  II,  p.  4.  Oldenbeeg, 
in  ZDMG  38,  p.  451  (=  K.  S.  p.  525),  who  rightly  distinguishes  between  suktm 
consisting  of  trcas  and  combinations  of  originally  separate  groupings  which  came  to 
constitute  one  sukta;  it  is  not  always  possible  to  arrive  at  a decision.  {See  also 
Bebgaigxe  at  JA  1889  (I  = 8-13),  p.  131).  Oedenbeeg  was  also  right  in  criticizing 
the  way  of  distinguishing  groups  of  stanzas  followed  by  K.  F.  Geedneb  and  A. 
EIaegi,  Siebenzig  Lieder  des  Rigveda,  Tubingen  1875. 

^ Cf.  8,  34;  8,  35  (recurrences  of  identical  padm  on  corresponding  places).  How- 
ever, features  of  this  kind  are  often  limited  to  part-  of  a hymn  {e.g.  6,  16;  1 ; 7;  13 ; 

7,  31,  3;  6;  9,  61,  6;  9;  12);  cf.  also  5,  26. 

^ E.g.  1,  2;  1,  25,  7-9;  38,  1-3;  4,  30,  4-6;  13  (I2)-18;  5,  25,  4-6;  8,  12  {rhvme); 
64,  7-9;  96,  16-18;  9,  61,  16-18;  cf.  also  4,  32,  19-21;  9,  64,  1-3.  The  three  stanzas 
of  a triplet  expre.ss  the  same  thought  in  a varied  form:  1,  2,  4-6;  3,  1-3;  4-6;  7-9. 
« Cf.  e.g.  1,  84;  3,  51;  62;  6,  44;  52;  7,  31;  see  also  5,  27;  6,  71. 

’ E.g.  1,  28,  1-6  anmtvhh,  7-9  gaya^rli  3,  26;  7,  31,  1-9  gayairi,  10-12  viraj; 

8,  34;  cf.  also  2,  32;  4,  55;  56;  in  8,  74  the  danmtwli  at  the  end  is  in  another  metre 
( anustuhh  ) , 

« E.g.  1,  3;  43;  for  1,  23  see  Gelbneb,  RY.  I,  p.  22.  Compare  also  8,  76  (in  1-9 
Indra  and  the  Marats;  in  10-12  Indra  alone). 

® OldejsTBEEG,  O.C.,  p.  474  (p.  548).  See  e.g.  AiB.  3,  1 (RY.  1,  2,  1—3  etc.);  3,  2,  4 
(RV.  1,  2,  1-3);  3,  29,  4 (RY.  5,  82,  1-3);  4,  29,  7 {?.Y.  8,  68,  1-3);  KB.  21,  4 (RY. 
6,‘70,  4-6). 


m 


J.  Gonda  • Yedic  Literature 


actually  are  trcm^^.  MorwTer,  the  Uttararcika  of  the  Sainaveda,  presenting  the 
complete  texts  used  in  their  liturgical  order,  mostly  quotes  these  as  tnplets^^. 
It  may  suffice  to  add  one  detail:  no  less  than  about  50  triplets  taken  from  all 
masalas  were  utilized  in  the  agnistoma^^.  In  ail  probability  these  trcas  or  poetic 
compcsitions  in  trm  form — and  often  in  the  gdyatrl  metre — ^were  from  an  early 
m%e,  or  eYen  from  the  beginning,  intended  to  be  sung  by  the  udgatar  and  his 
assistants. 

Of  the  other  groupings  of  stanzas  mention  can  only  be  made  of  the  dyads^® 
an  example  of  which  is  the  short  hymn  RV.  3,  28  consisting  of  three  dyads 
which  are  explicitly  intended  for  the  offering  of  rice-cakes  in  the  morning,  at 
noon  and  in  the  evening^*.  Two  stanzas  in  different  mixed  metres  are  often 
combined  so  as  to  form  a strophe.  Thus  1,  36  consists  of  alternating  hrhoMs  (8,  8, 
12,  S)  and  saiobrhails  (12,  8,  12,  8)^®.  Comparatively  rare  in  the  Rgveda,  this 
tj’pe  of  pragdtha  is  found  chiefly  in  mariMla  VIII.  RV.  4,  31  may  be  quoted  as 
an  instance  of  a combination  of  dyads  and  triplets.  Other  hymns  are  partly 
composed  of  triplets,  partly  of  stanzas  or  groups  of  stanzas  in  other  metres 
which  in  some  cases  may  have  been  secondary  intercalations^®. 


® *®™1  trca);  KB.  22,  4 

<RV.  6,  7Ij;  ef.  Keith,  R.  B.,  p.  470,  n.  2.  ' 

‘‘  Tims  two  of  the  five  triplets  in  gayatri  metre  of  RV.  3,  27  are,  at  different 

Peaces,  used  in  the  ritual  (see  e.g.  SS.  5,  14,  H;  1,  4^  g). 

The  obser\"ations  at  the  time  made  by  Bebgaigne  (JA  1889,  8-13,  p.  123) 
Se  ^ re-formulated  in  the  light  of  our  present  knowledge  of 


.,  particulars  and  less  usual  combinations  see  AjEiNOtD,  o.c.,  p. 

51  if  P-  20  et®-  cf.  Isvg.  5,  4,  6; 

,13.  bee  also  3,  5-  mentionmg  the  same  three  oblations;  5,  73 
“ bee  e.g.  also  I,  39;  44;  48;  6,  46;  7,  16. 

E.g.  1,  93  (see  Bebgaigne,  at  JA  1889  (I  = 8-13),  p.  26). 


228. 
gg.  14, 


The  straotiire  of  the  R^'edic  poems 


191 


5.  ^ Composite^  hymns 


Many  hymns  of  different  metre  have  been  regarded  as  owing  their  genesis 
to  the  combination  of  originally  separated  compositions  of  smaller  compass^. 
However,  in  part  of  the  instances  adduced  there  are,  apart  from  the  principles 
followed  by  the  redactors  in  arranging  these  hymns,  hardly  objective  and 
convincing  arguments  in  favour  of  this  supposition.  In  a hymn  such  as  that 
dedicated  to  Mtra  (3,  59)^  we  can,  it  is  true,  distinguish  between  a former  part 
(tristubh),  in  which  the  god’s  functions  and  benevolence  are  eonnneiiiorated 
and  the  wish  is  expressed  to  be  in  his  good  graces,  and  a second  part  (of  four 
gayatrl  stanzas)  in  praise  of  his  assistance,  greatness  and  protection ; the  pos- 
sibility of  composition,  by  means  of  partly  pre-existent  material,  by  one  and 
the  same  poet  can  how^ever  by  no  means  be  excluded®.  Secondary^  composition 
by  a redactor  has  also  been  assumed  in  cases  such  as  the  beautiful  Vanina 
h^^mn  5,  85,  not  on  metrical  considerations — it  is  in  tristubh  throughout — but 
because  at  a certain  point  (in  emu  after  stanza  4)  there  seems  to  begin  something 
new;  actually  how'-ever  the  poet,  through  changing  his  s^iatactic  and  stylistic 
devices,  continues  his  exposition  of  Vanina’s  miraculous  powder. 

There  are  hymms  which,  though  impressing  us  as  bipartite — ^for  instance, 
because  of  a closing  prayer  somewhere  in  the  middle  (4,  50,  6) — constitute  a 
coherent  whole:  the  first  part  of  4,  50  eulogizes  the  god  Brhaspati,  Indra’s 
domestic  priest,  the  second  his  earthly  representative,  the  king’s  priest^. 
Although  the  family  hymn  of  the  Visvamitra’s  (3,  53)  consists  of  no  less  than 
five  clearly  distinct  parts  and  the  reminiscences  of  the  family’s  history^  are 
loosety  strung  together,  it  is  no  doubt  conceived  as  a single  whole  intended  for 
the  glorification  of  the  ancestor®.  We  find  more  curious  instances  of  ‘composi- 
tion.’ In  7,  1 (1-18  virdj,  19-25  tristubh)  the  final  stanza,  including  a prayer  for 
Agni’s  blessing,  is  already  anticipated  as  st.  20,  a fact  that  gives  the  suMa  the 
indisputable  character  of  a ‘double  hymn,’  the  smaller  second  part  of  which  is 
clearly  an  addendum  to  avert  the  god’s  anger  and  to  win  his  favour.  In  a case 
such  as  5,  78  the  probabilities  are  strongly^  in  favour  of  the  supposition  that  a 
charm  or  conjuration  (st.  7-9)  has  been  secondarily  added  to  an  Aivin  hymiji 
consisting  of  an  invitation  (in  another  metre:  1-3)  and  myrihical  material®.  In 
other  cases  the  connection  betw’een  two  parts  of  a hymn  is  not  clear^,  not- 
withstanding the  fact  that  a thorough  study  of  the  texts  in  relation  to  the  other 


1 GBASSaiAmN,  RV.  ubers.,  was  among  those  who  were  mueh  inclined  to  distin- 
guish between  earlier  and  later  or  spurious  component  parts  of  Rg\'edic  hymins; 
see  e.g.  Abnoud,  at  KIZ  37,  p.  218;  Bloomfield,  at  JAOS  21,  p.  44. 

^ See  Oldenbebg,  Noten,  I,  p.  258;  P.  Thleme,  Mitra  and  Aryaman,  Connecticut 
Acad.  1957,  p.  57;  Renou,  E.  V.  P.  VII,  p.  8;  Goxda,  3Iitra,  p.  100. 

® For  ‘composite’  hymns  (in  different  metres)  see  e.g.  also  1,  91;  92;  191;  4,  55; 
56;  6,  71. 

^ Cf.  Geldneb,  Auswahl,  II,  p.  77. 

® Cf.  Geld^stee,  Auswahl,  II,  p.  56;  B*V.  I,  p.  392. 


im 


J.  Gonda  • Yedic  Literature 


Vedic  literature  (quotationSj  ritual  applications)  on  one  Land  and  the  practi- 
cabilities of  Tedic  life  and  religion  on  the  other  has  vindicated  many  so-called 

appendages®. 

Leaving  the  question  as  to  the  genesis  of  the  poems  as  we  have  them  now 
andecided  att-ention  may  be  drawn  to  some  other  instances  of  so-called  compo- 
site snkias.  RV.  1,  50  consists  of  a hymn  addressed  to  the  Sun  (Surya)  and  (in 
another  metre)  a short.er  spell  against  jaundice,  of  which  that  deity  is  expected 
to  cure  the  person  speaking.  RY.  8,  47  is  composed  of  a longer  general  part  in 
•which  the  Adltyas  are  implored  for  the  deliverance  firom  evil  and  a shorter 
special  section  addressing  Usas  and  aiming  at  the  annihilation  of  the  results 
of  a had  dream.  Even  among  the  shorter  hymns  there  are  not  a few  which  can 
fee  divided  into  some  clearly  distinct  parts.  In  6,  59,  st.  1-2  are  in  praise  of 
the  dual  deity  Indra-Agni,  in  3-4  they  are  invited  to  the  soma  draught ; 5-6 
deal  with  riddles  in  connection  with  Agni,  7-10  contain  prayers  and  another 
invitation.  Whereas  in  this  case  the  unity  of  subject  is  unquestionable,  other 
mkim—e.  g.  5, 40®;  9,  61--make  the  impression  of  more  or  less  casual  conglom- 
erates, of  combinations  of  parts  without  any  organic  connection^®.  In  6,  48  we 
can  distinguish  four  parts  which  are  directed  to  Agni,  the  Maruts,  Pusan,  and, 
again,  the  Maruts. 

Cases  may  present  themselves  in  which  the  arrangement  of  a number  of 
stanzas  in  the  ritual  literature  is  more  harmonious  and  satisfactory  than  the 
grouping  of  the  same  collections  in  our  Rgveda-Samhita.  In  RY.  6,  47,  the 
family  hymn  of  the  Bharadvajas,  stanza  1-10  looks  like  an  invocation  (sastra ) 
of  Indra  for  the  midday  pressing  of  the  soma;  Indra  is  invoked  m 11-13  and 
praised  in  14-21  (the  story  of  Ms  enemy  Sambara) ; 22-25  constitute  a ddnastvii. 
So  far  the  stmcture  of  the  sukta  is  clear,  but  st.  26—31  are  a strange  appendix, 
consisting  of  two  military  charms  and  constituting  a ‘Waffensegen’ : as  such 
they  occur  in  the  Atharvaveda-SamMta  as  6,  125  and  126  where  they  are  to 
further  the  success  of  a war-chariot  and  a war-drum.  In  the  ritual  texts  these 
SIX  stanms  are  however  combined  with  the  first  fourteen  verses  (or  another 
numfeer  of  stanzas)  of  R\ . 6,  75,  another  ‘Waffensegen’  intended  to  accom- 
pany the  putting  on  of  the  armour  by  a king  and  the  preparation  and  equip- 
fflent  of  his  war-chariot*^. 


* in  JGJRI  27  (1971),  p.  1;  see  above. 

p.- 1“:  i.  JA  I8S9(I  . 8-13).  p.  153, 

^ Mishra,  AUahabad  1970,  p.  511. 

• 20.  16,  4^14.  For  details-  V M Aptb 

*n  ..iddha-Bbaxati,  Vol.  Siddbeshwar  Vanna.  I,  Hoshiarpur  1950,  p.  123. 


The  structure  of  the  Rg\'€iiie  poems 


193 


6,  Similarities  and  repetitions 

That  commiinities  on  the  same  lerel  of  cnltnre  and  aciherii3,g  to  the  same 
religion  resort-ed,  in  their  literary  productions,  to  similar  imagery  an;cl  phraseo- 
logy is  not  surprising.  The  pertinent  facts  do  not  in  all  cases  point  to  direct  or 
indirect  borroidng  on  the  part  of  the  poets.  Anyhoir,  more  or  less  striMng 
similarities  between  two  ht'tnns  are  far  from  rare.  We  shoiild  distingnisli  between 
a general  similarity  between,  andarecinTence  of  the  same  details  in , two  successive 
hjmns  ascribed  to  the  same  author^  on  one  hand  and  a relationship  in  phraseol- 
ogy etc.  between  other  suktas  and  stanzas  on  the  other^.  For  instance,  a special 
tie  connects  the  two  A^vin  hymns  of  the  same  length  (25  stanzas|  RY,  1,  116 
and  117  ascribed  to  Kaksivat  and  showing  close  verbal  correspondences®. 
There  are  however  also  similar  passages  in  non-snccessive  hymns  of  one  and 
the  same  poet^. 

Of  greater  importance  are  the  very  numerous  close  similarities  and  partial 
repetitions  found  throughout  the  Rgvedic  corpus  and  the  other  collections  of 
Vedic  mantras.  Verse  units  often  appear  either  in  exactly  the  same  or  in  a 
more  or  less  changed  form  in  tw'o  or  more  places^.  In  many  cases  the  variations 
in  form  suit  the  differences  in  theme,  especially  the  differences  in  the  deity 
addressed.  The  changes  may,  of  course,  also  be  imposed  by  the  use  of  different 
metres.  It  is  difficult  to  define  the  boundary  line  separating  similarities  proper 
and  more  or  less  varied  repetition.  Although  there  are  hymns  of  related  tenor 
which  avoid  verbal  repetitions  of  the  length  of  a pdda*,  this  community  of 
material  is  proper  to  hymns  of  obviously  ritualistic  contents  as  well  as  to  the 
mythic  or  legendary  passages.  As  to  the  former’  it  may  be  supposed  that  the 
poets  drew  partly  on  ancient,  prehistoric  formularies,  partly  on  the  works  of 
their  predecessors  which  they  had  memorized®.  Within  the  latter  category  of 


^ See  e.g.  the  Indra  hymns  4,  24  and  25;  34  and  35;  10,  42  and  43.  No  more  than 
passing  mention  can  be  made  of  those  correspondences  between  hymns  which  are 
of  interest  from  the  point  of  view  of  their  liturgical  use.  The  hymns  7,  1 ; 7,  34  and 
7,  56,  all  of  them  consisting  of  the  same  number  (25)  of  stanzas,  were  used  on  the 
same  day  in  the  same  ritual  (cf.  SS.  10,  5,  2;  23;  24). 

2 Including  cases  such  as  e.g.  10,  27,  6;  7,  18,  16;  10,  28,  6;  6,  18,  13. 

® Bloomfieud,  Repetitions,  p.  18. 

^ E.g.  4,  34,  3 and  4;  37,  1 and  3. 

^ For  a detailed  discussion  of  all  pertinent  problems  see  BrooiEFiEiiD,  Repetit- 
ions, p.  1 ; for  an  exhaustive  treatment  of  the  variant  readings  in  the  repeated 
mantras  Bloomfield  and  Edgeeton,  Variants.  See  also  Bloomfield,  in  AJPh  1 i 
(1890),  p.  342. 

® E.g.  9,  104  and  105. 

’ The  apri  hymns  1,  13  and  1,  142  have  no  less  than  six  padas  in  common.  For 
parallelism  in  wording  and  structure  see  also  3,  28  (Agni)  and  3,  52  (Indra);  5,  40 
and  5,  78  (Bebgaigne,  in  JA  1888,  p.  20);  compare  also  cases  such  as  9,  104  and 
105. 

® See  p.  15  and  Aijfeecht,'H.  R.  II,  p.  12. 


m 


J,  Gbnda  • Yedic  Literature 


suMm  the  hymns  addreffied  to  the  same  deities — especially  to  the  deities  of 
marked  physiognomy  and  a characteristic  mythology  or  legendary — are  very 
often  connected  by  recurrent  expressions®.  It  seems  that  the  earlier  poets  had 
exploited  these  themes  so  thoroughly  that  nothing  was  left  for  their  successors 
but  to  follow  their  habits^®.  Yet,  even  in  cases  of  more  than  average  resemblance 
it  is  in  all  probability  safer  to  take  the  line  that  two  hymns  were  composed 
indepeiidently  than  that  one  was  more  or  less  consciously  modelled  upon  the 
other.  This  does  not  however  alter  the  fact  that,  as  far  as  we  are  able  to  see, 
the  Indians  then  already  had  what  we  would  call  an  imperfect  sense  of  literary 
proprietoraMp. 

The  similarity  of  Vedic  stanzas  is  often  due  to  identical  cadences^^,  recur- 
reiK^s  of  words  being  much  more  frequent  at  the  end  of  padas — ^and  prose 
formulas — ^than  at  the  beginning.  As  a rule  the  repeated  phrases  do  not  embrace 
more  than  two  or  three  words  of  a given  cadence,  but  sometimes  a longer 
formulaic  succession  creates  the  semblance  of  repeated  pddas^^.  These  cadences 
are  to  a considerable  extent  extremely  formidaic  set  phrases  consisting,  for 
instaiice,  of  a noun  with  a fixed  adjective — e.g.  hhUva/tidni  viivd  the  worlds 

(and  their  inhabitants)” — ^verbs  with  an  object — e.g.  irudM  hdvam  ‘‘hear  (my) 
invocation.” 

The  number  of  repetitions  in  the  Rgveda  is  indeed  considerable.  Groups  of 
stanzas,  stanzas,  parts  of  stanzas,  lines  and  pddus,  repeated  entirely  or  partially 
amount  perhaps  to  a total  of  about  2400^®.  The  padas  being  repeated  on  the 
average  nearly  2^^  times  make  a total  of  about  6000^^.  In  addition  to  this 
there  are  about  150  refrain  padas,  repeated  a total  of  about  1000  times.  That 
means  that  the  total  of  repeated  pMas,  ah  included,  probably  concerns  not 
less  than  one-fifth  of  the  entire  corpus.  However,  the  number  of  variants,  formal 
as  well  as  syntactic  and  stylistic,  occurring  in  the  repeated  rmniras  is  enormous  : 
there  are  many  inflexional  variations  and  much  more  numerous  shifts  between 
nominal  cases,  singular  and  plural,  words  and  so  on.  It  is  self-evident  that  these 
re|«titions  can  be  made  helpful  for  the  interpretation  of  the  text,  the  proper 
estimate  of  its  metrical  habits  and  sometimes  also  for  questions  regarding  the 
restive  chronology  of  hymns  or  stanzas^®. 

A considerable  number  of  stanzas  are,  throughout  the  Veda,  repeated  either 
m the  same  or  in  different  books  in  any  part  of  a sukta.  In  the  Rgveda  there 


» E.g.  4,  33,  8:  36,  2;  3,  10:  1,  1;  3,  1:  2,  35. 

Re^titions,  p.  19.  For  the  formulaic  character  and  the 
Significance  of  these  repetitions:  P.  Poucha,  ArchOr  13,  p.  257 

Bloomfield,  o.c.,  p.  lO;  653.  , p. 

» «.  e.g.  3,  46,  2 (6,  36,  4):  5,  85,  3;  9,  97,  56:  10,  168,  2. 
j,  o.e.,  p.  4;  for  a classification,  ibidem,  p.  491. 

xiepetitions  in  the  same  hymn  not  included 

of  P-  ^eots  of  a study 

ibidem, ^571  Bloomhuld,  Repetitions.  Introduction;  for  their  themes! 


The  structure  of  the  Rgvedic  poems 


195 


are  23  of  them,  repeated  each  a single  tiine^®s  not  including  the  recurrences  of 
substantiaily  identical  but  somewhat  varied  stanzas. 

The  majority  of  siagle  stanzas  that  are  repeated  verbatim  occur  at  the  end 
of  suMas.  These  hymns  are  usually  ascribed  to  the  same  rsi  or  family^  but 
there  are  also  other  repetitions  of  this  kind,  which  are  probably  due  to  some 
general  similarity  in  the  subjects  treated.  Although  they  generally  speaMng 
have  no  close  connexion  with  the  contents  of  the  hymn  to  which  they  are 
attached^’,  these  stanzas,  being  mostly  rounded  wholes,  may  be  amalgamated 
TOth  various  surroundings^®.  Some  hymns  seem  to  have  been  intentionally 
constructed  on  parallel  principles — the  same  general  theme,  metrical  structure, 
or  number  of  the  stanzas — , their  main  characteristic  being  the  identity  of 
their  final  stanzas^®.  These  repeated  final  stanzas,  so-called  refrains^®— 43  in 
number  occurring  about  130  times — are  of  special  interest.  Containing  mainly 
requests  for  happiness  they  belong  to  the  inheritance  of  individual  families: 
with  a few  exceptions  all  repetitions  of  this  type  occur  In  the  same  book®^.  The 
final  repetition  may  be  limited  to  a single  pdda^^.  Thus  the  Grtsamadas  had 
a special  predilection  for  the  closing  prayer  “We  would,  with  vigorous  (sons) 
speak  firmly  (and  impressively)  at  divine  worship,'’  which  has  aptly  been 
called  a sort  of  ‘seal’  authenticating  their  poems^®.  The  last  three  suM4X<s  of 
mawdcda  IX,  being  more  or  less  appendages®^  in  the  same  metre,  but  according 
to  tradition  of  two  poets,  have  the  same  refrain  -pada  “Flow,  0 Soma,  for  Indra” 
in  common. 

Other  refrains  concern  all  or  some  stanzas  of  the  same  mkia.  In  the  V|mkapi 
hymn  10,  86  the  words  “Indra  is  higher  than  all”  (one  pdda)  end  all  23  stanzas. 
This  t3rpe  is  more  normal  than  the  repetition  of  a few  words®®.  All  fourth 
pddas,  except  the  last,  of  the  famous  Indra  hymn  2,  12  are  concluded  by  the 


Bloomfieij),  o.c  , p 494;  and  cf.  p.  10;  K.  E.  Potdab,  in  Oriental  Thought,  I 
(1954),  1,  p.  70;  and  especially  Rekou,  E.  T.  P.  II,  p.  31.  Many  particuiars  must 
be  omitted  in  this  survey. 

In  several  cases  they  appear  to  be  added  after  a typically  closing  stanza  (2, 
19,  9;  24,  16). 

IS  Cf.  e.g.  1,  95,  11  = 1,  96,  9 (r^'  Kutsa,  deity  Agni);  3,  1;  5;  6;  7;  15;  22;  23 
(Agni  hymns).  For  the  ritual  use  of  fixed  conclusive  stanzas  (pandfmmya)  see 
Bebgaigne,  in  JA  1889  (I  = 8-13),  p.  153. 

« RV.  7,  34  and  56;  8,  36  and  37. 

2®  Bloomfield,  Repetitions,  p.  493;  P.  S.  Sastbi,  in  PO  10,  p.  99;  QJAIS  40, 
p,  41. 

The  exceptions  are  10,  89,  18  (=  3,  30,  22);  104,  11  (=  3,  30,  22).  In  VHI  and 
IX  there  are  no  refrains;  in  HI  and  VII  their  number  is  above  the  average. 

22  RV.  2,  1,  16d;  2,  13d;  11,  21  d etc.  (cf.  Renou,  E.  V.  P.  II,  p.  31),  in  some 
hynms  the  entire  final  stanza  is  repeated.  See  also  Bloomfield,  o.c.,  p.  123;  238 
and  cf.  9,  86,  48. 

2s  0f,  6^  4;  10 . 12,  13  (Agni  hymns  of  the  Bharadvajas);  for  the  Vasisthas  see  = 
Renou,  o.c.,  p.  37,  and  cf.  9,  90,  6. 

2^  Cf.  Renou,  E.  V.  P.  IX,  p.  118. 

« Cf.  1,  19;  78;  80;  2,  25. 


m 


J.  Gk)iida  * Vedic  Literature 


aiort  but  empbatic  refrain  “He,  0 men,  is  Incira’’^®,  drawing  tbe  hearer’s 
attention  to  the  feats  and  character  of  the  god  landed  in  the  preceding  parts  of 
tbe  trkiBbh  stanzas^’.  The  identity  of  final  pddas  is  soinetimes  hmited  to  a few 
stanzas^*.  Or  all  stanzas  except  the  last,  which  then  is  in  a different  metre,  end 
in  the  same  pada^^.  In  principle,  this  interior  refrain,  though  stylistically 
important,  appears  to  be  an  adventitious  element Only  in  a few  cases  it  is 
an  es^ntial  part  of  tbe  contents  or  the  structure  of  the  stanza®^. 

In  pmeiple  these  refrains  appear  in  any  type  of  hymn,  but  rarely  in  dialogues 
and  more  often  in  triplet  suktas  or  in  those  poems  which  are  of  a less  usual 
t}"pe  (for  instance  the  so-called  ballads),  the  atharvanic  compositions  and  in 
tbcMe  of  a comparatively  fixed  structure®^.  Occasionally  a refrain  expresses  the 
theme  of  the  poem:  3,  55  (22  stanzas)  “Great  is  the  unique  wonderful  divine 
power  of  the  gods As  far  as  I am  able  to  see  there  are  no  explicit  indications 
of  their  being  composed  for  the  reciter’s  company  to  be  brought  into  the  per- 
formance®*, but  the  supposition  that  the  words  “0  Soina,  flow  for  Indra”  in 
the  (adapted)  labour  song  9,  112  (and  in  113f.)  served  such  a purpose®®  seems 
legitimate.  There  is  no  denying  that  in  conjurations  refrains  may  be  largely 
suggestive®®.  The  recurrence  of  Rgvedic  refrains  in  the  Samaveda®’  shows 
that  these  at  least  were  considered  to  be  an  integral  part  of  the  suJdas.  The 
occurrence  of  the  same  final  pada  in  three  successive  stanzas  led  the  ritualists 
to  an  esoterics!  explanation:  the  words  “Indra  and  Agni,  become  aware  of 
this”  are  to  prevent  valour  and  strength  from  flowing  away®®. 

Many  occurrences  of  veise  repetition  are  due  to  the  frequent  catenary 
structure  of  stanzas®*.  In  the  succession  of  the  stanzas  of  a hymn  a motif, 
statement,  expression  occurring  in  a preceding  stanza  is  often  taken  up  anew 


G.  K.  Bhat,  in  JTJB  26  (1957),  25  argues  that  those  addressed  are  ‘the  people’ 

in  general;  rather,  the  poet’s  audience. 

In  8,  12  ail  (eleven)  triplets  have  internal  rhymes  of  this  type.  In  5,  87  one 
word  IS  repeated  at  the  end  of  every  second  pada, 

E.g.  2,  13,  2—4;  22,  1—3, 

=•  E.g.  1,  82;  105;  106;  in  1,  94  and  112  the  two  final  stanzas  are  excepted;  8,  34 
TOnsi^  of  five  triplets  (invitations)  in  anmtvbha  of  identical  second  lines;  the  last 

triplet  (expression  of  thanks)  is  completely  different. 

wn,!;? ^ refrain  is  interrupted  by  other 

words  (\BL4j<TCAa,  at  JUB  21,  2 (1952),  p.  4). 

100;  162.  In  9.  58  st.  la  is 

repeated  as  the  refrain  of  all  four  stanzas. 

Such  as  L 112  or  2,  12. 

arTicTtW  fk  f.'  “ SB  Berlin  1900,  p.  606  unconvincingly 

g^ed  that  the  them^,  generally  speaking,  were  adapted  to  the  refraius. 

?.V.  10,  86  could  suggest  this  idea. 

” With  PiscHKL,  V.  S.  I,  p.  107. 

Cf.  e.g.  10,  162;  163. 

*’  P.  S.  Sastbi,  at  QJMS  40,  p.  54. 

!!  ^23-425  = Ft,V.  8,  38,  1-3;  PB.  13,  8,  5. 

P-  E.  V P.  I.  p.  59, 


The  stmetiire  of  the  Rgvedic 


im 


in  the  next-  stanza,  in  such  a way  as  to  modiR",  develop,  explain,  or  carry  on 
further  the  thought  expressed,  or  the  events  depicted  in  the  first  Etanza.  There 
even  exist  cases  in  which  this  practice  runs  through  an  entire  hjnm:  in  Id,  84 
stanza  1 ends  in  ‘h  . . fire-shaped,’’  stanza  2 begins  with  ‘like  lire  Tioient  . . »” 
and  ends  in  . dispel”  and  3 begins  with  “overpower  ...”  and  ends  in  . 
thou  who  art  bom  alone”  and  4 begins  with  “one  of  many  . . etc.”^h  This 
procedure  is  also  known  in  the  Avesta^^.  Retarding  the  pro.gress  o'f  the  exposi- 
tions, and  letting  them  sink  into  mind  and  memory  of  the  auditor,  it  can  be 
realized  in  various  ways^^^  In  2,  we  find,  inter  alia,  in  2-3  . . . uMkair 
vdvrdhdndk,  ukthisu  . . in  3-4  . . . SubJirdh,  iubhrdfn  . . in  12-13  . . . dawdm 
sydma,  sydma  ti  . , . etc.^^,  in  1,  23,  23-24  tarn  md  sdm  srja  vdrcasm.  sdm  rmgne 
vdrcasd  srja.  While  in  some  cases  the  phenomenon  concerns  a single  "word 
followed  at  a distance  by  a related  term — e.g.  2,  26,  1-2  swprdiih  . . ... 
prd  viM — ^in  the  beginning  of  10,  119,  3 the  last  words  of  the  preceding  stanza 
“the  soma  juices  (which  I have)  drank  have  lifted  me  np”  are  completely  and 
literally  repeated^®;  the  poet  of  3,  39,  after  concluding  stanza  1 with  the  words 
“0  Indra,  take  note  of  the  (hjmm)  which  has  arisen  for  thee,”  begins  the  next 
stanza  with:  “Arisen  even  before  day(break),  watchful  . . 10,  118,  3e 

“Ms  (Agni’s)  face  is  anointed  with  the  ladle”  is  followed  by  4a  “Agni  is  anoint- 
ed with  ghee”^®.  Stanza  4 of  1,  85  “When  ye  (the  Marats  are  meant)  who  . . . 
shine  with  your  spears  have  yoked  the  spotted  mares  to  your  cars”  precedes 
5 ‘When  ye  have  yoked  the  spotted  mares  before  your  cars,  they  discharge 
the  streams  . . . and  moisten  the  earth.”  In  a number  of  cases^’  concatenation, 
wMch  can  here  be  illustrated  only  by  some  of  its  varied  forms*®,  extends  beyond 
the  limits  of  a single  pdda. 


« See  also  AV.  6,  42;  118. 

See  e.g.  Yasna  9,  17-18;  Yast  5,  62-63;  10,  82. 

For  cases  such  as  1,  25,  3-4  see  Rexou,  E.  V.  P.  VII,  p.  12. 

Cf.  A.  Webeb,  SB  Berlin  1900,  p.  607. 

Cf.  also  8,  1,  13-14. 

Cf.  10,  53,  4r-5  (see  Renou,  E.  V.  P.  XTV,  p.  81);  and  also  7,  60,  4-5;  83,  6-7. 
Cf.  e.g.  also  cases  such  as  RV.  1,  32,  1-2. 

See  Blooicfield,  Repetitions,  p.  8;  e.g.  1,  22,  5-6;  109,  7-8;  9,  67,  31-32. 

« Cf.  also  RV.  2,  16,  5-6;  19,  1-2;  25,  1-2;  4,  35,  2-3;  AV.  14,  2,  23-24;  26-27; 
34—35. 


J.  Gonda  • Vedic  Literature 


liS 

7.  MmiMogms^  di^dogms^  the  dhhydim  theory 

Among  those  deYices  of  style  to  which  the  Vedic  poets  were  not  averse  is 
dlre€4  speech,  a literal  quotation  of  words  supposed  to  be  used  by  their  per- 
sonages. TMs  is  not  snrprisiiig  since  their  work  bristles  with  addresses,  in  most 
ca^s  to  gcxls^,  sometimes  to  men^.  Occasionally  a poet,  using  a pronoun  of  the 
second  person  and  a present  tense,  introduces  his  hearers,  so  to  say,  into  the 
company  of  the  gods,  whether  the  words  put  into  their  mouths  open  the  poem 
impressively®,  or — more  frequently — ^interrupt  eulogy  or  a graphic  account  of 
mythical  events^.  An  experienced  poet  knows  how  to  make  such  a quotation — 
for  instance,  when  a god  is  urged  to  slay  his  enemy — also  applicable  to  the 
present  situation®.  A literal  quotation  of  the  words  of  a god  spoken  to  the  poet 
or  heard  by  Mm  may  warrant  their  authenticity®.  The  vision,  narrated  in  the 
first  person  (“I’’  and  ‘Ve’')  in  RV.  7,  88,  2f.,  is  no  doubt  to  evoke  memories  of 
an  intimate  relation  between  poet  and  deity^  Nor  is  a true  reproduction  of  a 
payer®  merely  a literary  embellishment:  this  form  enhances  its  value  in  the 
actual  situation. 

When  they  exceed  the  compass  of  a single  stanza  these  'quotations’  may 
develop  into  apostrophes  or  monologues.  The  central  part  of  the  Aivin  hymn 
10,  40  is  a long  prayer  (st.  5—12)  of  the  spinster  Ghosa,  who,  after  starting  with 
a mpaim  bemwkntim  and  picturing  the  joys  of  the  married  state,  implores 
the  divine  twins  to  give  her  a husband,  able  to  make  her  pregnant.  This  address 
is  duly  introduced  (st.  5) : Gho^,  the  daughter  of  a king,  walking  round  you®, 
0 Aivias,  addre^ed  (you) . . but  when  it  has  come  to  a conclusion  the  poet 
abruptly  resumes  his  own  line  of  thought,  returning  in  the  last  stanza  to  the 
theme  of  the  beginning.  Apala’s  prayer  (8, 91  )i®  is  iutroduced  by  three  narrative 
pddas  and  followed  by  a short  account  of  the  cure  she  had  to  undergo.  The 
structure  of  the  lament  of  the  gambler  (10,  34)  is  different.  Here  the  first  part 
of  the  monologue  wMch,  starting  at  the  very  beginning  of  the  poem,  contains 
the  self-accusation  of  a man  who  is  unable  to  resist  the  fascination  of  the  dice, 


I f ^ (apostrophe  to  Pu§an 

iHiking  the  danmiiMi  with  the  Lidra  hymn). 

» E.g.  to  tiM  one  who  institutes  the  sacrifice  (^IV.  1, 4, 4;  7);  for  a reference  to 

m©  present  situation  see  1,  4,  5f. 

* E.g,  4,  19,  1 

• =•  »•  «-='■  “■ 

• See  6,  0 3ff.  (Geldkke,  Auswahl,  n,  p.  89;  RV.  n,  p.  101)-  7 87  4-  of  7 

; ;1o,  53,  4f.;  167,  4.  ’ ’ ’ 

10,  27  ’ * dialogue  between  a god  and  the  poet  see 

* Sto  7,  83,  Iff. ; 5f.  and  the  passages  in  direct  speech  in  10,  22  4ff  Sneeches  are 

not  utdized  for  lengthening  the  narrative  by  repetition.  ^ 

HoiMge  or  r^>«3tfiil  salutatiom 

Se©  p.  145. 


The  structure  of  the  Rg\’edic  poems 


lii 


is  separated  from  the  second  part  in  which  he,  fortihed  by  a diviae  voice,  con- 
jures the  dice  to  leave  Mm  alone,  by  one  single  stanza  (11)  in  wMeh  the  poet 
provides  Ms  hearers  with  some  additional  comnient"^. 

The  Labasukta  (the  suMa  of  the  quail),  the  so-called  hymn  of  the  inebriated 
Indra^^  (10,  119),  is  in  its  entirety  a soliloquy  descTibing  the  state  of  miiid  of 
a person  who  has  dnuik  soma  and  experiences  a state  of  snpranormal  bliss  and 
power.  The  refrain,  nowhere  omitted,  “Have  I,  indeed,  dnmk  smiml,''  is  as 
essential  as  it  is  characteristic.  Tradition  has  that  the  whole  of  1,  105 — 
dealing  with  the  evil  plight  of  Trita  in  the  well^^^ — ^was  pronounced  by  Kntsa 
who  puts  a long  lament  into  the  month  of  that  Tinfortiiiiate  man  to  add,  in  the 
last  three  stanzas  wMch  begin  with  the  statement  “(Thus)  Trita  implores  the 
gods  for  assistance,”  a narrative  conclnsion  and  a reference  to  Ms  own  situation. 
This  wonid,  not  improbably,  mean  that  the  poet,  being  in  an  analogous 
situation  and  pleading  his  own  cause,  uses  the  story  of  Trita,  who  was  ulti- 
mately freed  by  Brhaspati,  to  put  pressure  upon  the  higher  powers.  The 
refrain,  absent  only  in  the  closing  stanza  where  it  is  replaced  by  a prayer  to 
six  deities,  ably  throws  the  parallelism  of  both  situations  into  relief.  Being  or 
impersonating  a physician,  the  poet  of  10,  97,  wMle  praising  the  medicinal 
herbs,  delivers  a monologue.  So  does  the  female  speaker  of  10,  159  who  prides 
herself  on  having  the  upper  hand  of  her  rivals. 

In  a few  cases  some  words  and  an  answer  spoken  by  two  partners  assume 
the  character  of  a rudimentary  dialogue^®.  The  theme  of  the  first-  half  of  RV. 
10, 98  is  part-ly  elaborated  in  the  form  of  a dialogue,  partly  in  narrative  stanzas ; 
the  second  half,  resuscitating  the  power  inherent  in  the  preceding  mytMcal 
story,  implores  Agni  to  bring  rain.  Real  dialogues  however  characterize  about 
twenty  hymns^®  that  differ  from  the  majority  and  have,  in  most  cases  also 
because  of  contents,  attracted  much  attention^’.  Already  in  Indian  antiquity 
they  were  distinguished  as  ‘colloquies’  (samvuda)^^.  In  particular  cases  the 
ancient  authorities  were  not  always  unanimous  in  regarding  a sukia  or  part-  of 
it  as  a real  dialogue:  it  could  also  be  a ‘story’  (itihdsa)^  a conversation  or  a 


Gonda,  Secular  hymns,  p.  342,  and  see  above  p.  146  f. 

« See  p.  149. 

See  Geldneb,  B»V.  I,  p.  136. 

“ Seep.  118;  127. 

RV.  5,  30,  8f.;  10,  61,  18f.;  10,  135  {Renoxj,  H.  S.,  p.  255);  cf.  also  1,  126,  6f. 
There*  are  also  instances  of  qu^tions  and  ans'wers,  both  stated  in  full  and  adding 
to  the  liveliness  or  solemnity  of  the  diction:  e.g.  6,  27,  If.;  10,  82,  5f.  (BiiOOMTiEnD, 
Repetitions,  p.  7). 

Fifteen  of  them  are  entirely  dialogues,  about  twelve  others  contain  short-  con- 
versations. For  a short  characterization:  Rekou,  B.  V.  P.  II,  p.  17. 

” In  general  see  Wucteenitz,  H.  I.  L.  I,  p.  100;  P.  S.  S{h)astbi,  in  13  AIOC, 
Nagpur  1946  (1950),  IE,  p.  15;  Eenou,  E.  T.  P.  II,  p.  17;  G.  K.  Bhat,  in  JUB  28 
N.  S.  2 (1959),  p.  51. 

Brhaddevata  2,  88;  4,  44;  47  etc.;  cf.  7,  153  quoting  Yaska. 


200 


J.  Gouda.  • Yedic  Literature 


eulogy^®.  Moreover,  witli  the  exception  of  the  cnriotis  10,  86,  Yaska,  Sannaka, 
and  also  Sayana  did  not  give  a ritnal  application  ( viniyoga ) prefeiing  to  narrate 
a story  in  explanation  of  the  text.  This  genre  of  composition  died  out  in  the 
later  Tedic  age;  in  the  Atharvaveda  there  is  hut  one  text  of  this  type  (5,  11) 
in  which  a priest,  Atharvan,  begs  Vanina  for  a cow  which  is  due  to  him^®.  On 
the  other  hand,  the  dialogues  of  mandcda  X are,  generally  speaking,  more  vital 
and  better  arranged  than  those  of  Rgveda  I-IX. 

Since  in  interpreting  these  texts  much  is  left  to  our  imagination  there  has 
among  ancient  and  modem  scholars  often  been  considerable  disagreement 
with  regard  to  partieulars^h  Thus  the  rather  enigmatic  conversation  between 
Indra,  Ms  ^ife  and  the  monkey  Vimkapi  (10,  86) — according  to  tradition  the 
god*s  ille^gitinmte  son  who  obviously  had  incurred  Indrani’s  displeasure — ^has 
hc^cn  regarded  as  a piece  of  erotic  mysticism^^,  as  a virility  charm^®,  as  a 
reminiscence  of  a clash  between  the  Aryan  Indra  religion  and  a non- Aryan 
\ rakapi  cult or  even  of  a primitive  age  in  which  a line  dividing  men  from 
animals  was  not  yet  drawn^®,  but  also  as  satire  on  human  relations^®  or  a 
humorous  scene  of  India's  family  life  remarkable  for  a fine  delineation  of  the 
characters®^.  Another  sidelight  on  India's  family  life  is  thrown  in  10,  28®® 
which — like  the  preceding  and  other  dialogue  hymns — beginning  abraptly,  is 
a^conversation  carried  on  by  three  persons,  viz.  the  god,  his  son  Vasukra  and 
Ms  daughter-in-law,  Vasukra 's  wife. 

There  are  more  instances  of  a conversation  between  three  interlocutors,  one 
of  whom  may  even  be  a group  of  persons.  In  some  texts  informing  us  about  a 
conflict  between  India  and  the  IVIaruts  and  their  conciliation  the  god,  who 
swms  to  have  appropriated  some  sacrificial  animals  wMch  were  destined  for 
Ms  allies,  disputes  with  them  because  they  had  disgraced  themselves  in  his 
eyes  by  deserting  Mm  in  the  Vrtra  contest;  at  last  however  they  succeed  in 
placating  Ms  anger®^  (2,  165)®^  In  1,  170,  wMch  continues  the  story,  Agastya 
mtervenes  m the  dispute,  advising  Indra  to  make  it  up®b  It  is  difficult  to  imagine 


See  e.g.  Brhaddevata  3,  155 f.  (on  RV.  1,  126);  5,  163  fon  7 33^  7 153*  r»f 

WiNTEKNiK,  in  WZIQI 23,  p.  102.  ^ 

Cf.  Webeb,  I.  S,  XWn,  p.  201. 

tri'  ^ Asxold,  at  KZ  37,  p.  214;  Geudneb,  RV.  II,  p.  210*  as  to  8 

"1’  25,  p.  209;  Geldneb,  RV.  II,  p.  427^^ 

as  Q ' “ Allahabad  TJniv.  Studies,  1 (1925). 

S.  A.  Daxgb,  at  Xagpur  Univ.  J.  16,  p.  127 
U.  P.  Shah,  in  JOIB  8,  p.  41.  ^ 

“ V.  M.  Aj>te,  in  QJMS  53,  p.  1. 

P.  V.  Brapke,  at  ZDMG  46,  p.  465. 

2,  p.  P-  ^2;  RV.  in,  p.  273.  Cf.  also  Velankab,  in  JUB  22, 

2.  p.  Jacobi,  p.  242;  ^V.  HI,  p.  169;  Velajs-hab,  in  JUB  21, 


•*  Cf.  also  1,  171  and  Geedkeb,  RV.  I,  p 237 
” Vel^-eab,  12  AIOC  I,  p.  223.’ 

Cf.  V.  G.  Rahcekae,  in  PO  22,  p.  40. 


201 


The  structure  of  the  Rgvedic  poeras 

whether  these  Agastya  suJdas  were,  in  the  view  of  the  Yeciic  audience,  so  point- 
less as  they  would  appear  to  a modem  eritic®^. 

Mention  has  already  been  made  of  the  beautiful  RY.  3,  33“— the  most 
successful  dialogue  of  the  older  Rgveda — in  which  Visvamitra’s  personality  so 
to  say  develops  from  that  of  the  poet  who  pronounces  the  initial  stanza  to 
address  the  rivers — ^females — ^in  the  next  one.  In  order  to  make  the  rivers  ford- 
able he  praises  them  and  requests  them  to  stop  for  a while.  In  their  answers, 
which  alternate  with  the  words  of  the  sage,  the  rivers  are  represented  as  pleased 
with  his  praise ; after  informing  him  that  they  cannot  comply  with  Ms  request 
because  they  flow  at  the  command  of  Indra  and  Savitar,  Yisvamitra  observes 
that  the  former  god,  it  is  true,  removed  the  obstacles,  intimating  that  the  rivers 
came  of  their  own  accord  and  may  therefore  be  supposed  to  cease  flowing  if 
they  choose  to  do  so.  Then  they  ask  him  to  continue  to  praise  them  so  that  the 
future  generations  will  hear  of  them.  After  a renewed  request  and  an  implicit 
promise  they  yield  to  his  persuasion.  At  the  end  of  the  conversation  the  sage, 
seeing  that  the  king’s  army  has  crossed  the  waters,  pronounces  two  impressive 
stanzas  in  order  to  alloiv  them  to  resume  their  activity.  It  has  not  without 
reason  been  suggested  that  this  poem  w’-as  an  old  family  ballad  moulded  or 
remoulded  into  the  form  of  a dialogue®^,  A good  dialogue  (in  alternate  stanzas) 
is  also  that  between  the  female  dog  of  the  gods,  Sarama,  and  the  Panis  (10, 
108)®®,  an  episode  of  the  m^dMcal  story  of  the  stolen  cows.  As  a messenger  of 
the  gods  Sarama  finds  the  way  to  the  Panis  who  have  Mdden  the  cows  at  the 
ends  of  the  world.  At  first  the  Panis  refuse  to  accord  with  her  wish  demanding 
that  Indra  should  come  himself,  but  in  the  course  of  the  conversation  they 
become  more  and  more  impressed  by  Sarama’s  minatory  speech  and  her 
references  to  such  mighty  aUies  as  Brhaspati  and  the  rsk.  Finally  they  attempt 
to  induce  her  to  remain  with  them,  but  this  offer  is  rejected.  In  the  last  stanza 
Sarama  enforces  the  flight  of  the  Panis  and  the  recovery  of  the  cows. 

The  dialogue  hymns  10,  51-53®®  form  a sort  of  trilogy  dealing  with  successive 
stages  in  a mythical  event  of  ritualistic  import  and  gloiMHnng  the  sacrificial 
performances  as  presided  over  by  Agni,  the  divine  hotar  and  heavenly  represent- 
ative of  the  human  hotar  on  the  sacrificial  place.  In  the  first  suMa,  a iristuhh 
‘stichom3rth’  between  Agni,  who  speaks  the  even  stanzas,  and  the  gods — ^w'hose 
spokesman  appears  to  be  Vanina — ^the  latter  try  to  persuade  the  god  of  fire, 
who  had  fled  from  them®^  to  resume  his  task  wMeh  he  alone  can  perform.  The 

Renoij,  E.  V.  P.  n,  p.  17. 

See  p.  125  and  H.  D.  Yklakkab,,  ia  JBBRAS  18  (1942),  p.  3;  G.  K.  Bhat,  at 
ABORI  53,  p.  117;  as  to  1,  179  see  p.  145. 

Renou,  E.  V.  P.  II,  p.  18.  But  why  should  it  be  pure  rhetoric  ! 

E.  D.  Pebby,  in  JAOS  11,  p.  141. 

F.  Edgebtoit,  Studies  in  the  Veda,  VH,  AJPh  40  (1919),  p.  175;  cf.  B^hadde- 
vata  7,  62 ff.  Less  convincing:  J.  Hebteu,  Das  indogennanische  Xeujahrsopfer, 
Leipzig  1938,  p.  33. 

Agni’s  flight  is  a well-known  theme:  RV.  1,  65,  i;  67,  3;  6;  7;  72,  2;  95,  4 etc. 
(Geldneb-Nobel,  RV.  TV,  p.  11). 


202 


J.  Gtenda  • Vedic  Literature 


second  contains  the  stanzas  spoken  by  Agni  when  be  is  invested  vdtb  tbe 
office  of  iofeirand  a final  eomnaent  of  the  poet.  RV.  10,  53  is  pronounced,  partly 
by  tbe  priests  who,  pleased  with  Agni’s  return,  intend  to  sacrifice,  partly  by  the 
god,  whose  blesing,  promise  and  injunction  to  gods  and  men — ^forming  together 
a sort  of  convenant — ^are  the  culminating  point  of  the  trilogy. 

Another  dialogtie  hymn  in  which  the  narrator  or  the  poet  imnself  takes  part 
is  10, 124,  a fragment  of  a discussion  between  Indra  and  Agni ; on  the  request  of 
the  former,  the  god  of  fire  joins  those  gods  who  want  him  to  sacrifice ; Vanina, 
up  to  now  the  ruler,  becomes  Indra’s  co-regent  and  sets  tbe  waters  free ; Indra, 
with  the  help  of  Soma,  slays  Vrfcra®^;  a most  interesting  sample  of  poetical 
imagination  attempting  to  acconnt  for  Vanina’s  subsidence  and  tbe  rise  of 
Indra’s  power  in  the  world  of  the  gods®®.  The  last  stanza  of  1, 179  seems  to  be  a 
legend  spell  in  the  form  of  the  poet’s  conclusion  of  a conversation  between  tbe 
sage  Agastya  and  his  "wife  Lopamudra^^.  The  discussion  in  RV.  1,  125  is  in  the 
initial  stanza  introduced  by  the  poet. 

RV.  4,  18,  in  which  we  find  the  fullest  accoimt  of  Indra’s  early  days^®,  has 
often  been  described  as  a dialogue  bymn^®,  but  can  be  interpreted  otherwise, 
although  part  of  the  contents  is  put  into  the  mouth  of  the  persons  figuring  in 
Opening  with  the  moment  of  the  god’s  birth  the  poet  says  that  when  his 
mother  makes  an  attempt  to  abandon  him  he  follows  her,  and  arriving  at  the 
house  of  Tvaster,  the  divine  carpenter,  he  drinks  soma.  Now  he  is  strong  enough 
to  conquer  his  enemies,  hut  his  mother,  obviously  unaware  of  this,  no  longer 
wish^  to  be  rid  of  him  and  so  she  conceals  him.  Indra,  however,  emerging  from 
the  concealment,  puts  on  Ms  resplendent  garment,  which  makes  him  visible  to 
his  enemies.  At  the  request  of  the  Waters,  who  see  him,  he  slays  Vrira  and 
releases  the  streams,  thereby  apparently  surprising  his  mother.  The  poet  now 
extols  his  deed  and  victory,  referring  to  his  abandonment  by  his  motber  and 
her  later  adherence  to  him.  Finally  he  addresses  Indra  hiinself  reminding  hiTu 
of  Ms  most  desperate  hour,  the  god  in  reply  acknowledging  his  dire  need  and 
the  welcome  aid  he  had  received  at  the  moment  when  the  falcon  brought  him 
the  soma. 

I^ve  in  different  forms  (conjugal  love,  twins,  lovers)  is  the  subject  of  1,  179; 
and  of  two  of  the  finest  specimens  of  the  genre  10, 10  and  10,  95^^  The  much 


**  Cf.  E.  D.  Peuby,  in  JAOS  11,  p.  159;  Geldnee,  RV.  HI,  p.  352. 

Cf.  Gonda,  R..  I.  I,  p.  81.  * ^ 

See  p.  145;  for  l^Y.  10,  10  see  p.  153. 

Cf.  the  theme  of  10,  183. 

•»  Sm  'SOMMAS  Beown,  in  JAOS  62,  p.  93. 

r,  Noten,  I,  p.  280;  Sieg,  Sagenstoffe, 

p-  82;  Geldnee,  I,  p.  440.  > & » 

“ Thus  W.  Nobman  Bbowu,  in  Siddha-Bharati,  Vol.  Siddheshwar  Vanna,  I, 
1950,  p 130.  For  this  hymn  see  also  Pischel,  V.  S.  n,  p.  42;  Geldneb, 
^ Veiaiteab,  in  JCB  1938,  p.  35;  JBBRAS  18  (1942),  p.  5. 

in  1ft  t-’  Bebgaigne  B.  V.  n,  p.  394f.;  for  10,  10,  p.  153;  for 

10,  10;  1^;  do:  R.  GoEDSCAii,  at  JOIB  18  (1969),  p.  273  (speculative). 


The  stmctiare  of  the  ^.gvedic  poems 


203 


discussed  dialogue^®  between  Pnruxavas  and  the  nympli  (ajmarm)  Urvaii  (10, 
95)  clearly  deals  with  the  theme  of  the  impo^bility  of  permanent  miptml  ties 
between  a human  being  and  a god.  Taken  by  itself  the  course  of  the  dialo^gne 
seems  to  be  as  follows : 

Piiiixravas  asks  Urvasi  for  an  interview  (st.  1.) ; Urvas! — to  whom  modern  authors 
often,  but  wrongly,  imputed  cruelty — declares  this  to  be  useless,  because  she  has 
disappeared  “like  the  first  of  the  dawns”  and  is  “difficult  to  be  caught,  like  the 
wind”  (2).  Pururavas  observes  that  it  was  a rase  which  made  him  lose  her  (3). 
After  st.  4,  in  the  third  person  and  therefore  possibly  narrative,  Uivas!  admits 
that  she  indeed  always  followed  his  will  (5).  When,  in  6 and  8,  he  recalls  that  the 
other  apsarases  coquettishly  fled  from  him,  UivasI  intemipts  him:  they  came 
out  of  curiosity  to  see  our  son  whom  they  will  look  after  (7).  He  continue: 
“May  the  water-woman,  flashing  like  lightning,  Uiv’asI,  lifelong  bring  me  the 
pleasures  of  love”  (10).  Urvail  replies:  “It  is  true  that  you  have  fecundated  me, 
but  I cannot  stay;  I had  warned  you”  (11).  “And  our  son,  when  he  is  bom,  will 
he  not  look  for  his  father  and  shed  tears  ?”  (12).  “If  he  does,  I shall  send  him  to 
you”  (13).  Pururavas  threatens  suicide  (14),  but  she  answers:  “Do  not  die  or 
depart  from  here.  Friendship  with  women  is  impossible;  their  hearts  are  like 
hyenas’.  Be  satisfied  with  the  four  years  you  have  had  me”  (15f.).  After  a last 
entreaty  (17)  she,  or  a divine  voice,  consoles  him  with  the  prospect  of  heaven. 

The  interpretation  of  this  sulda  was,  as  a mle,  made  dependent  on  the 
conception  scholars  had  of  the  characters,  the  situation,  the  nature  of  the  poem 
and  its  relation  to  later  versions  of  the  theme.  It  was  described  either  as  an 
exaltation  of  a popular  fairy-tale  and  the  source  from  which  all  the  later  variant 
versions  have  originated^’  or  as  a ballad  based  on  the  fairy-tale  as  it  appears  in 
the  Satapatha-Brahmaim,  with  which  it  has  all  essential  elements  in  common^®. 
Incorporating  five  stanzas  of  the  sulda  this  brdhmam  relates  the  story,  not  as 
an  episode,  but  in  a more  complete  form:  When  she  wedded  Pururavas,  Urva^i 
stipulated  that  she  should  not  see  him  naked.  But  after  a long  time,  w’hen  she 
was  with  child  by  him,  the  gaudharvas — ^the  natural  mates  of  the  apsarasm — 
devised  a means  how  she  might  come  back.  They  took  away  a lamb  which 
was  tied  to  her  bed,  and  when  Pururavas,  naked  as  he  was,  sprang  up  after 
them,  they  produced  a flash  of  lightning  . . . She  had  vanished,  but  he  found 
her  when  she  was,  in  the  shape  of  a swan,  swimming  in  a lake.  There  they 
exchanged  the  words  of  the  stanzas  1,  2, 14,  15  and  16.  Thereupon  she  allowed 


See  e.g.  OnnEr^BESG,  in  ZDMG  39,  p.  72  (=  K.  S.  p.  494);  Geldxbb,  Y.  S.  I, 
p.  243  and  ?»Y.  Ill,  p.  298;  Gbifftth,  H.  RY.  IY,  p.  304;  BnooMMEiLD,  in  JAOS 
20,  p.  180;  Caua^std,  in  Album  Kem,  p.  57  (discussing  brahnmna  and  sutra  texts, 
inter  (dia,  B§S.  18,  44f.);  H.  J.  be  Zwabt,  in  Orientalia  Neerlandica,  Leiden  1948, 
p.  363  (with  a bibliography);  D.  D.  Kosambi,  in  JBBRAS  27  (1951),  I,  p.  30  (with 
untenable  conclusions);  Rexotj,  H.  S.  p.  105;  249;  J".  C.  W bight,  in  BSOAS  30 
(1967),  p.  526  (quite  untenably  regarding  the  mkta  as  a dialogue  between  the  Holy 
Spirit  and  the  Mother  of  God  and  inclined  to  explain  Rgi^'edic  mythology  in  general 
writh  the  help  of  ‘parallel  material’  embodied  in  the  Bible). 

47  ^QQ  Gbutith,  Lc.;  H.  D.  Yeiajsteab,  The  Yikramorvasiya,  New  Delhi 
1961,  p.  XLHI. 

E.g.  Geldkeb,  ?Y.  Lc.;  see  SB.  11,  5,  1. 


J.  Gouda  • Vedic  Literature 


2M 

Mm  to  come  the  last  night  of  the  year.  The  next  morning  he  obtained  the  boon 
to  become  a gawdUrm,  This  ambition  was— qnite  mteUigibly,  m this  brahmam 
Tersioii— reafeed  by  means  of  a sacrificial  ceremony.  And  this  is  why  the  story 
is  told : anybody  who  now  performs  this  exemplary  sacrifice  will  become  one  of 
the  gmlMrms.  In  a similar  way  the  Bandhayana-Sranta-sutra  18,  44f.  mserts 
a Tarmnt  form  in  order  to  give  a m3dMcal  foundation  for  another  rite  which  is 
recommended  to  the  man  who  is  desirous  of  offspring^. 

Whereas  it  is  clear  that  the  author  of  the  gatapatha-Brahmana  passage  was 
acquainted  i^ith  the  Rgveda  text,  it  is  as  difficult  to  determine  the  mutual 
relation  of  the  Vedic  versions  as  it  is  risky  to  propose  an  answer  to  the  question 
as  to  why  the  suMa  was  included  in  the  SamMta^^  The  clue  is  perhaps  provided 
by  the  final  stanza : 3^£an  is  mortel  (even  if  he  is  temporarfiy  aUowed  to  associate 
with  the  divine  wMch  must  remain  unknown)  Let  him  therefore  worship  the 
gods  with  sacrifices  (to  have  a chance  of  attaining  heaven).  If  so,  the  theme,  in 
Qthei  countries  represented  by  the  sagas  of  Amor  (Eros)  and  Psyche,  Lohen- 
grin, Melusine,  may  in  the  decidedly  ritualistic  trains  of  ancient  Indian  thought 
have  been  reinterpreted  and  made  the  foundation  of  a ‘symbolical  interpreta- 
tion of  the  production  of  fire — earthly  material  infiamed  by  a heavenly  spark 
wMch  is  the  indispensable  ritual  means  of  transgressing  mundane  limitations, 
and  of  the  institution  of  the  above-mentioned  fire-rites^^  The  Rgvedic  and 
Yajurvedic  versions  may  then  have  developed  side  by  side  and  led  to  parallel, 
though  not  identical  applications.  Then  we  need  not  subscribe  to  the  hypothe- 
sis®® that  the  brdhmana  version  was  made  specially  to  provide  a better 
understanding  of  the  suMa  10,  95  m place  of  that  meaning  which  had  already 
been  lost.  But  two  questions  remain : first,  does  the  Rgvedic  version  presuppose 
the  existence  of  a prose  narrative  such  as  the  Satapatha  version  which  is  much 
more  comprehensible  ?,  and  secondly,  why  is  it  couched  in  dialogue  form  ? 

Tlie  presence  of  these  dialogues  in  the  Rgveda  has  indeed  given  rise  to  much 
controversial  discussion® Max  MuUer  had  already  in  1869®®  conjectured  that 


PB.  19,  3,  2;  see  Calanb,  o.c. 

Nobody  nowadays  will  subscribe  to  such  views  of  the  poem  as  “naturalistic 
myth  of  dawn  and  sun”  or  “love  romance”. 

For  a discussion  of  this  theme  in  connection  with  10,  10;  10,  17,  If,;  10,  95 
Bee  E.  Goldman,  in  JOIB  18,  p.  273. 

In  gB.  3,  4,  1,  22;  VS.  5,  2;  TS.  1,  3,  7,  1;  6,  3,  5,  3;  MS.  3,  9,  5:  121,  4ff.; 
KS.  26,  7:  131,  3ff.;  ApS.  7, 12,  lOfiT.  dealing  with  the  production  of  fire  by  mear^ 
of  a fire-drill  the  lower  piece  of  wood  is  identified  with  Urvaii,  the  mother,  the  upper 
piece  with  Pururavas,  the  father;  their  son — called  Ayu  “living  being;  life;  genius 
of  lital  force” — ^is  the  emhiy^o,  the  fire,  and  the  sacrifice  (§B.  3, 4, 1,  22) — ^which  are 
produced.  The  two  pieces  of  different  wood  occur  in  the  version  of  the  story  in  SB. 
II,  5,  1,  13. 

” KoSAIffiBI,  O.C.,  p.  11. 

They  certainly  were  no  convenient  literary  device  facilitating  the  expression 

of  a p'oet’s  iinconventionai  thoughts. 

M.  MtXLEB,  The  sacred  hymns  of  the  Brahmans,  I,  London  1869,  p.  172. 


The  stracture  of  the  Rgvedic  poems 


205 


the  dialogue  Rl' . 1,  165  ‘%as  repeated  at  sacrifices  in  honour  of  the  Mani,ts  or 
that  possibly  it  was  acted  by  two  parties,  one  representing  Indra,  the  other  the 
Maruts  and  their  followers/’  After  hizn  Sylvain  Levi^®  ventured  the  opmioii 
that  the  Rgvedic  dialogues  in  general  presupposed  dramatic  performances  of 
which  they  formed  a sort  of  libretti,  adding  that,  as  appeals  from  other  Vedic 
texts,  music  and  short  dramatic  spectacles  could  be  introduced  into  ritual  cere- 
monies^^. Leopold  von  Schroeder^®  elaborated  the  theory  that  not  only  these 
hymns  but  also  monologues  such  as  RV.  10, 119  are  relics  of  Yedic  cult  dramas, 
more  precisely,  mystery  plays  which  must  have  been  an  inheritance  from  pre- 
historic, probably  Indo-European  times.  The  close  relation  of  dance,  song, 
drama  and  religion  among  many  so-called  primitive  and  archaic  peoples^®  and 
some  references  to  dancing  in  Vedic  texts  led  him  to  the  conclusion  that  these 
plays,  while  bringing  vividly  before  the  people  the  majesty  of  the  gods,  must 
have  partaken  of  the  nature  of  sympathetic  magic.  This  theory  met  -with  Jus- 
tifiable criticism There  does  not  appear  any  trace  of  such  plays  or  mimes  in 
the  ritual ; the  later  literature  is  wholly  silent  on  a ritual  di  ama ; von  Schroeder’s 
argument  that  this  fact  was  due  to  the  aversion  of  the  priests  to  dancing  and 
singing  gods  on  the  stage  is  unfounded.  There  are  no  indications  whatever  that, 
for  instance,  1,  179  was  staged  for  ensuring  the  fertility  of  the  fields,  the  rain 
suMas  7,  101  ff.  were  sung  by  a party  of  brahmins  standing  in  a pool  with  frogs 
in  it — a performance  continuing  an  ancient  mimetic  frog-dance — or  the  sukia 
of  the  gambler  (10,  34)  was  sung  to  the  accompaniment  of  dances  of  the  per- 
sonified dice  and  staged  as  an  interlude  in  the  midst  of  a sacrifice  to  recall  the 
dangers  of  dicing.  We  have  seen  that  the  dialogue  of  Yama  and  Yam!  (10,  10) 
admits  of  a more  plausible  explication  than  that  of  a fertility  drama  from  which 
the  alleged  pmdishness  of  the  Vedic  age  has  omitted  the,  in  itself  necessary, 
union  of  the  pair.  No  conclusion  can,  finally,  be  drawn  from  the  presence  of 
certain  ‘dramatic’  elements  in  these  suktas  because  this  is  nearly  always  found 
in  sacred  texts. 

The  supporter  of  a variant  dramatic  theory,  Johannes  Hertel®^,  was  not 
successful  either.  Basing  Ms  argument  largely  on  the — ^untenable — ^supposition 

S.  Levi,  Le  theatre  indien,  Paris  1891  (1963),  p.  307. 

Cf.  J.  Gonda,  Zut  Frage  nach  dem  Urspnmg  und  Wesen  des  indischen  Dramas, 
AO  (Lugd.)  19,  p.  329;  F.  B.  J.  Kutpeb,  in  Gedenkschrift  W.  Braixdenstein,  Inrs- 
bmck  1968,  p.  77. 

L.  V.  Schroeder,  Mysterium  und  Mimus  im  Rig\^eda,  Leipzig  1908,  *1972;  see 
also  WZKM  22,  p.  223;  23,  p.  1 (on  RV.  10,  72);  270.  Cf.  also  U.  Schneider,  Der 
Somaraub  des  Manu,  Wiesbaden  1971,  p.  68;  75. 

See  e.g.  K.  Th.  Preuss,  in  Globus  95  (1909),  p.  41;  Gohda,  o.c.,  p.  333. 

®®  See  e.g.  W.  Caxajstd,  in  ArcMv  fur  Religionswissenschaft  14,  p.  499;  A.  B. 
Keith,  in  JRAS  1909,  p.  200;  1911,  p.  981;  ZDMG  64,  p.  534;  The  Sanskrit  drama, 
Oxford  1924  (1970),  p.  13;  Bloomfeedd,  in  JAOS  30,  p.  78,  see  also  Winternttz, 
in  WZKM  23,  p.  105  (who  was  inclined  to  subscribe  to  part  of  vox  Scheoeder’s 
interpretations) . 

J.  Hebtel,  in  WZKM  18,  p.  59;  137;  23,  p.  273;  24,  p.  117;  compare  also 
Hxllebraxdt,  in  SBBAW  1914,  4,  p.  31. 


2m 


J.  Gouda  * Yedic  Literature 


tiat  the  Yedic  hjxms  were  always  sung  and  that  it  would  have  been  impossible 
for  a single  singer  to  distinguish  between  the  different  speakers  of  a dialogue,  he 
made  an  attempt  to  expMn  the  Suparnadhyayas^  as  an  actual  drama  rep- 
reKntiag  in  its  elaboration  a marked  advance  upon  the  ‘dramas’  of  the  Rgveda. 
There  is  not  however  sufficient  ground  for  explaining  that  text— which  is  no 
doubt  in  part  narrative — in  this  forced  way.  In  short,  this  theory  resolves 
itself  into  a complex  of  bare  possibilities  which  do  not  substantially  add  to  the 
interpretation  of  the  suktm^^. 

A different  theory  of  the  character  and  the  purpose  of  the  texts  under  con- 
ffideration  has,  after  resolute  contestation,  energetic  vindication  and  a long 
period  of  negligence,  recently  again  met  with  the  attention  which  it  deserves. 
Windisch®^  was  the  first  to  advance  the  opinion  that  these  Yedic  suUm  rep- 
resent an  old  t5rpe  of  literature,  preserved  also  in  Celtic  sagas,  which  was  of 
epic  character  and  consisted  partly  of  prose,  and  partly  of  verses  put  into  the 
mouth  of  the  principal  figures.  In  the  Bgveda  only  the  verses,  representing  the 
pointB  of  highest  emotion,  were — ^he  thought — ^preserved  and  the  introductory 
and  connecting  prose,  which  "was  not  stereotyped,  was  lost.  The  narrative 
imssages  nith  ii^erted  verses  occurring  in  the  hrdhrtmrms  are,  in  his  view,  com- 
plete representatives  of  this  genre.  It  was  Oldenberg®®  whose  name  came  to  be 
most  closely  associated  with  this  dkhydna^^  (“tale,  narrative”)  theory.  Con- 
sidering that  the  mUas  to  which  he  applied  his  theory  are  xmintelligibie  as  they 
stand,  he  assumed  the  existence  of  a genre  of  literature,  narrative  in  character 
and  consisting  of  a mixture  of  prose  and  verse.  That  the  narrative  every  now 
and  then  took  the  dialogue  form  is  in  view  of  the  preference  for  direct  speech 
not  surprising.  The  verses — moments  of  supreme  emotion  or  the  point  of  the 
story — remained  fixed  and  were  handed  down  with  little  change,  but  the  prose 
was  allowed  to  deviate  from  its  original  ‘text,’  because  every  narrator  was  at 

« See  p.  47. 

B.  K.  Ghosh,  in  H.  C.  I.  P.  I,  p.  345  (dramas  in  embryo,  not  necessarily  for 
the  stage)  and  P,  S.  SASTRi,The  Rgv^edic  theory  of  drama,  JGJRI  15  (1957),  p.  13 
I superficially  and  without  argumentation)  return  to  the  dramatic  theory;  cf.  also 
B.  D.  Kosambi,  in  JBBRAS  27, 1,  p.  1.  M.  M.  Ghosh,  in  IHQ  31,  p.  203;  339  wisely 
limits  himself  to  speaking  of  dramatic  dialogues.  For  the  possibility  of  interpreting 

4,  26  and  27  as  simple  cult  dramas:  U.  Schxeidbb,  Somaraub  des  Manu, 
Wiesbaden  1971,  p.  75;  78.  References  to  Indra  as  a dancer  (e.g.  1,  130,  7)  prove 
a dramatic  i^rformance  of  some  hymns  no  more  than  a ‘dramatic  arrangement’  of, 
e.g.,  6,  9 IGelbneb,  Auswahl,  II,  p.  89). 

E.  WiNMSCH,  tber  die  altirische  Sage  der  Tain  B6  Cdalnge,  Yerh.  33. 
PMIologemwsammiung  Gera,  Leipzig  1879,  p.  15  (cf.  GescMcbte  der  Sanskrit- 
Philfilogie,  Strassburg  1917,  p.  404). 

H,  Olbexbebg,  Bas  altindische  Akhyana,  ZDMG  37  (1883),  p.  54  (=  K.S. 
p.  44i);  Ikhyina-Hymnen  im  Rgveda,  ZDMG  39,  p,  52  (=  K.S.  p.  474);  GGA 
im%  p.  66;  KG  1911,  p.  441  {=  K.S.  p.  1395);  KG  1919,  p.  79  (=  K.S.  p.  1495); 
Zur  GeecMcM-e  der  altindischen  Prosa,  Gottingen  1917,  p.  53ff. ; Das  Mahabharata, 

Gottingen  1922,  p.  21. 

Gebbseb,  explaining  ]RY.  10,  95  in  the  light  of  Oudejobbeg’s  theory,  prefers 
itiham  “tradition”  (used  e.g.  in  Bphaddevata  4,  46)  to  akhyana  (Y.  S.  I,  p.  284). 


The  structure  of  the  poems 


207 


liberty  to  alter  its  frona®^  or  even  to  supply  it  aceorclin,g  to  cireiimstances.  Tlie 
comparatively  detacbed  character  of  many  stanzas  was  made  an  argument  in 
favour  of  the  theory:  they  presupposed  a connective  text.  In  Oldenberg^s 
opinioii  it  even  was  probable  that  part  of  these  mldas  (e.  g.  10^  95)®®  were 
composed  for  the  purpose  of  this  type  of  delivery.  Pischel®®  had  already 
made  an  attempt  to  show  that  the  dhhydim  theory  was  capable  of  combination 
with  a dramatic  character  of  the  suMas  under  discussion,  and  was  inclined  to 
regard  the  intermingling  of  prose  and  verse  in  the  Sanskrit  drama  of  later 
times  as  a rehc  of  this  early  genre  of  literature.  Attempting  a similar  compro- 
mise, Wintemitz"®  argued  that  the  dialogues,  whether  relics  of  stories  in  pro^ 
and  stanzas,  or  not,  might  very  well  have  served  liturgical  purposes.  In 
contradistinction  to  Oldenberg,  who  regarded  the  original  prose  portions  as 
lost,  Geldner^^  supposed  that  the  stanzas  of  the  dialogue  hymns  were  detached 
from  the  complete  stories  (itihdsa).  In  his  opinion,  these  must  have  been 
collected  in  a prose  corpus,  lost  to  us,  but  utilized  as  their  principal  source  by 
the  commentators  and  the  authors  and  compilers  of  Brhaddevata,  Mahabha- 
rata  and  purdnas.  In  after  years,  however,  Geldner  sought  to  explain  the  longer 
dialogue  hymns  as  ballads’^,  that  is  to  say,  as  dialogized  narrative  poems  which, 
being  episodic  in  form,  do  not  presuppose  any  connective  prose^®.  Rejecting 
Oldenberg’s  dkhydTia  theory  as  well  as  the  dramatic  explanations,  yet  reco,gniz- 
ing  four  suJctas  (one  single  one  and  a set  of  three  others)  as  genuine  dramas, 
Charpentier’*  came  to  regard  the  disputed  texts  as  pieces  of  epic  poetry  not 
needing  any  additional  prose. 

Oldenberg’s  most  uncompromising  opponent,  Keith^®,  objected  that  the 
tradition  shows  no  trace  of  knowledge  of  the  supposed  characteristic  of  these 
suldcbs ; nor  do  we  jBbnd  any  work  actually  in  this  foim  in  the  Veda.  Why  should 

In  defending  his  thesis  OuDEZsmEBG  also  drew  attention  to  the  SnpamMhyaya 
— which  calls  itself  an  akhydna  (1,  5;  31,  7) — ^Paii  Jatakas  such  as  n®  253,  and  the 
Sunahsepa  story  in  AiB.  7,  13fif.  (ZDMG  37,  p.  77). 

Cf.  SB.  11,  5,  1,  and,  inter  alia,  RV.  5,  61;  1,  126:  16,  il;  RV.  1,  165-178: 

Brhaddevata  4,  44ff.;  RV.  1,  179:  ibid.  4,  57ff.;  on  BV.  8,  91  see  also  Ouidenbebg, 
at  ZDMG  39,  p.  76;  on’^V.  10,  95  GGA  1890,  p.  417. 

PiscHEL,  V.  S.  II,  p.  42;  in  GGA  1891,  p.  351. 

WiNTEBisiTZ,  in  WZKAI  23,  p.  132;  see  also  G.  I.  L.  Ill,  p.  609  (a  confused 
note  with  a bibliography). 

Geldneb,  V.  S.  I,  p.  289. 

See  p.  159. 

IIixjmBBAisrDT,  O.C.,  p.  29  observed  that  in  many  cases  neither  the  akhydna 
nor  the  ballad  theory  can  account  for  all  problems. 

J.  Chabpextieb,  Die  Suparnasage,  Uppsala  1920,  p.  13. 

A.  B.  Keith,  in  JRAS  1911,  p.  979;  1912,  p.  429;  R.  B.  p.  68;  The  Sanskrit 
drama,  p.  22;  A history  of  Sanskrit  literature,  Oxford  1920  (1948),  p.  67.  Por  other 
criticism  see  J.  Ghabpentieb,  in  WZKAI  25, p.  307  (whose objection:  the hjmms and 
the  narratives  of  the  brahmanas  are  two  parallel  offshoots  of  the  same  branch 
composed  for  different  purposes  and  hence  incapable  of  being  intermiiigled,  does 
not  hold  w^ater) ; Hobsch,  V.  G.  L.,  p.  306;  341 ; H.  von  Gi^napp,  Die  Literaturen 
Indiens,  Stuttgart  1961,  p.  60;  Ghosh,  Lc. 


2§8 


J.  Gouda  • Yedic  Literature 


tim  iikh0?m  prose  Lave  disappeared  wMle  that  of  tLe  hrdlimams  was  carefully 
Landed  down  ? In  the  case  of  Puriiravas  and  Urvasi  the  tale  of  the  Satapatha- 
Brahmana  does  not  agree  with  the  stanzas  of  the  Rgveda  and  must  be  con- 
sidered an  attempt  to  work  RV.  10,  95  into  the  explication  of  a particular  rite; 
some  stanzas  are  quoted  because  the  text  on  which  the  story  is  based  is  taken 
from  outside  the  White  Yayurveda.  Xor  do,  in  his  opinion,  the  other  alleged 
instances  fit  the  theory,  some  of  them  being  clear  enough  without  any  connect- 
ing explication  postulated  by  the  theory.  Yet  the  theory  was  accepted  by  other 
scholars"®.  It  was  pointed  out  that  for  all  suJctas  discussed  by  Oldenberg  the 
ancient  Indian  commentators  have  handed  down  stories,  legends  or  traditions, 
so-called  itihmm,  and  that  Burga  and  Sayana  refer  to  these  itihdsas  failing 
inciications  of  the  ritual  application  of  the  texts’^  The  conclusion  was  drawn 
that  already  in  the  Brahmana  period  there  must  have  existed  a rather  extensive 
narrative  literature  {itihdsa-purdna  “old  traditional  histories’’)  and  that  the 
contents  of  this  collection — w’hich  was  to  become  the  source  of  ancient  commen- 
tators—were  known  to  the  poets  of  the  Rgveda-Samhita’®.  Scholars  did  not 
however  fail  to  notice  that  the  stories  and  legends  handed  dowui  in  the  brdh- 
and  ancillary  literature  are  far  from  identical  or  completely  consistent 
with  the  sukim  to  which  they  traditionally  belong’®.  But  this  did  not  prevent 
them  from  considering  texts  such  as  the  four  suktas  of  the  Gaupayanas  (10, 
57-60)  to  constitute  the  collection  of  stanzas  belonging  to  the  Original’  story^ 
notwithstanding  the  fact  that  the  traditions  of  this  story  are  not  uniform;  they 
all  agree  in  giving  the  persons  figuring  in  these  texts  a historical  character®®.  " 

^ In  recent  times,  the  justifiability  of  the  dhhydna  theory  was  from  different 
sides  pleaded  again*L  Basing  himself  mainly  on  more  modem  views  of  the 
Buddhist  Jatakas«  and  what  might  be  caHed  the  Jain  contribution  to  the 
problem  under  discussion  Alsdorf*®  arrived  at  the  conclusion  that  Oldenberg’s 


« See'G,  Sagenstoffe,  p.  1;  Wiktekisttz,  in  WZKM  23,  p.  102  (cf.  p.  136:  part 

composed  of  prose  Lh 

stana^  mtermingled,  others  again  stanzas  accompanving  cult  dramas)  * H I L 
ol:  I-D-Bab  jTT;inBSOS  2,  p.  808;  cl^o, 

” Cf.  SayaM  oa  RV.  1,  105;  3,  53;  4,  18. 

” See  e.g.  Sieg,  o.c.,  p.  33. 

il  legend  of  gyavasva  Atreya  (Sieg,  o.c.,  p.  50). 

RV  in  d‘  f in  JAOS  18,  p.  42;  Gbldeee, 

r/i;o  ^ op^on  between  the  aLient  authorf- 

tits  see  e.g.  also  \on  Schboedeb,  in  WZKJVI  22  p 2^4 

rej^ei^,  p.  14  (“^rhap,  recitatives  in  cult  draznaa”);  p.  15  (baUacU^***^ 

Stein ^iTsJ^p.  diebuddbistischeLiteratur,  1942  (^Liechten- 


The  structure  of  the  Rgvedic  poems 


209 


arginnents,  though  admitting  of  some  slight  modihcations,  were  soimd  and 
never  convincingly  refuted.  Just  as  the  Pali  Jataka  collection  originally  mcluded 
the  stanzas  (gdthds)  only,  the  prose  being  from  the  heginriinE  a eomnieiitarv, 
which  was  lost  and  replaced  by  the  much  later  prose  test  that  is  kno'wii  to  ns ; 
just  as  from  the  text  of  the  Jain  Uttarajjhaya  it  appears  that  every  comaien- 
tator  supplied  the  old  stanzas  with  his  own  addition  to  make  the  tales  self- 
sufficient,  so,  Alsdorf  holds,  the  Rgveda  contains  specimens — few  in  number,  it 
is  true — of  a much  vaster  literature,  popular  in  character,  never  written  down 
and  therefore  lost  to  us.  However,  there  remains  one  serious  question  to  be 
solved : can  it  be  taken  for  granted  that  the  situation  and  the  relations  between 
the  oral  tradition  of  ‘complete’  stories  and  the  stanzas  of  these  Rgvedic  suMm 
were  similar  to  those  in  the  Buddhist  or  Jain  communities  of  later  times  ? 

An  attempt  to  understand  this  relation  was  subsequently  made  by  Rocher®^. 
Regarding  the  existence  of  an  earlier  prototype  in  verse  and  prose  as  unneces- 
sary and  in  any  case  as  difficult  to  prove  he  argues  that  the  h\nims  under  dis- 
cussion could  be  understood  only  by  those  who  w^ere  familiar  with  the  back- 
ground from  which  they  spread  and  to  which  they  constantly  allude.  In  his 
opinion  this  background  was  the  same  ‘popular’  Hinduism  as  that  of  the  Bud- 
dhist Jatakas  and  the  natural  surroundings  of  the  stories  can  best  be  known  from 
the  epics  and  typically  Hinduist  purd^s,  which,  he  holds,  contain  much  older 
material  than  is  often  believed.  Although  this  background  existed  alongside 
with  the  Veda,  no  direct  evidence  for  it  has  come  to  us  from  that  early  period. 

We  would  for  the  time  being  prefer  modifying  these  views  of  the  problem  as 
follows.  Like  ail  suktas  of  the  Rgveda  these  poems  presuppose  a mjdMcal  and 
legendary  background  known  to  many®®,  but  interpreted  and  consciously 
handed  down  in  the  light  of  their  own  view^s  of  life  and  the  world  by  the  spirit- 
ual elite.  Representatives  of  this  elite  drew  on  this  oral  tradition  whenever  they 
were  required  to  give  some  explanation  or  supplementary  uiformation®®. 
Alongside  with  the  brdhTmnas  there  may  have  existed  more  or  less  fixed  com- 
pilations of  this  material.  Since  in  course  of  time  this  oral  tradition  did  not 
remain  unaltered  the  stories  communicated  and  the  information  furnished  by 
the  ancient  commentators  and  epic  and  puranic  works  of  later  time  do  not — as 


L.  Rocheb,  a possible  background  of  the  dkhydna  hjTnns  of  the  ^gved&, 
Proc.  27  Int.  Congr.  Or.  1967  (Wiesbaden  1971),  p.  297.  See  also  Hobsch,  V.  G.  L., 
p.  341. 

It  may  be  remembered  that  sometimes  the  narrative  stanzas  of  the  poet  him- 
self supplied  some  information.  An  instance  of  an  incomplete  statement  or  a dialogue 
becoming  clear  with  the  help  of  other  passages  is  B'V.  4,  18,  2 : ef,  8,  45,  4f. ; 77,  If. 

®®  Oral  explanation  of  texts  or  chants  which  often  are  hardly  intelligible  to 
uneducated  members  of  the  audience  has  for  many  centuries  been  a common  feature 
of  Indian  social  and  religious  life.  While  most  of  the  themes  are  a matter  of  common 
knowledge  and  the  plot  and  the  cast  of  characters  of  lectures  and  dramatic  per- 
formances are  as  a rule  fixed,  the  information  or  ‘message’  is  conveyed  through 
the  prose  parts  which — ^whether  they  are  diaiogized  or  not — permit  a great  deal  of 
improvisation. 


210 


J.  Gonda  • Vedic  Literature 


far  as  we  are  able  to  see — ^always  tally  with  the  contents  of  the  suktas.  The  fact 
that  these  mUm,  generally  speaking,  were — ^like  many  other  hymns,  it  should 
be  remembered®^ — ^not  enjoined  in  the  ritual  ceremonies  as  described  in  the 
sMrm  etc.  known  to  us  is  not  very  surprising.  These  texts  may  have  been 
included  in  the  Rgveda — a corpus  of  an  on  the  whole  considerably  different 
character — because  they  were  beheved  to  be  inherently  powerful  and  could  he 
used,  for  instance,  as  legend  speUs®®  or  accompany  optional  rites  performed 
from  some  interested  motive®®.  The  dramatic  element,  which  is  very  often 
|H*eseiit  in  sacred  poems  expressing  mythical  truths  or  relating  traditions  about 
legendary  ancestora  and  intended  to  secure  important  results,  could  be  greatly 
expanded  by  the  literal  quotation  of  the  words  of  the  divine  or  deified  principal 
characters.  The  wish  to  preserve  these  words  in  a fixed  form  can  therefore  have 
been  one  of  the  Actors  determining  the  inclusion  of  these  dialogues  in  the 
Rgveda®®. 


•"  See  p.  83  f.,  87. 

E.g,  3,  33;  10,  108;  see  Aisdobf,  o.c.,  p. 


205. 


dialogue  hymns  are  prescribed  in  the 
^ case  of  a man  who  wishes  to  estabUsh  a kingdom 

t i,  -"o,  i,  33  in  crossing  a river  {2,  1,  4). 

ard  T P^ose  often  contains  passages  of  fixed 

m co^istmg  of  conversation  between  the  persons  who  play  a part 

m the  storj- (see  e.g.P.  Boas,  Primitive  art,  New  York  Ifikp  309)  ^ 


Chapter  Y 


THE  STYLE  OF  THE  YEDIC  BYimS 


I,  The  Egveda  from  the  stylistic  ‘point  of  view 

Widely  divergent  judgements  liave  in  the  course  of  the  last  century  been 
pronounced  on  the  aesthetic  value  of  Vedic  poetryb  The  perfection  and  sub- 
limity of  the  whole  collection  of  verses,  the  grandeur  of  its  sentiments,  the 
brilliance  of  its  images  and  the  profundity  of  its  inspiration  were,  in  the  eyes  of 
an  early  critic®,  only  marred  by  a lack  of  unity  and  proportions  and  an  excess 
of  subtleness  and  metaphysics.  The  immistakable  monotony  of  part  of  the 
prayers  and  eulogies  was  as  frequently  emphasized  as  the  charm  of  the  Usas 
hymns® ; the  naive  and  delightful  simplicity,  the  delicacy  of  thought  and  feelings 
so  l3nically  praised  by  earlier  authors^  was  in  the  eyes  of  others®  little  more 
than  primitiveness  or  the  effect  of  an  accumulation  of  worn  and  trivial  liturgical 
formulas.  In  the  presence  of  ‘"much  genuine  joy,  sorrow  and  anger,  much 
beauty  of  expression,  much  real  poetry”  the  artificiality  of  hymns  made  to 
order  was  according  to  many  critics  to  be  condoned®.  It  has  been  observed  that 
the  language  of  the  poets  had  undergone  long  cultivation  and  that  much  of 
their  work  must  have  been  ‘artificiaF  and  the  expression  of  speculation  or  of 
some  vague  mysticism.  It  has  also  been  contended  that  part  of  the  texts  were 
composed  by  competing  poets  without  religious  inspiration^. 

However,  the  Rgveda  is  neither  a collection  of  primitive  popular  poems®  (as 
it  was  apt  to  be  described  at  an  earlier  period  of  indological  studies)  nor  an 
anthology  of  purely  literary  poems,  of  fastidiously  elaborated  artificial  com- 


^ Cf.  C.  KmoBLAN  Haja,  in  12  AIOC  I,  p.  32. 

“ B.  St.  Hilaire,  at  J.  des  Savants  1853,  p.  463;  1854,  p.  204. 

® Cf.  e.g.  W.  Geigeb,  in  Nord  und  Sud  16  (1881),  p.  84;  Gbiitith,  H.  !p.V.  I,  p. 
YU;  WiNTEBOTEZ,  H.  I.  L.  I,  p.  91 ; 94.  According  to  P.  S.  Shastki,  Nagpur  Univ. 
Journal  12  (1948),  p.  56  the  Rg\’eda  is  an  anthology-  of  beautiful 

* See  e.g.  A.  Kaegi,  Der  Rig-Veda,  Leipzig  1878,  p.  4;  33;  35;  H.  BsorNNHorEB, 
Gber  den  Geist  der  indischen  L^ik,  Leipzig  1882,  p.  5;  Gbassma^tn,  RY.  iibers.  I, 
p.  YI;  L.  VON  ScHBOEDEB,  Indieos  Literatur  und  Cultur,  Leipzig  1887,  p.  37;  cf. 
also  OuDENBEBG,  at  ZDMG  49,  p.  172  (=  K.S.  p.  674). 

® See  S.  Levi,  A.  Bergaigne  et  Findiariisme,  Paris  1890. 

« See  e.g.  E.  W.  Hopkins,  in  JAGS  15,  p.  274.  P.  S.  Sastbi  (Nagpur  Univ.  J . 10„ 
p.  30;  11,  p.  1)  is  of  the  opinion  that  the  Rgv’eda  is  essentially  poetic  in  character.. 

7 ^iTH,  R.  Ph.  V.  U.  p.  14. 

8 See  also  Oudenbebg,  Yedaforschung,  p-  11. 


212 


J.  Gouda  * Yedic  Literature 


positions,  or  a mere  string  of  eccentric  rhetorical  delicacies  and  subtleties®.  It  is 
rather  a body  of,  on  the  whole,  sMlfally  composed  religions  hynmsi®  serving 
useful  purposes,  produced  by  more  or  less  inspired  poets  belonging  to  the 
sacerdotal  class,  its  style  eshibiting  a most  interesting,  often  almost  harmoni- 
ous, mixture  of  archaic  and  archaistic  traditionalism  on  one  hand  and  fnnc- 
tioiial  elaboration  on  the  other.  The  often  finished  phraseology,  the  strophic 
structure  and  the  persistence  of  a conventional  framework  all  suggest  a tra- 
ditional literary  form,  the  frequent  references  to  inspiration  and  the  poerns’ 
fnnctioiis  point  to  personal  impulses.  For  a modem  reader,  stud3dng  the  Veda 
entails  being  persuaded  to  perceive  an  imaginary  world  through  the  instrunien- 
tality  of  a difficult,  in  places  formulaic  or  technical,  language  and  an  at  first  sight 
curious,  but  on  closer  investigation  highly  adequate  style. 

Those  authors  are  no  doubt  right  who  have  characterized  these  collections  as 
poetry  of  very  uneven  literary  merit^^.  From  the  stylistic  point  of  view  the 
hymns  are  neither  unifonn  nor  of  the  same  value.  Although  on  the  whole  the 
hymns  proper  and  other  component  parts  impress  us  as  skilfully  composed, 
there  is  indeed  no  denying  that  some  texts  are  clumsy^  feeble,  stereotyped, 
artificial,  or  confused  compilations^®.  Other  suJdas  have,  in  most  cases  rightly, 
been  characterized  as  banal,  mediocre  or  devoid  of  a deeper  meaning^®,  as 
incoherent  or  repeating  what  in  other  hymns  is  said  in  a more  felicitous  or 
impressive  way.  Others  again  have  been  stigmatized  as  obscure,  or  bristling 
with  rare,  ambiguous  or  enigmatic  expressions^*.  However,  obscurity  as  well 
as  banality  may  be  due  to  our  lack  of  comprehension^^.  The  Mitra  hymn  3,  59, 
for  instance,  is  nowadays  held  in  much  higher  estimation  than  half  a century 
ago^®.  It  would  however  be  hardly  natural  for  a corpus  comprising  the  produc- 
tions of  many  poets  extending  over  a long  period  to  include  no  mechanical 
stanzas  and  commonplace^’  hymns  beside  crisp  and  vigorous  compositions  of 

® As  was  Bebgaignu’s  opinion,  at  MSL  4 (1881),  p.  96. 

Cf.  S,  K.  De,  in  mA  9 (1947),  p.  129. 

« See  e.g.  P.  Regnaud,  in  RHR  21  (1890),  p.  301;  MAODONBin,  H.  S.  L.  p.  65; 
V.  G-  P,4EAjrjPE,  in  13  AIOC  II,  p.  29;  v.  Guasexapp,  L.  I.,  p.  53. 

“ E.g.  15.V.  1,  186,  4;  2,  39;  8,  5;  10,  93;  for  ‘elementary’  poems  see  e.g.  1,  1 
(RENOr,  E.  V.  P.  XII,  p.  71);  18;  4,  49;  8,  5;  11;  43;  44;  85.  As  to  2,  18  see  Gbass- 
MAXX,  libera.  I,  p.  25;  4,  38:  Renou,  E.  V.  P.  XVI,  p.  l61;  8,  35:  Renou, 
E.  ¥.  P.  XVI,  p.  64;  10,  105:  Geedneb,  RV.  HI,  p.  323;  10,  149:  Rekou,  E.  V.  P. 
XV,p.32. 

« Cf,  e.g.  1,  85  (Rexou,  E.  V.  P.  X,  p.  6);  137;  5,  42  (Reis-qu,  E.  V.  P.  IV,  p. 
€4);  51;  71;  7,  65;  66;  77  (Renou,  E.  V.  P.  HI,  p.  95);'8, 13;  10, 170  (Gelbneb,  RV. 

Ill,  p,  3i5);  1.  89,  If. 

E.g.  1,  151  (Renou,  E.V.P.  VH,  p.  34);  5,  44  (Geebneb,  RV.  H,  p.  46);  8, 
13;  41;  10,  73  (E.  W.  Fay,  at  PADS  1895,  JAOS  16,  p.  CCXXIX);  106  (Geednbb, 

”^V.  Ill,  p,  325). 

“ Cf.  V.  Henby,  in  MSL  9,  p.  108. 

P.  Thieme,  Mitra  and  Aryaman,  New  Haven  Conn.  1957,  p.  39;  J.  Gonda, 
The  Vedic  gai  Mitra,  Leiden  1972,  p.  91. 

versifier  of  8,  73,  15,  for  instance,  seems  to  betray  himself  by  bathos  and 
tririaiity:  “Do  not  overlook  ns  with  thousands  of  kme  anij  horses.” 


The  style  of  the  Vedie  hjinns 


213 


true  solemnity'^*,  genuine  religious  feeling  and  real  poetical  excellence,  some  of 
which  were  never  paralleled  in  later  times.  However,  this  is  not  to  endorse  the 
attempts  made  to  distingiiish  between  two  genres  of  ¥edic  poetry,  that  of  the 
original  formulas  and  the  more  or  less  spontaneous  expressions  of  poetic  thought 
and  that  of  learned  and  complex,  liturgical  or  theological,  patchwork^*. 

With  the  exception  of  mani^n  X there  are  hardly  differences  of  dialect 
worth  mentioning.  In  many  peculiarities  of  their  style^®,  pi  acticaly  all  the  hymns 
are,  as  far  as  the  selection  of  syntactic  constructions  and  stylistic  'figures’  are 
concerned,  simple  or  at  least  in  harmony  with  well-known  tendencies,  their 
obscurity  being  due  to  our  imperfect  understanding  of  allusions,  references  and 
terminology.  The  largely  hieratic,  sometimes  technicaF^,  highly  archaic — ^and 
in  places  archaizing — language,  only  half  intelligible  to  anyone  who  knows  only 
classical  Sanskrit,  creates  the  impression  of  natural  vigour.  A great  wealth  of 
grammatical  forms^^,  a considerable  number  of  nominal  compounds  and  a 
copious  vocabulary,  (if  appearances  are  not  deceptive)  rich  in  stately  words  and 
phrases,  an  often  concise  and  elliptic  phraseology  enable  the  poets  to  couch 
their  thoughts  in  melodious,  dignified,  sufficiently  rmanced  stanms  which, 
while  being  complete  in  themselves,  often  leave  full  scope  for  imagination  and 
supplementation,  stanzas  which  in  their  contents  and  structure  may  be  sup- 
posed to  have  arisen,  as  a literary  form,  under  the  Influence  of  the  style  of 
prayer  and  ritual  formula. 

There  is  however  a considerable  amount  of  truth  in  the  statement*®  that  in 
many  places  the  phraseology  of  the  Rgvedic  h3rmns  seems  to  be  drowned  in  an 
indistinct  mass  of  h3;p>erbolic  eulogies;  especially  within  the  h3rnms  addressed 
to  the  same  deity  the  same  selections  of  words  and  expressions  are  found  again 


Cf.  e.g.  ?.V.  1,  21;  2,  12;  5,  85. 

Regnaub,  O.C.,  p.  302.  For  Titerary  strata’  also  S.  K.  Belvajlkae,  in  2 AIOC, 
p.ll. 

For  the  style  of  the  mantras  in  general  see  Gonda,  Old  Indian,  p.  153;  Renou, 
at  BSL  61,  p.  1 (emphasizing  the  isolated,  anomalous,  esoteric,  unnatural  and 
symbolical  features);  at  Silver  Jubilee  Vol.  Zinbim-Kagaku  Kenkyusyo,  Kyoto 
Univ.  1954,  p.  309.  For  linguistic  questions  bearing  on  stylistics  see  Gonba,  I.c. 
SuriDises  have  been  raised  with  regard  to  ‘coarse’  or  ‘popular’  expre^ions — often 
misjudged  by  westerners — : on  10,  38,  5 A.  Ludwig,  in  ZDMG  40,  p.  713;  Geld  neb, 
RV.  HI,  p.  190;  to  ‘slang’ : Pischel-Geldnek,  V.  S.  I,  p.  327;  II,  p.  332;  Geldnes, 

Ill,  p.  135.  Questions  relating  to  a preference  for  rare  or  special  words  must 
be  left  undiscussed.  See  e.g.  RV.  1,  62;  127-139;  3,  55;  4,  16,  9;  5,  12;  15;  41;  44; 
8,  13;  9,  73,  and  Geldneb’s  notes  (cf.  also  RV.  I,  p.  336;  II,  p.  91;  392;  427).  In 
Tiym-ng  dedicated  to  the  Maruts  there  is  a certain  predilection  for  terms  for  “sport - 
(ing)”  (Renou,  E.  V.  P.  X,  p.  59),  in  those  addressed  to  Bawnfor  “splendour  and 
prestige”  (dyumrmz  E.  V.  P.  HI,  p.  15). 

21  See  e.g.  8,  31,  5;  9,  6,  5;  11,  5;  10,  4,  5;  ef.  9,  113,  5;  and  compare,  in  general, 
L.  Renou,  at  Die  Sprache,  1 (1949),  p.  11. 

22  For  the  stylistic  value  of  grammatical  doublets  see  Renou,  E.  P.  I,  p.  49; 
54. 

2®  Renou,  H.  P.  p.  4.  See  also  Bloomfield,  Repetitions,  passim. 


214 


J.  €kmda  • Vedic  Literature 


and  again.  TMs  l>eiit  for  similar  and  homogeneous  expression  and  more  or  less 
stereotyped  pliraseology  was  no  doubt  promoted  by  the  benotbeistic  tenden- 
cies : the  pc^ts  were  almost  always  inclined  to  attribute  the  same  or  similar  high 
qualities  to  the  gods  eulogized^^.  The  phraseology  employed,  for  instance  to 
descril:^  Indra,  may  recur  in  poems  addressed  to  a subordinate  god,  such  as 
Parjanya  (5,  83),  w-hose  range  of  action  has  something  in  common  with  Indra’s. 
Many  descriptive  words  are  moreover  vague  and  applicable  to  the  plurality  of 
divine  beings:  they  are  “active,”  “zealous,”  “supporting  the  cultivators,” 
Fixed  combinations  of  words  may,  in  similar  contexts,  suffice  to  indicate  a 
situation  which  obviously  is  not  in  need  of  a more  detailed  description^®.  Yet 
the  occurrence,  and  especially  the  combination,  of  certain  images  and  epithets, 
and  a predilection  for  typical  allusions  characterize  many  passages  as  dedicated 
to  definite  gods  even  if  their  names  are  absent®®.  There  is,  in  marMa  IX,  a 
t3rpical  smna  phraseology,  but  this  also  is  monotonously  repeated®’.  Besides, 
there  are  considerable  differences  between  the  hymns  in  complication,  in 
allusive  or  enigmatic  obscurity,  in  syntactic  constructions.  Whereas  the  Usas 
hymns  belong  to  the  easiest  parts  of  the  corpus®®  other  poems  are  known  as 
complicated  'baroque/  studied  or  overladen  with  similes®*.  It  is  however  not 
always  easy  to  determine  whether  a passage  is  ‘mystic’  or  just  ‘narrative’  in 
character. 

Oldenberg  at  the  time  found  himself  unable  to  detect,  in  these  hymns,  many 
coherent  lines  of  thought.  It  must  be  admitted  that  the  independent  and  often 
isolated  character  of  many  stanzas  does  not  promote  the  development  of  elabo- 
rated ideas  or  chains  of  reasonings®*.  The  texts  indeed  afford  numerous  instances 
of  interraption,  anacoluthon,  abrupt  transitions®^,  of  successions  of  sentences 
without  any  apparent  connexion®®.  How  often  a poet  has  suppressed  a thought 
which  would  have  smoothed  an  abrupt  transition  away  we  do  not  know®®,  but 
there  can  be  no  doubt  that  in  supplying  missing  links  we  are  Kable  to  exagger- 
ate, Many  passages  can  be  elucidated  by  parallels  in  other  parts  of  the  corpus®^ 


Y ^ P-  CCXXXVI); 

« ^ P-  SCHLEEATH,  Bas  Konigtiim  im  Big- 

iind  Atharvaveda,  Wiesbaden  1960,  p.  43.  ^ ^ 

“ Cf.  e.g.  Bexou,  E.  V.  P.  IV,  p.  69  on  ^tV.  5,  44. 

Cf.  also  Matnxab,  Bepetitions,  p.  88. 

” See  also  Renou,  E.  V.  P.  HI,  p.  1. 

B.  V.  P.  Xin,  p.  159):  10,  27  (Gbumth, 
.fZ'  P-  (Renou,  E.  V.  P.  X,  p.  110) 

For  an  exception  see  ?,V.  5,  81,  2a  and  3-5  and  compare  8 47  15-  18 

« W.g.  RV.  1,  52,  lOff.;  1,  162;  5,  48,  5;  61,  Of.;  8!Tfr86  10  156  1-3 

aad  cf,  Geldhee,  RV.  I p 86  , , x,  oo,  i-a,  iu,  loo,  i 6 

f,  T *“>■ 


The  style  of  the  Yedic  hymns 


215 


Paraileiism  or  identity  of  thoughts  are  indeed  extremely  frequent®^  sho'W'ing 
that  notwithstanding  differences  in  subject  and  poetical  value  the  lines  of 
thought  are  often  governed  by  uniformity®®.  On  the  other  hand,  a motif  once 
introduced  is  in  a frequency  of  cases  somewhat  elaborately  continued:  (When 
it  rains)  the  mountains  dress  in  clouds  and  * violent’  men  (the  gods  of  storm) 
loosen  (the  garment)  (5,  85,  4)®^.  Additions  or  supplementary  explanations — 
for  instance  after  digressing  or  lingering  over  a detail — ^are  not  uncommon®®. 
The  tendenc}"^  to  accumulate  details,  to  make  great  play  with  the  possibilities 
of  characterization  and  descriptive  elaboration  rather  than  with  an  uninter- 
rupted continuation  of  a theme  is  already  in  this  earliest  document  of  Tnflifl.n 
poetry  clearly  recognizable. 

It  is  true  that  generally  speaking  the  way  in  which  these  authors  compose 
‘narrative’  passages  impresses  us  as  irregular  and  elementary ; that  many  details 
of  the  composition  are  not  perceptibly  determined  by  an  intrinsic  necessity 
resulting  from  the  structure  and  character  of  the  whole  poem ; that  passages 
are  few  in  which  a poet  pursues  the  same  subject®®,  allows  himself  to  dwell  upon 
the  same  event  or  (what  we  would  call)  systematically  to  relate  an  important 
occurrence^®.  Yet  many  authors  prove  able  to  present  their  hearers  with  a vivid 
description  of  some  incident  or  a sober  statement  of  a mythological  fact  which 
would  not  have  been  unbecoming  in  an  epic  narrative  of  greater  length:  2, 
30,  3: 


We  can  only  touch  on  the  interesting  subject  of  the  stylistic  iaterdependence 
of  hymns  and  groups  of  hymns.  Those  dedicated  to  Parjanya  and  the  frogs  (7,  lOI- 
103)  draw  in  their  phraseology  from  the  Indra  h3rmns  (W.  Noemak  Bbowtn*,  in 
NIA  2,  p.  115),  the  hymns  addressed  to  the  double  deities  have,  in  this  respect, 
much  in  common  (Gokda,  Dual  deities,  passim).  For  similarity  of  ob\doiisly  ritual- 
istic hymns  (e.g.  the  dprl  hymns)  see  BnooMFrEUD,  Repetitions,  p.  16;  for  imitative 
hymns  in  general  (the  Valakhilyas  and  4,  13-14;  9,  104-105),  ibidem,  p.  13;  for 

9,  5 (a  soma  pavamdna  hymn  modelled  upon  the  dpri  hymns)  Renoi:,  E.  V.  P.  VIII, 
p.  4;  for  the  Usas  and  Soma  hymns,  E.  V.  P.  Ill,  p.  2;  for  the  Asvin  hymns  5,  73; 
74  and  8,  73,  OuDE^mEEG,  ISToten,  11,  p.  136;  in  general,  T.  Ja.  Elizabeisteova, 
Rigveda,  Moscow  1972,  p.  37;  for  particulars,  Bloomfielb,  Repetitions,  p.  589. 
It  goes  wdthout  saying  that  in  many  cases  the  meaning  of  a stanza  is  elucidated  by^ 
another  text-place. 

See  e.g.  1,  4,  5:  3,  30,  1;  1,  186,  5:  3,  33,  10;  3,  5,  1:  3,  56,  4;  3,  53,  22:  7,  104, 
2:  4,  3,  10:  6,  66,  1;4,  22,  6;  7,21,  3:  10,  111,  9;  4,  23,  7:  2,  23,  17;  5,  6,  1:  6,  2,  2; 
6,  13,  5:  7,  68,  8,  etc.  etc.;  see  Gbudneb’s  and  Renou’s  commentaries. 

Cf.  e.g.  7,  18,  4;  36,  9;  7,  82,  5f.;  103,  5;  8,  19,  34f.;  8,  45,  14f.;  36 f.;  97,  2f.; 

10,  44,  6f.;  52,  4. 

See  e.g.  6,  1,  2ff.;  62,  If.;  7,  21,  4-6;  72,  2f.;  10,  25,  3f.;  30,  5f.;  45,  1-3;  89, 
3-5;  134,  3ff. 

Cf.  Renotj,  E.  V.  P.  I,  p.  45.  For  some  exceptions  (of  limited  compass):  2, 
38,  1-2;  3-6;  7-8;  3,  5,  5-6;  30,  12-13;  16-17;  4,  3,  9-10;  4,  6,  4-5. 

Compare  also  V.  Hekby,  Les  litteratures  de  Flnde,  Paris  1904,  p.  27.  This 
is  not  to  endorse  Keith’s  (R.  Ph.  V.  U.  p.  6)  opinion:  ‘‘when  the  Tedic  poet  seeks 
to  compass  more  elaborate  thought,  his  power  of  expression  seriously'  fails  Mm.” 


216 


J.  Gonda  • Tedic  Literature 


"Ob  fiigh  he  (Indrai  stood  in  the  air.  Hurled  his  weapon  to  Vrtra,  Who,  wrapping 
hirriself  in  rnist*^,  had  rushed  upon  him,  Indra  whose  weapon  was  sharp  con- 
quered the  enemy.” 

When  Indra  begins  the  battle  the  other  gods  abandon  him  for  fright : ^‘Shrink- 
ing from  the  snorting  of  Trtra  all  the  gods,  thy  companions,  left  thee  in  the 
lurch”  (8,  96,  7)*^.  "When  at  10, 113,  8 it  reads  that  they  cheered  Mm,  they  may 
be  supposed  to  have  returned,  but  this  detail  is  left  nnmentioned.  These  naixa- 
ti¥e  portions  find  their  match  in  the  minute  and  grapMc  descriptions  of  the 
personal  appearance  and  equipment  of  that  most  popular  deity,  the  defier  of 
foes,  glorious  in  battle. 

On  the  other  hand,  the  technique  of  these  poets  who  generally  select  some 
special  points  from  a series  of  mythological  or  legendary  events,  of  wMch  they 
presuppose  a knowledge,  is  not  well  suited  to  anything  that  borders  on  real 
nawative.  WTiile  choosing  the  episodes  with  care  and  emphasizing  the  critical 
moments,  while  weaving  marvefious  elements  around  the  central  themes  wMch 
they  vary  acconilng  to  their  purpose  and  insight,  they  do  not  provide  us  with 
regular  accounts  of  the  events  for  their  own  sake.  In  contradistinction  to  more 
or  less  successful  recapitulations  or  succinct  indications  of  a theme  truly 
narrative  passages  of  some  length  are  rare  and  where  they  occur  almost  always 
characterized  by  what  has  been  called  ‘immobiHsm’*^;  7,  83,  8: 

"To  Sudas,  in  the  combat  with  the  ten  kings  surrounded  on  all  sides. 

Ye,  O Indra  and  Vanina,  tried  to  render  assistance. 

While  (the  clan  of)  the  Trtsus,  (clad  in)  white,  wearing  braided  hair. 

Respectfully  worahipped  with  inspired  poetry,  possessors  of  poetic  inspiration.” 

Bescriptive  passages  in  the  proper  sense  of  the  term,  that  is  such  as  fill  one 
or  a few  stanzas  and  evoke  a clear  image  in  the  mind  of  the  hearer,  are  likewise 
comparatively  few  in  number.  Even  in  a case  such  as  4, 4,  10  the  picture  of  a 
warrior  who,  laden  vith  booty,  gold  and  horses,  returns  from  the  battle-field  is 
interrupted  by  the  statement  that  Agni  is  his  comrade  and  protector.  ”What 
appears  to  be— and  to  a certain  extent  is— a description  of  the  rains  (5,  63,  3ff.) 
is  no  doubt  designed  in  magnification  of  divine  power.  Although  the  ninth 
ffwisdofo  consists  entirely  of  hymns  dealing  with  the  preparation  (‘clarification*) 
of  soma^  it  offers  us  neither  a coherent  nor  a clearly  detailed  picture  of  the 
pertinent  procedure.  Instead  of  this  the  poets  take  delight  in  viewing  it  in  all 
aspects,  in  elucidating  it  by  a variety  of  metaphors  and  in  penetrating  its 
significance.  Even  highly  emotive  subjects,  for  instance  war  and  battle,  are 

« Cf.  5,  32,  4;  10,  73,  5;  111,  6.  For  Ladra’s  fight  with  Vrtra  see  also  E.  B. 
at-  JAOS  11  (1885),  p.  136  and  PAOS  1880,  p.  XLVII 

« C£  4,  18,  11;  8,  93,  14f.;  10,  113,  6. 

« See  e.g.  I,  33,  4ff.  (Geli>]steb,  Auswahl,  II,  p.  6);  179,  6;  5,  45,  11;  83,  10. 
\otim  also  the  succinct  formulations  of  prayers,  charms  etc.,  such  as  5,  78,  9;  6, 

-8,  8;  naimtive  final  stanzas  e.g.  1,  158,  6.  For  3,  7,  10  see  V.  Henet,  in  MSL  10, 

p.  is. 

Rbnoij,  E.  V.  P.  Vn,  p.  85.  Cf.  also  Gelbnee,  V.  S,  I,  p.  291. 


The  style  of  the  Yedie  hjrniii 


217 


pictured  with  a few — ^though  veracious — strokes Yet^  to  mention  only  one 
exception,  2,  38,  2 f.  is  a varied  description  of  sunset : when  Savitar  reaches  out 
Ms  arms  everytMng  obeys  Mm:  the  wind  dies  down,  the  traveller  nnhamesses 
Ms  horses,  the  wayfarer  takes  a rest,  the  voracity  of  the  b,irds  of  prey  is  for  a 
moment  intemipted.  Many  poets  do  not  fail  in  a certain  ability  to  insert,  by 
way  of  illustration,  strings  of  felicitous  characteristics:  “f India, ) who  slays 
with  Ms  arrows  the  unexpecting  many  that  commit  great  sin;  who  does  not 
forgive  the  arrogant  man  Ms  arrogance  . . (2,  12,  10).  Especially  in  mono- 

logues and  dialogues  some  poets  prove  to  be  able  to  typify  their  figures  success- 
fully. Hymns  such  as  10,  119  (the  so-called  drunken  India)  **  and  10,  34  (the 
gambler)  are  among  the  best  examples.  Some  stanzas  at  least  of  the  dialogue 
between  India  and  the  Maruts  (cf.  1,  165,  6 ff.)  give  a good  idea  of  the  former's 
character  or  behaviour : claiming  everytMng  for  Mmself  he  denies  that  the  Ma- 
rats  in  any  way  assisted  Mm  w^Mle  performing  Ms  great  deeds.  The  eonclusion 
that  such  dramatic  or  emotional,  or  at  least  ‘human,'  passages  should,  mainly 
or  exclusively,  be  due  to  a clash  of  religious  opiMons  or  differences  in  cult  and 
worsMp^’  is  by  no  means  obvious. 

Throughout  the  Rgveda  there  are  felicitous  stanzas,  -well-expressed  thoughts, 
touching  images,  sketchy  pictures,  harmomous  and  impressive  combinations  of 
stylistic  procedures^®.  In  1,  115,  2 the  Sun  is  said  to  follow  Dawn  as  a youth 
runs  after  a girl.  The  Morning- Wind  illuminates  heaven  and  earth,  because  he 
brings  the  day-blush,  and  that  is  Ms  glory  (1,  134,  3).  At  1,  122,  2 night  and 
morning,  represented  as  two  wives  who,  at  daybreak,  will  answer  a call  of  their 
husband,  are  described  as  a barren  woman  dressed  in  a badly  woven  (or 
threadbare)  garment  and  as  a beauty  resplendent  in  golden  attire  with  the 
splendour  of  the  sun.  There  are  many  grapMc — but  almost  always  short — 
references  to  natural  phenomena  sho-wing  that  a keen  po-wer  of  observation  was 
often  complemented  by  the  gift  of  pictorial  expression.  There  are  the  vigorous 
descriptions  of  Savitar,  the  Sun,  coming  through  the  firmament  in  Ms  chariot 
golden  in  colour  and  equipment^®;  of  Agni’s  voracity,  when  he  subdues  the 

Cf.  6,  46,  Ilf.;  7,  83,  2f.,  and  also  5,  10,  6. 

See  p.  149. 

A.  HiLiiEBRANDT,  Liedcr  des  Rgveda,  Gottingen-Leipzig  1913,  p.  67. 

« See  also  S.  F.  hliCHAUSXi,  in’Scientia  87  (1952),  p.  123;  E.  Hauschixd,  in 
Festschrift  F.  Weller,  Leipzig  1954,  p.  284.  One  should  not  ho’?^’ever  subscribe  to 
the  view  that  the  Rg\'’eda  is  a collection  of  ‘Iwics  of  love  and  beauty”;  the  state- 
ment that  its  central  theme  is  “the  unravelling  and  exposition  of  beauty”  fP.  S. 
Sastbi,  in  QJj\lS  50,  p.  21)  can  lead  to  serious  misunderstanding.  In  stud>dng  the 
meaning  of  certain  words  (Sri,  bhudra  etc.)  Oudenbebg  also  too  onesidedly  em- 
phasized the  aspect  of  beauty  (Die  vedisehen  Morte  fur  “schon”  . . . und  das 
vedische  SchonheitsgefuM,  NG  1918,  p.  35  (=  E.S.,  p.  830));  very  often,  what  is 
“beautiful”  to  Vedic  man  is  also,  or  primarily,  “suited  to  its  purpose,  pre-eminently 
useful,  auspicious,  excellent  etc.”  G.  Y.  Ch  a kb  at  abti  , in  PO  7 (1942),  p.  49  is 
nearer  to  the  mark:  the  Vedic  poet  is  a revealer  and  fashioner  of  (what  is  Ms  eyes 
was)  truth  (cf.  ^V.  10,  5,  2). 

Cf.  1,  35,  2;  9;  2,  38;  4,  53,  2;  6,  71,  5;  7,  38,  1. 


218 


J.  Gonda  • Vedic  Literature 


trees,  Ike  a warrior  the  enemies®®;  of  rain  accoinpanied  by  wind  and  lightning 
which  makes  the  plants  straighten  themselves  bringing  refreshment  to  all 
creatures®^;  there  is  the  evO'Cative  picture  and  conjuration  of  a conflagration 
ill  RT.  10,  142.  The  sacriflcial  fire,  sprinkled  with  butter  (and)  moving  grace- 
fnllv,  unites  with  the  brightness  of  the  snn  (5,  37,  1) ; in  the  rains  the  waters 
gush,  the  trees  are  swept  away  (5,  58,  6) in  a battle  ^^the  ends  of  the  earth 
nmde  the  impression  of  being  covered  (with  dust) ; the  tumult  has  risen  to  the 
heavens®’  (7,  83,  3).  There  are  references  to  evening  and  night  in  10, 127,  to  the 
sporting,  noisy  and  brilliant  troop  of  the  Mamts  with  their  cars,  garlands  and 
golden  ornaments  in  1,  37;  85  and  elsewhere  and  a characterization  of  the  god- 
dess Dawn,  who,  being  conscious  of  the  beanty  of  her  body,  stands  up,  like  a 
bathing  (woman)  to  let  herself  be  seen^®;  6,  64; 

(1)  “Like  waves  of  water,  bright  in  splendour 
The  radiant  Dawns  have  risen  to  be  glorious. 

She  makes  all  paths  easy,  fair  to  travel; 

The  wealthy,  benevolent  Daksina  has  appeared. 

(2)  Thou  showest  thyself  gracious;  far  shines  thy  lustre; 

Thy  radiance,  thy  splendours  have  flown  up  to  heaven. 

Looking  splendid,  thou  makest  bare  thy  bosom, 

Shinii^  in  majesty,  thou  Goddess  Dawn.” 

Sometimes  an  event  or  natural  phenomenon  is  in  the  same  stanza  pictured 
as  well  as  mythologically  interpreted;  4,  7; 

(11)  “‘When  he  grown,  greedily  (consuming)  the  foods  with  his  greedy  (flame), 

"Y  oung  Agm  makes  the  greedy  (wind)  his  messenger; 

He  follows  the  roaring  of  the  wind,  consuming  (the  foods); 

He  so  to  say  urges  the  swift  one  on;  the  courser  makes  haste.” 

It  Is  self-evident  that  there  often  is  a strongly  religions  or  ritualistic  flavour  to 

these  descriptions. 

ords  for  colours,  not  always  easy  to  determine,  are  often  inserted  to  add  to 
the  clearne®  and  vividness  of  a descriptive  passage^^.  Early  in  the  morning  the 
sun  is  a brightly  coloured  animal,  the  god  of  Are  is  a reddish  bull  appearing 
among  the  dark  (cows) ; the  officiants  are  invited  to  offer  the  extracted  reddish- 
brown  filament  ji.e.  the  soma)  to  Indra;  the  W’hite  udder  swelled  for  a tpsn 
named  Black  (Krsna).  The  w^hite  and  resplendent  flashes  of  lightning  are 
mentioned  m the  same  context  as  Agni,  radiant  with  Hght;  the  sun  is  the  gol- 
den {object)  of  broad  compass  in  the  firmament ; night  is  a black  cloth ; there 


RV.  1,  143,  5;  cf.  2,  4,  5;  7,  6;  6,  12,  4. 

« 5,  83,  4;  9;  10;  9,  41,  3;  cf.  1,  164,  42. 

6,  46,  13f.  (race);  7,  36,  3 and  8,  20,  4 (rains);  10,  121,  2-6  the  power 
01  tile  primeval  god  and  see  also  Renou,  E.  V.  P.  X,  p.  10. 

P'  Renou,  Pofeie 

“ Cf.  also  P.  S.  Sastei,  at  ABORI  28,  p.  62. 

su^esting  the  idea  of  wealth-see  also  1, 35,4; 

li,  3,  44,  50,  8;  38,  2 (Savitar  with  the  golden  hand). 


The  style  of  the  Yedic  hymns 


219 


are  various  classes  of  frogs,  inter  alia  the  speckled  or  yellomish  green®*.  More- 
over, to  denote  objects  or  concepts  the  poets  often  had  the  choice  of  a wealth  of 
‘'synonyms* — ^thns  a ‘horse’  may  be  called  cdtu,  arvM,  atya,  Mfja,  mpfi,  mjin; 
the  fine  semantic  differences  between  these,  so  essential  for  a complete  under- 
standing  of  the  texts,  are  however  as  a nde  dilficnlt  to  determine®^.  That,  for 
instance,  Bharadvaja  knew  how  to  phrase  effective  contrasts  appears  from  6, 
3,  3 putting  into  relief  the  differences  between  Agni’s  two  aspects:  “Whose 
appearance  is,  like  (that)  of  the  sun,  spotless,  (but)  terrible,  when  thine  in- 
tuition— (and)  glowing  (thou  art) — ^vigorous,  sets  out  for  booty®®,  the  same  fgod) 
is  at  night  anywhere  pleasant,  (affording)  a residence,  he  the  wood-bom  one”®®, 
iit  10,  97,  23  a medicinal  plant  is  said  to  be  the  upper  one,  the  trees  its  subjects. 

There  is  no  lack  of  eloquent  and  aptly  worded  prayers  and  invitations*®: 
“Do  not,  0 beneficent  one  (Indra),  abandon  us  in  this  danger  in  battle,  for  the 
end  of  thy  might  cannot  be  fully  reached”  (1,  54,  1);  “Dash,  0 beneficent  one, 
the  whole  crew  of  these  witches  in  the  lurking  place,  on  the  rubbish  ...”  (1, 133, 
3) ; “Destroy  the  fiend  (who  appears)  as  a great  owl,  as  a little  owl,  as  a dog  . . . ; 
grind  up  the  evil  being  as  though  with  a millstone”  (7, 104,  22).  Many  passages 
are  couched  in  simple  and  direct  language,  whether  they  are  very  human 
prayers — ‘ Alay  I not  live  to  lose  a friend  or  son”  (8,  45,  36) — or  in  the  cosmo- 
gonic hymns  rise  to  a lofty  expression  of  the  underlying  thought. 

Irrespective  of  stylistic  variations  conditioned  by  differences  in  subject- 
matter  the  styles  of  different  parts  of  these  collections  may  vary  considerably. 
For  instance,  those  hymns  of  Rgveda  IX  which  are  composed  in  the  shorter 
metres  are  on  the  whole  in  a ‘light,’  simple  and  uncomplicated  style,  whereas 
those  in  longer  metres  tend  to  be  ‘heavy^’  and  strained®®.  Similar  observations 
have  been  made  with  regard  to  the  hjonns  for  the  Maruts  included  in  manddl-a  I 
and  many  of  those  occurring  in  other  books 

Among  those  suJdas  which  various  authors  have  praised  for  the  comparatively 
high  order  of  their  poetical  excellence  are,  for  instance,  some  Usas  hymns,  e.g. 
1, 113®^;  3,  61 ; 7,  75 ff. ; the  Indra  hymn  2, 12®®;  the  Savitar  hymn  2,  38®® ; 2,  40 
addressed  to  the  dual  deity  Soma  and  Pusan®®;  the  sukta  5,  45  describing  sun- 


BV.  5,  75,  9;  6,  48,  6;  7,  98,  1;  10,  31,  11;  3,  1,  14;  5,  1,  12  (cf.  5,  61,  12);  4, 
13,  4;  7,  103,  6;  10. 

See  S.  S.  Bhawe,  20  AIOC  I,  p.  42. 

See  Gonda,  Vision,  p.  71. 

Compare  also  6,  39,  3 and  instances  such  as  6,  14,  3;  10,  10,  2f,;  105,  3f. 
See  e.g.  RV.  3,  42. 

Cf.  Renou,  E.  V.  P.  I,  p.  46  (see  also  IX,  p.  13). 

Cf.  Re^toij,  E.  V.  P.  X,  p.  6. 

Bebgaigjce,  in  J.  A.  1889  (I,  8-13),  p.  150f. 

A.  A.  IrlACDONEUL,  Hymns  from  the  Rigveda,  Calcutta-London  1922,  p.  48; 
WiNTEBNITZ,  H.  I.  L.  p.  85. 

Macboxeul,  H.  S.  L.  p.  78. 

®®  Bebgaigxe,  R.  V.  n,  p.  430. 


2m 


J.  Gonda  • Tedic  Literature 


rise®’;  the  classic  hjinii  5,  85  in  honour  of  Vanma®®;  the  sukta  addressed  to 
Sirja  and  YaMTanara  10,  88;  “the  pure,  simple  and  imaginative  hymn  to  the 
Forest”  fiO,  146)®®;  the  short  and  comparatively  simple  eulogy  of  Agni  10, 156; 
and  last  hut  not  least  the  cosmogonic  h3nmis’°  10,  90;  121 ; 129’^.  Although  the 
study  of  the  Vedas  is  reserved  for  specialized  scholars,  they  contain  many 
hymns  and  other  passages  which  can,  also  nowadays,  be  appreciated,  not  only 
by  those  who  seek  religious  ediScation  or  a deeper  xmderstanding  of  certain 
phases  of  human  culture,  hut  also  by  readers  who  try  to  discover  well-expressed 
thoughts,  happy  combinations  of  words,  harmonious  stanzas,  in  short  poetic 
beauty’2.  In  appreciating  the  aesthetic  or  evocative  value  of  the  individual 
hymns  tastes  and  opinions  will  always  differ,  but  the  fact  that  they  continue 
to  touch  the  hearts  of  modem,  and  not  in  the  last  place  of  Indian’®,  readers  is 
most  gratifying. 


LrDjEBS,  Vanina,  p.  325. 

Renou,  E.  \ . P.  VII,  p.  18;  for  7,  88  and  89  see  vox  Schboedeb,  l.c. 

” Das,  The  poetry  of  the  Rigveda,  AP  22  (1951),  p.  555,  who,  like  other 

modem  Indian  authors,  is  in  describing  the  “richness,  beauty,  depth  and  fervour” 
Of  tliese  poems  too  lavish  in  his  use  of  superlatives. 

'*  Hyperbolically  praised  by  Bbtjxnhofeb,  o.c.,  p.  14. 

Other  hymns  are  characterized  as  ‘original,’  e.g.  5,  64:  Rexoij  EVP  VII 
p 43;  as  ‘profom^,’  e g,  6.  9 (Gbidneb,  ^V.  n.  p.  101)  or  weU-considered,  e.g!  6,  51 
(Ibidem,  n,  p.  lo3).  One  should  however  avoid  speaking  of  a ‘Rgvedic  theory  of 
pc«t3y  or  hte^  criticism’  (P.  S.  S(h)astei,  in  IHQ  34,  p.  6;  12  AIOC  HI,  p.  232). 

For  a collection  of  translations  prepared  for  the  use  of  the  latter  category  of 
readers:  Ren’otj,  H.  P.  (see  p.  VH). 

w-  40,  p.  41;  IHQ  34,  p.  6;  Abbobikdo,  Hymns 

to  the  Mj3tic  Fire,  Pondicherry  1952,  p.  XXXIV;  and  othem  quoted  in  this  chapter. 


The  style  of  the  Tedic  hymEs 


221 


2.  Formulas,  paralklism  and  its  corollaries,  variation 

Whereas  earlier  stiidents  of  Indian  literature  were  inclined  to  the  view  that 
the  Rgveda  reflects  naive  beliefs  and  sentiments  straggling  with  a language  that 
had  never  been  a vehicle  of  poetical  ideas,  the  way  to  a more  adequate  insight 
was  paved  in  the  last  decades  of  the  XIX^  centnryh  It  became  clear^  that 
these  poets  must  have  stood  on  the  shoulders  of  many  generations  of  prede- 
cessors, that  a considerable  part  of  their  vocabulary,  style  and  technical 
procedures  was  inherited®.  Nowadays  there  is  hardly  any  dispute  over  the 
hj^othesis  that  already  in  prehistoric  times  poets  and  reciters  drew  on  and 
chose  from  a collective  inheritance  of  fixed  forms,  words,  phra^ses,  etc.  which 
were  on  the  one  hand  not  in  all  respects  identical  with  the  daily  parlance  of  the 
cononiinities  to  which  they  belonged^  and  on  the  other  possibly  varied  and 
reduced  in  number  by  gifted  poets  and  redactors.  One  of  the  mam  characteristics 
of  the  idiom  of  this  oral  poetry  was  a considerable  number  of  ‘formulas/  i.e.  of 
fixed  phrases  apt  to  recur  in  similar  circumstances®.  Helping,  in  ail  oral  poetry”, 
the  task  of  composition  these  ready-made  phrases,  many  of  which  variable  or 
adaptable  in  accordance  with  the  context,  proved  their  ivorth  also  from  the 
point  of  view  of  the  reciter  and  of  the  transmission®.  Even  single  words^, 
gravitating  to  certain  positions  in  the  verse  according  to  their  metrical  value 
had  formulaic  tendencies-  Some  of  them  most  probably  are  features  of  prehis- 
toric tradition  because  they  also  occur  in  other  ancient  Indo-European  liter- 
atures, e.g.  “undecaying  renown”  (dksiti  hdvah,  Srdvm  dhsitam)^  which 
recurs  in  Homer;  “the  herdsman  of  (the)  people”  for  a ruler  found  also  in 
ancient  Greek  and  German  poetry;  combinations  of  the  type  viyav  indrai  ca 
‘Vayu  (vocative)  and  Indra  (nominative)’®;  certain  introductory  formulas  such 

^ P.  VON  Bradke,  in  ZDMG  40  (1886),  p.  669. 

® Isolated  elements  of  that  ‘poetical  language’  had,  it  is  true,  been  brought  to 
light  at  an  earlier  date:  A.  Kuhn,  in  KZ  2 (1853),  p-  467. 

® See  R.  ScHSCETT,  Dichtimg  und  Dichtersprache  in  indogermanischer  Zeit, 
Wiesbaden  1967;  W.  Wtisr,  Von  indogermanischer  Dichtersprache,  RMma  12, 
Munchen  1969;  Zum  Problem  einer  indogermanischen  Dichtersprache,  Studia 
A.  Pagiiaro,  HI,  Rome  1969,  p.  251;  E.  Benveniste,  Phraseologie  po^tique  de 
Findo-iraneen,  in  Melanges  Renou,  p.  73;  H.  H.  Schaedeb,  in  Die  Weitiiteratur  18 
(1943),  p.  85;  Gonba,  S.  R.,  passim;  Renou,  Poesie  reii^euse,  p.  4;  E.  V.  P.  Ill, 
p.  3;  B.  L.  Ogibenin,  Semantic  aspect  of  the  Vedic  poetic  language  in  connection 
with  . . . the  Indo-European  poetic  language  (Russian),  Mcwcow  19  < 1. 

* For  a definition  see  M.  Leumann,  Die  lateinische  Dichtersprache,  Museum 
Helveticum  4 (1947),  p.  116  (=  Kleine  Schriften,  Zurich  1959,  p.  131).  Our  term 
‘plagiarism’  is  inapplicable;  see  also  Bloomfield,  Repetitions,  p.  19. 

® However,  the  non -narrative  character  of  these  texts  no  doubt  prevented  the 
formulas  proper  from  gaining  more  importance. 

* Cf.  e.g.  Bloomfield,  Repetitions,  p.  582;  Renou,  E.  V.  P.  HI,  p.  2. 

Among  them  some  pronouns,  vocatives,  case  forms. 

« A.  Fick,  Die  ehemalige  Spracheinheit  der  Indogermanen  Europas,  Gottingen 
1873,  p.  276.  See  e.g.  1,  40,  4. 

® RV.  1,  2,  5;  6;  135,  4;  Schmitt,  o.c.,  p.  11. 


222 


J.  Gt)nda  - Vedic  Literature 


as  {AV.  20,  127, 1)  ''Hear,  0 men  . . It  is  not  surprising  that  the  corre- 
spondences in  ancient  Iran  are  comparatively  nmnerons.  Among  these  are 
certatn  eomhinations  of  a nonn  and  an  adjective,  e.g.  a 'three-headed  and  six- 
eyed^  ddsa  (demon  or  barbarian:  RV.  10,  99,  6);  sequences  of  questions  intro- 
duced by  “I  ask’’  (1,  164,  34)^^;  the  pre-eminently  visual  type  of  nominal 
compound  exemplified  by  Vedic  vdjrahasta  'thimderboit-handed’  (lit.  'whose 
hand  is  with  the  thunderbolt’),  providing  a poet  with  the  shortest  means  pos- 
sible of  picturing  the  distmctive  quality,  attribute  etc.  of  his  personages^^^ 
Although  the  number  of  compounds  is  higher  in  descriptive  and  emphatic 
passages,  the  Vedic  poets  w'ere  far  from  usiag  them  so  profusely  as  did  many 
authora  of  the  later  period. 

Of  much  greater  frequency  and  importance  than  the  last-mentioned  features 
are  however  other  stylistic  peculiarities  some  of  which  may  for  a moment 
arrest  our  attention.  Taking  full  account  of  the  fact  that  the  styles  of  literary 
products  vary  considerably  according  to  their  contents  and  the  occasions  for 
which  they  are  composed  the  Vedic  poems  may  be  said  to  share  in  general  many 
features  which  are  characteristic  of  ancient  religious  poetry  elsewhere,  whether 
Indo-European  or  not^h  Islam  stylistic  'devices,’  often  incorrectly  described  as 
omaments  or  redundancies,  substantially  add  to  the  special  flavour  and  im- 
pressiveness  of  the  Vedic  mantra  texts  which  without  them  could  hardly  have 
fulfilled  the  requirements  of  archaic  prayers,  invocations  or  conjurations  in- 
tended to  be  solemnly  recited.^*  A fair  number  of  these  peculiarities  are 
common  to  both  prose  and  metrical  texts^®.  So,  though  'hieratic’  and  therefore 
to  some  extent  exclusive  and  artificial,  though  free  in  sentence  and  verse 
construction,  the  language  of  the  Rgveda  is  by  no  means  a collection  of  syntactic 
oddities^®  or  bizarre  figures  of  speech.’  A considerable  part  of  its  stylistic 
pecularities  are  due  to  hypertrophy  or  an  onesided  development  of  normal  usage 
rather  than  abnormalities  or  the  products  of  eccentric  literary  inclinations. 

The  style  of  the  poetiy-  and  the  liturgic  'prose’  formulas  of  the  Veda  was, 
indeed,  a good  substratum  for  nursing  and  preserving  widespread  and  often 
archaic  but  fimdamentaily  normal — forms  and  structures  such  as  several 
varieties  of  parallelism  and  balanced  binary  groupings  of  words^’.  Sequences  as 
for  instance  "Stop  lower  one;  stop,  upper  one”  (AV.  1,  17,  2);  "We  would  like 
to  wm,  0 Varuna  and  Mtra,  winning;  we  would  like  to  prosper,  O heaven  and 


” Schmitt,  o.c.,  p.  30;  201. 

“ Schmitt,  o.c.,  p.  37;  277. 

'»  P-  in  Language,  29,  p.  231. 

‘ tt.  Loxda,  S.  R.,  p.  17  and  Old  Indian,  p.  153  (also  for  a review  of  opinions 

anci  misconceptions).  ^ 

a while  ^petition  Vedic  poetry  wiU  in  the  foUowing  pages  be  considered  as 

'Carmen  style’:  Goxda,  S.  R.,  p.  22. 

n 5’  ?■  P-  162  on  6,  62,  9;  10;  m, 

p.  --.on  10,  61  5;  Iteor,  E.  V.  P.  XIV,  p.  126  on  7,  93,  2 and  5. 

Gonda,  S.  R.,  p,  52. 


The  style  of  the  Vedic  hymns 


223 


earth,  prospering  (RV.  i,  52,  1)  and  their  Taiiations  such  as  ‘‘VaniM  who  is 
of  the  same  region,  who  is  of  a different  region”  (AT.  4, 16,  8),  not  exceeding  the 
length  of  a metrical  unit,  are  far  from  rare^®.  The  less  frec|neiit  instaiiees  of 
three-  or  fourfold  parallel  structures  may,  in  many  cases,  contrihiite  stifl  more 
to  a certain  solemnity  of  a passage  and  to  emphasizing  the  ideas  denoted  by  the 
non-identical  terms^®,  in  order  to  persuade  the  invisible  powers  or  to  restrain 
them  from  doing  harm. 

In  reading  the  following  paragraphs  one  should  remember  that  rnanv  Vedic 
stanzas  are,  from  the  point  of  view  of  S3rntax  and  subject  matter,  and  increas- 
ingly also  in  their  metrical  form,  bipartite,  not  quadrupartite®®.  Often  the  half 
stanza,  not  the  single  pdda,  constitutes  the  substructure  of  the  phenomeiia 
under  consideration®^.  Like  other  S3mtactic  structures®®  the  above  svuioiietTical 
word  groups  were  often  skilfully  and  even  admirabty  adjusted  and  harmonized 
with  the  norms  of  versidcation.  The  widespread  tendency  to  start  with  shorter 
elements  or  at  least  to  end  with  longer  ones  manifests  itself  again  and  again®®. 
This  effect  is  not  infrequently  achieved  by  adding  an  epithet  or  other  w’ords  to 
the  noun  of  the  second  member;  “I  invoke  Mtra  (and)  Vanina  of  pure  ability” 
(RV.  7,  65,  1) ; “This  man  of  mine — bring  him,  relieve  him,  make  bim  also  frc^e 
from  disease  for  me”  (AV.  5,  4,  6).  Yet,  the  verb  which  both  members  of  the 
parallelism  have  in  common  is — ^in  consequence  of  the  aversion  to  long  and 
complicated  syntagmata — often  placed  in  the  middle  so  as  to  make  the  first 
member  longer.  Multiple  parallelisms  in  which  part  of  the  terms  are  replaced  by 
similar  words  are  sometimes  occasioned  by  context  and  situation®^. 

Some  variations®®,  corollaries  and  related  structures  may  be  mentioned  also: 
for  instance,  the  positive  and  negative  expression  of  the  same  thought,  e.g. 
“who  overpowers;  is  not  overpowered”  (RV.  9,  55,  4)®®,  often  a ‘didactic’ 
pleonasm  resulting  from  a desire  for  exactitude  or  for  emphasizing  the  thought 


See  e.g.  also  RV.  1,  81,  5;  112,  23;  2,  17,  5;  9,  67,  21;  10,  15,  14;  AV.  5,  30,  5; 
11,  9,  22;  18,  4,  57. 

See  e.g.  RV.  1,  24,  6;  5,  54,  7;  AV.  6,  64,  1;  7,  95,  3. 

“ Gonda,  in  IL  20  (1958),  p.  42. 

There  were  ample  other  opportunities  for  the  poets  to  fit  their  thoughts  into 
the  metrical  patterns : thanks  to  the  so-called  free,  but  by  no  means  arbitrary  word 
order,  an  abundant  supply  of  indeclinable  and  often  interchangeable  words  allowed 
them  to  fill  up  their  verses  if  they  were  in  need. 

Gon'DA,  S.R.,  p.  64  and  especially  Syntax  and  verse  structure  in  the  Veda,  IL 
20,  p-  35  (cf.  Akten24.  Int.  Orient.  Kongress,  Wiesbaden  1959,  p.  534);  Syntaxis  en 
versbouw  voornamelijk  in  het  Vedisch,  Amsterdam  Acad.  1960. 

O.  Behagheu’s  (IF  25,  p.  110)  tendencv  to  increasing  length  or  magnitude. 
See  e.g.  RV.  2,  21,  6;  6,  58,  1;  8,  48,  3;  10,  14,  7;  AV.  6,  102,  1;  11,  10,  3;  12,  2,  1. 

Cf.  AV.  15,  2,  iff.;  15,  6. 

Compare  also  instances  such  as  RV.  6,  50,  6;  9,  89,  4;  10,  159,  1 fa  simile  in 
the  form  of  a parallelism). 

See  also  1,  164,  16;  7,  103,  8;  8,  62,  12;  10,  60,  8;  85,  25;  AV.  5,  13,  4;  6,  73, 
3;  87,  2;  98,  1;  11,  1,  33  etc.;  Gonda,  S.  R.,  p.  87;  Renou,  E.  V.  P.  I,  p.  64;  H. 
Humbach,  in  MSS.  14,  p.  23. 


224 


J.  Gonda  • Vedic  Literature 


expressed  in  its  first  snember  and  sometimes  incorporated  into^  a larger  iinity 
with  Tariations  on  the  same  theme^^.  There  are  also  the  hyperbolic  affirmations 
of  the  type  “Thou  alone  . . . wilt  estimate  the  worth  of  a mortal  man;  there  is 
no  other  than  thee  to  pardon  him”  (1,  84,  19). 

The  frequency  of  parallel  sentence  structures,  of  the  repetition  of  sentence 
patterns  that,  once  adopted,  had  proved  adequate  means  of  expressing  specific 
thoughts ; the  emergence  of  a style  in  which  the  train,  of  thought  was  broken 
up  into  short  clauses  and  sentences-®  patterned  upon  the  same  models,  entailed 
a constant  occurrence  of  so-called  vertical  correspondences,  i.  e.  of  anaphora^®, 
rhyme  and  other  cases  of  recurrence  of  the  same — or  similar — words  in  the  same 
places  in  one  or  more  successive  utterances®®:  spfdho  ddevlr  ahM  ca  kramarm 
vim  ideiw  Miy  amavama  “we  would  overpower  the  godless  rivals,  we  would 
overcome  the  godless  clans”  (RV.  6,  49,  15)®h  Enjambement  being  rare,  this 
jmrallelism  prevented  the  parts  of  a stanza  from  becoming  isolated.  Anaphora 
is  in  the  Veda  no  more  than  in  other  ancient  literatures  an  artificial  device 
invented  to  add  charm  or  beauty  to  the  style,  but  often  rather  a natural  means 
of  focussing  attention  on  a central  or  important  idea:  “Ready  are  they  when  I 
go  out  early,  ready  when  I go  out  late”  (RV.  4,  32, 24).  The  repeated  “Homage 
to  . . at  the  beginning  of  five  successive  pddas  of  the  final  stanza  AV.  11,  2,  31 
is  more  impressive  and  more  suited  to  accompany  ritual  acts  than  a synthetic 
formulation  of  the  thought  “Homage  to  all  of  them,  whether  they  are  noisy  or 
hairy  or  . . Anaphora  is  likewise  not  rare  in  a frequent  type  of  stanza  struc- 
ture : “If  one’s  life  has  gone  to  an  end,  or  if  one  has  deceased,  or  if  one  has  been 
led  even  to  the  presence  of  death”;  three  successive  sentences  begin  with  “if,” 
the  last  oeeupying  the  second  half  of  the  stanza.  Anaphora  and  an  increasing 
ponderousness  of  the  members  of  an  utterance  are  a favourite  device  in  emo- 
tional or  pathetic  parages. 

Contraiwr  to  current  opinions  alliteration®®  is  another  feature  of  the  Vedic 
literal:^’’  style.  Just  as  in  other  languages  it  was  apt  to  occur  when,  under 
the  Influence  of  emotions,  a speaker  or  author  was  liable  to  repetitious 
speech®®.  It  is  moreover  a striking  characteristic  of  many  paronomastic  word 


For  the  ‘fipre’  of  the  litotes  (e.g.  RV.  7,  83,  2)  and  the  predilection  for  negative 
terms  or  combinations  of  positive  and  negative  terms  see  GomoA,  S.  R.,  p.  93  and 

FO'HT  studies,  p.  95;  116. 

For  the ^ prevalence  of  juxtaposition  and  additive  sentence  construction  see 
“ Symbolae  linguisticae  G.  Kuryiowicz,  Warsaw  1965,  p.  230. 

17  4f.;  34,  4;  8,  47, 

^ 28,  3;  31,  4;  34,  3;  3,  19,  1;  4,  4,  6;  11,  1;  8,  5,  13. 

Li.  also  6,  56,  6.  For  other  instance  see  Gonpa,  S.  R.,  p.  128*  166*  201*  in 

PoT^iser  poetical  aspects  of  the  ?,gvedia  repetitions, 

“ Cf.  also  ItV.  2,  12,  2;  7,  84,  3;  103,  6. 


The  style  of  the  Vedic  hjinns 


225 


groTlps^^  e.g.  mhrena  sodm  “with  bright  light”  (RV.  1,  48,  14),  and  combi- 
nations of  synonyms,  complementary  terms  or  other  words®^,  e.g.  kfsijai  h*a 
hsimdya  tvd  “For  land  culture  thee,  for  peace  and  quiet  thee”  (TS.  9,  22)®®.  It 
adds  to  the  snggcstiveness  of  many  formulas  which  often  derive  their  efficacy 
from  sound  repetition:  samudraya  svdM  sarirdya  svdhd  “To  the  ocean  hail ! to 
the  heaving  sea  hail!”  (VS. 22,25).  Like  other  forms  of  responsio  (correspond- 
ence) it  often  fulfils  a connective  fimction  in  versification:  purna  durte  jMim 
fata  I supurfu  punar  d pata  “Full,  0 Spoon,  fiy  aw^ay;  well-filled  fiy  back 
again”  (AV.  3,  10,  7).  Nor  are  various  types  of  rhyme  and  homoiotelenton, 
whether  or  not  accompanied  by  one  of  the  preceding  phenomena,  lacking  in 
these  texts®^:  hvdydmi  agnim  prathamdm  suastdye  / hvdydmi  mUrdvdrumv 
ihdvasB  “I  call  on  Agiii  first  for  w^elfare;  I call  on  Vamna  and  Mitra  here  for 
aid”  (RV.  1,  35,  1)®®.  They  occur  in  twin  phrases:  prestkah  iresihah  “dearest, 
most  excellent”  (10,  156,  5)®®;  help  to  picture  a variety  of  sentiments  or  dis- 
positions or  to  express  consistency,  obsession,  insistence : in  combination  with 
alliteration  and  paronomasia  e.g.  3,  39,  6 guhd  Mtdm  gdhyam  gulhdm  apsu  / 
Mste  dadhe  ddksine  ddhsindvdn  “him  (Vrtra)  that  had  secreted  himself  in  a 
hiding-place,  deserved  to  be  concealed,  concealed  in  the  waters,  he  (Indra) 
took  in  his  right  hand,  the  giver  of  sacrificial  presents”;  rhyme  is  another 
means  of  welding  the  parts  of  a stanza  together  and  of  giving  it  an  interior 
balance:  yati  devdh  pravdtd  ydty  udvdtd  “the  god  goes  by  a downward,  goes  by 
an  upward  path”  (1,  35,  3)^°.  However,  the  authors  of  Indian  antiquity  made 
no  more  than  their  colleagues  in  the  ancient  West  a consistent  or  systematic 
use  of  rhyme. 

In  short,  many  prayers  or  conjurations  were  made  more  effective,  more 
fitted  to  activate  divine  power  by  these  forms  of  repetition : The  oft-repeated 
“Thou,  0 Agni  ...”  is  most  helpful  in  suggesting  the  idea  that  Fire  is  the 
foremost  of  all  gods^^  (RV.  1,  31,  1-15).  Invoking  Vanina  to  release  him  from 
sin  the  poet  of  RV.  7,  86,  5 says  three  times  “away”  at  the  beginning  of  a ■pada 
to  make  the  verb  belonging  to  this  adverb,  viz.  “let  loose”  the  opening  wwd 
of  the  last  quarter^®. 

On  paronomasia  and  ‘popular  etymology’  cf.  also  PotrcHA,  at  ArehOr  i (1935), 

p.  423. 

« See  e.g.  RV.  1,  32,  12;  3,  54,  19;5,  26,  6;  6,28, 1;  8,  96,4;  9,  111,  3;  10,  40,  8; 
91  !•  AV.  4 9 2*  6 21  2. 

“ Seee.'g. alsoiRV.’l,  148, 5;3, 6,2; AV. 7, 12, 1 ; 8, 7, 12andcf.SCHMlTT,o.c.,p.265. 

GoismA,  S.  R.,  p.  201, 

“ See  e.g.  also  RV.  1,  1,  1;  157,  6;  7,  5,  5;  79,  5;  AV.  2,  9,  3;  3,  19,  5. 

” See  e.g.  also  RV,  1,  143,  1;  180,  6;  AV.  9,  3,  13;  14,  2,  21;  VS.  30,  14. 

“ See  e.g.  also  RV.  7,  104,  22;  10,  10,  8;  12,  7;  AV.  4,  21,  7;  6,  55,  3,  and  cf. 
Mainkar,  O.C.,  p.  103. 

On  RV.  1,  31  see  M.  Fowleb,  in  Art  and  thought,  issued  in  honour  of  A.  K. 
CoOMARASWAMY,  London  1947,  p.  186  (linguistically  unreliable);  on  1,  164,  34  see 
above;  on  10,  40,  4ff.  Maestkar,  o.c.,  p.  86. 

For  various  cases  of  anaphora  see  e.g.  RV.  1,  35,  1 ; 154,  1;  3,  59,  1;  5,  83,  5; 
6,  54,  5;  AV.  1,  28,  2;  29,  2;  34,  2;  3,  1,  4;  16,  3;  4,  5,  6;  18,  7 and  8;  16,  7,  12. 


226 


J.  Gonda.  • Vedic  Literature 


Various  other  patterns  of  recurrent  phonemes,  such  as  paronomasia,  as- 
sonance, figura  etymologica,  the  recurrence  of  the  same  word  in  another  case 
fo’nn*®,  likerae  of  considerable  frequency,  are  neither  due  to  an  eagerness, 
on  the  part^  of  the  authors,  for  puns  or  humoristic  effects nor  mainly  learned’ 
or  artificial^®.  The  Vedic  poets  no  doubt  readily  adopted  them  as  more  pon- 
derous means  of  giving  vent  to  emotions:  prasam  prdtiprdso  jahi  “smite  the 
dispute  of  {my)  opponent”  (in  the  refrain  of  AY.  2,  27);  of  elucidating  or 
emphasizing  connections:  aditydso  dditayah  sydma  “'may  we  be  free  (like)  the 
Adityas”  (RV.  7,  52,  1);  of  mdicating  otherwise  nameless  powers  manifesting 
themselves  in  a definite  activity:  vidtas  tvd  vidnvantu  “let  selectors  select 
thee”  {\'S.  4, 24) ; cf.  also  vdrmnti  vrstdyah  “the  rains  are  raining”  (RV.  5,  84, 3) ; 
of  emphasizing  or  amplif3dng  a verbal  idea:  sudltibhih  su  dldihi  “shine  well 
with  good  shining”  (6,  48,  3);  of  facilitating  syntactic  transitions  or  calling 
special  attention  to  relations  or  oppositions : yd  nah  soma  sudamsino  / duMdmsa 
ddideJcdi  “w’hatever  ill-famed  one,  0 Soma,  shall  aim  at  us  of  good  fame”  (AV. 
6,  6,  2),  and  so  on.  So  these  widespread  syntactic  and  stylistic  phenomena  were 
often  used  wrhere  modem  languages  w^ould  prefer  another  phraseology. 

On  the  other  hand,  w’e  cannot  always  distinguish  between  these  assonant 
phases  of  a predominant  syntactic  and  stylistic  significance  and  word  com- 
binations determined  by  the  poet’s  desire  to  shed  light  on  a hidden  connection 
between  ideas  or  phenomena^®.  Whereas  the  frequent  associations  of  the  name 
of  the  sun  in  its  dynamic  aspect,  Savitar,  with  the  etymologically  related  verb 
su-  “to  set  in  motion,  impel,”  and  even  more  generally,  in  connection  with 
deeds  of  this  god,  “to  render,  to  grant”  in  hymns  dedicated  to  the  Sun^^  attest 
to  the  authors’  well-founded  conviction  that  instigation  or  impulse  (sava ) is 
the  god  s essentmi  function,  it  is  not  always  easy  to  estimate  the  suggestive 
force  of  occasional  paronomastic  or  assonant  combinations^®. 

From  repetition  comes  variation:  “Set  us  free  from  the  misdeeds  of  our 
&thers,  from  those  that  w^e  have  committed  by  ourselves”  (RV.  7,  86,  5)^». 
One  of  the  most  popular  t^^es  of  variation  is,  also  in  the  Veda,  chiasmus^®, 
me  other  deviations  from  a usual  or  preceding  s^mtactic  structure  it  tends, 
both  m colloquial  and  litemrv  usage,  to  arrest  the  hearer’s  attention,  to 


e r P-  Renou,  E.  V.  P.  I,  p.  57.  See 

Cf.  e.g.  Bloomfield,  H.  A.  V.,  p.  703. 

“ A.  Meillset,  in  MSL  18,  p.  245. 

Tofoeov,  in  Poetics,  The 

65-  XV  ^ Restotj, e.  V.  p.  vn, p. 

bj;  p.  23;  GkiNTJA,  S.  R.  p.  374eto.  ^ 

p 2,  and  Renott  E V P X d 

of  etymological  Wusi;!. 

is  (anaphora  with  chiasmus). 

‘®  Gontja,  S.  R.  p.  109. 


The  style  of  the  Tedic  hymns 


227 


throw  one  or  two  elements  of  the  utterance  into  relief,  to  rairierliiie  an  anti- 
thesis. In  the  cMasmns  vi  vrksdn  huniy  ^ hardi  rahsmah  ‘'The  trees  he  fells 
and  he  fells  the  demons’’  (RV.  5,  83,  2}  the  immediately  repeated  verb  and  the 
great  distance  between  the  two  objects  lend  some  special  force  to  this  quarter 
of  a stanza.  Beside  simple  instances  such  as  “Dusky  is  your  place  of  repose, 
yoTir  residence  is  dnskj'”  (AV.  1,  23,  3)  there  are  more  complicated  cases  in 
which  other  syntactic  tendencies  may  have  made  their  influence  felt:  dmiir 
m>  Wid  tarln  / mA  nm  idrimr  (Mdrmtayah^^  “The  niggard  should  not  get  the 
better  of  ns,  not  sbonld  get  the  better  of  ns  the  hostile  plotters’’  (2,  7,  4) *2. 

There  is,  of  conrse,  another  type  of  variation.  In  dealing  with  the  same 
subjects  and  nsing  the  same  or  similar  nonns  and  verbs  the  |K>ets  are  free  to 
vary  their  modes  of  expression.  As  a resnlt  of  this  freedom  words  and  meanings 
often  develop,  so  to  say,  by  an  internal  process,  passing  from  one  phrase  to 
another^®. 

Thus  repetition,  in  one  form  or  other,  is  one  of  the  main  characteristics  of 
this  poetry®^.  When  the  theme,  the  qualities  and  exploits  of  the  divine  figures 
invoked,  the  fundamental  essentiality  of  the  mythical  events  described  are  of 
special  importance,  they  are  time  and  again  stressed  by  iteration.  The  proce- 
dures are  too  numerous  and  varied  to  admit  of  a detailed  discussion*®.  There 
is  the  repetition  of  the  same  word  in  the  same  sentence*®  which,  though  no 
doubt  sometimes  due  to  carelesness,  can  also  give  special  prominence  to  it 
or,  like  other  forms  of  repetition,  he  an  indicium  of  emotion:  RV.  1,  8, 4 “We 
wish,  0 Indra,  with  valiant  shooters,  with  thee  as  a companion,  to  overpower 
the  assafiants”  “we”  is  expressed  twice®’;  in  1,  32,  12  “Thou  eonqueredst  the 
cows,  thou  eonqueredst,  0 hero,  the  aowa”  the  verb.  It  vrould  be  incorrect 
to  consider®®  the  repetition  in  an  emotional  exclamation  such  as  “Agni,  Agni, 
they  always  invoke  with  invocations  ...”  a mere  ornament.  There  is  the  oc- 
currence of  the  same  word  in  a principal  and  a subordinate  clause  which  in 
archaic,  popular  and  more  or  less  ‘technicaF  usage  ivas  so  often  a conscious 
or  unconscious  means  of  achieving  cleame^:  “Thy  paths  in  the  atmosphere, 
on  these  . . . paths  do  thou  (come)  today  and  do  thou  protect  us”  (Savitar  is 
invoked:  1,  35,  11).  There  are  various  forms  of  concatenation,  catenary  struc- 
ture of  stanzas®*  and  repetitive  concentration  on  one  or  more  aspects  of  an 

The  enclitic  nas  (no)  normally  occupies  the  second  place;  longer  words  tend 
to  follow  on  shorter  elements  of  the  same  class. 

For  other  places  see  e.g.  RV.  1,  163,  3f.;  2,  1,  13;  35,  3;  15;  4,  25,  8;  5,  82,  4; 
8,  35,  16ff.;  10,  14,  13;  90,  10;  AV.  1,  19,  1;  2,  3,  6;  8,  2;  4,  13,  1;  36,  2;  5,  8,  7; 
6,  130,  4;  18,  3,  62;  19,  54,  5. 

See  li.  REXOir,  in  Vak  5,  p.  118  (with  examples  from  imiwfola  IX j.  For  two* 
chiastic  pairs  of  short  sentences:  5,  83,  4 (graphic,  simultaneity). 

Gonba,  S.  R.,  especially  p.  296. 

ss  classification  see  H.  D.  VELA^^KLAn,  in  JBBRAS,  N.  S.  14,  p.  2. 

See  also  Re^stou,  E.  V,  P.  II,  p.  33. 

*•  Cf.  e.g,  also  2,  21,  2f.;  3,  21,  If. 

'With  H.  R.  Diwekae,  Les  fieurs  de  rhetorique  dans  ITnde,  Paris  1930,  p.  8. 

« See  p.  196. 


228 


J.  Gonda  • Vedic  Literature 


importarit  fact  siicii  as  in  1,  22,  16ff.  where  the  poet,  enlarging  upon  Visnu’s 
most  remarkable  feat,  Ms  three  strides,  mentions  this  point  not  less  than  three 
times*®.  Ifllien  in  2,  16  the  words  for  “bull”  occur  seventeen  times  in  the  three 
staii,ms  4-6  tMs  is  more  than  a play  on  words:  the  author  obviously  wishes  to 
pronounce  a confimiation  of  Indra’s  bull-like  character;  the  god’s  attributes, 
his  drink  and  the  officiants  worsMpping  him,  being  also  bull-like,  add  to  Ms 
biill-Iike  potency.  A suggestive  force  residing  in  the  repetition  of  the  same 
idea  is  notable  in  stanzas  such  as  6,  19,  5 eulogizing  Indra  as  a possessor  of 
cattle,  a donor  of  treasures,  and  the  one  in  whom  the  ways  of  wealth  come 
together.  In  7,  63,  1-4  sunrise  is  described  four  times,  the  verb  “to  rise”  being 
each  time  followed  or  supplied  by  other  epithets,  images  and  references  to 
the  importance  of  the  phenomenon.  The  repetition  of  words  and  ideas,  for 
wdiich  the  Usas  h^nrm  1,  123  is  conspicuous,  is  perhaps  meant  to  emphasize 
the  recurrence  of  dawn  wMch  is  the  main  theme  of  the  poem®h  Hypercharacteri- 
zation easily  assumes  the  outward  form  of  h3rperbolic  paronomasia.  In  a 
eulogy  to  Rudra  it  reads  “the  mightiest  of  the  mighty”  (2,  33,  3)®^'  in  1,  91,  2 
this  construction  occurs  not  less  than  four  times. 

Extended  repetition,  by  no  means  rare,  may  become  a structural  principle 
of  a sukia:  “Drink  soma  . . . like  a bull,  like  a thirsty  bull”  (1,  130,  2)®^.  The 
hymns  1,  127-139,  all  in  the  same  long  and  complex  metre  and  ascribed  to  the 
same  poet,  provide  a typical,  but  in  its  consistency  unparalleled,  instance  of 
complicated  internal  repetition:  the  last  words  of  the  second  and  fourth  pddas 
and  of  the  sixth  and  seventh  padas  are  almost  continuously  identical.  The 
procedure  is  apt  to  combine  with  other  forms  of  repetition,  such  as  parono- 
masia; 4,  1,  1 : 

tv^rn,  hy  ugrie  %t  satnunyuvo  devdso  devatn  arcUhn  nyerird  iti  krdtvd  Tiyerire 

dmartyam  yajcOa  mdrtyem  d devdm  ddevam  fanata  prdcetasafn  visvam  ddevary, 

jumtia  prdcetmam : 

Thee,  O Agiii,  the  god,  the  gods  have  for  ever 
Dnaiiimoiisly  appointed  their  manager. 

Appointed  with  resourcef illness; 

They  wojshipped  the  immortal  one  among  the  mortals, 

They  engendered  the  mindful  god  (so  as  to  be)  devoted  to  the  gods. 

They  engendered  the  mindful  one,  (w’-ho)  belongs  to  the  clan,  (who  is)  devoted 

to  the  gcMts.” 

^ It  will  be  clear  now  that,  generally  speaking,  the  poets,  sensitive  to  propor- 
tion and  completeness  of  form  within  the  limits  of  a stanza,  are  bent  on 


See  e.g.  also  1,  11,  6f.;  24,  12f.;  32,  If.;  109,  7£ 

« A.  A.  .^lACDOXELL,  in  JRAS  1932,  p.  357;  cf.  also  Renoit,  E.  V.  P.  HI,  p.  L 
hor  repetitmn  of  proper  nouns  or  epithets  see  e.g.  6,  7;  44,  19flf.;  10,  150,  and 

Donua,  Epithets,  p.  226;  229.  & > » » , xv, 

**  E.  SCHWYZEB,  in  Abh.  Berlin  Acad.  1941,  p.  9;  Rekou,  E.  Y P I d 45 
" Gonda,  S.  R.,  p.  265.  . . , F- 

p ^d  see  Gbitfith,  H.  ^Y.  I, 


The  style  of  the  Tedie  hymns 


2m 

acMeTliig  weli-balaneed  arrangements  of  winch,  moreover,  often  are 

in  harmony  mth  well-established  syntactic  rales  or  stylistic  tendencies®*.  Like 
rhyt'lmilc  repetitions  in  general  they  often  have  a certain  impressiveness  that 
rests,  not  only  on  their  form  but  also  on  the  general  emotional  trend  of  the 
passages  in  which  they  occiir®h  In  i,  1,  1 the  name  of  the  god  invoked,  Agni, 
is  significantly®®  given  precedence:  after  this  ‘heavy'’  beginning  the  verb 
occupies  the  second  place,  followed  by  an  apposition  belon^ging  to  the  god’s 
name,  other  appositions  each  of  them  filling  a -pdda  aie  added  to  expiand  this 
short  exordium  and  qualify  the  addressee : agnim  fie  purokitam^  i^ajndsfju  derdm 
/ hdtdrafu  raifuidhdia^^iain^^.  Triplication,  much  valued  in  religious 
texts,  the  so-called  tricolon  ahundans  (in  which  the  third  member  is  the  longest), 
partial  parallelism  leading  to  a climax"®,  internal  duplications  and  amrilifica- 
tions"^  do  not  fail  to  give  strength  to  a multitude  of  stanzas’h  The  hyq^othesis 
that  at  the  base  of  these  ^alancenients’  is  an  old  rhydhmic  prose  litiirgical 
mode  of  expression — or  rather  a traditional  ^carmen’  style,  neither  ‘pirose’  nor 
‘poetry’  in  our  sense  of  the  terms — has  much  to  recommend  it”. 

A natural  sense  of  variation  and  aesthetic  alternation  is  apiparent  from 
stanzas  such  as  1,  44,  5 in  which  vocatives  and  accusatives  alternate  to  denote 
the  same  god,  or  as  7, 14, 1,  exhibiting  an  alternation  of  four  datives  and  three 
instramentals,  or  st.  2 in  which  anaphora,  chiasmus,  and  a felicitous  distribu- 
tion of  five  vocatives  concur  to  make  it  a harmonious  whole.  In  & tripiartite 
structure  of  8,  37,  1 a preverb  occurring  at  the  be^ginniiig  is  anaphorically 
repeated,  the  verb  is  placed  in  the  fimt  member,  the  tw^o  objects  in  the  first 
and  the  second,  the  two  adjuncts  in  the  first  and  the  third,  the  subject  being 
indicated  by  two  vocatives  placed  on  either  side  of  a caesura  in  the  second  and 
third  member^*-  Parallelism  of  thought  and  syntactic  structure  are  supported 
by^  word  correspondence  in  instances  such  as  10,  73,  10: 

“ ‘From  the  Horse  he  came,’  when  they'  say  this, 

‘From  Power  he  was  born,’  that  is  my  thought  of  him; 


Cf.  also  such  juxtapositions  as  ‘Tew”:  “rnanv”  (RV.  i,  31.  6);  “higher”: 
“lower”  (7,  20,  7):  Renou,  E.  V.  P.  XTU,  p.  129;  el  also  3,  59,  2;  10,  15,  2. 

A.  Estellee’s  speculations  on  Word-mobility'  in  the  ^g\’edasamhita,  Sri 
Venkateswara  Univ.  Orient.  Journal,  9 (Tirupati  1966),  p.  7 are  unfounded. 
Goxda,  Symtax  and  verse  structure,  etc.  (see  above). 

And  in  this  case  aimc^t  necessariiv,  a fact  overlooked  bv  Renou,  E.  V.  P, 
XH,p.  71. 

®®  See  e.g.  also  instances  such  as  RV.  1,  1,  3;  90,  9;  114,  7;  8;  2,  7,  6;  12,  2;  13; 
15,  2;  3,  30,  11;  45,  2;  5,  4,  6;  83,  4;  5;  7,  49,  1;  61,  4. 

Cf.  e.g.  AV.  5,  4,  6;  ?*V.  10,  119,  6f.  (cf.  R.  Hauschiij),  in  Festschrift  F. 
Weller,  Leipzig  1954,  p.  270). 

See  e.g.  1, 160, 5 (Gonda,  Symtaxis,  p.  17) ; Goxda,  Four  studies  in  the  language 
of  the  Veda,  The  Hague  1959,  ch.  I. 

” Space  forbids  to  mention  instances  of  ‘analylic  expression’  of  verbal  ideas 
(e.g.  1,  80,  3)  and  other  stylistic  features  of  minor  importance. 

Buoomiteld,  Repetitions,  p.  573;  Gonba,  S.  R.,  p.  27, 

For  an  extreme  case  of  application  of  etyinological  figures:  6,  18,  4. 


230 


J.  Gonda  • Vedic  Literature 


From  Fury  lie  came,  in  Louses  took  Ms  place. 

WLenOT  he  was  bom,  Indra  (alone)  knows”’^. 

There  is  an  iioiiiistakable  predilection  for  combinations  of  a positiwe  and 
negative  idea:  “felMng  the  slow  ones  by  means  of  the  swift  ones’’  (RV.  2, 15,  6) ; 
“he  moved  the  immoTable”  (2,  24,  2) ; “thon,  the  immortal,  among  the  mortal 
ones”  (6,  5,  5);  “he  made  the  thoughtless  think”  (7,  86,  7)’®;  the  one  who  does 
not  know  is  contrasted  with  the  knowing  ones  (1, 120,  2)  and  the  Atharvaveda 
speaks  of  “growth  and  diminution,”  “generosity  and  niggardliness,”  “knowl- 
edge and  ignorance”^^. 

Occasionally  the  elements  of  a stanza  are  distributed  according  to  a principle 
which  in  later  poetry  was  retamed  or  even  gained  in  popularity.  RV.  10, 146,  6 
presents  a case  of  the  arrangement  m the  first  half  of  a stanza  of  all  (four) 
adjectives  qnaliiying  a noun  that  occurs  in  the  second  line;  1,  85,  10  and  7,  92, 
1 of  stanzas  containing  three  sentences  distributed  over  four  padas:  a,  b,  cd; 
7,  S3,  2 of  three  pddm  filled  by  three  subordinate  clauses  followed  by  the 
fourth  with  the  principal  clause;  10,  117,  7 and  9 of  stanzas  with  the  main 
point  in  the  last  pdda ; 7,  83,  8 of  the  initial  and  final  position  of  two  words 
which  sjuitactically  belong  together. 

Ihese  observations  on  sentences  wMch  on  the  whole  are  highly  disciplined 
not  alter  the  fact  that  the  order  of  words  sometimes  creates  the  impression 
of  an  intertwinement  -whether  or  not  conditioned  by  rhythmical  or  psycholo- 
gical reasons^®.  Even  when  these  lines  have  a ritual  character  they  are — ^as 
appears  from  the  many  verses  that  recur  in  later  collections  of  mantras — ^not 
ateolutely  fixed  and  variations  of  a minor  kind  are  apt  to  occur  under  different 
infiuences. 


” Cf.  E.  W.  Fay,  PADS  1895  in  JAOS  16,  p.  CCXXXIV. 

” See  e.g.  al«>  6,  6,  1;  39,  3;  Goota,  S.  R.  p.  87. 

” AT.  11,  7,  25;  8,  21S. 

We  cMinot  enter  into  a discu^ion  of  possible  explanations  of  individual 
mms;  »e,  © g for  ^T.  1,  71,  4 Oudenbebg,  ISToten,  I,  p.  74;  Geudkbb,  W-  I. 
p.  S3;  for  I,  167,  3 OiJ3EHBESG,  o.c.,  p.  167;  Geldhee,  o.c.,  p.  243;  for  4,  31,  3 

I'ELANKAB,  m JBBRAS  X.  S.  14,  p.  30. 

Cf.  e.g.  1,  109,  4;  167,  3;  2,  13,  1;  4,  16,  13. 


The  style  of  the  Vedic  h^Trms 


231 


3-  Epithets 

It  belongs  to  the  style  of  these  hymns  that  the  names  and  epithets  of  the 
gods — ^the  latter  often  replacing  the  names — ^are  frequently  mentioned.  Being 
an  actuality  expressed  in  a word  and  an  essential  part,  of  the  bearer's  perso- 
nality^ a name  is  loaded  with  his  power  and  essence.  BeMeved  to  indicate  the 
nature  and  function  of  its  bearer  it  shares  Ms  creative  abilities  and  may 
furnish  the  clue  to  an  understanding  of  facts,  events  and  connexions.  When 
duly  pronounced  it  is  a potent  means  of  exerting  infiuence  upon,  or  through, 
the  bearer.  Xames  are  therefore  an  important  feature  in  requests,  prayers  and 
magical  formulas^.  It  was  even  believed  that  gods,  like  M,glily  placed  persons, 
are  offended,  if  their  complimentary  name  is  omitted®.  Hence  not  only  the 
almost  obligatory  mention  of  the  name  or  names  of  the  addressees*  of  these 
hymns,  but  also  their  repeated  use  in  the  same  sukta^:  a means  of  mamtaining 
the  intimate  relation  with,  the  god,  of  intimating  also  that  the  person  speaking 
knows  the  various  aspects  of  his  personality  mentioned  together  mth  the  name 
and  hence  supposes  himself  to  be  able  to  intensify  Ms  infiuence  upon  Mm. 

Vedic  poetry  abounds  in  epithets®,  a term  by  wMch  we  mean,  not  only  the 
formulaic  or  petrified  epitheta  omantia,  but  also  all  non-distinctive,  logically 
often,  but  by  no  means  always  superfluous,  stylistically  significant  descriptive 
attributive  adjectives  or  appositions,  denoting  a quality  or  attribute  wMch, 
wMle  being  characteristic  of  a person,  object  or  event,  is,  or  may  be  supposed 
to  be,  known  to  the  audience  and  is  recognized  as  true  and  pre-eminently 
suitable.  These  words  often  expre^  and  affirm  universally  acknowledged 
qualities  of  a god:  the  god  of  fire,  the  oblation-bearer,  is  ever  young;  the 
eulogist  who  invokes  Mm  as  the  oblation-bearer  who  performs  the  sacrifice 
well  intimates  that  the  god  also  on  the  present  occasion  will  convey  the 
offerings  to  their  destinationb  Since  the  terrible  and  dreaded  god  Rudra  may 
by  merely  abstaining  from  inimical  deeds  be  friendly  and  propitious,  Ms  wor- 
sMppers  emphasize  that  possibility  by  pronouncing  Ms  favourable  epithets— 
e.g.  gracious  and  helpful  (RV.  10, 92, 9} — ^in  the  conscious  or  unconscious  hope 
that  they  make  him  refrain  from  evil®.  A stanza  such  as  1,  43,  1 is  an  undis- 
guised capMio  henevvlentiae : “WThat  are  we  to  say  to  Rudra,  the  attentive  one, 
the  most  kind  and  liberal  one,  the  uncommonly  strong  one,  that  makes  Ms 


1 J.  Goxda,  Xotes  on  names  and  the  name  of  God  in  ancient  India,  Amsterdam 
Acad.*  1970,  p.  5;  7;  60.  For  1,  103,  4 see  Geld'J^ee,  in  ZDMG  71,  p.  317. 

2 Sometimes  the  name  of  the  person  praying  is,  no  doubt  for  reasons  of  exactitude 
or  to  underline  the  speaker’s  importance,  added:  ]R.V.  3,  33,  5;  42,  9. 

® See  CaiAlXd’s  note  on  PB.  14,  2,  6. 

* RV.  10,  172  is  an  exception. 

Gf.  e.g.  RV.  3,  59  {Rnxou,  E.  V.  P.  VH,  p.  8);  7,  87. 

® J.  Goxda,  Epithets  in  the  B^gv^eda,  The  Hague  1959. 

^ See  e.g.  1,  67,  2;  3,  2,  2;  5,  4,  2;  1,  44,  8. 

® Cf.  Th.  Bloch,  in  IVdrter  und  Sachen,  1,  p.  80. 


232 


J.  Gouda  • Vedic  Literature 


heart  as  happy  as  possible  ?”  In  opening  stanzas  a more  or  less  extended  series 
of  epithets  nmy  help  to  introduce  the  god  addressed  and  to  throw  Kght  upon 
diSereat  aspects  of  Ms  nature : it  may  be  a means  of  appealing  to  the  deity  in 
one  of  Ms  functions  or  capacities : 7,  63,  1 and  8,  48,  1 : 

“Up  rises  the  genial  all-seeing  sun”®; 

“Wisely  I have  partaken  of  the  palatable  food  (the  soma),  provoker  of  inspira- 
tional attentiveness,  best  granter  of  freedom  (relief)”^®. 

A similar  end  is  served  by  the  frequent  alternation  of  epithets  and  proper 

names,  e.g.  4,  21,  1 : 

“Indra  must  come  near  to  us  in  order  to  favour  (us);  here  the  celebrated  hero 

must  he  our  fellow-reveller”^^. 

Or  divine  names  in  the  former  part  of  a stanza  are  replaced  by  more  or  less 
explicative  or  illustrative  epithets  in  the  latter  half;  7,  84,  4: 

“Supply  m,  O Indra  and  Vanina,  with  property  consisting  of  all  desirable 
things  . . while  the  Iditya  (Vanma)  destroys  what  is  contrary  to  truth  and 

order,  the  hero  (Indra)  allots  immense  wealth”^®. 

In  other  stanzas  the  name,  mentioned  at  the  end,  is  introduced  by  a series  of 

significant  adjectives;  2,  33,  8: 

“For  the  ruddy -brown  and  whitish  bull  I pronounce  a mighty  eulogy  of  the 
mighty  one.  I will  adore  the  glo’^ving  one  with  obeisances.  We  extol  the  awful 

name  of  Rudra”^®. 

A large  number  of  epithets  can  make  a final  stanza  of  a hymn  or  triplet  ponderous 
and  recapitulative^^.  However,  an  epithet  can  at  the  same  time  be  syntactically 
relevant : for  instance,  Visnu  is  “T^ide-paced”  but  when  he  is  said  to  stride  out 
triply— Hs  most  characteristic  deed—the  addition  of  the  adjective  at  the  end 
of  a stanza  qualifies  the  process  of  striding^®. 

The  various  positions  of  the  epithets,  wMch  are  in  many  cases  due  to  the 
exigencies  of  versification,  open  opportunities  to  introduce  variation  or  to 
express,  for  the  sake  of  emphasis,  more  or  less  parallel  thoughts:  “Being 
Intoxicated  by  that  (drink),  sJay,  0 hero,  the  enemies,  relatives  or  not  related, 
0 benevolent  one^®,  the  opponents”  (6,  44,  17 : Indra  is  addressed).  Some  poet 
even  succeeds  in  constructing  pregnant  and  elegant  lines;  1,  81,  1 : 


W . KjarEL,  ergleichs-  und  Beiworte  der  Sonne  im  Rg-  und  Atharvaveda, 

Gomm.  VoL  J.  Xobel,  New  Delhi  1963,  p.  111. 

.y  5.  4,  1;  8,  1;  U,  1;  12,  1;  83,  1;  6,  32,  1;  44,  1;  10, 

<3,  I.  Cf.  also  Gonda,  Epithets,  p.  226. 

“ See  I,  174,  9;  3,  63,  1;  7,  63,  2;  81,  5;  8,  44,  3;  10;  10,  14,  4. 

*’  See  Goitda,  Dual  deities,  p.  267.  Cf.  e.g.  also  1,  160,  1;  2,  33,  12;  14;  7,  71  3. 

See  e.g.  also  1,  143,  4;  4,  51,  11;  6,  44,  1;  7,  8,  1. 

J*  See  1,  190,  8;  3,  62,  6;  5,  57,  8. 

~ j ^54,  2andsee  J.  Gojtda,  Four  studies  in  the  language  of  the 

Veda,  The  Hague  1959,  p.  43;  50. 

For  the  meaning  of  maghavan  see  Gokda,  Epithets,  p.  42. 


Til©  style  of  the  Tedic  hj'mjis 


233 


“Indra  feels  animated ^ to  get  drank,  the  slayer  of  Trtra  (has  been  3treri.gtheiieci’| 
unto  a display  of  heroic  energy,  by  men’s  doing”  (indr^  mddCpja  V'dtrdhe^  idwMe 
vrtrdhd 

Thus  a particular  arrangement  of  names  and  epithets  can  effect  a well-balanced 
structure  of  a stanza,  achieve,  while  keeping  the  audience  in  suspense,  a certain 
elegance  of  style;  3,  1,  IS: 

“In  the  abode  of  mortals  the  immortal  one 
Has  settled  down,  the  king,  promoting  sacrifice. 

The  ghee-faced  one  has  shone  forth  wide, 

Agni,  knowing  poetical  wisdom  of  every  kiad.” 

Duplication  by  means  of  epithets — by  no  means  rare  device — ^is  practised 
mth  some  skill  by  the  poet  of  1,  16,  8 : 

“To  every  libation  (that  is)  pressed  out  Indra  (with  a view)  to  intoxication 
comes,  the  killer  of  Vrtra  to  drink  the  soma.” 

The  more  or  less  tautological  parallelisms  in  emotional  poetry  in  general 
and  in  archaic  style  in  particular  are  also  significant  from  a religious  point  of 
view.  In  addressing  the  Unseen  one  is  by  natural  instinct  inclined  to  proceed 
cautiously.  Since  the  divine  powers  have,  or  may  have,  many  aspects,  to  wMch 
belong  as  many  names  and  epithets,  it  was  advisable  to  approach  them  as 
effectively  as  possible  and  to  make  an  appeal  to  those  sides  and  aspects  of 
their  personalities,  i.e.  to  those  of  their  supposed  functions,  which  might 
produce  the  result  desired,  or  lead  to  the  salvation  of  those  prating.  That 
means  that  the  frequent  addition  and  cumulation  of  words  referring  to  his 
aspects,  functions,  manifestations  or  epiphanies  confirm,  consolidate  or 
revivify  the  power  present  in  the  ideas  denoted,  stimulate  the  god  into  a display 
of  these  very  qualities  and  strengthen  the  e:fficacy  of  the  invocation^*:  “I 
eulogize  Indra,  the  bull  possessing  manly  power,  the  conqueror  and  true 
warrior’’  (6,  22,  1). 

The  numerous  strings  of  descriptive  or  attributive  terms  occurring  in  the 
hymns  are  not  always  so  varied  and  unsystematic  as  we  are  inclined  to  believe 
at  first  sight.  Epithets  contribute  much  to  a harmonious  and  homogeneous 
content  of  those  stanzas  which  dwell  upon  a god’s  character^®.  RY.  10,  74,  5, 
which  consists  almost  entirely  of  epithets,  is  an  attempt  to  emphasize  two  sides 
of  Indra’s  personality,  viz.  Ms  warlike  temperament  and  Ms  generosity  wMch 
often  go  together,  because  he  is  supposed  to  distribute  the  booty^^.  Even 
when  they  seem  to  be  merely  honorific  these  epithets  often  have  a stylistic 
and  religious  function:  though  an  inherited  procedure,  they  may,  on  one  hand, 
be  the  actual  consequence  of  the  poets’  emotional  mental  attitude,  and  on  the 
other,  an  outcome  of  the  ■well-known  ‘idealism’  of  archaic  poetry  in  general : 


See  e.g.  also  6,  48,  7 ; 8,  24,  9;  10,  7,  1. 

See  e.g.  1,  44,  5;  2,  11,  6;  21,  4;  5,  4,  3;  83,  1;  8,  2,  38;  13,  10. 
« See  e.g.  1,  37,  4;  109,  8;  174,  1;  2,  41,  14;  6,  24,  2. 

See  also  3,  30,  3;  10,  104,  7. 


234 


J.  Gonda  - Vedic  Literature 


it  is  almost  a necessity  to  remind  the  hearer  of  the  beauty,  perfection  and 
solidity  of,  for  instance,  the  weapons,  ornaments  and  vehicles  of  the  gods  by 
means  of  graphical  terms  of  a certain  imaginative  force^^  A king's  renown 
is  imperishable,  a hymn  brightly  adorned,  a cow  dedicated  to  a god  of  faultless 

appearance*®. 

Often  epithets  are  in  perfect  harmony  with  the  context.  Also  in  those  fre- 
quent cases  in  which  they  are  not  purely  distinctive  or  do  not  play  an  important 
part  in  the  conveyance  of  information  they  are  frequently  very  appropriately 
used.  They  may  add  an  element  of  vividness,  be  suggestive  or  evocative,  call 
up  an  image  or  a quality,  point  to  a connection,  opposition  or  motivation,  throw 
part  of  the  communication  into  relief  or  be  expressive  of  the  poet’s  emotion. 
In  1,  92,  5 the  adjective  “bright,”  far  from  being  a superfluity,  evokes  the  most 
eroential  feature  of  the  matutinal  phenomenon:  “(lisas’)  bright  ray  has  again 
become  visible”*®.  Since  the  adjective  “reddish”  (arusa)  in  1,  92,  1 evokes  the 
presence  of  Davii,  the  cows  which  it  qualifles  must  be  related  to  that  goddess. 
In  imploring  Indra  to  give  wealth  it  is  not  senseless  to  observe  that  he  is 
strong,  inventive  and  able  to  dispense  wealth  (8,  61,  10).  The  addition  of 
“strong-hoofed”  to  the  king's  horses  in  6,  75,  7 is  meaningful  because  these 
animals  are  stated  to  crush  the  enemies  with  their  feet. 

Part  of  the  epithets  are  almost  exclusively  attributed  to  one  and  the  same 
divine  figure.  Indra*^  is  “the  killer  of  Vrtra”  (vrtrahan “of  a thousandfold 
resourcefulness”  ( scdakratu),  benevolent  and  generous  (magJiavan ),  a shatterer 
of  strongholds  (purbMd)^^;  Agni  is  “the  bearer  of  the  oblations”  (havyava- 
hana) ; the  Alvins  “exhibit  marvellous  skill”  ( dasra).  Yet  qualifications  which 
are  very  common  in  connection  with  one  god  are  at  times  applied  to  one  of 
his  colleagues®^.  Thus  the  adjective  “purifying,  pure”  (pavaka)  which  so  often 
belongs  to  Agni  that — like  other  epithets,  also  in  connection  with  other  gods*® — 
it  may  even  replace  his  name  is  also  given  to  the  Dawns  (4,  51,  2)*®. 

More  or  less  fixed,  or  at  least  recurrent,  noim-adjective  combinations  seem 
to  be  an  ancient  possession  of  many  peoples.  They  made  the  poet's  task  easier, 
enabling  Mm  to  loosen  the  texture  of  his  poem  and  to  proceed  calmly ; they 
gave  the  audience  an  opportumty  to  enjoy  the  familiar  and  for  a moment  to 
slacken  their  attention.  In  \edic  poetry^  there  are  the  black  darkness,  the  swift 


« See  e.g.  i,  85,  9;  113,  14;  117,  15;  188,  6;  5,  77,  3;  6,  37,  3. 

« h 126,  2;  144,  1;  10,  68,  3. 

9;  59,  6;  5,  19,  5;  6,  9,  1;  7, 

96,  5;  6;  9,  i9,  5;  10,  70,  8;  115,  4;  118,  9. 

**  Gok'da,  Epithets,  p.  36. 

»®  E.  Benvekiste  and  L.  Eenott,  Vrtra  et  VrOragna,  Paris  1934. 

*•  H.  Lommee,  Der  ^sehe  Kfriegsgott,  FranMurt/M.  1939,  p.  20. 

” For  transfer  of  epithets  cf.  also  Bloomfield  and  Edgbbtox,  V.  V.  Ill,  p.  20. 
Identification  may  lead  to  transfer  of  an  epithet;  9,  83  5 

» See  e.g.  5,  58,  2;  6,  5,  1;  39,  1;  8,  44,  10. 

Epithets  of  the  p^bhus,  Proc.  26  Congr.  Or.  m,  1 

flib4™i9|,  p.  36.  ^ 


The  style  of  the  Vedic  hynms 


235 


horse,  substantial  wealth,  the  wide  atmosphere,  the  iinintemipted  protection®^* 
They  are  not  quite  constant,  but  it  is  clear  that  the  poets  felt  the  need  for  these 
elements  of  formulaic  diction,  also  in  connection  with  proper  names  whether 
of  gods  or  of  other  beings:  mighty  Indra,  the  deceitful  thief®'^.  The  addition 
of  an  adjective  can  be  a great  help  in  ma^king  the  sense  of  figurative  expressions 
intelligible  to  the  audience.  There  could  be  no  doubt  that  the  golden  aims  of 
the  sun  are  Ms  beams  (6, 71, 5).  Some  of  the  poets  knew  very  well  how  to  use 
rare,  if  not  original,  compound  adjectives:  6,  35,  4 “Do  thou,  fO  Indra,)  .grant 
the  eulogist  refreshments,  consisting  in  gifts  of  cows,  brilliaiit-with-iiorBes, 
famous-for-generative  power!”;  in  6,  49,  15  the  adjectives  are  meant  to 
characterize  the  wealthy  man:  “Give  us  wealth  that  goes  in  a chariot,  satis- 
fies-the-cultivators,  consist s-in-many-heroic-sons  . . Passing  mention  must 
also  be  made  of  the  occurrence  of  amplifications  of  epithets  such  as  “knower 
of  heart's,  lord  of  the  heart”  (Soma:  9,  11,  8),  well-known  paraphrases  of  the 
type  ‘‘a  brilliant  and  solid  wealth  consisting  of  many  sons”  (6,  6,  7)®^,  %en- 
ningar’®®  such  as  “the  dustless  paths”  instead  of  “the  air”  (6,  62,  6);  the  ellip- 
tical use  of  attributes  to  denote  nominal  concepts,  e.g.  “the  spotted  ones”  for 
“the  cows”  (1,  84,  11). 

There  exist  some  interesting  relations  between  characterizing  adjectives  and 
similes.  Whereas,  for  instance,  most  occurrences  of  the  word  for  “wind”  are 
left  unqualified,  the  epithets  wMch  do  accompany  it  are  in  most-  cases  an 
element  of  a simile:  Agni,  probably  as  lightning,  is  described  as  “a  noisy 
serpent  like  the  boisterously  impetuous  wind”  (1,  79,  1) ; India’s  impetuosity  is 
incessantly  excited  “like  the  wind  hurried  by  thundering  clouds”  {4,  17,  12)®^. 


« See  9,  66,  24;  10,  89,  2;  1,  117,  9;  7,  71,  5;  10,  107,  10;  1,  92,  8;  117,  23;  4,  44, 
6;  1,  91,  22;  3,  22,  2;  3,  54,  19;  6,  47,  4;  2,  25,  5;  3,  15,  5 etc. 

See  4,  19,  1;  10,  179,  3 and  cf.  1,  63,  7;  80,  7;  131,  6;  6,  41,  1;  7,  104,  10  and 
cf.  5,  79,  9;  6,  51,  13. 

GomoA,  Epithets,  p.  195. 

W.  Kbaijse,  Die  Kenning,  Schriften  der  Konigsberger  gelehrten  Geselischaft, 
Geistesw.  7,  1,  Halle  (S.)  1930,  p.  5;  ScmciTT,  o.c.,  p.  277.  See  below,  p.  252. 

See  also  10,  78,  3 and  cf.  1,  163,  11;  10,  95,  2. 


236 


J.  Gonda  • Yedic  Literature 


4,  Brevity 

Tlie  eulogistic  and  tajdiliological  character  of  many  passages  does  not  nullify 
the  essentially  utilitarian  point  of  view  of  the  mantra-^roducmg  poets  who  in 
spite  of  digressions  are  mostly  inclined  to  concentrate  on  a given  need,  viz. 
strengthening,  invitation,  or  stimulation  of  the  higher  powers.  The  traditional 
style  as  well  as  the  versification  of  the  hymns  often  permit  them  a high  degree 
of  concentration  in  a short  space.  To  their  most  characteristic  syntactic  devices 
belong  ellipses  and  related  forms  of  brevity  in  expression^  Brevity  in  general, 
economy  in  the  means  of  expression,  terseness  and  condensation  are  so  frequent 
and  in  many  cases  so  conspicuous  that  translators  are  often  forced  to  insert  one 
or  more  words.-  Intending  by  ellipsis  the  phenomenon  that  part  of  a current 
expression  or  usual  construction  is  omitted  because  at  the  moment  of  speaking 
it  may  he  dispensed  with  and  is  inevitably  and  as  a matter  of  course  supplied 
by  the  audience®,  we  limit  ourselves  to  some  examples.  The  adjective  ‘‘red’' 
indicates  Agni  s flames,  brown  the  wood  over  which  he  bends  j words  for 
“both”  or  “umted”  suffice  to  convey  the  idea  of  heaven  and  earth Soma 

mixes  mth  milk;  the  process  is  simply  denoted  by  “dresses”^.  Very  often and 

not  only  in  invocations  and  enumerations — ^the  subject,  verb,  object,  or  name 
of  a god  addressed  or  of  an  oblation  offered  is  to  be  mentally  supplied®.  There 
are  even  compound  sentences  in  which  both  verbs,  or  the  pronoun  or  antecedent 
are  brachylogically  lacking:  “That  h;^mm  of  praise,  that  I as  a stimulus” 
means  “listen  to  that  hvmn  which  I pronounce  in  order  to  stimulate  (thee)” 
(6,  10,  2);  “We  would  like  to  overcome  the  malignities  who  thy  directions” 
s^ms  to  mean  “we  would  like  to  gain  the  victory  over  those  who  defy  thy 
directions’'  (6,  4,  5).  Other  cases  of  brachylogy— that  conciseness  which  is  due 
to  the  omission  of  one  or  more  words  that  are  essential  to  a logically  correct 
or  complete  expression  of  thought  or  to  the  immediate  understanding — ^are 
likewise  iar  from  rare.  In  all  probability  the  poet  of  2,  38,  V wants  to  say  that 
Savitar  has  intended  the  waters  for  the  fishes,  the  waste  for  the  beasts  of  prey, 
the  forests  for  the  birds,  but  whereas  the  second  member  of  the  threefold 


D.  \ELAKXAR,  Word-economy  and  B^gvedic  interpWtion, 
Wiesbaden  1969,  p.  139  and  at  i^ORI  45 
^ f too  much  ,nclmed  to  view  the  pertinent  phenomena  as  con- 

sz  “i  ‘pp”-!  *« 

p.  translations  in  E.V.P.  and  his  notes  in  E.  V.  P.  I, 

: k ” 2T  “ ‘ 

® RV.  9,  26,  4;  cf.  Rexou,  E.  V.  P.  VTTT  p.  73. 

4-*4^5^1t  P'  cf.  e.g.  10.  60, 

.;I0,  1,6;89,6;113.2;1,  15,9;58,  1;8,41,7. 

Cf.  Geldkeb,  R\  . I,  p.  326;  Renoij,  E.  V.  P.  XV,  p.  19. 


The  style  of  the  Yedic  hynm-% 


237 


conmninication  is  complete,  the  first  lacks  The  fehes’  as  well  as  a noiiji  or 
verb  indicating  that  they  live  in  the  water*.  The  words  ''a  ripe  brancli”  in  1, 
8,  8 are  no  doubt  meant  to  suggest  branch  loaded  with  ripe  fruit/’ 

Another  phenornenoii  of  Sequent  ocearrenee  is  the  sous-entenriii,  instances 
of  which  are  often  foimd  in  more  or  less  Hteral  repetitions  or  in  parallel  utteran- 
ces subjoined  to  an — as  a rule  short — complete  statement : '“The  cloth  which 
they  spread  under  the  horse,  the  upper  garment,  the  objects  golden  | under | 
him’^  (1,  162,  16)®.  In  similes  and  elsewhere  a term,  though  mentioned  once, 
may  function  twice:  “Fire,  whom  they  hold  {in  hand)  like  a bracelet  fwom) 
on  the  hand’’  (6,  16,  40)^®.  Similes  are  sometimes  formulated  in  a condensed 
form^^:  “(Agni’s)  back  gleams  like  (that  of)  a stallion”  (i,  58,  2).  The  frequent 
occurrence  of  Juxtapositions  wThere  we  would  perhaps  expect  an  indication 
of  a comparison^®  characteristic  of  this  style  but  a natural  con- 

sequence of  the  poets’  view  of  the  world:  where  we  ivould  prefer  to  say  “a 
hand  sharp  like  a thunderbolt”  the  poet  of  1,  54,  4,  omitting  the  particle,  calls 
the  infallibl}^  striking  hand  (a  manifestation  of)  lightning^*.  It  Is  therefore  often 
impossible  to  draw  a hard-and-fast  line  between  comparison  and  identification. 
Furthermore,  the  soma  is  said  to  be  purified  by  the  pressing-stones  (1, 135,  2)^*. 
In  many  stanzas  a word  is  haplologically  omitted^*.  Preverbs  are  many  times 
used  alone  instead  of  preverb  and  verb^®:  stimulating  A,giii  into  a display  of 
Ms  pow’er  the  poet  of  3,  18,  4 says  only  “up,”  instead  of  “fiame  up”^h 

Among  the  other  peculiarities  of  the  often  concise^®  style  are  a predilection 
for  asyndetic  co-ordination  of  clauses  or  sentences  and  the  absence  of  any 
indication  of  causal  or  chronologic  relation^®,  enumerative  Juxtapositions  of 
the  type  “companion,  Mend,  relation”  (RV.  4,  25,  6)®®,  abrupt  transitions®b 
antithesis®®,  contrasts  of  smaller  compass:  “Virile  are  you,  impotent  your 


® See  e.g.  also  1,  62,  8;  120,  8;  135,  2. 

® For  other  examples  see  e.g.  Goxda,  Ellipsis,  p.  64. 

Cf.  also  places  such  as  4,  17,  4;  24,  3. 

“ The  so-called  compuratio  compendiaria:  Gonba,  o.c.,  p.  55.  For  other  con- 
densations see  1,  100,  13;  10,  29,  5. 

“ RENor,  E.  V.  P.  I,  p.  39;  Gonda,  Ellipsis,  p.  5. 

Cf.  1,  88,  4;  96,  5;  4,  4,  2;  6,  19,  9;  27,  6 etc. 

Also  9,  50,  3 ; it  is  of  course  pressed  out  by  the  stones  and  purified  by  the  sieve. 
See  e.g.  1,  184,  3;  2,  1,  5;  35,  14;  4,  8,  8;  5,  23,  4;  6,  15,  2;  19,  5;  7,  48,  1;  8, 
51,  9;  9.  88,  4;  cf.  also  9,  35,  4;  Goxda,  Ellipsis,  p.  61. 

Renou,  E.  V.  P.  I,  p.  30;  Gouda,  Ellipsis,  p.  77;  cf.  e.g.  also  6,  45,  8. 

Cf.  e.g.  also  1,  14,  6;  78,  1;  2,  13,  11;  8,  44,  11;  45,  40. 

1®  Cf.  e.g.  RV.  5,  77,  1;  8,  8,  3;  9,  64,  9;  97,  26;  10,  125,  4. 

1®  Rexou,  is.  V.  P.  I,  p.  05;  Goxda,  S.  R.  p.  402;  Ellipsis,  p.  69 f.  See  e.g.  BA  . 
5,  59,  1 (PiscHEE,  V,  S.  I,  p.  190);  6,  66,  11  (Geldxes,  RV.  II,  p.  169);  69,  4;  7, 
71,  5 (Geldxeb,  V.  S.  n,  p.  280);  cf.  also  10,  73,  5. 

Renou,  E.  V.  P.  I,  p.  68  (cf.  also  IV,  p.  5);  Gonoa,  S.  R.  p.  404.  Cf.  e.g. 
also  RV,  1,  14,  3. 

ti  See  e.g.  RV.  1,  25,  6 (Rexou,  E.  V.  P.  VII,  p.  12). 

Gonda,  S.  R.  p.  402.  Cf.  also  cases  such  as  10,  124,  6. 


2ZB 


J.  Gouda  • Vedic  Literature 


rimls”  (AT.  5, 20, 2}®®.  It  is  of  course  impossible  to  obtain  a perfect  insight  into 
the  value  of  these  and  other  forms  of  literary  expression — such  as  e.g.  synec- 
doche® hysteron  proteron®®  and  other  ‘figures’  recognized  by  modem  scholars 
— without  an  intimate  knowledge  of  the  language  and  culture  in  which  they 
have  come  into  being®®.  Anacolutha  are  far  from  rare®’.  Having  started  with 
some  idea  the  poet  is  struck  by  an  aspect  of  his  subject  that  seems  more 
iiii|wrtant  with  the  result  that  he  leaves  the  first  part  of  his  sentence  S37ntacti- 
cally  unfinished:  “While  we  . . . place  the  splendid  bolt  in  thine  arms — ^when 
thou,  O splendid  Indra,  has  become  stronger  at  our  (sacrificial  place)  thou 
wilt,  we  hope,  subdue  the  barbarian  tribes  with  the  sun”  (RV.  2,  11,  4).  There 
is  no  denying  that  theise  syntactic  irregularities®®  sometimes  produce  a striking 
impression  of  vividness:  “Thus  we  (the  rivers)  . . . are  flowing  on  in  our  bed 
which  has  been  made  by  the  gods®® — ^nor  can  our  rapid  course  be  checked” 
13,  33,  4).  Mention  may  also  he  made  of  abrupt  changes  in  the  construction  or 
transitions  from  a narrative  in  the  third  person  to  an  address  or  quotation®®; 
of  plural  first  persons  including  or  excluding  the  person  or  persons  on  behalf 
of  whom  the  poet  is  speaking®^.  In  dealing  with  parallel  events  or  activities — 
for  instance  in  the  sphere  of  men  and  that  of  the  gods — an  indication  of  the 
changing  subject  may  be  omitted®®. 

A stylistic  feature  which,  though  not  uncommon,  was  not  always  completely 
discerned  or  recognized,  is  parenthesis®®.  The  author  of  10,  127,  8 interrupts 
his  exposition  to  address  an  invitation  or  request  to  the  goddess:  “Like  k±ae 
I have  delivered  to  thee  a hymn — choose  it,  0 daughter  of  heaven,  Mght — 
like  a song  of  praise  to  a victor.”  A parenthesis  can  also  be  introduced  to  pay 
homage  to  a deity,  to  compensate  for  something  omitted,  to  add  an  explanation 
or  motivation,  to  insert  an  after- thought  or  supplementary  assertion,  to  prepare 
for  a foilowing  idea®^  It  occurs  also  as  a short  ‘simile’  (homologation)  inserted 


**  Gonda,  S.  R.  p.  404. 

See  e.g.  W-  4,  27,  5;  10,  159,  2;  167,  1, 

See  e.g.  l^Y.  3,  55,  19;  5,  78,  6. 

» OccasioEal  phenomena  such  as  irregular  constructions  cannot  be  considered 

here. 


TT^  p-  8^-  Cf-  e.g.  W-  1.  30,  1;  2,  17,  4;  19,  4 (Vblai^kab,  in 

JLB  >(.S.  9,  2,  p.  92);  21,  3;  34,  14;  6,  7,  1;  7,  64,  1;  8,  66,  1. 

Cf.  also  cases  such  aa  7,  47,  4;  8,  53,  7.  In  considering  these  constraotions  the 
lOTmulmc  composition  of  many  stanzas  should  not  be  left  out  of  account. 

Bed:  singular,  because  the  poet  is  speaking  at  the  confluence. 

« Cf.  e.g.  2,  11,  14;  3,  38,  2;  5,  56,  2;  6,  17,  11;  cf.  10.  70,  6;  3,  63,  9-12. 

" H.  LoMMEn,  Festschrift  Schubring,  p.  25. 

“ GEIa>^'EB,  ^V.  I,  p.  94  (on  RV.  1,  72). 
c r Th.  Auemcht,  in  FestgruB  Bohtlingk,  Stuttgart  1888,  p.  3;  W.  Wust,  Der 
Schaltotz  im  ?.gv-eda,  (unpublished)  thesis Munehen  1923,  p.  225;  V.  G.  Pabaitjkb, 
Parmta  in  the  ^g^^eda,  13  AIOC,  p.  29.  However,  some  ‘parentheses’  are 
nOfcliiDg  Dut  cimiiges  in  the  construction  (e.g.  6,  75,  11). 

1,  168,  1,  1,  ,.4,  6;  1,  149,  1;  7,  60,  7.  For  3,  1,  1 see  Renott,  E.  V.  P.  XU,  p.  113. 


The  style  of  the  Vedie  hjuins 


23i 


without  a particle : “Let  the  earth  to  me,  a mother  to  a son,  }ield  sailk”  (AT.  12, 
1, 10).  In  some  cases  it  may  be  a premeditated  literary  device : the  wat'^  m wMch 
this  oral  poetry  came  into  being  made  its  occasional  occurrences  almost  una- 
voidable, especially  when  it  was  desired  to  keep  the  expression  of  a complicated 
thought  within  compass. 

Occasional  instances  of  crowded  and  cumbrous  descriptions  are  not  com- 
pletely absent;  RY.  1, 136, 2 sunrise  is  pictured:  “A  broader  course  has  api^ared 
for  the  broad  (Hght) — ^the  path  of  Oi'der  has  been  Controlled'’  by  the  reins 
(rays),  the  eye  (of  the  siin)  by  the  reins  of  Bhaga’'^^,  but  the  snn  itself  is  left 
immentioned. 


Cf.  L.  AnsDOBy,  in  Ludebs,  Tamna,  p.  458,  n.  2;  Rexou,  E.  T.  P.  TH,  p.  32. 
For  the  procedure  adopted  by  the  poet  of  4,  58  see  Geedneb,  in  ZDMG  i 1,  p-  340. 


240 


J.  Gouda  * Vedic  Literature 


d.  An^^igmty 

Altiiough  obscurity  is  an  elastic  notion  and  the  number  of  passages  designat- 
ed as  difficult  to  understand  has,  as  a result  of  philological  research,  been  grad- 
uailv  reduced,  the  frequent  remarks  on  incotnprehensibleness  of  hymns  and 
stanzas  made  by  modem  translators  and  commentators  are,  generally  speaking, 
far  from  imfoimded^  Our  lack  of  understanding  can  be  due  to  an  imperfect 
knowledge  of  the  mid^hological  or  legendary  background^,  to  an,  at  least  in 
our  eyes,  too  high  degree  of  succinctness  or  condensation  in  the  expression  of 
ideas®,  to  unintelligible  allusions  or  to  an  accumulation  of  rare  or  difficult 
words  and  last,  but  probably  not  least,  to  our  ignorance  of  the  original  occa- 
sion of  a hymn  and  an  imperfect  ability  on  our  part  to  enter  into  the  ideas  and 
feelings  of  the  poets  who,  appealing  to  congenial  audiences^,  selected  those 
particulars  w’Mch  had  a lure  for  them  and  were,  moreover,  much  inclined  to 
project  outwardly  into  cosmos  and  mythical  reality  what  they  had  perceived 
inwardly.  Those  scholars  v/ho  imputed  part  of  these  obscurities  to  the  poets 
themselves  are  no  doubt  not  always  wrong : there  is  no  denying  that  they  in 
some  cases  give  the  impression  of  revelling  in  stylistic  excesses,  enigmatic 
expressions  and  poetic  licences  of  every  kind®.  There  is  also  reason  to  subscribe 
to  the  opinion  that,  at  least  in  part  of  the  pertinent  passages,  the  obscurity  has 
been  intentionaP,  although  it  would  perhaps  be  more  correct  to  speak  of 
premeditated  ambiguity.  Obviously  dealing  with  esoteric  knowledge  poets 
may  speak  of  ‘‘the  hidden  or  secret  tongue  of  the  sacrifice”  (RV.  10,  53,  3) 
or  of  “the  secret  name  of  Tvastar’s  cow  in  the  house  of  the  moon”  (1,  84,  15)®. 
Their  style  often  allows  comfortably  for  esoteric  digression;  7,  33,  8f. : 

^ Cf.  e.g.  Geldxeb,  on  1,  121;  149;  173;  176;  190;  3,  31;  53,  23;  56;  5,  2; 
19;  44;  6,  3;  8,  41;  9,  94;  cf.  also  10,  30,  10;  73;  105  (Velane:ab,  in  JUB  23  (1954), 
2,  p.  1);  130,  7;  131,  5. 

=*  E.g.  1,  161,  12;  174,  6;  4,  22,  2;  6,  20,  8;  11;  56,  3;  10,  99;  144;  172. 

® E.g.  1,  48,  3;  174,  3;  180;  5,  50,  4f.;  8,  6,  34.  See  also  Renou,  E.  V.P.I,  p.46. 
W Mle  every  sentence  of  a passage  seems  intelligible,  the  meaning  of  a larger  unit 
often  remains  obscure.  Cf.  also  W.  Nobman  Beowx,  at  JAOS  88,  p,  199. 

^ E.g.  1,  134,2;  2,  38,  8;  5,  1,  3;  8,  4,  8;  102,  14;  9,  22,  6;  71,  4;  10,  20,  7;  31,  8; 
77,  4;  96,  2;  99. 

® Cf.  also  Euzabekeova,  o.c.,  p.  66. 

® See  e.g.  Geijdnee,  on  10,  61  (cf.  S.  A.  Da^^ge,  at  JIH  45,  p.  369  (specula- 
tive)); the  mme  and  Geiftith,  Hjnnns,  I,  p.  226  on  1,  127ff. 

^ See  e.g.  Gbldneb,  RV.  on  1,  140;  3,  7;  38;  58,  1;  7,  87,  6;  10,  106;  cf.  also 
Gbassmahn,  ^Y,  ubers.  I,  p.  20  (on  2,  13f.);  p.  191  (on  5,  41f.);  p.  489  (on  8,  61); 
Geiitith,  Hymns,  III,  p.  292  (on  8,  61);  Haxjg,  Ai.  B.  I,  p.  23  (on  10,  61  and  62); 
P.  S.  Sastbi,  in  ABORI  28,  p.  64  (on  10,  106,  for  wMch  cf.  also  BABTHOLOiiiAE,  in 
IP  25,  p.  M7;  Laxman,  in  JAOS  10,  p,  403;  Roth,  in  ZDMG  37,  p.  112). 

* This  is  however  not  to  say  that  we  are  always  unable  to  understand  these 
secrets.  We  have  to  be  familiar  with  the  poets’  modes  of  expressing  particular  ideas 
before  we  can  rightly  comprehend  the  real  meaning  of  these  passages.  Cf.  also  7,  87, 
4;  8,  41,  5;  9,  71,  5;  86,  10;  10,  53,  11  etc.  and  Renou,  E.  V.  P.  I,  p.  9;  V,  p.  1; 
SI,  p.  116  (on  ]5*V.  3,  7);  XITE,  p.  92  (on  4,  3).  See  also  Babth,  The  religions  of 
India,  London  (1879)  ®1891,  p.  XTTT 


The  style  of  the  Vedic  hyimis 


241 


“Their  light  is  the  growth  of  the  sun. 

Their  greatness  profound  like  the  ocean’s. 

Like  the  haste  of  the  wind  is  your  praise, 

It  can’t  be  followed  by  othera. 

With  their  hearts’  illumination 

They  seek  for  the  thousand-branched  mystery*.” 

For  the  time  being  it  seems  adyisable,  whilst  admitting  that  we  are  not  in 
a position  to  Judge  and  appreciate  the  dark  hymns  and  passages  in  the  light  of  a 
perfect  knowledge  of  all  subtleties  of  the  language  and  a complete  enltiiral 
congeniality®,  to  take  full  account  of  the  necessity,  on  the  poets'  side,  to  resort 
to  dark  or  veiled  expressions  for  reasons  of  taboo  or  prudence,  of  their  desire 
also  to  reveal,  or  at  least  suggest,  connections  or  parallels  between,  for  instance, 
the  visible  world  and  the  Unseen  by  means  of  ambiguous expressions  or  bold 
or  far-fetched  allusions  and,  last  but  not  least,  to  mtimate  that  the  events  and 
personages  dealt  with  admit  of  interpretations  on  more  than  one  level,  cosmical, 
m3rthological,  psychological,  or  esoterical^^  and  philosopMcaF®. 

The  poets  availed  themselves  of  the  opportunities  olFered  by  trnlhological 
narratives  in  general.  Being  characterized  by  a typical  kind  of  fluidity  myths 
often  elicit  different  solutions  of  their  contents  and  imagerir.  The  myth  of 
Indra’s  great  feat  may  relate  the  transformation  of  primordial  chaos  into 
cosmic  order,  it  implies  also  that  only  by  the  domination  of  obstraeting  force  an 
orderly  universe  and  an  orderly  society  can  emerge:  Indra  is  implored  to  kill, 
also  now  and  in  the  future,  all  V^as  and  Ms  worshipper  is  believed  to  re-enact 
the  deed^®.  The  repetition  of  the  eternal  mytMcal  events  in  the  present  and  the 
belief  that  what  occurs  in  nature  and  in  human  society  or  history  is  made 
possible  because  a mytMcal  event,  regarded  as  unique  but  operating  now  and 
always,  has  taken  place  at  the  beginning  of  all  happening,  leads  a poet  to  pro- 
nounce the  at  first  sight  curious  words:  “Thou  (the  fire  wMch  is  being  kindled) 
hast  now,  fixing  thy  mind  upon  wealth,  saved  Atri  (who  is  a legendary  figure)” 
(5,  15,  5)^*.  When  some  people  are  said  to  have  made  the  sun  shine  by  their 
religious  chant,  “sun”  is  apt  to  be  taken  ‘metaphorically’  (8,  29, 10).  The  actual 
or  assumed  correspondence  betw’een,  or  identity  of,  cosmic  and  terrestrial 


* So  there  is  also  a good  chance  of  assuming  an  ambiguity  where  there  is  none. 
It  is  for  instance  MgMy  questionable  whether  the  poet’s  contemporaries  would 
regard  places  such  as  6,  39,  2 or  10, 17,  2;  75,  8 as  ambiguous  (Gelbxeb);  at  9,  15,  1 
(and  in  similar  contexts)  Geudxeb’s  interpretation  is  beside  the  mark. 

L.  Rbxou,  L’ambiguit4  du  vocabulaire  du  j^gveda,  JA  231,  p.  161  expresses 
very  emphatic  opinions  on  tMs  point;  Gonda,  Old  Indian,  p.  191. 

The  esoterical  implications  of  the  texts  and  the  difficulty  of  literary  art  are 
more  than  once  affirmed:  some  poet  speaks  of  the  “secret  tongue'  ’ or  ‘’secret  mind, 
another  refers  to  Mdden  names  or  functions  (cf.  e.g.  • 10,  53,  3;  11;  4,  58,  1; 
5,  3,  3;  3,  54,  5).  See  also  Rexou,  E.  V.  P.  I,  p.  9. 

Compare  also  systematic  correspondences  (correlations)  such  as  10, 

158,  1. 

« Cf.  RV.  3,  37,  5f.;  6,  17,  1;  60,  1;  7,  48,  2 etc. 

Cf.  also  5,  45,  9;  6,  33,  2. 


242 


J.  Gouda  - Vedic  Literature 


pienomeiia  leads  to  the  conviction  that  fire  is  the  terrestrial  fortn  of  the  smij  the 
snn  the  celestial  form  of  Agni.  Natural  phenomena  and  their  mythological, 
sinnholical  or  esoteiical  interpretation  are  often  interwoven:  the  luminous 
phenomena  connected  with  dawn  appear  like— no,  as — cows^^*  when  they  are 
said  to  have  brilliant  or  golden  rays  the  text  may  imply:  “they  ‘shine’  golden 
treasures”^®.  The  “desirable  things”  of  Usas  (5,  80,  6)  can  be  her  personal 
charms  as  well  as  her  highly  valued  gifts.  A mythical  quest  of  light  (4,  1,  14) 
mav  be  explained  spiritually.  A ritualistic  interpretation  often  is  as  probable  as 
a mythologicaP^  a reference  to  earthly  life  may  admit  of  an  esoterical  connota- 
tioii“.  Ritual  and  psychological  processes  are  occasionally  paralleled  to  the 
point  of  identification:  hence  the  relation  between  the  scrnm  filter  and  the  sieve 
of  thoughts^®.  Ritual  entities  and  objects  belonging  to  our  mundane  sphere  can 
be  systematically  related  to  each  other^®.  The  use  of  a characteristic  adjective 
may  suggest  a comparison®^. 

This  leads  to  a frequent  use  of  words  in  a double  sense  or  at  least  with  allusive 
possibilities®®;  to  semantic  ‘superpositions’®®  of,  for  instance,  concrete  (sensorial) 
and  abstract  (intellectual)  meanings;  to  what  might — ^not  always  rightly — 
appear  to  be  cases  of  zeugma  or  syllepsis®^;  to  indirect  indications — e.g.  “she 
that  should  not  be  killed”  for  “cow”®® — ; to  transference  of  the  terminology  of 
relationship  (son,  daughter,  father  etc.)  to  divine  powers  and  the  outer  garb,  the 
phenomena,  in  which  they  manifest  themselves®®.  A verb  in  1,  124,  10  has,  in 
connection  with  Dawn,  to  be  taken  to  mean  “awakening”  as  well  as  “making 
old”®".  Some  authors®®  translated  the  adjective  drapsiimh  characterizing,  in  RV". 


See  e.g.  RY.  1,  62,  5;  92,  2ff.;  105,  3;  124,  5;  4,  1, 16;  and  compare  texts  such 
as  9,  65,  1.  The  ‘ocean’  as  the  source  of  inspiration  is  in  the  poet’s  heart;  e.g.  10,  5, 
1 :Goxi) A,  Vision  p.  281.  For  the  black  cow  as  a symbol  of  night  (cf.  1,  113,  2;  4,  3,  9 j 
TOC  K.  L.  Jaxebt,  Sinn  und  Bedeutung  des  Wortes  dhdsi,  Wiesbaden  1956,  p.  29. 

RV.  1,  48,  9,  cf.  2,  2,  4. 

For  1,  112,  1 see  Geldiosb,  1R.Y.  I,  p.  144;  for  7 H.  D.  Veuankab,  in  Studies 
W.  Norman  Brown,  p.  228.  Cf.  e.g.  also  9,  95,  4. 

« For  “combat”  and  “festivity”  (e.g.  6,  75,  1)  see  Loboikl,  Gedichte,  p.  61;  for 
“{enjoyment  of)  food”  Rexou,  E.  Y.  P.  HE,  p.  28. 

Cf.  e.g.  9,  47,  4;  67,  22ff. 

« Cf.  e.g.  10,  85,  6ff.;  90,  i2ff. 

See  e.g.  9,  65,  8 (compare  9,  72,  1). 

See  e.g.  Renoit,  E.  Y.  P.  XIY,  p.  64  on  1R.Y.  10,  4,  4;  GEumsTEB,  RY.  Ill,  p. 
71  on  9,  76,  2;  see  also  1,  48,  7;  2,  1,  10;  8,  35,  2;  10,  39,  9. 

» Renou,  at  JA  231,  p.  161  and  E.  Y.  P.  XIY,  p.  75  (on  1,  63,  7;  10,  21,  1); 
III,  p.  51  (on  1,  113,  15);  Veijlxkab,  in  ABORI  45,  p.  2. 

« See  e.g.  1,  92,  17;  112,  9;  4,  58,  10;  9,  105,  1;  108,  7. 

» E.g.  10,  46,  3;  cf.  Rexou,  E.  Y.  P.  XIY,  p.  77. 

» Dawn  (Usas)  is  the  daughter  of  the  heavens  (e.g.  1,  48,  1;  92,  7);  fire  (Agni) 
the  son,  i.e.  manifestation  or  representative  of  overwhelming  power  (Gonda, 
‘Gcxis’  and  ‘powers’  in  the  Yeda,  The  BEague  1957). 

« Cf.  Renou,  E.  Y.  P.  m,  p.  66  and  see  RY.  3,  31,  14;  4,  41,  8;  8,  7,  8;  9,  50,  1. 

« Cf.  Oebexbebg,  Noten,  I,  p.  64;  Geldneb,  RY.  I,  p.  84;  Renou,  E.  Y.  P.  X, 

p.  64, 


Tile  style  of  the  Tedie  hymns 


M3 

1,  64,  2,  the  llariits,  gods  of  the  minds  and  shedders  cf  rain,  who  are  cottipared 
to  warriors,  by  ‘‘bearing  banners”  as  well  as  ‘‘pouring  out  drops.”  In  Agiii 
hjiniis  the  word  for  “drops  of  soma'^  (drapsa)  can  assume  the  secondary 
meaning  “spark”^*.  When  “wealth”  or  ‘^length  of  life”  imTjlored  on  behalf  of 
some  person  are  <said  to  be  *‘rieh  in  progeny”®®  a modem  reader  is  perhaps 
tempted  to  speak  of  an  unsuccessful  case  of  hypallage^h 

As  already  intimated  the  phraseology  of  many  stanzas  is,  in  more  than  one 
sense,  allusive.  When  at  1, 120,  3 the  poet  speaks  of  the  gods’  worshipper  w’ho 
having  started  a hymn  will  receive  his  share,  the  allusion  to  the  dahfiwa  is 
clear®®.  If  he  refers  to  the  gift  of  the  (1, 166, 12)  the  auditor  nnderstancis 

that  this  is  rain.  Many  references  to  ritual  acts  or  mythical  events  were  at  least 
for  the  contemporary  audience  clear  enough®®.  The  desire,  on  the  author’s  part, 
to  avoid,  for  reasons  of  ^ taboo,’  unequlvocalness®^,  to  indulge  in  an  aecumiilatioii 
of  metaphors*®  or  to  replace  a god’s  name  by  one  of  his  characteristic  features*® 
can  detract  from  the  plainness  of  a passage.  Other  instances  of  ambiguity  find 
their  explanation  in  the  metaphorical  use  of  another  word  in  the  context : when, 
in  1, 175,  3 Indra  is  implored  to  urge  on  the  chariot  of  man  w’e  should  remember 
that  “chariot”  often  refers  to  the  sacrifice®’.  Allusive  use  of  w’ords  which  in  a 
given  context  are  apt  to  evoke  ceitain  images  or  emotione  is  of  course  not 
foreign  to  these  texts  either : in  an  ofier  of  sexual  intercourse  the  reference  to 
jolting  and  rocking  wheels  cannot  be  meaningless  (10, 10,  7f.).  Not  infrequently 
the  ambiguity  of  the  word  or  words  used  and  our  lack  of  precise  information  on 
mythological  or  legendary  facts  do  not  allow  us  to  make  certain  about  the  poet’s 
intentions*®.  In  particular  cases  he  has  even  been  suspected  of  veiling  references 
to  personal  experiences  by  allusive  wordings*®. 

These  ambiguities  may  help  to  emphasize  parallelism,  which  many  times 
means  clarifying  homologations  or  identifications  or  correlations  between 

« Cf.  1,  94,  11  (Bextou,  E.  Y.  P.  XH,  p.  96);  10,  II,  4 (ibid.  XIY,  p.  71),  etc. 

« See  1,  113,  17;  4,  51,  10.  Cf.  also  1,  117,  6;  181,  2. 

Not  infrequently  scholars  have  also  been  too  prone  to  jump  to  hasty  conclusions 
with  regard  to  pass^^es  that  admit  of  more  than  one  interpretation.  At  1,  92,  3 the 
dawns  are  said  to  sing  hymns  (of  praise)  like  women  at  work;  a double  meajiing  of 
the  verb  (“shine”),  though  not  impossible,  is  questionable  and  not  necessary.  See 
OmnxBEBG,  NG  1918,  p.  62  (=  K.  S.,  p.  857);  Geudneb,  ?.V.  I,  p.  118;  Renov, 
E.  V.  P.  in,  p.  34.  Xeedless  to  say,  modem  readers  are  on  the  other  hand  apt  to 
overlook  many  connotations  or  appeals  to  the  feelings  of  the  audience.  Cases  of 
grammatical  ambiguity  (e.g.  7,  79,  1)  are  not  necessarily  intended. 

See  p.  79  and  compare  1,  171,  5;  5,  51,  15;  10,  11,  5;  2,  5,  5;  31,  5. 

« See  e.g.  1,  31,  4;  130,  9;  149,  3;  5,  73,  6;  6,  15,  5 (of.  1,  61,  15);  49,  8;  65,  5;, 
69,  8;  7,  79,  4;  99,  1;  8,  2,  39;  45,  37;  63,  9;  9,  41,  2;  10,  109,  4. 

« See  e.g.  7,  37,  7. 

“ See  e.g.  9,  41,  2;  74,  4. 

See  e.g.  7,  99,  1. 

Compare  e.g.  also  9,  96,  1. 

Cf.  e.g.  1,  120,  5;  6 (Geldxee,  RY.  I,  p.  163;  Rexov,  XYI,  p.  22);  1,  180,  8;. 

2,  13,  8;  4,  1,  6;  12,  6;  10,  21,  1. 

See  Geubkeb,  RY.  I,  p.  44  (on  1,  36);  p.  303  (on  2,  23);  5,  12. 


244 


J,  Gk)nda  * Vedic  Literature 


jnylMcal,  sa^cred  or  celestial  reality  and  ritnal  ‘symbolism’  as  a participation  of 
tbe  sacred:  in  2,  10,  3 deaHng  with  the  ‘birth’  of  fire  Agni  is  said  to  have  been 
the  embryo  “in  tho^  with  the  many  shapes  or  colours” ; the  feminine  adjective 
which  also  suggests  the  idea  of  “in  those  with  many  embroidered  garments” 
nnderlnes  the  feminality  of  the  vegetable  snbstance  in  which  fire  is  known  to 
originate*®.  Identifying  the  frogs  with  officiants,  busied  with  an  oblation  of  hot 
milk,  the  poet  of  7, 103,  8 describes  them  as  adhvaryu  priests,  heated, -sweating; 
in  connection  with  the  frogs  ‘heated’  denotes  their  being  oppressed  by  the  sun. 
In  references  to  the  Vala  i]a3dih  the  idea  of  Kberation  of  real  -cows  and  cosmic 
events  are  more  than  once  mixed  up*^. 

Although  many  Soma  hymns  of  mand^  mamly  describe  the  process  of 
preparing  the  beverage,  the  poets  do  not  conceal  their  thoughts  and  feelings,  or 
aippress  the  emotions  aroused  when  the  juice  is  extracted  *2.  The  fact  that  the 
soma  juice  and  the  deity  Soma  are  m these  hymns  almost- unrecognizably 
identified  has  given  rise  to  an  allusive  style  which  is  no  doubt  to  call  up  this 
Identity  in  the  mind  of  the  hearer  rather  than  to  invite  him  to  solve  the  problem 
as  to  whether  the  deity  or  the  juice  is  meant  and  whether  the  processes  described 
take  place  on  the  sacrificial  ground  or  m the  celestial  regions*^.  The  identity  of 
god  and  draught  is  also  apparent  from  statements  such  as:  the  soma,  while 
being  purified,  ‘Sows  out’  heroic  sons,  vigour  and  well-being**.  However,  this 
tendency  to  identification  can,  in  the  same  context,  alternate  with  a dissocia- 
tion of  both  aspects  of  the  divine  draught:  “One  birth  (of  Soma)  is  concealed, 
the  other  takes  place  when  he  is  offered”  (9,  68,  5)*®. 

One  of  the  difficulties  with  which  a modem  reader  of  the  Veda  is  confronted 
is  the  absence  of  such  dividing  lines  as  he  usually  draws  between  person  and 
non-person,  between  concrete  and  abstract*®.  Not  only  are  we  tempted  to 
assume  figurative  speech  where  there  is  none*’,  we  also  run  a serious  risk  of 

Cf.  also  6,  75,  3;  7,  3,  2;  24,  2;  47,  3;  101,  1;  8,  24,  6;  9,  16,  1;  66,  25;  69,  9; 

10,  123,  L 

« Cf.  4,  1,  13;  5,  85,  2 (Renotj,  E.  V.  P.  VII,  p.  19);  10,  62,  2 f.  (see  Ludebs, 

Vanina,  p.  515). 

P.  S.  Sastei,  in  IHQ  30,  p.  301. 

Cf.  e.g.  9,  3,  7;  16,  4;  66,  2;  79,  4;  97,  23,  and  see  e.g.  also  9,  10,  5;  48,  4;  62, 
3;  83,  2;  §6,  22.  ■ . 

Cf.  S.  S.  Bhawe,  in  J oumal  of  the  Mah.  Sayajirao  XJniv.  of  Baroda,  Hum- 
id, 1 11961),  p.-i  (on  9,  68).  Cf.  e.g.  9,  29,  6;  35,  1;  41,  4;  86,  45,  and  places  such  as 
4,  7;  20,  4;  30,  3;  31,  1;  59,  1;  69,  10.  . . . 

" Cf.  e.g.  also  5,  51,  9;  6,  44,  24;  8,  97,  6. 

**  For  details -see  Gonda,  R.  1. 1,  p.  29;  36  etc.;  H.  von  Glasenape,  Entwick- 
lungsstufen  des  indischea  Denkens,  Halle  S.  1940,  p.-  9;  J".  HebteXt,  Die  Sonne  iind 
Mithra  im  Avesta,  Leipzig  1927,  p.  6 etc.  exaggerated.  One  should  not  (with 
Macdonell,  H.  S.  L.  p.  100)  speak  of  “deifications  of  abstract  nouns.” 

Some  modem  mystics  and  philosophers — among  them  • Aurobindo,  e.  g.  in 
Hymns^  to  the  M37Btic  Fire,  Pondicherry  1952 — go  decidedly  too  far  in 
symbolism  and  allegories.  Interpretations  such  as  Gotama  (a  proper  name)  “most 
raLant  because  of  the  relations  between  cows  (go)  and  morning-light  are  absurd 
Md  unfounded.  ■ . & & , 


The  style  of  the  Tedie  hyiims 


245 


misiiiterpretiiig  the  tenor  of  a passage.  For  Vedie  man  all  processes  in  the  uni- 
verse were  determiEed  by  a co-operation  of  poteneies  or  power  siibstanees 
wMch  were  conceived  of  now  as  persons,  now  as  non-persons,  but  at  times  also 
as  persons  and  non-persons.  This  ambivalence  led  the  poc4  to  address  prayers 
for  a®istanee  to  the  river  Sarasvatl  in  the  same  stanza  (6,  61,  2)  in  “which  he 
describes  her  violence  in  breakiiig  open  the  mountains,  or  to  order  the  kettle- 
drum to  dnve  away,  together  with  Indra,  the  enemies,  and  to  impart  strength 
to  those  speaking  (6,  47,  29ff.). 

Although  we  are  sceptical  about  the  opinion^*  that  most  allegories  of  the 
Rgveda  were,  2500  years  ago,  as  hazy  and  obscure  as  they  are  now,  it  must  be 
admitted  that  part  of  them  continue  to  provide  food  for  discnsision.  There  is,  in 
general,  almost  nniveiml  agreement  about  the  poets’  intentions  to  convey,  by 
the  strmbols  and  images  of  cows*®,  another  and  deeper  meaning  than  the  surface 
one  in  passages  such  as  4, 41,  5 stating  that  the  big  cow — i.e.  poetic  art—- which 
with  her  milk  gives  a thousand  gushes  is  expected  to  ideld  now  also  as  if  she  had 
gone  through  the  pasture^®,  but  the  interpretation  of  many  places  remains 
disputed and  the  supposition  that  definite  "words  alwa;ys  have  the  same 
metaphorical  meaning  would  easily  lead  us  astray.  It  is  not  surprising  that  an 
allegorical  expression  was  more  than  once  borrowed  from  the  usual  saerifieial 
terminology®^  or  from  handwork  such  as  weaving:  the  ffis,  our  fathers,  are  in 
10,  130,  Iff.  described  as  having  woven  (i.e.  created)  the  sacrificial  ritual.  Xor 
are  allegorical  descriptions  a strange  appearance  in  speculative  contexts : Agni’s 
flames  ai-e  buffaloes  and  cows  meeting  in  the  same  nest  (10, 5, 2) ; the  ficus  indica 
( nyagrodha)  with  its  aerial  roots  represents  the  tree  of  heaven  and  the  descend- 
ing rays  of  light  (1,  24,  7)®b  la  view  of  the  identity  of  aim  and  effect®*  the 
activity  of  the  poet  is  compared  to  a race:  2,  31  “0  Vanim  and  Mtra,  show 
favour  to  our  chariot . . (st.  1) ; the  concluding  stanza,  expressing  the  wish  to 
be  successful  like  the  horses  before  the  chariot,  explains  the  allegor\'^®®. 

The  desire  to  elucidate  reality  by  means  of  images  hardly  led  to  the  creation 
of  real  parables.  This  term  is  sometimes  applied  to  the  well-known  stanzas  RV. 


Expressed  by  R.  von  Roth,  at  KZ  26,  p.  47. 

**  V.  M.  Afte,  The  allegorical  significance  of  the  word  for  ‘cows’  in  the  ?*g\"eda, 
17  AIOC  (1953),  p.  227. 

« See  e.g.  also  10,  101,  9;  133,  7 and  compare  1,  164,  26;  2,  32,  3;  4,  42,  10.  Cf. 
W.  P.  Schmid,  Die  Knh  auf  der  Weide,  IF  64,  p.  1. 

See  e.g.  3,  31  (Geldnieb,  ^tV.  I,  p.  366,  hazardoiisly  explained  m a reminiscence 
of  matriarchy  by  E.  Hebold,  in  ArchOr  26  (1958),  p.  81);  3,  55  (Geddiveb,  ^V.  I, 
p.  399);  10,  114;  135  (Geldneb,  W-  HI,  p.  367).'  ' 

See  e.g.  Geij>neb,  RV.  I,  p.  227. 

For  other  allegories  see  e.s.  1,  152,  6;  3,  26,  8;  57,  3;  5,  37,  3;  54,  12;  7,  44,  5; 
64,  4;  85,  1;  8,  12,  11;  42,  3;  9^  100,  1;  10,  113,  10. 

« See  p.  80  f. 

E.  WiKDiscH,  in  F^tgniB  Roth,  Stuttgart  1893,  p.  139;  Renou,  E.  V.  P. 
I,  p.  20. 


246 


J.  Gonda  • Vedic  Literature 


1, 164^  : two  birdSs  inseparable  companions,  embrace  the  same  tree;  one  of 

them  eats  the  sweet  fruit  (wisdom),  the  other  looks  on  without  eating^®. 

Authors  have  often  believed  to  find,  in  these  hymns,  many  instances  of 
various  types  of  puns  or  play  upon  words  If  however  we  understand  by  ^pun’ 
the  use  of  a term  in  such  a way  as  to  suggest  two  or  more  meanings  or  different 
am>ciations  we  should  remember  that  what  might  seem  different  meanings  to 
us  was  not  alw'^ajs  a case  of  polysemy  in  Indian  antiquity.  Vocabulary  being  a 
way  in  which  a community  classiSes  the  sum  total  of  its  experiences,  the 
‘meanings’  of  words  are  far  from  being  identical  in  aU  languages,  so  that  in 
translating  we  are  often  forced  to  split  up  the  meaning  of  a Vedic  word  or  to 
make  distinctions  where  for  Vedic  man  there  were  none®®.  We  would  for  instance 
be  quite  wrong  in  saying®®  that  the  poet  of  RV.  7, 41  continually  plays  upon  two 
meanings  of  bkuga^  viz.  ‘‘good  fort-ime”  and  a proper  name  of  a god.  No,  the  god 
manifests  himself  in  w'elfare  and  happiness;  wherever  there  is  good  fortune  the 
god  is  believed  to  be  active  in  performance  of  his  special  function®®.  The  com- 
bination of  the  name  of  Savitar,  “the  Stimulator”  (the  stm  in  its  dynamic 
aspect),  with  forms  of  the  root  su-  “to  impel,  set  in  motion,”  is  no  play  on  sound 
repetition®^  but  an  unequivocal  statement  of  the  fact  that  the  god  performs  the 
task  which  he  is,  in  virtue  of  his  character,  expected  to  accomplish.  When  Agni 
after  being  ignited  is  said  to  become  Mitra  (3, 5, 4)  the  poet  supposing  the  latter 
to  make  Ms  presence  felt  in  the  sacrificial  fire  is  not  playing  on  the  name  of  the 
god  of  ffriendsMp’  but  stating  a temporary  identity  of  divine  functions  ®2.  The 
sixteen  times  repeated  “bull”  in  RV.  2,  16,  4ff.  may  seem  an  exaggeration  not 
to  our  taste,  it  is  no  play®®  but  a serious  attempt  to  impress  upon  the  auditor 
that  Indra’s  weapons,  horses  and  chariot  participate  in  his  buU-hke  nature, 
that  Ms  driiik  and  ail  that  is  needed  to  prepare  it,  being  bull-like  themselves, 
are  to  preseive  this  powerful  nature.  ‘Double  meanings’  such  as  that  of  atpsu 


See  chapter  III,  p.  135  f. 

” See  e.g.  E.  W.  Hopeins,  at  JAOS  15,  p.  272;  Geldnbb,  V.  S.  11,  p.  269  (on 
2,  13,  7);  P.  S.  Sastbi,  in  IHQ  30,  p.  301.  For  the  confusion  between  these 
terms — '‘pun’  should  be  used  for  the  Indian  slesa  (Welleb,  in  Festgabe  Von  Garbe, 
p-  58|,  word-play  for  the  yamaka  etc. — see  E.  Gebow,  in  JGJRI  27,  3-4  (1971), 

p.  79. 

Cf.  Gonda,  The  study  of  ancient  Indian  religious  terminology,  History  of 
Religions,  I (1961),  p.  243. 

» With  A.  Hillebbandt,  Lieder  des  ^.gveda,  Gottingen— Leipzig  1913,  p.  82. 
Tins  is  not  to  deny  that  tMs  Vedic  usage  was,  in  germ,  a prototype  of  the 
cla»ical  Mem  or  double  entendre;  cf.  Renou,  at  Journal  de  Psychologie  44  (1951), 
p.  280;  G.  V.  Devasthau,  J.  Univ.  Poona,  Hum.  Sect.  23  (1965),  p.  39. 

« See  e.g.  1,  113,  1;  124,  1 and  Renou,  E.  Y.  P.  Ill,  p.  62. 

” Gont)a,  Mitra,  p.  48  (otherwise  Bebgatgne,  in  MSL  8,  p.  8 and  Geldkeb, 
W.  I.  P;  406  (on  3,  69)). 

Spielerei  Geld  neb,  Auswahl,  H,  p.  38.  In  Geld  neb’s  oonimentary  the  term 
W(»tgpiel  m a very  frequent  occurrence  (see  e.g.  1,  52,  3;  101,  2;  127,  3;  164,  42; 
177,  1;  180,  4);  see  also  Oldenbbbg,  Noten,  H,  p.  379,  s.v,  WortspieL  and  Renou, 

E.V.P.  n,  p.  71,  n.  3. 


The  style  of  the  Vedic  hjiniis 


247 


‘%talk  (of  the  soma)”  and  ^Vay  (of  the  find  their  €*xpIaiiatioa  in  the 

tendency  to  assmulate  or  lioi3iolo,gize  ritual  and  cosmic  entities,  the  poet  sug- 
gesting a second  sense  of  the  word  which  elsewhere  can  come  to  the  fore®®. 
Derivatives  of  the  same  root  often  have  from  the  semantic  point  of  view  many 
aspects  difficult  to  translate  exactly.  This  does  not  however  mean  that  the  text 
“plays  on  different  meanings.”  If  we  take  the  term  'play'  as  a means  of  pro- 
diicing  a hmnorous  effect  we  shall  in  most  eases  be  mistaken.  The  sharp  juxta- 
position of  “mortal”  and  “immortal”  in  8, 11.  o (“We  mortal  men  contemplate 
the  name  of  thee  that  art'  immortal  . . .”)  is  a case  of  conscious  antithesis^ 
emphasizing  the  contrast,  no  'play.'  Making  in  the  same  stanza  (6,  §6, 
mention  of  rddml  “heaven  and  earth”  as  well  as  RfMast^  a female  figure 
accompanying  the  Manits,  the  author  suggests  a close  eormexion  betw’een  both 
concepts : complete  or  partial  identity  in  name  w'as  believed  to  point  to  iiientitv 
of,  or  an  intimate  association  betw^een,  the  bearers  of  the  names : the  rivers  are 
called  nadt  because  they  resound  {nod-;  AY.  3,  13,  1)®’.  Even  imwm  asusam 
“the  voracious  Susna”‘*  (e.g.  2, 14,  5)— probably  an  oxymoron— is,  rather  than 
a mere  'play,'  an  attempt  at  indicating  a discrepancy  between  the  name  and  the 
behaviour  (notice  the  privative  prefix  a-)  of  the  demoniac  being.  It  is  Yrtra’s 
(Obstruction’s)  very  nature  and  function  to  obstruct®®,  but  at  3,  34,  3 the  posi- 
tions are  reversed:  it  is  Indra  who  obstructs  the  demon,  a fact  consciously  or 
unconsciously  emphasized  by  the  juxtaposition  of  object  and  verb  vrirdm 
avTimt.  Was,  finally,  the  author  of  6,  24,  4 describing  Indra  as  one  who  binds 
without  bonds  (i.  e.  without  being  bound  himself)  and  giving  laviS'hly,  notwith- 
standing the  'play’  upon  the  homonymous  verbal  roots,  only  playing  in  our 
sense  of  the  term  1 


Cf.  laV.  9,  15,  5;  AV.  7,  81,  3;  6;  19,  6,  16;  Rekou,  at  JA  1939,  p.  341. 

For  the  use  of  a word  in  ‘two  meanings’  suggesting  identity  cf.  (probably) 
1,  180,  4;  2,  20,  1. 

®®  Cf.  VON  Bbabke,  in  FestgruB  Roth,  p.  117  (overshooting  the  mark) ; Geubneb, 
RV.  II,  p.  108.  Cf.  1,  64,  9 and  Gonda,  R.  1. 1,  p.  61 ; 89.  Otherwise  Renou,  E.  V.  P. 
X,  p.  6. 

Gonba,  Xotes  on  nam^,  p.  7. 

*®  See  Macbonebb,  V.  M.,  p.  160.  Otherwise  Vebaneiab,  in  JUB  1940,  2,  p.  81. 
Cf.  2,  14,  2;  6,  20,  2;  9,  61,  22. 


248 


J.  Gonda  • Yedic  Literature 


6,  Imigery 

little  poetry  is  possible  without  imagery^.  Images,  often  a device  to  make 
seim  of  what  is  otherwise  bard  to  grasp,  to  familiarize  the  unfamiliar,  to  make 
explicit  bidden  qualities  or  relations,  are  very  frequent  tbrongbont  these 
collections.  Especially  when  a lai^age  has  not  yet  formed  many  abstractions 
imagery  is  apt  to  take  their  place  and  speakers  and  authors  quite  naturally 
resort  to  it  when  they  attempt  to  express  clearly  what  they  feel  and  want  to 
say.  Metaphors,  parallels,  similitudes  help  them  to  express  their  thought  more 
effectively  than  plain  statement,  the  more  so  as  they  usually  draw  their  images 
from  the  natural  world  about  them  and  so  make  an  immediate  impact  on  their 
audiences.  Suggesting  ontological  as  well  as  perceptual  identity  or  indistinguish- 
abiiity  equalizations,  omitting  any  form  of  explicit  comparison,  often  are 
evocative  and  suited  to  characterize  or  to  reveal  what  otherwise  would  remain 
more  or  less  mysterious^. 

For  a right  understanding  of  this  imagery  it  is  essential  to  realize  that  many 
passages  which  would  strike  us  as  exhibiting  a metaphorical  use  of  a noun  are 
rather  statements  of  an  equalization  or  assimilation®.  That  is  to  say  that  we 
nm  the  risk  of  regarding  as  an  image  what  in  Vedic  times  was  an  element  of 
claffiihcation  or  homologation  inherent  in  the  outlook  of  the  poets  and  priests 
in  general^.  Expressions  such  as  “navel  (of  the  world)’'®  for  the  sacrificial  place 
which  is  conceived  of  as  the  centre  of  the  universe  connected  with  heaven  by  the 
world  axis  and  on  earth  the  place  nearest  to  heaven,  are  more  than  an  ‘image.’ 
If  the  soma,  being  purified  and  Sowing  through  the  strainer,  is  believed  to  be 
heroic,  the  addition  to  a description  of  this  process  “a  hero  with  swift  chariots” 


^ One  should  decidedly  avoid  the  term  ‘rhetoric’  so  often  found  in  the  pertinent 
literature  (e.g.  A.  Bebgaignb,  Quelqu.es  observations  sur  les  figures  de  rh^toriqu© 
dans  le  Rig-V^,  MSL  4,  p.  96;  L.  Renou,  in  JA  243  (1955),  p.  420). 

® Cf.  e.g.  3,  26,  9;  39,  7;  5,  19,  2;  6,  15,  19;  7,  43,  4;  90,  6;  8,  8,  2;  101,  16;  9, 

22,  6;  10,  3,  iff.;  101,  2. 


^ Among  those  devices  which,  though  favoured  by  these  poets,  should  not  be 
regarded  as  poetical  omamentation  or  as  products  of  poetical  fantasy  is  the  identi- 
fication of  a god  with  on©  or  some  of  his  colleagues  (L.  von  Schboebeb,  Indiens 
Literatur  und  Cultur,  Leipzig  1887  (1922),  p.  77):  “Thou,  Agni,  art  Indra”;  “Thou, 
Agni,  art  ^.bhu”;  “Thou  god  Agni  art  Aditi  for  the  devout  worshipper”  fRV.  2, 
1,  3;  iOf.;  3,  36,^5;  5,  3,  iff.;  82,  1;  7,  9,  3;  12,  3;  8,  101,  15;  9,  77,  5 etc.).  As  soon 
M a deity  is  believed  to  fulfil  a function  which  is  commonly  attributed  to  another 
divine  being,  the  name  of  the  latter  can  be  transferred  to  him.  In  this  train  of 
thoiigM  the  cel^tial  protot\q>e  of  a terrestrial  being  can  be  described  as  its  highest 
form  , 1,  163,  7 (cf.  6);  cf.  also  8,  89,  1;  9,  62,  9). 

* One  should  not,  with  Ch.  Manning,  Hymns  of  the  ^gveda,  Calcutta  1952, 

p.  3 1 say  that  we  have,  generally  speaking,  to  do  with  passing  metaphors  developing 

into  ‘objects  of  real  belief.”  or  r -o 

® R\  . Is  43, 9;  59,  2;  164, 34;  185,  5 etc.;  cf.  also  H.  Welleb,  Zu  einigen  Meta- 
1961^^  3^  sacred  and  the  profane, 


The  style  of  the  Tedic  hjuiTAS 


M9 


is  no  poetic  Metaphor  in  our  modem  sense  of  the  tema.  The  use  of  “mountain"^ 
for  the  pressing  stones  is  rather  conditioned  by  the  belief  that  an  object  and  its 
source  or  materiai  cause  are  identical  than  a conscioiis  application  of  a Stylistic 
figure'®.  The  ‘ocean’  in  the  poet’s  heart  is  the  source  of  Ms.  inspiiration ; hence 
the  identity  of  heart  and  ocean  in  10,  177,  1. 

The  cows,  wHch  now  are  said  to  be  fond  of  Dawn  (1,  71,  i|,  now  to  be  her 
harbingers  or  representatives  (7,  81,  2),  are  elsewhere  (1,  92,  1|  substituted  for 
the  phenomenon  of  daybreak^.  Xot  all  mstances  of  ‘metonymy’  should  be 
regarded  as  poetical  embellishments  either.  Whereas  it  is  difficult  to  say  whether 
“the  pressed  jar”  (10,  167,  1)  is  based  on  colloquial  expressions  such  as  our 
‘‘bottle”  for  “wine”®,  the  frequent  cases  of  “cows”  instead  of  “milk”®  are  no 
doubt  mainly  due  to  a belief  in  the  ‘identity*’  of  source  and  jiToduct,  or  rather 
in  the  inherence  of  the  former  in  the  latter.  When  at  S,  79,  1 the  so'fm  juice  is 
called  an  inspired  rsi,  it  is  of  course  true  that  this  title  is  due  to  the  poet,  but 
other  places  show  us  that  divine  powers  mediating  the  procem  of  inspiration- — 
with  the  inclusion  of  Soma  himself — ^are  given  the  same  designation^®.  Else- 
where the  right  understanding  of  an  image  presuppO'Ses  an  acquaintance  with 
mydbological  ideas.  When  in  what  may  appear  to  us  to  be  a bold  metaphor  the 
soma  is  described  as  a bolt  (vajra ) when  it  is  eulogized  by  the  poet,  we  should 
remember  that  it  is  this  beverage  which  enables  Indra  to  wield  that  weapon^^. 
But  although  images  are,  generally  speaking,  an  important  feature  in  so-called 
mystical  passages  and  in  communications  about  Mgher  knowledge  revealed  to 
a poet,  we  cannot  discount  the  possibility  that  the  difficulty  found  in  under- 
standing texts  such  as  4,  5^^  is  not  only  due  to  a failing  congeniality  on  our 
side. 

The  word  of  the  officiant  is  on  account  of  its  swiftness  and  efficacy^  called  an 
arrow^®,  lightning  is  a smile^*;  Agni  is  the  son  of  victorious  and  overw^helming 
power^®,  Heaven  and  Earth  are  a pair  bom  of  the  same  womb^®;  rain  is  drawn 
from  a heavenly  welT^ ; continuity  and  communication  are  ‘symbolized’  by  the 
thread  or  texture  which  increase  in  length  when  they  are  spun  or  woven^®.  The 


® Otherwise  Geld  nee,  RV.  Ill,  p.  296  (h^’perbole).  Cf.  BW  3,  35,  8;  10,  94,  1; 
a double  meaning  in  5,  85,  2:  Renou,  E.  V.  P.  VII,  p.  19;  XVI,  p.  151;  Gonda, 
Epithets,  p.  212. 

^ For  particulars  see  Renou,  E.  V.  P.  Ill,  p.  33. 

® Cf.  also  8,  15,  13;  10,  14,  3 and  cases  such  as  8,  2,  6. 

» E.g.  9,  82,  8;  cf.  9,  71,  4. 

See  9,  12,  4;  8;  14,  1;  18,  2;  92,  2 etc. 

RV.  9,  47,  3;  72,  7;  77,  1 and  see  1,  80,  2. 

See  also  Renou,  E.  V.  P.  XIII,  p.  96;  RV.  5,  2. 

« RV.  1,  84,  16;  128,  4;  cf.  1,  190,  2 etc.  and  7,  40,  1. 

RV.  1,  168,  8;  2,  4,  6. 

RV.  1,  58,  8;  3,  1,  8 etc.;  cf.  1,  141, 1 and  Gonda,  Gods  and  powers  (see  above). 
RV.  1,  159,  4;  for  the  image  see  e.g.  also  3,  1,  6, 

RV.  5,  53,  6;  59,  8. 

« RV.  1,  142,  1;  159,  4;  7,  33,  9;  9,  22,  6;  10,  57,  2;  130,  1;  cf.  also  9,  73,  9. 


250 


J.  Gonda  • Yedic  Literature 


smm  in  process  of  pnrifjiiig  itself  is  addressed  as  a most  splendid  bull  and  in- 
Tited  to  gallop  near;  tbe  milk  with  which  the  juice  is  to  mix  is  ‘figuratively’ 
denotel  by  ‘‘cows/’  and  in  order  to  give  an  idea  of  its  absolute  superiority,  a 
|K>et  describes  the  Juice  as  the  guide  of  the  inspired  poets,  the  rsi  among  those 
who  experienced  spiritual  rapture,  the  buffalo  among  the  animals,  the  falcon 
among  the  birds  of  prey^^. 

Xow  and  then  an  image  strikes  us  as  specially  successful  and  at  tbe  same  time 
rare  or  perhaps  original.  Rain  is  described  as  a shining  dress  of  sacrificial  butter 
that  follows  two  gods  who  are  believed  to  dispense  it^o;  the  tongue  of  the  eulo- 
gist as  a whip  producing  pleasant  sounds  (9,  69,  2).  Other  images  occur  in  a 
simpler  as  well  as  an  elaborate  form:  Indra,  often  described  as  a bull,  is  some- 
times fancied  as  “the  bull  of  the  cultivators”-^. 

Some  poetic  conventions  of  the  classical  Sanskrit  authors  can  be  traced  to 
the  Rgveda.  The  Asvins  approaching  in  the  morning  are  compared  to  a couple 
of  mkramka  ducks  wMch  are  supposed  to  be  separated  during  nigbt  (2,  39,  3); 
a loving  woman  and  her  mate  to  a creeper  and  a tree  (RV.  10,  10,  13 ; AV.  6,  8, 
1);  a nuptial  tie  between  ocean  and  rivers  is  suggested  at  8,  16,  2^2. 

Occasionally  a poet  succeeds  in  creating  a double  or  ambiguous  image.  At 
10, 5, 4 the  upper  garment  of  Heaven  and  Earth  must  be  the  celestial  luminaries 
on  one,  and  vegetation  on  the  other  hand.  A tendency  to  complication  is  indeed 
not  lacking:  the  soma  stalks  are  depicted  as  excavated  sources  milked  with 
stones  (4, 50, 3).  Other  poets  combine  two  images  for  the  same  idea — ^in  principle 
a sort  of  intensification : thus  milk  and  sacrificial  butter  are  at  9,  74,  4 elements 
in  dealing  with  the  production  of  the  soma  juice  (and  parallel  to  it,  of  rain)^®. 
Or  they  mix  them^^  even  to  vacillate  on  the  verge  of  incomprehensibility:  the 
bulls  under  the  yoke  of  sacred  Order  w^hose  mouths  have  arrows  are  the  offi- 
ciants (1,  84, 16).  There  are  also  curious  instances  of  what  would  appear  to  be  a 
blend  of  image  and  reality:  when,  at  9,  86,  46,  it  reads  that  the  poems  Mck  the 
(soma)  stalks  when  the  poets  of  the  stanzas  “go  to  the  bright  garment”  (to  be 
put  on  by  the  soma  duriug  the  process  of  purification),  we  have  to  imderstand 
that  the  eulogists  treat  the  soma  juice  like  cow's  their  calves.  The  tendency  to 
combining  images  or  metaphors  with  other  ‘figures  of  speech’  has  not  failed  to 
add  to  the  complexity,  difficulty  or  obscurity  of  some  passages^^.  An  accumula- 
tion of  characteristic  images  and  elaborated  comparisons  may  on  the  other 
hand  concur  to  achieve  very  suggestive  effects  in  a hymn  such  as  1,  64  in  which 

« w*  ^1.  2,  2;  6,  6;  19,  3;  69,  4;  72,  3;  96,  6. 

« W-  62,  4;  cf.  e.g.  8,  5,  6. 

« See  2,  16,  6;  3,  46,  5;  6,  46,  4;  8,  21,  11;  10,  92,  8 etc.;  6,  18,  1;  cf.  7,  98,  1. 

2*  The  absence  or  rarity  in  Vedic  poetry  of  other  well-known  classical  imag^ 
flotias,  fig-fcree,  moonlit  night,  the  god  of  love  etc.)  is  partly  due  to  the  different 
geographical  surroundiiigs.  For  the  lotus  see  S.  Basu,  VIJ  6 (1969),  p.  61. 

2®  Cf.  also  o,  47,  7. 

**  Cf.  also  2,  18,  1 (a  chariot  with  oars);  35,  1;  6,  6,  4;  cf.  3,  53,  23. 

« See  e.g.  5,  66,  4;  9,  69,  2;  5;  10,  4,  5;  44,  9;  45,  3;  101,  11. 


The  style  of  the  T«lie  hymns 


251 


the  Marats,  bom  as  bulls  (st.  2),  shakers  who  milk  the  udders  of  heaTen  and  the 
thundering  source  of  moisture  (5:  6),  buffaloes  possessed  of  meomprehensible 
creative  power^  swift,  strong,  brilliant  f7),  able  to  make  the  nights  lively  (S)  and 
described  as  good  shots  who  have  taken  arrows  in  their  hands  110),  as  w^'aniors 
with  banners  (2),  as  roaring  like  lions  (8)  and  devouiing  the  trees  lilce  elephants 
(i'l,  are  very  well  characterized  as  gods  of  the  thunderstorm®®. 

It  is  not  always  easy  to  say  where  plain  statement  ends  and  metaphorical 
expression  begiiis.  R\.  8,  67,  traditionally  ascribed  to  a king  of  fishes  or  to 
fishes  caught  in  a net  may  owe  its  origin  to  a fairy-tale  on  fishes®’^ ; howrever, 
those  passages  w’hich  could  suggest  such  an  evil  plight  of  aquatict  arifinals — 
deep  "water,  bonds,  leaping  over — can  also  be  taken  as  a continued  metaphor®*. 
On  the  other  hand,  there  is  hardly  any  ground  for  sup]X)3iiig  that  a Vecil,c  poet 
did  not  resort  to  imagery  when  he  w'ould  express  himself  in  covert  terms : the 
race  with  a hundred  strategems  performed  by  a married  couple  (1, 179,  3)  is  no 
doubt  a reference  to  their  amorous  sport®®. 

The  metaphor  shades  into  the  ‘symbol,’  but  the  significance  of  what  in 
ancient  Indian  literature  is  commonly  called  ‘symboHsm’  should  not  be  missed. 
The  \edic  authors  were  always  convinced  of  the  existence  of  correlations  be- 
tween the  visible  and  the  invisible  world,  between  the  ritual  acts  and  natural 
phenomena  or  divine  agency,  between  the  celestial  sphere  and  human  exist- 
ence®®. The  hold  which  nature  has  over  man  comes  from  the  imseeii  powers 
within  it,  but  if  he  knows  the  correlations,  he  has  the  commaiid  of  a mighty 
means  of  influencing  and  controlling  these  pow'ers,  viz.  the  rites  and  the  ritual 
texts.  That  is  why  various  Hving  creatures  and  natural  phenomena  are  so  care- 
fully presented  and  given  an  ulterior  significance.  A practical  knowledge  of  the 
visible  world  and  a correct  comprehension  of  everrthing  in  it  that  is  relevant  to 
human  life  led  the  rsis  to  the  formulation  of  correspondences  and  paralleiisms 
and  helped  them  to  bring  the  remote  and  the  intangible  into  the  range  of  human 
comprehension.  The  horn  embodies  the  idea  of  strength  fS,  86,  5).  '^Tiatever 
the  meaning  of  the  “sea”  in  7,  88,  3,  the  voyage  of  the  rsi  Vasistha  and  Vamna 
in  one  and  the  same  ship  symbolizes  a deepening  communion.  Yrtra,  sunk  in 
deepest  sleep  (4,  19,  3)  represents  primordial  chaos  and  inertia®^  We  cannot 
escape  the  conviction  that  reference  to  these  symbols  many  times  is  of  greater 
importance  in  the  course  of  thinking  than  a development  of  ideas. 

Some  ‘transferred  meanings’  or  ‘figurative  expressions’  have  attracted  atten- 
tion because  they  occur  also  in  other  ancient  literatures  and  here  the  question 

See  e.g.  also  1,  140,  9;  2,  18,  1;  8,  66,  3f.;  10,  99,  4. 

GBLDXEa,  RV.  m,  p.  390. 

Cf.  also  RY.  1,  102  and  compare  cases  such  as  4,  58;  8,  69,  9, 

" Cf.  also  10,  40,  9. 

Goni>a,  R.  1. 1,  p.  176;  L.  Renou,  Les  litt^ratures  de  ITade,  Paris  1951,  p.  6; 
Ehezabeneova,  O.C.,  p.  66. 

For  the  influence  of  symbolism  upon  verbal  expression  see  S.  G.  Olephant, 
in  TAOS  30,  p.  174.  Differences  between  Vedic  and  post-Vedic  symbolism  are 
largely  explicable  from  other  geographical  or  cultural  eireumstances. 


252 


J.  Gk)ncia  • Vedic  Literature 


arises  whether  they  were  borrowed  or  belonged  ,to  an  inherited  Indo-European 
poetical  phraseology,  or  are  to  be  explained  as  instances  of  ‘Eleinentarverwandt- 
schaft.’  The  Inug  as  herdsman  of  men  or  of  his  people  occurs  EV.  3,  43,  5®^  and 
the  hands  with  ten  branches  (10,  137,  7)  has,  likewise  in  ancient  Greece,  a 
counterpart  in  Hesiod®^.  A paraphrasis  of  the  type  known  as  kenning  among 
the  ancient  Scandiiia¥ian  skalds  occiurs  also  in  RV.  1,  65,  8 where  the  plants  are 
said  to  be  *‘the  hair  of  the  earth’’^^.  Circumiocutions  such  as  “the  excellent, 
praiseworthy  celestial  and  terrestrial  wealth”®^  are  as  favourite  as  phrases  of 
the  type  “the  light  of  heaven”  or  “the  smoke-bannered  one”  (for  Agni)®®. 

Before  proceeding  to  a s^^ematic  discussion  of  the  similes — ^which  among 
the  above  quotations  were  not  completely  absent — a short  survey  of  some 
representative  images  may  find  a place  here.  In  elucidating  religious  or  ritual 
conceptions  the  poets  resorted  to  images  familiar  from  everyday  life;  they 
found  the  illustration  which  they  needed  in  their  own  surroundings®’.  The  two 
pieces  of  wood  used  in  kindling  fire  are  Agni’s  parents  (1,  31,  4) ; this  process  is 
a copulation,  and  the  god  is  able  to  produce,  by  means  of  friction,  sons  for  the 
euiogist  (1, 127, 11) ; Parjanya,  the  god  of  rain,  places  his  seed  in  the  plants  (5, 
83, 1) ; Dawn  is  a beaming  young  woman  (1,  92,  11)®®.  The  image  of  the  wife  or 
mistress  is  very  frequent®®:  the  rivers  are  Indra^s  wives  and  the  poet’s  hymns 
run  towards  him  in  the  same  capacity;  the  streams  of  sacrificial  butter  “frisk 
smiling  towards  Agni  like  beautiful  women  to  an  amorous  union.”  The  fingers 
preparing  the  soma  are  ten  ladies  (9,  1,  7)  or  sisters  (3,  57,  3).  When  sunlight 
takes  the  place  of  the  darkness  of  night  a woven  (cloth)  remains  unfinished : 
what  was  extended  is  rolled  together  again  (1, 115,  4)^®.  The  hymns  which  go  to 
fridra  to  invite  him  are  given  a lift  in  an  aerial  chariot  (6,  35,  1).  Varuna  used 
the  sun  as  a measuring  instrument  to  mark  out  the  ‘site’  for  the  earth  (5,  85,  5). 
Spiritual  enlightenment  and  salvation  are  called  light^^.  The  poets  figure 
Indra’s  swift  horses  as  rivers,  other  steeds  as  the  wings  of  their  owners;  the 
proverbial  swiftness  of  a famous  horse  as  a gale^®;  the  kindling  of  the  ritual  fire 

See  J.  Gonda,  Ancient  Indian  kingship,  Leiden  1966,  p.  2;  69;  R.  Schmitt, 
Dichtung  imd  Dichteraprache  in  indogermanischer  Zeit,  Wiesbaden  1967,  p.  283f.; 
W.  WusT,  in  Sttidia  elassica  et  orientaJia  A.  Pagliaro,  lU,  Rome  1969,  p.  261.  For 
other  im^es:  W.  WusT,  in  Festschrift  F.  Altheim,  Berlin  1969,  p.  24f. 

Hesiod,  Works,  742f.;  see  Schmitt,  o.c.,  p.  281. 

Cf.  also  6,  46,  11;  7,  63,  4;  9,  69,  2;  73,  1;  93,  1. 

“ W-  9.  19*  1;  see  also  1,  163,  5;  9,  21,  5;  75,  2;  10,  15,  7;  92,  4;  7. 

" Cf.  BW  1,  69,  1;  VS.  1,  11;  RV.  1,  27,  11  etc. 

For  im^ery  from  occupations  and  daily  life  see  e.g.  1,  105,  18;  130,  6;  5,  9,  5; 
6,  3,  4;  10,  71,  9. 

« For  the  expression  “daughter  of  heaven”  or  “of  the  sun”  see  R.  Gopal,  at 

JGJRI  23  (1972),  p.  523. 

» See  Beegaigne,  R.  V.  HI,  p.  348,  Cf.  1,  62,  lOf.;  3,  39,  1;  5,  42,  12. 

Cf.  Renou,  E.  V.  P.  XV,  p.  5. 

« E.g.  1,  50,  10;  2,  27,  11;  14;  3,  26,  8;  9,  35,  1;  113,  7;  10,  185,  3. 

“ P.  S.  Sastm,  The  imagery  of  the  Rgveda,  ABORI  29,  p.  152.  Cf.  6,  46,  14; 
47,  31  {cf.  5,  74,  9);  4,  38,  3;  5,  1,  1;  9,  62,  17;  5,  46,  1. 


The  style  of  the  Vedic  hymris 


253 


as  a process  of  awakening;  the  sacrifice  wMch  g%s  to  the  gcxls®  as  a cliariot, 
tile  officiant  being  the  horse  yoked  to  the  pole ; the  inspired  thoiight  as  a sMp*^ ; 
the  eulogy  as  a well-yoked  desire  While  martial  images  are  rare  chariot 
driving  plays  a more  prominent  part^®.  The  s^ift  motion  of  the  rSOf/W  drops*" 
led  to  the  comparisoii  with  cars^®.  Ships  evoke  an  Image  of  the  Movements  of 
the  Mamts  over  the  fields ^ and  especially  the  idea  of  rescue  and  a safe  crossing, 
of  overcoming  troubles  and  difficulties*®.  Birds  symbolize  not  only  swiftness, 
but  also  the  ability  of  expanding  their  wings,  soariiig  higher  and  higher  and 
going  into  unknown  regions®".  The  wolf  w'as  detested,  Ms  name  more  or  less 
clearly  transferred  to  malicious  enemies®^.  An  important  feature  in  Rgvedie 
imagery  is  the  cowr,  which  symbolizes,  not  only  milk,  food,  plenty  and  lil^ralit  j, 
but  also  poetic  art  and  sacrificial  technique®^.  It  hardly  needs  mentioning  that 
the  ^edic  poets,  like  their  colleagues  elsewhere,  w^ere  incliried  to  transfc-r  earthlv 
circumstances  to  the  world  of  the  go^ds,  describing  for  instance  the  Marats  as 
bards  or  singers — that  is  representing  the  sotmd  of  tempest  and  thunderstorm 
as  a song — and  divine  attributes  on  the  analogy  of  things  human  and  mun- 
dane®®. 

It  IS  not  surprising  that  some  metaphorical  expreOTons  should  be  in  harmony 
with  more  elaborated  similes  so  that  the  latter — ^to  which  we  have  impercep- 
tibly passed  on — ^provide  us  with  a clue  to  the  former : at  9,  3,  2 soma  is  said  to 
run  over  the  obstacles  (i.e.  the  deve),  in  9, 13,  6 the  drops  flowing  through  the 
sieve  are  like  coursers,  driven  on  by  drivers®*. 


J.  Gonba,  Adhvara,  VIJ  3 (1965),  p.  163.  Compare  e.g.  1,  127,  3;  129,  1;  2, 
18,  1;  4,  5,  13;  16,  21;  7,  73,  3;  9,  62,  17;  111,  3. 

**  RV.  1,  46,  7;  2,  16,  7. 

« RV.  4,  23,  5;  cf.  4,  31,  14;  5,  35,  7f. 

**  F.  Ebgebton,  in  AJPh  40,  p.  175fi.;  see  e.g.  1,  35,  4f.;  94,  8;  178,  3. 

« See  5,  66,  3;  9,  10,  If.;  22,  1;  38,  1;  67,  17;  10,  26,  9. 

*®  For  the  comparison  of  the  activities  of  the  pwt  to  those  of  the  cartwright  or 
carpenter  and  of  that  between  hymn  and  car  see  p.  73;  cf.  e.g.  1,  61,  4;  130,  6; 
5,  29,  15;  2,  20,  1;  7,  37,  1.  It  is  not  so  much  the  intricate  eonstraction  of  a hymn 
(Edgerton,  O.C.,  p.  183)  as  its  being  a vehicle  conveying  the  poet’s  thoughts  to 
the  higher  powers.  In  general,  see  also  Renoxj,  E.  'V'.  P.  I,  p.  14. 

« See  5,  54,  4;  1,  182,  6;  1,  140,  12;  5,  4;  9;  25,  9;  6,  68,  8;  7,  65,  3;  8,  16,  11; 
18,  17;  42,  3;  cf.  also  1,  41,  2. 

” E.g.  4,  38,  2;  10,  178,  1;  9,  48,  4;  1,  166,  10;  10,  80,  5;  123,  6;  1,  164,  21. 

« See  1,  42,  2;  120,  7;  6,  13,  5 and  cf.  e.g.  1,  105,  7. 

« See  1,  139,  7;  164,  29;  2,  34,  8;  3,  33,  1;  6,  48,  13;  8,  1,  10;  100,  10;  10.  65,  6; 
71,  5;  133,  7;  cf.  1,  160,  3;  8,  7,  10;  10,  87,  17  and  175,  2;  cf.  Renou,  E.  V.  F. 
I,  p.  10;  P.  S.  Sastei,  in  ABORI  28,  p.  42. 

See  e.g.  RV.  1,  85,  2;  88,  1. 

**  Cf.  also  9,  74,  1;  79,  2. 


J Gonda  • Yedic  Literature 


2M 

7,  Simihs 

The  nirmber  and  variety  of  similes^  and  comparable  forms  of  imagery  are, 
already  in  Vedic  poetr}"^  considerable.  They  show  a vast  field  of  observation® 
and  experience  wMcii  are  not  infrequently  flavoured  with  poetic  imagination 
and  encapsulated  by  traditional  beliefr.  Vanina’s  breath  'froars  in  space  like 
an  excited  animal  that  has  hunted  his  prey  on  the  pasture”  (7,  87,  2);  the 
rising  Sun  'Vaves  Ms  banner  like  a warrior”  (4,  13,  2).  These  similes,  w^Mch 
often  have  a tone  of  sincerity  and  familiarity®,  are  a valuable  source  of  know!- 
edge  of  Vedic  life,  religion  and  civilization  in  general®.  Eamily-life’,  daily 
pursuits  such  as  huntmg  and  cattle-tending®,  the  manners  and  doings  of  men 
and  ammals®,  natural  phenomena ; beautiful  and  well-dressed  girls  and  women^®, 
paternal  love  and  filial  aifection^b  friendsMp  and  hospitality^®:  the  much-prized 
horse^®;  sun,  clouds,  wind,  stars^^,  supply  the  poets  with  a good  number  of 
examples. 

It  is  however  their  stylistic  significance  wMch  should  claim,  our  special 
attention^®.  Far  from  being  mere  ornaments’^®  similes  belong  to  the  so-called  fig- 

1 A.  Hibzel,  Gleichnisse  und  Metaphem  im  Rgveda  in  cultur-historischer  Hin- 
sicht  zusammengestelit,  Thesis  Leipzig  1890  (Engl.  transL:  S.  B.  Velankab,  JUB 
X.  S.  7, 2 (1938),  p.  46;  9,  2 (1940),  p.  126) ; H.  Weller,  Vergleichungen  im  Rigveda, 
Festgabe  von  Garbe,  p.  54;  J.  Gonda,  Remarks  on  similes  in  Sanskrit  literature, 
Wageningen  1939;  Leiden  1949;  H.  D.  Vblankab,  at  JBBRAS  X.  S.  14(1938), 
p.  1 and  16  (1940),  p.  1 ; at  Bharatiya  Vidya  25  (1965),  p.  1 ; P.  S.  Sastri,  in  AJBORI 
28  (1947),  p.  34;  A.  Veniiatasubbiah,  in  Comm.  VoL  Siddheshwar  Varma,  Hoshiar- 
pur  1950, 1,  p.  178;  at  ALB  28  (1964),  p.  161;  J.  Tilakasiri,  at  23  AIOC  (1966-69), 
p.  275;  Elizarenkova,  o.c.,  p.  67. 

* Attention  will  also  be  paid  to  non-lR'g^’^c  poetry. 

® Cf.  e.g.  ?Y.  1,  130,  5;  7,  3,  2;  8,  63,  9;  103,  11;  9,  32,  3;  10,  116,  9. 

* Cf.  also  1,  61,  5 (parallelism  of  a race  and  the  production  of  poetry);  6,  27,  6; 
7,  36,  2;  8,  6,  7 (Hopkins,  at  JAOS  15,  p.  272). 

® Cf.  e.g.  7,  32,  2 (those  present  at  a soma  offering  sit  like  flies  on  honey) ; 10,  134, 
5 (missiles  fall  like  drops  of  perspiration);  8,  24,  6;  9,  69,  1;  10,  31,  3. 

® See  Hibzel  and  Weller  in  note  1 above;  Oldenberg,  R.  V.,  p.  515;  H.  D. 
Griswold,  Vedic  social  life  according  to  the  similes  in  the  Agni  hymns,  J.  Panjab 
Hist.  Sm,  1 (1911),  p.  56. 

’ Cf.  also  4,  5,  5;  16,  15;  7,  26,  3;  10,  68,  2;  102,  11. 

« Cf.  2,  4,  7;  4,  4,  1;  5,  31,  1;  6,  19,  3;  49,  12;  7,  18,  10;  10,  28,  10. 

» Cf.  2,  19,  2;  31,  1;  4,  2,  18;  41,  5;  5,  1,  1;  9,  4;  74,  4;  8,  20,  10;  21,  5;  63,  9; 

9,  3,  1;  32,  3;  62,  15;  86,  13;  97,  28;  10,  31,  3;  43,  4;  5;  67,  3;  9;  180,  2. 

Cf.  1,  124,  8;  4,  58,  9;  7,  2,  5;  9,  46,  2;  10,  71,  4. 

« Cf.  1,  38,  1;  127,  8;  3,  53,  2;  7,  26,  2;  32,  3;  26;  54,  2;  8,  48,  4;  10,  69,  10  and 
see  V.  Raghavan,  in  The  Vedanta  Kesari,  42  (1955),  p.  330,  and  also  R.  Gopal, 
The  figurative  use  of  duAitf  (daughter)  in  the  Rg\-eda,  JGJRI  28  (1972),  p.  523. 

« Cf.  1,  190,  6;  4,  6,  7;  8,  19,  8;  9,  2,  6;  96,  22. 

Cf.  5,  46,  1;  7,  3,  2;  9,  13,  6;  10,  119,  3;  and  see  1,  186,  7;  5,  86,  5. 

Cf.  1,  69,  1;  9;  71,  lOy  87,  1;  2,  2,  5;  4,  6,  2;  17,  12;  33,  1;  7,  8,  4;  10,  23,  4; 

77,  1.  As  to  the  sun  see  W . Kxepel,  at  Comm.  VoL  Xobel,  p.  Ill  (not  completely 

convincing). 

i-s  Obseiv’ations  on  the  out'ward  appearance  and  grammatical  construction  of 
similes  w^ere  made  by  Oldenberg,  Xoten;  Gonda,  o.c.,  p,  102. 


The  style  of  the  Vedic  h\'mns 


255 


ores  of  speech  which  were  highly  instrumental  in  making  the  Tedie  sacral 
language  answer  its  purpose,  in  giving  it  the  correct  and  requhed  form  of 
style”. 

The  similes  of  the  Atharvaveda^®  are  considerably  less  in  nniiiber — exclusive 
of  those  which  occur  also  in  the  Rgveda,  about  325.  like  other  references  to 
parallel  situations,  they  are  selected  from  human  asscxiation  '22'^  9)1  among 
them  are  'professionals'  such  as  a hunter,  a carpenter,  a dancing  girl,  a woman 
basket-maker^®.  Beside  cow^®  and  horse,  other  animals  dion,  wolf  and  tiger — 
who  is  almost  absent  in  the  other  corpus — monkey,  donkey,  hawk  and  vulture) 
figure  among  the  animals®^.  Of  lifeless  objects,  bow  and  arrow,  axe  and  miH- 
stone®®,  boat  and  chariot  make  their  appearance  beside  trees,  rivers,  sun  and 
moon,  heaven  and  earth®®.  More  abstract  ideas  are  however  not  lacking: 
“abiding  in  beings  like  speech  in  the  speaker”  {AVS.  2,  I,  4). 

In  perfect  harmony  with  the  normal  practice  of  the  speakers  of  any  language 
Vedic  poets  insert  similes  for  'economical  reasons’ — the  Manits  advanced  as  if 
drunk  (RV.  1,  39,  5) — or  for  bringing  about  a connection  with  familiar  facts: 
“Like  a bride,  0 dwelling,  w’e  carry  thee”  (in  a text  aecompaii3’ing  the  releasing 
of  a house,  AV.  9,  3,  24);  “. . . like  cows  rashing  forth  from  the  stable”  (RV, 
10,  97,  8).  Popular  phrases  of  the  type  “as  deep  as  the  sea”  (3,  45,  3,  cf.  7, 
33,  8)  or  “turn  round  like  wfreels”  (1,  185,  1)  may  be  expressive,  intensive  and 
graphical:  “Let  heat  boil  the  wicked  up  like  a fiery  pot”  (RV.  7,  104,  2;  AV, 
8,  4,  2)®*.  There  are  similes  that  by  means  of  a comparison  to  human  circum- 
stances bring  an  event  or  thing  nearer  to  the  hearer,  e.g.  RV.  2,  6,  7 “O  Agni, 
thou  goeth  between  both  races  (of  gods  and  men),  as  a messenger  like  a bride- 
groom’s friend”®®.  The  custom  of  the  geese  to  walk  one  behind  another  helps 
to  form  an  idea  of  the  manner  of  walking  of  celestial  horses  (1,  163,  10)®®.  The 
sun  is  the  very  picture  of  splendour:  hence  8,  34,  17  “red  mares  which  beam 
like  the  sun.”  Lightning  suddenly  appears  and  strikes  without  fail:  1,  176,  3: 
“Slay  him,  (0  Indra,)  like  the  celestial  thunderbolt.”  The  motherly  love  of  the 


Not  to  mention  those  who  spoke  of  rhetoric : A.  Guebinot,  De  rhetorica  vedica. 
Thesis  Ly^on  1900;  H.  R.  Deweeab,  Les  fleurs  de  rhetorique  dans  iTnde,  Thmis 
Paris  1930. 

This  was  the  original  meaning  of  the  term  cdamMra  which  is  usually  translated 
by  “(stylistic)  ornament”  (Goxba,  in  Volume  F.  W.  Thomas,  (NIA|,  Bombay 
ibo,  p.''97). 

“ S.  G.  OniPHAOT,  in  JAOS  35,  p.  30;  Velankab,  in  JASBombay  38  (1963), 
p.  19. 

« Cf.  e.g.  AY§.  10,  1,  26. 

Cf.  also  AVg.  4,  39,  6;  the  sky  as  a milch-cow,  the  sun  as  a calf. 

Cf.  e.g.  AVg.  2,  14,  6;  25,  2;  \ 11,  5;  8;  15,  8;  4,  36,  6. 

« Cf.  e.g.  AVg.  1,  1,  3;  2,  12,  3. 

Cf.  e.g.  AVg.  1,  8,  1;  3,  9;  14,  1;  27,  3;  32,  3;  2,  31,  1;  3,  6,  7;  9,  5;  23,  2. 

Cf.  also  RV.  1,  51,  14;  2,  5,  3;  AV.  8,  6,  19. 

Cf.  also  1,  83,  2;  85,  5;  AV.  3,  11,  8. 

Cf.  RV.  3,  8,  9. 


m 


J.  Gouda  • Vedic  Literature 


cow  is  already  in  the  Rgveda  a favourite  model  of  affection^’.  Side  by  side 
with  fixed  combinations  of  nouns  and  adjectives  like  '‘the  blowing  wind’’ 
(4,  38,  3 'ritam  . . . dhrdjaniam)  we  find  “thy  mind  hurries  on  like  the  wind” 
{1,  163,  11  V'dM  iva  dhrdfimdn)^^.  Savitar  is  the  god  who  has  placed  a light  on 
high : when  Agni  is  said  to  have  placed  such  a light  like  Savitar  the  latter  ob- 
viously is  typical  in  this  respect^®. 

The  Atharvaveda  furnishes  some  good  examples  of  similes  added,  in  more  or 
less  prolix  popular  or  emotional  speech,  for  the  sake  of  clearness:  AVS.  10, 
1 , 14  witchcraft  and  its  practieers  are  enjoined  to  “go  away,  making  much  noise, 
like  an  unikstened  she-ass”®®.  Similes  are  here  also  used  where  the  intellectual 
accustomed  to  abstract  expressions  would  prefer  exact  formulations,  avoiding 
images  or  exaggerations:  AVS.  6,  142,  2 inviting  the  grain  to  “rise  up  Mke  the 
sky”  and  to  be  “unexhausted  like  the  ocean”^h  The  man  who  has  no  difficulty 
in  finding  a treasure  is  compared  to  a thief  who  robs  somebody  sleeping  (RY. 
1, 53, 1 ).  The  graphical  concreteness  and  expressiveness  of  the  vivid  descriptions 
and  vigorous  phraseology  of  colloquial  usage  is  at  the  root  of  the  possibly 
‘poetieaF  simile  “he  continues  growing  like  twigs”  said  of  a man  of  numerous 
offspring  |2,  5,  4)®^.  Such  additions  may  be  serviceable  in  forming  a climax: 
“Do  you  here  get  up,  go  forth,  run  forth  (like)  a chariot  well-wheeled,  well- 
twed,  weli-naved”  (AVS.  4, 12,  6)®®.  In  accordance  with  the  tendency  to  make 
the  end  of  a composition  ponderous  there  often  are  one  or  two  similes  in  the 
last  stanza  of  a hymn®^.  The  affective  character  of  a simile  is  frequently  obvious 
from  the  context.  Thus  the  feelings  of  the  man  who  after  travelling  in  the  intense 
heat  of  the  sun  reaches  a shady  place  are  immediately  clear : “We  have  sought 
refuge  with  thee,  0 Agm,  as  if  from  the  heat  of  sunshine  with  a shady  spot” 
(RV.  6,  16,  38)®^ 

Similes—sometimes  creating  a parallel  world  beyond  the  apparent  one®*— 
are  also  a means  of  shedding  light  on  the  e^ence  or  characteristic  qualities  of 
the  object  compared.  Those  of  the  soma  hymns  emphasize  the  brightness, 


Cf.  1,  186,  7;  6,  45,  25;  28;  8,  69,  11;  9,  12,  2;  13,  7;  100,  1;  7;  104,  2;  105,  2. 
For  the  cow  see  e.g.  also  4,  51,  8;  9,  77,  1;  93,  2;  94,  2 and  W.  P.  Schmid,  Die 

Kmh  auf  der  Weide,  IF  64,  p.  1. 

**  For  the  wind  as  a model  of  swiftness  see  also  1,  113,  18;  4,  17,  12;  6,  45,  32; 
8,  34,  17.  For  other  similes  of  a formulaic  character  see  Bdoobcfield,  Repetitions, 

p,  583.  ^ 


» 4,  6,  2;  cf,  4,  13,  2;  7,  72,  4. 

See  also  10,  1,  30;  19,  55,  1. 

See  also  AV.  5,  19,  1 ; 20,  1 ; 9,  3,  17. 

Cf.  AV.  8,  6,  24;  10,  4,  19;  12,  3,  33. 

“ Cf.  also  AV.  6,  21,  2;  115,  2;  8,  6,  17;  8,  3;  9,  2,  6;  19,  28,  2 etc. 

6 - '^2,  10;  122,  15;  AV.  3,  11,  8;  18,  6; 

o,  V,  i , 115,  4;  19,  33,  o. 


**  bm  also  2,  33,  6.  Cf.  Velanhab,  at  BhV  (see  above  n.  1). 

»«  Cf.  ato  instances  such  as  ^V.  1,  65,  3;  4,  16,  19;  6,  36,  5 and  see  K.  F.  Lei- 
BECKE^  me  philosophic  significance  of  simfies  in  ancient  Indian  thought.  The 

Aryan  Path  25  (Bombay  1954),  p.  231. 


The  style  of  the  Tedic  hymxis 


biiliiancej  strength,  roaring  sound,  and  swift  and  restless  motioii,  of  the  bev- 
erage® o Rousing  the  hearer’s  interest  and  imagination  they  help  Mm  b€4tcT 
to  understand  the  process  of  clarification.  The  U^s  hymiis  show  that  ‘siiniles’ 
may  imperceptibly  blend  into  identifications,  the  light  of  dawn  beeomiiig  a 
linainoiis  female  form,  which  in  its  turn  dissolves  into  the  brightness  of  the 
sky®®.  TMs  does  not  however  mean  that  the  poets  are  generally  successful  in 
evoking  clear  images  of  the  unseen  reality  in  the  minds  of  modem  readers, 
who  might  be  inclined  to  overestimate  the  poetic  value  and  profundity  also 
of  those  verses  wMch  had  to  the  ancients  no  other  than  the  emotional  appeal 
of  the  religious  practice. 

Comparisons  borrowed  from  nature — ^intensifying  and  humanifying  nature’s 
life  and  creating  a feeling  of  being  in  touch  with  it — ^should  be  view^ed  in  the 
light  of  archaic  man’s  conviction  that  he  is  part  of  natore,  that  he  is  deeply 
rooted  in  Ms  natural  setting  with  wMeh  Ms  own  existence  is  inextricably 
iiiterw’'oven®®.  It  is  not  surprising  that  in  many  parts  of  the  Veda  similes  taken 
from  nature  are  much  more  frequent  than  those  boirow’ed  from  social  and 
spiritual  life,  mythology  or  human  events.  Parallels  in  nature  help  to  illustrate 
an  event  and,  in  magical  contexts,  to  lend  the  stanzas,  the  fmntrm,  their 
specific  force  because  a simile,  embodying  through  the  power  of  the  spoken  w’ord 
some  natural  force,  exercises  a potent  influence^®.  AVS.  6,  14,  2 it  reads  ‘T 
destroy  the  catarrh  of  this  man,  I cut  its  bond  like  the  root  of  a gourd”*^^'  and  at 
RV.  10,  145,  6 (=  AVS.  3,  18,  6)  a woman  imprecates  upon  a rival  wife  the 
misfortune  that  her  mind  must  run  after  herself  as  a cow’^  after  her  calf,  as 
water  on  its  track.  Thus  the  effective  power  of  the  objective  fact  or  event  in 
nature  is  expected  to  produce,  in  the  interest  of  those  pronouncing  the  formula, 
a similar  result  in  an  analogous  case  within  the  human  sphere:  “As  the  Ubnfd 
(a  creeping  plant)  has  completely  embraced  the  tree,  so  do  you  (the  w^oman 
whose  love  is  to  be  won)  embrace  me”  (AVS.  6,  8, 1 ).  These  activities  of  animals, 
properties  of  plants  and  life  of  nature  in  general  wMch  are  felt  to  be  analogous 
to  the  emotions  or  behaviour  of  man  or  to  the  effects  desired  are  called  upon 
to  reproduce  themselves  in  the  person  on  -whose  behalf  the  rite  is  executed^®. 
The  poet  of  AVS.  3,  6 (cf.  AVP.  3,  3),  a text  used  in  a rite  for  the  destruction 
of  enemies  by  means  of  an  amulet  of  aivoMha  -w-O'od  (ficus  religiosa],  -was  inspired 


B.  H.  KIapadia,  at  VIJ  2 (1964),  p.  47;  P.  S.  Sastbi,  at  IHQ  30,  p.  302.  See 
e.g.  9,  2,  9;  3,  1;  6,  5;  7,  5;  10,  1;  14,  5;  16,  6;  7;  32,  5;  45,  4;  46,  2;  54,  2;  57,  1; 
3;  61,  21;  64,  3;  70,  6;  101,  2. 

Cf.  RV.  1,  113,  7;  124,  3;  8;  4,  52,  1;  5,  79,  Iff.  etc.  Cf.  G.  K.  Beat,  at  Marath- 
wada  Univ.  Journal  3,  Aurangabad  1963,  p.  19. 

Goxda,  O.C.,  p.  70. 

TMs  aspect  of  the  use  of  similes  is  almost  exclusively  emphasized  by  Weixeb, 
Festgabe  Von  Garbe,  p.  54. 

Which  becomes  loosened  of  itself  when  the  fruit  is  ripe.  For  other  instances 
see  e.g.  AV.  3,  24,  3;  6,  54,  1;  89,  2;  7,  45,  2;  19,  50,  4;  RV.  5,  78,  7;  8;  10,  18,  5, 
« Cf.  e.g.  also  3,  25,  2;  6,  89,  2;  102,  2;  139,  2. 


258 


J*  Gonda  • Vedic  Literature 


by  a peculiarity  of  that  tree : it  begins  as  an  epipb3d#e  and.  as  it  grows  it  often 

s€|iie€zes  to  death  its  host^®: 

(1)  ^*^The  male  spning  from  the  male,  the  aSvattha  from  the  Jchadiru; 

Let  it  slay  my  enemies,  whom  I hate  and  who  (hate)  me. 

(6)  As,  0 aimdtha,  climbing  the  forest  trees  you  put  them  below  you. 

So  split  apart  the  head  of  my  enemy  and  get  the  upper  hand.” 

Kvine  power,  skill,  assistance,  example,  or  prototype  are  invoked  or  made 
effective  in  a similar  way:  ^‘Jnst  as  thou  consumest  the  shrubs  . . bum 
everyone  who  plots  against  us”  (RV.  8,  60,  7);  ‘'I  take  the  thunderbolt,  cutting 
to  pieces  the  shoulders  of  X.N.,  as  Indra  of  Viira”  (6,  135,  1)^^.  Constituting 
exactly  fommiated  sentences,  these  similes  were  consciously  employed  to 
exerci^,  by  means  of  their  inherent  parallelism,  which  was  understood  as  an 
identity,  an  incantating  effect.  Part  of  them  are  based  on  a belief  in  fixed 
correspondences  between  macrocosmic  and  microcosmic  entities:  AVlS.  10,  7, 
32 ff.:  sky:  head;  sun:  eye.  The  verb  may  be  repeated  to  enhance  the  exactness 
and  efficacy  of  the  formula:  AVS.  5,  25,  2,  quoted  at  Kaui.  35,  5 in  a ceremony 
for  conception  of  a male  child:  “As  this  great  earth  receives  the  embr^m  of 
existences,  so  do  I set  your  embryo.” 

Some  similes  may  be  regarded  as  familiar  or  proverbial.  Thus  the  comparison 
to  a hunter  following  the  track  of  a wounded  deer  by  the  drops  of  blood  (Manu 
8,  44)  was  already  known  to  the  author  of  AVS.  11,2,  13^^.  The  height  of  the 
heavenly  expanse  is  a favourite  standard  of  comparison^®. 

Like  other  emotive  elements  of  a sentence  similes  pronounced  under  the 
influence  of  strong  feelings  and  sentiments  tend  to  push  themselves  to  the 
beginning  of  the  utterance : “As  a son  to  a father  go,  like  a constrictor  trampled 
on  bite”  (AY&.  5,  14,  10)^^.  Many  ideas  introduced  to  concentrate  the  hearer’s 
attention  on  an  important  aspect  of  the  communication — ^i.  e.  many  upamdnas 
— that  stand  at  the  beginning  have  a great  emotional  value  in  themselves : in 
the  Atharvaveda  “like  a mother”  is  always  placed  in  that  position,  and  the 
Rgveda  also  furnishes  many  instances,  such  as,  for  instance,  the  emphatic  “As 
if  with  an  iron  club,  0 bearer  of  the  vajra,  strike  the  enemies”  (1,  63,  5)^®. 

The  frequent  and  as  a rale  varied  accumulation  of  images  in  a small  compa® 
is  not  necessarily  to  be  regarded  as  an  artificial  device.  In  poetical  as  well  as 
colloquial  usage  strong  emotion,  a vivid  imagination,  or  the  desire  to  express 
oneself  unequivocally  may  prompt  the  repetition  of  the  same  ‘figure  of  speech’ : 


Ksus.  48,  3ff. ; see  M,  B.  Emeneau,  in  Univ.  of  California  Publ.  in  Clas^. 
Philology  13,  Berkeley  1950,  p,  345. 

« Also  AV.  2,  27,  5;  4,  12,  7;  14,  1,  53;  19,  31,  9 etc.,  and  compare  RV-  1.  76,  5; 
2,  30,  4;  3,  17,  2;  36,  3 etc.  and  instances  such  as  AV.  9,  2,  6. 

« Cf.  WniTNEy-LAMCAif,  AV.,  p.  622. 

“ RV.  4,  16,  19;  6,  20,  I;  36,  5;  10,  59,  3. 

e.g.  4,  4,  6;  7,  109,  4;  8,  4,  8;  19,  46,  2 where  Indra’s  mighty  name 
occupies  the  first  place.  Cf.  Goota,  o.c.,  p.  52.  Otherwise  e.g.  AVS.  4,  18,  4. 

" Cf.  also  ?,V.  1,  32,  6;  117,  18;  123,  10  etc. 


The  style  of  the  Tedie  hymns 


259 


“Yon  are  the  best  of  herbsj  like  the  ox  of  moving  creatures,  like  the  tiger  of 
idlci  beasts*'^  fAVS.  8,  5,  11)**.  This  accnmiilatioii  is  eEpecmIlj  suited  to  lend 
force  to  an  injnnctioii : “Avoid  ns,  0 curse,  as  a buming  fire  a lake,  smite  onr 
enrser  as  the  thunderbolt  from  the  sky  a tree''  f ATS.  6,  S7,  2).  A,giii  Is  “plea- 
sant like  opulence,  like  a spacious  abode,  a source  of  benefit  like  a toountain, 
beneficent  like  a stream  of  water,  dashing  along  like  a course,  like  a stream  ...” 
(^T.  1,  65,  af.)®®.  Enthusiastie  about  the  beauty  of  Usas  the  poet  of  ET.  1, 
124,  7 strings  four  sioailes  together  in  a well-chosen  order  to  illustrate  the 
increasing  splendour  of  dawn^^ : 

“Like  a brotherless  (maiden)  she  turns  towards  men; 

Like  one  who  mounts  a staging  for  wirming  riches; 

Wel-dreffled  like  a willing  wife  for  her  husband; 

Her  TOcret  charms  Usas  bares  like  a play-girF’^^. 

Alliteration  and  homoioteleuton,  frequent  in  the  similes  of  other  p€*oples, 
occur  e.g.  at  RV.  1,4,  1 : 

mrupairtnum  utdye  sudugMm  im  godt^e  / juhumdm  dydvi-d^jam 
„Every  day  we  call  for  assistance  Indra  who  takes  a beautiful  form 
As  a good  milch  cow  (is  called)  to  the  milker”^*. 

More  complicated  or  artificial  instances  of  sound  repetition,  so  frequent  in 
classical  Sanskrit,  do  not  however  seem  to  occur.  Although  prolonged  or  ampli- 
fied similes  are  comparatively  rare®*,  the  amplification  is  in  part  of  the  cases 
longer  than  necessary  because  the  object  compared  (upameya)  has  nothing 
corresponding®®.  However,  an  occasional  simile  of  a somewhat  expanded  form 
shows  that  some  poets  at  least  were  able  to  produce  more  refined  and  profound 
comparisons  ; RV.  2,  3,  6®®: 

“Dawn  and  Dusk  (accomplish)  their  perfected  works  for  us  like  tw’o  joyful 
weaving  women  who  in  conjunction  with  each  other  weave  the  ingenioi»  form 
of  the  sacrifice  in  the  extended  weft  (of  time).” 

It  is,  in  view  of  the  often  concise  character  of  the  syntax,  not  surprising  to 
find  elliptic  or  brachylogical  similes  of  the  types  “I  have  offered  thee  hymim 


Cf.also  :i^V.  1,  130,  1;  186,  7;  3,  38, 1;  4,  4, 1;  7,  34,  I;  4;  5;  7;  9,  22,  2;  69,  Ir 
88;  10,  75,  4;  77,  3;  89,  12;  115,  3;  149,  4;  AT.  3,  29,  6;  6,  12,  1;  7,  45,  2 etc. 

Cf-  Beboaigke,  in  MSL  8 (1894),  p.  3.  For  the  accumulation  of  similes  in, 
hymns  dedicated  to  the  Aivins:  Oldenbebg,  in  NG  1918,  p.  65  (=  K.  S.,  p.  860), 

“ I cannot  follow  Renou,  E.  T.  P.  IX,  p.  77  in  considering  the  three  similes  in 
9,  69,  1 to  relate  to  DuicfeziL’s  ‘three  functions’  (viz.  that  of  the  priestly  order, 
nobility  and  husban,dry). 

See  Geudneb,  Auswahl  II,  p.  22.  On  some  uncertainties  in  the  translation 
see  Renou,  E.  V.  P.  IH,  p.  64;  cf,  also  W-  h ©2,  4. 

Cf.  also  1,  38,  8;  10,  149,  4;  AT.  6,  42,  1;  2;  80,  2;  H,  4, JO;  12,^1,  45;  Gokdj, 
o.e.,  p.  47.  For  a combination  of  simile  and  adnominatio:  AT.  19,  35,  2 (dkmmpdM^ 
dMneva  “as  a protector  of  riches  (Ms)  riches”). 

« See  e.g.  1,  130,  1;  4;  6,  9,  1;  7,  32,  20. 

« See  e.g.  4,  1,  6;  3,  12. 

M Cf.  also  h 71,  1;  2,  2,  2. 


m 


J.  Gonda  • Vedic  Literature 


as  a herds'maii  {viz.  drives  cattle  Lome)”  (1,  114,  9);  ‘‘to  fill  as  (the  rivers  fill) 
the  sea”  (RV.  1,  52,  4)®^.  Nor  are  incoherent  combinations  of  figurative  and 
iinfignrative  expressions  lacking:  Agni  (the  ritnal  fire)  “is  awakened  by  man’s 
foe!  awaiting  Usas  (Dawn)  who  approaches  like  a cow”  (5,  1,  1). 


6 6 Sim’  f;  2’  17=  16.  19;  21,  2;  27,  4;  6,  31,  1; 

(rk  lo’  105’  li-Vomna  1=  6,  45,22;  Geldneb,  ?,V.  m,  p.  323 

in  ALB  28  ’( 1 <ir4.\  ^ note,  I,  p.  437  (on  4,  16,  15) ; A.  Veueatasubbiah, 

Henier,  Paris  ISSefp.  75.  ^ Besgaigne,  at  Melanges 


Tile  style  of  the  Tedic  hymns 


281 


S.  Other  stylistic  feidmres 

The  frequent  nsentioii  of  nniiierica!  concepts^  m largely  eonditiorieci  fey  the 
belief  that  many  important  things  are  eharaetenzed  by  a fixed  nniaber  whether 
this  is  founded  on  fact  or  supposed  to  be  a reality  in  the  ritual  or  mi^hological 
sphere®;  that  identity  of  number  points  to  identity  in  essence*;  and  that 
gaming  an  uisight  into  numerical  relations  enables  the  expert  to  detect  hidden 
coimectioiis.  Then  there  are  the  almost  inevitable  three  and  seven,  expressing 
modificatioiis  of  the  idea  of  totality* : Indra  is  a seven-reined  bull  who  let  loo'se 
the  seven  streams  to  flow  (2, 12, 12).  The  births  or  birth-places  of  A^gni  are  three 
m nninber : in  the  sea,  in  heavens,  in  the  waters^ : this  led  the  author  of  3,  20,  2 
not  only  to  state  that  the  god  has  three  generative  powers  and  three  abcxiei, 
but  also  that  he  possesses  three  tongues  and  three  bodies*.  The  Aivin  hvMn 
1,  34  is  even  composed  on  the  motif  of  the  three’ : beginning  with  “Three  times 
ye  must  remember  us’’  the  poet,  mentioning  this  number  36  tiiries  in  12  stanzas, 
proceeds  to  describe  their  chariot  w’hieh  has  three  wheels,  three  tires  and  three 
supports,  to  commemorate  three  threefold  circuits  by  day  and  by  night,  to 
pray  them  for  thrice  repeated  favours  and  protection  and  so  on.  Part  of  these 
passages  have  the  character  of  numerical  riddles  or  of  enumcTations  of,  or 
argumentations  by  means  of,  entities  that  are  vaguely  indicated  by  their 
numerical  value®. 

That  high  numerals  should  be  used  to  suggest  the  idea  of  extremely  large 
quantities®  is  not  surprising;  the  curious  predilection  for  numbers  such  as 
60  hundred,  6 thousand,  60  and  6 (7,  18,  14)  or  60099  (1,  o3,  9)  is  how'ever 
worthy  of  special  attention^®.  Whereas  101,  a tirpical  ‘baker’s  dozen’  number  is 

^ E.  W.  Hopkxxs,  Numerical  formulae  in  the  Yeda,  JAOS  16,  p.  275;  for  Triads 
and  heptads  etc.:  The  holy  numbers  of  the  9g-veda,  Or.  Studies  1894,  p.  !41  (on 
3,  7,  9);  A.  S.  Agbawala,  in  26  Int.  Congr.  of  Orient.  1964,  p.  1 (partly  fantastic); 
Gond  A,  Triads  in  Awdic  ritual,  Ohio  Journal  of  Religious  Studies  1974, 2,  p.  5;  Triads 
in  the  A^eda,  Amsterdam  Acad.  1975. 

® Cf.  e.g.  2,  18,  1;  9,  114,  3;  10,  124,  1. 

® See  Gonda,  R.  1. 1,  p.  177. 

* See  e.g.  (3)  1,  34,  8;  140,  2;  142,  9;  164,  25;  10,  87,  10;  (7)  8,  96,  16;  9,  86,  25; 
36;  10,  67,  1;  (3x  7)  1,  34,  8;  7,  87,  4;  9,  86,  21;  10,  75,  1.  For  Ainu’s  tliree  strides 
etc.  now  see  J.  Goxda,  Visnuism  and  Sivaism,  London  1970,  p.  2;  for  five  (see  e.g. 
1,  89,  10;  3,  59,  8;  10,  60,  4)  p.  45;  for  seven,  Geldner,  I,  p.  341;  B.  Otto, 
A^anuia-Hymnen  des  JRgveda,  Bonn  1948,  p.  14. 

® See  1,  95,  3;  4,  1,  7;  cf.  10,  2,  7;  45,  1. 

® For  similar  cumulations  of  the  same  number:  (3)  3,  56,  3ff. ; 4,  53,  5;  7,  33,  7; 
(7)  1,  164,  3;  8,  28,  5;  9,  114,  3. 

^ This  is  no  play  on  the  number  three  as  is  the  opinion  of  Hillebe.ani>t,  V.  M. 
p.  58  and  Re:xoij,  E.  V.  P.  XVI,  p.  1.  See  AT  S.  Agibawala,  RA".  1,  34,  VIJ  4 (1966), 
p.  25  (not  completely  tenable). 

* As  to  7,  33,  7 see  Geldnee,  Auswahl,  11,  p.  109;  10,  114,  5ff.  Cf.  e.g.  also  10, 
13,  3 and  10,  88,  18:  8,  58,  2. 

® See  e.g.  1,  24,  9;  80,  9;  4,  46,  3;  58,  6;  6,  18,  11. 

Cf.  also  3,  9,  9;  10,  98,  10;  it  is  not  always  clear  how  these  numbers  are  ob- 
tained. 


262 


J.  Gonda  • Vedic  Literature 


not  absentl^  the  nnniber  99-— or  nine  times  90—  is  sometimes  symbolical  of  the 
defectiveness  of  enemies,  evil  powers  and  of  those  devoid  of  importance^®. 
There  are  some  instances  of  progressive  mnltiplication.  “Come,  0 Indra,  with 
two  bay  horses,  with  four,  with  sis,  with  eight,  with  ten . . . !”  (2,  18,  4),  Sayana 
mtimatrng  that  by  their  supernormal  power  the  god’s  two  horses  multiply 
them^lves  mdefinitely^®- 

Some  poets  at  least  knew  how  to  enliven  their  style^*  and  to  intensify  the 
contact  with  their  auditors  by  occasionally  directing  their  words  to  them: 
“Beieve  in  Mm:  he,  0 men,  is  Indra”  (2,  12,  5)^^  by  addressing  a god  more 
directly  as  a partner  in  conversation^®,  or  by  inserting  other  forms  of  address^b 
Yet,  direct  speech  is,  outside  the  dialogue  hymns,  not  very  frequent:  in  5,  53, 
3£  the  Mamts  are  represented  as  addressing  the  poet.  Self-address  or  self- 
adhortation^*  is  a frequent  device — ^it  may  be  emotional:  “Inquire  also  after 
the  mighty  generations  of  the  seers!”  (3,  38,  2) — , but  sometimes  an  adhorta- 
tion  is  rather  directed  to  the  eulogist  who  is  to  recite  the  poem  than  to  the  author 
himself:  “Invoke  Brahmanaspati  with  a view  to  old  age  (that  is,  that  he  may 
give  that)  ...”  (I,  38,  13)^®.  Elsewhere  however  the  poet  adds  his  own  name: 
“Offer,  0 Nodhas,  the  h^nnn  of  praise  to  the  manly  host . . the  Maruts”®*^. 

Questions,  partly  of  the  emphatic  or  emotional  (so-called  rhetorical)  t3rpes, 
sometimes  in  succession,  interrupt  the  usual  prayers  and  eulogies®^.  An  ex- 
plicit answer  is  seldom  given®®.  Questions  belong  also  to  the  hesitating,  mean- 
dering, progressing  and  regressing  mode  of  expression  wMch  is  many  times 
characteristic  of  passages  dealing  with  mysteries  and  metaphysical  problems : 
“What  will  be  revealed  to  me  of  this  word  . . . (4,  5,  8)®®. 


RV.  10,  130,  1;  cf.  J.  Gokda,  Refiections  on  the  numerals  “one’*  and  “two,” 

Utrecht  1953. 

See  1,  53,  9;  84,  13;  10,  49,  8;  for  90  see  3,  12,  6. 

« Cf.  also  8,  76,  12;  10,  27,  15,  For  63  (9  X 7)  see  8,  96,  8;  for  5 X 7 : 10,  55,  3.  A 

degTMsive  series:  2,  1,  8. 

There  are  e.g.  instances  of  aposiopesis  (e.g.  RV.  5,  30,  8;  74,  4;  7,  36,  6;  91, 4). 
« See  also  W-  13,  1;  8,  17,  13;  19,  7;  27,  li 
« Cf.  e.g.  8,  92,  30;  93,  4;  25;  10,  96,  1;  132,  6;  139,  4. 

Cf.  e.g.  9,  46,  4 and  Geldneb’s  note;  10,  166,  3 (incantation). 

Cf.  e.g.  1, 37, 5;  56, 4;  2,  8, 1 ; 3, 1, 10;  5, 45, 11,  Not  all  pertinent  interpretations 
(ef.  e.g.  Beegaigne,  in  MSL  8,  p.  21)  are  tenable. 

Cf.  also  6,  16,  22;  8,  49,  1;  101,  5.  The  priests  are  addressed  e.g.  8,  72,  1. 

« Cf.  e.g.  4,  3,  3;  29,  3;  5,  56,  5;  66,  1;  83,  1;  6,  10,  6;  38,  4;  8,  19,  2;  in  8,  49,  1 

the  plural  possessive  pronoun  accompanying  the  verb  form  in  the  singular  seems  to 
show  that  the  audience  is  included  in  the  address. 

Cf.  by.  1,  37,  6;  38,  1~3  (Rekou,  E.  V.  P,  X,  p.  61;  often  in  hymns  addr^ed 
to  the  Mamts) ; 120, 1 ; 168,  5f. ; 4, 3, 4-8  (ten  questions  in  succession) ; 21,  9 (three) ; 
55,  i;  5,  30,  1;  53,  If.;  61,  1-3;  74,  1-3;  7,  86,  2;  8,  7,  31  (three);  10,  27,  11;  86,  22; 
135,  5-6. 

See  1,  164,  34 £ For  qu^tions  and  answers  in  riddles  see  Bloomeebu),  Repeti- 
tions, p.  7 and  above,  p.  132. 

Cf.  Renou,  E.  V.  P.  n,  p.  58. 


263 


The  style  of  the  Tedie  h^mns 

A considerable  amount  of  material  would  be  available  for  sti^ d^dfig  the 
instances  of  hj^rbole^^  and  hypereharactenzation  wlileli  tewl  to  play  an 
important  part  in  all  eulogistic  poetry.  The  great  ni3irib€'rs  cf  cows  or  women 
offered  as  dahmna^  the  exuberant  praise  of  liberal  patrons®^  are  of  coarse 
landatory  and  honorific.  The  main  question  arising  in  connection  with  Tedic 
hyperboles  is  wrhether  the  distortion  of  the  proper  relation  betireen  snbject  and 
attribute  or  prc'dicate  is  intentional  and  conseioiisly  intrcxiiieed.  Part  of  what 
in  our  eyes  would  seem  exaggerations  may  have  been  traditional  imagery  or  a 
natnrai  consequence  of  the  poet’s  view  of  the  world.  Many  statements — e.g. 
“Indra,  as  inherently  strong  as  a moimtain”  (4,  20,  6) — w^ere  for  the  Vedic 
audience  not  hyperbolic  at  all,  because  the  events  and  persona.ges  referred  to 
were  omnium  consenmi  above  earthly  limitations  and  human  c^omprehension. 
Are  we  in  a position  fully  to  miderstand  all  implications  of  the  comparison 
between  the  poet’s  hymn  and  a mighty  torrent  notwithstanding  the  fact  that 
hymns  are — more  intelligibly — elsewhere  compared  to  lowing  water®®  ? How 
far  is  the  presence  of  the  storm-gods  in  a context  dea.IiBg  with  the  familng  of 
fire®"  nothing  but  a ‘poetical  hyperbole’  ? In  the  light  of  the  belief  In  the  demon- 
destroying  power  of  soma  and  of  the  soma-dimMng  god  India  the  stones  for 
pressing  out  the  juice  could  be  seen  as  Indra’s  tires  which  without  horse  and 
chariot  rash  at  the  barbarians  (5,  31,  5). 

Scholars  have  not  failed  to  notice  the  predilection  of  Vedic  |x>ets  for  para- 
doxes and  other  impossibilities  or  at  first  sight  untenable  statements  such  as 
the  child  of  t-wo  mothers  (Agni,  produced  by  tvro  pieces  of  wood),  Agni’s  being 
the  impregnater  of  Ms  own  mother®®,  the  paramour  of  the  virgin  fSuii  and 
Dawn),  the  udder  of  the  father  (the  cloud)  or  of  the  bull,  the  calving  barren 
cow.  In  judging  these  paradoxes®®  one  should  remember  that,  although  the 
essential  nature  of  creation  and  of  the  divine  powers,  of  the  relations  betw-een 
this  world  and  the  Unseen,  of  the  mysterious  wMch  is  beyond  the  opposites  of 
the  phenomenal  world  is  inexpressible,  attempts  were  time  and  again  made  to 
understand  these  by  means  of  analogies  and  imagery.  Why  then  could  that 
wMch  is  impossible  on  the  plane  of  daily  experience  not  be  formulated  as 
possible  in  the  sphere  of  the  divine  or  in  a transcendent  state®° '? 

We  shall  not  enter  here  in  a,  largely  otiose,  discusion  of  the  question  of  the 
occurrence  of  so-called  contradictions:  the  sun  sees  far  (7,  35,  S),  is  an  eye  or 

P.  S.  Sastbi,  at  ABORI  28,  p.  45, 

« See  p.  170  f.;  1,  122,  7;  5,  18,  3;  6,  28,  8;  8,  24,  29;  74,  13  ff.  etc. 

5V.  6,  66,  11;  see  e.g.  9.  95,  3. 

” RV.  3,  16,  2;  26,  4;  AV.  3,  3,  1;  cf.  GnuDNnB,  RV.  I,  p.  352;  359. 

« :RV.  1,  31,  2;  69,  2;  141,  2;  1,  152,  4;  3,  1,  9;  38,  5;  55,  9;  4,  1,  11;  22,  6;  6, 
16,  35;  59,  2;  7,  36,  3;  101,  3;  9,  68,  1;  90,  2;  10,  13,  5;  31,  10;  54,  3 etc.;  see  e.g. 
Bebgaigjoe,  R.  V.,  n,  p.  103;  III,  p.  332  (this  scholar  often  emphasized  the  para- 
doxical character  of  iRgvedic  texts);  GExmmEB,  V,  S.  I,  p.  167;  MACBOi^nLL, 
V.  M.,  p.  188. 

For  an  instance  of  oxyonoron  sw  10,  94,  II. 

®®  Whitney’s  comment  (PAOS  1882,  p.  CXI)  is  wide  of  the  mark. 


264 


J.  Gonda  • Yedic  Literature 


the  eye  of  the  sim-god  (5,  59,  5;  10, 10,  9),  is  or  has  a wheel  (1, 130,  9),  is  a bird 
(ef.  1,  164,  7),  has  a ship  (AV.  17,  1,  25),  or  a chariot  (RV.  1,  50,  8)®^.  They  are 
a natural  consequence  of  the  fluidity  of  the  traditional  views  of  life  and  the 
world  on  one  hand  and  of  the  freedom  of  the  poets’  fancy  in  penetrating  the 
mysterious  on  the  other.  That  at  3,  59,  8 Mtra  is  said  to  support  all  the  gods, 
and  at  1,  185,  1 Heaven  and  Earth  are  the  bearers  of  everything  is  one  of  the 
many  indicia  of  the  tendency  to  so-called  henotheism. 

More  than  the  poets  of  the  other  Tnandalas  those  to  whom  we  owe  the  last 
evince  the  inclination  to  assume  a certain  critical  attitude  and  to  convey 
moraiking  or  dissentient  views  in  aphoristic  language®^.  They  speak  of  col- 
leagues whose  words  bear  neither  fruits  nor  blossom  (10,  71,  5),  or  make  their 
comment  upon  the  female  character  whose  hearts  are  like  hyenas’  (10,  95,  15) 
or  the  significance  of  paternity  (10,  56,  6)®®. 

Incidentally  a stanza  exhibits,  in  a more  or  less  rudimentary  state,  turns  of 
speech  which  could  be  described  by  means  of  one  of  the  technical  terms  of  the 
classical  stylistic  theory®*.  When  gods  are  said  to  observe  the  rules  of  functional 
conduct  as  if  they  trace  footsteps,  this  metaphorical  ascription  of  a mode  of 
behaviour  which  they  have  never  shown  (5,  67,  3) — or  of  which  the  subject, 
generally  speaking,  is  literally  incapable — reminds  us  of  the  utprelcsd^^.  It  is 
however  very  difficult  to  distinguish  it  from  a simile  ( upamd J®®.  The  statement 
that  many  a one  who  hears,  does  not  hear  Speech  (10,  71, 4)  might  be  regarded 
as  an  instance  of  visesoUi:  despite  the  presence  of  a ‘cause’  there  is  no  ‘effect.’ 
When  contradictory  properties  are  expressed  of  the  same  subject  we  may  speak 
of  ‘contradiction’  (virodha):  in  10,  34,  9 cold  heavenly  charcoals  are  said  to 
bum  the  heart®’.  The  justification  of  the  statement  contained  in  8,  1,  20  “While 
soliciting  I would  not  make  thee  angry”  by  the  following  “who  would  not 
implore  a mighty  one  ?”  is  a regular  arthdntaranydsa^^.  However,  when  Indra 
is  implored  to  fell  the  enemies  like  trees  (6,  33,  3)  the  exaggeration  ( aiiiayokti ) 
exists  only  on  the  human  plane®®,  and  in  stating  that  the  One  is  given  different 
names  the  poet  of  1, 164, 46  certainly  does  not  intend  to  produce  an  instance  of 
uUekha  (the  description  of  one  thing  as  many)*®.  When  in  an  author’s  view  of 


Cf.  W.  Kiefel,  in  Comm.  Voi.  l^obel,  p.  112. 

« Cf.  Eenou,  E.  V.  P.  II,  p.  25. 

Cf.  e.g.  also  ?.V.  10,  117,  7. 

Cf,  Geedxeb’s  note  on  10,  68  (=  AY.  20,  16,  1-12):  Auswahl,  H,  p.l72. 
See  H.  D.  Yela^-eiab,  in  JBBRAS,  K.  S.  14,  p.  1;  P.  S.  Sastei,  in  ABORI 
28,  p.  47;  ^Y.  6,  75,  3;  10,  89,  7. 

“ Cf.  e.g.  also  !,  173,  3;  2,  4,  6;  5,  85,  5. 

Yhen  the  world  is  turned  upside  down  the  rivers  flow  upstream  and  the 
weaker  animais  attack  the  stronger  ones  (10,  28,  4). 

Cf.  also  1,  179,  5;  10,  95,  15. 

For  an  instance  see  4,  58,  3. 

Cf.  D.  R.  Bhaxdaeeab,  The  development  of  the  figure  of  speech  in  Rovedic 
hymnolo'gy j "^'oL  P.  Y.  Kane,  Poona  1941,  p.  70.  ' 


The  style  of  the  Tedie  hj-TfiTiH 


265 


the  world  Agiu’s  body  may  be  supposed  to  be  identical  ’Kth  piire  golri*^ 
(4j  10,  6) 5 he  is  not  aware  that  the  theoretieians  of  a later  periixl  eonld  regard 
Ms  words  as  a case  of  metaphorical  identification  .%iyliow,  these 

fristances,  wMch  could  be  multipiled,  show  that  the  ImaMriation  of  the  Tedic 
poets  foreshadowed  essential  features  of  the  classical  poetry^®.  We  should 
therefore  not  object  either  to  the  thesis that  these  authors,  though  unaware 
of  the  classical  rmsa  theory,  knew  how  to  evoke  sentiments  and  emotions  w'Mch 
later  theoreticians  ■would  have  classified  as  the  marTellous,  trariq'ail  or  pathe- 
tic*®. In  any  case  part  of  their  work  show’s  that  they  had  a notion  of  the  fact 
that  the  effectiveness  of  poetry  does  not  depend  upon  the  pow’er  of  descTiption 
releasing  clear  mental  images,  but  upon  the  energy  with  wMeh  words  and 
combinations  of  words  arouse  emotions*®. 


See  J.  Gonda,  in  Studies  in  Indo- Asian  art  and  culture  3 fXew  Delhi  1973, 
= Raghu  Vira  Comm.  VoL),  p.  39. 

*2  Cf.  also  4,  3,  10;  5,  3;  15,  1 etc. 

Real  Mesas  (the  intended  simultaneous  expression  of  two  meariings)  are  rare; 
see  4,  41,  8;  10,  94,  9. 

**  P.  L,  Bhabgava,  India  in  the  Tedic  age,  Aminabad-Lueknow  1971,  p.  350. 

For  the  pathetic  emotion  one  quotes  places  such  as  2,  33,  4;  5,  79,  9;  7, 
86,  4;  89,  1;  for  tranquillity  the  philosophical  hymns.  Cf.  also  M.  K.  Yabsia,  at 
26  AIOC  S.  P.  1972,  p.  382  and  ABORI  54,  p.  194. 

This  is  however  not  to  subscribe  to  the  view  pronounced  by  P.  S.  Sastsi 
(ABORI  38,  p.  54)  and  J.  TrLAKAsmi  (Univ.  of  Ceylon  Review  13,  p.  167)  according 
to  which  the  Tedic  poets  had  developed  a theory  of  rasa  and  poetry. 


Ghaptsb  TI 


THE  ATHARTA\'EI)A 


1.  Names  apA  jmsition 

The  oldest  name  of  this  Veda  is  Atharvangirasahh  a plural  compound 
formed  of  the  names  of  two  ancient  families  of  priests,  the  Atharrans  and 
Ahgirases^  -which  already  occurs  at  AVS.  10,  7,  20  after  the  aiml  names  of  the 
three  other  Vedas.  The  former  are  a semi-div'ine  family  of  (m\i:hical)  p^iests^ 
descendants  of  Atharvan,  a typical  priest  and  ‘"connection  of  the  gods'’  lAVS. 
5,  II5 11).  In  a considerable  range  of  the  literature  especially  of  older  times  tMs 
name  refers  to  those  who  occupy  themselves  with  appeasing  and  anspicloiis 
(mnki)  practices.  The  latter  "were  traditionally  regarded  as  '"sons  of  heaven  or 
of  the  gods/’  as  sages  and  (mythical)  fire-priests  and  authors  of  the  “hostile 
sorcery  practices/’  the  terrible  (ghora)  portions  of  the  corpus^.  In  the  texts 
they  are  invoked  to  avert  evil  or  to  afflict  enemies  (2, 12,  5 ; 3,  21 , 8),  said  to  be 
closely  associated  with  the  god  Agni  (6,  35,  3)^  and  called  upon  together  with 
the  Adityas  and  other  deities  (2,  12,  4;  11,  6,  13).  The  double  name  clearly 
reflects  the  double  character  of  this  Veda  which  is  for  instance  expressed  most 
unequivocally  in  the  Gbpatha-Brahmana®.  In  course  of  time  the  name  Atharvan 
and  its  derivatives  became  much  more  usual  throughout  the  literature^.  There 
are  moreover  two  other  names  the  use  of  which  is  practically  limited  to  the 
atharvanic  ritual  texts®,  viz.  Bhrgvangirasah  in  which  the  name  of  another 
ancient  priestly  family,  the  Bhrgus — who  are  sometimes  magnified  above 
others® — stakes  the  place  of  that  of  the  Atharvans,  and — especially  because  of 

^ Cf.  Mbh.  12,  322,  37  rg-yafuh-sdmabhir  . . . aiharvangiTamih  lalM. 

* Cf.  e.g.  also  AVS.  11,  6,  13  where  the  two  names  occur  separately  and  after 
each  other.  See  V.  W.  KAbambeleab,  at  JIH  26,  p.  107. 

* For  relevant  facts:  N.  J.  Shexde,  at  JUB  17  N.S.  (1948,  2),  p.  23. 

® For  references  see  Gonda,  Savayajnas,  p.  197;  Bloomfield,  A.  V.  G.  B.,p.  7, 
See  also  RV.  1,  121,  3;  10,  108,  10. 

® This  association  is  often  mentioned  in  the  B*g\’eda  (e.g.  4,  1,  12;  10,  62,  5)  and 
emphasized  by  N,  J,  Shende,  A6giras  in  the  Vedic  literature,  ABORI  31,  p.  IDS. 

® See  GB.  1,  2,  21;  5,  10  where  two  atharvanic  Vedas,  an  “auspicious'’  and  a 
“terrible,”  are  distinguished. 

^ Often  in  the  plural  (e.g.  SB.  13,  4,  3,  7);  the  compound  AtliMwaveda  appears 
at  GB.  1,  20  etc. 

® For  particulars:  BLOOMnELD,  o.c.,  p.  9;  30;  H.  AV.,  p.  XXVI;  LXII  etc. 

»'  Cf.  e.g.  GB.  I,  1,  3;  2,  22  and  see  e.g.  RV.  8,  43,  13;  10,  14,  6;  92,  10.  At  Kaus. 
139,  6 Bh|*gu  and  Angiras  receive  divine  hoaoms  together  with  Agni,  Brahma  and 
Prajapati. 


268 


J,  Gonda  • Yedic  Literature 


its  speculative  parts^®  in  wMch  hrahTmn  as  the  Ultimate  Principle,  soul  of  the 
univerae,  comes  to  the  fore^^ — Brahmaveda.  The  names  Atharvan,  Ahgiras  and 
Bhrgu,  tendiiig  already  in  atharvanic  antiquity  to  be  associated  with  special 
practices,  came  to  be  traditionally  connected,  as  poets’  names,  with  atharvanic 
literaiy  activity.  The  descendants  of  these  exalted  beings  held  the  same 
position  of  honour  as  the  other  families  of  rsis^^. 

The  application  of  the  name  Brahmaveda,  which  properly  indicated  the 
religious  literature  as  a whole  embracing  the  Threefold  Veda^^  and  was  as  such 
added  to  the  names  of  the  other  collections,  to  the  Atharvaveda  may  be  re- 
garded as  one  of  the  indications  of  the  claims  laid  by  the  adherents  of  this 
religious  and  ritual  tradition  to  equality  with  the  others.  For  a long  time  indeed 
the  Atharvavedins,  owing  to  the  general  character  of  their  practices  and  their 
sight  relation  to  the  irauta  rites^^,  found  themselves  in  an  inferior  position^®. 
Although  the  doctrine  of  the  fourfold  Veda — ^mythologically  represented  as 
proceeding  from  Brahma’s  four  mouths — ^found  acceptance^®  various  later  texts 
continued  speaking  of  the  Threefold  Holy  Ejiowledge^L  Even  in  modern  times 
there  have  been  brahmins  who  refused  to  recognize  the  authority  of  the 
promulgators  of  the  fourth  Veda,  because  of  a certain  prejudice  prevailing 
against  it”.  Even  today  brahmins  of  the  other  Vedas  do  not  dine  or  many 
with  the  atharvanic  brahmins  (paippaladins)  of  Orissa”.  As  soon  as  the  great 
sacrifices  wMch  required  the  co-operation  of  officiants  mastering  the  three 

Cf.  Rexou,  in  tJA  243,  p.  418  and  see  also  Buoomiteld,  H.  AV.,  p.  XLIII; 

for  brahman  see  below,  p.  293  f. 

” The  Ingiramkalpa  (see  below,  p.  277)  states  that  this  name  is  due  to  the  fact 
that  the  Athartm-eda  imparts  knowledge  about  brahman.  See  also  L.  Bhatta- 
CHABYA,  at  OH  5,  p.  205.  According  to  Sayana  the  Atharvaveda  is  called  Brahma- 
veda, because  it  was  revealed  to  Brahman  (Introd.  A.  V.  p.  4;  cf.  GB.  1,  1,  20). 

Cf.^ Bloomfield,  H.  AV.,  p.  XXXH;  ELabambelklaii,  o.c.  The  Atharvaveda- 
Samhita  (e.g.  A\'S.  4,  37,  1;  8,  3, 15)  mentions  also  other  authorities;  for  Kaiyapa 
see  V.  K.  Deshpande,  at  PO  28,  p.  12;  for  Narada,  Hoesch,  V.  G.  L.,  p.  368. 

” See  above,  p.  8;  cf.  W.  10,  90,  9;  AVg.  7,  54,  2;  10,  7,  14  (st.  20  adding  the 
AthMvwgir^h);  TS.  7,  3,  1,  4;  TB.  2,  3,  10,  1;  8B.  11,  5,  8,  3 etc. 

^ ” References  to  the  Atharimreda  are  absent  in  the  RV.,  SV.,  YV.  aamhUds  and 
m the  brahmanm  of  the  Rgveda. 

G.  V.  Devasthaii,  at  Kaviraj  Abhinandana  grantha  (Fel.  Vol.  Kaviraj), 
Luotao.  1867,  p.  8.  i„  h.  ay,,  p.  XXVm,  A.  V.  O.  B., 

T 52ff.;  MarkP.  48,  31ff.  (cf,  102,  3ff.);  KurmaP,  7,  55ff.  etc.;  see  also 

J.  llriB,  Original  Sanskrit  texts,  IH,  London  1873,  p.  lOff. 

Manu  i,  23,  2,  76;  "V  iP.  2,  11,  7;  3,  3,  29.  Mbh.  13, 10,  34  speaks  of  the  Athar- 
vaveda and  the  \eda,  the  latter  being,  according  to  the  commentator  Nilakantha, 
the  tliree  other  \edm.  See  also  Bloomfield,  H.  AV.,  p.  XLVI.  Compare,  on  the 
other  hand,  SB.  II,  5,  6, 4ff.  x'  ^ , 

Ind.  Lit.  u.  C.,  p.  171.  This  did  not  of  course  prevent 
ivianu  11,  dj  from  aUowmg  brahmins  to  direct  atharvanic  texts  against  their 

enemies.  ® 

1968^’  fundamental  themes  of  the  Atharvaveda,  Poona 


The  Athari'aveda 


2m 


other  ledas  had  developed,  been  systematized  and  come  to  enjoy  a t cod  rep- 
utation*®, the  largely  simple  private  rites  intended  to  supply  the  immediate 
wants  also  of  the  commoii  people  agsnmed  the  character  of  something  extra- 
neous*^. This  induced  the  AtharvaYedins  already  at  an  early  date  to  demon- 
strate, in  striking  solidarity,  the  importance  of  their  traditions,  praetiees  and 
literature  and  to  assert  their  rights  to  equality**.  Although  there  are  no  icdi- 
cations  of  any  srstematie  polemics  against  the  representatives  of  the  Mg-, 
Saman-  and  Yajurvecias,  they  not  unsuceessfnily**  claimed  the  oMees  of  the 
infliiential  domestic  priest  of  princes  fpurohitaj^^  and  of  the  priest  w-’ho, 
briefly  called  the  brahman,  oversees,  accompanies  ( anumantrana^^  j and  corrects 
by  means  of  expiatory  formulas  (prayakitta)  possible  accidents  and  blunders 
of  the  officiants*®.  Both  functions  seem  to  have  been  fulfilled,  as  a mie,  by  the 
same  expert*^  whose  very  presence  sufficed  to  ^‘protect  the  sacrifice”  ftSsf  1,  7, 
4,  18).  It  was  for  the  ritual  use  of  this  brahman  priest**,  and  especially  for  one 
of  Ms  assistants,  the  hraMrwanacclmTnsin^'^ , that  AVS.  XX  was,  as  their  special 
collection  (samhitd),  added  to  the  corpus.  Some  portions  (13  of  the  143  suMm) 
excepted  this  book  consists  of  literal  borrowings  from  the  Rgveda-SamMta*® 
relating  to  the  soma  ritual  and  almost  entirely  consisting  of  complete  Indra 
hjTiins.  The  \ aitana- Sutra  is  a collection  of  ritual  directions  for  the  brahman 
and  Ms  assistants  wMch  fits  easily  in  the  descriptions  of  the  rites  as  given  in  the 
other  S'uiras;  no  doubt  composed  in  order  to  supply  the  Atharvaveda  with  a 


« Cf.  e.g.  SB.  4,  6,  7,  1. 

**  U.  K.  OzA,  at  AP  21  (1950),  p.  360,  being  a Samiakiya-Athari’'av©ciin  Mrnself, 
expresses  the  view  that  Atharvaveda  wg®  the  name  given  to  all  the  uxiarraiigefd  and 
unsystematized  lore  remaining  after  sifting  out  the  three  other  Vedas. 

For  more  particulars:  Bloomfield,  H.  AV.,  p.  LVII. 

Cf.  Bloomfield,  H.  AV.,  p.  XLVI  and  see  e.g.  Yujn.  1,  312.  Tiieir  claims  did 
not  however  meet  with  the  sjunpathy  of  those  who  transmitted  the  other  Vedas: 
J.  V.  Xegelein-,  at  JAOS  34,  p.  262;  Rexou,  E.  V.  F.  VI,  p.  27. 

Gon'da,  in  Festschrift  Kirfel,  p,  107;  R.  I.  I,  p.  12;  142  etc.;  Bloomfield, 
A.  V.  G.  B.,  p.  29;  H.  AV.,  p.  LXVEI. 

Cf.  also  Vait.  1,  2. 

Cf.  e.g.  Kaus.  94,  2ff.;  Vait.  1,  1;  11,  2;  37,  2;  A\7Par.  2,  2S.;  3,  1;  3 as  con- 
trasted with  KB.  5,  32fr.;  SB.  11,  5,  8,  7. 

For  references  see  also  Bloomfield,  H.  AV.,  p.  LXI;  V.  W.  KAsambelxab, 
Brahman  and  purohite,  IHQ  26,  p.  293.  Cf.  e.g.  AVPar.  2,  if.;  3,  3,  7 in  connection 
with  AiB.  7,  26,  4;  TS.  3,  5,  2,  1. 

*»  Who  must  be  conversant  with  the  Brahma veda  (Vait,  1,  1)  and  is  in  this 
respect  contrasted  with  the  repr^entatives  of  the  other  Vedas  111,  2), 

The  subordination  of  this  functionary  to  the  brahman  is  due  to  the  eventual 
schematic  division  of  the  sixteen  officiants  into  four  groups  corresponding  with  the 
four  Vedas;  actually,  he  was  a subordinate  of  the  kotar,  the  priest  in  charge  of  the 
recitation  of  B^’®'dic  stanzas. 

W.  Calaxd,  at  WZKM  14,  p.  115;  18,  p.  190;  Das  V aitanasutra  des  Athar- 
vaveda,  Amsterdam  Acad.  1910,  p.  V (also  for  technical  particulars);  p.  125  (for 
a concordance);  Bloomfield,  A.  V.  G.  B.,  p.  95. — It  is  completely  intelligible 
that  the  Kausika-Sutra  quotes  no  text  from  this  book. 


270 


J.  Gonda  * Vedic  Literature 


mira  it  is  no  complete  and  all-embracing  ritual  bandbook^^.  Contrary  to  tbe 
nomml  relation  between  ^auta  and  Qrhya  sviras  it  was  compiled  later  than 
Kauiika’s  work  which  it  qiiotes®^. 

'The  AtharvavedhiSj  moreover,  urged  the  importance  of  special  rites  of  their 
own  wMch  could  enter  into  competition  with  the  srauta  rites  of  other  origin. 
For  instance,  their  comparatively  simple  rice  dish  sacrifice  ( sava ^ is,  in  the 
texts,  dewribed  as  if  it  were  a soma  sacrifice ; its  efficacy  is  exalted ; for  instance, 
it  brings  about  the  fulfilment  of  various  desires,  including  survival  in  heaven®®. 
AVS.  11,  3,  for  the  greater  part  composed  in  hrohmaim  prose,  is  an  allegoric 
liturgic  exaltation  of  this  sacrificial  material  { odana ) which  is  conceived  of  as 
a latency  of  world-wide  and  fundamental  significance.  It  is  personified  and 
deified,  and  the  earth  is  said  to  be  the  cookmg  vessel  in  which  it  is  prepared, 
heaven  being  the  cover  of  that  vessel.  This  means  that  the  sacrificial  rice-dish 
is  a cosmic  entity,  commensurate  with  the  universe : a conception  which  is  a 
lo'gical  necessity  resulting  from  the  conviction  that  the  sacrificer  can  transcend 
the  limitations  of  the  finite  human  condition  by  means  of  an  adequate  ritual 
technique  with  the  esoteric  significance  of  which  he  has  identified  himself®^. 
The  use  of  special  texts  taken  from  the  Atharvaveda  was  propagated  also  in 
other  rites : for  instance  AVS.  3, 14  (AVP.  2, 13)  or  part  of  it  should  be  pronoun- 
ced as  a blessing  on  the  kine®® ; whQe  co-operating  in  the  performance  of  a sorm 
sacrifice  f agniskma ) the  representatives  of  this  Veda  should  employ  AY&.  3, 
4,  7 and  7, 28, 1 (AVP.  3, 1, 7 ; 20, 30, 4)  accompanjdng  oblations  to  the  deity  of 
good  roads  (Pathya  Svasti)  and  other  divinities®®,  and  so  on. 

Generally  speaking,  the  Atharvavedins  allude  with  special  predilection  and 
in  terms  of  praise  and  commendation  to  their  own  literature®’.  For  instance,  in 
describing  the  origin  of  the  universe  GB.  1,1,  4ff,,  unlike  other  ancient  works 
which  as  a rule  ignore  the  Atharvan  in  this  account,  places  the  Atharvan  and 
Ahgiras  texts  at  the  head,  relegating  the  other  Vedic  works  to  the  rear®®.  At 
1,  3,  4 the  same  hrdkmaim  praises  these  compositions  as  the  greatest  mani- 
festation of  fundamental  holy  power  (brahman),  to  mention  them  (at  1,2,  16) 
as  the  fourth  Veda  by  the  name  of  Brahma veda®*  and  to  correlate  them  (at  1, 2, 
9)  with  the  ^mees  of  the  brahman  priest  during  the  performance  of  4ranta 

CaxjIKD,  Vaitanaautra,  Introduction  (this  work  contains  a German  trans- 
lation) ; BiiOOMFiELD,  at  J AOS  1 1,  p.  375 ; for  an  English  translation : S.  N.  Ghoshal, 
at  IHQ  34-36;  see  also  D.  Bhattachabya,  in  OH  5,  p.  13. 

« Cf.  e.g.  Vait.  10,  19;  11,  4;  28,  7.  See  also  Caland,  at  WZKM  18,  p.  186. 

»*  Gohda,  The  Savayajnas,  p.  27.  See  below,  p.  290. 

Gonda,  o.c.,  p.  31. 

“ Kaui.  19,  14;  Vait,  21,  26. 

Vait.  ^13,  2;  Caland-Henby,  L’agnistoma,  p.  29;  33. 

**  For  simiiar  reference  to  their  founder  and  priests:  BnooMMEnD,  H.  AV.,  p. 
Ll'TI.  Their  ritualistic  works  are  not  free  from  a polemic  and  apologetic  note. 

Cf.  also  Vait.  6,  1. 

Later  atharvamc  authorities  are  not  unanimous  in  explaining  the  original 
significance  of  this  name  (for  the  Angtrasakalpa  see  n.  11,  or  because  so  many 
'theosophical’  upanimMs  are  attached  to  it;  Atharvanarahasya). 


The  Atimrvaveda 


271 


cerejnoiiies.  The  atharranic  ritual  works  eonstantlv  ineliide  tlicfir  own  Veda 
among  the  total  number  of  saered  books  and  GB.  1,5. 25  explicit Iv  asserts 
that  those  who  study  the  Threefold  Veda  ^iil  reach,  it  is  true,  the  liighest 
heaTen,  but  yet  the  Atharvans  and  Ahgirases  go  beyond  to  the  great  worlds  of 
Brahman In  harmony  with  this  statement  the  learned — Mid  iriflispeiisable 
(cf.  1,  1,  14) — brahman  priest  is  deseribed  as  being  ‘ 'omniscient Le.  m having 
knowledge  of  the  All  (Totality:  sarvavid)^^:  this  implies  that  he  nmsteis  reli- 
gions knowledge  as  a whole and  therefore  controls  all.  It  is  Ms  knowledge 
wMch  enables  him  to  supervise  the  ritual  eeremonies  in  their  entirety*  He  is 
indeed — ^also  according  to  those  who  do  not,  or  not  yet,  acknowledge  the  claims 
of  the  Atharvavedins  to  Ms  function ‘the  physician  of  the  saerMce”«.  A 
legend  told  at  TS.  3,  5,  2,  1 according  to  "which  Indra  made  Vasistha  his 
domestic  priest  is  repeated  at  GB.  2,  2,  13  but  the  final  words  “therefore  one 
should  choose  a descendant  of  Vasistha  as  one’s  brahman  priest”  ure  signifi- 
cantly o3Daitted.  On  the  other  hand,  the  statement  that  the  three  Vedas  follow 
the  Bhrgus  and  Angirases  (GB.  I,  1,  39)  does  not  seem  to  occur  elsewhere.  An 
effective  means  resorted  to  for  the  acMevement  of  their  purpose  w^as  the  spread 
of  legends  and  allegorical  stories  in  wMch  the  other  Vedas  are  represented  as 
incompetent  and  the  Atharvaveda  appears  as  superior  to  them*®. 


The  Atharvavedins  lay  special  emphasis  on  the  number  fo-ur;  cf.  e.g.  GB.  1,  2, 
16;  3,  If.  and  Gonda,  Savayajhas,  p.  439,  Index  s.v.  For  the  Atharvaveda  as  the 
fourth  Veda:  J^Iacboneix,  H.  S.  L.,  p.  192. 

Cf.  also  1, 1, 15  and  see  N.  J.  Shende,  in  JTJB  17  X.  S.  (1948,  2),  p.  27 ; Gonba, 
Loka,  p.  108. 

GB.  1,  2,  18;  at  Vait.  1, 17f.  he  is  said  to  be  the  lord  (i.e.  dispijser)  of  the  world 
and  of  the  whole  creation. 

For  the  Atharvaveda  as  embodying  also  the  three  other  V«ias  see  e.  g.  SitaVp. 
23;  Jayantabhatta,  Kyayamanjari  I,  p.  235,  refuting  also  the  objection  raised  to 
this  Veda  that  it  contains  texts  devoid  of  sacrifice  utility  (see  H.  G.  Xasahabi, 
at  AP  22,  p.  209). 

Cf.  Webeb,  I.  S.  X,  p.  34;  137;  and  see  KB.  6,  II. 

« SB.  14,  2,  2,  19;  cf.  6,  1,  7 (BAU.  3,  1,  6). 

« Cf.  GB.  1,  2,  18;  19  and  ^ 1,  2,  9. 


272 


J.  Gonda  • Vedic  Literature 


2,  Genesis  and  recensions  of  the  Aiharvaveda-Samhiid 

Tradition  is  almost  unardmoiis  in  distingnishirig  nine  ‘schools’  of  the  Athar- 
vaTeda^  in  which  its  hymns  or  their  employment  hy  the  practitioners  was 
diveralfied.  Seven  of  these  are  for  ns  mere  names,  some  denoting  professional 
aspects  of  atharvanic  interests  (wandering  medicine-men:  cdranavaidya  etc.) 
rather  than  real  school  differences.  Texts  representing  these  idhhds  have  not 
been  found.  One  cannot  therefore  escape  the  conviction  that  the  material 
originally  collected  hy  the  Atharvavedms  was  already  at  an  early  date  split 
up  into  two — ^and  no  more  than  two — ^versions,  the  Paippalada,  founded  by 
Hppaiada  or  Pippaladi^,  which  is  regularly  placed  at  the  head  of  the  list,  and 
the  Saimakiya,  called  after  &imaka®.  The  differences  between  the  two  versions 
are  considerable. 

These  differences  concern,  not  only  the  arrangement  of  the  contents,  but 
also  the  contents  themselves,  which,  though  similar  and  largely  identical,  are 
far  from  agreeing  completely:  the  Paippalada  text  has  hundreds  of  stanzas 
more^  (many  of  which  are  not  found  in  the  Saunakiya  recension)  including  a 
large  amount  of  material  not  known  in  any  other  text.  The  ^unakiya  recension 
is,  however,  much  better  preserved^.  It  has  a samhitdpdtha,  a padapdfha,  two 
prdtiMMiym^,  some  anukrarmnis'^ , Its  text  is,  like  that  of  the  Rgveda,  accented 
and,  except  for  a few  portions,  metrical.  It  consists  of  three  well-arranged  parts 
each  of  which  is  followed  by  appendices  and  is  arranged  in  divisions  that  are 
partly  rgvedic,  partly  yajurvedic  in  character,  viz.  in  20  books  (kdn^ ),  lessons 
(anumka)  and  730  suktas^;  probably  at  a later  date,  the  books  1-18  were, 
moreover,  divided  into  lectures  (prapdfhaka).  The  whole  is  obviously  conceived 


^ For  thc^  pertinent  details  which  can  be  omitted  here : BLOomiEnD,  A.  V.  G.B., 
p.  11;  Kenou,  ficoles,  p.  58;  G.  Sagab  Rai,  at  Purana  14,  p.  58. 

® According  to  the  Angirasakalpa  a son  of  Angiras  (D.  Bhattachabyta,  The 

fundamental  themes,  p.  22). 

® This  authority  can  hardly  be  identical  with  the  author  of  the  Brhaddevata  etc. ; 
me  Renof,  £coles,  p.  59. 

^ See  L.  C.  Babeet,  in  JAOS  46,  p.  8.  The  Kashmir  manuscript  has  about  6500 
stanzas  as  against  about  6000;  according  to  D.  Bhattachabyya,  Fundamental 
themes,  p.  26  the  Orissa  manuscripts  have  about  8000  mantras,  the  excess  con- 
sisting of  both  charms  and  philosophical  passages.  Gf.  also  Renou,  at  JA  252, 
p.  421;  253,  p,  15  (with  translations  and  notes). 

Cf.  \ ISHVA  Baxbhu,  Vedic  text-critical  studies,  RO  21,  p.  455.  On  the  divisions 
of  the  Atharvaveda-Samhita:  Renof,  in  II J 1,  p.  4, 

® See  below,  p.  309. 

Bandhf,  Atharvavedapathanukramani,  Hoshiarpur  1964;  Athar- 
va^edlya-bfhat-sarvinukranianika,  Hoshiarpur  1966;  Atharvaveda-rsidevata- 

cfmndoiiiikraiiianika,  Hoshiarpur  1970. 

* ^ In  addition  to  the  mktas  there  is  also  a parallel  division  of  each  kdnda  in  “bjunns 
di\ided  according  to  sense”  (arthasukta)  and  briefer  subdivisions  into  groups  of 
staaizM  (usually  ten),  called  “period  hymns”  (paryayasukta).  See  Whitney-Lax- 
MAX,  AV.,  p.  CXXVn;  472. 


The  Aihari'aveda 


273 


as  a systematic  great  samMt&.  The  Paippalada  recension,  on  the  other  hand, 
is  less  correctly  preserred,  less  consistently  arrarsged,  not  accented*'^,  and 
contains  more  portions  in  prose.  It  is  not  accompanied  t>j  a pmiapatM  etc. 
HoweTer,  a closer  examination  of  the  Sannaldya  tradition  shows  that,  while 
contrasting  faTonrably  with  its  sister,  it  carmot  compare  with  the  samMtm  of 
the  other  Vedas  in  exactitude.  In  contradistinction  to  the  RgTeda*SamMtij 
hnt  in  harmony  with  the  Yajiirreda.  its  metrical  form  is  often  extremely 
iiregnlar^^.  The  padapatha — probably  mcxielled  upon  that  of  the  Rgreda^ — ■ 
is  frequently  in  error,  the  information  given  by  the  anuhrafPMrds  is  in  several 
respects  unreliable'®. 

Fate  has  decided  that  the  Saunaklya  recension  has  not  only  'been  incorrectly 
regarded  as  the  ‘vulgate^^^,  but  is  also  much  better  known  and  studied  in  the 
West^*,  The  books  I~XVIII — no  doubt  its  oldest  components^® — are  arrangf^d 
in  accordance  wdth  numerical  principles  w’Meh,  wMIe  be.ing  not  m strictly 
carried  through  as  in  the  Rgveda-SamMta,  seem  to  have,  to  a certain  extent, 
been  modified  by  a logical  principle  such  as  was  recognized  in  the  Yajurveda. 
The  three  great  divisions  (I-VII  which  is  generally  regardf^d  as  the  original 
nucleus;  VIII-XII;  XIII~XVIII)  are  in  their  arrangement  on  the  whole  based 
on  two  principles,  viz.  miscelianeousness  or  unity  of  subject  and  length  of  the 
the  numerical  scheme  preventing  the  grouping  of  all  related  mMas. 
The  first  division  comprehends  short  hymns  of  miscellaneous,  but  generally 
'magical’  subjects.  In  the  books  I-VI  the  normal  numbera  of  stanzas  per  €uHa 
is  4,  5,  6,  7,  8,  3 respectively,  but  there  are  many  deviations,  the  only  constant 
fact  being  that  4 etc.  are  minimum  numbers.  Almost  half  f52)  of  the  118 

® There  is  a tendency  to  group  two  or  more  suktm  of  somewhat  similar  content 

No  doubt  because  the  manuscripts  were  made  for  ritual,  not  for  didactic 
use.  For  the  Paippalada  recension  see  also  Siibhadba  Jha,  at  JBRS  38  fl952j, 
p.  233;  39,  p.  331;  40,  p.  395. 

Cf.  WniTOTiY-LAJsrMA^^  AV.,  p.  CXXVI. 

12  webeb,  i.s.  xm,  p.  6. 

Cf.  Wbit]NEIy-Lanman,  AV.,  p.  LXIX;  LXXI. 

See  below,  p.  309. 

“ Editions:  by  R.  Roth  and  W.  D.  Whitney,  Berlin  1855;  %y  51.  Lindenac, 
Berlin  1924;  *Bonn  1966;  with  the  commentary  of  Sayana  by  Sh,  Panbubano 
Panbit,  4 voL,  Bombay  1895-1898  and  by  Vishva  Banoho,  4 (5)  voL,  Hoshiarpur 
1960-1964.  Translations:  R.  T.  H.  Gbutith,  The  hyixms  of  the  Atharva-Veda, 
2 voL,  Benares  1895-1896,  ^916,  ®1968;  W.  D.  Whitney,  Atharva-Veda  Samhita 
translated  with  a critical  and  exegetical  commentary,  revised  . . . and  edited  by 
Ch.  R.  Lanman  (with  a long  and  valuable  General  Introduction's,  2 voL,  Cambridge 
Mass.  1905,  *DeIhi  1962;  anthologies:  J.  Gbiix,  Hundert  Lieder  des  Atliar\'aveda, 
Tubingen  1879,  ^Stuttgart  1888;  M.  Beoomeield,  H>uniis  of  the  Athar\’'a-Veda, 
Oxford  1897,  ®Delhi  1967;  F.  Ruceebt,  Atharw^aweda  (poetical,  written  about 
i860,  published  by  H.  Kbeyenbobg),  Darmstadt  1923;  for  older  translations  see 
Renou,  Bib!.,  p.  60. 

« The  internal  chronology  of  this  corpus  {see  D.  Bhattachaeyya,  at  20  AIOG, 
S.P.,  p.  33)  is  an  utterly  difficult  problem. 

See  Whitney-Lanman,  AV.,  p.  CXLII  and  for  many  details  Bloomfield, 
A.  V.  G.  B.,  p.  38. 


274 


J.  Gonda  * Yedic  Literature 


MuMm  of  lK>ok  Vn  consist  of  no  more  than  one  stanza.  These  very  short 
$uMm — ^wMch  like  those  of  two  stanzas  are  not  absent  jBrom  other  books  also — 
are  characteristic  of  the  Atharvaveda;  they  were  in  ritual  practice  combined 
TOtli  other  mantras  or  prescribed  in  ceremonies  which  did  not  require  many 
formulas.  Book  VII  creates  the  impression  of  being  an  addendum,  not  because 
of  this  accumulation  of  one-stanza  suktas^^,  but  because  the  total  number  of  its 
stanzas — ^wMch  is  increasing  from  153  in  I to  454  in  VI — ^is  less  than  the  latter, 
viz,  286^®.  Whereas  the  longest  suUa  of  the  first  division  has  18  stanzas,  the 
shortest  of  the  second  division  has  21  stanzas,  the  longest  73.  This  division 
indeed  comprises  longer  ‘hymns’  of  miscellaneous  subjects,  among  which  not 
only  texts  for  magical  and  otherwise  ritual  use,  but  also  so-called  mystic, 
‘pidlosopMcal,’  cosmogonical  texts  and  some  eulogies.  The  number  of  the 
siiUas  is  constant  (10),  with  the  exception  of  book  XII  (5).  The  third  great 
division  consists  of  long  suktas  characterized  by  a general  unity  of  subject: 
Xm  h3rmns  to  the  Ruddy  One  (Sun);  XIV  wedding  stanzas;  XV  deals  with 
the  vrdtya;  XVIII  with  funeral  stanzas.  Here  also  the  last  book  forms  an 
exception;  in  XTEI-XVII  the  number  of  the  hymns,  like  that  of  the  stanzas,  is 
decreasing. 

The  arrangement  of  the  Paippalada  recension  is  considerably  different  and 
less  rigorous.  As  far  as  the  above  principles  are  recognized  their  application 
fluctuates^®.  Those  very  short  Saunakiya  suktas  which  recur  in  the  Paippalada 
text  combine  with  other  material  to  form  longer  suktas,  and  the  long  hymns  of 
the  Saunakiya — ^part  of  which  are  in  fact  conglomerates,  although  those  of 
XTEI-XVili  are  characterized  by  a general  unity  of  subject — ^are  decomposed 
into — mostly  consecutive — ^shorter  suktas.  No  sukta  is  longer  than  28  stanzas. 

The  points  of  difference  between  both  recensions  shed  some  light  on  their 
mutual  relations  and  the  genesis  of  the  sanihitd.  Whereas  the  material  con- 
tained in  Paippalada  I-IV  recurs  in  Saimakiya  I-IV  and  Paippalada  XVI- 
XVm  correspond  to  Saunakiya  Vlil-XVH,  the  material  of  the  other  books 
is,  in  the  latter,  widely  dispersed.  With  the  exception  of  some  isolated  stanzas 
no  parts  of  Saunakiya  XV  (dealing  with  the  vrdtya),  XVlll  (the  funeral  hymns) 
and  XX  are  found  in  the  Paippalada  text;  Saimakiya  XIX  (supplementary 
hymns)®^  is  very  incompletely  represented.  The  last  two  books  (Paippalada 
XIX  and  XX)  are  again  mostly  ‘magicar  in  character,  corresponding  to  the 
first  division  of  the  Saunakiya,  especially  to  its  books  VI  and  VII.  These  facts 
seem  to  allow  of  the  following  conclusions-^.  The  rough  and  rudimentary 
arrangement  of  the  Paippalada  points  to  its  autonomy  and  higher  antiquity. 


AS'  was  Lakma^^’s  opinion:  WmrNEY-L-imviAi^',  AV.,  p,  CLI;  cf.  Oldeotbeg, 

in  ZDMG-  60,  p.  690. 

« Not  infrequently,  two  suktas  of  similar  content  follow  each  other  (3,  If.;  3f.; 
4,  6f.;  34f.;  7,  36f.);  see  also  10,  7f.;  19,  53f.;  Rekotj,  E.  V.  P.  II,  p.  5. 

For  details : Bmnov,  Ecoles,  p.  65. 

On  XIX  and  XX  see  below,  p.  275;  304. 

Renou,  O.C.,  p.  67. 


Hie  Atiiarvaveda 


275 


The  eo'ntents  of  Saiinaklya  VI  and  VII  Jnay  hare  been  borrowed  from  Faip- 
paiada.  XIX  and  XX : those  of  Sanimklya  XIX,  by  210  means  ‘late*  In  character, 
constitute  a regrouping  of  material  found — not  infreqneritly  witb  better 
reaciings — ^in  different  bcK)ks  of  the  other  rec^nsion^‘®.  Add  to  this  that  the 
Paippalada  often  has  more  acceptable  readingB;  that  it  has  more  ( reading’s, 
groups  of  manirm'i  in  common  with  the  Rgveda  than  its  iister®* — in  amplifying 
the  text  of  the  Rgveda  both  recensions  go  their  own  ways — and  that  it  is  more 
closely  related  to  the  yajiirvedic  tradition^^ ; so  the  concliisioii  is  warranted 
that  the  text  which  it  represents  is  more  original,  often  more  authentic,  than 
that  of  the  Satumkiya^®.  There  is  finally  something  to  be  said  for  the  supposition 
that  the  compilers  of  both  mmhitds  drew  also  from  a general  store  of  ‘'fioating^ 
fimfitrm.  The  assumption  that  part  of  this  materia!  is  older  than  many  comjio- 
nents  of  the  Rgveda  is  far  from  objectionable^’.  We  should  disimguMh  between 
the  time  at  which  poems  were  composed,  the  periods  in  w^hieh  their  crjinponeiit 
parts  or  the  ideas  expressed  were  moulded  into  concrete  fbnn  | certain  atlmr- 
vanie  themes  are  no  doubt  older  than  many  rgvedic  siibjects|  and  the  period 
of  ultimate  codification  (the  Atharvaveda  is  later).  Metre  and  language  hardly 
allow  of  chronological  conclusions  because  differences  may  also  be  due  to 
social  or  regional  peculiarities.  Since  the  Veda  niider  disciissioii  was,  as  a 
collection  of  some  kind,  known  to  the  authors  of  the  Taittirlya-Brahmana  and 
the  last  books  of  the  Satapatha-Brahma^^®  it  must,  at  least  in  the  main,  have 
been  compiled  at  an  earlier  date  than  these  treatises.  The  geographical  data 
contained  in  it  furnish  no  sufficient  evidence  as  to  the  region  or  regions  in 
wMch  its  suktm  were  composed*®.  It  is  only  possible  to  say  that  regions  further 
to  the  East  and  the  South  than  the  scene  of  the  Rgveda  had  come  in  sight. 

Our  only  source  of  knowledge  with  regard  to  the  Paippalada  recension  has 
for  many  years  been  a single  birch  bark  manuscript  discovered,  through  the 

“ Cf.  also  Babbet,  in  JAOS  40,  p.  151 ; 44,  p.  263;  Studies  M.  BnooMynxB,  Xew 
Haven  1920,  p.  19, 

Babbet,  at  Studies  Bloomfield,  p.  1 and  at  PAmPhA®  63,  p.  LXIV  (material 
■which  is  in  the  BV.  occurs  more  frequently  also  in  A VP.  than  in  AVS.;  and  if  in 
all  three  texts,  the  version  of  AVP.  is  likely  to  agree  more  closely  with  the  RV, ; 
AVP.  has  some  15  hymns  in  common  with  the  BV.  which  do  not  occur  in  AVS.); 
Rexou,  O.C.,  p.  69.  Cf.  e.g.  AVP.  8,  14:  RV.  1,  95  (to  the  ritual  fire);  6,  1 : B»V.  iO, 
120  (Indra);  4,  16:  RV.  1,  191  (against  venomous  animals ). 

Cf.  e.g.  AVP.  9, 1 ; TS.  4,  1, 8;  11,  6:  TS.  11,  6:  4,  2,  6.  AVP,  tends  to  agree  with 
yajurvedic  texts,  particularly  in  arrangement  of  stanzas.  Attempts  have  been  made 
to  explain  passages  in  the  Atlmrvaveda  by  means  of  yajmv^edic  themes;  see  e.g. 
BLOOMFrELD,  at  JAOS  15,  p.  163  on  AVS.  6,  80. 

S.  K.  Gupta’s  \dews  of  the  Paippalada  recension  (in  PO  16,  p.  48)  are  eironeous. 

Otherwise:  E.  V.  Abnolb,  at  JAOS  21,  p.  22.  Oldenbebg  (see  H,  R.  I,  p.  271 ; 
360  ; 404)  w^as  too  much  inclined  to  doubt  the  antiquity  of  non-!Rg\"eciic  material. 
For  a completely  untenable  view  of  the  atharvanic  chronology:  A.  P.  Kabmabkiab, 
in  ABORI  24,  p.  203;  see  also  K.  X.  Sastbi,  Proc.  26  Int.  Gongr.  Or.  Ill,  1,  p.  157; 
S.  R.  Shexde,  at  24  AIOC,  S.  P.,  p.  29.  See  also  HuxEBRAypT,  at  GGA  1S89, 1,  p.  405. 

“ See  e.g.  TB.  3,  12,  8,  2;  SB.  11,  5,  6,  7,  and  cf.  TS.  7,  5,  11,  2. 

*®  Cf.  Ejeith,  in  Cambridge  History  of  India,  I,  p,  48. 


27S 


J.  Gouda  • Vedic  Literature 


efforts  of  Botli,  in  Kashmir”.  The  fact  that  this  manuscript  was  found  in  the 
extreme  north  of  India  created  the  impression  that  in  that  region  the  Paip- 
paladiiis  had  held  out  longer  than  elsewhere,  or  even  that  it  was  their  main 
sphere  of  influence^h  This  view  was  however  successfully  combatted  by  the 
Indian  scholar  Durgamohan  Bhattacharyya  who  showed  that  the  school  of 
PfppaMda,  who  was  perhaps  the  most  important  redactor  of  the  Atharvaveda, 
must  in  ancient  times  have  enjoyed  a wide  recognition”  in  various  parts  of 
India  including  the  regions  to  the  south  of  the  Narmada®®.  In  Orissa  and  the 
adjacent  parts  of  West  Bengal  and  Bihar  the  same  scholar  discovered,  in  1957, 
commiiiiities  of  followers  of  this  school®*  members  of  which  were  able  to  recite 
the  texts  from  memory®® ; there  are  also  a few  families  in  Saurastra  and  Gujarat. 
In  the  Puri  district  and  elsewhere  he  could  lay  hands  on  palm-leaf  manuscripts 
written  in  Oriya  characters;  these  manuscripts  are  in  a better  state  of  preser- 
vation than  the  Kashmir  document.  Unfortunately,  he  died  before  he  could 
edit  more  than  four  books  of  the  text®®. 


®®  For  the  reasons  which  had  led  him  to  surmise  its  existence  alreewiy  in  1856 — 
relying  on  a remark  made  by  a traveller  he  had  induced  the  British  government  to 
search — , the  history  of  its  epoch-making  discovery,  and  a brief  comparison  with 
th©  \Tiigate:  Roth,  Der  Atharv’aveda  m Kaschmir,  Tubingen  (Univ.)  1875;  cf.  also 
Atti  4 Congr.  Int.  Orient,  (1878),  11,  p.  89.  The  manuscript  was  chromophoto- 
graphically  reproduced:  The  Kashmirian  Atharva-veda,  edited  by  M.  Bloomfield 
and  R.  Gaebe,  3 voL,  Baltimore  1901.  For  particulars  {inter  alia,  on  the  bad  con- 
dition, corruptness  and  peculiarities  of  the  manuscript) : Whitnev-Lanmak,  AV., 
p.  LXXX ; L.  C.  Babbet,  The  Kashmirian  Atharva  Veda,  Book  I,  JAOS  26,  p.  197 
(=  Digs.  J.  Hopkins  Univ.  New  Haven  1906);  JAOS  50,  p.  104;  F.  Edgbbtois’,  at 
JAOS  34,  p.  374.  The  text  has  been  edited  (in  transcription)  and  as  far  as  possible 
emended  by  Babbet,  in  JAOS  26-58  (book  VI  in  JAOS  34  by  Edgbbtok)  and 
separately  (XVI  and  XVEI  New  Haven  1936 ; XIX  and  XX,  1940) ; on  these  editions 
are  based  th©  editions  in  ndgari  script:  Atharva  Veda  of  the  Paippaladas,  book 
1-13,  Lahore  1936;  14-18,  Lahore  1940;  19-20,  Lahore  1942;  for  valuable  obser- 
vation in  connection  with  Barret’s  edition  see  Renotj,  at  JA  235,  p.  148. 

Sto  e.g,  Bloomfield,  Preface  to  the  facsimile  edition  of  the  Kashmir  manu- 
:«3ript;  P.  Thiems,  Panini  and  the  Veda,  Allahabad  1935,  p.  76. 

D.  Bhattachabyya,  at  OH  3 (1955),  p.  1.  In  references  to  the  Atharvaveda 
BhirO.  3,  15;  VaikhSm,  6,  17  mention  the  beginning  of  the  Paippalada  text  (which 
has  teen  lost  in  the  Kashmir  manuscript),  etc.  Cf.  also  Thiemb,  o.c.,  p.  76. 

» For  geographical  references  see  also:  D.  B.  Disealkab,  Atharvaveda  and 
epigraphy,  JASBombay  34r-35,  p.  75;  and  Atharvaveda  brahmanas,  PO  27,  p.  1. 

Bhattachabyya,  at  OH  1,  p.  1 ; 5,  p.  81 ; 8,  p.  73 ; ALB  25,  p.  203 ; The  funda- 
mental theniCT,  p.  18.  For  an  evaluation  of  the  new  manuscripts  see  also  -Rekou, 
in  JA  252,  p.  422;  for  noto  on  book  I Renou,  in  JA  252,  p.  421;  253,  p.  15. 

*®  It  may  be  added  that  Shankar  Pandurang  (see  above,  n.  15)  consulted  also 
the  oral  tradition,  reprmented  by  three  iwiters,  two  of  whom  did  not  want  to 
pronounce  the  inauspicious  funeral  hjrmns  of  AV§.  XVIII,  one  being  shocked  by 
the  vffliaiits  in  th©  manuscripts. 

**  D.  Bhattachabyya,  Paippalada  Samhita  of  the  Atharvaveda,  I (Book  I), 
Calcutta  1964;  II  (II-IV),  1970  (with  introductions).  For  criticism:  K.  Hoffmajni^, 
•at  HJ  11,  p.  1.  See  also  S.  Jha,  Studies  on  the  Paippaladi  Atharvaveda,  books  I 
and  n,  JBRS  38,  p.  233;  39,  p.  331;  40,  p.  395. 


The  Atharvaveda 


277 


S,  The  suiMs 

It  would  be  incorrect  to  describe^  the  AtharvaTeda-SamhIta  as  a collection 
of  magical  formuias.  Just  as  there  is  no  clear  distmetioii  between  the  ‘white* 
and  ‘Hack"  elements,  between  material  deriTing  from  ‘Atharvans’  and  that 
orighmting  among  ‘Angiras"  that  what  is  fireqnentiy  called  ‘soreerj^*  Is  often 
hoimd  up  with  domestic  ritual.  The  difference  between  this  Veda  on  the  one 
hand  and  the  Rg-  and  Yajtorreda  on  the  other  as  regards  ‘magic"  lies  in  the 
degree  of  its  prominence  and  applicability^.  Moreover,  many  passagc-s  are 
ritualistic  without  being  ‘magic’®,  and  part  of  them  are  interlarded  with 
‘pHloropMcaF  speculations  that  in  their  turn  are  also  included  without  any 
apparent  ritualistic  purpose. 

According  to  the  Ahgirasakalpa  of  the  Atharvaveda^  there  are  in  the  athar- 
vanic  tradition  ten  classes  of  rites,  viz.  those  that,  like  the  German  SegeM,  are 
to  appease  or  avert  evil  (MMika)^  that  are  to  promote  welfare  (pamMka)^  to 
bring  others  into  subjection  by  means  of  charms  ftmu),  to  hinder  or  paralyse 
(Mam^kana),  to  bewilder  (mohana),  to  bring  about  hatred  (dvesaPM)^  to 
eradicate  (w^tana)^  to  kill  (mdrana),  to  seduce  fdkarsa^)^  and  to  scare 
away  (vidrdvana).  In  surve37ing  the  pertment  literature  one  may  however 
follow  the  simpler  division  suggested  in  the  commentary  attributed  to  Sayana^ : 
the  ‘magical’  elements®  of  this  Veda  are  to  accompany  (consecrate)  rites  relating 
to  this  world  (aihika) — ^and  these  are  either  mniika  and  pamtika^^  or  im- 
precatory (dbhicdrika) — and  rites  relating  to  the  other  world  (dmmmika).  In 
modem  times,  other  classifications  were  attempted®  but  it  was  admitted  also 
that  the  classes  distinguished  cannot  be  rigidly  delimited  and  that  many 
suMas  are  hard  to  classify  because  of  the  variety  of  themes  and  objects  pres- 
ented in  them.  From  the  point  of  view  of  the  history  of  civilization  the  study  of 
this  corpus  is  indeed  perhaps  more  rewarding  than  that  of  the  Rgveda®,  The 

^ With  F.  Edgbbton,  in  Studio  M.  BnoOMriEUi),  New  Haven  1920,  p.  117: 
“a  book  of  witchcraft”;  see  also  Fabquhab,  Outline,  p.  23. 

® S.  S.  Bhawe’s  view  (20  AIOC  I,  p.  40)  according  to  ’which  the  ‘Vedic  people’ 
(Aryans)  adopted  the  magic  element  from  the  ‘primitive  inhabitants’  of  India  is 
incapable  of  proof  and  highly  improbable. 

s For  relations  between  the  Athaiwweda  and  gThyamirm  see  Buoomfieild, 
A.  V.  G.  B.,  p.  69  etc. 

^ See  below,  p.  309. 

® In  ViSBWA  Bandhu’s  edition,  I,  p.  7. 

® For  an  analysis  of  the  magic  i^ukUssi  A.  V.  Gerasimov,  The  Atharvaveda  as  an 
original  source  of  the  history  of  ancient  Indian  culture  (in  Russian),  Moscow  1965; 
for  the  procedure  and  effect  of  ‘magic’ : B.  R.  Modak,  at  J.  Kamatak  Univ.  (Hum.) 
13  (1969),  p.  8;  cf.  also  Maya  IIaia-Viya,  at  JGJKSV  27,  p.  319. 

^ M.  MaIiAVIYa,  Athanmv^e  Mniipmtikarmani,  Varanasi  1967  (including  a 
comparison  with  similar  rites  in  the  other  Vedas). 

* See  e.g,  BmoMiTEim,  in  H.  AY.  and  A.  V.  G.  B.,  p.  57 ; N.  K.  V.  PAXTUiii:,  at 
QJMS  29,  p.  387. 

® D.  Bhattacbaeyya,  The  social  significance  of  the  atharv^anic  hjmms,  Fel. 
VoL  K.  M.  Mtoshi,  Bombay  1963,  p.  33  (exonerative);  H.  B.  Phuxips  studied 


27S 


J.  Gouda  • Vedic  Literature 


purpose  and  interpretation  of  many  texts  is  considerably  facilitated  by  tbe 
fact  that  foraiiilas  and  ritual  actions  are  more  closely  allied  in  this  than  in  any 
other  Veda  and  that  the  Kaniika-Shtra  jfreqnently  furnishes  ns  with  most 
valuable  indications  of  the  litnal  situations  within  which  many  &unak!ya 
textis  were  conceived^®.  It  must  he  conceded,  of  course,  that  these  texts  also 
were  open  to  secondary  adaptation  and  that  the  compiler  of  the  sutTQ  may  have 
borrowed  from  the  samhita  to  supply  some  rite  or  other  with  appropriate 
foraiiilas'h 

There  are,  to  begin  with^®,  many  charms  to  cure  diseases  and  exorcise 
demons  (the  so-called  'medicaF  charms:  bhesaja,  hMisajydniy^,  both  sorts  of 
evil  being  not  clearly  dislinguished.  Among  these  there  are  charms  against 
fever  and  related  diseases^^  ‘Vhich  make  all  men  yellow,  heating  (them)  up 
like  fee  consuiiiing/*  jaun'dice,  headache,  cough,  excessive  discharges  from  the 
bcxiy,  constipation  and  retention  of  urine,  dropsy,  leprosy,  scrofulous  sores, 
wounds,  worms F poison,  disease  of  the  eyes,  baldheadedness,  sexual  incapac- 
ity, poisoning  and  insanity^® ; invocations  of  medicinal  plants  and  other  objects 
expended  to  destroy  the  cause  of  a disease^®:  ‘‘On  the  head  of  the  nimble 
antelope  a remedy  grows^*^ ; he  has  driven  the  leprosy  (ksetriya ) in  all  directions 
by  means  of  the  horn” ; prayers  to  or  exorcizations  of  those  powers  which  are 
conceived  as  their  causes : “The  arrow  that  Rudra  hurled  at  you,  at  your  limbs 
and  heart,  that  here  do  we  now  draw  out  away  from  you”^®;  prayers  also  to 

book  I-V  from  a didactic  point  of  view  in  Prabuddha  Bharata  67  (1962),  p.  513; 
see  also  Rknou,  Po^ie  religieuse,  p*  16. 

Cf.  Bloomfield,  at  PAOS  1886  (JAOS  13,  p.  CXni).  As  appears  from  the 
kiteiimi  evidence  of  the  mktas  themselv^,  the  use  made  by  Kausika — ^who  must 
have  been  a prominent  author — ^is  in  many  cases  demonstrably  right  (otherwise  or 
incomprehensiMe  e.g.  Kaus.  14,  i ; 17) — ^that  is  to  say,  mantras  and  rites  are  largely 
in  concordance — , but  he  does  not  employ  all  suhias  of  magical  contents.  Was  his 
scope  not  so  broad  or  did  he  base  his  prescriptions  on  a selection  ? 

C£  Bloomfield,  A.  V,  G.  B.,  l.c.  For  the  rites:  V.  Heney,  La  magie  dans 
rind©  antique,  Paris  1904. 

For  a more  complete  surt^ey  of  the  pertinent  texts:  Bloomfield,  A.  Y.  G.  B., 
p.  SB  (with  m,any  bibliographical  noto  up  to  1899). 

We  shall  not  try  here  a sub -classification  because  the  names  of  the  diseases  are 
often  obscur©  and  the  disease  themselves  not  infrequently  grouped  in  a way  diver- 
gent from  modem  classifications.  See  J.  Filliozat,  La  doctrine  classique  d©  ia 
m^edecine  indienne,  Paris  1949;  Magie  et  medecine,  Paris  1943;  Pronostics  medicaux, 
JA  240  (1952),  p.  299;  V.  W.  KAeambeieab,  The  Atharva-Veda  and  the  Ayur-Veda, 
Nagpur  i9il. 

AVg.  9,  8;  5,  22,  2;  also  6,  20,  3;  1,  12;  22;  6,  44;  105;  1,  3;  10;  7,  83;  1,  23; 
24;  6.  25;  83;  7,  76;  5,  5;  6,  109;  2,  31;  32;  5,  23;  4,  7;  5,  13;  6,  6;  100;  7,  56;  6, 
16;  136;  137;  4,  4;  6,  111;  AVP.  1,  44—46;  58;  94,  and  many  more. 

**  AVg.  4,  6 (AVP.  5,  8);  cf.  P.  Edgebtok,  at  AJPh  35,  p.  438;  AVP.  1,  71; 

6,  7;  1,  85. 

AVg.  1,  2;  2,  8;  5,  4;  6,  96;  19,  39. 

” Viz.  the  hom  which  is  used  as  a remedy  (Kaus.  27,  29):  AVg.  3,  7,  1;  for 
hgstriyai  PniiozAT,  Doctrine,  p.  93. 

AVg.  6,  90,  1;  cf.  also  1,  12;  22;  2,  10;  4,  36;  37;  6,  14;  32;  105. 


Tbe  Athar\''a\'eda 


27§ 


thO'Se  divkiities  that  are  able  to  proTide  remedies:  ‘‘Afay  tbe  divine  waters 
grant  me  that  cure  for  heart-ache”^®:  charms  by  means  of  various  amulets 
(which  are  largely  derived  from  the  vegetable  kmgdoin):  ^‘Destruction  of 
magical  contrivances  is  this  amulet,  also  destruction  of  hostile  beings;  let  this 
powerful  jai^ida  also  prolong  our  life-tmies”^^. 

As  a source  of  information  on  ‘primitive’  medicine  these  texts  are  almost 
unparalleled  in  any  other  literature.  They  give  a variegated  picture  of  archaic 
medicine,  cures  being  wrought  by  ‘sj^mbolic  practices,’  plants  or  amulets 
fort-ided  by  consecratory  formulas.  The  striking  resemblance  between  some  of 
them  with  ancient  German  medicinal  charms^^ — especially  in  connection  with 
cures  for  jaundice  and  fractures — which  have  often  led  to  the  assumption  of 
original  Indo-European  protot3rpes^“  are  in  any  case  indicative  of  typological 
relationship  pointing,  in  all  probability,  to  a parallel  development  of  literary 
expression  in  the  limited  domain  of  charms  and  incantations®®.  Most  quoted  is 
AVS.  4,  12®*,  a charm  to  cure  external  lesions  and  the  fractures  of  bones:  with 
that  end  in  view'  the  patient  is  sprinkled  with  w'ater  that  has  been  consecrated 
with  this  text;  besides,  he  drinks,  and  is  anointed  with,  a special  mixture  of 
milk  and  ghee  that  is  made  efficacious  in  the  same  w^ay®^. 

(1)  “Grower  art  thou,  grower;  grower  of  broken  bone; 

Cause  this  to  grow  (heal),  O Arundhati®*. 

(2)  The  bone,  the  piece  of  flesh  of  yours®’  that  was  tom  and  injured  in  you, 
Dhatar  must  auspiciously  put  that  together  again,  joint  with  joint. 

(3)  Your  marrow  shall  come  together  with  marrow,  together  your  Joint  with  Joint, 
Together  let  what  of  your  flesh  has  fallen  off,  together  let  your  bone  grow  also. 


« AV§.  6,  24,  1 ; cf.  6,  80. 

« AY&.  2,  4,  6;  also  6,  85;  10,  3;  19,  34;  35  etc.;  AYT.  1,  47;  58;  4,  18;  7,  6. 

A.  Kuhn,  at  KZ  13,  p.  49;  113;  V.  Grohmann,  in  Weber,  I.  S.  IX,  p.  386; 
414;  BLOOMFiEnD,  H.  AV.,  p.  313;  386;  454;  565.  For  a comparison  with  Russian 
oaths:  V.  X.  Topobov  in  Acta  et  comm.  univ.  Tartu  1969,  p.  9. 

**  Recently:  R.  Schmitt,  Dichtung  und  Dichtersprache  in  indogermanischer 
Zeit,  Wiesbaden  1967,  p.  9;  286  (with  bibliographical  notes). 

Cf.  also  B.  ScHXHBATH,  in  Zweiter  Fachtagung  fur  idg.  und  allg.  Sprachwissen- 
iBchaft,  Innsbmcker  Beitrage  zur  Kulturwissenschaft,  Sonderheft  15  (1962),  p.  139; 
G.  Eis,  Altdeutsche  Zauberspruche,  Berlin  1964. 

Compare  e.g.  BnooMFiEnD,  H.  AY.,  p.  19;  384;  Whitney-Lanman,  AY.,  p. 
166;  see  also  Schmitt,  o.c.,  p.  287,  n.  1666;  on  the  iinsatisfactory  condition  of  the 
text:  L.  Ausdorp,  at  ALB  25,  p.  112.  The  text  corresponds  to  AYP.  4,  15  (with  a 
different  order  of  stanzas  and  variants).  Alsdorf  may  be  right  in  considering  both 
texts  compilations  of  parallel  and  related  charms,  but  overlooks  that  repetitions 
are  often  to  enhance  the  magical  effectiveness  (cf.  Gonba,  S.R.,  p.  163  etc.).  For 
AY§.  5,  5 (AYP.  6,  4;  cf.  Kaus.  28,  14)  see  Yishva  Bandhit,  in  Yol.  S.  Yarma,  I, 
Hoshiarpur  1959,  p.  201. 

Kaus.  28,  of.;  cf.  14  and  C Aland’s  note,  Zauberritual,  p.  90. 

This  name  which  could  be  explained  as  “the  Xon-obstructing,’*  i.  e.  “promoting 
progress”  and  agreeing  in  sound  with  the  word  roham  here  translated  by  “grower” 
appears  to  denote  a vegetable  ingredient  of  the  decoction;  cf,  st.  5. 

The  patient  is  addressed. 


(4)  Lot  nmrrow  put?  iogt^lior  with  marrow,  lc4  ^km  grow  with  fikm; 

Lot  yoor  l)l()otl  grow  with  hk>o(i;  lot  tlonh  gri>w  with  IIohIi. 

(5)  Fit  togothor  tiair  with  hair;  lit  t^ogothiw  xkin  with  f4iii: 

Lot  honi',  grow  with  hotim  what  in  novonxl  piii<  ihon  t»^gof|irr,  horl'K 

(0)  Ht-ami  tip,  go  forth,  rtin  forth,  a ohariot  w<4h'whof4od,  woll-linHl*  woll'itavod. 

Stand  n|>right  firmly ! 

(7)  If  Iio  haH  Ikh'u  onmhod  hy  falling  into  a pit,  or  if  axt ono  hmiod  liaa  xinif  Ion  hmg 

Ah  IJhhn  thopartn  of  a ohariot.,  ho  (.Dhatar)  mnHtJildogfi  hor  joint  with  Joint''®*, 

Tho  miKHlial  (himnn *-an'u>ng  whioh  aro  AVf%.  2,  Ml : M2;  o,  22,  iiit.ondod  to 

ri'ndor  SvonnH*  hannlom^^ paan  invporoopt-ihly  ov<n*  intn  I ho  group  of  to,\t« 

for  obtaining  hoalth  and  a long  lifodhuo,  if  poaaitdo  tln^  idrii!  old  agc'  «if  a 
hmidrod  yoara®*^:  ‘Mhnnain  yo  Iiorn,  0 oxhalation  and  inhaliilion,  do  not.  go 
away  from  here;  do  ye  carry  anew  to  old  ago  hia  lanly  and  hia  limlw''  {M,  11, 
6)®h  Thnn  AViri.  10,  44  (AVI'h  15,  M),  oxhihiting  in  tho  main  tho  tdiaraoior  of 
snch  an  dyimjam,  makon  mention  of  variona  diaoaac'H,  I)ivr‘r«o  aulmtanooH, 
among  which  water  and  didiniti'  plant-a,  aro  atippoHini  f.o  Hinniro  immnnity  from 
diaeaHcn  and  expected  to  b(>.  lielpfni  m panaotxiH*'^^,  Cknieraliy  Hpixdung  the 

pertinent  texts  belong  to -or  oft^m  <*oitteide  with--4he  t'norininia  r|iiant;ity  of 

formulas  found  in  .iraufunnd  domt'stle  eolleetiona  that  |iray  for  oonfinniinee  of 
life  and  incidentally  also  for  the  fnltilment  of  other  winhoK  anrh  ns  ntrengtln 
offspring,  cattle,  prestige  eto.  I'htnr  ndationship  witli  the  jirose  formnlas  of  llie 
Yajnrveda  is  espeeially  ch*ar  in  easi's  sneh  m 2,  15  and  Ml  Mho  latMor 
being  nommetrieal : AVP.  6,  5;  2,  43):  ^‘0  exhalation  anrl  inhaliitiom  profe'ot 
me  from  ch'ath,  One  of  the  eharaetermtie  of  this  elans  i«  fhe^ 

prominence  of  Agni,  in  rvhosi'  spixnal  rare  life  i«  plaerd:  'iafodirf'afh  we  tlrive 
into  yon;  caelu'xy**‘‘  1 drivi^  away  from  you.  Hint  this  ilestratfh^  Agni  einlow  m 
with  life-time  from  all  sidi's''  (AVi>.  7,  53, 11)®^, 

Nnmmxnjs  texts  are  impnaaitionH  direeted  against-  deinoiia,  *riorefi‘er«'  aiul 
various  classes  of  <mimheH^^  lad-wetm  whom  t-here  is  no  dear  ili;44netion»f 


The  words  ben>  zi  bmu,  bhmt  zl  bltimin,  Hd  zi  nHnlm  of  the  Uormiin  charm  of 
Merseburg  ami  “siumv  to  simnv,  joint  to  joint,  blood  to  blood,  bontt  if*  hone''  in 
tho  Orkney  charm  (KtiUN;  om.,  p.  U)  run  mileod  strikingly  paralleL 

« Of.  Kau!^.  27,  14iL;  2IJL;  21b  20  and  WmTNi-noLA.i^ivilN,  aan,  p,  7:i;  WiKTtnn 
NiTO,  H.  ;L  L,^I,  p.  132;  V,  N.  dhroHOv,  Acta  Tartu  Unnn,  m.  ami.  4 illiaifb  p.  IK 
««  E.g.  AVkS.  :K  lU  4;  VVKimm  L vS,  XVIL  p.  Wli  and  bdow,  p.  TilT;  AVIK  1,  «bi 
6,  UK  * 


” Of.  e.g.  also  AVt^.  5,  30;  7,  33;  H,  1 ; 2. 

« AV{§.  (K  m;  m;  127;  S,  7 etc. 

” CL  also  Ermou,  in  JA  243,  p.  4IH;  AVIK  1,  HO, 

For  the  <lis(awr>  called  pakpfm  Fit.t.mii^AT,  Doctrine,  p.  H3. 

« CL  also  AYl  2,  13.  1;  23,  3;  2IK  I ; 3,  3L  1 : 0;  fa  30,  I i;  14. 

In.  it'ading  ^thr^st^  teixts  one  might  remember  tliat  ovil-'d»iers  boloiigiiig  to 
nnlanm  that  Ixrliovo  in  spells  and  magkt  can  be  brought  tti  treinble  l»v  an  nn-' 
lirecatiou. 


’*•  e *'*  i'’*-  •'); 

agamsi  snakes  AVH,  UK  4,  Ftm  the  curious  '’water^'lhunderlHdts''* 
Av.  10,  5 SCO  CUoANn,  KaulierrituaK  p,  17L 


The  Atharvaveda 


281 


Wluit  iH,  in  tlic  athanmic  tradition,  distinguished  is  offensive  (dhUcdrika) 
mu  I d(  vt  ensivi^  or  retaliatory  pi’actices.  Since  this  ‘sorceiy’  is  by  no  means 
liniit.ed  t.o  the  Atharvaveda  the  formulas  frequently  return  in  the  xitual  texts  of 
th(‘  otlun*  Xuaias.  Ihere  is  also  everything  to  be  said  for  the  supposition^®  that 
the  non«ttiettrical  texts  (of  5 lines  each)  AVS.  2,  20-23  constitute  a secondary 
development  in  accordance  with  specific  atharvanic  cosmological  ideas  out  of 
M8.  1 , 5^  2 which  is  identical  with  AVy.  2, 19®®:  while  here  Agni  is  in  a repeated 
scheme  iuvoktHl  to  lx*!  hot,  to  rage,  buim  etc.  against  the  enemy,  the  other  texts 
are  literal  ri^ietitions  of  its  words,  substituting  only  the  names  of  Wind,  Sun, 
Mooii,  and  Waters  ior  the  god  of  Fire.  Foimulas  similar  to  those  prescribed  at 
Katu^.  49,  7fA“  are  banded  together  as  snktas  in  4,  40  and  5,  10  which  are  to 
count(a'ae,t  inimical  attecka  from  the  different  quarters  of  the  universe.  A lax'ge 
variety  oi  demons  and  other  evil  beings often  obscure  as  to  their  individual 
designations,  btit  described  as  greedy  and  voracious,  are  addressed  in  more  or 
less  elaborate  conjurations  in  order  to  prevent  them  from  attacking  men  and 
cattle  or  spnxiding  diseases.^®  Among  these  is  the  curious  AVP.  1,  29^®,  for- 
mulas r(wer('ntially  to  force  the  apsarases  to  go  away.  Charms  directed  against 
human  adversaries  or  intended  to  counteract  their  practices^^  are  more  numer- 
ous l>ut  on  the  other  hand  often  quite  general,  colourless  and  stereotyped.  Some 
of  thmn*^®  ar('.  tnm)  eurses  intended  to  injure  the  enemies,  to  deprive  them  of 
tludr  Ht»r(Migth,  to  destroy  their  spells.  Others  however  are  more  characteristic 
or  <'ven  singular:  A VS.  7,  95  and  96  arc  directed  against  the  ureter  and  kidneys 
of  tht^  eiuuuy : 6,  135  conjures  one’s  own  food  to  swallow  up  the  breath  of  the 
antagotiist*.  mlktm  A'Vfi>,  5,  8 and  7,  70  arc  to  prevent  the  gods  from  hearing 
tlu^  iuuuuy  H (‘all  and  to  frustrate  his  sacaafiee.  Elsewhere  attention  is  mainly 
foeuHHiHl  otp  or  ttu^  invtxmtion  addressed  to,  some  object  which  is  supposed  to 
1)0  eHi>eeialIy  offiaisivi^  to  demons:  in  AVS.  1, 16  an  amulet  of  lead  or  red-lead*®, 
in  3,  9 an  amulet  tied  to  a reddish  thread*’,  in  3,  6 ; 4, 17-20  and  7,  65  the  plants 
whi(‘h  are  to  lu^Ip  tlu^  practician  discover  the  adversaries. 


Booomfiklo,  a.  V.  (b  B.,  p.  66. 

For  disimk:  WiirmHV-bANMAN,  AV.,  p.  62.  Cf.  AVP.  2,48  exhibiting  only 
the  Mtaums  1,  2,  4,  3 of  AViS.  2,  19. 

For  nimilar  formulas:  TB.  3,  11,  5;  IpS.  6,  18,  3.  The  rite  belonging  to  them 
(of,  also  AViS.  I,  31)  wiis,  variously  executed,  to  have  a great  future. 

N.  4.  Kiiknoe,  The  foundations  of  the  atharvanic  religion,  Poona  1949;  The 
religion  and  |:)hiloHo|)hy  of  the  Atharvavcxla,  Poona  1952. 

*»  Vf.  AVA.  2,  14;  3,  9;  6,  32. 

Hcmi  liENOiT,  in  4 A 252,  p.  430. 

**  Hee  e.g.  the  nt)n-metrieal  2,  11  (one  of  the  rifos  requiring  a vegetable  amulet: 
Booowkieoo,  at  I’AOS  1886,  4AOH  13,  p.  OXXXIX);  ef.  AVI?.  1,  99. 

” F.g.  AVS,  6,  37;  7,  13;  59. 

Cf.  liatiA  47,  23;  Bnooiaifn'flm),  IL  AV.,  p.  256. 

Uf.  Kanil.  43,  1 ; for  the  colour:  Tn.  ^lAoitAnrA®,  in  W%KM  17,  p.  140.  For  an 
amuli4*  um  also  the  long(a'  mlktm  8,  5;  1.0;  3;  6. 


tl,  (?oncla  * Vodir  Lii prut tin> 


282 

The  la-ter  .sywieinatizatieni*^  rc'gardetl  m riiatinel  from  IIk*  firm^diiig  eiai^oH 
otsukfm  a group  of  eharma  c'lewrihed  being  **promoti%'e  of  wrlfnrp**  f 
kdfd).  Siiil  more  than  in  the  domeatie  lifm'fit.nrt^  ami  in  the  me-.eallrti  “riiea  for 
apeeial  wiahea’^  (kdmffrMi)  of  itie  hnnf4$  t.exta  it  in  in  I brae  ftiat,  t]ie 

practical  eharaekn*  of  Vedic  lit.('ratnre  and  the  wiah  to  providi^  for  individnal 
dcHircB  anti  npccial  <'xigeneiea  an*  nnmiatiikal>ly  evident.  Forming  more  than 
one  tifth  of  the  (*ontenta  of  I, he  At^harvavinla  tlu^y  have  nn  mum  thenma  ex^ 
emption  and  prof-eetion  from  all  hoHh  of  diatrean,  danger^^  and  eiihimify,  eom 
eern  about  catth'^'’  and  horaea,  luuiae-  and  liehFh  ridiF^  ami  grain jounu^ving 
and  rctnrning^b  trade  and  ginnhling^'"^,  Thua  AVA.  IK  lOb  I AVI*.  lIK  2.1,  4'  li)  in 
prcHcrihed  (Kana.  52,  A)  in  a rilt‘  with  waterddanta  to  prevmif  eonllagradion  of 
one  a lunwe^^.  AVS.  *1.  12  in  to^  aeeompany  the  tmilding  of  ii  elwidling: 

(1)  'dtight  here  1 ereet.  (rny)  tlwelling  tirnu 

That  it  Hiand  in  HtHoirity,  apinnklmg  Kh<M\ 

Unto  tluas  O chvdhng,  may  wo  reaort^ 

With  our  herot'H  (mnw)  unliarmed.  nafe  and  mmnth 

(2)  Right  here.  O houae,  do  thou  atnnd  firm: 

Rieh  in  liorai'g.  kim\  ahnndanct\ 

Rich  in  vigour,  ghr'o  ami  milk. 

Erect  thyaelf  for  ample  hfippineHH''®K 

There  in  a henimnan V eharm  againai  wild  animala  ami  tliievea  |AVJ^.  4,  2; 

AVP.  2,  B): 

(1)  '‘Three  have  gtme  away  from  henn  tiger,  man  and  wolf. 

(2)  The  wolf  ahall  go  a that  ant  mad,  the  nddu^r  »me  atdl  mom  di*4anf , 

(2)  Your  eytm  and  jawa  %ve  griml  up,  and  all  yonr  t.weiny  elaw?!*  1 

A\oS.  (g  70  in  a elmra.eteriHtie  eharm  intendetl  to  atnuire  the  atfiiehment  of  a 
e.ow  to  her  ealf.  Reaiden,  I4m-re  are  variotm  of  a general  elmrarier  deaigneti 

to  wart!  offdangu'r  or  U>  promire  of  lune,  wealfli  or  jiroaperity^K  The 

piU’hirmaiUH*'  o{  t-he  ritt'H  and  tihe  uat''  id  theae  texta  wan  no  lean  f%‘iMrnt-ial  than 

**  Atharv'auiyapmhlhat.i  (for  thin  manual  ftu’  t'he  doim»:aie  |iraefiee?i  am'*  flno<um" 
yiKnOi  Ivauaika  Biitra,  JAON  14,  |n  X,IV)i  ef.  alao  Rnoowrimui',  Se-ven  hvmnw  of 
tlu^  AtharvaAl^da,  Ad  Hi  7*  p.  411;  IlmnniiHANier,  Uitmdhferainr,  p.  11111^ 

« or.  mg.  AVR,  4,  22  2lh  22;  U,  4U;  UK  14  ^ik  See  abo  AYR.  L 27  f|>rotretion 
from  the  arrowa  of  tfie  <aiemy);  R 22*  2,  R 7,  2. 

Of.  AV’S.^2,  22;  :K  M (eh  M,  Whnm.s,  at  ,IIi  Uir^H.  p.  2221;  4,  21;  fh  22;  7,  72. 
E.g.  Ayn.  U,  142;  cf.  (I,  22  (WmTNKvdMNj.tAK,  AV.,  p.  2021. 

Of.  AVH.  4,  15  (Wimmo  I.  H.  XVUR  p.  5H);  (k  22;  7,  IH  ftlie  nio  rei|mreH  inivr 
aim  the  of  worn  hIiooh  ami  an  othnung  to  tlie  MarntH;  Kami  4R  I fhh 
Cf.  AVH.  2,  24;  (1,  5U;  alao  2,  72. 

Of.  AVf§.  2,  15  (anaohnmiatieally;  R.  IS.  Panokv,  at  Proe.  Indian  Hint.  Com 
groHH  12  (1955),  p.  20);  fg  55;  7,  8;^  55;  00, 

For  BuooeHH  in  gamhhng:  AV8.  4,  2B,  I "4;  7.  50;  lOlk 

” Oh  Bnoowymnn,  at  AJPh  II.  p.  247, 

Oh  alHo  AVS.  7.  41  (KauA.  42,  2;  nee  iSnooMetm.n,  at.  d AOH  UK  tn  12). 

or.  O.g.  AVM.  1,  ISj  :U:  2,  atl:  7,  (iO:  lil.  1;  « il;  HI-.  AVI'.  H.  U;  f..  (for 

I'rt'Mt'iK*'). 


Tho  Atharvaveda 


283 


tlu^  Bkill  <>l  tho  lantu^r  and  herdsman.  Ritual  usages  possessed  the  same  degree 
of  as  tlu^  crafts  and  agriculture. 

1 he  HuhjiH't  oi  mon^  tlian  40  mlktas  is  what  in  ritual  terminology  is  called 
i.e.  nHlrcHB  of  every  form  of  ritual  defilement— such  as  pollution 
by  a tnirsc'®^,  misdomcafiour,  forgetfulness  in  religiotis  matters—,  irregulaiities 
in  the  crnirsc  of  religious  (HU’etuonies^h  correction  of  inauspicious  conditions— 
lor  instarn'c  <h<^  ixunoval  of  evil  characteristics—,  personal  mishap— birth  at 
an  unlni4\y  timt\  iiwanity  etc.®^— omitious  and  portentous  occurrences®*’, 
asfU'rHion  of  oiu'h  <dmraoi.er,  the  effects  of  the  evil 'eye  or  evil  dreams®  1 The 
bonndarydinc  h(4-we(m  wliat  we  wotild  regard  as  misfortune  and  (conscious  or 
nn{H>ns(nonH}  tratingn^ssioit®®  or  omission  is  hero  again  evanescent®®.  Inter- 
i'stingly  enough,  faults  in  tlie  iXTiormancc  of  sacrificial  rites — -a  frequent  topic 
in  ffh<^  dmtita  litm*atnre®^  -are  hardly  mentioned  in  the  atharvanic  hymns 
prop<^r®®  whicli  tou(*!i  htd.  lightly  upon  the  .4raiita  rites;  in  later  texts  of  this 
Vi'dic  tradirion  tins  topic  hc(U)mcs  very  prominent.  Kau§.  46,  Ilf.  explains 
how  to  cotnitcra<d.  the  effects  of  bad  dreaming  by  means  of  AVJ§.  7,  lOOf,  (AVP. 
20,  %35,  4i.),  tlie  stH'ond  text  dealing  also  with  its  prognostic  aspects®®. 

Whcrisis  thi^  domcsti(^  ritess  pertaining  to  women  are  in  the  main  restricted  to 
the  itior<^  normal  sac'ramcntal  ceremonies  connected  with  marriage,  pregnancy 
and  idnld-hirth,  tiu'  atharvanic  s|)ccialists  describe,  in  Kaiii§.  32,  28-*36,  39,  a 
i^lass  uf  pnu'tfis's  dcHignalssl  as  *wonuads  rib's’  (Mnkarmdni)^  the  consecratory 
f,cxts  of  wlui'h  arc  «cat4cr<s!  tlirough  the  first  sc^.ven  books  of  the  6annakiya 
recension  (in  addition  only  AVv^.  8,  0).  Most  of  these  deal  with  tho  relation 
bct.wccti  twc»  Ht'xt'H.  'Ksptanally  nnmerons  ar<^  love-charms  performed  by 
men  as  well  as  wr^ticn  for  obtaining  a partticr  or  retaining  his  affection’®; 
further  there  are  ehartus  spoktm  l)y  a bridal  oonple  or  pronotmeed  by  tlie  bride 
oviu*  the-  bridegr<aun’^ ; texts  to  be  re<‘.ite<l  in  connection  with  various  objects— 
stu'h  as  I>ra>ecli4»H  or  an  arrow to  <arstire,  (x)nceprion,  to  priwcnt  miscaniage,  to 


lAu*  the  elder  liti'rat.urc:  BrooMriKLO.  A.  Y.  G,  B.,  p.  85;  see  also  Gonoa, 
H,  LI,  p.  130. 

««  AV.<i.  7,  ffL  112. 

Thus  A\^A,  Ik  U2  is  to  (expiate  the  marriage  of  a younger  before  atx  older 
brother;  114  diHalulity  in  saentiee;  7,  65;  67;  102  (for  urinating  while  standing 
ertsT);  106;  10,  40. 

w AV;^.  L IH;  tk  26;  63;  84;  IIO;  HL  140;  7,  115. 

K.g.  t-lie  birth  of  twins  (3,  28),  ominous  birds  (6, 27  ff. ; 7, 64).  Soo  V.  R.  Pandit, 
in  13  AIGG,  p.  65, 

AVA.  6*  46  (ef.  45);  7.  100;  see  also  7,  101. 

For  reUt4,dri>jn  *siiP  or  gtiilt  stu^  (xg.  AY^.  6,  115;  llOff. 

AVA.  6.  10;  51 ; fl2  are  of  a gtnus’al  purificatory  character. 

||u,ianiH.4ND'T,  HitualUteratur,  p.  166. 

AYS.  Ik  114  ts  an  (exception;  see  ButaiMrinu),  A.  Y.  G.  B.,  p.  84. 

It,  ikscnin*,  m Album  Kimu  p*  115* 

GL  AVB.  L 34;  2,  30;  3,  25;  ih  8;  0;  80;  102;  130 132;  139;  7,  38;  AYP.  I,  43; 

55;  64,  See  aim)  eh,  II L fa  151  and  WiNTisaNriy,,  IL  L L.  L p*  130. 

AVA.  7,  36:  37. 


2S4 


,1.  tionilii  ‘ Vi'dir  5,it>'mtur<' 


obtain  a son”,  but  also  olmrinH  to  allay  joalotiiHy”,  lf>  iiniko  ii  Wtmmn  storilo, 
to  defrat  a rival  <'toJk  Matiy  Htaiv/.a8  shoubb  horr  iilwn  roai!  logi'tlif^r  with 
th<3  |)ertin«'nt  paasago  in  thv  rittial  handbook.  11niH  tho  aitiiilr  AX  A.  :i,  23,  2 
**Into  yonr  womb  shall  cnfor  a n*ah*  tnnbryo.  »a  iin  intim'  iiilr>  ii  ifuivia’'’ 
cxplainBtbtuim3c>ftlmtobjrft,iiliiMdnHl  lotbr  %vonian's  iil  Kaink  35*  3; 

tlio  words  AVi^.  2,  3tl  3 (AVIk  2,  2K  3)  “As«annl  pi  girl  n Iho  bill 

nnexhatmtililo  ship  of  Bhaga  fitio  god  of  gills  and  iiapinnrSpB  wifh  thiif  liTiiig 
hithor  tho  sniior  who  ia  reaponsivi'  to  yonr  h>vi3*  am  to  bo  proianiiirool  whon  ilio 
girl  asoonda  a propt^rly  proparod  boat.  IHhor  pasaagos  givo  ns  fin  idoa  of  the 
tronliles  and,  Htraitened  eireninatiinoea  wbioh  fm'ootj  thrnp  mmi  aiul 

women  to  have  reemirae  t.o  tbeae  rites,  e,g.  AVS.  II,  IMI,  2:  7,  43*  2 : 

'*'rhia  girl*  0 Aryamau  (the  god  of  tloinentje  and  oonjngal  hajipitifrf»-*ve  liiei  tuairied 
of  going  to  WiddingaisHemhlies  of  olht'r  womon.  Now  sbalh  wifhoni  liyl,  another 
woman  (otBer  women)  go  to  her  weddnigdewg 

“As  if  lire  is  burning  him,  as  if  a forest  4tre  bnrm«  m variotis  diiwfauis,  ik^  iliun” 
quench  this  jealousy  of  his,  iw  tire  (m  (|ueneheil|  with  miitor/* 

Many  Btanms  nweal  undisguimal  passion  rw  balri'd:  “Wtifi  thf**  ineanfatlon 
of  , . . Ka,4yapa  do  I shut  up  your  vnlvid'  !.  14*  4;  AVi\  1,  13,  4)”: 

^‘Indra  shall  with  a pair  of  pressing  stones  break  both  Ids  teslirli^'id*  f AV*^,  11, 
138,  2;  AVP.  I,  68,  3).  I'he  HiUim  pertaining  to  eldldd'urfb  iinil  eldlddife,  on 
the  other  hand,  reth^et  fiarent'id  rare  ami  gritd':  in  f^iise  a fddid  rs  born  under  an 
unlucky  star  one  should  reeite  AVJ%.  6.  I Id  ( AVib  lib  2d*  i fd ; 

“8ave  him,  0 Agni,  from  isnug  torn  up  by  Yama.  Bei  litiii  not  »lny,  when  he 
grows  up,  his  fatlu'r  nor  injure  his  nsuher**'***. 

Part  of  thest'  te,xts  are  in  elose  toueh  with  tfie  eonesjtoiiding  ‘aiu'ranients^ 
(m>imkdra)  of  tht^ 

It  is  difficult  to  drarv  a hard  amt  fast  line  between  these  fsr\ts  amt  the 
charms  intendtsl  to  mumre  harmony,  influetiee  among  felhnvomm  idsv  The  same 
e.g.  the  corieiliatory  charm  A\'^,  I,  34  is  employed  ti^  win  lovt:^  as 


II;  AVP 


Ii 


” AV8*  3,  23;  Ck  HI;  11,  17;  3,  23:  H,  U etc*;  see  also  I. 

AV8.  tk  18;  7,  43* 

llik 

AV*.  |u  412;  CViiwNin 
yaubcrritnal,  p*  I2b);  for  tlie  popular  iHdiefmH^  V,  IIiSNWv,  at  *IA  IK,  II  (IHIIt),  p, 
328. 


” AV8,  7.  35;  I,  14;  3,  IH  (lyV.  10,  145);  7,  U3;  AVIk  I. 
” (X  also  AV8*  7,  38  (KauA  3tk  12;  WinTNKvd4ANM^K, 


” Thou:  the  waiter  to  1k'  drunk  by  the  pemmi  who  has  tri  nufli'rgfi  the  cure:  tlu^ 
stanza  should  Im  wliispertHh  the  'eermnony'  hemg  a uuaaoefwuiil  tiiliiir  (Kaul. 
3tk  27)* 

^ ” As  to  the  interpretation  fif  AV8.  B 14;  IB  laiMMKi,,  m /*w,,  f,  deniriclies  Alf*ertum 
73  (103(1),  p,  243  (no  cqathalamium,  but  an  impremt ion ; i lerman  isiridlelfp;  HiimMiu?, 
Eel.  Ph,.  AV.,  |u  (17;  hi  Ilmtonn.  at  ArcbOr  24,  p.  Ill  (partly  mipml»able);  H.  K. 
(UrwrA,  at  JCkllil  17,  |u  711  (untenablid. 

” Hm  Kaul  4(1,  25.  (X  also  AV8,  (k  140  (AVP.  10,  40,  0 41);  Kamk  4tk  4:ilB 
” IVir  tht^sc^  s(»e  Ii.  Ik  'Panomy;  llimin  HifeipakiYrmu  Banariw  10411  kd:  p.  322). 


The  Athax’vaveda 


285 


well  an  reBpect  and  proBtige*^®.  Yet,  if  we  speak  of  conciliatory  ‘hymns’  two 
Biib-elasBeH  may  be  distinguished:  those  texts  that  aim  at  success,  prominence 
or  Bupta’iority^^  and  those  used  to  assuage  wrath,  discoi'd  and  violence®^.  A 
sueeoHBful  instance  of  the  latter  group  is  AVg.  3,  30  (AVP.  5,  19) : 

(1)  “Unity  of  heart,  tmity  of  mind,  freedom  of  hatted  do  I make  for  you; 

I'ake  <ielight  in  one  another,  as  the  cow  in  her  (uew-)born  calf. 

(2)  PevotKal  t(»  (his)  fatluNr  shall  be  the  son,  like-minded  with  (his)  mother; 

wi{(^  shall  H|)<'ak  friendly  words,  full  of  honey  to  (her)  husband, 

(4)  Idici  cliarm“po\WM'  by  which  the  gods  do  not  disagree  or  hate  each  other 
14iat»  W(^  t'stablisli  iix  your  house  as  a means  of  concord  for  (your)  men. 

(6)  The  sann^  shall  be  your  drink,  in  common  your  share  of  food, 
d'he  sana>  (shall  bo)  the  harness  in  which  I join  you  together. 

Worship  Agni  united,  like  spokes  about  the  nave”. 

Though  largely  8up|)Iying  the  needs  of  the  common  people  the  atharvanic 
experts  did  by  no  means  neglect  the  interests  of  the  higher  classes.  In  view  of 
the  fact  that  it  incorporated  much  material  that  did  not  arouse  the  special 
interest  of  the  compilers  of  the  other  Vedas  on  one  hand  and  of  the  claim  of  its 
followers  to  the  office  of  a king’s  domestic  priest  and  spiritual  adviser  on  the 
other  it  is  not  surprising  to  find  in  this  corpus  a larger  number  of  texts  per- 
taining to  royalty®®  tlian  in  the  other  satnhitds,  where  similar  subjects  arc,  it  is 
trtie,  alluded  to  here  and  there.  As  also  appears  from  the  long  series  of  “royal 
rites”  in  Kati^ika  (eh.  14-17)®*  these  texts  and  the  ritual  acts  which  they  are  to 
eonsox^rate  ar(^  first  and  Ibremost  intended  to  achieve,  by  means  of  various 
ht\agiear  praeti<H^s,  a king’s  victory  in  battle.  In  their  vigour  and  their  eager 
exj)loitation  of  details  elsewhere  uixknowit  tlieso  war  charms  are  one  of  the 
most  intert'sting  laHniliatities  of  the  Atharvaveda.  Interestingly  enough,  many 
of  them  appear  in  tlie  iS^aunaklya  recension  (and  partly  also  in  the  Paippakida, 
e.g.  1,  74 f.)  In  pairs  or  in  groups  of  three:  AVS.  1,  19  is  a charm  to  prevent  a 
warrior  from  being  hurt  by  arrows— “Ixjt  not  the  piercers  find  us,  nor  let  the 
peiud-raters  find  us;  far  from  us,  0 Indra,  to  either  side,  make  the  arrow- 
showers  fall”  (st.  1)— and  1,  20  and  21  arc  battle  charms  of  a more  general 
character®®.  Apart  from  texts  that  aim  at  victory  or  could  beside  other  appli- 
cations be  used  for  that  purpose®®  there  are  charms  of  a more  special  destractive, 
deterrent  effe<di,  for  instance  AVS.  3, 1 and  2 which  arc  to  discomfit  the  enemy’s 


Cf.  Kaui  7(),  8f.;  79,  10;  38,  17. 

« AVJS.  2,  27;  0,  15;  44;  7,  12. 

” AViS.  6,  42;  43;  AVP.  19,  8,  10-12;  33,  7-9;  cf.  Kau6.  36,  28ff,;  32;  AVg.  6, 
64;  73;  74;  7,  52;  AVP,  9,  4. 

However,  WiCBnit,  in  SB  Acad.  Berlin  1891,  p.  786  and  BLOOMriBLi>,  H.  AV., 
p.  XXV  went  too  fiu*  in  suggi^sting  that  it  was  the  Veda  of  the  princes. 

at  also  AVPar.  3;  17;'"  18 a;  b. 

” Cf*  also  AV^.  3,  1 an<l  2;  4,  31  and  32  (I?fV.  10,  84  and  83)  for  success  in  battl<> 
and  for  dtvifu'mining  which  of  the  two  opposing  armic^s  will  conquer  (Kauf^.  14, 
26f.;  30f.);  6,  65-47;  97-99;  103  and  104;  11,  9 and  10. 

According  to  Kau^^.  14,  7:  AVg.  1,  2;  19;  20,  21;  6,  65;  66;  67;  97;  98;  99;  of. 
AVP.  1,  66;  68;  79. 


286 


J.  (!<inda  • V<><lw  Litf'mfuri' 


army  (Kaul  14,  2,  16  iuloiuli'd  (n  puf  rom-rtgi’  info  <h(*  w>I«ii<'rH  of  (>»('’« 

own  kiiiK"’,  «*'•  1 ^ 

“Sharpout'd  tip  w thin  tiharm -power  of  Hharpt'iird  tip  limonoii.  Hlrength; 

Bliarpt'tw'd  tip.  vii'torimm  he  the  ttiid.’e«.viii«  atitltonfy  (of  thoee)  of  whom  1 am 

th(>  doiiU'Htif-  prif'Hf.f' 

1,  9 mul  Ih  9 wl'iifh  an^  to  a kin^:  t<>  rnh  aiu!  lummm  Itl,  27 f.). 

lie  miktm  fk  20  m\d  21  air  mkirrHmnl  U>  Imlilr^^rlninu  thr  tvmw  of  iho 
oiunuy  (Katm,  Itk  I f.):  2<K  5: 

“Wluai  tlio  wifo  of  tho  ouotny  hoarw  tho  votoo  of  iho  drum  whwh  Ppoakii  to  a 
dirttaiuns  hi  nhiv  mipplkmt.*  ntaiirng  up  iil  tho  i-Hnind,  mudrh  lior  mn  to  hw  mtm 
tmd  mu,  frighiout'd  svi  t;ho  rliwh  of 

There  are  a.l«o  proguoHtie  toxia:  5,  h helpful  in  knowing  tthiilier  (uie  in 

going  to  eotue  otii  aliv<'  (Kati,4,  15,  !2il.)*  In  A\»S.  0.  I2H  {A\  P.  Ilk  24»  10 18) 

the  BMoke  of  eowolung,  invoked  a king  enirtmtetl  with  the  iitti^jueifnw  day, 
is  requested  to  give  propit-uniH  wtMj,fher  and  an  auspieiotni  tnorning*  nmm, 
evening  and  night^'f  A lunnlxu'  of  AoH’hi.A'  nr('  designed  to  emstire  fo  a prinee 
superiority  over  ot!u‘r  nohleineiP^  (U'  U)  Hwmv  in  him  sip'eess”  nv  spf'eille 
qualities  sueh  as  pre«tigt%  s|>huu,loui%  glory  or  even  the  vigmir  id  an  el(q>hant^®. 
A few  liynntH  eonet'rned  with  royal  rites  are  ron^’fdved  in  ii  higher  spirit^,  AViS,  Jh 
4 is  a praytw  fm  the  Ixaudit  of  a kifig  who  has  been  railed  or  rhosen  ami  iw  to  lie 
inaugurated:  "“The  kingflom  has  eome  to  ytm:  arist\  nalowed  willi  ltisfre!“  (si. 
1)®^  AVk'^.  4,  8 has  Ihm-u  elieiitnl  hy  the  ■<s>nseeration  id' a king  ^“10!,  8th  7 pre- 
serihes  its  um^  at  tlu'  riljmiliia  nnnium  %vhen  the  otheiind'  (the  htihnmn)  eanses 
the  royal  saerilieer  to  sit  rl<iwn  <in  a tigeroikin  amt  anoints  him,  (id , 4;  h)i 

**(’^h>urself)  a Ugei%  stride  tipon  {this|  tiger ■•skm  (viefonoutrl  unto  fls’ great  regions 
of  tlu'i  universe  . . . With  t-he  lustrous  miergy  of  all  ihest^  lu-iu-enly  waters  I 
sprinkle  youd* 

While  its  stanm  8 is  idtmtleal  with  ItV.  8.  8H.  4 wdiere  tt  riders  to'.  Imira,  most 
of  its  stanzas  are  also  found  iti  ehapters  id’ynjurvedie  works  df*aling  tvitli  that 
irauta  ritt^^h 

The  many  prayiU’H  ami  imiireeations  in  the  interest  ni‘  the  Iniihmins*  ftdly 
eonseiouH  of  tludr  rvorthiness  and  tlignily,  ami  their  manifold  tdaims  ^of 

Of,  also  4,  81  ami  82:  Kau^.  14.  2iir. 

” Rotu,  at  Festgruli  Behtliugki  p.  99. 

« OL  Wmmn,  h's.  XVHR  p,  IHf., 

(X  Kau^.  09,  18iT.  (whta’e  it  prediets  tht*  woatlaadj  19ik  8:  |lt:.ooMFtKr,n.  at 
AJFh  7,  p.  484;  FA08  1888  (JAtkS  18.  p.  (kXXXIII);  ItnNoe.  U.  F.,  i*,  IhL 
4,  22;  8,  04;  Hll;  87;  88:  ef.  7,  H-F 

For  the  intterpreiation  of  AVfl,  7.  Fi  H.  K,  l>Asrnm;4in  at^  4\ui«m  Vel. 
8,  K.  Bhuyan,  Uaidiati  1989,  p.  77. 

<»»  AVSl  1,9;  8.  22;  9,  88;  89;  19,  87. 

8tHi  B.  N.  Danoukah,  at  Fomun  Vol,  Ii.  K.  BAaew,  tdiuhafi  littUh  p.  82; 
B.  HeiinieiiATin  Das  Ronigtum  »m  Hig^  und  Atharvavetia,  Wiriiliodro  llltiil*  p.  48 
etc. 

TIh  2,  7,  8;  10;  Itl;  KH,  87,  9;  ef.  4,  C\  UrmsTKHMAN,  The  aneteiil  Imhan  royal 
conseerat.ion,  Tlusas  lltrt'Hiht  1957,  p,  B18. 


'llie  Atharvavoda 


287 


invio!4il>iIii*v » nt  dakmjjm^  ol  exceptional  iidvaritages— belong  to  the  most  inter- 
cHting  pfirtn  of  ibe  (y)rf>nH*  AVS.  5, 17*®  is  an  imprecation  against  the.  violator  of 
the  wii«^  ot^a  brahmin:  ii  sm^h  a heinous  crime  should  happen,  prosperity  would 
vanish,  ehildn'U  and  animals  wotild  no  longer  be  born,  portentous  occurrences 
would  terrify  the  p<M>ph\  for  t.he  wife  of  a brahmin  is  able  to  burn  the  kingdom^ 
Th<*  tavo  following  deal,  like  AV8.  12,  5,  with  the  bi'ahmin^s  cow: 

he  who  ridm  or  injtin'S  tbat  aiiimal  is  threatened  with  terrible  punishments: 
he  biHs>mes  om^  wIm>  Ims  swallowed  poison  (5,  18,  13),  and  the  cow  will  swamp 
that,  kingtlom  as  wiik^r  a leaking  ship  in  which  an  offender  of  a brahmin  lays 
violent,  hands  upon  this  animal  (5,  19,  8)«®.  The  supernormal  abilities  ascribed 
f.o  this  eow  and  otlun'  animals  within  the  range  of  brahminical  interests— are 
oiu^^of  tbe  <'hara('t<aasticH  of  these  mMas:  just  as  the  draught-ox  extolled  in 
AVS,  4,  1 1 { A\  P.  3,  2h)  is  a divine  being  able  to  stistain  heaven  and  earth*®  this 
cow  is  an  ilbpoist>nous  adder  (5,  18,  3)  and,  becoming  eight-footed  (5,  19,  7), 
slmkoH  ilown  tin'  kingthum  While  the  dmiastutis  are  almost  entirely  absent^®® 
libc'rality  is  conjured  and  avarice  condemned^®h 

On  the  otlu'r  hatnl,  prayers  for  wisdom,  spiritual  elevation,  communion  with 
those  'who  knenv  purifieatioid®®,  success  in  the  study  of  the  Veda^®^, 

pri'stige*®'^  and  edher  advantag<'H  do  not  fail  to  give  us  an  idea  of  what  in  these 
cindi'S  was  r<rgarded  as  an  ideal  life.  The  mlkUt  4,  30—wdnch  with  a few  insig- 

nifteant  varianiH  is  liV,  10,  125 - was  prescrilxai  (Kaul  10,  16;  139,  15)  for 

g'cuu'ralion  of  wisd<uu  and  on  fin*?  (xa^asion  of  the  end  of  Veda  stxidy.  Signifi- 
('imf  ly  enough,  tin'  ftrsf.  .Hiikia  of  the  Satmakiya  recension  (=  AVP.  1,  6)  is, 
wliatever  its  implic'ations  and  tlu>  exact  explanation  of  details^®®,  in  the  main 
an  invocation  of  X’lleaspaf-i  (th<^  Ma>rd  of  speecld)  fc)r  the  retention  of  sacred 
learning.  Mnally,  the  iliflUndt  dialogiuO®^  between  Varuna  and  his  son  (st,  11) 
Aiharvan  AVkS.  5,  1 1 ( AVlk  8,  1)  seems  to  state,  not  only  the  divinization  of 
the  laffter,  the  ttnassailahie  sage  and  poet,  bxit  also  the  close  association  of  the 
god  ami  the  prototv3)e  of  atharvanic  wisdom  which  leads  to  a confidential 
initiathm  of  the  latter:  '^Tlxax'.  is  one  other  thing  beyond  the  welkin,  there  is 
something  hart!  in  attain  * , this  I,  Varuna,  knowing  it  proclaim  to  thee*^ 

(st.  6)* 

'riuH  text  eetnirs  in  part  in  AV1'\,  viz.  9,  10;  16,  1 ; it  contains  the  seven  stanzas 
ef  fU' * 16,  it)9,  fur  which  He(^  8.  S.  Bhawk,  at  Festschrift  W.  Kirfel,  Bonn  1955,  p.  17. 

r*art  of  tlie  Hiauzan  ar<'  in  atxotlx^r  order  found  also  in  AVP.  9,  16-19.  In  the 
Pai|i|>aliida  this  group  also  is  more  numerous. 

Hro  also  AVS,  12,  4 and  5. 

” Hof^  Ixdow,  p.  291  f. 

Hxcoi'X.uig  20,  127,  1 "3.  Bc(udxnx>,  p.  170, 

C’f.  AV8.  5,  7;  6,  122:  7,  103;  104, 

Vi\  AV^;.  19,  43:  64, 

AVH.  6,  19:  fU:  62. 

7»  54;  cf.  61 : 66:  67;  and  also  7,  105;  19;  19,  68. 

AVA.  6,  5H:  69. 

iti#  C!f,  WnrfNUV,  at*  Ft'stgrtiii  v.  lioth,  p,  94;  Vihuva  BANOito,  at  VIJ  5,  p,  13. 
HtH'  htdow,  }>.  303;  cf.  liUNX^u,  at  3 A 243,  p.  421. 


288 


J.  (Joiula  * 


4.  Ritml  and  .^peeulmtive  .HiilRtn 

Turning  mm  i,o  thcwc'  mllim  which  wcrt^  nmncwhiil  infcliinl<in«ly  entircl 
wc  direct  aii-.tmtion  I’lrnt  to  h e4n}wideTahle  nninlier  of  lexln  which 
Htate  dintinetly  that  th<\v  are  aetMnnpanietl  hy  an  ohlnlton  ffciriA\  a nminallv 
'vegetariatd  nffiwing  ecawini-ing  nf  nnlk.  hnffer.  rice,  n «nike  f-te  I AVf^,  I.  I/i 
(AVP.  1,  24)  iH  proHerila'd  in  a gtanwid  rile  fnr  pr^mjaiiiy  in  aeetnupnny  the 
bringing  of  water,  by  two  iH'raoiHH,  frtnn  l^w«^  navigable  afreantn  ninl  lln^ 
taJdng  of  a diali  of  tnixe<l  grain  Hh  41?.): 

(I)  ‘‘Together,  t.<ig(4h('r  h't  ihe  rivera  How,  together  thr*  wjttd?^.  together  the  hiriin. 
Thin  Haeritlee  of  old,  h't  them  <'tijey,  I otter  wiih  an  oblation  of  eonfinenee. 

(II)  The  foimtaitw  of  the  Htreanm  that  thvw  ttigethi'r.  even  niifAliiinided, 

With  all  thoHO  eonlhaaieeH  Wi'  n^akt^  wealth  tiow  togt'fhi'r  for  in«'**®. 

Other  mktm  of  thia  ela«H»  tnakt'  niention  of  ati  ohiation  \%'hii4t  k to  iin'roane  m 
renown,  of  aah'ty  hronght  about  by  “the  tiblation  «if  Ihe  nvvvn  aeerad'  of 
concord  or  harmony,  mictTHH  agaiimt  ciu'inica  (*i  hew  «>fT  iht'  iiniiH  of  the  foea 
with  this  oblation''),  or  prosperity  I'xpeeted  in  the  siiine  way.  From  places 
such  as  0,  41,  2;  75,  1 ; 7,  77,  1 it  appears  that  defmitf'  gods  |iii  emu  the  Manils) 
could  be  invoked  to  enjt>y  iha  oldatiom  Allhouglt  the  l^tvi'dii  occasimudly 
mcntiotiB  such,  special  Aneix  iit  <4*  afhaminit'  cliariicler'*  fliese  bhations 

for  limited  purposes- which  might  bc^  insewP'd  in  rit'cs  of  wid«i'  scope  and  ole 

jcH'tive wma  to  assntm^  in  thc'  Atharvavcnla,  whc'ii^  they  tonml  iheir  propc'r 

place,  a more  tcidmicid  and  indepewdent.  fornn 

At  tins  pciint  w<„^  have  fi>r  a moment  in  reintrn  to  tli'  reliiftona  he-iwmi  tlu^ 
Atharvaveda  and  thc^  irauta  ritc's^.  Iti  its  preaent  form  the  afharvimie  ci'ir|»tis 
does  not  only,  to  a certain  mxtcmt,  give'  c'videitce  of  aii|uiiinlan'ee  witli  ^nmta 

rit(‘H-'‘-on  winch,  it  is  a better  sot.|.n*e  of  in,fc»rmation  tlnm  tln^  l.lgvcdaeSaipInt.ll' 

it  includes  also  ieexts  for  usc'  in  tlu^  great  m.ilt'mn  tUvn  in  wliitdi  il^  is  occiisimndly, 
in  a detached  manner  and  in  aet'ordanci.'  wit4i  its  mm  fiurposes  and  points  of 
view,  intercstcHp.  ,lt  can  ha.rdly  ht^  c.iouhicHl  tlmt.  in  the  lireb's  of  tlnwc^  whti 
kept  up  the  atharvanic  traditiems  at  h'ast  some  ritt%H  wi'te  pei'tonned  tlmt  may 
be  regardcHl  as,  probably  simplcw,  cenuderparts  of*  .4m.nia  rmi'tiimdc's.  For 
instanee,  AVf^.  ik  47  (AVP,  Ilk  48,  a prayer  for  pmirviunu  pnip.ci1y, 

.Bm>OM.]riEnn,  A,  V,ib  Ik,  |>,  IH.  As  appears  from  ill*'  |iretnaimg  lagt'S  manv 
other  hymns  arc^  fireHerihcHl  in  at.hawmie  rites, 

* Similarly,  AV8.  2,  12(!  (Ht.  “I  ulTpr  with  a ««f  (•tditlui’iit'i’");  Ht.  I. 

® AVS.  0,  3l»  (n|..  1):  40  (Ht.  1);  (14;  tlS  (nt..  ‘i;  .'f.  tHU:  7S:  7H;  it.^*  idw..  f».  2K  3;  0. 
80;  87;  7,  94  <4.a.:  Ht*i'  Tii.(«tMfrKi.i),  A.  V.  <S.  li.,  ji.  1I3. 

* IJV.  (i,  7r.,  8;  10.  173.  I!  (i  ..  AVi^.  7.  94.  1);  Lfim-ju.  itig  VVda,  HI.  p.  371; 
ButoMrusi.t).  A.  V.  (i.  H.,  p.  93. 

« F<.r  datailH:  Hknol,  at.  .lA  243.  p.  417.  On  »h.<  uthrr  haa.l.  ih.’ !..»«  and  .ninr- 
oHt.ing  AVH.  12,  2 (A VP.  17,  30  35)  nu  (ht.  l!i!f.)n«iaf.iHK  tind  thi*  InnswnhMldnf'M  Urn  ni 
I\auH.  09,  7 umihI  in  t.hn  n.'rniiMmy  nt'  iirnpariji,?  thn  dnmnHt.n  Urn. 

» For  a wfutatinn  of  t.hn  nmmnnuH  toHimiptinn  that  tltn  AtlmrvavndtnM  nntdtl 

cwwe(il«bmt.n4r«M<«ritnH(»fthwrt*wii:  C’ai,ani*.  at  \VZlv.M  14,  p.  tJ.’.;  18,  p,  190. 


The  Atliarvaveda 


289 


a long  liiotittie  cto.— making  mention  of  libations  in  the  morning,  at  noon  and 
in  the  evening,  contains  the  term  savana  which  nsnally  denotes  the  pressing 
out  and  libation  of  the  soma  juice.  The  small  text  is,  interestingly  enough, 
known  also  to  authorities  of  the  Yajurveda’  but  not  quoted  by  Kau^ilia. 
According  to  an  atharvanic  instruction  the  hralmian  priest  has,  as  a collabo- 
rator in  a irauita  rite,  also  to  offer  some  oblations  to  the  accompaniment  of 
stanzas  from  the  Atliarva-Samhita®  which  in  case  the  rite  should  include  an 
incantation  must  be  replaced  by  AVi§.  2,  19  (“0  Agni,  bo  hot  with  the  heat 
that  is  thine  against  him  who  hates  us,  whom  wo  hate’’)  and  6,  75  (to  eject  a 
rival:  ‘T  thrust  that  man  out  of  home,  the  rival  who  fights  us”)».  On  the 
occasion  of  the  immolation  of  a lie-goat* — an  episode  of  the  ritual  preparation 
of  the  sacred  fire-place  (agnicayana) — the  brahma7i  priest  has  to  recite  AVl§. 

2,  6 (cf.  AVP.  3,  33)  which,  while  praising  Agni,  clearly  refers  to  his  being 
kindled  and  his  ritual  functions^o.  These  instances  may  suffice^h  TMs  use  of 
atharvanic  texts  furnishes  an  explanation  of  the  fact  that  part  of  them, 
recurring  with  variations  in  ^rauta  works^^^  hardly  differ  from  2jajus  formulas. 

This  ritual  interest  of  the  Atliarvaveda  is  however  not  always  free  from 
speculation  and  from  the  tendency  to  interpret  socio-religious  customs  and 
ceremonies  as  events  of  universal  import  or  manifestations  of  fundamental 
power.  The  long  prose  sukta  AVS.  9,  6 (AVP.  16,  111-117)  dealing  with  the 
significance  of  the  reception  and  entertainment  of  guests  and  identifying  these 
witli  act*B  and  reepnsites  of  the  i^rauta  ritual  is  a case  in  points®.  A guest  arriving 
at  somebody’s  house  is  a manifestation  of  hrahma^i,  the  parts  of  his  body  are 
identified  with  the  texts  of  the  three  Vedas;  when  his  liost  meets  him  with  his 
eyes  ho  looks  at  a sacrifice;  when  the  host  greets  him  ho  is  consecrated;  what 
is  presmited  to  a guest  is  a libation  that  annihilates  the  ‘sins’  of  the  host; 
incorrect  behaviour  towards  a guest  results  in  loss  of  ritual  merits,  and  so  on. 
One  of  the  characteristics  of  texts  of  this  genre  is  the  effort  made  to  demonstrate, 

^ 3,  1,  9,  1 f;  Ki5.  9,  3,  2L  Of.  also  Vait.  21,  7 and  Bloomfikld,  A.  V.  G.  B., 

p.  92;  Kfuth,  V.  B.  Y.  wS.,  p.  231. 

® AVjS.  4,  39,  9 f ‘with  homage  I offer  to  Agni  who  is  continually  to  bo  found  in 
the  fire'*);  10;  5,  29,  1 (likewise  addressed  to  Agni);  2,  35,  5 (an  invitation  to  the 
gods);  7,  97,  3 -8  (that  the  sacrifioc  will  prove  a success);  for  details:  Calanu,  at 
WZKM  14,  p.  121. 

» Cf.  Kau^.  47,  8;  10. 

Vait.  28,  4;  the  text  occurs  also  in  the  Yajurveda  (TS.  4,  1,  7 etc.);  for  an  in 
all  probability  secondary  use:  Kau6.  59,  15. 

See  also  AV8.  7,  27;  also  at  ApS.  4,  13,  4,  not  used  by  Kau4,,  in  Vait,  3,  15 
prescrib<Kl  to  aocom|)any  tlie  invocation  of  Ida  (reprosonting  the  ossonco  of  the 
offering,  ‘Opfersegon’);  7,  28  dealing  with  sacrificial  implements,  prescribed  at  Vait. 
4,  12  to  accompany  an  act  wlu<5h  in  all  probability  is  to  be  performed  by  the  brah- 
man, wliertMW  at  KS.  3,  8,  1 it  is  incutnbont  upon  the  wife  of  the  sacrfflcor;  7,  73; 
98;  99  etc. 

tkg.  the  non-metrieal  AVS.  6,  48  (not  in  AVP,),  but  see  TB.  3,  2,  1,  1;  §B,  12, 

3,  4,  3ff ; (h  a,  lOff.;  KS.  13,  1,  11;  aud  AVg,  7,  97. 

“ Ebnoij,  in  dA  243,  p.  42L 


290 


.1.  Itdiuhv  - VfHiio  Lifpmtnn' 


down  to  mimito  detailH,  tln^  oqnivfil<‘n<'f‘  of  ih(^  variotw  of  an  inKtiiin 

tioip  in  mm  tho  hoHf>itn>h!o  nnaqditnn  luni  f-ho  aarrod  iwin  f>f  Ifu^  dninfa  riinaL 
though  iutor!ard<M'I  wit.h  ^ayinholiHodinal  nod^ililiirgioa!  Kpcanilin 
tion,  aro  in  th<nr  ont-indw  nn^nl  in  typioally  ai.harviinio  rdo'M.  llio  surmmpmd* 
called  "rice-nu'KH  for  tlie  hrahnunn*'  (hmhmmni*$na)  whiein  aw  already  ol)« 
8emHd^  reprcHcnitH  iiaclf  aw  a (anintrrparf.  t>f  a regtdar  mfmt  fairrifha^  m exiolled 
in  I U where  it  w eoneeived  of  an  a potetiey  of  worldovide  iind  fnnda- 
mental  Hignilhmtuan  the'  cooking- vchhcI  lieing  for  inadinee  idt^niified  with  tJie 
earth  (nt*  11)*  mm  and  moon  with  iln  eyea  (af.  2).  dy  ollering  thia  di«h  to  die 
luaHinipanimenttof  AVJ^.  Id  1 {AVW  UP  HUff.:  Kan,4,  lid  li:i and  lid)*' ttie  giver 
will  be  enabled  to  iimH'ud  lo  the  heavtady  regions,  to  eonlinne  bin  exiatenee 
throngli  offHpring  and  to  reali/.e  variotia  other  amintirma*^:  iiftei  idtmiifying 
lihuHcIf  with  the  cHotiab*  aignilieanee  of  tlu'  rite  tin.'  «ieriliei*r  may  by  an  mb 
eqnate  ritual  teelmicpie'  "by  m.eanH  of  the  rieeoneaa  m a eo^inie  entity  conn 

menHuratc  witli  the  univm'He t^riutHiamd  the  limit'.iittona  of  thi'  Itnite  human 

condition.  The  ♦s'wto  IK  I an  well  an  tin'  much  longer  12,  IP'^  tit'  flnnr  nae  very 
well®‘^;  part  of  the  ritnab  enpeeiatly  the  eooking  pniper  and  the  feeding  of  tln^ 
bralnniuK,  requirea  atanmn  frotn  the  former,  part  atme/riia  of  the  bitt.m'®*  which 
is  dcaeribcd  (Ke&wa)  an  a *‘ri<'eom'a«  text  leaiiing  t^o  heiiveid' 
itBmmtrtw  being  mainly  to  eonnecrate  tlnwe  aeta  wlue-h  are  iif  apeeial  iinport'imce 
for  the  realimtiou  of  tln^  aaerilleer'a  wiah  to  aeeure  contiiuianee  of  life  in  ln'a%*en« 
ly  regiouH^®.  Other  texin  j'lreaeribed  in  thin  connection  |Kanii  lid  ilHI  arc  AV^, 
4,  M (AVdb  ih  22)  and  4,  25®*  the  latter  acetnnpanytng  ii  rde  lor  cncaping 
death : 

(I)  '*The  rietediab  which  the  flmtd'iorn  of  Drdor  Prajnpatt 
Crooked  with  mmUmiy  for  the  iunbodiment  of  hmhmmh 
Let  me,  by  iliat  Inmndary  -lme  hetaveen  the  wtirldii 
Which  will  not  go  wrongs  ovenamu'  tleathd* 

AV,  7.,  tvxtolling  the  remnant  cd*  the  tdTering  (mrhi^lap*  a Hnlmtimee 
believed  to  be  an  important  btvirer  of  that  eoneentratiHl  pio%'er  whitdi  enann^H 
continnati<m— btdiUtgH,  tinmgli  ntit  riitially  etnploycd  in  the  to  the  name 

ccdleetion  of  texta,  Ko  (h>eH  AVA,  lb  2 dealing  wdth  a mm  in  ‘whieli  a Inmta^  m 
given  to  a hralmiin  ao  that  the  glv<n*  woutil  in  the  hereaft.e'r  have'  a firmly  Imilt 

Gomoa,  HavaytqilaH. 

Bee  ab<>v<^,  p,  27d. 

Gohoa,  o.c.*  p,  20;  41 ; 432. 

(b>NOA,  O.C.,  p.  77  mui  piwim. 

Hw  alao  ChiNOA,  iwc.,  |a  02. 

Gonoa^  O.c. I p,  07. 

GoNOA,  <nc.,  p,  07. 

.For  I'mrticuIiMVi,  Gono-a,  o.c„  p.  71, 

WnrrNii5V«LAHMAN  {twe.»  p.  0H2)  ineorreetty  charaet'in*i/,e  tlim  mikin  iw  ''creiiiiO 
tion  m a Hacrificef  * 

(.loHOA,  ckc.,  p.  02;  0(1, 

C.'JoNOA,  at  MtSlangea  Ue.uou,  p,  20 L 21iemlA*Ui  Iwiathm  with  ieclitneal  idhtaiona, 


The  Atharvaveda 


291 


mansion®®.  According  to  an  atharvanio  tradition  preserved  at  Cfilika-Upanisad 
11  the  dranght-ox  of  AVlS.  4,  11  (AVP.  3,  25)®®  is,  like  the  Veda  student  of 
AVS.  11,5,  the  pillar  of  creation  (slcamhha)  of  10,  7 and  8,  the  sun  of  13,  1“3, 
the  uccMsta  of  11,  7,  time  (Mia)  of  19,  53  and  64,  breath  as  the  vital  principle 
of  11,4,  primeval  Man  (the  purum)  and  the  Lord  (I^vara)  of  19,6(cf.4),  Praja- 
|)ati  (cf.  2,  1 ; 4,  2)  and  Viraj  of  AV{§.  8,  9 and  10,  identified  with  the  Highest 
Being.  The  consecratory  stanzas  accompanying  the  rites — m casu  the  draught- 
ox  Mm®^~were  to  tratisform  the  sacrificial  substance  into,  or  to  identify  it 
witli,  that  High  Principle  or  aspects  of  it  and  so  to  achieve  the  fulfilment  of 
th('.  sacrificer's  aspirations,  i.e.  survival  in  heaven,  divine  existence. 

The  speculative  hymns— hardly  dissociated  from  ritual  and  ‘mystic’  sub- 
ject-matter—and  passages  of  this  corpus,  though  neglected  or  underestimated 
by  several  previous  authors®®,  are  from  various  points  of  view  of  the  greatest 
interest®®.  The  at  first  sight  strange  inclusion®®  of  a considerable  amount  of 
cosmogonic,  ‘theosophic,’  and  other  speculative  and  ‘esoteric’  matter  is  only 
difficult  to  explain  if  we  incorrectly  take  it  to  be  philosophical  in  any  modem 
sense  of  the  term.  It  is  tme  that  the  common  atharvanic  practitioner  as  well 
as  the  purohita  in  his  ordinary  offices  might  well  have  dispensed  with  them. 
Part  of  them  are  indeed  left  tmnoticed  in  the  Kau^ika®^  and  Vaitana  sutras. 
When  these  works  use  speculative  snktas  their  employment  often  seems  se- 
condary. Thus  AVk§.  2,  1 (AVP.  2,  6),  which— if  the  interpretation  proposed 
(elsewhere®®  is  right-  deals  with  the  prototype  of  the  inspired  seer  and  poet, 
here  called  vena,  who,  knowing  all  beings  and  all  abodes  and  being  the  sole 
nomcnclator  (st,  1 ; 3),  attempts  to  reveal  the  great  mystery,  the  “highest  in 


AVP,  10,  39  41;  KmL  60,  22-30;  Gonda,  Sav.,  p.  107;  376.  For  AVP.  9,  4 
(gift  of  a bxill):  OoNDA,  o.o.,  p.  90;  for  9,  5 (offering  of  a goat  and  five  rico-dishes), 
p.  90;  240;  for  9,  7 (offering  of  an  ox),  p.  100;  for  10,  9,  p.  94;  for  10,  10,  p.  65;  101. 

J.  Gonixa,  iti  Vol.  CJmeaha  Mishra,  Allahabad  1967,  p.  1;  Savayajfiaa,  p.  64; 
97  (translation) ; 2B7  (comxnetitary). 

Kcj^ava,  on  Kauj^.  04^-60. 

E.g.  by  Macdonku^,  H.  B.  L.;  von  Glasisnaff,  Lit.  Ind. 

s®  In  general,  seci  Bloomfibld,  A.  V,  G.  B.,  p.  80  (with  the  bibliographical 
not(^  1 on  p.  90  and  for  tlio  older  litcraturo  the  pertinent  introductory  notes  in 
WmTNBY-LANMAN,  AV.);  F.  Edgbeton,  The  philosophic  materials  of  the  Athar- 
vavoda,  Btudies  M.  BnoOMTOunn,  Now  Haven  1920,  p.  117;  Eknoxt,  Los  hymnes 
spckmlatifs  do  PAtharvaveda,  Bull,  do  la  Maison  franco- japonaiae,  N.S.  4,  1 (Tokyo 
1955),  p,  31. 

Most  of  tlieso  texts  occur,  because  of  their  length,  in  the  books  VIII-XIX, 
but  the  presence  of  such  sUhtas  at  the  beginning  of  tJio  books  11,  IV,  V and  VII  is 
certainly  not  fortriitoua. 

« Tluw  AVS.  B,  9 and  10  (on  Viraj);  9,  6;  10;  10,  2 and  11,  8 (the  structure  of 
t'uan) ; 10,  7 and  B (otx  the  ahambha) ; 11,  5 (the  Veda  student) ; 7 (the  retnnaiEit  of  the 
offering);  19,  0 (Ptiru^a);  53  and  54  {Mia,  time);  11»  3 is  not  used  by  Kauika,  but* 
nxentioruHl  by  cotmm^ntator  Ke4ava  (see  Wu-itniiiy-IAnman,  AV.,  p.  025). 

« Gonoa,  Vision,  p.  356;  see  also  M.  Linoknau,  at  ZIl  1,  p.  3vb'L.  Bohkkman,. 
PhiloHophisohe  Hyrnnon  axis  d(n^  Rig-  und  Atharva-Bamlxitu,  Btrassburg  1S87„ 
l>.  B2;  E.  N.  l)ANX>xsEAa,  at  FcL  VoL  Mirashi,  Nagpxxr  1905,  p.  24., 


292 


J.  C*<»ncla  • Lilomttiro 


secret/^  to  b(m>  tho  ftnicIainontaJ  iinity  nf  plH'Oontoniil  world  iii  the  Iiighoet 
prinoipI(\  in  at  Kjiiiw.  27»  2 in  a prngnoHti«^at-iv('  riio  prcnnninoinl  mpt  a varioiy 
of  articlcH®®.  AV^^.  4>  .11)  whitdn  barring  a fow  inBignifioant  rmiimln,  ih  liV*  10, 

125 the  BO-calletl  ac'lf revelation  of  tin'  godtJt^aa  of  Holy  Kprrndi  fl7lr)  who 

in  the  prineiple  of  Iih>  of  mm,.  th('  aonl  of  flie  W(nid  (at,  4 : III  ■ m prc^aerihed  in  n, 
ecn'mony  for  gcan'ration  rd' wiadom  in  a <dnld  and  alao  at  it  a lira!  iiae  of  apeerh 
(,10,  lOlf.)'^^.  The  oeenrrenee  <>(  AV^.  UK  0^^-  'Whieh  ia  IH7  10.  00.  Hie  Pnrnaa 
hymn,  with  variation  tnainly  in  tin'  nnlnr  of  the  atair/4iH  at'.  Ill,  10  when 
in  the  hnman  M,<n’ifl('e  ( purtn^amrdfm)  the  vietim  ia  hatlred  and  rAnmvd  in  i,n 
view  of  it«  nae  in  ritea  of  n'lU'waP'^  tpiit.e  intelligihh'. 

There  <'an  o,n  i!n^  otlu'r  hand  Ih'  no  donht  that  thia  inatmda!  re.pn'aentH  a 
genuine  atharvanii'  tradition.  Then'  are  no  gnnjndH  for  aiip|>o«ing  f.hat  the  aort 
of  apeenlation  of  whieli  it  givea  evidiniee  %vaH  foreign  to  it,  and  inmganie:  with 
the  exception  of  AVv^.  4,  20  RV.  10,  125  the  reh'vant  texlB  are  found  in  Imth 
reecnaiona.  That  mc'ana  tlnvt  tliey  mtaat  have  had  aoine  iif'harvanie  tine.  Now, 
aspirations  towards  luglter  knowhalgi'  in  India  ,hiive  nstially  ln'en  associated 
with  practical  ends.  Esoterh^  knowhalge  nf  the  truHi,  of  f'hi'  nainre  of  things 
does  not  only  help  man  out  of  tiu'  bondage  of  the  phemnneniil  W'«wld.  hut  leads 
also  to  the  aequisition  of  worldly  am!  praetieal  hmndlts  streh  as  wealth,  stieeess, 
ascendancy  over  omds  fellows,  or  t'iu'  tiiseomfitnre  of  one's  mmxim.  This 

ftmetion  oi  higher  knowledge which  is  not  the  result  <4*  intelfeeitial  reasoning 

— exphdns  many  textq>Iaces  whieh  at  ftrst  sight  may  imnn  raf-hi'r  strange'”. 
The  mat^  who  knows,  i,e.  who  mi'Otally  identilles  himself  with  the  milkings 
•of  the  dnmght'-<iX'"a  refert'iiee  to  the  androgynous  nature  t>f  the  Iliglu'Ht 

Being"' 'Obtains  progi'uy  and  a ('(S'lestial)  world,  that-  is,  fmlh  hn'ms  of  eom 

tinuance  ol  lile  (AVH.  4,  1 1,  'D;  AV!h  2,  25,  9) : the  aivimnl  indeeil  ysrhlM  milk  

according  to  the  <a>mmentary  identi-eal  witli  llu'  inexhausfihle  results  of  a 
religious  life  (to  enjoyc'd  in  the  of  ritual  and  religious  me'rit 

{mlrfu)).  An  already  intimati'd,  the  uihmmrdim  traditionally  Ind'd  that  tlu'ir 
.'Scripture  helps  to  attain  t'ujoyuu'ut  in,  and  lilH'ration  from,  this  world”. 
TduloBO|)hioar  spe<5ulations  could  tlnwcfore  easily  he  interj'Wet.'tHt  as  a Theort'ti- 
•cal  basis/  tliat  is,  be  uhchI  as  a consi'cratory  tt'xt,  of  ritual  i'»erh.u‘man'Ccs.  Hence 
the  fact^**  that  th<,H)Hophie  ideas  had  to  some  evtent  fomul  a p'liiC'C  in  the  V'ery 
tissue  of  a 'magical^'  mlkki.  stanza  il  of  AV^I.  4,  19  ( A\lh  5,  2''5}  wlueft  should  be 
used  by  those  who  pn'pan^  eonH'e>en:i.tcd  w^aU'r  t4)  count enud*  liostile  sorcery 

’*  Cf.  Cai<ani>.  5!Iiiub('n'it.uaI,  i>.  12(J. 

»*  Stio  txlHo  AVS.  7,  1:  «,  4:  U,  4;  rtwwiw  of  13,  I oi,o. 

”•  Togoaior  with  AV.'^,  K),  2.  Cf.  al«o  Viut.  3:!.  H on  AVA.  H.!I.  H 2«;  13.  2,  32  4(1. 

•*  <;tmi>A,  tit,  WZK.SA  12  13,  j).  I (11, 

Iho  nif^niflotiiitMMit  AVH.  4,  11  lout  for  inFitiinoo  hooit  oont{>l0toly  ttiixuinii'rxttitKi 
by  3.  Mtfiii,  Original  Htmakrit  tosl.M.  V.  bttnilon  »IHH4.  i».  31H1;  llr-owiKM.  A.  (J.  Phil. 
1,  1,  p,  2:10;  WiNTBitNtTC.  11. 1.  U.  I,  |>.  l.vt  (whortMvlMo  on  11.  4). 

For  l,hiM  oomwpt  nt«(  (Ut.NtiA,  Litka,  onp,  p,  132;  l.’Kl. 

’*  Artginwakalpa,  J»n,rt,t(h«ttion. 

*«  ObHorvtxl  tilrotwly  Ity  Bi.ttOMfrui.it,  A.  V.  U.  U..  p,  ho. 


The  Atharvaveda 


293 


(Katii.  39,  7)  states  that  ‘*n.on-being  (asat,  the  opposite  of  costtiic  existoxice) 
arose  Irom  the  earth ; that  goes  to  the  sky  . . . ; let  that,  spreading  vapours, 
come  back  against  the  performer’*  (of  witchcraft).  In  AVS.  13,  3 (26  stanzas) 
the  Bxm  is  exalted  as  the  Ruddy  One  (Rohita)  in  the  characteristic  ‘theosophic 
stylo’ : 

(1)  “He  who  produced  these  two,  heaven  and  earth, 

Wlio  clothes  himself  in  the  worlds,  making  them  a garmoxit, 

In  whom  abide  the  six  wide  directions, 

Which  1x0,  the  flyixxg  one,  pexxetrates  with  his  sight— 

(2)  From  whoxn  the  winds  in  their  sotxson  go  purifying, 

Ovit  of  whom  the  oooaixs  flow  forth— 

(3)  Who  causes  to  die  (and)  causes  to  breathe, 

From  whom  all  existences  breathe—,” 

but  the  refrain  added  to  25  stanzas  shows  that  this  glorification  of  the  heavenly 
body  is  to  discomfit  the  one  who  hates  and  pei'secutes  a brahmin : 

“Against  that  god,  angered,  is  this  offence; 

Whosoever  oppresses  a brahmin  who  knows  thus, 

Do  thou,  O Ruddy  One,  make  him  quake,  destroy  him, 

Fixsten  on  the  fetters  of  the  brahmin-oppressor.” 

AVS.  13,  1,  R-35  (AVP.  18,  16fF.),  likewiBc  a speculative  glorification  of  the 
sun,  were  iti  all  probability  intended  to  further  the  interests  of  a king:  **Lot 
him  bear  you  well  unto  kingdotn”  (st.  1 ; of.  4f. ; 8f.): 

(34)  “Attcetxd  the  hciavens  and  tiscetxd  the  earth, 

Ascend  sovereigxxty  and  aacexxd  possessions, 

Aseexxd  offspring  and  asoexxd  ‘imixxoxiiality,’ 

Briixg  your  body  itxto  coxxttrct  with  Rohita”*®. 

Although  the  laudation  of  the  Veda  student  {brahmaedrin,  AVS.  11,  5;  AVP. 
16,  153-155)  is  not  (|uoted  in  the  sutras  it  presupposes  the  existence  of  the 
ritual  of  which  that  youth  is  the  central  figure.  However,  the  text  lays  much 
stress  upon  the  supranormal  power  of  this  chaste  repository  of  lioly  knowl- 
edgehe  sets  heaven  and  earth  in  motion,  fills  his  teacher  and  the  gods  with 
austerity  (st.  If,);  he  fecundates  the  earth  (st.  12);  ‘‘all  creatures  which  have 
sprung  from  PrajUpati  are  preserved  by  brahman  which  is  conccntratexl  in  the 
brahmaedrin^^  (st,  22). 

However  awkward,  naive  or  incoxxxprehcnsible  these  texts  may  at  first  sight 
appear,  however  fluid  and  floating  the  opinions  of  the  problems  tackled, 
however  incoherent  the  argumentation  (if  there  is  any)  and  ‘mystical’  rather 
than  philoBopliieal  the  verbal  expression,  they  strive— for  the  above-mentioned 
practical  puiq)()B(.%  it  is  toic—aft(^r  an  insight  mto  the  true  nature  of  the  phenom- 
ena, tlu'ir  xxiutual  relations,  their  imity  in  a transcendent  Highest  Principle. 
In  HO  doing  they  seem,  whilst  iiKxwporating  tnaterial  that  is  also  found  in  the 


also  below,  p,  302  f. 

'Por  Btx)OMFiKLn’B  view  h(.h^  AJPh  12,  p.  430  (xxo  abstracst  worslxip  of  any 
divinity,  l)ut  an  allegorical  exaltation  of  a king  axxd  his  (pxeen).^^ 

J.  Gonda,  Change  aixd  continuity  in  Ixxdian  religion,  The  Hague  1965,  p.  285. 


294 


,T.  ( Jitndii.  • Vwlic  Li1('rni(ir<* 


other  Vedas,  to  have  heeti  a rt'ot'ptoeh'  of  a «’otiisiderahle  vari.dy  of  previous 
and  eonteiuporaneous  sp('('uhifionH  and  attenpds  at  solvijij?  tin'  prohh'ins 
under  consideraticvn  in  whi<'h  its  aut.lmrs  atv  mueh  jnore  int.'r.'stvd  t han  most 
pcn'ta  of  the  Itgveda.  Wln-iras  the  latter  ahnosf.  t'X.’lusively  eoin'f-nt  rated  upon 
oosniogony  elad  in  niytln>hifdeid  jjarh  and  spoke  of  the  unhorn  Primeval  dm', 
the  fornu'r  wc'n-  ae<ni!iinf  e<i  with  a variety  of  eoneeplions,  ternm  and  't  ln'ories' 
with  regard  to  the  origin  and  struet  ure  of  ( In'  universe  ami  (he  relat  ions  Ix't  wv.'i) 
tln^  pht'uomena  and  the  Unw'en.  tlu'  Transeendetd  "in  whieh  everythitig  lx-, 
eomesofoin'  form"  (AVf^.  2,  1,  1 : AVP.  2.  (5.  1).  In  tlie  t wo  nlwtraet,  ami  often 
obsinire  .siH-hw  AV!^.  Kh  7 and  8 (ef.  AVP.  17.  7 11 ; Id.  UU  1(18)  tine-drawn 

speeulations  on  t,h<'  “support,  or  pillar  of  ereat  ion"  (slmnhlm  whieh,  tlumgh 
sustaining  Iu*av<'n  and  (-arth,  and  hearing  tin'  gtnls.  set'i's.  sju'red  verses  and 
fonnuhis,  death  and  ('ontinuanee  of  life,  and  though  revered  ns  (he  Highest 
(10, 7, 21 ),  is  uttt'riy  mystc'riouH  - sio  not  only  rais<^  (pn'stions  ahont  ( he  ‘r«'lative 
position’  in  the  univt'rs('  of  diviin'  powers  and  iinporianf  'eoneepts  sw'h  as 
asoeticisni  and  Order,  about  the  natur<'  of  the  rlivisions  of  time.  ei<’.,  hut  deal 
also  rvith  other  idt'as  of  the  Highest  IVitwipIe  sm'h  as  hnthnmn,  Praj(l|)ati,  the 
Goldt'n  (h'rm.  Though  unoonneetr'd  with  any  ritual  (hese  .vtJWas  do  not  fail  to 
hold  out  a prospect  of  ‘kimwledge*  and  the  reaii7.a(i<ui  of  id<'nti(y ; 10.  7.  17: 

“VVhoevi'r  know  the  hmhmnn  in  man.  (hey  know  {he  most  exalted  One**; 

Who  knows  the  most  mtalttsl  One,  and  wlas'ver  knows  PrajApnti. 

Who  knows  the  ohief  toJ/tuKifai**.  they  aeeerthngly  know  also  tl»e  «km»bht*" 

and  hence,  of  freedom  from  darkness  and  evil  (10,  7,  •10),  It  has  rightly  hetm 
oltst'rved*’’  that  tlu're  is  an  immistakahle  hartnony  hetweeji  jnimy  speculative 
passagt's  of  this  corpus  in  that  thi'y,  in  tin*  form  of  alteinating  atid  enmnlative 
names,  coiuiepts  and  itnages,  attempt  t<r  delimit  and  th*termin»*  the  last-  eaus«' 
of  things. 

These  poets  arc,  mortHtver,  less  inclint'd  to  make  the  t raditifsnal  ntythitlogieal 
figures  ai;  (dement  of  their  speculations*".  Most  of  t he  gods,  it  is  f ru<',  retain 
their  fuirotions*',  but  the  new'-tuuner  Kilma  (Desire)  is  though  on  oiu'  hand,  as 
a divine  ptOTon,  revt'red  and  called  upoti  for  help,  on  the  olher  »n»nutely  d<‘- 
scribed  in  his  aspects  and  functions  (.'Wi^.  0.  2:  AVP.  1(5,  7(5  7H)  and  not  re- 
garded as  (iistinct  from  desire  as  the  "first  si'i'd  of  mind"  (A\'H.  10,  52,  1 : AVP. 
1,  80,  I which  Kuninds  us  of  tjLV.  10,  129,  -f;  ef.  AV!^.  9,  2,  19),  Th('  tendency  to 
deal  with  the  highest  eategories  figurativ«'ly  rather  than  mythologically  or 

“ Of.  o.g.  ,ScH«EMAN,  o.e..  p.  fiO:  M.  Linubnau,  at  S51I  3.  p.  2315;  K.  A.  .Souomon, 
at  .TOIB  9.  p.  233:  Kswoi*,  o,«„  p.  4(k 

“ 'rhis  term  (jHmmwffhm)  dts's  not  oeeur  in  th«'  I.igviHia. 

*•  That  or  who  is  eomu'cttsl  with 

o Hknou,  o.e.,  p,  47.  Hoe  also  |{t,(H>M»‘(Kt,u,  A.  V.  (J.  H.,  p.  Hit  on  AV8,  4,  1: 
7,  2;  8,  S)  and  KK 

o 8eo  also  JinooMviBt.n,  A.  V.  (i.  15„  p.  (19,  Mythology  is.  of  (Hturse.  jutt  almesit; 
of.  (ug.  AVS^.  U»,  7,  18;  22:  30. 

♦*  On  Vanu.ia,  Hknoii,  at  Festgabe  Dommel,  Wieslauien  lUttO,  p.  122. 


The  Atharvavoda 


295 


philosophically  is,  for  instance,  also  apparent  from  the  two  sulctas  devoted  to 
Time  {kila:  AV&.  10,  531;  AVP.  12,  2)«0: 

( 1 ) ‘‘Time,  the  steed,  drives  with  seven  reins,  thousand-eyed,  imaging,  rich  in  seed, 

H im  the  sei'i's  mount,  of  inspired  thought ; all  the  beings  (worlds)  are  his  wheels.  ’ ’ 

AViS.  0,  1 (AVP.  10,  33f.)  may  bo  regarded  as  an  attempt  at  comprehending 
the  signifi<^an<*.o  of  a mythological  concept,  in  casu  the  honey- whip  of  the  Aivins, 
nuaitionod  in  the  Rgveda^‘h 

Whereas  these  atharvanio  texts  arc  most  important  as  evidence  of  older 
Vedie  thought  a special  value  attaches  to  them  also  because  they  are  the  imme- 
diate liarbing(U's  of  the  oldest  wpanisads  and  as  such  attest  to  the  continuity 
of  the  ancient  B|)eciilativc  reasonings  and  x'eflcctions.  The  dtman  concept  gains 
in  prominence®^,  and  there  are  connections  between  the  siclcta  to  the  (cosmic) 
breath  (prana:  AVS.  11,  4;  AVP.  16,  21-23)  ‘‘in  whoso  control  is  this  AIF’  and 
which  is  described  as  the  enlivening  principle  of  everything®®  and  the  Pra^na- 
Upanimid®*, 

It  is  however  difficult  to  decide  how  to  jxxdge  the  outward  form  of  the 
speculative  hymns  and  passages — ^were  they  preseiwed  by  the  redactors  in  a 
very  corrupt  form®®  and  their  exact  relation  to  parallel  texts  in  other  Vedic 
works®®.  The  stage  of  speculative  thought  represented  by  them  and  the  fact 
that  tills  thought  is  more  varied,  more  prominent  and  creates  the  impression  of 
greater  originality  than  comparable  passages  of  tlio  Rgveda  allow  us  to  regard 
thexn  as  ap|)roximat(4y  synchronous  with  the  Yajurveda-ISamhitils  and  the 
chief  brdh^mmas:  notice  the  occurrence  of  passages  in  ‘didactic’  prose®’  and  of 
‘argumentation’  by  nutans  of  equivalences  and  identifications,  c.g.  “Breath  is 
vim;,  . . . the  sun,  the  moon,  breath  they  call  Prajapati”  (AVfS.  11,  4,  12).  It  is 
moreover  not  certain  that  Rgvedic  parallels  are  in  every  case  more  original.  Yet 
om^  can  hardly  escape  the  conviction  that  the  Atharvaveda  reproduces,  and 
often  (Uilarges,  ligvedio  material®®,  or— to  express  it  more  cautiously— material 

Cf.  F.  O.  BoilHAmsa,  tJbor  den  Stand  ch^r  indischon  Philosophic  zxxr  Zoit 
Mahaviras  und  Buddhas,  Thesis  Strassburg  1902,  p.  20;  D.  B.  Kshihsagae,  at  20 
AIOG,  S.  P.,  p.  300. 

See  Wiiitnby.Lanman,  AV.,  p.  518;  Eunou,  in  Bull  (sec  above,  n.  29),  p.  44. 

See  e.g.  AVS.  5,  1, 1;  5,7;  9,  7;  0,  53,  2;  7,  07, 1;  9,  4,  10  and  ospooially  10,  8, 
44  (on  which  see  Dk0ssbn,  o.o,,  p.  334;  Wiutnby-Lanman,  AV.,  p.  589). 

W Kdoiseton,  O.O.,  p.  121;  cf.  also  J.  Filliozat,  in  Eovuo  philosophiquo  1933, 
p.  410;  Boobwxtz,  J.B.,  p.  349. 

Cf.  e.g.  AVS.  11,  4,  19:  PrUp.  2,  7 and  soo  P.  Disussen,  Soohrig  Upanishad’s 
dcB  Veda,  lAupsrig  ®1921  (Darmstadt  1903),  p.  562, 

« As  is  assumed  by  l^lnaKETON,  o.c.,  p,  128;  135;  soo  also  BLOOMifiELi),  A.  V.  G. 
B.,  p.  88  on  AYA  19,  0:  BV.  10,  90  etc. 

««'One  can  for  instance  have  grave  doubts  about  the  oorroctness  of  Webke’b 
(1,  S.  XVll'l,  p.  9)  view  of  the  relation  between  AVS.  4,  2 (AVP.  4,  1)  and  fW.  10, 
121 : the  athuriMn  compilers  have,  in  his  opinioix,  adopted  (and  garbled)  tlxe  rgvedic 
text  on,  the  golden  embryo  only  to  saorifioe  with  gold  (Kaui§.  45,  1). 

” StH"^  bellow,  p,  305*  The  term  brahmj^fm  is  found  in  the  prose  silkta  9,  10  (st.  18). 

(hmpare  also  AVt§.  9,  9f.  (AVP.  10,  OOff.):  IJV,  1,  104;  AVS.  13,  2,  10-24 
(AVP.  18,  22,  1-9):  B'V*  h 50,  1™9;  cf.  also  Eenoxt,  o.o.,  passim. 


296 


that  mm,  in  variant  wonlinga  or  voi\so  ordnr*  alm>  in-rlwh'd.  in  !ha  ligvada- 
Saiiihitfk  Ttt  (loittg  ho  (ho  PaippahldinH  hooiu,  to  havo  had  Honnnvhai  more 
Hynp'Hithy  for.  if  iiot  more  familiarity  witin  tin'  llgvi'tlie  miitrrial  Ihan  did  tire 
^iannaklyaH.  To  conelnde  with  one  more  ('Xample:  aeveral  Hpeenliilive  l-honghtB 
of  the  Atharvavi'da  are  modelhH'l  npt>ir  tire  imag('  of  the  ITimeval  'ronnrie  (dant 
from  W'hoHe  limhH  the  world  eanre  intrr  exiatenec'^^  llow'evr-r.  there  in  an 
tmnriBtakalrle  teirdeirey  in  oni  lirre  a trew  devidopment'.  i hat  ia  t^o  graft  a hmkmmi 
doetriiH'  upon  Ihrmna  Hpeenlatnm ; the  hearer  of  AV(>.  llh  2 in  grinlmdly  led  ttr 
muh'rataml  thaf  hmhmm  in  ihn  aole  (aa'a-tor  and  <iwpoaei%  thiif  ii  in  omirtpreaeni 
and  that  matr  in  itn  ‘atronghold'  (par.  heiree  purm^a  ’’maid*!.  11iia  imihmmi 
Bpeeulation  in  rdleeted  nrea'e  eonHpii'noiialy  in  the  Faippallida  reeenaiim*'^ 
when',  the  eonet'pt  (rf  the  onerrean  of  tlrt'  worhl  itr  hmkmmi  in  tanght'  in  a 
what  dovelojred  fornr^h 

Revertiirg  to  the  relatitma  hetwernr  th<^  more  popnlar  Atlriirviiveila  inrd  the 
hieratie  Rgveda®^  it»  nray  hrit'fly  he  nedt'd  tlrivt.,  in  npite  of  tln^  difTert'ni  eharin'ter 
of  these  oollectionH,  abont  one  fifth  of  the  eontentaof  I'  -XIX  of*  iln^  for- 

mer 18  also  found  in  the  latter  (more  pnannely*  aliont  2l>hl)  }?iiHaag!ea,  of  whielr 
abont  600  in  AVk^.  X.X),  There  is.  m atati'd  aimve.  atliarviinie  maimdal  in  the 
Rgveda  and  tlie  Atharvaveda  has  bcnrowed  lr<nn  the  other  c'orpna  fenpetdally 
from  th('^  mamhtas  X,  I,  VI 11):  there  in  no  fixed  line  of  ilemarefiiitm  beiwei'ir 
Holemn  and  predomimrtrily  hmrgiear  private  rites.  Miwi'over.  flm  Atharvaveda 
no  dtmbt  in  an  early  example  of  an  Indian  work  that  haa  lemietl  to  lamie  form 
of  eneyelo|au'di<t  eompr<'henHiv<'neHH.  Hlawt'or  b'orrowingH  are  imwfly  found  hit 

AVk^.  1" Vld;  XIX»  Jdentieal  paHaagea  -of  soim^  extent,  mainly  from  I,iV.  X. 

mostly'- with  eomparatively  less  variantH"dn  Vllb;  IX;  XIII.  XIV;  XVIIL 

Many  of  tlie  longt'r  ^nuXim  have  nothing  in  eommon  with  the  Hgvetla;  moiit 
Rgvedie  material  oeetira  in  t^'xta  eonniating  of  diHjtnnt'.ed  Htair/rim.  Among  the 
borrowingH  are  many  miktm  of  mw  atanm  or  intdateil  stanrjia  wdiieh  otfen 
eoinekle  also  with  Yajurvedie  texts.  vStd<unn  panegyrieiil  verses  luive  raix'ly 
been  re<H'ived  in  the  new  mirroundings.  A aian7,a  nt  ftgvedie  origin  in  mnxmimim 
adapted  or  atharvanixed  l>ut  in  oilu't  eaaeH  inserieit  without  moiivatii>n 
perceptible An  instance  of  adaptation  is  EV.  1 . 1 64 , 49  luh  IrewiM  I ! o flie  gta  Idem 

” e.g.  AVA,  10,  2;  11,6  and  cf.  UnKotn  in  J'A  MX  p.  437;  lltill.  (see  aboVfV 
in  29),  p.  4H. 

«<>  Bch^  1).  BKArrAcnAEVVA,  at  ALB  2H.  p.  132. 

Gf.  e.g.  AVP.  B,  9,  2;  12;  UL  91,  7;  H;  IH,  23.  10;  20,  1 and  III,  103.  6 on 
the  Bolt^  god,  (I,  3,  2 on  Ih'ajripaii,  on  Uudra  20,  32,  6.  Aceiwtling  tO'  Mbh.  13,  10.  47 f. 
B.  the  rcxatia's  of  thiA  Aiharvaveila  tbe  Supreme  Brahman, 

« BnooMiouLO,  A.  V.  (L  B,,  p.  44;  UnNoo,  at  4A  243,  p,  403;  X,  *L  Siirmnn, 
at  J'AS  Bomliay  41 42,  P'.  00. 

Bor  qm'MiiouH  liearing  U|nm  metrical  divergtmcee,  intja'p-tOafakn  ete,  see 
BmwAiONn,  at  JA  IHHO,  p.  193  ami  eepetnally  A.  V.IL  If.,  p.  4L 

1310  metrt'H  of  tlu.^  Atharvave<la  on  a.  level  with  thtme  tif  the  that  le 

and  more  irregular  than  tJanr  rgvedta  counterparts,  winch  iihonht  not  tmvvm- 
warily  (with  IL  V,  AaNotm.  at  3AOH  22.  p,  309  (cf.  JAGS  17.  p,  2))  be  regiiriled  as 
more  originaL  On  tlie  contrary,  conmdering  the  tlc'Velopmtatt  id  ih*^  metrical 


Tho  Atliarvaveda 


297 


Sarasvat!  and  expressing  the  wish  to  suck  her  breast:  it  reappears  at  AV6.  7,  10 
as  a iorniiila  to  be  used  when  a child  is  seized  by  a demon  when  it  is  being  nursed 
by  its  mother®^.  There  are  inore  than  a hundred  instances  in  which  material 
occurring  in  both  corpora  is  ascribed  to  different  seers;  in  these  cases  the  Athar- 
vaveda  ascribes  tho  passage  mostly  to  Atharvan,  or  also  to  other  non-|:gvedic 
Irrespective  of  whether  there  exist  Rgvedic  occurrences  many  suktas  or 
sequences  of  stanzas  arc  common  property  of  Atharva-  and  Yajuiwedins®®. 


seliemt^s  and  otlna*  prosodic  propt^rties  as  a whole  it  esan  bo  said  that  there  exists  a 
tfOndemoy  of  formal  regularity  to  inoroaso  with  tho  passage  of  time.  Tho  relations 
bcTavocai  fgviHlic  and  atharvavedic  material  in  general  and  its  distribution  in  parti- 
(iular— occsasionally,  a complete  i-gvedio  mkta  is  divided  among  different  suktas  in 
th(^  AlharviivcMla— should  be  subjected  to  special  studies  taking  tho  rittial  applica- 
tions into  ac(?ount  (>.g.  IL  J>.  Vklankar,  in  JUB  N*  S.  I(),  2 (1941),  p.  109). 
For  some  particular  <^as(w,  (complications  etc.  see  o.g.  L.  0.  Baxiukt,  in  Sttidios 
M,  Bloomfi(4d,  N<nv  Uav(?n  1920,  p.  5 (AVF.  1,  109);  S.  8,  BiXAwn,  at  Festschrift 
Kirfnh  p.  17  (IJV.  10,  109  atid  5,  17);  N.  I.  Bmwnn,  J.  Uuiv.  Poona,  Hum.  22, 
p.  45  (fiV.  H),  90  and  AV.  19,  B);  W.  .Norman  at  JA,08  195B,  p.  201  (W.  1, 

104  and  AV.  9,  9 and  10). 

iU\  Kaia^.  22.  I atul  CAnANU,  in  ^DM(.l  52,  p.  224;  ZaulKUTitual,  p.  102. 

Hovvovivr,  in  k/lwja  XX  tho  fsis  and  dcutic's  are  tho  saino  i'u  both  corpora. 

For  pliilosophical  mahaial  nm  also  p.  202  etc. 


298 


♦1.  ^ VfHlit'  iatf^mfuro 


S.  Style  und  drueiure 


It  Unay  be  true  iliai  iniu^v  ef  t'lu\se  eiin  bi'  poriiy  onlv 

oniUMnnintof  their  tneirieal  form.  tlmt^themibjiHi  matlrr  ii*^f  |>of'iirftI 
ill  onr  «eiwe  of  the  term,  yvi  \\t  nbrnihl  nfhtlun\  ivilh  imitiy  je'eveaiN  loifhorH, 
taeitly  igiicire  the  neHtlH^iie  t|imlitira  id  tbi:'i  ('nrfntH,  it  onewiiltHilv 

according  to  tlie  ineritH  of  iia  content h.  nor  by  way  of  miw^arranlrHi  fn*nm\alb 
mtion  eharaeterr/.t'*  ila  authora  im  lean  abh^'  hniullera  of  fbc  poetical  feehiiiqmy 
m nniiwpired  and  h'awoHhicateil  vm'aifimc  Many  bnaineal*  lc\lr^  eoneerning 
recurrent  Hitimiiona  and  Hiandardi*/,^!  wiahe?^  may  l>c  alta‘r'0|y|icd  and  in  our 
eycH  nionotonoua,  they  are  far  from  dull  and  dreary.  If  mufd  be  eoiieeded  that 
their  imagery  and  phraaeohigy  lianlly  appeal  to  modern  wefiterrim'a  who  often 
find  ao  many  diffieultii'H  in  muieratantling®  what  ia  mean!  find  flow  overlook 
the  aenthetfe  cpialitieH:  that  tranalatii>nH  are  an  a rnh^  neet'^Harity  inadequati^ 
and  little  helpful;  that  then*  ia,  on  the*  i>t-her  hand,  ahviiyfi  tbr^  ii:4;  of  re.garding 
m aeBthetieally  aueet^anful  and  evms  an  iidembnlly  ‘poet  ieiiT  whiit  iirtnally  wan 
meant  to  be  of  value  from  a uttliiarinn  point,  of  v.ifnv.  liowcvfu%  any  emu- 
poaition  that  fultllH  ita  re«|tiirementa  ean  produei^  mitarkabli*  af-Mludii*  effeelK. 
Those  eontainedin  this  ('or[mH  not.  iidrequetif.ly  dc»an  bream^e  of  the  tdaliorafitm 
of  their  themes;  tlu^  npposit.emw  of  its  imag<'ry^  their  tv.r!!.bfdiiiiefnl  dielimd; 
the  predilection  for  nudapbora,  images.  'ayinholiMu/  b>r  flrwnipf  mils  iddud.ure, 
for  triplication  and  thrcidold  or  manifold  piualb*tisnd.  bir  anaphora  am!  varimiH 
finans  of  aritithcshd;  the  relief  in  which  important  tcrnmiire  plaerd  liy  repetition 
or  other  stylistic  deviet's’^;  the  fm|Utmt-  sueee^^'iions  id  words  of  tlu<  oame  .idasfd; 
the  evoeative  enumerations  sometimes  in  symmetrieal  order  eiuifributing 
to  the  earnest  (diameter  of  prayma  (u'  inviuiittoiud;  the  sueerssitms  of  short 


* Witli  hi.  lb  KMKNUAn,  in  Univ.  of  i’ahbirma  Ihibh  m diver  Phil,  13.  p,  333, 
bee,  in  giau'ral,  liKNOtu  La  po4sie  dt'  PAtharvav«H.ia,  Hull,  do  la  luiireon  frauco* 
japonaim^  N.b.  4,  I (Ibkyo  11)33).  p.  I;  M,  Tmxmm.  AMiarvn  \%Hia.  a literarv 
study,  Hoshiarpur  1973  (in  Hindi). 

» For  some  remarks  on  t-ht^  language  of  the  Atharvavedasee  lltsmMrmrn.  A.  V.  il 
B.,  p.  43;  Cm  li«  Lakman,  in  Album  Korn,  p.  303;  Wis'TrJiNiT/.,  m \VZI\3i  14, 
p,  -oO;  (..coHOA,  (.)ld  ludiau,  l.u  2‘ie.  ^fhere  are  many  rare  words  ami  nhio  many 
untranslatable^  cases  ot  homophony,  ■alhferatum  etc.  'rriuislafora  odeu  ov'crlooked 
th(N  use  of  th(^  im|sa*ative  in  conjumtmns.  On  the  Paippalada  reremmm:  Ukkov, 
E.V.  IMILp.  BKl 

^ » btai  also  chapter  V;  for  tla^  figures  of  spissdP  N'.J,  Hnumm.  Kiivt  and  kiivva 
in  tlw^  Atliarvavinla,  .Poona  1997, 


^ (X  e.g.  AVH.  3,  17;  19;  35;  4,  15;  HI,  lh  AVIh  4,  IL  I IL 
« Cf.  e.g,  A¥H,  1,  IL  il;  3,  25,  2:  5,  2L  4 <L  a,  95*  3;  im,  3;  lllh  1;  105*  P 3; 
9,  2,  19;  Kk  L 4;di;  18,  4,  38;  HK  % 3;  AVP.  I,  34;  35, 

B 0:  HP  27,  Hi  AVP,  fl, 

I I I * 


’ Cf.  „.g.  AVS.  (!.  il.  1:  2;  Hi.  1.  12:  7.  1;  H.  I Ho.;  111.  «.  Ij  U^Nut  . ....... j,. :m, 

, , ”■  ''•  H.  1;  11.  1.  .S;  12.  ft.  42;  4ft:  14.  1.  211:  Itl, 

L 2;  AVP*  2*  51*  L 

• Of.  o.g.  AV6.  0,  2B,  12;  «.  .W,  2;  Hft,  2;  IMl,  2j  «.  ti,  111;  (Joniia,  .S.  It.,  p.  4(14. 


Tho  Atharvavoda 


299 


parallel  <\lauBeB  or  sentences  involving  rliytlnnical  variation^^’.  Impersonality 
is  otton  bataneed  by  vivid  detail.  Though  shorter  than  the  Rgveda-Sainhita  the 
Atharvaveda  is  more  vaiied  in  contents.  Its  diction  is  generally  speaking  more 
uniform,  its  phraseology  moi’o  precise,  often  more  simple  and  flexible,  also  more 
eonerei('  because  the  authors^  interest  was  loss  diffuse  and  often  concentrated 
u]K>n  inntUHiiatc  needs.  The  tendency  to  address,  or  speak  of,  manifestations  of 
evil  or  dang(U',  divine  helpers,  ritual  instruments,  as  persons^^;  the  many 
identili(*atvions  and  suggestive  images^^  ; the  frequent  and  repeated  references  to 
])arallel  events^®  add  to  the  liveliness  of  tho  style,  the  continuous  concern  about 
maids  liealth  and  w<’ill-being,  as  well  as  the  bent  for  referring  to  the  highest  and 
most  geru'ral  cat(^gories,  to  origins,  mythical  prototypes,  the  beyond,  and  cos- 
mic relations  to  its  loltiness^^.  Tho  frequent  statement  that  he  who  knows 
transcends  tlie  ordinary  human  condition^ ^ the  almost  omnipresent  assump- 
tion of  reflations  or  parallelism  between  the  visible  world  and  the  Unseen,  the 
very  (flioice  of  words  describing  cosmic  events  and  functions^®  do  not  fail  to 
lend  to  many  places  a touch  of  weirdness  or  sublimity. 

Some  very  brief  observations  may  be  made  on  the  structure  and  component 
parts  of  the  magicjal  texts^’.  There  are  descriptions  of  the  nature,  aspects  or 
apiienranco  of  evil  or  references  to  tho  origin  of  tho  dreaded,  dangerous  or 
inimi('a.l  powt'rs  (which  imply  knowledge  of  their  nature  and  a possibility  of 
succ<^HHful  defeiuH^  or  atta(fl<)*®;  statements  of  the  might  and  names  of  the 
mauif<'Hf.at.ious  of  evil  and  of  tlu^  objects  used  in  d<£ence^®;  dnections  given  to 
th<^H(^  i'xptHlitaits®'’;  statements  of  tho  operator’s  knowledge  and  power,  of  the 
powen*  of  his  words  wliixfli  affirm  or  desoribo  what  ho  wants  to  come  to  pass®’*  ; 
various  forms  of  exorcism^®  or  of  expulsion  of  the  evil  to  others^®;  prayers  and 


Of.  c.g.  AVJ§.  1,  23,  3;  3,  19,  4;  4,  10,  0;  12,  5;  17,  1,  19;  AVP.  1,  57,  If,;  62; 
2;  6,  3,  10. 

Of.  c.g.  AVSS.  4,  31,  6;  32,  1;  5,  22,  4;  6;  7;  12;  cf.  14;  24,  3;  6,  106,  Iff.;  113, 


2;  19,  47,  1;  9;  AVP.  6,  3,  1. 

» Cf*  e.g*  AVk^.  5,  IS,  S;  0,  140,  1;  11,  1,  14;  12,  5,  16;  3,  6,  7;  5,  14,  10;  13;  18, 
3;  6,  37,  1;  2;  5;  138,  5;  12,  1,  57;  19,  45,  1. 

« Of.  c.g.  AViS.  2,  15;  6,  8;  105;  7,  50,  1;  18,  4,  55. 

Of,  c.g.  AVk^.  1,  25,  1;  29,  1;  2,  1;  25,  2;  4,  40,  8;  8,  1,  10;  19,  44,  4. 

Of,  c.g.  AViri.  2,  1,  2;  4,  11,  9;  6,  76,  3;  10,  7,  41;  15,  3,  11;  4,  U6. 

« (X  c.g.  AV.  5,  25,  2;  13,  1,  If.;  2f.;  25f.;  35f.;  3,  1. 

Of.  A.  V,  GEHAStMOv,  1^10  contents  of  tho  hymns  of  tho  Atharvaveda  (Russian), 
Indija  v drtnmoHti,  Moscow  1964,  p.  95, 

Of.  c.g.  AVv^.  1,  25,  2fl*.;  4,  37,  11;  5,  22,  3;  10;  6,  20,  3;  7,  56,  4;  116,  1;  1, 
25,  1;  5,  4,  if.;  8f.;  5,  1;  4;  6,  24,  1;  19,  39,  1. 

»*»  K.g.  5,  5,  4;  22,  2;  6,  21,  2;  7,  56,  2;  4,  19,  5;  19,  32,  1;  of.  6,  12,  3. 

« C.fl;  c.g.  AV,^.  5,  4,  6;  22,  3;  13;  6,  85,  1;  19,  31,  8;  32,  6;  33,  1. 

K.g.  AV.^.  1,3;  2,  10,  5;  3,  7,  6;  19;  24,  2;  cf.  6,  76,  3;  19,  39,  9.  Boasting  may 
hav<i  a stimulating  cflbct. 

w K.g.  AVS.  I,  22;  23,  2;  2,  25,  4;  4,  36,  7;  5,  22,  5ff.;  12;  7,  83,  L 
K.g.  AViS.  1,  19,  2;  6,  20,  1;  7,  116,  2. 


300 


J.  (lojida  * Vinltt' 


invocatioii  of  divine  aasi«t.anfe^*  nof-  infn*qtirid-ly  ff>!nl>iidng  wifli  «pell«  and 
chamB”,  Bosuo  stikfm  aaBinning  ilu'  ohariudvr  <d'a  prayer  for  liel|>  or  dfdivrranve 
from  cvil®^;  rofrn'OooB  i-o  a divine  an  analogotiB  ■ mid  Bina'eHKfnf*..'- 

deed  of  an  ancient  authority  or  paraHelB  in  natnre®'*;  (jnat.  Iicfore  tin'  enri  of  a 
mikta)  BtatenientH  of  the  BneccHHfnl  eotnphdicm  of  a rite‘^^,  !^liiny  conHiHt 

entirely,  or  almoBt  tmtindy.  of  i'omhinationa  of  ifrene  ^I^lf'ntion  of 

atriietureB  in  aeeordanee  with  dinadtonH  or  pointn  of  the  eiiinpaaB  hiiH  idready 
been  made®*^.  tStdim  belongini^  to  t-he  amne  elaHB  not  infrodnenlly  <\\dn!nt 
limiteci  nnmberB  of  *eat-ehworc!B’  denoting  the  Bftn’eotype^ii  wdiihcB,  r(Hmrrimf 
sitiiationB  and  identical  or  Himilar  nuauiH  of  defenee*  Hms  the  eharnm  and 
prayers  aiming  at  harmony  and  eom'ord  insini  on  nnily  of  miiitl  and  appease- 
ment of  anger”,  thone  aiming  at  a long  life-time  ask  for  a life  that  will  last  a 
hundred  years,  for  protection  against  tlm  regridtably  largt'  mimtier  of  deaths, 
or  implore  breath  not  to  leavt'.  the  hotiy  td-e.”.  In  tlie  hive-efnirms  the  tbrmula 
“that  you  shall  be  bent  to  my  will,  shall  ibllow  my  intent"  is  a fr(H|uent 
occurrence®®.  The  self-reliance  of  tire  laufonners  of  the  rit-es  is  apparemt  from 
statements  such  as  “I  shall  catisc^  you  to  live  unto  old  age"®*,  The  firoteetive 
power  of  amulets  is  exuberantly  praimHi.  they  an'  full  of  foree,  slay  imemiee, 
assail  and  attack,  and  make  those  wdm  wear  them  invinei!di\  a lion  or  a 
tiger®®. 

Sometimes  the  choi<x%  length  and  onler  of  words,  pa.riillidism  and  repet^itions 
converge  to  aeliunung  a most  stiggestive  paHsage:  AVfi.  3,  U!',  I f.  {AVtK  3,  20, 
If.): 

iludvd  dhniwif^i  ni  mifumu  ghftdm  ukftimdfut  / 

idf^i  tva  Mis  mtmmInVj.  ^uvtrfl.  dru^luslrd  dpa  mtp  mrr'mn  // 
ihaind  dhrtmi  prnti  tiftha  MU  tjdmatl  , 

‘Must  here  I fix  (tny)  dwelling  drm:  It't.  it  stand  sahdy,  «|'ifiukhng  glann 
Into  thee,  ()  dwelling,  nuty  wt>  enter*  tnir  gtsai  energt'tre  (sta'tfi)  sale  and  soun<i. 
Just  here  stand  linn,  0 dwtdling,  rich  in  horses,  in  kino,  in  |deaaantness  , . 3^ 


” E.g,  AVS.  1,  7;  2,  3,  i\;  10,  2;  14,  4;  4,  30,  1;  fi,  22.  1;  0,23,  1;  B2,  3;  IIL  1; 
7,  74,  4;  cf.  5,  4 (to  a plant). 

®®  IhuB  AVF,  1,  40  (Hkkoiu  in  JA  2fi2,  434)  is  to  reduee  various  gods  to 

Bubjecstion.  Hee  e.g.  also  AViS.  2,  10,  2;  2Bj  3.  23,  0. 

” E.g.  AYt  1,T>1T.;  7,  8311;  80;  Dl;  10,  lOfr 

” E.g.  AVB.  1,  2,  4;  2.  32,  3;  3,  31,  1;  4,  4,  1;  0,  3;  0,  12,  I;  2;  44,  1;  81,3;  00, 
1;  lOf),  3;  109,  1;  3;  137,  1;  7,  30,  1;  33,  1;  10,  a,  0;  ef.  8.  Ik  In 
« E.g.  AVB.  1,  23,  4;  2,  10,  Off.;  4,  0,  0 (ef.  3);  ef.  8,  fi,  8 and  2,  10,  L 

« E.g.  2,  10?  30;  3,  8;  3,  3;  0,  23;  20. 

BecjOiove,  p.  281;  ef.  also  AVl^.  3,  10;  0,  40,  2;  3;  10.  II,  8;  II.  2,  4;  HI,  13,  3. 

” AVB.  3,  30,  1;  4;  3;  0,  42,  1;  2;  3;  43,  1;  2;  04,  I;  2;  3:  73,  1;  74,  1;  2:  3; 

If  32,  1 ; 2, 

« Of  e.g.  AV^.  2,  28,  1;  2;  4;  3;  29,  1;  2;  3,  U.  2ir.;  7,  33,  2fT.:  8,  1,  1 ; 2,  H;  IL 
” AVB.  1,  34,  2;  3,  23,  3;  0,  42,  3;  43,  3. 

” AVS.  3,  30,  3;  ef.  nlno  2,  30,  2;  3,  U,  Iff 
” AVB,  8,  3,  lit.;  10,  3,  Iff;  0,  UL 


Tho  Atharvav'oda 


301 


Btxt  in  tnatiy  other  placoB  aonnd  or  deep  tlioughts  expressed  in  well-chosen 
words  alttniiafiC  with  repetitions  of  the  same  scheme  and  analytical  emnnei’a- 
tioiiB.  Tims  when  in  AVkS.  19,  53  after  5 *^Thne  generated  yonder  sky,  time  also 
these  eartliH  . . it  reads:  '^In  thne  is  mind,  in  time  is  breath,  in  time  is 
name  , . dr  1 1,  6,  n long  series  of  addresses  and  names  of  deities,  followed 
by  tlie  retrain  ‘‘Let  thetu  fr(H>  ns  from  distress/’  Not  to  mention  tho  wooden 
syntax  and  limit»<Hl  scopes  of,  for  instance,  ya;?'a.s‘like  formnlas  snch  as  AVS.  2, 
lOff. 

Most  of  tlu^  longin'  hnagii/  texts  contained  in  book  VIII  are  eliaracterixied  by 
\mity  of  ai\d  elal)oration  with  a considerable  degree  of  variation.  In 

AV)§.  S,  1 (AVP.  1(1,  If.;  21  stai\zas),  which  is  to  achieve  the  continnation  of 
somebody’s  lifo,  the  dotnitiant  thought  is  “retnain  here,  do  not  perish,  do  not 
leave  this  world,”  its  gimeral  tone  being  that  of  a conjuration;  the  atmosphere 
of  2 (AVP.  16,  3ff.},  with  the  same  purpose,  is  more  ritual.  Sukta  3 (AVP.  16, 
Off.,  1-23  are  identical  with  RV.  10,  87,  1-23)®®  is  a graphic  and  emphatic 
address  to  Agni  the  slayer  of  demons  and  ‘sorcerers’;  4 (AVP.  16,  9fF.  and  RV. 
7,  104)  a similar  invocation  to  Indra-and-Soma,  interrupted  by  stanzas  ad- 
dress(‘d  to  Agni  or  other  gods.  Sukta  5 enlarges  upon  the  power  of  an  anuilet,  a 
deftmee  winch  is  “to  driv<^  the  witchcraft  backward”  and  makes  its  possessor 
a lion  or  a tigi'r.  Thmx^  is  also  \inity  of  subject  in  6 (against  demons  attacking  a 
pregnant  woman  %vith  a r(Hmrr(n\t  “make  them  disappear”),  7 (to  tncdioinal 
herbs)  ami  8 (agaitist  <*(0(^11108:  a string  of  im])recationB.)  In  prevailing  upon 
dinties  to  help  or  spare  tlu^tn  tlu^  poets  often  rc'.sort  to  homage  and  praise^k  In 
some  cast's®**  the  invot'aftoti  of  a god,  rt^peated  again  and  again,  is  the  main 
tliem<^  of  a mllia : in  1 , 7®®  the  incantation  prevails  u|)on  Agni  to  ttxake  tlxoae  who 
practise  offt^nsive  ‘soretry’  coxm^  out  and  proclaim  tlxtur  true  character  (for  as 
soon  as  th<\y  rtwt'al  their  name  and  nature  they  beconxe  innocuous) : 

(1)  ‘‘Proclaiming  himself  do  thoti,  0 Agni,  convoy  hither 
Tht^  wizard  and  tht^  evil  spirit, 

For  thotn  ()  god,  whtai  |>rais(^d,  luxst  become 
Tht'  slayer  of  tlu>  impious  mam 

(3)  Tht^  sorcerers  shall  cry  and  iht^  devouritxg  spirits; 

Tht>n,  O Agtxi,  togt>tlM'r  with  ludra, 

Wticome  this  ohhxtion. 

(5)  W<5  wi>uld  lik<^  to  see  tlxy  xnight,  O Jatavedas; 

Anixonnee  to  us  tht^  wizards,  O thou  that  watches  mom 
Let  tlxtvnx  all,  b\irnt  by  thee  in  front, 

Announcing  thomst4vt'<B  come  to  tins  place.” 

Cf.  OxjOUNnnao,  H.  K.  I,  p.  246. 

8tH>e.g.  the'' long  hymn  to' Rtulra  AVl^.  11,  2 (AVP.  10,  l()4-~-d,00);  17,  I (AVP. 
IB,  31  ff.),  a prayer  and  praise  to  Indra,  Vi, *^011,  ami  the  Bun;  AVP,  1,  78;  95;  5,  U; 
20;  7,  3. 

Bee  e.g.  als<>  AVS.  0,  2 Indra  nnieiving  mma  (but  at  Kaui^.  20,  27  pr<m?ril)iug 
st.  2 no  mentJcHi  is  ma<i<^  of  this  offeritig);  2,  5 (Indnx);  0 (Agixi);  3.  20  (Agni  and 
other  g^als);  4,  23  (Agni);  7,  77  (Maruts),  Bomt^  of  a'Uktm  are  b(4(nv  tho  usmd 
standard  (e.g,  0,  33,  Indra)  or  olmeure  (0, 49,  Agni).  (T.  BnooMiMKcn,  A.  V.  (L  82. 

Cf.  also  1,  B.  JiltavedaH  (in  1,  7,  B)  « Agni. 


302 


J.  Ctoiuia  * Liif'rntiiro 


Tlic  very  thctneH  of  «<>me  of  the  larger  gave  their  poet  h an  opjiortiniity 
to  dr'Hcribe  the  ea^t'iiec^  of  i.h<^  cniiity  ehoaen  an  their  theiue,  and  dwell  on  its 

aspeets.  In  the  fioiions  Ifynvn,  to  the  Enrt.ln  AXA.  12,  I (AV1\.  IT,  i ||)^«\  o!ie 

of  the  most  l)eaiitifiil  V<'di<^  onr  phund'  is  wit  h mtjeh  variiit  m\  eelehrated 

under  various  aspc'cts:  as  the  heart'r  atul  restilema^  of  animate  and  inanimate 
beings;  as  the  indispensahle  grouml  for  smn’ifveing  and  diviiii*  and  hnman 
activity;  as  tlie.  uttiv<aml  tnot-lier  ami  disp^^nser  <d"  nmny  benefits,  t,o  whom 
every  Ixdng  owes  his  <'xiHt('nee.  IMneh  irndinetl  U\  anlhrepomorphism  the  |KHd 
imshes  the  traditional  mytlndogy  into  tin.'  hmdcgrotnnh  pairing  Innnage  to  the 
earth  as  a great  goddess  who,  while  sharing  in  man  s earea  and  interests, 
wields  influence  ripoti  elementary  foree  aiul  Inmiamenta,!  pow<'rs*  With(n,at 
neglecting  smdi  motifs  as  Inw  origin  and  speettlafwms  about  Inw  <Hionr  In^  has 
an  eye  tor  the  natural  seenery^h  On  the  otlier  haml,  thotjgh  sur|wvsHing  all 
magical  texts  proper  by  it^s  length  (tl3  st*fuizas),  the  depth  of  its  deseidptions  and 
the  broadness  of  its  outlook,  the  spirit  of  tin'  hymn  is  in  harmony  with  these, 

the  more  so  as  most  of  its  staiizas- and  many  of  them  emphatically  in  their 

last  quartar—expresH  the  personal  desires  of  the  poet  and  his  fellows; 

(1)  , Let  her,  mistress  of  what  in  and  what,  is  to  hi\ 

Let  the  earth  make  for  us  wide  room, 

(63)  0 Mother  Earth,  propitiously  set  n»e  dowri  welldbundf'd, 

In  concord  with  Heaven,  ()  place  me  in  fortune,  in  p'rt»spenfy.” 

Whereas  the  poet  oi  12,  1 does  not  deviatf<^  from  his  subject',  ilie  tlnunc,  or 
rather  the  starting-point,  t>f  the  .fottr  Hohita  of  Imok  XIII  (1  and  2: 

AVR  IB,  is  repeatedly  lost  sight  of,  iSHkta  1,  less  precatlvc  in  i'haraeter, 
describes  the  phenotnenon  of  Himrise  and  the  safety  and  otlier  benefits  resulting 
fr(,mi  it,  the  pow<w  of  tin'  sun  as  creator,  its  various  cosmic  and  mythological 
aspects  and  speculative  itnplieaihms  with  the  interrtiptiou  of  stn  27-31,'  im- 
prooatiouH  against  rivals  a<idn'HmH,l  to  Agni,  Indra  and  other  drilkn.  In  2,  deline- 
ating the  phenomena  aecomfianying  tim  appearance  of  sunlight,  the  functions, 
properties,  importance  and  imHunprehensive  powtr  of  the  i'etestiiil  body,  now 
called  Iditya,  come  to  thc^  fore,  tlu'  name  Kolnta  remaining  in  tim  Itaekgrotmd. 
SuMa  3 is  mai,nly  welded  into  a whoh^  by  tlu'  refrain  wording  a typically  athar- 
vanic  anathema  against  the  c,me  who  injtires  brahmins«  which  *iH  only  absent 


It  has  the  distinction  of  being  tla^  nmst  frequently  f'rai’wlat.ed  mlkiu  of  the 
Atharvaveda:  e.g.  Bloomfiklo,  IL  AV..  p.  m\;  M*  LmrmNAm  in  Fe.sigabi^  .H. 
Jacobi,  Bonn  1926,  |,).  24B;  H.  Bneain  I’h'r  .Hymnus  an  die  Erde,  Stuttgart  1934; 
Kbncw,  H.b.,  p.  189;  and  see  al«<»  (4.  'Pta'an',  ,Eranos*Jahrlmeh  22  (Zurteh  1964), 
p.  J23^;  P.  S,  bASTur,  at  ,IHQ  39,  p,  101 ; ef,  also  HnNOtq  at  Yggdiwill  1938*.  |>»  16L 
(lenorally  speaking,  in  referring  to  nature,  plants  ef.c.  tht^  poets  ^e.g,  of  AVI§. 
4,  34,  5,  b.  BAHtr,  at  V.hf  (I,  |'k  61-  • tend  t<i  overlook  the  aesflietto  teipeeis, 

bee  also  above,  |a  293.  For  a transhahm;  V.  flFNltv*  Los  hvmues  .Itohitas, 
farm  189,1;  see  also  BtooMFiKnm  at  AJPh  12.  p.  429;  l\  .lixsaNAtun  Le  mvthe  de 
Kolnta,  l>ar,iH  1892;  U.  K,  at  A.P  19,  p,  647;  V.  HatVASTAVA,  at  68, 

p.  122« 

See  abov(s  p*  287. 


Tho  At.harvttvoda 


303 


in  the  Imt  (2(]t.!i)  Himim,,  mnm  gronpK  of  two  or  more  successive  stanzas  being 
more,  clost^ly  mmxcHi^xi  by  mmmon  catchwords.  Tho  larger  part  of  the  last 
text  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  adoration  of  the  Snn,  althongh  tho  initial 
stanzas  ldimtili<Hl  him  with  other  divine  powers,  which  in  tho  transitional 
stanza,  13  an^  said  to  ‘i>tHM>nie  oiud’  in  him;  in  the  man  who  knows  this  all  gods 
b(Ha;>tne  one. 

We  shonld  \umim.^r  proeetai  with,  caution  in  assuming  a double  or  composite 
charactiU"  of  a ta'xt : AVJ^.  1 , 12  ( AV.P.  1 , 17)  lor  instance  is  not  a hymn  to  light- 
ning a,nd  a <duvrm  against  tlie  diseases  attributed  to  it*^,  but  rather  such  a 
charm  in  whi(di  the  aaithor  has,  in  the  usual  way,  included  references  to  the 
origin  and  (dTt'cts  of  lightning,  homage  and  the  expression  of  the  wish  to  bo 
spared  and^fnanl  from  disease*®,  ^rhe  sublime  and  justly  admired  hymn  to 
Varnna  AWS.  4, 16*®,  apparently  quite  original  in  the  Atharvaveda— part  of  its 
stairzas  are  also  foimd  in  AVP.  5,  32— betrays  its  purpose  in  its  second  half 
which  should  not  be  considered  a later  magical  addition  degrading  a beautiful 
piece  of  art  into  the  exordium  of  an  exorcism.  The  exceptional  statement  of 
divine  omniscience,  omnipresence  and  almighty  power  is  only  an  extreme 
instance  of  the  heights  of  poetical  fervour,  vision  and  eloquence  which  occasion- 
ally W(U’e  within  the  reach  of  tlu^se  poets : 

(1)  “The  (Irm  governor  watches  theu\,  as  it  were,  closely; 

Who  thinks  t,o  go  on  HOsiltbily  all  this  gods  ktxow. 

(2)  Whoever  stands,  \vbt>  moves,  who  crook<>dly  goes,  who  hiddenly  (or)  in 
Hi w ret  ( T), 

What  two  sitting  down  tog(^ther,  talk,  king  Varuna  as  the  third  knows  that. 

(3)  iioth  this  i'art^'i  is  king  Varuna's,  and  yonchn''  firm  sky  with  distant  max'gins; 
I'he  t.wo  <KH^ans  are  his  paunches,  in  t.lus  i>etty  watca'  is  he  hidden. 

(5)  All  tliis  king  Vartina  sees,  what  is  betweexi  heaven  and  (wth,  what  beyond; 
Numht^riHl  by  Inm  are  the  winkings  of  people;  tis  a gambler  the  dice,  so  does 
he  tix  thi'se  (things).^ 

And  ihtm  in 

(7)  “With  a hundred  snares,  O Varupa,  surrotmd  him;  let  tho  speaker  of  nn- 
trtith  not  escai)**!  thts\  ()  watcher  of  nuax  , , 

Witli  the  probable  exception  of  AVfi.  6, 11  (AVP.  8,1)  tluTO  are  no  dialogue 
sfiktxm,  but  c|ut'Httiotxs,  wlndficr  itxtroductory  or  intercalary,  arc  a favourite 


**  Bx.ooMiOKnn,  in  PA.()B  ISBO  at  JAGS  13,  p.  OXIII;  II.  AV.,  p.  247  (whore 
many  I'sutatudars  regarding  the  interpretation) ; A,  V,  G.  B.,  p.  37;  43, 

That  the  ritualists  had  a double  extqxloytnent  for  th<'>  text  (Katri.  26,  1 against 
(K'rtain  ^bseiwes;  38,  1;  7 against  bad  weather  and  siqxu'llnous  rain)  is  another 
thing, 

**  H.  ItoTii,  Al)baiMlhnatih><^r<len  Atharvav(Hla,  Tubixigen  1856,  p.  28;  A.  IvAncn, 
I)t>r  liigviHla,  IHBl,  p.  89  (with  paraihds  from  tlu^  Okl  d^^stiunent) ; 

viisun,  IL  AV.,  p.  390  (with  a bibliographieal  note);  WnuKiu  I.  H.  XVlll',  p,  66; 
WiuTNin^'-LANMAN,  AV.,  176;  Wintohnitz,  II.  1.  L.  I,  p.  144;  H.  Lommku,  at 
ZDMCl  92,  |).  452. 


304 


J.  t^oiKlfi  * Lit 


ckvioc'*^.  Qiieniicmw  and  aiinworn  an<l  ri<idloK  Iha  t'Vpr*^  ii\  Btw- 

cession  are,  in  these  texts,  an  a,-ttinn|>t’  to  gain  an  insighi  in'  efdahliBh  a tenth*® 
developing  into  a sfHHnilative  d(‘vi<a\  Kiddles  Idrtn,  hesides  praise'  c>f  pritices 
and  of  some  gods  (Agni,  Indra),  rittial  johes  nr  ohseemilie's,,  aitd  didiniie  stanms, 
the  contents  of  the  Kiini.a|ai  hymns  (AVH,  2ih  127-''  1311)^’^',  ftie  old}"  original 
mktm  of  book  XX;  while  lUlienl  to  (In'  of  (hc'  Kgveda  thev  are 

liturgies  to  be  lined  in  tin'  saerifieiat  riinal  Knar  ti(nrgi<'  (riidiiion  eorres|>onding 
to  the  natural  sabdivisions  aeetmling  to  (heir  snbjeel- mailer,  KetVains  are 
frecpient®*  and  so  are,  mosiiy  for  rifnid  pnrptwes,  repel  ifions  of  (tie  aanit'  st'henie 
and  varicHl  snceessions  of  words  ihai  wlih  one  or  a fe%v  except  ions  are  idi'nt  ieaK^. 
Various  forms  of  progress  by  means  of  eoneatenatioiV®  sometimes  inlerrnpt  the 
often  abrupt  and  arth'ss  transitions  from  one  stair/, a or  si'nlean'e  (o  another. 

The  pccndiaritii'S  nn'nifoned  last  are  also  proper  to.  Kie  |..wo  sfikim  of  book 
XIV  (AVP.  18,  Iff.)  (13i)  stanms)  wlueb  contain  ilu'  w.edding  formidiis^h  They 
coincide  largely,  bnt  not  entiix'ly,  with  RV.  ID,  (he  Sfiryiisfikta.  Other 
Rgvedic  stanms,  notably  10,  40,  lOff.,  n'appi'ar  also.  Init  many  formnlas  are 
foreign  to  the  other  eorpus.  Most  of  them  ar<'  fmtml  also  wit  h many  variants  in 
the  grhym&rm  where  they  are  ritnally  |>rescrihetR».  Ilr>wevei\  the  order  in 
which  the  stanzas  appear  in  the  Atharvavi'da  the  differences  het  wi'f'n  both 

recensions  are  but  slight <hndates  I'onsiih'rahly  from  (4ie  regular  order  of  tlu*. 

rites  which  is  Ibllowml  in  tlu'  (including  that  of  Katuuka),  Tho  eompihrr 
semns  to  have  arrangi'd  ilu'  material  in  a <'er(ain  extent  in  iwnmlimnn  with  tht^ 
principles  ot  metrical  idt'iitity,  unity  t.d  theme,  and,  in  plae.es,  emieatt'natiom 
AVb).  14, 1, 1-5  aridn  praise  o(  8oma  who  is  to  eontraet  the  areliefypat  marriages 


8eee,g,  AV.i  B,  h,  1;  H),  2,  If.;  4ff;  10,.  7,  Iff.;  IS,  K 4;  0;  7;  12;  $X  In  oral 
instruction  the  number  of  (questions  was  enlargtHl;  ef.  iL  It,  i'hwnxxm  m JKJKHV 
27,  p*  107. 

8ch)  p.  134.  For  an  etymology  see  e,g.  AV'fi.  4.  7.  I. 

I'.  «■  «.  1; 

8ff.:  AVI  . 1,  ,)0,  (!;  (i,  3,  If.;  1(5,  (11,  7f.  'I'hn  luwww  «iny  nlwii  hi'  inutln'd. 

Not  found  in  AVP,;  there  is  no  tt'xt,  'Phe  meaning  of  thf»  naita^'  t.s  not 
okmr.  Sec  Bw)OMFinno,  A.  V.  (k  Ik,  p,  00;  H.  (k  .NaiiAiuak  at  AT  21,  p.  403,  Of. 

0. g.  GB.  *,  0,  13:  by  namns^of  ,AVJ^.  20,  133,  Iff.  the  gO'ils  overeaiUi'  tiaar  enemh's 
(wiio  could  make  notlung  of  them),  and  saerilieers  are  mlviseti  to.  use  Kami  for  the 
same  purpciec,^. 

“ Cf.  o.g.  AVJ5.  2,  27,  2 (1;,'1,  31:4.  2;  24;  33;  fi,  31:  «.  107:  10,  7;  0;  II,  3;  12,  3, 

55ff.  , » I » 

->1'  l«'-:  i:‘:  l».  H.  Sff.; 

In,  8.^ Compare  also  thi^  structure  of  uml-kta  such  as  11,  130, 

0 0Kr"‘' *’■  **'■=  43f.; 

1,  25f.  and  BnooMemnn,  A.  V.  (k  B.,  p.  43  with  n.  13. 

“ 8o«  '.r,  Ya.  HmAKKNKovA  chhI  a,  Va.  Kvhkjm.  Aj>  (iHiUyiMK  «f  thn  Vi'dio 
HO.  TriHiM.  'I'lirtu  Univ.  IHI  Mt.m.  II  (llliiO).  p.  173;  (lONitA, 

«/;  *’  »»«.  1>-  402:  M.  Wt^rmsm.  Dm.  .dlHidMu. 

HoolizditenUioll,  DwikMcdirifton  Ak.uL  WUm  40  (IK02). 

8ee  abovii,  p.  1 la, 

See  also  Kau4.  70 70  (whiidi  does  not  usf^  all  mtmtrm). 


Tho  Aiharvavoda 


305 


with  Sfirya,  the,  daughter  of  the  Sun®’;  st,  6-16  deal  with  tho  requisites  and 
funetionat'it's  presc'ut  at  the  ceremony;  st.  17ff.  are  consecratory  formulas,  part 
of  which  art'  groupoil  to  acHMunpany  the  same  episode  of  the  ceremonies,  and  so 
on.  Hook  X VIl,r®*  in  four  mlkfm  containing  the  funeral stauKas  is  another  version 
of  the  eorres|>onding  materials  in  the  Kgveda,  amplified  however  witli  a con- 
siderahlt'  number  of  stanzas  that  arc  found  in  other  parts  of  that  corpus  or  are 
evi^n  (HU'nplet>i'ly  foreign  to  it®®.  Outside  this  book  there  are  in  the  Atharvaveda 
niany  ot.lu'r  allusionH  to  certain  funeral  practices®®. 

A bout»  om^-si  xth  of  (he  (?Saunakiya  Sainhita  consists  of  prose  which  generally  is  of 
the  brdhmmja  varic^ty  l^he  twenty-seven  stiMm  eomprising  book  XV  and  almost 
the  whoh'  of  X VI,  as  well  as  some  thirty  other  mktas  scattered  in  other  books 
(mainly  in  the  seeoiid  and  third  great  divisions)  are  entirely  nnmctrical,  in 
addition  t<^  thi\S(^  also  parts  or  single  stanzas  of  over  a hundred  stlldas^^.  In  the 
sfikfm  tntmtf  oned  last  this  prose  and  the  metrical  elements  are  generally  speak- 
ing tolerably  well  blended.  Constituting  in  all  probability  the  oldest  Indian 
prose  extant  this  mode  of  expression  seems  to  have  developed  together  with 
tho  formation  of  the  speculative  portions  of  the  coiquis.  Two  types  must  be 
distinguished,  the  and  the  'brdhmana'  prose.  Tlic  former  occurs,  either 

isolated  or  si'rially~l)ut  lU'ver  to  form  longer  mktm— in  all  parts  of  the  sani” 
hUfu  A typical  HjxH'imen  is  AV.  2, 17, 1 6jo  \sy  6jo  me  ddh  “(inatigurative)  power 
art  I'’hou:  givt^  me  (this)  powc'r'’*  (the  person  speaking  washes  to  benefit  by  the 
stakuiu'nt  of  a truth).  Ilu^se  are  presmnably  less  modified  by  the 

versifunl  f'gvtHlie  mtnirm  than  tlux  probably  contemporaneous,  corn^sponding 
yajurviHlic  formulas.  1^10  dmikmamd  prose  of  the  mTuhitd  mxnirs  in  larger 
autonomous  and  coherent  tc^xts  8,  U);  9,  6;  7;  11,  3;  12,  5;  15^—^^^^^  of  them 
being  jxmjdyti  (^^ptM’iotr^)  hymns®®.  It  is  <‘Iiaracterizcd  by  typically  brdhmaya 
eonstruetions,  an  unmistakabU^  monotony,  and  tlu^  use  of  some  formal  cato- 
gorit'S  wliieh  ar<^  foreign  to  the  Rgveda®*.  In  (jomparison  with  the  hrdhmanas  it 
is  howxrvia*  stiff,  mori^  uniform  and  morphologically  poorer. 

Book  XV,  in  contiuiis  and  styh^  lik(^  the  brdhmanas  and  divided  into  18  short 
cliapters  (pmjdyajf  glorifies  th<!i  uru/ya®®,  tho  representative  of  unorthodox, 


See  also  8.  KtiAMinsoif,  in  JAOB  81,  p.  116. 

Only  a hnv  stanzas  ar<^  in  difft^rent  placets  found  in  tho  PaippalRda  roconsion. 

For  particuliwu  see  BnoowriKtau  A.  V,  G.  B.,  p.  95. 

« Of.  BnooMiOEUi),  AJFh  11,  p.  336. 

For  a list  of  these  passages:  Whitnicy-Lanman,  AV.,  p.  1011;  for  a study: 
llENOtl',  K.  V.  P.  1,  p.  71. 

It  is  not  always  tnwy  to  distinguish  whether  a pieces  is  conipo8(H:l  in  prose  or 
ext-rcauciy  free  verse. 

Wuitney^Lanman,  AV.,  p.  CXXXIII;  471;  tlu^  tmati  applit^s  to  an  internal 
division  tlu'se  extended  compositions. 

Hiso  Henoo',  O.C.,  p.  81  and,  in  gtut^ral,  btiow  p.  410  ff. 

'fhe  prii(;ym  have  given  rise  to  much  and  pm’tly  unsc44hHl  (sml.rovavrsial 
diH|:njp^:  Tm  AuimKCMiT.  in  VVKima,  LB.  1,  P-  131  (translation);  J.  OuAHCENTimi, 
at  W^IKM'  23,  p.  151;  25,  p.  355;  M.  WiNTERNurz,  at  7m,  f.  Buddhismus  l024'-25, 


306 


,T.  (.‘oiulu  • Vi'tlit' 


but  Aryan,  oiTant  groups  %vi(h  Inulitioits.  n rttli  ntul  a (b-t'ub'iily  ritualist, ic 
spcOTlative  thought  of  tin  notstxivly  thr  V.nia  {Vll.  17.  1.2)- 

which  must  have  mainteimHl  intitnatu  conncctiojiK  with  the  Atharvavcilins**, 
In  theses  rather  u, bstrn.se  chapters,  which  arc  almost  completely  wanting  in  the 
Paippahlda  tradition  and  ar<>  not,  iinotcd  in  t he  t wo  .-.li/ras.  tlie  rraitfti  is  exalted 
as  having  become  the  Iswd ; section  10  13  deserihes  the  pro.speet  of  bh-asings 
held  otit  to  a king  wdm  receives  a vrihtf/tt  ns  his  guest ; sections  2 6 aiul  bt  are 
arrangt'd  in  aiaiordancc  witJj  th<'  wlt.known  syslejn  of  t he  regiojw  of  the  uni- 
vense,  through  which  the  deilied  rratifn  makes  a creative  lour. 


p.  48;  B.  Lau  Mokhkiukb,  atJASHeugal  p.  17it:  .1,  W.  Hai-k<».  Der  Vriitya. 
Stuttgart  I!)27  and  at  I'Vstaehrift.  M.  VV‘int.erntt‘/..  lanpy.ig  Ittlt.'b  jt,  I43j  >S,  Bi.swah, 
at  ZDMG  lOfi,  p.  *r)S  aiwl  Vh'iityastiima.  'rhesis  Ib'diu  Itifift:  .SAMceasiAVANO,  'I’lie 

Atharv(i*v<Hla  Vratynki^uja,  (tnllawiai^  Kityai.iah  4.  i\  IlKKHTitiiMAN, 

at  114  (k }).  I ; Oh.  at  JOI'B  1^,  p,  A.  i\  lUNMniUHA*  Hiialtari  m tka  limhiHH- 

Dalhi  p.  81;  llojtHHH,  'V.  0,  B.,  p,  (wtth  h laliitHgmplaaal  laHii). 

««  Bew  Il'OHHHHV  caa.»  p.  404, 


The  Atharvaveda 


307 


6.  Ancillary  and  exegeMcal  literature 

The  so-called  PariSistas  (Supplements,  Appendices)* **  of  the  Atharvaveda 
actually  constitute  a detailed,  valuable  and  informative  survey — of  course, 
from  the  atharvanic  point  of  view*— of  various  kinds  of  religious  practices  in 
vogue  in  definite  milieus  in  the  late  Vedic  and  early  Hindu  period.  They  are  a 
well-considered  collection  of  72  longer  or  shorter  texts®,  some  of  which  in  sutra 
stylo,  others  metrical,  in  the  older  parts  in  Vedic  metres,  in  the  younger  some- 
times in  complicated  younger  metres,  very  often  in  the  4bka.  The  stylo  often 
tends  to  enumerativc  exactness.  Many  of  its  chapters  are  Vedic  in  their  general 
contents,  but  their  language,  sometimes  even  ungrammatical,  reminds  us  of 
that  of  the  purdnas.  This  peculiarity  is  in  harmony  with  the  fact  that  the  rites 
and  customs  mentioned  are  not  hrfrcqucntly  also  described  in  other  works  that 
doubtless  belong  to  the  post-Vedic  period*.  Although  the  method  of  operation 
of  these  texts  is  genuinely  atharvanic  and  in  accordance  with  the  method  used 
by  Kaufiika'— ch.  45  on  the  agnihotra  is  in  close  agreement  with  Vait.  ch.  7 — 
their  compilation  must  have  taken  place  late.  They  attest,  for  instance,  to  the 
‘transition’  of  Rudra  to  Siva*.  Some  texts— for  instance  45— while  creating 
the  impression  of  being  a sutra  inculcate  the  doctrine  of  the  indispensability  of 
an  atharvanic  functionary  for  those  who  warrt  to  perform  sacrifices  or  other 
ritual’.  Hence  also  the  jiassages  that  urge  the  necessity  for  appointing  a puro- 
hita  who  alone  can  avert  evil*,  and  the  ample  room  given  to  omens,  portents*, 

* Edition;  Ci.  M.  Boixino  and  J.  von  Nkomokin,  The  Pari^i^tas  of  the  Athar- 
vavoda,  l^eipKig  1909  (ooutaining  also  roforonces  to  older  litoratvire).  The  text  is 

oftexi  cormpt. 

® Atluirvaxxic  mithoritiea  aro  frcquontly  meixtiouod  (o.g,  7;  23,  14,  3;  27,  2,  5; 
28,  1,  2;  44,  4,  15). 

® JBoo  V.  Nisoelkin,  at  OLZ  11  (1908),  p,  447;  Caland,  at  Archiv  fur  Eoligioris- 
wisBOUBchaft  14,  p.  513;  Exxgmioton,  in  Studies  Bloornfield,  p.  117;  B.  R.  Modak, 
A study  of  tlxe  ancillary  litertituro  of  the  Atharvaveda,  with  special  reference  to- 
tho  parUistas,  X\)oxxa  1951  (not  published) ; atxd  in  Journal  Karxxatak  Univ.  3 (1959),. 
p,  100;  S (1964),  p.  65. 

* To  avoid  xxxisundt^rstanding:  there  are  also  xnarxy  parallels  in  Vc^dio  texts  or  in 
parliutds  to  other  Vedic  works  (see  Calani>,  o.c.). 

® Notice  also  thcj  rt^sexnblanco  bc'itween  AVPar.  37  and  Kauj^.  93'”-136  ((xxpiatoiy 
coronxonies).  KauiS.  140  itnd  AVPar.  19  describe  the  saxxxo  Indra  festival:  Gonda,. 
at  JAOB  87,  p,  413, 

® Corxxpare  o.g,  AVI^ar.  40  a Pnsupatavratain,  being  the  rules  for  atx  ascetic 
porf<)rniauc('>  in  Ixoxxour  of  Jixidra  as  PtXi^upati.  Tlxe  ritual  of  a certHuony  in  honoxir 
of  8kanda  is  deseribiHl  in  20  (translated  by  0.  J.  GooinviK,  at  'PAOB  1890,  (,TAOH 
15),  p.  V);  atharvanic  Rudra-jSiva  <?(U’enionieB  in  36;  31  deals  with  a rit.ual  whi<dx 
Atharvan  oiU5es  p(B4brmtHl  for  ifiiva  an<l  xxiUHt  b(^  nvproduetHl  by  iho  purokUa.  Eor' 
‘transitioid  hoo  also  34. 

^ Gf,  also  5 (lustration  ritual);  21  (the  obj<HUs  riS|ulriHl  at  a c(H'emouy);  23,  14,  Iff. 

**  kStHA  e.g.  AVPar,  2 (on  the  acKiuisititHX  of  a kingdom) ; 4 (iJie  daily  ce'renxoxii<HH  to- 
be  perforna^l  by  that  bmctaorxary) ; 31  (bx'io  abovts  ix.  6);  70,  1,  4fr. 

^ I).  tP  IvmiMxiaixu'TE,  Atluu‘vav(Hla-pari.4iBtu,i  ftber  Omiua,  lTinK.jht  1938:. 


308 


(loiula  ^ Lit  w^ttiro 


astrology,  ritual  oonta'cted  %vith  tlio  cHniai<^!lniiotm^^  as  Wf^ll  m in  royal  ritc's**. 
BoHides,  tlun'o  aro  uiagit’al  prariiroH^®  ■ o.g.  35  in  ordrr  in  ovoia'onio  t>r  destroy 
a persoti  one  makes  his  imago  out  of  ground  hlaok  tniisiard  whioh  is  iiddroasod 
as  “tlio  I'mngont  oii«\  tko  hlossod  naldish  ono,  daugldo'r  of  Afkarviin  and  won- 

derworkor’' , rules  for  a popular  and  eonstsu'atory  rif^es.  rittial  for 

tlie  prest'utatiou  «>r gifts  to  offieiants^*,  dealing  with  the  ohjeeis  rerfuired 
at  a e<rremony^*^  and  other  stiUjind,  matter.  Thn  Ausanasadhhuiilni  f AA‘  Bar.  71 
deal  with  a large  varitdy  (d^porienia,  illuunenetl  oeiuirrenees  in  Huerifietm,  onums 
eoimee.te<l  with  hirds  and  oBua*  animals,  with  things  not  Imman  that  begin  to 
speak  or  stationary  things  that  nmve,  liesh  and  hhnal  falhm  in  stunrerfo  witlu'ixMl 
trees  that  begin  togniwnml  other  sueh  dn'ivded  oeeurrenees.  'Tln^  text-  I'vremmts 

itself  as  beitig  e.otunmineateel  iiy  Uthmas henei'  its  name  -in  Nilrada  who 

eame  to  him  for  instruetion,  a very  welhknown  st-rnetnre  <if  the  llimiu  {uiranie 
ami  diilaeth^  types  of  litAumtamu 

Another  ancillary  text,  tlm  Athar\u)^pn\vaseit4'.ilni*h  ilerivi^s  its  imporUnee, 
not  only— •notwithHtaiuiing  the  highly  corrupt  st.ivtc  of  its  tr^xt-  • ^ from  its  con- 
tents, atonements  for  various  tnisiaki's  or  oniinotis  <'vents  in  fht^  riiuiih  hut  also 
from  the  fact  that  it  is  the  oldest  collection  of  its  genre.  Although  some  of  its 
manuscripts  regard  it  as  ari  addendum,  to  th,e  X'aitilnanSutra,  it  is  an  independ- 
ent treatise  which,  i,n  contradiHiinctinn  ti>  Kiuii^ikaaml  \kiit4nii»  joins  the  lAdp- 
pallida  reiiensioid^.  The  compiler  often  refers  to  iliasentient«  oj'uniona  of  otlua* 
authorities  and  likes  to  dign^ss  in  Imthnmm  style  in  'Order  to  elneidaic  tlie  ritual 
practices  or  to  argue  Ins  preseripta  right  and  ctTi’etive.  The  prineijile  nn  whieh 
his  arginmmtation  is  haseil  is  tls'  neei'smty  of  an  imnuHiiate  integral  restftution. 
Bor  instaiuan 

(2,  4)  “Next,  if  the  tmnihdm  mm  u-lueh  is  to  give  warm  imik  for  pwune  (fiainahee) 
lows  wh,en  hIua  is  milkish  what  is  then  the  attmement-  T Kla*  lows  PtMumst^  sht^ 
wisht^s  to  announce  hungi^r  and  thirst  to  tht>  siuinfieer.  Therefore  oive  should 
give’i  her  also  hay  as  food  with  the  tmiatm  AVIA  2tK  H,  4 ’Foeiltng  m t^xeellent 


translation  <vto.  of  AVBar.  57,  02  (on  eartht|uakos) : 53  (glowing  of  tlio  horir.on  and 
meteors);  51)  (lightning) ; 00  (cyclones);  O.l  (twilight);  03  (halos):  |nwts  i»f  04;  70;  71 
(variouB  portents);  for  71  see  also  iL  T.  .liATrnaan  at  dA08  15,  p,  207  (rOsumo: 
PAOB  1888,  p.  XII,  CL'Vl)  and  Bdimumiic,  IhTtehte mleha,  Beio  th  Wtss.  44.  |a  188. 

B.  R.  Mouak,  Nak^atrakalpa  (AV|,*ar.  1),  ,Br4>e.  20  Int.  Congr,  of  Or.  Ill, 
119;  see  also  G.  M.  Bo,wuho,  The  ^^Intikalpa  nt  the  Atharvavetia  (a  small  k^xt 
containing  rules  for  propitiatory  ritos)*TAPhA  35  (1904),  p,  77  and  *t  At  )H  311,  p.  205. 

“ Bee  e.g.  3 (consecration  of  a king);  0 (lustraUun);  7 (a  nocturnal  hwtntiiim); 
8;  13;  17f. 

Bee  for  35:  IL  W.  Maaoun,  at  AdPh  10,  p,  105, 

W.  CAnAN,n,  Altindiseher  Ahnt^noult,  Leiden  1893.  p,  95;  240, 

Bee  AVlkw.  9 IP;  14 It 
« Bee  AVPar.  2 Iff. 

l^^xt  ami  trmwlation : m 9. 

Edition  (with  notes):  3,  von  N'mmnKiN.  at  dAOH  33,  p,  71;  211;  34.  p.  229 
<introduction;  tluu’o  is  no  translation) ; nms  also  Gauano,  at  W7Ji5I  18,  p.  197. 

« Calano,  at  W7dCM,  l.e. 


The  Athavvaveda 


309 


meadows,  woll-portiionod  (fortunate)  (so  also  may  wo  bo  well-portioned;  oat 

hay...).’” 

A few  wordB  must  be  said  on  the  prdtiiahhyas.  The  work  edited  at  the  time 
by  Whitney*®  is  in  aeeordancc  with  its  sxib-title  really  the  prdtiMkhija  of  the 
Sannakfya  recension,  not  that  of  the  Atharvaveda  in  general  or  of  the  Indian 
vnlgate— which  is  however  not  very  different,  the  Paippalada  standing  apart 
from  the  main  tradition.  Failing  to  see  this  the  editors  Roth  and  Whitney 
‘emended'  the  text  after  tliis  prdtiMkh/a^^,  Manuscripts  of  another  work  which 
is  fundamentally  different,  found  in  1923,  were  published  in  1939®^,  This  prdti- 
Mkhya  coincides  exactly  with,  the  manuscripts  of  the  vulgatc.  It  is  represented 
by  a shorter  (abridged)  text  comprising  stiff  and  simple  sutras  and  a larger, 
probably  less  original  one  that  has  been  amplified  with  paraphrases  and  inter- 
polations. It  is  a typical  illustration  of  a sutra  in  the  making;  from  its  style  it 
appears  that  the  larger  text  must  have  received  its  present  form  somewhere 
between  the  Rgveda-Pinti^akhya  and  the  later  philosophical  sutras : there  is 
an  admixture  of  concise  mnemonic  verses  (kdrikd).  The  plan  of  the  work  is 
remarkable.  Borrowing  a long  series  of  examples  from  the  padapdtha  it  is  a 
sort  of  codification  of  that  work  arranged  by  means  of  rubricating  sutras.  It 
does  not  contain  any  phonctical  rule.  This  type  of  prdtUdkhja  is  probably  older 
than  the  nortnal  type  in  which  tin's  pad(i^0tha  is  converted  into  the  samhitd 
text. 

Thi)  Affgirasakalpa^®  of  tln^  Atharvaveda  is  a later  handbook  whi<di,  besides 
an  account  of  the  legendary  promulgation  of  this  Veda  by  the  Atbarvans  and 
Ahgirases  and  myths  and  legends  connected  wifih  the  founder  Pippahida, 
inchid<^s  various  rites  ff>r  the  protection  of  the  saci'ificer  and  his  officiants, 
ixnprcH^atoiy  rites,  coiniter-riteBt(>  face  probable  VitchcratV  practised  by  enc- 
mies^^,  a description  of  the  accesBoricB  needed  in  performing  these  rites  and  so  on. 
Like  the  other  ritnal  liandbooks  (kalpa)  and  pariMstas  of  this  Veda  it  is  mainly 
written  in  the  pnranie  style  and  embodies  also  decidedly  Hindu,  or  ov(^n  abnost 
tantri<;,  matter.  In  accordance  with  this  character  of  tht!!  contents  they  are 
represented  as  biding  communicaiicd  by  Affgiras  to  his  son  and  intt'rrogator 
I^ippalida : the  well-known  structure  of  innumerable  Hindu  works. 


W.  D.  WinTNBY,  The  Atharvavoda-Prati^akhya  or  Saunaklya  Caturrulkyayika 
(text,  translation,  notes  etc.),  JAGS  7,  p.  333  (Waranasi  19G2),  See  also  Whitnmy, 
at  PADS  1862,  p.  IWII. 

The  corruptions  arc  however  part  of  the  atharvavedic  tradition.  It  may  be 
x*ecalled  that  this  tradition  was  from  th(^  beginning  less  |>rottX5tod  from  deterioration, 
intrusion  of  ‘hybrid’  fortns  etc.  also  Kiunon,  E.  V.  P.  HI,  p.  119). 

HCuya  KXNr’A,  Atharvav(Kia-Prati^n,khyam  (texts,  iutrodmvtion,  English 
translation  etc.),  Lah.ort,^  1939  (^Dollu  1968).  For  the  ‘vulgate’;  p.  .*12-  also 
|inN()i:r,  at  3'A  235,  jn  149. 

Gf.  (Jauano,  in  GOA  1900,  5,  p.  407;  Y.  W.  KAitAM^innacAit,  a.t  16  AIOG,  H, 
p,  61;  I),  BuAXTAOnARYYA,  at  21  AIOC,  X,  p.  73;  Fundanamtal  itluanes,  p.  2. 

Of.  IJfgvidhrma  4,  6,  4. 


310 


»T.  GoiitJa  * VtHiic  Lii<'ra<tin> 


According  to  DMla’n  conini<>ntary  on  tlu^  KnoHikn-Suin^®*  tlic  .Atfiarva- 
miitihitH  exiBicMl,  not  only  in  the  ionn  of  onr  printorl  toxin  (tln^  xambMd  of  the 
r,s’i>),  bnt  also  in  an  abbr(^viat(M'l  tbrtn  for  iho  inirptwo  of  innirnidion  {dfmi^mam- 
MM  and  a,  fortn  for  riitinl  mho  (vidhipmt^otja  ) in  whiidu  vcrncK 

arc  split  in  parts  or  iin'n'ascd  by  ropctitioiu  ticw  words  arc'  insorCcai,  etc*  As  in 
the  litcratnro  inmnu:! lately  attaching  itself  to  Ailnunnivcdin  tradit-ion®^  bas 
it  that  there  were  five  M^xix  ro^m'dod  an  l\aithinasi,  a eotnpiler  ofxiltra 

and  mnrU  niateriaf  wliose  works  Hctnu  to  hav<'  boon  lost  was  an  arlhertnit  of  tbe 
PaippalEda  sehooPh 

In  addition  to  what  has  alr<‘ady  Ix'en  said  on  tlu'  pn^sc'rvaiiini  of  t>ln'  Atihar- 
vaveda®**  it  nmy  tinally  be  obsi'rveil  that  various  post-Vedi<^  ^vorks,  among 
which  the  epics  and  piminm,  woro  ai'quaintetl  wiili  it  and  vooo^tmod  its  im- 
portance®®. Aiurording  to  the  Bhfnatiya-Nafyasfistra  desinibing  t-iie  tu'igin  of 
dramatic  art  (1,  17)  the.  re<atativ<>  was  taken  from  the  l.fgvisbn  tlu'  songs  from 
the  Silmaveda,  histrionic  repri'sentation  from  tlu^  Vajnrvcsla  ami  the  sentiments 
(rma)  frotn  the  Atharvaveda.  In  arguing  that  all  I’reatures  ri^ally  ar<^  hrahnmn 
Badarayana’s  Brahmasutras  2,  3,  43  refer  to  A VP.  8,  b,  IP  wdnu’e  gamblers  etc. 
are  said  to  bo  brahmaii^^  Epigraphieal  records  mentioning  tlie  fourth  Veda  are 
not  wanting^h  The  corntm^ntary”  attributed  to  8ayana,  but  mosl.  probably 
composed  by  another  interpreter®®,  contains  a mass  of  etymologi^^al  and  other 
nonsense,  worthless  Variantsf  false  I'onstrtietioim  ami  other  short.eomings; 
yet,  sometimes  it  may  put  us,  eviui  by  a not  <H>mpIet«dy  oovvooi  ini.erpreiaiaom 
in  a fair  way  to  a better  umlia^stamling  of  a passage'.  Noi.wiihstamiing  the 
waning  popularity  of  tins  (uirpuS'  ■ which,  whib^  containing  much  extram'OUB 
snbje<d-matter  was  not  of  much  ust'  in  saerifieing®^  ^ imiividual  seludars  eon- 

Dadla,  on  p.  1 of  the  edition  (KautlikwutrioI)ariliddu%'a,  ihL  hy  It.  H,  Do 
wmKAii  and  others,  Poona  1972).  vSihn  II.  R.  Djwkkau,  in  dGJKHV  27 "(11171),  L o. 
193.  * 

***  CAXiAnn,  Ahnoncult,  p.  99;  109;  A.  llini#EiiaA!snT,  lURtalhtX^'raitir^  St4iissbtirg 
1897,  p.  36;  Kank,  H.  Dh.  1,  p.  121.  , . « 

AVPar.  49,  4,  7;  BnooM^mnn,  JA()8  ll,  |,n  :n0;  for  tho  ritual  manuals  (p«l- 
dhat%,  thomildootunatterisexf  gr/tva  character)  of  the  Paippabldms  that,  liavt^  come 
to  light  in  Orissa  see  1).  BiiArrAeuAavYA,  Fundamental  themes,  p,  2.  A discussion 
of  these  texts  dotw  not  belong  here. 

Renwi,  iScoles,  i>.  85;  Rank,  II.  I)h.  I,  p.  121. 

And  to  tho  chaptor  position  of  thi^  Atharvavetia  in  Hindu  literature  in 
general,’  in  Buoomfiku),  H.  AV.,  p.  XXVII 1. 

« Hoc  N.  K.  V.  Pantulu,  at  QJM8  29,  p.  407;  Ih  ik  NAaAitAUt,  at  BIKJHl  18, 
p.  30.  Of.  e.g.  also  Bhavalilmti,  Mahilv.  I,  62;  2,  24. 

lor  Baxlarliyaya  (and  baPkara):  I),  ButA'rrAr'iiARvvA,  m l\1elanges  Hiaiou, 
p.  97;  at  ALB  28,  p.  141,  and  in  Proc.  26  lut.  fUmgr.  Or,  III,  p,  2H. 

1).  B.  DiSKAUKAm  at  OASBombay  34  .35,  p.  75. 

For  editions  Hoi\  ahovxn  p*  273,  m 15. 

BuavA  IvXnii'a,  <ne*,  |).  51  ami  at  BhV  11,  p.  75,  Bee  W,  IL  WntTSUv’w  vtay 
unfavourable  judgiamait  in  FestgrntI  v.  linth,  p,  89. 

Bchh  however,  for  a Lvxt  that  has  been  in  iise  up  to  tins  cmitury  (AV,'^..  1,  33,  to 
tho  Waters:  for  purificatory  use)  N.  K'.  V.  PANTuntr,  at  QJ5I8  29,  p,  38?/ 


The  Atharvtivoda 


311 


tiniicd  to  take  intercBt  itx  it.  Among  them  was  Dhiragovinda&xrman  who, 
between  1826  and  1832,  woto  an  Atharvanarahasya^*^  in  which  he  explains  its 
signific^ance  a.s  an  authoritative  part  of  scripture  and  la.ys  special  emphasis  txpon 
its  philosophical  aspects.  The  influence  exerted  by  the  Atharvaveda  upon 
spiritual  life  of  latin*  times,  the  link  it  constitutes  between  older  and  later 
thought,  cannot  bo  considered  in  this  chapter®®. 


liicATTAOUAitvvA,  itx  Mt'ilangcs  Ucamu,  p.  f)7, 

« X relivr  to  N.  J'-  Hnif/NO'n,  at  JUiX  19,  p.  28;  N.  K'.  V.  PANTiruir,  at  QiXMiS  27, 
p.  153;  liBNOO,  E,  V.  l\  VI,  p.  10. 


Chapter  VII 


THE  LITURGICAL  SAMHITlS 


L The  Sdmaveda 


Altlioxigh  piirdnm  and  other  later  works  make  mention  of  no  less  than  a 
thonsand  samhitm  of  the  Samaveda^  only  two  have  come  down  to  ns,  viz.  those 
of  the  Kaxithnmas  (considered  the  vulgate),  and  of  the  Jaiminiyas  or  Tala- 
vakaras^. 

The  Kanthnma-Samkhia*'’  consists  of  1810^ — or  if  the  repetitions  are  excluded 
1549— stanzas,  distributed  in  two  books  called  “collections  of  rc  stanzas’" 
(drclka)^.  This  natne  is  most  appropriate  because,  76  excepted  (a  few  of  these 
ot‘cur  in  otlua-  mmhUd.s'  or  works  on  ritual®),  all  these  stanzas  are  taken  from 
t.he  Rgv('da-KSarphitiI,  mainly  from  tl)e  books  VIII  and  IX  of  that  corpus^  Most 
of  ilu'se  stanziUH  a^('^  eom|)<>sed  in  gdi/atrl  metro  or  pragdtha  stanzas  and  doubtless 


^ H.  Simon,  Ikntrago  znr  K<aintniB  dor  vedischon  Schulen,  Kiel  1889,  p.  27; 
(}.  S.  Kai,  ifiakhiis  of  th(^  Srynav(Mla  in  the  purdnm,  Parana  8,  p.  115;  Calani>, 
PIk  |>.  I ; N.  4’hitji,  An  outline  of  i.ho  extant  Satnaveda  literature,  I,  Tokyo  1948 
(in  ;Ja|)atU'H(’»)*  Tlu^  t,radition  is  confused.  The  name  Samavoda  occurs  at  SB.  11,  5, 
8,  8;  Ailk  5,  32,  I etc. 

^ W.  Oalano,  Dio  .Tainiinlya-Sanduta  mit  oiner  Einleitung  ubor  die  Samavoda- 
lit<u'atur,  Brt«hm  1907 ; Henou,  IScoIob,  p.  87.  For  the  Ranayaniyas  see  below,  p.  318. 

® hklited  atid  translated  l>y  Th.  Benfey,  Dio  Hyrnnon  dc^s  Sama-Voda,  Leipzig 
1848;  reprint  1908  09  (text,  translation  etc.);  by  S.  D.  Satavai:.ekaii,  Pardi  1950. 

Barnhita  i.ext,  iiim  frnir  ganew  and  antxoxed  texts  were  moreover  edited  by 
Batyavrata  SAma5^ram1,  5 vol,  Calcutta  1871-1878.  With  the  commentaries  of 
Madhava  and  Bharatiisvamin  ed.  by  C.Kunhah  Raja,  Adyar-Madras  1941.  Other 
editions  (4ic.  in  the  Vedio  bibliographies.  Translations : J.  Stbvbnsok,  London 
1842,  ^Calcutta  1900  (much  antiquated);  R,  T.  H.  Geotxth,  Benares  1893  (*1963, 
imperfect). 

* Tlie  Iranyakasainhiia  (see  below)  not  included. 

« Ah  distiiint  from  mlrnan  (see  below),  the  dreikm  being  a kind  of  libretti. 

« A Ibw  may  pia’ha|>s  be  regarded  as  borrowed  from  a reoonsion— or  rather  from 
a khila  eolh^ction- amknown 'to  tis,  some  others  are  fitted  together  out  of  sundry 
vta^ses  of  Rgvedtk  A consi<l<a*abUs  part  of  theso  stanzas  is  however  up  to  rgvedic 
Htaialard.  Boiue  of  them  are  atharvatue  in  character  and  may  derive  their  origin 
frotn  tihati  <u>rpuH.  ihuua'ally  Bp(^aking  thc^si'*  stanzas  seem  to  be  insc'irtions  added  at 
an  early  <lat4'».  Mast  of  Diem  biOong  exclusively  to  the  Ivautliuma  and  (in  the 
PurviliHuka)  Jaimiuiya  traditions.  For  particulars  see  EENOtr,  at  JA  240,  p.  133. 

^ Cf,  also  KuuiSMNa,  I,  p.  XXI. 


314 


,1.  tiondii  ■ Votlic 


from  the  beginning  intmulrd  for  Hinging^  Smno  of  l,^gvo<iio  vrrsos  apprar 
with  different  readingn  wlntdi  lunat  be  «'\]>Iained  na  dne  lo  all  erai  ions  iiiirotbieed 
when  the  worda  of  iln^  i.exia  were  nvi  to  intade^.  1’he  brat  bnf»k.  of  oolleetion 
under  conBideratioiu  the  Pfirvandka^*^.  eonaiata  of  b8d  aingfo  fninaanncH'tnd) 
Htanma  frr),  4r>  of  whic'h  are  not  fotind  m the  Kgveda:  lbe\^  are  nrrangefi  in 
deeadcH  (daMt).  ten  d<H\adeH  forming  '‘leefnrf^“  f h of  wideb  tbere 

are  bix”.  The  Htnir/aH  follow  eaeli  other  rmighly  in  aeeordnnee  wdh  tleili(\H  and 
metreH,  no  donbt  In  imitation  id*  tbe  mmhitii  of  ihr  Hgveda.  Than  those  of  the 
firat  twelve  de<aul(\s  are  adilreasinl  to  Agtu.  thrwe  ot  the  folltnunp  thiriy-Hix 
chiefly  to  Indra^®,  thorn'  of  tin'  laat'  <'Ieven  to  Sonm,  Tin'  aeeoml  book  (IdtarUr- 
eika,  1225  ataima  of  whh'h  21  mm»Hgvedie)  eontaitia  nine-  “leefiirra"  <'aeh  of 
which  m divided  into  two,  ami  Hometinve'a  thn'e,  Heetiona  irird/m  *1nilff'),  Kaeli 
of  the  twentydavo  Heethma  eonaiata  of  a nnmber  (frotn  eleven  t'O  twenty-three, 
the  laat  one  howevi'r  nine)  an\fdl  gnmpa  of  atatr/na^^.  Xmnally  fhrav'  groupa 
are  triads:  of  these  tlien'  arc'  2H7^k  The  first  in  the  grotip  is  tiatifilly  fdimd  in  the 
Purvareika  also  and,  in  eontenia,  ehweh  eonnei'ted  wdh  tin*  rest  td‘  the  gronp. 
The  triads  and  otlier  groupa  are  arranged  aeeording  to  ihn  ordi'r  t:>f  the  principal 
aaerifiees-^^  In  eontratliatim’timi  to  the  first,  ureiln  fin'  rttarareika  ia  only 
eonec'rm'd  with  mfmt  Hai'rifieea. 

NoW|  in  lioth  hooka  the  i'Hsential  i'h'inent  is  not-  tin'  trxfS'  ■ tht'  Kamav«alina 

are  hw  int<n't'ated  in  tlic  mciining  i>f  the  words  than  in  prosodn'  eorreetneaa^'^ 

Init  the  nu'kuly.  To  teaeli  tlie  melodies  ia  tlieir  viow  pnrpi»se,  A brahmin  who 
wiahed  to  lu'  trained  as  an  'ndijdtur^'^* ■ "tht'  pvimi  whr»  a!  dtHuia  rdeis  ehant.a  the 
hynma  of  the  Hiimaveda-  'had  first  learn  the  nvrlothea  Tim  was 


» Hee  OnnicNimiun  at  7d)Mil  2H,  p.  4'B4  {■  - p.  atli;  J,  ilmerKn, 
in  WZKM  IB,  p.  !>\)  eiTtananisly  demetl  any  difh'O'uee  btS  wnm  r<*enaf  ioti  and  ehant. 
For  pragUtha  cite,  see  p.  177, 

^ IL  H,  Ik  p.  XXX,Vlli:  W.  in  VVarr^'i-no  m PAiKS  lHH:k  p. 

CLXXXIV  (tlie  larger  part  i,»f  tint'  aiati’/4n4  xn  whtdiy  nleniiesdl:  0010"'%' a Kwn  ll.  Ih, 
p*  289;  d,  jiaiiNK,  Taw  IVxikrit-tk  der  dt'iu  %Sinnavtntii.  mil  *lont  S,  ^ilain,hda  <le» 
^tgve<la  gemeiiiaanu'U  Ht44len,  'fhesis  Kiel  IIMHh 

Ofitm  liritifly  (Ircika. 

The  sixth  pmpdthaht  has  tmiy  nine,  tieeadtno  thorn  are  jiMirie  rolier  th'isoi^ires 
from  the  rule,  for  which  nm  .BKxrKv's  e'dtt ioii  tunl  Ituxot'’,  m Ihl  I.  |%  'There  is 
another,  and  perhaps  (ilths%  arrangement  in  three  fnilleeitraei  ikanda  or  piirnin), 

“ Cf*  Bloomfikuo,  at  W7iKM  17,  p.  U*h  anti  Ibr  fh»'  nm'^  el"  the  ifirio  m-iman  in 
connection  wit.h  Indra  e.g.  flV.  k iVZ,  2;  173,  k 

The  sum  total  of  the  groups  is  399,  of  which  2H7  are  Inads. 

For  dtvtaik  see  also  t‘vn#\Nm  Plk,  p»  IH. 

Cf*  A.  IlmnniniANOT,  liif4ydhieratur*  Htrmssbttrg  1897,  p,  9lh 

Hee  liKHoti,  ail  4 A 249,  p,  123, 

In  ritual  |)raeti<ie  die  ud^fur  and  Ins  aase4ants  shar**  the  th, venous  (usually 
live)  of  a clianr  auumg  themiit'lvim.  Ida'  partandars  see  \\  M*  .Aerio  af  fllli.'Hl  4, 
|a  28(k 

'The  hypothems  suggestod  hy  A.  IlmtanoiAJ^n'r,  th^  Xtniiniinuifr-iUe  m Ali- 
Jndien,  KoinaniHclie  ForMclmngen  5 {IBH9  iHIH.p,  p.  328,  llnooxiriiaon  at  \V/iKM 


The  litut'gical  Samhitas 


315 


doiiG  with  the  aid  ot  the  pumircika,  for  to  the  stanzas  of  this  collection  belong 
the  melodies  that  are  to  be  txsed  at  the  sacrificial  rites.  Considering  a melody  to 
be  sxmg  upon  a particular  stanza,  tradition  describes  the  former  as  having 
originated  out.  ot  the  latter  which  therefore  is  called  its  ‘Svomb’^  (yoni). 
Generally  speaking,  definite  stanzas  are  the  regular  yonis  for  certain  melodies. 
As  howevcu’  a stanza  can  be  sung  to  variotis  melodics— a'nd  vice  versa — -the 
585  singU'.  stanzas  ot  the  Ffirvarcika  are  in  practice  sung  to  about  double 
the  nutnlxu'  of  tunes^®.  d^iese  numerous  melodies  have  various  names,  the 
most  important  being  the  oft-mentioned  rathanitara  and  brhat'^^.  Having 
memoriztxl  the  melodies  tlu'i  aspirant  had  to  learn  the  complete  texts,  usually 
consisting  of  three-”  “ritually  connected — -stanzas  (trea),  which  are,  at  the  chief 
sacrifices,  sting  to  the  same  melody.  The  Uttarareika  containing  these  “hymns 
of  praise”  (stotra)  is  therefore  the  essential  completion  of  the  Purvareika, 
comparable  to  a song-book  which  contains  the  complete  texts,  while  it  is 
pi'esumed  that  the  melodies  are  already  known. 

While  both  parts  of  the  Samhita  give  us  the  texts  in  their  spoken  form,  the 
melodies^^  themselves— which  in  the  earliest  times  were  in  all  probability  a 
matter  Ibr  oral  instmetion— are  by  means  of  musical  notes  designated  in  the 
song-books  proper  (gdna).  These  gdnas  contain  tlio  texts  in  the  form  wliich 


17,  p.  HM  and  Winturnitz,  IL  I,  L,  I,  p.  UM  has —in  a modified  forin —niuch  to 
recommend  if:  part  of  t.h(^  oldest  ^dniam  were  presumably  popular  molodios,  to 
which  already  in  prehisl.oric  times  religious  songs  were  sung  ab  various  celebrations; 
otlxu'S  (^spt>ciaUy  tlioso  t.liat  were  iuberspersod  with  exclamations  (sec  below)— 
may  liav<^  originated  in  eiroles  which  attributed  a decidedly  ‘magicaf  power  to 
certain  and  chants,  a practice  surviving  and  systematized  in  the  Samavi- 

dhrma-Bnlhmana,  part  II.  Thc^  fact  that  the  sound  of  sdmans  and  musical  instruments 
was,  like  t.he  barking  of  dogs  and  the  cries  of  wolves,  jackals  and  owls,  a reason  for 
discontinuing  t.he  study  of  the  Veda  ( ApBh.  1,  3,  10,  19)  seems  also  to  point  in  that 
direction.  For  the  impurity  of  the  iSamaveda  boo  also  Manu  4,  123f.  and  J.  Ch. 
Mitra,  in  PrBh  49  (1944).  On  tlu^  other  hand,  being  chanted  and  regarded  as  the 
essence  of  tlie  JJ.gvtKla  (ChU,  1,  1,  2)  it  was  of  special  value  (BhG.  10,  22).  The  ety- 
mology and  original  meaning  of  the  term  sdfncm  are  not  clear;  if  sdman  “kind 
words,  conciliation,”  is  not  another  word  (of.  Rkkou,  I.C.  I,  p.  284)  it  could  have 
denoted  a “propitiation.”  For  a surve^y  see  Sh.  N.  Gayatondu,  at  JUB  N.S.  32,  2, 
p,  B9  (charactiHustics  of  220  admans  as  found  in  the  Samavoda  brdhmaxiaa), 

Gf.  OLUENimiun  in  GGA  1908,  p.  712. 

Company  IJV*  F 104,  25;  10,  ISl,  1.  Bee  A.C.  Bubnbix,  The  Arsoyabrahmana, 
Mangalore  1870,  p.  XXXVIII;  S.KONOWjDasBamavidbanabrahinaxia,  Thesis  Hallo 
1893,  p.  20;  II  It.  Buarma,  Ar^t'iya  Brahmana  (witli  the  Vodarthapraka^a),  Tirupati 
19(>7,  |>.  9.  OlioHO  names,  mostly  derivatives,  are  sonx’jtimos  meaningful.  Many  of 
tlwun  d(anv(^  from  ih<^  nii/ua^  of  bhe^  fsi  who  is  assutxied  bo  liavo  compostKl  the  chatib; 
from  init.ial  or  oi.lau’  phrast^s  of  a sbanza;  from  its  concluding  |)art;  from  bhe  purpose 
or  objecO.  for  whi<'.h  it  is  chanted.  Tlu'ty  have  givcvn  rise  to  various  ‘symboUeaf 
Hp(H5Ulati0UH. 

,1.  M.  VAN  oiSR  Hooerr,  4'h(^  Vedio  chant  Bbudi<Hl  in  its  textual  and  melodic 
form  (wibli  a.  biblit)graphy),  Thimis  AmsUsrdam  1929  (cotnpare  CAUANi),  at  DL2S 
1930,  p.  444). 


316 


,1.  i^onda  • Ltfi'mfiin* 


the?  tak<'-  in  ringing,  i-hni  in  with  thn  Mohhm.  Sfohkt^^-  la  ii  rmiipridifniHivn  tcnnu 
for  all  mcKiifumtionH  to  wliioh  a rt  \h  mihjorird  \%\m\  it  in  wing  in  a iiirlody  ofiho 
iSamav'oda,  vix.  ntotlifirailoniH  (<\g.  longllioning)  n{  ayllaldoN.  ro|H4iiionB» 
hroaking  n])  of  wordN,  itiNorliona  of  apparnitly  mNignifn’iint  wonk^  or  HyllaldoH 
Htich  an  hotfix  hfim,  hni  (Noamlird  ‘ohaidofl  inf I'tjoiiionN/  pdikixiiihlm-,  often 
bricdly  **?triWifi)-'-w]neti^  of  a tnyafieal  inlrr|aTf  alioiv’k  nndd  nerve 

eHoiericpnr}ioHeN  ""and  HlnaidnaerfedNenfianavN  f rid’^imfnhha  I,  Siiiee  flit'  r^Hnenee 
of  Vedie  ehant  ia  jtiaf  the  eoinhinafion  of  wordn  and  iiniNie  and  iIn  aim  i«  pre- 
eiaely  t-he  eaiablmhing  of  eonfaef^  with  na^afive  power^'^  the  tdlVefa  npon  tim 
UiiKeen  of  ionea  ming  in  a eertain  way  and  al,  a eerfain  jnlrli  in  relaliou  to  other 
toneH  in  of  gnaii  imporiaime'  the  fonr  *‘aimgdiookH*'  emvdilnff’  an  iiiiegrnl  part 
of  the  HannunnUe  lit4'raf>ure*  l.t^  will  on  five  id  her  hantl  hi^  elear  thaf  I In'  In^Oiriiint 
ornamentation  of  mm$n>  ehanta  eftVet-ed  hy  repefitioiia.  iinirriiomi*  nngram- 
matieal  mnfllaiionH.  what, ever  their  apirifnal  aignilleiinef'  for  the  Ividit'VerH,  ete, 
render  them  abnormal  an  pieeea  of  literature. 

'Four  gfinm^^  have  lieen  handed  dtnvn.  The  ■C«ramiigf'yagfiriii®®  ^ tbe  aongs  of 

which  eonld  be  praetiaed  in  tin'  village  (grfmm} Ivelonga  !o  the  Ihlrvfireika. 

It  eontaiivN,  in  17  Heeiiiiiw  ( pminltlmku),  the  mnmm  of  the  nUmvM  of  that 
corpim;  thene  melodiea  follow  each  tdher  in  exaef  ly  the  aiiinc'  ordi't  iin  the  «t,air/aa 
in  the  Areika^'h  Ft.>r  inHt4inee  for  SV.  ih  l\h  |2,  1 . 1.  13}  eorrr^Nptmding  to  HV. 
2»1tl  (F  3,  F ' the  Uramngeyagi'ina  pb  1. 37)  givt^n  live  the  Ia«t 

**  For  variantf  deflnifama  v.  d.  liotniT,  |v  I,  '"NlvMtif  “ noyv  be  an  a|)prox« 
inmte  translation.  There  a et4hHditot  tif  nrrnngiHl  m Uir^  i*rvier  of  the 

first  twogrla^w:  Mauhhiku  fS.  H^MArntAMrs  edifaiO  tl.  p<  »din.  nu  \vliteli  o.  lloooT* 
0.0.^  p.  B3  htwed  hi«  <aualt»gnis 

Hee  ClilT*  b 13  {*‘the  wnnwl  km  in  tins  wi-irld,  hn  w the  nir“  eie.),  tlin* 
tuiHMOil  by  B,  FAiHiK00N4  iVt  AO  tn  p.  177,  An  mstane'e  ef  a e«it  tn  og*ia:aia 

ftptir  amfii%  t$hhunm  *‘we  have  g«ine  fo  hght.  we  havi^  bf^eoine  mimonar'  (ef.  fiV. 
Bn  48,  3).  Aeeordiug  to  HVll,  I,  1,  10  th*'*'  inxin  (iy)  iirf*  tie'*  lienee  «if  i|ir^  m'imuMu  the 
Honnti  of  thii  int'Iiuly  tlvetr  fleriu  tlie  «foh/ia#  their  hatm.  lAtr  ssinnliir  frfiiififVi^rinii.tioniv 
of  reoitak  into  ciliants  'or  tlve*  tiae  at  **nnmtelhgthle  eniuOvf^  repeatevi  to  fill 

the  Hptuje  of  a rtHnirriiig  time*'  e.g,  F.  Boan.  Brmntiv«t  ai1.  New  York  llirifa  p. 
316;  il  YL  Bowiu,  iTiinitive  song,  New  Yiwk  IIIO;!.  p,  04. 

A.  A,  BaIvE  at  BrBh.  63,  p*  7t;  m Ituiiaii  art:  and  leit'ers  8 (I!»!l4h  p,  03. 

gee  W,  (tAOAKvn  l>e  wording  van  ilen  Hamavedm  Ainsf*a‘ilaiii  Aeadtnny  1IMI7 
(Knglmli  tranHlation  by  Iv.  A.  Nit.AKAHTirA  HAariti,  in  dilli  ih  |».  3II6|;  datnunlyto 
Sainliita  (set^  Indow,  n.  66),  p.  L 

For  editions  wee  above,  m 3 anti  J^iiAOTiJ^r  Ni1faiifVilii,f*ir/i/fir%f1fi 

I*rtal/itirwrlclA7al|/tl/i  eei/tif/flNrim,  d^rmonii  IH8lk  For  the  eotif’*aits  ?tee  ah*o  B,  FAiiO'E* 
<«)N,  gtndieH  on  the  Hainavetla.  Amsterdiwn  Aeinb  1661,  it.  .fiH  fef,  iihio  11.  I.oatm, 
at  7Amm  102,  p.  3H7). 

1 In'!  naint^s  of  tla'se  are  naaifatiaHl  m.  the  itrjjeva-'ltrfdnnaiia  Cfa'»e  ahove, 

n.  20).  ' ' 

Iht'  flgttre  2 tht^  Uitararetka,  I the  Bnrvarinka;  tiiotally  flut  nian'/.as 

<i:f  t'aeh  of  the  two  tiivieirn'is  ttf  Kupdnta  an^  nmnhere«i  eimf inooniOv*  dlie 
ipiotatioii  is  from  klV.  «,  BH,  1,  mliUvmml  to  Indra. 

« An  t^xamphi  in  Um  first  ipiarter  <0*  lyV.  ik  10*  10  tigwi  4 i|d/o  ftmi/r  fi/talml 
hapgdMtuiiii  Agni^  eome  to  tliti  hamp«et..,  being  eAitilted,  lo  iti<t  gift  nf  olleniiga.” 


The  liturgical  Sainhitas 


317 


of  which  m called  naudhasa;  on  this  the  stanzas  mentioned  in  the  Utta- 
rarcika  arc  to  be  chantixl  as  the  so-called  prsthastotra  executed  at  the  midday 
libation  of  soma  Biuvrilices^®.  The  second  song-book,  the  Aranyagana— which 
was  because  of  its  dangerous  and  esoteric  character  to  be  studied  in  the  forest 
or  desert  belongs  lilmwiso  to  the  Purvareika.  It  comprises  six 

sections  aiwl,  a|)pendix,  the  maliummms,  a group  of  three  triplets  to  bo 

sung  on  va.riou8  oec'nsions^h  It  inchides  the  stanzas  of  the  Aranyaka-Samhita®^, 
an  apptnidix  to  the  Purvareika,  the  sdmans  of  which  were  more  efficacious^®. 
The  i-wo  otlier  gfinas,  thetl  ha-  and  the  tihyagana,  belong  to  the  Uttarareika  and 
were  uschI  by  tlic'.  clmttters  in  fulfilling  their  duties  at  soma  sacrifices.  Hence  also 
the  dis  tribution  of  their  contents  over  seven  chapters  ( parvan ) : the  chants  of  the 
ten  ceniiral  days  of  a long  soma  sacrifice  (sattra),  the  year-long  sacrifice,  the 
one-day-rites,  the  rites  of  two  till  ten  days,  the  sattras^  prdyahittas  and  the 
rites  for  the  fulfilment  of  special  wishes®^.  The  tlhagana  containing  the  sdmans 


Gramageyagana  1,  Iff.  gives  tliree  melodies,  viz. 

1 4 2rr  1 1 r 2r  1 1 

(1)  Offi  I o^'gntfi  1 1 d ydhi^S  voitoi/d'*2i  / gp^no  ha-  / tn/addtoyd' 2i  / toyd'2i 

4 t 4r5r  4 1 1 r r r 2 

(2)  aynn  (tydhi  pV  1 1 tuyd'i  / gpulno  hain/cul(ltd'23  ydS  1 1 

4 (»  4rf»r  4 4 1 r r 2 2 2 

(3)  (mH<$  aydhi  I V(ffd  taydi  / gj^dno  hamjadd^X  tU'^Sye  1 1 

(tlu^  figurcss  ovtM*  the  letters  indicate  the  essential  notes  in  dosoonding  sequence, 
those  in  the  gyllabh^B  tlu^  ornamental  tones,  the  r denotes  lengthening,  the  oblique 
stroke  marks  inxits  to  be  <?hanttKl  with  one  breath).  It  is  clear  that  the  Samavoda 
stands  completely  apart  from  the  rgvedic  and  yajurvedio  recitations.  For  saxna- 
vedic  accentuation:  H.  Vahma,  at  6 AIOC,  p.  517.  For  transcripts:  VOK  Glabenapp, 
Lit.  Inch,  p.  03;  HENOtr,  I.C.  I,  p.  284. 

For  technical  particulars  see  Calanu-Heney,  L’agni^toma,  p.  318.  It  may  bo 
<)bR(^rve<l  tfiat  the  IJttanlrcika  gives  only  two  stanzas;  these  are  however  made  a 
trif)let  by  partial  re|xetiti()n. 

Elsewhere  10  or  1 1 stanzas  (11  also  as  a khila  to  the  ]?,gvoda:  Soheptblowitz, 
Apokryphiax,  |u  134),  but  xxine  of  them,  being  the  kernel,  are  known  to  all  Vedas, 
The  study  of  thc^se  verses -’dn  the  desert— is  comxoctod  with  many  observances; 
because  of  their  dangerous  character  the  student  should  bo  blindfold  (GG.  3,  2,  36). 
For  particulars:  Keith,  The  Aitareya  Aranyaka,  Oxford  1909, p.  258;  Oldbnbbrg, 
at  NG  1915,  p,  375  (===  K.  B.,  p.  412);  I.  Schbetelowitz,  at  ZII  1,  p.  58;  Calanb, 

PB.,p.  317.  , , , c-  1 T -1 

« Editions  also:  B.  GounsoHMiUT,  Oer  Vllto  prapdthaka  des  Samaveda-Aroika 

in  dor  Naigeyai^flkhrn  MonatslxT.  Akad.  Berlin  1868,  p.  228  and  I.  Iobtunatov, 
M.ohcow  1B75.  (Idle  Naigt^yas  seem  to  have  possessed  a slightly  different  rooonsion 
of  th<^  Aranyakasainhitil;  see  Gauano,  Jainunfya-Samhitu,  p,  11;  a Naigeya.Ct- 
khrmukramanl  has  inmi  inlited  hy  B.  U.  Behoal,  Delhi  1966). 

« (:3\  Omuwnmm,  in  GOA  1908,  p.  723;  NG.  1915,  p.  394.  Of  its  50  stanzas  13  are 
foreign  to  t'4a>  IJgvt^da. 

The  nurnbia^  of  gdnm  contaiiual  in  them  is  1145. 


318 


(iondit  • Vmiu'  l.ifi'inliit'i' 


in  their  ritnnl  orth'r  ntiaptH  f iih- ) (he  nu'hvdien  el' (he  ( hr()n(>}.!;eyn  (i>  (h<'  exigen* 
eioH  of  tiu'  ritual  praxiH.  The  rii.vagana  (hi’  itatue  in  an  ahhreviation  of 
OharahanyagilnH.  mhm;/n  “aei'rei"  being  aYnonymouM  with  iimnyahi  haw  (,hc 
same  relation  to  (he  .^ranyakagana  with  whieh  t(  ia  aftiliatr'ipy 

Ah  to  the  relativi'  ehronology  ami  inteniepemienee  nf  (heNe  worKu  (he  theory 
propoHed  by  (Jalaml”  may  with  alight  nioililleationa  at  ill  itr  mlnpteil,  (’ontrary 
to  the  prevailing  ojunion  aeeonling  to  whieh  a text  etptivaleni  tn  our  Uttii- 
rilreika  ia  of  later  origin  than  (he  1‘iirvflieika.  < 'aland  argued  (hat  the  former 
colleetion  of  texta  whieh  were  uw’d  at  (he  ritual  I’ereiuonieK  or.  mueh  more 
probably,  a predeei'SHor  of  (he  I’Karnreika  extant  mu.-it,  have  exiat  ed  before 
the  latter  whieh  waa  only  to  ri'giater  (he  melodieH  uaed’h  flefure  our  Uttanlreika 

and  the  colleetion  or  eolleetiona  preceding  it  eaine  into  exiatenee the  author 

of  the  Tajleaviip^n-Hr5hmana  ia  not  aeipiainted  with  it  (he  ehantera  Hcem  to 
have  borrowed  their  ataiixas  not  without  Bdjnat>nent.v  it  ia  true^*  directly 
from  the  Rgveda-iSaiphitil”.  The  ehanta  aeeoinpnnying  the  ritea  frcm  on  the 
same  melody  in  the  mmi  ritcH,  in  other  ritea  alao  single  xMrn  atan'/.aa— were 
collected  in  a mtphiid  that,  came  to  be  different iated  in  the  nehoola  of  the 
SilmavedinH:  the  ITttarareika.  In  order  to  fneilitiite  the  meinori'/.ation  the  first 
and  Hccond  guno.-r  w-eri'  drawn  up.  together  with  thi'  liHtii  of  (hat  belonged 
to  them,  the  Purvareika  and  t he  Aranyakaaaiphita.  Teehniealitiea  weri’  tlxi'd  in 
the.wtro.i,  CKpeeially  the  Ihmpastitra'*"  which  came  into  exist euee  at  a later  date. 
The  hiHt  two  (/tlimt  containing  tlie  elnhorated  rulra  mimt  have  heen  compiled 
after  the  fmVmmjm  ami  ni’drm,  which  do  not  mention  ihmn.  There  are  no 
grounds  for  supposing  that  the  redaction  of  (heae  works  took  place  at  wide 
intervals*'. 

The  ilitfi'renci'M  between  the  mtiihiiih  of  the  Kantlnimaa  and  another  Mkkl, 
the  Rdnayanlyas**,  are  slight.  Although  the  tradition  of  the  lat.t  er  school  is  not 


*‘  ^For  many  porticnilars  conei-rning  (he  yitmm  and  their  relation  to  the  arrikm 
ace  Cauand’h  articles  meniionetl  in  the  preeisbng  notes;  for  tJiii  Imii  two  mJniM  also 
Calano,  at  DLZ  U)()«.  1K84. 


„ Wording,  p.  .t;  Jaiminfya-Hamhitft.  p.  4 frombaffmg  WiNTmtnm., 

iiJ.L.  t,p.  l(«i;p.  146<irthe<iermane<htion):fhe author  modified  Ins  vte\vrt(WZKM 

An  * hv  tvt 

GGA  11)08,  p.  718;  7:22.  ¥m  iwuiihcT  viinv;  Hksuw  p.  11^$;  HiAiVa.  KInta, 

Jilktantram  (!>(:^k>w,  u.  05),  p.  2:k 

" Ncithi'r  oolleotiou  is  ix'rfectly  in  tune  with  the  ntual  as  we  know  n , See  Oi.uKN- 
1^^111  P.  714;  (Jai.ano,  Her  Ar.'jeyakalpa  dew  Samaveda.  heip/ig  IHOH, 

M So  !'■  '»»'!  ItKXOf.  Reolnii.  p,  H.'i. 

Which  iiiakes  mention  af' mhmin  singers  (‘4,  4:i,  1;  lo,  l»?,  d],  Ai,  i,,  {p,,  livtm. 
p fi'W)  eotliM'lion  s.’e  Oi.nKSiitmu,  m /tAtti  :t,S,  p.  f.J4  (eoiajiare 


*“  f'Ai.ANo.  at  in, 7,  IlHist,  JKHtt, 

“ t.f,  also  Hknou,  KcoIch,  p.  214. 

*•  Both  aamiw  arc  rare  in  the  Vedia  literature  proper  (Ittwoe.  Iveoles,  ji.  «lt). 


Tho  liturgical  Samhitiis 


319 


yet  extinct^,  there  Bcem  to  have  existed,  in  tho  tradition  of  the  Silmaveda  also, 
only  two  main  enrrents,  the  second  being  that  of  the  Jaiminiyas^^ 

The  Jainiiniyas'^^*-“-  'also  called  Talavakilras  * ‘Musicians* now  a veiy  rare 
Vcdic  school  surviving  in  Kcnala  and  Tamilnadu^h  were  over  a hundred  years 
ago  discovm’ed  by  A.  0.  Ihirnell  whose  manuscript  collection  was  until  tho 
recent  finds  of  new  material  a source  of  copious  information  that  has  mainly 
been  made  acci^ssible  by  Caland  and  some  of  his  pupils^®.  This  Mkha  has  a 
mmldta  of  its  own®«  which  g('nerally  speaking  has  a strong  resemblance  to  that 
of  the  Kautlmmass^;  its  deviations  from  the  Rgveda  are  however  less  in  num- 
ber. Tiuvir  Purvareika  shows  hardly  any  difference  worth  mentioning;  tho 
dram/aka  has  ten  stanzas  more.  Most  differences  exist  between  the  Uttarareikas, 
especially  in  the  arrangement  of  the  stanzas;  moreover,  the  Jaiminiya  Utta- 
rareikahas  184  stanzas  hvss.  The  first  two  gdnonS,  which  for  a long  time  were  the 
only  ones  that  liad  come  to  light,  contain  3681  items  as  against  2722  in  the 
Kauthuma  collection;  they  are  in  a better  state  of  preservation®^.  All  material 

F(vr  the  13^^'  century  cf.  Hemtldri,  Sriiddhakalpa,  p.  1078  (Caland,  Jaiminiya- 
Sanihita,  p.  l(i).  Nowadays,  there  are  Ranayaniyas  in  Mathura  (Raohavan, 
Present  position  of  Vedic  chanting,  Bull.  Inst,  of  Traditional  Cultures,  Madras 
1957,  p.  IB).  8ee  also  Rai,  o.c.,  p.  125. 

Many  point, s,  for  inst-ance  in  respect  of  affiliation  of  ancillary,  parUifita  and 
dharmaUsxiH,  nvo  uncertain:  Caland,  o.c.,  p.  10;  RuNotr,  lilcolos,  p.  87.  According 
to  tradition  (RiCNOtt,  fJeoU's,  127  and  in  Vol.  Siddheswar  Varma,  p.  217)  the 
Kanthutnas  are  now  also  in  Bengal,  Kanauj  and  (dsowhere;  tho  epigraphical 
data  atvtt^st,  t»o  tlunr  being  scattenHl  almost  ev('*rywht'»rc)  lived  in  Gujorat,  tho 
I^rmfiyanlyas  in  Malulru^^t^^a,  tlu^  JaiixiinTytis  in  Karpataka. 

Caland,  Jaiininfya-Haniihita,  p.  17;  Rdnoxt,  fiooles,  p.  97;  A,  Parcola,  The 
litei'attire  atid  study  of  tlu^  Jaiminiya  Silmavcnla  in  retrospect  and  prospect,  Hel- 
sinki Ac*ui.  1973. 

This  is  an  epithet  of  the  ffi  Jaimini,  a pupil  of  Vyasa  (boo  p.  10),  the  reputed 

founder  of  tho  school -one  of  those  authorities  of  whom  wo  hardly  know  anything 

but  his  naiue,  ndl^remjos  to  liim  in  ancient  literature  being  vague  (G.  V.  Dkvabthali, 
in  ABORI  21,  03).  Tht**  (epithet  occurs  at  JG.  1,  14  and  in  later  commentaries, 

Jaimini’s  name  IxHMUue  associatcHl  with  this  MkM  only  at  a later  moment;  see 
Parcola,  Mlmruusa,  ^laimini  and  Hamaveda,  (forthcoming). 

For  |)artit;ulars  siH>  V.  Raohavan,  Present  position,  p.  48  and  o.c.;  Parcola, 
Lit.,  |>.  22.  to  tlu’^  Jaiminlytis  in  Indian  liUa'aturo  are  rare  (Vm>A  Vyasa, 

in  5 AlOC  I,  p.  292). 

A.  C.  B URNMLL,  Catalogxie ofacolleciionof  Sanskrit  manuscripts,  I,  London  1 809. 

For  a stirvty  sch"*  Parcola,  o.c.,  p.  30.  8ee  also  Caland,  Fono  onbokendo 
roccaisie  van  d<>n  HaTnavtHia,  Amsterdam  Acad.  1905, 

CAtiAND,  Jaiminlya-Saiphita  (see  above,  n.  2),  including  an  abbreviated 
edition  of  l*he  dreikem;  RAcnin  Vira,  Hama-Veda  of  tho  fTaiminlyas,  Lahore  1938 
(a  compl<vUs  (Hiitiou), 

Se(^  also  Caland,  .huininlya-Sainhita,  p.  17;  Rknou,  flcok^H,  |).  97,  Variant's 
are  rare  but  tisually  more  than  mere  corruptions, 

Th(^  Jaiminiya  An^tya-Brahrnana*  <'<lit(Hl  by  Buhndll  (Tlu^  J.  of  the  A. 
of  iht'  HV.),  MangaUaH^  1878  r(H!ordH  th<^  xumu'iH  of  the  chantH  <*.ompriB(^d  m tlu^m^ 
two  An  (nlition  (He.,  also  by  BtutNULL,  Mangalore  ,1870:  The  Arj^ieyabrah- 

mapa.  B.  H.  Suahma,  ♦Jai:uiu!yaaM(^ya-Jaiiuiuly(>paniBa(l-lh’rihnninaH,  Tirupati 
1907  is  mainly  based  on  Biirnull's  (alitiou. 


320 


J.  Goiuia  ‘ Li1f»mhtn 


proper  to  tlu'  Jiiiininlyiw  m ako  fotioil  in  Vnlna'^y  In  rwoii  iiinoK  the 

previonnly  unknown,  gunm  hc'lottintig  to  Iho  r<f-iirhr<nlui  worn  I |■|lnKoribtM'i  from 
an  oral  a^nireo,  xm.  the  rhani'  of  tln^  XatnhnGiria*  am!  Giarrnnn'od  in  mann- 
scriptH^^*  We  eannoi  enter  here  into  a liiaenaaion  ^if  t!ie  waya  of  ainging  of  the' 
JaiminiVaH^®  or  into  their  peentiar  no!  at  ion  nhieh  haa  inlriiititHi  many 
aoholara^’®.  The  lo\v  of  tin'  lal  ter  vim  he  fonmi  in  Sahhapal  i V I ^liaranalakaanam^h 
Benulea  thia  Jaiminlya  treatise*  whieh  givra  alae^  valnahh'  inimmalion  on  the 
Mmmw,  Hianma,  metre'H  <te.^k  there  are  many  oilnn'  iineillary  wvrkn  rlealing 
with  tlie  teehniealitit’M  ot'  the  ehant.  The  large  miijorily  of  litem  are  affiliated 
with  the  Kanthuma  Hehook  whielt  haa  left,  na  Ihe'  mo:.t.  eomphde  eolleelion  of 
Vedie  maimalH*^^  ,A  luimlKW  mhiiismif  tmihmams  really  are  unukrmmmh 
(belonging  to  the  latent  period  of  Vedie  literafnre)  ami  tdker  eiimpilafioiiH 
raiaed  to  the  rattk  of  irali.  (feneridly  npeaking*  I hey  are  wmllth’aa  from  a literary 
point  of  view.  Ah  already  nnatiioned*  the  ArHeyii4h*i|}imana  enmui'rateH,  in 
mtm  style,  ami  tnore  sueeinet  than  its  tl'aiminlya  tanmlerparl,  the  mmam  of 
the  first  two  gtlnm;  it  is  handtHl  down  wilh  a etnnmenliiry  (\V‘tlaiihai>rakiMa) 
to  the  name  of  SEyana.  The  8ai|tl.tiio|MmisaiB^,  another  id’  Ihi'  six  Kanttmma 
works  traditionally  ealliai  *V<HHmdary  hmlmmnm*  (iinuimlkmtm),  m a 
conglomeration  of  oldiw  fragments*  dealing,  in  a inixlnre  of  proso  ami  v<nw, 
with  the  execution  of  tlu'  chants  and  its  eHeetfn  the  transformalifm  of  ?mv  into 
Mnmm^  an  atietnpt  at  analy*/.ing  their  relations,  viv.  Hie  f4}Hn‘t.  Xhufisadinlh* 
ma,pa^^  eontai,nH  a list  tifsilmavedie  authorities,  Hie  likf'wisi'  short-  I;>evatiV 
dhjuIya-BrIlhmana*®  lieats  with  the  gods  to  whom  ihv  mtnmn.^  are  addresseeh  the 
etymologies  of  their  names.,  ete.  The  S^Bnludt{tulna4lratnnana^'^  for  the  greatiT 
part  in  mltm  Htyle»  la'longs  to  tin'  I'at^egory  *if  tire  whieh  vinnv  to 

very  import^mt  in  tliesamavetlie  tradition,  The  treatise  explains  liow  tn  aehieve, 
by  means  of  sUrnmn,  didlniic'  tdfeeda,  enumerates  priigaAilim  ami  gives  in- 
struetion  in  the  medit'af  apotropaei<i  and  magieal  iip|,dieati<»n  mhiMms  whieh 
ate  assumed  to  be  more  effieaeious  than  the  texts  to  whieh  they  ari'  idiantiHl^k 

8ee  Omnwiimcn  at  (,10 A p,  73IU 

Of.  J*  F,  ST,AAn,  Namhudirl  Voda  reeitatien*  Hit'  tiagtie  Ulill,  p.  lilt  PaiohUiA, 
o.Cn  p.  17 ; 21. 

For  details  see  Baic’k,  o.c.;  Htaai*.  Namhutiid  Veiia  reeitaiiom  p.  fit;  pAimoi.A, 

O.C.,  p.  ICk 

Cf.  :,E.  Simon,  at  WZKM  27,  |a  '.lOfa 

For  particulars  see  .Pahfola,  o.e.,  p.  17;  IB,  and  eompare  liAtiUAVAN,  Pri'sent 
poBition,  p.  9. 

Cax.and,  Jaiininlya-Sanihithi  p.  llh 

For  a mirvey:  0AliAN,n,  Jaiininlyin'Brahiuimm  p.  IB;  Bnx’tn*,  Feoh''fi»  p.  99. 

Edite<l  by  ,A.  Ck  BoiiNKun,  Mangalore  IH77;  B.  H.  Hiiahxia,  1‘iru|ani  199*1. 

Edited  by  A.  W,ni:nm,  L H.  IV,  p,  B7I:  B.  H,  Huaioma,  Hrnpaii  1991. 

EdihHl  by  A.  Ck  ,BttiiNm.n,  Mangalore  1H7B;  H,  H.  Suahaia,  HrnpaU  1991, 

See  above,  m IH;  eilited  aim*  by  H,  H,  Huahma,  Hrnpali  1994  fnf  tke  same, 
at  i,A  III,  5 (1971),  p.  iOB);  for  t4n'^  genre  vidhUtm  nee  p,  97  1'* 

Hie  c,ither  Kauthvuna  tnaitises  thi  mit  htdtmg  to  this-  rliapfm'*.  For  a iiynopsiH 
of  the  extant  Jaimiufya  liti'raturt^  PAtyamA,  oat.,  p,  21. 


The  liturgical  Smuhitils 


321 


There  are  two  prdMMkhyas,  viz.  the  Rktantra^®,  somewhat  exceptional  in  its 
grammatical  rather  than  phonetic  contents,  and  the  typically  samavedic 
Samaprati^akhya.  The  latter,  better  kno\vn  as  Puspa-  or  Plmllasiltra®®,  lit. 
‘The  (collection  of)  aphorisms  (in  the  form)  of  flowers”  or  “the  developed 
aphoristns,”  and  sometimes  attributed  to  Gobhila  or  Vararuci,  comprises,  inter 
alia,  rules  indi(^ating  how  to  adapt  the  ^smnam  to  rcas  that  arc  not  given  as 
corresponding  to  them  in  the  gwna  and  the  correct  liturgic  content  of  the  words 
of  tlie  Arcika  as  tised  in  the  melodies. 

The  complicated  siltra  literature  cannot  be  dealt  with  in  this  chapter.  Mention 
may  only  be  made  of  the  Nidanasutra,  improbably  attributed  to  the  grammarian 
Patahjali,  an  instructive,  thotigh  difficult,  treatise  on  the  metres,  melodies  and 
rites,  referring  also  to  many  unknown  Vodic  works®’.  The  Samavedarscyadipa 
of  Ifliatta-Bhaskarildhvarhidra  is  a technical  text  of  the  anukramam  type 
recording  metres,  deities  and  pns  and  intended  to  be  a work  of  reference  for  the 
chanters®®. 

Prom  the  above  survey  it  will  become  clear  that  the  content  of  the  Samaveda 
can  be  approached  theoretically  (by  means  of  the  texts)  as  well  as  practically 
(starting  from  the  chant  at  the  actual  services).  However,  up  to  recent  times 
the  study  of  Samavedic  practice  was  badly  neglected®®  to  the  point  that  it 
could  inconxHitly  be  declared  extinct’®.  In  the  thirties  of  the  present  centtiry  a 
living  orthodox  Ivauthuma  tradition  was  brought  to  light  in  the  ncighboiu’hood 
of  'Baroda,  in  Kumbakonam,  Tanjon^,  Ghidatnbaram,  Trichinopoly,  a (rare) 
«)aimini3^a  tradition  in  Tinnevelly’^  and  Malabar,  ('specially  with  the  Nam- 
budiri  lirahtnans  of  K<'rala’^.  The  melodies  were  not  liowcwcr  what  one  would 

Editcnl  by  SiIkya  KAnta  (with  a long  introduction  dealing  with  the  Samavivla 
in  g(m(Witl),  Lalxoro  1933  (®D('ilhi  1970);  with  an  appendix:  Sainavedasarvunukra- 
inaiii;  of.  WKB«a,  at  I.  S.  XVII,  p.  315;  K.  Madhava  KmsHNA  Sauma,  at  ALB  5, 

p.  128. 

Edited  and  translated  by  E.  Simon,  Munohen  (Munich  Acad.)  1909;  cf.  vSxmon, 
at  ZDMG  03,  p.  730;  04,  p.  602;  CAnANi),  at  ZDMG  04,  p.  347. 

K.  N,  BHATNAaAK,  Nidanasutram,  Lahore  1939  (®]Dclhi  n.d.);  S.  Vabma,  at 
0 AIOO,  p.  55,  For  other  works  B(‘te  S.  K.  Gupta,  at  15  AIOC,  p.  37 ; D.  Bhatta- 
cnAEYYA,  at  18  AIOC,  3. Ik, p. 3;  for  apre-Bayana  commentary:  Chilndogyamantra- 
bhfu^ya  of  Gunavi,'^nu,  edited  by  D.  BnATTAOHAtiYYA,  Calcutta  1930;  cf.  I).  Biiatta- 
oirAitYYA,  at  011  2,  p.  1. 

Edited  by  B.  E.  Bhabma,  Tirupati  1967. 

A.  C.  Bueneul  was  an  exception;  Simon's  studies  of  the  Pu.^pasutra  throw 
light  on  the  exception  of  the  (diants  in  ancient  days.  Cf.  also  Mirnrunsusutra  2,  1, 
351T,  and  CAnANn(-HENKY),  L'agni.^t'<>ma,  p.  401.  Only  E.  Felbkh,  Die  indisclio 
Musik,  kSB  A<3ad,  Vienna  170  (1912),  eh,  3ff.  gave  a description  of  somts  phonograpluc 
records;  ho%¥<vvcT,  being  ma<lo  in  Bengal  and  Eajputana  where  the  Bamaveda 
tradition  is  not  sound,  most  of  them  ar(^  not  very  iH^iable. 

V.  t>.  HoooT,  O.C.,  p.  79. 

A.  A.  Bake,  pnmtict^  of  Bfunaveda,  7 AIOC,  p.  143.  It  proved  v<ny  diOicnih* 
to  induce  th<^  l>rahmans  to  sing  before  a stranger.  For  sornci  similarities  bot,w(Hin 
3amav(Khc  and  late^r  l,ndian  nuisic : V.  Eachiavan,  in  Journal  of  tlie  Music  Academy, 
33  (Madras  1902),  p.  127. 


322 


J . C?oih!«  * V<Hlio  Liirralnro 


have  expeeted  reailing  the  aneieni  te\ia  ■■■■there  art'  iiiKeilienH^  replace- 

MentH  of  B^dlahlcH,  ete. Inii  it  nhoidd*  on  one  hainl,  in  mind  that  not 

all  treatiacB  im\  known,  and  on  the  other  that  f■he  ijunm  impiiii:  knowledge  of 
the  melodiea  m memorized,  hy  the  HitnhmtH  individnally.  imt^  tin-  form  of  the 
chanta  an  extnnd-ed  at  the  i-ime  of  the  Haerifna'a.  Theri'  ia,  moreover,  a,  eoiwider- 
able  difiereiK’e  betwet'i'i  tln^  |>reHent»day  waya  of  ehaiiting  of  the  Kimlhtnnaa 
and  the  JaiminlyiiH^®, 


” For  the  Nambndiri»  net!  p*  44  f 

iiHiy  !)•'  foututl  in  Awih  Mwikind  .Si'ri.n.  Alltuni 
AHM  4120,  Niny  York  (with  iin  »itn«lu<'t.Htu  th'ntiUK  with  innny  itin-tomlitcM  Ity 
J.  Lkvy  tind  J.  h'.  Btaai,).  Tho  tiwt  qniirtor  of  tho  lUmvo  (u.  2li)  MtiuV/w  0,  Ui.  It) 
iH,  lu  JiiiniinlyH,  rooitttt^on:  <t  rtf/iHl  t / d «/d  /»J  tti  t (it  yd  ».  / fo  yd  » j yfodoo  hn  j (*;/(( 
aau)  ya  % / to  y/li...  For  othor  piiftiotilwrB  won  V.  ItAnKAVAN/riw  iirofioiit  ooHitiiKi 
of  Vodio  rooittttion  tuid  Vodio  t^ftkhiw.  KumhUttkotmin  IHOa. 


Tho  liturgical  SaiphitaB 


323 


2.  The  Yafiirveda 

Tho  Yajxirveda  is  thoroughly  ritual  in  charactei';  its  contents  are  intimately 
connected  with  the  cxilt.  It  was  among  its  exponents,  the  expert  members  of 
the  brahminical  order  to  whom  the  proper  observance  of  the  highly  complicated 
ritual  was  entrusted^,  that  tho  substantial  methods  of  sacrificial  practice  were 
developed  and  explored^.  This  Veda  contains  liturgical  formulas  arranged  in 
accordance  with  the  ritual  practice — ^not  to  mention  various  interruptions  and 
deviations  from  the  order  of  the  ritual  acts  as  described  in  the  sutras^—n^nd 
the  explanation  of  their  raison  d'etre.  These  interpretations  contained  in  the 
brahmanas  (or  hrdhmafia  passages)  are  of  considerable  prominence.  The  various 
texts — samhitds,  brahmanas,  sutras  etc. — belonging  to  this  Veda  are  well-group- 
ed, their  contents  well-defined^.  Each  Mkhd  aspires  to  self-sufficiency  producing 
sutras  and  other  texts  of  its  own.  What  is  lacking  is  the  original  Yajurveda- 
Samhita.  The  considerable  differences  between  the  Mkhds  extant  do  not  even 
allow  us  to  attempt  its  reconstruction,  except  for  some  sections,  among  which 
that  dealing  with  the  horse  sacrifice.  However,  so  far  as  that  subject-matter  is 
concerned  which  must  have  been  the  nucleus  of  this  Veda  the  Samhitas  extant 
are  in  entire  agreement®.  This  nucleus  comprises  the  Full  and  New  Moon 
sacrifices  (the  model  for  all  sacrifices  of  the  isti  type®),  in  which  the  adhvaryu 
does  most  of  the  officiating ; the  Soma  sacrifice ; the  construction  of  tho  great 
fireplace^  In  the  fundamental  portions— which  follow  each  other  in  an  order 
that  is  essentially  the  same  in  all  samhitas— lwoii  tho  Black  Yajurvoda  does 
not  intermingle  the  mantras  with  their  brdhmana  explanations.  Thus  Taittiriya- 
Sainhita  book  I contains  the  mantras  for  the  fortnightly  and  the  Soma  sacrifices ; 
IV  those  for  the  piling  of  tho  fireplace.  In  the  description  of  the  other  rites  the 
correspondence  between  the  Saiphitas  is  much  less  in  evidence.  For  instance, 
the  rites  for  special  advantages  (kdmyesti)^  are  lacking  in  the  White,  the 

^ Of.  e.g.  EoamiKO,  SB.  I,  p.  IX. 

® N.  Tstxjx,  Existerxt  Yajurvoda  literature.  A philological  study  of  the  funda- 
mental sources  of  tho  Vodio  ritual  (in  Japanese),  Tokyo  1970. 

® For  particulars  see  Kbith,  V.  B.  Y.  S.,  p.  LXXV;  Rbnoxt,  iScolos,  p.  141. 

* In  later  times  the  name  Yajurvoda  was  sometimes  applied  to  encyclopedic 
surveys  of  traditional  Hindu  learning  (of.  Webeb,  at  ZDMG  7,  p.  235).  For  the 
spurious  so-called  Essour-Vedam  see  E.  Winoisoh,  Goechichto  dor  Sanskrit-Fhilo- 
logio,  Btimsburg  1917,  p.  8. 

® For  a detailed  survey  sec  Kbict,  V.  B.  Y.  S.,  p.  XLVII. 

® As  opposed  to  animal  and  soma  sacrifices;  A.  Hilubbeandt,  Djxs  altindisoho 
Nou-  xitxd  Vollmondsopfcr,  Jena  1880. 

’ Othc^r  rites— among  them  the  animal  sacrifice— arc  scattered  in  iho  sections, 
dealing  with  the  above;  other8"™-e. g.  tho  royal  consecration— have  the  cliaracfi^r- 
of  appe»ndio<ss,  inserted,  in  each  SainhitE,  in  a differ(art  place.  Of.  also  N.  K,  V. 
Pantui;u,  at  QJMB  27,  p.  30. 

® W.  CAnANj),  Altindisoho  Zaulxaxa.  Darstelhmg  der  altindiscdion  *Wunsc?hopf<^rJ’ 
Amsterdam  Acad.  1908.  An  instance  is  KS.  10,  3:  “If  one  desires  rain,  one  should, 
offer  a definite  cake  to  Agni.” 


324 


.1.  (Jonda  • LiftTOttno 


'j^mvargija^  m almoiit  in  iho  Bliu'k  Vajtirv<'da:  Iho  Kariillri'^g  (miiira)  aro 
almost  diBreganJt'd  otiiHido  tin'  Tail4ir!ya  Branch.  The  1c.hk  claherated  or 
Hccondarily  aiiiuv?c.<Hi  mn'IhwH  an\  in  the  Naiiddfan*  tinicl'i  I he  aiinn\  8e  we  are 
led  to  aHHtinw^  that,  while'  part  of  thent'  erdleefiona  (ieveloped  from,  one  eotninon 
HOtiree,  tlu'y  werc\  afic'r  the'ir  He'paraiioin  amplifnal  aee'ooiing  i,o  a aitnilar  plan 
or  Biniilar  priiunph'H. 

According  to  tlu^  tradilhnt  preBf'fved  in  t-he  ('*aranaA\viitia*”,  coininentarie'B 
atul  furdnm  tlicre^  wt're  Ii)l  aehoolH  of  the  Vajtirvedadh  vi/.,  8d  etf  the  Black 
and  15  of  the  Whiter  YajtirvcHhd®.  Another  tniniher,  27»  aiaiuia  a better  t'harice 
of  being  bamni  on  reality.  In  any  eane,  t-he  nunitieat-ion  of^  t-fie  Kfana  (Black) 

Yajnrveda"" lattw  ('.ailed  la'cann^'  ita  folltiw^'ra  ('olIeettHi  mumiiw  m w<'ll  aa 

explanatory  matter  of  tin,',  hmhfimiia  type  in  tlnnr  MixiHi  hiiv<'  been 

ratluw  complc^x.  II,oweV(n%  what  baa  atirvived  haa  t'ryaialli/.eii  in  l-hrei'  grottpa, 
that  of  the  (larakaa,  nmndly  called  Kathaa,  ihni  riftin'  Maitiilyaiiiyaa  and  that 
of  the  Taittiriyaa.  Ah  to  tlic  firnt,  tftere  an>  Kathaa  prop^'r  and  tin'  KapiHthala- 
(Kathan) ; there  have  alno  hci'n  otlnw  affdiatc'd  branclu'H.  Among  the  Mnitnlyani. 
yas  there  were  Milnavan,  VarillniH  atni  othf'rn:  to  th,e  Tait-f-iriyiia  Indongt'd, 
among  otluwH,  tlie  Ankheyan  and  tin'  KhamliklyaH^h 

The  Sai’iihitfe  of  tln^ , Black  Yajnrvcda  fornu  a ('lonely  ('onnecti'd  grouj),  Th(*ir 
material  and  ita  dintrihutioti  point  tt*  an  (Wganie  tmity.  Thf'ir  agreement  is 
often  evmi  V(ad>ah  i'Hpi'C'ialty  in  thorn'  mmirm  whh'h  Wf're  Inwrrnved  frotu  the 
Hgvechdh  1'hongh  reprent'tvting  a latt'r  Htag('  th('  language'  of  tfre  imiidm,  portion 
on  the  whol('  agrt't'H  with  that?  tvf  tln^  Rgvi'da.  Aa  to  t-tn'  explanatory  prtaa'*  the 
portionH  c.a^ntaining  dirci'tioiw  and  injmn't-iona  (vnlhi}  liave  a at.ronger  reacm- 

blance  to  (\ach  otlu'r  tha,n  the  legi'inla,  Moreover,  t-lie  KiBhakn-Saiphita of 

which  tfn^  Kapi^(-ha!a  text  in  in^  irnn*e  t-ha«  a variatd-  irnd  that  of  the  MaitrU- 
yanlyan  are  genc'^rally  npt'aking  imn-e  ni'arly  ri'tai^'d  in  mvti  otht'r  tlian  to  the 


® Bee  bel(wv,  p.  3110, 

Beci  p,  3L  ,IA>r  partiendara  Itexotn  ftcelea,  p,  1 21b 

For  a Yajnrvrkfa  (a  chart  on  which  tlni  ^Yapta  tree*  at  drawn  with  iin  101 
branohcH  reaching  to  every  (Haru'r  of  hulia)  aee  lUoatt  Ytax,  at  donrnal  (if  VfHiic 
■Studies  2 (Lahore  1935)»  til. 

« Bee  .EcKmnmo,  BB,  L p.  XXYin;  ItnNoo,  ftcoh'H,  p.  133. 

,lhc  M(wtT(M  and  bnthffutnu  portions  are  (d*ten  widely  aeitarat-wi  and  |,iart  of  tln^ 

‘Concerning  the  h)rtiiigln4y  riten  are  fottud  ijrthi'  1’hif.firlva  Ilndnnana; 

<iL  e.g.  TB.  L 2,  I:  tl,  L 1;  L 3,  h 2.  th  4,  I;  0,  2.  Hb  I 7;  L 4.  43:  lb  lb  I:  I,  1^1: 
TB,  L 3,  6.  On  the  otlnnO:nmcl  TB.  2,  4.  0 and  10  explain  2.  4»  7 and  H,  Yr't.  in  view^ 
of,  the  c)ft«ai.  vcrl)al  ttiniilarith’H  between  'muntftm  and  the  hrO/iaaife*  piaf-ienH  the 
fornicw  nniHt  have  ber'ij  co11(h44hI  befor*'  the  rtHliwtion  ef  th«^ 

nim^  pnpiiii  <»f  Vakbnniatyana,  the  rti*pntcd  Ilr«t  proinnlgat-er  (4*  the 
Black  ^mjnrvi'da  mMs  BjtiNou,  Kceleii,  p.  133;  bir  tle^  leim  f'einplieaf.tnl  rafnilicittion 
of  thc^  Bnkla  iijurytHhii  ibtdejn,  |k  135;  b»r  the  Black  Vajttrvitda  (L  B.  Hai,  at 
Purilpa  7,  p.  (I;  235. 

borrowingB  connist  eitlea'  of  aingh^  atan‘/,aa  or  of  longer  patt»awteiit  rarity 
of  whole  liynmg  (e.g.  tw  TB,  h 2,  14:  I.iV.  4,  4 (15  Htaimud;  Kb  H7,  I ; fn  2,  II  and  10). 


The  liturgical  Samhitas 


325 


text  of  the  Taittiriyas^  ^^  It  is  however  hardly  possible  to  decide  whether  the 
Taittiriya-'Sanihita  represents  an  older  or  a younger  version. 

The  Taittiriyas— whose  name,  like  that  of  the  other  school  names,  must  bo 
a patronymic^’— seem  to  have  arranged  and  systematized  their  traditions  at 
an  early  moment  and  in  any  case  in  a peculiar  way.  They  have  distributed 
their  MmhiM  material  over  three  collections’®,  viz.  the  Sanihita’®  proper  divided 
into  seven  books  (k(inda)'^^\  the  Brahmana  and  the  Aranyaka®’  and  in  all 
three  collections  included  mantra  and  brahmana  portions.  Most  of  the  contents 
of  the  Brahmana  and  the  Aranyaka  are  however  supplementary  in  character. 
Yet  the  mantraps  and  the  brahmana  portions  of  the  Samhita  show  in  general 
close  and  intimate  relations,  the  latter  being  clearly  dependent  on  the  former. 
However,  the  brahmana  portions  deal  only  with  that  which  is  of  interest  from 
the  compiler’s  special  point  of  view,  so  that  many  formulas  quoted  remain 
unexplained-^.  In  contradistinction  to  the  Brahmana  etc.  the  Samhita  has  a 
very  accurate  padapfitha-^  and  is  the  subject  of  a good  Prati^akhya^^.  There  is 


See  e.g.  A.  Weber,  Uber  die  Konigsweiho,  Berlin  Acad.  1893,  p.  6 (704); 
V.  SOHROEDER,  Maitrayaui  Samhita  (see  below,  n.  37),  p.  XI;  Rbnou,  iScolos, 
p.  144. 

There  is  a no  doubt  secondary  puranic  legend  (of.  e.g.  Vij^nnPur.  3,  5,  Iff.) 
according  to  whicli  Vaii>iampa.yaua,  after  having  i, aught  the  Yajxxrvcda  to  his 
disciple  Yajilavalkya,  for  eomt^  scu'iouB  xvmon  called  upon  the  latter  to  givt^  up  all 
that  he  had  learnt;  thercnipon  Ynjriavalkya  votnitesd  fortli  the  tc^xts  staimMl  with 
blood;  they  were  pickcnl  tij)  by  tlu'*  other  pupils  who  were  tiurmxl  into  partxddgcs 
(tdUiriJ;  Ixenco  tlie  '*black”  Yajurveda  and  the  nanu^i  Taittirlya.  Yajilavalkya  then 
aorrowiully  indwxHl  the  8un  to  impart  him  thoa(>  yajus  texts  which  his  teacher  had 
not  possessed.  Tlie  Bun,  as  a horse  (tnJjin),  gave  tlvem  to  him;  hence  the  names 
Vajasaneyin  and  ‘briglit’  (hikla)  Yajurveda.  Bee  b(dow  and  cjomparo  Cauand, 
Kanva-recensie  van  lu^t  Brrdnnana  der  ‘Honderd  Baden,’  Amsterdam  Acad.  1912, 
p.  151;  E.  WiNmsOK,  in  Fostgabo  Wobor,  p.  04. 

For  a survey  baaed  on  the  Kandrumkramanika  (edited  by  Weber,  I.B.  HI, 
p.  375;  XII,  p.  350)  see  Keith,  V.  B.  Y.  S.,  p.  XXVII.  (The  Kandilnukrama,  an 
index  of  tlu^  kdralm  (chapters)— see  K.  V.  A.  Narayana  Bastrt,  at  ABOIH  39, 
p.  200— claims  to  belong  to  tlie  Atreya  Mkha,  for  which  see  Renoxt,  Eco1(«,  p.  134). 

EditcHl  by  A.  Weber,  Die  Taittirlya-Sarnhita,  2 voL,  I.  B.  XI  and  XII, 
Leipzig  1871-72;  by  K.  R5er,  E,  B.  Cowelu  and  others,  The  Sainhitu  of  the  Black 
Yajur  Veda  (with  Madhava’s  commentary),  0 voL,  Calcutta  1854'““1899;  by  B.  I). 
Satavalii:kar,  K|*§na-Yajurvediya-Taittirlya-Samhita,  Bardi  1945,  ^1957  (soo  also 
the  bibliographic^).  Translation:  A.  B.  Keitix,  The  Veda  of  the  Black  Yajus  School 
entitled  Taittiriya  Sainhita,  2 voL,  Cambridge  Mass.  1914;  ®Delhi  1967  (for  justified 
criticism:  CaXjA'NI),  at  AO  (LugtL)  2,  p.  22). 

For  the  divisions  of  the  texts  of  the  Yajurveda  see  Renoit,  at  IIJ  1,  p.  0;  as 
to  the  Taiitirlya-Batnliita,  s('>o  also  Keith,  V,  B.  Y.  B.,  |;).  XXXIV. 

Bee  Ix^low,  p.  339,  and  p.  420. 

For  some  particulars  and  an  etxci^ption  nm  Keith,  V.  B.  Y.  B.,  p.  LXXIV. 

Soil  Weber,  L B.  XHI,  p.  1 ; Keith,  V.  B.  Y.  B.,  p.  XXX;  X\  B.  Annanoara™ 
CHAitVA,  in  F(9.  VoL  H.  Dravid,  Allahabad  1071,  p.  87. 

Tlu;^  Taittirlya  Pratit^inkhya  ed.  by  H.  Mitra,  ChUcnitta  1872.  For  (extensive 
(piotations  from  the  Barvannkraman!  of  the  Taittirlya-Baiidiita  boo  C.  Kunhan 
Raja,  in  JOR  5,  p.  215  and  6 AXOC,‘p.  541. 


326 


.1 . Iktniin  ■ V'lnlir 


a (Hmparativdy  hriof  «>t>n»n('ni/»rv  hy  lUiatta-nhSHkanuniiim  (12*>'  cent )»» 
and  a long.'r  on<'  hy  Siivana.  Th.'  I rxiM  oflhiH  m'h.i.ti  ha  vp  hrrn  w.dl  j»rom>rv(>dL 
thcy  arn  ammk'd,  nmticnlnntily  mdalivith-d.  and  pnirtiraliy  m nhnni  variant*!' 
and  are  handrd  down  in  nnnu'nnw  nianimi’t  ipf a,  part  of  n iiii>h  nndrr  t in*  tidu 
Kmw-yajtirv('da.H(U]ih>tR.  I’hw  hranrf*  }m«  ind.a-d  long  hnni  rrgajxhHi  aa  tl!! 
Yajnrvrda /Kir  r.m7/f’/nv*''. 

Iht>  Ktlthaka-iSaiphili,  (nr  hrirdy  Ka^haka)*’.  at'rnidtng  t«»  tradition  miu- 
pilod  l>y  Ka(.ha,  a diaripln  uC  Vniiiampt\vnna»’.  ia  prrliapa  a hranrh  of  tlu> 
Caraka  Hclmol  tliia  runmx  ('flrakaaAkhii,  otn'iira  m the  rohiphoiw  of  otjr  inann- 
HcriptH  and  {.ho  arhoo!  niiia  iisrif  farakakatha.  Only  th.-  .Satpinii  lina  hern 
eomphdt'Iy,  though  not  fatilf  hwly,  proarrvrd®’.  Ifa  omitonta’"  am  Icaa  ('oinplet* 
than  thoa('  of  the  1 aittiriya^Siuphif  il,  hut.  t hero  am  aha*  [martagow  alia  of 

mythical  character  that  do  tint,  occur  in  the  latter.  'I'h.nc  a«v  h hooka  amUO 
ohaptora;  I If  I compriaing  the  rit  ca  t hat  may  he  mgar.  led  aa  f!,e  ntn’lcua  (the 
imntrm  inoatly  in  I,  tin*  I'orrc'aponding  Imlhimmift  in  M*‘  and  Ifl),  c«wmapnnd 
in  the  main  (and  faking  no  acemmt  of  variatioiia  in  order)  to  'PS.  | VI  Book  IV 
oontainH  mcrifunal  f(«-jnulnK» ; V ia  a colicdion  of  khilm  pertaining  f o the  horac 
TOcrifioe.  hpccial  mention  may  h«*  juade  of  the  j^oa'alh'd  rmkw  of  the  Kashmir 
Kilthaka,  series  of  rg  verse.s  mlapted  to  praetieal  pnrp.wes  for  the  tise  of 
yajurvedins  offlciatijig  as  fmtm  priest**,  Many  of  them  atanwm  do  not  occur  in 
the  Kilfhaka,  and  part  of  them  eshihit  devintions  from  ..in  Bgveda  .Sainhitil. 

‘''"daiii  ImVmmnn  pmwigea  which  have  a tdone  maemhlanec  to 
the  ImVmmga  portions  of  the  Taittirlya.Aranyaka  or  eotmtifufe  the  ‘com- 

*•  Kditwl  l,y  A.  MAiaimvA  and  K.  UAS.aeiav  v in  Th*.  Ta.ttniva 

»•  Of/wSu  I ’’■  “ 

4 Krtthakam.  I>,e  .S,„„|.na  ,,er  Kathft-tokhft, 

" rawhi”.  i!»;  xiirrs?-  »'  "vi-r. 

u:;“'sr.s':“srf  “>  

*»  Cf.  Wkukr.  I.S.  Ill,  p.  431. 

Book  II  is  oatl(.(I  “the  middle  .iik'";  wa.  nk-w,  Hknoc.  a!  Il.t  I o 7 
are  utl  j f*"*’ '**■  '’«d  of  Mectioita  of  I H I {mntl'Jlv  m TS  ) thev 

or  his  iZstlm  lo  he  meHe.i  hy  the’  holar, 

acKsratfui  libation  iifinriil  ' ^^^****''  **^^^^^**^*'*t.  io  fioooiri|tiitiy  and  oon- 

tirmmuM  «he  nanu.  ..f 

stitnto  a mil;  Klls  arid  VH.  mnd  t . m.  *" 

fffown  Viubn  1 . i'bf  m,  t nfi  t*|  tbft  oi  f.bti  fnlb 

(IK  laOh  uLiu  1)0 J ;k  ; ‘ ^ !*•  A 1115 

' »«  '‘It'  u ■ * ' ***  |o  (^oin|.*art7  o.||,  *|\S,  t if  ! u i'4« 

p.  If.  ■ wzKM  12.  p.  277;  hi.  p.  mw;  idw.;,-;  iT;;,].*; 


Tho  liturgical  Samhitas 


327 


mcntary’  on  tho  mantras  of  that  work®^.  These  facts  allow  of  the  conclusion 
that  the  Kathas  must  have  had  a brdhmana  (and  an  dranyaka)  of  theii*  own. 

The  Kapisthala-Samhita®®,  deriving  its  name  from  the  rsi  Kapisthala  who 
founded  tho  MMm—it  is  extinct  nowadays — ^is  practically  a variant  of  tho 
Kathaka,  although  it  omits  many  longer  and  shorter  portions  and  has— for 
instance  in  the  division  of  the  text— tmdergone  a greater  influence  of  the 
Rgveda^®. 

Tho  Maitrayani-Samhita®’,  in  the  manuscripts  usually  Maitrayaniya- 
Mrmava^®— the  Manavas  left  us  several  sutras—m  better  preserved  than  the 
Kathaka.  There  is  a padapWia  giving  some  interesting  variants  and  a small 
number  of  minor  toxts®’^.  Generally  speaking  the  contents  are  tho  same  as 
those  of  the  Kathaka.  Though  richer  in  contents,  it  lacks,  as  compared  with 
the  Taittiriya-Samhitii,  almost  the  same  portions  as  that  collection,  some 
sections  occupying  another  place.  The  mantras  are  as  a rule — ^with  variant 
readings  from  the  Taittiriya-Samliita — ^identical  with  those  of  the  Kathaka 
but  the  brdhmana  portions  are  often  widely  different,  especially  in  mythological 
passages,  which  are,  on  the  whole,  more  satisfactorily  presented.  So  both 
schools  are  rightly  regarded  as  autonomous  developments  of  the  same  plan^^. 

The  White  Yajurveda  is  represented  by  the  Vajasaneyi-Sarnhita.  Tho  name 
derives  from  Vajasaneya,  tlxe  patronymic  of  Ylijilavalkya,  tho  famous  author- 
ity on  (pu'stions  of  ritual  and,  according  to  tradition,  the  founder  of  this 
branch^®.  This  corpus  is  called  *‘White''  or  ‘Tllear’^  (HMa)  because*®  it  consists 
ontiredy  of  a convi^nicntly  arranged  collection  of  mantras  to  be  recited  at 
sacrifices,  and  is  from  tlic  explanatory  matter  that  is  collected  in  separate 
brdhmams*^.  The  Satphita,  which  has  been  preserved  in  two  recensions,  the 

Bct^  liKNOir,  fiooles,  p.  152.  For  tho  brdhmaria  see  p.  339  etc. 

hjdit(Hl  by  KAGinj  Viha,  Kapi^thala-Katha-Sainhita,  Lahore  1932 ; **Dolhi  1968. 

H.  OUHTKL,  at  SB  Munchen  1934,  6;  Renou,  Eoolos,  p.  164. 

Edited  by  L.  von  SoniiOEi>BR,  Maitruyani  Samhita,  2 (4)  vol.,  Leipzig  1881- 
1886  (n923,  ®WioBbadon  1970  4972), 

Doubli^  names  of  Mkhds  or  caranasy  often  caused  by  splits  or  socossiona,  are 
not  uncommon*  For  a no  longer  interesting  discussion  of  tho  name  of  tho  Mkhd— 
Maitrayaplya  appears  comparatively  late— see  tho  bibliography  at  Renoxt,  ficolos, 
p.  157* 

Two  pariM^xs,  dealing  witlx  cattle  rites  and  ritual  for  the  fulfilment  of  special 
desires,  Ixave  been  edited  by  Raghxj  Vira  in  Journal  of  Vedic  Studies  1 (Lahore 
1934),  p.  6;  2,  p.  91;  on  tho  Chandonukramam  Raohu  Vira  at  JRAS  1932,  p.  547. 

B\)r  oharacteristio  phonetic  particulars  see  v.  SoHROEDim,  o.o.,  I,  p.  XXIX 
and  at  XDMG  33,  p.  184. 

Bee  also  v.  BoiniOEDER,  tlbor  die  Maitrayani-Sanihita,  ihr  Alter,  ihr  Verhalt- 
nis  zu  di^n  veu'wandten  MkMsy  ihro  spraohliche  und  historischo  Bedoutung,  ZDMG 
33,  p*  177. 

JB*  2,  76;  BAlJ.  6,  3,  7 etc.  and  especially  I^AU.  0,  5,  3, 

With  't*lxo  (^xet^ption  of  a few  pbxoes  (VB.  24,  20;  30,  5);  see  Ramakr^xpr,  Bam- 
skilragana|>ati,  in  Bim.on,  Vtulisola'i  Bchulon,  p.  76f. 

**  B<h^  Emmumu  I,  p.  XXVII  mxd  also  0.  L.  Prabhakar,  at  BhV  28  (1968), 
p.  64. 


328 


.1.  (Idiulti  ■ V('<)i<’  Lifi't'rtlnn' 


Kiinva ami  the  Madhyaiiidina*'*.  compriricH  .(P  c-bapp'ra  (otlhtiatta).  I’ln'  vuinirm 
proper,  many  of  which  in  fact,  rgvei  iie  vcrhcM.  are  more  nitmermjHntiii  itnporfant, 
than  in  the  Black  ^’ajIn•vc^ia.  'I’Ik'  arranyc»nen<  in  heiier  adapii'd  to  tlu' 
Ncqttencc  of  th(\  rites.  I’lu'  fe\t  has  hoMever  in  eonrae  of  (nno  h.'cn  much 
enlarged.  On  the  atnaigth  of exienial  as  well  an  infernal  e%  idenee  it  ia  gem-raliv 
asanmed  that  the  ehapfera  VMM.  I XN'lll  are  older  than  fhe  Infer  ehapfera, 
heeauw' they  (»'<'  fhe  only  om'.s  that  eoinei<ie  with  fhe  aneienf  paila  of  the  Black 
Yajnrveda  and  are  ahnu'  in  ht'ing  eommenf.'d  upon  in  the  I'orreaponding  iirat 
nine  books  of  t!u‘  Aitapatha-BrahmainO*.  no  more  than  a few  tpiofaf  ions'froiu 
the,  following  chapters  being  found  in  that  voluminous  work.  Only  thi.s  portion 

rt'lating  to  tlu'  rt,hv»mrd/j<i  in  tin*  wlki/di/m 
XXII-XXV''’  contain  mmtmn  in  prose  ami  in  vers.<  which  recur  in  th(» 
Saiphitas  ot  the  Bhu'k  Vajurvt'tia,  whereas  the  contents  of  the  other  mlbt/di/m 
are  found  again  only  in  the  Brahmana  and  Aranyaka  of  the  'raiftirlvas.  Half 
of  this  Saiiihita  consisla  of  venst's,  most  of  whiidi  (over  "(Hi)  occur  also  in  the 
Rgvoda.  d'he  other  stanzas  as  well  as  the  many  prost'  fortHulas  must  have 
originated  in  the  eirtdes  ot  the  ritualists  when  the  developing  ritual  reiiuired 
additional  mtntm.H*'*. 

The  following  short  di'seription  of  the  eontenta  of  the  'Vajiuianeyi  Siuphita 
will  illustrate  the  gemwal  eharaeter  of  its  long  eollectiotui  of  muafro.v  and  throw 
light  on  the  mutual  relations  of  its  main  eompouent  pai'ts  The  «id/j »/«!/<«  i ami 
n give  the  formulas  lor  the  hull  and  Nmv  Moon  aaeritices 
the  regular  performance  of  whi.-h  it.  otdigatory  on  the  hrtdummeal  hous.dndder! 
ClhapH'r  111  contains  the  maiilrm  for  the  daily  Hreetdf,  t n (he  tddigatorv 
morning  and  evening  hurnt  iihlution  of  milk  and  for  the  four- 

ino.itldy  Htieritici's  at  the  hejdnning  ot  f in*  three  ehief  senHom.  ( i‘ii{urmMi/a).  In 
IV  to  VTH  lollow  tht'  formulas  for  the  mmi  saerith'i'  in  general  including  the 
animal  satn-ifict'  Indonging  to  if..  In  IX  and  X wr  ttml  the  f.wfH  rtapdred  for 
the  perlormanco  ol  two  important  umditicafions  t.f  the  .«tww  cacriticc.  viz.  the 
vwjaiH-ya,  which  was  connected  witii  a ch.ario!  .race  intended  to  win  vigour  or 


WKUKa.  The  VajasaneyeSiunh.m  ,n  the  Madby.md.na  a»,l  the 
Ivanva-sakhu  with  the  commentary  of  Mabtdhara.  Berlin  Loudon  is.'.g;  in  ItuU, 
this  w'ork  IS  an  editaon  of  the  Madhyandma  rts’enmon  with  a pr.diatdv  meomnlete 
reteronce  to  the  Kipiva  ileviations.  There  m-e  alao  Indoui  cditiine*  c’t>  hr  W I 

ssivli'K's'; 

m*’  1 'Vith  (he  same  eomnw„(a«e«K  t vol..  Benares 

VAUBKAH. 

*“  I'kfOBl.INO.  815.  1.  p.  XX.X  and  see  l,el„w. 

<«  /i,— "■  '"‘dated  pwHiaHe’., 

I>e  nwalil  iu'u’Tr’  1“  !'  <*'  ««'kv 

I.  c,  nomermm  mtn.  ,»  ,bo  l.t,,veda  w.H.out  anv  ritual 

icrmo<r  « ‘ndependent  nt  tlm  order  of  the 

“ LI.  P.  K.  Dumont,  L’aguihotra,  Baltimori'  llgtii. 


The  liturgical  Samhitils  329 

vegetative  force  (vdja)^\  and  the  royal  consecration  (rcijmuya)^^;  9,  5 and 
10,17: 

“Thou  (the  chariot)  art  the  thunderbolt  of  Indra,  winner  of  vdja;  with  tlioo  may 
this  (man)  win  vdja.  In  generation  of  vdja  wo  worship  with  words  the  Great 
Mother,  Aditi  by  name,  on  whom  this  whole  world  has  settled.  In  that  lot  god 
Savitar  bring  forth  for  us  sunshine.’’ 

“With  th(>  splendotir  of  Soma  I (the  officiant)  sprinkle  you,  with  Agni’s  brilliance, 
with  Surya’s  lustre  (imergy),  with  Indra’s  power.  Bo  lord  of  princely  powers. 
Protect  against  the  missiles!” 

In  the  (^haptts'B  XI  to  XVIII  follow  the  mnnerous  sacrificial  fornmlas  for 
the  constnudion  of  the  great  fireplace  (agnicayana)^^.  Among  these  is  the 
Satariidriya  (XVI),  a litany  accompanying  no  less  than  425  oblations  and 
addressed  to  the  hundred  forms  and  powers  of  the  god  Rudra®®:  an  early  in- 
stance of  the  well-known  Indian  enumerations  of  divine  names  the  recital  of 
which  is  considered  most  clfective  as  a means  of  compelling  a god  to  fulfil 
wishes  and  meritorious  as  a work  of  devotion  and  a method  of  entering  into 
spiritual  contact  with  a deity.  The  follomng  three  chapters  (XIX-XXI) 
contain  the  ma7itraHS  for  the  sautmmardj  a ceremony  recommended  to  expiate 
and  counteract  the  effects  of  excessive  sofna  drinking  and  a means  of  assuring 
victory,  stKicess  etc.^*^;  XXII-XXV  those  connected  with  the  horse  sacrifice 
( aknmedha) , whi<di  only  a mighty  king  can  perform®®.  The  complex  XTX  -XXV 
cix^atCH  t.Iu^  imptx^Hsioti  of  Ixdng  additions®®.  This  is  not  however  to  Hi)cak 
di^pnudal.iugly  of  tlui  lev(4  of  its  religious  and  literary  (|ualitics.  In  22,  22  the 
adhmryu  wliispi^rs  tlu^  lih^ssiugs  which  the  royal  sacrificer  hopes  the  sacrifice 
will  for  his  kitigdom®^: 

“O  Brahman,  let  tlun'o  bo  born  in  the  kingdom  the  brahmin  illustrious  through 
sacnvl  knowledge;  tliC!  nolikauan,  lu^roic,  skilful  shot,  a good  marksman,  a groat 
warrior;  the  cow  whicli  yields  (abundant)  milk;  tlio  ox  good  at  drawing;  the 
swift  st(H'd,  Gio  prolific  houacavife.  Let  to  this  sacrificer  a plucky  son  bo  born  who 
is  vicf.oriouH,  a (good)  chariot-fighter,  elocpient  in  the  assembly.  Lot  Parja-uya 
B<nid  rain  a(^(;u)rdiug  to  our  desire.  L(4.  our  (nutritive  and  tnedicinal)  plants  ripen. 
L(U.  ac(!uisition  and  preH(>rvation  of  property  fall  to  our  share!” 

Cf,  A.  Wkuku,  (tber  don  Vajapeya,  fSB  Berlin  Acad.  1892,  p,  705;  briefly 
Gonoa,  R.  .L  L p,  159. 

J.  C.  llKKHTmiMAN,  Th(^  ancient  Indian  royal  consecration,  Thesis  Utrecht 
1957,  esp.  p.  115, 

Company  in  the  fSatapirtha-Brahmana:  Full  and  Now  moon  sacrifices  in  book 
1 ; agnikotra  in  II ; mmia  sacrifice  hx  III  and  IV ; vfijapeya  and  rdjamya  in  V ; 

a(piicayana  in  Vl-IX. 

For  otIua‘  versions  hc:h'^  !K>S.  17,11;  MS.  2, 9, 1 f. ; of.  RuNOtr,  Podsio  roligiouse,  p.  04. 

Of.  OONDA,  li.  1.  I,  p.  173. 

Of,  P.  F.  DuMON'r,  L’advamodha,  Paris-Louvain  1927;  S.  S.  Bkawk,  in  20 
A IOC!  1,  p.  43.  ^,rii<^  fiturgi(’4il  formulas  of  th<^  Yajurveda  ixlaiing  to  tlus  sacirificc'i 
wts’o  auaiy/.tHl  jvnd  st<udi(sl  by  IhrAWic  in  Die  Yajus’  dt's  Ai^vauuHllia,  Stuttgart 
14KM).  Kor  tla^se  rifvs  h(hi  SB.  12,  7 ft  and  13. 

Accjordiug  tio  Buawk,  YajtiH’,  p,  70  the  (t^vamedha  is  a later  insertion  in  tlu:^ 
Yajurveda  in  gtuuu'al. 

Of.  Ab,  13,  1,  9;  Dumont,  A^vamedha,  p.  05. 


330 


,1,  C<oiula  ‘ Lifia’iittira 


The  MippleiUi^ntiify  c^hamrtt'r  of  Ihe  la^l  r-hapirra  in  hi;v‘'tial  doubt* 

The  Hoctionw  XXVI-'XXXV  are  ovrtu  hy  tlu'  Indian  Iriniiiion  ils'a'If  derngnated 
as  additions  (k!d!tis)^\  Th<\v  eonlain  stipplfninadary  nmnirm  mui  other  nia-^ 
terial  eonneeteil  wit^h  various  saerilb’es  finoIudinK  fhe  mniriinmnL  fin'  aJvame* 
(f/ai/,  the  luitnan  saeriliee  whi'eli  m unodollrii  tpam  I he  the  Sfienfieo 

of  all  pr{)|)erty  in  order  t(»  gain  iiinversa!  sneeiv^H  fsmmnmilm},  srane  litanies, 
glorifieiitions,  prayers  and  fonntdas  eonneeied  ndh  Ihe  samfiee  to  llii^  deeeased 
aneestorH  (pifarm).  Xonie  ehaplers  are  rfunartuddi^  in  llia!^  they  inftaTupt  the 
secpienee  of  tlie  imtnfrm:  just  tike  XXIV  whieh  eoniains  an  e^Xin't  eiuinn:ration 
of  the  anhnids  to  he  dediealtnl  fo  a ntiinher  of  gods*  ehapp*r  XXX  rninnierates 
the  ptH>pl<^  who  are  to  l)e  saerilleeri  ni  the  purnmmrdlm^^ . In  eonfintiatiou  <>f 
tliis  sacrifice  chapter  XXXI*  1 ■ III  is  a ven’sion  of  H\‘.  Ith  Oik  Ihe  ihirtisa  hymn, 
to  be  recited  to  the  asmanbleil  Inimau  vielitus,  ‘lids  hymn  deserihitig  the 
self-immolation  of  Frimeval  Matt  wldtdi  is  tin'  origin  of  all  erealion  is  incor- 
porated in  those  'WhUc'  texts  Fiat  iliait  with  tlu'  purufunmilm'^'^K  It  is  followed 
by  the  Uttara-Nanlyana  litany  with  whidi  thi'  Xtm  is  to  he  W4irsliippe(i:  the 
first  performer  (d'the  human  saeriliee  gidmal  the  fmnn  of  that  deify,  11n^  next 
section  eontaining  texts  to  lie  used  ni  tlu^  mrmmrdha  is  eonsiili'red  io  be  an 
it  indeed  sums  U|)  an  esoterie  doetrine  alamt'^  I hr*  one'  ibal  wlm  is 
Brahman  and  Frajilpati.  ('haptirr  XXXV  eiudaina  aoin*'  funeral  afaii/,as,  part 
of  whieli  are  taken  from  live  bigvediv^Hiuphitil.,  T!u'  see! imia  X X XVI  XXXIX' 

eluefly  prayi^rs  for  heidtfn  limgih  'of  days,  tnumpinred  faenitif's,  Hecuriiy 

etc*- are  dev<ited  f.o  t-he  prmuriitia  wmxmy  at  wideli  nnik  lluif  is  to  he  'Offered 

to  the  Alvins  is  btnletl  in  a t'luddron  wldeh*  henvg  made  led'lud,,  reprerients  the 
sun®®*  The  last  ehapter  (XL)  is®®  tlu^  IM-Fimidsinl  wlueh  omira  in  alt  eoIleet-ionH 
of It  is  not  threetly  eonmn'ted  w-ilh  sit'erideia!  t'erenmides.  Ttsudnng 
that  life  in  the  world  ami  'life  in  the  Divine  Spirit  art'  md  imsunp'af'thlf'  proviihsl 
one  disengages  onesedf  spiriiiudly  frtun  tlie  shaekles  tif  wiudd  this  mthpUpa 
reflects  an  advanced  stagt^  tif  speeulative  tlnujght^k  lire  nlteinpls  at  ilistin- 
guishing  several  ehronoktgieal  strata  in  this  wt»rk®®  are  imh'ed  not  fiitih',  but 

Adhyjlyas  XXVf-XXIX  evt'U  eoruam  hirmuliyi  eoniU'eted  wnfi  rites 
dealt  with  in  imwieiis  ehairpam  a ebsrr  uaheafttai  ef  thtnr  eu|^^pleiiaaitiiry  e'haraetiux 
»®  There  are  no  indicatuuw  of  its  Isnng  muuiilly  performed.  In  SuklioYajur- 
voda  it  is  a ‘syrnholkd  rite  (Sli  LL  tl,  2.  Hip 
»®  CE  UONOA,  at  WZiKSA  12  13,  p,  102* 

Most  of  its  siatr/.as  nsnir  in  ihe  begmmng  ttf  t.he  MiihieXid’'tkviiiuid 'Tani^iwh 
VS.  34,  are  likewis<\  m Hivasantkaipa-U|'timiv'«iMh  eounOHl  lynfkiig  flint  class  of 
texts  (see  F.  DiruaHKN,  Heelr/lg  llpamshadri  des  Vc'd'a,  lanp'^og  I HOT:  'dhirinst'iMit 
1933,  p*  837 ; H.  von  Li^AHUNvee.  Imh'rieheiJerUeswfdf.  I.  Hinkui 'thidiui  p.  24). 
®«  3,  A.  B*  VAN  BttrrnNKN,  11ie  ITavargya,  Ihmtm  IIUIH:  thiNOA,  Ih  L L p.  133. 
®®  Wltli  the  <^x.ee|‘)t.ion  of  ?U-an‘/,as  3 17* 

®*  Ik  TiOKMip  at  3 ADH  83,  p.  HO, 

or  the  a|)ph'Catitm  of  the  i.e^tn  of  the  White  Vajurviala  m mntriti  ritual: 
(h  D.  Tirrrip  at  CJentre  of  Adviiiweti  Study  m Han4irit  I iPoona  1972), 

p.  63.^ 

®®  Cf,  MAcmoKisw'i,  M.  H,  L*,  |,k  179  (not  eorreet  in  all  pti.fiieulare|*. 


Tho  liturgicttl  Samhifcas 


331 


we  should  bear  in  mind  that  formulas  of  the  atharvanic  type  such  as  ''A  yoke 
art  thou,  injure  the  injurer;  injure  him  who  injures  us;  injure  him  whom  we 
injure’’  (VS.  1,  8,  addressed  to  the  yoke  of  a chariot)  and  riddles  of  the  brah- 
modya  class^^  did  not  fall  into  disuse  when  speculative  thought  made  some 
progress. 

Of  the  two  nearly  related  recensions  that  of  the  Madhyandinas®®  is  more 
complete  aiid  more  systematically  arranged  than  that  of  the  Kanvaa®®.  It  is 
also  in  a Ixditcu’  states  of  |)re8ervation.  Tlie  former  has  attracted  much  more 
attention.  Although  Kiityilyana  in  his  iSrautasutra  and  other  ritualists  quote 
from  their  collection  the  Kfuwas  gradually  fell  into  the  background;  there  is 
no  no  prdtiMkhya,  there  are  no  iraitta-  and  grhyasutras  of  their 

school ; almost  all  commentaries  known  to  us  refer  to  the  other  recension.  Most 
of  the  diftbrences  between  the  tw^'o  texts  occur  in  the  initial  chaptei'S ; this 
observation  applies  also  to  the  coiTesponding  chapters  of  the  Kanviya  Brah- 
mana  which  therefore  may  have  been  composed  simultaneously  with  tho 
Samhita  (I-III).  Between  VSK.  IV-XI  and  VSM.  IV-X  there  are  many  more 
differences  than  between  the  later  chapters.  In  quoting  the  Rgveda  the 
Kilnviya  text  is  oft(m  ‘more  hxuiservative’— a closer  relation  to  that  coi'pus  is 
essential  in  tnany  later  t(^xt8  — ; while  tending  also  to  conform  to  the  Taittiriya 
school,  it  Hotnx'iitru'H  (exhibits  inferior  readings.  Altliongh  tho  name  of  Kanva 
occurs  already  in  ike  ItgvxHia  and  that  of  Madhyamdirulyana  not  before  later 
works^®  i<lu^  Kilnvii  re<H>nHion  impresses  us  as  being  not  only  younger  than  its 
sister  but  the  most  rixxxit  of  all  V(xlic  Saiphitils’h 

Tlu'^  Mridhyaipdinas  possess  various  ancillary  texts,  among  which  a (late) 
Ih'ati^ilkhya  and  a Barvanukramani,  both  attributed  to  Kiityayana’®,  who, 
according  to  i-radif-ion,  was  not  only  tho  fonndor  of  a ritual  school  of  tho  White 
Yajurvixia,  but  aiso  the  main  organi/.er  of  tho  learning  of  the  Vajasaneyins. 
lie  is  also  (‘.redit(Hi  with  eighteen  To  the  Kanviya  recension  belongs 

a conmu'ntary  asc^ribed  to  Dayana’' to  the  Madhya mdhina  the  valuable 
cotumc^ntaric's  by  llvata  and  Malndhara’®. 

8eo  134;  of.  <^.g.  T8.  7,  4,  18;  V8.  23,  passim,  misunderstood  by  Wiutebnitz, 
H.  I.  li.  I,  p.  183  (“fur  amuseinont  of  the  priests'^. 

««  K.  T.  II.  (lannfiTir,  The  texts  of  tho  White  Yajurvoda  translated,  Benaros 

1899;  31927;  ^^1957.  ^ r.  , 

For  many  particulars  boc’j  KENOtT,  at  JA  236,  p.  21;  compare  also  S.  K.  Gupta, 
at  FO  l(h  p.  54;  liKNotr,  itlcoles,  p.  159. 

IJV.  1,  36,  lOf.  and  many  other  places  (of.  p.  11);  BAIT.  4,  6,  2. 

(T.  liWNCHf,  in  JA  236,  p.  49.  li,  Mohton  Smith,  in  East  and  Wost^lO,  p.  112 
idittunptH,  in  a generally  disputabh^  argunxnit,  to  fix  th(^  date  of  tho  split^ between 
the  Kiinvas  and  MJ'idhyatullnas  at  375  B.  0.  As  compared  with  Maliara^fm  and 
oilier  n\auuHeri|)t»H  Orissan  manusinipts  of  V8K.  pn^stmt  pc^mliar  featurtw;  see 
F.  Aouabya,  3'he  Orissan  uHirmsion  of  th(^  Kaova  8mnhitu,  Vbl  2 (1964),  p.  79. 

Bt^e  liPNou,  flcsoloH,  p.  161, 

For  pardcmlarH  stH>  I'iifiNOU,  l^coles,  p.  162. 

Hoo  1).  BHATTAOitABYA,  at  21  AIOC  I,  p.  63. 

Bee  L.  Babup,  at  XL  2 (1932),  p.  73;  B.  S.  Misba,  at  20  AIOC,  S.F.,  p.  31; 


332 


.1. 


The  legend,  aeenrding  In  whieh  ihe  While  Yajtirvnla  in  xmmgvr  than  the 
Blaek^\  in  from  the  elmmologieal  poittl  n(  vivxs  ri?,!hl„  name  ‘"^nkla-Yajur* 
veda.,  W'liteh  rn'ema  to  haxe  aris^en  in  oppnaifinn  lo  in  whirh  fiaim  and 

hrdhnmm  portions  w<'re  not  aepaml<n|,  oretira  already'  in  Ihe  f^alapatlia- 
IMhmana^k  the  other  name  mdy*  m mnvh  Infer  winlue  Mnref'n;er,  iitithorities 
of  the  former  tnulition  eontrihnfmg  to  ifa  Hriihmnnin  the  JHaiapalha,  often 
polemis^a'j  againni  (tie  Blaek  Yajnrveda*  am!  Ihe  mtinfripi  el'  <lu'  '’White  hraneh 
are  not  infrta:|nently‘  <n>rrnpt  ami,  ennNeqmatli\\  yonrjger’"^  An  to  llu'  Kfmia. 
'Yajnrveda,  aftt^r  Keith  wlu)  regarded  iia  A*(iw/o‘hav  aa  et>nlrmpon:im'onH^\  it 
haH-'“<)n  the  ntrength  of  ineomplete  data  hwn  argtietB*^  that  the  ehronologieal 
order  of  its  !\mdatnetd-al  eolleef'iona  ia  Mailrayanl,  Tiulfiriya  and  Katdun 
The  Kaerifieial  fonmilaa,  frotn  %vhieli  the  Ynjtirveriii  lakea  ila  name  and 
whieh  are  ik  moat  eharaeteriafie  elenund'.  are  generally  in  pnwe  and,  in  prin- 
ciple, intended  to  lie  nuittenal  by  the  mfhmryii,  1'he  prone  of  thi'Hi^  short 
addressea  and  invoeations  eanriot  always  he  ilenied  n formal  iic'sl.hidie  value; 
it  is  often  markedly  rhythmical  e?drihiting  mieh  eharaelerialieH  of  archaic 
prose  as  repetition,  parallelism,  similarity  <d'%vord  order,  aniiplrora.  ehiasmns, 
cnnmerationH^*;  T8.  4,  3,  II;  4,  I,  h;  4,  5,  2:  VH.  4,  ll: 

*‘Thot't  art  the  (pitHai,  ttie  fwitern  qtanier* 

Thou  art  VirHj,  the  stnjlls'rn  tpiarfer* 

Thou  art  Samraj,  ihr^  wt'sl-tam  quarter  . . . 

XYoteet  my  lifedXme,  proteia.  my  e,Ji|'nraimii,  proteei  my  innpiratmn,  . , . protect 
my  eye,  protect  my  ear,  timeUen  nty  numh  Mtrrnglhen  my  voie»^  , . 

'‘*The  Y*U4us  nmst  tuahion  thee  with  thf'  lap/o/rl  ueUre*  tn  ihe  manmo*  of  AOginw, 
Thtnt  art  th(^  earth, 

The  Kudnw  must  faHhinn  thet^  with  the  tr^iMi  inetr<^  m the  matme.r  of  AOgirm 
Thou  art  the  atinosphere. 

The  Adityiia  must  fashion  ihts^  with  the  /ufaitl  metre,  m tla^  manmu'  id’ AOgima. 
Thou  art  tlie  sky  , . d* 

“Homages  to  the  goltl'n-armts!  h%der  id*  h«mts,  lual  ti^  tla^  lent  of  quarttTS  hom- 
age I 

Homage  to  thi^  tret^s  with  gnsm  tress«*s,  t<»  the  hu*ii  id'* rattle  homage!  , , d’ 

*^Tlio  milk  of.  tlu^  grtntt  <hu's  (tla^  cows)  art.  tlam.  thver  id*  ephmihmr  art  thorn 
(hve  me  Hphaxilonr, 

The  pupil  oi  Vrtn,ds  isyt)  art  thou,  UiviT  of  tyes  art  tlann  Uivi^  me  {vision)d^ 


P.  K.  (joM,  at  ABOHI,  21,  p.  243.  On  Ihi^  ctmimentati»rs  id*  tls'  VajurviHla  in 
general:  0.  L,  PaAimAKAU,  at  'Hiwtwch  diUtmal  Bangaha't^  Unu%  Illtllh  o.  12. 

8ee  above,  325,  n.  17, 

blh  14,  4,  33  (2~"‘3  JiAU.  (I,  fi,  3);  aet^  aht>ve,  p,  327. 

Caj.ako,  Ivapva-nHasiHiii  (sis^  ahove,  n,  17).  th  154, 

Kncrn,  V.  li  Y,  |).  XfUV, 

ItUAwn,  \ajuH,  |.K  70,  K.  'MvtatJs,  m Vhd,  W,  Hulsau  Mi‘rhu  11170.  p.  421 
asHumoH  that  the  TaittiriyanSaudatii  was  ctaupdtnl  alamt  tlfai  11,0, 

8.  li,,  11,  Oi.niSNiinnu*  *Am  Oeritd'mditi*  thw  aliimlischen 

Bedm^lDl?,  p,  2.  in  tm  tvmmi  whatevta*  n*  apeak,  with  von  SiStHOBona, 
Xnci,  Lit.  lu  Cultn  p,  113,  disparagingly  of  thomi  who  usetl  ihvm^  Omfn, 


The  liturgical  Sainhitus 


333 


Part  of  these  foriimlas  arc  no  doubt  very  old®®  and  a text  kSucH  as  RV.  10,  182 
seems  to  have  been  affected  by  their  style®®.  There  are  very  short  yafmes—e.g. 
the  initial  formtila  of  the  YajurvedinsTS.  1, 1,  letc.  '‘For  foocl  thee,  for  strength 
(vigour)  thee’’  words  aceotnpanying  the  cutting  of  a branch,  witli  whi<‘.h  the 
calves  are  driven  away  from  their  mothers  when  milk  is  required  for  the  of- 
fering®^; dedicatory  formulas  such  as  "This  (thee)  for  Agni'’  with  wliich  an 
oblation  is  offer(>d;  statements  of  the  ty|)e  "8urya  is  liglit,  light  is  Surya. 
Haill”;  simple  juxtapositions  of  mighty  terms:  bhur  bhuvafh  .wak  (the  three 
regions  of  the  universe) — ^and  long  or  very  long  litanies  in  which  many  gods 
are  successively  addr<^ssed,  their  powerful  deeds  commemorated,  wislies  for- 
mulated, directions  given,  homage  paid®®:  "To  Agni  hail!  (sijdhd).  To  Soma 
hail!  To  Savitar  hail!  . . Characteristically  enough,  many  mantras  are  not 
addressed  to  gods,  but  to  tlie  offerings  and  the  sacrificial  utensils.  The  razor 
with  which  the  sacrificer,  when  he  is  consecrated,  has  his  beard  shaved,  is  ad- 
dressed: "0  axe,  do  not  hurt  him!'’  (TS.  1,  2,  Ic);  when  the  officiant  girds  his 
wife  he  says:  "A  zone  for  Aditi  art  thou,”  tluis  bringing  the  utensil  into  rela- 
tion with  a deity.  By  means  of  these  consecratory  formulas  the  officiant  identi- 
fies or  locates  these  objects,  states  their  useful  or  auspicious  qualities,  or  the 
effects  to  bt''-  achieved  through  them,  averts  accidents,  itnparts  a sacred  character 
to  tluun,  formulates  the  pur})<>He  ixx  handling  them,  connects  thetn  or  declares 
them  idettticMil  with  important  })ower  (u)ncHq)ts®®;  in  short,  ho  makiis  thetn  fit 
to  bo  offered  or  used  siuusessfully.  When  the  officiant  takes  any  utensil  into  his 
hand  ho  pronounces  the  oft-r<H’.urring  formula:  "At  god  Savitar ’s  instigation, 

1 take  thee  with  the  arms  of  the  As^vins,  with  the  hands  of  ITisan”  therewith 
raising  the  act  to  a divitte  rank.  A throne  is  placed  on  a tiger’s  skin  witii  tlic 
words  "Thou  art  pleasant,  good  to  sit  on”  (VS.  10,  26). 

Of  special  interest  iim  the  nunuu'ous  identifications  by  which  the  objects 
addressed  are  filled  with  higlu'r  power  and  made  a tneans  of  achieving  the 
purpose  of  the  ritual  act®’:  while  the  purt)ort  of  tlie  complete  formula  TS.  1,  6, 

2 c "Thoti  art  ov<n'coTning ; may  I be  ovcu’commg  among  my  kinsmen,  ovc^r- 
coming,  an  att(^!\tive  one,  finding  (Ix^stowing)  wealth”  directed  to  one  of  the 
sticks  which  are  to  encircle  the  sa(a’al  fire  is  ixi  itself  clear,  many  other  fornmlas 


There  was  an  Aveetan  counterpart  of  the  introductoxy  formula  i/e  yajdnmhe ; 
cf.  YaMt  13,  50. 

The  terxn  yajm  ocoxirs  already  at  BV.  10,  90,  9,  but  this  place  dex^s  not  prove 
the  existence  ^)f  a oomphqjo  yapis  material  at  the  tixno  of  the  pex^o  also  Oiu>kn- 
BEEG,  at  2;DM:G  42,  i>.'244  (=::.  K,  p.  013). 

For  an  ('xplanath'xx  fiB.  1,  7,  I,  2 “Ihi  m('ans  to  say  Tor  that  food- 

e8S(XM5<^'»  which,  springs  from  rain.’” 

Of,  e.g.  K8.  5,  1;  15,  7;  MS,  1,  2,  18;  TS.  1,  3,  11 ; 0.  4;  8,  13.  Some  of  thes<^ 
lonmtfiis  an,^  (with  the  variation  nxitured)  repeat(xi  xuore  Gum  ilfty  or  a hmxlred 
times;  of.  (Kg,  TH,  4,  51?.;  7,  I,  19. 

Sec^  e.g.  TS.  1,  3,  3;  I,  0,  1;  1,  4,  34;  KS.  40,  4;  Md.  2,  7,  i\;  2,  13,  19;  TS.  I, 
6,  1;  KS.  5,  0;  1,  4,  28. 

Cf.  V.  SonnoKDKR,  Ind.  Lit.  u.  Cult.,  p.  129. 


334 


J.  tlowla  • Viilit’  l.ifi’tiilnri' 


of  this  rec|tiiiT  iho  givi^n  in  ihv  hmhmt$iui  pnrtioim  of  those 

eollooiioiw.  For  llio  wnnin  *‘11ion  art  thi^  titnkio'  i>r  roonp^  TS, 

4,  4,  7a  to!  their  oxpkniition  ioi  h,  Ih  IK  I ' “The  imil  flir  murm  were 
in  confliot  . . . the  godn  wiw  fhoNo  hrwhi  t^o  ht^  in  rnttfdrnefing  theilre* 
pkee),  they  pni  them  dcnrn  . , . fwith)  "Thm  Jiti  llie  nnikrr  of  wifle  room/ 
they  eonqnereil  thin  (earth)/*  Thv  hn'intiln  m at  a givi-^n  tnmmti  to  he  re|)eated 
by  the  oflioiant  while  handling  delinde  hrieka:  *'ile  hir  tUioin  theae  (brieks) 
are  pnt  down  heeoinea  greater,  eonqtie-ra  thrai^  workife  m\d  proapere  , . 

(6,  :hn,2)^^ 

Here  idno  hnagie*  in  iid-iwwovtni  %vit.h  ‘religion* : part,  of  t In'  fiufu$  are  by  their 
very  terniH  and  tenor  atharvanie  in  ehariMd.er,  e,g.  IVIS.  I,  2,  It)  “I  <nit  off  the 
neeka  of  tin',  detnona,  1,  ent.'  off  the  neek  of  him  who  hiia  Inmlite  intentions 
against  me,  he  he  my  ecpml  or  not  my  ot.pmr**®',  A apoeiineii  of  ‘mfigieo-speenla- 
tive/  as  it  were  npanim'idie  fornuitim,  showing  atmi  I In'  alwernn'  of  a hard-and- 
fast  line  betwec'n  mtiiliiiil  and  -ilmutmln  tnaferiak  is  fnrniahefl  by  the  Catnrho- 
tiras,  a series  of  eH('4,r'rie  mmirm  nat'd  in  an  wet!  m domeaiie  ritual, 

identifying,  mieralm,  priests  with  de'itiea^^k  In  tin'  I^laitrilyanl  iind  the  Vijasa- 
neyi  Saiphitls  the  aueefsaimi  of  the  ia  in  harmony  with  the  tirder  of  the 
rites^k 

No  long  quotations  are  iviwdetl  in  iUnstrate  tho  at  met  and  the  style  of 
the  brdhm'$'{m  pasnagt's,  tin'  leas  so  as  this  litpie  will  he  more  elaljtuutely 
discussed  in  the  next  ehapt'-er.  A few  hndanee'S  ehoiiet^  at  random  may  suffice: 
I'S.  /5, 1,  2,  1 being  the  Irrubimm  for  the  nmnirm  of  4*  k 2,  1 ft,  runs  as  follows; 

‘'limt  part  of  the  Haerilicf'  is  nnatweessfnl  wlneh  w performed  wilfjont-  a 
(With  the  words)  *1'hey  graspmi  thm  himd  of  Drder*  fl‘H.  4.  I,  *ii|  he  twkt^s  up 
the  horsefs  halter*  tt>  eonseerate  wHh  a ip^jm  and  te  make  thi^  aaerillee  sttiSH'Siful 
(With  tlw  wonls)  kSwiftly  riui  hithtw*  O sfiHsP  (dml.  h|  he  Indters  the  liorso; 
verily  he  procdaims  its  greatness  in  tins  form.  (With  the  wordsi  ’Yoke  ye  the  ass^ 
(ibid,  c)  (he  halters)  the  in«.  Verity  he  estahltshi's  fin'  iiafi  on  fh#'  iioim'xktent. 
That  is  why  tht^  ass  Is  less  real  tfian  tln^  horse  , , P' 

And  KS.  11,  10  {brdhfmim  htdfmging  to  the  in  II,  II)  dealing  with  a 

rain  rite : 

“‘The  wealthy  gods,  the  shi'lfermg  gmls  , . P these  gmls  are  lurfls  td'  rain.  With 
them  he  daily  wisln^s  rain  for  him.  lie  tu's  up  a Idaek  a«feiMp.e  skm.  ‘fhe  black 
antelope  skin  verily  is  t-he  tnaiidestation  t4  f In'  IJte  and  the  Samam  (It  is  therefore) 
with  and  Buman  (tliat)  he  wishes  rain  for  hnn  , . P* 

In  other  cases  a brdJinmm  passagt' ■■  ■■  even  a hmgt'r  one  ds  tligressive  in 
character  or  only  HC'eondarily  eonmn'itnl  witli  nmnirm,  For  iiifdain'e*  the  manim 

Bee  e.g.  MB,  I,  4*  14  Agni  is  all  the  gtabi#  Vtipn  the  saerihi'e  (w*  i liaf.  by  means 
of  an  offering  to  Agni«amhVii|pn  tmn  wtm  hi»ih  gods  ami  .saertlieei ; 2,  4,  4 a tiefmiic 
act  must  ht.s  pertormeil  with  iht^  iHffubb  metre  Issamse  it  i«  |generafivi'|  power. 
at  e.g,  also  TH.  I,  S,  2,  I;  tk  2,  U*  Ih;  VH,  0,  2;k 

MB,  1,  iq  KB,  I),  B;  'PA«  Ik  lib  Bee  F,  La  htamoden  tinafre  f»'hlatours, 

J’A  1970,  2(1  L 

Bhawk,  Bio  Yajusk  in  lllk 


Tlic  liturgical  Samhitas 


336 


quoted  at  TS.  2,  4,  11  are  found  in  3,  2,  11 ; in  the  long  conxment  given  at  2,  4, 
11  the  word  “of  three  constituents”  (tridhdtu)  is  used,  and  this  word  is,  in  its 
turn,  explained  by  a niythical  tale  in  2,  4, 12.  This  begins  with  the  god  Tvastar, 
who,  whilst  offering  senna  excluded  Indra,  and  narrates  how  through  Visnii^s 
mediation  the  disturbance  rc'sulting  from  this  deed* — ^Tvastar  ritually  produces 
India’s  enemy  Vytra—  ('ame  to  an  end.  In  this  narrative  the  number  three  is 
explained:  Visnu  placed  himst^lf  on  the  earth,  in  the  atmosphere  and  in  the 
sky  and  in  conx'lation  theimvith  there  is  three  times  a gift  and  an  acceptance 
of  power:  “That  is  why  tlie  threefold  is  called  threefold”  (2,  4,  12,  7)®^  In  a 
partial  duplicate  of  this  story  (2,  5,  2)  lhajapati,  not  Indra,  is  the  third  god 
and  Indra,  in  tlu^  course  of  the  events,  produces  from  himself  that  fever  which 
is  marked  by  alternating  cold  and  burning  heat.  “That  was  the  origin  of  that 
fever.  He  who  knows  that  the  origin  of  that  fever  was  thus,  is  not  slain  by  it” 
(2,  5,  2,  3f.). 

MS.  1,  6,  12  may  be  quoted  as  an  instance  of  a typical  mythical  tale®® 
illustrating  also  the  context  and  background  of  many  of  these  narratives,  the 
way  they  are  introduced  and  the  way  they  serve  as  a foundation  of  ritual 
acts: 

“Ho  gives  for  ever  who  praotiscs  the  daily  fire  service  (agnihotm) , Wliatover  ho 
aho\ild  desires  for  that  tlu’i  one  who  practises  the  agnihotra  should  solicit  Agni. 
That  falls  to  his  share.  With  rt^gani  to  this  they  say;  *He,  one  should  know,  xxxoets 
with  tlu'*  gods  wlxo  solicuts  thorn  for  ever.’  ITiat  is  why  he  should  not  bo  wor- 
shipped at  that  momenta  Yama,  ont^  should  ktxow,  ditMl.  Tlxe  gods  begged  Yaml 
(to  allow)  liim  (to  couu'))  along  (witlx  tluutx).  Wluni  tiny  iwked  her,  she  said;  *Ho 
has  died  today.’  They  said : “ITuis  sh<^  dot'ss  not  forgxT.  him.  Let  tis  create  night,’ 
Then,  one  shoxild  know,  it  was  day,  tlu^ro  was  tio  night.  The  gods  created  night. 
Then  it  betuwno  the  lU'ixt  day.  TTuM’eupou  she  forgot  him.  That  is  why  they  say : 
‘Days  and  night.s  uxake  (m<m)  forget  suffering.’  Now,  night,  being  created, 
(detrimentally)  asscKuated  with  tlu>  cattle.  The  gods  porcedved  the  cattle  by 
moans  of  tli(')  nn\t.reH.  By  means  of  the  uxotros  they  called  them  up  (near)  again. 
When  ono  worHlu|)s  then  one  perceives  (oner’s)  cattle  by  means  of  th(^  metres.  By 
means  of  the  nxetres  oim  calls  (one’s)  cattks  uj*)  (near)  again.  Then  they  say: 
‘Varuna,  having  b<HU>mo  night,  devoured  the  cattk^.  The  (other)  gods  rolotxacd 
them  from  Varuna  by  meatxs  of  the  metres.  By  means  of  the  ixxotees  one  ...” 

Occasionally  it  scexxxs  possible  to  detect  the  xncthod  adopted  by  a coixxpiler 
in  composing  a ti^xt.  MB.  1 , 10,  14-16  and  KS.  36,  S’-IO®^  contain  four  ixassages 
which,  wlxen  d<4ached  froxu  their  contexts  and  coxtxbixxed,  seem  to  constitute 
a more  or  k^ss  colu^rcnt  uarrative,  viz.  an  episode  of  Ixxdra’s  Vytra  conxbat 
whiclx  is  tiu)  xnorc  int(M‘estin,g  as  it  is  not  knownx  frotn  other  works.  These  pas- 
sages Bxice.eHHiv<^Iy  art' : 


Cb  also  040ANO,  in  lA'stgabe  ilacohi,  p,  240.  For  the  ixumlxca^  tlm>e  4. 
Gonoa,  iix  Ohio  Journal  of  nOigious  studies,  .1974,  2,  p.  5. 

F{)r  s<nn<'^  <.)th(^r  U^gi^uds  see  M>S,  I,  0,  12  (Agni’s  adulUny  with  Vanina’s  wife); 
1,  10,  13  (th(^  wiixgcul  mountains);  4,  5,  8;  4,  0,  3,  For  tlu^  go<.l  Kudra  in  the  Yajtir- 
voda:  B.  BuATTA(,acAiut,  in  ABO  III  41,  p.  85. 

Bese  K„  HoifFMANN,  in  Melanges  Itenou,  p.  307. 


336 


J.  I'nnida  * VihIjo 


**l'fo  (Indra)  da,nir«Hi:  *1  wniild  Iiko  lo  nlay  V|rlra.*  Aflia*  ii‘i''SnnHf mi,? 
ilu'Ho.  godn^  Ivo  liianda'd  otif:  flo  figliH  %vHh  fhf'  Martti-'j  $m  mmi  « , . \V!n»ii  ha  had 
nwdaul  Vflra  and  ?aw  hinu  i^aahlniil^  ) afilsrini  hy  n lairalvnia  of  his 

t.higlw^  Mlmnkuig  Irani  ith^  nffaakh  Th?^  Marnl's  nadir-il  nnin  Inm,  I'lii.y  Irmd  {<> 
pawn  hint  (wilhnnl  Innalnng  hnnl  Whpn  I hay  aainr  to  hm  %'nlnprii,lda  Hpaf,  ha 
innvad  (agaitt)/' ■ “Inh'itdtng  la  ?4ay  V|ira  ih^  nna'initf-r  llii'  ginia  waiiati 
whila  tdmliwinng  IVain  load,  lltay  laud : '\\'h*PiP  imII  Una  phnnnnt^iPl  hp  'hnin'iiTow 
or  whana  ? (i.a,  na  ntidlar  %vha  ttila  itnnjn‘t^n% wo  inin4  Uopkh  Utay 

naakad  Ihirt  rii'a- dtUtd'  'Undra  hati  huI  pm  a \Mya^!:a'l  far  from  l'*ath  fparii«'Hk 
TIta  gadn  p«l>  riawn  IV»r  Indra  Utah  parinnt  Pd*  na*\  llnnkiiarp:  'Smoo  a'partspix 
ha,H  haan  pttl-  dawn  far  hnn  ha  wdl  totuorvow  ahaa.na  nfi,**  "Wlian  f Iva  na\l,  day  had 
aomt\  ha  nai  aid.  ta  ?4lay  Vfirin  11n’  Marnf’4  aanftintMtrdy  pranaf^d  pn  axiiitidian) 
altani.  hint.  1'hay  ntada  |hnn)  dara  fu  fight  tVi’inud* 

’Whila  it  m dear  Utaf  Ui«'aa  hnir  ahnrt  paa.^iigrH  ladang  tagi-fltar  anti  may  hy 
iakint  tn  rapraaani  pra^tvxiaUatf  varaian  of  lin^  \',r!ra  anrnlial . Ilia  i-itary  nhnwa 
traces  of  adapiatbn  to  tha  ritnalistic  rxjdanidian  winrh  if  is  in  furnish:  t\g, 
“this  ricc-dislU*  must  refer  f^o  the  aarrifunal  iitiUariiil,  in  fh«'  first  passagi*  f.hcrc 
is  an  (nntranslatcd)  reference  to  Agni  which  innaf^  lie  mi  inaeiiian  lor  ritualistic 
purposes : the  first  passage  hegina  ahruplly : Indra*s  name  is  not  rv m numtioned ; 
we  are  kept  in  the  dark  ahout  themi^  eleinmfs  ef  the  afm-y.  e^g,  why  did  Indra 
not  stay  with  the  gods  U which,  in  fins  mnr  ritual  eonleyi,  ari^  not  relevant. 
What  is  relevant  is  the  exfdanation  of  the  rifna!  fact  that  m the  saerilier'  unthT 
dismission  the  Maruts  (and  (Agni)  receive  utdations  under  naniea  which  occur 
in  this  text,  e.g.  ‘'exultantly  praneing  Marufsd' 

The  Yajurveda  introtluees  us  to  a gengraplnea!  area  to  ttn^  larst  of  that  of 
the  l;?gveda,  In  the  ImUmmm  period,  as  tln^  tinusi  of  tin*  Infer  rntphiim  and  the 
are  olten  calhal,  the  eenf'Ce  of  the  Aryan  t*ivili/.atinn  ta  Hurukw'tnU'^, 
the  country  to  the  west  of  the  upper  eoursp  of  the  Vainuni  (Jumnil)  in  which 
the  typically  brahntinical  religious  doctrines  iiin!  soeiiil  syatein  mv  devcIo{icd  to 
H}mmi  over  ot'lier  parts  of  India,  A widc-r  Aryan  ferritory  is  the  ^Middle  ItcgioiU*, 
th(^  land  between  thi^  Hiinillaya  in  the  north,  the  \hndtiya  ■ which  tint's  not 
seem  to  have  hetm  rcatdnai  in  Vcilie  times  ■ in  the  soul. Ip  the  etfiiflticiua'  of  tlu* 
Ganges  and  Jumna,  in  the  laist  and  the  jdio'e  wdiere  f}tr  Sariiavutl  river  dis- 
appears in  tlu'  “iveHt,  Its  main  inhahifimts  were  flm  tiurus^'  ami  Ikulealas, 
whose  brahmins  gaiiusl  lame  and  eminemac  While  the  Ihiiijati  has  recialed  in 
im|)ortanee,  the  DoHli  (lietweeii  f.lie  two  great  rixu^rsb  the  lam!  id"  llie  Kosaliis, 
has  come  into  prominence  and  the  eastern  rmmtvirn  of  flu^'  MiigadfiaH  and  the 
Videhas  (the  modern  H.  ami  X,  Biharb  tlmugh  not  eompletely  iiryunixed  and 
brahminixeeb  suceessivcly  make  their  appearanei^  in  Ilio  texfa^^.  HiC'  Yajurvi'da 

tor  Kuruk|«dea  aii  the  home  t»f  th*-*  Kit|n;;dhaltifj  ;snn  H4Piit‘  Vnix,  o,c,,  p,  I 
and  the  imprehalde  objectnuei  raia*’d  by  L,  Kxnrx,  af  7 AlCMk  p,  Ul|i, 

'fhe  name  Madhyadiala  occurs  at  Mann  *4,  21  ole, 

^''ajiutauiyvr  Pratrifikbya  ami  the  eeunfrv  of  the  liuru?r;  Wemm,  I.H* 

I V,  p.  6fk  ” ' ' 

For  fuUlier  information  see  e,g.  Kmtu,  m i^muhmhy  llmior^  of  India,  U 
(mmlintlge  1022,  p.  1 inmXfAeooMmm  and  Hump  V.  I.  ic  fi.  \ , vp  A.  it,  ppH-AOSKit, 
m l:L  X.  J . b p*  351.  iSee  aliio  Vnu,  m donrimi  td'  Vedie  .Sfmhejt  3,  p.  id. 


Tho  liturgical  SamhitaB 


337 


Saniliitas  and  nioat  of  the  brdhmmm  literature  were  compiled  in  this  large 
tract  of  land,  the  Middle  Regioir,  in  which  the  four  Vedas  in  genexal  must  have 
been  forming  before  they  dispersed  in  ‘schools’®®.  The  White  Yajurveda  may 
to  a certain  extent  be  excepted,  because  there  are— outside  the  Sandilya  books^°® 
whicli  point  to  the  north-west — some  indications  of  a more  easterly  origin^®^. 
How  tho  dispersion  of  the  schools  came  to  pass  remains  obscure^®^  but  the 
cpigrapliic  records,  the  origins  of  manuscripts  and  various  other  data^®®— for 
instance  Mahidiisa’s  commentary  on  the  Caranavyiiha  (16‘^'  contury)^®"^— 
concur  iti  evidencing  the  following  distribxitioii  of  tho  idkhds  in  later  times^®®. 
The  Katha-Kapistlialas  were  spread  in  the  Punjab  and  Kashmir,  the  Maitra- 
yaniyas  (very  rare  in  modern  times)  in  Gujerat^®®  and  the  region  north  of  the 
Narmada,  the  Taittiriyas  must  have  been  widespread  in  the  South  whence 
such  prominent  exponents  of  their  school  as  Apastamba,  Hiranyakeiin  and 
Baudhayana  originated^®'^.  The  Madhyaindiniyas  covered  many  regions  of 
India,  especially  tho  north-east  and  east,  the  Kanvas  seem  to  have  been 
everywhere ; nowadays  tho  Madhyamdina  school  is  dispersed  in  many  regions 
of  the  north  and  tho  centre  of  India,  and  represented  also  in  the  east^®®.  The 
historical  data  must  however  bo  evaluated  in  the  light  of  the  fact  that,  for 
instance,  Apastamba  and  Baxxdlulyana  were  authors  of  sutras,  no  representa- 
tivcB  of  th<'  Taittirlya  Mkhd  as  a whole^®®,  and  that  on  the  other  hand  tradition 
is  sihait  about  various  points  concerning  tho  mfnhitdt<i  and  hrdhmanm : it  is,  to 
mention  only  this,  far  Irom  certain  that  the  earliest  scat  of  the  above  Taittirlya 
s<‘.hoolH  was  in  the  soutlP^®. 


For  particulars  sec  v.  SoHaoEnna,  Maitrayani  Samhita,  I,  p.  XIX;  Kjsith, 
V.  B.  Y.  S.,  p.  XCIX ; Rknoit,  BcoIob,  p.  199. 

Sec  Ix^low  p.  353  f. 

Gf.  Wumm,  I.  B.  I,  p.  189;  V,  p.  50;  EoaraNa,  SB.  I,  p.  XLI;  H.  C.  Chak- 
LADAa,  Contributions  of  Bihar  to  Vedic  culture,  6 AIOO  (1933),  p.  507  (mainly 
relying  on  partly  questionable  post-Vodio  traditions). 

See  e.g.  Kane,  in  JBBEAB  1917,  p.  620;  Riwou,  iScolos,  l.c, 

1®®  Bee  th(^  books  mentioned  in  n.  99  and  R.  G.  BHANUAitKAit,  at  lA  1 (1872),  p. 
163. 

W.  SiKCUXNO,  Dio  Rezensiomm  dos  Caranavyiiha,  Thesis  Berlin  1906,  p.  10. 

1®®  Cr.  also  Renou,  in  Vol.  B.  Varma,  p.  221.  Tho  only  schools  known  in  epi- 
graphy are  those  the  texts  of  which  are  still  extant. 

1®®  Bee  also  0.  G.  Kashocae,  in  Vol.  Kaviraj,  Lucknow  1967,  p.  14. 

^®^  Cf.  G.  BOicixsa,  Tho  sacred  laws  of  tho  Aryaa,  I,  Oxford  1879;  ®1898,  p. 
XXXII;  W.  Cauanu,  tJbor  das  rituello  Sutra  dos  Baudhsyana,  Leipzig  1903,  p.  11 ; 
Kane,  IL  DliS.  I,  p.  27;  44;  47. 

*®«  For  pamlits  in  Orissa  reciting  from  memory  tho  entires  Bukla-Yajurveda- 
Banihita,  a hereditary  tradition  waning  day  by  day  boo  B.  Aohaeya,  at  VIJ  2 
(1964),  p,  79. 

A diflieulty  is  that  some  souroes  seem  to  spcxik  of  Taittiriyas  when  mor(^ 
pri^oisi^y  tlu'^y  mean  th(^  for<a*iost  re|.)res(''ntativeB  of  this  Mkh(%^  viz.  tho  Apastam- 
bins. 

Cax^anu.  at  GGA  1898,  p.  956;  Ejcnou,  in  VoL  S.  Vaema,  p.  219. 


ClIATTBE  Vni 


THE  BRIHMANAS 


1.  General  introduction 

^ The  main  works  with  which  wo  shall  be  concerned  are  the  Aitareya-  ajid 
Sankhayana-  or  Kausitaki-Brahmanas,  which  belong  to  the  %veda,  the 
Samavedic  Paflcaviip^a-  or  Tandyamaha-  (and  its  ‘appendix/  the  SadvimSa) 
and  Jaiminiya-Brahmanas,  the  Taittiriya-Brahmana  of  the  Black  and  the 
i5atapatha  of  the  White  Yayurveda  and  the  Gopatha-Brahmana  which  is  a 
text  of  the  Athai'vavedins.  These  mostly  voluminous  prose  works  are  essentially 
digests  or,  in  a final  redaction,  collections  of  a floating  mass  of  views  and  dis- 
courses on  the  ritual  ceremonial.  The  exponents  of  this  tradition  often  belonged 
to  the  same  families  that  wore  already  productive  ‘authors’  in  Rgvedic  titnes^. 
The  practically  all-powerful  sacrificial  (kauta)  rites  are  the  one  and  only 
theme  from  which  all  discussions  start  and  on  which  everything  including  tho 
secondary  themes  hinges.  Tho  very  aim  of  the  compilers  is  not  to  describe, 
but  to  explain  the  origin,  moaning,  and  raison  d’&re  of  tho  ritual  acts  to  be 
performed  and  to  prove  their  validity  and  tho  significance  and  suitability  of 
the  mmtras  and  chants  used  as  well  as  the  mutual  relations  of  the  acts  and 
tlu'ir  connections  with  the  phenomenal  reality.  Thus  the  ceremonies  gave 
occasion  for  speculative  thought  which  was  to  justify  them  and  to  show  their 
indispensability.  Though  viewing  almost  all  topics  discussed  from  the  ritual 
angle®  the  authors  generally  strpposcd  their  audience  to  be  well  acquainted 
with  tlve  course  of  the  ritual,  its  terminology  and  technicalities®.  Many  partic- 
ulars are  stated  only  in  outline  or  omitted  altogether.  This  means  that  to 
understand  these  works,  a general  knowledge  of  tho  complicated  sacrificial 
ritual  is,  for  the  modern  reader  also,  an  indispensable  requirement*.  The  authors 
endeavoured  to  expound  systems  of  ritualistic  speculations  in  order  to  explain, 
as  far  as  man’s  intenssts  are  concerned,  the  world  and  tho  powers  operating  in. 


‘ Cf.  OimENUEno,  in  Z'DMG  54,  p.  189  (=  K.  S.,p.  93);  N.  J.  Shendb,  at  Comm.. 
Vol.  Jl.  D.  Viiankar,  Bombay  1906,  p.  133. 

” >S(Hi  WiNa'ictiNiTs;,  H.  I.  L.  I,  p.  188;  A.  HiLTJsnaANDT,  Avis  Bralimanas  und’ 
Upaui^aden,  Jena  1921,  p.  18. 

’ Many  Hpvicial  (lircobions  presupposed  in  tho  bralimanas  are  found  in  tho  ritual' 
siltras  wlvioh,  whilst  often  following  their  brahmaruis,  are  compiled  for  practical 
purposes. 

* A.  Hfi.ucitwANtw,  Itibuallitoratur,  Vodisoho  Opfor  vmd  Zaubor,  Strassburg' 
1 897 ; Liivi,  D.  b.  B.  (and  OisriTOr-  at  AJPh  20,  p.  444) ; Ki«mr,  ,R.  Ph.  V.  U.,  p.  313;; 
ClONOA,  R.  I.  I,  p.  138. 


340 


.1.  Oowin  • VimIu’  Lit  I'l'iO  uro 


it  and  to  cHtablinh  nK'ihodn  of  oontrolling,  or  at  loiiat  ox«oiing  inllnonco 
xipon,  tlu'HO  powtO'H  by  ofiho  ritual  wbirb,  if  proporly  tiiidia^Hiood  and 

aoouraiidy  porfi)rni<Hb  vmihh  iboy  b<dirv<’<i  aavoinan  from  ovil  and  niiBforiiinn 
in  tbia  world  and  boyoial.  11k'  boliof  in  iht'  r-ffirnoy  of  fbo  foundod  on  the 
conviotion  that  all  tliinga  and  ovonta  aro  eoinnndnd  wilti  ono  anot-hor,  that 
tlu're  oxint  corroMpondema^a  btdovoon  rittinl  acta  and  Ihr^  initnrfil  forooR  and 
atipornattiral  inllnonri^H.  that  it  nuiat  bo  ptwniblo  to  maintain  brni'innal  ndathma 
with  the  Btipra-nmndano  wna’tal  ordor  and  that  Um  jiofmibility  wiw  ttiowt 
appropriatidy  r('aIi7aHl  thnnigh  rituid  inalitnlionH  niiido  f horn  oaiabliah  ti  HynUmi 
of  likirgic-coBmioal  orpiivalonooH,  Known  <ady  to  tln^  iniliaif''  ■ or  m tlu^  imik* 

nmnm  have  it to  *hho^  ono  wia^  ktiotva^' thoH<'  caminHi'h>n«  and  roiationB  witli 

tlio  UnHooiu  tlu^  Boaadlod  are  ottt^  <d'tlto  moat  oliarmdnriHtfc  anbjoota 

for  diHcnmaiom  d'hiH  diKcmaHion  in  m a rtilo  oarrioti  on  wdth  minniottoHa  and 
intricate  argnnun'itation.  iu>t  iilwaya  avoiding  aptamlativi'  rligrcaaiona.  The 
sacrificial  ritnaf  indccifi  is  iinport^mt  beymtd  compart^*  a gnait.  rcgnlating 
cosmic  powaw,  elevating  man— the  only  earthly  e,r«*atnre  \%*!m  I'lin  sacrifice—, 
indispensahlc  for  the  gods,  "who  owe  their  miprtmitMinlhority  t4i  it.  grimtingall 
wishes,  redeeming  from  df'ath  and  support,  of  the  nnivrrse,  but  if*  shonld  be 
perlbrmed  with  a pcafee-t  knowletige  of  its  teehnica!  inlrieiieien  and  a fnll 
nnderstanding  of  ita  Iiiglun’  signilleaima^". 

,Acc?orrling  to  an  aneic'nt  authority,  Apastamba  {Ap»^\  24,  I.  *12ff )»  hrfihmmm 

propto’ that  is,  to  cvxeltmion  «>rt'he  nantes  of  aaerifieers  rdtn  ■ -d^id in 

those  Hcmteiu^es  wideli  contain  an  order  exprt^sse-d  in  the  opt-afivi^ . with  the 
rules  or  imKles  of  comlneting  saerifieial  <an*emonie«  or  vidM),  and 

W'itli  tvxegesiB  of  mmtrm  and  rites,  with  the  reasons  w‘by  a eertiiin  rite  iwist 
be  ptafbrnnHl  in  a clefinite  way  (arttmmdu}^,  1*he  latter  pail;  emnpri«t*s®  een«nr<^ 

^ Bec^  (^.g.  II.  OLonN'iininn  VorwisstaiHeliafthehe  Wiaaeiiaebafi;.  I>te  Weltanseham 
nng  der  Ih'iihniaiyvfibxnsCU'Utingeu  lUUhp.  4;Cb',mnA,  ft  L t p,  Kill:  1117;  2 lU;  272, 

® Be«^  e,g,  B.  KeiiAVKH,  in  Eh.  f,  HmldluBinus  ft  p.  2711;  Un?i«n\  iii  dA  237,  p.  13; 
241,  p.  171;  OoNOA,  at  ALB  2li  (UHlfd,  p,  L 

^ E.  g.  L 3,  fa  111;  2.  3,  L {*Uho  stm  wmilil  not  rtae.  wiat^  lie  not 
to  sacrifice  , , 3.  L 4,  3;  3,  fi,  2,  Ifi;  3,  fi,  3.  I ; 11,  3,  X H ; lb  4,  X i 1 : 10,  L X 4; 

10,  2,  IK  IB;  12,  2,  3,  12;  13,  4,  1,  3;  14,  3,  2,  L 

^ CL  also  BbatfadfiiuBkara,  <m  TB,  1,  5,  1 *'a  hrBhmmm  i«  an  tmplanatmn  of  a 
ritual  atit  and  of  thc^  nmntrm  fiohmging  to  itA  and  on  AtB.  L L L According  to 
the  later  Mlmfunsii  Hchoti!  of  tlionght  there  are  tlwee  idaeaf's  of  iiijnnetitms,  vi7,. 
ordca'H  enjoining  Bomething  not  <ithta*wiHe  kntnvn  (i^pdrmMhi ),  orderH  inHisting 
upon  a ilefiuite  alternative^  or  [mssibility  in  performing  an  act  (mfimmmdhi)  and 
ordia'R  concfaanng  aetions  known  but  not  ntHiessarily  por«nbl«»  alt.criiiif.iveB  fpriri- 
m'fikhymvidhi),  filie  miJmiHMtm  are  likewise  tbrindbld:  aomf4.hmg  efmtri'tdicting 
everyday  iwndenae  something  known  fonn  other  aonreea  of  knowledge 

(tmtmMa),  Momething  unknown  .and  nneontradietcd  alai.ed  a;iiilif»rnti.f4v<dy  (hhil- 
MHhavddu) , CL  also  Bitytuyn  .Introdnetmn  to  l^iV,  I,  p,  23  and  (for  more  rletailed 
distinetionM)  MmlluiHiidaua  Barsavati  <|noted  tiy  Wmmin  L H,  L |n  L At  AiB.  Ik  43,  B 
bmhnmpa  pm^’titms  and  ineirieal  texta  of  tjie  Vwla  (thmuim;  cL  Bll.  11,3.  7,  3)  arc^ 
scloarl y c I is  t i ngu  isl  aid , 

® CL  also  .fUim,  Ai.  B.,  .Intreal  p.  41). 


The  Bvalimanas 


341 


or  controversy  (nindd ),  o.g.  ‘‘(the  tear  shed  by  Agni  became  silver;  therefore) 
silver  is  not  a sxiitable  gift,  for  it  has  arisen  from  tears’^  (TS.  1,  5,  1,  2);  re- 
commendation (Mmsd : the  performance  of  a rite  with  the  proper  knowledge 
produces  the  effect  desired):  “he  offers  in  the  dhavanhja  fire;  verily  he  makes 
him  go  to  the  world  of  heaven”  (6,  3,  2,  1);  references  to  the  (exemplary) 
performance  of  sacrificial  acts  in  ‘former  times’  ( purdkalpa),  i.e.  the  nnmerons 
mythical  stories  of  primeval  events  (and  gods  as  originators)  to  which  the 
origin  of  many  rites  is  attributed;  and  precedents  or  the  achievements  of 
others  (purakrti):  stories  of  certain  performances  of  brahmins  who  were 
conversant  with  sacred  knowledge  (irotriya),  liberal  sacrificers  etc.,  and  the 
success  they  achieved.  The  many  ms^ths  contained  in  these  portions  have,  in 
some  way  or  other,  a bearing  upon  the  ritual  or  are,  in  any  case,  brought  into 
relation  with  it.  For  a right  understanding  of  the  brahmanic  ‘sacrifice’  they  are 
essential.  They  explain  how  a rite  originated,  why  a ritual  act  is  to  be  performed 
in  a definite  way,  what  is  its  effect,  why  a definite  utensil  should  be  used,  what 
is  the  significance  and  result  of  definite  practices  and  so  on^®.  The  above  means 
that  the  contents  of  the  hrahmanas  may  be  classified  under  the  heads  of  sacri- 
ficial directions,  explanations  and  oxegetical,  ‘mythological,’  polemical  or 
‘philosophical’  speculations  on  the  great  rites  and  their  ‘connections,’  and  the 
advantages  to  be  gained  by  moans  of  the  rites^^ 

These  prose  explanations  are  called  brdhmana^  i.e.  “comment  tipon 
i.o.  the  Veda^®.  For  instance,  TS.  3,  1,  9,  4f.: 

“Manu  (the  first  man)  divided  his  property  among  his  sons.  Ho  deprived  Na- 
bliruxcdi.stha,  who  lived  as  a Veda  student,  of  any  portion.  This  one  wont  to  him 
and  said,  ‘How  have  you  deprived  mo  of  a portion  V Ho  replied,  T have  not 
deprived  you  of  a portion;  the  Afiginxsos  hero  are  performing  a long  soma  sac- 
rifice; they  cannot  discsern  the  world  of  heaven.  Declare  this  brdhmana  to  them. 
When  they  go  to  the  world  of  heaven  they  will  give  you  their  cattle.’  Ho  told 
thorn  that  and  they  going  to  the  world  of  heaven  gave  him  thoir  cattle”^®. 

The  term  brdhmam  was  then  also  applied  to  collections  of  such  explanations, 
to  sections  of  the  iSatapatha  and  to  works  of  this  class  in  goneral^^^  In  this 
collective  meaning  it  occurs,  together  with  the  four  Vedas  (SamhitEs),  in  TA.  2, 
9,  10^®.  The  sutT(jifSf  using  the  term  for  “ritual  explanations,  not  for  definite 
corpora,  do  not  recognize  any  distinction  between  brdhmams,  Yajurvedic 


See  e.g.  JB.  I,  7;  11;  gB.  1,  1,  4,  Iff.;  20ff.;  2,  1 f.  For  a distinction  between 
purely  illustrative  and  oxegetical  matter  ace  below,  p.  368  ff. 

The  author  of  the  Pailcavim^a,  for  instance,  polemizes  against  the  Ivau.?italans, 
of.  PB.  17,  4,  3 where  the  latter  arc  blamed  for  an  incorrect  ritual  procedure. 
Rknou,  at  JA  237,  p.  15;  Minaud,  T.  E.  I,  p.  51. 
w also  Tfci.  3,  5.  2,  I ; AiB.  1,  25, 15;  6,  25, 1 “Ho  moiintB  the;  difficult  mount- 
ing; the  explanation  of  this  has  bcH:m  given,”  viz.  in  4,  21, 1 : “th(^  diflamlt  mounting 

is  the  world  of  heaven”;  S,  2,  1.  , 

On  tht^  possibility  of  shorti^r  works  of  this  class  prcxiedmg  those  known  to  us: 

Wiixman-Guabowska,  in  110  6,  p.  189, 

« See  also  HouBOir,  V.  G.  L.,  p-  42. 


342 


♦I.  Ldfn'fdnr^ 


mmhitil'^  and  an  r«»gard?^  ilinir  hriibnmm  peril, In  nntimn  <>,f  time, 

howovoi\  it  brmiun  tHMM\HHaiy  it>  diaf-ingtiiKli  olln’t  trf  lili<raiiirn,  thn  ninre. 

OHotoriral  ilmnyakm  anrl  ihn  uptnl^mls  of  winrh  flit'  hmknmnm  wm)  the 
harbingoi’B  and  into  whirh  iln'y  hwl  filtnead  hy  in^seniinbln  gratia!  ion* 

Up  to  tlio  pn^Hont  day  inan}^  df^priHnatory  jmkmvni^i  hav«^  laani  paanod  upon 
the  aontonta  atnl  tbo  litomry  talno  iddbrai’  %vorloi^%  llowm-or,  tlioir  iniportanen 
m tho  oldeat  body  td'  Indiati  proai'  oxfant  and  aa  roligioiia  and  apotniktive 
docinnontH  ean  bimlly  bo  o^vf^rmboti.  Un  thr  landa  of  {trmniaoa  that  ares  ohamo- 
toriatio  of  Hoamllcd  primitive  aitti  arohaie  eiviliaainnia  of  wlnoh  tlu\v  are 

antfmntie  dooiimimta their  imtlmra  erreted*  with  rrdimnl  iimifrnu'HH  and 

romarkabh'  eoimiateivey,  a wholly  mipandleled  atiperafrnniiire  In  wineh  Ukhai- 
bergk'^  bdieittma  (pialifieation  ‘pr<'aeient4fn'  aeienet'*  ia  pmle-efly  aj>plieable, 
'!riu^  hrdlmmnm  iH^preatmt  iht'  initdleet^nd  aetivity  of  a^,  aaemabdal  (daaH  whieh 
had  mmeeeded  in  arranging  and  ayaimuali/dng  the  forinn  of  Indiid' and 

worBhi|,>  anti  in  iwanaftnining  them  into  a highly  tnonplieated  Hyaf^em  of  aaeri- 
ficial  cxwetnoniea.  ,IIt)\vever  intt^reaieti  tire  mo!i%n^a  trf  thi'  antlnn^'a  anti  their 
diseipleB  might  have  l»ec*n  in  tive  qn<*«t  ft>r  an  e^planidory  theory  baHieiilly  it 
wan  the  deHire  to  plaee  a, II  !>innga  in  a t^anaid  etmfi^5i1^  wirhn'  I him  that  provided 
by  eommon  Htnme,  ihn  tleaire  to  pemdratt'  the  inyaleriefi  of  the  worlth  to  find 
that  tiniiy,  onlvv  4md  rt'gtilarily  whieh  nmlerlit^  apparmii  4ivvrml}%  dimatltT 
and  anomaly,  It  in  in  thtmt^  wttrha  that-  we  wtineae  a aptn!  of  intpdry  ami  a 
apetndativt^  tirge  aa  wtdl  aa  tht^  tlerdre  ayi^feiniitreally  to  timkp  the  kntnvledge 
of  the  hight'Ht  eait^gtnk'H  n^nnlting  from  fheBr^  aprinilalanm  am!  the  inaight  into 
the  tranHtHmdtaii  tnith  gainial  atihat'rvitnd-  ftt  inaida  higiirnt  goal.  In  many 
r(mp<H,d^H  thene  miihmm  ha.vt%  iogettn^  wilh  tfndr  «ndleagtnvi  of  fhe  At  hirrvavtala* 
laid  the  foundathma  td' the  Intlian  apeetdativi'  lhotig,ht  r»f  later  etmttirieH, 
Ab  to  the  ancient  eomnumtatorH  t>n  thia  elaaa  of  Iiferatitre  they  are  geruTally 
very  aparing  of  information  on  their  identity^  iiate  {Kinignruinaya ; 1177  A.,1).) 
or  origin.  The  prov<amnee  at  maiuiaeripia  e.g,  in  UtJvindioivUmiidH  eaae 
Kerala,  in  Bhat^'^^^^'BhilHkaivdB  Antihra  Bnult^ah  ■ , gta-sgriipbini!  datii,  refere,nee8 
to  pnalceeBBora— k^adgnrn^iBya  on  tht^  Aitareya  milking  mention  of  Uo- 
vindaBvImin--^'-,  (piotatioiiH  in  other  worka  art'  mtr  main  ht'Ip  in  titling  tin,'  gapB 
in  onr  knowledge.  From  theMe  data  it  appiaim  alao  that  part'  of  t fie  eommentarieB 
are  lost.  Wln^rean  OovindaBvfunin  iriea  to  be  m brief  ,iia  poaaible,  Havana  i« 
inelincnl  to  <piote  grammatical  ndc'H,  to  plain  every  word  by  aynonyttiH  and 

For  partkinlarH:  Knrrn,  F,  B,  Y.  H.,  p.  LXXVHI, 

‘Wunderlieht^  FmnigiiifiBe  , , , irrender  Idiantinsm**  {A.  K;,^r,on  Ihn’  HigA'’eda» 
Leiprig  IS7B,  p,  7);  **alaaTatitaui  of  the  human  imm,r'  i\\\  IP  Wtirr^inv*  in  Adbli,  3, 
p,  333);  “trwteH  Jlild  , . ♦ endltmer  HpO'/Jlndigkinfinf*  in  7d,)Mi«'  4IP 

B*  **‘**d'^^datable”  (WtNWHNrr/,*  Ib  b b,  b |e  IB7U  "101*111  nnattraetivc**’ 

(WmfiMAN (iHAnowHav,  at  lit)  tl,  p.  no);  ‘"fiitirdie*  (V.  V,  Bidaf-mmi  of  the 

epuiH  to  tlu^  Brhhmapa  Id.erature,  Foona  imu  p,  40);  "nmaomeldieh**  (K.  liorr- 
MANN,  in  MtdangeB  liemm,  p.  307). 

See  abovc%  m a, 


The  Brahmanas 


343 


to  illustrate  his  argument  with  theories.  In  his  bhasyas  (commentaries  of  wider 
scope)  on  the  Taittiriya  texts  Bhatta-Bhaskara  keeps  the  mean  between  them. 
SadguruSisya,  giving'  a brief  explanation  (vriU),  prefen-cd  wilting  in  verses. 
Commentators  often  quote,  not  only  ancient  authoritiesi“  but  also  parallel 
passages  in  order  to  substantiate  their  own  statements  and  opinions”",  home 
of  them  furnish  their  readers  with  stanzas  giving  summaries  or  constituting 
explanatory  links  between  two  chapters.  Bhatta-Bhaskara  oiten  inserts  a 
simple  indication  of  the  subject  matter. 


»»  Silyana,  for  instance,  was  acqnainpHl  with  numjHi'xte  and  pn^deci'Hsors.  On 

quoting  in  general,  S.  H.  hKitOAU,  at  NIA  5 (1,94.1),  i>.  dBO.  ,,  .>  , , g 

« E.g.  SrunaAramin  on  2,  (i,  8,  quoting,  inter  aim,  Ih.  2.  .1,  8,  hB.  ( , -,  1,  18 

favour  of  the  thosis  that  in  the  inlinitivo  time  there  were  human  saenlices. 


344 


(•Intuli*  • Viilii'  Ki(  Pi’ll) <tr<> 


2.  The  Text.^ 


Of  the'  Uvi,)  brithimmu  nlfiveht'ii  Im  Ihr  niid  iiilrtirlfil  lor  Ou'  prirBt 

who  ftnu'i’ioririi  m iminr  ' Iho  ojort^  nni^orOiol  ib  llio  AHnvvyuK  In  itn  prearnt 
fortn  iho  work,  whirh  ih  writi’On  in  n minphn  Ihotiith  oflrn  rrinlr-  fifwh*.  oonHiBiH 
of  f<wiy  rhnptiWK  (ItsHsmtH':  jliviihnl  nilo  vxuhi  hookfs  (‘nllml  ^pnniads* 

(parmln)  In'canaf^  oarh  of  Ihnn  ronfaina  fivo  aorf'imvM^  If  i«  riu’O'gnr/.rd  hy 
tradition  m handml  df>wn  hy  »Sayana  iin  I ho  work  of'  ono  prraon,  *^1ahithlm 
AitaroyH/\  hnt  ihia  man,  wlio  may  havo  Iwrtt  iin  anfhordy  td'amno  diatinrtion 
oannot  have  lavon  morn  than  fho'  nnliioftir  td'  l!m  proamit  t«nl . llnna'  in  ind'ord  no 
reamm  to  ihniht  that  lhi«  work  in  nofi  of  ono  hatnl  01^  tinvrf,  11uii  f,ho  laat  ton 
(ulhiffipm  VIT  and  VHl),  whioh  doal  with  tho  iiiimial  aarrifitan  oxpia- 

tioiiH  and  th('  royal  ronaooratitnn  w-rro  a hit.rr  adilitimi  in  mo’fo  flian  prohahla 
botli  from  a oompariaon  wiffi  ffto  mandy  ridniod  i\iuiidf.iiki4lril]nnana  whirh 
containa  nothing  oorroaponding  to  Ihm^  anhjfaia  nnil  from  fh<^  fimt  that  the 
real  ilmnv  of  tiro  Aitar(\va4vanaltahi  in  t-ho  .trww.  aarritioo  |AiB.  I -VI\  udkipiya 
B-1.6  mjtmimm,  17-48  gamm  nynmi.  Bf"'24  fwidvo  daya*  riio  or  tltddaAUu 
25-32  mjmfmtm;  Kli  VIf■■'XX,X)^  m\  whioh  fho  iiotanmt  of  tho  oonaooration 
rolatod  in  ttio  latter  |H>iiion  of  fho  work’  -nn  arootmf  Ilia!  Ima  nothing  parallel 
in  other  worka-'  haa  no  hearing  fthe  king  a aaoiifitnal  lirink  m not  In 

8,  24'*“28^  tln^  - mi  donht  lain  ■ laat  aeelimn  the  fo\f  immirn  to.  n dtnlrino  of  the 
roHolntion  of  the  tloitiea,  lightning*  rain,  moon,  imn,  fire*  tn  thia 

dootrino  iw  roproHoniotl  aa  a praotioa!  devwo  for  enahiniy  flie  ilonieidio  prioat 
to  oominer  tiu*  tmemioa  iddiia  royal  patron.  fir?a  part  of  imtk^kn  Vtt  tloab 
with  tho;  divinion  td‘ tlio  Hmnddeiiil  aniinala  aiming  f.ln'  olfieiiinf  ?e  lire  anthoniioity 
ot  pafiedn  VP  haa*  inoretwer*  with  good  reamm  been  donhtnk  nrw  only  lawauHo 


^ h]dit.ed  mid  tmn«lated  (with  an  miroihielory  vnm%y)  hy  M.  H.?ie"a,  voL*  Ikau- 
bay  1853  (II.  ®Alliihahwl  1 1122 j of.  I.H,  IX,  |e  ITTi;  Tn,  Aeranoirr*  Dai 

Aitaroya^Brahrnaiia  (with  ojctriwin  from  Hay  ana  etiei*  Bonn  18711  (11172):  hy 
Ik  h,  bXMAyitAMl,  4 voh,  (lilantta  I8II0  iwm  (with  tSayanai;  other  Indian  eehtionB; 
translation;  Kkitii,  Kigveda  Brahmaiiaa,  tlunbralgo  Miww.  1 1120  IPelht  110111)* 

In  tlio  Weatf  the.  work  la  laaiiilly  i.|uot'ed  aftia*  fitook?i  imd  nhoiifn"  ehapiew, 
boo  AtiFiiKcarr,  0.0,,  p,  III;  Kierru,  At.  A.,  p,  Bl  Iti^  name  oeenni  at  At  A*  2, 
1,  8;  ;k  7;  OhlL  3,  Ilk  7 Hiu 


^ llAtio,  AL  B,  B p.  58;  Knirm  U.  B,*  p.  28* 

^ OL  alsi)  N*  d,  HifnNOK,  iStanain  the  imUtminm  'of  Ihi^  BllvrHlit,  *1  AH  Ilomlmy  38, 
p*  122,  Ni^itht'r  brtihmufm.,  however,  treat  11  of"  all  the  wwritieial  riiea:  mw  KniTil, 
K,  B,,  p.  33;  54. 

AiB.  7,  28*  1 k , . tlien  Indra  waa  tli^prived  f»f  the  drmhmg  of  wimn.  and  iit 
aacmrdivnee  ^ ilie  d^eprivation  of  Indra  the  lordly  power  wm  deprived  of  the 
arntkmg  of  wimof*  eliapter  2llf  ndormmg  n«  that.  Mimm  w the  looil  of  the  hmhmarn, 
mml«  that  of  tIioem%M4^  ofltmliaMwi  a n»ildeman  nhmM,  m a mwnilmw, 

tatoUho  fruits  id  varuniu  flg^^i’roes.  In  eonnttetmn  with  wneh  liorrm  It.  B,» 

p*  ef  a Hpirit  ol  hrtdimameid  Melfm^merrion*  mdiieli  m at,  anv  ndo  not 

prormnont  m th«i  rr^ut  of  the  Aitiireya.^* 

C£  Haiici,  Aili  I,  p,  53;  Wlimm  f.  H,  IX,  p.  372;  Kkitii,  B,  Ik,  |o  3L 


Tho  Brill  Ulianas 


346 


it  makes  the  iin])ression  of  a supplement,  but  also  because  it  shows  many  signs 
of  such  defects  as  confusion  and  repetition  and  inconsistency  with  passages  in 
the  preceding  part  of  tho  work. 

As  to  the  procedure  adopted  by  the  redactor  his  main  purpose  is  to  account 
for  and  justify  the  d(dties  addressed,  the  mantras  applied”i.c.  their  use  in  their 
ritual  setting*^”- , tlu^  sainificial  material  used  and  the  ritual  acts  prescribed**. 
His  devi<H^s  to  realiz^e  tlu^sc  intentions  arc  emphasis  placed  upon  a single  word 
of  a n/-stanKa,  illustrative^  storic's  of  exemplary  ritual  performances,  references 
to  analogy  (fbr  instance  in  daily  experience)^**.  In  doing  so  ho  quotes  rival 
authorities^*,  siding  with  tlic  ritualists,  not  with  those  who  occupy  themselves 
with  tlie  esoteric  significance  of  hymns  and  rites  (the  brahmavcidins).  Never 
speaking  in  the  first  person  he  considers  it  part  of  his  task  to  recommend  certain 
practices  and  reject  others.  A point  of  interest  concerns  the  handling  of  the 
7m7itras^^.  Those  7na7itras  which  in  the  eyes  of  the  compiler  are  much  suited  to 
tho  occasion  are  valued  as  ‘'perfect  in  form,''  e.g,  AiB.  1,  16,  8: 

“(1J.V.  6,  16,  13b)  ‘Atharvan  produced  fire’  is  perfect  in  form;  that  in  the  sac- 
rifice is  perfect  whicli  is  perfect  in  form,  that  rite  which  as  it  is  performed  tho 

mantra  declaixis’ ’ 

Other  tbt'nmhts  h(U’V(^  t.o  alhuh!!  to  an  authority  fi>r  a particular  ritual  act  even 
in  the  v<^ry  Rgv(Hla-8atphittl,  e.g.  “B<', holding  this  the  rsi  declares  . . 
Therc^  is  ample  rootti  for  tlu^  observation  that  the  expansion  of  the  ritual  on  the 
one  haml  and  tlu^  lux^servation  of  mantrm  winch  wi^ro  not^®,  or  no  longer, 
ritually  uh<hI  on  the  otluu*,  necessarily  led  the  ritualists  to  look  for  applicable 
mantras  and  to  argxu's  that  ihese  had  the  sanction  of  rsis  of  the  Samhita  or 
otlu'rwise  to  ada])t.  tlu^  manira  material  to  tho  exigencies  of  the  ritual  practice, 
Since^  it  was  ofttm  difficult  to  fit  an  old  mantra  into  a new  ritual  frame,  part  of 
tho  l^gv(Hli<^  passages  adduced  to  explain  particular  features  in  the  ritual 
impr(^Hs  us  as  forciMl  or  anachronistic*,.  Thus  in  explanation  of  the  fact  that 
Indra  and  ViXyu  Ixave  an  oblation  oisoma  in  common  AiB.  2,  26  has  the  story 

« The  Aitanya-Tirahmana  quotes  047  ff/- verses,  of  which  119  are  repeated,  tho 
nurnbc'r  of  n^pciititins  being  210,  Hnwover,  part  of  tho  partial  (pratlh&na)  quota- 
tions stand  for  a complete  i^xlA^to’—about  150  complete  suktas  are  quoted:  Olden- 
BBRO,  at  ZDMG  38,  p,  473  (K.  S.,  p,  547)—,  so  that  tho  total  amount  of  versos 
quottid  is  mucli  high(a%  In  order  and  composition  of  stanzas  and  triplets  there  are 
some  divca'gences  Ix^aveen  Brahmana  and  Sanihitil. 

» It  may'  bo  recalled  that  these  aim  at  earthly  prosperity  as  well  as  fitness  for 
union  and  communion  with  the  Highest. 

^0  V.  Cu.  BiXATTACnAavvA,  at  OH  1 (1953),  p.  289,  Of.  e.g.  AiB.  I,  1;  1,  7; 
2,  13;  2,  23;  3,  47;  5»  1 ; 6,  9;  6,  23. 

n Of,  ,1'.  8'UKNon,  at  Oomm,  VoL  H.  D.  Velankar,  Bombay  1965,  p.  133. 

'V,  Cm  BuATTACiiAavvA,  at  OH  3,  p.  239;  4,  p.  99. 

Cf,  e.g.  also  AiB.  1,  17,  2;  25,  7;  2,  2,  32;  KIk  B,  7,  and  see  V.  Cli.  Bhaota- 
(lUAaYVA,  at  OH  4,  p.  99;  227;  5,  p.  119;  Henou,  in  4'A  250,  p.  184. 
e.g.  AiB.  2,  33,  6;  3,  12,  5;  20,  1. 

« A(5<u>rtling  to  tho  traditional  (‘orthodox')  view— which  is  rintenablo— all 
stanzas  of  tlu^  Bgvtula-Bainhitrt  were  originally  intended  for  ritual  use. 


346 


,r.  Gdiulfk  • Vi'dio  liitc'rnftin' 


of  a race  daring  wlu^di  Indra,,  {xweiving  that  Vayu  wm  winning,  naked  hia 
colleague  to  win  togef.lu'r  with  hiinaelf  if  nughi'  receive  a fourth  of  the  mma, 
which  wan  thc^  prize,  ddie  text  addtu'cd.  I^i\  . 4,  41k  2 or  4h,  2 ''with  ln<lra  an  a 
charioteer/' iBoidyappoaitc'  if  in  the  eoinpih,’r  h inilieu  a eha,riote(n*  waa  (uititled 
to  a fourth,  of  the  ]>riz('  and  if  i-hia  etintotn  (drained  alnnn:ly  in  Hi^yrdw  tinie«^«. 
While  working  tog('thiu%  in  Urn  wa\\  manirw.  rifniUialie  nih'H  and 

expoBitioiw  the  redactor  confmcMl  hininelf  f<w  th(^  tinmf  part  fo  the  dntic\H  of  the 
hotar  and  inn  aHsiHtani-H^k 

There  are  four  eoninu'ntari(^H'\  by  ( Inv inda.svhnnn . Mhal  t a, Bhankara^ 
SadguriK^iHya  (ratlu'r  <'laborat<d  a.n<l  Bayana4^. 

The  Kanaitakix  or  J^ruikhayana-Bralntiiuuv'^'”,  eotnpriHitig  thirty  (‘hapters 
(adhjmja),  and  of  a tuore  Inuited  nize,  in  nion^  hnrmotnotiH,  tinifcniu  aiul  Hyattuu- 
atic  in  eharacter  and  Ichb  diHctwaivt^  anal,  de.s<nnptive  the  trindnuait  of  its 
subjects  than  the  conp)at\iotii  t<'xt.  The  autlior's  tlelibend  e itdeidion  to  b(‘  brief 
led  him  to  avoid  re)>etitionH,  to  omit  many  narnitive  j,>asHa,geH,  ritual  innxa'pts 
and  explanations  of  the  applicability  of  mafifrm,  to  rtdVr  to  ritnal  jjarti<‘ulars 
in  a more  succinct  way,  and  to  h'ave  t he  seareh  for  many  links  itt  his  arginnen- 
tation  to  his  audience.  On  tlie  otlu'r  hand,  the  so-ealled  riltud  mystieism  is  a 
more  prominent  featnn'  of  his  -work^h  As  already  mentioned,  t main  subject 
of  this  hook  is  the  samt^  as  that  of  tlu'  original  part,  nf  tlie  Aitareya,.  Howevt'r, 
the  regular  exposition  of  tl'U'  mnm  Hnwitwo  does  not.  begin  brtdre  <4iapt>('r  V,II. 
The  first  six  chapters  are  d<na»ted  to  tiu' establishment  of  f Ir*^  tires 
the  ugni'fwtm^  tlu'  Full  and  N<'W  Moon  ollerings,  special  Haeritlees,  the  H<'asonal 
rit(^a  and  the  |)art  to  hy  playisl  by  the  hmfmmn  priest.”.  Some-  se'clions  liavt^  a 
cmmteri)art  in  th<^  Aitareya.,  which  on  tlu^  ot-her  hand  thies  wit  land.  a.  number 
of  sections  of  the  chapttTs  Vll,  XI,  XVIII  ete,®^.  In  their  tiis<nissiotts  ami, 
argumentations,  in  their  atiit.titl<^  to  tlu^  gotls,  in  tlieir  geaieral  similarity  Ixd.h 
works  strongly  irnfax'SH  tis  as  belonging  to  the  same  tradition.  "I'liey  seem  to 
have  boiTOWed  mueli  of  itnnr  material  from  <uu'  aral  the  same,  source,  Tht*  eo- 

Hence  also  s\K5b  laboured  attempts  to  tit.  t■■bt^  mriaOw  m the  rU.es  anti  t^nviron- 
ments  as  AiB.  1,  LI;  L 10,  l2ff ; otherwise  e.g,  AiB.  L 'il;  L 27;  2,  2. 

” Cf.  N.  J'.  SnuNnu,  at  4UB  22  (2),  p,  4H, 

C.  Kukuan  Kaja,  at  Al/B  3,  p.  17;  02. 

” C.  K'ONWAN  Baja,  at  12  AIOC  11,  p.  2o.  For  *Sayiuia*s  enmuieiUiUT  se<^  above 
(p.  244,  n.  1)  and  compare  BrurruiNOK,  at  BStJW  52,  p,  412;  fc»r  Sadgtuneh^ya,  tlu^ 
edition  by  B.  SAsrar  and  P.  ,K.  .Nahayan'a  PinuAU  IVivaminun  1042  .1IK15;  of. 
also  M.  M.  XUuTirmr,  at  25  AlOCX  H.  Ih,  p,  27 L It  may  be  olJHerve.ti  that.,  the  emre 
mentaric.B  on  Vedic  prose  ie.xtH  are  gtaterally  speaking  biUtr'r  l.hait  those  ou  the 
metrical  tcixts. 

IMinB  (,KatiJ^!nd«^lhid,uuapa)  hy  B.  LiKUNUnudeua  1HH7;  H.  tL  Sioouuusuna 
Bahm'A,  Wiesbaden  IIHIS  (cf,  IL  t’m  P.vrvAU,  at  ,B)IB  20,  p,  1021;  fraieslaied  by 
Knmi,  B.  B.,  |),  245  (of.  (Iauano,  at  AO  (Lttgdd,  Bh  p,  2.iJ5). 

Of,  als(»  B.  Lditnw<iKK,  (llmr  das  Verhaltnm  von  Brahmaims  tuel  BrioUasut.:ren, 
Tla^sis  L<4pzig  1008,  in  40;  Knrru,  H.  B.,  p,  22;  2.tl, 

'*^3  Bee  also  Winnow,  I,  H.  II,  p.  288, 

” For  particnilars  mm  Kkitu,  R.  1L,  p,  12. 


The  Brahmanas 


347 


existence  of  the  two  brahmanas  may  have  resulted  from  a lack  of  unanimity 
among  those  engaged  in  ritual  practice^*.  Because  of  its  wider  subject-matter^® 
the  Ivausitaki  (30  chapters)  has  been  regarded  as  a sort  of  expanded  supplement 
to  (the  first  30  cha|)ter8  of)  the  other  brdimhana  and  therefore  as  later  than 
that^®.  There  is  how<wer  much  to  be  said  for  a date  posterior  to  the  original 
part  and  prior  to  the  extiaision  of  the  ,Aitareya-k 

IhxXHHHiing  tiow  tio  tlie  brahmanas  of  the  Samaveda  it  is  interesting  to  notice 
that  Siiyana,  whilst  <mum(^rating  eighth®  of  them,  does  not  mention  tlio  most 
import.ant  tiaiminiya,  j)osBil)ly  because  he  did  not  reckon  it  among  the  works 
of  the  Kauthmnas®®.  Curiotisly  enough,  considering  the  bulk  of  tins  work  and 
the  number  of  the  legends  contained  in  it,  it  is,  moreover,  almost  unknown  to 
the  ancillary  littn’atiire  of  tlio  Veda®**;  it  has  no  commentary  or  paddhati.  How- 
ever, since  the  eomtnentator  of  the  other  great  Brrihmana,  the  Paficaviin.%, 
was  a Ranayaniya®*,  the  probabilities  are  in  favour  of  the  supposition  that 
these  works  were  common  pro])erty  of  the  two  Mkkds. 

The  Paficaviin^a  or  TSndyamaha-®^  (Maha-  or  Praudha-)Brahmana®®, 
consisting  of  twentydive  chapters — hence  its  former  name — and  the  other 
gi’oat  work,  also  called  l>davakara-Bralnnana®^,  pursue  the  same  object:  they 


Cf.  Rknou,  flcolcB,  p,  21,7. 

It  dotw  not  however  the  whole  of  tlu^  ImJtvnuma  tradition  of  the 

^ahkhuyana  school;  nm  J and  II,  XIV- XVI  (KniTn,  H.  B.,  p.  38). 

For  the  n'lat,.ive  chro.n()logy  hch)  Li.n.i)NEr,  ons.,  p.  .IX;  MAOnonuLn,  IL  !S.  L-, 

p.  208. 

a?  KiUTU,  Ai,  A.,  p.  31;  34;  E.  B,,  p.  47. 

Five  <vf  tlu'se  works  have  already  been  dealt  with  (above,  p.  320).  As  to  the 
Upanii?ad“Brrdnriapa  (Ohrmdogya-Bnlhmana)  of  this  school,  the  lirst  two  sewtions 
contain  mantrm  for  various  donu>Htic  rites,  rites  for  spocsial  purpoBos  etc.  (edited 
and  trannlated,  imdt>r  the  title  Matitra-hiuhtnana,  I,  by  H.  Btonnkii,  Thesis  Halle 
1901;  n,  l)y  IL  JiVnoKNsuN,  Thesin  Ku4  1911.  The  other  soctionH  constitute  the 
Chan<logya-U|)ani«^ad.  Cf.  also  1).  BiiATTACHAitYVA,  Chrmdogya-Ihfihmapa  with 
the  commentaries  of  (Junavii;>rm  and  Hayana,  Calcutta  1958,  and  at  011  2,  p,  203. 

See  V.  Cn.  BKATTA<UfAHVVA,  at  OH  7,  p.  91. 

IL  Omerm.,  at  AcB^s  11  Congr.  Intc^rn.  Ori<ui.t.  I,  p.  225.  (Cf,  Suyana,  on  AiB. 

2,  22). 

OALANn,  PB,,  p.  VMI. 

BtHi  CA,x*ANn,  PB.,  p,  XXVI;  Hknoxj,  J^colos,  p.  91;  100  on  the  name  of  the 
promulgator,  ITwuJya  or  Tarujiin,  of  whose  authorship  there  is  Clo  evidence  in  tlio 
text  itself. 

Fditions  by  ANANOACUANmiA  VKnANTAvAai.^A,  Calcutta  1809-“-74;  A.  Cimk- 
nabw,Ami  filHTHi,  BiHuares  1935--30.  Translation:  W'.  Cauand,  Paficavini^a-Bnlh- 
mana,  Calcuti»a  1931. 

edition  hy  Baohu  Viua  and  Lokwhu  Cuanoha,  Nagpur  1954,  Therci  is  no 
co,mpli^l,.e  i4'anHkvl.iom  For  partial  trausIaitiouH  He<^  IL  W.  .BoonwiTZ,  tJaiminlya 
Briihmana  L I 05  (with  c<»pionH  notes)  and  th<^  portions  translat<Ml  by  CaIiAno,  in 
Das  Oaiminiya-Bralimapa  in  Auswahl,  Amsterdam  Acad.  1919  (1900),  Book  I was 
alHO  edite<i  liy  liACaur  VniA,  Lahore  1937;  IL  l-'BO  by  Lokuhu  CitANOHA,  Tlu^sis 
IJtnwht.  1950.  Bt'hire,  in  the  tw'(Nnti<sH  and  thirties  of  tliis  cumtury,  ntnv  manuscripts 
werti  found  a <uunplet<>  (stlition  and  a satisfactory  translation  wer<^  impossible.  Men- 


348 


J.  (juiuld  • Vt’ilii'  Ijiti'i'iiltUf’ 


interpn't.  tho  ac(.H  ix'rtnitiiiig  (,t>  t lio  xmiita  riltinl  an  fijr  »»«  iTf^tanlH  <,h('  Niltna 
voda— -or,  t.ho  tank  ol'tho  mitjdfitr  and  hia  aHMsianfM  and.  piuiiindarly,  ddlne 
and  illuHtrato  ita  moat  (Wi'niitvl  olomoid.  <ho  .uhmnx.  ('onarquoidly,  ihov  deal 
exchmivcly  with  mmt  ri!('s.  'I’iu'  ('oidoidH  of’  hofh  worha  ran,  in  fho  main  paral 
ltd  without  corrt'Hpomling  in  parfit'tdarH’-’.  Tho  fimf  grt'ui  iowfion  of  tlx'  daimi- 
niya,  I.  dt'aling  with  tho  daily  fin'  ndt  (a-iuilitdrah  haa  no  ooiintt'rpart 
in  the  Pafloaviipria,  hut  1.  (Ht  :t(M.  oonfainitii^  fix'  romnn'id  a tipon  I !»'  nijitintoina 
coiTt'spond  to  PB.  VI  -IX;  II,  1 ,S()  doaliny  wilh  tin'  -juvAm  Wfuna,  i.o  the 
year-long  haaie  form  of  f.ht'  pt'rioiiie  rifra  foytimt ) of  t he  MiUnt  typ»'.  (airrt'Hpoiul 
to  PB.  I'V  and  V:  IT.  81  234,  with  tht«  one  day  wmi  !<.aeniieea  '{Hitlm}.  to  PB. 
XVl“XIX®*;  II,  23ft  333,  with  the  .aaeritieea  laating  tip  to  twelvr'  dnya  (ahlna) 
to  PB.  XX-XXII;  11,  334  37l)  with  tlniNi'  aaeritire.s  whieii  Ituif  more  than 
twtdve  daya  (mttm),  to  PB.  XXIIl  XXV;  II.  371  442ayain  with  the  pawm 
ai/afM ; all  388  aectiona  of  book  1 1 1 wit  h t he  rit »>  ot' t \t  t'K-i-  tlaya.  t o PB.  X~XV. 
The  first  chapter  of  the  Paheavipistk  emitains,  inatend  of  a ImUmma  te.xt  a 
collection  of  yajm  formulas  (I)  to  he  muttejv.l  by  the  t'hanf.'rs  on  various 
occasions  a small  prayer  book,  like  ihost'  of  tin'  tiomeafie  ritual,  no  doubt 
modelled  upott  similar  ('olh'etionw  ttf  the  Blat'k  Ynjurveda  and  eomptwed  after 
the  main  portion  of  tlu'  worlp',  ( 'bapters  1 1 attd  1 1 1 diseuNH  t h.'  so  etdled  risUdk, 
the  different  modes  of  fiu-ming,  out  of  a triplet,  the  number  of  verses  reijuirod 
for  a latitL 

ill  Hpito  (tI  flirt  t-liiii  hnih  luivi'"*  iiiurli  iiifitrriiil  In 

common,  tlu^y  iliffrr  wivtrly  in  ntyin  iiml  t Up  1 

of  a technical  IimI.iiciih.  amt  notoriumi  fur  iin  atilify,  dam  not 

give  mon^  than  what  in  Htricily  ami  i-N  mi  imreinct  that  aomc 

naiTativc  portiona  (mythicaUati^ii  ar.^  hanily  ctnnprchtmihhlc,  tht'  Jai^ 
minlya  in  much  mort^  prolis\  iimtni-ing  mythical  tah^a  ami  lifnrgical  am'cilotca, 
many  of  which  new.  Yi't,  lumiamrntal  tiiffm^rncca  art^  mrr  mid,  whma"  they 
occur,  mainly  iluc  to  tlu^  inclination  of  the  more  cclrtiat^  Jiiiminlya  to  borrow 


to”BiriIkt,l!.t?rn’  'f  "“’"'‘‘7  from  ihe  d.miunt.vn  Bnlhmw.ia 

to  the  hmtwy  ol  t.h('  bteratun'  (.Hl.tu.u,.,  irimMme.n.i  nod  d.'.eussions  of 

?see  in  V y !'•  1 » < ■■"‘8r.  hu - Orient,. 

1.  A,  at  5 Al(X,^.l,  ji.  0,1  111,,  ,l,n„u„(yn  hiernture  m neni'rat  e.s-  W,  t Ui.and, 

languaKe.  and  relative  p.,. niton  of  this 
talso  for  tui  < wni!?  “"'.‘’'y  bce  aliio  UuNoe's  and  Damikh  vti'n  B)hlaiHmi>hies  and 

Idiovo.  p! l iSd.  p ? »’■'  !*■  A.  Interatiire  (see 

Cf»  also  CjAl*A,nin  C)vrr  pu  nifi  . , p.  3, 

A.!™;,  -'I'- 

” CAUANn.  PB.,  p.  XXIV. 


The  Brulixnanas 


349 


from  other  bcIiooIb,  whereas  the  Paucavim^a  hardly  ever  departs  from  the 
Kauthnma  tradition^^  The  chronological  relation  of  the  two  works  is  disputed. 
Whereas  Galand®®,  mainly  on  the  strength  of  ritual  arguments,  hesitatingly 
arrived  at  the  conclusion  that  the  Jaitniniya  must  bo  older  than  the  other  work, 
Keith**^’  and  Renou^^  inclined  to  the  opposite  view. 

This  chronological  problem  is  ('-omplicated  by  the  existence  of  a considerable 
numben'  of  quotations  - in  Sfiyana  and  other  commentators— from  a Satyayana- 
Brahmansd^  (^^atyayatiakam)  which  could  be  identified  with  the  Jaiminlya— 
nxany  of  tlu^m  can  be  traceni  almost  literally  in  the  latter — were  it  not  that  the 
Jaiminiyas  (ionsider  the  {^atyayana  school  to  be  different  from  theirs^®.  We 
have  no  doubt  to  do  here  with  one  of  those  slightly  duplicate  versions  that  are 
far  from  I'are  in  Vedic  literature.  The  name  of  its  aixthor,  Satyilyani,  is  already, 
beside  Tapdya,  nuvntioned  in  the  Srautasutoa  of  the  Jaiminiyas^'^.  He  no  doubt 
was  an  authority  of  repute^®,  whose  brdhmana,  lost  to  us,  may  have  been  taken 
over  or  recast  and  amplified  by  the  Jaiminiyas^®. 

The  §adviip^a-Brahmana^’  is,  in  accordance  with  its  name,  the  ‘‘Twenty- 
sixth/’  and  its  desultory  cliaracter  intended  to  be  a kind  of  supplement  to  the 
Paiicaviip^a^®.  It  consists^®  of  five  iectures’  (prwpTitliaka)  which  deal  with  (I) 
the  subrahmanyd  litany  by  whicdi  tlu^  sacrifice  is  announced  to  the  gods;  the 
metres  and  Mmam  of  the  agniMoma ; ceremonies  to  be  performed  before  the 
morning  rc<ritation  ( j,  the  duties  of  the  brahmmi  priest,  expiatory 

rites,  tin's  pa|)  (earu)  offered  to  Soma;  (It)  the  singing  of  the  so-called  bahwpam- 
mdm-stMray  the  finudions  of  tlie  main  priests,  inantrm  to  be  pi'onouneed  by  the 
sacrificer  etc.;  (TIT)  the  expiatory  bath  (mmbhftha) , viMutiSy  incantations;  (IV) 
variotis  topics.  Prapftffmka  V,  the  so-called  Adbhuta-Briihmaxia,  is  devoted  to 


CAUANn,  I*B.,  p.  XXII;  Rknou,  J[5co1ob,  p.  101,  and  compare  Hopkins,  in 
Trans.  Comu'ctietit  Acad*  15,  p.  19. 

Calano,  inu  p.  XIX. 

« Kuitu,  ill  JHAS  1932,  p.  699. 

Kxwon,  l^lcoles,  p.  lOL 

BtTENKia.,  at  The  Amdmnyy  15  (1879),  p.  126;  OmmsL,  at  JAGS  18,  p.  15; 
Cauaku,  Over  en  nit  , . p.  5;  Ih  Gnosu,  Collection  of  tlio  fragments  of  lost  brah- 
maxias,  Calentta  1935. 

Cf.  Rknoxt,  l^ooles,  p.  106;  PAitPOnA,  o.o,,  p.  7;  9;  Bodkwxtz,  o.c.,  p.  11. 

Edited  l)y  I).  Gaastea,  Bijdrage  tot  do  konnis  van  hot  Vedischo  rituool,  Thesis 
Utrecht  1906,  p.  2 jjS.  1). 

A fairly  old  {^^atynyaixa-Bfitra  (healing  with  the  expiations  of  the  domestic 
ritual  is  alHo"(riglvtIy  t)  attribut(Kl  to  him  (OAUANn,  Brahmana-  on  Sutra-aanwinsten, 
Amsterdam  Acad.  1920,  p.  475). 

« Cki.ANO,  BB.,  p.  XVni. 

,Edit,(H,l  (with  tlie  <sonunentary  aUribut(>d  to  Htlyana)  by  H.  E.  Kkubinoh, 
Thesis  Utreeht  190H;  B.  R,  BtrAitivtA,  I.Hrupati  ; fmvpatJtaka  X also  by  K.  Klkmm, 
Das  BatRInu^ixlufihiiian^^  * • • nebst  eiu<w  Obersetzung,  (hhHaaloh  1B94;  translation: 
W.  B.  Boiaaha  BruRI ini^a-BrahTiuma,  Th<^sis  Utr<H*ht  1956. 

Ihaice  also  Tinp.iya^ej?a-Br}lhinana  (comm,  on  BB,  1,  1,  1). 

For  a longta'  survey  (in  Dutch)  see  Kklhinoh,  o.o.,  p.  XX. 


350 


J.  ihnuh\>  * Litptnfnn^ 


ominotiH  The  8atlvii|iHa  i.s  m>  dutibi  a roinpiirativ<^ly  late  conipila- 

In  cnntmdiHtifK'tInn  in  ihn  morn  aninnonnnm  hmbmmm  of  fin*  other  Wnlas 
iliose  of  ilie  Yajurveda  ft>liow  iln*  riinat  eloael^v,  Ah  already  ineniioned  in  iho 
preeeding  (diapk'r  tho  'Maiirayanlyaa  have  not--  lc*fi  xm  an  ineiependtatf.  hrdh^ 
the  prom,^  |)oriitntH  <>(  flieir  mtnhibl^  nerving  (hn'i  |>nrpi'we.  Tlu'  'fait- 
tiriyiiB^  ho\v<*vet\  <'ninlafing  ilu.'  Rgveiii^^  f-ratitf-ioiu  ponneaK  a aeparait*  lirflh. 
niana  whielp  gcau^rally  itt  tlu^  wune  Kfyh%  nntl  i'oni-idning  mmtifw  iw  well  im 
promy  in  a nainral  eouiiiniaiion  or  mipphnninii  f.t>  their  »'^iuphitii^®.  llniH  only 
the  Bpeeial  ntethodn  of  Iniilding  ilu^  firepiaet**'^  art'  dealt  with  in  the  Bifilnnana, 
beeanae  the  normal  form  haw  been  alnindaitf.Iy  tr«%*ded  in  the  HaophitH^^,  Idh  1, 6 
ampIificH  Home  d<d-ailH  mentiont'd  in  the  tr<*atment  of  t lie  r<wal  eonmn'rat-ion  in 
TS.  1,  8.  On  the  other  hand,  th<'  Bnlhmana  HometitneH  deaeriia^H  or  enntnerateH 
ritual  acta  in  a way  reminineent  of  the.  sfdm  atyle.  Tin*  wm^k*  a mere  agglome- 
ration of  material,  eonnintH  of  three  bt>okH.  11n‘He  are  railed  miuka  ‘‘eonaiating 
of  eight  (deettiread  eha|>t'erK:  pm^mltmka),''  a name  whieh  in  not;  applicable  to 
book  III  in  its  prenent  form:  ita  laat*  fotir  deefurea*  |fkd2)  m well  as  the  first 
two  boolcB  of  tlm  Taittirlya-Aranyaka  mhgitndly  beh>ngf'd  to  the  KafhaH, 
although  their  sehool  has  not-  premawnal  them^^,  The  other  part^f'i  of  the  Brfih- 
mana  are  traditionally  attrihuttnl  to  d'ittirL  In  ordf'r  to  pniteid.  llie  test  from 
eorrnption  the  Hmallent  diviHiona  (htmiiht)  are  (often  meehanieidly)  wihdividtal 
into  ten  elatwen,  tln^  final  wordn  of  wdueh  are  repeat  ml  at  the-  end  of  a Heetion 
(anuvdka)^'^,  dhe  following  in  a hritd' survey  of  its  main  mutenltd*:  (I)  mjntia* 
dMna^^,  t/aedm  fvl/a;ao/a,  royal  etmaoeration : (II)  mjntkiim^\  the  ho- 

ealhal  ddMhotm  mwrUlvvn^^  l nmntrm  fin'  mibaiiliary  mivvHmm:  in  its 

It  waa  Heparately  <'dit.ed  and  translated  l»y  A.  Uhnono  Xwe*  vmhiieht^  Texk.^ 
uhm*  Oinina  und  Porkmta,  Bialin  Amuk  Sf*e  aiao  N,  I'aean  t>n  flie  finanatkm 
of  tlio  Ailhluita-Brilhinapa,  ABOBI  4H  -lU,  p.  173, 

Cf.  already  Wmma,  L H.  I,  p,  37  (ainmltaneeua  wnh  the  'ratftjrlya.' Srapyaka). 

For  tiu'  Kathan  h<h*  helew,  p,  3f>L 

Th(ri.raittiriya**Briihtnana  <)f  the  Blaek  Vajur  Veda,  with  the  eenuneniary  of 
Bllyana  edited  by  lUJ^noiiAnAnA  Mitra,  3 vtd.,  e'aientta  tHAO  f|.H.(pn  IHTO  (eono 
pare  BtiHTiuNcnc,  in  BS(J\V  p.  139):  <n,her  editnnno  Kn..-\MA  'Sxmnit,.  Ivlyson^ 
1.921;  Poona  1938..  dlnuH*  does  not  yi't  exist  a eoniplett*  tnoeilaf ion;  for  |>.artial 
tranriationH  (mainly  by  P,  F.  Bomont)  see  the  llibl,  IIP  p,  fd;  l¥, 

p,  89  and  the  following  notes, 

1*.  F,  DtiMONT,  Tla^Hpeeial  kindM  of  mjnimi^ntm  {TH.  3,  10  .12  with  f raiwlation), 
PAldiH  95  (1951),  p.  028. 

Cf.  KiOTin  V.  B.  'Y.  p.  c*xx:v, 

»»  Cf.  Wmnm,  L H,  Xlll,  p.  299:  Kneru,  V.  B,  Y,  8.,  p,  PXXVlll;  iinNot^ 
Keolen,  p,  145. 

” Vd\  BomiTeiNoa,  o.en  (^.  V,  Vaiova,  m 5 ABn*  p p,  27H, 

For  a more  detailed  nurvey;  KioTIt.  V,  li  V,  8,,  |.i,  PX.XVl. 

For  P P t45  ami  2,  2 35  He.e  Wmmu*  P 8,  P o.  90, 

***  Hee  I'),  348. 

Dumont,  at  PAPhH  lOH,  p.  337, 

8e(%  c'l.g,  .KniTir,  li.  Ida  V.  U.,  p,  35ik 


Tho  Brixhmanas 


361 


kauhilu  form®®;  mvas  (a  type  of  rites  for  special  purposes  lasting  one  day); 
special  animal  sacrifices®^  (kamyeMi);  (III,  1-8)  sacrifices  to  the  constellations 
or  so-called  hinar  mansions  (7mkmtreMi)^^;  the  important  explanations  of  the 
rites  of  New-  and  Fnll-Moon®®  as  well  as  part  of  tho  mantras  belonging  to  it®’ ; 
the  Imman  sacrifice®®  (with  symbolical  human  victims)®®;  offerings  of  butter, 
cakes  etc.  (istl),  animal  sacrifice’®,  expiations’h  acts  to  be  performed  on  tho 
first  (III, 8)  and  on  the  second  and  third  (III,  9)  days  of  the  horse  sacrifice’^ ; the 
elaborate  c<n'emonies  connected  with  the  piling  of  a fireplace  for  the  adoration 
of  the  sim;  the  so-called  Nilciketa  fire;  the  Catnrhotra  ceremonies’®.  The  nnm- 
bcr  of  legends  col^t^^ined  in  this  brdhmana  is  compai'atively  small.  The  mantras, 
though,  generally  taken  irom  the  Rgveda,  are  not  infrequently  new’^. 

From  Apastamba's  ^rantasutra  (e.g.  5,  26,  13 f.)  it  was  already  known  that 
there  must  liavc  existed  also  a brdhmana  of  the  Kathaka  tradition’®,  and  from 
a short  notice  in  a mannscript  it  may  be  infexTed  that  this  belonged  to  a 
Kathakaxn,  a corpxxs  of  the  scriptures  of  that  school  consisting  of  a hundred 
chapters.  Soxnc  fragxnents  have  been  preserved,  among  which  an  agnyddheya- 
brdhmana  (an  addition  to  what  is  said  on  this  subject  in  the  Kathaka-Sainhita), 
comprising  <dcvcn  sections,  and  an  amdbrdhmana,  dealing  with  the  names  of 
the  days  of  full  and  new  ( amd)  moon ; it  refers  to  the  story  of  the  churning  of 
the  ocean’®. 

the  White  YajtirvxKla  belongs  the  iSatapatha-Brfihmana,  "‘the  Brfihmana 
of  the  Hundred  Paths/’  probably  so  called  because— in  tho  Madhyanduxa 
rctxmHion-  it  (Hxnsists  of  one  hundred  ‘lessons”  (ad%dyaj”.  It  is  not  only  the 

Dumont,  at  PAlfiuS  109,  p.  309;  see  e.g.  Gonda,  R.  I.  I,  p.  173  (instead  of 
soma,  surd,  a sort  of  luM'r,  is  oficred  to  Iixdra  and  other  gods;  it  comprises  also  an 
animal  sacrifice). 

Dumont,  at  PAPhK  113  (1909),  p.  34  (in  tho  title  road:  second  kanda  of  TB.). 

DtiMONT,  at  PAPhS  98,  p.  204. 

««  IhTMONT,  at  PAIduS  101,  p,  210;  103,  p.  584;  OOS;  104,  p.  1;  105,  p.  11. 

Iti  is  r(anarkabl(^  that  tlxe  foruixilas  and  stanzas  to  ho  r(K5ited  by  tho  hotar  are 
found  in  th<^  Brfdunana.,  while  tho  explanations  relating  to  part  of  them  are  given 

in  TH.  2,  5,  7-11;  2,  6,  7''' 10. 

«»  Dumont,  at  PAPh8  107,  p.  177. 

Tliis  sacrifice,  as  it  is  described  in  some  sutrm,  was  in  all  probability  never 
ptTfornuHL 

Dumont,  at  PAPhS  106,  p.  246  (TB.  3,  6,  1-15);  113,  p.  34 ff.  (TB.  2,  8,  D9). 

DtJMONT,  at  PAPhS  107,  p.  446.  For  the  expiations  in  connection  with  the 
ugnihotra  (TB.  1,  4,  3f,):  I)um:ont,  at  Melanges  Rxwotr,  p.  243. 

Dumont,  I’lio  horBe-sacrifioo  ixx  tho  Taittiriya-Briihinana.  PAPliS  92  (1948), 
p.  447. 

Se(^  (vg.  Kwrnr,  R,  Plx.  V.  D.,  p.  350,  For  3,  10-12  seo  abovo,  n,  54. 

’-i  For  fboHi^  xihvhI  irx  the  nakmtresti  see  Vatpya,  o.c.,  p.  282. 
n tiuH  pa.raKraph  si'-o  VV.  Gauani),  Bifilutiana-  tax  Hutra-aanwinshau  Arnsita*- 
dam  Acaul.  1920,  p.  466(1.;  478ff. 

Mbit.  I,  a.  16. 

On  fiaia{>atha-lb'ii:hmana  itx  gcnoral  h(h>  Fakumvino,  Introductions /.o  8P>. 
I-V;  Oauanp,  Ixxtroducti,on  to  8BK.  (soobolow,  n.  80)^;  Mxn'ard,  T,  K.;  IL  Biuinn- 
HOFUH,  Das  liuclx  (ha*  hxiiid<a‘t  X^fado,  Bern  1010.  In  8BK.  tlxea'o  arc  104  clxapters. 


362 


fl*  Uonda  • Viniir 


ttiofit  exienBivc  an<!  the  brai  known  of  nil  t-ho  workf^  ot  Huh  olaf4H,  htii 
of  tho  highent  aohiovoinoniH  in  iho  wholo  rango  fif  Vr-ilio'  lilomf  nn\  Hoing  more 
elabomted  ihan  iJio  oihor  ImlhnMms  if  in,  iiIho  m piiHHngrH  iddniinbor  conipaas, 
a mine  of  iiniK>rt4ini  inforinafioti  and  riohoni  in  niii!  nnrrafivoH,  part 

of  which  arc  rccotniicd  in  dciail,  t'hongh  ahuayn  filliHl  in  ihp  rifiial  framework. 
As  in  the  case  of  tlu^  Siuphitjl  of  I he  VajaHam^vina  I hero  arr  !.,wo  n'ccnwouB 
cxtanH«>  that  of  the  Mildhyandinas***  and  id  I he  fianvwH'®“.  Both  rcccnHiotw  arc 
very  closely  redated,  th<'  dilTcivnccH  being  mai?dy  fmind  m ^^HK.  f All  which, 
in  the  main,  run  parallel  to  v^BM.  \ \\  In  the  .Madhyainfiim  rci'cnaion  tlie  100 

adhiiUy(W- -whi<dii  are  numlnwiai  eonHeeulividy  are  diHlritntfed  among  fourteen 

books  (kdmh^  eaeh  with,  a name  of  ita  own) ; i hey  are  sni^flivitied  inf.o  Imihnmnm 
and  kmdihl^:  tlu^  smallest  mnta.  of  t-he  average'  ntnnbf'rs  of  Wf>rds  and  syllables 

39  and  79.  Tlio  ktmUkmmv^ after  and  before  a pause'"  -sfrnetured  as  follows: 

Incipit*  (pratlka),  minor  paust%  lamtinualioid  HuiiMu  Bb  11ie  text  is,  like  that 
of  the  Kanvas,  aeeented  in  Sk  peenliar  W4gv.  11te  Kanva  trvmmm  luis  (in  maim- 
scripts  of  southern  origin)^®  HA  -or  I7 boohs. 

The  first  nine  books  of  the  Madhyandina:  (am!  ebn'en  of  the*  Klinviya)  corres- 
pond eloBely  to  tiu'  ilrst  (ighteen  ehapters  of  flie  \"ajaHaneyi'-Siii|dnta^®.  They 
deal  with  the  fundamental  elements  of  t-lu*  liturgy  and  the  aneient  nueleus  of 
the  Yajurveda:  Full  and  New  IVloon  saeidtieeii.  e.st.abliidiimml  off  lie  saered  fires, 
agnihoira^  seasonal  saerifiees  ami  other  (NftM,  j mtd  11)^*.  tim  mmm 

saiwiEees  atul  the  winstruetion  of  the  saered  llff'plaei^  Ilf  IX'),  Although 

no  doubt  older  tlian  tlie  last  live  books  they  do  not  ronsidule  a unity,  heeausc 
in  BBM.  i-V,  whieli  are  more  elusely  eonnerieif  VajOavatkya  is  qtioti'd  as  the 


Tlu^  sehook  of  tht^  Vfijasaneyi**^  atatrd  to  hiivi'  been  Itffoeii  i>r  sm,’enita'ru 
their  names  arc  mentioned,  it  is  true  wdh  eon?uderiib|e  variiitmm  in  rliffi'risit  wiaks, 
See  KenmuNO,  I,  p.  XXVI II. 

Edited  'by  A.  WnuKa*  The  Vata|avthaltrAhniiiufi  in  tli«'  ^^Ifidhyaiidina-'Chkha 
with  extracts  from  the  eommentiines  of  Boyanii,  Ilartr4viuiun  and  i HuvedagaUga, 
Borlin-Lomlon  ISfifi,  ®Lei|V4ig  Bl24.  nhiraiuea  imtl:  B.  B,  t^alcntta 

1899'Alfll  (frill,  VAril'ontyU  A.  thus  SAHVAm  .Sastiu,  lieiiareii  iu:|?;  lliaO; 
Satvawiakasu,  New  Delhi  Hnn-'-riaml  other  Iiubiin  edifiotoiB  iraiwlatiHl  Iw  »T. 
Eooklino,  5 voIumoH,  Oxford  IHH2  timn.  riielln  11103;  liniii  (eompare  Whit- 
MY,  at  AJPh  3,  p.  3111;  PAOH  IHHH,  p.  VI;  iHICf  p.  XOV;  at^  BHC'KS  (I, 

p.297).^ 

Edited  by  W.  C.AnAsn,  1'be  t^aiapatha  Brrdimanii  m Ito'  liCnviya  reciHiBioa, 
Lahort^  192ffri()30  (f  VH,  with  a long  introtiuetionf 

Minaho,  E.  I,  p.  2 ete.,  II,  p,  I efe,  In  reality  the  noiitbfuoitg  sy^^Bsn  is 
more  com|dieated,  allowing  some  intiwestnig  efaielmaoiis  with  regant  to  the  genesis 
of  this  work:  M'inaho,  at  Mriangea  Henom'p.  ^33, 

for  a more  original  southt'rii  ami  a northi'w  ttHHitmuHit  (Ai*4Un,  Hlllv.  I, 
p.  23;27. 


” Of.  e,g.  Oauano,  MnL  I,  p,  39;  lOip  f:m4ert.  p.  BIO. 

TbiiMrulbyandiuiis  jregin  with  th»'  Full  and  New  Momi  vtim,  the  Ki'Aivlyas, 
in  accordance  with  the  ritual  Mcijuenee,  with  the  ai/ai/ild/it'imi  ami  mpnht^iM 
2,  Iff.). 


Tho  Brahmanas 


353 


great  atithority  whose  opinion,  mostly  oxi  ritual  problems,  is  conclusive®®  and 
in  VI-IX,  where  his  name,  rocuiTing  in  tho  later  books,  is  never  mentioned, 
Sandilya  is  the  teacher  most  frequently  referred  to®®.  Yajhavalkya  Vajasaneya, 
a native  of  Videha,  prot6g6  of  king  Janaka  and  disciple  of  Aruni,  is  the  most 
prominent  exegete  of  the  later  Vedic  period,  to  whom  tradition  attributes,  if  not 
the  redactio!t  of  the  Satapatha-Brahmana  in  its  entirety— which  actually  is  an 
anonymous  production— then  tho  promulgation  of  the  yajus  formulas  them- 
solves®^  He  is  very  often  (108  times)  mentioned  in  the  Brhadaranyaka- 
Upanisad  which  constitutes  tho  concluding  portion  (14,  4ff.)  of  this  Brah- 
mana®®.  Tins  esoteric  treatise  has  a counterpart  in  the  secret  doctrine  (rahasya ) 
expounded  in  SBM,  X— on  the  mystery  of  the  fireplace — ^joining  the  iSanciilya 
books®®  which  deal  with  tho  construction  of  the  great  fireplace  {agnicayanaY^^ 
Book  X — -in  which  Sandilya  again  figures  as  the  chief  authority — moreover 
ends  up  with  a ‘line  of  the  succession  of  teachers’  (vamia^^)  which,  referring  to 
the  wmia  of  the  whole  work  at  the  end  of  XIV,  shows  that  VI~X  were  com- 
pleted after  the  Yajhavalkya  books.  The  great  teacher,  a man  of  simple  solu- 
tions and  somewhat  coarse  woxxls,  plays  a prominent  part  in  SBM.  XI. 
In  a mnnber  of  dialogues  of  a free  brahmodya  type®^— a sort  of  liturgic  catechism 
—on  the  agndhotra  he  answers  questions  posed  by  the  generous  Idng  Janaka®®, 
enabling  us  to  gain  an  insight  iixto  tho  gradual  transitions,  in  contents,  stylo, 
and  composition  from  the  traditional  ritual  discussion  to  tho  philosophical 
speculations  of  tho  up(mkads^^. 


»»  8ee  e.g.  k^BM.  I,  I,  I,  9;  3,  L 21;  20;  9,  3,  10;  3,  1,  1,  4;  4,  0,  1,  10;  also  1,  3, 
1,  21;  2,  3,  4,  2;  compare  KamcLtNCH  SB.  I,  p.  XXX;  Rmnou,  Los  relations  du 
Satapatha-Brilhmana  av(H5  la  Bi'haduranyaka-Upani.'jad  ot  la  personalitd  do  Yaj- 
fiavalkya,  Indian  Culture  14  (1948),  p.  75;  A.  K.  Ooomaraswamy,  at  IHQ  13, 
p.  201  (fantastic ), 

They  BOKnotimos  touch  \ipon  tho  same  poiixt  (cf.  e.g.  SB.  5,  1,  1,  12 f. : 9,  3,  4,  8) ; 
the  iSilndilya  |)laoe  is  more  spiritual  in  cases  such  as  9,  4,  1,  13  ff.;  5,  4,  3,  3ff. 

14,  9,  4;  Calaho,  SBK.  I,  p.  04;  Rendu,  at  IC  14,  p.  75.  Yajfxavalkya 
(cf*  also  Hohsou,  V.  G,  L.,  p.  380)  is  often  montioixod  in  the  Jainxinlya-Brrihmana 
(Oaland,  Auswahl,  p,  315;  Renoxt,  iScolos,  p.  105). 

Th(^  <liBtinotion  betwetux  hrdhmanay  dranyaka  and  upa7iimd  (portions)  of  the 
same  tradition  —the  term  corpus  is  hardly  applicable— is  not  oontomporanoous. 

For  npani.sadio  passages  in  SBM.  X see  10,  5,  3;  (>,  1;  3;  as  to  10,  3,  3,  8 cf. 
BAIT.  3,  2,  13;  as  to  10,  5,  2,  11  cf,  BAU.  4,  3,  9 If.  etc.  The  oldest  occurrences  oj  tlio 
term  upmdmd  are  at  10,  3,  5,  12;  4,  5,  1 etc.  Tho  upani.^adio  passage  SBM. 

10,  0,  4 tmd  5 is  in  the  Kanvlya  text  (W(ai  transposed  to  l;)ook  XVI  to  bo  tho  Ix^gin- 
ning  of  tins  I'^rhaclurariyaka.— For  §BM.  Vl-X,  ABK.  VIH-XII  see  Caland, 
SBK.  1,  p*  103. 

also  FtKiEiuN'd,  SB,  V,  p.  XIIT.^ 

For  iihi^  vuryJm  see  also  FmacnrNcs,  ^B.  I,  p.  XXXL 
8(s)  p.  134. 

Bec^  e.g.  fiBM'.  11,  3,  I,  2;  0,  2,  Iff.  and  compare  11,  4,  3,  20;  G,  3,  L 
BAIJ.  3 and  4,  the  Yajilavalkyakanda,  may  be  rc^gardod  as  a continuation  of 
those  distnissiouB  in  ilu^  jSatapatha. 


354 


.1.  (lotitlii  • Idti'i’diint' 


WlK'ims  in  the  YajAavalkya  hoeka  linnlly  nny  Inif  ea,st('rn  propicK  and  those 
of  Gaiiftes-Juinna  r('gion  ar(>  naunai.  the  peopii'a  meidioncd  in  the  J^andilya 
boolvH  belong  to  the  nortlnwi'sf . Add  (u  thiH  diaaitniiarity  a mimber  “of 
lingnistio  and  Htyliatie  dilfen'ina's**  the  hooka  \'l  IX  are  nton'  arehaic 
in  oliaraeter  -and  tlie  (’onehmion  is  wtu'i'anted  that  (he  la((('r  an'  of  (bo- 
ther ])rovenan(ad'*,  jioHsibly  neither  Klinva  nor  Madhyaiaiiim*''.  I'he  books 
SBM.  Xb  XlV  (KBK.  XIII  •X\'l“’*).  besideM  aonu'  appendieta  to  tfu'  pn-eeding 
books— XT,  1 and  2 being  a mori'  ('sotiaieal  Mippleinent  to  the  nior<>  tcehnieal 
treatment  of  th(>  Full  and  New  Moon  rites  in  I eontain,  in  XIII,  the  aJmme.- 
the.  “human  Haerillet''’  (pnnimmrillM}.  ( he  ‘ .saeril'n-e  of  alF'  (mmmti'dha) 
and  the  pmmrtjya  eeremony  iti  (he  former  itarl  of  X I na  wdl  as  sonu'  Hoetions 
on  subjects  which  are  othervrise  fondgn  (<»  ImVimami'i,  e.g.  (tu-  initiation  of  the 
Veda  student  (uimnapana},  tin'  ilaily  study  (.tmihpiipa,  eonsidi'i'ed  a 
sacrifice  to  .Brahman,  11.5,  (I  H)  and  funeral  eereinonif's  (i:{.  S).  Among  the 
valuable  contents  of  XT  and  XII  are  some  impoilanf.  myths,  mid  an  inti'resting 
section  treating  of  the  way  in  whieli  the  dead  body  of  the  perfornu'r  of  the 
agnih>tra  is  to  be  dealt  with  (12,  5,  1-  2), 

There  can  be  no  doubt  that  tin'  two  reei'iisions  presuppose  (he  existt'iiee  of 
an  archetype  of  which  they  are  n-arrangements.  It  has  not  however  lu-i'n  pos- 
sible definitely  to  answer  tin'  tiuestion  of  ( heir  ehronnioyieal  relnt  it tn'''«.  From  a 
numbt'r  ol  mutual  dilTert'net'S  mnl  divergences  ot  t'itht'r  hfiihvHifjtt  from  its 
rnmhm  it  may  In'  inferred  that.,  I'xisting  for  a long  time  side  by  «nie,  tln'y  have 
.influeneed  ea<th  other"".  Nttr  is  it.doubtful  tiiat  in  its  pre.-nud  form  ! In-  Adapatha 
is— also  because  of  its  mor<'  faeilt>  style  and  more  aystemnfie  freiitment  of  the 
oercmonial—comparatively  lattt.  A date  aometimt'  hetween  the  (('xts  of  the 
.Black  X'ajurv('<la  and  tlu'  heginning  of  the  upaniwlie  peritai  ( • (HHi  B.d)  may 
bo  tint  best  that  can  be  suggestt'd  at  this  moment"'*.  'I'lie  fsatapntha,  indeed, 
often  mentions  -and  almost  invariably  rt'jeet.'i  the  vit'w.'i  or  inat'tiees  of  other 


^‘^Of.  WioBioa,  in  I.  S.  XIII,  p.  2(!7:  Hrs(U%  Iseoh's,  ji.  1(10;  Min.uio,  T.  K.  H, 

Jhia  dtats  not  imply  that  tlu'y  went  older;  aee  ahio  (fvi.ANit,  BBK.  1 n 103 
and  compare  Rhnou,  in  BMb  34.  p.  ttl.  ■ i • > 

•’  Cauand,  Oyer  dc  Kilnva-rf'censii'  van  l«*t  Brahmana  tier  ‘honderd  paden,’ 

Amsterdam  AciuL  1912,  p.  141 : esp.  p.  1.11.  ' 

••  Cauano,  SBK.  I.  p.  105. 

ati  AO  (Lugcl)  10*  p.  12U  {^tm.  Ul  l U imd  4 h tlouhlo 

^ ‘ Vi5i5.  a fmthmmm  for  iht^  hrmr  fiiui  mho  fOr  tfiM  urUmmiu), 

nai«\ ^ ‘ ‘ **  0 |n  Hf»j  107;  iC  iOmo  at  »IA  23(1 

p,  25. 

• ■ ••  '"‘""k'.v  influenced 

^ "r«Ktmaiy  were  the  prt.p.aiv  of  the  Kanviw.  For 

i r at  .1 A 23(1.  j,.,  gil  (.'SUts. , wbwh.  eurimiHlv 

umn.gh,  docs  not,  comment  upon  those  7„mtm»  (uttjut,}  vvbteh  are  es.dusn ely  proper 

vVr  tlm  tenor  oi^  the  (lootations  to 

1'-  1'  ?■  34  and  compare  Ukkou.  Reotes,  p,  liw. 

Of.  alHo  IloiiHao,  V'.  (L  p,  47;$,  ^ 


The  BrahinaTias 


355 


authorities,  reicrred  to  as  ''soMe  (adhvari/my  or  “Caraka-adlivaryxi(B)'’^‘’^.  In 
many  cases  othc^r  traditions  arc  eoxnpletely  ignored. 

The  {Satapatha-Brahniana,  which  to  a certain  extent  provides  ns  with 
legendary  and  terminological  links  between  the  Vedic  culture  on  one  hand^®* 
and  India  of  the  Great  Epic  and  ancient  Buddhisxn  on  the  otherj  was  xnore  tliait 
once  connnent(^d  trpoti.  One  cotxuncntator  may  be  nicntion(Kl  by  naxne,  Hari- 
svamin  (probably  in  the  second  half  of  the  7^*'  centiny)^^’®,  a pupil  of  Skanda- 
svamin  who  explaitUHl  the  Rgveda. 

From  the  fact  tliat  it  does  not  comprise  the  complete  brdhmcma  material  it 
has  been  presinned  that  tlie  Gopathadh*iIhmana^‘^®“probably  naxned  after  a 
a secondary  treatise  in  tlie  style  of  such  a work.  It  consists  of  two 
parts,  the  former  comprising  five,  the  latter  six  chapters.  These  arc  perhaps  the 
remainders  of  a work  of  a hundred  chapters^^®.  Especially  in  its  second  part  it 
is  a compilation  containing  many  portions  that  run  parallel  to,  are  more  or  less 
identical  with,  other  bnihmanas  (Aitareya,  Kausitaki,  Satapatha  etc.^”®)  or  are 
even  almost  literal  borrowings  from  these  works,  sometimes  even  without  any 
attempt  at  assimilation.  This  second  part  boars  indeed  more  than  the  other  half 
the  stamp  of  a regtdar  bmhmamy  following,  in  tlu^  main,  the  order  of  the  rites 
adopted  also  in  the  Vaitana-Sutra:  Full  and  New  Moon  sacrifice,  (igrdymia 
(the  oblation  of  tin's  first  fruits)  etc.  Idun'e  is  a tendency  to  includes  upanisadic 
portions : thus  1,1,  I 1 5 is  an  athar vanic  cosmogony  in  the  ixpanisadic  manner, 
1,  1,  16-30  is  almost  identical  witii  the  Ih'anava-IJpanisa(.B*‘*;  the  section  3,  1, 
31-38,  a disquisition  on  the  GUyatri  or  Havitri  (liV,  3,  62,  10),  calls  itself 
Savitri-Upanisad.  l^he  atharvanic  affiliation  is  xnainly  apparent  from  the  form 
of  the  manirm  <pioted,  slight  adaptations  and  a certain  general  character  of 
the  original  portions,  which  are  much  more  numerous  in  the  first  part : there  is  a 
discuBBion  of  the  duties  of  the  brahmin  disciple  {brahmaedrin:  1,  2,  1-9),  of  the 


Calani),  SBK,  I,  p.  92;  at  AO  (Lugd.)  10,  p.  126  (^B.  borrowCKl  from  TB.  and 
SS.);  Wkbisr,  ITbor  di('  KonigBweilus  Berlin  Acad.  1893,  p.  92;  8,  N.  Praohan,  at 
IHQ  8,  p.  588.  Cax'aka  is  meant  tin  a oomprehenBive  term  (unbracitig  th('»  older 
schools  of  the  Black  Yajurveda  (see  Knrra,  V.  B.  Y.  8.,  p.  XC). 

For  particulars  see  e.g.  Maodonbll,  H.  8.  L.,  p.  217. 

M.  Dbva  Shastri,  at  6 AIOC,  p.  595;  8.  L.  Kathk,  at  BhV  9,  p.  325  (chrono- 
logically untenable). 

Edited  by  D.  Gaabtra,  Das  Gopatha  Bnlhinana,  Ixadcrn  1919;  translatcul 
(witlx  notes  and  introduction)  l>y  H,  On.  Patyax.  (unpublished)  thesis  Poona  1969. 
Comparts  BLOOM.inKi;n,  A.  V.  0,  B.,  p.  101. 

Cf.  AVPar.  20,  6,  2;  27,  2,  5;  28,  I,  2;  31,  10,  6;  according  to  tlu^  AV.  Bjhat- 
Barvanukramaniku,  ed,  'Visuva  BAKnm.q  Hoshiarpur  1966,  p.  121;  124-  AV^.  19, 
25;  4-7‘‘'’‘5()  were  ‘se<3id  by  Oo|)atha. 

Ec4erreti  to  in  AVl^ar.  49,  4,  5;  of.  Gaahtra,  o.c,,  9;  8uyapa,  Intr.  to  AV8. 

(ed.  ViBMVA  BANtmu,  p.  28)  cpiotes  a slanyia  from  the  CfB.  whicli  is  not  found  in 
oiu*  t(^Xt, 

For  particulars  see  B:r400Mri"BLn,  A.  V,  G.  B.,  p,  107;  GAASi'itA,  o.c.,  p.  17. 

Cf.  BLOOMifOsxj-),  A.  V.  G.  B,,  p.  109;  P.  DimsHXSN,  Bech/ig  Upanislnuf  s des. 
Veda,  Leipzig  ®1921  (Darmstadt  1963),  p,  85B. 


356 


({oimIo  • VihIu'  l.iti’i'iittm' 


precedence  of  a.  follower  of  Ailiarvavedii  ftinelioning  an  a hmhmn  priest 
(1,  2,  24-3,  1);  then'  are  nilt^a  concerning  the  conaeeriif  {iHhii:  :i^  21;  23); 
a cliaenKHion  of  the.  mkmwkhshm  ainniftce  throtigh  wlnidi  r>in^  ol>i*inna  inn 
periahaljlc  rcHtilta  (1,5,  8) ; of  the  three  daily  ^smm  preaainga  iia  f rr’ii^ed  in  |2 
3, 4,  Iff.  hnt  interlardeil  with  many  athnrvnnie  trait  a f 1 . 5,  1 1 2tt) ; a nnmber  of 
legt'ndH  and  oilier  tnatfer.  It  m not  poaidhh*  to  decide  wlielhc'C  BifUinmna, 
which  docH  not  like  'Ot-lier  worha  of  ttiia  claaa  follow  tin  own  Haiphit-tl,  was  the 
exclnsivc  pniperty  of  the  ^annakins  tn*  tlie  raippaladinH***.  *rhe  'date  of  its 
coniposii.ion,  no  tlonht  tnulertaken  in  order  to  f>rrn*ide  the  Athnrva-vediim  with 
a brdhvmna,  is  unknown,  hnt  tluwe  eau  he  no  donht  that-  it  is  one  of  the  latest 
prodneiions  of  its  genne  Its  relation  to  the  Vaifllnic^Siifra  has  (X'easioned  a 
protracted  e.ontroversy  h<4.<wc<'n  BliHnnfi<4iB*®»  wln^  teas  of  the  t^fninon  that  the 
Sutra  was  compostai  earliiw  (nrxl  figured  m it  \eere  ii.s  lire  mmMid  of  this 
Bnlhmana)  and  ''Qdand**®,  wh<i  advi'ieattni  tin'  opj'xwit.e  view.  Although  the 
correspondence  between  the  tw^o  works  is  m%i  perfect*^*,,  tVland's  arguments, 
based  on  internal  evkh'nce  {sentenee  <Huiatrni'tion,  r|Uotafiiuw,  WTong  inter- 
Iiretotions,  gnunitnatical  inainniracies),  are  weight  ier**h 
In  mirm,  the  ancillary  literature  «>f  t-he  Verla,  eonunentaries  and  later  San- 
skrit literature  passagt's  are  oet^asituially  ipiof:ed  from  imihnmmh^^  that  are  lost. 
It  may  seem  cli'ffhndt  to  coneetve  how  so  many  wrulis  ami  even  entire  schools 
<K>uld  <'xpi‘re  without  leaving  traces.  Anylnnv,  the  fact.  tlud.  part,  of  this  litcr- 
■atuiH^  was  never  coinmitit'd  to  writing  ami  tlm  jiroducf.ton  of  com.nsc  manuals  of 
ritual  rules  (kd^mtltra)  mnv  not  favourable  fo  the  pcipirtuation  of  voluminous 
brcihnmnm.  The  quotations  of  fragments  are  cifhtU'*  ammymt'nis  or-'  less  tre- 
'(fuently --haiuled  d<iwn  with  the  name  of  their  rcputetl  nulhoi  or  tlie  text  in 
whicl'i  they  occurnHB^^.  In  atidil-ion  to  f.he  fifteen  from  winch 

quotet/l  passages  havi^  hc'Cn  eollecicih  scveriil  othm'  works  are  mentioned  but 
not  (|uotcd  in  the  tiost-brEhmanie.  Ii'fcrat'.ure.  By  far  the  largest  numb'cr  of 
•quotations  derive  from  the  BUfyilyana  mmitiiin  of  which  has  already  been 
madc”«. 

(X  IhamMirmnn.  A,  V.  Ch  Ih,  p.  13  (Ammakiyah  i'^AhAmu.  m WgdCM  IS,  p. 
193  (Paippaliida);  then^  are  htovever  <jnotat4ons  from  both  recensions  of  the 
Bamliita. 

Bloom, rcKLo,  The  position  of  iht^  t*fq.iatha4lriihwana  m V'iHlie  literature, 
JAGS  19,  p.  1 ; A.  V.  Ch  B.,  p.  103;  in  t'U.lA  1912.  p.  «;  MAcnovitmn  li.  H.  L.,  p,  219. 

Cala'NI),  in  (fi.»A  1900,  p,  104:  Diis  VaiUinasuira  de«  Afharvaveda,  Ainster- 
<lam  Acad.  1910,  |'k  IV ; WZlvM  18, p.  180;  19t ; ef.  also  liiatin  m d BAH  1910, p.  934, 

Cf.  Eb'KO'U,  tmlm,  p,  70, 

Heo  also  l>,  BifArrAottAuvvA,  at  OH  5 (Umi  p.  23, 

Thosc^  belonging  to  the  latter  group  were  (incompletely,  .id*  tHmme)  colleeted 
by  Gm>BU,^o,o.  (see  above,  p.  349,  n.  42).  dims  ApA.  0,  4,  7 mimt.ion.s  the  Brllhmaija 
•of  th('>  hailfllis,  Bh,  23,  5 a (fhhgaleya.4lrahmapa, 

I,hvanam,^^Ktmkati,  liihimavi,  C.'maka  {o,g.  m Hiiyana,  .en  ftV.  8,  77,  10), 
'ChagaU‘»ya,  Oilbali,  Baihgnyani,  BhftUavi,  Mhfa^aravn  Mait-riivanlva*  liaurukl, 
ibatyilyana,  Sailllli,  BvetMvetara,  .llaritlravika. 

above,  p.  349;  ef,  also  T,  ii,  i'mmAUAm,  at  dG|i  fl,  p,  290, 


The  Brahmantts 


357 


3.  Chronology/ 

From  the  few  observations  made  in  connexion  with  the  relative  chronology 
of  these  works  it  will  already  be  clear  that  this  is,  in  many  particulars,  largely 
uncertain.  There  is,  to  a considerable  extent,  unanimity  with  regard  to  the 
oldest  among  the  more  important  works, —viz.  the  prose  parts  of  the  Samhitils 
of  the  Black  Yajurveda  and  the  closely  related  Taittiriya-Brahmana— aiid  to 
the  latest  greater  brdhmwms—viz,  the  Satapatha  (which  in  Yajhavalkya’s 
teachings  borders  on  the  period  of  the  oldest  upanimeh)  and,  especially,  the 
Gopatha“— -but  the  position  of  the  other  texts  remains  a matter  of  dispute.  The 
problems  arc,  moreover,  complicated  by  the  composite  character  of  several 
texts  as  well  as  by  the  probability  that  part  of  them  have  been  recast  or  were 
long  in  the  making^.  The  discussion  was— and  will  be — earned  on  with  the  help 
of  external  and  internal  evidence,  including  linguistic^,  stylistic^,  ritual,  histori- 
cal and  geographical  arguments  which  however  are  sonaetimes  contradictory. 
Whereas,  for  instance,  according  to  many  scholars  the  priority  of  the  Pati- 
cavimiSa  to  the  Jaiminiya  would  be  proved  on  the  strength  of  linguistic  con- 
siderations—especially  the  use  of  narrative  tenses— ritual  facts  might  lead  us 
to  incline  to  tlu^  opposite  view*.  Wackcrnagel®,  relying  on  linguistic  arguments 
(syntax,  accentuation,  vo<uibulary),  arrived  at  the  (X)nclusion  that  the  l^ah- 
caviip^a  and  the  Tait»tiiiya  are  of  the  Brahmanas  proper  the  oldest,  the  Jai- 
miniya, Aitareya  and  KauiSitaki  of  later  origin,  because'*  the  latter  are  handed 
down  without  acesentuation  and  make  abundant  use  of  the  narrative  perfects 
Keith*  admitted  that  the  relation  of  the  two  Rgvedic  Bnlbrnanas  to  other 
texts  of  the  saine  type  does  not  throw  any  light  of  a decisive  character  on 
their  date;  that  there  is  good  evidence  to  maintain  the  early  origin  of  the 
Pailcavimfia ; that  Aitareya  I-V  has  priority  over  the  J'aittiriya  in  the  hrdhmmm 
portions.  Recently  Horsch*  thought  the  older  portions  of  the  Aitareya  to  have 
been  eom|>OBcd  imnuKliately  after  the  Taittiriya.  Keith  was  also  of  the  opinion 


1 For  thii  relation  between  the  portioris  in  VS.  22-25)  and  SB.  (13) 

and  doubles  in  the  mantra  collections:  Caland,  at  AO  (Lugd.)  10,  p.  132,  who  wtis 
led  to  believe  that  certain  parts  of  SB.  are  older  than  parts  of  VS. 

® For  the  use  of  tho  subjunctive  see  Minaed,  T.  E.  I,  p.  205;  for  the  narrative 
perfect  Whitney,  in  PADS  1891  (JAGS  15,  p.  LXXXV). 

® Hobsoh,  V.  (1.  L.,  p.  471  (abseixce  or  occurrences  of  gdth&a), 

^ See  e.g.  KobSCH,  V.  0.  lb.,  p.  479. 

* Cauani),  PB,  p.  XX;  sect  above,  p.  349.  Seo  Wintkrkitz,  H.  I.  L.  T,  p.  191. 

« 3".  WACKEBNAOE'ti,  Altiudisobe  Orammatik,  I,  GOttingon  189(),  p.  XXX. 
also  Keith,  R.  Tb,  p.  40. 

’ Cf.  Gonoa,  Old  Indian,  p.  12;  129.  For  the  disputCKl  reliability  of  tbis  oriUTion 
800  L.  liENon,  Introduction  gdndrale  (to  WAOKEKNAiUflu’s  Altindisohi^  Orammatik), 
Gdttingen  1957,  p.  08,  n.  195. 

« Keith,  K.  B.,  p.  45;  V.  B.  Y.  S.,  p.  XCIX;  and  in  BBOS  1,  p.  177. 

» Hobsoh,  V.  U,  I..,  p.  471. 


358 


,1.  ‘ Vf'dir 


that  tho  Kaiwiiaki  Hhiiidn,  in  point  of  vinw  ofj^ivlo  {mvmtivi^  porfwt),  on  nuich 
the  Hamn  hnad  an  tJio  input  ha  wtf-h  whioh  it^  inoroovin*  agr<M'H  m iin  doctrine  of 
repeated  death  (pn)mrmrfipt.)  am!  in  mnne  referenern  to  the.  name  anthoritien^^ 
Oert('l^^  wuH  eonvhun'd  that  the  dniminlya  ahtnild  nni  hv  ptinanl  very  far  hack 
among  theeindieHtntTfilaoddmllunatdeal  writings  heeanne  of  the  prolix  eliaracter 
ofneveral  ofita  h'gnnidn  and  the  nen%  often  rittmhalie,  delink,  gnifteii  on  the  old 
ntock.  Claland^\  drawing  atfvntton  tonnnny  ainnianf  itai  in  form,  atyle  and  lam 
gimge hetwtnn  tlu'daiininlyaami  t.heSatapathfn  eonehidmi  fhiif  Iheae  t-wo  \vork« 
are  nearer  t.o  eaeh  ot^ln'r  than  to  oihera.  However*  thin  dmii  not  neeeHHarily 
imply  ahnolnte  eoivknpiornneit j". 

Tluw'!  ehronologieal  podilemn  are  fnvHier  eomfdiiaileti  l\v  the  oeenrrenco  of 
common  or  parallel  |>aHaagea^^.  A eloae  examination  of  fhr'ae  him  often  inthiced 
Hcholara  to  venttm^  opiniona  on  t-htdr  relation  and  mi  tinentiemn  <>(  priority  or 
poateriority  of  certain  plaeea^'^.  Thm‘e  are,  for  inatanee  in  daiininlya,  paHaagea 
that  allow  a marked  reHemblanee,  not.  only  in  gent^ral  eonieiita^  Init  even  in 
their  wordinga»  to  aimilar  ehaptrra  in  other  Uw  ntory  of 

YiXjhavalkyak  eneonnter  with  the  hrafonina  of  tln^  K.uru-raiieillaa  on  the 
occaHion  of  a nat^rifu'i^  entailing  mimeroiiH  giftii  to  the  priei4a  iind  the  enaning 
dkettHHioriH  i«,  in  ik  |>hraHeoIogy,  ahnoat  ithmfieal  in  holh  worim*"®.  It  i«  however 
clear  that  lHdAV<'en  an  eanent-iidly  identical*'*  ami  a widely  difTerenf.  version  there 
are  many  d«‘greeH  of  Himilarity  and  poamhiUlien  ot'nhorfening  en  ninplilleaiioid^ 
We  Hhonkl  take  aeeonnt  of  tiie  prohahiliiy  t-hat  mmiriunrn  n well  .kmnvn  theme 
waa.  witiumt  lieing  a eoudenmition  tVtmi  anottier  fUed  hmkim$nti^  t.,ext.,  'dealt 
with  in  HO  nhort  a form  that  only  itie  i^aaenl iai  {Monk  are  menfioned.  Hhort 
referetuH'H  aneh  an  IHi  9*  M hardly  fail  to  eonvinei'  the  mid«a*  of  tlie  pre* 
(^xiHi.t'n(H>  of  a.  larger  •veraion : 


(X  Gonim*  IL  h h p.  IIH;  2mh 

**  OKiiTKO*  in  JAOiS  18*  p.  Si^edlk  I*  IH'4*  :i*  fel:  114;  ItO;  IIUK 
OAi>-AN'n>  Over  en  nit  , . p.  *2H, 

InHtauceH  will  he  mentiomHi  m the  ft4fownm  pngere  See  e.g,  al-ie  Til.  I*  I*  2, 
4ff. : BIk  2,  I*  2*  13fT. ; tlfk  I,  22fT, : 10,  tl*  I;  *tll.  I*  Iimi;  Ktl,  I*  la  IMT.  (OKETnL. 

at  J AOB  28)  p,  1 92),  For  apiHtitnemi  of  verhal  eorreripondencra  *»ee  i ietiTKt»*  als  ■»! i\08 
23,  p.  325. 


For  iiiHtanae;  ‘Xhe  fac't  that  HIk  tha»ii  not  meniifm  ilir*  e*»nrtieroirgurnerite 
againat  ofhaing  favtore  minrine  , , . might,  nngge^n,  that  tf  heiengfi  to  im  earhia-  phtwt^ 
(than  JJk)'’  (BooKwnv.,  J,  Ik,p*  29).  Hee  ako  Hontnwrr/.*  o,e.*  |e  42:  82;  92;  HU 
(on  dik  I,  42-44 ; Hlk^  11*  If  I,  ItT.  etc.);  fur  ilgltwent  layr-i'^  in  Stk,  p,  350, 

Gi,  li.  (maTmi,  GoutrilmiionH  from  the  daimmlyiidlraliimmii  to  the  hktory 
of  tlie  bn%hmm,m  Ijteratnre*  dAGB  23*  p.  325.  Ko'o  *||l,  2*  701'.  mul  Sll.  L 10*  T 
dik  1,  U)k:  fdiM*  11*  Ik  i*  Ifk;  BBK,  3,  t*  4 ete,;  m*i-* f. ‘.it. Orer  en  int , , .i 
p.  33, 


For  eaucH  of  vtn'hal  enrrefi|,Haidenee  Mmrrnn,  nt  *kAiiS  23*  |n  '325.  For 

aloHo  parallelH  o!  the  myt-lheal  tale  of  Indrak  conf.e'jw  wedi  *'rvie||iwk  win  (dik  2* 
153 It):  Ommn.*,  Tmiri,  Cloimeatieut  Aemk  15*  p.  iMti. 

Bee  i^.g,  ORittm*)  at  d AGH  18*  p*  15* 


Tho  Brabmanas 


359 


“Tlioro  wa8  a fonialo  Abgiras,  Akupai'a  (by  name).  I^iko  the  skin  of  a lizard,  so 
was  her  skin.  Indra,  having  cleansed  her  three  times  by  moans  of  this  chant, 
ixiade  her  sun-skinned;  that  indeed  she  had  then  wished” 

An  elaboi’atc  treatment  of  a stibject  is  not  necessarily  of  later  origin  than  a 
shorter  iier^otint,  however  ninch  later  authors  may  tend  to  become  involved  in 
discussions  on  what  was  simply  stated  by  their  predecessors^®.  A special  danger 
lies  in  oviu^- valuing  the  similarities  between  the  versions  of  a theme,  story, 
argumentation  or  ritualistic  subject.  Similar  versions  may  have  been  so  popular 
or  generally  (airretit  or  so  eonmionly  accepted  that  no  borrowing  or  other  form 
of  interrelation  is  satisfactorily  traceable.  The  mythical  story  of  the  Gayatri 
metre  which  (who)  flew  towards  Soma  to  bring  it  (him)  down  is,  in  mox'e  than 
twenty  passages,  in  tlie  main  narrated  or  alluded  to  in  no  more  than  two 
ditrerent  ibrms  %vhich  dilfer  one  from  the  other  only  in  the  framework  construct- 
ed around  them^h  Hypotheses  with  regard  to  the  chronological  relation  between 
two  passages  shoxild  by  no  means  be  generalized  and  applied  to  the  texts  in  their 
entirety. 

This  is  not  all.  In  discussing  the  problems  connected  with  relationship  and 
borrowing  neither  the  samhltxw  of  the  Yajurveda^^  nor  the  sutra  literature^®  can 
be  left  otit  of  consideration®^.  For  instance,  the  oldest  version  of  a section  on  a 
sevonit'enfold  agnihxdra,  found  at  MS.  1,  8,  10,  was  followed  by  TB.  2,  1,  7,  1, 
which  in  its  t.urn  was  ren^ast  and  made  a special  agnihotra  at  VadhS.  3,  37, 
wlu'reas  «IB.  1,  21  setuns  to  have  borrowed  this  sutra  passage®^.  It  would  be 
xmwisi'  to  aHcrib(5  all  these  dotiblcs  to  constant  onesided  borrowing,  disregarding 
the  poHsil)ility  of  mutual  l)orrowing  or  of  common  origin  in  a third  source — 
something  likc^  a ^*pre-brahmanic  itihasa  collection”®® — lost  to  us.  On  closer 


Cf.  8,  91;  stH^  Oertuu,  at  J AGS  18,  p.  28;  Gnosn,  Lost  brahmanas,  p.  57. 
Compare  o.g,  also  SIL  1,  5,  7 (Prajapati  creating  tho  Vedas  atid  tho  holy  words 
himr  bhuvah  svah)  as  against  Jlh  1,  357f. ; AiB.  5,  32f. ; SB.  11,  5,  8. 

Cf.  <^.g.  BouKwrrz,  J.  B.,  p.  29. 

Sei^  <\g.  T8.  1,  2,  10,  1 (alluHiou);  3,  5,  7,  1 (briefly  told);  0,  1,  6,  2 (longer);  TB. 
1,  1,  3,  10;  2,^  1,  0;  4,  7,  5;  3,  2,  1,  1;  AiB.  3,  25ff.  (a  longer  version  with  many 
particulars);  ^B.  1,  7,  I,  1 (very  briefly  told);  8,  2,  10  etc.  etc.  Coxnparo  RV.  4,  27, 
3.— “For  t,lu^  difftu’ent  versions  of  another  mythical  tale,  likewise  handed  down  in 
more  than  one  form,  viz.  that  of  Tva^tar  who  did  not  invite  Indra  to  a soma  sacritico 
because  the  latter  had  slain  his  son  soo  Gonjda,  Dual  deities,  p.  381. 

8co  e.g.  CA1.AND,  at  AO  (Lugd.)  10,  p.  132. 

Relations  with  upmd^ads  (o.g.  JB.  1,  22  tf.:  ChD,  5,  11)  cannot  bo  oonsidorod. 
Tlun*e  are,  of  ooursis  also  ri^mote  parallels.  Sec  e.g.  JB.  1,  12*“14:  VadhS.  3,  32. 
a®  BoniswiTZ,  J'.  B.,|).  08.  Compare  o.g.  also  OBimon,  in  JAOS  28,  p.  81  (U.4anaB 
Ivavya  and  Indra:  3B.  1,  1251T.;  BSS.  18,  40,  Calano,  in  AMi.^KundcMl.  Morgen- 
landt^H  12,  l»  p.  20);  Boimwirz,  o.o.,  p.  80  (on  JB.  1,  2011.);  92  (KS.  0,  5;  MS.  1,  8,  5; 
Jli  I,  39  IT.  <4.0.  and  VadhS.  in  A.  0.  (Lugd.),  4,  20.  A sample  of  argument  at  i(m : 

‘'Some  information  of  intivrest  as  to  the  dat(^  of  KB.  might  be  obtained  from_  ASS. 
if  it  won^  true  that,  as  Garbti  states,  that  text,  in  one  case  at  least,  cites  KB.” 
(K’Kitu,  K..  B.,  p.  48). 

a®  Oehtku,  in  JAOS  18,  p.  10;  Boo  below,  p.  407  ff. 


360 


.T.  (lontla  • Vi'dic  Litorattir*' 


inspection  the  difficniltios  provi>  ti>  he  ('mirmous,  nniny  pasHagc's  giving  rise  to 
controversial  cliscnssion.  'rtu;  corresironding  passages  in  t h<>  l^aiapatha  and  the 
(Ufnihotm  section  (1,  1-05)  of  tlie  Jainiiniya  tuay  h(>  tneivl  ioned  as  a case  in 
point.  After  Oertel  had  drawn  a,tt.('ntion  lo  ( Innu,  (’aland  with  ri'gard  to  the 
relations  between  the  two  f^atapatha  rts'ensions  and  the  .lainnniya  - oltserved 
that  Sum.  I-V  a.nd  ^ BK  T -VM  are  yonngt'r  t han  thi'  .Iniminiya.  whereas  the 
later  hooks  of  the  f^atapai.ha  S('t'm  i-atih('r  to  havt'  la-en  known  to  I hat.  sfimaveilio 
school.  More  recently  tin'  verst'S  of  iS B.  11 . 3,  1 , 5 have  h('en  regarded  as  yonngor 
—a  view  that  did  not  lind  general  favour  •.  'whih'  thi'  eorresponding  section 
JB.  1,  l!)f.  itsolf—thc  discussion  ln'twe<'n  danaka  and  \’ujriavalkya  oir  the 
suhstitntt's  for  the  normal  offering--  has  Ix'eu  considered  lat  er  t luni  the  i)aasago 
in  both  I'ccensions  of  the  other  woi'k®’. 

As  to  the  absolute  chronology  of  th(>  briihtmm  lits'ratuiH'.  dat('H  stieh  as  2800 
B.C.®®  arc  beyond  possibility®®,  the  hypotlu'sis  “alter  the  1 !*'>  ('cnt  ury  B.(j.  lor 
the  oldest  can,  in  connexion  with  the  problem  of  t he  chronology 

of  the  Rgvoda— known  to  all  of  them---,  Ix'  ri'ganled  as  dispnt  abh'.  A.s  to  the 
Kansitaki  and  Aitareya  they  must  have  been  known  to  PiiniJii  who  {at  1 , 62) 
mentions  two  brahmmv^  with  thirty  and  forty  ehapters : moreowr.  t he  language 
described  by  the  great  grammarian  is  decidedly  later  t hati  that'  ol  these  works®*. 
But  the  date  of  Pilnini  is  a vexed  (lut'stion  cent  ury  H.C.  i).  Anyhow',  this 
mass  of  explanatory  work  must  have  taken  mtn'h  titne  t o pmdm'e,  ('spc'cially 
when  we  realize  that  what  has  Hurviv<Hl  is  probably  a small  fraet  ion  of  what  lias 
existed.  So  10>''-7"'  cent,  may  for  the  main  lexis  be  a reasonabh'  eonjt'cture. 
Whether  there  has  even  existed  an  'Ifr-Urfilmiana’  is  an  instduble  probh-m;  in 
any  case,  it  cannot  In'  r('eonHt.ruct('<l.** 


” Cf.  OnHTKt.,  in  JAOS  23.  p.  328;  ('Ar.ANO.  SltK.  I,  p.  UH;  Uousen.  V.tS.L., 
p.  112;  Bomow’m,  J.  B.,  p.  02.  Otn  Jll.  1,  SI  (5S  (expiations)  m'e  Boonwm,  o.o., 
p.  ISO. 

C.  V.  Vaioya,  in  S AlOC  I,  p.  283;  the  same  author  in  ABOUl  t>.  jt.  2(57  ( p 
2360  B.C.);  see  o.g.  also  B.  V.  Kamk.swaua  Aivau.  at  (,)-JM.S  12.  p.  171;  223:  357 
(2300-2000  B.  C.):  P.  Cm  SiflN-Ctu'TA.  at  IIIQ  10.  p.  S32  (3102  2000  U.  (t). 

1400“12()0  B.  C.  (IIauo.  Ai.  B.  I,  p.  47)  is  also  for  (be  oldost  hrabmitr,t(v<  im- 
probable. 

Cf.  II.  C.  HAveUAnnmuw.  .Stndit's  in  Indian  .Antnpitties.  Calentta  1038. 

**  ]iri%hmar,i(Vi  were  monot.ononsJy  reeited  in  a slow  tone  (H  At  o,  \i,  15,  p.  72).  In 
manuBOripts,  the  lust  wort!  or  pbritse  of  a section  w often  init  t wteo  a mark  by 
whioh  to  recognize  the  (>nd  of  the  chapter.  There  are  eolopJmnn  mentioning,  e.g., 
th(^  naino  of  the  author  of  the  eoninientary.  Jn  almost'  ail  sonthm'ii  mamiHcript'S 
there  are  benedictions.  Many  corniptionH  art*  due  to  trimwertption  into  other  scripts 
or  to  regional  variations  in  itronimciatioti. 

See  also  K.  Myr.m.s,  in  Fesl.Nchrift  W.  Hnhen,  Berlin  11170.  p.  421. 


■^rho  Bruhmanas 


361 


4,  The  brdhmmm  as  hlstorkat  sources 

A few  words  tiiay  bo  said  about  the  importance  of  these  texts  from  the  point 
of  view  of  tlie  history  of  Indian  civilization^  They  supply  us  with  some  infor- 
mation on  tiun*  r geographicail  background : their  terra  cognita  was  broadly  speaking 
Brahmavarta  or  Madhyadciii^  and  som<'!  adjacent  countries;  the  Satapatha 
belongs  to  tlu',  ihingen  valley  and  the  east  of  Ihhar®.  Although  mention  is  made 
of  variotis  placH^s  and  tribes  tinknown  to  older  texts,  })assages  such  as  AiB.  8, 14 
not  only  mix  up  ethnic  names  based  on  historical  reality  with  mythological 
peoples  beyond  the  Ilinxlilayas,  but  are  also,  while  dividing  the  earth  in  accord- 
ance with  the  four  points  of  the  compass  and  the  central  region  of  the  Kuru- 
Paiicalas,  ii\  agreement  with  an  archaic  view  of  the  structure  of  the  inhabited 
world Legendary  matter  and  allusions  to  events  which  might  reflect  historical 
facts  have  in  modern  times  been  interpreted  as  sources  of  information  on  east- 
ward migration  of  the  Aryans®.  The  social  system  was  in  a state  of  transition 
between  the  ihudity  of  the  older  period  and  the  rigidity  of  the  post-Vedic  age: 
wo  hear  of  the  four  classics  ( varm)^  viz.  brahmins,  nobility,  vaihjas  and  Mdras; 
of  their  dtitic^s,  ambitions  and  functions  and  privileges®;  we  witness  the  growing 
importan(‘.e.  of  tfu'.  two  higlun’  classes’,  tludr  relations  and  prerogatives®,  and  tlie 
propagation  of  the  id<'al  of  iludr  co-o|)eration  and  complementary  relationship®. 
Despite  th<^  fact  that*  little  att(ait.ion  is  paid  to  the  lower  strat.a  of  society  wo 
become^  iirfornuHl  of  truiny  parti<mlarB  concerning  the  social,  political  and  mili- 
tary asp(Hits  of  i*he.  auei<'nt  Indian  communities*®.  Social  order  and  social 
behaviour  are  j^istithnl  in  religious  terms**.  There  are  of  course  many  references 
to  social  and  fatjuly  lifl^— to  marriage,  SB.  5,  2,  1,  10: 


* For  givua’al  information  J.  Basit,  India  of  the  ago  of  tlio  brdhrnariaSy  Cal- 
cutta 1909, 

® 8(H)  abov(H  p.  330  and  K.  J.  Racbon;  Anoieut  India,  Cambridge  1914  (Now 

York  1915),  p.  50;  Minahi),  T.  'K  I,  p.  190;  Basu,  o.  c.,  p.  L 
® K.  MvmuB,  Coographische  Untersuclmugoix  zur  Eixtstehungsgegond  des  ^ata- 
patha-Brillunana,  Wins.  Zs,  K.  Marx  Unjv.  Leipzig  14  (1965),  p.  759. 

* I rehn'  to  J.  Con  da,  Visnuism  and  Sivaism,  London  1970,  p.  38;  45  (with  the 
notes). 

® See  e.g.  W’KBBtt,  I.  R.  I,  p.  161  (6B.  1,  4,  1,  lOff.)  and  compare  EoGEXiiNa,  SB. 
I,  p.  XLl ; J.  V.  at  VVZKM  17,  p,  99  (SB.  1,  4,  1,  lOff.). 

« 8B.  5,  5,  4,  9;  L 3,  2.  15;  2,  5,  2,  6;  4,  1,  4,  5;  AiB.  7,  29;  TkS.  2,  5,  4,  4 etc. 

MAODONKra.  and  Kkito,  'V.  I.  s.v.  K.^atriya  etc. 

’ 1’he  cultural  importan<H^  of  the  nobility,  for  many  years  a matter  of  dispute, 
was  reccHUIy  <Hnphasiz(Hl  by  IIohhou,  V.  (b  L.,  p.  428, 

® Of,  (^,g.^^B/5,  4,  4,  15;  6,  4,  4,  13;  AiB.  7,  28  (N.  J.  Rhendu,  at  JAR  Bombay 
38,  p.  142). 

® 'K.g.  TR,  5,  1,  10,  3;  SB.  4,  1,  4,  Iff,;  AiB.  8,  2,  3;  8,  25. 

W.  liAtu  Rtaat  und  Ui^sellsohaft  im  alten  Indien,  Wiesbaden  1957;  A.  0. 
BANJSiaiSA,  Rtudies  in  the  bnlhmai^m^  Delhi  1963. 

**  Cf  also  R.  0.  Ratuayk,  at  Philosophy  East  and  West,  19,  p.  435. 


362 


J.  (tondii-  ‘ Iiifomlttm 


“Oiio’h  wif(3  is  lialf  of  oiuOh  own  si'lf:  m i«aig  as  oiif'  dfu's  nnf.  ii^ 

80  long  ono  doo«  n<^t*  iN'prodtU'o  om^sc'lf*  for  long  oia^  inrompItg^^O' ^ ’ 

to  ednoation  ainl  Hindy  <')f  tho  <iaily  ('voida  and  puranils.  food  atul  drink 

gamoB,  tools  and  ntonHiln,  droBs  and  dfs'oraf ioiriy  nvwml  rrlnlions^^^  dis^mej^ 
and  nuH'iieinc'^^^  (ninfoniH,  ngriotditirf\  imsltimgo  and  ofhrr  f>ron|>aiionH*«  as 
well  as  varioiiH  fornm  t>f  poptilnr  ladirf^'^  and  inforeonm*  \ulli  ‘ahorigineB’w 
That  tlusv  iH  an  ahnont  iin^xIuniHtihle  wealth  of  tnfonnafion  on  aaeriheial  rites 
is  self-evideidd®* 

Many  phns'S  attest  what  tnay  he  eidled  a prtvseiindifie  iideri'st  in,  and 
study  of,  the  world  and  to  atf.etnpts  at=  systtnnafi/ing  thr*  liiunvloclge  n'milting 
from  this  stndy®‘l  Mm*h  attentiot^  is  pnirl  t-o  ('hnmology  amt  tin*  c'ldendar,  the 
divisions  of  the  year  stieh  as  montfw  and  smsons^h  rain  nnd  tdhrr  etimatie  and 
meteorological  }.)henonu‘na®^  astronomy^®*  (saanology  and  rosmogony^^l  This 
scientilic  eoneern  is  wholly  tietennimsi  hy  man  s ritnal  and  re-Iigions 'interests 
and  constitutes  an  ititegral  part  of  onc»  and  the  same  hiirinofiiotis  view  of  life 


Seee*g.  Slh  11,  3,  3:  11.  r>.  4.  i\:  CJP.  I,  2,  2;  TA,  l!.  01!',;  AiK.  5,  3,  3;  li  K 

MooKBEJn  Anoi('nt  Indian  edtiealion,  London  I04T.  p,  71, 

8ee  e.g.  Til  3.  H,  Ih;  7,  3.  2.  42;  H.  7.  K 3 P’fionh  ri  fho  h^ni  kind  of 
food*':  ch  3,  1.  2,  21;  AiB.  4,  3.  4;  M W,  llortuxs.  of  JAOS  27.  p.  lin'd*  7»  2 
im\;  AiB.^,2,  23;  7,  30;  (raring)  AiB.  2.  23;  KB,  3.  L I.  3;  (warinng)  *^Ii  i,  g*  l'  p 
(olotlws)  KB,  »l  1,  2.  18;  13.  4.  I,  13;  14,  2.  I,  H;  (tiiournlfj  olej  KB,  p 1,2.  7fo  3 
1;  4,  Of.;  2,  I,  I*  10;  13.  2,  2,  10;  *k  4,  3;  d‘B,  2.  2,  I,  rd  Kit,  2.  0 |B,  BoTti,  Iiuli* 
sches  Fenemnig,  ZBMB  43,  p.  300);  (poilorl  MH,  I,  H.  2f,;  KB.  I K H,  f,  I {\V,  lUti, 
Topihrei  nnd  Tongi'seliirr  iin  vedisehon  Indann  3Iam,s?^  Aead.  f072  and  dt)rB  23,  p! 
137),  PB.  8,  2,  2 'lit' heard  a eat  ain't '/.tag*  ‘ {rf,  B-nnn%ooi.  K,  I,  |n  313). 

**  Cl  L.  BaAinrAKAin  at  lA  lit,  3 (VtO.  Bamiolar.  floint»av  1000.  p.  mt). 

(T.  e.g.  KB,  4,  K 3,  0;  AiB.  K 23,  13;  7.  13.  I;  OTB.  4,  K 1.  H;  KB,  3,'  I,  3 7* 
E.  F,  (I  MOuam,  at  Asia  M'ajnr  0,  |n  327.  * * » » » 

Keee.g.  TB.  3,  0.  14,  1;  AiB.  4,  20.  3;  KB,  I.  0.  I,  3,  2,  1.  L 7;  11  2 7 3‘>* 
BaS'U,  O.O.,  p.  07.  ' ' 

Kueh  as  iiorttnits  and  snpranormal  fiownr  of  r-orfain  (111,  p p :k  jp 

AwviVf’.i'  11  ■*'  II  I’*'  3.  3.  4.  H:  A.A,  3.  l!.  4;  .-f.  THty/.  ul, 

AiSUKl  48  45),  j).  173),  tl«»Higiiili(!iim<.,  <tCth,>  t't«Ut  lu.ti  Irf!  m.lt-i.  j.SM,  1.  1.  1,  2()- 

5,  2,  17  ()i5ireKj,.in3A()H  2t!,  {..  IMHIT,;  is.,s!,a.  t>*h»  h.wul  ...  in 

Vodu)  niiial.  H.4.k.,.u  2 (N.-vvcwtl.,  I»72).i..  1);  (l„.  ii,  fli..  kh..,!  ..ud  .n'il  (m> 
i;  ■ in  tht'  V'l'tla,  Ai'iwli'Uiv  ISUiUi;  (iCa. 

SB.  1,  3,  :t,  5;  2,  4,  2.  24;  14.  I.  1.  31).  ' ^ v k 

“ Of.  o.g.  AiB.  8.  11,  8;  BB.  HI.  (!.  7;  ,IH,  2.  183. 

“ For  a oolloction  (>r  (tcrtiiu.m.  imAs:  N‘.  .1.  .SiiKvtiK.  'I'h,,  },(.{, ir  and  Ihi'  otlu'r 
pnostH  m tho  bmhiruMitw  of  thi'  t.tKVodn.  .ItUl.  N.  N.  32.  1’.  p,  4Ht. 

A.la|»ft(Jm.Hrrt!»iHHio*.  Wori,  /,■.  K.  Mar\  Biiiv. 

i-)ei|)zig  10  (11)07),  p,  47. 

n fi  n'  !'/'  '•  *■  ”•  '•  *’  = J- 

3,  5,  0;  4,  3,  P 3;  0,  p p .pp  0,  3.  3,  IH;  12.  3.  2,  1. 

hng,  »IB.  P 117;  KB,  P,  P 4,  10;  P H.  3,  12;  7,  4,  2,  22 » fll  3 4 3’  p||  l 1 33 

**  Kg.  AiB,  2,  17;  KB.  4,  12;  AB,  2,  1.  2.  17;  7,  3.  p 37;'  14,  3,  :P  17, 

'"*1^^*/’  id.  pOi  P P I;  tp  p 2,  I ; Hoo  almi  H,  ||tiriwiAn%\  l)a^  Wt4t- 

%n»;ssi:.ai7,;!z  


The  Brubmanas 


363 


and  tlic  world.  Hiis  docB  iiot  however  oxchide  the  occurrence  of  references  to 
a certain  knowledge  oi  anatomy,  embryology,  and  medical  practice^®.  Nor  did 
some  lingiiiBtio  lacts—as  far  as  they  were  utilizable  for  ritual  purposes — escape 
the  authors'  notice : at  Slh  10, 5, 1, 2 the  three  nominal  genders  are  distinguished 
to  co-ordinate  them  with  tlu^  tlireefold  Veda  and  the  three  sacred  fires.  Unintelli- 
gible speech  is  l>arbarotis  and  not  permitted  to  a hrafmian  (3,  2,  1,  24).  The 
phenomenon  oi  linguistic  taboo*^*  is  repeatedly  utilized  to  explain  xmcxpected 
word  forms,  for  instaiuH>,  when  a black  antelope  skin  (carman)  is  in  a formula 
adressed  as  'somethijig  protective'  (batman),  “‘because  the  former  name  is  used 
among  men,  tlie  latter  among  the  gods"  (1,  1,  4,  4).  The  relations  between 
‘mind'  and  sp(HH*.h  wm'c  among  the  problems  that  arrested  the  attention  of 
some  authors*'^’’.  However  riidimentary,  these  observations  and  explanations 
represent  the  beginnings  of  various  branches  of  Indian  science^®. 

The  range  of  stories  contained  in  this  literature  supplies  us  with  a considerable 
number  of  data  from  which  we  might  gain  an  insight  into  what  with  terms  that 
might  easily  be  misunderstood  is  called  the  morals  and  ethics  prevailing  in  the 
epoch®®.  Despite  the  fact  that  on  one  hand  the  rituals  and  their  interpretation 
make  the  gist  of  the  autlior's  religion  and  view  of  the  world,  and  on  the  other 
the  gods  ar<^  not  r<^pr<'sent(Hi  as  much  interested  iti  morality  or  in  being  more 
sqtH^aitush  t*lum  tludr  worHlii|>p<'rH  about  abstract  decency  or  moral  standards, 
these  aufbors  —and  attuing  tlunn  espcicially  the  comi)iler  of  the  Kaxisitaki®®— 
oft<ai  took  o(‘<*asion  to  moralize  in  passing  or  to  put  some  words  of  reproof  into 
the  mouiii  of  tlieir  pt^rsonagi's.  Thus  the  well-known  story  of  Indra  and  Namuci 
reads,  in  Pli  12,  6,  8f.,  as  follows: 

‘Tudra  ami  the  asurit^  Nt^mnci  made  an  agreomont:  ‘of  us  two  one  shall  not  kill 
the  other  he  it  at  niglit  or  l)y  day,  (uther  with  something  wet  or  with  something 
dry.’  Indra  (nit  off  his  lu^ad  at  dawrx  before  sunrise  with  foam  of  water;  dawn 
sunrise  is  luntlun*  at  night  nor  by  dixy,  and  foam  of  water  is  neither  wot 
not  dry.  Th(^  (hwwl),  a gnnxt  <wil,  rolled  after  him  (crying  out):  ‘Man-slayer,  you 
have  clunxted,  you  have  cheated’  . . .” 

The  mythical  taU^  of  IVajUpati,  the  father  of  all  creatures,  who  could  not  con- 
tinue cri'ating  without  committiitg  incest— ho  had  intercourse  with  liis  own 
daughten*’*^"— h'd  auUmr  of  the  J^atapatha  version  to  spemk  of  “^a  sin  in  the 


E.g.US.  0,  4,  9,  3;  AiB.  7,  15;  1,  5,  4,  1;  1,  6,  4,  9;  3,  2,  1,  31;  3,  8,  3,  17; 


4,  5,  2,  4;  0,  4,  1,7;  st^o  also  J'i.  tSHTVAOANicsHA  MtniTHY,  at  Indian  J.  of  Hist, 
of  Beienwo  5 (1970),  |:).  80, 
kS(H)  fnrtlior  on,  |).  378. 

CL  PB.  1 U 1,  3;  (BL  U 4,  4,  7;  1,  4,  5,  11. 

For  an  Indian  ovaluatii’in;  H,  li.  Kahnxk:,  at  BhV  13,  p.  (15. 

1^3.  V¥.  Hock  INS,  Hods  and  saints  of  th(^  Croat  Bnllnuana  (I’B.),  Trans.  Con- 
mavticut  Acad.  15  (1908),  p,  23;  Buoomfxkud,  in  .J'AOS  15,  p.  IBO;  H.  E.  KAumjc, 
in  10  AIOO,  p,  29;  dUB  27,  2,  p,  95;  28,  2,  p.  58. 

(X  vS.  Infnn,  D.  H.  B.,  p.  21;  H(»e  almnTB.  I,  7,  I,  7. 


364 


J.  nmidii.  ■ Fiitrmtun' 


eyes  of  the  gods/'  At  Aili  Ih  I , where  they  mv  mul  in  hiive  eohahited  in  the 
form  of  a stag  and  a dnnr,  it  is  atnpliih'd  hy  a story  about  bis  ptiniKlunent,  and 
at  KB*  0,  1 modified : there  it  is  not  i.he  god  who  performs  ineeatnons  dmi, 
bnt  his  sons. 

Although  then'  is  hardly  anything  very  lofty  the  t'('aehers  of  t,ln^  hmhmaiuu 
impress  upon  their  diseiples  the  neei'ssity  in  enttivatv  some  virities  and  avoid 
certain  vices*  M,nr<h'rand  ot-her  forms  of  sever*'  injury  are  mmnihnvH  implicitly 
condemned,  all)eit  the  'sitf  n'miliing  from  it  enn  he  atoned  ft>r  by  a pariienlar 
rite*  This  possibility  of  <'X|)iafi(m  is  tlie  v<'ry  reason  for  insinding  the  story  of  a 
crime  committed  in  tlie  mytlueal  sphere  and  tht'  ('nsning  exemplary  atonement 
in  eases  sneh  as  IMh  Kf  (h  bf. : 

‘'A  saoritictvdest.roying  ogrens,  DIrgbajihvf  pd.ong^oiigueir')  kopt  brre  licking  at 
the  sacriticial  (food),  liuira  dt'spaired  (^t'Hlnymg  hf'r  by  any  stratagem  wbatevor. 
Now  Snmitra  Kntsa  was  a liaiuisome  (ytmng  nam),  1o  Inm  Is'  f Indra)  said:  ‘Call 
her  to  you**  lh>  called  her  to  him.  IShe  said  to  him:  ‘This  tmvilaf  am:l  truly  is  never 
heard  by  mo,  but  it  pltvases  nu'  vtay  much.*  Ht'  (Snimtral  came  to  an  understand- 
ing with  her.  At  the  (meeting-place)  agreed  npmi  they  | Indra  and  Sumitra)  slow 
her.  That  indeed  had  at  that  moment,  heiai  their  wesb.  Thi^  mntmiirn  (mtnmn) 
certainly  is  a wish-granting  ehant.  Through  tins  (mlmnn}  mu'  obtains  (tin'  fullll- 
merit  of)  his  wish.  (But)  an  (inauspiinons)  voiee  addressed  him  fSniintra)  thus: 
‘Although  you  are  tSumit-ra  ('Hhioif-friemP*).  yon  have  done  a,  hlotKly  deed.* 
Grief  tormente<l  lum;  he.  performed  austentws:  he  saw  this  (ml man)* 

Through  it  he  drov<^  away  hm  gri<d\  He  who.  fhn*  rt  nnnrh  m Imubng.  applies  tho 
mmmitm  (rnttumh)  drivt's  away  his  grief*'”*. 

Just  as  in  the  oldt'r  works  conformity  with  IVufli  and  Onier  is  tHawidcred 
a virtue  and  net'.essity;  SB.  4,  5,  ‘2f. : 

“The  gods  and  the  mnrm  eontemled.  Thn  mumm  went  to  the  mm  (to  fight  it). 
The  sun  was  afraid  of  (them)  . . . The  sun  Inut  rtHitnume  to  Prajapaii*  For  him 
Frajapati  saw  this  remerly*  vix.  Grdiw  frhij  and  Veraed^y  fmifi/aj””. 

A rccommcndathm  of  virtues^ such  as  luiHpitaiit'V,  generosity,  faitJi  and  loyalty 
may,  to  a certain  extent,  Ix'  foniul  in  varitms  other  tales,  its  first'  pnrpost'  is  not 
to  morali55o  bnt  to  explain  rites  ami  to  justify  ritual  rules  and  prescripts.  The 
appreciation  of  auskuaty,  sclfctontrol,  endurance  ami  rent  rain!'  id*  Hp<H‘ch,  a 
chaste  life  devoted  to  the  study  of  t-he  Visla  tiumt  b«'  msm  against  the.  same 
ritual  background,  as  is  |)erfectfly  <h*ar  from  tiie  imssagi's  in  whiidi  it  is  tixpressed; 
these  Virtues*  or  meritorioim  works  an'  first..  am.l  fortmiimt'  prermpusik'H  to  the 
sixocess  of  a task  or  enterprim'  undertakim  on  thoroughly  rtitiiil  At  AiB. 

” For  this  mythical  tale  w'e  II.  Aaim  II  ('‘ongres  intern,  dm  Orient. 

1897,  section  aryenne,  p.  228.  CT.  t\g.  J'B,  K BUrf  Ii.4axia.  at  .IPB  27*  2,  p.  95 
is  nustakwi  in  conskhniug  tins  tale  as  wtdl  as  TS.  H,  5,  8,  2:  Hfh  I.  2.  5,  24f‘f.;  dik  ..I, 
42;h,;  I,  121  irulic-atioUH  of  a “persiHimit  demaml  Idr  ahummJ/* 

»»  (X  also  l^B.  7,  2,  1,  :H\:  AiB.  8.  Mj  dll.  1,  2:0  dt‘|k  10. 

See  e.g,  TB.  3,  8,  PI,  PX;  ftlP  2.  4,  2,  IfP;  IK  H P HfP;  ip  .tp  3,  2:  It*  4,  1,  H. 

In  this  respiKit  alsii  Karuik  is  much  inchmsi  to  .I'xaggenU'e  ihe  tulneal  elenumt. 

Bee  e.g.  TS.  3,  1,  I,  1;  fi,  3,  8,  4j  Sll  2*  2«  4,  1;  2*  8.  P 1;  IP  8,  p Iff.;  10,  4, 

d,  dfP;  11,  d,  d,  1;  AiB.  2,  33,  fp  dB.  2,  21Hs  238;  27UP;  3,  P17;  .ami  riunpani  also 

passages  such  as  SB.  3,  4,  3,  P 


Tho  Brahinanas 


365 


8,  23  a iion-niling  nobl email  becomes  a paramount  king  because  Ms  priest  had 
comnimiicated  to  him  a Kpecial  knowledge,  viz.  that  of  ^‘the  great  anointing  of 
Indra'';  but  he  plays  the  ])riest  false,  loses  his  power  and  is  slain.  ‘^Therefore  a 
nobleman  should  not  |)lay  a brahma7h  who  knows  thus  false/’  The  true  signifi- 
cance of  what  at  first  sight  appears  to  be  condemnation  of  vices— for  instance 
arrogance,  eoiUH^it,  infid('Iity,  cheating,  impure  speech,  self-aggrandizement 
and  so  on  — Ixauiim^s  likinvise  clear  only  when  considered  in  its  context® For 
instance,  .IB.  3,  251 : 

“Gauijfrikiti  and  Aj^ivasukii,  the  sons  of  Isa,  having  accepted  many  (forbidden) 
gifts,  reganled  themsolves  as  having  swallowed  poison.  They  desired:  ‘May  wo 
expel  this  swallowt'd  poison.’  Tiu^y  saw  these  two  samam;  they  lauded  with 
them  . . . Th(>r(ni|)on  tht>y  expelhxi  the  swallowed  poison.  Ho  who  regards  himself 
as  one  who  has  swallowed  poison,  because  he  has  received  a gift  from  a person 
from  whom  he  ought  not  accept  a gift,  and  ho  who  has  eaten  food  from  one  whoso 
food  he  should  not  eat,  should  apply  those  sdmans  in  lauding.  Then  he  expels 
that  swallowed  poison.” 

The  autonomous  force  of  'sin’  or  ‘oviF  is  clearly  illustrated  by  places  such  as 
l^B,  14,  12,  7 : although  the  act  of  slaying  demons  is  in  itself  virtuous,  the  sin 
resulting  from  it  alw^ays  pursues  tho  slayer,  even  if  he  bo  the  god  Indra,  until 
ho  delivers  himself  from  it  by  means  of  a ritual  device. 

The  ideas  (H)n<HU'ning  tlu^  gods  and  the  pantheon  were  largely  adapted  to  the 
cnvirotmient  of  th<^  hrrdnnanic  view  of  the  world.  The  gods®’  are  closely  ndated 
to  the  ritual  systiun,  of  whicdi  tliey  constitute  an  integral  part,  and  have  a share 
in  th(^  usual  i(lent.ili(xitious®«,  earthly  classifi(‘.ations  being  transferred  to  their 
%oci<‘ty’®®.  Indra,  oft(m  a typical  warrior,  practises  austerity  and  has  his  strength 
increased  by  sacrificial  rit('s  or  ritual  energy,  slaying  his  enemy  Vrtra,  for  in- 
stance, by  a <uike-offering*®.  d’hough  on  the  one  hand  move  than  once  said  to 
assist  HtHvrs  or  holy  men,  lu^  <'.an  on  the  other  be  onsted  from  his  own  world  by  a 
wi'ong  sa(X’ifi<ual  pro<?ednre^h  When  tho  gods  want  him  to  bo  their  champion 
against  tlu'ir  iununit's  he  wants  hrahmwn,  represented  by  Bi'haspati,  tho  divine 
domestic  i)ri(‘Ht,  to  be  his  ally  (6b.  0,  2,  3,  3),  IStorios  in  which  tho  gods  show 
their  weak  and  all  too  human  sichm  are  not  lacking : they  arc  often  covetous, 
envious,  (|uarrelsome,  tricky  or  amoroiis*®. 

” See  e.g.  TH.  2,  3,  5,  Iff.;  5,  1,  Ift.;  6,  6,  1;  PB.  B,  1,  Off.;  19,  4,  10;  &B.  2,  2, 
3,  5,  2,  lit.;  4,  I,  2,  4;  5,  1,  1,  I (“arrogance  is  tho  cause  of  ruin”);  AiB.  7, 

27;  JB.  3,  70f.;  193f. 

also  G.  V.  DKVAHTUAt.t,  Religion  and  mythology  In  tho  hnlhmarias, 
Poona  1935. 

« (X  e.g.  SB.  fn  2,  4,  13;  5,  3,  5,  B;  0,  1,  1,  2;  TB.  2,  2,  5,  7;  11,  L 

Compare  also  PB.  22,  li),  3;  what  is  visible  for  imai  is  crypti(5  for  tho  gods  and 
vie<*t  v<a*Ha. 

K.g.  PB.  12,  13,  r>;  14.  9,  34;  BB.  5,  I,  1,  11;  5,  2,  3,  7;  11,  I,  3.  2 
K.g.  I^B.  15,  5,  29;  BB.  B,  5,  3,  8.  Por  Indra,  see  Hofk.in'S,  Gods  and  saints 
(see  above,  n.  29);  (,#.  IL  Gomiows,  at  JUB  N.B.  25,  2,  p.  32. 

K.g.BB.  I,  I,  2,  18;  I,  1,  4,  24;  3,  3,  4,  18;  4,  1,  3,  4;  7;  12;  5,  1,  1,  3;  8,  4,  1, 
4;  BB.  1,  I,  19;  cf.  Okhtuc,  at  JAOB  18,  p.  29;  19,  p.  118;  29,  p.  ISO;  Aotoe  11  Int. 
Congress  of  Gricait,  I,  p,  233. 


366 


,J.  • V'l'dii'  l.i<(*rivhn'i' 


Th<^  Htory  of  ItidmV  tinjtiHtifuihh*  tutirdor  nf  .^>on  'Fvnfif  iir  is  t^old  in  many 
texts'*®*  The  eontiutial  aniinoHity  aini  strife  hi'fw'rm  lln^  yods  nml  anlTgods 
(detm  mm  amms)  or  lK^i.w<’en  the  Aditynn  niid  the  Am*traHvt'i  are  welldcnowii 
themes^'**  Mention  is  alw>  nm,de  of  earthly  heiiiya  nitiwknnu  ^lisdaining^ 
distrriHting  gods'*®.  In  of  the  imaawi  of  fnintani7.alion  ef  tin'  dcnties,  the 
many  references  io  tiunr  linutatlouH  (t.heir  being  horn  nr  ertsded*  their  inor> 
tality)'*®,and  theinvjHH'tanec'  cddnitpersonal  ladtmenedt  h!«‘a?4inyM  are  aiill  Honght 
from  them**®.  Tlu^n^  is  an  tnnnistnkahle  inelinalion  to  ere  unity  in  various 
spheres  of  the  divine;  there  are  ienrletieies  to  henolheiioin  to  nnifu'atioiu  Agni^® 
and  Indra  beingi  in,  wnm'  way  or  ot-her.  stiperior  to  the  ttlber  gods®®  or  being 
re|.wesent(Hl  as  the'  sons  of  t.lm  great:  ereator  gt^l  IVajapafi  or  im  identiea-l  with 
this  figure  who  is  als(»  id<adilied  with  otht'r  deities,  ■elsentiere  deseribed  as  his 
children®*.  The  identity  of  this  etmtral  <leity.  rrnjhfwti,  the  ereator  who  is 
identical  with  bis  creatio.n,  with  the  rit^s  W'lueh  is  I tie  pretuse  eouiitt*rpart  of  the 
great  cosmic  drama,  is  t'ver  aiul  anon  empbiuii/,rd,  This  idmitificalion  is  the 
theoretical  basis  of  th('  <mtin'  rit'<unl  syHf.em®^ 

In  these  discussions  sonu*  of  the  phlh:wo{.ihit'al  ideas  of  the  ftdlowing  period 
arc  already  foreshadowinl,  but,  not  in  all  works  of  thin  e'law  fr,g.  tlu'  Fail* 
cavirpi^ia)  so  clearly  developcHl  as  in  t-ho  J^atnpatbm  As  to  the  ndation  between 
mananduiuverse^ati  huithroptwentriesulijeetive  idi'idisni*  is  noritml:  . sof^r 

as  the  two4bok‘d  and  tliefourdtioted  p'^tond)  so  tar  dtiei'd bi’i  mnvr-rse  (cKteiui)*^ 
1 1,  h|  F 28)®®.  Ma<H**H  such  aH^t.  4,  2.  Aat-ating  fhaf  I tie  blowing  wind  enb^rs 
tlnvliving  ereatvnv'H  aa  inhalidfon  and  exhalatieui  atfeaf.  to  fbr  f^vistenee  of  a 
doctrine  of  maeroeosmie  and  mieroeosniie  *t.ireath*®y  I'ifirimlidmiia  on  the ‘self 
{(Itmin)  are  in  Id,  If  2 already  very  near  to  an  tdentilb’ation  'witb  brahmm^\ 
the  union  with,  and  participation  in  the  world  of.  the  latter  being  taught  in  ll, 
4,  4,  Iff.  The  doetri,ue  oj  a ‘rc^peated  dying*  ( punmimitfu j in  f.lie  bt^yondi 
preached  by  Aruni  and  ^vvUikvin  appears  already  in  ir%iu  fuirlter  than  the 


in 

4i 


K.K.  TS.  2,  6,  1.  If.i  t>n.  17.  r..  I ; i^in.  I,  «.  3. 

K.g.TS.il,  4,  (i.  3:  TH.  2,  2.  .3.  r.;  3.  f).  21.  t;  .HI.  1.  !I7:  I.  }.'k1;  .sH.  l,  4.  I.  34. 

“ E.k.  Wi.  13,  U,  10:  14.  .3,  if,;  ,IH.  3,  Ht3, 

“ E.g.  SB.  (!,  1,  2,  2:  7.  .3,  I,  10;  lo,  1.  3.  1:  11.  1.  il.  14:  11.  2.  3,  1. 

*’  K-«-  SE.  (i,  1,  1.  1;  10.  ft,  3.  1;  11,  2.  3.  1. 

*'•  *’’**■  ihi'  fim'rilO’xil  mv  nl»lt)  to 

ftilfu  wishes  without  any  aHsistanei*  of  a god;  I,  a.  III, 

*“  For  Agni  soo  N. ,).  Unmtm.  nl  ABtHtl  40.  i».  I. 

““  E.g.  ftB.  1,  0,  2,  8;  fi,  2.  3.  0;  1».  2,  2.  2;  0,  2.  .3,  3. 

“ E.g.  SB.  2.  3,  .3.  18:  4.  2.  4.  11;  0.  2,  2.  2:  1*.  2.  ,3.  f.Oj  to.  4.  i,  ti*-  12.  0.  I.  1. 
'•  I ntfor  to  CioNi.A.  H.  1.  I.  p,  10(1;  (J,  1|,  < Joi.tiui  K.  i,t  fouu.,,  V.,1,  H.  1>.  Volau- 
ktw.  Binnhiiy^liKtO,  j>.  4f>.  .Sen  «t,g.  .<iB,  3,  (i,  3,  j, 

(4.  uIho  .SB.  11.2.  3.  0.  'I'lii’  'worltlfr  (hhtj  whitOi  nt  12.  3,  4,  1 1 iiff  mud  to  ho 

iiupcvrishable  do  ut>t  eouHiitum  rhe.  univerntu 

“ Cf.  alHO  KS  27.  3;  i^iB,  0.  ti.  2.  0;  7.  4.  2,  28.  lUid  .-.oo  .1,  B..  p.  21fl; 

(4ONOA,  Diaa  deities,  p,  tae. 

10^0^ (h'WthtoldtMh'r  Huiiwiihoi*  l'lttlu.i..iihu.,  I,  SidKhurg 
19.3.1,  p.  72;  Myt.utH.  o.c.  vol,  10,  p.  A.3. 


Tho  Bralimanas 


367 


{5atapa(^ha,  where  ii»  j«  iroc|iient®®,  the  tt’anBinigration  in  the  lattei*  work  at 
10,  3,  3,  8.  Hu^He  i.oxlHS  speak  also  of  a?arto?^,  usually  translated  by  ‘immortality’ 
but  in  fai't  denoting  “IrtHHlotn  from  death,  continuance  of  life.”  Considered  to 
be  the  “higliesti  thing”  in  the  universe  it  meaiiB,  for  man  in  this  life,  a full  life- 
time of  a hundiHHl  however  after  death  there  is  (at  least  according  to 

10,  4,  3,  0)  a proH|)e(’t  of  ‘itmuortality’  either  through  ‘knowledge’  (^idya)  or 
through  ‘work’  (/carman)^  (^omn^pts  which  arc,  in  the  same  contexts,  identified 
with  Agni,  tlu^  ritual.  What  is,  indeed,  most  important  is  the  conquest, 
whether  through  t*itt\s  or  through  atisterity®^  of  a world  in  which  to  exist 
safely,  a loka,  wheir^  man’s  ritual  merit  will  await  him®®. 


« TIh  :h  ll,  H,  nr.  (tlu^  story  ofNaeiketaH);  KB.  25,  1;  JB.  1,  23;  SB.  2,  3,  3,  9 
etc.;  TK.  2,  14,  1;  8A.  13,  1 ; JUlk  3*  (K  7,  8. 

« 9,  1,  2,  43;  10,  U 5,  4;  UK  2,  0,  7. 

« (Jf.  AirKrK47,9;4H,4;  JB.3,2Dl;BB.  IB.  3,  1 ; SB.  3,  4.  4,  27;  11,2,  7,  19  etc.; 
B(^e  4',  iJoNOA,  Lt4ca,  AmHte>r<lam  Acadtnny  1906,  p.  30. 

For  oth(n‘  particulars,  8,  Hohavk.r,  Dio  Weltanflchainmg  dcr  Brrihmana-Toxto, 
EO  3,  p.  57  ami  Did  Ht.rukttir  der  magischen  WcOfcansohauung,  Zb.  f.  Buddiiisnnis  0, 
p,  259. 


368 


J.  (Itnula  * Vodio 


5.  InterpreMtdon  mid  argnmcniation 


In  the  |:)rcc(H.:ling  I'^agen  pa-HHing  nient.ion  hiiH  alrc'iniy  nimh  i>f  the  relation 
between  the  samhitm  ((^npeeially  that  oi*  tiu'  Ijgvc'tla)  and  tin;  hmhmanm 
Although  many  inve«'t-igationH,  iindtiding  a ayatcnnalie  general  atmly  of  how 
the  authoi'H  of  the  bmknuiijm  tuuh'raicuHl  t'he  mfph{tiiM\ remain  to  he  tiiuiertaken 
a somewhat  more  cohenait,  though  brief.  ac*<a>nnt-  <vf  the  prt’HC'nt  jaiHithm  of 
research  may  find  a |)la<‘e  In're.  Ilu'  qm'Siion  is  of  wider  itd-erest  heeanse  it 
implies  also  all  ]>roblemH  eoimt'et^tMl  with  the  last^  made  of  llie  .vom/oVds^  by  the 
ritualists  and  the  compilers  of  t-he  hrfihmiijm^  and  the  mefho«is  whi<‘h'thoy 
adopted  in  inter})reting  tlu^  (pioi.ed  or  borrowed  texts.  is  evi^hatt  that  this 
subject  cannot  be  regarded  as  elomnl  by  a ndertmet'^  to  lh<'  onesided  ritualistic 
prcjiKlices  of  the  authors,  flene'tally  spealiing  tlu'  mmfrm  -cftiotmJ  by  their 
initial  i)art  (pmttkeim)^  only,  if  tlu\y  ladongtal  to  the  samt'  selmol  as  the  text 
quoting— do  not  constittite  an  organic  whole  wdth  tlndr  bnihmmju  ecmtexts.  As 
to  the  question  of  the  place  ocenpied  by  ihv  Rgve<hvKaiphita.  that  is,  by  the 
use  made  of  its  {complete  hymns  or  groups  of  stanzas  its  most  essential  ritual 
fnnetion— as  wr'll  as  by  its  sc'parate  stanzas  in  the  ritnal  and  in  tfn^  explanations 
of  the  brdlmmim,  it  has  alrc'ady  lasm  notieed  that  tln^  latter  niilizc*  only  part 
of  the  Rgvedie  manirm\  This  did  mrt  Iiowever  prevent,  ilunv  aut  htn\H  from'  using 
and  explaining  e<'rtain  portions  of  th<'  l.’Jgvtnla  mort^  than  mwv\  On  ihv  whole, 
the  ritnalists  seetn  to  have  hetn  to  a connideralde  extent  frr<'  in  borrowing 
•from  the  fJgvedanSaiphita  evtn  on  Indmlf  <d'ofrmiantH  tdhc'r  than  tin*  Indarmul 
his  assistents®.  On  the  other  hand,  ivxin  ladonging  t-o  ottan*  \\'dfia  sottudnnes 
included  seetfons  on  the  t>fiice  of  i\w  hotar  (e.g.  11b  :i  b.  I It),  b'rom  a study  of 
the  relevant  paas^iges  it  mor<s)v<n'  appt^arH  that,  in  titiliziiig  mmitrax^ -'lUvine 


^ ^ OL  B.  B.  Bhaxvk,  at  20  AlOth  lies,  rnidnwi.  p.  *12.  P.  PnoNxm>,  in  Revue  do 
1 bistoiro  des  religi(ms  22,  p.  38  lays  too  nuieh  stnxss  on  iiniamdt'rfUanrhng  (»u  the 
part  of  th(;  0<)inpiI<;rH  of  t,he  (mVimmjm, 

« H.  OnnnNBinun  ViHiaforsahung!  Btnitgartdh^rlin  U)0.">.  p,  23. 

B<y)  MiNAinn  I , K,  It,  |>,  2:  tiKNou.  Reoles.  p,  20.  Mimiras  eded  pmtlktna  in 
the  Aitareya-Briilnnana  Init  not  traced  in  tnir  Rgvotla.'Satnhtt'H  (anct  belonging  to 
iihhila  collection?)  wen^  investigate<l  into  by  P.  K.  Haiowxsa  IlnnAi,  at  Bt)0HT 
3,  p.  489;  for  an  examinat.ion  of  variants:  BBC  lit  4,  p.  340,  For  laniictdars^scH; 
also  CALANn,  in  <KJA  1900,  p.  409;  \V7AiU  IH,  p.  193. 

^Many  acts— among  which  the  less  important  and  often  tliojie  relating  to 

Prajapati^ are  performed  silently;  of.  e.g.  SB.  0,  4.  R 0.  For  the  fcgiiilicance  of 

silent  praise*  see  TB.  2,  5.  11,  3;  0,  3.  7,  i;  TB,  1,  U,  8,  H:  2,  R 2.  12;  3,  2,  4.  (R 

Ct.*RnNmr!  at 

JAOB  09,  p.  RR 

® Thus  IJV.  R 99  is  tpiobHl  (and  exptamed)  at  Ailb  4»  3o,  12;  32,  |0;  5,  2,  10: 

qnoied'at  BB. 

J*"’,  at  14.  3.  R 28:  ft  Vi  R 100, 

9,  Hee  nho  liKNiUt.  in  3 A 230.  p,  104.  and  K. 
V.  P.  VR  p.  29,  * 

* Coinpara,  (i.g  OoNUA,  Dual  dtnUt'H.  p.  U8ir.  {lh«  u»'  ..C  I.IV.  1.  HW  iu  a Hacri- 
noo  monbioHod  at  TB.  2,  8.  (),  if.). 


The  BiTihtnanaj^ 


369 


speech’^  (SB.  10,  5,  1,  I)  —,  the  deities  to  whom  they  arc  devoted  or  who  are 
mentioned  in  them,  the  metres  and  certain  nnmerical  conditions  were  generally 
regarded  as  more  essential  than  their  contents’'.  The  connexions  between  the 
Rgvedic  ^mintras  and  their  ritual  contexts  wore  indeed  less  close®  than  the 
formulas  pronoinuxHl  by  the  adhvaryu  otim  suis. 

In  quoting  i.he  ligviHla  it  was  not  the  authors’  purpose  to  explain  suMas, 
stairzas  or  diffumlt  places,  nor  did  they  wish  to  exhibit  their  learning®.  When 
drawing  on  tra<litiot\al  mattcu'  that  they  had,  or  believed  to  have,  in  common 
with  Rgvedic  poets  they  lik(xl  to  quote  the  latter  in  order  to  establish  a con- 
nexion with  the  wisdom  of  the  rsis  and  to  corroborate  their  own  views^®.  The 
introduction  of  IJgvedic  mantrm  into  the  Yajurvedic  samhitds  and  brdhmanas 
is  the  initial  phase  of  tlieir  liturgical  employment  in  the  sutra  texts  where  they 
appear  to  have  undergone  the  ititluence  of  a long  liturgical  tradition.  In  the 
final  phases  it  is  also  evident  that  the  successive  generations  of  ritualists  had 
developed  sotne  principles— e.g.  invoeational,  sacramental,  oblational,  ‘myth- 
ological’—underlying  the  citation  for  ritual  employments^ 

Because  of  their  more  getieral  character  the  Rgvedic  texts  are  well  adapted 
for  invitations,  for  dn^wing  the  gods’  attention^^  but  as  a rule  hardly  utilizablc 
for  more  than  alhisive  di'seript^ions  of  the  post- Rgvedic  ritual  acts.  This  explains 
also  th<^  f.rt^at.tneni  of  tlu^  gnait  n'citations  (,<aMra)  of  the  mma  sacrifices  com- 
])os<hI  of  eotn|)leit^  liymns  or  long  portions  of  the  Rgveda^®.  To  these  verses 
th<^  two  alli<Hl  bnlhmmjm  liav<^  ch^votcnl  long  explanations,  not  to  interpret 
tlicir  real  contt^nts  pldlologi<^ally  or  historically^'^— isolated  words  excepted, 
tlier<^  art^  no  glossi's  on  mantrm  in  tins  literature—,  but  to  show  their  adapt- 
ability to  their  rittial  use,  their  Bymboli(»al  value,  the  ecpnvalences  which  might 
be  dethiccHl  from  tlunn,  sometimes  probably  also  to  <‘.orroborato  an  dkhymia 
(i5B,  n,  5,  1,  (HT.).  Thus  AiB.  2,  16,  If.,  explaining  the  deeper  sense  of  RV.  10, 
30,  12,  the  initial  stanv;a  of  the  morning  recitation,  reads  as  follows: 

“Whi'U  Prajfipati  hinm(>lf  as  hoiar  wtm  about  to  reoite  the  morning  litany,  all  the 
dtntii^H  i<ook  'With  me  h(^  will  bt'tgin;  with  me.*  Prajapati  pondc^rcHi,  ‘If 

1 sliall  hi'gin  wit.h  one  Hpinhlled  dtnty,  thiax  by  what  xneans  shall  I win  over  the 
other  dt'ities  f llt>  saw  t-lus  ry-vc'rse  ‘0  waters,  Bonrc<\s  of  wealth  . . The  waters 


’ Of.  li'ENOtr,  in  JA  250,  p.  170;  K.  R.  Potdar,  in  JUB  15,^2,  p.  48.  Nor  are 
diffenait  and  ('ven  contra<li(itory  explanations  lacking:  of.  o.g,  SB.  3,  8,  1,  2 and 
11,  8,  3,  5. 


V.  M.  Am’U,  at  BDCEI  I,  p.  14;  127  arrived  at  the  concdrision  tlmt  the  rubrica- 
tion of  tb<^  RgvfHlio  nmntrm  in  the  mtrm  is  not  as  arbitrary  as  is  often  snpposod. 
® As  was  ,1.  OiiAarnNTnuH’s  opinion,  at  WZKM  25,  p.  30ih 

•»  ,S(H>  O.g.  AiB.  2,  27.  r.;  4,  2(5,  12;  .IB.  2.  9(5;  ^?B.  I,  2,  2.  10;  3,  4,  2.  7;  AiS.  1, 
2,  4;  (5. 


n iAh'  particulars;  V.  5!.  Arn’icJi  in  VoL  0.  Kuuhan  Raja,  Adyar  1940,  p.  233.  On 
the  chronological  relation:  BLooM'riifiun,  at  3 AOS  15,  p.  144. 

» or,  Tummn,  in  ZDMtl  107,  p.  95;  Risnuu,  in  JA  250,  p.  107. 

” SiAc  o.g.  (.UOANO  and  Hicnrv,  L’agnisp>ma,  Paris  1900,  p.  417  (morning 
recutation  (priUamnumtkaj  of  tlie  Aitareyins  and  Kaiusitakins). 

QL  also  1).  1).  Kohamju,  at  JBBHAS  27,  1,  p.  11. 


370 


C.mdii  • Vi-dio  KitdnUnr.' 


arc  all  i.ho  doitii-a;  tlu'  nottm-s  of  w.'idtli  arc  all  (ho  (iiafu-H,  Wifh  thw  iv/.vorao 
ho  hi'ijaii  tiho  ttvitrniiis;  liiauy.  All  ihi'ac  (Icitior-  woro  ih'li>,;h( 'd.  \\  itli  luo  ho  law 
hogtm:  with  imd’  . . . Hy  him  who  kinnva  thiiN  the  mm'nuiy.  htaiiy  iw  provided 
with  all  the  doitii's''**. 

Ill  the  Hkiv/ia  itHrlf-  whirli  vnh^nvAvH  ihr  Wiilr^n^  ii?s  wirlling  f'kvoiimble  in- 

fiiioiiw t'luTo  in  houTVt'f  nofbiiig  f*uvh  nn  Autho- 

riticH  luay  jih  Itv  pniiioiitiirH,  \\  hrrr'ar^,  for  iiiMf.aiu'r,  KB 

ICI  :i  ii)  ronnoxkm  wifb  HV.  I.  IMI  n hymn  Hravni  am!  (,a)iWveH 

that  it  OTVOH  hnMiJm  hwnnuv- ImiMm  iimi  rartli  art'  ilnu  foim- 

(Mionn,  4,  X X 12  5.  X 12)  Kfatrf4  flint  mniltirrH  milmisi  on 

thmUtWo  mid  iluuvin  of  fhr  hymn  imlmm  thenv  i\w  witli  juice  or 
vigour,  “and  upon  flaw  two*  f.huH  vigmouH  and  affording  tlu'  lurauH  oi  mibKis* 
tenoe,  tlu'st^  creatures  mibHiat/' 

In  iut(Ti>r<'ting  ilu%se  1-exiH  tlu^  riiualiafa  HomvimwH  rmoilnl  to  ariifuH\s  aucb 
as,  for  instance,  the  demonstration  fbaf.>  a niimm  addressed  to  another  god, 
for  instanee  Varuna,  was  really  iniendtHl  for  Indra  fo  whom  btdongs  the 
sacrifice*®. 

The  above  observations  have  inijHTcepf ibly  led  m to  tlie  dialeelfes,  the 
explanations,  argumentations  and  int'erpreiafions  ol  thear  aufliors^'^.  Before 
entering  into  some  tlef-ails,  ffiert'  is  room  for  the  hdboving  piT'linunary  remarks. 
Those  argunuaits  and  explanations  whieh  severat  belonging  to  difhaent 

scIkmiIh  have  in  common  may  he  n^garded  as  r<di»Hiing  no  an  or  leHU  general 
opinions,  notwitlmtanding  smdi  mumfuidilics  m horn>nin:g  or  indefumdent 
adiiptioiuif  tile  same  line  of  reasoning,  In  other  cases  t!ie  iioiaatuldy  of  t'xplana* 
tions  ad  hoc  and  of  miHimderstandiug  of  ilm  rifna!  mio  of  reading  more  into 
them  than  was  Intended  or  implimi  shoutd  tiy  no  nn-ans  i»e  ruled  oni*^  In 
interpreting  tiui  nacrificiaf  eeremonies  these  authors  wm'*'  much  inclined  to 
kdevatc'  the'  ritual  {uiu'tiees  and  to  emphasi/.e  their  impoiiane»\  irn‘H|H‘ctivc 
of  whetlicr  tluy  wiTe  traditional  in  tlu'  Aryan  upiier  eirclea  or  of  j'sipnlar  origin. 
For  that  purpose  tluy  nwirtetl  to  various  tlevieca*  ealahlislung  f\Hoim‘ie  signill" 


Compare  e.g.  also  such  symhobcal  mterpnaafioufi  iia  A til.  4.  21111;  lb  27  il; 
KB.  15,  2;  IH,  Sff. 

AiB.  (I,  It)  ./i  (di  2,  2,  20. 

S,  Livi,  La  doctrim^  du  sacrifice  dans  b»s  hrahmt$mh  Burts  I HUS;  see  also  the 
reviews  by  Cauanu,  at  UOA  UH)L  2,  p.  125  and  'Omrrni-..  at  AdIMi  2i),  p.  444; 

0.  U.  Thith,  Hacrifku^  in  tlio  htahmana  (unpublmbedl  tia'sci  Poena  11)70;  and 

atlATII,  5 (11)50),  p.  103,  Bor  tls^  rtfes;  Knrrtt*  It.  Bb.  V.  W.,  p.  252;  Conoa,  U,  I. 

1,  p.  104.  One  should  not  mibHcrih<»  n^  the  vtew-j  ef  K.  4*  A lanv  bistory 

of  Stmskrit  litcra'turc.  I.omlon  1002,  p,  73. 

This  is  of  courHc  not  tit  say  that  f-he  variom^  IremN  ef  nasb^i'U  eriinnsm  always 
enaltlo  uh  to  propost^  correct  noluttoUM,  Whe-reas  i*mne%r:it  wo’*'*  rntdineil  to  explain 
6n1/rnouai  places  by  lattw  texts  (at  Ketjiprumi  v.  Uotb,  Nrntfgart  tHiKI,  p.  101  on 
6b»  1L  0,  4 an<l  Vi^pu-Burhpa  0,  0),  V.  H,  AoitAWAUAi  Bro<\  20  Ini . t 'oukc*  of  Orient, 
111,  L p.  1 fails  to  convince  Iuh  reatlem  that  ont»  rluitthl  eon^4'rina4f  Iv  intta’pref#  tlic 
I^gvcda  in  the  liglit  cf  the  brtlhmufHtH, 


Tho  Brahmanas 


371 


cance,  divine  connexion  or  relations  with  the  mma  Their  ‘symbolic’  or 

interpretative  explanations  were  no  doubt  in  many  cases  foreign  to  the  original 
design  or  tenor  of  a story  quoted  or  ritual  act  discussed.  On  the  other  hand, 
not  all  Amuta  rituals  wt're  a matter  of  general  interest  or  received  a special 
treatment  in  all  Lastly,  the  later  brdhmanas  are  not  averse  to 

including  otlu^r  ri  ttial  performances’^^  <wincing  also  a tendency  to  more  spiiitual 
interpretations. 

In  tlie  speeulai.ions  ol  tlu*!  hrahmanm  special  value  is  attached  to  the  Word’’’^, 
tliat  is  the  Word  of  tln^  Veda  “in  which  the  sacrifice  is  firmly  established” 
(PB.  11,  5,  28)  and  which,  as  Prajapati’s  second,  is  regarded  as  the  mediating 
principle  in  creation At  PB.  13,  12,  3 and  7,  7,  9 it  reads: 

‘‘By  means  of  tho  Word  tluy  perform  the  whole  sacrificial  worship.  Therefore 
man  speaks  tlie  whole  Word,  for  in  him  it  is  firmly  established,  when  it  is  wholly 
chanted  (applied  in  landing).’’  “The  word  ‘word’  (vdcj  is  to  be  made  tho  begin- 
ning of  the  part  chanted  by  him  (tho  udgdtar);  an  ocean,  verily,  is  the  word;  he 
puts  an  ocean  hetwc^ni,  for  tho  sake  of  security” 

Now,  the  Word  materializes  in  metres  and  samam^K  The  metres,  “vigour- 
sustaining  deities  by  whi(’h  everything  living  is  supported”’^®,  play  a very 
im‘[)ortant  part  in  tlu^s(^  spectilations^^  As  already  mentioxied,  they  arc  brought 
into  relation,  honiologizcai^®,  itUmtified,  inter  alia,  with  the  three  regions  of  the 
universe,  tlu'!  cardinal  points  of  the  compass,  the  seasons,  gods,  the  divisions 
of  the  |)0|)ulaiion,  vahtable  (inalities,  tho  ‘vital  breaths,’  tho  parts  of  tho  body 
and  the  sacnxnl  im^place-’^^  On  tlie  strength  of  these  homologizations  the  sacrific- 

Compare  e.g.  6B.  14,  1,  1,  2(1;  AiB.  1,  24;  KB.  17,  1;  JB.  2,  338;  3,  374;  §B. 
11,  7,  2,  3 (tlu^  animal  sacrifice  said  to  have  tho  character  of  a soma  sacrifice); 
8B.  4,  1,  (I;  9IT. ; (}.  C.  Tnrm,  at  Publ.  Centre  Advanced  Study  in  Sanskrit,  Univ. 
of  Poona,  A 25  (19(18),  }>.  31;  at  lA  Til,  3 (Volume  Dandekar,  Bombay  1969),  p. 
163;  Sacrificed  in  tlad  brdhmaxia  texts,  ch.  V. 

See  e.g.  Cauani),  in  At)  (Lugd.)  10,  p.  127. 

“ Of.  K.  BnATTAtniAuVA,  at  JA  255,  p,  202.  See  e.g.  &B.  11,2,  (1,  Iff.;  5,  6,  Iff., 
(of,  Kane,  11.  DhS.  1.  p.  (197). 

Cf.  HoriviNs,  at  Trans,  (kmiwdcticut  Academy  15,  p.  26.  See  also  above,  p.  70  f.. 
(on  RV.  10,  125),  Ifor  th<d  identification  of  the  goddess  Sarasvati  with  Vac : Raghit- 
NATHA  Ann,  at  24  AIOO,  p.  201. 

« Cf,  PB,  20,  14,  2;  3B.  2,  244. 

Hence  also  various  st.oritds  relating  to  the  (divine  person)  Word:  TS.  6,  1,  4,  1; 
KS.  12,  5;  PB.  6,  5,  10;  &B.  3,  2,  1,  18ff.;  3,  5,  1,  18ff.;  4,  5,  8,  3f. 

w Gf.  e.g.  KS.  12,  5;  PB.  5,  7,  1;  7,  6,  3;  18,  8,  3. 

« 8,  2,  2,  8;  for  mvthioal  tales  see  e.g.  TS,  2,  6,  3,  2;  AiB,  3,  13;  3,  25ff.; 

&B.  3,  4,  1,  7ff;  8,  2,  4.  8ff 

” Sc'cd  also  ehair(»ta'  IV,  p.  176  f.  aiul  SuxnnESHWATtt  Vaicma,  The  Vedic  concept  of 
mtdtri^H,  16  A IOC  U,  10;  K.  M'vntuH,  T)i(d  hU^ntifikationen  der  Metreri  in  dor 
Literatur  d<^s  y,gve<la.  Wins.  Ks.  K.  'Marx  Hniv.  Leipzig  17,  p.  267.  See  (^.g.  TS.  3, 
4,  9,  1;  jSB.  9,  5,  L 39. 

***  S<Hd  <Ag,  fi'B,  2,  3,  7,  2 IT.  (th<d  agnihotra  is  ecpial  to  tlud  Full  and  New  rnoo'n, 
sacrifietd). 

See  e.g.  PB.  6,  1,8;  AiB.  1,  5;  28;  6,  15;  7,  23;  8,  12;  17;  KB.  3,  5;  10,  6;  14„. 

3;  SB.  5,  4,  1,  3ff.;  6,  7,  2,  13ff.;  10,  3,  2;  cf.  a'lso  liKNOtr,  at  JA.  250,  p.  177. 


372 


,T.  Oondrt  ■ Vt'dio 


cr  can,  by  moans  of  (vorsos  in)  ooiTospon«iin.«  motiH's  ron!i/,('  definite  wishes. 
For  inslance  AiB.  1,5,  1 : 

“Tlu'  one  who  dosin'S  I'uor^sy  or  hrabnuviiio  ilinsIvintiMiionu  nhonliJ  . . . tiro  gUyntrl 
Htanww.  'riw  oduatrl  in  om-rgy  «.ml  Iwahnmnto  dhu*trionKno«s.  I'biorgof.io  and 
illusteioua  do<'H  Iw  Ix'oomo  who  knowing  ihtw  tiM.-n  Hta«7iw"»''. 

Before  the  king  who  is  to  be  fortified  with  tbe  rite  of  the  'leni'Wed  anointing’ 
(fimtrabhmka)  mounte  a liiroue,  t his  seat  ia  eoveri'd  wit  h a t iger  skin- “the 
tiger  is  the' lordly  power  of  the  wild  animals,  the  pi  inee  i«  t he  lordly  power; 
thus  he  (the  offieiant)  ntakes  the  lonlly  pmv<>r  prosper  wit  h lordly  power”-.and 
addressed  as  follows  (Ailk  8,  fi.  d): 

“Let  Agni  in  unison  with  the  met  re  mount  tb«s  Savilar  with  the  np}ik, 

Soma  with  the  atw^tidih  . . . ' 

The  author,  ox})laining  the  signifieanee  of  t his  ritual  art  olrserves  (8,  (5,  6f.): 

“The  gods  in  unison  with  the  meln's  whieh  iueromi.>  tiy  four  syllahlos  mountiHl  on 
(i.o.  gained)  this  prosperity  on  whieh  they  are  now  .sitaVdmlsed.  , . . Fortune 
attends  him,  prospority  evi-r  inonswing  he  attains  . , . who.  homg  a nohlemaa, 
thus  mounts  this  throno  aftor  thoso  deities." 

Thus  the  ritual  fire  is  kitulled  with  slatntas  in  the  yrfyrttei'  metre  heeanse  the 
gciyatrl  is  Agni’s  metr<>.  It  is  perfwtly  evident  that,  t hen  already  t.he  Indian 
genins  for  oategoriv.ing  found  full  seopi'". 

These  identifieations”,  deduetions  and  Immologatioiw  w hieh  are  meant  to 
<sxplain  the  relations  between  the  ritual  nets  and  thnr  rtfreis  in  t he  universe, 
in  the  sphiwe  of  the  divine  really  are  eipmtioiw  in  trnns  of  a morii  or  less 
eonsistent  elassifii'atory  system*’.  They  are  the  key.stone  of  llte  hriXlimanic 
science.  Suect>eding  each  othi'r  eimlimmUy  often  also  in  various  eontexts 
that  have  no  bearing  npmi  metres  they  impress  us  ns  the  most  eharaeteristic 
feature  of  bnlhmanic  dialecties.  Whim  "the  man  who  know.s"  understends  one 
of  the  entities  whieh  are  declared  to  hi'  identieai  he  knows,  and  wields  power 
over,  the  other  or  the  others.  Explaining  an  event,  an  objeef..  a phenomenon 
means  e.stablislung  its  identity  with  some  rit-ual  detail:  the  priest  who  kindles 
the  sacred'  fires  is  the  spring,  and  tlmt  is  why  tht;re  are  forest,  fires  in  spring 
{SB.  II,  2,  7,  32).  One  can  appease  a dreaded  entity  with  water,  but  also  with 
a frog,  a lotus-flower**,  andahamhoo-shoot,  whii-h  are  "(kinds  of)  water"  (1),  1, 
2, 20ff.).  These  eorrespondenwsare,  intelligihly  enough,  very  often  aeeompanicd 
by  indications  of  their  ])raetieal  utility:  FB.  2,  8.  2: 


*“  Of.  iSB.  1,  8,  6,  4f. : the  ffiti/iUH  (the  first  of  t-h”  metres)  is  hmhman,  Hee  e.g. 
also  1,  .%  5,  Ifi:  1,  7,  2.  Ifij  I.  H.  2.  13. 

» Bee  e.g.  also  TB.  3,  12.  H.  tiff.;  FB.  7.  3.  7fl',;  I5B.  I.  1.  37;  I,  3.  10;  2.  5.  4. 

**  Hee  e.g.  also  'FB.  3,  U).  3,  Ij  10,  1:  11.  I (Di-movt.  at  FAFhS,  Ur..  p.  ti2«ff.j. 
**  See  e.g.  MiNAim,  T.  K.  11.  p.  322  (bawni  on  TB.  2.  2.  ».  .ntr.l.  In  general, 
OnDioNnKHO,  V. W.,  p.  lit);  (JoNOA.  H.  I.  I,  p.  178;  li.  IStwr.MAi'.s.,  m MtilangcH 
Renou,  p.  3t!7.  Borne  other  examples  are  8B.  4.  1.  4.  1 : t).  4,  4,  10;  RB.  12,  1. 

’*  Foimdwl  on  partiisipatioii!  HB.  0,  4.  2,  2 "the  lotus  meaiw  tlu'  waters.” 


The  Bralatianas 


373' 


“The  tot  (sUmm)  in  the  regular  place  of  the  brahminieal  order,  the  middle  one 
of  the  nobility,  the  last  one  oi  the  third  estate.  In  that  he  gives  the  largest  share 
(of  verses)  to  the  first  (which  here  is  used  seven  times),  thereby  ho  brings  (in- 
augurativo)  power  and  energy  in  the  brahminieal  order  and  makes  the  nobility 
and  the  third  estates  subjeet  to  the  brahminieal  order”®®. 

The  specnlations  on  the  Hignifie4inco  of  the  main  rites  led  to  identifications 
of  important  BaerifKua.l  elenients  with  the  highest  divine  concepts  and  cosmogo- 
nic principles,  which  in  their  turn  wore  elaborated  in  the  form  of  mythical 
episodes.  For  instance,  since  the  sacrificial  horse— on  the  strength  of  the 
conviction  that  the  sacrifiee  is  identical  with  Pmmsa-PrajSpati— is  of  Pi'aja- 
pati^s  natnre  or  a form  ol  PrajSpati  himself,  it  is  in  a cosmogonic  account 
represented  as  having  originated  directly  from  the  egg  prodneed  by  that  high 
god  from  the  cosmic  waters  and  that  immediately  after  brahman  and  Agni. 
According  to  other  versions  it  came  into  being  from  Prajapati’s  eye®®. 

Many  so-called  ‘magical  equivalences,’  for  instance  those  between  the 
sacrifice  and  the  body  of  the  cosmic  Puruim  or  between  ritual  acts  and  cosmic 
evonts'^^  are  presented  in  a short  and  abrupt  form.  According  to  a probable 
assumption^®  they  are  fragments  of  doctrines  which,  being  expounded  more 
elaborately  in  the  upanimeb,  were  already  in  the  main  known  to  the  audience. 
SB.  10,  5,  4,  17,  (^x|)laining  the  correspondence  between  the  groat  fireplace  and 
the  universe : 

**The  carth-fillingH  are  the  wt^lkin,  the  oblations  the  moon,  the  fire-logs  the  oon- 
stellations ; biHunise  the  moon  resides  in  (with)  the  constellations,  therefore  the 
oblation  resides  in  tlu^’i  fire-wood.” 

The  relation  between  cause  and  effimt  may  also  be  inverse,  PB.  6,  8,  10 : 

“In  the  opi'sn  tlxey  chant  ((ua'tain  chants);  thcroforo  wild  animals  live  outside 
enclosures”  ' ■ 

The  metres— to  whicli  we  have  to  revert  for  a moment— are  characterized 
by  numbers,  th<^  gtlyatrl  and  the  amishibh  consisting  of  octosyllabic  verses 
(fdda),  the  trkinbh  of  lour  pldm  of  eleven,  the  jagatl  of  four  fddas  of  twelve' 
syllables'*®.  That  nutans  tliat  these  speculations  on  the  inherent  divine  power 
of  the  metres  is  indissolnbly  associated  with  another  feature  of  these  works, 
viz.  ‘numerical  symbolism’^*.  The  underlying  principle  is  simple:  entities  and 
occurrences  tliat  are  charaoterizod  by  a definite  number  are  assumed  to  belong 


« Cf.  e.g.  also  PB.  4,  9,  1;  0;  J§B.  r>,  2,  1,  5. 

See  TB.  3,  9,  20,  2;  &B.  0,  h h H;  7,  fi,  2,  0;  13,  3,  1,  L 

For  idtaitiiy  of  the  tlmHjfold  Veda  and  the  sacrifice:  SB.  1,  1,  4,  2f. 

” MiNAiio,  T.  F,  1,  p,  20;  cf,  Livt,  o,c,,  p.  78,  Bee  e.g,  TB,  2,  3,  7,  1;  BB.  4,  1, 
3;  .BB,  2,  2,  2,  3;  6,  2,  1,  23;  0,  2,  2,  4;  8,  1,  1,  1;  8,  1,  4,  3;  1.0,  5,  2,  20;  10,  0,  2, 
10;  3 B,  1,40,  S'' 

»»  Bee  e.g.  also  PB,  18,  0,  IL 

For  hymns  of  p'raise  (stonm)  based  on  mix,nerioal  proportions  see  Haxjg,  Ai.B,, 
p.  77. 

Needless  to  say,  there  is  also  symbolism  without  numbers;  of.  'Dum,ont,  at 
Pel.  VoL  Belvalksjr,  Benares  1057,  p.  16  (tortoise). 


374 


• Vt'dio  Lit  I'ral  tiro 


together,  to  correnpoitd  in  aotne  iH'Hpo.ct  or  t)tlHn%  to  hr  honi«>logoim  and  identi- 
Sineo  many  important  Ixn'ttgK  (o.g.  godn),  phmtotnona  the  months 
and  nemom),  ohjoctH  (o.g*  tito  litnha  of  the  body)  have  i'heir  imni  nnmbora  one 
can,  in  the  opinion  oftlu'w^  anthora,  Hc<nir<'  cv^ny  thing  f^cvimlolii,  fworlda  of  the 
go(te,  domcHtic  anitnahn  ct-c.)  by  mvum  of  a hymn  of  acvon  Hianmn;  or  mippljr 
Agni  with  food  by  {)t'rfi aiming  a ritiial  a«'t  in  conno?^ion  with  tln^  anln's  with 
hmr  statr/.aB  bccatim^  thin  nu'ana  mi{)plying  hint  with  hnirding-od  aniinalH,  which 
arc  food.  Twelve  Htatr/,aH  an'  reeittnl  ‘'to  obtain  the  year*'  whieh  eonniRtB  of 
twelve  months.  ‘‘Fivefold  in  ntan  (heeatiat'  he  eonaiaia  of  hair*  akiin  lleah,  bones 
and  mar n:nv),  fivefbhl  ineattle  (therearefiveatuina!  vic'lims);  by  means  of  this 
viduU  (which  c<>m|>rim'H  five  viawes)  In'  <d'>tainH  ntan  aini  eatt.h\''  Seventeen 
stanms  ahoiild  be  recited  for  I.Vajaji^d.ti  who  is  st'vent.ec'nfoh:!  Tln^re  are  on  the 
occaBion  of  a royal  couHeeration  eh'ven  recipitmta  of  aptanal  Hin'rifieia]  honours, 
bccansc  the  trisfubh^  whieh  ri'preHentH  manly  energy,  eonaiats  of  i'leven  Kyllab- 
Ics*®.  Tim  gdyatrl  ean  “be  idaeed  on  botii  nuh,*K  at  tin'  morning  preming''  if  one 
follows  the  direction  given  at  Ailh  Jh  l-i  1 ff. : 

“‘Let  xis  two  praise’  is  liis  <aUl  of  three  syilahlcH  at'  the  nuaniing  prewtng,  ns 
recite,  0 dlvim^  ow''  is  the  mihmryu'n  respense  n\  fi\’e  iiyllixhh's.  That  niakes  \rp 
eight  HylIabI(B.  fi’he  gtlyairl  Inxs  eight  Hvllaldes.  '\hnoly  they  have  placed  the 
gditjairi  in  front  at  iht^  nxerning  pressing,  ‘The  hymn  hiw^  been  rf'ciieci’  he  says, 
having  retuted,  in  four  syllahles.  *'Ves,  rtsutfO*  hymmf  rf'|de'a  tlu^  adhmtgu  in 
four  HyllabloM.  Hiat  inaki's  up  eight  ayllahles.  Tln^  gilf/o/rl  hint  eight  syllahles. 
Verily  thus  tlxey  have  plaetni  the|/dyon*l  en  tmtij  mde?^i  af  the  mm’inng  prt^ssing”**. 

Gcjiierally  B[)eakirtg,  tlu'se  axrtlmrs  iliaplay  a.  preference  for  eom|)titations, 
onnmeraiionH,  mmu'ri<nxl  analysis,  idaHsifleations  ai'cording  f'O,  e.g.*  tlm  in- 
creasing nuttibor  of  t'lititii'S  and  of*  the  same  nmids-r  iit  t!n^  mmie 

explanatory  or  illnstrativo  pasmigc’*^.  Numerical  grini|nnga  havt'  always  been 

very  popular  in  India,  but  the  siguifieanee  of  the  ntimhers  shinikl by  the 

contemporary  audience  as  w<dl  as  by  th<'  moilmm  rcatler  - bo  jiroperly  under- 
stood. 

Another  characteristic  of  tliis  literature  m t-!ie  halut  ivf  flividing  various 
categories  of  beings,  entities  or  phenonu'ua  into  two  gronpm*  or  of  distingtashing 
among  thorn  two  complenrentary  elar*st‘K  ami  lumen  a femienry''  to  diehedomous 


See  Olt)KNBEE(J,  V.  W.,  p.  m;  (Ionoa*  U.  I.  1.  p.  177;  ef,  I'H,  2*  4.  H,  2 using 
the  term  ^‘identity  of  form”  Fer  ntitnierte.a!  congrueuee  (nmppmlj  sec 

Hkesteeman,  Aiieicnt  .Indian  royal  aonHecmt4ojm  p.  3A. 

SB.  9,  5,  2,  B;  0,  B,  2,  7;  .K.Ih  H,  1;  P,Ih  2,  4.  2;  2.  ilk  ft:  Atlb  h L 14;  5, 

3,  I,  12.  Compare  e.g.  also  ,PIi  4,  ft*  ftf,;  0,  2.  2:  Ilk  ft*  II;  I.  II  ll,  Ilk 

(X  mg.  also  TB.  I,  h 4,  1;  Ik  7;  2,  2,  3,  7;  Adk  4,  12:  KB.  3.  2;  7,  tO;  9.,  2; 
10,  2;  Idk  4,  (k  4;  fJB.  1,  2,  ft,  13;  3,  ft.  B>;  2.  2.  2.  4;  ft;  H,  1,  K 2;  3.  IK  4. 

(X  e.g.  KB.  14,  ft;  .^B.  4,  ft,  H,  1;  Ik  K K 43;  Bk  4,  2,  ilk;  3,  17;  KB,  Ik  Iff.; 
10,  3;  12,  B;  JB.  2,  431;  Plh  Ilk  fk  MX:  K 2.  3.  I:  K IK  ft.  II;  9.  3,  2,  B:  AiB. 

2,  17;  KB.  11,  7^100,  120,  301),  720,  1000);  PIk  XXlIk  XXV;  ftik  1,  ISftK  Needless 
to  dwell  o,n  the  importance  of  nmnhers  Hueh  m Three'  or  TevciP  Mikaiw, 

T.  K.  X,  p.  52).  For  lOBOO;  Slk  10,  4,  2,  20  and  Mmaiim  n.e.  I,  p.  BIk 


Tho  Brahmanas 


375 


“TIhb  All  was  twofold  in  the  beginning,  the  (dijBferentiated) 
cosmos  and  the  (inidifterentiated)  chaos.  Of  these  two  the  former  is  the  sdman, 
mind,  exhalation,  tlie  latt(n‘  the  speech,  inhalation  . . (JUB.  1,  53,  If.). 
If  a definite  aecudent  should  happen  both  at  the  morning  and  evening  cere- 
monies, both  categories  of  gods  an^  deprived  of  their  share  (TB.  3,  7,  1,  7).  In 
digging  a lump  ol  (day  ior  tilu'.  great  fireplace  two  formulas  should  be  pronounced : 

“Two-footed  is  the  sa<nilieer,  and  the  sacrificer  is  Agni And  twofold  is  also 

that  ftmn  of  his,  elay  mid  water’^  (ISB,  (1,  4,  1 , 3).  A nearly  related  feature  is  the 
importaiuu'.  ai.ta<duHl  to  pairs,  pair  concepts  or  pair  systems,  the  tendency  to 
grotipvarioxiBi}niigs,l)tdngs,phenonicnainpairsofcomplemcnts,oppo8ites 
Another  device  used  in  argumentative  reasoning  is  the  term  nipa.  The  bull 
is  a ‘form*  ( rtlpa)  of  Tndra,  i.  (^.  a representative  of  Indra*s  being  and  power  (SB. 
2, 5,  3, 18).  “Those  hairs  whi(di  ai'c  white  arc  a ‘form*  (image,  or  representatives) 
of  the  sky;  those  which  are  black,  of  the  earth**  (3,  2,  1,  3)^®. 

Just  as  the  formulas  of  the  Atharvaveda  often  refer  to  analogies,  designed  to 
intensify  the  power  of  word  and  ritual  act,  in  order  to  realize  the  practitioner’s 
ambition  the  authors  of  the  brdlmmmfi  frecpiently  rely  on  an  argument  based 
on  analogy,  <\g.  Tl^.  3,  3,  I,  2£: 

“If  he  should  wish,  *May  Parjanya  (the  god  of  rain)  bo  raining,’  one  should  brush 
(the  sp<H>uH)^  with  tlm  (grass ^^(^ps  (Uirned  downwards).  (By  doing  so)  ho  brings 
down  rain*  for  rain  has  its  points  turiu>d  downwards”^®. 

V(‘ry  common  an^  to  the  divine  arelietypo  such  as  l§B.  3,  9,  4,  20: 

“As  to  wily  h(^  iH'sorts  to  tlu^  nigr^bha  (formula).  Now,  when  ho  (Soma)  first  bo- 
camo  Haiu’ineial  food  for  the  gods,  . , . thc^  gods  (fulfilled  his  wish  to  consort  with 
th(^  rt^gions  , . .)  liy  nuMuis  of  the  nigrdbha.  In  like  manner  (the  sacrificer)  now 
makes  him  consort  with  the  regions.” 

Highly  fVe(|uent  are  ‘syllogismB*  of  the  type  MS.  1,  7,  2: 

“They  (the  gods)  wtn'c  unitiHl  with  these  bodic's;  cattle  are  the  dear  bodies  of  the 
gods;  th(^y  wvvi)  imitiHl  with  cattle.” 

and  tripartitiC'  variants  Hu,eh  as  AiB.  2,  4,  1 : 

“With  t.lm  itprl  stanzas^®  he  delights;  the  dprl  stanzas  arc  brillianoo  and  brah- 
minical  illustriousnt'ss;  verily  thus  witlx  briUiauco  and  brahmiuical  ilhistriousnosa 
he  causes  him  to  pros|,)er”^h 

Cf.  CloNOA,  Dual  dtntii^s,  p.  71  and  passim;  Duality  in  Indian  thought, 
TluM,a-Pi  (Ltudt^n  1973)  2,  p.  1. 

(loNOA,  Dual  diHties,  p.  17  and  paasim.  See  e.g.  MS.  3,  9,  7;  TB.  1,  1,  6,  4; 
3,  9,  3,  1 ; 3B.  2,  183;  8B.  h I,  I,  22;  'l,  0,  3,  23;  3,  8,  4,  16;  7,  2,  3,  2;  10,  1,  4,  1. 

« (Jf.  also  KH.  8,  15;  2H»  4;  TB.  3.  3,  6,  1;  AiB.  1,  14,  4;  2,  1,  6;  PB.  4,  2,  16; 
IB;  4,  9;  H,  6,  14;  9,  B,  7;  10,  6,  I ; 2,  2,  3,  7;  2,  6,  4,  5;  7,  4,  1,  6;  8,  7,  1,  4; 

10,  4,  3.  21,  and  see  OniusNUintu,  V.  W*,  p.  102;  114;  M.  Bauk,  Ndma-rupa  and 
dhimnamlpa,  (Calcutta  1943,  p.  19.  For  th<^  tt'nn  praiimll  “image”  in  a similar 
coutivxt  TB.  3,  2,  H,  H. 

Df.  e.g.  also  TB.  3,  2,  8,  2;  7;  &B.  9,  ,1,  2,  4. 

StM^  p.  104. 

» Of.  also  AiB.  3,  5,  1;  3,  6,  1;  KB.  11,  7;  PB.  4,  9,  3;  5,  3,  2;  6,  4,  1;  JB.  1,  240; 
SB.  2,  6,  4,  5;  5,  2,  1,  20;  5,  5,  5,  17. 


376 


J.  (JiuhIsv  • Liti’raturo 


A tripartite  argu'ineiit  line  of  ri%nf«niing  m ahn  a.  :i,  I ; 

“That  Bactifua^  wln^re  ihe  (fmerifi<'«»r*?h  \\\(o  rihf^^nf  tn  tmi  a ?ianriho(n  (1^  that 
iuwe)  no  chiUirou  would  he  hnriu  Tht'  \\\U^  aUioolfi  ffhi*  f^nri'ifjeuh  (fur)  it  k for 
the  proereathni  (dhehildnui  that  he  (the  t^aerdief'v)  \mn  undrwfo]%fni  Ihemerifiwv” 

Anotlier  diahadae  deviee  \h  '‘Ute  eart  reprenentH  an  uhnndaner\  lor  the  iawT  does 
indeed  represetii  an  ahtindanee*'  (*^ll  I.  I*  Ih  fd”. 

The  argninentationH  often  atari,  proeeed  f>r  eonehide  with  aloek  I'diraHeHand 
Bentent'.e  construe, tionn : 

“The  fonvotTerings,  otie  ahonid  kn«nv.  arf»  fhi^  fieaaunfo  lletmi  fht»ru  ativ  pvo  (of 
thetn)»  ha*  (there  are)  live  seaat>ns‘h  , . m oPerrHl  hy  tla^  uiu'  whu'  knowing  thus 
offers  the 

are  earned  on  by  nunnw  of  kyllogiHins*  atieh  as: 

“Th(^  waters  are  thc^  sacrifice.  Jn  iiiat,  thiw  ciune  if»  the  w‘-afer,^4.  %‘erily  they  como 

to  th(^  Hacrilice.“ - “In  that  tltey  utideriake  the  overj-iight*  saeritice.  (it  is  be- 

cause)  the  year  is  as  great  as  day  and  night,  In  Ihiif.  fh*w  undmlaJo'  tfie  atmUm^ 
(it  serves)  to  obtain  tlu^  yt*ar.“  ■ “He  renter  the  8nklrf i fhyitin,  i,i\  IJV,  lo,  I3i) 
Tile  Sukirti  is  a hirth|>!aee  of  gods.  Thus  hf*  pnsinees  thu  mumtlmn*  from  the 
sacrifioe  a*H  a birthphus^  of  gods“®H 

by  argvnmmtationH  of  the  types: 

“He  ('ncloses  it,  for  the  world  of  fht»  gothi  m hidden  fV»»in  I lie  wurlti  of  meu,“  - 

“MAir  |>loughing  thtsv  fvw  good  ernpff  tu»  say?e  Hierelhre  platO'ri  grow  up  without 

ploughing. “ “He  tranapones  thi*  metreiu  in  ordur  to  avuui  i^xliaustmm^  - 

“In  that  th(y  are  vem^s  hy  dauiadagni  (they  serv»d  to  murntp  the  |»«mf4esfdon  of 
all  forms,  of  all  perfect  iumf'^*U 

by  repetitions  of  tlie  saiue  Hentenei*  pattern^**,  idso,  tindertying  Itu'  piiridleliHUr 
wlum  ati  actuality  is  dtnscrihed  as  a.  nnt.ei'iHion  of  its  inytiueiil  e^nmple^^,,  by 
various  types  of  (|Ucstion  and  answer  phraaerdogy"*^,  e,g.  Hlh  4*  S.  Ilf,; 

“Tluisti  wh<> 'CliscinirHiMin  saerrHi  tenets  say,  Hlave  you  risen  from  a |irocecdiug 
(sacrificial)  Htwiom  or  from  one  that  stand'?*  stdl  ?'  They  who  rote  ai4er  chanting 
thi^nUhmitam  fmtnmn)  rise  from  aproei^edmg  (SfSi^ninh  ib>tardmg  these  . . , They 
who  rise  afha*  chanting  the  hf/iat  (mtmtm,.)  rise  from  a fmwutuif  stands  still. 
Hcgarding  these  , . 

Not  iuircquiuitly  argmrumts  are  hrouglii  ftwward  or  iiiaeiisiuotm  an^  he'Itl  in 
cpicstion  and  answer  stylt^*‘h  a disjunctive  quest  ion  being  not,  uneommoin  c.g. 
AiB.  2,  so,  2h: 

” ^eo  also  AiB.  1,  Itk  H quoted  on  I'u  IbHu 

SB.  1,  5,  S,  1;  Aifi.  h *h  Ih  SB.  1,  Hi  rf.  afoo'  Hll,  “ S,  I,  1;  Aill.  1,  IS,  31; 
16,  8;  17,  2;  JB.  I,  9;  10;  It;  hi;  IH  etc. 

KB.  12,  1;  17,  5;  similarly,  IS,  9;  AtB.  th  2H,  1;  2lh  I;  SO,  I, 

« TB,  (I,  i,  h 1;  S,  7;  Aili  4,  27,  S;  2lh  H. 

Bee  c.g.  6B.  I,  4,  3,  tiff.;  cf.  L r»,  1,  Iff.;  2,  IfftA  6,  t,  HUI'o  t h h hfb 
Bee  c.g.  BB,  I,  4,  2,  l|  I,  6,  t,  12;  Ifu  2,  2,  4,  17;  4.  3,  X 3, 

(Jf.  (lo'N04.  H.  Ii„  p,  38. 

on  also  PB,  fh  6,  IB  10,  4f.;  tih  12,  ti  H,  I,  12;  Bib  t*  tl,  L “tt;  X 23;  SB.  1, 

Bee  c.g.  AiB.  6,  3,  Sff.;  7,  20,  If.;  KB.  Ih  U;  Btl.  I,  'II.  I.  20;  7*  3,  1,  30;  Bk 
1,  4,  14. 


Tho  Brfihtnanas 


377 


“They  Hay,  \Sli(>uI(l  he  ('at  first,  tho  subdivide'^  sacrificial  food  ? (Or)  should  ho 
partake  ot  the  hotar^s  gobk'.t  V Ho  should  eat  first,  and  then  partake  of  tho  goblet.” 

Expiations  arc  generally  introduced  by  questions  of  the  type:  “If  the  milk  . . . 
bccouK's  Hpoii(Hl,  what  is  tlu>,  expiation 
All  extrctnely  irequiuit.  (diuuont  of  these  argumentations  is  the  explanation 
of  words^®.  '’.riioxigh  most  of  tlieso  ‘etymologies'  are  in  tho  light  of  modern 
linguistii^s  (‘.ompU'ti^  faihireB,  they  should  not,  with  previons  authors^®,  be 
(iescailied  as  quibbhvs  or  intantile  }>uns.  Always  engaged  in  attempts  at  finding 
tho  (‘-onnexions  IxdAvet^n  the  phenomena  and  to  understand  the  at  first  sight 
mysterious  lionds  between  these  and  the  Unseen  and  much  inclined  to  take 
words,  and  es|)ccially  names,  to  be  instinct  with  power  these  authors  practised 
the  art  of  (dymology  as  a means  of  gaining  knowledge  of  the  ideas  expressed  by 
words,  of  penetrating  into  the  hitherto  unknown  nature  of  an  object  or  a 
person,  of  acquiring  control  over  them.  These  ‘etymologies'  reveal  to  us  the 
authors'  views  of  tlie  above  connexions;  the  more  frequent  ones  may  be  regard- 
ed as  reflecting  more  or  less  fixed  convictions®*.  The  very  formula  in  which  the 
conclusiou  of  such  an  (dymologic  argument  is  expressed  is  highly  illustrative, 
o.g.  AiB.  2,  I,  1: 

“'!rh(>y  (ihi>  gods  who  Nvimt.  upwards  to  h('aveii)  obstruotixl  (ayopayan)  it  (tho 
way  to  hoavon)  by  uu'auH  of  tho  stunniicial  post  (yupa);  in  that  they  obsti'uctod 
fayopayttn ) by  iut'n.uM  of  i.lu^  post,  (yupa)^  that  is  why  the  post  has  its  name”  (lit. 
that  is  th<^  yupa^Hhip  of  t.lu^  ywpa)”®®. 

V(vry  oftiai  f.lu^se  ('xplanat.ions  ('mphasf/.o  that  B])ecial  aspect  of  an  idea  which 
undia*  d(dini<.(^  (nrtnimstamH'H  is  iuqiortant  to  tlie  exclusion  of  other  ways  of 
looking  af  it®®,  lie  offen'ing  f.o  be  presented  at  tho  end  of  tho  saorificial  rite  to 
the  officiant-s  and  regarded  as  its  v('.ry  keystone  is  said  to  owe  its 

name  to  tiu'  fai't.  f.hat  tlu'  gods  invigorated  (adakmyan)  the  sacrifice  by  it®^; 
tliat  nu'aiiH,  that  hie  et  nunc  tlio  gift  of  a dukfml  makes  a sacrifice  successful. 


Ailh  7,  4;  JB.  1,  Hilt;  12,  4,  I,  2ff. 

P.  PouiJUA,  VtHlisolm  Volksetymologie  und  das  Nirukta,  ArohOr  7,  p,  423 ; 
J.  UoNnA/riuM4.ymologi<'H  in  tht^  ancient  Indian  brahmanas^  I^ingua  5,  p.  61; 
C.  H,  Vknkatkswauan,  ItgvtHlic  words  (^(tymologically  quoted  in  both  tho  Aitareya- 
Brahmapa  and  th<^  Nirakta,  BDOlif  3,  p^,  547;  N.  Vkhma,  Tho  etymologies  rela- 
ting to  tlitH  nu^riw  and  nu^odies  in  tho  Satapatlia-Brahmana,  26  AIOC,  S.  P.,  p. 
383  (ac<jording  to  wliom  this  Imlhmafm  ‘explains’  no  loss  than  422  words). 

Eookmno,  ;IV,  p.  265;  W.  Eubein,  Die  Philosophon  dor  Upanis- 
hadtai,  Btam  1647,  p.  dl:  130  (jto.;  P.  Masbon-Oubsul,  Escpiisso  d’uno  histoiro  do 
la  philoHophio  indi(am<s  'Paris  1023,  p.  42. 

C’f.  idso  OmiKNin-mo,  V,  W.,  p.  llBf,;  S.  Bouayisb,  in  Zs.  f.  Buddhismus  0, 

p.  200. 

Eor  Hiinilar  iustanci'S  seo  o*g.  TJ8.  6,  1,  3,  5;  AiB.  1,  2,  1;  PB,  4,  2,  2;  12,  13, 
4;  JB.  1,  223;  6B,  L 3,  5,  U 

««  Whtvn,  gtvnta'ally  sptnddng,  a ‘tluxny’  is  founded  on  analogy  botwexm  pir/z/ding 
observations  or  nu4..a|)hyHieal  suppositiouH  and  familiar  phonomcma,  only  a limited 
aspixjt  of  th(^  lat.tt'r  is  apt  to  l>o  incorporatcxl  in  tho  lesulting  formulation. 

SB.  2,  2,  2,  2;  4.  3,  4,  2;  KB.  15,  1 otc. 


378 


J.  (tonda  * Vcnlir 


ThiiigB  can  havn  tnnn'  than  one  aH|n'ci.  and  ilm  tnranf  flirt,!  two  ‘ct.yturtlogies’ 
conld  be  rt^gariicd  m Hinniliatu'otiBly  <''omHd. : fhe  tiofid  m efilird  dirm  bccanee 
there  well-being  (M^)  k <'one('nf rated,  htd  idw>  be<'iitii4«'  i>reath  renorted 
(M-)  to  it  6,  K K 4).  Ktynndngieal  efnnbinrtiiriiif4  of  worda  were  utilized 
in  ritnal  magic,  or  religiona  |>ra<di<a^:  a sttmmi  calb'd  kriihotihi)ia  maTed  to 
obtain  ibod  Ixwanae  itn  name  wm  connect r<i  witli  five  ve-rb  /in/n/e  '‘to  bo 
digcHted'*  (P,B.  14,  5.  .27fd^^  Not  inlVe«|ttent-ly  the  hriihimtms  j^o  to  aay  eoirm 
ment  npon  an  explanation  that  in  given  in  tln^  Xirnkla:  for  inidama'  Nir,  3 oq 
nakmtra  '‘eoitakdlatioid'  in  aaid  U>  <ba'iv(^  fnmi  an  “no!  *'  and  hi^iru  '‘dtnniinon’^ 
and  dli  2,  26  Aditya  (the  mm)  in  narrat.ed  to  Imve  appropriaJed  tin,'  riomituon 
of  the  conatellationH  bo  that  tln^y  beeame  nukmfm,  Hieretore'  tbe  Knn  in  called 
Aditya,  bccatiBe  he  took  away  fddn/fn)  t.lu'ir  janver  (iSB,  ,2.  I.  2,  IH).  .Lingniatio 
taboo,  the  fear  of  tln^  poteneiea  rt'Hiiling  in  nann-a,,  nnderliea  tin,'  freqtient 
modificationa  of  word  forma  needed  to  arrive  at  an  etymoh>giea.l  eonehmion 
and  motivated  by  the  atattanent  t'hat  14)0  gmk  "love  the  erypfit'd' t'  g SB 
6,  1,  1,2: 

"Ho  (Indra)  by  his  partietdar  power  kmdied  filter, * vital  now- 

ere  . . „yuui  in  aH  much  m ho  kintlled  /ojd/i-  i.  ho  fhe  knidlor  fhnfhu);  the 
kindler  iiukH'd,  him  they  call  dinlra'  eiypfo'aUy.  fa*  fho  g»>d?i  lo\o  fho  eryptie"«». 


^ Ch  alno  2,  3, 
their  meaningH  (^,g, 

m. 

Bee  i\g,  alwo  Idg 
13;  9,  1,  1,  2;  1),  1,  2, 
PB.  4,  8,  9;  7,  10,  8. 


2^,  tor  other  lurdauco-f?  of  hv  oeaoei  Mg  wordft  and 

BIk  frt  1,  :k  3;  n,  2.  1.  0 and  Uihmuk  r„  K,  h p.  irirp  Ip  p. 

3, ^^12,  4,  1;  Bli.  11,  h I,  2;  II;  11,  t,  2,  :l;  7,  4,  t,  lO;  7.  4,  2, 
14,  h I,  Idj  Atli,  3,  iia,  6 rttid  eirtoptit'f*  .,Ailk  3,  34*  0; 


Tho  Brilhmanas 


379 


6.  DispiMlom 


Despite  tlu^  fact  that  in  those  bralnninical  cii’clos  to  which  we  owe  this 
literattire  tradition  was  extrenudy  important,  one  of  the  most  interesting 
features  of  the  hrdhmanm  is  tlie  very  frequent  references  to  the  manifold 
differences  of  opinion  on  the  various  aspects  of  the  sacrificial  doctrincKS.  It  is 
theretore  wort-h  wliile  to  dwell  on  tho  discussions  and  controversies  which  are 
almost  e<:)iitinuously  t^arrit'd  on,  as  well  as  on  the  ways  in  which  those  wore 
presented,  stalled  and  settkHlh  .Ranging  from  minor  details  to  questions  of  wider 
interest  such  as  the  mode  of  ])erformance  of  a sacrifice,  its  significance,  the 
possibility  of  gaining  the  results  desired  etc.  2,  these  discussions  are  in  part  a 
literary  device,  viz.  short  reterences  to  tho  opinions  of  one  or  more  other 
authorities,  in  part  represented  in  the  form  of  episodes  relating  conversations 
or  mecdiings  of  experts  debating  subjects  of  common  interest  and  controversy®. 
It  is  significant  that  one  of  those  interested  in  these  discussions  was  Janaka, 
king  of  Videha,  who  plays  a considerable  part  in  the  Satapatha  and  Jaimini^m- 
Brahmanas  as  well  as  in  the  Brhadaranyaka-upanisad^. 

The  introduction  of  atr--often  anonymous®— authoiity  is  indeed  in  many 
cases  an  important  point  in  an  argument:  ‘'About  this  they  (tho  exports) 
remark  . . d’®:  ‘*on  this  point  N.N.  uhchI  to  say  . . The  opinions  of  au- 
tlioriticH  wluvtht'r  mentiotu'd  by  name  or  remaining  anonymous*^— arc  some- 
times subserilxHl  to*^,  sometimes  rejected;  ^B,  1,  1,  1,  10: 

“Leti  him  . . . <»niy  wliat  grows  in  the  forest,  be  it  forest  plants  or  tho  fruit 
of  And  in  regard  to  this  Barkn  Var.^na  said;  ‘Cook  beans  for  mo,  for  no 
off(ufng  is  made  of  thetu.*  Ont^shonld  not  however  do  this,  for  pulse  servos  as  an 
addition  to  rice  and  bark^y  and  henct'i  one  increases  rice  and  barley  with  it;  one 
should  tluTcfort^  t'ut  only  what  grows  in  the  forest”^®. 

The  existence  of  diirmH'nc(*s  of  opinion  is  often  apparent  only  from  tho  rejection 
of  a view  lu'Id  or  |)roc<Hlure  adopted  by  ‘some’  or  other  authorities,  a usual 
Bchenu^  laung:  “but  let  him  not  <lo  this,  for  . . a favourite  formula  of  the 

* For  a systemaiit^  <H)ll(M,5tiou  of  pertinent  texts  see  Tuitk,  Sacrifice,  p.  61. 

® See  e.g.  Ailk  B,  4;  JB.  2,  80;  04;  177;  SB.  2,  I,  1,  14. 

® See  e.g.  dB.  1.  I0f.;  245;  2,  42;  76f.;  SB.  10,  6,  1,  Ilf;  11,  3,  1,  2ff.;  11,  5,  3, 
Ifo;  11,  6,  2,  Iff. 

^ Cf.  Macdonuu’i  and  Keith,  V.  1. 1,  p.  271. 
s K.g.  I>B,  4,  3,  13;  4,  4,  4;  8;  4.  6,  17;  6,  4,  15. 

« E.g.  PB.4,  5,  13;  15;  14,  10,  3;  10,  B,  0;  &B.  1,  1,  2,  11;  3,  3,  10;  6,  1,  20;  2, 
2,  1,  5;  (ef.  0). 

K.g.  PB.  14,  3,  17. 

» Although  many  nanu's  of  ‘sages’  and  h^aohers  are  mentioned  (according  to  N. 
d.  SiiKNOE.  at.  CJouuu.  VoL  11,  X>.  Velankar,  Bombay  1965,  p.  133  the  two  bnVimaxKts 
ef  tlu^  Rgve<la  rider  t<^  about  sixty  of  tluun),  oppommts  often  remain  anonymoua. 

® I'kg.  {SB.  1,  3,  1,  26;  2,  1,  4,  6.  Or  thr>  rtuidiT  may  use  his  own  discretion: 

2,  1.  4,  27, 

Also  1.  0,  1,21.  For  variatious  c^.g.  TB.  3,  3,  2,  2;  SB.  1,  6,  3,  27. 

» See  i^.g.  KB.  2,  3;  t^B,  1,  4,  1,  35;  3,  4.  3,  12;  4,  1,  1,  27;  4,  1,  2,  19;  5,  1,  3, 
14;  5,  2,  2.  3;  6,  3,  1,  42;  8,  I,  3,  7;  8,  4,  4,  0;  0,  3,  4,  IL 


380 


,1.  ( !<m(ia  ■ Voiiio  Iii(i'!’a(nri‘ 


Aitareyins  is:  in  not  to  Any  ninlivaticai  mwy  bt^  oinitted^l 

A procxHitire  may  bo  (linpatt'laMl  an  wwvo  a]a‘rnlntirai : nr  i Ito  iinl  hta\  a,ftcr  atating 
two  different  opinionn,  his  hia  audi('nee  take  Ibt'ir  elioieiny  Ol^jeetiona  to  an 
opinion  are  not  alwaya  (^,x|>lieitJy  t»harae1rri7.etl  m aneh*y 

Often  an  anthor  doea  not  atait'  Ida  ewn  view  beb*re  be  haw  not-  otily  nnaitioned 
blit  alao  explained  a diffenmt  opitnoid^.  Sueh  an  expinnat  ion  yaibc'rs  volume  in 
paBHagea  nneh  aa  81k  1,  ft  ft  Tift  on  tlu^  <|m\ation  na  to  wind  her  an  fnaudng  meal 
is  permitted  aft('r  t-lu^  ptaforma-m^e  of  f.he  ttipit/mim:  .AadijluftH  opinion,  amply 
expounded,  is  said  to  lie  not  so  atax^pt-ablt'  as  \ ajfiavalkyaa.  An  lexplanation 
is  also  given,  when  a ritual  pra<‘tiee  is  eondeinned;  L\  1,  4,  :ft* 

'‘Here  now  some  tie  up  a be-goat-,  arguing  fhiM^  tbe  gruU.  m Haer«Hi  to  Agni  and 
that  (this  is  done)  for  the  eomplef.eness  (^f  tb-e  tire*  Ibit-  one  lunni  not,  fio  this  , . 

Another  instanee  of  a tlivergent  ojiituon  that-  is  more  or  less  eireumstantially 
motivated  before  it  is  declared  ineom'et.  mnnirs  at-  Stk  th  b,  2»  22: 

“Now  some  make  three  fire-pans,  saying.  ‘Hiret'  fm  nnmherl  are  tlu'se  worlds, 
and  the  fire-pans  are  tlu'se  worlds,'  ami  also  for  nmlnal  expnifum,  thinking,  *If 
the  one  will  bnxik,  we  shall  carry  (Agin)  in  thi*  otlior.  ami  if  the  otht»r  breaks, 
then  in  the  thirdf  Let  him  not  th>  so.  for  , . 2 ' 

The  audience  in  sometimes  disHunded  from  following  opposite  adviee  heeause 
it  would  involve  disastm*  or  hml  to  tindcHirahle  resulta^^^.  'fhe-  tliwipproval  tif  an 
alternative  may  be  implied  in  the  argtimentation.  e.g,  ftlk  4.  Ith  Ilf. : 

“lic’igarding  this  (ritid  they  say,  Mt  ts  to  he  nmlertalo’ii  m fhi’  middh^  of  the  year 
(heeause)  in  tla^  middle  (of  tlu^  btsly)  the  futsi  whodi  hm  t‘een  entmi  nourmlew. 
Regarding  this  (however)  tht^y  (i.o.  tUhenp  wy,  *tf  tlioy  nnderiakt^  (it)  ir^  the 
middh^  of  the  year,  tla^y  olit-am  lialf  of  the  foml.  hut  hise  the  other  half/  At  the 
end  of  the  year  it  is  to  l>e  undortaken.  for  m the  eourfio  nf  lln^  year  all  food 
ripens.” 

Or  the  author,  aftx'r  stating  his  own  vit^w,  ipiotea  one  or  mt»re  dilTereiit  (^pinions 
with  the  arguments  addnetxl  by  tfndr  supporters  to  etoae  the  paf4Hage  by  a brief 
restatement  of  his  own  jxmiiion  (tlli.  2,  2(HI).  Or  the  author's  own  opinion  is 
given  at  the  end  of  an  aeixnmt  of  other  views  ami  poa'^ilulif  tea  (TR.  !,  ft  2, 1 ift; 
AiB.  2,  17).  Sorntdimes  tlu^  various  ofunions  are  rmtioilifHl  in  a story,  in  whieli 
the  personage  ivho  acts  in  afxiorthmee  wit.h  tin*  view  au|tj»oi1ed  !i)‘  t!u'  author  is 
repremmted  as  niost  stuHH'Hsful  ((*lk  ft  Ift  I A)-  An  olijeetum  of  fin  oppommtmay 
count  with  an  author'^®,  but  be  invalidated  by  tln^  foree  of  a eounier-argunient 
i&B,  6,  2,  2,  38). 

IS  K.g.  AiB.  2,  3,  I2;  2.  2tl.  b;  3,  IH.  lU,  (t.  nkm  NIL  2.  2,  I.  in. 
big.  fiB.  3,  fi,  2,  3j  3,  tl,  Ih  il 

RB.  4,  fi,  4,  7;  9,  fk  2,  Uj  Kli.  4,  I4,  mentionmg  many  po-mihilif  ten  ami  giving 
the  o|)tion,  ends  by  stating  tlie  est4ihlmhNl  rule, 

« Of  wg.  m.  fi,  7,  \k 
E.g.  2,  ft  ft  I4. 

Of.  also  &ll  2,  ft  2,  40;  ft  4,  8. 

“ B.ee  e.g.  KB,  10.  3;  8b,  I,  7,  ft  3;  2,  4,  :i,  7. 

For  aoeeptanoe  of  tlio  view  of  another  aniluirtry  nee  1‘Ii  2,  ft  2,  9ft 


The  Brrihmantuj 


381 


At  SB.  1,  7,  3, 17ff.  the  option  is  given  between  triMubh  and  anmtubh  verses 
and  eitlier  poBaibility  is  motivated,  but  the  combination  of  a tristubh  and  an 
annMubh  is  rejected  by  riuudling  the  accident  which  a certain  Bhallabeya  had 
after  tising  botli  metiH's  in  order  to  obtain  dotiblc  benefit : 

“He  from  his  cart  and,  in  falling,  broke  his  arm.  Ho  considered,  ‘This  has 
befallen  b('(^auH(^  of  something  or  other  I have  done.'  Ho  then  thought:  ‘(It  has 
befallen)  h(^(»4mHo  of  some  violation,  on  my  part,  of  the  proper  course  of  the 
8acrirKH>.’  IhaitHN  one  should  not  violate  the  proper  course  , . .” 

Sometimes  tlie  discnisHions  end  in  a compromise  or  iix  acceptance  of  the  opinions 
of  others^”.  Tlie  reasons  for  adopting  or  rejecting  a certain  procedure  are  not 
infreqxiently  foxind  in  an  exemplary  mythical  event  quoted  more  or  less 
circumstantially  to  introduce  the  author's  advice,  e.g.  ^‘Let  him  approach 
them  in  the  evening,  for  in  the  evening  the  gods  approached  Agni"  (as  told 
in  the  preceding  part  of  the  section,  SB.  2,  3,  4,  Zy-K  Eoferences  to  daily  life 
or  well-known  facts  or  practices  in  the  human  sphere  can  serve  the  same 
purpose,  e.g.  1,  6,  4,  3: 

“Jtist  as  one  •would  cook  a dish  of  rict^  or  a goat  in  common  for  two  relatives  or 
friends  who  have  conu>  to  stay  with  him  . , in  like  manner  . , 

These  autliois  like  t-o  int.rodu(H>  an  argument  by  posing  a questioxi  or  stating  an 
alternative'*  astvrilxHl  to  sottie  autlnority,  lor  iTistanee  a man  who  expounds,  or 
disctiHses  on,  saiunnl  texts  (br(thmav(Min)^'K  Idms  PB.  4,  8,  111: 

“The  hriiJmmvMuw  say:  *Hav('  you  risen  from  a saerifioial  session  that  goes  on 
or  from  one  tliat.  stauds  sthl !'  I'hey  who  rise  aftc^r  chanting  the  ratliantmu 
(sUnmn)  vm\  fnau  i\,  HCHsiou  that  goes  oti.  As  to  tla^se  one  should  say:  ‘They  will 
be  devoid  of  a ilrnx  support.'  They  who  rise  after  chanting  the  brhat  (s^man), 
ris(^  from  a si^ssion  that  st-ands  still.  As  to  these  one  should  say:  ‘Their  prosperity 
will  stand  still  (staguaUO  . . 

JB.  1,  22* '26  is  a good  instance  of  a discussion  told  with  a certain  circum- 
stantiality. 'rh(^  ptu'Hons  art^  ri'presented  as  historical,  the  event  as  unique.  Five 
brahmins  deei<le  (direct  spiH'ch)  to  discuss  the  agnihotra  with  king  Janaka 
who  (th(\y  say)  (!()nHiders  Idmself  superior  to  them  in  the  dispute.  ‘'They  ar- 
rived there”  (abrupt*  transition)  and  have  themselves  annoxinccd.  The  cere- 
monious xx'ception  and  the  host's  outfit  arc  described  ixx  some  detail.  The  host 
wishes  to  bo  informcHl  of  the  |)urpoBe  of  the  visit  (direct  speoclx).  The  answer: 
“You  out-talk  us,”  Tlu^  host  takes  the  initiative:  “Brahmins,  how  do  you 
offer  th<^,  ^inihotraV'  “Yoti  have  indianl  out-talked  us  . . Thereupon  one 
of  thc^  gui^sts  answen's.  Th(h  qm^stion  is  repeated  four  times  and  the  other  guests 
answei'  also. 

»»  ILg.  1 1,  L 711;  13.  1,  6.  HT.;  TB.  2,  I,  2,  Of. 

For  imiiation  of  tlui  gods  i^.g.  PB.  15,  7,  4;  1,  7,  3,  20, 

M Also  8B.  1 1,  1 20;  1,  4,  2,  1 ; 4;  1,  7,  2,  14;  2,  1,  4,  2. 

w Intcs’CBtingly  enotigh  AVS.  0,  0,  IB  xises  the  ttwn  br^hmaxi^a  in  connection  with 
an  alternatives  (ef.  11,  3,  27). 


382 


♦I.  (uniiln  * \ I 


At  thiH  point  wo  luvvt'  for  n nmnirnf  to  revert  to  flie 
trovorHy  on  a mibjoot  tliut^  in  roy.-iriii'il  ns  itnportntp  fmni  the  point  of 
ritualism,  mnorocoMmic-mioroeownii’  oorrespomieneoN.  or  in  penoral 
and  religion,  and  is  prommte.l  in  tlm  form  ot  a .iinlogno  {e,u,nUio,m  aml’amxvml 
whilst  oxhiliiting  tlu'  gonernl  elutrnetrr  of  n ridt!l,-’«.  Whereas  l>roltmo,l,/m  wo  > 
in  a fixed  form,  a oompulaory  eh-menf  in  e.'rtnm  great  rites  .'.speeially  tw 
royal  rites  {tdmmalha  ete.)»-*  . less  rigorotis  and  more  amplified  varied 
were  in  vogm'  anw>ng  tln>w’  who  dehaled  eontroversinl  proldems.  'rhese 
mneh  in  ('vitltmcx'  in  Isafapalha.  Bnihmana  X miel  XI,  e . m,  j iy 

“:Dhira  ^ataparn.yva  onee  set  out,  f.nvanis  Mali  .late,!,,.  U,.  aho  • , 

to  Imn,  'With  what  knowle.lKe  have  you  eo.ue  to  'I  k.mw  Im  - 

Agni  do  yon  know?'  'Spoeeh.'  'What  Iieeo.ne,.  of  }«„.  „i„.  j-,,,,,,;  ^ 

Ho  hoeomoK  oloeini'nl After  l>hira  lim.  d.-senlM-d  tli,-  mtttire  ..f  \e.u  ,w  J,  ^ i‘ 

ti„  ,,y,,  u„  it;;?'  ,r„'r,s 

apooch.  oyo.  mmd  eto.  p.ms  .nto  t.reath.  and  «he«  ho  aaako.,  they  agai.r  2 
fiom  breath,  ho  far  this  diH'Inni'  applies  to  the  miorooosimo  individual  fmllivd 
iman);  macrocommoaliy  [iMitkmIwn  ■'wiih  rem.ni  to  i),„  ,io,t,oK")  mi,.,.,  • 
Agni  himself,  the  eye  is  yomier  mm.  m,nd  the  mo..,.  ,,,,on  tire Imes  out 

It  ,8  xyafted  np  m the  a.r  (wmtl)  . , and  who.,  ,l,„  sots  ,t  onlers  thel 
(wiiul)  . . . atul  from  mxi  t>f  tlif'  lur  (wjiidl  tl»py  vmu^  . , /* 

()w.a«ioimlly  im*  'rn,  nj  *|||' , 

maIhv^vi‘“oT'';i  roahty,*  'What  is  that 

ainniKih,  Whiu.  m i]iai  V . , ^ ^ ^ 

At  (5H.  10.  r.,  2,  HUr.  the  tpiestion  is  dehatetl  as  to  « hot  her  there  is  oiu'  death 
or  matiy,  the  answer  being  "both  one  and  many 

“for  iuttsmueh  us  he  w that  pnan  m the  m.nj  y.,„.t..,.  u,,,id  „„„  . 

- 

yo  conclusion  to  which  the  diseussioti  leads  is  soinetitnea  eomimmmattHl,  not 
in  the  dialogue  proper,  hut  afterwanla  {.IH,  !,  ovi  ). 

EBpccially  in  the  later  parts  of  the  .'^ntapafha  fl.ese  dispufaiions,  often 
c ithcd  in  the  form  of  ((ueslionM  and  umivvers.  develop  info  dtalomies  hetwem 

Lu.helr'““  HI.  1.  1.  HI,  Thms  Vanina 

tcaduH  hiH  son  hhrgn.  win,  deems  Iiinwelf  superior  in  knowledge  to  his  fathw 


1909  (Suppl.  I. p.  (T.  also  Til  3:’;,:'^.  ‘‘/hi!  ’/.V  o' 

laiw  n W IV^rr  ‘ **■  'H.om.e,  ami  dnlaetio 

v.in!M3n,Vu'rr'5*lv:;-i;-t‘^ 

» u.  o,  4,  lu  cn  a,  in,i  dll,  I,  III;  Tti;  2110. 


The  Brahinanas 


383 


the  inystcri(%s  ol  tlu'  ag?iihotm  (11,  6,  1,  Iff.)-®  explaining  the  meaning  of  the 
scenes  seen  by  tlu^  yonng  man  in  the  regions  of  the  universe.  Svaidayana 
explains  the  signifieanee  of  the  Bull  and  New  Moon  ritual  to  Uddalaka  Iruni 
in  11, 4, 1,  h dCr^®,  the  initial  paragraph  introdiieing  us  to  the  situation  and  the 
next  one.  si.ating  tluit  Svaidayana  acts  as  the  champion  of  the  northern  brahmanas 
in  th(^  disputattion  witfh  llddrdaka.  Aftt'.r  the  salutation  “he  straightway  begins 
to  qm^stion  him/’  Ihit  what  follows  is  the  fourfold  statement  that  that  man 
alone  may  pass  hims(dfoil  as  a Ha<‘.rifleial  priest— and  this  was  what  Uddalaka 
(ii<j-»who  tauhn'stands  definite  features  and  results  of  tlio  Full  and  New  Moon 
ritual  Theretipon  Uddalaka  ('xpr<\sses  tlie  wish  to  become  the  other’s  pupil,  but 
the  latter  is  willing  to  t.ea(‘lii  him  without  entering  into  that  relation  with  him 
and  now  explains  tlu^  nuuining  of  the  problems  stated  in  his  former  address. 
The  sphere  is  of  eonrse  thoronghly  ritualistic,  but  the  magical  element  is  not 
lacking:  *'the  head  would  lly  off  of  whosoever  should  (dare  to  challenge)  him 
(Uddalaka)  to  a disputation.” 

While  this  (established  custom  of  discussing  brahmadyas  helps  on  one  hand 
to  understand  tlie  triu'  eliaraeter  of  these  'philosophicar  episodes,  these  hiddle 
contests’  iiro  on  the  otiuer  eontimu'd,  in  part  with  the  same  interlocutors  and 
in  similar  surroundings,  in  tlu^  oldc'st 


iX  Jlh  L 42ff,  11  f.oMMKi,,  at  ixldmmi%  4 (U)50),  9;i  and  BoimwxTO, 

J.  B.,  p,  IHl  (witli  a bihli<)p,rai>hy),  translatiouB  also  by  Okutwo,  atolA.OtS  15,  p.  235; 
11,'.  LoMMKt.,  AlitbrahinaniHahe  I,^tigtnuhm,  Stuttgart  1904,  p.  36;  Vauisnnk,  M.  L., 
p.  13511 

Of,  (Bi,  1,  3,  Off. 

Scse  also  Hknou,  in  FeBi»H(4irift  F,  Weller,  'Leipisig,  1054,  p,  533. 


384 


.1.  Gondii  • Wdio  liitoraturo 


7.  Myths,  kgcntU  and  narmtiir  i'pi,s(Hlrs 


On  the  strength  of  tlu'  nutni'rotw  refi-n-neos  and  nari-a(,i\‘o  |>a.ssagt'H  in  the 
Rgvoda  and  the  early  brnkmujas  we  tnay  he  I’ertnin  f hat.  ni  (hat  lu'riod  aneient 
Indian  myths  were  at  l.h<'ir  riehc'st.  Although  a long  or.  rather,  diHjiroportionate 
discussion  of  the  myths  and  h'gends  handed  tlown  in  X'lniii'  jiroHe*  might 
easily  prevent  us  from  forming  a true  pii'ture  of  (hi.s  elass  of  literntun',  there  is 
no  denying  that,  for  many  moih'rn  ri'aders,  I he  ehii'f  inleri'st  of  Uu'  Imthmana'i 
lies  in  these  episodes,  many  of  which,  thanks  (o  t he  Indian  genius  for  telling 
tales,  make  very  good  reading.  Without,  suhseiihing  to  the  (h'tireoiatory 
remarks  made  by  Winternite®  and  othei-s  on  t in-  ritiialisf  ie  and  sja-eulativo 
portions  of  these  works  we  must  readily  I'oneedc'  that  the  sometimes  really 
poetical  and  suecessful  narrative  passagi's.  tin'  oftim  thmighttul  mvdlia  and 
legends,  contribute  much  to  mdivoning  tin'  long  (‘spositions  on  K.'ieririeial  rites. 
It  is  moreover  beyond  dis[)ute  that  many  of  these  passages  are  of  uncommon 
interest  from  the  point  of  view  of  tlu'  comparative  history  of  philosoiihy  and 
religions  in  the  largest  sense'  of  this  term. 

Like  other  peoples  of  antiquity  thi'  Indians  told  myths  instead  of  presenting 
analytical  accounts  or  seeking,  in  a detached  way  and  wit  bout  ult  erior  motives 
for  intelligible  explanations  of  thi'  world  and  the  natiind  plienomi'iia.  The 
fundainental  signifieanee  of  a myth  is  for  itistane,'  apparent  in  easi's  such  as 
JB.  1,  3 where  at  the  vt'ry  Iieginning  of  a long  .seel  ion  (1.1  il'd  on  t lx'  apnhnira 
it  is  told  that  lh'a]apat«i  who,  as  so  often,  is  the  tuundei*  or  iiuvugurator*”." 
performed  a sacritleial  session  of  a thousand  yearn,  hy  whieh  he  and  the  gods 
after  him-  aseended  to  the  heavi'nly  world,  and  that  aftenvanis  this  rite,  being 
too  long  for  human  bi'iugs,  was  reduced  to  the  one  day 

Many  myths  are  indei'd  attempts  to  I'xplain  origins*.  Tims  silver  is  said  to 
derive  its  origin  from  the  ti'ars  whieh  gotl  Agni  wept  when  lie  was  pursued  hy 
the  gods  who  were  desirmis  of  recovering  their  t reinsures  with  whieh  he  had 
gone  away;  “therefore  silver  is  not  a suitahle  gift,  heeauw'  it  i.-i  liorti  of  tears" 
(IS.  1,  6,  1,  11.).  I ho  head  of  the  saerilu’ial  animal  cut  oif  hy  the  gods  heeaine 
the  plaksa  tree  ((5,  ,1,  10,  U);  \dsim‘s  heaii,  cut  ojf  heeanse  the  ants  had  gnawed 
his  bowstring  and  fallhtg  with  tlu'  sound  p/in).  the  sun  (^H,  I-t,  I,  I,  <)f). 
According  to  an  interesting  pjissage,  ,^H.  i . ;{jT ; 

Adifci  had  eight  sans.  Haf,  those  that  are  called  'ihi'  gi«ifi.  iieim  ,if  Aditi’  were 

only  seven,  for  the  eighth.  Martan.,la.  iihe  l.rought  furth  uufern.ed.  He  was  a 


* J.  Varknnk,  Mythes  et  Ii'igeiides  esilriittii  dew  hmli  futifiii 
translated  episodes,  with  notes,  mmnly  fmni  tlie  Satapmha); 

Kehgioii  mttl  inytluildgy  iif  ihti  hrtlhnmtim  with  M' 

Po(.>na  19115. 

^ WiNTiaHNrrT.t  11.  I,  L.  I,  p. 

» Cf.  also  6b.  I fi  t,  ur.  in  connexion  with  the  ert/apetm  nt 

Cf.  o.g.  1:B.  4,  10,  1;  la,  S),  1;  SB.  1,  7.  4,  4;  GB,  1.  a.  10. 

soo  below,  p.  389. 


Vmin  I INI?  (fifty 
, V,  Dl-::VA«THAltl, 
iff  t4M^  Sivtii- 


ir  myths 


The  Brahmtinas 


385 


mere  Initip  of  bodily  as  broad  as  ho  was  higli.  Some,  however,  say  that 

he  was  tlie  si/.e  of  a man.  The  gods,  sons  of  Aditi,  then  said,  ‘That  which  was 
born  aftt'r  us  tnnst  md.  bo  lost.;  come,  let  \is  fashion  it . . They  did  so  and  the 
flesh  which  tlioy  ent  off  him  became  the  elephant  and  ho  himself  was  Jditya 
Vivasvat,  the  sun”®. 

Some  passagi's  tnay  be  regard<Hl  as  accounting  for  what  may  bo  broadly  called 
the  origin  of  mdl : 

“Th(^  gods  attd  tlie  mnrm,  both  of  them  sprung  from  Prajapati,  ontorod  upon 
tlxeir  father  Pn^jiipati^s  inlwautancie,  to  wit.  speech— truth  and  untnxth  . . . ; they, 
both  of  tluuxx,  spolce  the  truth,  and  l)oth  of  them  spoke  the  untruth,  and,  indeed, 
speaking  alike,  tlxey  wore  alike.  The  gods  relinquished  untruth,  and  held  fast  to 
truth,  and  tlie  mtmw  relinquished  truth,  and  hold  fast  to  untruth  . . .”®. 

Natural  and  (dimatic^  phenomena  find  their  explanation  in  the  transcendent 
mythical  sphere;  JB.  I,  167: 

“Prajilpati  is  the  year.  Durixig  six  months  he  lifts  up  his  warm  foot:  then  here 
(on  the  earili)  warmth  is  above  and  cold  is  below;  . . . that  is  why  in  the  summer 
cold  water  is  drawji  from  the  w(dl.  When  he  lifts  up  his  cold  foot,  then  cold  is 
above  and  warmth  below ; . . . that  is  why  in  winter  warm  water  is  drawn  from 
th(’)  W('!ll.” 

Very  often  thes  fx^rtim^nt  passage  establishes  a ritual  truth  by  means  of  a 
reference  to  a mythical  origin,  e.g.  PB,  4,  1,  4f. : 

‘‘Prajilpati  was  here  alout^.  desinxl,  ‘May  t tnultiply,  may  I beget  prog(vny.’ 
He  saw  this  overuightuntt^.  He  practised  it.  By  means  of  it  ho  begot  dtry  and 
night.  In  that  this  (day)  is  an  ovtamight-ritts  they  procreate  day  and  night, 
they  get  a linn  foumlatiou  in  day  and  night  . . 

Or  a short  r<'ler<me(^  to  a mythical  occurreiuie  ends  in  the  statement  that  the 
one  “who  knows  this”  will  fare  just  as  the  divine  beings  figuring  in  the  mytlV. 

Many  mythical  taU^s  |)rovide  the  audiencis  with  one  or  more  explanations  of 
tradiHonal  pra<itie<‘S  by  stating  that  these  are  re-enactments  of  exemplary 
deeds  of  the  gods  piTrontuHl  in  the  bnythieal  past^^.  In  eases  such  as  SB.  14, 
1,  1,  Iff.  Hindi  explanations  follow  eaedi  other  regularly: 

”Th(H  gods  Agni,  Indra  . . . pix*(ormed  a sacrifice.  Their  place  of  worship  was 
Kuruk.sc^tra.  . . . Hence  wlu'rever  in  Kuruks(Ua‘a  one  settles  there  one  thinks, 
^TKm  is  a platuN  for  lUvine  worslup'  , . . Tln^y  (the  gods)  entered  upon  the  session 
tliinking,  ‘May  we  attain  (^xcellonct^^  . . And  in  likeunanner  do  those  (men)  now 
enUu*  upon  tlu^  Haerilicial  session  thinking,  ‘May  we  attain  excollonco  . . 

WIuMi  a prii‘Ht  is  invitex:!  to  officiate  lie  cannot  rclusc  the  invitation  unless  he 
has  alrt^ady  i'ommiifxHl  liimsidf  to  another  ritual  performance  or  the  person  who 
wants  him  to  Ih^  Ins  offudant  is  one  for  whom  it  is  not  suitable  to  sacrifice.  The 

® (X  lyiljvn  D.H.B.,  \K  6:if. 

® tb  ft,  b I2ff.;  also  5,  b b 1:  th<^  gods  and  the  murm  becamt'*  difforen- 
tiatisl,  the  latbn*  ohering  to  themH^dv<^H,  ilus  former  to  one  anotluun  b % 5,  24ff.  on 
tlu^  selbreinforcing  ellbcts  of  iml;  seo  W.  Bomiaca  OtbLAiraaTV,  in  History  of 
K(digi(axH,  10,  j>.  2HB. 

^ H.g.  PIb  5.  5,  15;  0,  3,  Of.  and  compare  e.g.  PB.  4,  3,  2. 

» bee  (^.g.  An,  2,  2,  3,  b 


386 


. Gouda  • Votlii'  Lili'raGin' 


mythical  motivation  of  tlu«  cuH(.om  in  given  in  a long.'r.  anmowlmt  dramatic 
talc,  the  main  lignrcK  of  which  i.hc  Adityun.  Ahgir«fi<'N  and  Agni,  one  of  the 
latter  group  who  acta  aa  a go-h('tw<'en  ilnd  tln-mw'l v.'k  in  t he  delicate  position 
that  both  gronpa  arc  MinuItanconHly  intenditig  to  HaeriHee  {AiH.  (5,  34). 

InstanccB  of  human  or  earthly  (lualitic'M.  mHimw,  pnuiii'cH,  institutions, 
manner  of  life  etc.  repr<'scnted  ns  owit>g  their  origitt  to  a divim'  ‘prcecd('nt’  or 
at  least  to  a mythical  arehetype  an'  very  fn'<iuenl“.  On  a certain  oc-casion 
Vanina  and  Mitra  W!>re  twaistMl  with  a cow;  therefore  the  victim  is  a cow 
(KB.  18,  13):  the  strength  of  noblemi'U  la'sidcH  in  t heir  arm.s  heeaus*'  they  arc 
created  from’lhrajapati’s  arms  (PB.  (5.  I,  8).  Occasionally  we  even  thul  a simple 
statement : 

“Now,  when  he  performs  that  he  no  «nther  lieeause  . , . ov  beeaiise 

the  gods  did 

The  never-ending  antagonism  between  god,s  and  anti-gods”,  one  of  the 
important  mythical  themes 

“The  ckvm  and  thcj  mtirm.  both  of  them  sprung  fr.mi  Prajiipal  s.  wenv  coni, ending 
for  superiority.  Tlu'  gods  vanepnshed  thi'  nuuniJi.  and  yet  these  afterwards 

harixsBcd  them  agaui“  * 

gives  rise  to  a consKlerahle  variety  of  tales;  ihv  e^fieiipiny.  were'  slnit  in 

by  the  gods;  they  were  m'lairattnl  by  the  eartli  whieb  lay  between  them:  the 
gods  deprived  tludr  euettd<‘S  ot  tltt'  neaaima  attd  tin-  year*  or  uf  t lie  l^est  pari 
of  the  saerifiec:  the  murm  built  atrirnghohlH^^  eti\  Mote  tlian  one<^  the^gods 
gain  the  victory  ithrough  iiu'  aHHistanei'  or  invent ive-iiena  of  Agni,  the  Hin'riileial 
god  who  at  AiB*  :h),  I is  only  witling  to  Indp  them  after  tliey  luixe  ritually 
praised  hiirn  In  Ail.  2,  h H there  is  no  question  of  eonteHt.  or  eombat,  Init 
the  demons  are  overthrown  heeauHe-  they  prefer  a wrong  huun  of  adoration. 
Now  this  myth— an  event  reph'te.  with  powe.r  reil<u‘ated  in  a rife  explains  the 
origin  or  signilieamai  of  a ritual  a<*i  ■ the  flinging  aw'iiy  of  a grai'tS"  bui4^  reiti'rates 
the  expulsion  of  the  mum^  (^iB.  I,  2,  4,  12}  or  Institution,  for  inatfi'UK'e  the 
forc-oirerings  which,  being  “victorious*'  were  'seen*  by  f!ie  gfnis  (1,6,  6,  2). 
The.  recitation  of  a formula  eonneeterl  with  the  myth  brings  about  the  victory 

® Compare  M.  I'lniAOU,  TraiUt  <rhrit<«ri'  dea  reltgiona.  Ihvria  Hf4lh  p.  3511  |hit» 
terns  of  comparatives  religion,  LondoioNew  V-ork  1\>M,  p,  4171;  be  mythi' de  IfKter- 
nol  Retour,  Paris  194*9  (1969),  p.  44;  53, 

10  gll  2,  4,  3,  12;  2,  6,  b 3;  2,  6,  2,  2;  nee  also  b 4.  fa  13;  '2,  b b I i : 7.  '2.  b 4; 
7,  3,  2,  6 (“what  the  gods  did  is  tioue  hiu’e’*);  7.  fn  2,  5;  H,  1.7;  Ih  2,  3,  4.  ^ 

One  should  not  view  this  theme,  wUh  lb  IlmiAn.  iit  JflllRAS  27,  fa  214  in  the 
light  of  Christian  idtAas,  3'he  iwurm  tivo  on  tht>  %vrong  oide  hohhng  ft»  I he  unreal  or 
chaos  (of.  i^ib  9,  r>,  I,  12)  ami  eannot  perform  th^  mnunhee  in  the  proper  way  (cL 
13,  8,  b 0),  They  continue  their  mlverae  activity  no  that  tli*^  god«.  %vagiiig  their 
continual  war  against  them,  can  preHtwve  the  world;  togeiJea*  thoy  kee|'i  the  world 
cycle  going. 

« Tib  3,  b 4,  7;  3,  3,  6,  1;  .lib  b 2.  4.  H;  b 4,  b 34;  b 5,  3*  2:  b th  2,  36;  3,  4, 
4,  3;  see  also  2,  b b 8;  % b 2,  13;  2,  2.  2.  H;  2,  4,  3.  2;  3.  2,  b IH  eie.;  dib  b 97; 
106;  107;  (ilb  1,  1,  23;  1,  2,  19;  b 3,  6 etc, 


Tho  Brainnai;;ia8 


387 


of  tho  man  for  whotn  it  in  recited  and  the  defeat  of  his  adversaries  (1,  4, 1,  35), 
for  the  man  who  knows  the  sense  of  a story  in  which  the  gods  are  narrated  to 
have  scored  a victory,  even  through  an  artifice  or  after  a bargain,  will  be  vic- 
torions  (cf.  VB,  21,  13,  2f.).  ^ 

There  are  many  good  specimens  of  myths  or  mythical  tales  of  some  extent 
with  strong  rit-nalisiic^  elenu^nts*  Thus,  when  Indra  had  slain  V^tra  he  concealed 
himself  (be(‘anBC  he  was  afraid  that  he  was  the  weaker  and  had  not  succeeded^®), 
and  Agni,  a rd  and  the  metre  B|*hati  set  about  searching  for  him.  Agni  discov- 
ered him  ami  stayt'd  with  him  as  a guest.  Tlie  other  gods  prepared  a rice-cake 
on  twelve  dialu's  Ibi'  their  two  colleagties— atid  that  is  the  origin  of  that  ritual 
practice.  1^'he  (uike,  how<nHn%  did  not  satiate  Indra,  and  the  soma,  which  was 
prep^^'^'^  afterwards,  did  not  agree  with  him.  Thereupon  they  made  it 

agree  with  him  by  nu'ans  of  boiled  milk^*.  The  same  passage  illustrates  the 
predilection  for  etymological  explanations.  The  two  gods  dwell  together  at 
(Indra^s)  home  (afml>  vm-).  And  dTiring  that  night,  so77ia,  the  food  of  the  gods 
and  here  identified  with  the  moon^®,  stays  at  home  also.  ‘‘Therefore  the  night 
of  new  moon — for  it  is  in  connection  with  the  special  rites  of  the  New  moon 
sacrifice  that  tlu^  stor>  is  told— is  called  dnumlsya'''^^. 

In  the  hrdhnmnm  tins  god  Indra  is  often  represented  as  a heroic  figttre  and 
in  this  capacity  t^mbroiled  with  all  sorts  of  weird  and  demoniac  beings.  One 
of  his  inost  pt>ptilar  exploits  was  his  contest  with  the  demon  Namuci^’'.  The 
story,  known  also  to  tlu^  ligvcnla  and  post-Vedie  literatures^,  may  be  treated 
in  four  ehapti'rs:  1.  Tlu^re  is  a batfh^  between  Indra  and  Namuci  wlio,  though 
being  a nai^iral  <'mnny  oi  ihi\  god  tdtimately  to  be  slain  by  liitn,  has  for  some 
reason  or  oth(‘r  conehuhHl  a viay  diploniat.ic  treaty  with  him^®:  “Of  ns  two  no 
one  shall  kill  tfu^  otJuv  (ntlua*  by  day  or  l)y  night,  either  with  something  dry 
or  with  sonuibing  woi,'*  This  d('tail  was  not  mentioned  in  tho  Rgveda.  2.  Na- 
muci gets  Indra  <irunk  with  surd  and  robs  him  of  hia  strength  and  vital  power®®. 
3.  With  th(^  aid  of  tht^  Ai^ivins  and  Sarasvati  who  heal  him,  Indra  circumvents 
the  com|)a(‘t  and  <mtH  off  Nammi's  lumd  at  dawn  (when  it  is  neither  day  nor 


This  scivtuH  it>  a mom  e^xplieit  statement  of  the  motif  of  1,  32,  14  (cf. 
(1.  lienr  et  malheur  <lu  guerrier,  Paris  1969,  p.  112).  In  other  cases  also 

brdhwuixuM  and  c'.pics  liave  devtieptnl  motifs  which  were  not  elaborated  in  tho  older 
literatnre.  The  proldtnn  as  t,o  whetlier  tlie  compl^^f^c  form  was  known  in  early  Vedio 
tiit'ms  does  not  iwlniit  «>f  a |„>asse-partoxit  solution. 

SB.  h 6,  4,  HT.;  for  <aher  iustauoes  see  e.g,  also  I,  7,  3,  1;  1,  8,  l,^lff. 

J.  IJoNOA,  (jhimge  aiul  continuity  in  Indian  religion,  The  Hague  1966,  eh.  II. 
For  rUlier  etymological  explatavtions  see  (^.g.  FB.  4,  10,  1 ; BB,  I,  2,  6,  7. 

Hee  ButHiMVijeon,  at  OAOS  16,  p.  143;  D'UMl^zru,  Hcnir  (vt  imilhcau*  du  gnerrior, 
p.  33. 

abovis  chapter  HI*  p.  U7f.  and  e.g.  K.  W.  HomaNS,  Epics  mythology, 
Btrassburg  1916,  p.  266;  H.  Hommsun,  Index  to  the  names  in  the  Mahribharata,. 
Loralon  1904  (Varaiumi  1963),  p,  602. 

MH.  4,  3,  4;  TB,  1,  7,  E Of.;  PB.  12,  6,  8;  ^5B.  12,  7,  3,  L 
t^B.  12,  7,  I,  10;  3,  1. 


388 


J.  (5oii(in  • Vwiit*  l.i{«'n»turi' 


night.)  with  foam  of  ■n-ai.ov  (which  ia  neither  wet  nor  iiry)»«.  Ak  alao  in 
caw'B,  th<^  Htory  which  contaiija  wane  nujior  |a>intN  (t)  that  may  he  i*7 
Tinmen  tioned~iH  in  the  varions  texta  not  jacaenfeti  in  if  a c{>m]ilete  to”* 
though,  of  (ionrae,  auiiahly  Jiticii  in  ila  eonfextri.  ' 

Not  infriHinently  mention  i.a  mmie  of  Iiniraa  aaaocialion  witlj  other 
minent  goda”;  of  hia  l>eing  the  at  rongcaf  of  ffio  goda  and  a Icinh-r  in  hattlX 
of  Ilia  identity  with  nolhlit.y,  Ida  naaocialion  with  «'ncrgy,  vital  anil  generate! 
power”,  hi.H  birtl)  or  origin»h  hia  r<>laf  iona  witii  varioiia  ('ntiliea;  of  the^id^ 
which  he  remiered  to  thoae  who  are  in  diafreaa”.  It  i.a  not.  anrpriaing  that  th' 
yajurvedie  texts  lik(^  to  uHaoeiate  him  witli  the  aaerilieia!  rile.H  of  which  1)0  1^ 
said  to  be  the  god  or  Iiaider,  or  with  entities  of  ritmd  importanee:  lie  k 
dueed  by  He  and  iSfimim”.  Klaewin're  Indra  ia  aaid  to  have  rei'onrae  to 
earthly  sage:  vHB.  1 , 1 , 24 : 


“The  goda  and  tht'  <wfww  eontendtal  with  each  other.  Hot  ween  l.bem 
practised  nuateriUt's.  Indra  went,  up  to  him  and  said.  Wei  aa  a spv  f„r  ns  bero> 
I cannot  do  so,  hi'  answeriHl.  'Then  let  mi'  go  m your  nhnoe,'  jiai,j  ina,.,,  .4' 
you  think  fit.’'’  * ^ 


A popniar  tht'nui”  was  that  of  Indra  a vniioim  erinie.i:  he  kjlh'ii  t.lu'  son  of 
Tvaspir  and  other  tn'eatures,  gave  the  Yat is  a myt  hieal  raee  to  t-he  liyaenas' 
he  Went  to  the  forest  and  after  the  other  goda  had  drelmed  I.,  wieriliet'  for  hitti 
Agni  rid  him  of  his  sin”.  There  an'  also  relereneec  to  hin  love  affairs”. 

IVajSpati”  who,  assuming  the  eharaeteri«f  tea  oi  a tmpretne  deity,  hml  in  the 
hatapatha  come  to  oeenpy  a very  import tmt  plaee,  w the  eenkal  figure  in 
many  passagt's  ilealing  with  primordial  events  wh,eh.  explaining  origins  are 


nil,  I,  *7^  I,  0f.;  Pli,  II,  Hfw  111',  *|*|i  1 i|  1 * 111  ft  t rf  t *1  ' 

lU,  ntihmvimnSli 

” Agni,  yanma.  Indra.  each  of  them  elaiintiig  kingnhip  (,81*.  2,  «,  4 } jy  v.  Am,; 
Iwto  and  Sfirya  (KB.  4.  fl, .},  I).  ‘ ' 

” |H.  4,  (!,  fl,  Sir.;  4,  (i,  H.  14:  fl.  2.  .'i.  3, 

!!  f!!'  -h  Ih  H;  ft.  '*h  ft,  i)  I'te. 

•»  SB.  .'h  2.  I,  2(1;  3,  3,  4.  iHj  U.  I.  (1.  la. 

” 'IB.  3,  2(17:  PB.  Ifi.  ft.  20. 

" SB.  1,  4.  ft.  4;  4,  1,  2,  US;  4,  (5.  7.  II. 

o '"af.T"  I'«h-a’H  name  imtl  birth  f.\’,  3.  .Shkmik.  .ifp,  a?  N.  s.  2 

fStrrm’io/*-'  *'*  *’**'  **1 'B,  2t!  ,N . ,S,  2. 31!)  •'.Senm 

j)®i<A.s  a,  s (.«4i, 

.Si(l<n,irhwM.VwnM^^  •''“'.'li.l.'..  V.,1. 

themes  in  that  work.  »«*'''’«  «»“««>..„  of  at...„t  7ft  mythical 

n TxM,  »>'  7 ft . A ill  j nil  u 1 * i 4,.*  . 

MJAOH  HI,  p,  12IH  WKKifitt  lit  I 4 u i ' ‘ 

II  ' * ^ ' WiittKH*  U I,  H,  .XUH  |»,  IIH  : V.  m WXKM  11.  p. 

imtu  'jB,  1 ^4(1,  *^^**^^  Inilm  Hi'iittniig  tt*  wtt* 

Josin,  at  AB()m*B/(U)72).*p^^^^  AHlf,  It.  i.  j,.  7:,l.  R. 


The  Brtlhmanas 


389 


paradigmatic®^,  lie  creatcB  the  living  beings  which  are  his  offspring®®,  devas 
and  asums^'^y  tlie  ninverse  and  the  sacrifice  as  a oonntcrpart  of  himself.  Whereas 
the  mytii  of  his  sexiial  nniou  with  his  daughter®®  is  a (diffexently  narrated) 
variant  of  the  thenw^  of  the  primeval  incest®®,  exploited  to  suit  a sacrificial 
purpose,  his  ritual  dismemberment  is  the  very  foundation  on  which  the 
brilhmanic  theory  of  the.  saerifice  has  been  reared.  Every  great  sacrifice  is  a 
repetition  of  ibe  aniuiypal  sacrilioe  in  which  ftajapati,  taking  the  place  of 
the  PuruBa®^,  while  hiving  dismembered,  was  transformed  into  the  universe. 
This  most  important  thetno.  gives  ample  occasion  to  mythological— and  at  the 
same  titne  ritualistic - variation  and  elaboration.  When,  after  having  created 
creatures,  he  became  disjointed,  the  sacrificial  god  Agni  restored  him;  "^'there- 
fore, while  being  Ibajapati,  people  call  him  Agni”®®.  He  is  indeed  also  identified 
with  Agni  who,  indispensable  to  the  performance,  is  like  Prajapati  himself, 
assutircd  to  be  identical  with  the  sacrifice®®.  Since  the  sacral  act  is  believed  to 
be  the  eoutiterpart  of  the  great  cosmic  drama  it  can,  in  the  interest  of  the 
sacrificer,  inlluenee  and  determine  the  cosmic  processes,  and  re-establish  the 
unity  and  totality  of  the  universe.  According  to  the  ritual  theory— which  was 
especially  applii'd  to  the  agnicayana  rite  that  could  bo  associated  with  any  soma 
sacrifwxv  the  ritual  is  not  only  to  reintegrate  Prajapati  so  as  to  enable  him 
to  continue  his  ereativi^  activity,  but  also  to  bring  about  a development, 
transformation,  new  birtli  and  higher  existence  of  the  saixificer  who  in  and 
through  this  ritual  is  iiltudbunl  with  Prajapati"^®. 

Of  special  inten^st  are  also  the  creatiou  myths  in  which  Prajapati  is  the 

central  figurt^ in  mothu'n  ivvcH  curious  mixtures  of  costnogonic  speculation  and 

ritualism.  In  tlm  majority  of  tliese  myths  he  is  the  only  creator.  After  the 

creation of  living  beings,  brahman^  the  earth,  Agni,  various  creatures— is 

accomplished,  IVajapivti,  who  has  mortified  himself,  is  exhausted  so  that  his 
strength  is  - not.  in  all  narrativi^s,  it  is  true— to  bo  restored  by  some  sacrifice 
or  ritual  a<d.,  tlu^  p<u'fonnance  of  which  is  a matter  for  variation*h  The  ritual 


geo  6B.  h 7,  4,  Iff;  7,  1,  2,  lit;  11,  1,  8,  3. 

« E.g.Tg,2,  1,  1,4;  5,5,  2,  1;TB.  1,  1,3,  5;  4,  3;  5,  4;  2,  2,  1,^1;  3,  1,4,  2.  For 
other  sUuii^s  handed  down  in  various  versions  see  TB.  2,  4,  4;  MS.  2,  2,  4;  KB-  10, 
n (Prajapati  creataug  catth^  and  Pu^an  bociuning  their  ruler  etc.),  cf,  Gonx>a, 
Dual  deitii^H,  p.  353;  (Jib,  JIJB.,  ChU.):  Oimmhy  at  JAOB  15,  p.  233;  23,  p. 
320. 

K.g.TB.  1,  1,  3,  11;  5,  7;  2,  1,  2,  1;  3,  10,  9,  1;  &B,  1,  2,  4,  8;  4,  2,  4.  11;  11, 
5 9 3 

AiB.  3.  ;t:h  FB.  8,  2,  10;  .TB.  3,  202;  SBM.  1,  7,  4,  1;  SBK.  2.  7,  2.  Iff.:  of. 
IW.  H),  (il,  7 iwul  TB.  3.  I,  4,  2 (FAFhB  98,  p.  210). 

»*  Ff.  H.  B.  Kaiinik.  at  12  AUK!  I,  p.  240. 

« Hwp.  137  f.;  373. 

»»  SB.  (!.  1,  2,  nCf.:  7.  1.  2,  UT.;  of.  10,  4.  2. 

»*  6B.  0.  1.  1.  r>:  2,  3;  10,  4,  1.  12.  „ , , „ ,a  . r 

*“  Cf.  AB.  5,  2.  1,  2;  0,  1,  2,  171T.:  «,  2,  2,  21;  7,  4,  1,  lOf.;  10,  1,  i,  10;  10,  1,  5, 

Adl.^’o,  Iff.;  SB.  2,  2.  4,  Iff.;  3,  9,  I,  Iff.;  4,  (i,  4,  1;  C,  1,  1,  12ff.;  7,  4,  1,  10; 


390 


J.  Gojidrt  • Viidio  Liii'nitiir)' 


which,  in  the  myth,  gives  relief  is  on  that  oci^amon  pc^rfoumMi  lor  the  first  time 
and  so  established  as  a permanent  institutiom  Ther<\  ar('  some  interesting 
variants:  in  SB.  2,  5, 1, 1 ff.  the  creatures  passcHl  away  after  they  had  come  into 
being  so  that  Prajapati  had  to  etx'ate  new  ereatnres  that  |>ro(hie«Hl  milk— ‘'by 
resorting  to  the  breast  the  beings  en^ated  by  him  theitetdbtili  eontinned  to 
exist' —or,  according  to  amither  vermon,  h<v  |>roihi('ecl  rait^  by  means  of  a 
sdman  of  which  he  had  a vision^®. 

As  may  be  expected  there  is  a considerable  amotmt  of  hn^dhologmng'  and 
what  usually— but  not  quite  correctly  is  (*alled  p<U'sonifieation : Sacrifice, 
Gayatri  and  the  other  metres  are  nq)reseni<Hl  as  speaking  and  aed  ing  like  living 
beings  and  the  Earth  is  said  to  have  gone  to  witiu^ss  tlu^  mmm  animal  ofFering«: 
the  well-known  personal  mode  of  thought  and  exprc'Hsion  of  arteient  man. 
Mention  has  already  been  made  of  the  importanei'  atfaehed  to  Spt'eeh  or  Word 
(Vac)'^'*,  which  as  a female  figure  makes  lier  a|)p<‘araiUH’i  in  many  narratives.  It 
may— also  because  of  the  theories  of  later  grammarians  and  |>hiloBophers  in 
connection  with  the  conception  of  6m/wiaM«as. w<>r( added  tfliat  the  myths 
about  Vac*®  arc  in  part  cosmogonic- and  then  Vfie  is  the  manifestation  of  a 
latent  creative  power  associated,  either  as  his  wife  or  as  his  |>rogeny,  with 
Pi'ajapati— ; partly  connected  with  the  BrwM  which  being  in  the  sky  was 
coveted  by  the  gods  but  stolen  by  a gandJmrmi  the  gotk  send  Vile  to  fetch 
it— and  })artly  with  the  perpcdual  struggic  betwi^m  t4te  gmls  (derm)  and  the 
anti-gods  (emmw):  first  sla^  Ixdongs  to  the  mtirm  l)ut  tlic  gods,  ihrtmgh  tlic 
intermediary  <)f  Sacrifice  (a  |)<u‘son)  who  be<*konH  h(n%  stn^'i'ecd  in  winning  her 
over  to  their  side*^. 

Other  myths  deal  with  the  primeval  watt^rs*^  on  wlueii  t lu'  I'arth  is  firmly 
established;  TS.  6,  6,  4,  2f.: 

“Waters  were  in  the  world  at  first,  the  moving  Brajilpatn  having  be- 
come wind,  rookc'^d  about  on  a lotits  k>af**.  .Me  find  no^  lirni  support.  He 

saw  that  nest  of  the  water's.  On  it  hi^  piled  fire,  q'hat.  l,S'eame  this  (earth).  Then 
indeed  did  he  find  a firm  support*,  “ 


of.  O0N.0.A,  E,  1. 1,  p.  ISO.  For  hrahmtm  en^ating  in  a similar  wny  see^  tMi  .1,  1,  21?. 
For  Prajupati  and  bmhman,  JB.  2,  StJOf. 

« JB.  1,  14S;  PB.  7,  10,  U;  JB.  1,  117;  h 187;  PB.  H,  B,  ,l4iT.;  of  also  tSB.  7, 
5,  2,  6. 

« E.g.  TB.  3,  12,  4,  2fT.;  to.  3,  2,  1,  10;  4,  2,  4,  21;  3,  B.  3,  2B. 

**  Sec  above,  p.,69  ff. 

See  e.g.  M.  BjAiiDKAtr,  ThOorio  do  la  connmHSfmcc  H plulimoplito  la  parole 
dans  le  brahmanismo  classkiue,  Th(^  Haguc.paris  1IHI4,  |>.  2th1. 

V.  N,  M.ISRA,  in  ,Proc.  20  Int.  Chngr.  of  Orient.  Ill,  1,  p.  100  a, ml  Vnl  Kavinlj, 
Lucknow  1907,  p.  20, 

Cf.  e.g.  IvH.  12,  (>;  27.  1;  JB.  2,  202  (sec  also  AiB.  fi.  32);  Aitl,  1,  27;  3, 

2,  4,  3;  3,  2,  1.^  IBfL 

800  also  BB.  0,  B,  2,  2f, ; 7,  4,  1,  0;  U,  1,  fi,  At  A.  2,  I,  B ami  CiUrtpam  M. 
Eliao®,  The  saorcKl  and  the  profane,  New  Vttrk  1957  (1 1101),  p,  129;  Images  et 
symbolos,  Paris  1902,  p.  199. 

For  the  lotus:  S.  Basu,  at  VIJ  4 (1900),  p.  39;  9 (1971),  |i.  20. 


Tho  Brahtixanas 


391 


with  a B()<‘ial  iA<'t  mich  a8  the  lour  claBBcw  (JB.  1,  68  f.),  with  the  exiKstenco  of  a 
god  who  i8 1>(>  |>tniiBh  traungrcHHorH  (3,  262).  Or  they  arc  variations  on  the  theme 
of  the  (|ueBt  for  the  elixir  of  life®'*: 

“When  (the)  (h'iyatr!  flew  f.owards  8onia,  a footless  arolier  aiming  at  her  while 
she  wiw  carrying  him  (it»)  otT,  B<naM'(vd  on<^  of  th<^  feathers,  either  of  (the)  Gayatrl 
or  of  king  8oma'^  ‘*Now  8oma  wiw  in  the  sky,  and  tho  gods  were  here  on  earth. 
The  gotls  dnsired,  ‘Would  that  Soma  came  to  ns  “Soma,  when  carried 

off  by  (hlyaf.rf,  was  «nicloHed  in  two  golden  cups;  sharp-edged  they  closed  to- 
gethca’  at  every  f»winkling  of  the  eye^’^k 

Or  on  that  of  tlu^  corupiesi^  of  a phu‘,e  of  the  gods,  beyond  the  reach  of  men  and 
other  crc'atnres®*^,  eombiiKHl  with  tlu^  motif  of  a secret  knowledge  enabling  the 
hero  of  the  tale  to  gaitt  ae<H^ss  to  it;  in  JB.  3,  76f.  there  are  also  the  exceptional 
position  of  tlio  man  wlio  is  disloyal  and  the  story  of  an  origin : 

“The  Afigirases,  dt'sirous  of  lu'aven,  performed  a long  sacrifice.  They  did  not 
however  know  (the  way  heading  to)  it.  One  of  the  Afigirases  had  gone  away  to 
fetch  hiel.  Thtm  th(^  gandhart'a  tJrnayu  flying  over  (him)  with  (i.e.  while  singing) 
this  mlmmi  said,  ‘This  mlman  leads  to  heaven;  with  that  you  (plural)  must  praise; 
having  praised  with  it  you  will  know  (the  way  to)  heaven!  Yon  should,  however, 
say  that  the  mlman  is  mine.  Wlu'ii  somebody  might  ask  you,  ‘Who  has  communi- 
cat'd ii  to  yon  1\  you  must,  say  ‘flrnayu  has  comxnnnicated  it  to  you.’  Don’t  say 
that  it  comes  from  anotht'r  than  me  . . llowt'ver,  after  returning  ho  says  that 
he  himself  hiwl  seen  tlie  His  relatives  praised  with  it  and  weixt  to  heaven. 

He  had  to  remain  is'lund  and  mm  transformed  in  a s|>ol»ted  snake  (^vitra)^  lionoo 
Hnak<w  are  called  o/in  because  fivitra  had  rtanaiued  behind  ((Myata).^^ 

To  tlu'  t^pisixh's  whi<'h  recur  in  latc'r  liicraitirc®®  (<d‘.  Mbh.  3,  a.  185)  belongs 
also  tlie  Ttuiian  v<*rHion  of  the  Deluge  ; 6B.  1,  8,  1,  Iff.®^: 

Wlien  Mann,  the  first,  man,  waslu's  himself,  a fish  cornt^s  into  his  hands  who 
promist's  t,o  save  him  from  a flood  which  will  carry  away  all  creatures,  if  ho  is 

A*  K,  CooMauASWAMY,  in  Htudit^s  and  ('ssays  G.  8arton,  Now  York  1944,  p. 
4(15  (not  all  (sanbinations  art^  capable  of  pr<M)f). 

6B.  1,  7,  U 1 (cf,  KoonuiNO,  ftB.  I,  p.  452);  3,  2,  4,  1;  3,  6,  2,  B;  cf.  11,  7,  2, 
S;  TH.  (k  1,  5;  TB.  1,1,  3,  HK 

AiB,  B,  23,  lih  'Ftif  a variant  of  3B.  3,  7(1  f.:  PB.  12,  11,  Off.  It  is  a well-known 
tlieme  in  tht^  fmlhmafim  tliat,  tlic  siM'rs  comt\  after  the  gods,  to  know  tho  way  to 
heav<m;  st'e  e.g.  PB.  8,  5,  7. 

« For  as  a dwarf  (SB.  I,  2,  5,  5;  cf.  T8.  2,  1,  3;  TB.  1,  0,  1,  6)  sec  Gonoa, 
E.  L 1,  p.  251 ; G.  (7il  1’iurATiu,  X)ta'  'Urspnmg  uud  <lic  Kntwicklung  dor  Vfimana- 
Legendi^  in  der  indisclani  Liit'ratur,  Wiesbaden  1908.  For  a mythical  complex 
oonnect('d  with  tluPhorse,  the  taming  of  its  wikhw^ss  (GB,  1,  2,  IB),  its  association 
with  Agni  w tire,  (^>B.  7.  3,  2,  14),  its  Ixung  sacred  to  Varupa  (5,  3,  1,  5 etc.),  th<^ 
oc(um  (waters)  as  the  woml>  «>f  the  horm^  (T8.  7,  5,  25,  2;  ftB,  5,  1,  4,  5),  the  horso- 
heati  connect.ed  with  the  myths  of  tla^  sec'kiug  of  Fire  and  the  seeking  of  soma  (14. 
I,  1 . IBff,)  t'tc.  Hef'  W.  DoNuiKH  G’FuAnwaTy,  Th(^  sulanarine  mare  in  th(i  mythology 
of  ^iva.  J EAK  1071,  p.  17.  Fiir  Mamfs  sacrifice  (and  other  tluvmc^s)  sew  3.  Hbutmo, 
at  WKKM  25,  p.  153;  A,  B.  Knrrn,  at  J EAH  1013,  p.  412.  O'or  tlu^  Naoiketas  (^pisodci 
(TB.  3,  n,  H);  Katha  I'lpanifgwl  I'-ik 

Wkukh.  I.  H.  I,  p,  1(11;  3.  Mana,  Original  Hauskrit  Texts,  Loralon  1B72,  H*, 
p.  IHl;  l!HI;  IL  P.  IvAiiMAiiXAit,  Tho  fish  in  Indian  folklore,  ABOEI  24,  p.  191 
(very  uncritical). 


392 


J.  0(>n<la  ‘ Vodie  Litomturo 


willing  io  r(W  luim.  Haviiig  vomod  <.h(^  iinh  IVIann  IvringH  him  tn  tho  Hoa.  The  fish 
advi«0B  him  io  makt^  a nhip,  and  io  etd^er  ii  aftnr  the  lioo<l  law  riBom  Wlaax  iho 
flood  happotiH  i.<»  Maim  iho  finh  hriugw  him  safely  fo  a monnfam. 

Typically  enongh,  t-lic  foxi  <*onf<iinK\s  f.o  relaie  thai  IVlamn  in  order  io  obiairi 
clcHcendantH,  migagcd  in  wierifu'ing  ami  n,iiHi<a’i<-ies.  Id’otn  iim  sanrilh’c  a woman 
aroBo  within  a year,  (‘alhal  Ida,  fiirongh  whom  hi'  gonentl.i'd  a hmnan  riuxx 
This  I(hl,  however,  in  ih<'  I'SHeniM'  of  f.-he  ofTerittg  (the  M'lide-rHt'geid),  “and  wlio- 
ever  knowing  thin  pmdornus  (HaerifieeH)  with  (fim)  hid  propnguleH  f.luH  race*’ 
(11).  Origin  from  a Semitic,  nimree,  ilunigh  nion'  than  oni'e  mipposeih^^^  is 
incapable  of  proofs®. 

TlieBc  mytliB  are  eloBcly  related  to  ih<'  pri'vniling  eoma^pfton  of  fitiu'.  Idieir 
scene  is  laid  in  a remote  past,  sonu'iimt'H  vngmdy  indiea!-wl  huf^^  always  set 
outside  the  normal  temporal  sehmne.  Idumojuemd  tiirxe  is  rt^ga-rchal  as  a 
reenrring  eych'.®^  in  which  events,  snch  as  t he  seasons  and  t !u'  growth  of  plants 
and  animals®®,  repeat  themselvi's  in  a regtihvr  siHpH'nee.  Tims  the  year  is  the 
full  time  cycle  and  by  ‘gaining'  it  one  mastt'rs  the  wdmle  of  t ime ; it  is  tlie  hvomb 
of  all  beings'  and  beyond  it  is  tlii^  immortal®^.  In  thi'  attmnptH  tto  I'larify  the 
nature  of  such  cycles  myths  play  a large  part.  tVrtain  |>owers.  tlu^  leading 
figures  of  the  myths,  are  beyond  the  eyele®’^  and  outside  time®*  and,  being 
imalfected  by  it,  able  to  eontrol  or  infhienei'  what  happens  in  the  world.  In 
the  stories,  wlu'tlu'r  mythical  or  h'gi'ndary,  time  is  not^  clearly  indi<'a,ted  and 
is  no  lactor  of  importance.  Only  thorn'  events  wlneli  are  releviudi  to  t*he  *plot' 
are  narrated  atid  these  twnally  ftillow  each  other  closely  and  so  an  t,o  be  I'on- 
nected  in  their  tinu’*  He(|tumc('.  1he  lapse,  of  time  hclwcim  them  is  liowi'vcr 
either  left  unmcntioiu'd  '*'Li't  a son  be  born  to  me  . . ./  ‘lit'  it  stn*  To  him  a 
son  was  born"  (AiB.  7,  14,  2)— or  eomletmi'd,  the  progress  of  time,  if  indicated 
at  all®**,  being  markial  by  "then,  tlvereaiter''®®,  a pri^grt'Hsive  partieh'  or,  iix  a 
minority  of  cases,  more  coiu*,rct<4y:  "after  mw  year’*;  *ddr  a,  yt'ar  he  wandered 


WiNTK,HNtTO,  H.  I.  L,  I,  p.  210:  lht>  Flutsagt'u  dcs  Alttwtuiiw  und  th'r  Natur- 
volkor,  Mitt.  d.  anthropob  (h's.  in  Wien  31  (1901).  p,  303;  A.  llonnsauHOKH,  Die 
indisohe  Flutsage,  Ltnpzig  1930.  Of.  also  \V*  liuimN.  m.  Imhan  *Stutla^«  piwt  and 
proBont,  7,  p.  137;  337. 

Various  fiood  and  d<4ug(>  motivi's  are,  in  nmiiiim  tmly  this,  alwn  foupient  in 
myths  of  American  peopli^s;  see  tng.  W,  Kau'KHnEim  and  tUht'rs.  Die  Ueligionen 
dos  alten  Amorika,  Stuttgart  1901,  p.  394  s.v.  Himilui;  M.  Jxooiw.  11ie  content 
and  stylo  of  an  oral  litw'aturtv  (dxicago  1959,  p..  244. 

The  term  Tcvolving'  occurs  c.y.  2,  3,  3,  II;  3,  2,  2.  4;  3,  4.  4.  15;  ,11,  2, 
5,  4;  of,  8,  4,  1,  25.  Bee  also  M.  ,fluanw.  Tim*'  and  etiwinty  tn  Imliaii  tlamght, 
Francs  Yearbook  3,  New  5h)rk  1957,  p.  173. 

a:  e.g.  :PB.  is,  4,  11 ; 19,  IB,  5;  HB.  7,  2,  4.  20;  H.  4.  t.  25;  H.  5.  2.  10. 

(If.  PB.  4,  7,  0;  18,  9,  7;  BB.  8*  4,  1,  24;  Bb  2,  0.  4;  *4*.  11.  1.2.  11 P;  1 1.  5,  2. 
10;  12,  1,  3,  20;  22. 

Of.  e.g.  Bli.  11,  2,  3,  3 (*tb.e  Hpht'U'  layomP). 

And  so  are  man's  religioiw  mi^ritH  (.^B.  2,  3,  3.  11). 

Very  often  there  is  no  .indication;  see  t'.g.  Ailh  2,  19;  3*  30;  Bll.  11.  ll,  1. 

Boo  e.g.  AiB.  7,  14,  1;  15,  L 


Tlu\  Bralrnmniw 


393 


ill  the  wild'’  (AiB.  7,  14,  9).  When  a penson  ia  not  explicitly  said  to  be  a girl  or 
an  old  nian*^*  lu'  is  ])raetit‘a,lly  without  age. 

Episodes  siieh  as  tlu^  leginid  of  l5miabsepa  (AiB.  7,  while  being 

ahnost  free  from  any  ri'dnnchiney,  are  stiictly  composed  of  mcidents  and 
coheriait  wlioh^s  mainly  by  tiuar  consistent  time  sequence.  These  are  nowhere 
intcrrnpt<'d  by  ii  flanshba<*k:  in  7,  14  HiuHH'Ssions  of  short  and  parallel  conversa- 
tions tak<'  pla<'<>  wlu'n  Rohita*  is  born,  is  more  than  ten  days  old,  is  teething 
and  so  on.  Vmiml  rtdalions  a,n'  not  however  absimt,  but  may  remain  implicit: 
whcai  Vanina  slriki's  RohitaAs  father  with  dropsy  (7,  15,  1)  because  the  young 
man  bad  gom^  to  tlu^  wild,  the  author  uses  the  connective  particle  atha  which 
introdnees  a new  (dmuentt  or  marks  trhe  beginning  of  the  following  phase  of  the 
narrative®®.  Tlunn^  are  of  eourst^  variations:  links  in  the  time  sequence  may  be 
omitted:  thus,  at  JB.  1,  42  Bhrgu  arrives  no  less  than  six  times  in  yonder 
world  but  only  aftc^r  his  last  visit  mention  is  made  of  his  I'eturn.  Or  the  author 
has  to  interrupt-  the  (dironologieal  succession  of  incidents  by  a descriptive 
passage  (ibidmu). 

That  alrmidy  in  t-he  |)r(sbrahmanie  ixa-iod  there  existed  a certain  amount  of 
legendary  ma-ttaa'  whiidi  was  drawn  uiion  by  the  compilers  of  our  present 
brdhmtmm  is  a.  plauHilih^  snppoHitiom  the  more  so  as  these  tc^xts  have  in  common 
a nnmbi'r  of  Htori<\H  wdth  typically  legendary  features:  the  primarily  religious 
purport,  manifestation  of  uneomnum  ahilitii^s,  the  vietoriouHiu'.ss  or  superiority 
of  the  luTO,  t.euHion  or  conlliid.  pre<'eding  the  culminating  point.  The  story  of 
old  aiul  (liHuipit  (\vavana®A  brii'fly  refiTred  to  at  RV.  1,  110,  10  and  recalled 
at  BB.  14,  0,  10,  is  the  Hul)jei>t  of  a long  section  in  JB.  2,  120^-128  and  SB.  4,  1, 
5,  wluu’e  t»lu^  priiu’ipal  figure  is  d<'s(*ribtHl  as  wedding  Sukanya  and  as  being 
rejuvxuiated  by  immersion  in  a |H>nd  - the  first  oeenrrenca^  of  a well-known 
motif.  In  tlu'*  fonma^'  tt^xt-  it  reads: 

“Oyavana,  tlu'  son  of  Bhfgu,  kiuav  the  ritual  knowledge  (hrdhmana)  of  (Eudra) 
VaMtu|'»a®^.  addressed  his  sons  as  ibllows,  ‘Sun^ly,  I know  the  knowledge  of 
(Rudra)  Vastupa.  Rut-  mo  thou  down  (thrice)  in  the  (vacattal  sacrificial)  place  and 
taki,^  your  l(au*o/  I'hoy  ropliotl,  A¥o  cannot  <lo  that.  We  shall  be  abused.  People 
will  say  about-  ua,  ‘'ris'y  liavo  abauthaual  tlunr  fatlu'r.’  'Not  so,'  said  he,  'you 
will  surely  fu^  tlu^  bot4-<a'  for  it,  aiul  1 on  th<'>  ot-hor  hand  sliaU  have  the  hopi^  of 
rt'juvt ‘nation.  Just  leave  mo  aiul  go  away.'  wert^  his  instructions.  Dopo- 

At  TO.  J,  10,  11,  J Bhararlvuja  is  an  old  man  after  three  lifctimcB*  study  of 
t.he  Veda. 

« Hoo  below,  p.  400  and,  n.g.,  also  JB.  1,  22ff.;  42fT.;  2,  122ff,;  12(:if.;  269ff.; 
27tHT. 

'riiis  obi'iorvaiion  tloos  luJ*  of  esmrst^  to  tlu^  'thta'ivroriJ  or  ‘that  is  why* 

introdumng,  afi-or  the  oml  of  the  story  p:rt>pt'i%  iho  Htatetnuaxt  of  a custom,  institu- 
iitm  et(a  tlotermmoil  tla^  myth  (e.g,  AiB.  2,  30,  3). 

« chapter  111,  p,  124:  alw>  Mbh,  3,  a,  l2ItT.;  llomuNM,  at  J"A()8  20,  p.  1; 
411:  H.  A.  l)ANtin,  at  JIB  45,  p.  300;  (.‘oomahahwamv,  at  IHQ  13,  p.  20();  traus- 
latiiouH  by  WiitTMivv,  at  I'AOH  1BH3,  JAOH  11,  p.  BXbV;  Calano,  Auswahl,  p.  253 
and  compare 'PH,  3,  10,  1 1,  3. 

ViiHtupa:  Hot^  TH.  3,  I,  0,  0;  All.  I,  7,  3,  1. 


394 


J.  (Jonda  * laiorattm' 


siting  Mm  tlion  by  thn  *F<nmi  of  YontF'  at-  t.b('  {rivor)  Kariwvaif  ihoy  t.ook  tboir 
leave.  Abandoned  oti  tbe  (va<n^ted  H{^.erideial)  place  h«^  }n'ononne(Ml  tb(> 

*May  I be  rejnv<>nated,  liiul  a girl  for  a wife*  ami  worsbip  (ibe  godH)  \vit,b  a thou- 
sand (oatthd.’  He  had  a vinion  of  this  chant  {eallt'd  ilte  C■''y^ivana,  ‘chant  of  Cya- 
vana’),  and  landt'd  with  it.  While  he.  was  landing,  f^aryalin  ^IVItwndH  son,  settled 
near  hiiti  witli  his  elan.  Tlie  yoting  etevhenls  and  shepherds  (of  »Saryat,a's  eom- 
pany)  smeared  him  with  ehy%  balls  of  duttg.  ashes  and  duni,  fie  nuuhs  discord 
among  the  deseendatits  of  Haryida.  so  that'  mtdher  igne-nsi  stm:  non,  toother 
Then  Sarykta^  Mantds  son,  stud,  Tlav<'  yott  anything  fdsmt,  her(^  which 
produced  this  (state  of  aflairs)  They  replied:  ‘Nhdhing  other  tlum  this:  there 
is  an  old  decripit  man  lying  lawe.  1‘he  young  eowherds  and  shepherds  luw<^  today 
smeared  him  wdth  clay,  Italls  of  dung*  itshc'.s  and  dn«t,.  ‘fhen  tins  has  Itappeued 
thus  ..d”  The  Jaimittiya-Briihinana  eontmties  the  story  as  felhavs:  Saryfita 
recognizes  Cyavana  who,  m ('Xpiathm  ami  nderrmg  to.  ins  knowh'dgi^  of  the 
6f^^itnatiaofVHStupa,  thanands  and  oht.ains  Sukanya.  th?'  f<trmer‘s  daughttn"®®.  Her 
clan^  however,  tells  her  to  run  aw“ay  from  him  as  soon  as  they  shonki  l>roak 
their  camp,  but  Cyavana  previuda  \m*  from  dvung  so  through  the  Ijtdp  of  a snake, 
Tnst  at  that  time  the  Ai^vins  wen^  wandering  about  among  men  m physicians.  Ou 
seeing  Bnkanya  they  desired  h(n%  lad.,  she  refusmi,  Wlam  tla^y  nd  timed  site  at  the 
instance  of  her  husband  (Cyavana)  told  them  that  he  emdd  make  them  partakers 
of  the  wna-drink  to  which  they  nm^er  hmi  been  invited.  Cyavana  then  coiwtluded 
an  agreement  with  thtam  that*  they  .should  rejuvenat.e  hnn  and  he  should  make 
them  drinkers  of  corned®.  8o  thi'y  carried  lutn  t.o  the  ‘Yont.h.pla.ee‘  of  t-lm  Baras- 
vatl’h  from  whicli  lie  came  up,  fair  and  fieantifnh  rejuvenated  and  imlistinguish- 
ablo  from  the  Ajlvins  , . . Finally  (,‘yavana  went  in  t^aryida  and  Maeriticed  for 
him. 


One  of  the  most  famouH  c'pisodes,  t.lm  earUt^d-  (^.^amph^  of  an  iikht/thm,  is  the 

longh^gmd  of  in  AiB.  7.  Ill  IH'»,  Bning  not  !«*  nun-h  hnwd  upon,  as 

inseparably  enibwldod  in,  ritual  it  wns  to  lu'  rerited  nlu-r  Iho  onthroiu'nu'Ut 
of  a king  who  is  boiug  const'cratud’*  it  is  for  many  n-nsonn  rcmarkablo. 

I’^ing  flanscandra,  bi'inpj  nbildtuss,  prays,  on  tbo  *Mlvu'i’  ot  Nurada,  a prirstly 
sour  dwelling  in  bis  boust',  to  V*arupa  t.o  grant  bun  a sf>n,  v'owing  saoritus'  biiu 
to  tbo  god.  A sou  is  born  and  is  wilUsl  Itobita.  but.  m spu .<  of  Varuna's  ntpoaUsl 
dotnaiuls,  tbt*  f’ultiliuont  of  tbo  vow  is  oonstantly  dotorrisl,  VVlioii  Hobita  has 
grown  an  fulult  youtb  and  is  t.(4d  t.lro  lab*  awaUtng  buu,  Ui*  ri*tusoii  tt*  ho  Ma(U*i(io(st 
and  gooH  to  tlw  junglt*.  Wbi'tt  bow««vor  Aartina  punmhrs  h(;<  fat  hoc  wit  h dropsy 
bo  bfvstons  botnoward,  but.  Indra  ooufVontuig  bun  in  tbo  form  of  a Iirahmiii. 
extols  tbo  fortuuo  of  a waudoror  and  porsuiulos  bun  to  wandor  for  auot.bor  yi'ar 


At  bB,  4,  1,  n,  7 baryiita  odors  Sukauya  of  bi.s  ow  n aooord. 

7 y , ■ tboro  is  no  bargain;  tbo  Aiiviiw  inako  t'vavana  young, 

and  tbon  bo  oxiilains  t.o  tboiii  why  tbov  aro  inoomplofo. 

” BB.  4,  1,  fi,  liJ  spoaks  only  of"  a pool. 

’*  Boo  o.g.  Max  Mth.LKii,  History  of  aiioiout  .Sau!4kri(  htoriUuro.  I.oudou-Kdin- 
burg  1859,  p.  408;  57!t;  Haou,  Ai.H.  II,  p.  4111);  Uorii.  in  Wobor,  I.  S,  I,  p.  457;  II 
**■  *•  ’*  !’•  td.iiKNUKnu,  in  Nt;  H»l  t.  p,  4tU  ( K.  B.,' 

T>'  'f.  *’■  <b  lb  Miwit..  Maniou  Hrahinau. 

XariH  Hktfi,  p.  tW;  H.  U.  NAiurtAHi,  in  Vobiiuo  1'.  V,  Kano.  iN.ona  1941,  p.  :!t)3; 
’if  '*:.'*; ^***''‘‘  **•  ‘^'“'kHisohon  tioM.  d.  Wiwi.  Itl2,  i Hk.mh:,  m .lA  251), 

p.  172;  .H.  laiMMm.,  at  ^DMH  114.  p.  122, 

lorV’’’  ‘'“kan  royal  oonwH-rat ion,  Tboms  Utrooht 

1957,  p.  158.  Boo  BB.  15,  t7ff.;  Spj5.  IK,  1«.  luff. 


Tlio  Brill itntmaB 


395 


in  tho  wild.  ThiB  in  n^pt'atod  fivo  ilmoB.  In  tlxo  sixth  year  ho  moots  a starving 
brahmin,  Ajfgartia,  wlio  (Kwmonts  to  soli  him  one  of  his  sons  to  ransom  himself 
through  him.  As  the  hither  <io('H  not  wish  to  part  with  the  oldest  and  the  mother 
rofnses  to  part  with  the  youngest  son,  ho  rocoivos  the  middle  one,  Sunah^epa. 
Having  gone  to  Ins  father  h(>  luis  Vanina's  approval- —{the  god:)  *‘a  brahmin  is 
bettor  than  a noblenumd*  8viuah^(^pa  is  to  bo  offered  in  the  place  of  the  sacrificial 
animal  on  ih<'  oiH^asion  of  i%  rdjmfa^a  rite,  the  royal  consecration.  When  no  one  is 
howi^ver  fomnl  who  will  nmh'rt.ake  to  bind  the  victim,  AjTgarta  volnntoers  to  do 
80  and  to  slay  lum,  ea<'h  act.  for  another  Imudrtid  cows.  Then  Snnah^opa  takes 
refuge  with  tlu»  most  iiromimad,  gods,  praising  them  with  l^V.  1,  24,  l“-27,  IS  and 
29,  1-SO,  thus  IxHmming  the  ‘stH'r’  of  these  stanzas.  The  gods  successively 
refer  him  from  one  t>o  anotlurr,  thl  by  praising  the  goddess  Usas  (Dawn)  he  is 
releastnl  from  his  and  his  fathia'  becomes  free  from  disease.  On  request  of 

the  prit'sts  ^lunahAi^jia  then  ‘simps'  a new  rite,  the  ‘immediate  pressing’ 

using  m nmntrm  tht^  nine  stanzas  of  HiV.  1,  28’^.  Thei*onpon  the  famous  sage 
Vi.4vamitra,  who  is  act  ing  as  the  hotar,  adopts  SimaMepa  as  his  son,  conferring 
upon  him  the  name  of  Devarilta;  neglecting  his  own  hundred  sons  he  appoints 
him  m his  heir. 

Omitting  a iliscnisHion  of  the  ejnestion  as  to  whether  it  preserves  any  memory 
of  human  saerifuM's^®,  the  first  problem  concerns  the  grounds  on  which  this 
legend  b(‘(*atne  int('grat(Hl  in  the  royal  <H>nsecration,  for  it  may  a priori  be 
snpposiMl  to  fwdaialize  in  its  own  way  tin's  same  reality  as  the  ritual.  The  answer 
has  beett  sotight’^  m original  eharaidm*  of  this  rite  as  a yearly  recurring 
festival  eiTeetiing  ri'uewal  and  t‘<'g<'tun*ation,  the  birth  of  a son  being  conceived 
of  as  a ri'birth  «>f  tlu'  royal  faOu'r  round  whom  the  tbstival  centres  and  whose 
rebirth  is  belii'ved  tn  hhattit^al  with  that  regeneration.  It  may  bo  noticed 
that  l^nnahi^(‘pa,  th<^  brahmin  substitutiN  also  is  ritually  reborn,  taking  another 
name  atul  i^ntt^ring  anotlu'r  fmnily.  Ik^rhaps,  however,  the  recitation  is  simply 
to  prott'ct  thi^  nyal  saerifuH'r  fnmi  'sin’  (as  stated  in  7,  18,  13f.):  Sunab^opa 
neutrali74\H  thi^  sins  eommitHsl  by  others.  As  to  the  theme,  the  sacrifice  of 
one/s  child,  wlietln^r  or  actually  performed,  is  well  known  in  other 

literaturt^s^*^ ; as  always,  t4u'  tlunne  is  elaborated  in  a typically  brithmanic  way. 
It  is  diflhndt  to  say  iii  which  I'lliase  of  development  the  origin  of  the  seven 

ligvedie  li^nnns winch  only  say  that  Hunab^epa,  hound,  invoked  Varuna  to 

set  him  fr<‘e  (1,  24,  12f.)  - was  ine.orporat(Hl  in  it.  As  regards  the  composition 
of  th<^,  narrativis  tiu'  last,  pa-rts-A.lic  adoption  and  the  heritage— impress  us  as 
being  an,  Ik4ng  composed  of  prose  alteimating  with  no  less  than  97 


TH.  fn  2.  K ll;  KS,  UK  11  mention  only  one  stanza  (H.V.  1,  24,  15).  See  also 
(iKLONKin  HV.  I,  p,  24.  'ris'  fgvtHlic  Ht-anzaH  ar(^  not  in  tunc  with  the  brdhmai^a 
version. 

chapbo'  ill,  |o  HI. 

Hoc  (hmoA,  li.  I.  U p.  173.  I cannot  follow  DoMfezm,  Flainoix-Brahinan,  p. 
2Bfr.  who  iH^gardo  the  opisudo  as  poHitavc  <^vidcnoc. 

llnKHTUntMAN,  O.C..  p.  151b 

Hec  I.oMMKin  me.  For  other  Vcdic  vt^rsions  sec  ClMbONEB’s  note,  W.  I,  p.  24. 

Weli.kh,  o.  0.,  wont  HO  far  aw  to  consider  tho  episode  a combination  of  two 
narratives. 


396 


J.  (lOTula  * VVtItp  latorn1nr(' 


Rgvedic  HtiuimH  and  31  gfitkls^^  ii-  in  an  tiinn.iH<:aka!>Io  and  nnntnni  nxarnplc  of  a 
mixed  form  of  compowiion  wnll  known  in  poal  A’odio  fimoH.  TIk'  III  qdtkdi^ 
conBiBi  of  throe  gronps,  tin.'  firat,  Narnda\s  aitawor  fo  I ho  king'a  qnoation  ‘'What 
doea  a man  gain,  by  a Hon  and  tlu'  at'orvnd,  Indra/a  addroHaow  to  Itoliita 
being  gm.mne  in  elm.,raefei%  t-h<'  third  rf'prwfing  the  oinivoraaiion  In^tween 
iSinmbiiepa  on  mu'  hatid  ami  Ajigaiiannd  Vi,4vamitra  on  Iho  tdhor.  The  Rm'die 
atanmBare,  it,iH  trm'»  ntilmal  apt^y  and  akilfnlKn  hnt  alao  qtnto  eonvontionally 

Tile  Btory whieli  obvionnly  wm  oonaid^'rod  very  important^  anrvivi'd  in  late 

literature,  but  not  in  thoBamefm'm.  In  the  veraion  prow'rvod  in  the  Ilfenilvana 
1,  0()£,  the  pith  ia  the  enrae  ealled  down  by  Viavainifra  on  hin  koiib  who  reinwo 
to  take  i!Snnalu4epa\B  phwH'  aa  a vieiim  and  the  hit,ter  a didivt'rnnee;  i,nBtead  of 
llarifemdra  and  hia  non  Ambari^n  king  tif  Ayialhya,  hia  prieat  and  Indra  are 
concerned  in  tin’s  Baerifuan 

The  en(,l  of  the  atory  aa  told  in  tlu>  Aitnreyadinllnnana  in  intercBting  in  that 
it  contains  a so-called  ^ratHimipimiu,  the  expheit  statenn'iit  of  (.he  good  results 
hold  out  to  those  who  hear  it;  7,  18,  14  and  16: 

‘‘Therefore  a vietorimis  king  Hhonkl,  rwmi  wlnni  nof.  Piierifienig,  make  him  (viz. 
his  hotar)  narrate  this  tale  (ttkhgdrmj  of  AunabSi^pa,  Nhn  the  leimf  tinge  of ‘siip 
(enm)  .is  left  over  in  him3‘  '‘Those  w‘h«i  dostm  sons  aifst  slionld  have  it.  narrated: 
they  obtain  s(,>nsd* 

Very  common  in  latc'f  iimt's,  ttuH  .merit,  in  et|nivatent,  u>  find  uf  a siu'rilleial 
rite«k 

These  authors  like  to  rcder  to  events  which  in  their  eyes  reiiresent  historical 
trutli  and  as  Hiu'h  art'  the  origin  of  praetii'es  or  insfdnfitms  whndi  are  often 
called  after  their  (iriginatcw;  .PB.  13,  H,2h: 

Vatsaprf,  the  sou  ot  Bhalandana,  e.onld  not  hint  tatih.  lie  pf*rfiuimMl  austerities 
and  saw  this  ViitHai>ra(“Chant).  Tlawenpon  he  found  faifh**^^ 

In  order  to  show  that  the  knowUslgi'  of  a jiarf-ientar  firi'plaet'  is  epiial  to  that  of 
the  three  Vedas  it  is,  at  TIk  3,  li),  11,  3fr.  t-old  that  the  fanii>nii  BharadvSja 
who  had,  during  three  lift-tinu'S,  simlietl  tin.'  tliree  \'edfm,  was  ndtlresm'd  by 
Indra  telling  him  that  the  Vi’das  are  endless,  so  that  iheri^  would  be  no  point  in 
continuing  his  study,  (»ome  and  know  this  oiu'  (the  llrepliiee);  Ibis  imh'ecl  is 
the  whole  of  knowledge'*”’^. 

p many  of  tho  KtorioH  which  w arc  jn.  inHunnmmittijlc  i)arricr 

oxiatfl  betweem  man’n  nt.rmal  environment  tmti  the  world  of  j^odH  and  dcmoiw. 
I’ransitionH  from  tho  natural  to  t.hn  Hn[i<*rnntt!rnl  takt'  idaw  Hii«i>!y.  (IcmIh  and 


For  this  term  see  lielow,  |n  40fh 
8ee  also  IloaHon,  Y,  (h  h.,  p,  4aiK 

Y:‘  >»•  J'-*. ». lo. «:  n, 

•f  iT’  **'  **’  **'  '**  '*•'“*  •’ 

*’  a ooiuploto  tratwlation  I*.  M.  l)t.M(tN-r.  m t*Al*hS  HA  illtSJ),  ii.  Ii4.t. 
l.or  legends  dealing  with  diH}nitoM  or  om.U'rui  kn..wt..dgo.  -.g.  (JH.  1.  2.  0-  It): 

1,  .1.  «,  with  coiiHooration,  1,  :t.  20. 


Th<^  BiTihmanas  397 

in  t.lH'  iiKnt  wlio  %nro  in  ihmo  works— converse  freely  with  one 
anothor^^;  PB.  14,0,8: 

ITpagtt,  t-ho  of  8u*4rav(W,  was  iiio  clomostio  |'>riest  of  Kutsa.  This  Kntsa  cursed 
anyone  who  wtnild  ofhn*  to  Itnlra*  Indra,  having  met  Hui^ravas,  said,  ‘OflFer  to 
me;  1 am  hungry.'  He  offered  to  hitu  and  Indra,  the  saorilicial  cake  in  his  hands, 
came  tio  Kutsa  . . . He  i.old  what  had  happened  and  Kutsa  cut  off  IJpagu’s  head, 
pie  was  however  revived  hy  means  of  a mimari* 

The  young  hoy  Natilod'-as,  wiio  was  givx'U  by  his  father  to  Death  (Mptyu),  calls 
upon  this  god  iit  his  realtn,  has  a conversation  with  him  and  obtains  from  him 
the  secret*  of  a spisnal  firtd>lnc(>  (''TB.  3,  1 1,  8).  By  praising  with  a definite  tdiant 
one  nuvy  r(*aeli  Indra's  premmee  (Pli.  5,  4,  14),  A mman  or  the  sacrifice  may 
appear  in  human  fornP'^.  Many  of  the  adventures  and  experiences  of  the  figures 
arc  howevtu'  <d’  a siuritaial  ratluu’  than  of  a material  character ; TB.  3, 10, 9,  Ilf.: 

“Devabhaga  tSrautar^a  had  sticeeeded  in  knowing  the  Savitra  (firo).  Tlioii  an 
invisibh'  (divine)  voice  said  to  him,  ‘Ah!  Gautama  (=  Dovabhaga)  knows  all 
becatise  he  knows  the  Hfivitra  (finO'  and  ho  (D.)  said,  ‘What  is  this  voice  V T am 
the  8avitra  (lire),  th<^  hight'si  world  (loka)  of  tho  gods,  that  possesses  a secret 
might.'  Thi'reupon  l)eva!>haga  . . . threw  himself  down  to  tho  ground,  (saying,) 
‘llortiage,  htauagef’  Atai  he  (the  tir(>)  said  to  hinx,  ‘Do  not  fear,  O Gautama,  you 
have  c<au|uer<Hl  your  world'"®®, 

8tihjoining  now  some  ohservatiotxs  on  the  myths,  legends  and  mythical 
narrativ<'S  indiH<unmina.tely  it.  tnuHt,  lu'gin  with,  be  bonxe  in  mind  that  these 
passagi'H  Hhotdd  not.,  as  regards  ihtur  fun<;tion,  h(^  ptit  on  a pxar^h  Part  of  them 
are  instTt.t'd  for  illuHtrativ<^  purposi^s  and  inteixchnl  to  communicate  details 
omitted  in  a forxtmla,  to  ridVt^sh  ilx<‘  menxory  of  tlie  Ixearer,  to  furnish  material 
for  undt^rstandiug  atx  alhision,  or  to  explain  the  special  circumstances  under 
wiiiielx  a hymn  was  'st'eid  or  a ritt'  or  mmm  introduced.  Bee  e.g.  PB.  7,  10,  10: 

"The  gods  <livi<le<l  amongst  Uunnselv<^H  th<>  bmhmmh  (sacred  lore).  Unto  them  camo 
Nodhas,  tht^  son  of  Kalog\'at.  They  said,  *A  seer  has  coixxe  to  us;  lot  us  give  him 
tlie  brahman,^  dlxey  grauteil  him  this  Hainan,  hx  that  tla^y  granted  (it)  to  Nodhas, 
therehme  it  is  ealleil  the  naudhma  fwl'/nanp'®**. 

Other  t^xismh'H  are  ex<^g(d4eal  iix  <dmraeter.  They  are  not  communicated  for  the 
sake  of  tlu^  story  im  a wh<di\  htit  oix  aecouixt  of  certain  details  by  which  some 
<aem(uxt  or  of  th<^  ritual  mity  find  its  explanation.  Since  most  stories  did 

not  contain  all  pm*H<mlars  n(a*d('d  to  explain  a given  rikial,  they  wore  liable  to 
adaptation  atxd  fxll.<u’ation,  Homc»  of  their  parts  being  dispropoi^ionatoly  empha- 
sfe(Hl  and  othiU^H  oiiiiitvd  or  cant  intu  the  shadow.  Whenever  two  or  more  versions 
of  the  saim^  sic  my  arc'  liandtHl  down  that  version  which  is  most  intimately 

Of.  Tih  3,  Hi  lU  3;  PB.  3,  4,  14;  14,  (I,  B;  3B,  1,  123;  154;  &B.  I,  1,  4,  15; 
1231  . U 33;  AK,  L II. 

« PB.  13,  10,  H;  Gli  I,  3,  20. 

(!h  PB.  13,  U,  22;  14*  0*  32.  For  the' part  |)layed  hy  a f/and/iurra  JB.  2,  126f. 
and  laiKKHii  Guvnohv,  at  ABDlil  35,  p.  71.  Omxquering  one's  world  means  gaining 
a safe  and  nacred  pt»rtitium 

»’  Cf.  OisitTKf,,  1 1 Itkt..  «li*H  Orwnt.,  p.  235. 

*»  (X  .IB-  I,  147;  HIM'  alHo  I,  14»;  Ifil;  I'B.  K*.  4,  11;  10,  8;  14,  5,  15  oto. 


398 


J.  • Vwiic 


connected  with  rittiai  cxegemH  nmy,  gciu'rally  Hpcidang,  In^  HUH|>(M,^tcd  of  being 
farthest  away  frotn  tln^  popular  tradiihai. 

Now,  the  nnniber  of  tiarrativ('H,  tha<>,  in  an  many  variimiH,  have'  been  pro- 
served  in  more  than  one  work  of  this  c'lass  is  indeed  eonfdderahh'**».  Tims  the 
bnlfmana  explanation  of  the  libation  of  *voma  offered  tn  Indra  and  Vaynw 
fonnd  at  1\S.  6,  4,  7 when^  the  gods,  having  pm*Hnadc'd  Viiyn  to  Indp  thetn,  slay 
Soma  who  after  beeotning  pntrid  is  nunh'  palatnide  by  ihv  god  of  wind— ‘"t, hero- 
fore  people  hang  out  what  iKHMunes  pntrid  in  a wiiul)*  place''  : in  MS.  4,  5,  8 
the  gods  at  first  did  not  Hnee<H'd  laaainHe  \Tiyn  was  inside  Soma  as  his  life- 

breath;  at  {SB.  4,  1,  3 Indra.  fearing  that^  he  had  not;  lulled  V|ira -who  here  is 

identical  with  Soma—,  hides  himsidf  ami  Vilyu.  tin"  swift  est  of  the  gods,  is  to 
ascertain  the  state  of  affairs.  Tln^  popular  (dements  of  tins  highly  likialked 
narrative  arc  no  doubt  tin"  motifs  of  VTiyifs  idemtaty  with  bnaith.  his  swiftness 
and  his  cleansing  stwviees.  Tlu"  mythitad  tlumu"  of  the  rapt"  of  the  wmia— one  of 
the  most  valued  subjects  of  tin'  Vtalit"  authors  and  that  of  Kadru  and  her 
sister®^  combine  at  |5B.  3,  2,  4,  1 ff.: 

“Now  Soma  was  in  the  heav("ns.  and  tlie  gods  wer*'  hen"  on  mirth.  The  gods 
desired,  ‘Would  that  {^oma  came  t.o  mi  w("  might  with  him.  when  (he 

has)  corned  They  en'at("d  two  products  of  their  imracnhnm  creative  power, 
Suparn!  and  Kadru  . . d' 

but  in  the  other  texts  of  tlu"  YajurvtHla  it  is  tlu"  Chtynfrl  whiidi  t^ak<"s  the  })laco 
of  the  falcon  of  tlu^  llgvinlit"  v<"rsion®^: 

“Gilyatrt  fhw  up  to  Homa  for  tht'im  Wliih"  slu"  wiot  ('arrying  him  <»tT.  tlu"  aumlharm 
Viilvilvasu  stoh^  him  from  htn\  gods  w«"n"  awari^  nf  ihis  . . . 'Haw  said,  ‘The 
gandharvm  are  fond  of  wommr.  Let  us  siaid  Vm"  (SptH^dil  t-o  thmn,  and  she  will 
return  to  us  togtvtls'r  with  Somad  'fhey  smit  Von  to  thorn,  and  nhe  r«"turu('d  to 
them  together  with  Homa.” 

In  another  version®^  three"  metre's,  Ix'coming  birds,  are"  semi'  out  t.o  fe'teh  8oma. 
After  the  Jagatland  theTrisiuhh  have"  faihal  to  aeeoinjdish  thenr  task,  (layatri 
is  successful 

An  instance  of  a eomhination  of  mythical  theum^s  handed  down  in  various 
forms  is  found  in  the  long  passage  {?>B,  1,  <1,  3,  t ff.  which  torms  [lart  of  tiu"  com- 
ment on  the  Bull  moon  saerifiet"®*.  Indra,  having  killed  Tva?4ar  s thriH'dieaded 

B(K'^  o.g.  TB.  1,  1,  3.  4ff.:  SB,  2.  1.  2.  Llff.  (Hookiuno.  Slh  I.  p.  28tp;  TB.  2, 
4,  4:  KB.  10,  11:  MB.  2,  2,  4. 

For  particulars  hch3  Gonoa.  Dual  dt"itit"H,  p.  2lfh 

Bee  p.  120  and  47;  BLOOMriiu.m  at  Festgrumi  von  lb»lh,  Hf.ntigart  IHOS,  p. 
149;  Gonoa,  Change  and  eontimirty,  The  Hagui"  lOthl,  p.  olHl".  At  Bll,  2,  0.  2 tki 
two  sisters  lay  a waigi'r;  “Which  of  us  nhall  a|.*y  furtla^st  (in  eonnrr^ii^u  with  a horne) 
shall  win  the  oth<'r“:  (T.  Mhlu  ft  a.  IHIf. 

“ However,  this  int'tre  is  more  than  once  ideutifb^d  with  the  fateon;  Blh  3.  4,  1, 
12  and  3,  9,  4,  10  (where  slie,  in  th«"  form  tjf  tltat  lord,  tairrws  oil  Boma  from  the 
heavens).  Of.  also  SB.  1,  7,  ft  1;  I,  H,  2,  10. 

Bee  AiB.  3,  25 ff.;  PB.  8,  4,  lff‘,  and  com|iar("  Sli  12,  3,  4,  3!l’, 

With  a rop(4ition  at  5,  5,  4,  Iff.  in  connoximi  wnli  the  Mmuirafnairl  rite  («f.  h 
6,  3,  7).  Compare  also  KB.  12,  10;  MB.  2,  4*  1. 


Tho  Brahmanas 


399 


son  Vi^varupa®®,  inctirs  tho  father’^  anger.  Being  exclnded  from  Tvastar’s 
he,  tiiotigh  nninvitcHi,  novertholesa  consumes  this  draught.  It  injures 
him  and  Tvastai',  furious,  h'ts  the  remainder  of  the  juice  flow  into  tho  fire  with 
the  result  that  tlu^  sa<aifl(H'!  is  desecrated.  The  juice  becomes  Vrtra,  who  is 
instantly  pursued  and  ev(uitually  cut  asunder  by  Indra.  This  story  is  completed 
by  sonu'i  minor  tluuui's,  among  which  the  origin  of  three  diiferent  birds  that 
spring  ibrtb  from  ViAva.rfi])a'H  tiirex^  mouths  with  which  he  consumes  different 
kinds  of  fot>d  and  drink;  the  origin  of  the  moon  foshioned  by  Indra  from  part 
of  Vrtra’s  bi'ing;  tlu^  institution  of  tine  mutrmnant  rite,  by  wliich  a man  who 
has  drunk  too  mtu*l\  mn  be  healed;  the  somewhat  mysterious  appearance 
of  tho  double  dt'i  ty  Agni  and  Soma  to  whom  Indra  offers  a cake  on  eleven  dishes 
to  win  thetn  ovtu',  an  explanation  of  a special  offering  to  this  divine  pair.  With- 
out entering  here  into  a dis(‘ussion  of  the  relations  between  the  double  deity  and 
the  Vrtra  (u>mbat®^,  ii»  may  be  observed  that  various  other,  more  or  less  parallel, 
versions  of  this  complex  of  myths  differ  in  many  points:  JB.  2,  155®’  introduces 
Soma  and  Agni  as  individual  gods;  at  TS.  2,  5,  2,  2 the  dual  deity — ^which  as 
such  Bcx'ms  to  owi^  its  I'xistence  to  Tvastar's  deed — ^pre vents  Indra  from 
slaying  V|*tra  IxH'ausc  they  arc  within  the  demon.  In  the  story  of  the  Vrtra 
combat  as  briefly  rt^b'rrt'd  to  in  AiB.  2,  3 Agni-Soma  play  a decisive  part,  be- 
catiBC!  Indm  nlays  his  antagotust  with,  or  by  tneans  of,  them.  As  compared  with 
older  vtx’HionH  td'  tiu'  <a>ttibai  ilu^  maiti  differences  reside  in  the  ‘rituaf  origin  of 
Vrtra;  in  ludra'a  Ixing  drawn  into  the  ritual  sphere;  in  tho  fact  that  it  is  tho 
combinaiion  t)f  tiu^  tavo  gr<^at  Bacaificial  gods—ciaeh  of  whom  was  already 
assoiiatcHl  with  Indra  in  tlie  I tg vetkv  - who  liave  replaced  other  assistants.  And 
anotlux*  point  of  inti'i’est.  is  that  it  now  is  explicitly  stated  that  the  sacrificer 
who  offi'rs  th(^  ol^lation  due  to  tho  dual  d<uty  repeats  Indra’s  powerful  act  and 
will  over(H)itn<>  his  antagonist®**. 

Traditional  siories  aiHN  in  theH<^  texts,  often  more  liberally  treated  or  inter- 
prcdicd  owing  U>  ilunr  ap|)lieation  to  ritual  practice  as  well  as  to  a certain  extent 
to  the  fvmr  s(H)|X‘  given  to  tho  atiihors  of  prose  texts  for  tlio  exercise  of  their 
abilitii^s.  Figuri^s  Ixlonging  to  the  traditional  mythology  are  brought  in,  or 
rc-intori)r(dHH],  to  Hvrvt)  tlm  pur{)OHo  of  tho  sacrifleial  rittxal,  o.g.  SB.  11,  1,  5,  7 : 

*‘As  t<.>  why  (he  prt^ixu'OB  an  oblation)  for  Indra  Vytraban  (tho  slayer  of  Vrtra)- 

Vrt^ra  is  (nul;  . . , with  ihi>  help  of  Indra  Vrtrahan  ho  thus  slays  evil”®®. 


Acxxx'ding  t-o  (h  'DxmtAth,  Hour  <1.  malhcxir  du  gnorrier,  Paris  1969,  p.  21  a 
K^l’xwoniativo  of  tlin ‘ihroofokl  <xuxny.* 

For  this  point  ivn<l  other  particulars  h(hi  (IoN'OA,  Dual  ddtics,  p.  37811. 
TrauHlat,o<l  by  II.  Dnirrm.,  at  I'rans.  Connecticut  Acad.  15,  p.  180. 

2,  4,  4,  IfD  <rr.  1,  0.  4.  12;  0,  2,  2,  19;  sec  also  N.  J.  SuiKNi:)U,^at  JXJB  N.  S. 
27,  2,  p.  29. ' OKJvrm.,  at  4 AOH  19,  p.  97  stirnuHcd  that  J'B.  2,  440ff.  (Baramfl  and 
the  PapiH)  is  an  at.tein|>t  t<»  ftw(^  the  tAvo  conflicting  versimrs  of  1J.V-  19,  108  (p.  146) 
and  B'l’haddevat.a  H,  24  ff. 

®®  Of.  also  BB.  I,  6,  4,  12f.;  6,  2,  2,  19. 


400 


■J,  lioiida  ’ Vi'du' 


A woll-kiK)wn  Htory  fiboui  iho  Winlding  t>f  i.s  likcwii^^ 

altiercHl  and  adaptinl  for  ox<'g(d>innl  ft:  m ntorro'Vor  itd^oroRtitig  to 

notice  that  a ])o|niIar  theme  m ofitm  niln|>t'(*d  to  i Imi  pnriivnlnr  \'edie  tradition 
in  which  it  m hamdt'd  down*"®.  Wlnwcaa,  in  the  l^gvnla,  Indra  alaya  Vftra  with 
hia  m/m,  the  compiler  of  the  IhiihaiviipaadiriUnnana  haa  him  dt)  ho  with  the 
help  ol'mmaM.  dobhm  or  In)Iy  worda**’^.  The  IndraA'iIra  myth  repn\seni('d  by 
Slk  1,  6)  in  ch'arly  aaerifunid  in  ehanieter:  the  aaeritieiai  godn  Agni 

and  Soma  come  on  tlie  neeite*  who  are  permiaded  to  go  over  to  India  afi.er  an 
offer  of  a npeeial  <-ihIa.tioin  the  Agni^-Soina  eake*  At^  P'H.  M,  fh  10  Ovavana 
be<5omeB  rejuvenahni  hy  landing  witJi  a chant,  not  inendy  hy  bathing  in  the 
fountain  of  youtln  Nor  did  favonritt'  and  no  doubt  widely  kmnvn  mythical 
themes,  found  in  older  as  widl  as  laitu'  literature,  t^aeape  t1iis  form  tvf  inaertion 
into  a ritual  context.  The  wtdhknown  story  of  tiie  wiitgi^d  m{nmt>ainH’‘^’h  briefly 
alluded  to  in  the  Rgveda  (4,  54,  5)  am!  told  in  fuller  tieiai!  in  tht'  Kilmayana 
(5,  1,  K)8ff.),  is  at  MS.  1,  10,  15  recalled  in  etmiiexion  with  the  Vaninapriighasa 
ceremonies  (one  of  the  seasonal  rites),  which  is  to  i^ause  rain  to  fall  in  tinu^: 

‘^Tho  mountains,  one  should  know,  are  IVajapatPs  e|df’?*f  elnidrem  were 

winged.  Tlu^y  fhnv  mvay  and  sat.  dowti  tisw  hked  it»  do  so..  Usai  this 

(earth)  hiHaune  unstt'ady.  Indra  cut  otTlhoir  wmgs  imd  nuido  the  isnih  stalilo  by 
them  (vir.,  by  the  nunintams),  Tla^  wings  iHs^ans'  el«»ud»».  d'hat  is  whv  Iht'MC 
usually  hang  round  the  mountain,  for  it  ts  th«'  place  of  ihf^n*  i»ngmd' 

The  autlior  continues  his  t'xposiiion  hy  miying  fhaf  the  fust  moistun'  that 
streamt'd  forth,  (from  t.lu'  eltuals)  hmanne  the  kmrn^nniH  and  tha.t  hy  per- 
tbrming  the  VarunapraghUm  oiu'  prodms-s  these  fruits  and  makes  rain  com 
tinuous**^**, 

Ihe  same  story  told  hy  at.!lu'r<'nta  <.d  different  selnsds  may  evfut  hear  an 
entirely  different  face.  Not  only  are  the  Netting  and  ilu'  inot.ivafton  often  distinct, 
the  main  points  ol  tlu^  tales  art'  apt  to  he  em|>Iuisi7,ed  in  ilillerrnf.  ways  or  to  Ik* 
coloured  by  the  changing  conte.xtH.  Thv  e{hsoiie  of  Dirghiijihvl,  am\dy  vxmu 
plilying  Indnds  wmstiality,  is  a good  instance  fif  an  emarnf  iaily  dmihle  tradition. 
A shorter  version  in  IHl  15,  0,  Pf.  amt  a longer  om^  in  dlh  llll  ff.  (wlieiv  it  is 
C|uoted  lor  ptir(*'ly  illustrativi'*  purpos<*s)  seem  to  have  preservetl  a form  that  is 
peculiaily  adapted  to  Im/Iras  cliarmder,  I'hi.s  samavedie  version  is  to  e.xplain 
the  meaning  of  a wish-granting  mmtn  (it  was  Imirids  wish  thid..  DirghajihvI 


AiB.  4,  7;  KB.  IS,  1 mlB.  I,  215. 

!!!  2^*  thuerKU,  in  JAOH  IH,  p,  25;  Aeteii  II  rongi*.  Ini.  ihm  Uneni.  I,  p.  255. 
nikaiiretwd  of  10,  um  (see  tlru.nNmi.  I^V.  fit,  p,  5701,  (TO.  5. 
ll,  8;  Ivathallp.  1.  IJY.)  proponed  by  IL  p),  m Melfingoji  Itemni,  p.  705 

iH  unconvincing.  ' ' 

I’U.  H,  1.2;  11.  u.  12:  115.11.  (1;  ,.f.  l-i.  4.  ft. 

**>*  kS(Mi  p.  :ii)8  f. 


X’lHOiiHL,  V.  H.  1.  p.  172. 

*“*  karlra  --  mpparw  ajihylla;  tif.  'I'M.  2, 
AojwL  ir,.  p.  188. 


•1.  W.  2:  Okktki.,  la'I'i'iHw. 


Tho  Brahiniiiuis 


401 


should  dit')  or  of  a doiuondiilling  vcm^  In  the  other,  shorter,  reforences^o’  to 
tliis  wiek<Hi  imira  wonuvn  who  lickini  the  oblations  Indra  does  not  play  a part, 
the  8<ory  lieing  quotvd  in  exphination  of  the  ritual  use  of  a milk  mess  as  a 
reuKHly  for  tiu^  m<>rnit\g  oblai-ion  ovi'r  which  tlu^  mum  woman  had  passed  her 
tougtie.  li  muy  gcuu^rally  spc^iikittg  be  sa-id  that  ritualists  belonging  to  different 
schools  whic'h  disitgrcH^  otdy  on  minor  and  minute  details  strongly  adhered  to 
the  methods  and  stibiletic's  of  tluh’  own  iraditions^^^”. 

The  uioHl.  promimuct  <'ha.raek'ristic  of  this  mythology  is  indeed  its  connection 
whh  the  saerifu^e.  Kvory  ihmu\  ahuost  (nany  important  detail,  gods,  seers  and 
their  doings  mtd  c^xpericnu^c's,  art"  directly  or  indirectly  associated  with  this 
ceniral  subjec't,  Wlnm  Agiu  coved, tnl  th(>  manifestations  (Ibrms,’  rupu)  of  the 
gods  whieli  they  had  depositiHl  with  Inm,  Truistar  recovered  them  by  means  of 
a re-establisluHl  rit  ual  firc^;  luau'C  tlu^  'forms'  are  his  and  'ht  is  for  Tvastar,  that 
one  must  n'“estal>lish  the  fin'''  (vSB.  2,  2,  3,  21f.).  In  one  of  the  references  to 
Pi’ajapati's  grcuit  creative'  activity,  introducing  the  so-called  Mitravinda 
micrifiee^**^  -by  whicli  oiu'  fimls  Miira  (Friendship)  and  gains  a complete  life- 
time—, the  goddess  (Fortune)  is  by  ten  deities  robbed  of  all  her  qualities 
which  slu'  thcuu  mi  PrajaiuithH  advice,  asks  back  by  a sacrifice:  each  god  is 
int<'reHtt*il  in  that  asptnd  of  Fortum^  which  from  of  old  is  his  concern.  Mind  is 
btdk't  tlian  Biieeeh:  whatever  at  a sacrifice'  is  pe'rformcd  for  Prajapati  is  done 
in  a low  voice'  {^U,  I.  4,  12)^^‘h  Kutsa,  fn'ijucntly  mentioned  in  the  Rgveda, 

is  introiltiet'd  af  Pli  Ik  as  ilu'  (u’iginator  of  a particular  sdman.  The  theme 
of  H,V.  H,  reetiru  af  PB.  9,  2,  14  when'  Indra  is  stat<xl  to  have  cleansed  a 
h'male  Augiras,  named  Akupilra  by  means  of  a mman.  The  brdhmanas  are 
tinauimouH  in  their  interpretation  of  l^fV.  I,  51,  13— Indra  transforming  him- 
self into  a woman  ■ , refer«'nec  to  the  story  Ix'ing  made  at  MS.  2,  5,  5: 

**,A  man  wht>  has  the  firm  of  a woman  is  seiy.cd  by  Nirrti  (the  goddcaa  of  perdi- 
tion)* ^Vbe^  Imtra  was  ui  that  situation  cbascnl  away  (Niryti,  who  is)  evil. 
This  beraini'  a rast-rated  (being).  I'he  man  wlio  bcliev<«  himself  to  be  seized  by 
evil  slanild  saertfice  tins  oiisi rated  (animal)  to  Indra'’^*’^. 

A won!  may  also  be  said  on  some  hauling  or  ctmtral  ideas  that  recur  in  several 
myihit’id  UdvH,  Tlu*re  is,  for  instance,  tlu'  idea  of  a fight  or  escape.  Says  SB. 
1,1,  4,  If  in  explaining  tlu'  use  of  an  antelope  skin  ("'lor  wholeness  of  the 
saerifiee'') : 


ittt  fV'IS,  Jl,  I'Ui,  tl j i\K»  2th  i»  AiB«  2i.  22,  10;  cf.  OnitTKL,  at  Actos  11  Congr.  Int. 
dt'H  Orieiif^..  p.  225;  thn.icNr.H,  RV.  Hf  p.  105, 
r%g,  Aiib  n,  30;  7,  27. 

Ail  i u 4,  3.  Ilf:  for  tins  saerifiet'  whi<0i,  in  accewdanoe  with  its  name,  is  to 
aequiro  fnond*a  nee  Ct«mo4,  m Indologiea  Taurinensia,  f (Turin  1073),  p.  80. 

»Seo  L.  fa  valour  du  mietwe  dans  1<^  mdk^  vfidicima  JAOH  60,  p.  11. 

Hiio  145,  Tlio  iiamt'  Apj'ihl  occurs  in  a longi'r  version  at  JB,  1,  220,  Of.  OnaTnu, 
in  JACKS  IH.  p.  26;  Ham  UtU'AU,  in  VIJ  2,  p.  55. 

(t.  RH."  HI.  5;  KB.  U f 16  and  Okhtou,  at  JAOS  26,  p.  176. 

Stn^  also  All,  f 2,  4,  Hh  f 5»  2,  6;  cf  WnmMAN-OitABOWSivA,  in  EG  6,  p.  183. 


402 


CJoiuisii.  ‘ Vtniir-  ill! 


tltn  f^at^rifico  f>ho  guilM,  ii,nd  haviiu?  fi.  hinrk  fWili^lopo  rnanuHi 

ahotii.  I'lio  gndH  having  thfn‘on|M»n  found  if.  and  :nri|t|>ini  if  «d’  its  idiiiu  hronght,  it 
away  witli  ihonu  lla  \vhit«'  and  hlank  haini  rn|n^fv??'nf  tlio  rj^„vor«'H  and  tho 

iStlmafis  . , 

A woll-kncnvn  ilmnw  in  Agni  a digid  whinh  at  7.  Tl  2,  M ia  Ifdd  «a  fdtlnwH: 

'‘Agni  wt'Uf.  luvay  friun  th«'  godn.  Hn  untun'd  lla^  uafrr,?t-  Th*^  godfi  aiitd  to  hrajih 
patn  H,h>  thou  in  ni'innh  of  hun;  n*  fhni\  hni  «»nn  fafian'.  Iio  will  rtn-nid  Intuw'ifd 
Ih'  iHHiamn  a whdn  hnwia.  and  wnni  in  Mayati  of  him,  Ih'^  found  hnn  on  a Intim 
Irah  having  nrn|d.  nni  of  tlm  watnr,  tin  nyiai  hum  anti  lio  iAgin)  ntmnditHi  him* 
llontH^  a whit4'  horn*'  haa»  it-  wt'rm  a la'ort'lnal  nioufln  anti  nah'vtl  m apt  tn 
ht'annitt  wt'aku'yt'd  . . d' 

Than  fharn  are  the  idean  td‘  a ef  fin'  w-agor  or  eaaiing  of 

chooHUig  a hnoiA^^,  hrt'aeh  t>f  faith  ainl  frieluny  |vvil!nitif-  tin:  ennn 

|mnetit>n)**^.  Tlu'  mnt-if  of  tiu'  Ht'end-  or  of  eatdrrie  laanvlntigi'  feidi/d  ) oeenrs 
i'.g.  T\\,  ll,  UK  Oir. : Un'  atory  of  Innv  tin'  tliviidfit^a  |wt'fdtiiiig  tmr  Uu'  natural 
day  inifiartt'd  to  king  ilana-ka  Uu'  neeret*  of  I he  Kil  viira  lirefOare*  ainl  the  ntate- 
ment  that  tin*  mm\  w'ln>  et>nvt'rm*H  aht>nt  af*er«'t  rif'nal  knimdialge  *'giv('H  hia 
proHperity^  to  hia  parttier'U  thnt^  of  t-he  man  who.  behaving  m ‘‘ilit'  ehild  nf  a 
nlave  womaiu  a elnatt,  no  hmhvmn^'  waa  v^vpeUfni  from  hm  eoinmnnify.  at 
AiB.  2,  U):  of  tin'  viait  i-o  heavt'O  or  the  rt'alni  *tf  fin'  *h'ini  of  a peraon  wdio  haa 
fnintcnl,  at  tllh  1, 4217.:  2.  UKB*^;  the  motif  of  ere-alive  heat,  at  Slh  11,  fh  *S,  Ik 
Among  thone.  mytlueal  ihemea  wdneh  aom*'  of  the  la»oka  mnler  tiiaeuMmnn 
have  in  eommon  with  poatAK'die  liieratnr*^  m fh*'  SanitfhyA  myfln  Uh  fumla. 
mt'Utala  ari'  aln'atly  clearly  atat-ed  in  i^'B,  4.  t>  and  M'A,  2,  d*'*’*^  winvo  th*'  tlmnouH 
Inul  a'ttaclo'd  tin'  ntm,  Urajilpati  Indpeil  hnn  hy  nnnina  of  a powt'idnl  ili'fencc, 
t4if.'  f/dyafrU®* : 

“'rht'refort^  a hmhmmi  performs  the  liwihghfi  nte  ni  the  jnnetnr*^  of 

day  aiwl  night . . . U,*'  throwa  up  droiei  of  wiiiia*  *'»itti?4oe*'af**d  t*y  f In'  i/dyntfl  which 
iKHanuo  tlnuuh'rhidtH.  Thea*>  Htrikf' d*nvn  the  mwow***”, 

To  eonclnde  thin  acetion  with  a ramlom  eolteiiitm  of  mUrvulitm  and  w'elh 
knowu  nuititn:  th*'  lant  ehiltl,  tlnd,  horn  after  aeveii  fin4i*''e  I lie  numln'r)  otht'rH 

K,g.  Ik  B.  2U  13,  2, 

K*g/l\S.  7*  h fh  Iff.:  JIh  2.  24nf,  (tAnwm  Ainwahh  p.  IHHJ;  Plh  2U  U Iff. 

hkg.  T8.  th  ‘h  UK  1:  TIh  7.  3,  UK  7.  3.  2.  M, 

K.g.  Blh  i:h  ih  h;  3Ih  L u\:i 

Danokkaio  in  14  AICK,^  IL  p.  3;  Ih‘Mo*^T,  at  PAPliS  hd.  p. 

CT  A.Ck  BeuNin.t.,  atdA  i:MhSH4hp.  UU  tl.  I.»'vvr:r,  at  f’aidr-nnm  4 (Ilimih 
in  03;  Bookwitt;,  ,1.  Ih,  p.  OH;  Ulfi  (with  lahimgraphieel  n»»ir;0, 

He<^  I).  Hiani'VAHANn  Sauulhyu!  invth  ainl  rifnah  thi  le.  ti,  ltl‘k 

Hi'o  p*  373. 

Hcane  oilier  anhjeeia;  th*'  thu'f  of  the  lotmi  fihreri  (Ailf  h.  30.  ill;  tOtAtirien- 
I'rmt,  at  2d)AI<l  04,  p.  thk;  Od,  p,  44;  tinnoJvna.  at  ZIAItt  n:n  |n  3oil;  lloamm  V, 
fh  L.,  p.  7(1;  Ahalyfda  adult t'ry  with  Imlm  (KB,  t,  t,  llUn  fd-;.  IK  IK  4.  iH;  MlOn  l>. 
12,  (I);  lloeiuisH,  at  AdPh  20,  p.  3H;  Ummu.,  at  dAUK  rti.  p,  IHH;  Urn  liiory  of 
llHanaa  Iviivya,  tin*  vhma'Htm  prnaa  *»f  the  tmtiruM  who  went  oua'  tv*  the  gtiilM  aftt'r 
ludm  had  (di(ntt'<l  a ritiml  Hi'and.  frtmt  u iim»Tii*d  aumnit  idU.  t.  Oiai-fKi.,  iit 

.JAOS  2K,  p,  HI  (tsyuh'  nf  tha  dt'Vil  lutd  NiiiiIi'm  wd'pj. 


The  Bralmianas 


403 


is  deformed  (!§B.  3,  1,  3,  3);  miracnlous  healings’^®;  revival  of  the  dead^®®; 
incest'®®;  the  betrayal  of  a Inisband’s  secret  by  his  %vifc'®“;  the  inferior  position 
of  one  of  the  members  of  a gi-oup’®’.  Then  there  ai-o  of  course  speaking  ani- 
mals’®®,  animals  remdermg  help  or  assistance  to  men  (SB.  1,  8,  1,  2),  meta- 
morphoses'®*: voices  of  iiivisible  beings'®";  iirvulnorability  (PB.  14,  6,  6); 
natural  phenonuma  such  as  eclipses'*';  the  beyond  as  the  reverse  of  this 
world'®®;  the  running  of  a rae.e  to  decade,  a dispute  or  to  win  something  valu- 
able'®®: gods  going  for  a decision  to  PrajSpati,  men  going  for  a similar  purpose 
to  the  king'®® : bad  faith  oti  the  part  of  a god'®' ; a god’s  or  other  being’s  amorous 
adventures'®*. 

It  may  bo  surmised  that  part  of  the  episodes  are  based  on  popular  tales  or 
riddles,  on  local  legends  and  anecdotes  or  on  pieces  of  folklore  rather  than  on 
the  inventiveness  of  an  individual  author'®®.  Among  these  are  in  all  probability: 
those  dealing  with  the  origin  of  night  and  of  the  phases  of  the  moon'®®;  with 
the  two  heavenly  dogs*®* ; the  belief  that  serpents,  while  laying  aside  their  old 
skin  give  up  evil"®;  retaliation  in  the  hereafter'*';  and  themes  such  as  cooking 
food  without  fire  and  reaping  immediately  after  serving  (JB.  3,  168);  a dead 


K.g.  JB.  1.  220;  PB.  i).  2,  14. 

JB.  :h  05:  PB.  14,  0.  «. 

>»«  M.g.  AiB.  3,  -JO.  1;  PB.  8,  2,  10:  SB.  1,  7.  4.  1;  of.  L^vi,  D.  S.  B.,  p.  20. 

. -V  « * vv.  Cl  t*  /Am,.-.-......,  tiio  an 


w 


AiB.  :i,  22,  1;  JB.  1,  125f.;  cf.  OKaTKi,,  iu  JA08  28,  p.  00. 
SB.  1,  7,  1(1'.:  cf.  H.  R.  Kabnck,  at  JUB  N.  S.  12,  p.  14. 


nX>.  At  /»  All.;  AU.  A A.  thU  il  . m. 

- JB.  2,  27(lf.;  SB.  I,  8.  1,  2;  14,  1,  1,  8;  GB.  1,  2,  5 (and  compare  OpxBi,,  in 
Trans.  ConneotievU.  Aciub  15,  p.  194).  For  speaking  stones:  Okrtkl,  in  JAOS  28, 
t).  04.  For  understaiuling  the  language  of  animals;  PB.  10,  2,  7. 

'«*  TB.  3,  10,  0,  11;  JB.  I,  125;  303;  2,  53;  79;  277;  77;  JUB.  4,  20;  soo  Obb- 

TKi„  in  JAOS  2(S,  p.  102;  196. 

'*»  E.g.  TB.  3,  10,  9,  11;  PB.  14.  11,  28;;7.  5,  1;  18,  1,  9;  19,  4,  7. 

TS.  2.  1,  2,  2;  JB.  1,  80;  PB.  4,  5,  2;  SB.  5,  3,  2.  2;  of.  Ommm,  in  JAOS  26, 

p.  190.  , .o  • 

KB,  11,  3;  of.  Ombtki,,  in  JAOS  15,  p.  234.  For  othor  motifs  in  connection. 

with  the  other  world:  Wbbbb,  at  ZDMQ  9,  p.  237;  ;)08.  „ x,,  „ , „ - r 

'®®  E.g.  AiB. 2,  25,  1;  4,  7,  4;  KB.  23,  5;  28,  1;  PB.  9,  1,  35f.;  SB.  4,  3,  4;  ct_ 
Okiitki.,  Trans.  Connecticut  Acad.  15,  p.  174. 

'®‘  E.g.  JB.  1,  rJ8;  2,  243;  3,  94;  PB.  13,  3,  24. 

>»®  E.g.  TS.  6.  5,  1,  Iff.  , , „ 

'»«  KB.  2:i,  4;  JB.  1,  162;  SB.  3,  3,  4,  18.  For  India’s  ‘sexual  immorality  sow 

Obbtioi,,  in  J AOS  19,  p.  120.  ■ i,- 

Ab  waB^  fbr  iuntanoo,  tho  opitxioiA  of  IL  B,  Kmwik,  10  7,  p.  ,^^17  in  rogajr4  Or 
1,  5,  4,  Off.  (JB.  2,  291f.  eto.;  Oalani,>,  AiiBwalil,  p.  200).  Soe  also  Boamwa,, 
I*  "I 

Tn  12;  KS.  11,  J;  stni  also  ff.  HAfiitTKn,  Indischo  MarcboxA,  JomxbOM)* 

(DriHHtJdorAKOln  1953;  1907),  p.  15;  16.  taaci  ir 

Cr.  MB.  1,  6,  9;  ISB.  11,  1,  5,  1;  TA.  6,  3,  1 mxd  BloommiauD,  at  JAOfe  15,. 


AiB.  6,  1,  6;  tho  <pioBtion  as  to  whotbor  ‘xAon-Vedio’  people  contributed  tlxc,) 
Arbuda  cpiBodo  (V.  Oh,  BKATTAOHAXtYYA,  in  OH  1,  ix.  292)  is  irrelevant. 

JB.  'l,  42ff.;  cf.  Lommul,  in  raidcunm  4,  p.  100. 


404‘ 


♦K  Ufnitifi  • Lilf>rnliirn 


iwikiiig  hin  a,pjH\'irnnr«*  i^h  a ahiMlmv  f*l  1*  II  .1.  2!!) . f hiimlKH  m 

ivf  tho  and  a ahiMimv  i%h  ii  mun  <‘f’  *’Xirrt4 ordinary  gilfei^. 

I'tf  in  hardly  nroramry  U>  poittl,  t>til  that  nrrafarnialiy  IIk^ 

Morr  ihaii  f>ur  tmrraiivr  in  nxjdanaiion  aain?' 

HcnnrH  of  villagt^  lifo  art'  m4  fadindy  laokiny.  llirr*'  arr  mnno  rrfrrcnrra  to 
road  aroidonta:  io  l,!u'  king  and  hia  donna^d  lo  inioaf  wlio,  w hd^^  rlfiving  a chariot, 
killed  with  a winad  f-ho  atni  of  a htahmm  wlio  a"aa  |dayin,i.!:  in  Ikr'  road  and  laicl 
the  blatne  on  each  <d4n'r:  t-ho  .arhit-era  givt^  lhr»  di-i’iinon  that,  tko  driver  is 
roaponsihh'^  (tlli  Ik  1)4):  iihallaht\va  who  fid!  from  fiia  fdiariot.  and  hroke  an  ann 
(8!i.  1,7,  :k  H)):  there  ia  a story  of  an  adullerer  of  tdyh  rank  who  got,  hisdeserte 
(JB.  2,  261)1?.}:  a.ml  of  a pn|dl  who  tmed  to  look  after  tin*  nitdlo  (dll,  2,  276).  Wo 
also  hear  of  fA’M'  who  devoted  their  time  to  ritmil  work  in  oi'dr^r  to  rank  above 
the  otlua*  bmimmm  or  to  have  gnad,  auei^esa  in  love  11,  271 
Unforinnatidy  iVw  hriHimiune  nnmitkv^  tiiive  eome  down  in  sneh  eom- 
pleti'neHs  and  fnlness  of  detail  m tlm  l^tinahaejiii  t^jdaodie  In  rnrmi  eases  a short 
r^Htime  snOieed  for  the  antlnw  h pnrpo?a%  ru,  the  e'Xjdanation  and  jnstifleation 
ot  a Hirerifieiid  ritet'^®.  It  is  sometimes  not  even  r-ihny  to  intnief'  from  td'unn  the 
mndtms  of  an,  okl  tradition,  la^gends  aneh  as  flrnfui  told  m tfo'  diuminlya  ahimt 
teaeluTsand anthoritiesexeite  otir  etniosif^y:  did  they  |n<deas  and  jwtiimilgaki 
the  doetrineH  rehwred  to  in  a more  eomidele  form  k and  how  far  are  the  infor- 
nmtiims  tnHheir  aurlienee  ainl  the  atl.entam  whieli  fheir  teiiefiinga  reeeived 
historieidly  ndiahle***®! 

Idle  <|nc\Htion  an  to  wdref.her  thera*-  legimtla  and  mytfiieal  tales  ever  eolwtitntiHl 
tile  eonttmts  of  om^  or  more  iiookid  has  elieited  divm'griit  answm'’id^k  There  is 
on  one  hand,  the  irniinjintahle  faei  that  itlso  in  their  ’mvrrative*  |im1ionH  the 
hm/mmfjm  attest  to  tlu^  exiaienet^  of  a fnnrlammitiitl)  tioimigeneinis  traiiitiorn 
atul  on  tlu^  other  the  im|:»osaihiliiy  to  piovt*  the  .in  Vedie  times,  of 

W'idhdeimed  anti  antlu>ri*/,r*tt  hotlit*ao{  wndfings  eoiiijairahh'*  tti  itii'  iinti 

themstdvrm.  Bt^fore  tiiseuasing  this  firohlein  it  seems  f»x|iedient 
briefly  tti  snrvty  tln^  variet«ieH  ol  literary  jwofhwfion  whieh,  jmlging  from  the 
tmans  nsiHl  in  <,nir  kevts,  were  more  or  hma  eh’arly  diatiiigtinihfal  hy  I'ht'  iineieiits 
themsidves, 

^ Thi'  ImlJmmnm  ami  tln^  mdmet|uent  lit eriiltirf-^  itientioin  in  lohiition  t-o  the  four 
Vedas,  no  I<*hh  than  t^vtmtydlve  literary  genres/  11mngh  not  af'},tarafe  frtmi  the 


Onumu  at  KZ  nn,  p,  2lk  ami  I.tiiif  aveifara  1 i llimkiha). 

tu  'h h 67  on  llw  liarreiinrmi  of  iJtt»  mnle, 

e.i.  also  hin  N.  iUvaw^in«•„  Mweilaiwtittf*  wlkrnmtmn  m the  mvt let  id  the 
t aniaviH  a-', ' inlnnanwa  BhV^  27*  |n  (eimmoraimi^  iho  fjri'Oi,  fiaiieii,  faimern  ami 

UW!h<w  l.y  itnnu'.  Mtirvf»yjH„  iJu»  k«nt<«,  munul  hf,',  ' 

n«  *****'eHl.  (I'AJ'hM  Hfl,  ]j,  .!*I ; ihrw’ stinn’M  »«  rtt»<wr’»«ion). 

*“  H.ft.  JIJ.  1,  2«i!;  iirtfi; 

™,  ‘I’  *’■  >■  *■  !'■  »•*■?»  'ViW  j«wH4v.«.  Om- 

r 4,n  A.ri  h it . j.,  44..  t. X XIV 

loi  a nihlmgra|,)hmal  not,e  mm  OKima**  in  JAilH  23-,  |».  IIM. 


The  Brahinanas 


406 


hieratic  tradition  w(Tc,  as  far  as  appears  from  the  pertinent  references'^®, 

mainly  the  eom^erii  of  ‘private  persona,’  members  of  the  nobility,  and  the  more 
or  less  tmorthodox  and  nneonventional.  Known  to  tia  only  from, those  fragments 
that  w<'re  rta-eived  into  the  literature  of  the  brahmins“»  they  may  have  been 
spread  also  liy  <'rrant  ‘bards,’  ix-aeln'ra  and  rituali8t8'®“  who,  being  welcomed 
to  the  ‘coni-ts’  of  i,h(^  mighty,  seem  to  have  contributed  much  to  the  great 
inttn-est  of  t.lu»  lattm-  in  religious  and  ‘philosophical’  problems  and  promoted 
their  part.ieipution  in  discussions^'.  These  fragments  may  bo  classified  as 
tollows:  1.  sp<'eial  forms  of  stanzas  which,  occurring  also  m the  samhitas, 
developed  into  indepemhmt  classes  of  metrical  compositions;  2.  portions  of 
brahmim  texts  which  in  styh^  and  contents  came  to  differentiate  from  then- 
origin  and  to  he  transmitted  independently;  3.  subjects  which  always  were 
iiulepend<'nt  of  Vt-die  literature  proper.  It  is  not  however  possible  to  delimit 
these  three  categories  exactly,  the  less  so  as  form  and  contents  of  a composition 
do  not  always  h-ad  us  to  assign  it  to  the  same  class.  The  technical  terms 
denotii\g  these  species  of  literature  do  not  appear  before  the  brahmanas'^^%  hut 
ouly  in  the  sid)H«‘(inent  period  they  are  used  for  separate  and  independent 

'r<>  firni  <'nf(^gory  Ix'long  the  gdthdSi  ^‘toxts  that  arc  sung/’  delivorod  to 
the  acHM)iui>iuunMU)it  Htring(‘d  iuBtrunumts'^^  Whereas  the  poets  of  the  Rgveda 
mupjala  X)  apply  iho  tenn  gdthd  to  hieratic  compositions  it  came  in 
(^cnirse  of  iftne  t^o  asButue  a more  or  less  protanc  (or  rather,  non-hieratic) 
(^hara<d»i'r  ai.  jS  B,  1 3,1, 6,  h etc.  gdikVi  are  in  praise  of  a sacrificer  who  has  given 
donations*  waged  a war  and  won  a battle-  and,  often  in  connexion  with  original 
lit<a*ary  t(^xt>s*  to  \h^  used  in  opposition  to  the  rcas  and  other  mantras  of  the 
satpkitm.  In  tin'  okh'st  brdlmmiay  the  Taittiriya,  gdtMs  arc  absent  and  in  the 
oldi'Ht  l)0(>ks  of  the  Aitareya  they  arc  rand®®.  The  latter  work  and  the  Kausitaki 


cr.  e.g.  BV.  10*  O (of.  also  OLimNUKRa,  in  ZDMG  42,  p.  238  (==  K.  S., 
p.  (107));  AVk  ItK  (h  4;  T8.  7.  5,  11,  2;  AiB.  6,  32;  13,  4,  3;  GB.  1,  1,  10;  21; 

23;  1,  2,  U);  2*  (h  11;  12;  OUB.  1,  50;  53,  etc.;  Hoesoh,  V.  G.  L„  p.  54. 

In  <iuoting  th<i  autlu>rs  dijdlax'ntiato  them  from  fcm  and  yajusm  using  other 
f(,)rinulii«. 

Cf.  10,  5,  5,  8;  for  travelling  KB.  7,  0. 

For  a rtaiewed  thHouHHion  of  the  old  problem  as  to  the  influence  exerted  by 
the  k§atnym  up<ai.  the  dev<4opment  of  Indian  culture  (R.  Gaebe,  Beitrago  zur 
indischen  Knliurgesohiehte,  Berlin  1903,  p.  1;  H.  Oi^BENBEEa,  Die  Lohre  der 
ir|)aniHlnvden,  GOttingc'n  ®1923,  p,  143)  see  Hoeboh,  V.  G.  L.,  p.  427. 

HoEHiun  'V.  G.  L.>  p.  47. 

l\  IhiiEMW,  in  ZDMG  107,  p.  95  pr<^po»ed  to  distinguish  between  an  originally 
Hetndar  eonviviid  or  hant|uet  ptH^ry  (known  to  us  only  in  its  sacral  form)  and  an 
i>riginally  magical*  eHoteric  poetry  dealitig  with  the  formulation  of  truth. 

CJf.  13,  I,  5,  1 ; 13,  4.  2,  S;  11,  14  '‘a  brahmin  harp-player  . , . sings  throe 
Htropht'M  eom|Haie<l  liy  himHchV’  Bee  Hoeboh,  V.  G.  L.,  passim  and  at  WZKSA  6, 
p.  I,  and  <jf.  B.  Boiioeeat.h,  at  MOnohenor  Studion  mt  Spraohwissensohaft,  25 
(19(19),  p.  99. 

FiU’  a e(4hKiti<ai  of  the  ammymous  stanzfw  explicitly  called  gdtM  or  Moka  in 


406 


.1,  (tonOa  ‘ Ijilm’ainro 


ttiako  i>{  f^tjfMpjnihm  in  iiif  inn  of  an  opinion  nxpro«8c>d 

ill  a pmHHiing  pronn  portion.  For  innianoin  AiB.  ll.  4.*k  4f, : 

*^Thirt  IB  thi>  Hatvrifioial  rito  withont  hi^ginninn  or  owl.  llio  OfiwWown,  in  oiuileMg 
liko  a (iliarioiovhooL  A,b  ib  Hh  beginning  bo  m Ha  owl.  A?i  to  tlun  t-hoy  tk'Iivor  a 
naoriflcial  wtair/.a  Ofujtmjdfh^l 

‘Thai  whioh  in  iia  Ix'ginning  ib  iHbo  Hb  inuL 
Thai  again  whioh  la  iia  taui  m alao  lia  hogwnmg. 

ih('  arooping  of  a analog  la  fhi^  movoinoiH-  of  tho  Hfikiita  {ritnall, 

'!rh(>3^  do  noi  diwoorn  whinh  of  tho  tavo  ri  itvo  mihao(|waH  ‘ 

Tn  coniradiHiinoiion  to  mioh  ‘ritnal  nianziiB*  a vfn>«^  I hat  tn  ifnotoil  “thoroT 
that  in,  in  th(^  worlil,  and  drain  with  hinining  thr  Idiitnrli'mi  and  rxow'ratimg  tho 
blannnvorthy  (5,  30,  10 f)  in  aimply  tlrarrilird  an  a tfafki.  Many  inntawH'H  of  the 
latter  type  are  inHerO'd  in  t!u^  :J>nnabarpa  efnaode,  e.g.  7,  Bh  fi: 

‘‘All  dtdighia  in  thr  oarih. 

AH  (delighiH)  in  tho  lire, 

AH  (delighia)  of  hving  htnnga  in  tho  watow. 

(h'eaier  tlian  tlioBi'  ia  thatf  of  a fathi'r  in  a aon.“ 

In  any  oase,  the  eontinitH  of  thene  atanwia  nw  eonriBo  fdrinuhiiionH  of  tlionghtg 
or  i<leaHregard<'d,  to  a certain  extent  and  inH.wifhatanding  their  anonymity,  m 
authoritative  at  tlie  tinn,'  when  tin'  ftrd/fiaiia/i.v  mn'e  «"rnnpiled,  They  are  tpiott'd 
to  ahow  that  there  in  a tinu^»hononred  tradition  h-ehiiid  the  «aa‘innoiniii  oliwa'v- 
aime  advo<'at(H!,  hnt  they  have  no  fnmH'ion  in  ritmd  |»rarfirti„ 

A HuhdiviHion  of  tile  0if/kN  henra  tlit^  name  of  '‘hnih^gioH  of  famotw 

kingH,  hniniHtw'H^  aiul  other  Hhvvnl  or  proininenf,  Both  Umm 

often  eonHtitute  a tlxeil  mBjuemHH®^  Thrir  rvlniitm  iti  tln^  namtm  literature  m 
illuHtrat<H'i  hy  the  Htatenunit  in  H'B,  l»  H,  2,  (I  imimriiy  f impure  portioiiB) 
of  the  brahfMPt^  (the  Viula)  beeaine  ilie  aiu!  ‘Thf'y  are,  in  the 

iextH,  often  aimply  inirodueiHl  ^Vdrophe/*  mt  imdanee  being  Ailb  8, 

2M4: 

^‘Th<^  MaruiH  m at,iendantH  <lw(di  in  Marutt.aV  houmn 
Of  Avikjs^ita  Kuinapri  the  Ihnu’ib  were  ivweii’jorBP* 


tho  brahmmim^  aiui  i>UU>v  upmufmk  net^  Hoioeui,  V,  U.  I.,,  p,  iwHh  eKiilanaiory 
noks);  1, . H.  Johhi,  at*H).lB2Bp,  2Ul  (i?iata|iHtha-'Briilunanan  p,  goO (AHareva* 
BiTdimana). 

lntr<Hiue.tory  formnlan  are,  ipiite  eommtm  m thie  ewitev^iiw. 

"II  BeealHoAiB.^  hU\;Hr2h2L;  KB.  Ilk  3 ; eompare  liintHein 

y.  and  \ . Ckn  IbiATrAonAavvAi  On  the  awi  Mnkm 

m i,lm  Ait.M-<.y(v.nniImi(M,.a.  OH  3,  Hit.  I-W  Ih,.  Y wm^Ufm  , it  TS.  h,  1.  8.  3 «.«- 

HouHoir,  V.  (h  I..,  p.  *iUk 

“P'f.  OwnoNuKHu.  Ut.  74MO  M,  .tlf  {-■  K.  S..  4t):  nf  NtJ  tlilf,.  iiU) 

( . K.  ,S.,  p.  :tH2):  U.  N.  OiHwiui,.  ftt  lUo  IH.  }>,  H:i  m»i  'I'h.i  -r  In<Uan 

* *»e  *'*’*’*•  B:  O.  HtH'iMtt  <n  Ih.  Kt»-!uiin,  riww 

* a',  t"?/ ’’r  y,:f  ■/'■■  »i«:  :i21;  -i'H;  H{h.«l<lrnrttf,  3.  tft4. 

If  ***  ^ emmiiinir  a ewnfiotiwh 

Iloitmtli  V.  (5.  L..  p.  31 : 233;  iw  U>  ;VtH.  M.  21,  H : ..f  }^lt.  13,  5,  4.  « « miHilar 
Btanza  m oalkni  a gMh4;  1 loan*  on  'V.  ih  |i,  4fifk 


The  Bmlixnanaia 


407 


attesting  to  the  high  praise  bestowed  on  their  patrons  by  the  eulogists.  iSlolcas 
ocinir,  in  the  brdhmanm,  not  in  the  samhitds,  as  quotations;  they  do  not  serve  a 
liturgical  pnrposi'  but  explain,  illustrate  or  corroborate  an  opinion  of  the  com- 
piler; tlu\y  are  always  tvietrical  and,  summarizing  the  leading  points  of  an 
argutmmti,  t»hey  at*o  the  projxer  form  of  hnemorial  stanzas.' 

VitnviHl  in  i'he  liglit  of  tins  dkhymia  theory^®^  these  Mohis  may,  at  least  in 
part,  be  ri'garded  as  ongimd»ing  in  compoBitions  in  whieti  a subject  was,  orally 
of  cours(\  denlit  wit.h  in  mingled  prose  aitd  verse  or  in  prose  interspersed  with 
metri(‘a.l  Hues  (dkhyftna)^^"^.  In  those  works  which,  have  been  preserved  these 
vers<\s  beeatm^.  eustotnary  hisertions  as  soon  as  the  narrative  themes  developed 
into  longer*  (qxisodes^®®.  Tliey  make  their  appearance,  in  a limited  number,  it 
is  true,  itx  the  Jaiminiya-Brahmana,  for  instaixco  at  1,  233 f.,  in  a short  illus- 
trative episode.  Anita,  the  son  of  Devala,  criticizing  people  who  do  not  sacrifice 
corre(‘fly,  predicts  in  metrical  form  that  misfortune  and  disaster  await  those 
who  do  not  worship  in  the  right  way^®^.  In  AiB.  8,  21  ff.  some  sequences  of 
verses,  introduced  as  ijafnagdtkl  and  Moka,  servo  the  purpose  of  eulogizing 
famous  kings.  In  later  literature  such  verses  became  more  numerous,  assuming 
tlu'  eharaet-i'r  of  (piotations.  Part  of  these  verses  are  gnomic,  moralistic  or 
Hpe<nilaiiv(\  e.g.  AiB.  7,  9,  15: 

<»n(^  whe  has  no  wife  and  who  drinks  no  soma 
Shotild  Haeridee  in  th(^  mutramard, 

\SacrilkH>  to  frts^  yourself  from  debt  to  fatlu^r  atul  mother,’ 

In  aeeord  witli  this  word  is  the  rule  of  the  Scripture”^®®. 

Anotln^r,  probably  txion'.  popular  genre,  the  ititulm,  literally  ‘'thus  it  has 
Ix'en,”  (U)mpriH(‘H  tahns  of  definite  events.  Although  there  was  much  diversity  of 
opinion  among  ancient  authorities  as  to  a moi’o  exact  definition^®®  the  genic 
im^huk^H  any  k^gendary  story  or  cosmogonical  account  that  in  the  brdhmanas 
e.an  s<n’v<':  to  lurnisii  a motivation  for  a ritual  precept  oi*  to  fill  an  inteival 
hotwvm  ritual  aetioid®^  At  fiB.  11,5,  7,  9 the  iUhdsa  forms,  together  with  the 
vdkovdkt/a  and  tho,  pmlmh  the  daily  lesson  to  bo  studied  by  the  man  who 
wislu‘H  to  satisfy  tlu*,  gods^®®.  No  complete  distinction  can  be  drawn^®®  between 
Uihdsa  and  funlna  ‘^(a  story  about)  things  or  events  of  the  past":  both  terms 
are  ot\*cn  found  togidJier  even  so  as  to  constitute  a compouncP*^®.  The  story  of 


H(H'»  p.  200  IT. 

Hoe  e.g.  OumSNBUao,  Lit.,  p-  44. 

*•**’  lirJNOU,  in  Festschrift  F.  Weller,  Leipzig  1954,  p.  528. 

UI4  also  OIL  1.  258;  277;  2,  28;  395;  IvB.  27,  1. 

also  AiB.  7,  13,  1;  KB.  27,  1;  OB.  2,  27;  28;  30;  72. 

Hohhou,  V.  (L  L.,  p.  13.  For  UihUsm  S(h)  also  Gblonke,  V.  b.  .1,  p*  zou; 
285;  Kmmuim,  6B.  V,  p.  98;  bmo,  Sagenstofle,  p.  17. 
ftu.  IL  L 0,  9;  IL  5,  0,  8;  13,4,  3,  12. 

Of.  id  HO  TA.  2,  10,  1. 

L.,  p.  14. 

11. 


or.  idHo  TA.  2,  10,  1. 

Oomparo  t^.g.  SB,  13,  4,  3,  12  and  13;  Hohbch,  V.  O. . 
K.g. 'FA.  2.  9,  1;  SB.  11,  5,  7,  9;  GB.  1,  1,  21;  BA.  8, 


408 


4.  ( Jonda  * Vcnlic  Liioridtirn 


PururavaB  and  in  ai'enrding  in  aonin  (\Sn\lgnrn«iKya)  m\  itihimh  to 

otliern  a pumm  or  a-n  dkhpdi/ikd  “a  nhori  narrat4vtd'  In  a^ny  eane, 

tlio  term  Hooina  in  ,hav('  Imni  a.|)plioahl<^  in  ocmniogony  aial  nwnniiH  <^onemnng 
the  imt  agea  of  the  world  There  ea,n  1n'  no  diniht  that  the  inimber  of  tlu'  talea 
of  the  itiMm  and  pimlna  varit'ihss  wan  eonHidernhle. 

Mentioiunay  alao  heonade  (d't.he  mlvnikpa  “aiaaati  and  reply,  \a\  dialogiu^** 
a term  whieli  at  jSB,  4,  0,  0,  in  explitdl.ly  amioeia,tetl  wdli  the  hrahmodimi  of 
tlie  miuMmna  “InHtrnetionH  (<4' a ritual  nr  «\Mo<e'rie  (tinraeler)***^^:  and  of  the 
^ypdJchydfia  and  aa-ata/aWn/d/ia  “exegeaiH''  ami  “additional  t^xegeaiad'  that 
nwaniB,  tlioae  portioniH  of  a hrdhmma  whi(4i  ('xplain  or  ilhiatrate  diffieuli.  texts 
or  obsiuire  statenwaitH**^. 

Now,  returning  to  t^he  (|ut^Htion  as  to  %vhi4»lun%  for  inatanee.  tlu'  t^erm 
pimlm  denoted  a definite  book,  it  may  be  olmt'rved  ttuif.  at  lirst  night  some 
facts  seem  to  point  to  the  existem'e  of  more  or  Ic^hs  eanonii%*il  ei>lle<4-ionH:  these 
‘genres’  are  often  enmnerated  imnuahately  idler  the  nientioii  is 

made  of  sections  ('fmmm)  of  eolleetions  of  obviotisly  larger  eomi>asM^’^;  soma 

‘genres’~e.g*  tliat  of  the  pmlnm -are  in  the  post-Vedie  periinl  n^pn^sented  by 

mnnerotiB  and  voluminous  witings  which  can  hardly  hc^  suppoainl  to  luive  been 
com])il(Hl  from  eompandavidy  reei'ut  et>Ileetions  of  mattndfi!**^  On  second 
thoughts  it  is  however  mt>re  prohahle  that  all  fragnnnds  and  technical  tenus 
refer  to  oral  and  largi4y  a.nonymtnm  trinlitimts  of  ddferent*  age  and  origin  and  to 
more  or  h'ss  homogem^otis  *<*olleetions’  of  variotis  and  vm'ialde  si/.e  whiefg  in 
par<»,  v/m)  hanchnl  down  in  dOinite  int<dl«H4‘Ual  idretrs,  in  part  wen'  eotnmon 
property.  Not  ev<m  tlu^  laet  that  the  i/i/aisa-pannia,  whilt'  being  nnmtioned 
inxmediate-ly  aftiw  tlu'^  Atlnarvaveda^  isaidaially  ealletl  the  ilfth  Veda  {VhlL  7,  I, 


8rH^  ahov<\  p.  203  f 

(hsnoKnH,  V.  H.  11,  p.  2Sr>;  Uouhviu  V.  (I  L.,  p.  14 : ef.  8imkam,  on  BStl. 
2,  4,  10. 

Of.  Silyaya,  on  AiB.,  lntr,»  p.  Of,  and  see  TB.  2*  2.  if  L 

For  details  sec^  lloimeu*  V.  <h  L.,  p.  IH;  10.  (T  7,  IB  4;  BAtl.  2.  fi,  III; 
KalJ,  0,  15. 

Bee  Hobsoh,  V.  Cf  L.,  p.  32.  Other  t.ennH  inditnitnig  Utorary  'genres^  are 
raibhl  sort  of  bardie  po<'m“;  aidyfl  “knowletlgf^'*  fsee  I'toimen,  0,  li.,  17) 
and  the  compounds  Hafpamhjii  “ktnnvhnige  of  ta’  eonneefetl  wuh  st'rpt»ntH“  and 
(ktmjmmvidy(l  *‘knowIe<lge  of  ihanons/*  no  doubt  for  the  tme  of  iv^itreistH.  Hrmiddyd 
“mythology’’  ( ?);  bhMtmddyd  “demonology”;  “aelroncmiy  and  astro- 

logy”; thc^  nt(>tneal  kundapt,  prohiddy  ma  tnueli  tbffereiit  fvmn  f/df/id  but  t^xpn^ssing 
a ritual  dirtHditon;  m/iyd^  “tht'  art  of  pnnlueing  illuiaoiis”;  p$irip$  ”(*^04i{d)  eoms'rning 
tho  decreased” ; |>robably  “arithinetki” ; dt$.im  “|irogiiofi!seiiiiim“  ami  lanne 
otlars  of  nnet'rtain  meaning* 

F.g,  TH.  7,  5,  II,  2:  KH.  45,  2. 

13,  4,  3,  7 40. 

Tlnvt  there  muHt.  have  betm  nueh  ’books’  wim  the  optinon  of  Om.nNmt  («et^  u. 
147);  Brno,  HagimstofOn  p.  33;  Itmrrun,  m WZK^t  23,  |i,  205;  24,  fu  420;  Omtrnn, 
in  W2IKM  24,  p.  121;  JAeom,  BB  Berlin  101 1,  p»  1100  aiat  otherm  eontra:  OnniM- 
BBBO,  at  CKIA  IB90,  p,  410;  Wintkbnito,  1L  L B.  B |n  313. 


Tho  BrahmanaB 


409 


2;  4;  2,  1 ; 7,  1)  (*an  Ix^  said  to  prove  more  than  that  narratives  and  stories  of 
past  times  formed  a class  of  literary  production.  The  very  vagueness  of  the 
ancient  terminology  and  tlie  facjt  that  only  such  general  terms  as  gdthd  and 
iUMsa  have  survived,  no  real  titles  of  books  or  collections,  prohibit  us  from 
assuming  tlie  t^xistcmcH'.  of  ‘hooks.’  If  this  view  of  these  ‘literary  genres’  bo  true, 
it  follows  tlmt  it  is  impossible  to  say  to  what  extent  the  authors  of  the  6mA- 
mmm  wert^  acuiuaiutcal  witli  collections  or  traditions  of  ‘texts’  bclmiging  to  each 
species— or  even  to  tliosi'j  genres  which  are  best  known  to  ns—;  of  what  size 
these  (K)llee.i.ions  were ; how  far  each  of  them  had  a permanent  or  unchangeable 
form;  in  which  ix^gions  the  docstrines  which  they  might  contain  were  dissemi- 
nated; to  what  extent  tliose  who  studied  and  preserved  the  Veda  pt'oper  had  a 
share  in  the  extension  and  transmission  of  this  marginal  knowledge.  Only  in  a 
few  cases  (^an  we  arrive  at  a certain  degree  of  probability.  The  pdriplava 
dkhydm^’^^  of  SB.  13,  4,  3,  which  speaks  not  only  of  the  samhitds  and  their 
well-known  divisions  but  also  of  itihdsaSy  pi&rdms  etc.  and  their  chapters 
(*parmm ) may  be  supposed  to  refer  to  definite  portions  of  comparatively  large 
maBses  of  traditional  material. 


Bee  p.  415  f. 


410 


J.  Oonda  • Vodir  Liirrniuro 


8.  8tf/h  and  Mriicturc 

The  difforcuce  f)(dAV(M'n  tiiodorn  ]mm^  whi<‘!i  m nimily  raid  and 

ancient  proHo  baned  on  tlu'  art  of  oral  dolivt'ry  in  cHaadtIerahbn  Thvvi^  m nnieh 
to  be  wud  for  the  theHiH^  that  t!t<'  dieiion  and  phraHc'oIngy  td'i hc'  imlhmams'  are 
baaed  on,  or  are  a litia’ary,  (H>TU‘tartionaif/»(al  dnvelopnn'id  (d\  th<'  langna^('  of 
oral  imdaiietion  ami  diHetiHHit.ntK  (>fi.b<'  ritnal  expeiin.  XevertlHd(%sH,  the  ‘atyle’ 
of  tlie  hrdhmanas  in  a largt^  nenm'  of  tlu'  term  ia,  even  in  India,  tnriqne.  In 
language,  atyks  expr(\sHion  and  line'  of  argunionti  tlu'Se'  worka  ahow  a <do.se 
affinity®.  On  earelul  iunpeetion  howeviT  there'  m more  \^ariation  tlian  iii  the 
mantra  literature.  Oenx'rally  apeakiitg.  thin  }>roHe  h aituplt*  anil  in  many  rt'spc'itB 
fairly  clear.  The  long  cotupouudH  of  latt'r  Hanakrif-.  |U‘tKSi'  nr<'  alKSi'id^.  Word 
order  and  Bentcnci^  Btru<?ttiri'  are  ntritt  ly  regnlaitn!  m a<’<MnHlauei'  with  dtdinable 
and  intelligible  prineiplea®,  A limited  number  of  help.s  to  Ixring  otit 

connexiona  and  ndatioiiH.  The  gramniatiea,!  fornw  teanes,  t>enHC'K  and  moodB) 
arc  used  with  preciseneaB.  Archaic  gramtnntlcn!  fonna^  are.  it-  ia  true,  alow  in 

disappearing,  aome  of  tliem—- ('.g.  Biihjnncflvca  atiding  to  a i'('rlain  hit'ratic 

exactitude  and  dignity,  but  innovationH  are  mnnenniH.  SyntU'X,  gaining  in 
preekion,  and  atyh',  adaptitig  itB('lf  to  tlu'  dee|>ening  vd'tlu'  IhotightH  and  tlu' 
widening  of  outlook  a.nd  horizon,  d<'Vi'k>p  from  the  rtn!innnt<iry  //a/a.vlike 
aimplieity  to  the  complex,  linguktic  atniet-tirea  that,  are  eharn('t('riHtu^  of 
yiljilavalkyak  eontrilmtionH  to  tin'  Saiapathadirnhinnna'y  Ibnvevt'r.  tin'  atrtua 
ture  of  t!te  Hcnte'ucea  ia  dt'ekk'dly  lacking  in  variety.  Oeacriptive'  adji'ctivr'H  and 
cpitheta  arc  rare.  Parata-xia  in  normal;  a am'ce.aaion  of  aliorf'.  fient<'iH?cH  Vi'iy 
common®.  .Relative*  ae'tvb'nci'a  an'  on  tin'  wlu'de  well  emiainn’teti  Init.  tlien^ 
harah  and  nnexpected  ('liangea  of  eon.strtn’tion‘.  I'Vriod  budding  in  little  dt'vel- 
oped,  mainly  becauaes  of  tln^  nae  of  <lireei  api'celi  for  refereut'«  a t.o  reptat-tnl 
thought,  adduced  argumentH,  auil  <haiir<‘a  or  inataidt'ratiotia  irf  the  piU'KonH  wlio 
play  a })art  in  authork  the  cx|)oaitkma.  On  tlie  oilier  InuuL  thin  frecpnnt 


^ Of.  KoenuuNO,  HIb  I,  p.  XXV. 

® For  the  Imthnaxia  proa<'  net'  t'.g.  H.  Ot.nuxitKinn  'Aur  ttrf«dnehto  <ier  aU-iudi- 
achen  ProHa,  Berlin  1917  (who  rightly  <'in|ih{vny.e,H  that  uotu  nh’itaiuhng  a geiu'ral 
uniformity,  there  are  clear  trat^cM  of  a certain  tievelopin<’Ut ) ; Kcamuixo.  1, 
p.  XXV;  Kurra,  V.  B.  Y.  8..  p.  CHATl ; H.  B..  p.  lit;  mi;  WtNAtua  T.  H.  H.  p.  :hlo; 
Kkno'CT,  F.  V.  P.  1.  p.  72;  IVmUnro  de  la  langtie  Hanakrde.  lyoti-PariM  p, 

42;  Babu,  O.C.,  p.  299.  F<ir  a mon'  antiqtn'  style  of  the  itthams  port ioi uusee  0 nun- 
KKH,  V.  8.  I,  p.  259. 

**  Het^  c^g.  J.  OoN'UA,  La  place  do  la  partimde  ndgntno%  t,«ndr»n  1951;  La  |ilace 
du  v<'rh(%  irtnadit  1952. 

'*  Oenerally  iqieaking,  archaiaiuH  are  m tlierie  te\tM  no  odtable  nnlieaflona  (»f 
antiquity  (liuNoif,  in  JA  2:Mk  p.  29). 

For  Htylmtic  dHTerenm'N  within  the  flatanatha;  Mtvrtou  T,  F.  L lu  1;  IL  p. 

290. 

« Heo  e.g.  TB.  2,  2,  B.  HIT.;  2,  10;  PB,  7,  H,  If.;  JIL  t.  II;  l29fL;  2.  195. 

’ E.g.  T8.  5,  4,  4,  2;  2.  5,  I,  22, 


Bmhinana« 


411 


introthiction  of  direct  Bpccch  and  (inotaiiona  does  not  fail  to  lend  a certain  air 
of  life  and  vividnesH  to  tnany  paHsages^* 

CaseB  of  alliteration®,  rhyme  and  hotnoiotelenton^®  are,  ontsidc  formulas, 
fixed  ;phraKeR— tmijafjd  ’fxduhhi/h  ''by  |)rogeny  and  by  cattle’ —flexional 
rhyme  et(?.,  not  nneoninionly  fnu'pient.  Instances  of  paronomasia  and  V3tymolo- 
gieaF  figures  are  nu>r<^  in  ('vid<m<H%  also  Ixu^ause  of  the  many  psexido-etymolo- 
gical  exphmations  smdi  as  Ai,A.  2,  1,5; 

twfh  devdh  prdnayafita*  m pmnUah  prdtdpata,  pnttdxjUi  tat  prdtar  abhavat,  “The 
gods  (‘.arritxl  him  forward.  Being  carried  Ibrvvard  he  was  stret.oliod  out.  (Because 
piH>ple  say,)  Mle  has  l>een  carritnl  forward^  th(^  mortiing  came  into  being” 

A eonsiderable  part-  of  tliese  stylistic  devices  is  determined  by  the  occurrence 
of  fixed  phrases  and  recurrent  series  of  words— (TB.  S,  5,  10,  2)  urjasvidt  ca 
^wjasmtl  ea  “abounding  in  fortifying  food  and  drink”;  (3,  7,  7,  4)  rtam  ca  me 
satpam  ca  ’'h'ight  and  truth”;  (AiB.  1,  20,  1)  prayCijai  cdnuydjdi  ca  ‘‘the  fore- 
offerings  and  after-()fferings”-"-<>thcr  instances  of  these  being  (SB.  6,  6,  3,  15) 
brahma  ca  kmtram  ca  ‘‘the  brahminical  order  and  nobility”;  (JB.  1,  282)  ya 
et}am  veda  “who  knows  thus”;  (I,  321)  “the  (gods,)  having  approached  (Praja- 
pati,)  said  171)  “he  beheld  this  mmm>,  with  it  he  praised”  and  so  on. 

Repetition,  in  dir<H?t  spt'eeh,  of  tlie  words  of  another  person  is  usual  (o.g.  TB.  3, 
11,  8,  2f.),  i.ltat  of  a pnMXHling  natTative  portion  of  tlio  text  is  tiot  always 
avoidiHl;  e.g*  ifiB.  1,  0,  2,  I f.  where  a passage  dealing  with  a conquest  of  the 
gods  and  tluvir  <u\Htnng  <H>nHideratiotts  and  (hKHls  is  literally  repeated  as  some- 
thing heard  l)y  th<''  rxis, 

lleiUH'i  also  tlu^  fri'<|iu^nt  occurrence  of  short  (jonversations,  discussions  and 
dialogues,  not  ortly  in  mythical  and  l<^g(u\dary  narratives  but  also  in  explicative 
and  argumentative  passagi^s;  PB.  8,  4,  2: 

“(The  metrics)  Tri^t’'d)h  and  JagaW  said  to  (layatil,  Txd;  us  join  you.’  She  an- 
swensi  AVhat  will  r<«ult  thc.vndrom  for  xxxo  V ‘ What(vv(3r  you  dosiro,’  they  said. 
81u3  answered,  *To  me  must  belong  the  wholes  morning  service  . . 

As  alrc^ady  observed,  in  many  of  these  dialogues  the  persons  disputing  ax’o 


^ 8oe  o.g.  TB.  3,  1,  5,  i);  3,  12,  2,  2,  etc.;  AiB.  2,  3,  1;  12;  2,  11,  1;  12;  KB.  3, 

I;  0,  12;  JB.  3,  23f.;  92;  PB.  6,  5,  1;  7,  5,  0;  19,  17,  8;  20,  14,  5;  SB.  1,  1,  2,  2; 

1,  2,  2,  9;  1,  2,  5,  24;  I,  3,  1,  3;  1,  4,  1,  23;  1,  5,  3,  21;  1,  6,  2,  1;  4,  11;  14;  1,  7, 

4,  1;  2;  3;  1,  8,  1,  10;  1,  9,  2,  25  etc.  etc. 

® Cf.  e.g.  TB.  1,  2,  I,  14;  3,  7,  7,  3;  JB.  1,  233;  2,  285;  SB.  0,  2,  2,  34;  JUB.  1, 
30,  4;  Bono  A,  8.  R.,  p.  177. 

'»  Cf.  o.g.  TB.  3,  8.  18,  AiB.  1,  10,  1;  1,  21,  6;  6,  2,  6;  6,  14,  2;  JB.  1,  287; 

2.  2!)0;  SB,  1.  2,  5,  7;  (SoNl)A,  S.  E.,  p.  201. 

'*  otiu'i'  TH.  (1,  I,  3,  B;  AiB.  2,  1,  1;  (S,  18,  7;  SB.  1,  5,  ,1,  .i  )iud 

Hm  AiB.  2,  7,  4;  2,  40,  4;  0,  »,  0;  JB.  I,  233;  SB.  3,  2,  1,  29;  Ail.  3,  2,  (i; 

(lOHOA,  H.  R.,  p.  232. 

(jC.  e.g.  also  JTh  3,  10,  9,  3£.;  Ailk  0,  34;  KB.  0,  21f. ; 20,  6;  JB.  2,  419;  3, 

31;  77;  04;  104;  TB.  0.  1,  3(i;  12,  11,  11;  13,  4,  17;  IB,  12,  3;  SB.  1,  2,  4,  Off.; 
1,  3,  3,  13;  1,  4,  5.  811'.;  1,  0,  1,  4ir.;  1,  (i,  3;  1,  8,  1,  8f.;  2,  2,  2,  lOff.;  11,  0,  1,  Iff.; 
OB.  1,  1,  25. 


412 


tead'UT  mkI  |HipiI  or  iuit>horiiy  and  aft«n'  iriiih  i\r  knowledge,  the 

anhjectH  of  ihc  cliw’otirKe  ofi<'n,  helng  of  ihc’  hrahminiff^i-  Tn,rieiy*^. 

Although  ahnoHi*  any  ornaf^nwHH  of  atyh^  in  avrndrd*  ainnlrH  lunl  niol:a|>hom— 
it  in  trne,  not  very  frcMjtnnit  and  ninninally  diatiihufiHl  ■ am  not  almeiit^^:  mmio 
of  theni  are  rt'ally  atuHa'HHftd.  llhml ndlve  or  «’X|>lanalory  iiungen  !>orro\vtnl  from 
ordinary  life  am  helpful  in  innking  aonn^  exfdatn-dion  ninrr  int<cdligil>lo.  Thus 
th<^  anthora  of  fi,  Ik  10.  I and  AiH.  0.  2o.  II  r(d«n'  to  wrll-kiiowin  almoit 
everyalay  oeeumnua'H  to  explain  the  fnnetiojt  (d’eeiiain  retpUHit'.eH: 

“lake  a pewt)*!  wh<»  te  the  waO'rn  in  a koat-.  f»ven  the  riaerifiet'r  geen  with 
them  to  tht'ae  worldH“i  “Aa  in  thw  world  a wagon  wdliont  a leader  eoineg  to 
ruirn  HO  a Hareritiee  without  a doA'f/pd  (nanea  t4>  rnm“*®. 

Some  aimilea  are  <'laborate<h  <ng.  Ailk  H.  11,  H; 

“Just  m notoAryans.  rohht'ts.  or  evil-doers,  sin/.uwt  a s\eallhy  maui  in  the  wilder- 
ness, fling  him  into  a pit  and  rtin  away  with  Ins  wtnilfh.  so  llu'se  offleiantg  Hing 
the  saerifieer  into  a |)it  and.  run  away  with  hia  winihln“ 

but  the  short  and  ineonifdete  t«ype  .is  numt  eominon^'k  i b'easirmidly,  an  argtnnent 
is  baaed  on  worldly  wisdom.  TIk  2,  I,  4.  2: 

“What  is  dear  to  one*  that  eotuen  hatdi  t-o  him,  aiui  WMfh  what  is  dear  to  him, 
h<,)  urutes.“ 

That  i,n  tea<d,iing  tluw^  k'xts  g(*stures^'  underlined  or  elmadfit.etl  the  meaning 
of  simiU'H  and  otlua*  paHsag^^s  is  .proved  by  d,  4,  II,  It: 

“In  that  flio  r<vrtu<^r  e\tps  are  <lrawu  m sdenee,  that,  la  a?^  wh^m  ,a  flnmt.er)  who 
app.roaehes  an  animal  HOaUtluIy  shoots  {an  arrr»W',  thmkmg.l,  *Ho  far  off  w my 
mark,  a.t  ho  far  I shall  not  maw."' 

Tlu^  huystie  visitud  of  Blirgu  wht>  is  setii  by  his  fat  her  Vartina  io  yornhu*  wtwkl, 
where!  lie  sees  sonu^  liorribie  visions  ■■  ptH^i.de  eut  edher  people  .into  pie<H‘s  etc,— • 
the  explication  wlneli  is  given  by  Varuna  after  Bh|*gu*s  leturid*  is  one  of 
thos(,^  longer  passages  that  make  the  tmiiresHton  of  a Iteatiliful  id!<'g«iry.  Hayings 
inul  maxims  are  not  lacking:  “the  earth  has  ears**  (.Ilk  I,  “arroga.nce  is 


« Kg.  v<^Ik  lO,  1,  4,  10;  (.Hk  1,  1,  III;  U 3,  H;  tl;  lilf.;  L 4,  24, 

B.  N,  (iAJKSoaAOAOXAR,  Decorativo  style  and  nlnp^ikfirm  in  thi^  Aitareya- 
Brilhmapa,  JBBHAB  27,  Buppk.  p.  314;  Knrrm  V.  Ik  Y.  H.,  p.  tMAklU;  CIonoa, 
Remarks  on  simik's  in  Biwisknt  ht<waturt%  Leiden  1040,  p.  m. 

^ « For  otlier  similes:  1\S.  5,  4,  10,  ^ (a  sleopmg  ligerl;  7,  2,  2,  3 (“lyi  wlien  a man 
s.itB  down  to  a cow  that  has  alnnuly  hisai  imlkmrj;  7.  In  B,  ft  fa  Hying  bird):  7,  ft,  I), 
2 (“as  men  htnng  .freed  from  bonds  cry  aIoud“);  Aili  2.  3,  W;  4\  27,  3;  tl,  21,  10; 
J,B.  1,  130;  303;  Plk  1 1.  ft,  20;  HIk  4,  ft,  2;  tUk  L 3,  2.  For  refr^rmieen  to  liaily  life: 
Ailk  3,  4,  7,  1;  3 Ik  2,  303;  420;  3,  02;  JttiL  3.  7,  0 (”we  will  leg.  itiepnie  witliout 
witncHHCtt,  like 

Hw  also  ,Aitk  3,  3B,  4 m agaiunt  ft,  32,  tk 

tor  gt^iurc's;  (Jai.aso,  (Iber  das  ritnelle  Hiitrades  ,|lau*thavaii;a.  Leiir/Jg  1003, 
p,  3.  Bee  a,ko  BB.  I,  3,  1,7. 

JB.  I,  42f!:.;  BIk  U,  II,  1,  .1  IT;  see  Ihum'Wrr:^,,  JJk,  p.  00  (wtih  a Inbliography). 

hoo  11.  Oeetoi,,  at  JAOH  28,  p.  88. 


Tho  Brahtiumas 


413 


the  catiBc  of  ruin’'  (^11 11, 1,  8, 1)^*^.  There  are,  mainly  because  of  identificatory 
arg'utnentat»ion,  many  cases  of  conscious  Asexualization’:  ‘‘The  vedi  is  female; 
the  fire,  male”  (8B.  1,  2,  5,  15)^^.  Some  authors  have  thought  certain  places 
humorous  or  saix^istic®^. 

For  iFe  sake  of  logi(*n»l  clis(nission  and  disputation  these  authors  resort  to  a 
unifoT’m  phraseology'^^*.  If  ih(\y  wish  to  quote  or  to  reject  a divergent  opinion  of 
other  brahttiins  who  have  to  remain  anonymous^'*  they  either  quote  their  views 
in  a BU<K‘inet  and  fixed  form  or  they  simply  refer  to  them  with  ''soino''  (eka). 
For  instance,  ^B.  1,  2,  2,  10  and  AiB.  2,  20,  3ff.: 

^‘And  now  Hon\(''  (experts)  say,  Tie  should  make  it  (a  sacrificial  cako)  of  tho  size 
of  a horstfs  lioof.'  But  who  knows  how  large  is  a horse’s  hoof?  Lot  him  make  it 
of  such  a size  as  in  his  own  mind  ho  does  not  think  woxild  be  too  broad.”— “Now 
some  make  the  invit.atory  verses^®  for  that  (cup)  for  Indra-and-Vayu  amwtubh 
stanzas,  and  t.hc»  offering  Btanzt^a  gdyatrls  (arguing),  ‘The  cup  for  Indra-and-Vayu 
is  speech  and  breath;  thus  will  the  two  bo  in  accord  with  metres  also.’  Such 
(opirxiouB  are)  not  to  bo  regarded.  (Because)  imperfection  is  produced  in  the 
sacrifice  when  Bie  invitatory  verse  is  longer  than  the  offering  verse  , . 

Apart  from  the  fornudas  “Such  (opinions  are)  not  to  be  regarded”  or  ‘AQue 
shoxdd  iiof>  do  so”^^  there  is  a phrase  to  reaffirm  one’s  own  opinion:  SB.  4,  5,  9, 
lOf.: 

“Now  t.liey  say,  Tie  should  not  transpose  the  cups  . . But  let  him  novortholoss 
trauH|)OHe  tht>m,  for  fh(^  cups  are  tlu^  limbs,  and  in  sleeping  one  likes  to  turn  one’s 
limbs  from  one  nido  to  ilie  otluau  thenToro  k^t  him  novortholoss  transpose  thorn”®". 

A favourite  scheme  used  to  dissuade  the  audience  from  following  certain 
ritual  diriKdions  may  be  exemplified  by  SB.  8,  1,  4,  1 : 

“Now  some  lay  <h)wn  (tlxese  bricks)  so  as  to  be  in  contact  with  tho  (gold)  man 
(laid  itx  the  first  layer  of  the  great  fireplace),  for  ho  is  tho  vital  air,  and  these 
(bricks)  sustaiix  hiixx  . . . One  should  not  do  so;  tho  vital  air  is  indeed  identical 
with  the  gt)ld  matx,  l)ut  . . . Hence  . . . Oxxo  should  therefore  . . 

Hee  e.g,  also  AiB.  5,  22,  5;  7;  SB.  10,  4,  1,  14;  Basu,  o.o.,  p.  281. 

Cf.  also  TB.  I,  1,  3,  S;  &B.  1,  1,  1,  18;  11,  1,  2,  2;  MmABU,  T.  E.  II,  p.  324. 

« Bloomfusud,  in  JAOB  15,  p.  150  (certainly  not  SB.  12,  7,  3,  3);  Minabd, 
T.  E.  II,  p.  244;  8.  K.  Ihs,  at  OH  3,  p.  157  (not  MS.  3,  6,  3). 

« Cf.  MtNAHn,  T.  K.  I,  p.  47  (with  a bibliographical  noto). 

Many  quotations  defy  any  attempt  at  identification;  part  of  them  may  be 
misquotations.  See  also  H.  Wxulman-Gbabowsica,  in  RO  6,  p.  173,  mentioning 
also  verses  axxd  otht^r  quotations  of  unknown  origin  (e.g.  bB.  7,  5,  1,  pi;  11,  6,  5,  8). 
There  are,  on  th<^  othx'r  hand,  cross  refeixmoes,  o.g.  bB.  9,  2,  3,  31:  “The  bandhu  of 
this  has  l>eon  explaitxe^d”  (viz.  in  6,  7,  2,  3);  or  quotations  from  previous  passages 
(Boukwitz,  J,  B.,  p.  19). 

« Hi^e  p.  320,  n.  32. 

See  e.g.  also  AiB.  1,  11,  1;  2,  13,  Ilf.;  22,  If.;  4,  7,  5f.;  8,  0;  2,  22,  1;  3,  18, 

9f.;  BB.  3,  1,  2;  SB.  1.  I,  2,  23;  0,  1,  9;  2,  1,  1,  7;  2,  1,  5;  4,  5,  0,  10. 

E.g.  AiB.  1,  4,  5;  1,  U,  2;  2,  3,  12;  TB.  3,  11,  9,  1. 
w Of.  e.g.  xdHo  6B.  3,  9,  3,  9 axxd  other  variations. 

Compare  e.g.  also  SB.  0,  1,  2,  31;  9,  4,  4,  15;  9,  5,  1,  61;  10,  2,  3,  6.  Generally 
speaking,  an  elaborate^  argumontatiorx  ixi  dchaico  of  tho  own  point  of  view  may 
imply  a refutation  (cf,  Boxuswitz,  J.  B.,  p.  29). 


414 


(^onda  • Lii  oral  tin' 


A KiatiCBient  of  fattin  m Viny  ofUai  followt'd  !>y  tm  aK|>Iion,iir>o,  a ndonaicc,  an 
indioaiion  of  tlie  (MtnHi'qtiencoH,  or  of  iho  pra<d/ioal  ivpplioalirtn,  flu"  ptirpono  or 
end  in  view,  a nhoder  or  longt'r  iimirnet-ion,  <de.;  for  iiiHianeo  I,  0,  3,  15: 

*‘He  ilii'n  lookH  tip  io  ihi'  mnu  for  that  m the  final  aoaf  lla'  linn  foundation.  To 
tliat)  linal  goal,  to  tliat  firm  fonitdaflmi  ho  fht'n'hy  1‘^tr  thia  rt'iwou  ho  looka 
lip  to  tlu^  mud 

d'ho  literary  dovicat  of  tin'  dt'hafe  af  arting  with  the  well  known  aini  tin'  t'Htah- 
liahed  m adopted  evi'iitnally  to  diaeover  an  nit  intai  e or  tmkinnvn  bac'kgronnd  or 
oHoterie  aignifieain'e*'' * . 

The  eonipoHition  of  largtw  argintvent.a  and  ('xplanaittry  Kec'tiottH  in  ion  varied 
to  be  atudied  in  fall  detaih  UHually  entdi  ehapter  or  mnall  group  of  ehaptens 
forma  a little  trcatiae  for  itst'lb^^.  Ah  will  appi'ar  from  t he  following  ftagen  the 
authoTH  do  not,  in  dinenHsing  tln'ir  mihjeeta,  avoitl  viiriouH  formn  of  repetition, 
which  are  often  partly  detennined  by  the  Hehematit'  etmat-nuttion  of  their 
arguments.  At  AiB.  3,  47  f.  the  offerings  tn  tht'  minor  tleilh's  are  syHtt'matieally 
dealt  with:  after  a sliort  introdnetioit  tln»  autlnn'  <'?nnnerateH  the  oblations  to 
the  male  deities,  identified  'with  the  metres.  This  passage  has  its  (Mnink'rpart  in 
48  where  the  femah'  deities  are  mentioned  in  a similnr  way,  I'hen  then'  follows 
a longer  passage  whieh,  ex<'('f)t  for  tin'  nanu'  of  a deit;y,  is  ideidhaU  in  both 
<hapters.  1110  seeoml  <'liapt<'r  <'ndH  with  an  epitogwe  in  whieh  ref  erenee  is  made 
to  the  n'snlt  reaclu'd  by  worHlu.p{)ing  tlu'se  gods  atnl  t-o  ii  man  wlu^  on  a ei'rtain 
0(Hwion  had  perfornu'd  the  Haerifn'es'‘*‘\ 

Proper  names  or  speeifie  p^awms,  votJehing  for  anthentieity  and  luHtorieity,* 
are  mwer  ahsc'nt  from  mytldeal  tales^h  These  deal  witfi  definitt'  mylhii'al 
events;  the  j)orsonag<'H  attain  the  ohji'et  whh'h  tln^v  pursin',  eoivverst'  in  lapi- 
dary dialogues  and  pi'rform  exmnplary  deeds.  Por  instanee,  TB.  3,  9,  32,  3, 
(hading  with  tlu'f  horse-saiahlee : 

“The  gods,  for  tliis  (iht^  lierstwHaerifleo),  killetl  (as  a vit'f.iiip  this  chfty  (Prajiipati) 
that  ht'eame  an  animal  fit  for  the  nnastiee.  It  wa?i  the  (itsolf).  (Ponst'- 

qu(aitly)  it  was  the  Hacrince  (itself)  ivith  winch  the  goits  worshipped  the  sacri- 
fiee”.  Tiny  (thus)  canni'd  the  Haertfict^  to  he  tlio  fnitihnent  of  dostre,  They  (then) 
di'sired  freedom  from  ihsith,  anti  th,oy  reaehetl  freedom  from  thavth.  Me  wln» 
oHers  tln^  horse-Haerihet^  gts's  tln^  way  of  tin'  gotis  , . 

Seqin'iKH'H  of  paralh'l  syntaetie  stnn'tnres  an'  not  a,voideti;  on  tin'  ('ontrary, 
the  texts  shoiv  a.  gnait  varii'ty  of  j'sindh'liHms,  e.g.  tsB.  1,4.  2,  7f. : 

»«  Bee  tag.  PB.  % I,  If.;  3;  5;  4,  H,  Pi;  5.  Ii,  lif;  8ll.  L I,  I.  12;  iHf,;  I,  2,  2, 
5;  7;  13;  1,  3,  I,  1:7?  27;  I,  7,  1.  1;  I,  7,  3,  10. 

Bonnwriv*.  d,  B.,  p.  223;  st'o  tag,  fiill.  U.  a.  :p  stf ; fMh  t,  3*  13, 
lAir  |>aH4<5idarii  rt'gartling  thviHitiUH;  H^Ntna  m Ihf  1,  p,  Ik 
k'or  the  eouHtrmitiou  tif  longin'  passages,  groups  tif  ehaplti’s  en%  m the  Jat- 
naniyadhhhnmpa,  sett  lioumvn%  o.c.,  p,  13;  72;  HO  mia  Fr*r  the  iipparetit  tminhi- 
nation  of  two  ditTercnit  |)assageH,  p,  52, 

'kor  names  introtiucing  a tliHcussiou  st'o  e.g.  d Ii.  1,  22, 

]<V)r  'Prajripati  the  satnhle.t'  see  p,  3Hlk 


T^ralunariaa 


415 


‘“Gla(ltlon(>(l  by  pootn,^  for  tlicvso  poot.s,  tlio  fds,  iadcod  gladdened 

biin  . . . ‘Prained  by  Hagen, ' for  ilione  poetn,  the  pnls,  indeed  praised  biin  , . 

Long  HUfooHRiouH  of  parallel  HcntonooH  and  passages  arc  far  from,  rare,  and,  if 
the  text,  gives  oe.easiou  t,o  mark  tliem  by  a series  of  numerals  authors  readily 
seize  tlu^  opportunity^’.  A verbatim  repetition  of  the  same  events  implies 
rhythinio  repetition,  a eommon  feature  in  archaic  narrative  which  obviously 
was  a source  of  pleasure!.  Repetition  of  the  author’s  words  by  one  of  the  persons 
figuring  in  his  aiaKuml,  or  of  an  instruction  by  the  person  instructed  is  no  rare 
ownirremw  either®".  I’art  of  tlu'se  repetitions  consist  of  formulas  to  be  pro- 
nounced by  an  officiant ; others  are  determined  by  the  enumeration  of  a number 
of  similar  formulas®*,  by  references  to  ritual  distinctions  or  to  parallel  ritual 
acts,  for  instance  those  resulting  in  some  effect  in  the  throe  provinces  of  the 
univer.se,  e.g.  SB.  5,  1,5,  1: 

“Now  when  they  run  a race,  he  thereby  wins  this  world.  And  when  the  hrahman 
sings  a .wimfui  . . ..  he  thereby  wins  the  intermediate  world.  And  when  ho  climbs 
the  sacrificial  post,  ho  thereby  wins  the  world  of  the  gods.  Hence  that  threefold 
}>orformance”**. 

Since  l.hese  repet, itions  relate  either  to  the  ideas  to  bo  expressed  or  to  tho  forms 
in  which  they  art^  expn'ssed — and  in  most  cases  to  ideas  and  forms  at  the  same 
time—- rceiuTeuces  of  the  same  schemes  and  tho  same  words  arc  throughout 
these  works  a common  feature**.  Reh^rcnce  to  identical  or  similar  acts,  events 
or  siliuations  are  always  likely  to  be  worded  in  the  same  stereotyped  pluascs'* 
or  in  the  same  syntactic  frames  filled  up  by  different  nouns  and  verbs,  as  tho 
context  may  re<iuire.  Thus  a number  of  parallel  statements  or  episodes  is  not 
infrc(|uently  ri'lated  seriatim  with — as  far  as  possible  tho  same  words,  at  dB. 

:L  12,  4,  2ff.  Prajapati,  being  exhausted  because  of  his  ritual  activity  worships 

several  successive  entities,  such  as  austerity,  belief  otc.  A fine  example,  showing 
at  tho  same  time  that  this  rope.titional  stylo  could  bo  a ritual  necessity,  is  the 
recitation  of  the  so-called  revolving  talc  (pdriplavam  akhydnam)  which  is  a 
special  feature  of  the  aiivamcdhct*^.  During  tho  year  in  which  tho  horse  is  wander- 
ing about  the  hofar,  seated  on  a cushion  wrought  of  gold  threads*®  is  invited  by 
the  (ulhmriju  to  Ul\  this  tale  in  order  to  raise  tho  royal  sacrificer  to  a higher 


""^  See  e.g.  also  TB.  3,  10,  8,  4fr.;  0,  1;  2;  6;  11,  6ff.;  11,  1,  2ff.;  9,  2ff.;  SB.  1, 
4,  3.  4f.;  I,  (!.  1,  11:  12:  2,  2,  2,  1:  GB.  1,  1.  4;  29:  33  , o a oo 

K.g.TB.3,  1,  4f.:  PB.  4,  1,  8ff.:  5,  4,  Iff.:  6,  1,  8ff.:  7,  8,  911.:  bB.  1,  3,  3,  ...0, 

1,  4.  i.  UlT.;  1.  f.,  4,  Off-.:  1,  0,  2.  8ff.;  1,  <5.  3.  3ff.:  1,  7,  2.  2ff.:  2,  2,  1,  lOff.;  6,  1, 

2,  Iff.:  12,  7.  1,  1:  GB.  1,  2,  18;  1,  3,  7;  Minamd,  T.  K.  1,  p.  30. 

K.g.  .IB.  2,  134;  3,  77;  240;  240f.;  PB.  12,  11,  lOf.;  15,  o,  20;  -4. 
kJ.  SB.  1.  7,  3,  10;  4.  Off.;  I,  0,  1.  4ff.:  13ff.;  8,  2,  4.  Iff.;  8,  4,  1,  Off. 

Hci*!  (i.g,  alno  JB»  .U  40 L;  451,;  PB.  0,  OfL  x-  a 

Cir.  o.g.  fill  :u  B 4,  0;  1,  2,  I,  7;  I,  4,  1,  2fL;  alao  of  tho  aamo  ciuostioiis  and 

auHv/ora:  fill  11  5,  I,  2ff.  , 

Cl’  (5  fiB.  L 2,  L Bff.  and  boo  WxxxMAN-CJnABOWBKA,  at_lU)_(),  p.  170. 

Ih  K.  Dum:ont,  L’a4vamodha,  Louvain  1937,  p.  39;  It.  1).  KAXtMAiiKAxi,  a- 

ABOlil  33,  p,  20;  lionmu,  V.  G.  L.,  p.  20. 

« Bof,*.  alao  AiXl  7,  18,  12;  Oldbnbkro,  l^roBa,  p.  61 ; LcK.fflLXNG-,  bB.  V,  p.  XXXl. 


416 


Btate  (5^.11  IZ,  4:,  3),  Thin  dkhtidnu  conHiniH  of  t<n'i  Hi.ort'oiypotl  lU'oooniH  of  kings, 
their  pe.oplen,  their  VetlaH,  the  wonlingn  of  eiieh  aei'oiint*  being,  as  far  as 
possible,  i(iei]iti(mb  Eaeh  diseoiirse  lasts  for  one  day,  the  whoh'  stales  for  ten 
days.  After  a series  is  ovt'r  tlie  eyeh'  is  tcv  reiHiit-ed  in  Ihe  Hione  order--4hat 
means,  M tinw^s  bxit,  no  donbt,  '('very  time  with  a different  sei'tion  of  the 

respective  texts till  the  iidiirn  of  the  hors<\  Th*'  rt>yal  mvriimn*  will  ‘^attain 

to  fellowship  and  eonnutinion  with  these  royaJties,  gain  Ew'  sovereign  rule  over 
all  people  and  seenre  for  hhnself  all  the  Vedas**  Kb  4.  :b  lb). 

Generally  spt'akitAg,  repeifftoim  of  elatist's  are  tnoii'  tmnwn’otm  fhati  t!\t^s(>  of 
sentences,  tliose  of  sentences  niort'  fnipu'nt  thim  fhost'  t>f  longt'r  passages,  Hunt 
this  natural  eonse(iuene<^  of  oral  transnuHsiotii  was  of  spciial  dida<4-ie  atul  nuus 
monie  signitlcaneo  is  self-evitlent. 

Another  lavourite  dtwnee  is  the  n'l^efition,  at^  Gie  tutd  i>f  a stHdioit,  of  the  ini- 
tial words  in  order  to  indicate  that  the  expIi<*ation  has  been  brought  to  a 
conclusion;  1,  3,  2.  1 : 

“Now  the  sacrifiee  is  the  Puru^a  {this  word  alsr^  demurs  the  man  wtio  is  the 
sacrificcr).  The  saerifiee  is  th<'  Piirm^a.  htiimse  man  (fmrtim}  fawforms  it,  and 
that  in  being  performed  it  is  nnule  of  I'xaetly  the  samo  extent,  m t-he  Ptirufa. 
Tins  is  why  tlxe  sacrifice  is  the  Purn.^a***\ 

A thorough  examination  of  tlu'  various  types  of  intiiHitH’'lnry  a.nd  eoneluding 
phrases  and  fortmtlas  would  Ih^  worth  while,  the  fim<'  being  a444ittion  may 
l)e  drawn  to  the  (‘lul  of  tln^  seetion  dib  K 22  2iK 

“Tliese  were  tlu'  reflections  on  tite  Ufmdmtmi  tlniie  wer»^  the  mmn.  'These  very 
aims  he  obtains  who  knovm  thus  anil  for  wlmm  {a  priest)  knowing  thtis  perfomis 
the  ^fnihotra,^^ 

Sometimes  stu?h  fornvtilas  mark  off  a section : “Now  tve  sltall  set  forth  . , 

Thus  parallel  evtmts  or  actions  are,  also  in  long  suei'essiorm,  ndernnl  to  in 
exactly  the  same  syntaeth*.  Htrucf.urr'S  aiul  with  vm'bal  repetition  of  tmitstant 
elemcnts'^b  Intelligibly  enotigh,  atbmtitm  has  often  he<m  riraAvn  to  fht'  tmmistak- 
able  monotony  of  tnatiy  siidlonH***,  hi  tlu^  off.U'eptnled  aeiinmis  of  tiu^  gods* 
endless  strif<^  with  tin**  demons  or  of  the  sfa,teimuits  of  wltat'  Kh'  gods  won  by 
this  or  that  rite  thert^  is  very  lit4.h^  variniitm : 

“The  gods  and  tht^  murmt  (both  of  theni  sprung  frmn  lk*ajopatu)  competed  with 
one  another.  The  gods  . . the  murm  * . ‘“Thereupon  the  gods  poispenri; 

« See  also  AiB.  2,  1,  r>;  iSjb  K U H ■ 17;  I,  K :b  H;  K H,  3,  2:i:  K 4b,  3.  Kb  15; 
2,  .1,  2,  4;  2,  5,  2,  6:  5,  K K It);  5,  2,  K 22;  IK  K 5,  7,  and  company  K K 3,  3-5; 
12;  K 4,  2,  5;  5,  K 3,  12;  W,il4,MAN4bia»o\VH'H,A.  m Hi)  tl*  p.  Il4:b 

K.g.  GB.  K 3,  13;  Ail.  5,  3.  3;  ef.  Tl.  7,  2,  1 ; »SIb  4,  lb  I : KB,  1,  I,  24;  2,  3, 
12;  K 3,  iSflri  K 4,  lb 

{See  also  Tib  3.  H,  12:  13;  14;  lb  B,  IK;  IK  5;  12.  lb  IIK  etc, 
lb  VV.  HoinciNS,  Clods  aiuf  saints  in  the  Kreai  Brfduiiana,  4‘rims.  Konnectleut 
Aeacb  Ifu  p,  39;  4fi;  Kmrtu  H.  B.*  p.  97. 

Pfb  a,  3,  1;  KK  3,  9;  JB.  K 103;  129:  0,  lb  2.  It;  Ik  2;  H,  K 1 : 3.  I etc.; 

cK  also  TB,  2,  2,  3,  3;  3,  9,  2K  K ,For  uiiimr  vanaKons  ut  grammatiital  t^x|U’eHsion; 
WixxMAN-G:aABOwsiCA,  in  liO  lb  p.  176, 


Tho  Brahma, na,H 


417 


tha  miirm  oamo  to  iiatiglh.  (wero  coixqtion'd),  llo  prospta's  hiniBolf,  hie  rival  conies 
to  naught  ivho  known  this'’®®. 

Occasionally,  howcvi'r,  a Honxewhat  longer  niid  vit.al  passage,  even  a brief 
narra-tm\  l)reakH  the  niotiotony;  PB.  12,  5,  23: 

‘‘The  gotls  and  tlu^  mnrm  wro  comp(>ting.  Whom  they  (the  asurm)  slow  of  the 
gods,  tha,t  one  did  not  <»nme  to  life  agtun.  Whom  (the  gods)  slow  of  the  (zstmuj 
that  ont^  (aun(^  to  lih'  again.  Hk'  gods  i^erhn’nied  aush'riticvs  (ta%ms).  Tht^y  saw 
tliat  arhht  (minuiH).  I'htanaipon  whom  they  (tla^  (mmm)  sl(nv  of  the  gods,  that 
one  came  to  lih^  again;  whom  of  th<>  amras,  that  ont^  did  not  come  to  life  again. 
(Be(uuiHe  tluy  then  ihought,)  ‘llirough  Ihis  (mlman)  wo  have  conu^  out  unliurt, 
tlu'refore  ii  is  called  ‘fret'  from  harnf  (arhfa),^  The  arista  is  applied  . . . to  bo 
free  from  Imrt,"’* 

Tins  tnonotony  dot's  not  indeed  exdnde  variation  from  stcreoty|)cd  foiinnlas 
and  lixtal  nuales  of  pri'sentation  in  narrating,  or  referring  to,  the  same  or  similar 
events  or  situations  or  even  the  dcvelopinent  of  different  versions  of  a tlieme : 

“Indra  raisi'd  his  tlumderbolt*  against  Vftra.  Ho  (Vrtra)  said,  Do  not  hurl  (your 
iveapon)  at.  me.  I have  lu're  a (thing  or  source  of)  energy.  I shall  give  you  that 
, . “Indra  wished  to  hurl  his  weapon  (vajm)  at  him.  Ho  said  to  Vi^nu, 
M will  hurl  th<'  vajm  at  V|’tra;  si-aud  by  m<'.‘  ‘8o  be  it,’  Vi.^nu  said,  T,  shall  stand 
l>y  you;  hurl  it-.’  Indra  raised  i.he  vajra  (aiming)  at  hitn.  Vptra  was  afraid  of  the 
raist'd  vajm.  He  Haiti,  is  ht'rt'  a (source  of)  entagy.  I shall  give  that  to 

you,  l)ut  <l<»  not  smite  me  , . - VNt>w  Vrtra*  being  struck,  lay  contracted  like 
a k'atlu'r  bot.tle  draint'd  of  its  coutiaxts,  lay  t'outracU'd  like  a skiix  bag  with  the 
harU'y-nxeal  shaktax  out.  hxdra  rusht'd  at  him,  intt'uding  to  slay  him.  Ho  said, 
‘Do  not  hurl  (your  W('apoti)  at  nu'  . . . Only  tnit  me  in  two  parts’’’— ‘‘Indra  had 
sifxin  Vftra,  His  eixt'rgy  (virtut')  broke  asunden*  in  all  diretstions.  The  gods  sought 
a rt'dn^ss  for  him  l>ut  nothing  did  satisfy  him  . . 

Mt)r<'Ovt'r,  wtdbknt)wix  thtmu's  siulx  as  tlxis  conxbat  of  Indra  and  Vrtra®^  or  the 
emnlai.it)n  bedavtam  gods  and  murm  are  t>ach  titxxe  repeated  for  another  purpose, 
and  evt'ry  other  pur|)OBe  may  require  emphasizing  other  details  or  aspects.  The 
et>nt(^xts,  or  rather  the  continuations  of  the  authors'  expositions,  are  often 
widely  difhnamt^*®  and  sometimes  a modern  reader®**  may  easily  be  under  the 
erromaiuH  inx])ri'Hsi<)n  that  some  of  the  recuxTcnt  passages  arc  makeshifts 
facJ.l iifating  transitions. 

Among  those  devices  which  may  break  the  monotony  and  add  to  a certain 
variation  ami  liveliness  are  questions  and  answers®®  as  well  as  typically  ‘oral 
constraetions’  stieh,  as  e.g.  ‘prolepsis’®®.  Besides,  there  are  otlicr  means  of 


««  PB.  2,  (b  2;  3,  2,  2;  4,  2,  2;  5,  r>,  15;  JB.  1,  124  etc. 

PB.  20,  15,  0;  5,  5,  5,  Iff.;  1,  6,  3,  l«f.;  PB.  18,  5,  2;  see  also  PB.  15,  11, 


7;  T8.  2,  1,  4,  5. 

K.g.  AiB.  K 20,  3;  2,  3,  12;  KB.  7,  2;  15,  2;  SB.  1,  h 3,  4f.;  1,  2,  4,  1;  4,  1, 

If.;  5,  2,  3,  H;  0,  2,  2,  10;  0,  5,  2,  4;  11,  1,  3,  5. 

M err.  SB.  1.  2.  4.  8:  L 2,  5,  Iff.;  L 5,  3,  2;  L 5,  L 0;  2,  1,  1,  8;  2,  1,  2,  1 


2,  2,  2,  B;  3,  2,  U IHff.;  3,  4,  4,  3ff. 

WirrM:AN»(litAB0VvsxA,  in  HO  0,  p.  170. 

« H.g.  PB.  0,  3,  0;  10,  5,  7;  fiB.  8,  I,  3,  1;  8,  I,  4,  2. 

K,g.  SB.  7,  1,  2,  13;  11,  2,  3,  2;  Mxnaed,  T.  E.  II,  p.  297. 


418 


.1,  * VihIio 


|mxhu‘iiig,  in  t.his  highly  n'priitiouH*''  Myh\  viirialion:  lor  inHfxnw,  tho 
atithor  pointtH  otii  wha;<*  would  o(anir  il  tho  dinniimiM  or  cnuirw'  of  n(i,iou,  givou 
by  hhti  W(W<^  not  foIl<nv<Hb  <'.g.  TS.  f».  K 

“If  lu'  Hliould  noi<  prouoiinrn  Ibni  formula,  flu'  diviuf'  wafor^i  AVould.  unuppoivnutl, 
(hwanKl  on  ibin  world," 

Tu  flu^  lat('r  imlhmmjm  flu'  foudotmy  to  vnrinlioti.  |o  a grrafrr  vividnrKa,  fo 
oonsirudbig  murfonms  anti  argunuadalitmM  t*f‘  tlit'lVroid  fypt'  in  ch'arly  in„ 
rroa-Hing.  'Tluia  It  rcnda  in  -I,  .1,  I.  5; 

“Lot.  him  hullo  t.wolvt^  Hpoonfnla  of  tluan:  fhoo^  aro  Iwoha  monthu  in  iho  vt'ar, 
t-h(‘r('foro  ho  nhould  hulli'  t.wolvo  a|ioonfuh4.  But.  hi'  may  alao  ladio  Ihirtotai, 
hi'tamso^  iluy  aay^  ihtH’t'  in  a thirfooufh  month.  Lot,  him  novorllu^li'Hs  ladli*  twolvo 
only%  ftir  anch  in  |H'rfooLon," 

It  18  not  haiHiblo  toainu  iti  dosoribing  Ilu'  varialion^  ifi  8friioinri\ at  anything 
like  <u)mpk‘tem'88.  At  fi,  I,  I,  I fF,  wo  fuul  a long  and  livodv  story  of  tlu'  gods 
running  a.  raot^  whioh  was  won  by*  Hrhn.spati  hooausc*  at  his  rrtpn*Ht  ho  was 
dmpolled'  by  tlu>  iiupollor  among  tho  gotin^  Bavitar:  ino“ml}ndosa  it.  oonlains  in 
0 a litoral  n^pidition  of  part  of  4. 

OooaHionally  t-lu'  nat.nral  troml  of  andiaio  proso  to  po^snit  I ho  snbjt'oionattor 

aimlytioally "llo  Haorifioos  in  tho  (naming  and  in  tho  morning;  to  Agni  in  iht' 

(vvoning,  to  Stlrya  in  tluMuorning*’  (KB.  2,  ia  tnoro-  prouonnroii  IiooauHo 
of  tlu'  fnapumt  iu'0('HHtty  t^o  instnl-  a vaHofy  of  nmt ivaiioos  or  o-xplnnatioim, 
Thus  Ml  U ‘S.  *b 

“Mb  thtm  8187.08  (two  nh'imil.M)  at  tlu^  sium*  tnn»\  for  on  lh«'  otaaoaon  , » , 

ho  makt'H  him  an  olilatiun  . , . Ho  nor/mt  thorn,  for  tho  \"o4Vf‘  Dovaly  for  , . , Ho 
Ht87.oH  th(8u  witli  Hu^  toxt  \\S,  2,  IH,  bn*  , . 

Thin  tomlonoy  qtiib^  mdairally  mitailH  innny%  ami  aoniotiim  a long,  onunuu'ationB 
of  nanu'H,  authorition,  poirtts  of  iln^  oompmm  ami  oihor  oonorgdH  or  oniitioH««, 
as  well  as  contituiod  ntringa  of  qnoationN^^  ami  a fnronrito  topio  dosrriptions 
()f  tlkintogration : *1nH  fatm^  goes  to  tlu'  toaolior,  hk  aloo|i  to  flu^  lma»  his  aiigta^ 
it)  tlu^  l)oar  , . Z’  ((Hi  K 2^  2).  Hitnalintio  »%tptisifiona  miiy  rorpiiro  oxpliidt 
Htatoim^nt  of,  for  ittHianoo,  tfttaliliontlona  of  ihv  prooojm  imiii’atod  liy  iho  'vm’h; 

‘M’lim  tho  si'anouH  hnuL  Ah  ouo  who  (loads)  om^  who  afio  kiiow;-n  as  onr^  who 
nndt'fHtaiidH  om^  who  undor.standH  alma  ho  iho  sofoions  hsid  him"^i 


Notioo  al«Q  the  froquottt  ro|mtitionH  of  tho  sami'  word  m ono  and  tho  fiamo 
<’.omplox  HfniBsuKo  Hfi  L a,  5,  hi  a,  I,  If>  anti  m gonond  Uht  Uit^iiowsKA,  in 
ItOthp,  IHIi 

(If.  tsg,  idwo  KB.  II  Hi  hi  4;  ati  Ij  BH,  M Hh  tl;  tHi  t,  Ih  to. 

AIho  otwt'M  Htuih  aa  4kS,  2,  4,  4:  “Braj/tpati  oroiOotl  ollijprmg  , , . Praiiipati 
iwmivd  oattlo";  KB.  2(h  Ij  IBi  H.  4,  ft. 

h.».g,  (di  L 2»  H (auimalH);  BB  nooi  also  pansagoH  sttoh  nn  *rii  fl,  4,  I IT. 

E.g.  (lli  I,  B 24;  L Ik  'll. 

« Vt  alHo  I>B.  7,  2.  tl. 


Hio  Braliuuinas 


419 


Directions  and  inBt.rnd-ionH  often  reqnire  a motivation mantronS  quoted  an 
ox|>lanation  or  a.  Bt.at.etn(mt  of  their  application®"^. 

Wluni  the  Btibject-niatter  of  a story  gives  occasion  to  analytic  presentation 
it  is  by  |)ref<nHnice  narrakal— if  possible,  with  reenrrent  pln^ascology— in  the 
form  of  a succesBion  of  {)haBeH.  'riic  gods,  desirons  to  win  Speech  who  sides  with 
the  muras,  ask  Yn.jfia  (Saci‘ific(>)  to  beckon  her,  SB.  3,  2,  1,  lOff.: 

'‘"•She  is  a womiui  and  will  c(ad.aiuly  call  you  to  her  . . Ho  accordingly  beckon- 
ed htn\  »Slie,  luavev<a%  at  hrst>  disdained  him  from  the  distance.  And  htuxoo  a 
womati,  when  bockotUHl  )>y  a man,  at  first  disdains  him  from  the  distance  . . - 
He  IxudoauHl  her  (again),  Init  sht^  otily  replied  to  him,  as  it  were,  by  shaking 
her  head.  And  hemu'*  . . . He  heckontal  her  (again),  and  she  called  him  to  her. 
Aixd  heiKiO  . . 

The  occurren(‘t'  of  various  fortns  of  recapitulative  concatenation,  sometimes 
in  sneoession,  is  not  surprising;  iSB.  3,  6,  3,  14: 

. . He  takes  tlxat-  (the  couch  of  leaves:  prastara);  liaving  taken  the  prastara, 
ho  spreads  the  bed  of  grass  . . .;  having  spread  the  bed  of  grass,  he  lays  tho 
enclositxg-Bticks  . . . round  (the  lire);  having  laid  the  enclosing-sticks  around, 
he  puts  two  kindling-sticks  (oix  the  fire)  xuid  having  put  . . 

a inod(^  of  c^xpression,  frcHpient  in  archaic  and  popular  literature,  which,  whilst 
avoiding  long  tmits  and  latratxrdinary  concentration  on  the  part  of  the  audi- 
(Uici's,  is  espcudjxlly  suited  to  lay  enxphasis  on  the  procesBOS  under  discussion  and 
their  HUceesHioTX. 

Another  i^haraelKvristic  of  this  style,  lor  all  its  prolixity,  repotitional  pedantry 
and  minute’!  exaeltitude  in  particulars,  is  a tendency  to  brevity  and  ellipsis,  con- 
<uH<vness  or  eomhmsation  in  contexts  of  minor  cotxxpass.  This  is  mainly  due  to 
tlu^  (vral  transmissiem  of  the  texts—  matter  mentioned  allusivoly  coxild  be  made 
(jk'ar  by  the  teacher—,  tbe  more  or  less  initiate  audience,  tho  technical  character 
of  many  ixassagt^s  (‘demi-mot  suffit’),  and  the  stylistic  relationship  with  the 
modes  of  <^xpressiori  prevalent  in  teaching  and  discussing.  A noun  may  he 
rephuxHl  by  a cjualificatory  adjective  or  an  anaphoric  pronoun;  a subject  of  a 
sentimee  or  of  an  absolute  locative  omitted;  an  important  clement  of  tho  argu- 
txKuxt  numtioned  only  otxce;  a verb  be  loft  withoxit  its  subject,  an  answer  to  a 
qtiestion  witliout  an  introductory  formula®^.  In  short,  what  was  considered 


E.g.FB.2,  1,  3;  4,  4,  11;  5,  3,  11;  SB.  1,  1,  1,  11;  21;  of.  also  cases  such  as 

r>.  ft  2, 14.  . ^ . 

e.g.  SB.  1,  1»  1»  13;  1,  1,  2,  12;  13;  1,  1,  4,  20;  1,^2,  1,  3;  1,  2,  2,  14. 

8omc  othex"  itxHt4,uices : TB.  0,  5,  1,  Iff.;  AiB.  3,  251.;  3,  30;  7,  15f.;  PB-  8,  4,  1; 
20,  15,  HI;  3B.  1.  42;  3,  I99f.;  SB,  1,  2,  3,  0;  1,  4,  1,  lOff.;  2,  5,  1,  If.;  4,  1,  5, 
5,  5,  5,  3ff,;  (IB.  1,  2,  IBft.;  24;  JUB.  4,  20.  A fornmla^‘‘lbr  the  second,  third 
iime'*  in  however  HtvrmUJmes  used  to  ootxdense  a story  (e.g,  JB,  3,  201). 

e.g.  also  KB.  12,  8;  SB.  1,  3,  5,  7;  3,  2,  1,  28;  5,  4,  5. 15;  7,  1,  2,  1;  8,  H 
2,  2;  Ailk  1,  18,  If.;  3B.  1,  224;  Gonda,  B,  K.,  p.  310;  M,i:nab;i>,  1.  E.  XI,  p-  68. 
CJf.  FB.  5,  3,  9;  7,  2,  1;  (IB.  1,  1,  34;  1,  3,  14;  1,  5,  8;  Ail.  2,  1,  3. 

« Exami>les:  TB.  3,  10,  9,  3ft.;  SB.  4,  0,  9,  22;  3,  4,  1,  17;  2,  3,  3,  10;  6,  (>,  4, 
14;  14,  3,  1,  30;  MB.  1,  8,  4;  4,  (I,  2;  AiB.  1,  14,  6;  KB.  7,  3;  8,  7;  11,  10;  JB.  1, 


420 


Hcif-evideni.  m oftt'tt  k'fi.  Th(»H'  fonttjn  of  ('lliphia  nmy  rdinhino  wii.Ii  prog- 

nanoy:  ‘‘If  oia>  Hhotild  pour  (iho  Hptvonftil)  dtiriiig  f.ho  (of  th^,  olarili- 

(uriion)^  tlio  <anhry<w  fall  <nii  al)f)iiivc‘!y'*  (MS.  4,  0*  fl).  1 rronpoi'iivo.  of 
what  haa  boon  Haiti  on  ilio  unany  rt'poliiinnH*  nnooinofiioHa  in  alao  a<'hiov<Ml  by 
omitting  anything  nuporflnotiH  and  <'omandTating,  iilmoal  alwaya  withont 

oonnnont,  tiptm  (wm'ntialn that  in,  in  mirrativo  paaaagoN  tiptm  tho  jnain  atagt'a 

in  tho  actiona  and  o<'0iirronoc\s.  A lu'gaiivc'  anawt'r  ia  n-  aiinplo  '’no.‘  and  a ptn’Hon 
wfu)  no  long(T  tak<*H  an  a('tiv<'  part  in  tho  ovimia  fiimply  vainaht\s«®.  Piwtioipanfa 
in  dimniHHionH  art',  an  a ntlo  abort  and  to  t-lu'  point*  innnding  anything  lilo^  opio 
prolixity.  That  moann  that  notwithatanding  a i*oriain  iHvtiiphg,<^n-^:^HH  of  tho 
mmooHHioti  of  tho  (nnaita  tho  maimor  of  t.olling  Hiorira  in  an  a ruli'  mnannc’t  and 
lapidary.  Thon^  in  hardly  any  Hoopt'  for  dotim*ation  of  oharaotrrK. 

Thin  tondomy  to  bn^vity  -oft^tm  no  dt>nb't  alao  a tnnh'noy  t-o  nmmnonic 

phraBoology -which  ban  Honu^titnt'H  lod  to  doprooativo  jtnlginontH^'*^  in  not  to 

tho  mimo  extent  peculiar  to  all  hrnhmmm.  ■Kxo«\HHivo  in  the  KiinHltaki'^h  whiclp 
pin'HningbrovityalHoinitH  logondary  portiiinHjH  lUitorionaly  hard  to  niulonitand, 
it  in,  notwithatanding  a lack  of  oloanu'HH  in  many  |>aHHagoH,  It^iw  prononnocnl  in 
tln^  Aitfmya’^  and  otht'r  workn  of  thin  olaan.  llm  atylo  of  the  rnfioa.viipfla  often 
approaohoH  tho  Huooinotm'HH  of  xa/m  ■<'omptni.ifif'm"*y  r,g,  14.  Ih  7f. : 

*‘ThiHH^  m Thn  ta  (>*o  li  op  to  ohiam  Oig-tltn 

tho  y«'ar  in  of  ditTonmt  ft'attnoa  (vinipn}  and  ftHnl  o*  of  dsiitn'ont  fonitinn'i;  (mp 
to  ol>tain  n>«)d^'’^, 

Thin  hrovity  ikn^n  not  howov<'r  t'Xi'hnlo  a onto  for  «dr  anti  |tn*omeiu\Na  in 

tnattora  o{*  vidhi  an  well  an 

A rolatod pluinnnonon  iaa  protUlroiitm  ftn* ahrnpt  brginiiint^a aiul iranaitioua*’®* 
The  Satapatha  layinn  iin  t^xpoHitittna  ttf  tho  lull  ami  Xrw  im»^m  HiiiaillooH  (ita 
firat  Huhjoct)  an  folIowH  (I,  1,  1,  1): 


f$7:  ^!B.  i:t.  4.  2.  (ifT.;  1.  7.  1.  10;  1.  (1.  2.  2,1:  TA.  I.  24.  t;  Min  aju.,  T.  K.  H,  p,  212. 
Bnsvity  in  iUho  i*  <wu’olh.ry  ptul.toipuil  iuuM,  i>r 

■iwytuhaao  t-ranHitionH. 

Soo  o.g.  TB.  :k  B),  Hyl;  th  1: 

IdiUH  liohita  in  tlic^  htipabat'iat  t'piNodo  AtB,  7.  la,  H,  fotupart'  alfir»  PoMMKt«, 
at  ZDMCic  144*  p*  125  and  hih'  o.g.  AiB*  5»  11:5.  1 and  manv  ohap{ta*a  in  C"%\t.ANiu 
Anawahk 

KmTH,  R.  B.,  p.  mi 

For  ‘‘agood  inutatim^  of  thin  dofocF*  KmTU*  IB  ih*  p.  117:  Hoo  aliovo* 

p.  Mil 

A dianation  in  thin  rt'Hp^n’.t  hint  hotm  ttf  tbo  roaaoir4  for  dtadiiing  t*ht^ 
gonninonoBH  trf  AB,  7*  tO  and  11. 

For  thin  hoc  a!«o  linKou,  in  JA  251*  p.  175. 

II.  Omernn*  Dativi  hnaloB  atmtmidor  Nhmmim  HB  5lom4ion  IltiL 
I luH  ia  lutt  to  aay  that'  at  loaat  lor  a omtlrw  rojyior  f Iihi'i-*  fto'^  no  amlngnottH 
pltraHOH  <70  Monpinott  coitHtmotionH ; non  o,g.  .MovahO'*  *r,  IB  1*  o.  2iH‘  II,  tt  555, 
a.v.  aml>iguittB  * i • « * . i . , 


BiHt  o.g.  K'.  HofimxUN,  in  Mdlangt^a  lUmm,  p.  UT*.  11tot' 
^eptiouH,  <i.g.  AiB,  5.  n 1;  7*  1;  KB.  II,  I -Noxt  l4u.  mormitg 
13,  B;  14,  4;  JB.  2.  25;  All  1,  U U 7. 


liro  tif  oourpit^  mo 
froilaitoidX  12,  5; 


Tho  Ih’aliiutuiaR 


421 


*ilo  who  ia  alxnit.  to  <‘id»or  ih<^  ob.scn’vaiico  i-oticlu»B  wat.(‘r  wlulo  Branding  bctiwooti 
ilu^  (llumimya  a,ud  gilrhapaiifa  Ihva  with  Im  facH^  tunuHl  iowardn  cmt>.  Tlio  rouBon 
why  ho  iouchoH  wah'r  in,  a nuui  ia  rit.ually  inipun^  . . 

atid  tlic  .laitaituya,  fd^ariitig  with  a diiHniHwion  of  the  cerehionies  in  connection 
mill  th<^  prepuratiooi  of  ih<^  Hiun'etl  fires  (aip^jftdhdna)^  begins  (1>  1): 

‘dhn'e  ntav  th<\y  say*  ‘VVIad.  (ions  lie  oflVi%  in  what  tluHX^  is  otl'en^d  f 'Ho  offers 
life,  in  (the)  !ife(l)r<ni,th)  there  is  offeriML  In  that  iliey  churn  out  the  fires, 
tlu'rt^hy  they  prodtuu'  tiu'  Haeriftcer's  hfi'»  breaths  . , 

subject  may  (diang<'  'without  any  itidieaiion  wbatever^'^*  Those  wlio  take 
part  in  a (Hmversaiion  are  as  a rule  introduetal  abruptly,  e.g.  dB.  1,  19: 

''Now  jw  to  this  djwuika  of  Vithdia  twked  Yajfiavalkya,  'Do  yon  know  . . 
Tl\i're  ar<'  many  eases  of  parenthesis  and  explicativi^  intcmiption : AiB.  7,  22,  (5: 

"He  who  ri'Sort.H  t>o  kingship  ri^sorts  to  lor<lly  power— for  kingship  is  lordly 
power ; luin  who  restarts  to  lordly  power  brahman  does  not  oppress’*’®. 

A frequent  structtire  of  a passage  dealing  with  a mythical  tale  and  its  ro- 
cmacttmait  file  et  nunc  m the  following:  a brief  statement  of  the  mythical  events 
- which  tnay  eont.ain  an  ex}>lanation  of,  for  instance,  a name— « folio  w’'ed,  if 
theri^  is  occasion  for  it,  by  ati  explanation  or  motivation  of  instniments  nsed, 
deviiHm  appliei!  and  at  tlu'  (uul  a statement  of  the  re-enactment** h In  very 
brief  wording  at  Plk  0,  7,  IH: 

wwridee,  luunng  taken  the  form  of  a horse,  went  away  frotn  the  g<Kl8,  The 
gods  brotight.  it,  to  a stand  by  a b\mch  of  grass.  l’h(H‘(vfor<^  a horst^  is  pkmaed  whotx 
it  is  wi|)ed  with  a h\mch  grasH.  1’hat.  the  adhraryu  Tatars  the  l>imch  of  grass, 
is  Ihr  soothing,  for  luvt,  O'rrifyitig  the  saorifictx” 

Not,  infrtH|uently,  a mythical  at*.count  is  interrupted  by  ritual  observations, 
l>y  Honu'  piet’e  of  advict^  or  tlie  statement  of  a divergent  opinion.  Tims  in  the 
long  narrative  in  jSB.  1, 2, 5, 1 ff. : to  the  gods,  who  were  worsted  in  their  straggle 
with  tlic  munw,  the  lattca*  ced(Hl  so  imudi  space  as  could  he  oociipiod  by  Visna, 
the  c.lwarf,  wdio  is  also  the  sacrifice..  After  enclosing  it  they  sacrificed  and 
smHHHHh'd  in  obtainitig  tlie  entire  earth.  When,  however,  Visnu  became  tired 
ami  found  himself  tmablt?,  to  t^siuvpc  he  hid  himself  among  the  roots  of  plants. 
The  gods  searched  for  him  by  digging  and  found  him  at  a certain  depth.  ''Therc- 
Ibre  tire  sacrificial  bed  (vedl)  should  (according  to  some  authority)  bo  of  that 
depth  . . . This  howewer  one  must  not  do  . . After  the  motivation  of  this 
(liHst„iaBion  tlu^  story  continucB. 

fiB.  1, 4,  1, 1(>-2P^  is  an  example  of  an  episode  of  the  saga  variety  interrupted 
bv**  a-n  (explanatory  insi'rtion.  In  illustration  of  a formula  oonta'iniiig  the  woid 


Cl\  <xg.  Ailh  4,  5;  SB.  1*  2,  4,  B;  1,  2,  5,  I;  1,  3,  2,  1;  2,  2,  2,  8;  2,  2,  3,  2* 
Cf,  (dst)  dB.  1,  19;  22;  SB.  H,  2,  1,  3;  «,  2,  2,  1;  also  cases  such  as  10,  3,  4, 
Sc^e  ixg.  also  HB.  3,  t,  2,  71.;  0,  3,  14;  5,  1,  5,  IC;  17;  JB.  2,  128. 

K.g.  at  ISB.  1,  1,  1,  10;  of.  BB.  B,  1,  4. 

B.g.  PB.  11,  7,  19;  {BB.  1,  1,  1,  l«t 

SB.  I,  2,  5,  9;  cf.  7;  see  e.g.  also  I,  2,  3,  4. 

»»  OL  WiiJiUfia,  I.  B.  1,  p.  170;  KoenuuNa,  SB.  I,  p.  104. 


1. 


422 


♦I.  Uondu  * X'rclit*  hiivrntnv^^ 


*Svith  tho  (H|><»in)*‘  ii  in  told  ihnf.  luni.t;  of  wiiilc 

oarryir^g  Agid  in  Ida  aiotii-h,  ('ould  not  ninovcr  tua  dtv{in%*aif'  priont  for  foar  that 
ihr  god  tuight  fall  down.  Hni  an  noon  an  ihv  primf^  liad  prraioiinrtal  R\’.  ,5,  2f> 
ooniaining  tlu^  won!  ‘ghoo'  fin'  god  fl.aniH’d  frtnn  Ida  nnmih.  lirfdrc 

coiiiimiing  io  rrlait*  f.hr  matting  mnvrrnafiott  r»f  god  utid  king  ladirr 

winlu'S  to  know  \rh<a'r  lir  wan  to  aln«l(\  tho  former  annw,rring.  “1V>  iho  rant  of 

thin  (rivrr)’’-'  ■ thr  atiUtor  innrrin  a panaigi*  on  tin*  prrviona  and  oonitnnporanr- 

(HiB otHnipatioiw <d't!jr  rrgion  <vf fltr  rivrm Saranvaliaitd  SadaninL  Afirr anothrr 
gmgraphiral  olmorvatittn  hr  rrrttrn  tlir  ron\rrnaf  i*ni  hr-iwnm  thr  king  and 
hin  prit'Ht. 

A nhort  rcvfrnnna'-  to  a niythii^al  wvni  m oflrn  fo  rnofA/att'  thr  iwr  of  a 
mmtm^  a mmmn,  a drfinitr  rifiia!  nrt<  rf.r.'^f  In  mar*  ovrnt  in  not  tannnion 
knowhslgcg  it  may  Irad  tlu^  a,ut.hor  ftt  rrrall  it.  hrirdly  : 

‘Tlir  d<nnonia<^  Rvarhhamt  nfntrk  fhr  mm  unh  diirknr.rrs.  |ty  inoana  of  fhf»  mim 
fmlmam)  thr  gndn  drhvfard  tl,  'Fhat  thrrr  arr  fho  (daynk  ia  for 

driivrring  t!ji{>  mm  (from  darknmw|,“  'iio  now  fiikoa  flio  tdark  antidripf'*  akin, 
for  oom|>ltg.{'nrHH  of  ilu'  Harrilh^r.  For  onrr  tho  aw'rifiro'  rriniprcl  f,|io  gothg  anti 
having  hrnomt^  a hlark  anOdt^pr  roatmal  al»otH,  II10  god?!  1 fotmtl  it-, 

HtripptHi  it  of  itn  nkin  anti  took  thm  wifk  llano.** 

In,  a foAV  t'aHr'H  an  r’-xplanaittry  rlrimmi  nupplim  or  rr'ptarrf^  pai't  of  a latiw/iYi- .* 
with  rcdnrrnrr  to  thr  tlmtiml  trtifh  t>f  (hr  lair  alnnif  fhr  romtinfii  hrtwtn'ii  gotln 
and  murm  11,  1,  th  Id  tpndrn  a rd' ; 

**Not  forymlnglt'  day  hast  ihoti  fimght*  not  Imnf  fhoit  wn  onrmy,  c)  Magtmvan. 
llinmon  in  what  th,ry  nay  ronrrrmng  Ihy  kafilrn.  No  I'wrll  nuluilml)  for  hmW 
thtm  ftniglit  tntht'r  ionh^y  or  aforrfnnr.** 

A<d,mdly  tht^  ftrnt  half  td‘  liV.  Iff  ff-l.  2 rmm  ol!irrwim''‘y 
A tripartitr  ntruattirn  in  not  nnronimon:  in  tlw  fain  namilrd  at  f^li.  I,  I,  4, 
14ff,  tlnwwara^killing  voitM'  in  nnrrmnivrty  in  Manidn  row,  ifi  hin  wift'  anti  in 
tho  Bacriiirr;  tho  two  prit*Ht.n  of  tht'  mum-^  nttrrtnnl,  hy  muniliring  for  Mann  ift 
killing  thri  bnll  ami  tiu'  wifin  Imt  an*  unaijir  to  tf  front  iht'  aar'riltta,**^^ 


«*  PB.  4.  5\  2;  R 1,  4.  ! ; 
ovont,  with  variatioim),  l^fi  1,  I 
15,  1,  4,  Kk 


rf.  alH»»  PB.  4.  fl.  Bl;  Ik  Ik  H:  t-P  tP  14  (tdir  himw^ 
, 2,  li;  p p :p  Hi  p 2,  p ip  p :k  i,  a;  p ip  :k  ip 


Pomparo  alm»  alhmionn  or  rrnnnmrrnri*n  mtrfi  ii.*i  'fll  It  2 2 2*  ItV  in  HI! 
2:p  TB.  :k  Ilk  4,  .1;  lyv.  Bk  i2:p  n.  ^ . 

•«  (X 1.  “H7(r,: i\n.  h. s. n.  i-.iuu.n.i.  r.u.  1. 1., mM-h 

an  AIH.  7,  5,  7;  Uk  I;  2 HtmiAtr^f^paa  falhm  m thrpo  nmm  givoit  a Inmtirrd  for 
mmmg,  hmdmg  and  lilanghimng  hta  at»n  a imalorn  rmdrr  ri  aifi  to  tir  ontrinltHlIy 

jini>roHNt.(l  by  tin.  r.it.waatiou  oflbt't,.  t'\.r  t-Ur.'..  wwl*.... .»  tit*,  iurm  .,f  ..b.Mmt«K  n (*(..« 
V , «.  l.i.  4,  17;  H,  ll.  lit  imtl  TJji*  .Miuii.vttjiiiw,  l ia.  !'..(■  tnmlii  m t!u* 

ViKla,  i.oNiu.  i«  Oluo  .bitirudl  (if  (-..liKU.iw  rtMuit*...,  Itt74,  „ n.t.Minit.iicKtt. 

Mtrnctnro  whioh  tn  a way  ta  tripartiitn  diP  p I2f. 


Ch  APT  Mil  IX 


Tim  Aranyakas 


"riuTO  luiH  long  bcnni  Bomc^.  imccvtainty  m to  tlic  exact  meaning  of  the  name 
dranyaka  givt^n  to  the  eoiu^huling  ]>artH  of  brdhmanm.  TIub  was  partly  due  to 
a nuHapprehen«iori,  l)(H\atiHe  it  wan  aHmitncHl  that  Silyana  gives  two  somewhat 
diift'rent  iniHn'pretationHh  The  former  led  some  scholars  to  the  conclusion  that 
tins  chiss  of  liti'ratnre  was  to  stip}>ly  a substitute  for  the  sacrificial  rites  for  the 
bemdit  of  asendh^s  who  lived  in  the  foi'est  or  jungle  (aranya).  According  to 
tlu^  oi*lu>r,  and  no  doubt  right,  interpretation  these  'works’— like  all  other 
'books’  of  tlie  brahmanic  variety,  Bubjects  of  instruction  of  Vcdic  schools— 
W('re  to  b('  itnparti'd  to  and  studied  by  advanced  students  in  the  solitiido  of 
tlu'  foiH'st  becatwi^  their  ('.onteixts  were  too  'sacrc^d/  too  secret  and  esoteric, 
too  ntu'anny  and  dattgin'otts  to  be  comnmnicuited  and  learnt  in  the  villages**, 
tntiiit  Hid>j(Hd<  was,  ituhaMl,  not  only  the  i'xplanation  of  tlu^  sacrificial  rites, 
l>tit»  tbe  reU'vant  thtmiselves  and  their  mystk^  and  allegorical,  'symbolicar 
iuid  *p!uloHOphi<ad’  sigtnftcance. 

Tiunx^  en.n,  on  the  ol.her  hand,  be  no  chmbt  tliat  in  course  of  time  the  tendency 
was  for  tlm  ('Xphmation  (contained  in  definite  ])ortions  of  the  brdhmanas  to 
devidoj)  into  ex|>OHitions  of  meta-ritxialism,  and  then  to  grow  independent  of 
tlu^  rit.nal  until  th<^  stage  was  reached  where  the  name  dranyaka  was  no  longer 
appli(*ai)U\  Ixaxuise  tlie  subject  matter  had  passed  into  that  of  an  tt^panisad^. 
At  tlud»  stage  the  growth  of  speculation,  as  leading  to  the  highest  goal,  had 
gradually  restilted  in  the  BuppresHion  of  ritnalisnu  As  a result  of  this  develop- 
trmnt  t,h('‘H<:^  tt^xts  (jatne  also  to  be  sttulicd  by  ascetics^.  As  wc  shall  see  farther 


^ Hayana,  Ihxvfiwx^  to  AiB.  (AtiifancHT’s  edition,  p.  3):  dranyavratarupam  hr&lu 
maximn  and  Ihx^face  to  AiA,:  d^ramja  mi  pdfhycUvCtd  dranyakam  Utryate. 

OnoKNUERO,  IL  R.  X,  p.  291;  and  CBpeciajly,  at  NG  1915  (1916),  p-  382  (= 
K.  S.,  |).  419);  XEiTIt,  Ai.S.,  p.  15;  compare  SG.  6,  1,  Iff.;  2,  Ilf.;  MvB.  8,  14; 

H,  11 ; 13;  15,  20,  Iff.  Bn.  PAwntmANc;-,  Atharvaveda-Samhita  (seep.  273, 

n.  15),  |>.  2 relatt^s  tliat  he  liad  to  go  to  the  forest  for  the  purpose  of  hearing  the 
inatispioiouH  fimeral  texts  of  the  Atiliarvavedtu  The  incorrect  view  is  reproduced 
(^.g.  in  H,  OAHcnn'^rA,  A history  of  Indian  j)hiIoBophy,  X,  Cainbridgo  1922  (1951), 
p,  14  uu<l  in  l<k  Prauwauuneh,  (JcHohichtc  dta’  indisohen  Xdxilo80|)hio,  I,  Bah.burg 
1953,  p.  42. 

® HiM)  tiUio  liEKoir,  XL  V.  XL  VI,  p.  31. 

* 44ie  ra.thc\r  late  Irimika-Upani^ad,  2,  enjoins  the  study  of  dranyaJem  and 
upan^wh  upon  itinerant  asootioB.  X'or  relations  between  this  literature  (especially 
the  Taittirlya-Aranyaka)  and  Sivaito  texts  see  J.  Vabenne,  in  JA  250,  p.  185. 


424 


on.  tlio  oldoai  upanimds  an'  in  pari  in<'1tulo<i  in,  thnno  ‘Idroai  and  in 

pari  appoinlnd  io  t4u'in. 

The  HirtKd.ure  of  ilu'  am;;//aius'  in  aa  iiit>Ie  honiogeinania  aa  ilna'r  <'oni(aitH. 
8<nu<^  |)oriioi][H  luive  i.lu'  ehara<‘ler  of  a mmliiffh  t^fhera  td' a bivkmui>ja,  oihera 
agaiit  of  a sdfra,  a<’(*ording  io  ihe  tuai«'rint  iinii.  %’nrying  from,  Veda  t,o  Wda, 
am,l  frotti  Hidiool  io  Behoof  wi\H  eolUn'd'd  in  an  iimntjtikn  eorpua.  LiiigniBiic\ally 
and  HiyliHiic'ally  alno,  ilu\s('  worka  fornt  a IrauBliion  hefav«'iii  Uu'  hmhmtmu 
l>roper  an<i  ilu^  Bpcnnilaiivt'  liit'rainn'  that  fdllowB  them  nnti  d<'VelopB  pari  of 
ih('  ulnaH  and  lim'B  of  t^houghi  whieh  an'  eharaeteriat  ie  of  t henrh  Wh('renH»  for 
inadmet^,  ihe  ireainumi  of  ilu'  fonr  H{H'eial  kituin  isUtfnkmpmm  in  TIi.  :f 
proceeds  i,n  ilie  naind  way  wiih  long  <‘iunnt'ratioim  (\(  mantrm,  i<leniificat.,ionB, 
eiynu)logi('B,  d5B(U,iHBionB,  (piOBiiotiH  of  ihe  hmhimHhja  typi\  k'g('ndH,  rt'ft'renees 
io  aniomatie  effeciB  attd  'Byniholkavr  int>er|>n'ia,tion«,  the  deHcri|>t-ion  of  ihe 
fifth  Bpeeial  ^pmapana,  ihai  of  ihe  migv  Artinakeitg  in  the  very  iH'ginning  of 
tlae  Aranyaka  Birikt'H  xm  by  a mtuih'  that  givi'B  aome  r'vi^leiu'e  of  dei'pt'r  philo- 
Bophk^al  inBight;  T,A.  I,  2, 

‘‘(JoHi  a«Binall(>r)  Bireama  unite  wiih  that  (thg  riverf  anil  beeotning  Imauf 
doi^B  .not  n,ni  diy.  t^lms  t-he  Hpaet\s  i>f  timi.',  i)f  ihfTeri'ni  ihiraliotn  art'  i'oni.aineil  in 
iheyi'ar,  whoilu'r  (they  areofihi'  finnn)  iT  miimlf'  |»arfieh'B  m*  *»f  iong(er)  pt'riodrt, 
and  iluB  (year),  lillt'd  wiih  all  of  theMt'.  hi'etumuK  hoMid  at  lenor  intinTupiod.  Ono 
Blumlil  know  tkat*  (iht^  worUl,  anhjeet-  t>o  tunt')  fiolotim*  to  the  ) tawd 

Thi't  Aliareya-Aranya'ka',  aitai'lu'il  ii>  t-he  Aidna'yadh'fdinnuur,  ('tnusiat-H  id' 
bookn  whieh  art'  deBignaieil  m mpmivUuirtv^fpilw,.  Tire  find*  ihriS'  i>f  t»hi\He 
•fonn one  wlioh'^  an  iliniinei ,rn.nn  tki'  iwii ittlu'rB  aiul  art'  wriiivii  in  an  t'HBimtbdly 
Himpli',  ihotigli  elumny,  Biyh'»  whii'h  hi-ara  a ehwe  n'Hionhhim’e  in  tkai  of  the 
Bnllnnana.  li  in  h'lHpiit'ar  ami  a Ic-ing  mnivn  id*  eioonlinaff'  eliuwi'H  ia,ki'H  ihe 
phute  <,)f  Buhordinaiion;  **iht'  ari  of  emminieiing  Bimfeneea  ia  wanting''f  But 
this  in  not  to  deny  ihai  ihe  harnh  and  i'ltipiie  atyh'  him  a i'erfain  htneaH  io  ihe 
»pc(nilaiion«  and  giieHninga  afh'r  trnih  wineh  eouHiiitd'e  ihi'  fmhjei*innaite'r.  Tlie 
firat  book  conHiBiH  t,if  an  explanation  iif  ihe  fmihumita  ritnal  from  riiiialiHiic 
and  meia-riitialiBiie  poiTiin  of  vit'W.  Iha'ama'  of  tin'  nmm  tr^of  erit'  <‘harm'ii'r  of 
ihe  MpeenlatiouB  io  whieli  ii  gav<'  risi'  this  ritmd  was  ivtd  ilealti  with  in  ilie 
B,rrdnnana^  Tn  tin?  form  pn^Hupposed  by  tlu'  atifhora  of  |*gvn.lie  umjjimkm 


^ For  a eolleeiiou  of  plnloHophioar  nmayaA'ii  Bt'i'  J,  t\  I b-rsurANina  I A 

I„n,  3 (Volunui  Damii'kar  libni),  p,  laO;  tbr  a iliaraeferimittai  nt  the 

(Imxipakm,  \\  M„  Amn  in  HFIB  h \k  42th  447. 

” DtiMONT,  ai  p.  a2H.  ' 

” .FdiiiMi,  irarmlaieil  and  eomna'iiiinl  npmi  by  A,  fh  KniTin  IHford  IIHIll  (HHIIP; 
oiliiw  (HliiiofiH  f>y  HWitKKimAt.AOv  5tmo\  {with  Haymmu  eomiiirtniiryh  (‘idniOa 
lH7d:  by  B.  d ,PnApAi(n.  Vmtm  tHim  otm 

« KniTiO  iSi'.M  p,  33. 

« In  eontradwiimdlou  |.i»  tho  at'en'ey  with  winrh  tm  the-*  oeoioaoii  tho  aelivify  i>f 
the  InHar  olnlotiHly  wan  mtrriauuled  uu  Hpeetat  luyatory  or  timtiitiy  aitmiliml  in  tXm 
,ri.m<:siionrt  irt  ilueadf/elOir  ut*  tuihvutpu  whieh  are  d*'Bta*ihei,l  iit  the  ,«oii/if/d/i,  hni/n/iioaw 
and  ,<rautmiitrm  of  iht'  nihnr  iiehoida. 


Tho  AranyMkaa 


425 


it  is  tho  (xvn^iiiiioiiial  perforKTiod  on  the  second  last  day  of  the  so-called  gavCirn 
ayana  sattra,  a sa.eriru'.e  extending  over  a year.  Being  a soim  sacrifice  it  is 
charaeterizc'd  by  a daily  divisioii  into  t»hree  parts,  tlio  niorning,  midday,  and 
evening  pressingH  and  libjit.ionH  of  the  mma  and  their  accompanying  stotras 
of  the  sdman  sitigm’s  and  kisirm  of  tlu^,  hotar  mm  suls^^.  The  pertinent  litany, 
to  bo  r(H^it.(Hl  b}^  tlio  hotar  while  he  was  seated  on  a swing,  was  one  of  the  most 
yacred  and  eom])li(‘-att'd  ptn^formarux^s  of  this  officiant,  considered  to  be  eqniv- 
aleni-  to  tlie  wholes  of  itiu',  Rgveda^b  The  long  description  of  the  different 
Ixdonging  t.o  the  three  pressings  begins  as  follows,  AiA.  1,  1,  1: 

‘‘Now  begins  t*be  maMrrala  (rite).  Itidra  having  slain  Vrtra  booamo  great  fma- 
When  he  btHjaine  great,  then  there  catnt^  into  being  the  mahdvrata.  That 
is  why  the  mahdvrata  (rit.e)  is  called  mahdtmUa^'^ 

to  eontinne  %vith  expositions  sneh  as  1,  1,  2: 

“Ho  who  desires  proper  food  should  use  the  silkta  (BV.  7,  1,  beginning:)  ‘Agni 
men  generatt'd  from  the  kindling  sticks  with  splendour.’  For  Agni  is  the  eater  of 
food.  In  the  other  chants  accompanying  the  ghee-olforings  men  approach  as  it 
were  niore  slowly  to  Agni,  but  here  they  come  upon  Agni  at  the  very  beginning. 
At  the  very  Ix'gituiing  lie  (the  uian  who  desires  proper  food)  obtains  proper  food; 
at  t.he  very  beginniug  they  (those  who  approach)  smite  away  evil.” 

are  many  siudi  esoteric  (explanations  of  tlic  deeper  scuisc  andappli(sahilitjr 
of  V(vrst'H  ft'om.  tlie  Itgvinla  in  whiidi  the  ttsttal  |)roccduros,  such  as  identifications 
and  nutiundinil  ‘sytiibolistii’  lead  to  a siatciiumt  of  the  effect  of  their  recitation. 
''riu'Hi^  f)aHsagt^H  alt(unate  with  (vx])lanatory  digressions  of  varied  length  and 
(H)ntenis,  For  insi^incc,  after  the  stat(unent  that  RV.  S,  68,  1-3  and  8,  2,  1-3 
bcdoiig  to  tlii'!  one  day  cerennony  it  imds,  1,2,  1 : 

“Miudi  ind(H'd  is  done  on  this  day  that  is  forliiddon,  and  (this  hymn)  servos  for 
atentuutmtu  Now  atotiemcuit  is  a linn  ibnndation  and  so  at  the  end  (of  the  sacri- 
fkje)  th('  HiWU’il’uHU’H  are  fotmded  on  the  atonement  of  the  one  day  as  their  firm 
fouudataou.  He  is  firmly  founded  who  knows  tihis  and  they  also  (aro  firmly  found- 
(hI)  for  wluui^  a hotar,  who  knows  this,  recites  this  hymn.” 

Tlu':  ol)H(^rvation  that  tin"  stanza  RV.  6,  17,  1 contains  the  word  ‘greatly'  is  at 
1,  2,  2 followiHl  by  tlm  explanation: 

“This  (hymn  is)  (K)mposcd  by  Bharadvaja,  and  Blxaradvaja  was  of  the  seers  the 
most  ItMirncd,  the  longest  lived,  and  the  greatest  practisor  of  austerities.  By  this 
hymn  lu"  drove  away  evil.  When  therefore  a man  recites  the  hymn  of  Bharadvaja, 
(it  is)  that  ho  (may  become,  by)  driving  away  evil,  learned,  long-lived,  and  versed 
in  aH(K"ti(UHm,  For  that  reasoti  he  recites  the  hymn  of  Bharadvaja.” 

Homo  peculiaritiiss  of  tlu^  no  doubt  originally  popular  rite  led  the  author  to 
insertf  loiigc^r  cx))lanations,  for  instaneo  in  (‘.onnexion  with  the  swing  on  which 
tlu"  hotar  is  Hwxmg  to  and  fro  (I,  2,  3f.). 

»»  For  iorihor  iufornuation  s("e  A.  B,  R'KiTU,  Tho  {Sruikhayana  Jlran3?'aka,  London 
JOOB,  p,  73;  fhiNOA,  H.  1.  1,  p.  161. 

Cir.  6B.  :l(),  I,  1,  5 and  KiumoiNO,  XV,  p.  110;  112;  283. 

As  may  be  ("XfHHrU.Hl  the  uloxxo  arcs  systematically  explained  in  tho 

rg V ( H I i rs  UraxtA/akas. 

Of.  also  1,  2, 


426 


,1.  • Vi'dif  hili'i'ivl iifi' 


Book  IT,  ^n,oi.  tlinv.tTy  ooim(M>i«nI  with  K oivnsi.^tK  of  iwn  park.  Blu', 

fo\st.  {adhjid^^/m  \-d\)  witk  aptaadatioON  on  tko  niirlilav  msini  of  tliin  riinaf 
a.s  boin|>'  prdjja  (1tfo-hn\ai!r)  or  Purnaa.  Bh  oNotrrioal  vhnvnvivr  ih  lippanait 
from  Hi-af<auontH  mmh  m ‘‘Pooplo  |i.<\  nininliaitHlI  May  ‘li^ann,  hymn,' 
(hull  in  roalify)  tTu^  hymn  in  tTn'  rarllP'  pk  I,  2).  In  2.  h ami  7 if  rtMadn: 

‘SSptM'o'h  \H  htH  fprf'pad/r/  n»p<\  nutnoa  tlio  Knnfa.  hv  hri  ’^pmu'Ii  iuj  ropr,  n,np 
by  lumu'H  an  ktioin,  lUl  ihia  tn  btauab  Ida  n.ll  llna  vi  nanio;^  nmi  hy  Inn  hi'mmmTi  bn 
uanu'H  (n’orytTunga*  'hNhnv  (cotoo)  t-ho  numdV-aat  toirs  of  tbi^  ininhr  of  tlua  Purumn 
l^y  his  sptHH'.h  oroai'od  oarib  au<l  bro.  fbi  ilua  ionrflO  plants,  nrow:  tiro  inaki's 
tiluau  palaiabh'*  ‘Taki'  this,  fako  Uusf  tboa  ,saymn  du  tuo.  oarth  luul  fm', 

H('rv(^  il'K'ir  rafb('i\  spooob.  v\h  far  as  tbo  ofoili  t'xtt'nii'-'.  :^o  far  oxtomls  bis  world 
floka).  And  as  long  as  fh^^  world  of  I’lylh  and  bro  do<’N  ntif  d»H%a\ » so  ban?  doos  flu> 
workl  not  doeay  <irbim  w*ht>  kuo\\'s  thus  f bo  mandbaf  af  lou  of  f ho  lumbt'^  ofHi'nsndid’ 

There  are  also  easi^s  of  a doublt^  iiderpndaUon,  vi/..  'mamvH'trmueally  ('hvitli 
regard  to  the  (leities"}  and  mien>eosnuealiy  (“with  revtanl  to  I tie  setPy^.  dluxse 
cha|)terB  are  already  tqannsadii'  in  eharaeter  nml  are  IhnadorrM  togelluw  wdth 
the  Heconti,  half  of  this  ehapter  • whieh  netnally  forms  the  Aifareya  rpaniwid— 
and  sometimes  togetlua'  with  ehapier  IIP  i’alled  the  '!\liihaitareynfUfwtusa<;P'\ 
Book  ITT  treats  of  the  es<derit'  meaning  of  IliO'  variomi  torma  of  the  text,  of 
the  HgvedanSarphiia  (vi/..  the  mmhiUL  /Wfi  and  kriinni  imihus^^),  Henee  the 
name  wlueli  it  elahus  for  iiwTf  tiy  its  opening  wtn"d?a  Saiplidie  rpauiaad.  P*eing 
a eompn.raiiv(dy  naamt  work  it  ahowa  a tamaalrraldo.  itd\aiua'  of  idioneiic’s, 
mentions  various  t^eehnieal  terms,  intiantuees  some,  piuily  artifieial,  distbie^ 
tions,  and  tptotes  nuthorithai  sueh  as  i^akalya  am!  dlaiylulo'ya  wTio  appear  to 
disagna.'  about  tlu'  ({Utsstion  ns  to  whet  tier  llu’  tmion  of  the  tir.'d  of  two  eoides* 
eing  sounds  (in  mndhi)  repnxaentitig  ttn^  eartti  and  the  seeumi  ngareseiiting 
tlu^  sky  meaaiH  rain  or  tTu*  air  (3,  P 2). 

The  fourth,  book  eonsists  of  tlie  iiMhiimtmfn  \'«"rst^:d\  Iifin*a!ly  tlu’  *great« 
named  ones/  wliieh  are  (dsmvTuwt*  (AtP  Lp  12,  3}  explieifly  inelmied  in  tlie 
(Iratiyiika  eurrienlum.  The.  studmit  io  whom  they  are  impart tal  is  uinv  nlsti  to 
kca^p  slitvruu'  and  to  wear  a t-iirban,  tlie  teaeher  himself  midufidning  a variety 
of  observarums^P  In  their  original  form  preservial  in  the  Si'iinaveda  tTny^'  iamsisi 
ol  three  stair/as  in  whieh  Intlra,  t!ie  able,  mighty  ami  gmierotis  goiP  is  praistal 
and  invoked  for  aitP  wixaith,  and  vietory.  dliey  are'  tiuwrver  interruptcal  hy 
secamdary  adilitions  anti  tvxttanied  into  iiinr  idiiir/as  so  as  in  hemme  an  nriitieial 
liturgical  wliole  whicTi  may  asHigimd  tti  the  end  of  th*^  f^V'etlie  pmaod. 
verst^s,  whieli  (HUiiain  rmniniseenees  of  ttn^  Hgve'da,  irre  reeif't*d  in  a euritnis 

(X  AiS,  2,  P 2;  also  P 3,  ;p  AA.  7,  2 ete, 

Sie  Knerm  Ai,A»,  [s  31k 

HtHI  p.  Ill  f, 

See  Km'rn,  Ai.A„  p,  2hHj  iH4msumu,  nt  Hu  luls  lUHtu.  p,  :iva  ( '•  K,  »S„ 
p.  4d2);  HtarnrrKi.oW'Cr/,,  'iM*  /dt  P p,  for  imothsr  |‘gvedm  iriidiiton  Htntnrmhih 
WIT/#,  Apokry|)heu,  |i,  Plfk  T'here  ejiists  also  a aamavedie  •ver'^aat  |see  HmuiVaxiiurs 
edition,  ip  p.  IbltUT.j  PAUANn,  «Pyminiya.-Siiiidni»n  p.  dUf.i, 

Pf.  also  (Kb  3,  2 dealiiig  witTi  tlu^  otM-aTvaneisi  m flasr  fsioiitt*.  etlie  form. 


'I'ho  XraixV'i'ii'f* 


427 


■vvav  pause,  then  the 

lloul-  V !i  sort,  of  t'ouvphuueut  tu  l>ook  T in  f^iUm  style,  w mainly  a description 
nf  the  wtsA-ecrt/yu.  ww/nt.  Ix'lonKing  to  the  midday  lihal.ion  ot  the  niahavrata. 
^inee  m-ithm-  tl’i.'  piveeding  parts  of  the  Aitan>ya  nor  the  Hahldiayana  Aranyalca 
contains  a formal  <>sposit.ion  of  tlu'  mihUmUi  m a whoh',  tins  addition  was 
n^vdouHly  felt.  i.0  h,<  a ms-essit.y.  Kor  the  Harne,  reason,  the  (.llowers  of  the 
Siliikhavn.na  tradition  athh'd  t.wo  hooks,  not,  t,o  thmr  Aranyaka,  but  to  then 
Sisatrn,,  ivhere  they  are  XVII  and  XVIlf.  Interestmgly  onouKdi.  Im 
eomment.at,or  Anartiya  infers  t.o  the  lat.tc-r  seetions  as  an  aranyaka  In  AiA. 

5 :5,  :i  t.ln^  esot(-rie  nature  of  t.he  doctrine  is  mnphasr/.ed  with  special  force  : 

' ' '>n'o  en.^  who  has  m.t  Insm  iuitiat.sl  should  incite  the  mfdidrmto.  tier  BhoukUio 
■I  n tvhoii  there  is  no  ritual  (ire;  nor  should  one  ineite  it  for  another,  uoi  if  it 
T"  ; s a n u-  Th  s lav  one  should  not  teach  to  one  who  is  not  a regular 

ViHla  aruf  .lot's  not,  h.'long  to  the  same  school  . . ■ 

Altlunmh  the  t'ompiU'r  of  the  Aitareya-lhfihinana,  who  to  all  appearance 
was  an  antlmril  v of  som.'  distinetion,  is  tradititmally  held  to  have  been  also 
responsihh'  tor  I'.ooks  1 HI  of  the  Aranyaka,  he  ('an  hardly  be  regarded  as  its 

1«.  i.'  in  it  n.  •>  t-n-l-C;; 

T ■:  xvlui  HviH  iorih  itiH  tiHt^  Ml  liiH  bratitaHulii a (7,  U,  ID),  iuao 

It  ” ,'nn  in  I'nv.mr  of  tin,  view  tlmt  1,«  fm  S«>  “ 

u,.:t,::nL:.l.l:  -.r ....m.  .„.i  .m, 

(idmitietd  With  4 4f  ot  the  ^ centurv).  To  Anandatirtha  wo  are 

imhditlnl  fit' a Huper-I!t>«m^^  Sahkara’s  explanation  of  the 

TT  1 (5  to  Visv<‘iivtiraf,irtha  for  a snpor-coinmcntary  on  the  formoi 

’ t mi  11  mull  In  contradistinction  to  the  last  mentioned  work  wliieh 
Vilni;,.  int.,.  l,.;,t,ttinn  ft.  other  —ontarie.  «pto.  ft. 
in  the  light  of  the  VedtlnU.  contents  agrees  very  closely  with 

..  *toito'”g»rfinB  •'“>  “ 

KniTii!  Ai.A..  p.  Ill;  IB:  sj’o:  a«i;  an. 

. . ' t _ . 0.0. t.  1*'“ ■Wilt m O'  Ai  . A- 


428 


J.  ( ttnula.  • Vodip  Liirrninn' 


very  Hliort.  In  ('oniradintlix^iaon  io  Katiwiaki,  Aifikhi'lyana  ia  not  enUnj 
authority  in  tlu^  book  iinvlt  bnt'  in  t^dhtithia  W (r(m.<it)  hv  fiyt'iroH  n.s  t.lu^  first 
tf('n.c!uT  who  derivi'd  Iuh  infonna-tion  from  Kaiistbaki.  If.  is  inton\Ht'-iiig  (.o 
thab  tho  following  b>nr  subjorta  whirh  <*on{diiitf^o  tin'  olnof  oont^aiks  of  this 

work a loose  mass  of  fragnietd-H"  ar<'  in  tho  'C*'fhyasnfni  of  this  si'Iiocd  (ff  4) 

not  only  onmmvratod  iii  tho  sanuM^nlor:  wn/ad‘mt<i.  (m//iynyri  1 and  I'l); 

(irf'-V'l);  mmhifuH  (VI I and  VII 1):  mnntha^^  (I  X).,  btii.  alao  o'\|4i<ntIy  dosoribtHi 
as  '('Hotoriiml  do«‘trin('’  fm/aw/rm).  As  to  I ho  obnihors  1 and  1!  it  is  worth 
observing  that  the  h.sirm  mv  far  from  roooiving  the  same  slmro  of  ibt'  atithor's 
attention;  the  een'nionial  «>f  tbe  motinting  of  tin'  swiiig  is  «v\|)taini‘d  a,t  <'oin 
siderable  length.  As  eompa red  with  tbo  Aitaroyn-Aranyaka  the  subjeet  is 
treated  with  clearness  and  <H>n<asenoss.  Thn  <*hapIors  Ilf  'VI  c'onbiin  the 
im|)ortant  Kaiisitald-IJpanisad.  The  nc'xt  s<‘eiion  (VI f and  \dn)  <H)rnvspon(ls 
closely  to  Aitareya-Aranyaka  1 11,  nderring  also  In  tin'  docirinc's  of  Ka,iiniha- 
ravya,  the  Mandnkeyas  a-nd  otlu'rs,  ‘'bo  Paheklac'ainla  ftn'  fln'ory  is  aseribed 
2,18:  “ . , 

*Xthat)  speech  is  tlio  union,  for  by  Hpocsl*  the  ^’odas  aro  nmO'd,  l»y  spoooh  the 
mc'tn'H,  l>y  spi'C'oh  one  uniO's  fritauls.  Whom  oiio  stndu's  nr  spoaks,' thon  breath 
IB  m HpcH'ch,  then  Hpt'('eh  abHc>rhs  bmath.  v'\nainii  win'ii  nun  rlnii’iJB  ni*  jn  Hilt'ut* 
then  spts'eh  is  in  hrc'ath;  thou  fu'oatb  ahanrlm  spoooh  . . 

.Both  vewsions  scHUn,  to  go  ha<*k  t'O  not  very  ilisiant'  otuuinon  ronroty  hid*  that 
of  the  i^afikhayana  hchmuh  mort'  nnsh'rn  tlian  tin*  otfic*i\ 

(lhapter  IX,  deals  willi  a.  c'ommon  topio,  the  rivalry  of  tln^  sonttt\s; 

X,  with  t*Iu'  soa*allod  internal  mjnihntra,  wlucli  ol!  Ina*  as  a rlmi’ing  point  or  as  a 
rclleetlon  may  he  (‘oniu'oted  with  tin'  a or'ronumv  in  whieh  food 

is  olTcued  1*0  tlu*!  hrcaitlis  rc'prc'sc'ntmg  tin'  sat'Ood  hros^*,  dlio  eomparativt'lv 
original  book  X,l  dc'als,  intrr  alia,  with  prt'Hngi’s  c»f  dc‘alh;  XII  with  tln^  ritual 
of:  an  amnlet,  precech'd  t»y  a no  doubt  oonipnrafivoly  late  apt*!!  in  tin'  form  of 
a ,hymn“tluvre  iwn  many  eorrespomh'Uees  with  tin*  Athnrvaroda  ■ addrc'SHt'd 
tc)  that  object;  XIII  with  thc'  pre«emimmec'  of  tin'  si'tf;  Xl\'  with  tlu,^  m*e<'ssity 
ol  knowing  tln^.  Veda;  XV  cHUitains  tho  mn'et'ssion  erf  the  .autlniritit'S  (the 
vamM), 

.Being  ckmt'ly  eonru'eted  with,  and  largely  dnpoinh*nt..  m\,  f.In'  .lva.uHliaki- 
Bnlhma,na,  it  is  more  elaborate  and  Hyntomalicn  bt.it  t.m  tin'  editf'r  band  atylisth 
eally  much  niore  eondensc'd  aud  appart'ntly  nnu't'  modt'rn  than  it'S  eoinpanion 
dfanyaka  oi  wineh  it  can  hardly*  hc'  aHstnnot.i  to  lakt'  pritiritv.  If-  hua  c'Vt'U  htsui 
supposed®®  tliat  tlu'  ritual  n'h'm'd  to  in  tin'  KnmUnki  was  detiborately  modilk'd 

and  trcmHlatcsl  hy  VV.  KiummANOnm  Unr  inahavnUieAbnolnitt  t oln«  (vmidiuvaua- 
Arapyaka,  Berlin  UHH):  for  a traunlatinn  of  tbfi  whnl«^  work  bv  liicrrn  nee  n.  1(1 
ahnvcv  Uhs  also  Knrrm  m J UAH  IPOH,  p.  2(13. 

<*.  4;  H',  lU.  .IHAK 

cr.  UODKWITZ,  J.  H., }).  2i:i!  2(tfi 

Kki'Wi,  Ai.s..  p.  M. 


Tho  Aranyakus 


429 


to  differentiate  it  from  that  of  the  Aitaroya;  in  any  case,  it  impresses  ns  as 
somewliati  younger.  As  botii  works  form  in  many  respects  a parallel  to  each 
other  ami  their  language  is  closely  related,  there  is  ample  room  for  the  hypoth- 
esis that  tlun'r  e,ompih>rs,  whilst  utilizing  common  sources,  did  not  refrain 
fronr  borrowing. 

In  the  BL'U'k  ^ ajurveda,  the  1’aittiriya  Ai’anyaka““  is  a continuation  of  the 
.Brilhmana  of  tlui  saiiu^  name.  .Bt'ing  the  largest  ot  its  class,  it  consists  of  ten 
chai)terH  (pmiMthaka),  VII  to  IX  constituting  the  a.'aittiriya  Upaniaad,  and 
X the  Mahainirayana  Upanisad,  which  is  a late  addition^b  Each  of  the  six 
books  with  whitdi  we  are  conc-erned  in  this  chapter  includes  from  12  to  42 
sections  (mmt)dlM)^K  d.’hey  belong  no  doubt  to  an  earlier  date,  than  tho  Upani- 
siid.  Being  thnmghout  bastul  on  the  ritual,  their  object  is  to  point  out  those 
peculiariti<^8  of  the  rites  and  ceremonies  which  have  not  been  fully  described 
or  indicattal  iir  tlio  Bnlbrnana.  Thus  book  I is  devoted  to  the  Irunaketuka 
fi.re=*».  It  is  mainly  a collection  of  niantras  to  be  used  in  placing  the  bricks  for 
tho  fireplace  alfernating  with  quotations— often  found  at  the  end  of  a section— 
from  tho  Taittiriya-Brahiuana  and  tho  Rgveda-Bamhita,  questions  and  an- 
swers, as  wc'll  as  statements  of  the  merits  of  tlio  ritual  act  and  tho  advantages 
ot  knoAving  tlmir  significance.  Thus  there  is  a passage  on  some  bricks  named 
aft(!r  the  <5ight  suns  which  give  liglit,  lu'alth  and  fruition  to  the  world  only  one 

ot  whudi  -tluA  lu'alcr  ol  <li8eaH(v is  ordinarily  visible  to  men ; according  to 

some  autluu’ities  sevrui  of  these  suns  are  the  sev(m  officiants.  A doubt  arising 
as  to  the  possibility  of  tlu're  being  more  than  oiu!  .sun  is  obviated  by  a quota- 
tion: “It  there  w('ro  thousands  ot  snns  . . (ItV.  8,  70,  6)  and  a reference  to 
tins  tt'aeher  Vaifeimpilyana  who  ooneludcd:  “Wliat  wonder  then  that  mention 
shoidd  be  made  of  seven  (other)  suns?”  (1,  7).  The  eighth  section  comprises 
questions  and  answers  of  tho  brahmodi/a  type  : 

“Where,  O gwl,  do  tlwA  clouds  settle  down  1 What  supports  tho  years,  day(s), 
night(H),  mouths,  si^vaons  . . . ? (d'ho  different  measures  of)  time  settle  down,  on 
th(^  waters,  and  the  waters  are  placed  (lixod)  upon  tho  sun.” 

The  next  questions  bear  ujxm  Visnu’s  cosmic  function  (1,  8,  2),  Death  (10-13) 
and  the  realm  of  Yama  (14-17).  Among  tho  topics  touched  upon  in  the  ninth 
section  is  an  expatiation  ni)on  tlm  forms  and  names  of  Vayu;  the  man  who 
knows  this  is  safeguarded  against  death  by  lightning.  There  is  also  an  inter- 
esting passage  on  lYajlipati’s  creative  activity:  tho  fii’st  being  created  is  the 
tortoise  wtu)  assumes  the  task  of  ci’cating  tho  universe.  The  advantage  of 
knowing  this  myth  consists  in  ‘gaining  and  entering’  the  All  (1,  23). 

Edited  (with  Sayatta’s  commentary  and  a long,  though  largely  antiquated, 
introduetion)  by  HXJBNDitATAUA  MtritA,  OaUmtta  1871;  (with  Bhatta-Blulskara- 
miiira’s  oomtuontary)  by  MArtXnKVA  and  lb  .K.  RanoaoiiArya,  3 voL, 

Bfysftre  lilOO  -lOOS).  For  book  1 soo  S.  BvmaAnMANyAM  in  JOR  13,  p.  19. 

For  these  works  soo  J.  VAaKNNM  in  tins  soctioti  on  tho  upani.?adio  litoroturo. 

••  For  particulars  soo  above,  p.  326  and  R.Kjkni>iiaiAi,a  Mitka,  o.c.,  p.  7f. 

•"  8oc  abov<y  p.  424. 


.1',  Cionda  • VimIic  Ldt^rnluro 


m) 

Book  II  doalH  wiih  <Mkicalit»n  and  fdndy  of  t’ho  \'f^da*  ail.onlion  on 

mantfW.  ni<Hli(.aiion.  {uirilioat-ion.  r\.|aaBnin  oriyjn*'*  advaiiianv8  raihor  ihau 
fhc  riina:!  ihdnllH.  Thr  arotion  ia  inl«T<‘Minn  in  tliaf.  li  proaorihoH  iho 
na'itaiion  of  cHadain  fmwfras  wMv  ■|noditalinn  on  imihimrn  an  an  oiioimouK 
porfioiain  ilu*‘  miTif  hoinf*:  pmB'-ofion  aoainaf  rop^alod  doalh  ( 
a,*ndnHi  poiishin,!]:  whilo  htang  on  a j<an’no\n  in  firo  or  in  wnfor,  and  atiainnuaii 
i>f  luaunai*  Book  Ilf  mipplioa  tko  mnufra-^  ro'ipiirtni  Itvr  Mif'  r^iurhofrarifi'*^^\  that 
ia  tlio  bnildin.1^  oftho  iln^plaor  with  forimda^  whwh  ’nyniholir.o'  tla^  four 
idiiof  officia-tin.y:  prioaks.  Hh  laat  ilvo  aooHona  f 17  21)  ooniain  imtniras  t'onnc'on'd 
with  the  funeral  rik'H.  ddu'  h<»ok.a  l\'  and  V ladoiii-t  topoUior,  tlie  fortnor  aup- 
pl^ang  the  mnnttas  for  the  pravtmjm^^  and  fho  tailor  iiirlirating  llnhr  umvs  and 
explaining  tlieir  meaning  ami  purport,  The  auhjeei  td  \'l  in  I lie  piipik^dkh  tlie 
oblationa  made  to  t!ie  Fathers,  the  riles  for  I heir  weltnre.  11u'  muafmx,  taken 
mostly  frotn  the  ligvtala  and  arranged  in  eonar«mii\n'  order,  are  not  iuH*om- 
panied  by  indieatioUH  of  ilie  ritual  aela  %vlue!i  nmy  be  found  in  the 

Aeeording  to  trarlition  the  books  I and  II  wm’  eoin|'»oM*d  by  I be  sage  Ka.tliip 
wlui  18  also  the  repiiteil  author  of  fragmenla  of'  a Kalha-Aranyakif^^'t  Among 
the  loHt  ('hapk^ra  of  tin'  Kathaka  tMiIleelion  of  aeriplurrid*  f ften*  mUHt  have  hern 
also  an  (iramfaka,  or  at  least  a aeetion  eonlaininp  nialmial  find  iw  idiaraeterintie 
of  Hueh  a 'tn'afmed  Home  fragments  have  hmi  |'»rer»firvrib’'‘r  11ie  ao-ealled 
l/m/ies/:i«/iru7naf'i{ia  disda  with  the  rites  l.o  be  pniornu'd  in  tionour  of  the  planets 
in  ord(W  to  acquire  denirabh'  quiditiea;  the  wuabtei  prilaniinf,t  to  them  have 
survived  also.  Among  th<^  other  fragments  is  a iiretrfioning* 

hiler  (dia,  t.he  two  ways  that  of  the  goria  and  that  fd’  the  fbdhera  whiidi  a 
<h‘e('aH('d  Hatadika'r  can  follow^’^. 

Ah  to  tile  Whitt'  Yajnrvtala,  the  last  hook  of  fhi^  'XbPihyaiprlina  reeem 

siom  containing  tfit'  optional  aiul  aonu'what  reetmdift'  |rruivi.rf/i/#i  et'remony 


rik^  in  dt'tdt  wiih  at  d'B.  Ik  12  {Uewtmv,  rn  BABliH  in.  p.  aiVlVk  lAir  the 
Thirnsiwukta  (fiV.  in,  IHl)  in  TA,  3,  12  Sf'e  X,  *1,  Hunvnm  *Vlm  I’nnesiaHukfa  m the 
Vt'die  liU'raiurts  d.  thiiv,  FtHuia,  Hum,  22  tllHini,  |e 

Of,  SB,  14*  1*1,  22  whtTt^  m ennueetmn  ivitli  the  ;siime  rife  it  rtaidfi;  ’'i>iie  mu«t 
not  t<amh  thin  to  any  ami  twery  tme,  mtu^0  tliat.  wenid  be  sinful  , , d* 

For  tht'  of  Htan/UH  takiut  from  thrs  Ariinyidyi  iti  tfuiilmrun  see  K,  Biiay- 
TAtniAitVA,  Le  bskhmut'*  rh^  etwlaina  texti^s  hiiuhiuislein  dA  2eO  !'♦* 

2 in).  _ 

Cf.  le  V,  SenuonuKa,  m WZKIVl  ll*  p,  llH  (who  was  elrMiiftly  iiudiiied  to  eoie 
Hidt'r  this  tnulition  eorn'et  ami  eupposetl  the  menenee'  m « isunphue  l\a|hfo 
Aranyaka  <d’  other  fiarta  <d'  the  *rattiiriva  eorpueh 
« Htsv  p.  m\i  imL 

b,  VON  HtumtinonH,  IheTuhmKta*  Kathadland'ehnliein  :di  tdruma  Aeiuk  127 
(181)7).  p,  52  (1'A.  hook  1 1 la  nhmmt  eompletely  lepeteumf  rr!  m the  Kitflia  inami' 
Heri|'»tH)j  W.  '(.knvNin  llmhinapa-  en  Hutm  aiuiwmsO'ii,  Aneii Gillum  Atutd,  11)20, 
|:n  dtltlflV;  4H4rb 

« dim  Maitrfiyiwhy*^  Arapyaka  {fahitsl  hy  H,  Ik  .%rnkAin  Fartii  llkdl)  i«  a 

vtwmon  oftho  Uiiam^ad  td*  tht*  mum*  name. 


Tlu>  Aranyakaw 


431 


and  (in  t.lu'-  adhiidjfa.'^  4 -9)  ilu^  Brhaciruranyaka-lJpan  is  c-allcd  dram/aka^^ 
kdfjdtv^^^ 

Mead  ion  has  alri'ady  made  of  two  ‘forest’  (‘collections  of  tlic  San:iavcda»«. 
4’lieiv  is,  furi.li<‘i\  tlu‘  lu’st,  arnwya/radike  chapter  of  the  Ohanclogya-Upanisad. 
To  ihm  ehiHH  of  works  Ixdongs  how(W(w  also  the  Jainiiniya*  orTalavakara- 
Upanisa(hlh’alninina,»»,  a t.ypieally  satnavedic  (H)mpilation  of  some  extent, 
(‘om|)i‘iHing  fonr  hooks  and  iiielnditig  (4,  ia~21)  the  Kena  or  Talavakara- 
Upanisad.  Almost,  all  oi'its  argimunits  and  episod(\s  deal  with  the  significance 
of  mmav.%  and  tuetres,  or  certain  syllables  as  well  as  with  peculiaritieB  and 
effects  of  the.  clnudu  For  instanciv,  I,  2,  2: 

'M  l o who,  knmviug  thus,  sings  tlus  ndgUfia  (i.  e.  discharges  the  cintios  of  an  tidgdtar) 
saying  oni  takes  Agni  (lire)  and  (unises  him  to  stand  (Inn  on  the  earth;  saying 
0}}i  lie  takes  Yayu  (air,  wind)  and  cansos  liirn  to  stand  tirm  in  tlio  atmosphere; 
saying  om  ho  takers  Aditya  (the  siin)  and  causes  him  to  stand  firm  in  the  sky; 
saying  om  ho  takes  lireath  and  causes  it  to  stand  firm  in  speech.” 

Atid  in  lik(^  manner  it  is  taxight  how  to  arrive  at  a complete  age,  to  slay  hunger 
through  food,  to  be<;ome  (h^ar  to  all,  to  bestow  fortune  upon  a person^®.  For, 
a(^cording  to  I,  14,  Iff.: 

“Ho  sliould  uotf  ho  one  whom  tho  gods  koop  at  a distance.  Truly  to  what  extent 
ho  worships  gods  with  his  internal  s(4f  to  thc.t  extent  the  gods  exist  for  him. 
And  who  knows  this  thus,  H am  tho  Mmua,  in  me  are  all  tlujse  divinities,’  truly 
tluiH  in  him  all  tlu^se  divinitii'S  i^xist.  4’hat  is  tho  dcvck^rut  (‘hoard  by  the  gods’) 
whnun,  tor  all  tliese  divinit.ies  give  ear  to  ono  who  knows  thus  with  a view  to 
whatf  is  pur<\  t,o  what  is  (vtTiuWive.  4’hey  make  Iiim  do  what  is  good,  what  is 
(^ftoetivi'  . . 

Evim  t4u^  gods,  indcH'd,  approach,  on  Praja})ati’s  authority,  heaven  by  means  of 
a speinal,  vi/..  a rc-k'ss,  and  this  great  figure  himself,  frequently 

numtfiomsH'^,  is  at  1,  49,  3 where  tlio  dems,  contending  with  tho  asiiras,  have 
r<Mumrse  to  him,  related  to  instruct  them,  ^Worship  me  (under  the  names) 
Ikirusa,  Prajilpatl,  Rfiman/  IxHiause  then  they  will  give  evidence  of  their 
knowing  him.  41nis  this  work,  in  addition  to  tlic  usual  classilicatory  identifica- 
tions, ‘(‘tymologicar  ex|>lauations,  and  mythological  expression  of  ideas'^^,  is 
full  of  (expositions  of  the  supreme  power  and  effectiveness  of  the  sdman  and 
rc^feix'iuH^H  to  samavedie,  technicalities.  The  gods,  washing  to  make  the  sdman 
t.h<‘ir  s<‘cond,  r<‘(|uest  heaven  and  earth  to  unite  in  order  to  produce  it  (1,  50); 
tln^  cpH‘stfon  is  posed  as  to  what  is  tlie  vital  priiwdple  of  tho  seman^  the  answer 


For  the  Kapva  recension  sec^  BoauLiNO,  SB.  V,  p.  XLIX. 

So(^  al)ov(x  p.  IH7. 

Fdit»e(l  and  ifrauHlakHl  l>y  IL  Oinmu.,  in  JAGS  1(5  (189(5),  p.  79;  by  P.  Bama 
1)KVA,  Laliore  1921  (hii^ial  <ai.  (Iwhtwl’h  (Mlitiori). 

Gf.  411 II.  I,  8,  UL;  51,  10;  55,  511. 

4UII.  I,  15,  Iff.;  of.  1,  1(5,  Sff. 

(.5f.  (^.  g.  J UJ:h  1,1,1  (compuu’ing  tho  universe  by  moans  of  tho  threefold  Veda) ; 
11,  1 (creating  creatim^s) ; IB,  X (ert mating  the  gods). 

€f.  e.g,  JIJB.  1,  21;  23;  40,  2;  2,  8,  7;  11,  8;  1,  34,  (5, 


432 


J,  (i<mda.  * Vodio  LiionUur(> 


being  d)rea.t,h’  (1,  41,  2)  ; ii  iw  Hia4('d  thni  4 he  Bpic'ndotir  of  f.lu'  mwan  \vhi(4i  wc 
worship  is  in  the  sinf  (I,  43,  I).  Ilie  thtinchw-elonds  aix'  said  U)  be  identical 
with  the  preindc  (pmisMra),  lightning  with  tin'  {)a*rti(’nlar  syllabh's  with  which 
the  pratikamy  i*e.  the  praUharfar  (one  of  tlu^  assislaints  of  the  iidtjdfar)  begins 
to  join  in  singing  and  so  on  (1,  13,  1).  34n'n'  are,  it  is  t rue,  many  <'|)isodes, 
roforences  to  authorities  bt'ing  (ju<'sti(nn'd,  ('^plaining,  dis(‘usHing;  tluae  a.re 
myths,  legends  and  ni^dhieal  t\arrativ('s,  bnt  th<'H<'  also  Jind  f ludr  raimn  (rMre 
in  the  mman  spi'ctilation^^,  111118  the  %v<'ll«known  siafennnd.  ihat  in  ihc^  be- 
ginning this  nniverse  was  twofold,  cosmos  (m>t  ) and  chaos  (ami ) is  immediately 
followed  by  the  explanation  that  the  fonnt'i  was  mnuia.  mind  and  ('xhalatiori, 
and  the  latter,  re,  speech  and  inhalation  (1,  53,  If).  11u'  principles  nnderlyinc 
the  argumentation  are  carried  through  so  coiusisi^t'ntly  that  t'V('n  well-known 
mythical  themes  are  modified : it  was  not  fh('  gods  and  f.hc'  msunts^  who  (‘ontended, 
bnt  Prajapati  and  Deatli,  and  the  gods,  the  former’s  sons,  r('solved  to  liave 
themselves  consecrated  by  that  ndfjdtar  who  would  tmahh'  th<'m  to  overcome 
death  and  to  go  the  to  heavenly  world  (2,  10,  The  work  eontains  two 

lists  of  teachers  who  were  believed  to  have  hamh'd  down  its  cont  ents  (3,  40fF.; 
4,  16f.),  tihe  former  reaching  back  to  Brahman,  tin'  lattt'r  to  Indra. 


Cf  c,g.  TUB,  1,  (f  30;  3B;  42;  45;  53;  3,  2911*  The  nmimn  3.  20''2H  in  mi 
exception, 

Cf.  also  episodes  and  statements  such  m 1,  2Bf. ; p 31,  i ff, 


QUmAKY 


mlhvaryn,  ofiunaiU-  who  ha<i  U\  prrfonn  manual  u<vI,h  whilt^  rt'pt'aiiug  fonmilas  of 
tln^  S' aytirvi'da 

Adiiti»  a goddoas,  m<d<la'r  of  t.ho  AilityaH 

Aditya,  tiamo  of  a grou|>  of  (Varuna,  IVIiira,  Aryainatu  <^io.) 

Agni,  (fUo  god  of)  (iro 

agnicayaria,  \aa\y  Holoutu  oonatamy  of  tho  piliug  or  couHtanuvUug  of  iho  saortai 
iiroplaoo 

a{piihotra,  tlu^  daily  (morniiig  atid  ovcnuug)  at.it'udaiKu'  on,  and  oblation  of  milk  oto. 
to,  Agni 

mjriiMcmia,  tln^  Him]>I('«i.  form  of  tlio  ono«day  aoma  naorifico 
agmjcldhdrm,  i'afabliHlmumt  of  tbo  ritual  lin'H 
ugmjddheyay  tho  amno 

dhavanlya,  th('  rit-tuU  firo  wliiolu  tluring  a ,^rauta  Haorilloty  roooivoH  tlio  oblations 
ahitpml^  bu>n-‘Violonot>,*  i.<\  abatontion  from  injury,  rospoot  for  human  and  animal 
lifi^ 

Afigiran,  a nago  ami  mythi(’al  firo^priost:  in  tho  plural,  his  dt^wamdantH 
arthavddit^  oKplatnU  ion  of  tho  mi'aning  of  a (rit\nd)  pnnu'pt 
mtcm,  a (^lann  of  dtniios.  in  tho  brdhnmjttfi  anti-’gods 
(k^mmedlHh  horned -Hfuadficto,  (au>  of  tho  grt'at»  royal  Haianfiot'H 
A^viuH,  mioinairing  ami  mat-ittinal  twin  gods,  diviiu^  physioiauH 
ath(mHi>rediru  followor  of  tho  Atharvavoda 

dbtmn,  *Holf,'  HUi>r<'mo  uuivtn’Hal  Soul  td  whioh  tvvt'ry  iiiU^lligont  boiug  is  a partial 
indivi<luat4oti  {do«iguatod  by  tho  namo  bs’m) 
brah'nuu'drhu  a Ht*mlout  (»f  tlu'  Votla,  obrnnaung  ohantit.y 
Brahmananpath  Brhaspati,  tho  (divino)  pri(^Ht  t)f  tlio  gods 
dakmjd,  odoring  |)rommtod  to  an  ofdoiating  prit'st 
deiHh  goil  (in  a Iarg«'r  aonw^) 
dhdmathf  *pri\Monoo'  tvf  a diuty 

dfmmut^  rigid.  <a'd(a\  iuolmling  tho  tmhltm  of  tho  (K)HmoH,  law  and  absoluto  moral 
ordtH*  and  itn  ouHt.omary  olmorvanco 
Dhilt.ar,  a Vislio  god,  ‘Tho  KHtablishor* 
rll/c.yl,  t.ho.  oouHtstrtd.ion  (of  tho  Haorifiota') 

gmulharvu,  a goniuB  of  oono<f)tion  and  propagation,  also  cok'^iatiid  musician 
gdtluX  stair/, a,  t^spocially  ono  m>t  belonging  to  tho  Vcala 

gdyatrl,  om^  of  th(^  Vinlic  metrics,  cap*  tho  st.an/a  }?,V.  3,  62,  10,  tho  gdyatrl  par 
etrcellenve  (also  MvUrl)^  addrossod  to  tho  Sun 
ghee,y  clariliod  butter  (mml  for  ndigioim  purposos) 

gfhycmfdra,  ritual  work  cotdauning  diroctions  for  domostic  ritos  and  coromonios 
gtira^  a,ny  vtana*ablo  or  rospi'Hitablo  porson  (parents  oto.)  c^sp.  a spiritual  guide  or 
priHjoptor 

lmmryap)a,  ilivino  worship  consisting  of  oblations  of  clariliod  butter  (ytc. 
hotar,  ono  of  tho  clued' I'lriosts,  in  oliarge^  of  tho  rocitatirm  of  the  I^gvi^'la 
Uihdmt,  t.tiwiitional  account  of  fonntu’  t^v(nd»H 

kdfnyentif  optioiuil  rite  pea’formi^d  from  dt^sire^  of  dcdinit.cs  l>(.vno:lit  or  from  special 
iut(4'(sHicBl  motives 

hmtriytp  a meunbor  of  tho  reigning  or  ‘military  order/  nobleman 


434 


J.  Gouda  • Vodic  Lit<'raturo 


loka^  ‘world,’  position  of  safety,  select-od  or  sacred  place  in  whic^h  t.o  exist  safely 
mandala,  a ‘book’  of  tlie  IJigvoda-Satnhita 
mantra^  Vodic  verse,  holy  or  powerful  formula 

Maruts,  gods  of  storm,  also  aBsooiai>ed  with  raiti  and  lighl-uing  and  forming  a troop 
Mimmusa  or  IMrvamimatnsa,  “inephry  into  or  intforpretation  of  (thtx  mantra  portion 
of  the  Veda),”  at  first  exegesis  of  the  Vedic  ritual,  cleveloping  ini.o  a philosophical 
school  aixd  doctrine  of  salvation 
pada,  a fourth  part  of  a regular  stau'/ia,  verse 
Par  j any  a,  the  god  of  rain 

Prajapati,  “Lord  of  creatures”  th<^  great  go<l  among  or  aho\*e  tlie  Vedic  deities 
the  creator  who  is  the  All  or  totality 
prdria,  breath,  vital  breath,  life4>reath,  vital  powia* 

pravargi/a,  a ceremony  introductory  to  the  soma  Hacrihci'  at  whiidi  fresh  milk  is 
poured  into  a heated  vessel 
pimarniftyu,  repeated  dying 

purvhita,  domestic  chaplain  or  family  priest  of  a ruler  or  uo!>lemau 
Piirusa,  Primeval  Man  as  the  origin  and  the  ‘souf  of  the  univ(>rse 
Purvamimamsa,  see  Mimanisa 

Pusan,  a god,  the  knower  and  guardian  of  roads  who  prot.ecdts  cattle  a.nd  can  make 
hidden  goods  easy  to  find 
rdjasUyay  the  royal  consecration 

^•bhu,  name  of  three  deified  artisans  celehrated  for  their  unusual  skill 
ff/^  plural  fcCM?,  saci'od  verse  of  the  l;J»gv<Hla,  iH'cihHl  in  praist^  of  a (b'ity 
r.n,  seer  and  inspired  poet  of  a Vedic  tt^xt,  regardi'd  as  a pat.riar<dial  lutge 
rto,  (cosmic  and  ritual)  Order  and  truth  cu  which  human  order  de|>ends 
ihidra,  a god,  represeutativo  ofth(>  uucultivatiMl  and  tmeonquered  nai  tiris  oxiiluded 
from  the  soma  ritual 

MhliM,  “branch”  or  school  of  the  Vinla,  adhering  to  its  <nvn  t.radti.ioual  text  and 
intta’pretation 

smpdhi,  sandhi,  euplxonic  combination  of  tluN  final  and  initial  soundH  of  words  etc. 
in  a sentence 

sayihim,  a continuous  text  treateil  according  to  tht>  euphonic  rules;  a mtdhodically 
arranged  collection  of  texts 
Rostra,  hymn  of  praise,  inv^ocation 

sattra,  a great  aoma  sacrifice,  lasting  from  13  to  bl  or  UK)  <layH 
sautrdfnani,  an  in  all  probability  originally  pojnilar  sacrillcial  rite,  |>erformtHi,  inter 
alia,  to  cure  the  sacriflcer  by  nuHins  of  an  oblat.ion  of  Inna*  and  an  animal  saorifice 
Savitar,  the  Sun  (in  its  dynamic  ixspiHit  as  th<^  sthnulator) 
sm&rta,  recorded  in  or  based  on  the  murtl 

smrti,  the  whole  body  of  saonsl  tradif.ion  far  as  nanembered  l>y  human  teach<a*s 
soma,  the  soma  plant  and  its  juice,  ofTeriHl  in  libations  t,o  ilu)  gods;  also  king  of  the 
plants  and  representative  of  th(^  <^lixir  of  lih’i 
soma  paimndna,  the  soma  in  proci^ss  t>f  clarifying 

mddha,  a ceremony  for  the  bemht  of  the  <lead  arua^stors  olism’ved  af.  fixtal  periods 
as  well  as  on  occasions  of  mourning  or  r<qoicing 

Iraida,  based  on  tlie  ,fnUt,  relating  and  conformable  to  tht^  i4a<u’iHl  faiulition  of  tlw^ 
Veda 

simutasiUra,  a sutra  work  liast^d  on  the 

Mih,  that  which  has  binai  luuird,  tht^  sacrtal  knowltnlge  of  t-he  orally  f-rans- 
mitt<Hl  by  brahmins,  the  etiTnal  and  infallible  truth  which  ih  cudsalieHl  m th(^ 
Veda 

atom,  (hymn  of)  praise;  thosi^  Vedic  ti^xts  which  arc  sung 
suhta,  lit.  good  recitation;  Vedic  hymn 


GIoHHary 


435 


a isort  of  bcnn* 

Stir^/a,  the  Sun  m a lioavetily  body  (alno  m a dtnty) 

sutra,  a sliort  or  apliorinfcio  rulo  or  formulation;  any  manual  oonsistiuK  of  such 

sucoinc?t  forinuIatiouB  ' ' ^ 

svcihdj  hail  (to)b  may  bU^HHing  roHt  out 

a god,  t.lu>  o<aoBtiaI  (sarponUa*,  buildor,  atul  arii«an 
tidgmar,  tho  chaut(a%  of  tho  ohic'fpnoHtB  of  iho  .<muta  ritual 
vdja,  gouorativo  aiwl  rogc'iuvrat.ivo  powt'r 

vclmi,  “drink  (,f  a form  of  <,lnx  Homa  mmrifmo  porformed  by  rulers  or 

brahmiUB  itBpinug  to  tho  higlu'-Ht  ponitiou  ^ 

vajra,  Indra’a  ‘Gxmuh'rbolt'*  woapou 
genealogy 

^tho  reprc»ental,ive  of  tlu;  «t,at,io  aspects  of  kingship,  guardian  of 

Vayu,  tho  god  of  wind 

veMnga,  oomprohensivo  name  of  (cla..w,«  of)  works  regarded  tvs  auxiliary  to  tho 
Veda;  SIX  are  usually  enuinerattHl  ^ 

vidhi,  i'hIc'.  (ritual)  precept,  direction  (I'sp.  for  the  performance  of  a rite) 
virS.},  tho  hypostatizivtiou  of  tho  coneeption  of  the  universe  as  a whole;  also  name 
of  a particular  Vedie  verse  consisting  of  throe  pMas  of  eleven  syllables;  tho 
duipadS.  vmy  consists  o(  lour  padas  of  five  syllalilos  each 
t^futd  >x  vwu^iy  of  arrangement  for  nviiting  (,hc  verses  of  a ptwtioular  oulogium 
Visve  lleyas,  someltmes  all  the  gods  oolhsitively,  elsewhere  the  ‘All-gods,’  boinK  a 
partioular  olaHH  oi  godH  *6 

Vrtnv,  (power  of)  obHtniol.ion,  r<>})roHeuf,etl  as  .v  snake,  fhe  chief  ad vimary  of  Indra 
whom  he  trietl  to  prevent  Iroiu  ('stablishing  a tuismos  and  a habitable  world 
Yaiua,  th<*i  Urnt  tuan  aiul  rtiifr  <>t  (hu  dtH'5t''tw*H>d 
yami,  twin-Hintor  of  Yama 


yupa,  tlAu  p<mt  or  ntako  to  which  the  wacritioial  victim  ie  hintoucd 


ABBREVIATIONS 


I,  Texts  (orighuil  sources ) 

AiA. 

A ii-an  >ya-  ilranyaka 

AiB. 

A i t-aroy  a-Bri  ilu  iiana 

AilTp. 

A it.an^^ra-lJpaiii.Mac  1 

Apl)li(8). 

ApaHt4Utiba-(ApiiHiatiiihiya-)Dliarinasut-ni 

ApS. 

Apart  tai  i il  )a-{^rai  itanu  l.ra 

MvG 

A.4vairiyana-(  JrhyaHutra 

AAvS 

Ai^  v«  li  fiy  ai  la  - 8rau  tartil  tra 

AVP. 

At.liarvave(ia-8ainliita  (Paippalada  rocoiision) 

AVPar. 

PariAispiB  of  tho  Atharvavoda 

AV(S). 

Atliar va vcda-Sai nlxita  (Sauuaklya  reconsion) 

AVVulg. 

Atliar vavoda-Saiphita  ( vidgaie  P^xt ) 

BAir. 

Brluularanyaka-Upauisad 

Bhilgl’ur. 

Bhagi  ivatfa- 1 b tri  m a 

Blxfird. 

Bha  rtt,(  1 v ii  1 f 1 ly  artuira 

Bha. 

Bhagtt.Viuig!t*ii 

Bfi. 

1 ht.u<  U t ii  y txatx-S  nit  t itiHU  in  i 

Chll. 

( '1  iau<  h tgya-  Uptuttj^ad 

inA 

I dtarmtii^riHira 

an. 

( } ( >1  tat  .1  ta.”  1 1 raht  taina 

(HI. 

( h t i ) hi  1 tt.  A < f 1 ty  t wal  ira 

.in. 

J ai  1 1 1 i 1 1 ty  ti»  1 aanti 

.Hi. 

J ai  1 1 1 i n i » ( h'l  ly  anu  ini 

JUB, 

fhiittiiiii!yti4jpiinirt<wPBrrdunai)a 

Kh|>H, 

K apiafhala»  Kafha-Sainhiiil 

Kaus^, 

Katif^ika-Suira 

KaunUp. 

K at  1 i iak  i - 11  pt  uii^ad 

KI^. 

Kaitt^Ii.aki-  or  iSaAkhaytioa-Brahinana 

KB. 

K {iihaka-Samliitri  ( Kuptaka) 

K^, 

K.uiyayarxa-HratiiiiBuira 

M'ark'Pur. 

M ilrktin  (Jttya- Ptirapa 

Mhli. 

Mtihahlianiia 

MXK 

M ilaavti-  ( 1 rhy  tiHuira 

MB. 

Mai  inl  y ap!  -Santhiia 

MiiU. 

Mnn  dtika- Upaxii^ad 

Kir. 

Nirukiii 

:Pm  Par. 

Porilpa 

PIP 

I hih  <ia  V i 1 1 iHadlrahi  t lapa 

Pr  tip. 

PniAnti«  Uptiaiifiad 

Bihu. 

liflmayanti 

I5.V. 

Ijigvrdti'Btwnhiia 

Sahklulyatxti-Arapytika 

ftnt.B. 

firdyayaiia-l.irrLhinar.ta 

.SB. 

fiat)  V ii  p^a-Brt  ihmana 

^ik 

fiat^iptiiha-Bnlhmarta 

438 


3.  Gonda  • Litoral  tit  (' 


&BK, 

iSatapatba-Bralimapa,  Kruiviya  roiaainion 

Sbm. 

iSatapatba - Btfilimana,  Mfidbyai i id i na  r < m >nn\ c m 

Sg. 

iSaAldiayanad  l|’hya8ntra 

>Sai\kbayaiia“{SrautaBrd.ra 

sv. 

Silmavoda 

8VB. 

Sanmvidhfliiadlrahniana 

(Svc^t'tTp. 

votfijS  vatara- Upani^ad 

TS. 

37uttirlya- Aranyidia 

TB. 

3’ai  1 1 i r ly  a - B rill  1 1 n ap  a 

TS. 

'fai  ttiriy  a-Sanib  i tft 

Up. 

Upanii^ad 

VaikliSm. 

VaiklirwiaMa-KSmaH-wiltra 

Vait. 

Vaitanaafit.ra 

VfiL 

Valakhilya 

Ymmx&. 

Vaei^thad  lliarina-SaHt.ra 

ViPnr. 

Vi.^nu-Purana 

VS. 

Vaj  ananoy  i -Sanihi  ta 

VSK. 

Vaj ananoyi  -Sarnhi  til,  K anva-t^rikha 

Yajili. 

Y a j fl  aval  ky  a - B mf  t i 

Yt. 

YaSt 

YV. 

Yayurveda 

IL  AMmvmtfAi  titk^  of  hook^  mnifmivd  in  tho  fo<dnofr^ 

The  biblitjgraphioal  rt^fon'tKioH  iit  th<^  Ibotnot-on  arr>  only  a Holonf.tnn,  F<n*  oompb^to 
aud  $yHtoi'natio  lintH  of  bookw  and  artioloa  mH>  'tbo  vovy  rolialdt^  Inbiiogmi'duoH  by 
L.  Rcaxoti,  Bibliograpbiii  vi^ditpin,  Barm  11)31  and  It.  K.  Danrlokar,  Vmiio  Biblio- 
grapby»  3 voL>  Ibanbay  U)4(h  Ib)ona  U)(U  and  11)73. 

Album  Koni  Albuui  IL  Korn.  Loklon  H)b3 

Arnold,  Vodio  motto  hi  'V.  Ar*M»UL  Vo<bo  motr<'  m da  bmimdoal  dovtdop- 

uu'ut.  (^ambridgi^  H)03 

Aufrocht,  Ait.  Bf.  Hi.  AufriHiht.  Dim  Aitaroya  Bnllimapa  (honumgogo* 

bon),  Bonn  1H71).  H\m 

Aufnxdit,  I'L  R.  37i.  Aufroolit,  I bo  llymuon  tio?*t  liigvoda  (horauHgC'*' 

gobon),  3 V(d,.  Borbn  IHIIl  -18113  Wotior.  L S.  VI 
an<l  VII);  »Bonn  1877;  *WioMbmlini  ll)f»d:  ^U)0H 
Borgaigias  li.  V.  A.  Borgaigno,  lai  roligimi  vddnfuo  iBaproH  loa  hynmoH 

du  liig-Voda,  3 voi.  and  Indt^x.  Ibirw  IH78;  1881 1883.* 
1897; 

Bloomfiold,  A.  V.  (L  B.  M.  Bloomfiold,  'Bho  Atharva-Voda  ami  tbo  Gopatha» 

Bnlhmapa,  StraHHburg  1891) 

Bloomfiold,  IL  A.  V.  M.  BIoomboUL  Hymiw  of  Git^  Atbarva*Voda.  Gxftu'd 

1897:  Hbu'aniwi  (Bonaron)  1984;  19117 

Bloomliobi,  ItopotitiouH  M.  BloomfiohL  Hig«VtHla  I(*'‘pO'liii«aif'*,  « voL  (3  partn)* 

Gamliridgo  Mfimn,  ilHlI 

Bloomfudd  aiul  Kdg(Nrt()n,  ,IVL  Bloomtiold  and  F.  Fdgorton  (voL  111  aloo  5L  B, 
V.  V.  or  VariantH  Fanonoan)*  VtHbo  Variants  3 vob.  I*tnlml«dplna  1930; 

1933:1934 

Bodowite,  ,L  B.  IL  W,  Bo<Iowtt*/.,  Jainntdya  Bralnnanin  L 1 iUK  'rhonw 

^ lltrooht  1973  (Loidon  1973) 

Caland,  AtmwaM  W.  (Jaland,  Uiw^  Jaiininfya-*Br/llunaita  in  AiiHwahl, 

Anmtordam  AomL  1919;  »l9tl0 


AbbrcviiiiionH 


439 


Calaiid,  Over  di^  . . . 
Caland,  OvtT  (^n  nit  . . . 
Calatid,  P.  B. 

Calaucb  HBK. 

Calaiid,  ZatdxnTit.ttal 

Oalatid  and  Houry, 
Cointti.  VoL  Nobol 
Coimn.  Vol.  8.  %^anna 
Congx*.  VoL  Gonda 
Dandokar,  V.  B. 
I)ouHHt'*xi»  A.  (L  Phil. 


Eggt^ling,  ^iB. 


Far<itihar,  Otiiliiu' 

>FoL  V(jL  Kavinij 
F<wt.gab(^  (voxi)  (bu’bt^ 
Fc^igalx^  *huif>bi, 
Fiwigabo  IxaianoL 
Fi'Htgabo  Wtd)oi% 
.Fi\Mt*gniHH  Bijhtdingk, 
Ft'HigruHH  (v.)  Both 
Fi'HtHohrift  KirfoL 
Ft'HiHchrift  Sohubring 

FoHtH(',hrift  Wollor 
Golduor,  AuHwahl 

(h'Idnoiv  IJV. 

Gohlnor*  \L  H, 

V*  Gliwionapp,  L.  B or 
idt.  hub, 

(.hxula,  Dual  dintiiw 


W.  (^alatwi^  Ovc't  do  Kanva  rooonsie  van  Let  Brabmana 
dor  b<>nd(>rd  |)adtnt,  Amsterdam  Acad.  1912 
W.  Calaud,  Over  on  nit  hot  Jaiminiya-Bralnnana, 
Amatordatn  Acad,  1915 

W.  CalaiuL  Ihnlcaviini^a-Brrihmana  (translated),  Cal- 
(uitta  1 93 1 

W.  Caland,  33io  iSatfapatha  BrohmaTxa  in  tho  Kativiya 
roconmon,  Ixdioro  192(11939 

W.  Galand,  AltimliBchos  ZanborritnaL  Dbersotzamg 
<l<'r  %vich(4gHt<m  ''rhoilo  dos  Kaui^ika-Sutra,  Amsterdam 
AcuuL  1900 

W.  Caland  and  V*  I tonry,  lVagni^p>i*'^^*'‘'»  ^ Paris 
1900;  1907. 

tlhanamukfnval!,  Commemoration  Volume  in  honour 
of  ,1.  NoboL  Now  Delhi  1903 

Biddha-BhilratT,  Siddhoshwar  Varma  Presentation  Vo- 
lume, 2 voL,  Hoshiarptir  1950 

India  Major,  Congratulatory  V olume  J.  Gonda,  Leiden 
1972 

H.  N.  Datidokar,  Vodio  Bibliography,  I,  Bombay  1946; 
II,  Poona  1961;  III,  Poona  1973 
P.  DouHsxm,  Allgouxoini^  Gc'sohiohto  dor  Philosophio,  I, 
I AllgouKniu^  Kitiloitung  und  Philosophio  dos  Voda  bis 
anf  di<^  ITpanishacrs,  Leipzig  1B94,  *1922;  2 Dio  Philo- 
Hophio  d('r  Upatushad's,  Ixapzig  1899,  *1920  (Engl. 
t4‘atmL  A>  S,  Gtxlom  Ph(^  Philosophy  of  tho  ITpaxxiijads, 
1906;  Nt^w  York  1966;  1972) 

J.  Kggoliug,  llio  J^a(<apailia-Brahmana  (Mudhyandina 
Scdiool,  tratiHlaiod),  Tht^  Sacred  Books  of  thc^  East,  5 
voL,  Oxford  1882-1900;  *»Dolhi  1963;  *Dolhi  1966 

J . N,  Far<|nhar,  An  Outliixo  of  the  Religious  Literature 
of  India,  Oxford  1920 

Kaviruj  Abhinandana  Grantha,  X^ucknow  1967 

Fostgabt^  R,  Gar  1)0,  Ex'langon  1927 

Fi'stgabo  XL  Jacobi,  Bonn  1926 

Ftudjgabo  fur  XL  Lommol,  Wiesbaden  1960 

Gunipujakaumudl,  Fostgabo  A.  Wobor,  Leipzig  1896 

FostgimsB  an  O.  v.  Bolxtlingk,  Stuttgart  1888 

FostgruHB  aix  R.  v-  Roth,  Stuttgart  1893 

Htudia  Irulologica,  Festschrift  fur  W.  Kirfol,  Bonn  1955 

Btnfcrtlgo  zur  indischon  Philologio  und  Altortumskundo 

W.  Sohtibring  dargobracht,  Hamburg  1951 

Asiatica,  Fostschrift  F.  Weller,  Leipzig  1954 

li,  F.  GiJdnor,  Dor  Rigvcxla  in  Auswahl,  I Glossar; 

IT  Kommontar,  Stuttgart  1907;  1909 

K,  F.  G(ddn('r,  Dor  Rig-Voda  (iiborsetzt),  J voL, 
Cambrixlgo  Mass,  1951;  IV  Index  by  J.  Nobel,  1957. 
HOC  PischtJ,  V.  H. 

PL  V,  GhvHixxapp,  Dio  l^itoraturen  Indiens,  Stuttgart 

1961 

j;  Gon<la,  Pho  dual  deities  in  tho  religion  of  tho  Voda, 
Anxsterdatn  Acad.  1074 


440 


J.  douda  * Vixiie 


Gouda,  KUipHiH,  4.  (louda,  lOIIipaiH,  hraohylogy  iua,l  ot^hor  forum  of 

hrovify  in  opoocli  in  isho  'Gitvrdn-,  AruHf('rdaiu  Acad. 

Ham  " 

('loiida,  EpiflietH  4.  (iruida,  HpiUn'to  in  tlio  l^tpvrda..  Thf*  Hague  H.lo!) 

Gouda,  'Loka  4'.  (k>n<Ia.  Luka,  \\'(a'Id  and  hua-vuu  in  the  V('<la, 

AtuHpa'dain  Acad.  Hkm 

(.k>uda,  M'iira  4,  ('k>nda,,  'fla'  Vodic  giid  Miira.  Lcadou  IP72 

Gouda,  Nokm  on  uauum  4*  (kaula,  Noiua  on  naiUfm  lual  tliu  luuuu  of  (}(hI  in 

atunt'ui  India,  Atuaierdatu  Acad.  1P70 

Goiwla,  Old  Indian  4.  Goiula.  Old  Indian  (Haudhntdi  dur  OricailaliHtik, 

11,  Indit'u).  Lutdt'u  1071 

Gouda,  li.  1.  4.  (^aula,  ]>i<'  Ht'Hgittnun  Indiuno,  L Sltdfgari  I0(m 

Gouda,  StHHilar  hyrntm  4.  Gouda,  The  .m>»callc<I  H'tnilar.  hunan'otiH  and  naliri- 

cal  'Hyniim  (4.’  fht'  l,lg%OHla,  in  Ora ‘id  aha  XtM'rlaudica, 
a voinnuMif  Oriental  Stiidioa,  l.oidon  H.HH,  p.  412 
G'Ouda,  S.  K.  4',  Gouda,  StylmHc  Hepetition  in  the  \hHla.  AiUHt-ordam 

Acad.  1940 

G'Onda,  ViBiou  4',  Gouda,  The  Vinion  of  tlio  X'cdic  laadn,  Hague 

1994 

Grassiuanu,  l^^V.  iibcrH.  11.  Graa-ainanu,  Kig-Vuda  {iihuracLd ),  2 vol.,  Leipzig 

1879  1877 

GraHHinanu.  W,  IJ.V.  IL  GraaKinann,  Wdrt'urhuch  mm  HigAhnia,  Leipzig 

1874:  nVicMhudun  1949:  1944:  1910 

GriflUIu  I-L  I,W‘,  or  Hjuuuh  H.  T.  H.  GnlTdl-n  d'he  Iiyiuua  of  HigA'uda  IrauH- 

lated  with  a popular  t4>uuneidary , 4 voh,  Ikniaum 
LHH9  1892,  «2  voh,  1H9H  4897:  *1919;  1920  1920; 
Varanaai  (Heuarea)  1904 

Hang,  Ai.H,  "M.  Hang,  1'he  Adareya  Hrahiuauaiu  td'  ilie  Uigvinla 

(edited,  t'ranalatfHl.  atul  u\plH4Uf‘dk  2 vot,,  Botuhay 
1804;  \AIlahahad  1922 

HilliOn'andt,  Lit'der  A.  Hillehrandf.,  Lteilur  den  l^igM'da,  Got  tinguu4*eipzig 

1914 

HillehraudL  Ak  M,  A.  Ilillehrandt,  Vetimehe  Mythologie,  4 voh,  Brealau 

LH9L  1899.  1992;  ®(veraudcrt.e  Auflagul,  2 voL,  Brefo 
lau  1927,  1929;  reprnd.  Hildeahiniu  1904 

HorBch,  V.  G,  L.  Ik  Hornch,  Hie  Veilmehu  thdlife-  uud  i^iokadateratur, 

Bia^n  1900 

IiidoL  Bt.udiim  Noriuau  Brown,  wee  »8f.udiea 

Kano,  H.  Dh.  Ik  'V,  Kane,  HiBt.ory  of  Hliariufvetfdra,  4 vol,  (7  parfa), 

Boona  1949  1902 

Keith,  Ai.A.  A.  B,  Keith,  Tht^  Aif-fw*eya  Arauvaka,  Oxhu’d  1999; 

1909 

Keith,  H,  8.  L.  A.  B.  Keith,  A hmiory  of  SauMkrit  Iderature,  Oxford 

1929;  1941;  1948 

Keith,  li.  B.  A.  B.  Keith,  Higveda  Brahiuatnei,  k’liuihriilge  ManH. 

1929 

Keith,  liu  Bh.  V.  IL  A,  B,  Keith,  Beligioti  ami  Blnloou|i!iy  td' tliu  Veda  and 

OpamHhaiiH,  Gainbraigi^  1924;  Hfllu  1909 

Km‘th,  V.  B.  V.  S.  A.  B,  Keith,  4‘hu  Veda  of  t!io  Mho4%  Vajn?t  tSehnol 

eutitded  'radd-irtya  Santuta  (traufOaledk  t'auibridge 
MaHH,  1914 

LiWi,  I).  8.  IL  8*  LOvi,  La  doctrine  du  aaordltH^  riiiuw  It^rt  Briduaauaii, 

PariH  IB98;  HMUl 


Abhrovlatiioiis 


441 


Lotuitiel,  (‘intlidbio 

LiiderH,  Vanina 
Lvulwig,  liV.  <vr  .KigvtM'Ia 

MacdonnlK  H.  S.  L. 

Ma.cdnn<'lK  V.  M. 
MtwalonoIU  V.  H. 

Miwaloiu^U  and  Kt'it.h,  V.  1. 

IVIc^Iangi'H  Hi'unn 

Mom.  Vol.  L.  Haru|) 

Miuard,  1'. 

Miillor,  8ktu  Lit.. 

Oldi'tdHn'g.  li.  li. 

Oldtad  inrg*  I a t . 

Oldiaihnrg,  Nntnn 

Oldiadnn'g,  rnma 

Oldonhi'rg,  It,  V. 

Oldtadx'rg,  Vt'darnrHaluiMg 
OhlnidH'rgi  ViHlin  hymuH 

Oldi'uln'rg,  V.  W. 

V,  S. 

'Riauag  Bild, 
litaion, 

Rcaiou,  K.  V.  r. 

Ik'Unia  H.  B* 

HiC'Unu,  11.  S. 
litainu,  Mafinw* 

Bnunn,  BonHin  ndigiia.mn 

Ii(ai<ni(-Fillto7iai)»  1.  0. 

Rntlu  I'it.  XU  OnHoh. 


1!,.  LonunoK  (k'dichtc  dt^s  Rigvx^da  (Answald  und 
(thin’Hnt-viitug),  Muuchon-Blaiingg  1955 
11.  Ludora.  'V^wnina,  (Idltingcn^  2 vol.,  1951*-1950 
A.  Ludwig,  D('r  Higvoda  ({iberBoty.t),  ()  voL,  Bi’ag- 
Lin|v/ag,  187d  1888 

A,  A.  Ma<MlonolL  A luntorv  of  Saunkrit  lilorakiro, 
liondou  1999;  R925;  Near  York  1929;  Delhi  1958;  1901 
A.  A.  Mai^tloiudl,  Vedtc  mythology,  Hkmsburg  1897 
A,  A.  Maedoui'll,  A Vedio  Header  for  Btiudouta,  Ox- 
ford 1917.  ®1928  eio. 

A.  A.  Mainloiudl  and  A.  B.  Keith,  Vedio  Index  of  Na- 
ineHand  SubjeotH,  2 vol.,  London  1912,  ^Varanasi  (Be- 
uaroH)  1958 

Mdlangi'B  dMudianismo  t\  la  inOmoire  do  Louis  Roiiou, 
1998 

Sarupa-Bharaii,  Dr.  L.  Sarup  Memorial  Volume, 
llosluarpur  1954 

A,  Minard,  IVois  Knigmos  sur  les  Confc  Cliomins,  2 v^oL, 
l^u'iH  1949;  1959 

F.  M!ax  MiilkuN  A Hislory  of  ancient)  Sanskrit)  lit/ora- 
lure,  London  1859;  HMO;  1912;  1929 
11.  Oldi'nlx'rg,  Die  llymiuMi  des  Higveda,  I,  Motrischo 
tind  Textg('Hebiehthehe  Brolegotnena,  Berlin  1888 
IL  ()ld('ub('rg,  Dii’'  Ijiti^ralur  des  alb'U  Indian,  Stult- 
gart.  1908;  H92:i 

IL  Oldenbt'rg.  Bigvinla,  9'''ext.kriiiHoh('i  und  cxegotiBcho 

Not.(m,  2 vol.,  Berlin  1909;  1912 

IL  Oldeubc^g,  Zur  (leH(du<ditit^  der  alt.indisohon  Xhosa, 

Abb.  ( bUllngi^n,  19,  9,  Bi^rlin  1917 

IL  Oldt'nberg,  Die  Religion  d(^s  Veda,  Berlin  1894; 

»I917:  n928;  1970 

IL  Oldi'nlierg,  Vcxlaihrschung,  Skitt-gart-Borlin  1905 

H.  ()ld(>nberg,  Vedio  hymns  (translated),  Part  2, 
Ilynmn  to  Agtxi,  Oxford  1897 

IL  Oldimberg,  VorwisBiawcjhaftiliche  WissonBchaft.  Dio 
WidtanBcbanung  <ler  Brrdnnana-Toxto,  Gottingen  1919 
R,  IdHohel  und  K.  Geldner,  Vodisoho  Studion,  3 vol., 
Stuttgart  1889;  1892;  1901 
L.  Ihaiou,  Bibliographio  vtklicpie,  Paris  1931 
L.  Etaxou,  Lob  dcoles  vddiques  ot  la  formation  du 
Veda,  Paris  1947 

L,  Renou,  Sltudes  v6diqno8  ct  panindonnos,  17  voL, 
PariH  1955-1999 

L.  Xh^nou,  Hymnes  ot  pridres  du  Voda,  Paris  1938  ^ 

L.  Ihaiou,  Hymnes  sp^culatifs  du  Vdda,  Pax'is  1959 
L.  litaiou,  L(^b  nmU'xm  do  la  pbilologie  v6diquo,  Paris 

1928  . . . 

L.  Htmou,  La  po^sio  religitniso  do  IMnde  antique^  Pans 

1942  . 

I, .  Hetxoxi  and  3.  Filliossat,  L’lndo  olassxquo,  I,  Pans 

n Roth,  :^ur  Littxvratur  und  Gosoliichto  dos  Woda, 
Btxittgart  1849 


442 


J.  Gouda  • V<H!io  Utoraturo 


Schcftolowii^,  Apokry|>ht>u»  J",  S<,du4’‘k4owtt//„  I)i(^ 

1000 


Apokryphon  don  ^l^vi'da,  Bn^slau 


V,  Bohrooder,  ItuL  Lit. 
u.  Cult. 

V.  Bchroodor,  MyHl^oriuiu 

Shoudo,  K-ol.  Pli.  AV. 

Biog,  Bagoustoffo. 

Bimorg  VodiBclu's  Bchuloix 

Btudioe  Nonuau  Brown 

Btndios  Knipor 

Symbolae  KnryJowioz 

VoL  S.  Vanna 

Wobex%  I.  B. 
Whituoy-Laninan»  AV. 

Wintcrnit:z:»  G,  I.  L. 

Wiid^ornit'/.,  IL  I.  I,.. 


L.  von  SohnuHicT,  Indic'UH  Iat,praLir  tnid  Cnlttir  in 
hintormolitH' Kidaviokluiig,  L<np>og  1887:  1922 
1..  von  Bohro(Hi<a%  IMynlorittin  nnd  Vinum.  im  Hiimnia 
L('ip7jg  lOOH 

N.  d.  Bliondo,  Tho  Roligitat  and'  I'InloHopby  <>f  tho 
Atbiu*vav('da,  Ikiona  I9ft2 

L,  Biog.  Dus  Bagt'nHioffo  doa  I^lgvcaia  nnd  <!io  indirnda^ 
ItihuHa-tradition.  I,  Binttgari  1902 

,R.  Biiuotu  Ik'itTiigf^  7.tir  Kanntniador  vcHliMobtni  Balm- 
lean  Ki(d  1889 

liuiologiaal  Btudioa  in  honotir  of  W.  Norman  Brown 
Now  Havon  Conn,  1902 

Pratidnnain,  Indian,  Iratmnu  and  Indr»».Kuroiioan  Bl,u- 
dioH  prtw'ntnd  to  F,  B.  J,  Km|>or,  1'ho  Bagno  1908 
Byndxdao  lingnmticao  in  hotit>rotn  G.  Kiirvlowicw 
Wroclaw  1905 

Biddba-BharatL  Biddhomsiir  'Variniv  BroKi'ntation  Vo- 
lunu%  2 voL,  ILmhiarpur  1950 

A.  Wobor,  Indmolx' Btndiou,  18  vtO..  Borlin  1849  1898 
VV,^1).  WhitiK'y,  AibaTva.Vfxla  Saininfa  (Irannlatod) 
n'vmod  by  Ch.  R.  'lawunan,  15nnbridgo  5IaHH.  1905 

M.  Wiut.ornit*/,  GoHobiobfo  dor  mdoiohon  Liioratnr  I 
Ixnp'/.ig  1905,  B909 

M.  W'ink'rnit'/.  A bixtiwy  of  Inrlnm  latorai-iins  R 
Calcutta  1927  (Fngb  Irinwl,  by  5'IrM.  K.  Kotkar) 


II T,  Periodimls  €t(\ 


Abb. 

ABORX 

Acad. 

AIOC 

AJPh 

ALB 

AO  (Lugd.) 
AP 

AroliOr 

ABGW 


AsBfc 

BB 

BDCRi: 

Bor,  Baolw,  (O'^h,  or  BBGVV 


BhV 

BBL 

BB0(A)B 


Abbattdhmgon 

Annalntd  Bbiuuiarkar  Orioutal  Ri’fioart'h  InHt4t'U(’(% 
lk>oua 

Acauloiny,  Akadoini(\  tgo. 

All  India  Oriont-al  Ckadoronoo  f Prooootlmg.H  of) 
Anx^rioan  Jiumual  of  linltdogy,  BabniMO'V^ 

Atlyai*  Libra, ry  Btdlotin.  Adyiliv  .VfMtraa 
Acta  Orioutalia,  Ltndon 
Tho  Aryan  I5alu  B<»mbay 
Arobiv  Orioutnlm,  Pragtx^ 

Abbandbmgon  dor  aaolwixolim  Go‘*oll>iohaft  dor  Wk- 
Hoiwobaftom  Ltd|r/.ig 
Aniatmobt^  Htmliiau  Born 

Btatriigo  7,tir  Knndo  dor  nnlog«irnjfynj;rbf'n  Bpratdioru 
boranagogohon  %*on  A.  Bo7,7,oi dxn*g<’r  *4o,,  Gof.iingon 
Btdbdm  IkMH^an  (Vllogt*  Ur^noiurb  lir^dtfnfo,  iNnxta 
Borwbto  (itbor  tlto  Vorhamibmg.aii  tlnr  (kgb)  nMmu 
H<4ion  GoMoIkobaft  tior  Wtraonfiobnii on,  Lotp‘/jg 
Bharatiya  Vidya*  Bombay 
BuIIoUii  do  la  BooiOtO  do  Lnigtnfstti|tio  4^  Parirt 
Bollotin  <*f  tbo  Hobo*4  of  (haontid  {mul  Afrioan)  Btm 
dioH,  Lontlon 


Abhn^viatioas 


443 


DLZ; 

BW 

Gob.  d.  Wibb. 


GGA 

H.  C.  I.  P. 


h:e 

lA 

IC 

IF 

IH() 

IIJ 

XL 

Ind.  Hint..  Cong(r(\HH) 
Int.  PhiloB.  Quart. 

I.  S. 

J. 

JA 

,TAOS 

,TASB(L) 


J'AH  Tb>ud)ay 
JBBHAS 

,1BOB8 
JBHS 
KSV 
.fGJ  HI 


JIB 

JO  I B 
JOR 
J HA« 
J'HAHI^ 

JSVO'I 

JITB 

JIBBIS 


K.  8. 

ICA 


Vol. 

MO 

M8L 

MS8 

NCH<JW) 


I)out.Boho  Litorattir-Zoituug,  Berlin 

Kant  and  West,  Rotno 

Oi'HollHohaft  dor  WisHouBchaft^on 

G{)tt>ingiBcho  (b>l('hrt(^  Air/.oigon,  Gottingen 

lIiHt.ory  and  Culttiro  of  th(^  Indian  People,  (I,  Tlio 

V(Hli(^  Ago)  (Hiited  by  R.  G.  Majumdar  and  A.  D. 

PuBalkar,  London  1051 

liintory  of  Roligioim,  Cliicago 

Indiiui  Aut»i(|uary,  Bombay 

Indian  Gult.uro,  Calcutta 

In<logt^rm^u^iHcho  ForBcImngt'n,  Htraasburg,  Berlin 
Indian  Hintorical  Quarterly,  Caknitta 
Indo-lranian  Journal,  Tlie  Bagtie 
IiKlian  Lingui8ti<w,  Calcutta 
Indian  Hintory  Congrt^BB 

1 ut(n'i\at.ional  PbiloBopliical  (Juart.crly,  Bronx,  N.  Y. 

BOO  Weber 

Journal 

Journal  tu^iatique,  Paris 

Journal  of  the  Arnorioan  Oriental  Society,  Now  Haven, 
Baltimore 

Journal  of  tJio,  Asiatic  Society  of  Bengal  (Lottors), 
Cal<mtt»a 

Journal  of  tlio  Asiatics  Socit^ty,  Bombay 

Journal  (J'  tlu^  Boml>ay  BraiuJi  of  tbo  Royal  Asioitio 

Society,  Bombay 

Journal  of  Bun  Bihar  and  OrisHa  Society,  Patna 
Jcmrnal  of  tlio  Bihar  .Rc'^si^arcsh  Society,  Patna 
Hot^  JGJ  RJ 

♦bmrnal  of  the  (hmganatli  Jha  Research  Institute,  or 
J.  (L  J,  Ktnulriya  Sanskrit  Vidyapeotha,  Allahabad 
Jotirnal  of  Indian  History,  Kerala  University,  Tri- 
vandrum 

Jotirnal  of  the  Oriental  Institute,  Baroda 
Journal  of  Oriental  Researclx,  Madras 
Journal  ol'  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society,  London 
J<mrmd  t)f  th<>  Royal  Asiatic  Society  of  Bengal,  Cal- 
ontta 

.hmrnal  (J”  the  !SrI-V(^i\katH\4vara  Oriental  Institute, 
J’‘iru|>ati 

Jimrnal  of  th(^  IJnivtn'sity  of  Bombay 
ilourual  of  tla^  University  of  Poona,  Humanities  Sec- 
tion 

Kloita^  Scshriftivi 

5^(ntH<Jirift  filr  vtv^gleichende  Sprachforsohung  axif  dem 
Gohi('tt>  dt'r  indogormanisclum  Spraohcni,  borausgoge- 
hou  von  A.  Kuhn  etc.,  Berlin,  Gutersloli,  Gdttingon 

Memorial  V<»hune 

1^0  inonde  orii^tdal,  IJppwJa 

MfrnuuroH  dts  la  soaifrttS  do  linguistique  do  Paris 

MuncluMxer  Stmlie-n  '/mr  SpracliwiBsenschaft 

NatshrichBrn  dx^r  Gbttinger  Gesollsohaft  dor  Wisson- 

H(Jiaften 


444 


OTA 
K.  S- 
OH 
Or. 

OT 

1>A0S 

PABiA(aB) 

:po 

PrBh 

Proc. 

Purana 

QJMS 

RHR 

RO 

SB 

SBBAW 

S.  P. 
TAPhA 
Trans. 
ITniv. 

VIJ 

VoL 

Wiss.  Zb. 
WZKM 

WZKSA 

ZDMG 

ZII 


fl.  Goiula  • V(N{lic  Lit  ora  turn 

Now  Indian  Ant*ic|uaiy,  Bninhay 
Now  S('rioH 

Our  Horit.a|j;o,  Oaknii»(,a 
Oriinit.al  iHt.H 

Orionkil  'I'hntightH  Nanik 

Prooo('dinfi;s  of  tlio  Atnori(»a.n  Oricnital  Sooiot.y  hoo 
4AOS 

ProtHMMlingH  of  ihn  Amori<*.‘Mi  Philoanpluoal  AsscHna- 

tioip  Pliiladt'lphia 

Tlio  Poona  On('ntaliHt,  Poona 

Pralniddha  Bhiiraia,  Almora 

Pi'ocoodings 

Purauii,  odiU'd  by  ilu>  AIMndia  Kashinij  Trust),  Vara- 
nasi (I^onaros) 

QiiarU'rly  Jotirnal  of  IVfyt.hic^  Sooioty,  Bangalore 
Rovno  do  rHist,oir(>  di'S  Koligions,  l*aris 
Rocr/ni  k Or i U.al isfcy ozi  ly , K rakd w 
Sitzungshori(?lito 

Sit)zimgHl)erioht)o  dtn*  bayia’iscduni  Akadtnnie  dor  Wis- 
scnschaflion,  M uu(4a>n 
8uininari<'s  of  papt'rs 

’[rransaotions  oftlu^  Anun’i(’a,u  Philologionl  Assooiaiion 

''rransac'.t.ions 

IJnivi'rsity 

Vishvi'shvaranand  Indologioal  .luurual,  Hoshiarpur 
Voluino 

W isst  wc'hafl.l itd  u ' Zt n tso  1 x r i ft . 

Wit'uor  Z<nt.sohriR  fur  di<^  Kundo  dos  Morgonlaudos, 
Wien  {Vu'(ania) 

VVitaior  ZtntHohnR  Air  die  Kundo  Sudasitais,  Witui 

(Vi(nma) 

Ztafsohriftt  dor  (baiksohon  nuayt'idiindistdion  OoHolI- 

Hohaft,  Ltup'/.ig,  VVit'shadcni 

Z<‘itBohrirt)  Air  Indologio  un<l  Irauistik.  Linp/ag 


INDEX 


The  order  in  iliat.  of  ilu>  Eoiuaii  nlphalx^tu  The  uvuuIxu'h  rt^fer  io  pagOvS,  ixuinb<>r8 
before  ii.  to  a footuot-e  on  i»lio  pag<^  imnitiotied.  'riu^  ( UoHBary  and  tla^  Bil)liogra|)hy 
arc^  not  indiNxed,  the  hxotnotoH  only  Hporadically. 


abbroviationH  (of  metrical  175 

abhiedra  83,  281 
Abhyavar  tin  1 3 0 
abniptiu>«H  420 
accuracy  101 
act  of  truth  147 
actual  past  117,  183 
adaptation  (of  a narrative)  307  f. 
Adbhuta-Bralunana  349  f. 
addendiuti,  addition  (see  also  ‘spux'iouB’ 
. . .)  28,  188,  101  f.,  215,  274 
additive  wmioxiw  constnu^-ion  224 
addr<>HH  2(i2 
ad'hikdra  185 

adhvarpu  244,  323.  :120,  332,  309,  415 
adhydima  45,  47,  55 
adhydya  0,  35,  43,  328,  344 
Aditi  111,  140,  181,  333 
Aditya(H)  177,  182,  102,  267,  302,  366, 
378,  386 

adjective  (fix<xl)  104 
Advaita  (see  also  Vedfinta)  50 
aesthetic  value  211,  213,  215,  220,  208 
332 

dgama  53 

Agastya  11,  48,  121,  145,  148,  20()f.,  202 
Agni  io,  12,  13,  51,  54,  67,  68,  85,  86,  01, 
04  n.,  95,  06,  08,  00, 100, 101, 104, 106, 
107,  111,  113,  116,  117,  132,  133,  134, 
135,  130,  140,  142,  143,  148,  140,  152, 
157,  161,  168,  170,  176,  177,  178,  170, 
180, 182, 183, 187,  101, 102,  100, 2015., 
216,  217,  210,  220,  220,  234,  235,  236, 
237,  242,  243,  245,  246,  240,  252,  256, 
258,  260,  261,  263,  265,  267,  280,  281, 
280,  301,  302,  304,  314,  333,  336,  366, 
367,  372,  373,  374,  381,  384,  386ff., 
401,  402,  422 
-aiubSrxrna  300,  400 

agnimyana  280,  320,  352,  353,  380,  424 
agnihotra  307,  328,  346,  348,  350,  352, 
353,  350,  360,  380,  381,  383,  384,  428 
agnimoma  86,  100,  348,  340 


agnyrtdhilna  346,  350,  352  n.,  421 
Agnyadl u \ya« Brfd xtnana  35 1 
(Igrdymja  355 
Ahi  Bndhnya  166 
Aitareya-Aranyaka  424  ff.,  428  f, 

- -Brrdnnana'33.  81, 83, 339, 342,  3441T., 
355,  357,  360,  396,  405,  420,  424,  427 

- -Upanisad  426 
AitareyiuB  86,  380 
Aitihiisikas  46 
(Ifyasdkta  80 
(IMydna  304,  306,  416 

~ ' tlHHuy  108,  206  ff.,  200  n.,  360,  407 
akkydyika  408 
Akupilril  401 
aimpkdra  255  n.,  412  n» 
allegeri(vs  134f.,  137,  245,  270,  271,  203 
n.,  412,  423 

anit(a-atien  224,  225,  250,  411 
allusi<aiH  213,  214,  240,  241,  242,  243, 
244,  360,  307,  410,  422  n. 

Alsderf,  L.  208  f. 

Atnrt  “ B rtll  n n a-tta  351 
Ainbai’i^a  306 
atxxbiguity  212,  240,  420  n. 
ambivalence  245 
aryhm  157 
dfmidya  43 

Amor  and  Psycho  204 
amorotis  adventures  403 
amplification  229,  235 
amrtam  367 

amulet  257,  279,  281,  300,  301,  428 
anachronism  39,  41 
tmacoluthoxx  214,  238 
analogy  345,  375,  377  n. 
analytic  ('’ixprc^ssion  or  pn^entation  220 
IX.*  301,  4:18,  419 
Ajiandatirtha  427 
aniiplnxra  224,  229,  208 
Anartlya  427 

xmeestors  74,  77,  85,  94,  97  f.,  112,  123, 
124,  131,  139,  191,  330 


446 


J\  Honda  • Vodin  Liita'aliiro 


ancillary  litcrainrt,^  208,  30711'.,  310  n., 
331,  34-7,  350 
Andhra  Ih'adcah  34 
aiuirogynouH  prinan^d  laOt^g  137  in 
ancc<iot<^  403 

AhgiraB,  AfigiriwcH  40,  07,  I HO,  180, 
307f„  370*  371*  377*  300*  300,  380* 
401 

Shgiranakalpa  20B,  377,  300 
aniiualB  04*  134,  100,  177*  300*  354*  355, 
357,  403 

animal  mu'rillccN  104*  333  in*  338*  344* 
,351,  371  n. 

n-nonymity  405  in,  400,  413 
anonymotiH  aiit4ioritit'8  or  traditioim  370* 
408 

anthropomorpliiHin  00*  303 
anti*god8  (HtH>  also  murm)  380 
antiilK'Hia  337,  337*  347,  308 
anubrdhmaxm  3 3 0 

anukramaxilf^Ji  amtkmmnfitkfl  14  in, 
341'.,  35*,  40.  58  in,  70,  83*  143*  373* 
373*  330,  331 
(mnnmiitmrm  300 
miuMmna  408 
ann^tuhh  173,  174,  573.  381 
anuiHtka  0*  373 
Annvlikilnnkrainapf  34  f, 

(tnutHtkjfd  330  n. 
am  a a/d<(7p/d  a a 4 08 
Aprdil  78*  145*  108*  401  in 
Apaa  (net'  idno  Watin'H)  103 
ApaHtamba  337*  340 
« »iSranl4iHut>ra  351 

aphoriHinH,  aphoriniic  ptH^ry  154,  304* 
331 

apocrypha  35  f. 
apoBiopi'Hia  303  n. 

apoiropa<4<t  (purport  of  hymnH)  143 
appcaHiuncnt  (mns  alao  MM(i)  148 
appendix  (nm  alno  addition)  35 f.,  103* 
105,  354 

Apr!hynmH34*  103,  104*  183*  lH7*315in 
ufmarmfenj  303*  381 
Aranyagilna  or  Arapyakagfuia  317*  318 
(Imxiyaka  8,  30,  45*  177*  318*  310*  337. 

334,  343.  433ff. 

Umxiyakukil  xaiu  4^  3 1 
AranyakaHainhita  313  in*  317*  318 
Arlmda  78 

anOiaiis  (cnltun^w*  nitUouH*  Mt-ylc,  vitnvu 
(4.0.)  133*  137  in,  104,  305**313*  313* 
323,  337,  333*  357,  370,  333.  343.  354. 
410*  415,  4:18,  410 


archai’/iat  ion  15,  313,  313 
arclu'fvpo  (diviiuO  375*  380*  380 
Areika  313,  310.  331 
argunandat  ion  203.  205,  340,  340.  350, 
3081T„  370,  41  1,  4l3h*  418.  433 
Arnold.  H.  V.  27 

arrangtanent.  («‘f  liymufO  Off.,  13,  15,  10, 
17*  30,  38*  30',  3730'..  314  tn 
- (ortlcr)  id'alan/nH  30,  103.  37311'..  314, 
310*337 

of  wordB  330,  333 
AnHantikriimaid  34  f. 

Ari^'cya-dlrahmapa  310  in,  330 
arthd  fitam  ntidmt  304 
nrthamUiu  373 
arthmiUhi  180,  340*  430 
artiiunaldy  311,  313,  333,  330 
ArunakfOu  434 
Arnnakfdnka  fln^  430 
Arupi  353,  300,  3H3. 

Arymnnn  1 1 1 

Aryaim30,  33 IT.,  130,  133,  138,  130,  157* 
^ 300,  377  n.,  300,  330*  301,  370 
Arya  Hainaj  54 
380 

amif  130,  433 
ivartOieuan  MO,  204,  433 
Aiuia  407 
naaoniwaa'  334 
ivHBonant  tauidnnaiu’mM  330 
mfuka  O'.  35 
AVoTvakra  4!'J 
lUOrology  3'0>H 
nalronomy  303 

amaw  334,  3'00,  385  in*  3H0,  380,  300, 
401.  417,  410.  43t.  433,  431,  433 
Arivalayana  10,  30,  3tf„  34*  45.  437 
■ «8rantaBnlra  83,  437 
aJmamiim  alnn  HacrOkuh  338, 
330*  383,  415 
357 

ABvmB40,  08*  77*  HO,  00*  lol,  103*  llOf., 
133.  134  r.*  135,  138,  157.  108,  170. 
I HO*  101.  103,  108,  315  n.,  334,  350, 
301*  305,  330.  333,  3H7 
aaytuhOnn  337 

Atharvau(id'  300,  307  f,.  370,  377,  387* 
307*  308*  300 

At harvanamhaaya  27«i  u,.  311 
A 1 1 tar  vit i‘tg  I riuia  It  2 0 7 
atharvaufnO  nmitvt\  ritylcctn. 

13*  13*  30*  00*  III.  103,  131.  M3l  lH7f., 
100*  308*  331,  3554, 

Atharvapritya/auttilm  !I0H 


Indox 


447 


AtliarvH.vtH'!{k  Atharvn,V(Hlin}4  8,  28 

’ 35,  103,  134,  138,  130,  142,  144,  151. 
174,  175,  177,  188,  102,  200,  230,  254, 
250,  258,  20707,  330,  342,  375,  408, 
428 

- 30717 

atMat^okii  204- 
Atithigva  123 

(Ummi  45,  5i),  140,  205,  300 
(itnuistuti  no 
]S;t,r(\ya  325  n. 

Airi(H)  0,  70,  131,  175,  1 84,  241 
atJiaMi  no 

atuliViKHv  70,  10817,  110,  122,  123,  150, 
157,  185,  187,  100  ii,,  107,  108,  200, 
200  n.,  231,  233,  234.  230,  240,  243, 
248,  202,  340,  373,  374,  380.  404,  413, 
410 

Aiikh(\va(H)  324 
Atilana  80 

Atirobindo  ,54,  244  n. 

Aiit^auHHrwlbhtiiruii  308 
atiilinmhip  7017 

Avmiii  2017,  102  lu,  17-1,  181,  107 
axin  nmndi  248 
Kyn  204  n. 

280 

BfUOinly.ma  ,311^ 

hah  ^ ahitmt  ■ 3 4 0 

bahv^ra  30 

balanr<Hl  Intiary  gnaipingrt  222 
ballad  15017,  100,  201,  203,  207 
l)ann;liiy  212 
bamlhu  340,  413  n. 
hart  I 405 
l)argain  402 
barim  104 
Barku  VAr^pa  370 
Baroda  321 
Ba^kala  10,  37,  45 
Ba^knbwna!it<ra»U|>Htd^ad  47 
IklMkalanSaudiitA  37 
bat44a  110,  120,  1.44,  210,  218 
alianiiH  144 
Battdhtlyaua  337 

"Sratd-aHilira  204 

iu'aut-y  217  n. 

Bt'kaghalV  taiabaa*y  223  n, 

Balvalkar,  H,  l\,  27 
Bargaigaa,  A,  13,  57,  84 
baytaid,  ila^  403 
Bliaga  OH.  230,  240,  284 
Bhallabaya  381,  404 


Bhara<lvrvja(H)  0,  131,  102,  219,  306 
Blairat^an  140 
BliaraB  104 

Bhriratly a^NTityiiiiaKtra  3 1 0 
hhdmm  30,  3471 

r$hn44^i“BhilakaradhvarIadra  321 

Bbat4’ad8haHkara(uuiira)  320,  34217,  340 

Bhal.iat'hitryya,  D.  270 

Blawabhilii  52 

bhatnirtlmn  03,  137,  130 

Bhrgti(a)  20717,  271,  382,  303,  412 

BhfgvaOginwah  207 

Bluijyn  124 

biblical  i^a-rallala  203  n. 

Bihar  270,  301 
bii^grapliy  3 
bi|^artito  hytniis  191 
8tan*/,aH  223 

bird(H)  00,  135,  143,  148,  149,  240,  253, 
300 

Bla<*k  Yajurv(ala,  Hoe  also  K^^nayajur- 
vmhi  52,  323 IT.,  328,  332,  330,  348, 
354,  357,  420 
bbwing  144 
blindnoHK  78,  124,  158 
BbnaufKdcl,  M,  20,  28,  58,  350 
boon  402,  422  n. 
brachylogy  230  f,,  250 
BraliiuA  208 
brahmacilrin  203,  355 
hmhman  2,  7 n.,  37,  50,  51,  69,  76,  80, 
134,  20H,  200,  270,  271,  286,  287,  289, 
203,  204,  200,  310,  330,  344,  340,  349, 
350,  303,  305,  300,  373,  389,  390,  402, 
404,  400,  430,  432 

br(thmana{i^)  8,  19,  20,  22f.,  30,  31,  32, 
34,  30,  39,  42,  4517,  47,  50,  52,  50, 
58,  70,  72,  75,  80,  84,  80,  88,  118,  127, 
137,  138,  177,  180,  208,  209,  270,  295, 
305,  308,  318,  320,  323,  324,  32511., 
332,  334,  330f..  330ff.,  381  n.,  423f. 
of  sonxo  of  tho  lost  - 350  n. 
bnlJimaxiMchafftsin  2 0 9 
I inlhnianasarvtxava  39 
Brahmanaspati  (soo  also  B|*haspati)  137, 
202 

BrahinaHiltraB  310 
bmhmaudana  290 
brahnimMin  345,  381 
Bralamlvaria  301 
Bmhnxavi^da  208,  209  n.,  270 
hnthmodya  134,  304,  331,  353,  382,  383, 
408,  412,  424,  420 
la'CHXch  of  faith  402 


448 


J.  • Voilit'  Liitn'aiiiro 


broaih  201,  205,  mi,  271,  208,  420,  422 
hiH^vity  22011,,  4I0f, 

47,  252,  270. 
421 

■Bri'addtwu.tri  22,  28,  40,  12<k  207 
BrhaH|mt.i  08,  00,  80,  07,  107,  111,  110, 
101,'  100,  201,  205,  418 
brfmt  215 
hrhatl  100,  287 
Brown,  W.  Nortmui  125 
Buddha,  Bmidhmn  2014.,  40,  52,  200. 
255 

Buriiouf,  E.  50 
eaxhauH^  1 04 

Caliuid,  W.  58,  218,  210,  240,  250  f., 
200 

captMio  henevoivHtiar  221 
Caraka(8)  224,  220,  255  n. 

Garaka-ad  1 \ vmy u (k ) ,255 
Carakak*it4ia.  220 
0anikju§5khil  220 
cararia  20,  20  f.,  227  n, 

Ga  r a.n  a V al  d y a 2 7 2 

Ganmavyfdia  10  n.,  21,  27,  224,  2,27 
mrtuc'U  Hiyh^  222  tu,  220 
oarpt'nt(a%  oa.rtAvri|i*;!iti  252  n, 

< 'ilr vrduiH  4 0 

('ai(vnary  HPru(’ittr<^  100,  227 
(JatiirhoUlraH,  (’aitirhot  ra  224,  251 
(Murhotrimitd  420 
cmurmdHua^  228,  2411,  252 
cjatmal  rolaiion  202 
ool(4)ra,iion  114 
ct'h^Htiai  protoiyju^  248  lu 
Gcdtic  HugaH  200 
cjlmiuH  of  roa.HtadugH  214 
Chaiianya,  K.  00 
Ghaiuliltndcratnan!  24  f. 
Ghatni()gya-Brillunana  247  n. 
Ghlli(ul<>gyaitiian4'ni.l)ha.»:!ya  221  n, 
GhE‘ndogya-U|:>?in:i.Mad  47,  421 
Ghandonukraiuani  227  n, 
changes  of  421 

chant  210,  220,  221  f.,  220.  421 
<4iarac4(a’ii^,ay (»n  2 1 5,  2 1 7 
charioi-nuu^  120,  100,  252 
chatin  144,  102,  lOI,  102.  20ih  277lf., 
281  ff.,  200,  202 
(Oiarpcnltcr,  2.  207 
<4iaHtity  145  f, 
chiaHniUH  220 f.,  220 
Ghidanihara'in  221 
child  284 


1 4 u’o u oI  ugy  2 . 1 1 ff . , 15,  18,  20  IT.  ,20  ff . 
88.  104,  272  IK,  275,  222,  247  n.,  24o’ 
254,  257 IB.  202,  200  n..  202 
(Orouinlnrul  inn  252 
oiviliznl ion,  Indian  Ilf.,  277,  201  ff. 
(daanidaal ion  248.  274.  421 
(daaapK’af  ory  avafoin  272 
(’hnu'noMM  227 
rlinvnx  IHI,  220.  250 
(’ollo(|nud  nango  25ih  2o8 
(’olophon  200  n. 
notour  worda  BU,  218.  281  u. 
(‘oinhinidiott  of  tuyllural  thomi'a  208f, 
('ouiic  I'aiaMagoa  BIH 

nonuncidiiiora  20 IT..  2! Of..  242,  240, 

247,  240,  250 

citmpnraiio  cow/irndinriu  227  n. 
(Mnupariaon  (hoo  also  lannhO  227,  242, 

248.  250,  202 
ninnpotition  8rH5 
(Mauplonaad  h 275 
coinphnatnai  170 
«annpoNtfi»  hynuci  HU  P 
<anupounda  212,  222,  225.  4|0 
Vinwni omit  uni  107,  227,  2iV4.  2H2*  410 
connoul  rat  ion  220 

nonadiaticy  idianna  2H4f. 
aoncian  fdylo  227,  410 
laimdtuhng  plira.’ara  410 
ronnu'otn  and  ahairani  244  f, 
ctmdnnHation  410 

nontinnatiou  BK5,  170,  IHO,  228,  222 
conjuration  225,  2tU 
nouaocraiion,  <’onMorraif»t'y  wt>nl  or  inxt- 
82,  87.  Oil.  M4.  277,  27!h  280,  202,  2t>5, 
20H,  ,250,  200  n, 
rontoaiH  80,  122.  li\l 
rontnnnty  I HO 

ronimdict  lona  21,  124,  127.  20217,  200  n, 
routraa!  210,  227,  24  7 
nontrnvnray  2701!,,  2S2 
Ciinvoraaito-u  lOOIt,  2lo  n.,  2tl2,  270, 
421,  422 

nouvivial  pootry  4'05  n. 
norrolationa  251 
ntuTCHpondonoo  251,  2cM;.  282 
comipfiona  15 
cofstuia  drama  I2ti,  2H0 
^ nnraoloa  I lOf, 

roMurngony  |t5,  120!'^.  tHI,  210,  220, 

274.  201,  202,  272,  280.  200.  407, 

40H 

noanmlogy  2HI,  tl02 
coimtia'mrguiiaart  280 


hult'X 


440 


c(nv{B)  144.  201,  244.  245.  24P.  250, 

253,  250,  203,  287 
creation  137,  138,  177.  380 
crow  103 

Culik5«Upanifatl  20 1 
cult.  tlranuiH  205 
cnnul>rourt  tl<'B<n’ipt-ion  230 
curne  112f„  158.  281,  283  ^ 

Cyavana,  Pyavana  124,  303.  400 
cycl(>(H)  302 

cyclical  contponii-ion  180 
- ovtaiiH  115,  302 

dadhigharma  00 

Dadhikrtl,  Dadhiknlvan  140,  100 
daily  life  254,  302,  381,  412 
daimitn  32 

daksm  75.  70,  07,  170,  243,  203,  280, 
377 

ddnmttdi  100,  104,  170,  180,  181,  IBO, 
187,  102,  287,  304 
dancing  205 
DUrila  310 
dariapdrn mndmt  3 2 8 
dam  24,  120,  222 
dA^ahoira  HacrifuMW  350 
Dtiiavraja  125 
d(Mgu  24 
dat<’'H  3 

Dawn  («e<^  alao  X^aa)  07  f.,  83,  08,  110, 
150f.,  lOS'll'.,  213  in.  217,  21B,  234. 
242.  240.  252 
Dayilnanda  Banwivatl  54 
death  01,  103.  138f..  142.  200.  382,  397. 

403.  428.  420,  432 
deitiea.  goda 
Delnge  301 

detnerm  04,  103,  111,  125,  120,  142,  157* 
278,  280.  281,  305,  390.  410 
deprcH^atiana  112 

doBcription.  dm<!riptive  elaboration  215, 
210,  217,  218,  250.  303 
deatmeinration  187 
dem  (boo  gtida)  04  n„  380,  380,  431 
DovEpi  80 

I)<watlldh5>''aya-lirElnnaj>a  320 
Dharapidakiapam  320 
dharma  (textw).  dfu$rmaMitrm  34,  30, 
30,  48,  310  in 
Dharnna  70 

dm  OOf..  70f..  73,  74,  81 
I)h!ragovindeiannan  311 
difdeot  213 
dialeotim  370IT..  370 


dialogne  (hymn)  140,  151,  154,  150,  171, 
100,  lOak,  217,  202,  287,  303,  382, 
408,  411,  414 

diehcitonimw  argnnuaitation  374f. 
diction  208  f. 

-•  (imitative)  170 
didactic  (hymn,  Htair/ia)  147,  304 
--  prom%  texiM  205,  308 
didcrcnccB  in  didail  124 
digiH'HBionn  178 
dlkm%  350 

direct  speech  118,  108,  200,  202,  411 
DIrghajihv!  304,  400f. 

Dlrght^ravM  Anaija  125 
Dlrghatamas  11,  77.  135 
diBcuBBkm  352,  370ff.,  404, 410, 411,  413, 
420,  424 

diseaBCB  278,  280,  281,  303,  362 
disputation  379ff.,  413 
distress  282 
DivodUsa  131 

dmm^tic  priest,  see  ptirohiia 

ritual  (atul  texts)  82,  83,  86,  145,  277, 
280,  282.  334,  348 
donations  170 
donhle  entendre  240  n. 

--  image  250 

- sense  242,  2401 
tradition  400 

dramatic  (arrangement  <do.)  150 
--  element  210 

- performances  2051,  200  n. 

- tale  380 
Drapsa  118 

dranght-ox  287,  291,  202 
Dravidian  languages  4 
dream  148,  163,  102,  283 
dual  deities  04,  00,  103,  ISO,  181,  182, 
215  m 

DumcM,  a.  50  n.,  1211,  250  n. 
dnplioate  myths  110 

- stanza  ISO 
duplication  233 

- (internal)  220 
Durga  33,  208 
Durga  51 
dvipadd  virdj  176 
dyad  100 
dynasties  131 

Earth  (hymn  to  the)  54,  302 
ecstasy  140 

elaboration  178,  170,  182,  187,  212,  215, 
298,  301,  359,  380,  412 


450 


J.  (?<uula  • Vodio  Liionittirp 


.E I ont( >1  ita.rvorwa.iui  taoi  uifi.  252 
olito,  Hpiritual  209 
Kliv;aronk(>va,  59 

ollipsia,  olliptio  diction  132,  235,  239, 
259,  419  f„  424 

iunotion  109,  151,  I5(HY.,  209,  224,  220, 

227,  229,  233,  234,  243,  259,  257,  25H, 
292 

oinphaniH  199.  232,  419 
enigma  (h(H'  alno  riddl(\a)  189,  240 
(aija.ml>nu\nt  174,  224 
omniUNratiouH  102f.,  142,  I80f.,  187,  239, 
291,  298,  301,  307,  329,  374,  415,  418 
opio(K)  21  n.,  34,  49,  125,  148,  159, 
180,  209,  215,  310,  355,  387  n. 
opilogno  187 

opiaodo  179,  180,  219,  379 

opithot  109,  108,  110,  191,  214,  223, 

228,  23111.,  410 
otpialixation  248 
oquivaloncoB  340,  399,  373 
orotic  poetry  151  f.,  200 

OHOtoric  doctriiu^  or  informat  ion  93,  133. 

142,  240,  292,  345,  353 
“ intor|>n4.ation. knowO'dgo,  apooulaf  ion 
(4c.  47,  54,  141,  242,  291,  319,  354, 
370,  399  m,  402,  405  m,  414,  423, 
424  IT. 

(^.(a'nity  of  tlu^  Vtula  7 m 
(4ymology  377,  387,  4M,  424,  431 
(HiluanoriMm  53 

otilogiHt(H),  tnilogy  70IT,.  74,  78,  HOf.,  83, 
87,  93,  104,  109,  109,  III,  140,  154. 
199,  171,  174,  179,  180,  189,  198,  200, 
211,  213,  239,  292,  274,  407 
oxactiituio  419,  420 
(^^xaggtu’aiion  128,  294 
oxogoaiH  (ancient)  17,  25,  32,  43,  45f,, 
397f,,  400 

extanplary  mytli  153.  381,  385 
oxormmn  83,  142,  147,  181,  278,  299, 
303 

exorditim  185,  189 

expiation  344,  349,  351,  394,  377.  430 
explicativ('<  narrativ(w  or  paanagi'H  397  f„ 
404,  411,  414 
expr(^Haiv(auw  259 

extiuwion  (of  nud-rical  nnita)  175,  1 87 
Eruanr-V^^lam  323  n, 

fal)leH  199 
fiury-iale  203 
falcon  120,  199,  202,  398 
family  hooka  9f,,  15.  131 


hymn  131.  1 91,  192 
■ i(*g('Tid  124' 

■ ■ lih'  3tUf. 
nnnu'M  123 
ritual  104 

Eatlu'ra  91, 97 f.,  112.  139.  430 
fi'mnh'  lignrea  94 
fhjura  229,  229  n. 

figurative  (ape^nOi  (Oc*)  244  f.,  251,  290, 
294 

final  pray  or  1 1 1 

- atair/.a  173,  175.  179.  180,  181,  183, 
185.  189,  187.  195,  2t)4,  224.  232,  245] 
259 

ilri'  2tl4 
■'  ritvH  204 

flxt'd  phrwu'H  221  f,,  379,  411 
fliwh Hindi  180,  393 
floating  vtn\scH  154,  275 
folklori^  4tK3 

formula(a).  hirmuliut'  dn*tion  28  n.,  30, 
97.  88.  109.  1 15.  127.  151,  194.  194.’ 
211.  212.  213,  221.  225.  231,  235.  238 
m.  25<l  n.,.  258.  278.  281.  323,  328. 
332 f.  345,  377,  379.  389,  397,  411, 
413,  415,  421  r. 
fount  Ihng  124 
Fount  of  5*out'h  394.  490 
fottr  271  to 

fragment  TO  m.  173  m,  179.  405,  408 
frtig(a).  fr(»g'hyiim  143,  199.  199,  205, 
215  m,  219,  244,  372 
Full  and  New  imton  Miiertfu’ea  328,  349, 
351,  352.  354.  355.  383,  398,  420 
functnm  of  epjiode^i,  narratiV(\B,  nt'iur/.aH 
397  f.  409 

funeral  textu  12,  139,  179.274.305,330, 
354.  430 

gamhifw,  gamldmg  80.  I49f,,  198,  205, 
217 

tfitmh  313  m,  315115.  318.  3I9f,,  321.  322 
(landharva,  gandharviia  9H,  203 f,  390, 
397  m 
(hmdhi  53 

(laugi'u  23.  31,  ,139*  354.  39 1 
iOunuJa  47 

r/5l/ul(f0  399,  4tl54’..  409 
tlaupftyamn^  208 
ptm^m  oynmi  344,  348.  350,  425 
<,hiyatrf  52.  98,  355 

metro  II,  I73  m,  I77,  182,  190, 
l9U3i3,  359,  372.  373,  374.  390,  398, 
402 


TiuU'X 


461 


Goldncns  K.  K.  57f..  (U.  140.  14«.  1«). 
168,  207 

KonoHWofiVCorptw.hyinnote.  176.  UUf.. 
374f..  3r>2f. 

g,HigmpI‘y  24  f..  31.  276.  301 
Gorman  olianuH  270,  284  n. 

...  poiitry  221 

goHt.nroH  4 1 2 

g/taria/xl/l”*  17 
ghoo  08  f. 
ahora  207 

Ghoffa  78,  123.  167.  1»H 
giutini<’  (piifwago)  300,  407 
Gobliila  321 

KOilH  40,  06,  07.  71.  74.  76.  80.  .86.  ,87. 
04ff.,  112.  114.  UOf..  12.6.  120.  131. 
132,  130,  142,  144.  140.  163.  164,  101. 
170. 177. 180. 108,  202. 231,  334.  30, Of.. 
300,  371.  380iT.,  300,  410,  417.  410, 
421.  422.  432 

Goldon  Gorm  (hoo  iUho  liimtiyagarbha) 

1 SB 

0<>pat»ha»Br*ihiium*i  SSth  357 

CJa^arya  12B 
Gatania  11, 

Govitulwwfimin  343,  343 
grahrftj-*bri%hmmm  4 1\0 
grdma  313 
GrEiuagaya(p\na)  313,  31 B 
graiaiatir,  gra*ianata'al  (fanat^)  IB3|  iII3, 
333,413 

ClniHHtUJUuu  I'l.  3B  lu,  57,  30 
GmHHH  ChT<4t(ii)  121.  133  n.,  174,  22U 

*)|I2 

gfhy<mUtm{^)  37,  43,  174,  270,  277  n,, 
2B4,  304,  331 
Griffith,  li.T.  H,  31 
graupiag«  af  aiataftiw  IBO 
Gfiwa'nawlaCi^)  0*  77,  105 
giu«i  2B0f, 

('hijarat  273,  337 
Gui^avi^pu  321  n. 
guru  43,  52 

I'lalilyudha  30 
handwork  245 
ha|dalagy  237 
llarifknyalra  304  0*. 

Ilariwvlinun  355 
hmrirtiiifM  352 
hiipw  2HB 

luwdingrt  (nuraculaiiii)  403 

hoai  (araativa)  402 

hatwan  290  f,,  402,  430,  431,  432 


lionxpn  and  Earth  105,  108,  240,  250, 
234,  370 

luaiathainm  04  tu,  108,  138,  214,  234, 
333 

llfuiry,  'V.  30 
luwhj  138,  100 
hi'ratvft('r,  iha  138f. 
harany  43 
lu'rai'H  04 

haraia  paaf^ry,  nagan  or  takw  125,  127, 
128,  150 

Hartal,  d;  20  n.,  205f. 

HaBiad,  252 

l\iar4dia  hyinim  20,  203 
■ '•  languag(\  213,  222 

t-^raditian  405 

Iligla^Ht  Principla  201  ff. 

Hindu  litaratura,  pariod  307,  308,  309 

Hiranyagarhha  78,  138 

Hiranyaka^in  337 

Hirapyiwt  upa  1 50 

hiatoriaal  paai.ry  128 

- rt'ality  114 

hiatoriaity  123,  414 

hiHtary  114,  123,  128'ff.,  331ff. 

Hatnar  221 

hatnaiatalautan  225,  250,  411 
hasnah»gatH>u  238 f.,  243fn  247,  248, 
3711.,  374 
Harnah.  l\  357 

haraa  133,  178  n.,  210,  252,  301  n. 

aacu’iflaa  323,  323,  329,  351,  354,  373 
}wtur  33.  82,  84,  89,  177,  201  f.,  260  n., 
323.  344,  346,  338,  415,  425 
Inunau  Baariftoa  202,  330,  351,  354,  395 
hvunaur  168,  200,  223,  247,  413 
hymn,  saa  Mia 
hypallagt^^  243 

hyparbola  213,  224,  228,  233 
hyparaharaotarization  228,  233 
hyMeron  proteron  238 

idaaliBitx  233 f. 

idrsntidcation,  identity  237,  242,  243,. 
244,  248  f.,  257,  258,  205,  209.  333„ 
335,  363,  370,  372f.,  424 
idtaitity  of  thoughts  215 
H5  (1#)  48,  104,  280  n.,  392 
ilhwtrativ<^  purposes  of  a narrative  or- 
stroplH^  307,  400,  407 
imagery  153,  133,  174,  193,  248ff.,  254,, 
233,208 

hnagas  180,  211,  214,  217,  228,  245f*,s, 
24BC,  252f.,  412 


452 


,1.  (tonda  ‘ Vadic  Llioraturo 


ooiixbiitation  of  2fK) 
iBiagitiatioii  254 
iitmiiobilisiu  21(1 

mxproeaiion  280,  SOI,  802 

iaxproviaaiioii  200  n, 
incantation  8S,  142,  144,  270.  2H0,  S40 
inccHt  152,  152,  S(i3b,  SBO,  4(^3 
incident  303 

incrciwing  l<aigth  or  pondt^nainncrtH  223  f. 
indirect  x^xprcwHion  c)f  tlioughtn  132 
Indo-Aryan  civiIir.Htion  20  f. 

- «Knrop<nui  (origina)  121,  174,  205,  221, 
222,  252,  270 

• -Iranian  174 

Indra  10,  (i7,  70,  78.  70,  80,  81,  85,  80. 
Of)  n.,  00,  07.  08,  100,  101,  104,  108. 
110,  in,  112,  113,  114,  ll5r„  117, 
118,  110,  120,  121,  124,  125,  127.  128, 
120,  130,  131,  132f.,  138,  143,  145, 
148,  140,  151,  152,  150,  lOl,  170,  170, 
177,  170,  180,  181,  182,  183,  185,  180, 
187,  101,  102,  105,  100,  100,  200,  201, 
205,  214,  215  n.,  210,  217,  218,  210, 
228,  233,  234,  235,  241,  243,  245.  240, 
247,  240,  250,  252,  258,  201,  203,  204. 
200,  271,  284,  285,  280,  302,  304,  314, 
,3355,  345 f,.  303,  3051.,  370,  375, 
387f.,  300,  307,  3085,  400,  401,  417, 
420,  432 

« -ambAgni  80,  103,  102,  100 

- -and“ll|*hattpati  182 
-and"3<ana  181,  301 

- -and-Viirnpa  80 
--  foHiival  307  n. 

IndrUp!  200 
InduB  23f.,  102 

oultnn^  24 
infallibility  40 
initial  pcaitinn  258 

- atanm  178f.,  185,E,  202 
inspiration  05IT„  73,  74,  81.  211,  212, 

242  n.,  240 

intercalation  (atHealae)  *Hptiri(ni«" . . .)  100 
inteipolations  13 
interpretation  370  ff, 
interrnption(B)  178.  187.  214,  421 
introdnetory  phriwt^  410 
invitation  101  IT..  170, 181,  185, 187.  210, 
230,  300 

invoeation  101  IT.,  170, 185, 222, 233, 230 

invnlnembility  403 

Iran  21,  222 

irony  1(18 

lSa-tJpani|(ad  330 


lalatn  3 

iHolate<l  aia.!r/:4xn  214 
iaosyllabiain  174 
f>/i*323.  351 
T A vara  2tH 

itihma  40.  125,  127,  145,  100,  200  n., 
207f.,  340,  350,  407,  408,  400.  410  in* 
■■■■  -pnrrunx  2tW.  407,  408 

JaiMibi,  fi.  21 

M/fgl  173.  175,  no.  177,  373,  308 
.laiminlyafB)  313.  3101.,  321,  322 
Jaiminlya-'Britbinapa  330,  347 IT.,  357 f,, 
300,  370,  404,  407,  421 

- -SairihdA  310.  310 

• ' -J^rauiiwuira  340 
■ '■  -lipani^iaMlrilbmana  431  f, 

Jainn'  40,  208.  200 

Janaka  353,  300,  370,  381,  402 

;Vi;?rt  82 
danltba  118 
Oatakmi  208  f. 

17 

jfhhmMniia  50 
jihtnmiikiA^  00 
jn^ttapt'iiahnn  23T.  247 
84 

Kailrtl  47.  308 
Kacgt.  A.  01 

Kak^vat  II,  77.  124,  127,  103 

kaia  201,  205 

Kali  124 

Killidibia  52 

kuijm  300.  310 

kal^)mU(m  350 

Kama  204 

tonyff/i  2H2,  323.  351 
Mf}{ia  272,  325 
Kapdilnukrama  325  n. 

Kapva(B)  II,  30,  40.  77.  128,  328.  331, 
337.  352.  354 

Kat^xvlyadirahinapa  331,  352 
KapiitbaladlCathiw)  324,  327.  330  in, 
337 

-Bandiita  327 
^<1ra‘<l*300 
kmrfmm.  307 
kummmlhMfm  340 
Mm  71 

Ktwhinir  272  in.  275,  320,  337 
Ki^yapii  77.  284 

Kii||ia(w|  30,  324,  32tlf..  337,  350.  430 
Katha*  Arapyaka  430 


Index 


463 


Kil,t,haka»l'^rahtnin)a  35 1 

»(Bainhitri),  Kfit’kakan'i  324,  32Bf.» 

Katyr^yana.  35,  331 
.^Jrautaauira.  35,  331 
Kauntharavya*  428 
Kau^ika  27(K  278,  285.  281>,  307,  308 

: «8uira  151,  200  u.,  270,  278,  20U  304, 

310 

Kaufitakl*  KatifltakiiiH  45,  HO,  42H 
Ivanaftaki-Brkhinana  330,  344,  340 f., 
355,  357  f„  300,  303,  405,  420 
- -Upaiu^ad  42H 

Kauilmnaw  313,  318,  3U),  320,  321,  322, 
347,  348 

Kauthimia-Bainluia  313 
Kautna  40  n. 

Kava^a  Aihl^a  70 
tea  71 
kdvy^i  52 

K(4i.h,  A.  50,  207fM  332,  340,  357f. 
Kena*llpainfjwl  431 
kmnimj  235,  252 
Kerala  310,  321,  342 
Ke^ava  (eenuiKaitml  \ipan  t4ie  Kavt^ika* 
Buira)  20il,  201  n. 
k(\4in  140 

Khfliu,liklya(«)  324 

khila  350',,  88,  104.  313  n„  320,  330,  308 
.(mMkrmnafil  35 
Khilagrantha  35 

king(a)  04,  132,  154,  170  n.,  171,  101, 
2850,  203,  300,  305,  372,  403,  404, 
400,  407,  422 
kingahip  07 

ImowliHlge  307,  3720,  377,  385.  301, 
300,  402,  412,  422 
Ki)«ala(a)  330 
kranmfi^thu  1 7 
Ki-f^pa  118,  218 

-yajnrveda  324,  332 
.yajtir\aHla»aainlniil  320 
kf(Ump  kfairii^a  24.  405  n. 

Knlin*  A.  121 

Ktiiper,  F.  Ik  J.  80  in,  120  tu 
Kninhakonain  321 
Kunt,apa  35,  304 
Kundcfeira  330 

K\mi4%^mm  31,  330,  358,  301 
Kutea  M,  78,  115,  125,  100,  401 

Laba  Anulra  140 
laditwOkta  140,  100 
labiwr  mni$u  107,  100 


'LaagloiB,  A.  00 

langnage  104,  171,  211,  354,  358,  410 
layunan,  R,  58 

logend(H)  50.  57.  50  n.,  08,  123ff.,  131, 
140,  210,  240,  243,  27b  332,  347,  351, 
355,  358,  301,  384,  303,  304f.,  403, 
404,  407.  411,  424,  432 
Ivgmil  H|iell  145,  140,  202,  210 
L5vi,  B.’20r> 

lila>raii<:>n  (from  thi«  world)  200,  202, 
200' 

life  104 

Hfotina^  280,  280,  307,  401 

light.  08,  00.  157,  104,  242,  252 

Hglttnitig  1(U,  303 

liiiga  72,  83,  132 

litany  80,  110,  179,  331,  425 

literary  gonrea  404ff.,  408  n.,  409 

--  merit  212,  215,  342 

^ proprietorship  104 

--  researoli  4f, 

litotes  224  n. 

liturgy  11.  16,  10,  36,  86,  102,  177  n., 
100,  103,  207,  304,  323,  348,  369 
bolu'ngriti  204 
Mu  202.  367 
Lopiltmulr5  145,  202 
h»ve  151  f.,  153,  202ff.,  254,  404 
283 f.,  300 
•■■■'  magic  151 
Ludwig,  A,  57,  60 
lyrics  1561L,  211  n.,  217  n. 

Maedonell,  A.  A.  60,  62  n,,  182 
Mildhava  40,  41 
MEdhavabhatb^  41 
Madhyadeia  336 f.,  361 
Mlidhyaipdina(s),  Mtldhyamdinlya  17, 
328,  331,  337,  350ff.,  354,  430 
MadliyamdinHyima  331 
Magadha(8)  336 
Mlgha  52 
mughamn  170 

magic,  magical  texts  82, 103, 142  ff.,  205, 
257,  273,  274,  277ff.,  285,  292,  296, 
298ffn  301,  308,  315  m,  334,  378,  383 
MahEbhtlrata  31,  33,  47,  48, 49, 127,  207 
MahE-llrtllimapa  347 
Mahadeva  31 

Mahaitaroya-XJptmii^ul  426 
MahanrmmlB  37  n.,  317,  426 
Mahanartlyaj^,a-Upam^,i.a  429 
Mahavrata  427,  428 
Mahidto  337 


454 


J\  (fouda  * 


Aitari^ya  344 
M:aliidhara  331 

MaiinlyaTu-Sarnhiia  337 » 332,  334 
Mait.rayan!ya(H)  30,  324,  337,  350 
M'aiirEyanlya- Ara^tyaka  430  n. 

Mlltiava  327 
Malal'jar  32 ! 

M'alayalatii  45 
inalodi(4.i<>n  1 12  f. 

77 

Mrwiava{H)  324,  327 
mandala  8 IT.,  20,  27,  35 
M^liukoya  Itk  420,  42H 
mmmd  00,  07,  71 
mannum  72 
manihi  42S 

mmitra(B)  B n.,  10,  30,  33,  35  tu,  30 f„ 
43,  45,  40,  50,  51.  52,  53,  54,  72,  70, 
83,  84,  80,  87,  88,  80,  01,  115,  144, 
104,  213  n.,  222,  230,  230,  257,  274, 
275,  200,  305,  320,  323,  324,  3251T., 
332f.,  330,  340,  345.  350 f*,  355,  308. 
300,  405,  400,  410,  410,  422,  424. 
420  f,,  430 

Maaira-Bnlhiaana  347  lu 
Matm  48,  114,  115.  120,  301  f,,  422 
MaivtdH  aawiik'o  301  lu,  422 
luaiumaripln  18  a, 

Mimyn  20,  78,  04  xu 
taamagtN  115,  283,  301  f. 

MamtH  00,  07,  101,  110,  121,  124.  125, 
120,  148,  157,  no,  102,  200.  205, 
213  n.,  217,  218,  210,  243,  247,  251, 
253,  255,  202,  288,  330 
Mfitarij^vau  117,  121 
nmtJm  32  n. 

MEihava  422 
tnati  7 If. 

maxiim  153f.,  412  f. 
mdyd  no 

ModliElithi  77,  127,  128 
laodical  cihaniw  27811, 
xncKlicinal  plaiitw  (mn^  uIho  lan’bn)  10 
mcKliiaiion  430 

inaladios  170  a.,  »314ff,,  318,  321  f, 

204 

inoiaorial  Hiair/4!u^  407 
ya<atun’ii?;al4oi'i  15 
ijaaiial  01 

xa<4^ali'lairgi<tal  Hpa<ndidif»^i  200 
nw^taraorpluwii  403,  412 
ttu^aphor  132.  137,  140.  151,  157,  100. 
107,  216,  241,  243,  245,  248,  240.  250, 
251,  253,  204,  205,  208 


maiaphyHicH  130,  202 
moi,ariit«diMin  423,  424 
n\a<<<wy!ny  240 

inniro(fd,  luairic'al  nalaanoH,  motnun  14, 
15.  27,  74,  171,  I7:irr*,  IH7,  180,  lOl, 
103,  100.  210,  221.  223,  275,  200f.  tu, 
304,  307,  321.  340,  300,  37 If.,  373, 
300,  431 

nvolTa'al  aanipo;aii»>nM  405 

■ vaHalicatM  175 
Mltnaipaa  30',  40',  50 
tniraoloH  125,  120,  140  n. 

Mil'ra  07,  00,  100,  107,  143,  153,  182, 
10 1.  240,  204,  401 

:Varupa  111,  125,  132,  170,  181,  180, 
222,  223,  245.  38tl 
Miiraviada  «ai'ri0t'a  401 
tnixtHi  <annp«miti*>n  {prono  and 
200iT.,  300.  407 
ninonu>ni<^  phrananlagy  420 
mnnimu  130 

naninlogua  140,  I08f.,  205,  217 
inunuihaiinn  138 

mimnUmy  182,  211.  214,  208,  305, 
300  n.,'4I0r. 

■na>un  300 
*tunmr  no,  152 

tuomlmin.  ntaralaOtr-  hyinna  or  fd-an'/.an 
147,  I52ir„  304,  407 
nvuraln  303  f. 
nuauing  hyinnii  105  n, 
nudif  13.  03.  00.  124,  170,  lOOf,,  215, 
402  fT. 

nu>iivaianii  380.  3H1.  3H0,  400,  407,  418, 
410*  421 
Mriy^^  '107 
Mndgala  130.  100 

5iailrr.  51.  H in.  22*  55  u..  50,  121.  204 
innmr  2'05.  314,  310,  4ii5 
xuyiitt^rim  133f,,  2021.,  383 
niyist.ary  |0ayfi  205 

tnyHliriatn  141,  211,  214*  240.  274.  340, 
423 

niythiral  avtmia  idl  04.  184 

V^xainpla  HO,  370 

■ fart,  183 

■ fignra  183 

narmtivaii  nr  123.  241, 

335*  341*  345.  348*  358  a..  350,  304, 
387.  404.  411.  414.  421.  432 
" ptwii  114.  117,  183*  385 
■ priHlarrawitra  tlH 
mality  114*  117 

ilmnm  110*  380.  400,  402f,.  432 


455 


myihologiea'l  rtllurtioim  liU 
— 242 

iityUm,  itiivihology  5B,  57,  00  n*,  04,  08, 
‘n4iT.,  210,  240,  241,  242,  257,  204, 
202,  554,  584  IT.,  401,  422,  451,  452 
and  hini-orv  I20f. 

NIU’ikol'a  (NiM’IUtdiiM')  liro  ,55 1 
;N<unl«4-nH  5tn  n.,  507 
mugamn  52 
Naigoy^w  517  n, 

Naigluint'^ika  hIhu'  Nighiin^.u)  52,  40 

,Mairha-Htya.in  57 

nnlrttkiu  40 

Kaki^at ru.kalpa  508  n. 

>)iakmitre^t i 551 
Nainlnuliri  44  f,.  520,  521 
uatiu'(H)  102,  105,  144,  251  f,,  245,  247, 
501,  520,  540,  577,  578,  414,  421 
nainoH  t>f  hyiuna  8 n.  f, 

Naintan  117,  11 8,  505,  587 
Kilrada  208  n.,  508,  500 
'NarkHanaia  104 
400 

Nanaadk  270,  557 
tuvrrniiva  Uioraittn^  208 

pa-HHu-gart  or  f^piaudau  200,  200  a..  214, 
215,  210,  548,  552,  505,  58411'.,  404, 
400,  417,  421) 

pot't.ry»  thonu^  120.  128,  207,  407 
natural  phtauuuuna  155.  140,  101,  217, 
254,  584,  585,  40,5 
naiurn  05,  04.  101  IT,,  257,  208,  502 
7i(indhma  5 1 7 
'Noma  70 
Now  Ynar  104 
NidanaHutra  521 
Nighapt-u  27,  52 
Niglit  127,  1020.,  181 
nimUt  541 
nirnkia  72 

Nirukia,  5215,  40.  57H 
nUkrmbju  imtm.  427 
7drld(m}  50,  88,  102.  lOOf. 
ladaliiy  70,  100,  177 
Nodhaa  IL  202 

non 'Aryan  inOunnnaa^  t.hanu'H  ,120|  125, 
120,  Vl2,  200,  502 

notuiauljariivi'  wnddnatitam  22  L 254r., 

250 

numarala  155  in,  415 
numariral  taaianpia  2010.,  500 
' riingrunniai  574  in 
Htatninania  155 


HyinhuliHin  575,  425 
' ' valuaH  177  n. 
nuptial  hymn  01 
iiyagroiiha  245 

ohjpcdion  580 
ohHronitO'H  504 
nhw'uriiy  212,  214,  240,  250 
odmia  270 
Oartnl,  11.  558,  500 
(Igdvanin,  B.  L,  80  in 
Oldanhnrg,  H,  15,  27,  57,  58,  01,  02  n., 
200 IT.,  214,  542 

ornixMi  285,  507 f.,  550,  502  n.,  428 
oinniHri'nnrn  07,  505 
Oius  thn  150f. 
npiiuual  ritea  210 

oral  i'spla.nati<ni  or  instruction  209  n., 
504  in,  515 

reproduction,  inst? ruction,  tradition 
'or  tranmuission  5,  15,  20,  20,  54,  45, 
100,  110,  120,  128,  150,  174,  200,  221, 
250,  270  in,  520,  408,  410,  410,  410 
Order  {HOC  also  l,ita)  07,  71,  72,  250,  204, 
504 

order  of  Mi-air/.aH  88,  545  in 
of  mlktm  528  in 
of  words  250,  500 

origins  151,  541,  5B4iT.,  501,  500,  450 
Orissa  208,  270,  557  in 
oxymoron  247,  205  n. 

/kMii  175,  175f.,  185,  180,  105,  194,  105, 
100,  107,  225,  225,  228,  220,  250, 
575 

^imdapatha  lOf.,  20  n.,  55,  37,  138,  272, 
275,  504  in,  500,  525,  327,  331 
pmiantobha  310 
puddhuti  310,  347 

Paippahlda  (Atharvaveda),  BaippaUl- 
dins  138  n.,  208,  272fT.,  285,  287  n„ 
200,  305  xn,  300,  308,  300,  310,  356 
|)air  concepts  375 
Faithfnasi  310 
IkitilcTdacaxu^a  428 
PaEcanitrins  40 

Tkulcavix|iAa“Bi€hmapa  41,  318,  339, 
547 IT,,  557,  500,  420 
panegyrics  52 

Papi(H)  07,  140,  180,  201,  390  xn 
lllpini  18,  500 
pantheon,  boo  gods 
para! lies  154,  245 f. 
paraxlox  205 


466 


J.  Goudu  • Vodii' 


pamildinm  180,  216,  22G  222,  223,  224, 
220,  232,  233,  241,  2431\,  261,  268. 
208,  200,  300,  332,  376,  414,  416 
paraphraBii(‘-  oxprt'BHion  132,  262 
iPai'Mara  11 
i’MniHkaniip  30 
para  tax  IB  410 
pan^ntlioHiH  238 f„  421 
paridh&ntyd  106  n. 
pdriplava  dkhpdna  400,  41 6f, 
parUkta  31,  310  a.,  327  a.,  331 
Pari^iv^piH  af  ila^  Aiha.rvtiv<'da  307  IT. 

t>f  tlia  Maitrayanl«8atnhit.E  327  ti. 
Parjaaya  106,  107,  108^  111,  103,  214, 
216  a.,  262 
parody  143 

pai'oaoaawia  224 it.,  228,  441 
Paruecliopa  1 1 
parvan  408,  400 
parpdpasukta  272,  306 
passion  284 
I^iynpataH  46 
l:‘6d.afijali  321 
patl'ioii(^  |,>a«Hag<^H  224 
Sviisti  270 

patrons  70,  86,  04,  111,  117,  170,  171, 
203,  407 

*pm(^tiku  277,  282 
parson  aa<l  non-porsou  244 f. 
'porHonillcatiou*  04  a,,  08,  108,  300 
philosop'hioal  tlortrinos,  t^pisodas, 
thought  134,  138,  274,  277,  201,  206, 
383,  404,  423 

plmwcHdogy  112,  167,  103,  212.  213, 
243,  262,  260,  208,  200,  413 
PhulhssCitra  321 
pictorial  expression  217 
pillar  of  creation  201,  204 
Pippahlda,  Pippaltldi  272,  270,  300 
Piprn  128 

l^ischel,  R.  67f.,  207 
pitarm  330 
pUffnedha  430 
plants  108 

play  on  words  228,  240  f. 
pleorwiHin  223  f. 
pcH)tieal  excsalleaf^o  210  f 
potdac^  convtaitioi^s  260 
liman^e  240 
ptxviies  62  n. 
polemics  341 
political  hackgrotind  130 
polysomy  240 
popular  iityiia)logy  226  a. 


lliadtastu  2<I0 
' hyams  or  2Hf.,  211 

litend^ara  410 

^ rii=»'s  144,  308,  370,  426 
spaach  26tl 

■■■*  tala,  thain<\  ti'aditiinn  308,  400,  403 
ptwdiva  and  n('gidiva  f'X|>ra.HHiou  or  idea 
i'otalha(sl  223,  23tl 

post.>RgV(Hijc  Id.aratara  or  nina.l  12tlf 
134,  300 

past“Vadi(^  liloratara  or  period  164, 
260  m,  261  la,  204 f.,  307,  310,  30i' 
300,  402,  40H 
PotK'ha,  l\  28 
1 Vftdh varfy lilm  37 
pmpmha  11,  177,  TOO,  3l3f. 
pmim  88 
pmifmMim  3ti 

praise  71,  03.  1 06 IT.,  1086.,  114,  123, 
128.  130.  171,  180*  304,  373  n. 
PrajEpati  137,  138.  201.  203.  204,  206, 
330,  336,  363.  300,  308,  373,  374,  384, 
3H0,  3H8,  3H0f.,  408.  4t)I.'402,  403^ 
416.  420.  431.  432 
pnItHi  206,  420 
prd tp*lpmh(dm  428 
I Vaaava  - 1 1 lamifaii  366 
272,  314 

Pntt^tia- Upiua^^ad  206 
prmtttm  432 
pmUhttm  423 

pmMa,  pmiUrna  346  n.,  362,  308 
pnUirmt  376  a, 

prmiMhpt${n}  17,  272.  3tHh  321.  326, 
331 

Praadha^ BrOhinana  347 
pmllifuJmirm  8tl.  101 
pmmm  77 

prmmrgpfi  324,  330,  364.  430 
pmpdju  104 

prdpiiJtdm  200,  283,  317,  320 
prayer  1 08 IT.,  123,  102,  100,  170,  186, 
IHO,  187,  108,  211,  213,  210.  222,  226, 
231.  202,  280f.,  30fk  3:01 
pmpugm  43 
pregiamay  420 
prehisterie  mytlw  id-c,  I20f 
pre verbs  237 
pHimtiveness  211 

‘primitive'  tioinafien  70,  2tK1,  277  m 
prinairitiid  nets  tw  time  137,  107 
prcaligies  I III  in,  117,  134 
profane  literature  406 
prugtmuiii^  {ntes.  texOi}  283,  280,  202 


Indox 


457 


prolopsis  417 

ProinotlioUB  121 

proBo  110,  200,  210  n.,  222,  27:i,  280, 
281  11.,  280,  205,  305,  332,  330  tT.,  350, 
384 

proHporily  282,  288 
protiotyport  115 

proverbial  iihruHoH  or  Hayin^H  154,  100, 
258 

prtyiOiolopjy  of  iho  poi^tn  and  ihoir  por- 
" 'HonagoB'75,  154 
pun  220,  240,  377 

P''imarabhi^cka  372 

punarmrtpii  258,  200 f.,  430 
Punjab  23,  27  lu,  330.  337 
Puratndhi  08 

pwnlna(B),  puranii^  Biylo  oto.  21  n.,  28, 
34*  30,  48,  40,  51,  50,  130,  207,  200, 
307,  308,  300,  310,  313,  324,  407, 
408,  400 

purification  287.  430 
purohita  10  n.,  80,  131.  101,  200,  285, 
201,307 

pimmwm  30,  88 
Pununflha  120 

PururavaH  48,  151,  203  P.  208,  408 
l>uruH  110 

Pnnu?a  137,  201.  200,  380.  420.  431 
hymn  51.  137  f,,  202.  330,  430  lu 
purw(wiedfm  (mH>  alnn  human  Hacrilicc) 
330 

l^uru^a-Prajilpati  373 
Purva-MiinrunHil  31,  40 
Purvilrcika  3i4  ff. 

Pu^an  80,  07,  115.  180.  102,  333 
Pujjipamltra  318,  321 

quartcrB  of  tlu^  univt^rBc  281,  300,  300, 
371 

quoHti(m(«)  133,  202,  303  f.,  381,  418 
quoBtion  and  anHW<u*  100  m,  202  n.,  304, 
370,  382,  417,  420 
quotation  108,  300,  407,  411,  413  n. 

raccB  80f..  107,  245.  251,  254,  340 

Kadhakrinlinan,  B.  54 

rahmya  3 IB,  353.  428 

rain  c4iarn\  or  m2kia  80,  143,  103,  205 

Hlljaj^<4ihara  52  n. 

ntjmilya  280,  320 

Kfiintlnuja  50 

EHintlyapa  400 

EilrulyanlyaH  318f.,  347 

rma  205,  310 


Eatahavya  70 
nUhmptara  315 
Rathaviti  Darbhya  120  f. 

Katri  102 
IJbhus  00,  117,  180 

rc  (rg)  8,  30,  313f.,  316,  320,  321,  326, 
345,  375,  388,  405,  431,  432 
fcaA'a(H)  320 
Et4>lia  124  n. 

recapitulation  178.  180,  216 
recap itulative  con<*.attmation  410 
n^<stmHionB  of  the  lJ*gvoda  8f. 
recitative  177 

reciters,  recitation  of  the  Veda  43  f.,  71, 
74,  81  f.,  S3,  80,  159,  187,  221 
recurrence  of  the  same  word  183 
rcctirront  pln^asoology  419 
redactor(B)  15f.,  191,  221,  344,  346 
refrain  142,  159,  107,  187,  194,  195f., 
199,  302,  304 
regions,  see  quarters 
reiteration  114 
rejuvetxation  124,  393,  400 
nOigion,  Indian  Iff, 
nOigious  poetry  (in  general)  222 
remedial  charnxs  278 ff. 
remnatit  290 
rc^mote  p^tat  183,  392 
renewal  292,  395 
Eenou,  L,  5Sf.,  01,  84,  349 
repeated  stanssae  194f, 
repetition  106,  107,  178,  186,  187,  193, 
2241,  227,  2281,  3001,  310,  376,  411, 
414,  415,  4161 

- (extended)  228 

- (internal)  228 

- (interrupted  , , . of  words)  175  n. 
repetitious  stylo  418 

repetitive  concentration  2271 
rmpomio  225 
retardation  422  n. 

IJgarthadIpikil  41 
!]^g(veda)-pr§<tM5.khya  171,  309 
]&gveda-(Samhit§)  2,  7ff,  etc.,  269,  272, 
273,  275,  277,  288,  294,  295,  296, 
297  n.,  299, 304, 305, 310, 3131, 315  n., 
319.  324,  326,  327,  328,  330,  331,  336, 
339,  344,  345,  3501,  360,  368,  369, 
384,  387,  3951,  399,  400,  401,  405, 
425,  426,  429,  430 
l^gvidhUna  371,  S3,  210  n. 
rhetoric  248  n.,  255  n. 
rhetorical  features  212 
rhyme  224,  225,  411 


458 


J.  Gnuda  • Vrdic 


rhyilmi  1()7 

ri(H>  dinh  Ra.crili(‘<^  "2*7 i),  205 

riddl(4«)  80,  limW,  130,  102,  201,  W4. 

331,  382,  403 
riddlo  132,  383 

rik'H,  riiuid  43 f.,  45,  400.,  53,  83 it.,  115, 
123,  133,  134,  137,  140,  142,  147,  148, 
104,  107,  177,  2<Kn,  210,  251,  274,  277, 
283,  28811'.,  203,  200,  321,  3231'., 
33011,  302,  304,  305,  378,  380,  382. 
304,  3070.,  423 
ritual  a|>plicai-i(ai  200 
--  drama.  205 
• Hta.U7.u  400 

ritunliatic  oltnia'ida,  iidrrprolatiun, 
Hpluvrn  (do,  242,  308 IT.,  382,  383,  384. 
387,  380,  308,  418,  423 
ritualiatH  831T.,  345,  308iT.,  401,  405,  410 
rivalry  Hi 

rivcn'H  125,  140,  201,  252 
^Ijii^vau  128 
13.kiatvt.ra  321 
K(Kdi<n%  L.  200 
liudani  247 

Kuluia  203,  302,  303.  300 
Kuila  li.  (von)  50f.,  01.  275,  300 
Itoy,  liammahuu  54 
n»yal  o(aiH«'ora,tlun  {im^  ulau 
323  ti.,  320,  344,  350,  374,  304  f. 
ritvH  308,  382 

rm{H)  Of.,  30,  34,  05 T,  08,  70,  7I,  74. 
70,  77,  80,  80.  20I,  245,  240,  250,  25I. 
207,  310,  321,  345,  355,  300,  387.  4<M, 
411,  422 

I3.ta  (HiHs  iilm  Ordvr)  OO,  71,  72,  70,  07. 
00,  140 

ftugrafm  14,  82,  101 

;Eudra04f.,  100.  108,  120  u.,  157,  177. 

228,  231,  278,  307,  320 
r€ifu  375,  401 
rU/paka  205 
KuilamaH  117 

Sabhapatfi  320 
wacrad,  ilu^  244 

HaariH<H^(H)  80,  84,  108.  115.  171,  185. 
204.  281,  283,  308,  315,  330,  341,  302, 
370.  380,  300.  307,  401,  404 
wua’ifUaa'  al«u  iiajmmlmt)  80,  104, 
130,  142,  171.  270,  201, 320.  371,  380. 
300,  410 

aaarilitual  IturHu  130 
8a<Uln!rll  422 

Ba(,lguruAi§ya  40,  145,  342,  340,  408 


Sadviiu/airBriilmynyi  330,  340 f. 
aaga(ai  118  lu,  I25f..  127,  128,  20Ta  421 
aag(d^)  71,  125 
mh mrai  i n 5 a i 3 5 1 » 
tSilknla  44 

Bitkalya  in.  181*.,  35,  37,  420 
.<dkh(1  in  u..  20,  30r,  45  a.,  83,  272,  318 
310,  323,  327 

fidman  8,  70,  177,  313.  314  f.,  310,  317, 
320,  321,  348,  340,  371,  375,  378,  388', 
300,  307,  400.  4td.  122.  425.  431 
Bftiunpriit  laOkhya  32 1 
Haumvada  H,  41,  liOl,  100.  200.  310, 
3130'..  3470,  420,  431 
Samav'c'iliir,M(\vadipa  32 1 
Hatttavada-Hiirv/untkriunanf  321  u. 
Maiuavui!}fluai‘ Hrahiufiua.)  38,  315  it.^ 
320 

J^auvbara  115,  120,  131,  102 
Haiudiiya  402 

mtrnhimdi)  8.  12,  10  n..  TO,  2fk  22,  20,  31, 
35,  30,  30,  00  It,,  72.  78,  IHO,  200,  273. 
310,  313.  314,  323,  32.»,  334,  330.  342, 
350.  3il8,  4!t4.  405.  407,  408,  424,  428 
fitifphfhlptifhti  17,  272 
Hattthdfv  rpantfiad,  Naitdiit(d’ani?(i«l320, 
420 

30  f. 

Mftnpwi  371  II, 

43 

Baiima  108 
dtt.ffml  341 
fmmukdm  284 
.yi'iwaOdii  lO'O 
.'^atujdyii  337.  353  4. 

Bitiiknra  42*/ 

SaOkbayiiiia  10,  3i4.  32,  45.  347  n.,  427f, 
..^ranyidut  42711, 
dlrahmana  330,  3401. 

.-'Urbyaautra  42H 
'Amtitfiatdm  427 
BnuukrO  3 ft.  35t» 

Mnta.  207 
Hiudnnu  80 
MnH  102,  277 
Sftidikalpa  3ti8  n. 

$%arii  125 

Hariituil  MO,  2o|,  300  n. 

Hariinyii  1 1 01*, 

Ham.nvafl  23,  24  ii  , 07.  104.  102,  245, 
207.  330.  371  u..  387,  422 
aiuraaiii  1011,  413 
374  ir 
330,  354 


451) 


3Ik  l^k  *^*U 

MMru(\H)  10!k  lUl  lOlk  :Milk  425.  425 
mt  Kkk  'il)2 

6ata.,pat<hiV‘l'^rahnama  20:if..  2i)8,  275. 
528.  321)  n..  332.  331),  341.  351  IT.,  355. 
357 r.,  350,  351,  353,  355 f.,  375,  3H2, 
388,  410,  420 
^Saianidriya  321) 

Haiiro  130,  151),  200 
100 

l!?iairi  170 
Mra  317,  324 

^^at^yri5'atuv4lrllluiama  340,  355 
ilt-y ay a,i laki u t \ 34 0 
t^utyilyaui  340 

t^aiiaaka,  {af.  272  n.  3)  H,  34,  35,  37, 
145,  200,  272,  427 

J^aunaldya  250  tu.  27211.,  283,  285,  287. 

295,  305,  300,  355 
Satipurpa  hyiutiH  37 
v4a\ir5{^t’^'a  275 

muiVitffifiHl  320,  330,  3501.,  30H  u.,  309 
mim  270,*  200,  201.  351 

mmtfHt  280 

200 

tSiuninr  52,  58,  91,  00,  158,  UO.  1,39. 
147.  153  n.,  201,  217.  210.  225,  235, 
245,  255.  333.  418 
BEvil-ra  llrapliua'  402 
Havitri  52,  5H.  355 
4,lptvui,«ail  355 
Savya  U 

mmxm  8 n,.  31.  35,  37,  40, 411',,  57.  58  ta, 
ilO.  51.  H3.  H5.  124.  127.  200,  20H, 
252.  25H  la.  277.  310,  320.  325.  331. 
34217.  344,  345,  347.  340.  408,  423, 
427 

HtOannalta  tMaialruaiinn  414 
hcIuhOh  (Vadia)  25 IT. 

Sclmvadar,  L,  von  50.  205 
rtcianvi^  352  f , 

Hoert'i  403 

Boeular  iivinuH  or  po(4;ry  93  ia>  157, 
405  la  ' 

aaar{M)  555,  78.  125.  291 
.SVf/fii  277 
HolfowldroHH  252 
Homaniio  tlilTorianaHi  219 
Boiniiiio  (origin)  392 
maiiontiiHtrt  piioiry  154 
mdting  400(7 
Hfw<'n  251.  374  la 
Hovoniotni  374 
aoxuaU*/<ation  413 


Biog.  K,  33  la,  58  la,  125  i:a 
Hi!niilari(i<H4  103 

Hiiuila  23  la,  151,  155,  157,  214,  235, 
237,  23Hf.,  25217,  254 ff.,  254,  412 
Hitnik'B  (atHnnnuladion  of)  25817 

- (aiuplifitadion  i>f)  250 

am  U5.  153,  283,  289,  35311,  388,  305 

Hnalim  152,  181 

Biva.  l^ivainm  51,  307,  423  la 

^kmnhlm  201,  204 

HkaiidaHvfiiuin  40.  355 

,<7ffa  245  ta,  255  n, 

.4hka  175  n„  307,  405  la,  405117 
mn/irUt  Hlta'ainro  83 
^mf(i  34.  45  la,  48,  310 
Hnako  155 

Booia!  oliiBHOB  24f,.  29,  177,  285,  344  n., 
351 

ronnoiotiHnoHH  130 
■ - lifo  157.  254  n.,  257 
Booioiy  93.  121  f. 

Bokannity  213.  223 

Bonia.  mmm^  mmu  aarrilioo  11,  47,  57, 
59.  83.  85,  87,  89,  90,  95,  98,  99,  101, 
no,  115,  no,  120,  121,  124,  127,  143, 
145.  M5,  1495,  155,  157,  155,  157, 
158.  159,  no.  177,  179,  IHl,  185,  192, 
199.  202.  214,  218,  235,  237,  242,  243, 
244,  248,  249,  250.  252,  253.  255f,, 
253,  259.  270,  289,  290,  304,  314,  317, 
318.  323,  328,  329,  333,  335,  344, 
345f.,  348,  349,  352,  355,  359,  359, 
371,  387.  390.  391  n.,  39Bf.,  425 
onnlrOu^an  219 

hynma  (woo  ako  Soma)  156,  157,  ISO, 
182,  215  ra 

^nma  papmndna  11,  89,  215  n,,  215 
Hong,  kongB*  75,  177 
Horot^ry  280  f.,  292 
Hoiw-ond'^ndti  237 

npoculativo  liymne  12,  13,  13611.,  139, 
288  ff.,  292 

- (litioratnro.  paaeages,  texts,  thoriglit) 
177,  211,  305,  306,  330,  339,  371,  384, 
407,  424 

H|KXH:?h  (see  ako  Vao)  69 ff.,  135,  292,  390, 
401,  419 
aped  112,  192 

- atanssa  186 

Hpirittial  intorpwdation  371 
lifo  257 

kpinacms'  (additional)  passages  29  n., 
138,  152,  171,  191  n. 

Sraddha  94 


460 


J.  Gouda  • Yedic  Liica’atriiro 


Mlddha  91,  308 
-brdhamana  430 
^rmita  liioratuin'i  83,  280,  282  f. 
ritoB  or  sacnficoB  51,  82,  14'8,  208, 
270 f.,  286,  288,  289  f.,  314,  334,  339, 
348,  371 

i^raiiUxsut'rm  37,  270,  331 
imvariaphala  39 6 
Sri  36,  78,  401 
Sriafikta  36,  51,  78 
^^rotripa  341 

MM  34,  46  n„  310,  320 
stanza  Btruciuro  159,  173fr. 
statomont  of  factn  414 
sterootypod  paasagoB,  phrasoB  oto.  Ill, 
182,  212,  214,  415f.,  417 
stobha  316,  400 

atonoB  for  pressing  out  the  mma  89 
story  in  illustration  of  an  opinion  380 
mra(B)  52,  315,  318,  420 
MrlkarmdfM  ^^63  f. 
atrophic  stnu'-turo  212 
structure  (of  hynuiH,  pasHagOB  etc.) 
173ff.,  212,  298ff.,  410,  421 

- of  a stanza  1 73 IT.,  233 

study  of  the  Veda  43f.,  287,  354,  362, 
364,  430 
mu  93,  108 

style  13,  171,  176,  189,  191,  194,  198, 
21  Iff.,  298,  348,  354,  358,  405,  4l0ir., 
424 

““  (simplicity  of)  164 
stylistic  device  175 

- interdependetu'.e  215 

- significance  254 
““  variation  219 
SubrahmapyE  127,  349 
succession  of  pluwes  419 
successive  liymns  13 

stanzas  180 
succinctness  240,  420 
BmlU  128f.,  182 
Mdra  25 
SukanyS,  393 

Suklayajurveda,  also  Whitts  Yajur- 
viKla  324  m,  325  m,  327,  332 
mikrrn  292 

mlkM  Sff.,  13,  35,  68,  69,  70,  77,  78,  82, 
83,  86,  87,  91,  93,  98  <d,4i. 
mkku  (lengtli  of)  173 
Sim  (see  also  BClrya)  274,  293,  303,  305, 
330 

Simal'iiepa  SI,  393,  394 ff.,  404,  406, 
422  m 


Suparnadhyaya  (Supimiakhvana) 

206 


47, 


supernat-um.U  the  162,  396f. 
suporposiGen  (Hemaniii')  242 
Hupphmuuit  35  f.,  188,  215,  330,  345,  340 
350 

Surya  68,  157,  161,  182,  192,  220,  333 
Silrya  91,  115,  305 
SuryuBukt-a  115,  304 
Su.Bim  114,  117,  125,  247 
mm{B)  8,  19,  22  f.,  30,  35.  39,  58,  84 
89,  185,  210,  269f . 290,  293,  306,  307' 
309,  310,  318,  320,  321,  323,  337,' 
339  m,  341,  350,  356,  359,  369  n.,  420^ 
424,  427,  430 


mHldhtplpa  (recit-atien  of  ilw  Veda  to 
onoBolf)  43 
Svaidayana  383 
Bvanaya  127 
Bvarblulnu  131 
mwgaudmm  290 
Svetaketu  366 
Sya.%uiava  126,  127,  151 
sylh'pHm  242 
syllogism  375,  376 

Hymholictd  interprfdaium  204,  242,  369 
370  m,  371  ' ' 

Hymhrilism  137,  244.  251,  290,  298,  423 
symHuioehe  238 


nytmiytm  219,  225 
HynUiviw  irregularitif^s  238 
synta-^  74,  173,  180.  189,  191,  194,  213, 
214,  223,  229,  301,  410,  415 

taboo  241,  243,  363*  378 
ffagf>ro,  Eabindranatii  54 
Taitt4rfya(«)  17,  30.  52,  324f.,  331.  337, 

^ 343,  3504'. 

Taittirfya-ilranyaka  325,  326,  328,350, 
429  f. 


- “Ertlhmapa  275.  324  m,  325,  328,  339, 
357.  405.  429 

^Smsihitli  323,  325 ft\,  332 

-Sarviimkramiipl  52  11. 

"tlpanifiui  429 

Talavakkradlrfllitnapii  347  IT. 
Talavakftras  313,  319 
TaiavakiTrit-  Gpiiimiiul  34 1 
■■■'  41pam^fuldtriihmrina  431  f, 

Tamil  52 r. 

Tamdnadii  319 
TiTiujlim  Tfuiijya  347  m.  349 
Tll3t>i)yaniiibi.|lrllhniiiriii  339,  347  ff. 
Tanjoro  321 


Xtuit>x 


461 


TantriBTix  SB,  fill  SOI) 

Taiulnapat  104 
tap(ts  1S7 
Taranta  120 
Tfirk^ya  100 
tautology  2SS 

toaclau' SfiS,  404,  405,  412,  4H),  427,  42B, 
4S2 

technical  languagts  Umm  170f.,  212, 
410 

technique  (of  tht^  pootn)  210,  221 
temporal  hcOuuuo  IBS 
ten  kings  120 

thetne  IS,  20,  4H,  00,  OB,  100,  111),  12B, 
170,  17B,  170,  lOSf.,  100,  100,  200  n., 
210,  227,  275,  277,  SOI,  302,  304,  SSO, 
S50,  388  m,  305,  401,  40Sf.,  417 
theosophy  201,  202  f. 

Thiem«%  P.  1S5  m,  145 
three  201,  335,  S74  n.,  422  n, 

Thre(4V)ld  Veda  8,  208,  271,  SOS,  SOO, 
4S1  m 

Tilak,  B.  (1.  21 

time  201,  204,  205,  302 f, 

- seci'tience  SOS 
Tinnev<4ly  S21 
Tit,tiri  S25  m,  SfiO 
ttu'BO  170 

tradition  0,  10,  20,  SI,  SO.  41,  57,  12S, 
207,  210,  221,  200,  202,  SSO,  SSI,  SSO, 
S44,  345  m,  340,  347  u*,  370,  300,  401, 
404,  400,  409,  427 

traditionalism  74  f.,  70,  100,  150f„  212 
tragic  tlumu^a  150 
transcendentail  visions  IBl 
tranHCcndcuifc  regality  <^r  sphen^  05 f.,  SB5 
transference  (semantic)  242,  251 
transition(»)  17B,  IBO,  180,  214,  237,  23S, 
SBl,  417,  420 
trayi  (mlt/d)  8 
irm  IBM.,  314f..  318 
tree  of  'heaven,  of  knowledge  135  m, 
245 

Triclnnopoly  32 1 
irimUm  abtmdam  220 
trilogy  201  f. 

tripartite  argttment  S75f, 
triplet  (nmirmi)  180,  I80f*,  100,  232,  348 
triphcatioii  220,  208 
triflMhh  173,  175,  177,  182,  101,  100, 
201,  S73,  374,  381,  308 
Trita  (Aptya)  78,  118*  127,  100 
truth  140,  147,  305,  342,  304,  385,  300, 
412,  422 


Iku'viti  124 

Tva^ta^r  101,  110,  202,  240,  SS5,  358  n., 
350  m,  S00,  S8B,  SOBP,  401 
twin  |>hra8os  225 
twins '153,  202 
two  375 f. 

uechiHla  200  f, 

ITdayana  40  n. 

Udilalaka  Arupi  (sec^  also  Arupi)  383 

udgmnr  177,  100,  S14,  348,  432 

udtdtha  42,  431 

'Oliagfma  317 

B I uin d liisy ag5na  318 

"Oh.vagana  317,  318 

tdlekha  204 

tmiformity  (lack  of)  126 
unity  of  a hymn  178,  183 
of  subject  102 
tmi  verse  177 

tlnmnai,  the  65,  72, 140  m,  141,  233,  241, 
203,  204,  200,  340,  377 
wptuml  204 
Ufm-mdna  258 
wpi$mmia  250 

wpmdfml{n)  8.  20,  34,  45,  47,  48,  50,  53, 
54,  03,  135,  137,  138,  142,  205,  330, 
334,  342,  353,  355,  357,  350  n.,  373, 
383,  400,  4231,  420,  428 
lTpanifad-Brfihnmi>a  347  n. 
llrvid!  125.  151,  2031,  208,  408 
llkmm  308 

(mH)  also  Dawn)  071,  86,  09, 163ff., 
170,  102,  211,  214,  215  m,  210,  228, 
242,  257,  258,  260 
204 

fiUarjanaprayoga  37 
UttarajjhEya  200 
XJttara-Nllri.yana  litany  330 
mtarErcika  100,  3141,  317,  318,  320 
40,  331 

Vac  (sec  also  speech  and  Word)  66,  69ff., 
78,  135,  292,  300 
VacMpati  287 
vagueness  214,  400 
Vaiklianasas  78 

VaiiampEyana  324  n*,  325  n.,  326,  420 
Vai^vEdeva  hymns  34 
VaitEna-Sutra  260,  201,  308,  3551 
vUja  SO,  81,  108,  114,  121,  320 
vWjapeya  3281,  350 
VEjasaneya  327 
VEjasaneym(s)  30,  331,  352 


462 


J.  (tonda  • Vodic  Lii<a‘n4nr<^ 


Vaja-Hanoyi^Banihiia  36,  36.  40,  327 
334,  3f>2 

vajra  240,  268,  400 
vdhmtkya  407,  408 
p(%ky(mtoblm  316 
Vala  no,  244 
Vrdakhilyn.B  8,  30  ik,  37 
Vrw,nadova(H)  0 
vayh4a  363,  428 
Vtw|)^a»Bmhiua.\\a  320 
VEnlha(H)  324 
Vararuoi  321 
Vareiii  131 
varga  0 

varituiiH  18f.,  126,  104 
variation  170,  180,  182,  185,  103, 

104,  221,  223f..  226B,  220,  232, 
200,  301,  302,  380f„  303,  400,  410, 
417f. 

Vanina  67,  74,  04,  07,  00,  106,  H2,  113, 
116,  133,  143,  I63f„  lOI,  200,  201, 
202,  220,  223,  225,  251,  252,  254,  287, 
303,  370,  382,  303,  412 
V an nyipra.gl ulna  4 00 
Vaniiitt.haCa)  0.  40,  74,  76,  77  n.,  U2,  UK. 

125,  120f.,  142,  251,  271 
Vil^Bwpati  13 
Vannkra  200 
Vmm  177 

Vilvu  176,  345 f.,  308,  420 
Vada  7 IT. 

wdd%a(H)  22,  32,  34,  46  n.,  40  n. 
Vndtlnta  45,  50,  135,  427 
ViHlUrthadlpika  40 
Vinlarthaprakilj^ia  41,  320 
V (Hlilr thaBati  igraha  50 
Vada  HtucUaii  203 
201 

vorlial  {lit<yrary)  cnnt<wt^a  HO 
“»  farina  117 

varaificaiinn  223  232  236 
voraioim  (af  a narrati V(0  307  f. 
vortical  corroBpandtaiC('  224 
victory  1200'. 

Vidcha(«)  336,  353,  370 
triMi  324,  340,  420 
irklhipmyaga  3 1 0 
miga  367,  402,  40H  n, 
view  of  or  of  the  world  I f,  03,  263, 
264  0,  3620,  410 
village  life  404 
Vinatii  47 
Vin<lhya(H)  24,  336 
tdfiiyoga  51,  83  tu,  86.  200 


ripra  71 

vmtj  176,  104,  201 
vimlha  264 
24  0 

264 

viaion  65  fO,  70,  07,  126,  I OH 
Vr^nfipn  124,  125 

Viifinn  Vi,Mntn5mi  38,  51,  00,  lf)H,  114, 
116,  I37.‘l80,  181,  228,  232,  335,  384.! 
301  tu,  421,  427,  420 
VaHUtiatlkl  a.  51 
vmfidi  348,  340,  374 
%4Bvakanntni  I3'6 

Vi.4vanntra{a)  0,  40,  74.  75.  76.  125.  130. 

146,  lOI.  201.  306 
Vi4varn|>a  300 

Viavo  Dovill)  01,  B42.  1 10,  132.  166,  176. 
177,  181 

V’^iHvcHVarat  iii  ha  427 
VivaHvat  1100 
Vivekftnanda  53 
vividncBH  178,  238 
vocaindary  213.  221.  246 
voice  (rlivnnO  307.  4'03 
vmkt  07.  147,  167 
irdigti  274,  3051'. 

Vfcivant.a  I3i} 

Ypn^kapi  105,  20i) 

Vflm.  46,  07,  106,  III,  114.  llhf..  11 8, 
no,  120.  157,  170.  IH'O,  186.  200.  202. 
216,  234.  241.  247.  251.  258.  3356. 
365.  387,  3006,  400.  417 
cf#i  343 

vulgato  AfharvavcdaMSaiiihiift  273.  300 
pgdkhgtttm  4118 
Vyfma  16 

Wackornitgol,  3.  357 
WaflVn«ogfai  103.  144,  102 
wugor  308  n,,  40'2 
warlH)  05.  120,  11^2,  216 
war  chariin  2853. 

■ Bang  144 

Watora  (hco  iilao  Apaa)  86,  162,  202,  370, 

300 

Wfdier.  A.  57,  58 

wedding  fto'iiinlion  hyiniia  176.  274,  304 
TVmt  Bengal  27 
whimpering  84 

Wliiitt  Vajnrveita.  aee  Anitlayajur* 
VfHla  31,  35,  20H.  323|\,  32716.  331. 
332.  337.  35111'.  430 

Whitney.  W.  Ih  50.  Oiili 

WiIhoiu  If.  IL  41,  53 


Indc'X 


463 


Wituii«(’h,  K.  tU.  206 

Wititornif/,,  M.  4.  T-M,  146.  207.  364 

wintlmu  2<S7,  202,  412 

wolf  166.  168.  253 

woinoii  151.  16.S.  254.  263.  283f. 

Word  {m'o  iUho  \5«')  371,  300 
word  (•orrt'Mpondonoo  220 
Wii.sl.  W.  27 

ynjamtlna  84 
Yajiui  410 
■tiajn<i(/<VM  406,  407 

Yajftavulky.i  32S,  327.  3fi2IT..  3.57,  358, 
360,  380,  410 

Yajurv(Hla.  Yujurvodiim  8,  31.  3.5,  41, 
44  n.,  40,  88.  204,  260,  273,  27.‘.,  277, 
280,  286,  280,  205,  206,  207,  30.5.  310. 
323 IT.,  341.  3.50ff.,  350,  360,  388,  308 
Yajurvflt^iv  324  u. 


8,  280,  301,  305,  .332f.,  348,  353, 
405  n.,  410 

36.  00.  104,  326  n. 
yalcfma  20 

Yama  12.  01,  111,  120,  130,  142,  151, 
1,53.  205,  420 
Yauiagat  htlH  406 
Yanvl  120,  130,  151,  153.  205 
Yamtuttl  24,  31,  336 
Yiwka  15.  32f..  34.  40,  42  n.,  46  u.,  57, 
.58  ti..  145.  200 
Yat  in  388 
65 

j/(wi  315,  318 
,Vd;Kt  88  f.,  104 

S5ahl('nratHel  133 
7,1'Ugnia  242 
JiiniH  121 


