Encyclopedia 
of 


Religion and Ethics 


PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN BY 
MORRISON AND GIBB LIMITED 


[The Rights of Translation and of Reproduction are Reserved.) 


Messrs. Charles Scribner's Sons, New York, have the sole right of publication of this 
ENCYCLOPADIA OF RELIGION AND ETHICS in the United States and Canada. 


OISTST OF 


ABBREVIATIONS 


a 


I. GENERAL 


A.H. = Anno Hijrac (A.D. 622), 
Ak. =Akkadian. 

Alex. = Alexandrian. 

Amer, = American. 

Apoc. = Apocalypse, Apocalyptic. 


Apoer. = Apocrypha. 
Aq. =Aquila. 
Arab. = Arabic. 


Aram. = Aramaic. 
Arm. = Armenian. 
Ary. =Aryan. 
As. = Asiatic. 
Assyr. = Assyrian. 
AT=Altes Testament. 
AV=Authorized Version. 
AVm=Authorized Version margin. 
A.Y.=Anno Yazdagird (A.D. 639). 
Bab. = Babylonian. 
e.=eirca, about. 
Can. = Canaanite, 
cf. =compare. 
et. =contrast. 
D=Deuteronomist. 
E=Elohist. 
bad, Bee or editors. 
. = Egyptian. 
Bae = English, 
Eth. = Ethiopic. 
EV, EVV = English Version, Versions, 
f. =and following verse or page. 
ff. =and following verses or pages. 
Fr. = French. 
Germ. = German. 
Gr. = Greek. 
H= Law of Holiness. 
Heb. = Hebrew. 
Hel. = Hellenistic. 
Hex. =Hexateuch. 
Buy = Himyaritie. 
Ir. = Irish. 
Iran. = Iranian. 


Isr. = Israclite. 
J=Jahwist. 
J” = Jehovah. 
Jerus. = Jerusalem. 
Jos. = Josephus. 
LXX=Septnagint. 
Min. = Minzan. 

"| MSS = Manuscripts. 
MT = Massoretic Text. 
n. =note. 
NT=New Testament. 
Onk. = Onkelos. 
OT=Old Testament. 
P= Priestly Narrative. 
Pal. = Palestine, Palestinian. 
Pent. = Pentateuch. 
Pers. = Persian. 
Phil. = Philistine. 
Phen. = Pheenician. 
Pr. Bk. =Prayer Book. 
R=Redactor. 
Rom. = Roman. 
RV=Revised Version. 
RVm=Revised Version margin. 
Sab. =Sabzean. 
Sam. = Samaritan. 
Sem. = Semitic. 
Sept. = Septuagint. 
Sin. =Sinaitic. 
Skr. = Sanskrit. 
Symm. = Symmachus. 

| Syr. = Syriac. 

t. (following a number) =times. 
Talm. = Talmud. 
Targ. = Targum. 
Theod. = Theodotion. 
TR=Textus Receptus, Received Text. 
tr. =translated or translation. 
VSS= Versions. 
Vulg., Vg. = Vulgate. 
WH= Westcott and Hort’s text. 


II. BOOKS or THE BIBLE 


Old Testament. 


Ca=Canticles. 
Is=Isaiah. 
Jer=Jeremiah. 

La = Lamentations. 
Ezk = Ezekiel. 


Gn= Genesis, 

Ex= Exodus. 

Lv= Leviticus. 
Nu= Numbers. 
Dt=Deuteronomy. 


Jos= Joshua. Dn = Daniel. 
Jg=Jndges. Hos= Hosea. 
Ru=Ruth. Jl=Joel. 


Am= Amos. 


18,2 S=1 and 2 Samnel. 
Ob = Obadiah. 


1K, 2 K=1 and 2 Kings. 


1 Ch, 2 Ch=1 and 2 Jon=Jonah. 
Chronicles. Mic=Micah. 

Ezr = Ezra. Nah= Nahum. 

Neh = Nehemiah. Hab= Habakkuk. 

Est = Esther. Zeph = Zephaniah. 

Job. Hag= Haggai. 

Ps= Psalms. Zec=Zechariah. 


Pr=Proverbs. Mal= Malachi. 


Ec= Ecclesiastes. 
Apocrypha. 


To=Tobit. 


1 Es, 2 Es=1 and 2 
Jth=Judith. 


Esdras. 


Ad. Est = Additions to 


Sus=Susanna. 


Esther. Bel = Bel and the 
Wis= Wisdom. Dragon. 
Sir = Sirach or Ecclesi- Pr. Man = Prayer of 
asticus. Manasses. 
Bar= Baruch. 1 Mac, 2 Mac=1 and £ 
Three = Song of the Three Maccabees, 
Children. 
New Testament. 
Mt= Matthew. 1 Th, 2 Th=1 and 2 
Mk= Mark. Thessalonians, 
Lk=Luke, 1 Ti, 2 Ti=1 and 2 
Jn=John. Timothy. 
Ac= Acts. Tit=Titus. 
Ro= Romans. Philem = Philemon. 
1 Co, 2 Co=1 and 2 He= Hebrews. 
Corinthians. Ja=James. 
Gal=Galatians. 1P,2P=1 and 2 Peter. 


Eph = Ephesians. 
Ph = Philippians. 
Col =Colossians. 


1 Jn, 2 Jn, 3 Jn=l, 2, 
and 3 John. 

Jude. 

Rev =Revelation. 


xxii 


UI. For THE 


LISTS OF ABBREVIATIONS 


LITERATURE 


1. The following authors’ names, when unaccompanied by the title of a book, stand for 
the works in the list below. 


Baethgen = Beiträge zur sem. Religionsgesch., 1888. + 

Baldwin=Dict. of Philosophy and Psychology, 
3 vols. 1901-05. 

Barth=Nominalbildung in den sem. Sprachen, 
2 vols. 1889, 1891 (71894). 

Benzinger= Heb. Archäologie, 1894. 

Brockelmann=Gesch. d. arab. Litteratur, 2 vols. 
1897-1902. 

Bruns - Sachau = Syr. - köm. Jecchtsbuch aus dem 
fünften Jahrhundert, 1880. 

Budge=Gods of the Egyptians, 2 vols. 1903. 

Daremberg-Saglio=Dict. des ant. grec. et Tom., 
1886-90. 

De la Saussaye=Lehrbuch der Religionsgesch., 
1905. 


Denzinger = Enchiridion Symbolorum™, Freiburg 
im Br., 1911. 

Deussen= Die Philos. d. Upanishads, 1899 [Eng. 
tr., 1906]. 

Doughty= drabia Deserta, 2 vols. 1888. 

Grimm= Deutsche Mythologie’, 3 vols. 1875-78, 
Eug. tr. Teutonic Mythology, 4 vols. 1882-88. 

Hamburger = Realencyclopd die für Bibel u. Talmud, 
i. 1870 (71892), ii. 1883, suppl. 1886, 1891 f., 1897. 

Holder = A ltceltischer Sprachschatz, 1891 fi. 

Holtzmann-Zöpffel = Lexicon f. Theol. u. Kirchen- 
wesen?, 1895. 

Howitt=Native Tribes of S.E. Australia, 1904. 

Jubainville = Cours de Litt. celtique, i.-xii., 1883 ff. 

Lagrange = Ktudes sur les religions sémitiqucs?, 1904. 

Lane=An Arabic-English Lexicon, 1863 ff. 

Lang= Myth, Ritual, and Religion®, 2 vols. 1899. 

Lepsius= Denkmäler aus Aegypten u. Aethiopien, 
1849-60. 

Lichtenberger = Encyc. des sciences religieuses, 1876. 

Lidzbarski= Handbuch der nordsem. Epigraphik, 
1898. 

McCurdy = History, Prophecy, and the Monuments, 
2 vols. 1894-96. 

Muir=Orig. Sanskrit Texts, 1858-72. 

Mnss-Arnolt=A Concise Dict. of the Assyrian 
Language, 1894 ff. 


2. Periodicals, Dictionaries, Encyclopzedias, 


AA=Archiv für Anthropologie. 

AAOJ = American Antiquarian and Oriental 
Journal. 

ABAW = Abhandlungen d. Berliner Akad. d. 
Wissenschaften. 

AE= Archiv für Ethnographie. 

AEG=Assyr. and Eng. Glossary (Johns Hopkins 
University). 

AGG=Abhandlungen der Göttinger Gesellschaft 
der Wissenschaften. 

AGPh= Archiv fiir Geschichte der Philosophie. 

AHR= American Historical Review. 

AHT= Ancient Hebrew Tradition (Hommel). 

AJPh=American Journal of Philology. 

AJPs= American Journal of Psychology. 

AJRPE= American Journal of Religious Psycho- | 
logy and Education. 

AJSL=American Journal of Semitic Languages 
and Literature. 

AJTh=American Journal of Theology. 

AMG=Annales du Musée Guimet. 

APES= American Palestine Exploration Society. 

APF= Archiv für Papyrusforschung. 

AR = Anthropological keen 

ARW = Archiv für Religionswisseuschaft. 

AS=Acta Sancetorum (Bollandus). 


Nowack=Lehrbuch d. heb. Archäologie, 2 vols, 
1394. 

Pauly-Wissowa=Realencyc. der classischen Alter- 
tumswissenschaft, 1894 ff. 

Perrot-Chipiez= Hist. de lart dans lantiquité, 
1881 fr. 

Preller = Römische Mythologie, 1858. 

Reville= Religion des peuples non-civilisés, 1883. 

Riehm = Handwörterbuch d. bibl. Altertums?, 1893- 
94. 

Robinson = Biblical Researches in Palestine?, 1356. 

Roscher= Lex. d. gr. u. röm. Mythologie, 1884 ff. 

Schaff-Herzog=The New Schajff-Herzog Encyclo- 
pedia of Religious Knowledge, 1908 ff. 

Schenkel = Bibel-Lexicon, 5 vols. 1869-75. 

Schürer=@JY?®, 3 vols. 1898-1901 LHJP, 5 vols. 
1890 ff.]. 

Schwally = Leben nach dem Tode, 1892. 

Siegfried-Stade= Heb. Wörterbuch zum AT, 1893. 

Smend=Lehrbuch der alttest. Religionsgesch.?, 
1899. 

Smith (G. A.)= Historical Geography of the Holy 
Land‘, 1897. 

Smith (W. R.)= Religion of the Semites*, 1894. 

Spencer (H.)= Principles of Sociology!?, 1885-96. 

Spencer-Gillen®= Native Tribesof Central Australia, 
1899. 

Spencer-Gillenb = Northern Tribes of Central 
Australia, 1904. 

Swete=The OT in Greek, 3 vols. 1893 ff. 

Tylor (E. B.)= Primitive Culture’, 1891 [41903]. 

Ueberweg = Hist. of Philosophy, Eng. tr., 2 vols. 
1872-74. 

Weber=Jiidische Theologie auf Grund des Talmud 
u. verwandten Schriften”, 1897. 

Wiedemann = Die Religion der alien Aegypter, 
1890 [Eng. tr., revised, Religion of the Anc. 
Egyptians, 1897]. 

Wilkiuson= Manners and Customs of the Ancient 
Egyptians, 3 vols. 1878. 

Zunz= Die gottesdienstlichen Vorträge der Juden®, 
1892. 


2 


and other standard works frequently cited. 


ASG = Abhandlungen der Sächsischen Gesellschaft 
der Wissenschaften. 

ASoc=L’Anuée Sociologique. 

ASWHI= Archeological Survey of W. India. 

AZ = Allgemeine Zeitung. 

BAG = Beiträge zur alten Geschichte. 
BASS=Beiträge zur Assyriologie u. sem. Sprach- 
wissenschaft (edd. Delitzsch aud Haupt). 

BCH=Bulletin de Correspondance Hellénique. 

BE= Bureau of Ethnology. 

BG = Bombay Gazetteer. 

BJ=Bellum Judaicum (Josephus). 

BL=Bamptou Lectures. 

BLE= Bulletin de Littérature Ecclésiastique. 

BOR=Bab. and Oriental Record. 

BS= Bibliotheca Sacra. 

BSA= Annual of the British School at Athens. 

BSAA = Bulletin de la Soc. archéologique à Alex. 
andrie. 

BSAL=BulletindelaSoc. d’Anthropologiede Lyon. 

BSAP=Bulletin de la Soc. d’Anthropologie, ete., 
Paris. 

BSG= Bulletin de la Soc. de Géographie. 

BTS= Buddhist Text Society. 

BW=Biblical World. 

BZ=Biblische Zeitschrift. 


LISTS OF ABBREVIATIONS 


CAIBL=Comptes rendus de l’Academie des In- 
scriptions et Belles-Lettres, 

CBTS= Calcutta Buddhist Text Society. 

CE=Catholic Encyclopædia. 

CF=Childhood of Fiction (MacCulloch). 

CGS=Cults of the Greck States (larnell). 

Cf=Census of India. 

CIA = Corpus Inscrip. Atticarum. 

CIE = Corpus Inscrip. Etruscarum. 

CIG = Corpus Inscrip. Griccarum. 

CIL=Corpus inscrip. Latinarum. 

CIS= Corpus Inscrip. Semiticarum. 

COT=Cuneiform Inscriptions and the OT [Eng. 
tr. of KAT?; sce below]. 

CR=Contemporary Review. 

CeR= Celtic Review. 

ClR= Classical Review. 

CQR= Church Quarterly Review. 

CSEL=Corpus Script. Eccles. Latinorum., 

DAC=Dict. of the Apostolic Church. 

DACL = Diet. d'Archéologie chrétienne et de 
Liturgie (Cabrol). 

DB=Dicet. of the Bible, 


DCA=Dict. of Christian Antiquities (Smith- 
Cheetham). 
DCB=Dict. of Christian Biography (Smith- 


Wace). 

DCG=Dict. of Christ and the Gospels. 

DI=Dicet. of Islam (Hughes). 

DNB=Dict. of National Biography. 

DPhP=Dict. of Philoophy and Psychology. 

DWAW =Denkschriften der Wiener Akad. der 
Wissenschaften. 

EBi= Encyclopædia Biblica. 

EBr=Encyclopedia Britannica. 

EEFM=Egyp. Explor. Fund Memoirs. 

EI=Encyelopaedia of Isläm. 

ERE=The present work. 

Exp= Expositor. 

ExpT= Expository Times. 

FHG=Fragmenta Historicorum Grecorum (coll. 
C. Müller, Paris, 1885). 

FL=Folklore. 

FLJ=Folklore Journal. 

FLR=Folklore Record. 

GA=Gazette Archéologique. 

GB=Golden Bough (Frazer). 

GGA =Gittingische Gelehrte Anzeigen. 

GGN=Göttingische Gelehrte Nachrichten (Nach- 
richten der königl. Gesellschaft der Wissen- 
schaften zu Gottingen), 

GIA P=Grundriss d. Indo-Arischen Philologie. 

GIrP=Grundriss d. Iranischen Philologie. 

GJV=Geschichte des jüdischen Volkes. 

GVI=Geschichte des Volkes Israel. 

HAI=Handbook of American Indians. 

HDB = Hastings’ Dict. of the Bible. 

HE= Historia Ecclesiastica. 

HGHL= Historical Geography of the Holy Land 
(G. A. Smith). 

HI= History of Israel. 

HJ = Hibbert Journal. 

HJP = History of the Jewish People. 

HL= Hibbert Lectures. 

HN = Historia Naturalis (Pliny). 

HWB = Handwörterbuch. 

IA =Indian Antiquary. 

[CC = International Critical Commentary. 

ICO = International Congress of Orientalists. 

ICR=1Indian Census Report. 

IG = Inscrip. Greece (publ. under anspices of Berlin 
Academy, 1873 ft.). 

IGA=Tnscrip. Greer Antiquissime. 

IGI=Imperial Gazetteer of India? (1885); new 
edition (1908-09). 

IJE =1nternational Journal of Ethics. 

ITL= International Theological Library. 

JA=Journal Asiatique. 


xxiil 


JAFL=Journal of American Folklore. 

JAI=Journal of the Anthropological Institute. 

JAOS= Journal of the American Oriental Society. 

JASB=Journal of the Anthropological Society of 
Bombay. 

JASBe=Journ. of As. Soc. of Bengal. 

JBL= Journal of Biblical Literature. 

JBTS=Journal of the Buddlust Text Society. 

JD=Journal des Débats. 

JDTh=Jahrbücher f. deutsche Theologie. 

JE=Jewish Encyclopedia. 

JGOS= Journal of the German Oriental Society. 

JHC=Johns Hopkins University Circulars. 

JHS=Journal of Hellenic Studies. 

JLZ=Jenäer Litteraturzeitung. 

JPh=Journal of Philology. 

JPTh= Jahrbücher für protestantische Theologie. 

JPTS=Journal of the Pali Text Society. 

JQR=Jewish Quarterly Review. 

JRAI=Journal of the Royal Anthropological 
Institute. 

JRAS=Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society. 

JRASBo=Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, 
Bombay branch. 

JRASC=Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, 
Ceylon branch. 

JRASK=Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, 
Korean branch. 

JRGS= Journal of the Royal Geographical Society. 

J RS= Journal of Roman Studies. 

JThSt=Journal of Theological Studies. 

KAT? = Die Keilinschritten und das 
(Schrader), 1883. 

KAT*=Zimmern-Winckler’s ed. of the preceding 
(really a totally distinct work), 1903. 

KB or K/B=Keilinschriftliche Bibliothek (Schra- 
der), 1889 ff. 

KGF=Keilinschriften und die Geschichtsfor- 
schung, 1878. 

LCBl=Literarisches Centralblatt. 

LOPh= Literaturblatt für Oriental. Philologie. 

LOT=Introduction to Literature of OT (Driver). 

LP = Legend of Perseus (llartland). 

LSSt= Leipziger sem. Studien. 

M=Melasine. 

MAIBL=M£&moires de l’Acad. des Inscriptions et 
Belles-Lettres. 

MBAW = Monatsbericht 
Wissenschaften. 

MGH = Monumenta Germanie Historica (Pertz). 

MGJV=Mittheilungen der Gesellschaft fiir jüd- 
ische Volkskunde. 

MGW J =Monatsschrift für Geschichte und Wissen- 
schaft des Judentums. 

MI=Origin and Development of the Moral Ideas 
(Westermarck). 

MNDPV = Mittheilungen u. 
deutschen Palästina- Vereins. 

MR=Methodist Review. 

MVG = Mittheilungen der vorderasiatischen Gesell- 
schaft. 

die 


MWJ = Magazin 
Judentums. 

NBAC= Nuovo Bullettino di Archeologia Cristiana. 

NC= Nineteenth Century. 

NHW B= Neuhebräisches Wörterbuch. 

NINQ=North Indian Notes and Queries. 

NKZ=Neue kirchliche Zeitschrift. 

NQ=Notes and Queries. 

NR=Native Races of the Pacific States (Bancroft). 

NT ZG =Neutestamentliche Zeitgeschichte. 

O#D=Oxford English Dictionary. 

OLZ=Orientalische Litteraturzeitung. 

OS= Onomastica Sacra. 

OTJC=Old Testament in the Jewish Church (W. 
R. Smith). 

OTP= Oriental Translation Fund Publications. 

PAOS=Proceedings of American Oriental Society. 


AT? 


d. Berliner Akad. d. 


Nachrichten des 


fiir Wissenschaft des 


xxiv 


PASE = Proceedings of the Anthropological Soc. of 
Bombay. 

PB=Polychrome Bible (English). 

PBE= Publications of the Bureau of Ethnology. 

PC=Primitive Culture (Tylor). 

PEFM = Palestine Exploration Fund Quarterly 
Memoirs. 

PEFSt= Palestine Exploration Fund Statement. 

PG=Patrologia Greeea (Migne). 

PJB= Preussische Jahrbücher. 

PL=Patrologia Latina (Migne). 

PNQ=Punjab Notes and Queries. 

PR=Popular Religion and Folklore of N. India 
(Crooke). 

PRE°=Prot. Realencyclopidie (Herzog-Hauck). 

PRR=Presbyterian and Reformed Review. 

PRS=Proceedings of the Royal Society. 

PRSE= Proceedings Royal Soc. of Edinburgh. 

PSBA=Proceedings of the Society of Biblical 
Archeology. 

PTS=Päli Text Society. 

RA = Revue Archéologique. 

RAnth= Revue d’ Anthropologie. 

RAS=Royal Asiatic Society. 

RAssyr = Revue d’Assyriologie. 

EB = Revue Biblique. 

RBEW=Reports of the Bureau of Ethnology 
(Washington). 

RC=Revue Critiqne. 

RCel=Revue Celtique. 

RCh=Revue Chrétienne. 

RDM = Revue des Deux Mondes. 

RE = Realencyclopädie. 

REG= Revue des Etudes Grecques. 

fig = Revue Egyptologique. 

REJ = Revue des Etudes Juives. 

REth= Revue d’Ethnographie. 

RGG=Die Religion in Geschichte und Gegenwart. 

RHLR=Revue d’Histoire et de Littérature re- 
ligieuses. 

RHR= Revue de !’Histoire des Religions. 

RMM=Revue du monde musulman. 

EN=Revue Numismatique. 

RP = Records of the Past. 

RPh=Revue Philosophique. 

RQ=Römische Quartalschrift. 

RS = Revue sémitique d’Epigraphie et d’Rist. 
ancienne. 

RSA = Recueil de la Soc. archéologique. 

RSI = Reports of the Smithsonian Institution. 

RTA P= Recueil de Travaux relatifs à l’ Archéologie 
et à la Philologie, 

RTP =Revue des traditions populaires, 

LiThPh=Revue de Theologie et de Philosophie. 

RTr= Recueil de Travaux. 

RV V=Religionsgeschichtliche Versuche und Vor- 
arbeitungen. 

RIVE = Realwörterbnch. 


LISTS OF ABBREVIATIONS 


SBA W =Sitzungsberichte d. Berliner Akademie d. 
Wissenschaften. 

SBB=Sacred Books of the Buddhists. 

SBE=Sacred Books of the East. 

SBOT=Sacred Books of the OT (Hebrew). 

SDB=Single-vol. Dict. of the Bible (Hastings). 

SK =Studien und Kritiken. 

SMÅ =Sitzungsberichte d. Münchener Akademie. 

SSG W =Sitzungsberichte d. Kgl. Sachs, Gesellsch. 
d. Wissenschaften. 

SWAW=Sitzungsberichte d. Wiener Akademie d. 


Wissenschaften. 

TAPA = Transactions of American Philological 
Association. 

TASJ = Transactions of the Asiatic Soc. of 
Japan. 


TC=Tribes and Castes. 

TES =Transactions of Ethnological Society. 

TALZ =Theologische Litteraturzeitung. 

ThT=Theol. Tijdschrift. 

TRHS=Transactions of Royal Historical Society. 

TRSE=Transactions of Royal Soc. of Edinburgh. 

TS=Texts and Studies. 

T, ae == Transactions of the Soc. of Biblical Arche- 
ology. 

TU=Texte und Untersuchungen. 

WAI=Western Asiatic Inscriptions, 

WZEM= Wiener Zeitschrift f. Kunde des Morgen- 
landes. 

ZA =Zeitschrift für Assyriologie. 

ZA = Zeitschrift für ägyp. Sprache u. Altertums- 
wissenschaft. 

ZATW = Zeitschrift für die alttest. Wissen- 
schaft. 

ZCK = Zeitschrift für christliche Knnst. 

ZCP =Zeitschrift für celtische Philologie. 

ZDA = Zeitschrift für deutsches Altertum. 

ZDMG = Zeitschrift der deutschen morgenländ- 
ischen Gesellschaft. 

ZDPV = Zeitschrift des deutschen 
Vereins. 

ZE=Zeitschrift für Ethnologie. 

ZKF= Zeitschrift für Keilschriftforschung. 

ZKG = Zeitschrift für Kirchengeschichte. 

ZKT = Zeitschrift für kathol. Theologie. 

ZKWL= Zeitschrift für kirchl. Wissenschaft und 
kirchl. Leben. 

ZM = Zeitschrift für die Mythologie. 

ZNTW = Zeitschrift für die neutest. Wissen- 
schaft. 

ZPRP = Dance für Philosophie und Päda- 
gogik. 

ZTK = Zeitschrift für Theologie und Kirche. 

ZVK= Zeitschrift für Volkskunde. 

ZVYRW = Zeitschrift für vergleichende Rechts- 
wissenschaft. 

ZWT = Zeitschrift für wissenschaftliche Theo- 
logie. 


Palästina- 


[A small superior number designates the particular edition of the work referred to, 
as KAT?, LOTS, ete.] 


VEDIC RELIGION 


601 


good hunting (exch in his own departinent); for, 
though Kande Yaka is patron of all food supplies, 
there are other yaku ench of whom is separately 
invoked for help in getting yams, rock-honey, and 
tree-honey. The yaku have their methods of 
showing approval of the ollerings; usually they 
scatter some of the food, sometimes they fecd a 
favoured member of the community or place leaves 
dipped in the sacred food upon his chest, or, putting 


his arms on his shoulders, the shaman, gasping 
and quivering, delivers a message of good omen 


from the yaku. Sometimes a yaka asks why he 
has been called. Is it because any one is sick? 
And, if any one is brought forward, he will feed 
him or anoint him with sacred food which is 
thought to cure the sickness. 

The manifest object of mest ceremonies is to obtain food, but 
there is ne suggestion that any of them are performed te 
increase the food supply, as are the intichiuma ceremonies of 
Australia. They are also performed to cure sickness, and it is 
in thie connexion that the Pata Yaku ceremony may be men- 
tioned. This ceremony is held fer a pregnant woman, that she 
may have safe delivery. Masses of bast are used on all the 
various properties necessary for the yaku; hence the name, 
signifying ‘bark yaku.’ No reason could be given for any figure 
in the dance, nor was there any known tradition connected with 
it, as was the case with most other ceremonies. A neticeahle 
feature of the dance was that it was necessary for the weman’s 
fatber to take part in it and tbat he dropped an arrow on the 

round several times and leapt over it. Certain Sinhalese 

emons known as the Pata Yaku personify disease, but these 

have no connexien with hast, and it is impessible to say 
why the Pata Yaku should have been taken over from the 
Sinhalese. 

Apart from the tendeney, already mentioned, of 
certain yaku to be associated with hill-tops, no 
definite locality is considered their home; on the 
other hand, they are certainly not thonght of as 
being habitually in close proximity with the living. 
Magical practices play a very small part in the 
life of the Veddas; their charms we believe to 
have been taken over from the Sinhalese, and it 
certainly is no exaggeration to say tlıat the Vedda 
couception of tlıe supernatural is embodied in their 
yaku beliefs, to whose influence usual or unusual 
events are alike attributed. No creation traditions 
or myths referring to the natural features of the 
country could be discovered among the wilder 
groups of Veddas. 

LITERATURE.— John Bailey, ‘Wild Tribes of the Veddahs of 
Ceylon,’ TES, new ser., ii. [1863]; E. Deschamps, Au Pays 
des Veddas : Ceylan, Paris, 1892; Robert Knox, An Historical 
Relation of Ceylon, London, 1681; H. Nevill, Taprobanian, 
Bombay, 1887, i. ; H. Parker, Ancient Ceylon, London, 1909; 
L. Rutimeyer, ‘Die Nilgalaweddas in Ceylen,’ Globus, Ixxxiii. 
[1903]; P. and F. Sarasin, Die Weddas von Ceylon, Wieshaden, 
1892; C. G. and Brenda Z. Seligman, The Veddas, Cambridge, 


1911. C. G. and B. Z. SELIGMAN. 


VEDIC RELIGION.— DEFINITIONS. — With 
a view to avoiding eonfusien, it is advisable to 
define at the outset the sense in which each of 
the three terms ‘religion, ‘mythology, and 
‘magic’ (witehcraft) is to be employed in the 
present article. Religion means, on the one hand, 
the body of beliefs entertained by men regarding 
the divine or supernatural powers, and, on the 
other, that sense of dependence on those powers 
which is expressed by word in the form of prayer 
and praise, or by act in the form of ritual and 
sacrifice. Mythology means the body of nıyths 
or stories which give an account of gods and heroes, 
describing their origin and surroundings, their 
deeds and activities. Mythology is thus included 
in, though not coextensive with, that aspect of 
religion which is concerned with belief. Magic 
means that body of practices which, instead of 
seeking to gain the goodwill of divine, beneficent 
powers by acts of worship, is largely directed 
against demoniac and hostile agencies, and aims 
at affecting the course of things directly, without 
the intervention of deities. Magic as such, being 
essentially ditferent from religion and represent- 


ing a more primitivo stage of belief, is exeluded 
from the scope of this article exalt where, as 
is sometimes the case, it is inextrieably mixed up 
with religious ritual. 


1. MEANING AND IMPORTANCE OF THE SUBJECT. 

By the general term ‘Vedie religion’ is here under- 
stood the religion of the Vedie period of Indian 
literature, whieh extends from some time after the 
Aryan immigration into the north-west of India, 
that is, from at least as early as B.C. 1300, down 
to ahout B.C. 200. 

Vedic religion is peculiarly important as a branch 
of study. Ilt is not only the earlicst body of reli- 
gions beliefs preserved in a literary form, hut it alse 
represents a more primitive phase of thought than 
is recorded in any other literature. It can, more- 
over, be traced step by step through the various 
stages of its development. Ibis, finally, the source 
of the religion of the modern Hindus, which can 
thus be historically followed up to its origin 
throughout a period of well over 3000 years. As 
a natural result of its value to the investigator 
of religious thought in general, the study of Vedic 
religion gave birth, in the latter half of the 19th 
cent., to the sciences of Comparative Mythology 
and Comparative Religion. 


2, STAGES OF VEDIC RELIGION. 


Three main successive stages may be clearly dis- 
tinguished in the religion which is recorded in 
three corresponding phases of Vedic literature, 
viz. in (a) the Vedas, (6) the Brälimanas together 
with the Sütras, (c) the Upanisads. 

(a) The religion of the four Vedas, regarded as 
a whole, is concerned with the worship of gods . 
largely representing personifications of the powers 
of nature; the propitiation of demoniac beings 
comes only to a limited extent within its sphere. 

The oldest and most important of the four 
Vedas, the Rigveda, from which considerable por- 
tions of the others are borrowed, is a collection of 
metrical nyns containing a large mythological 
element. These hymns are mainly invocations of 
the gods meant to accompany the oblation of Soma 
juice and the fire sacrifice of melted hutter. The 
polytheism of this Veda assumes in its latest 
hymns a pantheistic colouring. Only a very few 
of its hymns are connected with witchcraft. 

The hymns of the Atharvaveda, on the other 
hand, consist largely of spells meant for magical 
application, while their religion is pronounced pan- 
theism. 

The contents of the two other Vedas are entirely 
sacrificial in purpose. The Sämaveda is almost 
exclusively composed of verses borrowed from the 
Rigveda to be applied in the ritual of the Soma 
sacrifice. The Yajurveda consists of ritual for- 
mulas, largely in prose, which, not being directly 
addressed to the gods, are practically of a magical 
type. The religious phase which it represents is, 
in spirit, identical with that of the Brähmanas. 

(6) The Brahmanas are discursive theological 
treatises in prose dealing with the Vedic ritual; 
while the Sütras, text-books composed in a very 
concise style, largely condense and systematize the 
contents of the Brahmanas or add new material 
on domestic and everyday observances. The main 
difference in the mythology of the Brahmanas, as 
compared with the Rigveda, is their recognition of 
a father-god as chief of the deities; while the 
general character of their religions belief is ex- 
plicit pantheism. As to cult, they represent a 
ritual system which, in complexity of detail, far 
surpasses anything the world has elsewhere known. 

(c) Though generally forming a part of the Brah- 
manas, as a continuation of their speculative side, 
the Upanisads really represent s new religion 


602 


which is in virtual opposition to their ritual or 
practical side. This new, purely pantheistic reli- 
gion is dominated by the doctrine of transmigra- 
tion, a doctrine unknown to the Vedas, and only 
incipient in one of the Brähmanas. A world-soul 
takes the place of the father-god of the Brah- 
manas. Its nature is the main object of specula- 
tion ; and the identity with it of the individual 
soul is the great fundamental doctrine of the 
Upanisads. The religious aim now is no longer 
the obtaining of earthly and heavenly happiness 
by sacrificing correctly to the gods, but the release, 
as a result of true knowledge, from re-birth by 
absorption in the world-soul. 


3. VEDIC RELIGIOUS BELIEFS. 

The following account of Vedic beliefs, which 
are almost entirely mythological, starts from the 
statements of the Rigveda, to which the subse- 
quent developments of the Vedic period are, if of 
sufficient importance, in each case added. 

(a) COSMOGONIC BELIEFS.—Judged by their frag- 
mentary references to the origin of the world, the 

oets of the Rigveda usually regarded it as having 

een mechanically produced like a building, the 
material being wood, and heaven and earth being 
supported by posts. The agents in the construc- 
tion are regularly either the gods in general or 
various individual gods. 

The last book of the Rigveda, however, contains 
a few cosmogonic hymns which represent other 
views. One of these (x. 90), though among the 
latest of the period, preserves a very primitive 
belief. It accounts for the origin of the world 
from the body of a primeval giant, whom the gods 
sacrificed. His head became the sky, his navel 
the air, and his feet the earth; while from his 
various members the four castes were produced. 
This being, called Purusa, or man, and interpreted 
pantheistically in the hymn itself as ‘all this, 
both what has become and what shall be,’ reappears 
as the world-soul in the Atharvaveda and the 
Upanisads. 

here are, again, two cosmogonic hymns of the 
Rigveda which explain the origin of the universe, 
piilo hically rather than mythologically, as a 
ind of evolution of the existent (sat) from the 
non-existent (asat). In another hymn of the same 
type, the agency of a creator (dhäta) is, after the 
evolution of the ocean through heat (tapas), intro- 
duced to produce in succession sun and moon, 
heaven and earth, air and ether. There is also 
a hymn (x. 121) in which heaven and earth and 
the great waters are described as the creation of 
Hiranya-garbha, the golden germ, who is said to 
have arisen in the beginning, to be the one god 
above all gods, and is finally invoked as Prajäpati, 
lord of all ereated things. Itis to be noted that 
in the cosmogonic hymns the waters are commonly 
thought of as coming into existence first. In the 
Atharvaveda the all-god appears as a creator 
under several new names, especially as Skambha, 
‘support’; also as Prana, ‘breath’; Kama, ‘desire,’ 
and others. 

The cosmogony of the Brahmanas requires the 
agency of the creator Prajäpati, wbo is not, how- 
ever, always the starting-point. Sometimes the 
waters come first: on them ffoats the golden 
germ (hiranya-garbha), from which arises the 
spirit that produces the universe. This contra- 
diction is due to the theories of evolution and of 
creation being combined. One cosmogonic myth 
of the Brahmanas describes how the submerged 
earth was raised by a boar. The latter in post- 
Vedic mythology developed into an avatdr of 
Visnu. 

(6) THEOGONIC BELIEFS. — Heaven and earth 
are ordinarily regarded in the Rigveda as the 


VEDIC RELIGION 


parents of the gods in general. It is only very 
rarely that other gods are spoken of as parents of 
the rest; thus Dawn is once said to be the mother 
of the gods, and both Brahmanaspati and Soma 
are mentioned as their father. The cosmogonic 
hymns connect the origin of the gods chiefly with 
the element of water; but one of them describes 
the gods as born after the creation of the universe. 

(c) ORIGIN OF MAN.—The Vedic beliefs regard- 
ing the origin of the human race were somewhat 
fluctuating ; the ultimate source of man was, how- 
ever, always thought to be divine. Agni, the god 
of fire, is at least once said to have begotten the 
race of men, and certain families of seers are 
regarded as independently descended through their 
founders from the gods. Usually, however, the 
human race is traced to a first man, either Manu 
or Yama, both of whom are sons of Vivasvat, a 
solar deity. 


4. THE VEDIC GODS. 

The Vedic Indian believed in the existence of a 
large number of supernatural beings, varying in 
character and power. They comprise two main 
groups: on the one hand, gods who are almost 
exclusively benevolent and receive worship; on 
the other hand, demons who are hostile and whose 
operations have to be counteracted by the help of 
the gods or by ritual expedients. The divine 
powers, again, may be classed as higher gods, 
whose power pervades the world and controls the 
great phenomena of nature ; and as lesser divinities, 
whose activities are restricted to a limited sphere 
or are conducted on a smaller scale: for instance, 
tutelary deities and elves. The divine nature is 
further shared by men of days gone by: ancient 
heroes who are associated with the deeds of the 
gods, and ancestors who live with the gods and 
receive worship like them. Finally, at the bottom 
of the scale, we find many inanimate objects 
and implements which are deilied, being invoked 
and worshipped like divine beings. 


A. THE HIGHER GODS. 

The gods are usually stated in the Rigveda and 
Atharvaveda, as well as the Brähmanas, to be 
thirty-three in number; but there are occasional 
deviations or inconsistencies in regard to this 
belief. Troops of deities, such as the storm-gods, 
are, of course, not regarded as included in this 
number. The thirty-three are, in the Rigveda, 
divided into three groups of eleven, distributed in 
earth, air, and heaven, the three divisions of the 
universe. These three groups, now containing 
eight, eleven, and twelve deities respectively, 
appear in the Brähmanas under the name of 

asus, Rudras, and Adityas. 

Gods originally mortal.—The gods, as has al- 
ready been shown, were believed to have had a 
beginning. But they were not thought to have 
all come into being at the same time; for the 
Rigveda occasionally refers to earlier gods, and 
the Atharvaveda speaks of ten gods as having 
existed before the rest. Certain deities are, more- 
over, described as the offspring of others. The 
Atharvaveda and the Brähmanas also expressly 
state that the gods were originally mortal, adding 
that they overcame death by the practice of 
austerity. The same thing Is implied in the 
Rigveda, where the gods are said to have acquired 
immortality by drinking Soma or by receiving it 
as a gift from Agni and Savitr. In the post- Vedic 
view, the immortality of the gods was limited toa 
cosmic age. 

Their physical attributes.—The gods of the Veda 
are anthropomorphic in appearance. The parts of 
their bodies, which are frequently mentioned, are 
in many cases, however, little more than figurative 


VEDIC RELIGION 


603 


illustratiens of the phenomena of nature repre- 


sented by the deity. Thus the arms of the sun 
are nething mere than his rays; and the tongue 
and limbs of Agni merely denote his flames. 
Some of the gods appear equipped as warriors, 
especially Indra; others are described as priests, 
especially Agni and Brhaspati. All of them drive 
through the air in luminous cars, drawn chiefly by 
steeds, but sometimes by other animals. 

Their food.—The favourite feod of men is also 
that of the gods, censisting of milk, butter, grain, 
and the flesh of sheep, goats, and cattle. It is 
offered to them in the sacrilice; this is either 
conveyed to them in heaven by the god of fire, or 
they come in their cars to partake of it on the 
litter of grass prepared for their reception. Their 
favourite beverage is the exhilarating juice of the 
Soma plant. 

Their abode.—The home of the geds is described 
as heaven, the third heaven, or the highest step of 
Visnu (the zenith), where, cheered by drauglits of 
Soma, they live a life of bliss. 

Their attributes.—The most preminent charac- 
teristic of the Vedic gods is power; fer they are 
constantly described as ‘great’ and ‘mighty.’ 
They regulate the order of nature and vanquish 
the great powers of evil. They hold sway over all 
creatures: ne one can thwart their ordinances or 
live beyond the time they appoint; and the fulbl- 
ment of wishes is dependent en them. Their 
omniseicnce, which is restricted within narrow 
limits, is seldom referred te. It is an attribute 
which is emphasized in the case of Varuna only. 
The Vedic gods are benevolent beings whe bestew 
presperity on mankind, the only one in whom 
injurious traits appear being Rudra. They are, 
moreover, moral according to the standard of an 
early stage of civilization. They are described as 
‘true’ and ‘not deceitful,’ being friends and pro- 
tectors ef the honest and righteous, but punishing 
sin and guilt. They are not, however, above 
employing craft against the hostile, and occasion- 
ally practise deceit even without the justification 
ef a goed end. 

Since, in most cases, the Vedic gods have net 
yet become dissociated frem the physical pheno- 
mena which they represent, their figures are 
indefinite in outline and deficient in individuality. 
Having many features, such as power, brilliance, 
benevolence and wisdom in common with others, 
each god exhibits very few distinctive attri- 
butes. This vagueness is further increased by the 
practice of invoking deities in pairs—a practice 
making beth geds share characteristics preperly 
belonging to one alone. When nearly every power 
can thus be attributed te every ged, the identifica- 
tion of one deity with another becemes easy. 
There are, in fact, several such identifications in 
the Rigveda. The idea is even found in more 
than one late passage that various deities are but 
different ferms ef a single divine being. This 
idea, however, never developed inte monotheism, 
for nene of the regular sacrifices in the Vedic 
period were offered te a single ged. Finally, in 
other late hymns ef the Rigveda, we find the deities 
Aditi and Prajäpati identified not only with all 
the geds, but with nature as well. This brings 
us to the beginning of that pantheism which be- 
same characteristic of later Indian thought. 

Henotheism.—The practice ef inveking indivi- 
dual gods as the highest, frequent even in the 
older parts of the Rigveda, gave rise to Max 
Miller's theory of the ‘henotheism’ or ‘ katheno- 
theism’ ef that Veda, which he defines as ‘the 
belief in individual gods alternately regarded as 
the highest,’ the god addressed being fer the 
moment treated as an independent and supreme 
deity, alone present te the mind. Criticism has, 


however, shown that we have here only to do with 
an exaggerated form of praise which does not 
amount tø a distinct type of religious thought. 

The Vedic gods may mest conveniently be classi. 
fied as deities of heaven, air, and earth, according 
te an threefold division suggested by the Rigveda 
itself. 


l. CELESTIAL GODS. — The historically oldest 
among the gods of the sky, as going back to the 


Indo-European period and identical with the Greek 
Zeus, is Dyaus, Heaven. The persenitication here 
hardly went beyond the netion of paternity (Dyaus 
pitar = Zed wdrep, Jüp-piter). Dyaus is generally 
coupled with Prthivi, Earth, Sn the twe are 
celebrated as universal parents. He is once de- 
scribed as armed with a bolt, and, in another 
passage, as smiling through the clouds in allusion 
to the lightening sky. 

Another and much more prominent deity of the 
sky is Varuna, the greatest of the Vedic gods be- 
side Indra. He, tee, dates from an earlier peried, 
for in name he is probahly identical with the 
Greek Oùpavós, and in character he is allied to the 
Avestic Ahura Mazda. Varuna is the chief up- 
holder of physical and moral order (rta). By his 
ordinance heaven and earth are held apart; he 
regulates the course of sun, moon, and stars; he 
causes the rivers to flow and the cleuds to fertilize 
the earth with rain. Omniscient, he witnesses 
men’s truth and falsehood. He is angry with 
sinners, whom he severely punishes, binding them 
with his fetters. But he is gracious te the peni- 
tent, releasing men not only from their own sins, 
but from those committed by their fathers. The 
prayer fer fergiveness ef guilt is characteristic of 
the Varuna hymns, which in genera] are the mest 
exalted and ethical in the Veda. With the develop- 
ment of Prajäpati as creator and supreme god in 
the later Vedas, the importance of Varuna waned, 
till in the pest-Vedic period he retained only the 
dominion of the waters as god of the sea. 

Five geds represent various aspects of solar 
activity. The oldest of these, Mitra, the ‘friend,’ 
probably a personification of the sun’s beneficent 
power, is an inheritance from the Indo-Iranian 
peried, being identica] with the Persian sun-god 
Mithra, whose cult became se widely diffused in 
the Reman empire during the 3rd and 4th cen- 
turies A.D. In the Rigveda he has almost entirely 
lost his individuality, and is hardly ever invoked 
except in asseeiatien with Varuna. 

Sirya, etymologically allied to the Greek “HAtos 
is the most concrete of the solar deities, this being 
the regular name of the luminary. He is the 
husband of Dawn. His car, often referred to, is 
generally described as drawn by seven steeds. He is 
the soul of all that moves or is fixed, all creatures 
depending on him. He prolengs life, and drives 
away disease. His eye and his all-seeing power 
are often spoken of; and he is beseuglit te declare 
men sinless to Mitra and Varuna. 

Savitr, the ‘stimulator,’ represents the quicken- 
ing activity of the sun. Bestowing immortality 
en the gods as well as length of life on man, he 
also Et). the spirits of the dead te where the 
righteous dwell. Te him is addressed the most 
famous stanza of the Rigveda (iii. 62. 10), with 
which he was in ancient times invoked at the be- 
ginning of Vedic study, and which is still repeated 
by every orthodox Brahman in his morning prayers. 
It is called the Såvitri from the deity, or the 
Gayatri from the metre: 

‘ May we attain that excellent 
Glory of Savitr the god, 
That he may stimulate our theughts.’ 

Püsan, the ‘presperer,’ personifying probably 
the bountiful power of the sun, appears chiefly as 
a pastoral deity, who protects cattle and guides 


604 


VEDIC RELIGION 


them with his goad. He is a guardian of paths; 
and, knowing the ways of heaven, he conducts the 
dead to the abode of the fathers. 

Though occupying quite a subordinate position 
in the Rigveda, and less frequently invoked than 
the four gods just mentioned, Visnu is historically 
the most important of the solar deities ; for he has 
become one of the two great gods of modern 
Hinduism. His three strides, typifying doubtless 
the course of the sun through the three divisions 
of the universe, constitute the central feature in 
his mythology. His highest step is heaven, the 
abode of the gods. He is frequently said to have 
taken his three strides for the benefit of man. 
This general trait is illustrated by the Brähmana 
myth in which Visnu assumes the form of a dwarf 
as an artifice to recover the earth, now in posses- 
sion of demons, by taking his three strides. 
Visnu’s characteristic benevolence was in post- 
Vedic mythology further developed in the doctrine 
of his avatārs (‘descents’ to earth), or incarna- 
tions for the good of humanity. 

Usas (cognate to "Hws and Aurora), goddess of 
dawn, the ann of Dyaus, is the only female 
deity invoked with frequency in the Rigveda, and 
is the most graceful creation of the Vedic seers. 
Being a poetical rather than a religious figure, she 
did not, like the other gods, receive a share in the 
Soma offering. 

The Asvins (‘lords of steeds’), twin gods of 
morning, sons of Dyans, eternally young and hand- 
some, are addressed in many hymns. They very 
frequently receive the epithet ndsatya, ‘true.’ 
Usas is born at the yoking of their car, on which 
their spouse Süryä, daughter of the snn, accom- 
panies them. They are characteristically succour- 
ing deities. Delivering from distress in general 
and from shipwreck in particular, they are also 
divine physicians. They have several traits iu 
common with the two famons horsemen of Greek 
mythology, the Arécxovpo, sons of Zeus and 
brothers of Helen. The origin of these twin 
deities is obscure; it is perhaps most likely that 
they represent either the twilight, half dark, half 
light, or the morning and evening star. 

2. ATMOSPHERIC GODS.—Indra is the dominant 
deity in the aerial sphere. While Varuna is the 
great moral ruler, Indra is the mighty warrior. 
Indra is, indeed, the favourite and national god of 
the Vedic Indian. An indication of this is the 
fact that more than one-fourth of the Rigveda is 
devoted to his praise. He is a mythological crea- 
tion of an earlier period; for Indra is a demon in 
the Avesta. Though he is more anthropomorphic 
than any other Vedic god, his original character 
is still tolerably clear. He is primarily the thunder- 
god, and his conquest of the demon Vrtra is the 
central feature of the mythology which surrounds 
him. Henee Vrtra-han, ‘slayer of Vrtra,’ is his 
chief and specific epithet. Armed with his bolt 
(vajra), elated by copious draughts of Soma, and 
aided by the Maruts, or storm-gods, Indra engages 
in the fray. The fight is terrific; for heaven and 
earth tremble with fear as the conflict rages. The 
constant repetition of the combat corresponds to 
the perpetual renewal of the phenomena of the 
thunderstorm which underlie the myth. The 
result of the victory is the release of the waters for 
man and the recovery of the light of the sun. 
Indra thus became a god of battle whose aid is 
constantly invoked in conflicts with earthly foes. 
He is often described as the protector of the Aryan 
colour, and vanquisher of the black race. One of 
his commonest epithets is sakra, the ‘mighty one’ 
(which in the Pali form of Sakka became his regular 
name in Buddhist literature). Certain immoral 
traits appear in Indra’s character. He occasionally 
indulges in acts of capricious violence, such as 


slaying his father or shattering the car of Dawn. 
He is greatly addicted to Soma, which he drinks 
in enormous quantities to stimulate him in his 
warlike exploits. One entire hymn of the Rigveda 
(x. 119) consists of a monologue in which Indra, 
inebriated with Soma, boasts of his greatness and 
ower. While Varuna, after the period of the 
igveda, gradually sank into obscurity, Indra in 
the Brahmanas became the chief of the Indian 
heaven (svarga), and even maintained this position 
in the period of the Puranas, though, of course, 
subordinate to the trinity Brahmā-Vişnu-Siva. 

Three of the less important deities of the air are 
connected with lightning. Trita, a somewhat 
obscure god with the epithet dptya, ‘watery,’ 
mentioned only in detached verses of the Rigveda, 
seems to represent the ‘third’ (tritas = Greek 
rplros) form of fire. He goes back to the Indo- 
Iranian period, both his name and his epithet 
occurring in the Avesta. In the Rigveda he ap- 

ears as a presser of Soma, who aids Indra in slay- 
ing Vrtra and the three-headed demon Visvarüpa, 
or performs the latter exploit himself. He ie. 
the celestial fire, and even appears as a form of 
fire. His home is hidden and remote. As almost 
identical in origin with Indra, he was ousted by 
the latter at an early period. In the Brähmanas 
he appears as one of three sons of Agni, the other 
two being Ekata and Dvita. In the epic poetry 
Trita survives only as the name of a human seer. 

Apam napat, ‘son of waters,’ also goes back to 
the Indo-Iranian period. Rarely mentioned in 
the Rigveda, he is described as clothed in lightning 
and shining without fuel in the waters. He thus 
represents the lightning form of fire as produced 
from the thundercloud. 

Matarigvan is referred to only in scattered verses 
of the Rigveda as a divine being who (like the 
Greek Prometheus) brought down the hidden fire 
from heaven to earth. He was originally, in all 
likelihood, conceived as an aerial form of Agni, 
with whom he is sometimes actually identified. 
His character then underwent a transformation ; 
for in the later Vedas, the Brahmanas, and the 
post- Vedic literature he appears as a wind-god. 

It is somewhat remarkable that Rudra, the early 
form of the post-Vedic Siva, who in the Rigveda 
occupies a very subordinate position, like that of 
Visnu, should have risen to parallel pre-eminence 
with Visnu in a later age. Rudra is usually de- 
scribed as armed with bow and arrows, but some- 
times he appears with a thunderbolt and light- 
ning shaft. He is fierce and destructive like a 
wild beast, heing ‘the ruddy boar of heaven.’ 
The most striking feature of the hymns addressed 
to him is fear of his terrible shafts and depreca- 
tion of his wrath. For he slays men and cattle. 
and assails with disease. He is, indeed, the one 
malignant deity of the Vedas. His malevolence, 
however, unlike that of a demon, is not the only 
side of his character. For he is a healer as well 
as a destroyer, being even lauded as the greatest 
of physicians. Thus he is often besought not only 
to preserve from calamity, but to bestow welfare 
on man and beast. The euphemistic epithet Siva, 
‘auspicious,’ which begins to be applied to him 
in the Rigveda, grows more frequent in the later 
Vedas, till it finally becomes his regular name in 
post-Vedic mythology. With the increasing use 
of this epithet, the malevolence of Rudra becomes 
more pronounced in the later Vedas. The White 
Yajurveda, which adds various disgraceful attri. 
butes, furnishes the transition to the terrific and 
repulsive Siva of Hindu mythology. The exact 
basis of Rudra is somewhat obscure; but the in- 
ference from the evidence of the Rigveda seems to 
be justified that he originally represented the 
destructive agency of the thunderstorm. His un- 


VEDIC RELIGION 


605 


canny and baleful traits have, however, also been 
explained as starting from the conception of a 
deity of mountain and forest whence storm and 
disease attack man and beast. 

The sons of Rudra and Préni (the ‘mottled’ 
cloud-cow) are the Maruts, or storm-gods, also 
often called Rudras, a group of thrice seven or 
thrice sixty deities, the constant allies of Indra in 
his conlliets. They are described as like fires at 
their birth, and as ‘born from the laughter of 
lightning.’ They are young warriors, armed with 
spears and battle-axes, wearing lielmets and decked 
with golden ornaments. Their headlong course is 
often graphically depicted. They ride on golden 
cars which gleam with lightning: with their fellies 
they rend the mountains and shatter the lordly 
trees of the forest. They share to some extent the 
destructive as wel! as the beneficent traits of their 
father Rudra, Their lightning-bolt slays men and 
kine. But they also bring healing remedies, ap- 
parently the rains with which they fertilize the 
earth. 

The god of wind is not a prominent deity in the 
Rigveda. Under the more anthropomorphic form 
of Vayu he is chiefly associated with Indra. As 
Vata (the ordinary name of wind), he is described 
in a more concrete manner (often in connexion 
with the verb vd, ‘to blow,’ from which the word 
is derived), being coupled only with the less an- 
thropomorphic god Parjanya. 

A personification of the rain-cloud is Parjanya, 
son of Dyaus. He is not a prominent deity, being 
invoked in only three hymns of the Rigveda, which, 
however, describe his activity in the rainstorm 
very vividly. He quickens the earth with rain, 
causing abundant vegetation to spring up. He 
also bestows fertility on the animal Sosa He 
thus comes to be spoken of as “our divine father.’ 

The waters, Apah, are praised as divine powers 
in four hymns of the Rigveda. They are celestial, 
abiding in the home of the gods. The aerial waters 
are the mothers of one of the forms of Agni, Apäm 
napat, son of waters. But, as flowing in channels 
and having the sea for their goal, the waters are also 
terrestrial (cf. 3). They are young wives, mothers, 
goddesses who bestow boons and come to the sacri- 
hee. They not only bear away defilement, but 
cleanse from moral guilt, the sins of violence, 
cursing, and lying. They also grant remedies, 
healing, long life, and immortality. 

3. TERRESTRIAL DEITIES.—Rivers are not in- 
frequently personified and invoked in the Rigveda. 
Thus the Sindhu (Indus) is celebrated as a goddess 
in one hymn, and the Vipas (Bids) and Sutudri 
(Sutlej), sister streams of the Panjab, in another. 
The most important and oftenest lauded is, how- 
ever, the Sarasvati. Though the personification 
goes much further bere than in the case of other 
streams, the connexion of the Goddess with the 
river is never lost sight of in the Rigveda. In the 
Brahmanas, Sarasvati has become identified with 
the goddess of speech, and in Hindn mythology 
she appears further modified as the goddess of 
eloquence and wisdom, invoked as a Muse, and 
regarded as the wife of Brahma. 

Earth, or Prthivi, the broad, nearly always 
associated with Dyaus, is often spoken of as a 
mother. The personification is rudimentary, the 
attributes of the goddess being chiefly those of 
the physical earth. 

By far the most important of the terrestrial 
deities is Agni, god of üre. Next to Indra, he is 
the most frequently invoked of the Vedic gods, 
heing celebrated in about one-fifth of the hymns 
of the Rigveda. It is only natural that the per- 
sonification of the sacrificial fire, the centre of the 
Vedic ritual, should engross the thoughts of the 
poets to such an extent. Agni-s (Lat. igni-s) 


being also the ordinary name for fire, the an- 
thropoinorphism has not proceeded far. The 
bodily parts of the god have an uninistakable 
connexion with the various aspects of the sacri- 
ficial fire. Thus Agni is called ‘butter-backed,’ 
‘butter-faced,’ and “butter-haired,’ with reference 
to the oblation of ght (ghrta) cast on the llames. 
His teeth, jaws, and tongues are associated with 
the action of burning. Agni is borne on a brilliant 
car, drawn by two or more steeds, which he yokes 
to bring the gods, for he is the charioteer of the 
sacrifice. 

Beyond his sacrificial activities, little is said 
about the deeds of Agni. It is otherwise mainly 
his various births, forms, and abodes that ocenpy 
the thoughts of the Vedic poets. Agni is usually 
called the son of Dyans and Prthivi, sometimes 
also the offspring of Tvastr and the waters. But 
owing to the daily production of Agni from the 
two firesticks, they, too, are his parents. He is 
then a newborn infant, also called ‘son of 
strength’ because of the powerful friction re- 

uired to kindle the flame. He wakes at dawn, 
or the fire is lit every morning. He is thus the 
youngest of the gods; but he is also old, having 
conducted the first sacrifice. 

As not only terrestrial, but sprung from the 
aerial waters and having been brought from 
heaven, Agni is often spoken of as having a triple 
character. This threefold Agni is the earliest 
Indian trinity, probably the prototype not only of 
the later Rigvedic triad of Sun, Wind, Fire, con- 
nected with the three divisions of the universe, 
but also of the triad Sun, Indra, Fire, which, 
though not Rigvedie, is still ancient. There may 
be a historical connexion between this triad and 
the conception of the later Hindu trinity of 
Brahma - Visnu-Siva. This triad of fires may, 
further, have suggested, and would explain, the 
division of a single sacrificial fire into the three 
which form an essential feature in the cult of the 
Brahmanas. 

As kindled in innumerable dwellings, Agni is 
also said to have many births. He assumes vari- 
ous divine forms and has many names ; in him are 
comprehended all the gods, whom he surrounds as 
a felly the spokes. Though scattered in many 
Places he is one and tbe same king. It was pro- 

ably from such speculations on the nature of 
Agni that an advance was made to the conception 
of a unity pervading the many manifestations of 
the divine which has been noted above (p. 6033). 

As the deity most intimately associated with 
the everyday life of man, Agni is spoken of as an 
immortal who has taken up his abode among 
mortals in human dwellings, and is constantly 
called a ‘ guest’ and ‘lord of the house.’ Being 
the conductor of the sacrifice as wel] as the sum- 
moner of the gods, he is very frequently described 
as a ‘ messenger, who moves between heaven and 
earth. Agni is, however, most characteristically 
called a ‘priest,’ usually by the generic terms 
rtvij and vipra; or specifically ‘domestic priest’ 
(purohita), oftenest of all ‘invoker’ or ‘chief priest’ 
(hotr). He is, in fact, the great priest among the 
Vedic gods, as Indra is the great warrior. Agni 
is a mighty benefactor of his worshippers, whose 
enemies he consumes. The benefits which he 
confers are chiefly domestic welfare and general 
prosperity, while those which Indra grants are 
mostly the rewards of victory. 

Agni is frequently spoken of in the Rigveda as 
a ‘goblin-slayer,’ a trait surviving from what is 
perhaps the oldest phase of the cult of fire as ward- 
ing off the attack of evil spirits. 

eee the Soma sacrilice fornis, by the side of 
fire-worship, the other main feature in the ritual 
of the Rigveda, the personification of the juice of 


606 


the Soma plant is naturally one of its most promi- 
aent deities. Judged by the number of hymns 
addressed to him, Soma is third in importance 
among the Vedie gods, coming next to Agni from 
this point of view. Since the plant and the juice 
are constantly before the eyes of the priests as 
they sing the praises of the god, the personification 
is vague. The imagination of the poets dwells 
chiefly on the processes of pressing and straining, 
which it overlays with chaotic imagery and mys- 
tical fancies of almost infinite variety. 

As the most important of herbs, Soma is spoken 
of as ‘lord of plants’ or as their king, being also 
designated ‘lord of the forest.” There are many 
references to Soma growing on the mountains. 
Heaven, however, is regarded as its true and 
original home ; and the myth of its having been 
brought down to earth by an eagle (syena) is often 
alluded to. 

The mental stimulation produced by drinking 
Soma is expressed by one of the poets of the 
Rigveda with the words: ‘We have drunk Soma, 
we have become immortal, we have entered into 
light, we have known the gods.’ Its exhilarating 
power is, however, dwelt upon chiefly in connexion 
with Indra, whom it inspires in his mighty con- 
flicts with the aerial demons. Soma thus came to 
be regarded as a divine drink, which hestowed 
immortality on the gods, being called amrta (allied 
to Greek dp8pecta), the ‘immortal’ draught. 
Hence the god Soma places his worshipper in the 
imperishable world of eternal light and glory, 
making him immortal where Yama dwells. Heal- 
ing power is similarly attributed to Soma. The 
juice is medicine for the ailing man, and the god 

eals the sick, making the hlind to see and the 
lame to walk. 

In some of the latest hymns of the Rigveda, 
Soma begins to be somewhat obscurely identi- 
fied with the moon. In the Atharvaveda and 
the Yajurveda this identification is explicit in 
several passages. It is already a commonplace 
in the Brahmanas, which explain the waning of 
the moon as due to the gods and fathers consum- 
ing the ambrosia of which it consists. One of the 
Upanisads, moreover, states that the moon is 
king Soma, the food of the gods, and is drunk up 
by them. In post-Vedic literature, finally, Soma 
is a regular name of the moon. This somewhat 
remarkable coalescence of Soma with the moon 
must have started from the exaggerated terms in 
which the poets of the Rigveda describe the 
celestial nature and brilliance of Soma. It was 
doubtless furthered by the imagery in which the 
poets of the Rigveda indulged. Thus Soma is 
spoken of as swelling in the waters (with which it 
was mixed), and Soma in the bowls is once even 
compared to the moon in the waters. Soma is 
often called Indu, or ‘drop.’ This word shared 
the fate of Soma, also becoming a regular name 
of the moon in the post- Vedic period. 

Soma must already have been an important 
feature in both the mythology and the cult of the 
Indo-Iranian period ; for the Avestan Haoma shows 
many points of agreement, in both directions, with 
the Soma of the Rigveda. 

4. ABSTRACT DEITIES.—One result of the ad- 
vance of thought, during the period of the Rigveda, 
from the concrete towards the abstract was the 
creation of abstract deities. Of the two classes 
which may be distinguished, the earlier and more 
numerous one seems to have started from epithets 
which were applicable to one or more older deities, 
but which came to acquire an independent value, 
as the want of a god exercising the particular 
activity in question began to be felt. When the 
type was once established, the creation of direct 
abstractions of this kind became possible. We 


VEDIC RELIGION 


have here names denoting either an agent (formed 
with the suffix -fr or -tar, the Lat. and Gr. -tor, 
-ter), such as Dhatr, ‘creator,’ or an attribute, 
such as Prajapati, ‘lord of creatures.’ The agent 
gods are nearly all of rare occurrence, appearing 
for the most part in the latest book of the Rigveda. 
Thus Dhätr, an epithet of Indra and ViSvakarman, 
appears also as an independent deity who creates 
heaven and earth, sun and moon. In the post- 
Vedic period Dhatr has become one of the regular 
names of the creator and preserver of the world. 
Of rarer occurrence are Vidhatr, the ‘disposer,’ 
Dhartr, the ‘supporter,’ Tratr, the ‘protector,’ 
and Netr, the ‘leader.’ The only agent god 
mentioned with any frequency in the Rigveda is 
Tvastr, the ‘fashioner’ or ‘artificer,’ though no 
hymn is addressed to him. He is the most skilful 
of workmen, having among other things fashioned 
the bolt of Indra, and a new drinking-cup for the 
gods. He shapes the form of beings and presides 
over generation. He is a guardian of Soma, which 
is called the ‘mead of Tvastr,’ and Indra drinks it 
in his house. He is the father of Saranyü, wife 
of Vivasvat and mother of the primeval twins 
Yama and Yami. The origin of this deity is 
obscure. He may in the beginning have repre- 
sented the creative activity of the sun; having 
then, because of his name, become the centre of 
attraction for myths illustrative of creative skill, 
he finally came to fill the place of a divine 
artificer in the Vedie pantheon. Oldenberg thinks 
that Tvastr, the ‘artificer,’ was originally a direct 
abstraction of artistic skill. He regards the solar 
deity Savitr, the ‘stimulator,’ whose name is simi- 
larly formed, as from the outset an abstraction of 
this type. 

There are a few other abstract deities whose 
names were originally epithets of older gods. They 
are of rare and late occurrence in the Rigveda, 
their appellations being mostly compound in form 
and representing the supreme god who was being 
evolved at the end of the Rigvedie period. The 
historically most important among these is Praja- 
pati, ‘lord of creatures.’ Originally an epithet 
of such gods as Savitr and Soma, the name is 
mentioned in a late verse of the last book of the 
Rigveda as that of a distinct deity in the character 
of a creator. Prajäpati is often in the Atharvaveda 
and the White Yajurveda, and regularly in the 
Brähmanas, recognized as the chief and father of 
the gods. In the Sütras he is identified with 
Brahma, his successor in the post- Vedic age. 
Similarly, the epithet ViSvakarman, ‘all-creating,’ 
appears as the name of an independent deity, to 
whom two hymns of the last book of the Rigveda 
are addressed. In the Brähmanas, Visvakarman 
is expressly identified with the creator Prajapati, 
while in post-Vedie mythology he appears, doubt 
less owing to the name, as the artificer of the 
gods (like Tvastr in the Rigveda). Hiranya-garbha, 
the ‘golden germ,’ once occurs in the Rigveda as 
the supreme god, described as the ‘one lord of all 
that exists.’ In the Yajurveda he is expressly 
identified with Prajäpati, and in the later literature 
his name appears chiefly as a designation of 
Brahma. In one curious instance it is possible to 
watch the genesis of an abstract deity of this type. 
The refrain of a late hymn of the Rigveda refers 
to the unknown creator with the interrogative 
pronoun ka: ‘What god should we with sacrifices 
worship?’ This led to the word Ka being used, 
in the later Vedic literature, as an independent 
name of the supreme god. In the Atharvaveda 
Rohita, ‘the red one’ (whose female form is 
Rohini), has become a distinct deity in the capacity 
of a creator, the name having originally been an 
epithet of the sun. The only abstract deity of 
this type occurring in the oldest as well as the 


VEDIO RELIGION 


latest parts of the Rigveda is Brhaspati, ‘lord of 
the spell,’ of whom Brahmanaspati is a frequent 
doublet. He has been regarded hy Roth and 
other Vedic scholars as_a direct personification 
of devotion (brahma). To the present writer it 
seems more likely that he is only an indirect 
deitication of the sacrificial aspect of Agni, with 
whom he is often identified. As the companion 
and ally of Indra, Brhaspati has been drawn into 
the myth of the release of the cows, which he is 
frequently described as delivering from the demon 
Vala. His most prominent characteristic is, how- 
ever, his priesthood. As the divine brahmd priest, 
he seems to have been the prototype of the god 
Brahma, chief of the later Hindu trinity. The 
name Brhaspati itself survived in post-Vedie my- 
thology as the designation of a sage, teacher of 
the gods and regent of the planet Jupiter. 

The second and smaller class of abstract deities 
comprises personifications of abstract nouns. There 
are seven or eight of these occurring in the last 
book of the Rigveda. Two hymns are addressed 
to Manyu, ‘wrath,’ and one to Sraddhä, ‘faith.’ 
Anumati, ‘favour’ (of the gods), Aramati, ‘de- 
votion, Sünrtd, ‘bounty,’ Asuniti, ‘spirit-life,’ 
and Nirrti, ‘decease,’ occur in only a few isolated 
passages. These abstractions become commoner 
in the later Vedas. Thus Kama, ‘desire,’ first 
appears in the Atharvaveda, where the arrows 
with which he pierces hearts are already referred 
to; he becomes in post-Vedie mythology the well- 
known flower-arrowed god of love. In the same 
Veda Kala, ‘time,’ and Skambha, ‘support,’ are 
cosmogonic powers, while Prana, ‘breath,’ and 
some other analogous abstractions are identified 
with Prajäpati. Sri, as a personification of beauty 
or fortune, does not begin to appear till the 
Brähmana period. 

A purely abstract deity, often incidentally cele- 
brated throughout the Rigveda, is Aditi, ‘libera- 
tion,’ ‘freedom’ (literally ‘un-binding’: a-diti), 
whose main characteristic is the power of deliver- 
ing from the bonds of physical suifering and mora] 
guilt. She, however, occupies a unique position 
among the abstract deities owing to the peculiar 
way in which the personification seems to have 
come about. She is the mother of the small group 
of deities called Adityas, often styled ‘sons of 
Aditi’ This expression at first most probably 
meant nothing more than ‘sons of liberation,’ 
according to an idiom common in the Rigveda and 
elsewhere. The word was then personified, with 
the curious result that the mother is mythologi- 
cally younger than some at least of her sons, who 
(e.g. Mitra) date from the Indo-Iranian period. 
The goddess Diti, mentioned only three times in the 
Rigveda, probably came into being as an antithesis 
to Aditi, with whom she is twice mentioned there 
and several] timesin the later Vedas. The Atharva- 
veda speaks of her sons, the Daityas, who in post- 
Vedic mythology are demons, enemies of the gods, 

5. GODDESSES, in general play an insignificant 
part in the Vedas, taking no share in the govern- 
ment of the world. The only one of importance is 
Usas (p. 604°). Next comes Sarasvati, who, how- 
ever, ranks with only the least prominent of the 
male deities, Very few others are celebrated in 
even as much as one entire hymn. Such are 
Prthivi, Earth (p. 605°); Ratri, Night, the sister of 
Dawn, conceived not as dark, but bright with 
stars; Aranydni, goddess of the forest ; and Vac, 
goddess of speech. Others are only sporadically 
mentioned. Such are Puramdhi and Dhisand, god- 
desses of plenty. Less often referred to are Kaka 
and Sinivali, spoken of as bountiful goddesses ; in 
later Vedic texts they appear as the presiding 
deities of full and new moon respectively. Kuhu 
is also mentioned in these texts as a personification 


607 


of the new moon. Ild is a sacrificial goddess, the 
perronen tion of the oblation of milk and butter. 
Vith her is also mentioned Mahi or Bhärati, an- 
other sacrificial deity. The wives of the great 
gods are still more insignificant, being mere names 
formed from those of their consorts, altogether 
lacking in individuality. Thus Agnäyt, Indrani, 
Varunäni are the names of the spouses of Agni, 
Indra, and Varuna respectively. Budränt, as the 
wife of Rudra, first appears in the Sütras. The 
‘wives of the gods’ (devdndm patnis), occasionally 
mentioned as a group in the Rigveda, have a special 
place assigned to them, apart from the gods, in the 
cult of the Brähmanas. 

6. DUAL DIVINITIES. —A peculiar feature of 
Vedic religion is the invocation of pairs of deities 
whose names are combined as dual compounds. 
About a dozen such pairs are celebrated in entire 
hymns, and about half a dozen more in detached 
verses of the Rigveda. By far the largest number 
of hymns is addressed to the couple Mitra-Varuna, 
though the names most frequently compounded in 
the dual are Heaven and Earth (dydvdprthivi). 
Most likely the latter pair, having been associated 
as universal parents from the Indo-European period 
onwards, furnished the analogy for this dual type. 
They are also often called the Two Worlds (rodas?) 
in the Rigveda. 

7. GROUPS OF DEITIES.—Among the creations of 
Vedic mythology we also find a few more or less 
definite groups of deities, generally associated with 
some particular god. The Maruts who, as we 
have seen (p. 605*), attend on Indra, form the most 
numerous group. Under the name of Rudras, 
they are also occasionally associated with their 
father Rudra. Tbe smaller group of the Adityas, 
of whom Varuna is the chief, are constantly men- 
tioned in company with their mother Aditi. Their 
number in the Rigveda is stated to be seven or, 
with the addition of Afadrtanda, eight; while in 
the Brahmanas and later it is regularly twelve. 
One passage of the Rigveda enumerates six of 
them: Mitra, Aryaman, Bhaga, Varuna, Daksa, 
Amsa; Sürya was probably regarded as the 
seventh. A much less important group, without 
individual names or definite number in the Vedas, 
is that of the Vasus, whose leader is, in the Rig- 
veda, Keneral ly Indra, but in later Vedic texts 
generally Agni. In the Brähmanas their number 
is stated to be eight. There are, finally, the 
Visvedeväs, or all-gods, who are invoked in many 
hymns. It is an artificial sacrificial group, in- 
tended to include the whole pantheon, and thus 
to ensure the omission of no Bie when all were 
meant to be invoked. But in spite of its name, 
this comprehensive group was, strange to say, 
sometimes conceived as a narrower one, associated 
with others like the Vasus and Adityas. 


B. LESSER DIVINITIES. 

1, ELVES, GENII. — Besides the higher gods 
already described, a number of lesser divine 
powers are known to the Rigveda. The most 
prominent of these are the Rbhus, a deft-handed 
trio who by their marvellous skill acquired the 
rank of deities. Among their five main feats of 
dexterity, the greatest consisted in transforming 
the bow] of Tvastr into four shining cups. The 
bowl and the cups have been variously interpreted 
as the moon with its four phases or the year with 
its seasons. The Rbhus further exhibited their 
skill in renewing the youth of their parents, by 
whom Heaven and Earth seem to have been meant. 
The myth of the Rbhus having rested for twelve 
days in the house of the sun is probably an allusion 
to the intercalation of twelve days at the winter 
solstice, so as to bring the lunar year of 354 days 
into harmony with the solar year of nearly 366 days. 


608 


Occasional mention is made in the Rigveda of 
an Apsaras (‘moving in the waters’), a celestial 
water-nymph, the spouse of a corresponding genius 
named Gandharva. Occasionally more Apsarases 
than one are spoken of. In the Atharvaveda 
and later, the Apsarases form a class, regularly 
associated with the Gandharvas; and though they 
are still connected with the waters and clouds, 
their sphere is here, as well as in the Yajurveda, 
extended to the earth, where they haunt the dif- 
ferent varieties of fig-trees called Nyagrodha, 
Asvattha, Udumhara, and Plaksa, in which the 
music of their cymbals and lutes is heard. In the 
Brahmanas they appear as nymphs of great ie 
devoted to song, dance, and play. Several indi- 
vidual names of Apsarases are mentioned in the 
later Vedas, but the only one occurring in the 
Rigveda is that of Urvas. In an obscure hymn 
(x. 95) she engages in a dialogue with her earthly 
spouse Purüravas, whom she has forsaken. The 
myth of their alliance is told more fully in one of 
the Brahmanas. Gandharva is, in the hen. a 
single being (like the Gandarewa of the Avesta), 
who dwells in the aerial sphere, guards the celestial 
Soma, and is (as in the Avesta) connected with the 
waters. In the Jater Vedas the Gandharvas form 
a class associated with the Apsarases in a stereo- 
typed manner, and are bronght into relation with 
marriage and with wedding ceremonies. In the 
post-Vedie period the Gandharvas have hecome 
celestial singers. 

2. TUTELARY DEITIES.—There are a few div- 
inities of the tutelary order, guardians watch- 
ing over the welfare of house or field. One of 
these is Vastospati, ‘lord of the dwelling,’ rarely 
mentioned in the Rigveda, where he is invoked 
to grant a favourable entry, to remove disease, 
and to bestow protection and prosperity. The 
Sütras preserihe that Vastospati should be pro- 
pitiated when a new house is to he oceupied. 
Ksetrasya pati, ‘lord of the field,’ is besought 
in the Rigveda to grant cattle and horses and 
to confer prosperity. The Sütras state that he is 
to he worshipped when a field is ploughed. Siéa, 
the ‘furrow,’ is once invoked in the Rigveda to 
dispense crops and rich blessings. In a Sütra she 
appears as the wife of Indra. Here, too, Urvara, 
the ‘arable field,’ with her garland of threshing- 
floors, is supplicated to bestow welfare. 


C. HEROES. 

The heroes of the Rigveda are all ancient seers 
or priests. (1) The most important of them is 
Manu or Manus (which also means ‘man’), the 
ancestor of the human race, styled ‘our father’ by 
the poets, who also speak of the sacrificers of 
their own day as ‘the people of Manu.’ Regarded 
as the son of Vivasvat, he bears the patronymic 
Vaivasvata from the Atharvaveda onwards. He 
is thns a doublet of Yama as progenitor of man- 
kind. He is represented as the institutor of 
sacrifice. Soma is said to have heen brought to 
him by the bird, and Indra is described as drink- 
ing the Soma of Manu to fortify him for the 
conflict with Vrtra. In the Satapatha Brahmana, 
Manu plays the part of Noah, bee saved in a 
ship from a deluge, which has swept away all 
other creatures, by a fish (in post- Vedic mythology 
an avatar of Visnu). Manu then became the 
ancestor of the human race throngh his danghter 
Ilä, who was produced from his offerings. 
(2) Atharvan is frequently mentioned in the Rig- 
veda as an ancient fire-priest, who practised 
devotion along with Father Manu. In the Athar- 
vaveda he appears as a Som banen of the gods, 
being related to them and dwelling in heaven. 
The name is also found in the plural as that of 
& group of fathers. In the Atharvaveda, the 


VEDIC RELIGION 


Atharvans are described as destroying goblins 
with a magical herb. (3) Dadhyaäc, son of Athar- 
van, is a sacrificer who kindled Agni in the days 
of old. A myth told about him is that the Asvins 
gave him a horse’s head, with which he proclaimed 
to them where the mead of Tvastr was to be found. 
Indra is also connected with this myth; for he is 
said to have discovered the horse’s head, and with 
the bones of Dadhyaäc to have slain ninety-nine 
Vrtras. (4) Atri is one of the ancient seers most 
frequently mentioned in the Rigveda. The myth 
of his deliverance from a fiery chasm by the Asvins 
is often referred to. He is also said to have found 
the sun when hidden hy the demon Svarbhanu and 
to have placed it in the sky. The Atris are a 
family of seers to whom the authorship of the fifth 
hook of the Rigveda is attributed. (5) Kanva is 
another ancient seer and sacrificer often spoken 
of in the Rigveda. He is said to have heen be- 
friended by Agni, Indra, and the Maruts; and to 
have been specially aided by the Asvins, who re- 
stored his eyesight. Most of the hymns of the 
eighth book of the Rigveda are attributed to his 
descendants the Kanvas. (6) Kutsa is one of the 
very few Vedic heroes who exhibit warlike traits. 
He is chiefly connected with the Indra myth. 
Riding on the same car as Indra and acting as 
his charioteer, he is even invoked with Indra in 
the dual. He is aa associated with Indra 
in slaying the demon Susna. When Kntsa was 
pressed by his foes, Indra tore off the wheel of the 
sun to aid him. Nevertheless Indra sometimes 
appears as hostile to Kutsa, delivering him into the 
hands of an enemy. Several hymns of the first 
and ninth hooks of the Rigveda are assigned by 
tradition to the seer Kutsa. (7) Much less fre- 
quently mentioned in the Rigveda is the seer 
Kavya UsSanä, whose characteristic feature is 
wisdom. He, too, is associated with Indra. He 
is said to have fashioned for Indra the bolt for 
slaying Vrtra; and,once joins him and Kutsa in 
slaying the demon Susna. (8) Some names, more- 
over, appear predominantly or exclusively in the 
plural as representing families or groups of ancient 
seers, who, if in some cases historical in origin, 
have become invested with mythological traits. A 
frequently mentioned group of this kind are the 
Angirases, who are closely associated with Indra 
in the myth of the capture of the cows. They are 
described as seers who are the sons of the gods, 
and who by sacrifice obtained immortality as well 
as the friendship of Indra. They receive offerings 
of Soma, and are invoked like gods. When used 
in the singular, angiras is nearly always an 
epithet of Agni, who is called the first seer 
Angiras or the chief Angiras. The word angiras 
appears to he etymologically identical with the 
Greek Gyyedos, ‘messenger.’ This points to the 
Angirases originally having been regarded as 
messengers hetween heaven and earth, attendant 
on Agni. But if they were mythical in origin, 
they came to be regarded as an actual priestly 
family, the composition of the ninth book of the 
Rigveda being attributed to them. This is also 
indicated by the compound term Atharva-angir- 
asah, ‘the Atharvans and Angirases,’a designation 
of the Atharvaveda which occurs in that Veda 
itself as well as later. (9) Another group of 
ancient priests are the Bhrgus, chiefly connected 
with the myth of the communication of fire to men. 
The Indian Prometheus, Mätarisvan, brought the 
hidden Agni from heaven to the Bhrgus, who estab- 
lished and diffused the sacrificial fire on earth. 
In two or three passages of the Rigveda they 
are referred to as if au actual trihe of bygone 
days. In the later Vedic literature, Bhrgu is the 
eponymous hero of a tribe, and regarded as a son 
of Varuna. (10) A definite numerical group of 


VEDIC RELIGION 


609 


ancient priests, but rarely referred to in the Rig- 
veda, are the ‘Seven Seers’ (sapta rsayah). They 
are associated with the gods and ealled divine. 
Their number may have been suggested by the 
seven teelınical priests, of whom they would then 
represent the prototypes. In the Satapatha Brah- 
mana they are regarded as the seven stars in the 
constellation of the Great Bear, and are stated 
to have themselves heen originally bears, This 
identification was doubtless brought about by the 
sameness of number in the two groups, aided by 
the similarity of sound between rsi, ‘seer,’ and 
rksa, which in the Rigveda means both ‘star’ and 
‘bear.’ (11) The above groups are all spoken of 
as ‘fathers,’ and nearly all of them, as a few 
others, are mentioned as races of ancestors to 
whom worship is paid. Those thus characterized 
in the Rigveda are the Navagvas, Vairüpas, 
Angirases, Atharvans, Bhrgus, Vasisthas. The 
last four, whether mythieal in origin or not, appear 
in the historical aspect of families to which the 
composition of the Atharvaveda and two books of 
the Rigveda was attributed. 


D. ANIMALS. 

Animals play a considerable part in the mytho- 
logical and religious ideas of the Veda. (1) 
Among them the horse is prominent as drawing 
the cars of the gods. There are also mentioned in 
the Rigveda at least four individual steeds, prob- 
ably all representing the sun, which are regarded 
as deities and objeets of worship. The most not- 
able of these is Dadhikra or Dadhikrävan, to whom 
four hymns are addressed. He is deseribed as a 
swift and victorious steed, regularly invoked with 
Usas, oecasionally with Agni, the Asvins, Sürya, 
and others. The divine horse Tärksya, addressed 
in one short hymn of the Rigveda, is a god- 
impelled mighty steed, a vanquisher of chariots, 
speeding to battle. In one or two later Vedic 
texts Tarksya is referred to asa bird; and in the 
epic and later literature he is identical with the 
swift bird Garnda, the vehicle of Visnu. A third 
steed, several times mentioned, is Paidva, spoken 
of as white, a dragon-slayer, a conqueror invincible 
in battles, worthy to be invoked like the god Bhaga 
by men. Lastly, there is Htasa, the swift steed 
who draws the bright form of the sun, but also 
contends in a race with Sürya. (2) The cow, 
however, is the animal which occupies the most 
important position in Vedie mythology and re- 
ligion. Cows, representing beams of light, draw 
the car of Dawn. Rain-clouds, especially in the 
Indra myth, are personified as cows; Prsni, the 
mother of the Maruts, being an individualization. 
The bountiful clouds are doubtless the proto- 
types of the many-coloured cows, mentioned in 
the Atharvaveda, which yield all desires in the 
heaven of the Blest, and which are the forerunners 
of the Cow of Plenty (Kämaduh) of post-Vedie 
poetry. The animal herself is already regarded as 
sacred in the Rigveda; for one of the poets im- 

resses on his hearers that she should not be 

illed, and she is frequently designated by the 
term aghnyd, ‘not to be slain.’ She is even 
addressed as a goddess; and the divinities lā, 
Aditi, and Prthivi are sometimes conceived in the 
form of a cow. In the Atharvaveda the worship 
of the cow as a sacred animal is fully recognized. 
That the tendeney to deification had already begun 
before the Aryans entered India is proved by the 
evidence of the Avesta, which shows that the 
sanctity of the cow is at least as old as the Indo- 
Iranian period. (3) In the Rigveda the goat is 
the animal that draws the car of Püsan. This 
is also the form of the divine being Aja Ekapad, 
‘the one-footed goat.’ In the later Vedic litera- 
ture we oceasionally find the goat connected or | 

VOL. X11.—39 


identilied with Agni. (4) The ass appears in Vedic 
mythology only as drawing the ear of the Asvins. 
(5) The dog is met with in the form of the 
two brindled hounds of Yama, chief of the dead. 
(6) The boar has, in the Yajurveda, a cosmo- 
gonie character, as the form assumed by the 
creator Prajäpati when he raised the earth out 
of the waters. From this eonception the boar 
incarnation of Visnu was developed in Hindu my- 
thology. (7) The tortoise has, in the later Vedas, 
acquired a semi-divine position ; for in the White 
Yajurveda he is spoken of as ‘lord of waters,’ and 
in the Atharvaveda he appears under the name of 
Kasyapa, beside or as identical with Prajäpati, 
receiving the epithet Svayambhd, ‘self-existent.’ 
In the Satapatha Brähmana, Prajäpati is said, 
when producing all creatures, to have changed 
himself into a tortoise. This transformation be- 
came, in Hindu mythology, the tortoise incarnation 
of Visnu. (8) A monkey named Vrsakapi appears 
in an obscure myth told in a late hymn of the 
Rigveda as a favourite of Indra. (9) Another late 
hymn contains a panegyrie of frogs as bestowing 
cows and long life. (10) The bird frequently figures 
in Vedic mythology, as the eagle (syena) that 
brings the Soma to Indra. Noxious animals in 
Vedie mythology generally appear as demons or 
exhibit demoniac traits. (11) The serpent is here 
the most prominent. This is the form which the 
powerful demon Vrtra, the foe of Indra, is thought 
to possess ; for he is frequently designated as aft, 
‘the snake.’ The serpent, however, also shows a 
beneficent aspect in the divine being Ahi Budhnya, 
‘the dragon of the deep,’ who is supposed to 
dwell in the fathomless depths of the aerial ocean. 
In the later Vedas, the serpents (sarpäk) are men- 
tioned, along with the Gandharvas and others, as 
aclass of semi-divine beings that dwell on earth, 
in air, and in heaven; and in the Sütras, offerings 
to them are prescribed. In the Sütras, we for the 
first time come across the Nagas, human beings in 
appearance, but serpents in reality. In the Hindu 
eriod, serpent-worship is found all over India. 
Since there is no trace of it in the Rigveda, while 
it prevails widely among the non-Aryan tribes, 
the conclusion seems justified that, when the 
Aryans overspread India, the land of serpents, 
they found the cult diffused among the aborigines 
and borrowed it from them. 


E. DEIFIED INANIMATE OBJECTS. 

Besides the great phenomena of nature, various 
features of the earth’s surface, as well as artificial 
objects, are treated as deities in the Vedas. This 
is a fetishistic worship of inanimate things chiefly 
regarded as useful to man. 

I. Mountains are frequently addressed as divini- 
ties in the Rigveda, but only along with other 
natural objects, such as rivers and plants, or in 
association with gods. Parvata, ‘niountain,’ is 
even invoked with Indra in the form of a dual com- 
pound. Besides rivers and waters, already men- 
tioned as terrestrial goddesses, plants (osadhi) are 
regarded as divine powers. One entire hymn of 
the Rigveda is devoted to their praise, chiefly with 
reference to their healing powers ; the Atharvaveda 
refers to a medicinal plant as ‘a goddess born on 
the goddess earth’; and the Black Yajurveda pre- 
scribes an animal sacrifice to plants for the ob- 
taining of offspring. Large trees, called ‘lords 
of the forest’ (vanaspati), are also sometimes ad- 
dressed as deities, mainly in association with 
waters and mountains. 

2. Various sacrificial implements are deified. 
The most important is the sacrificial post. It is 
praised and invoked in a whole hymn of the Rig- 
veda, in which posts set up by priests are deseribed 
as gods. The sacrificial litter (barhis) is also dei- 


610 


VEDIC RELIGION 


fied, and the ‘divine doors,’ by which the sacri- 
ficial enclosure is entered, are goddesses. The 
pressing stones (grävan) are addressed as deities in 
three hymns of the Rigveda ; spoken of here asim- 
mortal, unaging, more mighty than heaven, they 
are invoked to drive away demons and destruc- 
tion. The mortar and pestle used in pounding the 
Soma plant are invoked in the Rigveda. In the 
Atharvaveda divine power of the highest order is 
ascribed to ucchista, the ‘remnant’ of the sacri- 
fice, as well as to various sacrificial ladles. The 
agricultural implements named suna and sird, pro- 
bably the ploughshare and the plough, are invoked 
in a few verses of the Rigveda, and, in the ritual, 
receive the offering of a cake. 

3. Weapons, finally, are sometimes deified; 
armour, bow, quiver, arrows, and drum being in- 
voked in one of the hymns of the Rigveda. The 
drum alone is also celebrated in an entire hymn of 
the Atharvaveda. 

4. Idols seem not to have been known in the age 
of the Vedas ; at all events they first begin to be 
referred to in the later additions to the Brahmanas 
and in the Siitras. One verse of the Rigveda, 
however, seems to allude to some image of Indra. 

5. Material objects treated as symbols of deities 
are occasionally mentioned in the ritual literature. 
Thus the wheel (cakra) represents the sun in vari- 
ous ceremonies; and it appears in Hindu mytho- 
logy as one of the weapons of the solar deity 
Visnu. A piece of gold, sometimes in the form of 
a disk, also indicates the sun on certain ritual 
occasions. A symbol must have been used by the 
phallus worshippers ($i$nddeväh), who are men- 
tioned with repugnance in the Rigveda. In the 
post-Vedic, period the phallus or Zinga became 
typical of Siva’s generative power, and its worship 
is widely diffused in India at the present day. 


5. DEMONS. 

a. The demons which are often mentioned in 
the Vedas are of two kinds. The higher and more 
powerful class, the aerial foes of the gods, are 
generally called Asuras in the Atharvaveda and 
later. his word, however, rarely means ‘demon’ 
in the Rigveda, where it usually preserves the 
older sense of ‘being of mysterious power,’ and 
denotes a god (ahura in the Avesta). The earlier 
notion of the conflict between a single god anda 
single demon, as Be by Indra and Vrtra 
in the Rigveda, gradnally made way for that of tlıe 
hostility of gods and demons as two opposing 
hosts. This is the regular view of the Brahmanas. 
Here the Asuras, no less than the gods, are re- 
garded as the offspring of Prajapati; here, too, 
the Asuras often vanqnish the gods at the outset, 
being finally worsted only by artilice. 

In the Rigveda the terms désa and dasyu, pro- 
perly the name of the dark aborigines overcome 

the conquering Aryans, are frequently used 
also to designate aerial demons, adversaries of the 
gods. A group of demons are the Panis (‘nig- 
gards’), primarily the foes of Indra, who with the 
aid of Saramä tracks and releases the cows hidden 
by them. 

Of individual demons, by far the most frequently 
mentioned is Vrtra, the ‘ encompasser,’ the formid- 
able opponent of Indra. His mother being called 
Danu, he is also sometimes alluded to by the 
metronymic term Dänava (which later becomes 
the name of a class of demons). Another powerful 
demon is Vala, the personified cave of the cows, 
which he guards, and which are set free by Indra 
and his allies, notably the Angirases. Other 
demon adversaries of Indra are Arbuda, described 
as a wily beast, whose cows Indra drove out; 
ViSvarfipa, son of Tvastr, a three-headed demon 
slain by both Trita and Indra, who seize his cows ; 


and Svarhhänu, who eclipses the sun (his suc- 
cessor in Hindu mythology being Rahu). There 
are several other individual demons, generally 
described as Däsas, and gen by, Indra in favour 
of protégés: such are Susna, Sambara, Pipru, 
Namuci, Dhuni, and Cumuri, besides some half 
dozen others who were originally, in all likeli- 
hood, terrestrial foes. 

b. The second or lower class of demons are 
terrestrial goblins, enemies of men, as Asuras are 
of gods. By far the most common generic name 
for them is Raksas. They are nearly always men- 
tioned in connexion with some god who destroys 
them. The much less common term ydtu or 
yatudhina (primarily ‘sorcerer’) alternates with 
raksas, and perhaps denotes a species. Terres- 
trial demons appear in the shape of various ani- 
mals or birds, having also the power to assume 
human forms in order to deceive. With human 
shape they often combine some monstrous de- 
formity ; they are even described as blue, yellow, 
or green in colour; they are male and female, 
have families, and are mortal. Greedy for flesh 
and blood, they attack men by entering into them, 
thus causing disease and madness. As they prowl 
about at night, and the sacrifice is the main object 
of their malignity, Agni is naturally the god 
oftenest opposed to them, and most frequently in- 
voked to hurn, ward off, or destroy them. An 
important group of goblins, scarcely alluded to in 
the Rigveda but often mentioned in the later 
Vedas, are the Pisäcas, eaters of raw flesh or of 
corpses. Besides some other groups of goblins of 
lesser importance, there were included in Vedic 
belief many other hostile agencies, such as those 
of disease, which it was one of the main tasks of 
magic to counteract. Only a few among the 
groups of terrestrial spirits were thought to he, 
after the manner of elves, helpful to men, as in 
harvest work, or in battle by terrifying the foe. 


6. RELIGIOUS PRACTICE. 

a. The cult of the Vedic Indian has three 
aspects. It endeavours, in the first place, to win 
the favour of the gods, who are almost without 
exception benevolent. It further aims at warding 
off the hostility of the demons, who are male- 
volent, here having recourse to practices which 
for the most part are not of a religious, but of a 
magical character. Lastly, its attitude towards 
ancestors is a combination of its treatment of gods 
and of demons; for, while ancestors receive wor- 
ship as divine beings, means are taken to prevent 
them from unduly prolonging their uncanny pres- 
ence among the living. 

b. The worship of the gods has two sides, find- 
ing expression either by word or by act. Praise 
of their greatness and power, or prayer for welfare 
and forgiveness of sin is addressed to them on the 
one hand; sacrifice consisting of food and drink is 
offered on the other. Prayer and praise, which 
include frequent invitations to the sacrifice, are 
largely metrical in form, entirely so in the Rig- 
veda. Prayer in the Vedas is almost entirely of 
the ritual type, intended to accompany a cere- 
mony, or at least to form part of a liturgy. In 
the creative age of the Rigveda new prayers were 
produced for ritual purposes ; but in the age of the 
ater Vedas, witb the development of a system 
which foresaw almost every desire and prescribed 
the offering to ensure its fulfilment, prayer was 
nothing more than the mechanical application of 
ready-made formulas. It is doubt whether, 
even in the earliest period, much room was left, 
owing to the highly ritnal type of the wor- 
ship, for independent prayer. The latter could 
hardly in any case have gone beyond the expres- 
sion of a concrete desire addressed to a particulaı 


VEDIC RELIGION 


deity ; it could certainly not have had the char- 
acter of a communion of the worshipper with 
divine powers. Prayer was, however, by no means 
necessarily accompanied by a ceremonial act. 
Thus the hymns of the Fer kan addressed to 
Usas were reeited withont any attendant ofler- 
ings; the same was the case, according to the 
ritual texts, with the prayers to Agni, Usas, and 
the A4vins in the morning litany of the Soma 
sacrifice, as well as with the daily invocations 
muttered at the morning and evening twilight 
devotions. 

As the hymns of the Rigveda, in addressing 
prayers to a god, aim at securing his goodwill, 
they are, in the first place and to a large extent, 
panegyrics which praise the greatness and power, 
the mysterious nature, and the exploits of the 
deity in question. The petition for the gifts 
hoped for, when the favour of the god has thus 
been won, is then briefly added. he benefits 
desired are almost entirely of a material, not of a 
moral, kind. They are mainly expressed by such 
general terms as treasures and blessings, protec- 
tion and victory ; when stated in detail they con- 
sist in long life and vigorous oflspring, cattle and 
horses, cars and gold; or the punishment of 
enemies, niggards, and Brahman-haters by their 
goods being taken away and bestowed on the 
pious. Rarely does the worshipper pray that his 
thoughts may be righteons, that he may refrain 
from doing what displeases the gods, that he may 
be reconciled to an offended deity, or delivered 
from the bonds of guilt; and his supplications lack 
the note of passionate a ve deep aspiration, 
mental struggle, or hone submission to the 
divine will. As regards its efficacy, prayer was 
held to be scarcely less potent than sacrifice in 
gladdening and stimulating the gods. But a 
hymn had to be composed with faultless art, ‘as 
a skilful workman constructs a car’; it had to be 
freed from imperfections ‘as grain is winnowed 
with the flail.’ Then it invigorated the god like 
draughts of Soma, stimulating him to new deeds; 
then it increased the mighty strength of Indra so 
that he slew the dragon. When prayer is thus 
thought, even in the Rigveda, to exercise the 
direct influence of a spell, magic is already be- 
ginning to encroach on the domain of religion. A 
similar tendency is observable in regard to the 
pet nce which accompanied the prayers to the 
gods. 

c. The general character of the Vedic sacrifice 
is essentially supplicatory, as it aims only at the 
obtaining of future benelits to be bestowed by 
the gods, and is not concerned with the past. 
What seem to be expiatory sacrifices are in reality 
of this order also, for they are accompanied by 
supplications that the guilt incurred should not be 

unished. Such expiatory sacrifices are of two 

inds. They are either intended to mollify the 
wrath of a god aroused by the transgression of his 
divine will, being generally offered to Varuna, the 
guardian of moral order and punisher of sin; or 
they aim at removing guilt as a kind of impalpable 
substance much as if it were a disease, producing 
this result either by the aid of a god, especially 
Agni, or by means of fire, water, Menem plants 
and spells, which are supposed to burn, wash, purge, 
or drive it away without the invocation of divine 
powers. This latter type belongs mainly to the 
sphere of the Atharvaveda, where magic supplants 
religious practice. Even a sacrifice made in fulfil- 
ment of a vow, after a god has granted a boon, is 
in reality only a supplicatory offering postponed, 
as when in the Atharvaveda Agni is promised an 
offering in the name of a lunatic, if the latter re- 
covers his reason ; or when, in the Brähmana story 
of Sunahsepa, the childless king vows, if a son is 


611 


born to him, to sacrifice that son to Varuna. 
Thank-oflerings in any true sense are unkuown te 
the Vedic cult, the very verb ‘to thank’ not being 
found in the vocabulary of the language. An 
approach to the notion of a thank-oflering is only 
to be found in a Sütra passage, in which certain 
sacrifices are prescribed on a man regaining his 
health. 

The conception of the effect of sacrifice which 
prevails in the Rigveda is that the offering wins 
the favour of a god and induces him to fullil the 
recom pan Ying prayer. The Soma offering satis- 
fics, gladdens, strengthens the god, who loves the 
sacrilicer and hates the niggard. The reward that 
follows is a voluntary act of the god, resulting 
from the benevolent attitude induced by the ofler- 
ing. It is not regarded as the repayment of a 
debt, though the sacrificer feels that the god can- 
not well help requiting him. While conscions of 
being in the presence of a mighty being, the sacri- 
ficer does not look on himself as infinitely far 
removed from the god, who is his old friend, and 
whose right hand he grasps. Even in the Rigveda, 
however, traces are already to be found of the 
notion that the sacrifice exercises compulsion not 
only over gods, but also over natural phenomena 
without requiring the co-operation of the gods. 
Here again we have the intrusion of magic into 
the domain of religion. In the ritual of the Brah- 
manas we find that the latter has already been 
largely supplanted by the former. 

d. The Medie ceremonial was essentially based 
on the use of a sacrificial fire, ‘the mouth of the 
gods,’ into which the offerings were cast, and by 
which they were conveyed to the gods. Excep- 
tionally only, fire was not the instrument of sacri- 
fice. Thus the oblations to aquatic deities were 
cast into water, those to the dead were placed in 
small pits at the funeral sacrifice, while oflerings 
to Rudra and demons were thrown into the air, 
hung on trees, buried, or disposed of in other ways. 
In the ritual there was beside the sacrificial fire a 
litter of grass (berhis), the soft seat on which the 

ods sat down to enjoy the offering. On this 
itter, according to the ritual texts, the oblations 
were deposited for a time, before being committed 
to the Heres which conveyed them to heaven. 
Thus the gods were conceived as partaking of the 
sacrifice both on the litter and in their celestial 
abode. Agni is even invoked, in one and the same 
passage of the Rigveda, to bring the gods to the 
sacrifice and to take it to them in heaven (vii. 
11.5). This contradiction is doubtless to be ex. 
plained by the survival of the litter in the cere. 
monial, from the time when offerings were presented 
onitalone. The burning of the litter at the end 
of the rite may perhaps originally have formed the 
transition to offering sacrifices in fire. 

In the Vedic ceremonial, even of the earliest 
period, we have to distinguish between the simpler 
ritual of the single domestic fire and the more 
complicated and technical ritual conducted with 
the three fires, which are independent of the 
former, though they may originally have arisen 
by its division. he single domestic fire was 
ınaintained by every head of a family, who per- 
formed the rites connected with it himself. The 
three fires were set up only by men of position 
and wealth, becoming a centre round which the 
sacrificial activity of many Brahmans and priests 
revolved. Certain regular rites, such as the dail 
morning and evening sacrifice or the new and fu 
moon ceremonies, were performed in essentially 
the same manner with the three fires as with the 
one, the ritual of the latter, however, being 
simpler. But the domestic rites were conducted 
with the one only, while the Soma sacrifice could 
be carried on with the three only. The chief of 


612 


VEDIC RELIGION 


the three fires, called Gärhapatya (doubtless re- 
presenting the old domestic fire of the heartlı), 
was the only one always maintained, the other 
two being taken from it for every sacrifice requiring 
their employment. It was used for the practical 
purposes of heating the vessels and preparing the 
offerings. The second, the Ahavaniya, situated 
to the east, was that in which the gods received 
their offerings. The third or Dakgina fire, placed 
in the south, the quarter specially connected with 
the souls of the dead and evil spirits, was used for 
offerings relating to those two classes of uncanny 
beings. About this fire and the pits dug around it, 
the ritual of the sacrifices to the manes chiefly 
moved. 

When a fire was established for purposes of the 
cult, it was either produced by means of the fire- 
sticks (called aranzs, and consisting of a lower slab 
of soft and a drill of hard wood) or fetched from 
certain places, as the house of a rich owner of 
herds or of a great sacrificer. Atthe four-monthly 
sacrifices offered at the beginning of the seasons 
and at the Soma sacrilice, a new fire was rubbed 
and united with the old Ahavaniya, doubtless with 
the intention of giving it new vigour. 

e. With regard to the material of the sacrifice, 
the Vedic Indian, as a general principle, offered 
to the gods what was his own favourite food. It 
comprised the chief produce of the dairy and of 
agrieulture : milk, in its various forms, and butter, 
together with the two prineipal kinds of grain, 
barley and rice (the latter, perhaps, not being used 
in the earliest period), cooked or baked in different 
ways. Among these, the products of the cow were 
unmistakably believed to have a more sacred and 
mystical import. In the cult of the dead, libations 
of water were characteristic. As beef and goats’ 
flesh, less frequently mutton, were the principal 
kinds of meat eaten, cattle, goats, and sheep were 
the usual victims in the animal sacrifice, the he- 
goat, it would seem, being regularly offered on all 
lesser occasions. On the other hand, animals the 
flesh of which was either not eaten at all or only 
exceptionally eaten, such as the pig, dog, deer, as 
well as fish and birds, were not sacrificed to the 
gods. It is true that, in the rare and costly horse- 
sacrifice, an animal was offered the flesh of which 
was never a regular article of diet. This is, how- 
ever, to be accounted for by the intrusion of magic 
into the domain of sacrifice; for the intention 
underlying the ceremony was to transfer the swift 
power (väja) of the horse to the royal sacrificer. 
This sacrifice was, indeed, akin to a peculiar 
tendency in the sacrificial ceremonial, to offer to a 
god what corresponded to his special individuality. 
Thus to the goddesses Night and Morning was 
offered the milk of a black cow having a white 
ealf. In the animal sacrilice, a victim was often 
chosen which agreed with the deity not only in 
sex, but in colour and other qualities. The starting- 
point of this practice was probably the notion that 
the eater acquires the qualities of the animal he 
eats, and that his strength is increased most by 
eating the flesh of the animal most like himself. 
Thus the mighty Indra, who is constantly called a 
bull in the Rigveda, commonly receives the sacrifice 
of a bull, as also of a buffalo, to which he is often 
compared. The sun-god Sürya has a white he-goat 
offered to him. 

The victim was killed by strangulation, and 
without bloodshed. With an evident desire of 
avoiding blood-guiltiness, it was addressed with 
such verses as ‘Thou dost not die; no harm is 
done thee; thou goest to the gods by pleasant 
paths.’ The ceremonial dealing with the disposal 
of the carcass was divided into two distinct sacri- 
ficial acts. In the first place, after an incision bad 
been made, the caul (omentunı) was extracted, 


being thereupon cooked and solemnly offered to 
the gods. This rite was concluded by the distribu- 
tion of presents to priests and by purifications. 
The second act of the ceremonial consisted in 
cutting up the carcass into parts, certain sections 
of which were offered to the gods, while others 
were eaten by the priests. What remained was 
distributed among sacrificers, priests, and Brah- 
mans. A magical rather than a religious notion 
underlies the practice of men eating the remnants 
of the sacrifice of which the god has first partaken ; 
for those remnants must have been regarded as of 
the nature of a medicine, which transfers to man 
the divine blessing counected with the sacrifice, 
or the particular power implied in the individual 
offering. The separate sacrifice of the caul was 
perhaps a relic of a time when that was the only 
portion of the victim which, owing to its agreeable 
odour, was presented as a burnt-offering to the gods. 
The blood of the victim was, in the Vedic ritual, 
not eaten, but was poured out as an oflering to the 
Raksases or lower demons, who were regarded as 
fond of blood, and who similarly received the offal 
of the grain used in making baked offerings. 
Analogously, offerings made to beings thought to 
have an uncanny nature, such as Rudra or the 
souls of the dead, were not partaken of by the 
sacrificer. Thus a bull offered to Rudra might not 
be eaten or even brought into the village; and 
funeral cakes presented to the manes might only 
be smelt. 

In connexion with the animal sacrifice, the 
interesting question as to whether the human 
sacrifice was known in the ritual of the Vedas 
suggests itself. The only certain trace of such a 
sacrifice is to be found in the important ceremony 
of building the brick fire-altar (called agni-cayana). 
Here it is prescribed that five victims—man, horse, 
ox, ram, he-goat—are to be sacrificed to different 
gods, and their five heads walled up in the lowest 
layer of the edifice. The object of this ceremony, 
which was a magical rite rather than an actual 
sacrifice, was to give stability to the altar. It is 
mentioned in the Satapatha Brähmana as the 
custom of a not very remote past, for which other 
rites had been substituted. The human sacrifice 
(purusa-medha), which the ritual books describe in 
detail, was probably only an innovation invented 
to imitate the horse-sacrifice. But of any actual 
human sacrifice there is no certain trace in Vedic 
India. Neither the evidence of ancient stories, 
like that of Sunahsepa, nor the evidence of various 
Buddhist legends, is by any means conclusive. 

Not only were food and drink presented to 
the gods to satisfy their hunger and thirst, 
but an intoxicant, of which the sacrificer also 
partook, was offered to them. This was the juice 
of the Soma plant, which was pressed, mixed 
with milk or other ingredients, and presented to 
the gods. Soma was certainly not the popular 
drink of the Vedic Indian, whose favourite intoxi- 
cant was called sura. How, then, is it to be 
accounted for that, in this case, he did not offer 
to the gods what he liked best himself? The ex- 
planation is that, having during the Indo-Iranian 
period been adopted in the cult instead of the 
earlier mead of the Indo-European age, it retained, 
by the force of tradition, its old-established posi- 
tion even in the Vedic cult. 

Occasionally we find that objects which da not 
constitute food are sacrificed. Thus a man who 
desires the possession of deadly weapons sacrifices 
iron nails. Here again we see the intrusion of 
witcheraft; the sacrifice becoming a means of ob- 
taining something analogous to the objects offered. 

f. Priests. -Vedie India was already far removed 
from that primitive condition of things in which 
every man was his own priest, and did not require 


VEDIC RELIGION 


| 
the services of persons possessing technical know- | 
ledge as intermediaries between him and the divine 
owers. On the contrary, it is certain that, even 
in the peried of the Rigveda, there already existed 
a priestly class qualified by special knowledge and 
magical qualities te act for others in the dilheult 
and dangerous intereontse of man with gods and 
spirits. ‘There were, indeed, already a number of 
sacerdotal families, like the Vasisthas and Visvä- 
mitras, in whieh the art of praying and saerilicing 
correctly was praci.sed as a hereditary calling, all 
of them employing the same cult, netably that of 
the Sema saeriliee, practically in the same way. 
There were no public priests; for there was no 
public worship of a national, tribal, or even con- 
gregational character. Vedie worship was of an 
essentially private type, sacrifice being perfermed 
on behalf of its individual institutor (yajamana) 
by the priests who acted fer him and whose 
rayers belonged to him. This, coupled with the 
bet that idols were not used, aceonnts for the 
absence of temples in Vedic India. 

Two saeerdotal types have to be distingnished 
in the Vedic eult: the domestic priest (purohita), 
whese funetien it was to snperintend the wership 
of his employer; and the oflieiating priest (rtvij), 
whe had to play a certain prescribed part in an 
individual sacrifice. 

The Purehita was generally in the service ef 
kings only, though Brahmans occasionally ap- 
peared in an analogous eapaeity in the houses of 
men of high pesitien. That the employment of a 
Purehita in a royal honsehold was considered 
essential is indieated by a Brähmana passage 
which states that the gods wonld not eat the feod 
of a king whe had no Purohita. The domestic 
priest was appointed by the king, and held his 
office for life, being often sueceeded by his son. In 
the ceremony accompanying the appointment, the 
same verse was empleyed as when the bridegreom 
takes the hand of the bride in the wedding rite. 
The Pnrohita was, in faet, the king’s right hand 
man, giving the direetions for all the reyal cere- 
monies and saerifices, Even in the Rigveda the 
whole prosperity of tbe country is said te depend 
on the Pnrohita, ‘the guardian of the realm,’ and 
the Purohita Deväpi at the sacrifice empleys a 
spell to proeure rain on behalf of his royal master, 
while in the Atharvaveda another Purehita uses 
spells to secure victory in battle. 

Of the sacrificial priests there were several, with 
definite funetions and technical names, the chief 
being the Hetr or ‘invoker,’ the Udgatr or ‘chanter, 
the Adhvaryu or officiating ‘sacrificer,’ and the 
Brahman or superintending priest; in the period 
of the Rigveda the Hotr was the most important, 
later the Brahman beeame se. The Purohita was 
probably net any one of these, thongh he might be 
employed to perform the functions of one of them ; 
in the earlier period he sometimes appears aeting 
as Hotr, in the later as Brahman. Thus in the 
Rigveda the Purohita Deväpi is chosen as a Hotr, 
and Agni is called both a Purohita and a Hotr. 

The Rigveda contains a list of seven kinds of 
sacrificial priests, and this was probably the 
regular number, not enly then but in the Indo- 
Tranian period. Seven priests still appear in 
various parts of the sacrificial ceremonial in later 
times, though, with the development of the ritual, 
additional ones were otherwise employed. The 
Avesta, which has eight sacrificial priests, pro- 
bably added one to the original number. It is, in 
any ease, a striking fact that the Zaotar, the 
leading priest who recites the Gathas in the 
Iranian Haoma sacrifice, corresponds, in both name 
and function, to the Hotr who recites the verses of 
the Rigveda in the Vedie Sema sacrifice. The 
most important of these seven Vedic priests were 


613 


the Hotr and the Adhvaryu. It was the duty of 
the former to recite the hymn which, in the chief 
libations of tho Soma sacritice, celebrated a parti- 
cular god and invited him to drink Soma. When 
the hymns of the Rigveda wero composed, their 
seers (rsis) themselves doubtless val the part of 
the Hotr at the saerilice ; and that the latter was, 
in the earlier period, regarded as the leading 
priest is clear from his furnishing the type for 
Agni, the priest god. The Adhvaryu performed 
the practical part of the ceremonial, tending the 
fire and the litter, arranging and eleaning the 
utensils, pressing and ollering the Soma. The 
remaining five acted as assistants to one or other 
of the two ehief priests. The Agnidh, or ‘ fire- 
kindler,’ helped the Adhvaryu in tending the 
sacrifieial fire. The Upavaktr or ‘exhorter’ 
(knewn also as Prasästr, ‘direetor,’ and Maitra- 
varuna, ‘priest ef Mitra and Varuna’), whose 
duty it was to give various orders to other priests, 
plays the part, in the animal sacrifice, of the only 
assistant, and in the Soma sacrifice, ef ene among 
the several assistants of the Hotr. The three 
other priests ef the ancient list belong to the Soma 
ritnal exclusively : the Potr, er ‘ purilicr,’ and the 
Nestr, er ‘leader,’ beeame quite unimportant in 
the later Vedas, while the main function of tbe 
Brahman was te recite hymns addressed to Indra, 
in the same way as the Hotr, whose assistant he 
was. In the later ritual this priest came to be 
called Brähmanäcehamsin, while the old name, 
Brahman, acqnired the technical sense of the 
priest who superintended the whole sacrifice, and 
whese duty it was to knew the three Vedas. 

g. Sacrifices. — The Vedie eult consisted of 
regularly recurrent or of occasional sacrifices. 
Our knowledge of the former is derived from the 
ritual literature, for there are only few and obsenre 
traees of them in the hymns of the Rigveda, which 
is almost exclusively concerned with the Sema 
sacrifice. It is, however, probable that they were 
performed, at least in their main features, during 
the earliest Vedie peried. These regular saerifiees 
are of three kinds, as connected with the eourse of 
the day, the month, and the year, being perfermed, 
respectively, twice a day, twice a month, and three 
times a year. Each of the first two kinds eonld be 
conducted, though without any difference in cere- 
menial form, either with the single demestie fire 
or with the three saerifieial fires. On the other 
hand, the annual sacrifices, which were celebrated 
at the commencement of the three seasons, re- 
quired the greater ritual of the three fires. It was 
a general eharaeteristie of all periodic sacrifices 
that they were never addressed to one single ged. 

The daily rites took place morning and evening. 
They consisted, en the one hand, of fire-offerings 
to the gods, and, on the other, of gifts of food pre- 
sented to all beings. The latter comprised offerings 
placed on the threshold and elsewhere fer the 
deities and spirits in and around the house; a 
libation to the seuls ef the dead in the southern 
quarter; food seattered for dogs and birds; and 
meat and drink given to needy human beings. 

The monthly saerifiees, which were celebrated at 
new and full moon, consisted of cooked oblations 
or of eakes offered to the gods. Among the 
numerens deities receiving them, the mest pro- 
minent was Indra. 

The seasonal sacrifices were offered every fonr 
months, at the beginning of spring, of the rains, 
and of the ceol weather. Throughout these the 
Maruts are the most prominent deities. In the 
ceremonial which inaugurates the rainy season, 
Karira fruits are offered with a view to procuring 
rain and consequent plenty. Then also two figures 
of dengh eovered with weel, and intended to repre- 
sent a ram and a ewe, are sacrificed in order to 


614 


promote the increase of flocks. In these two 
offerings the influence of magical notions is clearly 
observable. With the seasonal celebration of the 
rains was combined a great expiatory sacrifice with 
which Varuna was specially associated. 

In the ceremonial of the third or autumn sacri- 
fice was included an offering to Rudra Tryambaka, 
intended to avert his attacks from the flocks and 
to conciliate his healing power. Ata place where 
four roads meet, the ahode of uncanny beings, a flat 
cake was deposited on or buried in a molehill, to 
indicate that it was presented to the mole as the 
animal of Rudra, who would thus refrain from in- 
juring other animals. With this ceremonial was 
combined a great sacrifice to the dead, a kind of 
All Souls’ festival. 

We now turn to the extraordinary sacrifices, 
which are not limited to any fixed period. One of 
these is the independent form of the animal sacri- 
fice. According to the ritual texts, it should take 
place annually ; but the statements as to the time 
of year it should be performed are fluctuating and 
indefinite. Another form of the animal sacrifice is 
included in the Soma sacrifice. 

Of all forms of cult the Soma sacrifice appears 
as the most important in Vedic literature. It was, 
however, prohably not so important in actual life, 
as few end have possessed means sufficient for its 
performance. As compared with the recurrent 
sacrifices, it rather bore the character of an extra- 
ordinary act of liherality practised by the rich 
towards gods and priests. Though the time for its 
performance was not definitely fixed, later texts 
recommend the spring as the most suitable period. 
Soma was not oie to different gods according 
to circumstances, like a cooked oblation or an 
animal victim. On the contrary, it was offered, 
within the stereotyped scheme of the three press- 
ings of Soma made at morning, noon, and evening, 
in honour of a prescribed series of gods intended to 
include all deities except perhaps Rudra. In this 
ceremonial the important gods were all addressed 
by name, the lesser ones being included in the 
comprehensive term Visve devah, or ‘all-gods.’ 
The Soma sacrilice, in fact, constituted a general 
carouse for gods as well as for priests. Indra 
was, however, the most important deity and the 
central figure of the whole ceremony; thus the 
Soma pressed at midday belonged to him alone in 
addition to his share of the morning and evening 
libation. The ceremonies of the Soma sacrifice 
were of a complex nature. Even the simplest and 
fundamental form of it, the Agnistoma (‘praise of 
Agni’), required the ministration of sixteen priests. 
This rite occupied only one day ; other Soma sacri- 
fices lasted for several days, up to twelve; while 
another class, called sattras or ‘sessions,’ some- 
times extended toa year. These prolonged Soma 
sessions formed an unimportant exception to the 
rule that every sacrifice was performed for a single 
individual; for here a number of Brahmans com- 
bined in such a way that each, while officiating as 
a priest in the usual manner, was accounted a 
sacrificer (yajamäna). The texts which deal with 
the Soma sacrifice furnish sufficient details for a 
complete picture of its ceremonies, which in the 
main were doubtless the same in the period of the 
Rigveda. Numbers of priests and lay spectators 
thronged the sacrificial ground, on which burned 
the three fires strewed around with sacrificial 
grass. Between the fires was the vedi, an oblong 
shallow excavation somewhat narrowed in the 
middle and covered with a litter of grass for the 
reception of the offerings to the gods. Scattered 
about were to be seen sheds, posts for tying up 
victims, the seats and fire-altars of the various 
priests, vessels containing water for various pur- 
poses, pressing implements, tubs, and bowls for 


VEDIC RELIGION 


Soma. Among them moved about the officiating 
priests and their assistants, in whose midst were 
to be seen the sacrificer (yajamäne) and his wife, 
emaciated by initiatory asceticism. The priests 
were engaged in preparing or offering the sacri- 
ficial cakes and the libations of milk ; in sacrificing 
eleven he-goats to various gods; in pressing, puri- 
fying, mixing the Soma juice ; in pouring it into 
or out of various vessels, presenting it to the gods, 
or drinking their share. All these operations were 
accompanied by the calls, recitations, chants of the 
priests as they carried out the details of the ritual, 
which were far too numerous to indicate here. 

The Soma sacrifice was preceded by a protracted 
ceremony of initiation (dtks@), which was nnder- 
gone by the sacrificer and his wife, and was followed 
by another of purification (avabhrtha). Both of 
these ceremonies were probably known to the 
Rigveda. The Diksa belongs to the ancient type 
of magical rites which were intended as a pre- 
paration for intercourse with gods and spirits by 
producing an ecstatic condition. It consisted in 
seclusion and various forms of asceticism (tapas) 
ending in physical exhaustion. Fasting was a 
chief element in the preparation for this as well 
as other rites. A preliminary bath was taken, as 
in the wedding ceremony, for the removal of in- 
jurious substances which would nullify the effects 
of the initiation. On the other hand, no bath 
might be taken during the course of the Soma 
sacrifice, for it would have been regarded as 
washing off the sanctity communicated by the 
Diksä. As in the funeral and some other rites, 
the hair and beard were cut off and the nails 
pared, because they were considered impurities. 

In the ceremony called avabhrtha (‘carrying 
down’ to the water), with which the Soma sacrilice 
terminated, the black antelope skin and the sacred 
cord used by the sacrificer and his wife since the 
beginning of the Diksä were thrown into the 
water along with the Soma shoots which had been 

ressed out and the sacrificial utensils which had 

een in contact with the Soma. Finally, the 
sacrificer and his wife, as well as the priests, 
descended into the water to wash off the super- 
natural powers which they had acquired, and on 
emerging put on fresh garments. The offerings 
and texts which accompanied the Avahhrtha cere- 
mony were chiefly addressed to Varuna, the god 
who delivers from guilt. 

h. Rites of family life.—As the Vedic wedding 
ceremony had in its main features probably come 
down irom the Indo-European period, it retained 
much that belongs to the domain of witchcraft 
rather than that of religion. Thus the act, on 
the part of the bridegroom, of taking the hand of 
the bride, was intended to place her in the power 
of her husband. The seven steps which the young 
couple took and the food which they ate together 
were meant to establish friendship and community. 
Future abundance and male offspring were aimed 
at when the bride, after being conducted to her 
husband’s house, was placed on the hide of a red 
bull and took upon her lap the son of a woman 
who had borne only living male children. The 
worship of the gods, on the other hand, was some- 
what in the background during this ceremony. 
It was chiefly concerned with Agni, the god most 
closely connected with domestic life. hus the 
husband led his bride three times round the newly- 
kindled nuptial fire, which it was the duty of the 
couple to maintain henceforth throughout their 
lives as their domestic fire. The invocations ad- 
dressed to the gods were mostly of the nature 
of benedictions. The long wedding hymn from 
the Rigveda was also recited. Various oiferings, 
moreover, were made, especially one of parched 
grain strewn by the bride with hollowed hands. 


VEDIC RELIGION 


818 


After sunset the husband led his bride out of 
the house, and, as he pointed to the pole-star and 
the star Arundhati, the young couple exhorted 
each other to be constant and undivided for ever. 
The wedding was followed by three nights of 
conjugal abstinence, meant doubtless to exhaust 
the patience and divert the attacks of hostile 
demons. 

Similarly, in the rites performed beth before and 
after birth for the welfare ef children, the magical 
aspect predominated over the sacrificial. Thus a 
powdered drug was dusted into the nostrils of a 
pregnant woman to ensure the sex of her offspring 

eing male; aud unripe fruits of the Udumbara 
tree were attached to her in order to communicate 
to her child the exuberant maturity which that 
fig attains. 

On the tenth day after hirth, when the period 
of impurity was over, the ceremony of giving the 
child his name was performed. In the third year 
the rite of tonsure, accompanied by an oblation, 
took place. The boy’s hair was cut and arranged 
so as to be worn in accordance with the custom 
of the family. The hair which was cut off was 
buried. A similar ceremony was performed when 
the beard of the youth at the age of sixteen was 
shaved. 

But by far the most important rite connected 
with boyhood was that of initiation or ‘intro- 
duction’ (upanayana) to a religious teacher, which 
took place at the respective ages of eight, eleven, 
and twelve in the case of boys of the first three 
eastes. Standing at the sacred fire, the preceptor 
invested the boy, whese head had been shaved, 
with a girdle, which he wound round his waist 
three times from left to right, at the same time 
pronouncing certain formulas. He then grasped 
the boy’s hand and, placing his own on the pupil’s 
heart, recited a verse indicating that he had 
assumed power over the boy’s will. On this occa- 
sion the youth also received a garment, a staff, 
and a sacred cord to be worn over one shoulder 
and under the other arm. During the whole course 
of his subsequent apprenticeship, the religious pupil 
(brahmacärın) was required to practise chastity, to 
refrain from certain kinds of food, to tend his 
preceptor’s fire with fuel, and to beg food in the 
village. But his chief duty was to study the Veda 
and to learn the famous Savitri stanza from the 
Rigveda as an introduction to that study. By 
the rite of initiation, which was regarded as a 
spiritual birth, the pupil had become one of the 
‘twice-bern,’ qualified to eat the remnants of 
sacrificial offerings. Though this ceremony is not 
even alluded to in the Rigveda, it must have been 
known at that time, for it can be traced back to 
a still earlier age. The evidence of the Avesta 
shows that among the ancient Persians a youth 
of fifteen was received into the community of 
Zoroaster with a sacred cord ; and among primitive 
peoples similar rites have been found all over the 
earth to symbolize reception inte the community 
of men as an entry inte a new life. This ancient 
rite was in India transformed inte a spiritual 
ceremony which gave admission to the community 
of those qualified for the study of sacred knowledge. 

The peried of apprenticeship was terminated by 
the ceremony called samåvartana, or ‘return,’ the 
main element of which was a bath intended to 
indicate symbolically that the quality of religious 
studentship (brahmacarya) was washed off. 

The funeral rites, finally, belong to the sphere 
of the domestic ritual; it will, however, be more 
convenient to deal with them later as part ef the 
ceremonial relating to death and the future life. 

i. Rites relating to public life.—Even in cere- 
monies which assumed a public character because 
connected with the person of the king, the sacrifice 


was still instituted by him as an individual; and 
though prayers for the country and the people 
might be incidental to it, there existed no form of 
sacrifice which was oflered in the name of the tribe 
or the nation. In the royal ccremonial, magical 
practices were, as we found to be the case in the 
domestic ritual, more prominent than sacrificia! 
acts. The first of these celcbrations calling for 
description are the consccration (abhiseka) ay the 
king and the royal inauguration (rājasūīya). 
Neither of these is mentioned in the Rigveda, and 
they were probably developed in the later Vedic 
period; but the magical elements which they con- 
tain are most likely very old. Beth these celebra- 
tions included Sema rites, In the consecration 
ceremony the king was seated on a chair covered 
with a tiger skin and made of the woed of the 
Udumbara, the tree which to the Indian was 
typical of plenty. A cup, also made of Udumbara 
wood, was filled with a fluid compounded of butter, 
honey, rain-water, and other ingredients. With 
this fluid the king was anointed or rather be- 
sprinkled. In the Räjasüya a similar besprinkling 
took place; but it was followed by a series of 
further ritesintended to secure success of all kinds. 
These included a symbelical raid en a herd of 
cows; the discharge of arrows at feeble relatives 
of the king, who were plundered; and a game of 
dice in which a cow was the stake, and which was 
won by the king. 

Another ceremonial, regarded as still more dig- 
nified and efficacious, was the Vajapeya (‘draught 
of vigour’), a kind of Soma sacrifice, which might 
be performed not only by kings, but even by men 
of royal descent or of the Brahman caste. lis 
most characteristic feature was a chariot race, 
evidently a magical rite intended to secure for the 
sacriticer the swift power embodied in the horse. 
It also included a rite called the ‘ascent of the 

ost’ (yüpärohaena). A wheel made of wheaten 
our, and symbelical of the sun, was placed on 
the top of a sacrificial post. Mounting by means 
of a ladder, the sacrificer grasped the wheel as he 
uttered the formula, ‘We have reached the sun, 
ye gods.’ On descending to the ground he seated 
himself on a wooden throne and was besprinkled 
as in the inauguration ceremony. This part of 
the Vajapeya rite aimed at the attainment of 
exalted position. 

The splendour of royal ceremonial, however, 
culminated in the horse -sacrifice (asva - medha). 
It was not a thank-offering, as might at first 
sight be inferred from the words of the Brah- 
mana description of each king whe performed it, 
‘He victoriously traversed the earth and offered 
the horse-sacrifice.’ It was in reality a supplica- 
tory sacrifice offered, after military successes, for 
the fulfilment of the king’s highest wishes in the 
future. According to the ritual texts, this sacri- 
fice is addressed to the gods in the aggregate, but 
with special reference to Prajäpati (an evidently 
late trait); but there are indications that it may 
originally have been addressed to Indra the Vrtra- 
slayer, an obvious god to associate with a rite 
which is a glorification of military heroism. The 
horse itself represents swift vigour, a quality which 
the king aims at obtaining and increasing in him. 
self by means of this sacrifice. The ceremony was 
begun by bathing the horse, when a four-eyed dog 
(that is, one with two spots above its eyes) was 
killed with a club by a man of low origin. The 
horse, having been consecrated, was allowed to 
ream about free for a year, guarded by a retinue 
ef armed youths. During the interval the sacri- 
ficial ground was the scene of various offerings 
and rites, while stories were recited, chants sung, 
and lutes played. High and low, young and old, 
took a share in the pemp of the ceremonial. At 


616 


VEDIC RELIGION 


length, when the year had come to an end, the 
horse was sacrificed during the course of a Soma 
offering of three days’ duration. In the later 
Vedic ritual the horse is accompanied by a number 
of other victims; but in the Rigveda (two hymns 
of which are concerned with the horse-sacrifice) 
mention is made only of Püsan’s he-goat, which an- 
nounces the offering to the gods. Before the carcass 
was cut up, the chief consort of the king lay down 
heside the dead horse, while obscene conversations 
were carried on between the priests and the women 
of theroyal household. Before the caul was offered, 
the priests propounded and solved riddles among 
themselves, as they had already done at a previous 
stage of the ceremonial. The whole rite concluded 
with a purifying bath at the end of the third day. 


7. DEATH AND FUTURE LIFE. 

A. BELIEFS.—a. The sonl, variously called 
asu, ‘spirit,’ manas, ‘mind,’ iman, ‘breath,’ 
präna, ‘respiration,’ was thought to be separable 
from the body during unconsciousness, and to con- 
tinue its existence after the hody had been de- 
stroyed by cremation or burial. But, though 
imperishable, it was not believed to prolong life 
as a mere spirit or shadow, but to retain its 
personal identity in a corporeal state; for the 

ody, purified by the power of Agni and freed 
irom all imperfections, shares in the existence 
of the other world. The doctrine of transmigra- 
tion is not to be found in the Vedas ; its beginnings 
are met with in the Brähmanas, where the notion 
of repeated births and deaths in the next world 
appears; but it shows itself fully developed even 
in the oldest Upanisads, aud must have been 
generally accepted by 600 B.C., since Buddha 
would not otherwise have received it into his 
system without question. 

The spirit of the deceased proceeds upward 
through the air on the path trodden by the 
fathers (pitara) to the realm of eternal Tight, 
It is natural that Agni, who burns the corpse, 
should have been regarded as the conductor of the 
soul on its journey. Arrived in heaven, where he 
recovers his former body in a complete and glori- 
fied form, the departed meets the fathers who 
revel with Yama, and receives from the latter 
a resting- place. According to the Satapatha 
Brāhmaņa, the dead, on leaving this world, 
make their way between two fires, which burn 
the wicked but allow the good to pass. The 
latter proceed either by the path which leads 
to the fathers or by that which leads to the 
sun. The Upanisads also hold that there are 
two paths for the good: by the one, those who 
possess complete knowledge of the world-soul go 
to Brahmä; by the other, those whose knowledge 
is imperfect reach the world of heaven, whence, 
after the fruit of good works has been exhausted, 
they return to earth to be born again. On the 
other hand, those who are ignorant of the self 
go to the dark world of evil spirits, or are reborn 
on earth. To illustrate the mystery of the future 
life, the Katha Upanisad tells the myth of Naci- 
ketas, who, on visiting the realm of death, is 
informed that those who have not enough merit 
for heaven and immortality fall again and again 
into the power of death and, entering upon the 
cycle of existence (samsära), are born repeatedly 
with a body or as a stationary object; that he 
who controls himself reaches Visnu’s highest place ; 
but that there is no hell for the unworthy. 

b. Heaven. — The abode of the fathers and 
Yama is situated in the highest or third heaven, 
where is eternal light. It is also described as the 
highest point of the sun or the highest step of 
Visnu. ere is a tree in the shade of which Yama 
drinks with the gods. In the Atharvaveda it is 


stated to be a fig-tree (aévattha). Heaven is be- 
lieved to be the reward of the righteous, of heroes 
who risk their lives in battle, of those who practise 
rigorous penance, and, above all, of those who be- 
stow liberal sacrificial gifts. The Atharvaveda is 
full of references to the bliss in store for the latter. 

The deceased, on entering heaven, see again 
father and mother, wives and children. Sickness 
is left behind; bodily imperfections or frailties 
are unknown; and old age cannot prevail. There 
are neither rich nor poor, neither oppressors nor 
oppressed. The life of the blest is passed among 
the gods, more especially in the presence of the 
two kings Yama and Varuna. Here the sound of 
the lute and of songs is heard ; streams of Soma, 
ghi, milk, honey, and wine flow; and there is 
spirit-food and satiety. Bright, many-coloured 
cows, which yield all desires, are at hand. The 
life in heaven is thus one of indolent material 
bliss, devoted to sensual joys. In the Upanisads 
the life in the heaven of the gods, being followed by 
re-birth, isa lower and transient form of bliss ; only 
those who know the truth reach the higher stage, 
the condition of changeless joy and unending peace 
which results from absorption in the world-soul. 

c. The blest who dwell in the third heaven 
are called pitrs or ‘fathers.’ By these are gener- 
ally meant early ancestors who made the paths 
by which those who have recently died join them. 
Different races of them are distinguished (p. 608), 
the Angirases being more especially associated 
with Yama. The fathers are also spoken of as 
lower, higher, and middle; as later and earlier; 
all being known to Agni, but a few only to their 
descendants. The fathers are fond of Soma, feast- 
ing with the gods and leading the same life as they 
do. Being immortal, they are even spoken of as 
gods. Great cosmical actions, like those of the 
gods, are sometimes attributed to them; thus they 
are said to have adorned the sky with stars, and 
to have placed darkness in the night and light in 
the day. As the burning of the corpse was in no 
sense a sacrifice, the corpse-devouring Agni was 
distinguished from the Agni who wafts the otter- 
ing to the gods; and, similarly, the path of the 
fathers from that of the gods. The Satapatha 
Brähmana goes further, discriminating between 
the heavenly world (svarga loka), that is, the 
world of the gods, and that of the fathers (pitr- 
loka). The fathers are prayed to like the gods, 
being entreated to hear and to protect their wor- 
shippers, and to refrain from punishing their 
descendants for any sin humanly committed 
against them. They are also besought to give 
riches, offspring, and long life to their sons; 
individual ancestors being sometimes invoked by 
name. Coming to the sacrilice on the same car 
as Indra and the other gods, they drink the 
pressed Soma as they sit on the litter of grass 
to the south (the quarter of the dead). They 
arrive in thousands and range themselves in order 
on the sacrificial ground. They receive oblations, 
which are, however, different from those offered 
to the gods. 

d. The chief of the fathers is Yama, to whom 
three hymns of the Rigveda are addressed. He 
is only spoken of as a king who rules the dead, 
but it is implied that he is a god as well. He is, 
as is natural, specially associated with Agni, the 
conductor of the dead. Yama is the son of Vivas- 
vat and of Saranyi, Tvastr’s daughter. He was 
a mortal, who chose death and abandoned his 
body. Finding ont the path for many, he passed 
to the other world, whither the ancient fathers 
have gone. Having been the first of mortals that 
died, he is called ‘our father.’ As a mythological 
ereation, Yama goes back to the Indo-Iranian 
period, corresponding to Yima, son of Vivahvant, 


VEDIC RELIGION 


in the Avesta. The most probable conclusion to 
be drawn from the available evidence scems to 
be that Yama represents the chief of the sonls 
of the departed, as having been the first father 
of mankind and the first of those that died. This 
conclusion is snpported by the fact that in the 
Avesta Yima is the ruler of an earthly paradise. 
It is, perhaps, also borne out by the appearance 
of Yama and his sister Yamıi in the character of 
twins in a hymn of the Rigveda, where the very 
repudiation of their incest points to the existence 
of a belief in the descent of mankind from prim- 
eval twins. Some scholars have, however, identi- 
fied Yama with various phenomena of nature, such 
as Agni, the sun, or the moon. In the Rigveda 
Yama’s foot-fetter (padbisa) is referred to as 
parallel to the bond of Varuna, and his mes- 
sengers that seek the lives of men must have 
inspired feelings of dread. It is not till the 
Atharvaveda and the later mythology that Yama 
becomes more closely associated with the terrors 
of death, and assumes the character of a regular 
god of death; though even in the epie his domain 
is not limited to hell. 

The owl and the pigeon occasionally appear as 
Yama’s emissaries; but his regular messengers 
are two dogs, deseribed as four-eyed, broad-nosed, 
brindled, brown, sons of Saramä. They guard 
the path to the other world or wander about 
among men, keeping watch on them; and they 
are besought to grant continued enjoyment of the 
light of the sun. Their functions seem to have 
been thought to consist partly in tracking out 
among men those who are to die, and partly in 
keeping guard on the path over those who are 
about to enter the realm of Yama. The con- 
ception of a watch-dog of the dead goes back to 
the Indo-Iranian period, as shown by the evidence 
of the Avesta, where a four-eyed hound is stated 
to keep guard at the head of the bridge which 
leads to the other world. If the epithet sabalas 
{‘ brindled’) is identical with the Greek xepßepos, 
the notion of a dog of death must go back even 
to the Indo-European age. 

e. Hell.—As the virtuous, in the opinion of the 
Vedic seers, were rewarded in the future life, it is 
natural to suppose that they believed in some kind 
of abode for the wicked. The evidence of the 
Rigveda cannot, however, be said to go beyond 
showing that this was regarded as an underground 
darkness. But there can be no doubt that the 
belief in a regular hell exists in the Atharvaveda, 
which speaks of the house below, of black and 
lowest darkness, the abode of goblins and sorcer- 
esses, called näraka loka as contrasted with svarga 
loka, the heavenly world of Yama. The torments 
suffered in this infernal region are also once 
lescribed. It is not, however, till the period of 
the Brahmanas that the notion of future punish- 
ment appears fully developed. Thusthe Satapatha 
Brähmana states that every one is born again after 
death and, being weighed in a balance, receives 
reward or punishment according to his deserts. 
Nothing is said in the Vedas of a final judgment 
or of a destruction and renovation of the world. 

B. THE CEREMONIAL.—a, Funeral rites.—Cre- 
mation was the normal method of disposing of 
the dead in Vedic times. That burial was also 
practised to some extent is undoubted, though 
the ritual books have no rules regarding it, 
exeept in so far as the bones of the cremated are 
interred. The predilection of the Vedic theo- 
logians for the god of fire was most probably the 
reason for incineration having already become 
the almost universal practice among the Aryans 
in India. The beard and hair of the dead man 
were cut off and his nails trimmed ; his body was 
anointed, decked with a garland, and dressed in 


617 


a new garment, which he was intended to wear 
in the next world. T'he corpse was then carried or 
driven to the burning ground; a bundle of twigs 
was tied to it, in order to eflace the footsteps 
and so prevent death from making its way back to 
the living. The dead man was then exhorted, 
with verses from a funeral hymn of the Rigveda, 
to go by the ancient paths, past the two dogs of 
Yama, to the fathers. The widow, who had 
mounted the pyre and lain down beside the corpse, 
was now called upon to rise and tuke the hand of 
her new spouse (her husband’s brother). That the 
ceremonial excluded the burning of the widow is 
undoubted ; but the ritnal act which was required 
to recall her to life shows that her ascent of the 
pyre was symbolical of the actual immolation of 
bygone times. Indeed, it must be assumed that 
this ancient custom, though not sanctioned by the 
Vedic ritual, survived through the Vedic period in 
the families of military chiefs. Having by their 
example gradually spread to other classes, it be- 
came, in later times, a universal practice through- 
ont India. If the deceased was a warrior, his bow 
was taken from his hand, an indication that at one 
time it was burned with him ; if he was a sacrificer, 
his eombustible utensils were placed with him on 
the pyre. Here we bave a survival of the ancient 
custom of providing the dead with the chief articles 
of their property for use in the next life. At the 
same time as the corpse was burned, a cow and a 
he-goat were sacrificed. These animals, however, 
did not represent property, but were intended as a 
means of detlecting the consuming power of fire to 
them as substitutes for the corpse; and, by a 
fiction, Agni was supposed not to burn the dead 
man, but to send him ‘done’ to the fathers. 

The mourners, on returning from the burning 
ground, bathed, changed their clothes, and refrained 
from looking round. On entering the house of the 
deceased, they touched purifying or auspicious 
objects such as water, fire, or cow-dung; and 
finally removed the sacrificial tire of the dead man 
by some aperture other than the door. 

A death was followed by a period of impurity, 
varying from three days to ten, according to the 
degree of kinship. As the return of the soul was 
feared during this time, the surviving relatives 
took constant precautions to avoid infection. Thus 
only food which was bought or presented by others 
was eaten, evidently to guard against introducing 
anything tainted into the system. 

Generally on the third day, what remained of 
the bones of the eremated man was collected, 
placed in an urn, and temporarily buried, to the 
accompaniment of the Rigvedic verse, ‘Approach 
thy Mother Earth.’ During this ceremony the 
deceased was no longer thought of as in the realm 
of Yama, but as actually present. This incon- 
sistency is no doubt due to a primitive belief 
surviving beside the more recent conception of life 
in the heavenly world. 

Last of all—according to the Brähmanas, after 
the lapse of years—a burial mound was erected, the 
bones being exhumed for the purpose of removal to 
a suitable spot. During the following night music 
was performed, cymbals being beaten and the lute 
(vind) played, the female mourners repeatedly 
going round the bones with their left hands to- 
wards them. On the following morning, the bones 
were taken to a place, out of sight of the village, 
where the ground was free from thorns but per- 
meated with roots. A hole or furrow having been 
made, the bones were deposited and a mound of 
stone and earth was erected over them. Grain was 
scattered on the mound as food, while milk and 
water were poured into small pits dug around 
it, as drink for the deceased. When the mourners 
returned, various precautions were taken to pre- 


618 


vent death from following the living; thus a stone 
or a clod was deposited as a boundary. The 
Rigveda refers, in a funeral hymn, to the erection 
of a stone to divide the living from the dead. 

Though the Vedic Indian retained many primi- 
tive beliefs in the ceremonial concerned with the 
future life, he had advanced far beyond the terrors 
which inspire the funeral rites of the savage. The 
verses which he employed in that ceremonial, while 
combined with much petty ritual and betraying 
much zealous care for his own well-being, at the 
same time reflect trust in the gods, as guardians of 
the dead, and filial piety towards ancestors. If we 
find here no traces of deep feeling and genuine 
sorrow, this is largely due to the fact that the 
impersonal formulas contained in the ritual text- 
books are the only available evidence for this period. 

b. Spirits The inost striking contradiction in 
the Vedic view of the future life was the belief, 
though the Rigveda describes the deceased as con- 
veyed direct to the fathers by the funeral fire, 
that the dead man did not join the fathers at 
once, but continued to lead a separate existence 
near the living for a year. The soul in this inter- 
mediate stage was distinguished by the name of 
preta, ‘departed spirit,’ as opposed to the ancestral 
spirits fully recognized as pitara, ‘fathers.’ Dur- 
ing this transitional state it did not receive the 
regular monthly oblation to the manes of the 
sacrificer, but was honoured individually with 
separate offerings. At the end of the period it 
was received into the community of the fathers 
with a special ceremony which, strange to say, 
has nothing to do with that accompanying the 
final burial of the bones. Vedie literature has 
nothing to say about ghosts in any other sense 
than that of Pretas. There is, however, a passage 
in the Yajurveda stating that one who sheds the 
blood of a Brahman will be excluded from the world 
of the fathers ; and the evidence of early Buddhist 
texts may perhaps justify the inference that, even 
in the Vedic period, there was a belief in ghosts as 
spirits in the exceptional state of suffering torments 
on earth in punishment of guilt. 

c. Ancestor - worship.—It remains only to 
sketch briefly the cult of the Vedas in so far as it 
was concerned with the dead. The regular sacrifice 
to ancestors, offered to father, grandfather, and 
great-grandfather, was celebrated every month at 
new moon. It was called Sräddha or ‘offering 
given with faith’ ($raddh@). For the purposes of 
this rite, a space was marked off in the south-east, 
the region which was sacred to the manes, and 
which the performers faced during the whole cere- 
mony. Then the sacrificial fire was fetched and 
the food for the dead, consisting mainly of rice, 
but also of other offerings, prepared. Three small 

its, a span long and four fingers broad and deep, 

aving been dug and bestrewn with Darbha grass, 
an odd number of Brahmans were seated, enter- 
tained, and received gifts. Libations to Soma 
associated with the fathers, and to Agni, con- 
ductor of the sacrifices to the dead, were also 
offered. A firebrand having been placed beside 
the pits to drive away demons who might have 
intruded themselves among the fathers, the latter 
were summoned to the offering and invoked to 
bestow wealth on their descendants. Jars of water 
were then set down beside the pits; the sacrificer 
took one with his left hand and, pouring water into 
the pits, mentioned the name of the ancestor to 
whom the offering was made. Grasping the sacri- 
ficial ladle also with his left band, ks placed one- 
third of the food in the form of a cake in each pit, 
invoking the fathers to partake of the offering. 
In conclusion, pieces of cloth were presented to the 
ancestors ag clothing. The whole ceremony was 
interspersed with verses addressed to the fathers. 


VEGETARIANISM 


Our knowledge of this ceremonial is entirel 
derived from the ritual works of the Vedic period. 
There is nothing about it in the Rigveda, as it is 
not accompanied by hymns to the mighty gods 
with whom that Veda is concerned. Nevertheless, 
there can be little doubt that, in its essential 
features, it already existed in the earliest Vedic 
age; for its general character is extremely primi- 
tive: there is no trace of the souls of the dead 
abiding in heaven; the gifts offered to them are 
not sent up by the sacrificial fire, but are placea 
in the earth; and the spirit waits in or on the 
earth to be fed and clothed. The only details 
which probably do not go back to the times of the 
Rigveda are the offerings to Soma and Agni, as 
well as the presence of Brahmans. 

LITERATURE.—Jobn Muir, Original Sanskrit Texts, 5 vols., 
especially vols. iv. and v. (‘ Vedic Cosmogony and Mythology’), 
London, 1873, 1884; A. Bergaigne, La Keligion védique, 3 
vols., Paris, 1878-1883; A. Barth, Tke Religions of India, Eng. 
tr., London, 1882; A. Hillebrandt, Vedische Mythologie, 3 
vols., Breslau, 1891-1902, abridged ed., 1910; E. rt, Die 
vedisch-brahmanische Periode, Münster, 1893; E. W. Hopkins, 
The Religions of India, Boston, 1895, London, 1896 ; H. Olden- 
berg, Die Religion des Veda, Berlin, 1894, 21917; Die Lehre 
der Upanishaden, Göttingen, 1915; W. Caland, Altindischer 
Ahnencult, Leyden, 1893, Die altindischen Todten- und Bestat- 
tungsgebräuche, Amsterdam, 1896; W. Caland and V. Henry, 
L'Agnistoma: description complete de la forme normale du 
sacrifice de Soma dans le culte védique, 2 vols., Paris, 1906; 
A. Hillebrandt, Ritual-Litteratur, Strassburg, 1807; A. A. 
Macdonell, Vedic Mythology (=GIAP iii. 1a), do. 1897; E. 
Lehmann, ‘ Die Inder,’ in Chantepie de la Saussaye, Lehrbuch 
der Religionsgeschichte, 2 vols., Tübingen, 1905 ; M. Bloomfield, 
The Religion of the Veda, New York and London, 1908; R. E 
Hume, The Thirteen Principal Upanishads, Oxford, 1921. 

A. A. MACDONELL. 

VEGETARIANISM.—In this article an at- 
tempt is made to confine the discussion to those 
portions of the subject which ultimately have a 
practical bearing, even though the way may lie 
through the investigation of some rather complex 
ethical principles. The omission of all investiga- 
tion into the history of vegetarianism is dictated 
not only by fidelity to this aim, but also by the con- 
sideration that in this particular subject no sound 
inferences as to modern problems can possibly be 
drawn from any records of the past. It is, e.g., 
interesting to learn that the poet Ovid wrote in 
favour of a vegetable diet as being natural to primi- 
tive man. But what we want to know is bow far 
his words were effective. They may have been, 
and yet no one has recorded the efiect; or they 
may have been dictated at first by dismay at the 
sight of great excess in flesh food. They are any- 
how by themselves no evidence of vegetarian 
practice; and, if they were, we should be unable 
to connect it securely with the gradual decline 
of Rome. In short, at all times the important 
question has been, not the practice of an exceptional 
minority, but that of the mass of the population— 
just the large complex fact which has never been 
recorded. 

That omission leaves two principal aspects of the 
question to be considered: (a) the physiological 
argument, which is treated as of subordinate 
importance, owing to the evidence to be gathered 
from facts being still very incomplete; and (b) the 
ethical argument, including our duty to the lower 
animals, the bearing of the example of Christ, and 
the question how far a non-flesh diet is a help to 
the higher life. 

I. The physiological argument.—In several 
treatises on vegetarianism much has been written 
on the physiological effects of a flesh or non-flesh 
diet, but very little of any value. The truth is 
that before any scientific conclusion can be arrived 
at—in other words, before any broad inference can 
be drawn from periments Tuig question must be 
so far simplified that it becomes abstract: that is 
to say, experiments have to be conducted under 
conditions which do not obtain in ordinary life. 


