Presented  to  the 
LIBRARY  of  the 

UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO 

by 

PROFESSOR 
A.   K.     WARDER 


III.  BAND  1.  HEFT  A. 

Subskriptionspreis    M.  8.20. 
Einzelpreis  „  9.70. 


GRUNDRISS 

DER 

INDO-ARISCHEN  PHILOLOGIE 


UND 


ALTERTUMSKUNDE 


UNTER  MITWIRKUNG  VON 

A.  BAINES-LONDON,  R.  G.  BHANDARKAR-PUNA,  M.  BLOOMFIELD-BALTIMORE,  J.  BURGESS-EDINBURGH, 

O.  FRANKE-KONIGSBERG,  R.  GARBE- TUBINGEN,   \V.  GEIGER  -  ERLANGEN,  K.  GELDNER- BERLIN, 

G.  A.  GRIERSON- CALCUTTA,   A.  HILLEBRANDT-BRESLAU,  H.  JACOBI-BONN,  J.  JOLLY-WURZBURG, 

H.  KERN-LEIDEN,  E.  KUHN-MUNCHEN,  C.R.  LANMAN- CAMBRIDGE  (MASS.),  E.  LEUMANN-STRASSBURG, 

B.  LIEBICH-BRESLAU,  A.  MACDONELL- OXFORD,  R.  MERINGER-WIEN,  R.  PISCHEL-HALLE, 

E.  J.  RAPSON-LONDON,  J.  S.  SPEYER-GRONINGEN,  M.  A.  STEIN-LAHORE,  G.THIBAUT- 

ALLAHABAD,  A.  VENIS-BENARES,  SIR  R.  WEST-LONDON,  M.  WINTERNITZ- 

OXFORD,  TH.  ZACHARIAE-HALLE 

HERAUSGEGEBEN 


GEORG   BttHLER. 


VEDIC    MYTHOLOGY 

BY 

A.  A.  MACDONELL. 


STRASSBURG 
VERLAG  VON  KARL  J.  TRUBNER 

1897. 

\_Alle  Rechte,  besonders  das  der  Uebersetzung,  vorbehalten.~\ 


In  diesem  Werk  soil  zum  ersten  Mai  der 
Versuch  gemacht  werden,  einen  Gesamtiiber- 
blick  iiber  die  einzelnen  Gebiete  der  indp- 
arischen  Philologie  und  Altertumskunde  in 
knapper  und  systematischer  Darstellung  zu 
geben.  Die  Mehrzdil  der  Gegenstande  wird 
damit  iiberhaupt  zum  ersten  Mai  eine  zusammen- 
hangende  abgerundete  Behandlung  erfahren; 
deshalb  darf  von  dem  Werk  reicher  Gewinn 
fur  die  Wissenschaft  selbst  erhofft  werden, 
trotzdem  es  in  erster  Linie  fur  Lernende  be- 
stimmt  ist. 

Etwa  dreissig  Gelehrte  aus  Deutschland, 
Osterreich,  England,  Holland,  Indian  und 
Amerika  haben  sich  vereinigt,  urn  diese  Auf- 
gabe  zu  losen,  wobei  ein  Teil  der  Mitarbeiter 
ihre  Beitrage  deutsch,  die  ubrigen  sie  englisch 
abfassen  werden. 

Besteht  sclion  in  der  raumlichen  Ent- 
fernung  vieler  Mitarbeiter  eine  grossere 
Schwierigkeit  als  bei  anderen  ahnlichen  Unter- 
nehmungen,  so  schien  es  auch  geboten,  die 
Unzutraglichkeit  der  meisten  Sammelwerke, 
welche  durch  den  unbereclienbaren  Ab- 
lieferungstermin  der  einzelnen  Beitrage  ent- 
steht,  dadurch  zu  vermeiden,  dass  die  einzelnen 
Abschnitte  gleich  nach  ihrer  Ablieferung 
einzeln  gedruckt  und  ausgegeben  werden. 

Der  Subskriptionspreis  des  ganzen  Werkes 
betragt  durchschnittlich  65  Pf.  pro  Druck- 
bogen  von  16  Seiten,  der  Preis  der  einzelnen 
Hefte  durchschnittlich  80  Pf.  pro  Druck- 
bogen.  Auch  fur  die  Tafeln  und  Karten 
wird  den  Subskribenten  eine  Ermassigung  von 
20 %  auf  den  Einzelpreis  zugesichert.  Uber 
die  Einteilung  des  Werkes  giebt  der  auf 
Seite  3  dieses  Umschlags  befindliche  Plan 
Auskunft. 

STRASSBURG,  im  Oktober  1901. 

Die  Verlagshandlung. 


The  Encyclopedia  of  Indo-Aryan  Research 
contains  the  first  attempt  at  a  complete,  syste 
matic  and  concise  survey  of  the  vast  field  of 
Indian  languages,  religion,  history,  antiquities, 
and  art,  most  of  which  subjects  have  never 
before  been  treated  in  a  connected  form.  Though 
the  Encyclopedia  is  primarily  intended  as  a 
book  of  reference  for  students,  it  will  never 
theless  be  useful  to  all  connected  with  India; 
and  though  it  chiefly  summarises  the  results 
achieved,  it  will  also  contain  much  that  is 
new  and  leads  up  to  further  research. 

About  thirty  scholars  of  various  na 
tionalities,  —  from  Austria,  England,  Germany, 
India,  the  Netherlands  and  the  United  States  — 
have  promised  to  unite  in  order  to  accomplish 
this  task.  The  contributions  will  be  written 
either  in  English  or  in  German. 

Each  part  will  be  published  separately 
and  with  a  separate  pagination. 

The  subscription  for  the  complete  work 
will  be  at  the  rate  of  about  65  Pfennig  (8d), 
the  price  of  a  single  part  at  the  rate  of  80 
Pfennig  (10  d),  per  sheet  of  1 6  pages.  Sub 
scribers  will  also  enjoy  a  reduction  of  20 
percent  for  plates  and  maps. 

For  the  plan  of  the  work  see  page  3  of 
this  cover. 


The  Publisher. 


Bei  Begrundung  des  Grundrisses  war  in  Aussicht  genommen,  die  einzelnen 
Hefte  spater  in  drei  Bande  zusammenzufassen  und  jedem  dieser  Bande  ein  Ge- 
samtregister  fur  die  darin  enthaltenen  Hefte  beizugeben.  Da  aber  die  bis  jetzt 
erschienenen  Hefte  einen  weit  grosseren  Umfang  einnehmen  als  ursprioglich 
dafiir  angesetzt  war  und  das  Bedlirfnis  fur  Register  zu  den  einzelnen  Heften  sich 
als  dringend  herausgestellt  hat,  haben  sich  Herausgeber  und  Verleger  entschlossen, 
besondere  Register  fur  jedes  Heft  herzustellen. 

Dem    hier    vorliegenden    Heft    sind   Indices    beigefligt;    fur    die   berets    er 
schienenen  Hefte  liegen  fertig  vor  die  Indices  zu: 

I.  3b:  Zachariae,  Die  indischen  Worterbiicher. 
I.     6 :  Speyer,  Vedische  und  Sanskrit  Syntax. 
II.   ib:  Bloomfield,  The  Atharvaveda. 
II.  3b:  Rapson,  Indian  coins. 
II.     8:  Jolly,  Recht  und  Sitte. 
III.   i a:  Macdonell,  Vedic  Mythology. 
IIL     4:  Garbe,  Samkhya  und  Yoga. 
Til.     8:  Kern,  Manual  of  Indian  Buddhism. 


Die  Verlagshandlung. 


GRUNDRISS  DER  INDO-ARISCHEN  PHILOLOGIE  UNO  ALTERTUMSKUNDE 

(ENCYCLOPEDIA  OF  INDO  -ARYAN   RESEARCH) 

HERAUSGEGEBEN   VON   G.   BUHLER. 

III.  BAND,    1.  HEFT  A. 


VEDIC  MYTHOLOGY 


BY 


A.  A.  MACDONELL. 


STRASSBURG 

VERLAG   VON   KARL  J.  TRUBNER 
1897. 


15" 


GRUNDRISS  DER  INDO-ARISCHEN  PHILOLOGIE  UNO  ALTERTUMSKUNDE 

(ENCYCLOPEDIA  OF  INDO-ARYAN  RESEARCH) 
HERAUSGEGEBEN  VON  G.  BUHLER. 

III.  BAND,    I.  HEFT  A. 


VEDIC   MYTHOLOGY 

BY 

A.  A.  MACDONELL. 


I.  INTRODUCTION. 

§  i.  Religion  and  mythology.  —  Religion  in  its  widest  sense  includes 
on  the  one  hand  the  conception  which  men  entertain  of  the  divine  or 
supernatural  powers  and,  on  the  other,  that  sense  of  the  dependence  of  human 
welfare  on  those  powers  which  finds  its  expression  in  various  forms  of  wor 
ship.  Mythology  is  connected  with  the  former  side  of  religion  as  furnishing 
the  whole  body  of  myths  or  stories  which  are  told  about  gods  and  heroes  and 
which  describe  their  character  and  origin,  their  actions  and  surroundings. 
Such  myths  have  their  source  in  the  attempt  of  the  human  mind,  in  a 
primitive  and  unscientific  age,  to  explain  the  various  forces  and  phenomena  of 
nature  with  which  man  is  confronted.  They  represent  in  fact  the  conjectural 
science  of  a  primitive  mental  condition.  For  statements  which  to  the  highly 
civilised  mind  would  be  merely  metaphorical,  amount  in  that  early  stage  to 
explanations  of  the  phenomena  observed.  The  intellectual  difficulties  raised 
by  the  course  of  the  heavenly  bodies,  by  the  incidents  of  the  thunderstorm, 
by  reflexions  on  the  origin  and  constitution  of  the  outer  world,  here  receive 
their  answers  in  the  form  of  stories.  The  basis  of  these  myths  is  the  primitive 
attitude  of  mind  which  regards  all  nature  as  an  aggregate  of  animated  entities. 
A  myth  actually  arises  when  the  imagination  interprets  a  natural  event  as 
the  action  of  a  personified  being  resembling  the  human  agent.  Thus  the 
observation  that  the  moon  follows  the  sun  without  overtaking  it,  would  have 
been  transformed  into  a  myth  by  describing  the  former  as  a  maiden  following 
a  man  by  whom  she  is  rejected.  Such  an  original  myth  enters  on  the  further 
stage  of  poetical  embellishment,  as  soon  as  it  becomes  the  property  of  people 
endowed  with  creative  imagination.  Various  traits  are  now  added  according 
to  the  individual  fancy  of  the  narrator,  as  the  story  passes  from  mouth  to 
mouth.  The  natural  phenomenon  begins  to  fade  out  of  the  picture  as  its 
place  is  taken  by  a  detailed  representation  of  human  passions.  When  the  natural 
basis  of  the  tale  is  forgotten,  new  touches  totally  unconnected  with  its  original 
significance  may  be  added  or  even  transferred  from  other  myths.  When  met 
with  at  a  late  stage  of  its  development,  a  myth  may  be  so  far  overgrown 
with  secondary  accretions  unconnected  with  its  original  form,  that  its  analysis 
may  be  extremely  difficult  or  even  impossible.  Thus  it  would  be  hard  indeed 
to  discover  the  primary  naturalistic  elements  in  the  characters  or  actions  of 
the  Hellenic  gods,  if  we  knew  only  the  highly  anthropomorphic  deities  in  the 
plays  of  Euripides. 

B.  DELBRUCK,  ZVP.  1865,  pp.  266 — 99;    KUHN,    Uber  Entwicklungsstufen  der 
Mythenbildung,  Berliner  Ak.  der  Wissenschaften  1873,  pp.  123  —  51;  MAX  MULLER, 
Comparative  Mythology.     Oxford    Essays.  II;    Philosophy  of  Mythology.    Selected 
Indo-arische  Philolo^ie.  III.  1  A.  1 


III.    RELIGION;  WELTL.  WlSSENSCH.  U.  KUNST.      I  A.    VEDIC  MYTHOLOGY. 


Essays.  I;  Chips  from  a  German  Workship,  IV2,  155— 201;  Physical  Religion  276-8  ; 
SCHWARTZ,  Der  Urspfung  der  Mythologie;  MANNHARDT,  Antike  Wald- und  Feldkulte, 
Berlin  1871,  Preface;  MULLENHOFF  in  preface  to  MANNHARDT'S  Mythologische  For- 
schungen,  Strassburg  1884;  LANG,  Mythology.  Encyclopaedia  Britannica;  GRUPPE,  Die 
griechischen  Culte  und  Mythen.  Introduction;  BLOOMFIELD,  JAOS.  XV,  135—6;  F.  B. 
IEVONS,  Mythology.  CHAMBERS' Encyclopaedia;  Introduction  to  the  History  of  Religion, 
London  1896,  pp.  23.  32.  249-69. 

§  2.  Characteristics  of  Vedic  mythology. — Vedic mythology  occupies 
a  very  important  position  in  the  study  of  the  history  of  religions.  Its  oldest 
source  presents  to  us  an  earlier  stage  in  the  evolution  of  beliefs  based  on  the 
personification  and  worship  of  natural  phenomena,  than  any  other  literary 
monument  of  the  world.  To  this  oldest  phase  can  be  traced  by  uninterrupted 
development  the  germs  of  the  religious  beliefs  of  the  great  majority  of  the 
modern  Indians,  the  only  branch  of  the  Indo-European  race  in  which  its 
original  nature  worship  has  not  been  entirely  supplanted  many  centuries  ago 
by  a  foreign  monotheistic  faith.  The  earliest  stage  of  Vedic  mythology  is 
not  so  primitive  as  was  at  one  time  supposed1,  but  it  is  sufficiently  primitive 
to  enable  us  to  see  clearly  enough  the  process  of  personification  by  which 
natural  phenomena  developed  into  gods,  a  process  not  apparent  in  other 
literatures.  The  mythology,  no  less  than  the  language,  is  still  transparent 
enough  in  many  cases  to  show  the  connexion  both  of  the  god  and  his  name 
with  a  physical  basis;  nay,  in  several  instances  the  anthropomorphism  is  only 
incipient.  Thus  usas,  the  dawn,  is  also  a  goddess  wearing  but  a  thin  veil  of 
personification;  and  when  agni,  fire,  designates  the  god,  the  personality  of 
the  deity  is  thoroughly  interpenetrated  by  the  physical  element. 

The  foundation  on  which  Vedic  mythology  rests,  is  still  the  belief, 
surviving  from  a  remote  antiquity,  that  all  the  objects  and  phenomena  of 
nature  with  which  man  is  surrounded,  are  animate  and  divine.  Everything 
that  impressed  the  soul  with  awe  or  was  regarded  as  capable  of  exercising  a 
good  or  evil  influence  on  man,  might  in  the  Vedic  age  still  become  a  direct 
object  not  only  of  adoration  but  of  prayer.  Heaven,  earth,  mountains,  rivers, 
plants  might  be  supplicated  as  divine  powers;  the  horse,  the  cow,  the  bird  of  omen, 
and  other  animals  might  be  invoked;  even  objects  fashioned  by  the  hand 
of  man,  weapons,  the  war-car,  the  drum,  the  plough,  as  well  as  ritual  im 
plements,  such  as  the  pressing-stones  and  the  sacrificial  post,  might  be  adored. 

This  lower  form  of  worship,  however,  occupies  but  a  small  space  in 
Vedic  religion.  QThe  true  gods  of  the  Veda  are  glorified  human  beings,  in 
spired  with  human  motives  and  passions,  born  like  men,  but  immortal.  They 
are  almost  without  exception  the  deified  representatives  of  the  phenomena  or 
agencies  of  nature 2.]  The  degree  of  anthropomorphism  to  which  they  have 
attained,  however,  varies  considerably.  When  the  name  of  the  god  is  the 
same  as  that  of  his  natural  basis,  the  personification  has  not  advanced  beyond 
the  rudimentary  stage.  Such  is  the  case  with  Dyaus,  Heaven,  Prthivi,  Earth, 
Surya,  Sun,  Usas,  Dawn,  whose  names  represent  the  double  character  of 
natural  phenomena  and  of  the  persons  presiding  over  them.  £~  Similarly 
in  the  case  of  the  two  great  ritual  deities,  Agni  and  Soma,  the  personifying 
imagination  is  held  in  check  by  the  visible  and  tangible  character  of  the 
element  of  fire  and  the  sacrificial  draught,  called  by  the  same  names,  of 
which  they  are  the  divine  embodiments.JWhen  the  name  of  the  deity  is 
different  from  that  of  the  physical  substrate,  he  tends  to  become  dissociated 
from  the  latter,  the  anthropomorphism  being  then  more  developed.  Thus  the 
Maruts  or  Storm-gods  are  farther  removed  from  their  origin  than  Vayu,  Wind, 
though  the  Vedic  poets  are  still  conscious  of  the  connexion.  Finally,  when 
in  addition  to  the  difference  in  name,  the  conception  of  a  god  dates  from  a 


2.  CHARACTERISTICS  OF  VEDIC  MYTHOLOGY.     3.  SOURCES  OF  V.  M.          3 

pre-Vedic  period,  the  severance  may  have  become  complete.  Such  is  the 
case  with  Varuna,  in  whom  the  connexion  can  only  be  inferred  from  mytho 
logical  traits  surviving  from  an  earlier  age.  The  process  of  abstraction  has 
here  proceeded  so  far,  that  Varuna' s  character  resembles  that  of  the  divine 
ruler  in  a  monotheistic  belief  of  an  exalted  type.  Personification  has,  how 
ever,  nowhere  in  Vedic  mythology  attained  to  the  individualized  anthropo 
morphism  characteristic  of  the  Hellenic  gods.  The  Vedic  deities  have  but 
very  few  distinguishing  features,  while  many  attributes  and  powers  are  shared 
by  all  alike.  This  is  partly  due  to  the  fact  that  the  departments  of  nature 
which  they  represent  have  often  much  in  common,  while  their  anthropomor 
phism  is  comparatively  undeveloped.  Thus  the  activity  of  a  thunder-god,  of 
the  fire-god  in  his  lightning  form,  and  of  the  storm-gods  might  easily  be  de 
scribed  in  similar  language,  their  main  function  in  the  eyes  of  the  Vedic  poets 
being  the  discharge  of  rain.  Again,  it  cannot  be  doubted  that  various  Vedic 
deities  have  started  from  the  same  source3,,  but  have  become  differentiated 
by  an  appellative  denoting  a  particular  attribute  having  gradually  assumed  an 
independent  character.  Such  is  the  case  with  the  solar  gods.  There  is,  more 
over,  often  a  want  of  clearness  in  the  statements  of  the  Vedic  poets  about 
the  deeds  of  the  gods;  for  owing  to  the  character  of  the  literature,  myths 
are  not  related  but  only  alluded  to.  Nor  can  thorough  consistency  be  ex 
pected  in  such  mythological  allusions  when  it  is  remembered  that  they  are 
made  by  a  number  of  different  poets,  whose  productions  extend  over  a  pro 
longed  literary  period. 

i  BRI.  XIII  ff.;  P.  v.  BRADKE,  Dyaus  Asura,  Halle  1885,  2—11;  ZDMG.  40, 
670.  --  2  ORV.  591—4-  —  3  L.  v.  S'CHROEDER,  WZKM.  9,  125—6;  cp.  BRI.  25. 

Works  on  Vedic  Mythology  in  general:  R.  ROTH,  Die  hdchsten  Gotter  der 
arischen  Volker,  ZDMG.  6,  67 — 77;  7,  607;  BOHTLINGK  and  ROTH,  Sanskritworter- 
buch,  7  vols. ,  St.  Petersburg  1852—75;  j.  MUIR,  Original  Sanskrit  Texts  on  the 
Origin  and  History  of  the  People  of  India,  their  Religion  and  Institutions,  5  vols., 
especially  vols.  42  revised  (1873)  and  53  (1884);  GRASSMANN,  Worterbuch  zum  Rig- 
Veda,  Leipzig  1873;  Rig-Veda  iibersetzt  und  mit  kritischen  und  erlauternden  An- 
merkungen  versehen,  2  vols.,  Leipzig  1876—7;  W.  D.  WHITNEY,  Oriental  and 
Linguistic  Studies,  2,  149  ff. ;  JAOS.  3,  291  ff.  33  iff.;  P.  WURM,  Geschichte  der 
indischen  Religion,  Basel  1874,  pp.  21—54;  A.  BERGAIGNE,  La  Religion  Vedique 
d'apres  les  Hymnes  du  Rigveda,  3  vols.,  Paris  1878—83;  A.  LUDWIG,  Der 
Rigveda  oder  die  heiligen  Hymnen  der  Brahmana.  Zum  ersten  Male  vollstandig 
ins  Deutsche  iibersetzt.  Mit  Commentar  und  Einleitung.  Prag,  Wien,  Leipzig 
1876—88;  F.  MAX  MULLER,  Lectures  on  the  Origin  and  Growth  of  Religion, 
London  1878;  A.  KAEGI,  Der  Rigveda,  2nd  ed.,  Leipzig  1881 ;  English  Translation 
by  R.  ARROWSMITH,  Boston  1886;  A.  BARTH,  The  Religions  of  India,  London 
1882;  A.  KUHN,  Mythologische  Studien.  Is  :  Die  Herabkunft  des  Feuers  und 
des  Gdttertranks,  Gutersloh  1886;  L.  v.  SCHRODER,  Indiens  Litteratur  und  Kultur, 
Leipzig  1887,  pp.  45 — 145;  P.  D.  CHANTEPIE  DE  LA  SAUSSAYE,  Lehrbuch  der  Re- 
ligionsgeschichte,  Freiburg  i.  B.,  1887,  I, pp.  346 — 69;  PISCHEL  and  GELDNER,  Vedische 
Studien.  vol.  I,  Stuttgart  1889,  vol.  II,  part  I  1892;  A.  HILLEBRANDT,  Vedische 
Mythologie,  vol.  I,  Soma  und  verwandte  Gotter,  Breslau  1891;  P.  REGNAUD,  Le 
Rig-Veda  et  les  Origines  de  la  Mythologie  indo-europeenne,  Paris  1892  (the  author 
follows  principles  of  interpretation  altogether  opposed  to  those  generally  accepted). 
E.  HARDY,  Die  Vedisch-brahmanische  Periode  der  Religion  des  alten  Indiens, 
Miinster  i.  W.  1893;  H.  OLDENBERG,  Die  Religion  des  Veda,  Berlin  1894; 
P.  DEUSSEN,  Allgemeine  Geschichte  der  Philosophic  mit  besonderer  Beriick- 
sichtigung  der  Religionen,  vol.  I,  part  I,  Philosophie  des  Veda  bis  auf  die 
Upanishad's ,  Leipzig  1894;  E.  W.  HOPKINS,  The  Religions  of  India,  Boston  and 
London  1895. 

§  3.  Sources  of  Vedic  Mythology.  —  By  far  the  most  important 
source  of  Vedic  Mythology  is  the  oldest  literary  monument  of  India,  the 
Rigveda.  Its  mythology  deals  with  a  number  of  coordinate  nature  gods  of 
varying  importance.  This  polytheism  under  the  influence  of  an  increasing 

i* 


4     III.  RELIGION,  WELTL.  WISSENSCH.  u.  KUNST.   i  A.  VEDIC  MYTHOLOGY. 

tendency  to  abstraction  at  the  end  of  the  Rigvedic  period,  exhibits  in  its  latest 
book  the  beginnings  of  a  kind  of  monotheism  and  even  signs  of  pantheism. 
The  hymns  of  this  collection  having  been  composed  with  a  view  to  the  sa 
crificial  ritual,  especially  that  of  the  Soma  offering,  furnish  a  disproportionate 
presentment  of  the  mythological  material  of  the  age.  The  great  gods  who 
occupy  an  important  position  at  the  Soma  sacrifice  and  in  the  worship  of 
the  wealthy,  stand  forth  prominently;  but  the  mythology  connected  with  spirits, 
with  witchcraft,  with  life  after  death,  is  almost  a  blank,  for  these  spheres  of 
belief  have  nothing  to  do  with  the  poetry  of  the  Soma  rite.  Moreover,  while 
the  character  of  the  gods  is  very  completely  illustrated  in  these  hymns,  which 
are  addressed  to  them  and  extol  their  attributes,  their  deeds,  with  the  ex 
ception  of  their  leading  exploits,  are  far  less  definitely  described.  It  is  only 
natural  that  a  collection  of  sacrificial  poetry  containing  very  little  narrative 
matter,  should  supply  but  a  scattered  and  fragmentary  account  of  this  side 
of  mythology.  The  defective  information  given  by  the  rest  of  the  RV.  re 
garding  spirits,  lesser  demons,  and  the  future  life,  is  only  very  partially  sup 
plied  by  its  latest  book.  Thus  hardly  any  reference  is  made  even  here  to  the 
fate  of  the  wicked  after  death.  Beside  and  distinguished  from  the  adoration 
of  the  gods,  the  worship  of  dead  ancestors,  as  well  as  to  some  extent 
the  deification  of  inanimate  objects,  finds  a  place  in  the  religion  of  the 
Rigveda. 

The  Samaveda,  containing  but  seventy-five  verses  which  do  not  occur  in 
the  RV.,  is  of  no  importance  in  the  study  of  Vedic  mythology. 

The  more  popular  material  of  the  Atharvaveda  deals  mainly  with  dom 
estic  and  magical  rites.  In  the  latter  portion  it  is,  along  with  the  ritual  text 
of  the  Kausika  sutra,  a  mine  of  information  in  regard  to  the  spirit  and  demon 
world.  On  this  lower  side  of  religion  the  Atharvaveda  deals  with  notions  of 
greater  antiquity  than  those  of  the  Rigveda.  But  on  the  higher  side  of 
religion  it  represents  a  more  advanced  stage.  Individual  gods  exhibit  a  later 
phase  of  development  and  some  new  abstractions  are  deified,  while  the  general 
character  of  the  religion  is  pantheistic1.  Hymns  in  praise  of  individual  gods 
are  comparatively  rare,  while  the  simultaneous  invocation  of  a  number  of 
deities,  in  which  their  essential  nature  is  hardly  touched  upon,  is  characteristic. 
The  deeds  of  the  gods  are  extolled  in  the  same  stereotyped  manner  as  in  the 
RV.;  and  the  AV.  can  hardly  be  said  to  supply  any  important  mythological 
trait  which  is  not  to  be  found  in  the  older  collection. 

The  Yajurveda  represents  a  still  later  stage.  Its  formulas  being  made 
for  the  ritual,  are  not  directly  addressed  to  the  gods,  who  are  but  shadowy 
beings  having  only  a  very  loose  connexion  with  the  sacrifice.  The  most  salient 
features  of  the  mythology  of  the  Yajurveda  are  the  existence  of  one  chief 
god,  Prajapati,  the  greater  importance  ofVisnu,  and,  the  first  appearance  of  an 
old  god  of  the  Rigveda  under  the  new  name  of  Siva.  Owing,  however,  to 
the  subordinate  position  here  occupied  by  the  gods  in  comparison  with  the 
ritual,  this  Veda  yields  but  little  mythological  material. 

Between  it  and,  the  Brahmanas,  the  most  important  of  which  are  the 
Aitareya  and  the  Satapatha,  there  is  no  essential  difference.  The  sacrifice 
being  the  main  object  of  interest,  the  individual  traits  of  the  gods  have  faded, 
the  general  character  of  certain  deities  has  been  modified,  and  the  importance 
of  others  increased  or  reduced.  Otherwise  the  pantheon  of  the  Brahmanas 
is  much  the  same  as  that  of  the  RV.  and  the  AV.,  and  the  worship  of  in 
animate  objects  is  still  recognized.  The  main  difference  between  the  mytho 
logy  of  the  RV.  and  the  Brahmanas  is  the  recognized  position  of  Prajapati 
or  the  Father-god  as  the  chief  deity  in  the  latter.  The  pantheism  of  the 


4.  METHOD  TO  BE  PURSUED. 


Brahmanas  is,  moreover,  explicit.     Thus  ^Prajapati  is  said  to  be  the  All  (SB. 
i,  3i  5'°)   or  the   A11   and   everything   (SB.  i,  6,  42;  4,  5i  72)- 

The  gods  having  lost  their  distinctive  features,  there  is  apparent  a  tend 
ency  to  divide  them  into  groups.  Thus  it  is  characteristic  of  the  period  that 
the  supernatural  powers  form  the  two  hostile  camps  of  the  Devas  or  gods 
on  the  one  hand  and  the  Asuras  or  demons  on  the  other.  The  gods  are 
further  divided  into  the  three  classes  of  the  terrestrial  Vasus,  the  aerial  Rudras, 
and  the  celestial  Adityas  (§  45).  The  most  significant  group  is  the  repre 
sentative  triad  of  Fire,  Wind,  and  Sun.  The  formalism  of  these  works  further 
shows  itself  in  the  subdivision  of  individual  deities  by  the  personification  of 
their  various  attributes.  Thus  they  speak  of  an  'Agni,  lord  of  food',  'Agni, 
lord  of  prayer'  and  so  forth2. 

The  Brahmanas  relate  numerous  myths  in  illustration  of  their  main 
subject-matter.  Some  of  these  are  not  referred  to  in  the  Samhitas.  But  where 
they  do  occur  in  the  earlier  literature,  they  appear  in  the  Brahmanas  only  as 
developments  of  their  older  forms,  and  cannot  be  said  to  shed  light  on  their 
original  forms,  but  only  serve  as  a  link  between  the  mythological  creations 
of  the  oldest  Vedic  and  of  the  post-Vedic  periods, 
i  HRT.  153.  —  2  BRI.  42;  HRI.  182. 

§4.  Method  to  be  pursued.  -  -  Vedic  mythology  is  the  product  of 
an  age  and  a  country,  of  social  and  climatic  conditions  far  removed  and 
widely  differing  from  our  own.  We  have,  moreover,  here  to  deal  not  with 
direct  statements  of  fact,  but  with  the  imaginative  creations  of  poets  whose 
mental  attitude  towards  nature  was  vastly  different  from  that  of  the  men  of 
to-day.  The  difficulty  involved  in  dealing  with  material  so  complex  and  re 
presenting  so  early  a  stage  of  thought,  is  further  increased  by  the  character 
of  the  poetry  in  which  this  thought  is  imbedded.  There  is  thus  perhaps  no 
subject  capable  of  scientific  treatment,  which,  in  addition  to  requiring  a  certain 
share  of  poetical  insight,  demands  caution  and  sobriety  of  judgment  more 
urgently.  Yet  the  stringency  of  method  which  is  clearly  so  necessary,  has 
largely  been  lacking  in  the  investigation  of  Vedic  mythology.  To  this  defect, 
no  less  than  to  the  inherent  obscurity  of  the  material,  are  doubtless  in  con 
siderable  measure  due  the  many  and  great  divergences  of  opinion  prevailing 
among  Vedic  scholars  on  a  large  number  of  important  mythological  questions. 

In  the  earlier  period  of  Vedic  studies  there  was  a  tendency  to  begin 
research  at  the  wrong  end.  The  etymological  equations  of  comparative 
mythology  were  then  made  the  starting  point.  These  identifications,  though 
now  mostly  rejected,  have  continued  to  influence  unduly  the  inter 
pretation  of  the  mythological  creations  of  the  Veda.  But  even  apart  from 
etymological  considerations,  theories  have  frequently  been  based  on  general 
impressions  rather  than  on  the  careful  sifting  of  evidence,  isolated  and  second 
ary  traits  thus  sometimes  receiving  coordinate  weight  with  what  is  primary. 
An  unmistakable  bias  has  at  the  same  time  shown  itself  in  favour  of  some 
one  particular  principle  of  interpretation1.  Thus  an  unduly  large  number  of 
mythological  figures  have  been  explained  as  derived  from  dawn,  lightning, 
sun,  or  moon  respectively.  An  a  priori  bias  of  this  kind  leads  to  an  un 
consciously  partial  utilization  of  the  evidence. 

Such  being  the  case,  it  may  poye  useful  to  suggest  some  hints  with  a 
view  to  encourage  the  student  in  following  more  cautious  methods.  On  the 
principle  that  scientific  investigations  should  proceed  from  the  better  known 
to  the  less  known,  researches  which  aim  at  presenting  a  true  picture  of  the 
character  and  actions  of  the  Vedic  gods,  ought  to  begin  not  with  the  meagre 


6      III.  RELIGION,  WELTL.  WISSENSCH.  u.  KUNST.     i  A.  VEDIC  MYTHOLOGY. 


and  uncertain  conclusions  of  comparative  mythology,  but  with  the  information 
supplied  by  Indian  literature,  which  contains  a  practically  continuous  record 
of  Indian  mythology  from  its  most  ancient  source  in  the  RV.  down  to  modern 
times 2.  All  the  material  bearing  on  any  deity  or  myth  ought  to  be  collected, 
grouped,  and  sifted  by  the  comparison  of  parallel  passages,  before  any  con 
clusion  is  drawn3.  In  this  process  the  primary  features  which  form  the  basis 
of  the  personification  should  be  separated  from  later  accretions. 

As  soon  as  a  person  has  taken  the  place  of  a  natural  force  in  the 
imagination,  the  poetical  fancy  begins  to  weave  a  web  of  secondary  myth, 
into  which  may  be  introduced  in  the  course  of  time  material  that  has 
nothing  to  do  with  the  original  creation,  but  is  borrowed  from  elsewhere. 
Primary  and  essential  features,  when  the  material  is  not  too  limited,  betray 
themselves  by  constant  iteration.  Thus  in  the  Indra  myth  his  fight  with  Vrtra, 
which  is  essential,  is  perpetually  insisted  on,  while  the  isolated  statement  that 
he  strikes  Vrtra's  mother  with  his  bolt  (i,  329)  is  clearly  a  later  touch,  added 
by  an  individual  poet  for  dramatic  effect.  Again,  the  epithet  'Vrtra-slaying', 
without  doubt  originally  appropriate  to  Indra  alone;  is  in  the  RV.  several 
times  applied  to  the  god  Soma  also.  But  that  it  is  transferred  from  the 
former  to  the  latter  deity,  is  sufficiently  plain  from  the  statement  that  Soma 
is  'the  Vrtra-slaying  intoxicating  plant'  (6,  I711),  the  juice  of  which  Indra 
regularly  drinks  before  the  fray.  The  transference  of  such  attributes  is  parti 
cularly  easy  in  the  RV.  because  the  poets  are  fond  of  celebrating  gods  in 
couples,  when  both  share  the  characteristic  exploits  and  qualities  of  each  other 
(cp.  §  44).  Attributes  thus  acquired  must  of  course  be  eliminated  from  the 
essential  features.  A  similar  remark  applies  to  attributes  and  cosmic  powers 
which  are  predicated,  in  about  equal  degree,  of  many  gods.  They  can  have 
no  cogency  as  evidence  in  regard  to  a  particular  deity4.  It  is  only  when 
such  attributes  and  powers  are  applied  in  a  predominant  manner  to  an  in 
dividual  god,  that  they  can  be  adduced  with  any  force.  For  in  such  case  it 
is  possible  they  might  have  started  from  the  god  in  question  and  gradu 
ally  extended  to  others.  The  fact  must,  however,  be  borne  in  mind  in  this 
connexion,  that  some  gods  are  celebrated  in  very  many  more  hymns  than 
others.  The  frequency  of  an  attribute  applied  to  different  deities  must  there 
fore  be  estimated  relatively.  Thus  an  epithet  connected  as  often  with  Varuna 
as  with  Indra,,  would  in  all  probability  be  more  essential  to  the  character  of 
the  former  than  of  the  latter.  For  Indra  is  invoked  in  about  ten  times  as 
many  hymns  as  Varuna.  The  value  of  any  particular  passage  as  evidence 
may  be  affected  by  the  relative  antiquity  of  the  hymn  in  which  it  occurs. 
A  statement  occurring  for  the  first  time  in  a  late  passage  may  of  course  re 
present  an  old  notion;  but  if  it  differs  from  what  has  been  said  on  the  same 
point  in  a  chronologically  earlier  hymn,  it  most  probably  furnishes  a  later 
development.  The  tenth  and  the  greater  part  of  the  first  book  of  the  RV.s 
are  therefore  more  likely  to  contain  later  conceptions  than  the  other  books. 
Moreover,  the  exclusive  connexion  of  the  ninth  book  with  Soma  Pavamana 
may  give  a  different  complexion  to  mythological  matter  contained  in  another 
book.  Thus  Vivasvat  and  Trita  are  here  connected  with  the  preparation  of 
Soma  in  quite  a  special  manner  (cp.  §§  18,  23).  As  regards  the  Brahmanas, 
great  caution  should  be  exercised  in  discovering  historically  primitive  notions 
in  them;  for  they  teem  with  far-fetched  fancies,  speculations,  and  identi 
fications6. 

In  adducing  parallel  passages  as  evidence,  due  regard  should  be  paid 
to  the  context.  Their  real  value  can  often  only  be  ascertained  by  a  minute 
and  complex  consideration  of  their  surroundings  and  the  association  of  ideas 


5.  THE  AVESTA  AND  VEDIC  MYTHOLOGY.  7 

which  connects  them  with  what  precedes  and  follows.  After  a  careful  estim 
ation  of  the  internal  evidence  of  the  Veda,  aided  by  such  corroboration 
as  the  later  phases  of  Indian  literature  may  afford,  further  light  should  be 
sought  from  the  closely  allied  mythology  of  the  Iranians.  Comparison  with 
it  may  confirm  the  results  derived  from  the  Indian  material,  or  when  the 
Indian  evidence  is  inconclusive,  may  enable  us  either  to  decide  what  is  old  and 
new  or  to  attain  greater  defmiteness  in  regard  to  Vedic  conceptions.  Thus 
without  the  aid  of  the  Avesta,  it  would  be  impossible  to  arrive  at  anything 
like  certain  conclusions  about  the  original  nature  of  the  god  Mitra. 

The    further    step    may    now  be  taken  of  examining   the  results  of  com 
parative  mythology,  in  order  to  ascertain  if  possible,  wherein  consists  the  Vedic 
heritage  from  the  Indo-European  period  and  what  is  the  original  significance 
of  that  heritage.    Finally,  the  teachings  of  ethnology  cannot  be  neglected,  when 
it  becomes  necessary  to  ascertain  what  elements  survive  from  a  still  remoter 
stage  of  human  development.  Recourse  to  all  such  evidence  beyond  the  range  of 
the  Veda  itself  must  prove  a  safeguard  against  on  the  one  hand  assuming  that 
various  mythological  elements  are  of  purely  Indian  origin,  or  on  the  other  hand 
treating  the  Indo-European  period  as  the  very  starting  point  of  all  mythological 
notions.   The  latter  view  would  be  as  far  from  the  truth  as  the  assumption  that 
the  Indo-European  language  represents  the  very  beginnings  of  Aryan  speech7, 
i  OLDENBERG,  ZDMG.  49,  173.    -  -    *   pvs.  XXVI— VIII.    -  -    3  BLOOMFIELD, 
ZDMG.  48,  542.  —  4  HRI.  51.  —  5  Cp.  OLDENBERG,  Die  Hymnen  des  Rigveda  I, 
Berlin    1888;    E.  V.  ARNOLD,   KZ.  34,  297.  344;    HOPKINS,    JAOS.  17,  23  —  92.    - 
6  HRI.  183.   194;  v.  SCHR6DER,  WZKM.  9,  120.  —  7  ORV.  26—33. 

Cp.  also   LUDWIG,    liber   Methode  bei  Interpretation  des  Rgveda,    Prag  1890; 
HILLEBRANDT,  Vedamterpretation,  Breslau  1895. 

§  5.  The  Avesta  and  Vedic  Mythology.  --  We  have  seen  that  the 
evidence  of  the  Avesta  cannot  be  ignored  by  the  student  of  Vedic  mytho 
logy.  The  affinity  of  the  oldest  form  of  the  Avestan  language  with  the  dialect 
of  the  Vedas  is  so  great  in  syntax,  vocabulary,  diction,  metre,  and  general 
poetic  style,  that  by  the  mere  application  of  phonetic  laws,  whole  Avestan 
stanzas  may  be  translated  word  for  word  into  Vedic,  so  as  to  produce  verses 
correct  not  only  in  form  but  in  poetic  spirit1.  The  affinity  in  the  domain  of 
mythology  is  by  no  means  so  great.  For  the  religious  reform  of  Zarathustra 
brought  about  a  very  considerable  displacement  and  transformation  of  mytho 
logical  conceptions.  If  therefore  we  possessed  Avestan  literature  as  old  as 
that  of  the  RV.,  the  approximation  would  have  been  much  greater  in  this 
respect.  Still,  the  agreements  in  detail,  in  mythology  no  less  than  in  cult, 
are  surprisingly  numerous.  Of  the  many  identical  terms  connected  with  the 
ritual  it  is  here  only  necessary  to  mention  Vedic  yajna  =  Avestan  yasna, 
sacrifice,  hotr  =  zaotar,  priest,  atharvan  =  dthravan,  fire-priest,  rta  =  asa  order, 
rite,  and  above  all  soma  =  haoma,  the  intoxicating  juice  of  the  Soma  plant,  in 
both  cults  offered  as  the  main  libation,  pressed,  purified  by  a  sieve,  mixed 
with  milk,  and  described  as  the  lord  of  plants,  as  growing  on  the  mountains, 
and  as  brought  down  by  an  eagle  or  eagles  (cp.  §  37).  It  is  rather  with 
the  striking  correspondences  in  mythology  that  we  are  concerned.  In  both 
religions  the  term  asura  =  ahura  is  applied  to  the  highest  gods,  who  in 
both  are  conceived  as  mighty  kings,  drawn  through  the  air  in  their  war 
chariots  by  swift  steeds,  and  in  character  benevolent,  almost  entirely 
free  from  guile  and  immoral  traits.  Both  the  Iranians  and  the  Indians  ob 
served  the  cult  of  fire,  though  under  the  different  names  of  Agni  and  Atar. 
The  Waters,  dpah  =  dpo,  were  invoked  by  both,  though  not  frequently2. 
The  Vedic  Mitra  is  the  Avestan  Mithra,  the  sun  god.  The  Aditya  Bhaga 
corresponds  to  bagha^  a  god  in  general;  Vayu,  Wind  is  vayu,  a  genius  of 


8     III.  RELIGION,  WELTL.  WISSENSCH.  u.  KUNST.    i  A.  VEDIC  MYTHOLOGY. 


air;  Apam  napat,  the  Son  of  Waters  =  Apam  napat;  Gandharva  =  Gandarewa 

and  Krsanu  =  Keresani   are   divine   beings  connected  with  soma  =  haoma. 

To  Trita  Aptya  correspond  two  mythical  personages  named  Thrita  and  Athwya, 

and  to  Indra  Vrtrahan  the  demon  Indra  and  the  genius  of  victory  Verethragna. 

Yama,   son   of  Vivasvat,   ruler   of  the   dead,    is    identical   with  Yima,   son   of 

Vivanhvant,  ruler  of  paradise.     The  parallel  in  character,  though  not  in  name, 

of  the  god  Varuna  is  Ahura  Mazda,  the  wise  spirit.    The  two  religions  also  have 

in  common  as  designations    of  evil  spirits  the  terms  druh  =  druj  and  ydtu\ 

i  BARTIIOLOMAE    in    GEIGER   and   KUHN'S  Grundriss  der  iranischen  Philologie, 

vol.   i,  p.  i.  —  2  SPIEGEL,  Die  Arische  Periode,  Leipzig  1887,  p.   155.  —  3  SPIEGEL, 

op.  cit.  225 — 33;  GRUPPE,  Die  griechischen  Culte  und  Mythen,  I,  86—97;  ORV.  26 

—33;  HRI,   167—8. 

§  6.  Comparative  Mythology.  — •  In  regard  to  the  Indo-European 
period  we  are  on  far  less  certain  ground.  Many  equations  of  name  once 
made  in  the  first  enthusiasm  of  discovery  and  generally  accepted,  have  since 
been  rejected  and  very  few  of  those  that  remain  rest  on  a  firm  foundation. 
Dyaus  =  Ze6;  is  the  only  one  which  can  be  said  to  be  beyond  the  range 
of  doubt.  Varuna  =  Oupavo?  though  presenting  phonetic  difficulties,  seems 
possible.  The  rain-god  Parjanya  agrees  well  in  meaning  with  the  Lithuanian 
thunder-god  Perkunas,  but  the  phonetic  objections  are  here  still  greater.  The 
name  of  Bhaga  is  identical  with  the  Slavonic  bogu  as  well  as  the  Persian  bagha, 
but  as  the  latter  two  words  mean  only  'god',  the  Indo-European  word  cannot 
have  designated  any  individual  deity.  Though  the  name  of  Usas  is  radically 
cognate  to  Aurora  and  Hu>c,  the  cult  of  Dawn  as  a  goddess  is  a  specially 
Indian  development.  It  has  been  inferred  from  the  identity  of  mythological 
traits  in  the  thunder-gods  of  the  various  branches  of  the  Indo-European 
family,  that  a  thunder-god  existed  in  the  Indo-European  period  in  spite  of 
the  absence  of  a  common  name.  There  are  also  one  or  two  other  not  im 
probable  equations  based  on  identity  of  character  only.  That  the  conception 
of  higher  gods,  whose  nature  was  connected  with  light  (]A//V,  to  shine)  and 
heaven  (div)  had  already  been  arrived  at  in  the  Indo-European  period,  is 
shown  by  the  common  name  deivos  (Skt.  deva-s,  Lith.  deva-s}  Lat.  deu-s)}  god. 
The  conception  of  Earth  as  a  mother  (common  to  Vedic  and  Greek  mytho 
logy)  and  of  Heaven  as  a  father  (Skt.  Dyaus  pitar,  Gk.  Zsu  iraiep,  Lat. 
Jupiter)  appears  to  date  from  a  still  remoter  antiquity.  For  the  idea  of 
Heaven  and  Earth  being  universal  parents  is  familiar  to  the  mythology  of 
China  and  New  Zealand  and  may  be  traced  in  that  of  Egypt *.  The  practice 
of  magical  rites  and  the  worship  of  inanimate  objects  still  surviving  in  the 
Veda,  doubtless  came  down  from  an  equally  remote  stage  in  the  mental 
development  of  mankind,  though  the  possibility  of  a  certain  influence  exer 
cised  by  the  primitive  aborigines  of  India  on  their  Aryan  conquerors  cannot 
be  altogether  excluded. 

1  GRUPPE  op.  cit.  I,  97— 121;    ORV.  33— 8;    HRI.  168— 9.  —  2  TYLOR,  Primitive 
Culture  I,  326;  LANG,  Mythology.    Encyclopaedia  Britannica,  p.   150 — I. 

II:    VEDIC  CONCEPTIONS  OF  THE  WORLD  AND  ITS  ORIGIN. 

§  7.  Cosmology.  -  -  The  Universe,  the  stage  on  which  the  actions  of 
the  gods  are  enacted,  is___regarded  by  the  Vedic  poets  as  divided  into  the 
three  domains1  of  earth,  air  or  atmosphere,  and  heaven2.  The  sky  when 
regarded  as  the  whole  space  above  the  earth,  forms  with  the  latter  the  entire 
universe  consisting  of  the  upper  and  the  nether  world.  The  vault  (ndkd)  of 
the  sky  is  regarded  as  the  limit  dividing  the  visible  upper  world  from  the 


>.  COMPARATIVE  MYTHOLOGY.     7.  COSMOLOGY. 


third  or  invisible  world  of  heaven,  which  is  the  abode  of  light  and  the  dwelling 
place  of  the  gods.  Heaven,  air,  and  earth  form  the  favourite  triad  of  the 
RV.,  constantly  spoken  of  explicitly  or  implicitly  (8,  io6.  go6  &c.).  The  s&ter  S^ 
phenomena  which  appear,  to  take  place  on  the  vault  of  the  sky,  are  referred 
to  heaven,  while  those  of  lightning,  rain,  and  wind  belong  to  the  atmosphere. 
But  when  heaven  designates  the  whole  space  above  the  earth  both  classes 
of  phenomena  are  spoken  of  as  taking  place  there.  In  a  passage  of  the  AV. 
(4,  i43  =  VS.  17,  67)  the  'vault  of  the  sky'  comes  between  the  triad  of 
earth,  air,  heaven  and  the  world  of  light,  which  thus  forms  a  fourth  division 3. 
Each  of  the  three  worlds  is  also  subdivided.  Thus  three  earths,  three  atmo 
spheres,  three  heavens  are  sometimes  mentioned;  or  when  the  universe  is 
looked  upon  as  consisting  of  two  halves,  we  hear  of  six  worlds  or  spaces 
(rajdmsi).  This  subdivision  probably  arose  from  the  loose  use  of  the  word 
prthivl  'earth'  (i,  io89>  I0;  7,  I0411)4  in  the  plural  to  denote  the  three  worlds 
(just  as  the  dual  pitarau,  'two  fathers'  regularly  denotes  'father  and  mother'). 

The  earth  is  variously  called  bhumi,  ksam,  ksd,  gmd,  the  great  (ma/iT), 
the  broad  (prthivl  or  urvi),  the  extended  (uttdna),  the  boundless  (apdra),  or 
the  place  here  (id am}  as  contrasted  with  the  upper  sphere  (i,  221?.  i54T>3). 

The  conception  of  the__e_arth  being  a  disc  surrounded  by  an  ocean  does    . 
not   appear  in  the  Samhitas.     But  it  was  naturally  regarded  as  circular,  being 
compared  with  a  wheel  (io,  894)  and  expressly  called  circular  (parimandald) 
in  the  SB.6  ^ 

The  four  points  of  the  compass  are  already  mentioned  in  the  RV.  in 
an  adverbial  form  (7,  72s;  io,  36 14.  42")  and  in  the  AV.  as  substantives 
(AV.  15,  2  T  ff.).  Hence  'four  quarters?  ^(pradisali)  are  spoken  of  (io,  i98), 
a  term  also  used  as  synonymous  with  the  whole  earth  (i,  i64*2),  and  the 
earth  is  described  as  'four-pointed'  (io,  58 3).  Five  points  are  occasionally 
mentioned  (9,  8629;  AV.  3,  24^  &c.),  when  that  in  the  middle  (10,42",), 
where  the  speaker  stands,  denotes  the  fifth.  The  AV.  also  refers  to  six  (the 
zenith  being  added)  and  even  seven  points 5.  The  same  points  may  be 
meant  by  the  seven  regions  (disaJi)  and  the  seven  places  (dhdmd)  of  the 
earth  spoken  of  in  the  RV.  (9,  ii43;  i,  22l6). 

Heaven  or  div  is  also  commonly  termed  vyoman,  sky,  or  as  pervaded 
with  light,  the  'luminous  space',  rocana  (with  or  without  div  ah}.  Designations 
of  the  dividing  firmament  besides  the  'vault'  are  the  'summit'  (sdnu],  'surface' 
(vis tap},  'ridge'  (prstha),  as  well  as  the  compound  expressions  'ridge  of  the 
vault'  (i,  i255cp.  3,  212)  and  'summit  of  the  vault'  (8,  922)3.  Even  a  "third 
ridge  in  the  luminous  space  of  heaven'  is  mentioned  (9,  86 27).  When  three 
heavens  are  distinguished  they  are  very  often  called  the  three  luminous  spaces 
(frTrocana})  a  highest  (uttama),  a  middle,  and  a  lowest  being  specified  (5,  6o6). 
The  highest  is  also  termed  uttara  and  pdrya  (4,  266;  6,  40  5).  In  this  third 
or  highest  heaven  (very  often  parame  rocane  or  vyomari)  the  gods,  the  fathers^ 
and  Soma  are  conceived  as  abiding. 

Heaven  and  earth  are  coupled  as  a  dual  conception  called  by  the  terms 
rodasi]  ksom,  dvydvaprthivi  and  others  (§  44),  and  spoken  of  as  the  two 
halves  (2,  27^).  The  combination  'with  the  semi-spherical  sky  causes  the  -R^  o 
notion  of  the  earth's  shape  to  be  modified,  when  the  two  are  called  'the  two 
great  bowls  (camva)  turned  towards  each  other'  (3,  5520).  Once  they  are 
compared  to  the  wheels  at  the  two  ends  of  an  axle  (io,  894). 

The  RV.  makes  no  reference  to  the  supposed  distance  between  heaven 
and  earth,  except  in  such  vague  phrases  as  that  not  even  the  birds  can  soar 
to  the  abode  of  Visnu  (i,  1555).  But  the  AV.  (io,  8l8)  says  that  'the  two 
wings  of  the  yellow  bird  (the  sun)  flying  to  heaven  are  1000  days'  journey 


io     III.  RELIGION,  WELTL.  WISSENSCH.  u.  KUNST.     i  A.  VEDIC  MYTHOLOGY. 


apart'.  A  similar  notion  is  found  in  the  AB.,  where  it  is  remarked  (2,  iy8) 
that  '1000  days'  journey  for  a  horse  the  heavenly  world  is  distant  from  here'. 
Another  Brahmana  states  that  the  heavenly  world  is  as  far  from  this  world 
as  1000  cows  standing  on  each  other  (PB.  16,  86;  21,  i  9). 

The  air  or  intermediate  space  (antariksd)  is  hardly  susceptible  of  per 
sonification.  As  the  region  of  mists  and  cloud,  it  is  also  called  rajas  which 
is  described  as  watery  (i,  i245  cp.  5,  85  2j  and  is  sometimes  thought  of 
as  dark,  when  it  is  spoken  of  as  'black'  (i,  35 2>4'9;  8,  436).  The  triple 
subdivision  is  referred  to  as  the  three  spaces  ^or  rajdmsi  (4,  53 5;  5,  69 x). 
The  highest  is  then  spoken  of  as  uttama  (9,  225j,  parama  (3,  30 2),  or  trtlya, 
the  third  (9,  746;  io,  45 3.  I238;,  where  the  waters  and  Soma  are _> and  the 
celestial  Agni  is  produced.  The  two  lower  spaces  are  within  the  range  of 
our  perception,  but  the  third  belongs  to  Visnu  (7,  99 r  cp.  i,  i555).  The 
latter  seems  to  be  the  'mysterious'  space  once  referred  to  elsewhere  (io,  io57). 
The  twofold  subdivision  of  the  atmosphere  is  commoner.  Then  the  lower 
(upard)  or  terrestrial  (parthiva)  is  contrasted  with  the  heavenly  (divyam  or 
divah)  space  (i,  62s;  4,  533).  The  uppermost  stratum,  as  being  contiguous 
with  heaven  (div)  in  the  twofold  as  well  as  the  triple  division,  seems  often 
to  be  loosely  employed  as  synonymous  with  heaven  in  the  strict  sense. 
Absolute  definiteness  or  consistency  in  the  statements  of  different  poets  or 
even  of  the  same  poet  could  not  reasonably  be  expected  in  regard  to  such 
matters. 

The  air  being  above  the  earth  in  the  threefold  division  of  the  universe, 
its  subdivisions,  whether  two  or  three,  would  naturally  have  been  regarded 
as  above  it  also;  and  one  verse  at  least  (i,  8i5cp.  90 7)  clearly  shows  that 
the  'terrestrial  space'  is  in  this  position.  Three  passages,  however,  of  the 
RV.  (6,  91;  7,  So1;  5,  8i4)  have  been  thought  to  lend  themselves  to  the - 
view7  that  the  lower  atmosphere  was  conceived  as  under  the  earth,  to  account 
for  the  course  of  the  sun  during  the  night.  The  least  indefinite  of  'fhese 
three  passages  (5,  8i4)  is  to  the  effect  that  Savitr,  the  sun,  goes  round  night 
on  both  sides  (ubhayatah).  This  may,  however,  mean  nothing  more  than 
that  night  is  enclosed  between  the  limits  of  sunset  and  sunrise.  At  any  rate, 
the  view  advanced  in  the  AB.  (3,  44  *)  as  to  the  sun's  course  during  the  night 
is,  that  the  luminary  shines  upwards  at  night,  while  it  turns  round  so  as  to 
shine  downwards  in  the  daytime.  A  similar  notion  may  account  for  the 
statement  of  the  RV.  that  the  light  which  the  sun's  steeds  draw  is  sometimes 
bright  and  sometimes  dark  (i,  H55),  or  that  the  rajas  which  accompanies 
the  sun  to  the  east  is  different  from  the  light  with  which  he  rises  (io,  373). 

There  being  no  direct  reference  to  the  sun  passing  below  the  earth,  the 
balance  of  probabilities  seems  to  favour  the  view  that  the  luminary  was 
supposed  to  return  towards  the  east  the  way  he  came,  becoming  entirely 
darkened  during  the  return  journey.  As  to  what  becomes  of  the  stars  during 
the  daytime,  a  doubt  is  expressed  (i,  24™),  but  no  conjecture  is  made. 

The  atmosphere  is  often  called  a  sea  (samudra)  as  the  abode  of  the 
celestial  waters.  It  is  also  assimilated  to  the  earth,  inasmuch  as  it  has 
mountains  (i,  322&c.)  and  seven  streams  which  flow  there  (i,  3212&c.), 
when  the  conflict  with  the  demon  of  drought  takes  place.  Owing  to  the 
obvious  resemblance  the  term  'mountain'  (parvata)  thus  very  often  in  the 
RV.  refers  to  clouds8,  the  figurative  sense  being  generally  clear  enough.  The 
word  'rock'  (adri)  is  further  regularly  used  in  a  mythological  sense  for  'cloud' 
as  enclosing  the  cows  released  by  Indra  and  other  gods9. 

The  rainclouds  as  containing  the  waters,  as  dripping,  moving  and  roaring, 
are  peculiarly  liable  to  theriomorphism  as  cows10,  whose  milk  is  rain. 


8.  COSMOGONY.  n 


Line  cosmic  order  or  law  prevailing  in  nature  is  recognised  under  the 
name  of  rta™  (properly  the  'course'  of  things),  which  is  considered  to  be 
under  the  guardianship  of  the  highest  gods.  The  same  word  also  designates 
'order'  in  the  moral  world  as  truth  and  'right',  and  in  the  religious  world  as 
sacrifice  or  'rite'.  ^J 

i  ROTH,  ZDMG.  6,  68.  —  2  Cp.  Sp.AP.  122;  KRV.  34,  note  118.  —  3  HOPKINS, 
AJP.  4,  189.  —  4  BOLLENSEN,  ZDMG.  41,  494.  —  5  BLOOMFIELD,  AJP.  12,  432.  — 
6  Cp.  WEBER,  IS.  10,  358—64.  —  7  AIL.  357—9.  —  8  KHF.  178;  DELBRUCK,  ZVP. 
1865,  pp.  284—5.  —  9  KHF.  187;  Zft.  f.  deutsche  Mythologie,  3,378.  —  10  GW., 
s.  v.  go;  WVB.  1894,  p.  13.  —  JI  LUDWIG,  Religiose  und  philosophische  Anschau- 
ungen  des  Veda  (1875),  P-  ^5;  LRV.  3,  284—5;  HARLEZ,  JA.  (1878),  n,  105—6; 
DARMESTETER,  Ormazd  et  Ahriman,  13—4;  OGR.  198.  243;  KRV.  28;  BRV.  3,  220; 
WC.  91—7.  100;  Sp.AP.  139;  ORV.  196—201;  JACKSON,  Trans,  of  loth  Or.  Con 
gress,  2,  74. 

BRUCE,  Vedic  conceptions  of  the  Earth,  JRAS.  1862,  p.  321  ff.;  BRV.  I,  1—3; 
WALLIS,  Cosmology  of  the  Rigveda  (London  1887),  ill  — 17. 

§  8.  Cosmogony.  —  The  cosmogonic  mythology  of  the  RV.  fluctuates 
between  two  theories,  which  are  not  mutually  exclusive,  but  may  be  found 
combined  in  the  same  verse.  The  one  regards  the  universe  as  the  result  of 
mechanical  production,  the  work  of  the  carpenter's  and  joiner's  skill;  the  other 
represents  it  as  the  result  of  natural  generation. 

The  poets  of  the  RV.  often  employ  the  metaphor  of  building  in  its 
various  details,  when  speaking  of  the  formation  of  the  world.  The  act  of 
measuring  is  constantly  referred  to.  Thus  India  measured  the  six  regions, 
made  the  wide  expanse  of  earth  and  the  high  dome  of  heaven  (6,473-4). 
Visnu  measured  out  the  terrestrial  spaces  and  made  fast  the  abode  on  high 
(i,  I541).  The  measuring  instrument,  sometimes  mentioned  (2,  i53;  3,  38 3), 
is  the  sun,  with  which  Vaiuna  performs  the  act  (5,  855).  The  Fathers 
measured  the  two  worlds  with  measuring  rods  and  made  them  broad  (3,  38 3 
cp.  i,  i9o2).  The  measurement  naturally  begins  in  front  or  the  east.  Thus 
Indra  measured  out  as  it  were  a  house  with  measures  from  the  front  (2,  15^ 
cp.  7,  99 2).  Connected  with  this  idea  is  that  of  spreading  out  the  earth,  an 
action  attributed  to  Agni,  Indra,  the  Maruts,  and  others.  As  the  Vedic  house 
was  built  of  wood,  the  material  is  once  or  twice  spoken  of  as  timber.  Thus 
the  poet  asks:  'What  was  the  wood,  what  the  tree  out  of  which  they  fashioned 
heaven  and  earth?'  (10,  317=  10,  8i4).  The  answer  given  to  this  question 
in  a  Brahmana  is  that  Brahma  was  the  wood  and  the  tree  (TB.  2,  8,  96). 
Heaven  and  earth  are  very  often  described  as  having  been  supported  (skabh 
or  stabh)  with  posts  (skambha  or  skambhana),  but  the  sky  is  said  to  be 
rafterless  (2,  15*;  4,  56^;  10,  149 *),  and  that  it  never  falls  is  a  source  of 
wonder  (5,  29^;  6,  i77;  8,  456).  The  framework  of  a  door  is  called  dtd; 
in  such  a  frame  of  heaven  Indra  fixed  the  air  (i,  5$*).  The  doors  of  the 
cosmic  house  are  the  portals  of  the  east  through  which  the  morning  light 
enters  (1,1134;  4,51*;  5,4s1).  Foundations  are  sometimes  alluded  to. 
Thus  Savitr  made  fast  the  earth  with  bands  (10,  149*),  Visnu  fixed  it  with 
Pegs  (7;  993)j  and  Brhaspati  supports  its  ends  (4,  5*  *  cp.  10,  89 T).  The 
agents  in  the  construction  of  the  world  are  either  the  gods  in  general  or 
various  individual  gods;  but  where  special  professional  skill  seemed  to  be 
required  in  details,  Tvastr,  the  divine  carpenter,  or  the  deft-handed  Rbhus 
are  mentioned.  Little  is  said  as  to  their  motive;  but  as  man  builds  his  house 
to  live  in,  so  of  Visnu  at  least  it  is  indicated  that  he  measured  or  stretched 
out  the  regions  as  an  abode  for  man  (6,  49  I3.  695,  cp.  i,  I554). 

The  notion  of  parentage  as  a  creative  agency  in  the  universe,  chiefly 
connected  with  the  birth  of  the  sun  at  dawn  and  with  the  production  of  rain 


1 2     III.  RELIGION,  WELTL.  WISSENSCH.  u.  KUNST.     i  A.  VEDIC  MYTHOLOGY. 

after  drought,  has  three  principle  applications  in  the  RV.  The  first  is  tem 
poral,  as  involving  the  idea  of  priority.  One  phenomenon  preceding  another 
is  spoken  of  as  its  parent.  Thus  the  dawns  generate  (Jan)  the  sun  and  the 
morning  sacrifice  (7,  78 3),  while  Dawn  herself  is  born  of  Night  (i,  1239). 
As  the  point  of  view  is  changed,  contradictions  with  regard  to  such  relation 
ships  naturally  arise  (cp.  p.  48).  When  the  rising  of  the  dawn  is  ascribed 
to  the  sacrifice  of  the  Fathers,  the  explanation  is  to  be  found  in  this  notion 
of  priority.  Secondly,  a  local  application  frequently  occurs.  The  space  in 
which  a  thing  is  contained  or  produced  is  its  father  or  mother.  Illustrations 
of  this  are  furnished  by  purely  figurative  statements.  Thus  the  quiver  is 
called  the  father  of  the  arrows  (6,  755)  or  the  bright  steeds  of  the  sun  are 
termed  the  daughters  of  his  car  (i,  so9).  This  idea  of  local  parentage  is 
especially  connected  with  heaven  and  earth.  Paternity  is  the  characteristic 
feature  in  the  personification  of  Dyaus  (see  §  n),  and  Dawn  is  constantly 
called  the  'daughter  of  Heaven'.  Similarly  the  Earth,  who  produces  vegetation 
on  her  broad  bosom  (5,  84 3),  is  a  mother  (i,  89 4  &c.).  Heaven  and  earth 
are,  however,  more  often  found  coupled  as  universal  parents,  a  conception 
obvious  enough  from  the  fact  that  heaven  fertilizes  the  earth  by  the- descent 
of  moisture  and  light,  and  further  developed  by  the  observation  that  both 
supply  nourishment  to  living  beings,  the  one  in  the  form  of  rain,  the  other 
in  that  of  herbage.  They  are  characteristically  the  parents  of  the  gods  (§  44). 
As  the  latter  are  often  said  to  have  created  heaven  and  earth,  we  thus  arrive 
at  the  paradox  of  the  Vedic  poets  that  the  children  produced  their  own 
parents;  Indra,  for  instance,  being  described  as  having  begotten  his  father 
and  mother  from  his  own  body  (i,  i592;  10,  54 3).  Again,  the  raincloud 
cow  is  the  mother  of  the  lightning  calf,  or  the  heavenly  waters,  as  carrying 
the  embryo  of  the  aerial  fire,  are  its  mothers,  for  one  of  the  forms  of  the 
fire-god  is  'the  son  of  waters'  (§  24).  'Son  of  the  steep'  also  appears  to 
be  a  name  of  lightning  in  the  AV.  (i,  i32'3;  cp.  263  and  RV.  10,  i422). 
Thirdly,  the  notion  of  parentage  arises  from  a  generic  point  of  view:  he 
who  is  the  chief,  the  most  prominent  member  of  a  group,  becomes  their 
parent.  Thus  Vayu,  Wind,  is  father  of  the  Storm-gods  (i,  I344),  Rudra, 
father  of  the  Maruts  or  Rudras,  Soma,  father  of  plants,  while  SarasvatI  is 
mother  of  rivers. 

There  are  also  two  minor  applications  of  the  idea  of  paternity  in  the 
RV.  As  in  the  Semitic  languages,  an  abstract  quality  is  quite  frequently  em 
ployed  in  a  figurative  sense  (which  is  sometimes  mythologically  developed) 
to  represent  the  parent  of  sons  who  possess  or  bestow  that  quality  in 
an  eminent  degree.  Thus  the  gods  in  general  are  sons  (sunavah  or  pitrdJi) 
of  immortality1  as  well  as  sons  of  skill,  daksa  (8,  255;  cp.  §  19).  Agni  is 
the  'son  of  strength'  or  of  'force'  (§  35).  Pusan  is  the  'child  of  setting 
free'2.  Indra  is  the 'son  of  truth'  (8,  58 4),  the  'child  of  cow-getting'  (4,  32  22), 
and  the  'son  of  might'  (savasah,  4,  24 x;  8,  Si  '*,  his  mother  twice  being  called 
s'avas'i,  8,  45 5.  66 2).  Mitra-Varuna  are  the  'children  of  great  might'.  Another 
application  is  much  less  common.  As  a  father  transmits  his  qualities  to  his 
son,  his  name  is  also  occasionally  transferred,  something  like  a  modern  sur 
name.  Thus  visvarupa,  an  epithet  of  Tvastr,  becomes  the  proper  name  of 
his  son.  Analogously  the  name  of  Vivasvat  is  applied  to  his  son  Manu  in 
the  sense  of  the  patronymic  Vatiasvata  (Val.  41). 

A  mythological  account  of  the  origin  of  the  universe,  involving  neither 
manufacture  nor  generation,  is  given  in  one  of  the  latest  hymns  of  the  RV., 
the  well-known  purusa-sukta  (10,  90).  Though  several  details  in  this  myth 
point  to  the  most  recent  period  of  the  RV.,  the  main  idea  is  very  primitive, 


8.  COSMOGONY. 


as  it  accounts  for  the  formation  of  the  world  from  the  body  of  a  giant. 
With  him  the  gods  performed  a  sacrifice,  when  his  head  became  the  sky, 
his  navel  the  air,  and  his  feet  the  earth.  From  his  mind  sprang  the  moon, 
from  his  eye  the  sun,  from  his  mouth  Indra  and  Agni,  from  his  breath,  wind. 
The  four  castes  also  arose  from  him.  His  mouth  became  the  brahmana, 
his  arms  the  rdjanya  or  warrior,  his  thighs  the  vaisya,  and  his  feet  the 
sudra.  The  interpretation  given  in  the  hymn  itself  is  pantheistic,  for  it  is 
there  said  (v.  2)  that  Purusa  is  'all  this,  both  what  has  become  and  what 
shall  be'.  In  the  AV.  (10,  17)  and  the  Upanisads  (Mund.  Up.  2,  i10) 
Purusa  is  also  pantheistically  interpreted  as  identical  with  the  universe.  He 
is  also  identified  with  Brahma  (Chand.  Up.  i,  7  5).  In  the  SB.  (n,  i,  6  x)  he 
is  the  same  as  Prajapati,  the  creator. 

There  are  in  the  last  book  of  the  RV.  some  hymns  which  treat  the 
origin  of  the  world  philosophically  rather  than  mythologically.  Various  passages 
show  that  in  the  cosmological  speculation  of  the  RV.  the  sun  was  regarded 
as  an  important  agent  of  generation.  Thus  he  is  called  the  soul  (dtmd)  of 
all  that  moves  and  stands  (i,  115*).  Statements  such  as  that  he  is  called 
by  many  names  though  one  (i,  164^;  10,  ii45  cp.  Vol.  io2)  indicate  that  his 
nature  was  being  tentatively  abstracted  to  that  of  a  supreme  god,  nearly 
approaching  that  of  the  later  conception  of  Brahma.  In  this  sense  the  sun 
is  once  glorified  as  a  great  power  of  the  universe  under  the  name  of  the 
'golden  embryo',  hiranya-garbha,  in  RV.  io,  121. -3  It  is  he  who  measures 
out  space  in  the  air  and  shines  where  the  sun  rises  (vv.  5>  6).  In  the  last 
verse  of  this  hymn,  he  is  called  Prajapati4,  'lord  of  created  beings',  the  name 
which  became  that  of  the  chief  god^  of  the  Brahmanas.  It  is  significant  that 
in  the  only  older  passage  of  the  RV.  in  which  it  occurs  (4,  532),  prajdpati  is 
an  epithet  of  the  solar  deity  Savitr,  who  in  the  same  hymn  (v.  6)  is  said  to 
rule  over  what  moves  and  stands5. 

There  are  two  other  cosmogonic  hymns  which  both  explain  the  origin 
of  the  universe  as  a  kind  of  evolution  of  the  existent  (sat)  from  the  non-existent 
(asat).  In  io,  72 6  it  is  said  that  Brahmanaspati  forged  together  this  world 
like  a  smith.  From  the  non-existent  the  existent  was  produced.  Thence  in 
succession  arose  the  earth,  the  spaces,  Aditi  with  Daksa;  and  after  Aditi  the 
gods  were  born.  The  gods  then  brought  forward  the  sun.  There  were  eight 
sons  of  Aditi,  but  the  eighth,  Martanda,  she  cast  away;  she  brought  him  to 
be  born  and  to  die  (i.  e.  to  rise  and  set).  Three  stages  can  be  distinguished 
in  this  hymn:  first  the  world  is  produced,  then  the  gods,  and  lastly  the  sun. 

In  RV.  io;  129,  a  more  abstract  and  a  very  sublime  hymn,  it  is  affirmed 
that  nothing  existed  in  the  beginning,  all  being  void.  Darkness  and  space 
enveloped  the  undifferentiated  waters  (cp.  io,  82 6.  i2i7,  AV.  2,  8).  The 
one  primordial  substance  (ekam)  was  produced  by  heat.  Then  desire  (kama), 
the  first  seed  of  mind  (inanas)  arose.  This  is  the  bond  between  the  non 
existent  and  the  existent.  By  this  emanation  the  gods  came  into  being.  But 
here  the  poet,  overcome  by  his  doubts,  gives  up  the  riddle  of  creation  as 
unsolvable.  A  short  hymn  of  three  stanzas  (io,  190)  forms  a  sequel  to  the 
more  general  evolution  of  that  just  described.  Here  it  is  stated  that  from 
heat  (tapas)  was  produced  order  (rta)-,  then  night,  the  ocean,  the  year;  the 
creator  (dhdta)  produced  in  succession  sun  and  moon,  heaven  and  earth, 
air  and  ether. 

In  a  similar  strain  to  RV.  io,  129  a  Brahmana  passage  declares  that 
'formerly  nothing  existed,  neither  heaven  nor  earth  nor  atmosphere,  which 
being  non-existent  resolved  to  come  into  being'  (TB.  2,  2,  9  x  ff.).  The  regular 
cosmogonic  view  of  the  Brahmanas  requires  the  agency  of  a  creator,  who  is 


14     HI.  RELIGION,  WELTL.  WISSENSCH.  u.  KUNST.     i  A.  VEDIC  MYTHOLOGY. 

not,  however,  always  the  starting  point.  The  creator  here  is  Prajapati  or 
the  personal.  Brahma,  who  is  not  only  father  of  gods,  men,  and  demons,  but 
is  the  All.  Prajapati  is  here  an  anthropomorphic  representation  of  the  desire 
which  is  the  first  seed  spoken  of  in  RV.  10,  129.  In  all  these  accounts  the 
starting  point  is  either  Prajapati  desiring  offspring  and  creating,  or  else  the 
primeval  waters,  on  which  floated  Hiianyagarbha  the  cosmic  golden  egg, 
whence  is  produced  the  spirit  that  desires  and  creates  the  Universe.  This 
fundamental  contradiction  as  to  the  priority  of  Prajapati  or  of  the  waters 
appears  to  be  the  result  of  combining  the  theory  of  evolution  with  that  of 
creation.  Besides  this  there  are  many  minor  conflicts  of  statement,  as,  for 
instance,  that  the  gods  create  Prajapati  and  that  Prajapati  creates  the  gods  7. 
The  account  given  in  the  Chandogya  Brahmana  (5,  19)  is  that  not-being 
became  being;  the  latter  changed  into  an  egg,  which  after  a  year  by  splitting 
in  two  became  heaven  and  earth;  whatever  was  produced  is  the  sun,  which 
is  Brahma8  (cp.  Ch.  Up.  3,  I91"4).  Again,  in  the  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad 
(5,  61),  the  order  of  evolution  is  thus  stated:  In  the  beginning  waters  were 
this  (universe);  they  produced  the  real  (satyam)-,  from  this  was  produced 
Brahma,  from  Brahma  Prajapati,  from  Prajapati  the  gods. 

The  All-god  appears  as  a  creator  in  the  AV.  under  the  new  names  of 
Skambha,  Support,  Pranaq,  the  personified  breath  of  life  (AV.  n,  4),  Rohita, 
as  a  name  of  the  sun,  Kama,  Desire,  and  various  others I0.  The  most  notable 
cosmogonic  myth  of  the  Brahmanas  describes  the  raising  of  the  submerged 
earth  by  a  boar,  which  in  post-Vedic  mythology  developed  into  an  Avatar 
of  Visnu.11. 

i  OST.  5,  52.  —  2  OST.  5,  175,  note  271;    BRV.  2,  422  ff.;    DARMESTETER,  Haur- 

vatat  et  Ameretat,  83;   ORV".  232,  note  2.  —  3  SPH.  27—8;  HRI.  208.  —    4  SPH. 

29.  —  5  OGR.  295;  \VC.  50—1.  —  6  OST.  5,  48.  —  7  OST.  4,  20  ff.;  HRI.  208-9. 

-  8  WEBER,  IS.    i,   261.  —  9   SPH.   69—72.  —  10  HRI.   209.   —   "  MACDONELL, 

JRAS.  1895,  PP-  178-89. 

HAUG,  Die  Kosmogonie  der  Inder,  Allgemeine  Zeitung,  1873,  P-  2373  ff-;  WEBER,  IS. 
9,  74;  LUDWIG,  Die  philosophischen  und  religiosen  Anschauungen  des  Veda;  AIL. 
217;  BRI.  30 — I;  SCHERMAN,  Philosophische  Hymnen  aus  der  Rig-  und  Atharva- 
veda  Samhita,  Miinchen  1887;  LUKAS,  Die  Grundbegriffe  in  den  Kosmogonien  der 
alten  Volker,  Leipzig  1893,  pp.  65—99. 

§  9.  Origin  of  gods  and  men.  —  As  most  of  the  statements  con 
tained  in  the  Vedas  about  the  origin  of  the  gods  have  already  been  mentioned, 
only  a  brief  summary  need  here  be  added.  In  the  philosophical  hymns  the 
origin  of  the  gods  is  mostly  connected  with  the  element  of  water1.  In  the 
AV.  (10,  7  25)  they  are  said  to  have  arisen  from  the  non-existent.  According 
to  one  cosmogonic  hymn  (10,  129°)  they  were  born  after  the  creation  of 
the  Universe.  Otherwise  they  are  in  general  described  as  the  children  of 
Heaven  and  Earth.  In  one  passage  (10,  63 2)  a  triple  origin,  apparently 
corresponding  to  the  triple  division  of  the  universe,  is  ascribed  to  the  gods, 
when  they  are  said  to  have  been  'born  from  Aditi,  from  the  waters,  from 
the  earth'  (cp.  i,  139").  According  no  doubt  to  a  secondary  conception, 
certain  individual  gods  are  spoken  of  as  having  begotten  others.  Thus  the 
Dawn  is  called  the  mother  of  the  gods  (i,  ii319)  and  Brahmanaspati  (2,  26 3), 
as  well  as  Soma_-(9,  872),  is  said  to  be  their  father.  A  group  of  seven  or 
eight  gods,  the  Adityas,  are  regarded  as  the  sons  of  Aditi.  In  the  AV.  some 
gods  are  spoken  of  as  fathers,  others  as  sons2  (AV.  i,  3o2). 

The  Vedic  conceptions  on  the  subject  of  the  origin  of  man  are  rather 
fluctuating,  but  the  human  race  appear  generally  to  have  been  regarded  as 
descended  from  a  first  man.  The  latter  is  called  either  Vivasvat's  son  Manu, 
who  was  the  first  sacrificer  (10,  637)  and  who  is  also  spoken  of  as  father 


9.  ORIGIN  OF  GODS  AND  MEN.   10.  GENERAL  CHARACTER  AND  CLASSIFICATION.     15 

Manus  (i,  80 l6);  or  he  is  Yama  Vaivasvata,  Vivasvat's  son,  who  with  his 
twin  sister  Yam!  produced  the  human  race.  The  origin  of  men,  when  thought 
of  as  going  back  beyond  this  first  ancestor,  seems  to  have  been  conceived 
as  celestial.  Vivasvat  (§  18)  is  the  father  of  the  primeval  twins,  while  once 
the  celestial  Gandharva  and  the  water  nymph  are  designated  as  their  highest 
kin  (10,  io*).  Men's  relationship  to  the  gods  is  sometimes  also  alluded  to 3; 
and  men  must  have  been  thought  of  as  included  among  the  offspring  of 
Heaven  and  Earth,  the  great  parents  of  all  that  exists.  Again,  Agni  is  said 
to  have  begotten  the  offspring  of  men  (i,  962-4),  and  the  Angirases,  the 
semi-divine  ancestors  of  later  priestly  families,  are  described  as  his  sons. 
Various  other  human  families  are  spoken  of  as  independently  descended 
from  the  gods  through  their  founders  Atri,  Kanva,  and  others  (i,  i399). 
Vasistha  (7,  33 JI)  was  miraculously  begotten  by  Mitra  and  Varuna,  the  divine 
nymph  Urvasi  having  been  his  mother.  To  quite  a  different  order  of  ideas 
belongs  the  conception  of  the  origin  of  various  classes  of  men  from  parts 
of  the  world  giant  Purusa4  (§  8,  p.  13). 

i  SPH.  32.   —   2  OST.  5,  13  f.,  23  f.,  38  f.   —  3  BRV.  i,  36.   —   4  ORV.  275  —  7. 
125-8. 

III.  THE  VEDIC  GODS. 

§  10.  General  character  and  classification.  —  Indefiniteness  of  out 
line  and  lack  of  individuality  characterize  the  Vedic  conception  of  the  gods. 
This  is  mainly  due  to  the  fact  that  they  are  nearer  to  the  physical  pheno 
mena  which  they  represent,  than  the  gods  of  any  other  Indo-European  people. 
Thus  the  ancient  Vedic  interpreter  Yaska1  (Nir.  7,  4)  speaking  of  the  nature 
of  the  gods,  remarks  that  what  is  seen  of  them  is  not  anthropomorphic  at 
all,  as  in  the  case  of  the  Sun,  the  Earth,  and  others.  The  natural  bases  of 
the  Vedic  gods  have,  to  begin  with,  but  few  specific  characteristics,  while  they 
share  some  of  the  attributes  of  other  phenomena  belonging  to  the  same 
domain.  Thus  Dawn,  Sun,  Fire  have  the  common  features  of  being  luminous, 
dispelling  darkness,  appearing  in  the  morning.  The  absence  of  distinctiveness 
must  be  still  greater  when  several  deities  have  sprung  from  different  aspects 
of  one  and  the  same  phenomenon.  Hence  the  character  of  each  Vedic  god 
is  made  up  of  only  a  few  essential  traits  combined  with  a  number  of  other 
features  common  to  all  the  gods,  such  as  brilliance,  power,  beneficence,  and 
wisdom.  Certain  great  cosmical  functions  are  predicated  of  nearly  every 
leading  deity  individually.  The  action  of  supporting  or  establishing  heaven 
and  earth  is  so  generally  attributed  to  them,  that  in  the  AV.  (19,  32)  it  is 
even  ascribed  to  a  magical  bunch  of  darbha  grass.  Nearly  a  dozen  gods 
are  described  as  having  created  the  two  worlds,  and  rather  more  are  said  to 
have  produced  the  sun,  to  have  placed  it  in  the  sky,  or  to  have  prepared 
a  path  for  it.  Four  or  five  are  also  spoken  of  as  having  spread  out  the 
earth,  the  sky,  or  the  two  worlds.  Several  (Surya,  Savitr,  Pusan,  Indra,  Pra- 
janva,  and  the  Adityas)  are  lords  of  all  that  moves  and  is  stationary. 

LJSuch  common  features  tend  to  obscure  what  is  essential,  because  in 
hymns  of  prayer  and  praise  they  naturally  assume  special  prominence.  Againr 
gods  belonging  to  different  departments,  but  having  prominent  functions  in 
common,  are  apt  to  be  approximated.  [JThus  Agni,  primarily  the  god  of 
terrestrial  fire,  dispels  the  demons  of  darkness  with  his  lightwhile  Indra,  the 
aerial  god  of  the  thunderstorm,  slays  them  with  his  lightning]  Into  the  con 
ception  of  the  fire-god  further  enters  his  aspect  as  lightning  in  the  atmosphere. 
The  assimilation  is  increased  by  such  gods  often  being  invoked  in  pairs. 


1 6     III.  RELIGION,  WELTL.  WISSENSCH.  u.  KUNST.     i  A.  VEDIC  MYTHOLOGY. 


These  combinations  result  in  attributes  peculiar  to  the  one  god  attaching  them 
selves  to  the  other,  even  when  the  latter  appears  alone.  Thus  Agni  comes 
to  be  called  Soma- drinker,  Vrtra-slayer,  winner  of  cows  and  waters,  sun  and 
dawns,  attributes  all  primarily  belonging  to  Indra. 

The  indefiniteness  of  outline  caused  by  the  possession  of  so  many  com 
mon  attributes,  coupled  with  the  tendency  to  wipe  out  the  few  distinctive 
ones  by  assigning  nearly  every  power  to  every  god,  renders  identification  of 
one  god  with  another  easy.  Such  identifications  are  as  a  matter  of  fact 
frequent  in  the  RV.1  Thus  a  poet  addressing  the  fire-god  exclaims:  'Thou 
at  thy  birth,  O  Agni,  art  Varuna;  when  kindled  thou  becomest  Mitra,  in  thee, 
O  son  of  strength,  all  gods  are  centred;  thou  art  Indra  to  the  worshipper' 
(5,  3  x).  Reflexions  in  particular  on  the  nature  of  Agni,  so  important  a  god 
in  the  eyes  of  a  priesthood  devoted  to  a  fire  cult,  on  his  many  mani 
festations  as  individual  fires  on  earth,  and  on  his  other  aspects  as  atmospheric 
fire  in  lightning  and  as  celestial  fire  in  the  sun,  aspects  which  the  Vedic 
poets  are  fond  of  alluding  to  in  riddles,  would  suggest  the  idea  that  various 
deities  are  but  different  forms  of  a  single  divine  being.  This  idea  is  found 
in  more  than  one  passage  of  the  RV.  'The  one  being  priests  speak  of  in 
many  ways;  they  call  it  Agni,  Yama,  Matarisvan'  (i,  i644°;  cp.  AV.  10,  828. 
13,  4I5J.  'Priests  and  poets  with  words  make  into  many  the  bird  (=  the  sun) 
that  is  but  one'  (10,  ii45).  Thus  it  appears  that  by  the  end  of  the  Rigvedic 
period  a  kind  of  polytheistic  monotheism  had  been  arrived  at.  We  find  there 
even  the  incipient  pantheistic  conception  of  a  deity  representing  not  only  all 
the  gods  but  nature  as  well.  For  the  goddess  Aditi  is  identified  not  only 
with  all  the  gods,  but  with  men,  all  that  has  been  and  shall  be  born,  air, 
and  heaven  (i,  89 10);  and  Prajapati  is  not  only  the  one  god  above  all  gods, 
but  embraces  all  things  (10,  i2i8-10).  This  pantheistic  view  becomes  fully  deve 
loped  in  the  AV.  (10,  7*4.  *5j  and  is  explicitly  accepted  in  the  later  Vedic 
literature 2. 

In  the  older  parts  of  the  RV.  individual  gods  are  often  invoked  as  the 
highest,  but  this  notion  is  not  carried  out  to  its  logical  conclusion.  The  fact 
that  the  Vedic  poets  frequently  seem  to  be  engrossed  in  the  praise  of  the 
particular  deity  they  happen  to  be  invoking,  that  they  exaggerate  his  attributes 
to  the  point  of  inconsistency,  has  given  rise  to  the  much  discussed  theory 
which  MAX  MULLER  originated  and  to  which  he  has  given  the  name  of  Heno- 
theism  or  Kathenotheism 3.  According  to  this  theory,  'the  belief  in  individual 
gods  alternately  regarded  as  the  highest',  [the  Vedic  poets  attribute  to  the 
god  they  happen  to  be  addressing  all  the  nighest  traits  of  divinity,  treating 
him  for  the  moment  as  if  he  were— an  absolutely  independent  and  supreme 
deity,  alone  present  to  the  mindj  Against  this  theory  it  has  been  urged  4 
that  Vedic  deities  are  not  represented  'as  independent  of  all  the  rest',  since  no 
religion  brings  its  gods  into  more  frequent  and  varied  juxtaposition  and  com 
bination,  and  that  even  the  mightiest  gods  of  the  Veda  are  made  dependent 
on  others.  Thus  Varuna  and  Surya  are  subordinate  to  Indra  (i,  ioi3),  Va 
runa  and  the  Asvins  submit  to  the  power  of  Visnu  (i,  I564),  and  Indra, 
Mitra- Varuna,  Aryaman,  Rudra  cannot  resist  the  ordinances  ofSavitr  (2,  389). 
It  has  been  further  pointed  out  that  in  the  frequent  hymns  addressed  to  the 
viivedevahi  or  All-gods,  all  the  deities,  even  the  lesser  ones,  are  praised  in 
succession,  and  that  as  the  great  mass  of  the  Vedic  hymns  was  composed 
for  the  ritual  of  the  Soma  offering,  which  included  the  worship  of  almost 
the  entire  pantheon,  the  technical  priest  could  not  but  know  the  exact  rela 
tive  position  of  each  god  in  that  ritual.  Even  when  a  god  is  spoken  of  as 
unique  or  chief  (eka),  as  is  natural  enough  in  laudations,  such  statements 


THE  VEDIC  GODS,     i  o.  GENERAL  CHARACTER  AND  CLASSIFICATION.        1 7 

rose  their  temporarily  monotheistic  force  through  the  modifications  or  cor- 
lections  supplied  by  the  context  or  even  by  the  same  verse.  Thus  a  poet 
says  that  'Agni  alone,  like  Varuna,  is  lord  of  wealth'.  It  should  also  be 
remembered  that  gods  are  constantly  invoked  in  pairs,  triads,  and  larger  groups, 
even  the  exalted  Varuna  being  mostly  addressed  in  conjunction  with  one 
other  god  (as  in  6,  67)  or  with  several  other  gods  (as  in  2,  28).  Heno- 
theism  is  therefore  an  appearance  rather  than  a  reality,  an  appearance  pro 
duced  by  the  indefiniteness  due  to  undeveloped  anthropomorphism,  by  the 
lack  of  any  Vedic  god  occupying  the  position  of  a  Zeus  as  the  constant 
head  of  the  pantheon,  by  the  natural  tendency  of  the  priest  or  singer  in 
extolling  a  particular  god  to  exaggerate  his  greatness  and  to  ignore  other 
gods,  and  by  the  growing  belief  in  the  unity  of  the  gods  (cf.  the  refrain  of 
3?  55)»  each  of  whom  might  be  regarded  as  a  type  of  the  divine.  Heno- 
theism  might,  however,  be  justified  as  a  term  to  express  the  tendency  of  the 
RV.  towards  a  kind  of  monotheism. 

^The  Vedic  gods,  as  has  been  shown,  had  a  beginning  in  the  view  of 
the  Vedic  poets,  since  they  are  described  as  the  offspring  of  heaven  and 
earth  or  some|jrnAC  ^f  ^th^r  ™Ac  This  in  itself  implies  different  generations 
of"~golls7but  earlier  (purve)  gods  are  also  expressly  referred  to  in  several 
passages  (7,  21 7  £c.).  An  earlier  or  first  age  of  the  gods  is  also  spoken  of- 
(io;  722-3).  The  AV.  (n,  810)  speaks  of  ten  gods  as  having  existed  before 
the  rest.  The  gods,  too,,  were  originally  mortal 5.  This  is  expressly  stated 
in  the  AV.  (n,  5^;  4,  n6).  The  Brahmanas  state  this  both  of  all  the  gods 
(SB.  10,  4,  3  3)  and  of  the  individual  gods  Indra  (AB.  8,  i44),  Agni  (AB.  3,  4), 
and  Prajapati  (SB.  10,  i,  31)6.  That  they  were  originally  not  immortal  is 
implied  in  the  RV.  For  jmmortality  was  bestowed  on  them  by  Savitr  (4,  54 2 
=  VS.  33,  54)  or  by  AgnT  (6,  74;  AV.  4,  23°).  They  are  also  said  to  have 
obtained  it  by  drinking  Soma.  (Q,  io68  cp.  io92-3),  which  is  called  the  prin 
ciple  of  immortality  (SB.  9,  5^  i  8).  In  another  passage  of  the  RV.  (10,  53'°), 
they  are  said  to  have  acquired  immortality,  but  by  what  means  is  not  clear. 
According  to  a  later  conception  Indra  is  stated  to  have  conquered  heaven 
by  tapas  or  austerity  (10,  I671).  The  gods  are  said  to  have  attained  divine 
rank  by  the  same  means  (TB.  3,  12,  3*),  or  to  have  overcome  death  by  con 
tinence  and  austerity  (AV.  11,5  I9 )  and  to  have  acquired  immortality  through 
Rohita  (AV.  13,  1 7).  Elsewhere  the  gods  are  stated  to  have  overcome  death 
by  the  performance  of  a  certain  ceremony  (TS.  7,  4,  2  J).  Indra  and  several 
other  gods  are  said  to  be  unaging  (3,  46 x  &c.),  but  whether  the  immortality 
of  the  gods  was  regarded  by  the  Vedic  poets  as  absolute,  there  is  no  evi 
dence  to  show.  According  to  the  post- Vedic  view  their  immortality  was  only 
relative,  being  limited  to  a  cosmic  age. 

The  physical  appearance  of  the  gods  is  anthropomorphic,  though  only 
in  a  shadowy  manner;  for  it  often  represents  only  aspects  of  their  natural 
bases  figuratively  described  to  illustrate  their  activities7.  Thus  head,,  face, 
mouth,  cheeks,,  eyes,  hair,  shoulders,,  breast,  belly,  arms,  hands,  fingers,  feet 
are  attributed  to  various  individual  gods.  Head,  breast,  arms,  and  hands  are 
chiefly  mentioned  in  connexion  with  the  warlike  equipment  of  Indra  and  the 
Maruts.  The  arms  of  the  sun  are  simply  his  rays,  and  his  eye  is  intended 
to  represent  his  physical  aspect.  The  tongue  and  limbs  of  Agni  merely 
denote  his  flames.  The  fingers  of  Trita  are  referred  to  only  in  order  to 
illustrate  his  character  as  a  preparer  of  Soma,  and  the  belly  of  Indra  only 
to  emphasize  his  powers  of  drinking  Soma8.  Two  or  three  gods  are  spoken 
of  as  having  or  assuming  all  forms  (visvarupd}.  It  is  easy  to  understand 
that  in  the  case  of  deities  whose  outward  shape  was  so  vaguely  conceived 

Indo-arische  Philologie.    III.   1  A. 


20     III.  RELIGION,  WELTL.  WISSENSCH.  u.  KUNST.     i  A.  VEDIC  MYTHOLOGY. 

in  the  RV.  where  they  are  spoken  of  as  great  and  small,  young  and  old 
(i,  2713).  .It  is  probable  that  this  statement  represents  the  settled  view  of 
the  Vedic  poets  as  to  gradation  of  rank  among  the  gods  (cp.  pp.  14.  17). 
It  is  only  a  seeming  contradiction  when  in  one  passage  (8,  30')  it  is  said 
with  reference  to  the  gods,  'none  of  you  is  small  or  young;  you  are  all 
great';  for  a  poet  addressing  the  zods  directly  on  this  point  could  hardly 
have  expressed  himself  differently,  pt  is  certain  that  two  gods  tower  above 
the  rest  as  leading  deities  about  equal  in  power,  Indra  as  the  mighty  warrior 
and  Varuna  as  the  supreme  moral  rulerTJ  The  older  form  of  Varuna  became, 
owing  to  the  predominance  of  his  ethical  qualities,  the  supreme  god  of 
Zoroastrianism  as  Ahura  Mazda,  while  in  India  Indra  developed  into  the 
warrior  god  of  the  conquering  Aryans.  Varuna  appears  as  preeminent  only 
when  the  supreme  Taws"~ot  the~pKysTcal  and  moral  world  are  contemplated, 
and  cannot  be  called  a  popular  god.  It  has  been  held  by  various  scholars 
that  Varuna  and  the  Adityas  were  the  highest  gods  of  an  older  period,  but 
were  later  displaced  by  Indra  (p.  28).  There  is  at  any  rate  no  evidence  to 
show  that  Indra  even  in  the  oldest  Rigvedic  period  occupied  a  subordinate 
position.  It  is  true  that  Ahura  Mazda  is  the  highest  god  and  Indra  only 
a  demon  in  the  Avesta.  But  even  if  Indra  originally  possessed  coordinate 
power  with  Varuna  in  the  Indo-Iranian  period,  he  was  necessarily  relegated 
to  the  background  when  the  reform  of  the  Avestan  religion  made  Ahura 
Mazda  supreme20  (cp.  p.  28).£^Next  to  Indra  and  Varuna  come  the  two  great 
ritual  deities  Agni  and  SomaJJ  These  two  along  with  Indra  are,  judged  by 
the  frequency  of  the  hymns  addressed  to  them,  the  three  most  popular  deities 
of  the  RV.  For,  roughly  speaking,  three-fifths  of  its  hymns  are  dedicated  to 
their  praise.  The  fact  that  the  hymns  to  Agni  and  Indra  always  come  first 
in  the  family  books,  while  the  great  majority  of  the  hymns  to  Soma  have  a 
whole  book,  the  ninth,  to  themselves,  confirms  this  conclusion21.  Following 
the  number  of  the  hymns  dedicated  to  each  of  the  remaining  deities,  com 
bined  with  the  frequency  with  which  their  names  are  mentioned  in  the  RV., 
five  classes  of  gods  may  be  distinguished:  i)  Indra,  Agni,  Soma;  2)  Asvins, 
Maruts,  Varuna;  3)  Usas,  Savitr,  Brhaspati,  Surya,  Pusan;  4)  Vayu,  Dyava- 
prthivl,  Visnu,  Rudra;  5)  Yama,  Parjanya22.  The  statistical  standard  can 
of  course  be  only  a  partial  guide.  For  Varuna  is  celebrated  (mostly  together 
with  Mitra)  in  only  about  thirty  hymns,  his  name  being  mentioned  altogether 
about  250  times,  while  the  Asvins  can  claim  over  50  hymns  and  are  named 
over  400  times.  Yet  they  cannot  be  said  to  approach  Varuna  in  greatness. 
Their  relative  prominence  is  doubtless  owing  to  their  closer  connexion  with 
the  sacrifice  as  deities  of  morning  light.  Again,  the  importance  of  the  Maruts 
is  due  to  their  association  with  Indra.  Similar  considerations  would  have  to 
enter  into  an  estimate  of  the  relative  greatness  of  other  deities  in  the  list. 
Such  an  estimate  involves  considerable  difficulties  and  doubts.  A  classification 
according  to  gradations  of  rank  would  therefore  not  afford  a  satisfactory  basis 
for  an  account  of  the  Vedic  gods. 

Another  but  still  less  satisfactory  classification,  might  take  as  its  basis 
the  relative  age  of  the  mythological  conception,  according  as  it  dates  from 
the  period  of  separate  national  Indian  existence,  from  the  Indo-Iranian,  or 
the  Indo-European  epoch.  Thus  Brhaspati,  Rudra,  Visnu  may  be  considered 
the  creations  of  purely  Indian  mythology;  at  least  there  is  no  adequate 
evidence  to  show  that  they  go  back  to  an  earlier  age.  It  has  already  been 
indicated  (§  5)  that  a  number  of  mythological  figures  date  from  the  Indo- 
Iranian  period.  But  as  to  whether  any  of  the  Vedic  gods  besides  Dyaus  may 
be  traced  back  to  the  Indo-European  period,  considerable  doubt  is  justified. 


CELESTIAL  GODS.     1 1 .  DYAUS.  2 1 


A  classification  according  to  the  age  of  the  mythological  creation  would  there 
fore  rest  on  too  uncertain  a  foundation. 

The  stage  of  personification  which  the  various  deities  represent,  might 
furnish  a  possible  basis  of  classification.  But  the  task  of  drawing  a  clear 
line  of  demarcation  would  involve  too  many  difficulties. 

On  the  whole,  the  classification  of  the  Vedic  deities  least  open  to  ob 
jection,  is  that  founded  on  the  natural  bases  which  they  represent.  For  though 
in  some  cases  there  may  be  a  doubt  as  to  what  the  physical  substrate  really 
is,  and  a  risk  is  therefore  involved  of  describing  a  particular  deity  in  the 
wrong  place,  this  method  offers  the  advantage  of  bringing  together  deities  of 
cognate  character  and  thus  facilitating  comparison.  It  has  therefore  been 
adopted  in  the  following  pages.  The  various  phenomena  have  been  grouped 
according  to  the  triple  division  suggested  by  the  RV.  itself  and  adhered  to 
by  its  oldest  commentator. 

i  OST.  5,  219;  BRI.  26;  EDA.  12—14;  ORV.  100.  —  2  HRI.  138—40.  —  3  MM., 
ASL.  526.  532.  546;  Chips  i,  28;  OCR.  266.  285.  298  f.  312  ff.;  Science  of  Religion 
52;  PhR.  iSoff.;  OST.  5.  6  f .  12  f.  125;  00.3,449;  BUHLER,  OO.  1,227;  LRV. 
3,  XXVII  f.;  KRV.  33;  note  113;  ZIMMER,  ZDA.  19(7),  175;  HILLEBRANDT,  Varuna 
und  Mitra,  105;  BRI.  26.  —  4  WHITNEY,  PAOS.,  Oct.  1881 ;  ORV.  101;  HOPKINS, 
Henotheism  in  the  Rigveda,  in  Classical  studies  in  honour  of  H.  Drisler  (New  York 
1894),  75—83;  HRI.  139  &c.—  5  SVL.  134;  cp.  ZDMG.  32,  300.—  6  Mum,  JRAS. 
20,41—5;  OST.  4,  54—8;  5,  14-17;  cp.  AV.  3,  223;  4)  I4i.  SB.  i,  7,  31; 
AB.  6,  208;  TS.  i,  7,  1 3;  6,  5,  31;  HRI.  187.  —  7  NIRUKTA  7,  6.  7.  —  8  WC.  9.  — 
9  ORV.  347-  353-  355-  357-8.  —  I0  ORV.  93-  —  1X  OST.  5,  18.  —  ^  QRV.  238. 
—  13  BRV.  3,  203—4.  —  H  BRV.  3,  199.  —  15  ORV.  282.  —  16  OST.  5,  18—20; 
ORV.  97— 101 ;  281  —  7.293—301.  —  17  KATYAYANA,  SarvanukramanT,  Introd.  §2,  8; 
Say  ana  on  RV.  i,  139".  --  ^  'Indra  and  Vayu  are  closely  allied'  (TS.  6,  6,  83). 
Cp.  HRI.  89.  —  J9  Agni,  Vayu,  Surya  are  sons  of  Prajapati  (MS.  4,  212).  —  20  ORV. 
94 — 8.  —  2I  HRI.  90.  —  22  These  classes  and  the  statistics  fournished  below  in 
the  account  given  of  the  single  gods,  are  based  on  data  derived  from  LRV.,  GW., 
GRV.  (2,421—3),  and  AUFRECHT'S  RV.  II2,  668—71. 


A.  THE  CELESTIAL  GODS. 

§  ii.  Dyaus. — By  far  the  most  frequent  use  of  the  word  dyaus  is  as 
a  designation  of  the  concrete  'sky',  in  which  sense  it  occurs  at  least  500 
times  in  the  RV.  It  also  means  'day'1  about  50  times.  When  personified 
as  the  god  of  heaven,  Dyaus  is  generally  coupled  with  Earth  in  the  dual 
compound  dyavaprthiin,  the  universal  parents.  No  single  hymn  of  the  RV. 
is  addressed  to  Dyaus  alone.  When  he  is  mentioned  separately  the  per 
sonification  is  limited  almost  entirely  to  the  idea  of  paternity.  The  name 
then  nearly  always  appears  in  the  nominative  or  genitive  case.  The  latter 
case,  occurring  about  50  times,  is  more  frequent  than  all  the  other  cases 
together.  The  genitive  is  regularly  connected  with  the  name  of  some  other 
deity  who  is  called  the  son  or  daughter  of  Dyaus.  In  about  three-fourths 
of  these  instances  Usas  is  his  daughter,  while  in  the  remainder  the  Asvins 
are  his  offspring  (napata],  Agni  is  his  son  (sunu)  or  child  (sts'u),  Parjanya, 
Surya,,  the  Adityas,  the  Maruts,  and  the  Aiigirases  are  his  sons  (putra). 
Out  of  its  thirty  occurrences  in  the  nominative  the  name  appears  only  eight 
times  alone,  being  otherwise  generally  associated  with  Prthivl  or  mentioned 
with  various  deities  mostly  including  PrthivT.  In  these  eight  passages  he  is 
three  times  styled  a  father  (i,  907.  16433;  4,  1 10);  once  the  father  of  Indra 
(4,  72  3),  once  he  is  spoken  of  as  rich  in  seed  (suretdtt)  and  as  having  generated 
Agni  (4,  174);  in  the  remaining  three  he  is  a  bull  (5,  365)  or  a  red  bull  that 
bellows  downwards  (5,  58 6),  and  is  said  to  have  approved  when  Vrtra  was 
slain  (6,  723).  in  the  dative  the  name  is  found  eight  times.  In  these  passages 


20     III.  RELIGION,  WELTL.  WISSENSCH.  u.  KUNST.     i  A.  VEDIC  MYTHOLOGY. 

in  the  RY.  where  they  are  spoken  of  as  great  and  small,  young  and  old 
(i,  2713).  It  is  probable  that  this  statement  represents  the  settled  view  of 
the  Vedic  poets  as  to  gradation  of  rank  among  the  gods  (cp.  pp.  14.  17). 
It  is  only  a  seeming  contradiction  when  in  one  passage  (8,  30 l)  it  is  said 
with  reference  to  the  gods,  'none  of  you  is  small  or  young;  you  are  all 
great';  for  a  poet  addressing  the  sjods  directly  on  this  point  could  hardly 
have  expressed  himself  differently,  pit  is  certain  that  two  gods  tower  above 
the  rest  as  leading  deities  about  equal  in  power,  Indra  as  the  mighty  warrior 
and  Varuna  as  the  supreme  moral  rulerTJ  The  older  form  of  Varuna  became, 
owing  to  the  predominance  of  his  ethical  qualities,  the  supreme  god  of 
Zoroastrianism  as  Ahura  Mazda,  while  ( in  India  Indra  developed  into  the 
\yarrior  god  of  the  conquering  Aryans.  Varuna  appears  as  preeminent  only 
when  the  supreme  laws  "ot  the "pEysTcal  and  moral  world  are  contemplated, 
and  cannot  be  called  a  popular  god.  It  has  been  held  by  various  scholars 
that  Varuna  and  the  Adityas  were  the  highest  gods  of  an  older  period,  but 
were  later  displaced  by  Indra  (p.  28).  There  is  at  any  rate  no  evidence  to 
show  that  Indra  even  in  the  oldest  Rigvedic  period  occupied  a  subordinate 
position.  It  is  true  that  Ahura  Mazda  is  the  highest  god  and  Indra  only 
a  demon  in  the  Avesta.  But  even  if  Indra  originally  possessed  coordinate 
power  with  Varuna  in  the  Indo-Iranian  period,  he  was  necessarily  relegated 
to  the  background  when  the  reform  of  the  Avestan  religion  made  Ahura 
Mazda  supreme20  (cp.  p.  28).f/Next  to  Indra  and  Varuna  come  the  two  great 
ritual  deities  Agni  and  SornaTJ  These  two  along  with  Indra  are,  judged  by 
the  frequency  of  the  hymns  addressed  to  them,  the  three  most  popular  deities 
of  the  RV.  For,  roughly  speaking,  three-fifths  of  its  hymns  are  dedicated  to 
their  praise.  The  fact  that  the  hymns  to  Agni  and  Indra  always  come  first 
in  the  family  books,  while  the  great  majority  of  the  hymns  to  Soma  have  a 
whole  book,  the  ninth,  to  themselves,  confirms  this  conclusion21.  Following 
the  number  of  the  hymns  dedicated  to  each  of  the  remaining  deities,  com 
bined  with  the  frequency  with  which  their  names  are  mentioned  in  the  RV., 
five  classes  of  gods  may  be  distinguished:  i)  Indra,  Agni,  Soma;  2)  Asvins, 
Maruts,  Varuna;  3)  Usas,  Savitr,  Brhaspati,  Surya,  Piisan;  4)  Vayu,  Dyava- 
prthivl,  Visnu,  Rudra;  5)  Yama,  Parjanya22.  The  statistical  standard  can 
of  course  be  only  a  partial  guide.  For  Varuna  is  celebrated  (mostly  together 
with  Mitra)  in  only  about  thirty  hymns,  his  name  being  mentioned  altogether 
about  250  times,  while  the  Asvins  can  claim  over  50  hymns  and  are  named 
over  400  times.  Yet  they  cannot  be  said  to  approach  Varuna  in  greatness. 
Their  relative  prominence  is  doubtless  owing  to  their  closer  connexion  with 
the  sacrifice  as  deities  of  morning  light.  Again,  the  importance  of  the  Maruts 
is  due  to  their  association  with  Indra.  Similar  considerations  would  have  to 
enter  into  an  estimate  of  the  relative  greatness  of  other  deities  in  the  list. 
Such  an  estimate  involves  considerable  difficulties  and  doubts.  A  classification 
according  to  gradations  of  rank  would  therefore  not  afford  a  satisfactory  basis 
for  an  account  of  the  Vedic  gods. 

Another  but  still  less  satisfactory  classification,  might  take  as  its  basis 
the  relative  age  of  the  mythological  conception,  according  as  it  dates  from 
the  period  of  separate  national  Indian  existence,  from  the  Indo-Iranian,  or 
the  Indo-European  epoch.  Thus  Brhaspati,  Rudra,  Visnu  may  be  considered 
the  creations  of  purely  Indian  mythology;  at  least  there  is  no  adequate 
evidence  to  show  that  they  go  back  to  an  earlier  age.  It  has  already  been 
indicated  (§  5)  that  a  number  of  mythological  figures  date  from  the  Indo- 
Iranian  period.  But  as  to  whether  any  of  the  Vedic  gods  besides  Dyaus  may 
be  traced  back  to  the  Indo-European  period,  considerable  doubt  is  justified. 


CELESTIAL  GODS.     1 1 .  DYAUS.  2 1 

A  classification  according  to  the  age  of  the  mythological  creation  would  there 
fore  rest  on  too  uncertain  a  foundation. 

The  stage  of  personification  which  the  various  deities  represent,,  might 
furnish  a  possible  basis  of  classification.  But  the  task  of  drawing  a  clear 
line  of  demarcation  would  involve  too  many  difficulties. 

On  the  whole,  the  classification  of  the  Vedic  deities  least  open  to  ob 
jection,  is  that  founded  on  the  natural  bases  which  they  represent.  For  though 
in  some  cases  there  may  be  a  doubt  as  to  what  the  physical  substrate  really 
is,  and  a  risk  is  therefore  involved  of  describing  a  particular  deity  in  the 
wrong  place,  this  method  offers  the  advantage  of  bringing  together  deities  of 
cognate  character  and  thus  facilitating  comparison.  It  has  therefore  been 
adopted  in  the  following  pages.  The  various  phenomena  have  been  grouped 
according  to  the  triple  division  suggested  by  the  RV.  itself  and  adhered  to 
by  its  oldest  commentator. 

i  OST.  5,  219;  BRI.  26;  BDA.  12—14;  ORV.  100.  —  2  HRI.  138—40.  —  3  MM., 
ASL.  526.  532.  546;  Chips  i,  28;  OCR.  266.  285.  298  f.  312  ff.;  Science  of  Religion 
52;  PhR.  iSoff.;  OST.  5.  6  f .  12  f.  125;  00.3,449;  BUHLER,  OO.  1,227;  LRV. 
3,  XXVII  f.;  KRV.  33;  note  113;  ZIMMER,  ZDA.  19(7),  175;  HILLEBRANDT,  Varuna 
und  Mitra,  105;  BRI.  26.  —  4  WHITNEY,  PADS.,  Oct.  1881;  ORV.  101;  HOPKINS, 
Henotheism  in  the  Rigveda,  in  Classical  studies  in  honour  of  H.  Drisler  (New  York 
1894),  75—83;  HRI.  139  &c.—  5  SVL.  134;  cp.  ZDMG.  32,  300.—  6  MUIR,  JRAS. 
20,41—5;  OST.  4,  54—8;  5,  14-17;  cp.  AV.  3,  223;  4)  14i.  SB.  i,  7,  31; 
AB.  6,  208;  TS.  i,  7,  i3;  6,  5,  31;  HRI.  187.  —  7  NIRUKTA  7,  6.  7.  —  8  WC.  9.  — 
9  ORV.  347.  353.  355.  357—8.  —  10  ORV.  93.  —  »  OST.  5,  18.  —  "  ORV.  238. 
—  13  BRV.  3,  203—4.  —  H  BRV.  3,  199.  —  is  ORV.  282.  —  16  OST.  5,  18—20; 
ORV.  97— 101 ;  281  —  7.293—301.  —  17  KATYAYANA,  SarvanukramanT,  Introd.  §2,  8; 
Sayana  on  RV.  i,  139".  —  l6  'Indra  and  Vayu  are  closely  allied'  (TS.  6,  6,  83). 
Cp.  HRI.  89.  —  i9  Agni,  Vayu,  Surya  are  sons  of  Prajapati  (MS.  4,  212).  —  20  QRV. 
94—8.  —  21  HRI.  90.  —  22  These  classes  and  the  statistics  fournished  below  in 
the  account  given  of  the  single  gods,  are  based  on  data  derived  from  LRV.,  GW., 
GRV.  (2,421—3),  and  AUFRECHT'S  RV.  II2,  668—71. 

A.  THE  CELESTIAL  GODS. 

§  ii.  Dyaus. — By  far  the  most  frequent  use  of  the  word  dyaus  is  as 
a  designation  of  the  concrete  'sky',  in  which  sense  it  occurs  at  least  500 
times  in  the  RV.  It  also  means  'day'1  about  50  times.  When  personified 
as  the  god  of  heaven,  Dyaus  is  generally  coupled  with  Earth  in  the  dual 
compound  dydvdprthivi^  the  universal  parents.  No  single  hymn  of  the  RV. 
is  addressed  to  Dyaus  alone.  When  he  is  mentioned  separately  the  per 
sonification  is  limited  almost  entirely  to  the  idea  of  paternity.  The  name 
then  nearly  always  appears  in  the  nominative  or  genitive  case.  The  latter 
case,  occurring  about  50  times,  is  more  frequent  than  all  the  other  cases 
together.  The  genitive  is  regularly  connected  with  the  name  of  some  other 
deity  who  is  called  the  son  or  daughter  of  Dyaus.  In  about  three-fourths 
of  these  instances  Usas  is  his  daughter,  while  in  the  remainder  the  Asvins 
are  his  offspring  (napata),  Agni  is  his  son  (sunu)  or  child  (si's'u),  Parjanya, 
Surya,  the  Adityas,  the  Maruts,  and  the  Aiigirases  are  his  sons  (putra). 
Out  of  its  thirty  occurrences  in  the  nominative  the  name  appears  only  eight 
times  alone,  being  otherwise  generally  associated  with  Prthivl  or  mentioned 
with  various  deities  mostly  including  PrthivT.  In  these  eight  passages  he  is 
three  times  styled  a  father  (i,  907.  16433;  4)  i '°),  once  the  father  of  Indra 
(4,  72  3),  once  he  is  spoken  of  as  rich  in  seed  (suretah)  and  as  having  generated 
Agni  (4,  174)-  in  the  remaining  three  he  is  a  bull  (5,  365)  or  a  red  bull  that 
bellows  downwards  (5,  586),  and  is  said  to  have  approved  when  Vrtra  was 
slain  (6,  723).  In  the  dative  the  name  is  found  eight  times.  In  these  passages 


22     III.  RELIGION,  WELTL.  WISSENSCH.  u.  KUNST.    i  A.  VEDIC  MYTHOLOGY. 


he  is  mentioned  only  three  times  quite  alone,  once  being  called  the 
father'  (1,715)^  once  'lofty'  (i,  543),  an(*  once  the  'lofty  abode'  1^47 7)- 
TrT~tWoof  the~~four  occurrences  in  the  accusative  Dyaus  is  mentioned  with 
PrthivT,  once  alone  and  without  any  distinctive  statement  (i,  i;43),  and  once 
(i,  3 14)  Agni  is  said  to  have  made  him  roar  for  man.  Thus  it  appears 
that  Dyaus  is  seldom  mentioned  independently  and  in  only  one-sixth  of  over 
ninety  passages  is  his  paternity  not  expressly  stated  or  implied  by  association 
with  Prthivl.  The  only  essential  feature  of  the  personification  in  the  RV. 
is  in  fact  his  paternity.  In  a  few  passages  Dyaus  is  called  a  bull  (i,  160^- 
5,365)  that  bellows  (5,586).  Here  we  have  a  touch  of  theriomorphism  inas 
much  as  he  is  conceived  as  a  roaring  animal  that  fertilizes  the  earth.  Dyaus 
is  once  compared  with  a  black  steed  decked  with  pearls  (10,  68"),  an 
obvious  allusion  to  the  nocturnal  sky.  The  statement  that  Dyaus  is  furnished 
with  a  bolt  (asanimat)  looks  like  a  touch  of  anthropomorphism.  He  is  also 
spoken  of  as  smiling  through  the  clouds  (2,  46),  the  allusion  being  doubtless 
to  the  lightening  sky2.  Such  passages  are,  however,  quite  isolated,  the  con 
ception  of  Dyaus  being  practically  free  from  theriomorphism  and  anthropo 
morphism,  excepting  the  notion  of  paternity.  As  a  father  he  is  most  usually 
thought  of  in  combination  with  Earth  as  a  mother 3.  This  is  indicated  by 
the  fact  that  his  name  forms  a  dual  compound  with  that  of  Prthivl  oftener 
than  it  is  used  alone  in  the  singular  (§  44),  that  in  a  large  proportion  of 
its  occurrences  in  the  singular  it  is  accompanied  by  the  name  of  Prthivl, 
and  that  when  regarded  separately  he  is  not  sufficiently  individualized  to  have 
a  hymn  dedicated  to  his  praise,  though  in  conjunction  with  Prthivl  he  is 
celebrated  in  six.  Like  nearly  all  the  greater  gods4  Dyaus  is  sometimes 
called  asura^  (i,  122  x.  131 x;  8,  20*')  and  he  is  once  (6,  51$)  invoked  in 
the  vocative  as  'Father  Heaven'  (dyaus  pitar)  along  with  'Mother  Earth' 
(prthivi  mdtar}.  In  about  20  passages  the  word  dyaus  is  feminine,  some 
times  even  when  personified6.  Dyaus,  as  has  been  pointed  out  (§  6)  goes 
back  to  the  Indo-European  period.  There  is  no  reason  to  assume  that  the 
personification  in  that  period  was  of  a  more  advanced  type  and  that  the  RV. 
has  in  this  case  relapsed  to  a  more  primitive  stage.  On  the  contrary  there 
is  every  ground  for  supposing  the  reverse  to  be  the  case.  Whatever  higher 
gods  may  have  existed  in  that  remote  age  must  have  been  of  a  considerably 
more  rudimentary  type  and  can  hardly  in  any  instance  have  been  conceived 
apart  from  deified  natural  objects7.  As  the  Universal  Father  who  with  Mother 
Earth  embraced  all  other  deified  objects  and  phenomena,  he  would  have 
been  the  greatest  among  the  deities  of  a  chaotic  polytheism.  But  to  speak 
of  him  as  the  supreme  god  of  the  Indo-European  age  is  misleading,  because 
this  suggests  a  ruler  of  the  type  of  Zeus  and  an  incipient  monotheism  for  an 
extremely  remote  period,  though  neither  of  these  conceptions  had  been 
arrived  at  in  the  earlier  Rigvedic  times. 

The  word  is  derived  from  the  root  div,  to  shine,  thus  meaning  'the 
bright  one'  and  being  allied  to  deva,  god8. 

i  v.  SCHRODER.  \VZKM.  8,  126—7.  —  2  PVS.  i,  ill;  SEE.  46,  205.  —  3  HRL 
171.  —  4  BDA.  119—23.  —  5  BDA.  86.  —  6  BDA.  114;  cf.  GW.  s.  v.  div\  OSTHOFF, 
IF.  5,  286,  n.  —  7  BDA.  111.  —  8  Cp.  KZ.  27,  187;  BB.  15,  17;  IF.  3,  301. 

OST.5,2i— 3;OGR.2o9;LRV.3,3i2— 3;BRV.  1,4— 5;Sp.AP.i6o;JAOS.  i6,cxLV. 

S  12.  Varun a. — Varuna,  as  has  been  shown  (p.  20),  is  by  the  side  of 
Indra,  the  greatest  of  the  gods  of  the  RV.  The  number  of  hymns  dedicated 
to  his  praise  is  not  a  sufficient  criterion  of  his  exalted  character.  Hardly  a 
dozen  hymns  celebrate  him  exclusively.  Judged  by  the  statistical  standard 
he  would  rank  only  as  a  third  class  deity;  and  even  if  the  two  dozen  hymns 


CELESTIAL  GODS.     12.  VARUNA.  23 

in  which  he  is  invoked  along  with  his  double  Mitra  are  taken  into  account, 
he  would  only  come  fifth  in  order  of  priority,  ranking  considerably  below 
the  Asvins  and  about  on  an  equality  with  the  Maruts  (cp.  p.  20). 

The  anthropomorphism  of  Varuna's  personality  is  more  fully  developed 
on  the  moral  than  the  physical  side.  The  descriptions  of  his  person  and 
his  equipment  are  scanty,  more  stress  being  laid  on  his  activity.  He  has  a 
face,  an  eye,  arms,  hands,  and  feet.  He  moves  his  arms,  walks,  drives,  sits, 
eats  and  drinks.  The  poet  regards  the  face  (ariikaui)  of  Varuna  as  that  of 
Agni  (7,  88 2  cp.  87 6).  The  eye  of  Mitra  and  Varuna  is  the  sun  (i,  115  x; 
6,  51 x;  7,  6ix.  63  x;  10,  37  x).  The  fact  that  this  is  always  mentioned  in  the 
first  verse  of  a  hymn,  suggests  that  it  is  one  of  the  first  ideas  that  occur  when 
Mitra  and  Varuna  are  thought  of.  The  eye  with  which  Varuna  is  said  in 
a  hymn  to  Surya  (i,  5o6)  to  observe  mankind,  is  undoubtedly  the  sun. 
Together  with  Aryaman,  Mitra  and  Varuna  are  called  sun-eyed  (7,  66 10),  a 
term  applied  to  other  gods  also.  Varuna  is  far-sighted  (i,  255-16;  8,  90 2) 
and  thousand-eyed  (7,  34'°).  Mitra  and  Varuna  stretch  out  their  arms 
(5,  64 2;  7,  62 5)  and  they  drive  with  the  rays  of  the  sun  as  with  arms  (8,  90 2). 
Like  Savitr  and  Tvastr  they  are  beautiful-handed  (supani).  Mitra  and  Va 
runa  hasten  up  with  their  feet  (5,  64 7),  and  Varuna  treads  down  wiles  with 
shining  foot  (8,  41 8).  He  sits  on  the  strewn  grass  at  the  sacrifice  (i,  264; 
5,  722),  and  like  other  gods  he  and  Mitra  drink  Soma  (4,  41 3  &c.).  Varuna 
wears  a  golden  mantle  (drdpi)  and  puts  on  a  shining  robe  (i,  251-3).  But 
the  shining  robe  of  ghee  with  which  he  and  Mitra  are  clothed  (5,  62 4;  7,  64') 
is  only  a  figurative  allusion  to  the  sacrificial  offering  of  melted  butter.  The 
glistening  garments  which  they  wear  (i,  I521)  probably  mean  the  same  thing. 
In  the  SB.  (13,  3,  65)  Varuna  is  represented  as  a  fair,  bald,  yellow-eyed  old 
man1.  The  only  part  of  Varuna's  equipment  which  is  at  all  prominent  is 
his  car.  It  is  described  as  shining  like  the  sun  (i,  I2215),  as  having  thongs 
for  a  pole  (ibid.),  a  car-seat  and  a  whip  (5,  62?),  and  as  drawn  by  well-yoked 
steeds  (5,  62 4).  Mitra  and  Varuna  mount  their  car  in  the  highest  heaven 
(5;  63  x).  The  poet  prays  that  he  may  see  Varuna's  car  on  the  earth  (i,  25 l3). 
Mitra  and  Varuna's  abode  is  golden  and  situated  in  heaven  (5,  67 2; 
i,  i362)  and  Varuna  sits  in  his  mansions  (j>astydsU)  looking  on  all  deeds 
(i,  2510-11).  His  and  Mitra's  seat  (sadas)  is  great,  very  lofty,  firm  with  a 
thousand  columns  (5,  68 5;  2,  415)  and  their  house  has  a  thousand  doors 
(7,  88 5).  The  all-seeing  sun  rising  from  his  abode,  goes  to  the  dwellings  of 
Mitra  and  Variina  to  report  the  deeds  of  men  (7,  60 I>3),  and  enters  their 
dear  dwelling  (i,  1524).  It  is  in  the  highest  heaven  that  the  Fathers  behold 
Varuna  (10,  i48).  According  to  the  SB.  (n,  6,  i)  Varuna,  conceived  as  the 
lord  of  the  Universe,  is  seated  in  the  midst  of  heaven,  from  which  he  surveys 
the  places  of  punishment  situated  all  around  him1. 

The  spies  (spasaJi)  of  Varuna  are  sometimes  mentioned.  They  sit  down 
around  him  (i,  24 13).  They  behold  the  two  worlds;  acquainted  with  sacrifice 
they  stimulate  prayer  (7,  873).  Mitra's  and  Varuna's  spies  whom  they  send 
separately  into  houses  (7,  6i3),  are  undeceived  and  wise  (6,  67 5).  In  the 
AV.  (4,  i64)  it  is  said  that  Varuna's  messengers  descending  from  heaven, 
traverse  the  world;  thousand-eyed  they  look  across  the  whole  world.  The 
natural  basis  of  these  spies  is  usually  assumed  to  be  the  stars;  but  the  RV. 
yields  no  evidence  in  support  of  this  view.  The  stars  are  there  never  said 
to  watch,  nor  are  the  spies  connected  with  night.  The  conception  may  very 
well  have  been  suggested  by  the  spies  with  whom  a  strict  ruler  on  earth  is 
surrounded2.  Nor  are  spies  peculiar  to  Varuna  and  Mitra,  for  they  are  also 
attributed  to  Agni  (4,  43),  to  Soma  (9,  734'7.  here  perhaps  suggested  by  the 


24     HI.  RELIGION,  WELTL.  WISSENSCH.  u.  KUNST.     i  A.  VEDIC  MYTHOLOGY. 


previous  mention  of  Varuna),  to  demons  combated  by  Indra  (i,  33 8),  and 
to  the  gods  in  general  (io,  io8).  In  one  passage  the  Adityas  are  said  to 
look  down  like  spies  from  a  height  (8,  47  IX).  That  these  spies  were  primarily 
connected  with  Mitra  and  Varuna  is  to  be  inferred  from  the  fact  that  the 
Iranian  Mithra  also  has  spies,  who  are,  moreover,  called  by  the  same  name 
(spas)  as  in  the  Veda  3.  The  golden-winged  messenger  (dutd)  of  Varuna 
once  mentioned  in  the  RV.  (io,  I236),  is  doubtless  the  sun. 

Varuna  alone,  or  conjointly  with  Mitra,  is  often  called  a  king  (rdjd), 
like  the  other  leading  deities  and  Yama  (i,  247-  8  &c.)4.  He  is  king  of  all, 
both  gods  and  men  do,  I324;  2,  27  10),  of  the  whole  world  (5,  85^),  and  of 
all  that  exists  (7,  87 6).  Varuna  is  also  a  self-dependent  ruler  (2,  28 J),  a  term 
generally  applied  to  Indra.  Much  more  frequently  Varuna,  alone  or  mostly 
in  association  with  Mitra,  is  called  a  universal  monarch  (samrdj).  This  term 
is  also  applied  to  Agni  a  few  times  and  oftener  to  Indra.  Counting  the 
passages  in  which  Varuna  and  Mitra  together  are  so  called,  it  is  connected 
with  Varuna  nearly  twice  as  often  as  with  Indra.  Considering  that  for  every 
eight  or  ten  hymns  celebrating  Indra  only  one  is  dedicated  to  Varuna  in  the 
RV.,  the  epithet  may  be  considered  peculiarly  appropriate  to  Varuna. 

The  attribute  of  sovereignty  (ksatra]  is  in  a  predominant  manner  appro 
priated  to  Varuna,  generally  with  Mitra  and  twice  with  Aryaman  also.  Other 
wise  it  is  applied  only  once  respectively  to  Agni,  Brhaspati,  and  the  Asvins. 
Similarly  the  term  'ruler'  (ksatriyd)  in  four  of  its  five  occurrences  refers  to 
Varuna  or  the  Adityas  and  once  only  to  the  gods  in  general.  The  epithet 
asura  (§  67)  is  connected  with  Varuna,  alone  or  accompanied  by  Mitra, 
oftener  than  with  Indra  and  Agni;  and,  taking  account  of  the  proportion  of 
hymns,  it  may  be  said  to  be  specially  applicable  to  Varuna5.  Mitra  and 
Varuna  are  also  called  the  mysterious  and  noble  lords  (asurd  arya)  among 
the  gods  (7,  652). 

The  divine  dominion  of  Varuna  and  Mitra  is  often  referred  to  with  the 
word  mdyd6.  This  term  signifies  occult  power,  applicable  in  a  good  sense 
to  gods  or  in  a  bad  sense  to  demons.  It  has  an  almost  exact  parallel  in 
the  English  word  'craft*,  which  in  its  old  signification  meant  'occult  power, 
magic',  then  'skilfulness,  art'  on  the  one  hand  and  'deceitful  skill,  wile'  on 
the  other.  The  good  sense  of  mdyd,  like  that  of  asura  (which  might  be 
rendered  by  'mysterious  being')  is  mainly  connected  with  Varuna  and  Mitra, 
while  its  bad  sense  is  reserved  for  demons.  By  occult  power  Varuna  standing 
in  the  air  measures  out  the  earth  with  the  sun  as  with  a  measure  (5,  855), 
Varuna  and  Mitra  send  the  dawns  (3,  6i7),  make  the  sun  to  cross  the  sky 
and  obscure  it  with  cloud  and  rain,  while  the  honied  drops  fall  (5,  634); 
or  (ibid.  3-  7)  they  cause  heaven  to  rain  and  they  uphold  the  ordinances  by 
the  occult  power  of  the  Asura  (here  =  Dyaus  or  Parjanya)?.  And  so  the 
epithet  mdyin,  'crafty',  is  chiefly  applied  to  Varuna  among  the  gods  (6,  48  I4; 
7,  284;  io,  99  I0.  i475). 

In  marked  contrast  with  Indra,  Varuna  has  no  myths  related  of  him, 
while  much  is  said  about  him  (and  Mitra)  as  upholder  of  physical  and  moral 
order.  Varuna  is  a  great  lord  of  the  laws  of  nature.  He  established  heaven 
and  earth  and  dwells  in  all  the  worlds  (8,  42  ').  The  three  heavens  and  the 
three  earths  are  deposited  within  him  (7,  875).  He  and  Mitra  rule  over  the 
whole  world  (5,  63 7)  or  encompass  the  two  worlds  (7,  6i4).  They  are  the 
guardians  of  the  whole  world  (2,  27 4  &c.)'.  By  the  law  of  Varuna  heaven 
and  earth  are  held  apart  (6,  70 ';  7,  86 *;  8,  41 10).  With  Mitra  he  supports 
earth  and  heaven  (5,  62  3),  or  heaven,  earth,  and  air  (5,  69 T-4).  He  made 
the  golden  swing  (the  sun)  to  shine  in  heaven  (7,  875).  He  placed  fire  in 


CELESTIAL  GODS.     12.  VARUNA.  25 

the  waters,  the  sun  in  the  sky,  Soma  on  the  rock  (5,  852).  He  has  made  a 
wide  path  for  the  sun  (i,  24s;  7,  87*).  Varuna,  Mitra,  and  Aryaman  open 
paths  for  the  sun  (7,  6o4).  The  order  (rta)  of  Mitra  and  Varuna  is  established 
where  the  steeds  of  the  sun  are  loosed  (5,  621).  The  wind  which  resounds 
through  the  air  is  Varuna' s  breath  (7,  8j2). 

By  Varuna's  ordinances  (vratani)  the  moon  shining  brightly  moves  at 
night,  and  the  stars  placed  up  on  high  are  seen  at  night  but  disappear  by  day 
(i,  2410).  In  another  passage  (8,  4i3)  it  is  said  that  Varuna  has  embraced 
(pan  sasvaje)  the  nights,  and  by  his  occult  power  has  established  the  mornings 
or  days  (us rah).  This  can  hardly  indicate  a  closer  connexion  with  night  than 
that  he  regulates  or  divides  night  and  day  (cp.  7,  66 IT).  In  fact  it  is  the  sun 
that  is  usually  mentioned  with  him,  and  not  the  moon  or  night.  Thus  in  the 
oldest  Veda  Varuna  is  the  lord  of  light  both  by  day  and  by  night,  while  Mitra,  as 
far  as  can  be  judged,  appears  as  the  god  of  the  celestial  light  of  day  only. 

In  the  later  Vedic  period  of  the  Brahmanas  Varuna  comes  to  be  specially 
connected  with  the  nocturnal  heaven8.  Thus  Mitra  is  said  to  have  produced 
the  day  and  Varuna  the  night  (TS.  6,  4,  83);  and  the  day  is  said  to  belong  to 
Mitra  and  the  night  to  Varuna  (TS.  2,  i,  74)9.  This  view  may  have  arisen 
from  a  desire  to  contrast  Mitra,  who  was  still  felt  to  be  related  to  the  sun, 
with  Varuna  whose  natural  basis  was  more  /  obscure.  The  antithesis  between 
the  two  is  differently  expressed  by  the  SB.  (12,  9,  2T2);  which  asserts  that 
this  world  is  Mitra,  that  (the  celestial)  world  is  Varuna. 

Varuna  is  sometimes  referred  to  as  regulating  the  seasons.  He  knows 
the  twelve  months  (i,  258)10;  and  the  kings  Mitra,  Varuna,  and  Aryaman  are 
said  to  have  disposed  the  autumn,  the  month,  day  and  night  (7,  66 !I). 

Even  in  the  RV.  Varuna  is  often  spoken  of  as  a  regulator  of  the  waters. 
He  caused  the  rivers  to  flow;  they  stream  unceasingly  according  to  his  ord 
inance  (2,  284).  By  his  occult  power  the  rivers  swiftly  pouring  into  the  ocean 
do  not  fill  it  with  water  (5,856J.  Varuna  and  Mitra  are  lords  of  rivers  (7,642). 
Varuna  is  already  found  connected  with  the  sea  in  the  RV.,  but  very  rarely, 
perhaps  owing  to  its  unimportance  in  that  collection.  Varuna  going  in  the 
oceanic  waters  is  contrasted  with  the  Maruts  in  the  sky,  Agni  on  earth,  and 
Vata  in  air  (i,  i6iT4)".  The  statement  that  the  seven  rivers  flow  into  the 
jaws  of  Varuna  as  into  a  surging  abyss  (8,  5812),  may  refer  to  the  ocean12. 
Varuna  is  said  to  descend  into  the  sea  (sindhum)  like  Dyaus  (7,  87&)13. 
It  is  rather  the  aerial  waters  that  he  is  ordinarily  connected  with.  Varuna 
ascends  to  heaven  as  a  hidden  ocean  (8,  4i8).  Beholding  the  truth  and 
falsehood  of  men,  he  moves  in  the  midst  of  the  waters  which  drop 
sweetness  and  are  clear  (7,  493).  Varuna  clothes  himself  in  the  waters 
(9,  9o2  cp.  8,  69"'  I2).  He  and  Mitra  are  among  the  gods  most  frequently 
thought  of  and  prayed  to  as  bestowers  of  rain.  Varuna  makes  the  in 
verted  cask  (of  the  cloud)  to  pour  its  waters  on  heaven,  earth,  and  air, 
and  to  moisten  the  ground,  the  mountains  then  being  enveloped  in  cloud 
(5»  853'4)-  Mitra  and  Varuna  have  kine  yielding  refreshment  and  streams 
flowing  with  honey  (5,  6g2).  They  have  rainy  skies  and  streaming  waters 
(5,  685).  They  bedew  the  pasturage  with  ghee  (=  rain)  and  the  spaces 
with  honey  (3,  62 l6).  They  send  rain  and  refreshment  from  the  sky  (7,  642). 
Rain  abounding  in  heavenly  water  comes  from  them  (8,  256).  Indeed,  one 
entire  hymn  (5,  63)  dwells  on  their  powers  of  bestowing  rain.  It  is  probably 
owing  to  his  connexion  with  the  waters  and  rain,  that  in  the  fifth  chapter  of 
the  Naighantuka  Varuna  is  enumerated  among  the  deities  of  the  atmospheric 
as  well  as  those  of  the  celestial  world.  In  the  Brahmanas  Mitra-  and  Varuna 
are  also  gods  of  rain14.  In  the  AV.  Varuna  appears  divested  of  his  powers 


26     III.  RELIGION,  WELTL.  WISSENSCH.  u.  KUNST.     i  A.  YEDIC  MYTHOLOGY. 


as  a  universal  ruler,  retaining  only  the  control  of  the  department  of  waters. 
He  is  connected  with  the  waters  as  Soma  with  the  mountains  (AV.  3,  33). 
As  a  divine  father  he  sheds  rain-waters  (AV.  4,  i5I2J.  His  golden  house  is 
in  the  waters  (AV.  7,  83').  He  is  the  overlord  of  waters,  he  and  Mitra  are 
lords  of  rain  (AV.  5,  24^-  sj.  jn  the  YV.  he  is  spoken  of  as  the  child  (s'isu) 
of  waters,  making  his  abode  within  the  most  motherly  waters  (VS.  10,  7). 
The  waters  are  wives  of  Varuna  (TS.  5,  5,  41).  Mitra  and  Varuna  are  the 
leaders  of  waters  (TS.  6,  4,  32j. 

Varuna's  ordinances  are  constantly  said  to  be  fixed,  the  epithet  dhrta- 
vrata  being  preeminently  applicable  to  him,  sometimes  conjointly  with  Mitra. 
The  gods  themselves  follow  Varuna's  ordinances  (8,  4i7)  or  those  of  Varuna, 
Mitra,  and  Savitr  (10,  36 13).  Even  the  immortal  gods  cannot  obstruct  the 
fixed  ordinances  of  Mitra  and  Varuna  (5,  69*  cp.  5,  63").  Mitra  and  Varuna 
are  lords  of  order  (rta)  and  light,  who  by  means  of  order  are  the  upholders 
of  order  (1,235).  The  latter  epithet  is  mostly  applied  either  to  them  and  some 
times  the  Adityas  or  to  the  gods  in  general.  They  are  cherishers  of  order 
or  right  (i,  2s).  Varuna  or  the  Adityas  are  sometimes  called  guardians  of 
order  (rtasya  gopa],  but  this  term  is  also  applied  to  Agni  and  Soma.  The 
epithet  'observer  of  order'  (rtdvari\,  predominantly  used  of  Agni,  is  also 
several  times  connected  with  Varuna  and  Mitra. 

Varuna's  power  is  so  great  that  neither  the  birds  as  they  fly  nor  the 
rivers  as  they  flow,  can  reach  the  limit  of  his  dominion,  his  might,  and  his 
wrath  (i,  24°).  Neither  the  skies  nor  the  rivers  have  reached  (the  limit  of) 
the  godhead  of  Mitra  and  Varuna  (i,  i5i9).  He  embraces  the  All  and  the 
abodes  of  all  beings  (8,  4iI<7j.  The  three  heavens  and  the  three  earths  are 
deposited  in  him  (7,  875).  Varuna  is  omniscient.  He  knows  the  flight  of 
birds  in  the  sky,  the  path  of  ships  in  the  ocean,  the  course  of  the  far- 
travelling  wind,  and  beholds  all  the  secret  things  that  have  been  or  shall  be 
done  (i,  257-9-  "j.  He  witnesses  men's  truth  and  falsehood  (7,  49').  No 
creature  can  even  wink  without  him  (2,  286).  The  winkings  of  men's  eyes 
are  all  numbered  by  Varuna,  and  whatever  man  does,  thinks,  or  devises, 
Varuna  knows  (AV.  4,  i62-5).  He  perceives  all  that  exists  within  heaven  and 
earth,  and  all  that  is  beyond:  a  man  could  not  escape  from  Varuna  by 
fleeing  far  beyond  the  sky  (AV.  4,  i64' 5).  That  Varuna's  omniscience  is 
typical  is  indicated  by  the  fact  that  Agni  is  compared  with  him  in  this  respect 
(10,  iixj. 

As  a  moral  governor  Varuna  stands  far  above  any  other  deity.  His 
wrath  is  roused  by  sin,  the  infringement  of  his  ordinances,  which  he  severely 
punishes  (7,  863>  4).  The  fetters  (pasah)  with  which  he  binds  sinners,  are 
often  mentioned  (i,  2415.  25";  6,  744;  10,  8524).  They  are  cast  sevenfold 
and  threefold,  ensnaring  the  man  who  tells  lies,  passing  by  him  who  speaks 
truth  (AV.4,  i66j.  Mitra  and  Varuna  are  barriers,  furnished  with  many  fetters, 
against  falsehood  (7,  653).  Once  Varuna,  coupled  with  Indra,  is  said  to  tie 
with  bonds  not  formed  of  rope  (7,  842).  The  term  pdsa  is  only  once  used 
in  connexion  with  another  god,  Agni,  who  is  implored  to  loosen  the  fetters 
of  his  worshippers  (5,  27).  It  is  therefore  distinctive  of  Varuna.  According 
to  BERGAIGNE  the  conception  of  Varuna's  fetters  is  based  on  the  tying  up  of 
the  waters,  according  to  HILLEBRANDT  on  the  fetters  of  night15.  But  is  seems 
to  be  sufficiently  accounted  for  by  the  figurative  application  of  the  fetters  of 
criminals  to  moral  guilt.  Together  with  Mitra,  Varuna  is  said  to  be  a  dis- 
peller,  hater,  and  punisher  of  falsehood  (i,  152';  7,  60?.  6613).  They  afflict 
with  disease16  those  who  neglect  their  worship  (i,  1229).  On  the  other  hand, 
Varuna  is  gracious  to  the  penitent.  He  unties  like  a  rope  and  removes  sin 


CELESTIAL  GODS.     12.  VARUNA.  27 

(2,  285;  5,  857- 8).  He  releases  not  only  from  the  sins  which  men  themselves 
commit,  but  from  those  committed  by  their  fathers  (7,  865).  He  spares  the 
suppliant  who  daily  transgresses  his  laws  (i,  25')  and  is  gracious  to  those 
who  have  broken  his  laws  by  thoughtlessness  (7,,  Sp5).  There  is  in  fact  no 
hymn  to  Varuna  (and  the  Adityas)  in  which  the  prayer  for  forgiveness  of 
guilt  does  not  occur,  as  in  the  hymns  to  other  deities  the  prayer  for  worldly 
goods. 

Varuna  has  a  hundred,  a  thousand  remedies,  and  drives  away  death  as 
well  as  releases  from  sin  (1,249).  He  can  take  away  or  prolong  life  (1,24". 
2512;  7,  884.  891).  He  is  a  wise  guardian  of  immortality  (8,  42 2),  and  the 
righteous  hope  to  see  in  the  next  world  Varuna  and  Yama,  the  two  kings 
who  reign  in  bliss  (10,  147). 

Varuna  is  on  a  footing  of  friendship  with  his  worshipper  (7,  884~6),  who 
communes  with  him  in  his  celestial  abode  and  sometimes  sees  him  with  the 
mental  eye  (i,  25**;  7,  88 2). 

What  conclusions  as  to  the  natural  basis  of  Varuna  can  be  drawn  from 
the  Vedic  evidence  which  has  been  adduced?  It  is  clear  from  this  evidence, 
in  combination  with  what  is  said  below  about  Mitra  (§  13),  that  Varuna  and 
Mitra  are  closely  connected  with  the  sun,  but  that  the  former  is  the  much 
more  important  deity.  Mitra  has  in  fact  been  so  closely  assimilated  to  the 
greater  god  that  he  has  hardly  an  independent  trait  left.  Mitra  must  have 
lost  his  individuality  through  the  predominant  characteristics  of  the  god  with 
whom  he  is  almost  invariably  associated.  Now,  chiefly  on  the  evidence  of 
the  Avesta,  Mitra  has  been  almost  unanimously  acknowledged  to  be  a  solar 
deity  (§  13).  Varuna  must  therefore  have  originally  represented  a  different 
phenomenon.  This  according  to  the  generally  received  opinion,  is  the  en 
compassing  sky.  The  vault  of  heaven  presents  a  phenomenon  far  more  vast 
to  the  eye  of  the  observer  than  the  sun,  which  occupies  but  an  extremely 
small  portion  of  that  expanse  during  its  daily  course.  The  sky  would  there 
fore  appear  to  the  imagination  as  the  greater  deity.  The  sun  might  very 
naturally  become  associated  with  the  sky  as  the  space  which  it  traverses  every 
day  and  apart  from  which  it  is  never  seen.  The  conception  of  the  sun  as 
the  eye  of  heaven  is  sufficiently  obvious.  It  could  not  very  appropriately  be 
termed  the  eye  of  Mitra  till  the  original  character  of  the  latter  had  become 
obscured  and  absorbed  in  that  of  Varuna.  Yet  even  the  eye  of  Surya  is  several 
times  spoken  of  in  the  RV.  (p.  30).  The  attribute  of  'far-seeing',  appropriate 
to  the  sun,  is  also  appropriate  to  the  sky,  which  might  naturally  be  conceived 
as  seeing  not  only  by  day  but  even  at  night  by  means  of  the  moon  and  stars. 
No  real  difficulty  is  presented  by  the  notion  of  Varuna,  who  has  become 
-quite  separate  from  his  physical  basis  X7,  mounting  a  car  in  the  height  of 
heaven  with  Mitra.  For  such  a  conception  is  easily  explicable  from  his  asso 
ciation  with  a  solar  deity;  besides  every  leading  deity  in  the  RV.  drives  in  a 
car.  On  the  other  hand,  the  palace  of  Varuna  in  the  highest  heavens  and 
his  connexion  with  rain  are  particularly  appropriate  to  a  deity  originally  re 
presenting  the  vault  of  heaven.  Finally,  no  natural  phenomenon  would  be  so 
likely  to  develope  into  a  sovereign  ruler,  as  the  sky.  For  the  personification 
of  its  vast  expanse,  which  encompasses  and  rises  far  above  the  earth  and  on 
which  the  most  striking  phenomena  of  regular  recurrence,  the  movements  of 
the  luminaries,  are  enacted,  would  naturally  be  conceived  as  watching  by  night 
and  day  all  the  deeds  of  men  and  as  being  the  guardian  of  unswerving  law. 
This  development  has  indeed  actually  taken  place  in  the  case  of  the  Zeus 
(=  Dyaus)  of  Hellenic  mythology.  What  was  at  first  only  an  appellative  of 
the  sky  has  here  become  the  supreme  ruler  of  the  gods  dwelling  in  the  serene 


28     III.  RELIGION,  WELTL.  WISSENSCH.  u.  KUNST.     i  A.  VEDIC  MYTHOLOGY. 


heights  of  heaven,  who  gathers  the  clouds,  who  wields  the  thunderbolt,  and 
whose  will  is  law. 

The  phenomena  with  which  the  two  greatest  gods  of  the  RV.  were 
originally  connected,  largely  accounts  for  the  difference  in  their  personality. 
Varuna  as  concerned  with  the  regularly  recurring  phenomena  of  celestial  light, 
is  the  supreme  upholder  of  law  in  the  moral  as  well  as  the  physical  world.  His 
character  as  such  afforded  no  scope  for  the  development  of  myths.  Indra 
as  the  god  fighting  in  the  strife  of  the  elements,  was  conceived  by  the  militant 
Vedic  Indian  as  a  sovereign  of  the  warrior  type.  Owing  to  his  close  con 
nexion  with  the  meteorological  phenomena  of  the  thunderstorm,  which  are  so 
irregular  in  time  and  diversified  in  feature,  the  character  of  Indra  on  the  one 
hand  shows  traits  of  capriciousness,  while  on  the  other  he  becomes  the  centre 
of  more  myths  than  any  other  deity  of  the  RV.  The  theory  of  ROTH  as  to 
the  supersession  of  Varuna  by  Indra  in  the  Rigvedic  period,  is  dealt  with 
below  (§  22). 

With  the  growth  of  the  conception  of  Prajapati  (§  39)  as  a  supreme  deity, 
the  characteristics  of  Varuna  as  a  sovereign  god  naturally  faded  away,  and 
the  dominion  of  the  waters,  only  a  part  of  his  original  sphere,  alone  remained 
to  him.  Thus  he  ultimately  became  in  post-Vedic  mythology  an  Indian 
Neptune,  god  of  the  Sea. 

The  hypothesis  recently  advanced  by  OLDENBERGIS  that  Varuna  primarily 
represented  the  moon,  cannot  be  passed  over  here.  Starting  from  the  assertion 
that  the  characteristic  number  of  the  Adityas  was  seven  and  that  their  identity 
with  the  Amesaspentas  of  the  Avesta  is  an  assured  fact,  he  believes  that 
Varuna  and  Mitra  were  the  moon  and  sun,  the  lesser  Adityas  representing 
the  five  planets,  and  that  they  were  not  Indo-European  deities,  but  were 
borrowed  during  the  Indo-Iranian  period  from  a  Semitic  people  more  skilled 
in  astronomy  than  the  Aryans.  The  character  of  Varuna  when  borrowed 
must  further  have  lost  much  of  its  original  significance  and  have  already 
possessed  a  highly  ethical  aspect.  For  otherwise  a  distinctly  lunar  deity  could 
hardly  have  thrown  Mitra,  who  was  clearly  understood  to  be  the  sun,  into 
the  shade  in  the  Indo-Iranian  period,  or  have  developed  so  highly  abstract 
a  character  as  to  account  for  the  supreme  position,  as  a  moral  ruler,  of  Ahura 
Mazda  in  the  Avesta  and  of  Varuna  in  the  Veda.  This  hypothesis  does  not 
seem  to  account  at  all  well  for  the  actual  characteristics  of  Varuna  in  the  RV. 
It  also  requires  the  absolute  rejection  of  any  connection  between  Varuna  and 


It  has  already  been  mentioned  that  Varuna  goes  back  to  the  Indo-Iranian 
period  (§  5),  for  the  Ahura  Mazda  of  the  Avesta  agrees  with  him  in  character20 
though  not  in  name.  The  name  of  Varuna  may  even  be  Indo-European. 
At  least,  the  long  accepted  identification  of  the  word  with  the  Greek  oopavoc, 
though  presenting  phonetic  difficulties,  has  not  been  rejected  by  some  recent 
authorities  on  comparative  philology21. 

But  whether  the  word  is  Indo-European  or  the  formation  of  a  later 
period22,  it  is  probably  derived  from  the  root  var,  to  cover23,  thus  meaning 
'the  encompasser'.  Sayana  (on  RV.  i,  89^)  connects  it  with  this  root  in  the 
sense  of  enveloping  or  confining  the  wicked  with  his  bonds24,  or  commen 
ting  on  TS.  i,  8,  i6x,  in  that  of  enveloping  'like  darkness'  (cp.  TS.  2,  i,  7*). 
If  the  word  is  Indo-European,  it  may  have  been  an  attribute  of  dyaus,  the 
ordinary  name  of  'sky',  later  becoming  the  regular  appellative  of  sky  in  Greece, 
but  an  exalted  god  of  the  sky  in  India  2^. 

1  WEBER,   ZDMG.   9,  242;    18,  268.    —    2  QRV.  286,  n.  2,    —    3  Cp.  ROTH, 
ZDMG.  6,  72;  EGGERS,  Mitra  54—7;  OLDENBERG,  ZDMG.  50,48.  --  4  OST.  5,60, 


CELESTIAL  GODS.     13.  MITRA.  29 


—  5  BDA.    120—1;  ORV.  163.  —  6  BRV.  -3,  81 ;  v.  BRADKE,  ZDMG.  48,  499— 501 ; 
'  )RV.   163.  294.  —  7  Cf.  BDA.  55.  60.  —  «  OST.  5,  70;  ROTH,  PW.  s.  v.  Varuna; 
BRV.  3,  ii6ff.;  v.  SCHROEDER,  WZKM.  9,  119.  —  9  Cf.  TB.   I,  7,  id;  Sayana  on 
RV.  i,  893;    2,  388;    7,    871;    TS.  i,  8,  i6t.    .  -    10    Cp.    WVB.    1894,    p.    38.    - 
ii    BOLLENSEN,    OO.  2,  467.        -    I2  ROTII,  Nirukta,  Erl.  70—1.    -       *3  Cp.  ROTH, 
ZDMG.  6,  73.  —  I4  HILLEBRANDT,  Varuna  und  Mitra  67,  note.  —  T5  Cp.  HRI.  68. 

—  ID  Varuna' s  later  connexion  -with  dropsy  is  traced  by  HILLEBRANDT,  p.  63  f.  and 
ORV-  203  even  in  the  RV.,  a  view  opposed  by  BRV.  3,  155.  —  J7  Cp.  OLDENBERG, 
ZDMG.  50,  61.  —  l8  ORV.  285—98.  —  J9  Cp.  v.  SCHROEDER,  WZKM.  9,  116 — 28; 
MACDONELL,    JRAS.    27,    947—9-    -  -    20  ROTH,    ZDMG.  6,  69  ff.  (cp.  OST.  5,  72); 
WHITNEY,  JAOS.  3,  327;    but   WINDISCHMANN   (Zoroastrische  Studien    p.  122)  held 
Ahura  Mazda  to  be  purely  Iranian,  and  SPIEGEL,  Av.  Transl.  3,  introd.  iii.,  sees  no 
similarity    between   Ahura  Mazda  and  Varuna;     cp.  Sp.AP.   18 1.    —  2I    BRUGMANN, 
Grundriss  2,   154;  PRELLWITZ,  Etym.  Worterbuch  d.  gr.  Spr.  —  22  Cp.  v.  SCHROE 
DER,   WZKM.   9,  127.   --   23  HILLEBRANDT  9—14;   v.  SCHROEDER,   WZKM.  9,  118, 
n.   i;     HRI.   66,   note;    70;    cp.    also  SONNE,    KZ.  12,364—6;    ZDMG.  32,    7i6f.; 
BOLLENSEN,  ZDMG.  41,  504 f.;    GELDNER,  BB.  11,  329;    MM.,  Chips  42,  xxiii  f.    - 
*\  Cp.  GVS.  2,  22,  note;  OLDENBERG,  ZDMG.  50,  60.  —  25  MACDONELL,  JRAS.  26,  628. 

ROTH,  ZDMG.  6,  70—4;  7,  607;  JAOS.  3,  341—2.  WEBER,  IS.  17,  212  f.;  OST. 
5,  58  —  75;  LRV.  3,  314—6;  GRV.  i,  34;  HILLEBRANDT,  Varuna  und  Mitra,  Breslau 
1877;  BRV.  3,  110—49;  -MM->  India  197—200;  BRL  16—9;  GPVS.  I,  142.  188; 
WC.  98 — 103;  KERBAKER,  Varuna  e  gli  Aditya,  Napoli  1889;  BOHNENBERGER,  Der 
altindische  Gott  Varuna,  Tubingen  1893;  ORV.  189—95-  202—3.  293—8.  336,11.  i; 
ZDMG.  50,  43—68;  HRI.  61—72;  JAOS.  16,  cxLviiiff.;  17,  81,  note;  FOY,  Die 
konigliche  Gewalt,  Leipzig  1895,  P-  80  —  6  (Die  Spaher  Varuna's). 

§  13.  Mitra. —  The  association  of  Mitra  with  Varuna  is  so  predominant 
that  only  one  single  hymn  of  the  RV.  (3,  59)  is  addressed  to  him  alone. 
The  praise  of  the  god  is  there  rather  indefinite,  but  the  first  verse  at  least 
contains  something  distinctive  about  him.  Uttering  his  voice  (bruvanah)  he 
brings  men  together  (yatayati)  and  watches  the  tillers  with  unwinking  eye 
(animisd,  said  also  of  Mitra- Varuna  in  7,  6o6). 

In  another  passage  (7,  362)  almost  the  same  words  are  applied  to  Mitra 
who  'brings  men  together,  uttering  his  voice',  in  contrast  with  Varuna  who  is 
here  called  'a  mighty,  infallible  guide'.  This  seems  a  tolerably  clear  reference 
to  Mitra's  solar  character,  if  we  compare  with  it  another  verse  (5,  829)  where 
it  is  said  that  the  sun-god  Savitr  'causes  all  creatures  to  hear  him  and  impels 
them'.  _  In  the  fifth  verse  of  the  hymn  to  Mitra  the  god  is  spoken  of  as  the 
great  Aditya  'bringing  men  together'.  This  epithet  (yatayaj-jana)  is  found 
in  only  three  other  passages  of  the  RV.  In  one  of  these  it  is  applied  to 
Mitra- Varuna  in  the  dual  (5,722),  in  another  to  Mitra,  Varuna,  and  Aryaman 
(i,  i363),  and  in  the  third  (8, 9i12)  to  Agni,  who  'brings  men  together  like  Mitra'. 
The  attribute  therefore  seems  to  have  properly  belonged  to  Mitra.  The  hymn 
to  Mitra  further  adds  that  he  supports  heaven  and  earth,  that  the  five  tribes 
of  men  obey  him,  and  that  he  sustains  all  the  gods.  Savitr  is  once  (5,8i4) 
identified  with  Mitra  because  of  his  laws,  and  elsewhere  (Val.  43)  Visnu  is 
said  to  take  his  three  steps  by  the  laws  of  Mitra.  These  two  passages  appear 
to  indicate  that  Mitra  regulates  the  course  of  the  sun.  Agni  who  goes  at 
the  head  of  the  dawns  produces  Mitra  for  himself  (10,  84);  Agni  when  kindled 
is  Mitra  (3,  5 4);  Agni  when  born  is  Varuna,  when  kindled  is  Mitra1  (5,  31). 
In  the  AV.  (i3,313)  Mitra  at  sunrise  is  contrasted  with  Varuna  in  the  evening, 
and  (AV.  9,  3l8)  Mitra  is  asked  to  uncover  in  the  morning  what  has  been 
covered  up  by  Varuna2.  These  passages  point  to  the  beginning  of  the  view 
prevailing  in  the  Brahmanas,  that  Mitra  is  connected  with  day  and  Varuna 
with  night.  That  view  must  have  arisen  from  Mitra  having  been  predominantly 
conceived  as  allied  to  the  sun,  Varuna  by  antithesis  becoming  god  of  night  3. 
The  same  contrast  between  Mitra  as  god  of  day  and  Varuna  as  god  of  night 
is  implied  in  the  ritual  literature,  when  it  is  prescribed  that  Mitra  should 


30     III.  RELIGION,  WELTL.  WISSENSCH.  u.  KUNST.      IA.   VEDIC  MYTHOLOGY. 


receive  a  white  and  Varuna  a  dark  victim  at  the  sacrificial  post  (TS.  2,  i,  7*. 
91;  MS.  2,  57.)4.  The  somewhat  scanty  evidence  of  the  Veda  showing  that 
Mitra  is  a  solar  deity,  is  corroborated  by  the  Avesta  and  Persian  religion  in 
general.  Here  Mithra  is  undoubtedly  a  sun-god  or  a  god  of  light  specially 
connected  with  the  sun5. 

The  etymology  of  the  name  is  uncertain6.  However,  as  the  word  also 
often  means  'friend'  in  the  RV.  and  the  kindly  nature  of  the  god  is  often 
referred  to  in  the  Veda,  Mitra  even  appearing  as  a  god  of  peace  (TS.  2, 
i,  84)7,  while  in  the  Avesta  Mithra  is  on  the  ethical  side  of  his  character 
the  guardian  of  faithfulness8,  it  must  have  originally  signified  'ally'  or  'friend' 
and  have  been  applied  to  the  sun-god  in  his  aspect  of  a  beneficent  power  of 

nature. 

i  EGGERS  16 — 19.  —  2  HILLEBRANDT  67.  —  3  OLDENBERG  thinks  that  the 
special  connexion  of  Varuna  with  night  is  old:  ZDA1G.  50,  64 — 5.  —  4  HILLE 
BRANDT  67.  90;  ORV.  192, 'note.  —  5  Sp.AP.  183;  ORV.  48.  190;  EGGERS  6—13. 
u  HILLEBRANDT  113—4;  EGGERS  70.  —  7  EGGERS  42 — 3.  —  8  EGGERS  53 — 6. 

KHF.  13;  ROTH,  ZDMG.  6,  70  ff.;  PW.;  OST.  5,  69—71;  WINDISCHMANN, 
Mithra,  Leipzig  1859;  GW.  s.  v.  Mitra;  HILLEBRANDT,  Varuna  und  Mitra  111—36; 
BRV.  3,  no — 29;  BOLLENSEN,  ZDMG.  41,  503—4;  WEBER,  IS.  17,  212;  BRI.  17; 
ORV.  190 — 2;  BOHNENBERGER  85;  A.  EGGERS,  Der  arische  Gott  Mitra,  Dorpat  1894 
(Dissertation);  v.  SCHROEDER,  WZKM.  9,118;  HRI.  71 ;  OLDENBERG,  SEE. 46,  241.  287. 

§  14.  Surya.  -  Ten  entire  hymns  of  the  RV.  may  be  said  to  be  de 
voted  to  the  celebration  of  Surya  specifically.  It  is  impossible  to  say  how 
often  the  name  of  the  god  occurs,  it  being  in  many  cases  doubtful  whether 
only  the  natural  phenomenon  is  meant  or  its  personification.  Since  his  name 
designates  the  orb  of  the  sun  as  well,  Surya  is  the  most  concrete  of  the  solar 
deities,  his  connexion  with  the  luminary  never  being  lost  sight  of.  The 
adorable  light  of  Surya  in  the  sky  is  as  the  face  (amka)  of  great  Agni 
do,  7  3).  The  eye  of  Surya  is  mentioned  several  times  (5,  4o8  &c.),  but  he 
is  himself  equally  often  called  the  eye  of  Mitra  and  Varuna  (p.  23)  or  of 
Agni  as  well  (i,  us1);  and  once  (7,  773)  Dawn  is  said  to  bring  the  eye  of 
the  gods.  The  affinity  of  the  eye  and  the  sun  is  indicated  in  a  passage 
where  the  eye  of  the  dead  man  is  conceived  as  going  to  Surya  (10,  i63  cp. 
9o3.  I583-  4).  In  the  AV.  he  is  called  the  'lord  of  eyes'  (AV.  5,  249)  and  is 
said  to  be  the  one  eye  of  created  beings  and  to  see  beyond  the  sky,  the 
earth,  and  the  waters  (AV.  13,  i*5).  He  is  far-seeing  (7,  358;  10,  37*),  all- 
seeing  (i,  5o2),  is  the  spy  (spas)  of  the  whole  world  (4,  i33),  beholds  all 
beings  and  the  good  and  bad  deeds  of  mortals  (i,  50?;  6,  5i2;  7,  6o2.  6ix. 
63 I>4).  Aroused  by  Surya  men  pursue  their  objects  and  perform  their  work 
(7,  634).  Common  to  all  men,  he  rises  as  their  rouser  (7,  63*-  3).  He  is  the 
soul  or  the  guardian  of  all  that  moves  or  is  stationary  (i,  115*;  7,  6o2).  He 
has  a  car  which  is  drawn  by  one  steed,  called  etasa  (7,  632),  or  by  an  in 
definite  number  of  steeds  (i,ii53;  10,373.  497)  or  mares  (5,298)  or  by  seven 
horses  (5,  459)  or  mares  called  haritah  (i,  5o8-  9;  7,  6o3)  or  by  seven  swift 
mares  (4,  133). 

Surya's  path  is  prepared  for  him  by  Varuna  (i,  248;  7,  871)  or  by  the 
Adityas  Mitra,  Varuna,  Aryaman  (7,  60^).  Pusan  is  his  messenger  (6,  583). 
The  Dawn  or  Dawns  reveal  or  produce  Surya  as  well  as  Agni  and  the  sacri 
fice  (7,  8o2.  783).  He  shines  forth  from  the  lap  of  the  dawns  (7,  633).  But 
from  another  point  of  view  Dawn  is_  Surya's  wife  (7,  755). 

_He  also  bears  the  metronymic  Aditya,  son  of  Aditi  (i,5o12.  i9i9;  8,90") 
or  Aditeya  (10,  88"),  but  he  is  elsewhere  distinguished  from  the  Adityas 
(8>  3513-15)-  His  father  is  Dyaus  (10,  371).  He  is  god-born  (ibid.).  The  gods 
raised  him  who  had  been  hidden  in  the  ocean  (10,  727).  As  a  form  of  Agni 


CELESTIAL  GODS.     14.  SURYA.  31 


he  was  placed  by  the  gods  in  heaven  (10,  8811).  According  to  another  order 
of  ideas  he  is  said  to  have  arisen  from  the  eye  of  the  world-giant  Purusa 
(io,  90^).  In  the  AV.  (4,  io5)  the  sun  (divakara}  is  even  described  as  having 
sprung  from  Vrtra. 

Various  individual  gods  are  said  to  have  produced  the  sun.  Indra 
generated  him  (2,  i24  &c.),  caused  him  to  shine  or  raised  him  to  heaven 
(3,  442;  8,  787).  Indra- Visnu  generated  him  (7,  99'4).  Indra-Soma  brought  up 
Surya  with  light  (6,  722);  Indra- Varuna  raised  him  to  heaven  (7,  82 3).  Mitra- 
Varuna  raised  or  placed  him  in  heaven  (4,  i32;  5,  63*-  7).  Soma  placed  light 
in  the  Sun  (6,  442j;  9,  9741),  generated  Surya  (9,  965.  no5),  caused  him  to 
shine  (9,  637),  or  raised  him  in  heaven  (9,  1077).  Agni  establishes  the 
brightness  of  the  sun  on  high  (io,  32)  and  caused  him  to  ascend  to  heaven 
(io,  i564).  Dhatr,  the  creator,  fashioned  the  sun  as  well  as  the  moon  (io, 
1903).  The  Angirases  by  their  rites  caused  him  to  ascend  the  sky  (io,  623). 
In  all  these  passages  referring  to  the  generation  of  Surya  the  notion  of  the 
simple  luminary  doubtless  predominates. 

In  various  passages  Surya  is  conceived  as  a  bird  traversing  space.  He 
is  a  bird  (io,  177*-  2),  or  a  ruddy  bird  (5,  47 J),  is  represented  as  flying  (i, 
igi9),  is  compared  with  a  flying  eagle  (7,  635)  and  seems  to  be  directly 
called  an  eagle  (5,  459)1.  He  is  in  one  passage  called  a  bull  as  well  as  a 
bird  (5,  473)  and  in  another  a  mottled  bull2  (io,  I891  cp.  5,  473).  He  is  once 
alluded  to  as  a  white  and  brilliant  steed3  brought  by  Usas  (7,  773).  Surya's 
horses  represent  his  rays  (which  are  seven  in  number:  8,  6il6),  for  the  latter 
(ketavati),  it  is  said,  bring  (vahanti)  him.  His  seven  mares  are  called  the 
daughters  of  his  car  (i,  50$). 

Elsewhere  Surya  is  occasionally  spoken  of  as  an  inanimate  object  He 
is  a  gem  of  the  sky  (7,  634  cp.  6,  51')  and  is , alluded  to  as  the  variegated 
stone  placed  in  the  midst  of  heaven  (5,  473  cp.  SB.  6,  i,  23).  He  is  a  brilliant 
weapon  (ayudha)  which  Mitra- Varuna  conceal  with  cloud  and  rain  (5,  631), 
he  is  the  felly  (pavi)  of  Mitra- Varuna  (5,  62*),  or  a  brilliant  car  placed  in 
heaven  by  Mitra- Varuna  (5,  637).  The  sun  is  also  called  a  wheel  (i,  i754; 
4,  3o4)  or  the  'wheel  of  the  sun'  is  spoken  of  (4,  282;  5,  2910). 

Surya  shines  for  all  the  world  (7,  631),  for  men  and  gods  (i,  50$).  He 
dispels  the  darkness  with  his  light  (io,  37+).  He  rolls  up  the  darkness  as  a 
skin  (7,  631).  His  rays  throw  off  the  darkness  as  a  skin  into  the  waters 
(4,  i34).  He  triumphs  over  beings  of  darkness  and  witches  (i,  I9i8<  9  cp. 
7,  ic>424).  There  are  only  two  or  three  allusions  to  the  sun's  burning  heat 
(7?  34I9j  9)  I0720);  for  in  the  RV.  the  sun  is  not  a  maleficent  power4,  and 
for  this  aspect  of  the  luminary  only  passages  from  the  AV.  and  the  literature 
of  the  Brahmanas  can  be  quoted5. 

Surya  measures  the  days  (i,  5o7)  and  prolongs  the  days  of  life  (8,487). 
He  drives  away  sickness,  disease,  and  every  evil  dream  (io,  374).  To  live  is 
to  see  the  Sun  rise  (4,25*;  6,52s).  All  creatures  depend  on  Surya  (i,i6414). 
and  the  sky  is  upheld  by  him  (io,  851).  The  epithet  'all-creating'  (visva- 
karmari)  is  also  applied  to  him  (io,  170^;  cp.  §  39).  By  his  greatness  he 
is  the  divine  priest  (asuryah  purohitatj)  of  the  gods  (8,  9o12).  At  his  rising 
he  is  prayed  to  declare  men  sinless  to  Mitra- Varuna  and  other  gods  (7,  6oT. 
622).  He  is  said,  when  rising,  to  go  to  the  Vrtra-slayer  Indra  and  is  even 
styled  a  Vrtra-slayer  himself  when  invoked  with  Indra  (8,  82*-  2-  4). 

The  only  myth  told  about  Surya  is  that  Indra  vanquished  him  (io,  435) 
and  stole  his  wheel  (i,  i754;  4,  30*).  This  may  allude  to  the  obscuration  of 
the  sun  by  a  thunderstorm. 

In  the  Avesta,   the  sun,  hvare  (=  Vedic  svar,   of  which  surya6  is  a  de- 


32     III.  RELIGION,  WELTL.  WISSENSCH.  u.  KUNST.     i  A.  YEDIC  MYTHOLOGY. 


rivative  and  to  which  Gk.  TjsXios?  is  allied)  has  swift  horses,  like  Surya,  and 
is  called  the  eye  of  Ahura  Mazda8. 

i  Cp.  ZDMG.  7,  475—6.  —  2  Otherwise  HVM.  I,  345,  note  3.  —  3  Cp.  ZDMG. 
2,  223;  7,  82.  —  4  BRV.  I,  6;  2,  2.  —  5  EHM,  Yama  134.  —  &  KZ.  12,  358; 
J.  SCHMIDT,  KZ.  26,  9.  —  7  BRUGMANN,  Grundriss  i,  218.  —  8  Sp.AP.  i,  190  —  i; 
cp.  OLDENBERG,  ZDMG.  50,  49. 

Nirukta  12,  14—16;  OST.  5,  151—61;  GKR.  55—6;  BRI.  20;  KRV.  54—5. 
145;  BRV.  I,  7;  HVM.  I,  45;  HVBP.  29—30;  ORV.  240—1;  HRI.  40—6. 

§  15.  Savitr.  —  Savitr  is  celebrated  in  eleven  whole  hymns  of  the  RV. 
and  in  parts  of  others,  his  name  being  mentioned  about  170  times.  Eight  or 
nine  of  these  are  in  the  family  books,  while  all  but  three  of  those  to  Surya 
are  in  the  first  and  tenth.  Savitr  is  preeminently  a  golden  deity,  nearly  all 
his  members  and  his  equipment  being  described  by  that  epithet.  He  is  golden- 
eyed  (i,  358),  golden-handed  (i,  359'  10)>  golden-tongued  (6,71^  all  these 
epithets  being  peculiar  to  him.  He  has  golden  arms  (6,  71*-  5;  7,  452),  and 
is  broad-handed  (2,  38*)  or  beautiful-handed  (3,  336j.  He  is  also  pleasant- 
tongued  (6,  7i4)  or  beautiful-tongued  (3,  5411),  and  is  once  called  iron-jawed 
(6,  7i4).  He  is  yellow-haired  (10,  I391),  an  attribute  of  Agni  and  Indra  also. 
He  puts  on  a  tawny  garment  (4,  532).  He  has  a  golden  car  with  a  golden 
pole  (i,  352-  5),  which  is  omniform  (i,  3  5  3),  just  as  he  himself  assumes  all 
forms  (5,  Si2).  His  car  is  drawn  by  two  radiant  steeds  or  by  two  or  more 
brown,  white-footed  horses  (i,  352<  5;  7»  451)- 

Mighty  splendour  (amati)  is  preeminently  attributed  to  Savitr,  and  mighty 
golden  splendour  to  him  only  (3,  388;  7,  381).  This  splendour  he  stretches 
out  or  diffuses.  He  illumines  the  air,  heaven  and  earth,  the  world,  the  spaces 
of  the  earth,  the  vault  of  heaven  (i,  357'  8;  4,  i42.  534;  5,  8i2).  He  raises 
aloft  his  strong  golden  arms,  with  which  he  blesses  and  arouses  all  beings 
and  which  extend  to  the  ends  of  the  earth  (2,382;  4,  533'4;  6,'ji*-5;  7,452).  The 
raising  of  his  arms  is  characteristic,  for  the  action  of  other  gods  is  compared 
with  it.  Agni  is  said  to  raise  his  arms  like  Savitr  (i,  95');  the  dawns  extend 
light  as  Savitr  his  arms  (7,  792),  and  Brhaspati  is  implored  to  raise  hymns  of 
praise  as  Savitr  his  arms  (i,  i9<D3).  He  moves  in  his  golden  car,  seeing  all 
creatures,  on  a  downward  and  an  upward  path  (i,  352-  3).  He  impels  the 
car  of  the  Asvins  before  dawn  (i,  3410).  He  shines  after  the  path  of  the 
dawn  (5,  8  12).  He  has  measured  out  the  earthly  spaces,  he  goes  to  the  three 
bright  realms  of  heaven  and  is  united  with  the  rays  of  the  sun  (5,  8i3>  4). 
The  only  time  the  epithet  surya-rasmi  is  used  in  the  RV.  it  is  applied  to 
Savitr:  'Shining  with  the  rays  of  the  sun,  yello  w-haired,  Savitr  raises  up  his 
light  continually  from  the  east'  (10,  I391)-  He  thrice  surrounds  the  air,  the 
three  spaces,  the  three  bright  realms  of  heaven  (4,  535:  cp.  Visnu,  §  17). 
His  ancient  paths  in  the  air  are  dustless  and  easy  to  traverse,  on  them  he 
is  besought  to  protect  his  worshippers  (i,  3511).  He  is  prayed  to  convey  the 
departed  spirit  to  where  the  righteous  dwell  (10,  i74).  He  bestows  immort 
ality  on  the  gods  as  well  as  length  of  life  on  man  (4,  542j.  He  also  bestowed 
immortality  on  the  Rbhus,  who  by  the  greatness  of  their  deeds  went  to  his 
house  (i,  no2-  3).  Like  Surya,  he  is  implored  to  remove  evil  dreams  (5,  824) 
and  to  make  men  sinless  (4,  543).  He  drives  away  evil  spirits  and  sorcerers 
(i,  35'°;  7,  387). 

Like  many  other  gods  Savitr  is  called  asura  (4,  53*).  He  observes  fixed 
laws  (4,  534;  10,  348.  I393).  The  waters  and  the  wind  are  subject  to  his  or 
dinance  (2,  38*).  He  leads  the  waters  and  by  his  propulsion  they  flow  broadly 
(3)  336  cp.  Nir.  2,  26).  The  other  gods  follow  his  lead  (5,  8i3).  No  being,  not 
even  Indra,  Varuna,  Mitra,  Aryaman,  Rudra,  can  resist  his  will  and  independent 


CELESTIAL  GODS.     15.  SAVITR.  33 


dominion  (2,  387.  9;  5,  82 2).  His  praises  are  celebrated  by  the  Vasus,  Aditi, 
Varuna,  Mitra  and  Aryaman  (7,  38^-  4).  Like  Pusan  and  Surya,  he  is  lord  of 
that  which  moves  and  is  stationary  (4,  536).  He  is  lord  of  all  desirable  things, 
and  sends  blessings  from  heaven,  air,  earth  (if  243;  2,  38").  He  is  twice 
(i,  i233;  6,  7 14)  even  spoken  of  as  'domestic'  (damunas),  an  epithet  other 
wise  almost  entirely  limited  to  Agni.  Like  other  gods,  he  is  a  supporter 
of  the  sky  (4,  53*;  10,  I494).  He  supports  the  whole  world  (4,  544).  He 
fixed  the  earth  with  bonds  and  made  firm  the  sky  in  the  rafterless  space 
(10,  I491). 

Savitr  is  at  least  once  (i,  226)  called  'child  of  Waters'  (apdm  napdt], 
an  epithet  otherwise  exclusively  belonging  to  Agni.  It  is  probably  also  applied 
to  him  in  10,  i^g2  2.  Yaska  (Nir.  10,  32)  commenting  on  this  verse  regards 
Savitr  here  as  belonging  to  the  middle  region  (or  atmosphere)  because  he 
causes  rain,  adding  that  the  sun  (Aditya,  who  is  in  heaven)  is  also  called 
Savitr3.  It  is  probably  owing  to  this  epithet  and  because  Savitr's  paths  are 
once  (i,  35")  said  to  be  in  the  atmosphere,  that  this  deity  occurs  among  the 
gods  of  the  middle  region  as  well  as  among  those  of  heaven  in  the  Nai- 
ghantuka.  Savitr  is  once  called  the  prajapati  of  the  world  (4,  532).  In  the  SB. 
(12,  3,  51)  people  are  said  to  identify  Savitr  with  Prajapati  j  and  in  the  TB. 
(i,  6,  41)  it  is  stated  that  Prajapati  becoming  Savitr  created  living  beings4. 
Savitr  is  alone  lord  of  vivifying  power  and  by  his  movements  (yamabhih] 
becomes  Pusan  (5,  825).  in  his  vivifying  power  Pusan  marches,  beholding  all 
beings  as  a  guardian  (10,  I391).  In  two  consecutive  verses  (3,629- I0)  Pusan 
and  Savitr  are  thought  of  as  connected.  In  the  first  the  favour  of  Pusan  who 
sees  all  beings  is  invoked,  and  in  the  second,  Savitr  is  besought  to  stimultae 
(cp.  Pusan,  p.  36)  the  thoughts  of  worshippers  who  desire  to  think  of  the 
excellent  brilliance  of  god  Savitr.  The  latter  verse  is  the  celebrated  Savitrl, 
with  which  Savitr  was  in  later  times  invoked  at  the  beginning  of  Vedic  study  5. 
Savitr  is  also  said  to  become  Mitra  by  reason  of  his  laws  (5,  8i4).  Savitr 
seems  sometimes  (5,  82'-  3;  7,  38*-  6)  to  be  identified  with  Bhaga  also,  unless 
the  latter  word  is  here  only  an  epithet  of  Savitr.  The  name  of  Bhaga  (the 
good  god  bestowing  benefits)  is  indeed  often  added  to  that  of  Savitr  so  as 
to  form  the  single  expression  Savitd  Bhagah  or  Bhagah  Savitd6.  In  other 
texts,  however,  Savitr  is  distinguished  from  Mitra,  Pusan,  and  Bhaga.  In 
several  passages  Savitr  and  Surya  appear  to  be  spoken  of  indiscriminately 
to  denote  the  same  deity.  Thus  a  poet  says:  'God  Savitr  has  raised  aloft 
his  brilliance,  making  light  for  the  whole  world;  Surya  shining  brightly  has 
filled  heaven  and  earth  and  air  with  his  rays'  (4,  14*).  In  another  hymn 
(7>  63)  Surya  is  (in  verses  i.  2.  4)  spoken  of  in  terms  (e.  g.  prasavitr,  vivi- 
fier)  usually  applied  to  Savitr,  and  in  the  third  verse  Savitr  is  apparently 
mentioned  as  the  same  god.  In  other  hymns  also  (10,  I581"4;  i,  351"11. 
I241)  it  is  hardly  possible  to  keep  the  two  deities  apart.  In  passages  such  as 
the  following,  Savitr  is,  however,  distinguished  from  Surya.  'Savitr  moves 
between  both  heaven  and  earth,  drives  away  disease,  impels  (veti)  the  sun' 
C1*  359)-  Savitr  declares  men  sinless  to  the  sun  (i,  123^).  He  combines 
with  the  rays  of  the  sun  (5,81*)  or  shines  with  the  rays  of  the  sun  (10,139* 
cp.  i8i3;  i,  157^  7,  358-  I0).  With  Mitra,  Aryaman,  Bhaga,  Savitr  is  besought 
to  vivify  the  worshipper  when  the  sun  has  risen  (7,  664). 

According  to  Yaska  (Nir.  12,  12),  the  time  of  Savitr's  appearance  is 
when  darkness  has  been  removed.  Sayana  (on  RV.  5,  81*)  remarks  that  be 
fore  his  rising  the  sun  is  called  Savitr,  but  from  his  rising  to  his  setting,  Surya. 
But  Savitr  is  also  sometimes  spoken  of  as  sending  to  sleep  (4,536;7,45I),  and 
must  therefore  be  connected  with  evening  as  well  as  morning.  He  is,  indeed, 

Indo-arische  Philologie.   III.  1  A.  3 


34     III.  RELIGION,  WELTL.  WISSENSCH.  u.  KUNST.     i  A.  VEDIC  MYTHOLOGY. 

extolled  as  the  setting  sun  in  one  hymn  (2,  38);  and  there  are  indications 
that  most  of  the  hymns  addressed  to  him  are  meant  for  either  a  morning  or 
an  evening  sacrifice7.  He  brings  all  two-footed  and  four-footed  beings  to 
rest  and  awakens  them  (6,  ;i2  cp.  4,  533;  7,  45 1).  He  unyokes  his  steeds, 
brings  the  wanderer  to  rest;  at  his  command  night  comes;  the  weaver  rolls 
up  her  web  and  the  skilful  man  lays  down  his  unfinished  work  (2,  38^  4). 
Later  the  west  was  wont  to  be  assigned  to  him  (SB.  3,  2,  3l8),  as  the  east  to 
Agni  and  the  south  to  Soma. 

The  name  Savitr  has  all  the  appearance  of  being  a  word  of  purely 
Indian  formation.  This  is  borne  out  by  the  fact  that  the  root  sfi,  from  which 
it  is  derived,  is  continually  used  along  with  it  in  a  manner  which  is  unique 
in  the  RV.  Some  other  verb  would  nearly  always  be  used  to  express  the 
same  action  in  connexion  with  any  other  god.  In  the  case  of  Savitr  not 
only  is  the  root  itself  used,  but  also  several  derivatives  (such  as  prasavitr 
and  prasavd)  constituting  a  perpetual  play  on  the  name8.  These  frequent 
combinations  show  clearly  that  the  root  has  the  sense  of  stimulating,  arousing, 
vivifying.  A  few  examples  may  here  be  given  in  illustration  of  this  peculiar 
usage.  'God  Savitr  has  aroused  (prasavlt)  each  moving  thing'  (i,  I571). 
'Thou  alone  art  the  lord  of  stimulation'  (prasavasya:  5,  8i5).  'Savitr  bestowed 
(dsuvai)  that  immortality  on  you'  (i,uo3).  'God  Savitr  has  arisen  to  arouse 
(savaya)  us'  (2,  381).  'Thrice  a  day  Savitr  sends  down  (sosaviti)  boons  from 
the  sky'  (3,  $66).  'Do  thou,  o  Savitr,  constitute  (suvatdf]  us  sinless'  (4,  54^). 
'May  we  being  sinless  towards  Aditi  through  the  influence  (save)  of  Savitr 
possess  all  boons'  (5,  826).  'Send  away  (para  sava)  evil  dream,  send  away 
all  calamities,  bestow  (asuvd)  what  is  good  (ib.  4*  5).  'May  Savitr  remove 
(apa  savisat)  sickness'  (10,  ioo8).  With  this  verb  Savitr  is  specially  often 
besought  to  bestow  wealth  (2,  566  &c.).  This  use  of  su  is  almost  peculiar  to 
Savitr;  but  it  is  two  or  three  times  applied  to  Surya  (7,  6$2-  4;  10,  37*).  It 
also  occurs  with  lisas  (7;77I))  with  Varuna  (2,289),  with  the  Adityas  (8,  i8T), 
and  with  Mitra,  Aryaman  coupled  with  Savitr  (7,  664).  This  employment 
being  so  frequent,  Yaska  (Nir.  10,  31)  defines  Savitr  as  sarvasya  prasavita, 
'the  stimulator  of  everything'. 

The  fact  that  in  nearly  half  its  occurrences  the  name  is  accompanied  by 
deva,  god,  seems  to  show  that  is  has  not  yet  lost  the  nature  of  an  epithet, 
meaning  'the  stimulator  god'.  At  any  rate,  the  word  appears  to  be  an  epithet 
of  Tvastr  in  two  passages  (3,  5519;  10,  io5),  where  the  juxtaposition  of  the 
words  devas  tiastd  savitd  vih'arupa  and  the  collocation  with  deva  indicate 
that  Savitr  is  here  identical  with  Tvastr. 

We  may  therefore  conclude  that  Savitr  was  originally  an  epithet  of  Indian 
origin  applied  to  the  sun  as  the  great  stimulator  of  life  and  motion  in 
the  world,  representing  the  most  important  movement  which  dominates  all 
others  in  the  universe,  but  that  as  differentiated  from  Surya  he  is  a  more 
abstract  deity.  He  is  in  the  eyes  of  the  Vedic  poets  the  divine  power  of 
the  sun  personified,  while  Surya  is  the  more  concrete  deity,  in  the  conception 
of  whom  the  outward  form  of  the  sun-body  is  never  absent  owing  to  the 
identity  of  his  name  with  that  of  the  orb  (cp.  i,359.  I241). 

OLDENBERG9,  reversing  the  order  of  development  generally  recognized, 
thinks  that  Savitr  represents  an  abstraction  of  the  idea  of  stimulation  and 
that  the  notion  of  the  sun,  or  of  the  sun  in  a  particular  direction,  is  only 
secondary  in  his  character10. 

1  HRI.  44.  -  a  cp.  v.  BRADKE,  ZDMG.  40.  355;  HRL  48.  --  3  Cp.  ROTH, 
Nirukta  Erl.  143;  OST.  4,  96.  in.  —  4  WEBER,  Omina  und  Portenta  386.  392.  — 
5  WHITNEY  in  COLEBROOKE'S  essays,  rev.  ed.  2,  in.  —  6  BRV.  3,  39.  —  7  HRI. 


CELESTIAL  GODS.     16.  PUSAN.  35 


46.  —  8  ROTH,  op.  cit.  76.  —  9  ORV.  64—5.  —  10  MACDONELL,  JRAS.  27,  951—2; 

V.    SCHROEDER,   WZKM.    9,    125. 

WHITNEY,  JAOS.  3,  324;   OST.  5,  162—70;  ROTH,  PW.;  ZDMG.  24,  306—8; 
GRV.  I,  49;  GW.  s.v.;  KRV.  56;  BRV.  3,  38—64;  HVBP.  33. 

§  1 6.  Pus  an.  —  The  name  of  Pusan  is  mentioned  about  120  times  in 
the  RV.  and  he  is  celebrated  in  eight  hymns  (five  of  them  occurring  in  the 
sixth,  two  in  the  first,  and  one  in  the  tenth  book).  He  is  also  lauded  as  a  dual 
divinity  in  one  hymn  (6,  57)  with  Indra  and  in  another  with  Soma  (2,  40). 
Thus  statistically  he  occupies  a  somewhat  higher  position  than  Visnu  (g  17). 
In  the  later  Vedic  and  the  post-Vedic  periods  his  name  is  mentioned  with 
increasing  rareness.  His  individuality  is  indistinct  and  his  anthropomorphic 
traits  are  scanty.  His  foot  is  referred  to  when  he  is  asked  to  trample  on 
the  brand  of  the  wicked.  His  right  hand  is  also  mentioned  (6,  5410).  He 
has  (like  Rudra)  braided  hair  (6,  552)  and  a  beard  (10,  267).  He  wields  a 
golden  spear  (i,  426)  and  carries  an  awl  (6,  535-  6-  8)  or  a  goad  (539.  $82). 
The  wheel,  the  felly,  and  the  seat  of  his  car  (6,  543)  are  spoken  of  and  he 
is  called  the  best  charioteer  (6,  562-  3).  His  car  is  drawn  by  goats1  (ajasvd) 
instead  of  horses  (i,  384;  6,  553'  4).  He  eats,  for  his  food  is  gruel  (6,  56 r 
cp.  3,  527).  It  is  probably  for  this  reason  that  he  is  said  to  be  toothless  in 
the  SB.  (i,  7,  47). 

Pusan  sees  all  creatures  clearly  and  at  once  (3,  6  2 9),  these  identical 
words  being  applied  to  Agni  also  (10,  i874).  He  is  'the  lord  of  all  things 
moving  and  stationary'  almost  the  same  words  with  which  Surya  is  described 
(i,  1 15';  7,  6o2).  He  is  the  wooer  of  his  mother  (6,  55s)  or  the  lover  of  his 
sister  (ib.  4-  s),  similar  expressions  being  used  of  Surya  (i,  ii52)  and  of  Agni 
(10,  33).  The  gods  are  said  to  have  given  him,  subdued  by  love,  to  the  sun- 
maiden  Surya  in  marriage  (6,  584).  Probably  as  the  husband  of  Surya,  Pusan 
is  connected  with  the  marriage  ceremonial  in  the  wedding  hymn  (10,  85), 
being  besought  to  take  the  bride's  hand  and  lead  her  away  and  to  bless  her 
in  her  conjugal  relation2  (v.  37).  In  another  passage  (9,  6710)  he  is  besought 
to  give  his  worshippers  their  share  of  maidens.  With  his  golden  ships  which 
move  in  the  aerial  ocean,  subdued  by  love  he  acts  as  the  messenger3  of  Surya 
(6,  583).  He  moves  onward  beholding  the  universe  (2,  4o5;  6,  582)  and 
makes  his  abode  in  heaven  (2,  4o4).  He  is  a  guardian,  who  goes  at  the  in 
stigation  of  Savitr,  knowing  and  beholding  all  creatures.  In  a  hymn  devoted 
to  his  praise,  Pusan  is  said  as  best  of  charioteers  to  have  driven  downwards 
the  golden  wheel  of  the  sun  (6,  563),  but  the  connexion  is  obscure  (cp.  Nir. 
2,  6).  A  frequent  and  exclusive  epithet  of  Pusan  is  'glowing'  (aghrni).  He 
is  once  termed  agohya,  'not  to  be  concealed',  an  attribute  almost  peculiar 
to  Savitr. 

Pusan  is  born  on  the  far  path  of  paths,  on  the  far  path  of  heaven  and 
of  earth;  he  goes  to  and  returns  from  both  the  beloved  abodes,  knowing 
them  (6, 1 76).  Owing  to  this  familiarity  he  conducts  the  dead  on  the  far  path  to 
the  Fathers,  as  Agni  and  Savitr  take  them  to  where  the  righteous  have  gone 
and  where  they  and  the  gods  abide,  and  leads  his  worshippers  thither  in 
safety,  showing  them  the  way  (10,  i73~5).  The  AV.  also  speaks  of  Pusan 
as  conducting  to  the  world  of  the  righteous,  the  beautiful  world  of  the  gods 
(AV.  1 6,  92;  1 8,  253).  So  Pusan's  goat  conducts  the  sacrificial  horse  (i,i622-3). 
Perhaps  to  Pusan's  familiarity  with  the  (steep)  paths  is  due  the  notion  that 
his  car  is  drawn  by  the  sure-footed  goat. 

As  knower  of  paths,  Pusan  is  conceived  as  a  guardian  of  roads.  He  is 
besought  to  remove  dangers,  the  wolf,  the  waylayer,  from  the  path  (1,42 X~3J. 
In  this  connexion  he  is  called  vimuco  napdt,  'son  of  deliverance'4.  The  same 

3* 


36     111.  RELIGION,  WELTL.  WISSENSCH.  u.  KUNST.     i  A.  VEDIC  MYTHOLOGY. 


epithet  is  applied  to  him  in  another  passage  (6,55T)  and  he  is  twice  (8, 415>l6) 
called  vimocana,  'deliverer'.  As  vimuco  napdt  he  is  invoked  to  deliver  from 
sin'  (AV.  6,  ii23).  Pusan  is  prayed  to  disperse  foes  and  make  the  paths 
lead  to  booty  (6,534),  to  remove  foes,  to  make  the  paths  good,  and  to  lead 
to  good  pasture  (i,  427-  8).  He  is  invoked  to  protect  from  harm  on  his  path 
(6,  549)  and  to  grant  an  auspicious  path  (10,  597J.  He  is  the  guardian  of 
every  path  (6,  49*)  and  lord  of  the  road  (6,  531).  He  is  a  guide  (prapathya] 
on  roads  (VS.  22,  20).  So  in  the  Sutras,  whoever  is  starting  on  a  journey 
makes  an  offering  to  Pusan,  the  road-maker,  while  reciting  RV.  6,  53;  and 
whoever  loses  his  way,  turns  to  Pusan  (AGS.  3,  78-  9;  SSS.  3,  49).  Moreover, 
in  the  morning  and  evening  offerings  to  all  gods  and  beings,  Pusan  the  road- 
maker  receives  his  on  the  threshold  of  the  house  (SGS.  2,  149). 

As  knower  of  ways  he  can  make  hidden  goods  manifest  and  easy 
to  nnd  (6,  48*5).  He  is  in  one  passage  (i,  23^-  J5  Cp.  TS.  3,  3,  91)  said  to 
have  found  the  king  who  was  lost  and  hidden  in  secret  (probably  Soma),  and 
asked  to  bring  him  like  a  lost  beast.  So  in  the  Sutras,  Pusan  is  sacrificed 
to  when  anything  lost  is  sought  (AGS.  3,  79).  Similarly,  it  is  characteristic  of 
Pusan  that  he  follows  and  protects  cattle  (6,  545-  6-  I0.  58"  cp.  10,  263).  He 
preserves  them  from  injury  by  falling  into  a  pit,  brings  them  home  unhurt, 
and  drives  back  the  lost  (6,  547-  10).  His  goad  directs  cattle  straight  (6,539). 
Perhaps  connected  with  the  idea  of  guiding  straight  is  the  notion  that  he 
directs  the  furrow  (4,  577).  Pusan  also  protects  horses  (6,  545)  and  weaves 
and  smooths  the  clothing  of  sheep  (10,  266).  Hence  beasts  are  said  to  be 
sacred  to  Pusan  (i,  51'2),  and  he  is  called  the  producer  of  cattle  (MS.  4,  37; 
TB.  i,  7,  24).  In  the  Sutras  verses  to  Pusan  are  prescribed  to  be  recited 
when  cows  are  driven  to  pasture  or  stray  (SGS.  3,  9). 

Pusan  has  various  attributes  in  common  with  other  gods.  He  is  called 
asura  (5,  51").  He  is  strong  (5,  439)>  vigorous  (8,  415),  nimble  (6,  5 48), 
powerful  (i,  I381),  resistless  (6,  48*5).  He  transcends  mortals  and  is  equal 
to  the  gods  in  glory  (6,  48 19).  He  is  a  ruler  of  heroes  (i,  io64),  an  uncon 
querable  protector  and  defender  (i,  895),  and  assists  in  battle  (6,  48 19).  He 
is  a  protector  of  the  world  (10,  173  cp.  2,  40').  He  is  a  seer,  a  protecting 
friend  of  the  priest,  the  unshaken  friend  born  of  old,  of  every  suppliant  (10, 
265-  8).  He  is  wise  (i,  425)  and  liberal5  (2,  31^).  His  bounty  is  particularly 
often  mentioned.  He  possesses  all  wealth  (i,  896),  abounds  in  wealth  (8,415), 
gives  increase  of  wealth  (i,  895),  is  beneficent  (i,  I382),  bountiful  (6,  584; 
8,  4l8),  and  bestows  all  blessings  (i,  426).  He  is  the  strong  friend  of 
abundance,  the  strong  lord  and  increaser  of  nourishment  (10,  267-  8).  The 
term  dasra,  'wonder-working',  distinctive  of  the  Asvins,  is  a  few  times  (1,42*; 
6,  56^)  applied  to  him,  as  well  as  dasma,  'wondrous'  (i,  42 10.  I384)  and 
dasma-varcaS)  'of  wondrous  splendour'  (6,  584),  usually  said  of  Agni  and  Indra. 
He  is  also  twice  (i,  io64;  10,  643)  called  Narasamsa  'praised  of  men',  an 
epithet  otherwise  exclusively  limited  to  Agni.  He  is  once  spoken  of  as  'all- 
pervading'  (2,  4o6).  He  is  termed  'devotion-stimulating'  (9,  883),  is  invoked 
to  quicken  devotion  (2,  4o6),  and  his  awl  is  spoken  of  as  'prayer-instigating' 
(6,  538;  cp.  Savitr,  p.  33). 

The  epithets  exclusively  connected  with  Pusan  are  dghrni,  ajds'va,  vimo- 
cana,  vimuco  napdt,  and  once  <tw3\pustimbhara,  'bringing  prosperity',  anasta- 
pasu,  'losing  no  cattle',  anastavedas,  'losing  no  goods',  karambhdd,  'eating 
gruel'.  The  latter  attribute  seems  to  have  been  a  cause  for  despising  Pusan 
by  some  (cp.  6,  56*;  i,  i384)6.  Karambha,  mentioned  three  times  in  the  RV., 
is  Pusan' s  distinctive  food,  being  contrasted  with  Soma  as  Indra's  (6,  572). 
Indra,  however,  shares  it  (3,527),  and  in  the  only  two  passages  in  which  the 


CELESTIAL  GODS.     17.  VISNU.  37 


adjective  karambhin  'mixed  with  gruel'  occurs,  it  applies  to  the  libation  of 
Indra  (3,  52';  8,  So2).  Piisan  is  the  only  god  who  receives  the  epithet 
pasupa,  'protector  of  cattle'  (6,  582)  directly  (and  not  in  comparisons). 

The  only  deities  with  whom  Pusan  is  invoked  conjointly  in  the  dual  are 
Soma  (2,  40)  and  Indra  (6,  57),  whose  brother  he  is  once  called  (6,  558). 
Next  to  these  two,  Pusan  is  most  frequently  addressed  with  Bhaga  (i,  Qo4; 

4,  3o24;  5,  41*.  462;  10,  125";  cp.  SB.  u,  4,  3^;  KSS.  5,  13')  and  Visnu  (1,90^; 

5,  46^;  6,  2i9;  7,  441;   i o,  66s),    his    name   in   all  these  passages  of  the  RV. 
being  in  juxtaposition  with  theirs.    He  is  occasionally  addressed  with  various 
other  deities  also. 

The  evidence  adduced  does  not  show  clearly  that  Pusan  represents  a 
phenomenon  of  nature.  But  a  large  number  of  passages  quoted  at  the 
beginning  point  to  his  being  closely  connected  with  the  sun.  Yaska,  too, 
(Nir.  7,  9)  explains  Pusan  to  be  'the  sun  (Aditya),  the  preserver  of  all  beings', 
and  in  post-Vedic  literature  Pusan  occasionally  occurs  as  a  name  of  the  sun. 
The  path  of  the  sun  which  leads  from  earth  to  heaven,  the  abode  of  the 
gods  and  the  pious  dead,  might  account  for  a  solar  deity  being  both  a  con 
ductor  of  departed  souls  (like  Savitr)  and  a  guardian  of  paths  in  general. 
The  latter  aspect  of  his  character  would  explain  his  special  bucolic  features 
as  a  guide  and  protector  of  cattle,  which  form  a  part  of  his  general  nature 
as  a  promoter  of  prosperity.  Mithra,  the  solar  deity  of  the  Avesta,  has  the 
bucolic  traits  of  increasing  cattle  and  bringing  back  beasts  that  have  strayed7. 

Etymologically  the  word  means  'prospered  as  derived  from  the  root/z/f, 
'to  cause  to  thrive'.  This  side  of  his  character  is  conspicuous  both  in  his 
epithets  visvavedas,  anastavedas,  puruvasu,  pustimbhara,  and  in  the  frequent 
invocations  to  him  to  bestow  wealth  and  protection  (6,  4815  &c.).  He  is  lord 
of  great  wealth,  a  stream  of  wealth,  a  heap  of  riches  (6,  55-  3).  But  the 
prosperitiy  he  confers  is  not,  as  in  the  case  of  Indra,  Parjanya,  and  the 
Maruts,  connected  with  rain,  but  with  light,  which  is  emphasized  by  his  ex 
clusive  epithet  'glowing'.  The  welfare  which  he  bestows  results  from  the 
protection  he  extends  to  men  and  cattle  on  earth,  and  from  his  guidance  of 
men  to  the  abodes  of  bliss  in  the  next  world.  Thus  the  conception  which 
seems  to  underlie  the  character  of  Pusan,  is  the  beneficent  power  of  the  sun 
manifested  chiefly  as  a  pastoral  deity. 

i  KRV.  note  120.  —  2  is.  5,  186.  190.  —  3  GGA.  1889,  p.  8.  -  -  4  OST.  5, 
175;  GW. ;  LRV.  4,  444;  HVBP.  34,  and  BRV.  (who  explains  the  original  meaning 
differently);  'Sohn  der  Einkehr'  (  =  unyoking):  ROTH,  FW.  und  ORV.  232;  'Son 
of  the  cloud':  Sayana  and  GRIFFITH  on  RV.  I,  421.  --  5  Puramdhi  according  to 
HILLEBRANDT,  \VZKM.  3,  192—3,  means  'active,  zealous'.  —  o  I-1RI.  51.  — 
7  Sp.AP.  184. 

WHITNEY,  JAOS.  3,  325;  OST.  5,  171—80;  GVBERNATIS,  Letture  82;  BRY.  2, 
420—30;  KRV.  55;  PVS.  i,  ii ;  HVM.  i,  456;  HVBP.  34;  ORV.  230—3  (cp.  WZKM. 
9,  252);  PERRY,  Drisler  Memorial  241 — 3;  HRI.  50—3. 

§17.  Visnu.  —  Visnu,  though  a  deity  of  capital  importance  in  the  mytho 
logy  of  the  Brahmanas,  occupies  but  a  subordinate  position  in  the  RV.  His 
personality  is  at  the  same  time  more  important  there  than  would  appear  from 
the  statistical  standard  alone.  According  to  that  he  would  be  a  deity  only 
of  the  fourth  rank,  for  he  is  celebrated  in  not  more  than  five  whole  hymns 
and  in  part  of  another,  while  his  name  occurs  only  about  100  times  alto 
gether  in  the  RV.  The  only  anthropomorphic  traits  of  Visnu  are  the  fre 
quently  mentioned  strides  which  he  takes,  and  his  being  a  youth  vast  in  body, 
who  is  no  longer  a  child  (i,  I556).  The  essential  feature  of  his  character  is 
that  he  takes  (generally  expressed  by  Ti-krani)  three  strides,  which  are  referred 
to  about  a  dozen  times.  His  epithets  uritgaya,  'wide-going'  and  urukrama, 


38     III.  RELIGION,  WELTL.  WISSENSCH.  u.  KUNST.    i  A.  VEDIC  MYTHOLOGY. 

'wide-striding',  which  also  occur  about  a  dozen  times,  allude  to  the  same 
action.  With'  these  three  steps  Visnu  is  described  as  traversing  the  earth  or 
the  terrestrial  spaces.  Two  of  these  steps  or  spaces  are  visible  to  men,  but 
the  third  or  highest  step  is  beyond  the  flight  of  birds  or  mortal  ken  (i,i555; 
7,  992).  The  same  notion  seems  to  be  mystically  expressed  (i,  I553)  when 
he  is  said  to  bear  his  third  name  in  the  bright  realm  of  heaven.  The  highest 
place  of  Visnu  is  regarded  as  identical  with  the  highest  place  of  Agni,  for 
Visnu  guards  the  highest,  the  third  place  of  Agni  (10,  i3)  and  Agni  with  the 
loftiest  station  of  Visnu  guards  the  mysterious  cows  (probably  =  clouds: 
5,  33).  The  highest  step  of  Visnu  is  seen  by  the  liberal  like  an  eye  fixed  in 
heaven  (i,  2220).  It  is  his  dear  abode,  where  pious  men  rejoice  and  where 
there  is  a  well  of  honey  (i,  I545),  and  where  the  gods  rejoice  (8,  297;. 
This  highest  step x  shines  down  brightly  and  is  the  dwelling  of  Indra  and  Visnu, 
where  are  the  many-horned  swiftly  moving  cows2  (probably  =  clouds),  and 
which  the  singer  desires  to  attain  (i,  i546).  Within  these  three  footsteps  all 
beings  dwell  (x,  I542),  and  they  are  full  of  honey  (i,  i544),  probably  because 
the  third  and  most  important  is  full  of  it3.  Visnu  guards  the  highest  abode 
(pdthas)^,  which  implies  his  favourite  dwelling-place  (3,  5510)  and  is  else 
where  expressly  stated  to  be  so  (i,  15 4s).  In  another  passage  (7,  ioo5) 
Visnu  is  less  definitely  said  to  dwell  far  from  this  space.  He  is  once  spoken 
of  (i,i565)  as  having  three  abodes,  trisadhastha,  an  epithet  primarily  appro 
priate  to  Agni  ($  35). 

The  opinion  that  Visnu's  three  steps  refer  to  the  course  of  the  sun  is 
almost  unanimous.  But  what  did  they  originally  represent?  The  purely 
naturalistic  interpretation  favoured  by  most  European  scholars5  and  by  Yaska's 
predecessor  Aurnavabha  (Nir.  12,  19)  takes  the  three  steps  to  mean  the  rising, 
culminating,  and  setting  of  the  sun.  The  alternative  view,  which  prevails 
throughout  the  younger  Vedas,  the  Brahmanas,  as  well  as  post-Vedic  litera 
ture,  and  was  supported  by  Yaska's  predecessor  Sakapuni  and  is  favoured  by 
BERGAIGNE  and  the  present  writer8,  interprets  the  three  steps  as  the  course  of 
the  solar  deity  through  the  three  divisions  of  the  universe.  With  the  former 
interpretation  is  at  variance  the  fact  that  the  third  step  of  Visnu  shows  no  trace 
of  being  connected  with  sunset,  but  on  the  contrary  is  identical  with  the 
highest  step.  The  alternative  view  does  not  conflict  with  what  evidence  the 
RV.  itself  supplies,  and  is  supported  by  the  practically  unvarying  tradition 
in  India  beginning  with  the  later  Vedas. 

That  the  idea  of  motion  is  characteristic  of  Visnu  is  shown  by  other 
expressions  besides  the  three  steps.  The  epithets  'wide-going'  and  Svide- 
striding'  are  almost  entirely  limited  to  Visnu,  as  well  as  the  verb  vi-kram. 
The  latter  is  also  employed  in  allusion  to  the  sun,  spoken  of  as  the  varie 
gated  stone  placed  in  the  midst  of  heaven,  which  took  strides  (5,  47 3).  Visnu 
is  also  swift  esa  (otherwise  said  only  once  of  Brhaspati)  or  'swift-going*  evaya, 
evayavan  (otherwise  connected  only  with  the  Maruts).  Coupled  with  the  con 
stant  idea  of  swift  and  far-extending  motion  is  that  of  regularity.  In  taking 
his  three  strides  Visnu  observes  laws  (i,  22l8).  Like  other  deities  typical  of 
regular  recurrence  (Agni,  Soma,  Surya,  Usas),  Visnu  is  the  'ancient  germ  of 
order',  and  an  ordainer,  who  (like  Agni,  Surya,  Usas)  is  both  ancient  and 
recent  (i,  i$62~*).  In  the  same  words  as  the  sun-god  Savitr  (5,  8i3),  he  is 
said  (i,  I541;  6,  4913)  to  have  measured  out  the  earthly  spaces.  With  this 
may  also  be  compared  the  statement  that  Varuna  measured  out  the  spaces 
with  the  sun  (p.  n).  Visnu  is  in  one  passage  (i,  I556  cp.  i,  164*-  4b)  de 
scribed  as  setting  in  motion  like  a  revolving  wheel  his  90  steeds  (=  days) 
with  their  four  names  (=  seasons).  This  can  hardly  refer  to  anything  but 


CELESTIAL  GODS.     17.  VISNU.  39 

the  solar  year  of  360  days.  In  the  AV.  (5,  26?)  Visnu  is  besought  to  bestow 
heat  on  the  sacrifice.  In  the  Brahmanas  Visnu's  head  when  cut  off  becomes 
the  sun.  In  post-Vedic  literature  one  of  Visnu's  weapons  is  a  rolling  wheel8 
which  is  represented  like  the  sun  (cp.  RV.  5,  63*),  and  his  vehicle  is  Garuda, 
chief  of  birds,  who  is  of  brilliant  lustre  like  Agni,  and  is  also  called  garutmat 
and  suparna,  two  terms  already  applied  to  the  sun-bird  in  the  RV.  Finally 
the  post-Vedic  kaustubha  or  breast-jewel  of  Visnu  has  been  explained  as  the 
sun  by  KUHN?.  Thus  though  Visnu  is  no  longer  clearly  connected  with  a 
natural  phenomenon,  the  evidence  appears  to  justify  the  inference  that  he 
was  originally  conceived  as  the  sun,  not  in  his  general  character,  but  as  the 
personified  swiftly  moving  luminary,  which  with  vast  strides  traverses  the  whole 
universe.  This  explanation  would  be  borne  out  by  the  derivation  from  the 
root  z'/V10,  which  is  used  tolerably  often  in  the  RV.  and  primarily  means  'to 
be  active'  (PW.).  According  to  this,  Visnu  would  be  the  'active  one'  as  re 
presenting  solar  motion.  OLDENBERG,  however,  thinks  that  every  definite  trace 
of  solar  character  is  lacking  in  Visnu,  that  he  was  from  the  beginning  con 
ceived  only  as  a  traverser  of  wide  space,  and  that  no  concrete  natural  con 
ception  corresponded  to  the  three  steps.  The  number  of  the  steps  he  attri 
butes  simply  to  the  fondness  for  triads  in  mythology. 

Visnu's  highest  step,  as  has  been  indicated,  is  conceived  as  his  distinctive 
abode.  The  sun  would  naturally  be  thought  of  as  stationary  in  the  meridian 
rather  than  anywhere  else.  So  we  find  the  name  of  the  zenith  in  Yaska  to 
be  vimupada,  the  step  or  place  of  Visnu.  Probably  connected  with  the  same 
range  of  ideas  are  the  epithets  'mountain-dwelling'  (giriksit)  and  'mountain- 
abiding'  (giristha)  applied  to  Visnu  in  the  same  hymn  (i,  i542'  3);  for  in  the 
next  hymn  (i,  155')  Visnu  and  Indra  are  conjointly  called  'the  two  undeceivable 
ones,  who  have  stood  on  the  summit  (sanuni)  of  the  mountains,  as  it  were  with 
an  unerring  steed'.  This  would  allude  to  the  sun  looking  down  from  the 
height  of  the  cloud  mountains12  (cp.  5,  S;4).  It  is  probably  owing  to  such 
expressions  in  the  RV.  that  Visnu  is  later  called  'lord  of  mountains'  (TS.  3, 

4,  5')- 

The  reason  why  Visnu  took  his  three  steps  is  a  secondary  trait.  He 
thrice  traversed  the  earthly  spaces  for  man  in  distress  (6,  49 13);  he  traversed 
the  earth  to  bestow  it  on  man  for  a  dwelling  (7,  ioo4);  he  traversed  the 
earthly  spaces  for  wide-stepping  existence  (i,  i554);  with  Indra  he  took  vast 
strides  and  stretched  out  the  worlds  for  our  existence  (6,  69$-  6).  To  this 
feature  in  the  RV.  may  ultimately  be  traced  the  myth  of  Visnu's  dwarf  in 
carnation  which  appears  in, the  Epic  and  the  Puranas.  The  intermediate  stage 
is  found  in  the  Brahmanas  (SB.  i,  2,  $$;  TS.  2,  i,  31;  TB.  i,  6,  i«),  where  Visnu 
already  assumes  the  form  of  a  dwarf,  in  order  by  artifice  to  recover  the 
earth  for  the  gods  from  the  Asuras  by  taking  his  three  strides I3. 

The  most  prominent  secondary  characteristic  of  Visnu  is  his  friendship 
for  Indra,  with  whom  he  is  frequently  allied  in  the  fight  with  Vrtra.  This  is 
indicated  by  the  fact  that  one  whole  hymn  (6,  69)  is  dedicated  to  the  two 
deities  conjointly,  and  that  Indra's  name  is  coupled  with  that  of  Visnu  in  the 
dual  as  often  as  with  that  of  Soma,  though  the  name  of  the  latter  occurs 
vastly  oftener  in  the  RV.  The  closeness  of  their  alliance  is  also  indicated 
by  the  fact  that  in  hymns  extolling  Visnu  alone,  Indra  is  the  only  other  deity 
incidentally  associated  with  him  either  explicitly  (7,  995>  6;  i,  i552)  or  im 
plicitly  (7,  99*;  i,  i546.  i55T;  cp.  i,  6i?)14.  Visnu  strode  his  three  steps  by 
tha  energy  (ojasd)  of  Indra  (8,  i227),  who  in  the  preceding  verse  is  described 
as  slaying  Vrtra,  or  for  Indra  (Val.  43).  Indra  about  to  slay  Vrtra  says,  'friend 
Visnu,  stride  out  vastly'  (4,  i811).  In  company  with  Visnu,  Indra  slew  Vrtra 


40     III.  RELIGION,  WELTL.  WISSENSCH.  u.  KUNST.    i  A.  VEDIC  MYTHOLOGY. 

(6,  2o2).  Visnu  and  Indra  together  triumphed  over  the  Dasa,  destroyed  Sam- 
bara's  99  castles  and  conquered  the  hosts  of  Varcin  (7,  994>  5).  Visnu  is 
Indra's  intimate  friend  (i,  2 2 J9).  Visnu  accompanied  by  his  friend  opens  the 
cows'  stall  (i,  1564).  In  the  SB.  (5,  5,  51)  Indra  is  described  as  shooting 
the  thunderbolt  at  Vrtra,  while  Visnu  follows  him  (cp.  TS.  6,  5,  i1).  Visnu  is 
also  invoked  with  Indra  in  various  single  verses  (4,  24.  554;  8,  io2;  10,  664). 
When  associated  with  Indra  as  a  dual  divinity,  Visnu  shares  Indra's  powers 
of  drinking  Soma  (6,69)  as  well  as  his  victories  (7,  994~6),  Indra  conversely 
participating  in  Visnu's  power  of  striding  (6,  69$;  7,  996).  To  both  conjointly 
is  attributed  the  action  of  creating  the  wide  air  and  of  spreading  out  the 
spaces  (6,  695)  and  of  producing  Surya,  lisas,  and  Agni  (7,  994).  Owing 
to  this  friendship  Indra  drinks  Soma  beside  Visnu  (8,  3*.  i2l6)  and  thereby 
increases  his  strength  (8,  38;  io,  H32).  Indra  drank  the  Soma  pressed  by 
Visnu  in  three  cups  (2,  22 l  cp.  6,  17"),  which  recall  Visnu's  three  footsteps 
filled  with  honey  (i;i544).  Visnu  also  cooks  for  Indra  100  buffaloes  (6, 17") 
or  100  buffaloes  and  a  brew  of  milk  (8,  66TO  cp.  i,  6i7).  Along  with  Mitra, 
ATaruna,  and  the  Maruts,  Visnu  celebrates  Indra  with  songs  (8,  i59). 

Indra's  constant  attendants  in  the  Vrtra-fight,  the  Maruts,  are  also  drawn 
into  association  with  Visnu.  When  Visnu  favoured  the  exhilerating  Soma,  the 
Maruts  like  birds  sat  down  on  their  beloved  altar  (i,857)15.  The  Maruts  are 
invoked  at  the  offering  of  the  swift  Visnu  (2,  34"  cp.  7,  405).  They  are  the 
bountiful  ones  of  the  swift  Visnu  (8,2o3).  The  Maruts  supported  Indra,  while 
Pusan  Visnu  cooked  100  buffaloe?  for  him  (6,  I711)-  Visnu  is  the  ordainer 
associated  with  the  Maruts  (mart/fa),  whose  will  Varuna  and  the  Asvins  follow 
(i,  i564).  Throughout  one  hymn  (5,  87,  especially  verses  4- 5)  he  is  associated 
with  the  Maruts,  with  whom,  when  he  starts,  he  speeds  along16. 

Among  stray  references  to  Visnu  in  the  RV.  may  be  mentioned  one 
(7,  ioo6)  in  which  different  forms  of  Visnu  are  spoken  of:  'Do  not  conceal 
from  us  this  form,  since  thou  didst  assume  another  form  in  battle'.  He  is 
further  said  to  be  a  protector  of  embryos  (7,36$)  and  is  invoked  along  with 
other  deities  to  promote  conception  (io,  184').  In  the  third  verse  of  the 
Khila  after  io,  i8417,  Visnu  is,  according  to  one  reading,  called  upon  to 
place  in  the  womb  a  male  child  with  a  most  beautiful  form,  or,  according 
to  another,  a  male  child  with  Visnu's  most  beautiful  form  is  prayed  for18. 

Other  traits  of  Visnu  are  applicable  to  the  gods  in  general.  He  is  bene 
ficent  (i,  1565),  is  innocuous  and  bountiful  (8,  2512),  liberal  (7,  40$),  a 
guardian  (3,  5510),  who  is  undeceivable  (i,  22l8),  and  an  innoxious  and  generous 
deliverer  (i,i554).  He  alone  sustains  the  threefold  (world),  heaven  and  earth, 
and  all  beings  (i,  i544).  He  fastened  the  world  all  about  with  pegs  (7,993). 
He  is  an  ordainer  (i,  I564). 

In  the  Brahmanas  Visnu  is  conceived  as  taking  his  three  steps  in  earth, 
air,  and  heaven  (SB.  i,  9,  3?-,  TB.  3,  i,  27).  These  three  strides  are  imitated 
by  the  sacrificer,  who  takes  three  Visnu  strides  beginning  with  earth  and 
ending  with  heaven19,  for  that  is  the  goal,  the  safe  refuge,  which  is  the  sun 
(SB.  i,  9,  310-  I5).  The  three  steps  of  the  Amsaspands  taken  from  earth  to 
the  sphere  of  the  sun,  are  similarly  imitated  in  the  ritual  of  the  Avesta20. 
A  special  feature  of  the  Brahrnanas  is  the  constant  identification  of  Visnu 
with  the  sacrifice. 

Two  myths  connected  with  Visnu,  the  source  of  which  can  be  traced 
to  the  RV.,  are  further  developed  in  the  Brahmanas.  Visnu  in  alliance  with 
Indra  is  in  the  RV.  described  as  vanquishing  demons.  In  the  Brahmanas 
the  gods  and  demons  commonly  appear  as  two  hostile  hosts,  the  former  not, 
as  in  the  RV.,  uniformly  victorious,  but  often  worsted.  They  therefore  have 


CELESTIAL  GODS.     17.  VISKU.  41 


recourse  to  artifice,  in  order  to  recover  the  supremacy.  In  the  AB.  (6,  15} 
it  is  related  that  Indra  and  Visnu,  engaged  in  conflict  with  the  Asuras,  agreed 
with  the  latter  that  as  much  as  Visnu  could  stride  over  in  three  steps  should 
belong  to  the  two  deities.  Visnu  accordingly  strode  over  these  worlds,  the 
Vedas,  and  speech.  The  SB.  (i,  2,  5)  tells  how  the  Asuras  having  overcome 
the  gods  began  dividing  the  earth.  The  gods  placing  Visnu,  the  sacrifice,  at 
their  head,  came  and  asked  for  a  share  in  the  earth.  The  Asuras  agreed  to 
give  up  as  much  as  Visnu,  who  was  a  dwarf,  could  lie  on.  Then  the  gods 
by  sacrificing  with  Visnu,  who  was  equal  in  size  to  sacrifice,  gained  the  whole 
earth.  The  three  steps  are  not  mentioned  here,  but  in  another  passage  (SB. 
1  >  9?  3°)?  Visnu  is  said  to  have  acquired  for  the  gods  the  all-pervading  power 
which  they  now  possess,  by  striding  through  the  three  worlds.  It  is  further 
stated  in  TS.  2,  i,  3T,  that  Visnu,  by  assuming  the  form  of  a  dwarf  whom  he 
had  seen,  conquered  the  three  worlds  (cp.  TB.  i,  6,  i5).  The  introduction  of 
the  dwarf  as  a  disguise  of  Visnu  is  naturally  to  be  accounted  for  as  a 
stratagem  to  avert  the  suspicion  of  the  Asuras21.  This  Brahmana  story  forms 
the  transition  to  the  myth  of  Visnu's  Dwarf  Incarnation  in  post-Vedic 
literature 22. 

Another  myth  of  the  Brahmanas  has  its  origin  in  two  passages  of  the 
RV.  (i,  6 1 7;  8,  6610).  Their  purport  is  that  Visnu  having  drunk  Soma  and 
being  urged  by  Indra,  carried  off  100  buffaloes  and  a  brew  of  milk  belonging 
to  the  boar  (=  Vrtra),  while  Indra  shooting  across  the  (cloud)  mountain, 
slew  the  fierce  (emusam)  boar.  This  myth  is  in  the  TS.  (6,  2,  42-  3)  developed 
as  follows.  A  boar,  the  plunderer  of  wealth,  kept  the  goods  of  the  Asuras 
on  the  other  side  of  seven  hills.  Indra  plucking  up  a  bunch  of  kusa  grass 
and  piercing  through  these  hills,  slew  the  boar.  Visnu,  the  sacrifice,  carried 
the  boar  off  as  a  sacrifice  for  the  gods.  So  the  gods  obtained  the  goods  of 
the  Asuras.  In  the  corresponding  passage  of  the  Kiithaka  (IS.  XL  p.  161) 
the  boar  is  called  Emusa.  The  same  story  with  slight  variations  is  told  in 
the  Caraka  Brahmana  (quoted  by  Sayana  on  RV.  8,6610).  This  boar  appears 
in  a  cosmogonic  character  in  the  SB.  (14,  i,  211)  where  under  the  name  of 
Emusa  he  is  stated  to  have  raised  up  the  earth  from  the  waters.  In  the  TS. 
(?»  T5  51)  this  cosmogonic  boar,  which  raised  the  earth  from  the  primeval 
waters,  is  described  as  a  form  of  Prajapati.  This  modification  of  the  myth 
is  further  expanded  in  the  TB.  (i,i,35).  In  the  post-Vedic  mythology  of  the 
Ramayana  and  the  Puranas,  the  boar  which  raises  the  earth,  has  become  one 
of  the  Avatars  of  Visnu. 

The  germs  of  two  other  Avatars  of  Visnu  are  to  be  found  in  the  Brah 
manas,  but  not  as  yet  connected  with  Visnu.  The  fish  which  in  the  SB. 
(i,  8,  i1)  .^delivers  Mann  from  the  flood,  Jipjsears  in  the  Mahabharata  as  a 
form  of  Prajapati,  becoming  in  the  Puranas  an  incarnation  of  Visnu.  In  the 
SB.  (7,  5,  i5,  cp.  11A.  i,  233)  JPrajapati  about  to  create  offspring  becomes  a 
tortoise  moving  in  the  primeval  waters.  In  the  Puranas  this  tortoise  is  an 
Avatar  of  Visnu,  who  assumes  this  form  to  recover  various  objects  lost  in  the 
deluge 23. 

The  SB.  (14,  i,  i)  tells  a  myth  of  how  Visnu,  the  sacrifice,  by  first 
comprehending  the  issue  of  the  sacrifice,  became  the  most  eminent  among 
the  gods,  and  how  his  head,  by  his  bow  starting  asunder,  was  cut  off  and 
became  the  sun  (adityd).  To  this  story  the  TA.  (5,  i,  i  —  7)  adds  the  trait 
that  the  Asvins  as  physicians  replaced  the  head  of  the  sacrifice  and  that  the 
gods  now  able  to  offer  it  in  its  complete  form  conquered  heaven  (cp.  PB. 

7,  56)- 

In  the  AB.   (i,  i)  Visnu  as  the  locally  highest  of  the  gods  is  contrasted 


42     III.  RELIGION,  WELTL.  WISSENSCH.  u.  KUNST.      i  A.  VEDIC  MYTHOLOGY. 

with  Agni  the  lowest,  all  the  other  deities  being  placed  between  them.  The 
same  BiTihmana  (i,  30)  in  quoting  RV.  i,  1561,  where  'Visnu  accompanied 
by  his  friend  opens  the  stall',  states  that  Visnu  is  the  doorkeeper  of  the  gods. 

i  The  moon  according  to  HVBP.  33.  —  2  Stars  according  to  PW.,  HVBP.  and 
others.  —  3  Cp.  BRV.  2,  416.  —  4  Otherwise  SIEG  in  FaW.  (Leipzig  1896),  97  —  100. 
-  5  WHITNEY,  MAX  MULLER,  HAUG,  KAEGI,  DEUSSEN,  and  others.  —  6  BRV. 
2,414—5.  —  7  MACDONELL,  JRAS.  27,  170—5.  —  8  KHF.  222.  —  9  Entwicklungsstufen, 
!  !6.  _  10  Other  derivations  in  ORV.  229,  HRI.  580,  BB.  21,205.  —  "  ORV-  228—30.  — 
J2  Cp.  ORV.  230,  note  2;  MACDONELL,  JRAS.  27,  p.  174,  note 2.  —  13  JRAS.  27,  188—9.  — 
u  Ibid.  184.  —  15  BERGAIGNE,  JA.  1884,  p.  472.—  l6  MM.,  SEE.  32,  p.  127.  133—7.  — 

i?  AUFRECHT,  RV.  II2,  687.  —    *8  WiNTERNlTZ,  JRAS.  27,   150—!.  —  19  HlLLEBRANDT, 

Xeu-  und  Vollmondsopfer,  171  f.  -  -  20  DAKMESTETER,  French  Tr.  of  the  Avesta 
I,  401;  ORV.  227.  —  2r  Otherwise  A.  KUHN,  Entwicklungsstufen  der  Mythenbildung, 
12g.  —  22  JRAS.  27,  168  —  177.  —  23  Ibid.  166—8. 

WHITNEY,  JAOS.  3,325;  087.4,63-98.  121—9.  298;  WEBER,  IStr.  2,  226  f . ; 
Omina  und  Portenta  338;  BRV.  2,  414— 8;  ORV.  227 — 30;  HOPKINS,  PAOS.  1894, 
cXLViif.;  HRI.  56  f. 

§  1 8.  Vivas  vat. — Vivas  vat  is  not  celebrated  in  any  single  hymn  of  the 
RV.,  but  his  name  occurs  there  about  thirty  times,  generally  as  Vivasvat,  five 
times  also  as  Vivasvat.  He  is  the  father  of  the  Asvins  (10,  i72)  and  of  Yama 
(10,  1 4s.  17  T).  As  in  post-Vedic  literature  he  is  already  also  in  the  Vedas 
the  father  of  Manu  (§  50),  the  ancestor  of  the  human  race,  who  is  once 
(Val.  41)  called  Vivasvat  (=  Vaivasvata,  p.  12)  and  receives  the  patronymic 
Vaivasvata  in  the  AV._and  the  SB.  Men  are  also  directly  stated  to  be  the 
progeny  of  Vivasvan  Adityah  (TS.  6,  5,  62;  SB.  3,  i,  34J.  The  gods  are  also 
once  spoken  of  as  the  offspring  (janima)  of  Vivasvat  (10,  63').  Vivasvat's 
wife  is  Saranyu,  daughter  of  Tvastr  (10,  ij1-2). 

It  was  to  Vivasvat  as  well  as  Matarisvan  that  Agni  was  first  manifested 
(i,  31°).  Vivasvat's  messenger  is  once  (6,  S4)  stated  to  be  Matarisvan,  but 
is  otherwise  Agni  (i,  58  x;  4,  7^;  8,  39 3;  10,  2i5).  Agni  is  once  said  to  be 
produced  from  his  parents  (the  fire-sticks)  as  the  sage  of  Vivasvat  (5,  ii3). 

The  seat  (sadana)  of  Vivasvat  is  mentioned  five  times.  The  gods  (10,  12  7) 
and  Indra  delight  in  it  (3,  5i3)  and  there  singers  extol  the  greatness  oflndra 
(*>  53l>  3>  347)  or  of  the  waters  (10,  75 l).  Perhaps  the  same  notion  is 
referred  to  when  a  new  hymn  is  said  (i,  I391)  to  be  placed  in  Vivasvat  as 
a  centre  (iiabha). 

Indra  is  connected  with  Vivasvat  in  several  passages  oftheRV.  He  rejoices 
in  the  prayer  of  Vivasvat  (8,  639)  and  placed  his  treasure  beside  Vivasvat  (2, 
I36)-  With  the  ten1  (fingers)  of  Vivasvat  Indra  pours  out  the  pail  from  heaven 
(8,  6i8,  cp.  5,  536).  Indra  being  so  closely  associated  with  the  abode  of  Vi 
vasvat,  Soina  is  likely  to  be  there.  And  indeed  Soma  is  in  the  ninth  book 
brought  into  intimate  relation  to  Vivasvat.  Soma  dwells  with  Vivasvat  (9,  264) 
and  is  cleansed  by  the  daughters  (=  fingers)  of  Vivasvat  (9,  14 5).  The  prayers 
of  Vivasvat  urge  the  tawny  Soma  to  flow  (9,  99 2).  The  seven  sisters  (=  waters) 
urge  the  wise  Soma  on  the  course  of  Vivasvat  (9,  66 8).  The  streams  of 
Soma  flow  through  the  sieve  having  obtained  (the  blessing)  of  Vivasvat  and 
producing  the  blessing  (bhagani)  of  dawn  (9,  ioS). 

The  Asvins  who  dwell  with  Vivasvat  are  besought  to  come  to  the  offering 
(i,  46 13j.  At  the  yoking  of  the  Asvins'  car  the  daughter  of  the  sky  is  born 
and  r  the  two  bright  days  (probably  day  and  night)  of  Vivasvat  (10,  39 12; 
cp.  SB.  10,  5,  24). 

Vivasvat  is  also  mentioned  along  with  Varuna  and  the  gods  as  an  object 
of  worship  (10,  656).  In  one  passage  Vivasvat  shows  a  hostile  trait,  when 
the  worshippers  of  the  Adityas  pray  that  the  missile,  the  well- wrought  arrow 


CELESTIAL  GODS.     18.  VIVASVAT.     19.  ADITYAS.  43 


of  Vivasvat,  may  not  slay  them  before  old  age2  (8,  5620,  cp.  AV.  19,  97).    On 
the  other  hand,  Vivasvat  preserves  from  Yama  (AV.  18,  362). 

The  word  vivasvat  occurs  a  few  times  as  an  adjective  meaning  'brilliant' 
in  connexion  with  Agni  and  Usas.  Agni  is  said  to  have  produced  the  children 
of  men  and  by  brilliant  sheen  heaven  and  the  waters  (i,  962).  Agni  is  the 
wise,  boundless,  brilliant  sage  who  shines  at  the  beginning  of  dawn  (7,  9  3). 
Agni  is  besought  to  bring  the  brilliant  gift  of  dawn  (1,44*),  and  men  desire 
to  see  the  shining  face  of  brilliant  dawn  (3,  30 13).  The  etymological  meaning 
'shining  forth'  (vi  +  ]/"  vas)  is  peculiarly  appropriate  in  relation  to  Usas, 
whose  name  is  derived  from  the  same  root  and  in  connexion  with  whom  the 
words  mus  and  viusti,  'shining  forth,,  dawning'  are  nearly  always  used.  The 
derivation  is  given  in  the  SB.  where  it  is  said  that  Aditya  Vivasvat  illumines 
(vi-vaste)  night  and  day  (SB.  10,  5,  24). 

In  the  YV.  (VS.  8,  5;  MS.  i,  6  I2)  and  the  Brahmanas  Vivasvat  is  called 
Aditya  and  in  the  post-Vedic  literature  is  a  common  name  of  the  sun. 

He  goes  back  to  the  IndoTranian  period,  being  identical  with  Vivanhvant 
(the  father  of  Yima),  who  is  described  as  the  first  man  that  prepared  Haoma, 
Athwya  being  the  second,  and  Thrita  the  third  (Yasna,  9,  10).  The  first  and 
third  of  these  are  found  connected  in  the  RV.  also  (Val.  41),  where  India 
is  said  to  have  drunk  Soma  beside  Manu  Vivasvat  and  Trita. 

As  a  mythological  figure  Vivasvat  seems  to  have  faded  by  the  time  of 
the  RV.  like  TiitaS.  Considering  the  etymology,  the  connexion  with  the 
Asvins,  Agni,  and  Soma,  the  fact  that  his  seat  is  the  place  of  sacrifice4,  the 
most  probable  interpretation  of  Vivasvat  seems  to  be  that  he  originally 
represented  the  rising  sun5.  Most  scholars6  explain  him  simply  as  the  sun. 
Some  take  him  to  be  the  god  of  the  bright  sky7  or  the  heaven  of  the 
sun8.  BERGAIGNE  (1,88)  thinks  that  Agni  alone,  of  whom  the  sun  is  a  form, 
can  be  responsible  for  the  character  of  a  sacrificer  which  is  prominent  in 
Vivasvat.  OLDENBERG?  comparing  the  Avestan  Vivanhvant,  the  first  mortal 
that  prepared  Haoma,  believes  that  the  reasons  for  considering  Vivasvat  a 
god  of  light,  are  insufficient  and  that  he  represents  simply  the  first  sacrificer, 
the  ancestor  of  the  human  race. 

i  Cp.  LRV.  4,  386.  —  2  SVL.  148.  —  3  ROTH,  ZDMG.  4,  424.  —  4  PW.,  BRV. 
i,  87,  ORV.  275;  PVS.  I,  242  ('chapel  of  V.');  FOY,  KZ.  34,  228.  —5  The  later  view  of 
ROTH,  PW.  ('Morgensonne');  cp.  ZDMG.  4,  425  ('das  Licht  der  Himmelshohe').  — 
6  A.  KUHN,  Sp.AP.  248  ff.,  HVM.  i,  488,  HRI.  128.  130,  and  others.  —  7  LRV.  3,  333; 
5,  392;  EHNI,  Yama,  19.  24.  —  8  BRI.  9—10.—  9  ORV.  122,  ZDMG.  49,  173,  SEE. 
46,  392.  Cp.  also  ROTH,  ZDMG.  4,  432;  BRV.  i,  86-8;  HVM.  i,  474-88;  BLOOM- 
FIELD,  JAOS.  15,  176—7. 

§19.  Adityas. — The  group  of  gods  called  Adityas  is  celebrated  in  six 
whole  hymns  and  in  parts  of  two  others  in  the  RV.  It  is  rather  indefinite 
both  as  to  the  names  of  the  gods  it  includes  and  as  to  their  number.  Not 
more  than  six  are  anywhere  enumerated  and  that  only  once:  Mitra,  Aryaman, 
Bhaga,  Varuna,  Daksa,  Amsa  (2,  271).  In  the  last  books  of  the  RV.  the 
number  is  once  (9,  ii43)  stated  to  be  seven  and  once  (10,  728)  eight,  Aditi 
at  first  presenting  only  seven  to  the  gods  and  bringing  the  eighth,  Martanda1, 
afterwards  (ibid.  9).  The  names  of  the  Adityas  are  not  specified  in  either  of 
these  passages.  The  AV.  states  that  Aditi  had  eight  sons  (8,  9 2I),  and  the 
TB.  (i,  i,  91)  mentions  these  eight  by  name  as  Mitra,  Varuna,,  Aryaman, 
Amsa,  Bhaga,  Dhatr,  Indra,  Vivasvat  (the  first  five  occur  in  RV.  2,  27*),  and 
the  same  list  is  quoted  by  Sayana  (on  RV.  2,2,7 T)  as  found  in  another 
passage  of  the  Taittirlya  branch  of  the  Veda.  The  SB.  in  one  passage  speaks 
of  the  Adityas  as  having  become  eight  by  the  addition  of  Martanda,  while 
in  two  others  (6;  i,  28;  n,  6,  3*)  they  are  said  to  be  twelve  in  number  and 


44     HI.  .RELIGION,,  WELTL.  WISSENSCH.  u.  KUNST.     i  A.  VEDIC  MYTHOLOGY. 

are  identified  with  the  twelve  months.  In  post-Vedic  literature  they  are 
regularly  twelve  sun-gods,  evidently  connected  with  the  twelve  months,  Vismi 
being  one  of  them  and  the  greatest2.  In  addition  to  the  six  Adityas  men 
tioned  in  RV.  2,  27*,  Surya  is  a  few  times  termed  an  Aditya  (p.  30),  which 
is  a  common  name  for  the  sun  in  the  Brahmanas  and  later.  Under  the 
name  of  Aditya,  identified  with  Agni,  Surya  is  said  to  have  been  placed  by 
the  gods  in  the  sky_(io,  8811).  Savitr  is  also  once  mentioned  in  an  enumer 
ation  with  the  four  Adityas  Bhaga,  Varuna,  Mitra,  Aryaman  (8,  iS3).  If  there 
fore  the  number  of  the  Adityas  was  regarded  by  the  poets  of  the  RV.  to 
have  been  definitely  seven,  the  sun  must  have  been  the  seventh,  the  eighth 
Martanda  whom  Aditi  throws  away  and  brings  back  (10,  728-9)  probably 
being  the  setting  sun.  Injthe  AV.  (13,  29-37)  the  sun  is  called  the  son  of 
Aditi,  the  sun  and  moon  Adityas  (8,  2  I5),  and_Visnu  is  invoked  in  an  enu 
meration  containing  gods  who  in  the  RV.  are  Adityas:  Varuna,  Mitra,  Visnu, 
Bhaga,  Amsa  besides  Vivasvat  (n,  62).  The  mother  of  the  Adityas  is  here 
once  (9,  i 4)  said  to  be  not  Aditi  but  the  golden-hued  Madhukasa,  daughter 
of  the  Vasus. 

Indra  is,  however,  in  the_RV.  once  coupled  in  the  dual  as  an  Aditya 
with  Varuna  the  chief  of  the  Adityas  (7,  854),  and  in  Val.  47  he  is  directly 
invoked  as  the  fourth  Aditya.  In  MS.  2,  i  I2  Indra  is  a  son  of  Aditi,  but  in 
the  SB.  (n,  6,  35)  he  is  distinguished  from  the  12  Adityas.  When  one  god 
alone  is  mentioned  as  an  Aditya,  it  is  generally  Varuna,  their  chief;  but  in 
the  hymn  in  which  Mitra  is  celebrated  alone  (3,  59),  that  deity  is  called  an 
Aditya,  as  well  as  Surya.  When  two  are  mentioned,  they  are  Varuna  and 
Mitra,  once  Varuna  and  Indra;  when  three,  Varuna,  Mitra,  and  Aryaman  :\: 
when  five,  which  is  only  once  the  case,  the  same  three  together  with  Savitr 
and  Bhaga.  Daksa  occurs  only  in  the  enumeration  of  six  mentioned  above. 
The  Adityas  are  often  invoked  as  a  group,  the  names  of  Mitra  and  Varuna 
being  generally  mentioned  at  the  same  time.  They  also  appear  frequently 
along  with  other  groups  (§  45)  Vasus,  Rudras,  Maruts,  Angirases,  Rbhus. 
Visvedevas.  The  term  Adityas  seems  not  infrequently  to  be  used  in  a  wider 
sense,  as  an  equivalent  for  the  gods  generally4.  Their  nature  as  a  class  in. 
fact  resembles  that  of  the  gods  in  general,  not  being  specifically  characterized 
like  that  of  their  two  chiefs,  Mitra  and  Varuna.  In  the  aggregate  sense  they 
are  the  gods  of  celestial  light,  without  representing  any  particular  manifestation 
of  that  light,  such  as  sun,  moon,  and  stars,  or  dawn.  The  hypothesis  of 
OLDENBERG  that  the  Adityas  originally  represented  sun,  moon,  and  the  five 
planets,  is  based  on  their  abstract  nature  and  names  (such  as  Bhaga.  Amsa, 
Daksa)  and  the  supposition  that  their  characteristic  number  is  seven5,  which 
is  also  the  number  of  the  Iranian  Amesaspentas6.  It  is  here  to  be  noted  that 
the  two  groups  have  not  a  single  name  in  common,  even  Mithra  not  being 
an  Amesaspenta;  that  the  belief  in  the  Adityas  being  seven  in  number _is  not 
distinctly  characteristic  and  old 7;  and  that  though  the  identity  of  the  Adityas 
and  Amesaspentas  has  been  generally  accepted  since  ROTH'S  essay8,  it  is- 
rejected  by  some  distinguished  Avestan  scholars9. 

In  some  of  the  hymns  of  the  RV.  in  which  the  Adityas  are  celebrated 
(especially  in  2,  27),  only  the  three  most  frequently  mentioned  together,  Mitra, 
Varuna,  and  Aryaman,  seem  to  be  meant.  What  is  distant  is  near  to  them: 
they  support  all  that  moves  and  is  stationary,  as  gods  who  protect  the  uni 
verse  (2,273-4).  They  see  what  is  good  and  evil  in  men's  hearts  and 
distinguish  the  honest  man  from  the  deceitful  (2,  27^;  8,  i815).  They 
are  haters  of  falsehood  and  punish  sin  (2,  274;  7,  52 2.  6o5.  66 13).  They 
are  besought  to  forgive  sin  (2,  2714.  29 5),  to  avert  its  consequences  or  to 


CELESTIAL  GODS.      19.  ADITYAS.  45 

transfer  them  to  Trita  Aptya  (5,  52 2;  8,  47 8).  They  spread  fetters  for  their 
enemies  (2,  27l6),  but  protect  their  worshippers  as  birds  spread  their  wings 
over  their  young  (8,  47 2).  Their  servants  are  protected  as  with  armour,  so 
that  no  shaft  can  strike  them  (ib.  ?• 8).  They  ward  off  sickness  and  distress 
(8,  i810),  and  bestow  various  boons  such  as  light,  long  life,  offspring;  guidance 
(>,  27;  8,  i822.  56'5-20). 

The  epithets  which  describe  them  are :  bright  (s'uci),  golden  (Jiiranyayd), 
many-eyed  (bhuryaksa),  unwinking  (animisd),  sleepless  (asvapnaj),  far-observing 
(dirghadht).  They  are  kings,  mighty  (ksatriyd),  vast  (uru\  deep  (gabhira), 
inviolable  (arista),  having  fixed  ordinances  (dhrtavrata),  blameless  (anavadya), 
sinless  (avrjina\  pure  (dhdraputa),  holy  (rtdvan). 

The  name  is  clearly  a  metronymic  formation  from  that  of  their  mother 
Aditi,  with  whom  they  are  naturally  often  invoked.  This  is  also  one  of  the 
three  derivations  given  by  Yaska  (Nir.  2,  13,  cp.  TA.  i,  I41). 

The  greater  gods  belonging  to  the  group  have  already  been  dealt  with 
separately,  but  the  lesser  Adityas  having  hardly  any  individuality  may  best 
be  described  here  in  succession. 

Aryaman10  though  mentioned  about  100  times  in  the  RV.  is  so  destitute 
of  individual  characteristics,  that  in  the  Naighantuka  he  is  passed  over  in  the 
list  of  gods.  Except  in  two  passages,  he  is  always  mentioned  with  other 
deities,  in  the  great  majority  of  cases  with  Mitra  and  Varuna.  In  less  than 
a  dozen  passages  the  word  has  only  the  appellative  senses  of  'comrade'  and 
'groomsman',  which  are  occasionally  also  connected  with  the  god.  Thus  Agni 
is  once  addressed  with  the  words:  'Thou  art  Aryaman  when  (the  wooer)  of 
maidens'  (5,  32).  The  derivative  adjective  aryamya,  'relating  to  a  comrade', 
once  occurs  as  a  parallel  to  mitrya,  'relating  to  a  friend'  (5,  85 7).  Thus 
the  conception  of  Aryaman  seems  to  have  differed  but  little  from  that  of  the 
greater  Aditya  Mitra,  'the  Friend'.  The  name  goes  back  to  the  Indo-Iranian 
period,  as  it  occurs  in  the  Avesta. 

One  hymn  of  the  RV.  (7,  41)  is  devoted  chiefly  to  the  praise  of  Bhaga11, 
though  some  other  deities  are  invoked  in  it  as  well;  and  the  name  of  the 
god  occurs  over  sixty  times.  The  word  means  'dispenser,  giver'  and  appears 
to  be  used  in  this  sense  more  than  a  score  of  times  attributively,  in  several 
cases  with  the  name  of  Savitr12.  The  god  is  also  regularly  conceived  in  the 
Vedic  hymns  as  a  distributor  of  wealth,  comparisons  with  Bhaga  being  generally 
intended  to  express  glorification  of  India's  and  Agni's  bounty.  The  word 
bhaga  also  occurs  about  twenty  times  in  the  RV.  with  the  sense  of  'bounty, 
wealth,  fortune',  and  the  ambiguity  is  sometimes  played  upon.  Thus  in  one 
passage  (7,  41 2)  where  Bhaga  is  called  the  distributor  (vidharta),  it  is  stated 
that  men  say  of  the  god,  'May  I  share  in  Bhaga'  (bhagam  bhakst).  In  another 
verse  (5,  46 6)  in  which  he  is  termed  the  'dispenser'  (vibhaktd,  derived  from 
the  same  root  bhaj),  he  is  invoked  to  be  full  of  bounty  (bhagavdn)  to  his 
worshippers. 

Dawn  is  Bhaga's  sister  (i,  1235).  Bhaga's  eye  is  adorned  with  rays 
(i,  is62),  and  hymns  rise  up  to  Visnu  as  on  Bhaga's  path  (3,  54 14).  Yaska 
describes  Bhaga  as  presiding  over  the  forenoon  (Nir.  12,  13).  The  Iranian 
form  of  the  name  is  bagha,  'god',  which  occurs  as  an  epithet  of  Ahura  Mazda. 
The  word  is  even  Indo-European13,  since  it  occurs  in  Old  Church  Slavonic 
as  bogu  in  the  sense  of  'god'.  There  is  no  reason  to  suppose  that  it  designated 
any  individual  god  in  the  Indo-European  period,  for  it  cannot  have  attained 
a  more  specialized  sense  than  'bountiful  god',  if  indeed  it  meant  more  than 
merely  'bountiful  giver'. 

The  word  Amsa,  which  occurs  less  than  a  dozen  times  in  the  RV.,   is 


46     III.  RELIGION,  WELTL.  WISSENSCH.  u.  KUNST.     i  A.  VEDIC  MYTHOLOGY. 

almost  synonymous  with  bhaga,  expressing  both  the  concrete  sense  of  'share, 
portion*  and  that  of  'apportioned.  It  is  found  but  three  times  as  the  name 
of  a  god14,  only  one  of  these  passages  stating  anything  about  him  besides 
his  name.  Agni  is  here  said  to  be  Amsa,,  a  bountiful  (bhdjayii)  god  at  the 
feast'  (2,  1 4). 

Daksa15  is  mentioned  hardly  more  than  half  a  dozen  times  in  the 
RV.  as  the  name  of  a  god.  The  word  occurs  more  frequently  as  an  adjective 
meaning  'dexterous,  strong,  clever,  intelligent',  applied  to  Agni  (3,  147)  and 
Soma  (9,  6il8  &c.),  or  as  a  substantive  in  the  sense  of  'dexterity,  strength, 
cleverness,  understanding'.  The  name  of  the  personification  therefore  appears 
to  mean  the  'dexterous'  or  'clever'  god.  Excepting  the  verse  (2,  27*)  which 
enumerates  the  six  Adityas,  he  is  mentioned  only  in  the  first  and  tenth  books. 
In  one  passage  (i,  89 3)  he  is  referred  to  with  other  Adityas,  and  in  another 
(10,  64 5)  with  Mitra,  Varuna,  and  Aryaman,  Aditi  also  being  spoken  of  in 
connexion  with  his  birth.  In  a  cosmogonic  hymn  (10,  72^5)  Daksa  is  said 
to  have  sprung  from  Aditi,  when  it  is  immediately  added  that  Aditi  sprang 
from  him  and  is  his  daughter,  the  gods  being  born  afterwards.  In  another 
verse  (10,  5?)  it  is  stated  that  the  existent  and  non-existent  were  in  the  womb 
of  Aditi,  in  the  birthplace  of  Daksa.  Thus  the  last  two  passages  seem  to 
regard  Aditi  and  Daksa  as  universal  parents.  The  paradox  of  children  pro 
ducing  their  own  parents  has  been  shown  (p.  12)  to  be  not  unfamiliar  to 
the  poets  of  the  RV.  The  manner  in  which  it  came  to  be  applied  in  this 
particular  case  seems  to  be  as  follows.  The  Adityas  are  spoken  of  as  'gods 
who  have  intelligence  for  their  father'  (6,  5o2),  the  epithet  (daksapitard)  being 
also  applied  to  Mitra- Varuna,  who  in  the  same  verse  (7,  66 2)  are  called  'very 
intelligent'  (sudaksa).  The  expression  is  made  clearer  by  another  passage 
(8,  255),  where  Mitra- Varuna  are  termed  'sons  of  intelligence'  (sunu  daksasya) 
as  well  as  'children  of  great  might'  (napata  savaso  mahaJi).  The  juxtaposition 
of  the  latter  epithets  shows  that  daksa  is  here  not  a  personification  but  the 
abstract  word  used  as  in  Agni's  epithets  'father  of  skill'  (daksasya  pitr:  3,  2  7  9) 
or  'son  of  strength'  (§§  8,  35).  This  conclusion  is  confirmed  by  the  fact  that 
ordinary  human  sacrificers  are  called  daksdpitarah,  'having  skill  for  their  father" 
(8,  5210).  Such  expressions  probably  brought  about  the  personification  of 
Daksa  as  the  father  of  the  Adityas  and  his  association  with  Aditi.  In  the 
TS.  the  gods  in  general  are  called  daksapitarah,  and  in  the  SB.  (2,  4,  42) 
Daksa  is  identified  with  the  creator  Prajapati. 

i  BLOOMFIELD,  JAOS.  15,  176  note;  vSPH.  31.  —  2  OST.  4,  117 — 21.  —  3  BOL- 
LENSEN,  ZDMG.  41,  503.  —  4  Cp.  GW.,  s.  v.  Aditya.  -  -  5  Cp.  v.  SCHROEDER, 
WZKM.  9,  122.  —  &  On  the  Amesaspentas  see  DARMESTETER,  Haurvatat  et  Ameretat 
(Paris  1875),  i  f. ;  BARTHOLOMAE,  AF.  3,  26.  —  7  Cp.  MACDONELL,  JRAS.  27,  948.  — 
*  ZDMG.  6,  69  f.  —  9  Sp.AP.  199;  HARLEZ,  JA.  1878(1 1),  129  ff.  — "ROTH,  ZDMG.  6,  74; 
BOLLENSEN,  ibid.  41,  503;  HVBP.  55—6.  —  "  ROTH,  1.  c.;  WC.  11  —  12;  BAYNES, 
The  Biography  of  Bhaga.  Transactions  of  the  8th  Oriental  Congress,  II,  I,  85 — 9; 
HRI.  53—6.  -  -  12  Cp.  GW.  s.  v.  bhaga.  —  13  v.  SCHROEDER,  WZKM.  9,  127.  — 
M  ROTH,  ZDMG.  6,  75;  BRI.  19.  —  J5  OST.  5,  51—2;  BRV.  3,  93.  99;  W7C.  45. 

WHITNEY,  JAOS.  3,  323—6;  OST.  5,  54—7;  MM.,  SBE.  32, 252— 4;  ORV.  185—9. 
286— 7;  ZDMG.  49,  177—8;  50,  50— 4;  SBE.  48, 1 90;  HOPKINS,  JAOS.  17,  28;  IF.  6,  n  6. 

S  20.  Us  as. — Usas,  goddess  of  Dawn,  is  celebrated  in  about  20  hymns 
of  the  RV.  and  mentioned  more  than  300  times.  Owing  to  the  identity  of 
name,  the  personification  is  but  slight,  the  physical  phenomenon  of  dawn 
never  being  absent  from  the  poet's  mind,  when  the  goddess  is  addressed. 
Usas  is  the  most  graceful  creation  of  Vedic  poetry  and  there  is  no  more 
charming  figure  in  the  descriptive  religious  lyrics  of  any  other  literature.  The 
brightness  of  her  form  has  not  been  obscured  by  priestly  speculation  nor 
has  the  imagery  as  a  rule  been  marred  by  references  to  the  sacrifice.  Arraying 


CELESTIAL  GODS.     20.  USAS.  47 

herself  in  gay  attire,  like  a  dancer,  she  displays  her  bosom  (i,  92 4,  cp.  6,  642). 
Like  a  maiden  decked  by  her  mother  she  shows  her  form  (i,  I2311).  Clothed 
in  light  the  maiden  appears  in  the  east,  and  unveils  her  charms  (i,  I243-4). 
Effulgent  in  peerless  beauty  she  withholds  her  light  from  neither  small  nor 
great  (ib.  6).  Rising  resplendent  as  from  a  bath,  showing  her  charms  she 
comes  with  light,  driving  away  the  darkness  (5,  80  s-6).  She  is  young,  being 
born  again  and  again,  though  ancient;  shining  with  an  uniform  hue,  she 
wastes  away  the  life  of  mortals  (i,  92  I0).  As  she  has  shone  in  former  days, 
so  she  shines  now  and  will  shine  in  future,  never  aging,  immortal  (i,  ii313-15). 
The  maiden  coming  again  awakes  before  all  the  world  (i,  i232).  Ever 
shortening  the  ages  of  men,  she  shines  forth,  the  last  of  the  dawns  that  have 
always  gone,  the  first  of  those  to  come1  (i,  I242).  Like  a  wheel  she  revolves 
ever  anew  (3,  6i3).  She  awakens  creatures  that  have  feet  and  makes  the 
birds  to  fly  up:  she  is  the  breath  and  life  of  everything  (i,  48  s  I0-  49 3).  She 
awakens  every  living  being  to  motion  (i,  929;  7,  y;1).  The  Dawns  waken 
the  sleeping  and  urge  the  living,  the  two-footed  and  the  four-footed,  to 
motion  (4,  5 1 5).  When  lisas  shines  forth,  the  birds  fly  up  from  their  nests, 
and  men  seek  nourishment  (i,  I2412).  She  reveals  the  paths  of  men,  waken 
ing  the  five  tribes  (7,  79')-  She  manifests  all  beings  and  bestows  new  life 
(7,  So1-2).  She  drives  away  evil  dreams  to  Trita  Aptya  (8,  47  '«•  10).  She 
removes  the  black  robe  of  night  (i,  ii314).  She  dispels  the  darkness  (6,  643. 
65 2).  She  wards  off  evil  spirits  and  the  hated  darkness  (7,  75 T).  She  dis 
closes  the  treasures  concealed  by  darkness  and  distributes  them  bountifully 
(i,  i234'6).  She  illumines  the  ends  of  the  sky  when  she  awakes  (i,  92"). 
She  opens  the  gates  of  heaven  (i,  48 15.  H34).  She  opens  the  doors  of 
darkness  as  the  cows  their  stall  (i,  924).  Her  radiant  beams  appear  like 
herds  of  cattle  (4,  522~4).  She  is  visible  afar,  spreading  out  cattle  (j>asuri) 
as  it  were  (i,  92 12).  The  ruddy  beams  fly  up,  the  ruddy  cows  yoke  them 
selves,  the  ruddy  dawns  weave  their  web  (of  light)  as  of  old  (ib.  2).  Thus 
Usas  comes  to  be  called  'mother  of  kine'2  (4,  52 2<  3;  7,  772). 

Day  by  day  appearing  at  the  appointed  place,  she  never  infringes  the 
ordinance  of  order  and  of  the  gods  (i,  92  I2.  I239.  i242;  7,  765);  she  goes 
straight  along  the  path  of  order,  knowing  the  way  she  never  loses  her  direc 
tion  (5,  80 4).  She  renders  good  service  to  the  gods  by  causing  all  wor 
shippers  to  awake  and  the  sacrificial  fires  to  be  kindled  (i,  ii39).  She  is 
besought  to  arouse  only  the  devout  and  liberal  worshipper,  leaving  the  un 
godly  niggard  to  sleep  on  (i,  I2410;  4,  51 3).  Worshippers  are  however 
sometimes  spoken  of  as  wakening  her  instead  of  being  awakened  by  her 
(4,  52 4  &c.),  and  the  Vasisthas  claim  to  have  first  wakened  her  with  their 
hymns  (7,  So1).  She  is  once  asked  not  to  delay,  that  the  sun  may  not 
scorch  her  as  a  thief  or  an  enemy  (5,  799).  She  is  besought  to  bring  the 
gods  to  drink  Soma  (i,  48 T2).  Hence  probably,  the  gods  are  often  described 
as  'waking  with  Usas'  (i,  i49  &c.). 

Usas  is  borne  on  a  car  which  is  shining  (7,78*),  brilliant  (1,237), 
bright  (3,  6 1 2),  well-adorned  (i,  49 2),  all-adorning  (7,  75°),  massive  (i,  48 10  &c.), 
and  spontaneously-yoked  (7,  784).  She  is  also  said  to  arrive  on  a  hundred 
chariots  (i,  48 7).  She  is  drawn  by  steeds  which  are  ruddy  (7,  75 6  &c.)> 
easily  guided  (3,  6i2),  regularly-yoked  (4,  5i5),  or  is  said  to  be  resplendent 
with  steeds  (5,  79 1~I°).  She  is  also  described  as  being  drawn  by  ruddy 
kine  or  bulls  (go:  i,  92 2.  124";  5,  So3).  Both  the  horses  and  the  cows 
probably  represent  the  ruddy  rays  of  morning  light  3;  but  the  cows  are  generally 
explained  as  the  red  morning  clouds.  The  distance  the  dawns  traverse  in 
a  day  is  30  yojanas  (i,  I238). 


48     III.  RELIGION,  WELTL.  WISSENSCH.  u.  KUNST.     i  A.  VEDIC  MYTHOLOGY. 

As  is  to  be  expected,  Usas  is  closely  associated  with  the  sun.  She  has 
opened  paths  for  Surya  to  travel  (i,  H3l6).  She  brings  the  eye  of  the  gods 
and  leads  on  the  beautiful  white  horse  (7,  773).  She  shines  with  the  light 
of  the  sun  (i,  ii$9),  with  the  light  of  her  lover  (i;  92").  Savitr  shines  after 
the  path  of  Usas  (5,  8i2).  Surya  follows  her  as  a  young  man  a  maiden 
(i,  i  is2).  She  meets  the  god  who  desires  her  (i,  i2310).  She  is  the  wife 
of  Surya  (7,  755);  the  Dawns  are  the  wives  of  the  Sun  (4,  5  X3).  Thus  as 
followed  in  space  by  the  sun,  she  is  conceived  as  his  wife  or  mistress.  But 
as  preceding  the  sun  in  time  she  is  occasionally  thought  of  as  his  mother 
(cp.  p.  35).  She  has  generated  Surya,  sacrifice,  Agni  (7,  7  8  3).  She  has  been 
produced  (prasutd)  for  the  production  (savdya)  of  Savitr,  and  arrives  with  a 
bright  child  (i,  H3I>2).  Usas  is  the  sister  of  the  Aditya  Bhaga  (i,  i235; 
cp.  p.  45)  and  the  kinswoman  (jdmi)  of  Varuna  (i,  I235).  She  is  also  the 
sister  (i,  ii32-3;  10,  127 3)  or  the  elder  sister  (i,  I248)  of  Night;  and  the 
names  of  Dawn  and  Night  are  often  conjoined  as  a  dual  compound  (usdsd- 
naktd  or  naktosasa}.  Usas  is  born  in  the  sky  (7,  75*);  and  the  place  of 
her  birth  suggests  the  relationship  most  frequently  mentioned  in  the  RV. :  she 
is  constantly  called  the  daughter  of  heaven  (i,  30 22  &c.)4.  She  is  once  also 
spoken  of  as  the  beloved  (priya)  of  heaven  (i,  46  T). 

The  sacrificial  fire  being  regularly  kindled  at  dawn,  Agni  is  naturally 
often  associated  with  Usas  in  this  connexion,  sometimes  not  without  a  side- 
glance  at  the  sun,  the  manifestation  of  Agni  which  appears  simultaneously  with 
the  kindling  of  the  sacrificial  fire  (i,  124'-  IX  &c.)5.  Agni  appears  with  or 
before  the  Dawn.  Usas  causes  Agni  to  be  kindled  (1,1139).  He  is  thus 
like  the  sun  sometimes  called  her  lover  (i,  69 x;  7,  lo1,  cp.  10,  3 3).  He  goes 
to  meet  the  shining  Usas  as  she  comes,  asking  her  for  fair  riches  (3,  6i6). 
Usas  is  naturally  also  often  connected  with  the  twin  gods  of  the  early  morning, 
the  Asvins  (i,  44 2  &c.).  They  accompany  her  (i,  i832)  and  she  is  their 
friend  (4,  522-3j.  She  is  invoked  to  arouse  them  (8,  9  17j,  and  her  hymn  is 
said  to  have  awakened  them  (3,  581).  When  the  Asvins'  car  is  yoked,  the 
•daughter  of  the  sky  is  born  (10,  39 12).  Usas  is  once  associated  with  the 
moon,  which  being  born  ever  anew  goes  before  the  dawns  as  harbinger  of 
day  (10,  85'9). 

Various  gods  are  described  as  having  produced  or  discovered  the  dawns. 
Indra  who  is  characteristically  a  winner  of  light,  is  said  to  have  generated 
or  lighted  up  Usas  (2,  12 7  &c.).  But  he  is  sometimes  also  hostile  to  her, 
being  described  as  shattering  her  wain  (§  22).  Soma  made  the  dawns  bright 
at  their  birth  (6,  39 3)  and  constituted  them  the  wives  of  a  good  husband 
(6,  44 23),  as  Agni  does  (7,  65).  Brhaspati  discovered  the  Dawn,  the  sky 
(svar),  and  Agni,  repelling  the  darkness  with  light  (10,  68 9).  The  ancient 
Fathers,  companions  of  the  gods,  by  efficacious  hymns  discovered  the  hidden 
light  and  generated  Usas  (7,  764). 

The  goddess  is  often  implored  to  dawn  on  the  worshipper  or  bring  to 
him  wealth  and  children,  to  bestow  protection  and  long  life  (i,  30".  48 x  &c.), 
to  confer  renown  and  glory  on  all  the  liberal  benefactors  of  the  poet  (5, 79°, 
cp.  i,  48 4).  Her  adorers  ask  from  her  riches  and  desire  to  be  to  her  as 
sons  to  a  mother  (7,  Si4).  The  soul  of  the  dead  man  goes  to  the  sun  and 
to  Usas  (10,  58s),  and  by  the  ruddy  ones  in  whose  lap  the  Fathers  are  said 
to  be  seated,  the  Dawns  are  doubtless  meant  (10,  15?). 

Besides  the  sixteen  enumerated  in  the  Naighantuka  (i,  8)  Usas  has 
many  other  epithets.  She  is  resplendent,  shining,  bright,  white,  ruddy,  golden- 
hued,  of  brilliant  bounty,  born  in  law,  most  Indra-like,  divine,  immortal6. 
She  is  characteristically  bountiful  (inaghonr.  ZDMG.  50,  440). 


CELESTIAL  GODS.    21.  AS'VINS.  49 

The  name  of  Usas  is  derived  from  the  root  vas  to  shine  and  is  radically 
cognate  to  Aurora  and  'Hu>?  (p.  8)7. 

*  GVS.  i,  265—6.  —  2  Cp.  KUHN,  Entwicklungsstufen,  131.  —  3  See  the  passages 
quoted  above,  where  the  rays  of  dawn  are  compared  with  cattle  or  cows.  —  4  OST. 
5,  190;  cp.  above  p.  21.  —  5  Ibid.  191.  —  6  Ibid.  193 — 4.  —  7  SONNE,  KZ.  10,416. 

WHITNEY,  JAOS.  3,  321—2;  OST.  5, 181—98;  MM.,  LSL.  2,  583—4;  GKR.  35—6; 
KRV.  52—4;  BRV.  i,  241—50;  BRANDES,  Usas  (Copenhagen  1879,  pp.  123). 

§  21.  Asvins. — Next  to  Indra,  Agni,  and  Soma,  the  twin  deities  named 
the  Asvins  are  the  most  prominent  in  the  RV.  judged  by  the  frequency 
with  which  they  are  invoked.  They  are  celebrated  in  more  than  fifty  entire 
hymns  and  in  parts  of  several  others,  while  their  name  occurs  more  than 
400  times.  Though  they  hold  a  distinct  position  among  the  deities  of  light 
and  their  appellation  is  Indian,  their  connexion  with  any  definite  phenomenon 
of  light  is  so  obscure,  that  their  original  nature  has  been  a  puzzle  to  Vedic 
interpreters  from  the  earliest  times.  This  obscurity  makes  it  probable  that 
the  origin  of  these  gods  is  to  be  sought  in  a  pre- Vedic  period.  They  are 
twins  (3,  39  3;  10,  i;2)  and  inseparable.  The  sole  purpose  of  one  hymn 
(2,  39)  is  to  compare  them  with  different  twin  objects  such  as  eyes,,  hands, 
feet,  wings,  or  with  animals  and  birds  going  in  pairs,  such  as  dogs  and  goats 
or  swans  and  eagles  (cp.  5,  78* — 3;  8,  35  7 — 9-  I0,  io62 — I0).  There  are, 
however,  a  few  passages  which  may  perhaps  point  to  their  originally  having 
been  separate.  Thus  they  are  spoken  of  as  born  separately  (ndnd:  5,  734) 
and  as  born  here  and  there  (ihehd),  one  being  called  a  victorious  prince, 
and  the  other  the  son  of  heaven  (i,  i8i4).  Yaska  also  quotes  a  passage 
stating  that  'one  is  called  the  son  of  night,  the  other  the  son  of  dawn'  (Nir. 
12,  2).  The  RV.,  moreover,  in  another  passage  (4,  36)  mentions  alone  'the 
encompassing  Nasatya',  a  frequent  epithet  otherwise  only  designating  both 
Asvins  in  the  dual. 

The  Asvins  are  young  (7,  67  I0),  the  TS.  (7,  2,  7  2)  even  describing  them 
as  the  youngest  of  the  gods.  They  are  at  the  same  time  ancient  (7,  62 5). 
They  are  bright  (7,  68  x),  lords  of  lustre  (8,  2214;  10,  93 6),  of  golden  brilliancy 
(8,  82j,  and  honey-hued  (8,  266).  They  possess  many  forms  (i,  ii79).  They 
are  beautiful  (6,  62 5.  63 x)  and  wear  lotus-garlands  (10,  i842;  AV.  3,  22*; 
SB.  4,  i,  516).  They  are  agile  (6,  63  5J,  fleet  as  thought  (8,  22l6),  or  as  an 
eagle  (5,  784).  They  are  strong  (10,  244),  very  mighty  (6,  62 5),  and  are 
several  times  called  'red' l  (rudrd,  5,  753&c.).  They  possess  profound  wis 
dom  (8,  82)  and  occult  power  (6,  63s;  10,  937).  The  two  most  distinctive 
and  frequent  epithets  of  the  Asvins  are  dasra,  'wondrous'.,  which  is  almost 
entirely  limited  to  them,  and  nasatya,  which  is  generally  explained  to  mean 
'not  untrue'  (na-asatyd),  but  other  etymologies2,  such  as  'the  savers'  have 
been  proposed.  The  latter  word  occurs  as  the  name  of  a  demon  in  the 
Avesta',  which,  however,  sheds  no  further  light  on  it.  These  two  epithets 
in  later  times  became  the  separate  proper  names  of  the  Asvins4.  The  attri 
bute  rudravartani  'having  a  red  path' 5  is  peculiar  to  them,  and  they  are  the 
only  gods  called  'golden-pathed'  (hiranyavartani),  an  epithet  otherwise  only 
used  (twice)  of  rivers.6 

Of  all  the  gods7  the  Asvins  are  most  closely  connected  with  honey 
(madhti),  with  which  they  are  mentioned  in  many  passages.  They  have  a 
skin  filled  with  honey,  and  the  birds  which  draw  them  abound  in  it  (4,  45  3«4). 
They  poured  out  100  jars  of  honey  (i,  n76).  Their  honey-goad  (x,  122 3. 
i574)  with  which  they  bestrew  the  sacrifice  and  the  worshipper8,  is  peculiar 
to  them.  Only  the  car  of  the  Asvins  is  described  as  honey-hued  (madhu- 
varnd)  or  'honey-bearing'  (madhu-vdhana).  They  only  are  said  to  be  fond 

Indo-arische  Philologie.  III.  IA.  4 


50     III.  RELIGION,  WELTL.  WISSENSCH.  u.  KUNST.     i  A.  VEDIC  MYTHOLOGY. 


of  honey  (inadhuyu,  mddhvi)  or  drinkers  of  it  (tnadhupa).  The  priest  to 
\vhom  they  are  invited  to  come  is  called  honey-handed  (10,  41 3).  They  give 
honey  to  the  bee  (i,  112  2I  cp.  10,  4o6)  and  are  compared  with  bees  (10,  io610). 
They  are,  however,  like  other  gods,  fond  of  Soma  (3,  587<9£c.)  and  are 
invited  to  drink  it  with  Usas  and  Surya  (8,  35').  HILLEBRANDT  (VM.  1,241), 
however,  finds  traces  showing  that  the  Asvins  were  at  first  excluded  from  the 
circle  of  the  Soma-worshipped  gods. 

The  car  of  the  Asvins  is  sun-like  (8,  82)  or  golden  (4,  444>  5),  and  all 
its  parts,  such  as  wheels,  axle,  fellies,  reins  are  golden  (i,  180';  8,  529.  22s). 
It  has  a  thousand  rays  (i,  119')  or  ornaments  (8,  8"-  I4).  It  is  peculiar  in 
construction,  being  threefold,  having  three  wheels,  three  fellies,  and  some 
other  parts  triple  (i,  nS1-2  &c.).  It  moves  lightly  (8,  Q8),  is  swifter  than 
thought  (i;ii72&c.)  or  than  the  twinkling  of  an  eye  (8,  62 2).  It  was 
fashioned  by  the  Rbhus  (10,  39  I2).  The  Asvins'  car  is  the  only  one  which 
is  three-wheeled.  One  of  its  wheels  is  said  to  have  been  lost  when  the 
Asvins  came  to  the  wedding  of  Surya  (10,  85 15;  cp.  §  37). 

The  Asvins'  name  implies  only  the  possession  of  horses,  there  being  no 
evidence  to  show  that  they  are  so  called  because  they  ride  on  horses10. 
Their  car  is  drawn  by  horses  (i,  ii72&c.),  more  commonly  by  birds  (pi, 
6,  63 6  &c.  or  patatrin,  10,  i435),  swans  (4,  45 4),  eagles  (i,  n84),  bird  steeds 
(6,  63 7)  or  eagle  steeds  (8,  5').  It  is  sometimes  described  as  drawn  by  a 
buffalo  (kakuha)  or  buffaloes  (5,  73  7;  i,  i843  &c.)  or  by  a  single  ass  (rdsa- 
bha:  i,  34°.  n62;  8,  747).  In  the  AB.  (4,  7 — 9)  the  Asvins  are  said  at  the 
marriage  of  Soma  and  Surya  to  have  won  a  race  in  a  car  drawn  by  asses11 
(cp.  RV.  i,  n67  and  Sayana's  comm.).  Their  car  touches  the  ends  of  heaven 
and  extends  over  the  five  countries  (7,  63 2<3).  It  moves  round  heaven 
(i,  i8o10).  It  traverses  heaven  and  earth  in  a  single  day  (3,  588),  as  the 
car  of  the  sun  (i,  us3)  and  that  of  Usas  (4,  5i5)  are  also  said  to  do.  It 
goes  round  the  sun  in  the  distance  (i,  ii2I3j.  Frequent  mention  is  also 
made  of  their  course  (vartis],  a  word  which  with  one  exception  is  applicable 
to  them  only.  The  word  parijman,  'going  round'  is  several  times  connected 
with  the  Asvins  or  their  car,  as  it  is  also  with  Vata,  Agni,  and  Surya. 

The  locality  of  the  Asvins  is  variously  described.  They  come  from  afar 
(8,  53°),  from  heaven  (8,  87),  heaven  and  earth  (i,  44 5),  from  heaven  and 
air  (8,  84.  92),  from  air  (8,  83),  earth,  heaven,  and  ocean  (8,  lo1),  from  the 
air,  from  far  and  near  (5,  73  J).  They  abide  in  the  sea  of  heaven  (8,  26 17), 
in  the  floods  of  heaven,  plants,  houses,  the  mountain  top  (7,  7o3).  They 
come  from  behind,  before,  below,  above  (7,  725).  Sometimes  their  locality 
is  inquired  about  as  if  unknown72  (5,  74 2'3;  6,  63  T;  8,  62 4).  They  are  once 
(8,  823)  said  to  have  three  places  (j>adant),  possibly  because  invoked  three 
times  a  day. 

The  time  of  their  appearance  is  often  said  to  be  the  early  dawn13,  when 
'darkness  still  stands  among  the  ruddy  cows'  (10,  6i4)  and  they  yoke  their 
car  to  descend  to  earth  and  receive  the  offerings  of  worshippers  (i,  22 2  &c.). 
Usas  awakes  them  (8,  917).  They  follow  after  Usas  in  their  car  (8,  52).  At 
the  yoking  of  their  car  Usas  is  born  (10,  39 T2).  Thus  their  relative  time 
seems  to  have  been  between  dawn  and  sunrise.  But  Savitr  is  once  said  to 
set  their  car  in  motion  before  the  dawn  (i,  34 10).  Occasionally  the  appearance 
of  the  Asvins14,  the  kindling  of  the  sacrificial  fire,  the  break  of  dawn,  and 
sunrise  seem  to  be  spoken  of  as  simultaneous  (i,  157*;  7,  724).  The  Asvins 
are  invoked  to  come  to  the  offering  not  only  at  their  natural  time,  but  also 
in  the  evening  (8,  2214)  or  at  morning,  noon,  and  sunset  (5,  763).  The 
appearance  of  the  Asvins  at  the  three  daily  sacrifices  may  have  been  the 


CELESTIAL  GODS.     2 1 .  AS'VINS.  5 1 


starting-point  of  the  continual  play  on  the  word  'three'  in  the  whole  of  a 
hymn  devoted  to  their  praise  (i,  34).  As  deities  of  the  morning,  the  Asvins 
dispel  darkness  (3,  39 3)  and  are  sometimes  said  to  chase  away  evil  spirits 
(7>  73 4;  8,  35 l6).  In  the  AB.  (2,  15),  the  Asvins  as  well  as  Usas  and  Agni 
are  stated  to  be  gods  of  dawn;  and  in  the  Vedic  ritual  they  are  connected 
with  sunrise's.  In  the  SB.  (5,  5,  41)  the  Asvins  are  described  as  red-white 
in  colour  and  therefore  a  red-white  goat  is  offered  to  them16. 

The  Asvins  are  children  of  Heaven  (i,  182  T.  184*;  10,  6i4),  one  of 
them  alone  being  once  said  to  be  a  son  of  Heaven  (i,  i844).  They  are 
once  (i,  46 2)  said  to  have  the  ocean  as  their  mother  (sindhumdtara).  Other 
wise  they  are  in  one  passage  (10,  iy2)  said  to  be  the  twin  sons  of  Vivasvat 
and  Tvastr's  daughter  Saranyu  (p.  42),  who  appear  to  represent  the  rising 
sun  and  dawn.  On  the  other  hand  the  solar  deity  Pusan  claims  them  as  his 
fathers  (10,  8514)17.  By  their  sister  (i,  iSo2)  Dawn  seems  to  be  meant 
(cp.  p.  48).  They  are,  as  male  deities  of  morning  light,  often  associated 
with  the  sun  conceived  as  a  female  called  either  Surya  or  more  commonly 
the  'daughter  of  Surya'.  They  are  Surya' s  two  husbands  (4,  43 6  cp.  i,  ii95), 
whom  she  chose  (7,  69 4).  Surya  (5,  735)  or  the  maiden  (8,  810)  ascended 
their  car.  The  daughter  of  the  sun  mounts  their  car  (i,  34 5.  n6I7.  n85; 

6,  63 5)   or   chose  it  (i,  ii713;  4,  43 2).     They   possess    Surya    as    their    own 
(7,  68 3),  and  the  fact  that  Surya  accompanies  them  on  their  car  is  character 
istic  (8,  298).     She   must  be   meant  by  the  goddess  called  Asvini   and  men 
tioned  with  others  in  5,  46 8.     In  a  late  hymn  (10,  8  5  9)  it  is  said  that  when 
Savitr  gave  Surya  to  her  husband  (fatye)  Soma  was  wooer  (vadhuyu)   while 
the  Asvins  were   groomsmen  (vara).     In   another  passage  (6,  584)   the   gods 
are  said  to  have  given  Pusan  to  Surya.     Owing  to  their  connexion  with  Surya 
the  Asvins  are  invoked  to  conduct  the  bride  home  on  their  chariot  (10,  8526). 
They  are  also  besought  along  with  several  other  deities  to  bestow  fertility  on 
the  bride  (10,  i842).     They  give  the  wife  of  the  eunuch  a  child  and  make 
the  barren  cow  yield  milk  (i,  112  3).     They  give  a  husband  to  the  old  maid 
(10,  393)  and  bestowed  a  wife  on  one  of  their  favourites    (i,  116*  &c.).     In 
the  AV.  (2,  30 2  &c.)  they  are  said  to  bring  lovers  together18. 

The  Asvins  may  originally  have  been  conceived  as  finding  and  restoring 
or  rescuing  the  vanished  light  of  the  sunT9.  In  the  RV.  they  have  come  to 
be  typically  succouring  divinities.  They  are  the  speediest  helpers  and 
deliverers  from  distress  in  general  (i,  ii22.  n83).  They  are  constantly 
praised  for  such  deeds.  In  particular,  they  rescue  from  the  ocean  in  a  ship 
or  ships.  They  are  also  invoked  to  bring  treasures  from  the  ocean  or  from 
heaven  (i,  47 6)  and  their  car  approaches  from  the  ocean  (4,  43s);  here, 
however,  the  celestial  ocean  appears  to  be  intended.  Their  rescue  from  all 
kinds  of  distress  is  a  peaceful  manifestation  of  divine  grace,  not  a  deliverance 
from  foes  in  battle,  as  is  generally  the  case  with  Indra  (with  whom,  however, 
they  are  once  associated  in  fight,  even  receiving  the  epithet  of  Vrtra-slayers) 20. 
They  are  thus  also  characteristically  divine  physicians  (8,  1 8 8  £c.),  who  heal 
diseases  with  their  remedies  (8,  2210&c.),  restoring  sight  (i,  n6l6),  curing 
the  blind,  sick,  and  maimed  (10,  393).  They  are  the  physicians  of  the  gods 
and  guardians  of  immortality,  who  ward  off  death  from  the  worshipper  (AY. 

7,  53 T;  TB.  3,  i,  2").     Apart  from  their   character   as  helpers,   healers,   and 
wonder-workers,  their  general  beneficence  is  often  praised.     They  bring  their 
worshipper   to    old    age    with   seeing    eye   and  reward   him   with  riches   and 
abundance  of  children  (i,  n625;  8,  81-3  &c.). 

Quite  a  number  of  legends  illustrating  the  succouring  power  of  the  Asvins 
are  referred  to  in  the  RV.  The  sage  Cyavana,  grown  old  and  deserted, 

4* 


52     III.  RELIGION,  WELTL.  WISSENSCH.  u.  KUNST.     i  A.  VEDIC  MYTHOLOGY. 


they  released  from  his  decrepit  body;  they  prolonged  his  life,  restored  him 
to  youth,  rendered  him  desirable  to  his  wife  and  made  him  the  husband  of 
maidens  (i,  n610£c. :  OST.  5,  143).  A  detailed  story  of  how  Cyavana  was 
restored  to  youth  by  the  Asvins  is  given  in  the  SB.  (4,  i,  5)21.  They  also 
renewed  the  youth  of  the  aged  Kali  (10,  398)  and  befriended  him  when  he 
had  taken  a  wife  (i,  ii215).  They  brought  on  a  car  to  the  youthful  Vimada 
wives  (i,  ii219)  or  a  wife  (i,  n6T)  named  Kamadyu  (10,  65 12),  who  seems 
to  have  been  the  beautiful  spouse  of  Purumitra  (i.  n;20;  10,  397).  They 
restored  Visnapu,  like  a  lost  animal,  to  the  sight  of  their  worshipper  Visvaka, 
son  of  Krsna  (i,  n623.  ii77;  10,  6512),  who  according  to  the  commentator 
was  his  father.  The  story  most  often  referred  to  is  that  of  the  rescue  of 
Bhujyu,  son  of  Tugra,  who  was  abandoned  in  the  midst  of  the  ocean  (sam- 
udre]  or  in  the  water-cloud  (udameghe)  and  who  tossed  about  in  darkness 
invoked  the  aid  of  the  youthful  heroes.  In  the  ocean  which  is  without 
support  they  took  him  home  in  a  hundred-oared  ship.  They  rescued  him 
witli  animated,  water-tight  ships,  which  traversed  the  air,  with  four  ships, 
with  an  animated  winged  boat,  with  three  flying  cars  having  a  hundred 
feet  and  six  horses,  with  their  headlong  flying  steeds,  with  their  well- 
yoked  chariot  swift  as  thought.  In  one  passage  Bhujyu  is  described  as 
clinging  to  a  log  (vrksd]  for  support  in  the  midst  of  the  waves22.  The  sage 
Rebha,  stabbed,  bound,  hidden  by  the  malignant,  overwhelmed  in  the  waters 
for  ten  nights  and  nine  days,  abandoned  as  dead,  was  by  the  Asvins  revived  and 
drawn  out  as  Soma  is  raised  with  a  ladle  2^.  They  delivered  Vandana  from 
calamity  and  restored  him  to  the  light  of  the  sun  (i,  ii25.  116".  ny5.  n86), 
raising  him  up  from  a  pit  in  which  he  lay  hidden  away  as  one  dead  (io,398) 
or  restoring  him  from  decrepitude  (i,  ii96-  7) 24.  They  succoured  the  sage 
Atri  Saptavadhri  who  along  with  his  companions  was  plunged  in  a  burning 
pit  by  the  wiles  of  a  demon.  They  brought  him  a  cooling  and  refreshing 
draught,  protected  him  from  the  flames,  and  finally  released  him  in  youthful 
strength.  They  are  also  said  to  have  delivered  him  from  darkness.  When 
Agni  is  spoken  of  as  having  rescued  Atri  from  heat  (10,  30^)^  the  meaning 
probably  is  that  Agni  spared  him  through  the  intervention  of  the  Asvins  2s.  The 
Asvins  even  rescued  from  the  jaws  of  a  wolf  a  quail  which  invoked  their  aid26. 
To  Rijrasva  who  had  been  blinded  by  his  father  for  killing  one  hundred 
and  one  sheep  and  giving  them  to  a  she-wolf  to  devour,  they  restored  his 
eyesight  at  the  prayer  of  the  she-wolf  (i,  u6l6.  ny1?-  l8);  and  cured  Paravrj 
of  blindness  and  lameness  (i,  ii28).  When  Vispala's  leg  had  been  cut  off  in 
battle  like  the  wing  of  a  bird,  the  Asvins  gave  her  an  iron  one  instead27. 
They  befriended  Ghosa  when  she  was  growing  old  in  her  father's  house  by 
giving  her  a  husband  (i,  n;7;  10,  39 >  6.  40$).  To  the  wife  of  a  eunuch 
they  gave  a  son  called  Hiranyahasta  (i,  n6T3.  n;24;  65/627;  10,  397);  who 
is,  however,  once  called  Syava  (10,  6512).  The  cow  of  Sayu,  which  had  left 
off  bearing  they  caused  to  give  milk  (i,  n622&c.).  They  gave  to  Pedu  a 
swift,  strong,  white,  incomparable,  dragon-slaying  steed  impelled  by  Indra, 
which  won  him  unbounded  spoils  (i,  116°  &.).  To  Kaksivat  of  the  family 
of  Pajra  they  granted  blessings  in  abundance,,  causing  a  hundred  jars  of  wine 
(surd)  or  of  honey  to  flow  from  a  strong  horse's  hoof,  as  from  a  sieve 
(i,n67.  ii76)28.  Another  miraculous  deed  of  theirs  is  connected  with  honey 
or  mead.  They  placed  a  horse's  head  on  Dadhyanc,  son  of  Atharvan,  who 
then  told  them  where  was  the  mead  (madhti)  of  Tvastr  (§  53) 2Q.  Besides 
the  persons  referred  to  above,  many  others  are  mentioned  as  having  been  suc 
coured  or  befriended  by  the  Asvins  in  RV.  i,  112  and  116 — 19.  These  may 
be  largely  the  names  of  actual  persons  who  were  saved  or  cured  in  a 


CELESTIAL  GODS.     21.  ASVINS.  53 

remarkable  manner.  Their  rescue  or  cure  would  easily  have  been  attributed 
to  the  Asvins,  who  having  acquired  the  character  of  divine  deliverers  and 
healers,  naturally  attracted  to  themselves  all  stories  connected  with  such  mira 
culous  powers.  The  opinion  of  BERGAIGNE  and  others  that  the  various  miracles 
attributed  to  the  Asvins  are  anthropomorphized  forms  of  solar  phenomena 
(the  healing  of  the  blind  man  thus  meaning  the  release  of  the  sun  from 
darkness),  seems  to  lack  probability -5°.  At  the  same  time  the  legend  of  Atri 
(cp.  §  56)  may  be  a  reminiscence  of  a  myth  explaining  the  restoration  of  the 
vanished  sun. 

As  to  the  physical  basis  of  the  Asvins,  the  language  of  the  Rsis  is  so 
vague  that  they  themselves  do  not  seem  to  have  understood  what  phenomenon 
these  deities  represented.  The  other  gods  of  the  morning,  the  night-dispelling 
Agni,  the  man-waking  Usas,  and  the  rising  Surya  are  much  more  vividly  ad 
dressed.  They  may  be  called  possessors  of  horses,  because  the  latter  are 
symbolical  of  rays  of  light,  especially  the  sun's.  But  what  they  actually  re 
presented  puzzled  even  the  oldest  commentators  mentioned  by  Yaska.  That 
scholar  remarks  (Nir.  12,  i)  that  some  regarded  them  as  Heaven  and  Earth 
(as  does  also  the  SB.  4,  i,  5l6),  others,  as  Day  and  Night,  others,  as  sun  and 
moon,  while  the  'legendary  writers'  took  them  to  be  'two  kings,  performers  of 
holy  acts'. 

Yaska's  own  opinion  is  obscure.  ROTH  thinks  he  means  Indra  and  the 
sun,  GoLDSTtiCKER,  that  he  means  the  transition  from  darkness  to  light,  which 
represents  an  inseparable  duality  corresponding  to  their  twin  nature,  and  agrees 
with  this  view.  This  is  also  the  opinion  of  MYRIANTHEUS  as  well  as  of  HOPKINS, 
who  considers  it  probable  that  the  inseparable  twins  represent  the  twin-lights 
or  twilight  before  dawn,  half  dark,  half  light,  so  that  one  of  them  could  be 
spoken  of  alone  as  the  son  of  Dyaus,  the  bright  sky.  Other  scholars*1  favour 
the  identification  of  the  Asvins  with  sun  and  moon.  OLDENBERG  following 
MANNHARDT^2  and  BOLLENSEN  (ZDMG.  41,  496)  believes  the  natural  basis 
of  the  Asvins  must  be  the  morning  star,  that  being  the  only  morning  light 
beside  fire,  dawn,  and  sun.  The  time,  the  luminous  nature,  and  the  course  of 
the  Asvins  round  the  heavens  suit,  but  not  their  duality. 

The  morning  star  would  indeed  naturally  be  thought  of  in  connexion 
with  the  evening  star,  but  they  are  eternally  separate,  while  the  Asvins  are 
joined.  The  latter  are,  however,  in  one  or  two  passages  of  the  RV.  spoken 
of  separately;  and  though  the  morning  in  Vedic  worship  is  so  important, 
while  sunset  plays  no  part  (5,  yy2),  the  Asvins  are  nevertheless  sometimes 
(8,  22*4;  10,  391.  404)  invoked  morning  and  evening^.  The  Asvins,  sons  of 
Dyaus,  who  drive  across  the  sky  with  their  steeds  and  possess  a  sister,  have 
a  parallel  in  the  two  famous  horsemen  of  Greek  mythology,  sons  of  Zeus 
(Aid?  xoupoi)34j  brothers  of  Helena,  and  in  the  two  Lettic  God's  sons  who 
come  riding  on  their  steeds  to  woo  the  daughter  of  the  sun,  either  for  them 
selves  or  the  moon.  In  the  Lettic  myth  the  morning  star  is  said  to  have 
come  to  look  at  the  daughter  of  the  sun 35.  As  the  two  Asvins  wed  the  one 
Surya,  so  the  two  Lettic  god-sons  wed  the  one  daughter  of  the  sun;  they 
too  are  (like  the  Aiooxoupoi)  rescuers  from  the  ocean,  delivering  the  daughter 
of  the  sun  or  the  sun  himself*6.  If  this  theory  is  correct,  the  character  of 
the  Asvins  as  rescuers  may  have  been  derived  from  the  idea  of  the  morning 
star  being  a  harbinger  of  deliverance  from  the  distress  of  darkness.  WEBER 
is  also  of  opinion  that  the  Asvins  represent  two  stars,  the  twin  constellation 
of  the  Gemini 37.  Finally  GELDNER  thinks  that  the  Asvins  do  not  represent 
any  natural  phenomenon,  but  are  simply  succouring  saints  (Notheilige)  of 
purely  Indian  origin38. 


54     III.  RELIGION,  WELTL.  WISSENSCH.  u.  KUNST.    i  A.  VEDIC  MYTHOLOGY. 


The  twilight  and  the  morning  star  theory  seem  the  most  probable.  In 
any  case,  it  appears  not  unlikely  that  the  Asvins  date  from  the  Indo-European 
period  in  character  though  not  in  name. 

i  According  to  PVS.  I,  56—8;  variously  interpreted  by  others;  cp.  BRV.  3,  38 
note.  —  2  BRUNNHOFER,  ('savers'  from  1/~nas  in  Gothic  nasyan),  Vom  Aral  bis  zur 
Ganga,  p.  99;  BRV.  2,  434;  HRI.  83.  —  3  Sp.AP.  207;  COLIXET,  BOR.  3,  193.  — 
4  KRV.  note  172.  —  5  PVS.  I,  55.  —  6  PVS.  56—7,  gives  a  list  of  the  epithets 
of  the  Asvins.  —  7  HVM.  I,  237.  —  8  According  to  OLDENBERG,  this  refers  to 
morning  dew;  cp.  BRV.  2,  433.  —  9  HAUG,  GGA.  1875,  p.  93.  —  IQ  BOLLENSEN, 
ZDMG.  41,  496;  HRI.  80.  —  ii  On  the  car  and  steeds  of  the  Asvins  cp.  HOPKINS, 
JAOS.  15,  269—71.  —  12  pvS.  2,  105.  —  *3  OST.  5,  238—9;  HRI.  82.  —  H  BRV. 
2,  432.  —  15  ORV.  208.  —  16  HRI.  83.  —  *7  Cp.  IS.  5,  183.  187;  EHNI,  ZDMG. 
33,  168—70.  — 18  WEBER,  IS.  5.218.  227.  234.  —  19  v.  SCHRSDER,  WZKM.  9,  131; 
HRI.  83.  —  20  OST.  5,  248—9.  —  21  OST.  5,  250—3;  SEE.  XXVI,  273 ff;  BENFEY, 
OO.  3,  1 60;  MYRIANTHEUS  p.  93  (=  sun  which  has  set  restored  in  the  morning); 
HVBP.  H2.  —  22  References  in  OST.  5,  244—5;  SOXNE,  KZ.  10,335—6;  BENFEY, 
OO.  3,  159;  MYRIANTHEUS  158;  HVBP.  112.  --  23  OST.  5,  246;  BENFEY,  OO.  3, 
162.  164;  MYRIANTHEUS  174;  BAUNACK,  ZDMG.  50,  264—6.  —  24  BAUNACK,  .ibid. 
263—4.  -  -  25  Ibid.  268;  SONNE,  KZ.  10,  331  (Atri  =  sun);  OST,  5,  247;  cp. 
v.  BRADKE,  ZDMG.  45,  482 — 4.  —  26  MM,  LSL.  2,525—6;  OST.  5,  248;  MYRIAN 
THEUS  78 — 81. —  27  OST.  5,  245;  MYRIANTHEUS  100—12;  PVS.  i,  171 — 3  (Vispala, 
name  of  a  racing  mare).  Vispala  is  variously  interpreted.  —  2S  MYRIANTHEUS  149  f . ; 
KRV.  note  185.  —  29  BENFEY,  OO.  2,  245;  MYRIANTHEUS  142—3;  HVBP.  113.  — 
3°  OST.  5,  248;  HVBP.  H2.  —  31  LRV.  3,  334;  HVM.  i,  535  (against  ZLMMER, 
Archiv  f.  slav.  Philol.  2,  669  ff.);  HVBP.  47—9-  —  32  Zft.  f.  Ethnologic  7,  312  f.  - 
33  BRV.  2,  500.  -  •  34  HRI.  78.  80;  JRAS.  27,  953—4.  —  35  ORV.  212  n.  3.  - 
36  v.  SCHRODER,  WZKM.  9,  133—1.  -  -  37  WEBER,  IS.  5,  234;  Rajasflya  100.  - 
38  GVS.  2,  31  cp.  i.  xxvii. 

ROTH,  ZDMG,  4,  425;  WHITNEY,  JAOS.  3,322;  MAX  MULLER,  LSL,  2,  607—9: 
BENFEY,  OO.  2,  245;  OST.  5,  234—54:  GOLDSTUCKER,  ibid.  255—7;  GRV.  i,  150; 
MYRIANTHEUS,  Die  Asvins  oder  Arischen  Dioskuren,  Miinchen  1876;  BRV.  2,  431 
—510;  KRV.  49—52,  notes  171.  179.  180;  HVBP.  47— 49.  111—13;  ORV.  209— 15; 
HRI.  80-6. 


B.    THE  ATMOSPHERIC  GODS. 

§22.  Indra. —  Indra  is  the  favourite  national  god  of  the  Vedic  Indians. 
His  importance  is  indicated  by  the  fact  that  about  ^250  hymns  celebrate  his 
greatness,   more  than  those  devoted  to  any  other  god  and  very  nearly  one- 
fourth  of  the  total  number  of  hymns   in   the  RV.     If  the  hymns  in  parts  of 
which  he  is  praised  or  in  which  he  is  associated  with  other  gods,  are  taken 
"into    account,    the    aggregate    is    brought  up  to  at  least  300.     As  the  name, 
-which  dates  from  the  Indo-Iranian  period  and  is  of  uncertain  meaning,   does 
.not  designate    any  phenomenon   of  nature,   the  figure   of  Indra  has  become 

•  very  anthropomorphic   and  much  surrounded  by  mythological  imagery,  more 

•  so  indeed  than  that  of  any  other  god  in  the  Veda.     The  significance  of  his 
-character  is,  however,  sufficiently  clear.   He  is  primarily  the  thunder-god,  the 
-  conquest  of  the  demons  of  drought  or  darkness  and  the  consequent  liberation 
'Of  the  waters  or  the  winning  of  light  forming  his  mythological  essence.     Se 
condarily  |Tndra  is   the   god   of  battle,    who  aids  the  victorious  Aryan   in  the 

•  conquest  of  the  aboriginal  inhabitants  of  India.  ] 

He  is  the  dominant  deity  of  the  middle  region.  He  pervades  the  air 
(i,  5 12).  He  occurs  among  the  gods  of  the  air  alone  in  the  Naighantuka 
(5,  4),  and  is  the  representative  of  the  air  in  the  triad  Agni,  Indra  (or  Vayu), 
Surya. 

Many  of  Indra's  physical  features  are  mentioned.  He  has  a  body,  a 
head,  arms,  and  hands  (2,  i62;  8,  853).  His  belly  is  often  spoken  of  in 

•  connexion  with   his   powers   of  drinking  Soma  (2,  i62  &c.).     It  is  compared 


ATMOSPHERIC  GODS.     22.  INDRA.  55 

when  full  of  Soma  to  a  lake  (3,  36s).  His  lips  (the  probable  meaning  of 
sipra)  are  often  referred  to,  the  frequent  attributes  susipra  or  siprin,  'fair- 
lipped',  being  almost  peculiar  to  him.  He  agitates  his  jaws  after  drinking  Soma 
(8j  65'°).  His  beard  is  violently  agitated  when  he  is  exhilerated  or  puts 
himself  in  motion  (2,  n17;  10,  231).  He  is  tawny-haired  (10,  96s-  8)  and 
tawny-bearded  (10,  23*).  His  whole  appearance  is  tawny,  the  changes  being 
rung  on  that  word  (Jiari)  in  every  verse  of  an  entire  hymn  (10,  96)  with 
reference  to  Indra.  He  is  a  few  times  described  as  golden  (i,  y2;  8,  5  5  3), 
an  attribute  distinctive  of  Savitr  (p.  32),  as  golden- armed  (7,  34*),  and  as 
iron-like  (i,  563;  10,  96*-  8).  His  arms  as  wielding  the  thunderbolt  are  men 
tioned  particularly  often.  They  are  long,  far-extended,  great  (6,  19^;  8.  3210. 
701),  strong  and  well-shaped  (SV.  2,  1219).  Indra  assumes  the  most  beautiful 
forms  and  the  ruddy  brightness  of  the  sun  (10,  ii23)  and  takes  many  different 
forms  at  will  (3,  48*.  538;  6,  47 l8). 

The  thunderbolt  (vajra) I  is  the  weapon  exclusively  appropriate  to  Indra. 
It  is  the  regular  mythological  name  of  the  lightning  stroke  (cp.  p.  59).  It  is 
generally  described  as  fashioned  for  him  by  Tvastr  (i,  32"  &c.),  but  Kavya 
Usana  is  also  said  to  have  made  it  and  given  it  to  him  (i,  i2i12;  5,  342). 
In  the  AB.  (4,  i)  it  is  the  gods  who  are  said  to  have  provided  Indra  with 
his  bolt.  It  lies  in  the  ocean  enveloped  in  water  (8,899).  Its  place  is  below 
that  of  the  sun  (10,  2721).  It  is  generally  described  as  dyasa  or  metallic 
(i,  52*  &c.),  but  sometimes  as  golden  (i,  £72  &c.),  tawny  (3,  44*;  10,  963) 
or  bright  (3,44s).  It  is  four-angled  (4,222),  hundred-angled  (4,  i710),  hundred- 
jointed  (8,66&c.);  and  thousand-pointed  (i,8o12&c.).  It  is  sharp  (7,  i8l8&c.). 
Indra  whets  it  like  a  knife  or  as  a  bull  his  horns2  (i,  130*.  55').  It  is  spoken 
of  as  a  stone  (as'man)  or  rock  (parvata-.  7,  io419).  The  bolt  in  Indra' s  hand 
is  compared  with  the  sun  in  the  sky  (8, 59 2).  Epithets  derived  from  or  com- 
•  pounded  with  vajra,  some  of  which  are  very  frequent,  are  almost  entirely 
limited  to  Indra.  Vajrabhrt,  'bearing  the  bolt',  vajrivat,  'armed  with  the  bolt', 
and  vajradaksina^  'holding  the  bolt  in  his  right  hand'  are  applied  to  him 
exclusively,  while  vajrabdhu  or  -hasta,  'holding  the  bolt  in  his  arm  or  hand', 
and  the  commonest  derivative  vajrin,  'armed  with  the  bolt',  otherwise  occur 
as  attributes  of  Rudra,  the  Maruts,  and  Manyu  only  once  each  respectively. 

Indra  is  sometimes  said  to  be  armed  with  a  bow  and  arrows  (8,  454. 
666<  ";  10,  io32>  3).  The  latter  are  golden,  hundred-pointed,  and  winged 
with  a  thousand  feathers  (8,  667-  ").  He  also  carries  a  hook  (ankusa)  with 
which  he  bestows  wealth  (8,  i710;  AV.  6,  82 3)  or  which  he  uses  as  a  weapon 
(10,  449).  A  net  with  which  he  overwhelms  all  his  foes  is  also  attributed  to 
him  (AV.  8,  85~8). 

Indra  is  borne  on  a  car  which  is  golden  (6,  292&c.)  and  is  swifter  than 
thought  (10,  ii22).  The  epithet  'car-fighter'  (rathestha)  is  exclusively  appro 
priated  to  Indra.  His  car  is  drawn  by  two  tawny  steeds  (/ian)*,  a  term  very 
frequently  used  and  in  the  great  majority  of  instances  referring  to  Indra's 
horses.  In  a  few  passages  a  greater  number  than  two,  up  to  a  hundred  and 
even  a  thousand  or  eleven  hundred  are  mentioned  (2,  18*-?;  4.  463;  6,47**; 
8,  i9-24).  These  steeds  are  sun-eyed  (i,i6T-2).  They  snort  and  neigh  (i,3ol6). 
They  have  flowing  manes  (i,  io3  &c.)  or  golden  manes  (8,3229.  8224).  Their 
hair  is  like  peacocks'  feathers  or  tails  (3,  45';  8,  i25).  They  swiftly  traverse 
vast  distances  and  Indra  is  transported  by  them  as  an  eagle  is  borne  by  its 
wings  (2,  i63;  8,  349).  They  are  yoked  by  prayer  (2,  i83  &c.),  which  doubt 
less  means  that  invocations  bring  Indra  to  the  sacrifice.  Indra  is  a  few  times 
said  to  be  drawn  by  the  horses  of  Surya  (10,  497)  or  by  those  of  Vata  (10, 
22*~6),  and  Vayu  has  Indra  for  his  % charioteer  (4,  462.  482)  or  his  car-corn- 


56     III.  RELIGION,  WELTL.  WISSENSCH.  u.  KUNST.     i  A.  VEDIC  MYTHOLOGY. 

panion  (7,  9i6).  India's  car  and  his  steeds  were  fashioned  by  the  Rbhus  (i, 
in1;  5?  3l4)-  Indra  is  once  said  to  be  provided  with  a  golden  goad  (kasd: 

8,  33")-' 

Though   the   gods  in  general  are  fond   of  Soma  (8,  2lS.  58"),    Indra  is 

preeminently  addicted  to  it  (i,io49£c.).  He  even  stole  it  in  order  to  drink 
it  (3,  484;  8,  44).  He  is  the  one  Soma-drinker  among  gods  and  men  (8,  24), 
only  Vayu,  his  companion,  coming  near  him  in  this  respect4.  It  is  his  favourite 
nutriment  (8,  4").  The  frequent  epithet  'Soma-drinker'  (soma-pa,  -pavari)  is 
characteristic  of  him,  being  otherwise  only  applied  a  few  times  to  Agni  and 
Brhaspati  when  associated  with  Indra,  and  once  besides  to  Vayu  alone. 

Soma  is  sometimes  said  to  stimulate  Indra  to  perform  great  cosmic 
actions  such  as  supporting  earth  and  sky  or  spreading  out  the  earth  (2,  i52). 
But  it  characteristically  exhilarates  him  to  carry  out  his  warlike  deeds,  the 
slaughter  of  the  dragon  or  Vrtra  (2,  I51.  ig2;  6,  47 '•  2)  or  the  conquest  of 
foes  (6,  27;  7,  222;  8,  8i6).  So  essential  is  Soma  to  Indra  that  his  mother 
gave  it  to  him  or  he  drank  it  on  the  very  day  of  his  birth  (3,  482>3>  329-10; 
6,  4o2;  7,  983).  For  the  slaughter  of  Vrtra  he  drank  three  lakes5  of  Soma 
(5,  2Q7  cp.  6,  i7")»  and  ne  is  even  said  to  have  drunk  at  a  single  draught 
thirty  lakes  of  the  beverage  (8,  66*).  One  entire  hymn  (10,  119)  consists  of 
a  monologue  in  which  Indra  describes  his  sensations  after  a  draught  of  Soma. 
But  just  as  too  much  Soma  is  said  to  produce  disease  in  men,  so  Indra  him 
self  is  described  as  suffering  from  excessive  indulgence  in  it  and  having  to  be 
cured  by  the  gods  with  the  Sautramani  ceremony6.  Indra  also  drinks  milk 
mixed  with  honey  7  (8,  48). 

He  at  the  same  time  eats  the  flesh  of  bulls  (10,  283),  of  one  (10,  272), 
of  twenty  (10,  8614),  or  of  a  hundred  buffaloes  (6,  17";  8,  6610),  or  300 
buffaloes  roasted  by  Agni  (5,  297).  At  the  sacrifice  he  also  eats  an  offering 
of  cake  (3,  527-  8),  as  well  as  of  grain  (3,  35^.  434;  i,  i62),  and  the  latter  his 
steeds  are  supposed  to  eat  as  well  (3,  357.  52?). 

Indra  is  often  spoken  of  as  having  been  born.  Two  whole  hymns  (3,  48; 
4,  1 8)  deal  with  the  subject  of  his  birth.  Once  (4,  iS1-  2)  he  is  represented 
as  wishing  to  be  born  in  an  unnatural  way  through  the  side  of  his  mother8. 
This  trait  may  possibly  be  derived  from  the  notion  of  lightning  breaking  from 
the  side  of  the  storm-cloud.  On  being  born  he  illuminates  the  sky  (3,  444). 
Scarcely  bom  he  set  the  wheel  of  the  sun  in  motion  (i,  130°).  He  was  a 
warrior  as  soon  as  born  (3,  5i8;  5,  3o5;  8,  454.  661;  10,  ii34)  and  was  irre 
sistible  from  birth  (i,  io28;  10,  I332).  Through  fear  of  him  when  he  is  born, 
the  firm  mountains,  heaven  and  earth  are  agitated  (i;  6i14).  At  his  birth 
heaven  and  earth  trembled  through  fear  of  his  wrath  (4,  1 7 2)  and  all  the 
gods  feared  him  (5,  305) 9.  His  mother  is  often  mentioned  (3,  48'-  3  £c.)10. 
She  is  once  (4,  i810)  spoken  of  as  a  cow  (grsti),  he  being  her  calf;  and  he 
is  spoken  (10,  n  i2)  of  as  a  bull,  the  offspring  of  a  cow  (gdrsteyd).  He  is 
once  (10,  101^)  called  the  son  of  NistigrI,  whom  Sayana  regards  as  synony 
mous  with  Aditi  (cp.  §  41).  According  to  the  AV.  (3,  io12-  '-)  Indra's  (and 
Agni's)  mother  is  Ekastaka,  daughter  of  Prajapati.  Indra  has  the  same  father 
as  Agni  (6,  592),  who  is  the  son  of  Dyaus  and  Prthivi  (§  35).  According  to 
one  interpretation  of  a  verse  in  a  hymn  (4,  i74)  in  which  his  father  is  twice 
mentioned,  the  latter  is  Dyaus.  A  similar  inference  may  be  drawn  from  a 
verse  in  an  Indra  hymn  (io,  120')  where  it  is  said  that  'among  the  worlds 
that  was  the  highest  from  which  this  fierce  (god)  was  born',  and  from  a  few 
other  passages  (cp.  6,  30$;  8,  364  with  io,  543,  and  io,  I386  with  i,  164"). 
His  father  is  said  to  have  made  his  thunderbolt  (2,  i76),  which  is  elsewhere 
generally  described  as  fashioned  by  Tvastr  (§  38).  Indra  drank  Soma  in 


ATMOSPHERIC  GODS.     22.  INDRA.  57 


the  house  of  his  father,  where  it  was  given  to  him  by  his  mother  (3,  48 2). 
He  drank  Soma  in  the  house  of  Tvastr  (4,  i83),  Indra  having  at  his  birth 
overcome  Tvastr  and  having  stolen  the  Soma,  drank  it  in  the -cups  (3,  48*). 
Indra  seizing  his  father  by  the  foot  crushed  him,  and  he  is  asked  in  the 
same  verse  who  made  his  mother  a  widow  (4,  i812).  From  these  passages 
it  is  clearly  to  be  inferred  that  Indra's  father  whom  he  slays  in  order  to 
obtain  the  Soma,  is  Tvastr11  (cp.  i,  So1*).  The  hostility  of  the  gods,  who  in 
one  passage  (4,  30^)  are  said  to  have  fought  against  him,  is  perhaps  con 
nected  with  the  notion  of  his  trying  to  obtain  Soma  forcibly.12. 

A  few  different  accounts  are  given  of  the  origin  of  Indra.  He  is  said 
to  have  been  generated  by  the  gods  as  a  destroyer  of  fiends  (3,  49 T),  but 
the  verb  fan  is  here  no  doubt  only  used  in  the  figurative  sense  of  'to  con 
stitute'  (cp.  2,  i35;  3,  5 18).  Soma  is  once  spoken  of  as  the  generator  of  Indra 
and  some  other  gods  (9, 965).  In  the  Purusa  hymn  Indra  and  Agni  are  said 
to  have  sprung  from  the  mouth  of  the  world-giant  (10,  9o13).  According  to 
the  SB.  (u,  i,  614)  Indra,  as  well  as  Agni,  Soma,  and  Paramesthin,  is  said  to 
have  been  created  from  Prajapati.  The  TB.  (2,  2,  io:)  states  that  Prajapati 
created  Indra  last  of  the  gods. 

Agni  is  Indra's  twin  brother  (6,592)  and  Pusan  is  also  his  brother  (6.  555). 
The  sons  of  Indra's  brother -are  once  mentioned  (io,551),  but  who  are  meant 
by  them  is  uncertain. 

Indra's  wife  is  several  times  referred  to  (i,  82$-  6;  3,  534-  6;  10,  869-  10). 
Her  name  is  Indrani  in  a  hymn  in  which  she  is  represented  as  conversing 
with  Indra  (10,  86"-  I2)  and  occurs  in  a  few  other  passages  which  contain 
enumerations  of  goddesses  (i,  2212;  2,  328;  5,  468).  The  SB.  expressly  states 
Indrani  to  be  Indra's  wife  (14,  2,  i8).  The  AB.  (3,  227),  however,  mentions 
Prasaha  and  Sena  as  Indra's  wives  *3.  These  two  are  identified  with  Indrani 
(TB.  2,  4,  27-  8;  MS.  3,  8>;  4,  12') '4-  PISCHEL  (VS.  2,  52)  thinks 'that  Saci  is 
the  Proper  name  of  Indra's  wife  in  the  RV.  as  well  as  in  post-Vedic  litera 
ture15.  The  AV.  (7,  382)  refers  to  an  Asura  female  who  drew  Indra  down 
from  among  the  gods;  and  the  Kathaka  (IS.  3,  479)  states  that  Indra  en 
amoured  of  a  Danavl  named  Vilistenga,  went  to  live  among  the  Asuras, 
assuming  the  form  of  a  female  among  females  and  of  a  male  among  males. 

Indra  is  associated  with  various  other  gods.  His  chief  friends  and  allies 
are  the  Maruts,  who  in  innumerable  passages  are  described  as  assisting  him 
in  his  warlike  exploits  (§  29).  His  connexion  with  these  deities  is  so  close  that 
the  epithet  marutvat,  'accompanied  by  the  Maruts',  though  sometimes  applied 
to  other  gods,  is  characteristic  of  Indra,  this  epithet,  as  well  as  marudgana 
'attended  by  the  Marut  host',  being  sufficient  to  designate  him  (5,426;  9,6510). 
With  Agni  Indra  is  more  frequently  coupled  as  a  dual  divinity  than  with  any 
other  god  (§  44) l6.  This  is  natural,  as  lightning  is  a  form  of  fire.  Indra  is 
also  said  to  have  produced  Agni  between  two  stones  (2,  12^)  or  to  have 
found  Agni  hidden  in  the  waters  (10,  32fc).  Indra  is  further  often  coupled 
with  Varuna  and  Vayu,  less  frequently  with  Soma,  Brhaspati,  Pusan,  and 
Visnu  (§  44).  The  latter  is  a  faithful  friend  of  Indra  and  sometimes  attends 
him  in  his  conflict  with  the  demons  (§§  17.  44) I7. 

Indra  is  in  three  or  four  passages  more  or  less  distinctly  identified  with 
Surya18.  Speaking  in  the  first  person  (4,  26')  Indra  asserts  that  he  was  once 
Manu  and  Surya.  He  is  once  directly  called  Surya  (10,  89*);  and  Surya  and 
Indra  are  both  invoked  in  another  verse  (8,  824)  as  if  they  were  the  same 
person.  In  one  passage  Indra  receives  the  epithet  Savitr  (2,  30*).  The  SB. 
(i,  6,  4l8),  too,  once  identifies  Indra  with  the  sun,  Vrtra  being  the  moon. 

The  gigantic  size  of  Indra  is  dwelt  upon  in  many  passages.  When  Indra 


58     III.  RELIGION,  WELTL.  WISSENSCH.  u.  KUNST.     i  A.  VEDIC  MYTHOLOGY. 

grasped  the  two  boundless  worlds,  they  were  but  a  handful  to  him  (3,  3o5). 
He  surpasses  in  greatness  heaven,  earth,  and  air  (3,  46^).  The  two  worlds 
are  but  equal  to  the  half  of  him  (6,  30 T;  10,  119')-  Heaven  and  earth  do 
not  suffice  for  his  girdle  (i,  I736).  If  the  earth  were  ten  times  as  large, 
Indra  would  be  equal  to  it  (i,  52").  If  Indra  had  a  hundred  heavens  and 
a  hundred  earths,  a  thousand  suns  would  not  equal  him  nor  both  worlds 

(8,  59s). 

His  greatness  and  power  are  lauded  in  the  most  unstinted  terms.  He  has 
no  parallel  among  those  born  or  to  be  born  (4,  i84).  No  one,  celestial  or 
terrestrial,  has  been  bora  or  shall  be  born,  like  to  him  (7,  322J).  No  one, 
god  or  man,  either  surpasses  or  equals  him  (6,  3o4).  Neither  former,  later, 
nor  recent  beings  have  attained  to  his  valour  (5,  426).  Neither  gods  nor  men 
nor  waters  have  attained  to  the  limit  of  his  might  (i,  loo1*).  No  one  like 
him  is  known  among  the  gods;  no  one  born,  past  or  present,  can  rival  him 
(i,  1 659).  He  surpasses  the  gods  (3,  46$).  All  the  gods  yield  to  him  in 
might  and  strength  (8, 5i7).  Even  the  former  gods  subordinated  their  powers 
to  his  divine  glory  and  kingly  dignity  (7,  2i7).  All  the  gods  are  unable  to 
frustrate  his  deeds  and  counsels  (2,  324).  Even  Varuna  and  Surya  are  sub 
ject  to  his  command  (i,  ioi3  cp.  2,  389  p.  16).  He  is  besought  to  destroy 
the  foes  of  Mitra,  Aryaman,  and  Varuna  (10,  89®-  9)  and  is  said  to  have 
acquired  by  battle  ample  space  for  the  gods  (7,  983).  Indra  alone  is  king  of 
the  whole  world  (3,  46 2).  He  is  the  lord  of  all  that  moves  and  breathes 
(i,  ioi5).  He  is  the  king  of  things  moving  and  of  men  (5,  3o5);  he  is  the 
eye  of  all  that  moves  and  sees  (10,  io212).  He  is  the  leader  of  human 
races  and  divine  (3,  342).  He  is  several  times  called  a  universal  monarch 
(4,  i92  &c.)  and  still  oftener  a  self-dependent  sovereign  (3,461&c.;  cp.p. 24). 
He  is  also  said  to  rule  alone  (ekd)  by  his  might  as  an  ancient  seer  (8,  641). 
A  few  times  he  receives  the  epithet  asura  (i,  174*^8,  796).  Indra  bears 
several  characteristic  attributes  expressive  of  power.  Sakra  'mighty'  applies 
to  Indra  about  40  times  and  only  about  five  times  to  other  gods.  Sacwat, 
'possessed  of  might'  describes  Indra  some  fifteen  times  and  other  deities  only 
twice.  The  epithet  sacipati  'lord  of  might',  occurring  eleven  times  in  the  RV. 
belongs  to  Indra  with  only  one  exception  (7,67s),  when  the  Asvins  as  'lords 
of  might'  are  besought  to  strengthen  their  worshippers  with  might  (sacibhih). 
In  one  of  these  passages  (10, 242)  Indra  is  pleonastically  invoked  as  'mighty 
lord  of  might'  (sadpate  saclnam).  This  epithet  survives  in  post-Vedic  literature 
as  a  designation  of  Indra  in  the  sense  of  'husband  of  Sac!'  (a  sense  claimed 
for  it  by  PISCHEL  even  in  the  RV.).  The  very  frequent  attribute  satafyratu, 
'having  a  hundred  powers',  occurring  some  60  times  in  the  RV.  is  with  two 
exceptions  entirely  limited  to  Indra.  In  the  great  majority  of  instances  satpati, 
'strong  lord'  is  appropriated  to  Indra.  Indra's  strength  and  valour  are  also 
described  with  various  other  epithets.  He  is  strong  (tavas),  nimble  (nrtu), 
victorious  (turd),  heroic  (sura),  of  unbounded  force  (i,n4.  iQ26),  of  irresistible 
might  (i,  842).  He  is  clothed  in  might  like  the  elephant  and  bears  weapons 
like  the  terrible  lion  (4,  i614).  He  is  also  young  (i,  n4  &c.)  and  unaging 
(ajard),  as  well  as  ancient  (purvyct). 

Having  dealt  with  Indra's  personal  traits  and  his  character,  we  now  come 
to  the  great  myth  which  is  the  basis  of  his  nature.  Exhilerated  by  Soma  and 
generally  escorted  by  the  Maruts  he  enters  upon  the  fray  with  the  chief 
demon  of  drought,  most  frequently  called  by  the  name  of  Vrtra,  the  Obstructor 
(S  68)  and  also  very  often  styled  ahi  the  'Serpent'  or  'Dragon'  (§  64).  The 
conflict  is  terrible.  Heaven  and  earth  tremble  with  fear  when  Indra  strikes 
Vrtra  with  his  bolt  (i,  80";  2,  nq-  I0;  6,  17$);  even  Tvastr  who  forged  the 


ATMOSPHERIC  GODS.     22.  INDRA.  59 

bolt   trembles    at  Indra's  anger  (i,  So1^).     Indra  shatters  Vrtra  with    his  bolt 
(i,  325.   6i10;   10,  897).     He   strikes  Vrtra  with  his  bolt  on  his  back  (i,  327. 
8oS),    strikes   his    face  with    his    pointed    weapon    (i,  52'$),     and    finds    his 
vulnerable    parts    (3,  32*;    5,  322).     He    smote   Vrtra   who    encompassed    the 
waters  (6,  2o2  &c.)  or  the  dragon  that  lay  around  (parts ay anam}  the  waters 
(4,  i92);    he    overcame    the    dragon   lying    on   the  waters  (5,  3o6).     He  slew 
the    dragon   hidden    in    the    waters    and    obstructing   the  waters   and  the  sky 
(2,  ii5),  and  smote  Vrtra,  who  enclosed  the  waters,  like  a  tree  with  the  bolt 
(2,  i42).     Thus   'conquering  in  the  waters'  (apsujif]  is  his  exclusive  attribute. 
Indra  being  frequently  described  as  slaying  Vrtra  in  the  present  or  being  in 
voked    to    do    so,    is    regarded    as    constantly  renewing  the    combat,    which 
mythically   represents    the    constant  renewal  of  the  natural  phenomena.     For 
many  dawns  and  autumns  Indra  has  let  loose  the  streams  after  slaying  Vrtra 
(4,  i98)   or  he   is   invoked   to  do  so  in  the  future  (8,  78*).     He  cleaves  the 
mountain,  making  the  streams  flow  or  taking  the  cows  (i,  57°;  io,897),  even 
with  the  sound  of  his  bolt  (6,  27*).  When  he  laid  open  the  great  mountain, 
he    let   loose    the    torrents    and    slew   the  Danava,   he   set   free   the  pent  up 
springs,  the  udder  of  the  mountain  (5,  321-2).   He  slew  the  Danava,  shattered 
the  great  mountain,  broke  open  the  well,  set  free  the  pent  up  waters  (i,576; 
5,  331).    He  releases  the  streams  which  are  like  imprisoned  cows  (i,  6i10)  or 
which,  like  lowing  cows,  flow  to  the  ocean  (i,322).   He  won  the  cows  and  Soma 
and  made  the  seven  rivers  to  flow  (1,32";  2,i212).    He  releases  the  imprisoned 
waters  (i,  576.   io32j,   released  the   streams   pent  up  by  the  dragon  (2,  n2), 
dug  out  channels  for  the  streams  with  his  bolt  (2,  153),  let  the  flood  of  waters 
flow  in  the  sea  (2,193),  caused  the  waters  pent  up  by  Vrtra  to  flow  (3,266; 
4,  I71).     Having  slain  Vrtra,    he  opened  the  orifice  of  the  waters  which  had 
been    closed    (i,  32").     His    bolts    are    dispersed  over  ninety  rivers  (i,  So8). 
References  to   this  conflict   with  Vrtra  and  the  release  of  the  waters  are  ex 
tremely  frequent  in  the  RV>  The  changes  on  the  myth  are  rung  throughout 
the  whole  of  one  hymn  (i,  80).    Another  deals  with  the  details  of  the  Vrtra 
fight  (i,  3 2).^  That  this  exploit  is  Indra's  chief  characteristic,  is  shown  by  the 
manner  in  whicE^frTe^po^tr'epiluiuizeb  the  my  eh  in  the  two  nrst  verses  ot  trie 
latter  hymn:  'i  will  proclaim  the  heroic  deeds  of  Indra,  which  the  "wieTde'Fbf 
the  bolt  first  performed:  he  slew  the  dragon  lying  on  the  mountain,  released 
the  waters,   pierced  the   belly   of  the  mountains'.  *The  physical  elements  are 
nearly  always  indicated  by  the  stereotyped  figurative  terms  'bolt',   'mountain', 
'waters  or  rivers',  while  lightning,  thunder,  cloud,  rain  (yrsti,  varsa,  or  the  verb 
•urs)    are   seldom  directly  named  (i,  52$- 6- x*  &c.)19.     The    rivers    caused    to 
flow  are  of  course  often  terrestrial  (BRV.  2,  184),  but  it  cannot  be  doubted 
that  waters    and    rivers    are    in    the  RV.  very    often   conceived   as   aerial   or 
celestial  (i,  io8;   2,  2os.  22*  cp.  BRV.  2,  187).     Apart  from   a   desire  to  ex 
press  the  Vrtra  myth  in  phraseology  differing  from  that  applied  to  other  gods, 
the  large  stores  of  water  (cp.  arnas,  flood)  released  by  Indra  would  encourage 
the    use    of  words    like  'streams'  rather    than  'rain'.     The  'cows'  released    by 
Indra  may  in  many  cases  refer  to  the  waters,  for  we  have  seen  that  the  latter 
are    occasionally  compared  with    lowing    cows.  %  Thus  Indra    is   said   to  have 
found  the  cows  for  man  when  he  slew  the  dragon  (5,  293  cp.   i,  528).     The 
context  seems  to  shew  that  the  waters  are  meant  when  Indra  is  described  as 
having,  with  his  bolt  for  an  ally,  extracted  the  cows  with  light  from  darkness 
(*»  33IO)-*But  the  cows  may  also  in  other  cases  be  conceived  as  connected 
with  Indra's  winning  of  light,  for  the  ruddy  beams  of  dawn  issuing  from  the 
blackness   of  night  are  compared  with  cattle  coming  out  of  their  dark  stalls 
(p.  47).     Again,    though   clouds  play  no  great  part  in  the  RV.20  under  their 


60     III.  RELIGION,  WELTL.  WISSENSCH.  u.  KUNST.     i  A.  VEDIC  MYTHOLOGY. 

literal  name  (abhra  &c.)  it  can  hardly  be  denied  that;  as  containing  the  waters, 
they  figure  mythologically  to  a  considerable  extent  under  the  name  of  cow 
(go:  §  61),  as  well  as  udder  (udhar),  spring  (utsd),  cask  (kavand/ia\  pail 
(kosa)  and  others.  Thus  the  rain- clouds  are  probably  meant  when  it  is  said 
that  the  cows  roared  at  the  birth  of  Indra  (8,  594). 

It  is  however  rather  as  mountains  (jxirvata,  giri:  p.  10)  that  they  appear 
in  the  Indra  myth.  They  are  the  mountains  (i,  32*)  on  which  the  demons 
dwell  (i,  322;  2,  I211),  or  from  which  he  casts  them  down  (i,  130?;  4,  30**; 
6,265).  Indra  shoots  forth  his  well- aimed  arrow  from  these  mountains  (8,  6 66). 
He  cleft  wide  the  mountain  to  release  the  cows  (8,  453°).  Or  the  cloud  is 
a  rock  (adri)  which  encompasses  the  cows  and  which  Indra  moves  from  its 
place  (6,  i75).  He  loosened  the  rock  and  made  the  cows  easy  to  obtain 
(10,  ii28).  He  released  the  cows  which  were  fast  within  the  stone  (6,  433 
cp.  5,  3o4).  The  cloud  rocks  or  mountains  would  seem  to  represent  the 
stationary  rainless  clouds  seen  during  drought,  while  the  cloud  cows  would 
rather  be  the  moving  and  roaring  rain-cloud  (p.  10).  OLDENBERG  (ORV. 
i4of.)  thinks  that  to  the  poets  of  the  RV.  the  mountains  as  well  as  the  rivers 
in  the  Vrtra-myth  are  terrestrial,  though  he  admits  that  they  were  originally 
aerial  and  at  a  later  period  also  were  understood  as  such. 

*  In  the  mythical  imagery  of  the  thunderstorm  the  clouds  also  very  fre 
quently  become  the  fortresses  (flirah)21  of  the  aerial  demons.  They  are  spoken 
of  as  ninety,  ninety-nine,  or  a  hundred  in  number  (2,  i46.  iQ6;  8,  i;14.  Sy6). 
These  fortresses  are  'moving'  (8,  i28),  autumnal  (i,  1307.  1311  174^  6,  20'°), 
made  of  metal  (2,  2o8)  or  stone  (4,  3o20)22.  Indra  shatters  them  (i,5i5  &c.), 
and  so  the  epithet  'fort -shatter er'  (purbhid)  is  peculiar  to  him.  In  one  verse 
(10,  in10)  he  is  spoken  of  as  a  fort-shatterer  and  lover  of  waters  at  the 
same  time.  In  another  the  various  features  of  the  myth  are  mentioned 
together:  he  slew  Vrtra,  broke  the  castles,  made  a  channel  for  the  rivers,, 
pierced  the  mountain,  and  made  over  the  cows  to  his  friends  (10,  897). 

Owing  to  the  importance  of  the  Vrtra-myth  the  chief  and  specific  epithet 
of  Indra  is  Vrtrahan,  'Vrtra-slayer' 23.  It  is  applied  about  70  times  to  him 
in  the  RV.  The  only  other  deity  who  receives  it  with  any  frequency  is  Agni; 
but  this  is  due  to  Agni's  frequent  association  with  Indra  as  a  dual  divinity, 
The  few  applications  of  the  epithet  to  Soma  are  also  clearly  secondary 
(§  37)24-  Though  Indra  is  sometimes  expressly  stated  to  have  slain  Vrtra 
by  his  own  might  alone  (i,  i658;  7,  2i6;  10,  I386)  other  deities  are  very 
often  associated  with  him  in  the  conflict.  The  gods  in  general  are  said  to 
have  placed  him  in  the  van  for  action  or  battle  (i,  55^;  6,  i78),or  the 
slaughter  of  Vrtra  (8,  i222).  They  are  also  said  to  have  increased  his  vigour 
for  the  fray  with  Vrtra  (10,  ii38),  or  to  have  infused  might  or  valour  into 
him  (i,  So'S;  6,  2o2;  10,  483.  i2o3),  or  to  have  placed  the  bolt  in  his  hands 
(2,  2o8).  But  most  frequently  he  is  urged  on  and  fortified  by  the  Maruts 
(3>  324;  10,  731-  2  &c.  §  29).  Even  when  the  other  gods  terrified  by  Vrtra 
fled  away  (8,  857  cp.  4,  iS11;  AB.  3,  20),  they  stood  by  him;  but  the  Maruts 
themselves  are  in  one  passage  said  to  have  deserted  him  (8,  731)-  Agnir 
Soma,  and  Visnu  are  often  also  allied  with  Indra  in  the  fight  with  Vrtra. 
Even  priests  on  earth  sometimes  associate  themselves  with  Indra  in  his  com 
bats  (5>  3°8;  8,  5 111;  10,  449).  The  worshipper  (jarita)  is  said  to  have 
placed  the  bolt  in  Indra's  hands  (i,  63 2),  and  the  sacrifice  is  spoken  of  as 
having  assisted  the  bolt  at  the  slaughter  of  the  dragon  (3,  32 12).  Hymns, 
prayers,  and  worship,  as  well  as  Soma,  are  also  often  described  as  increasing 
(Yvrdh)  the  vigour  of  Indra 2s. 

Besides  Vrtra,   Indra   engages   in   conflict  with  many  minor  demons  also 


ATMOSPHERIC  GODS.     22.  INDRA.  61 


{§  69).  One  of  these,  Urana,  mentioned  only  once  (2,  14*)  is  described 
as  having  99  arms,  while  another,  Visvarupa,  is  three-headed  and  six-eyed 
(10,  996).  He  does  not  always  slay  them  with  his  bolt.  Thus  one  of  them, 
Arbuda,  he  crushes  with  his  foot  or  pierces  with  ice  (i,  51°;  8,  3226).  Some 
times  Indra  is  described  as  destroying  demons  in  general.  Thus  he  is  said 
to  sweep  away  the  Asuras  with  his  wheel  (8,  859),  to  consume  the  Raksases 
with  his  bolt  as  fire  a  dry  forest  (6,  i810)  and  to  overcome  the  druhah  or 
malignant  spirits  (4,  23".  282). 

With  the  liberation  of  the  waters  is  connected  the  winning  of  light,  sun, 
and  dawn.  Indra  won  light  and  the  divine  waters  (3,  348).  The  god  is  in 
voked  to  slay  Vrtra  and  win  the  light  (8,  y84).  When  Indra  had  slain  the 
dragon  Vrtra  with  his  metallic  bolt,  releasing  the  waters  for  man,  he  placed 
the  sun  visibly  in  the  heavens  (i,  5i4.  528).  Indra,  the  dragon-slayer,  set  in 
motion  the  flood  of  waters  to  the  sea,  generated  the  sun,  and  found  the 
cows  (2,  i93).  He  gained  the  sun  and  the  waters  after  slaying  the  demons 
(3,  348<  9).  When  Indra  slew  the  chief  of  the  dragons  and  released  the 
waters  from  the  mountain,  he  generated  the  sun,  the  sky  and  the  dawn  (i, 
324;  6,  3o5).  The  sun  shone  forth  when  Indra  blew  the  dragon  from  the 
air  (8,  3*°).  Though  the  sun  is  usually  the  prize  of  the  conflict,  it  also 
appears  as  Indra's  weapon,  for  he  burns  the  demon  with  the  rays  of  the  sun 
(8,  129).  Without  any  reference  to  the  Vrtra  fight,  Indra  is  said  to  find 
the  light  (3,  344;  8,  i55;  10,  434)  in  the  darkness  (i,  io88;  4,  i64).  Indra  is 
the  generator  of  the  sun  (3,  494).  He  placed  the  sun,  the  brilliant  light,  in 
the  sky  (8,  i23°).  He  made  the  sun  to  shine  (8, 36.  Sy2),  and  made  it  mount 
in  the  sky  (i,  73).  He  gained  the  sun  (i,  ioo6-  l8;  3,  349)  or  found  it  in  the 
darkness  in  which  it  abode  (3,  39s)  and  made  a  path  for  it  (10,  in3). 

Indra  produces  the  dawn  as  well  as  the  sun  (2,  12 7.  2i4;  3,  31 l5;  32 8. 
494).  He  has  made  the  dawns  and  the  sun  to  shine  (3,  442).  He  has 
opened  the  darkness  with  the  dawn  and  the  sun  (i,  625).  He  steals  the 
dawn  with  the  sun  (2,  20$).  The  cows  which  are  mentioned  along  with 
sun  and  dawn  (i,  625;  2,  12";  6,  i75)  or  with  the  sun  alone  (i,  73;  2,  i93; 
3,  349;  6,  i73.  322;  10,  i382)  as  found,  delivered,  or  won  by  Indra,  probably 
do  not  so  much  represent  the  waters25  or  rainclouds,  as  the  morning  beams 
(§  61)  or,  according  to  BERGATGNE  (BRV.  i,  245)  and  others,  the  red  clouds 
of  dawn.  The  waters  are  probably  meant  by  the  ruddy  watery  (apya)  cows 
(9,  io86),  but  the  morning  beams  or  clouds  in  the  following  passages.  The 
dawns  on  seeing  Indra  went  to  meet  him,  when  he  became  the  lord  of  the 
cows  (3,  3 14).  When  he  overcame  Vrtra  he  made  visible  the  cows  (dhenah} 
of  the  nights  (3,  343  cp.  BRV.  2,  200).  Dawn  is  in  some  passages  spoken  of 
in  expressions  reminding  of  the  winning  of  the  cows.  Thus  'Dawn  opens  the 
darkness  as  cows  their  stall'  (i,  924).  Dawn  opens  the  doors  of  the  firm  rock 
(7>  794)-  The  cows  low  towards  the  dawns  (7,  757).  The  Angirases  burst 
open  the  cowstalls  of  Usas  on  the  heights  (6,  655).  The  dawn  is  sometimes 
said  to  have  been  produced  along  with  the  sun  in  the  same  passages  in 
which  the  conquest  of  the  waters  is  celebrated  (i,32x-2- 4;  6,3o5;  10,13s1-2). 
Thus  there  appears  to  be  a  confusion  between  the  notion  of  the  restoration 
of  the  sun  after  the  darkness  of  the  thunderstorm  and  the  recovery  of  the 
sun  from  the  darkness  of  night  at  dawn.  The  latter  trait  is  in  the  Indra 
myth  most  probably  only  an  extension  of  the  former. 

Indra's  activity  in  the  thunderstorm  is  sometimes  more  directly  expressed. 
Thus  he  is  said  to  have  created  the  lightnings  of  heaven  (2,  137)  and  to  have 
directed  the  action  of  the  waters  downwards  (2,  175). 

With  the  Vrtra  fight,  with  the  winning  of  the    cows   and   of  the  sun,  is 


62     III.  RELIGION,  WELTL.  WISSENSCH.  u.  KUNST.    i  A.  VEDIC  MYTHOLOGY. 


also  connected  that  of  Soma.  When  Indra  drove  the  dragon  from  the  air,  fires, 
the  sun,  and  (Soma,  Indra' s  juice,  shone  forth  (8,  320).  After  his  victory  over 
the  demon,  hechose  Soma  for  his  drink  (3,  368J.  After  he  conquered  the 
demons,  Soma  became  his  own  property  (7,985j;  he  became  the  king  of  the 
Soma  mead  (6,  20^).  Indra  disclosed  the  juice  pressed  with  stones  and 
drove  out  the  cows  (3,  445).  He  won  Soma  at  the  same  time  as  the  cows 
(i>  3212)-  He  found  in  heaven  the  hidden  nectar  (6,  4423).  He  found  the 
honey  accumulated  in  the  ruddy  cow  (usriydyam:  3,  396).  The  raw  cow  goes 
with  ripe  milk,  in  the  ruddy  cow  is  accumulated  all  sweetness,  which  Indra 
placed  there  for  enjoyment  (3,  3o14).  Indra  places  ripe  milk  in  the  cows 
(8,3225),  which  are  raw  (8,787)  black  or  red  (1,629),  anci  for  which  he  opens 
the  gates  (6,  17°).  These  passages  seem  to  have  primarily  at  least  a  mytho 
logical  reference  to  rainclouds,  as  the  context  in  most  cases  describes  the 
great  cosmical  actions  of  Indra. 

Indra  is  said  to  have  settled  the  quaking  mountains  and  plains  (2,  i22; 
10,  448).  In  a  later  text  Indra  is  said  to  have  cut  off  the  wings  of  the 
mountains,  which  originally  alighted  wherever  they  pleased  and  thus  made  the 
earth  unsteady.  The  wings  became  the  thunder  clouds  (MS.  i,  lo1^).  This 
is  a  favourite  myth  in  post-Vedic  literature.  PISCHEL  (VS.  i,  174)  traces  its 
origin  to  a  verse  of  the  E.V.  (4,  545).  Indra  also  fixed  the  bright  realms  of 
the  sky  (8,  149).  He  supported  the  earth  and  propped  the  sky  (2,  i;5&c.). 
He  holds  asunder  heaven  and  earth  as  two  wheels  are  kept  apart  by  the 
axle  (10,  894).  He  stretches  out  heaven  and  earth  (8, 36)  like  a  hide  (8,65L 
He  is  the  generator  of  heaven  and  earth  (8,  364  cp.  6,  47*).  He  generated 
that  which  is  and  shall  be  by  his  great  secret  name  (10, 552)  and  made  the  non 
existent  into  the  existent  in  a  moment  (6,245).  The  separation  and  supporting 
of  heaven  and  earth  are  sometimes  described  as  the  result  of  Indra's  victory 
over  a  demon  (5,29*),  who  held  them  together  (8,617).  When  he  was  born 
for  the  Vrtra  fight,  Indra  spread  out  the  earth  and  fixed  the  sky  (8,  785). 
The  dragon-slayer  made  earth  visible  to  heaven,  when  he  opened  a  path  for 
the  streams  (2,  i35).  Similarly  he  is  said  to  have  found  heaven  and  earth 
which  were  hidden  (8,85l6)  or  to  have  won  them  along  with  light  and  waters 
(3>348)-  Possibly  the  effect  of  light  extending  the  range  of  vision  and  seeming 
to  separate  heaven  and  earth  apparently  pressed  together  by  darkness,  may 
have  been  the  starting  point  of  such  conceptions. 

Indra,  the  wielder  of  the  thunderbolt,  who  destroys  the  aerial  demons 
in  battle,  is  constantly  invoked  by  warriors  (4,  242  &c.).  As  the  great  god 
of  battle  he  is  more  frequently  called  upon  than  any  other  deity  as  the 
helper  of  the  Aryans  in  their  conflicts  with  earthly  enemies.  He  protects  the 
Aryan  colour  and  subjects  the  black  skin  (3,  349;  i,  i3o8).  He  dispersed 
50000  of  the  black  race  and  rent  their  citadels  (4, i613).  He  subjected  the 
Dasyus  to  the  Aryan  (6,  i83)  and  gave  land  to  the  Aryan  (4,262).  He  turns 
away  from  the  Arya  the  weapon  of  the  Dasyu  in  the  land  of  the  seven  rivers 
(8,  2427).  Other  deities  are  only  occasionally  referred  to  as  protectors  of 
the  Aryas,  as  the  Asvins  (i,  ii72I)>  Agni  (8,  92'),  or  the  gods  in  general 
(6,  21"). 

More  generally  Indra  is  spoken  of  as  the  one  compassionate  helper 
(i,  84*9;  8,  55'3.  691),  as  the  deliverer  and  advocate  of  his  worshippers 
(8,8520j,  as  their  strength  (7,3i5),  and  as  a  wall  of  defence  (8,697).  His  friend 
is  never  slain  or  conquered  (10,  I521).  Indra  is  very  often  called  the  friend 
of  his  worshippers27,  sometimes  even  a  brother  (3,  535),  a  father  (4,  i717; 
10,  48 ')  or  a  father  and  mother  in  one  (8,  8711).  He  was  also  the  friend  of 
the  fathers  in  the  olden  time  (6,2i8cp.  7,334),  and  the  epithet  Kausika  which 


ATMOSPHERIC  GODS.     22.  INDRA.  63 

he  once  receives  (I,IOTI),  implies  that  he  particularly  favoured  the  family  of 
the  Kusikas28.  Indra  does  not  desire  the  friendship  of  him  who  offers 
no  libations  (10,  424).  But  he  bestows  goods  and  wealth  on  the  pious 
man  (2,  19*.  223;  ^  27  3),  and  is  implored  not  to  be  diverted  by  other 
worshippers  (2,  18^  &c.)29.  All  men  share  his  benefits  (8,  547).  Both  his 
hands  are  full  of  riches  (7,  373).  He  is  a  treasury  filled  with  wealth 
(10,  42 2).  He  can  shower  satisfying  wealth  on  his  worshippers  as  a 
man  with  a  hook  shakes  down  ripe  fruit  from  a  tree  (3,  454).  Gods  and 
mortals  can  no  more  stop  him  wishing  to  give  than  a  terrific  bull  (8, 
7o3).  He  is  an  ocean  of  riches  (i,  5iT)>  and  all  the  paths  of  wealth  lead 
to  him  as  the  rivers  to  the  sea  (6,  i95).  One  entire  hymn  in  particular  (10,47) 
dwells  on  the  manifold  wealth  which  Indra  bestows.  Cows  and  horses  are 
the  goods  which  Indra,  like  other  gods,  is  most  often  asked  to  bestow  (i,i69. 
10 14  &c.),  and  it  is  chiefly  to  him  that  the  epithet  gopati,  'lord  of  cows'  is 
applied.  His  combats  are  frequently  called  gavisti,  literally  'desire  of  cows' 
(8,245&c.)  and  his  gifts  are  considered  the  result  of  victories  (4, 1710-11  £c. : 
cp.  BRV.  2,  178).  Indra  also  bestows  wives  (4,  i7l6)  and  male  children 
(i,535£c.).  His  liberality  is  so  characteristic  that  the  very  frequent  attribute 
maghavan,  'bountiful'  is  almost  entirely  monopolized  by  him  in  the  RV.  (cp. 
p.  48)  and  in  post-Vedic  literature  remains  his  exclusive  epithet.  The  epithet 
vasupati,  'lord  of  wealth',  is  also  predominantly  applicable  to  Indra. 

Though  the  main  myth  concerning  Indra  is  his  combat  with  Vrtra, 
various  other  stories  attached  themselves  to  him  as  the  performer  of  heroic 
deeds.  Some  passages  describe  Indra  as  coming  into  conflict  with  Usas.  He 
struck  down  the  wain  (anas)  of  Dawn  (10,  736).  He  shattered  the  wain  of 
Usas  with  his  bolt  and  rent  her  slow  (steeds)  with  his  swift  (mares:  2,  i56). 
Terrified  at  the  bolt  of  Indra,  Usas  abandoned  her  wain  (10,  I385).  Indra 
performed  the  heroic  manly  exploit  of  striking  and  crushing  the  female  medi 
tating  evil,  Usas,  the  daughter  of  the  sky;  her  wain  lay  shattered  in  the  river 
Vipas  and  Usas  fled  away  in  terror  (4,  3o8~ 1X).  The  obscuration  of  the 
dawn  by  a  thunderstorm  is  usually  regarded  as  the  basis  of  this  myth. 
Against  such  an  interpretation  BERGAIGNE  urges  that  it  is  not  Indra  who 
obscures  the  sky  but  a  demon,  and  that  the  application  of  the  bolt,  Indra's 
characteristic  weapon,  need  not  be  restricted  to  the  Vrtra-fight.  He  concludes 
that  the  sunrise  overcoming  the  delaying  dawn  (cp.  2,  i56;  5,  79°)  is  here 
conceived  as  a  victory  of  Indra  bringing  the  sun  3°. 

Indra  comes  in  conflict  with  the  sun  in  the  obscure  myth  about  a  race 
run  between  the  swift  steed  Etasa,  who  draws  a  car,  and  the  sun  drawn  by 
his  yellow  steeds.  The  sun  being  ahead  is  hindered  by  Indra.  His  car 
loses  a  wheel,  a  loss  which  in  some  way  seems  to  have  been  caused  by 
Indra  (§  60 D).  With  this  myth  is  probably  connected  the  statement  that  Indra 
stopped  the  tawny  steeds  of  the  sun  (10,  928).  Indra  is  also  associated  with 
the  myth  of  the  rape  of  Soma.  For  it  is  to  him  that  the  eagle  brings  the 
draught  of  immortality  (§  37).  Another  myth  which  is  not  often  mentioned 
and  the  details  of  which  chiefly  occur  in  a  single  hymn  (10,  108)  is  that  of 
the  capture  by  Indra  of  the  cows  of  the  Panis  (§  67).  These  demons,  who 
here  seem  to  be  the  mythical  representatives  of  the  niggards  who  withhold 
cows  from  the  pious  sacrificer,  possess  herds  of  cows  which  they  keep  hidden 
in  a  cave  far  away  beyond  the  Rasa,  a  mythical  river.  Sarama,  Indra's 
messenger,  tracks  the  cows  and  asks  for  them  in  Indra's  name,  but  is  mocked 
by  the  Panis.  In  another  passage  (6,39*)  Indra  desiring  the  cows  around  the 
rock  is  said  to  have  pierced  Vala's  unbroken  ridge  and  to  have  overcome 
the  Panis.  Elsewhere  the  cows  are  spoken  of  as  confined  by  the  demon 


64     III.  RELIGION,  WELTL.  WISSENSCH.  u.  KUNST.     i  A.  VEDIC  MYTHOLOGY. 


Vala  without  reference  to  the  Panis,  and  driven  out  by  Indra  (2,  i23;  3,3o10). 
In  various  passages  the  Angirases  are  associated  with  Indra  in  piercing  Vala, 
shattering  his  strongholds,  and  releasing  the  cows  (§  54). 

Fragmentary  references,  often  in  enumerations,  are  frequently  made  to 
the  victory  of  Indra  over  Dasas  or  Dasyus.  These  are  primarily  human  foes 
whose  skin  is  black  (i,  i3oH  cp.  2,  2o7),  who  are  noseless  (5,  29™),  are  god 
less  and  do  not  sacrifice.  Though  mythological  elements  are  no  doubt  largely 
mingled  in  the  account  of  his  victory  over  individual  Dasas,  the  foundation 
of  these  myths  seems  to  be  terrestrial  and  human.  For  while  Vrtra  is  slain 
for  the  good  of  man  in  general,  individual  human  beings  are  mentioned  for 
whom  or  with  whom  Indra  overcame  the  Dasa  or  Dasas.  These  proteges 
of  Indra  are  not  as  a  rule  ancestors  of  priests  but  are  princes  or  warriors 
who  seem  to  have  been  historical.  Thus  Divodasa  Atithigva31  is  the  father 
of  the  famous  king  Sudas,  his  Dasa  foe  being  Sambara,  the  son  of  Kulitara 
(§  69  B).  But  when  the  term  ddsa  is  applied  to  the  dragon  (ahi),  from  whom 
Indra  wrests  the  waters  (2,  n2)  or  to  the  three-headed  six-eyed  monster 
whom  Trita  combats  (10,  996)  or  to  Vyamsa  who  struck  off  Indra's  jaws 
(4,  i89),  it  unmistakably  designates  regular  demons.  An  account  of  Namuci 
and  other  Dasas  vanquished  by  Indra  will  be  found  in  the  chapter  on  demons. 

A  myth  which  seems  to  have  no  general  significance  but  to  be  simply 
the  invention  of  a  later  poet  of  the  RVV  is  that  of  Indra  and  Vrsakapi,  the 
details  of  which  are  given  somewhat  obscurely  in  RV.  10,  86.  This  hymn 
describes  a  dispute  between  Indra  and  his  wife  Indram  about  the  monkey 
Vrsakapi,  who  is  the  favourite  of  the  former  and  has  damaged  the  property 
of  the  latter.  Vrsakapi  is  soundly  threshed  and  escapes,  but  afterwards  returns, 
when  a  reconciliation  takes  place,  v.  BRADKE  considers  the  story  a  satire, 
in  which  under  the  names  of  Indra  and  Indran!  a  certain  prince  and  his 
wife  are  intended  32. 

Among  stories  preserving  historical  traits  is  that  of  Indra  having  safely 
brought  Turvasa  and  Yadu  across  the  rivers  (i,  i749  &c.).  They  are  the 
eponymous  heroes  of  two  closely  connected  Aryan  tribes,  which  are,  however, 
sometimes  mentioned  by  the  poets  in  a  hostile  sense.  This  varying  attitude 
is  a  tolerably  sure  indication  of  historical  matter.  Here  the  national  warrior 
god  appears  as  the  patron  of  Aryan  migrations.  In  another  passage  Indra 
is  said  with  Susravas  to  have  crushed  twenty  chiefs  and  their  60099  warriors 
with  fatal  chariot  wheel.  The  accounts  of  the  conflicts  of  king  Sudas  have 
all  the  appearence  of  a  historical  character.  Thus  Indra  is  said  to  have 
helped  him  in  the  battle  of  the  ten  kings  (7,  333),  to  have  aided  him  in 
answer  to  the  prayers  of  his  priests  the  Trtsus  (among  whom  Vasistha  is 
prominent),  and  to  have  drowned  his  foes  in  the  river  Parusm  (7,  i89>  I3). 

Finally,  a  hymn  of  the  RV.  (8,  80)  relates  how  a  maiden  named  Apala 
having  found  Soma  beside  a  river  and  having  pressed  it  with  her  teeth,  de 
dicates  it  to  Indra  who  approaches  and  from  whom  she  receives  as  a  reward 
the  fulfilment  of  certain  desires33. 

Regarded  as  a  whole  the  attributes  of  Indra  are  chiefly  those  of  physical 
superiority  and  of  dominion  over  the  physical  world.  Energetic  action  is 
characteristic  of  him,  while  passive  sway  is  distinctive  of  Varuna.  Indra  is  a 
universal  monarch,  not  as  the  applier  of  the  eternal  laws  of  the  universe  nor 
as  a  moral  ruler,  but  as  an  irresistible  warrior  whose  mighty  arm  wins  victory, 
whose  inexhaustible  liberality  bestows  the  highest  goods  on  mankind,  and  who 
delighting  in  the  exhileration  of  magnificent  Soma  sacrifices,  confers  rich  re 
wards  on  the  hosts  of  priests  officiating  in  his  worship.  The  numerous 
hymns  which  celebrate  him  dwell  on  these  features  in  more  or  less  stereo- 


ATMOSPHERIC  GODS.     22.  INDRA.  65 


typed  terms  and  are  seldom  free  from  references  to  the  Soma  offering.  He 
is  not  usually  described  as  possessing  the  moral  elevation  and  grandeur  of 
Varuna.  There  are,  however,  several  passages  which  ascribe  to  Indra  actions 
characteristic  of  Varuna34.  There  are  also  a  few,  mostly  in  the  later  books, 
in  which  an  ethical  character  is  attributed  to  him  and  faith  in  him  is  con 
fessed  or  enjoined  (i,  555  &c.),  faith  in  the  reality  of  his  existence  being 
sometimes  expressed  as  against  the  disbelief  of  sceptics  (2,  12$  &.)35.  Once 
he  is  said  in  a  late  passage  of  the  RV.  to  have  attained  heaven  by  austere 
fervour  (10,  167*  cp  .I594). 

To  the  more  intense  anthropomorphism  of  Indra's  nature  are  doubtless 
due  certain  sensual  and  immoral  traits  which  are  at  variance  with  the  moral 
perfection  elsewhere  attributed  to  him  and  essential  to  the  character  of  the 
Vedic  gods.  This  incongruity  cannot  be  accounted  for  by  different  passages 
representing  chronologically  different  stages  in  the  development  of  his  char 
acter,  for  it  is  apparent  in  the  words  of  the  same  poet,  sometimes  even  in 
the  same  verse.  It  is  chiefly  connected  with  his  excessive  fondness  for  Soma. 
In  one  passage  (8,  6y5-  6)  he  is  said  to  hear  and  see  everything,  viewing 
the  zeal  of  mortals,  and  in  the  next  verse  his  belly  is  described  as  full  of  the 
vigorous  draught.  One  entire  hymn  (10,  119)  consists  of  a  monologue  in 
which  Indra  is  intoxicated  with  Soma,  boasting  of  his  greatness  and  capricious 
power.  It  is  even  indicated  that  he  once  suffered  from  the  effects  of  ex 
cessive  drinking  (§  69).  His  love  of  Soma  is  even  represented  as  having 
driven  him  to  parricide  (4,  i812).  In  judging  morally  of  Indra's  immoderate 
indulgence  in  Soma,  it  must  be  borne  in  mind  that  the  exhilaration  of  Soma 
partook  of  a  religious  character  in  the  eyes  of  the  Vedic  poets  and  that  the 
intoxicating  influence  of  Soma  itself  led  to  its  being  regarded  as  the  drink 
of  immortality.  It  is  probably  from  the  latter  point  of  view  that  Indra  is 
conceived  as  having  performed  his  grandest  cosmical  feats,  such  as  fixing 
heaven  and  earth,  under  the  influence  of  Soma  (2,  i52).  And  the  evident 
sympathy  of  the  poets  with  the  effect  of  Soma  on  the  god  but  reflects  the 
moral  standard  to  the  age.  Amorous  adventures,  on  the  other  hand,  are 
entirely  absent  from  the  exploits  of  Indra  in  the  RV.  and  there  is  hardly  a 
trace  of  such  even  in  the  Brahmanas,  except  that  he  is  spoken  of  as  the 
paramour  of  Ahalya  the  wife  of  Gautama36.  It  is  only  natural  that  the 
poetry  of  the  Soma  offering  should  have  dwelt  on  the  thirsty  aspect  of  his 
nature. 

It  has  been  maintained  by  RoTH^7  followed  by  WHITNEY  (JAOS.  3,327) 
that  the  preeminence  of  Varuna  as  belonging  to  an  older  order  of  gods  was 
in  the  course  of  the  Rigvedic  period  transferred  to  Indra.  This  view  is  based 
partly  on  the  fact  that  not  a  single  entire  hymn  in  the  tenth  book  is  addressed 
to  Varuna,  while  Indra  is  celebrated  in  forty-five.  There  are,  however,  two 
hymns  (126,  185)  of  book  X,  in  which  Varuna  is  lauded  with  two  other 
Adityas,  and  in  many  single  verses  of  that  book  Varuna  is  invoked  or  re 
ferred  to  along  with  other  deities.  The  argument  from  the  number  of  hymns 
is  not  very  cogent,  as  in  all  the  earlier  books  of  the  RV.  far  more  hymns 
are  addressed  to  Indra  than  to  Varuna.  In  book  III  no  hymn  is  devoted  to 
Varuna  but  22  to  Indra,  and  in  book  II  there  is  only  one  to  Varuna  and 
23  to  Indra.  Moreover,  these  two  books  added  together  are  considerably 
shorter  than  the  tenth  alone.  It  is,  however,  true  that  Varuna  is  much  less 
frequently  mentioned  in  the  last  book  than  in  the  earlier  books  of  the  RV. 
Beyond  this  fact  there  seems  to  be  no  direct  and  decisive  proof  of  the  super 
session  of  Varuna  by  Indra  during  the  composition  of  the  RV.  One  hymn 
(4,  42)  of  the  earlier  part,  describing  in  the  form  of  a  dialogue  the  rivalry 

Indo-arische  Philologie.     Ill,     1  A.  5 


66     III.  RELIGION,  WELTL.  WISSENSCH.  u.  KUNST.     i  A.  VEDIC  MYTHOLOGY. 

between  Indra  and  Varuna  has,  however,  been  regarded  (GKR.  27)  as  char 
acteristically  indicating  a  transition  from  an  older  period  in  the  relative  im 
portance  of  the  two  gods.  The  conclusion  is  perhaps  hardly  justified  by  the 
statements  of  another  (cp.  GRV.  2,  401)  of  the  last  book  (10,  i24)38.  At 
the  same  time  it  must  be  remembered  that  on  the  one  hand  Varuna  seems 
to  have  occupied  a  more  important  position  than  Indra  in  the  Indo-Iranian 
period,  while  on  the  other,  Indra  in  the  Brahmanas  (AB.  8,  12)  and  in  the 
epics  has  become  chief  of  the  Indian  heaven  and  even  maintains  this  posi 
tion  under  the  Puranic  triad  Brahma-Visnu-Siva,  though  of  course  subordinate 
to  them39.  Varuna  meanwhile  had  become  divested  of  his  supreme  powers 
by  the  time  of  the  AV.  (p.  26).  Thus  there  must  have  been  at  least  a 
gradually  increasing  popularity  of  Indra  even  in  the  Rigvedic  age.  By  BENFEY 
(OO.  i,  48)  and  BREAL  (Hercule  et  Cacus  101)  Indra  in  the  Vedas  is  con 
sidered  rather  to  have  superseded  the  ancient  Dyaus.  This  may  perhaps 
with  greater  probability  be  maintained  with  regard  to  the  Indo-Iranian  Trita 
Aptya.  For  Trita  though  rarely  mentioned  in  the  RV.  is  there  described  as 
performing  the  same  exploits  as  Indra,  occasionally  appearing  even  as  the 
more  important  personage  in  the  myth  (§  23). 

The  name  of  Indra  occurs  only  twice  in  the  Avesta40.  Beyond  the  fact 
of  his  being  no  god,  but  only  a  demon,  his  character  there  is  uncertain41. 
Indra's  distinctive  Vedic  epithet  vrtrahan  also  occurs  in  the  Avesta  in  the 
form  of  verethraghna,  which  is,  however,  unconnected  with  Indra  or  the 
thunderstorm  myth,  designating  merely  the  God  of  Victory42.  Thus  it  is 
probable  that  the  Indo-Iranian  period  possessed  a  god  approaching  to  the  Vedic 
form  of  the  Vrtra-slaying  Indra.  It  is  even  possible  that  beside  the  thundering 
god  of  heaven,  the  Indo-European  period  may  have  known  as  a  distinct  con 
ception  a  thundergod  gigantic  in  size,  a  mighty  eater  and  drinker,  who  slays 
the  dragon  with  his  lightning  bolt4^.  The  etymology44  of  Indra  is  doubtful, 
but  that  the  root  is  connected  with  that  in  indu,  drop,  seems  likely. 

i  ZDMG.  32,  296—7;    WZKM.  9,  232.  --    2  HVM.   i,  44,  note.  —    3   ZDMG. 
i,  67.  --  4  HVM.   i,   119.  —  5  ROTH  on  Nir.  5,  1 1 ;  KHF.  138—9.  —  6  SB.  5,  5,  49; 
12,  7,  i";  TS.  2,  3,  2,  cp.  HVM.   i,  266;   ZIMMER,   AIL.  275.  —  7  HVM.  238.  - 
3    PVS.  2,  242 — 53;    LANG,    Myth,    Ritual  and  Religion  i,  183;    2,  U3f.  244.    • 
9  PVS.  2,  249.   --    10  ibid.  2,  51—4;  MACDONELL,  JRAS.  27,  183.    -  -    ^  BRV    3, 
58—62;  PVS.  i,  44.  —  12  ibid,  i,  211.  —   X3  Cp.  ibid.  2,  38,  note  i.  —  H  BLOOM- 
FIELD,  ZDMG.  48,  549—51.  —  15  Ibid.  548.  —  16  MACDONELL,  JRAS.  25,470—1; 
27,   I7S.  —  *7  Ibid.  27,   175.  —  18  HRT.  92.  —  19  Other  passages   i,  So4-  M;  2,  13-1; 

4,  262;  8,  319-20.  6*;   10,  92*.   1249;  AV.  13,441.  —  20  HVM.   i,  313.  —  21  ZLMMKK, 
AIL  42.  —  22  Also  Kalhaka   IS.  12,   161 ;   JRAS.  27,  181.    —  23  ZDMG.  8,  460.  - 
24  MACDONELL,  JRAS.  25,  472.  —  25  QST.  5,  91—2.  —  26  AUFRECHT,  ZDMG.   13, 
497;  BRV.   i,  259;  KRV.  42  (raincloud).  —  27  OST.  5,   104—5.  —  28  QST.  5,  348—9. 
29  OST.  5,  106—7.  —  30  BRV.  2,   193;  cp.  SONNE,  KZ.  10,  416—7;  MM.  Chips  2, 
91  f.;  ORV.   169;  HRI.  77,  note.  —  31  BRV.  2,  209;  HVM.   i,  96.  107.  —  32  ZDMG. 
46,  465  cp.  ORV.  172—4.    —   33  AI-FRECHT,  IS.  4,  i—8;    OLDENBERG,  ZDMG.  39, 
7-6—7-  —   34  BRV.  3,   143.    --35  OST.  5,  103—4.    --   3°  WEBER,  Sitzungsberichte 
der  Berliner  Akad.   1887,  p.  903.  —  37  ZDMG.  6,  73;  PW. ;  cp.  BRI.  27.  —  3^  ORV. 
95—7;    OST.  5,  121—6.  —  39  ZDMG.  6,  77;    25,  31.  —  40  SPIEGEL,  Av.  Tr.  Ill, 
LXXXI;  Sp.AP.  195;  OST.  5.   121,  note  212.  --   41  DARMESTETER,  SBE.  IV2,  LXXII; 
HILLEBRANDT,  ZDMG.  48,  422.    -        42  Sp.AP.   195.    -        43  ORV.  34,  note   i;    134; 

.  v.  SCHRODER,  WZKM.  9,  230.    —    44  YN.   10,  8;    Sayana  on  RV.  i,  34;    BENFEY, 
OO.  I,  49;  ROTH,  PW.;  MM.,  LSL.  (1891)2,543,  note; 'OGR.  218;  AR.  396;  OS  T. 

5,  119,  note.  208;  GW.;  BB.  i,  342;  BRV.  2,  166;  BOLLENSEN,  ZDMG.  41,  505—7; 
JACOBI,  KZ.  31,  316;  IF.  3,  235. 

KHF.  8;  ROTH,  ZDMG.  i,  72;  WHITNEY,  JAOS.  3,  319—21;  DELBRUCK,  ZVP. 
1865,  277-9;  OST.  5,  77—139;  4,  99  — 108;  LRV.  3,  317;  KRV.  40—7;  BRI.  12—3; 
BRV.  2,  159—96;  PERRY,  Indra  in  the  Rigveda,  JAOS.  11,  117 — 208;  HILLEBRANDT, 
Literaturblatt  f.  Or.  Philol.  1884—5,  p.  108;  Die  Sonnwendfeste  in  Altindien  (1889), 
16;  SP.  AP.  194-7;  HVBP.  60—80;  ORV.  134-75;  ZDMG.  49,  174—5;  HRI. 
91—6;  v.  SCHRODER,  WZKM.  9,  230—4. 


ATMOSPHERIC  GODS.     23.  TRITA  APTYA.  67 


§  23.  Trita  Aptya.  —  Trita  Aptya  is  not  celebrated  in  any  entire 
hymn  of  the  RV.  but  is  only  incidentally  mentioned  there  in  forty  passages 
occurring  in  twenty-nine  hymns.  The  epithet  Aptya  accompanies  or  alternates 
with  Trita  seven  times  in  four  hymns  of  the  RV.  (i,  109;  5,  41;  8,  47; 
10,  8).  He  is  oftenest  mentioned  or  associated  with  Indra;  he  is  seven  times 
connected  or  identified  with  Agni,  is  several  times  spoken  of  with  the  Maruts, 
and  ten  times  with  Soma  either  as  the  beverage  or  the  deity.  Trita  is 
mentioned  alone  as  having  rent  Vrtra  by  the  power  of  the  Soma  draught 
(i,  187'). 

The  Maruts  aided  Trita  and  Indra  in  the  victory  over  Vrtra  (8,  724j. 
Such  action  must  have  been  regarded  as  characteristic  of  Trita,  for  it  is 
mentioned  as  an  illustration.  When  Indra  in  the  Vrtra  fight  strove  against 
the  withholder  of  rain,  he  cleft  him  as  Trita  cleaves  the  fences  of  Vala  (i, 
524<5).  So  again  the  man  who  is  aided  by  Indra- Agni,  pierces  rich  strong 
holds  like  Trita  (5,  86 1).  Trita  Aptya  knowing  his  paternal  weapons  and 
urged  by  Indra  fought  against  and  slew  the  three-headed  son  of  Tvastr  and 
released  the  cows  (10,  88).  In  the  following  stanza  Indra  performs  exactly 
the  same  feat;  for  he  strikes  off  the  three  heads  of  Visvarupa  the  son  of 
Tvastr  and  takes  possession  of  the  cows.  Indra  (or  perhaps  Agni)  subdued 
the  loudly  roaring  three-headed  six-eyed  demon  and  Trita  strengthened  by 
his  might  slew  the  boar  (i.  e.  the  demon,  cp.  i,  121")  with  iron-pointed  bolt 
(10,99°).  Here  the  feat  performed  by  the  two  gods  is  again  identical.  Indra 
produced  cows  for  Trita  from  the  dragon  (10,  482).  Indra  delivered  over 
Visvarupa  the  son  of  Tvastr  to  Trita  (2,  n^).  Indra  strengthened  by  the 
Soma-pressing  Trita,  cast  down  Arbuda  and  with  the  Angirases  rent  Vala 
(2,  ii20).  When  the  mighty  Maruts  go  forth  and  the  lightnings  flash,  Trita 
thunders  and  the  waters  roar  (5,  542).  In  two  obscure  passages  of  a  Marut 
hymn  (2,  34)  the  bright  path  of  the  Maruts  is  said  to  shine  forth  when  Trita 
appears  (v.  10)  and  Trita  seems  to  be  conceived  as  bringing  the  Maruts  on 
his  car  (v.  14).  In  an  Agni  hymn  the  winds  are  said  to  have  found  Trita, 
instructing  him  to  help  them  (10,1154).  The  flames  of  Agni  rise  when  Trita 
in  the  sky  blows  upon  him  like  a  smelter  and  sharpens  him  as  in  a  smelting 
furnace  (5,95).  Trita  eagerly  seeking  him  (Agni)  found  him  on  the  head  of 
the  cow;  he  when  born  in  houses  becomes  as  a  youth  the  centre  of  bright 
ness,  establishing  himself  in  dwellings.  Trita  enveloped  (in  flames)  seated 
himself  within  his  place  (10,463- 6).  Trita  is  spoken  of  as  in  heaven  (5,95). 
His  abode  is  secret  (9,  io22).  It  is  remote;  for  the  Adityas  and  Usas  are 
prayed  to  remove  ill  deeds  and  evil  dreams  to  Trita  Aptya  (8,  47 '3-7).  It 
seems  to  be  in  the  region  of  the  sun.  For  the  poet  says:  'Where  those  seven 
rays  are,  there  my  origin  is  extended;  Trita  Aptya  knows  that;  he  speaks  for 
kinship':  which  seems  to  mean  that  he  claims  kinship  with  it  (i,  1059).  In 
the  same  hymn  (v.  17)  Trita  is  described  as  buried  in  a  well  (kupe)  and 
praying  to  the  gods  for  help;  Brhaspati  heard  him  and  released  him  from 
his  distress.  In  another  passage  (10,  87)  Trita  within  a  pit  (vavre)  prays  to 
his  father  and  goes  forth  claiming  his  paternal  weapons;  and  in  the  next 
stanza  (10,  88)  he  fights  with  Visvarupa.  Indra  is  said  to  drink  Soma  beside 
Visnu,  Trita  Aptya,  or  the  Maruts  (8,  I2l6)  and  to  delight  in  a  hymn  of 
praise  beside  Trita  (Val.  41).  In  the  ninth  book,  doubtless  owing  to  its 
peculiar  character,  Trita  appears  in  the  special  capacity  of  a  preparer  of 
Soma,  a  feature  alluded  to  only  once  in  the  rest  of  the  RV.  (2,  ii20). 
Soma  is  purified  by  Trita  (9,  34*).  Trita's  maidens  (the  fingers)  urge  the 
tawny  drop  with  stones  for  Indra  to  drink  (9,  322.  382).  Soma  occupies  the 
secret  place  near  the  two  pressing  stones  of  Trita  (9,  io22)  and  is  besought 


68     III.  RELIGION,  WELTL.  WISSENSCH.  u.  KUNST.     i  A.  VEDIC  MYTHOLOGY. 


to  bring  wealth  in  a  stream  on  the  ridges  (prsthesti)  of  Trita  (9, 102$).  Soma 
caused  the  sun  along  with  the  sisters  to  shine  on  the  summit  (sdnu)  of  Trita 
(9,  374).  They  press  out  the  stalk,  the  bull  that  dwells  on  the  mountains, 
who,  like  a  buffalo,  is  purified  on  the  summit;  hymns  accompany  him  as  he 
roars;  Trita  cherishes  (him  who  is  like)  Varuna  in  the  ocean  (9,  95*).  When 
Soma  pours  the  mead,  he  calls  up  the  name  of  Trita  (9,  8620). 

There  are  several  passages  from  which  little  or  nothing  can  be  gathered 
as  to  Trita's  original  nature.  Thus  his  name  occurs  in  some  enumerations 
which  furnish  no  information  (2,  3i6;  5,  4i4;  10,  643).  In  two  other  verses 
(5,  4 1 9-  I0)  the  interpretation  is  uncertain,  as  the  text  seems  to  be  corrupt. 
In  one  passage  in  the  middle  of  a  Varuna  hymn  Trita  is  described  as  one 
in  whom  all  wisdom  is  centred,  as  the  nave  in  the  wheel  (8,4i6).  In  another 
passage  Trita  is  said  to  have  harnessed  a  celestial  steed  fashioned  from  the 
sun  and  given  by  Yama,  this  steed  being  in  the  following  stanza  said  to  be 
identical  with  Yama,  the  Sun,  and  with  Trita  'by  secret  operation'  (i,i632<3). 
The  half  dozen  passages  of  the  AV.1  which  mention  Trita,  add  no  definite 
information  about  him.  They  suggest  only  the  idea  of  a  remote  god,  to 
whom  guilt  or  dream  is  transferred  (i,  ii3I>3;  19,  564).  The  TS.  (i,  8,  io2) 
describes  Trita  as  a  bestower  of  long  life.  This  is  no  doubt  a  secondary 
trait2  accruing  to  Trita  as  the  preparer  of  Soma,  the  draught  of  immortality. 
The  Brahmanas  speak  of  Trita  as  one  of  three  deities,  the  t  other  two  being 
Ekata  and  Dvita,  sons  of  Agni  and  born  from  the  waters  (SB.1, 2, 3*'  2;  TB. 
3,  2,  810-  ").  Sayana  on  RV.  i,  105  quotes  a  story  of  the  Satyayanins,  in 
which  the  same  three  brothers  are  Rsis,  Trita  being  cast  into  a  well  by  the 
other  two.  It  is  clear  that  here  the  three  names  have  a  numerical  sense. 
Dvita  already  occurs  in  the  RV.,  once  along  with  Trita  (8,  47l6)  and  once 
alone  in  an  Agni  hymn  (5,  i82)  and  apparently  identified  with  Agni.  The 
name  of  Trita  is  not  mentioned  in  the  list  of  deities  in  the  Naighantuka. 
Yaska  (Nir.  4,  6)  explains  the  word  to  mean  Very  proficient  in  wisdom' 
(deriving  it  from  ytr\  or  as  a  numeral  referring  to  the  three  brothers  Ekata, 
Dvita,  Trita.  In  another  passage  (Nir.  9,  25)  he  explains  Trita  as  'Indra  in 
three  abodes'  (i.  e.  heaven,  earth,  air). 

In  examining  the  evidence  of  the  RV.  we  find  that  Indra  and  Trita  in 
three  or  four  passages  perform  the  same  feat,  that  of  slaying  a  demon.  Trita 
in  one  is  impelled  by  Indra,  while  in  another  Indra  is  inspired  by  Trita;  and 
twice  Indra  is  said  to  have  acted  for  Trita.  Further,  Trita  is  associated  with 
the  Maruts  in  the  thunderstorm.  Moreover,  he  finds  Agni,  kindles  Agni  in 
heaven,  and  takes  up  his  abode  in  human  dwellings,  clearly  as  a  form  of 
Agni.  His  abode  is  remote  and  hidden,  and  Soma  is  there.  In  the  ninth 
book  Trita  as  the  preparer  of  Soma  diverges  more  from  Indra,  who  is  only 
a  drinker  of  Soma.  Corresponding  to  Trita  in  the  Avesta  we  find  Thrita, 
who  is  a  man  (as  Trita  becomes  in  the  Indian  Epic).  He  is  once  (Yasna 
9,  io)  described  as  the  third  man  who  prepared  Haoma  (=  Soma)  for  the 
corporeal  world  (Athwya  =  Aptya  being  the  second)  and  once  (Vend.  20, 2) 
as  the  first  healer  who  received  from  Ahura  Mazda  ten  thousand  healing 
plants  which  grow  round, the  white  Haoma,  the  tree  of  immortality.  Thrita 
is  also  called  the  son  of  Sayuzhdri  in  two  passages  (Yasht  5,  72;  13,  113)  in 
one  of  which  he  is  said  to  have  dwelt  in  Apam  napat  (as  a  locality  on  earth)  3. 
This  shows  that  Trita  was  connected  with  Soma  as  early  as  the  Indo-Iranian 
period.  The  other  side  of  Trita's  activity,  the  slaughter  of  the  three-headed 
six-eyed  demon  or  dragon  we  find  in  the  Avesta  transferred  to  a  cognate 
personage,  Thraetaona,  who  slays  the  fiendish  serpent  (Azi  dahdkd),  the  three- 
mouthed,  three-headed,  six-eyed  demon.  It  is  noteworthy  that  Thraetaona  in 


ATMOSPHERIC  GODS.     24.  APAM  NAPAT.  69 


his  expedition  against  Dahaka  is  accompanied  by  two  brothers  who  seek  to 
slay  him  on  the  way4.  The  word  tritd  phonetically  corresponds  to  the  Greek 
Tptto;5,  the  third.  That  it  was  felt  to  have  the  meaning  of  'the  third',,  is 
shown  by  the  occurrence  beside  it  of  Dvita  in  the  RV.  and  by  the  invention 
of  Ekata  beside  these  two  in  the  Brahmanas.  The  collocation  of  trtni,  three, 
with  Trita  (RV.  9,  102^;  AV.  5,  i1)  points  in  the  same  direction.  Finally, 
it  is  highly  probable  that  in  one  passage  of  the  RV.  (6,  4423)6  the  word  trita 
in  the  plural  means  'third'. 

Trita's  regular  epithet  Aptya  seems  to  be  derived  from  dp,  water,  and 
hence  to  be  practically  equivalent  in  sense  to  Apam  napat7.  Sayana  (on 
RV.  8,  4715)  explains  it  as  'son  (putra)  of  waters'.  Another  epithet  of  Trita, 
Taibhuvasa,)  which  is  formed  like  a  patronymic  and  only  occurs  once  (10, 
46 3)  may  be  connected  with  Soma8. 

The  above  evidence  may  perhaps  justify  the  conclusion  that  Trita  was 
a  god  of  lightning,  the  third  or  aerial  form  of  fire,  originally  the  middle 
member  of  the  triad  Agni,  Vayu  or  Indra,  Surya.  By  a  process  of  natural 
selection  Indra  seems  to  have  ousted  this  god  originally  almost  identical  in 
character  with  himself,  with  the  result  that  Trita  occupies  but  an  obscure 
position  even  in  the  RV.  If  this  interpretation  be  correct,  Trita's  original 
connexion  with  Soma  would  signify  the  bringing  of  Soma  from  heaven  by 
lightning  (as  in  the  Soma-eagle  myth:  §  37).  The  paucity  of  the  evidence 
has  led  to  many  divergent  views9.  Only  some  of  these  need  be  mentioned 
here.  ROTH  (ZDMG.  2,  224)  considered  Trita  a  water  and  wind  god.  HILLE- 
BRANDT10  regards  him  as  a  deity  of  the  bright  sky.  PERRY  believes  him  to 
be  a  god  of  the  storm,  older  than  Indra11.  PISCHEL  who  formerly  (PVS.  i, 
1 86)  thought  him  to  be  'a  god  of  the  sea  and  of  the  waters'  has  recently 
(GGA.  1894,  p.  428)  expressed  the  opinion  that  Trita  was  originally  a  human 
healer  who  was  later  deified.  HARDY  thinks  Trita  is  a  moon  god12. 

i  See  WHITNEY'S  AV.  Index  verborum,  s.  v.  Trta.  —  2  Otherwise  PISCHEL, 
GGA.  1894,  p.  427.  —  3  SP.  AP.  193.  —  4  SP.  AP.  271.  —  5  BRUGMANN,  Grundriss  2,  229; 
according  to  FICK,  Vergleichendes  Worterbuch  14,  63.  229,  Trita  originally  meant 
sea.  —  6  ORV.  183,  n.;  cp.  POTT,  KZ.  4,  441.  -  -  7  Cp.  JOHANSSON,  IF.  4,  136. 
143.  —  8  JRAS.  25,  450.  —  9  Stated  up  to  date  in  JRAS.  25,  4,  19 — 23.  - 
10  Varuna  und  Mitra  94—5.  —  «  JAOS.  n,  142—5.  —  "  HVBP.  35—8. 

MACDONELL,  The  god  Trita;  JRAS.  25,  419—96.  To  the  authorities  here 
quoted  may  be  added:  LRV.  3,  355—7;  KRV.  33,  note  112  d;  BRI.  II;  BDA.  82, 
n.  3;  Sp.AP.  262 — 71 ;  BLOOMFIELD,  AJP.  1 1,  341 ;  PAOS.  1894,  cxix — cxxiii;  LUDWIG, 
Rgveda-Forschung  117—9;  FAY,  PAOS.  1894,  CLXXIV;  AJP.  17,  13;  ORV.  143; 
SEE.  46,  406;  I1RL  104;  OERTEL,  JAOS.  18,  18—20. 

§  24.  Apam  napat.  --  The  deity  called  Apcam  napat  is  celebrated  in 
one  whole  hymn  (2,  35),  is  invoked  in  two  verses  of  a  hymn  to  the  waters 
(10,  30^-  4),  and  is  mentioned  by  name  nearly  thirty  times  altogether  in  the 
RV.  The  waters  stood  around  the  brilliant  Son  of  waters;  the  youthful  waters 
go  around  him  the  youthful;  three  divine  females  desire  to  give  food  to  him 
the  divine;  he  sucks  the  milk  of  the  first  mothers  (2,  353~5).  He,  the  bull, 
engendered  the  embryo  in  them;  he  the  child,  sucks  and  they  kiss  him 
(v.  X3);  the  Son  of  waters  growing  strong  within  the  waters,  shines  forth  (v.  7). 
He  shines  without  fuel  in  the  waters  (v.  4;  10,  3o4).  Clothed  in  lightning 
the  Son  of  waters  has  mounted  upright  the  lap  of  the  slanting  (waters); 
carrying  him  the  swift  (waters)  golden  in  colour  go  around  him  (v.  9;  cp. 
Agni  in  i,  954-  s).  The  Son  of  waters  is  golden  in  form,  appearance  and 
colour;  coming  from  a  golden  womb  he  sits  down  and  gives  food  to  his 
worshipper  (v.  I0).  Standing  in  the  highest  place  he  always  shines  with  un- 
dimmed  (splendour);  the  swift  waters  carrying  ghee  as  food  to  their  son,  fly 


70     HI.  RELIGION,  WELTL.  WISSENSCH.  u.  KUNST.     i  A.  VEDIC  MYTHOLOGY. 


around  with  their  garments  (v. I4).  The  face  of  the  Son  of  waters,  whom  the 
maidens  kindle,  whose  colour  is  golden,  and  whose  food  is  ghee,  increases 
in  secret  (v.  ").  He  has  a  cow  which  in  his  own  house  gives  good  milk 
(v.  ?).  Steeds  (vrsanah)  swift  as  thought  carry  the  son  of  waters  (i,  i865). 
The  son  of  waters  is  connected  with  rivers  (nadya\  v.  I).  The  son  of  waters 
has  engendered  all  beings,  who  are  merely  branches  of  him  (v.  2-  8).  In  the 
last  stanza  of  the  Apam  napat  hymn,  the  deity  is  invoked  as  Agni  and  must 
be  identified  with  him.  Conversely  Agni  is  in  some  hymns  addressed  to  him, 
spoken  of  as  Apam  napat  (cp.  VS.  8,  24).  Agni  is  the  Son  of  waters  (3,9T)- 
He  is  the  Son  of  waters  who  sat  down  on  earth  as  a  dear  priest  (i,  I431). 
But  they  are  also  distinguished.  Agni,  accordant  with  the  Son  of  waters, 
confers  victory  over  Vrtra  (6,  i33).  The  Son  of  waters  unites  here  with  the 
body  of  another  as  it  were  (2,3513).  The  epithet  asuhejnan,  'swiftly  speeding'1, 
applied  three  times  to  Apam  napat,  is  in  its  only  other  occurrence  used 
of  Agni. 

Apam  napat  is  mentioned  in  various  enumerations,  especially  with  Aja 
ekapcad  (2,  31*;  7,  35^),  Ahi  budhnya  (i,  i865;  2,  3I6;  7,  35'*),  and  Savitr 
(2,  3 16;  6,  5o13).  The  epithet  is  directly  applied  to  Savitr  at  least  once 
(p-  33);  perhaps  because  Savitr  represents  another  fertilizing  form  of  Agni. 

Apam  napat,  who  is  golden,  is  clothed  in  lightning,  dwells  in  the  highest 
place,  grows  in  concealment,  shines  forth,  is  the  offspring  of  the  waters, 
comes  down  to  earth,  and  is  identified  with  Agni,  appears  to  represent  the 
lightning  form  of  Agni  which  is  concealed  in  the  cloud.  For  Agni,  besides 
being  directly  called  Apam  napat,  is  also  termed  the  embryo  (garbha)  of  the 
waters  (7,  93;  i,  7o3).  As  such  he  has  been  deposited  in  human  dwellings 
(3,  53),  his  abode  is  in  the  waters  (8,  43^)  and  the  two  fire-sticks  engender 
Agni  who  is  the  embryo  both  of  plants  and  of  waters  (3,  i13).  Agni  is  also 
called  the  'son  of  the  rock'  (10,  20?  cp.  6,  48$),  which  can  hardly  refer  to 
anything  but  the  lightning  which  issues  from  the  cloud  mountain.  As  con 
trasted  with  his  celestial  and  terrestrial  forms,  the  third  form  of  Agni  is  de 
scribed  as  kindled  in  the  waters,  the  ocean,  the  udder  of  heaven,  the  lap  of 
the  waters  (io,45T~3).  *n  ^act  tne  abode  of  the  celestial  Agni  in  the  waters 
is  one  of  the  best  established  points  in  Vedic  mythology2.  The  term  Aptya 
applied  to  Trita  appears  to  bear  a  similar  interpretation  (g  23). 

Apam  napat  is  not  a  creation  of  Indian  mythology,  but  goes  back  to 
the  Indo-Iranian  period.  In  the  Avesta  Apam  napat  is  a  spirit  of  the  waters, 
who  lives  in  their  depths,  is  surrounded  by  females  and  is  often  invoked 
with  them,  drives  with  swift  steeds,  and  is  said  to  have  seized  the  brightness 
in  the  depth  of  the  ocean3.  SPIEGEL  *  thinks  this  deity  shows  indications  of 
an  igneous  nature  in  the  Avesta,  and  DARMESTETER  considers  him  to  be  the 
fire-god  as  bom  from  the  cloud  in  lightnings.  L.  v.  SCHROEDER  agrees  with 
this  view6;  some  scholars,  however,  dissent  from  it.  OLD ENBERG7  is  of  opinion 
that  Apam  napat  was  originally  a  water  genius  pure  and  simple,  who  became 
confused  with  the  water-born  Agni,  a  totally  different  being.  His  grounds 
are,  that  one  of  the  two  hymns  in  which  he  is  celebrated  (10,  30),  is  con 
nected  in  the  ritual  with  ceremonies  exclusively  concerned  with  water,  while 
even  in  2,35  his  aqueous  nature  predominates8.  HiLLEBRANDT9,  on  the  other 
hand,  followed  by  HARDY  I0,  thinks  Apam  napat  is  the  moon,  and  MAX 
MULLER"  that  he  is  the  sun  or  lightning. 

i  WINDISCH,  FaR.  144.  —  2  Cp.  especially  RV.  3,  I  (GVS.  i,  157—70);  also 
5»  &52;  7,  494;  10,  96.  —  3  Cp.  HVM.  i,  377—8.  —  4  Sp.AP.  192—3.  —  5  SEE. 
42,  LXiii;  1' Avesta  traduit  2,630,  note,  3,  82  (cp.  Ormazd  et  Ahriman  34);  but  see 
HILLEBRANDT,  ZDMG.  48,  422.  --  6  WZKM.  9,  227—8.  —  7  ORV.  118—20,  cp. 


ATMOSPHERIC  GODS.     25.  MATARISVAN. 


357.  _  8  Cp.  v.  SCHROEDER,  WZKM.  1.  c. ;  MACDONELL,  JRAS.  27,  955—6.  — 
9  HVM.  I,  365—80;  ZDMG.  48,  422 f.  —  *o  HVBP.  38  f.  —  "  Chips,  42,  410;  NR.  500. 
RIALLE,  Revue  de  Ling.  3,  49  ff. ;  WINDISCHMANN  in  SPIEGEL'S  Zoroastrische 
Studien  177—86;  SPIEGEL,  Avesta  Tr.  3,  xix.  Liv;  GRV.  I,  45;  BRV.  2,  17—19. 
36 — 7;  3,  45;  Manuel  pour  etudier  le  Sanscrit  vedique,  s.  v.  apam  napat;  LRV.  4, 
181;  GRUPPE,  Die  griech.  Culte  1,89;  BDA.  82,  note  2;  LRF.  93;  MACDONELL, 
JRAS.  25,  475—6;  HRI.  106. 

§  25.  Matarisvan. —  Matarisvan  is  not  celebrated  in  any  hymn  of  the 
RV.,  and  the  name  is  found  there  only  twenty-seven  times,  occurring  twenty- 
one  times  in  the  latest  portions  of  that  Veda  and  otherwise  only  five  times 
in  the  third  and  once  in  the  sixth  book.  In  these  six  older  passages 
Matarisvan  is  always  either  identified  with  Agni  or  is  the  producer  of  fire. 
Though  the  myth  of  Matarisvan  is  based  on  the  distinction  between  fire  and 
aT  personification  which  produces  it,  the  analysis  of  the  myth  shows  these 
Two  to  be  identical.  Nothing  even  in  any  of  the  later  books  of  the  RV., 
can  be  said  to  show  clearly  that  the  conception  of  Matarisvan  prevailing  in 
the  other  Vedas  and  in  the  post-Vedic  period,  had  begun  to  appear  in 
that  Veda. 

Matarisvan  is  a  name  of  Agni  in  three  passages  (3,  59.  262;  i,  96*). 
This  is  probably  also  the  case  where  the  name  occurs  in  the  vocative  at  the 
end  of  an  Agni  hymn  (9,  88 X9).  In  another  verse,  where  an  etymological 
explanation  of  the  name  is  given,  he  is  spoken  of  as  one  of  the  forms  of 
Agni:  'As  heavenly  germ  he  is  called  Tanunapat,  he  becomes  Narasamsa 
when  he  is  born;  when  as  Matarisvan  he  was  fashioned  in  his  mother  (ami- 
mtta  matari-.  cp.  i,  i4i5),  he  became  the  swift  flight  of  wind'  (3,  2911)-  It 
is  further  said  elsewhere:  'One  being  the  wise  call  variously:  they  speak  of 
Agni,  Yama,  Matarisvan'  (i,  i6446).  Once  Matarisvan  is  also  a  form  of 
Brhaspati,  who  is  several  times  identified  with  Agni  (§  36):  'That  Brhaspati 
appeared  (sam  abhavat]  at  the  rite  as  Matarisvan'  (i,  i9o2). 

Elsewhere  Matarisvan  is  distinguished  from  Agni.  'He  (Agni)  being 
born"  in  the  highest  heavens  appeared  to  Matarisvan'  (i,  I432).  'Agni  first 
appeared  "to" Matarisvan  and  Vivasvat;  the  two  worlds  trembled  at  the  choosing 
of  the  priest'  (i,3i3).  'Agni  being  the  highest  of  the  luminaries  has  supported 
with  his  flame  the  firmament,  when  Matarisvan  kindled  the  oblation-bearer 
who  was  concealed'  (3,510).  This  verse  follows  one  in  which  Agni  is  directly 
called  Matarisvan.  The  only  explanation  of  such  a  discrepancy  in  contiguous 
verses  of  the  same  hymn,  seems  to  be  that  the  name  of  a  specific  personi 
fication  of  Agni  in  the  latter  verse  is  used  as  an  epithet  of  the  generic  Agni 
in  the  former.  Matarisvan  brought  to  Bhrgu  as  a  gift  the  glorious  offerer, 
the  banner  of  the~~sacrificiar]gathering~  the  messenger  who  has  two  births 
(i,  601)..  Matarisvan  brought  the  one  (Agni)  from  the  sky,  the  eagle  wrested 
the  other  (Soma)  from  the  rock  (i,  936).  Matarisvan  brought  Agni  the 
adorable  priest,  the  dweller  in  heaven  (3,  2^).  Matarisvan  (and)  the  gods 
fashioned  Agni,  whom  the  Bhrgus  produced,  as  the  first  adorable  (priest)  for 
man  (10,  46^).  Him,  the  god,  Matarisvan  has  brought  from  afar  for  man 
(i,  I282).  Matarisvan,  the  messenger  of  Vivas  vat,  brought  hither  from  afar 
Agni  Vaisvanara,  whom  the  mighty  seized  in  the  lap  of  the  waters  (6,  84). 
Matarisvan  brought  from  afar  the  hidden  Agni,  produced  by  friction,  from 
the  gods  (3,1)5).  Matarisvan  produced  by  friction  the  hidden  Agni  (i,  i4i3). 

i was  produced  with  friction  by  Matarisvan  and  was  set  up  in  human 

abodes  (i,  7i4.  I481).  Indra  produced  cows  for  Trita  from  the  dragon  and 
delivered  the  cowstalls  to  Dadhyanc  (and)  Matarisvan  (10,  482). 

There  are  a  few  obscure  passages  in  late  hymns  which  hardly  shed  any 
further  light  on  the  character  of  Matarisvan.  In  two  of  these  he  seems  to 


72     HI.  RELIGION,  WELTL.  WISSENSCH.  u.  KUNST.    i  A.  VEDIC  MYTHOLOGY. 

be  regarded  ras  purifying  "and  enjoying  Soma  (9,  6;3X;  10,  H41);  and  in 
another,  he  is  mentioned  in  an  enumeration  of  Fathers  beside  whom  Indra 
drank  Soma  (Val.  42).  Indra  is  once  compared  with  him  as  with  a  skilful 
artificer  (10,  io56),  probably  in  allusion  to  Matarisvan' s  skill  in  producing 
Agni  (cp.  10,  469,  where  the  same  verb  taks  is  used).  This  notion  of  skill 
is  probably  also  present  in  a  verse  of  the  wedding  hymn  (10,  854?),  where 
Matarisvan  is  invoked  along  with  other  deities  to  join  the  hearts  of  two 
lovers  (cp.  Tvastr,  §  38).  Finally,  in  a  very  obscure  verse  (10,  109*)  Matari 
svan  is  spoken  of  as  'boundless'  and  'wandering'  (salila,  an  adjective  several 
times  used  with  vdta  in  the  AV.),  attributes  which  possibly  already  represent 
the  conception  of  Matarisvan  to  be  found  in  later  times. 

Matarisvan  would  thus  appear  to  be  a  personification  of  a  celestial  form 
of  Agni,  who  at  the  same  time  is  thought  of  as  having  like  Prometheus 
brought  down  the  hidden  fire  from  heaven  to  earth.  Hardly  anything  but 
lightning  can  be  his  natural  basis.  This  would  account  for  his  being  the 
messenger  of  Vivasvat  from  heaven  to  earth  (6,84),  just  as  Agni  himself 
is  a  messenger  of  Vivasvat  (§35)  between  the  two  worlds1.  In  the  AV. 
Matarisvan  is  still  found  as  a  mystic  name  of  Agni  (AV.  10,  8^9-  4°).  but 
generally  in  that  (AV.  12,  i51  &c.)  and  other  Samhitas,  the  Brahmanas  and 
all  the  subsequent  literature,  the  name  is  a  designation  of  wind.  The  transition 
to  this  conception  is  to  be  found  in  a  passage  already  quoted  (3,  29"): 
'Agni,  when  as  Matarisvan  he  was  formed  in  his  mother,  became  the  swift 
flight  of  wind'2,  and  Agni  in  the  air  as  a  raging  serpent  is  elsewhere  com 
pared  with  the  rushing  wind  (i,  791).  Such  a  statement  might  easily  have 
been  taken  later  to  interpret  Matarisvan  as  the  wind. 

The  word  matarifvan,  which  is  without  a  cognate  in  any  other  Indo- 
European  language,  has  every  appearance  of  being  a  purely  Indian  compound 
(like  mdtaribhvari,  rjisvan,  durgfbhisvati).  The  Rigvedic  poet's  explanation 
of  the  name  as  'he  who  is  formed  in  his  mother'  can  hardly  be  dismissed 
as  an  etymological  conceit,  since  the  word  in  all  likelihood  dates  from  a 
contemporary  phase  of  language.  It  probably  means  'growing  in  his  mother' 
(  YSU,  to  swell,  from  which  we  have  sis'u,  child,  and  other  derivatives)  3,  Agni 
being  also  said  to  grow  (Yvrdh)  in  his  mothers  (i,  i4i5).  There  is  a  change 
of  accent  from  the  second  to  the  third  syllable,  probably  due  to  the  influence 
of  numerous  words  in  -van  (like  prdtaritvaii).  By  the  mother  either  the 
lower  aram  or  the  thundercloud  might  be  meant;  but  the  latter  is  the  more 
probable,  as  Matarisvan  comes  from  heaven.  Yaska  (Nir.  7,  26),  who  regards 
Matarisvan  as  a  designation  of  Vayu,  analyzes  the  compound  into  mdtari 
(=  antarikse)  and  svan  (from  svas  to  breathe  or  ds'u  an  to  breathe  quickly), 
so  as  to  mean  the  wind  that  breathes  in  the  air. 

1  ORV.  122,  n.  I  thinks  the  frequently  expressed  opinion  that  Matarisvan  is 
nothing  but  a  form  of  Agni,  has  no  sure  foundation,  and  regards  Matarisvan 
simply  as  the  Prometheus  of  the  RV.;  cp.  ORV.  108,  n.  i,  and  SEE.  46,  123.  — 
2  Cp.  BRV.  i,  27;  BDA.  51;  OLDENBERG,  SEE.  46,  306.  -  -  3  Cp.  WHITNEY, 
Sanskrit  Roots  p.  176;  ROTH,  Nirukta  in — 3;  WEBER,  IS.  I,  416;  REUTER,  KZ. 
31,  544—5- 

KHF.  8. 1 4 ;  MUIR,  JRAS.  20,  4 1 6,  note ;  OST.  5, 204,  note ;  SCHWARTZ,  KZ.  20, 2 10 ; 
GW.  s.  v.;  BRV.  i,  52-7;  BRL  9;  KRV.35;  HVBP.  no;  EGGELING,  SEE.  12,  186, 
note  2;  ORV.  122—3. 

S  26.  Ahi  budhnya.  --  The  serpent  of  the  Deep,  Ahi  budhnya,  whose 
name  is  mentioned  solely  in  hymns  to  the  Visvedevas,  is  spoken  of  only 
twelve  times  in  the  RV.  and  hardly  ever  alone.  He  is  associated  five  times 
with  Aja  ekapad,  three  times  with  Apam  napat,  three  times  with  the  ocean 
(samudrd),  and  twice  with  Savitr.  There  are  only  three  verses  (5,  41 l6; 


ATMOSPHERIC  GODS.     26.  Am  BUDHNYA.    27.  AJA  EKAPAD.  73 

7,  34l6'  I?)  in  which  he  is  invoked  alone.  When  only  one  other  deity  is 
referred  to  with  him,  it  is  either  Apam  napat  (i,  i865)  or  Aja  ekapad  (10, 
644).  When  Ahi  budhnya  and  Aja  ekapad  are  mentioned  together  in  the 
same  verse,  they  are  always  (with  the  slight  exception  of  10,  66 IJ)  in  juxta 
position.  The  most  characteristic  enumerations  in  which  the  name  is  invoked 
are:  Aja  ekapad,  Ahi  budhnya,  the  ocean,  Apam  napat,  Prsni  (7,  35I3)j  Ahi 
budhnya,  Aja  ekapad,  Trita,  Rbhuksan,  Savitr,  Apam  napat  (2,  3i6);  the  ocean, 
the  "stream,  the  space  (rajas],  the  air,  Aja  ekapad,  the  thundering  flood,  Ahi 
budhnya,  and  all  the  gods  (10,  66 II).  Judged  by  these  associates  Ahi 
budhnya  would  seem  to  be  an  atmospheric  deity,  and  he  is  enumerated  in 
the  Naighantuka  (5,  4)  among  the  divinities  of  the  middle  or  aerial  region. 
But  it  is  only  where  he  is  mentioned  alone  that  anything  more  definite  than 
this  can  be  gathered.  In  the  verse  which  gives  most  information  about  him, 
the  poet  exclaims:  'I  praise  with  songs  the  serpent  born  in  water  (abjdm\ 
sitting  in  the  bottom  (budhne)  of  the  streams  in  the  spaces'  (7,  34l6;  cp.  10, 
935).  This  indicates  that  he  dwells  in  the  atmospheric  ocean,  and  Yaska 
explains  budhna  as  air  (Nir.  10,  44).  In  the  verse  immediately  following  he 
is  besought  not  to  give  his  worshippers  over  to  injury,  and  these  identical 
words  are  addressed  to  him  in  another  passage  also  (5,  4il6).  This  suggests 
that  there  is  something  hurtful  in  his  nature.  Ahi  is  otherwise  a  term  com 
monly  applied  to  Vrtra  (§  68),  and  Vrtra  enclosing  the  waters  is  described 
as  overflowed  by  the  waters  or  lying  in  them  (ibid.)  or  at  the  bottom  (budhna) 
of  the  air  (i,  526).  Agni  in  the  space  of  air  is  called  a  raging  ahi  (i,  791) 
and  is  also  said  to  have  been  produced  in  the  depth  (budhne}  of  the  great 
space  (4,  ii1).  Thus  it  may  be  surmised  that  Ahi  budhnya  was  originally 
not  different  from  Ahi  Vrtra,  though  he  is  invoked  as  a  divine  being,  who 
resembles  Apam  napat,  his  baleful  aspect  only  being  hinted  at.  In  later  Vedic 
texts  Ahi  budhnya  is  allegorically  connected  with  Agni  Garhapatya  (VS.  5,  33; 
AB.  3,  36;  TB.  i,  i,  io3).  In  post- Vedic  literature  Ahi  budhnya  is  the  name 
of  a  Rudra  as  well  as  an  epithet  of  Siva. 

.     WEBER,  IS.   i,  96;    ROTH,  PW.  s.  v.  budhnya;    OST.  5,  336;  BRV.  2,  205—6. 
401;  3,  24—5;  HVBP.  41  (as  a  name  of  the  moon). 

§  27.  Aja  ekapad.  —  This  being  is  closely  connected  with  Ahi  budhnya, 
his  name  occurring  five  times  in  juxtaposition  with  that  of  the  latter  and 
only  once  unaccompanied  by  it  (10,  6513).  The  deities  invoked  in  the  latter 
passage,  'the  thundering  Paviravl  ('daughter  of  lightning':  PW.),  Ekapad  aja, 
the  supporter  of  the  sky,  the  stream,  the  oceanic  waters,  all  the  gods,  Sara- 
svatf,  are,  however,  almost  identical  with  those  enumerated  in  the  following 
hymn:  'the  ocean,  the  stream,  the  aerial  space,  Aja  ekapad,  the  thundering 
flood,  Ahi  budhnya,  and  all  the  gods'  (10,  66 ll).  These  two  passages  suggest 
that  Aja  ekapad  is  an  aerial  deity.  He  is,  however,  enumerated  in  the 
Naighantuka  (5,  6)  among  the  deities  of  the  celestial  region.  In  the  AV. 
Aja  ekapada  is  said  to  have  made  firm  the  two  worlds  (AV.  13,  i6).  The 
TB.  (3,  i,28)  speaks  of  Aja  ekapad  as  having  risen  in  the  east  The  commen 
tator  on  his  passage  defines  Aja  ekapad  as  a  kind  of  Agni,  and  Durga  on 
Nirukta  1 2,  2  9  interprets  him  as  the  sun.  Yaska  himself  does  not  express  an 
opinion  as  to  what  Aja  ekapad  represents,  merely  explaining  Aja  as  ajana, 
driving,  and  ekapad  as  'he  who  has  one  foot'  or  'he  who  protects  or  drinks 
with  one  foot'.  Though  hardly  any  longer  an  independent  deity,  Aja  ekapad 
as  well  as  Ahi  budhnya  receives  a  libation  in  the  domestic  ritual  (Parask. 
2,  i52j.  In  the  Epic  Ajaikapad  is  both  the  name  of  one  of  the  eleven  Rudras 
and  an  epithet  of  Siva. 

RoTH1,  with  whom  GRASSMANN  agrees2,  regards  Aja  ekapad  as  a  genius 


74     IH.  RELIGION,  WELTL.  WIRSENSCH.  u.  KUNST.     i  A.  VEDIC  MYTHOLOGY. 


of  the  storm,  translating  the  name  as  the  'one-footed  Driver  or  Stormer'. 
BLOOMFiELD3  and  VICTOR  HENRY  4  think  he  represents  a  solar  deity.  HARDY  5 
believes  that  'the  goat  who  goes  alone'  is  the  moon.  BERGAiGNE6,  interpreting 
the  name  as  'the  unborn  (a-ja)  who  has  only  one  foot',  thinks  this  means  he 
who  inhabits  the  one  isolated  mysterious  world.  If  another  conjecture  may 
be  added,  the  name,  meaning  'the  one-footed  goat' 7,  was  originally  a  figurative 
designation  of  lightning,  the  'goat'  alluding  to  its  agile  swiftness  in  the  cloud- 
mountains,  and  the  one  foot  to  the  single  streak  which  strikes^'the  earth. 

i  PW.  s.  v.  aja\  Nirukta,  Erl.  165—6  (cp.  OST.  5,  336).  —  2  GW.  s.  v.  I  a/a- 
cp.  FAY,  AJP.  1 7,  24—5.  —  3  AJP.  12,  443 ;  SEE.  42,  664.  —  4  Les  hymnes  Rohita,  Paris 
1891,  p.  24.  —  5  HVBP.  41—2.  —  6  BRV.  3,  23.  —  7  ORV.  71—2;  cp.  BRI.  24. 

WEBER,  IS.   i,  96. 

$  28.  Rudra.  --  This  god  occupies  a  subordinate  position  in  the  RV., 
being  celebrated  in  only  three  entire  hymns,  in  part  of  another,  and  in  one 
conjointly  with  Soma,  while  his  name  occurs  about  75  times. 

His  physical  features  in  the  RV.  are  the  following.  He  has  a  hand 
(2,  337&c.),  arms  (2,33^;  VS.  16,  i),  and  firm  limbs  (2,  33").  He  has  beautiful  lips 
(2,  33s)  and  (like  Pusan)  wears  braided  hair  (i,  H41-5).  His  colour  is  brown 
(babhru\  2,  335  &c.).  His  shape  is  dazzling  (i,  H45),  and  he  is  multiform 
(2i  339)'  HG  shines  like  the  brilliant  sun,  like  gold  (i,  43s).  He  is  arrayed 
with  golden  ornaments  (2,  33^)  and  wears  a  glorious  multiform  necklace1 
(niska:  2,  33in).  He  sits  on  a  car-seat  (2,  334).  The  later  Samhitas  (espe 
cially  VS.  1 6)  add  a  number  of  other  traits.  He  is  thousand-eyed  (AV.  u, 
22-  ?,  VS.  1 6,  7).  He  has  a  belly,  a  mouth,  a  tongue,  and  teeth  (AV.  n,  26). 
His  belly  is  black  and  his  back  red  (AV.  15,  i7'8).  He  is  blue-necked  (VS. 
1 6,  7)  and  blue-tufted  (AV.  2,  276).  He  is  copper-coloured  and  red  (VS. 
1 6,  7).  He  is  clothed  in  a  skin  (VS.  3,  61;  16,  51)  and  dwells  in  mountains 
(VS.  1 6,  2-4). 

The  RV.  often  mentions  Rudra's  weapons  of  offence.  He  is  once  said 
to  hold  the  thunderbolt  in  his  arm  (2,  333).  His  lightning  shaft  (didyut)  dis 
charged  from  the  sky  traverses  the  earth  (7,  463).  He  is  usually  said  to  be 
armed  with  a  bow  and  arrows  (2,  3310-  ";  5,  42";  10,  125*),  which  are 
strong  and  swift  (7,  46 x).  He  is  invoked  with  Krsanu  (§  48)  and  the  archers 
(10,  648);  and  seems  to  be  intended  when  Indra  is  compared  with  the  archer 
on  the  car-seat  (6,  20°,  cp.  2,  33 IT).  In  the  AV.  he  is  also  called  an  archer 
(i,  28';  6,  93 x;  15,  51""7).  In  that  and  other  later  Vedic  texts  his  bow, 
arrow,  weapon,  bolt,  or  club  are  frequently  referred  to  (AV.  i,  285  &c.;  SB. 
9,  i,  i6). 

One  of  the  points  most  frequently  mentioned  about  Rudra  is  his  rela 
tionship  to  the  Maruts.  He  is  their  father  (i,  ii46-  9;  2,  33');  or  they  are 
more  frequently  spoken  of  as  his  sons  and  are  also  several  times  called 
Rudras  or  Rudriyas2.  He  is  said  to  have  generated  them  from  the  shining 
udder  of  Prsni  (2,  342)  3.  But  Rudra  is  never  associated,  as  Indra  is,  with 
the  warlike  exploits  of  the  Maruts,  for  he  does  r  not  engage  in  conflict  with 
the  demons.  Tryambaka,  a  common  epithet  of  Siva  in,  post-Vedic  literature, 
is  already  applied  to  Rudra  in  Vedic  texts  (VS.  3,  58;  SB.  2,  6,  29)  and  seems 
to  refer  to  him  once  even  in  the  RV.  (7,  5912).  The  meaning  appears  to  be 
'he  who  has  three  mothers'  (cp.  3,  565)  in  allusion  to  the  threefold  division 
of  the  universe  (cp.  GRV.  i,  555).  Ambika,  a  post-Vedic  name  of  Siva's 
wife,  is  mentioned  for  the  first  time  in  VS.  3,  5,  appearing  here,  however, 
not  as  Rudra's  wife,  but  as  his  sister.  Uma  and  Parvati,  regular  names  of 
Siva's  wife,  seem  first  to  occur  in  the  TA.  and  the  Kena  Upanisad. 

In  a  passage  of  the  RV.  (2,  i6)  Rudra  is  one  of  several  deities  identified 


ATMOSPHERIC  GODS.     28.  RUDRA.  75 


with  Agni.  He  is  also  identified  with  Agni  in  the  AV.  (7,  By1),  in  the  TS. 
(5,  4,  31;  5>  5>  74),  and  the  SB.  (6,  i,  3™,  cp.  9,  i,  i1).  The  word  >Wr0 
often  occurs  as  an  adjective,  in  several  cases  as  an  attribute  of  Agni4  (though 
rather  oftener  as  an  attribute  of  the  Asvins  (§  21).  Sarva  and  Bhava  are, 
among  several  others,  two  new  names  assigned  to  Rudra  in  VS.  (16,  18.  28). 
These  two  also  occur  in  the  AV.  where  their  destructive  arrows  and  lightnings 
are  referred  to  (2,  276;  6,  93';  10,  i2^;  n,  21-  I2);  but  they  seem  here  to 
have  been  regarded  as  deities  distinct  from  one  another  and  from  Rudra. 
Bhava  and  Sarva  are  in  a  Sutra  passage^  spoken  of  as  sons  of  Rudra  and 
are  compared  with  wolves  eager  for  prey  fSSS.  4,  201).  In  VS.  39,8  Agni,  Asani, 
Pasupati,  Bhava,  Sarva,  Isana,  Mahadeva,  Ugradeva,  and  others  are  enumerated 
as  gods  or  forms  of  one  god.  Rudra,  Sarva,  Pasupati,  Ugra,  Asani,  Bhava, 
Mahan  devah  are  names  given  to  represent  eight  different  forms  of  Agni 
(SB.  6,  i,  37;  cp.  Sarikh.  Br.  6,  i  &c.),  and  Sarva,  Bhava,  Pasupati,  and  Rudra 
are  said  to  be  all  names  of  Agni  (SB.,i,  7,  38).  Asani,  one  of  the  above 
names  assigned  to  Agni  Kumara  in  the  SB.  (6,  i,  310),  is  there  explained  to 
mean  lightning  (vidyuf)  but  in  the  Sankh.  Br.  it  is  interpreted  as  Indra.  The 
epithet  pasupati,  'lord  of  beasts',  which  Rudra  often  receives  in  the  VS.,  AV., 
and  later,  is  doubtless  assigned  to  him  because  unhoused  cattle  are  peculiarly 
exposed  to  his  attacks  and  are  therefore  especially  consigned  to  his  care. 

Rudra  is  described  in  the  RV.  as  fierce  (2,  339-  "•  10,  12 6s)  and  de 
structive  like  a  terrible  beast  (2,  33").  He  is  the  ruddy 5  (arusd)  boar  of 
heaven  (i,  ii45).  He  is  a  bull  (2,  337-  8-  xs).  He  is  exalted  (7,  io4),  strong 
d,43T.  H41),  strongest  of  the  strong  (2,333),  unassailable  (7,46*),  unsurpassed 
in  might  (2,  3310),  rapid  (10,  925),  and  swift  (i,  ii44).  He  is  young  (2,  331; 
5,  6o5)  and  unaging  (6,  4910).  He  is  called  asura  (5,  42  JI)  or  the  great 
asura  of  heaven6  (2,  i6).  He  is  self-glorious  (i,  i293;  10,  92^),  rules  heroes 
(i,  Ti4x<  2  &c.),  and  is  a  lord  (Js'dna)  of  this  vast  world  (2,  339)  and  father 
of  the  world  (6,  4910).  He  is  an  ordainer  (6,  461),  and  by  his  rule  and  uni 
versal  dominion  he  is  aware  of  the  doings  of  men  and  gods  (7,  46 2).  He  makes 
the  streams  flow  over  the  earth  and,  roaring,  moistens  everything  (10,  92 5). 
He  is  intelligent  (i,  43'),  wise  (i,  ii44),  and  beneficent  (2,  337;  6,  4910).  He 
is  several  times  called  'bountiful',  midhvas  (i,  114^),  and  in  the  later  Vedas 
the  comparative  and  superlative  of  this  word  have  only  been  found  in  con 
nexion  with  Rudra7.  He  is  easily  invoked  (2,  336)  and  is  auspicious,  siva 
(10,  929);  an  epithet  which  is  not  even  in  the  AV.  as  yet  peculiar  to  any 
particular  deity. 

Malevolence  is  frequently  attributed  to  Rudra  in  the  RV.;  for  the  hymns 
addressed  to  him  chiefly  express  fear  of  his  terrible  shafts  and  deprecation 
of  his  wrath.  He  is  implored  not  to  slay  or  injure,  in  his  anger,  his  wor 
shippers,  their  parents,  children,  men,  cattle,  or  horses  (i,  ii47-8),  but  to 
spare  their  horses  (2,  33*),  to  avert  his  great  malevolence  and  his  bolt  from 
his  worshippers,  and  to  prostrate  others  with  them  (2,  33"- I4).  He  is  besought 
to  avert  his  bolt  when  he  is  incensed  and  not  to  injure  his  adorers,  their 
children,  and  their  cows  (6,  287.  462~4),  and  to  keep  from  them  his  cow- 
slaying,  man-slaying  missile  (2,  33')-  His  ill-will  and  anger  are  deprecated 
(2»  334~6'  I5)?  and  he  is  besought  to  be  merciful  to  the  walking  food  (io; 
I691).  His  worshippers  pray  that  they  may  be  unharmed  and  obtain  his 
favour  (2,  331-  6).  He  once  even  receives  the  epithet  'man-slaying'  (4,  36), 
and  in  a  Sutra  passage  it  is  said  that  this  god  seeks  to  slay  men  (AG. 
4,  832).  Rudra's  malevolence  is  still  more  prominent  in  the  later  Vedic  texts. 
His  wrath  is  frequently  deprecated  (VS.  3,61  &c.;  AV.  i,  285  &C.).  He  is  invoked 
not  to  assail  his  worshippers  with  celestial  fire  and  to  cause  the  lightning  to 


76     III.  RELIGION,  WELTL.  WISSENSCH.  u.  KUNST.     i  A.  VEDIC  MYTHOLOGY. 

descend  elsewhere  (AV.  n,  225;  10,  i23).  He  is  even  said  to  assail  with 
fever,  cough,  and  poison8  (AV.  n,  222-  26;  6,  90  op.  93).  Rudra's  wide- 
mouthed,  howling  dogs,  who  swallow  their  prey  unchewed,  are  also  spoken 
of  (AV.  10,  i3°,  cp.  VS.  16,  28).  Even  the  gods  were  afraid  , of  the  strung 
bow  and  the  arrows  of  Rudra,  lest  he  should  destroy  them  (SB.  9,  i,  i1-  6). 
Under  the  name  of  Mahadeva  he  is  said  to  slay  cattle  (TMB.  6,  9 ?).  In 
another  Brahmana  passage  he  is  said  to  have  been  formed  of  a  compound 
of  all  the  most  terrible  substances  (AB.  3,  331).  It  is  probably  owing  to  his 
formidable  characteristics  that  in  the  Brahmanas  and  Sutras  Rudra  is  regarded 
as  isolated  from  the  other  gods.  When  the  gods  attained  heaven,  Rudra 
remained  behind  (SB.  i,  7,  31).  In  the  Vedic  ritual  after  offerings  to  other 
gods,  a  remainder  is  not  uncommonly  assigned  to  Rudra  (Gobh.  GS.  i,  828; 
Ap.  Dh.  S.  2,  423).  His  hosts,  which  attack  man  and  beast  with  disease  and 
death,  receive  the  bloody  entrails  of  the  victim  (SSS.  4,  i98),  just  as  blood 
is  poured  out  to  demons  as  their  peculiar  share  of  the  sacrifice9  (AB.  2,  71). 
The  abode  of  Rudra  in  these  later  texts  is  commonly  regarded  as  in  the 
north10,  while  that  of  the  other  gods  is  in  the  east.  It  is  perhaps  due  to 
his  formidable  nature  that  in  the  RV.  Rudra  only  appears  once  associated 
with  another  deity  (Soma:  S  44)  as  a  dual  divinity  in  one  short  hymn  of 
four  stanzas. 

In  the  VS.,  besides  many  other  epithets  too  numerous  to  repeat,  several 
disgraceful  attributes  of  Rudra  are  mentioned.  Thus  he  is  called  a  'robber, 
cheat,  deceiver,  lord  of  pilferers  and  robbers'  (16,  20 — i).  In  fact,  his 
character  as  shown  by  the  various  epithets  occurring  here,  approximates  to 
the  fierce,  terrific,  impure,  and  repulsive  nature  of  the  post- Vedic  Siva. 

Rudra  is,  however,  not  purely  maleficent  like  a  demon.  He  is  also 
supplicated  in  the  RV.  to  avert  the  anger  or  the  evil  that  comes  from  the 
gods  (i,  ii44;  2,  337).  He  is  besought  not  only  to  preserve  from  calamity 
(5,  51 13),  but  to  bestow  blessings  (i,  H41-  2;  2,  336),  and  produce  welfare  for 
man  and  beast  (i,  436).  His  healing  powers  are  mentioned  with  especial 
frequency.  He  grants  remedies  (2,33"),  he  commands  every  remedy  (5,42"), 
and  has  a  thousand  remedies  (7,  463).  He  carries  in  his  hand  choice  reme 
dies  (i,  ii45).  and  his  hand  is  restorative  and  healing  (2,  337).  He  raises 
up  heroes  by  his  remedies,  for  he  is  the  greatest  physician  of  physicians 
(2,  334),  and  by  his  auspicious  remedies  his  worshipper  hopes  to  live  a  hundred 
\vinters  (2,  33 2J.  He  is  besought  to  remove  sickness  from  his  worshippers' 
offspring  (7,  462)  and  to  be  favourable  to  man  and  beast,  that  all  in  the 
village  may  be  well-fed  and  free  from  disease  (i,  H41).  In  this  connexion 
Rudra  has  two  epithets  which  are  peculiar  to  him,  jaldsa^  (perhaps)  'healing' 
and  jaldsa-bhesaja,  'possessing  healing  remedies  (i,  434;  AV.  2,  276).  These 
medicines  against  sickness  are  probably  rains11  (cp.  5,  53M;  10,  599).  That 
this  attribute  was  essential  to  his  nature,  appears  from  a  verse  of  a  hymn  in 
which  various  deities  are  characterized  without  being  named  (8,  295):  'One 
bright,  fierce,  possessing  healing  remedies,  holds  a  sharp  weapon  in  his  hand'. 
Rudra's  lightning  and  his  remedies  are  also  mentioned  together  in  another 
verse  (7,  463).  The  healing  Rudra  with  the  Rudras  is  invoked  to  be  favour 
able  (7.  356).  The  Maruts  are  also  in  another  verse  associated  with  Rudra 
as  possessing  pure  and  beneficent  remedies  (2,  3313).  The  healing  power  of 
Rudra  is  sometimes  referred  to  in  the  other  Samhitas  (VS.  3,  59;  16,  5.  49; 
AV.  2,  276);  but  much  less  frequently  than  his  destructive  activity.  In  the 
Sutras,  sacrifices  to  him  are  prescribed  for  removing  or  preventing  disease  in 
cattle  (AG.  4,  84°;  Kaus.  S.  51,  7  &c.). 

The   evidence   of  the   RV.   does   not  distinctly  show  with  what  physical 


ATMOSPHERIC  GODS.     28.  RUDRA.     29.  THE  MARUTS.  77 

basis  Rudra  is  connected.  He  is  generally  regarded  as  a  storm-god.  But 
his  missile  is  maleficent,  unlike  that  of  Indra,  which  is  directed  only  against 
the  enemies  of  his  worshippers.  Rudra  appears  therefore  to  have  originally 
represented  not  the  storm  pure  and  simple,  but  rather  its  baleful  side  in  the 
destructive  agency  of  lightning I2.  This  would  account  for  his  deadly  shafts 
and  for  his  being  the  father  or  chief  of  the  Maruts  or  Storm-gods,  who  are 
armed  with  lightning  and  who  are  said  to  have  been  born  'from  the  laughter 
of  lightning'  (i,  2312).  His  beneficent  and  healing  powers  would  be  based 
partly  on  the  fertilizing  and  purifying  action  of  the  thunderstorm  and  partly 
on  the  indirect  action  of  sparing  those  whom  he  might  slay.  Thus  the  de 
precations  of  his  wrath  gave  rise  to  the  euphemistic  epithet  'auspicious'  (s'iva), 
which  became  the  regular  name  of  Rudra's  historical  successor  in  post-Vedic 
mythology.  This  explanation  would  also  account  for  Rudra's  close  connexion 
with  Agni  in  the  RV. 

WEBER  IJ  expresses  the  view  that  this  deity  in  the  earliest  period  speci 
ally  designated  the  howling  of  the  Storm  (the  plural  therefore  meaning  the 
Maruts),  but  that  as  the  roaring  of  fire  is  analogous,  Storm  and  ,Fire  com 
bined  to  form  a  god  of  rage  and  destruction,  the  epithets  of  the  Satarudriya 
being  derived  partly  from  Rudra  =  Storm  and  partly  from  Agni  =  Fire. 
H.  H.  WILSON  thought  that  Rudra  was  'evidently  a  form  of  either  Agni  or 
Indra'14.  L.  v.  SCHROEDERIS  regards  Rudra  as  originally  the  chief  of  the 
souls  of  the  dead  conceived  as  storming  along  in  the  wind  (cp.  p.  81). 
OLDENBERG  is  of  opinion  that  Rudra  probably  represented  in  his  origin  a  god 
of  mountain  and  forest,  whence  the  shafts  of  disease  attack  mankind10. 

The  etymology  of  the  word  rudra  is  somewhat  uncertain  as  regards  the 
meaning.  It  is  generally  derived  from  the  root  rud,  to  cry,  and  interpreted 
as  the  Howler17.  This  is  the  Indian  derivation18.  By  GRASSMANN^  it  is 
connected  with  a  root  rud  having  the  conjectural  meaning  of  'to  shine'  or, 
according  to  PISCHEL,  'to  be  ruddy'20.  Rudra  would  thus  mean  the  'bright' 
or  the  'red  one'21. 

i  Cp.  PISCHEL,  ZDMG.40, 120—1.  —  2  i,  642-  12.  85";  5,  4215;  6,  504.  66"; 
8,  2017  (cp.  5,  59 8;  7,  561.  585).  —  3  Vayu  is  once  said  to  have  generated  the 
Maruts  from  the  sky  (i,  1344)  and  Vata  is  approximated  to  Rudra  in  10,  1691.  — 
4  i,  271°  (cp.  Nir.  10,  8;  Erl.  136);  3,  25;  4,  3  i;  5,  33;  8,  6i3.  —  5  Cp.  BLOOM- 
FIELD,  AJP.  12,  429;  PVS.  I,  57;  ORV.  359,  note  4.  —  6  Cp.  BDA.  46.  54; 
GELDNER,  FaW.  20.  —  7  BLOOMFIELD,  AJP.  12,  428—9.  -  -  8  Cp.  BLOOMFIELD'S 
explanation  (AJP.  7,  469—72)  of  AV.  I,  12  as  a  prayer  to  lightning  conceived  as 
the  cause  of  fever,  headache,  and  coughs  (otherwise  WEBER,  IS.  4,  405).  —  9  HRI. 
250,  note  2;  cp.  ORV.  488.  302—3-  334— 5-  458-  —  I0  Cp.  ORV.  335,  note  3.  - 
ii  The  remedy  is  explained  by  BRV.  3,  32  as  Soma,  the  draught  of  immortality, 
and  by  BLOOMFIELD  (AJP.  12,  425—9)  followed  by  HVBP.  83—4,  and  HOPKINS, 
PAOS.  Dec.  1894,  CL  ff.,  as  rain  (Jala  s  a  =  the  mutra  of  Rudra).  —  *2  MACDONELL, 
JRAS.  27,  957;  HOPKINS,  PAOS.  Dec.  1894,  p.  CLI;  HRI.  112;  cp.  KRV.  38, 
note  133.  —  13  IS.  2,  19—22.  --  J4  Translation  of  the  RV.,  introductions  to  vol. 
i,  26—7.  37—8;  cp.  vol.  2,  9  —  io.  —  15  WZKM.  9,  248.  —  16  ORV.  216—24 
(cp.  HOPKINS,  PAOS.  1.  c.).  —  17  KUHN,  Herabkunft  177;  KZ.  2,  278;  3,  335; 
WEBER,  IS.  2,  19—22;  MM.,  OGR.  216;  otherwise  v.  BRADKE,  ZDMG.  40,  359— 61. 
—  18  TS.  I,  5,  ii;  SB.  6,  I,  310;  YN.  10,  5;  Sayana  on  RV.  i,  1141.  —  19  GW. 
-  20  pvS.  i,  57;  ZDMG.  40,  120.  —  21  Cp.  BRI.  14;  HVBP.  83. 

ROTH,  ZDMG.  2,  222;  WHITNEY,  JAOS.  3,  318—9;  Oriental  and  Linguistic 
Studies  1873,  p.  34— 5;  OST.  4,  299—363.  420—3;  LRV.  3,320— 2;  BRV.  3,  31— 8. 
152—4;  v.  SCHROEDER,  WZKM.  9,  233—8.  248—52;  HRI.  99.  578. 

§  29.  The  Maruts.  --  These  are  prominent  deities  in  the  RV.,  thirty- 
three  hymns  being  dedicated  to  them  alone,  seven  at  least  to  them  conjointly 
with  Indra,  and  one  each  to  them  with  Agni  and  Pusan.  They  form  a  troop, 
gana  (a  word  generally  used  in  connexion  with  them)  or  sardhas  (i,37I-5&c.), 


78     III.  RELIGION,  WELTL.  WISSENSCH.  u.  KUNST.     i  A.  VEDIC  MYTHOLOGY. 

of  deities  mentioned  only  in  the  plural.  Their  number  is  thrice  sixty  (8,  858) 
or  thrice  seven  (i,  133°;  AV.  13,  iT3).  Their  birth  is  often  referred  to  (5, 
575  &c.).  They  are  the  sons  of  Rudra  (p.  74),  being  also  often  called  Rudras 
(i,  394-  7  &c.)  and  sometimes  Rudriyas  (i,  387;  2,  3410  &c.),  and  of  Prsni 
(2,  34 2;  5,  52l6.  6o5;  6,  663),  often  also  receiving  the  epithet  prsnimatarah, 
'having  Prsni  for  their  mother'  (i,  23'°  &c.;  AV.  5,  2I11).  The  cow  Prsni 
($>  S2'6);  or  simply  a  cow  is  their  mother  (8,  83 x)  and  they  bear  the  epithet 
gomatarafa  'having  a  cow  for  their  mother'  (i,  85^,  cp.  8,  2o8).  This  cow 
presumably  represents  the  mottled  storm-cloud  (§§43.  6iB.);  and  the  flaming 
cows  having  distended  udders  with  whom  they  come  (2,  345),  can  hardly 
refer  to  anything  but  the  clouds  charged  with  rain  and  lightning.  When  born 
from  Prsni  the  Maruts  are  compared  with  fires  (6,  66 1-3).  They  are  also 
said  to  have  been  born  from  the  laughter  of  lightning  (i,  23 12,  cp.  38*). 
Agni  is  said  to  have  fashioned  or  begotten  them  (6,  3s;  i,  71*).  Vayu  is 
once  said  to  have  engendered  them  in  the  wombs  of  heaven  (i,  I344),  and 
once  they  are  called  the  sons  of  heaven  (10,  772),  being  also  referred  to  as 
the  heroes  (vtrdh)  of  heaven  (i,  64!  122*;  5,  54I0j  or  as  the  males  (niaryah) 
of  heaven  (3,  54'3;  5,  596).  Once  they  are  said. to  have  the  ocean  for  their 
mother,  sindhumdtarah  (10,  78°  cp.  p.  51).  Elsewhere  they  are  said  to  be 
self-born  (i,  i682;  5,  8;z). 

They  are  brothers  among  whom  none  is  eldest  or  youngest  (5,  596.  60$), 
for  they  are  equal  in  age  (i,  I651).  They  have  grown  together  (5,  565; 
7>  S^1)  an<^  are  °f  one  mind  (8,  2O1-  2I).  They  have  the  same  birthplace 
(S)  S33)  and  the  same  abode  (i,  165*;  7,  56').  They  are  spoken  of  as  having 
grown  on  earth,  in  air,  and  heaven  (5,  557)  or  as  dwelling  in  the  three 
heavens  (5,  6o6J.  They  are  also  once  described  as  dwelling  in  the  mountains 
(8,  83'  2). 

They  are  associated  with  the  goddess  Indram,  who  is  their  friend  (10, 
86g),  and  with  Sarasvati  (7,  96 2,  cp.  395).  Their  connexion  is,  however, 
closest  with  the  goddess  RodasI,  who  is  described  as  standing  with  them  on 
their  car  bringing  enjoyments  (5,  568)  or  simply  as  standing  beside  them  (6, 
666).  In  all  the  five  passages  in  which  her  name  occurs,  she  is  mentioned 
with  them  (cp.  i,  i674-  5).  She  therefore  appears  to  have  been  regarded  as 
their  bride  (like  Surya  as  the  bride  of  the  Asvins).  It  is  probably  to  this 
connexion  that  they  owe  the  epithet  bhadrajanayah,  'having  a  beautiful  wife' 
(5,  6 14)  and  their  comparison  with  bridegrooms  (5,  6o4)  or  youthful  wooers 
(10,  786). 

The  brilliance  of  the  Maruts  is  constantly  referred  to.  They  are  golden, 
of  sun-like  brightness,  like  blazing  fires,  of  ruddy  aspect  (6,  662;  7,  59"; 
8,  7 7).  They  shine  like  tongues  of  fire  (10,  78^).  They  have  the  form  or 
the  brilliance  of  Agni  (10,  84*;  3,  26 5),  with  whom  they  are  compared  in 
brightness  (10,  7S2).  They  are  like  fires  (2,  34*)  or  kindled  fires  (6,  662) 
and  are  expressly  called  fires  (3,  264j.  They  have  the  brilliance  of  serpents 
(ahibhanavah:  i,  I721).  They  shine  in  the  mountains  (8,  71).  They  are 
self-luminous  (i,372£c.),  an  epithet  almost  exclusively  applied  to  them.  They 
are  frequently  spoken  of  in  a  more  general  way  as  shining  and  brilliant 
(i,  165"  &c.). 

They  are  particularly  often  associated  with  lightning,  vidyut  (5,  542'3'11; 
i,  645).  The  lightnings  smile  down  on  earth  when  the  Maruts  shed  their 
ghee  (i,  i688,  cp.  5,  52°).  The  lightning  lows  like  a  cow,  as  a  mother 
following  her  calf,  when  they  shed  their  rain  (1,38 8).  They  are  like  lightnings 
shining  with  rain  (7,  5613).  Lightning  is  so  characteristic  of  them  that  all 
the  five  compounds  of  vidyut  in  the  RV.  are  connected  with  the  Maruts  and, 


ATMOSPHERIC  GODS.     29.  THE  MARUTS.  79 

excepting  a  single  instance,  with  them  only.  They  hold  lightnings  in  their 
hands  (8,  723;  5,  54"),  they  delight  in  lightnings  and  cast  a  stone  (5,  543). 
Their  lances  (rsti)  are  often  mentioned,  and  that  these  represent  the  lightning 
is  shown  by  their  epithet  rstividyut,  'lightning-speared'  (i,  i68S;  5,  5213).  Less 
frequently  they  are  spoken  of  as  having  axes  (i,  372.  883;  5,  33*.  572;  8,  20*), 
which  are  golden  (S,732).  Once  (ibid.)  they  are  said  to  bear  the  bolt  (vajrd), 
India's  peculiar  weapon,  in  their  hands.  Sometimes  they  are  said  to  be 
armed  with  bows  and  arrows  (5,  534.  572;  8,  2o4-  I2),  once  being  termed 
archers  shooting  an  arrow;  but  as  this  trait  is  rare  in  the  numerous  hymns 
addressed  to  them,  it  may  be  borrowed  from  their  father  Rudra.  The  Maruts 
are  decorated  with  garlands  and  other  ornaments  (5,  534).  They  wear  golden 
mantles  (5,  556).  Like  rich  wooers  they  deck  their  bodies  with  golden  orna 
ments  (5,  6o4).  Armlets  or  anklets  (khddi)  are  an  ornament  peculiar  to  them. 
With  these  they  shine  like  the  sky  with  stars  and  glitter  like  showers  from 
the  clouds  (2,  342).  One  verse  describes  their  appearance  more  fully  than 
usual.  They  have  spears  on  their  shoulders,  anklets  on  their  feet,  golden 
ornaments  on  their  breasts,  fiery  lightnings  in  their  hands,  golden  helmets 
upon  their  heads  (5,  5411)- 

The  Maruts  ride  on  cars  which  gleam  with  lightning  (i,  881;  3,  5413), 
which  are  golden  (5,  571),  which  have  golden  wheels  or  fellies  (1,64".  885), 
in  which  are  weapons  (5,  576),  and  which  have  buckets  standing  in  them 
(i,  87*).  The  coursers  which  draw  their  cars  are  ruddy  or  tawny  (i,  8S2; 
5»  574)>  golden-footed  (8,  72?),  and  swift  as  thought  (i,  85*).  These  coursers 
are  spotted,  as  appears  from  the  epithet  prsadasva,  'having  spotted  steeds', 
which  is  several  times  and  exclusively  connected  with  the  Maruts.  More  fre 
quently  the  animals  which  draw  their  car  are  spoken  of  in  the  feminine  as 
prsaflh  (i,  396  &c.).  These  are  in  two  passages  (5,  556.  586),  mentioned 
with  the  masculine  asvah.  The  Maruts  are  also  described  as  having  yoked 
the  winds  as  steeds  to  their  pole  (5,  58?). 

The  Maruts  are  great  as  the  sky  (5,  5  7  4),  they  surpass  heaven  and  earth 
(10,  773),  are  immeasurable  in  greatness  (5,  582),  and  no  others  can  reach 
the  limit  of  their  might  (i,  i679).  The  Maruts  are  young  (i,  642.  i652;  5, 
42 l5)  and  imaging  (i,  643).  They  are  divine  (asura),  vigorous,  impetuous, 
without  soil  (i,  64-- I2)  and  dustless  (6,  662).  They  are  fierce  (i,  19*),  irascible 
(7,  568),  terrible  (5,  562-  3;  7,  58'),  of  terrible  aspect  (5,  56*),  of  fearful  form 
(i,  i95.  642),  and  are  terrible  like  wild  beasts  (2,  34*;  cp.  p.  75).  They  are 
playful  like  children  or  calves  (i,  i662;  7,  56l6;  10,  786).  They  are  like 
black-backed  swans  (7,  597).  They  are  iron-tusked  boars  (i,  885);  they  are 
like  lions  (i,  648). 

The  noise  which  they  make  is  often  referred  to  (i,  169?  &c.)  and  is 
expressly  called  thunder  (i,  23");  but  it  is  also  the  roaring  of  the  winds  (7, 
56j).  At  their  coming  heaven  as  it  were  roars  with  fear  (8,  720).  They  are 
often  described  as  causing  the  mountains  to  quake  as  well  as  making  the 
earth  or  the  two  worlds  tremble r.  With  the  fellies  of  their  cars  they  rend  the 
mountains  or  the  rock  (i,  64";  5,  529).  It  is  when  they  come  with  the  winds 
that  they  cause  the  mountains  to  quake  (8,  74).  They  rend  trees  and  like 
wild  elephants  devour  the  forests  (i,  395.  64?).  The  forests  bow  down  before 
them  through  fear  (5,  6o2).  Resistless  as  mountains  they  cast  down  terrestrial 
and  celestial  creatures  (i,  643).  All  creatures  are  afraid  of  them  (i,  858). 
They  speed  like  boisterous  winds  (10,78^)  and  whirl  up  dust  (i,  64").  They 
make  the  winds  or  the  noise  of  the  winds  (7,  5 63).  They  come  with  the 
winds  (8,  73-  *•  X7)  and  take  them  as  their  steeds  (5,  587). 

One    of   the    main   functions   of  the  Maruts  is  to  shed  rain.     They  are 


8o     III.  RELIGION,  WELTL.  WISSENSCH.  u.  KUNST.     i  A.  VEDIC  MYTHOLOGY. 


clothed  with  rain  (5,  574).  They  rise  from  the  ocean  and  shed  rain  (1,389). 
Milking  the  unfailing  well,  they  blow  through  the  two  worlds  with  rain  (i, 
646;  8,  716).  Rain  follows  them  (5,  5310).  They  bring  water  and  impel  rain 
(5>  S^3)-  They  obscure  their  brilliance  with  rain  (5,  591).  They  cover  the 
eye  of  the  sun  with  rain  (5,  595).  They  create  darkness  with  the  cloud  when 
they  shed  rain  (1,389).  They  scatter  mist  when  they  speed  with  winds  (8,7*). 
They  cause  the  heavenly  pail  (5,  536.  598)  and  the  streams  of  the  mountains 
to  pour  (5,  597).  When  they  hurry  on,  the  waters  flow  (5,  586).  A  terrestrial 
river  receives  its  name,  Marudvrddha,  'swelled  by  the  Maruts'  (10,7  5s),  from 
this  action.  The  sweat  of  the  sons  of  Rudra  became  rain  (5,  587).  The 
rain  shed  by  the  Maruts  is  also  figuratively  referred  to  as  milk  (i,  i663), 
ghee  (i,  853;  10,  784);  milk  and  ghee  (i,  64b);  or  they  are  said  to  pour  out 
the  spring  (i,  85")  or  to  wet  the  earth  with  honey  (5,  548)2.  They  raise 
waters  from  sea  to  sky  and  discharge  them  from  the  sky  upon  the  earth 
(AV.  4,  274).  The  waters  which  they  shed  are  often  clearly  connected  with 
the  thunderstorm.  Desiring  to  give  water,  whirling  hail,  violent,  they  rush 
on  with  thunder  (5,  543).  They  cause  winds  and  lightnings  with  their  might, 
milk  heavenly  gifts  from  the  udder,  and  fill  the  earth  with  milk  (i,  64s). 
The  spring  which  they  milk,  thunders  (i,  646).  The  sky,  the  ruddy  bull, 
bellows  when  they  shed  the  waters  (5,  586).  They  cause  the  stallion  to  make 
water  (i,  646).  They  bestow  the  rain  of  heaven  and  shed  abundantly  the 
streams  of  the  stallion  (5,  836).  They  assume  a  golden  colour  when  they 
make  water  with  the  steed  (2,  3413).  The  streams  resound  with  the  fellies 
of  the  Maruts,  when  they  raise  the  voice  of  the  cloud  (i,  i688).  The  waters 
which  Indra  sheds  are  called  marutvatih,  'attended  by  the  Maruts'  (i,  8o4). 
In  connexion  with  their  character  as  shedders  of  rain,  the  Maruts  receive  the 
epithets  purndrapsdh  (5,  57s)  or  drapsinah  (i,642)  'abounding  in  drops'  and 
the  frequent  suddnavah,  'dripping  well'.  They  also  avert  heat  (5,  541)-  But 
they  likewise  dispel  darkness  (7,  5620);  produce  light  (i,  8610),  and  prepare 
a  path  for  the  sun  (8,  78).  They  are  also  said  to  have  measured  out  the 
an"  (5?  552);  stretched  out  the  terrestrial  regions  as  well  as  the  bright  realms 
of  heaven,  and  held  apart  the  two  worlds  (8,  83q<  IX). 

Doubtless  in  allusion  to  the  sound  of  the  wind,  the  Maruts  are  several 
times  called  singers  (5,  521.  6o8;  7,  35^).  They  are  the  singers  of  heaven 
(S>  575)-  They  sing  a  song  (i,  i94.  i667J.  While  singing  they  made  the  sun 
to  shine  (8,  29™)  and  while  blowing  their  pipe  they  cleft  the  mountain 
(i,  85'°).  For  Indra  when  he  slew  the  dragon,  they  sang  a  song  and  pressed 
Soma  (5,  292.  3o6).  In  singing  a  song  they  created  Indra-might  (i,  852). 
Though  their  song  must  primarily  have  represented  the  sound  of  the  winds 
(cp.  4,  224),  it  is  also  conceived  as  a  hymn  of  praise  (3,  i44).  Thus  they 
come  to  be  addressed  as  priests  when  in  the  company  of  Indra  (5,29^  and 
are  compared  with  priests  (10,  781).  They  were  the  first  to  perform  the 
sacrifice  as  Dasagvas  (2,  362),  and  they  purified  Agni  in  the  house  of  the 
pious,  while  the  Bhrgus  kindled  him  (10,  12 25).  Like  the  other  gods  they 
are  several  times  also  spoken  of  as  drinkers  of  Soma  (2,36*;  8,  839— I2  &c.). 

Being  identified  with  the  phenomena  of  the  thunderstorm,  the  Maruts  are 
naturally  intimate  associates  of  Indra,  appearing  as  his  friends  and  allies  in 
innumerable  passages.  They  increase  his  strength  and  prowess  (3,  359;  6,17"), 
with  their  prayers,  hymns,  and  songs3  (i,  165"  &c.).  "They  generally  assist 
Indra  in  the  Vrtra  fight  (8;  6$2-  3;  10,  ii33).  They  help  Trita  as  well  as 
Indra  in  slaying  Vrtra  (8,  724).  They  are  besought  to  sing  a  Vrtra-slaying 
hymn,  (8,  781"3).  They  helped  Indra  in  the  conflict  with  the  dragon  and 
with  Sambara  (3,  473-  4).  With  them  Indra  gains  the  light  (8,  654),  found 


ATMOSPHERIC  GODS.     30.  VAYU-VATA.  Si 


the  cows  (i,  65)  and  supported  the  sky  (7,  475).  In  fact  Indra  accomplishes 
.all  his  celestial  exploits  in  their  company  (i,  100.  101.  165;  10,  65).  Some 
times  the  Maruts  appear  more  independent  in  these  exploits.  Thus  they 
strike  Vrtra,,  assisted  by  Indra  (i,  23°)  and  are  even  spoken  of  alone  as  having 
rent  Vrtra  joint  from  joint  (8,  723)  or  as  having  disclosed  the  cows  (2,  34*)- 
They  (like  the  gods  in  general)  have  Indra  as  their  chief  (i,  238  &c.)  and 
are  accompanied  by  Indra  (10,  I282).  They  are  like  sons  to  Indra  (i,  ioo5) 
and  are  called  his  brothers  (i,  170'-).  The  Maruts  are,  however  two  or  three 
times  said  to  have  left  Indra  in  the  lurch.  They  involved  him  alone  in  the 
fight  with  the  dragon  (i,  i656)  and  they  abandoned  him  (8, 731).  One  verse 
even  gives  evidence  of  hostility  between  Indra  and  the  Maruts,  when  the 
latter  say  to  him:  'Why  dost  thou  seek  to  kill  us,  Indra?  Do  not  kill  us  in 
the  fray'  (i,  i7o2  cp.  i7i6)4.  A  Brahmana  passage  (TB.  2,  7,  n1)  also  refers 
to  a  conflict  between  the  Maruts  and  Indra. 

When  not  associated  with  Indra,  the  Maruts  occasionally  exhibit  male 
volent  traits.  They  then  to  some  extent  participate  in  the  maleficent  nature 
of  their  father  Rudra.  They  are  implored  to  ward  off  the  lightning  from 
their  worshippers  nor  to  let  their  ill-will  reach  them  (7,s69),  and  are  besought 
to  avert  their  arrow  and  the  stone  which  they  hurl  (i,  i722),  their  lightning 
(7,  574),  and  their  cow-  and  man-slaying  bolt  (7,  561?).  Evil  can  come  from 
them  (i,  398j,  their  anger  is  deprecated  (i,  171';  7,  58s),  and  they  are  said 
to  have  the  wrath  of  the  serpent  (i,  648-9).  But  like  their  father  Rudra,  the 
Maruts  are  supplicated  to  bring  healing  remedies,  which  abide  in  the  Sindhu, 
the  Asiknl,  the  seas,  and  mountains  (8,  2o^~6),  and  once  they  are  associated 
with  Rudra  in  the  possession  of  pure,  salutary,  and  beneficent  remedies 
(2»  33 13)-  The  remedies  appear  to  be  the  waters,  for  the  Maruts  bestow 
medicine  by  raining  (5,  53 H).  Like  Agni,  they  are  several  times  also  said 
to  be  pure  or  purifying,  pavaka  (7,  5612  £c.). 

From  the  constant  association  of  the  Maruts  with  lightning,  thunder,  wind, 
and  rain,  as  well  as  from  other  traits  mentioned  above,  it  seems  clear  that 
they  are  Storm-gods  in  the  RV.  According  to  the  native  interpreters  the 
Maruts  represent  the  winds,  and  the  post-Vedic  meaning  of  the  word  is  simply 
'wind'.  But  in  the  RV.  they  hardly  represent  the  winds  pure  and  simple, 
as  some  of  their  attributes  are  borrowed  from  cloud  and  lightning  as  well. 
A.  KUHN  and  BENFEYS  held  the  Maruts  to  be  personifications  of  the  souls 
of  the  dead  (cp.  p.  77),  and  with  this  view  MEYER  6  and  v.  ScHROEDER7  sub 
stantially  agree.  This  origin  is  historically  possible,  but  the  RV.  furnishes 
no  evidence  in  support  of  it.  The  etymology8  being  uncertain  can  throw  no 
additional  light  on  the  beginnings  of  the  conception.  The  root  appears  to 
be  mart  but  whether  in  the  sense  of  'to  die',  'to  crush',  or  'to  shine',  it  is 
hard  to  decide.  The  latter  meaning,  however,  seems  to  accord  best  with  the 
description  given  of  the  Maruts  in  the  RV. 

i  PVS.  2,  73.    —    2  On  the   various  names  for  rain  in  the  RV.  see  BOHNEN- 

BERGER,  op.  cit.  43-4.—  3  BRV.  2,  391.—  4  PVS.  i,  59.—  5  OO.  on  RV.  1,64. 

—  6  Indogermanische  Mythen  I,  218.  —  7  WZKM.  9,  248 — 9.  —  8  Niruktair,  13; 

GRASSMANN,  KZ.  16,  161—4;  BDA.  112 — 3;  ZDMG.  40,  349—60;  KRV.  note  136; 

MM.,  Vedic  Hymns,  SEE.  32,  xxiv— XXV;  HRI.  97. 

ROTH,   ZDMG.  2,  222;     WHITNEY,    JAOS.  3,  319;     OST.    5,  147—54;     GRV. 

I,  44;  BRV.  2,  369—402;    BRI.   14;    KRV.  39;  MMPhR.  317—20;    HVBP.  83—5; 

v.  BRADKE,  FaR.  117—25;  ORV.  224—5.  283>  HRI-  96~ 9- 

§  30.  Vayu-Vata.  --  Each  of  the  two  names  of  wind  Vayu  and  Vata 
is  used  to  express  both  the  physical  phenomenon  and  its  divine  personi 
fication.  But  Vayu  is  chiefly  the  god  and  Vata  the  element.  Vayu  is  cele 
brated  alone  in  one  whole  hymn  besides  parts  of  others,  and  in  about  half 

Indo-arische  Philologie.     III.  1  A.  6 


82      III.  RELIGION,  WELTL.  WISSENSCH.  u.  KUNST.     i  A.  VEDIC  MYTHOLOGY. 


a  dozen  others  conjointly  with  Indra.  Vata  is  invoked  only  in  two  short 
hymns  (168  and  186)  at  the  end  of  the  tenth  book  of  the  RV.  The  names 
of  both  sometimes  occur  in  the  same  verse  (6,  5o12;  10,  92^).  The  difference 
between  the  two  is  illustrated  by  the  fact  that  Vayu  alone  is  as  a  god  associated 
with  Indra,  the  two  deities  being  then  often  invoked  as  Indravayu.  This 
couple  was  regarded  as  so  closely  connected  by  the  ancient  native  inter 
preters,  that  either  of  them  might  represent  the  deities  of  the  atmospheric 
region  in  the  Vedic  triad  (Nir.  7,  5).  Vata  on  the  other  hand,  being  less 
fully  personified,  is  only  associated  with  Parjanya  (§  31),  whose  connexion 
with  the  thunderstorm  is  much  more  vivid  than  that  of  Indra.  Different  sets 
of  epithets  are  applied  to  the  two  wind-gods,  those  belonging  to  Vata  being 
chiefly  expressive  of  the  physical  attributes  of  swiftness  and  violence. 

Few  references  are  made  to  Vayu's  origin.  The  two  worlds  are  said  to- 
have  generated  him  for  wealth  (7,  90^).  He  is  once  spoken  of  as  the  son- 
in-law  of  Tvastr  (8,  262I~2),  though  his  wife's  name  is  not  mentioned  (cp. 
§  38).  In  the  Purusa  hymn  he  is  said  to  have  sprung  from  the  breath  of 
the  world-giant  (10,  90^).  Vayu  is  rarely  connected  with  the  Maruts.  He  is, 
however,  once  said  to  have  generated  them  from  the  wombs  of  heaven 
(i,  I344)  and  to  be  accompanied  by  them  (i,  i4212)  as  well  as  by  Pusan 
and  the  Visvedevas.  His  personal  attributes  are  rather  indefinite.  He  is 
beautiful  (i,  21)  and  with  Indra  is  spoken  of  as  touching  the  sky,  swift  as 
thought,  and  thousand-eyed  (i,  232>  3).  He  is  once  said  to  have  roaring 
velocity  (10,  ioo2).  Vayu  has  a  shining  car  drawn  by  a  team  or  by  a  pair 
of  red  (rohita)  or  ruddy  (arund)  steeds.  His  team  consists  of  99  (4,  484)r 
ioo  or  even  1000  (4,  463)  horses  yoked  by  his  will.  The  attribute  niyutvat, 
'drawn  by  a  team',  often  occurs  with  reference  to  Vayu  or  his  car,  being 
otherwise  used  only  once  or  twice  in  each  case  with  reference  to  Indra,  Agni, 
Pusan,  or  the  Maruts.  Vayu's  car,  in  which  Indra  is  his  companion  (4,  462. 
482;  7,  9 15),  has  a  golden  seat  and  touches  the  sky  (4,  464).  Like  the  other 
gods,  Vayu  is  fond  of  Soma,  to  which  he  is  often  invited  to  come  with  his 
teams  and  the  first  draught  of  which  he  obtains  as  his  share1  (also  in  com 
pany  with  Indra:  i,i354),  f°r  ne  *s  tne  swiftest  of  the  gods  (SB.  13,  i,  27&c.)2. 
The  AB.  (2,  25)  tells  a  story  of  how  in  a  race  which  the  gods  ran  for  the 
first  draught  of  Soma,  Vayu  reached  the  goal  first  and  Indra  second.  He  is 
in  the  RV.  also  called  a  protector  of  Soma  (10,  855)  and  has  the  characteristic 
epithet  sudpa,  'drinking  the  clear  (Soma  draught)',  an  epithet  which  Indra 
once  shares  with  him.  He  is  also  once  connected  with  the  'nectar-yielding' 
(sabardugha)  cow3  (i,  1344).  Vayu  grants  fame,  offspring,  wealth  in  steeds, 
oxen,  and  gold  (7,  go2-  6).  He  disperses  foes  (4,  48*)  and  is  invoked  for 
protection  by  the  weak  (i,  13 4s). 

Vata,  as  the  ordinary  name  of  wind,  is  celebrated  in  a  more  concrete 
manner.  His  name  is  frequently  connected  with  the  root  vd,  to  blow,  from 
which  it  is  derived.  One  of  the  hymns  devoted  to  his  praise  (10,  168)  de 
scribes  him  as  follows.  Shattering  everything  and  thundering,  his  din  presses 
on;  he  goes  along  whirling  up  the  dust  of  the  earth;  he  wanders  in  the  air 
on  his  paths;  he  does  not  rest  even  a  day.  Firstborn,  he  is  a  friend  of  the 
waters;  but  the  place  of  his  birth  is  unknown.  This  deity  wanders  where  he 
lists;  one  hears  his  roaring,  but  his  form  one  does  not  see  (cp.  i,  i6444). 
He  is  the  breath  of  the  gods  (cp.  7,  872;  10,  92^)  and  is  worshipped  with 
oblations. 

Vata,  like  Rudra,  also  wafts  healing  and  prolongs  life,  for  he  has  the 
treasure  of  immortality  in  his  house  (10,  186).  This  healing  power  of  wind 
doubtless  represents  its  purifying  character  (cp.  p.  77).  The  activity  of  wind 


ATMOSPHERIC  GODS.     31.  PARJANYA.  83 

is  chiefly  mentioned  in  connexion  with  the  thunderstorm  (4,  17";  5,  834; 
10,  168'-  2).  Blasts  of  wind  being  coincident  with  the  appearance  of  lightnings 
and  preceding  the  reappearance  of  the  sun,  Vata  is  spoken  of  as  producing 
ruddy  lights  (10,  i68l)  and  of  making  the  dawns  to  shine  (i,  I343).  The 
swiftness  of  wind  often  supplies  a  comparison  for  the  speed  of  the  gods 
(4,  iy12;  5,  4i3;  9,  975*)  or  of  mythical  steeds  (i,  163";  4,  383).  Its  noise 
is  also  frequently  mentioned  (4,  22^;  8,  91^;  10,  168'- 4).  The  name  of  Vata 
has  been  identified  with  that  of  the  Germanic  god  of  storm  and  battle,  Odhin 
or  Wodan4,  which  is  explained  as  formed  with  a  derivative  suffix  from  the 
cognate  base.  But  this  identification  seems  to  be  very  doubtful5. 

i  i,  1341.  1351;  4,  461;  5,  43^;  7,  92 *;  8,  892.  —  2  OLDENBERG,  ZDMG.39, 
55,  note  i;  HVM.  i,  260.  -  3  Cp.  OLDENBERG,  SEE.  46,  244.  --4  GROHMANX, 
KZ.  10,274;  ZIMMER,  ZDA.  19,  170  —  2.  179—80;  MANNHARDT,  ibid.  22,  4;  MOGK  in 
PAUL'S  Grundriss  1075;  STOKES,  BB.  19,  74;  MACDONELL,  JRAS.  25,  488; 
v.  SCHROEDER,  WZKM.  9,  239.  —  5  Cp.  BDA.  p.  x;  IF.  5,  272. 

OST.  5,  143—6;  KRV.  38;  BRV.  i,  24—8;  Sr.AP.  156—8;  HVBP.  82—3; 
ORV.  225  —  6. 

§31.  Parjanya.  --This  god  plays  a  very  subordinate  part  among  the 
deities  of  the  RV.,  being  celebrated  in  only  three  hymns,  while  the  name  is 
mentioned  less  than  thirty  times.  His  praises  are  also  sung  in  one  hymn  of 
the  AV.  (4,  15),  which,  however,  chiefly  consists  of  verses  from  the  RV.  In 
the  following  passages  the  word  parjanya  can  only  have  the  appellative  sense 
of  'rain-cloud'.  'This  same  water  rises  and  descends  day  by  day;  the  rain- 
clouds  (parjanydJi)  quicken  the  earth,  the  fires  quicken  heaven'  (i,  i6451). 
The  Maruts  'even  during  the  day  cause  darkness  by  the  water-carrying  rain- 
cloud,  when  they  inundate  the  earth'  (i,  389);  'they  poured  out  the  pail  of 
heaven,  they  discharge  the  raincloud  through  the  two  worlds,  the  rain  pervades 
the  dry  places'  (5,  536).  Brhaspati  is  besought  to  cause  the  cloud  to  rain 
and  to  send  the  rain-charged  (yrsfimantam)  cloud  (10,  98*-  8).  Soma  flows 
'like  the  rain-charged  cloud'  (9,  29)  and  the  drops  of  Soma  speed  'like  the 
rains  of  the  cloud'  (9,  222).  In  the  AV.  the  rain-shedding  cow  Vasa  is  thus 
addressed:  'The  rain-cloud  is  thy  udder,  o  excellent  goddess,  the  lightnings 
are  thy  teats,  O  Vasa'  (AV.  10,  io7).  In  all  such  passages  the  native  com 
mentators  explain  parjanya  by  megha,  'cloud'.  On  the  other  handr  parjanya 
is  used  to  explain  dyaus  in  VS.  12,  6  and  stanayitnu,  'thunder'  in  SB.  (14,  5, 
510)1.  In  some  cases  it  is  hard  to  say  whether  we  have  the  appellative  or 
the  personified  meaning.  Thus  the  might  of  Agni  is  said  to  resound  like 
parjanya  (8,  91$);  and  the  frogs  are  spoken  of  as  uttering  their  voices  when 
roused  by  parjanya  (7,  I031).  In  most  passages,  however,  the  word  clearly 
represents  the  personification  which  presides  over  the  rain-cloud,  while  generally 
retaining  the  attributes  belonging  to  the  phenomenon.  The  latter  then  becomes 
an  udder,  a  pail  (kosd)  or  water-skin  (drti\  5,  83®-  9;  7,  ioi4).  The  personi 
fication  is  to  a  considerable  extent  theriomorphic,  Parjanya  being  often  spoken 
of  as  a  bull,  though  with  a  certain  confusion  of  gender  (probably  because 
clouds  are  otherwise  cows).  He  is  a  roaring  bull  with  swift-flowing  drops, 
who  places  his  seed  in  the  plants  as  a  germ  (5,  83%  cp.  7-  9;  AV.  4,  I51). 
The  clouds  (abhrdni)  impelled  by  the  wind  come  together,  and  the  roaring 
waters  of  the  great  bellowing  aqueous  (nabhasvatati)  bull  delight  the  earth  (AV. 
4, 151)-  Sometimes  Parjanya  is  like  a  barren  cow,  sometimes  he  is  productive, 
disposing  of  his  body  according  to  his  wish  (7,  ioi-3). 

The  shedding  of  rain  is  his  most  prominent  characteristic.  He  flies 
around  with  a  watery  car  and  loosens  and  draws  downwards  the  water-skin 
(5»  83').  Like  a  charioteer  urging  on  his  horses,  he  displays  his  rainy  mess 
engers;  when  he  sheds  rain  water,  the  roar  of  the  lion  resounds  from  afar; 

6* 


84       HI.    RELIGION;  WELTL.  WlSSENSCH.  U.  KUNST.      I  A.    VEDIC  MYTHOLOGY. 


with  thunder  he  comes  shedding  rain-water  as  our  divine  (asura)  father 
(S>  S33'  6).  He  is  besought  for  rains  (7,  ioi5)  and  is  implored  to  withhold 
rain  after  shedding  it  (5,  83'°).  It  is,  however,  implied  that  the  action  of 
Parjanya,  as  well  as  of  the  Maruts,  in  shedding  rain  is  subordinate  to  that 
of  Mitra  and  Varuna  (5,  6^~6).  He  is  several  times  said  to  thunder  (5,83). 
Thundering  he  strikes  down  trees,  demons,  evil-doers;  the  whole  world  is 
terrified  at  his  mighty  weapon  (5,  832).  He  and  Vata  are  the  wielders  of 
mighty  thunder  (10,  66 10).  Parjanya  is  also  associated  with  lightning,  though 
less  frequently  than  with  thunder.  The  winds  blow  forth,  the  lightnings  fall, 
when  Parjanya  quickens  the  earth  with  his  seed  (5,  S34).  Parjanya  thunders 
with  lightning  in  the  (aerial)  ocean  (AY.  19,  30-).  He  also  appears  to  be 
meant,  in  a  hymn  of  the  RV.  to  the  Visvedevas,  by  the  god  who  thunders 
and  roars,  rich  in  clouds  and  water,  who  with  lightning  excites  the  two  worlds, 
besprinkling  them  (5,  4214). 

As  the  shedder  of  rain  Parjanya  is  naturally  in  a  special  degree  the 
producer  and  nourisher  of  vegetation.  When  he  quickens  the  earth  with 
his  seed,  the  plants  spring  up;  in  his  activity  are  plants  of  every  form;  he 
has  produced  plants  for  nourishment  (5,  83** 5* I0,  cp.  6,  526;  AV.  4,  i52'3'15; 
8,  721).  He  is  the  fructifier  and  increaser  of  plants;  protected  by  the  god 
they  bear  good  fruit  (7,  ioiI<5).  Reeds  and  grass  are  produced  by  his  action 
(7,  I021,  cp.  5,  75'5;  AV.  i,  2T.  31;  19,  3o5).  Parjanya  places  the  germ  not 
only  in  plants  but  in  cows,  mares,  and  women  (7,  io22),  and  is  invoked  to 
bestow  fertility  (5,83?cp.6,52l6).  He  is  the  bull  that  impregnates  everything:  in 
him  is  the  soul  of  what  moves  and  stands  (7,  ioi6;  cp.  i,  H51).  He  is  even 
described  as  a  self-dependent  sovereign,  who  rules  over  the  whole  world, 
in  whom  all  beings  and  the  three  heavens  are  established,  and  in  whom  the 
threefold  waters  flow  (7,  ioi2-4<5).  Owing  to  his  generative  activity  Parjanya 
several  times  receives  the  epithet  of  'father'  (7,  ioi3;  9,  82^  AV.  4,  i512; 
12,  i12).  He  is  once  called  'our  divine  (asura)  father'  (5,  836);  and  in  an 
other  passage  'the  occult  power  of  the  Asura'  (5,633-?)  perhaps  refers  to  him. 

His  wife  is  by  implication  the  Earth  (5,  834;  7,  ioi3,  cp.  i,  i6o3).  The 
AV.  (12,  i12)  states  that  Earth  is  the  mother,  Parjanya  the  father2,  but  else 
where  explicitly  calls  Vasa  his  wife  (10,  io6).  In  these  respects  as  well  as 
the  theriomorphic  conception  of  him  as  a  bull,  his  relation  to  thunder, 
lightning,  and  rain,  he  approximates  to  the  character  of  Dyaus  (cp.  io,  454; 
2,  46.  2715)  whose  son  he  is  once  called  (7,  I021).  Parjanya  himself  is  said 
to  produce  a  calf  (vatsam),  the  germ  of  plants  (7,  ioi1,  cp.  v.  3;  5,  831), 
who  perhaps  represents  lightning.  Soma  may,  however,  be  meant,  for  his  father 
is  once  (9,  82 3)  said  to  be  Parjanya3,  and  he  is  spoken  of  as  'increased  by 
Parjanya^  (9,  1133). 

Parjanya  is  associated  with  various  other  deities.  His  connexion  is  closest 
with  Vata,  who,  with  the  single  exception  of  Agni  in  one  passage,  is  the  only 
god  forming  a  dual  divinity  with  him  (§  44).  The  Maruts  are  also  a  few 
times  invoked  with  Parjanya  (5,  636.  835)  and  are  called  upon  to  sing  his 
praises  (AV.4,i54).  Agni  is  celebrated  with  him  in  two  verses  of  one  hymn 
(6,  526-  l6;  cp.  §  44).  Indra  has  much  in  common  with  the  'rainy'  Parjanya. 
being  compared  with  him  in  this  respect  (8,  61).  The  two  gods  have  in  fact 
much  the  same  natural  basis,  the  connexion  with  which  is,  however,  much 
clearer  in  the  case  of  Parjanya  (cp.  p.  82). 

Parjanya's  name  is  of  uncertain  derivation.  But  it  is  still  usually  identi 
fied,  owing  to  the  similarity  of  character,  with  that  of  the  Lithuanian  thundergod 
Perkunas4,  though  the  phonetic  difficulties  of  the  identification  cannot  be  ex 
plained.  The  freshness  of  the  conception  in  the  RV.  renders  it  probable  that 


ATMOSPHERIC  GODS.     32.  APAH.  85 


if  the  two  names  are  really  connected,  their  Indo-European  form  was  still  an 
appellative.  It  seems  clear  that  in  the  RV.  the  word  is  an  appellative  of 
the  thundering  rain-cloud  as  well  as  the  proper  name  of  its  personification, 
the  god  who  actually  sheds  the  rain.  The  senses  of  rain- cloud  and  rain-god 
both  survive  through  the  Brahmanas  into  the  later  language.  The  native 
dictionaries  explain  the  appellative  as  'thunder-cloud'  (garjanmegha  &c.),  while 
the  deity  is  sometimes  found  identified  with  Indra  in  the  Mahabharata. 

i  Cp.  OO.   I,  223.  —  2  The  TA.  i,  10, 12  says  that  Bhumi  or  Earth  is  the  wife 

and  Vyoman  or  Sky  is  the  husband.    --    3  Cp.  BLOOMFIELD,  FaR.   153.    --4  OO. 

i,  223';  ZIMMER,  ZDA.  19,  164  f.,  cp.  AIL.  42  f.;  LRV.  3,  322  f.;  ZDMG.  32,  314!".; 

KRV.  note   139;  IIiRT,  IF.   1,  481—2. 

BUHLER,  OO.  i,  214—29;  DELBRUCK,  ZVP.  1865,  p.  275  f.;  ROTH,  ZDMG-  24, 

302—5  (on  RV.   i,  165);    OST.  5,  140—2;    BRV.  3,  25  —  30;    KRV.  40;    BRI.   14; 

\VC.  56  f.;  HVBP.  80—2;  ORV.  226;  SEE.  46,  105;  I1RI.  103-4. 

§  32.  A  pah. — The  Waters,  Apah,  are  lauded  in  four  hymns  of  the  RV. 
(7,  47.  49;  10,  9.  30),  as  well  as  in  a  few  scattered  verses.  They  are  also 
invoked  in  many  detached  verses  along  with  other  deities.  The  personification 
is  only  incipient,  hardly  extending  beyond  the  notion  of  their  being  mothers, 
young  wives,  and  goddesses  who  bestow  boons  and  come  to  the  sacrifice. 
They  are  goddesses  who  follow  the  path  of  the  gods  (7,  473).  Indra  armed 
with  the  bolt  dug  out  a  channel  for  them  (7,  474.  49'),  and  they  never  in 
fringe  his  ordinances  (7,  473).  They  are  also  said  to  be  under  the  commands 
of  Savitr  (p.  32).  They  are  celestial,  as  well  as  flowing  in  channels,  and  have 
the  sea  for  their  goal  (7,49*).  It  is  implied  that  they  abide  where  the  gods 
are  and  the  seat  of  Mitra  and  Varuna  is  (io,3ox).  They  are  beside  the  sun 
and  the  sun  is  with  them  (i,  23*7).  King  Varuna  moves  in  their  midst,  looking 
down  on  the  truth  and  falsehood  of  men  (7,49^).  In  such  passages  at  least, 
the  rain-waters  must  be  meant  (HRI.  99).  But  the  Naighantuka  (5,3)  enumerates 
the  waters  among  the  terrestrial  deities  only  (cp.  YN.  9,  26). 

Agni  is  often  described  as  dwelling  in  the  waters  (p  92).  He  is  said  to 
have  entered  into  them  (7,  494).  As  mothers  they  produce  Agni  (10,  9i6, 
cp.  2";  AV.  i,  331),  one  of  whose  forms  is  called  'Son  of  Waters'  (§24).  The 
waters  are  mothers  (10,  i710;  i,23l6),  who  are  the  wives  of  the  world,  equal 
in  age  and  origin  (io,3o10).  They  are  besought  to  give  their  auspicious  fluid 
like  loving  mothers  (10,  9').  They  are  most  motherly,  the  producers  of  all 
that  is  fixed  and  moves  (6,  5o7). 

The  waters  cleanse  and  purify;  these  goddesses  bear  away  defilement; 
the  worshipper  comes  up  out  of  them  pure  and  cleansed  (10,  i710).  They 
are  even  invoked  to  cleanse  from  moral  guilt,  the  sins  of  violence,  cursing, 
and  lying  (i,  23"  =  io,98).  They  are  remedial  (6,  5o7),  bestowing  remedies 
and  long  life,  for  all  remedies,  immortality  and  healing  are  contained  in  them 
(10,  95~7;  i,  23T9~21).  They  watch  over  man's  health  in  the  house  (HGS. 
2,  45).  They  dispose  of  boons  and  wealth  and  bestow  excellent  strength  and 
immortality  (10,  95.  3o12).  Their  blessing  and  aid  is  often  implored  (7,  474. 
49X~~4;  10,  9.  30 IX),  and  they  are  invited  to  seat  themselves  along  with  the 
Son  of  waters  on  the  sacrificial  grass  at  the  offering  of  the  soma-priest  (10, 
30M.  15). 

The  waters  are  several  times  associated  with  honey.  As  mothers  they 
mix  their  milk  with  honey  (i,23l6).  The  wave  of  the  waters  is  rich  in  honey; 
dripping  with  ghee  it  became  the  drink  of  Indra,  whom  it  exhilarated  (7,47T>  2)- 
Apam  napat  is  besought  to  give  waters  rich  in  honey,  by  which  Indra  grew 
to  heroic  strength  (10,  3o4).  The  waters  are  invoked  to  pour  the  wave,  rich 
in  honey  and  gladdening  the  gods,  for  Indra  who  released  them  from  con 
finement;  the  wave  which  intoxicates,  the  draught  of  Indra,  which  is  produced 


86     III.  RELIGION,  WELTL.  WISSENSCH.  u.  KUNST.     i  A.  VEDIC  MYTHOLOGY. 

in  the  sky  (10,  307~~9).  These  passages  appear  to  show  that  sometimes  at 
least  the  celestial  waters  were  regarded  as  containing  or  identical  with  the 
heavenly  Soma,  the  beverage  of  Indra.  In  other  passages  the  waters  used  in 
preparing  the  terrestrial  Soma  seem  to  be  meant.  When  they  appear  bearing 
ghee,  milk,  and  honey,  they  are  accordant  with  the  priests,  bearing  well- 
pressed  Soma  for  Indra  (io;  30^).  Soma  delights  in  them  as  a  young  man 
in  lovely  maidens;  he  approaches  them  as  a  lover;  they  are  maidens  who 
bow  down  before  the  youth  (10,  3o5~5). 

OST.  5,  24,  note.  343.  345;  BRV.  i,  260;  DARMESTETER,  Haurvatat  et  Ameretat 
73—4;  WC.  56;  Sp.AP.  153—5;  ORV.  242. 


C.    TERRESTRIAL  GODS. 

§  33.  Rivers.  —  Beside  the  divine  Waters,  deified  rivers  occupy  a  not 
unimportant  position  in  the  RV.  The  whole  of  one  hymn  (io;75)  celebrates 
the  Sindhu  or  Indus  with  the  exception  of  the  fifth  verse,  in  which  several 
of  its  tributaries  are  invoked  besides  other  streams,  while  in  the  sixth  verse 
a  number  of  other  rivers  are  mentioned  as  affluents  of  the  Indus.  Another 
entire  hymn  (3,  33), is  devoted  to  the  invocation  and  praise  of  the  sister 
streams  Vipas  and  Sutudrl. 

The  SarasvatT  is,  however,  more  greatly  celebrated  than  any  other  river. 
But  though  the  personification  in  this  case  goes  much  further  than  in  the 
others,  the  connexion  of  the  goddess  with  the  river  is  in  the  RV.  always 
present  to  the  minds  of  the  poets.  Sarasvati  is  lauded  in  three  hymns  of 
the  RV.  and  in  numerous  detached  verses.  Sarasvati,  Sarayu,  and  Sindhu 
are  invoked  as  great  streams  (10,  649)  and  elsewhere  (10,  755)  Ganga, 
Yamuna,  Sarasvati,  Sutudrl,  Parusnl,  and  others  known  and  unknown,  altogether 
twenty-one,  are  addressed.  Kings  and  peoples  living  on  the  banks  of  the 
Sarasvati  are  referred  to  (7,  96*;  8,  2il8).  Sarasvati,  an  iron  fort,  flows  with 
fertile  flood,  a  stream  (sind/iu)  surpassing  all  other  waters  in  greatness;  she 
alone  of  rivers  appeared  pure,  flowing  from  the  mountains,  from x  the  (celestial) 
ocean  (7,  95*-  2,  cp.  5,  43 II).  She  tears  away  with  her  mighty  waves  the 
peaks  of  mountains,  and  her  immense  and  impetuous  flood  moves  roaring 
(6,  6 12*  8).  She  is  distinguished  by  greatness  among  the  great,  she  is  the 
most  active  of  the  active,  and  is  implored  not  to  withhold  her  milk  (6,  6i13). 
The  poet  prays  that  he  may  not  be  removed  from  her  to  fields  which  are 
strange  (6,  6i14).  She  has  seven  sisters  and  is  sevenfold  (6,  6i10-12).  She  is 
one  of  seven,  a  mother  of  streams2  (7,366).  She  is  the  best  of  mothers,  of 
rivers,  and  of  goddesses  (2,4il6).  She  is  called  pavlravl,  an  epithet  (applied 
also  to  tanyatu,  'thunder',  in  10,  65^)  probably  meaning  'daughter  of  light 
ning'  3,  and  is  said  (6,  49?)  to  be  the  wife  of  a  hero  (probably  Sarasvat). 
She  fills  the  terrestrial  regions  and  the  wide  atmospheric  space  and  occupies 
three  abodes  (6,6iII<12).  She  is  invoked  to  descend  from  the  sky,  from  the  great 
mountain,  to  the  sacrifice  (5,  4311)-  The  last  three  passages  (cp.  also  7,  952) 
seem  to  allude  to  the  notion  of  a  celestial  origin,  like  that  of  Ganga  in  post- 
Vedic  mythology.  She  is  once  called  asurya  or  divine  (7,96Z).  The  goddess 
comes  to  the  sacrifice  on  the  same  chariot  as  the  Fathers  and  seats  herself 
on  the  sacrificial  grass  (10,  i78-9).  Even  here  she  must  be  conceived  as  the 
river  goddess,  for  in  the  following  two  verses  the  waters  are  invoked  to  cleanse 
from  defilement. 

She  herself  is  a  purifier  (i,  3™).  She  is  besought  to  come  'swelling  with 
streams'  (6,526)  and,  along  with  the  waters,  the  bestowers  of  wealth,  progeny, 


TERRESTRIAL  GODS.     33.  SARASVATT.  87 

and  immortality,  to  grant  vitality  (io,3o12).  She  bestows  vitality  and  offspring 
(2,  4i17)  and  is  associated  with  deities  who  assist  procreation  (10,  i842).  She 
is  also  said  to  have  given  a  son  named  Divodasa  to  Vadhryasva  (6,  6I1). 
Her  unfailing  breast  (cp.  AB.  4,  i)  yields  riches  of  every  kind  d,  i6449).  She 
is  often  said  to  bestow  wealth,  plenty,  and  nourishment  (7,  952;  8,  2i17; 
9,  6732;  10,  i73-9),  and  several  times  receives  the  epithet  subhaga,  'bountiful' 
(i,  89^;  7,  954-  6;  8,  2i17).  As  a  mother  (ambd}  she  grants  reputation  to  the 
unrenowned  (2,  41 Ib).  She  stimulates,  directs,  and  prospers  the  devotions  of 
her  worshippers  (i,  310-  xl;  2,  38;  6,  6i4).  She  is  invoked  along  with  the 
goddesses  of  prayer  (7,  37";  10,  6513).  She  destroys  the  revilers  of  the  gods, 
is  terrible,  and  a  Vrtra-slayer  (6,  6i>  7).  But  to  her  worshippers  she  affords 
protection  and  conquers  their  enemies  (7,  95^  5;  2,  3o8;  6,  497). 

SarasvatI  is  often  invoked  with  other  deities.  Besides  Pusan  and  Indra, 
she  is  particularly  associated  with  the  Maruts  (3,  541-3;  7,  95.  39s.  4o3)  and  is 
said  to  be  accompanied  by  them  (2,  3o8)  or  to  have  them  as  her  friends4 
(7)  96 2)-  She  is  also  once  in  the  RV.  connected  with  the  Asvins.  When  the 
latter  aided  Indra,  SarasvatI  is  said  to  have  refreshed  him  (10,  i3i5).  With 
reference  to  the  same  myth  the  VS.  (19,  12)  states  that  when  the  gods  cele 
brated  a  healing  sacrifice,  the  Asvins  as  physicians  and  SarasvatI  through 
speech  (vdca)  communicated  vigour  to  Indra5.  The  VS.  even  speaks  of 
SarasvatI  as  the  wife  of  the  Asvins  (19,  94).  SarasvatI  is  several  times  asso 
ciated  in  the  eighth  and  ninth  verses  of  the  dpri  and  dpra  hymns  with  the 
sacrificial  goddesses  Ida  and  BharatI  (with  whom  she  forms  a  triad),  and 
sometimes  also  with  Mahl  and  Hotra.  This  association  may  have  been  due 
to  the  sacred  character  of  the  river.  Allusion  is  made  to  Agni  being  kindled 
for  sacrifice  on  the  banks  of  the  SarasvatI  and  Drsadvati  (3,  23*) 6;  and  the 
AB.  (2,  19)  refers  to  a  sacrifice  performed  by  Rsis  on  the  SarasvatI.  Hence 
on  the  banks  of  the  SarasvatI  there  were  perhaps  places  of  worship  of  the 
Bharatas;  in  that  case,  BharatT,  the  personified  offering  of  the  Bharatas,  would 
naturally  find  a  fixed  place  along  with  SarasvatI  in  the  AprI  litany  which 
accompanied  the  animal  sacrifice7. 

Though  there  is  nothing  to  show  distinctly  (cp.  7,  35")  that  SarasvatI  is 
ever  anything  more,  in  the  RV.  than  a  river  goddess,  we  find  her  identified 
in  the  Brahmanas  (SB.  3,  9,  i?;  AB.  3,  i10),  with  Vac,  Speech,  and  in  post- 
Vedic  mythology  she  has  become  goddess  of  eloquence  and  wisdom,  invoked 
as  a  muse  and  regarded  as  the  wife  of  Brahma8.  The  transition  from  the 
older  to  the  later  conception  is  perhaps  to  be  found  in  passages  like  VS. 
19,  12  quoted  above. 

There  has  been  much  controversy  as  to  the  identity  of  the  stream 
of  which  the  goddess  SarasvatI  is  a  personification.  The  name  is  identical 
with  that  of  the  Avestan  river  Haraqaiti  in  Afghanistan9,  and  it  may 
have  been  the  latter  river  which  was  first  lauded  as  the  SarasvatI10.  But 
ROTH  (PW.),  GRASSMANN  (GW.),  LUDWIG",  and  ZIMMER  (AIL.  10)  are  of 
opinion,  that  in  the  RV.  SarasvatI  usually  and  originally  meant  a  mighty 
stream,  probably  the  Indus  (SarasvatI  being  the  sacred  and  Sindhu  the  secular 
name),  but  that  it  occasionally  designates  the  small  stream  in  Madhyadesa, 
to  which  both  its  name  and  its  sacred  character  were  in  later  times  trans 
ferred.  MAX  MtiLLER12  believes  it  to  be  identical  with  this  small  river 
SarasvatI,  which  with  the  Drsadvati  formed  the  boundaries  of  the  sacred 
region  Brahmavarta  and  which  loses  itself  in  the  sands  of  the  desert,  but 
in  Vedic  times  reached  the  sea.  According  to  OLDHAM  X3  a  survey  of 
ancient  riverbeds  affords  evidence  that  the  SarasvatI  was  originally  a  tribu 
tary  of  the  Sutudrl  (the  modern  Sutlej)14,  and  that  when  the  latter  left  its 


88     III.  RELIGION,  WELTL.  WISSENSCH.  u.  KUNST.     i  A.  VEDIC  MYTHOLOGY. 


old  bed   and  joined   the  Vipas,   the   Sarasvati   continued   to   flow  in  the  old 
bed  of  the  Sutudri. 

Sarasvati  has  a  male  correlative  named  Sarasvat,  who  after  the  praises 
of  the  river  goddess  have  been  sung  in  three  verses  of  one  hymn  (7,  96), 
is  invoked  in  the  next  three  by  worshippers  desiring  wives  and  offspring, 
protection  and  plenty.  Here  his  fertilizing  waters  and  even  his  exuberant 
breast  are  referred  to.  In  another  passage  (i,  i6^2),  Sarasvat,  here  appar 
ently  a  name  of  the  bird  Agni1*,  is  spoken  of  as  refreshing  with  rain.  ROTH 
(PW.)  regards  him  as  a  guardian  of  the  celestial  waters  who  bestows  fertility. 
HiLLEBRANDT16  identifies  Sarasvat  with  Apam  napat  (=  Soma,  the  moon) 
and  HARDY*?  expresses  a  similar  view. 

i  Cp.  BRV.   i,  326.  —  2  According  to  BERGAIGNE  (ibid.)  'having  the  (celestial) 
ocean  for  her  mother',  owing  to  the  accent.  —  3  ROTH,  Nir.  i65f. ;  FW.  ;,BRV.   I,  327. 

—  4  Cp.  Marudvrddha  as  the  name  of  a  river  (10,  755).  —    5  Cp.  SB.   12,  7,  3  l ; 
OST.  5,  94  note.  —  6  Cp.  Manavadharmasastra  II,  I7f.;  OLDENBERG,  Buddha  413  f. 

—  7  ORV.  243.  —  8  Cp.  ZDMG.   i,  84;  27,  705.  —  9  Sp.AP.   105  f.  —  1°  HRI.  31. 
"  Nachrichten    des  RV.  und  AV.  liber  Geographic  etc.,  Prag  1875—6,  p.   13;    qx 
PVS.  2,  86.  —  12  Vedic  Hymns  SBE,  32,  60.  —  13  JRAS.  25,  49—76.  —  '4  OST, 
2,  345.  —  15  BRV.   i,   144;  2,  47.  —  10  HVM.   I,  380—2.  —  17  HVBP.  42-3. 

OST.    5,  337—43;    BRV.   i,  325—8;    BOLLENSEN,    ZDMG.  41,  499;    HVM.   I, 
382—3  (celestial  Sarasvati  =  milky  way);  HVBP.  98;  ORV.  243. 

J&  34.  Prthivi. —  The  Earth,  PrthivT,  being,  as  has  been  shown  (p.  22),. 
generally  celebrated  conjointly  with  Dyaus,  is  lauded  alone  in  only  one  short 
hymn  of  three  stanzas  in  the  RV.  (5,  84)  and  in  a  long  and  beautiful  one 
in  the  AV.  (12,  i).  The  personification  is  but  slight,  the  attributes  of  the 
goddess  being  chiefly  those  of  the  physical  earth.  According  to  the  RV.  she 
abounds  in  heights,  bears  the  burden  of  the  mountains,  and  supports  the 
trees  of  the  forest  in  the  ground  (ksma}.  She  quickens  the  soil,  for  she 
scatters  rain,  and  the  showers  of  heaven  are  shed  from  the  lightning  of  her 
cloud.  She  is  great  (ma/it),  firm  (drlhd]  and  shining  (arfum}. 

The  meaning  of  Prthivi  is  'the  broad  one';  and  a  poet  of  the  RV.  (2,  i52} 
alludes  to  the  etymology  when  he  says  that  Indra  upheld  the  earth  (prthivT) 
and  spread  it  out  (paprathat).  The  TS.  (7,  i,  5)  and  TB.  (i,  i,  3s)  in  de 
scribing  the  origin  of  the  earth,  expressly  derive  the  name  of  Prthivi  from 
the  root  prath,  to  extend,  because  she  is  extended. 

Prthivi  is  spoken  of  as  'kindly  Mother  Earth',  to  whom  the  dead  man  in 
a  funeral  hymn  (10,  i810),  is  exhorted  to  go.  When  mentioned  wirh  Dyaus,. 
Prthivi  frequently  receives  the  epithet  of  'mother'  (cp.  §§  n.  44). 

BRUCE,  JRAS.  1862,  p.  321;    OST.  5,  21-  2;    BRV.  i,  4—5;  BDA.  48;   BOL 
LENSEN,  ZDMG.  41,  494—5;  HVBP.  25—6;  THURNEYSEN,  IF.  4,  84. 

§35-  Agni.  -  -  The  chief  terrestrial  deity  is  Agni,  being  naturally  of 
primary  importance  as  the  personification  of  the  sacrificial  fire,  which  is  the 
centre  of  the  ritual  poetry  of  the  Veda.  Next  to  Indra  he  is  the  most 
prominent  of  the  Vedic  gods.  He  is  celebrated  in  at  least  200  hymns  of 
the  RV.,  and  in  several  besides  he  is  invoked  conjointly  with  other  deities. 

As  his  name  is  also  the  regular  designation  of  fire,  the  anthropomorphism 
of  his  physical  appearance  is  only  rudimentary,  his  bodily  parts  having  a. 
clear  reference  to  the  phenomena  of  terrestrial  fire  mainly  in  its  sacrificial 
aspect.  He  is  butter-backed  (5,43&c.),  butter-faced  (3,  il8£c.)  and  beautiful- 
tongued  (i,  147).  He  is  butter-haired  (8,  492),  flame-haired  (i,  456  &c.)  or 
tawny-haired  (3,  21-*),  and  has  a  tawny  beard  (5,77).  He  has  sharp  (8,  493&c.) 
or  burning  jaws  (i,  585  &c.),  golden  (5,  2>)  or  shining  teeth  (5,  74)  and  iron 
grinders  (10,  872).  He  is  once  described  as  footless  and  headless  (4,  iix)> 


TERRESTRIAL  GODS.     34.  PRTHIVI.    35.  AGNI.  89 

but  elsewhere  he  is  said  to  have  a  burning  head  (7,  31)  or  three  heads  and 
seven  rays  (i,  146*;  2,  53).  He  faces  in  all  directions  (2,  31  &c.).  His  tongue 
is  often  mentioned  (8,  6il8  &c.).  He  is  also  said  to  have  three  tongues 
(3,  2o2)  or  seven  (VS.  17,  79),  his  steeds  also  being  seven-tongued  (3,  62). 
A  name  was  later  given  to  each  of  these  seven  tongues x.  Butter  is  Agni's 
eye  (3,  267);  he  is  four-eyed  (i,  3i13),  thousand-eyed  (i,  7912),  and  thousand- 
horned  (6,  i8).  In  his  hand  he  bears  many  gifts  for  men  (i,  72*).  Like 
Indra,  he  has  the  epithet  sahasra-muska  (8,  i932).  He  is  called  an  archer 
(4,  41)  or  is  compared  with  an  archer  (i,  7oxi),  who  sharpens  his  flame  like 
a  blade  of  iron  (6,  35). 

He  is  often  likened  to  various  animals,  in  most  cases  doubtless  with  a 
view  to  indicating  his  functions  rather  than  representing  his  personal  form. 
He  is  frequently  called  a  bull  (i,  585  &c.).  He  is  a  strong  bull  with  a  mighty 
neck  (5,  212).  As  such  he  bellows  (10,  81),  abounds  in  seed  (4,  53),  and  is 
provided  with  horns  (5,  i8;  6,  i639),  which  he  sharpens  (8,  49 Ij),  which  he 
shakes,  and  which  make  him  difficult  to  seize  (i,  140°).  He  is  many  times 
spoken  of  or  alluded  to  when  born  as  a  calf  (vatsd).  He  is  also  often  com 
pared  with  (i,  582&c.)  or  directly  called  a  steed  (i,  149^;  6,  i26)2.  The 
tail  which  he  agitates  like  a  horse  (2,  44)  is  doubtless  his  flame.  When  puri 
fied  by  sacrificers  he  is  compared  with  a  groomed  horse  (i,  60$  &c.).  Sacri- 
ficers  lead  (3,  2''),  excite,  and  set  him  in  motion  like  a  horse  (7,  71  &c.). 
He  is  the  horse  they  seek  to  tame  and  direct  (2,  5';  3,  2  7 3).  He  is  kindled 
like  a  horse  that  brings  the  gods  (3,  27^).  He  is  attached  to  the  pole  at 
places  of  sacrifice  (2,  21)  or  to  the  pole  of  the  rite  (i,  I437).  He  is  yoked 
in  order  to  waft  the  sacrifice  to  the  gods  (10,  5i7).  He  is  also  compared 
with  (3,  263)  or  directly  called  a  neighing  steed  (i,  368).  He  is  further  likened 
to  a  horse  as  conquering  (8,9i12)  or  causing  to  escape  from  dangers  (4,  28). 
Agni  is,  moreover,  like  a  bird.  He  is  the  eagle  of  the  sky  (7,  15*)  and  a 
divine  bird  (i,  i6452).  As  dwelling  in  the  waters  he  resembles  the  aquatic 
bird  hamsa  (i,  659).  He  takes  possession  of  the  wood  as  a  bird  perches  on- 
a  tree  (i,  662;  6,  35;  10,  9i2).  He  is  winged  (i,  58*;  2,  24),  his  course  is 
a  flight  (6,  37.  46  &c.),  and  he  darts  with  rapid  flight  to  the  gods  (10,  64). 
He  is  once  described  as  a  raging  serpent  (i,  791)- 

Agni  is  besides  frequently  compared  with  inanimate  objects.  Like  the 
sun,  he  resembles  gold  (2,  24;  7,  36).  When  he  stretches  out  his  tongue 
(6,  34)  he  is  like  a  hatchet,  to  which  he  is  elsewhere  also  several  times  com 
pared  (i,  1273  &c.).  He  resembles  (i,  i4i8  &c.)  or  is  directly  called  a  car 
(3,  ii5),  as  bringing  riches  (i,  583;  3,  155)  or  as  being  formidable  in  battle 
(i,  666).  He  seems  to  be  thought  of  as  a  car  directed  by  others,  for  he  is 
conducted  to  the  sacrifice  like  a  laden  car  (10,1763).  He  is  even  compared 
to  wealth  (i,  58°.  60')  or  to  wealth  acquired  by  inheritance  (i,  731). 

Wood  (2,  76)  or  ghee  (7,  31)  is  his  food,  melted  butter  is  his  beverage 
(2,  76;  10,  692).  He  is  nourished  by  ghee  poured  into  his  mouth  (3,  2ix; 
5,  n3&c.)  and  is  an  eater  of  oil  (AV.  i,  72).  He  eats  and  chews  the  forests 
with  sharp  tooth  (1,1435)  or  eats  and  blackens  them  with  his  tongue  (6,6o10; 
10,  792).  He  is  all-devouring  (8,  4426).  He  is  nourished  three  times  a  day 
(4,  I21,  cp.  i,  i4o2;  7,  1 1 3).  He  is  sometimes  spoken  of  as  the  mouth  and  the 
tongue  by  which  the  gods  eat  the  sacrifice  (2,iI3- I4);  and  his  flames  are  spoons 
with  which  he  besprinkles  or  honours  the  gods  (i,  76s;  10,  64).  But  he  is 
more  frequently  asked  to  eat  the  offerings  himself  (3,  2I1"4.  281"6).  Writh 
upright,  god-ward  form  he  strives  after  the  ghee  that  is  offered  (i,  127'), 
Though  the  regular  offering  to  him  is  fuel  or  butter3,  he  is  sometimes,  and 
then  nearly  always  with  other  gods,  invited  to  drink  the  Soma  juice  (i,  14'°, 


90     III.  RELIGION,  WELTL.  WISSENSCH.  u.  KUNST.     i  A.  VEDIC  MYTHOLOGY. 

199.  2 11'  3;  2,  364).  In  one  hymn  he  is  called  somagopd,  'guardian  of  Soma' 
(10,  45 5<  I2).  He  is  invited  to  come  to  the  sacrifice  (10,  989j  and  is  often 
spoken  of  as  sitting  down  on  the  sacrificial  grass  along  with  the  gods  (3,  i42; 
5,  ii2.  265;  7)  1 1  *,  Cp.  433). 

Agni's  brightness  is  naturally  much  dwelt  upon.  He  is  of  brilliant  lustre 
(2,  io2  &c.),  brilliant-flamed  (6,  io3),  bright-flamed  (7,  15™  &c.),  clear-flamed 
(8,  433I)>  and  bright-coloured  (i,  140*;  5,  2 3).  He  has  a  golden  form  (4,  31 
io,  2o9).  He  shines  like  the  sun  (i,  I493;  7,  36).  His  lustre  is  like  the  rays 
of  the  dawn  and  the  sun  and  like  the  lightnings  of  the  rain-cloud  (io,9i4-5). 
He  shines  even  at  night  (5,  74).  Like  the  sun  he  dispels  the  darkness  with 
his  rays  (8,  4332).  He  is  a  destroyer  of  darkness  and  sees  through  the  gloom 
of  the  night  (i,  945;  7,  92).  Kindled  he  opens  the  gates  of  darkness  (3,  51). 
The  earth  enveloped  in  darkness  and  the  sky  become  visible  when  Agni  is 
born  (io,  882).  For  he  is  kindled  at  dawn  and  is  the  only  individual  god 
who  is  described  as  Svaking  at  dawn',  usarbudh  (though  the  gods  collectively 
sometimes  receive  this  epithet). 

On  the  other  hand,  Agni's  course,  path,  or  track,  and  his  fellies  are 
black  (i,  1417;  2,  46- 7;  6,6';  7,  82;  8,23*9),  and  his  steeds  make  black 
furrows  ( 1,140*).  Driven  by  the  wind  he  rushes  through  the  wood  (i,584-5), 
invades  the  forests  and  shears  the  hairs  of  the  earth  (i,  658),  shaving  the 
earth  as  a  barber  a  beard  (io,  I424). 

His  flames  are  like  the  roaring  waves  of  the  sea  (i,  44").  His  sound 
is  like  the  Wind  or  the  thunder  of  Heaven  (5,  2 5s;  7,  36).  He  roars  like 
the  thundering  Dyaus  (io,  454),  or  Parjanya  (8,  9i5),  or  a  lion  (3,  211).  He 
bellows  like  a  bull  when  he  invades  the  forest  trees,  and  the  birds  are  terri 
fied  at  the  noise  when  his  grass-devouring  sparks  arise  (i,  9410<  IX).  He 
cannot  be  checked  any  more  than  the  sound  of  the  Maruts,  an  army  let 
loose,  or  the  bolt  of  heaven  (i,  I435). 

Agni  flames  upwards  (6,i52).  Driven  by  the  wind  his  flames  shoot  into 
the  sky  (8,  43*).  His  smoke  wavers  and  his  flame  cannot  be  seized  (8,23'). 
His  red  smoke  rises  up  to  heaven  (7,  3\  i63).  His  smoke  spreads  in  the 
sky  (6,  26).  Like  the  erector  of  a  post  (metr),  he  supports  the  sky  with  his 
smoke  (4,  62).  He  touches  the  ridge  of  heaven  with  his  crest  and  mingles 
with  the  rays  of  the  sun  (7,  21).  He  encompasses  heaven  with  his  tongue 
(8,  6il8)  and  goes  to  the  flood  of  heaven,  to  the  waters  in  the  bright  space 
above  and  below  the  sun  (3,  223).  The  Agni  of  Divodasa  spread  along 
mother  earth  towards  the  gods  and  stood  on  the  ridge  of  the  sky  (8,  92 2). 
'Smoke-bannered'  (dhumaketu)  is  a  frequent  epithet  exclusively  connected 
with  Agni. 

Agni  is  borne  on  an  lightning  car  (3,  I41),  on  a  car  that  is  luminous 
(i,  I4Q1),  bright  (i,  I4i12),  shining  (5,  i11),  brilliant  (io,  iSj,  golden  (4,  i*) 
or  beautiful  (4,  24).  It  is  drawn  by  two  or  more  horses4,  which  are  butter- 
backed  (i,  i46),  ruddy  (rohita^  arusa),  tawny  and  ruddy  (7,  42-),  beautiful 
(4,  22J,  omniform  (10,70"),  active  (2,  42),  wind-impelled  (i,  94 10),  mind-yoked 
(i,  i46).  He  yokes  them  to  summon  the  gods  (i,  i412;  3,  66;  8,  641).  For 
he  is  a  charioteer  (i,  253  &c.)  of  the  sacrifice  (io,  92*  &c.).  With  his  steeds 
he  brings  the  gods  on  his  car  (3,  69).  He  comes  seated  on  the  same  car  as 
the  gods  (3,  4";  7,  n1)  or  in  advance  of  them  (io,  7o2).  He  brings  Varuna 
to  the  offering,  Indra  from  the  sky,  the  Maruts  from  the  air  (io,  70"). 

According  to  the  ordinary  view  of  the  Vedic  poets,  Agni's  father  is 
Dyaus,  who  generated  him  (io,458).  He  is  the  child  (sis'u)  of  Dyaus  (4, 1 56; 
6,492)  and  is  said  to  have  been  born  from  the  belly  of  the  Asura5  (3,291). 
He  is  often  called  the  son  of  Dyaus  and  Prthivl  (3,  22.  3".  25';  10,  i2.  27. 


TERRESTRIAL  GODS.     35.  AGNI.  91 


i4o2).  He  is  also  spoken  of  as  the  offspring  of  Tvastr  and  the  Waters,  as 
well  as  of  Heaven  and  Earth  (10,  27.  469),  or  even  simply  of  Tvastr  (1,9 5*)  or 
of  the  Waters  (10,  gi6;  AV.  i,  33').  It  is  otherwise  incidentally  said  that  the 
Dawns  generated  Agni  as  well  as  the  Sun  and  Sacrifice  (7,  y83)  or  Indra- 
Visnu  generated  Agni  besides  Sun  and  Dawn  (7,  994),  or  Indra  generated 
Agni  between  two  stones  (2,  12^,  cp.  i1).  Agni  is  also  described  as  the  son 
of  Ila  (3,  29^)  or  as  the  embryo  of  the  rite  (6,  48s).  The  gods,  it  is  some 
times  said,  generated  him  (6,  7';  8,  91 17),  as  a  light  for  the  Aryan  (i,  592), 
or  simply  fashioned  him  for  man  (10,46^)  or  placed  him  among  men  (1,36*°; 
2,43;  6JI61;  8,732).  At  the  same  time  Agni  is  the  father  of  the  gods  (1,69', 
cp.  p.  12).  The  different  points  of  view  which  give  rise  to  these  seemingly 
contradictory  statements,  are  sufficiently  clear. 

Owing  to  his  slightly  developed  anthropomorphism,  the  myths  of  Agni  have 
little  to  say  about  his  deeds,  being,  outside  his  main  activity  as  sacrificial 
fire,  chiefly  concerned  with  his  various  births,  forms,  and  abodes. 

The  divergent  accounts  given  of  the  births  of  Agni  are  not  inconsistent, 
because  they  refer  to  different  places  of  origin.  His  daily  terrestrial  birth  by 
friction  from  the  two  arams  or  firesticks6  is  often  referred  to  (3,  292.  23*- 3; 
7,  i1;  10,  79).  In  "this  connexion  they  are  his  parents,  the  upper  being  the 
male  and  the  lower  the  female  (3,  29^).  Or  they  are  his  mothers,  for  he  is 
said  to  have  two  mothers  (i,  3i2)7.  The  two  sticks  produce  him  as  a  new 
born  infant,  who  is  hard  to  catch  (5,  93>4).  From  the  dry  (wood)  the  god 
is  born  living  (i,  682).  The  child  as  soon  as  born  devours  the  parents  (10, 
794).  He  is  born  of  a  mother  who  cannot  suckle  him  (10,  us1)-  With 
reference  to  this  production  by  friction,  men  are  said  to  have  generated  him 
(i,  6o3;  4,  i1;  7,  i1),  the  ten  maidens8  that  produce  him  (i,  952)  being  the 
ten  fingers  (cp.  3,  23')  employed  in  twirling  the  upright  drill,  which  is  the 
upper  aram.  Pramantha,  the  name  of  this  fire-drill,  occuring  for  the  first 
time  in  a  late  metrical  Smrti  work 9,  the  Karmapradipa  (i,75) I0  has,  owing  to 
a  superficial  resemblance,  been  connected  with  IlpoaYjOs-j;11.  The  latter  word 
has,  however,  every  appearance  of  being  a  purely  Greek  formation,  while  the 
Indian  verb  math,  to  twirl,  is  found  compounded  only  with  nis,  never  with 
pra,  to  express  the  act  of  producing  fire  by  friction. 

The  powerful  friction  necessary  to  produce  fire  is  probably  the  reason 
why  Agni  is  frequently  called  the  'son  (sunu,  putra,  once  yuvan)  of  strength* 
(sahasahy* .  This  explanation  is  supported  by  a  passage  of  the  RV.  stating 
that  Agni  'rubbed  with  strength  (sahasa)  is  produced  {jay ate)  by  men  on  the 
surface  of  the  earth'  (6,4S5).  According  to  a  later  text,  the  kindling  of  Agni 
by  friction  must  not  take  place  before  sunrise  (MS.  i,  610).  Being  produced 
every  morning  for  the  sacrifice  Agni  appropriately  receives  the  very  frequent 
epithet,  exclusively  connected  with  him,  of  'youngest'  (yavistha,  yavisthyd).  His 
new  births  are  opposed  to  his  old  (3,  i20).  Having  grown  old  he  is  born 
again  as  a  youth  (2,  45).  In  this  sense,  he  does  not  grow  old  (i,  i282),  his 
new  light  being  like  his  old  (6,-«i6J1).  Like  some  other  gods,  Agni  is  also 
spoken  of  simply  as  'young'.  At  the  same  time  he  is  old.  There  is  no  sacri- 
ficer  older  than  Agni  (5,  35),  for  he  conducted  the  first  sacrifice  (3,  15*).  He 
shone  forth  after  former  dawns  (i,4410),  and  the  part  played  by  Agni  in  the 
sacrifices  of  ancestors  is  often  referred  to  (8,  43 13  &c.).  He  is  thus  sometimes 
in  the  same  passage  paradoxically  called  both  'ancienc'  and  Very  young* 
(10,  4'-  2). 

More  generally  Agni  is  spoken  of  as  born  in  wood  (6,  3*;  10,  797),  as 
the  embryo  of  plants  (2,  i14;  3,  i13)  or  as  distributed  in  plants  (10,  i2).  He 
is  also  said  to  have  entered  into  all  plants  or  to  strive  after  them  (8,  439). 


92     III.  RELIGION,  WELTL.  WISSENSCH.  u.  KUNST.    i  A.  VEDIC  MYTHOLOGY. 


When  he  is  called  the  embryo  of  trees  (i,  70*)  or  of  trees  as  well  as  plants 
(2,  i1),  there  may  be  a  side-glance  at  the  fire  produced  in  forests  by  the 
friction  of  the  boughs  of  trees. 

The  terrestrial  existence  of  Agni  is  further  indicated  by  his  being  called 
the  'navel  of  the  earth'  (i,  592).  This  expression  appears,  in  the  many 
passages  in  which  it  occurs,  to  allude  to  the  receptacle  of  the  sacrificial  Agni 
on  the  excavated  altar  or  redi*$.  In  the  Vedic  ritual  ndbJd  or  'navel'  is  the 
technical  term  designating  the  hollow  in  the  uttard  vcdi,  in  which  Agni  is- 
deposited14.  The  earlier  use  of  the  term  probably  suggested  the  figure,  that 
the  gods  made  Agni  the  'navel'  or  centre  of  immortality  (3,  i;4).  The  only 
two  occurrences  in  the  RV.  of  the  attribute  vedisad,  'sitting  on  the  altar', 
refer  to  Agni. 

Agni's  origin  in  the  aerial  waters  is  often  referred  to.  The  'Son  of 
waters'  has,  as  has  been  shown  (§  24),  become  a  distinct  deity.  Agni  is  also 
the  'embryo'  (garbha)  of  the  waters  (3,  i12-  J3);  he  is  kindled  in  the  waters 
(10,  45 z;  AV.  13,  1 5°);  he  is  a  bull  who  has  grown  in  the  lap  of  the  waters 
(10,  81);  he  is  ocean-girt  (8,  9i5).  He  is  also  said  to  descend  from  the  dhanu 
or  cloud-island  (i,  i445;  10,  45)  and  to  be  the  shining  thunder  dwelling  in 
the  bright  space  (6,  62).  In  such  passages  the  lightning  form  of  Agni  must 
be  meant.  Some  of  the  later  hymns  of  the  RV.  (10,  51 — 3.  I24)15  tell  a 
legend  of  Agni  hiding  in  the  waters  and  plants  and  being  found  by  the  gods. 
This  legend  is  also  often  related  in  the  Brahmanas16.  In  the  AV.  the  Agnis 
in  the  waters  are  distinguished  from  those  that  go  on  the  path  of  lightning 
or  from  the  celestial  Agni  with  the  lightning  (AV.  3,  2iT-  7;  8,  i11)  and  are 
said  to  have  dwelt  on  earth  (AV.  12,  i37).  In  one  passage  of  the  RV.  also 
it  is  stated  that  Agni  rests  in  all  streams  (8,  398,  cp.  Ap.  SS.  5,  21);  and  in 
the  later  ritual  texts  Agni  in  the  waters  is  invoked  in  connexion  with  ponds 
and  water-vessels.  Thus  even  in  the  oldest  Vedic  period,  the  waters  in  which 
Agni  is  latent,  though  not  those  from  which  he  is  produced,  may  in  various 
passages  have  been  regarded  as  terrestrial.  OLDENBERGI?  thinks  that  the 
terrestrial  waters  are  chiefly  meant  in  this  connexion  and  doubts,  whether  the 
lightning  Agni  is  intended  even  in  the  first  hymn  of  the  third  book18.  In  any 
case,  the  notion  of  Agni  in  the  waters  is  prominent  throughout  the  Vedas.. 
Water  is  Agni's  home,  as  heaven  is  that  of  the  sun  (5,  852:  cp.  AV.  i3,i5"; 
I9»  331)-  1ne  waters  are  also  often  mentioned  along  with  the  plants  or  wood 
as  his  abode '9  (2,  i1  £c.). 

Agni's  origin  in  heaven  is  moreover  frequently  spoken  of.  He  is  born 
in  the  highest  heavens  (i,  143*;  6,  S2).  He  existed  potentially  though  not 
actually  in  the  highest  heavens  (10,5'),  and  was  brought  from  heaven,  from 
afar  by  Matarisvan  (§  25).  In  such  passages  Agni  doubtless  represents  lightning; 
for  lightning  is  regardtd  as  coming  from  heaven  as  well  as  from  the  waters 
(AV.  3,  2iK  7;  8,  i11),  and  in  a  Brahmana  passage  (AB.  7,  72)  it  is  spoken 
of  as  both  celestial  (divyd)  and  aqueous  (apsumai).  When  lightning  is  mentioned 
by  its  proper  name  vidyitt  (which  occurs  hardly  30  times  in  the  RV.)  alorg 
with  Agni,  it  is  commonly  compared  with  and  thereby  distinguished  from 
him20,  doubtless  as  a  concrete  phenomenon  in  contrast  with  the  god.  The 
myth,  too,  of  the  descent  of  fire  from  heaven  to  earth,  due  undoubtedly  to 
the  actual  observation  of  conflagrations  caused  by  the  stroke  of  lightning, 
implies  the  identity  of  the  celestial  Agni  and  lightning.  The  heavenly  origin 
of  Agni  is  further  implied  in  the  fact  that  the  acquisition  of  fire  by  man  is 
regarded  as  a  gift  of  the  gods  as  well  as  a  production  of  Matarisvan;  and 
Agni's  frequent  epithet  ot  'guest  (atithi)  of  men'  may  allude  to  the  same 
notion  (5,  i9  &c.). 


TERRESTRIAL  GODS.     35.  AGNI.  93 

In  other  passages,  again,  Agni  is  to  be  identified  with  the  sun;  for  the 
•conception  of  the  sun  as  a  form  of  Agni,  is  an  undoubted  Vedic  belief.  Thus 
Agni  is  the  light  of  heaven  in  the  bright  sky,  waking  at  dawn,  the  head  of 
heaven  (3,2^).  He  was  born  on  the  other  side  of  the  air  and  sees  all  things 
(10,  iS;4'5).  He  is  born  as  the  sun  rising  in  the  morning  (10,  886)21.  The 
AB.  (8,  285-  Ij)  remarks  that  the  sun  when  setting  enters  into  Agni  and  is 
produced  from  him.  The  same  identification  is  probably  alluded  to  in  passages 
stating  that  Agni  unites  with  the  light  or  the  rays  of  the  sun  (5,  37';  7,  21), 
that  when  men  light  Agni  on  earth,  the  celestials  light  him  (6,  23),  or  that 
Agni  shines  in  heaven  (3,  2712;  8,  4429).  Sometimes,  however,  it  is  difficult 
to  decide  whether  lightning  or  the  sun  is  intended.  The  solar  aspect  of 
Agni's  nature  is  not  often  mentioned,  the  sun  being  too  individual  a  pheno 
menon  to  be  generally  conceived  as  a  form  of  fire.  Agni  is  usually  thought 
of  in  his  terrestrial  form,  being  compared  rather  than  identified  with  the  sun. 
Thus  the  poet  says  that  the  minds  of  the  godly  are  turned  to  Agni  as  eyes 
towards  the  sun  (5,  i4).  At  the  same  time  there  is  frequently  a  side- glance 
at  Agni's  other  forms,  it  being  therefore  in  many  cases  doubtful  which  of  his 
aspects  is  intended. 

Owing  to  the  diverse  births  above  described,  Agni  is  often  regarded  as 
Jiaving  a  triple  character22,  which  in  many  passages  is  expressly  referred  to 
with  some  form  of  the  numeral  fthree'.  This  earliest  Indian  trinity  is  important, 
for  on  it  is  based  much  of  the  mystical  speculation  of  the  Vedic  age*3. 
Agni's  births  are  three  or  threefold  (i,  95^;  4,  i/).  The  gods  made  him 
threefold  (10,  SS10).  He  is  threefold  light  (3,  267),  has  three  heads  (i,  146'), 
three  tongues,  three  bodies,  three  stations  (3,  2o2).  The  epithet  trisadhastha, 
'having  three  stations',  is  predominantly  connected  with  Agni24,  and  the  only 
passage  in  which  the  word  tripastya,  'having  three  dwellings',  occurs  (8,  398),  it 
is  an  attribute  of  Agni.  The  triad  is  not  always  understood  in  exactly  the  same 
way  or  mentioned  in  the  same  order.  Thus  one  poet  says:  'From  heaven 
first_.Agni  was  born,  the  second  time  from  us  (=  men),  thirdly  in  the  waters 
(10,  451,  cp.  vv.  2-  3).  The  order  of  Agni's  abodes  is  also  heaven,  earth, 
waters  in  other  passages  (8,  44l6;  10,  27.  469),  while  one  verse  (i,  953)  has 
the  variation:  ocean,  heaven,  waters.  Sometimes  the  terrestrial  Agni  comes 
first:  'He  was  first  born  in  houses,  at  the  base  of  great  heaven,  in  the  womb 
of  this  atmosphere'  (4,  i11);  'the  immortals  kindled  three  flames  of  Agni:  of 
these  they  placed  one  with  man,  for  use,  and  two  went  to  the  sister-world' 
(3,  2°).  A  Sutra  passage  (Ap.  SS.  5,  i64)  distinguishes  a  terrestrial  Agni  in 
animals,  an  aerial  one  in  the  waters,  and  a  celestial  one  in  the  sun.  Occa 
sionally  the  terrestrial  Agni  comes  third.  He  is  one  of  three  brothers  of 
whom  'the  middlemost  brother  is  lightning  (asnaJi)  and  the  third  is  butter- 
backed'  (i,  164*,  cp.  i4i2).  'Agni  glows  from  the  sky,  to  god  Agni  belongs  the 
broad  air,  men  kindle  Agni,.  bearer  of  oblations,  lover  of  ghee'  (AV.  12,  i20,  cp. 

i3,321;  18,4"). 

The  third  form  of  Agni  is  once  spoken  of  as  the  highest  (19,  i3;  cp. 
5,  33;  i,  722>  4).  Yaska  (Xir.  7,  28)  mentions  that  his  predecessor  Sakapuni 
regarded  the  threefold  existence  of  Agni  referred  to  in  10,  88 10  as  being  in 
earth,  air,  and  heaven,  a  certain  Brahmana  considering  Agni's  third  mani 
festation,  which  is  in  heaven,  to  be  the  sun  (cp.  Nir.  12,  19).  This  threefold 
nature  of  Agni,  so  clearly  recognised  in  the  RV.,  was  probably  the  prototype 
not  only  of  the- posterior  triad  of  Sun,  Wind,  Fire  (8,  iS19),  which  is  spoken 
of  as  distributed  in  the  three  worlds  (10,  158';  AV.  4,  392)  and  is  implied 
in' another  verse  (i,  164^),  but  also  of  the  triad  of  Sun,  Indra,  Fire,  which 
though  not  Rigvedic  is  still  ancient.  Here  Vata  or  Vayu  and  Indra  have 


94     HI.  RELIGION,  WELTL.  WISSENSCH.  u.  KUNST.     i  A.  VEDIC  MYTHOLOGY. 

taken  the  place  of  Agni  Vaidyuta,  the  lightning  Agni,  as  the  Brahmanas  and 
commentators  call  him.  This  substitution  is  perhaps  partly  due  to  the  transient 
nature  of  lightning  and  partly  to  the  lack  of  any  name  other  than  Agni  for 
the  personified  lightning,  which  could  therefore  be  expressed  only  by  epithets 
or  allusions.  The  triad  of  Agnis  may  have  suggested  and  would  explain  the 
division  of  the  sacrificial  fire  into  the  three  sacrificial  fires 25  which  in  the 
Vedic  ritual  are  kept  distinct  from  the  domestic  fire26  and  which  form  an 
essential  feature  of  the  cult  in  the  Brahmanas27.  The  ritual  may  have  then 
reacted  on  the  myth.  At  any  rate,  later  Hindu  literature  took  the  three  fires 
as  representative  of  the  three  forms  of  Agni  known  to  the  RV.2S  The  three 
sacrificial  fires  may  go  back  to  the  time  of  the  RV.,  possibly  even  to  an 
anterior  period29.  Thus  Agni  is  besought  to  bring  the  gods  and  to  seat 
himself  in  the  three  receptacles  (yonisu:  2,  364;  cp.  5,  n2;  10,  105^). 

Doubtless  on  the  basis  of  the  twofold  division  of  the  Universe  into  heaven 
and  earth,  Agni  is  in  several  passages  said  to  have  two  births,  being  the 
only  single  god  spoken  of  as  dvijanman  (i,  6oT.  i4o2.  i492-  •').  An  upper 
and  a  lower  birth  are  mentioned  (2,  9^),  his  abode  in  lower  and  upper  spheres 
is  referred  to  (i,  i283),  and  the  opposition  is  generally  between  terrestrial 
and  celestial  fire  (3,  54%-  10,  45 10),  though  in  one  passage  at  least  (8,  4328) 
the  contrast  is  between  his  birth  in  heaven  and  in  the  waters.  Agni  is  sum 
moned  from  his  supreme  abode  (8, 1 1 7)  and  comes  thence  to  the  lower  ones 
(8,6415).  When  he  is  brought  from  the  highest  father  he  rises  into  the  plants 
(i,  1 4 14).  Here  Agni  is  conceived  as  coming  down  in  rain  and  then  entering 
the  plants,  out  of  which  he  is  again  produced.  The  fires,  like  water,  after 
descending  to  earth  again  rise  to  heaven  (i,  i6451).  On  this  distinction  of 
two  forms  of  fire  are  based  such  prayers  as  that  Agni  should  sacrifice  to 
himself  (10, 76),  that  he  should  bring  Agni  (7,395),  or  that  he  should  descend 
with  the  gods  to  the  sacrifice  (3,  69  &c.).  Allied  to  this  distinction  is  the 
notion  that  Agni  was  kindled  by  the  gods  as  contrasted  with  men3°  (6,  23). 
The  latter  notion  is  due  to  the  assumption  that  celestial  fires  must  be  kindled 
by  some  one  and  gods  must  sacrifice  like  men  (cp.  AB.  2,  34). 

From  another  point  of  view,  Agni  is  said  to  have  many  births  (10,  5'). 
This  multiplicity  no  doubt  primarily  refers  to  the  numerous  fires  kindled  on 
terrestrial  altars.  For  Agni  is  very  frequently  said  to  abide  in  every  family, 
house,  or  abode  (4,  68.  71-  3;  5,  i5.  6s  &c.).  He  is  produced  in  many  places 
(3>  5419)  and  nas  many  bodies  (10,  9810).  Scattered  in  many  places,  he  is 
one  and  the  same  king  (3,  554).  Kindled  in  many  places,  he  is  but  one 
(Val.  io2).  Other  fires  are  attached  to  him  as  branches  to  a  tree  (8,  i933). 
Thus  he  comes  to  be  invoked  with  the  Agnis  (7,  3T;  8,  iS9.  49';  io,  i4i6) 
or  all  the  Agnis  (i,  26™;  6,  i26). 

The  accounts  given  of  Agni's  abodes  or  birthplaces  sometimes  involve 
cross  divisions.  Thus  his  brilliance  in  heaven,  earth,  air,  waters,  and  plants 
is  referred  to  (3,  222)  or  he  is  said  to  be  born  from  the  heavens,  the  waters, 
stone,  woods,  and  plants  (2,  i1).  Longer  enumerations  of  a  similar  kind 
occasionally  occur  elsewhere  (AV.  3,  21;  12,  i19;  Ap.  SS.  5,  i64).  When  Agni 
is  said  (i,  7o4,  cp.  6,  48 5)  to  dwell  in  a  rock  (adrau)  the  reference  is  probably 
to  the  lightning  latent  in  the  cloud  (cp.  p.  io).  The  same  is  probably  the 
case  when  he  is  said  (2,  i1)  to  be  produced  from  a  stone  (asmanaK)  or  to 
have  been  generated  by  Indra  between  two  stones  (2,  12 3);  but  here  there 
may  lurk  an  allusion  to  the  production  of  fire  from  flint.  Animal  heat  is  of 
course  meant  when  Agni  is  said  to  be  in  the  heart  of  man  (io,  51),  or  in 
beasts,  horses,  birds,  bipeds  and  quadrupeds  (AV.  3,  2i2;  12,  i19.  233;  XS. 
4,  6,  1 3).  As  being  the  spark  of  vitality  and  so  widely  diffused  in  nature, 


TERRESTRIAL  GODS.     35.  AGNI.  95 

Agni  naturally  comes  to  be  described  as  the  germ  (garbha)  of  what  is 
stationary  or  moves  and  of  all  that  exists  (i,  7o3;  AV.  5,  257). 

The  triple  nature  of  Agni  gave  rise  to  the  notion  of  three  brothers 
(i,  I641);  while  the  multiplicity  of  sacrificial  fires  may  have  suggested  the 
idea  of  Agni's  elder  brothers  who  are  spoken  of  in  the  plural  (10,  5i6).  The 
number  of  these  is  later  stated  to  be  three  (TS.  2,  6,  61).  The  same  are 
probably  meant  by  the  four  Hotrs  of  the  gods,  of  whom  the  first  three  died 
(Kath.  25,  7)31.  Varuna  is  once  spoken  of  as  Agni's  brother  (4,  i2).  Else 
where  Indra  is  said  to  be  his  twin  brother  (6, 592)32.  Indra  is  indeed  oftener 
associated  with  Agni  than  with  any  other  god  and  is,  with  two  slight  exceptions, 
the  only  god  with  whom  Agni  forms  a  dual  divinity  (§  44).  It  is  doubtless 
owing  to  this  association  that  Agni  is  described  as  bursting  the  rock  with 
heat  (8,  46l6)  and  vanquishing  the  unbelieving  Panis  (7,  63).  In  one  entire 
hymn  (i,  93)  Agni  is  also  coupled  with  Soma  (§  44). 

Agni  is  occasionally  identified  with  other  gods,  especially  with  Varuna 
and  Mitra33  (2,  i4-  3,  54-  ^  I23).  He  is  Varuna  when  he  goes  to  the  sacri 
fice  (10,  8s).  He  is  Varuna  when  he  is  born  and  Mitra  when  he  is  kindled 
(5,  31).  Agni  in  the  evening  becomes  Varuna,  rising  in  the  morning  he  be 
comes  Mitra;  becoming  Savitr  he  traverses  the  air,  becoming  Indra  he  illumines 
the  sky  in  the  midst  (AV.  13,  3^).  In  one  passage  of  the  RV.  (2,  i3— 7)  ne 
is  successively  identified  with  about  a  dozen  gods  besides  five  goddesses.  He 
assumes  various  divine  forms  (3,  387)  and  has  many  names  (3,  20^).  In  him 
are  comprehended  all  the  gods  (5,  31),  whom  he  surrounds  as  a  felly  the 
spokes  (5,  i36). 

What  is  probably  the  oldest  function  of  fire  in  regard  to  its  cult,  that 
of  burning  and  dispelling  evil  spirits  and  hostile  magic,  still  survives  in  the 
Veda.  Agni  drives  away  the  goblins  with  his  light  (3, 1 5 r  &c.)  34  and  receives 
the  epithet  raksohan,  'goblin-slayer'  (10,  87')-  When  kindled  he  consumes 
with  iron  teeth  and  scorches  with  heat  the  sorcerers  as  well  as  the  goblins 
(10,  87 2-  5-  14),  protecting  the  sacrifice  with  keen  glance  (ib.  9).  He  knows 
the  races  of  the  sorcerers  and  destroys  them  (AV.  i,84).  Though  this  function 
of  dispelling  terrestrial  demons  is  shared  with  Agni  by  Indra  (as  well  as  by 
Brhaspati,  the  Asvins,  and  especially  Soma),  it  must  primarily  have  belonged 
to  Agni  alone,  just  as,  conversely,  that  of  slaying  Asuras  or  aerial  demons  is 
transferred  to  Agni  (7,  13')  though  properly  peculiar  to  Indra.  This  is  borne 
out  by  the  fact  that  Agni  is  undoubtedly  more  prominent  as  a  goblin-slayer 
than  Indra,  both  in  the  hymns  and  in  the  ritual 35. 

Agni  is  more  closely  connected  with  human  life  than  any  other  god. 
His  association  with  the  dwellings  of  men  is  peculiarly  intimate.  He  is  the 
only '  god  to  whom  the  frequent  epithet  grhapati,  'lord  of  the  house',  is 
applied.  He  dwells  in  every  abode  (7,i52),  never  leaving  his  home  (8,49*9). 
The  attribute  'domestic'  (damunas)  is  generally  connected  with  him  (i,6o4&c.). 
This  household  deity  probably  represents  an  old  order  of  ideas;  for  in  the 
later  elaborate  ritual  of  the  three  sacrificial  fires,  the  one  from  which  the 
other  two  (the  dhavariiya  or  eastern  and  the  daksina  or  southern)  were  taken, 
is  called  the  gdrhapatya  or  that  which  belongs  to  grhapati.  In  this  connexion 
it  is  interesting  to  observe  that  even  as  early  as  Rigvedic  times  there  are 
traces  of  the  sacrificial  fire  having  been  transported36.  For  Agni  is  led  round 
(4,  93.  I51),  strides  round  the  offerings  (4,  i53)  or  goes  round  the  sacrifice 
three  times  (4,  64-  5.  i52);  and  as  soon  as  he  is  released  from  his  parents, 
he  is  led  to  the  east  and  again  to  the  west  (i,  3i4). 

He  is  further  constantly  designated  a  'guest'  (atitht]  in  human  abodes. 
He  is  a  guest  in  every  house  (io,9i2),  the  first  guest  of  settlers  (5,82).  For 


96     III.  RELIGION,  WELTL.  WISSENSCH.  u.  KUNST.     i  A.  VEDIC  MYTHOLOGY. 

he  is  an  immortal  (a  term  much  more  commonly  applied  to  Agni  than  to 
any  other  god),  who  has  taken  up  his  abode  among  mortals  (8,  6oT).  He 
has  been  established  or  settled  among  human  habitations  (3,  5  3;  4,  62).  It  is 
the  domestic  Agni  who  caused  mortals  to  settle  (3,  iI7j.  He  is  a  leader 
(3,  25)  and  a  protector  of  settlers  (i,  96*),  and  the  epithet  vispati,  'lord  of 
settlers'  is  mainly  connected  with  him. 

Thus  Agni  comes  to  be  called  the  nearest  kinsman  of  man  (7,  15'; 
8,  49 T0),  or  simply  a  kinsman  (i,  2 63  &c.)  or  a  friend  (i,  75*  &c.).  But  he 
is  oftenest  described  as  a  father  (6,  i5  £c.),  sometimes  also  as  a  brother 
(8;  43l6;  I0;  73  &c-)>  and  eyen  as  a  son  (2,  i9)  or  mother  (6,  i$),  of  his 
worshippers.  Such  terms  seem  to  point  to  an  older  order  of  things,  when 
Agni  was  less  sacrificial  and,  as,  the  centre  of  domestic  life,  produced  an 
intimate  relation  such  as  is  not  easily  found  in  the  worship  of  other  gods  3 1. 

The  continuity  of  Agni's  presence  in  the  house  would  naturally  connect 
him  more  closely  than  any  other  god  with  the  past.  Hence  the  ancestral 
friendship  of  Agni  with  his  worshipper  (i,  7i10)  is  probably  more  typical  of 
him  than  of  any  other  deity.  He  is  the  god  whom  the  forefathers  kindled, 
to  whom  they  prayed.  Thus  mention  is  made  of  an  Agni  of  Bharata  (2, 7*; 
7,84&c.),  of  Vadhryasva  (10,69*),  of  Devavata  (3,233),  of  Divodasa  (8,922), 
and  of  Trasadasyu  (8,  I932J38.  The  names  of  ancestors  sometimes  identified 
with  Agni  are  in  part  those  of  families  to  which  composers  of  the  RV.  be 
longed.  Some  of  these,  like  Vasistha,  seem  to  have  had  a  historical  origin, 
while  others,  like  Angiras  (§  54)  and  Bhrgu  (§  51),  are  probably  mythical 

(cp.  S  58). 

Agni  is  further  brought  into  close  relations  with  the  daily  life  of  man 
in  the  sacrifice.  He  is,  however,  not  merely  a  passive  receiver  of  the  offering, 
but  is  an  intermediary  between  heaven  and  earth.  He  transmits  the  oblation 
to  the  gods,  who  do  not  get  exhilarated  without  him  (7,  n1).  On  the  other 
hand,  he  brings  the  gods  (3,  i42)  to  the  sacrifice  as  well  as  takes  it  to  them 
(7,  ii5).  He  seats  them  on  the  strewn  grass  (i,  31 17;  8,  443),  to  eat  the 
offering  (5,  IIT&C.).  He  goes  on  the  paths  leading  both  to  the  gods  (10,98") 
and  to  earth  (8,  72),  knowing  these  paths  (6,  i63).  He  is  therefore  constantly 
and  characteristically  called  a  messenger  (dutct),  who  knows  the  paths  and 
conveys  the  sacrifice  (i,  727)  or  visits  all  abodes  (4,  i8);  who  flies  swiftly 
(10,  64),  moving  between  heaven  and  earth  (4,  78.  84;  10,  42),  or  the  two 
races,  gods  and  men  (4, 22-3);  who  has  been  appointed  by  the  gods  (5,86&c.) 
and  by  men  (10,  4610),  to  be  an  oblation-bearer  (havya-vah  or  -vdhana, 
terms  always  connected  with  Agni)  and  to  announce  the  hymn  of  the  wor 
shipper  (i,  274)  or  to  bring  the  gods  to  the  place  of  sacrifice  (4,  82).  He  is 
the  messenger  of  the  gods  (6,  i59)  and  of  Vivasvat  (p.  42);  but  as  knowing 
the  innermost  recesses  of  heaven,  as  conveying-  the  sacrifice,  and  bringing 
the  gods  (4,  78.  8J)  he  is  mainly  to  be  considered  the  messenger  of  men. 
A  later  text  states  that  Agni  is  the  messenger  of  the  gods,  and  Kavya  Usanas 
or  Daivya  that  of  the  Asuras  (TS.  2,  5,  85.  n8).  Another  describes  Agni  not  as 
the  messenger  of,  but  as  the  path  leading  to,  the  gods,  by  which  the  summit 
of  heaven  may  be  reached  (TB.  2,  4,  i6). 

In  consequence  of  his  main  function  in  the  Veda  of  officiating  at  the 
sacrifice,  Agni  comes  to  be  celebrated  as  the  divine  counterpart  of  the  earthly 
priesthood.  He  is  therefore  often  called  generically  the  'priest'  (rtvij^  viprd) 
or  specifically  the  'domestic  priest'  (purohitd],  and  constantly,  more  frequently 
in  fact  than  by  any  other  name,  the  'offerer'  (hotf)  or  chief  priest,  who  is 
poet  and  spokesman  in  one.  He  is  a  Hotr  appointed  by  men  (8,  491;  10,  7s) 
and  by  gods  (6,  16').  He  is  the  most  adorable,  the  most  eminent  of  Hotrs 


TERRESTRIAL  GODS.     35.  AGNI.  97 

(10,  21.  9 18).  He  is  also  termed  an  adhvaryu  (3,  54)  and  (like  Brhaspati, 
Soma,  and  Indra)  a  brahman  or  praying  priest  (4, 94).  He  combines  in  himself 
the  functions,  in  a  higher  sense,  of  the  various  human  priests  called  by  the 
above  and  other  specific  names  (i,946;  2,  i2&c.).  He  is  constantly  invoked 
to  honour  or  worship  the  gods  (3,  25';  7,  n3  &c.),  while  they  in  their  turn 
are  said  to  honour  Agni  three  times  a  day  (3,  42).  He  is  the  accomplisher 
of  the  rite  or  sacrifice  (3,33.  272),  promoting  it  by  his  occult  power  (3,  277), 
making  the  oblations  fragrant  (10,  i512),  and  causing  the  offering  which  he 
protects  to  reach  the  gods  (i,  i4).  He  is  the  father  (3,34),  the  king  (4, 31), 
the  ruler  (10,  63),  the  superintendant  (8,  4324),  the  banner  (3,  33.  io4;  6,  23; 
10,  1 5),  of  sacrifice.  In  one  hymn  (io,  51)  it  is  related  that  Agni  grew 
weary  of  the  service  and  refused  to  fulfil  his  sacrificial  offices,  but  on  being 
granted  the  remuneration  he  required  from  the  gods,  continued  to  act  as 
high  priest  of  men3?.  Agni's  priesthood  is  the  most  salient  feature  of  his 
character.  He  is  in  fact  the  great  priest,  as  Indra  is  the  great  warrior.  But 
though  this  phase  of  Agni's  character  is  so  prominent  from  the  beginning  to 
the  end  of  the  RV.,  it  is  of  course  from  a  historical  point  of  view  compara 
tively  recent,  due  to  those  mystical  sacerdotal  speculations  which  ultimately 
led  to  the  endless  sacrificial  symbolism  of  the  later  ritual  texts.  From  the 
ordinary  sacrificial  Agni  who  conveys  the  offering  (havya-vah  or  -vdhana)  is 
distinguished  the  form  of  Fire  which  is  called  'corpse-devouring'  (kravyad: 
cp.  §  71).  The  VS.  distinguishes  three  forms,  as  the  Agni  who  devours  raw- 
flesh  (amad\  the  corpse-devouring  or  funereal,  and  the  sacrificial  Agni  (VS. 
i,  17,  cp.  1 8,  51).  The  TS.  (2,  5,  S6)  also  distinguishes  three,  the  Agni  that 
bears  the  oblation  (havyavdhana),  as  belonging  to  the  gods,  the  Agni  that 
bears  the  funeral  offering  (kavyavakand),  as  belonging  to  the  Fathers,  and  the 
Agni  associated  with  goblins  (saharaksas)  as  belonging  to  the  Asuras. 

Agni  is  a  seer  (rsi)  as  well  as  a  priest  (9,  6620);  he  is  kindled  as  an 
eminent  seer  (3,  2i3);  he  is  the  most  gracious  seer  (6,  i42);  he  is  the  first 
seer  Angiras  (i,  31').  He  is  the  divine  one  (asurd)  among  the  sages  (3,  34). 
Agni  knows  the  sacrifice  exactly  (io,  no11)  and  knows  all  rites  (io,  I222). 
Knowing  the  proper  seasons  he  rectifies  the  mistakes  which  men  commit 
through  ignorance  of  the  sacrificial  ordinances  of  the  gods  (io,  24-  5)  He 
knows  the  recesses  of  heaven  (4,  82-  4).  He  knows  everything  (io,  n1)  by 
his  wisdom  (10,913).  He  has  all  wisdom  (3,  i1?;  io,  2i5),  which  he  embraces 
as  the  felly  the  wheel  (2,53)  and  which  he  acquired  as  soon  as  born  (i,96x). 
He  is  'all-knowing'  (vis'vavid);  and  the  epithets  'possessed  of  all  knowledge' 
(visvavedas),  'sage'  (kavi),  and  'possessing  the  intelligence  of  a  sage'  (kavikratu) 
are  predominantly  applicable  to  him.  He  exclusively  bears  the  epithet  jdtav&fas, 
which  occurs  upwards  of  120  times  in  the  RV.  and  is  there  (6,  i513)  ex 
plained  as  meaning  'he  who  knows  all  generations'  (visva  veda  janima)*0. 
He  knows  the  divine  ordinances  and  the  generations  of  men  (i,  70'-  3).  He 
knows  and  sees  all  creatures  (3,  55'°;  io,  i874)  and  hears  the  invocations 
addressed  to  him  (8,  43 23).  Agni  is  also  a  producer  of  wisdom  (8,  9i8). 
Wisdom  and  prayers  arise  from  him  (4,  n3).  He  is  an  inspirer  (io,  465), 
an  inventor  of  brilliant  speech  (2,  94),  the  first  inventor  of  prayer  (6,  i1). 
He  is  also  said  to  be  eloquent  (6,  44)  and  a  singer  (jaritf). 

Agni  is  a  great  benefactor  of  his  worshippers.  He  protects  them  with  a 
hundred  iron  walls  (7,  3?.  i610,  cp.  6,  488;  i,  i892).  He  preserves  them  from 
calamities  or  takes  them  across  calamities  as  in  a  ship  over  the  sea  (3,2o4; 
5,  4°;  7,  i22j.  He  is  a  deliverer  (8,  495)  and  a  friend  of  the  man  who 
entertains  him  as  a  guest  (4,  410).  He  grants  protection  to  the  worshipper 
who  sweats  to  bring  him  fuel  (4,  26),  He  watches  with  a  thousand  eyes  the 

Indo-arische  Philologie.  III.  1  A.  7 


98     III.  RELIGION,  WELTL.  WISSENSCH.  u.  KUNST.     i  A.  VEDIC  MYTHOLOGY. 


man  who  brings  him  food  and  nourishes  him  with  oblations  (10,  795).  He 
consumes  his  worshippers'  enemies  like  dry  bushes  (4,  4*)  and  strikes  down 
the  malevolent  as  a  tree  is  destroyed  by  lightning  (6,  85,  cp.  AV.  3,  21  &c.). 
He  is  therefore  invoked  in  battle  (8,4321),  in  which  he  leads  the  van  (8,738). 
The  man  whom  he  protects  and  inspires  in  battle  wins  abundant  food  and 
can  never  be  overcome  (1,277).  All  blessings  issue  from  him  as  branches  from 
a  tree  (6, 13*).  He  gives  riches,  which  he  abundantly  commands  (i,i3.  3i10. 
36*).  All  treasures  are  collected  in  him  (10,  66)  and  he  opens  the  door  of 
riches  (i,  6810).  He  commands  all  riches  in  heaven  and  earth  (4,  511)  or  in 
earth,  heaven,  and  ocean  (7,  67;  10,  913).  He  gives  rain  from  heaven  (2,  6s) 
and  is  like  a  water-trough  in  the  desert  (10,  41).  He  is  therefore  constantly 
besought  to  bestow  every  kind  of  boon:  food,  riches,  deliverance  from  poverty, 
childlessness,  enemies,  and  demons41.  The  boons  which  Agni  bestows  are 
rather  domestic  welfare,  offspring,  and  prosperity,  while  Indra  for  the  most 
part  gives  power,  victory,  and  glory.  Agni  also  forgives  sin42  committed 
through  folly,  makes  guiltless  before  Aditi  (4,  i24;  7,  93?,  cp.  p.  121),  and  averts 
Varuna's  wrath  (4,  i4).  He  even  frees  from  guilt  committed  by  a  man's 
father  and  mother  (AV.  5,  3o4;  TB.  3,  7,  12*-  4) 

Agni  is  a  divine  (asura]  monarch  (samrdj),  strong  as  Indra  (7,  6 *).  His 
greatness  surpasses  that  of  mighty  heaven  (i,595).  He  is  greater  than  heaven 
and  earth  (3,  62;  10,  8814),  than  all  the  worlds,  which  he  filled  when  born 
(3,  310).  He  is  superior  to  all  the  other  gods  in  greatness  (i,  68 2).  All  the 
gods  fear  and  do  homage  to  him  when  he  abides  in  darkness  (6,  97).  He 
is  celebrated  and  worshipped  by  Varuna,  Mitra,  the  Maruts,  and  all  the  gods 
(3,  98.  14*;  10,  69q).  Agni  performed  great  deeds  of  old  (7,  62).  Men  tremble 
at  his  mighty  deeds  (8,923).  In  battle  he  procured  space  for  the  gods  (i,595) 
and  he  delivered  them  from  curse  (7,  i32).  He  is  a  conqueror  of  thousands 
(sahasrajit:  more  commonly  an  attribute  of  Soma).  He  drives  away  the 
Dasyus  from  the  house,  thus  creating  a  wide  light  for  the  Arya  (7,  56).  He 
is  a  promoter  of  the  Arya  (8,92')  and  a  vanquisher  of  irreligious  Panis  (7,63). 
He  receives  with  some  frequency  the  epithet  of  'Vrtra-slayer',  and  two  or 
three  times  that  of  'fort-destroyer'  {puramdard),  attributes  primarily  appro 
priate  to  Indra  (p.  60).  Such  warlike  qualities,  though  suitable  to  Agni  in 
his  lightning  form,  are  doubtless  derived  by  him  from  Indra,  with  whom  he 
is  so  frequently  associated  (p.  127). 

Although  Agni  is  the  son  of  Heaven  and  Earth  he  is  nevertheless  called 
the  generator  of  the  two  worlds  (i,  96^  cp.  7,57)>  his  ordinance,  which  does 
not  perish  (2,  83),  being  followed  by  heaven  and  earth  (7,  54).  He  stretched 
them  out  (3,  65;  7,  54)  or  spread  them  out  like  two  skins  (6,  83).  With  his 
flame  or  his  smoke  he  supported  the  vault  of  heaven  (3,  5'°;  4,  62).  He  kept 
asunder  the  two  worlds  (6,  83).  He  supported  earth  and  heaven  with  true 
hymns  (i,  67^).  He  stands  at  the  head  of  the  world  or  is  the  head  of  the 
earth  at  night  (10,  885-  6),  but  he  is  also  the  head  and  summit  (kakud)  of 
the  sky  (i,  592;  6,  7*;  8,  44l6).  He  measured  out  the  air  and  touched  the 
vault  of  heaven  with  his  greatness  (6,  82).  He  measured  out  the  aerial  spaces 
and  the  bright  realms  of  heaven  (6,  77).  He  caused  the  sun  to  ascend  the 
sky  (10,  i564).  The  notion  that  the  kindling  of  Agni  exercised  a  magical 
influence  on  the  sunrise  seems  not  to  be  entirely  absent  in  the  RV.43.  Such 
appears  to  be  the  meaning  of  the  poet  when  he  exclaims:  'Let  us  light  Agni, 
that  thy  wondrous  brand  may  shine  in  heaven'  (5,64).  This  notion  is  clearly 
stated  in  a  Brahmana  passage:  'By  r sacrificing  before  sunrise  he  produces  him 
(the  sun),  else  he  would  not  rise'  (SB.  2,  3,  is,  Cp.  TS.  4,  7,  133).  Otherwise 
the  kindling  of  Agni  and  the  sunrise  are  represented  merely  as  simultaneous 


TERRESTRIAL  GODS.     35.  AGNI.  99 

in  the  RV.:  'The  sun  became  visible  when  Agni  was  born'  (4,  311).  This 
trait  of  the  Agni  myth  resembles  the  winning  of  the  sun  in  the  Indra  myth, 
but  the  original  point  of  view  in  the  two  cases  is  clearly  different.  Agni  is 
further  said  to  have  adorned  the  sky  with  stars  (i,  685).  He  created  all  that 
flies,  walks,  stands,  or  moves  (10,  884).  He  placed  the  germ  in  these  beings 
(3,  210),  in  plants,  in  all  beings,  and  engendered  offspring  in  the  earth  and 
in  women  (10,  i833).  Agni  is  once  spoken  of  as  having  generated  these 
children  of  men  (i,  96*);  but  this  is  a  mere  incidental  extension  of  the  notion 
expressed  in  the  same  stanza,  that  he  created  heaven,  earth,  and  the  waters, 
and  cannot  be  interpreted  as  a  general  belief  in  Agni  as  father  of  the  human 
race 44.  Finally,  Agni  is  the  guardian  (7,  74)  and  lord  (7,  46)  of  immortality, 
which  he  confers  on  mortal  men  (i,  3i7). 

Though  agni  is  an  Indo-European  word  (Lat.  igni-s,  Slavonic  ogni),  the 
worship  of  fire  under  this  name  is  purely  Indian.  In  the  Indo-Iranian  period  the 
sacrificial  fire  is  already  found  as  the  centre  of  a  developed  ritual,  tended  by  a 
priestly  class  probably  called  Atharvan;  personified  and  worshipped  as  a  strong, 
pure,  wise  god,  giver  of  food,  offspring,  intellectual  power,  fame;  friendly  to 
the  house,  but  a  destroyer  of  foes;  probably  even  thought  of  as  having  different 
forms  like  lightning  or  the  fire  produced  from  wood 45.  The  sacrificial  fire 
seems  to  have  been  an  Indo-European  institution  also46,  since  the  Italians  and 
Greeks,  as  well  as  the  Iranians  and  Indians  had  the  custom  of  offering  gifts 
to  the  gods  in  fire.  But  the  personification  of  this  fire,  if  it  then  existed, 
must  have  been  extremely  shadowy47. 

The  word  ag-ni  may  possibly  be  derived  from  the  root  which  in  Sanskrit 
appears  as  #/48,  to  drive  (ajdmi,  Lat.  ago,  Gk.  flfyw),  meaning  'nimble',  with 
reference  to  the  agility  of  the  element. 

Besides  epithets  of  celestial  fire  which,  like  Apam  napat,  have  become 
separate  names,  some  epithets  of  Agni  exhibit  a  semi-independent  character. 
The  epithet  Vaisvanara49,  occurring  about  sixty  times  in  the  RV.  and  with 
two  exceptions  restricted  to  Agni,  is,  apart  from  some  five  detached  verses, 
to  be  found  in  fourteen  hymns  of  the  RV.,  in  nearly  all  of  which,  according 
to  the  native  tradition  of  the  Anukramanl,  Agni  Vaisvanara  is  the  deity  ad 
dressed.  The  attribute  is  never  in  the  RV.  unaccompanied  by  the  name  of 
Agni.  It  means  'belonging  to  all  men'  and  seems  to  designate  'Universal 
Agni',  fire  in  all  its  aspects,  celestial  as  well  as  terrestrial.  Thus  the  hymns 
addressed  to  this  form  of  Agni  sometimes  refer  to  the  myth  of  Matarisvan 
and  the  Bhrgus,  which  is  connected  with  the  descent  of  celestial  fire  to  earth 
(3)  24j  6,  8  4),  and  Agni  Vaisvanara  is  once  even  directly  styled  Matarisvan 
(3,  262).  In  the  Naighantuka  (5,  i)  Vaisvanara  is  given  as  one  of  the  names 
of  Agni.  Yaska  in  commenting  on  the  epithet  states  (Nir.  7,  23)  that  ancient 
ritualists  (yajnikaJi)  took  Agni  Vaisvanara  to  be  the  sun,  while  Sakapuni  con 
sidered  him  to  be  this  Agnis0.  Later  on  (Nir.  7,  31),  he  states  as  his  own 
opinion  that  the  Agni  Vaisvanara  who  receives  praise  and  sacrifice  is  this 
(i.  e.  terrestrial)  Agni,  while  the  two  higher  (uttare)  lights  (i.  e.  the  aerial  and 
the  celestial)  only  occasionally  share  this  designation.  f  In  the  ritual  texts 
Vaisvanara  is  distinguished  as  a  special  form  of  Agni  (ASS.  i,323;  KSS.  23,3*; 
(PB.  21,  io»;  SB.  1,5,  i16). 

Th£  epithet  Tanunapat,  generally  unaccompanied  by  the  name  of  Agni, 
occurs  eight  times  in  the  RV.  and,  with  two  exceptions  (3,  29";  10,  922) 
always  in  the  second  verse  of  the  AprI  hymns,  which  are  liturgical  invitations 
introducing  the  animal  sacrifice  and  in  which  fire  under  various  names  and 
forms  is  invoked51.  The  word  occurs  as  an  independent  name  in  the  Nai 
ghantuka  (5,  2).  The  explanations  given  by  Yaska  (Nir.  8,  5)  are  artificial 

7* 


ioo     III.  RELIGION,  WELTL.  WISSENSCH.  u.  KUNST.     i  A.  VEDIC  MYTHOLOGY. 


and  improbable52.  It  seems  to  mean  'son  of  himself',,  as  spontaneously 
generated  in  wood  and  cloud.  According  to  BERGAIGNE'S  interpretation,  it 
signifies  'the  bodily  (i.  e.  own)  son'  of  the  divine  father 53.  Tanunapat  as  con 
trasted  with  Matarisvan  and  Narasamsa  is  said  to  be  'the  divine  (asura) 
embryo'  (3,  29 ll).  The  dawns  are  said  to  kiss  Agni  'the  domestic  priest,  the 
Tanunapat  of  the  ruddy  one'  (10,  92 2,  cp.  5,  58°).  Tanunapat  is  beautiful- 
tongued  (10,  no2).  He  is  besought  to  take  the  sacrifice  to  the  gods  (i,i32; 
10,  no2);  he  distributes  the  sacrifice  rich  in  ghee  and  mead  (i,  142%  cp. 
i882).  The  gods  honour  him  three  times  a  day,  Varuna,  Mitra,  Agni,  every 
day  (3,  42).  HILLEBRANDTS*  (comparing  9,  5*)  identifies  Agni  Tanunapat  with 
Agni  Somagopa  or  the  lunar  Fire,  which  he  assumes  to  be  a  special  form  of 
Agni  55. 

The  somewhat  more  frequent  epithet  Narasamsa  which  is  given  as  an 
independent  appellation  in  the  Naighantuka  (5,  3)  and  is  unaccompanied  by 
the  name  of  Agni  in  the  RV.,  is  not  restricted  to  Agni,  being  twice  connected 
with  Ptisan  (i,  io64;  10,  643)56.  It  has  the  third  verse  as  its  fixed  place  in 
the  Apr!  hymns  and  the  second  in  those  which  are  technically  called  Apra. 
Narasamsa  is  'four-limbed'  (10,  92")  and  is  the  'lord  of  a  celestial  wife 
(gndspati:  2,  3810).  With  honey  on  his  tongue  and  in  his  hand,  he  performs 
the  sacrifice  (i,  i33/  5,  52).  Three  times  a  day  he  besprinkles  the  sacrifice 
with  honey  (i,  I423).  He  anoints  the  three  heavens  and  the  gods  (2,  32). 
He  comes  at  the  head  of  the  gods  and  makes  the  sacrifice  pleasant  for  them 
(10,  ;o2).  Through  his  sacrifices  worshippers  praise  the  greatness  of  the  gods 
(7,  22).  Soma  is  said  to  go  between  Narasamsa  and  the  celestial  (daivya) 
one  (9,8642),  which  seems  to  mean,  between  the  terrestrial  and  the  celestial 
Agni.  As  contrasted  with  Tanunapat  and  Matarisvan,  Agni  is  called  Nara 
samsa  when  he  is  born  (3,  29").  In  one  hymn  to  Brhaspati  (10,  i822) 
Narasamsa  is  invoked  for  protection,  and  in  another  he  is  spoken  of  as  the 
sacrificer  of  the  seat  of  heaven  (i,  i89).  He  thus  seems  in  these  two  passages 
to  be  identified  with  Brhaspati.  The  word  nttra-sdmsa  is  apparently  an  im 
proper  compound  (in  which  the  m  of  the  genitive  plural  has  disappeared), 
having  a  double  accent  and  having  its  parts  separated  by  particles  in  two 
passages  (9,  86*2;  10,  64^).  As  the  expressions  naram  samsa  and  devdndm 
samsa  occur  (2,346;  i,  141")  and  a  poet  once  calls  Agni  samsam  dyoh, 
'Praise  of  Ayu'  (4,  6"),  Narasamsa  appears  to  mean  'Praise  of  men'  in  the 
sense  of  'he  who  is  the  object  of  men's  praise'.  BERGAIGNE  expresses  the 
opinion57  that  the  exact  aspect  of  Agni  represented  by  Narasamsa,  is  that  of 
a  god  of  human  prayer,  like  a  second  Brhaspati. 

i  Mund.  Up.  i,  24;  cp.  ZDMG.  35,  552.  —  2  Cp.  OLDENBERG,  ZDMG.  50, 
425  —  6;  SEE.  46,  159.  207.  —  3  ORV.  104;  SEE.  46,  128.  —  4  Cp.  BRV.  i,  143;  SEE. 
46,  144.  —  5  EDA.  50—1 ;  OLDENBERG,  ZDMG.  39,  69.  —  6  SCHWAB,  Das  alt- 
indische  Tieropfer  77 — 8;  ROTH,  Indisches  Feuerzeug,  ZDMG.  43,  590 — 5.  —  7  BRV. 
2,  52;  PVS.  2,  50.  —  8  ROTH,  Nirukta,  Erl.  120;  PW.  s.  v.  yuvati  and  tvastr\  OO. 
2,  510.  —  9  JOLLY  in  this  Encyclopaedia  II,  8,  p.  25.  —  *o  KHF.  ed.  Schrader  (1889) 
37-9;  cp.  ZDMG.  35,  561.  -  -  «  KHF.  18;  KRV.  note  121;  HRI.  107.  - 
12  ROTH,  ZDMG.  43,  593;  ORV.  121.  —  *3  Cp.  HVM.  i,  179  note  4.  —  14  HAUG, 
AB.  2,  p.  62.  —  15  OLDENBERG,  ZDMG.  39,  68—72;  MACDONELL,  JRAS.  26,  16  ff. 
-  16  LRV.  5,  504.  —  17  ORV.  115.  —  18  Cp.  GVS.  i,  157—70.  —  19  ORV.  113 
note  2.  --  20  ibid.  112.  —  21  Other  passages  are  3,  144;  8,  565;  10,  88  «•  I2 ; 
AV.  13,  113;  TS.  4,  2,  94.  —  22  OST.  5,  206;  BRV.  i,  21—5;  MACDONELL,  JRAS. 
25,  468—70;  ORV.  106;  SEE.  46,  231.  —  23  Cp.  HRI.  105.  —  24  See  GW.  s.  v. 

—  25  LRV.  3,  356;    BRV.  i,  23.    —  26  ORV.  348.  —  27  Cp.  SB.  2,  i  and  EGGE- 
LING,  SEE.   12,  274  ff.  —  28   HRI.   106;  cp.  LRV.  3,  356.    —    29  BRV.   i,  23;    LRV. 
3»  355;    OLDENBERG,  SEE.  30,  x,  note  i;    46,  362;  ORV.  348.  —  3°  BRV.   i,  103. 

—  3'  LRV.  5,  504—5.  —   32    Cp.  Sayana;  ROTH,   Nirukta,  Erl.  140;  MM.,  LSL.  2, 
614.  —  33  Cp.  BRV.  3,   134  f.  —  34  BRV.  2,  217.  —  35  ORV.  128.  36  SEE.  46,  361.  - 


TERRESTRIAL  GODS.     36.  BRHASPATI.  101 


37  ORV.  132—3.  -  —  38  OST.  i,  348—9;  cp.  SEE.  46,  123.  211.  —  39  MAC- 
DONELL,  JRAS.  26,  12 — 22.  —  4°  WHITNEY,  AJP.  3,  409;  otherwise  PVS.  I,  94 
and  BLOOMFIELD,  JAOS.  16,  16.  —  41  OST.  5,  218.  —  42  Cp.  ORV.  299 — 300.  - 
43  Cp.  BRV.  i,  140  ff.;  ORV.  109;  SEE.  46,  330.  —  44  The  view  of  KHF.  69  ff. 
—  45  ORV.  103.  —  46  KNAUER,  FaR.  64.  —  47  ORV.  102.  —  48  PW.;  MM.PhR. 
117  (cp.  KIRSTE,  WZKM.  7,  97);  rejected  by  BARTHOLOMAE,  IF.  5,  222.  —  49  BRV. 
153—6.  —  5°  ROTH,  Nir.  Erl.  7,  19.  —  51  ROTH,  Nirukta,  Introd.  36  f. ;  Erl.  117—8. 
121—4;  MM.ASL.  463—6;  WEBER,  IS.  10,  89—95;  GRV.  i,  6.  —  52  ROTH,  Nir. 
Erl.  117;  cp.  OLDENBERG,  SEE.  46,  10.  —  53  BRV.  2,  99  f.  —  54  HVM.  i,  339.  — 
55  Ibid.  330 — 6.  —  56  ROTH,  Erl.  117  f. ;  cp.  Sp.AP.  209  f.  —  57  BRV.  i,  305—8. 
KHF.  1  —  105;  WHITNEY,  JAOS.  3,  317—8;  OST.  199—220;  LRV.  3,  324—5; 
KRV.  35—7;  BRV.  i,  11—31.  38—45.  70—4.  100— i.  139—45;  BRL  9—11;  Sp.AP. 
147— 53;  v.  SCHROEDER,  KZ.  29,  193  ff.  (cp.  BB.  19,  230);  WZKM.  225—30; 
MM.PhR.  144—203.  252—302;  HVBP.  63—8;  ORV.  102—33;  HRI-  105—12. 

§  36.  Brhaspati.  --This  god  occupies  a  position  of  considerable  pro 
minence  in  the  RV.,  eleven  entire  hymns  being  dedicated  to  his  praise.  He 
also  forms  a  pair  with  Indra  in  two  hymns  (4,  49;  7,  97).  His  name  occurs 
about  120  times  and  in  the  form  of  Brahmanas  pati  about  50  times  besides. 
The  two  forms  of  the  name  alternate  in  different  verses  of  the  same  hymn 
(e.  g.  in  2,  23).  The  physical  features  of  Brhaspati  are  few.  He  is  seven- 
mouthed  and  seven-rayed  (4,  5o4),  beautiful-tongued  (i,  190*;  4,  50*),  sharp- 
horned  (10,  i552),  blue-backed  (5,  4312),  and  hundred-winged  (7,  977)-  He 
is  golden-coloured  and  ruddy  (5,  4312),  bright  (3,  62"-  7,  977),^pure  (7,  977), 
and  clear-voiced  (7,  975).  He  has  a  bow,  the  string  of  which  is  the  rite 
(rfa),  and  good  arrows  (2,  248;  cp.  AV.  5,  i88-9).  He  also  wields  a  golden 
hatchet  (7,  977)  and  is  armed  with  an  iron  axe,  which  Tvastr  sharpens  (io, 
539).  He  has  a  car  (10,  103*)  and  stands  on  the  car  of  the  rite,  which  slays 
the  goblins,  bursts  the  cowstalls,  and  wins  the  light  (2,  23^).  He  is  drawn 
by  ruddy  steeds  (7,  976). 

Brhaspati  was  first  born  from  great  light  in  the  highest  heaven  and  with 
thunder  (ravena)  drove  away  darkness  (4,  5o4;  cp.  10,  6812).  He  is  the  off 
spring  of  the  two  worlds  (7,  978),  but  is  also  said  to  have  been  generated 
by  Tvastr  (2,  231?).  On  the  other  hand,  he  is  called  the  father  of  the  gods 
(2,  263);  being  said  to  have  blown  forth  the  births  of  the  gods  like  a  black 
smith  (10,  722). 

Brhaspati  is  a  domestic  priest1  (2,  249;  VS.  20,  n;  TS.  6,  4,  10;  AB. 
8,  264),  a  term  almost  peculiar  to  Agni  (p.  96).  The  ancient  seers  placed 
him  at  their  head  (puro-dha)  (4,  50*).  He  is  Soma's  purohita  (SB.  4,  i,  24). 
He  is  also  a  brahman  or  praying  priest2  (2,  i3;  4,  5o8)_,  once  probably  in  the 
technical  sense  (10,  i4i3).  In  later  Vedic  texts  Brhaspati  is  the  brahman 
priest  (in  the  technical  sense)  of  the  gods3.  He  is  even  called  the  prayer  or 
devotion  (brahmd)  of  the  gods  (TS.  2,  2,  91  &c.)  Brhaspati  promotes  the 
yoking  of  devotion,  and  without  him  sacrifice  does  not  succeed  (i,  i87).  As 
a  pathmaker  he  makes  good  the  access  to  the  feast  of  the  gods  (2,  236-  7). 
From  him  even  the  gods  obtained  their  share  of  sacrifice  (2,23').  He  awakens 
the  gods  with  sacrifice  (AV.  ig}  63 x).  He  himself  pronounces  the  hymn  in  which 
Indra,  Varuna,  Mitra,  Aryaman,  the  gods  take  pleasure  (i,  4o5).  He  sings 
chants  (10,  36s).  His  song  (sloka)  goes  to  heaven  (i,  i9o4)  and  metre 
(chandas)  belongs  to  him  (MS.  i,  92).  He  is  associated  with  singers  (7,  io4; 
10, 1 43).  He  sings  with  his  'friends  that  cry  like  Hamsas'  (10,67^),  by  whom 
the  Angirases4  (§  54)  mentioned  in  the  preceding  verse  (io,  672)  seem  to  be 
meant.  He  is  also  said  to  be  accompanied  by  a  singing  (rkvatY  host 
(gana:  4,  5o5).  This  is  doubtless  the  reason  why  he  is  called  ganapati,  'lord 
of  a  host'  (2,  231),  a  term  once  applied  to  Indra  also  (io,  ii29). 

As  the  name  Brahmanas  pati  shows,  the  god  is  a  'lord  of  prayer'.    He 


io?     III.  RELIGION,  WELTL.  WISSENSCH.  u.  KUNST.     i  A.  VEDIC  MYTHOLOGY. 


is  also  described  as  the  supreme  king  of  prayers,  the  most  famous  sage  of 
sages  (2,  231).  Mounting  the  car  of  the  rite  he  conquers  the  enemies  of 
prayer  and  of  the  gods  (2,233-8).  He  is  the  generator  of  all  prayers  (i,i9o2), 
He  utters  prayer  (i,  405)  and  communicates  prayers  to  the  human  priest 
(io,  9827)-  Thus  he  comes  later  to  be  called  a  ')ord  of  speech',  vdcaspati 
(MS.  2,  66,  cp.  SB.  14,  4,  i2-3),  a  term  specially  applied  to  Brhaspati  as  god  of 
eloquence  and  wisdom  in  post-Vedic  literature.6 

There  are  several  passages  in  which  Brhaspati  appears  identified  with 
Agni.  Thus  'the  lord  of  prayer,  Agni,  handsome  like  Mitra'  is  invoked 
(i,  38*3).  In  another  passage  (2,  i3  ff.)  Agni,  though  identified  with  other 
gods  as  well,  is  clearly  more  intimately  connected  with  Brahmanaspati,  as 
only  these  two  names  are  in  the  vocative.  In  one  verse  (3,  262)  both  Mli- 
tarisvan  and  'Brhaspati  the  wise  priest,  the  guest,  the  swiftly-moving'  seem  to 
be  epithets  of  Agni,  while  in  another  (i,  ipo2)  Matarisvan  seems  to  be  an 
epithet  of  Brhaspati.  Again,  by  Brhaspati,  who  is  blue-backed,  takes  up  his 
abode  in  the  house,  shines  brightly,  is  golden-coloured  and  ruddy  (5,  43 12), 
Agni  must  be  meant.  In  two  other  verses  (i,  i819;  io,  i822)  Brhaspati  seems 
to  be  the  same  as  Narasamsa,  a  form  of  Agni  (p.  100).  Like  Agni,  Brhaspati 
is  a  priest,  is  called  'Son  of  strength'  (i,  4o2)  and  Angiras  (2,  23l8)  as  well 
(the  epithet  angirasa  belonging  to  him  exclusively),  and  burns  the  goblins 
(2,  2314)  or  slays  them  (io,  io34).  Brhaspati  is  also  spoken  of  as  ascending 
to  heaven,  to  the  upper  abodes  (io,  6710).  Like  Agni,  Brhaspati  has  three 
abodes  (4,  So1);  he  is  the  adorable  one  of  houses  (7,97s),  and  'lord  of  the 
dwelling',  sadasas  pati 7  (i,i86;  Indra-Agni  are  once  called  sadaspati,  i,2i5). 
On  the  other  hand,  Agni  is  called  brahmanas  kavi,  'sage  of  prayer'  (6,  i63°) 
and  is  besought  (2,  2 7)  to  make  heaven  and  earth  favourable  by  prayer 
(brahmana).  But  Brhaspati  is  much  more  commonly  distinguished  from  Agni 
(2,  253;  7,  io4;  io,  689),  chiefly  by  being  invoked  or  named  along  with  him 
in  enumerations  (3,  20$  &c.)8. 

Like  Agni,  Brhaspati  has  been  drawn  into  and  has  obtained  a  firm 
footing  in  the  Indra  myth  of  the  release  of  the  cows.  The  mountain  yielded 
to  his  splendour,  when  Brhaspati,  the  Angiras,  opened  the  cowstall  and  with 
Indra  as  his  companion  let  loose  the  flood  of  water  enveloped  by  darkness 
(2,  23l8,  cp.  i,  56s.  899).  Accompanied  by  his  singing  host  (cp.  §  54)  he 
with  a  roar  rent  Vala;  shouting  he  drove  out  the  lowing  cows  (4,  5o5).  He 
won  treasures  and  the  great  stalls  full  of  cows;  desiring  waters  and  light, 
the  irresistible  Brhaspati  slays  his  foe  with  flames  (6,  733).  What  was  firm 
was  loosened,  what  was  strong  yielded  to  him;  he  drove  out  the  cows,  he 
cleft  Vala  with  prayer;  he  covered  up  the  darkness  and  made  heaven  visible; 
the  stone-mouthed  well  filled  with  honey,  which  Brhaspati  pierced  with  might, 
that  the  celestials  drank,  while  they  poured  out  together  abundantly  the 
watery  fountain  (2,24-^4).  When  Brhaspati  with  fiery  gleams  rent  the  defences 
of  Vala,  he  revealed  the  treasures  of  the  cows;  as  if  splitting  open  eggs,  he 
drove  out  the  cows  of  the  mountain;  he  beheld  the  honey  enclosed  by  the 
stone;  he  brought  it  out,  having  cloven  (Vala)  with  his  roar;  he  smote  forth 
as  it  were  the  marrow  of  Vala  (io,  684~9).  He  drove  out  the  cows  and 
distributed  them  in  heaven  (2,  2414).  Brhaspati  fetched  the  cows  out  of  the 
rock;  seizing  the  cows  of  Vala,  he  took  possession  of  them  (io,  685).  His 
conquest  of  Vala  is  so  characteristic  that  it  became  proverbial  (AV.  9,  32). 
Being  in  the  clouds  (abhriyd)  he  shouts  aloud  after  the  many  cows  (io,6812, 
cp.  673).  These  cows  may  represent  the  waters,  which  are  expressly  mentioned 
(2,  23l8;  6,  733)  or  possibly  the  rays  of  dawn  (cp.  io,  675.  689). 

In  releasing  the   cows   Brhaspati   seeks   light   in   darkness  and  finds  the 


TERRESTRIAL  GODS,     36.  BRHASPATI.  103 


light;  he  found  the  Dawn,  light,  and  Agni,  and  dispelled  the  darkness  (10, 
684'  9).  In  shattering  the  fort,  he  found  the  Dawn,  the  Sun,  the  Cow  (10, 
675).  He  hid  or  dispelled  the  darkness  and  made  visible  the  light  (2,  24$; 
4,  5o4).  Brhaspati  thus  comes  to  acquire  more  general  warlike  traits.  t  He 
penetrated  the  mountain  full  of  riches  and  split  open  the  strongholds  of  Sam- 
bara  (2,  242).  Brhaspati  Angirasa,  the  first-born  holy  one,  cleaver  of  rocks, 
roars  as  a  bull  at  the  two  worlds,  slays  Vrtras  (prtrdni\  shatters  forts,  over 
comes  foes  (6,  731-  ').  He  disperses  foes  and  wins  victory  (10,  103^).  No 
one  can  overcome  him  in  great  fight  or  small  (i,  4o8).  He  vanquishes  the 
enemy  in  battle  (2,  23").  He  is  to  be  invoked  in  combats  (2,  ^313)  and  is 
a  priest  much  praised  in  conflict  (2,  249). 

Being  the  companion  and  ally  of  Indra  (2,  23l8.  24';  8,  8515),  he  is 
often  invoked  with  that  deity  (4,  50 10-  IX  &c.).  With  Indra  he  is  a  soma- 
drinker  (4,  49^.  50*°)  and,  like  him,  is  styled  maghavan,  'bountiful'  (2,  2412). 
Indra,  too,  is  the  only  god  with  whom  he  forms  a  pair  (2,  2412;  4,  49T~6). 
Thus  he  comes  to  be  styled  vajrin,  'wielder  of  the  bolt'  (i,  4o8)  and  to  be 
described  as^hurling  the  bolt,  the  Asura-slaying  missile  (AV.  n,  lo1^).  He  is 
also  invoked  with  the  Maruts  at  the  same  time  as  Indra  (i,  40*)  and  is  once 
besought  to  come  accompanied  by  the  Maruts,  whether  he  be  Mitra,  Varuna 
or  Pusan  (10,  98')-  In  one  passage  he  is  said  to  have  heard  the  prayer  of 
Trita  buried  in  a  well  and  to  have  delivered  him  (i,  105*7). 

Brhaspati  favours  the  man  who  offers  prayer  (2,  251)  but  scourges  the 
hater  of  prayer  (2,  23^).  He  protects  the  pious  man  from  all  dangers 
and  calamities,  from  curse  and  malignity,  and  blesses  him  with  wealth  and 
prosperity  (i,  18^;  2,  231— I0).  Possessed  of  all  desirable  things  (7,  10*.  97*), 
he  is  opulent,  a  procurer  of  wealth,  and  an  increaser  of  prosperity  (i,  i82). 
He  is  a  prolonger  of  life  and  a  remover  of  disease  (i,  i82).  Having  such 
benevolent  traits  he  is  called  a  father  (4,  5<D6;  6,  731)- 

He  is  asurya,  'divine'  (2,  232),  belongs  to  all  the  gods  (3,  624;  4,  5o6), 
and  is  the  most  god-like  of  the  gods  (2,  243).  As  a  god  he  widely  extended 
to  the  gods  and  embraces  all  things  (2,  24",  cp.  8,  6il8).  Mightily  he  holds 
asunder  the  ends  of  the  earth  with  his  roar  (4,  5oT).  It  is  his  inimitable 
deed  that  sun  and  moon  rise  alternately  (10,  6810).  He  is  also  spoken  of 
as  stimulating  the  growth  of  plants  (10,  97^- ^j.  Later  Brhaspati  is  brought 
into  connexion  with  certain  stars.  Thus  in  the  TS.  (4,  4,  lo1)  he  is  stated  to 
be  the  deity  of  the  constellation  Tisya9,  and  in  post-Vedic  literature  he  is 
regarded  as  the  regent  of  the  planet  Jupiter. 

Brhaspati  is  a  purely  Indian  deity.  Both  forms  of  the  name  occur 
throughout  the  older  as  well  as  the  later  books  of  the  RV.  But  since  appella 
tions  formed  with  pati  (like  vacas  pati,  vastos  pati,  ksetrasya  pati}  to  designate 
deities  presiding  over  a  particular  domain,  must  be  comparatively  recent  as 
products  of  reflexion10,  this  mythological  creation  can  hardly  go  much  further 
back  than  the  beginning  of  the  Rigvedic  period.  The  accentuation  of  the 
word  brhaspdti  shows  it  to  be  an  improper  compound.  The  prior  member 
might  possibly  be  a  neuter  noun  in  -as*1,  but  the  contemporaneous  form 
brdhmanas  pati,  which  is  a  kind  of  explanation,  indicates  that  the  poets  of 
the  RV.  regarded  it  as  the  genitive12  of  a  noun  brh,  from  the  same  root  as 
brahman. 

The  evidence  adduced  above  seems  to  favour  the  view  that  Brhaspati 
was  originally  an  aspect  of  Agni  as  a  divine  priest  presiding  over  devotion, 
an  aspect  which  (unlike  other  epithets  of  Agni  formed  with  pati,  such  as 
vis'dm  pati,  grhapati,  sadaspati)  had  attained  an  independent  character  by 
the  beginning  of  the  Rigvedic  period,  though  the  connexion  with  Agni  was 


104     III.  RELIGION,  WELTL.  WISSENSCH.  u.  KUNST.     i  A.  VEDIC  MYTHOLOGY. 

not  entirely  severed.  LANGLOIS^,  H.  H.  WILSON  I4,  MAX  MULLERXS  agree  in 
regarding  Brhaspati  as  a  variety  of  Agni.  ROTH16  was  of  opinion  that  this 
sacerdotal  god  is  a  direct  impersonation  of  the  power  of  devotion.  Similarly 
KAEGi17  and  OLDENBERGIS  think  him  to  be  an  abstraction  of  priestly  action, 
which  has  appropriated  the  deeds  of  earlier  gods.  WEBER Z9  considers  Brhaspati 
to  be  a  priestly  abstraction  of  Indra,  and  is  followed  in  this  by  HOPKINS  20. 
Finally,  HiLLEBRANDT21  holds  him  to  be  a  lord  of  plants  and  a  personification 
of  the  moon22,  representing  predominantly  the  igneous  side  of  that  luminary. 
As  the  divine  brahman  priest,  Brhaspati  seems  to  have  been  the  proto 
type  of  Brahma,  the  chief  of  the  -Hindu  triad,  while  the  neuter  form  of  the 
word,  brahma,  developed  into  the  Absolute  of  the  Vedanta  philosophy2^ 

i  Cp.  ZDMG.  32,  316.  —  2  ORV.  396,  note  i;  SEE.  46,  190.  —  3  ORV.  382.  — 
4  ROTH  thinks  they  are  the  Maruts:  ZDMG.  I,  77.  —  5  Stars,  HVM.  i,  416; 
Maruts,  Vedainterpretation  10.  —  6  ZDMG.  i,  77.  —  7  Cp.  HILLEBRANDT,  Vedaint. 
10.  —  8  OST.  5,  283.  —  9  WEBER,  Die  Naksatra  2,  371.  --  «>  ROTH,  ZDMG.  i, 
72.  --  ii  HVM.  i,  409.  —  «  MACDONELL,  KZ.  34,  292 — 6.  —  13  RV.  Trans,  i, 
249.  254.  578.  --  T4  RV.  Trans,  i,  xxxvii.  —  J5  Vedic  Hymns,  SEE.  32,  94.  - 
16  ZDMG.  i,  73;  PW.  —  *7  KRV.  32.  —  18  ORV.  66-8.  381—2;  SEE.  46,  94. 
19  Vajapeya  15.  —  2°  HRI.  136;  cp.  WILSON,  RV.  Tr.  2,  ix;  EDA.  xi.  —  21  HVM, 
i,  404.  418—9  (cp.  277);  cp.  OLDENBERG,  ZDMG.  49,  173.—  22  Also  HVBP.  46—7. 
-  23  BRV.  i,  304;  HRI.  136. 

ROTH,  ZDMG.  i,  72—80;  OST.  5,  272—83;  BRV.  i,  299-304;  KRV.  73—4; 
BRI.  15  —  6;  HVM.  i,  404-25;  LRF.  97—8;  PISCHEL,  GGA.  1894,  p.  420. 

§  37.  Sojna.  -  -  Since  the  Soma  sacrifice  forms  the  main  feature  of  the 
ritual  of  the  RV. T,  the  god  Soma  is  naturally  one  of  the  most  important  deities 
of  that  Veda.  All  the  114  hymns  of  the  ninth  besides  6  in  other  books,  are 
dedicated  to  his  praise.  He  is  also  celebrated  in  portions  of  four  or  five  other 
hymns,  and  as  a  dual  divinity  with  Indra,  Agni,  Pusan,  or  Rudra,  in  about 
six  more.  The  name  of  Soma,  in  its  simple  form  and  in  compounds,  occurs 
hundreds  of  times  in  the  RV.  Judged  by  the  standard  of  frequency,  Soma 
therefore  comes  third  in  order  of  importance  among  the  Vedic  gods.  Soma 
is  much  less  anthropomorphic  than  Indra  or  Varuna,  the  constant  presence 
of  the  plant  and  its  juice  setting  limits  to  the  imagination  of  the  poets  who 
describe  its  personification.  Consequently  little  is  said  of  his  human  form 
or  action.  The  marvellous  and  heroic  deeds  attributed  to  him  are  either 
colourless,  because  common  to  almost  all  the  greater  gods,  or  else  only 
secondarily  belong  to  him.  Like  other  gods,  he  is,  under  the  name  of  Indu 
as  well  as  Soma,  invoked  to  come  to  the  sacrifice  and  receive  the  offerings 
on  the  strewn  grass2.  The  ninth  book  mainly  consists  of  incantations  sung 
over  the  tangible  Soma  while  it  is  pressed  by  the  stones,  flows  through  the 
woolen  strainer  into  the  wooden  vats,  in  which  it  is  finally  offered  on  a 
litter  of  grass  to  the  gods  as  a  beverage,  sometimes  in  fire  (i,  9414;  5,  51; 
8,  43 IX  &c.)  or  drunk  by  the  priests.  The  processes  to  which  it  is  subjected 
are  overlaid  with  the  most  varied  and  chaotic  imagery  and  with  mystical 
fancies  often  incapable  of  certain  interpretation. 

In  order  to  make  intelligible  the  mythology  of  Soma,  the  basis  of  which 
are  the  concrete  terrestrial  plant  and  the  intoxicating  juice  extracted  there 
from  ,  it  is  necessary  briefly  to  describe  these  as  well  as  the  treatment  they 
undergo.  The  part  of  the  Soma  plant  which  is  pressed  is  called  ams'u,  'shoot 
or  stalk'  (9,672b).  The  shoots  swelling  give  milk  like  cows  with  their  udders 
(8,9T9).  As  distinguished  from  the  stalk,  the  whole  Soma  plant  seems  to  be 
intended  by  andhas  (8, 32*8;  io,948  &c.),  which  is  said  to  have  come  from 
heaven  (9,6i10)  and  to  have  been  brought  by  the  eagle  (5,459;  9,686;  10,1445). 
The  same  term  is  applied  to  the  juice  also3  and  is  distinguished  from  Indu 
the  god  (9,  5 1 3;  10,  115^).  The  juice  is  also  designated  by  soma  (which 


TERRESTRIAL  GODS.     37.  SOMA.  105 


means  the  plant  as  well)  and  generally  by  rasa,  fluid.  In  one  hymn  (i,  187) 
the  juice  is  called  pitu,  the  'beverage';  and  it  is  often  styled  mada,  'intoxi 
cating  draught'4.  Soma  is  occasionally  also  referred  to  with  anna,  'food'  (7,  98*; 
8,  412;  SB.  i;  6,  4s).  The  term  madhu,  which  in  connexion  with  the  Asvins 
means  'honey'  or  'mead',  comes  to  be  applied,  in  the  general  sense  of  'sweet 
draught',  not  only  to  milk  (payas)  and  ghee  (ghrta),  but  especially  to  the 
Soma  juice  (4,  275;  8,  696).  Mythologically  madhu  is  the  equivalent  of  Soma 
when  the  latter  means  the  celestial  ambrosia  (amrta)s.  Conversely,  amrta 
is  frequently  used  as  an  equivalent  of  ordinary  Soma  (5,  23;  6,  373  &c.;  VS. 
6,  34;  SB.  9,  5,  i8)6.  King  Soma  when  pressed  is  amrta  (VS.  19,  72). 
Another  expression  is  somyam  madhu,  'Soma  mead'  (4.,  265;  6,  2o3).  Figu 
ratively  the  Soma  juice  is  called  piyusa  (3,  482  &c.),  milk  (9,  io712),  the  wave 
of  the  stalk  (9,  968)  or  the  juice  of  honey  (5,  43 4).  The  most  frequent  figur 
ative  name  applied  to  Soma  is  indu,  the  'bright  drop',  another  term  of 
similar  meaning,  drapsa,  'drop',  being  much  less  common. 

The  extraction  of  the  juice  is  generally  described  by  the  root  su,  'to 
press'  (9,  62*  &c.),  but  often  also  by  duh  'to  milk'  (3,  366-  ?  &c.).  The  juice 
is  intoxicating  (i,  1253;  6,  17".  2o6)  and  'honied',  madhumat  (9,  971*)-  The 
latter  expression  simply  means  'sweet',  but  as  applied  to  Soma  originally 
seems  to  have  meant  'sweetened  with  honey",  some  passages  pointing  to 
this  admixture  (9,  i78.  8648.  97".  io920)7.  As  flowing  from  the  press,  Soma 
is  compared  with  the  wave  of  a  stream  (9,  8o5)  and  directly  called  a  wave 
(9,  64"  &c.)  or  a  wave  of  honey  (3,  47*).  With  reference  to  the  juice  collected 
in  the  vat,  Soma  is  spoken  of  as  a  sea  (arnava:  10,  ii53)  and  frequently 
as  an  ocean  (samudra-.  5,  473;  9,  64®  &c.).  The  heavenly  Soma  is  also  called 
a  well  (utsa),  which  is  in  the  highest  place  of  the  cows  (5,  458),  which  is 
placed  in  the  cows  and  guided  with  ten  reins  (i.  e.  fingers:  6,  4424),  or  a 
well  of  honey  in  the  highest  step  of  Visnu  (i,  i545). 

The  colour  of  the  plant  and  juice,  as  well  as  of  the  god,  is  described 
as  brown  (babhni)  or  ruddy  (aruna\  but  most  frequently  as  tawny  (Jiari). 
Thus  Soma  is  the  branch  of  a  ruddy  tree  (10,  94^);  it  is  a  ruddy  milked 
shoot  (7,  981);  the  tawny  shoot  is  pressed  into  the  strainer  (9,  921).  The 
colour  of  the  Soma  plant  or  its  substitute  prescribed  in  the  Brahmanas  is 
ruddy  (SB.  4,  5,  lo1);  and  in  the  ritual  the  cow  which  is  the  price  paid  in 
the  purchase  9f  Soma,  must  be  brown  or  ruddy  because  that  is  Soma's  colour 
(TS.  6,  i,  6J;  SB.  3,  3,  i<4)8- 

Soma  is  described  as  purified  with  the  hands  (9,  8634),  by  the  ten  fin 
gers  (9,  84.  i58  &c.),  or,  figuratively,  by  the  ten  maidens  who  are  sisters 
(9,  i7.  65),  or  by  the  daughters  (naptt]  of  Vivasvat  (9,  i45).  Similarly,  the 
maidens  of  Trita  are  said  to  urge  on  the  tawny  one  with  stones  as  a  drop 
for  Indra  to  drink  (9,  322.  38").  Soma  is  also  spoken  of  as  purified  or 
brought  by  the  daughter  of  the  sun  (9,  i6.  72^.  H33)9.  Sometimes  it  is  said 
to  be  purified  by  prayer  (9,  9613.  H35).  The  priests  who  press  Soma  are 
Adhvaryus10  (8,  4"). 

The  shoot  is  crushed  with  a  stone  (9,  6719)  or  pressed  with  stones 
(9,  ic>710);  the  plant  is  pounded  to  produce  the  Soma  draught  (10,  853). 
The  stones  tear  its  skin  (TB.  3,  7,  I31).  The  stones  lie  on  a  skin;  for  they 
'chew  him  on  the  hide  of  the  cow'  (9,  794).  They  are  placed  on  the  vedi 
or  altar  (5,  3i12):  a  practice  differing  from  that  of  the  later  ritual11.  They 
are  held  with  hands  or  arms  (7,  221;  9,  794;  AV.  n,  i10).  The  two  arms 
and  the  ten  fingers  yoke  the  stone  (5,  434).  Hence  the  stones  are  said  to 
be  guided  by  ten  reins  (10,  948).  Being  spoken  of  as  yoked,  they  are  com 
pared  with  horses  (10,  946).  The  usual  name  for  the  pressing  stones  is  adri 


io6    III.  RELIGION,  WELTL.  WISSENSCH.  u.  KUNST.     i  A.  VEDIC  MYTHOLOGY. 

(generally  used  -with  the  verb  su,  to  press)  or  grdvan  (generally  connected 
with  vad,  to  speak,  or  verbs  of  cognate  meaning,  and  hence  showing  a  greater 
tendency  to  personification12  than  adri).  Both  terms  nearly  always  occur 
either  in  the  singular  or  the  plural,  and  not  in  the  dual.  The  stones  are 
also  once  respectively  called  as'na  (8,  22),  bharitra  (3,  367),  parvata  (3,  358) 
and  parvata  adrayah  (10,  941).  The  pressing  of  Soma  by  means  of  stones 
was  the  usual  method  in  the  period  of  the  RV.  But  the  extraction  of  the 
juice  by  mortar  and  pestle,  which  is  also  sanctioned  by  the  ritual  texts,  was 
already  known  to  the  RV.  (i,  28T~4);  and  as  this  method  is  in  use  among 
the  Parsis,  it  may  go  back  to  the  Indo-Iranian  age. 

The  pressed  drops  are  poured  upon  (9,  63 10  &c.)  and  pass  over  the 
strainer  of  sheep's  wool  (9,  699).  For  it  removes  Soma's  impurity,  so  that 
he  goes  cleansed  to  the  feast  of  the  gods  (9,  78*).  This  strainer,  which  is 
very  frequently  mentioned,  passes  under  various  names.  It  is  called  a  skin 
(tvac],  hair  (romaii),  wool  (vdra\  filter  (pavitrd),  or  ridge  (sdnu,  as  the  top 
of  the  contrivance).  All  these  terms  are  used  with  or  without  an  adjective 
formed  from  am,  sheep.  The  word  am  itself  is  sometimes  figuratively  em 
ployed  in  this  sense.  As  passing  through  the  strainer  Soma  is  usually  called 
pavamdna  or  pundna^  'flowing  clear'  (from  rfpu).  The  more  general  term 
mrj\  'to  cleanse'^  is  not  only  applied  to  the  purification  of  Soma  with  the 
strainer,  but  also  to  the  addition  of  water  and  milk  (9,  86".  9i2).  The 
purified  (unmixed)  Soma  juice  is  sometimes  called  suddha,  'pure',  but  much 
oftener  sukra  or  s'uci,  'bright'  (8,  2TO;  9,  332;  i,  5s.  3o2).  This  unmixed  Soma 
is  offered  almost  exclusively  to  Vayu  and  Indra,  the  epithet  sucipa,  'drinking 
clear  (Soma)'  being  distinctive  of  Vayu  (p.  82).  This  agrees  with  the  later 
ritual,  where,  in  the  Grahas  or  draughts  for  dual  divinities,  clear  Soma  is 
offered  to  Vayu  and  Indra-Vayu,  but  is  mixed  with  milk  for  Mitra-Varuna, 
and  with  honey  for  the  Asvins1-3. 

After  passing  the  filter,  Soma  flows  into  jars  (kalafa,  9,  6o3  £c.)  or 
vats  (drona)**.  The  streams  of  Soma  rush  to  the  forest  of  the  vats  like 
buffaloes  (9,  33*.  926);  the  god  flies  like  a  bird  to  settle  in  the  vats  (9,  31); 
like  a  bird  sitting  on  a  tree,  the  tawny  one  settles  in  the  bowls  (camu: 
9,  7  25).  Soma  is  mixed  with  water  in  the  vat.  United  with  the  wave,  the 
stalk  roars  (9,  745).  Like  a  bull  on  the  herd,  he  rushes  on  the  vat,  into 
the  lap  of  the  waters,  a  roaring  bull;  clothing  himself  in  waters,  Indu  rushes 
around  the  vat,  impelled  by  the  singers  (9,  y65.  icy26).  The  wise  milk  him 
into  the  waters  with  their  hands  (9,  794).  Having  passed  over  the  wool  and 
playing  in  the  wood,  he  is  cleansed  by  the  ten  maidens  (9,  65).  Several 
other  passages  refer  to  the  admixture  of  water  with  Soma  (9,  305.  534.  868-25). 
The  Soma  drops  are  said  to  spread  brightness  in  the  streams  (9,  761). 
Besides  the  verb  mrj\  'to  cleanse',  which  is  commonly  used  to  express  the 
admixture  of  water  (e.  g.  9,  6317),  a-dhav,  'to  wash',  is  also  employed  (8,  i17). 
In  the  preparation  of  Soma,  the  pressing  ( ~\/~su)  comes  first,  then  the  mixing 
with  water  (7,  326;  8,  i17.  318;  AV.  6,  21),  just  as  in  the  later  ritual  the 
savana,  'pressure',  precedes  the  ddhavana,  'washing'.  In  the  bowls  Soma  is 
mixed  with  milk  (9,  86  &c.)15,  which  is  said  to  sweeten  it  (8,23) l6.  In  several 
passages  the  addition  of  both  water  and  milk  is  mentioned.  Thus  it  is  said 
that  Soma  clothes  himself  in  waters,  that  streams  of  water  flow  after  him, 
when  he  desires  to  clothe  himself  in  cows  (i.  e.  milk:  9,  23-4).  They  press 
him  with  stones,  they  wash  him  in  water,  clothing  him  as  it  were  in  cow-garments, 
men  milk  him  out  of  the  stalks  (8,  i17;  cp.  2,  36';  6,  4o2;  9,  86?4-5.  96^). 

Soma  is  recognised  in  the  RV.  as  having  three  kinds  of  admixture 
(trydtir:  5,  275),  with  milk  (gavasir),  sour  milk  (dadhydsir],  and  barley  (yavd- 


TERRESTRIAL  GODS.     37.  SOMA.  107 


sir).  The  admixture  is  figuratively  called  a  garment  (vastra,  vdsas, 
or  a  shining  robe  (nirnij:  9,  i45),  the  latter  term  being  applied  to  the  strainer 
also  (9,  7o7).  Hence  Soma  is  spoken  of  as  decked  with  beauty  (9,  344  &c.) 
and  as  richly  adorned  (9,  Si1).  Mention  is  also  made,  though  rarely,  ot 
mixture  with  ghee  (9,  822);  but  neither  this  addition  nor  that  of  water,  is  a 
regular  ds'ir18. 

In  the  ritual  there  is  a  ceremony  called  dpydyana  or  causing  the  half- 
pressed  Soma  stalks  to  swell  by  moistening  them  with  water  afresh.  The 
beginnings  of  it  are  found  in  the  MS.  (4,  55).  The  verb  d-pya,  'to  swell', 
occurs  in  the  RV.  in  connexion  with  Soma  (i,  9il6~8);  10,  85$)  X9;  but  here 
it  seems  to  refer  to  Soma  as  identified  with  the  moon.  In  one  other  passage, 
however,  (9,  3i4)  it  may  have  a  ritual  application.  Soma  is  also  said  in  the 
RV.  to  swell  (p^  pinv})  like  a  sea  or  river  (9,  648.  io712). 

Soma  is  described  in  the  RV.  as  pressed  three  times  in  the  day.  Thus 
the  Rbhus  are  invited  to  the  evening  pressing  (4,  33"  &c.)  20,  Indra  to  the 
midday  pressing  (3,  32*-  2;  8,  371),  which  is  his  alone  (4,  36?),  while  the  mor 
ning  libation  is  his  first  drink  (10,  H21). 

The  abode  (sadhastha]  of  Soma  is  often  referred  to21;  once,  however, 
mention  is  made  of  three,  which  he  occupies  when  purified  (9,  io32),  the 
epithet  trisadhastha,  'having  three  abodes',  being  also  applied  to  him  in  another 
passage  (8,  835).  These  three  abodes  may  already  designate  the  three  tubs 
used  at  the  Soma  sacrifice  of  the  later  ritual  (TS.  3,  2,  i2;  KSS.  9,  517.  74;  cp. 
RV.  8,  2s);  but  BERGAIGNE  (BRV,  i,  179)  regards  them  as  purely  mytholo 
gical.  A  similar  remark  applies  to  the  three  lakes  of  Soma  which  Indra 
drinks  (5,  297'8;  6,  17";  8,  710)22.  The  epithet  triprstha,  'three-backed',  is 
peculiar  to  Soma.  Being  applied  to  the  juice  at  least  once  (7,  371)  it  probably 
refers  (as  Sayana  thinks)  to  the  three  admixtures,  much  as  the  Agni's  epithet 
ghrtaprstha  alludes  to  ghee  being  thrown  on  the  fire23. 

Based  on  the  mixture  of  water  with  the  juice,  the  connexion  of  Soma 
with  the  waters  is  expressed  in  the  most  varied  ways.  Streams  flow  for  him 
(9?  3l3)«  The  waters  follow  his  ordinance  (9,  825).  He  flows  at  the  head 
of  streams  (9,  S612).  He  is  lord  and  king  of  streams  (9,  i55.  86H  892), 
lord  of  spouses  (9,  86^2);  an  oceanic  (samudriyd)  king  and  god  (9,  io7l6). 
The  waters  are  his  sisters  (9,  8  2  3).  As  leader  of  waters,  Soma  rules  over 
rain  (9,  742).  He  produces  waters  and  causes  heaven  and  earth  to  rain 
(9,  963).  He  streams  rains  from  heaven  (9,  88.  491.  9717.  io89-10).  The  Soma 
drops  themselves  are  several  times  compared  with  rain  (9,  4i3.  891.  io69)24 
and  Soma  is  said  to  flow  clearly  with  a  stream  of  honey  like  the  rain-charged 
cloud  (9,  2  9).  So  too  the  Pavamana  drops  are  said  to  have  streamed  from 
heaven,  from  air,  on  the  ridge  of  earth  (9,  63  2?).  There  are  some  other 
passages  in  which  the  soma  that  is  milked  appears  to  refer  to  rain  (8,  710; 
9,  744,  cp.  10,  3o4)25.  The  SB.  (n,  5,  45)  identifies  the  amrta  with  the 
waters.  This  identification  may  have  given  rise  to  the  myth  of  Soma  brought 
down  to  man  by  an  eagle  (p.  in)26.  But  the  celestial  Soma  descending 
to  earth  was  doubtless  usually  regarded  as  only  mixed  with  rain,  and  not 
confounded  with  it27. 

The  waters  are  invoked  to  set  in  motion  the  exhilerating  wave,  the 
draught  of  Indra,  the  sky-born  well  (10,  3o9).  Soma  is  the  drop  which  grows 
in  the  waters  (9,  8510.  892).  Hence  he  is  the  embryo  of  the  waters  (9,  9741; 
SB.  4,  4,  521)  or  their  child,  for  seven  sisters  as  mothers  are  around  the  child, 
the  newly  born,  the  Gandharva  of  the  waters  (9,  86^6;  cp.  10,  13$),  and  the 
waters  are  directly  called  his  mothers  (9,  6i4).  Soma  is  also  spoken  of  as 
a  youth  among  the  waters  or  cows  (5,  459;  9,  9$). 


io8    III.  RELIGION,  WELTL.  WISSENSCH.  u.  KUNST.     i  A.  VEDIC  MYTHOLOGY. 


The  sound  made  by  the  Soma  juice  as  it  is  being  purified  and  rushes 
into  the  vats  or  bowls,  is  often  referred  to.  It  is  compared  with  that  of  rain 
(9, 4 13).  But  the  language  is  generally  hyperbolical.  Thus  the  sweet  drop 
is  said  to  flow  over  the  filter  like  the  din  of  combatants  (9,  69").  The  noise 
is  constantly  designated  by  various  verbs  meaning  to  roar  or  bellow  (krand, 
nad,  md,  ru,  vas:  9,  9i3.  954  &c.).  Even  the  verb  stan,  'to  thunder',  is  used 
(9,  869)  and  the  wise  are  described  as  'milking  the  thundering  unfailing  stalk' 
(9,  726).  Lightning  also  is  in  some  verses  connected  with  the  purification 
of  Soma  (9,  4 13.  So1.  843.  8;8);  this  in  all  probability  alludes  to  the  purifi 
cation  of  the  celestial  Soma  and  may  have  referred  to  the  phenomena  of 
the  thunderstorm28. 

When  Soma  is  said  to  roar  he  is  commonly  compared  with  or  directly 
called  a  bull.  'As  a  bull  he  bellows  in  the  wood'  (9,  73);  'the  tawny  bull 
bellows  and  shines  with  the  Sun'  (9,  26).  As  the  waters,  added  with  or  with 
out  milk,  29  are  figuratively  called  cows,  the  relation  of  Soma  to  them  is 
usually  that  of  a  bull  to  cows.  He  is  a  bull  among  the  cows  (9,  i66.  69! 
967)  or  is  lord  of  the  cows  (9,  724).  He  bellows  like  a  bull  traversing  the 
cows  (9,  7 19)  or  like  a  bull  towards  the  cows  (9,  7i7),  the  cows  also  bellowing 
towards  him  (9,  8o2  &c.).  He  is  the  bull  of  heaven  as  well  as  of  the  earth 
and  the  streams  (6,  4421)-  The  impetuosity  of  Soma  is  also  several  times 
illustrated  by  comparison  with  a  buffalo  (mahisd).  Thus  he  even  comes  to 
be  called  an  animal  (pas'u:  9,  8643).  Being  a  bull  among  the  cow-waters, 
Soma  is  the  fertilizer  of  the  waters  (10,  368,  cp.  9,  i95).  He  is  also  (9,  8639) 
an  impregnator  (retodha),  an  epithet  especially  applied  to  the  moon  in  the 
YV.  (e.  g.  MS.  i,69).  Hence  he  is  a  bestower  of  fertility  (9,  6o4.  745).  Soma 
being  so  frequently  called  a  bull  (uksan,  vrsan,  vrsabhd)  is  sharp-horned 
(tigmasrngd),  an  epithet  which  in  five  of  its  six  occurrences  in  the  RV.  is 
accompanied  by  a  word  meaning  'bull'.  Thus  the  brewed  drink  (manthd)  of 
Indra  is  like  a  sharp-horned  bull  (10,  86 IS).  Soma  is  also  said  (like  Agni) 
to  sharpen  his  horns  (9,  i54.  70?) 3°. 

Soma  is  swift  (i,  47)  and,  in  illustration  of  the  speed  with  which  the 
pressed  juice  flows,  is  very  often  compared  with  or  designated  a  steed.  Thus 
the  ten  maidens  are  said  to  cleanse  him  like  a  swift  steed  (9,  6s).  The  drop 
which  intoxicates  Indra  is  a  tawny  steed  (9,  6317).  Soma  flowing  into  the 
vats  is  sometimes  also  compared  with  a  bird  flying  to  the  wood  (9,  72$  &c). 

Owing  to  the  yellow  colour  of  the  juice,  the  physical  quality  of  Soma 
mainly  dwelt  on  by  the  poets,  is  his  brilliance.  His  rays  are  often  referred 
to  and  he  is  frequently  assimilated  to  the  sun.  He  shines  like  or  with  the 
sun  or  clothes  himself  in  its  rays  (9,  76!  8632;  cp.  7i9).  He  ascends  the  car 
of  the  sun  and  stands  above  all  beings  like  the  sun31-  He  fills  heaven  and 
earth  with  rays  like  the  sun  (9,  41 5).  When  born  a  bright  son,  he  caused 
his  parents  to  shine  (9,  93).  The  daughter  of  the  sun  purifies  him  (9,  i6). 
Thus  it  comes  to  be  said  of  him  that  he  combats  the  darkness  (9,  97),  wards 
it  off  with  light  (9,  8622),  or  creates  bright  light,  dispelling  the  darkness 
(9,  6624.  ioo8.  io812  &c.). 

Its  mysteriously  exhilerating  and  invigorating  action,  surpassing  that  of 
ordinary  food  or  drink  and  prompting  to  deeds  beyond  the  natural  powers, 
led  to  Soma  being  regarded  as  a  divine  drink  which  bestows  immortal  life. 
Hence  it  is  mythologically  called  amrta,  the  draught  of  immortality.  It  is  an 
immortal  stimulant  (i,  84^),  which  the  gods  love  (9,  85")  and  of  which,  when 
pressed  by  men  and  mixed  with  milk,  all  the  gods  drink  (9,109*5);  for  they 
hasten  to  exhileration  (8,  2l8)  and  become  exhilerated  (8,  58").  Soma  is 
immortal  (i,  439;  8,  4812;  9,  3T  &c.)j  and  the  gods  drank  him  for  immortality 


TERRESTRIAL  GODS.     37.  SOMA.  109 


(9,  io68).  He  confers  immortality  on  the  gods  (i,  gi6;  9,  io83)  and  on  men 
(i,  9 11;  8,  483).  He  places  his  worshipper  in  the  everlasting  and  imperishable 
world  where  there  is  eternal  light  and  glory,  and  makes  him  immortal  where 
king  Vaivasvata  lives  (9,  ii37-8)32. 

Thus  Soma  naturally  has  medicinal  power  also.  It  is  medicine  for  a 
sick  man  (8,  6i17).  Hence  the  god  Soma  heals  whatever  is  sick,,  making 
the  blind  to  see  and  the  lame  to  walk  (8,  682;  10,25").  He  is  the  guardian 
of  men's  bodies  and  occupies  their  every  limb  (8, 489),  bestowing  length  of 
life  in  this  world  (i,  9i6;  8,  484<7;  9,  46.  gi6).  The  Soma  draught  is  even 
said  to  dispel  sin  from  the  heart,  to  destroy  falsehood  and  to  promote  truth. 

When  imbibed  Soma  stimulates  the  voice  (6,  473;  9,  84"*.  955.  9732)>  which 
he  impels  as  the  rower  his  boat  (9,  95 2).  This  is  doubtless  the  reason  why 
Soma  is  called  'lord  of  speech'  vdcas pati^  (9,  264.  ioi5)  or  leader  of  speech, 
vdco  agriya  or  agre  (9,  73.  6225~6.  8612.  io610).  He  is  also  said  to  raise  his 
voice  from  heaven  (9,  68s).  In  the  Brahmanas  vac,  'speech',  is  described  as 
the  price  paid  by  the  gods  for  Soma34.  Soma  also  awakens  eager  thought 
(6,473).  So  his  worshippers  exclaim:  'We  have  drunk  Soma,  we  have  become 
immortal,  we  have  entered  into  light,  we  have  known  the  gods'  (8,  48 3).  Thus 
he  is  also  spoken  of  as  a  lord  of  thought  and  as  a  father,  leader,  or  gener 
ator  of  hymns35.  He  is  a  leader  of  poets,  a  seer  among  priests  (9,  966). 
He  has  the  mind  of  seers,  is  a  maker  of  seers  (9,  96 l8)  and  a  protector  of 
prayer  (6,  523).  He  is  the  'soul  of  sacrifice'  (9,  210.  68),  a  priest  (brahma) 
among  the  gods  (9,  96°),  and  apportions  to  them  their  share  of  sacrifice 
(10,  85 19).  Soma's  wisdom  thus  comes  to  be  predominantly  dwelt  upon36. 
He  is  a  wise  seer  (8,  681).  He  knows  the  races  of  the  gods  (9,  8i2.  952. 
977.  io83).  He  is  a  wise  man-seeing  wave  (9,  782).  Soma  with  intelligence 
surveys  creatures  (9,  71 9).  Hence  he  is  many-eyed  (9,  265)  and  thousand- 
eyed  (9,  6oT). 

Soma  stimulated  the  Fathers  to  deeds  (9,  96");  through  him  the  Fathers 
found  the  light  and  the  cows  (9,  9739).  Soma  is  also  said  to  be  united  with 
the  fathers  (8,  4813)  or  to  be  accompanied  by  them  (AV.  18,  412;  SB.  2,  6, 
i4,  &c.),  the  Fathers,  conversely,  being  called  soma-loving,  (somya:  10,  i46; 

AV.    2,   125). 

The  exhilerating  effect  of  the  draught  on  man  was  naturally  transferred 
to  the  gods,  to  whom  the  Soma  was  offered.  The  main  application  of  its 
intoxicating  power  is  its  stimulating  effect  on  Indra  in  his  conflict  with  the 
hostile  powers  of  the  air.  That  Soma  strengthens  Indra  for  the  fight  with 
Vrtra,  is  mentioned  in  innumerable  passages  of  the  RV.  (8,  8i17  &c.).  In 
the  intoxication  of  Soma  Indra  slays  all  foes  (9,  i10)  and  no  one  can  resist 
him  in  battle  when  he  has  drunk  it  (6,  47').  Soma  is  the  soul  of  Indra 
(9?  &53),  the  auspicious  friend  of  Indra  (10,  259).  whose  vigour  he  stimulates 
(9,  762)  and  whom  he  aids  in  slaying  Vrtra  (9,  6i22).  With  Soma  as  a  com 
panion  Indra  made  the  waters  to  flow  for  man  and  slew  the  dragon  (4,  281). 
Thus  Soma  is  sometimes  even  called  the  bolt  (vajra)  of  Indra  (9.  727.  77* 
in3).  Soma,  Indra's  juice,  becomes  a  thousand-winning  bolt  (9,  473).  It 
is  the  intoxicating  draught  which  destroys  a  hundred  forts  (9,  482)  and  is  n 
Vrtra-slaying  intoxicating  stalk  (6,  17").  Thus  the  god  Soma  is  said  to  be 
'like  Indra  a  slayer  of  Vrtras  and  a  fort-destroyer'  (9,  884)  and  comes  to 
.receive  half  a  dozen  times  the  epithet  vrtrahan,  'Vrtra-slaying',  which  pri 
marily  belongs  to  Indra37. 

When  drunk  by  Indra  Soma  caused  the  sun  to  rise  in  heaven  (9,  8622). 
So  this  cosmic  action  comes  to  be  attributed  to  Soma  independently.  He 
caused  the  sun  to  shine  (9,  28s.  374),  caused  the  lights  of  the  sky  to  shine 


no    III.  RELIGION,  WELTL.  WISSENSCH.  u.  K.UNST.     i  A.   VEDIC  MYTHOLOGY. 


(9>  ^59),  and  produced  the  sun.  in  the  waters  (9,  42*)  38.  He  caused  the  sun 
to  rise,  impelled  it,  obtained  and  bestowed  it,  and  caused  the  dawns  to 
shine39.  He  makes  his  worshippers  participate  in  the  sun  (9,  45)  and  finds 
light  for  them  (9,  35').  He  found  the  light  (9,  594)  and  wins  light  and 
heaven  (9,  32J.  Just  as  even  the  sacrificial  butter  is  spoken  of  as  the  'navel 
of  immortality',  on  which  rests  the  whole  world  (4,  581-11),  the  conception 
of  Soma  comes  to  be  extended  to  that  of  a  being  of  universal  dominion 
(9,  8628-*9),  who  is  'lord  of  the  quarters'  (9,  ii32),  who  performs  the  great 
cosmic  actions  of  generating  the  two  worlds  (9,  901),  of  creating  or  estab 
lishing  heaven  and  earth,  of  supporting  heaven,  and  of  placing  light  in  the 

sun  (6,  4423~4-  473'4)40- 

Being  so  intimately  connected  with  Indra  in  the  conflict  with  Vrtra, 
Soma  comes  to  be  spoken  of  independently  as  a  great  fighter.  He  is  a  victor, 
unconquered  in  fight,  born  for  battle  (i,  9i21).  He  is  the  most  heroic  of 
heroes,  the  fiercest  of  the  terrible,  ever  victorious  (9,,  66l6~7).  He  conquers 
for  his  worshippers  cows,  chariots,  horses,  gold,  heaven,  water,  a  thousand 
boons  (9,  784),  and  everything  (8,  681)-  Without  reference  to  his  warlike 
character,  he  is  constantly  said  to  bestow  all  the  wealth  of  heaven  and 
earth,  food,  cattle,  horses,  and  so  forth  (9,  45^.  49^.  52 T  &c.).  Soma  himself 
is,  occasionally  called  a  treasure  (rayi:  9,  48^)  or  the  wealth  of  the  gods 
(SB.  i,  6,  45).  Soma  can  also  afford  protection  from  foes  (10,  257).  He 
drives  away  goblins  (9,  495)  and,  like  some  other  deities  but  more  frequently, 
receives  the  epithet  of  goblin-slayer  (raksohan).  Soma  is  the  only  god  who 
is  called  a  slayer  of  the  wicked  (9,  286  &c.).  In  the  later  Vedic  literature 
the  statement  occurs  that  Brahmans  who  drink  Soma  are  able  to  slay  at  a 
glance  (MS.  4,  82)*1. 

Being  a  warrior,  Soma  is  said  to  have  weapons  (9,  96l6),  which  like  a 
hero  he  grasps  in  his  hand  (9,  y62)  and  which  are  terrible  and  sharp  (9,613°. 
9o3).  In  one  passage  he  is  said  to  have  obtained  his  weapons  by  robbing 
his  malignant  father  of  them  (6,  4422).  He  is  described  as  armed  with  a 
thousand-pointed  shaft  (9,  83s.  864°)  and  his  bow  is  swift  (9,  9o3). 

Soma  rides  in  the  same  chariot  as  Indra  (9,  Sy9.  962.  1035).  He  is 
charioteer  to  the  car-fighter  Indra  (AV.  8,  823).  He  drives  in  a  car  (9,  35), 
which  is  heavenly  (9,  in3).  He  has  light  (9,  8645)  or  a  filter  for  his  car 
(9>  83s).  He  is  the  best  of  charioteers  (9,  6626).  He  has  well-winged  mares 
of  his  own  (9,  8637)  and  a  team  like  Vayu  (9,  883). 

Soma  is  naturally  sometimes  connected  with  Indra's  intimate  associates, 
the  Maruts.  They  are  said  to  milk  the  bull  of  heaven  (9,  108",  cp.  54*) 
and  to  adorn  the  child  when  born  (9,  96*7).  Like  Indra,  Soma  is  attended 
by  the  Maruts  (6,  475)  or  the  troop  of  the  Maruts  (9,  6622).  The  Winds, 
too,  are  said  to  be  gladdening  to  Soma  (9,  3i3)  and  Vayu  is  his  guardian 
(10,  855).  Soma  forms  a  pair  with  Agni,  Pusan,  and  Rudra  respectively 
(p.  128 — 9).  A  few  times  he  is  mystically  indemnified  with  Varuna  (9,  775.  954; 
cp.  733'9;8,  4i8).  f 

The  Soma  plant  is  once  in  the  RV.  (10,  341)  described  as  maujavata, 
which  according  to  later  statements42  would  mean  'produced  on  Mount 
Mujavat'.  Soma  is  also  several  times  described  as  dwelling  in  the  mountains 
(giristha)^  or  growing  in  the  mountains44  (parvatavrdh:  9,  461).  Mountains 
are  also  called 'Soma-backed'  (AV.  3,  2i10),  a  term  which,  perhaps  by  sacri 
ficial  symbolism,  is  applied  to  the  pressing  stones  (adraya/i)  in  RV.  8,  522. 
All  these  terms  point  to  the  abode  of  the  Soma  plant  being  on  terrestrial 
mountains  (cp.  especially  9,823).  This  is  confirmed  by  the  statement  of  the 
Avesta  that  Haoma  grows  on  the  mountains^.  Since  the  Soma  plant  actually 


TERRESTRIAL  GODS.     37.  SOMA.  in 


grew  on  mountains,  it  is  probable  that  this  fact  is  present  to  the  mind  of 
the  poet  even  when  he  says  that  'on  the  vault  of  heaven  sweet-tongued 
friends  milk  the  mountain-dwelling  bull'  (9,  8$l°  cp.  954).  Terrestrial  hills  may 
also  be  intended  when  it  is  said  that  'Varuna  has  placed  Agni  in  the  waters, 
the  sun  in  heaven,  and  Soma  on  the  rock'  (5,  852),  or  that  'Matarisvan  brought 
the  one  (Agni)  from  heaven,  while  the  eagle  carried  off  the  other  (Soma) 
from  the  rock'  (i,  936);  but  here  there  is  more  doubt,  as  'mountain'  and 
'rock'  mythologically  often  mean  'cloud'  (p.  10). 

Though  Soma  is  a  terrestrial  plant,  it  is  also  celestial  (10,  n63);  in  fact 
its  true  origin  and  abode  are  regarded  as  in  heaven.  Thus  it  is  said  that 
the  birth  of  the  plant  is  on  high;  being  in  heaven  it  has  been  received  by 
earth  (9,  6i10).  The  'intoxicating  juice'  is  the  'child  of  heaven'  (9,  38s),  an 
epithet  frequently  applied  to  Soma.  In  one  passage,  however,  he  is  called 
the  offspring  (jdh)  of  the  sun  (9,  931)  and  in  another  Parjanya  is  spoken  of 
as  the  father  of  the  mighty  bird  (9,  82^  cp.  ii33).  In  the  AV.  the  origin 
of  amrta  is  also  traced  to  the  seed  of  Parjanya  (AV.  8,  y21).  When  Soma 
is  called  a  child  (sis'u)  simply  (9,  96 I7)  or  a  youth  (yuvan),  this  is  doubtless 
in  allusion  to  the  fact  that,  like  Agni,  he  is  continually  produced  anew46. 
Soma  is  the  milk  (plyusa)  of  heaven  (9,  51 2  &c.),  is  purified  in  heaven 
(9,  832.  86 22  &c.).  He  flows  with  his  stream  to  the  dear  places  of  heaven 
(9,  i28).  He  runs  through  heaven  across  the  spaces  with  his  stream  (9,  37). 
He  occupies  heaven  (9,  859),  is  in  heaven  (SB.  3,  4,  3^),  or  is  the  lord  of 
heaven  (9,  86 II-33).  As  bird  of  heaven  he  looks  down  on  earth  and  regards 
all  beings  (9,  yi^).  He  stands  above  all  worlds  like  god  Surya  (9,  543). 
The  drops  being  purified  have  been  poured  from  heaven,  from  the  air,  on 
the  surface  of  the  earth  (9,  6327)47;  for  he  is  a  traverser  of  space  (rajastur: 
4,  484.  io87).  Fingers  rub  him  surrounded  with  milk  fon  the  third  ridge,  in 
the  bright  realm  of  heaven'  (9,  8627).  His  place  is  in  the  highest  heaven 
(3,  3210;  4,  266;  9,  86'5)  or  in  the  third  heaven  (TS.  3,  5,  71  &c.)«8.  'Heaven', 
however,  also  seems  to  be  frequently  a  mystical  name  of  the  strainer  of 
sheep's  wool49.  This  seems  to  be  the  case  when  Soma  is  spoken  of  as 
being  'on  the  navel  of  heaven,  on  the  sheep-filter'  (9,  i24),  as  traversing 
the  lights  of  heaven,  the  sheep-filter  (9,  373),  as  running  with  Surya  in  heaven, 
on  the  filter  (9,  27$);  or  when  it  is  said  that  'the  bull  has  occupied  heaven, 
the  king  goes  soaring  over  the  strainer'  (9,  859  cp.  868).  The  term  sdnu, 
'summit',  so  frequently  applied  to  the  filter,  is  suggestive  of  divah  sanu,  'the 
summit  of  heaven'.  Such  terms  would  naturally  come  to  be  connected  with 
the  terrestrial  Soma,  because  heaven  is  the  abode  of  the  celestial  Soma  or 
amrta  (6,  4423). 

Soma  has  been  brought  from  heaven  (9,  6327.  663°).  The  myth  most 
commonly  expressive  of  this  belief  is  that  of  Soma  and  the  eagle.  It  was 
brought  by  the  eagle  (i,  8o2).  The  bird  brought  Soma  from  that  highest 
heaven  (4,  266).  The  eagle  brought  the  Soma  or  mead  (madhu)  to  Indra 
(3»  437;  4,  i813).  The  swift  eagle  flew  to  the  Soma  plant  (5,  45^);  the  eagle 
tore  off  the  sweet  stalk  for  Indra  (4,  20°).  The  eagle  brought  it  for  Indra 
through  the  air  with  his  foot  (8,  71 9).  Flying  swift  as  thought,  the  bird 
broke  through  the  iron  castle  (cp.  4,  271),  going  to  heaven  he  brought  the 
Soma  for  the  wielder  of  the  bolt  (8,  8gs).  The  eagle  bore  the  plant  from 
afar,  from  heaven  (9,  68°.  772.  8624;  10,  n*.  998.  I444).  The  myth  is  most 
fully  dealt  with  in  RV.  4,  26  and  275°.  In  the  Brahmanas  it  is  Gayatri,  a 
mystical  sacerdotal  name  of  Agni 5 x,  that  carries  off  the  Soma.  In  the  RV. 
the  eagle  is  constantly  distinguished  from  Indra  as  bringing  the  Soma  to  him. 
There  is  only  one  passage  (unconnected  with  this  myth)  in  which  Indra  seated 


1 1 2     III.  RELIGION,  WELTL.  WISSENSCH.  u.  KUNST.     i  A.  VEDIC  MYTHOLOGY. 

at  the  Soma  offering  is  called  an  eagle  (10,  998).  'Eagle  of  heaven'  is  an 
epithet  applied  to  Agni  (7,  i54:  otherwise  twice  said  of  the  Maruts),  the  term 
eagle  is  connected  with  Agni  Vaidyuta  or  lightning  (TB.  3,  10,  51  cp.  i2,i2), 
and  Agni  is  often  called  a  bird  in  the  RV.  (p.  89).  On  this  evidence  BLOOM- 
FIELD,  who  subjects  his  predecessors'  interpretations  of  RV.  4,  27  to  a  search 
ing  criticism,  with  much  plausibility  explains  the  carrying  off  of  Soma  by 
the  eagle  as  a  mythological  account  of  the  simple  phenomenon  of  the 
descent  of  lightning,  darting  from  the  cloud  (i.  e.  the  iron  castle)  and  causing 
the  fall  of  the  ambrosial  fluid  Soma  (i.  e.  the  water  of  the  cloud).  At  the 
same  time  he  refers  to  a  passage  of  the  RV.  (i,  936)  in  which  the  descent 
of  fire  and  of  Soma  are  mentioned  together52.  A  detail  of  the  myth  (pro 
bably  a  mere  embellishment  added  by  the  individual  poet)  is  the  trait  that 
as  the  eagle  carried  away  Soma,  the  archer  KrsanuS3  shot  at  him  knocking 
out  a  feather  (4,  272- 4;  Cp.  AB.  3,  25).  This  trait  is  related  with  greater 
detail  in  the  Brahmanas.  Either  a  feather  or  a  claw  is  here  stated  to  have 
been  shot  off.  Falling  to  the  ground,  it  became  a  parna  (palasa]  or  a 
salyaka  tree.  The  tree  hereby  acquired  a  specially  sacred  character  in  conne 
xion  with  the  ritual54. 

Being  the  most  important  of  herbs  Soma  is  said  to  have  been  born  as 
the  lord  of  plants  (9,  ii42),  which  are  also  said  to  have  Soma  as  their  king55 
(9,  9718""9).  He  receives  the  epithet  vanaspati,  'lord  of  the  wood'  (i,  gi6; 
9,  127)  and  is  said  to  have  generated  all  plants  (i,  9i22).  In  the  Brahmanas 
plants  are  connected  with  Soma,  being  styled  saumya  (SB.  12,,  i,  i2)50. 
Irrespectively  of  his  being  lord  of  plants,  Soma  is  often,  like  other  leading 
gods,  called  a  king57.  He  is  also  a  king  of  rivers  (9,  892),  a  king  of  the 
whole  earth  (9,97s8),  a  king  or  father  of  the  gods  (9,  8610.  872.  109*)  a  king 
of  gods  and  mortals  (9,  9724),  and  a  king  of  Brahmans  (VS.  9,  40;  TS.  i,810; 
MS.  2,  69).  He  is  of  course  often  called  a  god;  but  in  one  passage  he  is 
described  as  (a  god  pressed  for  the  gods'  (9,  36-  ?). 

In  the  post-Vedic  literature  Soma  is  a  regular  name  of  the  moon,  which 
is  regarded  as  being  drunk  up  by  the  gods  and  so  waning,  till  it  is  filled  up 
again  by  the  sun.  In  the  Chandogya  Upanisad  (5,  lo1)  the  statement  is 
found  that  the  moon  is  king  Soma,  the  food  of  the  gods,  and  is  drunk  up 
by  them58.  Even  in  the  Brahmanas  the  identification  of  Soma  with  the  moon 
is  already  a  common-place59.  Thus  the  AB.  (7,11)  remarks  that  the  moon 
is  the  Soma  of  the  gods;  the  SB.  (i,  6,  45),  that  king  Soma,  the  food  of 
the  gods,  is  the  moon;  and  in  the  Kausitaki  Br.  (7,  10;  4,  4)  the  sacrificial 
plant  or  juice  is  symbolical  of  the  moon-god.  The  mythology  of  the  Brah 
manas  already  explains  the  phases  of  the  moon  as  due  to  the  gods  and 
Fathers  eating  its  substance,  which  consists  of  ambrosia60.  Soma,  as  the 
moon,  is  in  the  YV.  also  conceived  as  having  the  lunar  asterisms,  the  daughters 
of  Prajapati,  for  his  wives61.  In  the  AV.,  moreover,  Soma  several  times 
means  the  moon  (7,  8i3'4;  n,  67,  &c.).  A  large  number  of  scholars  agree 
that  even  in  a  few  of  the  latest  hymns  of  the  RV.  (in  the  first  and  tenth 
books)  Soma  is  already  identified  with  the  moon62.  Most  of  them,  however, 
hold  that  Soma  as  a  god  is  celebrated  in  the  Vedic  hymns  only  as  a  per 
sonification  of  the  beverage,  regarding  his  identification  with  the  moon  as 
merely  a  secondary  mythological  growth 6-3.  The  most  important  of  the 
passages  in  which  the  identification  is  generally  admitted,  is  that  which  de 
scribes  the  wedding  of  Soma  and  the  sun-maiden  Surya  (10,  85)64.  Here 
Soma  is  spoken  of  as  'in  the  lap  of  the  stars',  (v.2),  and  it  is  said  that  no 
one  eats  of  that  Soma  which  the  priests  know  and  which  is  contrasted  with 
that  which  they  crush  (v.  3).  The  Soma  nature  of  the  moon  being  referred 


TERRESTRIAL  GODS.     37.  SOMA.  113 

to  as  a  secret  known  to  Brahmans  only,  shows  that  it  cannot  yet  have  been 
a  popular  notion.  The  process  by  which  the  celestial  Soma  gradually  coa 
lesced  with  the  moon  is  not  difficult  to  understand.  Soma  is,  on  the  one 
hand,  continually  thought  of  as  celestial  and  bright,  sometimes  as  dispelling 
darkness  and  swelling  in  the  waters;  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  very  often 
called  a  'drop',  indu  (6,  4421)65.  Comparison  with  the  moon  would  there 
fore  easily  suggest  itself.  Thus  Soma  in  the  bowls  is  said  in  one  passage  to 
appear  like  the  moon  in  the  waters  (8,  yi8;  cp.  i,  I051);  and  in  another, 
Soma  being  described  as  the  drop  (drapsd]  which  goes  to  the  ocean,  looking 
with  the  eye  of  a  vulture  (io;i238),  is  generally  admitted  to  allude  to  the  moon. 

HILLEBRANDT,  however,  in  his  Vedische  Mythologie  not  only  claims  this 
identification  for  a  number  of  other  passages  in  the  RV.,  but  asserts  that  in 
the  whole  of  the  ninth  book  Soma  is  the  moon  (p.  309)  and  nowhere  the 
ordinary  plant  (p.  326),  the  ninth  book  in  fact  being  a  book  of  hymns  to 
the  moon66.  Soma,  he  maintains,  means,  in  the  earliest  as  well  as  the  latest 
parts  of  the  whole  RV.,  only  the  Soma  plant  or  juice  on  the  one  hand,  and, 
as  a  deity,  only  the  moon  on  the  other  (pp.  274.  340.  450).  According  to 
his  view,  the  moon  is  a  receptacle  of  Soma  or  amrta  and  is  the  god  whom 
the  worshipper  means  when  he  presses  the  draught,  which  is  part  of  the 
lunar  ambrosia.  HILLEBRANDT  goes  even  further  than  this  complete  iden 
tification  of  Soma  and  the  moon  in  the  RV.  He  also  asserts  that  the  moon- 
god  as  Soma  forms  the  centre  of  Vedic  belief  and  cult  (p.  277),  being  the 
creator  and  ruler  of  the  world  much  more  than  the  sun  (p.  313),  while  Indra 
is  the  most  popular  Vedic  god  only  next  to  the  moon67  (p.  315). 

In  opposition  to  this  hypothesis,  it  has  been  argued  that,  in  the  vast 
majority  of  the  references  to  Soma  in  the  RV.,  the  character  of  the  god  as 
a  personification  of  the  plant  and  juice  is  clear  and  obvious.  On  the  other 
hand,  while  the  identification  of  Soma  and  the  moon  is  perfectly  clear  in 
the  later  literature,  there  is  in  the  whole  of  the  RV.  no  single  distinct  and 
explicit  instance  either  of  the  identification  or  of  the  conception  that  the 
moon  is  the  food  of  the  gods.  It  is  only  in  passages  where  the  brilliance 
of  Soma,  so  constantly  connected  with  the  sun,  is  vaguely  expressed,  that 
references  to  the  moon  can  be  found.  At  the  same  time  it  is  possible  that 
amid  the  chaotic  details  of  the  imagery  of  the  Soma  hymns,  there  may 
occasionally  lurk  a  veiled  identification  of  ambrosia  and  the  moon.  Here 
and  there  passages  celebrating  the  luminous  nature  of  Soma  or  referring  to 
his  swelling  (apyayana),  which  affords  a  parallel  to  the  swelling  of  the  moon, 
may  allude  to  such  a  notion.  But  on  the  whole,  with  the  few  late  excep 
tions  generally  admitted,  it  appears  to  be  certain  that  to  the  seers  of  the 
RV.  the  god  Soma  is  a  personification  of  the  terrestrial  plant  and  juice68. 
It  is,  moreover,  hardly  conceivable  that  all  the  Vedic  commentators,  in  whose 
day  Soma  and  the  moon  were  believed  to  be  one,  should  not  know  that 
Soma  means  the  moon  in  the  RV.  also69. 

It  is  an  undoubted  fact  that  Soma,  the  Avestan  Haoma,  was  already 
prepared  and  celebrated  in  the  Indo-Iranian  period.  In  the  RV.  Soma  is 
described  as  growing  on  the  mountains  or  a  particular  mountain;  in  the 
Avesta  it  is  said  to  grow  on  a  certain  mountain.  In  the  RV.  Varuna  places 
it  on  the  rock;  in  the  Avesta  it  is  placed  on  the  great  mountain  Haraiti  by 
a  skilful  god.  In  the  RV.  it  is  brought  by  an  eagle;  in  the  Avesta  it  is 
distributed  from  its  native  mountain  by  certain  auspicious  birds.  In  both  it 
is  king  of  plants.  In  both  it  is  a  medicine  which  gives  health,  long  life,  and 
removes  death.  As  Soma  grows  in  the  waters,  so  Haoma  in  the  waters  of 
Ardvi-sura  7°.  The  pressing  and  offering  of  Soma  was  already  an  important 

Indo-arische  Philologie,  III.  1  A.  Q 


ii4    in.  RELIGION,  WELTL.  WISSENSCH.  u.  KUNST.     i  A.  VEDIC  MYTHOLOGY. 

feature  of  Indo-Iranian  worship.  But  while  three  daily  pressings  are  referred 
to  in  the  RV.,  only  two  are  mentioned  in  the  Avesta  (Yasna  10,  2).  In  both 
it  is  stated  that  the  stalks  (amsu  =  dsu}  were  pressed,  that  the  juice  was 
yellow  and  was  mixed  with  milk  (Yasna  10,  13).  In  both  the  celestial  Soma 
is  distinguished  from  the  terrestrial,  and  the  beverage  from  the  god.  In  both 
the  mythical  home  of  Soma  is  heaven,  whence  it  comes  down  to  earth.  In 
both  the  Soma  draught  (like  the  sacrificial  fire)  had  already  become  a  mighty 
god  and  is  called  a  king.  As  Soma  is  vrtrahan,  so  Haoma  is  verethrajan 
and  casts  missiles  (vadare  =  Vedic  vadhar).  Both  are  light- winning  (svarsa 
=  hvaresd]  and  wise  (sukratu  =  hukhratii).  Both  remove  the  machinations 
of  the  wicked,  bestow  victory  over  foes,  and  confer  the  celestial  world.  Both 
grant  steeds  and  excellent  children.  The  RV.  and  the  Avesta  even  agree  in 
the  names  of  ancient  preparers  of  Soma,  Vivasvat  and  Trita  Aptya  on  the 
one  hand,  and  Vivanhvant,  Athwya,  and  Thrita  on  the  other71.  The  belief 
in  an  intoxicating  divine  beverage,  the  home  of  which  was  heaven,  may  be 
Indo-European.  If  so,  it  must  have  been  regarded  as  a  kind  of  honey-mead 
(Skt.  mddhu,  Gk.  jxsftu,  As.  medii)  brought  down  to  earth  from  its  guardian  demon 
by  an  eagle  (the  Soma-bringing  eagle  of  Indra  agreeing  with  the  nectar-bring 
ing  eagle  of  Zeus  and  with  the  eagle  which,  as  a  metamorphosis  of  Odhin, 
carried  off  the  mead)72.  This  madhu  or  honey-mead,  if  Indo-European,  was 
replaced  in  the  Indo-Iranian  period  by  Soma;  but  may  have  survived  into 
the  Vedic  period,  by  amalgamating  with  Soma73. 

Etymologically  Soma  =  Haoma  means  'pressed  juice',  being  derived  from 
the  root  su  —  hu,  'to  press'. 

i  OLDENBERG,  ZDMG.  42,  241.  —  2  BRV.  i,  182.  —  3  HVM.  i,  47.  —  4  Anna 
=  sura  SB.  12,  7,  38;  cp.  HVM.  I,  264.  —  5  HVM.  i,  518.  —  6  KHF.  128  f . ; 
ZDMG.  32,  301.  -  -  7  HVM.  i,  243—4.  —  8  Op.  cit.  28.  -  -  9  Op.  cit.  468  ff.; 
ORV.  389.  —  10  HILLEBRANDT,  Vedainterpretation  16.  -  -  ir  HVM.  i,  182.  — 
12  Op.  cit.  151.  -  -  J3  Op.  cit.  206 — 7.  -  -  14  WINDISCH,  FaR.  141.  --  15  HVM. 
I,  186.  —  16  LRV.  3,  378—9.  —  17  HVM.  i,  210.  —  i*  Op.  cit.  229.  —  '9  Op. 
cit.  195.  -  -  20  Op.  cit.  256,  note  3.  -  -  21  Op.  cit.  189.  -  -  22  LRV.  5,  260.  — 
23  Otherwise  HVM.  i,  392—3.  -  -  24  WINDISCH,  FaR.  140.  —  25  pyS.  i,  87—8; 
KHF.  129.  142.  227;  KZ.  I,  521  ff.;  GGH.  70.  115;  WVB.  1894,4.  13-  —  26  HRI. 
123—4.  —  27  BRV.  i,  165.  —  28  Op.  cit.  I,  170;  lightning  is  associated  with  rain 
in  i,  399;  5,  843;  7,  56^3;  10,  915  cp.  5,  834;  BLOOMFIELD,  AJP.  7,  470.  - 
29  BRV.  I,  204.  -  3°  HVM.  i,  340  thinks  the  horns  are  those  of  the  moon.  — 
31  References  in  HVM.  I,  601.  —  32  KRV.  note  308;  BRV.  I,  192.  —  33  BRV. 
i,  185;  HVM.  i,  349.  —  34  ROTH,  ZDMG.  35,  687;  WEBER,  IS.  10,  360;  HVM. 
i,  79-  —  35  BRV.  i,  300,  note  2;  HVM.  i,  403.  —  36  BRV.  i,  185—6.  —  37  KHF. 
105;  MACDONELL,  JRAS.  25,  472.  —  38  HVM.  i,  387—8.  —  39  References  in  HVM. 
i,  388.  —  4o_Cp  HAUG,  ZDMG.  7,  511.  —  41  ZDMG.  7,  331.  375.  —  42  VS.  3,  61 
and  comm.,  Ap.  oS.  12,  5,  1 1 ;  YN.  9,  8;  cp.  AIL.  29;  HVM.  i,  63  ff.  —  43  Twice, 
also  said  of  Visnu,  once  of  the  Maruts.  -  -  44'Bergfroh',  HILLEBRANDT,  Veda- 
interpretation  15.  —  45  On  the  habitat  of  the  Soma  plant,  see  ROTH,  ZDMG.  38, 
134—9;  MM.,  Biographies  of  Words  (London,  1888)  222 — 42.  —  46  JRAS.  25,437. 
—  47  WINDISCH,  FaR.  140.  —  48  Also  6,  i,  6i;  Kath.  23,  10  in  IS.  8,  31;  VS.  i, 
211;  TB.  I,  I,  310;  3,  2,  ii.  —  49  HVM.  i,  361,  note  3.  —  5°  ROTH,  ZDMG.  36, 
353—60.  384;  LUDWIG,  Methode  30.  66;  KOULIKOVSKI,  Revue  de  linguistique  18, 
1  —  9;  BRV.  3,  322  ff.;  PVS.  i,  207—16;  HVM.  i,  278—9;  BLOOMFIELD,  FaR.  149—55; 
ORV.  180-1;  WVB.  1894,  p.  5.  —  5i  Cp.  bB.  3,  9,  410;  KHF.  130  f.  144  f.  172. 
-  52  BLOOMFIELD,  JAOS.  16,  1—24;  ORV.  176.  180  thinks  there  is  no  reason  to 
see  a  natural  agent  in  the  bird,  or  to  assume  any  connexion  between  the  Soma 
and  the  water  of  clouds.  -  -  53  Sp.AP.  224.  -  -  54  KHF.  I59f.  170.  209;  WVB. 
1894,  p-  5-  —  55  Cp.  ZDMG.  25,  647.  —  56  HVM.  I,  390,  note  4.  -  -  57  Op.  cit. 
317—8.  —  58  DEUSSEN,  System  des  Vedanta  415  ff.  —  59  WVB.  1894,  p.  16—7.  — 
60  HVM.  i,  296.  --  61  WEBER,  Naksatra  2,  274  ff  ;  OLDENBERG,  ZDMG.  49,  470; 
on  Soma  dwelling  with  Rohinl,  cp.  TACOBI,  FaR.  71,  note;  R.  BROWN  JR.,  Academy 
42,  439.  —  62  HVM.  i,  269.  —63  BRV.  i,  1 60.  —  64  WEBER,  IS.  5,  178  ff.;  WVB. 
1894,  p.  34;  OST.  5,  237;  EHNI,  ZDMG.  33,  167—8;  JACOBI,  ib.  49,  227;  OLDEN 
BERG,  ib.  478.  -  -  65  EHNI,  1.  c.  —  66  Cp.  BLOOMFIELD,  AJP.  14,  491—3;  MM. 


ABSTRACT  GODS.     38  A.  VARIOUS  AGENT  GODS.  115 

Fortnightly  Review,  Oct.  1893,  443  ff.  (=  Chips  42,  328—67)  —  67  GUBERNATIS,  Myth, 
des  Plantes  2,  351,  Letture  sopra  la  mitol.  vedica  106,  and  PVS.  I,  80  (cp.  2,  242) 
had  called  for  a  complete  identification,  but  without  attempting  to  prove  the  pro 
position  (cp.  GGA.  1889,  p.  10).  —  68  WHITNEY,  PAOS.  1894,  p.  xcixf.;  ORV. 
599—612.  —  69  HRI.  1 17.  —  7°  SPIEGEL,  Av.  Tr.  2,  LXXII  f. ;  DARMESTETER,  Ormazd  et 
Ahriman  140.  —  71  Yasna  IX — x;  cp.  SP.AP.  172;  HVM.  I,  121.  265.  450;  ORV. 
178;  MACDONELL,  JRAS.  25,  485.  —  72  ORV.  176.  —  73  Op.  cit.  178. 

WINDISCHMANN,  Ueber  den  Somakultus  der  Arier,  Abh.  d.  Miinchner  Akad. 
1846,  p.  127  ff.;  KHF.  105  ff.;  WHITNEY,  JAOS.  3,  299;  WEBER,  IS.  3,  466;  WVB. 
1894,  p.  3.  13  —  17;  HAUG,  AB.  Introd.  p.  61—2;  OST.  5,  258—71;  BRV.  I,  148 
—225  &c.;  BRI.  24;  ROTH,  ZDMG.  35,680—92;  Sp.AP.  168-78;  HVM.  I;  ZDMG. 
48,  419  f.;  E.  H.MEYER,  IF.  2,  161;  KNAUER,  Vedische  Fragen,  FaR.  61— 7;  HVBP. 
68-74. 


D.   ABSTRACT  GODS. 

§  38.  Two  Classes.  —  There  are  in  the  RV.  two  classes  of  deities 
whose  nature  is  founded  on  abstraction.  The  one  class  consisting  of  the 
direct  personfications  of  abstract  notions  such  as  'desire'  is  rare,  occurring 
only  in  the  very  latest  hymns  of  the  RV.  and  due  to  that  growth  of  specu 
lation  which  is  so  plainly  traceable  in  the  course  of  the  Vedic  age.  The 
other  and  more  numerous  class  comprises  deities  whose  names  primarily  either 
denote  an  agent,  in  the  form  of  a  noun  derived  from  a  root  with  the  suffix 
-tr,  such  as  Dhatr,  'Creator',  or  designate  some  attribute,  such  as  Prajapati, 
'Lord  of  Creatures'.  This  class,  judged  by  the  evolution  of  the  mythological 
creations  of  the  Veda,  does  not  represent  direct  abstractions,  but  appears  in 
each  case  to  be  derived  from  an  epithet  applied  to  one  or  more  deities  and 
illustrating  a  particular  aspect  of  activity  or  character.  Such  epithets  gradually 
becoming  detached  finally  attained  to  an  independent  position.  Thus  Rohita, 
'the  Red  One'  (whose  female  form  is  Rohim),  originally  an  epithet  of  the 
sun,  figures  in  the  AV.  as  a  separate  deity  in  the  capacity  of  a  Creator1. 

A.  Various  Agent  Gods.  —  The  most  important  of  the  gods  whose 
names  denote  an  agent  in  -tr,  is  Savitr,  who  has  already  been  treated 
among  the  solar  deities  (§  1 5).  Most  of  the  others  are  of  rare  occurrence  in 
the  RV.  Dhatr,  found  in  a  few  passages  as  an  appellative  designating  priests 
as  'establishes'  of  the  sacrifice,  occurs  as  the  name  of  a  deity  about  a  dozen 
times  and,  with  the  exception  of  one  indefinite  mention  in  company  with  a 
number  of  other  gods  (7,  353),  only  in  the  tenth  book.  In  one  of  these 
passages  the  name  is  an  epithet  of  Indra  (10,  167^)  and  in  another  of 
Visvakarman  (10,  822).  The  frequent  ascription  of  the  action  of  establishing 
( Ydha)  the  phenomena  of  the  world  to  different  gods,  gradually  led  to  the 
conception  of  a  separate  deity  exercising  this  particular  activity.  Thus  Dhatr 
generally  has  the  independent  character  of  a  god  who  creates  sun,  moon, 
heaven,  earth,  and  air  (10,  iQo3),  and  is  lord  of  the  world  (10,  I287).  In  a 
hymn  to  the  Sun,  Dhatr  is  invoked  to  grant  a  clear  eye  (10,  158^).  He  is 
besought  with  Visnu,  Tvastr,  Prajapati,  to  grant  offspring  (10,  184*)  and,  by 
himself,  to  bestow  length  of  days  (10,  i85).  He  is  also  prayed  to  indefinitely 
with  Visnu  and  Savitr  (10,  i8iI—3)  or  with  Matarisvan  and  DestrT  (10,  8547). 
In  the  Naighantuka  (5,5)  Dhatr  is  enumerated  among  the  gods  of  the  middle 
region  and  by  Yaska  (Nir.  n,  10)  explained  as  the  'ordainer  of  everything'. 
In  the  post-Vedic  period,  Dhatr  is  the  Creator  and  Preserver  of  the  world, 
being  the  equivalent  of  Prajapati  or  Brahma.  The  rare  name  Vidhatr,  the 
'Disposer'  is  in  two  passages  an  epithet,  beside  Dhatr,  once  of  Indra  (10, 
1673)  and  once  of  Visvakarman  (10,  822);  but  appears  twice  in  enumerations 
of  deities  to  have  an  independent  character  (6,  5o12;  9,81$).  Dhartr,  'Supporter', 


1 1 6     III.  RELIGION,  WELTL.  WISSENSCH.  u.  KUNST.     i  A.  VEDIC  MYTHOLOGY. 

frequently  used  (almost  exclusively  with  the  genitive  of  that  which  is  supported) 
as  an  epithet  of  Indra  and  other  gods,  occurs  once  as  an  independent  name 
along  with  Dhatr  and  other  deities  (7,  353).  Similarly,  Tratr,  the  'Protector', 
mostly  employed  as  an  epithet  of  Agni  or  Indra  and,  in  the  plural,  of  the 
Adityas,  occurs  independently  as  'the  Protector  God'  in  five  passages  along 
with  other  deities  (i,  106";  4,  555>  7;  8,  i820;  10,  i287).  In  ROTH'S  opinion, 
Savitr  especially  and  also  Bhaga  are  intended  by  this  god2.  A  'Leader 
God'  (deva  netr)  is  invoked  two  or  three  times  in  one  hymn  (5,  50)  as  a 
guide  to  prosperity  in  life. 

B.  Tvastr.  —  The  only  deity  bearing  a  name  of  this  type,  who  besides 
Savitr  is  mentioned  with  any  frequency,  is  Tvastr.  His  name  occurs  about 
65  times  in  the  RV.,  pretty  uniformly  in  the  family  books  (though  rarely  in 
the  seventh  as  well  as  the  eighth),  but  relatively  oftenest  in  the  first  and 
tenth.  No  hymn  is,  however,  devoted  to  his  praise. 

No  part  of  Tvastr's  physical  form  is  mentioned  except  his  arm  or  hand, 
it  being  characteristic  of  him  to  hold  an  iron  axe  in  his  hand  (8,  293).  He 
is  once  described  as  yoking  his  two  steeds  to  his  chariot  and  shining  greatly 
(6,  4719).  Tvastr  is  beautiful-armed  (sugabhasti\  6}  499),  or  beautiful-handed 
(supdni\  predominantly  applied  to  him  and  Savitr). 

He  is  a  skilful  workman  (i,  859;  3,  5412),  producing  various  objects 
showing  the  skill  of  an  artificer.  He  is  in  fact  the  most  skilful  of  workmen, 
versed  in  crafty  contrivances  (10,  539).  He  is  several  times  said  (5,  3i4  &c.) 
to  have  fashioned  ( ytaks)  the  bolt  of  Indra.  He  also  sharpens  the  iron  axe 
of  Brahmanaspati  (10,  539).  He  formed  a  new  cup  (i,  2o6)  which  contained 
the  food  of  the  asura  (i,no3)  or  the  beverage  of  the  gods  (i,i6i5;  3,35s). 
He  thus  possesses  vessels  out  of  which  the  gods  drink  (10,  539).  The  AV. 
(9,  43>  6)  describes  him  as  an  old  man  bearing  a  bowl  of  wealth,  a  cup  full 
of  Soma.  From  Tvastr  the  swift  horse  was  produced  (VS.  29,  9),  and  he 
gives  speed  to  the  horse  (AV.  6,  921). 

The  RV.  further  states  that  Tvastr  adorned  all  beings  with  form  (10, 
no9).  He  developes  the  germ  in  the  womb  and  is  the  shaper  of  all  forms, 
human  and  animal  (i,i889;  8,9i8;  10,  i84x).  Similar  statements  are  frequently 
made  in  later  Vedic  texts  (AV.  2,  26%  &c.),  where  he  is  characteristically  a 
creator  of  forms  (SB.  n,  4,  33;  TB.  i,  4,  71)3.  He  himself  is  called  omniform 
(visvarupd)  oftener  than  any  other  deity  in  the  RV.  As  fashioner  of  living 
forms,  he  is  frequently  described  as  presiding  over  generation  and  bestowing 
offspring  (3,  49  &c.).  Thus  he  is  said  to  have  fashioned  husband  and  wife 
for  each  other  from  the  womb  (10,  io5;  AV.  6,  782).  He  has  produced  and 
nourishes  a  great  variety  of  creatures  (3,  5519).  Beasts  belong  to  Tvastr  (SB. 
3 5  7)  311-  8,  3").  He  is  indeed  a  universal  father,  for  he  produced  the  whole 
world  (VS.  29,  9). 

He  is  also  the  ancestor  of  the  human  race  in  so  far  as  his  daughter 
Saranyu,  wife  of  Vivasvat,  becomes  the  mother  of  the  primeval  twins  Yama 
and  YamI  (io,  ly1-  2,  cp.  5,  4213).  Vayu  is  once  said  to  be  his  son-in-law 
(8,  2621).  Tvastr  begot  Brhaspati  (2,  23*7).  Agni  produced  by  the  ten  fingers, 
is  the  offspring  of  Tvastr  (i,  952),  who,  along  with  Heaven  and  Earth,  the 
Waters,  and  the  Bhrgus,  generated  him  (io,  2?.  469).  It  is  to  be  inferred 
that  Tvastr  was  also  the  father  of  Indra  (p.  57).  Tvastr  is  especially  a  guardian 
of  Soma,  which  is  called  'the  mead  of  Tvastr'  (i,  ii722).  It  is  in  his  house 
that  Indra  drinks  Soma  and  presumately  steals  it,  even  slaying  his  father  in 
order  to  obtain  it  (p.  57).  The  'omniform'  Tvastr  has  a  son  named  Visvarupa 
(the  Omniform),  who  is  a  guardian  of  cows.  The  hostility  of  Indra  is  directed 
against  the  son  in  order  to  win  these  cows,  just  as  against  the  father  in 


ABSTRACT  GODS.     386.  TVASTR.  117 


order  to  gain  possession  of  the  Soma.  Even  Tvastr  himself  is  said  to  tremble 
with  fear  at  the  wrath  of  Indra  (i,  So1*)  and  is  represented  as  inferior  to 
Indra,  inasmuch  as  not  even  he  was  able  to  perform  a  feat  done  by  Indra 
(10,  4910).  The  TS.  (2,  4,  I21)  tells  a  story  of  how  Tvastr,  whose  son  had 
been  slain  by  Indra,  refused  to  allow  the  latter  to  assist  at  his  Soma  sacri 
fice,  but  Indra  came  and  drank  off  the  Soma  by  force.  The  Brahmanas  often 
relate  a  similar  tale  (SB.  i,  6,  36,  &c.). 

Probably  because  of  his  creative  agency  in  the  womb4,  Tvastr  is  closely 
allied  with  celestial  females  (gndh,  janayak)  or  the  wives  of  the  gods,  who 
are  his  most  frequent  attendants  (i,  229  &c.)5.  Tvastr  is  chiefly  mentioned 
with  gods  of  cognate  activity,  Pusan,  Savitr,  Dhatr,  Prajapati.  'Savitr'  is  indeed 
an  attribute  of  Tvastr  in  two  passages  (3,  5519;  10,  io5)  in  which  occurs  the 
identical  collocation  devas  tvastd  savitd  visvarupah^^  'god  Tvastr,  the  omni- 
form  vivifier',  and  in  both  of  which  the  generative  or  creative  faculty  of  the 
deity  is  referred  to.  In  the  Kausika  Sutra,  Tvastr  is  identified  with  Savitr 
and  Prajapati7,  and  in  the  Markandeya  Purana,  with  Visvakarman  and 
Prajapati.  In  the  later  mythology  Tvastr  is  one  of  the  twelve  Adityas 
and  in  the  Mahabharata  and  the  Bhagavata  Purana  is  once  or  twice  a  form 
of  the  sun. 

The  RV.  adds  a  few  rather  indefinite  traits,  which  throw  no  light  on 
Tvastr's  character.  He  is  said  to  be  the  first  (i,  i310)  or  the  first-born 
(agrajd}  and  one  who  goes  before  (9, 59).  As  a  companion  of  the  Angirases 
he  knows  the  region  of  the  gods  (10,  70^),  goes  to  the  place  of  the  gods 
(2,  i9)  between  heaven  and  earth  (MS.  4,  i49).  He  is  a  bestower  of  blessings 
and  is  possessed  of  excellent  wealth  (10,  7o9.  92").  He  is  supplicated  to 
grant  riches  to  his  worshippers  and  to  delight  in  their  hymns  (7,  3421). 
Tvastr  also  confers  long  life  (10,  i8&;  AV.  6,  783). 

The  word  is  derived  from  a  rare  root  tvaks^  of  which  only  one  verbal 
form,  besides  some  nominal  derivatives,  occurs  in  the  RV.,  and  the  cognate 
of  which,  thwaks,  is  found  in  the  Avesta.  It  appears  to  be  identical  in 
meaning  with  the  common  root  taks,  which  is  used  with  the  name  of  Tvastr 
in  referring  to  the  fashioning  of  Indra's  bolt.  The  meaning  therefore  appears 
to  be  the  'Fashioner'  or  'Artificer'. 

Tvastr  is  one  of  the  obscurest  members  of  the  Vedic  pantheon8.  The 
obscurity  of  the  conception  is  explained  by  KAEGi9  as  due  to  Tvastr,  like 
Trita  and  others,  having  belonged  to  an  earlier  race  of  gods  who  were  ousted 
by  later  ones;  while  HILLEBRANDT  thinks  Tvastr  was  derived  from  a  mythical 
cycle  outside  the  range  of  the  Vedic  tribes.  Different  explanations  have  been 
offered  of  Tvastr's  original  nature.  Owing  to  Tvastr  being  called  Savitr, 
A.  KuHN10  thought  that  he  meant  the  sun,  but  seems  later11  to  have  with 
drawn  this  view.  LuDwio12  regards  him  as  a  god  of  the  year,  while  OLDEN- 
BERG  believes  him  to  be  a  pure  abstraction  expressing  a  definite  characteristic 
activity I3.  HILLEBRANDT  holds  KUHN'S  earlier  view  that  Tvastr  represents  the 
sun,  to  be  probable14.  HARDY  also  considers  him  a  solar  deity15.  It  does 
not  indeed  seem  unlikely  that  this  god,  in  a  period  anterior  to  the  RV., 
represented  the  creative  aspect  of  the  sun's  nature.  If  such  was  the  case  the 
Rigvedic  poets  themselves  were  only  very  dimly  conscious  of  it.  The  name 
itself  would  have  encouraged  the  growth  of  mythical  accretions  illustrative 
of  creative  skill,  the  desire  to  supply  the  pantheon  with  a  regular  divine 
artificer  being  natural  enough.  Much  in  the  same  way  it  was  supplied  with 
a  divine  priest  in  the  person  of  Brhaspati. 

The  cup  of  Tvastr  has  been  explained  as  the  'bowl  of  the  year'  or  the 
nocturnal  sky.  But  neither  of  these  could  well  have  been  conceived  as  full 


1 1 8     III.  RELIGION,  WELTL.  WISSENSCH.  u.  KUNST.     i  A.  VEDIC  MYTHOLOGY. 


of  Soma  and  drunk  by  the  gods.     HILLEBRANDT'S  interpretation  of  it  as  the 
moon  is  more  plausible  (cp.  p.  133). 

i  OST.  5,  395—6;  V.  HENRY,  Les  Hymnes  Rohitas,  Paris  1891;   BLOOMFIELD, 

AJP.  12,  429—44;  HRI.  209,  n.   I.  — 2  ROTH,  PW.;  cp.  GW.;  WC.  9— 10.  —  3  Cp. 

PW.  s.  v.  tvastr.  —  4  Ibid.  —  5  OST.  5,  229.  —  6  ROTH,  Nir.  Erl.  144.  —  7  WEBER, 

Omina  und  Portenta  391  —  2.  —   8  GGH.   113—6.  —    9  KRV.  note   131.  —  10  KZ. 

i,  448.  —  «  KHF.   109.  —    12  LRV.  3,  333—5-  —    J3  ORV.  233.  —    H  HVM.  i, 

517.  —  15  HVBP.  30—1. 

ZDMG.   I,  522;    GEIGER,  Ostiranische  Kultur  304;   BRI.  22;    BRV.  3,  38—64; 

HVM.  I,  513—35;  IF.  i,  8;  EHNI,  Yama  4—16;   OLDENBERG,  SEE.  46,  416  f.  248. 

§39.  Visvakarman,  Prajapati. —  A  few  other  abstract  deities  originating 
in  compound  epithets  and  all  representing  the  supreme  god  who  was  being 
evolved  at  the  end  of  the  Rigvedic  period,  are  found  in  the  RV.  As  the 
name  of  a  god  Visvakarman  occurs  only  five  times  in  the  RV.  and  always 
in  the  tenth  book.  Two  whole  hymns  (10,  81.  82)  are  dedicated  to  his  praise. 
The  word  also  occurs  as  an  attribute  once  (8,  8y2)  of  Indra  and  once  (10., 
i7o4)  of  the  Sun  as  the  ( all- creating'.  It  is  not  uncommon  as  an  adjective 
in  the  later  Vedas,  where  it  also  appears  as  an  attribute  of  Prajapati  (VS. 
12,  61).  The  two  hymns  of  the  RV.  describe  Visvakarman  thus.  He  is  all- 
seeing,  having  eyes,  as  well  as  a  face,  arms,  and  feet,  on  every  side.  (In 
this  the  Brahma  of  later  mythology,  who  is  four-faced  and  four-armed,  resembles 
him.)  He  is  also  provided  with  wings.  He  is  a  seer,  a  priest,  our  father.  He 
is  a  lord  of  speech  (vdcas  pati},  swift  as  thought,  beneficent,  the  source  of 
all  prosperity.  He  knows  all  places  and  beings,  and  he  alone  gives  their 
names  to  the  gods.  He  is  wise  and  energetic,  the  highest  apparition  (paramd 
samdrk).  He  is  an  establisher  (dhdtf)  and  a  disposer  (vidhdtr),  having  pro 
duced  the  earth  and  disclosed  the  sky.  It  seems  likely  that  the  word  was 
at  first  attached  as  an  epithet  chiefly  to  the  sun-god,  but  in  the  later  Rigvedic 
period  became  one  of  the  almost  synonymous  names  given  to  the  one  god 
(10,  Si3)  the  conception  of  whom  was  then  being  tentatively  evolved,  and 
who  as  Visvakarman  was,  owing  to  the  name,  mainly  thought  of  in  his  archi- 
techtonic  aspect1.  Visvakarman  in  the  Brahmanas  is  expressly  identified  with 
the  creator  Prajapati  (SB.  8,  2,  i10.  3^,  cp.  AB.  4,  22).  In  post-Vedic  times 
he  was  conceived  as  the  artificer  of  the  gods. 

Prajapati  occurs  in  one  passage  of  the  RV.  (4,  532)  as  an  epithet  of 
Savitr,  who  is  spoken  of  as  a  supporter  of  heaven  and  prajdpati  of  the 
world2,  and  in  another,  as  an  epithet  of  Soma  compared  with  Tvastr  and 
Indra  (9,  59).  Otherwise  the  word  is  found  four  times  as  the  name  of  a 
distinct  deity,  always  in  the  tenth  book.  The  god  Prajapati  is  invoked  (10, 
8543)  to  bestow  abundant  offspring  (prajdui},  is  besought,  along  with  Visnu, 
Tvastr,  and  Dhatr,  to  grant  offspring  (10,  184*),  and  is  spoken  of  as  making 
cows  prolific  (10,  i694).  As  a  protector  of  generation  and  living  beings 
Prajapati  is  also  often  invoked  in  the  AV.3  In  the  one  hymn  devoted  to 
his  praise  in  the  RV.  (10,  121),  he  is  invoked  by  this  name  only  in  the  last 
verse.  In  this  hymn  he  is  celebrated  as  the  creator  of  heaven  and  earth, 
of  the  waters  and  of  all  that  lives;  who  was  born  (jdtd)  as  the  one  lord 
(pati}  of  all  that  is,  the  one  king  of  all  that  breathes  and  moves,  the  one 
god  above  the  gods;  whose  ordinances  all  beings  and  the  gods  follow;  who 
established  heaven  and  earth;  who  traverses  space  in  the  atmosphere;  who 
embraces  with  his  arms  the  whole  world  and  all  creatures.  Here  Prajapati  is 
clearly  the  name  of  the  supreme  god.  Though  only  mentioned  once  in  the 
RV.  in  this  sense,  he  is  commonly  in  the  AV.  and  VS.,  and  regularly  in  the 
Brahmanas,  recognized  as  the  chief  god.  He  is  the  father  of  the  gods,  (SB. 
n,  i,  614;  TB.  8,  i,  34  &c.),  having  existed  alone  in  the  beginning  (SB.  2 


ABSTRACT  GODS.     39.  VIS'VAKARMAN,  PRAJAPATI.    40.  MANYU,  SRADDHA.     119 

2,  41).    He  created  the,  Asuras  as  well  (TB.  2,  2,  2^)4.    He  is  also  described 
as  the  first  sacrificer  (SB.  2,  4,  41;  6,  2,  31).   In  the  Sutras  Prajapati  is  identi 
fied  with  Brahma  (AGS.  3,  4,  &c.).     In    the    place    of   this    chief  god  of  the 
later  Vedic    theology,    the    philosophy  of  the  Upanisads   put   the  impersonal 
Brahma,  the  universal  soul  or  the  Absolute. 

A  myth  is  told  in  the  MS.  (4,  212)  of  Prajapati  being  enamoured  of  his 
daughter  Usas.  She  transformed  herself  into  a  gazelle;  whereupon  he  trans 
formed  himself  into  the  corresponding  male.  Rudra  incensed  at  this  aimed 
his  arrow  at  him,  when  Prajapati  promised  to  make  him  lord  of  beasts  if  he 
did  not  shoot  (cp.  RV.  io,,6i7).  The  story  is  several  times  referred  to  in 
the  Brahmanas  (AB.  3,  33;  SB.  i,  7,  41;  PB.  8,  2IO)s.  The  basis  of  this  myth 
seem  to  be  two  passages  of  the  RV.  (i,  7i5;  10,  6iS~~7)  in  which  the  incest 
of  a  father  (who  seems  to  be  Dyaus)  with  his  daughter  (here  apparently  the 
Earth)  is  referred  to  and  an  archer  is  mentioned6. 

In  the  refrain  of  the  first  nine  verses  of  RV.  10,  121  the  supreme  god 
is  referred  to  as  unknown  by  the  interrogative  pronoun  Ka,  Who  ?  The  answer 
given  in  the  tenth  verse,  is  that  Prajapati  alone  embraces  all  beings.  This 
later  led  to  the  employment  of  Ka  not  only  as  an  epithet  of  Prajapati  (AB. 

3,  227),  but  as  a  name,  used  by  itself,  of  the  supreme  god  (MS.  3,  12$).   In 
the  TS.  (i,  7,  66)  Ka  is  expressly  identified  with  Prajapati7. 

In  the  first  verse  of  RV.  10,  121  the  supreme  god  is  referred  to  as 
Hiranyagarbha,  the  'Germ  of  Gold',  the  one  lord  of  what  exists.  This  is 
the  only  occurrence  of  the  name  in  the  RV.,  but  it  is  mentioned  several 
times  in  the  AV.  and  the  literature  of  the  Brahmana  period  (cp.  p.  13). 
Hiranyagarbha  is  also  alluded  to  in  a  passage  of  the  AV.  (4,  28)  where  it  is 
stated  that  the  waters  produced  an  embryo,  which  as  it  was  being  born,  was 
enveloped  in  a  golden  covering.  In  the  TS.  (5,  5,  i2)  Hiranyagarbha  is  ex 
pressly  identified  with  Prajapati.  In  the  later  literature  he  is  chiefly  a  desig 
nation  of  the  personal  Brahma8. 

i  OST.  4,  5—n;  5,  354-55  WC.  80—5;  SPH.  33-40.  —  2  Cp.  BLOOMFIELD, 
AJP.  14,  493.  —  3  See  PW.  s.  v.  prajdpati.  —  4  Cp.  OST.  5,  80— i.  — 5  ASL.  529; 
OST.  4,  45;  SEE.  12,  284,  n.  i;  DELBRUCK,  FaB.  24;  WVB.  1894,  p.  34;  GELDNER, 
FaW.  21.  —  6  Cp.  BRV.  2,  109  f.;  OLDENBERG,  SEE.  46,  78  f.  —  7  SPH.  27,11.2; 
ASL.  433;  IS.  2,  94;  SEE.  12,  8.  -  -  8  ASL.  569  f.;  OGR.  295;  OST.  4,  15  —  18; 
5>  352-  355;  WC.  50 — i;  HVM.  i,  380,  n.  i;  HRI.  141—2;  GELDNER,  1.  c. 

§  40.  Manyu,  Sraddha  &c.  --  We  have  yet  to  deal  with  the  deifica 
tions  of  abstract  nouns.  Manyu,  Wrath,  a  personification  suggested  chiefly 
by  the  fierce  anger  of  Indra,  is  invoked  in  two  hymns  of  the  RV.  (10,  83. 
84).  He  is  of  irresistible  might  and  self-existent.  He  glows  like  fire,  is  a 
god;  who  is  Indra,  Varuna,  Jatavedas.  He  slays  Vrtra,  is  accompanied  by 
the  Maruts,  grants  victory  like  Indra,  and  bestows  wealth.  United  with 
Tap  as,  Ardour,  he  protects  his  adorers  and  slays  their,  foes.  One  short 
hymn  of  the  RV.  (10,  151)  is  devoted  to  the  praise  of  Sraddha,  Faith1. 
She  is  said  to  be  invoked  morning,  noon,  and  night.  Through  Faith  fire  is 
kindled  and  ghee  offered.  Through  Faith  wealth  is  obtained.  In  the  Brahmanas 
Sraddha  is  the  daughter  of  the  Sun  (SB.  12,7,3")  or  of  Prajapati  (TB.  2,  3, 
lo1).  Her  relationships  are  still  further  worked  out  in  the  Epics  and  Puranas. 
Anumati,  Favour  (of  the  gods),  occurs  twice  as  a  personification  in  the 
RV.  She  is  besought  to  be  gracious  and  let  her  worshippers  long  see  the 
sun  (10,  596)  and  her  protection  is  referred  to  (10,  i673).  In  the  AV.  and 
VS.  she  becomes  a  goddess  of  love  and  presides  over  propagation.  The 
later  ritual  connected  her  with  the  moon,  regarding  her  as  representing  the 
day  before  full-moon 2.  Aramati,  Devotion,  Piety,  is  occasionally  personified 


120     III.  RELIGION,  WELTL.  WISSENSCH.  u.  KUNST.     i  A.  VEDIC  MYTHOLOGY. 


in  the  RV.  The  name  has  a  counterpart  in  the  Avestic  Armaiti,  a  genius  of 
earth  as  well  as  wisdom  3,  but  the  personification  can  hardly  go  back  to  the 
Indo-Iranian  period.  Sunrta,  Bounty4,  appears  to  be  personified  as  a  goddess 
two  or  three  times  in  the  RV.  (i,  40^;  10,  i4i2)-  Asunlti,  Spirit-life,  is 
personified  in  one  passage  of  the  RV.  (10, 595>6J,  being  besought  to  prolong 
life  and  grant  strength  and  nourishment5.  Nirrti,  Decease,  Dissolution,  appears 
about  twelve  times  in  the  RV.  as  a  personification  presiding  over  death. 

Other  personifications  appear  for  the  first  time  in  the  later  Vedas.  Kama, 
Desire,  is  deified  in  the  AV.  (9,  2;  19,  52).  Here  he  is  not,  as  in  post-Vedic 
literature,  a  god  of  love,  but  a  deity  who  fulfils  all  desires.  His  arrows,  with 
which  he  pierces  hearts,  are  already  referred  to  (AV.  3,  251).  He  is  described 
as  the  first  who  was  born  (AV.  9, 2I9).  The  origin  of  the  conception  is  most 
probably  to  be  traced  to  the  kama  'desire',  which  in  a  cosmogonic  hymn 
(p.  13)  of  the  RV.  (10,  i294),  is  called  'the  first  seed  of  mind'6.  Kala, 
Time,  is  personified  as  a  cosmogonic  force  in  the  AV.  (19,  53.  54)7,  and 
Skambha,  Support,  an  abstraction  postulated  by  the  speculation  of  the  A V. 
to  uphold  the  universe  created  by  Prajapati,  comes  to  be  praised  as  the  All- 
god  (AV.  10,  82)  8.  Prana,  Breath,  is  also  deified  and  identified  with  Praja- 
pati  (AV.  n,  412  &c.)9.  Other  personified  abstractions  of  a  like  nature  are 
to  be  found  in  the,  AV.10  Sri  as  a  personification  of  Beauty  or  Fortune 
first  appears  in  the  SB.  (n,  4,  31)11- 

i  Cp.  OLDENBERG,  ZDMG.  50, 450  f.  —  2  ZDMG.  7,  608;  IS.  5,  229.  —  3  ZDMG.  7, 
519;  8,  770;  9,  690  —  2;  Sp.AP.  151.  200—3;  HVBP.  91;  HRI.  136.  —  4  OLDE*- 
BERG,  ZDMG.  50,  440.  —  5  But  cp.  MM.,  JRAS.  2,  460,  n.  2.  —  6  WEBER,  IS.  5, 
224;  17,  290;  ZDMG.  14,  269;  OST.  5,  402;  SPH.  76—7.  —  7  SPH.  78—82; 
HVBP.  88.  —  8  SPH.  50—9;  HRI.  209.  —  9  SPH.  35.  —  ™  SPH.  14.  —  «  GGH.  4. 

§41.  Aditi.  —  There  is  one  deity  who,  if  rightly  interpreted  as  the 
personification  of  a  pure  abstraction,  like  those  treated  in  the  preceding 
paragraph,  occupies  an  anomalous  position  in  the  RV.  For  the  name  is  not 
limited  to  the  latest  portion,  but  occurs  throughout  the  collection.  This  would 
be  accounted  for  by  the  peculiar  manner  in  which  the  personification  came 
about,  supposing  the  explanation  offered  below  to  be  correct.  Otherwise  this 
deity  would  have  to  be  classed  with  abstractions  of  the  epithet  type  (§  39). 

The  goddess  Aditi  is  not  the  subject  of  any  separate  hymn,  but  is  often 
incidentally  celebrated  in  the  RVV  her  name  occurring  nearly  eighty  times. 
Very  rarely  mentioned  alone  (8,  i914),  she  is  constantly  invoked  with  her 
sons,  the  Adityas. 

She  has  no  definite  physical  features.  She  is  often  called  a  goddess 
(devi),  who  is  sometimes  styled  anarva,  'intact'  (2,  4o6;  7,  4o4).  She  is  widely 
expanded  (5,  46°),  extensive,  a  mistress  of  wide  stalls  (8,  6"712).  She  is  bright 
and  luminous,  a  supporter  of  creatures  (i,  I363:  otherwise  said  of  Mitra- 
Varuna  only),  and  belongs  to  all  men  (7,  io4:  also  said  of  Heaven  and  Earth). 
She  is  invoked  at  morning,  noon,  and  sunset  (5,  693)1. 

Aditi  is  the  mother  of  Mitra  and  Varuna  (8, 253;  io,  36^.1 326)  as  well  as  of 
Aryaman  (8,  479).  Hence  she  is  called  the  mother  of  kings  (2,  27%  cp.  v.  x), 
of  excellent  sons  (3,4"),  of  powerful  sons  (8,56"),  of  heroic  sons  (A V. 3,8 3; 
n,  i11),  or  of  eight  sons  (10,  728;  AV.  8,  g21).  She  is  once  said  to  be  the 
mother  of  the_  Rudras,  being  the  daughter  of  the  Vasus  and  (strange  to  say) 
sister  of  the  Adityas  (8.  90^),  and  the  AV.  (6,  41)  mentions  her  brothers  as 
well  as  her  sons.  In  another  passage  of  the  AV.  (7,  62  =  VS.  21,  5)  she  is 
invoked  as  the  great  mother  of  the  devout,  the  mistress  of  rta>  strong  in 
might,  undecaying,  widely  extended,  protecting,  skilfully  guiding.  Such  passages 
and  the  constant  invocation  of  Aditi  along  with  the  Adityas,  her  sons,  show 


ABSTRACT  GODS.     41.  ADITI.  121 

that  her  motherhood  is  an  essential  and  characteristic  trait.  Her  epithet 
pasty  a,  housewife  (4,  553;  8,  27^)  may  possibly  also  allude  to  her  mother 
hood.  In  the  Epic  and  Puranic  mythology  Aditi  is  the  daughter  of  Daksa 
and  mother  of  the  gods  in  general,  and  expressly  of  Vivasvat,  the  Sun,  and 
of  Visnu  in  his  dwarf  incarnation.  She  is  said  to  be  the  wife  of  Visnu  in 

VS.  (29,  6o  =  TS.  7,  514). 

Aditi  is  several  times  spoken  of  as  protecting  from  distress  (amhas),  and 
she  is  said  to  grant  complete  welfare  or  safety  (10,  100;  i,  94 15),  but  she  is 
more  frequently  invoked  to  release  from  guilt  or  sin.  Thus  Varuna  (i,  24*5), 
Agni  (4,  i24),  and  Savitr  (5,  826),  are  besought  to  free  from  guilt  against 
Aditi.  Aditi,  Mitra,  and  Varuna  are  implored  to  forgive  sin  (2,  2714),  Aditi 
and  Aryaman,  to  loosen  (the  bonds  of)  sin  (7,  93 7).  Worshippers  beseech 
Aditi  to  make  them  sinless  (i,i6222);  praying  that  by  fulfilling  her  ordinances 
they  may  be  without  sin  towards  Varuna  (7,  877)  and  that  evildoers  may  be  cut 
off  from  Aditi  (10,  87l8).  Hence  though  other  gods,  Agni  (3,  5410),  Savitr 
(4,  543),  Sun,  Dawn,  Heaven  and  Earth  (10,  35*' 3)  are  petitioned  to  pardon 
sin,  the  notion  of  releasing  from  it  is  much  more  closely  connected  with 
Aditi  and  her  son  Varuna,  whose  fetters  that  bind  sinners  are  characteristic, 
and  who  unties  sin  like  a  rope  and  removes  it  (p.  26). 

This  notion  is  nearly  allied  to  the  etymology  of  the  name.  The  word 
aditi  is  primarily  a  noun  meaning  'unbinding',  'bondlessness',  from  di-ti  'binding' 
(=  Gk.  5=-ai-c),  derived  from  the  root  da,  'to  bind'.  The  past  passive  parti 
ciple  of  this  verb  is  employed  to  describe  Sunahsepa  'bound'  (di-td)  to  the 
stake  (5,  27).  Hence  as  a  goddess  Aditi  is  naturally  invoked  to  release  her 
worshippers  like  a  tied  (baddhd)  thief  (8,  6714).  The  original  unpersonified 
meaning  of  'freedom'  seems  to  survive  in  a  few  passages  of  the  RV.  Thus 
a  worshipper  exclaims,  'who  gives  us  back  to  great  aditi,  that  I  may  see 
father  and  mother'?  (i,  241).  The  Adityas  are  besought  (7,  5I1)  to  'place 
the  offering  in  guiltlessness  (andgastve)  and  freedom  (adititvef.  The  poet 
perhaps  means  the  same  thing  when  he  prays  to  Heaven  and  Earth  for  'the 
secure  and  unlimited  gift  of  aditi*  (i,  1853).  The  word  aditi  also  occurs 
several  times  in  the  adjectival  sense  of  'boundless'.  It  is  thus  used  as  an 
attribute  twice  of  Dyaus  (5,598;  10,  633)  and  more  frequently  of  Agni  (1,94*5; 
4,  i20;  7,  93;  8,  i9<4). 

The  indefiniteness  of  the  name  would  easily  have  lent  itself  to  mystical 
identifications,  and  the  conception  was  naturally  affected  by  the  theogonic  and 
cosmogonic  speculations  found  in  the  more  recent  portions  of  the  RV.  Thus 
the  gods  are  said  to  have  been  born  from  Aditi,  the  Waters,  and  Earth  (10, 
63 2;  cp.  p.  14).  In  the  verse  immediately  following,  the  'boundless'  Sky  (dyaur 
aditi),  their  mother,  is  said  to  supply  the  gods  with  honied  milk.  Here  there 
fore  she  appears  to  be  identified  with  the  sky2.  Elsewhere  (1,72$;  AV. 1 3,1 38) 
Aditi  seems  to  be  identified  with  the  Earth,  and  this  identification  is  frequent 
in  the  TS.  and  SB.  In  the  Naighantuka  the  name  is  given  as  a  synonym  of 
earth,  and,  in  the  dual,  of  Heaven  and  Earth3.  In  many  passages  of  the 
RV.,  however,  she  is  distinguished  from  Heaven  and  Earth  by  being  mentioned 
separately  along  with  them  (io,63IO&c.)+.  In  another  passage  (i;8910)  Aditi 
represents  a  personification  of  Universal  Nature:  'Aditi  is  the  sky;  Aditi  is 
the  air;  Aditi  is  the  mother,  and  father,  and  son;  Aditi  is  all  the  gods  and 
the  five  tribes;  Aditi  is  whatever  has  been  born;  Aditi  is  whatever  shall  be 
born'  (p.  1 6;  cp.  Katha  Up.  4,  7). 

Though  according  to  the  older  mythology  of  the  RV.  Aditi  is  the  mother 
of  Daksa  as  an  Aditya  (2,  271),  she  is  in  a  cosmogonic  hymn  (10,  72*-  s) 
said  to  be  his  daughter  as  well  as  his  mother  by  the  reciprocal  generation 


122     III.  RELIGION,  WELTL.  WISSENSCH.  u.  KUNST.    i  A.  VEDIC  MYTHOLOGY. 

which  is  a  notion  not  unfamiliar  to  the  RV.  (p.  12;  cp.  10, go5).  In  two  other 
hymns  of  the  tenth  book  (5".  645)  these  deities  are  connected  in  such  a 
way  that  Aditi  can  scarcely  be  the  mother  of  Daksa,  but  seems  rather  to  be 
subordinate  to  him.  Though  Aditi  is  the  mother  of  some  of  the  leading 
deities,  she  plays  an  inferior  part  in  a  few  other  passages  also.  Thus  she 
celebrates,  along  with  her  sons  Varuna,  Mitra,  Aryaman,  the  praises  of  Savitr 
(7,  38*)  and  is  said  to  have  produced  a  hymn  for  Indra  (8,  i214,  cp.  5,  31$). 

Probably  as  the  mother  of  the  luminous  Adityas,  Aditi  is  sometimes 
connected  with  light.  She  is  asked  for  light  (4,  25^,  cp.  10,  36^),  her  im 
perishable  light  is  celebrated  (7,  8210),  and  Dawn  is  called  the  face  of  Aditi 
(i,  ii319).  Occasionally  Aditi  is  referred  to  in  general  terms  which  might 
apply  to  other  deities.  Thus  she  is  implored  to  protect  or  bless  her  wor 
shippers,  their  children,  and  their  cattle  (8,  i86-  7;  i,  43 2J.  She  is  prayed  to 
for  wealth  (7,  40*),  her  pure,  intact,  celestial,  imperishable  gifts  are  suppli 
cated  (i,  i853),  and  the  large  blessings  bestowed  by  the  Maruts  are  com 
pared  with  the  beneficent  deeds  of  Aditi  (i,  i66I2j. 

In  some  passages  of  the  RV.  (i,  I533;  8,  9ol5;  10,  n1  &c.)  as  well  as 
in  later  Vedic  texts  (VS.  13,  43.  49),  Aditi  is  spoken  of  as  a  cow,  and,  in 
the  ritual,  a  ceremonial  cow  is  commonly  addressed  as  Aditi5.  Terrestrial 
Soma  is  compared  to  the  milk  of  Aditi  (9,  96^);  and  milk  only  can  be 
meant6  by  the  daughter  of  Aditi  who  yields  to  Soma  as  he  flows  to  the  vat 
(9,  693).  There  may  be  a  similar  allusion  when  priests  with  their  ten  fingers 
are  said  to  purify  Soma  on  the  lap  of  Aditi  (9,  261.  7i5). 

A  review  of  the  evidence  indicates  that  Aditi  has  two  and  only  two 
prominent  characteristics.  The  first  is  her  motherhood.  She  is  the  mother 
of  a  group  of  gods  whose  name  represents  a  metronymic  formation  from  hers. 
Her  second  main  characteristic,  in  conformity  with  the  etymological  meaning 
of  the  name,  is  her  power  of  releasing  from  the  bonds  of  physical  suffering 
and  moral  guilt.  Mystical  speculation  on  the  name  would  lead  to  her  being 
styled  a  cow,  as  representing  boundless  plenty,  or  to  her  being  identified  with 
the  boundless  earth,  heaven,  or  universe.  But  how  are  we  to  account  for  so 
early  a  personification  of  such  an  abstract  idea,  and  in  particular  for  Aditi 
becoming  the  mother  of  the  Adityas  ?  BERGAIGNE?  thinks  the  transition  to  Aditi's 
motherhood  is  to  be  found  in  such  an  expression  as  dyaur  aditih,  the  'bound 
less  sky',  the  mother  who  supplies  the  gods  with  milk  (10,  633)-  According 
to  this  view,  the  rare  and  secondary  adjectival  meaning  'boundless'  would  have 
developed  from  being  an  epithet  of  the  sky,  otherwise  characteristically  regarded 
as  a  father,  into  an  independent  female  deity.  Nor  does  this  explanation 
seem  to  account  satisfactorily  for  the  conception  of  Aditi  releasing  from 
bondage.  Another  explanation  is  possible.  The  expression  aditeh  putrdh, 
sons  of  Aditi,  several  times  applied  to  the  Adityas  in  the  RV.,  may  in  the 
pre- Vedic  period  have  simply  meant  'sons  of  freedom'  (like  sahasah  putrah, 
'son  of  strength':  p.  12)  as  describing  a  prominent  quality  of  Varuna  and 
cognate  gods.  Such  an  expression^  would  easily  lead  to  the  personification 
of  Aditi  as  a  mother.  Similarly  SavasT  wa?  evolved  as  a  name  of  Indra's 
mother  in  the  RV.  itself  from  his  epithet  'Son  of  Might'  (savasah:  p.  12) 
and  Indra's  epithet  sacipati,  'lord  of  might',  later  led  to  sad  being  personi 
fied  as  the  wife  of  that  god,  the  compound  being  interpreted  as  'husband  of 
Sacf.  The  formation  of  a  metronymic  Aditya,  son  of  Aditi,  would  tend  to 
the  limitation  of  the  group  comprising  her  sons.  The  deified  personification 
would  naturally  retain  a  connexion  with  the  original  meaning  of  existence 
free  from  all  fetters,  but  would  assume  a  few  additional  fluctuating  attributes, 
such  as  brightness,  from  the  Adityas.  As  mother  of  some  of  the  leading  gods 


ABSTRACT  GODS.     42.  Dm.  123 

or  of  the  gods  in  general,  she  might  occasionally  be  identified  with  Heaven 
and  Earth,  the  universal  parents,  and  the  meaning  of  the  word  would  en 
courage  cosmogonic  speculations.  Thus  Aditi,  an  entirely  Indian  goddess,  is 
historically  younger  than  some  at  least  of  her  sons. 

The  opinion  that  Aditi  is  a  personification  of  the  idea  of  'freedom  from 
bondage'  is  favoured  by  WALLIS*  and  OLDENBERG9.  MAX  MULLERIQ  thinks 
that  Aditi,  an  ancient  god  or  goddess,  is  the  earliest  name  invented  to  ex 
press  the  infinite  as  visible  to  the  naked  eye,  the  endless  expanse  beyond 
the  earth,  the  clouds,  and  the  sky.  ROTH  at  first :  x  interpreted  Aditi  to  mean 
'inviolability,  imperishableness',  denoting  as  a.  personification  the  goddess  of 
eternity.  Later  he  explained  her  as  'eternity',  the  principle  which  sustains 
the  Adityas,  or  imperishable  celestial  light12.  He  regards  her  not  as  a  definite 
but  only  an  incipient  personification.  In  the  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  how 
ever,  he  explains  Aditi  as  a  personification  of  the  boundlessness  of  heaven 
as  opposed  to  the  finite  earth.  PISCHEL,  on  the  other  hand  believes  Aditi  re 
presents  the  earth  X3.  This  is  also  HARDY'S  opinion14.  COLINET  considers 
Aditi  the  female  counterpart  of  Dyaus1*.  The  Naighantuka  gives  aditi  as  a 
synonym  vi prthivt  (earth),  vac  (speech),  go  (cow),  and,  in  the  dual,  of  dydvd- 
prthivl  (heaven  and  earth).  Yaska  defines  Aditi  as  'the  mighty  mother  of 
the  gods',  and  following  the  Naighantuka  (5, 5)  locates  her  in  the  atmospheric 
region,  while  the  Adityas  are  assigned  to  the  celestial,  and  Varuna  to  both  l6. 
1  OST.  5,  36,  note  68.  —  2  Op.  cit.  5,  39,  note  73.  —  3  According  to  BRV. 

3,  90,  Aditi  in  4,  55  lb  =3  7,  624  a  is  synonymous  with  dyavaprthivl.  —  4  References 

in  OST.  5,  40  f.  —  5  ORV.  206  cp.  72.  —  6  Otherwise  BRV.'  3,  94.  —  7  BRV.  3, 

9o.  —  8  WC.  45  f.  —  9  ORV.  204—7  cp.  SEE.  46,  329.  —  «>  Vedic  Hymns,  SEE. 

32,  241;  cp.  LSL.  2,  619;    HOPKINS,  JAOS.   17,  91.  —  "  Nirukta,  Erl.  150—1.  — 

12  ZDMG.  6,  68  f.;  so  also  KRV.  59,  HILLEBRANDT,  Aditi  p.  20.  —  13  PVS.  2,  86. 

—  H  HVBP.  94.  —  15  Trans,  of  the  9*  Or.  Congress   I,  396—410.  —  16  ROTH  on 

Nir.   10,  4. 

BENFEY,  Hymnen  des  Samaveda  218  (=  Unteilbarkeit);  OST.  I,  26;  5,  35—53. 

55;  BRV.  3,88—98;  HILLEBRANDT,  Ueber  die  Gottin  Aditi,  Breslau  1876;  BRI.  19; 

DARMESTETER,  Ormazd  p.  82;  COLINET,  Etude  sur  le  mot  Aditi,  Museon  12,  81 — 90; 

ROTH,  IS.   14,  392—3;  BLOOMFIELD,  ZDMG.  48,  552,  note  i;  HRL  72—3. 

§  42.  Diti.  -  The  name  of  Diti  occurs  only  three  times  in  the  RV., 
twice  along  with  that  of  Aditi.  Mitra  and  Varuna  are  said  to  behold  from 
their  car  Aditi  and  Diti  (5,  62s).  Sayana  here  explains  the  two  as  the  in 
divisible  earth  and  the  separate  creatures  on  it,  ROTHX,  as  'the  eternal  and 
the  perishable',  and  MuiR2  as  'the  entire  aggregate  of  visible  nature'.  In  a 
second  passage  (4,  211),  Agni  is  besought  to  grant  diti  and  preserve  from 
aditi.  Here  Sayana  interprets  the  two  words  as  'liberal  giver'  and  'illiberal 
giver',  ROTH  as  'wealth'  and  'penury'.  BERGAIGNE^  takes  the  words  to  de 
signate  the  goddesses  of  the  previous  passage;  but  it  is  more  likely  that  they 
are  here  quite  different  words,  derived  from  da,  'to  give',  and  thus  meaning 
'giving'  and  'non-giving'.  This  view  seems  to  be  favoured  by  both  the  con 
text  and  the  order  in  which  the  words  occur.  In  the  third  passage  (7,  i512) 
Diti  is  mentioned  without  Aditi,  but  along  with  Agni,  Savitr,  and  Bhaga,  being 
said  to  give  (da)  what  is  desirable  (vary am).  Diti  is  named  along  with  Aditi 
as  a  goddess  in  the  later  Samhitas  also  (VS.  18,  22;  AV.  15,  i84;  16,  67). 
Her  sons  are  mentioned  in  AV.  7,  7'.  These  are  the  Daityas,  who  in  post- 
Vedic  "mythology  are  the  enemies  of  the  gods.  The  name  of  Diti  as  a 
goddess  seems  to  be  merely  an  antithesis  to  that  of  Aditi4,  formed  from  the 
latter  to  express  a  positive  sense,  'as  sura,  'god',  was  later  (by  false  etymo 
logy)  evolved  from  asura,  'demon'. 

i  ZDMG.  6,  71.  —  2  OST.  5,  42.  —  3  BRV.  3,  97.  —  4  MM.,  SEE.  32,  256; 
cp.  WC.  46. 


124    III.  RELIGION,  WELTL.  WISSENSCH.  u.  KUNST.     i  A.  VEDIC  MYTHOLOGY. 

E.    GODDESSES. 

§  43.  Goddesses.  —  Goddesses  occupy  a  very  subordinate  position  in 
Vedic  belief  and  worship.  They  play  hardly  any  part  as  rulers  of  the  world. 
The  only  one  of  any  importance  is  Usas,  who  judged  by  the  statistical  stan 
dard  ranks  as  a  deity  of  the  third  class  (p.  20).  But,  unlike  nearly  all  the 
gods,  she  received  no  share  in  the  Soma  offering1.  Next  to  her  comes  Sa- 
rasvatl  (§  33),  who,  however,  only  ranks  with  the  lowest  class  of  deities.  A 
few  other  goddesses  are  praised  in  one  hymn  each.  Prthivi,  hardly  sepa 
rable  from  Dyaus,  is  praised  in  one  short  hymn  of  three  stanzas  (§  34). 
Ratri,  Night,  is  also  invoked  in  one  hymn  (10,  127).  Like  her  sister  Dawn, 
she  is  called  the  daughter  of  Heaven.  She  is  not  conceived  as  the  dark, 
but  as  the  bright  starlit  night.  She  shines  manifoldly  with  her  eyes.  Decked 
with  all  splendour,  she  fills  the  valleys  and  heights,  driving  away  the  darkness 
with  light.  At  her  approach  men  return  home  like  birds  to  their  nests. 
She  is  invoked  to  keep  away  the  wolf  and  the  thief,  guiding  her  worshippers 
to  safety.  Night  probably  became  a  goddess  by  way  of  antithesis  to  Dawn, 
with  whom  she  is  invoked  in  several  verses  as  a  dual  divinity2  (pp.  48.  129). 
Vac,  personified  Speech,  is  celebrated  in  one  hymn  (10,  125  cp.  71),  in 
which  she  describes  herself.  She  accompanies  all  the  gods  and  supports 
Mitra-Varuna,  Indra-Agni,  and  the  Asvins.  She  bends  Rudra's  bow  against 
the  unbeliever.  Her  place  is  in  the  waters,  the  sea.  She  encompasses  all 
beings.  In  another  passage  (8,  89IO>  n)  she  is  called  queen  of  the  gods  and 
divine3.  In  the  Naighantuka  (5,  5)  Vac  is  enumerated  among  the  deities 
of  the  atmosphere;  and  thunder,  or  mddhyamika  vac,  'the  voice  of  the  middle 
region',  in  the  terminology  of  the  commentators  (Nir.  1 1 ,  27),  may  nave 
been  the  starting  point  of  the  personification.  A  legend  about  Vac  frequently 
referred  to  in  the  Brahmanas  is  that  of  Soma  being  bought  back  from  the 
Gandharvas  at  the  price  of  Vac  transformed  into  a  woman  (AB.  i,  27). 
Puramdhi,  whose  name  occurs  about  nine  times  in  the  RV.,  is  goddess  of 
Plenty4.  She  is  nearly  always  mentioned  with  BhagaS,  two  or  three  times 
also  with  Pusan  and  Savitr,  and  once  \vith  Visnu  and  Agni.  Parendi,  com 
monly  regarded  as  identical  with  Puramdhi,  is  generally  considered  a  goddess 
of  riches  and  abundance  (cp.  Yast  8,  38)  in  the  A  vesta6.  HILLEBRANDT, 
however,  thinks  Puramdhi  is  a  goddess  of  Activity7.  Another  goddess  of 
abundance  is  D  his  an  a,  mentioned  nearly  a  dozen  times  in  the  RV8.  I  la, 
Nourishment,  is  the  personification  (mentioned  less  than  a  dozen  times  in  the 
RV.)  of  the  offering  of  milk  and  butter,  thus  representing  plenty  derived 
from  the  cow.  Hence  Ida  is  in  the  Brahmanas  frequently  connected  with, 
though  never  an  actual  name  of,  the  cow;  and  in  the  Naighantuka  (2,  n) 
it  occurs  as  one  of  the  synonyms  of  cow.  Owing  to  the  nature  of  the 
offering  Ila  is  called  butter-handed  (7,  i68)  and  butter-footed  (10,  7o8).  As 
a  personification  she  generally  appears  in  the  Apr!  hymns,  in  which  she 
usually  forms  a  triad  with  SarasvatI  and  Mahl  or  BharatR  It  is  doubtful 
whether  the  literal  or  the  personified  sense  is  intended  by  the  phrase  ilayas 
_pade,  'in  the  place  of  nourishment'  (i.  e.  of  the  sacrificial  fire).  Agni  is  once 
called  the  son  of  Ila,  clearly  in  allusion  to  the  place  of  his  production 
(3>  299'  I0)-  Pururavas  is  also  said  to  be  her  son  (10,  95l8).  She  is  once 
called  the  mother  of  the  herd  (yutha]  and  connected  with  UrvasT  (5,  4i19). 
She  is  once  mentioned  with  Dadhikravan  and  the  Asvins  in  reference  to  the 
morning  sacrifice  (7,  44").  In  the  SB.  she  is  called  the  daughter  of  Manu 
(i,  8,  i8;  ii,  5,  35)  as  well  as  of  Mitra-Varuna  (1,8,  i2?;  14,  9,  427;  ASS.  i,  7?). 
The  name  of  the  goddess  Brhaddiva  occurs  four  times  in  hymns  to  the 


43-  GODDESSES.  125 


Visvedevas.  She  is  called  a  mother  (10,  6410)  and  is  mentioned  with  Ila 
(2,  314;  5,  41 T9),  SarasvatI  and  Raka  (5,  42").  Raka  (probably  from  Yrd, 
to  give)  is  mentioned  only  twice  in  the  RV.  as  a  rich  and  bountiful  goddess, 
who  is  invoked  with  others  (2,  327;  5,  42I2J.  Sinivali  is  referred  to  in  two 
hymns  of  the  RV.  (2,  32;  10,  184).  She  is  a  sister  of  the  gods,  broad-, 
hipped,  fair-armed,  fair-fingered,  prolific,  a  mistress  of  the  family,  and  is 
implored  to  grant  offspring.  She  is  invoked  with  SarasvatT,  Raka,  as  well 
as  Gungu  (who  is  only  mentioned  here).  In  the  AV.  (8,  46^)  Sinlvali  is 
called  the  wife  of  Visnu.  The  later  Samhitas  and  the  Brahmanas  also  men 
tion  a  goddess  Kuhu,  a  personification  of  the  new  moon10.  Raka  and 
Sinlvali  are  in  later  Vedic  texts  connected  with  phases  of  the  moon,  the  former 
being  the  presiding  deity  of  the  actual  day  of  full  moon,  and  the  latter,  of 
the  first  day  of  new  moon.  There  is  nothing  to  show  that  any  such  connexion 
is  to  be  found  in  the  RV11. 

A  few  other  goddesses  occasionally  mentioned  in  the  RV.  have  already 
been  incidentally  referred  to.  Prsni,  the  mother  of  the  Maruts  (p.  78)  pre 
sumably  represents  the  mottled  storm-cloud12.  The  word  is  also  used  as  an 
adjective  in  the  sense  of  speckled  (cp.  7,  io36-  IOJ,  in  the  singular  as  an 
attribute  of  both  bull  and  cow,  and  in  the  plural,  of  the  cows  which  milk 
Soma  for  Indra  (i,  84*°-  ";  8,  61?.  710.  58^.  It  thus  came  to  mean  'speckled 
cow',  and  finally  'speckled  cloud'.  Saranyu  occurs  once  in  the  RV.  (10,  if2) 
as  the  name  of  Tvastr's  daughter,  wedded  to  Vivasvat.  The  most  likely 
interpretation  seems  to  be  that  which  identifies  her  with  the  sun-maiden 
Surya;  or  Usas,  the  Dawn^.  The  word  also  occurs  four  times  as  an  adjec 
tive  in  the  RV.  meaning  'swift'.  It  is  an  ordinary  Sanskrit  formation,  derived 
with  the  suffix  -yu  from  sarana,  speed  (]Ar,  to  run),  like  caran-yu 
and  others. 

Goddesses  as  wives  of  the  great  gods  similarly  play  an  insignificant 
part  in  the  Veda.  They  are  altogether  without  independent  character,  simply 
representing  the  spouses  whom  such  gods  as  Indra  must  have  had.  Hardly 
anything  about  them  is  mentioned  but  their  names,  which  are  simply  formed 
from  those  of  the  gods  with  the  feminine  suffix  -ani.  Thus  Indrdm  is  simply 
'wife  of  Indra'14.  VarunanI  and  Agnayl  also  occur  in  the  RV.,  but  rarely. 
Rudrani  is  not  found  till  the  Sutras,  but  she  plays  a  decidedly  more  import 
ant  part  in  the  cult  than  any  of  the  other  goddesses  in  -dni^.  The  wife  of 
the  Asvins  is  once  in  the  RV.  called  AsvinI  (=  Surya:  p.  5i)x6.  The  'wives 
of  the  gods'  (devandm  patmti)  occasionally  mentioned  in  the  RV.  have  in 
the  Brahmanas  an  established  place  assigned  to  them  in  the  cult  apart  from 
the  gods  (SB.  i,  9,  211)17. 

i  BERGAIGNE,  Recherches  sur  1'histoire  de  la  liturgie  vedique,  p.  9.  —  2  OST. 
5,  191;  HRI.  79  f.  —  3  WEBER,  IS.  9,  473  ff.;  BRI.  16;  OLDENBERG,  ZDMG.  39, 
58—9;  WC.  85—6;  HRI.  142—3.  226.  —  4  PVS.  2,  202—16;  BLOOMFIELD,  JAOS. 
1 6,  19;  ORV.  63.  —  5  Cp.  OLDENBERG,  SEE.  46,  190.  —  6  DARMESTETER,  Ormazd 
et  Ahriman  25;  SEE.  4,  LXX;  23,  ii;  MILLS,  SEE.  31,  25;  PVS.  I,  202;  Sr.AP. 
207 — 9;  COLINET,  BOR.  2,  24554,  121 ;  Trans.  Or.  Cong.  1892,  i,  396—420.  —  7  HILLE- 
BRANDT,  WZKM.  3,  188—94.  259 — 73;  cp.  also  V.HENRY,  Vedica,  ire  serie,  p.  iff., 
Memoires  de  la  Societe  de  ling.  9.  —  8  pyS.  2,  82  ff. ;  OLDENBERG,  SEE.  46, 120 — 2. 
—  9  WEBER,  IS.  i,  168—9;  BRV.  i,  325;  GGH.  51;  ORV.  238.326;  SEE.  46,  11. 
156.  191.  288;  BAUNACK,  KZ.  34,  563.—  ™  ZDMG.  9,  LVIII.  —  u  IS.  5,  228  ff.  — 
12  Cp.  ROTH  on  Nir.  10,  39,  p.  145.  —  J3  BLOOMFIELD,  JAOS.  15,  172 — 88,  where 
the  opinions  of  his  predecessors  are  stated.  —  M  ORV.  172;  cp.  LEUMANN,  KZ. 
32,  299.  —  15  ORV.  219.  —  16  KRV.  n.  148;  on  Surya  and  the  Asvins  cp.  WEBER, 
IS.  5,  178—89;  BRV.  2,  486;  PVS.  i,  13—29;  OLDENBERG,  GGA.  1889,  7—8; 
ORV.  241.  —  17  On  female  divinities  cp.  HOPKINS,  PAOS.  1889,  p.  CLXII;  on  Sarama 
(above  pp.  63 — 4)  see  below,  §  62. 


126    III.  RELIGION,  WELTL.  WISSENSCH.  u.  KUNST.     i  A.  VEDIC  MYTHOLOGY. 

F.   DUAL  DIVINITIES. 

§.  44.  A  peculiar  feature  of  Vedic  mythology  is  the  celebration  in 
pairs  of  a  number  of  deities  whose  names  are  joined  in  the  form  of  a  special 
kind  of  dual  compound  in  which  both  members  are  dual,  accented,  and 
occasionally  separable1.  About  a  dozen  gods  are  thus  conjointly  praised  in 
at  least  sixty  hymns  of  the  RV.  The  name  of  Indra  enters  into  seven  or 
more  than  half  of  these  combinations,  but  by  far  the  largest  number  of 
hymns  —  twenty-three,  and  parts  of  several  others  —  is  addressed,  to  the  pair 
Mitravdrund,.  Eleven  are  dedicated  to  Indragnl,  nine  to  Indrd-vdrund, 
about  seven  to  Jndra-vayii,  six  to  DySvd-prthivt,  e  two  each  to  Indrd-sdmd 
and  Indrd-brhaspdti,  and  one  each  to  Indrdvisnii,  I  ndrd-pusdnd,  Somd-pusdnd, 
Somd-nidrd,  and  Agm-sdmd.  A  few  other  couples,  including  the  names  of 
nine  or  ten  deities  not  mentioned  above,  are  invoked  in  detached  verses. 
These  are  Indra-ndsatyd,  Indrd-parvatd,  Indrd-marutah,  Agiii-parjanyd,  Par- 
jdnyd-vdtd  (once  Vdtd-parjanya),  Usdsdndkta  or  (less  often)  Ndktosdsd, 
Suryd-masd  or  Suryd-candramdsa. 

There  can  be  little  doubt  that  the  analogy  for  this  favourite  formation 
was  furnished  by  Dyavaprthivl,  Heaven  and  Earth2,  the  pair  which  to 
early  thought  appeared  so  indissolubly  connected  in  nature,  that  the  myth  of 
their  conjugal  union  is  found  widely  diffused  among  primitive  peoples3  and 
has  therefore  probably  come  down  to  the  Veda  from  a  period  anterior  to 
that  immediately  preceding  the  separation  of  the  Indo-European  nations.  In 
the  RV.  itself  this  couple  is  so  closely  associated  that  while  they  are  invoked 
as  a  pair  in  six  hymns,  not  one  is  devoted  to  the  praise  of  Dyaus  alone 
and  only  one  of  three  verses  to  that  of  Prthivl.  So  hard  was  it  for  the 
poets  to  dissociate  the  two,  that  even  in  this  hymn  Prthivl  is  praised  for  send 
ing  the  rain  of  heaven  from  her  cloud  (5,  843).  The  dual  compound,  moreover, 
occurs  much  more  frequently  than  the  name  of  Dyaus  as  a  god.  It  occurs,  in 
cluding  the  comparatively  rare  synonyms  Dydvdksdmd  and  Dydvabhiiml, 
about  a  hundred  times,  or  more  frequently  than  the  name  of  any  other  pair. 
Heaven  and  Earth  are  also  called  rodasi,  the  two  worlds  (spoken  of  as  sisters, 
i,  i855,  owing  to  the  gender  of  the  word),  an  expression  occurring  at  least 
a  hundred  times  in  the  RV.  Heaven  and  Earth  are  parents,  being  often 
styled  pitard,  mdtard,  janitri,  and  also  separately  addressed  as  father  and 
mother  (i,  I591"3.  i6o2).  They  are  primeval  parents  (7,  532;  10,  658).  Their 
marriage  is  referred  to  in  the  AB.  (4,  275~6)1  They  have  made  and  sustain 
all  creatures  (i,  I592.  i6o2.  185').  Though  themselves  footless,  they  support 
much  offspring  with  feet  (i,  i852).  They  are  the  parents  of  the  gods  also; 
for  to  them  exclusively  belongs  the  epithet  dei'dputre,  'having  the  gods  as 
sons'.  They  are  in  particular  said  to  be  the  parents^  of  Brhaspati  (7,  978) 
and,  with  the  Waters  and  Tvastr,  to  have  begotten  Agni  (10,  2  7).  At  the 
same  time  they  are  in  different  passages  spoken  of  as  themselves  created  by 
individual  gods.  Thus  a  poet  observes  that  he  who  produced  heaven  and 
earth  must  have  been  the  most  skilful  artisan  of  all  the  gods  (i,  i6o4;  4,  563). 
Indra  is  said  to  have  generated  or  fashioned  them  (6,  3o5;  8,  36*;  10,  296.  543). 
Visvakarman  produced  them  (10,  8i2  cp.  AV.  12,  i6o)5.  They  received  their 
forms  from  Tvastr  (10,  no?).  They  sprang  from  the  head  and  feet  of  Purusa 
(10,  90*4).  But  one  poet  is  puzzled  as  to  how  they  were  produced  and  which 
of  the  two  first  came  into  being  (i,  185*;  cp.  p.  i3)6.  Many  of  the  epithets 
applied  to  Dyavaprthivl  are  suggested  by  their  physical  characteristics.  The 
one  is  a  prolific  bull,  the  other  a  variegated  cow  (i,  i6o3).  They  are  both 
rich  in  seed  (i,  I592;  6,  701-2).  They  yield  milk,  ghee,  and  honey  abundantly 


44-  DUAL  DIVINITIES.  127 


(6,  7Q1—5),  and  produce  amrta  (i,  i$92.  i856).  They  never  grow  old  (6,  70*). 
They  are  great  (i,  I591)  and  wide-extended  (i,  i6o2).  They  are  broad  and 
great  abodes  (i,  i856).  They  are  fair-faced,  wide,  manifold,  with  ends  which 
are  far  away  (i,  i856-7).  Sometimes,  however,  moral  qualities  are  attributed 
to  them.  They  are  wise  and  promote  righteousness  (i,  I591)-  As  father 
and  mother  they  guard  beings  (i,  i6o2)  and  protect  from  disgrace  and  mis 
fortune  (i,  i8510).  They  grant  food  and  wealth  (6,  yo6;  i,  I595)  or  bestow 
great  fame  and  dominion  (i,  i6o5).  They  are  sufficiently  personified  to  be 
called  leaders  of  the  sacrifice  and  to  be  conceived  as  seating  themselves 
around  the  sacrifice  (4,  562>7),  as  coming  to  their  worshippers  along  with  the 
heavenly  folk  (7,  532),  or  taking  the  sacrifice  to  the  gods  (2,  4i20).  But 
Heaven  and  Earth  never  attained  to  a  living  personification  or  importance 
in  worship.  These  two  deities  are  quite  coordinate.  But  in  most  of  the 
other  couples  one  of  the  two  greatly  predominates,  his  characteristic  qualities 
being  shared  by  his  companion.  Thus  Indra-Agni  are  conjointly  called  'wielders 
of  the  bolt'  and  'Vrtra-slayers'.  Occasionally  an  attribute  of  the  lesser  deity 
is  predicated  of  both.  Thus  Indra-Visnu  are  together  said  to  have  taken 
wide  strides  (6,  6g5).  Frequent  association  of  this  kind  may  lead  to  a  deity 
receiving  by  himself  an  epithet  to  which  he  originally  had  no  right.  Thus 
Agni  when  mentioned  alone  is  often  called  a  'Vrtra-slayer'.  The  characteristics 
of  each  member  of  the  pair  are,  however,  in  some  passages  distinguished7. 

Next  to  Heaven  and  Earth,  the  pair  most  frequently  named  is  Mitra- 
Varuna.  These  two  deities  are  invoked  conjointly  in  many  more  hymns  than 
are  dedicated  to  their  separate  praise.  As  Mitra  has  hardly  any  individual 
traits,  the  same  attributes  and  functions  belong  to  the  pair  conjointly  as  to 
Varuna  alone.  Scarcely  anything  need  therefore  be  here  added  to  what 
has  already  been  said  about  Varuna.  The  couple  are  conceived  as  young 
men  (3,  54'°;  7,62s).  Like  various  other  gods,  they  are  spoken  of  as  shining 
(candrd),  bright  (sud),  sunlike  (svardrs),  ruddy  (rudra),  and  terrible  (ghora}. 
The  priority  of  the  name  of  Mitra  in  the  compound  might  seem  to  indicate 
that  he  was  originally  the  more  important  deity;  it  is,  however,  probably  due 
simply  to  the  tendency  to  make  the  shorter  word  the  first  member  of  a  com 
pound.  This  dual  invocation  goes  back  to  the  Indo-Iranian  period,  for  Ahura 
and  Mithra  are  thus  coupled  in  the  Avesta8. 

Indra-Varuna,  the  two  universal  monarchs  (i,  17'),  hollowed  out  the 
channels  of  the  waters  and  set  the  sun  in  motion  in  the  sky  (7,  82^).  They 
are  vanquishers  of  Vrtra  (6,  682),  aid  in  battle  (4,  41")?  and  grant  victory 
(i,  177).  They  cast  their  mighty  bolt  against  the  wicked  (4,  4i4).  They 
bestow  protection  and  prosperity  (i,  i77'8),  fame,  wealth,  and  abundance  of 
steeds  (4,  41  *-10;  6,  688).  They  are  drinkers  of  the  pressed  Soma,  their  car 
comes  to  the  sacrifice,  and  they  are  invoked  to  exhilerate  themselves  seated 
on  the  sacrificial  grass  (6,  6810-11).  In  some  passages  the  characteristics  of 
each  member  of  the  pair  are  distinguished.  Thus  Varuna  is  besought  to 
divert  his  wrath  from  his  worshippers,  and  Indra  to  procure  them  wide  space 
(7,  842).  Indra  is  contrasted  as  the  warlike  god  who  slays  Vrtra,  with  Varuna 
who  supports  men  in  peace  and  wisdom  (6,  68^;  7,  825-6.  853).  The  asso 
ciation  of  the  couple  Indra-Agni^  is  very  intimate;  for  Indra  is  invoked 
conjointly  with  Agni  in  more  hymns  than  with  any  other  deity10,  while  Agni 
is  otherwise  addressed  as  a  dual  divinity  only  in  one  hymn  and  two  detached 
verses  with  Soma  and  in  one  verse  with  Parjanya.  Indra-Agni,  the  best  of 
Soma-drinkers  (i,  2I1),  come  on  their  car  to  drink  Soma  (i,  loS1),  and  are 
invited  together  to  come  and  drink  it  (7,  936;  8,  384-  7~9),  to  sit  down  on 
the  sacrificial  grass  at  the  offering,  and  to  exhilerate  themselves  with  the 


128    III.  RELIGION,  WELTL.  WISSENSCH.  u.  KUNST.     i  A.  VEDIC  MYTHOLOGY. 

pressed   draught   (i,  lop5).     They   are   often   called  Vrtra-slayers.     They   are 
armed  with  the  bolt  (6,  593  &c.),  and  their  lightning  is  sharp  (5,  863).    They 
are  fort-destroyers  who  aid  in   battle  (i,  1097-*).     They  together    demolished 
the  99  forts  of  the  Dasa  (3,  i26)  and  are  invincible  in  battle  (5,  862).    They 
released  the  rivers  from  their  imprisonment  (8,  48s)  and  accomplished  heroic 
deeds  together  (i,  io85).     They   are  bountiful   (5,  863).     All  these   are  traits 
characteristic  of  Indra.     Indra-Agni  are  also  called  the  two   priests   of  sacri 
fice  (8,  381),  and  are  wise  (8,  403).    They  are  lords  of  the  abode  (sadaspafi) 
and  drive   away  the   goblins  (x,  2i5).     These   features   are   more   appropriate 
to  Agni.     The   two   gods    are    twin    brothers    who   have   one    father   (6, 592). 
They  are  once   called  Asvins11    (i,  io94),   possibly   in  allusion   to   this  close 
relationship.     They  bestow  food,  wealth,   strength,   cattle,   steeds   (4,  6oI3~14). 
They  are   greater  than  heaven    and   earth,   rivers,    and    mountains    (i,  io96). 
The  two  gods  are  once    contrasted,    though  not  when  addressed   as   a  pair; 
Indra  being  said  to  slay,  but  Agni   to   burn,  the   Dasyus   (6,  284).     The  two 
hymns  (4,  49;  7,  97)  addressed  to  Indra-Brhaspati  consist  chiefly   of  invi 
tations  to  drink  Soma  and  of  prayers   to  bestow   great   wealth   abounding  in 
steeds   and  to    promote    devotion.     Indra-Vayu    are    constantly   invited   to 
come  and  drink  Soma  (i,  231"2  &c.),  little  else  being  said  about  them.    They 
come  to  the  offering  with  their  teams  (4,  472~4)  or  in  their  golden-seated  car 
(4,  46*)    and  seat    themselves    on    the    sacrificial   litter    (7,  9i4).      They    are 
thousand-eyed,    lords    of  devotion   (dhiyas  patt:   i,  233),   and   lords   of  might 
(savasas  patl:    4,  473).     They   help  in  battle    (7,  924)    and   bestow   wealth  in 
steeds,  cattle,  and  gold  (7,  9o6).     Indra-Soma  perform  the  warlike  exploits 
characteristic  of  Indra  or  the  great  cosmic  actions  so  often  ascribed  to  him. 
They   made    the    waters    flow  for  man,   released  the    seven  rivers,    slew  the 
dragon,  depressed   the   wheel    of  the   sun  (4,28I<2;6,  72^).     The   true  work 
of  the  two  bountiful  gods  was  that  they  destroyed  their  foes  and  broke  open 
what  was   enclosed   in   the   rock   (4,  284- 5).     They  performed  the   first  great 
deeds  in  finding  the  sun  and  light,   dispelling  the  darkness,   causing   the   sun 
to  shine,   supporting   heaven,   and  spreading  out   the   earth   (6,  72'-  2).     They 
too  placed  ripe  milk  in  the  raw  bodies  of  cows  (ib.4).    They  grant  victorious 
might  to  men  (ib.5).     Indra-Visnu,  who  are  receptacles  of  Soma,  lords  of 
intoxication  (madapaft)^  are  invited  to  come  with  their  steeds,  to  drink  Soma, 
and  to  fill  their  belly  with  it.     The   two   gods  strode   out  widely   in   the  in 
toxication  of  Soma,   made   the   air  broader,    and   spread   out  the    spaces  for 
existence.      Ever   victorious,    they    grant    wealth,    and   conduct    safely    across 
dangers.     As    generators   of  all    prayers,    they   are   besought   to   hear  the  in 
vocations   of  their    worshippers    (6,  69) I2.     Indra-Pusan   are   invoked   con 
jointly  in  only  one  short  hymn  (6,  57),    and  their   names   form  a  dual  com 
pound   only  twice.     When  Indra  made  the  great  waters   flow,  Pusan  was  his 
companion.    With  him  as  a  friend,  Indra  slays  Vrtras  (6,  562).    One  of  them 
drinks  Soma  and  is  drawn  by  two   steeds  with  which  he   slays  Vrtras,   while 
the  other  desires  gruel  (karambhd)  and  is  drawn  by  goats.     Mention  is  once 
(i,  i622)  made  of  the  abode  (pdthas)  of  Indra-Pusan,  to  which  a  goat  con 
ducts  the  sacrificial  horse.    The  two  gods  are  as  usual  also  besought  to  confer 
welfare  and  booty. 

Soma-Pusan  (2,  40)  drive  away  darkness  and  are  invoked  to  quicken 
the  seven-wheeled  five-reined  car,  yoked  by  thought,  which  measures  out 
space.  They  are  generators  of  wealth,  of  heaven  and  earth,  and  protectors 
of  the  world  (cp.  10,  i73),  whom  the  gods  made  the  centre  of  immortality. 
For  them  Indra  is  invoked  to  produce  ripe  milk  in  the  raw  cows.  Together 
they  bestow  victory  over  foes  and  grant  abundance  of  wealth  and  food. 


44-  DUAL  DIVINITIES.  129 


But  they  are  also  contrasted.  One  of  them  has  made  his  abode  high  in 
heaven,  while  the  other  dwells  on  earth  and  in  air;  one  generated  all  beings, 
while  the  other  moves  seeing  everything *3.  Soma-Rudra  (6,  74)  are  in 
voked  to  drive  away  sickness  and  decay  from  the  house,  to  place  all  remedies 
in  the  bodies  of  their  worshippers,  to  remove  from  them  all  sin,  and  to 
free  from  the  fetter  of  Varuna.  Wielding  sharp  weapons,  they  are  besought 
to  have  mercy  and  are  implored  for  prosperity  to  man  and  beast.  Agni- 
Soma  are  celebrated  together  for  having  released  the  confined  streams, 
obtained  the  light,  and  set  the  luminaries  in  the  sky.  At  the  same  time  they 
are  distinguished,  Matarisvan  being  said  to  have  brought  the  one  from  heaven, 
and  the  eagle  the  other  from  the  rock  (i,  93).  Their  joint  help  and  pro 
tection  are  invoked,  and  they  are  besought  to  grant  cattle,  horses,  offspring, 
health,  happiness,  and  wealth  (10,  19*.  667).  This  pair  is  mentioned  several 
times  in  the  AV.  In  the  MS.  (3,  71)  they  are  spoken  of  as  'two  eyes'.  The 
SB.  refers  to  them  as  brothers  (n,  i,  619),  also  stating  that  the  sun  belongs 
to  Agni  and  the  moon  to  Soma  (i,  6,  324).  In  the  ritual  Agni-Soma  seem 
never  to  receive  a  share  in  the  Soma  offering,  but  only  cakes  and  animal 
sacrifices.  It  is  somewhat  remarkable  that  the  two  great  ritual  deities,  who 
form  a  very  frequent  couple  in  the  sacrificial  literature,  should,  outside  the 
one  hymn  (i,  93)  devoted  to  their  praise,  be  mentioned  only  twice  as  a 
pair,  and  that  only  in  the  most  recent  part  of  the  RV.14 

A  few  other  pairs  are  invoked  in  detached  verses  only.  Agni-Parjanya 
are  mentioned  in  one  passage  (6,  52l6).  They  are  together  besought  to 
bestow  food  and  progeny,  but  are  at  the  same  time  contrasted,  the  one  being 
said  to  have  produced  the  oblation  (ildm)  and  the  other  offspring  (garbham). 
Parjanya-Vata  are  invoked  in  four  passages.  As  bulls  of  earth  they  are 
besought  (6,  496)  to  impel  the  watery  vapours  (purisani).  Along  with  Indra- 
Vayu  and  other  gods,  they  are  invoked  as  vaporous  (purlsina)  bulls  (10,  659). 
In  another  enumeration  they  are  entreated  to  bestow  abundant  food  (6,  5o12). 
They  are  also  once  (10,  6610  cp.  Nir.  7,  10)  invoked  as  connected  with  'the 
thundering  buffalo'  (probably  Dyaus15).  Dawn  and  Night  are  invoked  several 
times.  They  are  mentioned  almost  exclusively  in  Visvedeva  or  Apr!  hymns. 
They  are  rich  goddesses  (2,  31$;  10,  yo6),  divine  maidens  (7,  26;  10,  no6), 
daughters  of  heaven  (5,  417;  10,  7o6).  They  are  like  two  wives  (i,  I222) 
and  abound  in  milk  (2,  36).  Changing  their  colour  they  suckle  a  single 
child  who  beams  between  heaven  and  earth  (i,  965).  They  are  two  sisters 
who  are  of  one  mind  but  of  different  colour,  whose  path  is  the  same  and 
endless,  who,  taught  by  the  gods,  move  alternately  and  never  clash  or  stand 
still  (1,1133).  They  are  the  shining  mothers  of  order  (i,  I427);  they  con 
duct  with  bright  rays  every  offering  (5.  4i7)  and  weave  the  web  of  sacrifice- 
(2,  36).  They  are  bountiful,  much  invoked,  and  sit  on  the  sacrificial  grass 
(7,  26).  They  are  great  and  well-adorned  (10,  361.  no6;  i,  i37.  1427). 
Appearing  alternately  they  arouse  all  living  things  (2,3i5)16.  Sun  and  Moon  " 
are  mentioned  five  times  in  the  form  of  snrydmasd  and  three  times  in  that  <j 
of  suryacandramdsa.  These  are  the  only  dual  compounds  formed  with  the  .1 
name  of  SuryaT7.  In  most  cases  the  concrete  luminaries  only  are  meaner  J 
Thus  they  are  said  to  move  alternately  so  that  we  may  see  (i,  io22).  It  is 
the  act  of  Brhaspati  that  sun  and  moon  rise  alternately  (10,  6810).  The 
Creator  fashioned  sun  and  moon  (10,  190  3).  A  poet  says,  'let  us  go  on  our 
path  like  sun  and  moon'  (5,  5i15).  There  is,  however,  an  incipient  personi 
fication  when  the  pair  is  invoked  with  other  deities  (10,  64$.  9212.  935).  In  a 
few  passages  sun  and  moon,  though  not  expressly  mentioned,  are  evidently 
thought  of  in  their  dual  character.  'The  two  go  round  the  sacrifice  like 

Indo-arische  Philologie.  III.  1  A.  9 


130     III.  RELIGION,  WELTL.  WISSENSCH.  u.  KUNST.     i  A.  VEDIC  MYTHOLOGY. 

playing  children;  the  one  surveys  all  beings,  the  other  is  born  again,  ordering 

(the  seasons'  (10,  85l8).  There  is  no  doubt  that  they  are  meant  by  the  two 
bright  eyes  of  Varuna  (8,  4i9)  and  by  the  two  eyes  of  heaven  made  by  the 
immortals  (i,  72™). 

i  KHF.  i6if.;  OGR.  297  f.;  HVM.  i,  98.  —  2  Sp.AP.  159;  cp.  ORV.  93. 
240.  —  3  TYLOR,  Primitive  Culture  322—8  (Chapter  on  Mythology).  —  4  HAUG 
Translation  of  the  AB.,  vol.  2,  308.  —  5  Cp.  ibid.  2,  299.  —  6  Cp.  Nirukta  3,  22 ; 
MM.,  LSL.  2,  606.  -  -  7  RV.  2,  404-5;  6,  52*6.  572.  683;  7,  362.  825-6.  839. 
842.  853.  8  OST.  5,  70;  EGGERS,  Mitra  29—31;  OLDENBERG,  ZDMG. 

50,  46.  —  9  OST.  5,  220;  MACDONELL,  JRAS.  25,  470.  —  io  Cp.  FAY,  'AJP.  17, 
14.  —  "  LSL.  2,  614.  —  12  MACDONELL,  JRAS.  27,  175.  —  13  OST.  5,  180;  HVM. 
i,  456.  —  14  OLDENBERG,  Die  Hymnen  des  Rigveda  I,  267;  HILLEBRANDT,  GGA. 
1890,  p.  401;  HVM.  i,  458—61.  —  15  Cp.  LRV.  4,  228.  —  16  KRV.  52;  OLDEN 
BERG,  ZDMG.  39,  89;  HRI.  79.  —  17  OLDENBERG,  ZDMG.  50,  63. 

G.    GROUPS  OF  GODS. 

§  45.  The  mythology  of  the  Veda  recognised  a  certain  number  of  more 
or  less  definite  groups  of  divine  beings,  generally  associated  with  some  par 
ticular  god.  The  largest  and  most  important  of  these,  the  Maruts,  whose 
number  in  the  RV.  is  variously  stated  to  be  21  or  180  (p.  78),  is,  as  has 
been  shown,  constantly  described  as  attending  Indra  in  his  warlike  exploits 
(p.  57).  The  same  group  under  the  name  of  Rudras  is  occasionally  asso 
ciated  with  their  father  Rudra  (7,  io4.  356).  The  number  of  the  Rudras, 
treated  as,  a  separate  class  in  the  Brahmanas,  is  stated  to  be  eleven  in  the 
AB.  and  SB.  (p.  19)  but  is  thirty-three  in  the  TS.  (i,  4,  n1).  The  smaller 
group  of  the  Adityas,  whose  number  in  two  passages  of  the  RV.  is 
seven  or  eight  (p.  43)  and  in  the  Brahmanas  becomes  twelve,  is  in  the  RV. 
constantly  associated  either  with  their  mother  Aditi  (7,  io«-  &c.)  or  with  their 
chief  Varuna  (7,  356  &c.).  This  group  is  more  definite  than  that  of  the 
Maruts  inasmuch  as  its  members  have  separate  names.  A  third  group  fre 
quently  mentioned  in  the  RV.  is  more  vague  than  the  other  two,  for  they 
are  neither  characterized  nor  is  their  number  mentioned.  That  they  were 
conceived  as  specially  connected  with  Indra,  is  shown  by  two  passages  in 
which  Varuna  or  Aditi  with  the  Adityas,  Rudra  with  the  Rudras,  and  Indra 
with  the  Vasus,  are  invoked  (7,  io4.  356).  But  in  later  Vedic  texts  Agni  is  the 
leader  of  the  Vasus1.  They  are  regarded  as  eight  in  number  in  the  AB.  and 
SB.  (p.  19),  but  in  the  TS.  (5,  5,  25)  become  333.  The  three  groups  of  the 
Adityas,  Rudras  and  Vasus  are  invoked  together  in  a  few  passages  of  the 
RV.  (2,  3 11;  io,  6612  cp.  7,  io*.  356)2.  The  Brahmanas  distinguish,,  as  three 
kinds  of  r  gods,  the  Vasus  of  earth,  the  Rudras  of  air,  and  the  Adityas  of 
heaven  (SB.  i,  3,  4";  4,  3,  51).  In  the  Chandogya  Upanisad  (3,  6 — io)  five 
'  groups  are  mentioned,  the  Vasus  being  connected  with  Agni,  the  Rudras  with 
Indra,  the  Adityas  with  Varuna,  the  Maruts  with  Soma,  and  the  Sadhyas  with 
Brahma  (cp.  RV.  io,  97-  l6)3.  There  is  besides  the  group  of  the  semi-divine 
Angirases  who  are  chiefly  connected  with  Brhaspati  (§§  36,  54)  and  the 
small  one  of  the  three  Rbhus  who  are  nearly  always  associated  with  Indra 
(§  46).  Finally,  a  comprehensive  group  is  formed  of  the  Visvedevah  or 
All-gods,  who  occupy  an  important  position  in  the  sacrifice,  for  at  least  forty 
entire  hymns  of  the  RV.  are  devoted  to  their  praise.  It  is  a  factitious  sacri 
ficial  group  meant  to  represent  all  the  gods  in  order  that  none  should  be 
excluded  in  laudations  intended  to  be  addressed  to  all.  But  the  All-gods 
are  sometimes  conceived  as  a  narrower  group,  being  invoked  with  other 
groups,  such  as  the  Vasus  and  Adityas  (2,  3^)4. 

i  IS.  5,  240;    BRV.  2,  370;    BLOOMFIELD,   FaR.  151.    —    2   LRV.  6,  147;  cp. 

PERRY,  JAOS.  16,  178.  —  3  WEBER,  IS.  9,  6;  SPH.  23.  —  4  HRI.  137.  143,  note  i.  182. 


45-  GROUPS  OF  GODS.  —  H.  LOWER  DEITIES.    46.  RBHUS.  131 

H.   LOWER  DEITIES. 

§  46.  Rbhus.  -  -  Besides  the  higher  gods  of  the  Veda  there  are  a 
number  of  mythical  beings  not  regarded  as  having  the  divine  nature  fully 
and  originally.  The  most  important  of  these  are  the  Rbhus.  They  are  cele 
brated  in  eleven  hymns  of  the  RV.  and  are  mentioned  by  name  over  a 
hundred  times.  They  form  a  triad.  Their  individual  names,  which  often 
occur,  are  Rbhu  or  less  commonly  Rbhuksan  ('chief  of  the  Rbhus'),  Vaja, 
and  Vibhvan.  These  three  names  are  several  times  mentioned  together, 
sometimes  only  two  of  them,  while  occasionally  Rbhu  is  referred  to  alone. 
They  are  most  often  spoken  of  in  the  plural  as  rbhavah,  but  the  plural  of 
each  of  their  names  may  designate  the  triad.  Sometimes  the  plurals  of  all 
three  (4,  36^;  8,  481)  or  of  only  two  (Vdjd  Rbhuksanah  or  Vdjd  RbhavaJi) 
appear  to  be  used  together  pleonastically  to  indicate  the  trio.  Once  the  com 
bination  Vdjo  Vibhvdn  RbhavaJi  occurs  (4,  366j.  Occasionally  an  indefinite 
group  seems  to  be  meant,  as  all  (visve)  the  Rbhus  (7,  5i3),  or  Rbhu  with 
the  Rbhus,  Vibhvan  with  the  Vibhus  (7,  48 2)  are  invoked.  In  the  latter  passage 
Rbhu  and  Vibhvan  are  evidently  thought  of  as  chiefs  of  groups  of  the  same 
name.  The  three  Rbhus  are  once  distinguished  as  eldest,  younger,  and 
youngest  (4,  335). 

The  Rhbus  are  about  a  dozen  times  called  by  the  patronymic  name  of 
Saudhanvana,  sons  of  Sudhanvan,  'the  good  archer'.  They  are  also  once 
collectively  addressed  as  the  son  (suno)  of  Indra  (4,  374).  In  the  same  verse 
they  are  invoked  as  'children  of  might'  (savaso  napdtaJi),  as  if  a  play  on  the 
meaning  of  napdt  (also  'grandson')  were  intended,  in  contrast  with  the  epithet 
'son  of  might'  (savasah  sunu),  which  is  applied  exclusively  to  Indra.  The 
epithet  savaso  napdtaJi  is  almost  peculiar  to  them,  being  applied  to  them 
five  times  and  otherwise  only  once  to  Mitra-Varuna.  In  one  passage  (3,6o3) 
they  are  spoken  of  as  'children  of  Manu'  (manor  napdtaJi)  and  their  parents 
(pitara)  are  several  times  mentioned.  In  one  hymn  they  address  Agni.  as 
their  brother  (i,  i6iT-  3). 

They  are  very  frequently  invoked  to  come  to  the  sacrifice  (4,34*- 3.  371) 
and  to  drink  the  Soma  juice  (4,  344.  362;  7,  481).  Being  high  in  heaven  they 
are  besought  to  come  to  the  Soma  in  the  lower  abodes  (4,  37^).  In  this  they 
are  generally  associated  with  Indra  (3,  6o4~6;  4,  333.  346.  357),  a  few  times 
with  the  Maruts  (i,  20$.  in4;  4,  34"),  and  once  with  the  Adityas,  Savitr, 
Mountains,  and  Rivers  (4,348).  In  other  respects  also  they  are  closely  connected 
with  Indra.  They  are  Indra-like  (4,375)  and  Rbhu  is  like  a  new  Indra  (i,  no?). 
With  Indra  they  help  mortals  to  victory  (4,  376)  and  are  invoked  with  him 
to  crush  foes  (7,  48^).  They  are  said  to  have  obtained  the  friendship  of 
Indra  by  their  skilful  work  (3,  6o3;  4,  35?' 9);  for  it  is  they  who  fashioned 
his  steeds.  In  the  hymns  devoted  to  their  praise,  they  are  rarely  invoked 
with  gods  other  than  Indra,  there  being  only  one  such  passage  (4,  34®)  in 
which  Indra  is  not  mentioned  as  well.  Indra's  connexion  with  them  is  indeed 
so  characteristic,  that  he  is,  like  the  eldest  of  the  triad,  called  'chief  of  the 
Rbhus'  (rbhuksan\  a  term  also  two  or  three  times  applied  to  Indra's  asso 
ciates,  the  Maruts.  In  some  of  the  Visvedeva  hymns  they  are  brought  into 
connexion  with  a  few  other  gods,  chiefly  Tvastr. 

The  references  to  the  physical  aspect  or  the  equipment  of  the  Rbhus 
are  scanty.  They  are  of  sunlike  appearance  (i,  no4).  They  have  a  caj 
(i,i6i')»  which  is  drawn  by  steeds  (7,  481).  Their  car  is  bright,  their  steeds 
are  fat;  they  wear  metal  helmets  and  fair  necklaces  (4,  37^).  Rbhu  is  a 
possessor  of  steeds  (asvin\  4,  37$).  The  Rbhus  are  characteristically  deft- 

9* 


132     III.  RELIGION,  WELTL.  WISSENSCH.  u.  KUNST.     i  A.  VEDIC  MYTHOLOGY. 

handed  (suhastdh)  and  skilful  (apds,  suapas:  4,  331'8  &c.);  their  skilful  deeds 
being  incomparable  (3,  60-*).  They  are  frequently  said  to  have  acquired  the 
rank  of  gods  in  consequence  of  their  marvellous  skill.  Through  their  wondrous 
deeds  they  obtained  divinity  (3,  60 T).  By  their  skilful  deeds  they  became 
gods  and  immortal,  alighting  like  eagles  in  heaven  (4,  358).  They  are  men 
of  the  air  who  by  their  energy  mounted  to  heaven  (i,  no6).  For  their 
skilful  services  they  went  the  path  of  immortality  to  the  host  of  the  gods 
(4,  353),  obtaining  immortality  among  the  gods  and  their  friendship  (4,333>4. 
353.  364).  But  they  were  originally  mortals,  children  of  Manu,  who  by  their 
industry  acquired  immortality  (3,  6o3;  i,  no4).  The  AB.  (3,  3o2)  speaks  of 
them  as  men  who  by  austerity  (tapas)  obtained  a  right  to  partake  of  Soma 
among  the  gods.  The  gods  rejoiced  so  greatly  in  their  work,  that  Vaja 
became  the  artificer  of  the  gods,  Rbhuksan  of  Indra,  and  Vibhvan  of  Varuna 
(4>  339)-  They  went  to  the  gods  and  obtained  the  sacrifice,  or  a  share  of 
the  sacrifice,  among  the  gods  through  their  skilful  work  (i,  2ou8.  i2i6-  /). 
Thus  the  third  or  evening  pressing  or  libation  (savana)  belongs  to  them, 
they  having  obtained  it  by  their  skilful  work  (i,  i6i8;  4,  33".  344.  35°). 
They  are  thus  sometimes  expressly  invoked  as  gods  (4,  365.  37'). 

Like  the  higher  gods,  they  are  besought  to  give  prosperity  and  wealth 
(4?  338-  375X  m  cattle,  horses,  heroes  (4,  3410),  and  to  grant  vigour,  nourish 
ment,  offspring,  dexterity  (i,  in2).  They  grant  treasures  to  the  Soma  presser 
(1,20?;  4,356).  He  whom  they  help  is  invincible  in  fight  (4,  366),  and  Rbhu 
and  Vaja  are  besought  to  give  aid  and  booty  in  battle  (i,  n55). 

The  same  verb  taks,  to  fashion,  is  generally  used  with  reference  to  the 
manual  skill  of  the  Rbhus  as  to  that  of  Tvastr.  The  five  great  feats  of  dexterity 
by  which  they  became  gods,  are  spoken  of  with  pretty  uniform  frequency 
and  are  all  or  most  of  them  mentioned  in  nearly  every  hymn  dedicated  to 
their  praise.  They  fashioned  or  made  a  car  (i,  in1.  i6i3;  4,  338.  362), 
which  is  horseless,  reinless,  three-wheeled,  and  traverses  space  (4,  361).  The 
car  which  goes  round  they  fashioned  for  the  Asvins  (i,  2o3.  i6i6;  10,  3912). 
When  in  a  verse  (4,  349)  which  enumerates  each  of  their  feats  with  a  single 
word,  they  are  said  to  have  fashioned  the  Asvins  themselves,  this  appears 
to  be  only  a  loose  way  of  referring  to  the  same  exploit. 

For  Indra  they  fashioned  the  two  bay  steeds  (hari)  which  waft  him 
(4?  33 10  &c.).  It  appears  to  be  only  a  varied  reference  to  the  same  feat 
when  the  Rbhus  are  represented  as  desiring  to  make  a  horse  or  as  having 
made  one  horse  after  another  (i,  i6i3-?). 

They  further  fashioned  or  made  a  cow  (i,  i6i3;  4,  34$),  which  yields 
nectar  (i,  2o3)  and  is  all-stimulating  and  omniform  (4,  338).  This  cow  they 
formed  out  of  hide  (i,  no8)  or  extracted  (arinitd)  from  a  hide  (i,  i6i7&c.j. 
They  guarded  her  and  formed  her  flesh  (4,334).  That  they  formed  this  cow 
for  Brhaspati  may  be  inferred  from  a  verse  (i,  i6i6)  which  states  that  Indra 
yoked  the  two  bay  steeds  and  the  Asvins  the  car,  while  Brhaspati  drove  up 
the  omniform  (cow).  A  minor  feat,  only  twice  referred  to  and  perhaps  con 
nected  with  the  foregoing  one,  consists  in  their  having  re-united  the  mother 
with  her  calf  (i,  no8,  in1). 

The  Rbhus  also  rejuvenated  their  parents  (i,  2o4.  in1;  4,  355),  who 
were  frail  and  lay  like  decaying  posts  (i,  no8;  4,  33 2-3).  They  made  the 
two  who  were  old  young  again  (i,  i6i3-  7).  When  in  the  brief  enumeration 
of  their  feats  already  referred  to  (4,  349),  they  are  simply  said  to  have 
fashioned  their  parents,  the  same  feat  is  doubtless  meant.  It  was  their  laudable 
fame  among  the  gods,  that  they  made  their  frail  and  very  old  parents  young 
again  so  as  to  walk  (4,  36^).  In  the  first  verse  of  the  same  hymn  it  is  said 


LOWER  DEITIES.     46.  RBHUS.  133 

to  have  been  the  great  proclamation  of  their  divine  power,  that  they  made 
heaven  and  earth  to  thrive.  The  latter  thus  seem  to  be  intended  by  their 
parents. 

The  exhibition  of  skill  which  is  most  frequently  mentioned  and  appears 
to  have  been  thought  the  greatest,  as  showing  the  Rbhus  in  the  character  of 
successful  rivals  of  Tvastr,  consists  in  their  having  made  the  one  cup,  the 
work  of  Tvastr,  into  four  (i,  2o6.  no3;  4,  352-  3.  364).  This  cup  is  the 
drinking  vessel  of  the  gods  (i,  i6i5;  4,  355)  or  of  the  Asura  (i,  iio3).  The 
Rbhus  were  commissioned  by  the  gods  through  their  messenger  Agni,  to  make 
the  one  cup,  which  was  of  wood,  into  four,  promising  as  a  reward  that  they 
should  receive  worship  equally  with  the  gods  (i,  i6iT>  2).  Tvastr  praised 
(panayaf)  the  proposal  of  the  Rbhus  to  make  two,  three,  or  four  cups,  and 
acquiesced  (avenat)  when  he  saw  the  four  shining  cups  (4,  33$'  6).  But  in 
another  passage  it  is  said  that  Tvastr,  on  seeing  the  four  cups,  hid  himself 
among  the  females  and  desired  to  kill  the  Rbhus  for  desecrating  the  drinking 
vessel  of  the  gods  (i,  i6i4>  5),  though  the  Rbhus  in  a  previous  verse  of  the 
same  hymn  (v.  T)  disclairn  any  wish  to  desecrate  it.  They  are  described  as 
measuring  out  like  a  field  the  one  wide  drinking  vessel  (fiatra),  desiring 
fame  among  the  immortals  (i,no5).  The  same  feat  is  less  definitely  referred 
to  when  they  are  said  to  have  formed  or  fashioned  cups  (i,  i6i9;  3,  6o2 

cp.  4,  355)- 

The  skill  of  the  Rbhus  is  incidentally  exemplified  by  the  statement 
that  they  fashioned  prayer  (10,  8o7),  sacrifice  (3,  5412),  and  the  two  worlds 
(4,  349),  or  that  they  are  supporters  of  the  sky  (10,  6610). 

Another  myth  connects  the  Rbhus  with  Savitr.  They  are  said  to  have 
been  round  the  sky,  wind-sped,  in  swift  course  (4,  331  cp.  i,  i6i12).  After 
much  wandering  they  came  to  the  house  of  Savitr,  who  conferred  immortality 
on  them  when  they  came  to  Agohya  (i,  no2- 3).  When,  slumbering  for 
twelve  days,  they  had  rejoiced  in  the  hospitality  of  Agohya,  they  made  fair 
fields  and  directed  the  streams,  plants  occupied  the  arid  ground  and  waters 
the  lowlands  (4,  337).  By  their  skill  they  made  grass  on  the  heights  and 
waters  in  the  depths,  when  they  slumbered  in  the  house  of  Agohya  (i,  I6:11). 
Having  slept,  they  asked  Agohya  as  to  who  had  awakened  them;  in  a  year 
they  looked  around  (ib.  I3). 

The  word  rbhu  is  apparently  derived  from  the  root  rabh,  to  grasp  (cp. 
2,  38)1,  thus  meaning  'handy',  'dexterous'.  It  frequently  occurs  in  the  RV. 
as  an  adjective  and  is  several  times  thus  used  as  an  attribute  of  Indra,  Agni, 
and  the  Adityas.  It  seems  to  be  identical  with  the  German  elbe  and  the 
English  elf2.  Vaja  (from  the  root  vaj)  means  the  'vigorous  one' 3,  and 
Vibhvan4  (from  m  and  the  root  bhu),  'the  eminent'  (artist).  Thus  both  the 
name  of  the  Rbhus  and  the  account  given  of  them  in  the  RV.  indicate  that 
their  essential  character  is  that  of  skilful  artificers. 

It  is  clear  that  they  were  regarded  as  not  having  been  gods  from  the 
beginning.  Whether  their  close  connexion  with  Indra  has  in  any  way  to  do 
with  their  original  nature  is  doubtful.  It  is  also  uncertain  who  is  meant  by 
their  patronymic  Saudhanvana,  since  the  word  sudhanvan  occurs  only  twice 
in  the  RV.  as  an  attribute  of  Rudra  and  of  the  Maruts.  It  is,  however,  most 
probable  that  their  parents  who  are  mentioned  so  often,  represent  heaven 
and  earth5.  The  notion  that  they  produce  fertility  is  connected  with  their 
sojourn  of  twelve  days  in  the  house  of  Savitr  or  Agohya,  the  sun  'who 
cannot  be  concealed'6.  They  have  therefore  by  various  scholars 7  been  taken 
to  be  genii  of  the  three  seasons8,  which  are  at  a  stand-still  during  the  twelve 
days  of  the  winter  solstice.  The  cup  of  Tvastr  possibly  represents  the  moon, 


134     HI.  RELIGION,  WELTL.  WISSENSCH.  u.  KUNST.    i  A.  VEDIC  MYTHOLOGY. 

and  the  four  into  which  it  was  transformed  by  the  Rbhus,  its  four  phases. 
On  the  whole  it  seems  probable  that  the  Rbhus  were  originally  terrestrial  or 
aerial  elves,  whose  dexterity  gradually  attracted  to  them  various  myths  illu 
strative  of  marvelous  skill.  But  the  evidence  furnished  by  the  RV.  is  hardly 
sufficient  to  warrant  any  certain  conclusion. 

1  Cp.  WACKERNAGEL,  Altind.  Gr.  p.  70.  —  2  BRUGMANN,  Grundriss  2,  298;  cp. 
A.  KUHN,  KZ.  4,  103—20;  WACKERNAGEL,  KZ.  24,  297.  —  3  'Riches'  according  to 
BRV.  2,  407.  -  -  4  Cp.  OLDENBERG,  SEE.  46,  191.  -  -  5  A.  KUHN,  Entwicklungs- 
stufen  134;  AIL.  366.  —  6  WVB.  1894,  37,  note  3;  according  to  BRV.  3,  52,  'from 
whom  nothing  is  concealed'.  —  7  AIL.  1.  c. ;  LRV.  3,  335;  KRV.  53—4;  HVM. 
i,  515;  HVBP.  100.  -  -  8  According  to  WEBER,  1.  c.,  they  are  genii  of  creative 
time,  past,  present,  and  future;  according  to  BRV.  2,  412,  three  ancient  skilful 
sacrificers  who  acquired  immortality  and  whose  number  is  connected  with  the  triad 
of  sacrificial  fires. 

NEVE,  Essai  sur  le  Mythe  des  Ribhavas,  Paris  1847;  cp.  ROTH,  ZDMG.  2, 
126;  OST.  5,  226—7;  GKR.  119;  GRV.  i,  103;  BRV.  2,  403—13;  3,  51—5; 
GGH.  108.  no;  WC.  24—6;  E.  H.  MEYER,  Germanische  Mythologie  124;  An- 
zeiger  fur  deutsches  Altertum  13,  31—5;  ORV.  235—6  (cp.  L.  v.  SCHROEDEK, 
WZKM.  9,  253). 

§  47.  The  Apsarases.  —  Apsaras  denotes  a  kind  of  nymph  that  even 
in  the  RV.  appears  almost  completely  separated  from  her  physical  basis. 
The  information  there  obtainable  is  very  scanty,  as  the  name  occurs  only 
five  times.  The  Apsaras  smiles  at  her  beloved  (the  Gandharva  mentioned  in 
the  preceding  verse)  in  the  highest  heaven  (10,  i235).  Vasistha  was  born 
of  the  Apsaras  (7,  33I2j  and  the  Vasisthas  are  said  to  have  sat  close  to  the 
Apsarases  (ibid.  9).  The  Apsarases  of  the  sea  are  described  as  flowing  to 
Soma  (9,  y8J),  with  reference  to  the  water  which  is  mixed  with  the  juice. 
The  long-haired  ascetic  with  semi-divine  powers  is  spoken  of  as  able  to  move 
on  the  path  of  the  Apsarases  and  the  Gandharvas  (10,  i366).  The  Apsaras 
is  also  doubtless  meant  by  the  aqueous  nymph  (apyd  yosa),  the  wife  of  the 
Gandharva  in  the  waters  (10,  io4). 

More  is  said  about  the  Apsarases  in  the  AV.  Their  abode  is  in  the 
waters,  whence  they  come  and  go  in  a  trice  (AV.  2,2^);  and  they  are  besought 
to  depart  from  the  vicinity  of  men  to  the  river  and  the  bank  of  the  waters 
(AV.  4,  373).  The  goddesses  accompanying  the  Gandharva  Visvavasu  are 
described  as  connected  with  clouds,  lightning,  and  stars  (AV.  2,  24).  They 
are  expressly  called  wives  of  the  Gandharvas  (AV.  2,  25),  and  their  connexion 
with  the  latter  has  assumed  the  character  of  a  formula  in  the  later  Samhitas 
(VS.  30,  8;  AV.  8,  99,  &C.)1.  In  the  SB.  (n,  5,  i«)  the  Apsarases  are  de 
scribed  as  transforming  themselves  into  a  kind  of  aquatic  bird  (dtayaJr.  cp. 
RV.  9,  59).  In  the  post-Vedic  literature  they  are  very  often  spoken  of  as 
frequenting  forest  lakes  and  rivers,  espescially  the  Ganges,  and  they  are  found 
in  Varuna's  palace  in  the  ocean2.  The  etymological  meaning  of  the  word  is 
most  probably  'moving  in  the  waters'  3. 

The  above  evidence  indicates  that  the  oldest  conception  of  the  Apsaras 
is  that  of  a  celestial  water  nymph,  already  regarded  in  the  RV.  as  the  con 
sort  of  a  genius  named  Gandharva.  In  the  later  Samhitas  the  sphere  of  the 
Apsarases  extends  to  the  earth  and  in  particular  to  trees.  They  are  spoken 
of  as  inhabiting  banyans  (nyagrodhd]  and  sacred  fig-trees  (asvattha],  in  which 
their  cymbals  and  lutes  resound  (AV.  4,  374).  Elsewhere  the  same  trees  as 
well  as  other  varieties  of  the  fig-tree  (udumbara  and  plaksa)  are  said  to  be 
the  houses  of  Gandharvas  and  Apsarases  (TS.  3,  4,  84).  The  Gandharvas  and 
Apsarases  in  such  trees  are  entreated  to  be  propitious  to  a  passing  wedding 
procession  (AV.  14,  29)4.  jn  the  SB.  (n,  6,  i)  the  Apsarases  are  described 
as  engaged  in  dance,  song,  and  play.  Post-Vedic  texts  even  speak  of  mount- 


LOWER  DEITIES.     47.  THE  APSARASES.  135 

ains,  both  mythical  and  actual,  as  favourite  resorts  of  these  two  classes  of 
beings5.  The  AV.  adds  the  traits  that  the  Apsarases  are  fond  of  dice  and 
bestow  luck  at  play  (AV.  2,  25  &c.),  but  that  they  are  feared  especially  as 
causing  mental  derangement,  magic  therefore  being  employed  against  them 
(AV.  2,  3s  &c.). 

The  love  of  the  Apsarases,  who  are  of  the  great  beauty6  (cp.  86.13,4 
3 7« 8),  is  enjoyed  not  only  by  the  Gandharvas,  but  occasionally  even  by  men 
(cp.  10,  959).  A  myth  turning  on  such  a  union  is  related  of  at  least  one 
individual  Apsaras  in  Vedic  literature.  The  names  only  of  several  other 
Apsarases  are  there  mentioned.  The  AV.  refers  to  three,  Ugrajit,  Ugram- 
pasya,  and  Rastrabhrt  (AV.  16,  nS1-2),  while  the  VS.,  airing  several  others, 
speaks  of  Urvasi  and  Menaka  (VS.  15,  15 — 19).  The  SB.  (3,  4,  i22)  also 
specifies  Sakuntala,  the  ancestress  of  the  royal  family  of  the  Bharatas?  (SB. 
13,  5,  4T3),  as  well  as  UrvasT  (SB.  u,  5,  i1).  ^ 

The  only  one  of  these  names  occurring  in  the  RV.  is  that  of  Urvasi. 
That  she  was  there  regarded  as  an  Apsaras,  appears  from  the  fact  that; 
Vasistha  is  said  in  one  verse"  to  have  been  born  of  Urvasi  and,  in  the  next,! 
of  an  Apsaras  (7,  3311' I2).  She  is  once  invoked  with  the  streams  (5,  4iI<?). 
Her  name  is  otherwise  only  mentioned8  twice  in  a  late  and  obscure  hymn 
(10,  95IC-  X7),  which  consists  of  a  dialogue  between  her  and  her  lover  Puru 
ravas,  son  of  Ila.  She  is  there  described  as  aqueous  (apyd),  as  filling  the 
atmosphere,  and  traversing  space  (the  latter  expression  is  also  applied  to  the 
celestial  Gandharva  in  10,  i395).  She  is  said  to  have  spent  four  autumns 
among  mortals  (v.  l6)  and  is  besought  to  return  (V.  I7)-  The  request  is  ap 
parently  refused;  but  Pururavas  receives  the  promise  that  his  offspring  shall 
worship  the  gods  with  the  offering,  while  he  himself  shall  enjoy  bliss  in 
heaven  (svarga:  v.  l8).  Several  verses  of  this  hymn  find  their  setting  in  a 
continous  story  told  in  the  SB.  (n,  5,  i),  which  fills  in  details  partly  based 
on  a  misunderstanding  of  the  text  of  RV.  It  is  there  related  that  the  Apsaras 
Urvasi  joins  herself  with  Pururavas,  son  of  Ila,  in  an  alliance,  the  permanence 
of  which  depends  on  the  condition  that  she  shall  never  see  him  naked.  The 
Gandharvas  by  a  stratagem  produce  a  noise  during  the  night.  Pururavas 
springs  up  naked,  when  he  is  seen  by  Urvasi  illuminated  by  a  flash  of  light 
ning.  Urvasi  vanishes  forthwith.  Pururavas  wanders  about  in  search  of  her, 
till  he  at  last  observes  her  swimming  in  a  lotus  lake  with  other  Apsarases 
in  the  form  of  an  aquatic  bird.  Urvasi  discovers  herself  to  him  and,  in 
response  to  his  entreaties,  consents  to  receive  him  for  one  night  a  year  later9. 
He  returns  at  the  appointed  time,  and  on  the  following  day  the  Gandharvas 
grant  him  the  boon  of  becoming  one  of  themselves  by  producing  fire  in  a 
particular  way.  Excepting  10,  95,  the  name  of  Pururavas,  which  means 
'calling  aloud',  occurs  only  in  one  passage  of  the  RV.  (i,  31*),  where  Agni 
is  said  to  have  caused  the  sky  to  thunder  (vdsaya)  for  the  righteous  man 
(manave)  Pururavas.  The  word  may  here,  however,  have  the  adjectival 
sense.  Pururavas  and  Urvasi  have  by  some  scholars10  been  interpreted  as 
sun  and  dawn. 

1  See  PW.  s.  v.  gandharva.  —  2  HOLTZMANN,  ZDMG.  33,  635.  641.  —  3  Ex 
plained  by  YN.  5,  13  by  ap-sarim;  cp.  MEYER,  Indogermanische  Mythen  l,  183; 
GGH.  10 ;  PVS.  I,  79  cp.  183  ff.';  LUDWIG,  Methode  91;  otherwise  WEBER,  IS.  13, 
I35>  GW.,  BURY,  BB.  7,  339.  -  -  4  HAAS,  IS.  5,  394;  13,  136;  E.  H.  MEYER,  op. 
cit.  13.  —  5  HOLTZMANN,  ZDMG.  33,  640  f.;  v.  SCHROEDER,  op.  cit.  67;  MANN- 
HARDT,  Wald-  und  Feldkulte  I,  99  ff.  —  6  in  the  Epic  period  the  Apsarases  have 
become  regular  celestial  courtesans.  — 7  Cp.  WEBER,  IS.  i,  198 — 201;  HOLTZMANN, 
ZDMG.  33,  635  f. ;  LEUMANN,  ZDMG.  48,  80—2;  v.  BRADKE,  ibid.  498  ff.  —  8  Cp. 
OLDENBERG,  SEE.  46,  323.  —  9  They  have  a  son  named  Ayu:  cp.  KHF.  65.  71; 


136     III.  RELIGION,  WELTL.  WISSENSCH.  u.  KUNST.     i  A.  VEDIC  MYTHOLOGY. 

IS.  i,  197;  GVS.  i,  283;  BRV.  2,  324;   OLDENBERG,  SEE.  46,  28.    -  •    10  WEBER, 
IS.   I,   196;  MM.,  Oxford  Essays  p.  61 ;  Essays   i,  408  —  10;  Chips  42,  109  f. 

LASSEN,  Indische  Alterthumskunde  1,432,  note  2;  KHF.  71  —  8;  ROTH,  Nirukta 
155—6;  GRV.  2,  488;  BRV.  2,  90—6;  v.  SCHROEDER,  op.  cit.  i,  23—39  (cp.  WZKM. 
9,  253);  OLDENBERG,  ZDMG.  37,  81 ;  39,  52  n.  4.  73—6;  GGA.  1890,  420  flf.; 
GVS.  i,  243  —  95;  SIECKE,  Die  Liebesgeschichte  des  Himmels,  Strassburg  1892 
(Urvasl  =  moon);  HRI.  137. 

§  48.  Gandharvas.  —  With  the  Apsaras  or  Apsarases  are  associated 
even  in  the  RV.,  as  has  been  shown,  a  male  being  or  beings  named  Gan- 
dharva.  Of  the  twenty  occurrences  of  the  word  in  the  RV.  only  three  are 
in  the  plural,  while  of  the  thirty-two  occurrences  in  the  AV.  half  are  in  the 
plural.  The  name  is  found  a  few  times  in  the  Avesta  as  Gandarewa1  (a 
dragon -like  monster)  and  only  in  the  singular.  This  points  to  the  Gandharvas 
as  a  class  having  been  gradually  developed  from  a  single  being.  In  the  later 
Samhitas  they  are  spoken  of  as  forming  a  distinct  class  by  the  side  of  Gods, 
Fathers  and  Asuras  (AV.  n,  52;  TS.  7,  8,  252).  Their  number  is  fixed  as  27 
in  some  Yajus  texts  and  is  even  said  to  be  6333  in  the  AV.  (n,  52)2. 
The  fact  that  the  conception  goes  back  to  the  Indo-Iranian  period,  accounts 
to  some  extent  for  its  obscurity.  The  evidence  of  the  RV.  is,  moreover,  so 
scanty  and  vague  that  no  certain  result  as  to  its  definite  original  character 
is  attainable.  It  is  worthy  of  note  that  the  name  is  found  only  once  in 
books  II  to  VII,  while  in  book  VIII  it  occurs  twice  as  that  of  a  being  hostile 
to  Indra.  The  word  seems  sometimes  to  be  only  an  appellative 3.  It  is 
occasionally  accompanied  by  the  epithet  visvdvasu,  'possessing  all  goods' 
(9,  8636;  10,  i394-  5;  AV.  2,  2*;  VS.  2,  3).  This  epithet  is  in  one  hymn 
used  alone  to  designate  Gandharva  (10,  85"-  22  cp.  4°-  4I);  and  in  the  later 
Samhitas,  the  Brahmanas,  and  the  post-Vedic  literature,  it  frequently  occurs 
as  the  name  of  an  individual  Gandharva. 

In  the  RV.  Gandharva  seems  to  be  localized  in  the  high  region  of  air 
or  sky.  He  is  a  measurer  of  space  (10,  i395).  He  is  found  in  the  fathom 
less  spaces  of  air  (8,  665).  He  is  heavenly  (divyd)  and  stands  erect  on  the 
vault  of  heaven  (10,  I237).  He  is  the  lover  on  whom  the  Apsaras  smiles 
(ib.  5).  His  abode  is  in  heaven  (AV.  2,  21-  2)  and  the  Blest  live  with  the 
Gandharvas  (AV.4, 343).  In  several  passages  Gandharva  is  closely  connected  with 
some  form  of  celestial  light.  Thus  he  is  brought  into  relation  with  the  sun, 
'the  golden-winged  bird,  the  messenger  of  Varuna'  (10,  I236),  with  the  sun- 
bird  (10,  i772),  with  the  sun-steed  (i,  i632),  with  Soma  likened  to  the  sun 
(9?  8512)'  He  is  further  connected  with  the  27  stars  of  the  moon's  orbit 
(VS.  9,  7)  and  in  particular  with  Rohini  (AV.  13,  i23).  He  is  possibly  also 
associated  with  the  rainbow4  in  one  hymn  of  the  RV.  (10,  123).  In  the  VS. 
(18,  38  ff.)  the  Gandharvas  are  enumerated  with  Agni,  Sun,  Moon,  and  Wind. 
In  post-Vedic  literature  one  of  the  names  of  the  mirage  is  'city  of  the 
Gandharvas' 5. 

Gandharva  is,  moreover,  in  the  RV.  often  associated  (chiefly  in  the  ninth 
book)  with  Soma.  He  guards  the  place  of  Soma  and  protects  the  races  of 
the  gods  (9,  834  cp.  i,  2214).  Observing  all  the  forms  of  Soma,  he  stands 
on  the  vault  of  heaven  (9,  85* 2).  Together  with  Parjanya  and  the  daughter 
of  the  sun,  the  Gandharvas  cherish  Soma  (9,  H33).  Through  Gandharva's 
mouth  the  gods  drink  their  draught  (AV.  7,  733).  The  MS.  (3,  810)  states 
that  the  Gandharvas  kept  Soma  for  the  gods,  but  having  allowed  it  to  be 
stolen,  were  as  a  punishment  excluded  from  the  Soma  draught.  Doubtless 
owing  to  this  association  with  Soma,  Gandharva  is  described  as  knowing 
plants  (AV.  4,  41).  It  is  probably  as  a  jealous  guardian  of  Soma  that  Gan 
dharva  in  the  RV.  appears  as  a  hostile  being,  who  is  pierced  by  Indra  in 


LOWER  DEITIES.     48.  GANDHARVAS.  137 

the  regions  of  air  (8,  665)  or  whom  Indra  is  invoked  to  overcome  (8,  i11). 
For  in  a  later  text  Soma  is  besought  to  elude  the  Gandharva  Visvavasu  in 
the  form  of  an  eagle  (TS.  i,2,9T).  Soma  is  further  said  to  have  dwelt  among 
the  Gandharvas  or  to  have  been  stolen  by  the  Gandharva  Visvavasu,  but  to 
have  been  bought  from  the  Gandharvas,  as  they  were  fond  of  females,  at  the 
price  of  the  goddess  Vac  (AB.  i,  27;  TS.  6,  i,  65;  MS.  3,  73).  The  trait  of 
hostility  appears  to  be  old,  for  in  the  Avesta  (Yt.  5,  38)  the  hostile  Ganda- 
rewa,  dwelling  in  the  sea  Vourukasa,  the  abode  of  the  white  Haoma,  is  fought 
with  and  overcome  by  Keresaspa.  Moreover,  the  archer  Krsanu,  who  shoots 
at  the  eagle  that  carries  off  the  Soma  (RV.  4,  27^),  appears  to  be  a  Gan 
dharva6,  being  expressly  said  to  be  one  in  TA.  i,  9'. 

Gandharva  is  sometimes  connected  with  the  waters.  'Gandharva  in  the 
waters'  and  the  'aqueous  nymph'  are  alluded  to  as  the  parents  of  Yama  and 
Yam!  (10,  lo4).  Soma  poured  into  water  is  called  'the  Gandharva  of  the 
waters'  (9,  8636).  Gandharva,  connected  with  the  Apsarases,  is  also  said  to 
dwell  in  the  waters  in  the  AV.  (2,  23;  4,  3712).  In  the  Avesta  Gandarewa  is 
a  lord  of  the  abyss  who  dwells  in  the  waters  (Yt.  15,  28). 

The  union  of  Gandharva  with  the  water  nymph  is  typical  of  marriage. 
He  is  therefore  connected  with  the  wedding  ceremony,  and  the  unmarried 
maiden  is  said  to  belong  to  Gandharva  as  well  as  to  Soma  and  Agni  (10, 
3540-1).  The  Gandharva  Visvavasu  in  the  first  days  of  wedlock  is  regarded 
as  a  rival  of  the  husband  (ib.  22),  and  the  Gandharvas'  love  of  women  is 
prominent  in  later  texts  (cp.  MS.  3,  73).  The  Gandharvas  and  Apsarases  thus 
preside  over  fertility  and  are  prayed  to  by  those  who  desire  offspring  (PB. 

19,  32)- 

Of  the  conception  of  the  Gandharvas  being  celestial  singers,  which  appears 
in  the  Epics  and  later,  there  seems  to  be  no  distinct  trace  in  the  RV.  (cp. 
10,  i772.  ii2). 

There  are  only  two  or  three  references  to  their  physical  appearance  in 
the  RV.  They  are  wind-haired  (3,  386)  and  Gandharva  has  brilliant  weapons 
(10,  i237).  The  AV.  is  more  definite  (especially  4,  37;  8,  61  ff.).  Here  they 
are  said  to  be  shaggy  and  to  have  half  animal  forms,  being  in  many  ways 
dangerous  to  men.  Elsewhere,  however,  they  are  spoken  of  as  handsome 
(SB.  13,  4,  37-  8).  The  RV.  adds  the  touch  that  Gandharva  wears  a  fragrant 
(surabhi]  garment  (10,  1237),  while  in  the  AV.  (12,  i23)  the  odour  (gandha) 
of  the  earth  is  said  to  rise  to  the  Gandharvas. 

This  suggests  the  derivation  from  gandha  as  possible.  But  such  an  ety 
mology,  even  if  true,  would  seem  to  shed  no  light  on  the  original  conception. 
The  name  has  even  been  identified  with  Ksvraupo;;  but  in  order  to  justify 
this  equation  the  aid  of  popular  etymology  has  to  be  called  in  7  as  well  as 
the  doubtful  epenthesis  of  u  assumed  in  the  Greek  word8.  The  two  con 
ceptions,  moreover,  appear  to  have  nothing  in  common.  The  utmost,  from 
a  review  of  the  evidence,  it  seems  possible  to  say  about  the  original  nature 
of  the  Gandharva  is,  that  he  was  a  bright  celestial  being,  sometimes  thought 
of  as  dwelling  in  the  waters  with  his  spouse  the  Apsaras.  Various  conjectures 
have,  however,  been  made  by  different  scholars.  Some  regard  the  Gandharvas 
as  wind-spirits9,  others  think  that  Gandharva  represents  the  rainbow10,  or  a 
genius  of  the  moon11,  or  Soma12,  or  the  rising  sun13,  or  a  cloud-spirit14. 

1  Yasht  5,  37;    19,  41;    cp.   SP  AP.  276;    BARTHOLOMAE,    ZDMG.  42,  158.  - 
2  WVB.   1894,  p.  34.  —  3  HVM.   i,  427.  —  4  Disputed  by  BERGAIGNE  and  HILLE- 
BRANDT;    cp.  ORV.  246,  note   l.    —    5  See  PW.  s.  v.  gandharva-nagara,   -pura.  - 
6  KHF.  151  —  2;    WVB.   1894,  7—9  (cp.   1888,    p.   13,  n.);    as  to  Krsanu,    cp.  also 
WEBER,  IS.  2,  313—4;  KUHN  in  KZ.  i,  523;  ROTH,  ZDMG.  36,  359;  BRV.  3,  30 ff.; 
Sp.AP,  223—4;  BLOOMFIELD,  JAOS.  16,  20;  ORV.  181.  —  7  v.  SCHROEDER,  GGH.  73; 


138     III.  RELIGION,  WELTL.  WISSENSCH.  u.  KUNST.      i  A.  VEDIC  MYTHOLOGY. 

MEYER,  Indog.  Mythen   164  f.  --    8  Cp.  BRUGMANN,  Grundriss   I,  481.  —    9  MANN- 
HARDT  201;  MEYER,  op.  cit.  i,  219  f.;  v.  SCHROEDER,  op.  cit.  71;  HVM.  I,  446.— 

10  ROTH,    Nir.  Erl.    145;    GRV.   2,  400;    DPV.  253;    KIRSTE,    WZKM.  9,  164.  - 

11  PW.;    LRV.   4,    158;    HRI.    157.    -   -    12    BRV.  2,  38  ff.    -  -    13  WC.  34.  36  cp. 
LRF.   10 1.  —  14  KHF.  153. 

A.  KUHN,  KZ.  i,  513  ff.;  WEBER,  IS.  i,  90;  5,  185.  210;  13,  I34f.;  MEYER, 
op.  cit.  11—2.16—8.23.55.  179;  BRV.  3,  64—7;  PVS.  i,  77—81;  Sp.AP.  210—15; 
HVM.  i,  427—66;  ORV.  244—9;  ZDMG.  49,  178—9. 

§  49.  Tutelary  Deities.  —  The  name  of  Vastos  pati  occurs  only 
seven  times  in  the  RV.,  and  one  hymn  of  three  stanzas  (7,  54)  is  devoted 
to  his  praise.  He  is  there  invoked  to  grant  a  favourable  entry,  to  remove 
disease,  to  bless  man  and  beast,  to  confer  prosperity  in  cattle  and  horses, 
and  always  to  afford  protection.  In  the  first  verse  of  the  hymn  immediately 
following  (7,  551)  he  is  described  as  a  destroyer  of  disease,  who  assumes  all 
forms.  He  is  once  (7.  542)  identified  with  Soma,  being  addressed  as  Indu. 
In  a  verse  of  a  hymn  to  the  All-gods  (5,  41 8)  he  is  invoked  in  immediate 
juxtaposition  with  Tvastr  and  is  perhaps  identified  with  him  as  the  great 
artificer.  In  another  verse  (8,  i714)  he  is  called  a  firm  pillar,  a  cuirass  of 
Soma-pressers,  and  seems  to  be  identified  with  Indra.  In  the  only  passage 
of  the  tenth  book  which  mentions  him,  he  is  spoken  of  as  the  observer  of 
ordinances  who,  along  with  prayer  (brahmct),  was  fashioned  by  the  gods  (10, 
6 17).  According  to  GELDNERX  Rudra  is  here  meant,  Vastospati  being  an 
epithet  of  that  god  in  TS.  3,40,  io3.  Though  identified  with  various  deities  in 
the  above  passages,  there  seems  no  sufficient  reason  to  suppose  that  the 
name  was  originally  attached  to  any  one  particular  greater  deity  as  an  epithet 
(like  grhapati  to  Agni).  The  Grhya  Sutras  (AGS.  2,  99;  SGS.  3,  4;  PGS. 
3,  47)  prescribe  that  Vastospati  is  to  be  propitiated  when  a  new  house  is  to 
be  entered.  This,  together  with  the  contents  of  the  hymn  devoted  to  his 
praise,  points  to  his  having  been  simply  a  tutelary  deity  of  the  house2,  as 
the  name  itself  'Lord  of  the  dwelling'  implies.  He  thus  seems  to  be  one  of 
the  lower  order  of  deities  which  in  primitive  beliefs  animate,  inhabit,  or  preside 
over  natural  objects  such  as  trees  and  mountains. 

To  the  same  order  belongs  Ksetrasya  pati  the  tutelary  deity  of  the 
field.  He  is  invoked,  in  the  first  three  verses  of  4,  57,  to  grant  cattle  and 
horses  as  well  as  to  fill  heaven  and  earth,  plants  and  waters  with  sweetness  3. 
In  a  verse  of  a  hymn  to  the  All-gods  (7,  35™)  he  is  besought,  along  with 
Savitr,  the  Dawns,  and  Parjanya,  to  bestow  prosperity.  In  a  similar  hymn 
(10,  66I3),  worshippers  express  a  desire  to  have  him  as  a  neighbour.  The 
Grhya  Sutras  state  that  r  he  is  sacrificed  to  or  worshipped  when  a  field  is 
ploughed  (AGS.  2,  io+;  SGS.  4,  i35).  In  one  verse  of  a  hymn  addressed  to 
agricultural  deities  (4,576)  Slta,  the  Furrow,  is  invoked  to  grant  rich  blessings 
and  crops.  Sita  later  appears  (PGS.  2,  179)  as  the  wife  of  Indra  (perhaps 
because  that  god  is  once  in  the  RV.  called  urvarapati,  'lord  of  the  field': 
8,  2i3  cp.  4,  577)  and  bears  the  patronymic  Savitrl  (TB.  2,  3,  zo1).  In  the 
Sutra  passage  just  mentioned  the  blessings  of  Urvara,  the  arable  Field,  de 
scribed  as  'having  a  garland  of  threshing-floors',  are  invoked. 

i  FaW.  21;  V.  =  Agni,  WC.  22.   --    2  Cp.  BLOOMFIELD,  SEE.  42,  343—4.  - 

3  PERRY,  DRISLER  Memorial  241,   thinks  Pusan  is  probably  meant.     Cp.  WINDISCH, 

Berichte  der  k.  sachs.  Gesellschaft   1892,  p.   174;  ORV.  254 — 5. 

IV.     MYTHICAL  PRIESTS  AND  HEROES. 

§  50.    Manu.  As  the  appellation  Manu  or  Manus  is  often  used  in 

the  sense  of  'man',  there  is  sometimes  an  uncertainty  as  to  when  it  has  the 
value  of  a  proper  name  in  the  RV.   It  appears  to  have  the  latter  signification 


49- TUTELARY  DEITIES.  —  IV.  MYTHICAL  PRIESTS  AND  HEROES.  50.  MANU.     139 

nearly  twenty  times  in  the  form  of  Manu  and  almost  as  often  in  that  of 
Manus.  Manu  is  five  times  styled  a  father,  and  in  two  of  these  passage's 
more  definitely  as  'our  father'  (2,  33^  &c.;  cp.  §  9).  Sacrificers  are  spoken 
of  as  the  people  (vis'afy)  of  Manus  (4,  37 x  &c.)  and  Agni  is  said  to  abide 
among  the  offspring  of  Manu  (i,  684).  Manu  was  the  institutor  of  sacrifice. 
For  when  he  had  kindled  the  fire,  he  presented  the  first  offering  with  the 
seven  priests  to  the  gods  (10,  637).  The  sacrifice  of  Manu  is  the  prototype 
of  the  present  sacrifice.  For  the  latter  is  compared  to  the  sacrifice  which 
Manus  offered  to  the  gods  (i,  76$).  Such  comparisons  are  frequently  made 
with  the  adverb  manusvat^  'like  Manus'.  Worshippers  make  Agni  the  accom- 
plisher  of  sacrifice,  as  Manus  did  (i;  44").  They  kindle  Agni  like  Manus 
(5,  21 '  &c.).  Like  Manus,  they  invoke  Agni  who  was  kindled  by  Manu  (7,  23). 
They  offer  Soma  as  Manus  did  (4,  373).  Soma  is  prayed  to  flow  as  he  once 
flowed  for  Manu  (9, 9612).  Manu  established  Agni  as  a  light  for  all  people  (i,  3619). 
Manu  is  also  mentioned  with  other  ancient  sacrificers,  with  Angiras  and  Yayati 
(i,  3 117)?  with  Bhrgu  and  Angiras  (8,  4313),  with  Atharvan  and  Dadhyanc 
(i,  8ol6);  with  Dadhyanc,  Angiras,  Atri  and  Kanva  (i,  I399).  The  gods 
(i,3610),  Matarisvan  (i,i282),  Matarisvan  and  the  gods  (io,469),  and  Kavya 
Usana1  (8,  23*?)  are  said  to  have  given  Agni  to  Manu  or  to  have  instituted 
him  a  sacrificer  for  Manu.  In  the  last  four  passages  the  word  has  perhaps 
only  the  appellative  meaning  of  'man'. 

Indra  is  said  to  have  drunk  Soma  beside  Manu  Vivasvat  (Val.  41)  or 
Manu  Samvarani  (Val.  31),  and  to  have  drunk  the  Soma  of  Manus,  three 
lakes,  to  strengthen  himself  for  the  Vrtra-nght  (5,  29").  Soma  is  said  to  have 
been  brought  to  Manu  by  the  bird  (4,  26*).  In  the  TS.  and  the  SB.  Manu 
is  also  frequently  described  as  a  celebrator  of  religious  ceremonies. 

Manu  appears  to  have  been  regarded  as  the  son  of  Vivasvat  even  in 
the  RV.;  for  he  is  once  (Val.  41  cp.  31)  called  Manu  Vivasvat  (cp.  p.  42).  In 
the  AV.  (8,  io24)  and  the  SB.  (13,4,3^),  as  well  as  in  post-Vedic  literature, 
he  bears  the  regular  patronymic  Vaivasvata.  Yama  also  is  a  son  of  Vivasvat, 
and  the  first  of  mortals.  Manu  is  thus  a  doublet  of  Yama  as  ancestor  of 
the  human  race2.  But  Manu  is  regarded  as  the  first  of  men  living  on  earth, 
while  Yama,  as  first  of  men  who  died,  became  the  king  of  the  dead  in  the 
other  world.  Hence  in  the  SB.  (13,  4,  33~5)  Manu  Vaivasvata  is  described 
as  ruler  of  men,  and  Yama  Vaivasvata  as  ruler  of  the  Manes.  Yaska  (Nir. 
12,  10)  explains  Manu  to  be  the  son  of  Vivasvat,  the  sun  (Adityd),  and  of 
Savarna  the  substitute  of  Saranyu  (cp.  10,  i72;  p.  125),  counting  him  (Nir. 
12,  34)  among  the  divine  beings  of  the  celestial  region  (Naigh.  5,  6). 

The  SB.  (i,  8,  ix~10)  relates  a  legend  of  how  Manu  was  saved  in  a  ship 
from  a  deluge,  which  swept  away  all  other  creatures,  by  a  fish  (in  post-Vedic 
mythology  an  Avatar  of  Visnu).  Manu  is  then  said  to  have  become  the 
progenitor  of  mankind  through  his  daughter  Ida,  who  was  produced  from  his 
offerings.  That  the  story  of  the  flood  was  known  as  early  as  the  time  of 
the  AV.  is  implied  in  a  passage  of  that  Sajnhita^Or^  J9 8) 3.  The  myth  of  the 
deluge  occurs  in  the  Avesta  also,  and  may  be  Indo-European4.  It  is  generally 
regarded  as  borrowed  from  a  Semitic  sources,  but  this  seems  to  be  an  un 
necessary  hypothesis6. 

i  An  ancient  sage  and  sacrificer,  see  §  58  B.  —  2  Possibly  ancestor  of  the  Aryans 
only,  as  he  is  in  several  passages  contrasted  with  Dasyus,  cp.  OST.  I,  174;  Sp.AP. 
272.  -  -  3-  HKUI6O.  -  -  4  LINDNER,  Die  iranische  Flutsage,  FaR.  213—6.  — 
5-B.UEN.oup,  Bhagavata  Purana,  preface,  LI  — LIV;  WEBER,  IS.  i,  160  ft;  Sp.AP.  271—4; 
ORV.  276  note."—  6  MM.,  India  133—8-,  HRI.  160. 

KHF.  21;  KZ.  4,  QijTIokssEx,  KZ.  2,32;  WEBER,  IS.  i,  194;  ZDMG.  4,302; 
18,  286;  ROTH,  ZDMG.  4,  430;  ZDMG.  5,  525  ff.;  KZ.  12,  293;  19,  156;  ASCOLI, 


140     III.  RELIGION,  WELTL.  WISSENSCH.  u.  KUNST.    i  A.  VEDIC  MYTHOLOGY. 


KZ.   17,  334;    Mum,  JRAS.  1863,  410—16;  1865,  287ff.;    OST.  i,  162—96;    BRV. 
i,  62—70;  ORV.  275—6;  HRI.  143. 

§51.  Bhrgus.  •  •  Bhrgu  is  a  name  met  with  twenty-one  times  in  the 
RV.,  besides  two  occurrences  in  the  adverbial  form  bhrguvat.  It  is  found 
only  once  in  the  singular;  and  appears  therefore  to  have  properly  designated 
a  group  of  mythical  beings.  Mentioned  twelve  times  in  Agni  hymns,  they 
are  chiefly  connected  with  the  communication  of  fire  to  men.  Matarisvan 
brought  Agni  as  a  treasure  to  Bhrgu  (i,  601)  or  kindled  the  hidden  Agni 
for1  the  Bhrgus  (3,  510).  Matarisvan  and  the  gods  fashioned  Agni  for  Manu, 
while  the  Bhrgus  with  might  produced  him  (10,  469).  The  Bhrgus  found 
Agni  lurking  in  the  waters  (ip,  462);  worshipping  him  in  the  waters,  they 
placed  him  in  the  abodes  of  Ayu  or  man  (2,  42  cp.  4).  They  established  Agni 
like  a  friend  well-deposited  in  the  wood  (6,i52)  or  as  a  treasure  among  men 
(i,  586).  For  Agni  is  the  Bhrgus'  gift  (3,  2 4).  Rubbing  him  they  invoked 
him  with  prayer  (i,  1277).  With  songs  of  praise  they  caused  him  to  shine 
forth  (10,  1225)  in  wood  (4,  71).  They  brought  him  to  the  navel  (cp.  p.  92) 
of  the  earth  (i,  i434).  While  Atharvan  established  rites  with  sacrifices,  the 
Bhrgus  showed  themselves  as  gods  with  their  dexterity  (10,  9210).  Their  skill, 
primarily  manifested  in  producing  fire,  is  incidentally  spoken  of  as  artistic.  For 
worshippers  make  a  prayer  for  Indra  or  the  Asvins  as  the  Bhrgus  (made)  a 
car  (4,  i620;  10,  39'4). 

They  are  an  ancient  race.  For  sacrificers  speak  of  them,  together  with 
the  Angirases  and  Atharvans,  as  their  Soma-loving  fathers  (10,  14°)  and  in 
voke  Agni  as  the  Bhrgus  (bhrgitvat),  the  Angirases,  and  Manu  did  (8, 43 13). 
They  implore  Indra  to  hear  their  prayer  like  those  of  the  Yatis  and  Bhrgus 
(8,  6l8),  or  to  aid  them  as  he  did  the  Yatis,  Bhrgus,  and  Praskanva  (8,  3?). 
The  Bhrgus  are  mentioned,  along  with  the  Druhyus  and  Turvasa,  as  the  foes 
of  king  Sudas  (7,  18°).  In  the  last  three  passages  their  name  appears  in 
the  historical  character  of  the  designation  of  a  tribe.  The  Bhrgus  are  in 
voked  to  drink  soma  with  all  the  thirty-three  gods,  the  Maruts,  the  Waters, 
the  Asvins,  lisas,  and  Surya  (8,  353).  They  are  compared  with  suns  and 
said  to  have  gained  all  their  desires  (8,  3l6).  In  one  passage  (9,  ioiJ3)  they 
are  connected  with  an  unknown  myth,  when  worshippers  express  a  wish  to 
drive  away  the  niggardly,  as  the  Bhrgus  the  demon  (makham\ 

Thus  the  Bhrgus  never  designate  actually  existing  priests  in  the  RV.,  but 
only  a  group  of  ancient  sacrificers  and  ancestors,  to  which  Bhrgu  bears  the 
relation  of  chief,  just  as  Angiras  does  to  the  group  of  the  Angirases,  or 
Vasistha  to  that  of  the  Vasisthas. 

The  myth  of  the  descent  of  fire  and  its  communication  to  man  is  chiefly 
connected  with  Matarisvan  and  the  Bhrgus.  But  while  Matarisvan  brings  it 
from  heaven  as  lightning,  the  Bhrgus  do  not  fetch  it,  but  are  rather  regarded 
as  kindling  it  for  the  establishment  and  diffusion  of  the  sacrifice  on  earth. 

In  the  later  Vedic  literature  Bhrgu  occurs  as  the  name  of  a  seer  re 
presenting  a  tribe  (AV.  5,  19*;  AB.  2,  20?).  He  arises  as  a  spark  from  Pra- 
japati's  seed  and  being  adopted  by  Varuna  receives  the  patronymic  Varuni 
(AB.  3,  341  cp.  PB.  1 8,  91)  and  is  expressly  called  a  son  of  Varuna  (SB. 
n,6,  i1)2. 

Etymologically  the  word  bhrgu  means  'shining'  from  the  root  bhraj,  'to 
shine'.  BERGAIGNE^  thinks  there  can  hardly  be  a  doubt  that  bhrgu  was 
originally  a  name  of  fire,  while  KUHN*  and  BARTHS  agree  in  the  opinion  that 
the  form  of  fire  it  represents  is  lightning.  KuHN6  and  WEBER7  further  identify 
the  Bhrgus  as  fire-priests  with  the  Greek  <pXey6at. 

1  Cp.  OLDENBERG,  SEE.  46,  243.  —  2  WEBER,  ZDMG.  9,  240  ff.  —  3  BRV.  i, 


MYTHICAL  PRIESTS  &c.     51.  BHRGUS.     52.  ATHARVAN.    53.  DADHYANC.     141 

52—6;  cp.  HOPKINS,  JAOS.  16,  280.  —  4  KHF.  9—14.  —    5  BRI.  10.  —  6  KHF. 
2i—2.  —  7  ZDMG.  9,  242.  —  OST.  i,  170;  ORV.  123;  HRI.  168. 

§  52.  Atharvan.  -  -  The  name  of  Atharvan  occurs  fourteen  times  in 
the  RV.,  thrice  in  the  plural,  and  is  also  several  times  found  in  the  AV. 
Atharvan  generally  appears  in  the  character  of  an  ancient  priest.  He  rubbed 
Agni  forth  (6,  i613)  and  priests  rub  Agni  as  Atharvan  did  (6,  i517)-  Agni 
produced  by  Atharvan  became  the  messenger  of  Vivas  vat  (10,  2i5).  Atharvan 
first  established  (order)  by  sacrifices,  while  the  Bhrgus  showed  themselves 
gods  by  their  skill  (10,  9210).  By  sacrifices  Atharvan  first  extended  the  paths; 
then  the  sun  was  produced  (i,  835).  Atharvan  along  with  Father  Manu  and 
Dadhyanc  practised  devotion  (i,  8ol6).  Indra  is  the  helper  of  Atharvan  as 
well  as  of  Trita,  Dadhyanc  and  Matarisvan  (10,  482).  The  goblin-destroying 
Agni  is  invoked  to  burn  down  the  fool  with  divine  flame  like  Atharvan 
(10,  8y12).  The  AV.  adds  some  further  traits.  Atharvan  brought  a  cup  of 
Soma  to  Indra  (AV.  18,  354).  A  miraculous  cow  was  given  to  him  by  Varuna 
(AV.  5,  n;  7,  104).  Atharvan  is  a  companion  of  the  gods,  is  related  to  them, 
and  dwells  in  heaven  (AV.  4,  i?,  &c.).  In  the  SB.  Atharvan  is  spoken  of 
as  an  ancient  teacher  (14,  5,  522.  7,  32S). 

In  the  plural  the  Atharvans  are  enumerated  as  Fathers  along  with  the 
Angirases,  Navagvas,  and  Bhrgus  (10,  i46).  They  dwell  in  heaven  and  are 
called  gods  (AV.  u,  6I3j.  They  destroy  goblins  with  a  magical  herb  (AV. 

4,  377)- 

In  a  few  passages  of  the  RV.  the  word  atharvan  appears  to  have  the 
appellative  meaning  of  'priest'.  Thus  it  is  an  attribute  of  Brhaddiva,  the 
composer  of  a  hymn  (10,  i2o9  cp. 8).  In  this  sense  it  seems  to  be  an  epithet 
of  Agni,  when  a  seer  is  described  as  pouring  the  libation  on  the  Atharvan 
(8,  97).  The  word  also  means  priest  when  it  is  said  that  the  Atharvans  mix 
Soma  (9,  42)  or  that  they  receive  a  hundred  cows  from  a  patron  (6,  47 24). 
That  this  is  the  original  sense  is  borne  out  by  the  fact  that  the  cognate 
Avestan  word  dthravan  signifies  'fire-priest',  which  is  also  the  etymological  sense ; 
for  atar  (for  athar],  fire,  is  the  same  as  the  Vedic  athar-*,  which  also  occurs 
in  athar-yu,  flaming  (said  of  Agni,  7,  i1).  This  old  name  must  then  have 
been  mythologically  applied  to  designate  an  ancient  priestly  race  of  a  semi- 
divine  character,  generally  represented  in  the  singular  by  their  chief. 

1  BRUGMANN,  Grundriss  2,  360;    cp.  BLOOMFIELD,  SEE.  42,   xxm,  n.   2;    BAR- 

THOLOMAE,  IF.  5,  221,    rejects    the    connexion   of  atar  with  atharvan.    -  -    Cp.  also 

LASSEN,    Indische  Alterthumskunde  1,523;    KHF.  10;  IS.  I,  289  ff.;    OST.  i,  160; 

BRV.i,  49;  HRI.  160,  n.   i. 

§  53.  Dadhyanc.  —  Dadhyanc,  who  is  the  son  of  Atharvan  (6,  i614; 
i,  n612.  n722),  is  mentioned  nine  times  in  the  RV.  and,  with  one  exception, 
only  in  the  ninth,  the  tenth,  and  especially  the  first  book.  He  is  a  seer  who 
kindled  Agni  (6,  i614)  and  is  mentioned  with  Atharvan,  Angiras,  Manu,  and 
other  ancient  sacrificers  (i,  8ol6.  i399). 

The  Asvins  gave  a  horse's  head  to  Atharvan's  son  Dadhyanc,  who  then 
proclaimed  to  them  the  (place  of  the)  mead  (madhu]  of  Tvastr  (i,  ii722). 
With  the  head  of  a  horse  Dadhyanc  proclaimed  to  the  Asvins  the  (place  of 
the)  mead  (i,  n612).  The  Asvins  won  the  heart  of  Dadhyanc;  then  the 
horse's  head  spoke  to  them  (i,  ii99).  Indra  is  also  connected  with  this 
myth.  For  it  is  said  that,  when  seeking  the  head  of  the  horse  hidden  in 
the  mountains,  he  found  it  in  Saryanavat  and  slew  with  the  bones  of  Da 
dhyanc  ninety-nine  Vrtras  (i,  84^-  I4).  Indra,  besides  producing  cows  from 
the  dragon  for  Trita,  gave  cowstalls  to  Dadhyanc  (and)  Matarisvan  (10,  482). 
These  are  probably  the  cowstalls  which  Dadhyanc  opens  by  the  power  of 


142    III.  RELIGION,  WELTL.  WISSENSCH.  u.  KUNST.     T  A.  VEDIC  MYTHOLOGY. 

Soma  (9,  io84).  It  is  noteworthy  that  in  the  only  older  passage  (6,  i614)  in 
which  the  name  of  Dadhyanc  occurs,  he  is  the  son  of  the  ancient  fire-priest 
Atharvan  and  is  himself  a  kindler  of  fire.  Otherwise  he  is  chiefly  connected 
with  the  secret  abode  of  Soma  and  with  Indra  in  the  release  of  the  cows. 
Owing  to  his  horse's  head  and  his  name  he  can  hardly  be  altogether  disso 
ciated  from  the  steed  Dadhikra.  The  etymological  sense  of  dadhi-aiic,  'curd- 
ward'  might  signify  either  'possessing' T  or  'fond  of  'curdled  milk'.  In  BER- 
GAIGNE'S  opinion  Dadhyanc  does  not  differ  essentially  in  origin  from  Soma2. 
The  evidence  is,  however,  insufficient  to  justify  any  certain  conclusion.  But 
it  does  not  seem  an  altogether  improbable  conjecture  that  Dadhyanc  originally 
represented  the  lightning  form  of  fire.  The  horse's  head  would  indicate  its 
speed,  the  voice  with  which  it  speaks,  the  thunder,  its  bones,  the  thunderbolt. 
His  connexion  with  the  secret  abode  of  Soma,  would  resemble  that  of  the 
eagle  with  the  celestial  Soma.  The  name,  too,  suggests  the  curdling  effect 
of  the  thunderstorm.  In  post-Vedic  literature  the  name  generally  occurs  in 
the  form  of  Dadhlca,  and  in  the  Mahabharata  the  thunderbolt  for  slaying 
Vrtra  is  said  to  have  been  fashioned  out  of  his  bones3. 

i  'Uni  au  lait',  BRV.  2,  457.  —  2  BRV.  2,  458.  —  3  PW.  s.  v.  —  Cp.  also  BRV. 
2,  456— 60;  GRV.  2, 84;  PERRY,  JAOS.  ii,i38;LRF.  120—2;  OERTELjAOS.  18,16—18. 

§  54.  Angirases.1  —  Of  the  more  than  sixty  occurrences  of  this  name 
in  the  RV.  about  two-thirds  are  in  the  plural.  Derivatives  of  the  word  are 
also  found  there  about  thirty  times.  The  whole  of  one  hymn  (10,  62)  is 
voted  to  the  praise  of  the  Arigirases  as  a  group. 

The  Angirases  are  sons  of  heaven2  (3,  537;  10,  6y2  cp.  4,  215).  They 
are  seers  who  are  sons  of  the  gods  (10,  624).  A  single  Angiras  being 
regarded  as  their  ancestor,  they  are  also  termed  'sons  of  Angiras'  (10,  625). 
Poets  speak  of  them  as  'fathers'  (ib.  2j,  'our  fathers'  (i,  7i2),  or  'our  ancient 
fathers'  (i,  622).  They  are  once  mentioned  as  fathers  with  the  Atharvans 
and  Bhrgus  (10,  i4fc),  being  especially  associated  with  Yama  (ib.3~5).  They 
are  also  in  a  more  general  way  connected  with  other  groups  of  divine  beings, 
the  Adityas,  Vasus,  Maruts  (7,  444;  8,  3514),  or  the  Adityas,  Rudras,  Vasus, 
as  well  as  the  Atharvans  (AV.  n,  813).  Soma  is  offered  to  them  (9,  629), 
and  they  are  invoked  like  gods  (3,  537;  10,  62).  They  are  brahman  priests 
(7,  421).  They  found  Agni  hidden  in  the  wood  (5,  n6)  and  thought  of  the 
first  ordinance  of  sacrifice  (10,  672).  It  is  by  sacrifice  that  they  obtained 
immortality  as  well  as  the  friendship  of  Indra  (10,  621). 

With  the  latter  deity  the  Angirases  are  closely  associated.  To  them  Indra 
disclosed  the  cows  (8,  523),  for  them  he  opened  the  stall  (i,  5i3.  I344),  and 
drove  out  the  cows  which  were  hidden,  casting  down  Vala  (8,  i48).  Accom 
panied  by  them  Indra  pierced  Vala  (2,  n20)  and  drove  out  the  cows  (6,  i76). 
As  their  leader  Indra  is  twice  called  aiigirastama,  chief  Angiras  (i,  ioo4.  1302). 
Soma  (as  inspiring  Indra)  is  also  once  said  to  have  opened  the  cowstall  for 
the  Angirases  (9,  8623).  In  connexion  with  the  myth  of  the  deliverance  of 
the  cows  the  song  of  the  Angirases  is  characteristic.  Praised  by  them  Indra 
pierced  Vala  (2,  i58),  and  burst  the  cowstalls  (4,  i6l8),  slew  Vala  and  opened 
his  citadels  (6,  i85),  or  dispelled  the  darkness,  spread  out  the  earth,  and 
established  the  lower  space  of  heaven  (i,  62^).  So  characteristic  is  their 
singing  that  the  Maruts  with  their  varied  songs  are  said  to  be  like  the  An 
girases  (10,  785),  and  the  gods  are  invoked  to  the  offering  with  the  chants 
of  the  Angirases  (i,  io72).  Hymns  addressed  by  actual  priests  to  Indra  are 
also  several  times  compared  with  those  of  the  Angirases  (i,  62 T-2  &c). 
Incidentally  Indra  assumes  a  less  prominent  position  than  the  Angirases  in 
the  myth  of  the  cows.  Thus  the  Angirases  are  said  to  have  emptied  the 


MYTHICAL  PRIESTS  &c.     54.  ANGIRASES.     55.  VIRUPAS  &c.  143 

stall  containing  cows  and  horses,  with  Indra  as  their  companion  (10,  627). 
Here  we  have  the  transition  to  the  omission  of  Indra  altogether,  his  char 
acteristic  action  being  directly  attributed  to  the  Angirases  themselves.  By  the 
rite  they  drove  out  the  cows  and  pierced  Vala  (ib.  2),  caused  the  sun  to 
mount  the  sky,  and  spread  out  mother  earth  (ib.  3).  By  the  rite  they  cleft 
the  rock  and  shouted  with  the  cows  (4,  3").  Singing  they  found  the  cows 
(i,  62 2).  They  burst  the  rock  with  their  songs  and  found  the  light  (i,  722). 
The  Angirases  are  further  connected  with  the  finding  of  the  cows  of  the 
Panis  for  Indra  by  Sarama  (10,  ioS8-  I0),  who  is  said  to  have  assisted  Indra 
and  the  Angirases  in  tracking  them  (i,  62 3  cp.  728).  The  Angirases  are 
also  described  alone  as  having  found  the  cows  and  steeds  of  Pani  (i,  83*). 
Brhaspati^  who  is  connected  with  the  same  myth  (10,  loS6-11),  receives  the 
epithet  Angirasa  when  piercing  the  rock  and  capturing  the  cows  (6;  731)  or 
giving  cows  like  Bhaga  (10,  682). 

Brhaspati  is  even  directly  called  Angiras  when  he  drives  out  the  cows 
and  releases  the  waters  with  Indra  (2,  23l8).  Otherwise  in  nearly  all  the 
occurrences  of  the  word  in  the  singular,  Angiras  is  an  epithet  of  Agni,  who 
is  the  first  seer  Angiras  (i^i1),  the  ancient  Angiras  (10,  9215)  or  the  oldest 
(i,  i272)  and  the  most  inspired  (6,  n3)  of  the  Angirases.  Agni  is  several 
times  also  called  the  chief  Angiras  (i,  752  &c.).  This  term  is,  however,  once 
or  twice  applied  to  Indra,  Usas,  and  Soma.  Sometimes  Angiras  only  desig 
nates  an  ancient  priest  without  direct  allusion  to  Agni,  as  when  'the  ancient 
Angiras'  is  mentioned  in  an  enumeration  of  ancestors  (i,  I399)  or  when 
the  context  shows  that  in  the  form  angirasvat  the  singular  sense  'like  Angiras' 
is  meant  (i,  453).  In  one  passage  (i,  3i17),  in  which  the  poet  exclaims,  'O 
Agni,  come  to  us  as  to  Manus,  as  to  Angiras,  o  Angiras',  the  name  designates 
both  the  ancestor  and  Agni. 

According  to  the  tradition  found  in  the  Amikramam  of  the  RV.,  the 
Angirases  must  have  been  regarded  as  an  actual  priestly  family,  as  the  com 
position  of  the  ninth  book  is  attributed  to  members  of  it  3.  Priestly  families 
also  seem  to  be  alluded  to  in  the  compound  Atharva-angirasah,  which  occurs 
as  a  designation  of  the  AV.  in  that  Veda  itself  (AV.  10,  720)  and  later  (SB. 
n,  5,  67  &c.)4. 

On  the  whole  it  seems  probable  that  the  Angirases  were  originally  con 
ceived  as  a  race  of  higher  beings  intermediate  between  gods  and  men,  as 
attendants  of  Agni,  who  is  so  often  described  as  a  messenger  between  heaven 
and  earth  (p.  96),  and  that  their  priestly  character  was  a  later  development5. 
They  may  possibly  have  been  personifications  of  the  flames  of  fire  as  messengers 
to  heaven  (cp.  RV.  7,  33).  This  view  is  borne  out  by  the  etymological  connexion 
of  angiras  with  the  Greek  ayyeXo;,  'messenger'0.  WEBER,  however,  is  of 
opinion  that  they  were  originally  priests  of  the  IndoTranian  period7. 

i  KHF.  10;  OST.  5,  23;  GW.;  BRV.  i,  47  —  8;  2,  308—21;  WC.  69—72; 
ORV.  127—8.  —  2  Cp.  BDA.  45.  —  3  Cp.  WEBER,  History  of  Ind.  Lit.,  Engl.  tr. 
p.  31.  --  4  Cp.  BlooMFiELD,  JAOS.  17,  i8o— 2;  SEE.  42,  xvn— xxvii.  —  5  Cp. 
ROTH,  PW.;  BRY.  2,  309;  cp.  HVBP.  109;  ORV.  127.  —  6  BRUGMANN,  Grundriss 
2,  188;  HR1.  167.  —  7  IS.  i,  291  ff. 

§  55.  A.  Virupas1.  --  Closely  connected  with  the  Angirases  are  the 
Virupas,  whose  name  is  mentioned  three  times  in  the  plural.  The  Angirases, 
the  Virupas,  are  sons  of  heaven  (3,  53").  The  Virupas  are  seers,  sons  of 
Angiras,  born  from  Agni,  from  heaven  (10,  62 5-6).  Virupa  once  occurs  as 
the  name  of  a  single  being,  who  sings  the  praises  of  Agni.  in  a  stanza  (8,  646) 
immediately  following  one  in  which  Angiras  is  invoked.  The  name  also  has 
the  singular  sense  in  the  adverb  viruparat,  'like  Virupa',  as  is  indicated  by 


144    HI.  RELIGION,  WELTL.  WISSENSCH.  u.  KUNST.     i  A.  VEDIC  MYTHOLOGY. 


the  occurrence  in  the  same  stanza  (1,453)  of  Priyamedhavat,  Atrivat,  besides 
Angirasvat.  The  word  once  occurs  in  its  patronymic  form  in  a  verse  (10,  145) 
in  which  Yama  is  invoked  with  the  Angirases  and  the  Vairupas.  As  the  word 
is  most  usually  a  simple  adjective  meaning  'of  variable  form'  and,  when  a 
name,  is  always  found  in  company  with  that  of  Angiras  or  the  Angirases,  it 
would  seem  to  have  been  hardly  more  than  an  epithet  of  the  latter. 

B.  Navagvas2.     The  name  of  these  beings    occurs   altogether  fourteen 
times  in  the  RV.,  six  times   in   association  with  that   of  the   Angirases.     The 
Navagvas  are  spoken   of  as  'our   ancient   fathers'   (6,  222),  or  as  'our  fathers' 
along  with  the  Angirases,  the  Atharvans,  and  the  Bhrgus  (10,  i46).    Like  the 
Angirases,  they  are  connected  with  the  myth  of  Indra,  Sarama,  and  the  cows 
of  the   Panis    (i,  623-4;  ^  457-  I0)  io8s).     Indra   with    the  Navagvas    as   his 
friends  sought  the  cows  (3,  395).     Pressing  Soma  they  laud  Indra  with  songs; 
they  broke   open   the   stall   of  the   cows   (5,  2912).     In    one    hymn    they   are 
described  as  having  sung  with  the  pressing  stones  for  ten  months  (5,457>I1)- 
In  two  of  its  occurrences  in  the  plural  the  word  navagva  is  a  simple  adjective, 
being  in  one  of  these   cases   an   attribute   of  the  rays  of  Agni  (6,  63).     It  is 
also  found  three  times  in  the  singular,  when  it   appears  to    be   an   epithet  of 
Angiras    (4,  5i4;  10,  626)  or    of  Dadhyanc   (9,  io84).     It    apparently    means 
'going  in  (a  company  of)  nine'3,    designating    as   a   plural    noun   a   group  of 
nine  ancient  priestly  ancestors. 

C.  Dasagvas2.     This  name  occurs  seven  times  in  the  RV.,  three  times 
in  the  singular,  and  only  twice  unassociated  with  that  of  the  Navagvas.    The 
Dasagvas  were  the  first  who  offered  sacrifice  (2,  34* 2).    Indra  with  the  Nava 
gvas  sought  the   cows    and  with  the   ten  Dasagvas    found   the    sun    (3,  395). 
With  the  Navagvas  and  the  Dasagvas  Indra  rent  the  rock  and  Vala  (i,  62-*). 
The  Navagvas  and  Dasagvas   praise  Indra    and  broke   open  the  stall  of  the 
cows    (5,2912).     The   dawns  shine    on   the  Navagva  Afigira    and    the    seven- 
mouthed  Dasagva  (4,  5i4).    Dasagva,  mentioned  with  Navagva,  is  once  spoken 
of  as  chief  Angiras  (10,  626).    Dasagva  is  described  in  one  passage  as  having 
been  succoured  by   Indra   (8,  i22).      The    name,    being    merely    a   numerical 
variation  of  Navagva,  was  most  probably  suggested  by  the  latter. 

D.  The  seven  Rsis4.     The  ancient  seers  are  represented  by  a  definite 
numerical  group  as  'the  seven  Rsis',  who  are,  however,  only  mentioned  four 
times  in  the  RV.    One  poet  speaks  of  them  as  'our  fathers,  the  seven  seers' 
(4, 428).    They  are  called  divine  (10,  130?),  and  in  another  passage  (10,  io94) 
the   'seven   ancient  seers'    are   associated  with   the   gods.     The  number    may 
have   been  suggested   by  that   of  the   seven  technical   priests   (enumerated  in 
2,  i2),  of  whom  they  would,  in  that  case,  have  been  regarded  as  the  proto 
types.   In  the  SB.  they  become  individualized  by  each  receiving  a  name  (SB. 
14,  5,  26;    Brhadar.  Up.  2,  26).     In    the    same  Brahmana  (2,  i,  24  cp.  8,  i,  10) 
they  are  also  regarded  as  the   seven  stars  in   the   constellation   of  the  Great 
Bear   and   are  stated  to   have   been    originally  bears5.     This   identification   is 
doubtless  due   partly    to  the  sameness    of  the   number  in   the   two  cases  and 
partly  to  the  similarity  of  sound  between   rsi,  'seer',   and  rksa,  which  in  the 
RV.  means  both  'star'  (i,  24'°)  and  'bear'  '(5,  563). 

Probably  the  same  ancient  sacrificers  are  referred  to  as  the  seven  priests 
(viprdk)  who  with  the  Navagvas  praise  Indra  (6,  222  cp.  3,  31$;  4,  2^),  or 
the  seven  Hotrs6  with  whom  Manu  made  the  first  offering  to  the  gods  (10,  637). 
Mmilarly  the  ft\vo  divine  Sacrificers'  (dairy a  Jiotdra]  mentioned  nearly  a  dozen 
times  in  the  RV.  seem  to  have  been  the  celestial  counterpart  of  two  tech 
nical  priests7. 

1  GW.  s.  v.  vintpa;    BRV,  2,  307,  note  4.    —    2  BRV.  2,   145  —  6.    307  —  8.  — 


MYTHICAL  PRIESTS  &c.     56.  ATRI.     57.  KANVA.  145 


3  Cp.  YN.  n,  19;  BRV.  2,  145:  'having  nine  cows'.  —  4  ROTH,  PW,  ;  OLDENBERG, 
ZDMG*—  42,  236;  ORV.  276—8.  —  5  WEBER,  IS.  i,  167;  EGGELING,  SEE.  12, 
282,  n.  2.  —  £_Cp_JioPKixs,  JAOS.  16,  277;  ORV.  383—  4;  SEE.  46,  189.  322.  — 
7  ORV.  391;  SEE.  46,  u  ;  cp.  BRV.  I,  234—5. 

§  56.  Atri.  —  This  is  one  of  the  seers  of  ancient  days  most  frequently 
mentioned  in  the  RV.  The  name  occurs  there  about  forty  times  in  the  sin 
gular  and  six  times  in  the  plural  as  a  designation  of  his  descendants.  Atri 
is  spoken  of  as  a  seer  belonging  to  the  five  tribes  (i,  ii73)  and  is  mentioned 
along  with  Manu  and  other  ancestors  of  the  human  race  (i,  399). 

Agni  is  said  to  have  helped  Atri  (7,  i55)  as  a  well  as  other  ancient 
seers  (1,453;  10,  1505).  Indra  also  heard  the  prayer  of  Atri  (8,  367)  and 
opened  the  cowstall  for  him  and  the  Angirases  (i,  5i3).  Atri  is,  however, 
chiefly  represented  as  the  protege  of  the  Asvins,  and  the  characteristic  myth 
about  him  is  connected  with  them.  They  delivered  Atri  from  the  darkness 
(6,  5o10;  7,  718).  They  rescued  him  out  of  a  chasm  (5,  784)  with  all  his  host 
(i,  n68.  n73),  when  they  destroyed  the  wiles  of  the  malignant  demon  (i,  n73). 
The  chasm  into  which  he  has  fallen  and  from  which  they  deliver  him  is  a 
burning  one,  but  they  gave  him  a  strengthening  draught  (i,  n68.  n87).  They 
made  the  burning  chasm  (rbisa]  or  his  abode  (grhd)  agreeable  for  him 
(I0?399;  8;  62?);  they  prevent  the  fire  from  burning  him  (8,  62s).  They  res 
cued  Atri  who  was  in  the  heat  (10,  8o3),  they  protected  him  from  the  heat 
with  coolness  (i,  up6;  8,  623),  and  made  the  burning  heat  agreeable  for  him 
(i,  ii27).  Once  they  are  said  to  have  rejuvenated  Atri,  who  had  grown 
old  (10,  I431-2). 

In  one  hymn  Atri  is  said  to  have  found  the  sun  when  it  was  hidden 
by  the  demon  Svarbhanu  and  to  have  placed  it  in  the  sky  (5,  4o6-  8).  But 
in  the  very  next  verse  (9)  this  deed  is  attributed  to  the  Atris  collectively. 
The  AV.  also  refers,  to  Atri  finding  and  placing  the  sun  in  the  sky  (AV.  13, 
24.  12.  36^  jn  the  SB  Atri  is  a  priest  who  dispelled  darkness  (4,  3,  421), 
originated  from  Vac  (1,4,  513),  and  is  even  identical  with  her  (14,  5,  25). 

The  plural  form  of  the  name  in  the  RV.  regularly  occurs  in  the  last 
or  one  of  the  last  verses  of  a  hymn.  The  Atris  here  designate  the  family 
of  seers  who  are  the  composers  of  the  hymns  (5,  39s  &c.).  The  whole  of 
the  fifth  book  is  attributed  to  the  family  of  the  Atris,  and  about  one-fourth 
of  the  occurrences  of  the  name  in  the  singular  or  plural  are  found  in  that  book. 

The  name  is  perhaps  derived  from  the  root  ad,  to  eat,  in  the  sense  of 
'devouring',  as  the  cognate  word  atrin,  a  frequent  adjective  in  the  RV.  used 
to  describe  demons,  seems  to  have  this  meaning.  The  word  atri1  itself  is 
once  employed  as  an  attribute  of  Agni,  probably  with  this  signification  (2,  8s). 
BERGAiGNE2  is  even  of  opinion  that,  though  Atri  has  become  a  priest,  he 
originally  represented  some  form  of  Agni.  The  name  of  Atri  is  four  times 
accompanied  or,  in  the  next  verse,  followed  by  that  of  Saptavadhri.  The 
latter  is  a  protege  of  the  Asvins,  a  seer  whom  they  are  invoked  to  release 
from  captivity  (5,  782-  6),  and  who  is  said  to  have  sharpened  the  blade  of 
Agni  with  his  prayer  (8,  628).  For  Atri  Saptavadhri  the  Asvins  made  the 
burning  chasm  agreeable  (10,  399).  The  two  are  therefore  probably  identical  3. 
i  Cp.  OLDENBERG,  SEE.  46,  35.  214.  —  a  BRV.  2,  467—72.  —  3  Op.  cit.  467; 

BAUNACK,  ZDMG.  50,  266.    —    Cp.  also  PW.,  s.  v.  Atri;    OLDENBERG,  ZDMG.  42, 

213;  BAUNACK,  ZDMG.  50,  266—87. 


V  § 


57.  Kanva  &c.  —  The  name  of  Kanva  occurs  about  sixty  times  in 
the  RV.  as  that  of  an  ancient  seer  and  of  his  descendants,  the  occurrences 
in  the  singular  and  plural  being  nearly  equally  divided.  Kanva  is  spoken 
of  as  the  son  of  Nrsad  (io;  3iIT)  and  bears  the  patronymic  Narsada  (i,  ii78; 

Indo-arische  Philologie.    III.  1  A.  10 


146    III.  RELIGION,  WELTL.  WISSENSCH.  u.  KUNST.     i  A.  VEDIC  MYTHOLOGY. 

AV.  4,  iQ2).  He  is  mentioned  in  an  enumeration  of  ancient  ancestors  such 
as  Manu  and  Angiras  (i,  i399).  The  gods  gave  Agni  to  Kanva  and  others, 
who  kindled  him  and  were  blessed  by  him  (i,  36IO<  "•  I7).  Agni  helped 
Kanva,  as  well  as  Atri,  Trasadasyu,  and  others,  in  battle  (10,  5o5),  and  is 
spoken  of  as  a  friend  and  chief  of  the  Kanvas  (10,  n55).  Indra  conferred 
gold  and  cattle  on  Kanva,  Trasadasyu,  and  others  (Val.  i10-  210).  The  Maruts 
bestowed  wealth  on  Kanva  along  with  Turvasa  and  Yadu  (8,  7 l8).  The  Asvins 
are  several  times  said  to  have  helped  Kanva  (1,475.  ii25;  8,  5?5.  820).  He 
was  blind  when  succoured  by  the  Asvins  (8,  523),  who  restored  his  sight 
(i,  "8?). 

Most  of  the  hymns  of  the  eighth  book  of  the  RV.  are  attributed  to  the 
family  of  Kanva,  and  poets  there  speak  of  themselves  as  Kanvas.  The  name 
as  that  of  a  family  is  therefore  historical.  But  the  ancestor  whose  name  was 
transferred  to  them  in  reality1  never  appears  in  the  RV.  as  that  of  a  con 
temporary.  ROTH  thinks  his  origin  may  have  been  mythical  like  that  of 
Angiras2;  and  BERGAIGNE  is  of  opinion  that  the  blind  Kanva  represents  the 
sun  during  the  night  or,  more  generally,  the  hidden  Agni  or  Soma3. 

Medhyatithi,  a  descendant  of  Kanva,  being  called  by  the  patronymic 
Kanva  (8,  2*°),  is  mentioned  nine  times  in  the  RV.,  occasionally  with  Kanva 
in  enumerations  of  ancestors  (i.  3610-11-  X7).  The  name  seems  to  mean  'he 
who  has  a  sacrificial  guest  (i.  e.  Agni)'.  Priyamedha,  whose  name  occurs 
four  or  five  times  and  is  found  beside  that  of  Kanva  (8,  525),  belongs  to 
the  past,  but  his  descendants  often  speak  of  themselves  in  the  plural  as 
Priyamedhas4. 

i  OLDENBERG,  ZDMG.  42,  216— 7.  —  2  pw.  s.  v.  Kanva.  —  3  BRV.  2,  465.— 

4  OLDENBERG,  ZDMG.  42,  217. 

§  58.  A.  Kutsa1.  This  warlike  hero  belonging  to  the  Indra  myth  is 
mentioned  nearly  forty  times  in  the  RV.  The  name  occurs  only  once  in 
the  plural  as  a  designation  of  a  family  of  singers  who  address  a  hymn  to 
Indra  (7,  25$).  Kutsa  is  four  times  called  by  the  patronymic  Arjuneya,  son 
of  Arjuna  (i,  ii223  &c.).  Mention  is  made  of  a  son  of  his,  whom  Indra 
aided  in  fight  against  a  Dasyu  (10,  io5XI).  Kutsa  is  young  and  brilliant 
(i,  633).  He  is  a  seer,  who  called  upon  Indra  for  aid  when  plunged  in  a 
pit  (i,  io66).  Kutsa  rides  on  the  same  car  as  Indra  (4,  16";  5,  299),  who 
wafts  him  (5,  3i8;  8,  i11)  or  takes  him  as  his  charioteer  (2,  ig6;  6,  20$). 
Kutsa  is  similar  to  Indra  (4,  i610)  and  is  even  invoked  with  him  in  a  dual 
compound  as  Indrakutsd,  the  pair  being  besought  to  come  on  their  car  (5,  3i9). 

The  foe  against  whom  Kutsa  is  associated  with  Indra  is  Susna.  Indra 
smote  Susna  for  Kutsa  (i,  633.  i2i9;  4,  i612;  6,  263),  aided  Kutsa  against 
Susna  (i,  5 16),  subjected  Susna  to  him  (7,  i92),  or,  associated  with  Kutsa 
and  the  ,gods,  vanquished  Susna  (5,  29$).  Indra  is  invoked  to  fight  with  Kutsa 
against  Susna  (6,  3i3)  or  to  bring  Kutsa  as  a  slayer  of  Susna  (i,  i754). 
Indra  fights  for  Kutsa  even  against  the  gods  (4,  3o2~5j  Or  against  Gandharva 
(8,  i11).  The  conflict  with  Susna  results  in  the  stealing  of  the  wheel  of  the 
sun  (i,  i754;  6,  3i3).  For  Kutsa  pressed  by  his  foes  Indra  tore  off  the  wheel 
of  the  sun  (4, 3o4)  while  the  other  he  gave  to  Kutsa  to  drive  on  with  (5,  2910). 
This  miracle  of  stopping  the  sun  (cp.  i,  i2i10;  10,  I383)  seems  to  be  a 
transference  of  the  myth  of  Indra  gaining  the  sun  for  human  happiness,  to 
the  reminiscence  of  a  semi-historical  battle.  In  winning  the  sun  Indra  is  said 
to  have  made  wide  space  for  his  charioteer  Kutsa  (6,  20$).  He  is  invoked 
to  crush  the  fiends  with  Kutsa  and  to  roll  forward  the  wheel  of  the  sun 
(4,  i612).  In  one  passage  Indra  is  said  to  have  subjected  other  foes  than  Susna 
to  Kutsa,  viz.  Tugra,  Smadibha,  and  the  Vetasus  (10,  494). 


5 8.  KUTSA  &c.  —  V.  ANIMALS  AND  INANIMATE  OBJECTS.  59.  GENERAL  TRAITS.    147 

Kutsa,  whom  Indra  aided  and  loved  (i,  33 T4),  nevertheless  sometimes 
appears  as  his  enemy.  Thus  Indra  struck  down  the  heroes  of  Kutsa,  Ayu, 
and  Atithigva  (2,  147),  harassed  Ayu,  Kutsa,  and  Atithigva  (Val.  52),  delivered 
these  three  into  the  hand  of  the  young  king  Turvayana  (i,  5310),  or  smote 
them  to  the  earth  for  him  (6,  i813).  This  seems  to  indicate  the  historical 
character  of  Kutsa.  For  a  deity  of  light  would  naturally  have  been  regarded 
by  the  Vedic  poets  as  always  a  friend,  and  a  demon  of  darkness  always  as 
a  foe.  Tradition  also  attributes  a  number  of  the  hymns  of  the  first  and  ninth 
book  of  the  RV.  to  a  seer  Kutsa  of  the  family  of  the  Angirases.  BERGAIGNE, 
however,  thinks  that  Kutsa  is  purely  mythical,  originally  a  form  of  Agni  (or 
Soma),  sometimes  seeming  to  represent  the  sun.  In  the  Naighantuka  (2,  20) 
kutsa  appears  as  one  of  the  synonyms  of  thunderbolt  (yajra}. 

B.  Kavya  Usana2.    The  ancient  seer  Usana  is  mentioned  eleven  times 
in  the  RV.     He    is  twice  called  a    sage  (kavi)    and  five    times   receives  the 
epithet  Kavya.     He  is    characteristically  wise;  for  Soma   uttering   wisdom  is 
compared  (9,  977)  and,  owing  to  his  wisdom,  is  identified  with  Usana  (9,  873). 
Kavya  Usana  established  Agni  as  the  hotr  of  sacrifice  (8,  2317).     He  is  said 
to   have   driven  hither  the   cows,  in  the  same  verse  in   which  Atharvan,   the 
institutor  of  sacrifice,  is  referred   to  as   having  prepared  the  path  of  the  sun 
(i,  83s).    He  was  a  protege  of  Indra  (6,  2011),  who  rejoiced  with  him  (i,  5I11) 
and  who  is   represented  as  identifying  himself  with   Usana   as  well  as  Kutsa 
and  others  (4,  261).     He,  was   associated  with  Indra  when   the   latter,   along 
with  Kutsa,  vanquished  Susna  (5,  299).     Usana   also   fashioned   for  Indra  the 
bolt  for  slaying  Vrtra  (i,  i2i12;  5,  342  cp.  i,  5i10). 

C.  Several  other  ancient  seers  of  a  historical  or  semi-historical  character 
are  mentioned  in  the  RV.    Such  are  Gotama,  Visvamitra,  Vamadeva,  Bharad- 
vaja  and  Vasistha3  to  whom,    or  to   whose   families,   the  composition   of  the 
second,   third,   fourth,   sixth,   and   seventh    books   are    respectively   attributed. 
Agastya  is  another  seer  mentioned  several  times  in  the  RV.4.     More  or  less 
historical  warriors  of  the  olden  time   are  king  Sudas,  Purukutsa  and   his  son 
Trasadasyu,  as  well  as  Divodasa  Atithigva5. 

Even  the  most  mythical  of  the  ancestors  of  man  or  of  particular  families 
treated  of  in  this  chapter  seem,  with  perhaps  two  or  three  exceptions,  to 
have  been  either  actual  men  of  bygone  days  or  to  have  been  projected  into  the 
past  to  represent  the  first  progenitors  of  actually  living  men.  The  deeds  attri 
buted  to  them  are  partly  historical  reminiscences,  partly  aetiological  myths, 
and  partly  poetical  creations.  By  association  with  the  gods  they  are  often 
drawn  into  participation  in  the  mythological  actions,  such  as  the  winning  of 
the  sun,  on  which  the  order  of  nature  is  founded.  Most  of  what  is  told 
about  the  priestly  ancestors,  is  intended  to  furnish  evidence  of  sacerdotal  art 
and  power,  which  are  therefore  treated  supernaturally.  It  is  not  likely  that 
they  represent  powers  of  nature  and  are  faded  gods  come  down  to  earth6. 

i  KHF.  54  ff.;  BRV.  2,  333-8;  PERRY,  JAOS.  11,  181;  PVS.  i,  24;  GVS.  2, 
35.  163  ff.;  ZDMG.  42,  211 ;  ORV.  158—60;  JAOS.  18,  31—3.  —  2  BRV.  2,  338—41 ; 
Sp.AP.  281 — 7.  —  3  Cp.  BRV.  i,  50 — 2;  OLDENBERG,  ZDMG.  42,  203  ff.;  OERTEL, 
JAOS.  1 8,  47—8.  —  4  Cp.  ZDMG.  34,  589  ff.;  39,  65—8.  —  5  OLDENBERG,  ZDMG. 
42,  199 — 247;  HRI.  in.  —  6  Cp.  GRUPPE,  Die  griechischen  Culte  I,  298  ff.;  ORV. 
273—4. 

V.    ANIMALS  AND  INANIMATE  OBJECTS. 

§  59.  General  Traits.  --  Animals  enter  to  a  considerable  extent  into 
the  mythological  creations  of  the  Veda.  There  are  still  numerous  traces 
surviving  from  a  more  primitive  age,  when  the  line  dividing  men  from  animals 

10* 


148     III.  RELIGION,  WELTL.  WISSENSCH.  u.  KUNST.     i  A.  VEDIC  MYTHOLOGY. 


was  not  definitely  drawn  (§  65)  and  gods  might  be  conceived  as  having 
animal  forms  also.  The  higher  Vedic  gods  themselves  being  anthropomorphic 
in  character,  the  supernatural  beings  of  the  Veda  which  have  an  animal  form 
belong  to  a  lower  order,  being  semi-divine  only  or  demoniac  according  as 
the  animal  is  useful  to  man,  as  the  cow,  or  injurious,  as  the  serpent.  More 
over,  just  as  man  has  attached  to  him  various  animals  which  are  serviceable 
to  him,  so  the  great  anthropomorphic  gods  are  naturally  surrounded  by  a 
celestial  animal  world  of  a  similar  character.  Lastly,  actual  animals  are  in 
the  ritual  connected  with  mythological  conceptions  of  the  gods.  They  are 
symbolical  representatives  intended  only  as  an  instrument  for  the  time  being 
to  influence  the  gods  they  in  some  respect  resemble.  This  fetishistic  point 
of  view  is  probably  the  faded  remnant  of  a  more  primitive  identification  of 
gods  with  visible  objects.  The  part  which  such  animal  fetishes  play  in  Vedic 
times  is,  however,  no  longer  great,,  since  the  representation  of  deities  by 
animals  conflicted  with  the  higher  conception  prevailing  of  the  gods  as  mighty 
men  dwelling  in  heaven  and  coming  invisibly  to  the  sacrifice. 

§  60.  The  Hors_e_L.  —  A.  Dadhikra.  Besides  the  celestial  horses  which 
draw  the  cars  of  the  gods,  various  individual  divine  steeds  occur  in  Vedic 
mythology.  One  of  the  most  notable  of  these  is  Dadhikra,  who  is  celebrated  in 
four  rather  late2  h\mns  of  the  R.V.  (4,  38 — 40;  7,  44).  The  name  is  men 
tioned  there  twelve  times,  interchanging  with  the  extended  form  Dadhikravan, 
which  is  found  ten  times.  The  name  hardly  ever  occurs  in  other  Vedic  texts. 
Dadhikra  is  so  characteristically  a  steed  that  the  word  is  given  in  the  Nai- 
ghantuka  (i,  14)  as  a  synonym  of  horse.  He  is  swift  (4,  38*'  9.  39*),  being 
the  first  steed  at  the  head  of  chariots  (7,  44*)  and  a  vanquisher  of  chariots 
(rathatur),  who  speeds  like  the  wind  (4,  383).  The  people  praise  his  swift 
ness  and  every  Puru  praises  him  as  he  runs  on  a  precipice  as  it  were  (ib.  9-  3). 
He  bounds  along  the  curves  of  the  paths  (4,  40*).  He  is  also  conceived  as 
winged.  For  he  is  called  bird-like,  his  wing  being  compared  with  that  of 
a  bird  and  of  a  speeding  eagle  (4,  4o2-3).  He  is  likened  to  a  swooping 
eagle  and  even  directly  called  an  eagle  (4,  38s- 2).  In  one  passage  (4,  40^) 
he  is  spoken  of  as  the  swan  (hamsd)  dwelling  in  light,  as  well  as  the  Vasu 
in  the  air,  the  priest  at  the  altar,  the  guest  in  the  house  -  -  all  epithets 
appropriate  to  various  forms  of  Agni. 

Dadhikra  is  a  hero,  smites  the  Dasyus,  and  is  victorious  (4,  38Z~~3'  7). 
His  adversaries  fear  him  as  the  thunder  of  heaven,  when  he  fights  against 
a  thousand;  he  wins  booty  in  combats  and  the  tribes  cry  after  him  in  con 
tests  (ib.  8- 5- 4).  Making  himself  (krnvana)  a  garland,  he  tosses  the  dust  and 
scatters  it  from  his  brows  (ib.  6- 7).  He  belongs  to  all  the  tribes,  pervades 
the  five  tribes  with  his  power,  as  Surya  the  waters  with  his  light,  and  observes 
the  assemblies  (ib.  2- I0- 4).  Mitra-Varuna  gave  him,  the  victorious  steed,  like 
shining  Agni,  to  the  Purus  (4,  392  cp.  381-2);  they  gave  us  the  horse  Da 
dhikra  as  a  blessing  for  the  mortal  (ib.  5). 

The  steed  Dadhikravan  is  praised  when  Agni  is  kindled  at  the  dawning 
of  Usas  (4,  393).  He  is  invoked  with  the  Dawns  (ib.1.  40'),  who  are  prayed 
to  turn  to  the  sacrifice  like  Dadhikravan  (7,  4i6).  He  is  regularly  invoked 
with  Usas,  nearly  as  often  with  Agni,  less  frequently  with  the  Asvins  and 
Surya,  sometimes  with  other  deities  also  (3,  201-5;  7,  44I—4j  10,  ioix);  but 
Dadhikra  is  invoked  first  (7,  441). 

The  etymological  meaning,  being  uncertain 3,  cannot  be  said  to  throw 
any  additional  light  on  the  original  nature  of  Dadhikra.  The  second  part 
of  the  compound  may  be  a  by-form  of  the  root  kr,  'to  scatter',  and  the 
word  would  then  mean  'scattering  curdled  milk',  in  allusion  to  the  dew  or 


ANIMALS  AND  INANIMATE  OBJECTS.     60.  THE  HORSE.  149 

rime  appearing  at  sunrise,  according  to  ROTH  and  GRASSMANN*,  who  both 
think  that  Dadhikra  represents  in  the  form  of  a  steed  the  circling  ball  of 
the  sun.  This  view  is  supported  by  the  fact  that  the  deity  with  whom 
Dadhikra  is  most  closely  connected  is  lisas,  that  the  sun  is  often  conceived 
as  a  steed  or  bird  (p.  31)  and  that  he  is  sometimes  regarded  as  warlike  (ib.). 
The  statement  that  Dadhikra  was  given  by  Mitra  and  Varuna  might  be 
connected  with  the  notion  of  the  sun  being  the  eye  of  those  deities.  BER- 
GAIGNE  thinks  that  the  name  of  Dadhikra  refers  rather  to  lightning,  but  that 
he  represents  Agni  in  general,  including  his  solar  and  lightning  forms  5. 
LuDWic6,  PISCHEL?,  v.  BRADKE8,  and  OLDENBERG^,  however,  agree  in  the 
opinion  that  Dadhikra  was  not  a  deity,  but  an  actual  horse,  famous  as  a 
racer  or  charger,  which  received  divine  honours. 

It  has  already  been  remarked  (p.  142)  that  Dadhyanc  is  allied  to  Da 
dhikra  in  name,  and  possibly  in  nature,  since  he  is  spoken  of  as  having  a 
horse's  head. 

B.  Tarksya.     Nearly    related   to  Dadhikra  is  Tarksya,    whose  name  is 
mentioned  only   twice   in   the  RV.  (i,  8Q6;  10,  178*).     One   late   hymn,    con 
sisting    of  three    stanzas   (10,  178),  is   devoted  to   his    praise.     He    is    there 
described   as   a  god-impelled   mighty   steed  (vdjin),  a  vanquisher    of  chariots 
(cp.  6,  444),  swift,  and  speeding  to  battle.    He  is  invoked  as  a  gift  of  Indra. 
In  the  identical  words  applied  to  Dadhikra  (4,  3810),  he  is  said  to  have  per 
vaded  the  five  tribes  with  his  power,  as  Surya  the  waters  with  his  light.   That 
he  was  primarily  conceived    as  a   steed   is  shown  (v. 2;  i,  896)  by  his  epithet 
aristanemi,  'whose  fellies  are  intact'  (which  in  VS.  15,  1 8   appears   as   an   in 
dependent  name   beside  Tarksya   and  Garuda).     In   the  Naighantuka    (i,  14) 
the    word    tdrksya    occurs    as   a  synonym   of  'horse'.     In    one   or    two    later 
Vedic  texts  Tarksya  is,  however,  referred  to  as  a  bird;  and  in  the  Epic  and 
subsequent  literature,  he   is  identical  with   the   swift  bird  Garuda,  the  vehicle 
of  Visnu.    It  seems  on  the  whole  probable  that  Tarksya  originally  represented 
the  sun   in   the  form    of  a   divine   steed10.     The    word  seems  to    be    derived 
from  Trksi,   the    name   of  a   man,    with  the    patronymic  Trasadasyava,    once 
mentioned  in  the  RV.  (8,  227).     This  derivation  leads  Fov11  to   believe   that 
Tarksya  was  an  actual  race  horse  (like  Dadhikra),  belonging  to  Trksi  of  the 
family  of  Trasadasyu. 

C.  Paidva.     Another  mythical  steed   is  that  which  the  Asvins  are  said 
to    have    brought   to   Pedu   (i,  iig10;  7,  7i5)   and    which    is    therefore    called 
Paidva  (i,  n66;  9,  884).     The  object  of  the  gift  was  to   replace   an  inferior 
horse,  as  may  be  inferred  from  the  description  of  Pedu  as  agkds'va,  'he  who 
has  a  bad  horse'  (i,  n66).    This  steed  is  several  times  spoken  of  as  'white', 
sveta  (i,  n66,  &c.).     He    is   praiseworthy   (i,  119™;  10,  39™;  cp.  4,  382)   and 
is  to  be  invoked  (i,  n66)  by  men,  like  Bhaga  (10,  3910).     He  is  compared 
with  Indra  (i,  ii910)    and  is   called   a   'dragon-slayer',   ahihan  (i,  1179.   n89 
cp.  9,  884),  an  epithet  otherwise   peculiar  to   Indra.     He  is   a  conqueror   in 
vincible  in  battles,   seeking  heaven  (i,  ii910).     Here   again  the   evidence,  as 
far  as  it  goes,  appears  to  favour  the  interpretation  of  the   steed   of  Pedu  as 
symbolical  of  the  sun12. 

D.  Etas  a.     The  word  etasa,  which  occurs  a   few  times  as   an  adjective 
meaning  'swift',  more  frequently  signifies  'steed'  in  the  RV.     In  the   plural   it 
designates   the   horses   of  the   sun   (7,  622;  10,  37^.  497).     It   occurs    about  a 
dozen   times   as   a    proper  name  in  the   singular,,   always   connected  with  the 
sun,  often  with  reference  to  the  wheel  of  the  sun.    Savitr  is  the  steed  (etasa) 
who  measured  out  the  terrestrial  regions  (5,  8i3).    The  swift  god  Etasa  draws 
the  bright  form  of  the  sun  (7,  66I4j.     Yoked   to   the  pole,  Etasa   moves   the 


150     III.  RELIGION,  WELTL.  WISSENSCH.  u.  KUNST.     i  A.  VEDIC  MYTHOLOGY. 

wheel  of  the  sun  (7,  6.32);  he  brought  the  wheel  of  the  sun  (i,  i2i'3;  5,  31"). 
India  urged  on  the  steed  (etasd)  of  the  sun  (8,  i11  cp.  9,6s8).  Indra  helped 
Etasa  contending  in  a  race  with  Surya  (i,  6iI5).  It  may  be  gathered  from 
stray  references  to  this  mythical  contest,  that  Etasa  being  at  first  behind  takes 
up  the  lost  wheel  of  the  sun  and  fixes  it  to  the  car  of  Surya;  he  has  now 
gained  the  lead,  and  in  the  end  Surya  seems  to  concede  to  him  the  place 
of  honour  before  his  own  car13.  It  appears  to  be  impossible  to  suggest  any 
satisfactory  interpretation  of  this  myth.  It  can,  however,  hardly  be  doubted 
that  Etasa  represents  the  steed  of  the  sun. 

E.  The  Horse  symbolical  of  Sun  and  Fire.  That  the  horse  is  sym 
bolical  of  the  sun,  is  indicated  by  a  passage  of  the  RV.  in  which  Dawn  is 
said  to  lead  a  white  steed  (7,  77^,  and  is  suggested  by  another  (i,  163*)  in 
which  the  sacrificial  steed  is  said  to  have  been  fashioned  by  the  gods  out  of 
the  sun14.  In  a  particular  form  of  the  Soma  ritual,  the  horse  also  appears  to 
be  symbolical  of  the  sun's. 

Agni,  the  swift  and  agile  god,  is  often,  as  has  been  shown  (p.  89),  spoken 
of  as  a  steed.  In  the  ritual  the  horse  is  symbolical  of  Agni.  A  horse  is 
stationed  so  as  to  look  at  the  place  where  fire  is  produced  by  friction. 
When  the  fire  is  borne  towards  the  east,  it  is  deposited  in  the  track  of  the 
horse  which  goes  in  front16.  In  the  ceremony  of  piling  the  fire-altar,  the 
horse  is  addressed  with  the  verse:  'In  heaven  is  thy  highest  birth,  in  air  thy 
navel,  on  earth  thy  home'  (VS.  n,  12).  Such  a  rite  is  explained  in  the  SB. 
as  bringing  Agni  together  with  himself17.  The  same  Brahmana  speaks  of 
lightning  as  a  horse  descended  from  the  waters  or  the  clouds  (SB.  5,  i,  45; 
7,  5,  a"). 

i  Cp.  GUBERNATIS,  Zoological  Mythology  i,  283  ff.  —  2  E.  V.  ARNOLD,  KZ. 
34>  303-  —  3  Cp.  WACKERNAGEL,  Altind.  Gr.  p.  15.  —  4  ROTH,  PW.;  GW.  s.  v. ; 
cp.  HRI.  55,  note  5.  —  5  BRV.  2,  456—7;  cp.  MACDONELL,  JRAS.  25,  471;  MM., 
SEE.  46,  282.  --  6  LRV.  4,  79.  --  7  PVS.  i,  124;  cp.  HILLEBRANDT,  Vedainter- 
pretation  17—18.  —  8  ZDMG.  42,  447—9.  462—3.  --  9  ORV.  71;  SEE.  46,  282. 

-  i°  PW. ;    BRV.  2,  498;    HIRZEL,    Gleichnisse  und  Metaphern  im  RV.  (1890)  27. 
62—3;    GRIFFITH,    Transl.  of  SV.    69,    note  i.    —    "    KZ.  34,    366 — 7.    -  -    12  Cp. 
BRV.  2,  51-2.  —  13  BRV.  2,  330  —  3;  ORV.   169  f.;  cp.  PVS.  i,  42;  GVS.  2,  161  ff. 
M  Cp.  AB.  6,  35  &c.;    KHF.  52;    WEBER,  IS.   13,  247,  n.  3;  Die  Naksatra  2,  270. 

-  15  ORV.  81.  —  16  ORV.  77.  —  17  ORV.  80. 

§  6 1.  A.  The  Bull.  Indra  is  in  the  RV.  constantly  designated  a 

bull,  a  term  applied  much  less  frequently  to  Agni,  and  occasionally  to  other 
gods,  such  as  Dyaus  (p.  22).  In  the  AV.  (9,  4?)  a  bull  is  addressed  as  Indra, 
and  in  the  SB.  (2,  5,  3l8)  the  bull  is  stated  to  be  Indra's  form1.  In  the  Avesta 
the  bull  appears  as  one  of  the  incarnations  of  Verethraghna,  the  Avestan 
Indra2.  In  one  of  the  sacrifices  of  the  Vedic  ritual,  a  bull  also  represents 
the  god  Rudra3.  A  bull  plays  a  part  in  the  obscure  and  much  discussed 
myth  of  Mudgala  and  MudgalanI  (RV.  10,  io2)4. 

B.  The  Cow.  -  -  Owing  to  its  great  utility  on  earth,  the  cow  naturally 
enters  largely  into  the  conceptions  of  Vedic  mythology.  The  beams  of  Dawn 
are  personified  as  cows5,  which  draw  her  car  (p.  47).  The  rain-cloud  is 
personified  as  a  cow,  the  mother  of  a  (lightning)  calf  (pp.  10.  12).  This 
cloud-cow  is  individualized  as  Prsni6,  the  mother  of  the  Maruts  (VS.  2,  16), 
her  milk  (6,  48")  and  udder  being  several  times  referred  to  (cp.  p.  125).  The 
bountiful  clouds  are  doubtless  the  prototypes  of  the  many-coloured  cows 
which  yield  all  desires  (kdmadugha)  in  the  heaven  of  the  Blest  (AV.  4,  348) 
and  which  are  the  forerunners  of  the  Cow  of  Plenty  (kamaduK)  so  often 
mentioned  in  post- Vedic  poetry  7.  Ida,  the  personification  of  the  offering  of 
milk  and  butter,  has  a  tendency  to  be  regarded  as  a  cow  (p.  124).  Aditi 


ANIMALS  AND  INANIMATE  OBJECTS.    61.  THE  BULL  &c.    62.  THE  GOAT  &c.     151 

also  is  sometimes  spoken  of  as  a  cow  (p.  122).  The  gods  are  sometimes 
called  cow-born,  gojdtdh.  The  most  frequent  application  of  the  cow  is,  how 
ever,  in  the  myth  of  the  kine  released  from  the  rock  by  Indra  (pp.  59.  61). 
The  terrestrial  cow  herself  has  already  acquired  a  certain  sanctity  in 
the  RV.,  being  addressed  as  Aditi  and  a  goddess,  while  the  poet  impresses 
on  his  hearers  that  she  should  not  be  killed  (8,  Qo15'  l6  cp.  VS.  4,  19.  20). 
The  inviolability  of  the  cow  is  further  indicated  by  her  designation  aghnyd, 
'not  to  be  slain',  which  occurs  sixteen  times  in  the  RV.  (the  corresponding 
masculine  form  aghnya  being  found  only  three  times).  In  the  AV.  the  worship 
9f  the  cow  as  a  sacred  animal  is  fully  recognised  (AV.  12,  4.  5.)8.  In  the 
SB.  (3,  i,  221)  he  who  eats  beef  is  said  to  be  born  again  (on,  earth)  as  a 
man  of  evil  fame;  though  beef  is  allowed  to  be  cooked  for  guests  (SB.  3,  4,  i2)9. 

i  Cp.  MS.  i,  1016;  TB.  I,  6,  74;  Ap.  SS.  8,  1119.  —  2  ORV.  76,  note  2.  — 
3  ORV.  82.  —  4  Last  treated  of  by  V.  HENRY  (with  reference  to  his  predecessors) 
in  JA.  1895  (6),  516  —48.  —  5  Cp.  GRUPPE,  op.  cit.  i,  77.  —  6  Cp.  ROTH,  Nir. 
Erl.  145;  PW.'s.  v.  —  7  KHF.  188.  -  -  8  HRT.  156;  cp.  BLOOMFIELD,  SEE.  42, 
656.  —  9  WVB.  1894,  p.  36;  HRL  189;  cp.  WINTERNITZ,  Hochzeitsrituell  33. 

§  62.  The  Goat  &c.  --In  the  RV.  the  goat  is  specially  connected 
with  Pusan  as  drawing  his  car  (p.  35).  It  also  appears  there  as  a  divine 
being  in  the  form  of  Aja  ekapad,  the  one-footed  Goat  (§  27)1.  In  the 
the  later  Vedic  literature  the  goat  is  several  times  connected  or  identified 
with  Agni2. 

The  ass  appears  in  Vedic  mythology  mainly  as  drawing  the  car  of  the 
Asvins  (p.  50) -3. 

The  dog4  is  found  in  the  RV.  mythologically  in  the  form  of  the  two 
brindled  hounds  of  Yama,  called  Sarameya  (p.  173).  This  name  indicates  that 
they  were  regarded  as  descendants 5  of  Sarama6  (p.  63),  the  messenger  of 
Indra.  There  is  nothing  in  the  RV.  directly  showing  that  Sarama  was  there 
conceived  as  a  bitch,  though  in  the  later  Vedic  literature  she  is  regarded  as 
such  and  by  Yaska  (Nir.  u,  25)  is  described  as  the  'bitch  of  the  gods' 
(devaswii). 

The  boar  occurs  in  the  RV.  as  a  figurative  designation  of  Rudra,  the 
Marufs,  "anoTTrtra  7.  In  the  TS.  and  TB.  this  animal  appears  in  a  cosmo- 
gonic  character  as  the  form  assumed  by  the  Creator  Prajapati  when  he  raised 
the  earth  out  of  the  waters.  A  later  development  of  it  is  the  boar  incar 
nation  of  Vismi8. 

In  the  later  Samhitas  the  tortoise  is  raised  to  a  semi-divine  position 
as  'lord  of  waters'  (VS.  13,  3i)9,  or,  as  Kasyapa,  often  appears  beside  or 
identical  with  Prajapati  in  the  AVV  where  he  receives  the  epithet  svayambhu, 
'self-existent'  (AV.  19,  5310)10.  In  the  AB.  (8,  2i10)  the  earth  is  said  to  have 
been  promised  to  Kasyapa  by  Visvakarman.  In  the  SB.  Prajapati  is  described 
as  changing  himself  into  a  tortoise  (7,  4,  35),  in  which  form  he  produced  all 
creatures  (7,  5,  i1)11.  This  assumed  form  of  the  creator  became  in  post- 
Vedic  mythology  the  tortoise  incarnation  of  Visnu12.  In  the  TS.  (2,  6,  33) 
the  sacrificial  cake  (purodasd)  is  said  to  become  a  tortoise. 

A  monkey  appears  in  a  late  hymn  of  the  RV.  (10,  86)  as  Indra's 
favourite,  who  is  expelled  for  his  mischievousness  by  Indram,  but  is  finally 
restored  to  favour  (§  22,  p.  64). 

Frogs  awakened  by  the  rains  are  in  RV.  7,  103  the  objects  of  a  pane 
gyric  as  bestowing  cows  and  long  life,  and  seem  to  be  conceived  as  possessing 
magical  powers  '3.  This  hymn  has,  however,  been  interpreted  by  MAX  MtJLLER14 
as  a  satire  on  Brahmans.  BERGAIGNE  interprets  the  frogs  as  meteorological 
phenomena^. 


152     in.  RELIGION,  WELTL,  WISSENSCH.  u.  KUNST.     i  A.  VEDIC  MYTHOLOGY. 


i  ORV.  .72;  SEE.  46,  62;  BLOOMFIELD,  SEE.  42,  625.  664,  who  thinks  Aja 
ekapad  is  undoubtedly  the  Sun,  with  reference  to  TB.  3,  I,  28  ('Aja  ekapad.  has 
risen  in  the  east',  &c.),  a  passage  which,  however,  is  not  cogent  for  the  Rigvedic 
conception.  —  2  ORV.  78.  —  3  WVB.  1894,  p.  26,  n.  2.  —  4  Cp.  HOPKINS,  The 
Dog  in  the  RV.,  AJP.  1894,  154—5;  BLOOMFIELD,  SEE.  42,  500.  —  5  Cp.  WHITNEY, 
Sanskrit  Grammar2,  1216.  —  6  Op.  cit.  Ii66b;  WACKERNAGEL,  Altind.  Gr.  §  52  a.; 
KRV.  n.  149;  ZDMG.  13,  493—9;  14,  583-  —  ?  Cp.  KHF.  177—8;  Entwicklungs- 
stufen  136;  IS.  i,  272,  note;  HOPKINS,  JAOS.  17,  67.  —  8  MACDONELL,  JRAS.  27, 
178—89.  —  9  Cp.  IS.  13,  250.  —  i°  Cp.  SPH.  8 1.  —  ii  Cp.  IS.  i,  187.  —  12  MAC 
DONELL,  JRAS.  27,  166—7.  —  '3  ORV.  70;  BLOOMFIELD,  JAOS.  17,  173—9.  - 
14  ASL.  494—5;  cp.  OST.  5,  436.  —  15  BRV.  i,  292  &c.;  cp.  HRI.  100— i. 

§  63.  TJae  Bird.  -  -  Birds  figure  largely  in  Vedic  mythology.  Soma  is 
often  compared  with  or  called  a  bird1  (p.  106).  Agni  in  particular  is  frequently 
likened  to  or  directly  designated  a  bird 2,  once  being  spoken  of  as  the  eagle 
of  the  sky  (p.  89) 3.  The  sun  is  also  sometimes  conceived  as  a  bird  (p.  3i)4, 
twice  under  the  name  of  garutmat^.  The  fact  that  Visnu's  vehicle  in  post- 
Vedic  mythology  is  Garuda,  the  chief  of  the  birds,  is  probably  based  on  the 
same  notion  (cp.  p.  39).  The  main  application  of  the  bird  in  the  Veda  is 
as  the  eagle  which  carries  off  the  Soma  for  Indra  and  which  appears  to 
represent  lightning6.  In  the  Kathaka  it  is  Indra  himself  who  in  the  form  of 
an  eagle  captures  the  Soma  or  amrta.  Similarly  in  the  Avesta,  Verethraghna 
assumes  the  form  of  Varaghna,  the  swiftest  of  birds,  and  in  Germanic  mythology, 
the  god  Odhin  transforming  himself  into  an  eagle,  flies  with  the  mead  to  the 
realm  of  the  gods  (p.  H4)7. 

Ominous  birds  as  well  as  beasts  are  occasionally  connected  with  certain 
gods  by  whom  they  are  supposed  to  be  sent.  Thus  in  the  RV.  the  owl  and 
the  pigeon  are  spoken  of  as  messengers  of  Yama  (§  77)8.  In  the  Sutras 
the  owl  is  'the  messenger  of  evil  spirits';  while  the  beast  of  prey  besmeared 
with  blood  and  the  carrion  vulture  are  called  messengers  of  Yama9.  In  the 
RV.  a  bird  of  omen  is  once  invoked  to  give  auspicious  signs  (2,  42^). 

i  Cp.  BENFEY,  SV.  glossary,  s.  v.  syena.  —  2  BLOOMFIELD,  FaR.  152.  —  3  KHF. 

29.  —  4  v.  BRADKE,  ZDMG.  40,  356.  —  5  GW.;  HRI.  45.  —  6  BRL   II.  —  7  ORV. 

75.  —  8  Cp.  ZDMG.  31,  352  ff.;  BLOOMFIELD,  SEE.  42,  474.  —  9  ORV.  76. 

§  64.  Noxious  Animals.  -  -  These  generally  appear  as  demons  or 
show  demoniac  traits.  Demons  are  sometimes  in  the  RV.  referred  to  with 
the  generic  term  mrga,  'wild  beast'  (i,  80?;  5,  29*.  323).  One  demon  who 
is  mentioned  three  times  (2,  nl8;  8,  3226.  662)  is  called  Aurnavabha,  'Spider- 
brood';  another  referred  to  only  once  (2,  14*)  is  named  Urana,  'Ram'. 

The  most  common  animal  form  applied  in  this  way  is  the  serpent1 
(ahi  =  Av.  azhi) 2.  This  is  generally  only  another  designation  of  the  demon 
Vrtra,  who  probably  received  his  name  (cp.  §  68)  as  a  formidable  enemy  of 
mankind  enveloping  his  prey  like  a  serpent  in  his  coils3.  The  Vrtra-slayer 
Indra,  who  is  also  called  the  serpent-slayer,  is  said  to  have  slain  the  serpent 
(8,  82 2  cp.  4,  I71);  the  identity  of  Ahi  and  Vrtra  is  clear  where  the  terms 
interchange  (i,  32I-2-7-I4)j  and  by  the  'first-born  of  the  serpents'  (ib>  4)  no 
other  can  be  meant  than  'Vrtra,  the  most  Vrtra'  (ib.5).  In  several  passages, 
too,  the  words  are  in  apposition  and  may  be  translated  'the  serpent  Vrtra'4. 
When  Ahi  is  mentioned  alone,  the  results  of  Indra's  victory  over  him  are 
the  same  as  in  the  case  of  Vrtra,  the  god  causing  the  waters  to  flow,  deli 
vering  the  seven  streams,  or  winning  the  cows5.  The  waters  are  also  des 
cribed  as  encompassed  by  the  serpent,  the  action  being  expressed  by  the 
root  vr  (2,  i92)  among  others.  They  are  similarly  said  to  be  swallowed 
(Vgras)  by  the  serpent  (4,  i;1;  10,  ui9).  Ahi  is  armed  with  lightning 
thunder  and  hail  (i,  3213).  He  is  bright,  for  the  Maruts  are  called  ahi- 
bhanavah,  'shining  like  Ahi'  (i,  172');  and  the  term  ahi  is  applied  to  Agni, 


63.  THE  BIRD.     64.  Noxious  ANIMALS.     65.  PREHISTORIC  NOTIONS.      153 

who  is  described  as  a 'raging  serpent,  like  the  rushing  wind'  (i,  791)5.  Soma 
is  once  besought  to  deliver  an  enemy  to  Ahi  (7,  1049).  The  plural  of  the 
word  is  occasionally  used  to  express  a  race  of  demons  (9,  884;  10,  I396),  of 
whom  the  Ahi  is  the  first-born  (i,  32^4). 

The  serpent,  however,  also  appears  as  a  divine  being  in  the  form  ot 
Ahi  budhnya  (§26),  who  seems  to  represent  the  beneficent  side  of  the  char 
acter  of  Ahi  Vrtra. 

In  the  later  Samhitas  the  serpents  (sarpah)  are  found  as  a  class  of 
semi-divine  beings  beside  the  Gandharvas  and  others.  They  are  spoken  of 
as  being  in  earth,  air,  and  heaven  (VS.  13,  6;  cp.  TB.  3,  i,  i7).  They  are 
often  mentioned  in  the  AV.6,  one  hymn  of  which  (n,  9)  is  sometimes  inter 
preted  as  an  invocation  of  certain  serpent  divinities7.  In  the  Sutras  offerings 
to  the  serpents  of  earth,  air,  and  heaven  (AGS.  2,  i?;  PGS.  2,  i49)  are  ,pre- 
scribed;  serpents  are  satiated  along  with  gods,  plants,  demons,  &c.  (SGS. 
4,  93.  i54;  AGS.  3,  41),  and  blood  is  poured  out  for  them  (AGS.  4,  827).  In 
this  worship  the  serpent,  owing  to  its  hurtfulness,  is  naturally  regarded  as 
having  a  demoniac  nature,  which  has  to  be  propitiated.  In  a  similar  sense 
offerings  are  sometimes  made  to  ants  (KS.  116). 

1  Cp.  BENFEY,  GGA.  1847,  p.  1484;  GUBERNATIS,  Zoological  Mythology  2, 
392  —  7;  WINTERNITZ,  Der  Sarpabali,  Vienna  1888.  —  2  Sp.AP.  257.  —  3  Cp.  Sp.AP. 
261.  —  4  BRV.  2,  204.  —  5  GRIFFITH,  RV.  Transl.  i,  133,  note  i;  MACDONELL, 
JRAS.  25,  429.  —  6  \VEBER,  Jyotisa  94;  PW.  s.  v.  sarpa.  —  7  Cp.  BLOOMFIELD, 
SEE.  42,  631—4. 

§  65.  Survival  of  prehistoric  notions.  —  The  primitive  conception 
that  man  does  not  differ  essentially  from  beast,  has  left  a  few  traces  in  the 
form  of  a  belief  in  beings  of  the  werewolf  order.  These  are  represented  by 
the  man-tigers  (VS.  30,  8;  SB.  13,  2,  42)1  and  by  the  Nagas,  human  beings 
in  appearance  but  in  reality  serpents,  which  are  first  mentioned  under  this 
name  in  the  Sutras2  (AGS.  3,  41).  It  does  not  seem  likely  that  the  later 
serpent  worship  had  any  connexion  with  the  myth  of  the  Vrtra  serpent,  but 
its  development  was  probably  due  rather  to  the  influence  of  the  aborigines. 
For  on  the  one  hand  there  is  no  trace  of  it  in  the  RV.,  and  on  the  other 
it  has  been  found  prevailing  very  widely  among  the  non-Aryan  Indians.  The 
Aryans  doubtless  found  the  cult  extensively  diffused  among  the  natives  when 
they  spread  over  India,  the  land  of  serpents  \ 

Similarly,  there  are  possibly  in  the  RV.  some  survivals  of  totemism  or 
the  belief  in  the  descent  of  the  human  race  or  of  individual  tribes  or  families 
from  animals  or  plants.  Kasyapa,  'Tortoise',  the  name  of  a  seer  (9,  ii42) 
and  of  a  priestly  family  (AB.  7,  27),  is  also  frequently  found  in  the  AV.  and 
the  later  Vedic  literature4  as  that  of  a  cosmogonic  power  nearly  related  to 
or  identified  with  the  Creator  Prajapati.  In  a  passage  of  the  SB.  (7,  5,  i5) 
Prajapati  appears  in  the  form  of  a  tortoise  (kurma}.  Here  it  is  remarked 
that,  as  kurma  is  identical  with  kasyapa,  'therefore  men  say:  all  beings  are  the 
children  of  the  tortoise  (kasyapa)'.  The  RV.  (7,  i86-/9)  mentions  as  tribal 
names  the  Matsyas  (Fishes)  5,  the  Ajas  (Goats),  and  the  Sigrus  (Horse-radishes). 
As  names  of  Vedic  t  priestly  families  also  occur  the  Gotamas6  (Oxen),  the 
Vatsas  (Calves),  the  Sunakas  (Dogs),  the  Kausikas  (Owls),  and  Mandukeyas  7 
(Frog-sons).  The  father  of  Samvarana  (a  name  occurring  in  RV.  5,  53 10), 
from  whom  the  kings  of  the  Kurus  claimed  descent,  is  in  the  Epic  called 
Rksa  (Bear)8.  HOPKINS,  however,  expresses  a  doubt  whether  the  names  of 
animals  ever  point  to  totemism  in  the  RV.9 

i  Cp.  the  Man-lion  incarnation  of  Visnu.  —    2  Cp.  WINTERNITZ,  Sarpabali  43. 

—   3  ORV.  69,  note  2.    —    4  PW.  s.  v.;  IS.  3,  457.  459.    —    5  Also  mentioned  in 


154     HI.  RELIGION,  WELTL.  WISSENSCH.  u.  KUNST.     i  A.  VEDIC  MYTHOLOGY. 

Manu  2,  19.  —  6  Superlative  of  go.  —  7  See  PW.  sub  vocibus.  —  8  ORV.  85—6; 
BLOOMFIELD,  JAOS.   15,  178,  note.  —  9  PAOS.  1894,  p.  CLIV. 

§  66.  Deified  Terrestrial  Objects.  —  A.  Besides  the  phenomena  and 
forces  of  nature,  mostly  aerial  and  celestial,  and  the  earth  itself  (§  34),  various 
natural  features  of  the  earth's  surface,  as  well  as  artificial  objects,  are  treated 
as  deities  in  the  RV.  It  is  the  worship  of  inanimate  things  chiefly  regarded 
as  useful  to  man1.  It  is  not  pantheistic,  since  each  object  is  regarded  as  a 
separate  divinity2,  but  is  rather  fetishistic  in  its  character. 

Rivers  personified  as  goddesses  have  already  been  dealt  with  (§  33). 

Mountains  (parvata)  are  often  in  the  RV.  conceived  as  divinely  animate, 
being  invoked  as  deities  nearly  twenty  times  in  the  plural  and  four  times  in 
the  singular.  In  this  capacity  they  never  appear  alone,  but  only  with  other 
natural  objects  such  as  waters,  rivers,  plants,  trees,  heaven  and  earth  (7,3423,&c.), 
or  with  gods  like  Savitr,  Indra,  and  others  (6,  49 M,  &c.).  They  are  invoked 
as  manly,  firmly  fixed,  rejoicing  in  plenty  (3,  542J).  Parvata  is  even  three 
times  lauded  with  Indra  in  the  dual  compound  Indrdparvata  (i,  I223.  i326j. 
The  pair  are  spoken  of  as  driving  in  a  great  car  and  are  besought  to  come 
to  the  offering  (3,  53*).  Here  Parvata  seems  to  be  a  mountain  god,  conceived 
anthropomorphically  as  a  companion  of  Indra. 

Plants  (osadhi)  are  also  personified  as  divine.  The  whole  of  a  long 
hymn  of  the  RV.  (10,  97)^  is  devoted  to  their  praise,  mainly  with  reference 
to  their  healing  powers4.  They  are  called  mothers  and  goddesses  (v.  *),  and 
Soma,  to  whom  trees  are  subject,  is  described  as  their  king.  In  another  text 
a  herb  to  be  used  medicinally  is  spoken  of  as  a  'goddess  born  on  the 
goddess  earth'  (AV.  6,  I361).  An  animal  sacrifice  is  even  offered  to  plants  in 
order  to  remove  their  obstruction  to  the  attainment  of  offspring  (TS.  2,  i,53j. 

Large  trees,  called  vanaspati,  'lord  of  the  forest',  are  a  few  times 
addressed  as  deities  either  in  the  plural  (7,  3423;  10,  648)  or  the  singular 
(i,  90*;  Val.  64),  chiefly  along  with  Waters  and  Mountains.  Later  texts  refer 
to  the  adoration  paid  to  large  trees  passed  in  marriage  processions 5  (cp.  p.  134). 

The  forest  as  a  whole  appears  as  a  deity  under  the  name  of  Ar  an  van  I, 
the  jungle  goddess,  who  is  invoked  in  RV.  10,  146.  Here  she  is  called  the 
mother  of  beasts,  abounding  in  food  without  tillage;  and  the  various  uncanny 
sounds  heard  in  her  dark  solitudes  are  weirdly  described.  The  plant,  tree, 
and  forest  deities,  however,  play  a  very  insignificant  part  not  only  in  the 
RV.,  but  even  in  the  AV.  and  in  the  ritual  of  the  lesser  domestic  sacrifices; 
while  in  the  Buddhist  literature  they  seem  to  have  been  more  closely  con 
nected  with  human  life  than  any  other  lower  deities6. 

B.  Implements.  Another  group  of  inanimate  objects  susceptible  of 
personification  and  worship  is  formed  by  various  implements  of  sacrifice.  The 
deification  of  these  is  by  BARTH7  called  by  the  rather  misleading  name  of 
ritualistic  pantheism8.  The  most  important  of  these  objects  is  the  sacrificial 
post,  which  under  the  name  of  vanaspati  and  svaru  is  deified  and  invoked 
in  RV.  3,  8.  The  tree  is  here  described  as  well-lopped  with  the  axe,  as 
anointed  and  adorned  by  priests;  and  the  posts  set  up  by  priests  are  gods, 
and  as  gods  go  to  the  gods  (vv.  6-  9).  In  the  tenth  or  eleventh  verses  of  the 
Apr!  hymns10,  the  post  is  described  as  thrice  anointed  with  ghee  and  being 
set  up  beside  the  fire  is  invoked  to  let  the  offering  go  to  the  gods.  In  other 
verses  of  the  same  hymns  the  sacrificial  grass  (bar/its)  is  twice  (2,34;  10,  7o4) 
addressed  as  a  god,  and  more  frequently  the  doors  leading  to  the  place  of 
sacrifice,  as  goddesses  (devlr  dvdrah). 

The  pressing  stones  (grdvan,  also  adri)  are  deified  in  three  hymns 
(10,  76.  94.  175).  They  are  spoken  of  as  immortal,  unaging,  and  more 


66.  DEIFIED  TERRESTRIAL  OBJECTS.  155 

mighty  even  than  heaven11.  When  pressing  they  are  like  steeds  or  bulls  and 
the  sound  of  their  voice  reaches  to  heaven.  They  are  invoked  to  drive  away 
demons  and  destruction,  and  to  bestow  wealth  and  offspring.  In  two  verses 
of  the  RV.  (i,  2 8 s-  6)  the  mortar  and  pestle  are  invoked  to  resound  aloud 
and  to  press  Soma  for  Indra. 

The  AV.  ascribes  divine  power  of  the  highest  order  to  Ucchista,  the 
'remnant'  of  the  sacrifice  (A V.  11,7)"  as  well  as  to  different  sacrificial  ladles1^ 

Agricultural  implements  named  Suna  and  Sir  a,  probably  the  ploughshare 
and  the  plough,  are  invoked  in  a  few  verses  of  the  RV.  (4,  575~8),  and  a 
cake  is  assigned  to  them  at  the  sacrifice  in  the  ritual  (SB.  2,  6,  3s). 

Weapons,  finally,  are  sometimes  deified.  The  whole  of  RV.  6,  75  is 
devoted  to  the  praise  of  various  implements  of  war,  armour,  bow,  quiver, 
and  arrows.  The  arrow  is  adored  as  divine  and  is  besought  to  grant  pro 
tection  and  to  attack  the  foe  (vv.  "•  J5-  l6).  The  drum  (dundubhi)  is  invoked 
to  drive  away  dangers,  foes,  and  demons  (vv.  29~31);  and  a  whole  hymn  of 
the  AV.  (5,  20)  celebrates  its  praises14. 

C.  Symbols.  Material  objects  are  occasionally  mentioned  in  the  later 
Vedic  literature  as  symbols  representing  deities.  Something  of  this  kind 
(possibly  an  image)  must  be  meant  even  in  a  passage  of  the  RV.,  in  which 
the  poet  asks,  'Who  will  buy  this  my  Indra  for  ten  cows?  When  he  has 
slain  his  foes  he  may  give  him  back  to  me'  (4,  24™;  cp.  8,  i5).  References 
to  idols15  begin  to  appear  in  the  later  additions  to  the  Brahmanas  and  in 
the  Sutras16. 

The  wheel  is  in  various  ritual  performances  employed  as  a  symbol  of 
the  sun,  as  representing  both  its  shape  and  its  motion.  It  is  thus  used  in 
the  Vajapeya  sacrifice17,  in  the  ceremony  of  laying  the  sacrificial  fire,  and 
at  the  solstitial  festival18.  In  post- Vedic  mythology,  moreover,  one  of  the 
weapons  of  Visnu  is  a  wheel  (cakrd) I9. 

Gold  or  a  firebrand  was  employed  as  a  symbol  of  the  sun,  when  drawing 
water  after  sunset  (SB.  3,  9,  29);  gold  served  the  same  purpose  when  the 
sacrificial  fire  was  made  up  after  sunset  instead  of  before  (SB.  12,4,  46);  and 
in  piling  the  fire- altar,  a  disc  of  gold  was  placed  on  it  to  represent  the  sun 
(SB.  7,  4,  i10)20. 

A  symbol  must  have  been  used,  as  at  a  later  period,  in  the  phallic  wor 
ship  which  was  known  in  the  earliest  Vedic  period,  as  is  shown  by  the 
occurrence  in  two  passages  of  the  word  sisnddevafa  'those  who  have  a  phallus 
for  their  deity'.  Such  worship  was,  however,  repugnant  to  the  religious  ideas 
of  the  RV.;  for  Indra  is  besought  not  to  let  the  sisnadevah  approach  the 
sacrifice  (7,  2iS),  and  he  is  said  to  have  slain  the  sisnadevdh,  when  he  won 
the  treasure  of  the  hundred-gated  fort  (10,  993).  In  the  post- Vedic  period 
the  phallus  or  linga  became  symbolical  of  Siva's  generative  power  and  its 
worship  is  widely  diffused  in  India  even  at  the  present  day21. 

i  HRI.  166.  —  2  HRI.  135.  —  3  Cp.  ROTH,  ZDMG.  25,  645—8.  -  -  4  Cp. 
DARMESTETER,  Haurvatat  et  Ameretat  74—6.  —  5  ORV.  252;  tree-worship  also  appears 
in  the  Sfitras,  where  a  newly  married  couple  are  said  to  bring  offerings  to  the 
itdumbara  and  to  invoke  its  blessing:  WINTERNITZ,  Hochzeitsrituell  101  —  2.  —  6  ORV. 
259 — 61.—  7  BRI.  37,  note.  —  8  HRI.  135.  —  9  Cp.  OLDENBERG,  SHE.  46, 12.  253—5.  - 
10  Cp.  ROTH,  Nir.  xxxvi,  Erl.  117—8.  121 — 4;  ASL.  463—6;  WEBER,  IS.  10,  89 — 95; 
GRV.  1,6;  KRV.n.126;  OLDENBERG,  SBE.  46,  9-10.  —  «  HVM.  i,  151.  — I2  OST. 
5,  396;  SPH.  87-8.  -  -  13  OST.  5,  398.  -  -  M  ROTH,  FaB.  99.  —  15  The  allu 
sion  to  idols  of  Agni,  seen  in  RV.  i,  1454-  5  by  BOLLENSEN  (ZDMG.  47,  586),  is 
inconclusive.  —  16  WEBER,  Omina  und  Portenta  337.  367  f.;  IS.  5,  149;  KRV. 
note  79a;  HRI.  251.  —  17  WEBER,  Vajapeya  20.  34  f.  —  18  ORV.  88,  note  4.  — 
X9  v.  BRADKE,  ZDMG.  40,  356.  —  20  ORV.  255—61.  87—92.  —  2'  v.  SCHROEDER 
WZKM.  9,  237;  HRI.  150. 


156     III.  RELIGION,  WELTL.  WISSENSCH.  u.  KUNST.     i  A.  VEDIC  MYTHOLOGY. 


VI.    DEMONS  AND  FIENDS. 

§  67.  A.  Asuras. —  Opposed  to  the  beneficent  gods  is  a  body  of  male 
volent  beings  called  by  various  designations.  Asura  is  throughout  the  Vedic 
literature  the  name  of  the  celestial  demons  who  are  regarded  as  the  regular 
adversaries  of  the  gods  in  their  mythical  conflicts  and  who  only  rarely  appear 
as  present  foes  of  men  (e.  g.  AV.  8,  65;  KS.  8;16;  881).  The  term,  however, 
occurs  only  a  few  times  in  the  RV.  with  the  later  sense  of  demon.  It  is 
there  found  only  four  times  in  the  plural  with  this  meaning.  Indra  is  invoked 
to  scatter  the  godless  Asuras  (8,  859).  Otherwise  they  are  only  mentioned  in 
the  tenth  book,  always  as  opposed  to  the  gods  in  general.  The  gods,  it  is 
said,  smote  the  Asuras  (10,  i574;.  Agni  promises  to  devise  a  hymn  by  which 
the  gods  may  vanquish  the  Asuras  (10,  534).  The  gods  are  even  said  to 
have  placed  faith  in  the  formidable  Asuras  (10,  i5i3).  The  word  also  occurs 
three  times  as  the  designation  of  an  individual  demon.  Brhaspati  is  besought 
to  pierce  with  a  burning  stone  the  heroes  of  the  wolfish  Asura  (2,  3 o4).  Indra 
shattered  the  forts  of  the  crafty  Asura  Pipru  (10,  i383)  and  Indra- Visnu  smote 
the  i oo ooo  heroes  of  the  Asura  Varcin  (7,  995).  The  sense  of  'demon'  is 
also  found  in  the  epithet  asurahan,  'Asura-slayer',  \vhich  occurs  three  times 
and  is  applied  to  Indra  (6,  224),  to  Agni  (7,  13*),  and  to  the  Sun  (10,  i7o2). 
The  older  Rigvedic  notion  of  the  conflict  of  a  single  god  with  a  single  demon, 
mainly  exemplified  by  Indra  and  Vrtra,  gradually  developed  into  that  of  the 
gods  and  the  Asuras  in  general  being  arrayed  against  each  other  in  two 
hostile  camps.  This  is  the  regular  view  of  the  Brahmanas.  A  new  and 
frequent  feature  of  the  conflicts  constantly  described  in  these  works  is  that 
the  gods  are  worsted  at  the  outset  and  only  win  by  artifice.  The  most 
notable  illustration  of  this  notion  is  the  myth  of  Visnu  taking  his  three  strides 
in  the  form  of  a  dwarf  on  behalf  of  the  gods1. 

In  the  Brahmanas  the  Asuras  are  associated  with  darkness  (SB.  2,4, 2 5)2. 
Day  belongs  to  the  gods,  night  to  the  Asuras  (TS.  i,  5,  92).  They  are,  how 
ever,  constantly  spoken  of  as  being  the  offspring  of  Prajapati  and  as  having 
originally  been  equal  to  and  like  the  gods3.  It  is  perhaps  for  this  reason 
that  malignant  spirits  are  sometimes  included  by  the  term  deva  (TS.  3,  5,  41; 
AV.  3,  i55j. 

In  the  AV.  and  later  asura  means  'demon'  only;  but  in  the  RV.  the 
word  is  predominantly  a  designation  of  gods,  and  in  the  Avesta  Ahura 
(==  asura)  is  the  name  of  the  highest  god.  Thus  the  sense  of  'god'  is  clearly 
the  older.  An  attempt  has  been  made  to  explain  the  transition  from  this 
meaning  to  that  of  'devil',  from  national  conflicts  in  consequence  of  which 
the  Asuras  or  gods  of  extra- Vedic  tribes  became  'demons'  to  the  Vedic  Indian4. 
There  is,  however,  no  traditional  evidence  in  support  of  this  view.  The  ex 
planation  seems  rather  to  be  found  in  the  following  development  within  the 
Veda  itself  5.  Asura  as  compared  with  deva  has  in  its  older  sense  a  peculiar 
shade  of  meaning.  It  is  especially  applied  to  Varuna  or  Mitra-Varuna  b, 
whose  may  a  or  'occult  power'  is  particularly  dwelt  upon  7.  But  the  word 
may  a  in  the  sense  of  'craft'  is  also  applied  to  hostile  beings8  and  is  closely 
connected  with  the  bad  sense  of  asura  (10,  I245.  i383)9.  To  the  Vedic  poets 
asura  must  therefore  have  meant  'possessor  of  occult  power'10  and  as  such 
would  have  been  potentially  applicable  to  hostile  beings.  In  one  hymn  of 
the  RV.  (10,  124)  both  senses  seem  to  occur".  Towards  the  end  of  the 
Rigvedic  period  the  application  of  the  word  to  the  gods  began  to  fall  into 
disuse.  This  tendency  was  perhaps  aided  by  the  want  of  a  general  word  to 


DEMONS  AND  FIENDS.     67.  ASURAS,  PANIS,  DASAS.  157 

denote  the  higher  hostile  demoniac  power  and  by  an  incipient  popular  etymo 
logy12  recognising  a  negative  in  the  word  and  leading  to  the  invention  of 
sura,  'god'  (first  found  in  the  Upanisads) I3. 

B.  Pan  is.  —  A  group  of  demons  of  the  upper  air,  primarily  the  enemies 
of  Indra  (6,  2o4.  392J,    secondarily    also  of  his   allies  Soma,  Agni,  Brhaspati,, 
and  the  Angirases,  are  the  Panis.    In  nearly  all  the  passages  in  which  these 
demons    are    named,    their    cows    are    either    expressly   mentioned  (10,  108; 
6,  392)  or  alluded  to  as  the  treasure  or  wealth  of  the  Panis  (2,  246;  9,  in2). 
There  is  a  similar  reference  when  Agni  is  said  to  have  opened  the  doors  of 
the  Panis  (7,  92).    In  one  passage  the  gods  are  described  as  having  found  in 
the  cow  the  ghee  hidden  by  the  Panis  (4,  58*).    The  Panis  are  comparatively 
powerful,  for  they  are  said  to  be  surpassed  in  might  by  Indra  (7,  5610)  and 
not  to  have  attained  to  the  greatness  of  Mitra-Varuna  (i,  i5i9). 

The  name  occurs  in  the  RV.  about  sixteen  times  in  the  plural,  but  is 
also  found  four  times  in  the  singular  as  representative  of  the  group.  Thus 
Indra  or  Agni-Soma  are  described  as  having  robbed  the  cows  from  Pani 
(10,  676;  i,  934),  or  Soma  is  invoked  to  strike  down  the  voracious  Pani  who 
is  a  wolf  (6,  5 114). 

The  word  pani  occurs  with  considerably  greater  frequency,  and  here 
oftener  as  a  singular  than  a  plural,  in  the  sense  of  'niggard',  especially  with 
regard  to  sacrificial  gifts.  From  this  signification  it  developed  the  mythological 
meaning  of  demons  similar  to  those  who  primarily  withhold  the  treasures  of 
heaven14. 

C.  The   word    ddsa   or   its  equivalent    dasyu,    is  also  used  to  designate 
atmospheric    demons.     Its    history    is    the    converse    of  that  of  Vrtra  (§  68). 
Primarily  signifying   the    dark  aborigines    of  India  contrasted  with    their    fair 
Aryan  conquerors,  it  frequently  rises  to  mythological  rank  in  the  RV.  as  the 
line  between  what  is    historical   and   mythical  is  not  clearly  drawn.     This  is 
especially  the  case  with  individual  Dasas,   some  of  whose  names  even  (e.  g. 
Susna)  lend  themselves  to  a  mythological  interpretation,   though  others  seem 
to  be  those  of  non- Aryan  men  (e.  g.  Ilibisa)1^. 

Thus  both  the  singular  (2,  i210,  &c.)  and  (mostly  of  dasyu)  the  plural 
(i,  ioi5)  are  frequently  used  to  designate  foes  vanquished  by  Indra,  some 
times  beside  the  name  of  Vrtra  (6,  232,  &c.).  Hence  Indra  is  sometimes 
called  dasyuhan,  'Dasyu-slayer'  (i,  zoo12,  &c.)  and  the  combat  is  several 
times  referred  to  as  dasyuhatya  (i,  5i5-  6,  &c.).  In  favour  of  individual 
proteges  Indra  'sent  to  sleep'  (i.  e.  slew)  30000  Dasas  (4,  3o21),  bound  a 
thousand  Dasyus  (2,  i39),  or  won  cowstalls  from  the  Dasyus  for  Dadhyanc 
(and)  Matarisvan  (10,  48 2).  When  Indra's  aid  is  invoked  against  both  Arya 
and  Dasa  foes  (10,  383,  &c.)  or  when  he  is  spoken  of  as  discriminating 
between  Aryas  and  Dasyus  or  Dasas  (i,  51®;  10,  86IQ),  terrestrial  foes  are 
undoubtedly  meant.  This  is  probably  also  the  case  when  Indra  fights  against 
the  Dasyus  in  favour  of  the  Aryas  (6,  i83.  252).  Owing  to  the  Dasas  being 
so  frequently  taken  captive  by  the  conquering  Aryans,  the  word  ddsa  comes 
to  be  used  two  or  three  times  in  the  RV.  (7,  867;  Val.  83)  in  the  sense  of 
'servant',  'slave',  its  ordinary  meaning  in  post-Vedic  Sanskrit l6.  On  the  other 
hand,  the  Dasyus  who  endeavouring  to  scale  heaven  are  cast  down  by  Indra 
(8,  i414  cp.  2,  i212),  the  Dasyu  whom  he  burnt  down  from  heaven  (i,  337), 
whom  he  vanquished  from  birth  (i,  51°;  8,  66I-3)?  Or  against  whom  he  aids 
the  gods  (10,  541),  must  be  demons.  This  is  also  the  case,  when  Indra 
attacks  the  Dasyu,  scattering  the  mist  and  darkness  (10,  735),  or  wins  the 
sun  and  the  waters  after  slaying  the  Dasyus  (i,  iool8),  and  when  the  gods 
and  the  Dasyus  are  contrasted  as  foes  (3,  299).  A  demon  must  be  meant 


158     III.  RELIGION,  WELTL.  WISSENSCH.  u.  KUNST.     i  A.  VEDIC  MYTHOLOGY. 

by  the  Dasa  who  is  the  husband  of  the  waters  (i,  32";  5,  30$;  8,  85l8), 
which  by  his  victory  Indra  makes  the  wives  of  a  noble  husband  (10,  438). 
The  seven  forts  of  the  Dasas,  which,  like  those  of  Vrtra  (i,  i742),  are  called 
autumnal  (6,  2o10  cp.  7,  103 9),  are  doubtless  atmospheric. 

As  the  words  ddsa  and  dasyu  primarily  mean  'malignant  foe'  and  then 
'demon'  I7,  it  seems  convenient  to  render  them  by  'fiend'.  They  are  frequently 
added  as  a  generic  term  to  the  names  of  individual  fiends  combated  by 
Indra.,  being  most  commonly  thus  applied  to  Namuci  (5,307~9,  &c.),  Sambara 
(4,  3o14,  &c.),  Susna  (7,  19*,  &c.),  sometimes  to  Pipru  (8,  32*;  10,  i383), 
Cumuri  and  Dhuni  (2,  15$;  7,  i94),  Varcin  (4,  3o15;  6,  4721),  Navavastva  (10, 
496-  7),  once  to  Tvastra  (2,  n19)  and  to  the  dragon  Ahi  (2,  n2). 

i  MACDONELL,  JRAS.  27,  168  —  77.  —  2  HRI.  187.  —  3  OST.  4,  52.  58—62; 
5,  15.  18.  22.  230.  —  4  Cp.  BDA.  109.  —  5  Otherwise  EDA.  106.  —  6  Op.  cit. 
120  ff.  —  7  BRV.  3,  81  cp.  GVS.  I,  142.  —  8  BRV.  3,  80.  —  9  AV.  passim;  cp. 
ORV.  164,  note  2.  -  -  10  ORV.  162 — 5;  cp.  DARMESTETER,  Ormazd  et  Ahriman 
269  f.  The  Indo-Iranian  meaning  was  according  to  BDA.  86  'Herr'  (lord).  — 
"  OLDENBERG,  ZDMG.  39,  70,  note  2.  -  -  12  On  the  etymology  cp.  v.  BRADKE, 
ZDMG.  40,  347—9-  -  X3  Cp.  PW.  s.  v.  sura.  -  -  H  Cp  ORV.  145;  otherwise 
HVM.  i,  83  ff.  —  J5  Cp.  WACKERNAGEL,  Altindische  Grammatik  i,  xxn.  — 
16  Cp.  'Slave',  originally  =  'captive  Slav'.  —  */"  Cp.  AIL.  109—13. 

§  68.  A.  Vrtra1.  -  -  Of  the  individual  atmospheric  demons  by  far  the 
most  important  and  the  most  frequently  mentioned  is  Vrtra,  who  is  the  chief 
adversary  of  Indra  and  for  whose  slaughter  that  deity  is  said  to  have  been 
born  or  grown  (8,  785;  I0,  55).  Hence  the  most  distinctive  epithet  of  Indra 
is  vrtrahan,  'Vrtra-slayer'.  This  compound  is  analyzed  in  two  passages  of 
the  RV.:  'May  the  Vrtra-slayer  slay  Vrtra'  (8,  78^)  and  'Vrtra-slayer,  slay  the 
Vrtras'  (8,179).  Indra's  conflict  with  Vrtra  is  also  frequently  referred  to  with 
vrtrahatya,  'slaughter  of  Vrtra'  and  sometimes  with  vrtraturya^  'conquest 
of  Vrtra'. 

It  has  already  been  shown  that  Vrtra  is  conceived  as  having  the  form 
of  a  serpent  (§  64).  Hence  he  is  without  feet  or  hands  (i,  32?;  3,  3o8)2. 
His  head,  which  Indra  pierces,  is  mentioned  several  times  (i,  52™;  8,  6b. 
652),  as  well  as  his  jaws,  into  which  Indra  strikes  his  bolt  (i,  526).  His 
hissing  or  snorting  is  sometimes  referred  to  (8,  857;  5,  294  cp.  i,  52™.  6i10; 
6,  i710).  He  has  thunder  at  his  disposal  (i,  8o12),  as  well  as  lightning,  mist, 
and  hail  (i,  32*3). 

Vrtra' s  mother  is  called  Danu  and  is  compared  with  a  cow  (i,  329). 
This  name  seems  to  be  identical  with  the  word  ddnu,  which  is  several  times 
used  as  a  neuter  meaning  'stream'  and  once  as  a  feminine  to  designate  the 
waters  of  heaven  3.  The  same  term  is  applied  as  a  masculine,  apparently  in 
the  sense  of  a  metronymic,  to  Vrtra  or  the  dragon  (2,  12";  4,  30?),  as  well 
as  to  the  demon  Aurnavabha  (2,nl8),  and  to  seven  demons  slain  by  Indra 
(10,  i2o6).  The  regular  metronymic  Danava  is  used  five  times  to  designate 
a  demon  combated  by  Indra  and  doubtless  identical  with  Vrtra.  Indra  cast 
down  the  wiles  of  the  wily  Danava  (2,  n10),  he  struck  down  the  snorting 
Danava  (5,  294),  to  release  the  waters  (5,  321). 

Vrtra  has  a  hidden  (ninya)  abode,  whence  the  waters,  when  released  by 
Indra,  escape  overflowing  the  demon  (i,  3210).  Vrtra  lies  on  the  waters 
(i,  121";  2,  ii19)  or  enveloped  by  waters  at  the  bottom  (budhna)  of  the 
rajas  or  aerial  space  (i,  526).  He  is  also  described  as  lying  on  a  summit 
(sdnu),  when  Indra  made  the  waters  to  flow  (i,  8o5);  or  as  having  been  cast 
down  by  Indra  from  lofty  heights  (8,  3*9).  Vrtra  has  fortresses,  which  Indra 
shatters  when  he  slays  him  (10,  897J  and  which  are  ninety-nine  in  number 
(7,  i95;  8,  822). 


DEMONS  AND  FIENDS.     68.  VRTRA,  VALA  £c.  159 

There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  word  vr-tra  is  derived  from  the  root  vr, 
'to  cover  or  encompass'4.  Poets  several  times  speak  of  Vrtra  as  having  en 
compassed  the  waters,  apo  varivdmsam  (2,  14%  &c.)  or  vrtvl  (i,  526j,  or  as 
being  an  encompasser  of  rivers,  nadl-vrt  (i,  522;  8,  i226  cp.  6,  30*;  7,  2i3). 
These  are  clearly  allusions  to  the  etymology  of  the  name.  There  is  also 
evidently  a  play  on  the  derivation  when  it  is  said  that  Indra  'encompassed 
the  encompasser',  vrtram  avrnot  (3,433),  or  that  in  slaying  Vrtra  he  uncovered 
(apa  vr)  the  prison  of  the  waters  (i,  32".  5i4).  A  similar  notion  is  implied 
in  a  passage  in  which  the  (cloud)  mountain  (parvata)  is  described  as  being 
within  the  belly  of  Vrtra  and  Indra  strikes  the  streams,  placed  in  a  covering 
(vavri),  down  declivities  (cp.  i,  576).  Vrtra  is  also  said  to  be  an  encloser 
(paridhi)  of  the  streams  (3,  336J. 

It  has  been  shown  above  that  Indra's  epithet  vrtrahan  was  understood 
by  the  Vedic  poets  to  mean  not  only  'slayer  of  Vrtra'  but  also  as  'slayer  of 
Vrtras'.  This  plural,  which  is  of  frequent  occurrence  in  the  RV.  and  is 
always  neuter,  sometimes  appears  in  passages  mentioning  the  names  of  various 
individual  fiends  (7,  19*;  10,  496).  The  result  of  Indra's  conflict  with  the 
Vrtras  is  the  release  of  the  waters  (7,  34^)  or  of  the  rivers  (8,  85 l8)  which 
are  'encompassed',  vrtdn  (4,  42 ?).  It  is  the  Vrtras  which,  as  well  as  the 
fiends,  he  is  to  smite  as  soon  as  born  (6,  2<)6)  and  to  destroy  which  he  has 
been  produced  by  the  gods  (3,  49 T).  With  the  bones  of  Dadhyanc  he  slew 
99  Vrtras  (i,  8413)  just  as  he  shatters  the  ninety-nine  forts  of  Vrtra  (7,195). 

The  term  Vrtras,  which  is  regularly  employed  with  the  verb  ban,  'to 
slay',  also  refers  to  terrestrial  foes,  as  when  Aryas  and  Dasas  are  distinguished 
as  two  kinds  of  Vrtras  (6,  2210.  333).  There  are,  moreover,  many  passages 
in  which  it  is  quite  as  applicable  to  human  enemies  as  to  celestial  demons. 
Then,  however,  it  does  not  mean  simply  'enemy',  which  is  amitra  (=  inimicus) 
or  satru  (cp.  6,  732),  but  is  employed  with  a  side-glance  at  the  demon  Vrtra, 
much  as  the  English  word  'fiend'  in  its  present  use,  when  applied  to  men, 
is  suggestive  of  'devil'.  This  relation  of  meaning  is  the  converse  of  that  in 
das  a  or  dasyu,  which  first  meant  ffoe'  and  then  'fiend'.  The  use  of  vrtra  in 
the  plural,  as  it  is  then  always  neuter,  can  hardly  be  derived  from  a  generali 
zation  of  the  proper  name  Vrtra,  but  must  be  based  on  an  earlier  meaning 
such  as  'obstruction',  then  'obstructor'.  In  the  Avesta  verethra  means  'victory', 
which  is,  however,  a  secondary  development  of  'obstruction'. 

In  the  Brahmanas  Vrtra  is  interpreted  as  the  moon,  which  is  swallowed 
by  Indra  identified  with  the  sun,  at  new  moon5. 

B.  Vala6.  This  word  occurs  about  twenty-four  times  in  the  RV.  and 
is  regularly  connected  with  the  release  of  the  cows  by  Indra  or  his  allies, 
especially  the  Angirases  (§  54).  Vala  is  a  guardian  of  cows,  whom  Indra 
rent  when  he  robbed  Pani  of  his  cows  (10,  676  cp.  6,  392).  He  laments  for 
his  cows  when  taken  by  Brhaspati  (10,  68 10  cp.  676).  He  has  castles  which 
were  forced  open  by  Indra  (6,  i815),  fences  which  were  pierced  by  Indra 
(i,  52s),  and  an  unbroken  summit  which  was  broken  by  Indra  (6,  392).  The 
TS.  (2,  i,  51)  speaks  of  Indra  having  opened  the  hole  (bila)  of  Vala  and 
cast  out  the  best  beast  in  it,  a  thousand  others  following.  There  are,  how 
ever,  several  passages  in  which  the  word  is  still  unpersonified.  The  primary 
meaning  in  these  cases  seems  to  have  been  'covering'  or  'cave'  (from  the 
root  vr,  to  cover).  Thus  the  word  is  twice  (i,  624;  4,  5o5)  used  in  appo 
sition  with  phaliga,  the  receptacle  of  the  (atmospheric)  waters  (8,  3225j  and 
appears  in  the  Naighantuka  (i,  10)  as  a  synonym  of  megha,  'cloud'.  Indra 
is  said  to  have  driven  out  the  cows  and  opened  (apa  var)  the  vala  (2,  i43) 
or  to  have  opened  (apdvar)  the  aperture  (cp.  i,32XI)  of  the  vala  containing 


160     III.  RELIGION,  WELTL.  WISSENSCH.  u.  KUNST.     i  A.  VEDIC  MYTHOLOGY. 


cows  (i,  ii5).  The  PB.  (19,  7)  speaks  of  the  cave  (vald)  of  the  Asuras 
being  closed  with  a  stone.  In  several  passages  the  word  may  have  either 
the  primary  or  the  personified  sense  (i,  525;  2,  12 3;  3,  3410).  It  has  probably 
the  latter  in  Indra's  epithet  valamruja,  'breaker  of  Vala',  which  occurs  imme 
diately  after  vrtrakhdda,  'destroyer  of  Vrtra'  (3,  45*  cp.  2,  12*).  The  transition 
to  the  personified  meaning  appears  in  a  passage  (3,  3o10)  in  which  Vala  is 
spoken  of  as  the  stable  (vraja)  of  the  cow  and  as  having  opened  (vi  ara) 
for  fear  before  Indra  strikes.  That  the  personification  is  not  fully  developed, 
is  indicated  by  the  action  of  Indra  and  others,  when  they  attack  Vala,  being 
generally  expressed  by  bhidt  'to  pierce',  sometimes  by  dr,  'to  cleave',  Qiruj, 
'to  break',  but  not  (as  in  the  case  of  Vrtra)  by  han>  'to  slay'.  The  connexion 
of  the  verb  bhid  with  the  name  of  Vala  is  preserved  in  valabhid,  which  is  a 
frequent  epithet  of  Indra  in  post-Vedic  literature.  Here  Vala  is  regarded  as 
the  brother  of  Vrtra,  and  the  two  are  associated  in  Indra's  compound  epithet 
vala-vrtra-han,  'Slayer  of  Vala  and  Vrtra'. 

C.  Other  demon  foes  of  Indra.  Arbuda  is  mentioned  seven  times 
(twice  oxytone,  five  times  proparoxytone)  in  the  RV.,  always  as  an  adversary 
of  Indra.  He  is  a  wily  beast,  whose  cows  Indra  drove  out  (8,  3*9).  Indra 
cast  him  down  (2,n20.  14*  cp.  8,  323),  trod  him  down  with  his  foot  (i,  5i6), 
pierced  him  with  ice  (8,  322)  or  struck  off  his  head  (10,  6;12).  He  is  men 
tioned  two  or  three  times  with  Vrtra  (or  Ahi)  and  appears  to  be  cognate  in 
nature  to  him7. 

Visvarupa8,  the  son  of  Tvastr,  is  a  three-headed  demon  slain  by  both 
Trita  and  Indra,  who  seize  his  cows  (10,  88-  9).  He  is  mentioned  simply  by 
his  patronymic  Tvastra  in  two  or  three  other  passages,  in  which  he  is  de 
scribed  as  rich  in  horses  and  cattle  (10,7  63)  and  is  said  to  have  been  delivered 
over  by  Indra  to  Trita  (2,  iiJ9;  cp.  pp.  61.  67).  In  the  TS.  (2,  5,  i1)  Visva 
rupa,  though  related  to  the  Asuras,  is  spoken  of  as  Purohita  of  the  gods9. 
In  the  Mahabharata  (5,  22f.)  the  three-heated  son  of  Tvastr  and  Vrtra 
are  identical. 

Svarbhanu10  is  a  demoniac  (asura)  being  mentioned  four  times  in  one 
hymn  of  the  RV.  (5,  40).  He  is  described  as  eclipsing  the  sun  with  dark 
ness.  Indra  fought  against  his  wiles  and  Atri  put  the  eye  of  the  sun  (back) 
in  heaven.  This  demon  is  also  mentioned  several  times  in  the  Brahmanas. 
In  post-Vedic  mythology  his  place  is  taken  by  Rahu.  The  name  appears  to 
mean  'withholding  the  light  of  the  sun'. 

Urana,  a  demon  slain  by  Indra  and  described  as  having  ninety-nine 
arms,  is  mentioned  only  once  (2,  144). 

i  BREAL,  Hercule  87—99;  BRV.  2,  196—208;  ORV.  135—6;  ZDMG.  50,  665 f.  — 
2  Cp.  Agni  in  4,  i  "  cp.  2,  23.  —  3  BRV.  2,  220 ;  cp.  OLDENBERG,  SEE.  46,  123 ;  according 
to  PW.  and  GW.  the  words  are  distinct  -  -  4  Cp.  PERRY,  JAOS.  n,  135;  Vrtra 
=  'Restrainer'  HRI.  94.  —  5  HRI.  197.  _  6  p\y. ;  GW.  s.  v.  vala\  BRV.  2,  319 
—21.  —  7  Cp.  GW.  —  8  Cp.  HVM.  i,  519.  531—2.  —  9  Cp.  OST.  5,  230-2.— 
10  IS.  3,  164  f.;  LRV.  5,  508;  BRV.  2,  468;  OLDENBERG,  ZDMG.  42,  213;  HVM. 
i,  464.  507,  n.  i;  LANMAN,  FaR.  187 — 90. 

§  69.  Individual  Dasas.  —  A.  Susna1.  This  fiend,  who  is  mentioned 
about  forty  times  in  the  RV.,  is  the  chief  enemy  of  Kutsa,  for  or  with  whom 
Indra  vanquishes  him  (4,  i612;  5,  299,  &c.).  He  is  horned  (i,  3312).  He  has 
eggs  (8,  4o10-  1X),  i.  e.  a  brood  (cp.  10,  22"),  from  which  it  may  be  inferred 
that  he  is  a  serpent.  He  is  described  as  hissing  (svasana-.  i,  545)2.  He  is 
six  times  spoken  of  as  asusa,  a  term  which  is  otherwise  only  once  applied 
to  Agni  and  perhaps  means  'devouring' 3.  He  has  strong  forts  (i,  51")  or  a 
fort  (4,3oT3),  which  is  moving  (8,  i28).  Indra  releases  the  waters  in  shattering 
Susna's  forts  (i,  51"),  obtains  the  receptacle  of  waters  (krivi)  in  smiting 


DEMONS  AND  FIENDS.     69.  SUSNA,  SAMBARA,  &c.  161 

Susna  (Val.  38),  or  wins  heavenly  (svarvafiJi)  waters  when  he  destroys  the 
brood  of  Susna  (8,  40 T0).  The  name  of  Susna  is  four  times  accompanied  by 
the  epithet  kuyava,  'causing  bad  corn  or  harvest'.  In  the  two  passages  in 
which  this  word  is  used  independently  as  the  name  of  a  demon  (i,  io38. 
io43),  it  may  refer  to  Susna.  The  result  of  the  conflict  between  Indra  and 
Susna  is  not  always  the  release  of  the  waters,  but  is  als9  the  finding  of  the 
cows  (8,  8517),  or  the  winning  of  the  sun  (cp.  §  58).  Susna  in  his  conflict 
with  Indra  moves  in  darkness,  is  a  'son  of  mist',  miho  napdt,  and  a  Danava 
(5?  324)-  In  the  Kathaka  (IS.  3,  466)  Susna  is  called  a  Danava  who  is 
in  possession  of  the  amrta. 

The  above  evidence  seems  to  point  to  Susna  having  been  a  demon  of 
drought  from  the  beginning  rather  than  a  reminiscence  of  some  historical 
human  foe.  This  view  is  supported  by  the  etymological  meaning  which  must 
be  either  'hisser'  (from  the  root  s'vas,  sus)  or  'scorcher'  (from  sus,  'to  dry'). 

B.  Sambara.     The    name  of  this    fiend  occurs  about    twenty    times  in 
the  RV.     He  is  mentioned  along  with   others,   chiefly  Susna,   Pipru  (i,  ioi2. 
io38;  2,  i96;  6,  i88),  and  Varcin.,    Indra  was   re-inforced   by   the  Maruts   in 
the  fight  against  the  dragon  and  Sambara  (3,  474).    Indra  shook  the  summit 
of,  heaven  when  he  cut  down  Sambara  (1,54*).   He  found  Sambara  dwelling 
in  the  mountains  (2,  I211)  and  struck  him  down  from  the  mountain  (i,  130?; 
6,  26s).     He  struck  down  from  the  great    mountain    the  Dasa  ^Sambara,    the 
son  of  Kulitara  (4,  30^).     He   struck   down   from   the  height  Sambara,    who 
thought  himself  a  little  god  (7,  i820).     Sambara  is   often  said  to   have    forts, 
ninety  (1,1307),  generally  ninety-nine  (2,i96,  &c.),  or  a  hundred  (2,  i46,  &c.). 
The  word  sambara  once  occurs    in    the  neuter   plural,    meaning  'the  forts  of 
Sambara'4.     These  Brhaspati  is  said  to  have  cleft  and  then  to  have  entered 
the    mountain    rich    in    treasure  (2,  242).     Indra    vanquishes  Sambara    in    the 
interest    of  Atithigva  (i,  5i6),    but    generally    of  Divodasa  (2,  ig6,  &c.),    and 
sometimes  of  both  (i,  130?;  4,  263).    The  two  names  are  usually  thought5  to 
refer  to  the  same  person,  but  this  is  doubted  by  BERGAiGNE6. 

C.  Pipru.   This  fiend,  mentioned  eleven  times  in  the  RV.,  is  the  enemy 
of  Indra's  protege  (Val.  i10)  Rjisvan,   who   offers  Soma  to  Indra  and  is  aided 
by  him  in  the  conflict  (5,  29";   10,  99").     Indra  with  Rjisvan  (i,  IOIT-  2;  10, 
i383)  or  for  him  (4,  i613;  6,  2o7)  conquered  Pipru.    The  fiend,  who  has  the 
wiles  of  Ahi,    possesses    forts  which   are  shattered    by  Indra  (i,  51$;  6,  2o7). 
When  Indra  slew   the    Dasa   Pipru   as   well   as   some  other  rarely  mentioned 
beings,  he  shed  the  waters  (8,  322).     When  the   sun   unyoked  his  chariot  in 
the  midst  of  the  sky,  the  Aryan  found  a  match  for  the  Dasa:    Indra  acting 
with  Rijisvan,   shattered   the   strong  forts  of  the  wily  Asura  Pipru  (10,  1383). 
He  delivered    the    wild  beast   (mrgaya)  Pipru  to   Rjisvan,    overthrew    50000 
blacks,  and  rent  the  forts  (4,  i6'3).     With  Rjisvan   he  drove   out   those  who 
have  a  black  brood7  (i,  ioi1).     Since  Pipru  is   called   an  Asura   as  well  as 
a  Dasa,   it   is  doubtful  whether   he   represents  a  human  foe  with  a  historical 
foundation,    as  some  scholars    think8.     The  name    has    the    appearance  of  a 
Sanskrit  word  as  a  reduplicated  derivative  of  the  root  par  or  pr  (like  si-sn-u 
from  \fsan)9,  possibly  meaning  'resister',  'antagonist'. 

D.  NamuciI0is  mentioned  nine  times  in  the  RV.  besides  several  times 
in  the  VS.,  TB.,  and  SB.     He   once  receives   the   epithet  asura,   'demoniac', 
in  the  RV.  (10,  13 i*;  SB.  12,  7,  i10)  and   is  called   an  Asura  in  later  Vedic 
texts.    He  is  also  spoken  of  as  a  Dasa  in  three  or  four  passages  of  the  RV. 
(5»  3°7'  8>  &c.)  and  once  as  'wily'  (i,  537).     In  vanquishing  Namuci  Indra   is 
twice  associated  with  Nam!  Sapya  as  his  protege  (i,  537;  6,  2o6).    Namuci  is 
slain  like  several   other   demons  (2,  148;   7,  195)  Or  struck  down  (i,  53")  by 

Indo-arische  Philologie.     III.     1  A.  \\ 


1 62     III.  RELIGION,  WELTL.  WISSENSCH.  u.  KUNST.     i  A.  VEDIC  MYTHOLOGY. 

India.  Indra  destroyed  a  hundred  castles,  slaying  Vrtra  and  Namuci  (7,  i95). 
The  characteristic  feature  about  the  conflict  is  that  Indra  twirls  ( }fmath)  off 
the  head  of  Namuci  (5,  30®;  6,  2o6),  while  he  is  said  to  pierce  \rbhid)  that 
of  Vrtra.  Otherwise  Indra  is  described  as  having  twisted  (uartayd)  the  head 
of  Namuci  (5, 307)  or  to  have  twisted  it  off  with  the  foam  ofwater  (8, 14X3).  The 
Brahmanas  also  refer  to  Indra's  cutting  off  Namuci's  head  with  the  foam  of 
the  waters11.  In  one  passage  of  the  RV.  (10.  1314-5)  Indra  is  described  as 
having  drunk  wine  beside  the  demoniac  Namuci,  when  the  Asvins  aided  and 
Sarasvati  cured  him  (cp.  p.  87). 

The  etymology  of  the  name  is  according  to  Panini  (6,  3,  75)  na-muci, 
'not  letting  go'.  In  that  case  it  would  mean  'the  demon  withholding  the  waters' I2. 

E.  Dhuni  and  Cumuri13.     The  Dasa  Cumuri   is   mentioned  six  times, 
with  one  exception  always  along  with  Dhuni.   The  closeness  of  the  association 
of  these  two  is  shown  by   their   names  once  appearing  as  a  dual  compound 
(6,  2oT3).     Indra  sent  them  to  sleep  (2,  i59;  6,  20^;  7,  i94)^rhe  same  being 
said  of  Cumuri  alone  (6,  266).   Along  with  Sambara,  Pipru,  Susna,,  they  were 
crushed  by  Indra,  so  that  their  castles  were   destroyed  (6,  iS8).     They  were 
sent    to    sleep    or   overcome   by  Indra  (10,  ii39)  in  favour  of  Dabhlti,  who 
pressed  Soma  for   him  (6,  20*3)  and  who  was   rewarded  by   the  god  for  his 
faith  (6,  266).     Without  any  mention  of  the  two  fiends,  Indra  is  also  said  to 
have  sent   to  sleep    for  Dabhlti  30000  Dasas  (4,  3o21)  and    to   have  bound 
the  Dasyus  for  him  without  cords  (2,  i39). 

Dhuni  means  'Roarer'  (}/ ' dhvari),  the  word  being  frequently  also  used 
in  the  RV.  as  an  adjective  in  the  sense  of  'roaring,  raging'.  Cumuri  on  the 
other  hand  looks  like  a  borrowed  aboriginal  name14. 

F.  V  arc  in  and  others.     Varcin    is    mentioned    four    times,   always  with 
Sambara.    He  is  called  an  Asura  (7,  99$),  but  he  and  Sambara  together  are 
termed  Dasas  (6,  47 2I).     Indra  is   said  to   have   shattered  the  hundred  forts 
of  Sambara  and  to  have  dispersed  or  slain  the   100000  warriors  of  the  Dasa 
Varcin  (2,  i46;  4,  30I5).    The  name  appears  to  mean  'shining',  from  varcas, 
'brilliance'. 

Several  others,  whose  names  occur  only  once,  are  mentioned,  along  with 
Vala,  Susna,  Namuci  and  other  fiends,  as  vanquished  by  Indra.  Such  are 
Drbhika,  Rudhikra  (2,14^5),  Anarsani15,  Srbinda  (8,322),  and  Ilibisa  (1,33 12). 
They  probably  preserve  a  historical  reminiscence  of  prominent  terrestrial  foes. 
For  the  last  two  of  these  names  have  an  un- Aryan  appearance;  nor  does  it 
seem  likely  that  original  individual  demons  should  have  received  names  which 
do  not  designate  a  demoniac  attribute  like  the  appellations  Vrtra,  Vala, 
and  Susna. 

i  KHF.  52  ff.;  BRV.  2,  333-8;  GVS.  2,  163  ff.;  HVM.  i,  516;  ORV.  155. 
158—61.  --  2  Cp.  y'svas  and  svasatha  applied  to  Vrtra.  --  3  Cp.  ORV.  159.  - 
4  Perhaps  through  the  influence  of  the  neut.  pi.  vrtrani.  --  5  PW.,  GW.,  OLDEN- 
BERG,  ZDMG.  42,  210.  —  6  BRV.  2,  342—3.  —  7  Ace.  pi.  fern.:  =  waters,  GW. 
s.  v.  krsnagarbha.  —  8  LRV.  3,  149;  EDA.  95;  ORV.  155.  —  9  BRV.  2,  349,  but 
with  the  sense  of  'filler'  or  'rescuer'.  —  'o  LRV.  5,  145;  BRV.  2,  345—7;  LANMAN, 
JAS.  Bengal  58,  28—30;  Sanskrit  Reader  375b;  BLOOMFIELD,  JAOS.  15,  143—63; 
OLDENBERG,  Gottinger  Nachrichten  1893,  342—9;  ORV.  16 1.  -  -  n  BLOOMFIELD, 
JAOS.  15,  155—6.  —  12  Cp.  KUHN,  KZ.  8,  80.  —  13  BRV.  2,  350;  ORV.  157.  - 
14  WACKERNAGEL,  Altind.  Gr.  i,  xxn.  —  15  Cp.  JOHANSSON,  IF.  2,45;  PERRY,  who 
treats  of  all  the  demons  combated  by  Indra,  JAOS.  n,  199 — 205. 

§  70.  A.  Raksases.  —  By  far  the  most  frequent  generic  name  in  the 
RV.  for  terrestrial  demons  or  goblins1,  enemies  of  mankind,  is  raksas.  It  is 
mentioned  (upwards  of  fifty  times)  both  in  the  singular  and  plural,  nearly 
always  in  connexion  with  a  god,  who  is  invoked  to  destroy  or  praised  for 


DEMONS  AND  FIENDS.     70.  RAKSASES.  163 

having  destroyed  these  demons.  In  two  hymns  of  the  RV.  (7,  104;  10,  87) 
which  deal  with  the  Raksases,  the  much  less  common  terms  ydtu  or  ydtu- 
dhana  (strictly  speaking  'sorcerer') 2  alternate  with,  and  in  some  verses  appear 
to  be  used  in  the  same  sense  as,  raksas.  As  the  latter  word  designates  evil 
spirits  in  general  (especially  in  the  YV.),  raksas  here  perhaps  expresses  the 
genus  and  ydtu  the  species3. 

These  demons  have  the  form  of  dogs,  vultures,  owls,  and  other  birds 
(7,  104.  2°— 22).  Becoming  birds  they  fly  about  at  night  (ib.  l8).  Assuming 
the  form  of  a  brother,  husband,  or  lover,  they  approach  women  and  desire 
to  destroy  their  offspring  (10,  162$).  They  also  lie  in  wait  for  women  in 
the  shape  of  a  dog  or  an  ape  (AV.  4,  37 IX).  Thus  they  are  dangerous  during 
pregnancy  and  childbirth  (AV.  8,  6).  They  prowl  around  the  bride  at  wed 
dings,  and  little  staves  are  therefore  shot  into  the  air  to  pierce  the  eye  of 
the  Raksases  (MGS.  i,  10).  The  AV.  gives  the  most  detailed  account  of  the 
appearance  of  the  Raksases.  They  have  mostly  human  form,  their  head, 
eyes,  heart,  and  other  parts  being  mentioned;  but  they  have  frequently  some 
kind  of  monstrous  deformity,  being  three-headed,  two-mouthed,  bear-necked, 
four-eyed,  five-footed,  fmgerless,  with  feet  turned  backwards,  or  with  horns  on 
their  hands  (AV.  8,  6;  HGS.  2,  3?).  Blue  and  yellow  or  green  demons  are 
also  spoken  of  (AV.  19,  224<5)4.  They  are  further  described  as  male  and 
female,  having  families  and  even  kings  (AV.  5,  2212;  HGS.  2,  3");  and  they 
are  mortal  (AV.  6,  32 2  &.). 

The  Yatudhanas  eat  the  flesh  of  men  and  horses,  and  drink  up  the 
milk  of  cows  (10,  87l6-17).  In  order  to  satisfy  their  greed  for  flesh  and  blood 
the  Raksases  attack  men,  usually  by  entering  them.  Agni  is  besought  not  to 
let  the  Raksas  enter  (d  vis}  into  his  worshippers  (8,  49 20),  and  the  AV.  des 
cribes  a  demon  of  disease,  which  flies  about,  as  entering  into  a  man  (AV. 
7,  764).  These  evil  spirits  seem  chiefly  to  have  been  regarded  as  entering 
by  the  mouth,  especially  in  the  process  of  eating  and  drinking  (AV.  5,  296~8), 
but  also  by  other  entrances  (AV.  8,  63).  When  once  within  they  eat  and 
lacerate  a  man's  flesh  and  cause  disease  (AV.  5,  295-10).  The  Raksases  are  also 
said  to  produce  madness  and  take  away  the  power  of  eloquence  (AV.  6,  in3; 
HGS.  i,  1 5s).  Human  dwellings  are  invaded  by  them  (KS.  I359).  Some  of 
these  spirits  are  described  as  dancing  round  houses  in  the  evening,  braying 
like  donkeys,  making  a  noise  in  the  forest,  laughing  aloud,  or  drinking  out 
of  skulls  (AV.  8,  610-  "•  '4;  HGS.  2,  3?). 

The  time  of  the  Raksases  is  the  evening  or  night  (7,  io4l8).s  In  the 
east  they  have  no  power,  because  they  are  dispersed  by  the  rising  sun 
(TS.  2,  6,  63).  A  falling  meteor  is  regarded  as  an  embodiment  of  a  Raksas 
(KS.  1269).  It  is  especially  the  dark  time  of  new  moon  that  belongs  to  evil 
spirits,  as  to  the  souls  of  the  dead  (AV.  i,  i6J;  4,  363). 

The  sacrifice  is  peculiarly  exposed  to  their  attacks.  Thus  the  RV.  speaks 
of  Raksases  that  have  produced  taints  in  the  divine  sacrifice  and  of  Yatus 
that  throw  the  offering  into  confusion  (7,  io4l8>  2I).  They  are  haters  of  prayer 
(10,  i823).  Agni  is  besought  to  burn  them  in  order  to  protect  the  sacrifice 
from  curse  (i,  763).  The  AV.  contains  a  spell  meant  to  nullify  the  sacrifice 
of  an  enemy  through  the  wiles  of  Yatudhanas  and  of  the  Raksas  (AV.  7,  7o2). 
These  evil  spirits  also  obtrude  themselves  at  the  sacrifice  to  the  dead  in  the 
form  of  the  souls  of  ancestors  (AV.  18,  228  cp.  VS.  2,  29)6.  In  post-Vedic 
literature  this  notion  of  the  Raksases  (there  often  also  called  rdksasd)  dis 
turbing  the  sacrifice  is  still  familiar. 

Agni,  being  the  dispeller  of  darkness  as  well  as  the  officiator  at  the 
sacrifice,  is  naturally  the  god  who  is  oftenest  opposed  to  them  and  who  is 

11* 


1 64     in.  RELIGION,  WELTL.  WISSENSCH.  u.  KUNST.     i  A.  VEDIC  MYTHOLOGY. 

frequently  invoked  to  burn,  ward  off  or  destroy  them  (10,  873-6,  &c.)7.  In 
this  capacity  he  (as  well  as  some  other  deities)  receives  the  epithet  of 
raksohan,  'Raksas-slayer'. 

These  evil  spirits  injure  not  only  spontaneously  but  also  at  the  insti 
gation  of  men.  Thus  the  RV.  speaks  of  the  'yoker  of  Raksases',  raksoyuj 
(6,  629),  and  refers  to  the  Raksas  and  the  Yatu  of  sorcerers  (7,104^; 
8,  6o20).  One  suffering  from  hostile  sorcery  drives  away  the  Raksases  by 
sacrificing  to  Agni  Yavistha  (TS.  2,  2,  3*),  and  in  a  hymn  of  the  AV.  (2,24) 
demons  are  called  upon  to  devour  him  who  sent  them. 

As  a  designation  of  demons  raksas  is  both  masculine  as  an  oxytone  and 
neuter  as  paroxytone  (in  the  latter  case  meaning  also  'injury').  It  may  be 
derived  from  the  root  raks  to  injure 8,  which  occurs  in  only  one  verbal  form 
in  the  AV.  (cp.  also  rksay  'injurious').  It  is,  however,  possibly  connected 
with  the  ordinary  root  raks  to  protect9.  In  this  case  it  must  have  meant 
'that  which  is  to  be  warded  off'.  BERGAIGNE,  however,  thinks  it  may  originally 
have  signified  (avaricious)  'guardian'  of  celestial  treasure. 

B.  Pisacas.  A  third  and  important  class  of  goblins  are  the  Pisacas. 
The  name  occurs  only  once  in  the  RV.  as  a  singular  in  the  form  of  pisdci 
(J>  I335)-  Indra  is  here  invoked  to  crush  the  yellow-peaked  (pisangabhrstim) 
watery  (ambhrnam}  Pisaci  and  to  strike  down  every  Raksas.  In  the  TS. 
(2,  4,  i1)  the  three  hostile  groups  of  Asuras,  Raksases,  and  Pisacas  are  opposed 
to  the  three  classes  of  gods,  men,  and  Pitrs.  The  Pisacas  would  therefore 
seem  to  have  been  specially  connected  with  the  dead.  They  are  frequently 
spoken  of  as  kravyad,  eaters  of  raw  flesh  or  corpses  (AV.  5,  299  &c.),  a 
term  which  may  be  regarded  as  a  synonym  of  Pisaca10.  Agni  is  besought 
to  restore  to  the  sick  man  the  flesh  which  the  Pisacas  have  eaten  away 
(AV.  5,  295).  They  were  thus  apparently  a  kind  of  ghoul.  Pisacas  are  also 
spoken  of  as  shining  in  water  (AV.  4,  20?.  3710)",  or  infesting  human 
dwellings  and  villages  (AV.  4,  368). 

A  lesser  group  of  demons,  mentioned  about  a  dozen  times  in  the  RV. 
and  frequently  in  later  Vedic  texts,  are  the  Aratis12,  a  personification  of 
illiberality  (a-rati)  and,  owing  to  the  gender  of  the  word,  always  feminine. 
A  group  of  'injurious'  demons,  the  Druhs,  both  male  and  female,  is  referred 
to  about  twelve  times  in  the  RV.  They  are  Indo-Iranian,  their  name  occurring 
in  the  Avesta  as  druj  (§  5,  p.  8). 

Goblins  of  various  kinds  are  usually  conceived  as  forming  an  indefinite 
crowd,  but  are  sometimes  thought  of  as  pairs.  The  latter  constitute  a  class 
named  Kimidin,  already  mentioned  in  the  RV.  (7,  io423;  10,  8724)13. 

The  nature  of  the  spirits  which  surround  the  everyday  life  of  man  con 
sists  in  injury,  and  that  of  their  various  species  in  a  particular  kind  of  injury 
usually  indicated  by  their  names.  They  are  as  a  whole  unconnected  with 
phenomena  or  forces  of  nature,  seeming  partly  at  least  to  be  derived  from 
the  spirits  of  dead  enemies14.  Less  personal  than  the  demons  mentioned 
above  and  probably  due  to  a  more  advanced  order  of  thought,  are  the  hostile 
powers  which  are  conceived  as  a  kind  of  impalpable  substance  of  disease, 
childlessness,  guilt,  and  so  forth,  which  flying  about  in  the  air  produce  in 
fection,  and  to  deflect  which  to  enemies  is  one  of  the  chief  tasks  of  sorcery I5. 
Some  of  these  terrestrial  spirits  are,  however,  not  injurious,  but  are 
regarded  as  helping  at  the  harvest  or  weaving  long  life  for  the  bride,  while 
others,  with  Arbudi  at  their  head,  assist  in  battle  by  striking  terror  into  the 
foe  (AV.  3,24.  25';  14,  i45;  u,  912)- 

i  BRV.  2,  216—19;  ORV.  262  —  73.   —    2    Yatu  in  the  Avesta  =  'sorcery'  and 
'sorcerer':  Sp.AP.  218—22.   —  3  Cp.  ORV.   263,  note   I.  —   4  HOPKINS,  AJP.   1883, 


ESCHATOLOGY.       71.    DISPOSAL  OF  THE  DEAD.  165 

p.   i^s.    —    5  ORV.  269.    —    6  Cp.  CALAND,  Altindischer  Ahnencult,  Leiden  1893, 

p.    3.    4.     -  -     7    Cp.    HlLLEBRANDT,    ZDMG.    33,    248  —  51.     -  -     «   PW.,    GW.     --    9   Cp. 

BRV.  2,  218;  WHITNEY,  Sanskrit  Roots,  s.  v.  raks  —  *°  ORV.  264  note.  —  "  Cp. 
ROTH,  FaB.  97—8.  —    ™  Cp.  HILLEBRANDT,  1.  c."  --    J3  WEBER,  IS.  13,  183  ff.  - 
M  ORV.  60—2;  cp.  ROTH,  FaB.  98.  —  15  Cp.  RV.  10,  10312;  KS.  14,  22;  IS.  17,  269. 


VII.    ESCHATOLOGY. 

S  71.  Disposal  of  the  Dead.  --In  the  Vedic  hymns  there  is  little 
reference  to  death.  When  the  seers  mention  it,  they  generally  express  a 
desire  that  it  should  overtake  their  enemies,  while  for  themselves  they  wish 
long  life  on  earth.  It  is  chiefly  at  funerals  that  the  future  life  engages  their 
thoughts.  Burial  and  cremation  were  concurrent.  One  hymn  of  the  RV. 
(10,  1 6)  describes  a  funeral  by  burning,  and  part  of  another  (10,  iS10"13)1, 
one  by  burial.  The  'house  of  clay'  is  also  once  spoken  of  (7,  891).  Fathers 
burnt  with  fire  and  those  not  burnt  with  fire  (i.  e.  buried)  are  referred  to 
(10,  i5M;  AV.  18,,  234).  But  cremation  was  the  usual  way  for  the  dead  to 
reach  the  next  world.  The  later  ritual  (cp.  AGS.  4,  i)  practically  knew  only 
this  method;  for  besides  the  bones  and  ashes  of  adults,  only  young  children 
and  ascetics  were  buried2. 

With  the  rite  of  cremation  therefore  the  mythology  of  the  future  life 
was  specially  connected.  Agni  takes  the  corpse  to  the  other  world,  the  fathers, 
and  the  gods  (10,  i6z~4.  i73).  He  places  the  mortal  in  the  highest  immor 
tality  (i,  3 1 7).  Through  Agni,  the  divine  bird,  men  go  to  the  highest  place 
of  the  sun,  to  the  highest  heaven,  to  the  world  of  the  righteous,  whither  the 
ancient,  earliest-born  seers  have  gone  (VS.  18,  51 — 2).  Agni  Garhapatya 
conducts  the  dead  man  to  the  world  of  righteousness  (AV.  6,  I201).  Agni 
burns  his  body  and  then  places  him  in  the  world  of  the  righteous  (AV.  18,  3?I). 
The  Agni  that  devours  the  body  (kravydd}  is  distinguished  from  the  Agni 
that  takes  the  offering  to  the  gods  (10,  i69).  Agni  is  besought  to  preserve 
the  corpse  intact  and  to  burn  the  goat  (aja)*  which  is  his  portion  (10,  i64). 
A  goat  is  also  immolated  with  the  sacrificial  horse  to  go  before,  as  the 
first  portion  for  Pusan,  and  announce  the  offering  to  the  gods  ere,  it  reaches 
the  highest  abode  (i,  i622-4.  Z6312-  '3).  In  the  ritual  (AGS.  4.  2;  KSS.  25,  7^) 
the  corpse  is  laid  on  the  skin  of  a  black  goat,  and  when  an  animal  is  sacri 
ficed,  it  is  a  cow  or  a  goat5.  During  the  cremation  Agni  and  Soma  are 
also  prayed  to  heal  any  injury  that  bird,  beast,  ant,  or  serpent  may  have 
inflicted  on  it  (10,  i66). 

The  dead  man  was  supposed  to  go  with  the  smoke  to  the  heavenly 
world  (AGS.  4,  47)6.  The  way  thither  is  a  distant  path  on  which  Pusan 
protects  and  Savitr  conducts  the  dead  (10,  i74).  The  sacrificial  goat  which 
precedes  and  announces  the  deceased  to  the  fathers,  passes  through  a  gulf 
of  thick  darkness  before  reaching  the  third  vault  of  heaven  (AV.  9,  5I<3; 
cp.  8,  i8). 

The  dead  man  was  provided  with  ornaments  and  clothing  for  use  in 
the  next  life,  the  object  of  the  custom  being  still  understood  in  the  Veda 
(AV.  1 8,  431).  Traces  even  survive  (RV.  10,  i88>9j  which  indicate  that  his 
widow  and  his  weapons  were  once  burnt  with  the  body  of  the  husband7.  A 
bundle  of  faggots  (kudi)  was  attached  to  the  corpse  of  the  departed  to  wipe 
out  his  track  and  thus  to  hinder  death  from  finding  its  way  back  to  the 
world  of  the  living  (AV.  5,  ig12  cp.  RV.  10,  i82.  97l6)8. 

i  ROTH,  ZDMG.  8,  467— 75;  cp.  BRI.  23— 4;  v.  SCHROEDER,  WZKM.  9,  112—3; 
HOPKINS,  PAOS.  1894,  p.  CLIIII;   CALAND,  Die  altindischen  Todten-  und  Bestattungs- 


1 66     III.  RELIGION,  WELTL.  WISSENSCH.  u.  KUNST.     i  A.  VEDIC  MYTHOLOGY. 

gebrauche,  Amsterdam  1896,  S  49— 5°-  —   2  ROTH,  ZDMG.  9,  471;  MAX  MULLER, 

ibid,  l — LXXXII;    HRI.  271 — 3.     •        3  A/a   is  by  some  taken  to  mean  the  'unborn' 

(a-j'a)  part.    --4  HILLEBRANDT,  ZDMG.  37,  521.    --    5  MM.,  ZDMG.  9,  iv.  v.  xxx. 

xxxii.  —  6  Cp.  Chand.  Up.  5,  103;  Brhadar.  Up.  6,  119.  —  7  WEBER,  IStr.   I,  66; 

HILLEBRANDT,  ZDMG.  40,  711;  ORV.  586—7.  —  8  ROTH,  FaB.  98—9;  BLOOMFIELD, 

AJP.  u,  355;  12.  4i6. 

§  72.  The  Soul.  —  Fire  or  the  grave  are  believed  to  destroy  the  body 
only.  But  the  real  personality  of  the  deceased  is  regarded  as  imperishable. 
This  Vedic  conception  is  based  on  the  primitive  belief  that  the  soul  was 
capable  of  separation  from  the  body,  even  during  unconsciousness,  and  of 
continued  existence  after  death.  Thus  in  a  whole  hymn  (10,  58),  the  soul 
(manas)  of  one  who  is  lying  apparently  dead  is  besought  to  return  from  the 
distance  where  it  is  wandering.  There  is  no  indication  in  the  Vedas  of  the 
later  doctrine  of  transmigration;  but  in  a  Brahmana  the  statement  occurs  that 
those  who  do  not  perform  rites  with  correct  knowledge,  are  bprn  again  after 
their  decease  and  repeatedly  become  the  food  of  death  (SB.  10,  4,  310). 
Besides  prdna,  'respiration',  and  atman^  'breath'  (several  times  the  express 
parallel  of  vdta,  'wind'),  the  usual  terms  denoting  the  animating  principle  are 
asu,  'spirit',  expressing  physical  vitality  (i,  H3l6<  i4o8),  even  of  animals 
(AB.  2,  6),  and  manas,  'soul',  as  the  seat  of  thought  and  emotion,  which 
already  in  the  RV.  (8,  895)  seems  to  be  regarded  as  dwelling  in  the  heart 
(hrd) I.  Many  passages,  especially  in  the  AV.,  show  that  life  and  death 
depend  on  the  continuance  or  departure  of  asu  or  manas \  and  the  terms 
asuriiti)  asiinita,  'spirit-leading'  refer  to  the  conduct  by  Agni  of  the  souls  of 
the  dead  on  the  path  between  this  and  the  other  world  (10,  15*.  i62)2. 
Funeral  ritual  texts  never  invoke  the  asu  or  manas  of  the  deceased,  but  only 
the  individual  himself  as  'father',  'grandfather',  and  so  forth.  Hence  the 
soul  is  not  a  mere  shadow,  but  is  regarded  as  retaining  its  personal  identity. 
Though  men  obtain  immortality  only  after  parting  from  the  body  (SB.  i  o,  4,  39), 
the  corpse  plays  an  important  part  in  the  myth  of  the  future  state,  which  is 
corporeal.  For  the  body  shares  in  the  existence  of  the  other  world  (10,  i65; 
AV.  1 8,  226).  A  body,  however,  from  which  all  imperfections  are  absent 
(AV.  6,  I2o3),  can  hardly  have  been  regarded  as  a  gross  material  body,  but 
rather  as  one  refined  by  the  power  of  Agni  (cp.  10,  i66),  something  like  the 
'subtile'  body  of  later  Indian  speculation.  An  indication  of  the  importance 
of  the  corpse  in  connexion  with  the  future  life,  is  the  fact  that  the  loss  of 
a  dead  man's  bones,  which  according  to  the  Sutras  were  collected  after 
cremation,  was  a  severe  punishment  (SB.  n,  6,  3";  14,  6,  928).  In  one  passage 
of  the  RV.  (10,  1 63)  the  eye  of  the  dead  man  is  called  upon  to  go  to  the 
sun  and  his  breath  (dtmd)  to  the  wind.  But  this  notion,  occurring  in  the 
midst  of  verses  which  refer  to  Agni  as  conducting  the  deceased  to  the  other 
world,  can  only  be  an  incidental  fancy,  suggested  perhaps  by  the  speculations 
about  Purusa  (10,  90*3),  where  the  eye  of  the  latter  becomes  the  sun  and 
his  breath  the  wind.  In  the  same  passage  (also  in  10,  58?)  the  soul  is 
spoken  of  as  going  to  the  waters  or  the  plants,  a  conception  which  perhaps 
contains  the  germ  of  the  theory  of  metempsychosis'. 

Proceeding  by  the  path  which  the  fathers  trod  (10,  147),  the  spirit  of 
the  deceased  goes  to  the  realm  of  eternal  light  (9,  ii37),  being  invested  with 
lustre  like  that  of  the  gods  (AV.  n,  i37),  in  a  car  or  on  wings  (AV.  4,  34*), 
on  the  wings  with  which  Agni  slays  the  Raksases  (VS.  18,  52).  Wafted  up 
ward  by  the  Maruts,  fanned  by  soft  breezes,  cooled  by  showers,  he  recovers 
his  ancient  body  in  a  complete  form  (AV.  18,  22I~6),  and  glorified  meets 
with  the  fathers  who  revel  with  Yama  in  the  highest  heaven  (10,  i48-10.  i544<5). 
This  is  spoken  of  as  a  return  home  (astam:  10,  i48).  From  Yama  he 


ESCHATOLOGY.      72.   THE  SOUL.      73.  HEAVEN.      74.  HEAVENLY  BLISS.          167 

obtains    a   resting   place    (10,  i49),   when   recognized   by    Yama    as   his    own 
(AV.   1 8,  237). 

According  to  the  SB.,  the  ordinary  belief  is  that  the  dead  leaving  this 
world  pass  between  two  fires,  which  burn  the  wicked  but  let  the  good  go 
by4.  The  latter  proceed,  either  by  the  path  leading  to  the  Fathers  or  by 
that  leading  to  the  sun  (SB.  i,  9,  32,  &c.)5.  In  the  Upanisads  there  are  two 
paths  for  those  who  know  the  Absolute,  the  one  (as  a  consequence  of  com 
plete  knowledge)  leading  to  Brahma,  the  other  to  the  world  of  heaven, 
whence  after  the  fruit  of  good  works  has  been  exhausted,  the  spirit  returns 
to  earth  for  rebirth.  Those  ignorant  of  the  'Self,  on  the  other  hand,  go  to 
the  dark  world  of  evil  spirits  or  are  reborn  on  earth  like  the  wicked6. 

1  ORV.  525.    —    2  The  AV.    is   already   acquainted  with    the  breaths  or  vital 

airs  familiar  to  post-Vedic  literature:  HRI.    153.—  3  BRI.  23.  — 4  Cp.  KUHN,  KZ. 

2,  318. —  5  WEBER,  ZDMG.  9,  237;  IStr.  1,20—1;  OST.  5,314—5;  SVL.  121;  HRI. 

206.  —  6  HRI.  227. 

§  73.  Heaven.  -  -  The  abode  where  the  Fathers  and  Yama  dwell,  is 
situated  in  the  midst  of  the  sky  (10,  i514),  in  the  highest  heaven  (10,  i48), 
in  the  third  heaven,  the  inmost  recess  of  the  sky,  where  is  eternal  light 
(9,1137-9).  The  AV.  also  speaks  of  it  as  the  highest  (11,4"),  luminous 
world  (4,  342),  the  ridge  of  the  firmament  (18,  247),  the  third  firmament 
(9,  51'8;  1 8,  43),  and  the  third  heaven  (18,  2*8).  In  the  MS.  (i,  iol8;  2,  39) 
the  abode  of  the  Fathers  is  said  to  be  the  third  world1.  The  abode  of  the 
Fathers  is  in  the  RV.  also  spoken  of  as  the  highest  point  of  the  sun  (9,  ii39). 
The  Fathers  are  united  with  or  guard  the  sun  (10,  io72.  I545),  or  are  connected 
with  the  rays  of  the  sun  (i,  1097;  cp.  SB.  i,  9,  310)2,  and  suns  shine  for 
them  in  heaven  (i,  I256).  They  are  connected  with  the  step  of  Visnu 
(10,  153),  and  pious  men  are  said  to  rejoice  in  the  dear  abode,  the  highest 
step  of  Visnu  (i,  i545).  As  Visnu  took  his  three  steps  to  where  the  gods 
are  exhilerated 3,  so  the  sun  follows  the  Dawn  to  where  pious  men  offer 
sacrifice4. 

Stars  are  also  said  to  be  the  lights  of  virtuous  men  who  go  to  the 
heavenly  world  (TS.  5,  4,  i3;  SB.  6,  5,  48),  and  ancient  men,  especially  the 
seven  Rsis,  besides  Atri  and  Agastya,  are  said  to  have  been  raised  to  the 
stars  (TA.  i,  n,  i2)s. 

The  RV.  mentions  a  tree  beside  which  Yama  drinks  with  the  gods 
(10,  i35r)-  This  according  to  the  AV.  (5,  43)  is  a  fig-tree  where  the  gods 
abide  in  the  third  heaven  (no  mention  being  made  of  Yama). 

i  PVS.  i,  211.    —    2  JAOS.  1 6,  27.  —    3  Cp.  MACDONELL,  JRAS.  27,  172.  — 

4  WINDISCH,  FaB.  1 1 8.  —  5  WEBER,  Naksatra  2,  269;  KRV.  note  286. 

§  74.  The  most  distinct  and  prominent  references  to  the  future  life  are 
in  the  ninth  and  tenth  books  of  the  RV.,  but  it  is  also  sometimes  referred 
to  in  the  first.  Heaven  is  regarded  as  the  reward  of  those  who  practise 
rigorous  penance  (tapas\  of  heroes  who  risk  their  lives  in  battle  (10,  i542~ 5), 
but  above  all  of  those  who  bestow  liberal  sacrificial  gifts  (ib.3;  i}  I255;  10,  io72). 
The  AV.  is  full  of  references  to  the  blessings  accruing  to  the  latter. 

In  heaven  the  deceased  enter  upon  a  delectable  life  (10,  i48.  i514.  i62-5), 
in  which  all  desires  are  fulfilled  (9,  i^-11),  and  which  is  passed  among  the 
gods  (10,  i414),  particularly  in  the  presence  of  the  two  kings  Yama  and 
Varuna  (10,  i47).  There  they  unswervingly  overcome  old  age  (10,  2721). 
Uniting  with  a  glorious  body  they  are  dear  and  welcome  to  the  gods 
(10,  i48.  i65.  561).  There  they  see  father,  mother,  and  sons  (AV.  6,  I2o3), 
and  unite  with  wives  and  children  (AV.  12,  3*7).  The  life  is  free  from  imper 
fections  and  bodily  frailties  (10,  i48;  AV.  6,  I2o3).  Sickness  is  left  behind 


1 68     HI.  RELIGION,  WELTL.  WISSENSCH.  u.  KUNST.     i  A.  VEDIC  MYTHOLOGY. 

and  limbs  are  not  lame  or  crooked  (AV.  3,  285).  It  is  often  said  in 
the  AV.  and  SB.  that  the  deceased  are  in  that  world  complete  in  body 
and  limbs1. 

The  dead  are  in  the  RV.  often  spoken  of  in  general  terms  (madanti, 
mddayante)  as  enjoying  bliss  (10,  i410.  i514,  &c.).  The  most  detailed  account 
of  the  joys  of  the  life  in  heaven  is  given  in  RV.  9,  1137-".  There  are 
eternal  light  and  swift  waters;  there  movement  is  unrestrained  (cp.  TB.  3,  12,  2?); 
there  is  spirit  food  and  satiety;  there  joy,  glee,  gladness,  and  the  fulfilment 
of  all  desires.  The  joys  here  indefinitely  referred  to,  are  later  explained  to 
be  those  of  love  (TB.  2,  4,  66  cp.  SB.  10,  4,  4*  );  and  the  AV.  (4,  342)  states 
that  in  the  heavenly  world  there  is  abundance  of  sexual  gratification.  Accord 
ing  to  the  SB.'  the  joys  of  the  Blest  are  a  hundred  times  as  great  as  the 
highest  on  earth  (14,  7,  i32~ 3).  In  the  heaven  of  the  Blest,  the  RV.  further 
says,  the  sound  of  the  flute  and  of  songs  is  heard  (10,  I357)2;  Soma,  ghee, 
and  honey  flow  for  them  (10,  I541)-  There  are  ponds  filled  with  ghee  and 
streams  flowing  with  milk,  honey,  and  wine  (AV.  4,  345' 6;  SB.  n,  5,  64). 
There  are  at  hand  bright,  many-coloured  cows  yielding  all  desires  (kdma- 
dughdh:  AV.  4,  348).  There  are  neither  rich  nor  poor,  neither  powerful  nor 
oppressed  (AV.  3,  293).  To  the  celestial  life  of  the  Blest  in  the  Samhitas 
and  Brahmanas  corresponds  in  the  Upanisads  the  lower  and  transient  bliss 
of  the  heaven  of  the  gods  which  is  followed  by  rebirth,  only  those  who  know 
the  truth  attaining  to  immortality  and  the  changeless  joy  of  unending  peace 
by  absorption  into  the  world-soul3.  Thus  the  life  of  the  righteous  dead  in 
heaven  was  clearly  regarded  as  one  of  indolent,  material  bliss,  in  which  freed 
from  all  frailties  they  were  united  with  the  gods,  and  which  was  devoted  to 
music,  drinking,  and  sensual  joys  (such  as  the  gods  themselves  are  occasionally 
alluded  to  as  indulging  in:  cp.  3,  536). 

Heaven  is  a  glorified  world  of  material  joys  as  pictured  by  the  ima 
gination  not  of  warriors  but  of  priests4.  It  is  the  world  of  the  righteous 
(10,  i64),  where  righteous  and  godly  men,  familiar  with  rites  (rtd)  dwell  in 
bliss5.  There  they  are  united  with  what  they  have  sacrificed  and  given 
(isfdpurfa)6,  especially  reaping  the  reward  of  their  pious  gifts  to  priests 
(10,  i543  &c.)7.  In  the  Brahmanas  it  is  said  that  those  who  sacrifice  properly 
above  all  attain  union  and  identity  of  abode  with  the  sun  (aditya)  and  with 
Agni,  but  also  with  Vayu,  Indra,  Varuna,  Brhaspati,  Prajapati  and  Brahma 
(SB.  2,  6,  48;  n,  4,  421.  6,  22-3;  TB.  3,  10,  n6).  A  certain  sage  is  described 
as  having  through  his  knowledge  become  a  golden  swan,  gone  to  heaven, 
and  obtained  union  with  the  sun  TB.  (3,  10,  9").  In  the  TS.  (6,  6,  92)  the  notion 
occurs  that  a  man  by  the  performance  of  certain  rites  can  reach  heaven 
without  dying  (fivan)*. 

One  who  reads  the  Veda  in  a  particular  way  is  said  to  be  freed  from 
dying  again  and  to  attain  identity  of  nature  (sdtmata)  with  Brahma  (SB.  10, 
5,  69).  As  a  reward  for  knowing  a  certain  mystery  a  man  is  born  again, 
in  this  world  (SB.  i,  5,  314).  Thus  we  have  in  the  SB.  the  beginnings  of  the 
doctrine  of  retribution  and  transmigration.  That  doctrine  (as  well  as  the 
doctrine  of  hell)  is  not  only  to  be  found  in  the  earliest  Sutras  9,  but  appears 
fully  developed  in  the  later  Brahmana  period,  that  is  to  say,  in  the  oldest 
Upanisads,  the  Chandogya,  the  Brhadaranyaka,  and  especially  the  Katha 
Upanisad10.  In  the  latter  Upanisad  the  story  is  related  of  Naciketas,  who 
pays  a  visit  to  the  realm  of  Death  and  is  told  by  the  latter,  that  those  who 
have  not  sufficient  merit  for  heaven  and  immortality,  fall  again  and  again 
into  the  power  of  death  and  enter  upon  the  cycle  of  existence  (sainsard), 
being  born  again  and  again  with  a  body  or  as  a  stationary  object.  He  who 


ESCHATOLOGY.       74.    HEAVENLY  BLISS.       75.    HELL.  169 


controls  himself  reaches  Visnu's  highest  place.     On  the   other   hand,   there  is 
no  hell  for  those  not  found  worthy11. 

1  References  in  OST.  5,  315;    cp.  AIL.  411;    HRT.  205.  —  2  At  the  sacrifice 

to  the  Manes  music  was  performed,  lutes  (vino)  being  played  (KS.  84,  8).  —  3  HRI. 

239.  —  4  ORV.  532.  —  si,   1152.   1545;  IO,  15*.   174.   1542—5;  AV.  6,  951.  1203; 

VS.   15,  50.  —  6  WINDISCH,  FaB.   115 — 8.  —  7  For  references  to  the  same  idea  in 

the  AV.  see  OST.  5,  293,    note  433;    cp.    IStr.  i,  20  ff.    -  -    8  WEBER,    ZDMG.  9, 

237  ff.;    OST.  5,  317;    HRI.  204.    —    9  HRI.   175.    —    ™  HRI.  145,  note  4;    cp. 

v.  SCHROEDER,  Indiens  Litt.  u.  Kultur  245;  GARBE  in  this  encyclopedia  3,4,  p.  15. 

—  «  Origin  of  the  myth,  TB.  3,   118;  Cp.  SVL.   10,  n.   i;  BRI.   78. 

§  75.  Hell.  —  If  in  the  opinion  of  the  composers  of  the  RV.  the  vir 
tuous  received  their  reward  in  the  future  life,  it  is  natural  that  they  should 
have  believed  at  least  in  some  kind  of  abode,  if  not  in  future  punishment,1 
for  the  wicked,  as  is  the  case  in  the  Avesta2.  As  far  as  the  AV.  and  the 
Katha  Upanisad  are  concerned,  the  belief  in  hell  is  beyond  doubt.  The  AV. 
(2,  143;  5,  193)  speaks  of  the  house  below,  the  abode  of  female  goblins  and 
sorceresses,  called  ndraka  loka?>,  in  contrast  with  svarga  loka,  the  heavenly 
world,  the  realm  of  Yama  (12,  436).  To  this  hell  the  murderer  is  consigned 
(VS.  30,  5).  It  is  in  the  AV.  several  times  described  as  'lowest  darkness' 
(8,  224  &c.),  as  well  as  'black  darkness'  (5,  30")  and  'blind  darkness'  (18,33). 
The  torments  of  hell  are  also  once  described  in  the  AV.  (5,  19)  and  with 
greater  detail  in  the  SB.  (u,  6,  i)4;  for  it  is  not  till  the  period  of  the 
Brahmanas  that  the  notion  of  future  punishment  appears  plainly  developed5. 
The  same  Brahmana  further  states  that  every  one  is  born  again  after  death 
and  is  weighed  in  a  balance6,,  receiving  reward  or  punishment  according  as 
his  works  are  good  or  bad  (SB  n,  2,  7 33;  cp.  12,  9,  i1).  This  idea  is  also 
Iranian.  ?  ROTH  8  favours  the  view  that  the  religion  of  the  RV.  knows  nothing 
of  hell,  the  wicked  being  supposed  to  be  annihilated  by  death.  Evidence 
of  the  belief  in  some  kind  of  hell  is,  however,  not  altogether  wanting  in 
the  RV.  Thus,  'this  deep  place'  is  said  to  have  been  produced  for  those  who 
are  evil,  false,  and  untrue  (4,  55).  Indra-Soma  are  besought  to  'dash  the 
evil-doers  into  the  abyss  (vavre),  into  bottomless  darkness,  so  that  not  even 
one  of  them  may  get  out'  (7,  1043);  and  the  poet  prays  that  'she  (the 
demoness)  who  malignantly  wanders  about  like  an  owl  concealing  herself, 
may  fall  into  the  endless  abysses'  (ib.  I7),  and  that  the  enemy  and  robber 
may  lie  below  all  the  three  earths  (ib.11).  But  such  references  are  few  and 
the  evidence  cannot  be  said  to  go  beyond  showing  belief  in  a  hell  as  an 
underground  darkness.  The  thoughts  of  the  poets  of  the  RV.,  intent  on  the 
happiness  of  this  earth,  appear  to  have  rarely  dwelt  on  the  joys  of  the  next 
life,  still  less  on  its  possible  punishments9.  The  doctrine  of  the  Brahmanas 
is  that  after  death,  all,  both  good  and  bad,  are  born  again  in  the  next  world 
and  are  recompensed  according  to  "their  deeds  (SB.  6,  2,  22?;  10,  6,  31),  but 
nothing  is  said  as  to  the  eternity  of  reward  or  punishment10.  The  notion 
also  occurs  there  that  those  who  do  not  rightly  understand  and  practise  the 
rites  of  sacrifice,  depart  to  the  next  world  before  the  natural  term  of  their 
terrestrial  life  (SB.  n,  2,  733). 

The  idea  of  a  formal  judgment  to  which  all  the  dead  must  submit, 
seems  hardly  traceable  to  the  Vedic  period.  One  or  two  passages  of  the 
RV.  in  which  reference  to  it  has  been  found11,  are  too  indefinite  to  justify 
such  an  interpretation.  In  the  TA.  (6,  5*3)  it  is  said  that  the  truthful  and 
untruthful  are  separated  before  Yama,  but  that  he  acts  in  the  capacity  of  a 
judge,  is  not  implied12. 

That  the  belief  in  a  hell  goes  back  even  to  the  Indo-European  period, 
has  been  argued  by  WEBER13  on  the  strength  of  the  equation  Bhrgu  =  cpXsfuai I4 


170     III.  RELIGION,  WELTL.  WISSENSCH.  u.  KUNST.     i  A.  VEDIC  MYTHOLOGY. 


and  the  fact  that  the  former  is  described  in  the  SB.  as  sent  by  his  father 
Varuna  for  pride  to  see  the  tortures  of  hell,  and  the  latter  are  condemned  for 
pride  to  undergo  severe  tortures  in  hell.  But  the  similarity  of  the  two  legends 
is  probably  only  a  coincidence,  as  belief  in  the  torments  of  hell  seems  to  be 
a  later  development  in  India15. 

1  ZIMMER  and  SCHERMAN,  but  HOPKINS  considers  this  conclusion  pedantic.  — 
2  ROTH,  JAOS.  3,  345;  GELDNER,  Fa\V.  22,  thinks  that  hell  is  directly  referred  to 
in  RV.  10,  10  6  by  the  word  vtci.  —  3  Naraka  in  AV.  and  Brahmanas:  WHITNEY, 
JAOS.  13,  civ.  —  4  WEBER,  ZDMG.  9,  240  ff.  —  5  HRI.  175.  —  6  WEBER,  ZDMG. 
9,  238;  OST.  5,  314—5.  —  7  JACKSON,  Trans,  of  the  loth  Or.  Congress  2,  67—73. 
-  8  ROTH,  JAOS.  3,  329-47;  cp.  also  WEBER,  ZDMG.  9,  238  f.  -  9  Cp.  AIL. 
4i8ff.;  SCHERMAN,  Romanische  Forschungen  5,  569  ff.;  SVL.  I22ff.;  KRV.  n.  287a; 
ORV.  538  ff.;  HRI.  147.  —  10  WEBER,  ZDMG.  9,  237—43.  —  "  SVL.  152—3.  - 
12  ORV.  541-2.  —  '3  ZDMG.  9,  242.  —  '4  KHF.  23;  WVB.  1894,  p.  3.  —  '5  Cp. 
Jaiminiya  Br.  ed.  BURNELL  i,  42-4;  OERTEL,  JAOS.  15,  234—8;  SVL.  5—8;  SPIEGEL, 
Eranische  Altertumskunde  I,  458;  HRI.  206. 

§  76.  The  Pitrs.  —  The  blessed  dead  who  dwell  in  the  third  heaven 
are  called  Pitrs  or  Fathers.  By  this  term  are  generally  meant  the  early  or 
first  ancestors  (10,  i58-  I0),  who  followed  the  ancient  paths,  seers  who  made 
the  paths  by  which  the  recent  dead  go  to  join  them  (10,  i42-7-15).  They 
are  connected  with  the  (third)  step  of  Visnu  (io;  i53  cp.  i,  I545).  Two 
hymns  of  the  RV.  are  devoted  to  their  praise  (10,  15.  54). 

Their  different  races  are  mentioned  by  name  as  Navagvas,  Vairupas, 
Angirases,  Atharvans,  Bhrgus,  Vasisthas  (10,  i44~6.  i58),  the  last  four  being 
identical  with  the  names  of  priestly  families,  to  whom  tradition  attributed  the 
composition  of  the  AV.1  and  of  books  II  and  VII  of  the  RV.  Among  these 
the  Angirases  are  particularly  associated  with  Yama  (10,  i4>  5).  The  Pitrs 
are  spoken  of  as  lower,  higher,  and  middle,  as  earlier  and  later,  and  though 
not  all  known  to  their  descendants,  they  are  known  to  Agni  (10,  I51-  2-  I3). 
The  AV.  speaks  of  the  Pitrs  as  inhabiting  air,  earth,  and  heaven  (AV.  18,  2^ 
cp.  RV.  10,  i52). 

The  ancient  fathers  themselves  once  offered  the  Soma  libation  (10,  i58). 
They  revel  with  Yama  (10,  i410  cp.  135*;  AV.  18,  410),  and  feast  with  the 
gods  (7,  764).  Leading  the  same  life  as  the  gods,  they  receive  almost  divine 
honours.  They  come  on  the  same  car  as  Indra  and  the  gods  (10,  i510). 
They  are  fond  of  Soma  (somya:  10,  I51-  5  &c.)  and  sitting  on  the  sacrificial 
grass  to  the  south,  they  drink  the  pressed  draught  (ib>6).  They  thirst  for 
the  libations  prepared  for  them  on  earth,  and  are  invited  to  come  with 
Yama,  his  father  Vivasvat,  and  Agni,  and  to  eat  the  offerings  along  with 
Yama  (ib.  8~".  i44'5).  Arriving  in  thousands  they  range  themselves  in  order 
on  the  sacrificial  ground  (10,  i510-  ").  When  the  Pitrs  come  to  the  sacrifice, 
evil  spirits  sometimes  intrude  into  their  society  in  the  guise  of  friends  accord 
ing  to  the  AV.  (18,  228). 

The  Fathers  receive  oblations  as  their  food,  which  in  one  passage 
(10,  143)  is  referred  to  with  the  term  svadha  as  contrasted  with  svaha,  the 
call  to  the  gods2;  so  too  in  the  later  ritual  the  portion  of  the  gods  at  the 
daily  pressings  was  strictly  distinguished  from  that  of  the  Pitrs  (SB.  4, 
4,  22).  They  receive  worship,  are  entreated  to  hear,  intercede  for  and  pro 
tect  their  votaries,  and  invoked  not  to  injure  their  descendants  for  any  sin 
humanly  committed  against  them  (10,  i52-  5- 6  cp.  3,  552).  Their  favour  is  im 
plored  along  with  that  of  the  dawns,  streams,  mountains,  heaven  and  earth, 
Pusan  and  the  Rbhus  (6,  52*.  75™;  7,  3512;  i,  106*).  They  are  besought 
to  give  riches,  offspring,  and  long  life  to  their  sons  (10,  is?-11;  AV.  18,  314. 
462),  who  desire  to  be  in  their  good  graces  (10,  i46).  The  Vasisthas  collec- 


ESCHATOLOGY.       76.    THE  PlTRS.       77.    YAMA.  171 

tively  are  called  upon  to  help  their  descendants  (7,  33 x  cp.  10,  is8);  and 
individual  ancestors,  as  Turvasa,  Yadu,  and  Ugradeva,  are  invoked  (i,  36 l8). 

The  Fathers  are  immortal  (AV.  6,  41 3)  and  are  even  spoken  of  as  gods 
(10,  564)3.  In  the  Angirases  and  similar  groups  the  divine  character  is  com 
bined  with  that  of  ancient  priests.  Cosmical  actions  like  those  of  the  gods 
are  sometimes  attributed  to  the  Fathers.  Thus  they  are  said  to  have  adorned 
the  sky  with  stars  and  placed  darkness  in  the  night  and  light  in  the  day 
(10,  6811),  to  have  found  the  hidden  light  and  generated  the  dawn  (7,  764 
cp.  10,  I071),  and  in  concert  with  Soma  to  have  extended  heaven  and 
earth  (8,  48  T3). 

Just  as  the  corpse-devouring  Agni  is  distinguished  from  the  Agni  who 
wafts  the  sacrifice  to  the  gods  (10,  i69),  so  the  path  of  the  Fathers  is  dis 
tinguished  from  that  of  the  gods  (10,  2  7.  iS1  cp.  88*5)4.  Similarly  in  the  SB. 
the  heavenly  world  (svarga  loka]  is  contrasted  with  that  of  the  fathers  (pitrlokd), 
the  door  of  the  former  being  said  to  be  in  the  north-east  (SB.  6,  6,  24), 
and  that  of  the  latter  in  the  south-east  (13,  8,  is)5.  The  fathers  are  also 
spoken  of  as  a  class  distinct  from  men,  having  been  created  separately 
(TB.  2,  3,  82). 

1  The  attribution  of  the  AV.  to  fire-priests,  the  Atharvans  and  Angirases,  is 
historically  justified,  as  the  cult  of  fire  is  still  associated  with  the  AV.  in  the  epic : 
cp.  WEBER,  History  of  Ind.  Lit.  148;  HRI.  159.  —  2  HAUG,  GGA.  1875,  94;  SEE.  42, 
660;  OLDEMBERG,  SEE.  46,  162.  --  3  Otherwise  HRI.  145,  n.  i.  --  4  Cp.  Hiran- 
yakesi  Pitrmadhhsutra,  ed.  CALAND,  Leipzig  1896,  p.  55;  HRI.  145,  n.  4.  - 
5  The  South  is  in  general  the  quarter  of  the  Manes  (SB.  i,  2,  5X7):  this  is  Indo- 
Iranian,  cp.  KERN,  Buddhismus  I,  359;  CALAND,  Altindischer  Ahnencult,  Leiden 
1893,  p.  178.  180;  ORV.  342,  n.  2;  ZDMG.  49,  471,  n.  i;  HRI.  190. 

§  77.  Yam  a.  -  -  The  chief  of  the  blessed  dead  is  Yama.  Reflexion  on 
the  future,  life  being  remote  from  the  thoughts  of  the  poets  of  the  RV.,  only 
three  hymns  (10,  14.  135.  154)  are  addressed  to  Yama.  There  is  besides  one 
other  (10,  10)  consisting  of  a  dialogue  between  Yama  and  his  sister  Yami. 
Yama's  name  occurs  about  50  times  in  the  RV.  but  almost  exclusively  in 
the  first  and  (far  oftener)  in  the  tenth  book. 

He  revels  with  the  gods  (7,  764;  10,  I351)-  Individual  gods  with  whom 
he  is  referred  to,  are  Varuna  (10,  i47),  Brhaspati  (10,  134.  143),  and  especially 
Agni,  who  as  conductor  of  the  dead  would  naturally  be  in  close  relations 
with  him.  Agni  is  the  friend  (kdmya)  of  Yama  (10,  2i5)  and  his  priest 
(10,  523).  A  god  (10,  5 11)  and  Yama  (who  by  implication  are  identical) 
found  the  hiding  Agni  (ib.  3).  Agni,  Yama,  Matarisvan  are  mentioned  together 
as  the  names  of  the  one  being  (i,i6446).  Yama  is  also  mentioned  in  enumer 
ations  of  gods  including  Agni  (10,  643.  9211). 

Thus  it  is  implied  that  Yama  is  a  god.  He  is,  however,  not  expressly 
called  a  god,  but  only  a  king  (9,  ii38;  10,  14  passim),  who  rules  the  dead 
(yamdrajnah-.  10,  i69).  Yama  and  god  Varuna  are  the  two  kings  whom 
the  dead  man  sees  on  reaching  heaven  (10,  i47).  Throughout  one  of  the 
hymns  devoted  to  his  praise  (10,  14)  he  is  associated  with  the  departed 
fathers,  particularly  with  the  Angirases  (vv>  5).  With  them  he  _comes  to  the 
sacrifice  and  is  exhilerated  (vv.  3-  4.  i$8).  Later  texts  (TA.  6,  52;  Ap.  SS.  16,  6) 
make  mention  of  the  steeds  of  Yama,  which  are  described  as  golden-eyed 
and  iron-hoofed.  He  is  a  gatherer  of  the  people  (10,  14'),  gives  the  dead 
man  a  resting  place  (10,  14^;  AV.  18,  237)  and  prepares  an  abode  for  him 
(10,  1 8 '3). 

Yama's  dwelling  is  in  the  remote  recess  of  the  sky  (9,  H38).  Of  the 
three  heavens  two  belong  to  Savitr  and  one  to  Yama1  (i,  356  cp.  10,  I236), 
this  being  the  third  and  highest  (cp.  §  73).  The  VS.  (12,63)  speaks  of 


172     III.  RELIGION,  WELTL.  WISSENSCH.  u.  KUNST.     i  A.  VEDIC  MYTHOLOGY. 

him  along  with  YamI  as  being  in  the  highest  heaven.  In  his  abode  (sddand2) 
which  is  the  home  of  the  gods  (devamana]  Yama  is  surrounded  by  songs 
and  the  sound  of  the  flute  (10,  i357). 

Soma  is  pressed  for  Yama,  ghee  is  offered  to  him  (10,  i/j.1-^  I4),  and  he 
is  besought  to  come  to  the  sacrifice  and  place  himself  on  the  seat  (10,  i44). 
He  is  invoked  to  lead  his  worshippers  to  the  gods  and  to  prolong  life  (10,  i414). 

His  father  is  Vivasvat  (10,  i45)  with  whom  Saranyu  is  mentioned  as  his 
mother  (10,  i;1).  He  is  also  several  times  called  by  the  patronymic  Vai- 
vasvata  (10,  14.*,  &c.).  This  trait  is  Indo-Iranian,  for  in  the  Avesta  Vivanhvant, 
as  the  first  man  who  pressed  Soma,  is  said  to  have  received  Yima  as  a  son  3 
in  reward.  In  the  AV.  (18,  232  cp.  36l~~2)  Yama  is  described  as  superior  to 
Vivasvat,  being  himself  surpassed  by  none. 

In  their  dialogue  in  the  RV.  (10,  io4)  Yama  and  Yarn!  call  themselves 
children  of  Gandharva  and  the  water  nymph  (apydyosa)*.  Yam!  further  speaks 
of  Yama  (v.  3)  as  the  'only  mortal'.  In  another  hymn  Yama  is  said  to  have 
chosen  death  and  abandoned  his  body  (10,  i34)5.  He  passed6  to  the  other 
world,  finding  out  the  path  for' many,  to  where  the  ancient  fathers  passed 
away  (10,  14'-  2).  He  was  the  first  of  mortals  that  died  (AV.  18,  313).  Here 
'mortals'  can  only  mean  'men',  though  later  even  gods  are  spoken  of  as 
mortal7.  As  first  and  oldest  of  the  dead  he  would  easily  be  regarded  as 
the  chief  of  the  dead  that  followed  him8.  He  is  called  'lord  of  settlers' 
(z'ispati)9,  'our  father'  (10,  I351)-  Through  Yama  men  come  in  later  texts 
to  be  described  as  descendants  of  Vivasvan  adityah10  (TS.  6,  5,  62  cp.  SB. 
3,  i,  34;  RV.  i,  1059).  Even  in  the  RV.  Yama  seems  to  be  connected  with 
the  sun;  for  the  heavenly  courser  (the  sun)  'given  by  Yama'  probably  means 
the  solar  abode  granted  by  Yama  to  those  who  become  immortal  (i,  i632 
cp.  835). 

Death  is  the  path  of  Yama  (i,  385)  and  once  (i,  i654;  cp.  MS.  2,  56; 
AV.  6,  2831.  93 J)  he  appears  to  be  identified  with  death  (mrtyu)11.  Yama's 
foot-fetter  (padbisa)  is  spoken  of  as  parallel  to  the  bond  of  Varuna12  (10, 
97l6).  Owing  to  such  traits  and  also  to  his  messengers,  Yama  must  to  a  certain 
extent  have  been  an  object  of  fear  in  the  RV.  But  in  the  AV.  and  the 
later  mythology  Yama,  being  more  closely  associated  with  the  terrors  of  death, 
came  to  be  the  god  of  death  (though  even  in  the  Epic  his  sphere  is  by  no 
means  limited  to  hell)  ^\  In  the  later  Samhitas  Yama  is  mentioned  beside 
Antaka,  the  Ender,  Mrtyu,  Death  (VS.  39,  13),  and  Nirrti,  Decease  (AV.  6, 
293;  MS.  2,  56),  and  Mrtyu  is  his  messenger  (AV.  5,  30' 2;  18,  227,  &c.).  In 
the  AV.  Death  is  said  to  be  the  lord  of  men,  Yama  of  the  Manes  (AV. 
5,  24X3-4),  and  Sleep  comes  from  Yama's  realm  (19,  561  &c.). 

The  word  yamd  has  also  the  appellative  meaning  of  'twin' I4,  in  which 
sense  it  occurs  several  times  in  the  RV.  (generally  in  the  dual  masculine  or 
feminine),  while  ydma,  which  is  found  a  few  times  in  the  RV.,  means  'rein' 
or  guide'.  Yama  actually  is  a  twin  with  Yam!  in  the  RV.  (10,  io)'5.  The 
sense  of  'twin'  also  seems  to  belong  to  Yima  in  the  Avesta  (Yasna  30,  3). 
A  sister  of  Yima  is  mentioned,  not  in  the  Avesta,  but  in  the  later  literature16 
only,  as  Yimeh,  who  with  her  brother  produces  the  first  human  couple.  At 
a  later  period  of  Indian  literature,  when  Yama  had  become  the  god  of 
death  who  punishes  the  wicked,  the  name  was  understood  to  be  derived 
from  yam,  'to  restrain' :  7,  but  this  derivation  is  not  in  keeping  with  the  ideas 
of  the  Vedic  age. 

A  bird,  either  the  owl  (uluka)  or  the  pigeon  (kapota),  is  said  to  be  the 
messenger  (10,  i654  cp.  i236)18  of  Yama  apparently  identified  with  death. 
The  messenger  of  Yama  and  of  death  would  therefore  appear  to  be  the 


ESCHATOLOGY.        77.    YAMA.  173 

same  (AV.  8,  8").  Yama's  regular  messengers,  however,  of  whom  a  fuller 
account  is  given  (10,  i4IO~12),  are  two  dogs.  They  are  four-eyed,  broad- 
nosed,  brindled  (sabala),  brown  (udumbala],  sons  of  Sarama  (sarameyd).  They 
are  guardians  that  guard  the  path  (10,  14")  or  sit  on  the  path  (AV.  i8,212). 
The  dead  man  is  exhorted  to  hasten  straight  past  these  two  dogs  and  to 
join  the  fathers  who  rejoice  with  Yama  (10,  i4IOJ;  and  Yama  is  besought  to 
deliver  him  to  them  and  to  grant  him  welfare  and  freedom  from  disease. 
Delighting  in  lives  (asutrp)  they  watch  men  and  wander  about  among  the 
peoples  as  Yama's  messengers.  They  are  entreated  to  grant  continued  en 
joyment  of  the  light  of  the  sun.  Their  functions  therefore  seem  to  consist 
in  tracking  out  among  men  those  who  are  to  die,  and  in  keeping  guard  on 
the  path  over  those  who  enter  the  realm  of  Yama.  In  the  Avesta  a  four- 
eyed  yellow-eared  dog  keeps  watch  at  the  head  of  the  Cinvat  bridge  I9,  which 
leads  from  this  world  to  the  next,  and  with  his  barking  scares  away  the  fiend 
from  the  souls  of  the  holy  ones,  lest  he  should  drag  them  to  hell20.  There 
does  not  seem  to  be  sufficient  evidence  for  supposing  that  the  two  dogs  of 
Yama  were  regarded  as  keeping  out  the  souls  of  the  wicked,  though  it  is 
quite  possible  that  they  were  so  regarded21.  If,  however.  RV.  7,  552~5  is 
rightly  interpreted  by  AuFRECHT22,  the  object  of  the  dogs  was  to  exclude  the 
wicked.  In  the  AV.  the  messengers  of  Yama,  sent  by  him  among  men,  are 
spoken  of  both  in  the  plural  (AV.  8,  2Ir.  811)  and  the  dual  (AV.  5,  3o6).  Of 
the  two  dogs  one  is  described  as  sabala,  'brindled'  and  the  other  as  sydma, 
'dark'  (AV.  8,  i9).  The  word  sabala  has  been  identified  with  Kspj3spo;23, 
but  this  equation  has  been  called  in  question24.  BERGAIGNE  (i,  93)  thinks 
the  two  dogs  are  simply  another  form  of  Yama  (as  fire)  and  YamI;  and  the 
trait  of  the  later  mythology,  which  represents  Yama  as  coming  to  fetch  the 
dead  himself,  is  regarded  by  him  as  primary  (1,92).  BLOOMFiELD25  identifies 
Yama's  two  dogs  with  sun  and  moon26. 

The  most  probable  conclusion  to  be  drawn  from  all  the  available  evidence 
seems  to  be,  that  Yama  represents  a  mythological  type  found  among  the  most 
diverse  peoples,  that  of  the  chief  of  the  souls  of  the  departed.  This  would 
naturally  follow  from  his  being  the  mythical  first  father  of  mankind  and  the 
first  of  those  that  died.  The  myth  of  the  primeval  twins  that  produced  the 
human  race,  Yama  and  Yam!  =  Ytma  and  Yimeh  27,  seems  to  be  Indo-Iranian. 
The  attempt  to  clear  Yama  of  the  guilt  of  incest  in  RV.  10,  10,  shows  that 
the  belief  in  that  incest  already  existed28.  Yama  himself  may  have  been 
regarded  in  the  Indo-Iranian  period  as  a  king  of  a  golden  age,  since  in  the 
Avesta  he  is  the  ruler  of  an  earthly29,  and  in  RV.  that  of  a  heavenly  para 
dise.  That  Yama  was  originally  conceived  as  a  man,  is  the  view  of  ROTH 
and  other  scholars^0.  E.  H.  MEYER,  thinking  YamI  to  be  a  later  creation 
like  Indrani  and  others,  believes  that  Yama,  the  twin,  originally  represented 
the  soul  as  the  alter  ego^.  A  number  of  other  scholars  believe  that  Yama 
originally  represented  a  phenomenon  of  nature.  Some  think  he  was  a  form 
of  Agni^2,  the  sun^  the  parting  day  3*,  or  the  setting  sun  and  thus  god  of 
the  dead^s.  HILLEBRANDT 3<3  thinks  Yama  is  the  moon,  in  which  dying  is 
typical,  and  thus  the  mortal  child  of  the  sun  and  closely  connected  with  the 
Manes.  He  considers  him,  however,  to  have  been  a  moon-god  in  the  Indo- 
Iranian  period  only,  but  no  longer  so  in  either  the  Avesta  or  the  Veda, 
where  he  is  merely  king  of  a  terrestrial  paradise  or  of  the  realm  of  the  Blest. 

i  By  LRV.  4,  134  regarded  as  a  hell.  —  2  This  abode  (also  AV.  2,  12  7;  18 
2  56.  3  70^  which  seems  always  to  mean  the  world  of  Yama  or  the  place  of  burial 
TA.  6,  7,  26  cp.  RV.  10,  18U)  is  understood  by  PVS.  I,  242  to  refer  to  a 'chapel 
of  Yama'.  A  harmya  of  Yama,  spoken  of  in  AV.  18,  455,  is  understood  by  EHNI 


174     HI-  RELIGION,  WELTL.  WISSENSCH.  u.  KUNST.     i  A.  VEDIC  MYTHOLOGY. 

to  mean  'tomb'  (cp,  SVL.   138).    —    3  Cp.  ROTH,  ZDMG.  2,  218.    —    4  MM.,  with 

Sayana,  regards  these  two  as  identical  with  Vivasvat  and  Saranyu.  —  5  The  inter 
pretation  is  doubtful,  cp.  SVL.  146.  —  6  Cp.  ROTH,  Nir.  Erl. '138;  SVL.  113.  — 

7  HRI.  128.  —  8  KHF.  21 ;  SVL.  137.  --  9Vispati  is  often  said  of  Agni,  once 
or  twice  of  Indra  and  Varuna.  —  I0  Cp.  ROTH,  IS.  14,  393.  —  «  But  the  passage 
may  mean  'Yama  (and)  Death'.—  «  Cp.  BLOOMFIELD,  AJP.  11,  354—5.  —  13  SVL. 

155.  —  J4  Op.  cit.  142,  note  I.  — fl5  Yama  and  Yarn!  mentioned  together  as  in 
heaven:  TS.  4,  2,  53;  VS.  12,  63;  SB.  7,  2,  11°;  TA.  6,  42.  --  16  SPIEGEL,  Era- 
nische  Altertumskunde  i,  527.  —  *?  This  is  also  the  explanation  of  GRASSMANN, 
KZ.  n,  13;  LEUMANN,  KZ.  32,  301.  —  18  SVL.  130,  note  3.  —  19  There  is  no 
reason  to  assume  such  a  bridge  in  RV.  9,  412  (Cp.  SVL.  no)  nor  a  river  (WEBER, 
Indische  Skizzen  10)  in  RV.  10,  631°  (cp.  SVL.  ill).  —  2°  SEE.  42,  LXXIV.  — 
21  AIL.  419;  SVL.  127.  152;  ORV.  538.  —  22  is.  4,  341  ff.;  Cp.  AIL.  421;  KRV. 
note  274.  —  23  BENFEY,  Vedica  und  Verwandtes  149 — 64;  KUHN,  KZ.  2,  314; 
WEBER,  IS.  2,  298;  MM.,  Chips  42,  250;  LSL.  (1891),  2,  595;  Selected  Essays 
(1881),  i,  494;  KRV.  note  274 a;  VAN  DEN  GHEYN,  Cerbere,  Brussels  1883.  — 
24  Cp.  ROHDE,  Psyche  i,  280,  note  i.  —  25  JAOS.  1893,  P-  l&3 — 72., —  26  Kath. 
37.  14  (MS.  p.  101,  note  2),  Kauslt.  Br.  n,  9  (=  day  and  night);  SB.  II,  I,  51 
(moon  a  heavenly  dog);  on  the  dogs  of  Yama  cp.  also  RAJENDRALALA  MITRA,  PRASB. 
May  1881,  pp.  94.  96;  Indo-Aryans,  Calcutta  1881,  2,  156—65;  Sp.AP.  239—40; 
HVM.  i,  225.  510 — i;  CASARTELLI,  Dog  of  Death,  BOR.  4,  269  f.  —  27  Sp.AP. 
246.  —  28  ROTH,  JAOS.  3,  335;  DARMESTETER,  Ormazd  et  Ahriman  106.  —  29  ROTH, 
ZDMG.  4,  420;  on  traces  of  Yima  having  been  the  first  man  in  the  Avesta,  cp. 
SVL.  148  n.  i.  —  30  ROTH,  ZDMG.  4,  425  ff.;  IS.  14,  392;  SCHERMAN,  Festschrift 
fur  K.  HOFMAN,  Erlangen  1890,  p.  573  ff.;  HOPKINS,  PAOS.  May  1881.  —  31  Indo- 
germanische  Mythen  i,  229.  232.  —  32  KHF.  208;  BRV.  i,  89;  cp.  WEBER,  Raja- 
suya  15,  n.  I;  YN.  12,  10  (Yama  =  lightning  Agni,  YamI  =  voice  of  thunder); 
SVL.  132,  n.  2.  —  33  BRI.  22—3;  EHNI,  Die  urspr.  Gotth.  d.  ved.  Yama,  p.  26  &c. 

-  34  WVB.  1894,  p.  I  (Yaml  =  night).  —  35  MM.,  LSL.  2,  634—7;  India  224; 
AR.  297—8;  BERGAIGNE,  Manuel  Vedique  283  (sun  that  has  set).  —  36  HVM.  i,  394 ff. ; 
IF.  i,  7;  also  HVBP.  43. 

On  this  chapter  cp.  also  ROTH,  ZDMG.  4,  417 — 33;  JAOS.  342 — 5;  WHITNEY, 
JAOS.  3,  327—8;  13,  cm— vm;  OLS.  i,  46—63;  WESTERGAARD,  IS.  3,  402—40; 
OST.  5,  284—335;  DONNER,  Pindapitryajna,  10—14.  28;  AIL.  408— 22;  BRV.  1,85  —  94; 
2,96;  KRV.  69 — 71;  SP.  AP.  243 — 56;  LANMAN,  Sanskrit  Reader  377 — 85;  SVL. 
122—61;  HVM.  i,  489—513;  ZDMG.  48,  421;  EHNI,  Der  vedische  Mythus  des 
Yama,  Strassburg  1890;  Die  urspriingliche  Gottheit  des  vedischen  Yama,  Leipzig 
1896;  HOPKINS,  PAOS.  1891,  xciv— v;  HRI.  128-50.  204—7;  MM.,  PsR.  177—207; 
ORV.  524—43;  SEE.  46,  29;  JACKSON,  JAOS.  17,  185. 


LIST  OF  ABBREVIATIONS. 


AB.  =  Aitareya  Brahmana. 

AF.  =  Arische  Forschungen. 

AGS.   =  Asvalayana  Grhya  Sutra. 

AIL.  =  ZIMMER'S  Altindisches  Leben. 

AJP.  =  American  Journal  of  Philology. 

Ap.  =  Apastamba. 

AR.  =  MAX  MULLER'S  Anthropological  Reli 
gion. 

ASL.  =  MAX  MULLER'S  History  of  Ancient 
Sanskrit  Literature. 

ASS.  =  Asvalayana  Srauta  Sfitra. 

AV.  =  Atharvaveda. 

BB.  =  BEZZENBERGER'S  Beitrage. 

BDA.  =  BRADKE,  Dyaus  Asura. 

BOR.  =  Babylonian  and  Oriental  Record. 

Br.  •=  Brahmana. 

BRV.  =  BERGAIGNE,   La  Religion  Vedique. 

Dh.  S.  =  Dharma  Sutra. 

DPV.  ==  DEUSSEN,  Philosophic  des  Veda. 

FaB.  =  Festgruss  an  BOHTLINGK. 

FaR.  =  Festgruss  an  ROTH. 

FaW.  =  Festschrift    an   WEBER    (Gurupuja- 
kaumudi). 

GGA.  =  Gottinger  Gelehrte  Anzeigen. 

GGH.  =  SCHROEDER'S    Griechische    Gotter 
und  Heroen. 

GKR.  =  GELDNER,  KAEGI,  ROTH,  Siebenzig 
Lieder  des  Rigveda. 

GRV.  =  GRASSMANN'S    Translation    of   the  j 
Rigveda. 

GS.  =  Grhya  Sutra. 


auf  dem  gebiete  der  Rgveda-forschung 

(1893)- 

LRV.  =  LUDWIG,  Rigveda  Translation. 
LSL.  =    MAX    MULLER'S   Lectures    on    the 

Science   of  Language  (ed.   1891). 
MGS.  =  Manava  Grhya  Sutra. 
MM.  =  M^  MULLER. 


Samhita. 

NR.  =  MAX  MULLER'S  Natural  Religion. 
Nir.  =  Nirukta. 
OGR.  =  MAX  MULLER'S  Origin  and  Growth 

of  Religion. 
OLS.  =  WHITNEY'S  Oriental  and  Linguistic 

Studies. 

OO.   =  BENFEY'S  Orient  und  Occident. 
ORV.  =  OLDENBERG,  Die  Religion  des  Veda. 
OST.  =  MUIR'S  Original  Sanskrit  Texts. 
PAOS.    =    Proceedings    of    the    American 

Oriental  Society. 

PB.  =  Pancavimsa  'Brahmana  (=  TMB.) 
PCS.  =  Paraskara  Grhya  Sfltra. 
PhR.  =  MAX  MULLER'S  Physical  Religion. 
Ps.R.  =  MAX  MULLER'S  Psychological  Reli 

gion. 
PRASB.  =  Proceedings  of  the  Royal  Asiatic 

Society  of  Bengal. 
PVS.   =  PISCHEL,  Vedische  Studien. 
PW.    =    Petersburger    Worterbuch    (B6HT- 

LINGK     and     ROTH'S     larger     Sanskrit 

Dictionary). 
RV.  =  Rigveda. 


I    ,  V-  = 

GVS.  =  GELDNER,  Vedische  Studien.  |  SB.  =  Satapatha  Brahmana. 

GW.  =  GRASSMANN,    Worterbuch  (Rigveda  IJ5BE.  =  Sacred  Books  of .  the. -East. 

Lexicon). 

HGS.  =  Hiranyakesi  Grhya  Sutra. 
HRI.  • —  HOPKINS,  ff Ninons,  of  India./ 
FrVB"pT ==    HARDY,    Vedisch-brahmanische 


Periode. 
HVM.    =   HILLEBRANDT,    Vedische   Mytho- 

logie. 

IF.  =  Indogermanische  Forschungen. 
IS.  =  Indische  Studien. 
IStr.  =  Indische  Streifen. 
JA.  =  Journal  Asiatique. 
JAOS.  =  Journal  of  the  American  Oriental 

Society. 
JRAS.    =    Journal    of    the     Royal    Asiatic 

Society. 

Kaus.  S.  =  Kausika  Sfltra. 
KHF.  =  KUHN,  Herabkunft  des  Feuers  und 

des  Gottertranks. 
KRV.  =  KAEGI,  Der  Rigveda  (quoted  from 

ARROWSMITH'S  translation). 
K.S.  =  Kausika  Sutra. 
KSS.   =  Katyayana  Srauta  Sutra. 
KZ.  =  KUHN'S  Zeitschrift. 
LRF.  =  LUDWIG,  Ueber  die  neuesten  arbeiten 


. 

STp.AT.  =  SPIEGEL,  Die  Arische  Periode. 
SPH.  =  SCHERMAN,  Philosophische  Hymnen. 
SV.  =  Samaveda. 

SVL.  =  SCHERMAN,  Visionslitteratur. 
SSS.  ==  Sankhayana  Srauta  Sutra. 
TA.  =  Taittirlya  Aranyaka. 
TB.  =  Taittirlya  Brahmana. 
TMB.  =  Tandya  Mahabrahmana  (=  PB). 
TS.  =  Taittirlya  Samhita. 
Up.   =  Upanisad. 
Val.  =  Valakhilya. 
VS.  =  Vajasaneyi  Samhita. 
WC.  =  WALLIS,  Cosmology  of  the  Rigveda. 
WVB.=  WEBER,  Vedische  Beitrage  (Sitzungs- 

berichte  der  Berliner  Akademie). 
WZKM.  =  Wiener  Zeitschrift  fur  die  Kunde 

des      Morgenlandes     (Vienna      Oriental 

Journal). 

YN.  =  YASKA'S  Nirukta. 
YV.  =  Yajurveda. 

ZDA.  =  Zeitschrift  fiir  deutsches  Altertum. 
ZDMG.  =  Zeitschrift  der  Deutschen  Morgen- 

landischen  Gesellschaft. 
ZVP.  =  Zeitschrift  fiir  Volkerpsychologie. 


N.B.      The    figures    in    parentheses    without   an    added    abbreviation    refer    to  the 
Rigveda. 


CONTENTS. 


I.  INTRODUCTION       .      .     . 
§     I.  Religion  and  Mythology 


Page 
I 
I 


8  2.  Characteristics  of  Vedic  myth 
ology  

8     3.  Sources  of  Vedic  Mythology 

S     4.  Method  to  be  pursued    . 

8  5.  The  Avesta  and  Vedic  mytho 
logy  

8     6.  Comparative  Mythology 

II.  VEDIC   CONCEPTIONS   OF  THE 

WORLD  AND  ITS  ORIGIN  . 

%     7.  Cosmology 

8     8.  Cosmogony 

8     9.  Origin  of  Gods   and  Men    . 

III.  THE  VEDIC  GODS     .... 
S  10.  General  character  and  classi 
fication        

A.  CELESTIAL  GODS 

8   II.  Dyaus 

8  12.  Varuna 

§   13.  Mitra 

S  14.  Suryj^ . . . ^__^_._ 

J"T£  Savitr 

8  16.  Pusan 

17.  Visnu 


S 

§  18.  Vivasvat 

S   19.  Adityas 

S  20.  Usas 

S  21.  Asvins 

B.  ATMOSPHERIC  GODS 

8  22.  Indra 

§  23.  Trita  Aptya  .... 
8  24.  Apa"m  napat  .... 
8  25.  Matarisvan  .... 
§  26.  Ahi  budhnya  .... 
S  27.  Aja  ekapad  .... 

S  28.  Rudra 

S  29.  The  Maruts     .... 
S  30.  Vayu-Vata        .... 
S  31.  Parjanya     .      .      .      . 
S  32.  Apah 

C.  TERRESTRIAL  GODS 

§  33.  Rivers.    SarasvatI 

§  34.  Prthivl 

S  35-  Agni 

8  36.  Brhaspati 

S  37-  Soma 

D.  ABSTRACT  GODS     .... 
S  38.  Two  Classes   .... 

A.  Various  Agent  Gods  . 

B.  Tvastr 

S  39-  Visvakarman,  Prajapati  . 
S  40.  Manyu,  Sraddha&c.  .      . 


15 

21 
21 
22 
29 
30 
32 

35 
37 
42 

43 
46 

49 
54 
54 
67 
69 

71 

72 

73 

74 
77 
81 

83 
85 
86 
86 


101 
104 


116 
118 
119 


Page 

8  41.  Aditi 120 

S  42.  Diti 123 

E.  S  43-  GODDESSES 124 

F.  8  44-  DUAL  DIVINITIES  .      .      .      .126 

G.  S  45-  GROUPS  OF  DEITIES    .      .     .130 
H.  LOWER  DEITIES 131 

8  46.   Rbhus  . 131 

8  47.  Apsarases.    UrvasI     -      .      .134 

8  48.  Gandharvas 136 

8  49.  Tutelary  Deities:  Vastos 

pati,'  &c 138 

IV.    MYTHICAL  PRIESTS  AND 

HEROES 138 

§  jig^JManu^^.^ — . — . . — ^_JL___12^_ 

8  51.  Bhrgus 140 

S  52.  Atharvan 141 

S  53.  Dadhyanc 141 

8  54.  Angirases 142 

§  55.  Virupas,  Navagvas,  Dasagvas, 

Seven  Rsis       ....  143 

S  56.  Atri   "..__. ^_^-^-^  145  - 

57.  Kanva  &c 145 


8  58.  Kutsa,  Kavya  Usana  &c.      . 

V.  ANIMALS  AND  INANIMATE  OB 
JECTS  .....      . 


146 


147 
147 


S  59.  General  Traits      .... 
S  60.  The  Horse  :   Dadhikra,  Tark- 

sya,  Paidva,  Etasa,  &c.  .  148 
S  6  1.  A.  The  Bull.  B.  The  Cow  .  150 
§  62.  The  goat,  boar,  dog,  monkey, 

tortoise,  frogs  .  .  .151 
§  63.  The  Bird  .  ....  152 

§  64.  Noxious  animals;  serpent,  &c.    152 
§  65.  Survivals  of  prehistoric  notions 

about  animals  .  .  .153 
§  66.  Deified  terrestrial  objects  .  154 

VI.  DEMONS  AND  FIENDS   .      .      .156 
S  67.  Aerial  demons  :  Asuras,  Panis, 

Dasas    ......  156 

S  68.  Vrtra,  Vala  &c  .....  158 

§  69.  Susna,  Sambara,  Namuci,  &c.  160 
§  70.  Raksases,  Pisacas    and   other 

terrestrial  demons      .      .  162 

VII.  ESCHATOLOGY     .....     165 

S  71.  Disposal  of  the  dead      .      .     165 
8  72.  The  Soul  ......     166 

8  73-  Heaven      ......     167 

S  74-  Joys  of  the  future  life   .      .167 
8  75-  Hell      .......     169 

S  76.  The  Pitrs  or  Manes  .      .      .170 
8  77-  Yama,  King  of  the  Dead    .     171 


NB.    The  Manuscript  was  sent  in  on  September  23,  1896. 


I.  SANSKRIT  INDEX. 

The  references  in  both  Indexes,  unless  accompanied  by  §,  are  to  pages. 


Amsa  43,  45,  46. 

amsu  104,   114. 

aiphas   121. 

Agastya  147,    167. 

agohya,  35,    133. 

Agnayl  125. 

ASni  S  35  (88—100);  2,  7,  10, 

11,  15,  l6,  17,  l8,  19,  22, 
23,  24,  25,  26,  29,  30,  32, 

33,  35,  36,  38,  40,  42,  43, 
44,  45,  46,  48,  92,  94,  97, 
99,  116,  121,  123,  124,  126, 
130, 139, 141,  142, 145, 147, 


148, 151,  152,  156, 168,  170,    agraja  117. 
171.  agriya  109. 

Agni  kumara  75,  garhaspatya  j  agre  109. 
165,  yavistha  164,  vaidyuta    arikusa  55. 
94,   112. 


of  Dyaus  21;  son  of  strength 
12;  as  the  sun  129;  his  ter 
restrial  form  91,  92;  m  the 
waters  57,  70;  his  wfscTonT 
97  ;  his  youth  91. 

Agni  associated  with  Atri  145, 
146;  with  Kanva  145;  with 
Parjanya  84,  129;  with 
Soma  95 ;  contrasted  with 
Parjanya  129;  with  Soma 
129. 

Agnl-parjanya  126. 

Agnl-soma  126. 


Agni's  aerial  form  92 ;  his 
ancestral  friendship  96;  as 
a  benefactor  97,  98;  as  a 


bird  88;  his  births  91;  his 
thre<r"b~irths  ~93 ;  his  many 
births  94;  his  brothers  95; 
burns  goblins  163  — 164;  his 
car  and  steeds  90;  his  ce 
lestial  form  92;  compared 
with  inanimate  objects  89; 

conductor  of  the  dead  165,  j  arigirasvat  143,   144. 
166;  corpse-devouring  171;    aghasva  149. 


Angira   144. 
Aiigiras  96,  97,  102,  139;  as 
an  epithet  of  Agni  143, 146. 
Angirasah  §  54  (142— 143);  15, 


44,  61,  64,  67,  101,  117, 
130,  140,  141,  143,  144,  145, 
^47,  159,  170,  171 ;  as  an 
cient  fathers  142;  as  foes 
of  the  Panis  157;  their  song 
142;  are  sons  of  Dyaus  21. 
angirastama  142. 


his  cosmical  actions  98 — 
99;  demon-dispelling  95; 
domestic  95,  96;  etymology 
of  the  name  99 ;  his  father 
90;  his  food  89;  is  foot 


less  and  headless 


for 


gives  sin  98;  his  various  ajara  58. 
forms  5,  6;  his  greatness  Ajah  153. 
98;  hidden_i4O^r46j  hymns  ajasva  36. 


aghnya  151. 
|/aj  99. 
aja  74. 

Aja  ekapad  S  27  (73— 74);  70, 

72,  151- 
ajana  73. 


to  Agni  140;  identified  with 
other  gods  95 ;  is  Indra's 
twin  brother  57;  contrasted 
with  Indra  97,  98,  99;  his 
lightning  form  98;  his  lunar 
form  100;  as  a  messenger 
96;  as  a  priest  96,  97;  as 
a  raksas-slayer  166 ;  his  roar 
ing  90;  his  seven  tongues 
89;  as  a  serpent  153;  son 


Ajaikapad   73. 

atithi  92,  95. 

Atithigva  64,   147. 

atka  107. 

Atrayah  145. 

atri  145. 

Atri  §  56  (145);   15,  53,   139, 

160,  167  ;  finds  the  sun  145 ; 

etymology  of  the  name  145. 
atrin  145. 


atrivat  144. 

atharyu   141. 

Atharvan  §  52  (141);  139,  H7  ; 
identified  with  Agni  141. 

Atharvaveda  4. 

Atharvarigirasah   143. 

Atharvan  ah  140,' 141,  142,170. 

V'ad  145. 

Aditi  §41(120  —  123);  13,  14, 
1 6,  33,  44,  45,46,  56,  121, 
123,  130,  150,  151;  her  two 
main  characteristics  122; 
associated  with  Daksa  121, 
122;  etymology  of  her  name 
121;  frees  from  guilt  121 ; 
identified  with  the  universe 
121;  her  motherhood  122; 
her  sons  13. 

adititva  121. 

Aditeh  putrah  122. 

adri  10,  60.  94,  105,  106,  154. 

adhvaryu  97,    105. 

anarva   120. 

Anarsani   162. 

anavadya  45. 

anastapa£u  36. 

anastavedas  36,  37. 

anas  63. 

anagastva   1 21. 

animisa  45. 

Anukramam  99,   143. 

Anumati   119. 

Antaka   172. 

antariksa   10,  72. 

andhas   104. 

anna   105. 

ap  69,  159. 

apas   132. 

Apam  napat  §24  (69 — 70);  72, 
73,  85,  88,  99;  identified 
with  Agni  70,  with  Savitr 
33;  is  the  Avestic  Apam 
napat  8. 

Apala  64. 

apya  61. 

apya  35;  — yosa  134,  172. 

Apsaras   136,    137. 
Apsarasah  §  47  (134—135)- 
apsujit  59. 


Indo-arische  Philologie.    III.  1  A 


178     III.  RELIGION,  WELTL.  WISSENSCH.  u.  KUNST.    IA.  VEDIC  MYTHOLOGY. 


apsumat  92. 

abja  73- 

abhra  60,  83. 

abhriya  102. 

amati  32. 

amitra   159. 

amrta  105,  107,  108,  III,  113, 
127,  151,  161. 

amba  87. 

Ambika  74. 

ambbrna   164. 

aram  72,  91. 

Aranyani   154. 

Aramati   119. 

Aratayah  164. 

arati   164. 

arista  45- 

aristanemi    149. 

aruna  82,    105. 

arusa  75. 

arjuna  88. 

Arjuna  146. 

arnava  105. 

arnas  59. 

Arbuda  6l,  67,  160;  his  cows 
1 60. 

Arbudi  164. 

Aryaman  §  19  (43);  16,  23, 
24,  25,  29,  30,  33,  34,  44, 
45,  46,  120. 

aryamya  45. 

avi  106. 

avrjina  45. 

Asani  75. 

asusa  160. 

asna  93,   106. 

asman  55,  94. 

asva  79. 

asvattha  134. 

asvin   131. 

AsvinI  51,   128. 

Asvinau  §  21  (49 — 54);  16,  20, 
24,32,36,40,41,42,43,48, 
106,  124,  125,  132,  141,  149,  ; 
151,     162;    their    physical; 
basis  53;  their  locality  50;  j 
are  red-white  5 1 ;  originally  j 
perhaps    separate  49;    are 
matutinal  gods  51  ;  perhaps 
morning   and  evening  star  i 
53;  are  succouring  gods  51 ; 
are    divine    physicians    51; 
come  to  the  sacrifice  three 
times    a    day   50;    ancient 
explanations  of  their  nature 
53;  are  sons  of  Dyaus  21, 
5 1 ;   sons   of  Vivasvat   and  i 
Saranyu  51  ;  their  wife  51; 
their  sister  51;  their  ships 
or  boat  52;  associated  with 
Atri   145,  with  Kanva  146, 
with  Savitr  50,    with  Usas 
50;   identified  with   Indra- 
Agni   128. 
asat  13. 
Asiknl  8 1. 


asu    1 66. 

asutrp   173. 

asunlta  166. 

asumti  1 66. 

Asuniti   120. 

asura  22,  24,  32,  36,  58,  75, 
79,  84,  97,  98,  116,  1*3, 
156;  means  both  god  and 
demon  156;  identical  with 
the  Avestic  ahura  7. 

Asura  90,  133,  161,  162. 

asurahan  156. 

Asurah  S  67  A;  5,  39,  41,  57, 
6l,  95,  96,  97,  119,  136, 
1 60;  offspring  of  Prajapati 
156;  connected  with  dark 
ness  156. 

Ahalya  65. 

ahi  58,  64,  73,  152,   153. 

Ahi  158,  1 60,  161;  identical 
with  Vrtra  73. 

Ahi  budhnya  70,  72,   153. 

ahibhanu  78,   152. 

ahihan  149. 

Aghrni  35,  36. 
aiigirasa  102,   103,  143. 
atayah  134. 

ata  ii. 

atman    166;    connected    with 

wind   1 66, 
aditeya  30. 

Aditya  29,  42,   139,   188. 
Adit'yah  S  19  (43—46);  5,  H, 

15,     l8,    20,    24,    26,    27,    28, 

30,   34,   42,  116,  117,   120, 

121,     130,    142;     sons    of 

Dyaus  21. 
a-dhav   106. 
adhavana  106. 
Apah  §32(85—86);  identical 

with  Avestic  apo  7. 
Aptya  70;   etymology  of  the 

word  69. 
a-pya   107. 
apyayana   107,   1 13. 
apra  87,   loo. 

aprl  87,99,  loo,  124,129,154. 
amSd  97. 
ayasa  55. 

Ayu  loo,   135  n.  9,   140,   147. 
ayudha  =  sun  31. 
Arjuneya   146. 
arya  62,  98. 
asir  107. 
asuheman  70. 
asura   IOO,   1 60,    161. 
ahavanlya  95. 

Ida   139,   150. 

indu  66,  105,   113. 

Indu  104,  106,   138. 

Indra  §  22  (54—66);  6,  10,  1 1, 
12,  15,  16,  17,  19,  24,  26, 
31,  35,  36,  37,  38,  39,  4t, 
42,  43,  45,48,  53,  H5,  ll6, 


118,  119,  126,  130,  131,  138, 
141,  142,  144,  147,  149,  151, 
154,  155,  J56,  159,  160,  161, 
162,  168,  170;  associated 
with  Agni  57,  60,  67,  95, 

102,  124,    126,    127,    128, 
with  the  Asvins   126,  with 
Kutsa    146,    with    Parvata 
126,    with   Pusan   37,  126, 
128,    with    Brhaspati    101, 

103,  126,    128,    with    the 
Maruts    57,    60,   126,    with 
Varuna  126,  127,  with  Vayu 
82,    106,    126,    128;    with 
Visnu  57,  60,  91,  126,  127, 
128,    156,    with    Soma  60, 
126,  128,  169;  as  an  Aditya 
44;    god  of  battle  62  ;    be- 
stower  of  riches  63 ;  his  birth 
56 ;  his  bolt  6, 56,  5  7 ;  brother 
of  Agni   57,    of  Pusan  57; 
his  car  55;  his  leading  char- 
acteristic§64 — 65;  contrast 
ed  with  Agni  128;  contrast 
ed  with  Varuna  20,  64,  65, 
127;    as    a    demon   in    the 
Avesta  8,  66;  etymology  of 
the  name  66;  his  father  56; 
slays  his  father  1 8,  57;  his 
physical    features    54 — 55; 
his  food  56 ;  fights  against 
the  gods   18,   57,   146;    his 
gigantic    size    57  —  58;    his 
greatness  58;    as    a  helper 
62;  immoral  and  capricious 
traits  18,  19,  65;  his  intoxi 
cation  65 ;    identified   with 
Manu5  7;  his  steeds5  5;  threa 
tens  the  Maruts  18,  81 ;  his 
mother  56;  clips  the  wings  of 
the  mountains  62;  settles  the 
mountains  62;  his  parents 
12;    releases   the    cows   of 
the  Panis  59;  produces  Agni 
57;    produces    heaven  and 
earth  62;  produces  the  sun 
61 ;    is  produced    from  the 
mouth  of  Purusa  57;  scep 
ticism    as    to  his  existence 
65;    son    of  truth   12;    his 
steeds     55;     releases    .the 
streams  59;  supports  heaven 
and    earth    62;     identified 
with  Surya  57;  transference 
to  him  of  Varuna's  preemin 
ence   20,  65 — 66;    shatters 
the   car  of  Usas  18,  48,  63; 
his  weapons  55;  his  wheel 
6 1,    64;   his  wife    57,  125; 
as  winner   of  light  6l;    as 
winner  of  Soma  62. 

Indra-nasatya   126. 
Indra-vayu  126. 
Indra-kutsa   146. 
Indragm    126. 
Indra-parvata  126,    154. 


I.  SANSKRIT  INDEX. 


Indra-pusana   126. 

Jndra-bfhaspati   126. 

Indra-varuna   126. 

Indra-visnu   126. 

Indra-soma   126. 

Indranl57, 64, 78, 125,151,173. 

Illbisa  157,  162. 

ista-purta  168. 

ija  129. 

l)a  87,  91,   124,    135. 

ilayas  pade   124. 

Isana  75. 

Uksan  108. 

Ugrajit  135. 

Ugradeva  75. 

Ugrampasya   135. 

Ugradeva  171. 

ucchi.sta  155. 

uttara  99. 

utsa  60,   105. 

udamegha  52. 

udumbara  134. 

udumbala  173. 

Uma  74. 

Urana  61,  152,  160. 

uru  45. 

urukrama  37- 

urugaya  37. 

Urvara  138. 

urvarapati  138. 

Urvasi   15,  124,   135. 

uluka   172. 

usarbudh  90. 

Usas  S  20  (46—49);  2,  8,  19, 
20,  21,  31,  34,  38,  40,  43, 
124, 125, 148, 150;  daughter 
of  heaven  21,  48;  etymo 
logy  of  the  name  49 ;  her 
kine  and  steeds  18,  47;  as 
sociated  with  Surya  48. 

Usasanakta  48,  126. 

usriya  62. 

Udhar  60. 

]/r  with  vi  160. 

rkvat  101. 

rksa  144,  164. 

Rksa  153. 

Rgveda  3. 

rjisvan  72. 

Rjisvan   161. 

Rjrasva  52. 

rta  II,  13,  26,  101,  120,  168; 
=  asa  7. 

rtavan  45. 

rtvij  96. 

rblsa  145. 

Rbhavah  §  46  (131  — 134);  n, 
32,  44,  50,  56,  107,  130, 
170;  associated  with  Agni 
131;  with  Indra  131,  132, 
with  other  deities,  ibid., 
with  Savitri33,  withTvastr 
131,  132,  133;  their  car 


and  steeds  131  ;  became  im 
mortal  132;  their  origini33; 
their  parents  131,  132, 
133;  their  skill  132. 

Rbhu  131. 

rbhu,  etymology  of  133. 

rbhuksan   131. 

Rbhuksan  73,   131,  132. 

Rsayah,  sapta  144. 

r'§i  97,'  H4- 

rsti  79. 

Ekata  68,  69. 
ekapad  73. 
Ekastaka  56. 
Etasa  30,  149—150. 
emu.sa  41. 
Ema.sa  41. 
evaya  38. 
ev  ay  a  van  38. 
esa'38. 

Aitareya  Brahmana  4. 

Ojas   39. 
osadhi  154. 

Aurnavabha  38,  152. 

Ka  =  Prajapati  119. 
kakud  98. 
kakuha  50. 
Kakslvat  52. 


kapota   172. 

Kamadyu  52. 

karambha  36,  128. 

karambhad  36. 

karambhin  37. 

Karmapradipa  9^* 

kalasa   106. 

Kali  52. 

kavandha  60. 

kavi  97,  102,  147. 

kavikratu  97. 

kavyavahana  97. 

Kasa  56. 

Kasyapa   151,   153. 

Kathaka  41,  57- 

Kama  13,  14,  120;  his  arrows 

120. 

kamadugha  150,  168. 
kamaduh  150. 
kamya   171. 
Kala   120. 

KavyaUsana  55,  96,  I39»  *47- 
kimldin  164. 
Kutsa  §  58  (146-147);  160; 

associated  with  Indra  146. 
kuyava  161. 
Kuravah  153. 
Kulitara,  son  of  64,  161. 
kusa  41. 
Kusikah  63. 
Kuhu  125. 
kudi  165. 
kupa  67. 
kurma  153. 


]/kr  148 

Krsanu  74,  112,  137  =  Kere- 

sani  8. 
Krsna  52. 
kosa  60,  83. 
Kausika  62. 
Kausikasutra  4,  117. 
Kaasikah.  153. 
kaustubha  39. 
]/ krand   108. 
kravyad  97,   164,  165. 
krivi   1 60. 
ksatriya  45. 
ksam  9. 
ksa  9. 

ksetrasya  pati   138. 
ksonl  9. 
ksm'a  88. 

Khadi  79. 
khila  40. 

Ganga  86. 

gana  77,   101. 

ganapati   101. 

gandha  137. 

Gandharva  8,  15,  134,  146, 
172;  his  hostility  137;  as 
sociated  with  Soma  136; 
with  the  Waters  137. 

gandharva-nagara  137,  note  5. 

Gandharvah  §  48  (136—137); 
107,  124,  135,  153;  their 
appearance  137;  connected 
with  marriage  137 ;  as  guar 
dians  of  Soma  136. 

Garuda  39,  149,   152. 

garutmat  39,  152. 

garjanmegha  85. 

garbha  70,  92,  95,  129. 

gavasir  106. 

gavisti  63. 

Gayatrl,  asanameof  Agni  III. 

garsteya  56. 

garhapatya  95;  agni  — 73. 

giri  60. 

giriksit  39. 

giristha  39,  no. 

Gungu   125. 

gr?ti  56- 

grha  145. 

grhapati  95,   103,  138. 

go  60,  123. 

gojata  151. 

Gotama  147. 

Gotamah  153. 

gopati  63. 

gomatr  78. 

Gautama  65. 

gnah  117. 

gnaspati   loo. 

gma  9« 

Vgras   152. 

gravan   106,  154. 

Ghrta  105. 
ghrtaprstha   107. 


i8o      III.  RELIGION,  WELTL.  WISSENSCH.  u.  KUNST.     IA.  VEDIC  MYTHOLOGY. 


ghora  127. 
Ghosa  52. 

Cakra   155. 

candra   127. 

camu   106. 

Caraka  Brahmana  41. 

caranyu   125. 

Cumuri   158,   162;  associated 

with  Dhtmi   162. 
Cyavana  51. 

Chandas   101. 
Chandogyopani.sad   14. 

VJan  57- 
janayah  117. 
janitrl   126. 
janima  97. 
jaritr  60,  97. 
jalasa  76. 
jalasabhesaja  76. 
ja   HI. 
jata  1 1 8. 

jatavedas  97,   119. 
jami  48. 
jlvan  168. 

J/taks  72,   1 1 6,  117,   132. 

Tanunapat  71,  99—100. 

tanyatu  86. 

tapas   13,   17,   132,  167. 

Tapas   119. 

tavas  58. 

Tarksya  149. 

tigmasriiga  108. 

Tisya  103. 

Tugra  52,  146. 

tura  58. 

Turvasa  64,  140,   146,   171. 

Turvayana  147. 

V'tr  68.  ' 

-tr  (suffix)   115. 

Trksi  149. 

Trtsavah  64. 

Trasadasyu  146,  147;  Agni 
of  —  96. 

Tratr   it 6. 

Trasadasyava  149. 

trita  69.  ' 

Trita  S  23  (67-69);  6,  43, 
64,  7i>  73,  80,  103,  117, 
141;  —  Aptya  8,  14,  45, 
47,  66,  67;  associated 
with  Agni  67;  his  abode 
67;  his  fingers  17;  his 
maidens  67, 105;  associated 
with  the  Maruts  67;  is 
remote  68;  as  a  Soma- 
presser  67. 

tripastya  93. 

triprstha   107. 

trisadhastha  38,  93,   107. 

trini  69. 

Tryambaka  74. 

tryasir   106. 

|/tvaks   117. 

tvac    106. 


Tvastr  S  38  B;  II,  12,  19, 
23,  34,  55»  56,  58,  82,  91, 
101,  115,  118,  126,  138, 
141;  associated  with  Indra 
116,  117,  with  the  Rbhus 
133;  his  cup  1 16,  117,  13^; 
his  daughter  125;  etymo 
logy  of  the  name  117;  his 
mead  52;  as  a  shaper  of 
forms  1 16;  his  skill  116; 
his  son  160;  his  steeds  116. 

Tvastra  158. 

Daksa  12,   13,  43,44,46,  121. 

dak.sa  12,  46. 

daksapitr  46. 

daksasya  pitr  46. 

daksina  95. 

Dadhikra  142,  148,   149. 

Dadhikravan   124,   148. 

Dadhlca  142. 

Dadhyanc  §  53  (142  —  143); 
52/71,  139,  141,  144,  149, 
157;  his  bones  159;  ety 
mology  of  the  name  142; 
as  an  ancient  fire-priest  142. 

dadhyasir   106. 

Dabhlti   162. 

damunas  33,  95. 

darbha   15. 

Dasagvah  80,   144. 

dasma  36. 

dasmavarcas  36. 

Dasyavah  62,  64,  98,  148,  162. 

dasyu   146,  157,   158,   159. 

dasyuhatya  157. 

dasyuhan  157. 

dasra  36,  49. 

I/da  121,    123. 

Danava  59,   158,   161. 

Dana vi  57. 

danu  158. 

Danu  158. 

dasa  157,   158,   159. 

Dasa  40,   158,   161,  162. 

Dasah§69(i6o  — 162);  64,157. 

dita  121. 

diti  121,   123. 

Diti  S  42  (123). 

div  8,  9,  10. 

Divodasa  87,  90,  161  ;  Agni 
of—  96;  — Atithigva  147. 

divya  92,   136. 

disah  9. 

dlrghadhl  45. 

dundubhi   155. 

Durga  73. 

durgfbhisvan  72. 

|/duh   105. 

duta  96. 

|/dr  160. 

drdha  88. 

drti  83. 

Drbhlka  162. 

DrsadvatI  87. 

deva  8,  34,  156. 


devaputra  126. 

devamana  172. 

Devavata,  Agni  of  96. 

devasunl  151. 

devah  5. 

devi  120. 

devlr  dvarah    154. 

Destrl   115. 

I3aityah  123. 

daivya   100. 

Daivya  96. 

daivya  hotara   144. 

Dyavaksama   126. 

DyavaprthivT  9,  20,  21,  123, 
126. 

Dyavabhuml  126. 

dyaur  aditih   121,   122. 

Dyaus  pitar  8. 

Dyaus  §  II  (21—22);  2,  12, 
19,  25,  27,  28,  30,  53,  61, 
83,  88,  121,  123,  124,  126, 
129;  has  a  boh  22;  as  a 
bull  21;  as  a  father  8,  21, 
22 ;  as  father  of  Indra 
21;  conceived  as  feminine 
22;  his  incest  119;  associ 
ated  with  Prthivl  90;  roars 
21,  22;  thunders  90;  iden 
tical  with  Zeus  8. 

drapsa  105,  113. 

drapsin  80. 

druh  =  druj   8. 

Druh  164. 

druhah  61. 

Druhyavah  140. 

drona  106. 

Dhanu  92. 

Dhartr  115. 

1/dha  '115. 

dhatr   1 1 8. 

Dhatr   13,  43,   116,  117,   118. 

dhiyas  patl   128. 

Dhi  sana   124. 

Dhuni   158,   162. 

dhumaketu  90. 

dhrtavrata  45. 

dhena  61. 

ydhvan  162. 

Naktosasa  48,  126. 
Naciketas,  story  of  168. 
nadlvrt   159. 
napat   131. 
napata  savasah  46. 
napti   105. 
nabhasvat  83. 
Naml  Sapya  161. 
Namuci  64,  158,  161 — 2;  ety 
mology  of  the    name   162. 
narasamsa  100. 
Narasamsa   36,  71,  loo,   102. 
navagva  144. 
Navagvah   141,   144,    170. 
Navavastva  158. 
naka  8. 
Nagah  153. 


I.  SANSKRIT  INDEX. 


181 


nadya  70. 

nabhi  42,  92. 

naraka  loka  169. 

Narsada   145. 

Nasatya  49. 

ninya  158. 

niyutvat  82. 

Nirrti   172. 

nirnij    107. 

niska  74. 

Nistigrl  56. 

nrtu  58. 

Nrsad   145. 

netr   116. 

Naighantuka  19,  25,  33,  45, 
4«,  54,  68,  73,99,  100,  115, 
121,  123,  124,  147,  148,  149, 

159. 
nyagrodha  134. 

Pajra  52. 
paclblsa  172. 

Panayah  95,  98,  143,  144,  157; 
their  cows  63 ;    as  foes  of 
Brhaspati   157;    as  foes  of 
Indra  157. 
pani   157. 
Pani   157,  159- 
patatrin  50. 
pati  51,  118;    names  formed 

with  103,   138. 
patnlr  devanam   125. 
pada  50. 
Vpan   133. 
payas   105. 
Paramesthin  57. 
Paravrj   52. 
parijman  50. 
paridhi   159. 
parisayana  59- 
Parusni   64,  86. 
Parjanya    S31;    I5»    2O>    37, 
90,  136,  138,  addenda,  line 
30;  his  car  83;  etymology 
of  the  name  84 ;  as  father 
84 ;  as  father  of  Soma  ill; 
as  fructifier  84;  his  identity 
with  Perkunas  doubtful  8; 
resembles  Indra  84;  resem 
bles  Dyaus  84;  son  of  Dyaus 
2  i  ;    subordinate  to  Mitra- 
Varuna  84;  his  wife  84. 
Parj  anya-vata  126. 
parna  (tree)  1 1 2. 
parvata  10,  55,  60,  106,  159. 
Parvata   154. 
parvatavrdh   110. 
palasa   112. 
pavamana  106. 
Pavamana  107. 
pavitra   106. 
pasu  47;  =  Soma   108. 
Pasupati  75. 
pasupa  37. 
pastya   12 1. 
Panini   162*. 


patra  133. 
pathas  38,    128. 
Parvati  74. 
pavaka  81. 
pavlravl  86. 
Paviravi  73. 
pasa  26. 
'  I/pi   107. 


Paidva  149. 

praja   118. 

prajapati   118;  =  Savitr  33. 

Prajapati  S  39;  4,  5»  ^3,  14, 
16,  17,  19,  28,  41,  46,  56, 
57,  115,  117,  120,  140,  151, 
153,  168;  identified  with 
Savitr  33;  and  Usas  119. 


Pitarah  §  76;   164;  classes  of  j/prath  88. 

170;    cosmical    actions    of  pradisah   9. 

171;  worship  of  170.  prapathya  36. 

pitara   126,  131.  pramantha  91. 

pitu  105.  prasava  34. 

pitrloka  171.  prasavitr  33,  34. 

pinv   107.  prasuta  48. 

Pipru   156,158,161,162;  ety-  Praskanva   140. 

mology  of  the  name   161;  prana  166. 


his  forts  161. 
pisangabhrsti   164. 
Pisacah   164. 
pisaci   164. 
plyusa  105,   in. 
putra  69. 
punana  1 06. 
pur  60. 
puramdara  98. 
puramdhi  37,  n.  5. 
Puramdhi  124. 
purlsa  129. 
purisin   129. 
Purukutsa  147. 
;  purudrapsa  80. 
Purumitra  52. 


Prana  14,   120. 
prataritvan  72. 
Prasaha  57. 
Priyamedha  146. 
priyamedhavat  144. 
priya  (Usah)  48. 
plaksa  134. 

Phaliga  159. 

Baddha  121. 
Babhru  74,   105. 
barhis  (deified)   154. 
bila  159. 
budhna  73,  158. 
Brhadaranyakopanisad   14. 
Brhaddiva  141. 


Purusa  13,  15,  31,  166;  hymn    Brhaddiva  124. 


to  82. 
purusasukta  12,  57. 
Pururavas   124,   135. 
puruvasu  37. 
purodasa   151. 

purohita  96;  =  the  sun  31. 
Purohita  160. 
1/pus  37- 

pustimbhara  36,  37. 
\'pvL  106. 
Puru   148. 
pflrbhid  60. 
purvya  58- 
Pusan  S  16; 


brhaspati,  etymology  of  103. 

Brhaspati  §  36;  II,  13,  20, 
24,  32»  38»  48,  71,  83,  100, 
117,  126,  129,  130,  132,  143, 
156,  159,  161,  168,  171;  his 
three  abodes  102;  identified 
with  Agni  1 02;  his  car  and 
steeds  lot;  his  cosmical 
actions  103;  releases  the 
cows  102;  as  alight-winner 
103;  his  origin  103;  asso 
ciated  with  the  Maruts  103; 
associated  with  singers  101, 
102;  his  song  1O]  ;  as  a  puro 
hita  loi;  his  weapons  101. 


101,     102,    103, 


12,  15,  20,  33, 
40,  82,  100,  117,  124,151, 
165,  170;  his  car  35;  con 
ducts  the  dead  35 ;  protects  Brahma  iT,  13,  14,  101,  104, 
the  dead  165;  etymology  {  LQ  15y< 
of  the  name  37;  his  goats  brahman  97 
18;  is  son  of  the  Asvins  lo*  1A2 
51;  is  Surya's  messenger  Brahmanas  pati  S  36;  13,  14, 
30;  is  toothless  35.  10I 

VP?   l61-  i  Brahma    87,    104,    115,    118, 

prthivi  9,   123.  II9?   I30>   l68- 

Prthivi  S  34;    2,    19,  21,  22,  Brahmavarta  87. 

I24»   I26-  Brahmana  81,  93,  94. 
Prsni  73,  74,  78,   125,   150. 

prsnimatr  78.  Bhaga  S   19;    37,  44,  45,  48, 

prsat)   79.  1 16,  123,  124,  149;  his  eye 

prsadasva  79.  45;  his  path  45;  his  sister 

prstha  9,  68.  45;  =  bagha  7,  8. 

Ped'u  52,   149.  bhaga  45,  46. 


1 82      III.  RELIGION,  WELTL.  WISSENSCH.  u.  KUNST.     IA.  VEDIC  MYTHOLOGY. 


bhagavat  45. 

jbhaj  45- 

bhadrajani  78. 

Bharata  96. 

Bharatah  87,    135. 

Bharadvaja   147. 

bharitra  106. 

Bhava  75. 

Bhagavata  Purana   117. 

bhajayu  46. 

Bhara'tl  87,   124. 

ybhid   1 60,   162. 

Bhujyu  52. 

1/bhu'  with  vi   133. 

bhumi  9. 

bhuryaksa  45. 

Bhrgavah  S  51;  80,  99,  116, 
141,  142,  170;  ancient  fire- 
priests  140. 

Bhrgu     71,     96,     139,     140; 


bhrguvat   140. 
]  bhraj    140. 

Makha   140. 

maghavan  63,   103. 

maghoni  48. 

Matsyah    153. 

I/math  91,   162; 

{/mad  168. 

mada   105. 

madapati   128. 

madhu  49,  52,  105,  ill,  114, 
141. 

Madhukasa  44. 

madhupa  50. 

madhumat  105. 

madhuvahana  49. 

madhuyu  50. 

Madhyadesa  87. 

manas    13,   166. 

manu   135. 

Manu  §  50;     12,    15,  41,  42, 
43,   140,  141,  144,  145,  146;  ' 
as    first   ancestor  139;    as 
first  man   14;    as  first  sac- 
rificer  139;  called  Vivasvat 

manusvat   139. 
Manus   138,   143. 
Manor  napatah  131. 
mantha  108. 
Manyu  §  40. 
I/mar  81. 

Marutah  $  29;  2,   n,   12,   18, 
20,  23,  25,  37,  38,  40,  44, 

76,    119,  122,  130,  142,   146, 

150,  151,  152,  161,  166; 
their  brilliance  78;  their 
cars  79;  etymology  of  the 
name  8 1  ;  as  allies  of  Indra 
80— 81 ;  as  hostile  to  Indra 
81 ;  associated  with  light 
ning  78;  malevolent  traits 
in  their  character  8  [  ;  as 
priests  80;  as  shedders  of 


rain  79,  So;  their  remedies 
81;  their  roaring  79;  as 
Soma  drinkers  80;  sons  of 
Dyaus  21;  sons  of  Rudra 
78';  their  steeds  18,  79; 
associated  with  Trita  67. 

marutvat  57. 

marutvata  80. 

marudgana  57. 

Marudvrdha  80,  88. 

marya  78. 

Mahadeva  75,  76. 

Mahabharata  41,  85,  117,  142, 
160. 

mahisa  (=  Soma)  108. 

mahi'88. 

Mahi  87,   124. 

1/ma  71,   108. 

Mandfikeyah  153. 

matara   126. 

mataribhvarl  72. 

Matarisvan  §  25;  16,  42,  92, 
99,  100,  102,  in,  115,  129, 
139,  140,  141,  157,  171; 
etymology  of  the  name  71; 
as  a  name  of  Agni  71,  72. 

matr  71,  72. 

madhyamika  vac   124. 

madhvi  50. 

maya  24,   156. 

mayin  24. 

maruta  40 

Markandeya  Purana   117. 

Martanda   13,  43,  44. 

Mitra  S  13;  7,  16,  20,  23,  24, 
25»  27,  33,  34,  40,  43,  44, 
45,  46;  etymology  the  name 
30;  identical  with  the  Aves- 
tan  Mithra  7. 

Mitra-Varuna  12,  15,  16,  85, 
106,  120,  124,  127,  131,  148, 
15^,  157;  their  eye  23; 
associated  with  other  gods 

31; 

Mitravdruna   126. 
mitrya  45. 
miho  napat   161. 
mlclhvas  75. 
Mudgala  150. 
MudgalanI   1 50. 
Mujavat  no. 
mrga   152. 
mrgaya  161. 
mrj  106. 
mrtyu   172. 
megha  83,  159. 
metr  90. 

Medhyatithi   146. 
Menaka  135. 
maujavata  no. 

Yajurveda  4,  26. 
yajna  (=  yasna)  7. 
Yatayah   140. 
Yadu  64,   146,   171. 
I/yam   172. 


yama  172. 

yama  172. 

Yama  S  77;  16,  19,  20,  27, 
42,43,68,71,  139,  142,  144, 
151,  152,  166,  167,  169,170; 
his  abode  1 7 1 ;  his  foot-fetter 
172;  his  messengers  152; 
1 72, 1 73  5  the  first  mortal  that 
died  172;  his  path  172;  his 
steeds  171 ;  connected  with 
the  sun  172;  associated  with 
Yami  116,  137,  171,  172, 
173;  identical  with  the 
Avestan  Yima  8;  has  the 
patronymic  Vaivasvata  15. 

yamarajan   171. 

Yamuna  86. 

Yayati   139. 

yavasir  106. 

yavistha  91. 

yavisthya  91. 

yajnika  99. 

yatayajjana  29. 

yatu  8,   163,   164. 

yatudhana   163. 

Yaska  15,  19,  33,  34,  37,38, 
39,  45>  49,  53,  68,  72,  73, 
93,  99,  H5,  123.  J39,  151. 

yuvan  (=  Soma)  Hi. 

yutha  124. 

yojana  47. 

yoni  94. 

j/raks   164. 

raksas   162,   164. 

Raksasah  §  70;  61  ;  their 
appearance  163. 

raksoyuj    164. 

raksohan  95;   no,  164. 

rajas  9,   10,  73,   158. 

rajastur  111. 
|  rathatur   148. 

rathestha  55. 
IVrabh  133. 

rayi   110. 

rava  101. 

rasa  105. 

Rasa  63. 

j/ra  125. 

Raka   125. 

raksasa   163. 

Raj  any  a  13. 

Ratri  124. 

Ramayana  41. 

Rastrabhrt  135. 

rasabha  50. 

Rahu   1 60. 

j'ru   108. 

]/ruj  160. 

|/rud  77. 

rudra  49,  75,  77,   127- 

Rudra  S  28;  12,  16,  20,  35, 
73,  74,  119,  124,  130,  138, 
151;  identified  with  Agni 
75,  77;  his  colour  74;  his 
injurious  features  18;  con- 


I.  SANSKRIT  INDEX. 


183 


trasted  with  Indra  77;  his 
malevolence  75;  as  father 
of  the  Maruts  74,  78;  is 
mountain-dwelling  74;  his 
physical  features  74;  his 
remedies  76;  is  clothed  in 
a  skin  74  ;  his  repulsive 
traits  76;  his  weapons  74. 

rudra-vartani  49. 

Rudra-Soma  76,   129. 

Rudrani   125. 

Rudrah  5,  44,  74,  I2O,  130, 
142;  are  eleven  in  number 

19- 

Rudriyah  74,   78. 
Rudhi'krk  162. 
retodha   108. 
Rebha  52. 
rocana  9. 
rodasl  9,   126. 
Rodasi  78. 
roman  106. 
Rohini   115,   136. 
rohita  82. 
Rohita   14,    17,   115. 

Linga  155. 


133- 

vajra  55,  79,   109,   147. 

vajradaksina  55. 

vajrabahu  55. 

vajrabhrt  55. 

vajrahasta  55. 

vajrin  55,   103. 

vajrivat  55. 

vatsa  84. 

Vatsah   153. 

vadhar   1  14. 

vadhEyu  51. 

Vadhryasva  87  ;  Agni  of  —  96. 

vanaspati  154;  (=  Soma)  112. 

Vandana  52. 

vara  5  1  . 

Varunag  12;  3,  6,  li,  16,  17, 
18,  19,  29,  30,  33,  34,  40, 
42,  43,  44,46,48,  119,  130, 
168,  171,  1/2;  his  abode 
23;  identical  with  the 
Avestan  Ahura  Mazda  8; 
his  car  23;  etymology  of 
the  name  28  ;  his  face  23  ; 
as  father  of  Bhrgu  i/o; 
his  fetters  26;  contrasted 
with  Indra  28;  he  and  Surya 
subordinate  to  Indra  58; 
his  messenger  136;  his 
natural  basis  27;  connected 
with  night  25,  29,  with  rain 
25,  with  waters  25,  26; 
his  omniscience  26;  as  up 
holder  of  order  24;  iden 
tical  with  U'jpavo?  8;  as  a 
punisher  of  sin  26;  his  spies 
23,  24;  associated  with  Yama 
167. 

Varunam   125. 


varcas   162. 

Varcin  40,  156,  158,  161,  162. 

vartaya   162. 

vartis  50. 

varsa  59. 

Vala  S  68  B;  63,  64,  102,  142, 

143,     144,     159,    162;     his 

castles   159. 
valamruj    160. 
valabhid   160. 
valavrtrahan   1 60. 
vavra  67,   169. 
vavri  159. 
Vasa  83,  84. 
Vasatkara   19. 
Vasavah  5,  33,  44,   120,   130, 

142;  are  eight  in  number  19. 
Vasistha   15,  64,  96,  134,  135, 

140,   147. 

Vasisthah  47,   170. 
Vasu   148. 
vasupati  63. 
vastra   107. 
|/va  82. 
vac   109.    123. 
Vac  87,   124,   137,   145. 
vacas  pati  109,  118. 
Vaja  131,   132,   133. 
Vajapeya  155. 
vajin   149. 
vata  72,  1 66. 
Vata  25;  as  a  healer  82;  his 

steeds  55. 

Vata-Parjanya  82,  84. 
Vata-parjanya   126. 
Vamadeva   147. 
Vayu   2,   12,  20,  72,  78,   1 10, 

116,  168;  his  car  and  steeds 

82;    as  Indra's    charioteer 

55;   as   a   soma-drinker  56; 

identical  with   the  Avestan  : 

vayu  7. 

Vayu- Vata  §  30  (81-83). 
vara   106. 
Varuni   140. 
varya   123. 
j/va's    108,   135. 
vasas   107. 
Vastospati  138. 
vi-kram  37,  38. 
vidyut  78,  92. 
vidhartr  45. 
vidhatr   11 8. 
Vidhatr   115. 
Vipas  63,  86,  88. 
vipra  96,   144. 
vibhaktr  45. 
vibhavah  131. 
Vibhvan   131,   132,   133. 
Vimada  52. 
vimuco  napat  35,  36. 
vimocana  36. 
virupavat   143. 
Virupah  §  55. 
Vilistenga  57. 
vi-vas  43. 


|  Vivasvat  §  18;  6,  12,  14,  15, 
43,  44,  7i,  H4,  116,  121, 
125,  139,  170,  172;  his 
arrow  42,  43;  his  daughters 
42,  105;  his  messenger  42, 
72;  his  messengers  96,  141 ; 
identical  with  the  Avestan 
Vlvaiihvant  8. 

vis  39,   139. 

vispati  96,  172. 

Vispala  52. 

Visvaka  52. 

visvakarman  31. 

Visvakarman  §  39;  115,  117, 
118,  126,  151. 

visvarapa  34,  116,  117. 

Visvarupa  12,  61,  116,  160; 
his  cows  160;  as  son  of 
Tvastr  67. 

visvavid  97. 

visvavedas  37,  97. 

Visvamitra  147. 

visvavasu  136. 

Visvavasu  134,  136,  137. 

Visve  devah§  26;  14,  16,  72, 
82,  84,  '  125,  130,  131; 
hymns  to  the  —  129. 

vistap  9. 

Visnapfl  52. 

Visnu  S  17;  4,  9,  10,  n,  16, 
20,35,37,44,  45,  H5»  Il8» 
121,  124,  149,  151;  Ava 
tars  of —  14,  41,  139,  151; 
as  a  dwarf  39,  41,  156; 
his  friendship  for  Indra  39; 
his  head  becomes  the  sun 

39,  41 ;  as  lord  of  mountains 
39;  identified  with  the  sa 
crifice  40.  41 ;    his  highest 
place  169;  his  highest  step 
18,  105;    his   highest  step 
as  abode  of  the  fathers  167; 
his  steps  38;  his  three  steps 
29,156;  his  third  step  170; 
his  wife   125. 

visnupada  39. 
vlra  78. 

|/vr  152,  159;  with  apa  159. 
vrksa  52. 
vrta  159. 

vrtra  (masc.)  159,  (neut.)  159; 

etymology  of  the  word  159. 

Vrtra  §  68;  6,  18,  21,  31,  39, 

40,  56,  58,  59,  .60,  61,  67, 
73,  80,  81,  119,  127,  147, 
151,152,153,  156,  157,  158, 
160,    162;    his    belly  159; 
his    forts    158,     159;     his 
mother  6;    identified  with 
the    moon   57,  159;    asso 
ciated  with  Indra  158. 

vrtrakhada  160. 
vrtraturya  158. 
vrtrahatya  158. 
vrtrahan6o,  66,  109,  114,  158, 
159- 


184       III.  RELIGION,  WELTL.  WISSENSCH.  u.  KUNST.     IA.  VEDIC  MYTHOLOGY. 


Vrtrah  103,   141,  158,  159. 
vrtvl  159. 
J/'vrdh  60,  72. 

Vvr?  59- 

vrsan   108. 

vrsabha  108. 

Vrsakapi  64. 

vrsti  59. 

vrstimat  83. 

Vetasavah  146. 

Vedanta  104. 

vedi  92,  105. 

vedisad  92. 

]/ven  133. 

vaibhiivasa  69. 

Vairupah  144,  170. 

Vaivasvata  12,  42,  109,  139, 

172. 

Vaisya  13. 
Vaisvanara  71,  99. 
Vyamsa  64. 
vyoman  9. 
vraja   160. 

Samsa  100. 
Sakuntala  135. 
sakra  58. 
sad  58. 
Sacl  57,  122. 
sacipati  58,  122. 
saclvat  58. 
satakratu  58. 
Satapatha  Brahmana  4. 
satarudriya  77- 
satru  159. 
sabala  173. 
sambara  (neuter)  161. 
Sambara  40,  64,  80,  103,  158, 
161,162;  his  forts  161,162. 
Sayu,  cow  of  52. 
sardhas  77. 
Saryanavat  141. 
Sarva  75. 
salyaka  112. 
savasah  putrah  122. 
savasah  sunuh  131. 
savasas  patl  128. 
savasi  12,  122. 
savaso  napatah  131. 
Sakapuni  38,  93,  99. 
Satyayaninah  68. 
Sigravah  153. 
sipra  55'. 
siprin   55. 
siva  75,  77. 

Siva  4,  73,  74,  76,  155. 
sisu  72,  90;  (=  Soma)  in. 
sisnadevah  155. 
sukra  106. 
suci  45,  126,  127. 
sucipa  82,  106. 
Sutudrl  86,  87,  88. 
suddha  106. 
Suna   155. 
Sunahsepa  121. 
sus  161. 


SusnaS  69  A;  146,  147,  157, 
158,  162;  his  brood  160, 
161 ;  his  eggs  160;  his  forts 
i6oj  his  horns  160. 

sudra   13. 

sura  58. 

syama   173. 

syava  52. 

Sraddha  119. 

Sri   120. 

svas  72,   161. 

svasana   160. 

sveta  149. 

Samvarana  153. 

Samsara  168. 

sat  13. 

satpati  58. 

sadana  (of  Vivasvat)  42. 

sadasas  pati  102. 

sadaspati   102,   103. 

sadaspatl  128. 

sadhastha  107. 

samdrk  (parama)   11 8. 
1  Saptavadhri  (Atri)  52,   145. 

sabardugha  82. 

samudra  52,  72,  105;  =  cele 
stial  waters  10. 

samudriya  107. 

samraj  98. 

sarana  125. 

Saranyu  42,51.  Il6>  125>  139> 
172. 

Sarama  63,  125  (note  17),  143, 

^  144,   151,  173. 

Sarayu  86. 

Sarasvat  86,  88. 

SarasvatI  12,  73,  78,  86—88; 
124,  125;  associated  with 
the  Asvins  and  Indra  87 ; 
associated  with  Indra  162; 
associated  with  the  Maruts 
87;  as  a  sacred  river  87. 

sarpah   153. 

salila  72. 

sava  34,  48. 

savana  106,  132. 

Savarna  139. 

Savitr  §  15;  10,  u,  15,  16, 
17,'  19,  20,  23,  26,  29,  35, 

37,  38,  44,  45,  48,  55,  57, 
70,72,73,85,115,  116,117, 
118,  122,  123, 124,  138, 149, ; 
154,  171;  his  arms  32;  his 
car  and  steeds  32 ;  conducts 
the  dead  165;  connected 
with  evening  as  well  as 
morning  34;  etymology  of 
the  name  34;  he  is  golden 
32;  play  on  the  name  34; 
is  called  prajapati  13;  iden 
tified  with  Bhaga  33,  with 
Prajapati  117,  Surya  33, 
Tvastr  1 1 7, Visvakarman  1 1 7. 

saharaksas  97. 

sahas  91. 


sahasah  putrah  9,    122. 

sahasrajit  98. 

sahasramuska  89. 

;  satmata  168. 

sadana  172. 

sadhya  130. 

sanu  39,  68,  106,  111,  158. 

Samaveda  4. 

Sayana  28,  33,  41,  43,  68,  69, 
107,  123. 

Sarameya  151,  173. 

Sinlvali   125. 

sindhu  86,  87. 

Sindhu  Si,  86. 

sindhumatr  51,   78. 

Sira  155. 

sisnu  161. 

"J/su  105,  106,  114. 

sukratu   114. 

sugabhasti  116. 

sudaksa  46. 

sudanu  80. 

sudas  64,   140,   147. 

sudhanvan  133. 

Sudhanvan  131. 

suparna  39. 

supani   116. 

subhaga  87. 

sura  123,  157. 

surabhi  137. 

susipra  55. 

susravas  64. 

suhasta  132. 

Vsu  34,  72. 

sunu  daksasya  46. 

sunrta  120. 

Sflrya  §  14;  2,  15,16,20,23, 
33,  34,  35,  38,  40,  44,  48, 
148,  149,  150;  as  a  form 
of  Agni  30;  his  daughter 
51;  is  a  son  ofDyaus  21; 
his  eye  30;  vanquished  by 
Indra  31;  measures  days 
31 ;  his  messenger  35  ;  is  a 
spy  30;  his  steeds  30,  55; 
his  wife  30. 

suryarasmi  32. 

Surya  50,  51,  125;  associated 
with  Soma  112. 

Suryacandramasa   126,    129. 

Suryamasa  126,   129. 

Srbinda  162. 

Slta  138. 

Sena  57. 

soma  104. 

Soma  S  37;  2,  6,  9,  10,  12, 
14,  17,  18,  20,  23,  25,  26, 
35,  38,  40,  42,  43,  46,  47, 
48,  50,  72,  125,  130,  134, 
137^  138,139,146,  147,152, 
153,  162,  168,  170,171,172; 
as  bestower  of  wealth  no; 
bought  with  Vac  109;  as 
a  brahma  priest  109;  his 
brilliance  108;  brought  by 
an  eagle  ill  — 112;  his  car 


I.  SANSKRIT  INDEX. 


185 


and  steeds  no;  is  celestial 
III;  his  colour  105;  his 
cosmical  actions  109  —  no; 
etymology  of  name  114; 
as  drink  of  immortality 
1 08;  as  a  fighter  no;  first 
draught  of  —  82 ;  as  food 
of  the  gods  112;  the  gods 
fond  of —  108;  Indra's  ex 
cessive  indulgence  in —  56; 
his  healing  power  109;  as  a 
king  112,  as  king  of  plants 
154;  magical  power  of  — 
no;  mixed  with  milk  106; 
mixed  with  water  106; 
identified  with  the  moon  •, 
107,  112,  113,  129;  grows 
on  mountains  lio,  ill; 

—  offering   16,   124;    rape  ' 
of —  63;  his  roaring   108;  ' 

—  sacrifice  4,  18;  stimulates 
Indra    56,   109;    stimulates 
thought  109;  stimulates  the 
voice  109;  three  or  thirty- 
three  lakes  of — 56;  his  wea 
pons   lio;    his  wives   112; 
associated  with  the  Fathers 


!09,withtheMaruts  I  io,with 
Parjanya  84,  with  Pusan 
37,  128,  129,  with  rain  107, 
withRudra  129,  with  waters 
86,  107 ;  compared  with 
rain  83,  with  Surya  108, 
Hi;  identified  with  Varuna 
lio;  identical  with  the 
Avestan  haoma  7 ;  —  Pava- 
mana  6. 

somagopa  (Agni)  90,   lio. 

somapa  56. 

somapavan  56. 

Soma-pusana  126. 

Soma-rudra   126. 

somya   105,   109,   170. 

Saudhanvana   131,   133. 

Sautramanl  56. 

saumya  112. 

skambha   n. 

Skambha   14,   120. 

Skambhana  1 1. 

]/stan  108. 

stanayitnu  83. 

Smadibha  146. 

svadha  170. 

svapas   132. 


svayambhu   151. 

svar  31,  48. 

svaru   154. 

svarga  135. 

svarga  loka  169,   171. 

svardrs   127. 

svarbhanu   145,  160. 

svarvat   161. 

svarsa  114. 

svaha   170. 

Hamsa  101,  148;  =Agni  89. 
1/han   159,   1 60. 
hari  55,   105. 
haritah  30. 
hari  55,   132. 
havyavah  96,  97. 
havyavahana  96,  97. 
Hiranyagarbha  13,  !4;=Pra- 

japati   119. 
hiranyaya  45. 
hiranyavartani  49. 
Hiranyahasta  52. 
hrd   1 66. 

Hotarah  (of  the  gods)  95. 
hotr  96,  147;  =  zaotar  7. 
Hotra  87. 


II.  GENERAL  INDEX. 


Aborigines  of  India  153,  157. 

agricultural  implements  dei 
fied  155. 

Ahuva  156;  — Mazda  20,  28, 
32,  45,  68. 

alter  ego   173. 

Amesa  spentas  28. 

Amsaspands  40. 

agent  gods  S  3&  (115  —  118). 

aYT^o;  143. 

ancestors   141,   142,  170. 

ancestor-worship  4. 

animal-sacrifice   154. 

animals,  mythological  §  59  — 
64(147  —  153);  noxious  S  64 
J52— 3);  symbolical  148. 

anthropomorphism  1 7,  88, 9 1 , 
104,  148;  degrees  of—  2. 

ants   153,  165. 

Apam  napat  68,  70. 

ape  163. 

archer  116,  119,  137;  as  a 
designation  of  Agni  89. 

archers  74,  79. 

Ardvl-sura  113. 

Armaiti   121. 

armour  155. 

arrows  deified  155. 

Aryan   161. 

Aryans   157. 

Aryas  and  Dasas  157,  159. 

ascetic   134. 

ass  151  ;  —  of  the  ASvins  50. 

asu   1 14. 

asura-slaying   103. 

Atar  7,  141. 

athravan   141. 

Athwya  8,  43,  68,  114. 

atmospheric  gods  54 — 86. 

attributes  transferred   127. 

AUFRECHT  173. 

Aurora  8,  49. 

avatar  of  Visnu  41. 

Avesta  7,  20,  27,  28,  30,  31, 
37,  40,  45,  49,  66,  68,  70, 
87,  113,  114,117,124,127, 
1361  137,  139,  HI,  152,  156,: 
159,  164,  169,  172,  173; 
its  relation  to  Vedic  mytho 
logy  S  5  (7—8). 

axe,  of  Brahmanas  pati  1 16; 
of  Tvastr  116. 

Azhi   152;  —  dahaka  68. 

Bagha  7,  45. 


balance,    in  which  the  dead 

are  weighed  169. 
EARTH  140,  154. 
bear  144,   153. 
beast  165. 
bee  50. 
beef  151. 
BENFEY  66,  81. 
BERGAIGNE  26,  38,  43,  53,  61, 

63,  74,  100,  107,  122,  123, 

140,  145,  146,  147,  149, 151, 

161. 
Bird  139,  148,  149,  152,  163, 

172;  =  Agni  89,  152,  165; 

=  Soma    106,    108,    152; 

—  sun  9,  31,   152. 
Birds,    aquatic   134,  135;    as 

steeds  50. 

BLOOMFIELD  74,  112,  173. 
boar  67,  75,  151 ;  cosmogonic 

-  14,41,  151;  ==  Vrtra4l. 
boars   79. 

body  in  heaven   166. 
bogu  45. 

BOLLENSEN    53. 

bolt,  Indra's   18. 

bones,  of  Dadhyahc  142;  of 
the  dead  165,  166. 

bow  55;  deified   155. 

v.  BRADKE  64,  66,  149. 

Brahman   13. 

Brahmans,  secret  of  113. 

Brahmanas  4,  5,  6,  13,  17, 
25,  29,  31,  33,  37,  38,  39, 
40,  41,  43,  44,  68,  69,  72, 
76,  87,  92,  109,  in,  112, 
117,  u 8,  119,  124,  125,  130, 
136,155,  156,159,160,168, 
169. 

Buddhist  literature  154. 

buffalo   1 8,  129. 

buffaloes  40,  41,  56,   106. 

bull  75,  80,  83,  84,  125; 
=  Agni  88,  90,  92,  150; 
=  Dyaus  120,  150;  =  Indra 
150,  connected  with  Indra 
18;  =  Rudra  150;  =  Soma 
106,  108;  =  sun  31  ;  —  in 
mythology  S  61  A  (150). 

bulls  56,  129. 

burial   165. 

Cake,  offering  of  56. 
calf  =  Agni  89;  =  lightning 
12,   150. 


car,  of  the  Asvins  50,  51,52, 
of  Indra  55,  of  lisas  18,  47, 
of  the  gods  18;  =  the  sun 
31;  three-wheeled  —  50. 

castes,  four   13. 

cave   159,   160. 

Cinvat  bridge   173. 

claw  of  the  Soma  eagle   112. 

clothing  of  the  dead   165. 

cloud  88,  107,   112. 

clouds  io,  59,  60,  78,  134. 

cloud-spirit   137. 

COLINET    123. 

commentators   124. 

Comparative  Mythology  S  6 
(8). 

cosmical  functions  of  Vedic 
gods  15. 

cosmogonic  hymns   13,  46. 

cosmogonic  paradox    12,  46. 

Cosmogony  S  8  (11  —  14). 

Cosmology  S  7  (8—  1  1). 

cow  56,  70,  78,  82,  122,  124, 
125,  148;  =  Aditi  122; 
=  Prthivi  126;  =  raincloud 
10,  12,  150;  sacrificial  — 
165;  sanctity  of  -  -  151; 
—  of  Plenty  150;  —  of  Rbhus 
132;  —  in  mythology  150; 
raw  —  62. 

cows  io,  107,  1  16,  141,  142, 
144,  147,  152,  157,  159,  161, 
168;  =  beams  of  dawn  59,61, 
150;  =  waters  59,61,  108; 
-  of  light  47,  of  Vala  102. 

craft   156. 

cremation  165. 

cymbals   134. 

Dahaka  69. 

DARMESTETER  70. 

Dawn  14,  15,  30,  45;  asso 
ciated  with  Aditi  122,  with 
cows  61,  with  Indra  61, 
with  night  129;  her  car  18. 

dawns   138. 

dead,  souls  of  the  163,  164. 

death  168. 

deities,  lower  131  —  138;  agri 
cultural  138;  tutelary  S  49 


deluge   139. 

demons  4,  18,  152,  156  —  164; 

—  of  the  mountains  60. 
descent  of  fire   140. 


II.  GENERAL  INDEX. 


187 


Sect;  121. 
d^evil   156,   159. 
dew    14& 
dice    135. 
Aio;  xo'jpoi  53. 
dog  151;  four-eyed  —   173. 
dogs  163,  1  73  ;  —  of  Rudra  76. 
donkeys   163. 
doors,  sacrificial   154. 
druj  S,   164. 
drum,  deified   155. 
dual  divinities§44(i26—  130), 
15  —  1  6. 

Eagle  71,  104,  111,  113,  137, 
148;  =  Agni  89,  112; 
=  Indra  112,  152;  =  Ma- 
ruts  112;  =  sun  31;  car 
ries  off  Soma63,  112,  152; 
-  of  Zeus  114. 

Earth  15,  121;  is  circular  9; 
as  a  mother  8,  12. 

east,  connected  with  Agni 
34;  as  region  of  the  gods  76. 

'HsAto;  32. 

egg,  cosmogonic   14. 

elbe   133. 

elephants  58,  79. 

elf  133- 

elves   134. 

'H(i>;  8,  49. 

epenthesis   137. 

Epic  39,  149,  153,  172. 

Epics   119,  121,  137. 

eschatalogy  165  —  173. 

eternity  of  reward  and  punish 
ment  169. 

etymological  equations  in  my 
thology  5- 

etymology,  popular  157. 

evil  dreams  47. 

evil  spirits  47. 

extra-Vedic  tribes  156. 

eye  =  sun  38;  associated 
with  the  sun  166;  —  of 
Mitra  and  Varuna  23,  149; 
—  of  the  gods  (==  sun)  48. 

Father  Heaven  22. 

Fathers  li,  12,  48,  86,  136, 
165,  166,  167,  170;  as  a 
distinct  class  171;  path  of 
the  —  171. 

feather  of  the  Soma  eagle  112. 

felly  =  the  sun  31. 

fetishistic  animals   148. 

fetishistic  worship  154. 

fiend   158. 

ringers  in. 

fire   15;  domestic  —  94. 

fire-altar  155. 

fire-cult  7. 

fire-drill  91. 

fires  that  burn  the  wicked  167. 


flesh-eating  goblins   163. 


__.  I ;  Indo-Iranian  l 
flute 

forest,  deified   154. 
forts,  autumnal   158. 
fort-destroyer  109;   127. 
FOY  149. 

friction,  fire  produced  by  91. 
frogs  83,   151. 
funerals   165. 
future  life  165,   171. 

Gandarewa  8,   136,   137. 

Ganges   134. 

garland   148. 

GELDNER  53,  138. 

gem  -=  the  sun  31. 

Gemini  530 

Germanic  mythology  152. 

ghee  107,  168,  172;  =  rain  25. 

goat  74, 151;  sacrificial  —  165; 
skin  of  —  165. 

goats  128;  —  of  Pusan  35. 

goblins   162. 

god  of  battle  54. 

gods  5;  abode  of  the —  18; 
abstract—  115  —  123;  —  and 
Asuras  156;  —  and  Dasyus 
157;  —  and  demons  40; 
equipment  of  the  —  18; 
food  of —  18;  generations 
of —  17;  gradation  in  rank 
of— 20;  groups  of — S  45 
(130);  number  of  —  19; 
offspring  of  Vivasvat  42; 
origin  of  —  §  9  (14);  re 
lative  importance  of  —  20 ; 
—  come  to  the  sacrifice  18. 

gold  =  sun   155. 

GOLDSTiiCKER   53. 

grain,  offering  of  56. 

GRASSMANN  73,  77,  87,  149. 

Great  Bear  144. 

groups  of  gods  5. 

i  Hail  158. 

!  Haoma  43,  68,  113,  114,  137. 

I  Haraiti  1 13. 

i  Haraqaiti  87. 

i  HARDY  69, 70, 74,  88,  117,  123. 

|  heaven  S  73  (167);    150;    as 

abode   of  Soma   in,   114; 

highest  —   165,   166,  167; 

path  to  —   1 66,  167;  —  of 

priests   168;    as  reward  of 

virtue    167;    third  —   167, 

171. 
Heaven  and  earth  1 1 6, 1 2 1 , 1 23, 

154;   distance  between  - 

9,  10;  as  universal  parents 

8,  14,  15,   126. 
Heavenly  bliss  S  74  (167 — 8). 
!  Helena  53. 
|  hell    S   75    (169—170);    172, 

173;     darkness  of  —   169; 

doctrine  of —  168;  torments 

of  —   169,   170. 


henotheism  16  — 17. 
HENRY  74. 

HlLLEBRANDT  26,    69,    70,    88, 

loo,  104,  117,  118,124,173; 

his  lunar  theory  113. 
honey    102,   168;    associated 

with    the  Asvins  49,    with 

the  waters  85. 
HOPKINS  53,  104,  153. 
horns  of  Soma  108. 
horse     132;    head    of    a    — 

141,  149;  —  in  mythology 
§  60  (148—50);  sacrificial  — 
165;  =  sun  48. 

horses  of  the  Asvins  50. 
T/hu  114. 
hukhratu   114. 
hvare  3  i . 

Ice   160. 

identifications      of     different 

gods  16. 
idols   155. 
ignis  99. 
image   155. 
images   18. 
immortality,  acquired  by  the 

gods  17;  navel  of  —  no. 
implements,  deified  154. 
inanimate  objects,  deification 

of  2,  4. 
incest  173. 
Indo-European  period  8,  20, 

45,  66,  85,   169. 
Indo-Iranian  period  7,  20,  28, 

43,    45,    66,    68,    70,    106, 

113—114,    120,    127,    136, 

H3»   173- 
Indus  86. 
iron  leg  of  Vispala  52. 

Judgment  169. 
Jupiter  (planet)  103. 

KAEGI  104,  117. 
Kathenotheism  16. 
KsvTa'jpo?  137. 
Kdp,3epo;  173. 
KUHN  39,  81,  117,  140. 

LANGLOIS  104. 

Lettic  myth  53. 

life  after  death  4. 

lightning  12,  15,  16,  56,  59, 
61,  67,  69,  70,  73,  75,  76, 
77,  78,  81,  83,  84,  88,  90, 
92,  112,  128,  134,  135,  140, 

142,  149,    152,  158;    as  a 
form    of  Agni    92,  93,  94; 
associated  with  Soma  108. 

lion  58,  79,  83,  90. 

LUDWIG    87,    117,    149. 

lutes  134. 

Magical  effect  of  kindling 
fire  98. 


1 88        III.  RELIGION,  WELTL.  WISSENSCH.  u.  KUNST     IA.  VEDIC  MYTHOLOGY. 


magical  rites  8. 
man  and  beast  153. 
man-tigers  153. 
Manes   172,   173. 
MANNHARDT  53. 
marriage  processions   154. 
MAX  MULLER  16,  70,  87,  104, 

123,  151- 

mead,  Indo-European  1 14. 
measuring  the  earth   n. 
medu   114. 

men  and  animals   148. 
men,  origin  of   14. 
messengers   143,   172,   173. 
metamorphoses   134,151,163. 
metempsychosis,  germ  of  1 66. 
meteor  163. 
method    in    mythology    §    4 

(5-7). 

[J.£}>'J     114. 

MEYER  81,  173. 

milk  1 68;  =  rain  10,  80 ; 
=  water  86;  ripe  —  62. 

milky  way  88. 

mirage   136. 

mist  158. 

Mithra  30,  37,  44,   127. 

monkey  64,   151. 

monotheism,  a  kind  of  4; 
polytheistic  —  16,  17. 

moon  31,  48,  69,  70,  73,  74, 
88,  104,  108,  ill,  1 18,  136, 
137,  159,  173;  =  Soma 
112;  phases  of  the  —  112, 
125,  133,  134;  waning  of 
the  —  112. 

morning  star  53. 

mortar  and  pestle  106;  dei 
fied  155. 

mother  earth  22,  88,  90. 

mothers,  Agni's  two  91; 
Waters  as  —  85. 

mountain  =  cloud  in,  159. 

mountains  135,  161 ;  aerial  — 
10;  —  deified  154. 

MUIR  123. 

Myriantheus  53. 

mythological  conceptions,  re 
lative  ages  of  20. 

mythology,  comparative  §  6 
(S);  definition  of  —  §  i ; 
characteristics  of  Vedic  — 
§  2  (2—3);  post-Vedic  — 
86,  87. 

myths,  primary  and  secondary 
traits  in  6. 

Names,  un-Aryan  162. 

niggard  157. 

night  12,48;  time  of  goblins 
163;  associated  with  morn 
ing  124. 

north,  region  of  Rudra  76. 

north-east  171. 

Odhin  83, 1 52 ;  as  an  eagle  114. 


ogni  39. 

OLDENBERG  28,  34,  39,  43, 
44,  53,  60,  70,  77,  92,  104, 
117,  123,  149. 

OLDHAM  87. 

omen,  birds  and  beasts  of 
152. 

origin  of  various  deities  iden 
tical  3,  15. 

ornaments    of  the  dead  165. 

Oupavo;,  28,  addenda,  line  10. 

owl   152,   163,   169,   172. 


rivers,  deified  S  33  (86—88); 

154. 

rock  =  cloud  III. 
ROTH  28,  44,  53,  65,  69,  73, 

87,  88,  104,  116,  123,  146, 

149,  169,  173. 

Sacrifice,  attacked  by  goblins 

163;  celestial  —   167. 
sacrificial  fire  99;   —  fires  47; 

—  gifts  1 67, 1 68 ;  —  horse35  5 

—  implements  154;  —  ladles 
155;  — 


paradise,  earthly  173  ;  heaven- 
73' 


JOH.,  addenda,  1.  10, 


Paradoxi2,  46,  91,  121,   122.    I'  SCHROEDER  70,  77,  81. 

SemitlC 


Parendi   124. 

parentage,  my thological  appli-    serPecnt    ?2»    ^8,     152,     153, 
cations  of  11,   12.  !58'   l6o>  l65;  =  Agm  89. 

Parsis   106.  serpent-slayer  152,   153. 

Perkiinas  84,  addenda,  line  31.    seven'   hotrs  ^ .  "  Priests 

PERRY  69.  !39>  H4;  ~J<SiM44r-Lfi7i 

phallic  worship   155.  -.stars   H4.     . 

oXeYuai  140  sheep  36;  wool  of  --   106. 

pigeon  152,  '172.  sin'  Pardoned  by  various  gods 

PISCHEL    57,   58,   62,  69,  77,    Ql  "r" 
123,  149- 

plants  84,   154;    deified   154. 

points  of  the  compass  9. 

post-Vedic  literature  102,  136, 
139, 142, 160, 163;  —  mytho 
logy  1 18, 155  ;  — poetry  150;  i 


solstitial  festival   155. 
soma-backed  no. 
soma-drinker  (Agni)   16. 
soma-drinkers   127. 


-period  155;    -  Sanskrit  isoma-eagle  69>  IO7,  "4,  142 


157;  —  Soma  112. 

prehistoric  notions  about  ani 
mals  S  65  (153). 

pressing-stones  105,  no,  144, 
154- 

pressings  of  Soma  114. 

priest,  Atharvan  7,  141; 
Adhvaryu  107;  Hotr  7,  96, 
147- 


152. 

soma-strainer  106,   in. 
soma  vat  106. 
son,  figurative  use  of  the  word 

12  ;  —  of  strength  102  ;  —  of 

waters  85. 
song  1 68, 1 72  ;  —  of  the  Aiigiras- 

esi42;  — of  the  MarutsSo. 
sorcerers  95. 


priests  and    heroes,  mythical  Soul  S  72  (166- 167); -of the 

1-7—147  dead  48,  81. 

Prometheus' 72,  91.  south'     co™ected    with    the 
punishment,  future   169. 


Puranas  39,  41,    119,   121, 

Quail  52. 

quiver,  deified   155. 


Fathers  1 70,   with  Soma  34. 
south-east   171. 
SPIEGEL  70. 
spirits,     friendly    164;     dark 

world  of  evil  —   167. 
stallion  80. 
|  stars   10,   103,   112,   134,   136, 
Kain  24,  59,  63,  88;    names!       144,   167,   171. 

of  --  81,  n.  2.  steed  i48;=Agni  89;  =  light- 

rainbow   136,  137.  ning    150;    =  Soma    108; 

ram-cloud  83,  85,  90;  names  j      =  sun  31. 

°f  -•  83.  steeds  of  Indra  55;  of  Apam 

rain-clouds  60.  napat  70. 

rain-god  85.  steps  of  Visnu  37,  38,  39. 

rain-waters  85.  stone,  burning  156;  =sun3i. 

rays  =  steeds  of  the  sun  31.  j  storm-cloud   125. 
rebirth   167,   168.  j  storm-gods  81. 

religion,  definition  of  §  I  (i).    strainer,  Soma  106,   ill. 
retribution,  doctrine  of  168.      stratagem  of  the  gods   156. 


II.  GENERAL  INDEX. 


189 


sun  15,  148;  as  a  cosmogonic 

~~~~agent  13;  as  a  form  of 
Agni93;  daughter  of  the  — 
53,  105,  108,  119;  eye  of 
the  —  160;  as  abode  of 
the  Fathers  167;  coupled 
with  the  moon  129,  173; 
its  whereabouts  at  night 
10;  restoration  of  the  - 
51,  53,  61;  rising  —  43, 
137;  steeds  of  the  —  12; 
wheel  of  the  —  56,  63. 

sun-bird  39,  136. 

sunrise,  Agni  produced  at  91. 

sunset  155;  unimportant  in 
Vedic  worship  53. 

sun-steed   136. 

supersession  of  Varuna  by 
Indra  28. 

Sutlej  87. 

Sutras  36,  75,  76,  119,  125, 
152,  153,  155,  166,  168. 

swan,  golden  168. 

symbolical  steed   150. 

symbols   155. 

Temples,  unknown  in  Rgveda 
18. 

ten  fingers   105,  116,   122. 

ten  maidens  =  fingers  91,  106. 

terrestrial  gods  86 — 114. 

terrestrial  objects  deified  154. 

third  daily  Soma  pressing  132. 

Thraetaona  68. 

three  Agnis  94;  —  classes  of 
beings  164;  — daily  invoca 
tions  119,120;  —  dailyoffer- 
ings  89 ;  —  daily  Somapress- 
ings  107;  --  earths  169; 

—  lakes  of  Soma  107,  139; 

—  sacrificial  fires  94, 95  ;  — 
Soma-tubs  139; — worlds  41. 

three-headed  demon  61,  64, 
67,68,  160;  —  goblins  163. 

three-wheeled  car  132. 

Thrita  8,  43,  68,  114. 

thunder  59,  84;  —  of  the  Mar- 
uts  80. 


thunder-god  54. 

thunderstorm   108. 

Thwaks  117. 

time  of  the  Asvins'  appearing 
50. 

tortoise  41,  151,   153. 

totemism   153. 

track  of  death  165. 

transmigration  166,  168,  169. 

tree,  celestial  167. 

trees   134,  154. 

triad  of  gods  5,  19,  54,  69, 
93;  —  of  sacrificial  god 
desses  87;  —  of  worlds  9. 

triple   character   of  Agni  93. 

Tf.ito;  69. 

twin  172. 

twins,  Asvins  49;    primaeval 

173- 

two  births  of  Agni  94 ; 
—  classes  of  abstract  gods 
115;  —  eyes  =  sun  and 
moon  130. 

Universe,  mechanical  produc 
tion  of  li;  three  divisions 
of  8,  11,  14. 

Upanisads  119,  167,   168. 

Vadare  114. 

Varaghna  152. 

Vedic  commentators  113. 

Vedic  gods,  beneficent  18; 
their  character  §  10  (15  — 
19);  classified  19 — 21 ;  their 
common  features  15;  their 
number  17,  19;  originally 
mortal  17;  subordinate  to 
one  another  16. 

Vedic  mythology,  sources  of 

§  3  (3-5). 
verethra  159. 

Verethraghna  8,  66,  150,  152. 
verethrajan   114. 
Vlvanhvant  43,   114,   172. 
Vourukasa  137- 
Vrtra-slayer  87,  98,  109,  152; 

=   Agni  16;  =   sun  31. 


Vrtra-slayers  127,  128;   =  As 
vins  51. 

Vrtra-slaying  6,  80. 
vulture  152. 
vultures   163. 

WALLIS  123. 

water-nymph    15,     134,     137, 

172. 
Waters  10,  91,  116,  121,  126, 

152,     154,    158,    159,   161; 

aerial  59;    associated  with 

Agni  92;  in  cosmogony  14; 

as  mothers  12,  69,  85,  107; 

purifying  and   healing    85, 

son  of —  12;  as  wives  of 

Varuna  26. 
Weapons,  deified  155;  —  of  the 

deadi65 ;  —  oftheMaruts79. 
WEBER  53,  77,  104,  140,  143, 

169. 

wedding  hymn  35 
wedding  procession  134. 
weddings   163. 
were-wolf  153. 
west,  connected  with  Savitr  34. 
wheel  =  sun  31,    155;  —  of 

the  sun  146 ;  —  of  Visnu  155. 
WHITNEY  65. 
widow-burning  165. 
WILSON  77,  104. 
wind  72. 
wind-spirits   137- 
wine   168. 
winged  steed   148. 
Wodan  83. 
wolf  52,    157. 
wolves  75. 

wood,  cosmogonic  II. 
world-giant  13,  15,  82. 
world-soul  168. 

Yima  43«   172,  173- 
Yimeh  172,  173. 

Zarathustra  7. 
Zs6;  27. 

ZlMMER    87. 


ADDENDA  AND  CORRIGENDA. 

P.  i,    ast  line,  for  Oxford  Essays  II  read  Oxford  Essays,  1856  (=  Chips  42,   i  — 154). 

—  P.   2,  1.    i   add  Contributions  to  the  Science  of  Mythology,  2  vols.  London,   1897.    — 
P.  5,  1-5  from  below  for  pove  read  prove.  —  P.  8,  1.  4  y^rVerethragna  read  Verethraghna. 

—  P.   12,  1.  7  from  below,  for  vi'svarupa  read  visvarupa;  1.  23:  on  this  paradox  cp.  WC. 
41.   —  P.   15,  1.   10  from  below  for  Prajanya  read  Parjanya.    -  -    P.   17,  1.    14  from  below 
add-.    The    notion   of   an    infinite    number  of  cosmic  ages  is  already  to  be  found  in  the 
AV.  (10,  839-4°),  cp.  JACOBI,  GGA.  1895,  p.  210;  GARBE  in  this  Encyclopedia  3,  4  p.  16. 

-  P.  21,  note  22  for  fournished  read  furnished.  —  P.  22,  1.  14  asanimat:  cp.  PAOS. 
1895,  P-  J38.  —  P.  28,  note  2  add  but  cp.  RV.  10,  1271  and  BLOOMFIELD,  JAOS.  15, 
170;  SEE.  42,  391.  —  P.  29,  note  21  add  JOH.  SCHMIDT  writes  to  the  effect  that  till  the 
relation  of  the  Aeolic  opavo;  and  wpavo?  to  oypavos  has  been  determined,  it  is  im 
possible  to  say  whether  Varuna  is  connected  with  o-jpavo?  or  not.  —  P.  29,  §  13,  1.  4 
for  bruvanah  read  bruvanah.  —  P.  33,  1.  25  for  stimultae  read  stimulate.  —  P.  35>  1.  4 
add  BLOOMFIELD,  AJP. '14,  493.  -  P.  37,  §  16,  last  line  of  notes,  after  PERRY  add 
JAOS.  n,  190  —  1.  —  P.  39,  1.  19  for  mythology  read  mythology11.  —  P.  41,  1.  28  for 
IS.  XI  read  IS.  XII.—  P.  42,  1.  5,  note  4  add  cp.  MACDONELL,  GGA.  1897,  p.  47-8.  - 
P.  42,  1.  17  add  On  Visnu's  obscure  epithet  sipivista  cp.  OST.  4,  87  f. ;  LRV.  I,  162; 
4,  153;  KRV.  note  214.  -  -  P.  44,  1.  6:_  On  Surya  and  Savitr  as  an  Aditya  cp.  JAOS. 
18,  28.  —  P.  44,  1.  21  for  Adityas  read  Adityas.  —  P.  46,  note  9  add  Cp.  WURM,  Gesch. 
d.  ind.  Rel.  p.  29.  —  P.  46,  1.  5  for  feast'  read  feast.  -  -  P.  50,  delete  note  9.  - 
P.  54,  note  22  add  cp.  JAOS.  16,  21—2;  1.  33  add  HOPKINS,  PAOS.  1894,  CXLIX— CL. — 
P-  55'  !•  15:  On  Indra's  weapons  cp.  PERRY,  JAOS.  11,  138.  198.  —  P.  55,  1.  21  :  on  ayasa 
cp.  OLDENBERG,  SBE.  46,  278.  —  P.  66,  note  "  add  cp.  LRF.  142—3;  note  33  add  cp. 
WINTERNITZ,  Hochzeitsrituell  43.  46;  OERTEL,  JAOS.  18,  26—31;  note  3  add  BRV.  3, 
200—7;  note  42  add  cp.  ZDMG.  9,  687.  --  P.  69,  note  J°  add  cp.  HILLEBRANDT,  Veda- 
interpretation  13.  19;  and  two  lines  below  before  LRV.  3,  355  —  7  add  WESTERGAARD, 
IS.  3,  414—24.  —  P.  80,  1.  9  for  Marudvrddha  read  Marudvrdha  (also  p.  88,  note  4).  - 
P.  84,  1.  8  from  below:  On  points  of  resemblance  between  Indra  and  Parjanya  cp. 
HOPKINS,  PAOS.  1894  (Dec.),  36-9.  --  P.  85,  note  4  add  JOH.  SCHMIDT  writes  that  he 
regards  the  equation  Parjanya  =Perkunas  as  quite  wrong,  since  Lith.  u  can  only  corre 
spond  to  Sansk.  u.  LESKIEN  also  considers  this  equation  untenable  (communication  through 
B6HTLINGK).  It  is,  however,  accepted  by  WACKERNAGEL,  Altindische  Grammatik  §§  52. 
100  b.  —  P.  88,  note  «  add  cp.  BOLLENSEN,  ZDMG.  41,  499.  —  P.  114  delete  note  4'.  — 
P.  169,  note  6  add  HAUG,  GGA.  1875,  p.  96. 


Indo-arische  Philologie.    III.  IA.  -J2 


VERLAG  VON  KARL  J.  TRUBNER  IN  STRASSBURG. 


Begriindet  von 

Georg   Biihler, 

fortgesetzt  von 

F.  Kielhorn, 

Professor  des  Sanskrit  an  der  Universitat  Gottingen. 

Das  Werk  erscheint  in  der  Ausstattung  des  Grundrisses  der  iranischen  Philologie. 
Die  einzelnen  Abschnitte  warden  nach  ihrer  Fertigstellung  einzein  ausgegeben  und  sind 
auch  einzein  kaufiich.  Abnehmer  des  ganzen  Werkes  geniessen  einen  betrachtlich  er- 
massigten  Subskriptionspreis. 

Band  I.     Allgemeines  und  Sprache. 

1)  *a)  Georg  Biihler.    1837  —  1898.  Von  J.  Jolly.    Mit  einem  Bildnis  Buhlers  in  Heliogravure. 

[Subskr.-Preis   M.  2.—,  Einzelpreis  M.  2.50.] 
1)}  Geschichte  der  indo-arischen  Philologie  und  Altertumskunde  von  Ernst  Kuhn. 

2)  Urgeschichte  der  indo-arischen  Sprachen  von  A.  Thumb. 

3)  a)  Die  indischen  Systeme  der  Grammatik,    Phonetik  und  Etymologic  von  B.  Liebich. 
*£)  Die  indischen  Worterbiicher  (Kosa)  von  Th.  Zachariae.    Mit  Indices.    [Subskr.-Preis 

M.  2.20,  Einzelpreis  M.  2.70.] 

4)  Grammatik  der  vedischen  Dialekte  von  A.  A.  Mac  don  ell  (englisch). 

5)  Grammatik  des  klassischen  Sanskrit  der  Grammatiker,  der  Litteratur  und  der  Inschriften, 

sowie  der  Mischdialekte  (epischer  und  nordbuddhistischer)  von  H.  Luders. 
*6)  Vedische  und  Sanskrit-Syntax  von  J.  S.  Spey  er.  Mit  Indices.  [Subskr.-Preis  M.  4.25,  Einzel 

preis  M.  5.25.] 

7)  Paligrammatik  von  R.  O.  Franke. 

*S)  Grammatik  der  Prakrit-Sprachen  von  R.  Pischel.     Mit  Indices.     [Subskr.-Preis  M.  17.50, 

Einzelpreis  M.  21.50.] 

9)  Grammatik  und  Litteratur  des  tertiaren  Prakrits  von  Indien  von  G.  A.  Grier  son  (englisch). 
*io)  Litteratur  und  Sprache   der   Singhalesen  von  Wilh.    Geiger.      Mit   Indices.      [Subskr.- 

Preis  M.  4.  —  ,  Einzelpreis  M.  5.—.] 

*il)  Indische  Palaographie  (mit  17  Tafeln  in  Mappe)  von  G.  Biihler  [Subskr.-Preis  M.  15.—  , 

Einzelpreis  M.  18.50.] 

Band  II.     Litteratur  und  Geschichte. 

1)  Vedische  Litteratur  (Sruti). 

a]  Die  drei  Veden  von  K.  Geldner. 

*b]  The    Atharvaveda    and    the    Gopatha-Brahmana    by  M.  Bloom  field    (englisch).     Mit 

Indices.  [Subskr.-Preis  M.  5.40,  Einzelpreis  M.  6.40]. 

2)  Epische  und  klassische  Litteratur  (einschliessiich  der  Poetik  und  der  Metrik)  von  H.  Jacob  u 

3)  Quellen  der  indischen  Geschichte. 

a]  Litterarische  Werke  und  Inschriften  von  F.  Kielhorn  (englisch). 
*l>)  Indian  Coins.     With  five  plates.     By  E.  J.  Rap  son  (englisch).     Mit  Indices.    [Subskr.- 

4)  Geographic  von   M.  A.  Stein.  Preis  M.  5.20,  Einzelpreis  M.  6.20.] 

5)  Ethnographic  von  A.  Baines  (englisch). 

und  Sir  R-  West  (cnslisch)- 


*8)  Recht  und  Sitte  (einschliessiich  der  einheimischen  Litteratur)  von  J.  Jolly.    Mit  Indices. 

[Subskr.-Preis  M.  6.80,  Einzelpreis  M.  8.30.] 
9)  Politische  Geschichte  bis  zur   muhammedanischen  Eroberung  von  J.  F.  Fleet  (englisch). 

Band  III.     Religion,  weltliche  Wissenschaften  und  Kunst. 

i)*a)  Vedic  Mythology  by  A.  A.  Macdonell  (englisch).  Mit  Indices.  [Subskr.-Preis  M.  8.20, 

b]  Epische  Mythologie  von  M.  Winter  nitz.  Einzelpreis  M.  9.70.] 

*2)  Ritual-Litteratur,  Vedische  Opfer  und  Zauber  von  A.  Hillebrandt  [Subskr.-Preis  M.  8.—, 

Einzelpreis  M.  9.50] 

3)  Vedanta  und  Mimamsa  von  G.  Thibaut. 
*4)  Sarnkhya  und  Yoga  von  R.  Garbe.    Mit  Indices.  [Subskr.-Preis  M.  2.70,   Einzelpreis 

5)  Nyaya  und  Vaisesika  von  A.  Venis  (englisch).  M.  3.20] 

6)  Vaisnavas,  Saivas,  Sauras,  Ganapatas,  Skandas,   /  -p,    i.-     -         \  von  R.    G.  Bhandarkar 

Saktas       ...........    (  I  (englisch). 

7)  Jaina  von  E.  Leumann.  j  [Einzelpreis  M.  7.60.] 
*8)  Manual  of  Indian  Buddhism  by  H.  Kern  (englisch).    Mit  Indices.    /  Subskr.-Preis  M.  6.10, 
*9)  Astronomic,  Astrologie  und  Mathematik  von  G.  Thibaut.   [Subskr.-Preis  M.  3.50,  EinzeJ- 

preis  M.4.—  .], 

*io)  Medizin  von  J.  Jolly.     Mit  Indices.     [Subskr.-Preis  M.  6.—,  Einzelpreis  M.  7-—.] 
1  1)  Bildende  Kunst  (mit  Illustrationen)  von  J.  Burgess  (englisch). 
12)  Musik. 

NB.  Die  mit  *  bezeichneten  Hefte   sind   bereits   erschienen  und    zu    den    beigesetzten 
Preisen  durch  die  meisten  Buchhandlungen  zu  beziehen. 


VERLAG  VON  KARL  J.  TRUBNER  IN  STRASSBURG. 


Soeben  erschien: 


ALTIRANISCHES 

WORTERBUCH 


VON 


CHR.  BARTHOLOMAE. 

Lex.  8°.    XXXII  S.,  2000  Spalten.    1904. 
Geheftet  M.  50. — ,  in  Halbfranzband  gebunden  M.  53. — . 


Urteile  der  Presse: 

„  .  .  .  Was  heute  ein  altiranisches  Worterbuch  bieten  kann,  ist  besser  als 
was  Justi  seiner  Zeit  bieten  konnte,  und  was  das  neue  Werk  Bartholomaes  uns 
bringt,  ist  um  so  ausgezeichneter,  als  er  nicht  nur  mit  ungeheurem  Fleifte  die 
Resultate  der  bisherigen  Forschung  zusammengetragen  und  kritisch  verarbeitet, 
sondern  auch  aus  Eigenem  viel  Neues  und  Richtiges  beigesteuert  hat.  Es  steht 
auf  der  Hohe  der  Wissenschaft  unserer  Zeit  und  bildet  wie  den  AbschluB  .der  bis 
herigen  so  die  Grundlage  der  kiinftigen  Forschung;  es  ist  fiir  unsere  Fachwissen- 
schaft  ein  epochemachendes  Bach,  nach  dessen  Erscheinen  es  keinem  Sprach- 
forscher  mehr  gestattet  ist,  am  Iranischen,  wo  es  immer  in  Betracht  kommt,  achtlos 
voriiberzugehen,  wie  es  in  letzter  Zeit  nur  zu  oft  geschehen  ist  ..." 

Literarisches  Zentralblatt  1904,  Nr.  49. 

„  .  .  .  Comme  autrefois  la  chrestomathie  de  M.  Justi,  le  dictionnaire  du 
vieil  iranien  de  M.  Bartholomae  marque  une  etape  de  la  philologie  iranienne;  on 
y  trouve  a  la  fois  le  resume  et  la  critique  des  travaux  deja  faits,  et  il  est  a 
prevoir  qu'il  sera  durant  de  longues  annees  le  principal  instrument  de  toutes  les 
recherches  sur  les  textes  iraniens  anciens.  M.  Bartholomae,  qui  a  toujours  con- 
sacre  a  1'Avesta  le  meilleur  de  son  activite,  a  droit  a  la  reconnaissance  des  irani- 
sants  et  aussi  des  linguistes  et  des  historiens  des  religions  pour  avoir  acheve  une 
ceuvre  indispensable,  et  que  lui  seul  sans  doute,  a  1'heure  actuelle,  etait  en  mesure 

d'accomplir  d'une  maniere  aussi  achevee. 

Revtie  critique  1904^  Nr.  47. 


Druck  von  W.  Drugulin  in  Leipzig. 


BL 
1115 

M3 


Macdonell,   Arthur  Anthony 
Vedic  mythology 


PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE 
CARDS  OR  SLIPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET 


UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO  LIBRARY 


