T antr apusp anj ali 

Tantric Traditions 
and Philosophy of Kashmir 



Studies in Memory of 
Pandit H.N. Chakravarty 


Edited by Bettina Sharada Baumer 
and Hamsa Stainton 




Tantrapuspanj ali 

Tantric Traditions 
and Philosophy of Kashmir 



Studies in Memory of 
Pandit H.N. Chakravarty 


Edited by Bettina Sharada Baumer 
and Hamsa Stainton 






Tantrapuspanjali 

Tantric Traditions and Philosophy of Kashmir 

Studies in Memory of Pandit H.N. Chakravarty 









Tantrapuspanjali 

Tantric Traditions and Philosophy of Kashmir 


Studies in Memory of Pandit H.N. Chakravarty 


Edited by 

Bettina Sharada Baumer and Hamsa Stainton 


Indira Gandhi National Centre for the Arts 

New Delhi 

<±> 

Aryan Books International 

New Delhi 


Tantrapusparijali 

Tantric Traditions and Philosophy ot Kashmir 


ISBN: 978-8i-7;-}05-59o-4 


f Indira Gandhi National Centre for the Arts, New Delhi 

All rights reserved. No part of this hook may he reproduced, utilised in any form or 
by any means, electronic and mechanical, including photocopying, recording or 
by any information storage and retrieval system w ithout prior permission of 
the contributor and the* publishers. 

Responsibility for statements made and visuals provided in the various papers rests solely 
with the contributors. The views expressed by individual authors are not necessarily 
those of the editors or of the publishers. 

First Published in 2018 bv: 

Indira Gandhi National Centre for the Arts 

Central Vista Mess, Janpath, New Delhi - 110 001 (India) 

and 

Aryan Books International 

Pooja Apartments, 4B, Ansari Road, New Delhi-110002 (India) 

Tel.: 23287589, 23255799; Fax: 91-11-23270385 
E-mail: aryanbooks^gmail.com 

www.aryanbooks.co.in 


Designed and Printed by 
ABI Prints & Publishing Co., New Delhi. 



Foreword 


Indira Gandhi National Centre for the Arts (IGNCA) through its Kalakosa 
Division has remained engaged in the study of the sastras received from various 
branches of the holistic tree of the Indian tradition. These studies culminate into 
three fundamental publication series, the Kalatattvakosa, Kalamulasastra and 
Kalasamalocana, focussing on concept, text and analysis respectively. 

The tantra sastras of the Kashmiri Saiva tradition are the most vibrating 
branch of the vast tree of Indian tradition that is catching global attention today 
from the scholars and the masses alike. The fundamental aspect of this tradition 
upholds the philosophy that concerns individual growth irrespective ot any 
cast, creed or gender. According to this tradition every aspect ot the existing 
phenomena is a part of that ultimate truth known as supreme consciousness 
or Parama Siva (the state of ultimate bliss). It prescribes the means of achieving 
individual growth for different categories of individuals having diffeient levels 
of the intellect, but at the same time it assures the possibility of achieving the 
ultimate growth for all. Therefore, each individual must stiive on the path to 
achieve inner growth here and now while performing all sorts of worldly chores, 
establishes the theory of Kashmiri Saivism. 

There exists an extensive corpus of the tantras of Kashmiri Saiva tradition 
in the form of manuscripts which have become part of various public and 
private collections. IGNCA has had the privilege of digitising the major part of 
the manuscripts kept in the Oriental Library of Jammu and Kashmir at Srinagar. 
Much remains unexplored from this collection. 


vi TANTRAPUSPANJALI 


The year 2016/17 was observed as the millennium year of Acarya 
Abhinavagupta, the towering figure of this tradition. IGNCA played an important 
role by organising four seminars at different regions of India for generating 
common awareness and interest. These seminars included a major international 
seminar organised at New Delhi in December 2016. The event was inaugurated 
by the Honb’le Minister of Human Resource Development, Shri Prakash 
Javadekar on 15th December 2016. The minister also felicitated the galaxy of 
scholars gathered at the event from various parts of India and abroad to make 
presentations in their respective fields of expertise. The purpose of all these 
seminars was to unfold the treasure holding the highest ideas related with the 
philosophy concerning life. The proceedings of these seminars are in the process 
of preparation for publication and we hope to see them published soon. 

Meanwhile, IGNCA has come up with a commemoration volume on Pandit 
Hemendra Nath Cakravarty who was a dedicated and practising scholar of the 
Kashmiri Saiva tantras. He also remained associated with IGNCA especially in 
the project based on the key concepts of Indian Arts, the Kalatattvakosa. This 
volume is very useful for the scholars involved in the studies on the tantras. 

I am grateful to Prof. Bettina Sharada Baumer and Dr. Hamsa Stainton for 
collecting the contributions of high research value and submitting the well 
edited material for publication to IGNCA. I may also thank each contributor of 
this volume for sharing their research on the tantras, including Dr. Advaitavadini 
Kaul, Head of Kalakosa Division of IGNCA. Dr. Kaul’s contribution has also been 
immense in the preparation of this volume at various levels followed by the final 
publication with a conscientious handling. 

I am pleased to place in the hands of readers this aptly titled volume 
Tantrapuspanjali : Tantric Traditions and Philosophy of Kashmir - Studies 
in Memory of Pandit H. N. Chakravarty, as a step towards motivating and 
generating interest especially among the young readers towards understanding 
the holistic philosophy of our own nation. 


Dr. Sachchidanand Joshi 
Member Secretary 
IGNCA, New Delhi 




Preface 


TT^f HMI*il f^PT T^T ^T f*T T^T fsFpT ?Nf II 

- LalleSvari’s Vdkh in Kashmiri 

=t-‘’’1 Fh ^~t>4 <l3'=l T^rr q-5lf4 i|:g I R rT%3" TT^": I 
' T&r ^fti'R' 4Tnr? j&t t^tF^t ttrt^- h 

- Tr. Rajanaka Bhaskara 

what karma I do is the worship 
what I say is the mantra / 

by (practicing) this, the body (of limited consciousness) recognizes 
(experiences the supreme consciousness) 
that (recognition) is the Tantra of Parama Siva// 

The Tantras of Kashmiri Saiva tradition are the source of most fundamental 
concepts, which have stamped a whole culture and spiritual tradition, and which 
are prevalent in ritual practices of initiation, yoga, a non-dual view of reality, 
cosmology, the supremacy of guru and related areas. No doubt some of these 
concepts do occur in other schools of thought as well but in the Kashmiri Saiva 
tradition we find its own distinctive approach. The great authors have referred 
to the highest reality as paramadvaita - the supreme non-duality, because the 
arguments of the Saivas of Kashmir have come out from personal experiences 
combined with logic and intellectual speculation. The personal experience 



viii TANTRAPUSPANJALI 


guided them through their deep vogic states to c larity their doubts, have dear 
understanding of the reality and thereby recognize one transcendental reality 
and identify oneself with the absolute non-dual state* of consciousness known 
as Parama Siva. 

In the Kashmiri Saiva tradition we find a long lineage of saints scholars 
especially from the 8th 9th century onwards, who were not just thinkers but they 
were also mystics of a very' high spiritual order. Continuing with their deep study 
of Saiva tantras agamas along with critical analysis of other existing schools 
of thought they came up with fresh interpretations. Such works functioning as 
aids to scholars also contributed in continuing the tradition. Many great mystics 
touched the heights of spirituality, absorbed in spiritual ecstasy and complete 
devotion, their outpourings that have come down to us are the mystic devcuional 
poems. These stotras or studs as they are commonly known, have been the means 
of spiritual elevation for many. It is interesting to note that from the 14th century 
onwards there has come up another genre of the Saiva literature composed in 
Kashmiri language. The foremost example of this literature is the opening vakh 
(verse) of this preface, by' the well-known Saiva yogini Lallesvari. 

No doubt Utpalacarya and Abhinavaguptapadacarya will remain at the 
top as torchbearers of this great tradition, their works attract the attention of 
most of the scholars today. Much more remains yet unexplored in its entirety. A 
crucial requirement remains for looking into the whole corpus of the Kashmiri 
Saiva tantras and sastras housed in different collections, to bring to light many 
unknown details and also the contributions of lesser known saint scholars who 
continued on their trajectory to achieve the highest goal of sadhanci and also 
helped common people to walk on the path. 

As they say that the tradition never dies, the Kashmiri Saiva tradition has 
been a living tradition all through, and in spite of having to confront historical 
upheavals from time to time, it is still a living tradition to some extent. 

Pandit Hemendra Nath Chakravarty of Varanasi (1918-2011), disciple of the 
great Pandit Gopinath Kaviraj, was a true sddhaka and a scholar of the Kashmiri 
Saiva tantras who inspired his students. The spiritual grace overflowed from his 
spontaneous laughter. Panditji has many admirers of his scholarship and his 
persona. He has left a legacy of scholars whom he taught with open heart and 


PREFACE ix 


with whom he shared the true knowledge of this tradition. The present volume 
is the expression of a humble tribute to Panditji from some of his students and 
admirers. 

Pandit Hemendra Nath Cakravarty was one of the key members associated 
from the very beginning with our ongoing project of Kalatattvakosa (on the 
Indian key concepts) at IGN'CA. The purpose of launching this project at the 
Varanasi office was mainly for the availability of scholars like Panditji to receive 
continued guidance for this herculean project. In fact, Prof. Bettina Sharada 
Biiumer had engaged him for the Kaltikosa project at Varanasi. IGNCA will always 
remain grateful to Panditji for his unassuming support to this pioject till his last. 

Prof. Bettina Sharada Baumer and Dr. Hamsa Stainton deserve admiration 
for achieving success in the most challenging task taken by them in collecting 
the original research materials, quite appropriate and befitting contributions for 
Panditji’s commemoration volume. They approached IGNCA for its publication. 
It has been a proud privilege for me personally to take up the publication process 
forward under the Kalasamalocana series (on the analytical and critical studies) 
of IGNCA. The present collection of studies focussing on the 6aiva tantras of 
Kashmir is yet another significant addition to the series. I express my heaitfelt 
thanks to Prof. Bettina Sharada Baumer and to Dr. Hamsa Stainton for theii 
continued cooperation and deep understanding. Working with both of them has 
been an experience that will be cherished for long. It is also a great opportunity 
for us at IGNCA to express our deep gratitude to Shri Vinay Jain for designing the 
beautiful cover. Sincere thanks are due to Shri Vikas Arya of M/s Aryan Books 
International for handling the materials quite meticulously for publication. It 
is heartening to see the combined efforts coming to fruition in the form of this 
Tantrapuspdnjali. 


Advaitavadini Kaul 
Head of Kalakosa Division 
IGNCA, New Delhi 









Contents 


Foreword — SachchidanandJoshi v 

Preface — Advaitavadini Kaul vii 

Introduction 

Pandit Hemendra Nath Chakravarty: Scholar, Teacher, Sadhaka xiii 
— Bettina Sharada Baumer 

Mudra Photos xviii 

Tantrapuspahjali: Offerings in Memory of a True Pandit xxii 

— Hamsa Stainton 

List of Contributors xxix 

Section One 
TANTRA 

1. The Yoga of the Netra Tantra: A Translation of Chapters VII and VIII 3 

with Introduction 

— Bettina Sharada Baumer 

2. Svacchanda Bhairava: Blissful Spontaneous Will of Siva 34 

— Advaitavadini Kaul 


3. The Khacakrapahcakastotra, Hymn to the Five Spheres of Emptiness: 67 
Introduction, Edition, and Translation 

— Mark Dyczkowski 

4. Varahl Worship in the Parasurama-Kalpasutra : A Study of 132 

Imagination and Transformation in Kaula Srividya 

— Annette Wilke 




xii TANTRAPUSPAS'JALI 


5- The Wisdom of Excess: Guru. Initiation and Prat titc in an Extreme i>n 
Tantric Ritual 
—John Dupuche 

Section Two 

PHILOSOPHY 

6. The Body and Consciousness in Early Pratvahhijria Philosophv: at;, 

Amurtatva in Somanantla's Sivadrsti 

—John Nemec 

7. A Brief Hermeneutical Note on Consciousness in I’tpaladeva's 22b 

Pratyabhijna Texts 

— Navjivan Rust opt 

8. Ontological Hierarchy in the Tantrdloka of Abhinavagupta 240 

— Mrinal Kaul 

9 - Purnatd-pratyahhijhd, The Recognition of Fullness of M. \1. Acarva 271 
Rameshvar Jha: An Introduction 
— Sadananda Das 

to. Pratyabhijna Philosophy and the Evolution of Consciousness: 2S8 

Religious Metaphysics, Biosemiotics, and Cognitive Science 

— David Peter Lawrence 

Section Three 
AESTHETICS 

11. The Doctrine of Pratihhd in Selected Texts of Abhinavagupta 303 

— Ernst Furlinper 

12. Smell: The Sense Perception of Recognition 325 

— Aleksandra Went a 

13- Poetry and Ksemaraja’s Hermeneutics of Non-dualism 339 

— Hamsa Stainton 

POST-SCRIPTS 

14 - Ksana: Its Spiritual Significance 371 

— Pt. Hemendra Nath Chakravarty 

15. Posthumous Letter to Panditji Hemendra Nath Chakravarty 377 

— Rettlna Sharada Bdumer 



Pandit Hemendra Nath Chakravarty. 




Prof. KAX Tripath i and Panel it ji teaching Paratnsika Yivarana. 200N. Photo: I. rust Pii dinner) 



Paratrisika Vivarana seminar, Varanasi 2008. (Photo: Krnst Fiirlinger) 















At the inauguration of Sariividalaya, Abhinavagupta Research Library, 2006. 
(Photo: Boltina Sharada Biiunier) 










Kashmir Saivism Workshop, with Pandit M.L Kokiloo, Mark Dyc zkovvski 
and Betti na Sharada Baumer, 2010. 







Tantra GosthI at Gupta Ganga House, Samne Ghat, Varanasi, ca. 2012. 
(Photo: Bettina Sharada Baumer) 

















Panditji with his wife Suhha. 




Panditji with his family and Dr. Annette Wilke. 










At Jagdhi Mata Temple near Jaipur, 1986. (Photo: Bettina Sharada Baumer) 







■'V 



With Bettina Sharada Baumer at Chidambaram Temple, i<>S(». 



IGNCA book release function at the residence of then Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi, u)S8 
(Panditji at the extreme right, left to him Bettina Sharada Baumer). ( Photo: IGN( !A Archives) 














Introduction 


PANDIT HEMENDRA NATH CHAKRAVARTY: 
SCHOLAR, TEACHER, SADHAKA 
Bettina Sharada Biiumer 

HTTH ^ HTTTHI 

■'•'ti'fcld % HI iEET fl'i'-i ^JT: II 

yatrdmtarakhilam blidtiyac ca sarvatra bhasate | 
sphurattaiva hi sa hy ckd hrdayam paramam budhah || 

cT?TrH^HfiW^'HI^W|^W< I 

tathobhayamahanandasausumnahrdaydntare | 
spandamdnam updsita hrdaycim srstilaksanam || 

^ f^IcL I 

R«nRTHfcI ^ cTRI. II 

dhydyan smaran pravimrsan kurvan vdyatra kutracit \ 
visrantim etiyasmdc ca prollased dhrdayarh tu tat \ \ 








xiv TANTRAPUSPANJALI 


That in which the entire universe shines, 

And which shines everywhere, 

That is the one and unique resplendence 
Which is the Supreme Heart, O wise ones. 

One should meditate on the Heart, 

Of the nature of creation, 

In the innermost Heart in the central vein, 
Full of the great bliss of both (Siva and Sakti). 


That in which, whether meditating, 

Remembering, reflecting or acting, 

Everything finds repose, 

And whence it emerges in manifestation: 

That is the Heart. 

Abhinavagupta, summary verses in his Purutrisikd Vtvarutui 

How does a tradition stay alive? And at the opposite end, how does it decline? 
In the Indian tradition we find many examples where a single person—saint, 
yogi, philosopher, guru, Pandit, or in whatever role—has not only kept a tradition 
alive, but often revived it after a decline or near oblivion. In Varanasi (Banaras) 
there is a saying about several scholars that they are or were an institution by 
themselves, implying that they were not dependent on any University or other 
religious or academic institution. Their independence and recognition was solely 
based on their knowledge, their experience, their rootedness in the tradition. 
Pandit Hemendra Nath Chakravarty fully exemplified this. Banaras has been a 
centre for Tantric studies of different traditions, including the Bengal school and 
the non-dualist Kashmir Saiva traditions, as well as other schools of Saivism, 
Saiva Siddhanta, Vlrasaivism, and Srlvidya, in the tradition of Bhaskararaya etc. 
In the 20th century the towering figure among all the scholars in Varanasi, whose 


1. The Paratrisika Vivarana of Abhinavagupta has engaged Pandit Chakravarty 
and myself for about 25 years. 


INTRODUCTION xv 


vast and deep knowledge of Tantra attracted a number of students, was M.M. 
Gopinath Kaviraj. Thakur Jaideva Singh, a scholar of musicology, philosophy and 
Kashmir Saivism, moved to Varanasi especially in order to meet and study with 
Gopinath Kaviraj. A great grammarian, Acarya Rameshvar Jha, after meeting his 
Guru Swami Lakshman Joo in Kashmir, became another centre and authority 
in the field of Kashmir Saivism. 2 These great scholars, each one unique and 
independent, were yet connected, and had a common sense of total dedication 
to the tradition. 

Pandit H.N. Chakravartv, who came as a refugee from East Bengal (now 
Bangladesh), belonged to the tradition, and he was one of the foremost disciples 
of Gopinath Kaviraj. After the passing of his Guru, Panditji (as he would be 
called respectfully and affectionately) became himself a major teacher of the 
Tantras and other texts of Kashmir Saivism, attracting students from India 
and from all over the world. The contrast between the poor living conditions 
of Panditji and his family (and the tiny space available for his teaching) and 
his vast knowledge and selfless dedication was astonishing. In a world totally 
dependent on institutions, structures, positions, money and external recognition 
it is difficult to describe the very different atmosphere in which scholars like him 
lived, studied and taught. But it is due to them that the tradition of learning—in 
the case of Panditji, of non-dualist Kashmir Saivism—has lived on for decades. 

Hemendra Nath Chakravarty was born in 1918 in the village of Kalihati, in 
the district of Mymensingh in former East Bengal (now Bangladesh). His father, 
Taraka Nath Chakravarty, was an ayurvedic physician, and the family belonged to 
the Kaulika tradition, which worshiped Dak§ina Kali. Thus he grew up within a 
Sakta tradition, which he continued to practice his whole life. Hemendra Nath did 
his matriculation at the village high school in 1935, and studied Sanskrit and later 
Samkhya at the Balananda Brahmacharyashram in Deogarh (Bihar). In 1939 he 
went to Varanasi and studied Nyaya under the famous Pandit Vibhuti Vibhushana 
Bhattacharya. In 1944 he graduated in Nyaya TIrtha, and 1945 in Tarka Tlrtha 
from the Calcutta Government Sanskrit Association. He obtained a B.Ed. in 1950, 


2. It is not my intention to give a complete list of Pandits representing the 
tradition. See my article "Tantric Pandits in Varanasi,” in The Panditl, ecL A. 
Michaels (Delhi: Manohar, 2001). 






xvi TANTRAPUSPANJALI 

which enabled him to work as a teacher in Varanasi tor a number <> t years. He 
met the illustrious Pandit Gopinath Kaviraj tor the first time in 197,8 ami became 
his disciple. This was the beginning of a long and deep association and learning. 
Having been trained as a logician in the dualistic system of NvavaA aisesika, Ik* 
was drawn towards the non-dualist system of Kashmir Saivism. It is thanks to 
his training under his Guru that he became one of the foremost exponents of 
this tradition. After the death of Kavirajji in 1976, Panditji became a prominent 
teacher of the texts of Tantra and Kashmir Saivism in Varanasi until his own 
death in 2011. For some time he taught Sanskrit and Puranas at the k'anyapith 
of Mata Anandamayl Ashram. He was one of the editors of the commemoration 
volumes for Gopinath Kaviraj, brought out by Anandamayi Ashram, titled 
Navonme?a (co-edited with Jaideva Singh and G. Mukhopadhyaya). He was also 
closely associated with the editorial team of the volumes on Hindu Spirituality in 
the series of World Spirituality, mainly Dr. Bithika Mukherjee, Prof. K. Sivaraman 
and 1 . In this context I discovered him and invited him to join the Alice Boner 
Institute for Fundamental Research in the Indian Arts, where we were editing 
texts from Orissa on Silpa. In 1986-87 the newly created Indira Gandhi National 
Centre for the Arts under the leadership of Dr. Kapila Vatsyayan decided to open 
a branch in Varanasi, and I was appointed as Honorary Coordinator. Soon after 
its establishment I invited Panditji to join this new institution as “Chief Pandit," 
and his presence and collaboration was very precious and fruitful. We were 
mostly engaged in the planning and editing of the volumes of Kalatattvakosa, 
A Lexicon of Fundamental Concepts of the Indian Arts, to which he contributed 
several articles. 

Alongside his work with IGNCA, his private teaching continued, which had 
already started in 1972. Many internationally known scholars of Tantra and non¬ 
dual Kashmir Saivism were his students at some point of time, including many 
of the contributors to this volume. This book is an expression of their gratitude 
and indebtedness to their teacher. 

Panditji’s style of teaching was different from the traditional way, in the 
sense that he was open to questions and suggestions, and that his enthusiasm 
and fascination with the texts were never subjected to a purely grammatical or 
technical analysis. While remaining faithful to a tradition-based interpretation, 
his range of interests and learning enriched his teaching. Moreover, his sense of 




INTRODUCTION xvii 


humour paired with his sharp critical faculties made every session with him a 
joyful experience. 

In 2003 Panditji received the “Thakur Jaideva Singh Award" from the Trika 
Interreligious Trust for his merit in teaching Kashmir Saivism. He also participated 
in some important interreligious seminars organised by the Abhishiktananda 
Society. He had inherited his interest and openness to mysticism in other 
traditions from his Guru. 

Panditji attained his samddhi on 30th March, 2011. 














Vanilla and Abhaya Mudra. 












xxii TANTRAPUSPASjALI 


TANTRA PL'S PA.\JA L /: 

OFFERINGS IN MEMORY OF A TRUE PANDIT 
Hamsa Stainton 


Here at the beginning of a volume in commemoration of Pandit ji, I am reminded 
of the first time I was introduced to him at his home In mv friend, a student 
of his. Panditji noted my first name and quoted the moving hhujan attributed 
to Kabir and made famous by Kumar Gandharva: ud jdega hums ufcclu, with its 
beautiful imagery of the hamsa bird flying alone, high in the sky. when one's time 
is up. The final verse says: 

Kabir sings the qualities of God 
whose boundaries can’t be found. 

The guru’s actions 
mark his path. 

The disciple’s actions 
mark his path. 3 

As we, Panditji’s students and friends, celebrate his extraordinary life, 
teaching, and scholarship, we are also honoring the actions that mark the path 
of all such selfless devotees of knowledge. 

We conceived of this commemoration volume during a seminar on 
Abhinavagupta at the Indian Institute of Advanced Study in Shimla, after Bettinaji 
and I, along with a number of other students and friends of Panditji, learned 
of his passing in 2011. It is appropriate that our memories and celebrations of 
Panditji’s life mixed with our reflections on the great Saiva polymath that he 
spent so many years studying. 

As its title suggests, this volume brings together articles related to Tantra like 
a handful of flowers ( pu$pahjaU ), which we humbly offer in honor of Panditji 
and everything he represents. The diversity of articles presented here suggests, 
at least in part, the impressive breadth of Panditji’s own erudition—they move, 
for example, from the 8th century to the 21st, from esoteric Tantric ritual to 

3. Translated by Linda Hess in Bodies of Song: Kabir Oral Traditions and 
Performative Worlds in North India (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2015), 
p. 62. 



INTRODUCTION xxiii 


Pratyabhijna philosophy, from north to south, and from the body and the senses 
to the nature of consciousness. At the same time, their overlapping themes and 
concerns suggest the depth of knowledge Panditji shared with his students and 
colleagues. 

The articles are organized into three main parts. Of course, these divisions 
are heuristic, and in fact many of these essays could reasonably be grouped in a 
different section. But hopefully this organization allows the reader easier access 
to the contents of this volume. 

The first section, called “Tantra,” consists of five articles that are closely 
related to specific Tantric scriptures and generally focus on religious practices, 
including yoga, ritual, and devotional worship. Bettina Sharada Baumer offers 
a detailed introduction to the Netra Tantra, an authoritative Saiva scripture 
from early 8th-century Kashmir, and specifically to Chapters 7 and 8, along 
with K$emaraja’s influential commentary. These chapters present a unique 
form of Saiva yoga, including the practice of the netra mantra and a Tantric 
reinterpretation of Patanjali’s astdhgayoga. To the best of our knowledge, this is 
the first English translation of a section of this Tantra to be published. 

Like the Netra Tantra, the Svacchanda Tantra has been a prominent Tantra 
in Kashmir for over a thousand years. Advaitavadini Kaul has a unique starting 
point for her study of this scripture: a precious family heirloom, a miniature 
painting of Svacchanda Bhairava Siva from the nineteenth century. Her essay 
studies this and other images of Svacchanda Bhairava in light of the Svacchanda 
Tantra itself as well as contemporary religious practice in the Kashmiri Saiva 
community. Rich with striking images and original translations, this article offers 
numerous insights into the Kashmiri tradition of Svacchanda Bhairava, past and 
present. 

Mark Dyczkowski also contributes a pioneering work with his exposition, 
edition, and translation of an early text of the Kashmiri Krama tradition, the 
Khacakrapahcakastotra (Hymn to the Five Spheres of Emptiness), based on two 
Nepalese manuscripts. This hymn provides valuable evidence for the history and 
development of the Krama tradition, particularly the evolving role of Yoginls and 
Kalis and the emerging system of Five Currents ( pahcavaha ) that became the 
core of the branch of the Krama called Mahanaya. Dyczkowski’s work, moreover, 







xxiv TANTRAPUSPANJALI 


encourages future research on the important function of stntra literature in tin- 
transmission of the Krama teachings 

In her study of the IkirasurCima-Kulpasutru. Annette Wilke presents 
some of the fruits of her extensive research on this ritual manual of the Kaula 
Srividya tradition. Here she focuses on the midnight worship of the fierce, hoar¬ 
faced goddess Varahi, the judge and commander-in-chiet of the beautiful and 
benevolent goddess Lalita. Her historical work on this text and its interpretation 
(as well as her translations sprinkled throughout > are already major contributions 
to the study of Tantra, hut W'ilke goes further and uses the worship of Varahi as 
a starting point for careful, theoretical reflections on the nature of imagination 
that draw from a wide range of interdisciplinary conversations, from Indologv to 
cultural studies to cognitive science, from the work of Foucault to research by 
scholars of cognitive blending. 1 n doing so, she argues for how act ive imagination 
is not only a key to Tantric practice and discourse, but also a critical, theoretical 
tool and analytic category for making sense of religious practice and discourse in 
general. 

In the final paper in this section, John Dupuche seeks to rectify what he 
perceives as misperceptions of Tantric ritual, and specifically Kula/Kaula ritual. 
He does so by exploring why Abhinavagupta was so drawn to these extreme ritual 
practices and provided a full description of them in Chapter 29 of his Tuntruloku. 
Based on his translations from this chapter, Dupuche analyzes the details of Kula 
ritual, including the specific roles involved (guru, duti, etc.), types of initiation, 
and categories of ritual practice (particularly the required daily ritual), in order 
to provide the proper context for the interpretation of this tradition. 

Section Two brings together five papers that explore philosophical issues 
in the works of prominent Tantric scholars, including Somananda, Utpaladeva, 
Abhinavagupta, and Rameshvar Jha. As this list suggests, most of these articles 
are concerned specifically with the Pratyabhijna (“Recognition”) tradition of non¬ 
dual theology, philosophy, and exegesis founded by Somananda (c. 900-95) and 
developed by his disciple Utpaladeva and then Abhinavagupta (c. 975-1025). John 
Nemec s essay focuses on the early authors of the Pratyabhijna and investigates 
their striking and seemingly paradoxical claims that the dynamic universe is the 
very body of Siva, and, moreover, that this body is nothing hut consciousness. He 
aigues that Somananda takes the idea of body-as-consciousness quite literally 


INTRODUCTION xxv 


and sees the universe as the action of the supreme agent, Siva, who is disembodied. 
Nemec goes f urther and explores how this philosophical understanding impacts 
religious practice. Ultimately he suggests that this complicates common scholarly 
interpretations of the body and Tantric practice, since, as he shows, there are 
divergent Tantric conceptions of the body. 

Navjivan Rastogi's article investigates precisely what is meant by 
consciousness in Utpaladeva and Abhinavaguptas definitive piesentation of 
ITatyabhijna. and he brings this exploration into discussion with some classic, 
twentieth-century Indian scholars of consciousness and non-dualism, including 
K.C. Bhattacharya, T.R.VMurti, and A.K. Chatterji. He usefully identifies a series of 
insights found specifically in Utpala s seminal texts, his /si 'Cirajwutycibhijncikdrtka 
and Isvarapratvabhijnakcirika-vrtti, in the light of Abhinavaguptas exposition. 
Moreover, he highlights how Utpala and Abhinava use different strategies to 
theorize consciousness in order to argue for their unique vision of a complete, 
integral consciousness that cannot he reduced to knowing, willing, or feeling 
alone, hence their formulation of the position of purnata, what Rastogi glosses 
as “the doctrine of integral dynamic absolutism.” 

In Mrinal Kaul’s essay, we turn from Abhinavagupta’s contributions to 
Rratyabhijna specifically to his formulation ot Tantric ontology and metaphysics 
in general. Kaul analyzes Abhinavagupta’s presentation of the tattva system 
the “ontological hierarchy” that describes the fundamental organization of 
existence—based on his extensive knowledge of Saiva sources and Indian 
philosophy and his close reading of Abhinavagupta’s magnum opus, the 
Tantraloka , with the commentary of Jayaratha. Kaul explores a number of 
complex questions, from the number and sequence of tattvas (and why these 
matter) to the reasons Abhinava includes a sophisticated discussion of causality 
within his presentation of the tattvas. In doing so, he illumines how Abhinava, 
as an exegete, worked to systematize the various presentations of the tattvas 
found in the diverse Saiva scriptures at his disposal. His article thus offers new 
perspectives on both Abhinavagupta as a religious scholar and tattva as a key 
philosophical category across traditions in South Asia. 

The final two papers in this section suggest two different ways that 
Pratyabhi jna has endured the tests of time. Sadananda Das offei s the first English 
translation of part of the 20th-century Purnatd-pratyabhijna (The Recognition 




xxvi TANTRAPUSPANJALI 


of Fullness) by Acarya Rameshvar Jha. Jha, another of the great pandits who 
congregated in Varanasi, was an influential disciple of Swami l.akshman J«»o anti 
composed thousands of original verses in Sanskrit, ranging from philosophical 
treatises to devotional poetry. With his introduction and translation of the first 
32 verses of Purnatd-pratyabhijnu, Das helps make this great scholar and author 
better known among English audiences and contributes to our appreciation for 

how Pratyabhijna has continued to be an inspiring and dynamic tradition into 
the present. 

David Peter Lawrence seeks to engage Pratyabhijna philosophy with current 
developments in cognitive scientific theories of religion and theories of signs 
that elaborate on the work of Charles Sanders Peirce (1839-1914) (specifically 
pansemiotics and biosemiotics). After helpfully surveying the relevance of 
cognitive science and semiotics to the study of religion, Lawrence suggests 
how Peircean semiotics may be reconceived within the perspective of the 
Pratyabhijna. In doing so, he demonstrates how Peircean language may be used 
to elucidate, for example, debates between Buddhists and Saivas. Overall, he 
productively introduces Pratyabhijna philosophy into the recent and ongoing 
dialogue between scholars of religion, philosophy, cognitive science and 
semiotics. 

The third section of this volume includes three papers that address, at least 
in part, the aesthetic dimensions of Tantra. In his article on pratibhd in selected 
works of Abhinavagupta, Ernst Fiirlinger demonstrates that this critical term has 
a multitude of meanings that make any single translation insufficient. Building 
on the work of earlier scholars, such as V. Raghavan and J. Gonda, Fiirlinger 
charts some of the complexity of this term and shows some of the unique ways in 
which Abhinavagupta deploys the concept of pratibhd to bring together spiritual 
practice {sa.dh.ana), Indian philosophy of language, yogic experience, aesthetic 

theory, and everyday life within the framework of his dynamic, expansive vision 
of non-duality. 

Aleksandra Wenta explores the peculiar focus on smell as what she calls 
the sense perception of Recognition” in non-dual Saivism, and particularly 
in the Maharthamahjari (The Flower-Bouquet of the Supreme Meaning) by 
Mahesvarananda (i2th-i3th century) in south India. For him, smell is a central 





INTRODUCTION xxvii 


symbol of recognition because it is grounded in the direct, aesthetic experience 
of the senses. YVenta charts how Mahesvarananda deftly integrates features of 
the Krama into his formulation of the Pratyabhijna, and she explains why smell 
is given such a special place in this tradition. Overall, her research demonstrates 
how Mahesvarananda closely ties the metaphysical and soteriological teachings 
of the Pratyabhijna with the immediacy, emotion, and aesthetic dimensions of 
sense perception, epitomized most of all in the sense of smell. 

My own paper considers the role of poetry and poetics in the non-dual 
hermeneutics of K§emaraja, the great eleventh century Kashmirian Saiva exegete. 
I identify and explain three different interpretive strategies Ksemaraja employs 
in his commentaries on the Stavacintamaru, !$rv(is tot reived! , and Sdmbapancdsikd. 
I chart how his commentaries on these devotional hymns ( stotras ), which 
represent a distinct sub-group within his exegetical oeuvre, showcase his creative 
and non-dual literary hermeneutics. 

The collection concludes with two special postscripts. The first is a reprint of 
a short essay Panditji published in 1985 in honor of Thakurjaideva Singh. In this 
article, “K§ana: Its Spiritual Significance,” Panditji explores the power and true 
meaning of time, and in particular, how the yogin can journey through time to 
attain the state of timelessness. The second is a beautifully personal, posthumous 
letter Bettina Sharada Baumer wrote to him shortly after he passed. With these 
two timely and timeless reflections, our volume concludes. 

PANDIT H.N. CHAKRAVARTY’S PUBLISHED WORKS 

Books: 

The Narada-purana, Vol. 3- Translation with notes. Delhi. Motilal Banarsidass, 
1982. 

Tantrasdra by Abhinciva Gupto.co.Tyci. Hindi translation and annotation; English 
introduction. Varanasi: Varanaseya Sanskrit Sansthan, 1986. 

Navonmesa: M.M. Gopinath Kaviraj Smriti Granth, 2 vols. (Ed. with Jaideva 
Singh and G. Mukhopadhyaya). Varanasi: M.M. Gopinath Kaviraj Centenary 
Celebration Committee, 1987. 

Tantrasdra of Abhinavagupta. English translation with introduction. Edited by 
Boris Marjanovic. Portland, OR (USA): Rudra Press, 2012. 


xxviii TANTRAPUSPANJALI 


Articles: 

K$ana: Its Spiritual Significance. The Indian Theosophist, I'hakur < Dr. i Jaideva 
Singh Felicitation Number, Vol. 82 Nos. 10 8: 11, October-November. 1987,. 
“Prana” and “Blja.” In Kaldtattx'akosu, Vol. I, edited In B. Baunier. New Delhi: 

Indira Gandhi National Centre for the Arts and Motilal Banarsidass, 1988. 
“Bindu,” “Nabhi,”and “Cakra." In Kaldtath’akosa, Vol. II, edited by B. Baunier. New 
Delhi: Indira Gandhi National Centre for the Arts and Motilal Banarsidass, 
1992 - 

“Tantric Spirituality.” In Hindu Spirituality: Postelassieal and Modern, edited In- 
ICR. Sundararajan and B. Mukerji, pp. 209-231. New York: Crossroad, 1997. 

“Bahurupagarbhastotra, An Annotated Translation." In Sdmarasya: Studies in 
Indian Arts, Philosophy and Interreligious Dialogue, edited by S. Das and T. 
Fiirlinger, pp. 37-47. New Delhi: D.K. Printworld, 2005. 

“Gopinath Kaviraj on Purna" (trans.). In Void and Fullness in the Buddhist, Hindu 
and Christian Traditions, edited by B. Biiumer andj. Dupuche. New Delhi: DK 
Printworld, 2005. 



List of Contributors 


Bettina Sharada Baumer, Indologist from Austria and Professor of Religious 
Studies (Visiting Professor at several universities), has lived and worked in 
Varanasi since 1967. She is the author and editor of 23 books and over 70 
research articles. Her main fields of research are non-dualistic Kashmir Saivism, 
Indian aesthetics, temple architecture and religious traditions of Odisha, 
and comparative mysticism. She has been Coordinator of the Indira Gandhi 
National Centre for the Arts, Varanasi. She has translated important Sanskrit 
texts into German and English. Her important publication is Abhinavaguptas 
Hermeneutics of the Absolute, Anuttaraprakriya (2011). In 2015 she leceived the 
Padma Shri award from the President of India. She has been National Fellow at the 
Indian Institute of Advanced Study, Shimla (2015-17). She has been extensively 
giving seminars on texts of Kashmir Saivism in India and Europe over the last 

20 years. 

Sadananda Das received his Ph.D. from the Centre of Advanced Study m Sanskrit, 
University of Pune, and since 2005 is an Assistant Professor in the Institute 
of Indology and Central Asian Studies at the University of Leipzig, Germany. 
His areas of interests include Atharvaveda, Non-dual Saivism of Kashmii, and 
Sanskrit literature including Kavyas and Subha$itas. He is a well-known teachei 
for spoken Sanskrit and has been teaching Spoken Sanskrit at summer schools in 
different universities in Australia, India and Europe for more than two decades. 





XXX tantrapusfAnjali 


His research and publications focus on the Atharvavrila. Silpasastra. Non-dual 
Saivism of Kashmir and Spoken Sanskrit. 

Rev. John Dupuche, is Honorary fellow at the Australian (.atholic l niversit\. 
Senior Lecturer at VI CD University of Divinity, and (.hair of the (.atholic Interfaith 
Committee of the Archdiocese of Mell)ourne. lit* has a doctorate in Sanskrit, 
specialising in Kashmir Saivism, and is particularly interested in its interface with 
Christianity. His hook, Ahhinavacjuptu: the Kula Ritual as I.'lahnratcJ m Chapter 
29 oj the Tcintrdtoka , was published in 2003; Jesus, the Mantra 0/ (uni in 2ony 
and Vers un Tantra Chretien in 2009 (translated as Towards a Christian I antra). 
He has written many articles in these fields. He lives in an interfaith ashram on 

j 

the outskirts of Melbourne. 

Mark Dyczkowski was born in London in 1951. He has lived and studied 
in India since 1969. He has published numerous books on Kashmiri Saivism 
and Tantra. He has studied Indian classical music (sitar and vocal) since 1966, 
performing in India and many other countries for the past thirty years. 

Ernst Furlinger is Head of the Center for Religion and Globalization, Danube 
University Krems, Austria, and Associate Professor for Religious Studies, Institute 
for Religious Studies, University of Vienna. He lived in Varanasi and New Delhi 
from 2001-2006 and studied there, mainly with Pt. H.N. Chakravarty. Monographs: 
The Touch ofShakti, New Delhi 2009; Mosque Conflicts in Austria, Goettingen 2013 
(in German). 

Advaitavadini Kaul is Associate Professor of interdisciplinary study of the arts 
within Indian tradition and Head of Kalakosa Division at the Indira Gandhi 
National Centre for the Arts (IGNCA), New Delhi. Here, she has been initiating 
research projects in association with scholars of international recognition for 
last 26 years. Many projects have already culminated in well-received and well- 
known published volumes, each presenting an analytical study of a particular 
aspect of art and aesthetics within an overall Indian world view. Her own research 
and publications are mainly focused on Kashmir and various aspects of its 



LIST OF CONTRIBUTORS xxxi 


cultural heritage, intellectual traditions and historiography. She has contributed 
about forty research articles, which are published in research journals and 
seminar proceedings in India and abroad. She is author of the book Buddhist 
Savants of Kashmir - Their Contributions Abroad and has edited a few volumes 
which include History of Kashmiri Pandits and volume IV of the Kalatattvakosa 
on Manifestation of Nature: Srsti Vistara (co-ed.). She comes from a family of the 
Saivas of Kashmir. 

Mrinal Kaul is a teaching Fellow in the Manipal Centre for Philosophy and 
Humanities, Manipal University, India. Prior to this, he taught at the Universita 
degli Studi di Napoli “L’Orientale,” Naples (Italy). He studied Sanskrit and 
Indological literature, first in Kashmir, and then in Delhi, Pune, Varanasi, Oxford, 
Montreal and Naples. His main research focuses on pre-modern South Asian 
intellectual and social history, the history of ideas and literary cultures, Sanskrit 
language and literature, Classical Indian philosophical literature, Abhinavagupta, 
Trika Saivism, Tantric literatures, and Philosophy of Religion. The focus of his 
doctoral project was Abhinavagupta’s Theory of Reflection that comprised a 
critically edited text, translation and study of the Pratibimbavdda as discussed in 
the Tantrdlokaviveka (3.1-65). 

David Peter Lawrence specializes in the Pratyabhijna philosophy of non-dual 
Kashmiri Saivism and related areas of Hindu and Buddhist philosophy and 
religion. He previously taught at universities in Hong Kong and Canada, and 
is now Professor of Philosophy and Religion at the University of North Dakota. 
His publications include Rediscovering God with Transcendental Argument: 
A Contemporary Interpretation of Monistic Kashmiri Saiva Philosophy, The 
Teachings of the Odd-Eyed One: A Study and Translation of the Virupdksapancdsikd 
with the Commentary of Vidyacakravartin. Presently he is completing 
Abhinavagupta’s Commentary on the Recognition of the Lord: A Translation of 
the isvarapratyabhijndvimarsini, with Utpaladeva’s Isvarapratyabhijhdkarikd, 
Introduction and Notes, under contract with SUNY Press. Prof. Lawrence was 
recipient of a Fulbright-Nehru Senior Research Fellowship for research at the 
University of Lucknow in the academic year 2011-12. 



xxxii TANTRAPUSFAN'jALI 


John N'emec is Associate Professor of Indian Religions and South Asian Studies 
in the Department of Religious Studies of the University of \ irginia. He is the 
author of The Ubiquitous Siva: Sombnunda’s Sivadrsti and Ills Tantric Interlocutors 
which includes a critical edition, annotated translation, and extended study of 
the founding work of the famed Saiva tantric philosophical school known as the 
Pratyabhijna. He also currently sen.es as Kditor of the Religion in Translation 
Series of the American Academy of Religion. He holds a Ph.I). degree in South 
Asia Studies from the University of Pennsylvania (20051. an M.Phil. in Classical 
Indian Religions from the University of Oxford (20005 an M.A. in Religious 
Studies from the University of California at Santa Barbara (19971, and a B.A. in 
Religion from the University of Rochester (1994). He was a Pulbright Scholar 
in India in the academic year 2002-05. His current research examines not only 
tantric philosophical works but also the larger intellectual and cultural context 
of the valley of Kashmir of the ninth to twelfth centuries. 

Navjivan Rastogi, who comes in the direct lineage of the legendary K.C. Pandev, 
is formerly Professor & Head, Department of Sanskrit and Honorary Director, 
Abhinavagupta Institute of Aesthetics &: Saiva Philosophy at the University of 
Lucknow. His primary interest lies in Abhinava studies comprising philosophy, 
aesthetics and tantra. Known for his pioneering research on the Krama school of 
Kashmir Saivism and the Tantrdloka, his recent published research relates to the 
study of the Pratyabhijna epistemology. Besides numerous books and papers to 
his credit, he is presently co-editing (with Karl H. Potter) the volume on Kashmir 
Saivism for the Encyclopaedia of Indian Philosophies. 


Hamsa Stainton is an Assistant Professor in the School of Religious Studies at 
McGill University in Montreal, Canada, and he earned his I’h.D. from Columbia 
University. His interests include Saivism and Tantric traditions, religion in 
Kashmir, Indian aesthetics, hhakti traditions, the Mahdhlidrata, and Sanskrit 
literature. His current research and recent publications focus on the popular 
genre of Sanskrit devotional poetry called the stotra ("hymn of praise"), especially 
in the religious and literary history of Kashmir. 








LIST OF CONTRIBUTORS xxxiii 


Aleksandra Wenta is currently pursuing her second DPhil in Oriental Studies at 
The Queen's College, University of Oxford. She is also assistant professor in the 
School of Buddhist Studies, Philosophy and Comparative Religions at Nalanda 
University, India. She has co-edited (with Purushottama Bilimoria) Emotions in 
Indian Thoia/ht-Systems (New Delhi, London, New York: Routledge, 2015) and 
published several peer-reviewed articles. Aleksandra is also a researcher at FIND 
(India-Europe Foundation tor New Dialogues), Italy. 

Annette Wilke is Professor for the Study of Religion and head of the department 
at the University of Muenster, Germany (from 1998)- She teceived her Ph.D. 
from Berne University (CH) and held a two-year scholarship in Varanasi. Besides 
systematic studies in religion, aesthetics (religion and the senses), religious 
imagination, ritual studies, and mysticism, her major fields of reseatch are 
Hindu traditions: Advaita-Vedanta, Tantra, goddess worship, sonic aspects of 
Hindu culture, reform in Hinduism, and Tamil Hindu temples in Germany. She is 
a member of the cluster of excellence “Religion and Politics at the University of 
Muenster, and is currently working on aesthetic communication and a research 
project on “Global Hinduism - The Chinmaya Mission in India and around the 

world.” 






Section One 


TANTRA 








The Yoga of the Netra Tantra: 

A Translation of Chapters VII and VIII 
with Introduction 

Bettina Sharada Baumer 


The Netra Tantra, “the Tantra of the (Third) Eye (of Siva),” also called Mrtyujit 
or Mrtyunjaya (“the Overcomer of Death”) with the honorific Bhattdraka added, 
is one of the most authoritative Tantras of the Trika or non-dualist Saivism of 
Kashmir. Along with the more extensive Svacchanda Tantra, it enjoys a high 
place in the tradition, although it is of lesser antiquity than the Mdlinmjayottara 
Tantra, which was the main scriptural source for Abhinavagupta’s Tantraloka. 
Alexis Sanderson gives 700-850 ce as its approximate date, 1 but as is the case 
with many Tantras, this would be only the date of the redaction in the form it 
has come down to us. There is no doubt, as Helene Brunner also admits, that 
the subject matter and a number of passages are much older. In any case, it has 
to predate Abhinavagupta, who quotes it in the 10th century. 2 Along with its 
antiquity, the importance of the text in the tradition is strongly supported by 
the Uddyota commentary by Ksemaraja (early 11th century). In spite of certain 
heterogeneities noted by scholars/ this Tantra is unique in several respects. The 
first is the very content expressed in the title “ Netra, ” in that it is the only Tantra 

, See Alexis Sanderson, “Religion and the State: Saiva Officiants in the Territory of the 
King's Brahmanical Chaplain,” in Indo-Iranian.Journal 47 (2004). P- 243. where he 
gives the approximate date as between 700 and 850. 

2. Tantraloka 16.59,16.224, and 21.11. 

3. Helene Brunner, in her study, says interestingly that “un des attraits de ce Tantra 
est paradoxalement son heterogeneity (“Un Tantra du Word: Le Netra Tantra," in 
Bulletin de I’Ecole Frangaise d‘Extreme Orient 61 [1974]. p-127)- 



4 tantrapuspAnjali 


to my knowledge that has the Third Eye ol Siva as its theme.- The form of Siva 
revealed therein is likewise called Nctra for Netrandtha . Mrtyujit. Mrtyuh/avu. 
or Amrtesa, the latter names expressing tin* i|iialities of overcoming death 
and bestowing immortality. The same names denote the Deitv, the Tantra, and 
the mantra revealed. Thus, the aim of the text and its practice is clearly the 
attainment of immortality' at different levels, as we shall see. 

The Netra Tantra (NT) has received the attention of mam sc holars, but 
till date only a Hindi translation is available. I In* two chapters contained in 
this article may be the first English translation of a section of this Tantra to 
be published. Helene Brunner has dedicated a detailed analysis and a form of 
paraphrase of the Tantra in her extensive article, “Un Tantra du Sard: l.c Nctra 
Tantra .” Her study is concentrated on the Tantra with only occasional references 
to Ksemaraja’s commentary (with the obvious intention of not falling under 
the influence of his non-dualist interpretation). Andre I’adoux has devoted a 
significant section of his eminent study, Vac: The Concept of the Word in Selected 
Hindu Tantras, to the Netra mantra. V.V. Dvivedi has published a critical edition 
of the text; however, this does not take into consideration the manuscripts f rom 
Nepal, which at present are being edited and studied by Gavin Flood. Alexis 
Sanderson has studied the NT mainly from the point of view of the rituals 
performed for the king . * 5 6 Navjivan Rastogi’s article on “The Yogic Disciplines in 
the Monistic Saiva Tantric Traditions of Kashmir: Threefold, Fourfold, and Six- 

Limbed" contains a useful and thoughtful analysis of the NT with regard to Saiva 
yogaT 

In view of all these works, a detailed study of the yoga of the Netra Tantra is 
still a desideratum . 7 This article will concentrate on the two chapters translated 

4 - According to Prof. A. Sanderson (communication by E-mail). 

5 . Religion and the State,” and also “The Saiva Exegesis of Kashmir,” in Melanges 
tantnqu.es a la memoire d’Helene Brunner / Tantric Studies in Memory of Helene 
Brunner, ed. Dominic Goodall and Andre Padoux (Pondicherry: Institut Franyais 
d Indologie / Ecole Franyaise d’Extreme- 

6. In Ritual and Speculation in Early Tantrism. Studies in Honor of Andre Padoux , ed. 
Teun Goudrian (Albany: SUNY Press, 1992). 

7 - Somadeva Vasudeva also has some useful passages and comparison with the yoga of 
the Malinlvijayottara Tantra in his excellent study, The Yoga of the Mdlinlvijayottara 

Tantra (Pondicherry: Institut Franyais de Pondichery / Ecole Franyaise d’Extreme- 
Orient, 2004). 






THE YOGA OF THE NETRA TANTRA 5 


and place them in the context of the entire Tantra. I also make use of K§emaraja’s 
commentary, keeping in mind his effort to make the text consistent in light of 
his supreme non-dualism or paramadvaita, as he expresses it in the fourth 
mangalasloka: 

sarvahhasavikasi cinmciyamahah svacchasvatantrasphurad 
yad dvaitendhanaddhi yac ca paramadvaitdmrtenocchalat \ 
dvaitadvaitadrgandhakdraharanani dhdmatraikdtmakam 
sah'cim netram anugrahdyajagato ‘mutraitad uddyotate || 

Here I will throw light ( uddyotate ) on the Eye of Siva for the grace and benefit of the world 
(jagatah anugrahdya ), which consists of the three luminaries (Sun, Moon and Fire), which 
unfolds all manifestation, the glory of Consciousness, shining as pure freedom, which bums 
the fuel of duality and causes the nectar of supreme non-duality to flow forth, destroying 
the darkness of the (conflicting) views of duality' and non-duality. 

The Tantra is clearly contained in a Trika framework, and its triadic vision 
pervades both theory and practice, as expressed in the very first verse: tridha 
tisrsv avasthasu... (I.i). The central symbol for this triadic vision is Siva’s set of 
three eyes, of which the singular always refers to the middle one. The three eyes 
correspond to a number of triads: the three Acts of Siva {srsti, sthiti, samhrti ), 8 the 
three Energies {para, parapara, apara, or else krtya, jnana, iccha; Vol. I, p. 4). and 
in the yogic sense the three nadis also as eyes, as nadis are connected with the 
symbolism of Moon, Sun and Fire {soma, surya, vahni; Vol. I, p. 5)- Experientially, 
the eyes and the nadis have three functions: nourishing, illuminating and 
burning {apyaya, prakasa, daha; Vol. I, p. 5). These qualities have far-reaching 
consequences in relation to theyo^a of the Netra Tantra. 

Interestingly, although one would expect the goal of this yoga to be the 
opening of the Third Eye of the yogi, no explicit mention of this is found. One 
might all the more assume this to be so, since not only are the Deity and the 
mantra identical, but also the yoc/f who reaches the Ultimate becomes identified 
with Amrte^a (as expressed at the end of Chapters VII and VIII). It may well be 

8. H61&ne Brunner notes that where one would expect the pentadic scheme of 
pancakrtya, the threefold list shows an older layer of the Saivagamas which was 
triadic (“Un Tantra du Nord,” p. 130, note). Ksemaraja of course seeks to complement 
it with the remaining two: vilaya and anugraha {The Netra Tantra, Vol. I, p. 4). 


6 tantrapuspAnjali 


that the underlying assumption is that it is the opening <>l the I bird I-ye. in union 
or identity with Amrtesa, which bestows immortality hut. even In the end of 
the two yoga chapters which describe the path leading to such a state, we find no 
explicit reference to this symbolism. 

Among the important triads are the three hija s of the Netra mantra: Om jam 
sah. Interestingly, it is not in the Xctra Tantra hut rather in the Svaeehundu I antra 
that the three bljas are identified with the three lives i SvT I.(>;•', >. The Xctra Tantra 
is the revealer of both, the mantra and the Third [.ye. and "netra" again denotes 
both. Why this liberating mantra is called netra is explained by Ksemaraja, who 
says that it is the most prominent (pradhana , of mantra s just .is the organ of 
sight is the most prominent of the sense organs (....mantresu madhye visavesu 
ca netrabhutam yathd netrum itarendriyamadhyc pradhanuhhutum), since it 
illumines all existing things (satsu vidyamdncsu hhdvcsu prakdsakam )(II.n, p. 44). 
Here we encounter another triad, namely the three ways or methods to realize 
the state of immortality :jhdna,yoga anti mantra (II.7 in the question of the Devi, 
its opposite in the answer of Siva: mantra,yoga, jrtdna, II.9), which lead to both 
moksa and siddhi. Here the Tantra is very- consistent, especially when we come 
to Chapters VI, VII and \ III, which relate to the gross, i.e., ritual wav (sthula), to 
the subtle way of yoga (, suksma ), and to the supreme way of knowledge (para). 

This triad is eminently applicable to the three chapters, which are called not 
updya nor yoga, but dhydrxa. If j yoga in the narrow sense applies only to Chapter 
VII, in the broad sense it would include the three. Dhydna is here understood in 
the broad sense. The triad here consists of sthula, suksma and para, the "gross 
meditation” referring to ritualistic mantra practice, the “subtle meditation” to 
yoga in the sense of the rise of the Energy through the cakras and mull s, and the 
supreme meditation” to jndna. 

No doubt, the greater part of the Tantra is devoted to the mantra, including 
its revelation, the theory underlying it, and its manifold applications in rituals, 
initiation, protection, healing, magic and the like. 

If the goal of the Tantra and its practice is mrtyujit, the overcoming of death, 
this is again to be understood at three levels. At the sthula or physical level, with 
the practice of mantra, ritual and magic, the aim is to overcome disease, unnatural 
and untimely death ( apamrtyu ), as well as other obstacles from evil forces. In the 





THE YOGA OF THE NETRA TANTRA 7 


dialogue between the Devi and Siva Amrtesa, it is repeatedly stressed that the 
Devi is asking her questions “out of great compassion" ( atikarunyamdvistd , II.9) 
for suffering beings, and the kinds of sufferings are very realistically enumerated.- 1 
The solution to these is found precisely at the level of mantra and ritual practice. 
"Overcoming death” at the levels oi yoga (Ch. VII) and jndna (Ch. VIII) means 
something else, as we will see. However, the spiritual pedagogy of the Tantra 
is clearly implied in these three steps, for unless the practitioner or the jyogf is 
conscious of the suffering of living beings and acts out of compassion in order to 
alleviate them, his or her ascension to the higher stages oiyoga and jndna would 
be meaningless. Nevertheless, the motivation for the higher stages remains the 
same compassion, since even in the practice of subtle meditation, “the yogi 
fulfills his own self as well as that of others” ( apydyam kuruteyogi dtmano va 
parasya ca, \dl.5ab). Only at the supreme level of meditation “is there neither self 
nor other” ( nd/mm as mi na canyo’sti .... VIII.39-40). The Dev! invokes Amrtesa not 
only in his quality of being compassionate and graceful, but also as the one “who 
produces great wonder” ( mahdvismayakdrakam , I.16; and citrdscarya pra\>artaka, 

In)* 

Leaving aside the intervening chapters, 111 which reveal the mantra and its 
applications in ritual, the triad of sthula, suksma and para dhydna is taken up at 
the beginning of Chapter VI. Here the Dev! again picks up the thread and reminds 
Siva of his promise to reveal the Amrtesa or Mrtyujit mantra, “the life of all living 
beings” ( sarvaprdnisujcvitam, VI.2), which liberates them from all sufferings. Siva 
then proclaims “the wonderful secret by which human beings who are drowned 
in the ocean of suffering, who are afflicted by premature death, misery, sickness, 
fear, and suppressed by sins and obstacles, can be saved” (VI. 4-5). The secret 
remedy is the three upayas (VI.6). He briefly defines them: 

The ‘gross’ (sthula) consists of (external worship), sacrifice, fire offering, japa, and 
meditation, combined with mudras and yantras. The ‘king of mantras’ (i.e., the netra 
mantra) liberates from delusions, etc. 


9. For example, II.2-6 mention all kinds of diseases, poison, fear, unnatural death, etc. 
Therefore, the Devi repeatedly implores Siva by calling upon him as compassionate 
and graceful ( lokdnugrahakaraka , II.2, etc.). 

10. Helene Brunner calls Chapters III, IV and V “parentheses”! 


8 tantrapuspAxjali 


The ‘subtle’ (suksma) is the means of yoga with its energy centres and stages ot ascent 
through energy channels (nadx). 

The ‘supreme’ (para) is universal 1 sarvdtmakum . it bestows liberation and the yogi i 
becomes the Conqueror of Death Mrtyujit . \T. 7-8 

Ksemaraja paraphrases ‘universal’ as ‘supreme non-duality’ (paramadvayam. 
on VI.8), because clearly his paramadvaita belongs to the level of para dhyana 
(or updya). The extremely brief definition of suksma dhyana as udaya (‘rising’ 
or ‘ascent’) is significant, given that it is applied to kala and nadi, the stages 
of the rising of the energy (kalci meaning both) through the energy channels. 
The supreme one is ‘universal,’ as Ksemaraja explains, "because it is ol the 
nature of the supreme 1-consciousness ( mantravirya ), which is common to all 
( mahdsdmdnya )’’ (VI.8, comm., p. 127). 

After this introduction we can turn to the two chapters on yoga and jiiCina, 
which are titled subtle and supreme meditation (dhyana). 

SUKSMA DHYANA: CHAPTER VII 

The beginning of Chapter VII establishes that the chapter focuses on making 
the Energy rise “by the sole means of the nectar of subtle meditation” 
(■suksmadhydnamrtenaiva , VII. 4). The experience is one of filling, nourishing, 
and invigorating ( dpydyana ), not only of the self and body of the yogi hut that 
of others as well. This ‘filling’ with nectar ( amrta ) transforms the yogT s body 
into a divine body ( divyadeha , VII.5). Thus the entire exercise of this subtlejpoc/u 
leads to a divinization of the body, pervading it from foot to head and beyond 
with the nectar of immortality (amrta), or with the supreme Energy (VII.6). The 
processes vary, as well as the descriptions of the centres and channels (see the 
translation below). The most important point is the ingress of the Energy in the 
central prana. And here we find an extraordinary phrase: Only at this point the 
>'o^r‘becomes (an) ‘I,’”, (aham bhutvd, VII.7), and from that true T (ahum) arises 
the mantra. Here Ksemaraja is very explicit in defining that true T: “Becoming T 
means he enters/gets absorbed in the fullness of I-consciousness, by bringing to 
rest the individual subjectivity identified with the body etc. (i.e., prana, buddhi, 
sunya)" (p. 153). 





THE YOGA OF THE NETRA TANTRA 9 


In what terms is this process described? First, K$emaraja defines the 
process found in the first fifteen verses as kulciprakriyd (p. 147), which is more 
subtle than the subsequent tantraprakriyd (found in verses 16-51). A number 
of terms describing the subtle body are introduced at the beginning and then 
applied (without much explanation): cakra, ddhdra, laksya, vyornan, grcinthi, 
nddi , dhdman (VII. 1-3). K§emaraja does explain the three goals ( laksya ) as being 
internal, external and both (p. 148). 

The text goes on to describe the process of rising through these centres in 
the middle prana: first, it is the supreme Energy herself who is self-arisen ( svodita 
tu para saktir, VII.6), implying that the yogi has nothing to do but to allow her 
to be what she always is. Yet there is a subtle effort required to make her enter, 
expressed by the verb vahet: he should lead her, or cause her to flow. After the 
yogi is established firmly in the central vein and has become *1/ the mantra arises, 
producing a spontaneous vibration ( spandanam , VII.8). Significantly, K§emaraja 
identifies this with samanyaspanda, the universal vibration 11 . Obviously 
samanyaspanda is a characteristic of the para sakti. 

Th eyogi has to fix or concentrate his virile power in the cakra of the sexual 
organ (Janmasthana, the place of birth, rather seems to be a description of the 
female organ), and with the needle of the subde ( mantra) sound he pierces the 
centres (of the cakras ) while rising through the middle path (VII.9-10). 

Being established in that centre he becomes the all-pervading Siva, 
overcoming all suffering. Then he fills the heart with the same energy, and he 
should meditate on the elixir obtained (VII.11-12). Experiencing a state of repose 
he should make that nectar pour out and fill his body completely, “by the yoga 
of infinite meditation” ( anantadhyanayogena paripurya puram svakam, VII.14). 
Filling everything he becomes deathless (VII.15). This is the final state of the 
meditation in the way of kulaprakriya, leading to the transformation into a 
divine body. 

The description of the tantraprakriyd, which is relatively more gross than 
the previous one, begins at verse 16 (Ksemaraja, p. 155). The text uses a number 
of terms denoting “locations” in the yogic body, which seem to have been derived 
from different sources. Their exact locations are not always immediately clear. 


11. Cf. Spanda Kdrikd 1.19 with Spanda Nirnccya. 



10 tantrapuspAnjali 

The essential practice is described in verses ib-22ab. I ho yogi first establishes 
himself in the muladhara upon the central vibrating energy, from there he 
proceeds (always understood by way of imaginative awareness or hhavunu) 
downwards to the right big toe, described in Agamic cosmology as the region 
of Kalagni. The synchronization between they/oc/i's ascent through the tsubtle) 
body and the stages of cosmology is again hinted at. calling these stages by the 
names of their karanadevutds (The presiding causal' divinities;. Now the process 
is put in motion by the three energies, understood to be the vot/i's: first, he takes 
hold of knowledge or awareness ( vijhdna ), and then he fills it with the power of 
kriyasakti (VI 1 .17-18). Then the process of rising and piercing the knots is propelled 
by knowledge and by will (vijhanenordhvato hhitti’d granthihhcdcna cccchayd, 
VII.18). Depending on the vibration at the base ( mulaspanchun samdsritya). the 
yogi finally abandons the two flows of prana and apana to enter the central 
path. Resting there in the susumna he gives up the domain of the sense objects. 
Again, he rises by the upward pull of knowledge/awareness and slowly crosses or 
transcends the domains of the kdranas. He then attains the sixth centre, full of 
energy, called kundald and nirudhika. Piercing the knots of maya etc., lit* attains 
the heart, one of the five voids. For Ksemaraja’s details regarding this process, see 
the translation below. 

What follows now in the text is a brief description of these various stages: 
granthi, vyoman and kdrana are all to be pierced in the movement of rising. 
“By piercing the twelve knots {granthi) he enters the supreme state” (VII.25). 
Ksemaraja, in his commentary on the kulaprakriyd, explains this using the same 
expression and identifies this state of transcending the twelve grant his as the 
dvddasanta:granthidvddasakarn ca bhittvd paramum dhruvam dvadasantadhama 
vedhayedaviset (p. 154). Surely this is a much simpler explanation of this term— 
dvadasanta —than the usual explanation of it as “the end of twelve fingers,” even 
though ahgula is never mentioned! It can simply mean the highest state at the 
end of the twelve granthis or kald s. It may be that this meaning was so obvious 
that it was never explicitly mentioned. Granthis or ‘knots’ are the corresponding 
stages to cakras, in so far as they present obstructions in the rising of the energy. 

Leaving aside the other processes—the five voids, the cakras and 
adharas, let us come to two extraordinary expressions applicable to the whole 
experience of the yogi. In a kind of summary statement, the Tantra says: “All 





THE YOGA OF THE NETRA TANTflA 11 


the previously mentioned (stages, centres, knots etc.) should be pierced by the 
spear of knowledge” ( jndnasiitena bhcdayct , MI.scab). 1 - Ksemaraja gives a most 
enlightening interpretation of jnanasula: it is “the effulgence of Consciousness 
transformed into the vitality of mantra" (jndnasulam mantravlryabhuta- 
citsphurattd , p. 164), with mantravlrya being a technical term denoting the pure 
I-consciousness. Helene Brunner translates it as “le scintillement de l’Esprit 
transforme en energie mantrique.” 1 ' Ksemaraja develops this metaphor by saying 
that this spear of knowledge needs to be sharpened, and the Tantra provides a 
method for it ( yukti ). The method will be described in the text, but the starting 
point is the mu/ddhdra, which Ksemaraja justifies by saying that it is the cause of 
the source of prana, and in the Sastras it is given great importance. 

Being established there (i.e., at the source of prana), the .yocff experiences 
the khecaramudrd (MI.32-33). The verb used is vindate ; he finds or discovers it, 
paraphrased by Ksemaraja with labheta (‘he attains,’ p. 166). By this mudrd of 
“moving in the space of consciousness,” thejyo^I’s self is “sealed (or imprinted ), 
and by the power of this knowledge he ascends, piercing through the various 
stages, until he attains the highest place ( tatsthdnam , explained by Ksemaraja 
as “param sthdnarn dvadasantam ,” p. 167). Repeating the verb “to pierce” points 
to a kind of mental effort. After reaching the highest state, the yogi becomes of 
equal essence" ( samarasa ) and becomes the all-pervading supreme Siva (MI.34- 
35ab). This is a state of equality or harmony ( samam sarvam, Missed) and 
tranquility ( nihspandam ), which has arisen “in unity with the supreme Light of 
Consciousness which he has attained” (Ksemaraja: praptaparacitprakdsaikyam, 
p. 168). 

Once the yogi has attained the state of Siva, “from him the sakti proceeds,” 
explains Ksemaraja as he introduces the following passage on Sakti (p. 170), who is 
the womb ( yoni ) of all the gods and all the energies (MI.40). This is not a theoretical 
description of Sakti, but applies to the “filling” and invigorating ( dpydyana ) of 
the entire body and every centre (MI.40-46) until they reach complete fullness 
(tadapurya samantdttu paripurnam smaret puram, susumnamrtendkhilam 
paripurnam vibhdvayet, MI.46cd-47ab). 


12. Cf. jnanasula in PTV and TA. 

13. "Un Tantra du Nord," p. 144. 




12 tantrapuspAnjali 


This fullness of amrta does not remain confined in the body: it spreads 
out and is poured out in a movement of all-pervasiveness. Although the yogi 
from whom the three energies proceed is thus divinized, the lantra hints at the 
transcendence of Siva, even beyond that “ocean of nectar (VII.44). The state of 
immortality is achieved (VII.51-52;. 

In summary, the chapter on “subtle meditation" leads the yogi through 
the variously described subtle centres in an ascending way to the divinization 
of the body. This transformative and transcending process is in no way limited 
to his/her body; it reaches out to others as well. Otherwise the motivation of 
compassion would be meaningless. 

PARA DHYANA : CHAPTER VIII 

The very starting point of the “supreme meditation” (paradhyuna ) is an Ipanisad- 
like negative theology of Siva, who cannot be the object of any sense-perception 
or thought (VIII.3-5). However, the Tantric element comes to the fore. Although 
Siva is free from any colour or taste, he is also endowed with every colour and 
taste (sarvavarnarcisair yuktum, VIII.5c), while still remaining immeasurable 
and beyond the senses (VUI.sd). The yogi (in this context, K^ema raj a calls him 
parayogi) attains the same state as Siva, becoming ageless anti deathless (VIII.b). 
The Tantra refers to Patanjali’s Yogasutra when it mentions the two conditions 
necessary for th a yogi to attain supreme Siva: practice, and the highest type of 
renunciation. 14 He has to be free from passion and hatred and must renounce all 
delusion and intoxication (VIII.7). 

This introductory part provides, on the one hand, the metaphysical 
background to the supreme yoga, and, on the other, the ethical conditions for 
attaining Siva, the Supreme. Then comes an enigmatically brief mention of the 
means for this attainment: 

nimesonmesamdtrenayadicaivopalabhyate || VIII.8cd 
tatah prabhrti mukto 'sau na punarjanma cdpnuyat | VII.gab 

Here, Ksemaraja is silent: either nimesa and unmesa were too obvious to be 
commented upon, or he was at a loss to explain this unique means. Theologically 

14. Cf. Yogasutra 1 .12: abhydsa-vairagyabhyam. 






THE YOGA OF THE NETRA TANTRA 13 


the two terms refer to the two basic acts of Siva, as contained in the Spcinda 
Kcirikd: 

yasyonmesanirnesdbhydm jagatah pralayodayau | 

"By whose unfolding and enfolding [or: opening and closing of the eyes] the universe is 
dissolved and arises.” (Spanda Karika I.i) 

This refers to the macrocosmic activities of the Divine, but in the case of 
the yogi it may mean (as in my translation below) “by mere extroversion or 
introversion," which, with even greater brevity, K§emaraja comments upon 
with kenacit iti mcidhye (p. 181), “(by concentrating) on any centre,” external or 
internal. 1 '’ Understanding the implications of these two terms is crucial, because 
only by these does thejyo^f get liberated. 1 ' 1 

What follows in the Tantra is a complete re-interpretation of the 
astangayoga of Patanjali (VIII.9cd-2o). Although Ksemaraja had defined the 
&aiva yogi as “one who is a worshipper of Isvara by means of the six-fold yoga” 
(commenting on 1.8, p. 9), referring to the sadanga yoga of the Agamas, 17 the 
Tantra itself takes astangayoga as its basis, although giving it a new meaning at 
the supreme level. I refer to the translation below for the meanings given to the 
eight limbs, but let us glance at a few pertinent examples. One is the re-definition 
of asana, which has nothing to do with a physical posture. 

“Relying on the central prana in the path between exhalation and inhalation, and taking 
firm hold of the energy of knowledge, being established there (theyo^f) attains the asana.” 

(Vm.11). 

Asana as a physical posture would belong to the level of sthula dhyana. Even 
the disciplines of yama and niyama are immediately elevated to the level of 
the Ultimate; niyama, for example, comes to mean “creative contemplation of 
the supreme Reality” ( bfidvand tu pare tattve, VIII.10). Dhyana is meditation on 


15. See Vijhana Bhairava on madhya; e.g., verses 49, 61, and 62. 

16. Alternative translations of unmesa and nimesa would be: unfolding and closing, 
or expansion and withdrawal. Cf. Mark S.G. Dyczkowski (trans.), The Stanzas on 
Vibration (Varanasi: Dilip Kumar Publishers, 1994), passim. 

17. Cf. Vasudeva, The Yoga of the Malincvijayottara Tantra, Tables on pp. 368, 379,380. 



14 TANTRAPUSPANJALI 


the “non-meditable, all-pervading, imperishable, Lord mnihycyum ccnyuyurn 
vibhum , \HI.15b), because he cannot be an object of meditation. Samutlhi 
or samdclhdna is understood progressively in tour ways, also playing with the 
etymology or nirvacana of sama and dclhdna. One is the vision ot equality in 
relation to all beings (VIII.17). On this basis ot equality the yogi experiences 
the highest absorption: “I am Siva without a second" {sivo hum udvitiyo 'hum, 
VIII.18). When one’s true essential nature in the form ot pure consciousness 
is spontaneously realized, this is the third stage (according to Ksemaraja, this 
corresponds to anupdya , VIII.19). The fourth is identified with sumbhuvopdyu by 
Ksemaraja, being the thought-free means ( avikulpopuyu , p. 18b). There, tin* yoc/i 
discriminates between consciousness and unconsciousness {cit and jucju), which 
calls to mind sattarka as the highest yogdhgu in the Agamas, s and he attains the 
highest, eternal state (VIII.20). 

In the definition of samadhi one can discern a special feature of the Nctru 
Tantra : it is not only a question of the yogi attaining his or her perfection and 
freedom from death, but also of attaining a state of equality with all beings. Once 
again, this is the goal of the approach that makes compassion one’s motivation, 
as in the repeated questions of the Devi. 

By means of this kind of astdihgayoga , the yogi overcomes Death/Time 
and becomes Amrtesa (VIII.21-22), which implies a state of transcendence of 
the thirty-six tattvas and the Six-fold Path. But this transcendence implies an 
immanence, since he becomes the very life of all beings and pervades every 
mantra (VIII.23). In fact he attains an incomparable state, having attained the 
totality (VIII.24-25). The stability ( dhruvam , VIII.26) of such a state is stressed 
repeatedly, since at the para level it cannot he a temporary achievement. At the 
end of the entire description of the astangayoga and its fruit comes a universal 
statement about the nature of the Absolute, which is pure Consciousness and 
which is revealed in all scriptures” (sarvasastresu kathyate, VIII.28). Whether this 
refers to only Saiva scriptures or to a greater corpus is alluded to by Ksemaraja in 
his referring to the universality of Consciousness by citing the first Sutra of the 
Sivasutra (caitanyam dtma, p. 191). 

18. Ibid., p. 370 and note 5. Vasudeva writes that “the Nctru Tantra [...] imbues the 
Patanjala model with Saiva concepts." For his discussion on the place of tarka in 
Saivayoga, see ibid., pp. 373ff. 






THE YOGA OF THE XETRA TANTRA 15 


Helene Brunner is right to say that the chapter could end here, since at this 
point the yogi has reached the ultimate state of paradhydna, “but it restarts 
by changing direction in an unexpected \vay.”'“ It suddenly speaks of a state of 
impurity “which would persist” unless “the yogi is not awakened by the Energy” 
(nirmalam na bhaved devlydvac c/iaktydi na bodhitam, \dll.29ab). It seems odd 
that the very condition for achieving such a high state is mentioned at the very 
end, instead of at the beginning. But the pedagogy of the redactor seems to be 
conscious, expressing a warning to the yogis of the highest order that they should 
not attribute their achievement to themselves, but to the divine Sakti. K$emaraja 
immediately quotes the Vijndna Bhairava on the necessity of the Sakti in order 
to experience “the entry into Siva” ( sacvimakham ..., Vijndna Bhairm>a v. 20). The 
(individual) self is to be purified by initiation and knowledge (VlII.29cd), which 
appear to belong to the levels of dnava and sdkta updya, and to the general 
Siddhanta prescription. Impurity consists of a vision of duality: Those who 
speak of another, they have not found the supreme Siva” (VIII.3oab). The warning 
concerns those who are “worshippers of (their own, limited) self ( dtmopdsakdh ), 
who cannot attain the supreme state” (VIII.30cd). Interestingly, Abhinavagupta 
quotes this line twice (at least) in his Vivrttvimarsini. 10 

These verses become clear in the light of the Svacchanda Tantra (rV.388-393). 
In the context of the stages of dtmavydpti and sivayydpti (IV.390-391), it says. 

Those who have not known the supreme Reality imagine (they have attained) the state of 
Siva. They are worshippers of (their own) self at the level of the Siva tattva, (but) they do 
not attain the supreme Siva." (SvT IV.2gicd-392ab) 

These dtmopasakas are at the dualistic level of considering themselves 
separate from Siva ( bhinnasivarupatvam ). This corresponds to the dualistic 
Saiva doctrine where the practitioner becomes a liberated Siva ( muktasiva ), but 
does not attain complete union with Paramasiva. The self of the dtmopasaka is 
kalpita, which implies it is both imagined and created, and hence artificial. The 


19. “Un Tantra du Nord,” p. 146: “Le chapitre pourrait s’arreter la, mais il rebondit en 
changeant de direction d’une fa^on impr^vue.” 

20. See The Isvarapratyabhijhd-Vivritiyimarsini by Abhinavagupta, ed. Madhusudan 
Kaul Shastri, Kashmir Series of Texts and Studies No. LXV, Vol. 3 (Bombay: Nirnaya 
Sagar Press, 1943), pp. 311 and 313. 



16 tantrapuspAnjali 


danger consists in mistaking the purified self for the state of Siva. as Ksemaraja 
quotes the Netra Tantra (VIII.30) in his commentary on the Svacchanda Tantra. 

In contrast to the criticism of the “worshippers of the (limited ) self,” the 
Tantra asserts that the essential condition for attaining the highest non-dual 
state is tlvrasaktipdta, an “intense descent of grace.”- This condition is nothing 
less than what is stated in VIII.;-ji-32ab: "As long as the supreme F.nergy has not 
pervaded (the body of the yogi) from foot (to head), the pure (Energv) cannot 
expand; so long as his self is not pure, he is considered a hound soul.” 

With these warnings, the question arises whether the highest state reached 
by theyoglin verses 22-25 is not also attained by an awakening through the para 
sakti. Either this part of the chapter is a kind of afterthought, or else leaves it open 
whether the yogi at the highest level is still in danger of being an dtmopdsuka, 
which sounds like a contradiction. 

After this the chapter proceeds with a description of the true nature of one 
whose Energy has expanded (vikasitayah sakteh sva rupum, Ksemaraja, p. 194). 
The expansion or pervasion of Sakti is reminiscent of suksma dhydna. I fowever, 
in suksma dhydna the entire practice is directed at the rise and expansion of the 
Energy. In both ways, whether as a condition or as the result of the dhydna/yoga, 
no achievement is possible without the supreme Energy, as Ksemaraja points 
out by quoting Vijhdna Bhairava 20 (“Sakti is the mouth or entrance to Siva”). 
Expansion of the Energy also means the unfolding of her three forms as icchd, 
jhana, and kr'cyd as she flows forth from Siva (VIII.33-34). The self of the yogi 
becomes all-pervasive and endowed with omniscience like Siva, fully satisfied 
(sarvqjnah paritrpatasca, VIII.36a), and possessing infinite energies (VIII.37). 
He shares in the two forms of Siva, with manifestation ( sdbhdsa ) and beyond 
manifestation ( nirdbhdsa ) (VIII.38). At this stage of pervasion the individual self 
has disappeared and, with an astonishing exclamation in the first-person, the 
yogi proclaims: “I am not, nor is there any other” ( naham na cdnyo ‘sti, VIII.39a).“ 
Here the Tantra goes beyond the typical style of revelation by giving expression 
to an ecstatic experience of the yogi who has attained the non-dual state. The 

21. Ksemaraja, p. 193 \yadi tu kadacit tLvrasaktipdtd gacchanti . 

22. This is reminiscent of some Upanisads, where repetition of a state of realization is 
a confirmation and an expression of intensity. 







THE YOGA OF THE NETRA TANTRA • 17 


ecstatic nature of this realization is endorsed by repetition, where no object 
of meditation ( dhyeya ) remains. It corresponds to the level of unmana in the 
Svacchandci Tantra (IV.394). The text illustrates this quality of being beyond any 
object of meditation ( nirdhyeya ) by excluding all possible focuses of meditation, 
leaving nothing to hold on (VIII.41-44). K§emaraja relates each one of these 
negations with a dharand in the Vijnana Bhairava 23 concerning particular 
practices of either focusing on a centre of attention or leading to a state of being 
void. The conclusion of all these negations is important: “Giving up everything 
(that could be an object of meditation), being established in samadhi, one should 
only abide as one with ‘That’” ( tanmayo bhavet, VHI.44.cd). The yogi attains the 
supreme state of the supreme Reality and transcends all manifestation (VIII.45). 

How is it still possible to perform any contemplation after reaching such a 
state? There is a bhdvand in a state of nlrvikalpa (according to K$emaraja in 46, 
p. 202) that leads to the pure and peaceful supreme Siva (VIII.46). It is different 
from bhdvand as a means. It is rather the power ( bala ) of this contemplation, 
which leads to the firmness of reflective awareness (vimarsaddrtjhyam tena 
bhdvayet, K§emaraja, p. 202). The need for firmness and steadiness ( dhruva ) is 
often stressed in the Netra Tantra. 

The Reality attained is One, it is present everywhere, it overcomes death, and 
it is gracious (VIII.47, where sivam is an adjective). It is the supreme Amrtesa, and 
the third state in the sequence of sthula, suk§ma, and para (VIII.47). In verse 48, 
Siva resumes his personal address of Devi: “What else can I tell you?” (48ab)—for 
there is nothing else to reveal after declaring this secret (rahasyam, Ksemaraja, 
p. 203). Although a state of nirdhyeya has long been reached by the yogi, yet 
the title dhyana is justified: “Having meditated on everything as Mrtyujit, the 
yogi becomes all-pervasive and is liberated” (VIII.48cd). And this yoga which 
overcomes Death/Time is difficult to attain (VIII.49-50). 

While the chapter might have concluded at this point, it returns to several 
important topics (VIII. 51-63). In response to the repeated questions of the 
Devi, who was concerned with the sufferings of living beings and asks Siva for a 
remedy to overcome them, Siva returns to the topic of compassion. Thej/o^fwho 


23. Vijnana Bhairava 28,122, 76,115, 88, 60, 62, 61 and 98. 



18 tantrapuspAnjali 


has reached the highest state should not keep it to himsell or herself. hut shouhl 
use it for bestowing grace on other beings. Once hi* has become Mrtvam java, he 
shares in Siva’s power of grace and is Inkdnuprahakaraka VII i. 

Siva also summarizes the three ways of attaining the supreme nectar of 
immortality that leads one to overcome death for oneself and for others ( \ III.53- 
54ab). Verses 54cd-56ab are reminiscent of a similar universalization of practices 
in the Vijnana Bhairava . M By whichever method and wherever the ytx/i meditates 
(on Mrtyujit or Amrtesa), he overcomes Death Time ( \'III.r>4cd-",ab i. The varietv 
of methods is explained by Ksemaraja as the three updya s: dnava (individual), 
sdkta (of the Energy) and samhhava (divine), which in principle contain all the 
possible ways to realize the Divine (p. 20 =>). The universalization of spiritual 
means goes further to include all vrata s (observances), all kinds of voi/a and all 
(spiritual) states ( bhava , VIII.55-56). It is the One (Divine or Kealitv) which is 
meditated upon in various ways, which bestows perfection (siddhidam, VIII.5b). 
Here follows an enumeration of different schools and Tantric traditions, whether 
dualist, non-dualist, or mixed (i.e., dvaitddvaita or bhcdahhcda). The examples 
given (Ekavira and Yamala) are revealing. The pluralism of ways to the Divine is 
clearly i nd icated: sarvasastraprakaren a , “by means of ever)' tradition," perfection 
is achieved (VIII.57). 

The concluding verses come back to the praise of the "king of mantra s," 
which is like a wishing-jewel for fulfilling all desires (cintdratna, VIII.58). It is 
the support of all the seven crore s of mantras and they then become efficacious 
by enclosing them at the beginning and end of each recitation. It is the Amrtesa 
mantra which gives life to all other mantras, and by meditating on it all is 
obtained (VIII.61-62). 

TRANSLATION OF CHAPTERS VII AND VIII OF THE NETRA TANTRA 

(A note on the translation: This translation of two chapters of the Nctra Tantra 
is based on the text edition of the Kashmir Series of Texts and Studies. It only 
selectively quotes the commentary by Ksemaraja, since the introduction has 
already provided context and interpretation for the chapters.) 


24. Cf. Vijnana Bhairava 51, 74,116,117, and 129. 



THE YOGA OF THE NETIIA TANTRA 19 


CHAPTER VII: SUKSMA DHYANA 

1. Now I will reveal the supreme meditation, the highest subtle one. 

Ksemaraja: Nothing is superior to that subtle meditation, however there will be 
the supreme one higher than that. He goes on to describe it: 

2. The six cakra s, the 16 supports, the three goals, the five voids, joined 
with the 12 knots and united with the three energies, the path of 
the three luminous abodes (Sun, Moon and Fire), together with the 
three (primaiy) ndciis, 

3. surrounded by ten nddis and 72,000 (minor) energy channels— 
having known the body (in this way), O Devi, 

4. with a host of channels, impure, riddled by diseases, but nonetheless 
above it, by the sole means of the rising and supreme nectar of 
subtle meditation, 

5. the yogi nourishes and fulfills his own self as well as that of others. 
He becomes a divine body free from all affliction. 

6. His own nature, his own experience ( svascimvedyam ), resting in his 
self, united with his self-pervasion (svavyapti) —that is the supreme 
Energy, self-arisen (svoditd), resting in herself, Siva, (ever-)present 
in the womb of (Siva). 

7. (The yogi) should cause her to flow within the stable central prana, 
between prana and apdna, (thereby) becoming T (i.e., realizing his 
true I-consciousness); then the mantra, established in it (i.e., the 
I-consciousness), present in her womb, is stable. 

8. Creating a vibration through the self-arisen (spontaneous) vibration, 
one should establish one’s own power ( abhimdna ) within the birth 
cakra. 

9. From that place, by distinguishing (the different) states, one should 
join it (the birth cakra) with the muladhara. By the application of 
the needle-like subtle sound (of the mantra ), one should pierce that 
(cakra) by means of subtle yoga. 

10. Having pierced the 16 supports (adharas) and the twelve knots 
(granthis), ascending by the central nadl, one should penetrate into 
the supreme stable (state) (=dvadasanta). 


20 tantrapuspAnjali 


11. Then one becomes established in it (that stable state) and attains 
the all-pervading Siva. (Such a yogi) foregoes all suffering by the 
power of the undisturbed, undivided Energy. 

12. Again, by the same path, filling the heart (with energy), by merely- 
entering into it he should meditate upon the elixir obtained 
(therein). 

13. Having attained the experience of repose, he should cause (this 
elixir) to flow forth from that place, and he should speedily pour out 
all of that nectar everywhere. 

14- Through the various infinite nadis and by the yoga of infinite 
meditation he should fill his own body (pura) with the supreme, 
infinite nectar of immortality'. 

15. Thus he becomes ageless and deathless, both externally and 
internally, 0 Dear One! Thus through Mrtyujit (the mantra or Siva), 
he fills everything through his subtle meditation, 
i6ab. Then that {yogi ) quickly attains perfection. O Goddess! This is true, 
and not otherwise. 

i6cd. Establishing himself on the base (=muldulhdra), 

17- the central Energy {kald) full of vibration, resting upon it, (th eyogi) 
should support his self on kalagni (in the big toe"'). Having reached 
this place and having obtained the power of knowledge, he should 
fix it ( niksipet ) exactly there. 

18. The Energy filled with this power ( tadvirya ) is the excellent central 
Energy of Activity ( kriya ). Through his knowledge, (the yogi) 
penetrates it in an upward movement of the Energy of Will (icchd) 
by piercing the knots ( granthibhedena ). 

19- Resting on the vibration at the base, and then abandoning the two 
streams (i.e., prana-apana), he should take support in the central 
channel called the susumna by means of the Energy flowing in the 
central path. 


25. Kalagni, “the fire of time,” is the lowest level of the cosmos presided over by 
Kalagnirudra. In the body it is located in the big toe. The Vijnana Bhairava prescribes 
a meditation on the burning of the body starting from the right big toe (v. 52). 







THE YOGA OF THE NETRA TANTRA ; 21 

20. Supporting (himself) upon her, (the yogi) should abstain from all 
sense-objects. Again he should move upwards through his (mystical) 
knowledge, free from illusion. 

21. Gradually giving up the Causes—Brahma, etc.—one attains the 
sixth (centre) full of Energy, nirodhika (‘the obstructing one’), called 
kundala. 

22ab. By piercing the knots of mdyd etc., (he attains) the five voids, starting 
from the heart/ 1 ’ 

22cd. The binding knot called mdyd is situated at the root of the birth 
cakra (Janmamule) in the place of birth for a living being ( pasu ). 

23. The five locations of the Causes are (governed by) Brahma, Vi§nu, 
Rudra, Isvara and Sadasiva. 

24. The knot called indhika (transcends) the restlessness of the two 
paths (of prana), (hence it is) auspicious (siva). Above that (is the 
granthi) called dipika, and above that the baindava. 

25. The great knot is called nada, and the supreme one is the saktigranthi. 
Piercing the twelve granthis one gains access to the supreme State. 

K§emaraja: (This is) in the abode of the nature of unmana, the supreme Reality. 

26. (Thejyogf) pierces (the abodes of) Brahma, Vi§nu, Rudra, Isvara and 
Sadasiva, and the abodes of Sakti and 6iva. 

(The five voids:) 

27. The endless void is called birth (cakra), in the navel is the second 
void, the third is in the space of the heart, the fourth is in the central 
bindu (between the eyebrows), 

28. and the one called nada is described: now the six cakras are 
discussed: In the birth (cakra) there is the nadicakra, in the navel is 
the excellent (cakra) called mdyd. 

29. In the heart is the yogicakra, and the palate is called the separation. 
The effulgent cakra is situated at the bindu (between the eyebrows), 
the cakra situated at (the level of) nada (forehead) is called the 
peaceful one. 


26. Cf. Vasudeva, The Yoga of the Malincvijayottaratantra, pp. 270-271. 


22 tantrapuspAnjali 


3oab. All the previously mentioned (supports, knots and cakras) should 
he pierced by the spear of knowledge. 


Ksemaraja: 


3ocd. 

3i-32ab. 


32cd. 


33- 


34- 


35a b. 


35 cd. 


36-37ab. 


37cd. 

38 . 


The spear of knowledge is the effulgence of Consciousness, 
transformed into the vitality of mantra (jndnusularn 
mantraviryubhida-cdsphurattd 

Seizing the support of the hirth (cukra i, one should c|iiicklv press 
upon its base. 

0 Goddess! Listen to the various names of janmadhura: the place of 
birth (janmasthanam ), the knob (kanda), the tortoise {karma ), along 
with fish-belly (rnatsyodara), and the root support (mulddbara). 
These are the five (names of) this place. 

The expert yogi experiences there the mudrd called khccarn 
(moving-in-the-space-of-Consciousness), 

and, 0 Goddess, when by this mudrd his self is ‘sealed’ (imprinted), 
then he gradually rises and expands upwards through his (mvstical) 
knowledge, and reaches the summit ( = upper dvadasanta). 

Th a yogi should pierce, pierce every cukra (sthunu), until he attains 
that supreme abode (= dvadasanta), through the excellent (mantra) 
sound, and he becomes unified (samarasa). 2 " 

He attains the integral state, and becomes the supreme, all- 
pervading Siva. 

Having become thus, everything (for him) is equal, still (nihspanda), 
and ever-arisen (sarvadoditam). 

Hence the (supreme) Energy manifests, ineffable, free from suffering 
0 niramaya ); being One, she manifests in the different states as pure 
Will, Knowledge and Activity. 

By the khecarimudrci, he fills himself everywhere, up to sakti. 

As long as the Moon (=apdna) has not risen, it is certain that the 
yogis remain established in the subtle, stainless Reality, the supreme 
one beyond all states; 


27. Helene Brunner translates: “le scintillement de l’Esprit transforme en energie 
mantrique" (“Un Tantra du Nord,” p. 144). 

28. Or: of harmonious essence. 





THE YOGA OF THE NETR.A TANTRA 23 


39. they become the supreme, all-pervading Lord, incomparable, 
free from suffering, having ascended that (transcendent state), O 
Goddess! 

Ksemaraja: The yogi who has thus attained the supreme Reality and is not 
different from it, “from him the Energy proceeds,” therefore the 
supreme Energy manifesting herself ( unmisanti para sakti) is 
described. 

40. She is the Womb of all the gods and all the manifold energies. This 
Womb is of the nature of Fire-and-Moon ( agnisomatmakd ), whence 
everything originates. 

41. The mantras, which are all tied together in her, become salvific 
(tranavanto ), and the resorption of everything is itself the supreme 
state. 

42. From her, creation comes forth, having agitated the supreme Siva. 
By playfully agitating the bindu, (theyogi) obtains the incomparable 
nectar. 

43. As soon as the Moon has risen, the supreme, the excellent nectar 
flows forth; these infinite waves of nectar should be meditated upon 
as they arise. 

44. Having obtained from her the pure nectar, one should draw it in the 
middle path by one’s own energy, O Goddess, and one should pierce 
the (levels of the) Causes. 

45. One should nourish and fulfill every centre in ordei, one by one, 
until one attains the state of Brahman. From there one should lead 
(the Energy) downwards and nourish (every centre). 

46. One should proceed along the path from the biith cakra 
(janmasthdna) (downwards) to kdlagniS" completely ( samantat) 
filling (the body). Thus he should meditate on the body (pura) as 
being completely full. 

47. (The yogi) should visualize his entire (body) as being filled with/ 
bathed in the nectar of the susumnd, completely pervading all his 
nadis, pouring through every pore (of his body). 


29. Cf. Vijnana Bhairava v. 52. 


24 taxtrapuspAnjali 


48. He should pour (the Energy; out, (therehv becoming all-pervasive, 
flooded by the waves of nectar. Having attained the ocean of nectar 
he merges/dives into that ocean of nectar. 

49- Beyond that there is (another) ocean of nectar flowing forth, the 
all-pervading Siva. Having thus become <of-the-same-flavour> (i.e., 
unified, samarasibhuta), with nectar pervading on all sides, 

50. he realizes by his own experience that his self is of the nature of 
Siva, possessing the energies of Will, Knowledge and Activity, having 
attained the state free from suffering (nirdmuyam). 

51. Having attained the state of Amrtesa, the subtle one, he becomes 
immortal. 

Having become immortal, he is Mrtyujit (Conqueror of Death), there is no doubt. 

52- That fortunate, self-possessed yogi cannot be subject to death. (O 
Goddess,) 1 have revealed to you the subtle (way) to overcome death 
( kola ); 

53- Except to you, O Devoted One, I have not revealed this (secret) to 
anyone. 

CHAPTER VIII: PARA DHYANA 

Ksemaraja: [After describing] the subtle meditation, the blessed Lord spoke, in 
order to explain the supreme meditation (paradhydna). 

1. Now I will reveal the supreme, eternal Mrtyunjaya (Conqueror of 
Death); after attaining him one does not return to this three-fold 
world of bondage, O Dear One. 

2. The yogi shines as Siva, omnipresent, all-knowing and all-doing 
(sarvakrt). I will (reveal) this (knowledge), after which one (needs) 
no further knowledge. 

3ab. Having obtained this (Reality), one becomes ageless and deathless 
through oneness with Him (tanmayatvena). 

3cd. That which cannot be expressed by words, which is eternal, which 
cannot be seen by the eyesd 0 


30. Cf. for this whole passage the Kena Upanisad. 







THE YOGA OF THE NETRA TANTRA 25 


4. that which cannot be heard by the ears, which cannot be smelled 
by the nose, which cannot be tasted by the tongue, which cannot be 
felt by the tactile sense, 

5. that which cannot be conceived by the mind, which is free from 
colour and taste and yet is endowed with every colour and taste, 
which is immeasurable, beyond the senses— 

6. attaining That, O Goddess, yogis become ageless and deathless, by 
(their) great practice and supreme renunciation. 31 

7. By completely renouncing passion and hatred, by dissolving greed 
and delusion, O Dear One, by renouncing intoxication and jealousy, 
and by destroying ego and pride, 

8-gab. (thejyo^ij attains the eternal, ever-new Siva, indestructible, supreme. 
If he realizes 32 by mere introversion or extroversion ( nimesea- 
unmesamatrena), 33 then due to (this realization) he is liberated, and 
will not be born again. 

gcd. He attains (this realization) by means of the eight-fold yoga, (and) 
not otherwise. 

(Reinterpretation of astangayoga :) 34 

10. Yatna means being ever-detached from the world of becoming 
(samsara). Niyama is contemplation ( bhavana) on the supreme 
Reality. 

31. Cf. Yogasutra 1 .12. 

32. Ksemaraja: “gets absorbed.” 

33. The Sutra-like brevity of this expression can be explained in the light of Spanda 
Karika III.8-9. Giving an example for unmesa, verse 9 defines it as follows: 
ekacintaprasaktasya yatah syadaparodayah, unmesa sat tu vijneyah svayam tarn 
upalaksyate. “That should be known as ‘awakening’ whence the rise of another 
thought takes place in the mind of a man who is already engaged in one thought, 
one should experience it introspectively for oneself" (trans. Jaideva Singh). 
Ksemaraja’s commentary on this verse as well as his quoting it in the context of 
Pratyabhijnahrdaya in his discussion of Sutra 18 should be taken into consideration 
for understanding the implications of both unmesa and nimesa. 

34. Quoted by Ksemaraja in Sivasutra Vimarsinl on Sivasutra III.6. 


26 tantrapuspAnjali 


) 


n. Resting in the central prana (=uddna) at the junction between 
the paths of exhalation and inhalation ( pranapanapathantaram ), 
supported by the energy of knowledge and establishing himself in 
that, he should take his seat ( usana i. 

12. Renouncing the gross state of prana etc., as well as the subtle one 
within, one thereby attains the supreme vibration, bcvond the 
subtle. 

i3ab. This is called (the real ) prdndydma, from which one never falls. 

i3cd-i4_ Leaving aside even subtle, supernormal sounds etc., which are modes 
of sensation caused by the puna s of prakrti and are experienced 
only by the mind, one should enter the highest state with one’s i>wn 
consciousness—this is called (the real) pratyahdra. This cuts away 
the noose of transmigratory existence. 

15 - Transcending the qualities of the intellect (dhitpina) one should 
meditate on the all-pervading, immutable Lord who cannot be an 
object of meditation. The wise know this to be meditation ( dhviina ), 
whose object is one's own consciousness (svasamvcdyant). 

16. When the supreme Self is at all times held (r Uidryatc) in 
consciousness, that is (real) dharand. This is defined as dharand, 
which dissolves the bondage of worldly existence. 

17 - Fixing one’s mind equally in all beings is called samadhana 
(absorption), free from mental representations. This is called (true) 
samadhana —all else is merely befooling the people. 

18. When one has a sense of equality for all beings in this world, seeing 
oneself and others as equal, (contemplating thus:) “1 am Siva, I am 
without duality!"—this is called the highest state of samadhi. 

19 - This is known as the supreme samadhana, in which the true essential 
nature, one’s own experience, the nature of Consciousness arising 

35- Cf. Swami Lakshman Joo, The Awakening of Supreme Consciousness, ed. and 
trans. Jankinath Kaul “Kamal" (Srinagar: Ishwara Ashram Trust, 1998), p. 12 for his 
commentary. 

36. Partly translated by Jaideva Singh in Siva Sutra Vimarsinl on Sivasutra III. 6 ( Siva 
Sutras: The Yoga of Supreme Identity [Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 2006 [1979]], p. 
144). 








THE YOGA OF THE NETRA TANTRA 27 


20. 

21 . 

22 clll. 

22 C’d- 2 j$- 

24. 
25a b. 

Ksemaraja: 

25cd-26. 

27. 

28. 


from one’s own being and the true nature of one’s own experience 
are realized. 

This is known as samddhdna, when one has understood that through 
the mass of consciousness and inert things (Jadatd ), (one realizes) 
the immutable, eternal, everlasting state. 3 ' 

The one who by this eightfold yoga is firmly established in his own 
supreme nature conquers Time with this realization and becomes 
the supreme Lord Amrtesa (Lord of Immortality). 

O Goddess! He becomes the Conqueror of Death, and Time cannot 
affect him any longer. 

He has renounced the thirty-six tattvas and discarded all the infinite 
worlds ( bhuvana ); he is above the eightv-first ( pada ) and beyond 
the fifty phonemes. He pervades all the mantras, he is the life in 
every being (sarve?veva hijcvanam). 

Being beyond the 38 kalas, being the end of all, he is in the centre of 
everything. Nobody can know his beginning, 

middle or end, but he attains everything, being immeasurable and 
incomparable. 

He attains the state of Amrtesabhairava, who is all-in-all 
(sarvasarvdtmamrtesabhairavata). 

Since the entire world is filled by one immeasurable one, knowing 
him one is quickly released from the terrible bondage of samsdra\ 
(one is) liberated from the three principles, (and one becomes) 
eternal, unmoved, stable. 

By this divine path of yoga one is not born again. Liberated from 
all the sense-organs, one realizes the unknowable, beyond suffering 
( anamayam ). 

The essential nature of the supreme Self free from all 
superimpositions, the form of Consciousness, is praised in all the 
scriptures (sastras). 


37. See note by Helene Brunner about progression in these four definitions of samadhi, 
p. 145 note 2. 




28 tantrapuspAnjali 


29. (But), O Goddess, (one’s own nature; is not pure, unless it is 
awakened by thedivine Energy. The self is to be purified by initiation, 
knowledge, and so on. 

30. Those who speak of another, they have not found the supreme 
Siva. Those worshippers of the self (at the level) of the Siva (tath-u) 
cannot attain the supreme state. ' 

3i-32ab. As long as the supreme Energy, endowed with the attributes of 
omniscience etc., has not pervaded (the self) with a complete 
pervasion from foot (to head), she, being pure, cannot unfold; she is 
said to be hound. 


Ksemaraja: He (now) describes the nature of the self whose Energy has expanded: 
32cd-33ab. Being established therein, this person knows everything, past and 
future. With the senses under control, that reality has the quality of 


33cd-3 4 ab. 


34cd-35ab. 


35cd-36ab. 


36cd-37. 


38. 


39- 


Energy. 

The quality of Energy is that wherever Will and Knowledge arise 
they take the form of accomplished Activity. 

O Goddess, within (th eyogi) whose self has become all pervasive, 
being of the nature of pure Consciousness, the wonderful blissful 
Energy flows forth from Siva. This Energy is known as the Supreme. 
Having expanded his own self, (the yogi) is endowed with the 
qualities of omniscience and the like. O Goddess, he is Siva in his 
shining manifestation, the supreme Cause. 

He who is thus endowed with infinite energies is omniscient and 
fully satisfied, his awakening ( bodha ) is beginningless, he is totally 
free, and he cannot lose (any of these accomplishments). Being full 
of these qualities ( gum ), the possessor of power ( saktiman ) attains 
qualities of the self in each category of guna. 

(He) reflects upon the multiplicity of differentiation (. sdbhdsa ), and 
yet he is beyond that, free from manifestation ( nirdbhdsa). 

“I am not, nor is there any other”—he attains that state beyond 
manifestation. This state is called the supreme state of Siva, the 
highest Self. 


38. Cf. Svacchanda Tantra 4.392. 





THE YOGA OF THE NETFLA TANTRA 29 


40. “I am not, nor is there any other”—(in that state) no object of 
meditation is found. His mind is immersed in the state of bliss; it 
has attained the <flavour of unity’ ( samarasigcitcim). 

K$emaraja: After attaining such a state, God reveals the Divine means 
(sdm bh avop cry a): 

41. One should not direct one’s meditation towards something above, 
nor below, nor in the middle, neither before nor behind, nor at 
either side. 

42. One should not contemplate any place within or outside the body. 
One should not fix one’s attention towards the sky (open space), nor 
should one direct one’s gaze downwards. 

43. One should neither meditate with closed eyes, nor by fixing one's 
eyes (open) without blinking. One should not meditate on a support 
nor without a support ( nirdlambam ), nor with the help of any 
support. 

44. (One should focus) neither on the senses, nor on beings, nor 
on sensual perceptions like sound, touch, taste, etc. Giving up 
everything, established in samadhi, one should only abide as one 
with That (Supreme). 

[Here K$emaraja gives examples from the Vi/hana Bhairava for these meditations:] 
for inside the body: Meditate on the Sakti rising from muladhara (cakra ), which 
is luminous like rays of the sun and which gets subtler and subtler 
until it dissolves in dvadasanta. Then the state of Bhairava will 
awaken. {Vijhana Bhairava, 28) 

for outside the body: When one perceives a particular object, other objects 
gradually appear as if void. Mediating on this void in the mind, 
one attains peace, even when the object is still perceived. ( Vijhana 
Bhairava, 122) 

for open space: One should direct one’s gaze on space which is filled with the 
variegated light of the sun or of a lamp. There itself one’s own 
essential nature will be revealed. {Vijhana Bhairava, 76) 


30 tantrapuspAnjali 


for below: By standing above a deep well or any abvss and fixing one's eves (on 
the bottom of the well or abyss), one becomes completely free from 
thoughts, and immediately the mind will certainly be dissolved. 
(Vijndnu Bhairavu, 115) 

for closing the eyes: In the same way, by first closing one’s eyes and meditating on 
the darkness in front, and then opening the eyes and contemplating 
the (dark) form of Bhairava, one becomes one with that (state of 
Bhairava). (Vijndnu Bhairavu, 88) 

for fixing the gaze: One should cast one’s gaze on an open (stretch of) land 
devoid of trees, mountains, walls etc. When the state of the mind is 
fixed there, then the fluctuating thoughts dissolve (bv themselves). 
(Vijndnu Bhairava, 60) 

for giving up any support: When the awareness has abandoned one object and 
remains fixed without moving on to another object, then through 
the state in between (the two) the supreme realization will unfold. 
(Vijndnu Bhairava, 62) 

for supportlessness: Meditating on the knowledge of two things or states one 
should rest in the middle. By abandoning both simultaneously, the 
Reality shines forth in the centre. (Vijndnu Bhairava, 61) 

for support: But once will and knowledge have arisen, one should fix one’s mind 
(on the point where they emerge) with undivided awareness of the 
Self—then one gains insight into the essence of Reality. (Vijndnu 
Bhairava, 98) 

45- This is called the supreme state of the highest Self. Truly, attaining 
the state beyond manifestation (nirdbhdsa), one turns away (from 
samsdra). 

46. In this way one should meditate on the Self through the energetic 
contemplation of the Self. (Such a yogi) becomes the supreme, 
peaceful Siva, of utmost purity. 

47- That is the One Reality everywhere: 1 " Mrtyujit, Siva. That is the 
supreme Amrtesa, the third, 4 " highest state. 


39 - Ksemaraja: i.e., from Earth to Anasritasiva. 

40. I.e., third in the triad of sthula, suk sma, and para ; see chapters VI, VII, and VIII. 






THE YOGA OF THE NETRA TANTRA 31 


48ab. O Goddess! I have revealed this to you, what else can I tell you? 

[Conclusion:] 

48cd. Meditating in this way on everything as Mrtyujit, (theyogi) becomes 
pervasive and is liberated. 

49-50. O Goddess, 1 have revealed to you the threefold (yoga ) by which one 
conquers Death/Time at till times. This conquering of Death/Time 
is the _yoc/u (that is) most difficult to attain. By its practice of yoga, a 
human being becomes Mrtyujit. 

51. By this_yoc/a, thejyoc/; united with Mrtyujit and desirous of bestowing 
grace on the world can grace all living beings. 

52. He is called Mrtyunjaya (Conqueror of Death), eternal, supreme, 
firm. Nothing is beyond him. 1 am declaring this as the truth. 

53. I have revealed this supreme nectar as three-fold. By its practice, 
living beings can become equal to Amrtesa, for (the sake of) 
themselves and for others. O Goddess, without doubt, this is 
Mrtyujit. 

54. By whichever method and wherever one meditates ( samsmaret ), 
by that very inner attitude the yogi becomes a conqueror of Death/ 
Time. 

55cd*56ab. Whatever one’s condition, and whichever observance one follows, 
by whichever (path of) yoga, (th e yogi) attains perfection thiough 

the various states. 

5 6cd-57. O Goddess! That One (Supreme Reality), meditated upon in 
manifold ways, bestows perfection. Whether in the non-dual or dual 
or mixed traditions, whether in the tradition of the solitary hero 
(ekavlra) or that of yamala, by means of all the sastras He always 

bestows perfection. 

58. Just like the wish-fulfilling jewel in the world, he bestows one’s 
desired result. Thus the king of mantras bestows the fruit to which 
one aspires. 

59-63. This ( mantra or Mrtyujit) is the supreme, powerful support of the 
seven crore s of mantras. Mantras uttered without the right attitude 
and fastened without power, devoid of [the proper] phonemes 



32 tantrapuspAnjali 


and syllables, (practiced) without guru or agama, defective due to 
the loss of tradition, or obstructed due to a break in tradition do 
not succeed, O Goddess, even after thousands of recitations of the 
istamantra-, (but even) if they are unsuccessful and devoid of all 
parts, nevertheless if they are enclosed at their beginning and end 
by this mantra that begins with the phoneme sa, these (obstacles) 
shall be removed, 0 Goddess of all gods; they are enlivened through 
this Amptesa (mantra), and they become successful without any 
effort by reciting the ista (mantra)-, there is no doubt (about this). 

0 Goddess! Meditating on these ( mantras) bestows everything. This is the 
truth. 

Thus, O Dear One, the entire supreme secret has been revealed. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Brunner, Helene. “Un Tantra du Nord: Le Netra Tantra.” Bulletin da I’Ecole Fran^atse d' 
Extreme Orient 61 (1974): 125-197. 

Dyczkowski, Mark S.G., trans. The Stanzas on Vibration. Varanasi: Dilip Kumar Publishers. 
1994- 

The Isvarapratyabhijnd-Vivritivimarsini by Abhinavagupta. Edited by Madhusudan Kaul 
Shastri. Kashmir Series of Texts and Studies No. LXV, Vol. 3. Bombay: Nirnaya Sagar 
Press, 1943. 

Lakshman Joo, Svvami. The Awakening of Supreme Consciousness. Edited and translated by 
Jankinath Kaul “Kamal.” Srinagar: Ishwara Ashram Trust, 1998, 2nd ed. Delhi 2014 
(Utpal Publ.). 

The Netra Tantrum with Commentary by Kshemaraja. Edited by Madhusudan Kaul Shastri. 
Kashmir Series of Texts and Studies Nos. XLVI and LXI. Bombay: 1926 (Vol. 1) and 
1939 (Vol. II). 

Padoux, Andre. Vac: The Concept of the Word in Selected Hindu Tantras. Albany: SUNY Press, 
1990 . 

' Tantric Mantras: Studies on mantrasastra. London: Routledge, 2011. 

Rastogi, Navjivan. “The Yogic Disciplines in the Monistic Saiva Tantric Traditions of 
Kashmir: Threefold, Fourfold, and Six-limbed.” In Ritual and Speculation in Early 
Tantrism, edited byTeun Goudriaan, pp. 247-280. Albany: SUNY Press, 1992. 

Sanderson, Alexis. “Religion and the State: Saiva Officiants in the Territory of the King’s 
Brahmanical Chaplain.” Indo-Iranian Journal 47 (2004): 229-300. 

• Meaning in Tantric Ritual. New Delhi: Tantra Foundation, 2006. 

—• “The Saiva Exegesis of Kashmir.” In Melanges tantriques a la memoire d’Helene 
Brunner / Tantric Studies in Memory of Helene Brunner, edited by Dominic Goodall 




THE YOGA OF THE NETRA TANTRA : 33 


and Andre Padoux, 231442. Pondicherry: Institut Frangais d’lndologie / Ecole 
Frangaise d'Extreme-Orient, 2007. 

Singh. Jaideva, trans. Sh’a Sutras: The Yoga of Supreme Identity. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 

2006 [1979]- 

-, trans. Spanda-Karikas: The Divine Creath’e Pulsation. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 

2007 [1980]. 

Srinetratantram (Mrtyunjayabhattarakah) with the Commentary Netrodyota by Acarya 
Sri Kshemaraja. Edited with Hindi commentary and translation by Radheshyam 
Chaturvedi. Varanasi: Chowkhamba Surbharat Prakashan, 2004. 

Vasudeva, Somadeva. The Yoga of the Malincvijayottaratantra. Pondicherry: Institut Frangais 
de Pondichery / Ecole Frangaise d’Extreme-Orient, 2004. 


2 


Svacchanda Bhairava: 
Blissful Spontaneous Will of Siva 

Advaitavadini Kaul 


I 

^TTTPT T^iprPT -Xl-HN't M || 

o/77 brail.madikdrandtltarn svasaktydnandanirbharam 
namdmi paramesanam svacchandarnvirandyakum 

"I pay my homage to the Great Lord Svacchanda, the leader of VIras. who is Beyond tin- 
causes—such as Brahma and the others—and who is absolutely perfect in his bliss, one 
with his Sakti.” 

- Opening verse of the Bahurupagarbliastotra, translated bv H.N. Chakravartv 


P-pai-KHnr | 

M j U't,PTTTT J^rr: || 

visvaikarupavisvatmavisvasargadikdranam 
paraprakasavapusam stumah svacchandabhairuvam I / 

“(Meditating upon the oneness with supreme consciousness), I laud Svacchanda Bhairava, 
the body of supreme light, underlying substratum of the universe, supreme being and the 
creator primordial.” 

- Ksemaraja’s opening verse to his commentary on the Svacchanda Tantra 

It was indeed a blessing and a great honour to be invited to contribute to 
the commemoration volume of a great, and at the same time, a very humble 
scholar, I andit Hemendra Nath Chakravarty. Panditji possessetl a fine and rare 
knowledge, especially of the Saiva Tantras and Agamas of the Kashmir tradition. 















SVACCHANDA BHAIRAYA: BLISSFUL SPONTANEOUS WILL OF $IVA 35 


I thought that contributing this paper on Svacchanda Bhairava would be an apt 
tribute to perpetuate his memory. It is an additional privilege that this volume has 
been published through the Indira Gandhi National Centre for the Aits (IGNCA) 
and that I have been part of bringing this task to its fruition. Panditji had a long 
association with IGNCA through our Varanasi office and we pay our homage to 
Panditji through the publication of this volume containing rich contributions on 
the study of a tradition to which he had dedicated his life. 

INTRODUCTION 

The present study has been inspired by one of my family’s most precious 
heirlooms, a beautiful miniature painting of Svacchanda Bhairava Siva (Plate I). 
This framed image adorned our home in Srinagar since its creation. 1 When we 
left our home at the beginning of the year 1990 due to the rise of militancy in 
Kashmir, this image came with us and remained a part of our daily worship. It is 
such an irony that our home was burnt by terrorists on the very day the copy of 
this image was shown on national television in a programme on Kashmir in July 
1996. Infused with a sense of inquisitiveness after this incident, I was personally 
drawn towards our deity whom I found at the centre of all our activities, be it 
mundane or sublime (spiritual). 

During my research, tracing the correlation of this image of Svacchanda 
Bhairava Siva and his attributes to Saiva metaphysics and its praxis among 
the Kashmiri community, I came across some more images of the deity. A few 
images were collected from various published volumes (Plates II-V), while 
others (Plates VI-IX) were identified in the digital collection of IGNCA from the 
Oriental Research Library of Jammu and Kashmir State. Since the tradition of 
worshipping the deity has remained very close and traces of this worship can 
now be identified in a few surviving ritual practices among our community, we 
can expect more images/ paintings of Svacchanda Bhairava which are in the 
possession of many Kashmiri families. 


1. The size of the painting was measured at 27-5xi7cms during the process of treatment 
for its conservation. It was also found to be drawn on an office file-covei of yellow 
colour with the year 189... printed on it, thus establishing its creation more than a 
hundred years ago. 



36 TANTRAPUSPANJALI 


BACKGROUND AND CONTINUITY OF THE TRADITION 

The human urge to search for the creator of this universe has resulted in various 
thought-provoking speculations and visualizations. The Vedas visualised 
Hiranyagarbha, ‘One who brought this universe out of himself.' and the Puranas 
refer to the same concept as Visnu, ‘one who pervades all,' or as Siva, ‘the 
auspicious one’. Hiranyagarbha also represents the Sun, because in our solar 
system it is the Sun that is the source of energy, whereby all activities and all life 
become possible. One has to be aware of the reality that the supreme power or 
supreme consciousness which becomes manifest in the form of the Sun before 
us is also present within us. 

Every mantra describes the glory of a devatti, i.e., a particular manifestation 
of the supreme truth. The recitation of a particular mantra amounts to the 
worship of the supreme truth in that particular dcvutci or manifestation. The 
devata of the Gayatrl mantra is the Sun. In this mantra, the Sun is introduced 
as Savita, he who creates, protects, and sustains all life in this universe 
through his power, namely Bhargah, which means light or consciousness 
in the context of our discussion. The entire universe is a combination of two 
saktis (powers), viz. kriya (action) and jnana (knowledge), represented in the 
Gayatrl mantra by Savita and Bhargah respectively. Attention may be drawn to 
a very interesting term, Gayatrlvallabha (Lord of Gayatrl), as an epithet of Siva.* 
Siva in the Vedas is referred to as Rudra, who pervades the whole universe. 
Everything that exists is but his form.-- In the Satapathabrdhmana (XI 3.2), 
all elements, the Sun, the Moon and so on are consecrated with Satarudrlya 
offerings for the omniscience of Rudra. * 3 4 Siva is described as such in major 
Puranas. For example, the KurmaPurana refers to Siva by his eight names: Rudra, 
Bhava, Sarva, Isana, Pasupati, Bhlma, Ugra and Mahadeva (KP I.10.26). These 
names are further identified with eight cosmic forms, viz. the sun, water, earth, 
fire, wind, ether, initiated brahmancis and the moon, respectively (KP 1 .10.27). 
Hence, in Vedic and Pauranic traditions, Siva has been accepted as the creator 
who embodies everything as universal consciousness. This very idea is basic 

2. Stvamahapurdna, Kotirudrasamhita, 36.65. 

3 - See the Rudradhyaya. 

4 - Kdnvasatapathabrdhmana VI, ed. and trans. by Swaminathan (New Delhi: Indira 
Gandhi National Centre for the Arts, 2011), pp. 73-87. 





SVACCHANDA BHA1RAVA: BLISSFUL SPONTANEOUS WILL OF $IVA 37 


to all schools of Saiva philosophy. Siva is worshipped by both Vedic as well as 
Tantric practitioners in all types of ritual practices, viz. nitya (daily), naimittika 
(occasional), and kamya (specific). 

We have also seen that the identification of the Sun with the supreme 
consciousness has been a phenomenon throughout the tradition. This 
identification can be seen in a concretised form in the Adityahrdayam, a stotra 
from Valmlki’s Ramayana. Aditya, meaning the Sun, may be explained in the 
title of this mystical stotra as ‘one who is shining in the heart.’ Therefore, ‘Heart 
of Aditya’ means the all-pervading light of consciousness in the cosmic form 
of the Sun that illuminates everything. Meditation on the Sun in the heart and 
reciting this stotra is believed even today to enable a practitioner to conquer all 
types of enemies, external ( adhibhautika) as well as internal ( adhyatmika ). The 
Adityahrdayam is widely revered as one of the most powerful stotras, and this 
is certainly true in Kashmir as well. The creation of the marvellous Sun temple 
in Kashmir during the 8th century ce provides further evidence of the history 
of Sun worship in Kashmir. Martanda, meaning ‘one who infuses life into the 
egg of the universe,’ is one of the famous Sun temples of ancient India created 
at a significantly chosen location in Kashmir, with sculptures of the Sun god in 
various forms. The identification of the surviving forms (along with attributes) 
with textual references may shed further light on the complementarity of 
theory and praxis in this respect. Another important reference regarding the 
identification of the Sun with supreme consciousness is the Sambapahcdsika. 
This is a mystical hymn dedicated to the Sun of consciousness and has remained 
a prominent stotra among Kashmiri Saivas to the present day. 5 Though of an 
unknown date, 6 it presents both Vedic and Tantric symbolism through its most 
appealing, poetic, and heart-touching verses in praise of the Sun, an existing 
entity that illuminates the universe and as the supreme consciousness hidden in 


5. See Bettina Baumer, “Surya in a Saiva Perspective: the Sambapahcasika, A Mystical 
Hymn of Kashmir and Its Commentary by Ksemaraja,” in Sahrdaya: Studies in 
Indian and South East Asian Art in Honour of Dr. R. Nagaswamy, ed. Bettina Baumer 
et aL (Chennai: Tamil Arts Academy, 2006). 

6. The author of this hymn is Samba, believed to be the son of Srikrsna, who composed 
this mystical hymn on the advice of his father to please the Sun god in order to get 
cured of his skin disease (see Varaha Purana, Ch. 171). 




38 TANTRAPUSPANJALI 


the inner heart of evert' individual. The only available commentary by Ksemaraja 
(11th century CE) has interpreted it from the Trika Saiva perspective. 

Srlmadbhagavadyitdi, the ‘song eternal’, has always remained an integral 
part of the recitation, contemplation and study of sadJiakas and scholars alike 
across India. Many commentaries have explored its mystical meanings and 
teachings to help even a common individual face challenges and load a balanced 
and spiritual life. Adi Sankara’s commentary from a Yedantic perspective is one 
of the most well-recognised commentaries. There are some significant points 
worth noting regarding the study of the Bhayavudyitd in Kashmir. The text of the 
Kashmiri recension has variations at many places from the rest of the available 
texts of the Bhayavudyitd. The most important studv is the (Jltdrthasaipyraha 
of Acaraya Ahhinavagupta, in which he presents a unique untierstanding of the 
Bhayavudyitd. By bringing out its hidtlen meanings and adding a satpyraha sloku 
at the end of each of its eighteen chapters, Ahhinavagupta has presented in a 
condensed form the idea expressed in each chapter. He emphasises the essence 
of its teaching, which is paramadvaita, supreme oneness anti the realization of 
supreme truth. In addition, we come to know from this work of Ahhinavagupta 
that there existed a long line of teachers and scholars in Kashmir who taught anti 
studied the Bhayavudyitd. There also exists an elaborate commentary named 
Sarvatohhadra written by Ramakantha" of Kashmir before Ahhinavagupta. His 
emphasis was on the equal importance of both jncina anti karma (Jhdna-karma- 
samuccayavada) recognized in the non-dual Saivism of Kashmir. A noteworthy 
point may he added here about the visualization of the true self as Visvarupa, the 
creator and destroyer of this universe, seen only by Arjuna through divine eyes 
granted to him just for that moment, as described in the Bhayavudyitd (Chs. 10 
and 11). Attempts have been made to capture that form by artists to express that 
experience in a large number of sculptures and paintings of Visvarupa. The basic 
idea behind all this is to experience oneness between the microcosm and the 
macrocosm. 

The Puranas and the Tantras are replete with dhycina mantras of the gods 
and goddesses in different forms and with different attributes. According to 


7 - See Rhagavadgita with Commentary Sarvatohhadra by Ramakantha, ed. M.S. Kaul 
Shastri (Bombay: Nimaya Sagar Press, 1943). 












Pi. II. Svat ( harula H)i<iira\ a. 
Manifestations of Siva. Stella kramrisch. 


























PL \ I- Svacchanda Bhairava, Oriental 
Library, J&K, I( i \(.A digital collect ion. 



PI. \ II. Svacchanda Bhairava. ()riental Libra rv, 
LVk. I(i\(..\ digital collection. 



PL VIII. Svacchanda Bhairava, Oriental Library, J&K, IONCA digital collection. 












s 


Pi. XI. Pandit Krishnajoo 
Razdan( 1850-1926) with tilaka as 
symbol of Third Eye. 

















Aghora (South Face) 
nilotpaladalaprabham - like 
blue lotus 

Sadyojata (West Face) 
candrarbudapratlkasam -moon li^e 
off-white 

Candrako{ipratTkasam - Halo ^ 
behind each head represents the 
radiance of Free Will 

1. Khadga (Sword) power of 
knowledge cuts the bonds of 
ignorance 

3. Pasa (Binding Cord) for*, 
release in samsdra from 
threefold pdsas 
5. Sara (Arrow) breaks the_ 
cycle of birth & death 

7. Varada hasta hand 
conferring boons for 
blissful life in this world 

9. Mun^a (Skull) 
representing may a 
removes the veil of 
ignorance 

11. Vina (Lute) power of 
hearing, represents low 
sound 

13. Ghan(a (Bell) power of a 
identifying, represents * I 
medium sound 

15. Vajra (Thunderbolt) 

(upper three claws 
represent icchd, jhdna & 
kriya saktis and lower 
three claws represent 
three e$amyas (points of 
arrows) which a jiva is 
to overcome 

17. Parasu (Battle Axe) 

represents supreme truth as 
nada-sakti i.e. all pervading 
sound 

G^ja Carma Uttariyakam - 
(Elephant Skin) represents mdya- 
sakti that has the nature of covering 

Siipha Carma Paridhanam - (Tiger 
Skin) represents the nature of 
overpowering 


Vairagya (Absence of worldly desire) 
represents Vairagya i.e. northwest direction 

Jnana (Knowledge) represents Nairia i.e. southwest 
direction 


fsana (Uppermost Face) sphatikdhham 
^crystal like pure-white 

f Tripancanayanam - three eves on each 

I contemplation \iz. para, apard ct 



Tatpuruya i hast Face > 
a pit am - golden colour • 

N'amadeva (North 1-ace i like 
pomegranate flower or 
kumkum red 

Jatamukta - The locks 
tied up on top of three 
heads represent crow ns 


2. Khefaka (Shield) power of 
action removes fear of samsdra 

Ankusa (Fdephant Cioad) 
goads those m samsdra 
towards him 

Pinaka (Bow » breaks the 
cycle of birth & death 

. Ahhava hasta. hand 
bestowing protection 
for release unoksa i 
from birth <N death 

10. Khalvaiiga (C'lub) 
reminder to that 
consciousness underlies 
the whole world 

12. Damaru (Small Drum) 
power of grasping 
represents high sound 

14. Trisula ( I ndent » 
represents three 
powers of u did. jnana 
kriya together 
standing on danda 
representing the power 
of free w ill 

x 16. Danda (Stick) along with 
• a akti (in female form) 
denotes supreme law that 
controls this universe 


18. Mudgara (Mace) represents 
bindu-sakn that destroys all 
differentiation 

Garlands : i. Sarpa (Snake) represents mdxixa 
pdsa , ii. Gonasa(Gems) represents karma-pdsa. 
iii. Vrscika (Corals) represents dnava pdsa. 
Kapalamala (Skulls Garland) denotes 
identification o \ jiva.s with supreme Siva 
therefore show n as ornament 

Anantesvara (Most powerful I idycsvara) 
represents Anantdsana visualized as throne 
(Simhdsana) 


Aisvarya (Supremacy) represents Isdna i.e. 
northeast direction 

Dharma (Right course of action) represents 
Agneya i.e. southeast direction 


Pi. XII. Svacchanda Bhairava Siva with attributes. 





PI. XIII. Svacchanda Bhairava according to 
Snmatottara Tantra (MBI). 



PI. XIV. The Goddess Kubjika and 
Bhairava (MBT). 



PI. XV. Svacchanda Bhairava and Svacchanda Bhairava, Isvar Ashram, Ishber (Srinagar). 






















PI. \\ I. Xstadasabhu ja S.ink.i on 
simhasana: svmbolu representation 
ol (akresvari developed in calendar 
an . 



PI. XVII. Astadasabhuja Sarika, 
Oriental Library, J&K, IGNCA digital 

collection. 
















SVACCHANDA BHAIRAVA: BLISSFUL SPONTANEOUS WILL OF $IVA 39 


the Kuldrnava Tantrci (XVII.36), “Controlling the affliction of senses by the 
mind, contemplation by the inner being of the chosen deity is called dhydna 
Underlying this practice is the idea that the worshipper and the worshipped are 
one. The ability to visualize in a concentrated manner is one of the preliminary 
elements of Tantric practices of worship and other yogic practices associated 
with it. External images, different elements of worship, and repeated practice 
lead to perfection in which the meditator, the means of meditation, and that 
which is meditated on are realized in their essential unity. Then there are the 
three degrees of visualization, viz. gross, subtle, and supreme. Image may be 
taken as the gross form.jyantra or mandala the subtle, and mantra the supreme. 
Sound in the form of mantra is the absolute visualization of the vibration of the 
supreme sound (vdk), known as Spanda in Kashmiri tradition. 

There emerged a tradition of giving form to the dhydna mantras found in 
various texts, probably from medieval times onward. This is evident from the 
existence of the dhydna paintings of various gods and goddesses drawn either for 
meditation or for illuminating manuscripts, and also for distribution on specific 
occasions.* With this broad survey as background, we now proceed to our focus 
on Svacchanda Bhairava as a deity in relation to the Tantric scripture of the same 
name and the traditional praxis related to this deity. 

THE SVACCHANDA TANTRA 

The vast literature of the Saiva Tantras is traditionally classified according 
to deity, doctrine, and the number of Tantras. The main division is the 
classification of the Tantras into ten Saivagamas, eighteen Rudragamas, and 
sixty-four Bhairavagamas. These are further divided into groups and subgroups. 
The SrikanthI Samhita describes the sixty-four as monistic Bhairavagamas. The 
Svacchanda Tantra, associated with the worship of Svacchanda Bhairava Siva, is 
the principal Tantra in the group of Bhairava Saiva Tantras. This group of eight 
Bhairava Tantras is described as an expansion of Svacchanda Bhairava: 


8. For example, in Kashmir, the family priest would distribute such paintings among 
children on the occasion of first Caitra (New Year’s day), Gauri Trtiya (3rd day 
of the bright half of the month of Magha). It is said that this day used to be the 
convocation day of the Sarada University (now in PoK). Scrolls of horoscopes were 
also illuminated with such paintings. 


40 tantrapuspAnjali 


?fT?r | 

sTTWffiT wzr=w^: TTFfr^FT-^T ? || 

TT% 4^4'J| vrrffpTT: | 

svacchandabhairavascandah krodha unmattabhairavah 
asitahgo mahocchusmah kapdllsastathaiva ca 
ete svacchandarupastu bahurupena bhdsitdh 

Here Sarvavira, as quoted by Ksemaraja, has associated the Svacchanda 
Tcintra with the first four in the above group along with four others which are 
known as mantra pithas: 

'ip^r-gpr?:: wjij ^ | 

tT^I'H^ID'l ^|P> T^pfpr || 

svacchandobhairavascandah krodha unmattubhutravah 
granthantarani catvari mantrapitham vardnane 

In yet another classification, the Saiva Tantras are divided into various 
streams ( srotas ) of scriptural revelations emanating from the faces of Siva 
through his various forms. The Brahmaydmala (Ch.19) describes the three 
streams as Daksina, Varna, and Madhya. It also mentions the Bhairava srotas. The 
Svacchanda Tantra is referred to as belonging to the Daksina stream of Tantras." 
Further, by ranking these streams, Ksemaraja refers to them as Saiva (Saiva 
Siddhanta), Varna, Daksina, and Kaula: 

. | 

. tvrvrxd TfSpirq; | 

Tnr TT^iM J 7' ^fk || 

vedadibhyah param saivam ./ 

. saivadvamam tu daksinam / 

daksinatparatah kaulam kaulatparataram nahil l u 

In his commentary on the Netratantra (Chs.11-12), Ksemaraja names the 
presiding deity of each stream as Sadasiva for the Saiva Siddhanta, Tumburu for 
the Varna, Bhairava for the Daksina, and again Bhairava for the Kaula. 


9 - Quoted by Jayaratha in his commentary on Tantraloka 1:42. 

10. Quoted by Ksemaraja in his commentary on Svacchanda Tantra 1.4-7. 
n. Commentary on Svacchanda Tantra i.i-4ab. 

12. Commentary on Svacchanda Tantra 11.74. 

























SVACCHANDA BHAIRAVA: BLISSFUL SPONTANEOUS WILL OF $IVA ! 41 

In one more succeeding classification, the Tantras are divided into four pithas 
(seat/base/throne), viz. vidyd, mantra, mandala, and mudra. The vidyapitha 
has eight Bhairavas and eight Yamalas. The list of the eight Bhairavas is led by 
Svacchanda and followed by the other seven: Kroddha, Unmatta, Ugra, Kdpalika, 
Jhahkdra, Sekhara, and Vijaya. The eight Yamalas are named Rudraydmala, 
Skandaydmala, Brahmayamala, Visnuyamala, Yamaydmala, Vdyuydmala, 
Kuberaydmala, and Indraydmala. The Yoginlhrdaya, Mantramalinl, Aghoresl, 
Ldkinlkalpa and others are the Tantras belonging to the vidyapitha.' 3 

The Svacchanda Tantra ,‘ 4 also known as Lalita Svacchanda Tantra, 
is introduced (v. 1.5) as a compendium ( Samhitd) with four pithas 

(<catusplthamahdtantra), meaning supports, and as the source of knowledge 
in four folds ( catustayaphalodqyam).The four pithas have been explained by 
K?emaraja as vidyd, mantra, mandala, and mudra : 

mudramandalapltham tu mantrapitham tathaiva ca I 
vidyapitham tathaiveha catuspitham tu samhitd //'* 


13. Mahamahopadhyaya Gopinath Kaviraj, Tantra aur agama sastron ka digdarsan, 
trans. Hansa Kumar Tiwari (Patna: Bihar Rashtrabhasha Parishad, 2003 reprint), 

14. ^Catalogue of Oriental Research Library, Srinagar: a .Svacchanda Tantra Mss. 
nos i.844, ii.1718 (both in Sarada); b .Svacchanda Tantra Tikd Mss. nos.i.1051-3. 
ii.1052-2, iii.1062. iv.1663-1, v.2146, vi.2178 (all in Sarada); c.Svacchanda Tantra Sara 
Ms. no.2225-45 (Sarada); d .Svacchanda Tantrodyota Ms. no.2234 (Devanagari); 
e.Vrddhasavacchanda Mss. nos.i.1514 (Sarada), ii. 153 1 (Devanagari); 2.Descriptive 
Catalogue of Sanskrit Manuscripts in Gaekwad Library, Bharat Kala Bhawan Library 
and Sanskrit Mahavidyalaya Library, Banaras Hindu University Sanskrit series, ed. 
Rama Sankar Tripathi, Banaras, 1971: i .Svacchanda Bhairava Tantram Ms. no. C4400, 
p.776; ii .Svacchanda Bhairava Maha Tantram Ms. N0.3865, p.776; 3 - The Nepal- 
German Manuscript Preservation Project, Kaisar Library, Kathamandu, Tantra Ms. 
no.68, cf. Svacchanda Lalita Bhairava Stotram in NepaLarajakiyavlrapustakdlayasth 
ahastalikhitasamastapustakdn&msanksipta suclpatram, Purdtattvaprakasanamala 
18, Kathamandu, 1963, p.167. 

15. Quoted in his commentary on Svacchanda Tantra 1.5. 



42 tantrapuspAnjali 


Vidya is explained as the matrix of supreme reality, vibrating in the form 
of Svacchanda Siva. Mantras are explained as catuskula, which means that the 
mantras have four kalas (levels/degrees/parts), understandable also in relation 
to the four levels of speech. In gross form, om is known as catuskula. 

The letters a, u, m, representing Brahma, Vi$nu, and Hudra respectively, 
are also considered as mantras.' Mandala s represent innumerable spheres 
that make up the universe, described in Chapter to of the Svacchanda Tantra. 
Mudra means gesture and Chapter 14 of the Tantra precisely describes eighteen 
poses used during the interior worship of Svacchanda Bhairava. In this process, 
mudras are acted to imitate the attributes displayed by the eighteen arms of the 
deity. The Tantra at many other places also prescribes various mudra s during the 
discussion on different ritual practices. To explain ‘the source of knowledge in 
four folds,’ Ksemaraja says there are four individuals occupying four different 
positions in the ritual of Saiva dlksa. They are:.- samayl (initiate), putraka (spiritual 
son), sadhaka (adept), and acarya (spiritual master). All four are bestowed with 
fruition in the form of worldly enjoyment and liberation through the practice 
of this Tantra. The Svacchanda Tantra, with its predominantly ritualistic and 
meditational content, explains the queries relating to the practice of religious 
rites, ceremonies, and the traditional oblation rites. The main objective of 
the Tantra is the recognition of the identification of the individual self with 
Svacchanda Bhairava, also known as Aghoresa or Bahurupa, through the practice 
of the secret mantra known as the Aghoresa mantra or Bhairava mahdmantra. 
It contains the seeds of most of the rituals, particularly those practiced by the 
Saivas of Kashmir. The printed editions of the Svacchanda Tantra are based 
on manuscripts in Sarada script and contain a commentary called ‘Udyota’ by 
Ksemaraja, a disciple of Abhinavagupta. 

SVACCHANDA BHAIRAVA AND THE PRAXIS OF THE TRADITION 

Visualized in the form of the self ( atmarupa ), Svacchanda is explained by 
Ksemaraja as one who, out of his own (sva-) free will (-chanda), creates this 
universe. Thus, Svacchanda Bhairava, through his spontaneous free will, performs 
the five-fold act of creation, sustenance, dissolution, covering and bestowing 


16. Commentary on Svacchanda Tantra 1.69. 

17. Commentary on Svacchanda Tantra'j .232. 


SVACCHANDA BHAIRAVA: BLISSFUL SPONTANEOUS WILL OF $IVA 43 

grace. This activity is his krlda (play), and therefore everything is only bliss, in the 
real sense. As such, this universe is the blissful, spontaneous will of Siva. There 
is no difference between Svacchanda Bhairava and his acts. It is also for this 
reason that both the deity and the Tantra are known by the same name, states 
Ksemaraja. Siva reveals the knowledge of the Tantra in order to bestow his grace 
upon humanity', which is hound by limitations. His grace consists of both worldly 
enjoyment and (final) liberation.'* The revelation involves the performance of 
the rituals and practices at various levels in order to identify oneself with the 
supreme self. Beginning with the discussion of the manifestation of the mdtrakds 
(Sanskrit phonemes), the text teaches that one is to realise that all sound 
originates from the vibration of unstruck ndda and undifferentiated bindu, the 
state of paramananda, supreme bliss. Bhairava becomes manifest in the form of 
sixteen svaras (vowels) and BhairavT is known as th eyoni (place of origin) of the 
phonemes, representing the thirty-four vyahjanas (consonants). Thus, the fifty 
letters of the Sanskrit alphabet are the matrcikas (mothers) of all mantras and 
Tantras (scriptures). As the support of all the mdtrakds, Bhairava is the ultimate 
reality. He consists of three letters: bha for bharana (bearing), ra for ravana 
(resonating), and va for vamana (emitting). Known as Ni§kala Bhattaraka, he 
should be worshipped with the sixteen (vowels), and Ni§kala Bhattarika, identical 
to him, should be worshipped with the thirty-four (consonants). Emitting the 
light of BhairavT in seven directions are the seven mothers (mdtrakds) with 
their specific names. Manifest in the form of seven groups of letters, these seven 
mdtrakds are associated with the worship of Svacchanda Bhairava. This worship 
can be performed at two levels, para (subtle) and apara (gross), according to the 
Tantra. 1 -’ 

The mantras become manifest on the basis of the mdtrakds. Worship with 
mdtrakds incorporates the use of various types of mantras, e.g., blja mantras, dsana 
mantras, murti mantras, dhyana mantras, etc. All mantras have an associated 
deity to be meditated upon by the sddhaka. The mdtrakds are supported by 
mandalas (diagrams) in order to explain their subtle meaning and mantras are 
supported by mudras (gestures) to make an act of the gross forms during the 


18. Commentary on Svacchanda Tantrai. 1-3. 

19. Svacchanda Tantra 1.32-36 with commentary. 





44 TANTRAPUSPANJALI 


ritual performance. This knowledge is for both internal as well as external growth 
and both culminate finally in supreme Siva, known as Svacchanda Bhairava, who 
is the supreme deity of the Tantra. 

The process of worshipping the mdtrakds (in subtle form) begins with the 
dsana mantra(s). Bhairava's presence (in subtle form) in the group of sixteen 
mdtrakds (i.e., the vowels) has already been noted. Each mdtrakd is considered 
as an abode and each identifies with a particular vibration {spatula). The Tantra 
further says that the thirteenth vowel in this group is ‘o' By adding a bindu, it 
becomes 'om,' i.e., Pranava, the supreme reality. Here it is known as ‘ trayodasam 
(dhaman )’ and the dsana (seat) of Ananta Bhattaraka. It is appropriately 
designated with its three locations in body. The seat located below is identified 
with the seat (of sadhana ) from Nirodhika to Ajhacakra hija. This is the abode 
of the Vidyesvaras. The next seat located in the middle is the abode of VyapinI, 
and finally Unmana is the highest seat, located at the top. At this dsana is the 
pervasion of the manifold universe, which also has infinite (ananta) forms going 
lower and lower. By uniting all seats located below with the dsana mantras, the 
sadhaka contemplates on a single support (dsana) conceived as a lotus with its 
parts, i.e., leaves, stem, and pericarp. He places Soma (moon), Surya (sun), and 
Agni (fire) in these parts respectively, along with their presiding deities, Brahma, 
Visnu, and Mahesa. By this practice the body of the sadhaka should become 
manifest as Bhairava, according to the Tantra. The essence of this practice is to 
experience the unity of all objects of knowledge ( prameya ), means of knowledge 
(pramana ), and knowing subjects ( pramdtr). 2 " 

For dissolution of the limited state (anutva), the sadhaka should settle himself 
in the murti mantra, i.e., ‘hamsa,’ meaning that ‘the limited self is identical with 
the supreme self.’ This provides the ignition for all mantras, just as aranl kindling 
ignites the fire for yajha. This mantra has an oscillating nature, which is the 
sound ‘h’ together with bindu, representing undifferentiated awareness of all 
knowledge uttered as mantra. Here murti means the establishment of the self 
as form, on account of the loss of awareness of the pervasion of duality and on 
account of the emergence of the state of the pure self. The sadhaka should reflect 
upon ( vimarset ) and visualize this form. This effort is undertaken in order to 


20. Svacchanda Tantra i.37cd-38 with commentary. 








SVACCHANDA BHAIRAVA: BLISSFUL SPONTANEOUS WILL OF $IVA 45 

pierce through the knot of the forehead and enter the abode of andhata nada, the 
‘unstruck sound,’ that is the abode of the self-sounding ( svasvanam ). Being the 
form of resonance ( dhvani ), it has the form of reflective T awareness. It is lustrous 
like white snow ( tuhinaprabhd ). The light of consciousness ( ahamvimarsa 
rupcim) has been explained as the blossoms of the round-shaped Kadamba 
flower. The 7 r/A'a Hrdaya, quotes Ksemaraja, says that “through the emergence 
of Bhairava on Ananta ( dsana ), there is the intermediate state ( pardpara ), 
and by merely touching it, the limited nature (of individuality) gets dissolved.” 
Above this consciousness, it is stated, one should first contemplate Svacchanda 
Bhairava with form ( sakala ). The difference between the contemplation on 
Bhairava with form (sakala), being in the state of Bhairava (Bhairavabhdva), and 
Bhairava without form ( niskala ), is solely based on imagination, as the Tantra 
makes clear . 21 

Devoted to receiving the grace of Siva, the sddhaka visualizes the five faces of 
Bhairava with the vaktra (face) mantras for the characterization of the pervasive 
nature of pure consciousness. These mantras are the four letters fromjya to va 
along with samhdra(ksa). At top of these letters appears the bindu, consolidating 
all into one. These mantras reside in the five faces of Bhairava, i.e., urdhva, purva, 
daksina, pascima, and vama. Only with the vaktra mantras, states Ksemaraja, can 
the image of Bhairava be formed . 22 

These faces are imposed upon the universal body of Bhairava. Standing as 
an axis mundi, it holds within it all tattvas, as can be seen in the following table: 



Tattva 

Vaktra 

BIja 

Di 6 a sthanam 

X. 

Akasa 

I 6 ana 

ksarn 

Urdhva mukha 

2 . 

Vayu 

Tatpuru§a 

yam 

Purva mukha 

3 - 

Tejas 

Aghora 

ram 

Daksina mukha 

4. 

Vari 

Vama Deva 

vam 

Vama mukha 

5 - 

Dhara 

Sadyojata 

lam 

Uttara mukha 


For visualizing the five faces standing as a single danda, there is a single 
mantra for contemplation : 23 


21 Svacchanda Tantra i.3gcd-4o with commentary. 

22. Svacchanda Tantra i.45cd-46ab with commentary. 

23. Svacchanda Tantra i.46cd with commentary. 



46 TANTRAPUSPANJALI 


‘>f i&TFPpi 

jA ‘<f 1 '*-)*" M 4 "+q I '-I 
m 'A i' si-'-ir-l 
‘q - ’ q i h A q M.;q i q 
‘*fi -iqJl 

om 'ksam' isdnamurdhne 
om ‘yam’ tatpurusavaktrdya 
om 'ram' aghorahrdaydya 
om 'vam' vamadevaguhydya 
om 'lam'sadyojatamurttaye 

For showing divisions, the faces emerge in their respective areas/directions. 
Therefore, each face is imposed with a separate mantra :* 4 

& ‘if i^lMq+qM TtT: (*3?st) 

& ‘<fi q4qq-q Iq Rtf: (t^) 

TfT: (TP-PT) 

& qrri t q q + 4 1 4 Rif: (Tfsnt) 
s*- ,7 f ^vj| 4Mq-+4N ;PT: (T^P - ) 

om ‘ksam’ Isanavaktrdya namah ( urdhvam) 
om 'yam' tatpurusavaktrdya namah (purvam) 
om 'ram' aghoravaktrahrdaydya namah ( daksinam) 
om ‘vam’ vamadevavaktraya namah (, pascimam) 
om ‘lam’sadyojdtavaktraya namah (uttaram) 

Among these, ks-kdra is placed at the top and is equal to the lord, as that 
is the undifferentiated state. The supreme power shines forth through its 
innumerable rays. Bhairava, who is the sum-total of the power of his own free 
will, takes different forms due to the expansion of his own power in its respect ive 
forms. Without power, expansion is not possible. It is only due to supreme 
power that the visualization of different forms becomes possible. Therefore, 
for establishing connection with the supreme power, the imposition of kalds 
(levels of manifestation) is taught in the text. Working to ‘open the doors,’ these 
kalas are therefore called ‘kavdta bharigl.’ As such, kald s are powers in the real 
sense. The imposition of kald s on the five faces of the Bhairava is indicated in the 
following manner: 


24. Svacchanda Tantra i.47ab with commentary. 


SVACCHANDA BHAIRAYA: BLISSFUL SPONTANEOUS WILL OF $IVA 47 

1. Isana (upper face) has five kalds: i. tdrci, ii. sutdrd, iii. tarani, iv. tdrayanti, 
and v. sutdrini. These kalds are together known as ‘niraiyana-padanuga,’ 
i.e., ‘following the untainted path of the supreme state.’ 

2. Tatpurusa (east face) has four kalds: i. nivrtti, ii. pratisthd, iii. vidya, and 

iv. sdntd. 

3. Aghora (south face) has eight kalds : i. tarna, ii. mohd, iii. ksudhd, iv. nidra, 

v. mrtyu, vi. mdyd, vii. bhayd, and viii.yard. 

4. Vamadeva (north face) has the following thirteen kalds: i. raja , ii. rciksd, 
iii. rati, iv. kdmyd, v. trsnd, vi. mati, vii. kriyd, viii. rddhi, ix. mdyd, x. ratri, 
xi. bhrdmani, xii. mohani, and xiii. martonmani. 

5. Sadyojata (west face) has eight kalds in the following order: i. siddhi, ii. 
rddhi, iii. dyuti, iv. laksmt, v. medha, vi. kdnti, vii. sudhd, and viii. sthiti . 0 

The manifestation of the universal body originating from Siva-Sakti in thirty- 
six tattvas is the gross state (of power) and the gross body is made up of the thirty- 
six principles (tattvas). The thirty-sixth tattva is visualized in three variations. 
1. Suddhatma, 2. Unmana, and 3. Para. Due to this variation, imposition is made in 
the body of Bhairava while keeping in view the expansion of tattvas (principles). 

After the imposition is made according to aparavydpti as gross manifestation 
(as explained above), the imposition is to be made now according to suksmavyapti 
(subtle manifestation) and paravydpti (pre-eminent manifestation) in the body 
made up of thirty-six tattvas. Here, the sadhaka should contemplate nine tattvas 
and three tattvas in all parts of the body. The nine subtle tattvas (in ascending 
order) are i. Prakrti, ii. Purusa, iii. Niyati, iv. Kala, v. Maya, vi. Vidya, vii. Isa, viii. 
Sadasiva, and ix. Siva-$akti. For their expansion, the imposition of nine saktis 
is also prescribed. These nine saktis are i. Varna, ii. Jyestha, iii. Raudri, iv. Kali, 
v. Vikarall, vi. BalavikaranI, vii. Sarvabhutadamani, and ix. Manonmani. The 
imposition of three tattvas is made according to i. Atma-tattva, ii. Vidya-tattva, 
and iii. Siva-tattva. This is also done according to the expansion ol i. Suddhatma, 
ii. Unmana, and iii. Para-tattva. 2T 


25. Svacchanda Tantra i.47-5gab with commentary. 

26. Svacchanda Tantra 2.68-7iab. 

27. Svacchanda Tantra 1.60 ab with commentary. 



48 TANTRAPUSPANJALI 


Through the imposition (nyasa) in all limbs (sarvarigesu), Bhairava Bhattaraka 
becomes manifest to the sadhaka. He sees this manifestation in infinite forms 
and perceives Bahurupa Bhairava as knowledge per se. Therefore, imposition 
of the Vidyaiigas is performed with the Aghora mahdmantru containing thirty- 
two syllables, to which is also added the Netra mantra. Nctra. identified with the 
third eye (see Plates X & XI), represents knowledge (vidyd). The procedure for 
this performance is given in detail in Ksemaraja’s commentary on the Tantra. 
This can be understood with the help of following table: 


iTpT 

f^rrpr 


TTTfb 

(body parts) 

(name) 

( levels of knowledge) 

(rank of mantra) 


3T 






l~r,T 

I. f&PIT 



w; 

<■ 


frpR 

V* 


& *T: 

RTfPR 


c -. sra 

(This is a separate 
mantra) 

HUM 

T^rrr&fTR: 

TvT 

Anga 

Vidyariga 

Vidyanga 

Jati 

(Body parts) (Name) 

(Levels of 

(Rank of 

1 . hrt 

aghorebhyah 

mantra) 

sarvatmci 

knowledge) 

namah 

2 . sir as 

atha ghorebhyah 

brahmas ircis 

svdhd 

3- sikha 

ghoraghoratarebhyah 

! jvdiinl 

vasat 

4- kavaca 

sarvatah sarva sarvebhyah pingaia 

hum 

5 . netratraya 

om jum sah 

jyotirupa 

vausat 

6. astra 

(This is a separate mantra) 

namasterudrarupebhyah durbhedyapdsupatyah phat 


Ksemaraja further adds that the six qualities of Bhairava can also be included 
with these mantras, which are: sarvajnatd (omniscience), trpti (contentment), 
anadibodha (eternal knowledge), svatantratd (free will), avUupta sakti 
(unimpaired power), and ananta sakti (eternal power). 2 * Through this whole 
process, beginning with the imposition of the dsana mantras, the awareness 


28. Svacchanda Tantra i.6ocd-65ab with commentary. 


SVACCHANDA BHAIRAVA: BLISSFUL SPONTANEOUS WILL OF $IVA i 49 


arises that omniscient Bhairava in his universal body is the controller and the 
refuge of all, and it is Bhairava who becomes manifest in infinite forms, hence 
the appellation Bahurupa. 

According to the Svacchanda Tantra, the secret meanings of the three 
saktis, i.e., kriya,jncina, and iccha, are the bija mantras ‘ ksim,’ 'sum,' and ‘ham,’ 
representing the power of illuminating creation ( sarvasr?tiprakdsikd ), the 
power of awakening to bliss ( prabodhajananisubha), and the power related to 
the immeasurable infinity of Bhairava ( bhairavasyamitatmika ), respectively. 
Bringing about the manifestation of this unlimited universe, these saktis repose 
in the all-pervading and yet unperturbed Svacchanda Bhaffaraka. To reveal the 
bija mantra, it is stated that ‘hamsa,’ consisting of two aksaras — ‘ha’ and ‘sa,’ 
meaning ‘cessation’ and ‘receiving back,’ respectively—symbolizes the nature 
of dissolution and manifestation of everything in this universe. The origin of 
this universe lies in the resonance of the matrakas from ‘a’ to ‘k?a,’ because the 
seed of this whole universe resides in nada. Known as anahata nada (unstruck 
sound) in the Sastras, this eternal sound is not pronounced or prevented from 
being pronounced by anyone. Self-sounding Bhairava is being pronounced, 
meaning that this eternal nada itself is Bhairava itself, manifest in a subtle state. 
To the letter ‘h’, which encompasses the nature of oscillation, the sixth vowel 
‘u’ is added. In explaining this, the Tantra states that in the development of 
letters ( Lipi ) it is seen that manifestation takes place both ways, i.e., upwards and 
downwards. Therefore, ‘h’ symbolizes the unlimited nature of consciousness and 
‘u’ the limited nature of creation. Although pervaded by consciousness, creation 
gets entangled by the power of kriya sakti. By joining both the letters together, 
it becomes ‘hu,’ along with the bindu, representing complete oneness with the 
universe ( asesavisva-samarasya ), and the bija mantra of Svacchanda emerges as 
‘hum’. Svacchanda Bhairava, originally of the nature of self-sounding ( anahata - 
dhvani), hence without any form ( niskala ), manifests in the form (sakala) 
of mantra out of his will to grace human beings. In this way the bija mantra 
‘hum’ represents oneness between the mantra and the whole universe. In yogic 
parlance also, the bindu signifies anahata nada, which holds everything within 
it. 







50 tantrapuspAxjali 

Ksemaraja further explains this by saying that in the process aisudhunu six 
stages called nirodhikci, nada, ncidanta, vydpini, samand, and nuinonnumu are 
experienced, culminating at Niskala Svacchanda Bhairava. The differentialing 
(sirorupdkdra ) aspect of reality is revealed in six forms (susthcnasakurcna): 

1. It signifies the terrible cycle of powers. 

2. Brahma, Visnu, and Rudra are differentiated on its basis. 

3- It represents brahmanda, prukrtyundu, and mayandu. 

4 • It encompasses the states of jay rat, .wupw/.and susupti. 

5 - It is the absorber of knowledge, the means of knowledge, and the objects 
of knowledge. 

6. It also absorbs within itself the principles of' srsti, sthiti, sumhura, and 
vUaya. 2 ' 1 

All these are the special characteristics of Svacchanda Bhairava, who is in 
a real sense formless, and can be experienced as such hy a sadhaka. As already 
noted, the expansion of the Lord becomes manifest in multi-forms (huhurupu) 
and those forms are not different from his own self (sva), as it is nothing but his 
own splendour or joy ( chanda ) that he performs the five acts of this universe with 
his spontaneous power of free will. This is the secret meaning of Svacchanda. 
This process is known as paramlkarana (effecting the supreme state) with Sri 
Sakala Bhattaraka. The Tantra says that hy mere utterance of this 'fuimsa’ mantra, 
even a sinner attains purity like that of a crystal. The Tantra also emphasises 
the utterance of this mantra along with W and says that this is known as the 
Bhairava Raja Mantra Nyasa, as it is the bestower of unlimited prosperity and 
(final) liberation. 30 

Knowledge is the effulgence of sakti and the blja mantra of Bhagavatl is 
om hnm aghoresvarim bum phut! Aghoresvari, shining as the essence of light 
(knowledge), is specifically known as Cakrasvaminl. She is never separable front 
Siva, therefoie she is visualized in the lap of Svacchanda (svacchandabhairavus 
yotsangagdmini) and at the highest state of self-awareness, i.e., the unmananta 
state, as full of supreme light. She is visualized as part of niskala Siva because 
both are basically the same. The vaktra mantras are the same for Aghoresvara 


29. Svacchanda Tantra 1.65CCI-69 with commentary. 

30. Svacchanda Tantra i.70-73ab with commentary. 






SVACCHANDA BHAIRAVA: BLISSFUL SPONTANEOUS WILL OF $IVA : 51 


and Aghoresvari, and these mantras are both sakata and niskcilci because both 
are basically one and the same/ 1 

In the expansion of manifestation, Svacchanda Bhairava appears in the form 
of eight Bhairavas, together known as Bhairava§taka. There are also separate 
btja mantras for all eight Bhairavas named as 1. Kapalesa, 2. Sikhivahana, 3. 
Krodharaja, 4. Vikarala, 5. Manmatha, 6. Meghanadesvara, 7. Somesvara, and 8. 
Vidyaraja/- These dhydna mantras are given in the second chapter ot the Tantra. 
Eight Lokapalas are the controllers of this universe who are guarded by Para 
Bhairava manifest in the forms of the eight Bhairavas mentioned above. The 
eight Lokapalas, who are regarded as being beyond the purview of this world, 
are: 1. Indra, 2. Agni, 3. Yama, 4. Nirrti, 5. Varuna, 6. Vayu, 7. Kubera, and 8. Isana. 
Their astras (weapons) are vajra, scikti, danda, khadga, pdsa, dhvaja, gada, and 
trisula, respectively. Their mantras are also given in the Tantra/’ 

Japa (repeated recitation of mantras) and homa (offering oblations into the 
consecrated fire) are important to all types of worship, i.e., nitya, naimittika, and 
kcimya. The daily worship begins with the preliminary purification by means of 
taking a bath using clean mud ( sucimrdam ) charged with the sakala astra mantra, 
while following the procedure for it. The prescribed procedure for taking a bath 
should be completed by stimulating the remaining mud by the light of the sun 
seven times. Then, after applying the pack of this stimulated mud on the whole 
body (from head to toe), a bath should be taken with pure water. In absence of 
the sun, adds K§emaraja, stimulation should be made through ones vital power 
as the sun and the vital power are the same according to the tradition. 3 

The text also emphasizes the cognizance of the body of the sadhaka. This 
procedure is known as vidhi sndna. While approaching the yagagrha (place for 
performing oblations), the worshipper first worships the deities at and around 
the entrance gate/ 5 The yaga grha is entered while reciting the Bhairavastra 

31. Svacchanda Tantra i.73cd-76ab with commentary. 

32. Svacchanda Tantra i.76cd-86. 

33. Svacchanda Tantra 1.87 with commentary. 

34. Svacchanda Tantra 2.1-5 with commentary. 

35. Svacchanda Tantra 2.22-25 with commentary. This recalls a significant ritual practice 
performed even now by the Kashmiri community before entering th eyaga grha for 
performing marriage rituals. The ritual is known as dvarapuza (pujd). 





52 tantrapuspAnjali 


n' 'yii q 

mantra and performing the nardcastra mudra for removing obstructions 
first worship in th eyagagrha is offered to Brahma, who is described bv Ksemaraja 
as Vastvadhisthata (overlord of the oblation site). 1 ’ 

For the identification with the supreme self, nyd.su (imposition) upon the 
hands is made of Svacchanda and then of the eight Bhairavas, i.e., Kapalesa etc., 
with the respective nyasa mantras. 3 ' According to K$emaraja, after imposing 
the eight Bhairavas upon the eight fingers of both the hands (starting from 
index finger of the left hand to the same finger of the right hand)> one should 
contemplate the remaining two thumbs of the two hands as the supreme 
principle, i.e., Ni$kalanatha along with parts and with Devi, signifying that 
due to the expansion of power as kriya sakti everything becomes active in this 
world, represented by the two hands, as it is with the hands that we perform 
most activities. 38 For the destruction of the impurities of the body, the Tantra 
prescribes the exercise of pranayama, through which the worshipper replaces 
his impure body, from the lowest to the highest plane, with a pure mantra body 
equated with Siva, as is rightly stated “sivobhutvasivam yajet.” 3 " For absorption 
of the impure body, the ritual practices of Rudra blja, Agni blja, Vayu bi/a, and 
Varuna blja are performed. 40 After the impure body gets dissolved, it turns into the 
powerful body (saktideha) through the imposition (nyasa) of manonmaylsakti. 
By bringing this sakti to the centre, nectar overflows (amrtenapldvayet). 

The body gets impaired by the impure tattvas, i.e., kala, vidya, raga, kala, and 
niyati ; buddhi and ahamkara tie up the body composed of the tattvas from 
prakrti to the five elements. Though the supreme self is always inside the body, 
it gets covered by maya. As such, all adhvans must be cleared of obstructions. 
The sadhaka, through identification of the microcosm and macrocosm, 
visualizes the expansion of a cosmic lotus in his body, representing the entire 
hierarchical universe. At the top of this lotus he imposes sakata Bhairava (see 
Plate II) and subsidiary Bhairavas with their respective dhyana mantras. 41 

36. Svacchanda Tantra 2.26-29 with commentary. 

37. Svacchanda Tantra 2.30-32 with commentary. 

38. Svacchanda Tantra 2.32 with commentary. 

39. Svacchanda Tantra 2.33-35 with commentary. 

40. Svacchanda Tantra 2.34>38ab with commentary. 

41. Svacchanda Tantra 2.39-87 with commentary. 







SVACCHANDA BHAIRAYA: BLISSFUL SPONTANEOUS WILL OF $IVA j 53 


Through this process the entire world becomes an experience of 6iva. The 
encompassing effulgence of Siva is experienced in the entire universe. K§emaraja 
states that in this world there does not exist any god similar to this splendid form 
of Svacchanda Bhairava. 

The extensive depiction of the deity has been given in the dhyana mantras of 
Svacchanda Bhairava. K$emaraja’s commentary explains in detail the theological 
reinterpretation of these features and attributes. As the description and 
interpretation of the image of Svacchanda Bhairava remains the main focus of 
the present writing, and in order to get a clear idea of its characteristic features, 
attention is drawn to Plate XII, which is an oudine prepared with labels on the 
basis of the image of Svacchanda Bhairava. The dhyana mantras of Svacchanda 
Bhairava in the Tantra are as follows: 



^JrFFJTT TTR=T: || 


. tripancanayanam devamjatamukutamanditam// 

candrakotipratlkasam candrardhakrtasekharam/ 
pahcavaktram visalaksam sarpagonasamanditam// 
vrscikairagnivarnabhairharena tu virajitam/ 
kapdlamdldbharanam khadgakhetakadharinam// 
pasankusadharam devam sarahastam pinakinam/ 




54 TANTRAPUSPANJALI 


varadabhayahastam ca mundakhatvahgadJidrinam 
vinadamaruhastam ca ghantahastam trisuhnam/ 
vajradandakrtatopam parasvdyudhali as taka m / 
mudgarena vicitrena vartulena virdjitam/ 
simhacarmaparidhdnam gajacarmottanyakam ' 
astadasabhujam devam nllakantham sutejasam/ 
urdhvavaktram mahesani sphatikabham vicintayet// 
apitam purvavaktram tu nllotpaladalaprabham/ 
daksinam tu vijaniyadvamam caiva vicintayet// 
dddimikusumaprakhyam kumkumodakasannibham, 
candrarbudapratikcisam pascimam tu vicintayet// 
svacchandabhairavam devam sarvakdmaphalapradam/ 
dhyayateyastuyuktatma ksipram sidhyati mdnavah // 4 - 

Ksemaraja has decoded the above verses at length in his commentary. 
Accordingly, Svacchanda Bhairava has been conceived as having three eyes which 
represent the three levels of contemplation, namely para, apara, and pardpara. 
The locks of the deity are tied up on top like beautiful crowns on five heads, with 
the radiance of Tree will’ represented by a prabhCimandala (halo) behind each 
head. The deity is described as emitting the light of a thousand moons, which 
denotes beauty par excellence. The half-moon on the five foreheads represents 
the primordial state of the moon known as amptakala that fills the whole 
universe with its soothing light. The Tantra states that the five faces represent 
five subtle forms known as cit, dnanda , tcchd, jndnci, and kriyci of the Visalaksa, 
the one who is wide-eyed/ The wide-eyed one is explained as one who looks 
outside and who can also be seen in one's inner self. He is beyond creation and 
dissolution. The adornment of the deity by garlands of snake, gems, and corals 
of red colour represent the three pasas (bindings) known as mdycya , karma , 
and anava. These pasas undertake the play of connecting and disconnecting 
jevas with the Supreme Siva. Kapdlamala (the garland of skulls) denotes that 
the entire universe is no different from Svacchanda Bhairava’s body, and thus 
it is represented as an ornament and not as a covering. The eighteen arms of 
the deity represent his three-fold power of icchdjndna , and kriyci. Each of these 
three saktis have three levels—gross, subtle, and supreme—making a total of 
nine saktis. These nine saktis work further on two levels, subtle and gross. This 


42. Svacchanda Tantra 2.88cd-g7. 



SVACCHANDA BHAIRAVA: BLISSFUL SPONTANEOUS WILL OF $IVA 55 

makes a total of eighteen saktis, which are represented by the eighteen arms of 
the deity. K$emaraja explains the attributes of the hands of these eighteen arms, 
starting from the top of each side, as follows: 

1. The khadga (sword) represents the power of knowledge, for it cuts all 
bonds (pasas) of ignorance. 

2. The khetaka (shield) is the power of action, for it creates confidence 
in the bhaktas (devotees) and removes the fear of samsara. 

3. The pdsa (the binding cord) has the capacity to release the one in 
samsara from the three bonds (pasas). 

4. The ankusa (elephant goad) goads those in satnsara toward him. 

5 & 6. The sara (arrow) and pindka (bow) break the cycle of birth and death. 

7. The varadahasta (hand conferring boons) represents blissful life in 
this world. 

8. The abhayahasta (hand giving protection) represents moksa (release) 
from birth and death. 

9. The munda (skull) represents rndyd, and he removes the veil of maya 
as it is under his control. 

10. The khatvdnga (a kind of club made from the forearm or the leg of a 
cart, at the end of which a human skull is attached) represents that 
the world in the form of a skull attached to consciousness has no real 
existence. 

11,12 & 13. The vina (a stringed instrument), damaru (small drum), and ghanta 
(bell) represent the wonders of svara (sound) in the form of mandra 
(low), tdra (high), and madhya (middle), denoting samsara with 
different varieties of sounds. This means that he has the power of 
hearing, grasping, and identifying all sorts of sound emanating from 
this world. 

14. The trisula (trident) represents the three powers of icchajndna, and 
kriyd together standing on the danda (stick) that represents the power 
of free will. By this he removes the three pasas. 

15. The vajra (thunderbolt) has a shape made up of two similar limbs, 
each having three claws resembling the claws of birds, and both 
these parts are connected together by a handle in the middle. Here, 
the upper three claws are explained as representing the saktis, viz. 



56 TANTRAPUSPANJALI 


icchd.jndna, and kriyd, and the lower three daws represent the three 
esartrya (points of the arrows), which a jiva is supposed to overcome. 
All these six powers are under his control. 

16. The danda (stick) along with sakti (in female form) denotes the 
Supreme Law that controls this universe. 

17. The para.su (battle axe) represents him in the form of ndda sakti (all- 
pervading sound). 

18. The mudcjara (mace) represents his bindu sakti that destroys all 
differentiations, i.e., when we concentrate upon an object, we become 
one with it. 

Thus Ksemaraja explains the symbolism of the attributes of the eighteen 
arms of Svacchanda Bhairava. 

Now follows the description of the deity’s drapery. The deity wears a lower 
drape of simha carma (tiger skin) and an upper drape of gaja carma (elephant 
skin). Simha represents the expansion of five faces in the form of Vulva, Isvara, 
Sadasiva, Sakti, and Siva. The simha carma, meaning ‘to overpower,’ is the nature 
of simha. The elephant represents the mayd sakti that envelopes the entire world. 
Since this expansion of mdyd svarupa is attached to cit svarupa (represented by 
simha carma), the cit svarupa destroys the mdyd svarupa of the gaja carma, as 
Ksemaraja explains. 43 The deity is addressed as Deva, Nllakantha, and Sutejas. 
Deva, meaning ‘player’ or ‘performer,’ is the name given for his playful nature. 
Since he devours the poison of the akhyati (ignorance) of mdyd, he is known 
as Nllakantha. Sutejas refers to the pure consciousness shining in full glory. The 
five faces of the deity are contemplated along with the specific directions and 
colours ascribed to each, as follows: 

1. The uppermost face known as Isana should be contemplated as being of 
pure white colour like a sphatika (crystal). 

2. The face towards the East is known as Tatpurusa and it has pltavarna (a 
golden colour). 

3. The face to the South is called Aghora. It is nllavarna (of blue colour). 

4 - The face looking towards the West is named Sadyojata. It has an off- 

white colour like the light of candra (the moon). 


43' Commentary on Svacchanda Tantra 2-93cd. 


SVACCHAXDA BHAIRAVA: BLISSFUL SPONTANEOUS WILL OF $IVA j 57 

5. The face looking towards the North is named Vamadeva and has red 
colour like that of the pomegranate flower or the colour of kumakuma. 

Svacchanda Bhairava is the bestower of all wishes. The Tantra states 
that through one-pointed meditation (according to the dhyana mantras) an 
individual achieves success in attaining worldly enjoyment ( bhukti ) and final 
liberation ( mukti ). With such all-encompassing features, Svacchanda Bhairava is 
meditated upon as described in the dhycina mantras. On the basis of these veiy 
mantras the practice of creating miniature paintings of Svacchanda Bhairava 
was taken up at some point in time (see Plates I-IX), and these became objects of 
daily worship with the passage of time. 

The deity in the paintings is shown being held upon the shoulders of a human 
form which resembles the main deity in several respects. It has three eyes, a 
similar lower drape, and the same ornaments. This human form may be identified 
with Ananta Bhaftaraka, the deity of the asana mantra known as Anantasana. 44 

To explain the identification of this form, K§emaraja offers a quotation: 
“sarvam dsanam bhairavasya tu,” meaning that Bhairava pervades the asana 
in its entirety because tradition says “ sarvamstvamayam .” This pervasion 
is possible only through Sakti. This being so, asana (abode) is power 
incarnate. Quoting Sri Rauravagama, Ksemaraja further states that the user 
of the mantra, i.e., the sadhaka, while doing the asana nyasa, must use the 
padma mudra and divide the asana according to the respective deities. 45 
Here, we may recall the state of meditation in which the sadhaka visualizes 
a lotus with its parts, and then on this lotus asana visualizes sakala deva, i.e., 
Svacchanda Bhairava, adorned with the vibrating thirty-two varnas (of the 
aghora mantra). It vibrates as a bright light shining in the deadly darkness, 
according to the Tantra. 46 

It has been already seen that the nyasa begins with imposition of Sakti. This 
happens through an experiential and imaginative state by the arousal of iccha 
sakti. Arising from the root, this power ( iccha sakti) is the foundation ( kanda) 
that sprouts ( ahkurita ) upwards as support ( naia) on which the knot or joint 


44. Svacchanda Tantra 1.38 with commentary. 

45. Svacchanda Tantra 2.82 with commentary. 

46. Svacchanda Tantra 2.84 with commentary. 



58 TANTRAPUSPANJALI 


(,granthi ) is of intermediate nature. The upward expansion is the pure passage 
(suddha adhvan) and the downward passage the impure (asuddha udhrun). 
Therefore it is known as mdydtmikd sakti (illusionary power . It is positioned as a 
lotus of knowledge ( vidyd padtna ) adorned with the seeds known as Vidyesvaras, 
conceived as eight gods, viz. Ananta, Suksma, Sivottama, Trinetra, Srikantha, 
Sikhandhin, Ekanetra, and Ekarudra. As such, this is the dhyana of the asana 
(conceived as a lotus) with kanda, ndla, granthi, dala, karnikd, and hi/a (till parts 
of the lotus). In such a position, mdyd granthi (as Sakti j is conceived along with 
Anantesvara for their inseparable nature in creation. Anantesvara is the most 
powerful Vidyesvara. 4 ’ This seat is visualised as a throne (siinhdsana) with a lotus 
on it (see Plate II, in which such a lotus can he seen). The symbolic representation 
of the four padakas (legs) of this seat are imposed as per t he f ollowing table: 


Nyasa 

(imposition) 

Direction 

Colour 

Dharma 

(representing the right 
course of action) 

agneva (southeast) 

white 

Jnana 

(representing knowledge) 

nairrtya (southwest) 

red 

Vairagya 

(representing the absence 
of wordly desires) 

vayavya (northwest) 

yellow 

Aisvarya 

(representing supremacy) 

Tsana (northeast) 

bluish-black 


Although all four legs symbolise the supreme power, they are misunderstood 
in their downward passage. Only through recognising their real nature can their 
true meaning be realized. Then the in-between directions, i.e., purva, daksina, 
pascima, and uttara, are imposed with adharma, ajhdina, avairdgya, and 
anaisvarya. All these directions are together known as Gatraka (body) and the 
colour assigned (to all) is white. Representing the sides (of the body) of the seat, 
these directions are pervaded by mdyd sakti, therefore they are named as such. 4 * 


47 - Svacchanda Tantra 2.58-60 with commentary. 
48. Svacchanda Tantra 2.6o-64ab with commentary. 







SVACCHANDA BHAIRAVA: BLISSFUL SPONTANEOUS WILL OF SlVA 59 


Ksemaraja makes an interesting statement at the beginning of the 
Chapter 1;-$, in which he says that the Svacchanda Tantra illustrates twenty-two 
different forms of sakala Svacchanda Bhairava for various rituals. The twenty- 
third, he further states, is the only single one, i.e., niskala, being the underlying 
essence of the other twenty-two sakala forms. The symbolic interpretation of 
the image of Svacchanda Bhairava as depicted in miniature paintings is solely 
based on the Tantra. This reflects the uniqueness of the traditional practice of 
the worship of this deity with the secret mahamantra 4 " containing thirty-two 
aksaras, as given here: 

m ■* v ii * | 

am aghorebhyo 't/m ghorebhyo ghoraghoratarebhyascal 
sarvatah sarvasarvebhyo namaste rudrarupebhyahU 

“Om, praise be to the forms of Rudra, Sarva, Sarva, pervaded by (the powers in the form of) 
Aghora, Ghora and Ghoraghoratara." 

In this mahamantra the three powers named Aghora, Ghora, and 
Ghoraghoratara are the three saktis of Parama Siva known as Para, Parapara, and 
Apara. As explained by Svami Lashmanjoo Maharaja, there are endless saktis 
which can be categorised under these three categories. The Aghora saktis, also 
known as Para saktis, are the messengers of Para Bhairava. Through the support 
of these saktis, a sadhaka succeeds in achieving his goal. The Ghora saktis, which 
are known as Parapara saktis, are at an intermediary position. These saktis stop 
the sadhaka from reaching the aghoralpara state. By being stopped, the sadhaka 
is also saved from his descent to lower states. The Apara saktis, also known as 
the Ghoraghoratara saktis, are dreadful. Through them, individuals are drawn 
towards worldly materialism that takes them away from the path of sadhana. 

49. The origin of the mantra can be traced in the Samhitas: see Maitrdyani Samhita 
2.9.10, 130.1: Taittircya Aranyaka 10.45-1: Mahdndrdyanopanisad 17.3: Mdnava 
Srauta Sutra 11.7. Nardyanopanisad 19 in Isadyastottarasatopamsad (p.142) has the 
following reading: 

3 TTfH-’ft "g ’TfH'TT vf| v 41 *id* «T: i 

aghorebhyo 'tha ghorebhyo ghoraghoratarebhyahl 
sarvebhyah sarvasarvebhyo namaste astu bhadrarupebhyah / 




6 o tantrapuspAnjali 


The Svacchcinda Tcintra refers to the mahdmantra as containing thirty-two 
aksaras, and these aksaras are described by Ksemaraja as the lord incarnate 
with multiple forms and limbs.' There is a very important stotru known as 
the Bahurupagarbhastotra.' In the verses of this stotru, the thirty-two seed 
letters are secretly concealed. The stotru actually contains thirty-four verses. 
The first verse starts with om, symbolising the supreme truth that holds all 
tattvas within it. The last verse, which starts with the uksuru ‘u,’ represents the 
visargah (:) of the mulamantru, symbolising anuttaradhdma in which Siva and 
Sakti are present together ( samarasibhdva ). Each of the other thirty-two verses 
starts with a blja aksara of the mahdmantra. This stotru, according to the Saiva 
tradition of Kashmir, is recited at the beginning and at the completion of each 
ritual observation for removing inauspicious effects and also for the fulfilment 
of worldly objectives. For a Saiva sadhaka the stotru contains secret and deep 
meaning. There has been a system of reciting this stotru for daily, occasional, 
and specific worship along with introductory verses from the Svacchandu Tantru in 
dialogue form between Siva and Devi. This is followed by sahkalpa (mental resolve), 
viniyoga (application), nydsa including kara nyasa and ahga nyusu (imposition of 
energies), and dhydna sLokas (of the attributes of Svacchanda Bhairava). Then 
prdnd.yd.ma with the Gayatrl of the Svacchanda Bhairava mantra is performed. 
This is followed by the japa (108 times) of the Aghora mahdmantra. Then the 
dhydna mantras (of the form of Svacchanda Bhairava) are to be recited. Finally, 
the recitation of the Bahurupagarbhastotra is performed, and then at the end the 
phalasruti is recited. Thus is the systematic worship with this stotra performed. 

The dhydna mantras of the form of Svacchanda Bhairava include descriptions 
of the form of Devi Aghoresvarl. However, the following verses are significant in 
noting characteristic features of the Devi: 

’tt ’jw wtwptt srri T1 ^if^r^nRT|| 

Tprf^TT ^ y ^ | 


50. Commentary on Svacchanda Tantra 1.60-63. 

51. There are twenty-seven manuscripts of the Bahurupagarbhastotra available in 
the manuscript collection of the Oriental Research Library of J&K State. All are in 
Sarada script except one, Ms. No. 998, which is in Devanagari script. Some of the 
published versions are listed in the bibliography at the end of this article. 


SVACCHANDA BHAIRAYA: BLISSFUL SPONTANEOUS WILL OF SlVA ; 61 


f J T 7= W^ J i | 

^FIWFqt HTT ^TRT^T^f Qf^HHWwTiT || 

va sd purvam mayakhydta aghort saktiruttama// 
bhairavam pujayitvd tu tasyotsarige tu tarn nyaset/ 
yadrsam bhairavam rupam bhairavydstadrgeva hi// 

Isatkaralavadanam gambhIravipulasvanam/ 
prasanndsyam sadd dhyayedbhairavlm vismiteksandm//** 

“As already described, (says Mahadeva,) Aghora the Supreme Sakti should be visualized after 
worshipping (Svacchanda) Bhairava in his lap. Her form is undoubtedly the same as that 
of Bhairava.'^ (However,) a sadhaka should also contemplate her face as slightly dreadful 
(due to its devouring of the sheaths), as making deep and profound sounds (due to her 
dynamic nature), as bright (due to her eagerness for compassion like that of Bhairava),(and 
therefore) with eyes bright and full of wonder (for her entrance into bhairava mudra ).” 

Svacchanda Bhairava has been integrated into the earliest teachings of the 
Kubjika Tantras 54 (see Plate XIII). Here Kubjika is the Adi Devata (first deity) and 
Bhairava the Adi Natha (first teacher). The Kubjikamata Tantra dedicates two 
chapters to Bhairava as Aghora. Sikha Svacchanda is Kubjika's £ikha (topknot), 
described as the second of her six limbs. In the later tradition the Bhairava is 
referred to as Navatmabhairava (derived from nine seed-syllables) common with 
Svacchanda Bhairava. Kubjika is addressed in her vidyd as Aghoramukhl. The 
growing influence of Svacchanda is evident in the following reference from one 
of the late Kubjika Tantras, viz. Ambamatasamhita (20.30): 

3*TcT^ ^ ^ cT^Tdl^-^ || 

vamadaksinasiddhante nityatantre cayamale/ 
anvaye ca svatantre ca svacchandam tantranayakam // 

“Among (the Tantras of) the left, right, Siddhanta, Nityatantra, Yamala, and the independent 
(Kaula) traditions, the Svacchanda ( Tantra ) is the leader of the Tantras.” 


52. Svacchanda Tantra 2.ii4cd-n6. 

53. Bhairava’s form has already been described in Svacchanda Tantra 2.88-97. 

54. For details, see Mark S.G. Dyczkowski, Manthanabhairavatantram: 
Kumarikakhandah (The Section concerning the Virgin Goddess of the Tantra of the 
Churning Bhairava ), VoL II - Introduction (New Delhi: Indira Gandhi National 
Centre for the Arts, 2009), pp. 49-63. 




62 tantrapuspAnjali 


The Manthanabhairavatantra (MBT) is the most important and extensive 
Tantra dedicated to the worship of the goddess Kubjika. Here, Svacchanda is very 
closely associated with the goddess. The City of the Moon, i.e., the core mandala 
of the goddess, is said to be the abode of Aghora (MBT, Kumari Khanda 3.108), 
and the western transmission is that of Bahurupa (MBT, Kumari Khant.la3.b2). 
Kubjika is now worshipped in Nepal and the manuscripts and related literature 
are essentially found only there. 

In Kashmir, there evolved a strong tradition of Sakti worship along with the 
worship of Siva. This seems to have become more intense with the passage of time. 
In the present context, we have the evidence of miniature paintings in which this 
development can be observed. Devi in the Svcicchundu Tantra is visualized in the 
lap of Svacchanda, and this is also found in some depictions (see Plates I, IV, V, 
VI, & VII). However, Svacchanda Bhairava and Bhairavi are also depicted in some 
paintings separately but in the same form and with the same attributes (see 
Plate XV). We also observe Bhairavi emerging as a full-fledged goddess known as 
Sarika 33 in Kasmir (see Plate XVI). Sarika PItha, situated on a hill at the centre of 
Srinagar city, is also known as Cakresvara or Cakresvari. There is evidence of a 
long line of sadhakas who have achieved spiritual heights through their regular 
meditational practices around this spiritual abode. A beautiful image of Sarika 
Bhagavati was lately developed in Kashmiri calendar art (see Plate XVII).With 
great reverence to the goddess, this image adorns each Kashmiri home even 
after their exile from Kashmir. Not only that, a replica of the Sarika shrine has 
been created near Delhi in Faridabad, which is evidence of this deeply rooted 
tradition. One is also reminded of the practice of the strong Bhairava tradition 
back home in Kashmir where eight Bhairavas/Lokapalas guard the city. There 
may be a change in the nomenclature, but by this one can definitely observe 
that the mental practice was complimented by physical models in Kashmir. 
Whatever condition these sites are in now, they nevertheless stand as reminders 
of this great tradition. 

Sivaratri is one of the foremost festivals observed by the Kashmiri 
community. This festival is observed as Bhairavotsava, in which bhairava 

55. See Advaitavadini Kaul, “Sarika Devi: The Cosmic Mother in Sakta Tradition of 
Kashmir,” in SaktyuUasah: Sharika Devi - A Yogini of Kashmir, ed. Neerja Mattoo, 
(Delhi: D.K. Printworld, 2013). 



SVACCHANDA BHAIRAVA: BLISSFUL SPONTANEOUS WILL OF SlVA 63 


yaga is performed with elaborate ritual worship of Bhairava-Bhairavl, along 
with the devl putras Vatuka (Vatuka Bhairava) and Ramana (Rama god. 
as called in Kashmiri, symbolically represented by a vessel during Sivaratri Puja). 
There is a stoiy that goes as follows. Once, while in dncindci mudra, Lord Siva 
was in a playful mood. All his ganas appeared in his sendee. While thinking of 
Parvatl (Supreme Sakti), Siva saw her in a garden in the Himalaya along with 
many other goddesses (her own creations) who were busy in preparing various 
food items. Some goddesses were making containers of different shapes, etc. 
Seeing all this in his samadhi, Mahadeva Siva took the form of Svacchanda 
Bhairava and appeared before them all. The goddesses got frightened by this 
form. Mahamaya became disturbed by this and looked into a water container. 
When she did this Vatuka Bhairava appeared there, along with his attributes. 
Finding Vatuka incapable of facing Svacchanda Bhairava, she looked again inside 
another water container and there appeared Ramana (a handsome boy) along 
with ayudhas (shields). In this way Mahamaya created many ganas in order to 
combat the fearful form of Siva. At this point the form of Siva disappeaied, and 
all came to Para Sakti for refuge. Offering delicious food she blessed them all. 
This day was the thirteenth day of the dark fortnight of the month of Phaguna. 
To grace his devotees, Siva also appeared (on this day) at the time of the sunset in 
the form ofJvala Liiiga dispersing heat, and this heat calmed down by midnight. 
The symbolic representation of this Jvala Linga is the Sunya Putula (locally 
called Sonya Potul), the prime deity worshipped during Sivaratri puja as niskala 
Svacchanda Bhairava. 

The ritual worship of Sivaratri concludes with the ritual of Vaisva Deva 
(Vaisadlv in Kashmiri), in which oblations are made to each entity through the 
conceptualization of the entire universe as one divine entity (Visva Deva). This 

56. In Kashmiri, the word god means ‘the sprinkling of water, etc., during a ritual 
performance.’ 

57. This correlates with the manifestation of Siva Linga in the form of a pillar 0 ig t 
equal to a hundred doomsday fires, without beginning, middle, or end, incomparable, 
indescribable, and indefinable, whose bottom and top Visnu and Brahma could 
not reach. See Linga Purcina I.17, quoted in P.S. Filliozat, “Jyotis/Tejas/Prakasa,” m 
Kalatattvakosa VoL III Primal Elements - Mahdbhuta, ed. Bettina Baumer, general 
editor Kapila Vatsyayan (New Delhi: Indira Gandhi National Centre for the Arts, 
1996), p. 293. 






64 TANTRAPUSPANJALI 


is a great reminder to our obligation towards preserving and nourishing each and 
eveiy creation of blissful and compassionate Svacchanda Bhairava and BhairavT. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Aditya Hrdayam with the Commentary Tattvaprakasika. Translation and commentan by 
Swami Tattvavidananda Saraswati. New Delhi: DK Printworld, 2011. 

Baumer, Bettina. “Surya in a Saiva Perspective: the Sambapahcdsikd , A Mystical Hymn of 
Kashmir and Its Commentary' by Ksemaraja.” In Sahrdaya: Studies in Indian and 
South East Asian Art in Honour of Dr. R. Nagaswamy, edited by Bettina Baumer et al. 
Chennai: Tamil Arts Academy', 2006. 

Bhagavadgita with Commentary Sarvatobhadra by Ramakantha. Edited by M.S. Kaul 
Shastri. Kashmir Series of Texts and Studies 64. Bombay: Nirnav Sagar Press, 1943. 

Chakravarty, Hemendra Nath, trans. “ Bahurupagarbhastotra : An Annotated Translation.” 
In Sdmarasya: Studies in Indian Arts, Philosophy, and Interreligious Dialogue in 
Honour of Bettina Baumer, edited by Sadananda Das and Ernst Furlinger, 37-48. New 
Delhi: D.K. Printworld, 2005. 

Conio, Caterina. The Problem of Continuum and Discontinuum in the Cosmogony of 
Svachandatantra XI, 1-9." Indologica Taurinensia, Vols. YTII-IX. 1980-81. 

Dyczkowski, Mark S.G. Manthanabhairavatantram: Kumarikdkhandah (The Section 
concerning the Virgin Goddess of the Tantra of the Churning Bhairava), Vols. /-// - 
Introduction. New Delhi: Indira Gandhi National Centre for the Arts, 2009. 

Filliozat, P.S. “Jyotis/Tejas/Prakasa.” In Kaldtattvakosa VoLlII Primal Elements - Mahdbhuta, 
edited by Bettina Baumer, general editor Kapila Vatsyayan. New Delhi: Indira 
Gandhi National Centre for the Arts, 1996. 

Ganju, Omkarnath. VatukaPujd ( Herath ). Ghaziabad, UP: Amarnath Gurtu, 2006. 

Gayatri-Mantra bhdsya of Sahkardcdrya. Edited by Swami Nilakanthananda Saraswati, 
translated into Hindi byjankinath Kaul. Srinagar, 1975. 

Handa, O.C. Siva in Art: A Study of^aiva Iconography and Miniatures. Delhi: Indus Publishing 
Company, 1992. 

Isadyastottarasatopanisad. Edited by Vasudev Lakshman Panshikar. Varanasi: Chowkhamba 
Vidyabhawan, 1990 reprint. 

James, William Arraj. “The Svacchandabhairavatantram: History and Structure of a Saiva 
Scripture.” Ph.d. diss., University of Chicago, IL, USA, 1988. 

J 0 °, Swami Lakshman, ed. with Hindi commentary. The Sivastotrdvali of Utpaladevdcdrya 
with the Sanskrit commentary of Ksemaraja. Srinagar: Ishwar Ashram Trust, 2000. 

Kanvasatapathabrahmana VI. Edited and translated by C.R. Swaminathan. KalamulaSastra 
Series no. 40. New Delhi: Indira Gandhi National Centre for the Arts, 2011. 

Kaul, Advaitavadini. “Sarika Devi: The Cosmic Mother in Sakta Tradition of Kashmir.” In 
S aktyulldsah: Sharika Devi - A YoginI of Kashmir, edited by Neerja Mattoo, 147-174. 
Delhi: D.K. Printworld, 2013. 



SVACCHANDA BHAIRAVA: BLISSFUL SPONTANEOUS WILL OF $IVA | 65 


Kaviraj, Mahamahopadhyaya Gopinath. Tantra aur agama sastron ka digdarsan. Translated 
by Hansa Kumar Tiwari. Patna: Bihar Rashtrabhasha Parishad, 2003 reprint 
Kaviraj, Mahamahopadhyaya Gopinath. Tantrik Sadhana aur Siddhant. Translated by 
Hansa Kumar Tiwari. Patna: Bihar Rashtrabhasa Parishad, 1994* 

Kaviraj, Mahamahopadhyaya Gopinath. Tantrik Sahitya (.Descriptive Catalogue). Lucknow: 

Rajarshi Purushotam DassTandon Hindi Bhawan, 1972. 

Koshur Samachar. A monthly magazine of the Kashmiri Samiti Delhi. March 1999. 
Kramrisch, Stella. Manifestations of Siva. Philadelphia Museum of Art, 1981. 

The Kurma-Purdna, Part /. Translated by G.V. Tagare. Ancient Indian Tradition and 
Mythology, Vol. 20. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidas, 2005 reprint. 

Marjanovic, Boris. Abhinavagupta’s Commentary on the Bhagavad Gita: Gltartha Sangraha. 
Varanasi: Indica Books, 2002. 

McCarter, Simon. “The Body Divine: Tantric Saivite Ritual Practices in the Svacchandatantra 
• and its Commentary.” Religions 5(3) (2014): 738-75°- 
Pandit, Baljinath. Kdimlra^atvadarsana-Brhatkosa, Vols. 1 8 c 2. Jammu: 2001 8 c 2005. 
Rastogi, Navjivan. “Gayatri in the Non-dualistic Saiva Tradition of Kashmir.” Presented at 
the 15th World Sanskrit Conference. New Delhi, January 2012. 

Rudradhayayah - Rgvedcya Sahkhayana. Edited and translated by Prakash Pandey. New 
Delhi: Indira Gandhi National Centre for the Arts, 2009. 

Shri Bahuroopa Garbha Stotram. Translated and annotated by Chamanlal Raina. Delhi: 
Swami Mastbab Ashram Trust, 2014. 

Sribahurupagarbha-stotram. Edited by Sri Shambu Nath Razdan, translated by Rudradev 
Tripathi. New Delhi: Sri Lai Bahadur Kendriya Sanskrit Vidyapitham, 1986. 

&rl Bahurupagarbhastotram (from Sri Lalitasvacchandatantra). Hindi translation and 
commentary by Makhanlal Kukilu. Srinagar, Kashmir: Iswar Ashram Trust, Ishber 
(Nishat), 2010. 

&rlBahurupa garbha. Delhi: Pt. Radhakrishna Raina, Samvat 5074. 

Srlmadgltartha Samgrahah of Abhinavagupta. Edited and translated by Prabha Devi. 
Srinagar: Isvar Ashram, 1987. 

Sri Netra Tantra with Commentary by Kshemaraja . Edited by Madhusudan Kaul Shastri. 
Kashmir Series of Texts and Studies No. XLV1, Vol. 1, 8 c No. LXI, vol. II. Srinagar, 1926 

& 1939- 

Sri Netra Tantra (Mrtyunjaya Bhattarakah). Edited and translated by Acarya Radheshyam 
Caturvedi. Varanasi: Chaukhamba Sura Bharati Prakashan, 2004. 

$rl Sambapahcasika with Commentary by Ksemaraja. Edited by Saivacarya Isvarasvarupa 
Swami Laksmanjoo Maharaj. Sringar, 2009 (3rd ed.). 

Sri Svacchandantantram (with Hindi commentary), Part I (containing 3 Patalas). Edited 
with commentary by Paramahansamishra ‘Hans/Varanasi: Sampumanada Sanskrit 
Vishvavidhyalaya, 2003. 

The Svacchandatantra with Uddyota of Ksemaraja, Vols. MV. Edited by Madhusudan Kaul 
Sastra. Delhi: Sanskrit Gian Sansthan, 1986 reprint. 




66 TAMRAPUSPANJALI 


The Svacchandci Tantra with Commentary Uddyota hy Kscmarajacana . VoK I & II. Edited 
by Vraj Y'allabh Dwivedi. Delhi: Parimal Publications. 1985. 

The Tantraloka ofAbhinavagupta with Commentary' hy Rajdnaka Java rat ha. Vnl. I. Kashmir 
Series of Texts and Studies 23. Allahabad: The Indian Press. 1918. 
Vrddhasvacchandasamgraha Tantram. Edited by Prakash Pandev. GamjanathaJha Kendriya 
Sanskrit Vidyapitha Text Series, V0I.50. Delhi: Pratibha Prakashan. 2001. 



The Khacakrapancakastotra, Hymn to 
the Five Spheres of Emptiness 

Introduction, Edition, and Translation 

Mark Dyczkowski 1 


INTRODUCTION 

The Khacakrapancakastotra (KhCPS) is an early work of the Kashmiri Krama 
school founded by Jnananetra (also known as Sivananda), who is praised at 
the beginning as the ‘first teacher’ ( adyanatha ) (verse 3) who ‘brought down 
the hymn into the world (5), although it represents itself as revelation (151-156)- 
The Krama outlined here prefigures the system of Five Currents ( pahcavaha) 
that became the core of the branch of the Krama system called Mahanaya, 
which was considered to have originated from Jnananetra. The Mahanaya 
reached its peak of development in three texts called Mahanayaprakasa. Here 
some of the essential elements of that system, as yet undeveloped, can be 
discerned, especially the Five Spheres of Emptiness which are the focus of this 
hymn. 

Arnasimha tells us in his Mahanayaprakasa (MP) Light of the Great 
Teaching—that there are two lines of teachers who transmitted the Mahanaya 


1. I began studying with Panditji in 1971. 1 was his first student. Panditji helped me 
translate the Mahdrthamanjariby Mahesvarananda, which substantially aided with 
my admission to Oxford in 1975 to study for my doctoral dissertation, which was 
published as the Doctrine of Vibration. I remained close to Panditji all his life. 




68 TANTRAPUSPA.VJALI 



branch of the KallkramaC It begins with the goddess Marigold who manifested 
to Jnananetra in ‘Udlsa’s seat’ (that is, Oddiyana). The transmission continued 
down through Keyuravat! to Vamana and then Cakrabhanu with whom the 
other line begins. Jayaratha also refers to Cakrabhanu as an important Krama 
teacher. * * 3 4 5 There is a reference in Kalhana's Rajataranyini to a Brahmin ascetic 
called Cakrabhanu who, caught participating in a 'cakramelaka', was imprisoned 
and branded on the forehead with the mark of a dog’s paw during the reign 
of King Yasaskara, who ruled between 939 and 948 CE.‘ A manuscript of the 
Pltkadvdclasikastotra by Cakrabhanu has been recovered in which he boasts of 
how he cares nothing about being in jail as he knows the method by which to 
consume Time (a clear allusion to Krama practice) and that when he gets out 

2. MP verses 151-166. Sivananda was succeeded by Keyuravati, who transmitted the 
Krama to Vamana. This may have been the Vamandatta who wrote the.' samvitprakasa. 
It was then passed on to Cakrabhanu, then to Devatanaya, then from Isanika to 
Nandaka through Sajjana to Somesvara. The author of the Cidyayanacandrika who 
calls himself Kalidasa received the Krama teachings from a disciple of Somesvara 
(somaputra) (v. 304). This work, composed in a rich literary style, appears in many 
places to be an elaboration of Arnasimha's Mahuimyaprakd.su. 

The other line begins with Cakrabhanu. He initiated Prabodhanatha who wrote the 
Astikdstotra. He may have been the Vimalaprabodha who wrote the unpublished 
Devyardhasatika and Kallkulakramdrcana. Prabodhanatha initiated Jayaka, after 
whom the line continued through Paiika, then Naga to Arnasimha. 

3 - The Goddess Mahgala is Kalasamkarsini (verse 132)—the Attractress of Time—who, 
repeatedly associated with time and its power, consumes it into her own eternal 
nature. She is the Wave of the Great Reality ( mahdrtha ) and the Great Reality itself, 
the Light of the Inexplicable ( andkhya ) and the Goddess of the Wheel ( cakresvari ). 
She is the Moon, Letter, Fire (especially the Fire of Time), Sun, the Great Abode and 
Emptiness. 

4 - Commentary to TA 4/i73ab. There Jayaratha attributes to Cakrabhanu the view that 
there are only Twelve Kalis, not thirteen, although this is most probably not correct. 
See below. 

5 - “The King Yasaskara [was ever] ready to exercise control over the castes and 
conditions of life [among his] subjects. On discovering that at a cakramelaka 
a Brahmin ascetic Cakrabhanu by name had departed from proper conduct, the 
king, in accordance with the law, punished him by having the mark of a god’s 
foot branded on his forehead. Infuriated by this, the uncle of that [Brahmin], the 
magician Vlranatha, who was the king’s own minister of foreign affairs then took 
revenge upon him.” RT 6.108-110, Stein’s translation. 





THE KHACAKRAPASlCAKASTOTRA, HYMN TO THE FIVE SPHERES OF EMPTINESS | 69 

he will cover his forehead with the tip of his turban and continue his practice. 
Thus, we may say with confidence that Cakrabhanu lived around 900 to 975. 
There were five generations after him up to Somesvara and Arnasimha, who 
were thus about 125 years later and so lived around 1025-1100. Sivananda, who 
was from three generations before, lived around 825-900, during which time the 
Khacakrapahcakastotra was written, if it was by him. 

The Kallkrama'’ can be said to have developed through four major phases. 

1) The first phase precedes Jnananetra and may have started in the 8th 
century. It is represented by the Kallmata of the JayarathayamaLa (JY), 
which is an extensive Tantra of the Bhairava current. In this phase we find 
the worship of numerous forms of Kali, amongst which Kalasamkar?inl 
emerges as one of the major forms, and continues as the highest form in 
the later phases. There are chapters in the JayarathayamaLa dedicated 
to the secret teachings of the Kallkula, which is thus embedded in the 
Mata system of theJY. 

2) The second phase is marked by the emergence of Matsyendranatha as 
the founder of Kaulism, as an independent current ( srotas ) of scriptures 
and associated traditions. Previously embedded in the Bhairava Tantras, 
the Kulas of Yoginls, related more or less directly to the eight Kulas of 
the Mothers ( matrka ), were deemed to be sources of especially secret 
and powerful teachings transmitted in the esoteric Bhairava Tantras. 
Matsyendranatha figures as the founder of Kulas that exist in their own 
right independently of the Bhairava Tantras. These are of two types. 
We could call the first type non-sectarian. The deities are Kulesvara 
and Kulesvari, the Bhairava and Bhairav! of the Yoginlkula. Examples 
of scriptures of such Kulas are the published KauLajhdnanLrnaya and 
AkuLavlratantra and the unpublished Kulapahcasika. To the second type 
belong Kulas, centred on the worship of a specific goddess. Several such 
revealed scriptures are attributed to Matsyendra. The GuhyasiddhL, for 
example, is a Tantra attributed to Matsyendra centred on the worship 
of Kubjika. Another example is the UrmikauLarnava that expounds 


6 . The names Kallkrama and Kallkula are interchangeable. It came to be called just 
Krama ( kramadarsana , kramanaya, kramasasana, etc.) by the Kashmiri teachers. 



70 tantrapuspAnjali 


the teachings of the Bhogahastanaya branch of the Kalikrama. 
Matysendranatha, who is totally unknown to the JV. came to he regularly 
represented as a founder figure in the major independent Kula schools 
that developed from around the 9th century onwards. These include the 
tradition of the goddess Kubjika and the Kashmiri Kfilikrama its well 
as Abhinavagupta’s Anuttaratrikakula. But note that he is unknown 
to the earlier extant Trika Tantras—the Siddhavogcsrarimuta, the 
Tantrasadbhava and the Malinrvijayotiara. In the scriptures of the 
Kalikrama he appears in the cycle of persistence ( sthiticakra ) as the first 
teacher of this aeon (yugandtha ) along with those of the previous three. 
He is usually represented together with his twelve disciples, who are 
referred to as ‘rdjaputras’ (literally ‘princes’), six of whom founded their 
own lineages. This is where they are placed in the Devipancasataka (DP) 
and the Kramasadbhava (KS). In the KhCPS they appear in Gocakra, 
the fourth of the five wheels which is related to the cycle of persistence. 
Jnananetra also praises them at the beginning of the Yoniguhvaratantra. 
Abhinava worships them at the beginning of his exposition of Kaula 
ritual ( kulaprakriyd ) in Chapter 29 of the Tantrdloka. This is done in the 
Siddhacakra, the gurumanda la of his Anuttaratrikakula. 

3) The third phase of the Kalikrama partly coincides in time with the second 
and the fourth. This is represented by texts such as the Devipancasataka 
and the Kramasadbhava. These are Tantras revealed in the Uttarapitha 
(i.e., Oddiyana). They are centred on the worship of forms of Kali, 
notably KalasamkarsinI and Suska or Ravinl. We shall return to these 
texts further ahead. 

4) The fourth phase begins with Jnananetra. He ‘brought down to earth’ 
at least one Tantra—the Yonigahvara —and wrote at least one hymn 
called the Kalikastotra still recited regularly by Swami Lakshman Joo’s 
disciples. This phase of development of the Kalikrama is no longer 
shrouded in the anonymity of scripture. Initially in this phase, as in 
the third one, the Kalikrama is replete with the worship of Yoginls and 
is largely devoid of associations with the energies of perception that 
characterise its culmination in the following phase. We may refer to it as 



THE KHACAKRAPAfiCAKASTOTRA. HYMN TO THE FIVE SPHERES OF EMPTINESS 1 71 

the Mahartha school of the Kalikrama, a name already known to the JY. 
This development reaches a peak in the system presented by three texts 
recovered to date, all of which are called Mahdnayaprakasa. Although 
it continues to refer to the reality it expounds as Mahartha, we may call 
this final phase of development the Mahanaya, to distinguish it from the 
previous one. 

Probably the first of these three Mahanayaprakdsas in chronological order 
is hy Sitikantha. Written in Kashmiri and commented upon in Sanskrit, it is 
certainly Kashmiri. The following two, first by Arnasimha and then another by 
an unknown author, are probably from the south of India where the monistic 
traditions of Kashmiri Saivism were popular for at least three centuries from 
about the beginning of the second millennium. There, in the land of the Cola 
kings (which roughly corresponds to modern Tamil Nadu), Mahesvarananda 
wrote his Mahdrthamanjarl probably in the late 13th century. In this work he 
presents a synthesis of fully developed Kashmiri Saivism, which he calls Trika, 
with the teachings of the Srividya tradition ( saubhagyasampradaya ) and the 
Mahanaya of Arnasimha, who is his authority for his exposition of the Sequence 
of the Five Currents ( pancavdhakrama ). 

The Sequence of the Five Currents is the procession of energies in the 
five cycles of creation, persistence, withdrawal, the inexplicable ( anakya ) and 
illumination (bhdsci). In the KhCPS they correspond to the five cycles of Bhucari, 
Gocari, Dikcarl, Khecari and Bhasa, where they appear in the reverse order. This 
doctrinal core is already presented in variant forms in the Tantras of the third 
phase, including the Devlpahcasataka and, especially, the Kramasadbhava. The 
importance of the latter text in this respect is acknowledged by Sitikantha. A 
fragment of the Kramasadbhava has been recovered in one Nepalese manuscript. 
Another large part of it is preserved as a chapter of the Kulakaulanlmata. There 
too we find confirmation that it is expounding this Krama and knows it by that 
name. 7 

Abhinava’s disciple, Ksemaraja, also refers to these five cycles but with some 
differences. In his setup the first wheel is that of Vamesvari who, like Bhasa, 


7. pancavahakramam hy etat kathitam tava sobhane | KuKauM i5/i59ab. 



72 tantrapuspAnjali 


governs all of the five. The remaining four are Khecari, Gocari, Dikcari and 
Bhucarl, which he lists in this order. Thus in comparison to the KhCPS, Ciocari 
andf Dikcari are in reverse order, in his commentaries on the Spundukurikd , 
Spandasamcloha and Spandanirnaya," Ksemaraja explains that they have 
internal and external forms. The latter bestow higher and lower yogic powers. 
The foremost amongst them is the total expansion of consciousness (prat/ui) 
experienced while delighting in sense objects. The lower ones are standard 
yogic attainments ( siddhi ). Moreover, the internal forms operate in opposite 
ways for those who have received Siva’s grace and those who have not, elevating 
the former and conditioning the latter. The Vamesvarls emit oneness for the 
awakened and duality for those who are not. The Khercarls operate on the plane 
of the subject. When awakened by grace they bestow the expanded state of 
consciousness ( unmllcina ) with the attributes of omniscience and the like of the 
supreme subject. Similarly, the Gocarls operate in opposite ways on the level of 
the intellect, mind and ego, enlightening or deluding them. The Dikcarls operate 
in the ten directions (dik) of the external senses, either revealing or obscuring 
unity through them. The Bhucarl energies move on the earth ( bhu ) operating 
in this dual way in the domain of objectivity. Abhinava refers to this pentad in 
this form only once in a work attributed to him. This reference is found in verse 
23 of the Paryantapancdsikd, where Vyomesvarl is likened to a great lake from 
which the rivers of her energies emerge and in which the yogi should merge 
his limited individuality in order to submerge in universal consciousness. In 
his extended commentary on the PcirdtrUikd, Abhinava presents a condensed 
form of this pentad in which the functions of Vamesvarl are virtually fused with 
those of Khecari. Clearly, Abhinava was well acquainted with the basic Krama 
principles concerning these cycles, as was his disciple Ksemaraja. They equate 
them with energies operating in the domains of perception but they show no 
sign of knowing about the sophisticated and extensive elaboration of the Krama 
system we find in the three texts called Mahanayaprakasa. 

8. SpSam p. 19-22, translated in Mark S.G. Dyczkowski (with an introduction and 
exposition), The Stanzas on Vibration (Albany, NY: State University of New York 
Press, 1992), 69-70. Ksemaraja refers to these five again in the Spandanirnaya, his 
commentary, written later, on the entire Spandakarika (p. 7). The sequential order 
of the five is the same there. 


THE KHACAKRAPAftCAKASTOTHA. HYMN TO THE FIVE SPHERES OF EMPTINESS : 73 


Krama is the most elevated esoteric aspect of Abhinava’s Anuttaratrikakula. 
The goddess of the Krama, KalasamkarsinI, is Beyond Para (Paratlta) of the 
Trika even as she integrates her into herself as Anakhya. It is evident from the 
great attention Abhinava pays to the Twelve Kalis that he understands the 
teaching concerning them to be the fundamental one of the Krama system. 
According to him the Twelve Kalis are THE universal activity of consciousness 
(samanyaspanda), THE cycle of consciousness ( samvitcakra ., samvitkrama) 
and THE wheel of Energies (sakticakra). As the cycle of Anakhya, it is the most 
excellent of all the cycles and contains them all. Thus they are the culminating 
experience in all three categories of practice, Anava, Sakta and Sdmbhava. In 
short, the Twelve Kalis are the most vital part of the Krama system of Abhinava’s 
Anuttaratrikakula. 

Thus, instead of focusing on the Five Currents ( pancavaha ), Abhinava attends 
to the cycle of the Twelve Kalis which, as we shall see, is part of it. Abhinava’s 
Anuttaratrikakula mirrored the integration of the Kallkula into the Trika, which 
is an emergent development in the primary sources in which there are thirteen 
Kalis, not twelve. Probably the earliest traceable reference to the thirteen Kalis is 
in a passage in the JY quoted byjayaratha in his commentary on the Tantraloka. 
But although the names of the Kalis coincide, the JY hardly does more than list 
them and so this is just one of many configurations ( cakra) of Kalis worshipped in 
the JY. In the Kramasadbhava the thirteen Kalis constitute Anakhyacakra, just as 
they do in the Devlpancasatika, where their functions and nature are described. 
Jayarartha quotes the latter, fully suggesting the importance and, probably, the 
uniqueness of this detailed presentation at the original scriptural level. 

Where we do seem to find the twelve rather than thirteen Kalis treated 
independently as virtually the entire content of the teaching of a branch 
of the Kallkrama is the Kalakarikalakula documented in the (perhaps 12th- 
century) Cincinlmatasdrasamuccaya (CMSS). It is also called the Bhanavlkula 
or Bhanavikrama, as it centred on the mystical experience of the Twelve Suns 
embodied in the cycle of Twelve Kalis. There it is presented as the essential 
teaching of the Northern Tradition ( uttardmndya ) originally transmitted by 
Ni$kriyananda to Vidyananda. The DP acknowledges them as the earliest 
teachers of its tradition also and adds the two next in line, Saktyananda and then 
Sivananda, who may have been Jnananetra. However, there the twelve do have a 






74 TANTRAPUSPANJALI 


thirteenth in the centre. There, as in the KhCPS (verse (>2 ), the emptiness in the 
centre is the abode of the thirteenth Kali who is the other twelve. In the CMSS, 
which is a Tantra belonging to the Kubjika school, the emptiness in the centre 
is identified with Kubjika. In short, the system of Twelve Kalis Abhinavagupta 
expounds is his own modification based on the approach ol the Bhanavikrama. 
Indeed, he clearly says that the Kalis are twelve, as are the suns corresponding 
to the months of the year. Thus, although the KhCPS does refer to this group 
of twelve, it lists not one, but two sets of thirteen Kalis in Khacakra, which 
corresponds to Anakhyacakra. 

We turn now to a brief summary of the most salient features of the teachings 
implicit in the KhCPS. We have seen that the source of the Great Teaching— 
Mahartha—is Mahgala, who embodies it. She is a YoginI who is identified 
in general with Kali and in particular with Kalasamkarsini. She revealed the 
Mahartha directly to Jnananetra. Appropriately, she appears in the benedictory 
verse at the beginning of the KhCPS. She is the embodiment of Mahartha and 
the flux—Krama—of its energies who unfolds as 'the sound of the egoity of 
emptiness’ (vyomcihamkaraghosa) (verse 2). This should not be confused with 
the perfect I-ness ( purndhambhdva ) the Pratyabhijna and the Trika present 
as ultimate reality. This other ‘ego’ is pure Emptiness. The energies unfold in 
Emptiness as aspects of this Sound ( rava ) and the goddess Kali who embodies 
it is essentially egoless. As Arnasimha puts it, Kalika is 'one and devoid of all 
egoity ( nirahamkdradharmint ). She shines perfectly and at all times by virtue 
of the process {krama), which is the very nature of Cakresvari, the Mistress of 
the Wheels (MP 245). Accordingly, Jnananetra, the Solitary Hero (ekuvlra) who 
has realised this reality completely and hence realised his true nature, is 'devoid 

of (phenomenal nature) ( nihsvabhava ) and is merged in the state of unity 
(■samarasa )’ (KhCPS 3). 

One of the most immediately evident and striking features of the KhCPS 
is the presence of many Yoginis and Kalis. While the latter continue to appear 
in subsequent developments, culminating in Abhinavagupta’s Twelve Kalis, 
the Yoginis disappear, replaced by their essential sonic nature as energies of 
the letters and, above all, as energies of perception. These, we notice, are not 
mentioned at all in this early stage of the Mahartha. The Yoginis of the KhCPS 


THE KHACAKRAPA.kCAKASTOTRA. HYMN TO THE FIVE SPHERES OF EMPTINESS 75 


are worshipped in five Wheels containing seventeen Yoginls each. They are the 
energies of the Great Vidya of KalasarnkarsinT of seventeen syllables, 9 which 
correspond to the energies of the sixteen lunar vowels that unfold as aspects 
of the Sound ( rctva) that resounds in the Void of pure, egoless consciousness 
which is the seventeenth energy, their transcendental source. The Yoginls praise 
the Vidya (150) as the Mistress of the Wheels, as they behold, as the KhCPS puts 
it, ‘the Great Wonder ( mabdscarya ) in the Circle of Emptiness ( khacakrci)’ (56). 
She who is the ‘first of all the secret formulas (vidya),’ the light of all things, who 
recites the mantra of consciousness (97), is praised by the Yoginls in each sphere 
(57-149) who refer to her with a variety of names. 

The Five Wheels are those of Bhasa, Space ( Kha ), the Directions ( dik ), Speech 
(go) and the Earth (bhu). This group of five constitutes the transcendental Wheel 
of the Sky (Vyomacakra) with its 85 Yoginls, the names of which are carefully 
noted (12-24). From these five arises a second group of five spheres, which is 
its immanent equivalent, making up the Wheel of the Earth (Bhucakra) (38cd- 
39) with the same number of Yoginls, whose names are also listed (25-38ab). 
The two sets of 85 Yoginls, totaling 170 altogether, are said to be engaged in the 
Great Festival of Union (38cd-3gab), thus implying that each of the Yoginls has 
a corresponding Siddha or Bhairava. The first set of five praises the goddess in 
the five circles. The second set taught the hymn to Bhairava, who transmitted it 
through a series of teachers, first divine and then mortal, to the world (150-156). 

The five groups of Yoginls move in five spheres of Emptiness. The Bhasa 
Yoginls delight, inebriated with supreme bliss, in the energy of the goddess who is 
Mudra, the Khecaris in Emptiness, the Dikcarls in the radiance of the directions, 
the Gocarls in the union within the Heart of the Self and non-Self, while the 
Bhucaris in the Root centre illuminate the Channel of Brahma (i.e., susumna in 
the subtle body) (48cd-52). These five spheres of Emptiness correspond to five 
stages of the development of absorption into consciousness. These are the Deity’s 
Speech (kathana) that induces penetration (avesa) into Emptiness, the worship 
of the Krama (kramapujana), the bliss (ramana) of entry into the Sound that 
resonates through Emptiness, the fire of emanation of the pure consciousness 

9. The Vidya according to the Devyayamala quoted by Jayaratha in his commentary 
on TA 29.70 is HRlM MAHACANDAYOGESVARI THR DHR THR PHAT PHAT PHAJ 
PHAT PHAT 



76 TANTRAPUSPANJALI 


of Emptiness that consumes duality, and, finally, complete assimilation into the 
Emptiness of the Deity’s essential nature. 

As the expansion of Divine Sound unfolding in Emptiness, the five spheres 
of Emptiness correspond to the five letters of the seed syllable of Kalasamkarsini, 
KHPHREM. Also called Pindanatha or Samharablja, it is embodied in the Kali 
who is the mistress of all the Wheels ( cakresvcirt ). In its normal forward order 
it is the abode of the Goddess in Bhasacakra (57). In the other four wheels it is 
presented in the reverse order, that is, MAEKHAPHARA (75, 106, 112). 

We may now note briefly a few important features of the contents of the five 
spheres of Emptiness and the aspects of the goddess illumined in this way within 
the Emptiness of pure consciousness. At first sight it appears that a basic format 
of the Krama we find in all its representations, from the Kalikula that preceded 
the Kashmiri Krama system to the one centred on Guhvakall that developed after 
it in Nepal, is absent. This is the well-known division into cycles of emanation 
(srsti ), persistence ( sthiti ), withdrawal ( samharci ), the Inexplicable ( andkhya ), 
and, in those branches that maintained the pentadic format, Illumination 
(bhasa) as the fifth. But this is not really so. Dikcakra is said directly to be the 
Wheel of Withdrawal (samharci) (95)- Gocakra is called the Wheel of Descent 
(avatara), which is persistence (sthiti) (105). We may infer that Bhucakra, which 
contains, as we shall see, the gross elements and the 36 principles, is the Wheel 
of Emanation (srsti). The first two Wheels, Bhasa and Khacakra, represent, 
respectively, the perfectly pure, transcendental illumination of Emptiness and 
the totality of all the Voids and their energies. Thus Khacakra is equivalent to 
Anakhyacakra, in which all the energies and states of the cycles are summated. 

However, although the cycle of emanation and withdrawal is represented by 
the Five Spheres of Emptiness, this is not emphasised in the KhCPS, as they are 
perceived in terms of the Five Currents (pahcavaha) of the Mahanaya. According 
to the MP of Arnasimha, this is governed by the energies Vyomavama (also called 
VamesvarT), Khecari, Bhucarl, SamharabhaksinI and Raudresvarl (MP 25-46ab). 
Their energies, which are the whole of the Krama, make up the Wheel of Egoity 
(asmitacakra) (MP 105) that unfolds in the Emptiness of the one fundamental, 
egoless energy. In other words, the KhCPS is primarily concerned with the 
expanse of the Goddess who is all the energies of Emptiness that unfold in 
Emptiness as aspects of it, rather than the process through which it takes place. 


THE KHACAKRAPA ftCAICASTOTRA , HYMN TO THE FIVE SPHERES OF EMPTINESS j 77 


It is to these five aspects of the Goddess, characterized by the configuration 
( cakra ) of her energies that are the five spheres of the Emptiness she governs, to 
which we now turn. 

1) Bhasacakra: This Wheel is the encompassing Emptiness of the Light 
that shines as all the Wheels, that is, as their foundation and essential 
nature, which is their absence of phenomenal nature ( nihsvabhava ). 
Thus the Mistress of the Wheel, who is the Supreme Energy within the 
Great Abode of all things (the syllable KHPHREM), is beyond them all 
and so is devoid of aspects and has no specific name. 

2) Khacakra: Cakresvari in the sphere of Khacakra is the Kali of the energy of 
the Void (60, 66). Emerging from Bhasacakra onto the plane of the Vidya 
of seventeen syllables (76), which unfolds in the Spheres of Emptiness, 
she is Kali who is linked to the Kallkrama. This Wheel is the equivalent 
of Anakhyacakra, which is that of the Thirteen Kalis. Accordingly, she 
is praised as the Kali whose Light is twelve-fold and ‘whose brilliance 
is like twelve suns’ (62), whereas she herself is the emptiness in the 
centre. As Emptiness within Emptiness (79), she is the bliss of the Great 
Cessation ( mahanirvana ) within the dimensionless Point ( bindu ) of pure 
consciousness, at the climax of Inaction (niskriyanta) (77). She is praised 
as two series of thirteen Kalis (62-74, 82-94), the second of which is very 
similar to the one to which Abhinavagupta refers. They are: Sr$tikall 
(82), Sthitikali (83), Samharakall (84), Raktakall (85) Dhvamsukali (86), 
Yamakali (87), Mrtyukall (88), Bhadrakall (89), Martandakall (90) Para 
(91), Kala (92), Varna (93) and Ghoracan^a (94)- In between the Goddess 
is extolled in her basic form as Yogesvari in general and specifically as 
Khacakresvarl. Her presence in each of the five letters of KHPHREM, 
presented here in reverse, is praised in between these two series (77-81). 

3) Dikcakra: Ten forms of Kali are praised in this sphere of Emptiness 
representing, presumably, the ten directions in directionless Emptiness. 
This is the sphere of the sequence ( krama) of destruction ( sarrihara ). 
Accordingly, the forms of the goddess are both pervasive and fierce. 
She is the embodiment of anger (cantfa) (97), Bhlmakall, the ‘fierce 
one’ (99), and the wrathful RaudrI (100). She is ‘extremely greedy to 



8 tantrapuspAnjali 

devour (phenomenal) existence’ (102) and yet she protects her devotees, 
consuming time and death which would otherwise consume them (103). 

4) Gocakra: The fourth Krama marks the descent of the Deity s universal 
consciousness ( avatdra) into the individual Self. It is the Light of 
consciousness that shines in the midst of the circle of the senses that 
illumines and impels them with its energy (107). The mistress of this 
Wheel is the goddess who is embodied as the four Yuganathas and the 
twelve princes, who are the disciples of Matsyendranatha, the teacher 
of this age, and she incarnates as their consorts. These are distributed in 
the five letters of KHPHREM, presented in reverse. 

5) Bhucakra: The Kali of this Sphere of Emptiness is the Mother of the 
Five Elements (113) and hence is the womb ( yoni ) of the five Brahmas 
(Brahma, Visnu, Siva, Isvara and Rudra) (123-126) who govern and sustain 
them. She is the energy of consciousness inwardly present within the 
individual soul ( purusa) as she is in all the thirty-six principles (146- 
147)- Here she assumes the form of the mind, intellect and ego (114), as 
well as the breath (115), and she is the inner presence the Siddhas intuit 
within themselves as their ultimate goal (119). Inwardly, she bestows all 
the higher yogic states of consciousness up to ultimate rest (120) and 
the Great Cessation ( mahdmrvdna) she embodies. Within the body 
and the world, she is the source of all the means to realisation and so 
serves as the bridge between the divine and human (124). Thus she is 
the sacrificial fire and is full of the Vedic scriptures (128). These realities 
are distributed in the five letters KHPHREM, presented in reverse three 
times. 

The hymn concludes that the goddess, established in the Great Reality 
(mahdrtha), assumes the form of all things (148-49), even as she is the 
Great Abode ( mahadkdman) that contains them. Thus she is like Nature 
( prakrti ), the three qualities of which she embodies and instigates 
Her omniformity does not just extend to all the principles 
of existence; she is also all the forms of the goddess and the female 
supernatural beings of the Kaula universe that attend on her. These 
include the Eight Mothers and the goddesses of the directions, along 




THE KHACAKRAPAftCAKASTOTRA, HYMN TO THE FIVE SPHERES OF EMPTINESS ; 79 


with YaksinI, Nagini, Vidyadhari and GandharvI who govern the beings 
from whom they draw their names. She is the great Yoginls of the cult 
of the Brahmayamala —Mahocchu§ma, KapalesI and Camunda (135- 
136). She embodies the Yoginls Jaya, Yijaya, JayantI and Aparajita (137) 
who attend on Tumburu, the Bhairava of the Varna Tantras. She is all 
the Great Goddesses represented by Para, Durga, Candika, Uma and 
Aghoresi. Above all, she is KalasamkarsinI, the Great Time, Kalaratri, 
and Kankall (132-133). She is ‘the manifestation of time,’ and ‘called 
time in the great festival that takes place at all times!’ (132)- The Hymn 
ends with a brief account of its descent into the world from Bhairava 
who learnt it from the Yoginis. This is followed by a list of eighty-five 
accomplishments ( siddhi ) bestowed by that same number of Yoginls in 
the five spheres. 



8 o TANTRAPU 5 PANJALI 


Khacakrapancakastotra Edition and Translation 

R: i I 4 4 ft d WJ IH 

ft-IW;J^TT 5 l d i.l l%Ri : | T -FfTd i 

*n?p-} RTPf M'-Mlfa I I ? II 

ya santakagniravisoma - anakhyabhasarp 
nihsesapuritamaharthamahotkallolam 
ciccandatejasivasaktim asesamatarp- 
srimangalam iti 3 maharthanr prati 7 pranaumi i 

I bow to the Great Reality ( mahdrtha ), the venerable (goddess) Marigala, she 
who is the mother of all things, the energy of Siva, the awesome ( canda ) power 
(tejas) of consciousness. (I praise her,) the great wave of the Great Reality filled 
with all things, (she who is) the light of the Inexplicable (that illumines) the Sun 
and Moon along with the Fire of (universal) destruction. (1) 

TTH ^TT 5 RTOPT FRT -- 4 wd'TK' 4 mi 

65 <iwpi -mm 1 

1 ■+, K P-f; ift H 'T cA H H -d. dl ^ IM -h r -P?' H 

■RTWRT RWWi ddNsf. I I = I I 

eka devT prasarati para 7 vyomahamkaraghosa 
cakrarn’ raudrarp gaganasadrsarp'' rasmipunjarn'" samagram | 
vyomakarakalitakalananandabhasapracandam" 
bhasatltam 12 vismayavisayarp ' 3 devTcakram''* namami || 2 || 

One goddess (alone), the Supreme, (her) Sound the egoity of Emptiness 
(vyoman), extends (as all things). I salute the Circle of the Goddess (, devicakra) 
whose field (• visaya) is wonder ( vismaya ), which is beyond speech and extremely 
terrible with the light of the bliss of undifferentiated manifestation ( kalcind) 
whose form is Emptiness (vyoman). (I salute) the fearful (raudra) circle which 
is (empty) like the sky, the totality (of all things), the network of the rays (of 
consciousness). (2) 

10. Note on the text: superscript numbers in the verses refer to endnotes supporting the 
edition of the text. For the sake of simplicity, these endnotes are only given once, in 
the Roman transliteration, and not in the Devanagari text. Superscript numbers in 
the translation refer to footnotes relevant to the interpretation of the verse. 


















THE KHACAKRAPAfiCAKASTOTRA. HYMN TO THE FIVE SPHERES OF EMPTINESS | 81 


NKd'-KHd^'l c^f^MHR<= 4 ) 
dMdMWW^MddRHI«l: \ \ \ \ \ 

samarasapadallno nihsvabhavaikavirah 
samitasakalabhavair^jnanadrstiprakasah | 
viditaparamatattvo labdhavijnanasaukhyo 16 
nayitaparamabodhajnananetradyanathah 17 1| 3 || 

The first teacher ( adyanatha ) is Jnananetra who has been led to supreme 
consciousness, attained the bliss of insight ( vijnana ) and known the ultimate 
reality. He is the light of the vision of knowledge (that arises) once all phenomenal 
states (bhava) have been quelled and is the Solitary Hero ( ekavlra) devoid of 
(phenomenal nature )(nihsvabhava) merged in the state of unity (samarasa ). (3) 

dStft dloMqRlcj d^d'dfd^. I I V I I 

yasmad 18 asamkhyakiranavalikalavahnim 
nityam niruddham udayastamanasvabhavam 19 1 
ekarn 2 " hy anekavibhavaih ksatasarvabhavam 
tad 21 naumi cavyayasivani bahutejavisvam || 4 || 

I bow to Him, the imperishable (ayyqya), auspicious ( siva) One Who is the 
universe of many energies ( bahutejas ), from Whom (arises) the Fire of Time 
with (its) countless streams of rays; He Who with the multitude of (His) glorious 
powers ( vibhava ) has destroyed all phenomenal states of existence (bhava)’, He 
Who, eternally at rest (nlruddha), is the essential nature of the arising and falling 
away (of all things). (4) 

*frff i 

^RTcR: *RT dR^MdRMcf I I S I I 



82 tantrapuspAnjali 


gaurim~ vighnesavatukarn virasiddhan ca yoginim 
voginvo matarah sarva namaskrtvavatarayat- - 

Once he saluted (the goddess) Garni, the Vogini, Ganesa, Yatuka, the 
Virasiddhas, all the Yoginls and Mothers, (Jnananetra) brought (this hymn) 
down (into the world). (5) 

TJTJT 7 T JTFCT-H yj|i-||w 7 M: W. I 

^ I I 6 I ! 

ganesam saktisamyuktam pranamami ganaih saha 
vande srinathapadabjanr 4 khecaryadiganasya ca 6 
sivayoginicakrasya"' gurunam amalatmakam* 

I prostrate before Ganesa who is conjoined with (his) energy along with the 
host. 1 praise the lotus feet of Srlnatha and the pure nature of the teachers and 
that of the host (of energies), which is the circle of Siva’s Yoginis commencing 
with Khecari. (6-7ab) 

- ciMfFPRATT -yyqray^-ii: 11*11 

^ glVi'bilR r[ *WRPTT: I 

R-^PTT: I | C | | 

sripitha - uttarantastha astapithasamudbhavaln 7 1| 7 || 
karavlrasmasane tu ekacakre^ samagatah"" j 
mahamelapamilita yogakridotsave' sthitah || 8 |j 

(The Yoginls) in the venerable Northern Seat, born of the eight seats 
( astapltha ) (of the Mothers), have come together in a single gathering ( cakra ) in 
the cremation ground of Karavira. They are united together in the Great Union 
( mahameidpa ), engaged in the play of (sexual) union (yogaknda ). (7cd-8) 

T^P^RT pi-eKI ■Mwl TFTO rPU I 

*iiirerT g jjsmph i i i i 

khecari dikcari caiva - * 1 gocari bhucarl tatha | 
ramyadamaridakinyo^ vyomesl tu mahabala || 9 || 





















THE KHACAKRAPAftCAKASTOTRA. HYMN TO THE FIVE SPHERES OF EMPTINESS J 83 


(They are) Khecari, Dikcarl, Gocari, Bhucari along with Ramya, Daman, 
Dakini, and VyomesI," who is very powerful. (9) 

H£lflc*Nfafedl 4 lPl« 4 « ’HHHIdl: II HI 

anyair anekasarnghatair yogyanyair 0 vividhatmakaih | 
mahamelapamilita yoginyas ca' 4 samagatah || 10 || 

The Yoginls who have come are also assembled (there) together in the Great 
Union with other Yogis of many kinds and in many groups. 1 * (10) 

dm=l»J|N^<d W T^IcTI: II ?? II 

astasastis tu yoginyo daSasaptadhikah sthitah | 
namavarnavibhedena pancacakre' 5 yatha sthitah || 111| 

The Yoginls number sixty-eight and seventeen (that is, eighty-five). They 
reside in the five circles according to their names and the letters (of the alphabet 
to which they correspond). (11) 

^ <hfoiyiRU|) | 

^ ^*M|RHI II H I I 

M'hlfddl I 

I TTRl ^ 5RTT d-dMsKI I I I 

maiigala ekaratrl ca khecarP (i phanidharinl | 
ravin! mantrarupa ca hamsakhya cakranayika 37 1| 12 || 

11. Although, as we shall see, the Wheels of Siddhas and Yoginls are arranged differently, 
here it seems that their common origin—as that of all the Yoginls from the Eight 
Mothers is underscored right at the beginning by identifying eight major Yoginls 
who, representing the others, have come from the seats of the Eight Mothers. 

12. In this case Yoginls are, as their name literally means, ‘uniters and united in 
the Great Festival of Union—Yoga—with the Yogis assembled with them in the 
cremation ground of KaravTra. 






84 TANTRAPUSPANJALI 


gharhana 3 * damara 3 '- devi tatha Isa prakirtita 
gaijanl ekacari ca savarl vajrapanjara 13 
rddhih 44 saptadasi jneya bhasacakre 4 vyavasthita 

(The names of these Yoginls are as follows): Mangala, Ekaratri, Khecarl, 
PhanidharinI, RavinI, Mantrarupa, the one called Harnsa, Cakranayika, 
Gharhana, Damara, Dev! and the one renouned as Isa, Garjani, Ekacari, Savarl, 
Vajrapanjara and know Rddhi to he the seventeenth (YoginI who) resides in the 
Circle of Bhasa. (i2-i4ab). 

U ,+.HKI ^FTT TTTI I I Vd I I 

TfrtHRI rtT-HIHI ^ I 

1 1 1 1 

-ri-MHI I 

tif ^ WM: TpqpTT MTIHHI: II II 

mandara ekanari 42 ca khagl phanl ravantika 43 1| 14 || 

rasminama mantrakala haramata ca candika 1 

nabho 44 bhasa dambamayl yamandakhya 47 gabhastini || 15 || 

ekayoginimantrajna 46 vamana rddhinl smrta | 

khe cakre yoginyah 47 khyata dasasapta praklrtitah || 16 || 

Seventeen are said to be the Yoginls in the Circle of the Sky ( khacakra ), 
(namely): Mandara' 3 , Ekanarl, Khagl, Phanl, Ravantika, she who is called Rasmi 
and is the energy of mantra ( mantrakala ), Haramatr, Candika, Nabhas, Bhasa, 
Dambamayl, the one called Yamanda, GhabhastinI, EkayoginI, Mantrajna, 
Vamana and Rddhinl. (i4cd-i6) 

^ cRTT I | II 

■wnc^icTT ^frfdHi crt i 

H'htflHI ^ idfifril T^'rilMril II I I 


13, Notice that the name of the first YoginI in each one of these five primary groupings 
(cakra) begins with Ma. This is the initial of the main YoginI—Mangala—who is the 
first of all these Yoginls and is identified with the main goddess Kalasamkarsanl. 


























THE KHACAKRAPAfiCAKASTOTRA, HYMN TO THE FIVE SPHERES OF EMPTINESS j 85 


^#«IcfT: | | ^ I I 

manthana ekavira ca svadinl 4 * phanibhusana 49 1 
ramani mantrallla ca hari candramasa 50 tatha || 17 || 
nabhotthita 5 ’ damarus ca 52 yamuna oghinl tatha | 
ganesl ekalama ca sankhinl 53 vajraghatinl || 18 || 
rtuksayamkari devi saptadasapadojjvala | 
dikcakrasamsthita devyastrtlye cakre 54 samsthitah 55 1| 19 || 

The goddesses residing in the Circle of the Directions ( dlkcakra ), which is the 
third circle, are: Manthana, Ekavira, SvadinI, Phanibhusana, Ramani, Mantralila, 
Hari, Candramasa, Nabhotthita, Damaru, Yamuna, Oghinl, Ganesl, Ekalama, 
Sankhinl, Vajraghatinl and Rtuksayamkari, the goddess who burns brilliantly 
with the seventeen states (of this circle). (17-19) 

’(.'*1*^1 I I I I 

Hp^d) 411^41 cT^TT I 

*FTTT wVl ^ cRf^lT I I R? I I 

w fftlT -dsbHimi I 

madana ekacakra ca khagacakra 56 phalaSini | 
rajaki 57 madagandhakhya phalinP 8 cakrapujita || 20 || 
nandinl 59 dandinl 60 caiva yasah^ri 61 modinl 62 tatha | 
gagana 63 ekavira ca Savabhaksya varayudha 11 2111 
rksa saptada£l 64 jneya gocakre cakranayika | 

(The goddesses residing in the Circle of Speech are): Madana, Ekacakra, 
Khagacakra, PhalasinI, Rajaki, the one called Madagandha, PhalinI, Cakrapujita, 
Nandinl, Dandinl, Yasahsri, Modinl, Gagana, Ekavira, Savabhaksya, Varayudha 
and Rksa, who should be known to be the seventeenth mistress in the Circle of 
Speech ( gocakra ). (20-22ab) 

JTTN'MI *jI 35 c 5 T Wl^fi I I RR II 


86 TANTRAPUSPANJALI 


^=TT % WyT 2 WT 4 l T<TT '-'.A 
WFTT K«4kl ^ 3ETU Cj ^Vj|pu|| I 
ifcrafrl diKTHHI ^1% H«J'-JFAlFTT: | | TV 

manovega ekanisa khakala phanagarvini 2a 
raktaksi mandasiddhih' srlhayagriva ' ca carcika 
nadana' ’ uhaka ,K ‘ caiva yasoda' osadhi tatha 23 
gandharvi ekavlra’ 1 ca savari vajraclharini 
rddhika'- dasasaptetiP bhucakre samvyavasthitah- 24 

These are the seventeen that reside in the Circle of the Earth (bhucukra): 
Manovega, Ekanisa, Khakala, Phanagarvini, Raktaksi, Mandasiddhi, Srihayagriva, 
Carcika, Nadana, Uhaka, Yasoda, Osadhi, Gandharvi, Ekavira, Savari, \ ajradharini 
and Rddhika. (22cd-24) 

if i 

WIT feTFT ^ '-ilPTT.i 4dlMFTq | | I ; 

etatsarnkasad udbhutam anvad vai” cakrapancakam 
parivare sthitim 7 ' ca” yamekaikanP ca vadamy aham 25 

Another group of hve circles arises from this one. 1 will tell (you) the 
condition of each in the surrounding entourage. (25) 

tilE-hHI WTi ^TTTT i-MAI CTM'APtTTiT I 

-T1ofiV |4l ^ WTTT I I T& I I 

RMdOl CEW N'Jil I 

yfwpj|T %tl 4 U|| yj^l ^H- 4 ,'J|| oqcfTT^pfT I I T' 3 I I 

^ TPfcTT: TflPdiTT: I 

dakinl 7 '’ pinjarighora unmatta pranabhaksika | 
kaliiiga kalaratrl ca marjarl sandhibhedinl || 26 || 
ajavaktra mesamukha vyaghrl sukararupini | 
jambhanl’’" bhlsanl raudrl” 1 kumbhakarnl vyavasthita || 27 || 
dasasapta* 2 ca sambhutah prathame cakre h:i samsthitah* 4 1 
































THE KHACAKRAPAfiCAKASTOTRA. HYMN TO THE FIVE SPHERES OF EMPTINESS 87 


Dakinl, Pinjarl, Ghora, Unmatta, Pranabhaksika, Kalihga, Kalaratri, Marjari, 
SandhibhedinI, Ajavaktra, Mesamukha, Yyaghri, SukararupinT, JambhanI, 
BhlsanT, Raudri and Kumbhakarni; (these) seventeen reside in the first circle. 
(26-28ab) 

^ *TYRl I I ^ I I 

FWc 5 T TTTT^RT ^ TWI ^TJcfT I 

S.Tfd'buff ^1431 I I ^ II 

TT^PTI ^fh^fr ^u^mRehl | 

HTTW: II II 

sakinl 8 '’ bhadracarl ca rodhani 8 '’ madaranjika || 28 || 
nirmala jambhinl caiva svacchanda jaijari 8 " smrta | 
hastikaml candateja jagaddhatri 88 sivanana || 29 || 
carcika raksasi bhatta mundinl mundadharika 8 ” | 
saptadasakramotthas ca'"’ dvitlye cakre"' nayikah " || 30 || 

The mistresses who arise from the seventeen-fold sequence in the second 
circle are: Sakinl, Bhadracarl, Rodhani, Madaranjika, Nirmala, Jambhinl, 
Svacchanda, Jarjarl, Hastikaml, Candateja, Jagaddhatri, Sivanana, Carcika, 
Rak§asl, Bhatta, Mundinl and Mundadharika. (28cd-3o) 

^TRT % iRtqT cT«IT I 

WT sflftlcWTOT ^ cFfift cfqtrrr I I X? I I 

^fT HTSJ PPJRT ^^*1 1 

TRHt dTCT ^ II ^ M 

TTR^T: I 

lama ca rukminl caiva harinl 93 khecari 94 tatha | 
prabha sonitabhasa 95 ca tapanl 96 varsani 97 smrta || 311| 
jaya 98 ca vijaya siddha trijata putrahartrka | 
digvasa jananl" tara durdura 100 ca vyavasthita || 32 || 
dasasaptakramakhyatah 101 trtlye cakre 102 sambhavah 103 1 

Those who are called the seventeen-fold sequence and arise in the third 
circle are: Lama, Rukminl, Harinl, Khecari, Prabha, Sonitabhasa, Tapani, Varsani, 



88 TANTRAPUSPANJALI 


Jaya, Vijaya, Siddha, Trijata, Putrahartrka, Digvasa, Janani, Iara, and Durdura. 
( 3 i- 33 ab) 

^ cmr i i 11 

$|lcWI =g ^Tlcjfi Kl fi'-JMHI I 

^ Mills'll I I 3.V I I 

<£rM #n^rt i 

JTRTKT WIKPfcl: I I AH I I 

rupika cittaharT" 4 ca bhasvari bhavanT " tatha [j 33 j 
£ulinT° 6 sulaghatT 07 cajlvahari hayanana J 
kukkuri 108 cakravega ca grdhravaktri 1 ■' nisacari || 34 || 
pumsinl sribala caiva rajakT 10 clrabhucarT” j 
maijari dasasaptaitah 112 caturthe 113 cakre 114 nayikah |l 35 j j 

These are the seventeen mistresses in the fourth circle: Rupika, CittaharT, 
Bhasvari, Bhavani, SulinI, Sulaghatl, JIvaharT, Hayanana, Kukkuri, Cakravega, 
Grdhravaktri, Nisacari, Pumsinl, Sribala, RajakT, Clrabhucarl, and Marjarl. 
( 33 cd- 35 ) 

I 

Sil'hUR ^ I I AA I I 

dKdlHI ^ ddcA-tNI WMHI I 
5TTfTT ffrPft ’ETKT ^Tb+id) I I A'f I I 

bhucari vedhak! caiva bindumalantrabhaksika" 5 j 
akarnl bhadrakarnl ca sumatir viragarvita 116 1| 36 || 
guhyadhvi viravasa 117 ca kalaratri kharanana | 
sarikarT* 8 vrttini ghora muktakesl krsodarT 19 1| 37 || 
saptadasatra vikhyatah pancacakrasamudbhavah | 

Here the seventeen (goddesses who) are known as the outpourings of the fifth 
circle are: Bhucari, VedhakI, Bindumala, Antrabhak§ika, Akarnl, Bhadrakarnl, 
Sumati, Viragarvita, Guhyadhvi, Viravasa, Kalaratri, Kharanana, Sankari, Vrttini, 
Ghora, Muktakesl and Kr^odari. (36-383!?) 



THE KHACAKRAPAfiCAKASTOTRA, HYMN TO THE FIVE SPHERES OF EMPTINESS ! 89 


HHfrlSJ 5TcT 4lHWMi ^HHId'H. II I I 

fldlfdl ft«IcTT: I 

saptatis ca satarn caiva yoginlnam kramagatam || 38 || 
sarvas ta ekacakrastha mahayogotsave sthitah | 

One hundred and seventy are (the energies) that form the sequence of 
Yoginis. All of them are in a single assembly ( cakra) engaged in the Great Festival 
of Union (yoga). (38cd-3gab) 

fP-FTT: FRT ^1% ^ I I VU I 

vyomacakre sthitah sarva bhucakre tu visesatah 11 39 11 

All of them reside in the Circle of Emptiness (■ vyomacakra ) and in particular 
in the Circle of the Earth ( bhucakra ). (3gcd) 

W*dlfd*3^ ^ ■d^hdlRl'hl I 

TT^<AK^I 3 *TT 3#i<bK<b'0 ^ *TT I I V® I I 

paricasitis tu kharn cakrarn 120 tanmadhye cakranayika | 
mangalakhya 121 tu ya dev! adhikarakari tu sa 11 40 11 

Eighty-five make up the Wheel of the Void ( khacakra ) and in its centre is 
the mistress of the circle called Mangala, the goddess who bestows authority 
(adhikarakari) (to all the Yoginis). (40) 

H$.l4iPlPi4> sW I I V? I I 


,22 kramopadesamargena 123 pithayoginikain matam | 
mahayoginikam canyam 124 kramam sarvesvaresvaram 123 1| 41 jj 

According to the path of the Krama teachings, the Tradition ( mata) is that 
of 1) the Yoginis of the Sacred Seats. 2) Another sequence (krama) is that of the 
Great YoginI and is the governor of all the Lords. (41) 


3 IKFT 1 TO I 





I I MR II 







go TAXTRAPUSPAXJALI 


advayoginikam canyam kramarn mantratanum ' param 
mahasiddhakramam pascat pithayoginikam ■' matam 42 

3) Another (sequence) is that of the First Yogini; supreme, its body consists 
of the mantras of the sequence (krama). 4) After this comes the sequence of the 
Great Siddhas, which is the teaching (mata) of the Yoginis of the Sacred Seats. 
(42) 

H'ZNZUHI’-i'i 4 J/. dm-, 4 . HI 4 MH I I V-. 

siddhayoginikarn canyam u ' kramarn sarvesvaresvaram • 
mudrapancasanwuktam gurupamktikramagatam 43 

5) Another sequence is that of the governor of all the Lords and is that of 
the Siddhayoginls. Associated with the five gestures (rnudra), it has come down 
along the sequence of the Lineage of the Masters. (43) 

WI sTFFT WTT if.H4.HHH I 

| 1 VV I I 

WWWJIWfFTl i 

rrg fj qiHIHId-MM'Jiqq | | y-. I I 

"TT YtMIH HM-YKi JTF?R: I 

kramenajnayateyogl kathanam kramapujanam 
samkramanam' 3 ' sarvagatam sarvavesavivarjitam 44 
ravapravesaramanam vamanagrasaghasmaram' 12 1 
evam maiigalapurvam tu yoginIkramanirnayam Hi || 45 || 
yo janati mahakaulo 134 maharthas tasya' 3 ' gocarah 13 '' | 

A (true) yogi is one who knows 14 (the following) in due order: 1) speech 
(kathana) (that enlightens), 2) the worship of the Krama ( kramapujana ), 3) the 
transference ( samkramana) (of insight from the master to the disciple) which 
is present everywhere and is free of all (demonic) possession ( dvesa ), 4) the 

14. Although in the expression 'jnayate yogi’ the verb is passive and so the logical subject 
(‘y°g>’) should be in the instrumental case, I understand the verb to be irregularly 
(mistakenly?) treated as active. 





















THE KHACAKRAPAfiCAKASTOTILA. HYMN TO THE FIVE SPHERES OF EMPTINESS 91 


playful joy ( ramana) of entry into Sound, 5) the consuming fire of emission and 
assimilation—such is the auspicious ( mangala) teaching of the Yoginlkrama. 
The Great Reality ( maharthci) is in the purview of the Great Kaula who knows 
(this). (44-46ab) 

cpFST < 14^,131 ell I I I I 

JWR R-i ?T%n TFRt WQ cT«n I 

^ Mdc^d. I I V'S I I 

■TR Yq|«j H^4|U|: 7 ^ -441 ^Y|| 4 d: I 

puja caryakramah krida mudra ravapradarsita || 46 || 
mahamamsam"' tatha matsyam' ,s madyarn sidhum u ‘‘ tatha suram' 41 ’ | 
carurn' 4 ' pasun ca 144 vividhan gltavadyam 143 nivedayet || 47 II 
japarn dhyanarn prakurvanah' 44 sve 143 sve' 41 ’ cakre svabhavatah 147 1 

Worship (puja) is mystical sexual union ( carydkrama). It is (erotic) play 
(krida), while gesture (mudra) is that exhibited by (the inner mystical) Sound 
(rdva). (The yogi) should offer the Great Meat (i.e., human flesh or beef), fish, 
liquor, rum and wine, the sacrificial pap (earn), many kinds of sacrificial animals, 
song and instrumental music. (He should do this) as he meditates and repeats 
mantras (to the Yoginls) in their own respective circles according to their own 
nature. (46cd-48ab) 

HflKTd clef: Sgm q<|ch|*||feH 3 Hlci II W<I I I 

9 J 3 T cj fW-l'HI ’qFrcTT: I 

W^I^TOT^lcTT: I I W I I 

Tfrlri^j f^BT: I 

maharavam tatah srutva parakasan niranjanat 148 1| 48 || 
srutva tu hrstamanasa paranandena 149 ghurnitah 130 1 
mudrapravesagaminyah 131 pancadhakramasamsthitah 152 1 | 49 II 
bhasakhyas 133 caiva yoginyo 134 mahadhamantare 155 sthitah l3b | 

1) Then, having heard with (their) minds delighted the Great Sound (that 
emerges) from the Supreme Emptiness ( parakasa ) of the Stainless ( niranjana), 
the Yoginls called Bhasa, who are part of the five-fold sequence, reside within the 





92 TANTRAPUSPANJALI 


Great Abode, and are present in the mystical entry into the seal (of the 1 energy of 
consciousness) {mudrdprccvesa) t vibrate inebriated by supreme bliss. (4Scd-5oab) 

khecaryo'" vyomamargasthah-' s paravyomalavarngatah 50 

2) The Khecarl (Yoginls) reside on the path of emptiness and have dissolved 
away into the Supreme Emptiness (vyoman). (soed) 

feWTTWTT: I 

I V< , I 

dikearyo 159 dikprakasabhah suksmadhyanaparayanalr' 
gocaryo hrdi yogajna atmanatmavibhavitah ' : || 51 

3) The Dikcari (Yoginls) are the radiance of the light of the quarters (dik) 
and are intent on subtle meditation. 4) The Gocarl (Yoginls) know the union 
(yoga) within the Heart and are generated by the Self (atman) and its opposite 
( anatman ). (51) 

H W H I HI d Id I d M HIM % 1: I I Rk I I 

bhucaryah 1 '’ 2 kandacakrastha l '' , brahmanadiprakasikah"' 4 1 
bhavajna bhavanirmukta bhavabhavavibhavikab || 52 || 

5) The Bhucarl (Yoginls) reside in the circle of the Root (Centre in the body) 
0 kandacakra ) and illuminate the Nerve of Brahma. They know the states of being 
(bhava) and, free of them, are generated from being and non-being. (52) 

NrrNIHH RW | 

II II 

etaddhi 165 cintayamasa prasutam 16 '’ rasmimandalam 167 1 
duspreksam 11 ' 8 sarvabhutanam anilanalamadhyagam || 53 || 

This (the yogi) contemplates, namely, the Circle of the Rays (of consciousness) 
(newly) born that, hard to behold, resides in between the Fire and the Wind (of 
the vital breath) of all living beings. (53) 



















THE KHACAKRAPAftCAKASTOTRA. HYMN TO THE FIVE SPHERES OF EMPTINESS I 93 


mahabhasurarupabham tejojvalasamakulam | 
pancamandalamadhyastham samantat tejasavrtam || 54 || 

It is the Light which is the Great Radiance full of the flames of (its) energy 
(tejas). Located in the centre of the five circles, it is enveloped all around by (its) 
radiant energy (tejas). (54) 


rT^rRTT ^ 4)Pl-4l f£TTFW: | | I I 

somasuryagnikotyabham jyotisam' hs jyotir uttamarn' 70 1 
tattejasa tu sarvas ta yoginyo hrstamanasah || 55 || 

Shining with the light of millions of moons, suns and fires, it is the supreme 
Light of lights, and by its radiant energy (tejas) the minds of all those Yoginls are 
delighted. (55) 

SliglcWUldl: I I I I 

paSyanti ca mahaScaryam khe cakre 17 ' cakrasamsthitah | 
pranjalipranatah' 72 sarva idam stotram udirayan' 73 1| 56 || 

(The Yoginls) residing in the (five) circles behold the Great Wonder 
(mahdscarya) in the Circle of Emptiness (kha) and, all bowing with folded hands, 
they uttered this hymn. (56) 

1) The Kali of the Wheel of Light (Bhasacakra) 
ta'&IH RT ^ I I I I 



94 TANTRAPUSPANJALI 


khapharemkaradhamasthe - dhamarupe niranjane 
ciddhama paradhamakhye mahadhama pare kale 7,7 
gaganambarasamkase niradharapadojjhite 
nabhovyomantarakare manthanante " namo’stu te 78 

Hail to you, (0 goddess,) whose form is within the Void of Emptiness! You 
who are within the churning (Lord of Consciousness) and reside in the abode of 
KHPHREM! (Hail to you) whose form is the abode (of all things), the Stainless, the 
abode of consciousness called the Supreme Abode, you who are the Great Abode 
and the Supreme Energy which is like the garment of the sky and (t ranscendent), 
free of (even) the plane of the Unsustained! (57-58) 

'bbHI’Hhb HR-flYR RWI I 

HIHIA 4 H I I A 0 . I I 

ekabhasaki bhasasthe bhasottare 1- niramaye 
sarvabhasasamuttirne bhasarupe namo’stu te 59 

Hail to you whose nature is Light (bhdsd)\ (You are) beyond all (the 
phenomenal) lights (of manifestation), without defect, the sole illuminating 
Light present in the Light and (yet) beyond it! (59) 

2) The Kali of the Wheel of the Void ( Khacakra ) 

333^5 wwti I 

*HNtWI I I So I | 

khakale khecare khasthe svabhave khamasrite | 
khagapamktya' 783 samarudhe rSb khecaryakhye namo’stu te || 60 || 

Hail to you who are called Khecari, (you who have) ascended by the 
lineage residing in emptiness! You who are the energy of emptiness that moves 
in emptiness and is established in it! (Hail to you) who are the Innate Nature 
( svabhdva ) dwelling in the Void. (60) 

TVER CFT I 


H I I $ ? I I 





















THE k'HACAKRAPANCAKASTOTRA . HYMN TO THE FIVE SPHERES OF EMPTINESS 95 


khakare phakare''" rave yanujaksaravigrahe | 
s a ip ha last h a s t ra raj es i 1 '■ amkarante namo’stu te || 61 || 

Hail to you who are the letter KH and the letter PH, you who are (vocalic) 
sound in the form of (the vowel E) and have the form of the letter that follows 
Y ( = R). (Hail to you) who ends with the letter M, O Mistress of the Royal Missile 
(astraraja) (KHPHREM), the weapon of (universal) destruction ( samhdra)\ (61) 

^ ^Rt'^ ^ I I I I 

raviprakasasamkase’* 1 dvadasarkasamaprabhe | 
dvisatkabhasamadhye lS - tu' St rasmikali namo’stu te || 62 || 

1) Hail to you, O Rasmikali (Kali of the Rays [of the Void]), whose brilliance is 
like that of (all) twelve Suns and is like the light of the Sun! (You who are) in the 
centre of the twelve-fold Light! (62)' r ' 

Tp^ildld HT 5TPEI rf I I I I 

mantravyomamaye devi sarvamantralayodbhave' 84 | 
mantratite lS:i pare Sante mantrakali namo’stu te || 63 || 

2) Hail to you, O Mantrakali! You who are supreme, peaceful and beyond 
mantra! O Goddess, you are made of the emptiness of mantra ( mantravyoman) 
and arise from the abode of all mantras! (63) 

3TRI^ ftrWR d I I W I I 

hamsaprakasasamkase kalasodasavigrahe | 
amarupe niradhare l8b candrakali namo’stu te || 64 || 

15. In verses 62 to 74, the goddess is praised as thirteen forms of Kali. Further ahead 
(verses 82-94), she is praised again as another set of thirteen Kalis which are 
practically the same as the Kalis to which Abhinavagupta refers in chapter four of 
the Tantraloka as found in the Devlpancasataka and related Kallkrama sources. The 
‘rays of the Void’ are the surrounding twelve Kalis. The Kali in the centre is this Void 
which unfolds in this way as the twelve Kalis that surround her. 




96 TANTRAPUSPANJALI 


3) Hail to you, 0 Candrakall (Kali of the Moon)! You who have no support 
(and are self-sustained), you who are the New Moon (amd), your form the sixteen 
energies (of the Moon), brilliant like the Light of the Self (harnsa)l ((>4) 

H I I Ak, I I 

nabhobhasvaradiptabhe jyotsnasatasamakule 
nabhobhanukalatlte nabhaskali 1 '' namo’stu te 65 

4) Hail to you, O Nabhaskali (Kali of the Sky)! You whose light is inflamed by 
the radiance of the Sky. Hail (to you who), filled with countless lights, transcend 
the energies of the Sun (that shines in the transcendental) Skv. (65) 

HWI+H kRhbR I 

damare' 88 bhasurakare nirakare anamake | 
citkale khakalakali damarahve' 89 namo’stu te || 66 |j 

5) Hail to you, O Damara! You who are the nameless and formless called 
Damara whose form is Light! (Hail to you,) the energy of consciousness! 
Khakalakali (the Kali of the energy of the Void)! (66) 

^q^iqirriV.-iM W-khlW H I I II 

yasascintamaniprakhye 190 sreyobhave 1 ' 11 abhavake | 
sarvabhavantarellne yasaskali namo’stu te || 67 || 

6) Hail to you, O Yasaskali (Kali of Fame), lucid like the wish-granting gem 
of fame! 0 supreme good ( sreyobhdva)l (You who are) free of phenomenal being! 
(You who are) merged (in the reality) within all existing things! (67) 

'iV+ikxrkH 3TTdR FRTHK I 

ail’d 4dR7 dHTHFH II \c I I 

omkararasmi adhare 192 niradhare kalojjhite’ 93 1 
oghakali' 94 prabhatante omkarakhye' 95 namo’stu te || 68 || 



















THE KHACAKRAPAftCAKASTOTRA. HYMN TO THE FIVE SPHERES OF EMPTINESS | 97 


7) Hail to you, O Oghakall (Kali of the Transmission)! You who reside within 
(the shining light of) dawn ( prabh.ata)\ O (you who) are called the letter OM! 
O (you who are) the rays of OM, the foundation (of all things) who, free of the 
forces (of differentiation), are (self-established and) unsustained! (68) 




I IV* I I 


gaganadityamargasthe bhavabhavamahotsave’ 96 | 
gaganadyutidyotabhe" 1 " yamakali namo’stute || 69 || 

8) Hail to you, O Yamakali! You who are the brilliant light of the radiance of 
the sky, the great festival of being and non-being! You who are on the Path of the 
Sun of the firmament (of consciousness)! (69) 






I I vso | I 


ekabhasvarabhasante bhasurarkamahadyute | 
ekakini kalanitye ekakali namo’stu te 11 70 11 

9) Hail to you, O Ekakali (the One Kali), O Nitya 16 of Time! Solitary one! The 
great brilliance of the radiant Sun (of consciousness)! (Hail to you who) reside in 
the Light of the one shining (reality)! (70) 



sabdambarambaradhare sabdabrahmantarasthite | 
sarvarupe 198 arupasthe sabdakali namo’stu te 11 7111 

16. A Nitya (lit. ‘Eternal One’) is a type of YoginI that is attractive or alluring, as opposed 
to the fierce, frightening types of which Kali is a cardinal example. Both types can 
assume the attributes of the Great Goddess. Tripurasundari is a well known example 
of a Nitya who has assumed this role. They also appear in groups. The Sixteen Nityas 
of srlcakra who govern the phases of the Moon and attend on Tripura are the best 
known. A less known group are the Nine Nityas who attend on Tripurabhairavl. 
Here Kali is referred as the Nitya of Time ( kdlaniiya .). She is referred to as ‘Nitya’ 
again in verses 114,117 and 138. It is thus implied that although Kali is fierce, she is 
also attractive. 




98 TANTRAPUSPANJALI 


10) Hail to you, O Sabdakali (Kali of the Word)! (You who) are the form of all 
(things) established in the formless (absolute) ( ariipa)'. (Hail to you) who reside 
within the Word Absolute (s abdabruhman) and wear the garment ol the Void of 
the Word. (71) 

RMHl'-fi-MH JTr.HHh'-blil'-b I 

A I I 

varapratapasantapte mahatamaprakasake 
vamasvarapadatlte varnakali namo’stu te 72 

11) Hail to you, O Varnakali (Kali of the Letters)! (You who) transcend the 
plane of letters and vowels and, energized (santapta ) by the most excellent 
valour ( pratdpu ), are the one who illuminates the great darkness (of ignorance)! 
( 72 ) 

sfikHIHIHHtlH ‘•‘R7T I 

dik+TPI A I I ^ I I 

rddhibhasasamadyote bhargo divantasarnsthite'" j 
rtusatkasamuttirne 201 rddhikali namo’stu te || 73 

12) Hail to you, 0 Rddhikali (Kali of Prosperity)! You who transcend the six 
seasons and are the Sun within the sun, you whose lusture is like the light of 
prosperity ( rcldhi )'.! (73) 

R H 4 M HI * lij -d **+1 vq H M ^ I 

HRT'RI A I I otf || 

bhurisuryapratikase candrakotyayutaprabhe | 
kalpantagnisahasrabhe tejaskali 21 ' 2 namo’stu te || 74 || 

13) Hail to you, O Tejaskali (Kali of Radiant Energy)! You whose light is that 
of billions of moons, a multitude of suns and thousands of fires (that burn) at the 
end of the aeons! (74) 

RFTHJR RFFTKI 3RT5T% H II ^ I I 





















THE KHACAKRAPAftCAKASTO 77M. HYMN TO THE FIVE SPHERES OF EMPTINESS ' 99 


mekhapharapancasthe* 1 ’ 3 mahacandasamakule | 
yogesvari yogagamye ajasakte 204 namo’stu te || 75 || 

Hail to you, O unborn energy (of consciousness), the Mistress of Yoga 
attainable by Yoga residing in the five (letters of the syllable) KHPHREM 1 ' who is 
full of great wrath ( mahaccindci)\ (75) 

■HKHM R-MI d I H H '-I d IPTH I 

II I I 

bhasacakraviniryate dasasaptapadasrite | 
kalikramasamayukte khacakresi 205 namo’stu te || 76 || 

Hail to you, O Mistress of the Circle of Emptiness ( khacakra ), who, endowed 
with the sequence of Kalis ( kalikrcima ), have emerged from the Circle of Light 
(bhdsaccikra) and reside on the plane of the seventeen syllables (of yourVidya)! 

(76) 

SIWT PRHIH PiRtb'dl'-d I I w I I 

bindusthe vimale sante suddhasphatikanirmale | 
aprameye nirabhase niskriyante 2 " 6 namo’stu te || 77 || 

M) Hail to you who, unmanifest and imperceptible, are the culmination of 
Inaction ( niskriydntd)\ Pelucid as pure crystal, tranquil and pure, (you reside) in 
the (dimensionless) Point ( bindu)l (77) 

M,<+i|RhM 3 J,'d I 

I I I I 

ekakini pare suksme 207 suddhe 2 ” 8 atyantanirmale | 
sarvakarananirmukte icchasakte namo’stu te || 78 || 

E) Hail to you, energy of volition, free of all (instigating) causes, you who are 
solitary, supreme, subtle, pure—extremely pure! (78) 

17. The order of the letters of Kali’s seed syllable mantra given in this verse is M E KH 
PH R. Verses 77-81 each begin with one of these letters (or the word bindu itself for 
M in verse 77) and extol the nature and experience of Kali as each one. 



100 taxtrapuspAxjali 


q ^MFrfed I 

•« wm? ''pTTPfld 5PTT'^rJ ^ I I I i 

khasvarupe khamadhyasthe khacakre- khapratisthite- 
apratarkye anuccary'e 2 " gunatite 2 ' 2 namo'stu te 79 

KH) Hail to you who transcend the qualities (of material) nature, you who 
are unutterable, inconceivable, and well established in emptiness (khu), you who 
are the circle of emptiness, whose nature is emptiness residing in the centre of 
emptiness! (79) 

^ rf II C J I I 

phakararatane devi grasane 212 bhairavotkate 2 ' 4 , 
atyantagahane gudhe 415 avadhute namo’stu te 80 

PH) Hail to you who are free of worldly bondage ( avadhuta ), secret, 
extremely profound! (Hail to you,) O goddess, the devouring one (grasand) close 
to Bhairava, you who are the recitation of the letter PH! (80) 

N-H'TlNNdl^R I 

I I <S r < I I 

rasmibhavarasanande 216 cinmarlcicidasraye 2 ' 7 1 
mahanirvanaramane nityanande 2,s namo’stu te || 81 || 

R) Hail to you who are eternal bliss, the playful joy of the Great Cessation 
( mahdmrvana ), you who reside in the consciousness of the rays of consciousness 
and are the bliss of the aesthetic delight (rasa) of the state of the rays (of 
consciousness)! (81) 


HrlTHN Ndjcjd I 


HHT'TtT FT I I CR I I 


jyotistarakatarabhe sattamatre 2 " 1 cidavrte | 
suiyamrtasamakarse srstikali namo’stu te || 82 


















THE KHACAKRAPAftCAKASTOTRA, HYMN TO THE FIVE SPHERES OF EMPTINESS | 101 


1) ‘ s Hail to you, O Sr§tikall (Kali of Emanation), who gather together the solar 
nectar and are pure being enveloped in consciousness, the light of the star of the 
saving light (jyotistaraka)\ (82) 

fMd+lk- 1 ) H I I I I 

mantratantreSvarl 22 ” devi 22 ' mantratantre vyavasthite | 
sthitisthanakasambhavye 222 sthitikali namo’stu te || 83 || 

2) Hail to you, O goddess Sthitikali (Kali of Persistence), who can be intuited 
as the locus of persistence, mistress of (all the) mantras and Tantras established 
in (all) mantras and Tantras! (83) 

dWIiHdd'+fcMd I 

Tirfe 3 I I cv I I 

hakarardhakaladhare balagrasatakalpite | 
sakale niskale kali samharike 223 namo’stu te || 84 || 

3) Hail to you, O Kali, who destroy (all things), who are formless ( ni?kala) 
and with form ( sakala ), the sustaining ground of the energy of Unstruck Sound 
(hakarardha), (subtle as) the hundreth part of the tip of a hair! (84) 

ql'dAliyi'WIHTSI cl I I <SH I I 

candrakrtisamasparSe kalasodasasambhave 224 | 
sodasadharadhamasthe 225 raktakali namo’stu te || 85 || 

4) Hail to you, O Raktakali (Blood-red Kali), who reside in (the body), the 
abode of the sixteen supports, you who are born of the sixteen energies (of the 
Moon) and are the pervasive touch ( samasparsa ) of the moon’s form! (85) 


18. Verses 82 to 94 extol the goddess Bhasa as the thirteen Kalis a second time. The two 
sets make 26 which, along with Bhasa, the first a form of Mangala, constitute the 27 
Yoginls of this sphere of emptiness. 


102 TANTRAPUSPANJALI 


'wiWtJ^I W 7 \ I | C'. 

nabhorupasvarupabhe"' grahvagrahakavarjite 
kaivalye kevalabhase dhvarnsukali"' namo’stu te 8b 

5) Hail to you, O Dhvarnsukali (Kali of What is Destructable), who are the 
liberated state of isolation (, kacvalya ), the unique Light (kcvaluhhdsci) which is 
the light of the innate nature of emptiness, devoid of subject and object! (8b) 

i I kb Hid I -H ! 

rWcfnfe q I I I I 

dakare- 2S dakinlbije kulakaulapratisthite 
pranapanakalagrase yamakali namo’stu te 87 

6) Hail to you, O Yamakali (Kali of Confinment), who devour the energy of 
the two breaths {prana and apdna)\ (You who are) the letter L) and seed syllable 
of the Dakini established in Kula and Kaula! (87) 

fpfe I I 1 I 

yakaravarnavahasthe vayurupe niranjana | 
dharmadharmaksayakare mrtyukali namo’stu te j| 88 j| 

7) Hail to you, O Mrtyukali (Kali of Death), who destroy both Dharma and 
Adharma, the stainless Absolute ( niranjana) whose form is the wind residing in 
the flow of the letter Y! (88) 

VTj^rfo II <i°, I I 

amoghoghe’avyatikrante 22 ” mahabodhavalokite | 
bhavabhavakalatlte bhadrakali namo’stu te || 89 || 

8) Hail to you, O Bhadrakali (Auspicious Kali), who transcend the energies of 
being and non-being, the unfailing flux (of reality), unsurpassed and perceived 
by the Great Consciousness ( mahabodha)\ (89) 





















THE KHACAKR.-\PAftCAKASTOTRA, HYMN TO THE FIVE SPHERES OF EMPTINESS 103 


PKsH I 

R J tFT5T:«bc4l«bW dld^Rl d^TT'^ d I I V> | | 

gamagamaprakasasthe'-’" vayubhute niranjane | 
visvatejahkalakale martandesi namo'stu te || 90 || 

9) Hail to you, O (Martandakali), Mistress of Martanda (the Sun)! You who 
are Time, which is the energy of the radiant power of the universe! O stainless 
one! (You are) the Wind present in the Light of the coming and going (of the vital 
breath)! (90) 

q^m^Kidid d 11^? II 

ekarupe anackakhye-" susuksme-*- caksaye ame | 
paraparaparatlte parakali namo’stu te || 911| 

10) Hail to you, O Parakali (Supreme Kali), who transcend the supreme and 
intermediate (states)! You who are the imperishable (energy), the New Moon 
{amd)\ You who are one, extremely subtle and called Unstruck Sound ( anacka)\ 
(9i) 

SKIdld bb-MIdld SRWq I 

*felcWj|(c* d*TT'^ d I I ^ I I 

sabdatlte gunatlte kriyatlte anamaye | 
kalakalasamuttlrne 2;w kalakali namo’stu te || 92 || 

11) Hail to you, O Kalakali (Kali of Time), who transcend the energy of time! 
You who are free of imperfection, beyond action, word and the qualities (of 
Nature)! (92) 

^ fd s cPTdK I 

d^IMpi HI<Fd d'jUlW ddT'^J d I I 'U I I 

varade visvakartare varnarupe avarnake | 
varnadhvani ca nadante varnakali namo’stu te || 93 || 



104 tantrapuspAnjali 


12) Hail to you, O Varnakall (Phonemic Kali), who are the Cessation of Sound 
( nadanta ) on the path of the letters, you whose nature is letter (although) devoid 
of letters, the bestower of boons, the doer of all things! (93) 

yR-^u-^l+IW H I I P .V I I 

retojjvale mahadlpte balasuryasamaprabhe 
ghoracandamahakali 234 bharitakhye 2 '-' namo’stu te 94 

13) Hail to you, O Ghoracandamahaktlll (Fearsome Wrathful Kali), who are 
called Full (of all things), you whose light is like the young sun (of dawn), greatly 
luminous, burning with vitality ( retojjvala)\ (94) 

3) The Kali of the Circle of the Directions ( dikcakrci) 

VRdl'bRNilfi I 

ddW-H-dshlH I I ^ I I 

samharakramamarudhe 23b bhairavakaravigrahe | 
trtlyakramacakrante dikcakresi namo’stu te | j 95 11 

1) 20 Hail to you, O Mistress of the Circle of the Quarters, who reside in the 
circle of the third sequence, who have the form of Bhairava and who are mounted 
on the sequence of destruction! (95) 

d 1 I I I 

mahesvaresvari 237 devi 238 ekadha bahudhasthite | 
khavyomalamkrtakare phanikesi namo’stu te |[ 96 || 

2) Hail to you, 0 Phanikesi, whose form is decorated with the Sky of Emptiness 
( khavyoman)\You who are the goddess who is the mistress of the Great Lord and 
(although) single abides as many! (96) 


19. As the Kali in the centre, she is full of the energies of the twelve Kalis she has emitted 
that surround her. 

20. Verses 95 to 104 praise the goddess as the ten Kalis of the ten directions. 


THE KHACAKRAPANCAKASTOTRA, HYMN TO THE FIVE SPHERES OF EMPTINESS i 105 


TnTTT HdM'ill'iJ RTT'^ FT | | <V» | | 

ratanr 3 ‘’ sarvabhavabhe rasmijvale* 40 mahojjvale 24 ’ | 
mahata sarvavidyadye candarupe namo’stu te || 97 || 

3) Hail to you who are anger ( canda) and who, by (your) great power ( mahat ), 
are the first of all secret formulas ( vidyd ), you who are the flame of the rays (of 
consciousness)! O light of all existing things, (hail to) you who recite (the mantra 
of) consciousness! (97) 

RJHF9 HtllHN 4blld)d W I 

Rrpsft T^lcHK«^ dll V II 

yogagamye 242 mahamaye yogatite parapare | 
yogesvari vibhutyakhye navaksari namo’stu te || 98 || 

4) Hail to you, O Nine-syllable (Vidya)!The Mistress ofYoga named ‘Greatness’ 

( vibhuti)\ You who are supreme and inferior, the Great Maya, attainable by Yoga 
and (yet) beyond Yoga! (98) 

I I V* II 

aghore ca mahaghore ghoraghorogranihsvani 243 1 
ghoraghargharabhlmakhye bhlmakali namo’stu te 11 99 11 

5) Hail to you, O Bhlmakali, who are called the fierce one of the terrible storm 
clouds (of doomsday)! You who are not terrible! Greatly terrible one, whose fierce 
roar is more terrible than terror (itself)! (99) 

^ d I I ?oo | | 

cande candamahacande candatejahparakrame 244 | 
rudraraudre ca rudreSi rudrasakte 245 namo’stu te || 100 || 



io 6 TANTRAPUSPA 5 .JALI 


6) Hail to you, energy of Rudra, Rudra’s mistress! (You who are) the fearful 
( raudra ) (consort) of Rudra, wrathful one, the wrath of great wrath and the 
valour of wrathful energy ( candatejas)'. (too) 

pingarudre mahavire samharagrasanakule" : 
ekadasantavasane bhairavyakhye 24 ' namo'stu te ! 101 

7) Hail to you who are called Bhairavl, the trace (of consciousness) at the end 
of the eleven (energies of consciousness)! (Hail to you,) O Pingarudra, the great 
heroine who is intent on devouring (universal) destruction! ( 101) 

STITip# ‘HMiil’HIi I 

^N^(ri^llfe»H H I I r <°< i I 

mahabhutaksaye kali bhavagrasogralampate | 
bhavavrttidasalipte M,, raksesvari namo’stu te || 102 |j 

8) Hail to you who are the mistress of protection! (You who are) not stained 
by the plane of phenomenal activity! You, O Kali, who are the destruction of the 
(physical) elements, extremely greedy to devour (phenomenal) existence! (102) 

%lcWl 9 l Hdklhi ■dKilK I I ?°^ I I 

krtantantakare kali yamagrase alolupe | 

kalaratri 249 maharatri ghorasabde 25 ” namo’stu te || 103 || 

9) Hail to you, O Kalaratri (the Night of Time), the great night called the 
terrible one! O Kali who brings about the end of (universal) destruction! You 
who, devoid of greed ( alolupa ), devour death! (103) 

pi | 

Hr t ldk ^ II ?oy I I 

candesvaresvari 251 devi rudraraudradasarcite 252 1 
bhairavesi mahavire kararikini namo’stu te || 104 || 




THE KHACAKK\PANCAKASTOTHA, HYMN' TO THE FIVE SPHERES OF EMPTINESS : 107 


10) Hail to you, O Karaiikinl, the mistress of Bhairava! Great heroine, the 
mistress of the wrathful lord! (You who are) worshipped on the fearful ( raudra) 
plane of Rudra! (104) 

4) The Kali of the Circle of Speech ( Gocakra) 

i|d-KHdHI<^I -MN*hKI II ? <=>H I I 

caturthakramamarudhe avatarapradarsite | 

‘ ri hrtpadmacetanavasthe’’’ gocakresi namo’stu te || 105 || 

Hail to you, O Mistress of the Circle of Speech! You who are the state of 
sentience in the lotus of the heart (of consciousness)! (Hail to you who are) 
mounted on the fourth sequence and are revealed by the descent ( avatara) 
(which is persistence [sthiti] and the sphere of revelation). (105) 

ssnft^q ?wiTcj tt i i ?o$ i i 

maekhapharapancasthe^ 5 mahacandakramodbhave | 
yogesvarlpadantasthe 25 " vyaptirupe namo’stu te || 106 || 

Hail to you who are pervasion! (You who are) established within the plane of 
the Mistress ofYoga, the arising of the greatly fierce sequence ( mahacandakrama)\ 
(You who) reside in the five (letters of the syllable) KHPHREM. (106) 

37TcR^ TO d I I I I 

aksendriyamadhye 257 kale 258 citprakase vyavasthite | 
atmasthe pancavimsakhye tattvarupe namo’stu te || 107 || 

M) 21 Hail to you who are the nature of the principle called the twenty-fifth (i.e., 

21. The goddess is praised at the beginning of this section, as in the previous ones, as 
residing in the letters of her seed-syllable. It is clear in all the previous cases, and 
indeed those that follow, that the deities praised reside in the letters of this syllable. 
Thus it is reasonable to assume that this is the case here also. The number and 
sequence of the verses support this assumption. 








io8 tantrapuspAnjali 


prakrti)\You who reside in the Self, the energy that is the light of consciousness 
established in the centre of the senses of perception! (107) 

1 1 1 i 

khagendrakurmasambhute mesamatsyendrabhusite 
bhadramaramahendrakhye 2 ’ varadevi namo'stu te 108 

E) Hail to you who were born as Khagendra(natha) and Kurma( nathu), and 
adorned with Me§a(natha) and Matsyendra(natha)! You who are called Bhadra, 
Amara and Mahendra! O goddess of Vara! (108) 2 - 

^ H I I I I 

citravalkalaniryate alibimbasamasrite 2 '”1 
ahindrake gajendre ca mahagudi namo’stu te || 109 |i 

KH) Hail to you who have come forth as Citra and Valkala and reside in Ali 
and Bimba, (you who are) Ahindraka, Gajendra, and Mahagudi! (109) 

3Hs*Roq f§N3>fe( £ | | I I 

vijnambe 261 marigalakhye ca 262 kamamarigalamarigale | 
madanambe anarigakhye tricakresi namo'stu te || no || 

PH) Hail to you, O Mistress of the Three Circles! Vijnamba and the one called 

22. Cf. TA 29.30-41. Four male Yuganathas are listed in KhCPS io8ab: Khagendra, Kurma, 
Mesa and Matsyendra. Their consorts are listed in 110-111: Vijnamba, Marigalamba, 
Kamamarigala, and Komkanamba, respectively. These are the same as in the TA, 
which also lists the twelve disciples of Matsyendarantha, who are called ‘princes' 

( rdjaputra ). According to the TA, six were qualified to teach: Amara, Varendra, 
Citranatha, Alinatha, Vindhyanatha, and Gudikanatha. The remaining six are: 
Bhatta, Indra, Valkala, Ahlndra, Gajendra, and Mahldhara. The KhCPS lists the 
following in verses 108-109 (those names marked with an asterisk are those qualified 
to teach, according to the TAs list): Bhadra, Amara*, Mahendra, Vara*, Citra*, 
Valkala, Ali*, Bimba (= Mahldhara), Ahindraka, Gajendra, and Mahagudi. 



THE KHACAKRAPAftCAKASTOTRA. HYMN TO THE FIVE SPHERES OF EMPTINESS j 109 


Marigala! (Hail to you who are) the auspicious ( mangala ) Kamamangala and the 
mother of Madana (Madanamba), and who are called Anaiiga! (110) 

sbWJiiH yicriscl i 

RkIKR-KH-HH qJTf'*c| El || ??? II 

kulesvaresvari 2 ’’ 3 devi 2< ’ 4 komkanambe 2 '’ 5 pratisthite | 
siddhadisiddhapatnyambe 2 ” 6 lelihane namo’stu te || 1111| 

R) Hail to you who are the well-established Komkanamba! 0 goddess, 
mistress of the Lord of Kula! O Lelihana! You who are the mother that is the 
consort of the first Siddha of (all) the Siddhas! (111) 

5) The Kali of the Circle of the Earth (Bhucakra) 

^*131 RRt'^ R I I I I 

pancame 267 pancacakreSi pancavarne 268 pratisthite | 
mekhapharapindasthe 2 * 9 bhucakresi namo’stu te || 112 || 

Hail to you who are the mistress of the Circle of Earth ( bhucakra)\ You who 
reside in the syllabic mantra (pintfa) KHPHREM and are well established in the 
five letters! (Hail to you,) mistress of the five circles in the fifth (sequence)! (112) 

Hfii+KuiRiwy r 11 m 11 

ksitibhumyodbhave 27 " tejovayuvege 271 nabhopame | 
mahakaranavispaste 272 bhutamatar 273 namo’stu te 11113 11 

M) Hail to you, O Mother of the (gross) Elements, who are clearly manifest as 
the great cause (of all things)! You who arise from the land of the earth! O force 
of fire and wind, (you who are) like Space! (113) 

,c i u 'S«.Rh c m. PicM I 

R I I II 

candarasmikare nitye manobuddhir ahamkrte 274 1 
yogesi sarvabhavasthe astamurte 275 namo’stu te || 114 || 









110 TANTRAPUSPANJALI 


E) Hail to you, 0 Mistress of Yoga! 0 Nitya (whose) rays are fierce! (You who 
are) the mind, intellect and ego! You who have eight forms* and are present in 
all existing things! (114) 

3TF5 - H I I 

svasane nihsvase 2 "’ devi agnisomantavartini*” 
rddhi - atm am aye vidye navaksari namo’stu te 115 

KH) Hail to you who are the sacred formula (vidyd) of nine letters,* 4 you who 
are the very self of prosperity! O goddess who resides between tin* Fire and Moon 
and are the inhaled and exhaled breath! (115) 

TTRrT ! 

WFJ H I I ??5 I 

garvite 27 ’ sarvadevesi*"" gurvamnayaprasarpite 
sreyaskarakarabhase 2So niskriyakhye*'' 1 namo’stu te 116 !' 

PH) Hail to you who are called Inaction ( niskriyd)V You who are the light of 
the rays of the supreme good! You who are the dignified mistress of all the gods, 
you who flow through the tradition of the masters! (116) 

iVdffTd ^ H I I ??* I I 

vidyanande nandacare saktyanande 2S2 prakasake | 
sivajnane ca nityakhye moksanande namo’stu te || 117 || 

R) Hail to you who are the bliss of liberation called ‘Nitya’! You who are the 
knowledge of Siva! You who are the bliss of the Vidya and move within joy! O 
illuminating light, the bliss of (Siva’s) energy! (117) 


23. The eight forms of the goddess are the five gross elements, mind, intellect and ego. 

24. Cf. above, verse 98. 

25. Cf. above, verses 77 and 92. 


THE KHACAkRAPAftCAKASTOTRA, HYMN TO THE FIVE SPHERES OF EMPTINESS < ill 


HSIM C II U I'-K'H H II ??<£ | | 

anande ca niranande paramanandanandite | 
mahanirvanaparame gurvanande namo’stu te || 118 || 

M) Hail to you who are the bliss of the master, the supreme Great Cessation 
(mahcinirvana )! (Hail to you who are) delighted by supreme bliss, you who are 
(both) bliss and devoid of bliss! (118) 

R-K'-NN PfKMsrlMc-md | 

wwf H II m I I 

siddhante siddhaparyaye siddhaprajriavalokite | 
pancaprakarasambhute siddhadevi namo’stu te || 119 || 

E) Hail to you, O goddess of the Siddhas, you who are of five kinds! You who 
are perceived by the wisdom of the Siddhas! You who are within the Siddhas and 
are their ultimate goal ( siddhapciryaya)l (119) 



5TTR idl-rlHHH FT I | | | 

divyaprakasasambhavye sarvabhavasamrddhide | 
samane 283 Santamanase 284 santasiddhe 285 namo’stu te || 120 || 

KH) Hail to you who are attained by the tranquil ( santasiddhi ), you who are 
tranquillity and whose mind is peaceful! (Hail to you) who bestow the prosperity 
of all states of being, you who are honoured as divine Light! (120) 

i^liy«bHfdfyd I 

Mfetfj'blfoVfrl’fc'io HHl'TtJ cT I I ?R? II 

siddhikamavikasabhe 286 disastakapratisthite | 
ciccihnakalikarudhe yamasiddhe 287 namo’stu te || 1211| 

PH) Hail to you who are the conquest of death (yamasiddhi ), mounted on 
Kalika (who is marked) with the sign of consciousness! You who are established 



112 tantrapuspAnjali 



in the eight directions and are the light of the expansion of the passion for 
attainment ( siddhi)\ (121) 

i-i^IKH-oMM'-I«Tl HSIHPS.M- 41 I 

frWAk 1 1 hh 1 1 

anadimadhyaparyante 2 *'’ mahasiddhiprabodhite 
kaivalyarnavamadhyasthe 2V -' kulasiddhe 2 " namo’stu te 122 

R) Hail to you who are the accomplishment of Kula (kulasiddhi), you who 
reside in centre of the ocean of liberation (kah’alya )! You who are the beginning, 
middle and end (of all things)! You who are awakened by the Great Attainment! 
(122) 

dlMM I 

T5R H I I HA I I 

sadyo 291 yogini viniskrante pancadaivatyasambhave 2 '* 2 | 
sivaisvara rudresi visnubrahme namo’stu te || 123 || 

M) Hail to you, O Mistress of Rudra, you who are Brahma, Visnu, Siva and 
Isvara! (Hail to you,) O Yogini, who have come forth in a moment and are the 
source of the five deities! (123) 

rAlci'-ilMMH-l'h I 

H I I HV I I 

divamartyantapatale 293 sivayoniprasuyake | 
maharthaparamavasthe 294 Isayone 295 namo’stu te || 124 || 

E) Hail to you, O Womb (yoni) of Isa! You who are the supreme state of the 
Great Reality ( mahdrtha)\ You who give birth to the womb of Siva! You who are 
the abyss ( patala ) between the divine and human! (124) 

M£MHKc1I4>K | 

GbAIHH - "iTT-OH NUJJ/dM A I I HR I I 

cidvrttibharitakare 29fi raudrabhave ayonije | 
khagasasana - adhare visnuyone 297 namo’stu te || 125 || 


















THE KHACAKRAPAfiCAKASTOTRA, HYMN TO THE FIVE SPHERES OF EMPTINESS ! 113 


PH) Hail to you, O Womb of Vi§nu! You who are the support of the teaching of 
the Skyfarers ( khaga )\You whose form is filled with the activity of consciousness, 
O wrathful one, not born of (any) womb! (125) 

H'iid l fay fated I 

HtUfkdfa'W^ dfar'TcJd I I m II 

srstisrjanacakrasthe padmayonipratisthite 298 1 
mahasantatikandasthe brahmayone 2 " namo’stu te || 126 || 

R) Hail to you, O Womb of Brahma! You who reside in the root of the Great 
Tradition! You who are well established in the lotus womb and reside in the circle 
that emits emanation! (126) 

3 I I I I 

ksetrajne ksetrarupabhe sarvaksetrasama£rite | 
k§etrapalasamakare vaturupe namo’stu te || 127 || 

Hail to you whose form is Va^u, you who have the same form as the guardian 
of the (sacred) field! You who know the field! You who are the light whose form is 
the (sacred) field and are well established in all the (sacred) fields! (127) 

sjfcRlHuf ntemifa dfar'Tg3 I I ?r<s I I 

sarvatra rurupanisthe sarvacaksuprakaSake | 
sarvatra Srutisampurne purnimante namo’stu te || 128 || 

Hail to you who are within the Full Moon and are everywhere perfectly full of 
the Vedic scriptures (sruti )\You who reside in the hand of Ruru [?] and, (present) 
everywhere, are the illuminator of every eye. (128) 

^cMwufr^d ft I I m M 

sarvavarnasamayukte 300 sarvavarnavivaijite | 
devatavaranodbhute 301 sakarakhye 302 namo’stu te || 129 || 






114 tantrapuspAnjali 


Hail to you called the One with Form, born of the entourage of deities! You 
who are conjoined to all the letters and (as Unstruck Sound) are free of all the 
letters! (129) 

qr=2[R ^ d-dIMIH HHT'TR H I I '<\° I I 

maricijvaladhumrabhe tapane tapanadyute 

pacani 304 havyavahe 3 '' 3 ca' tejobhase' ‘ namo'stu te 130 

Hail to you who are the light of the radiant energy' (tcjas) (of the Deity), you 
who are the sacrificial fire and the fire that cooks (in the home)! (Hail to you) 
who are (the sun) that heats ( tapand)\ Lustre of the sun! The smoky light of the 
flames of the rays (of consciousness)! (130) 

TRHFR HTTHTH TWOTR HMIIRT i 

TfR idl'-DII-TH dV-flTd RTT'RI H I I '<V< I ! 

satadhame mahadhame visvadhame tamantike' ' I 
dahane sosanakare vasyakarse 3 ’" namo’stu te 131 

Hail to you who attract those under (your) control! You who are fire (duhand) 
and the form of desiccation! The end of darkness, you are the Great Abode, 
countless abodes, and the abode of all things! (131) 

TdrAdak MblTk'-y TleMTM A I I r '\R I I 

kalabhase 310 ca 311 kalakhye 3 ' 2 sarvakalamahotsave 3 ' 3 1 
kaladande mahakale kalakarse 3 ' 4 namo’stu te || 132 || 

Hail to you, OKalakarsI(AttractressofTime), the Great Time, the punishment 
of time! The manifestation of time! You who are called time in the great festival 
that takes place at all times! (132) 

•+4,lkA I 

r Tl<AH-+jMU||r;i4 '+,|<ATTR A II ’AA II 


THE KHACAKRAPAftCAKASTOTRA. HYMN TO THE FIVE SPHERES OF EMPTINESS I 115 


kankali brahmakankali kalanalasamadvuti iir ’ | 
kalasamkarsanidevi kaulesvari namo’stu te || 133 || 

Hail to you, O goddess Kalasamkar§inl, you who are the mistress of Kaula! 
Kankali! Brahmakankali! Whose brilliance is like the Fire of Time! (133) 

'bW-dib'bR SfcTTcS I 

FPTT'^ H I I I I 

kalacakrakari*"’ kali kaladahaksayamkari | 
kalatrane kalabhave kalaratri namo'stu te || 134 || 

Hail to you, O Kalaratri, you who are the phenomenal world of time! You 
who save from time! You who destroy the fire of time! O Kali who fashions the 
Wheel of Time! (134) 

RT% TvjTPTR 3l I I ?V* II 

rakse 3 ' 7 karali candaksi mahocchusme 318 ca bhairavi | 
siddhe suske kajabhave utpalakhye namo’stu te || 135 || 

Hail to you who are called the Lotus! You who have accomplished (all things)! 
You who are emaciated and without breasts ( kaja)\ O Bhairavi! Mahocchu§ma! 
You whose gaze is fierce and who have fangs (for teeth)! (Hail to you) who are 
protection (from misfortune)! (135) 

-d<J^4|||HW I 

ddMlR 4>NlRRl H I I I I 

camunde candaghorogre 319 candike candagamini | 
kapalavasi kapale kapalesi namo’stu te || 136 || 

Hail to you, O Kapalesi (the Mistress of the Skull), the skull-bearer ( kapdld)\ 
You who reside within the skull! O Camunda! O Candika! You who are mighty 
and terrible with wrath! (You whose) gait is wrathful ( candagdminl)\ (136) 


VI5 f^FTP^ ?RT'^ H II I I 




n6 : TANTRAPUSPANJALI 


jaye ca vijaye devi jayanti 320 ca 32 ' parajite | 

bhadre subhadre bhramani vibhramakhye namo’stu te [ 137 

Hail to you who delude and are called delusion! O Java, Vijaya, Javantl and 
Aparajita! O Bhadra and Subhadra! (137) 

HKIfik I 

T%FT H I I '<\c I I 

candri 322 bhaskari vayavye narasimhe 323 pare 324 kale 323 j 
sriye 326 sarasvati 327 nitye tustipusti namo'stu te || 138 || 

Hail to you who are satisfaction and prosperity! Nitya! Sarasvati! §rl! Moon! 
Sun! Wind! NarasimhI! 26 Supreme power! (138) 

dli^t ^ <£hiR 5«J|c<|^cj | 

-arraft rri-jh ^ 1 1 m i i 

brahmi mahesvari 328 caiva kaumari 32<( vaisnavodbhave | 
varahi 330 caindri agneyi 33 ' sivaduti 132 namo'stu te || 139 || 

Hail to you, O Brahmi! Mahesvari! Kaumarl! Born as Vai§navl! Varahi! Aindri! 
Agneyi! SivadutI! (139) 

^11 *-4 dWl R'iR'HI CR | 

3^ 1*T S-tRRRi ftfcTRi JWT'fFJ A I I ?Vo I I 

kaubere yamye 333 nairtye khimkhinl garudi 334 pare | 
ume durge aghoresi vikrtante namo’stu te || 140 || 

Hail to you, destroyer of distortions! Kaubera! Yamya! Nairrtya! Khimkhinl! 
Garudi! Para! Uma! Durga! Aghoresi! (140) 

%H I I ?V? | I 

yogabhave abhavasthe sabahyabhyantare kale | 
yogasimhasanarudhe yogesvari namo'stu te || 1411| 

26. Kalasamkarsini is commonly identified with Vaisnavi Sakti who is the consort of 
Narasimha in the Kallmata. 



THE KHACAKFLAPAftCAKASTOTRA, HYMN TO THE FIVE SPHERES OF EMPTINESS | 117 

Hail to you, O Mistress of Yoga, you who are mounted on the throne of yoga! 
You who are inner and outer energy, the being of yoga, established in non-being! 
(141) 

^ I I m I I 

vidyadhari 335 ca gandharvi 336 pannage 337 yaksaraksasi | 
khecari candike :yS caiva divyayone 339 namo’stu te || 142 || 

Hail to you, the divine womb (of creation)! Khecari! Candika! Yaksaraksasi! 
Pannaga! GandharvI! Vidyadhari! (142) 

W3T icRjqiivR^ dW^KptJ I I m I I 

pasupaksimrgante ca sthavarakhye sarisrpe | 
pancadha tiryagyonisthe 341 ’ tamasakhye namo’stu te || 143 || 

Hail to you who are called the quality of darkness ( tamas)\ You who, five¬ 
fold, reside in the womb of living beings! You who are the snake! Present within 
animals and birds, (you are also) called (all that is) immobile ( sthavara)\ (143) 

^ PM ^ I I ?W I I 

manusyayoner antasthe 341 vrsabhe 344 ksatrivaisyaje | 
brahmayonyantasthe 343 devi varnarupe namo’stu te || 144 || 

Hail to you, O goddess in the form of (each) caste! O cow (of plenty)! You 
who are present in the womb of mankind! (Hail to you) who are bom as warrior 
and merchant and reside within those bom from Brahma! (144) 

I I I I 

sattvike jnanajanani 344 rajase karmasambhave | 
pramadamohajanani trigunakhye namo’stu te || 145 || 






n8 TANTRAPUSPAXJAL! 


Hail to you who are called the three qualities! () Sattvika, mother of 
knowledge! O Rajasa, who gives rise to action (karnuin)'. () Mother of distraction 
and delusion! (145) 

FTT4 H I I r 'V s I I 

parthivadimahadante'- 4 ' avyakte puruse’pare 
niyate kalaragakhye avidyakhye namo’stu te 146 

Hail to you who are (the principles) from Earth to Intellect! The l nmanifest 
(nature) ( avyakta)\ The lower Person! (You who are the principle of) constraint! 
(You who are) called time and attachment and the one called ignorance! (146) 

T 7 T HP? 3 ]j§HdlfiM 

PiWfTFT TtItTIH HTTT'TM H I I I I 

kale maye suddhavidyesvaryakhve” f ' sadasive 
saktitattve sivesante sattrimsante 34 ' namo’stu te ji 147 | 

Hail to you who are (conditioned) agency (kata), Maya, Suddhavidya, Isvara, 
Sadasiva, and the principle of Sakti! (You who are) within Lord Siva and at the 
end of the thirty-six (principles)! (147) 

H WTl TTfri 4I*4'4 I 

qV RWT H I I I I 

na tvaya 34 * rahitarn kincid varimayam M '' sacaracaram | 
sthule suksme 350 pare devi visvarupe namo’stu te || 148 || 

Hail to you, 0 goddess, you who are omniform, supreme, subtle and gross! 
There is nothing that is devoid of you in the (domain of) speech and the moving 
and immobile (universe). (148) 

BTV-ik-MI-H tTIP-JPT Hdl-TH H II I I 

ekadha bahudhakare 351 satadhalaksadhasthite | 
asamkhyante maharthasthe 352 sarvakare namo’stu te || 149 || 


THE KHACAKRAPAtiCAKASTOTRA. HYMN'TO THE FIVE SPHERES OF EMPTINESS j 119 


Hail to you who are omniform and established in the Great Reality within 
the innumerable! You who are single (and yet whose) form is manifold! You who 
abide one hundred-fold and one hundred thousand-fold! (149) 

CONCLUSION 

Hcj TtpIT W: wlM: I 

II | | 

evam stutva mahavidyam 353 yoginyah sarvaplthajah | 
dviprakarakramodbhutah ,M pancasaptadasotthitah 355 1| 150 || 

The Yoginls generated from all the sacred seats praised the Great Knowledge 
(mahavidya) in this way and having done so were bom from the two-fold 
sequence^ 7 and arose in five (groups of) seventeen. (150) 

SFfrlcll: I 

TO: HsHsbWf: VTCTfFl M+lRldH. I I I 

prathamaS cakrasambhutah 37 ’ 1 ’ stutirn krtva layamgatah | 
aparah pancacakrasthah 337 bhairavasya prakasitam 1115111 

The first ones generated in circles dissolved away once they had praised 
(the goddess). The others who reside in the five circles revealed (the hymn) to 
Bhairava. (151) 

THTTO cTSJHj^ld Hidlcdd: I 

Rldd^R-d TfeRmTf bddlddH I I I I 

bhairavena 3 "’ 8 tathakhyatam sivasya paramatmanah 359 1 
sivenesasya kathitam Isvarad rudram agatam || 152 || 

Bhairava spoke this to Siva, the Supreme Self; Siva told it to Isa, and from 
isvara it reached Rudra. (152) 


27. The sequence of Yoginls is two-fold because there are two groups of five circles of 
Yoginls. See above, verse 25. 




120 tantrapuspAnjali 


RTH !THNyJ|HI I 

STTrfc sf^T ^T^TI I I 9 ^\ | | 

5TWI MNM | 

^FTRt|^T|^n 5 nH 3 TfTT: STRF 3 3 FFF=h I I ?«Vrf I I 

3 rfe ^ cINWHWI =3 IcflH I 

cfch STTH PTR: feSR Wl^I, I I ?Hh|| 

fWNId TOlwl cP-TT I 

^TFRl fclN ^5^ MI<iiyrlH II II 

rudrac caiva tatha praptam visnuna prabhavisnuna | 

tenaiva brahmanah proktam brahma provaca vajrine" j| 153 l( 

sakrena somasuryabhyam suryah ifjl provaca vayave ! 

vayos tu vahnina praptam agnih provaca vakpateh || 154 || 

uktam ca vacaspatina sukraya ca mahatmane | 

rsibhis ca tatah praptam tebhyah siddhan 3fj2 samagatam || 155 II 

siddhebhyas tu samayatam yogimmartyagam 3 ' 3 tatha | 

evam kramagatam stotram vaktrad vaktre pratisthitam || 156 || 

Visnu, the one who prevails, received it from Rudra in this way and he himself 
told it to Brahma, while Brahma spoke it to Indra, Indra to the Sun and Moon, 
and the Sun told it to the Wind. Fire obtained it from the Wind, and Fire (also) 
told it to Vakpati. Vacaspati told it to Sukra, the great-souled one. Then it was 
obtained by the R§is and from them it reached the Siddhas. From the Siddhas it 
came to the Yoginis and mortals. In this way (this hymn) has come through the 
tradition ( krama ) from mouth to mouth and is established (there). (153-156) 

^ ^ I I | | 

anena stotrarajena siddhih sarva pravartate | 
aprakasyam idam tattvam likhyate na ca pustake 11157 11 

Every accomplishment ( siddhi ) is attained by means of this king of hymns. 
This reality ( tattva) should not be revealed nor is it written in (any) book. (157) 




THE KHACAKRAPASlCAKASTOTRA. HYMN TO THE FIVE SPHERES OF EMPTINESS j 121 

3 r^iciM deJi^faddd =q I I l l 

H^l5lW<W^)c6l+l Hc 4 cb|cMrd%T ^ I 

E^ftfEl % *#u 4 t -KI L KH 1 1 m I I 
E^lRl 4 cf^ 1 

RpnjdH S^lcfck ^F«IR fldl'-ld: I I ?$o I I 
^ 4 it=r ^4 ^ stttr qrqq Erar i 

=q $d<M =INEMc 4 ETSTNEH. I I ?$? I I 
3TMTTT EEfvTRT WTT Mlftkd ^ I 

^ qftfEI ^ *M7Nld*i I I m I I 
JJrgg^t'ar^WT^^ WEI I 

^ =q qr^T %r 1 1 m 11 

#qqT«j m l 

«hl'*SN3M4> ^ c5*Ft ET«JT I I ?5V I I 

fofM I ET«k =q 1 

awRl^dH +|U^iil^Plc|K'J|H II HH II 

I 

4dlc*lc«JFR%^NE*ifddl$|cR I I I I 
^iiTh^i4 siRiMn# T^rsrq u-'Rik+h. i 
qRi’jTl'Higd Rht&mic^k et^ineh. II ?<^> i I 
*uRri 4 > qffefc % iiwitoi =q 1 

wvn qtrR EET»R Ef%JT I I I I 
^d^Rld ^ I 

qdsi«^H 1 1 1 1 



122 tantrapuspAnjali 


WEmrafafeaj dMIsIM I 

^dcfl^'+.^llHd^l^Mr^dl TOT I I | | 

MliNMIiWK ^ ^fKlFN-Wdl I 
■M*MITOHWIH HriKl^yrnfeH ! ! '<4.!; II 

fe-MK fd MfilHrAIM 4 . *ITO I I ?«» I I 
dKshM^IIH tRTO I 
HWT I I ?«X I I 

M^Vlldd^ ^ *tejymi-crt I 

moksam tathoditam 384 krtva pancasltikrame sthitam 3 ’' ! 
akasam tu sivakhyam ca mahabhusitam eva ca || 158 || 
mahajnanas tapoloko 388 martyalokas tathaiva ca | 
bhur bhuvah svar iti caiva 3 ° 7 sarvaisvaryam 3 '* paraparam || 159 11 
sivam 369 sadaSivam tattvam Isvaram rudrasiddhidam | 
visnulokam 370 brahmalokam svargasthanam 0 saclpateh 3 "- || 160 || 
somasuryam 373 yatha 374 lokam 377 agneyam vayavam tatha | 
vamnam ca kuberakhyam 378 vacaspatyam tathaparam || 161 || 
anima laghima caiva mahima praptir eva ca | 
prakamyam Isvaratvam ca vasitvam ca kramagatam || 162 || 

3 'mrtyunjayo’arthasiddhis ca vagvidhanah pravartate | 
khadgam 378 ca paduka 379 caiva gutikapattasiddhidam 3S< ’ || 163 || 
khecaryaS ca padam srestham sunyabhumipravartakam | 
kandavesanakam caiva vrsthes ca 381 labhanam tatha || 164 || 
nirbljam bljadaham tu visabhaksam tathaiva ca | 
anagnijvalanam siddhim kandasastranivaranam || 165 || 
vedhanam 382 satrughattanam caiva parakayapravesanam 383 1 
vetalotthapanam caiva bhutapasmitinasanam || 166 || 
saktavadam 384 saktijalam 385 siddhartham 388 khecaradikam | 
yaksinlsadhanam siddhidhatuvadam 387 tathaparam || 167 || 
santikam postikam 388 caiva vasyakarsanam eva ca | 
uccatam 389 maranam proktam vidvesam stambhanam 390 tatha || 168 || 
mantratantrakavitvam ca garudabhutasiddhidam 391 1 




THE KHACAKRAPAftCAKASTOTRA . HYMN 1 TO THE FIVE SPHERES OF EMPTINESS ! 123 


kulakaularthatattvajno 1 '- vedasastram 3 “ :i patanjalam || 169 || 
dharmakamarthasiddhis ca 3 ' 4 tapojnanarn tathaparam | 
sarvatirthaphalapraptir yajnadanakriya 395 tatha || 170 || 
pithopaplthasiddhim ca ksetrasandohasampada | 
cakravartitvam apnoti maharajyaprasiddhidam || 1711| 
uktanuktam tu'“" yat 3 "‘ kincit sakalarn 3 -’ 4 tat 399 pravartate | 
dviruccare krte samyak mahamelapakam bhavet || 172 || 
triruccare krte vlrakramajnanam pravartate | 
caturuccarya tattvajno bhedayet suryamandalam || 173 || 
pancadhavartayed yas tu mahadhamantararn vaset | 

Once liberation is made manifest in this way it resides in the sequence of 
eighty-five. (These are): 1) space, 2) the one called Siva, 3) the Greatly Adorned 
One, 4) the Great Knowledge, 5) the world of austerity, 6) the world of mortals, 
7-9) (the worlds of) Bhur, Bhuvas, and Svar, 10-11) all lordship, superior and 
inferior; the principles 12) Siva, 13) Sadasiva and 14) Isvara, which bestows the 
attainment of Rudra, 15) the world of Visnu, 16) the world of Brahma, 17) the 
heaven of Indra, 18-19) the worlds of the Sun and Moon, those of 20-22) Fire, Wind 
and Water, 23) the one called Kubera, 24) mastery over speech (vacaspatya), 25- 
31) the power to make oneself small, light and great (at will), so too the powers 
to reach (whatever one wants) and to obtain (whatever one wants), and mastery 
and control (of others), which has come down through the tradition, 32) the 
conquest of death, 33) the attainment of wealth, 34) (the power) to give orders 
(that are always carried out), 35) (the accomplishment of) the sword and 36) 
that of the sandals, 37) the alchemical pill and 38) the shawl, 39) (the attaiment 
of the place) of the skyfaring (goddess), which is the best of all, 40) generation 
of the plane of emptiness, 41) (the power to) enter any treasure chest ( kanda ), 
42) the attainment of rain, 43) seedless (contemplation), 44) the burning of the 
seeds (of past actions), 45) (the power to) eat poison, 46) (the power to) burn 
without fire, 47) (the power to) protect oneself from weapons ( kandasastra ?), 
48) the piercing (of the vital centres), 49) the killing of an enemy, 50) entry into 
another’s body, 51) (the power to) arouse spirits ( vetala ), 52) the destruction of 
ghosts and demons, 53) knowledge of the energies, 54) (control over) the net of 
energies, 35) attainment of (any) goal, 56) the power of flight ( khecara ) and the 



124 tantrapuspAnjali 


rest, 57) the control of Yaksinis, 58) knowledge of alchemy (siddhidhatuvada), 
59) the power to quell (evil influences), 60-62) (the power to) satisfy-, control and 
attract, 63) (the power to) remove (one’s enemies), 64) kill (by magical means), 
65) create enmity and 66) paralyse, 67-69) (knowledge of) mantras, Tantras and 
poetic (powers), (the attainment of which) bestows 70-71) control over ghosts 
and Garuda’s (power to cure snake bites), 72-73) knowledge of the true nature 
of Kula and Kaula, 74) the Vedic scriptures and 75) (the yoga of) Patanjali, 76-78) 
the attainment of Dharma, sexual fulfiment ( kama) and wealth, so too 79) the 
knowledge that comes from (the practice of) austerity, 80) the attainment of the 
fruit of (visiting) all sacred places and 81) (the merit) of affering a sacrifice, 82) the 
attainment (to be had at) sacred seats primary and secondary (pitha, upapitha), 
and 83) the wealth of (the other Kaula sites called) K§etras and Sandohas. (The 
yogi who recites this hymn also) attains 84) the sovereignty of empire, and this 
hymn bestows 85) the attainment of a great kingdom. (In short,) whatever has 
been said or never uttered takes place (as one desires it to). When it is recited 
properly twice one participates in the Great Assembly ( mahameldpaku ). When it 
is recited three times, knowledge of the Transmission of the Heroes ( virakrcuna) 
arises. The knower of reality who recites it four times pierces the circle of the Sun 
and he who repeates it five times resides within the Great Abode. (158-1743^) 

ffcf 

iti srioddiyanaplthavinirgatam sarvayoginlpranltam 
mukhan mukhavinirgatam maharthakramajnanartham 
srikhacakrapancakastotram samaptam subham || 

Thus ends auspiciously the venerable Hymn to the Five Circles of Emptiness, 
the meaning of which is knowledge of the process ( krama ) of the Great Reality 
{mahartka). It has been transmitted by word of mouth and taught by all the 
Yoginls, and it has come forth from the venerable sacred seat of Oddiyana. 




THE KH ACAKR.APANCAKASTOTRA, H^X TO THE FIVE SPHERES OF EMPTINESS | 125 


ENDNOTES 

The sign * indicates a missing letter. 

I k, kh: -maholkalolam 

* k, kh: -tejah- -sakti asesa- 

3 k, kh: srimahgallniti 

4 k, kh: mahartha 
r ’ k, kh: pratim 

*’ The first first and fourth verses are set in 
the metre Vasantatilaka (14 syllables per 
quarter). The second and third verses are 
in Mandakranta (seventeen syllables per 
quarter) and Malinl (fifteen syllables per 
quarter), respectively. 

7 k: tara; kh: taram 

8 kh: cakra 

9 kh: gagana- 

10 k: rasmi- 

II k: -bhama-; kh: -bhasa- 

12 k, kh: -tlvram 

13 k: visamavisamam; kh: visama- 

14 k: devicakram; kh: devicakra 

15 k: samita- 

,b kh: larva- -saukho 

17 k: nasita- - netrathyanatha; kh: 
vamita—netrathya- 

18 k, kh: yasya asamkhya- 

19 k, kh: -nimddha udayastamanaih- 

20 k, kh: eka 

21 k: tan; kh: tat 

22 k, kh: gauri 

23 k: namaskrtvavatarayet; kh: -yet 

24 kh: -namthapadakum 

25 kh: -yoginl- 

k: -latmaka; kh: guruna- -ka 

27 k: abja- 

28 k, kh: -cakra 

29 k: -gata 


30 k: -kridatsavai; kh: -kridatsavaih 

31 kh: vaiva 

32 k: raghadamiridakinyo; kh: radya- 

33 k, kh: -ginyair- 

34 k, kh: yoginyodhva 

35 k: -cakra 

36 kh: khacari 

37 kh: -nayika 

38 k: narhana; kh: nandana 

39 kh: tramara 

40 k, kh: rddhi 

41 k: bhasa-; kh: bhasa- 

42 k, kh: -tan 

43 k, kh: ravantaka 

44 k, kh: nabho 

43 k: yama-augha; kh: yamandagha 

46 k: -^amantrajna 

47 k, kh: -nl 

48 k: khadinl; kh: khadina 

49 k: -bhutida 

50 kh: -masi 

31 k: nabhontata; kh: nabhonnata 

32 k, kh: damarucchaha 

33 k: SamkhinI 

34 k: cakra 
33 kh: ? 

36 kh: -vakra 

57 k: ranjaki; kh: ramjanl 
38 kh: pharini 

59 k, kh: nandini 

60 kh: uttim 

61 k, kh: ya£asrf 

62 k, kh: odinl 

63 k, kh: gamana 

64 kh: sapta- 

65 kh: -na 

66 k, kh: -siddhi 

67 kh: ghnl- 





126 taxtrapuspAxjali 


88 k: nadana; kh: nadana 

69 kh: dahaka 

70 k: yasadha 

71 k, kh: ekavara 

72 k, kh: rntika 

73 kh: -saptaita 
“ 4 kh: -ta 

75 k: -sakasadudbhutamanyadvai; kh: 
-sakasaduptatamanyai 

78 kh: sthita 
77 k, kh: cai 

7 ^ k, kh: samekaikam 

79 kh: dakini 

80 kh: -nl 

8j k, kh: raudra 

82 k, kh: -sapta 

83 kh: cakra 

84 kh: sasthitah 

85 k, kh: sa- 

86 k, kh: rodanl 
kh:jarijari 

^ k: jagadgrasi; kh: gajadgrasl 

89 kh: -rika 

90 k : "kramottha ca; kh: siptadasakramottha 
ca 

91 k, kh: cakra 

92 k, kh: nayika 

93 kh: pharini 

94 k, kh: kacari 

95 k, kh: -bhaksa 

96 kh: taplnl 

97 k: carsanl 

98 kh: yaya 

99 k: man! *; kh: vamanl 
,otJ k, kh: dardura 

101 k, kh: - khyata 

102 k, kh: cakra 

109 k: sambhava; kh: sammbava 


4 k: vittahari: kh: ( Utahan 
kh:bhavane 
k. kh: mulini 
k, kh: miilaghati 
' k: kakara: kh: krak.ua 
kh: -vakti 
kh: rajavi 
k. kh: -bhucara 

* k. kh: -taitas 
kh: catuthe 

4 k. kh: cakra 
kh: -malantrabhaksita 
k: sumativirra-; kh: sumatlmra- 
kh: ciravasi 
" kh: samkarl 
' k: krsodari 

* k, kh: khamcakram 
12; kh: -khyan 

l2 ‘ k: -na; kh: kramau- -na 

123 k, kh: -margena 

124 kh: canye 
12 ' kh: -rl 

u ’ k, kh: -tanum 
12 ~ kh: -pltayoginikam 
l2 ‘' kh: canya 
u ‘ k: -svaramam 

130 kh: -pakti- 

131 kh: -nam 

132 k: -prasa-; kh: -ghasmaram 

133 kh: -nimayam 

134 k, kh: mahakaulam 

135 k, kh: maharthasa ca 
,3f) kh: goyarah 

137 k, kh: -sas 

138 k: matsya; kh: matsyo 

139 kh: slmdhu- 

140 k, kh: sura 

141 k, kh: carum 




THE KHACAKRAPAftCAKASTOTRA. HYMN TO THE FIVE SPHERES OF EMPTINESS 127 


•^k:* sunca 

43 kh: -vadya 

44 k, kh: prakurvanam 

43 kh: sva 

4,1 kh: sva 

4 ~ k, kh: svabhavita 
48 kh: -sanni *janat 

44 kh: -nanda na 

30 k, kh: ghurmita 

31 k, kh: -gamana 

^ k: -samsthita; kh: 
Damvadhakramasasthita 
33 k: bhasa-; kh: bhasa- 

54 kh: yoginyau 

55 k, kh: mahadha- 
5(1 kh: sthita 

57 kh: khecarya 

38 kh: -margesthah 

59 k: dikcarya 

bo kh: suksma- 

4,1 k, kh: atmanatma- 

( ’ 2 kh: bhuvaryah 

b3 kh: -carkrastha 

b4 k: -prakasakah; kh: -prakasakah 

<>3 k, kh: etadvi 

bb k, kh: prabhutam 

b7 kh: -la 

68 kh: duhpreksam 
(>9 k, kh: jyotlnam 

70 k: ruttamam 

71 kh: khecarye 

72 k, kh: pranjalihpranatah 

73 k, kh: -mudlrayet 

74 k, kh: -mastho 

73 kh: nirarapadejjhite 

76 k: masthanamte 

77 k, kh: bhasantara 
178a kh: -padma 


rSb kh: sana- 

1-9 k, kh: phatkaraphetkare 
,So k, kh: samharastrastra- 
,Sl k: -prakasa- 
,s - k: disajvabhasamadhye 

153 kh: sta 

154 k, kh: -yodbhava 
185 k: -tlta 

lSb kh: -ra 

lS: k, kh: nabhakali 

188 k, kh: damare 

lS9 k: damarariki; kh: damarahvi 

190 k: yasacinta- 

191 kh: srayo- 

192 k, kh: okararasmi- 

193 k: -phalojyhite 

194 k: osakali; kh: okha- 

195 k, kh: okarakhye 

196 kh: bhavabhave- 

" >r kh: gaganadyutidyobhage 

>9* k, kh: samarupe 

■99 kh: mahatamaprakasate 

200 kh: -sasthite 

201 kh: -satka- 

202 kh: tejokali 

2°3 k: ma ekha-; kh: matrakhapha- 
20 -* k: anacchante; kh: anakra * 

2 °5 k: khe- 

206 kh: nihkri- 

207 kh: suksme 

208 kh: suddha 

209 k: khe- 

210 k: pratisthite; kh: * tisthite 

2,1 k: anuccarya; kh: anurcarye 

212 kh: -ta 

213 kh: grasate 

2,4 k: bhairavatkate 
215 kh: rudhe 





128 tantrapuspAnjali 


216 kh: -nanda 
2J7 k: -vidasraye 

218 kh: -nanda 

219 kh: sastamatre 

220 k, kh: mantratantresvari 

221 k, kh: devi 

222 kh: -nekasam- 

223 k: samharaksi; kh: samharaksa 

224 kh: -sodasa£ambhave 

225 kh: sotu£a- 

226 k, kh: nabhorupasvarupabhe 

227 k, kh: tvamsu- 

228 kh: -ro 

229 k: oghamogha; kh: oghamoghavyeti 

230 kh: -prakasesthe 

231 kh: arkakhye 

232 kh: su£uksme 

233 k, kh: kalakala- 

234 kh: gholavanda- 

235 kh: bhakalitakhye 

236 k: samharaprakra- 

237 k: -ri; kh: ma- -ri 

238 k, kh: devi 

239 k, kh: racanl 

240 k, kh: -jvala 

241 k: mahajjvale 

242 kh: -gamya 

243 k: -ghoragranisvani; kh: -nisvani 

244 kh: * * tejah- 

245 k: rudra- 

246 kh: samharagramagrasanakule 

247 k: bhairavakhye 

248 k, kh: -vasa- 

249 kh: kola- 

250 kh: -sabda 

251 k, kh: -ri 

252 k, kh: -vasa- 

253 k: hrtpame 


kh: retanava * 
ir ' kh: matrakhaphara- 
*" k, kh: yogesvari- 
*" k: aksendriye madhya: kh 
akse m d ri y a r a m a d b y a 
k: kale 

*' J kh: bhattamara- -khya 
k: alivindha- 
2 ' 1 kh: virjjakse 
k: missing; kh: ka 
k, kh: -ri 
2fi4 k: devi 

" kh: kaunkanasva/ 

2 '' k, kh: -patyambe 
kh: pamca * 

^ kh: -vama 
2#>9 kh: ma esaphara- 
2-0 k, kh: -rapodbhave 
2-1 k: -vega 

272 kh: -spasta 

273 kh: bhutagotre- 

274 k: -tern 

275 k, kh: -murti 
27<J k, kh: ni£vase 

277 kh: agnisoman vartini 

278 k, kh: garvita 

279 kh: -dedesi 

280 kh: -karobhase 

281 kh: niskriyakhye 

282 kh: -nanda 

283 kh: samane 

284 kh: -sanase 

285 k, kh: -siddhi 

286 k, kh: -vika£abhe 

287 kh: pahma-; k, kh: -siddhi 

288 kh: -paryantam 

289 kh: kaivarlyamava- 

290 k, kh: -siddhi 





THE KHACAKRAPASrCAKASTOTRA, HYMN TO THE FIVE SPHERES OF EMPTINESS | 129 


21,1 kh: yadyo- 

329 kh: -ri 

292 k: -devatya-; kh: -sambhava 

330 k, kh: -hi 

2 “ 3 kh: divyamartyanupa- 

331 k, kh: -yl 

294 k, kh: maha Isvarabhavasthe 

332 k: -tl; kh: ^iva- 

2M " k, kh: -yoni 

333 k: yamya 

29h kh: -ram 

334 k, kh: -dl 

3 ‘ r k, kh: -yoni 

335 k, kh: -ri 

298 kh: pahma- 

336 kh: gandharvl 

299 k, kh: -yoni 

337 k: patrage 

MM kh: -yuktam 

338 k, kh: candika 

301 k, kh: devatakaranod- 

339 k, kh: -yoni 

302 k: sakara-, kh: -karaksye 

340 kh: tigyonisthe 

303 k: tapane-; k, kh: -dyuti 

341 k: manusye yonicantasthe; kh: 

304 k: pacanl; kh: yavanl 

manusyayonicantasthe 

305 k: havyava * 

342 k, kh: -le 

k: va 

343 k: -yonyottame; kh: brahmayonyottame 

H ° 7 k: -bhapi; kh: -bhasi 

344 k, kh: -janane 

308 k: tamontike; kh: tantike 

345 k, kh: -mahanante 

309 k: -karsi; kh: -karsa 

346 k, kh: -vidye Isvarakhye 

3,0 k, kh: kala- 

347 k: sadvim^ante 

3,1 k, kh: * 

348 kh: tyaya 

312 k: kalakhe; kh: kalarase 

349 kh: vagmayam 

3,3 k, kh: -kama- 

350 kh: ^uksme 

314 k: -karsi; kh: -karsa 

351 kh: -le 

3,5 kh: -samadyuti 

352 k, kh: mahantasthe 

316 k: kala-; k, kh: -kare 

353 k, kh: mahavidya 

317 kh: rakta 

354 kh: dviprakalekramodbhuteh 

318 kh: maha- 

355 k, kh: -ta 

319 k: candaghantogre; kh: candaghamtagre 

356 kh: -bhutah 

320 k, kh:jayanti 

357 k, kh: -cakrastha 

321 kh: va 

358 kh: -vela 

322 k, kh: candri 

359 k: -ni 

323 kh: -simha 

360 kh: cajrine 

324 k: -simhepare 

361 k: surya 

325 kh: kare 

362 k, kh: siddha 

326 kh: sriya 

363 k, kh: -martyagams 

327 k, kh: -tl 

364 k, kh: tathaditah 

328 k, kh: -ri 

365 k, kh: sthita 











130 tantrapuspAxjali 


3 " k ? kh: -jriana- -loka 
k. kh: scaiva 
3 * 9 k, kh: sarvaisvarya 
37 - kh: sivah 
r kh: -ka 
371 k: svargasthana 
k: saclyateh; kh: sa- 
373 k: -surye; kh: -surya 
371 k: tatham 
37: k, kh: loke 
3 ~’ kh: kuverakhyam 
3 ~ k, kh: mrtyurijaya- 
379 k: khamgam 
37s< k, kh: -kau 
3 * J kh: gudika- 

391 k, kh: vrksasya 

392 k: *?dhanam 
383 kh: para- 


k. kh: khanya\adani 
'■ kh: bhaksi- 

' kh: biddhimrthain ra 
' k. kh: - 

" k: paustikam: kh: pustikani 
' k. kh: ucratam 
k: tambhanam 
kh:garudam- 
* k, kh: -jna 
k. kh: vedasamkhya 
' 4 k: -karmartha- -siddhini ca 
' k: -praptiyajna-; kh: -phalam prapti 
yajna- 
kh: ca 
■' kh: vat 

‘ " k: v(?;jna; kh: sakrjja 
’ k: yat; kh: pat 


ABBREVIATIONS 

CMSS: CLncinlmcitasarasamuccaya 
DP: Devipancasataka 
JY: Jayadrathayamaia 

K: KhCPS manuscript: NAK no. 5-5183 Saivatantra 157 = NGMPP reel no. A 150/6; 
size: 32 1/2 x 12 1/2; folios: 35 (of which 15-20). 

Kh: KhCPS manuscript, the second half of a manuscript called Kallkulakramarcana: 
NAK no. 1 - 252 Saivatantra 150 = NGMPP reel no. A 182/6; folios: 16 (numbered 61 to 
77); paper, Nevarl script. 

KhCPS: Khacakrapancakastotra 

MP: Mahanayaprakasa by Arnasimha 

NAK: National Archives of Kathmandu 

NGMPP: Nepal-German Manuscript Preservation Project 

RT: Rajcitaranginl 

TA: Tantrdloka 




THE KHACAK&APAXCAKASTOTRA. HYMN TO THE FIVE SPHERES OF EMPTINESS 131 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Cidgaganacandrika with the commentary called Kramaprakasika by Raghundtha Misra. 

Varanasi: Sampurnananda Sanskrit University, 1980. 

Dyczkowski, Mark S. G., trans. (with an introduction and exposition). The Stanzas on 
Vibration . Albany, NY: State University of New York Press, 1992. 

Kaul, Madhusudan, ed. The Spandakarikas ofVasugupta with the Nirnaya by Ksemaraja. 

Kashmiri Series of Texts and Studies 42. Srinagar, 1925 
Stein, M.A., trans. (with an introduction, commentary and appendices). Kalhana's 
Rdjatarahgini: A Chronicle of the Kings of Kasmir (2 volumes). Delhi: Motilal 
Banarasidass, 1979. 





4 


Varahl Worship in the Parasurama- 
Kalpasutra : A Study of Imagination and 
Transformation in Kaula Srlvidya 

Annette Wilke 


This article is dedicated in gratitude to Panditji Chakravarty, to whom I owe 
my (purely academic) “initiation’’ into Tantra, and more precisely Srlvidya and 
the non-dual version of Kashmir Saivism of Abhinavagupta that shaped it. For 
Panditji, Tantric studies were not simply an intellectual matter; they explored 
a living tradition and deeply spiritual reality. His personal dedication to the 
subject was ever present in his discourse. It was very much part of his profound 
knowledge about Abhinavagupta, Pandit Gopinath Kaviraj, and the vast lore 
of Tantric texts, and both his inspiration and his scholarship expanded my 
understanding of the confusingly complex world of esoteric Tantric philosophy 
and ritual. 

During my scholarship in Varanasi in the early 1990s, I studied with Panditji 
the texts of the apocryphal Sankara tradition—in particular, the Lalitatrisati- 
Bhasya ascribed to Sankara, the famous Advaita Vedanta philosopher, and 
part of Laksmldhara’s commentary on the SaundaryaLciharl, the artistic and 
profound Devi hymn also attributed to Sankara. 1 In this article I present material 

1. This field remained a long-term research focus of mine and inspired a number of 
articles since the 1990s. Most directly concerning my studies with Panditji: Annette 
Wilke, “A New Theology of Bliss: ‘Vedantization’ of Tantra and ‘Tantricization’ of 
Advaita Vedanta,” in Samarasya: Studies in Indian Arts, Philosophy and Interreligious 
Dialogue, ed. S. Das & E. Fiirlinger (New Delhi: D.K. Printworld, 2005). For wider 
contexts see: Annette Wilke, “Sankara and the Taming of Wild Goddesses,” in 
Wild Goddesses in India and Nepal, Proceedings of an International Symposium 
Berne and Zurich, November igg4, ed. Axel Michaels et al. (Bern: Peter Lang, 






\ARAh! WORSHIP IN THE PARA&URAMA-KALPASUTRA I 133 


from a more recent research project and a very different version of Srividya: the 
Parasurdma-Kalpasutra (PKS), an eminent ritual manual, which stands out for 
its “left-handed” Kaula approach. 2 My presentation consists of three parts. The 

1996), "Beauty Personified: The Goddess Lalita-Tripurasundari and Her Thousand 
Names,” in Foundations of Indian Art, Proceedings of the Chidambaram Seminar 
on Art and Religion , ed. R. Nagaswamy (Chennai: Tamil Arts Academy, 2002), “Die 
Gottin KamaksI und ihr jahrlicher sricakra-Ritus: Zur neuen Offentlichkeit einer 
esoterischen Tradition in Hamm-Uentrop,” in TempelundTamileninzweiterHeimat: 
Hindus aus Sri Lanka im deutschsprachigen und skandinavischen Raum, ed. M. 
Baumann et al. (Wurzburg: Ergon, 2003), and “Mental Journeys, Cosmic Geography, 
and Intermediary Space: Shrichakra and Shrichakrapuja,” in Sacred Geography 
of Goddesses in South Asia, Essays in Memory of David Kinsley , ed. R.P.B. Singh 
(Newcastle upon Tyne: Cambridge Scholars, 2010). Dealing with Tantra, Nama- 
Stotras and Saundaryalahari also inspired my recent studies on the high significance 
of sonality in Hindu India: “Sound and Sense: Sonic Perception in Hindu India,” in 
Religion and Music , ed. L. Guzy (Berlin: WeiSensee Verlag, 2008), which discusses 
two goddess hymns set to music, and Annette Wilke and Oliver Moebus, Sound 
and Communication: An Aesthetic Cultural History of Sanskrit Hinduism (Berlin/ 
New York: de Gruyter, 2011). The latter work starts with the Banarsi soundscape and 
contains long sections on Veda and Tantra, including sound contemplation in the 
Varvasya Rahasya (pp. 751-762). 

2. I conducted a research project along with Dr. Claudia Weber on the text and its 
bulky commentaries (“Vertextete Riten. Das ParaSurama-Kalpasutra und seine 
‘Weiterschreibungen’ in der Rezeptionsgeschichte,” annotated edition, initial 
translation, ritual analysis) from 2006 to 2009, which was sponsored by the 
German Research Foundation (DFG). Claudia Weber presented the first translation 
into a non-Indian language with her publication: Das Parasurdma-Kalpasutra: 
Sanskrit-Edition mit deutscher Erstubersetzung, Kommentaren undweiteren Studien 
(Frankfurt/Berlin/New York: Lang, 2010). I refer to this work below with the short¬ 
cut “Weber, PKS.” When referring to RameSvara’s commentary, however, I am using 
the Baroda edition, hence the abbreviation PKS(Ba): Parasuramakalpasutra with 
Ramesvara’s Commentary, ed. Mahadeva Sastri (Baroda: Oriental Institute, 1923 
[rev. and enlarged 1950 by Sakarlal Yajneswar Sastri Dave, repr. 1979,1999]. My own 
contribution were ritual studies: Annette Wilke, “Basic Categories of a Syntactical 
Approach to Rituals: Arguments for a ‘Unitary Ritual View’ and the ParaSurama- 
Kalpasutra as Test Case,’” in Grammars and Morphologies of Ritual Practices in Asia, 
ed. A. Michaels 8 c A. Mishra (Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz, 2010), “Negotiating Tantra 
and Veda in the Para^urama-Kalpa Tradition,” in Negotiating Ritual, ed. U. Hiisken 
8 c F. Neubert (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2012), “Re-coding the Natural and 
Animating the Imaginary: Kaula body practices in the Parasurama-Kalpasutra, 




134 TANTRAPUSPANJALI 

first briefly introduces the PKS, while the second is the main body of the article. It 
discusses in detail the major elements of Chapter 7" the* midnight w 01 ship of the 
sinister, boar-faced goddess Varahl, the fierce judge and commander-in-chief of 
the main goddess Lalita, the beautiful queen of the universe. Much like the i est of 
the PKS (andTantra in general), VarahPs ritual cycle includes a great deal of active 
imagination"—i.e., the deliberate use of mental capacity to create t he presence of 
invisible things—as a technique of self-sacralization and transformation. In my 
analysis I emphasize these features, since they are richly developed in the PKS. 
I also discuss Ramesvara’s commentary on purascarana, the mantra repetition 
which must complement the worship. It will be seen that not only heterodox 
ritual involving the pancamakdra (see below), but also—and even primarily— 
intense imagination and mantra discipline are introduced as major instruments 
to transform th esadhaka (theTantric seeker, practitioner) into a siclclha (a man of 
perfection). The third and concluding part of the article reflects on the nature of 
imagination in general and Tantric imagination in particular in terms of method 
and theory. It synthesizes theoretical reflections made already in part two and 
situates them into a larger analytical framework. In addition to suggesting that 
imagination is a descriptive term highly relevant to Tantric discourse, I also use 
it as an analytical category and tool to consider the individual and collective 
dimensions of imagination and review the history, politics, techniques and 
spaces of (Tantric) imagination, and their mutual interplay. 4 Thus, my intention 
is not only to summarize, but also to look at imagination and transformation 
in a more analytical, typological and generalizing fashion. In doing so, I offer 


ritual transfers and the politics of representation,” in Transformations and Transfer 
of Tantra in Asia and Beyond, ed. I. Keul (Berlin & New York: de Gruyter, 2012), and 
“Aktive Imagination im Tantra—Am Beispiel des Ritualmanuals Parasurama- 
Kalpasutra,” in Imagination — Religion — Asthetik: Vorstellungs- und Sinnerswelten 
in Religion und Kultur (Gottingen: Vandenhoeck, 2014). These articles contain a 
broader discussion of the ritual manual than the present article on Chapter 7. 

3 * “Active imagination” denotes also a particular method of psychoanalytical therapy 
developed by C. G. Jung, which I will not go into here. 

4 - A more elaborate discussion of this approach (including manifold empirical 
examples and a broad spectrum of theories of imagination) is found in: Lucia 
Traut and Annette Wilke, ed., Imagination — Religion — Asthetik: Vorstellungs- und 
Sinneswelten in Religion und Kultur (Gottingen: Vandenhock & Ruprecht, 2015). 





\ ArAhI worship in the paraSurAma-kalpasutra ; 135 


new insights into the procedures and effects of imagination, the human capacity 
to create new realities through cognitive blending and shifts of attention and 
agency. 

1 . THE PARA$URAMA-KALPASUTRA AND ITS RITUAL CYCLES 

The PKS is an eminent source of Kaula-Srividya of uncertain origin. Due to its 
highly composite nature—it draws from Tantric sources originating all over 
India—it is difficult to discern with certainty the place and date of composition. 
But the oldest manuscripts and the commentary tradition make the i4-i6th 
century and Tamil Nadu most probable. 5 6 The PKS was likely composed shortly 
before the 16th century, i.e., around the time when Lak$mldhara developed his 
famous Samaya interpretation of Sffvidya, which was decisively anti-Kaula. 
Tamil Nadu, where the PKS probably originated, is the area where Sffvidya is 
most widespread today. In this region, Sffvidya came to pervade large segments 
of Adisaiva and Smarta Brahmin communities and became strongly connected 
to the monastic, orthodox Sankaracaryas, i.e., became pronouncedly right- 
handed.” Therefore, for many contemporary ears, “Kaula Sffvidya sounds 
like a contradiction in terms, since Sffvidya was seemingly purged of what 
was considered heterodox, deviant, impure, and immoral in the normative 
Brahmanical Hinduism, to which today's Sffvidya mainstream in Tamil Nadu 
owes so much. But Kaula wings of Sffvidya existed in the past and still exist 
although diminished— as the PKS and its reception history demonstrate. The 
text includes the debated pancamakara —alcohol, meat, fish, parched grain, and 
sexual intercourse/fluids—which are defended in the commentary tradition 
until the late 19th century. 1 ’ Even today, the PKS has a vibrant living tradition 
of Kaula initiates and family lines, particularly in Kerala. In the 20th century, 
the PKS enjoyed a broad renaissance, as seen in new editions and the large 
borrowing of ritual elements from the PKS in modern Sffvidya ritual manuals 
like the Srividyaratnakara —although, of course, “purged” of the pancamakara. 


5. Cf. Claudia Weber, “Manuskripte des Parasurama-Kalpasutra und seiner 
Kommentartradition,” in Miinchener Indologische Zeitschrift 1, 186-207 (2008/9), 
and Weber, PKS, 41-67, where she suggests also influences from Orissa. 

6. I refer here to the commentaries of Ramesvara (Surl) (1832) and Laksmana Ranade 
(1889). 



136 TAXTRAPUSPANJALI 


However, only a very discerning perusal will reveal this purging, since the PKS is 
itself very discrete about the pancamaka.ru and stipulates strict secrecy around 
them. The pahcamakdra, or "the five words beginning with M," are represented 
by code words or numbers and are hardly discussed. In particular, the filth— 
maithuna, sexual intercourse/fluids—is only mentioned passingly, quite in 
contrast to the otherwise detailed ritual descriptions and prescriptions found in 
thePKS. Like many Tantric texts, the PKS is deliberately challenging for outsiders, 
as it presents most of the mantras of the goddesses in encoded form, so that 
they remain a secret for the non-initiates, unless they take the pain to consult 
Ramesvara’s bulky and difficult commentary.' 

The cryptic nature of a large amount of this textual material and the need for 
decoding and commenting may explain why the statements of the ritual manual 
are called “Sutras,” even though many are very elaborate and descriptive and 
thus do not conform to the terse style typical of Sutras. It is also possible that 
the term “Sutra” was only chosen for a pragmatic reason, to indicate that simple 
prose statements, rather than metrical verses, constitute the ritual manual. 
However, these statements ( sutras ) of the legendary Parasurama about the ritual 
procedure (kalpa) attain the weight of an authoritative textbook in the manual's 
best known title (Parasu.rdmakalpasu.tra) and the reception history. It is probably 
the unique combination of detailed ritual descriptions and philosophical ideas 
that made the PKS such an important and renowned ritual text up to the present 
day. It is strongly informed by the vocabulary and concepts of Abhinavagupta’s 
school * * 8 * and combines them with Upanisadic ideas, Vedantic terms (starting 
with Brahman) and Mahavakya-like formulas of non-dual unity. 1 ' Moreover, it 
contains quotations and glosses from Kaula and non-Kaula Tantric sources from 
different parts of India , 10 and many features of pan-Indian Saiva ritual, so it is 

7- This was done in our research project by Claudia Weber, whose PKS edition and 

translation offers both versions of the mantras, the encoded and decoded form. 

8. It uses terms like samvit, prakdsa , vimarsa, etc. 

9- For example, the text describes Brahman as bliss absolute (PKS 1.12), it uses 
mahavakyas and mahavakya -like formulas (PKS 3.31, 7.6), and it propounds the 
search of the self ( atman) (PKS 1.28). The PKS also includes a number of Vedic 
mantras (PKS 2.2; 2.6; 3.26; 3.31; 10.10-n; 10.20). 

10. Major sources are mentioned in Wilke, “Re-Coding the Natural and Animating the 
Imaginary," 36, footnote 29. See also Weber, PKS, 41-63. 






vArAhI worship in the paraSurAma-kalpasutra \ 137 


not easy to discern where it comes from, which gives the manual a cosmopolitan 
and universal flair. At the time of composition, the PKS was apparently a sort 
of compendium or summa of Kaula Tantric practice. And yet, remarkably, it 
proudly claims itself to be a “great Upani§ad.” The PKS reflects developments 
and negotiation processes in the history ofTantra." In many ways, it shares more 
with older trends within Tantra and Abhinavagupta’s version of Kashmir Saivism 
than the present “right-handed” mainstream. 

Besides, its undeniable Kaula-Srividya approach, the PKS is a valuable 
historical source for a time period in which so far Tantra has been little explored. 
It possibly reflects that the Srividya mainstream in the earlier centuries was 
different from todays and more of the Kaula type. The PKS tells a different story 
about Brahmanical Hinduism than the one we are used to. All its commentators 
were Brahmins and RameSvara, whose commentary was completed in 1832, 
was even a staunch Vedic Mlmamsaka. The Brahmin Ramesvara uses MImamsa 
methods to defend the Kaula features of the text. For him, alcohol and sexual 
intercourse are ritual obligations as much as severe mantra practices (see 
below). He does not at all see the Vedic cLharma and the Tantric dharma as being 
opposed. Many indicators lead us to conclude that throughout the centuries the 
practitioners were primarily sophisticated educated elites, including Brahmins 
and royal customers. Undoubtedly, Umananda, who wrote a PKS extension called 
the Nityotsava, had close relations with the court of Tanjore in the 17th century. 

The ten chapters of the PKS chart a complex ritual architecture, starting 
with initiation (Chapter 1). The main body of the text offers detailed descriptions 
of the daily worship of the five major mantra deities, who each have their own 
ritual cycle to be followed in the prescribed sequence ( krama ): the elephant¬ 
headed god Ganapati (Chapter 2), the chief goddess Lalita, who is the beautiful 
sovereign of the jewel island (srlcakral the cosmos) and strongly connoted with 
(mystical) eroticism and language (Chapters 3-5)> 12 Lalita’s close attendant and 

11. Elaborated in Wilke, "Negotiating Tantra and Veda” and “Re-Coding the Natural and 
Animating the Imaginary.” 

12. Erotic imagination plays a substantial role in the PKS, particularly in the daily rites 
of the chief Srividya deity Lalita who is described as “ever wet.” The initiate drinks 
her nectarine water of immortality when consuming liquor and participates in 
her love-play with Siva when performing her ritual worship mentally, verbally and 




138 TANTRAPUSPANJALI 


minister Syama (Chapter 6), her terrifying commander-in-chief and fierce judge 
\arahl (Chapter 7), and her inner nature or “heart" Para, the “supreme” (pcirci) 
form of the goddess as the blazing light (of consciousness) representing Lalita’s 
transcendental form (Chapter 8). A separate chapter on fire sacrifice (9) and a 
longer one (10) on special rites and an integrated view of the mantra s conclude 
the PKS. 

Except for VarahT, whose worship is at midnight, the ritual descriptions of 
all other deities have their worship starting at sandhya time. They at least must 
be remembered and visualized at dav-hreak. Chapter 10 of the PKS spreads the 
goddess worship throughout the day, and relates it to specific times and body 
parts: in the morning Laiita is worshiped in the mulddhdracakra (near the 
genitals), in the afternoon Syama in the heart, at night Vartali/ Varahi between 
the eyebrows, and before sunrise Para is worshiped in the whole body and 
particularly in the “vessel of Brahman” ( brahmarandhra ), i.e., the vogic cakra of 
the thousand-petalled lotus above the crown of the head (PKS 10.33-47, 10.55; on 
Para, see also 8.4). 

All deity cycles include, to some degree, the pancamakdra (alcohol, meat, fish, 
parched grain, and sexual intercourse/fluids) considered as heterodox, deviant, 
impure, and immoral in the normative Brahmanical Hinduism. Although the 
I KS stipulates strict secrecy around them, it does not view the pancamakdra as 
unorthodox, but rather as related to higher, esoteric knowledge. It symbolically 
identifies them as orthodox, and regards them as central ritual means, as they 
make the bliss of Brahman in the body manifest (PKS 1.12). In addition to bodily 
practices, such as those involving the pancamakdra , the PKS ritual prescriptions 
include numerous mantra rites, visionary visualisations, and the practice of 
cakra yoga 2 in order to activate the inner senses and interior landscape, and 

physically. This love-play is conceived of as the creative impulse of creation, as in 
the right-handed Srividya, wherein the erotic imagery was retained metaphorically. 
Lalita is related not only to eroticism, but also to language. Lalita’s “powers,” the 
Nitya deities, are worshiped with highly sexual epithets (“vulva,” “full of passion,” 
etc.), but at the same time identified with the vowels of' the alphabet (and the lunar 
days). The reason for this coupling seems to be that eroticism and language share 
the same metonymic association: both are world-creative. 

13- Like other Tantras, the PKS not only has its own system of mantra deities, but also 
its own cakra system; see below, including a visual representation. 


vArAh! worship in the paraSurAma-kaLPASUTRA I 139 


to infuse the yogic body, the ritual images and the ritual diagrams (yantras) 
with the respective deity’s life. The tangible and intangible features merge in 
the description to such an extent that it is often difficult to decide where the 
mental practises end and the corporal practises start. Moreover, throughout the 
PKS there is a monistic philosophy underlying all ritual acts and each goddess 
cycle contains at some point w«/?dvd/rya-like formulas of non-dual existence to 
be meditated upon while performing the ritual. The final aim is emancipation 
while living, or, as the PKS also expresses, to become the supreme, bodiless 6iva 
throughout one’s bodily limbs (PKS 10.50,10.82). 

Three major ritual means are mentioned explicitly in the initiation chapter 
and marked out as particularly important: first, the use of mantras, due to their 
“inconceivable power” (PKS 1.8): second, the pancamakdra, because they “make 
the bliss of Brahman manifest in the body” (PKS 1.12): and third, firmness in 
the power of active imagination and stability in contemplation ( bhavana ), 14 as 
this will bring about commanding power ( djna-siddhi) (PKS 1.13). Remarkably, 
stability in imaginative capacity is conceived as the very first updsaka-dharma 
(“duty of the seeker"), and the commanding power (djna-siddhi) gained by 
it is connected to the awesome boar-faced goddess Varahl, specifically as the 
fruit of her worship (PKS 7.28). The worship of Varahl (and her mantra japa) is 
particularly connected to important features of the emancipated self: complete 
fearlessness, controlling power, happiness, and autonomy. 

2 . THE MIDNIGHT WORSHIP OF THE GODDESS VARAffl 

As already outlined above, the boar-faced goddess Varahl is one of the three 
goddesses related to the chief deity Lalita, the mild and ravishingly beautiful 
queen of the universe who is Lord Siva’s creative spouse and dynamic reflection, 
and also the very consciousness of the practitioner. The Varahl ritual cycle 
(krama) is described in Chapter 7, between the cycles of Syama (Ch. 6) and Para 
(Ch. 8). Already, by means of this position, it may be seen as the final step to 
ultimate perfection (personified by Para). 

14. At the end of section two I will discuss why I suggest rootedness in active 
“imagination” as the primary meaning of bhctvana/a in the PKS context, and 
stability in contemplation, meditation and a spiritual state as a secondary meaning, 
and how both aspects flow into each other in meditative imagination. 



140 tantrapuspAnjali 


Chapter 7 first states that Varahi should be worshipped after one worships 
Syama, and describes how Varahi was assigned by Lalitu as her terrifying 
commander-in-chief and fierce judge (PKS 7.1). Varahi protects the surrmya — 
the (Kaula) Tantric discipline, ethics and moral codes—and has unrestricted 
commanding power to restrain and punish evil-doers ( dusta-nigraha) and to 
bestow favours and blessings on the well-informed and faithful initiates who 
follow the Kaula rules and regulations (sista-anugraha). Varahi stands for the 
protection of right behaviour, discipline and control, and for perfection in 
command. These capacities will be transferred to the practitioner after he 1 ' 
has gained perfection in worship and mantra siddhi (“perfection in mantra 
[practice]”), as the concluding Sutra of her ritual cycle states. Another outstanding 
feature is that Varahl’s worship starts at midnight and not in the early morning 
shortly before and during sunrise, as in the worship of the other deities. 

The sequential structure of Varahl’s worship according to the PKS closely 
parallels the other deity cycles of the PKS, except that it takes place at midnight 
and contains features distinctive to this goddess, such as the "seed” ( blja) mantras 
(AIM GLAUM); 

7-1 description of the goddess 

7-2 getting up at midnight; listening to the “unstruck” ( andhata) sound in 
the heart cakra 

7-3 invoking the sandals of the Guru on the top of the head 

7-4 specific seed mantras (bljas ) of the ritual cycle ( krama ): AIM GLAUM 
7-5*6 bhutasuddhi (“purification of the elements”) in the muladhara cakra 
7 - 7*9 nydsas (the “laying down” of mantras on the bodily limbs): (a) matrkal 
AIM GLAUM on the body, (b) five fingers, (c) six limbs 
7-io-u arghya : (“respectful offering, oblation”) (a) with water, (b) with alcohol 

15- I use the masculine form, as the PKS apparently addresses primarily male 
practitioners; females appear only as ritual partners during saktipuja. On the other 
hand, females are at no point explicitly excluded. It is well known that they have 
acted and often themselves act as practitioners and gurus in actual Tantric and 
Srlvidya practices. The commentator Ramesvara clearly also includes women and 
Sudras by making no gender or social restrictions. According to Ramesvara, there 
are only restrictions with respect to a specific, limited set of practices, such as the 
Vedic fire sacrifice (see section 2.6 below). 





VARAHl WORSHIP IN THE PARASURAMA-KALPASUTRA I 141 


7.12-14 nyascis continued: with the mulamantrci (“root -mantra”) and Rudra 
names 

7.15-17 establishing and visualizing the Varahl yantra (“ritual diagram”) 

7.19-24 mental creation of the goddess image (on the yantra ), mental 16 
upacdras (“attendances” with puja items) and dhyana (“meditation” of 
the goddess image) 

7.25 arghya (ten water [and alcoholic?] offerings [ tarpana ] with the 
mulamantra) 

7.26-32 yantra worship (of the deities of the six avaranas, “encircling 
enclosures” of the diagram) 

7-33-35 image worship (16 upacdras, balidana, and “pleasing the guru”) 

7.36 sakti- and batuka-puja (worship of three young women and a boy as 
deities) 

7.37 purascarana (mantra discipline, mantra repetition) 

7.38 phala (statement of the "fruit” of the Varahl worship) 

Varahl’s ritual cycle starts at midnight One arises from sleep and practices 
yogic meditation on the heartbeats in the heart-cakra, which is said to generate 
divine bliss (PKS 7.2). Much of Varahl’s worship consists of mantra rites and 
imaginative manipulations of the physical and yogic body. But it also involves 
alcoholic and meat offerings and physical worship of the goddess, called the 
saktipuja, which is performed in a corporal, erotic (i.e., Kaula) way with a 
human representation of Sakti. The Tantric initiate attempts to absorb Varahl’s 
controlling and empowering nature, her protective and soteriological power, 
through an array of contemplative and imaginative techniques, including the 
erotic ritual and mantra repetitions. 

I will concentrate on the most striking and prominent features of this 
awesome goddess—those which make her different from the other deities and 
those which convert her into a secret image of Lalita. Her unique character 
includes cruel and erotic aspects which are, however, superseded by strongly 
contemplative, yogic, linguistic-cosmic (alphabetic) and soteriological features. 
The combination of horror and eroticism reminds one of the “contrasting 
harmony” of the tremendum and fascinans, which Rudolf Otto famously 
identified as the most common and essential structure of religious experience. 




142 tantrapuspAnjali 


Fear and attraction appear here in a typically Tantric manner. However, as I 
will argue in what follows, this “contrasting harmony" is also transcended. My 
focus wall be the ritual embodiment of this complex construction oi contrasting 
harmony and transcendence, which involves the body and mind and a set of 
blending processes. The procedure involves different techniques of imagination 
that are typical of Tantra. 

The creative imaginative process starts with Varahl's exoteric description 
(PKS 7.1) and esoteric yoga (7.2), summarized above. With regard to the yogic 
body, this goddess is related to two cakras only: implicitly to the andhuta cakra 
or heart centre (7.2) and explicitly to the mulddhdra cakra near the genitals (7.5- 
6). As I will show in more detail, the mulddhdra is the body centre where the 
ritual “purification of the elements” ( bhutasuddhi ) takes place, involving intense 
imaginations of destruction and union. The succeeding nydsa rites apply the 
cosmic Tantric alphabet ( matrka ) (7.7) and Varahl’s fear-inspiring “root mantra” 
(mulamantra) (7.13) on the bodily limbs, and must include Varahl’s "seed” (bya) 
mantras AIM GLAUM (like all the mantric utterances in Varahl’s cycle, PKS 7.4). 
These two seed mantras hint at Varahl’s double nature, the attractive and the 
cruel. Typically, the meditative visualisation ( dhydna ) of Varahl’s iconographic 
representation includes both fierce and delivering features (7.24). Varahl’s ritual 
diagram bears some characteristics of Lalita’s beautiful jewel-island, the sricakra 
(7.16), but the “encircling" (avarana) goddesses invoked in the Varahl yantra are 
violent and cruel (7.28, in particular). The description of the saktipujd invokes 
terrifying deities, and at the same time refined erotic-aesthetic sentiment (7.36), 
as outlined below. These changes of rasa finally merge in a state of transcendence 
and supernatural perfection which is, however, not achieved without strict mantra 
discipline. The horrific goddess image and erotic ritual have strong appeal to the 
senses and emotions in contrast to the rule and discipline that characterize the 
stem mantra repetition ( purascarana ) which concludes the ritual cycle (7.37). 
Far from sense-indulgence, it takes (nine) years of mantra discipline, according to 
the commentator Ramesvara, to attain the “fruit” ( phala ) of worship: the gain of 
unlimited commanding power, autonomy, freedom, perfection, and bliss (7.38). 
Such a person has achieved mantra siddhi, “perfection in the mantra" correlating 
with the full absorption of Varahl’s powers, and the transformation into a Tantric 
superman. He has done what has to be done and lives a deified existence. My 


vArAhI worship in the pah\$urAma-kalpasOtra \ 143 


objective in the following sections is to look more closely at these procedures 
and practices of transformation, which are meant to be repeated daily. 

2.1 Contemplative Framing andBhutasuddhi 

The first action after getting up at midnight is a type of meditation well-known 
among accomplished yogis: concentration on the heartbeats, the “unbeaten 
sound” ( andhata) in the heart centre ( cakra ), the “highest space.” This exercise is 
said to lead to overwhelming, blissful joy (PKS 7.2). 16 This contemplative framing 
of the actual ritual structurally parallels the early morning meditations of the 
other deity cycles of the PKS, where the practitioner imagines being showered 
with the nectarine rains of bliss and immortality oozing from the highest cakra, 
the secret place at/above the top of his head. 17 This site became the abode of 
the god and goddess (Kamesvara and Kamesvari) and the guru’s “sandals” at the 
time of initiation. Just as this morning meditation includes the veneration of 
the guru, the midnight worship of Varahl continues with remembrance of the 
lineage of gurus, starting with the god Siva himself (7.3), after having created a 
contemplative frame of mind and inner joy by concentrating on the heartbeats. 

This meditation prepares the practitioner for bhutasuddhi. This is the 
purification of the bodily elements (7.5-6)—the constituents of the gross and 
subtle body 18 —by transforming the body into a divine, pure mantra body. This 
very important Tantric rite of self-transformation and deification is a necessary 
precursor to the performance of worship. In the Varahl chapter of the PKS, it 
consists of a set of powerful, imaginative manipulations, while concentrating 
on the muladhara cakra at the end of the spine near the genitals. This is the 
place in the body where the practitioner must dry up, burn and cook his old, 
limited body, and immerse it in the water of immortality of 6iva by means of the 
elemental mantras YAM (air/wind), RAM (fire), YAM (water), LAM (earth), and 


16. tatrayam kramo maharatre buddhva sva-hrdaya-paramdkase dhvanantam anahata- 
dhvanim urjitananda-dayakam avamrsya //PKS 7.2// 

17. The PKS uses the terms brahmarandhra, dvadasanta, sahasradalakamala and 
brahmabila for this top-most yogic body centre. 

18. Ramesvara's commentary relates Varahl’s bhutasuddhi to the subtle body {linga 
deha, suksma deha), which is seen as the indestructible original of the gross or 
visible body. 



144 TANTRAPUSPANJALI 


HAM (ether/space), while he unites in the muladhara with Siva by meditating 
with the awareness “He am I" ( so’ham ) —esoterically hinted at by the word 
hamsah. I add, in the following rendering of the relevant Sutra, Yarahi’s “seed” 
sounds—AIM GLAUM (7.4)—which must be added to all mantric utterances 
throughout her ritual 1 ' 1 : 

AIM GLAUM, through the central yogic channel ( susumnd) I unite my soul* with the 
supreme Siva at the crossing [of the yogic channels] in the Muladhara. s\'ci/uV. 

AIM GLAUM - YAM, dry up the limited body, dry it up. svdhdl 

AIM GLAUM - RAM, bum the limited body, burn it! Cook it, cook it, svdhdil 

AIM GLAUM - VAM, let the water of immortality of the supreme Siva rain on me, let it rain 

on me, svahd\ 

AIM GLAUM - LAM, bring forth Siva’s body [to replace my old uprooted body], bring it 
forth, svaha\ 

AIM GLAUM - HAMsa/z, He (= Siva) am I. 0 soul, come down, come down from the abode 
of Siva. Enter by the Susumna path! Illumine the crossing in the Muladhara, illumine it! 
Flame up, flame up! Flame up brightly, flame up brightly! Hamsah, He am I. svahdl (PKS 
7-6) 21 


Bhutasuddhi is one of the most widespread Tantric practices. The way it 
is performed here—imaginative destruction followed by union—evokes the 
old Yogin! cults described by David White/ 2 but the physical mimesis of the 
frightening ghostly Yoginls with real-world women outlined by him occurs in the 
PKS within an interior space, and the love-making is non-dual contemplation. 
The Sutra connects multiple levels and stimulates ritual efficiency and 
transformation in a performative way by establishing a network of metaphoric 
and metonymic links and blends in the visionary space of imagination. The 

x 9 - The actual Sutra does not contain the seed mantra AIM GLAUM, but it is clear from 
oral tradition and Ramesvara’s commentary where it must be inserted. 

20. Literally, “the individual Siva.” 

21. rnula-srrigatakat susumna-pathena jtva-sivam para-slye yojaydmi svaha - YAM 
sahkoca-sarlram sosaya sosaya svaha - RAM sahkoca-sartram daha daha paca paca 
svaha - VAM parama-stvamrtam varsaya varsaya svaha - LAM sambhava-sarlrarn 
utpadayotpadaya svaha - HAMsah so ( ham avataravatara siva-padat jlva susumnd- 
pathena pravisa mula-srhgatakam uUdsoltasa jvala jvala prajvala prajvata hamsah 
so \ham svaha - iti bhuta-suddhim vidhaya //7.6// 

22. David G. White, Kiss of the Yoginl: "Tantric Sex” in Its South Asian Contexts (Chicago: 
Chicago University Press, 2003). 







VARAhI WORSHIP IN THE PARASURAMA-KALPASOTRA 145 


performance presupposes knowledge about yogic psycho-physiology (the body’s 
cakras and channels) and the idea that the five elements (air, fire, water, earth, 
ether/space) exist in a purer form of sonic energy, i.e., the mantric seeds of 
the elements YAM (air/wind energy), etc. The element of space/ether (HAM) 
is considered the most subtle and most directly connected with sound and the 
divine sphere. This was also seen above in the picture of the “ether of the heart,” 
the “highest space” where an “unbeaten sound” (not caused by an instrument, 
etc.) is constantly going on in a living being. The idea of a close connection 
between space, sound, and the divine is culturally widespread, far beyond the 
Yogic and Tantric traditions, and expressed in many cultural symbols. This Sutra 
(7.6) hints at this connection onomatopoeically with the highly symbolic word 
hamsah (divine goose), which contains—purely phonetically—the seed syllable 
HAM, but alludes semantically to a liberated person and accomplished yogi. It is 
therefore also seen as a permutation of the meditation formula aham sab (I am 
He) and so’hain (He is I”) of non-dualist Saivism. 

Thus, the set of imagination techniques in Varahi’s bhutcisuddhi is a 
“technology of the self,” as Foucault terms the transformative practices of self- 
cultivation (see section three below), 23 and a dense network of different semantic 
levels and allusions. For instance, the rain shower of “the water of immortality, 
which is evoked with the blja VAM (water principle/water energy) to purify the 
body, is a trope which appears quite often in the PKS for the first time during 
initiation. Here, it is the guru who performs a number of ritual-imaginative 
acts on the disciple to transform and sacralize the adept’s body and to make 
him qualified for Tantric practice. Indeed, the initiate himself will perform 
during daily pujd many similar acts to those of the guru during initiation. The 
bkutasuddhi is only one of many instances. Its aim is clearly to destroy the old, 
limited I-identity and replace it with a new, godly and unlimited one, which is 
actually understood as the true nature of the human being. It is important and 
typically Tantric that this divine identity is not purely spiritual (as an Advaita 
Vedantin would see it), but also corporal. It can be felt with the interior and 
exterior senses. This is precisely what concentration on the bodily cakras and 

23. Michel Foucault, “Technologies of the Self,” in: Technologies of the Self: A Seminar 
with Michel Foucault, ed. L.H. Martin and P.H. Hutton (Amherst: University of 
Massachusetts Press, 1988). 



146 TANTRAPUSPANJALI 



channels—the psycho-physical yogic centres which connect inside and outside 
sensations, worlds and spaces—does. 

The description of the bhutusuddlii in the Varahl cycle is the closest parallel 
in the PKS to the cakra-/kundalinTyoga based on the Satcakra-Nirupana (1577 
CE) described by Sir John Woodroffe (Arthur Avalon)/ 4 His presentation ot 
cakra-yoga became the prototype for conceptions of the yogic cakras in the West. 
According to his source, however, the kundalim has to be led into the highest 
yogic centre, the thousand-petalled lotus, to experience non-dual existence (the 
union of Siva and Sakti, or kdmakala). In contrast, Varahl’s cycle concentrates 
non-dual contemplation in the lowest body place, the muladhara. The PKS has 
its own cakra system and in fact each deity cycle knows different techniques 
of cakra-yoga. In the early morning rites of Ganesa and Para, for instance, the 
thousand-petalled lotus (above the head) is visualized as showering the water 


24- Sir John Woodroffe, The Serpent Power—Being the §at-Cakra-Nirupana and Pcidukd- 
Pahcaka, Two Works on Laya-Yoga (Madras: Ganesh, 1918, repr. 1992). 












yArAhI worship in the pamSurAma-kalpasutra 147 


of immortality on the body. Instead ot Woodroffe’s six or seven cakras, the PKS 
mentions four cakras in the body and two which transcend it.- 5 

There is no system of mystic stages in the PKS, or at most a rather vague 
one. The body centres hctve two basic ritual functions. On the one hand, they 
provide a focussed space for making the deity' an inner experience and embodied 
reality. They are the psycho-physiological places wherein the deities are mentally 
created, animated, and meditated upon. From their invocation in the heart the 
deities are projected into outer space, the human body, the physical deity image 
and the ritual diagram ( yantra ). On the other hand, the cakras are concentrated 
on in order to destroy the limited frame of the physical body and infuse it with 
divinity, divine light, hliss and immortality, such as in the sandhya ritual and 
Varahl’s rite of body purification (bhutasuddhi). Just as the physical and subtle 
bodies are purified in the Varahl cycle by concentrating on one’s muladhara, 
the physical cosmos is melted and burnt in the muladhara (of the goddess!) in 
the subsequent Para-cycle. The (reflected) cosmos is brought to the heart lotus 
“like heated metal” to be sacrificed in the blazing light of the godhead ( prakdsa 
and vimarsa, the world-transcendent Parama-Siva and Para, HSAUM and SAUH, 
and their union). Cakra-yoga is a very powerful technique to encode the body in 
a new fashion, to connect one’s inner and outer world, and to create spaces of 
imagination experienced as embodied reality. 

The PKS’s emphasis on the muladhara, which is most explicit in the Varahl 
cycle, is typical of Kaula texts and was abhorred and forbidden by the right- 
hand” Srividya theoretician Laksmldhara around the same period when the PKS 
was written. In the Varahl cycle, however, this concentration on the lowest cakra 
is a highly solemn and spiritual exercise. It is noteworthy that Laksmldhara s 
censure is primarily concerned with imaginative action, the visualization of the 
genital body parts of the goddess and the union of Siva and Sakti ( kdmakala ) 
in the muladhara, rather than physical sexual practice (which he undoubtedly 
also despises). This shows that imaginative practices are seen as being as crucial 
as physical practices—or even more so. This is also true for the PKS. However, 

25. The cakras of Fig. 1 are those explicitly mentioned in the PKS. But in the Para cycle 
there are also visualisations in the navel region. It is curious, however, that the 
throat cakra is not mentioned, considering that language and ritualized linguistic 
mysticism play a substantial role in the text. 







148 TANTRAPUSPANJALI 


whereas Lak§mldhara considers the kamakala meditation and concentration 
on the muladhara as a despicable act of love-magic,* this concentration is in 
the PKS closely connected with Tantric yoga and non-dual Kashmiri Saiva 
philosophy. Ritual turns here into gnostic contemplation and mystical union 
(unlike in ordinary forms of bhutasuddhi). 2 ' 

2.2 Nyasa 

The second well-known Tantric rite to purify and divinize the body is nyasa 
(“laying down”), which follows bhutasuddhi in PKS Chapter 7. In terms of 
imagination theory, nyasa may be described as a self-technology of embodied 
imagination in a very real sense of the word “embodied.” In nyasa, the practitioner 
“lays down” or projects mantras or parts of mantras on his corporal limbs and/ 
or the places of his yogic body. The nyasa rite completes the creation of a pure 
mantra body and the deification and cosmicization of the self. As is usual in 
later Tantra, the PKS prescribes a number of different nyasa rites for each deity. 
I restrict my presentation to the two most typical forms of nyasa in the Varahi 
cycle: the mdtrka nyasa, which consists of the superimposition of the sounds of 
the alphabet on all the limbs of the body (from head to toe), and the mulamantra 
nyasa, which consists of the projection of the root -mantra of Varahi onto the 
bodily limbs. The mdtrka nyasa (PKS 7.7), which occurs first, can be interpreted 
as one of the instances where Varahi is esoterically correlated with the chief 
goddess Lalita—the great Language Goddess (Vac)—who is the sovereign of the 
universe. The “root mantra” or mulamantra nyasa, in contrast, communicates 
verbally Varahi’s very own gruesome form (PKS 7.8, 7.12). The common thread 
running through both nyasa mantras is the insertion of Varahi’s “seed(-mantra)" 

AIM glaum. 

However, there is disagreement on how the alphabetical matrka nyasa (PKS 
77) is actually performed. The problem is that the PKS mentions only 41 places 
of the body (from head to toe), whereas the (Tantric) alphabet consists of 51 
syllables (from “a(m)’’ to “ksa(m)”). Umananda in his PKS-extension Nityotsava 

26. See, for instance, his commentary on Sa.undaryala.harl, verse 19. 

27. The actual kamakala meditation occurs at another place of the PKS ritual, most 
prominently in the Lalita cycle. It involves the visualisation of the head, breasts and 
genitals of the goddess (and her union with Siva). 




vArAhI worship in the paraSurAma-kalpasutra i 149 


The Matrka—Nyasa (PKS 7.7); Ramesvara’s solution 

am am im Im utp um rm fm 
lm Im em aim om aum am ah 
kam kham gam gham nam 
cam cham jam jham nam 
tarn tham dam dham nam 
tarn tham dam dham nam 
pam pham bain bham mam 
yam ram lam vam sam sain sam 
ham lam ksain aim glaum ksam lain ham 
sam sam sam vam lam ram yam 
mam bham bam pham pam 
nam dham dam tham tain 
nam dham dam tham tarn 
nam jham jam cham cam 
nam gham gain kham kam 
ah am aum om aim em lm lm 
rm rm um um Tm im am am namah / 

Fig. 2. “Alphabet'-A/ydsa in PKS 7.7. 

and Ramesvara in his PKS-commentary come to different solutions in tackling 
this difficulty. 28 Whereas the Nityotsccva suggests that each of the alphabet letters 
must englobe AIM GLAUM (e.g., AM AIM GLAUM AM), Ramesvara holds this to 
be untenable, as it would leave ten mantras without a body place. It may have 
been quite intentional of Umananda to leave the ten simple vowels without body 
place, as they are esoterically correlated to the divine sphere beyond the physical 
world. Figure 2 above represents Ramesvara’s solution: the entire alphabet 
from A to K§A must be spoken twice (forward and backward or clockwise and 
anticlockwise) and AIM GLAUM inserted in between. It is this whole formula 
which has to be spoken for each of the 41 bodily parts. 

The matrka nyasa — well-known in Tantric ritual culture—has both an 
important sensory and a highly symbolic value. The Tantric alphabet invariably 
adds to the grammatical alphabet a final nasal sound ( anusvara) and thus 


28. For further references, see Weber, PKS, 379. 








150 tantrapuspAnjali 


converts the usual letters or sounding syllables into powerful seed mantra s. The 
acoustic aspect of the alphabet is very important also for the grammarians— 
the alphabet being strictly structured phoneticallv according to the place of 
articulation of the letter or syllable. This sonic dimension is enhanced in Tantra 
by the mantric “m,” which leaves a strong sensorv impression, even after the 
sound is uttered, just like the vibrating echo of a gong or bell. The grammarians 
sought a systematic way to account for all sounds possible, and for the Tantrics 
the alphabet was central as the very basis and raw material of their mantras — 
and even as the basis and raw material of the universe. The alphabet sounds are 
known in Tantra as "mother" ( matrkd) or primeval forms according to which the 
physical universe is moulded. The application of the “mother” seeds on oneself 
from head to toe thus establishes performativelv a cosmic body. 

In addition, this divinised body is marked in Varahi’s cycle with the signs of 
Varahi, her two seed mantras AIM and GLAUM. They appear right in between 
the forward and backward recitation of the alphabet. Sutra 7.7 speaks of two 
hemispheres enclosing Varahl’s two bija s (called dvitarl). This structure seems to 
communicate an esoteric secret, a blending performed solely in the imagination 
of the informed and conscious actor: VarahT’s powerful “seeds” are the connecting 
link of the linguisticand physical creation, the hub of the evolution of the universe 
and its involution back into the divine source “a” and “a," connoting supreme I- 
consciousness and bliss, Siva and Sakti, light and energy/sound, according to the 
non-dualist Kashmiri Saivas’ philosophical alphabet speculations/” 

While the matrkd nydsa refers to a linguistic base and transcendental 
sphere that is always immanent in creation, the mulamantra nydsa refers to 
immanent aspects of Varahi, namely her highly dangerous nature. The root 
mantra (mulamantra ) of Varahi is mentioned verbally only in the final chapter 
and appears even there in encoded form (FKS 10.46). When being decoded, it is 
of particular interest, as it is largely semantically lucid, in contrast to the usual 
Tantric mantras (such as Lalita’s root mantra), which often contain only strings 
of seed mantras. Varahi’s root mantra combines certain non-lexical seed sounds 


29. I am referring here to Abhinavagupta and the Siva Sutra s (2.5 and 2.7-8) with 
Ksemaraja’s commentary. 


VARAHl WORSHIP IN THE PARASURAMA-KALPASOTRA j 151 


(btjas) with semantic language that communicates the very fearsome and horrific 
features of this deity and her magic powers (the six magic acts to protect oneself 
and subdue enemies). It reads as follows in decoded form: 

AIM GLAUM AIM prostrations unto you, O goddess, 

O Vartall, O Vartall, O Varahl, O Varahl, 

O you with the hoar-face, O you with the boar-face. 

Lady Darkness, darkening lady, prostrations unto you, 

Lady Arrest, arresting lady, prostrations unto you, 

Lady Devourer, devouring lady, prostrations unto you, 

Lady Delusion, deluding lady, prostrations unto you, 

Lady Paralysis, paralysing lady, prostrations unto you, 

Make, make all depraved and very depraved persons be paralysed in their speech, thought, 
sight, face, movement, and tongue. Let there be quick submission! 

AIM GLAUM JHAH JHAH THAH THAH 
HUM unto the weapon PH ATP" 

In the Varahl chapter the root mantra is only hinted at by code words or 
simply by the term itself, e.g., “midamantrena” (7.8-9, 7.12-14)- By means of 
repeated mulamantra nyasa in ever new forms, the practitioner ritually deifies 
himself and performatively absorbs the fearsome goddess. It is noteworthy that 
in the nyasa of PKS 7.12, the words of the mulamantra must be applied on the 
same 41 limbs of the body like before the matrka. 3 ' The nyasa rites thus establish 
a network of cognitive blends and hyperblends, uniting different domains 
(linguistic, philosophical and corporal ones) to transform the body into an icon 
of the divine and make it apt for ritual. 

This mulamantra nyasa is performed in various ways: with the whole “root 
mantra" (7.8, 7.12), with parts of it (7.9), and combined with ancient names of 


30. AIM GLAUM AIM namo bhagavati vartdli vartall varahi varahi varaha-mukhi 
varaha-mukhi andhe andhini namah rundhe rundhini namah jambhe jambhini 
namah mohe mohini namah stambhe stambhini namah sarva-dusta-pradustanam 
sarvesam sarva-vdk-citta-caksur-mukha-gati-jihva-stambhanam kuru kuru slgrham 

vasyam AIM GLAUM THAH THAH THAH THAH HUM astraya PHAT II PKS 10.46 II 
For the encoded original, see Weber, PKS, 462. 

31. The Nityotsava and Ramesvara count the mantra’s words differently: the first, 
looking at the compounds as one word, arrives at the number 42, whereas Ramesvara 
counts 51 words (corresponding to the number of letters in the alphabet). 



152 tantrapuspAnjali 


Rudra (7.13). It is also performed while visualising Yarahi to make her present 
and thereafter transfer the mental image into the icon (7.14-7.15). 

2.3 The Yantra and Dhydna ofVdrdhi 

After having deified oneself by incorporating the goddess into one’s own body by 
means of nydsa, one fashions her mental and physical icons. However, the ritual 
elements flow into each other in Varahi’s case (at least in the textual version), 
whereas they are more clearly separated in the other deities’ cycles. So we find 
an arghya rite, the “offering” of alcohol mixed with water (PKS 7.10-11),■inserted 
in the mulamantra nydsa rites and coupled with drawing Varahi’s ritual diagram 
(yantra), and we find also mulamantra nydsa consciously performed as active 
imagination and as dhydna (visualizing meditation) to bring the diagram to 
life (7.14-15). As in other Agamic and Tantric contexts, it is the ritual action and 
mental power of the worshipper which transforms the material diagram and 
image into an animate embodiment of the divinity. 

PKS 7.15 suggests that the practitioner fashions the yantra of Varahi himself. 
This channels his imagination automatically into a “ritual attitude” and brings 
the deity to mind in both a sensory and abstract way. The geometrical pattern 
is less complex than the srlcakra, but the internal yantra must be enclosed in a 
lotus of a thousand petals (which is not so easy to achieve!). It is possible to use 
different materials: the diagram can be drawn on a piece of fabric or inscribed 
on a plate of copper, gold, silver, or sandalwood. Thereafter, divine life is invoked 
in it. While throwing flowers on it, a number of greeting formulas are spoken. 
Whereas the first formula may be taken as a hint that Varahi’s yantra is likened 
to Lalitas jewel-island in the “ocean of nectar,” the larger part of the invocations 
1 elate her to Vaisnava symbolism and apparently identify the boar-faced goddess 
as a female counterpart to Visnu’s incarnation as a boar (Varaha) (PKS 7.16). The 
very same Sutra, however, also salutes a set of opposites that includes things that 
are not very Vaisnava and fit more closely with Saivism. For example, it states 

32. Arghya (water, alcohol or mixed offering) is very important in all the goddess cycles, 
and it is performed by sprinkling, sipping, and applying the fluid—in Varahl’s case, 
by drawing the yantra with the consecrated liquid after one has perfumed oneself 
(PKS 7.10-11). In the Lalita cycle the arghya of alcohol is identified with the "water of 
immortality,” i.e., converted into it by suggestive mantra utterances. 


yArAhI worship in the paraSurAma-kalpasutra 153 



Fig. 3. Varahiyanfra and a South Indian Varahl icon. 


that the goddess does not only stand for law ( dhanna ), but also unlawfulness, 
cidhcirma (“AIM GLAUM RM prostrations to unlawfulness’’), and not only for 
sovereignty ( aisvaiya ), but also for the lack of it (“AIM GLAUM LM prostrations 
to anaisvarya"), be it powerlessness or anarchy. 33 

In contrast to her ritual diagram, Varahl’s fierce boar-faced image is pre¬ 
fashioned (or might not even be existent materially). But invariably, it will be 
(re-)created in the mind by active visualisation and special mantras (murti- 
mantra) (PKS 7.19-20), followed by hand gestures and deity nydsa (7.21-22), before 
the sixteen offerings ( upacdra ) start (7.23). Again there is Varahl dhyana (7.24), 
visualizing meditation prior to the yantra worship ( avarana-pujd ) (7.25-32). As 
is customary, the dhyana draws a mental map of the goddess’ iconography to 
produce her image in the mind as an exact mental replica of the physical image, 
and vice versa: 


33. These epithets, however, are not specific to Varahl only, but appear in all the image 
worships, starting with Ganapati (see Weber, PKS 2.7, 277 and 387, fn. 70). 

















154 i TANTRAPUSPASIJALI 


Vartall must be visualized as black as a (rain) cloud, with crooked tusks, with reddish eves, 
and full, round breasts, [carrying] a disc, a sword, a mace, [the mudrd] "Be free from fear,” a 
conch-shell, a club, a plough, and [the mudrci] “Granting boons” in her [eight] hands, and 
sitting on a lotus. (PKS 7.24)^ 

The dhyana or visualizing meditation thus activates mentally and verbally 
the goddess’ iconographic features. The objective of the dhyana is to contemplate 
this powerful goddess and animate her internal (mental) and external image. It 
refers to both the terrifying and protective traits of Varahi, who is called in this 
place Vartall. 33 InTantric dhyanas the iconographic details often are enhanced 
by poetic language, though in Varahi’s case, the language of the dhyana is less 
artistic than in other cases. Such language activates imagination more easily than 
a simple list of iconographic features. This way of description brings the deity 
automatically to the mind and inner vision, if consciously spoken and vividly 
imagined by the inner eye: The boar-faced goddess, sitting on a lotus, is “as black 
as a cloud, with crooked tusks, reddish eyes and full breasts.” She carries various 
dangerous weapons (disc, sword, mace, conch, club, and plough) in six hands, 
while her other two hands show the gracious gestures of "freedom from fear” and 
granting boons.” This meditation on such a fierce and frightening goddess aims 
to cultivate fearlessness for the practitioner and ensure auspicious protection 
from the goddess. Both the weapons and hand gestures may be understood to 
communicate in a metonymic fashion the goddess as a powerful protective force 
for those who duly worship her. 

2.4 The Puja of Varahi 

After having animated the goddess in the mind and making her present in the 
yantra, the practitioner begins actual worship by venerating the surrounding 
circles ( avarana ) of the ritual diagram (PKS 7.26-7.38). As is common in Tantric 
practice, all parts of the diagram are identified with the surrounding deities or 
emanating powers of the goddess. Varahl’s powers are anything but cosy, instead 

34. dhyanam devyah - megha-mecaka kutUa-damstra kapila-nayana, ghana-stana- 
mandala cakra-khadga-musalabhaya-sankha-kheta-hala-vara-panih padmasina 
vartall dhyeya II7.24II 

35. This is the name of a dangerous Buddhist goddess; Varahi herself is also known in 
Buddhism. PKS 7.22 uses both names synonymously. 




yArAhI worship in' the paraSurAma-kalpasutra ! 155 


evoking the groups of wild Yoginls and ferocious Mother goddesses (Sapta- 
Matrka) to which Varahi once belonged. However, in contrast to the older YoginI 
cults, which— if David Gordon White’s reconstruction is right—included a 
lot of violence and sexual fluid exchange, 31 ' the terrifying features here appear 


36. This is the major argument in White’s Kiss of the Yogini, and many examples of what 
he reconstructs as “proto-Tantric worship" in old Yogini cults are found throughout 
the hook. He sees a strong continuity between the Kushan-age seven female Seizers 
or Mothers (Sapta Matrka) and the post-Gupta-age Yoginls (ibid., 192). These 
"Seven Seizers,” according to him, are portrayed in the Epics, the medical tradition, 
and Tantric literature “as possessing their victims and preying upon them from 
within, causing their skin to erupt in pustules identified with their‘eyes’ or‘vulvas.’ 
As a general rule, then, these goddesses or demonesses of disease in some way 
penetrate the bodily envelope of their prey to inject them with their own fiery or 
virulent bodily fluids. Yet their penetration results in a pathological condition that 
consumes or burns up their victims from within. It is as if they at once devour and 
force-feed their victims. [...] they both destroy and re-create their victims" (ibid., 
191). The blood offerings (often from one’s own body) made to them in exchange 
were seeking their protection and nurture. This reciprocity model continued in 
the Yogini worship, holds White: “Of course, the reciprocity between devotees 
and goddesses of the tooth is often an extremely dangerous undertaking and is 
reserved in Hindu Tantra for the Virile Hero or Perfected Being. [...] In the Tantric 
context, the Virile Hero is one who has become empowered, through initiation, 
ritual practice—or divine grace [...] to transact in bodily fluids [blood and semen] 
with the devouring Yoginis, wild goddesses who would otherwise consume the 
unprepared with their fiery energy, concentrated in their sexual fluids, as well as 
with their animal claws, teeth and talons” (ibid., 191-192). This was the central theme 
in what was called “cremation-ground mysticism.” According to White: The Tantric 
Hero, in his cremation-ground cult of the Yoginis, incites these multiple female 
beings to devour him—both from within through their fiery sexual fluids, and from 
without, by making him ‘food for the Yoginis’—in order precisely that they might 
transform him into their superhuman lover and master” (ibid., 193)- This pattern 
the Tantric hero, who by offering himself as victim will be saved and transformed 
into the Yoginis’ master and lover (Siva himself)—was, according to White, also 
physically enacted with ritual partners of low caste who were emulating the Yoginls. 
White suspects the original social location was the world of village shamans, yogis 
and healers, the masters of the spirit world, and the master narrative was the 
Siddha culture of Demigods, Perfected Beings and Virile Heroes (ibid., 160). “Over 
time the notion arose that the realm [...] of the Siddhas was one to which humans, 
too, could accede” (ibid., 161). It was believed that supernatural beings inhabit the 





156 | TANTRAPUSPANJALI 


semantisized in goddess names and invocations. Names such as Yakini, Rakini, 
and Lakini, which are part of the third group of avarana deities ( FKS 7.28, quoted 
below), are also found in the Lalitasahasranama. This famous hymn is dedicated 
to the goddess Lalita, who is best known for her mild goddess form, but as the 
Great Goddess she also incorporates horrific traits. In the FKS, all the images of 
horror are assembled in Varahl. The mantra formulas of her avarana pujd partly 
have the form of spells or speech-acts that provide the practitioner with magic 
powers to destroy his enemies (PKS 7.28): 

O YakinI, pulverize, pulverize the constituent body parts (dhatu) of all my enemies ( mama 
sarva-satrunam). Tear, tear their skin. Exercise your power to make [them] small, make 
them small like an atom, svaha. 

O RakinI, drink, drink their blood, 

0 LakinI, eat, eat the meat of their body, 

O Dakini, swallow, swallow their fat, 

O Kakini, crash, crash their bones, 

0 Sakini, grasp, grasp their marrow, 

0 Hakim, drink, drink their sperm. Exercise your power to make [them] small like an atom, 
svaha? 1 

PKS 7.28 qualifies the tortures of the violent goddesses, which also include 
oral sex (the sucking out of all the sperm, i.e., life substance), as a “sacrifice” to the 
lord of the constituent parts of the body” (iti dhatu-ndtha-yajanam )—a phrase 

bodies of selected Kaula practitioners and that the status of a universal conqueror 
(cakravartin ) and omniscience could be achieved by complete perfection of mantra 
and other means (ibid. 160,162). Within this development, the courts became major 
social locations, royal chaplains and princes Tantric actors par excellence, and 
Tantra a source of communal power and a religion of the state (ibid., 123-147). 

37. My translation is based on the decoded form of the mantras (Weber, PKS, 394). 
The encoded form reads (ibid., 393) : sat-kone a ksa l brahmanl 1 la I mahesvari u 
ha l kaumarlf sa l vaisnavi ai sa l indrani au va l cdmunda tasyaivagresu madhye 
ca ya-ma-ra-yum yam ylm yum yaim yaum yah yakini jambhaya jambhaya mama 
sarva-satrunam tvag-dhatum grhna grhna anima-”di-vasam kuru kuru svaheti / 
anyasam dhatu-nathanam apy evam bye namani dhatau tv aradhana-karmani 
mantra-sannamah / ra-ma-ra-yum rakini rakta-dhatum piba plba, la-ma-ra-yum 
lakini mamsa-dhatum bhaksaya bhaksaya, da-ma-ra-yum dakini medo-dhatum 
grasagrasa, ka-ma-ra-yum kakini asthi-dhatum jambhaya jambhaya, sa-ma-ra-yum 
sakini majja-dhatum grhna grhna, ha-ma-ra-yum haklni sukra-dhatum piba piba 
anima-”di-vasam kuru kuru svaha - iti dhatu-natha-yajanam //PKS 7.28// 


VARAHl WORSHIP IN THE PARASURAMA-KALPASUTRA j 157 


which could refer to the individual (jcva) as well as supreme I-consciousness or 
lord Siva. The enemies, who are the tortured prey, are not specified. They may 
be the respective parts of one’s own gross body or psychological enemies like 
doubt, fear, greed and languidness, but also demonical beings, or real-world 
human foes. Based on specific circumstances, they may be evil-doers, personal 
enemies, political foes, those who are hostile or critical toward Kaula conduct, 
or other persons who do not belong to the holy family of initiates. Perhaps 
they are initiates who still have fears and doubts, and do not behave according 
to the Tantric commands and ethics. In any case, this is clear: Varahl is indeed 
“very dark” and an image of horror, but first of all she is dreadful for exterior 
and interior enemies. The formulas are part of daily puju. They can be seen as a 
powerful protective charm, possibly a prayerful plea to be released from earthly 
bondage represented by the gross body, and almost certainly as ritual absorption 
of Varahl’s fierce traits as judge and commander. 

In the earlier YoginI cults, it was the practitioner himself who was to 
become the tortured prey of the wild ladies, their “food” to be “devoured,” before 
uniting with them. 38 In the PKS, it is not clear who the victim is. Moreover, the 
imagination is not physically imitated as it may have happened in older times. 
It appears semantisized and institutionalized as one of many ritual elements, 
possibly also used separately as a magic charm. One objective maybe to discipline 
or purify the initiates themselves, another to fill them with magic power. The 
goddess is invoked to strike and kill, to drink the enemies’ blood and sperm, to 
paralyse them and bring them under control, and to bestow success upon the 
practitioner. The ritual aim may be useful for anyone, but most of all for kings to 
protect their power and kingdom and ensure them victory. There are additional 
possibilities as well: perhaps, in picturing the violent mistresses, the practitioner 
reminds himself that the Tantric hero ( vlra) must overcome any trace of fear 
(for instance, the fear of breaking the usual moral codes and conventions) 
and disgust, and be steady and self-composed in the face of any censure and 
misfortune. Non-dualist Kashmir Saivism (to which the PKS owes so much) 
offers a still more spiritual model of interpretation, for instance, in §iva Sutra 2.9: 

38. This is elaborated in White, Kiss of the YoginI (see footnote 36), where he points out 
that it is not “just” a visionary imagination, but manifested in embodied enactment 
and social reality. 



158 | tantrapu$pAnjali 


“The limited, vitiated knowledge which is the cause of bondage is the food to be 
devoured.” 39 Different interpretations are possible and deliberate ambiguity may 
well have been desired by the author. One should also not exclude the possibility 
that the fearsome formulas are nothing more than literary tropes. Calling on the 
violent mistresses may be a mere convention for the practitioners who speak 
the formulas without much reflection. However, as the imagination of horror is 
quite strong and well established in the cultural memory, and specifically in the 
Tantric imagination, it is not so easily ignored. 

Whatever interpretations one espouses, the FKS prescribes extensive mental 
and verbal worship ofVarahl’s horrific features. These f eatures are also materially 
displayed, as Varahl’s exoteric puja includes an offering (bali) of rice mixed with 
blood and other substances, such as buffalo meat (PKS 7.34). This is the only 
instance of raw blood sacrifice in the PKS and it underpins metonymically this 
particular goddess’ fearsome character. The meat offered elsewhere in the ritual 
cycles of the PKS appears to be spiced and cooked. 4 " 

2.5 Saktipuja 

Another striking specific feature of the Varahl cycle is that the goddess whose 
dark image has been extensively verbally expressed and meditated upon receives, 
at the end of the puja, the most aesthetically refined erotic worship (PKS 7.36). 

Each of the deity cycles of the PKS, except for Para, ends with saktipuja. 
This consists in the physical worship of a beautiful girl or young woman as 
a representative of the goddess, followed by a communal meal among the 
practitioner’s peer-group. According to the text, the saktipuja itself invariably 
includes the offering of alcohol and meat to the human Sakti, and also sexual 
intercourse if she agrees and shows signs of sexual arousal. This union ( maithuna) 
is never explicitly expressed and in fact is hidden in short and terse language 
and code-words. The references to sexual intercourse are so short and cryptic 
that the commentators are in disagreement about whether maithuna must 

39 - Jaideva Singh, trans., Siva Sutras: The Yoga of Supreme Identity (Delhi: Motilal 
Banarsidass, 1979 [repr. 1982]), 120. 

40. Except for fish, animal slaughter is usually not done by the practitioner himself. In 
contrast, the preparation of alcoholic liquor according to the custom of the country 
is part of his duties. See PKS 10.62-63. 



vArAhI worship in the paraSurAma-kalpasutra \ 159 


be practised only in the Lalita cycle or in all the deity cycles. It is noteworthy 
that in the Lalita cycle the obligatory intercourse is only indirectly hinted at by 
commanding the consumption of all the pahcamakdra, whereas the Varahl cycle 
speaks of “all substances.” 41 Interestingly, the Varahl passage in question is the 
most descriptive about saktipuja and the only one in the whole PKS that offers a 
bit more information about the ritual procedure. 

In Varahl’s case, it not a singular Sakti who is worshiped like in the Lalita and 
Syama cycles, but three Saktis (very beautiful girls or very young women) and a 
boy or male teenager. All of them represent fearsome deities. This combination, 
along with the very intimate, sensuous and erotic ritual action, communicate 
that eroticism/beauty and horror/fear are not opposites: 

He should call three saktls blossoming in full youth, of (great) beauty, and infatuating, along 
with a boy ( batuka 42 ). He should honour, bathe, and decorate them with perfume, etc. He 
should place one sakti in the middle while imagining her as Vartall, the other two saktis on 
both sides while imagining them as KrodhinI and StambhinI, and the boy in front of them 
while imagining him as Candoccanda. He should please them with all the substances and 
address them: “May I get perfection in Sri Vartali’s sacred mantral” And they should answer. 
“The presiding deities shall be gracious!” (PKS 7.3b) 43 

Pleasing and gratifying Varahl does not however stop here. Intimate 
intercourse is not enough to receive her full grace and absorb her powers. It is 
less the sensuous staging than hard discipline in the form of intensive mantra 
practice which leads to the final goal. The next Sutra enjoins purascarana , 
the constant repetition of VarahFs root mantra for a hundred-thousand times 
(PKS 7.37), which alone brings about ajna siddhi , the perfection in Varahls 


41. According to RameSvara’s commentary, this formula relates to alcohol, meat, 
and fish, which are prescribed for Vartalfs ritual sequence (PKS 7 * 34 )> but it does 
not relate to the fourth and fifth substances (parched grain and semen/sexual 
intercourse). See PKS(Ba) p. 223, line i3ff., and Weber, PKS, 400, fn. 143. 

42. This term is also an epithet of Siva. 

43. samp urn a-yauvanah sa-laksana-madanonmadinls tisrah saktlr ahuya batukam 
caikam abhyarcya snapayitva gandhadibhir alankrtya vartall-buddhya ekam saktim 
madhye krodhinl-stambhinl-buddhya dye Ltare parsvayos candoccanda-dhiya 
batukam agre sthapayitva sarvair dravyalh samtosya mama srl-vdrtall-mantra- 
siddhir bhuyad iti tab prativadet tas ca prasldantv acUiidevatah - iti bruyuh //PKS 
7-3 6 // 



160 I TANTRAPUSPAftjALI 


power of command, autonomy and ever-lasting joy, i.e., the complete union 
with the goddess and absorption of her protective power. This fruit of worship 
cum purascarana is referred to in the final Sutra of the Varahl cycle (PKS 7.38), 
according to which the daily worship concludes with the meditative imagination 
of uniting oneself with the goddess (by re-absorbing her in the heart lotus): 

Thereafter he shall unite his own self with the revered goddess and having reached 
unconstrained joy and perfection in command ( ajha-siddhah ), he rests in [everlasting] 
happiness ( sukhiviharet ). This way it is auspicious. 44 

Here the cycle of Varahl reaches its peak. The dynamic movement of the text 
is dramatic: the violent atmosphere around the worship of Varahl transforms 
into the aesthetic sentiment of refined eroticism in the saktipujd (approximating 
Varahl to Lalita), and then flows into severe mantra practice with the promise of 
a life of joy, autonomy and perfection. According to the commentator Ramesvara, 
this means supernatural power and emancipation while living—a life free from 
the limitations of time, space, and matter. Ramesvara attributes this wondrous 
transformation to the singular concentration on and repetition of the Varahl 
mantra. Whereas the PKS only mentions the purascarana practice in brief, 
Ramesvara devotes a long passage to it that quotes from different Tantras and 
contains interesting details about the transformative power of mantra repetition. 


2.6Ramesvara on TantricDiscipline andMantra-siddhi 

Sexual activities have often been disproportionally assigned to Tantra. In 
the PKS, the offering and consumption of alcohol seem to be at least equally 
important. No doubt, erotic activities are prescribed, but they are highly 
ritualised, symbolically charged, and connected with self-control and discipline. 
The commentator Ramesvara, who was a Kaula Tantric as well as a Vedic 
scholar, 45 sees the sexual practices of the PKS not as sense indulgence, but as a 

44 - tatas capujltam devlm atmaniyojayitva svairam viharann djna-siddhah sukhiviharet 
- itisivam //PKS 7.38// 

45 * Ramesvara (Sun) belonged to the Ka^yapa gotra. He proudly describes his 
higher education in the bhumika of his commentary Saubhagyodaya (which was 
completed on February 2nd, 1832). His dlksa- name was Aparajitanandanatha. 
His gum was AmrteSanandanatha and his paramesthi-guru (his guru’s guru) the 
famous Bhaskararaya (who made a name of himself as the most important Srividya 




VARAHi WORSHIP IN THE PARASURAMA-KALPASUTRA 1 161 


ritual duty to be usually performed with one’s own wife. Moreover, he stresses as 
more important the severe mantra practice of purascarana, which must follow 
the saktipuja. Whereas the PKS enjoins purascarana verbally only in Varahl’s 
cycle, Ramesvara (on PKS 7.37) is very strict about it being mandatory for all 
the Srividya deities, except Para. 46 According to him, it is only after a very hard 
and long mantra-sacLhana (“mantra practice”) that the actual fruits of worship, 
the siddhis or perfections, will occur—in Varahl’s case, complete autonomy, 
free will, uninhibited commanding power ( ajna-siddhi), deep satisfaction and 
divine bliss. More specifically, purascarana ensures the complete absorption of 
Varahi’s ambivalent powers to bind, subdue, punish, and even destroy, as well as 
to bestow favour and grace. More generally, purascarana leads to mantra-siddhi, 
“perfection in the mantra" replete with an array of supernatural powers. 

A good deal of Ramesvara’s comments on this process and its miraculous 
results consist of extensive quotations from different Tantras. He uses the 
Paramananda-Tantra and the Yoginl-Tantra most extensively at the beginning 
of his commentary, but he quotes a number of other sources as well, such as 
the Prapancasara, Tantraraja, Saura-Tantra and Daksinamurti-Samhita, plus 
others belonging more clearly to the Srividya tradition, like the Tripurarnava 
and Sncakra-Samhitd. Based on the authority of his various sources, RameSvara 
holds that it takes nine years of severe mantra practice to enjoy these fruits of 
worship. He comments that if purascarana is not performed, the mantra, i.e., 
the goddess, will turn away. If it is performed, however, the practitioner reaches 
a stage of being completely free while living. He can do whatever he pleases and 
forever enjoy himself. He has done what is to be done and not even srlcakra- 
puja is mandatory any more for him, since he has reached perfection. The 
Varahl-mantm has, according to RameSvara, specific power to bring about such 
autonomy and freedom. This fruit seems to be indicated by the term ajna-siddhi 
This term needs more scrutiny, however, as it is not entirely clear what ajna- 
siddhi (cf. PKS 1.13,7.1, 7.38)—the “perfection in commanding power”—actually 
entails. It is a rather ambiguous term and interpreted even by Ramesvara in 

theoretician). For Ramesvara’s autobiographic notes, see PKS(Ba) p. 87, line 10 on 
PKS 3.1. 

46. This whole section is based on RameSvara’s commentary on PKS 7.37 (and 7.38). See 
PKS(Ba), 223-237. 







162 j TANTRAPUSPASJALI 


various ways. He takes the term (a) to denote Varahl’s two com plementary powers 
to discipline, restrain, and punish ( nigraha ) and to bless and bestow favour and 
grace ( anugraka ) (PKS 7.1). It is these two powers which the practitioner will 
acquire, absorb and interiorize by his mantra-sddhana. Regarding the first, 
Ramesvara emphasizes mantra repetition (Japa ) as a particularly powerful 
practice to restrain, curb and discipline the mind (. mannnigraha ). Another of his 
interpretations takes ajha-siddhi (b) to mean that a person who constantly fulfils 
(siddha) the command ( ajnd ) of Varahl has done all that is to be done in his 
lifetime. In this interpretation, he connects ajha-siddhi to the state of liberation 
while living. Perhaps these two readings (a and b) hint at the same practical 
proficiency: the telepathic control exercised by the guru since initiation (when 
the guru “entered" the body of the disciple through visualizing meditation) passes 
over to the disciple who henceforth himself possesses the controlling power of 
the guru and therefore has command on the empirical plane over Siva’s powers 
to conceal and to enlighten. Most likely, this indicates that he exercises these two 
powers to keep the Kaula circle of initiates as exclusive and excellent as possible. 
It is this elite group or person who decide(s) who is going to be liberated and who 
is to be “bound” and kept away; that is, from whom the “secrets” of the family of 
initiates must be concealed. However, there is also a third way to interpret ajna- 
siddhi, namely (c) in the sense of vasikaranam, the magic power to control and 
subdue other people and make them do whatever one wishes. This is what kings 
and rulers may have been most interested in. Princes apparently belonged to the 
clientele and users of the PKS, as we can infer from Umananda’s involvement 
with the Tanjore court. 

Each of these interpretations deals with command, autonomy and free will. 
Such perfection of autonomy is reached only when mantra-siddhi, the perfection 
in the mantra, occurs, or in other words when the practitioner has completely 
internalized and incorporated the mantra, which is the goddess and her powers, 
since the goddess is, like all Tantric deities, first of all a mantra- deity. The mantra 
is her body and contains her potency. Ramesvara gives precise instructions about 
the number of mantra repetitions required by quoting from a large set of Tantras. 
These prescribe at least one Lakh (100,000) repetitions of the mantra and 10,000 
fire oblations ( homas ), followed by the feeding of Brahmins. If the practitioner 
is a woman or a Sudra, and thus not allowed to perform the oblations, they can 



vArAhi worship in the paraSurAma-kalpasutra I 163 


have a Brahmin do it for them. A ^udra may even do it on his own if he has a lot 
of bhakti, loving devotion. 47 

How does one know for sure whether mantra-siddhi has really been 
achieved? One knows experientially, according to Ramesvara, by dreams that 
communicate good omens, by an ever cheerful and peaceful mind and a shining 
body, and furthermore hy being able to survive without food and drink for a 
whole month with hardly any need for sleep. This person will have heavenly 
visions of light, yogic auditions of occult sounds (thunder, bees, tinkling bells, 
etc.), smell divine fragrances, and acquire paranormal powers like clairvoyance, 
the ability to fly, go through walls, becoming small like an atom, becoming big 
like the earth, or becoming invisible as he wishes, and finally gain omnipotence 
and omniscience. Much of this is the usual siddha tropes found in the Agamas 
and Hathayoga treatises. The perfected ones ( siddhas ) see and hear more than 
ordinary humans, they perceive the unseen fabric of the cosmic whole, and 
freely move around in it. They participate in the cosmic powers, embody them, 
and wield them freely. 

As already mentioned, according to Ramesvara, such wonderful things do 
not happen without many years of constant mantra training. After three years of 
repetition, there will first occur all sorts of troubles; inhibiting factors will arise 
and bad omens will appear in dreams, which have to be removed by appeasing 
santi- rites. The essential thing is not to panic. If this is achieved (after another six 
years), all kings and emperors will follow the practitioner and worship him. They 
will respect and love him for his greatness and shining charisma and aura. Kings 
and emperors will see him from far away because of his enflaming brilliance, 
bodily radiance and beauty. It will be impossible for them to address him with 
harsh or disgraceful words. On the contrary, they will pray: “Have mercy with us, 
O Lord. Help us to get out of trouble.” 

Here we see what can be described as the Tantric superman, who has achieved 
perfection in the Varahl -mantra and is himself Lalita’s appointed general. He has 
uninhibited commanding power, is able to punish evildoers and bestow favours 
upon faithful initiates and empathic non-initiates, and can even bring emperors 


47. To support this, Ramesvara quotes the Paramananda-Tantra. 





164 | TANTRAPUSPAfijALI 


and the whole universe under his control. Ramesvara states exact correlations 
between the number of mantra repetitions and the specific fruits acquired. 
Within this scheme of counted piety, there are stages of perfection: 

100,000 repetitions will bring mantra-siddhi and remove all sins; 

300,000 repetitions will enable the practitioner to move the entire world; 

900,000 repetitions will bring heaven, earth and the underworld under his 
control. 

There is a long-standing tradition in the history of Yoga and Tantra that yogic 
perfection is not only about liberation, but also about the gain of supernatural 
powers, either as a natural “side-effect” of fierce ascetic practices, concentration, 
body techniques (sometimes including drugs), and most of all mantra sadhana 
as one pursues liberation, or as the goal sought by a practitioner irrespective of 
final emancipation. The gain of occult powers, overlordship and omnipotence 
hold a dominant place in Ramesvara’s discussion of the purascarana of the 
Varahl-mcmfra and the suggestive way he describes the person who has become 
a mantra-raja (“king of mantras”) and his wonderful achievements. 

For a European it is hard to imagine the possibility of such a superman in 
flesh and blood. It sounds rather like fiction. In contrast, it is an old and well- 
established image and part of cultural knowledge in India, amounting to a social 
fact that such persons who have surpassed all human limitations can exist. 

2.7 Imagination and Perfection—Notes on the Tantric Superman 
The clientele whom the PKS addresses rarely consists of ascetics, liberation- or 
power-seeking yogis practising in seclusion, and even less common villagers. 
The language style, the materials for rituals described, as well as the leisure 
presupposed for ritual performance—to mention just three indicators—seem 
to point clearly to a strata of society better off than others and well educated 
in Sanskrit. The PKS addresses primarily cultural elites, Brahmin and non- 
Brahmin. Probably one has to presuppose as major clientele the refined urban 
householders seeking self-perfection and liberation. It is likely that princes, and 
not only from the Tanjore court, as well as royal chaplains, gurus and advisors 
were customers and practitioners, and it is not unlikely that a courtly milieu was 



vArAhI worship in the paraSurama-kalpasOtra I 165 


also the social setting in which the PKS originated. 48 In some places, the PKS 
seems to have precisely such an audience in view. The homa chapter (PKS 9.24) 
mentions—besides immortality ( amrta) —a number of worldly results achieved 
by different oblations into the sacrificial fire. To these belong several effects 
relating to regal interests: rajya (kingship), samrajya (complete overlordship), 
aisvarya (rulership), sarva-vasya (power over all, bringing all under control), and 
satru-nasa (destruction of enemies). The sovereign’s interests are not only about 
personal powers and perfections, but primarily about political power to rule and 
protect the state, and assure communal well-being and prosperity. Most of the 
goals to be achieved by the fire-ritual (PKS 9.24) are beneficial both individually 
and collectively: peace, healing fever, long life, well-being, happiness, prosperity, 
and good fate. There are also less auspicious objectives mentioned along with 
“destruction of enemies”: maddening ( unmadaya ), killing ( maranaya ), and 
creating hatred and division ( vidvesanaya ). 

Such kamya karmas (ritual actions seeking to fulfil specific desires and 
objectives) are sanctioned by the PKS (1.22, 1.26, 9.27) and Umananda and 
Ramesvara (commenting on 1.22 and 9.24) only if performed in a spirit of 
selflessness, renunciation, sacrifice and dedication to the divine. 49 RameSvara 
even tends to forbid kamya karmas altogether and accept only ritual obligations, 
such as the daily puja and the homa after the completion of a hundred-thousand 
purascaranas (PKS 7.37). Clearly self-cultivation and personal perfection are 
at the centre of concern: no higher fruit exists, according to PKS 1.26-28, than 
objectless awareness and reaching the self, one’s true 6iva-nature. Although the 
worship outlined, particularly the one of Varahl and the fire-sacrifice for specific 

48. These were also the major agents to make Saiva Tantra ( mantra marga) into a 
religious mainstream between the 5th and 13th centuries, as Alexis Sanderson’s 
research on the “Saiva Age” reveals. See, for instance, Alexis Sanderson, “Religion 
and the State: Saiva Officiants in the Territory of Brahmanical Royal Chaplain (with 
appendix on the provenance and date of the Netratantra)," in Indo-Iranian Journal 
47 (2004), and “The Saiva Age: The Rise and Dominance of Saivism during the 
Early Medieval Period,” in Genesis and Development ofTantrism, ed. Shingo Einoo. 
Institute of Oriental Culture Special Series, 23 (Tokyo: Institute of Oriental Culture, 
University of Tokyo, 2009). 

49- This ideal is very close to the karmayoga prescribed by the Bhagavadglta (for prince 
Arjuna). 





166 TANTRAPUSPANJALI 


results (PKS 9.23), is not purely devotional, it would be problematic—and would 
go against the grain of the Kaula-Tantric ideal of perfection—to construct a 
divide and opposition between pragmatic goals and selfless devotion, power- 
seeking and liberation-seeking activity, or sacred and profane spheres. What is 
sought is more holistic and all-inclusive—embodied emancipation in all spheres 
of life. 

The overall goal of the PKS ritual is explicit: emancipation while living (PKS 
10.82). The Tantric seeker must practice certain ethical standards (upusaka- 
dharma) to reach this goal, including egolessness, giving up interest in 
possessions and the fruits of ritual, letting go of social identification with caste 
ties and roles, and being considerate of those who abhor Kaula behaviour (1.19, 
1.21-22,10.70,10.77-78). Whatever one knows, does and experiences must be seen 
as an oblation into the sacrificial fire of Siva, one’s own highest self (1.26, 9.27). 
The whole cosmos (reflected in one’s mind) is to be “sacrificed" or absorbed into 
the divine blazing light of consciousness represented by Para, Lalita’s supreme 
form and “heart” (8.21-22, 24). The real fruits of this discipline are the constant 
vision of one’s objectless awareness (nirvisaya-cit) (1.27), the identification with 
one’s own highest self (1.28), and the constant presence of the brilliant light of 
divinity (10.73). Perfection means to embody the supreme godhead, Parama-$iva, 
throughout one’s body (10.50) and experience total autonomy and the pure bliss 
of consciousness throughout one's life (1.27-28, 7.38,10.82). 

It is of interest that the PKS not only praises the bliss-producing/ia«camnA'dm 
(PKS 1.12) and the “unfathomable” power of mantras (1.8), but also stipulates 
firmness in the power of imagination (bhdvana) (1.13). This is in fact the very first 
of the upasaka-dharmas, the to-do’s of the Tantric practitioners, and particularly 
related to Varahl. Stability in the power of imagination leads to commanding 
power ( ajnd-siddhi ) (1.13), which is Varahl’s basic characteristic and the fruit of 
her worship (7.28). I primarily gloss bhavana/a as “imagination,” in the sense 
of the basic capacity to “bring to mind,” “produce,” “affect,” “make present;” and 
more precisely as “active imagination,” the intentional use of this capacity. I 
understand imagination as making present or manifest non-present or invisible 
things, which is what Tantric visualization practices intend to do. 

There are several reasons why I suggest rendering bhavana as “active 
imagination,” the first being that “imagination” is a relatively common translation. 



vArAhI worship in the paraSurAma-kalpasutra : 167 


Jaideva Singh, for instance, translates bhctvand (based on Abhinavagupta) 
with “creative contemplation,” in which “imagination plays a very large part.” 30 
Bhavcind is further defined as “the power of spiritual attention, a total dedication 
of the mind to one central thought.” 5 ' This is more strictly speaking that very 
special case of imagination which I term “active imagination,” the conscious use 
of a human’s imaginative power in contrast to its normal unconscious presence 
in all of our thoughts and perceptions. What I want to highlight is deliberate 
imagination and focused attention as a technique in ritual and meditation to 
bring about transformative effects and new spaces of cognition and experience. 
This technique has a long history in India. The many upasanas (visualizing 
meditations) found in the Upani§ads are based on it. Already in the early Veda, 
according to William K. Mahony, imagination is understood as an effective, 
reality-creating and transforming force and the “divine art" of cosmological 
reach. 52 

The semantic field of bhavand is broad; multiple meanings resonate in the 
PKS ritual context besides (active) imagination: creation, an efficient cause, 
contemplation, (abstract) meditation, total immersion, feelings of devotion, and 
a spiritual state. This explains why the term “active imagination” in many cases 
could be replaced by “meditative imagination" or “imaginative contemplation." 
However, the more spiritual connotation in this replacement is not found in the 
ritual text, it is a matter of personal piety. What can be deduced more safely are 
a great number of active imagination techniques, starting in the initiation rites. 
These techniques are not only about creativity, but are also regimens of control 
and discipline. 

This connection between creativity and control is a second reason why I 
render bhavand primarily with active imagination, and it leads us back to the 
first upasaka-dharma, which pairs firmness in bhavand with commanding power 

50. Jaideva Singh, ed. and trans., Vijhanabhairava or Divine Consciousness (Delhi: 
Motilal Banarsidass 1979 [repr. 1999], xix. 

51. Ibid. 

52. William K. Mahony, The Artful Universe: An Introduction to the Vedic Religious 
Imagination (Albany: SUNY, 1998), 2,5-7. Imagination, due to this depiction, is first 
of all a godly art and in a secondary sense also human: it is the gods who project 
what is in their minds inside-out, and the world is created. 



168 | TANTRAPUSPAfijALl 


( cyna-siddJii) (PKS 1.13). There is hardly a better example of this connection than 
the Tantric guru. His active imagination and controlling power (effected by 
imagination) play a vital role in making the Tantric guru a guru. He must exercise 
creative mental manipulations in the disciple’s initiation (PKS 1.31-43). In the 
PKS 1.36, as in other Saiva initiation contexts since the 6th century, ’ the guru 
uses focused imagination and visualizing power to take complete possession 
of the adept’s body in order to divinize it. He enters the adept’s body using 
his imagination, purges it by imagining blazing light destroying all impurities, 
and transforms the old person completely. Similar imagination practices are 
performed thereafter in the daily ritual by the adept himself. 

An additional, yet related meaning of bhavand that is vital in the PKS is the 
stability in contemplation and meditation gained by rigorous, constant mantra 
practice. Mantra practice may be called "ritual imagination” in the sense of a 
socio-religious performance well-established far beyond the Tantric context 
which involves specific, collectively shared understandings, such as the mantra's 
self-efficient power and spectacular results. This combines in the Tantric context 
with techniques of visualization and active imagination, in the sense of deliberate 
activation of the human capacity of calling to mind and making present non¬ 
present things. Here is a third reason to view bhavana as imagination, as such 
techniques working with imagination are the most wide-spread and important 
Tantric practices, in addition to plain mantra repetition, with which they often 
combine. In the mantra rituals, bhavana’s whole palette of meanings come 
together. For instance, imagination, contemplation, and attainment of the 
spiritual state of perfection and completeness (purnata) by mantra competence 
merge into one in PKS 1.43. This Sutra enjoins the newly initiated disciple to 
meditate {bhavayitva) on his completeness as though being one who has already 
reached the final goal. 54 The stage of perfection may be understood as the stage 
of the gum who knows all that is to be known ( vidita-veditavya) and has full 
qualification and competency in all mantra practice {asesa-mantrdd.hikd.rt). 


53. See Alexis Sanderson, “Saivism and Brahmanism in the Early Medieval Period,” 
(expanded version of a text delivered as the 14th Gonda Lecture on 24 November 
2006; http://alexissanders0n.c0m/D0cuments/G0ndaLecture2.pdf), 3. 

54. sisyo ‘pipurnatarri bhavayitva krtarthas ... bhavet (PKS 1.43). 



vArAhI worship in the paraSurAma-kalpasutra I 169 


A fourth reason why I relate PKS 1.13 (on bhavana resulting in ajha-siddhi ) 
first of all on firmness in the power of imagination is the sheer quantity of 
techniques and terms relating to imagination. It is remarkable and striking that 
active imagination plays a vital role in all major points of daily ritual described in 
the PKS. r,s There are a number of terms in addition to bhavana. that refer to facets 
of mental powers related to imagination, including: kalpyate, upasate, nyasate, 
buddhyd, etc. One should “project” X onto Y, “superimpose,” “visualize,” “mentally 
transfer,” “meditate on,” “regard” or “think something to be this or that way,” and 
so on. Such practices recode and re-semantisize one’s experience of normal 
day-to-day life, converting it into something extraordinary. They allow active 
participation in a sacred cosmos by making it a lively inner reality. The ultimate 
objective is completely embodied and incorporated imagination, so that the 
inner world becomes a lived reality outside, a state of liberation, perfection and 
beatitude while living. Imagination techniques facilitate this process by shifting 
attention and agency from the ordinary limited self to the divine self, which is 
identical with the guru and the deity—a major axiom in the PKS (1.11), as in other 
Tantric contexts. 

Singh (based on Abhinavagupta) and Mahony (based on Vedic literature) 
stress imagination as a creative power and skilful art that brings forth an innate 
reality which was not visible before. This ontologizing assertion about the power 
of imagination is problematic from the perspective of cultural studies, but it is 
consistent with the sources. Bhavana , the conscious activation of imagination, 
is exercised as a powerful means of transformation. It plays a seminal role for 
Abhinavagupta in invoking one’s innate divinity, the real self, as being 6iva: ‘One 
has to imagine oneself with all the faith and fervour at his command that he 
is Siva. [...] Bhavana is finally metamorphosed into suddha vidya whereby the 
psychological I is swallowed up into the essential metaphysical I.” 56 Indeed, 
this is also a central function in the PKS. Ramesvara’s short commentary on 
the relationship between bhavana and ajha-siddhi (1.13) alludes precisely to 
this direction. He takes bhavana to mean a specific technique of imagination 
centred on the self, a conscious change of the locus of I-identification and 

55. I have discussed this feature more elaborately in Wilke, “Aktive Imagination im 
Tantra.” 

56. Singh, Vijhdnabhairccva, xix. 



170 i tantrapuspAnjali 


agency ( aham idam janami —“I know myself to be this [exalted being]”). For 
Ramesvara, active imagination and a spiritual state of beatitude merge into one. 
While he acknowledges the transformative creativity of imagination practice, 
his observations on purascarana reveal that practices of imagination also have 
a restraining and disciplining function. They channel the mind and make it 
focused. It is remarkable how Varahl’s two-fold power to restrain and to bless 
transform here into psychological realities. 

The major objective of the creative, imaginative manipulations during the 
Varahl puja and the long mantra repetitions after pujd is to make the divinity 
a living reality. The goal is to connect oneself with her not only mentally and 
verbally, but also to make her an embodied experience and interiorize her 
powers completely. However, the overall aim of ritual is even more ambitious, 
namely to absorb the supreme “bodiless” godhead Siva (whose "body” is pure 
knowledge and not limited by time and space) “in all one’s bodily limbs” (PKS 
1.5,1.18,10.50); in other words, to physically embody the supreme god and his 
powers. The firmness of imagination required for this involves the constant entry 
and absorption in one’s (innate) Sivahood ( satatam sivatd-samdvesah, 1.18) even 
in daily life, outside the ritual context (see Ramesvara’s comments on PKS 1.18). 
This leads to Sivahood as a natural state—one’s own innate nature and true self 
according to the non-dualists’ Tantric metaphysics. It is noteworthy that this 
state of perfection is “learned” and trained in the daily bhutasuddhi of Varahl, 
where the practitioner imagines and contemplates the mantra "Siva am I” while 
concentrating on the muLadhara, the “lowest” cakra within the body, which is 
most connected to the physical nature of the self. By such imaginative techniques 
a new consciousness is created which includes a new bodily awareness and an 
extreme expansion of the mind. 

RameSvara’s discussion of mantra-siddhi may be seen as a great narrative 
about the power of mantras, called “unfathomable” (acintya) by PKS 1.8. 
Purascarapa and mantra-siddhi lead to results which transcend the ordinary 
human frame and earthly limitations. They transform the practitioner into a 
cosmic and divine being, a superman on earth, or in Ramesvara’s terminology, 
into “a king of mantras '’ ( mantra-raja ). What is important about the cultural 
image of the “Tantric superman,” the “perfected one” ( siddha ), is that in addition 
to referring to inner sensations, extraordinary spiritual experiences, and altered 



\ ArAhI worship in the paraSurAma-kalpasutra | 171 


states of consciousness, it encompasses sensory perception, inter-subjectivity, 
and the shared material world of human beings. Ramesvara’s commentary on 
mantra-sadhana locates the power of the perfected one very much on the physical 
and corporal level. Typically, in his discourse the imagination of a wonderful, 
virtual world, in which no human limitations whatsoever exist anymore, extends 
into phenomenal reality. This world of perfection is not only subjectively felt, 
but a radical transformation of the old personality is also physically perceived 
by others according to Ramesvara’s “great narrative": the man of perfection’s 
auratic charisma and bodily lustre are seen from far and even emperors bow 
down and ask for protection. The inter-subjective perception is thus denoted by 
terms of “shining," “lustre,” and “brilliance.” Ramesvara’s narrative explains that 
these terms must not be understood only metaphorically. He rather speaks of 
a physically perceivable radiance and charisma. Apparently, he interprets the 
radiant personality of the Tantric as a visible sign for how the bodiless, universal 
Lord Siva entered and permeated the body of this human actor and how the 
blazing light of Para (the goddess’ supreme, unmanifest form) translates into 
daily life and becomes a manifest, corporal reality. 

The embodiment of Varahl through the interiorization of her protective 
power is a central step in the process of perfection and emancipation (PKS ch. 
7), but it must be followed by the interiorization of the highest goddess Para 
and her world-transcending nature (PKS ch. 8). This goddess is related to radiant 
light: the light of pure self-shining consciousness and reflexivity ( prakasa and 
vimarsa) (PKS 8.21). Unlike in the cycles of the other deities described in the PKS, 
no image worship, diagram worship, or saktipuja is performed in Paras cycle. 
Para receives offerings of alcohol and meat, but at the centre of her worship are 
cakra-yoga, visualizations on the regions of the yogic body (fontanel, heart, navel 
region), and immersion in her root mantra SAUH. This mantra is characterized as 
the ultimate reality ( anuttara ), supreme light and Lalita’s “auspicious heart” (PKS 
8.1), and it also connotes emancipation, the oneness of Siva-Sakti (alluded to by 
HSAUH in PKS 1.38, and in 10.24,10.26-27), and the absorption of the universe in 
the blazing light of the goddess, i.e., one’s consciousness (8.10, 8.17, 8.18, 8.21-22). 
The active imagination of PKS 8.21 correlates S with pure light, i.e., illumination 
and supreme consciousness (prakasa), AU with reflective power ( vimarsa) and H 
with the union of illumination and reflection. While uttering the mantra sounds 




172 ! TANTRAPU§PANJALI 


one must visualise them as the muladhara, heart, and face of the supreme 
luminous queen Para, into whose lustre of “ten million world-fires (, kaldgni)" the 
whole cosmos (all the “elements” or tattvas) is offered thereafter (8.22). 

What I regard as psychologically significant about the Kaula ritual are the 
many ways it empowers the practitioner to blur the line between mind and body 
by unifying them in a new space of experience. A major objective of “left-handed” 
practices seems to be to unite flesh and spirit, body and mind, and actually do 
it performatively through ritual means of expression, active imaginations, and 
mantra practices. 


3 . THEORIZING IMAGINATION 

There are theories which view imagination as the very root of culture and 
religion. 07 1 would not go that far, but I want to throw light from different angles on 
why and how imagination matters. The power of imagination influences human 
life and experience in many ways. 0 ® Far from being restricted to inner worlds and 
private fantasies, it impresses on all our perceptions—generally without our 
being conscious of it. It makes us see something as something. Imagination works 
in the individual and the collective—in cultural memory, values, social identity, 
religious systems, worldviews, nationalisms, demonizations and sacralizations. 
Thus imagination is not at all restricted to individuals and privacy; it is also a 
collective and public affair found, for instance, in guiding mental maps that shape 
public behaviour, in cultural images of self and others, and in great narratives of 
a nation’s past. Imagination is essential to the identity formation, community 
building and cohesion of groups and larger collectives.™ It is an important 


57 - See, for instance, the cultural philosopher Cornelius Castoriadis, Gesellschaji als 
imagindre Institution: Entwurf einer politischen Philosophie (Frankfurt: Suhrkamp, 
! 984 /i 99 o [French original 1975]). 

58. This and the next paragraph are a rough translation and gloss of Wilke and Traut, 
Imagination Religion—Asthetik , i7ff. The far-reaching propositions made in these 
introductory remarks of the book are worked out in great detail and scrutiny in the 
remainder of the volume in terms of a variety of empirical, cross-cultural data and 
a variety of methods and theories. 

59. This collective dimension of imagination has been at the core of a number of recent 
studies. Seminal was Benedict Anderson, Imagined Communities Reflections on the 
Origin and Spread of Nationalism (London 8c New York: Verso, 1991). It was further 



vArAh! worship in the paraSurAma-kalpasOTRA I 173 

factor not only in envisioning the world, but also in individual and collective 
social and religious practices. It needs expression in physical forms to become 
public. Thus, it also has to do with the senses and material culture by which it is 
stimulated, mediated, channelled, re-produced, and transformed. Sensory media 
provide imagination and imagining with aesthetic embodiment and real-world 
presence. They stabilize not only the world and society as they are, but also push 
change, new interpretations, revised meaning constructions and new spaces 
of experience which go beyond the merely subjective. However, imagination 
does not only create and produce something new, it also has channelling and 
disciplining functions. 

Religions, in particular, have made conscious and unconscious use of these 
qualities of imagination. One could even say that religion would not exist 
without the power of imagination. Religions speak of transcendence, holy 
universes, gods, spirits and demons that are not perceivable by the physical sense 
organs. They know worlds beyond this world and sacralise the known physical 
world and day-to-day activities, so that they can be seen as something else. There 
seems to be a special affinity between religion and imagination, as both make 
the non-present present and recode the seen with meanings beyond the seen. 
Therefore, imagination has particularly powerful functions in religions. It is an 
excellent instrument for producing transformation by translating sensory worlds 
into systems of meaning and, vice versa, systems of meaning into sensory worlds. 

Thus, the emphasis on imagination in Tantra is not a special case. What is 
so special is the very conscious, deliberate, methodical and active use of this 
human power—in such variety and density seen, perhaps, nowhere else. My 
objective in this final section is to reflect on this special case by situating my 
analysis of the PKS within a larger analytical framework, so that this individual 
historical case can be understood as an illustration of a more general theory of 
imagination related to all practices of imagination in the Tantric religious world. 
Such practices channel perception and feeling. They bring abstract ideas to life, 
animate material things, produce inner certainties, stimulate extraordinary 


developed by many authors, e.g., by Dipesh Chakrabarty, in his chapter “Nation 
and Imagination” in his Provincializing Europe: Postcolonial Thought and Historical 
Difference (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2000). 



174 ! TANTRAPUSPANJALI 


experiences, and facilitate the perception of realities beyond the sensory world. 
Considering the Tantric techniques of active imagination, I suggest, sheds light 
on the creative and manipulative functions of any kind of imagination, and 
specifically the transformative efficiency of religious and ritual imagination. 

In the terms of cognitive science, I understand imagination as an act 
of cognitive blending , 60 namely as an act that fuses conceptual entities and 
real world entities, or subjective mental space and the physical world (inter- 
subjectively shared phenomena), and thereby creates a third space wherein a 
new reality is produced. More technically, cognitive blending projects elements 
and structures from different domains into a new space, a blended space, in 
which a new structure can arise that is projected back into the input spaces 
and allows new inferences. I suggest “reading” Tantric ritual techniques based 
on imagination practices as modes and techniques of cognitive blending that 
establish new spaces of imagination and symbolic order. 

What I call “active imagination” in Tantra is first of all a technique of self¬ 
transformation, but this also includes a transformed vision of the world, as it 
establishesnewspacesofimaginationand experience.The PKS uses this technique 
with great sophistication and in exceptionally great variety, incorporating and 
shaping the bodily, intellectual, emotional and verbal spheres of knowledge and 
experience. It is a technique of self-cultivation and self-perfection which includes 
creative as well as disciplining, channelling and manipulative functions. In the 
PKS these functions are particularly related to Varahl and her commanding 
power. But they are there in any act of deliberate imagination. The creative 
and disciplining functions aim at a transformed perception of oneself and the 
world. Active imagination can be understood, therefore, as a “technology of the 
self. Foucault introduced this term for cultural and historical regimes based on 

60. For the major theoreticians of cognitive blending, see Gilles Fauconnier and Mark 
Turner, The Way We Think: Conceptual Blending and the Mind's Hidden Complexities 
(New York: Basic Books, 2002). In this theory metaphor and metonymy take a 
primary place. While I will not elaborate on that here, metaphoric cartographies 
and metonymic relations are certainly also vital in what I call “active imagination.” 
But it would be too narrow to hold on to this restriction, as the Tantric conception 
of consciousness and the non-dual world view goes beyond the metonymic and 
metaphoric. 

61. Foucault, "Technologies of the Self.” 



vArahI worship in the paraSurAma-kalpasutra I 175 


individual efforts and disciplines of self-cultivation that create certain spaces of 
experience and emotion, and new patterns of perceiving oneself and the world. 
This is indeed what Tantric techniques of imagination intend to do. Therefore, 
they can be also called performative ways of world-making. 

Tantrics knew that imagination is productive. They were aware of the 
power of imagination to make the non-present present and to transform reality 
by recoding it. And they also knew that this power can only be exercised if 
imagination is converted into material forms and physical architectures, from 
texts and oral teachings to sensory staging in ritual practices, mantra sounds, 
graphical designs, iconographies and body images. Indeed, imagination has a 
particular capacity to make the invisible visible, dislocate and relocate attention, 
and re-figurate reality by connecting, intersecting and blending mental pictures 
and abstract ideas with sense perceptions and the physical world. In doing so, 
new spaces of perception, experience and empowerment are created according 
to the school’s soteriological ideals. The PKS rites and active imaginations 
stimulate an immense expansion of consciousness and altered bodily awareness. 
VarahT’s ritual and purascarana discipline will lead, according to Ramesvaras 
comments discussed above, to superhuman powers and transform the limited 
human frame into an unlimited divine one. 

In keeping with contemporary cultural theories, historical anthropology and 
my previous discussions of the PKS, I do not view such notions as a field of fantasy 
and speculation. Imaginative practises, ideas and narratives cannot be isolated 
from actions, motivations and contexts, and are bound to representational forms, 
strategic actions, lines of argumentation, and discursively shaped experiences 
and events. Although exercised by the individual self for personal perfection, 
they are not open to individual choice. The ritual textbook freezes the method 
and even the Tantric guru, perceived as an autonomous man of perfection, 
follows in the initiation ritual a traditional pattern of visualization. As ritual 
techniques, active imaginations are at the same time cultural techniques, 
relating to identities, practices and values of larger collectives. The practises are 
both embedded in and shaping the cultural memory of the given society and 
participate in the society’s formative practices and discourses. 

Likewise, the ideal of perfection is not the individual’s own creation or 
the PKS’s invention, but informed by existing ideals in the socio-cultural 




176 | TANTRAPUSPANJALI 


framework. Such ideals and guiding images were termed by Jacques Le Goff 
cultural imaginaire{ s ).” 62 Le Goff belonged to the French £cole des Arxnales, 
whose program of a “new history” (nouvelle histoire) included a his to ire des 
imaginaires, an investigation of the guiding images and mental maps—world¬ 
views, ideals, narratives of the extraordinary and supernatural, fantasies and 
dreams of medieval European society, expressed by sensory-aesthetic forms 
and motivating social practices. The term “(cultural) imaginaire” thus denotes 
such reality-forming images and ideals, or collective imaginations, which were 
regarded by Le Goff as absolutely vital for the historian to look at and to be taken 
seriously in order to understand the given culture. 

Tantric practices involving active imagination, the ways they are performed, 
the symbolic orders they establish and the expectations about what they will 
achieve are part of a larger history of cultural imaginaires . Active imagination 
and its results depend on the plausibility of the expected results within the 
cultural framework. Active imagination never creates something entirely new, 
but is always constrained by cultural codes and shaped by habitual behaviour. 
It rests a good deal on pre-figured cultural knowledge, which is simply there 
without much reflection. That god(s), or a higher reality, exist is taken for granted 
in (nearly) all religions. A typical and specifically Tantric imaginaire , however, 
is that divinities appear in mantric form, whereas the cultural knowledge (not 
merely belief!) of supreme universal consciousness being already present in 
human beings (and in fact in all that exists) is shared by non-dualist Tantrists and 
Advaita Vedantins. Differences exist only in the way it is activated and perceived. 
In other words, the difference lies in different mental maps or imaginaires and 
different symbolic orders that make up Tantric or Advaita Vedantic identity. 

Imagination is, according to the art historian Ludger Schwarte / 13 the very 
foundation of symbolic order, and at the same time the potential to change this 
symbolic order. It is therefore more than a cognitive faculty, but relevant in all 


62. Jacques Le Goff, “Preface,” in Uimaginaire medieval, ed. Jacques Le Goff (Paris: 
Gallimard, 1985), and Evelyne Patlagean, "L’histoire de l’imaginaire,” in La Nouvelle 
Histoire , ed. Jacques Le Goff et al. (Paris, 1978). 

63. Ludger Schwarte, Intuition und Imagination—Wie wir sehen, was nicht existiert,” 
in BildundEinbildungskraft, ed. B. Hiippauf and Ch. Wulf (Munchen: Wilhelm Fink, 
2006), 93. 



VARAhI WORSHIP IN THE PARASURAMA-KALPASUTRA I 177 

social, religious and creative activity. It must be there whenever there is need 
to orient oneself and coordinate time, space and action. Imagination is vital to 
establish collective identity and social belonging. It informs one’s recollection 
of the past, self-image in the present and hopes for the future. In short, shared 
spaces of imagination are vital for group cohesion and cultural memory. 

Although Tantric active imagination is a very personal performance, 
concerned as it is with changing the focus of attention and re-conditioning 
the mind to produce altered states of consciousness, it is rooted in collective 
ideas, time-sanctioned practices and transmission in Tantric lineages. It is an 
essential part of groups’ identity and self-image. Therefore, it has also to do with 
the politics of imagination, which adjudicates between exclusion and inclusion, 
permitted and forbidden imagination and what can be said, felt and done in a 
given time, society, culture or specific group. Different interest groups, including 
different Tantric lineages, can have vastly different politics of imagination. The 
various mantra and cakra systems relate not only to different practices and 
group identities, but also to specific belief-systems and world-views, i.e., again to 
different symbolic orders. 

In what follows I want to consider more closely the politics, the techniques 
and spaces, and the history of imagination 64 engrained in the PKS and specifically 
its Varahl chapter. 

3.1 Politics of Imagination — Outsiders’ and Insiders’ Representations ofTantra 
Imagination can be both dangerous and useful. It has potential for radical 
change, subversion of given structures and development of new concepts, and 
also the potential to stabilize social order and cultural stereotypes. The politics 
of imagination involves inclusion and exclusion, judgements of inferiority and 
superiority, and clashes of symbolic order. They have much to do with personal 
and collective interests, power structures, and images of self and others, be it 
in the sense of group identities, “imagined communities” (Anderson), “cultural 
imaginaire( s)” (Le Goff), or subjectivity and “technologies of the self” (Foucault). 

Imagination can undoubtedly produce powerful images of oneself and 
others. It can also produce strong cultural cliches, stereotypes and value 


64. For a more theoretical discussion of these four dimensions of imagination see Wilke 
and Traut, Imagination — Religion — Asthetik, 75-79, 193-196,271-274,383-386. 











178 1 TANTRAPUSPASJALI 


judgements, both negative and positive. Two of the most powerful images in 
Tantra are imaginations of the erotic and the horrific. Eroticism and horror are 
particularly strong and popular stimuli for human imagination (as we know 
from modem movies!). In Tantra, the erotic and horrific have a long history; often 
they appear interwoven, but they are not common to all traditions. However, 
they have played a major role in representations of Tantra as the exotic other. 
I understand representation as production and creation, rather than simply 
depiction, description or presentation of something. Representations do 
something; they bring about what they speak of, they give form to the portrayal 
by the way it is portrayed. Imagination is a central part of this process. 

It is noteworthy that outsiders’ representations of Tantra have been quite 
different in the Western world and in India. To put it somewhat bluntly: the first 
overemphasizes sex, the latter, crime. If one searches for Tantra on the internet, 
thousands of entries on sex will pop up. This trend can be interpreted as a form 
of Orientalism that reverses the missionaries’ and British administrators’ disgust 
toward what they perceived as the obscene Hindu religion and its indulgence in 
practices like worshiping the liriga, a symbol resembling the penis. In contrast to 
this pattern of distortion that emphasizes sex, the pattern in India is to portray 
the Tantric as a black magician, or a bloodthirsty, orgiastic human monster 
who craves human sacrifice and supernatural powers to fulfil his fantasies of 
omnipotence. This image has been extremely powerful in popular discourse, 
from classical literature and drama (e.g., see the works of Bhavabhuti and 
Krsnamisra, and the various Sahkara-Digvyayas) to present-day imaginations 
in popular culture and Bollywood movies. 63 Both patterns of representation 
actually contain more self-descriptions than accurate descriptions of reality, and 
both are culturally formed. 

How do Tantric insiders represent themselves? Given the ambiguity of the 
term Tantra, the historical complexity of what it refers to and the vast quantity 
of Tantric literature, there is no a single answer to this question. But it is clear 
that sexual activity and violence are the exceptions rather than the rule in 

65. Konrad Meisig, Shtvas Tanz: Der Hinduismus (Freiburg: Herder, 1996), 129; Hugh 
Urban, Tantra: Sex, Secrecy, Politics and Power in the Study of Religion (Berkeley: 
University of California Press, 2003); Wilke and Moebus, Sound and Communication, 
684-689. 



vArAhi worship in the paraSurAma-kalpasutra ! 179 


Tantric traditions, and when present, they have quite different connotations 
and fields of discourse attached to them. Most of all, it is mantra practice that 
forms a common bond across Tantric ritual practice. It is mantra utterance and 
active visionary imagination that bring the mantric deities to life and facilitate 
participation in their powers. The type of mantra deity and practice will define 
the individual identity of the initiate members of the clan-based lineages. This 
is also true for the PKS, which happens to include Kaula sexual ritual. From 
an insiders’ perspective, this almost certainly reflects a deliberate choice to 
include the most basic bodily and procreative functions and natural ecstasy in 
spiritual practice. The politics of self-imagination of an elite circle of initiates 
found the Kaula ideal of merging body and mind most perfectly realized in the 
paiicamakdra. Ritual intercourse—like the rest of the paiicamakdra, starting 
with alcohol—is seen as a bodily experience of the bliss of Brahman. 

The Kaula program, with its “heterodox" bodily practices, challenges, 
negotiates and subverts normative Vedic-Brahmanic orthodoxy by the "higher 
esoteric knowledge that the bliss of Brahman is a spiritual and corporal reality, 
as it becomes manifest in the body by the paiicamakdra. This redefinition of 
Upanisadic orthodoxy is very typical for the Kaulas’ politics of imagination. 
The Srividya Kaulas pose a challenge to established sacred hierarchies by re¬ 
defining soteriology, spiritual empowerment and deified existence, and aiming 
at integrating Tantric and Vedic practice (an important objective for Ramesvara). 

A substantial part of the politics of imagination and self-image for the 
Kaulas and the PKS is actually to feel superior to the Veda, the most authoritative 
Brahmanical canon. Whereas normative, “orthodox” Sanskrit Hinduism 
associates the Veda with ethical and spiritual perfection, the PKS compares 
the Veda to a prostitute (■ vesya ) (1.30). The Veda belongs only to the “exterior” 
sciences, whereas the “esoteric,” secret Tantric and mantric knowledge alone 
leads to liberation while living. This knowledge involves the “esoteric” truth that 
the bliss of Brahman, which the Upanisads speak about, can be experienced 
not only in the mind, but also in the body. The consuming of the paiicamakdra, 
starting with alcohol, and the joy and ecstasy gained thereby, is understood as 
embodied manifestation of supreme beatitude, as a direct, corporal experience 
of the godhead and the true nature of oneself. So it is very consistent that the 






180 | TANTRAPUSPASJALI 


PKS designates itself as a “great Upani§ad” (PKS 10.83), even though this would 
be untenable to a Vedantin or by the normal, international scholarly standards 
used to identify a text as an Upanisad. 

The politics of imagination in the PKS clearly aims at a corporal embodiment 
of non-dual existence. It reflects a spiritual program that is typical for the Kaulas, 
namely to unite flesh and spirit by practices that place the body in the mind 
and the mind in the body. This program includes the ritual visualization that 
Lak$mldhara abhors the most: the concentration on the muladhara cakra, the 
lowest body centre near the genitals. This typically Kaula feature is considered 
low and disgusting in Laksmldhara's commentary on the Saundaryalahari, 
whereas it is a highly spiritual act in the PKS, as we saw in the case of VarahT’s 
bhutasuddhi. This example is about allowed and forbidden imaginations, 
selective choices, diverging value judgements and interests, and how they alter 
in different contexts and perspectives. Besides the clash of different symbolic 
orders, it is instructive about the important role of imagination in different 
body politics. The different techniques of imagination create different spaces 
of imagination and experience, i.e., different body feelings. Results and effects 
brought about by different forms of imagination vary l>h : to concentrate on the 
muladhara or other lower body centres and the whole body as the Kaulas do 
brings about another bodily awareness rather than concentrating only on the 
head centre, the thousand-petalled lotus, as LaksmTdhara wants it. These cakra 
yoga variations are different technologies of the self. Imagination is not harmless 
and does not pertain only to inner life; rather, it has results in one’s outer life as 
well. The Kaulas’ samaya (right behaviour, i.e., their own definition of “orthodox” 
practice and Tantric morals) is vastly different from Laksmldhara’s samaya and 
his pronounced Brahmanic orthodoxy. The difference between left-handed and 
right-handed Tantra does not start or end with the notorious pahcamakara. 
Rather, the differences are continued and pre-figured in the techniques and 
spaces of imagination, which feed back into the exterior world, and vice versa. 

66. See also Kelly Bulkeley, The Wondering Brain: Thinking about Religion with and 
beyond Cognitive Neuroscience (New York: Routledge, 2005), 151-176 (in particular 
164-165), on modem empirical research in cognitive neural science and psychology, 
which shows that it matters how meditation is performed and what one meditates 
upon, as the brain shapes the cognitive results accordingly. 



VArAHI WORSHIP IN THE PARA&URAMA-KALPASUTRA 1 181 


3.2 Techniques and Spaces of Imagination—Active Imagination and 
Transformation 

Notwithstanding the differences between right- and left-handed Tantra discussed 
above, the PKS shares a great number of features with right-handed Tantra. This 
is even true for the horrific goddess Varahl. For an outsider it may come as a 
surprise that a very wild and fearsome goddess who uses violence to punish and 
to bless and gets blood offerings in her midnight worship is at the same time 
closely related to contemplation and interiority, and to the inner landscapes of 
the yogic body and intensive mantra practice. But this kind of exoteric ambiguity 
and esoteric synthesis belongs very much to VarahT’s “atmosphere,” her spaces of 
imagination and redemptive functions in the PKS. 

This goddess is particularly challenging—at least she was that way for me 
and my previous understandings of Srividya. She differs most from the mild, 
great goddess Lalita of the right-handed wing of Srividya, who dominated my 
studies with Panditji Chakravarty. But she differs also from the other goddesses 
of the PKS by her unusual time of worship, her horrific and cruel features, her 
reception of blood sacrifice, etc. In Varahl’s image some older traits of wild deities 
and the fearsome Yoginls continue. In a certain way the boar-faced Varahl may 
be seen as Lalita’s dark alter ego, an image of horror and destruction in contrast 
to the beautiful, highly erotic sovereign queen. And yet, Varahl’s ritual cycle 
also includes refined eroticism and she is strongly related to the world-forming 
power of language. She shares a large amount of mantra utterance and interior 
worship with the other deity cycles, and in fact enjoys the most contemplative 
practice besides Para. This “contrasting harmony,” which is so puzzling and 
confusing for an outsider, is typical of Varahl. Underlying her horrific features 
are strong associations with moral conduct ( carya) and yoga. Her worship is 
most explicitly related to the Tantric sadhana, in this case the Kaula samaya, the 
school’s regulations of rightful practice, and to the break of human limitations 
engendered by this practice. The images of horror and eroticism are closely 
related to discipline and ultimately to spiritual perfection, in which horror and 
eroticism transform into divine concealing power and grace, exercised by the 
enlightened self. Psychologically, they turn into the self-command and blissful 
self-immersion of the liberated. 




182 j TANTRAPUSPANJAL! 


The complex nature of Varahl and her midnight worship is why this is an 
appropriate topic to explore my particular interest in the practices of imagination 
and transformation. It is necessary to move from the imagination of Tantra by 
outsiders to the insiders’ self-representation, here the PKS’s own portrayal of 
the horrific and erotic, and their view of embodied perfection emerging from 
techniques of imagination and mantric discipline. The insiders' imaginations 
differ not only regarding complexity, seriousness and spirituality 7 from those of 
the outsiders, but also by their deliberation. 

It is imagination which allows heavy semiotisizing of the ritual universe 
and creation of a corresponding frame of mind. Tantric imaginative practices 
encode reality and convert it into something else, something extraordinary, 
and thereby allow active participation in the sacred cosmos. The Tantrics knew 
many means and ways to do so and this variety is reflected in the PKS. It happens 
when physically uniting with a human Sakti who is perceived as the goddess 
herself, but it happens as well when placing the alphabet sounds on the body. 
Since the alphabet is conceived of as primordial matter, the body attains cosmic 
dimensions, and the consciousness expands to omniscience. It is imagination 
again which transforms alcohol consumption into the physical appearance of 
the deity and divine bliss. Imagination is also needed to perceive the deities 
present in their mantras and acquire their powers by mantra practice. Mantra- 
siddhi or divine power requires many years of severe mantra practice, by means 
of which the practitioner absorbs (interiorizes) the deity completely, but even 
in daily practice such absorption occurs in the ritual itself. For instance, by 
“placing” the mantra sounds on the body (verbally, mentally, and sometimes 
also physically pointing to the body parts), the body changes into a divine one, 
a sounding mantra -body full of the deity’s powers (in Varahl’s case, mighty and 
frightful powers which for the fearless practitioner turn into protective and 
graceful powers). 

The Tantrics trained themselves in active imagination as a technique to 
make the virtual hyper-real and bring the extra-ordinary to life. The primary aim 
of Varahl worship is to attain the goddess’ protective function, i.e., to interiorize 
her completely as the power of protection. The empowering of the ritual 
practitioners in the Varahl-ritual to conquer and subdue their real and virtual 




vArAhi worship in the paraSurAma-kalpasutra \ 183 


enemies is but a part (and not even the major one) of a more encompassing 
process of sacralising and making cosmic the Tantric self. 

As 1 have shown in my discussion of the PKS, Tantric imagination as a 
technology of the self makes use of the conceptual blending of different domains: 
the physical/corporal, mental, and verbal. These techniques of imagination 
allow for the creation of new spaces of imagination, and they give immediacy 
and presence to things that are not accessible via normal sensory perception. 
A new self-image is achieved by the dislocation and relocation of attention and 
shifting agency from human to divine self. 

While the mystical image of perfection—non-dual experience and deified 
existence while living—belongs to the most powerful and well-known cultural 
imaginaire s and social plausibility systems, the techniques used to achieve this 
goal find support in modern neuroscience. Empirical research confirms that 
practices of relocating attention and methodical focussing have indeed the 
power to create a new self-image, and—equally interesting research reveals 
that different meditation techniques (among which are counted visualizing 
meditation, mantra repetition and the contemplation of bliss) produce different 
psychological results and new forms of knowledge and feeling in conformity with 
the performances and the subjects being focussed upon. 67 In view of these modern 
findings, it is remarkable that the techniques of imagination in the PKS are so 
complete. They work on multiple levels—body (e.g., through the pancamakara 
and yogic body centres), mind (e.g., through contemplating ones innate Siva- 
hood), language (e.g., through mantra-japa and poetic descriptions), material 
objects and abstractions (from yantras to bliss absolute). These examples could 
easily be multiplied. The new spaces of imagination created thereby are believed 
in emic discourse to invest the whole self with divine power, knowledge, and 
bliss. For Kaula traditions, the aim is to fuse body and mind by investing the body 
with divinity, and making non-dual knowledge a corporal experience. 

3,3 History of Imagination and Historically Successful Imaginaires 

Active imagination in Tantra has individual and collective dimensions. The 

techniques and spaces of imagination are not only about individual well-being. 

67. Bulkeley, The Wondering Brain, 164-165, referring to earlier studies of Lou (1999) and 
Lazar (2000). 




184 ! TANTRAPUSPANJALI 


Being embedded in a specific socio-cultural framework and pre-existing value 
system, they go beyond the creation of individual meaningfulness. The PKS 
tradition draws from and adds to existing discourses, practices and dispositions 
of spiritual transformation and ultimate perfection. The PKS makes use of many 
earlier Tantric sources and draws heavily from the non-dual Kashmir Saivism 
of the Abhinavagupta school. Likewise, Ramesvara is not a lonely thinker or 
autonomous genius. He is very tradition-bound and draws extensively on his 
predecessors to describe the man of perfection and give Kaula practice legitimacy. 

Therefore, the PKS tradition of active imagination is part of a larger cultural 
heritage, borrowing from it and shaping it. This heritage includes esoteric 
practises like Vedic upasana and Saiva initiation, the belief in mantra power, 
and an image of perfection which finds its most spectacular embodiment in the 
Tantric superman, the Perfected One ( siddha ), who has miraculous supernatural 
powers at his disposal. Particularly with regard to mantra power and the Siddha 
imagery, cultural heritage could be replaced by “history of imagination" or 
history of imaginaires. When Le Goff applied the term imaginaire, he primarily 
had narratives of wonder and the supernatural in mind, the “naturalness” with 
which miraculous events were narrated and the physical manifestations they left 
(e.g., landscapes and architecture coded with feats of wonder, haunting spirits, 
etc.). In contrast to Le Goff’s European medieval examples, which survived only 
in folk traditions and were partly revived in modern esotericism, the Indian ideas 
of mantra power and perfected human beings who are freed from normal earthly 
limitations were historically quite successful in India and became part of religious 
mainstream knowledge. When the PKS was composed, these ideas already had 
an ancient past, and they have remained popular down to the present day. They 
truly demonstrate a history of “Longue duree which the Ecole des Annales, to 
which Le Goff belonged, was particularly interested in. 

Mantra power and siddha imagery are often closely related. Ramesvara 
draws testimony from a long tradition of more than a thousand years, going 
far beyond the Varahl ritual. The imaginaire of the Tantric superman is not 
dependent on a specific deity, but on mantra power thought to be effective 
irrespective of the intention of the speaker—dedicated performance (including 
correct pronunciation, ritual correctness und uninterrupted continuity) is all 
that counts. The ancient belief in mantra power is a cultural imagination which 




vArAhI worship in the paraSurAma-kalpasutra j 185 


was so effective in India that it became naturalized and inter-subjectively shared 
cultural knowledge—not restricted to the Tantrics and the educated who had 
Sanskrit knowledge (such as the elites who were the probable audience for 
the PKS). This knowledge of mantra power is shared across various strata of 
society, including the uninitiated and uneducated, and in vernacular cultures 
as well. It diffused into the remotest villages. Mantras will empower, bring 
supernatural capacities, and allow one to transcend and transform oneself by 
direct participation in the divine. 

The cultural image of the “perfected one” ( siddha ) and the person “free while 
living" (jivanmukta) enjoyed great historical popularity as well. The attribution 
of miracles and extraordinary capacities to such persons is widespread. 
As Knut Jacobsen points out, extraordinary capacities called yoga powers 
(siddhis ), attained through corporal practices, mantra-sadhana, meditation 
and concentration, are at the core of the religious imagination in the history 
of South Asia. 1 ’" Indeed, Ramesvara’s image of a Tantric yogi with occult and 
supermundane powers at his disposal is not merely the product of a single 
individual’s active imagination. It is deeply rooted in the collective memory and 
a very powerful and successful socio-religious construct, a “cultural imaginaire 
of longue duree, whose popularity goes far beyond yogic and Tantric circles and 
their esoteric practices. 

3.4 Concluding Remarks 

It was my intention in the previous discussion to argue that imagination is not 
only a key to Tantric practice and discourse, but also a meta-linguistic theoretical 
term and analytical category for explaining and interpreting religious practice 
and discourse more broadly. I think imagination is a very powerful category 
for analysing religious universes, ritual efficiency, socio-religious identities and 
cultural or group-specific codes by looking at the techniques, spaces and politics 
of imagination, and how they relate to the larger whole of society and historically 
effective cultural imaginaire s—being marked by them, but also modelling them, 
negotiating them, and sometimes even changing them. As I have explored, 
imagination does not only pertain to the inner world, but has also to do with 

68 . Knut A. Jacobsen, ed., Yoga Powers: Extraordinary Capacities Attained Through 
Meditation and Concentration (Leiden: Brill, 2012). 






186 ; TANTRAPUSPANJALI 


the senses. It is not only a private affair, but relates to the public and collective 
bodies as well. It is not only creative, but also disciplining. It not only has the 
capacity to manipulate and symbolically transform power relations between 
humans, but also between the human and the divine. It projects powerful images 
of self and others. Collectively shared imaginations have much to do with world¬ 
views, regardless of whether they are shared in a group or a whole culture. What 
I call “active imagination” is a special case which does not merely reveal all 
these functions more clearly than habitualized ideas and behaviours. It is, most 
of all, also a, special case due its deliberation and its channelling of individual 
awareness and experience. It shifts attention methodically, and by doing so it 
shifts agency and self-perception from human to divine. This is why I have called 
it a powerful technology of the self. 

Imagination forms a vital practice in Tantra beyond the PKS and the 
Varahl chapter discussed here, particularly through its creative, disciplining 
and channelling functions. In the detailed presentation of the sequence and 
complexities of Varahfs worship, my major focus has been on the techniques 
of imagination: the various ways of deliberately using the human power of 
imagination as a contemplative method to bring about absorption, empowerment 
and transformation. The PKS is a particularly good example of how powerfully, 
creatively and methodically imagination is activated within Tantra, using 
multiple media (sounds, pictures, diagrams, corporal gestures, alcohol, sexuality, 
etc.). It illustrates how imagination is channelled into new types of perception 
and worldviews. Thus, the Varahl chapter of the PKS exemplifies the extensive 
and conscious use of imaginative practices that is common across Tantric 
traditions, often discussed in terms of bhavana but also reflected in a host of 
other key terms. These deliberate, imaginative practices recode the practitioner's 
normal day-to-day perception and convert it into something else, something 
extraordinary. By doing so, they allow direct participation in the sacred cosmos 
taught by the texts and stimulate a transformed perception of the world and 
oneself. 

I do not view imagination and visionary spaces of perception as something 
irrational, purely fictional, or unreal. Nor are they bound to private fantasies, 
subjectivity and inner worlds. Imagination is—mostly unconsciously—an 
essential component of religious ideas and rituals, accounting for supermundane 



VARAHl WORSHIP IN THE PARASURAMA-KALPASUTRA I 187 


references, the presence of the unseen, and ritual efficiency. Such creative acts 
of imagination are necessary, for instance, to view normal water as holy water, 
wine as the blood of Christ, or alcohol as the “water of immortality and the 
“ever wet”'”' goddess Lalita. In ritual, imagination charts the mental maps one 
needs to give the acts religious significance. It is usually present without much 
reflection and conscious thought. Generally, the mental maps already exist in 
the cultural archive, and pop up automatically within the religious actor and 
ritual practitioner. I would call this normal habitualized form of imagination 
“ritual imagination” in contrast to the “active imagination” appearing in the 
deliberate imaginative modes and techniques which are so prominent inTantric 
ritual. The boundaries are fluent, as active imagination builds upon the normal 
ritual imagination. However, the intentional use of imagination and channelled 
attention is more likely to stimulate personal immersion and experience, and 
avoid routine and tediousness (the typical “dangers” of ordinary ritual). Moreover, 
conscious techniques are not only able to reproduce well-known cultural patterns, 
but also to recode and innovate upon them, thereby leading to new spaces of 
perception. This is actually what Tantric ritual does. It adds extra esoteric rites 
and extra esoteric meanings to the normal pujd in order to chart new mental 
maps and an altered sacred topography. Tantric rites enrich the normal worship 
agenda by adding complex, intentional contemplation exercises that fuse mental 
and physical action and by investing these practices with additional layers of 
meaning. In addition to activating the physical body and sense perception, these 
rites also engage the yogic body, mind, inner senses, visionary power, emotions 
and feelings. Active imagination plays a vital role in bringing all these aspects 
together to produce a holistic, experiential knowledge a body knowledge 
beyond the body, and a mental insight beyond the mind. This knowledge 
approximates Abhinavagupta’s conception of (cosmic) consciousness, which 
refers to a synthetic vision of the whole in which rationality, intuition, feeling 
and sense perception form a unity. This is what his favoured term samvit ( all¬ 
knowing," cosmic consciousness, an integral perception of the whole) connotes, 
which is used for both the supreme deity and the Tantric practitioner who has 
reached perfection. 


69. See footnote 12 above. 





188 | TANTRAPUSPANJALI 


In reverence and gratitude I bow to Panditji Chakravarty who opened this 
fascinating world of Tantric imagination to me. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Primary Sources 

Nityotsava by Umanandanatha. Edited by A. Mahadeva Sastri and revised by Trivikrama 
Tirtha. Baroda: Central Library, 2000 [1923, rev. ed. 1930]. 

[PKS] Das Parasurama-Kalpasutra: Sanskrit-Edition mit deutschcr Erstubersetzung, 
Kommentaren und weiteren Studien. Edited and translated by Claudia Weber. 
Frankfurt: Peter Lang, 2010. 

[PKS(Ba)] Parasuramakalpasutra with Ramesvara's Commentary. Edited by A. Mahadeva 
Sastri, revised and enlarged by Sakarlal Yajneswar Sastri Dave. Baroda: Oriental 
Institute, 1999 [1923, rev. ed. 1950]. 

[PKS commentary Laksmana, manuscript] Sutratattvavimarsini by Laksmana Ranade. 

Manuscript No. TR 587.1 and TR 587.2. Chennai, Adyar: Adyar Library. 
[Sat-Cakra-Nirupana] Avalon, Arthur [Sir John Woodroffe], trans. The Serpent Power, Being 
the Sat-Cakra-Nirupana and Paduka-Pahcaka: Two Works on Laya Yoga. Madras: 
Ganesh, 1992 [1918]. 

Saundaryalaharl of Sahkaracarya. With Ten Commentaries in Sanskrit. Edited by A. 
Kuppuswami. Delhi: Satguru Publishers, 1991. 

Srcvidyd-Ratnakara. Compiled by Karapatrasvami and enlarged by Sitarama Kavirajah. 

Varanasi: Srividya Sadhanapltham, 1991/92 [original ca. 1950]. 

Weber, see [PKS]. 

Secondary Sources 

Anderson, Benedict. Imagined Communities: Reflections on the Origin and Spread of 
Nationalism. London 8 c New York: Verso, 1991. 

Bulkeley, Kelly. The Wondering Brain: Thinking about Religion with and beyond Cognitive 
Neuroscience. New York 8 c London: Routledge, 2005. 
oriadis, Cornelius. Gesellschaft als imaginare Institution: Entwurf einer politischen 
Phibsophie. Frankfurt: Suhrkamp, 1984/1990 [French original 1975]. 
akrabarty, Dipesh. Nation and Imagination.” In: Dipesh Chakrabarty, Provincializing 
Europe: Postcolonial Thought and Historical Difference , 149-179. Princeton and 
Oxford: Princeton University Press, 2000. 

auconnier, Gilles and Mark Turner. The Way We Think: Conceptual Blending and the Mind’s 
Hidden Complexities. New York: Basic Books, 2002. 

Foucault, Michel. “Technologies of the Self.” In Technologies of the Self: A Seminar with 
Michel Foucault, edited by L.H. Martin, H. Gutman and P.H. Hutton, 16-49. Amherst: 
University of Massachusetts Press, 1988. 



vArAhI worship in the paraSurAma-kalpasutra i 189 


Jacobsen, Knut A., ed. Yoga Powers: Extraordinary Capacities Attained Through Meditation 
and Concentration. Leiden: Brill, 2012. 

Le Goff, Jacques. “Preface." In L'imaginaire medieval, edited by J. Le Goff, i-xxi. Paris: 
Gallimard, 1985. 

Mahony, William K. The Artful Universe. An Introduction to the Vedic Religious Imagination. 
Albany: SUNY, 1998. 

Meisig, Konrad. Shivas Tanz: Der Hinduismus. Freiburg: Herder, 1996. 

Patlagean, Evelyne. “L’histoire de l’imaginaire.” In La Nouvelle Histoire, edited by J. Le Goff, 
R. ChartierandJ. Revel, 249-269. Paris, 1978. 

Sanderson, Alexis. “Religion and the State: Saiva Officiants in the Territory of Brahmanical 
Royal Chaplain (with appendix on the provenance and date of the Netratantra).” 
Indo-IranianJournal 47 (2004), 229-300. 

-. Sanderson, Alexis. “Saivism and Brahmanism in the Early Medieval Period.” 

Expanded version of a text delivered as the 14th Gonda Lecture on 24 November 
2006 (http://alexissanders0n.c0m/D0cuments/G0ndaLecture2.pdf). 

-. “The Saiva Age: The Rise and Dominance of Saivism during the Early Medieval 

Period.” In Genesis and Development of Tantrism, edited by Shingo Einoo, 41 - 35 ° • 
Institute of Oriental Culture Special Series, 23. Tokyo: Institute of Oriental Culture, 
University of Tokyo, 2009. 

Schwarte, Ludger. “Intuition und Imagination—Wie wir sehen, was nicht existiert” In 
Bild und Einbildungskraft, edited by B. Huppauf and Ch. Wulf, 92-103. Munchen: 
Wilhelm Fink, 2006. 

Singh, Jaideva, trans. Siva Sutras: The Yoga of Supreme Identity. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 
1979 [repr. 1982]. 

-, trans. Vijhanabhairava or Divine Consciousness. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1979 

[repr. 1999]. 

Traut, Lucia and Annette Wilke, eds. Imagination—Religion—Asthetik: Vorstellungs- und 
Sinneswelten in Religion undKultur. Gottingen: Vandenhoeck, 2015. 

Urban, Hugh B. Tantra: Sex, Secrecy, Politics and Power in the Study of Religion. Berkeley: 
University of California Press, 2003. 

Weber, Claudia. Das Parasurdma-Kalpasutra. See Primary Sources [PKS]. 

-. “Manuskripte des Paragurama-Kalpasutra und seiner Kommentartradition.” 

Munchener Indologische Zeitschrift 1 (2008/09), 186-207. 

White, David Gorden. Kiss of the Yogini “Tantric Sex” in its South Asian Contexts. Chicago: 
The University of Chicago Press, 2003. 

Wilke, Annette. “Sankara and the Taming of Wild Goddesses.” In Wild Goddesses in India 
and Nepal, Proceedings of an International Symposium Berne and Zurich, November 
l 994 < edited by Axel Michaels et al., 123-178. Bern: Peter Lang, 1996. 

-• "Beauty Personified: The Goddess Lalita-Tripurasundari and Her Thousand Names.” 

In Foundations of Indian Art, Proceedings of the Chidambaram Seminar on Art and 
Religion, edited by R. Nagaswamy, 108-133. Chennai: Tamil Arts Academy, 2002. 






190 ' TANTRAPUSPANJALI 


_. “Die Gottin Kamaksi und ihr jahrlicher sricakra-Ritus: Zur neuen Ottentlichkeit 

einer esoterischen Tradition in Hamm-Uentrop." In Tcmpcl und Tamilcn in zweiter 
Heimat: Hindus aus Sri Lanka im deutschspruchigen und skandinuvischcn Raum, 
edited by M. Baumann et al., 189-222. Wurzburg: Ergon, 2003. 

-. “A New Theology of Bliss: ‘Vedantization’ of Tantra and 'Tantridzation' of Advaita 

Vedanta." In Samarasycv Studies in Indian Arts, Philosophy and Interreligtous 
Dialogue, edited by S. Das and E. Furlinger, 139-155- New Delhi: D.K. Printworld, 
2005. 

-. “Sound and Sense: Sonic Perception in Hindu India." In Religion and Music, edited 

by L. Guzy, 15-59. Berlin: WeiRensee Verlag, 2008. 

-. “Basic Categories of a Syntactical Approach to Rituals: Arguments tor a Unitary 

Ritual View’ and the Parasurama-Kalpasutra as ‘Test Case. In Grammars and 
Morphologies of Ritual Practices in Asia , edited by A. Michaels and A. Mishra, 215- 
262. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz, 2010. 

-. “Mental Journeys, Cosmic Geography, and Intermediary Space: Shrichakra and 

Shrichakrapuja.” In Sacred Geography of Goddesses in South Asia, Essays in Memory 
of David Kinsley, edited by R.P.B. Singh, 79-108. Newcastle upon Tyne: Cambridge 
Scholars, 2010. 

-. “Negotiating Tantra and Veda in the Parasurama-Kalpa Tradition.” In Negotiating 

Ritual , edited by U. Hiisken and F. Neubert, 133-160. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
2012. 

-. “Re-Coding the Natural and Animating the Imaginary: Kaula body practices in 

the Parasurama-Kalpasutra, ritual transfers and the politics of representation.” In 
Transformations and Transfer of Tantra in Asia and Beyond , edited by I. Keul, 19-76. 
Berlin 8 c New York: de Gruyter, 2012. 

. “Aktive Imagination im Tantra—Am Beispiel des Ritualmanuals Parasurama- 
Kalpasutra.” In Imagination—Religion — Asthetik: Vorstellungs- und Sinneswelten in 
Religion undKultur, edited by L. Traut and A. Wilke. Gottingen: Vandenhoeck, 2014. 

Wilke, Annette and Oliver Moebus. Sound and Communication: An Aesthetic Cultural 
History of Sanskrit Hinduism. Berlin & New York: de Gruyter, 2011. 





The Wisdom of Excess: Gum, 
Initiation and Practice in an 
Extreme Tantric Ritual 

John Dupuche 


This paper is written in thanks to Pandit H.N. Chakravarty, whose frank 
and learned elucidation of Tantraloka Chapter 29 was indispensable for my 
translation of this difficult chapter and its commentary by Jayaratha. 1 

INTRODUCTION 

The term ‘tantra’ has sometimes acquired a profoundly negative connotation in 
the West. Georg Feuerstein comments, 

This ‘California tantra,’ [is] based on a profound misunderstanding of the Tantric path. 
Their main error is to confuse Tantric bliss ... with ordinary orgasmic pleasure. 

To which Hugh Urban adds: 

... instead of the ideal of unity, order, or harmony, the late-capitalist aesthetic is one of 
physical intensity, shock value, immediate gratification, and ecstatic experience. 3 

‘Tantra’ has acquired a disreputable meaning also in India where it can mean 
‘trickery’ or even ‘black magic.’ Yet, in Chapter 29 of his great work Tantraloka , 4 
(‘Light on the Tantras’), Abhinavagupta, the greatest exponent of non-dual 
Kashmir Shaivism, after surveying the vast range of tantras without any of the 

1. John Dupuche, Abhinavagupta: the Kuta Ritual as elaborated in Chapter 29 of the 
Tantraloka (Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 2003). 

2. Hugh Urban, Tantra: Sex, Secrecy, Politics and Power in the Study of Religion (Berkeley: 
University of California Press, 2003), p. 205. 

3. Urban, Tantra, p. 255. 

4. Abhinavagupta, Tantraloka with the Commentary of Jayaratha, ed. R.C. Dwivedi and 
N. Rastogi (Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1987). 




192 | tantrapuspAnjali 


negative connotations mentioned above, provides a full description of the 
most extreme of the tantras, namely the Kula tradition. Indeed, Jayaratha (13th 
cent. CE), who provides a full commentary on the immense work, states that 
Abhinavagupta preferred the Kula above all others. 

... he esteems more highly the guru who follows the Kula ritual procedure ( kulaprakriyd )— 
because of [its] restfulness—in comparison with the guru who is devoted to tantra ritual 
procedure ( tantraprakriya ). 5 

Alexis Sanderson lists the Kula and the Kaula traditions among those 
with the most extreme rituals. 6 What is there in the Kula tradition which is so 
appealing to this outstanding philosopher, mystic and poet? 

THE KULA TRADITION 

In his Tantraloka (TA ), Abhinavagupta names well over one hundred texts 7 and 
often lists the various schools in ascending order of importance. 8 While the 
lower-placed schools are not entirely bereft of truth, the higher-placed contain 
and surpass them. 9 He is generally consistent in his several listings. 10 The order, in 
increasing importance, is: Veda, Siddhanta, Left, Right, Mata, Kula, Kaula, Trika. 11 

5. TAVvol. 2, p. 31. 

6. Alexis Sanderson, “Meaning in Tantric Ritual,” in Essais sur le rituel III: Colloque du 
centenaire de la section des sciences religieuses de lEcole Pratique des Hautes Etudes 
(Vol. 3), ed. A.-M. Blondeau and K. Schipper (Louvain-Paris : Peeters, 1995), pp. 23 
and 79. 

7 - R.Gnoli, Luce delle sacre scritture, (Tantraloka ) (Torino: Unione Tipografico-Editrice 
Torinense, 1972), pp. 883-892. 

8. TA i 3 . 30 ob- 3 oia, TA 13.319b, TA 15.319-320, TA 37.25^278. See also Pardtrlsikavivarana, 
ed B. Baumer (Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1988), pp. 217 and 269, and Andre Padoux, 
La Paratrlsikalaghuvrtti de Abhinavagupta (Paris: E. de Boccard, 1975), p. 56. 

9. The hierarchy is presented ritually in TA 29.51. 

10. This is true except for the so-called Mata which varies its position, being placed 
usually before or sometimes after the Kula. But what does ‘Mata’ mean? Does it refer 
to that variant of the Northern Transmission called ‘the Mata’ or to the other variant 
of the Northern Transmission called ‘the Krama’ which features so frequently in the 
Tantraloka? 

11. Alexis Sanderson amplifies the list: “below the Siddhanta are the various Pa^upata 
systems (Lakula, Vaimala, Mausala and Karuka); below Saivism is the Vaisnava 
Tantric system of the Pancaratra; and finally there is the universal prescription 
(sdmanyo dharmah) of the smarta and srauta traditions. Thus the Trika locates 
itself at the furthest remove from neutral ‘vedic’ orthodoxy”, The Visualisation of 



THE WISDOM OF EXCESS 1 193 


The highest-placed tradition, Trika, refers above all to the single mantra SAUH, 
which is the phonic expression of consciousness in all its manifestations. Thus 
the Trika does not refer so much to a system as to ultimate consciousness itself. 
The mantra SAUH is expounded at length in the Paratrisikavivarana. 11 

The Kula and Kaula traditions are explicitly distinguished by Abhinavagupta 
in his hierarchy of traditions, but in Tantraloka 29 he uses the terms ‘kula’ and 
'kaula' interchangeably. For example, at one point he will speak of the “Kula 
ritual procedure” 13 and shortly afterwards define the kaula as the “knowledge and 
the object of knowledge” 14 without feeling any need to distinguish the terms. 

He defines kula as “the sakti of Paramesa, his capacity, eminence, freedom, 
vitality and potency, mass, consciousness and body,” 15 moving by degrees from 
the supreme state “sakti of Paramesa” to the material level “body,” but the full 
meaning of the term is appreciated only in seeing how it unfolds in the whole 
chapter. 


THE GURU 

L The variety of personages 

The officiant ( karmt) is concerned with performing rituals. The yogi focuses 
on securing particular supernatural powers (sLddhi) and enjoyments ( bhukti) l6 

the Deities of the Trika," in L’lmage Divine, ed. A. Padoux (Paris: Editions du Centre 
National de la Recherche Scientifique, 1990), p. 50. 

12. The term ‘consciousness’ is central to Kashmir Shaivism. Indeed, the first sentence 
of the Siva Sutra, which stands at the fountainhead of the tradition, reads: 
“Consciousness is the Self” ( caitanyam atma). The term more commonly used 
in 7 X 29 is samvit. This is no ordinary awareness but is unlimited and universal. It is 
the foundation of all other forms of consciousness, and indeed is present in them all, 
from the highest to the lowest, as the sesame oil is present in every part of the seed. 
The purpose of the rituals is to acquire this consciousness, which is also called ‘Siva’ 
and whose primordial expression is ‘I am.’ The experience of enlightenment is the 
moment of acquiring this consciousness. This article uses the term ‘consciousness’ 
in its rich sense. 

13. TA 29.1b. 

14- TA29.9. 

15. 7X29.4. 

16. Translation is always problematic, no less so in translating 7 X 29 where many words 
are not only in code but can be understood on three levels: 'gross’ ( sthuLa), ’subtle’ 






194 TANTRAPUSPANJALI 


for which he performs the appropriate practices. The gnostic (jndnl) seeks 
understanding, discernment ( vijnana) and liberation ( mukti): 

Ordinary initiation ( samaya-diksa) is essentially a prelude. Indeed, in TA 29 
the term dlksa , properly speaking, is reserved to initiation as a Son ( putraka ), of 
which there are four types: he may be sciblja , i.e., with a set ritual and way of life; 
or nirbya } without these. If he seeks liberation he is called niskala . If he seeks 
enjoyment as well as liberation he is scikalci. 

Furthermore, the Son may wish to remain in the state of liberation given 
by his initiation or he may go on to seek a public role and receive consecration 
( abhi§eka ) as either an Adept ( sadhaka) or a Master (dcdrya). 

The Adept's role is to grant enjoyments; the role of the Master is to grant 
liberation. In his commentary on TA 29.231b, 18 Jayaratha notes that the Master 
can bestow both attainment and liberation. 

... the one who is an Adept... [and who has not subsequently been consecrated as Master 
and] in this sense is a gum, dispenses only supernatural powers to others. The other [the 
Master] who is a gum ... [without being consecrated as an Adept], after first bestowing 
supernatural powers ... [grants] liberation as well. The role of ‘Master’ is transmitted to the 
person who seeks liberation [and not to the one who only seeks enjoyments] even if he has 
been initiated with sabija initiation. 

The roles of karml and jnanl can also be given to a person who seeks only 
liberation. However, both the Adept and the Master are minor figures in TA 29, 
mentioned in passing but superseded by the guru. 

Abhinavagupta distinguishes between three types of gurus: the jnanl 
the yogi, and the guru who most properly deserves the name and who has the 
qualities of both jndnl and yogi 

He who wishes enjoyment and liberation and discriminating knowledge should seek a gum 
who is well-practised ( svabhyasta) in knowledge and accomplished in yoga (yogasiddha ). 
However, if such a person does not exist, he should seek [a gum] who is a knowledgeable 

(suksma) and ‘supreme’ {para). The word bhukti is one such term. The translation 
‘enjoyment’ is correct but should not be understood hedonistically. Any experience 
that leads to enlightened consciousness is properly termed bhukti. The pleasures of 
a ‘bound animal’ ( pasu ), by contrast, are shallow and disempowered. 

17. Abhinavagupta describes the roles of jnanl and yogi in TA 13.326^340. 

18. TAVvo\. 7, p. 3435 * 



THE WISDOM OF EXCESS j 195 


person as regards discriminating knowledge and liberation; as regards a particular 
enjoyment, [he should seek out] a yogi who is able to grant that result. 19 

TA 4.33-85 analyses the nature of the guru ( gurusatattvam ). After speaking of 
the false guru who leads his disciple into the net of illusion ( mayd ), Abhinavagupta 
points out that a disciple can still achieve true consciousness by means of 
reasoning ( tarka ). Consciousness can occur spontaneously ( samsiddhika ), from 
one’s own self ( s\>atah). This is superior to the consciousness that arises from 
scripture ( sdstratah ), which itself is superior to the consciousness that is due to 
a guru ( gurutah ). These three terms— svatah, sdstratah, gurutah are central in 
the process of establishing the varieties of guru. 

The person who achieves consciousness by his own self, svatah , is 
akalpita, that is, he is "initiated by the goddesses of his own consciousness 
( svasamvittidevibhir diksita), not by another guru. In this sense it occurs for no 
reason” ( akasmat ), that is, for no commonly recognizable reason ( lokaprasiddha). 
The real reason of course is the direct communication from the goddess. 

The person who comes to knowledge through an interior understanding 
(atmabhavandtah) of the scripture—in other words, sdstratah is called a 
‘formed-unformed’ (akalp it akalpita) guru. That is, he does not depend on another 
guru but has relied on the scriptures. 20 Abhinavagupta goes on to describe in 
more detail the subcategories of ‘formed-unformed,’ according to whether their 
saktipdta is intense ( tivra ), middling ( madhya ), or weak ( manda ). Such persons 
may use meditation, recitation, etc. to reach the akalpita state. 

The person who is not able to reach consciousness by himself or through 
the scriptures, may receive consecration ( abhiseka ) from a guru and so himself 

become a guru, albeit a ‘formed’ ( kalpita) guru. 21 

There is, therefore, a hierarchy. The person who arrives at consciousness 
spontaneously is superior to person who arrives at consciousness in dependence 
on other sources ( ahrta ). In the presence of the more gifted person, the lesser 
person loses authority ( adhikara ), falls silent ( tusni ), and his activity is dependent 
( anuvartana) on his better. 


19. 7 A 13.338-339. 

20. 7 A 4-52b-53- 

21. TA 4-7ob-7i. 









196 | TANTRAPUSPANJALI 


Although the recipient of an intense descent of energy does not need the 
external rite of ritual purification ( samskdra ), he may seek it for the sake of a certain 
completeness so that the internal and external dimensions might correspond. In 
other words, the rite is not performed in order to obtain a consecration as though 
it did not exist already. Rather, the rite is celebrated in order to manifest the real 
condition the akalpita guru has already received directly from the goddess. He 
wishes to show that the external world and the inner world coincide. He seeks 
to endorse the conviction” ( samvadadrdhatakrte) he already has. He is truly 
Bhairava, since inner and outer coincide. 22 In this way the knowledge (Jndna) 
based ones own self ( svatah ), based on the scriptures ( sastrcitah) and based on 
the guru (gurutah) reaches its fullness (j purnatva ). 23 

This same point is made in the Tantrasara. While discussing the relationship 
of external and internal, Abhinavagupta notes that if the initiation occurred only 
interiorly there would be a lack of exteriority and therefore a limitation and a 
dualism. To avoid any limitation (avacc/iedahanaya), the external rite ( bahir api 
karyoyago ) is also sought. 24 

Although there is a hierarchy between these various personages, 
Abhinavagupta makes it clear that it does not matter how a person reaches 
consciousness. What counts is the one result, consciousness, whether the guru be 
unformed, unformed-formed’ or ‘formed/ 25 The variation is due to the varieties 
of‘descent of energy' ( saktipata ). 

Thus, in the Kula ritual the akalpita guru bestows liberation and enjoyment, 
he initiates and teaches, he performs rituals, and he receives the worship of 
Masters, Adepts, Sons and ordinary initiates. 

The Tantraloka is essentially divided into two sections. Chapters 1-12 describe 
the basic structure of reality and the ways ( upaya) to experience that reality. The 
second, Chapters 14-37, describes the relevant rituals. Chapter 13 acts as a hinge 
which joins the two. 

TA Chapter 13 describes nine forms of the descent of energy ( saktipata) f all 
of which are varieties of the one grace ( anugraha ) of Siva. Abhinavagupta arrives 

22. TA 4.766-773. 

23. TA 4.77b-78a. 

24. Abhinavagupta, Tantrasara (Delhi: Bani Prakashan, 1982), p. 43. 

25. TA 4.80-83. 



THE WISDOM OF EXCESS j 197 


at this number by distinguishing between three major categories: ‘intense’ 
( tcvra), ‘middling’ ( madhya) and ‘weak’ ( manda ). Each of these categories has 
three levels similarly distinguished by the terms tcvra, madhya and manda. Thus, 
the highest form of saktipata is tcvra-tcvra (most intense), the weakest is manda- 
manda (most feeble). 

The person who receives the most intense form of saktipata is soon taken 
out of this transient world. 26 The recipient of the second form, namely the 
‘intense’ ( madhya-tcvra) 27 descent of energy, is enlightened and established as a 
guru without need for external initiation. The first two forms of saktipata are due 
to the goddess alone, namely consciousness itself, without need for a guru. The 
third level of saktipata, the ‘less intense’ (manda-tcvra), 28 does not bestow the 
same degree of enlightenment: the recipient will need to seek initiation from a 
guru if he is to be assured of his enlightenment. The six lower levels of saktipata 
are described in just six verses. 29 

While the akalpita guru may be initiated at any stage in life by the goddess, 
Abhinavagupta has the highest esteem for the person who is yoginibhu. The 
child who is conceived while his parents are engaged in a sexual union of such 
quality that they experience their identity with Siva and sakti is a “repository of 
knowledge ... even ... in the womb," as noted in the following quotation. 

The body ( tanu ) who is conceived during such a mating, who develops in the womb, is 
called ‘yoginl- bom.’ This \yogini-bom\ is, by his very self, the repository of knowledge, a 
Rudra. According to the illustrious Virdvali-sdstra, even as a child in the womb he has the 
form of Siva. 30 

Jayaratha has no hesitation in seeing Abhinavagupta as a ‘yogini- born.’ 3 ' 

26. It is described briefly in TA i3.i3ob-i3ia. 

27. The ‘intense’ form is described at length in TA 13.131-217. 

28. It is described in TA 13.218-2228. 

29. TA 13.240-2468. 

30. TA 29-i62b-i63a. 

31. In TAV vol. 2, p. 14, Jayaratha quotes 2A.i62b-i63a—with two slight changes— 
in reference to Abhinavagupta himself. Note also that the verse that introduces 
three of Abhinavagupta’s major works, the Tantraloka, the Tantrasara and the 
Paratrlsikavivarana, can be read as a hymn of praise either of his parents or of Siva 
and sakti. In his translation of the Paratrlsikavivarana, Jaideva Singh shows how the 
one verse can be translated in these two ways, Paratrlsikavtvarana, trans. J. Singh, 




198 : TANTRAPUSPASJALI 


LL The duti 

In the Kula ritual, the guru, for all the importance attached to his role, is deemed 
to be less significant than the sexual partner (duti). u This is because the Kula 
ritual comes from Ardhatryambaka, the daughter of Tryambaka, the founder 
of the non-dual ( advaita ) school who is also one of the manifestations of Siva. 
On the model of Ardhatryambaka, therefore, the duti brings the practitioner to 
the form of consciousness that lies at the heart of the Kula tradition, namely 
the sense of universality which transcends the opposition of clean and unclean, 
outer and inner and so on. 

Sambhunatha, whom Abhinavagupta describes as “the moon shining on the 
ocean of Trika knowledge," 33 initiated Abhinavagupta into the Kula ritual. 34 He is 
mentioned in 734 1.13 together with his bhagavati, who.Jayaratha explains, was his 
duti Indeed, Sambhunatha is the only guru explicitly named in the encomium 
of TA 1.7-21. In TA 29.95 “the illustrious Sambhunatha" is praised at the highly 
significant moment when Abhinavagupta moves from the presentation of the 
ritual based on the internal sakti (TA 29.56-94) to the ritual based on the external 
sakti {TA 29.96-1663). 

The significance of the ritual based on the external sakti is shown by the 
fact that the Tantrasara, which is a summary of the Tantraloka, repeats TA 29.96- 
166a almost word for word; and the Tantroccaya, an even shorter summary of the 
Tantraloka, mentions only the ritual based on the external sakti and ignores the 
other five rituals of TA 29. 

Abhinavagupta states, quoting Kallafa: “...by her very being she is superior 
to [the guru’s] own body.” 35 Jayaratha is explicit:"... because her central sacred 


ed. B. Baumer (Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1988), pp.1-3. For a thorough analysis 
of this hymn see Alexis Sanderson, “A Commentary on the Opening Verses of the 
Tantrasara of Abhinavagupta,” in Samarasya, Studies in Indian Arts, Philosophy and 
Interreligious dialogue in Honour of Bettina Baumer, ed. Sadananda Das and Ernst 
Ftirlinger (Delhi: D.K. Printworld, 2005), pp. 89-148. 

32. The word duff literally means ‘female messenger.’ She is the spiritual partner, which 
includes being the sexual partner. 

33. TA 29.95. 

34. Lilian Silburn, Hymnes de Abhinavagupta (Paris: E, de Bocard, 1970), p. 2. 

35. TA 29.123. 



THE WISDOM OF EXCESS I 199 


space is spontaneously fully opening and closing, [the sakti is superior even to 
the guru’s own body].” 3 '’ 

Nevertheless, the guru still has a role, for he must ritually prepare the dutl 
for her role. Abhinavagupta states, still quoting Kallata: “[The guru] should 
ritually prepare [the sakti]," 3 ' or as Jayaratha explains: “the guru should purify 
(sarnskrtd) her [for the ritual].” 3 " This double aspect is brought out well in the 
play of Sanskrit words: because her being, bhciva, is superior, she is prepared, 
bhavitd, by the guru. 3 -' 

In this way, the guru uses the dutl as the means of transmitting the Kula 
tradition. 

To her alone, because [of the fact that her central path is fully opening and closing], the 
guru properly transmits the substance of the Kula. And by means of the [mouth of the 
sakti], he transmits [the substance of the Kula] to men. 40 

She does so by sexual intercourse. She does not teach with her upper mouth, 
her voice, but she initiates with her ‘lower mouth,’ her sexual organ. She initiates 
him not into just any sort of sexual experience but into the state of consciousness 
which is at the heart of the Kula tradition, into an experience which cannot be 
described. As Abhinavagupta says: “how could consciousness, which is unique to 
oneself, be put into writing?” 41 She is, indeed, purified or set apart for her role by 
the guru and in that sense she is ‘initiated,’ but in turn she initiates her partner. 

INITIATION ( DlKSA ) 

The guru has himself been initiated and will initiate others, for he functions 
within a tradition which stretches back in time through human gurus to the 
Perfected Beings ( siddha ) and thence to the divine realm. This traditional 
nature of the Kula ritual is shown clearly in the very structure of TA 29, which is 
divided into two halves: the first section 42 describes the rituals which all initiates, 


36. TAV vol. 7, p. 3378. 

37. TA 29.123b. 

38. TAVvol. 7, p. 3378. 

39. TA 29.123b. 

40. TA 29.i22b-i23a. 

41. TA 29.126a. 

42. TA 29.i8-i86a. 




200 | tantrapuspAnjali 


including the guru, are to perform. The second section 4 " describes the rituals 
of initiation, which the guru performs. The sloka that joins these two sections 
pointedly shows the connection: 

After first of all performing the sacrifice in that manner, he should initiate his own 
disciple—one among a hundred thousand who possesses the suitability for such things— 
into such a procedure. 44 

In other words, before initiating his chosen disciple, he brings himself to 
the highest state of absorption; for the ritual is destined for the “most advanced 
gums and disciples” who, Jayaratha explains, “dwell in a state of undifferentiated 
(nirvikalpa) thought at the supreme level.” 45 He gives what he is. As Jayaratha 
puts it, the gum acquires “the single form of the knowing subject,” “where the 
state of bliss alone remains,” “the place of repose in one's self alone.” 40 

L Ordinary initiation ( samaya-diksa ) 

Although the term ‘initiation' is strictly speaking reserved to initiation-as-Son 
(putraka-dlksd), the entry into ordinary discipleship is described within the 
general category of initiation announced by TA 29.187. 

The first example of ordinary initiation is taken from the 
Mdlincvijayottaratantra and reads as follows: 

After sprinkling the [disciple] with rudrasakti , 47 [the gum] should bring him before 
the god. After looking at the arms of the [disciple], [the gum] should set them on fire 
with rudrasakti. With the same [rudrasakti] he should place a flower in the hands of the 
[disciple], which have been smeared with sandal-paste. Having ensured that [his disciple's 
hands] are unsupported, [the gum] should reflect on them as being pulled by rudrasakti , 
which is a flame with the form of a hook. Then, after the [disciple] has spontaneously taken 
the cloth, he is blindfolded and he spontaneously drops the flower. From its fall [the guru] 
ascertains the kuia [to which the disciple belongs]. Then, after [the disciple] has uncovered 
his face, [the rudrasakti] makes [him] fall prostrate at the feet [of the goddess into whose 
kuia he has been initiated]. 48 


43 * TA 29.i86b-28i. 

44- 7X29.1873. 

45- TA 29.2a, TAV vol.7, p. 3292. 

46. TAV on TA 29.185b, 

47 - The mantra rudrasakti is the mantra Malini enclosed by either Para or Matrsadbhava. 
48. 7X29.187^190. 




THE WISDOM OF EXCESS | 201 


The flower falls on the mandala, which in its sacred geography represents 
the various goddesses who each separately has her own kula and who together 
form the overarching ‘clan’ (kula). There are complexities within complexities, 
wheels within wheels. Similarly, the human body is a microcosm of the universe, 
each different level corresponding to a different realm with its appropriate 
advantages. Whilst the guru adverts to the action of the mantra rudrasakti, which 
is the phonic form of the goddess, the rudrasakti makes the flower fall on a realm 
which is sacred to one or other of the goddesses who thus becomes the special 
object of the disciple’s worship and the particular source of his powers (siddhi). 

Abhinavagupta is realistic, for he knows that certain initiations have 
no effect. He goes on, therefore, to describe other initiations which are less 
external but more fearsome. Thus the initiation described in the Ratnamala 
involves the use of the mantra KSROAUM and the ‘oblation' (earn). Under the 
impact of the mantra placed by the guru on the disciple’s hand, the hand moves 
spontaneously—the movement is called the ‘hand of Siva’ ( sivahasta )—and hits 
the body at a spot which indicates the kula to which the disciple belongs, for the 
body is a hierarchy of saktis. This blow suddenly causes conviction (pratyaya). If 
the disciple hesitates, he is to remain an ordinary initiate. 

A third form of initiation, from the Anandesvara, involves just the ‘oblation.’ 
Ordinarily caru is a grain boiled with butter and milk, but in the Kula ritual, as 
Jayaratha explains with a quotation, the ‘oblation’ consists of the ‘five jewels,’ 
which are listed as “male urine, semen, menstrual blood, phlegm, and faeces.” 49 It 
is taken as the human equivalent of the paficagavya, the five products of the cow: 
milk, curd, ghee, urine and dung. 50 It is mixed with ‘nectar-of-the-left’ (vama- 
amrta), which means ‘wine’ but can also take on the further meaning of sexual 
fluid. If the gentler ritual of TA 29.187-191 will not work, perhaps the shock of the 
concoction will. 

However, if the disciple should show any hesitation (kampa) to take the 
mixture he must remain an ordinary initiate who is only qualified for study, for 
hearing the scriptures, for daily worship and for service of the guru 51 till such 
time as he is ready for true initiation-as-Son. 


49. 7 >lVvoI. 7, p. 3420. 

50. TAV vol. 7, p. 3420. 

51. Cf. TA 15.52008-5213. 






202 ; tantrapuspASjali 


ii Initiation-as-Son (putraka-diksa) 

Abhinavagupta gives several versions of this form of initiation. For the first of 
these he quotes the Ratnamala, which reads as follows: 

[The disciple] ... stands upright before [the guru]. The guru who is composed of the sakti 
should [then] reflect on the sakti, which is all blazing, as going from the foot to the top of 
the head of the [disciple] burning his bonds. After that, when the [disciple] has sat down, 
[the guru] should reflect, step by step, on the [saA'f/] as burning [the bonds], starting right 
from the cleansing of the base [and] terminating with the final cleansing of the top [of 
his head]. Having thus burnt ... all the categories etc. that are to be cleansed, be should 
meditate [on the sakti] as merged in Siva, either in his simple or his composite form. [The 
sakti,] which the yogi joins to the path, nourishes that which is of the same nature [as 
herself and] bums up anything else that belongs to a different class. * 

The human being is a microcosm of the universe. The highest part, either 
the tuft of hair ( sikha ) or the ‘end-of-twelve’ ( dvadcisanta ), a point twelve finger- 
widths above the crown of the head or the crown of the head itself, represents 
the highest level of consciousness from which the thirty-six categories ( tattva) or 
levels of being are progressively emanated down to the foot. 

The disciple is “unclean" in the sense that the various dimensions of his 
being have not been suffused with the purity of ultimate consciousness. They are 
constrained by the bonds of ignorance. 

The gum, who himself is all sakti, notices how the sakti moves upwards from 
the feet of the disciple to the head. The sakti burns, i.e., transforms every level 
into pure consciousness, starting from the lowest dimension and finishing with 
the highest. 

Abhinavagupta is again realistic and knows that the initiation may not in 
fact be successful because of the weakness of the saktipata. He therefore gives 
two other initiations, one from an unnamed source, 53 the other taught to him by 
Sambhunatha and found also in the Sadbhava. 54 In both these cases the method 
is just the projected mantra, which is more powerful than an external act. 

Initiation-as-Son is essentially an initiation into liberation. However, in the 
Kula tradition liberation and enjoyment are not incompatible. Accordingly the 


52. tA 29.202-206. 

53. TA 29.2io-2iia. 
54 - TA 2g.2i2b-2i3. 


THE WISDOM OF EXCESS j 203 


Son, having attained liberation ( moksa ), may also wish to be initiated into a 
particular category of enjoyment. 55 Indeed, the person who is liberated-while- 
living (jrvan-mukti ), the goal of the Kula ritual, knows both mukti and bhukti. 

iiL Consecration ( abhiseka ) 

The consecration of the Adept and the Master, taken from the 
Mdlinhujayottaratantra , is not an initiation, strictly speaking, but is quoted in 
order to contrast with putraka-diksd. 

The correct consecration into yoga of the Adept who desires enjoyments [is as follows]. In 
this [ceremony], after sacrificing to the god according to [the disciple's financial] means, 
[the gum] should light eight flawless lamps made of gold etc., after furnishing them with 
red wicks and with ghee. The [eight lamps] are to be worshipped according to the set of 
eight kula [goddesses]. Kulesvara and Kulesvari are also [to be worshipped] in the conch- 
shell’ full of the nectar of bliss. By using the aforesaid process of the ‘hand of 6iva [the 
gum] consecrates [the disciple] by using the [‘conch-shell']. Afterwards, the [Adept] 
should undertake mantra practice. 

The consecration of the Master is as follows. The [gum] who is qualified should set out for 
him sixty-four ‘lamps’ made with paste etc. The [‘lamps’] are to be worshipped according 
to the sixty-four [kula goddesses], Kulesvara and Kulesvari are [to be worshipped] in the 
centre as before. [The gum] also consecrates him as gum simply by means of what is called 
the ‘hand of Siva.’ 56 

In TA 29. 233-235, Abhinavagupta gives a form of consecration, taken from 
the Virdvalibhairava , which involves simple yogic projection. 

iv. Initiation-by-penetration ( vedha-diksd) 

There is a further form of initiation, which is developed uniquely in TA 29. 
Initiation-by-penetration is mentioned briefly in TA 24.i3b-i5 57 where it is used in 
order to secure the liberation of a dying or dead person. For example, at a certain 
moment in the ritual the corpse trembles or raises the left hand with the result 
that the bystander realises that liberation has occurred. This ritual is performed, 


55. 7X29.219. 

56. TA 29.226-229. 

57. This ritual is mentioned in a few other places such as TA 13.234^235 and Tantrasdra , 
PP-175-176- 



204 i TANTRAPU$PAftJALI 


therefore, in the context of doubt and in order to produce effects, i.e., specific 
enjoyments which can lead the bystander to conviction. 

In TA 2g.236ff. Abhinavagupta lists six types of initiation-by-penetration 
from the Gahvara and nine given by an unspecified group called 'some gurus.’ 
He notes that both the guru, who can perform all rituals, and the yogi who is 
particularly concerned with enjoyments, are qualified to perform vedha-diksd. 

The first, from the Gahvara, reads: 

He [first] meditates on the bundle of flames, which is described in his own scripture, a 
circle of eight beams of light etc. Because he [then] penetrates the circle of [his disciple’s] 
heart with it, this is ‘penetration by mantra.' 5 '’ 

In other words, the mantra, which is both aural and visual, is summoned up 
in the guru’s own mind and then projected into the inner being of the disciple 
who then experiences its effects. 

Another initiation-by-penetration is taken from the Viravalibhairava and 
reads: 

The disciple should sit before the guru. The [guru] should penetrate [him] ‘mouth’ to 
mouth,’ form to form, in various particular ways until [the disciple] becomes perfectly 
fused [with ultimate reality ]. 59 

At the end of the long list of such initiations which focus on just the disciple, 
Abhinavagupta describes the ritual that initiates all beings into Sivahood. This 
practice, performed by the disciple, involves a double motion: the outgoing 
awareness of all beings, and the subsequent identification of prana and apana, 
externality and intemality, so as to reach that point of origin from which all 
derives. In this way, all beings are brought into union with Siva. 

58 - TA 29.240^2413. 

59 - TA 29.273^2748. In her introduction to initiation-by-penetration, Silbum quotes 
from Kausitaki-Upanisad II.15 which describes the ceremony during which the 
dying father identifies himself with his son in every part of his body: “I want to put 
my voice in you, says the father. I receive your voice into myself, says the son. I want 
to place my breath in you, says the father. I receive your breath into myself, says the 
son. And so on for sight, hearing, taste, action, pleasure and suffering, procreation, 
conduct, and intellect”, Lilian Silbum, La kundalini, I’energie des profondeurs (Paris: 
Les Deux Oceans, 1983), pp.107-108. See also TA 28.296-298. 



THE WISDOM OF EXCESS j 205 


The external subtle-breath, which goes outside, which, taking on the form of darkness, has 
left through the pores, circulates through all the causal deities. After he has aimlessly made 
the [external subtle-breath] arrive at a centre, he causes it to [continue to] circulate. Then 
he 'emits.’ By increasing the union [of prana and apana ] he penetrates the five knots. He 
reflects on the central sacred place, which is the pairing of the modalities of the coupling 
[of prana and apana]. He does not focus on the combination of self or space or external 
reality or mind or body. This initiation grants the acquisition of the state of Siva to all living 
creatures."" 


PRACTICE (SADHANA) 

Abhinavagupta categorises the rituals for the initiate, described at length in TA 
2g.i8-i86a, into six groups or ‘sacrifices’ as follows: 

si. 18-23 The Daily Ritual ( nityapuja ) 

si. 24-55 Sacrifice 1, external ( bahih ) 

si 56-95 Sacrifice 2, based on the Sakti ( saktau ) 

si. g6-i66a Sacrifice 3, based on the pair (yamale) 

si. i66b-i77 Sacrifice 4, based on the body ( dehe) 

si. 178-180 Sacrifice 5, based on the subtle-breath ( prane ) 

si. i8i-i86a Sacrifice 6, based on the mind ( matau) 

In this short presentation we must confine ourselves to the Daily Ritual 
(slokas 18-23), which gives the essence of all the other rituals. Its longer form is 
Sacrifice 1 (slokas 25-55). 

The Daily Ritual: 

(sloka 18-23 are given first in translation. My commentary then follows.) 

sloka 18 After entering the hall of sacrifice rich with perfume and incense, 
facing north-east, by means of Para or Malini, upwards and 
downwards, 61 he should 

sloka 19 perform the cleansing which consists of ‘fire’ and ‘growth,’ ‘burning’ 
and ‘cooling’ respectively, in due order. Or else [he may do this] with 
the mantra Matrsadbhava. 

sloka 20 If he wishes to perform an initiation, [the mantra] is then ritually 
installed on the pathway to be purified. 

60. TA 2g.278b-28i. 

61. TA 15.121-1253 gives the procedure in detail, in the direction of emanation, from the 
tuft of hair to the feet. See also Tantrasara, p. 199. 






2o6 i TANTRAPUSPANJALI 


Next, by means of sakti alone' " he should bestow immortality on the 
articles to be purified. 

sloka 2i [Malini] enclosed by Para; or [Malini] enclosed even by 
Matrsadbhava]; or Malini by itself: these are the [distributions of 
Malini] in all ritual actions. 

sloka 22 Let him fill the vessel with ingredients, which are the fruit and the 
causes of joy. At that point, through an identity with the mantra 
that has been mentioned, he should bring himself to the state of 
Bhairava. 

sloka 23 Consequently, he should satiate the self with its multitude [of 
goddesses] in the circle and sub-circle, externally by sprinkling 
drops upwards and downwards, and internally by drinking. 

My commentary; 

L The context 

The place of ritual is filled with items pleasing to the senses, such as flowers and 
incense, for they will stimulate the practitioner (sloka 18a), as will even more so 
the substances in the cup to be mentioned in sloka 22a. 

In the symbolism of the ritual, the east represents life and its multiple 
enjoyments, for that is where the sun rises to make its varied course across the 
sky. The north, where the sun never goes, represents that which transcends life, 
and therefore the realm of liberation. By facing north-east, the practitioner 
shows that he is ‘liberated-while-living’ (Jivanmukti). 

The ritual is directed to the lineage of the Perfected Beings ( sicldha) of the 
Kula tradition in union with their wives ( patni ). 63 They are the expressions of the 
god and goddess from whose eternal intercourse the universe springs. 


iL Divinisation: 

The human body represents the universe. The practitioner begins the ritual by 
regenerating himself and the universe by means of the great mantras of the Kula 


62. The term ‘sakti’ is to be understood as ‘ rudrasakti ,’ which is Malini enclosed by Para, 
or Malini enclosed by Matrsadbhava. 

63. Cf. TA 29.2. 




THE WISDOM OF EXCESS j 207 


tradition, which are the phonic form of the goddess and are imbued with all her 
powers (sloka i8b-ig). 

The phonic form of Para is SAUH. Malini consists of the fifty phonemes of the 
Sanskrit alphabet in mingled fashion, such that the vowels, which represent Siva 
or seed, and the consonants, which represent sakti or the womb, are united. Malini 
is essentially sexual in nature. Its abbreviated form NA-PHA consists of the first 
and last phonemes of the mingled set. Malini has, therefore, a more emanative 
character. The term matrsadbhava can mean either “the essence of the mother" 
or the “essence of the one who knows.” In either case it refers to the ultimate 
origin of things. By reciting the phonic form of Matrsadbhava, KHPHREM, the 
practitioner acquires the consciousness of the supreme reality, independent of 
its manifestations. In this way Matrsadbhava has a more reabsorptive quality. 64 

The relationship between the practitioner and the mantra resembles 
that between the initiating guru and the mantra during initiation. That is, the 
practitioner does not involve his personal will ( iccha ) separately from the will 
of the goddess. On the contrary, in both cases, there is fusion ( samarasya ) or 
identity between the agent and the goddess. The practitioner using the mantra 
(,mantrl ) and the mantra itself are never separate, just as Siva and his sakti are 
never separate ( anavacchinna ). The practitioner has submitted to the goddess 
and she in turn submits to him. They are one. 

The practitioner experiences reabsorption ( samhara ) into pure 
consciousness by the process of ‘burning’ from the tip of the big toe to the tuft of 
his hair on his head, for he is being consumed in the fire of consciousness. That is, 
by placing the mantra on his body ( nyasa ) he is progressively being reabsorbed. 
He is then refashioned by the opposite process of ‘cooling’ or emanation (srsti), 
likewise by a process of installing the mantra. He and the universe are thus 
wholly regenerated. 

There are two basic categories of ‘pathways’ (adhvan) which constitute the 
basic structure of reality. The pathway of time ( kala-adhvan ) is based on the 

64. The goddess Matrka consists of the fifty phonemes of the Sanskrit alphabet arranged 
in their usual order from A to KSA. Her abbreviated form, A-KSA, likewise consists 
of the first and last phonemes of the alphabet. They represent and reproduce the 
emanation of the whole cosmos. She appears in Sacrifice 1 which is an extended 
form of the Daily Ritual. 





208 j tantrapu$pAnjali 


subtle breath; the pathway of space ( desa-adhvan ) is based on bodily forms. 
While the ‘burning’ and ‘cooling’ cover all pathways, there is provision at this 
point to emphasise one or other of them ( sloka 20a). 

Just as the practitioner regenerates himself, he also consecrates the ritual 
articles, such as flowers and the ingredients of the vessel.'’ 5 Otherwise they would 
be inappropriate for the ritual. This is done simply, by means of just a mantra and 
without any action ( sloka 20b). 

“Malinl enclosed by Para” is SAUH-NA-PHA-SAUH. "Malinl enclosed by 
Matrsadbhava” is KHPHREM-NA-PHA-KHPHREM. “Malinl by itself" is NA-PHA. 
The central mantra NA-PHA is the focus of this ritual, being enclosed ( samputita) 
by the other mantras ( sloka 21). Let us remember that Abhinavagupta considers 
his Tantraloka to be a gloss on the Mdlincvijayottaratantra 

He prepares the vessel with its three “M’s” (makdras): b ~ namely mamsa, meat; 
madya, wine; and maithuna, which is sexual union, or, by extension, the sexual 
fluids which result from it (iloka 22a). 

It must be first noted that the Kula ritual, which involves actual sexual 
intercourse ( maithuna) or the substances which arise from it, is for those 
who have already been initiated. This also applies to the other two “M’s,” meat 
(mamsa) and wine (madya), a point alluded to in TA 29.99 and noted at length 
by Jayaratha in his commentary on that sloka, where he provides this quotation: 

Without a guru, without a deity, like dullards, O ParameSvari, forever consuming wine and 
meat, they are ‘bound animals.’ There is no doubt about it. 

And then comments: 

... the [set of three “M’s”] is to be utilised by the person who has entered upon the Kula path 
for the reason that he is in every way committed simply to manifesting his own bliss. [The 
set of three “M’s”] is not [to be utilised] out of greed. If that were the case, how would [the 
use of the three “M’s”] differ from worldly usages? 68 


65. U4Pvol.7, p. 3307. 

66. Ztfi.17. 

^e Kula ritual uses only three M’s, whereas other tantric rituals add two more: fish 
(matsya) and parched grain ( mudra ). 

68. TAV vol. 7, p. 3357. 



THE WISDOM OF EXCESS | 209 


In other words, the three “M’s" are not a means to achieve a consciousness 
that does not yet exist but a way of expressing what is already present. The 
consciousness provided by the duti in Sacrifice 3 is the enhancement or external 
expression of the consciousness already experienced in initiation, whether 
that initiation be directly from the goddess or from the guru. The Daily Ritual is 
likewise performed from enlightened consciousness. 

These substances are reprobate, as a quotation given by Jayaratha in his 
commentary on TA 29.10 states: 

This lineage [of the Perfected Beings] is to be worshipped with ingredients that are both 
hated by people and forbidden according to the scriptures, that are both disgusting and 
despised. 

The contrast with the agreeable substances such as perfume and incense 
mentioned in sloka 18 is intentional. The Daily Ritual involves both beauty and 
horror, just as it involves what is forbidden and what is permitted. The non¬ 
dualist mind rejects such divisive concepts and shows it by intentionally using 
irreconcilable opposites. The practitioner has no regard for the categories of pure 
and impure, pleasant or unpleasant, which are mental constructs. He transcends 
such divisions for he is identified with absolute consciousness itself. 

Of these, the last, sexual fluid, is by far the most important. The cup contains, 
therefore, the meat and wine, which lead to congress, and the sexual fluid, which 
results from congress. 

The cup ( patra) represents the whole domain of bliss: all that leads to it and 
all that results from it. Indeed, the contents of the cup are not adharmika but 
pure and purifying. 

The cup both symbolises all that the practitioner is and enables him to 
become in fact what he is in essence. Should he have lost, for any reason, his 
sense of Sivahood, the cup and its contents will restore it. This happens, for 
example, in the concluding rites when the disciple once again consumes the 
oblation (earn) should he have ‘sinned’ either through underestimating (defect) 
or overestimating (excess) the identity of the self with the Self. As Abhinavagupta 
states, “The ritual which is ‘defective’ or ‘excessive’ is indeed a sin. This [ritual of 
eating the oblation] is said to be ‘the ceasing of [sin]’.” 69 


69. Zri 29.283. 







210 tantrapuspAnjali 


By means of the mantra, the practitioner has regenerated himself as Bhairava, 
the fearsome form of Siva, and now proceeds to use the fearsome substances of 
the cup (sloka 22b). 

iiL Action 

He now performs the act of sprinkling, which has a range of meanings. It refers 
in the first instance to the emanation of the universe, which proceeds from the 
bliss of Bhairava in union with his sakti. Secondly it refers to the reabsorption of 
the universe: it is a work of satiation ( tarpana ), for the human being consists of 
circles ( cakra ) and sub-circles ( anucakra ), which interlock, one leading to the 
other. The various faculties, or rather the goddesses of the faculties, seek their 
objects so as to be satisfied and rest content. By providing them with substances 
both fearsome and blissful, they are satisfied, and since the lower circles are 
organically linked to higher circles and ultimately to consciousness, the Self is 
satiated. The practitioner, Bhairava, thus rests in peace, fulfilled (sloka 23). 

This essential procedure is at the heart of all the ritual practices of TA 29. 
For example, Jayaratha quotes TA 29.23 in his commentary on TA 29.109a, so that 
‘circle,’ ‘sub-circles’ and ‘satiate’ are given to mean ‘the sexual organ,’ 'the sexual 
zones’ and ‘sexual activity.’ Indeed, this basic pattern is quite simply the pattern 
of vibration (spanda) or the cycle of emission (srsti) and reabsorption (sarnhdra) 
of the universe. Moreover, since the purpose of the ritual practices is to reach the 
state of supreme Bhairava “ever unattached, liberated-while-living,""' the essence 
of the procedure is ideally experienced in every situation. 

The following quotation comes from Abhinavagupta’s description of 
Sacrifice 2, but it is equally applicable to the Daily Ritual, which is the essence of 
all the Kula rituals. 

Moreover, having by his own nature become the sole lord of the kula, he should satiate the 
many saktis by pairing [with them], he who possesses every form. 72 


70. See the well-known and ancient ritual of offering fruit and incense to the deity 
present in the external image. 

71. TA 29.162a. 

72. TA 29.79. 



THE WISDOM OF EXCESS i 211 


CONCLUSION 

Wisdom and excess go together: that is the essential point of the Kula ritual. 
But what wisdom, which excess? In Brahmanical eyes, the practices of the Kula 
are a grave infringement of the dharma as set out, for example, in The Laws of 
Manu. For the Kula practitioner, by contrast, the wisdom of the Vedas is at best 
just the beginning of wisdom, for he knows a higher truth which rises above all 
constrictions and categories. He seeks to be free precisely by entering into the 
forbidden and the impure proscribed by the traditional dharma. He uses the 
prohibitions to demonstrate his freedom from prohibitions. He uses excess so 
as to show that he transcends excess. He is free from illusion, master of his own 
desires, not constrained by fear; he is equal in pain or pleasure, beauty or horror. 
He rejects the categories of good and evil, the licit and illicit. He is free. 

However, the Kula practitioner is not foolish in the ways of the ignorant who 
confuse licentiousness with freedom, mindlessness with universal consciousness, 
as do some misguided forms of twentieth- and twenty-first-century tantrism. 
Those who follow false teaching on the tantra will succumb to the fate mentioned 
by Abhinavagupta: “absorption by a Pisaca demon.” 73 This article is an attempt to 
counter some such misguided presentations of the Kula. 

It is this kaula perception of transcendent freedom and universal 
consciousness which leads Abhinavagupta, philosopher, poet, and mystic, to 
prefer the Kula prakriya. By performing this Daily Ritual and the other rituals of 
the Kula tradition, the practitioner, initiated into the tradition by an authentic 
guru, expresses his ‘Bhairavic attitude’ ( bhairava-mudra) whereby the inner and 
the outer coincide. External reality is a projection of his inner being and the 
outer world is a revelation of his inmost self. To see the one is to see the other. All 
is one. All is his veiy self. Each thought, word and deed is a Kula sacrifice- 4 when 
performed by the Kula hero ( kula-vlra) who isjcvan-mukta, ‘liberated-while-living. 


73. TA 29.239a. 
74- Cf. 7X29.6. 










212 | tantrapuspAnjali 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Abhinavagupta. Paratrisikavivarana. Translated by J. Singh, edited by B. Baumer. Delhi: 
Motilal Banarsidass, 1988. 

Abhinavagupta. Tantrasdra. Delhi: Bani Prakashan, 1982. 

Abhinavagupta. Tantraloka with the Commentary of Jayaratha. Edited by R.C. Dwivedi and 
N. Rastogi. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1987. 

Dupuchejohn. Abhinavagupta: the Kula Ritual as elaborated in Chapter 29 of the Tantraloka. 
Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 2003. 

Gnoli, Raniero . Luce delle sacre scritture, (Tantraloka ). Torino: Unione Tipografico-Editrice 
Torinense, 1972. 

Padoux, Andr 4 . La Paratrlsikalaghuvrtti de Abhinavagupta. Paris: E. de Boccard, 1975. 

Sanderson, Alexis. “The Visualisation of the deities of the Trika." In L’lmage Divine , edited 
by A. Padoux, 31-88. Paris: Editions du Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, 
1990 . 

Sanderson, Alexis. “Meaning in Tantric Ritual.” In Essais sur le rituel III: Colloque du 
centenaire de la section des sciences religieuses de lEcole Pratique des Hautes Etudes 
(Vol. 3), edited by A.-M. Blondeau and K. Schipper, 15-95. Louvain-Paris: Peeters, 
1995 . 

Sanderson, Alexis. “A Commentary on the Opening Verses of the Tantrasdra of 
Abhinavagupta.” In Samarasya, Studies in Indian Arts, Philosophy and Interreligious 
dialogue in Honour of Bettina Baumer, edited by Sadananda Das and Ernst Fiirlinger, 
89-148. Delhi: D.K. Printworld, 2005. 

Silbum, Lilian. Hymnes de Abhinavagupta. Paris: E, de Bocard, 1970. 

Silbum, Lilian. La kundalini, I’energie des profondeurs. Paris: Les Deux Oceans, 1983. 

Urban, Hugh. Tantra: Sex, Secrecy, Politics and Power in the Study of Religion. Berkeley: 
University of California Press, 2003. 



Section Two 


PHILOSOPHY 









The Body and Consciousness in 
Early Pratyabhijna Philosophy: 
Amurtatva in Somananda's Sivadrsti 

John Nemec 

I. INTRODUCTION 

cidakasamaye svarige visva lekhyavidh ay in e 
sarvadbliutodbliavabhuve namo visamacaksuse. 

- Sivadrsttvrttt ($DVr) of Utpaladeva 

Homage to the Three-eyed [Siva], the source of the generation of all marvelous things, the 
one who creates the portrait of the universe on his own body ( svahga ), which is made of 
the ether of consciousness ( cidakasamaya ). 

I must admit to having read this mangala verse, not only in Benares in 2002 with 
my teacher and friend, Pandit Hemen Chakravarty, but literally dozens of times 
in the last years, all without giving too much thought to the image presented 
in it, prior to preparing my comments for this volume. I had not taken proper 
note of the paradox, not to say contradiction, presented herein. That is, how are 
we to understand Utpaladeva when he suggests that Siva “creates the portrait 
of the universe on his own body, which is made of the ether of consciousness ? 
What does it mean to say that the body is made up of consciousness? What, if 
anything, distinguishes the functioning of the body as it is habitually conceived 
from a body that is as it is described here? If it is nothing but Siva's consciousness, 
as this author and this tradition suggest, then what implications does this idea 
have for the religious practitioner? Does it affect his (or her) relation to the ritual, 
to notions of bodily purity, and the like? Are there practical consequences to 
conceiving of the body as consciousness? 



216 i tantrapuspAnjali 


I propose to address these questions by considering the philosophical (or, 
perhaps, theological) understanding of the body as it is found in the text which 
the work beginning with this mangala glosses, the Sivadr§ti of Somananda, the 
circa 900-950 ce/ad author who is the founder of the famed Pratyabhijna or 
“Recognition” School, is the teacher of Utpaladeva, and is the first in the lineage 
of teachers culminating with the great polymath Abhinavagupta. 

I wish to argue that Somananda is explicitly aware of the differences between 
a material body as it might be habitually conceived and a body-as-consciousness, 
and that he addresses the tension between mind (or, rather, consciousness) and 
body that Utpaladeva’s mangala invokes. In doing so, Somananda makes a strong 
case for the conceiving of Siva as an unequivocally disembodied, but thoroughly 
active and dynamic, agent. In particular, Somananda does so by arguing at some 
length that consciousness is amurta, immaterial or disembodied, and that Siva 
is possessed of an amurtatva, an immateriality, that also characterizes all of 
existence. 1 

In what follows, I will first consider the ways in which Somananda uses 
the terms amurta and amurtatva, which he deploys in particular in a series 
of arguments against the circa sixth-century Hindu Grammarian, Bhartrhari. 
Following this, I will briefly examine the ways in which Somananda suggests this 
disembodied Siva acts. Finally, I will conclude by briefly illustrating the degree to 
which his philosophy of disembodied action is reflected in the religious practices 
and social vision Somananda espouses in the Sivadrsti. Here I will show that 
Somananda diminishes the role of the body in both the spheres of ritual and of 
social action. 


1. Incidentally, the terms in question, amurta and amurtatva, while rather prevalent 
in Somanandas Sivadrsti, are nearly entirely absent from the writings of those 
who follow him. The terms are not used at all in the Isvarapratyabhijnakarika and 
Isvarapratyabhijnakarikavrtti of Somananda’s immediate disciple, Utpaladeva (c. 
9 2 5-975 CE )> who is probably the most accomplished philosopher in the history 
of the Pratyabhijna, nor do they appear in the I s va ra p ra ty a bhijnavimarsinl of 
Abhinavagupta (so far as I am aware), though they appear occasionally in Abhinava’s 
Isvarapratyabhijnavivrtivimarsinl in ways we unfortunately cannot explore here in 
any detail. 



THE BODY AND CONSCIOUSNESS IN EARLY PRATYABHIjNA PHILOSOPHY | 217 


II. SOMANANDA’S USE OF THE TERMS AMURTA AND AMURTATVA 

Somananda first invokes the concept of amurtatva when arguing against the 
circa sixth-century Hindu Grammarian, Bhartrhari. In particular, he criticizes a 
description of the divine offered by that author in yet another mangala verse, 
this one from Bhartrhari’s Saddhatusamlksa, a.k.a. the Sabdadhatusamlksa, one 
that incidentally is identical to the opening stanza of Bhartrhari’s Nltisataka. The 
verse reads: 


dikkaladyanavacchinnanantacinmatramurtaye 
svanubhutyekamanaya namah santaya tejase. 

Homage to the one whose form is pure, endless consciousness, which is not limited by 
space, time, etc., to the one of whom the only means of knowledge is one’s own experience, 
the one who is peaceful, to (the one in the form of) energy. 

It is critically summarized by Somananda at $D 2.73cd-74ab, as follows: 

dikkaladilaksanena vyapakatvam vlhanyate 
$D 2.74, avasyam vyapakoyo hi sarvadiksu sa vartate. 

Omnipresence is destroyed by spatial, temporal, and other attributes, for the one who 
pervades necessarily exists everywhere. 

Now, the mangala is clearly written in a devotional mode, but Somananda 
chooses polemically to criticize it on what are at bottom philosophical grounds: 

svanubhutir vartamanakalendsya vibhayyate. 

$D 2.75. evam kalanavacchedah katham asyodito hi taih 
anantasyanubhutih ka paricchedam vinatmanah. 

§D 2.76. anante *vagamah kutra tejastve santata katham 
asarvagapramanam hi murtir no Laksyate citah. 

The experience one has of it appears in the present. Thus, how can they say that it is not 
limited by time? What experience can there be of the endless [Brahman] without its being 
divided? Where is there understanding in an endless entity? If it is energy, then how can it 
be peaceful? After all, consciousness does not appear as having a limited measure 2 or as a 
material form. 3 

2. Note that Utpaladeva glosses °pramana in SD 2.76c with °parimana t and my 
translation here follows his gloss. 

3. Cf. Utpaladeva's commentary on 2.74cd-76: upacare ca kim prayojanam. 
asarvagatadravyaparimanam murtih kathinyam va na cid bhavati, tat katham 
cinmurtaya iti. “And what is the use of figurative speech? Consciousness is not a 




218 ! TANTRAPUSPASiJALI 


Somananda here deploys a number of critiques, challenging the 
Grammarians’ understanding of time, their conception of the unity and ubiquity 
of the purportedly monistic divine, and their contradictor}' understanding of 
the nature of the divine, it supposedly being simultaneously both energetic and 
peaceful. 

Most importantly, however, at least for the purposes of this essay, is the tact 
that Somananda ultimately suggests that all of these critiques may be levied 
against Bhartrhari because he, too, understands the divine to be made up of 
consciousness—Bhartrhari is an idealist and a monist, as is Somananda—, while 
he further suggests that their respective views differ insofar as consciousness, 
for Somananda, cannot properly be understood to have a (discernible) material 
form. That is, Somananda criticizes Bhartrhari for understanding consciousness 
to operate in a manner similar to that of a physical body. (Note that Utpaladeva 
helpfully glosses murti with kathinya, suggesting that Somananda, in saying 
that consciousness does not appear as a murti —in saying, in effect, that it is 
amurta —, means to suggest that consciousness is not a “solid” entity.) It is, in 
fact, of an altogether different, and indeed disembodied, nature. 

Somananda elsewhere makes the case for just such a disembodied 
consciousness, this in §D 2.53-54, where he argues that the amurtatva of 
consciousness prohibits it from behaving analogously to a material entity. The 
context of this passage again relates to Somananda’s arguments contra Bhartrhari. 
He argues, in rejecting a somewhat morbidly themed counter-argument, that the 
divine cannot self-divide into parts that are distinguishable as agent of action, 
object of action, instrument, etc. This is so because the divine, being nothing but 
consciousness, is amurta, not a material entity. 

SD 2.53. atmanam atmana hanti devadattoyathd tatha 
bhavisyaty atra tatrdsya svahgair eva vibhagita. 

SD 2.34. hastadeh karanatvam hi mastakades ca karmatd 
kartd manahsvdvayavi ndmu.rtd.yd idam punah. 

(Opponent’s Argument:) Just as Devadatta kills himself by means of himself, so it is here. 
(Somananda’s Reply:) Under those circumstances, he is divided by his own limbs, for the 
hand, etc., is the instrument of the action, and the head, etc., is the object of the action. The 

substance of a limited measure, nor is it a material form, i.e., a solid entity. So, why 
do you say ‘(homage) to the one whose form is (pure, endless) consciousness?”’ 




THE BODY AND CONSCIOUSNESS IN EARLY PRATYABHIJNA PHILOSOPHY [ 219 


agent is the ‘self’ who has these limbs and (is connected with) the mind. This, however, is 
not the case for the immaterial (i.e., for the divine in the form of pasyanti, the ‘seeing' one). 

The rules, then, that define how a material entity may function simply 
cannot apply to consciousness, to 6iva-as-consciousness, even if Siva exists in 
the form of the universe. 

III. THE ACTIONS OF A “DISEMBODIED” SlVA 

How, then, does Siva—and the universe—function, in Somananda’s view? If 
Siva cannot function in the same manner as the suicidal Devadatta, then how 
does he operate? Simply, Siva, and with him the universe with which he is said 
to be identical, functions in a disembodied fashion. He functions like a yogin in 
concentration: 

&D 1.44. yoginam icchayayadvan nanarupopapattita 
na casti sadhanam kincin mrdddlccham vindprabhoh 
$D 1.45. tatha bhagavadicchaiva tathatvena prajayate 

Just as various forms can arise by the will of yogins, and there is no extrinsic means 
whatsoever, be it the clay (with which, e.g., a pot is formed) or something else, apart from 
the Lord’s will, in the same way, it is the Lord's will that arises as reality. 

Like a yogin, Siva creates whatever he desires, and knows what he wishes 
to know, intuitively and immediately. There are no extrinsic means whatever, 
apart from Siva’s will. A desire arises, immediately following which the wished- 
for object appears. The world simply appears as he wishes it. 4 

4. See SD 3.34b-d \yavatecchaivayadril / parasya tddrgdtmatvam utpadyetatrayogivat. 
“Here, (however,) like a yogin, the nature of the Supreme One arises as it does 
only in as much as he wills it to be so.” Cf. Utpaladeva's Vrtti on the same: tasya tu 
parasya yadrgatmatvam abhlstam tathavasthanam evotpattiryoginam tva. Instead, 
the nature of the Supreme One exists simply as a condition that accords with his 
wishes, as is the case with that which yogins create.” Note that I accept the reading 
of three manuscripts at SD 3.34b, where the KSTS edition reads yavatas caiva before 
correction and tasya cecchaiva in the list of corrections at the end of the published 
edition. Similarly, I read parasya at &D 3.34c* which is found in the corrected reading 
of the KSTS edition, though prior to correction the text reads sivasya in place of 
parasya. A full accounting of the variant readings is offered in John Nemec, 2011, The 
Ubiquitous Siva: Somananda’s Sivadrsti and His Tantric Interlocutors , New York and 
Oxford: Oxford University Press, p. 367. 





220 j tantrapuspAnjali 


There are, as it were, no moving parts in the functioning of Siva’s will. There 
is no real transformation of some entity in the performance of any action. 

&D 3-35- icchaya sarvabhavatvam anekatmatvam eva ca 
natra svatmavikarena janayed bhavamandaiam 
§D3.36 . tadicchasamanantarye tathabhutdtmatd yatah 

Omnipresence and multiplicity of nature exist by means of will. It is not the case here 
that [Siva] produces the universe by transforming himself, since his nature is as it is in 
immediate conformity with his will. 

All activity is merely the expression of divine will, envisioned in 
consciousness, with immediate effect. (So, incidentally, Somananda is a self- 
professed satkaryavadin , but fully an idealist one.) And as we see in the extended 
explanation of Utpaladeva’s commentary on §D 3.35~36ab, action in this view is 
not similar to mundane, embodied activity; it does not take place in stages, as for 
example when a potter produces a pot. 5 Rather, creation is unembodied, because 
it is the product not of Siva-the-agent's material form (of which there is, in effect, 
none), but of his consciousness. 

Indeed, all the universe is said to be thus. It is not merely Siva but all 
phenomena within the universe that behave in this manner, as is expressed in 
SD 5 - 4 cd- 5 ab: 


icchavantah sarva eva vyapakas ca samastakah. 

5-5 a b- amurtas ca tatha sarve sarvejndnakriyatmakah. 

5. See SDVr ad SD 3.35-36ab: yatha yoginam sarvabhavatvam iccayanekatmatvam 
va bhavatltlstam, tatha paramesvarasyapi mantavyam. na hy asau yogi svatmano 
mrtpindasyeva sibikastupakadirupa-vikaraparinamakramena kumbhakara iva 
ghatam iva bhavamandalam janayati, apt tu yasya yadrslccha tatsamanantaram 
westakaryatmabhildsatmataya sthitih, tatha cidatmano 'pi. “Just as he maintains 
that, for yogins, omnipresence, as well as multiplicity of nature, comes into 
existence by means of (their) will, so he understands the same for the Supreme 
Lord, as well. For the yogin does not produce the universe out of his own self in 
the manner that the one who appears to be a potter produces what appears to be a 
pot out of what appears to be a ball of clay—in stages, by the real transformation, 
the modification of form, sibika, stupaka, etc. It is rather that there exists a certain 
desire for something, which, immediately following it, exists as the nature of the 
(yogins) desire: the wished-for object. It is the same for the one whose nature is 
consciousness, as well.” 



THE BODY AND CONSCIOUSNESS IN EARLY PRATYABHIjM PHILOSOPHY | 221 


Absolutely everything is possessed of will and pervades everything else. And everything is 
thus devoid of material form ( amurta ); everything consists of cognition and action. 

Everything is possessed of will and everything mutually penetrates 
everything else. That is, everything is devoid of material form, is amurta , and 
consists merely in Siva’s powers of will, cognition, and action. 6 Indeed, volition 
and therefore agency exists ubiquitously, even in apparently inanimate objects, 
as, for example, a pot. 7 “Cognizing itself as the agent, the pot performs its own 
action. If it were not aware of its own agency, the pot would not be present.” 8 
This is what it means for Siva to be ubiquitous, in Somananda’s system: Siva is 
omnipresent, and behaves in precisely the same manner everywhere and always, 
whether as creator of the universe, a monadic agent, or—astonishingly—as the 
humble water-pot itself. 

The crucial point is that all the powers, functioning as they do, cause reality to 
appear, but do so instantaneously, as a yogin conjures images in his consciousness 


6. One should note that the passage just referred to, SD 5.4cd-sab, makes reference 
to the famed triad of powers that are a well-known dimension of the Trika: will 
or icchdy cognition or jfidna, and action or kriya. Less well known is the fact that 
Somananda is the first of any of the Saiva post-scriptural authors of Kashmir 
explicitly to refer to this triad of powers (which, incidentally, Utpaladeva does not 
invoke in his IPK or its short auto-commentary). There is no space here to enter into 
a survey of how Somananda understands this triad to function as a vortex of a cycle 
of powers, operating simultaneously as well as sequentially. Suffice it to say here 
that he understands these myriad £aktis themselves to constitute the activity of the 
universe, and the power of desire or will ( icchd ) initiates and directs all of them. 
About this phenomenon, see: John Nemec, 2014, “The Evidence for Somananda s 
Pantheism,” in Proceedings of the 15th World Sanskrit Conference, New Delhi , ed. by 
Lyne Bansat-Boudon and Judit Torzsok, Journal of Indian Philosophy 42.1, pp. 99 -U 4 - 

7. Everything begins with the desire or will of an agent— the agent, Siva to act, and 
it is Siva who is everywhere and always this self-same agent of action. Somananda, 
moreover, argues this point in the extreme, such that Torella referred to his position 
as an “extreme formulation.” See Raffaele Torella, 19941 The isvarapratyabhijnakarika 
of Utpaladeva, with the Author’s Vrtti: Critical Edition and Annotated Translation , 
Rome: IsMEO, p. xxviii. 

8. See SD 5.16: janan kartaram atmanam ghatah kuryat svakam kriyam / ajhate 
svatmakartrtve na ghatah sampravartate. Cf. SD 1.23 and the Vrtti on the same; cf. 
also SD 3.62. 




222 j tantrapuspAnjali 


while in a concentrated state of awareness. There is, in sum, an agent who acts— 
indeed, agency is enshrined in Somananda’s (somewhat unique) insistence on 
the primacy of wilt —but the agent acts out the creation of the universe in his 
own consciousness and is utterly disembodied. 

IV. IMPLICATIONS FOR RELIGIOUS PRACTICE AND SOCIAL VISION 

Finally, we consider briefly the practical implications of Somananda’s 
understanding of action as disembodied. They are of two kinds: first, he denies 
the validity of notions of purity, in particular as they relate to caste. Second, he 
understands religious practice in a manner that de-emphasizes the role of the 
body 

Regarding the first: Somananda simply denies that purity and impurity exist 
beyond the conventions related to them. He expresses this idea in the form of a 
counter-argument from an opponent, who argues that purity and impurity must 
exist if rites are prescribed in Saiva scripture for the purification of fire. 

3.46. ...athocyeta vahneh samskdracodand 
sastresu varnita kasmat karyartham kdryam eva tat. 

3.47a. nasvarupavibhago 'tra... 

Objection: injunctions involving the (purificatory) rites of passage for the (sacred) fire are 
explained in the (Saiva) teachings. (Reply:) What is the goal of the action (i.e., of performing 
these rites)? It is the action itself. There is no division of his (i.e., of Siva’s) nature, here.'* 


9. See Utpaladeva’s commentary on the same passage, as well: atha vahner yacty 
asuddhata na syat tat tasya kuto mantraih samskarayogah karyasampadanartham 
sastre codyeta tasmat tasyasuddhata sambhavet. naivarn kdryam evanustheyam eva 
tad vyavaharaya na tu svarupe vahner vibhagah, svarupe nijarupe sthite tu vahnav 
upagamyamanetatsvarupatavahnirupataiva sarvatra. “Objection: If a fire (installed 
in an outcaste s home) cannot be (understood to be) impure, then it is inexplicable 
why the rites of passage, replete with the mantras, are enjoined to it in the (Saiva) 
teaching(s), this for the purpose of accomplishing their (purifying) effect; thus, it 
must be possible that [the outcaste’s fire] can be impure. (Reply:) Not so. The rite 
itself is established simply for the purposes of everyday life, but there is no change 
in the nature of the fire. Rather, it being established that fire is fixed in its nature, 
i.e., in its own form, the fact of having that nature, i.e., the very fact of being fire, 
exists in every instance (of fire).” Note that I read codyeta where the KSTS edition 
reads codyate. See Nemec, op. cit., p. 373 for further details. 



THE BODY AND CONSCIOUSNESS IN EARLY PRATYABHIJNA PHILOSOPHY | 223 


Isn’t the fire installed in the candala's, the outcaste’s, home impure? Doesn’t 
the ritual fire need purification so as to prepare it for its sanctified uses? No, 
Somananda declares. All of the requisite rites of passage are described only for 
conventional, everyday use, for vyavaharci , as Utpaladeva’s commentary suggests. 
And a fire is what it is, as everything is merely a part of Siva’s consciousness. 
Nothing is inherent in a fire that is set in a candala’s house that renders it impure, 
for purity and impurity are mere conventions. The rituals are performed for the 
sake of ritual, and not for any other reason. 

Second, Somananda clearly articulates an understanding of religious 
practice that does not need the body; or, rather, the practices he describes de- 
emphasize the role of the body therein . 10 In particular, the seventh chapter of the 
Sivadrsti parallels the Vijndnabhairava (a well-known Trika scripture that is said 
to be a part of the Rudrayamalatantra and that details a series of dharanas, or 
exercises in concentration) in re-envisioning tantric practice such that the (fully 
embodied) “visionary experiences” emphasized in tantric scripture are replaced 
with practices that instead emphasize liberating knowledge or jnana. In fact, 
both works ask the practitioner to interiorize religious practice—to “disembody 
them—, but the Vijndnabhairava regularly emphasizes entrance into a state free 
of distinction and conceptualization, while the Sivadr§ti emphasizes the identity 
of the agent and his actions with Siva himself. 

While Somananda deals (albeit briefly) with all the various forms of religious 
practice—including bathing ( snana ), fire worship ( homa ), mantra repetition 
(japa ), worship ( pujana ), and the visualization ( dhyana ) I here highlight only 
three: snana, pujana, and homa. Regarding the first, Somananda says that the 
only bath that counts is immersion of oneself in the thought “I am Siva : We 


10. Alexis Sanderson has shown that Abhinavagupta’s writings evince a turn toward 
abstract contemplation in preference to ordinary tantric worship; and he has 
further argued that Abhinava grounded this turn away from body-centered, tantric 
practices toward abstract contemplation on the same Vijndnabhairava. Here, 
we note parallels with Abhinavagupta’s paramesthigu.ru Somananda. See Alexis 
Sanderson, 1990, “The Visualization of the Deities of the Trika,’’ in L’image divine: 
Culte et meditation dans I’hinduisme, ed. by Andre Padoux, Paris: Editions du CNRS, 
p. 76. 


224 ! tantrapuspAnjali 


maintain that the mental delight of thinking i am Siva' is the supreme water- 
bath ” 11 As for pujana t he suggests Siva gains no satisfaction from the practitioner’s 
worship, as there is no fault in failing to perform the pujds. u Finally, the homa : the 
fire sacrifices are nothing but the awareness of one’s identity with a supremely 
delighted Siva . 13 In sum, and as is well known, the non-dual Saiva tantrics did not 
think physical practices were necessary (though often they were desirable) for 
those who wished to gain liberating insight, and moksa. 

CONCLUSION 

Somananda offers a remarkably consistent, if somewhat idiosyncratic, view of 
existence. It is all action, with Siva as the agent, but it is thoroughly disembodied. 
It is possessed of an amurtatva. The body as consciousness is an idea taken 
quite literally, and this notion impinges on both philosophy and practice. 
Consciousness is said not to be capable of performing as the body does, as a 
spatially divisible entity with various limbs, appendages. The physical form of 
an entity cannot serve as a repository of impurity, nor is the body—or embodied 
action indispensable to the religious practitioner. 

In sum: we have all heard so much of the body in tantric practice, from the 
consumption of transgressive substances, to tantric sex with hordes of yoginls , 
to any number of other (perhaps transgressive but surely embodied) ideas and 
ideals. At the same time, we have heard (extensively) about the philosophical 
non dualism of tantric philosophy. In outlining the philosophical-theological 
views of a sem inal “Kashmiri Saiva” thinker, I hope I have highlighted a 

11. See SD 7.89ab: sivo smlti manohlado jalasnanam param matam. Note the similarity 
with Vijhanabhairava 152: svatantranandacinmatrasarah svatma hi sarvatah / 
avesanam tatsvarupe svatmanah sndnam iritam. 

12 * ^ ee 7 - 9 2 cd. pujanan nasti me tustir ndsti khedo hy apujanat. “I am not satisfied 
by worship, for no affliction results from the failure to worship.” Note the similarity 
to Vijhdnabhairava 147: puja nama na puspadyairya matih kriyate drdha / nirvikalpe 
pare vyomni sa puja hy adaral layah. 

13. See &D 7.91: so ham stvah sutrpto ’smi homa ity uditah parah / atrakdre nayan me 
sti tad akarantare 'sti me. "I am Siva, (and) I am completely delighted; this is what 
is spoken of as the supreme ‘homa'. What does not exist here in one form of mine 
exists in another form of mine.” Note the similarity with Vijhdnabhairaya 149: 
mahasunyalaye vahnau bhutaksavisayadikam / huyate manasa sardham sa homas 
cetanasruca. 



THE BODY AND CONSCIOUSNESS IN EARLY PRATYABHIJNA PHILOSOPHY j 225 


fundamental question in thinking about the tantric body, namely, of which 
tantric body is one thinking? The body that is a means, often transgressive? 
Or the body as represented in tantric philosophy (or at least some strands of 
tantric philosophy), where embodied practice is regularly marginalized (even if 
no other tantric philosopher quite follows Somananda to the extreme view of 
understanding the physical body to be utterly absent)? There are, in a word, real 
differences in the various tantric conceptions of the body. I believe Somananda’s, 
however, to be nearly unique insofar as he presents us with a vision of action that 
is at once driven fully and completely by the will of a divine agent, Siva, and, at 
the same time, is literally and completely disembodied in its form and manner 
of functioning. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Nemec, John. 2011. The Ubiquitous Siva: Somananda's Sivadrsti and His Tantric Interlocutors, 
New York and Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

-. 2014. "The Evidence for Somananda’s Pantheism.” In Proceedings of the 15th World 

Sanskrit Conference, New Delhi, ed. by Lyne Bansat-Boudon and Judit Torzsok. 
Journal of Indian Philosophy 42.1, pp. 99-114. 

-. “Realism and the Pratyabhijna: Influences on and Legacies of Somananda’s 

Conception of Materiality.” In Around Abhinavagupta: Aspects of Intellectual History 
of Kashmirfrom the Ninth to the Eleventh Century (Leipziger Studien zu Kultur und 
Geschichte Sud- und Zentralasiens 6), ed. by Eli Franco and Isabelle Rati 4 , Leipzig: 
LIT Verlag, 2016:339-371. 

Sanderson, Alexis. 1990. “The Visualization of the Deities of the Trika.” In L’image divine: 
Culte et meditation dans I’hinduisme. Ed. by Andre Padoux. Paris: Editions du CNRS, 
pp. 31-88. 

Torella, Raffaele. 1994. The Isvarapratyabhijnakarika of Utpaladeva, with the Author’s Vrtti: 
Critical Edition and Annotated Translation, Rome: IsMEO. 



A Brief Hermeneutical Note on 
Consciousness in Utpaladeva’s 
Pratyabhijna Texts 

Navjivan Rastogi 


This note is my humble homage to Hemen Da who always inspired me with 
his child-like innocent smile and deep penetrative insight. I am grateful to the 
editors for giving me this opportunity to pay my respects to his sacred memory. 

Before I begin, a note of caution seems called for. This being a “brief 
hermeneutical note,” the reader might feel disappointed if he or she finds the 
desired coherence and details missing or some doubts under-addressed. Nor 
is there any claim to present all aspects of the comprehensive speculation on 
consciousness in this system. This note is an improved and modified version of 
my paper written for the National Seminar on Consciousness organized by the 
Centre for Advanced Studies in Sanskrit, University of Pune, in September 2012. 

Kashmir Saivism, traditionally the Trika or Pratyabhijna school, is all 
about consciousness. Way back in 1905, Prof. K.C. Bhattacharya, in the course 
of propounding his conception of philosophy, subjectivity and the absolute, 
formulated consciousness in three alternative modes—knowing, feeling 
and willing—and conceived of an alternation of truth, value and reality as 
constitutive of the absolute. He himself termed his thesis as the "doctrine of 
trinal absolute.” 1 In 1934, Prof. T.R.V. Murti, in his article "Knowing, Feeling and 
Willing as Functions of Consciousness," brought out the implications of Prof. 
K.C. Bhattacharya’s doctrine, arguing that the alternative forms of the absolute 

1. Vide “Editor’s Introduction” and “The Concept of the Absolute and Its Alternative 
Forms” in Studies in Philosophy, Ilnd Volume, ed. Gopinath Battacharya (Calcutta: 
Progressive Publishers, 1958), pp. xxx-xxxi, 121-143. 



CONSCIOUSNESS IN UTPALADEVA’S PRATYABHIjM TEXTS j 227 


are essentially three modes or aspects of consciousness. In the first of these 
three models, the cognitive model, consciousness is knowing consciousness, and 
the precise function of the subject is to present the object as such as a datum 
free from subjective intervention. In the second model, it consists of the willing 
consciousness where the subject creates the object as its inner content. In the 
third model—consciousness as feeling—the subject and object, while facing 
one another, are not subordinated by either, yet remain intertwined. Prof. A.K. 
Chatterji continued this dialogue further in his article “Types of Absolutism: 
Buddhist and Non-Buddhist," where he sought to investigate the underlying 
links between these alternatives and the existing main strands of non-dualistic 
speculation. For him, the non-dualism of Sankara emerges as a representative 
version of the cognitive model, the subjective idealism of Yogacara of the 
willing model, and the acintyabhedabheda of Caitanya of the feeling model. 
Prof. Chatterji also included Bhartrhari’s Word-monism and the non-dualism of 
Kashmir Saivism under the second model, i.e., consciousness as willing. 2 

The basic point I want to make at this juncture is that K.C. Bhattacharyas 
main plank was the Advaita Vedanta of Sankara, despite the fact that his canvas 
was very comprehensive. This was also the case with T.R.V. Murti when he wrote 
his famous paper, though in his later days he became thoroughly conversant 
with Kashmir Saivism as well. A.K. Chatterji’s broad classification does show his 
insight into Kashmir Saivism. It would be a wild guess as to how the duo of K.C. 
Bhattacharya and T.R.V. Murti would have revisited their formulations today. But 
there is no doubt these reformulations would be radically different. For, Kashmir 
Saivists proclaim that the notion of consciousness in their understanding cannot 
be reduced to consciousness as willing alone; instead it must be complete, total 
and integral, in the sense that knowing, willing and feeling—though understood 
as discreet alternatives—are indeed inter-reducible modes seeking and realizing 
their meaningful fulfillment in one another. This is evidenced by the fact that the 
notion of rasa, representing the peak aesthetic experience embodied within the 
feeling mode of consciousness, seeks its metaphysical foundation in the willing 
mode of consciousness and its cognitive and epistemological analysis in the 
knowing mode of consciousness. 

2. Vide A.D. Sharma’s “Bhumika,” in Navjivan Rastogi, Abhinavagupta ka Tantragamcya 
Darsana (Sagar: Vishvavidyalaya Prakashan, 2012), pp. ix-x. 







228 j tantrapuspAnjali 


In the following lines, which are intended to give only an outline, the focus 
will be on Utpaladeva’s insights in his seminal philosophical texts, especially 
the Isvarapratyabhijndkdrikd and Isvarapratyabhijndkdrikd-vrtti in the light 
of Abhinavagupta's exposition. While discussing the notion of vimarsa , self- 
affirming awareness, Utpala presents two distinct, but complementary, direct 
theorizations of consciousness. In one, he identifies the Self with consciousness: 
atmata eva caitanyam . 3 In a dense hermeneutical analysis, caitanyam is first 
posited in terms of consciousness as dynamic activity by Abhinava. 4 In a related 
but slightly different formulation, it is presented as the activity of the conscious 
(i cetanakriya: cetanasya kriya , which is also open to be construed as cetand kriya , 
conscious activity). However, in both interpretations, citikriya (consciousness- 
activity) is ultimately equated with or reduced to the agency in consciousness 
(citikriya ca citau kartrta ), 5 and this defining characteristic demarcates the 
sentient from the insentient, i.e., the self from the not-self ( tena jadat sa hi 
vitaksanah). 6 

In the karika 7 that immediately follows this section of the IPK , we meet 
with an altogether novel and complex conceptualization presented through a 
two-fold strategy: first by definition and then by three reductionist equations. 
Consciousness, that is consciousness-activity according to Abhinava, is conceived 
of as pratyavamarsa , self-reflective consciousness, which is defined as the 


3* atmata eva caitanyam citkriyacitikartrta- / tatparyenoditas tena jadat sa hi 
vitaksanah // IPK 1.5.12. “Precisely for this reason the self has been defined as 
sentience, meaning by this the activity of consciousness in the sense of being the 
agent of this activity. Because, (it is) due to this (consciousness) that the self differs 
from insentient (reality).” The karika translations here and hereafter (except IPK 
1.7.1) represent a combination of those by K.C. Pandey and R. Torella with necessary 
editing and modification. 

4. citikriyarupam dharmam sambaddham avagamayata [...]/ IPV } I, p. 247 

5. Ibid, also the IPVrtti commentary on this section: sa cetanakriya citikartrtaiva / 

6. Vide fn. 3 above. 

7. citih pratyavamarsatma paravak svarasodita / svatantryam etan mukhyam tad 
aisvaryam paramatmanah // IPK 1.5.13. “Self-referential consciousness is the very 
essence of sentiency. It is the Supreme Speech that happens to be ever-arisen self- 
spontaneously. It is primary freedom. It is the sovereignty of the Supreme Self.” 



CONSCIOUSNESS IN UTPALADEVA’S PRATYABHIjM TEXTS | 229 


self-aestheticising essence of consciousness-activity, 8 technically designated as 
camatkara in Abhinava’s parlance. As a part of the second strategy, consciousness 
is equated in the first instance with self-spontaneous, self-arising Supreme Speech 
(svarasodita para vak), in the second with autonomy or freedom in the primary 
sense of the term ( mukhyam svatantryam) and in the third with the sovereignty 
of the Lord, that is, the Supreme Self ( aisvaryam paramatmanah). What is 
important to note is that in all these three equations it is not “consciousness” 
(citi) but rather “consciousness-as-self-reflective-awareness” ( svatmacamatkara - 
laksanah pratyavamarsah) that is sought to be explained. However, in his Vrtti, 
Utpala alters the whole stance of the karika by taking pratyavamarsdtmd citi as 
one with paravak and then projecting primordial supreme speech as constituting 
freedom in the absolute sense called sovereignty or lordliness ( aisvarya ). 9 In so 
doing, the subject in the karika is transposed as the predicate and vice versa 
in the Vrtti. Abhinava carries this exegesis to its logical end. By inventing a 
new term, sabdana (verbalizing), he now formulates pratyavamarsa as inner 
verbalization 10 not dependent upon any convention, a state of uninterrupted 
self-relishing which is the source and foundation of all such other thoughts 
as find expressions in phrases like “This is blue” and “I am Caitra,” which draw 
their sustenance from the use of conventional words. u Thus there is implicit in 
it a reference to the ground pratyavamarsa and the superstructural one, i.e., the 
primary and secondary pratyavamarsas, that prompts Abhinava’s commentator 
Bhaskara to describe these two types of thoughts as (i) those in the nature of 
pure reflectiveness ( citirupapratyavamarsa) and (ii) those in the nature of 
determinate or mentally constructed awareness ( vikalparupapratyavamarsa). 12 

8 . cetayati ity atraya citih citikrtya tasyah pratyavamarsah svatmacamatkaralaksana 
atma svabhavah / IPV, I, p. 250. 

9. abhinnavacya adya vag esa nityacitsvariipatvena anadyanantaparatantra, 
bhavantaranapeksam suddham etat svatantryam advaryasamjnam / Vrtti on IPK 
1 - 5 - 13 - 

10. pratyavamarsas ca dntardbhUapatmakasabdanasvabhavah / IPV, I, p. 252. 

11. tac ca sabdanam sahketanirapeksam eva avicchinnacamatkdratmakam 
antarmukhasironirdesaprakhyam akdrddimdyiyasdhketikasabclajcvitabhutanUam 
idam caitro ‘ham ityddipratyavamariantarabhittibhutatvat / Ibid., pp. 252-253. 

12. Bhaskarl, I, p. 252; also see my “Vak as Pratyavamarsa,” pp. 336-337. 







230 tantrapuspAn t jali 


By reducing pratyavamarsa to sabdana, the way is paved for identifying 
pratyavamarsa with Supreme Speech (para vak).' 3 It is para because it is full 
and whole; it is vak because it expresses everything (contained within), and this 
speaking is in the nature of vimarsana. It speaks ( abhilapati ), as explained by 
Bhaskara, 14 "through conscious identification-cum-recognition,” 1 ' or, to put it 
differently, through the self-affirming ontological activity of consciousness. 

From the foregoing we can conclude that the first formulation is in terms of 
camatkara' b (the subject’s aesthetic relishing of his own self), which theorizes 
consciousness as consciousness-activity ( citikriyci ), and the other is in terms 
of sabdana, which encompasses it as consciousness-agency ( citikartrta). 
The second formulation embodies the first by fusing awareness, subjectivity, 
autonomous agency, reality and language into one and as one, and it suggests that 
creation is nothing but joyous expression through the self-presenting reflective 
activity of the Supreme Language Principle that constitutes the integral essence 
of the dynamic absolute which is the Self. With this formulation the Saiva 
metaphysician is now ready to substantiate his purnafd-thesis (the doctrine of 
integral absolutism): if consciousness is whole, full and integral it must be self¬ 
content, self-sufficient, self-expressing and self-sustaining. 

Moving towards the next leg of his theorization, Utpala construes the 
subject, pramata, in terms of consciousness, or as identical with consciousness, 
and develops this through four karikas appearing at different places of the text. 
In comparison to the erstwhile formulation, this could be called an indirect 
approach. In IPK 1.3.7, 17 opening his defence against the Buddhist, Utpala 
sees the consciousness-principle (cit-tattva) as constituting everything, since 
nothing different from it is logically possible, rendering consciousness as the 

13- pumatvat para, vakti visvam abhilapati pratyavamarsena iti ca vak / Ibid , p. 253. 

14- pratyavamarsavrttya, na tu uccaravrttyd / Ibid 

15. Cf. “Vak as Pratyavamarsa,” p. 336. 

16. Camatkara in Kashmir Saivism is used in a technical sense (as explained above) 
and not in its usual sense of “wonder,” which is just one dimension of this technical 
notion. 

17. na ced antahkrtanantavisvarupo mahesvarah / syad ekas cidvapur 
jhanasmrtyapohanasaktiman // IPK 1.3.7. “If there were no Mahesvara who holds 
within Himself infinite all forms, who is one, whose essence is consciousness, 
possessing the powers of knowledge, memory and exclusion." 




CONSCIOUSNESS IN UTPALADEVA’S PRATYABHIjftA TEXTS j 231 


inter-unification of all cognitions relating to objects. 18 Abhinava explicates 
this mutual unification in two ways, namely “becoming one” ( eklbkccvana ) and 
“mixing” or "blending” ( misrlkarana). 19 The common element between both 
ideas is that this mutual unification of cognitions is based on the unity of their 
objective content, which is tantamount to asserting their absolute dependence 
on one consciousness principle. 2 " 

This portrayal stems from Utpala’s conviction that day-to-day worldly 
interaction cannot be accounted for unless the discreet cognitions are mutually 
coordinated in the form of a synthesizing consciousness. Since the subject 
consists of consciousness and holds entire objectivity within as one with itself, 
the unity of objective content through mutual unification of cognitions becomes 
easy to establish. 21 Abhinava notices two additional corollaries here. First, 
viewing consciousness as being plural or manifold is to view consciousness as 
constituting sakti (energy, power), and viewing it as being the same as one is to 
view it as saktimdn, the holder or repository of sciktis. 22 Second, this constituting 
of the form of all ( visvarupata ) is what defines Lordship ( isvarata). 23 Such a 
postulation, which Abhinava takes special care to bring out as Utpala’s prime 
intention in the Vrtti, succeeds in establishing the dynamic consciousness- 
absolutism, upheld and buttressed by Kashmir isaivists, as being solely rooted 
within consciousness itself. 24 


18. cittattvam eva visvarupam ato 'tiriktasydnupapatteh, asesapaddrthajndndnam 
anyonydnusamdhanam / IPVrtti 1.3.7. 

19. IPWI, I, p. 276. 

20. anusamdhdnam ekavisayatalaksanam [...] parisesatah ekacidrupatamatrayattain 
sampadyate / Ibid. 

21. y yavaharasambhavasya ekatmata hetuh iti / IbicL, 273. 

22. tatra bahutvapardmarsapradhdnatdydm sakttvyavahdrah, 

tadekaparamarsapradhanatve tadvadvyavahdrah / Ibid., 287. 

23. isvarataiva ca visvarupata gitasu darsita I ihapi etad artham eva 
“antahkrtdnantavisvarupah”iti uktam / Ibid., p. 298. 

24. prakasamanataya vina tavat vyavahara na upapadyante, sa ca cittattvasyaiva, na 
anyasya iti dyotayata svatantracidadvaitam api siddhyed iti samastasdstrarthasiddhir 
iyataiva ayatnaghatita iti vrttikrdaha / Ibid., p. 275. 



232 ; tantrapuspAnjali 


Utpala chooses IPK 1.5.7 25 to bring out the underlying implications of his 
present line of thinking more clearly. Resorting to a two-fold construction of the 
phrase cidatmaiva devah , one in the karika (cidatma [cit citmci yasya sah] eva 
devah) and the other in the Vrtti (cit devah eva dtma), 1 ' consciousness is posited 
first as God and then as God who is also the Self. The repeated insistence on 
(consciousness as) divine sovereignty or Godly potency is meant to strongly deny 
“externality” to the phenomenal or external world. Thanks to His Divinity, the 
Divine, whose essence is consciousness, manifests the objective multitude— 
“manifestation” here means the externalising of what is internal through the 
sheer force of will, with no recourse whatsoever to a material cause—and this 
underscores the logical untenability of objects outside of consciousness. 27 Hence 
Abhinava sticks to the spirit of the karika in upholding consciousness as the 
precise source of the Lord's divine essence, 28 while being somewhat at variance 
with the Vrtti, where God-essence (devatva) is depicted as the prima causa . 

We come across an entirely new, path-breaking interpretation of 
consciousness in IPK 1.7.1, 29 a seemingly simple karika but very intricate 
otherwise. 30 In an apparent digression from his original formulation of 


25. cidatmaiva hi devo 'ntahsthitam icchavasad bahih /yoglva nirupadanam arthajatam 
prakasayet // “Since God, who is without a doubt essentially consciousness [or 
consciousness-God who constitutes our inner self], like a yogin, in virtue of His will, 
without material cause, manifests the mass of objects, internal to him as external 
(hence what is the use of resorting to an external entity which is not substantiated 
by reason?).” In this translation, the portion within parentheses represents part 
of the preceding karika carried forward by Abhinava in order to make the sense 
complete. 

26. cittattvam eva isvaratvat svatmarupataya upapannabhasanam / IPVrtti 1.5.7. 

27. hiyat evam devatvat cidatma abhasavaicitryam prakasayati, tasmat “anupapattina. 
kim artyena bahyena”itipurvena sambandhah iti sutrayojana / IPW } II, p. 146. 

28. samvidlsvararupa samvitivad eva iti svabhavahetuh / Ibid., II, p. 153. 

29. yd caisa pratibha tattatpadarthakramarusita / akramanantacidrupah pramata sa 
mahesvarah // IPK1.7.1. “And that (which is called) inner manifesting awareness 
(pratibha) inlaid with a succession of myriad objects is beyond succession; the 
same is Mahesvara, who is the knowing subject having infinite awareness as (His) 
essence” (tr. mine). 

30. Abhinavagupta hints that Utpala was conscious of ambiguity with regard to the 
exact purport of this karika and sets out to address the same in his Vtvrti , now lost 



CONSCIOUSNESS IN UTPALADEVA’S PRATYABHIjM TEXTS | 233 


consciousness as self-affirming consciousness {pratyavarmarsa ), Utpala now 
visualizes consciousness as intuitive luminosity or inner manifesting awareness 
(,prakcisa ), moving theoretically from a wnarsa-formulation to a prakdsa- 
formulation, so to say. This prakcisa is conceptualized as pratibha or pratibhana. 
The notion of pratibha (lit., reflective light, counter manifestation, and generally 
translated as intuition, intuitive flash or luminous consciousness), we might 
recall, plays an extremely significant role in the aesthetic, poetic and linguistic 
domains duly endowed with a metaphysical framework evolved by Kashmir 
Saivists, and Abhinava in particular. 

Abhinava offers a perceptive analysis 31 of the epistemic process involved 
in our cognitions and defines pratibha as “manifestation that exists internally” 

( antahsthita eva abhasah) 32 or "inner manifesting awareness that encompasses 
objective totality” ( antahsarvarthavabhasah; IPV on 1.6.3), belonging to the 
knowing subjects. In doing so, he brings out three crucial insights: 

1. In worldly experience, e.g., “a jar appears to me (“mam pratibhati 
ghafah”), the inner manifesting light that appears as related to the 
object does not actually belong to it, rather it is the light of awareness as 
such ( samvedanam eva) that shines as the object, for the object always 
appears or shines as belonging to the subject ( pramatrlagnatvat ), e.g., 
‘appears or shines to me.’ 33 

2. Even the succession that seemingly characterizes our cognitions is a 
projection of this inner awareness, which in virtue of its self-luminosity 
is manifest to all and remains beyond succession for the simple reason 
that its essential introversion, ensuing logically from its structural 
dependence on the subject, eschews any differentiation and keeps its 

except for a small portion: na ca sarvathd sautrau vidhyanuvadau spastau ity aha 
“evakarena" iti / IPW, II, p. 341. 

31. We may for the time being ignore the minute exegetical distinction between 
Utpaladeva and Abhinavagupta in their textual analysis of this karikd. For a detailed 
exegetical appraisal of this karika, the discerning reader’s attention is drawn to my 
paper, “Utpala’s insights in aesthetics and his impact on Abhinavagupta’s aesthetic 
speculation” (cf. the section entitled “Pratibha: the power of visualization”), in 
Utpaladeva, eds. R. Torella and B. Baiimer (forthcoming). 

32. His grand-teacher's formulation in IPVrtti, which he upholds. 

33. IPV, I, p. 348. 




234 TANTRAPUSPASJALI 


self-luminous essence intact. 34 On the other side, the cognizing subject 
{pramata) too is essentially of the nature of the pure light of introverted 
awareness, which is free from determinations of any kind and constitutes 
an enduring substratum ( anantakalcintarmukhasamvcdanarupa ). Thus, 
pratibha and pramata, by virtue of their sharing a common essence 
( prakasa or samvedana), have their natural identity self-substantiated. 
This cognizing subject goes by the name of the “Self” (dtmun). <: ' 

3. Through homologization of the two prakdsas (namely, pratibha and 
pramata), Utpala tends to transform prakasa into vimursci, the original 
formulation of consciousness with which he began. Full repose of 
prakasa, inner manifesting awareness, within itself is what turns it 
into vimarsa par excellence: aham-pratyavamarsa,'" self-presenting 
consciousness. It is seen as a natural corollary of the epistemic process 
involved. Thus, according to Abhinava’s reformulation in his Vimarsinl, 
“the correct description of the light 37 of consciousness is that it is the 
‘I,’ the resting place of both (i) the indeterminate cognition of a jar as 
an external object and (ii) the inner, determinate cognition, ‘this is jar,’ 
which assumes the form of a jar, and which was the content of former 
indeterminate cognition." 3 ” 

34 - ya. pratibha. ukta [...] esa iti ca sarvasya svaprakasarupa, paramdrthatas ca 
antarmukhatvena prakasamatraparamarthataya bhedabhavad akrama / IPV, I, p. 
35 2, Bhaskara explains: antarmukhatvena “aham janami” iti pramatrlagnatvena 
sphuranat, tadvat “aham”itigrahanayogyatvena / Bhaskari, I, p. 352. 

35 ' tattatpadarthakramac churitas caiso ‘ntahsthita eva abhasah (=pratibha) 
sarvasamvitkalayyapi[...] atmasamjhahpramata / IPVrtti. 

36. Utpala rearticulates this dimension in his Ajadapramatrsiddhi with greater 
precision: 

prakasasyatmavisrantir ahambhavo hi kirtitah // ukta saiva ca visrantih 
sarvapeksanirodhatah / 

svatantryam atha kartrtvam mukhyam isvaratapi ca // APS 22-23. See also: 
pramanapramitisamuhasya yathdrucisamyojanddikaranasvdtantryayuktah 

suddhahampratyavamarsamayah [...] mahesvarah pramata / IPW, II, p. 340. 

37. atas ca bahirghataprakasah “ayam ghatah” iti antarvikalpah svikrtapurvarupah 
aham iti tadubhayavisrantisthanam, itiyat purnam prakdsasya svarupam / IPV, I, 
PP- 354 - 355 - 

38. IPV, III, p. 101. 



CONSCIOUSNESS IN UT PA LAD EVA’S PRATYABHIJNA TEXTS j 235 


The central thrust of this rather long argument is to evaluate consciousness, 
or I-consciousness to be more exact, as the knowing subject {pramata) because 
of its freedom to know and integrate what looks different outside, and also as the 
Supreme Lord ( mahesvara ), because of His absolute freedom to create objects 
lying within as His own limbs. 39 Moreover, in a kind of synthesis of two (that 
is, the previously mentioned second and third) alternative yet complementary 
valuations, there is a deliberate transposition of meaning between pratibha 
on the one side and pramata and mahesvara on the other: pratibha can now 
be viewed as pramata and mahesi'ara, 40 and at the same time, pramata and 
mahesvara too can be viewed as pratibha . The latter formulation forcefully 
presents consciousness in its fully developed form, that is, consciousness as duly 
nourished by knowing subjectivity and absolute autonomy 41 . 

Finally, Utpala and Abhinava use IPK 2.4.20 42 to dwell on the most vital 
aspect of their notion of consciousness: Isvarata or aisvarya . In the Saiva systems 
they adhere to, Isvarata (“lordliness”) must be the sine qua non of any notion of 
consciousness. Isvarata stands for Freedom with a capital F, that is, freedom in 
the absolute sense. This line of thought represents a definitional departure from 


39. antahsthita eva abhasah [...] dtmasamjhah pramata, svahgabhute prameye 
nirmdtrtaya mahesvaras ca / IPVrtti. 

40. yd caisa pratibha [...] pramata sa mahesvarah I IPK 1.7.1. One is therefore not 
surprised when Utpala addresses Siva as pratibhamaya (pratibhasi pratibhamayo 
yatha) in his Sivasto travail (18.11). 

41. pramata mahesvarah sa pratibha iti pramdtrtvamdhesvaryabhydm upacita 
labdhapariposd IIPW ', II, p. 341. The current thematicization takes us back to the 
original notion of reality, that is consciousness, in Kashmir Saivism as consisting 
of harmony, synthesis or unity of prakasa and vimarsa abstracted also, for the sake 
of clarity, as bodha (awareness) and kartrta (agency) respectively (cf. mukhyatvam 
kartrtayasca bodhasya ca cidatmanah / IPK 3.2.12). This kartrta , invariably identified 
with primary freedom, is also referred to as uttamakartrta (agency par excellence, 
ultimate agency). Pramatrtva and mahesvarya would, thus, represent awareness 
and agency respectively both in their absolute agential mode. 

42. vastave ‘pi cidekatve na syad abhdsabhinnayoh / ciklrsdlaksanaikatvaparamarsam 
vina kriya // IPK 2.4.20. “Even if the unity of consciousness is held to be ultimately 
real, there can be no act of creation (lit., activity) of the two entities divided as 
regards the nature of their manifestation unless there be reflective awareness of 
identity (of the objects with the self) which is characteristic of the desire to create.” 



236 ( TANTRAPUSPAiNJALI 


the standpoint of the non-dualist Brahmavada and the subjective idealism of 
Buddhist Yogacara. 

Kashmir Saivists were confronted with two problems—one, if consciousness 
is a plenum, how and where does it leave space for the variegated objective 
multiplicity within itself without disrupting its homogeneous unity; and two, if 
the existing models of consciousness in terms of unitary plenary consciousness 
or idea were already available, why was it necessary to search for a new model 
in terms of a God or a Lord wielding absolute freedom? Two options were open, 
either to give in to the Vedantic belief in maintaining absolute opposition 
between subject and object and as a result being forced to logically fabricate 
some kind of adventitious intervention, or to envisage an agential mechanism 
intrinsic to consciousness itself, denying any restriction to its free play and 
leaving no room for any instrumentality other than itself. Kashmir Saivists chose 
the second alternative and formulated consciousness in terms of subjectivity 
as absolute freedom 43 or absolute autonomous agency, which they called Isvara 
(Lord) or mahesvara (Great/Supreme Lord). 44 Through the employment of 
these two words they also tried to mark a subtle semantic distinction between 
Isvara and mahesvara. They looked upon individual subjects, the individuated 
instances of subjectivity, qua consciousness as being endowed with the same 
kind of autonomy as the supreme subject (parama atma) } although to a lesser 
degree. Consciousness devoid of this freedom (aisvarya) f the essential nature of 
God, is as good as insentience, 45 they declared. It is easy to see why the Trika 
theoreticians equate consciousness with subjectivity, and subjectivity with 
autonomous agency or freedom in its absolute form. Having done so, it is but 
logical to look at this consciousness, the self-affirming consciousness-activity, as 
will in the form of will-to-do/create,” holding internally all future creation as if 


43. tasmat vastavam cidekatvam abhyupagamyapi tasya kartrtvalaksana 
bhinnarupasamavesatmika kriyanopapadyate, paramarsasvarupam tu svatantryam 
yadi bhavati tadopapadyate sarvam / IPV, II, pp. 203-204. 

44. tad evasyatidurghatakaritvaLaksanam svatantryam aisvaryam ucyate / Ibid. } p. 204. 
45 * yatha najadasya karanata na kartrta, tathanlsvarasya cetanasyapi / Ibid. , p. 206. The 

point not to be missed is that this is the way Saivists prepare a rational background 
for their metaphysics’ smooth transition into the realm of philosophical theology. 



CONSCIOUSNESS IN UTPALADEVA’S PRATYABHIjfJA TEXTS | 237 


identical with it, 46 and thus accounting for its self-affirmation. Utpala goes to the 
extent of maintaining that an insentient entity cannot even be the agent of the 
action of being (e.g., “is, exists, becomes”) since it lacks the freedom that shows 
through “desiring-to-be” ( bubhusayogena ). Really speaking, it is the knowing 
subject alone who causes the insentient entity “to be” what it appears to be. 47 

In his Vrttiy Utpala says: “Even if there be only one consciousness-principle, 
the diversity of manifestation occurring without a cause (contingendy) is not 
possible, nor is there any activity (in that consciousness-principle). However, 
when that subject as consciousness, with a desire to act in this particular way, 
reflecting determinately, occasions external manifestation, only then could 
action be feasible.” 48 Subjecting this statement to a minute analysis, Abhinava 
decodes a series of three moments or components that underlie the whole 
process of self-affirmation: (i) the will to act ( cikirsa ), (ii) determinate reflection 
(pardmarsa) and (iii) manifestation ( abhasana ). During the descending (i.e., 
external manifesting) or forward movement of consciousness, cikirsa emanates 
into pardmarsa^ then the two ( cikirsa and pardmarsa) emanate into abhasana . 
In the reverse movement, abhasana dissolves into pardmarsa and then the 
twosome ( abhasana plus pardmarsa) dissolve into a single moment of ciklrsa. A9 To 


46. paramarso hi ciklrsarupeccha tasyam ca sarvam antarbhutam nirmatavyam 
abhedakaipena aste / IbicL> p. 204. 

47. jadasyapi asti bhavati ity asyam apisattakriyayam bubhusayogena svatantryabhavad 
akartrtvam, tena pramatatva tarn bhdcvayati / IPVrtti 2.4*20. To explicate, 
Abhinavagupta cites the opening verse of Kalidasa's Kumarasambhavam : nanu 
drstam jadasya kartrtvam - “asty uttarasyam disi devatatma himalayo nama 
nagadhirajah” iti / naitad, ity aha “jadasya” iti “akartrtvam” iti sambarndhah / IPW, 
III, p. 248. 

48. ekasmims cittattve 'pi akasmat abhasabhedo na ghatate, na ca tatra kriyatvam /yada 
tu sa cidatma tathaciklrsayd paramrsan bahirabhdsayati tada tad upapacfyate / 
IPVrtti 2.4.2. 

49* nanu pardmarsa eva iccha bhagavatah kriya, tatas ca vrttau tritayam yad uktam 
“ciklrsaya” ityadi tat katham uktam [...] na tena trayam etad upakrame dvayam eva, 
vastutas tu ekam api iti tatparyam / IPW> III, pp. 249-250. Here the Vrttl s phrase 
“tathaciklrsayd paramrdan bahirabhdsayati” is under Abhinava’s consideration. 
Abhinavagupta’s present formulation is extremely ingenuous and exhaustive and 
equally applies to aesthetic creativity and appreciation. For a detailed view, see 
Abhinavagupta ka Tantrdgamlya Darsana, pp. 381- 382. 



238 TANTRAPUSPANJALI 


these three Abhinava adds a fourth, freedom or autonomy ( svatantrya), thereby 
marking the ultimate state of luminous awareness (prakdsa) —deliberately 
designated as camatkara, 5 ' that is, the supreme aestheticizing consciousness 
principle, representing prakdsa —as resting on itself with no dependence on 
anything else. 51 Abhinava sees the first three as a kind of whole that represents 
the penultimate state of consciousness because of its succinct reference to the 
willed-to-be-creation, and he sees the fourth as the quintessence of prakdsa. 
However, reformulating his position, Abhinava identifies icchdi as camatkara that 
is svatantrya, marking its presence even in the ultimate state ' 1 of consciousness, 
positing will-to-act ( ciklrsa) as its integral form. 

Thus, it may be noted that the Saivists, particularly Utpala, sought to 
overcome, dissolve and homologize the alternative, exclusive approaches that 
treat consciousness as either knowing, feeling or willing (as pointed out at the 
outset) in their own notion of consciousness. 

To conclude. The whole thrust of the Kashmir Saivists as proud champions 
of the purnatd. doctrine, i.e., the doctrine of integral dynamic absolutism, is to 
invest even the incomplete, the imperfect, and the finite with fullness, freedom 
and divinity. They hold the manifestation of the finite as an act of absolute 
freedom, not one of compulsion, self-defilement, incapacity, or self-alienation 
on the part of the divine, without tampering with His wholeness and integral 
character. 33 The whole creation is a celebration of consciousness and thus a 
pathway to the Divine embodied and pulsating within our own being. 

ABBREVIATIONS AND TEXTUAL SOURCES 

Ajadapramd.trsid.dhi of Utpaladeva [APS], published as part of and under the title 
Siddhitrayl. Edited by M.S. Kaul Shastri. Kashmir Series of Text and Studies. Srinagar, 
1921 

Bhattacharya, K.C. Studies in Philosophy [2 volumes], edited by Gopinath Battacharya. 
Calcutta: Progressive Publishers, 1958. 

50. prakasasya paradasayam camatkaramatratmayo vimarsas tad ova svatantryam, na 
tu iccharupam, paraparatve tu tad iccharupam isyamanonmesat / Ibid., p. 251 

51. camatkaro hi svatmani ananyapekse visramanam / Ibid 

52. sarvatra hi camatkara eva iccha, sa ca parabhumav api asti/Ibid, p. 252. 

53. dvidha sa esa evatma mito ‘parimitastha / pranadina niruddho'nuh paramdtma tv 
akhanditah II APS, versei6. 



CONSCIOUSNESS IN UTPALADEVA’S PRATYABHIJNA TEXTS ! 239 


Isvara-pratyabhijnd-vimarsinl [IPV], Abhinavagupta’s commentary on IPK, together with 
Bhdskari [Bhaskari], Bhaskarakantha’s commentary on IPV. Vols. I-II (Sanskrit text) 
edited by K.A.S. Iyer and K.C. Pandey, vol. Ill (English translation) by K.C. Pandey. 
Delhi: Motilal Banarsidas, 1986 [reprint]. 

Lwara-prat)>abliij?id-vtvrti-vimarsim[\PVV]y gloss by Abhinavagupta on Utpaladeva’s Vtvrti, 
3 vols. Edited by M.S. Kaul Shastri. Kashmir Series of Texts and Studies. Srinagar, 
193 ^- 1943 * 

The Pratyabhijndkarikd of Utpaladeva [IPK] with the Author’s Vrtti [IPVrtti/Vrtti on IPK]. 
Edited and translated by R. Torella. Rome: Is.M.E.O., 1994* 

Rastogi, Navjivan. “Vak as Pratyavamar^a: Bhartrhari from Abhinavan Perspective” in 
Bhartrhari : Language, Thought and Reality , edited by Mithilesh Chaturvedi. Delhi: 
Motilal Banarsidas, 2003. 

-. Abhinavagupta ka Tantragamiya Darsana. Sagar: Vishvavidyalaya Prakashan, 2012. 

-. Kdsmira Sivadvayavada mem Pramana-cintana. Ahmedabad: L.D. Institute of 

Indology, 2013. 

-. “Utpala’s insights in aesthetics and his impact on Abhinavagupta’s aesthetic 

speculation,” in Utpaladeva , edited by R. Torella and B. Baiimer (forthcoming) 
[since published, Shimla 8 c Delhi: HAS 8 c D.K. Printworld, 2016, pp. 102-223]. 

Sivastotravall of Utpaladeva , with Vtvrti by Ksmaraja. Edited with Hindi Commentary by 
Rajanaka Laksmana. Varanasi: Chowkhamba, 1964. 




8 


Ontological Hierarchy in the 
Tantraloka of Abhinavagupta 1 

Mrinal Kaul 


In classical Sanskrit metaphysics a tattva is defined as a category ( padartha), a 
true principle ( tat-tva ), a reality (yathatathya), an entity ( sadbhava ), empirical 
truth (yathabhuta), true nature ( svabhava ), the essence of a thing ( sclra ), or an 
essential being (sat), and as not the opposite ( aviparlta). 2 Literally, tattva means 
that-ness, with tat standing for ‘that’ and -tva signifying ‘ness/ 3 It is that aspect 
of reality which makes itself manifest; in other words it is the ‘state of being 
that, where that stands for a potent entity. 4 This is to say that the existence of 
an entity is known by the manifestation of its true nature. In other words Earth 
is a tattva but a pot or a house made of earth is not a tattva. The commonality 
existing in a pot, a house and anything made of earth is that all of these things 

1. I sincerely thank Professor Alexis G.J.S. Sanderson (All Souls College, Oxford) for 
the immense help he offered me in studying and understanding Abhinavagupta’s 
debate on the hierarchy of the tattvas as discussed by him in chapter nine of the 
Tantraloka. All errors or misunderstandings, if any, remain my own. I also thank 
Professor Bettina Baumer for offering me an opportunity to pay tribute to the 
memory of Pandit Hemendra Nath Chakravarty. I thank Dr. Hamsa Stainton and 
Dr. Shaman Hatley for many suggestions they offered for improving this article. 

2. Nydyakosa , p. 309-310. 

3. Astadhyayl 5.1.119: tasya bhavas tva-talau || 

4. There is no standard definition of tattva in the Mantramarga scriptures. Even 
though in Nyaya-Vaisesika a universal ( samanya ) and a category (padartha) are 
absolutely two different entities, in the Tantra there does not seem to be a strong 
distinction between them. However, terms such as tattva , padartha, prameya etc. 
are used synonymously and refer to the same realities. 


ONTOLOGICAL HIERARCHY IN THE TANTRALOKA OF ABHINAVAGUPTA | 241 


can be broken down into a basic element called Earth. In the same way a river, ice 
etc. are all basically the different modifications of the same basic element called 
Water/' In the cosmogonic discussions of classical India, a tattva is characterised 
as the essence of each stage of the manifestation of this universe, with each 
stage represented by a tattva. Ontologically speaking a tattva can be described 
as a ‘category of being’ and thus be called an ‘ontological category.’ The concept 
of tattva works in two ways: parallel and sequential. On the one hand all the 
tattvas expand as “identical units” and at the same time each one also manifests 
as another entity—another subsequent tattva or a modified form of the same 
tattva." In reality, whatever we see around us is the grossest form of the same 
manifestation of the basic elements called tattvas. 

The concept of tattva is absolutely fundamental to the Sanskrit Sastric 
systems, so much so that almost all schools of classical Indian philosophy define 
and enumerate a certain number of tattvas according to their own prerequisites. 
The systematic scheme of the sequence of tattvas was propounded by the ancient 
system of Samkhya. Setting the number of categories ( tattvas) to be twenty-five, 
Sarhkhya greatly influenced subsequent Sanskrit knowledge systems, including 
the Agamas/Tantras. Among the Agamic scriptures belonging to different 
currents, the Agamas of the Saiva Siddhanta also took over the Samkhya model 
and expanded the components of their own cosmology from twenty-five to thirty- 
six, adding eleven more tattvas. 5 6 7 Both the Saivagamas following the dualistic 

5. Abhinavagupta explains this in his IPV (3.1.2): just as mountains, trees and towns 
belong to the category of Earth (prthtvitattva) and river, lakes and seas are a 
modification of Water (Jalatattva), in the same way a tattva is defined as an efficient 
cause of a categorisation of various collective units that appear to be singular and 
undivided. The same idea is expressed in IPW, Vol. Ill, p. 264. 

6. This concept is explained in detail by Rastogi (2012:222). I have borrowed Rastogi’s 
use of the term “identical units” here. 

7. It is important to mention here that it is vitally important to investigate how tattvas 
have been understood in the early Mantramarga scriptures. One such attempt has 
been made by Dominic Goodall (2009), focusing primarily theNisvasatattvasamhita 
and the eclectic constructions of the sequence of the tattvas derived from this text 
and used in many later Agamic scriptures. Another important point to mention 
here is that the Saiva Siddhanta modified upon the Samkhya ontology in two ways: 
“They added principles to the top, demonstrating that the Sarikhyas had correctly 
grasped the nature of only the inferior levels of the universe, and they attempted 



242 tantrapuspAnjali 


doctrine called Siddhanta and the Trika Saivagama adhering to the non-dualistic 
doctrine usually agree on the total number of the tattva s to he thirty-six. Though 
this is true of most post-scriptural Saiva Siddhanta commentaries, we do come 
across some exceptions, which I will discuss subsequently. The purpose in the 
following is to analyse the nature of the tatt\ ; as as understood hv Abhinavagupta 
( fLc . 975-1025 ce) in his Tantraloka (TA) and as understood by his illustrious 
commentator Jayaratha (fLc . 1225-1275 CE). h I begin with a brief introduction 
to the textual tradition of Anuttara Trika Saivism, and particularly the most 
illustrative manual of this system: the Tantraloka. 

Among the many schools of Saivism that existed in Kashmir, the Trika 
survived as a major post-scriptural non-Saiddhantika ritual system of the 
Mantramarga. 9 The most defining feature of the scriptures of the Trika was the 
worship of the three Goddesses Para, Parapara and Apara. lu The traditions of 
Tantric Saivism (the Mantramarga) evolved from their scriptural anonymity into 
an extensive body of Kashmirian exegesis from the middle of the ninth century 
onwards. 11 During the early medieval period there were two major competing 
traditions, among which the Trika and the Krama systems belonged to the left- 
handed course (vama-hasta-marga) and followed non-dualism, and the authors 
of the Saiva Siddhanta, who accepted the orthodox Vedic boundaries of purity 
and impurity, were on the right ( daksina ) side following dualism. 12 The followers 
of the Trika attacked the ritualism of their contemporaries who adhered to the 
Saiva Siddhanta. 13 It was in opposition to the propitiation of this ritual system 

to place worlds inherited from older Saiva scriptures on the levels of these various 
principles. The latter change meant that tattva in some contexts approximates to 
a ‘reality level’ of the universe in which various worlds are placed rather than a 
constitutive “principle” of the universe” (TAK-III, p. 25). 

8. An earlier attempt to study the first 49 verses of the ninth chapter of the Tantraloka 
was made by Dr. Keith Allen (2003) in his unpublished master’s dissertation. 
While Allen focused only on the first 49 verses with detailed and comprehensive 
exposition of both the Tantraloka and the -vlveka commentary thereupon, I focus 
here on the broader theme of the tattvas in the TA. 

9. See Sanderson 1988:690 and 2004:5. 

10. See Sanderson 1988:673 and also Sanderson 2007a: 370-371. 

11. See Sanderson 1988: 69off. 

12. See Sanderson 1995: i7ff. 

13. See Sanderson 1988:692. 



ONTOLOGICAL HIERARCHY IN THE TANTRALOKA OF ABHINAVAGUPTA j 243 


propounded by the Siddhanta that Abhinavagupta endeavoured to establish 
a system emphasizing the significance of knowledge (jndna), the absence of 
which is taught to be the true cause of impurity (mala) and bondage. 14 Abhinava 
established his Trika on the basis that it is the removal of this impurity rather 
than the performance of ritual that can lead to liberation. 15 

The post-scriptural Anuttara Trika has perhaps a single author and that is 
Abhinavagupta, since it is only his works on the Trika that constitute the literature 
available in the Trika proper or Anuttara Trika. Alexis Sanderson has thrown 
ample light on Abhinavagupta and his works as the author of the Krama and 
Trika-based Krama, and also discussed him separately as the author of the Trika.' 6 
Abhinavagupta’s texts to be considered in this pool of Anuttara Trika are the 
Malinlslokavartika, Tantraloka, Tantrasara, Tantroccaya and Paratrisikavivarana. 
Abhinavagupta chose the Malincvijayottaratantra (MVUT) as the foundation of 
all his writings on the Trika. In fact the TA, which is an exposition of the Anuttara 
Trika Saivism, is an exhaustive commentary on the MVUT. 17 Abhinavagupta 
holds that the scriptures of the Trika contain the essence that animates all the 
branches of the Saiva canon. The MVUT was a fitting base to formulate this 
position for the Trika. 18 Even though Abhinavagupta tells us that he bases the 

14. See Sanderson 2007a: 372. 

15. This of course does not mean that there is no ritual practice prescribed in the 
Trika of Abhinavagupta. But the idea here is that the path of following ritual was 
understood as inferior because there were other superior means, such as meditation 
and imaginative visualisation. Cf. Sanderson 2007b: 114-115. 

16. See Sanderson 2007a: 352ff. 

17. TA 1.17-18: na tad astlha yan na srimalLnlvijayottare \ devadevena nirdistam 
svasabdenatha lingatah || dasdstddasavasvastabhinnam yac chasanam vibhoh \ 
tatsaram trikasastram hi tatsaram malinimatam || 

18. Sanderson (20078:376) suggests two reasons for this argument: “The Md/inm/ayottara 

was a fitting base for this project for two principal reasons. The first is that it offers 
a bridge from the Sakta ground of this exegesis to the Siddhanta since it shows 
striking continuities with the latter system. The second is that the 18th chapter of 
Malinivijatottara could be read as formulating the view that while the hierarchy of 
revelation leads upwards to culminate in the Trika, the highest revelation within the 
Trika itself, to be found in this chapter, transcends transcendence by propagating 
the position that all forms of Saiva practice, including that of the Siddhanta, are 
really valid provided they are informed by the nondualistic awareness enjoined 
here.” 





244 I TANTRAPUSPANJALI 


TA on the MVUT, he also draws on a wide range of other scriptural texts of the 
Saiva Mantramarga, from Trika scriptures including the Siddhayogesvarlmata , 
Trisirobfiairava, Devyayamala, Tantrasadbhava, and Trikasadbhavci to the Krama 
scriptures such as the Kallkula and Brahmayamata and to other Saiddhantika 
scriptures. 19 In other words Abhinava developed a Saiva system that, on the 
one hand, adheres to the features of earlier Saiva scriptures and, on the other, 
simultaneously emerges as a distinct Saiva system with unique features. It is this 
system of Abhinavagupta that I intend by the expression Anuttara Trika Saivism. 

In the Tantraloka, Abhinavagupta dedicates Chapters 9 and 10 to the study 
of the tattvas. In Chapter 9, Abhinavagupta finds an opportunity to explain away 
the fact that the Saiva scriptures are not in absolute agreement with each other 
on the order of the manifestation of the tattvas , besides explaining the nature 
of all the thirty-six tattvas . In Chapter 10 he mentions further categorisation of 
the tattvas grouped into fifteen and viewed through seven knowing subjects 
(saptapramatr ). 20 Our primary focus here will be the relevant parts of Chapter 
9 of the TA and the TAV. The ninth chapter of the Tantraloka is entitled 
Tattvaprakasahnika and describes the nature and hierarchy of ontic-levels 
(tattva-krama) as accepted by the Trika system. Abhinava begins the chapter 
with a detailed discussion on the Saiva theory of causality. The first six verses 
discuss the definition of tattva and verses seven to forty-eight discuss causality 
and its various aspects. Verses forty-nine onwards deal with the ideas of ‘longing’ 
(i lolikd) } impurity (ma/a), vijnanakevalin, pralayakala and ultimately the nature 
and order of the tattvas . In this paper I am limiting my discussion only to the five 
tattvas belonging to the pure universe (suddhadhvan). 

But why does Abhinava, instead of going straight into the discussion on the 
order of tattvas as in his root text the MVUT, first choose to have a philosophical 
enquiry into the nature of causality and only then turn to the main subject 
matter of this chapter? He begins Chapter 9 with a discussion on causality as part 
of his endeavour to rationalise philosophically the traditional lore of the Trika 

19. See Sanderson 2007a: 374. 

20. The seven knowing subjects ( saptaptramatr ) are Sakala, Pralayakala, Vijnanakala, 
Mantra, Mantresa, MantramaheSa and Siva. See KSDK-II, p. 424, for more details on 
saptapramatr . For the role of saptapramatr in the tattvakrama see Vasudeva 2013: 
216-217. Abhinava describes the tattvabheda in the TA 10.1-2. See TAK-III, p. 26, for 
how thirty-six tattvas are associated with the seven knowing subjects. 



ONTOLOGICAL HIERARCHY IN THE TANTRALOKA OF ABHINAVAGUPTA | 245 


scriptures. Another example of Abhinavagupta’s philosophical rationalization of 
Trika ritual and scriptural doctrines is, for instance, his treatment of the theory 
of knowability ( vedyatd ), prior to discussing the nature of and relationships 
between the seven knowing subjects ( saptapramatrs) and seven objects of 
knowledge ( saptaprameyas) in Chapter 10 of the TA. 21 On somewhat similar 
lines, he also offers an analytical account of the theory of reflection in Chapter 
3“ of the TA before discussing the doctrine of phonemic emanation (i.e., the 
genesis of sound/language), since eventually he has to prove that the creation 
becomes manifest when the syllable 'a' of the Sanskrit alphabetic system 
divides itself into component parts of itself, without losing the essence of 
the energy of consciousness of ‘a.’ 2J By following this process of philosophical 
rationalisation, Abhinava is gradually moving himself into a position to explain 
the inconsistencies in the Saiva accounts of the order of tattvas ( tattvakrama ) 
that still existed in earlier Saiva scriptures. Once he has achieved that goal and 
constructed the rational-philosophical backbone of his otherwise stumbling 
system, he moves on to his principle subject matter of defining and explaining 
each tattva following the earlier Agamic scriptures. 

But we have more compelling questions to answer: Why is the order of the 
emergence of the tattvas important for Abhinavagupta at all? What sequence do 
the tattvas follow? How many tattvas are there actually? Which tattva emerges 
from which? For each of these questions, scriptures offer a variety of different 
answers. 24 For Abhinavagupta, scriptural discrepancies may be allowed for as far 
as the valid performance of ritual prescribed by scriptural revelation, but there 
should be unanimity at the doctrinal level. The job for a traditional commentator 
like Abhinavagupta or Jayaratha was to draw attention away from inconsistencies 
and to emphasise the doctrinal harmony of Saiva scriptures. This was indeed a 

21. For more details on this topic see Allen 2011. 

22. For more details on this topic see Kaul 2016. 

23. See Padoux 1990: 223 for more details on the topic of phonemic emanation in the 
Tantric scriptures. 

24. Cf. TAK-III, p. 25: “But there is no consensus in the scriptures about 1) how many 
tattvas there are; 2) what their order is; 3) exacdy what they are—in some cases they 
are better rendered “principle,” in others "reality level,” and in the case of the tattva 
of the bound soul and the uppermost tattvas of the pure universe neither of these 
translations is adequate—and 4) which worlds ( bhuvana ) belong in which tattvas!’ 




246 TANTRAPUSPANJALI 


challenging task. Even though Abhinava and other post-scriptural commentators 
would maintain the doctrinal unity of the Saiva canon, this was not always the 
case. The sequence ( krama) of the emergence of the tattvas was one such area 
that required careful hermeneutical attention. In the remainder of this paper we 
shall focus on how Abhinavagupta and his commentator Jayaratha address these 
questions. 

Abhinavagupta’s tattva scheme is largely based on the Saiva Siddhanta 
model. In the Saiva cosmology the entire creation exists within the four cosmic 
spheres ( andacatu$tciya ): the sphere of Energy ( saktyanda ), the sphere of 
maya ( mayanda), the sphere of Nature ( prakrtyanda ) and the sphere of Earth 
(prthvyanda ). These spheres contain within themselves an infinite number of 
bhuvanas. To these cosmic spheres are also connected the three series"' of kalas, 
tattvas and bhuvanas according to which the sakytanda has five tattvas, viz. 
saktij sadastva, Isvara, suddhavidya and mahamdyd. Within the mayanda there 
is maya, kala, vidya, raga, kala, niyati and purusa . In the prakrtyanda there are 
tattvas from prakrti to Jala, and in the prthvyanda there is only the prthvi tattva. 
The prthvyanda is contained within the prakrtyanda and the prakrtyanda is 
contained within the mayanda. In the same way the mayanda is contained in 
the saktyanda and the latter is contained in the Anuttara. Anuttara is beyond 
all the spheres, tattvas, bhuvanas, etc., and it contains all of them within itself 
at the same time. Even though the definitions and numbers of the tattvas and 
bhuvavas vary in different Agamas, our focus here is the Tantrdloka. The tattvas 
pervade the bhuvanas and the bhuvanas are classified as being within the tattvas. 
Furthermore, as far as the concept of five kalas is concerned,the first, nivrttikald, 
is formed of prthivltattva and 16 bhuvanas. The second, pratisthakala, is made of 

25. For details on sadadhvan see Padoux 1990: 33off. and also Dwivedi 2000: 387. In 
the Agamic scheme of the sadadhvan, the tattvadhvan (the path of the tattvas) 
constitutes one of the three ‘ways’ in the desadhvan, the other two being kala 
and bhuvana. The kaladhvan constitutes the triad of varna , pada and mantra. 
The desadhvan falls under the category of vacaka or sabda and the kaladhvan is 
categorised under vacya or artha. However, in the highest stage of manifestation 
the vacya and the vacaka are one. Here I focus only on the tattvadhvan. 

26. TA 11.8-gb: nivrttih prthivltattve pratisthavyaktagocare | vidyd nisante santa ca 
saktyante 'ndam idam catuh || santatlta sive tattve kalatltah parah sivah | For more 
details on kala see TAK, Vol. II, p. 71 under note 6. 



ONTOLOGICAL HIERARCHY IN THE TANTRALOKA OF ABHINAVAGUPTA | 247 


23 tattvas from jala to prakrti and contains 56 bhuvanas. The vidyakala, which 
is the third, contains seven tattvas from purusa to mayo, and 28 bhuvanas. The 
fourth, sdntdkald, has three tattvas: suddhavidya, isvara and sadasiva and 18 
bhuvanas, and finally the fifth, sdntatitdkala, has only two tattvas, viz. Siva and 
Sakti and there are no bhuvanas. Paramascva is beyond all the katas. We see here 
that a given sequence of bhuvanas corresponds with particular tattvas 27 and we 
must remember that in the hierarchy of the tattvas the succession cannot be 
denied in view of the cause and effect relationship (kdryakaranabhava) between 
them. So each tattva is related to the other by a cause and effect relationship, 
and depending on the type of the sequence whether it is the srstikrama or the 
samhdrakrama, the subtlest tattva Siva is on the top and the grossest Earth is at 
the bottom/* That being so, there do exist higher and lower tattvas, the higher 
being subtle in nature and more intrinsic and the lower being relatively gross and 
more extrinsic. Each higher tattva permeates and pervades the succeeding ones, 
with the highest and most subtle pervading and permeating all the tattvas. This 
makes it clear that each successive lower tattva exists in and draws its sustenance 
from the successive higher tattvas which are also its material cause. Here the two 
important concepts emerging in the study of tattvas are vyapyavyapakabhava 29 
and kdryakaranabhava. We will come back to these topics shortly. 

According to Abhinavagupta, there is no constant causal nature of the 
tattvas defined in the earlier Agamas. Commentators on the Saiva scriptures 
offer different explanations for the discrepancies between how various Agamas 
present the hierarchy of the tattvas. For Abhinavagupta, the relation of cause and 
effect is really that of an agent and the act. 30 He points out that mere succession 

27. TAV 9.1: bhuvananirupanantaram tadanuyayinam tattvandm nirupanasya 
prdptavasaratvat \ 

28. tattvas manifest in two ways: srstikrama and samhdrakrama. Cf. TP: verses 67-68. 
Texts that follow the srstikrama include the Pardpahcdsika, Saubhagyasudhodaya, 
Tattvaprakasa and Yoginihrdaya, and texts that follow samhdrakrama include the 
Tattvasamgraha, Bhogakarika, Virupaksapancasika. See Dwivedi 1963: t 9 ^> n. 3. Also, 
cf. tattvakrama in the TAK-III, p. 28. 

29. vyapyavyapakabhava is discussed in TA 9.306-314 and the kdryakaranabhava is 
discussed in TA 9.7-48. 

30. In his commentary on TA 9.13 Jayaratha quotes a verse from IPK 2.4.2 emphasizing 
the principle argument of the Trika in this context: jadasya tu na sa saktih satta 



248 TANTRAPUSPANJALI 


does not constitute causality ’ 1 and introduces the concept of succession saying, 
Let the insentient have a variegated form successively (through the sequence of 
time), but then what contradiction is there in this?"” There is not some thing in 
addition to the nature of things. They are just the form of our perception. So if the 
thing is successive or non-successive there is nothing added on to the thine itself. 
He explains that these two, successive and non-successive, are just the perceiving 
of things in these ways. Abhinava explores the diversity of the teachings on tattvas 
to prove his own special point: causality is just an ultimate analysis appearing in 
one way or the other. As a result of this, in the scriptures, causality is not fixed 
and constant. Abhinava looks at it from two ways using an earlier tantric scheme 
of the prakriyasastra 33 and the sarasastra. The prakriyasastra means the teaching 
of hierarchy, the standard Saiva doctrine in which religion means ascending 


yadasatah satah \ kartrkarmatvatattvaiva kdryakdranatd tatah || “The inert could 
have no power to bring the non-existent into being, therefore the relation of cause 
and effect is really that of agent and act.” 

3 1. TA 9-i 3 : bijam ankura ity asmin satattve hetutadvatoh \ ghatah patas ceti blmvet 
kdryakdranatd na kim || “So if the cause and effect is seed and sprout then why 
should not there be a causal relation between a pot and cloth. Mere succession, in 
other words, does not constitute causality.” 

32. TA g.iyab: kramena citrdkdro \stujadah kim nu viruddhyate | 

33 - For more on prakriya, see TA 8.5: tatradhvaivam nirupyo 'yam yatas 
tatprakriyakramam anusamdadhad eva drag yogi bhairavatdm vrajet | Jayaratha 
clarifies the definition further: prakriyakramam iti kalagnyader andsritaparyantam 
tathatathanupurvyendvasthanam | This distinction of the prakriyasastra and the 
sarasastra is also discussed by Bhaskarakantha, whose aim is to describe the nature 
of the tattvas in the prakriyasastra. For more details, see Torella 2002:189 fn.2. Also 
cf. Bhaskarakantha, IPWya 3.1.3, p. 222 \yady api sarasdstresu sakter eva spandatvam 
uktam ta th dp chap rakriyasas tre pro ktan ity a saddsivader uktam | saktisivayor eva hiha 
sastre paramarthasvarupatvam na parasivasyety alam | Translation by Sanderson: 
Although in the Essence Teachings ( sarasastram) it is Sakti that is said to be 
Vibration, here it is Sadasiva and [Isvara], this [text, the isvarapratyabhijndkdrika] 
being a p rakriyasas tram. For in this text it is merely Siva and Sakti that are the 
ultimate leality, not [as there] Paramasiva [the non-dual reality whose ‘power’ 
(saktih.) or ‘vibration’ ( spandah) is seen as manifesting itself as all the thirty-six 
tattvas of the system texts, from Siva and Sakti down to Earth].” (This translation 
was personally communicated to me by Sanderson in a letter dated 29 October, 
2014). 


ONTOLOGICAL HIERARCHY IN THE TANTRALOKA OF ABHINAVAGUPTA | 249 


the cosmic ladder, while the sarasdstra, which is essentially a Sakta concept, 
emphasises ‘expansion’ rather than ‘hierarchy.’ But the saraiastra transcends 
the prakrcydsastra and follows the scheme of gradual expansion. This concept of 
gradual expansion is not really present in the prakriydscistra, as can be seen from 
the fact that it is not present in the Siddhanta, which is the doctrinal basis of the 
prakrcydsastra. To further clarify this, the manifestation of the universe is not 
considered to be the expression of the Lord’s nature. He remains transcendent 
and his involvement with the world is indirect. He does not himself stimulate 
mdyd with his sdkti, this function being delegated to Ananta. Abhinava follows 
the model of the prakrcydsastra, but in the background the other model of the 
sarasdstra is operative all the time and this esoteric view keeps arising abruptly 
at several occasions. Abhinavagupta fails to conceal it and repeatedly suggests 
the sarasdstra model, which transcends the hierarchy of the tattvas. When Siva 
is seen as the thirty-sixth tattva he is perceived as being at the summit of this 
hierarchy transcending the universe ( visvottirna ). When one sees him from the 
sarasdstra point of view, the thirty-six are in fact his expansion, and then one can 
see that totality, seeing Siva in his visvamaya aspect (all-embracing expanded 
form), which is sometimes called Bhairava , 34 the thirty-seventh tattva. 

DEFINING TATTVA 

The Saiva Siddhanta believes in two classes of tattvas: three eternal tattvas 
called Pati, Pasu and Pasa 35 and the thirty-six transitory tattvas. The thirty-six 
secondary tattvas are dependent on the three primary tattvas. Accordingly, Siva, 
Sakti, Sadasiva, Isvara and Suddhavidya reside in Pati, Purusa resides in Pasu and 
the tattvas from kata to prthvl reside in Maya or Pasa. The five tattvas from Siva 
to Suddhavidya are the pure categories (suddha-tattvas ), 36 the seven tattvas from 
Maya to Purusa are both pure and impure (suddhasuddha-tattvas ) 37 and the 

34. MW1.658: tattve tattvesvecchaya devadevah \ \ sarvamsarvam bhumimalambamanah 
|| purnaikatma purnasamvitsvarupah || srimansastre bhairavo niruktah || 

35 - TP 5: satvagamesu mukhyam patipasupasa iti kramat tritayam \ tatra patih siva 
uktah pasavo hy anavo'rthapancakam pasah 11 

36. TP 21: suddhani pancatattvdny actyam tesu smarantisivatattvam \ saktisadasivatative 
Isvaravidydkhyatattve ca 11 

37. TP 22: pumso jnakartrtdrtham mdydtastattvapancakarn bhavati \ kalo niyatis ca 
tatha kata ca vidya ca ragas ca || 




250 tantrapuspASjali 


twenty-four tattvas from prakrti to prthvi are impure (asudcihu-tattms) because 
of being insentient (Jada ). ;ih The Siddhanta defines a tattva as that which lasts 
till the destruction of the whole world, unlike a body or a pot, and which acts as 
a means of experiencing [reality] for all beings. 1 ' 1 The principle tattva amongst 
all the tattvas is regarded as that which is invisible, devoid of qualities, and has 
nothing to reject and nothing to seek. It is of imperceptible form and is said to 
be content. It is volition ( iccha ) that is filled with its qualities and characteristics; 
it is the power emanating out of it. 4 " In his Paramdrthasdratikd Yoga raja offers 
three etymological definitions of the tattva-. that where all is expanding (tunyate), 
that which is extending till the dissolution of the world ( tanandt ), and the state 
of being that ( tasya bhdvah). 4 ' 

But what does tattva mean in reality? This is a very important question 
because usually Saiva systems define and explain the tattvas, but after discussing 
their ‘ontological hierarchy’ they seem to regard this as ‘artificial.’ 44 This is 
because in reality, as Abhinava justifies, Siva is the most competent agent of 
his creation 43 and the principle of causal relations is projected forth by the 
will of Siva alone. In other words, from the absolute point of view, Siva alone 
is the supreme tattva pervading all the other tattvas. This is also the view of 
Siddhanta. 44 In Trika this ‘absoluteness’ of the autonomy of Siva is defined by 
the fact that it modifies individual consciousness on many different levels. It is 


38. This is not, for instance, the case with the Svayambhuvagama that regards all the 
tattvas as impure ( asuddha ) except Siva, which is the only pure ( suddha) tattva. 

39 - TP 73: apralayamyat tisthati sarvesam bhogaddyibhutanam | tat tattvam itiproktam 
na sariraghatadivat 11 

40. Quoted by Jayaratha at TAV-1.274 from the Kularatnamala: adrstam nirgunam 
yac ca heyopadeyavarjitam | tattattvam sarvatattvanam pradhanam 
paripathyate || adrstavigrahas caiva sa santa iti giyate | tasyeccha nirgata saktis 
taddharmagunasamyuta || 

41. PSV, p. 363. tanyate sarvam tanvadi yatra tat tattvam, tananad va tadapralayam, 
tasya bhdva iti va tattvam | 

42. I am borrowing the word ‘artificial’ for ‘ kalpita' from Somadeva Vasudeva. See his 
treatment of the subject in Vasudeva 2013:213. 

43 - TA g.8ab: vastutah sarvabhavanam kartesanah parah sivah \ 

44 - TP33: tattvam vastutaekam sivasamjnam citrasaktisatakhacitam \ saktivyaprtibhedat 
tasyaite kalpita bhedah 11 



ONTOLOGICAL HIERARCHY IN THE TANTRALOKA OF ABHINAVAGUPTA | 251 


always grounded in self-awareness and that self-awareness is always present. 
There is no differentiation in that and it is always the same dynamic force which 
is perceived as just conscious and it freely manifests its own contraction. 

The causality principle of Trika works in two ways 45 : from the absolute point 
of view ( pdramcirthika ) and from the point of view of something that is created 
( srsta ). Here srsta should be understood in the sense of kalpita (artificial). 
Criticizing the Buddhists’ reductionist view of causality, Abhinavagupta 
says: “The essence of the situation in which some thing comes into existence 
upon the existence of something else is nothing but dependence ." 46 With this 
statement he attacks the famous Buddhist theory of dependent origination 
(pratifyasamutpada) that asserts that “phenomena are happening in a series and 
we see that there being certain phenomena there becomes some others. 4 ' The 
causal formula of this system is: This being, that arises’ or ‘Depending on the 
cause, the effect arises’ (asmin sati, idarn bhavati). Thus every object of thought 
is necessarily dependent and because it is dependent, it is neither absolutely real 
nor absolutely unreal. Abhinava challenges this idea of the Buddhists and asks, 
“How can this theory be true in the case of things that are independent of each 
other inasmuch as they are self-contained ?” 48 

TATTVA ACCORDING TO ABHINAVAGUPTA 
Navjivan Rastogi argues that Abhinavagupta’s notion of tattva is also influenced 
by the Naiyayika idea of universals ( samanya ), the Samkhya theory of 
satkaryavada, and the idea of sabda-sakti propounded by the philosophers of 
language like Bhartrhari, in addition to the discussions on tattvas in the earlier 
Agamic scriptures like the Matangaparamesvaragama . 49 According to Rastogi, 
Abhinava purposely uses the word samanya in the IPW, which also signifies 

45. TS 8, p. 69-70: tatra esam tattvanam karyakaranabhavo darsyate sa ca dvmdhah || 
paramdrthikah srstes ca || tatra pdramdrthika etavdn karyakaranabhavo yad uta~ 
kartrsvabliavasya svatantrasya bhagavata evamvidhena sivadidharantena vapusa 
svarupabhinnena svarupavisrantena caprathanam || 

46. TA-g.uab: tasmin sati hi tadbhava ity apeksaikajivitam \ 

47. Dasgupta 2004:84ff. 

48. TA g.ncd: nirapeksesu bhavesu svatmanisthataya katham | 

49. See the chapter titled 'padartha' in Rastogi 2012:219-232. Also cf. Vasudeva 2013:214. 






252 j tantrapuspAnjali 


the Naiyayika influence of samanya on the idea of tattva? A tattva is the reality 
that pervades a certain class. 51 Abhinava also thinks of tattva like the ‘universal- 
universal’ ( makasamanya ). 52 In the TA, Abhinavagupta paraphrases the MPA 
while offering the definition of the tattva?* Jayaratha quotes Abhinava s source 
from the MPA: 

tattvam yad vasturupam syat svadharmaprakatatmakam | 
tattvam vastupadam vyaktam sphutamnayadarsanat 11 3 11 
yad acyutam svakad vrttat tatah saktavasam jagat | 
tatam anyena vayat syat tat tattvam tattvasantatau 11 4 11 54 

While interpreting Abhinavagupta, Jayaratha says that in Saivism the one 
reality which pervades the plurality, which consists of the worlds and so on, and 
which has as its nature earth and so on, is said to be the tattva. For that very 
reason, tattva means the state of being (- tva) of those (tat-) things, namely Earth 
and so on. And it is this very singular reality that envelops the whole universe 
and therefore is named Parama Siva, the thirty-seventh tattva. The fact that 
this universe is m anifest is nothing but the effhlgence of that one tattva » Like 

50. IPW, Vol. Ill, p. 264: iha tasya bhavas tattvam iti varganam visesarupanam 
ekikarananimittam samanyam ucyate mrtpdsdnadarvasthimdmsddlndm prthivi, 
saritkupasarahsamudradindmjalam iti | Also cf. Rastogi 2012: 220. 

51. IPV 2.3.2: bhinndndm varganam varagikarananimittam yad ekam avibhaktam bhdti 
tattattvam | 

52. In his Tantrasdra Abhinavagupta offers another clear definition of tattva. TS p. 
69. yad idam vibhavatmakam bhuvanajatam uktam garbhikrtantavicitrabhokt 
rbhogyam, tatra yad anugatam mahaprakasarupam tat mahasamanyakalpam 
paramasivarupam \ yat tu katipayakatipayabhedanugatam rupam tat tattvam | 
Vasudeva 2004.191 also notes that Abhinavagupta understands a tattva as similar to 
the common property (samanya) present in all members of a superset (mahajati). 
^ 9‘bcd. srlmatangasastradau tad uktam paramesina || Cf. Vasudeva 2004: 
190-191: “Abhinavagupta’s understanding of tattva is based upon that of the 
Matangaparamesvara , which he cites with approval. In the Tantraloka he defines a 
tattva as that which is recurrent or pervasive in all of the members of its class. The 
term used by Abhinavagupta to describe the nature of this presence is anugamin. 
By this he is adopting a key-term (also syn. anuyayin) used in Gastric discourse to 
define a generic property (jati)” 

54. MPA (VP) 5.3-4. 

55. TAV 9.2ab: idam hi nama paramesvare darsane " tattvam M ity ucyate—yad 
ekam eva rupam avyabhicarena anekatra bhuvanadav anugami syat , tac ca 



ONTOLOGICAL HIERARCHY IN THE TANTRALOKA OF ABHINAVAGUPTA | 253 


Yogaraja, 3 " Jayaratha also maintains that tattva means the state of being that 
(supreme form) which pervades everything. 37 To clarify things further, Jayaratha 
hypothesises an opponent asking how that tattva could exist severally if this 
universe is something whose only reality is the all encompassing single light of 
consciousness. He answers this implicit question by saying that when plurality 
has become completely manifest from Siva’s domain owing to his spontaneity, 
then that dynamic reality does not have different modes of pervasion. In other 
words, the process of “manifesting” is a singular spontaneous dynamic process 
and as we did observe Abhinavagupta often saying it is nothing but Siva who 
himself pervades as the light of consciousness. But in the mode of plurality the 
same term is used to refer to different modes of pervasion. 

Abhinavagupta himself offers the following definition of a tattva : 

tatsvatantryarasatpunah sivapadadbhede vibhateparam || 

yadrupam bahudhdnugdmi tadidam tattvam vibhoh sasane || TA g.2cd || 

“According to the Lord’s teaching, a tattva is that reality which pervades 
variously ( bahudhdnugdmi ) once plurality [bhede) has become completely 
manifest ( vibhate) from the state of [parama-]siva due to the savour of his (tat-) 
autonomy.” 

Here the idea of pervasion ( anugati , vyapti, anusyuti or anuvrtti) is important 
and Rastogi makes this point clear. Rastogi maintains that even though this 

prthtvyadydtmakam anekaprakdram, ata eva tasya—prthiyyader bhavah " tattvam” 
tatha vyapadesanimittam ity uktam, tac ca samanantarahnikoktesu nanaprakaresu 
bhuvanesu yad etat prakasaikaghanam param tattvam prakdiamanatanyathanup 
apattyanuyayi bhasate sa nikhilavisvakrodlkarena dyotamanah, tasyatva hy ayam 
spharoyad idam visvam namavabhasate \ 

56. See note 41 above. 

57. We observe a slight awkwardness with Jayaratha’s interpretation here. He says 
that it is tat which is the supreme nature (TAV g.2ab: ata eva ca tanoti sarvam iti 
“tat” param rupam, tasya bhavas tattvam - ity arthah ||), but Abhinava does not 
seem to mean it in this sense. For him tattva and not tat is the supreme nature 
(TA 9.2cd: yad rupam bahudhdnugdmi tad idam tattvam vibhoh sasane ||). It seems 
that Jayaratha here has made the mistake of pressing too close in his analysis and 
ended up producing something implausible, which Abhinavagupta himself has 
avoided. Other examples of Jayaratha’s clumsiness are pointed out by Sanderson 
(2007b: g6ff). Bansat-Boudon and Tripathi (2011:105, n.434) have also referred to this 
problem of the etymology of tattva. 



254 TANTRAPUSPANJALI 


scheme of pervasion is not standard in Saivism, it still can he categorised into 
three: viz., the pervasion of material cause in effect, the pervasion of parts in a 
collection, and the pervasion of a universal in an individual. If an entity fulfils 
the above criteria, it can be called a tattva by a Saiva ontologistA” Each tattvu 
is covered by each subsequent tattva. Each prior, lower tattvu is a vydpya and 
the immediately following higher tattva is vyapaka.'" The tattvus sequentially 
existing above each other have their qualities as pervasive ( vyapaka ) anti the 
lower tattvas have their qualities pervaded (vyapya)." 1 For instance as Saktitattva 
is‘pervaded’ by Stvatattva, in that case Sivatattva is ‘pervasive’."’ In the same way, 
all the causal tattvas are pervasive and the effect tattvas pervaded. Abhinavagupta 
explains that the prthtvi tattva is found from kalagnirudrabhuvana up to the 
vlrabhadrabhicvana 62 because of the manifestation of its constant characteristics, 
which are firmness ( dhrti ), rigidity (kathinya) and weight ( garimbi And one 
should explain it in the same way in the context of the tattvas water etc. up to 
Sadascvatattva. 64 Abhinavagupta’s hypothetical opponent is in disagreement and 
contends that just as cow-ness pervades because of the pervasion of a dewlap in 
the individual species of cows, one should understand that this also is the case 
with bodies or worlds. To this Abhinava answers, "A tattva is that which extends 
by virtue of its pervasive state of being and remains in the manner of a universal 
to its own effects. These are, in due order, earth, individual soul and Siva etc. 

58. Rastogi 2012:221. 

59. Also see TA 8.186 and 8.189. 

60. TA 9.310: yo hiyasmad gunotkrstah sa tasmad urdhva ucyate | urdhvata vyaptrta 
snmanmdlinlvijaye sphuta || 

61. TS 8, p. 90: asmims ca tattvakaiape urdhvordhvagunam vyapakam nikrstagunam 
tu vyapyam || TS 8, p. 91: sa eva gunasya utkarso yat tena vind gunantaram na 
upapadyate tena prthtvitattvam stvatattvat prabhrti jalatattvena vyaptam evam 
jalam tejasa ityadiyavac chaktitattvam || 

62. In the prthavyanda there are said to be 16 worlds ( bhunavas ) from kalagnirudra to 
vlrabhadra. 

63. TA 9.3: tathahikdlasadanddvirabhadra*purdntakam em. Sanderson ] purantagam 
Ked. | dhrtikdthinyagarimadyavabhdsdd dharatmata || Also cf. TS 8, p. 69 : yatha 
prthtvi nama dyutikathinyasthaulyadirupa kaldgniprabhrtivirabhadrantabhuvanes 
ddhisthitasamastabrahmandanugata \\ 

64. TA 9.43b: evam jaladitattvesu vacyam *ydvatsaddsivam conj. Sanderson ] 
yavatsadasive Ked. 




ONTOLOGICAL HIERARCHY IN THE TANTRAWKA OF ABHINAVAGUPTA | 255 


So there is no question that it will apply to bodies or worlds.” 63 Therefore, the 
supreme tatti'a, which is Parama Siva, is the radiant, all-encompassing reality 
pervading all these different tattvas. 

DIVERSITY OF CAUSALITY WITHIN THE SCRIPTURAL ACCOUNTS 

As mentioned earlier, Abhinavagupta in his TA makes note of diversity within 
Sastric accounts of causality. This diversity, he asserts, is present not only in 
scriptural accounts but also in the exegetical literature, where two commentators 
while commenting on the same text can still have two different interpretations. 
But as far as Abhinava’s own interpretation of causality is concerned, it is simply 
a matter of the way that the all-encompassing consciousness presents itself in 
the form of various things, and therefore this accounts for the inconsistency of 
the Agamic interpretations of the arising of the tattvas in the process of creation. 
Thus, Abhinava uses metaphysical principles to interpret the historical diversity 
in the accounts of cosmology found in Saiva scriptures. There are different ways 
in which the causality is made manifest and Abhinavagupta uses a metaphysical 
model to explain away what other commentators on some of the Tantras say. 
In fact, he seems to think that his system is under strain and he makes his best 
possible effort to reconcile and make sense of the inconsistency present in 
the scriptures. He does not simply choose to ignore this problem, but he finds 
a brilliant solution by rationalising his tradition and making sense out of the 
inconsistent accounts about causality both in the scriptural and exegetical 
accounts. Since causality has a diverse character and it appears in one way or 
the other,' 1 ’ it is for this very reason, Abhinava seems to suggest, that it makes 
sense that there are various opinions in the scriptures concerning the essential 

65. TA g.4cd-6ab: svasminkarye' tha dharmaughe yadvapi *svasadrggane em. 
Sanderson ] svasadrggune Ked. | aste samanyakalpena tananddyyaptrbhavatah || 
tat tattvam kramasah prthvipradhanam pumstvadayah 11511 dehanam bhuvananam 
ca na prasahgastatto bhavet | Sanderson’s emendation is also supported by 
Abhinavagupta himself in TA 9.54 where he says mantra iti visuddhah syur ami 
panca ganah kramat \ svasmin svasmin gane bhatiyadyad rupam samanvayi || It 
is very likely that the scribe who has just written dharmaughe in the preceding line 
bears in mind that dharma means guna and writes guria instead of gana. 

66. TA g.44cd-45ab: tat a eva svarupe' pi krame’ py anyadrsi sthitih || sastresu yujyate 
citrat *tathdbhanasvabhavatah conj. Sanderson] tathdbhdvasvabhdvatah | Ked. 



256 TANTRAPUSPANJALI 


nature and the order of manifestation of the tattvas. Jayaratha further helps us in 
understanding Abhinava and says that just as mind is sometimes referred to as 
an organ of the mental faculty and sometimes classified with the antahkarana , 
so it is perfectly acceptable that the scriptures should give different accounts of 
things both as to their nature and as to the order of their appearing. 

To explain his position further, Abhinava offers illustrations: one example 
of causal discrepancy is from the scriptures and the other from the natural 
world. 6. First, he explains the apparent discrepancy between two views on the 
origins of prakrti in the Saiva ontology. One interpretation, he says, is based on 
the Rauravasutrasamgraha , which claims that from maya come two products, 
namely prakrti and kaid (power of limited agency). Another is based on the MVUT, 
and maintains that prakrti comes out of/ra/a. 68 Jayaratha further elaborates upon 
Abhinava by introducing the causal discrepancy at the exegetical level. He quotes 
the relevant verses of the Rauravasutrasamgraha (2.4.14-15) and identifies this 
interpretation as that of Brhaspati (c. 650-750 ce), who in his Rauravavdrttika 
on the Rauravasutrasamgraha says that the word tatah in avyaktam ca tatah 
means from maya. In contrast to Brhaspati’s interpretation, Sadyojyotis (c. 
67 5 " 7 2 5 ce) took a different line. He, in his commentary Rauravasutrasamgraha- 
vrtti, understood tatah to mean “next.” In fact, Brhaspati and Sadyojyotis 
differed precisely on this fundamental point. 69 Jayaratha explains that in this 
interpretation the pronoun tatah in avyaktam ca tatah is understood to mean 
thereafter rather than “from that,” i.e., maya. , and he attributes this view to the 


67. TA 9 - 39 cd- 4 oab: ata eva tathdbhdnaparamdrthatayd sthiteh \ kdryakdranabhdvasya 
loke sastre ca citrate || “Since for this reason it is established that the relation of 
cause and effect is an ultimate analysis appearing in this way or that way. Because of 
that it takes many forms both in the worldly domain and the causality maintained 
by scriptures.” 

68. TA 9.40cd-4iab: mayato vyaktakalayor iti rauravasamgrahe || sripurve tu kalatattvad 
vyaktam iti kathyate | 

69. This debate is explained in detail in Sanderson 2006: 48-51. He also refers to 
TA 9- 21 7 where Abhinavagupta gives another view of the same passage: nanu 
srimadrauravadau ragavidyatmakam dvayam | sute kata hiyugapat tato *vyaktam iti 
sthitih II 'Surely in such texts as the Raurava the position is that Kala simultaneously 
creates the pair Raga and Vidya and thereafter Avyakta” (Trans. Sanderson). 



ONTOLOGICAL HIERARCHY IN THE TANTRALOKA OF ABHINAVAGUPTA | 257 


author of the vrtti, Sadyojyotis. 70 This clearly shows that the diversity in relation 
to causality is present both in the scriptural and the exegetical accounts. In case 
of the exegetical interpretations, as we just saw above, one says that avyakta is the 
effect of maya and another says that it is a product of kata. But the explanation of 
the inconsistency, namely that prakrti has come forth from what is called nisei or 
may a tattva after becoming kata is completely implausible. However, Abhinava 
resolves this apparent contradiction by saying that both positions are true. Even 
though he maintains that prakrti comes directly from maya after maya first 
turns itself into kata, 7 ' yet it is clear to his readers that he seems to try and make 
exegetical accounts consistent rather forcefully. 

Abhinava offers a second example from the natural world. He uses the 

example of a scorpion, 72 saying: “.[I]n the world a scorpion can come out 

of cow-faeces, from another scorpion, from imagination, from memory, from 
the desire of a Yogi, from such factors as the power of certain substances and 
mantras.” 73 Abhinava has also used this example as a maxim supporting his 
theory of causation in the case of a Yogi. A thing produced by a Yogi is accepted 
to be similar to something that is produced naturally. To clarify, he further says 
that this is unlike the case of a scorpion that is produced out of natural birth 
as opposed to the one produced from cow-faeces. 74 What Abhinava is arguing 
here is that even if a scorpion produced out of a natural birth is not similar 
to the scorpion produced from cow-faeces, yet the idea that it is a scorpion is 
the same. Jayaratha elaborates the same argument of Abhinava, answering the 
hypothetical opponent, saying that if they consider a separate scorpion to be 
actually there because of some specific quality as a result of some specific cause, 
then surely there is some personal difference of place, time, form etc. in these 
various scorpions that have come forth from a scorpion or faeces etc. Each one 

70. Cf. Sanderson 2006:4gff. 

71. TA 9.4icd-g.42ab: tata eva niidkhydndt katlbhutad alingakam \ \ iti vyakhydsmad ukte 
‘smLn sati nyaye ’tinisphala \ 

72. See Rastogi 1984:3sff. for more details on vricikagomayddisambhutavrscikadinydya. 
Abhinavagupta also uses this analogy in his IPV 2.4.U. 

73. TA g.42cd-43ab: loke ca gomayat kltat samkalpat svapnatah smrteh || yoglcchato 
dravyamantraprabhavddeicavrscikah | 

74. IPV 2.4.11 \yoglcchdpi sarvatha tadrsam eva na tu vrscikagomayadisambhutavrscikad 
inydyena kathamcit rasaviryadina bhinnam karyamjanayati \ 





258 TANTRAPUSPA.N'JALI 


of them has some specific characteristics pertaining to themselves, as a result 
of which they are different from each other. In spite of that, they always remain 
scorpions (the idea of being a scorpion is the same in all of them). That each is 
‘a scorpion’ is always constructed as ‘scorpion’ through pardmarsa. So it is not 
wrong to teach variety in consistency of effects, both with respect to what they 
are, their definition and then the order of their appearance." 

DEBATE ON THE SEQUENCE OF TATTVAS 

If causality with respect to the tattvas is diverse, so too is the order and the 
number of tattvas. How many tattvas are there and what exactly is their sequence 
or their order of manifestation? Dwivedi (1982) has discussed this problem 
systematically in the case of the Puranas. As far as the Agamic notions are 
concerned, as we saw above, the Supreme tattva is one alone anti the generally 
accepted number of tattvas according to the Agamas is thirty-six, yet the latter 
topic remains problematic. Here we should keep in mind that Abhinava does 
speak of two additional tattvas, i.e., the thirty-seventh and the thirty-eighth 
tattvas. These two tattvas are a demonstration of the deep esotericism of the 
Trika of Abhinavagupta.'" 

After having appropriated the diversity of causality within the scriptural 
accounts, Abhinavagupta remarks on the diversity of the sequence of the tattvas 
as taught in various Agamas. He paraphrases relevant passages from some 
important Agamas to illustrate his stand. He mentions, for instance, that the order 
of the tattvas followed in the Sarvajndnottaratantra is purusa (individual), rdga :: 

75. TA 943cd-g.44ab: kamam kutascit svavisesatah || sa tu sarvatra tulyas 
tatparamarsaikyam asti tu | 

76. For more on the thirty-seventh and thirty-eighth tattvas see TAK-III (p. 26): “The 
thirty-seventh is called parasiva (TA n.2iff.), and, as opposed to the thirty-sixth, 
which is emptier than empty ( sunyatisunya ), this represents Siva as identical 
with and inseparable from the universe ( sarvavibhagatman ) and autonomous 
(.svatantra ). The thirty-eighth, mere consciousness, is distinguished by its being 
unlimited and/or contiguous ( anavacchinna ). In TA 5.314 the lotus-seats of the 
goddesses are at the thirty-seventh principle.” 

77. For the Saivas raga is that craving of the soul by virtue of which it always wants 
something. It is not an attachment to a particular thing; rather, the soul is constantly 
driven by abhilasa (desire). It is by virtue of raga that it is attached to sense objects. 
Individual consciousness is contaminated by raga. 



ONTOLOGICAL HIERARCHY IN THE TANTRALOKA OF ABHINAVAGUPTA [ 259 

(desire), vidyd (limited power of cognition), kala 7 * (power of limited action), kala 
(time), and mayo 79 (material cause of the world). There is no mention of niyati 
there and the order of sequence followed is of re-absorption from bottom to 
top. On the other hand, he further adds that in the Svdyambhuvasutrasamgraha, 
niyati is said to be above kala . The pair kala and niyati is above the three, namely 
purusa, rag a and vidyd, Quite contrary to this, the Kiranatantra teaches the order 
to be kala first and then maya* 0 while the order Siva has taught, according to 
Abhinavagupta, in the MPA starts with purusa in association with niyati and 
then kala along with raga, vidyd and kala* 1 Jayaratha identifies and quotes the 
appropriate sources of Abhinavagupta. In his commentary Jayaratha cites from 
the Svayambhuvasutrasamgraha , saying that the kala tattva is below maya tattva 


78. Cf. IPV 3.1.9: kala kihcitkartrtvopodvalanamayl karyam udbhdvayati kihcij janami 
kihcit karomlti | Abhinavagupta discusses kala in detail in the eleventh chapter of 
the Tantraloka, See TA 11.3-4, 8. He also gives definitions for the five kalas in his TS, 
p. 109-110. 

79. Maya is a sort of super prakrti , non-differentiated, eternal, all pervasive and 

unconscious. It is called maya because everything fits into it. For different definitions 
of maya in the Tantric exegesis, see Vasudeva 2004:181-184. Also see TA f° r 

the definition of maya. For more detailed accounts of maya in both dualist and non¬ 
dualist systems of Saivism, see Sanderson 1992:282ff. 

80. TA g.46cd-47ab: pumragavit trayad urdhvam *kalaniyatisamputam em. Sanderson 
] kalaniyatisamputam Ked || kala em. Sanderson ] kalo Ked mayeti kathitah 
kramah kiranasastragah || According to Sanderson the two words seem to have 
been wrongly inverted by the manuscript tradition. But Jayaratha makes it clear 
in his commentary that he himself thought through this problem and proposed 
an emendation. However, it is evident that the editors of KSTS did not take pains 
to understand the commentary. See TAV Vol. VI, p. 46* atra ca kalo niyatisamputah, 
kalety evam atmaiva jaratpustakadrstah patho grahyah, anyathd hi kairano rtho 
visamvadet | So Jayaratha has proposed the reading kala which he found in certain 
old manuscripts. This proves that there were still manuscripts around in his time 
which had the correct reading, for otherwise, as he himself suggests, the reading of 
the Kiranagama would be in disagreement with this passage in the TA. 

81. TA 9.45cd-9*48ab: pumragavitkalakalamayd jhanottare kramat || niyatir nasti 
vairihce kalordhve niyatih sruta corr ] srata Ked | pumragavittrayad urdhvam 
kalaniyatisamputam \ \ kala mayeti kathitah kramah kiranasastragah | pumanniyatya 
kalas ca ragavidyakalanvitah || ity esa krama uddisto matahge paramesvare | 





260 tantrapuspAnjali 


and niyati stays in-betvveen them and then follow kald and vidyd. Sz According to 
him, the Kirandgama holds that purusa is the guardian of the house of prcikrti 
and then follows raga tattva , which arouses impure knowledge and deludes lower 
beings. Raga tattva is followed by kdla and niyati , which are said to be mutually 
dependent. In this scheme of the Kirandgama, kald comes into being from kdla 
and maya stays above both of them. 83 According to MPA, the order taught begins 
by purusa followed by niyati and then comes kdla along with raga, vidyd and 
kald . S4 Once again Jayaratha identifies and quotes the relevant passages from the 
MPA that Abhinava is referring to. 85 

As pointed out earlier, Abhinava bases his TA on the MVUT. It is only after 
he debates the diversity of causality within several Siddhanta scriptures and the 
heterogeneity of the sequence of the tattvas therein that he comes back to the 

82. There are three variant readings of this verse. One is from the KSTS edition 
[Ked] of the Tantraloka-viveka (TAV Vol.VI, p. 46.). The second is from the 
Mysore edition [Med] of the Svayambhuvasutrasamgraha (adhvapatalam 26cd- 
2 7 ab), and the third is from the Pondicherry I.F.I. Transcript [Ped] No. 39 (35.28): 
mdydtattvdt Ked ] mdyadhah Med, mdydthaksd Ped. kdlatattvam Ked ] kdlatattvan 
tu Med, kalatadvastu Ped. samsthitam Ked Med ] samsthitas Ped. tatpadadvaye | 
samsthanyasminkala tadvad vidyapyevam Ked ] niyatiscapare' nyasmin kalavidya 
Med, niyatis ca parenyasmin kald vidya Ped. tatah punah | | 

83. Here I am only quoting the verses referred to by Jayaratha in his commentary. 
Kirandgama (VP) 8.125. tatraiva purusojheyah pradhanagrhapalakah | ragatattvat 
tuvidyakhyam asuddhampasumohakam || 8.128a: tatah kdlaniyatydkhyau samputau 
vyapya laksadha | 8.130b: kalatattvat kald jneya laksayutaparicchada || 8.133a: 
tadurdhvam tu bhaven mdyd kotim vyapya sthitd hy adah || 

84. TA 4 7 cd 48ab. pumanniyatya kalas ca ragavcdyakalanvitah || ity esa krama uddisto 
matahge paramesvare | 

85. Here I am only quoting the verses referred to by Jayaratha in his commentary. 
MPA (VP) 9.2a: ksobhito 'nantanathena granthir mayatmako yada | 9.15a: 
tadvanmaydnusamyogad vyajyate *’cetand Ped ] cetand Ked. kald \ 10.1: *athdnoh 
Ped ] ity anoh Ked. kalitasyasya kalaya pragjagannidheh | kaladhare ’nu vijnanam 

bubhuksor Ped ] bubhutsor Ked. vidyaya abhavat || 11.2: tasmad evasayadragah 
suksmarupo bhijayate | yenasau ranjitah ksipram bhogabhugbhogatatparah || 12.1: 
atha kalah kramatpraptah Ped ] kalakramapraptah Ked. kancukatrayadarsanat 
| yenasau % kalpyate Ped ] kalyate Ked. suksmah sivasamarthyayogatah || 13.1: 
atheddnim munivydghra karanasyamitadyuteh \ saktir niydmikd pumsah *saha 
tattvena Ped ] satattvena Ked. *sarpita Ped ] samarpita Ked. || i4.iab: atha 
pumstattvanirdesahsvadhisthdnopa*sarpatah Ped ] sarpitah Ked. | 


ONTOLOGICAL HIERARCHY IN THE TANTRAWKA OF ABHINAVAGUPTA | 261 


teachings of the MVUT. 8b Here he interprets the nature and functioning of the 
tattvas along with their mutual causal relations and sequence according to Trika 
Saivism. According to the doctrine expounded in the MVUT, Abhinavagupta 
demonstrates in the TA the five-fold division with which Parama Siva manifests 
himself. There arises a set of five tattvas called Srva, Sakti, Saddstva, Isvara, and 
Suddhavidya as a result of the coming into full vividness of one or other of the 
five powers of Parama Siva. 87 Parama Siva, being of the nature of autonomous 
consciousness overflowing with the five powers, is categorised into five tattvas 
through the division manifested by his own autonomy. This autonomous 
consciousness of Parama Siva does not need anything else in order to accomplish 
what it accomplishes. In that sense it is truly autonomous, needing nothing 
else for its operation. But what are these five powers of Parama Siva and how 
do they operate in the Trika ontology? According to Trika Saivism, from cit 
sakti arises the Scvatattva, from ananda sakti comes the Saktitattva, from iccha 
sakti comes forth the Sadastvatattva, from jndna sakti emerges the Isvaratattva 
and from kriya sakti arises the Suddhavidyatattva. 88 This distinction is based 
on predominance and is also clearly articulated in Abhinavagupta’s TS. 89 For 
instance, one cannot think of cit without the other four. The power of Parama 
Siva is that which is able to manifest this play of predominance within its totality. 
So where cit is the predominant element in Parama Siva’s autonomous nature 

86. TA g.48cd-49ab: karyakdranabhavcye tattva ittham vyavasthite || Mpurvasastre 
kathitam vacmah karanakalpanam | 

87. TA g.49cd-5oab: scvah svatantradrgrupah pahcasaktisunirbharah || 

*svdtantryabhdsitabhidah conj. Sanderson ] svatantryabhasitabhidha Ked. 
pancadha pravibhajyate \ 

88. TA g.socd-g.sicd: cidanandesanajhanakriyanam susphutatvatah || 

stvasaktisadesdnavidyakhyam tattvapancakam | ekaikatrapi tattve ’smin 
sarvasaktisunirbhare \ \ 

89. TS 8, p. 73-75: tatra paramesvarah pancabhih iaktibhih nirbhara ity uktam sa 
svatantryatsaktim tam tam mukhyataya prakatayan pancadha tisthati \ citpradhanye 
stvatattvam anandapradhanye saktitattvam icchapradhanye sadasivatattvam 
icchaya hi jhanakriyayoh sdmyarupdbhyupagamdtmakatvat jnanasaktipradhdnye 
Isvaratattvam kriyasaktipradhanye vidyatattvam iti | atra ca tattvesvarah 
sivasaktisadasivesvaranantah brahmeva nivrttau esam samanyarupanam 
visesa anugativisayah pahca tadyatha sambhavah saktah mantramahekvarah 
mantresvarah mantra iti suddhadhva \ 






262 tantrapuspAnjali 


(.svatantrya ) that is regarded as citsakti: when ananda is predominant that is 
ananda sakti. So Sivatattvci is where cit is predominant. As pointed out earlier, 
from the Saiddhantika point of view, which is mostly adopted in such exegesis 
in terms of hierarchy, there is contraction as we go from cit to kriyd. Moreover, in 
each of these tcittvas, though each one is full, each one is in fact replete with all 
these Saktis and each of these distinctions are taught to he the various divisions 
on the basis of predominance of one over the other. 

A brief summary of how Jayaratha explains the position of Abhinava 
further helps us understand this better. Reiterating Abhinava’s thesis, Jayaratha 
comments that it is clear that Siva, being supreme and fully expanded, is regarded 
to be of the nature of nothing but Consciousness according to the Trika system. 
Even though, he adds, Siva is without desire because of his fullness, nonetheless, 
by virtue of the greatness of his autonomy, there arises a desire within him to 
project himself externally. As a result of this he shines forth, entering the state 
of Sakti first by representing himself as / ( ahum ). This comes about through a 
gradual intensification of the relish of his total bliss ( ananda ). This state of Sakti 
that is represented by/ is the first contraction of citscikti . Immediately after this he 
projects the two branches of self-reflexive re-apprehension which are I and this 
(< aham-idam ), where /can see its own reflected-self as this. In other words, it is like 
Siva is able to see his own reflected image in a mirror, but both the mirror and the 
image reflected within the mirror belong to the same homogenous consciousness 
as that of Siva. 91 With that projection of Siva there arise two possibilities which 
further manifest into two tcittvas: Saddsiva and Isvara. In both cases the state 
represented is: aham-idam. In both cases the supreme Lord is manifested in this 
aspect (objective aspect) represented by idam along with the / aspect (subjective 
aspect) represented by ahcim. However, at the Saddsiva level / is principle and this 
has a subordinate position while at the Isvara level, this has a principle position 
and / is at a subordinate place. The ground of the a ham aspect is nothing but 
pure consciousness. In Saddsiva tattvci, urge ( iccha ) is predominant because that 


90. TA g.sicd: tat tat pradhdnyayogena sa sa bhedo nirupyate | 

91. For a detailed discussion on how the theory of reflection functions in the system of 
Abhinavagupta, see Kaul 2016. 



ONTOLOGICAL HIERARCHY IN THE TANTRALOKA OF ABHINAVAGUPTA j 263 


is underdeveloped while in Isvara tattvci knowledge (jnana) is predominant. At 
the Sadcisiva level, Siva is supposed to take as his object the mass of phenomena 
which are like a picture of which the mere outline has been drawn and that takes 
the form aham-idam (the aham element is predominant). But when the mass 
of phenomena has become fully vivid, and he submerges the / element within 
the This element which has that mass of phenomena as its basis, then there 
arises Isvara tattvci. Therefore, according to Abhinavagupta, although there is no 
difference of the /-awareness, there is a difference in the cases of Sadascva and 
Is\’ara in accordance with the vividness and non-vividness of the idam element. 
The last in the pentad of the pure-universe ( Suddhadhvan ), the Suddhavidya 
tattva arises when kriya sakti is predominant and when there is the awareness 
aham-idam where both aham and idam are in perfect equilibrium. This occurs 
when for Isvara the / element flashes forth as grounded in pure consciousness 
and when there is the manifesting of the / element in the midst of the mass 
of phenomena in which duality is now fully developed. The supreme Lord Siva 
has this single undiluted potency, nonetheless, just as his activity becomes Sakti 
tattva through extraversion, so also for Sadascva and Isvara there is Suddhavidya 
tattva." 1 

Furthermore, corresponding to the five powers of Siva mentioned above, 
Abhinava introduces five kinds of supersensuous beings called Sambhava, 
Saktija, Mantramahesvara, Mantresvara and Mantra, according to the five powers 
of Siva predominant in each one of them. Here it is worth mentioning that three, 
namely Mantramahesvara, Mantresvara and Mantra, are basically an adoption 
from the Saiva Saiddhantic system and it is for the purpose of his exegesis that 
Abhinavagupta introduces Sambhccva and Sakta beings also . 93 Following the 
scheme of the MVUT, Abhinava counts these five experients as belonging to 
the pure realm with their corresponding tattvas. Whatever nature is manifest 
is inseparably connected with these five categories of beings and the tattva in 
these beings is defined as whatever nature is manifest in each of these classes of 


92. TAV, p. 49 ‘ 51 - 

93. Vasudeva 2004:i52ff. has carefully looked into the problem of experients in general 
and the five pure experients in particular. 



264 TANTRAPUSPAXJALI 


beings. Just as earth is the substance of experience of kdldgnirucira and others, ' 4 
so those experiencing at the highest level are called Sdmbhavu {Siva tattva is the 
substance of their experience), and the same thing applies at all subsequent 
lower levels right down to the earth. The prthivi tattva is also pervaded by a 
hierarchy of beings. These beings are said to be the Rudras and the lowest of the 
Rudras within the prthivi tattva are supposed to govern the lire of the eon. ' 

At this stage in the text, Abhinavagupta comes back to the concept of kalds 
that we discussed earlier. He comes back to it in reference to the hierarchy of the 
karana deities and the karanas are correlated with the kalds. Most of the Saiva texts 
accept five karanas 96 while the system of Svacchanda added Andsritabhattdraka 
as a sixth representing Siva in a purely transcendent form. As far as the five kalds 
are concerned, Brahma is said to rule nivrtti, Visnu rules pratisthd, Rudra rules 
vidya, isvara rules sdntd and Sadasiva rules santatita, while Andsrita Siva is beyond 
hietarchy. The topic comes up when Abhinava’s opponent makes an objection 

94. As mentioned earlier Abhinavagupta explains that the prthivi tattva is found from 
kaLagntrudra-bhuvana up to the virabhadra-bhuvana because of the manifestation 
of its constant characteristics, which are firmness ( dhrti ), rigidity ( kdthinya ) and 
weight ( garima) 

95 - TA 9-53cd-55ab. sambhavah saktija mantramahesd mantrandyakdh || mantra iti 
visuddhah syur amipahca ganah kramat | svasmin svasmin gane bhatiyadyadrupam 
samanvayai 11 tadesu tattvam ity uktam kalagnyader dharadivat | 

96. For a detailed account of the concept of karanas in the Tantric traditions, see 
TAK II, p. 90-91. In the Siddhanta, these are the five deities Brahma, Visnu, Rudra, 
I'svara and Sadasiva. They are the overlords of the five kalds, and so of the entire 
tattvakrama divided up (variously by different texts) into five branches (Parakhya 
Tantra 14.75-76). In the body of the practitioner they have their seats in the five 
granthis that are located along the course of the breath {card), Brahma being in 
the heart, Visnu in the throat, Rudra in the palate, Isvara between the brows, and 
Sadasiva at the tip of the nose (Sardhatrisatikalottaravrtti 23.90-12^ Kiranagama 
58.32 45). Svacchanda Tantra (u.igff) gives another set of five deities as the five 
karanas , identified with Brahma, etc.: Anasrita, Anatha, Ananta, Vyomarupin 
and Vyapin (see also Svacchanda Tantra on 11.18). However, Svacchanda Tantra 
11.48IT. lists a set of only three karanas, homologised with Brahma, Visnu and §iva; 
mdydtattva, vidyatattva, and scvatattva ; Raudrl, Vania and Jyestha; jhdna, krtyd } and 
Lccha. The Tantrasadbhava (9*458) speaks about six karanas in the context of varnas, 
which reach up to the level of samana and are to be abandoned by the practitioner 
in order to attain dissolution (laya) in the seventh state." 


ONTOLOGICAL HIERARCHY IN THE TANTRALOKA OF ABHINAVAGUPTA | 265 


asking: “How come Brahma, the Lord of nivrtti, is not counted as a separate 
tcittvci, but Sadasiva and the rest are counted as separate tattvas ?" 97 Abhinava 
makes a distinction between the tattva and the karana devata, and says that just 
as the king who rules the country is not a separate tattva, so too these lords of the 
various kalas (karanas) should not be regarded as separate tattvas. 98 Nivrtti is the 
lowest of the kalas into which Saivas divide the tattvas . 99 Brahma is the lord of 
nivrtti, the lowest of these kalas. Since the causes are not counted as tattvas —the 
tattva is simply the substance of their experience—and since the substance of 
Brahma’s experience is in fact prthivi tattva, the opponent’s objection is regarded 
as out of place. Moreover, there is no direct agent other than the will of Siva by 
which the division has been manifested. 100 What Abhinavagupta says is that the 
only factor here that does the work is the will of Siva and it is this that manifests 
the difference between karanas. Nothing else makes that differentiation appear 
in consciousness, so there is no extrinsic factor here causing the unity of Siva to 
break up into five levels. 

Abhinava is then asked by a hypothetical objector that if it was the will of 
Siva that made the pure universe manifest, then who is the lord of the impure 
universe? In answer to this, Abhinava says that it is the Lord Aghoresa (= Ananta) 
who creates the impure universe in order to divide the plurality of consciousness 
in those classes of conscious beings who crave sense experience, and it is he 
who has been stimulated by the will of the Lord. 101 Here Abhinava speaks the 
language of the Saiddhantikas, but uses the terminology of the MVUT, where 
Ananta becomes Aghoresa. Ananta is the highest of the Vidyesvaras and in the 
Saiddhantika doctrine Siva does not contaminate himself by directly acting on 
maya to bring about the manifestation of the impure universe. This is done by 

97. TA-9.56.cd: brahma ncvrttyadhipatih prthaktattvam naganyate || 

98. TA 9.59: yatha prthcvyadhipatir nrpas tattvantaram nahi \ tatha tat tat kalesanah. 
prthak tattvantaram katham || 

99. For more on kalas, please see note 26 above. 

100. TA 9.60: tadevam pahcakamidam suddho’ dhva paribhasyate \ tatra 
saksacchcvecchacva kartryabhasitabhedika || 

101. TA 9.61: isvarecchavasaksubdhabhogalolikacidganan \ samvibhaktumaghoresah 
srjatiha sitetaram || (“So Aghoresa creates this impure universe in order to 
differentiate all souls whose craving for experience has been stimulated by the force 
of Siva’s will”). 



266 TANTRAPUSPANJALI 


the foremost of the Vidyesvaras. Ananta Bhattdraka, reflecting on the will of Siva, 
animates mciya with his power and this stimulates mdyci to produce kulci tattva 
and so forth. 

While the distinction between the pure universe (suddhadhvan) and 
the impure universe ( asuddhadhvan) according to Saivism is fundamental 
for understanding the Saiva cosmology and the ontic-hierarchy functioning 
within its paradigm, in this article 1 have limited myself to talking only about 
the five tattvas constituting the pure universe ( suddhadhvan). I have studied 
Abhinavagupta’s position as an exegete who pursues a resolution of the problem 
of the tattvcis. He uses the scheme of causality to rationalise the ontic-hierarchy 
in the Trika. He notes inconsistency in the hierarchy of the tattvcis in his source 
texts of Siddhanta Saivism and attempts to explain the ontological model versus 
the metaphysical model of the tattvcis. He notes that the sequence of the tattvcis is 
not historically accurate, but he seeks to introduce ontological accuracy therein. 
However, a study of the tattvcis falling under the realm of the impure universe 
( asuddhadhvan ) lemains a future desideratum. Having said that it is important 
to note that there are other significant dimensions attached to the Trika idea 
of tattva. For instance, how does the process of tattvabhedana and tattvajaya U)2 
work in the yogic parlance and what is the role played by the seven experients 
( pramatr) therein? On the other hand it would also be important to look more 
closely at the concept of causality in the TA, taking help from Abhinavagupta’s 
Prcityabhijna literature.Abhinava’s system does not work in isolation. The 
multi-layered textures that his works are embedded with can be challenging 
even for advanced scholars. The understanding of his deep esotericism and 
archaic mysticism needs a thorough grounding in the multi-layered textures 
spread across the domains of Prcityabhijna , Aesthetics, and Tantra-Agama, both 
dual and non-dual, which are often ignored. This is also true of Abhinavagupta’s 
concept of tattva. We also need to have a clearer understanding of the functioning 
of tattva in the context of Abhinavan aesthetics. But as 1 said above, this remains 
a task for the future. 


102. See Vasudeva 2004 for more details on tattvabhedana (p. 203ff) and tattvajaya (p. 
293 - 295 )- 

103. Abhinava discussed kdryakaranabhava in the IPV 2.4.1-21. 



ONTOLOGICAL HIERARCHY IN THE TANTRALOKA OF ABHINAVAGUPTA | 267 
ABBREVIATIONS 


conj. 

Conjecture 

corn 

Correction 

em. 

Emendation 

IPV 

Isvarapratyabhijndvimarsini 

IPW 

Isvarapratyabhijhdvivrtivimarsini 

IPWya 

Isvarapratyabhijnavimarsinrvyakhyd ( Bhdskari) 

Ked 

KSTS Edition 

KSDK 

Kasmirasaivadarsanabrhatkosa 

KSTS 

Kashmir Series of Texts and Studies 

MPA 

Matangaparamesvaragama 

MVUT 

Mdlinh'ijayottaratantra 

MW 

Matin ivijayavdrttika 

Ped 

Pondichery: Publications de l’lnstitut frangais d’indologie 

PSV 

Paramdrthasaravrtti 

TA 

Tantrdloka 

TAK 

Tan trikabhidh dnakosa 

TAV 

Tan trdlokavtveka 

TP 

Tattvaprakdsa 

TS 

Tantrasdra 

VP 

Vidyapada 

Med 

Mysore Edition of Matangaparamesvaragama 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Primary Sources 

Bhdskari, Vol II: A Commentary on the Isvarapratyabhijndvimarsini of Abhinavagupta. 

Edited by K.A. Subramania Iyer and K.C. Pandey, Allahabad, 1950. 
Isvarapratyabhijndkdrikdvrtti of Utpaladeva. See TORELLA 2003. 

Isvarapratyabhijndvimarsini of Abhinavagupta, Volume II. Edited by Madhusudan Kaul 
Sastrl. KSTS 33. Bombay, 1921. 

Isvarapratyabhijhavtvrttvimarsinl of Abhinavagupta, Volume III. Edited by Madhusudan 
Kaul Sastri. KSTS 65. Bombay, 1943. 

Kasmlrasaivadarsanabrhatkosah, Vol. 1. Project Director & Commentator Dr. Balajinnatha 
Pandita. Jammu (Jammu 8 c Kashmir): Sri Ranbir Kendriya Sanskrit Vidyapeetha. 


2001. 



268 TANTRAPUSPANJALI 


Kasmirasaivadarsanabrhatkosah, Vol. 2. Project Director &: Commentator Dr. Balajinnatha 
Pandita. Jammu (Jammu & Kashmir): Rashtriya Sanskrit Sansthan, 2005. 
Kiranagama. II Kiranagama: Testo e trciduzione del vidyapada. Edited and translated by 
Maria Pia Vivanti. Supplement n.3 to ANNALI, vol. 35 (2). Istituto orientale di 
Napoli, 1975. 

Malincvijayottaratantra of Abhinavagupta. Edited by Madhusudan Kaul Shastri. KSTS 37. 
Bombay, 1922. 

Malincvijayavarttikam of Abhinavagupta. Edited by Madhusudan Kaul Shastri. KSTS 31. 
Srinagar, 1921. 

Matahgaparamesvaragama Vidyapada, avec le commentaire (v. rtti) de Bhatta Ramakantha. 

Edited by N.R. Bhatt. Pondicherry: Institu fran^ais d’Indologie, 1977. 

Nyayakosa or Dictionary of Technical Terms of Indian philosophy. Compiled by 
Mahamahopadhyaya Bhlmacarya Jhalaklkar. Revised and re-edited by 
mahamahopadhyaya Vasudev Shastri Abhyankar. Poona: The Bhandarkar Oriental 
Research Institute, 1978. 

Svdyambhuvasutrasangrah. Institu frangais d’Indologie, Transcript 39. Pondicherry. 
Svayambhuvasutrasangraha. Edited by Verikatasubrahmanya Sasrtl. Mysore: 
Mahlsuradharmasamsthana, 1937. 

Tantraloka of Abhinavagupta with the commentary {-viveka) of Rajanaka Jayarathcu Edited 
by Mukund Ram Shastri and Madhusudan Kaul Shastri, 12 vols. KSTS 23, 28, 29, 30, 
35 > 36, 4 i> 47 » 52,57, 58, 59. Allahabad and Srinagar, 1918-1928. 

Tantrasara of Abhinavagupta. Edited by Mukund Ram Sastri. KSTS 17. Bombay, 1918. 
Tantrikabhidhdnakosa II: Dictionnaire des termes techniques de la literature hindoue 
tantrique. A Dictionary of Techinical Terms from Hindu Tantric Literature. Edited 
by H. Brunner, G. Oberhammer, and A. Padoux. Beitrage zur kultur - und 
Geistesgeschichte Asiens Nr. 44. Vienna: Verlag Der Osterreichischen Akademier 
der wissenschaften, 2004. 

Tantrikabhidhdnakosa III: Dictionnaire des termes techniques de la literature hindoue 
tantrique. A Dictionary of Techinical Terms from Hindu Tantric Literature. Edited by 
Marion Rastelli and Dominic Goodall. Beitrage zur kultur - und Geistesgeschichte 

Asiens Nr. 76. Vienna: Verlag Der Osterreichischen Akademier der wissenschaften, 
2013. 

Editions with Translations and Other Secondary Sources 

Allen, Keith Maurice. 2003. Causality in Kashmiri Saivism: A Translation and Study of 
Abhinavagupta s Tantraloka, Chapter Nine, Verses 1-49 andjayaratha’s Commentary.” 
M.A. thesis, The University of Texas at Austin. 

Allen, Keith. 2011. “Being Known According to Abhinavagupta.” Ph.D. diss., University of 
Oxford. 

Bansat-Boudon, Lyne and Kamalesha Datta Tripathi. 2011. An Introduction to Tantric 
philosophy. The Paramarthasara of Abhinavagupta with the commentary ofYogaraja. 



ONTOLOGICAL HIERARCHY IN THE TANTRALOKA OF ABHINAVAGUPTA | 269 


Translation, introduction, notes, critically revised Sanskrit text, appendix, indices by 
Lyne Bansat-Boudon. Routledge Studies in Tantric Traditions. London: Routledge. 

Dasgupta, Surendranath. 2004. A History of Indian Philosophy, Volume I. Delhi: Motilal 
Banarsidass. 

Dwivedi, Vrajavallabha. 1982. Kati Tattvani pp. 3-13, in Tantra-Yatra: Essays on Tantra- 
Agama Thoughts and Philosophy, Literature, Culture and Travel, Ratna Publications, 
Varanasi. 

-, ed. 1983. Luptagamasamgraha, Part II. Yogatantra-Ratnamala 10. Varanasi. 

-, ed. 1988. Astaprakaranam. Yogatantra-Ratnamala 12. Varanasi. 

-. 2000. Tantragamfya Dharma Darsan, VoL /. Varanasi: Shaiva Bharati Shodha 

Pratishthanam. 

Goodall, Dominic. 2009. On the tattvas in the Nisvdsatattvasamhita. Handout of the 
presentation given on July 20,2009 at Pondicherry. Second International Workshop 
on Early Tantra (20-31 July, 2009), Ecole frangaise d’Extreme-Orient 

Kaul, Mrinal. 2016. “Abhinavagupta’s Theory of Reflection: A Study, Critical Edition 
and Translation of the Bimbapratibimbavada (verses 1-65) in Chapter III of the 
Tantraloka with the commentary of Jayaratha.” Ph.D. diss., Concordia University, 
Montreal. 

Padoux, Andr£. 1992. Vac: The Concept of Word in Selected Hindu Tantras. Translated by 
Jacques Gontier. Sri Garib Dass Oriental Series No. 155. Delhi. 

Rastogi, Navjivan. 1984. “Some More Nyayas as Employed by Abhinavagupta.” Annals of the 
Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute 65:27-42. 

-. 2012. Abhinavagupta ka Tantrdgamcya Darsan -Itihas, SanskrtiSaundarya aur Tattva- 

cintan. Sagar: ViSvavidyalaya PrakaSan. 

Sanderson, Alexis. 1988. “Saivism and the Tantric Traditions.” In The World's Religions edited 
by S. Sutherland, L. Houlden, P. Clarke and F. Hardy, pp. 660-704. London: Routledge. 

-• 1992. “The Doctrine of the Malinlvijayottaratantra.” In Ritual and Speculation in 

Early Tantrism: Studies in Honour of Andre Padoux, edited by T. Goudriaan. Albany: 
SUNY Press. 

-• 1 995 - “Meaning in Tantric Ritual.” In Essais sur le Rituel III: Colloque du Centenaire 

de la Section des Sciences religieuses de I’Ecole Pratique des Hautes Etudes, edited by 
A.-M. Blondeau and K. Schipper, pp.15-95. Bibliotteque de l’Ecole des Hauts Etudes, 
Sciences Religieuses. Louvain-Paris: Peeters. 

-. 2004. “An Introduction to Saivism.” A handout of the lecture delivered in the 

University of Kyoto on December 10,2004. 

-. 2006. “The Date of Sadyojyotis and Brhaspati.” In Tantra and Visistadvaitaveddnta, 

edited by Marzenna Czemiak-Drozdzowicz. Cracow Indological Studies Vol. 8. 
Cracow: Ksiegamia Akademicka. 

-. 2007a. “The Saiva Exegesis of Kashmir.” In Melanges tantriques a la memoire d’Helene 

Brunner / Tantric studies in memory of Helene Brunner, edited by Dominic Goodall & 





270 tantrapuspAnjali 


Andre Padoux, pp. 231-442 and (bibliography) pp. 551-582. Collection Indologie n° 
106. Pondicherry: Institut fran^ais de Pondichery/Ecole fran^ais d’Extreme-Orient. 

-. 2007b. “Swami Lakshman Joo and His place in the Kashmirian Saiva Tradition.” In 

Samvidullasah, Manifestation of Divine Consciousness: Swami Lakshman Joo, Saint- 
Scholar of Kashmir §acv ism, edited by Bettina Baumer and Sarla Kumar, pp. 93-126. 
New Delhi: D.K. Printworld. 

Torella, Raffaele, ed. and trans. 2003. Isvarapratyabhijhakdrikdvrtti of Utpaiadeva with the 
Author’s Vrtti, Critical Edition and Annotated Translation. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass. 
Vasudeva, Somadeva. 2004. The Yoga of Malinivijayottaratantra, Chapters 1-4, 7, 77-77. Critical 
Edition, Translation and Notes. Collection Indologie 97. Pondicherry: Institut 
frangais de Pondichery/Ecole fran^ais d’Extreme-Orient. 

-. 2013. “The Unconscious Experiencer: Bhoktrtva in the Pramatrbheda of the Trika.” 

Journal of Indological Studies, No. 24 & 25 (2012-2013): 203-230. Kyoto, Japan. 




Purnatd-pratyabhijnd, 

The Recognition of Fullness of 
M. M. Acarya Rameshvar Jha 

An Introduction 

Sadananda Das 


I have chosen this text for translation because it shows the continuity and, 
at the same time, creativity of the tradition. The Purpata-pratyabhijnd (The 
Recognition of Fullness) by Acarya Rameshvar Jha stands in the tradition of 
prakarana texts, which in a way summarizes what has gone before and brings it to 
a certain conclusion. Since he chose the word purnata for the title, two meanings 
are implied: the culmination of the philosophy and spirituality of Pratyabhijna 
as contained in the concept of fullness, and more precisely, purnahanta, full or 
perfect I-consciousness. It is important that such a text has been composed in the 
20th century against all speculation that there has been a break in the tradition. 

The second motivation for choosing a text by a great Pandit of KasI is to 
connect him with Pandit H.N. Chakravarty, to whom this volume is dedicated. 
Pandit Chakravarty was a direct disciple of M.M. Gopinath Kaviraj, and all these 
great scholars who revived the tradition of so-called Kashmir Saivism in KasI 
were personally connected and deeply linked with a sense of respect. Although 
Pandit Chakravarty was not a disciple of Acarya Rameshvar Jha, he referred to 
him as an authority. The fourth scholar in this group would be Thakur Jaidev 
Singh, who was also a disciple of Gopinath Kaviraj, and who often consulted 
Pandit Rameshvar Jha in clarifying some textual or grammatical problem. 
Acharya Vraj Vallabh Dvivedi equally belongs to this group of scholars in KasI, 
each one contributing in their own way to the scholarship on non-dual Kashmir 
Saivism and thus establishing it as a living scholarly tradition in the centre of 
traditional learning that is KasI or Varanasi. 



272 : tantrapuspAnjali 


Acarya Rameshvar Jha spent some time in Kashmir in the sixties and 
met Swami Lakshman Joo. The meeting had such a deep impact on him that 
he became his disciple and changed from being an orthodox Naiyayika to a 
convinced follower of Trika Saivism and the Pratyabhijna school. He certainly 
owed his own enlightenment to his guru , and he expresses it in no equivocal 
terms in his gurustuti. He was equally influenced by the spiritual greatness of 
devl Sharika, to whom he also dedicated a number of stotras and slokas. 

Mahamahopadhyaya Acarya Rameshvar Jha was born in Patasa village in 
Samastipur district, on the bank of the Kareh River near the holy land of Baba 
Kusesvara, in the land of Mithila known at present as the state of Bihar. He 
was bom in a family of Maithili Brahmins on the first day of the bright half of 
the month of Vaisakha in the year 1905 (vL sam. 1962). His mother was Srlmatl 
Ramadevi, and his father, Sri Ayodhyanatha. According to the family tradition, his 
education started after the sacred thread ceremony with the reading of Sandhya- 
gayatrl ’, §isubodha y and Nahnidattapancavimsatika. He studied the scriptures 
of logic {nyaya) } grammar (y yakarana) and other texts starting from prathama 
up to the acarya examination (equivalent to a Master's degree) with scholars, 
including Pt. Ramadatta Mishra, Sri Vidyanath Jha, Sri Muktinath Mishra, Sri 
Raghunath Jha, Sri Radhakant Jha and Sri Sadananda Jha. He started his teaching 
career in the Nityananda Veda Vidyalaya in Varanasi in 1933 and then became a 
lecturer of Nyaya in the Radhakrishna Sanskrit College at Khurja, Bihar. Later 
he set up a Sanskrit college in his own village Patasa, in the memory of his uncle 
and taught there in the traditional method. As a student he practiced svarayoga 
{theyoga of sound) from his uncle Sri Akshaya Jha and lived only on water and 
milk {payas). Later in ca. 1950 he came to Varanasi and lived in the house of Sri 
Rameshvar Joshi and engaged himself in the practice of yoga and teaching. 

In ca. 1955 he went to Swami Lakshman Joo in Kashmir. He took initiation 
from him and studied Saivagama texts with him. Inspired by M.M. Pt. Gopinath 
Kaviraj, he composed his Purnata-pratyabhijnd (The Recognition of Fullness) in 
i960 (vL sam . 2017) and made it available for teaching. Afterwards he moved to 
many different places, from KasI to Kashmir, as well as to his village Patasa. He 
taught Nyaya, Vyakarana, Vedanta and Saivagama texts to interested people of all 
levels, from laymen to the educated elite, and promoted the philosophy of Purnata- 
pratyabkijna. In 1980, he was honored with the title ‘Mahamahopadhyaya' and 


purnatA-pratyabhijM, the recognition OF FULLNESS I 273 

appointed as a Guest/Emeritus Professor at Banaras Hindu University. In 1981, he 
was honored with the President’s Award by the Government of India and he also 
received the title of 6astracu<Jamani. 

At 12:20 am on December 12th, 1981, after fulfilling his mortal duty he 
immersed himself in the state that is ever new ( abhinava) and shining, saying “I 
take my own form." 

Over the course of his lifetime, as he meditated on the scriptures, M.M. 
Acarya Rameshvar Jha would compose deep and poetic verses. Roughly ten 
thousand verses are preserved in his diaries as well as in his letters written to 
his guru Swami Lakshman Joo, to Sharika Devi and Prabha Devi. Many of these 
verses have been published in other forms, including his Gurustuti (addressed 
to Swami Lakshman Joo) 1 2 and Stvatattvavimarsa, and in the special edition 
of Sanmarga on Tantragama. Many of his compositions are in metrical and 
philosophical poetry in praise of the Lord who is none other than one’s own self. 

I quote one of his verses to give an example of this type of poetry, which provides 
philosophical ideas. 

upasate 'piye canyam devamyam kancanapi tu / 
sa devo ’py aham evasti na ced devojacLo bhavet //* 

Those who worship whatever other god, even that (other) god is indeed 
‘I am.’ Otherwise the god would be inert (jada ). 

He once said that he did not make anybody his disciple, but he offered his 
guidance/mastership (guruta) to whoever wanted to be his student: 

na maya kriyate sisyah krtah sisyo na kascana / 
sisyatam icchate sadyo diyate guruta maya // 

I neither make anybody my disciple, nor was anybody made my disciple. 

But whoever wants to be a disciple I offer my guidance. 

1. Srlgurustuti (Ishbar (Nishat), Srinagar, Kashmir: Ishvar Ashram Trust, 1992). A 3rd 
edition of the text has been published by the Trust with a Hindi translation by 
Sushri Prabha Devi Ji and with an English translation by Shri Samvit Prakash Dhar 
(2000). 

2. This verse is quoted in the Introduction of Purnata-pratyabhijnd, page 4. Itwas taken 
from the diary of Acarya Rameshvar Jha, and later published in Samvitsvatantryam, 
edited by Kamalesh Jha (Nichi Bag, Varanasi: Shri Aran Krishna Joshi and Shri Vijay 
Krishna Joshi [distributed by R. B. Joshi and Brothers], 2003). 






274 TANTRAPUSPANJALI 


M.M. Acarya Rameshvar Jha, having bathed in the scriptures of Saivagama 
and Saiva philosophy, collected the essence of the Saiva scriptures (Saivagamas) 
in the form of Purnatd-pratyabhijna. He said in one of his verses that this non¬ 
dual Saiva tradition, which began before Acarya Vasugupta and was continued 
over the years by Acarya Utpaladeva and Acarya Abhinavagupta, became 
complete by reaching him. There is a double meaning in the title of his book, 
Punatd-pratyabhijhd. In addition to meaning “The Recognition of Fullness” (i.e., 
the recognition of the fullness of Consciousness), it also means that Pratyabhijna, 
the philosophy of Recognition that continued from the time of the great masters 
Somananda, Utpaladeva, and Abhinavagupta, became complete ( purnatd ) 
with him. In this sense, Purncita-pratyabhijnd also means “The Fullness of 
Recognition.” As he says in the following verse in his Purnatdi-pratyabhijnd : 

samvitsvabhdvah kilci saiva agamah 
spandatvam dpto vasuguptam agatah / 
sa p ra tyabh ijn abh in avarci ta u tp a ll 
purnatvam apta samupetya mam api II* 

Saiva scripture is indeed of the nature of Consciousness (scunvit). It 
became the scriptures on Vibration (s panda) when it reached Acarya 
Vasugupta. It became the philosophy of Recognition ( i pratyabhijna ) 
when it reached Acarya Abhivanagupta and Acarya Utpaladeva. Now it 
has become complete {puma) after reaching me. 

M.M. Acarya Rameshvar Jha completed Purnatd-pratyabhijna in i960, and it 
was translated into Hindi by Kamalesh Jha and published in 1984. This translation 
includes some brief information about M.M. Acarya Rameshvar Jha ( guruvara) f 
a prologue ( bhumikd ), and some personal words ( atmanivedanam) by Kamalesh 
Jha, words of praise ( subhdsamsanam ) by Devasvarupa Mishra, a brief summary 
{mttanca sdrahca ) by M.M. Acarya Rameshvar Jha himself, followed by the 
contents and the Sanskrit text with Hindi translation. It is divided in two sections. 

The first section containing 630 verses in various metres is called vimarsa 
(Reflection), which has no specific title at the beginning of the contents and 

3. Acarya Rameshvara Jha, Purnatd-pratyabhijna , translated by Kamalesh Jha (Nichi 
Bag, Varanasi: Shri Amn Krishna Joshi and Shri Vijay Krishna Joshi [distributed by 
R. B. Joshi and Brothers], 1984), verse 15, first section, p. 5. 



purnatA-pratyabhijM, the recognition OF FULLNESS I 275 


at the beginning of the first section. At the end of the first section it says ‘iti 
prathamo vimarsah’, and thus ends the first section called ‘vimarsa.’ This section 
known as vimarsa is meant for advanced practitioners ( sadhakas) or devotees, 
who by the grace of the guru and without much effort realize their own Self. 

The second section is called Prakriyavimarsanam (Reflection on Method) 
and contains 622 verses in different meters. This section is meant for the devotees 
who are not advanced in their practice and therefore, through the practice of 
meditation and other means ( prakriyd ), wish to realize their own self. 

There are subject headings to some verses which are listed in the list of 
contents and originally provided by the author. They do appear in the text also. 
Pt. Rudradhar Jha has added a brief note under the title Hrdayam (heart) at the 
end, wherein he has shown the importance of the present text for readers in 
contemporary times and has praised the author for writing such an important 
book on philosophy. A list of Errata also has been added at the end of the book. 

Having provided this brief introduction to M.M Acarya Rameshvar Jha’s 
life and work, I now offer a translation of the first 32 verses from his book 
Purnatd-pratyabhijna, The Recognition of Fullness. At places, I add brief notes 
of interpretation and clarification, wherever I find it necessary. I feel this is an 
important addition to the existing texts in the tradition of non-dual Kashmir 
Saivism, especially in the school of Pratyabhijna philosophy. The author has 
presented traditional wisdom on the pratyabhijna. philosophy in an accessible 
and lucid way for the reader. He uses the same technical terms of the Pratyabhijna, 
Trika and Spanda schools of Saivism, but in a creative way. He composes the 
verses in a style that reminds one of the texts of Utpaladeva. He follows a kind 
of pattern which appears to be like that of Utpaladeva or Abhinavagupta. 4 The 
language, terminology, and concepts are very much in the tradition, but with a 
different approach. Thus, the text appeals easily to the reader of this philosophy. 
After reading a few pages of the book I found it significant and worthy of 
translation. Therefore, I have planned to translate the entire book, which 
contains 1252 verses in various metres, into English. However, as a first attempt, I 
have selected only the first 32 verses for this volume. 


4- For examples, see verses 1,2,4,8,10,13,15,23,27,28 and 30. 







276 ! tantrapuspAnjali 


Translation of Pumdta-pratyabhijnd, verses 1-32 

- svatmamahesvarasamavesah 

Abiding together with the great Lord of one’s own Self: 

pRUiW pMM*i WlrHRflWlll ? II 

anuttaram param devam svatantram cinmayadvayam / 
nirdsamsam nljanandam vande svatmamahesvaram //ill 

1. I extol the highest, supreme Lord, who is independent, non-dual, and 
consists in Consciousness, who is the form of one’s own bliss and free from 
desire, the great god Mahesvara in the form of one’s own Self. 

' 3 HI < tlMMI<{l*ll - upayopeyadlnam svdtmasvarupdbhimarsanam 

Unification of the means and the goal with one’s own Self: 

aqwlMWfol WcMUl II Rll 

svacchasvacchandacinmatrarupa eva mahesvarah / 
upayopeyarupena sphuran bhami svatejasa //2 // 

2. As the great lord who is pure, independent, and in the form of 
Consciousness, manifesting as both the means and the goal, I shine forth by my 
own brilliant power ( tejas ). 

- iivasdmarasydpannaiaktismaranam 

Remembering the energy that is always together with Siva: 
qcEZTflfaciWH Rwdwfa I Wl: I 

itftf eft H-WWI'Uf flef: STTtR RiqilcH^blHjI ^ II 

yatkataksavilasena sivatam eti vai savah / 

naumi tam paramam adtyam satah saktim sivatmikam //3 // 

3.1 bow down to the highest, primordial, and essential Energy, which is of 
the nature of Siva, and by whose playful glance a corpse indeed becomes Siva. 5 

5. See the well-known verse which talks about the same idea: 
sivah saktyayuktoyadi bhavati saktah prabhavitum 
na cedevam devo na khaLu kusalah spanditumapi / 



purnatA-pratyabhijM, the recognition OF FULLNESS I 277 


svatan trydkhyayecclidsaktya sacvdgamasarasatngrahah 

Showing the essence of the Saiva scriptures through the Energy of will called 
svatantryasakti, Energy of Freedom: 

f^isfh WdWIci q^c!T oTT II VII 

svarupam anugaminyd vilasad visvarupaya / 
sivo 'pi samatam etipasutam vdyayecchaya //a, II 

4. Even Siva attains the state of equanimity or the form of an individual 
being by means of that Energy of Will which follows its own nature and plays in 
the form of the universe. 

cl% qftdd TRT I 

felMFJlt*IR: II Hll 

tayacva bhuvanesvarya preritena maya punah / 
darsyate sacvasastranam sarah santapasantaye II5II 

5. Inspired by that very Energy of Will, the goddess of the Universe 
(Bhuvanesvart ), 6 1 am revealing the essence of the Saiva scriptures to pacify the 
affliction (of the world). 

srlgurusakter adbhutatvdbhimarsanam 

Reflection on the miraculous nature and power of the Guru : 

^pqfcf f^R?: II $ II 


atastvdmdrddhydm hariharavirificddibhirapi 

pranantum stotum va kathamakrtapunyah prabhavati //Saundaryalaharl v. 1 // 
Saundaryalahari of Sri Adi Sankardcarya, text with Hindi translation by Pt. Harihar 
Prasad Tripathi, edited by Acharya Mrityunjaya Tripathi (Varanasi: Chowkhamba 
Sanskrit Series Office, 2005). 

6. 'The Willpower ( icchasakti ) mentioned in the previous verse is extolled in this verse 
as the goddess of the universe. 




278 TANTRAPUSPASjALl 


srcgurupadanakhajanma ja.nmdndhasyapiprakctia.yann arthdn / 
sajayati ko ‘pivikasah prakasamano'navacchinnah // 6 // 

6. Born from the guru’s toenail, revealing meaning even to a person lacking 
the knowledge of one’s own Self," shining and uninterrupted—that extraordinary 
expansion is victorious. 

PKRTtrt I 

WM FKT ^RF^sMIM+d W^ddlHM *11 

gurudeve giratlte gambhlre gatalaksane / 

katham gird paricchinnavdcikeyam pravartatam // 7 // 

7. How can this speech, which is only capable of referring to limited things, 
describe the guru who is beyond language, profound, and free from marks? 7 8 9 
3tUjUj i3|cj<L|«ri|-L| *IN ^fTR^Tf I 

FRT ^«FJ<K«1 JJWTT II CII 

apy anum sivayantcyam dhanya kapi krpdmayi / 
gird punarguror eva varnyate 'pi gururyaya //8 // 

8. And yet the blessed, extraordinary, and compassionate speech of the guru 
transforms even the bound individual into Siva, and it alone can describe the 
gum. 

rw^r^iwn II 

gurusaktirjayaty eka madrupapravikasikd / 
svarupagopanavyagra sivasaktirjitayaya // 9 // 

9. Victorious is the singular power of the guru , which reveals my own nature 
and overpowers Siva’s Energy intently engaged in concealing His own nature/ 


7. janmandha , literally “blind from birth.” 

8. This verse describes a true spiritual master, one who is indeed free from delineating 
marks, who is beyond all limitations and qualifications, and who cannot be 
described by ordinary speech. 

9. In this verse the power of the guru is praised as higher than that of Siva, since it 
conquers Siva's power of concealment ( mdyascikti ). 



purnata-pratyabhijM, the recognition OF FULLNESS I 279 


jfrfo cri ^v-inici 1 

Rw«wK^i(ci^«Kw«riW i^wricTRn 11 hi 

iiaumi tarnjayatat sacvayaya saksatkrta maya / 
sivaikydkhydtisamsdrdvastbdpcyam stvatmika //10 // 

10 .1 bow to that power of the guru. By means of this power, I have perceived 
directly that this worldly existence, which appears as different from Siva, is 
indeed the state of Siva. May it be victorious! 

^ f4eR«U«+|{SH 

Hfjrft cRlt RF3RH 94l<Rl«hllfH|ld- 

4^1-Hl^prI RRtHHMI ^ II ??ll 

asty asmin mahasam mahanidhir asau devo vtvasvan mahan 
yasmin jagratijagratcva rajamsupta imejanminah / 

kin tv eka mabati tato vijayate srldaisikanghridyutir yadbhdsacchuritam cirantanatamo 
hitvaivajagarti sat //n // 

11. The Sun god is the great treasure of light in this world. When he rises, 
these worldly beings rise from their sleep during the night. But one great light 
surpasses him—the radiance of the venerable master’s feet, by whose lustre a 
being gives up the long darkness of ignorance and awakens forever. 



Htftr elf J<1^ fen II ?RII 

bhedabhedamayi drstir vidyavidyamayi pratha / 
naumi tarn srlguror murttim svormir evayaya krta //12 // 

12.1 bow down to the embodiment of the guru, which has turned the vision of 
difference and non-difference and the appearance of knowledge and ignorance 
into the waves of his own Self. 



SERF! II ?XII 

sivasya dasatvam upagato’yam nivrttatarsah paripurnakamah / 
pravartate lokahitdbhildsisvdtantryasakiyaiva niyujyamdnah //13 II 





280 tantrapuspAnjali 


13. Having become a servant of Lord Siva, having become free from all 
desires, having all his wishes fulfilled, and having been inclined by Siva’s energy 
of freedom, which intends to do the well-being of the world, this person" is 
writing this book. 


t7Tdldlfdl«3 



< 71 : SFTei: 
Rttll+id I 


T^fhTT Tdd^l fewfd II ?VI| 

pradhitastas ca vidya rsimunigurubhlraksitayah prayatnaih 
praptam pltam ca purnam gurumukhasulabham brahma vidyamrtamyat / 
kintv esa kapi ramya samarasarasika moksayantica bhogan 
saktih svcya sv at antra viiasati hrdaye purnatapratyabhijh a//14 // 


14. I have learned the wisdom that has been carefully preserved by our 
seers, sages and teachers. I have received without any obstacle from the mouth 
of my master and drunk completely the nectar of wisdom, Brahman. But some 
extraordinary, beautiful Energy of mine, full of identical flavour, transforming 
enjoyment into liberation, and totally free, shines in my heart as the Recognition 
of Fullness (puma.td-pratyabh.ijnd). 

WFIF7-JW_ iatvdgamasya 

purnata-pratyabhijhdtmatvakhydpanam 


Revealing the nature of the Recognition of Fullness of Saiva scriptures: 
Wl 3TFTR: 


10. Here the author refers to himself in the third person and proclaims the reason 
why he wrote this book in the same manner as the great master Utpaladeva. This 
verse resembles the first verse of the Isvarapratyabhijhdkdrikd of Utpaladeva: 
kathahcid asadya mahesvarasya dasyam janasyapy upakaram icchan / 
samastasampatsamavaptihetum tatprafyabhijhdm upapadayami // I.1.1 // The 
Isvarapratyabhijhdkdrikd of Utpaladeva with the Author's Vrtti, edited and translated 
by Raffaele Torella, Serie Orientale Roma LXXI (Rome: Istituto Italiano Per II Medio 
ed Estremo Orienta, 1994)- 



PURNATA-PRATYABHIJM, the recognition OF FULLNESS I 281 


^mhihi fujMcM Rmfq 11 11 

samvitsvabhavah kila sacva agamah 
spandatvam apto vasuguptam agatah / 
sa pratyabhijndbhinavdrcitautpali 
purnatvam apta samupetya mam api //15 // 

15. Saiva scripture is indeed of the nature of Consciousness ( samvit ). It 
became the scriptures on Vibration (s panda) when it reached Acarya Vasugupta. 
It became the philosophy of Recognition ( pratyabhijnd ) when it reached Acarya 
Abhinavagupta and Acarya Utpaladeva. Now it has become complete {purria ) 
after reaching me". 




Approval of the reader’s shrewdness: 

SIHRJ W® Wfl 

STHlfcI II ?«UI 

sarasaravivekabuddhivikalo loko varako hy ayam 
spandasyutapardmrtasya vacasojanatu tattvam katham / 
kin tv etasya madcyadtvyavacaso vacyam kim apy adbhutam 
putapremapardmrtaikarasikojanati vijrio bhavan //16 // 

16. How can the poor common man, lacking the knowledge of distinction 
between what is essential and what is non-essential, know the truth ( tattvam) 
of the highest Speech in the form of supreme nectar interwoven with Vibration 
(spanda)? But you, the reader, being intelligent and purified by and devoted to 
the supreme nectar, know the highest meaning and purpose of my divine speech, 
full of wonder. 

anuttardkhyascvasya mahamantramayayya saktya nityasrstiyuktatvabhidhanam 


11. This is a bold statement made by the author. By making such a statement the author 
connects himself to the great masters of Saiva tradition and shows his creativity. 







282 tantrapuspAnjali 


Describing the eternal act of creation through his Sakti called Mahamantra 
of Siva, known as Anuttara: 

RR: I 

P-NlII II 
WTI HV^lIrhf^WI I 

3T^^IcK|^cf]f^'cl^IbHIIf: II ?CII 

p a ravd h m ay a man trd tm aviryasarga m ay a h sivah / 
svaviryaghanatdrupedantdspkuranarupa}>d //17 // 
yujyate satatam srstyd svlyasaktivisrstayd / 
adesakdlakaUtaspanddtmdnuttardbkidhah //18 // 

17-18. Siva’s nature is emission through his own vitality in the form of 
mantras, which are the supreme Word. He is known as the Absolute/Unsurpassed 
(anuttara), which consists of Vibration that is not limited by space or time. He 
is joined constantly with the created universe, which is emitted through his own 
energy and which manifests “This-ness” through his own unbroken vitality. 

clTticej felj ?f=! VHlcJlr) ^T?jT 

5lfrf> vpppff tpR I 

RRfSR H- 

vaktvyam kimu tatrayatra bhagavan vettaiva vedyo bhavan 
saktim svam ahamatmikam bhagavatlm pasyan svayam muhyati / 
pumstvastrltvavikalpanam sughatayan bhoktaiva bhogyo ‘pisann 
acchanno ‘pi vibhati visvavibhavah svacchandayd svecchaya //,g // 

19. What is there to say, when it is the Lord himself who becomes the knower 
and the object of knowledge, who observes his own Goddess Energy whose 
nature is I-ness, who conceals himself, who establishes the distinction between 
male and female, who becomes the enjoyer as well as the object of enjoyment, 
and who, while being manifest, shines as the universal glory through the freedom 
of his own Will. 

- prakdsakhyasivasya sarvabhavasvabhavatvam 


PURNATA-PRATYABHIJNA , THE RECOGNITION OF FULLNESS j 283 


The nature of the omnipresence of Siva, who is known as Light ( prakasa ): 
Td dNldi 'WHM: I 

d ^ TO dd: II II 

prakasa eva bhdvdndm svabhdvah sarvasammatah / 
sa eva sivasdstre’sminn upadeyahparo matah //20 // 

20. The nature of all things is indeed the Light (of Consciousness); this is 
accepted hy all. That very (Light of Consciousness) is considered to be the 
supreme reality in the Saiva scriptures. 

SIW^T ^ dlcE^d.^ d ddd ft dd. I 

dTdTdd II R? II 

aprakdsam ca yatkincit svayam na prathate hi tat / 
svabhdvatvain kutas tasya vastutattvam avastunah //21 II 

21. Nothing that is devoid of the Light (of Consciousness) shines on its own. 
So how can the objectivity of an object be its own nature? 

3 THR: SpjddTd T%^d I 

IThl^ld dddTd M^llcdd^l ftdT II RRW 

ciblidvcih sunyam evathayad anyad api kincana / 
prakdsate na tat sarvam prakasatmataya vina //22 II 

22. Non-existence, emptiness, or any other thing—none of these shines 
without having the nature of the Light (of Consciousness). 

Mdd^+dlUTTTd^ ddTd MdJAIIrHd°^fdTWI. _ 

prakasasyaikatvabhidhanapurvakam sarvasya prakdsdtmatvayyavasthdpanam 

Describing the oneness of the Light (of Consciousness), (the author) 
establishes the nature of the Light of (Consciousness) of all objects: 

d ddlfTd d^I^Md>Pod: II R\W 

ghatadyakarabhedena mrdader bhinnatayatha / 
na tathasti prakasasya tadbhedanupalabdhitah 7/23 // 




284 TANTRAPUSPAXJALI 


23. Just as there is no real difference in clay when it is in various forms, such 
as a pot, there is no real difference in the Light (of Consciousness) when it takes 
on its different forms. 

A\W^Pi II RVII 

sa ca prakaso naneka eka evayatab kila / 
prakdsdditaras tasya svabhdvo nopapadyate // 24 // 

24. That Light (of Consciousness) is not many, but only one. Therefore, there 
is no existence of another Light (of Consciousness) beyond this one. 

fesQFl WJr\: for?; 1 

II R^W 

bhdvabhdvasvarupasya visvcisyajagatah kila / 

atma svabhayas caitanyam tadbbinnam na hi kincana //25 // 

25. The very Self and nature of the entire universe, whose nature is existence 
and non-existence, is Consciousness, and nothing other than that. 

TOW: 7^: ^STq f dNd , I 

RWCT II || 

ndcetyamanah kasyapi svabhavah ko \pikutracit / 
cetyamanah prakasatma cid evanyo na kascana // 2 6 // 

26. Having an unconscious nature is impossible anywhere, for anything. 
Being conscious means having the nature of the Light of Consciousness itself, 
and nothing other than that. 

sarvasya prakasatmakatve purvacaryasamarthanam 

In establishing the Light of Consciousness of all, (the author) reflects on the 
(opinion of) former masters: 

*TT3vf ^ 5RJT: tfJSJ W1 II 5?vs II 

taduktam paramesena srimaducchusmabhairave / 
yavan na vedaka ete tavadvidyah katham priye //17 // 

















purnatA-pratyabhijM, the RECOGNITION OF FULLNESS 285 


27. The Highest Lord (Siva) spoke (to Parvatl) in the Agama called 
Ucchusmabhairava : “Oh my dear, how can they attain knowledge unless they 
become knowers?” 

HI-NHMH ^ 5 FR 5 I ^TR^TTT: II R6\\ 

spandasastre 'pi samproktam vasuguptamahatmana / 
bhoktaiva bhogyabhavena sadd sarvatra samsthitah //2SII 

28. (The same has also been) said in the Spanda 12 scriptures by the sage 
Vasugupta: “The enjoyer (bhoktd) is present everywhere and always as the object 
that is to be enjoyed ( bbogya ).” 

A^I'blcV-Tl : HM-fWbGIHN: - desakalciyohsamvidbliedakatvabhavah 

Space and time cannot divide Consciousness ( samvit ): 

T^ittA) h HRcj i 

RTPHT FTTf*fr II TOI 

desakdlau na caivasya bhedakau bhavitum ksamau / 
svaprathdm prdpnutoyasmdd asmad evapi tdv ubhau //29 // 

29. Space and time cannot divide this (Light of Consciousness), because they 
both get their own existence from this (Light of Consciousness). 

'HdJ || \o || 

kramakramakathatite svasmin santi na tattvatah / 
saddyadd tadetyadikalakelivikalpandh //30 // 

30. The Light of Consciousness is beyond sequence and absence of sequence. 


12. tasmacchabdarthacintasu na savastha nay a sivah / bhoktaiva bhogyabhavena sadd 
sarvatra samsthitah // 2.4 II Spandakarika of Vasugupta, with the Commentary 
Nirnaya of Ksemardja, Kashmir Series of Texts and Studies, Vol. 42, edited by 
Madhusudan Kaul Shastri (Srinagar, Kashmir, 1925). This verse also occurs with little 
variation as ...nayah sivah / in The Spandapradlpikd of Utpaldcaiya, a Commentary 
on Spandakarika , edited by Pandit Vaman Sastii Islampurkar, The Vizianagram 
Sanskrit Series Vol. 16 (Benaras: E.J. Lazarus & Co., 1898). 

















286 tantrapuspAnjali 


There really is no distinction of time, such as ‘always,’ ‘when,’ ‘then,’ etc.“ 

^ ^ chlcWiSI'ft: 53 WTOT: | 

^ ft cTTCTT T^M+rlr+.-AHi RRT II V' II 

na ca kalakalabhih sa sprsyate paramesvarah / 
na hi tasam svatantrasti sthitis tatkalpandm vind // 31, 

31. The highest Lord is not touched by the divisions of time, and those 
(divisions of time) do not have their own independent existence without the 
knowledge of the highest Lord. 

.p, *\ 

_ prakasascimvidor abhedah 

Non-difference of Light ( prakdsa ) and Consciousness ( samvit ): 

3 T 2 mi*U!^n f| Wrfl II ARM 

saiva sarvesu sastresu samvidityabhidhcyate / 
arthaprakasarupa hi samvit sarvasy a sammata //32 // 

32. He is verily described as Consciousness in all the scriptures. All (teachers) 
agree that Consciousness is the Light illuminating everything. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Jha, Acarya Rameshvara. Pumatd-pratyabhijnd, translated by Kamalesh Jha. Nichi Bag. 
Varanasi. Shri Arun Krishna Joshi and Shri Vijay Krishna Joshi [distributed by R. B. 
Joshi and Brothers], 1984. 

SrigurustutL Ishbar (Nishat), Srinagar, Kashmir: Ishvar Ashram Trust, 1992. 

. Samvitsvatantryam, edited by Kamalesh Jha. Nichi Bag, Varanasi: Shri Arun Krishna 
Joshi and Shri Vijay Krishna Joshi [distributed by R. B. Joshi and Brothers], 2003. 
Sankara. Saundaryalahariof&riAdiSankaracarya. Text with Hindi translation by Pt. Harihar 

Prasad Tripathi, edited by Acharya Mrityunjaya Tripathi. Varanasi: Chowkhamba 
Sanskrit Series Office, 2005. 

tpaladeva. The Spandaprac/Ipika of Utpalacarya, a Commentary on Spandakarika. Edited 
by Pandit Vaman Sastri Islampurkar. The Vizianagram Sanskrit Series, Vol. 16. 
Benaras: E.J. Lazarus & Co., 1898. 


13. Compare this verse, and also verse 31 below, to verse 12.5 of Utpaladeva’s 
ivastotravali, where he talks about the non-existence of the perception of time in 
God-realization: na tada na sadd nacaikadety api sayatra na kaladhlr bhavet / tad 
idam bhavadlyadarsanam na ca nityam na ca kathyate’nyatha // 



P URN AT A -PRA TYABHIJIN A , THE RECOGNITION OF FULLNESS j 287 


. The Isvarapratyabhijndkdrikd of Utpaladeva, with the Author's Vrtti, edited and 
translated by Raffaele Torella. Rome: Istituto Italiano Per 11 Medio ed Estremo 
Orienta, 1994. 

\ asugupta. Spandakarikd ofVasugupta, with the Commentary Nirnaya ofKsemaraja. Edited 
by Madhusudan Kaul Shastri. Kashmir Series of Texts and Studies, Vol. 42. Srinagar, 
Kashmir, 1925. 





Pratyabhijna Philosophy and the 
Evolution of Consciousness: Religious 
Metaphysics, Biosemiotics, and 
Cognitive Science 1 

David Peter Lawrence 


I am honored and humbled by the invitation to contribute to this volume 
commemorating our dear mentor and friend, Pt. Hemendra Nath Chakravarty. 
Over two years between 1987-1989, and in numerous subsequent visits to Varanasi 
since that time, I studied intensively with Pt. Chakravarty the Pratyabhijna 
philosophy and related areas of non-dual Kashmir Saivism, tantra, and 
Sanskrit philosophy. While one inevitably develops one’s own interpretations, 
my understanding of the Pratyabhijna and related subjects owes much to his 
teachings. 

Closely linked with Panditji’s great erudition, and equally impressive, were 
his personal qualities. He was a deeply spiritual man, whose life was formed and 
illumined by his own close relation with Mahamahopadhyaya Gopinath Kaviraj. 
With Panditji I felt something for which I had yearned for many years, a learning 
imbued with a direct sense of profound religious truths. For him the dgarnas 
and sdstras were not merely dry collections of ancient and abstruse ideas, but 
expressions of a living reality. Sometimes the texts would unexpectedly provide 
answers to our questions, as if Panditji were in communication with this reality 
through them. At the same time, Panditji, perhaps to some extent reflecting his 
training in Nyaya philosophy, maintained a critical mind, and questioned the 
rationality of his own religious and philosophical convictions. 

1. An earlier draft of this paper was presented at the session, Tantra and Cognitive 
Science: Ritual, Language, and the Body in Dialogue, at the Annual Meeting of the 
American Academy of Religion, Chicago, 2012. 



PRATYABHIJNA PHILOSOPHY AND THE EVOLUTION OF CONSCIOUSNESS | 289 


Panditji was also known for his welcoming, cheerful personality and 
delightful sense of humor. For me, he was like another father, supporting me in 
my personal and professional struggles. He also helped me find direction in my 
own religious search. I wish that we all could have had more time with Panditji, 
but I am glad that we are able to express some of our gratitude towards him with 
this volume. 

Striving to follow the spirit of Pt. Chakravarty’s religious interest in non-dual 
Saivism and the Pratyabhijna system, as well as his critical intellectual attitude, 

I will here formulate a position paper regarding one of the topics of my recent 
research. Building upon my earlier work, this research endeavors to engage 
Pratyabhijna philosophy with current developments of Peircean semiotics as 
well as cognitive scientific theories of religion. The present paper will first discuss 
the challenges of Peircean pansemiotics and biosemiotics to cognitive science, 
and then suggest how such semiotics may themselves be reconceived within 
the perspective of the Pratyabhijna. In the future, I plan to further advance the 
various suggestions made here in more detailed studies. 

COGNITIVE SCIENCE: THEORIES OF RELIGION 

In the contemporary period, a large proportion of humanistic as well as social 
scientific studies of culture have used methods that have, forthrightly or 
implicitly, imitated the empirical methods of the physical sciences. These have 
ranged from empirical, philological, ethnographic and historical descriptions, 
through diverse “causal” reductions of culture to constructions of symbolic, 
linguistic, social, political, economic, biological, and psychological factors. One 
useful result of such analysis, as applied with postmodem/postcolonial self- 
reflexivity, has been to alert us to the insidious influence of exploitative power 
in Western-dominated, Orientalist and neo-Orientalist studies of non-Westem 
cultures as scientific objects. While every systematic viewpoint is likely to 
contain at least some truth, in my view we must endeavor to pursue self-reflexive 
dialogue between etic academic theorization and emic perspectives of those we 
study, whether they are from our own or another society. This would seem all 
the more requisite in the case of studies of highly sophisticated scholars such as 
those within the traditions of South Asian philosophy (Lawrence, 2011). 





290 tantrapuspAnjali 


Among the most important and influential theories of culture that have lately 
risen to prominence in the global academy have been those endeavoring to apply 
the methods and paradigms of cognitive science. The very name of this research 
program candidly identifies its scientific agenda. Cognitive science, as a study of 
the human mind, consciousness, and culture, developed in close relations with 
information theories throughout the physical sciences and engineering, and has 
been influenced particularly by computer science, cybernetics, and artificial 
intelligence. 

The goal for cognitive science has been to find an approach to the mind, and 
so on, grounded in objectively describable modes of information processing. The 
fundamental concept is that one sort of information is entered into a computing 
device and by algorithmic formulae is transformed into new information. The 
brain is conceived as an evolved fleshly computer working through the neurons 
in its various regions that are specialized in particular types of data operations. 
Though this approach may be formulated in a philosophically modest way, it has 
tended to be quite reductive. Human consciousness and culture are nothing but 
operations of the brain as a computer engaged in information processing (for a 
summary and critique, see Brier, 2008). 

Cognitive science and affiliated forms of evolutionary psychology have been 
applied with considerable explanatory force in empirically oriented, humanistic, 
and social scientific studies of religion. Thus, Pascal Boyer’s influential Religion 
Explained interprets religion in terms of innate as well as learned modalities of 
information processing—inference systems and memes regarding supernatural 
full access ’ agents who violate quotidian cognitive templates (2001). 

Ellen Goldberg has provided a useful overview of the relevance of cognitive 
scientific theories to Hindu studies (2007). Glen Hayes, a leader in developing 
cognitive science approaches in tantric studies, has utilized George Lakoff and 
Mark Johnson’s (2003) metaphor theory to interpret the rich bodily metaphors 
informing vernacular expressions of tantra. He has also explored the use of 
Mark Turner and Gilles Fauconnier’s (2003) multi-spatial blending theory in 
interpreting the interweaving and multivalent traditions of tantric symbolism 
and practice (Hayes, 2006, 2012). Sthaneshwar Timalsina (2006, 2012) and others 
are continuing research utilizing these theories. However, Goldberg, Hayes and 
Timalsina have not endeavored to apply the etic theories of cognitive science 


PRATYABHIjNA philosophy and the EVOLUTION OF CONSCIOUSNESS i 291 


in a reductive manner, but are rather interested in dialogue between them and 
emic expressions of tantra. 

RECENT DEVELOPMENTS OF PEIRCEAN SEMIOTICS 

Concomitant with developments of information theory in general and cognitive 
science in particular have been further elaborations and refinements of semiotics 
or theories of signs. In my view, particularly important have been elaborations 
of the semiotics of Charles Sanders Peirce in what are called pansemiotics and 
biosemiotics (Sebeok, 2001; Brier, 2003; Hoffmeyer, 1997,2008). The new semiotic 
approach to information processing has also been described as cybersemiotics 
(Brier, 2008). Peircean theory may be distinguished from more structuralist 
varieties of semiotics, indebted to Ferdinand Saussure, in their attention to 
semiosis as engaged in by an agent in practical relation to a broader objective 
environment, including other agents. The basic Peircean semiotic triad is sign, 
object and interpretant, linking the first two in understanding and behavior. 

An important advantage of Peircean semiotics is that it provides a 
theory that can interpret the action of the processing and communication of 
information at all levels of physics and biology, including what David Chalmers 
has called the “hard problem” of the transition from third person description 
to the phenomenology of first person experience (1997). It may not “solve” the 
problem, but it can explain processes on both sides of the divide, and thus may 
improve our understanding of the relations between the two. It is possible to 
give elucidative subjective and objective meanings to the items and processes 
defining Peircean semiosis. 

Though both pansemiotics and biosemiotics are rooted in Peirce, a distinction 
may be made between them. Pansemiotics describes atavistic processes of sign 
interpretation at the very origin of the universe, in the first formation of scientific 
laws, which Peirce described as interpretive “habits” (see Christiansen, 2002). 
Biosemiotics explains the origins of semiosis as concomitant with the beginning 
of life. 

Biosemiotics builds upon systems theory, which conceives life as self¬ 
organizing systems, working to maintain themselves in counter-equilibrium 
or counter-entropic states by controlling and actually increasing entropy in 
their broader environment. From self-organization comes self-repair, then 





292 i tantrapuspAnjali 


reproduction, and then evolution, with the development of genes, mutations, 
and so on. The process of evolution itself evolved (Deacon, 2012; Hoffmeyer, 
2008). 

According to biosemiotics, modes of sign interpretation—or in cognitive 
science terms, cognitive schema—are intrinsic to the very nature of life forms as 
self-organizing, counter-entropic systems. Thus, Terrence Deacon picks up on a 
seminal idea of the cybernetic theorist Gregory Bateson in describing semiotic 
information as “difference that makes a difference” (Deacon, 2007, 2008, 2012). 
A living being or collectivity of beings, as the Peircean interpretant, utilizes 
structural deviation from randomness to define a sign (in metaphor theory, the 
source) within a given medium, in order thereby to adapt to the objects of its 
internal and external environments (metaphorical target). Counter-equilibrium 
states are thus built through semiosis. 

This semiosis develops through the feedback of reproduction regarding 
random mutations in physical evolution, as well as in success and failure in 
correlated modes of animal and human consciousness. At relatively simpler 
levels, it comprises iconic and indexical signs, characterized by minimal 
differentiation from their environmental objects. From these evolve the more 
elaborately differential “digital codes” of DNA, and finally innate and learned 
cognitive schema, and the linguistic and cultural “digital” structures as conceived 
by de Saussure, Claude Levi-Strauss, and so on (Hoffmeyer, 2008). 

The self-interpretation of organisms acting in their environments 
furthermore has an intrinsically “narrative” character. This occurs in the most 
elementary self-interpretations of an organism's action as well as in human self- 
consciousness (Deacon, 2012). Here we may perhaps integrate Paul Ricoeur’s 
(1984-1988) sophisticated schema of how self-understanding of our narrative 
action in mimesis 1 is enhanced by the classical narratives of mimesis 2 and the 
critical philosophical self-reflection of mimesis 3. 

The biosemiotician, Jesper Hoffmeyer, has argued that in both physical 
and cultural evolution there is evidence of a natural teleology towards what he 
calls semiotic freedom”—more semantically rich and practically efficacious 
interpretations of the world. This extends beyond the agency of individual 
organisms. There is an (imperfectly realized) drive towards agency in the 



pratyabhijnA philosophy and the evolution OF CONSCIOUSNESS j 293 


cooperative, ethical relations of human society as well as in the entire biosphere 
(Hoffmeyer, 2008, 2012). 

Biosemiotics in itself has no relation with religion and most theorists seem 
to be agnostic. I believe that this discipline provides a way of integrating a great 
range of information processes at all levels, from the physical to the cultural. 
While remaining closely tied to naturalistic, third-person empirical description, 
it includes the first-person phenomenology of human experience, and need not 
be interpreted in a reductive manner. Therefore, I believe that it may be more 
amenable to dialogical engagement with philosophies of religion and it has 
already begun to draw the attention of some Western theologians (for example, 
Ulanowicz, 2010). 

Peircean semiotics, of course, was already applied to the ostensibly empirical 
social scientific interpretation of religions in India by thinkers such as Milton 
Singer (1984) and E. Valentine Daniel (1987). Deacon and Tyrone Cashman 
have also suggested that the newer Peircean semiotics might contribute to 
the cognitive science of religion, for example, in the understandings of the 
agent’s narrative structuration of consciousness, capacity for symbolization 
of transcendent realities, and formation of emergent emotional experiences, 
such as through the conceptual blending described by Fauconnier and Turner 
(Deacon and Cashman, 2009; also see Deacon, 2006 on blending theory and art). 
We may proceed to consider whether empirical theorization may be integrated 
into a philosophical and dialogical framework. 

pratyabhijnA philosophy and semiotic theory 

Developing parallel to empirically oriented approaches to religious studies have 
been the candidly normative methods of philosophy and theology, including 
intercultural or comparative philosophy. Scholars of intercultural philosophy 
have already begun dialogically to engage various areas of non-Westem thought 
with contemporary consciousness studies, cognitive science, and evolutionary 
psychology. For example, in the sphere of Indian philosophies, Chakravarthi 
Ram-Prasad (2007) and Bina Gupta (2003) have worked on Advaita Vedanta, 
Samkhya and Nyaya, and Jay Garfield (2011), Christian Coseru (2012), Dan 
Arnold (2012), and Matthew Mackenzie (2007) on various theories of Buddhism. 



294 TAXTRAPUSPAN'JALI 


Francisco Varela and Evan Thompson have engaged Buddhism with systems 
theories of evolution and consciousness (Varela et al., 2010; Thompson, 2007), 
andjanet Gyatso (1992) as well as Mario D’Amato (2003) have engaged Buddhism 
with Peirce (2003). In recent years, 1 have been exploring how the Kashmiri Saiva 
Pratyabhijna philosophy of Utpaladeva and Abhinavagupta might he brought 
into the discussion, particularly through engagements with pansemiotics and 
biosemiotics. 

The early twentieth century mystic and philosopher, Sri Aurobindo Ghose, 
in his philosophy of the Super Mind, already endeavored to synthesize a broadly 
tantric metaphysics of emanation and return with the basic concept of biological 
evolution and related modern notions of social progress (Ghose, 1977; cf. 
Srivastava, 1968:194-213; Pandit, 1972). Pt. Chakravarty informed me in personal 
conversations that Aurobindo had some correspondence with Gopinath Kaviraj, 
but I am not aware that any of this has survived. Aurobindo does not seem to 
have been knowledgeable regarding deeper philosophical expressions of tantra. 
In any event, I find much relevant to contemporary theorization on evolution in 
what I have described as the "transcendental arguments” of Pratyabhijna thought 
regarding epistemology, philosophy of language, and ontology/metaphysics, as 
well as the tradition’s philosophical psycholog)'. 

Amidst all the differences, I believe that the Pratyabhijna philosophy has 
some affinity to theories of Peircean semiotics in its utilization and advancement 
of the linguistic philosophy of Bhartrhari to interpret the myth and ritual of Siva’s 
emanation and control of the universe through his power and consort, Sakti. 
(Siva is called the saktimdn because he is believed to comprehend Sakti within his 
integral nature.) As is well known, the Saivas identify Sakti with Siva’s Supreme 
Speech (paravak), and they accordingly conceive all epistemic experience 
and ontological categories as subtly linguistic in nature (see Nemec, 2011 for a 
summary for how Utpaladeva and Abhinavagupta continue and diverge from 
Somananda in the interpretation and use of Bhartrhari). Now, what Bhartrhari 
and the Saivas understand as metaphysically foundational, subtle language 
is not gross conventional language. David Carpenter and I have separately 
compared it with Abrahamic philosophical theologies of logos (Carpenter, 1995; 
Lawrence, 1999). In my view, it can be helpful to view this abstract essence of 


pratyabhijna philosophy and the evolution of CONSCIOUSNESS i 295 


language as a form of semiosis or, in its ultimate form, a paradoxically non-dual 
“protosemiosis." 

To translate into semiotic terms, we could say that for the Pratyabhijna, 
Siva’s Supreme Speech is the interpretant ground immanent in all human and 
other animal consciousness as subtle language ( suk?masabdana ), recognitive- 
linguistic apprehension ( vimarsa ), or semantic intuition ( pratibha ), that 
links innate/“instinctual” as well as conventional signs with their objects. The 
Pratyabhijna philosophers’ Buddhist opponents, such as Dharmaklrti and 
Dharmottara, endeavored to separate signs from the objects comprising the 
Buddhists’ ostensibly signless reality (see Gyatso, 1992 on dharanis as icons of 
emptiness; D’Amato, 2003). Resonating with both Berkeley’s idealism and a 
recently renewed panpsychism in the philosophy of mind (Strawson, 2006; 
Skrbina, 2007), for the Pratyabhijna nothing exists other than awareness, 
and this awareness is transcendentally of the nature of linguistic-recognitive 
apprehension ( vimarsa as the essential nature of prakasa) (see Lawrence, 
1999). The Saivas concur with Peirce that the thesis of an uninterpreted object 
is incoherent, inasmuch as objects are defined entirely as the referents of 
interpretations (Peirce, 1991). 

The Saivas likewise concur with Bhartrhari’s description of waking 
consciousness in the Vakyapadcya 1.127, and thus with Peirce on the semiotic 
triad, that the agent (Peircean interpretant) through the word (sign) acts on 
the object ( karta toy a karye pravartate, Bhartrhari, 1966, 1:119, 195). For them, 
however, Siva is the ultimate agent ( kartr ), and the final interpretant is his own 
integral Supreme Speech (Lawrence, 2014)- 

The Buddhist opponents, in some agreement with Deacon and contemporary 
structuralists, defined meaning differentially as semantic exclusion ( apoha ). 
For the Saivas, this exclusion is itself epistemically grounded in the semantic 
intuition ( pratibha ) of Siva’s plenary Supreme Speech (see Utpaladeva, 2002,1.6.3; 
Lawrence, 1999, 129-131). Siva likewise in certain ways “blends’ interpretations 
through his recognitive synthesis ( ansu.samdha.na ). The synthesis of particular 
referential objects (the Saiva version of the svalaksanas) incorporates both 
innate and culturally learned forms of inherited understanding ( agamal 
prasiddhi) as well as purposes and emotional proclivities (Lawrence, 1999 and 



296 TANTRAPUSPANJALI 


2013, which further engages the Pratyabhijna with the hermeneutic theory of 
truth as disclosure and supporting non-objectivist criteriologies). What Deacon 
described as a merely natural cognitive function of blending (2009) is in this 
perspective the action of the supreme interpretant agent, Siva. 

The Saivas follow Bhartrhari in viewing language as primarily an expression 
of action, and thus agree with the semiotic notion of narrative as the self¬ 
interpretation of the self-organizing living system. According to Utpaladeva 
and Abhinavagupta, being is the agency of the act of becoming (sattd bhavatta 
bhavanakartrta, Utpaladeva, 2002,1.5.14,19 ; sattd ca bhavanakartrtd sarvakrcydsu 
svatantryam, Abhinavagupta, 1986,1.5.14,1:258-259). From the Saiva perspective, 
Hofffneyer’s posited natural teleology towards semiotic freedom could be seen as 
the recovery of the saktiman Siva’s status as ultimate discursive, sign-employing 
first person ( uttamapurusa ), and grammatical agent ( kartr ) with absolute 
autonomy ( svatantrya) (see Baumer, 2011; Dupuche, 2001; Lawrence, 1998, 2008b, 
2014; on the philosophical psychology of this as a transformation of narcissism 
into divine self-satisfaction, see Lawrence 2008a; also see Ratie, 2011 for a recent 
general study of the Pratyabhijna system). 

CONCLUSION 

Though I have painted with broad strokes in this short essay, I hope that I have 
demonstrated both the interest of biosemiotics as well as the intellectual force 
of Pratyabhijna tantric philosophy as a dialogical challenge to contemporary 
interpretations of religion and tantra. It must of course be stressed that there are 
also many differences between the ways of thinking of contemporary semiotics 
and Pratyabhijna. In Sandersonian terms, I have endeavored nevertheless to 
SUggest some promising ways in which the new Peircean semiotic theories could 
“overcode” cognitive science, and how the Pratyabhijna could “overcode” such 
semiotics (see Sanderson 1986,1988 on tantric modes of appropriation). 

In defense of this rather apologetic and speculative agenda, I submit that 
a hierarchization of alternative viewpoints is correlative to an identifiable 
hermeneutic circularity of semiosis, including the very process of dialogue. 
Even if you convert me to something, I will understand that in my own terms. 
Indeed, anti-hierarchism itself subordinates hierarchism. What is crucial is that 
we endeavor to be modest and open-minded. While I am sympathetic to the 



pratyabhijna philosophy and the evolution OF CONSCIOUSNESS I 297 


Pratyabhijna philosophy, one of my overarching concerns is that we should not 
assume that the people we study and their worldviews are primarily scientific 
objects, but should also try to consider the implications and plausibility of what 
they are claiming. Through such efforts, I believe we may strive to honor the 
disclosive power as well as the sophisticated, critical spirit of the traditions of 
Sanskrit learning so nobly embodied by our Panditji. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Abhinavagupta. 1986. Isvarapratyabhijhavimarsinl (with Bhaskari ) (Vols. 1-2). Edited by 
K.A. Subramania Iyer & K.C. Pandey. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass. 

Arnold, Dan. 2012. Brains, Buddhas, and Believing: The Problem of Intentionality in Classical 
Buddhist and Cognitive-Scientific Philosophy ofMindL New York: Columbia University 
Press. 

Baumer, Bettina. 2011. “The Three Grammatical Persons and the Trika.” Chapter in 
Abhinavagupta's Hermeneutics of the Absolute, Anuttaraprakriya: An Interpretation 
of his Paratrlsika Vivarana, 101-112. New Delhi: D.K. Printworld. 

Bhartrhari. 1963-1973. Vakyapadrya (with commentaries). 4 vols. Edited by K.A. Subramania 
Iyer, kanda 1, Pune: Deccan College, 1966. kanda 2, Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1983. 
kanda 3, part 1, Pune: Deccan College, 1963. kanda 3, part 2, Pune: Deccan College, 
1973 - 

Boyer, Pascal. 2001. Religion Explained: The Evolutionary Origins of Religious Thought New 
York: Basic Books. 

Brier, Soren, ed. 2003. “Thomas Sebeok and the Biosemiotic Legacy.” Cybernetics and 
Human Knowing: A Journal of Second-Order Cybernetics, Autopoiesis and Cyber- 
Semiotics 10:5-111. 

Brier, Soren. 2008. Cybersemiotics: Why Information is not Enough! Toronto: University of 
Toronto Press. 

Carpenter, David. 1995. Revelation, History, and the Dialogue of Religions: A Study of 
Bhartrhari and Bonaventure. New York: Orbis Books. 

Chalmers, David. 1997. The Conscious Mind: In Search of a Fundamental Theory. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press. 

Christiansen, P.V. 2002. “Habit Formation as Symmetry Breaking in the Early Universe. 
Sign System Studies 30:347-360. 

Coseru, Christian. 2012. Perceiving Reality: Consciousness, Intentionality, and Cognition in 
Buddhist Philosophy. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

DAmato, Mario. 2003. “The Semiotics of Signlessness: A Buddhist Doctrine of Signs.” 
Semiotica 147:185-207. 

Daniel, E. Valentine. 1987. Fluid Signs. Berkeley: University of California Press. 



298 TANTRAPUSPANJALI 


Davies, Paul and Gregersen, Niels Henrik, eds. 2010. Information and the Nature of Reality: 

From Physics to Metaphysics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

Deacon, Terrence. 1997. The Symbolic Species: The Co-Evolution of Language and the Brain. 
New York: Norton. 

Deacon, Terrence. 2006. “The Aesthetic Faculty." In The Artful Mind: Cognitive Science and 
the Riddle of Human Creativity, ed. Mark Tuner, 21-53. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press. 

Deacon, Terrence. 2007. “Shannon-Boltzmann-Darwin: Redefining Information. Part 1." 
Cognitive Semiotics 1:123-148. 

Deacon, Terrence. 2008. “Shannon-Boltzmann-Darwin: Redefining Information. Part 2.” 
Cognitive Semiotics 2:167-194. 

Deacon, Terrence, and Cashman, Tyrone. 2009. “The Role of the Symbolic Capacity in the 
Origins of Religion." Journal for the Study of Religion, Nature and Culture 3:1-28. 
Deacon, Terrence. 2010. “What is Missing from Theories of Information?” In Information 
and the Nature of Reality: From Physics to Metaphysics, ed. Paul Davies and Niels 
Henrik Gregersen, 146-169. Cambridge: Cambridge University’ Press. 

Deacon, Terrence. 2012. Incomplete Nature: How Mind Emerged from Matter. New York: 
Norton. 

Dupuche, John R. 2001. Person to Person: Vivarana of Abhinavagupta on Pardtrimsika 
Verses 3-4.” Indo-Iranian Journal 44:1-16. 

Fauconnier, Gilles, and Turner, Mark. 2003. The Way We Think: Conceptual Blending And The 
Mind's Hidden Complexities. New York: Basic Books. 

Garfield, Jay. 2011. Ask Not What Buddhism Can Do for Cognitive Science; Ask What 
Cognitive Science Can Do For Buddhism.” Bulletin ofTibetology 47:15-30. 

Chose, Sri Aurobindo. 1977. The Life Divine. Puducherry: Sri Aurobindo Ashram. 

Goldberg, Ellen. 2007. “Cognitive Science.” In Studying Hinduism: Key Concepts and 
Methods, ed. Sushil Mittal and Gene Thursby, 59-72. New York: Routledge. 

Gupta, Bina. 2003. Cit: Consciousness. Delhi: Oxford University Press. 

Gyatso, Janet. 1992. Letter Magic: A Peircean Perspective on the Semiotics of Rdo Grub- 
chen s DharanI Memory. In In the Mirror of Memory: Reflections on Mindfulness and 
Remembrance in Indian and Tibetan Buddhism, ed. Janet Gyatso, 173-213. Albany: 
State University of New York Press. 

Hayes, Glen Alexander. 2006. “Blended Worlds and Emergent Beings: Metaphors, Cognitive 
Science, and the Study of Tantra.” Presented at the Annual Meeting of the American 
Academy of Religion, Washington, D.C. 

Hayes, Glen Alexander. 2012. “Sensuous Cosmographies: Cognitive Science, Embodiment, 
and the Study of Tantra.” Presented at the Annual Meeting of the American 
Academy of Religion, Chicago. 

Hoffmeyer, Jesper. 1997. Signs of Meaning in the Universe. Bloomington: Indiana University 
Press. 



pratyabhijna philosophy and the evolution of CONSCIOUSNESS I 299 


Hoffmeyer, Jesper. 2008. Biosemiotics: An Examination into the Signs of Life and the Life of 
Signs. Scranton: University of Scranton Press. 

Hoffmeyer, Jesper. 2010. “Semiotic Freedom: An Emerging Force.” In Information and the 
Nature of Reality: From Physics to Metaphysics, ed. Paul Davies and Niels Henrik 
Gregersen, 185-204. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

Lakoff. George and Johnson, Mark. 2003. Metaphors We Live By. Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press. 

Lawrence, David Peter. 1998. “The Mythico-Ritual Syntax of Omnipotence.” Philosophy East 
and West 48: 592-622. 

Lawrence, David Peter. 1999. Rediscovering God with Transcendental Argument: A 
Contemporary Interpretation of Monistic Kashmiri Saiva Philosophy. Albany: State 
University of New York Press. 

Lawrence, David Peter. 2008a. The Teachings of the Odd-Eyed One: A Study and Translation 
of the Virupdksapahcasika with the Commentary of Vidyacakravartin. Albany: State 
University of New York Press. 

Lawrence, David Peter. 2008b. “Abhinavagupta’s Philosophical Hermeneutics of 
Grammatical Persons !'Journal of Hindu Studies 1:11-25. 

Lawrence, David Peter. 2011. “Current Approaches: Hindu Philosophical Traditions. 
In Continuum Companion to Hindu Studies, ed. Jessica Frazier, 137 - 15 1 * London, 
Continuum. 

Lawrence, David Peter. 2013. “The Plurality and Contingency of Knowledge, and its 
Rectification According to the Pratyabhijna.” In Abhinava, Perspectives on 
Abhinavagupta: Studies in Memory of K.C. Pandey on his Centenary, ed. Navjivan 
Rastogi and Meera Rastogi, 226-258. Delhi: Munshiram Manoharlal. 

Lawrence, David Peter. 2014. “The Linguistics and Cosmology of Agency in Nondual 
Kashmiri Saiva Thought.” In Free Will, Agency, and Selfhood in Indian Philosophy, 
ed. Matthew R. Dasti and Edwin F. Bryant, 210-231. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
MacKenzie, Matthew. 2007. “The Illumination of Consciousness: Approaches to Self- 
Awareness in the Indian and Western Tradition.” Philosophy East and West 57:40-62. 
Nemec, John. 2011. The Ubiquitous Siva: Somananda's Sivadrsti and His Tantric Interlocutors. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Pandit, M.P. 1972. Sri Aurobindo on the Tantra. Puducherry: Sri Aurobindo Ashram. 

Peirce, Charles Sanders. 1991. “Questions Concerning Certain Faculties Claimed for Man. 
In Peirce on Signs, ed. James Hooper, 34-53* Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina 

Press. 

Ram-Prasad, Chakravarthi. 2007. Indian Philosophy and the Consequences of Knowledge. 
Aldershot: Ashgate. 

Ratie, Isabelle. 2011. Identite, difference et alterite dans la philosophie de la Pratyabhijna. 
Leiden: Brill. 

Ricoeur, Paul. 1984-1988. Time and Narrative. 3 vols. Translated by Kathleen McLaughlin/ 
Blarney and David Pellauer. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 





300 tantrapuspAnjali 


Sanderson, Alexis. 1986. “Mandala and Agamic Identity in the Trika of Kashmir.” In Mantras 
et diagrammes rituels dans L’Hindouisme, ed. Andre Padoux, 169-214. Paris: Centre 
National de la Recherche Scientifique. 

Sanderson, Alexis. 1988. “Saivism and the Tantric Traditions.” In The World’s Religions, ed. 

Stewart Sutherland et al., 660-704. London: Routledge. 

Sebeok, Thomas A. 2001. Global Semiotics. Bloomington: Indiana University Press. 

Singer, Milton. 1984. Man’s Glassy Essence: Explorations in Semiotic Anthropology. 

Bloomington: Indian University Press. 

Skrbina, David. 2007. Panpsychism in the West. Cambridge: MIT Press. 

Srivastava, Rama Shanker. 1968. Sri Aurobindo and the Theories of Evolution: A Critical and 
Comparative Study of the Indian and Western Theories of Evolution with Special 
Reference to Sri Aurobindo’s Philosophy of Evolution. Varanasi: Chowkhambha 
Sanskrit Series. 

Strawson. Galen, et al. 2006. Consciousness and its Place in Nature: Does Physicalism Entail 
Panpsychism? Exeter: Imprint Academic. 

Thompson, Evan. 2007. Mind in Life: Biology, Phenomenology, and the Sciences of Mind. 
Cambridge: Harvard University Press. 

Timalsina, Sthaneshwar. 2006. “Fluids, Metaphor, and Self-Realization: Reading Tantra 
through the Lens of Rasa.” Presented at the Annual Meeting of the American 
Academy of Religion, Washington, D.C. 

Timalsina, Sthaneshwar. 2012. “Mnemonics, Image Compression, and Tantric Visualization.” 

Presented at the Annual Meeting of the American Academy of Religion, Chicago. 
Ulanowicz, Robert E. 2010. God and the World of Signs: Semiotics and the Emergence of 
Life.” Zygon 45:391-406. 

Utpaladeva. 2002. The Isvarapratyabhijndkdrikd of Utpaladeva with the Author’s Vrtti, ed. 

and trans. Raffaele Torella. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass. 

Varela, Francisco J.; Thompson, Evan and Rosch, Eleanor. 2001. The Embodied Mind: 
Cognitive Science and Human Experience. Cambridge: MIT Press. 



Section Three 


AESTHETICS 




The Doctrine of Pratibha in Selected 
Texts of Abhinavagupta 

Ernst Fiirlinger 1 


1 . INTRODUCTION 

Pratibha is a fundamental concept in Indian philosophy ( darsana ) and 
spiritual practice ( sadhana ); it is usually translated as "insight,” "intuition, or 
"inspiration.” In this article I will examine its specific meaning in a few selected 

i. I am deeply grateful that I could read and study texts of Trika Saivism (mainly 
Abhinavagupta’s Tantrdloka) regularly with Pandit Hemendra Nath Chakravarty 
from 2001 until 2004. When I started my studies on Trika Saivism and my life in 
Varanasi in 2001, Dr. Bettina Baumer recommended that I study with Panditji, 
one of the last Tantric pandits in Kashi (Baumer 2001). It was a great opportunity 
for me to observe him in several aspects—as a member of his family in their new 
house in Bhelupura, especially as a loving grandfather; as a traditional pandit with 
a stupendous memory, knowledge and deep understanding of Sanskrit texts; as a 
scholar with a young, open mind and an always fresh curiosity to get to know new 
publications in the field of non-dualistic Tantric Kashmir Saivism; on a few precious 
and rare occasions as a Saiva guru conducting the ritual of the mrtyunjaya dlksa 
for a woman; and as a Hindu practicing his morning puja in an elaborate, beautiful 
manner together with his wife. Above all, I encountered him as a human being who 
had attained the qualities of lightness, and who had a wonderful sense of humour 
and equilibrium of mind ( sarnatd ). I guess that in his discretion and humility he 
never showed off what he knew and what he had achieved—he was influenced by 
the attitude of his great guru M.M. Pandit Gopinath Kaviraj. As a European, I was 
not accustomed to touching somebody’s feet as a traditional sign of reverence 
for me it was a very difficult discipline. But in the case of my teacher Pandit H.N. 
Chakravarty, after one year, it was authentic for me to bow my head and to touch his 
feet with respect and love. 



304 TANTRAPUSPANJALI 


texts of one of the distinct systems of Saivism: the non-dualistic, Tantric Saivism 
of Kashmir, especially its Trika (“Triad”) school or trika-scistra , which belongs 
to the non-Saiddhantika division of the Mantramarga." Relatively unknown 
in the West as well as in India today it represents for some “the culmination 
of Indian philosophy and sadhana ” 3 Saiva Advaita flourished in Kashmir and 
other parts of India from the ninth until the thirteenth century and reached 
its zenith with the Kashmirian master Abhinavagupta (c. 975 - 1025 ce). 4 Even 
if broken or interrupted, and even if some of its aspects (e.g., ritual practices) 
disappeared (Sanderson 2007a: 433ff), the tradition continues into the present 
age, particularly represented by the Saiva Guru Swami Lakshmanjoo Raina (1907 
-1991) in Kashmir (Sanderson 2007b). The concept of pratibha belongs to the key 
terms of Trika and leads directly to the core of its darsana (“view”) and experience 
of reality. It occupies an important role in texts not only of Abhinavagupta but 
also of masters like Utpaladeva (c. 925 - 975 ce) —the teacher of Abhinavagupta’s 
teacher Lak^managupta and Abhinavagupta’s brilliant pupil, the Kashmirian 
scholar Ksemaraja (c. 1000 - 1050 ce), the commentator on the Svacchanda and 
Netra Tantra. 

It would require an elaborate study to demonstrate the development of the 
doctrine of pratibha within the Trika school of Saivism in the context of other 
streams of classical Indian philosophy and spirituality. It would also be necessary 
to examine its place within the extensive scholastic work of Abhinavagupta and 
within his different source texts, as well as to explain the nuances given to it by the 
different authors of the school. In this article I will concentrate on a few passages 
in Abhinavagupta s texts which deal with pratibha , focusing on his Tantraloka 
(TA) and Paratrimsikavivarana (PTV). Every treatment of this topic has to start 
from comprehensive and pioneering studies by two eminent scholars: an Indian 

2. On the history, schools and literature of non-dualistic, non-Saiddhantika, Tantric 
Saivism of Kashmir (as well as other branches of the Saiva tradition): Sanderson 
1988; 2007a; 2009; 2014. 

3. Jaideva Singh, quoted in Baumer 1987: 450. For Raffaele Torella, particularly the 
Pratyabhijna ( Recognition”) school, the philosophical bases of Kashmirian Saiva 
Advaita, constitutes “one of the profoundest and most sophisticated worldviews 
that India has ever produced” (Torella 2014:705). On the Pratyabhijna system in the 
context of the six major Brahmanic philosophical systems: Torella 2011:117-125. 

4. On Abhinavagupta: Sanderson 1987; Muller-Ortega 1998; Lawrence 2012. 




THE DOCTRINE OF PRATIBHA IN SELECTED TEXTS OF ABHINAVAGUPTA | 305 


pandit, M.M. Gopinath Kaviraj (1887-1976), and a European Indologist, Jan Gonda 
(1905-1991). My own contribution tries to complement these studies with some 
aspects and details regarding pratibha in selected works of Abhinavagupta. 5 

In his ground-breaking study, “The Doctrine of Pratibha in Indian Philosophy” 
(1990), Kaviraj elaborates how the term is employed in different schools of Indian 
philosophy, including Nyaya-Vaise?ika, Vedanta, Yoga, and Vyakarana, as well as 
in the Agamas of the Saiva-Sakta traditions. 6 Part IV of his study, on pratibha in 
the Agamas, is very brief. His presentation of the meaning of pratibha in theTrika 
school of Saivism is based on only two texts: K§emaraja’s Pratyabhijhahrdaya and 
the Spandakarika. Abhinavagupta’s works are not mentioned. 7 Gonda’s analysis 
of the concept of pratibha was published in his book The Vision of the Vedic Poets 
(Gonda 1963, ch. XV, 318-348). 8 In this chapter, Gonda gives an account of the 
use of this term in different fields of Indian culture, philosophy, and spiritual 
traditions, based on the earlier work of Kaviraj. Gonda mentions the role of 
pratibha in the aesthetic works of Abhinavagupta as well as in Chapter 13 of his 
Tantraloka, an important source for the present study (Gonda 1963:343). But this 
very brief passage fails to do justice to the importance of the doctrine of pratibha 
in the main works of Abhinavagupta. Before I demonstrate this, let me present 
briefly the main aspects of this crucial concept. 

5. For this topic see also Pandey 2000: 692-732 (ch. VII, “The Kula system”); Baumer 
2011: i32ff. Shortly before this article went to print, the following study also came to 
my notice: Kuanpoonpol 1991. 

6. Mahamahopadhyaya Gopinath Kaviraj lived in Varanasi from 1914 until his death 
(on Kaviraj: Pande 1989). He was the revered teacher of Pandit Hemendra Nath 
Chakravarty who was part of a circle around this great yogi-scholar. Together with 
Jaideva Singh and Govindagopal Mukhopadhyaya, he edited the Commemoration 
Volume for Pandit Gopinath Kaviraj on the occasion of his 100th birth anniversary 
(Singh, Mukhopadhyaya and Chakravarty 1987). 

7. The reason could be the situation of the printed edition of the works of Abhinavagupta 
in the first decades of the 20th century: Pandit G. Kaviraj first published his study on 
pratibha in 1923 and 1924 (Kaviraj 1923/24). The first printed edition of Tantraloka, 
the magnum opus of Abhinavagupta, was started in the “Kashmir Series of Texts and 
Studies” (KSTS) in 1918 by Pandit M.R. Shastri and finished by Pandit M.S. Kaul in 

1938- 

8. The book was first published in 1963 in The Hague, Netherlands (Mouton & Co.), in 
the series Disputationes Rheno-Trajectinae, vol. VIII. 


306 tantrapuspAnjali 


2 . DIFFERENT ASPECTS OF THE CONCEPT OF PRATIBHA IN 
INDIAN PHILOSOPHY AND AESTHETICS 

The Sanskrit term pratibha is derived from the root bha, “to shine, to be bright 
or luminous; to appear, show one’s self; to manifest.” The nominal bha (“light, 
brightness, splendour”), combined with the prefix prati, forms pratibha. The 
literal meaning could be given as “a flash of light, a revelation"; in literature it is 
usually used “in the sense of wisdom, characterized by immediacy and freshness” 
(Kaviraj 1990: l). In his study Kaviraj has elaborated the different meanings and 
usages of the concept of pratibha. in different schools of Indian philosophy. Here 
I briefly mention three different contexts of this key term," which are connected 
with different conceptions of it: 

(a) Pratibha in the context of Yoga: In the Yoga system ( Yoc/a-darsana ), 
pratibha denotes a certain stage on the path of the yogin, connected to the 
attainment of the faculty of supreme knowledge, i.e., omniscience (Kaviraj 1990: 
7 ff). Patanjali says in one of his aphorisms: pratibhad vd sarvam; “by pratibha 
one knows everything "(Yoga-Sutra 3.33; Hariharananda Aranya 2000: 308)."' 

In his commentary ( Bhasvati ), Vyasa uses the metaphor of the light of dawn 
before sunrise: “Pratibha, i.e., Taraka knowledge" is the state of knowledge before 
attainment of discriminative knowledge, like the light of dawn preceding the 
sunrise (Hariharananda Aranya 2000:308). In the words of Gopinath Kaviraj: 

It is said that as practice continues, and before the glory of the final illumination yet breaks 
forth, there dawns on the zone, in the fashion of the effulgence of the morning sun before 
the actual rise of the orb above the horizon, an unspeakable splendour in which the entire 
universe stands fully revealed. (Kaviraj 1990:7) 

This happens in the context of the attainment of other extraordinary, super¬ 
natural powers ( siddhi ), like super-natural powers of hearing (sravana), touch 
(1 vedana ), seeing (adarsa), taste (asvada) and smell (vdrta, cf. Yoga-Sutra 3.36). 


9. For the overview and its three-fold structure, I am indebted to the seminar of 
Professor Arindam Chakravarty (University of Hawai’i at Manoa, USA) “Pratibha- 
Vimarsah: The Philosophy of Abhinavagupta” (Banaras Hindu University). 
Handwritten hand-out, 18 pages, dated 1 August, 2000. 

10. Abhinavagupta quotes YS 3.33 in TA 13.146 (Pandey 2000: 693 ff). 

11. Here “Taraka knowledge” refers to a higher, mystical, intuitive, and saving knowledge. 



THE DOCTRINE OF PRATIBHA IN SELECTED TEXTS OF ABHINAVAGUPTA j 307 

Vyasa characterizes this pratibha knowledge (omniscience) in this way: “From 
Pratibha, a prescience is acquired of the knowledge of the subtle, the obstructed, 
the remote, the past and the future” (Hariharananda Aranya 2000:312). 

In this sense, the Malincvijayottaratantra (MVT), one of the main Tantras of 
Trika, uses the term pratibha in the context of acquiring siddhi at a certain stage 
of spiritual practice. 12 In Chapter XV, the Tantra talks about the introspections of 
the sense organs. After the contemplation of one’s organ of speech, the hand, the 
nose, the eyes etc., it speaks about the introspection of mind ( manas ): 

Contemplating for a mere month, intuitive insight (pratibham ) is achieved. He sees 
something for no reason, and similarly he hears something for no reason, now and again 
sensory cognition from all the faculties [arises]. [...] After achieving the esoteric knowledge 
of the mind-realm one obtains the Perfection^] of the Soma (=Saumya). (MVT 15.37 ff; 
Vasudeva 2004:348) 

(b) Pratibha in the context of Bhartrhari's philosophy of language: The 
philosopher, linguist, and grammarian Bhartrhari (5th century ce) understands 
the sentence and its meaning as a unity and defends its indivisibility (< akhandatva ), 
in contrast to the atomistic view of the MImamsa-thinkers, in which sentence 
meaning arises as the result of a collection or joining together of words. The 
ultimate oneness of manifold language participates in the absolute non-duality 
of a manifold reality like the power of time, which appears in Bhartrhari s 
understanding as temporal sequences or discrete moments, but is in reality 
one and indivisible. In the context of explaining the non-duality of word and 
meaning, Bhartrhari employs the fundamental concept of pratibha in the second 
book of the Vakyapadcya , 13 The term pratibha is used to denote the dynamism of 
cognizing the meaning of a sentence: an immediate, spontaneous and intuitive 
flash of comprehension of the sentence as a whole (Vakyapadcya II: i 43 ” 1 5 2 J 


12. The MVT is an early Saiva Tantra; Abhinavagupta distinguishes it as the central 
scriptural text for his systematic exegesis of Trika in the TA (cf. TA 1,18) and in 
MaLimvijayavartika. In his commentary on TA 1,18, Rajanaka Jayaratha (Kashmir, 
13th century) describes the MVT as the “essence” of Trika (Vasudeva 2004: XLV; 
Sanderson 2007a: 370 ff; Sanderson 2014:41). 

13. See Iyer 1969: 86-92; Joshi 1977; Tola and Dragonetti 1990; Akamatsu 1997: Matilal 


2001. 







308 : TANTRAPUSPANJALI 


Akamatsu 1997: 37). 14 For Bhartrhari, this comprehension is different from the 
knowledge of the particular lexical word-meanings. How can this instantaneous 
“flash” be understood? For Bhartrhari, the reality of pratibhd can be described 
only in a negative, non-objectifying way: 

Pratibhd cannot be explained to others in the form of ‘this is that.’ Though pratibhd is 
accepted in common to be realized in every person, even the person who experiences it 
cannot describe it. (VP II: 144; Akamatsu 1997:40) 

According to Bhartrhari, small children can understand the meaning of 
language because of this innate force of pratibhd (VP II: 117). Moreover, it is not 
just part of human reality: “Even animals begin their activities by its force” ( VP II: 
147b; Akamatsu 1997:40). 

Who makes the cuckoo sing in spring? Who teaches the spiders etc. to weave their webs? 
Who inspires the wild beasts and birds in acts such as eating, mating, hating or swimming 
[and all other activities well-known to be determined] by heredity? (VP II: 148) 

From these remarks it is clear that it would be misleading to understand 
pratibhd in the sense of a human capability or a rational function of the intellect. 
It may be better understood as a force of an inner (trans-rational) knowledge 
or creative, intelligent force in children, adults, and even animals, in different 
forms. 

(c) Pratibhd in Indian aesthetics: In the context of Indian poetics and 
aesthetics ( alamkarasastra ), pratibhd is seen as the source of artistic creativity 
and inspiration. In his Kdvydlamkdra , Vamana (8th century) uses the short 
formula: Pratibhd is the seed of poetry” (kavitvabljam pratibhanam ; KA 1.3.16). 15 
The classical definition was presented by Bhattatauta, one of the teachers of 
Abhinavagupta, in his Kavyakautuka: prajna navanavolekkhosdlim pratibhd 
mata, Pratibhd is understood as cognition/wisdom (prajna) associated with 
bringing up the always new/fresh ( navanava).” 16 


14. In the words of Anndam Chakravarty: “It is a sudden flash of synoptic awareness 
of the whole sentence meaning that exceeds the amalgamation of the separate 
elements of the word meanings.” (Chakravarty 2000, handout, p. 7). 

15. Quoted from Gnoli 1985, L, note 4. 

16. Sanskrit text quoted from Gnoli 1985, LI, note 2. 



THE DOCTRINE OF PRATIBHA IN SELECTED TEXTS OF ABHINAVAGUPTA | 309 


The Kashmirian author Rajanaka Anandavardhana (9th century) treats 
pratibha in a passage of his Sanskrit text known as the Dhvanyaloka (“Light on 
Poetic Suggestion”). 17 He underlines the superhuman dimension of pratibha: 

Sarasvati [working] within great poets, in pouring forth this sweet matter ( arthavastu ) 
reveals a special vibrant pratibha, which is superhuman (alokasamanyam). (Dhvanyaloka 
1.6; Ingalls 1990:119) 18 

According to this author, it is pratibha that is the origin of great art and 
distinguishes great poets—and, we may add, great artists, musicians, painters, 
and so on. Ultimately, its source is not the intellectual or technical ability of the 
artist, but Sarasvati, the Goddess (Sakti) "in the form of speech” who is “givingforth 
from her very self the divine rasa of bliss” ( anandarasam ), 19 as Abhinavagupta 
explains in his commentary Locana (“The Eye”) on the Dhvanyaloka. From the 
perspective of these authors, this can explain why the really great artistic works 
in different cultures and civilizations, or at least moments in them, can evoke 
such a great joy and uplift the heart and spirit of their audiences. Within the field 
of our usually limited cognition, these moments of special aesthetic experience 
are traces, a tasting of and opening to that which, in the words of the Saiva Sakta 
tradition, is called Sakti, the highest goddess, the unnamable heart of reality 
which is described in this spiritual-philosophical tradition (but also in others) in 
positive terms as supernatural light, bliss and beauty. Within the creative process, 
and also the process of encountering art, the artist, the listener, or viewer may 
come—maybe just for a few moments—in touch with that Ultimate, in other 
words, may be touched by that power (Furlinger 2006b; 2009). Because of this, 
from the perspective of Abhinavagupta, art can touch the core of our being. It 
carries the touch of the goddess (Para, Sakti) with them, and it reminds us in this 
way of our own ultimate nature (“heart”) which is one with the heart and source 
of great art. 


3 . PRATIBHA IN SELECTED WORKS OF ABHINAVAGUPTA 
In the following sections, I will analyze the specific use and understanding of the 

17. Edition: Durgaprasad and Parab 1998. 

18. I have changed the translation by not translating the word pratibha. Original 
translation: “a special, vibrant genius.” 

19. rasa : “juice, taste, essence.” 




310 tantrapuspAnjali 


concept of pratibha by Abhinavagupta in his works on aesthetic, in his systematic 
reflections on the ultimate reality, and in his discussions of vogic practice. When 
I differentiate these contexts here to give a systematic presentation, one has to 
bear in mind that this differentiation could be misleading: for Abhinavagupta all 
these fields and topics are not separated, but interwoven. Aesthetic experience 
can become a form of spiritual practice and of realizing the ultimate reality'. 
And, as we will see, both the ultimate reality and the way of its realization are 
illuminated with the help of the aesthetic meaning of the concept of pratibha. 

3.1 Pratibha. in Abhinavagupta's aesthetic works 

Abhinavagupta follows in the footsteps of his teacher Bhattatauta, when he gives 
a definition of pratibha in the Locana, his commentary on Anandavardhana’s 
Dhvanydtoka: pratibha apurvavastunirmanaksamd prajha; “pratibha is [that 
form of] wisdom ( prajha ) capable of creating the new (apurva)" (Durgaprasad 
and Parab 1998:34). 

Abhinavagupta explains pratibha by identifying it with prajha. /" which itself 
is a crucial, difficult term. In some Indian traditions, e.g., in Yoga and Buddhism, 
prajha denotes certain stages in the spiritual ascent until the ultimate Reality 
“reveals itself in the light of Supreme Wisdom” (Kaviraj 1990: 33). It is a form 
of cognition different from and higher than the empirical cognition based on 
the physical, natural senses: a super-natural seeing/vision, a super-natural 
hearing, etc. Therefore, it seems misleading to translate it in this passage of the 
Locana as “intelligence,” 111 since the term "intelligence" in modern times carries 
an andro-centric and rationalistic background with it. It tends unconsciously 
towards an interpretation of the Sanskrit text—like in the case of the translation 
of pratibha —within the worldview and anthropology of the modern Western 
sciences, which are in principle naturalistic and neither know nor accept any 
higher faculty like prajha. 22 


20. In the same way, Jayaratha defines pratibha’ with prajha in his commentary on TA 
1.2 (Dwivedi and Rastogi 1987, vol. II: 17). 

21. Masson and Patwardhan 1985:191; Ingalls, Masson and Patwardhan 1990:120. 

22. On the hermeneutical problem of the translation of key words of other civilizations: 
Fiirlinger 2006a. 



THE DOCTRINE OF PHATIBHA IN SELECTED TEXTS OF ABHINAVAGUPTA | 311 


In the Abhinavabharatl, his commentary on the Natyasastra, Abhinavagupta 
underlines the relation between creativity—the power to create the new and 
fresh—and the Divine in the same way: the creative power of the poet, which 
from a non-dualistic point of view participates in some way in the divine 
creativity, stems from pratibhd, which is identified with the Deity and shines in 
the “heart” of the artist in action. He says: 

Like the Creator, the poet creates for himself a world according to his wish. Indeed, he 
is amply endowed with the power of creating manifold, extraordinary things, originating 
thanks to the favour of the Deity called pratibhd, and continually shining within his heart 
(Abhinavabharatl 1.4)-' 

In their translation of the Dhvanydloka and the Locana, Ingalls, Masson, and 
Patwardhan translate the term pratibhd with “genius" (Ingalls 1990: ng). Here we 
meet a fundamental hermeneutical question. I prefer to avoid a translation, since 
I see the danger of applying a certain interpretation to the Sanskrit term through 
the use of a term from a European language that transfers the assumptions 
of modern European aesthetic and epistemological traditions, and thereby 
potentially obstructs what these texts in their own historical and philosophical 
contexts say and mean. But at the same time, I, too, have to translate it for myself 
and to develop a certain understanding that is nourished by a close reading of the 
concept according to Abhinavagupta and the Trika school. Thus, in the context 
of the artistic process, pratibhd can be seen as moments of a flash of “vision,” 
or “insight” —moments in which the artist goes beyond the borders of limited 
cognition, by touching or immerging into that shining, vibrating, blissful power 
(Sakti) that permanently brings forth and creates the universe anew, or by being 
touched by that Heart ( hrdaya ) of reality which is essentially light, freshness, 
clarity, freedom, beauty, power and beatitude, the essence of all. 24 

3.2 Para-Pratibha as a specific name for the Ultimate 

The term pratibhd is one of the key words not only in Abhinavagupta s aesthetic 

worksbutalsoinhisgreatphilosophical-spiritualtexts,especiallyinhismagisterial 

23. Quoted from Gnoli 1985: XLVIII. I have changed the translation of Gnoli in the 
second part. Gnoli renders pratibhd here as “the Supreme Vocality”. 

24. See Ksemaraja’s Pardprdvesikd (“Entering the Highest”); for the Sanskrit text: Sastri 
1918 (KSTS 15). 



312 taxtrapuspAxjali 


Tantraioka, which presents itself as the exegesis of the Mdlinlvijayottara Tantra , 
and also in the Paratrimsikavivarana , his prose commentary on the short 
Paratrimsika Tantra (or Paratrlsika), which belongs to the scriptures of the 
Kulamarga (Sanderson 2014:68)/' Its importance is expressed by the fact that the 
term pratibha is an element of the opening or benedictory verses {manyalasloka) 
of these works/ 0 Let us first consider these mangalasloka s, which contain the 
essence of Trika in a nutshell (Baumer 2011:51). In the third benedictory verse of 
the PTV, Abhinavagupta exclaims: 

narasaktisivdtmakam trikam 
hrdccyeyd vinidhaya bhasayet | 
pranamamiparam anuttaram 
nijabhasam pratibhacamatkrtim |j 

Homage to the wonder ( camatkrti) of pratibha , 
the Supreme {Para), Highest (Anuttara), 
self-radiant, 

which manifests and has within her heart the triad: 
the person ( nara )/ 7 the Power (sakti) and Siva/ 28 

At the beginning of his text, Abhinavagupta identifies the Supreme, the 
Unsurpassable (anuttara), that which has nothing beyond it, with pratibha , and 
connects or qualifies it with the term camatkrti (or camatkara), “wonder, surprise, 
amazement, rapture.” Both terms have the flavor of spontaneity— pratibha and 
camatkrti cannot be produced technically, by one’s own effort or achievement. 
Rather, they have to do with being overwhelmed and swept away by a wave of 
joy, light and beauty, spontaneously becoming one with “that” and “opening of 
the eyes (unmesa). In this way, there is a close analogy and similarity between 


25. On RTY: Baumer 2011. 

26. On the role of mahgalaslokas : Sanderson 2005. 

27. The individual person (nara) represents all created beings, the phenomenal world. 

28. Edition: PTV , Sanskrit text corrected by Swami Lakshmanjee (trans. J. Singh 2000a); 
the translation here is my own. When Abhinavagupta seems to use the term pratibha 
in this and other passages as more than a mere qualification for the highest goddess 
in Tiika (Para), in other words, when it seems to be another name for her, I use 
Pratibha" with a capital P as a proper noun. 


THE DOCTRINE OF PRATIBHA IN SELECTED TEXTS OF ABHINAVAGUPTA | 313 


the state of pratibha-camatkrti in the aesthetic and in the yogic experience. 29 The 
inner power of the senses and of delight, the vibrating heart which is touched by 
it, the power that carries one to the stage of pratibha in one flash, and pratibha 
itself are ultimately one, the one Sakti, and different manifestations of it. 

In the third benedictory verse of the PTV, Abhinavagupta uses the word 
pratibha. like another name of the Ultimate in this Saiva-Sakta-system, i.e., 
the 6akti, Para, the highest goddess. This is not an exception; in the second 
benedictory verse of the Tantraloka we find the same identification of pratibha 
with Para, the supreme Goddess in Trika: “I salute the Goddess Para [who is] 
Citpratibha, united with Bhairava” (TA 1.2). Pandit H.N. Chakravarty explains 
the expression “I salute" ( naumi ), based on Jayaratha’s commentary: it should 
not be interpreted in a dualistic way (to adore the Highest Divinity which is 
absolutely distant from me). Rather, it means: I myself get absorbed in Para who 
is Citpratibha, who is realized in the spontaneous flash of pratibha? 0 Through 
absorption, the wrong, dualistic identification of the subject with the body, the 
breath, the intellect, the thoughts etc. slowly dissolves, 31 and one’s own nature 
the “heart”—becomes manifest. Therefore, Abhinavagupta says in the last part 
of the first benedictory verse of P 7 Yand TA: hrdayam anuttardmrtakulam mama 
samsphuratat ; “May my heart ( hrdaya ), embodying the bliss/nectar ( amrta) of 
the Ultimate ( anuttara ), fully shine forth 32 (samsphuratat)”(TA 1.1). 

In the Trika tradition, “heart” (hrdaya) is interpreted in several ways. It refers 
to jagadananda (“universal bliss”), 33 the divine joy and beatitude, which is the 
heart of Reality, manifests ever fresh in the form of the phenomenal world and is 
realized by some at the highest stage of the yogic path. At the same time, “heart” 
refers to susumnd (PTV, trans. J. Singh 2000a: 2), the “middle channel” which is 
understood by the tradition as the rise, the upward flow of the 6akti in the form 

29. On camatkara and its relation with pratibha which connect the realm of aesthetics 
and spirituality: Baumer 1997. 

30. Notes from my private studies with Pt. Chakravarty on TA (undated). 

31. Cf. Jayaratha’s commentary on TA 1.2: “’I salute’—by means of bringing down the 
body, breath, subject, form” (Dwivedi and Rastogi 1987, vol. II: 17). 

32. Or: “fully sprinkle/vibrate.” 

33. Cf. Jayaratha’s commentaiy on TA 1.1 (Dwivedi and Rastogi 1987, vol. II: 4). On the 
seven stages of bliss: TA 5.43-53; Silbum 1988:75ft'. 




314 TANTRAPUSPANJALI 


of kundalinl within the body, leading finally to the state of pratibhd-cumatkrti 
and jagadananda. In TA 3.67ft., Abhinavagupta explicitly denotes kundalinl 
(“Kaulikl”) as “the heart, the supreme emission of the lord." 

Abhinavagupta characterises anuttara with the expression or name “the 
goddess Para-Pratibha” {para pratibhd devi, TA 2.66) in other passages as well. 14 
He uses the expression “the goddess Pratibha {pratibhd devi), Siva’s power” ( TA 
logoff.), 35 and in thePTVthe expression “highest mistress pratibhd" {pdramesvari 
pratibha). 3 ' 1 Pratibhaisno longerjust a technical term within aesthetics or spiritual 
practice, but rather it becomes a name, a central qualification of the ultimate 
reality, adored as the goddess (Pandey 2000: 679). In this way, Abhinavagupta 
breaks away from his grand-teacher Utpaladeva, who characterized pratibhd as 
the “great lord” (Mahesvara) (Isvarapratyabhijhdkdrikd I.7.1; Torella 2002:136). 

What could be the reason that Abhinavagupta denotes the Highest, Supreme 
{anuttara) with the name Pratibha which is also, as we have seen, a technical 
term in yoga, in the philosophy of language and in the field of aesthetics? 
Using the term pratibhd, Abhinavagupta seems to hint at a certain quality of 
the Highest Reality, and at the same time of its realization and the power which 
grants it. While this Reality is one, the fullness beyond time, space, movement, 
plurality, and dynamism, it emits/manifests the phenomenal reality of the 
universe multiplicity, time, space, movement, dynamism and so on—in an 
always new {abhinava), open, spontaneous, and ever fresh way, and in the form 
of something always new, fresh, open, free, spontaneous, and amazing ( TA 3.66). 
Here we meet the specific, complex ontology of Trika Saivism which does not 
represent a monism, but in the words of Abhinavagupta—“supreme non¬ 
dualism {paramadvayavada). 3 ' The Supreme {anuttara) is the coincidence of 
the Absolute (“Siva”), the creative power and dynamism of the Absolute (“Sakti”) 

34. Dwivedi and Rastogi 1987, vol. II: 426. 

35. Dwivedi and Rastogi 1987, vol. V: 2027. 

36. Abhinavagupta: PTV, trans. J. Singh 2000a, Sanskrit text, 37. Jaideva Singh translates 
this expression with divine Pratibha," which omits Abhinavagupta's presentation 
of the divine subject, the goddess denoted as Pratibhd. For an insightful reflection 
of the connection between the goddess as Paravak, Para-Pratibha and aesthetic 
experience, presented with the example of Buddhist mandalas in Tabo and Alchi: 
Kim 2014, especially ig2ff. 

37. See Abhinavagupta’s Malinivijaya Vdrttika (KSTS 31). 



THE DOCTRINE OF PRATIBHA IN SELECTED TEXTS OF ABHINAVAGUPTA | 315 


and the phenomenal, plural world (“Nara") emanated by this Power without any 
loss of its absolute fullness. By using the term pratibha, Abhinavagupta hints 
at how the Ultimate can be realized: by an immediate flash (like the artistic 
inspiration), a sudden illumination, which reveals the “Whole” (like the whole of 
the sentence), the non-dual reality. 

3.3 Pratibha in the context of spiritual practice 

Let us ask again: How can we interpret this remarkable identification of 
Ultimate Reality (anuttara) with pratibha ? Why does Abhinavagupta prefer this 
expression and give it a central place in his writings? In my view, the reason 
is that pratibha is connected with the very core of Tantric, non-dual Saivism 
of Kashmir, i.e., the spiritual or yogic practice, in several different ways. The 
centrality of the term highlights and refers to this core, and at the same time 
Abhinavagupta characterizes the particular nature of this subtle process. I think 
that this characterization allows us to derive important criteria for the field of 
spiritual or yogic practice in general. 38 

(a) Abhinavagupta identifies the energy of the breath ( pranasakti ) one of 
the dimensions or aspects of Sakti—with pratibha. It is one name of the Sakti; 
pranasakti not in its limited, concealed form “in the stage of maya,” 39 but the 
original, true, pure, non-dual nature of the universal life force and vital breath: 

This energy of the breath ( pranasakti ), which is united with the first pulsation [of cit ], 
is called vibration ( spanda ), pulsating effulgence ( sphuratta ), repose ( visranti ), life (jcva), 
heart (hrt), pratibha. (TA 6.13; Dwivedi and Rastogi 1987, vol. Ill: 1100) 

According to the Vijhana Bhairava Tantra ( VBh ), one of the most important 
and revered Agamas of Tantric Kashmirian Saiva Advaita which presents 112 
meditation exercises, 40 “by focusing one’s awareness on the two voids [at the 
end] of the internal and external breaths” {VBh, verse 25), at the center or void 
between the inhaling and exhaling breath, the usual duality of inhaling and 
exhaling, which keeps the person and its cognition within the realm of duality, 

38. See my conclusion. 

39. Ksemaraja: Pratyabhijhahrdayam, trans. J. Singh 1998:93. 

40. In particular it is “a work of the Trika" (Sanderson 2007a: 399; cf. Sanderson 2014:42). 
Ksemaraja composed a commentary, but only his exposition on the 23 introductory 
verses of the VBh survived (Sanderson 2014:53). 





316 TANTRAPUSPANJALI 


is overcome and thoughts slowly dissolve ( VBh 26). Prana regains its true nature 
of pure samvit, from which it unfolds. 41 In a subtle process, the two vital breaths 
(prana and apana) get merged and united in that reality variously called “the 
center, the median way, the heart, susumna ( Spanda-Karika I.23-25; trans. J. 
Singh 1994: i05ff.). The upward flow of susumna unfolds and prdnasakti slowly 
rises in the form of kundalinl (VBh 28), or it shoots upwards {VBh 29). 44 This 
prdnasakti is called pratibha by Abhinavagupta. 

(b) Camatkrti, one of ten successive yogic states, 4 ^ is identified by 
Abhinavagupta with pratibha —the wonder of the flash of pratibha , the 
recognition of one’s identity with the whole world, the state of all-knowing, 
the state of “illumination” (Silbum 1968: 138). In his commentary (Vimarsini) 
on Siva Sutra 5 {udyamo bhairavah), Ksemaraja underlines the abruptness, the 
suddenness of the opening of the state of divine, unlimited consciousness: 

That is udyama which is an emergence of an awareness in the form of the highest pratibha 
which is a sudden springing up (i.e. which is a sudden flash) of that I-consciousness of Siva 
which expands in the form of the whole universe. 44 

In other words, by connecting pratibha with camatkrti, Abhinavagupta 
brings it together with a particular stage in the rise of kundalinl, the yogic 
state of all-knowing, omniscience and illumination. In this way it is clear that 


41. See TA 6.8. Initially samvit unfolded itself into vital breath (prana).” Samvit could 
be understood as supreme, universal, non-dual Consciousness, which is luminous 
and unlimited by time and space. 

42. On this process: Ksemaraja, Pratyabhijnahrdayam, trans. J. Singh 1998: 92ff; Silbum 
1988:39ff; Lakshmann Joo 2002:2iff; Kaul “Kamal” 2014: 9 ff 

43 - Abhinavagupta describes these different stages and the signs connected with them 
in TA s.ioob-iosa: kampa (trembling), revolving ( bhrama ), vibrant whirling (ghurni), 
diving or flight ( plavana ), stability ( sthirata ), light of cit (citprakasa ), bliss (ananda), 
celestial vision ( diyyadrsti ), wonder ( camatkrti ), the indescribable ( avacya ). On 
these phases and signs: Silburn 1988, ch. 6: “Various Reactions Occurring in a Yog in” 
Translation. J. Singh 2000b: 30. Swami Laskhman Joo renders the Vimarsini in 
this form: “That active effort which takes you abruptly, in one flight, to your 
consciousness, and makes shine the supreme pratibha , the supreme knowledge 
of being that effort is Bhairava” (Lecture on Siva Sutra 5: 21 June, 1975; audio 
documentation: Swami Lakshman Joo 2001). It is not the result of one’s own 
individual spiritual effort and achievement. 


44 


THE DOCTRINE OF PRATIBHA IN SELECTED TEXTS OF ABHINAVAGUPTA | 317 


Abhinavagupta uses the word in a non-dualistic way to express the non-dualistic 
nature of reality: pratibha is both the highest Reality, its realization, and the 
power which realizes it (Padoux 1990: 181, note 38). In a similar way, Silbum 
explains that Pratibha is illumination which reveals Pratibha, the luminous 
essence (Silbum 1968:181, note 3). 

(c) Abhinavagupta makes it clear that this sudden, spontaneous realization 
of one’s own nature, 43 of the supreme Subjectivity—and the attainment of 
omniscience connected with it—is ultimately not the result of one’s own effort, 
or certain yogic techniques, but the intense form of saktipata (lit. “the falling 
down of the power”; “grace”). Within the system of nine degrees of intensity of 
Saktipata, 46 Abhinavagupta identifies pratibha, the abrupt opening of the “great 
knowledge" ( mahajhanam ), with the second-highest degree ( madhyatcvra, 
“middle intense” form of Saktipata; TA 13.13^.). The Trika tradition calls such 
a person who attains the “great knowledge” independent from scriptures and 
teachers svayambhuh. (“spontaneously/self-existing,” TA 13.135a) or pratibha 
guru {TS , ch. 11) —a realized master who is neither instructed by scriptures nor 
initiated by a gum, but who is initiated by the supreme power, the Goddess 
{Para-Pratibha) Herself. Like with the artist, the poet, musician or philosopher 
who instantly receives a sudden flash of inspiration (j pratibha) as a surprising 
gift, so the person who is suddenly captured and caught by the flash and power 
of the uprising Sakti. 

(d) Pratibha-camatkrti does not only denote the Ultimate itself, or one 
of the highest states of the spiritual path. 47 It is also related to the sudden 
disappearance of the usual contraction of cognition, to moments of openings 
to higher states within everyday life, called nirvikalpa samvicL. Such an opening 
could be interpreted as a sudden uncovering of our true nature. 

But it [nirvikalpa samvid ], known by different names such as unmesa, pratibha etc., does 
occur in the interval between two different determinate ideas or percepts, one that has 


45. Lilian Silbum renders pratibha with “spontaneous illumination” (glossary) and 
"spontaneous realization without a guru” (Silbum 1964:43, note 3). 

46. See TA 13.129 ff.; Abhinavagupta, Tantrasara {TS), ch. 11. 

47- Abhinavagupta explicidy states in TA 13.136 that there are different degrees of 
intensity and stability of pratibha. 




318 TANTRAPUSPANJALI 


just terminated and the other that is about to arise (as tamitodesyat). (PTV. trans. J. Singh 
2000a: 93) 

Abhinavagupta characterizes this reality of nirvikalpa samvid (Jaitleva Singh: 
“undifferentiated, indeterminate consciousness”) as being without temporal and 
spatial limitations: “There is the absence of the limitation of time etc” ( PTV, trans. 
J. Singh 2000a: 94). He follows this with an important statement on pratibhd: 

Thus the one divine Pratibha (pdramesvarlpratibhd) defined by my weighty statement is of 
this kind, i.e. of unlimited nature, the very Self of all. Not only in the beginning and the end 
but in the intervening state also, she is the origin of the emergence of the other present, 
past and future determinate apprehensions. Those who are adept in discrimination have 
experienced diaya-vijndna i.e. unified or integral knowledge in this very way (i.e. in the way 
of indeterminate consciousness). (PTV, trans. J. Singh 2000a: 94) 

Abhinavagupta comes to the final characterization of pratibhd in this 
context. It is: 

... that which moves in the prior, intervening and posterior state of the apprehension of 
all the objects of sense, which is universal, which is endowed with the splendour of the 
highest sakti. ( PTV, trans. J. Singh 2000a: 95) 

Again, there exists the danger of reducing pratibhd or nirvikalpa samvid in a 
modem, andro-centric manner to a certain state of human consciousness only. 
But as we have seen, Abhinavagupta states directly that it is “the very Self of 
all.” It unites the wholeness of reality. 4 * Jaideva Singh underlines this point in 
his exposition of the PTV: Abhinavagupta “has used nirvikalpa samvid in a very 
wide sense, in the sense of the divine creative consciousness, the very life of all 
manifestation” (Singh 2000a: 98). For me, it seems that these reflections are the 
result of the extraordinary, extremely subtle perception of those persons who 
have reached the highest state of nirvikalpa samvid, the state of consciousness 
without the limits of time etc., and who are able to keep it, to remain in this state 
and to watch the play of the emergence of differentiation, determination in form 
of different objects, colors, movements and so on within it. 4 ' 1 They are “adept in 

48. TA 10.133b: samvid is one, present even in insentient things (Dwivedi and Rastogi 
1987. vol. V: 1979). 

49 - Among the three means ( upaya ), this state is defined as the highest way, 
sdmbhavopaya (Lakshmanjoo 2000:33f). 



THE DOCTRINE OF PRATIBHA IN SELECTED TEXTS OF ABHINAVAGUPTA j 319 


discrimination.” Maybe the concrete experience of this state and reflections on it 
by masters and realized yogins like Abhinavagupta form the empirical basis and 
background for the ontological model of the paramadvayavada , a philosophical 
view of reality which overcomes the opposition of the oneness ( advaita , unity, 
timelessness) and the multiplicity ( dvaita, difference, time, motion) of the 
phenomenal world. In my view, we can read these reflections of Abhinavagupta 
not as mere philosophical speculation, but as a report of concrete experiences 
by a person remaining in the pure, full, timeless and indeterminate state while 
watching the ever new appearance, the play and dissolution of the objective 
world in time and space out of pratibha . In this respect, Abhinavagupta gives 
precise descriptions of the relation between the absolutely pure state of oneness 
and fullness and the appearance of differentiation (i.e., phenomena) because of 
the power of the Goddess Pratibha at the stage of the attainment of omniscience 
(cf. TA 10.109-110). 


4 . CONCLUSION 

The doctrine of pratibha in selected texts of the great Kashmirian master 
Abhinavagupta leads us to the core of the world view of the Kashmirian Tantric 
Saiva Advaita, to its grand, breathtaking vision and experience of reality: the 
phenomenal universe does not consist of dull matter and mechanisms; rather, it 
is the creative and ever new manifestation of the dynamism within the oneness 
and fullness of anuttara —the shining, vibrating, sparkling Power, which in 
the Trika tradition is venerated as the Highest Goddess, Para-Pratibha. She is 
identical with the universe and transcends it at the same time, 50 and therefore 
one can conclude that the universe, in its deep dimension, shares the nature 
of Para-Pratibha: absolute spontaneity and freedom ( svatantrya ), 51 freshness 
and novelty, absolute light, and universal bliss (jagadananda ). According to the 
masters of Trika, this is not a mere metaphysical speculation but a concrete reality 

50. See the beginning of Ksemaraja’s Pardpravesika : “We adore Samvit which flashes 
up, sparkling ( sphurantlm) in the form of the highest primordial power ( sakti ), 
the heart of the highest Lord, which is identical (dtmikd) with the universe and 
transcends it ( uttlrnam ).” (Sastri 1918:1) 

51. It could be fruitful to reflect on principles of modern quantum physics—e.g., the 
quantum indeterminacy, or the existence of pure or objective accident—in the 
light of the Trika philosophy. 



320 ! TANTRAPU§PANJALI 


which can be realized in the supreme knowledge of pratibhd by means of the 
awakening of kundalini, i.e., by grace (saktipata). At the same time, this Reality 
can also be touched in moments of our everyday life: in the void between two 
steps, breaths or thoughts, in moments of extreme fear, in visionary moments of 
the creation and experience of great art, in blissful moments of openings when 
we experience love, sexuality, joy, music, or a sudden joyful surprise, but also 
pain, exhaustion and other states in ordinary life. 52 

In his texts, Abhinavagupta combines the openness of poetic language with 
the precision of philosophical identification based on his own experience and 
the knowledge of 6aiva literature. In an inimitable manner, he uses the language 
at the border of the indescribable ( avacya ), the unnamable. Specifically, the 
word pratibhd functions within the works of Abhinavagupta like a crystal: the 
different meanings and connotations of pratibhd —the individual surfaces of the 
crystal—are respectively transparent to the others, and transfer their specific 
light and color to the others. In this way, pratibhd allows the author to express the 
non-dual nature of reality as such, in particular the integrality of aesthetic and 
yogic experience. It allows him to underline and clarify central characteristics of 
the spiritual path and process: the primary relevance of spontaneity, immediacy, 
freshness, novelty, freedom, and grace (Saktipata). 53 

With the help of the term pratibhd and its different connotations, 
Abhinavagupta is able to illuminate both the Ultimate, the inner nature of 
reality, and the manner of its realization in a new, fresh, surprising, beautiful 
and clearway. I am sure that this itself is the fruit and expression of pratibhd. 


52. See VBh; ed. and trans. Singh 1999; commentary: Lakshman Joo 2002. 

53 - From this characterization, I think, one could conclude a certain "pratibhd- quality” 
or pratibhd -criterion for the realm of spiritual practice which excludes the 
dominance of yogic techniques, techniques of manipulating and misusing people 
m the spiritual field, the business with spiritual knowledge as a part of consumer 
culture, as well as any “spiritual materialism” (Trungpa 1973) with its ego building 
and pride of one’s own spiritual efforts and achievements. 

54 - In this Tantric Advaitic worldview, the "Ultimate,” "Absolute” is not only “beyond,” 
transcendent, separated from the phenomenal world, rather, at the same time it is 
the innate nature of human and non-human reality. Therefore, the phenomenal 
world, the power of the senses and its objects, can become means for the recognition 
(pratyabhijhd) of the ultimate nature (Fiirlinger 2006b). 



THE DOCTRINE OF PRATIBHA IN SELECTED TEXTS OF ABHINAVAGUPTA | 321 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Akamatsu, Akihiko. 1997. “Pratibha and the Meaning of the Sentence in Bhartrhari’s 
Vakyapadlya.” In Bhartrhari: Philosopher and Grammarian. Proceedings of the 
First International Conference on Bhartrhari , edited by Saroga Bhate and Johannes 
Bronkhorst, 37-43* Reprint, Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass. First published 1994. 

Baumer, Bettina. 1987. “Jaideva Singh - In Memoriam.” In Arcasmrtb Mahamahopadhyaya 
Gopinath Kaviraj Commemoration Volume. Four volumes. VoL IV in English: 
Navonmesa, edited byjaideva Singh, Govindagopal Mukhopadhyaya, and Hemendra 
Nath Chakravarty, 449-450. Varanasi: Ratna Printing Works. 

-• 1997* “Aesthetics of Mysticism or Mysticism of Aesthetics? The Approach of Kashmir 

Saivism.” In Mysticism in Shaivism and Christianity , edited by Bettina Baumer, 329- 
349. New Delhi: D.K. Printworld. 

-• 2001. “Tantric Pandits in Varanasi: A Brief Survey.” In The Pandit Traditional 

Scholarship in India. Felicitation Volume Parameswara Aithal, edited by Axel 
Michaels, 99-103. New Delhi: Manohar. 

-. 2011. Abhinavagupta’s Hermeneutics of the Absolute. Anuttaraprakriya. An 

Interpretation of his Paratrisika-Vivarana. Shimla: Institute of Advanced Study/New 
Delhi: D.K. Printworld. 

Chakravarty, Arindam. 2000. “Pratibha-VimarSah: The Philosophy of Abhinavagupta” 
(Banaras Hindu University, seminar, unpublished hand-out, 1 August, 2000). 

Durgaprasad, M.M. Pt. and KaSlnath Pandurang Parab. 1998. The Dhvanyaloka of 
Anandavarhananacharya. New Delhi: Munshiram Manoharlal. Reprint of the 
edition Bombay: Nimaya Sagar Press, 1935. 

Dwivedi, R.C. and Navjivan Rastogi, eds. 1987. The Tantraloka of Abhinavagupta with the 
Commentary ofjayaratha, 8 vols. New Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass. 

Fiirlinger, Ernst. 2006a. “Is Cit ‘Consciousness’? Hermeneutical Reflections on Translating 
Abhinavagupta.” \n Abhinavagupta: Reconsiderations, edited by Makarand Paranjape 
and Sunthar Visuvalingam, 204-210. Evam: Forum on Indian Representations 4:i&2. 
New Delhi: Samvad India Foundation. 

-. 2006b. “A Spirituality of the Senses in Nondualistic Kashmir Shaivism.” In Sahrdaya, 

Studies in Indian and South East Asian Art: Dr. R. Nagaswamy Felicitation Volume, 
edited by Bettina Baumer, R.N. Mishra, Chirapat Prapandvidya, and Devendra 
Handa, 29-44. Chennai: Tamil Arts Academy. 

-. 2009. The Touch of Sakti: A Study in Non-dualistic Trika Saivism of Kashmir. New 

Delhi: D.K. Printworld. 

Gnoli, Raniero. 1985. The Aesthetic Experience According to Abhinavagupta. Chowkhamba 
Sanskrit Studies LXII. Varanasi: Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series Office, third edition. 

Gonda, Jan. 1984. The Vision of the Vedic Poets. New Delhi: Munshiram Manoharlal. 

Hariharananda Aranya, Swami. 2000. Yoga Philosophy ofPatanjaliwith Bhasvati. Translated 
by P.N. Mukeiji. Calcutta: Calcutta University Press. 



322 tantrapuspAxjali 


Ingalls, Daniel H.H., ed. 1990. The Dhvanyaloka of Anandavardhana with the Lacuna of 
AbhinavaguptcL Translated by Daniel H.H. Ingalls, Jeffrey Moussaieff Masson and 
M.V. Patwardhan. Harvard Oriental Series 49. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University 
Press. 

Iyer, K.A.S. 1969. Bhartrhari: A Study of the Vakyapadiya in the Light of the Ancient 
Commentaries. Poona: Deccan College. 

Joshi, S. D. 1977. “Bhartrhari’s Concept of Pratibha: A Theory on the Nature of Language 
acquisition.” In Some Aspects of Indo-Iranian History and Cultural Traditions. 
Commemoration Volume of Dr. Vasudev Copal Paranjpe, edited by Suniti Kumar 
Chatterji, R.N. Dandekar, V. Raghavan, H.P. Schmidt, T.G. Mainkar and S.N. 
Gajendragadkar, 71-76, Delhi: Ajanta Publications. 

Kaul “KamalJankinath, ed. 2014. The Awakening of Supreme Consciousness. Lectures by 
Swami Lakshman Joo. Delhi: Utpal, Publications. First published in 1998. 

Kaviraj, Gopinath. 1923/24. “Doctrine of Pratibha in Indian Philosophy.” Annals of the 
Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute (Poona) Vol. 5, parts I & II. 

-• 1990* “The Doctrine of Pratibha in Indian Philosophy.” In Selected Writings of 

M.M. Gopinath Kaviraj , edited by M.M. Gopinath Kaviraj Centenary Celebrations 
Committee, 1-45. Varanasi: Ratna Printing Works. 

Kim, Sung Min. 2014. Voice of the Void: Aesthetics of the Buddhist Mandala on the Basis of the 
Doctrine ofVdkin Trika Saivism. New Delhi: D.K. Printworld. 

Kuanpoonpol, Priyawat. 1991. “Pratibha: The Concept of Intuition in the Philosophy of 
Abhinavagupta.” PhD diss., Harvard University. 

Lakshmanjoo, Swami. 2000. Kashmir Shaivism: The Secret Supreme , edited by John Hughes. 
Culver City: Kashmir Shaivism Fellowship. 

-. 2001. Shiva Sutras: The Supreme Awakening. Audio Study Set. Culver City, CA: 

Universal Shaiva Fellowship. 

-. 2002. Vijhdna Bhairava: The Practice of Centring Awareness. Varanasi: Indica Books. 

Lawrence, David P. 2012. Abhinavagupta.” In Brill's Encyclopedia oj Hinduism. Volume IV, 
edited by Knut A. Jacobsen, 139-149. Leiden: Brill. 

Matilal, Bimal Krishna. 2001. “Bhartrhari’s View of Sphota.” In Bimal Krishna Matilal, The 
Word and the World: India’s Contribution to the Study of Language, 84-98. Delhi: 
Oxford University Press. 

Muller-Oitega, Paul E. 1998. “Abhinavagupta.” In Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy, Vol. 

1, edited by Edward Craig, 15-19. New York: Routledge. 

Padoux, Andre. 1990. Vac. The Concept of the Word In Selected Hindu Tantras. Translated by 
Jacques Gontier. Albany: State University of New York Press. 

Pande, G. C. 1989. Mahamahopadhyaya Gopinath Kaviraj. Makers of Indian Literature 
Series. New Delhi: Sahitya Akademi. 

Pandey, K. C. 2000. Abhinavagupta: An Historical and Philosophical Study. The Chaukhamba 
Sanskrit Studies 1. Varanasi: Chaukhamba Amarabharati Prakashan, 3rd edition. 


THE DOCTRINE OF PRATIBHA IN SELECTED TEXTS OF ABHINAVAGUPTA j 323 


Sanderson, Alexis. 1987. “Abhinavagupta.” In The Encyclopedia of Religion, Vol. 1, edited by 
Mircea Eliade, 8-9. New York: Macmillan Publishing Company. 

-. i 9 88. “Saivism and the Tantric Traditions.” In The World’s Religions, edited by Stewart 

Sutherland, Leslie Houlden, Peter Clarke, and Friedhelm Hardy, 660-704. London: 
Routledge. 

-. 2005. “A Commentary on the Opening Verses of the Tantrasara of Abhinavagupta.” 

In Samarasya: Studies in Indian Arts, Philosophy, and Interreligious Dialogue, edited 
by Sadananda Das and Ernst Fiirlinger, 89-148. New Delhi: D.K. Printworld. 

-. 2007a. “The Saiva Exegesis of Kashmir.” In Melanges TantriquesalaMemoired’Helene 

Brunner/Tantric Studies in Memory of Helene Brunner, edited by Dominique Goodall 
and Andre Padoux, 231-442. Collection Indologie 106. Pondicherry: Institut Francis 
de Pondichery/Ecole ffan$ais d’Extreme-Orient. 

-. 2007b. “Swami Lakshman Joo and His Place in the Kashmirian Saiva Tradition.” 

In Samvidulldsah: Manifestation of Divine Consciousness. Swami Laksmanjoo - A 
Centenary Tribute, edited by Bettina Baumer and Sarla Kumar, 93-126. New Delhi: 
D.K. Printworld. 

_. 2009. “The Saiva Age: The Rise and Dominance of Saivism during the Early Medieval 

Period.” In Genesis and Development of Tantrism, edited by Shingo Einoo, 41-350- 
Institute of Oriental Culture Special Series 23. Tokyo: Institute of Oriental Culture, 
University of Tokyo. 

-. 2014. “The Saiva Literature.” Journal of Indological Studies (Kyoto), nos. 24 8 c 25 

(2012-2013), 1-113. 

Sastrl, Pandit Mukunda Rama, ed. 1918. The Para Praveshika of Kshemaraja. KSTS 15. 
Bombay: Tattva-Vivruhaka Press. 

Silburn, Lilian. 1964. La Bhakti: Le Stavacintdmani de Bhatta Ndrdyana. Translation and 
commentary by Lilian Silburn. Paris: Editions de Boccard. 

- # ^68 MahartamanjarideMahesvardnanda, avecdesextraitsduParimala. Translation 

and introduction by Lilian Silburn. Paris: Editions de Boccard. 

-. 19 88. Kundalini: The Energy of the Depths. A Comprehensive Study Based on the 

Scriptures of Nondualistic Kasmir Saivism. Albany: State University of New York 
Press. 

Singh, Jaideva, trans. 1994. Spanda-Kdrikds: The Divine Creative Pulsation. Delhi: Motilal 
Banarsidass. Second reprint of the first edition (1980). 

- ) trans. 1998. Pratyabhijhahrdayam: The Secret of Self Recognition. Delhi. Motilal 

Banarsidass. Third reprint of the fourth revised edition (1982). 

- 1 trans. 1999. Vijhanabhairccva or Divine Consciousness: A Treasury of 112 Types of Yoga. 

Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass. Fifth reprint of the first edition (1979). 

-, trans. 2000a. Abhinavagupta: Pardtrisika-Vtvarana. The Secret of Tantric Mysticism. 

Edited by Bettina Baumer. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass. Second reprint of the first 
edition (1988). 








324 TANTRAPUSPANJALI 


, trans. 2000b. Siva Sutras. The Yoga of Supreme Identity. Text of the Sutras and the 
Commentary Vimarsinl of Ksemaraja. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass. Ninth reprint of 
the first edition (1979). 

Singh, Jaideva, Govindagopal Mukhopadhyaya, and Hemendra Nath Chakravarty. 1987. 
ArcasmrtL Mahamahopadhyaya Gopinath Kaviraj Commemoration Volume. Four 
volumes. VoL IVin English: Navonmesa. Varanasi: Ratna Printing Works. 

Tola, Fernando and Carmen Dragonetti. 1990. “Some Remarks on Bhartrhari’s Concept of 
Pratibha.” Journal of Indian Philosophy 18:2, 95-112. 

Torella, Raffaele, ed. and trans. 2002. The Isvarapratyabhijhdkdrikd of Utpaladeva with the 
Author's Vrtti. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass. Corrected edition; first edition: Roma, 
1994 . 

. 2011. The Philosophical Traditions of India: An AppraisaL Varanasi: Indica Books. 

• 201 4 * Pratyabhijna and Philology.” Journal of the American Oriental Society 133 (4), 
705 - 713 - 

Trungpa, Chogyam. 1973. Cutting Through Spiritual Materialism. Boston, Massachusetts: 
Shambhala Publications. New edition 2002. 

Vasudeva, Somadeva. 2004. The Yoga of Mdlincvijayottaratantra. Critical edition, translation 
and notes. Collection Indologie 97. Pondicherry: Institut Fran^ais de Pondichery/ 
Ecole fran^ais d’Extreme-Orient. 




Smell: The Sense Perception of 
Recognition 

Aleksandra Wenta 


In a traditional form of Hindu worship, the temple deity is venerated through 
sacrificial offerings of food ( bhoga ) served three times a day. Bhoga, meaning 
“enjoyment,” “eating,” and “feeding,” and derived from the verbal root bhuj, 
denotes anything that can be enjoyed by the senses. However, in this specific 
gastronomic dimension, it is the sense of smell, and not the sense of taste, 
that occupies the central place. The deity is said to consume bhoga through its 
fragrance. The food ingested by the act of smelling is “metonymously transformed 
into prasada or consecrated food ” 1 and distributed to the devotees. Given the 
importance of this insight, it is odd that smell has received little or no scholarly 
attention in the scientific tradition of Indology . 2 In this essay, I make a humble 
attempt to look at the original contribution of non-dual Kashmiri Saivism to the 
understanding of the sense perception of smell by drawing upon the work of 
Mahesvarananda (i2th-i3th century), called the Maharthamahjarl (The Flower- 
Bouquet of the Supreme Meaning). Mahesvarananda (also known as Goraksa), 
son of Madhava, was a denizen of Cidambaram during the rule of the Cola 


1. Paul M. Tomney, “Krishna’s Consuming Passions: Food as Metaphor and Metonym 
for Emotion at Mount Govardhan,” in Divine Passions: The Social Construction of 
Emotions in India, ed. Owen M. Lynch (Berkeley: University of California Press, 
1990), p. 164. 

2. A recent publication by James McHugh, Sandalwood and Carrion: Smell in Indian 
Religion and Culture (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2012), certainly helps to fill 
this gap. 





326 TAXTRAPUSPAXJALI 


dynasty (9th-i3th century). The fact that the Mahdrthamahjan was written 
in medieval Cidambaram is important because it provides evidence that the 
Kashmiri Saiva traditions, which originated in the far north, were transmitted to 
the far south, where they were not only well known but also practiced. Of course, 
it is important to note that so-called Kashmir Saivism was not confined to the 
socio-historical realm of Kashmir, but was rather a trans-regional tradition whose 
influence extended to South India and far beyond the Indian subcontinent. 

The sense perception of smell plays a major role in Mahesvarananda’s system. 
He adopts it as a symbol of recognition or reflective awareness, which has a more 
direct experimental and aesthetic dimension situated in the reality of the senses. 
For Mahesvarananda, smelling is synonymous with recognition (pratyabhijhcV). 
In this way, Mahesvarananda tries to put Pratyabhijna 3 4 discourse on a new footing 

3. The term ‘ pratyabhijnd' is one of the three cluster-concepts constituting the 
theory of recognition. ‘ Pratyabhijnd' means ‘shining as facing oneself towards 
what was forgotten’ (‘pratl= towards, abhi= face to face, //acknowledge). 
Moreover, pratyabhijna means cognition through the unification of past and 
present experiences expressed in judgments such as: This is the same Caitra’ 
( Isvarapratyabhijndkdrika-vimarsini 1.1, pp. 6-7). In the event of recognition, both 
memory (smrti) and direct perception ( pratyaksa) are important. This standpoint 
was opposed to that of Vijnanavadins, who rejected memory, and to that ol Advaita 
Vedantins, who did not assign any value to perception. ‘ Pratyabhijnd’ is to bring 
about the notice of the powers of the Self—knowledge ( jndna ) and action (krivd )— 
which takes place simply by the removal of ignorance (mohapasciranamatra) 
(Isvarapratyabhijndkarikd-vimarsini 1.2, p. 13). 

4. The Sivadrsti (“Vision of Siva”), written by Somananda (gth-ioth century), is regarded 
as the first treatise to furnish a philosophical foundation of the Pratyabhijna school 
(‘Recognition [of the Lord]’). The Pratyabhijna reached its apogee in the work 
of Somananda s disciple Utpaladeva, whose Isvdrapratyabhijnakdrikd (“Stanzas 
on the Recognition of the Lord”), along with his two commentaries (the Vrtti 
and Vrtti-Vimarsini), built on the germinal ideas of the Sivadrsti and represent a 
full-fledged edifice of Pratyabhijna philosophy. The Pratyabhijna philosophy is 
important in large part because it provides a theoretical basis for the Saiva tantric 
traditions of Kashmir. It flourished at the time when certain transgressive practices 
connected with the tantric culture of the cremation grounds became symbolically 
internalized, to subsist in thought alone. Cf. R. Torella, The Philosophical Traditions 
of India. An Appraisal (Varanasi: Indica, 2011). This inward reorientation developed 
a highly gnoseological attitude directed toward cognitive grasping of the Light of 
Siva in all objective phenomena. The aim of a human being is precisely recognition 



SMELL: THE SENSE PERCEPTION OF RECOGNITION 327 


by providing an analog ) * * 5 6 7 of its philosophical ideas with corresponding concepts 
from the Krama 5 metaphysical scheme. In doing so, he follows Abhinavagupta, 
who defines gandha or smell as a symbol of pratyabhijna in his Paratrisika 
Vivarana." Analogies between Pratyabhijna and Krama offer support to the 
logical structure of Mahesvarananda’s methodology, which, at least in some part, 
can be interpreted as a claim to revive the doctrinal concomitance of these two 
distinct traditions . 7 But what specific qualities make smell special among the 
sense perceptions? In answering this question, we should concentrate on three 
closely related focal points. The first is the materiality of smell in its relation to 
earth. The second is smell’s ability to expand in space, which endows it with the 
attribute of all-pervasiveness. The third is the stimulus that gives rise to smell, 
in this case a fragrant flower. Mahesvarananda develops a notion of flower- 
fragrance covering different semantic fields to which the sense of smell, equated 
with reflective awareness or recognition, belongs. Let us analyze these specific 
features in turn. 

(pratyabhijna) of one’s own nature (atman) to be identical with Siva. This implies 

recognition of Siva’s essential nature manifesting everywhere and at all times. 

5. The Krama system is one of the earliest among Saiva tantric traditions of Kashmir, 
elaborated in the first half of the ninth century in Uddiyana. The principal feature 
that distinguishes the Krama from other schools of Kashmir Saivism is the notion 
of the sequence (krama) that brings into prominence the inherent dynamism 
of reality itself. The term krama is used in reference to the goddess Kali, or more 
precisely KalasamkarsanI, “The Enchantress of Time,” and her emanations, who are 
worshipped in sequence (krama). 

6. Gandha (as is well known) is the attribute of earth. In the para or transcendental 
consciousness, gandha is symbolic of recognition or pratyabhijhd in the form T 
have always been like this’ (Paratrisika Vivarana, trans. Jaideva Singh, p. 135). In the 
scheme given in the Paratrisikdtantra and adopted by Mahesvarananda, taste (rasa) 
is the sense perception of relish (asvada, rasana, carvand), which is characterized 
as ‘the joy of Siva’s realization as I, relish of one’s own true nature’; while smell 
(gandha) stands for recognition. 

7. According to Abhinavagupta, it was Utpaladeva himself who appears in the spiritual 
lineage that transmitted the Krama doctrine to him. Somananda, the first preceptor 
of the Pratyabhijna system, was, according to Abhinavagupta, a disciple of the 
Krama teacher Govindaraja, who, before dying, passed to him the Krama doctrine 
taught in the Devipahcasatika (Kalikulapahcasatakd). This doctrine was transmitted 
by Somananda, through his spiritual lineage of Utpaladeva and Laksmanagupta, 
down to Abhinavagupta. See Torella, IPV, xiv. 



328 TANTRAPUSPAXJALI 


SMELL — SCRIPTURE AS THE AESTHETIC-CUM-MYSTICAL EXPERIENCE 

Mahesvarananda tries to locate scripture within a certain aesthetic-cum-mystical 
framework of artwork. Here, there is neither a clear distinction between the 
aesthetic and mystical, nor a real difference between the sensory and reflective 
experience. Mahesvarananda’s method of approach seeks to expand the power 
of reflective awareness or recognition to the reality of the senses. In regard to a 
striking similarity between aesthetics and mysticism, Bettina Baumer avers thus: 

The sense-experience serves thus as a door of entrance to the ultimate experience. This 
is the unique contribution of Kashmir Saivism to an integral mysticism which does not 
exclude any human dimension but embraces every possible experience and at the same 
time pierces through it to the Absolute— anuttara . s 

Generally, scripture is not seen as an art form comprehended by the 
olfactory sense organ. The literary form employs the language of phonetic signs 
and denotations that allow language to convey meaning. Unlike visual and 
performing arts, which are inextricably experienced through a vast range of sense 
organs, including visual, auditory, and olfactory, written words are seen as almost 
entirely devoid of sensory value. Contrary to this widely accepted view, however, 
Mahesvarananda argues that the revealed text is the medium through which a 
sensory experience leading to the direct encounter with the divine is activated. In 
his description of the purpose ( prayojana : 9 ) of his work, he claims that the aim of 
the Maharthamanjart is discriminating knowledge {parijnana) about the sensory 
perception leading towards the transcendental experience ( mahanubhava) that 
is synonymous w ith the experience of the Supreme Luminosity ( mahaprakasa ). 10 

Bettina Baumer, Aesthetics of Mysticism or Mysticism of Aesthetics? The Approach 

of Kashmir Saivism, in Mysticism in Satvism and Christianity , ed. Bettina Baumer 
(Delhi: DK Printworld, 1997), p. 349. 

9. Traditionally, the structure of scripture (sastra, agama) consists of (1) the prayojana , 
e purpose or aim, (2) the adhikarin, one who is competent for the study of the 
particular scripture, (3) abhidheya or artha } the subject-matter of the scripture, 
and (4) sambandha or relation, which is analyzable in terms of causal relation 
between word ( abhidhana ) and meaning ( abhidheya ) (sambandhas ca tantrasya 
pratipadyasya cabhidhanabhidheyabhavah | MMP, p. 8 ). 

10. Moreover, the prayojana is also the achievement of the reflective awareness of one’s 
own Self ( vimarsasvarupasiddhi ). Finally, the prayojana is the enjoyment ( bhoga ) 
of one s own liberating state, characterized as the mere playfulness of the Supreme 
Lord ( mahesvaryollasa ). 



SMELL: THE SENSE PERCEPTION OF RECOGNITION | 329 


In doing so, Mahesvarananda tried to establish a new literary genre that hinges 
upon activation of a religious feeling, a moment of elevated sensory experience 
moving toward mysticism. Through his literary undertaking, Mahesvarananda 
creates and enacts the reality to be savoured by the senses. Text, according to 
Mahesvarananda, is capable of stimulating the immediacy of the sensory and 
aesthetic experience. He writes: 

Having bowed to the ever-pure feet of the Great Luminous Master, Mahesvarananda has 
composed this pleasant fragrance of the Supreme Flower-Bouquet. 11 

Mahesvarananda takes recourse to the metaphorical usage of the “flower 
bouquet” in the title of the Maharthamanjari, The Flower-Bouquet of the 
Supreme Meaning. According to this metaphor, a scripture and a flower-bouquet 
are both collections of separate elements in a creative arrangement. In a flower- 
bouquet, different flowers are tied together, and thus they appear to be one. In 
a scriptural composition, different levels of meaning are knotted together in a 
coherent synthesis. Grouping these disparate elements together in this way serves 
the goal of (metaphorical) fragrance . 12 Indeed, his auto-commentary on the 
Maharthamanjari is called simply The Fragrance ( parimala ). Mahesvarananda 
grounds his scripture in sensory particularity, most notably, in the experience of 
smell. The power that Mahesvarananda assigns to fragrance is that of recognition 
{pratyabhijha) or the reflective awareness (vimarsa' 3 ). The whole text of the 


11. MM, v. 1. 

12. MMP, p. 7. 

13. The term vimarta is one of the cluster-concepts constituting the theory of 
recognition. Vimarsa is derived from the verbal root ‘mrs.’ Semantically, it is 
employed to denote reflective awareness, consideration, reasoning, and, as David 
Lawrence has emphasized, is has a recognitive structure. Implicit in reflective 
awareness is its aesthetic evaluation (Isvampratyabhijndkdrikd-vimarsinl 5.13.). 
According to the fundamental Pratyabhijha premise, the supreme consciousness, 
Siva, is Light endowed with the dynamic reflective awareness (vimaria) due to 
which he continuously performs his cosmic activity. Siva is the supreme Light of 
consciousness (prakaia) whose mysterious force becomes manifested in the cyclic 
unfolding of his energy. Beginning with Somananda and ending with Utpaladeva, 
we clearly notice the progressive development of the concept of Siva and his 
phenomenological identity with the light of all objects and the encompassing 
importance of reflective awareness {vimaria). Reflective awareness constitutes the 




330 TANTRAPUSPANJALI 


Maharthamanjarl exposes the means—that is, the method or discipline—ot 
reflective awareness ( vimarsopciya ), here equated with smell. What has to be 
reflected upon or smelled is the fragrant luminosity ot consciousness, abiding in 
one’s own Self. Thus, in this scripture fragrance, the savouring of smell is a primary 
goal. Mahesvarananda writes: “[The fragrance] of the literary composition and 
the flowers in its state as the means of grasping accomplishes its goal with ease. 
This fragrance is everything desirable—the fragrant abode of the luminous 
consciousness.” 14 A sweet-smelling luminosity of consciousness is precisely the 
ultimate sense perception that constitutes the goal of Mahesvarananda’s literary 
undertaking. 


SMELL AS THE SUBSTANCE OF EARTH 

The senses have been scrutinized in depth by Indian philosophers. It was 
none other than the philosophical school of Nyaya that was best known for 
its illuminating insights into the principle of correspondences and ties of 
interaction connecting the senses with the extended universe. The standard 

dynamic aspect of Light. This ability to reflect on itself is inherent in the very nature 
of the light of consciousness. It is due to reflective awareness constituting a dynamic 
power of consciousness that Light has the capacity to reveal its universal nature, 
generating the universe in its multiplicity and experiencing its wonderful variety. 
Prakasa and vimarsa are treated together as a couple (ydmala) within the unity 
(aikyay, they stand for two quintessential components of the universe constituting 
perfect identity (purnata). Prakasa stands for a pure, unchanging aspect of the 
universal consciousness. Vimarsa denotes power that impels the ‘awakening’ 
of self-awareness or reflection. These two are never separated. As Torella (2002: 
xxiii) points out: u Prakasa is the motionless cognitive light that constitutes the 
basic fabric, the founding structure of reality, of the ‘given,’ while vimarsa is the 
spark that causes this luminous structure to pulsate by introducing self-awareness, 
dynamism and freedom of intervention.” The term vimarsa was inspired by the 
5th-century Bhartrhari, the author of the Vakyapadlya. He maintained that no 
cognition or thought-construct (pratyaya) is possible without reflective awareness 
(pratyavamarsa). This reflective awareness is the essence of the word ( sabda) 
and must be presupposed in every formation of cognition or thought-construct 
(Vakyapadlya I.124., trans. Iyer, pp. 111-112). For an extended explanation, see Iyer 
K.A.S., Bhartrhari , pp. 104-108. 

14. granthanam ca puspader upeyasydnaydsagrahanopayataya prasiddham \ sa ca 
surabhih, sarvabhilasanlyaprakasarupasaurabhaspadatvat \ MMP , v. 1. 



SMELL: THE SENSE PERCEPTION OF RECOGNITION | 331 


view assumed the elemental constitution of the senses based on the principle 
of correspondence, in which there is agreement between the various planes or 
levels of manifestation. The principle of correspondence by which the sensory 
experience receives its uniform structure is best formulated in the following 
scheme: each sense organ has a special ability to grasp a certain sense perception 
(tanmdtra ) due to the material element ( bhuta ) constituting its nature . 15 In 
accordance with this logic, the sense of smell is a substance made of earth found 
inside the nose. 

Mahesvarananda too explains the sense of smell with regard to its earth- 
composition. However, unlike his predecessors, he considers it to be an utmost 
secret. He refers to the secrecy of smell-earth in the following words: “If examined 
carefully, smell too is earth. There is no other element beyond earth. What has 
been stated here is eminence. What has been stated is highly secret .” 16 In part, 
he calls it secret due to the view that the principle ( tattva ) of earth is the most 
complete of all the tattvas, since it contains within itself all other tattvas * 7 This 
assumption is to be understood by viewing it in terms of a larger conception of 
consciousness, or more specifically, as the specific mode of consciousness set on 
the sequence of withdrawal ( samhara-krama ). In the samhara-krama, peculiar 
to the Krama system, consciousness operates in a reverse order. Its modus 
operandi is withdrawal, thus the creation moves in a backward manner. As a 
consequence, in the samhara-krama , earth is the first of all tattvas , while the Siva 
tattva is the last; on the other hand, in the srsti-krama, the earth appears to be 

15. Each sense, except for the auditory, is composed of the four material elements 
(earth, water, fire, and wind). 

16. gandho 'pi nirupyamanah prthtvl \ prthtvya upari na kihcid bhutantaram ity 
atrotkarsa iti rahasyam \ MMPv . 24. 

17. The Paratrisikatantra describes the process of samhara-krama thus: According 
to the reverse order, it is at first earth which has completeness. Then it is water 
which also having absorbed within itself the characteristic of all the tattvas 
appears and is apprehended in completeness. Having absorbed within itself the 
wondrous, prakasa-vimarsa present in the earth category becomes complete by the 
transmission of the samskara of the completeness of the earth category. Finally, the 
earth itself is but the integral divine consciousness, i.e., the very Self of Siva. Thus 
even limited space contains the entire form of Brahman” (Paratrisikatantra, p. 116, 
29-30). 




332 TANTRAPUSPANJALI 


the last, while the Siva tattva is the first. Baumer summarizes this in the following 
words: “In samhara-krama, earth is the first of categories. Thus, that very last 
tattva-e arth, while maintaining its character as earth and holding within itself 
all the innumerable earlier tattvas (water, fire etc.) as inseparable from itself, 
is complete in itself.” lh Abhinavagupta emphasizes the complete nature of the 
earth tattva in a similar fashion: 

The Siva principle can be considered complete only if it abides also in the ultimate earth 
category. So also, the consciousness of earth can display as identical with central reality in 
spite of its appearance as an object only when it is able to display the awareness of all the 
categories as inherent in the earth category. 1 " 

Following this line of reasoning, we may concede that due to its earth 
constitution, the sense of smell is the most complete of all the senses. 
Mahesvarananda seems to advance this notion. He is clear that what he means 
by referring to the “secret” is the successive order of dissolution ( samhara-krama) 
in which smell is principal of all the sense perceptions. 

THE GARDEN OF THE UNIVERSE: 

SMELLING THE FIVE FLOWERS OF SENSE PERCEPTIONS 

Mahesvarananda s writing often employs images that try to represent abstract 
concepts in aesthetic terms. Thus, he speaks to us in images and metaphors, 
expounding ideas with poetic imagination. In one such case, Mahesvarananda 
invokes the compelling image of “the garden of the universe” and its sensory 
appreciation to describe the sensory richness of the cognitive process. In this 
way, Mahesvarananda unfolds the essential epistemological ideal of the non¬ 
dual Kashmiri Saiva tradition, namely the holistic and aesthetic nature of the 
cognitive process. He elucidates on this theme in the following verse: 

God, the trickster of the three regions, plays in the garden of the universe, enjoying the 
pleasant fragrance of the five flowers beginning with smell growing there. 21 ’ 


18. Bettina Baumer, From Stone to God,” in Foundations of Indian Art: Proceedings 
of the Chidambaram Seminar on Art and Religion, Feb. 2001, ed. Ramachandran 
Nagaswamy (Tamil Arts Academy, 2002), pp. 28-9. 

19- Paratri&ikatantra, p. 114; quoted in Baumer, “From Stone to God,” p. 29. 

20. visvocfyanavirudhdm gandhapramukhani sugandhlni puspani | pahcapyajighran 
krldati trailokyadhurtto devah || MMP, v. 24. 



SMELL: THE SENSE PERCEPTION OF RECOGNITION | 333 


Here he compares the cognitive process, consisting of the cognizer, cognition, 
and cognizable, to the enjoyment of “the garden of the universe.” In this garden, 
we find Siva the trickster, who is both immanent (as he disguises himself in the 
triadic form of the cognition, cognizer and the cognizable) and transcendent 
(as the supreme cognizer). It is noteworthy in this connection that using this 
metaphor emphasizes the value of sensory experience. Stva the trickster enjoys 
the pleasant fragrance of five flowers, the sense perceptions. Here again, the 
sense of smell acts as the signifier of sensory experience as a whole, and it is 
considered in terms of its aesthetic appeal, which results in pleasure. Moreover, 
the very act of enjoying the pleasant fragrance of five flowers is linked to play. 
Siva emerges as the playful agent, who “vibrates,” “throbs,” and “becomes active" 
due to the joy he experiences ( kridati harsdnusarena spandate ). 21 In this way, he 
comes to realize his own freedom . 22 

Mahesvarananda’s understanding of the “garden of the universe” is embedded 
in the concrete historical and cultural context of the courtly and urban society 
of thirteenth-century Cidambaram. From this point of view, Mahesvarananda’s 
conceptual formation of this metaphor is an interesting example of a religio- 
philosophical idea reflecting the cultural form of a particular social space. As 
Daud Ali has pointed out, in the early medieval courtly and urban culture of India, 
gardens were places of enjoyment, sovereignty, and happiness . 23 He explains: 
“The words denoting garden: upavanam, kananam, vrksavatika, udyanam or 
generic vanam, were often prefixed by words for pleasure or enjoyment ( keli , 
krida, pramoda ).” 24 Specifically, the pervasive existence of gardens attached 
to royal palaces has its roots in the “irenic” conception of lordship, “in which 
the king ‘fructified’ and ‘enjoyed’ his realm .” 25 Insofar as the function of these 
gardens is concerned, Ali points to their capacity to “evoke wonder and charm.” 

21. This quotation is from the & vadrsti, p. 29. It appears without identification of the 
source in the MMP, v. 24. 

22. MMP, v. 24. 

23. Ali claims that “many texts of historic India held that properly lived worldly (as 
opposed to renunciatory) life was pervaded by the propagation of felicity ( sukha ) 
founded on proper enjoyments ( bhoga) of the world" (Daud Ali, “Gardens in Early 
Indian Court Life,” Studies in History, vol.19, no. 2,2003, p. 224). 

24. Ali, “Gardens in Early Indian Court Life,” p. 224. 

25. Ibid. 



334 TANTRAPUSPANJALI 


In addition, gardens were the place of various activities that engaged the senses, 
such as the viewing (of trees), the hearing (of birds), the smelling of flowers, and 
so on. Ali calls the combination of these activities, which allowed each individual 
visiting the garden to fully expand the senses, the “sensorial practices.”"’ Needless 
to say, gardens were given the value of sensual beauty able to stimulate emotive 
responses and aesthetic feelings from those who frequented their grounds. Given 
this analysis, one can recognize parallels between the religio-philosophical notion 
of a garden expounded by Mahesvarananda and its analogous socio-cultural 
context reflected in the practices of the royal and courtly elite in medieval India. 

THE FLOWER OF REFLECTIVE AWARENESS AS THE RITUAL OFFERING 

The sequence flower-fragrance is found also in the ritual domain. In this regard, 
the first important thing to note is that ritual space assumes an internal cognitive 
framework distanced from the commonly observed external one. The notion of 
cognitive ritualization has been adopted by Mahesvarananda from the Krama 
tradition, where worship of deified consciousness is directed towards attainment 
of Pure Knowledge ( suddha-vidyd ). In this case, and most other instances, 
Mahesvarananda tends to extend the notion of cognitive ritualization by adding 
a typical Pratyabhijna framework of prakasa-vimarsa. What we have then is the 
structural pattern of cognitive ritualization, in which the all-pervasive luminosity 
of consciousness (prakasa) is the only worshipped deity, and reflective awareness 
(vimarsa) represented by the fragrance of perfume and flowers—is the only 
gift that can be offered to the deity. Mahesvarananda gives a prominent place 
to what he called the “flower of reflective awareness” or recognition, which he 
defines as follows: 

All these (sacrificial) objects should be directed towards Paramesvara as one’s own reflective 
awareness. This is a cognition which is of the nature of reflective recognition. This is verily 
a flower, because it is one s own nourishment and because it has assumed a form of Srlguru. 
This should be done by fragrant application of mantra whose nature is being power [...]. 27 

26. Daud Ali, “Botanical Technology and Garden Culture in Somesvara’s Manasollasa ,” 
in Garden and Landscape Practices in Pre-colonial India , eds. Daud Ali and Emma 
Jane Flatt (New Delhi: Routledge, 2012), p. 51. 

27. atha ca tarn vastuniparamesvaram pratisvatmatayayo vimarsah pratyabhijndnatma 
paramarsah, sa eva puspam, svabhavaposakatvat srlgururupatvacca \ tena 
mantrasaktyatmana surabhlkartavyani [...]. MMP , v. 35. 



SMELL: THE SENSE PERCEPTION OF RECOGNITION j 335 


Gods receive flowers perfumed by reflective awareness, belonging to one’s own power/ 
glory. ;S 

Closely associated with the image of a flower is that of nourishment, which 
implies involvement of the sense perception of taste . 29 Mahesvarananda traces 
the etymology of the word puspa, meaning “flower,” to the verb posayanti, “to 
nourish." Here “flower” is a generic term symbolizing all sacrificial substances 
offered to the deity. All substances, both external and internal, are like flowers 
and smell offered to the deity in the cave of the heart of the worshipper . 30 
According to Mahesvarananda, puspa goes to the center of the heart and fills it 
with nourishment; thus it is known as the nourisher ( posaka ). 31 This is nothing 
else but a relishing of aesthetic pleasure. Mahesvarananda acknowledges the 
fact that this explanation is based on Abhinavagupta’s Paratrisika Vivarana. 

ABHINAVAGUPTA ON FLOWERS OF SENSE PERCEPTIONS 

The chief importance of Mahesvarananda’s notion of smell lies in his 
acknowledgment of a wider metaphysical scheme of the senses taken from 
the Krama school. Mahesvarananda’s originality stands out in his perception 
of fragrant consciousness as the goal of recognition or reflective awareness. 
However, his poetic elaboration of the five flowers of sense perceptions and the 
enjoyment of this garden as a metaphor for the cognitive process, as well as his 
emphasis on the nourishing aspect of the flower of reflective awareness as the 
only suitable offering that can be given to the deity abiding in ones own heart, 
show the influence of Abhinavagupta. In his Hymn to the Deities of the Senses 
Abiding in One’s Own Body ( Dehasthadevatacakrastotra ), 32 Abhinavagupta 
develops the idea of the deities of the sense organs offering the flowers of the 

28. Samvid-ullasa by Mahesvarananda, quoted in MMP, v. 42. 

29. On the “multisensory nature of aromatics,” see James McHugh, “Seeing Scents: 
Methodological Reflections on the Intersensory Perception of Aromatics in South 
Asian Religions,” History of Religions, vol. 51, no. 2,2011, pp.156-177. 

30. MMP, v. 45. 

31. MMP, v. 45. 

32. While this hymn is commonly attributed to Abhinavagupta, Alexis Sanderson has 
challenged this attribution in “The Saiva Exegesis of Kashmir,” in Tantric Studies in 
Memory of Helene Brunner, ed. Dominic Goodall and Andre Padoux (Pondicherry: 
Institut franqais d’lndologie/Ecole fran?aise d’Extreme-Orient, 2007), p. 381. 



336 TANTRAPUSPAN'JALI 


sense perceptions to the deity (Anandabhairava) who is pure consciousness 
(■cinmaya ). The deities of the sense organs are represented by a classical set of eight 
mothers ( matrkas) in the following way. Brahman!, whose nature is the intellect 
(buddh'i), worships Bhairava with the flowers of certitude ( niscaya-kusumaih ). 
Sambhavl, whose nature is egoity ( ahamkrti ), worships Bhairava with the flowers 
of ego-feeling ( abhimana ). Kaumarl, whose nature is mind (memos), worships 
Bhairava with flowers of thought-constructs ( vikalpa-kusumaih ). Vai$navi, whose 
nature is speech (s abdarupa), worships Bhairava with flowers of speech (s abda- 
kusumaih). Varahl, whose nature is skin, worships Bhairava with flowers of touch 
(sparsa-kusumaih). IndrapI, who embodies sight ( drktanum ), worships Bhairava 
with flowers of the most beautiful colors. Camunda, who is embodied tongue, 
worships Bhairava with a variety of six delightful tastes. Mahalak?ml, who is 
embodied nose, worships Bhairava with different fragrances. 33 

The centrality of smell in Mahesvarananda’s system is attested by the 
references in which he made an attempt to describe how reality of cognition and 
ritual must be imbued with fragrance spread out by an all-pervasive luminosity 
of consciousness. Whether this fragrance comes from the five flowers of sense 
perception smell, sound, touch, sight, and taste—or from the flower of 
reflective awareness offered to the deity residing in an innermost chamber of 
the heart, it is the act of smelling its pleasant odor that triggers the process of 
recognition or reflective awareness. On this assumption, it should be emphasized 
that the image of a flower figures prominently in Mahesvarananda’s analysis, 
because it is able to serve a particular soteriological end through sensory 
means. Mahesvarananda does not try to establish the truth of recognition or 
reflective awareness independently of the sensory theme. Rather, he attempts 
to prove a close-knit correlation between the two. In this regard, the sensory and 
recognitive both constitute the immediate, penetrating insight into the absolute 

reality, which draws into subsistent unity all aspects—cognitive, emotional and 
aesthetic. 

This essay is a form of modest homage paid to Panditji’s now invisible feet. 
Although the time of Panditji’s physical presence on earth is gone, he continues 
to live, not only in our memories, but also in the teachings he imparted to us and 


33* Dehasthadevatacakrastotra of Abhinavagupta. 



SMELL: THE SENSE PERCEPTION OF RECOGNITION | 337 


in the strength of the tradition he was representing. The power of his personality 
and wisdom shall grow stronger in those who were fortunate to be his students, 
“for none of us lives to himself alone and none of us dies to himself alone” 
(Romans 14.7)- It is in this respect that one can perceive Panditji’s dominant 
features of gentleness, compassion and kindheartedness, as well as his unique 
destiny as one of the very last preceptors in the lineage of traditional teachers, 
standing strong at the fortification of true teachings, in defense of the authentic 
gurukulcL For everything that Panditji was representing has always been and 
continues to be true. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Ali, Daud. “Gardens in Early Indian Court Life .” Studies in History, vol.19, no.2 (2003): 221-52. 

-. “Botanical Technology and Garden Culture in SomeSvara’s Manasollasa!' In Garden 

and Landscape Practices in Pre-colonial India: Histories from the Deccani, edited by 
Daud Ali and Emma J. Flatt, 39-53. Delhi: Routledge, 2012. 

Banes, Sally, and Andre Lepecki, eds. The Senses in Performance . New York: Roudedge 2007. 

Baumer, Bettina. “Aesthetics of Mysticism or Mysticism of Aesthetics? The Approach 
of Kashmir Saivism.” In Mysticism in Saivism and Christianity , edited by Bettina 
Baumer, 329 ~ 349 « Delhi: DK Printworld, 1997. 

• From Stone to God.” In Foundations ofIndian Art: Proceedings of the Chidambaram 
Seminar on Art and Religion , Feb. 2001 , edited by Ramachandran Nagaswamy. Tamil 
Arts Academy, 2002. 

Dehasthadevatacakrastotra of Abhinavagupta. Sanskrit text printed in the appendix 
of K.C. Pandey, Abhinavagupta: An Historical and Philosophical Study. Varanasi: 
Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series, 1963. 

Mahesvarananda. Maharthamahjartwith the Auto-commentary Tarimala! [MMP], edited by 
Pt. Vrajavallabha Dviveda. Yogatantra-Granthamala Vol. 5. Varanasi: Sampumanand 
Sanskrit University, 1992. 

McHugh, James. “The Classification of Smells and the Order of the Senses in Indian 
Religious Tradition.” Numen, vol. 54 (4) (2007): 374-419. 

-• “Seeing Scents: Methodological Reflections on the Intersensory Perception of 

Aromatics in South Asian Religions.” History of Religions, vol. 51, no. 2 (2011): 156-177. 

-. Sandalwood and Carrion: Smell in Indian Religion and Culture. Oxford: Oxford 

University Press, 2012. 

Paratrisikavivarana of Abhinavagupta , translated byjaideva Singh and Swami Lakshman Joo, 
edited by Bettina Baumer. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 2000. 

Sandreson, Alexis. “Saiva Exegesis of Kashmir.” In Melanges tantriques a la memoire dHelene 
Brunner I Tantric Studies in Memory of Hilene Brunner , edited by Dominic Goodall 





338 TAXTRAPUSPANJALI 


and Andre Padoux, 195-311 (bibliography, pp. 551-582). Pondicherry: Institut Franyais 
d’Indologie/Ecole Franqaise d’Extreme-Orient, 2007. 

Tomney, M. Paul. “Krishna’s Consuming Passions: Food as Metaphor and Metonym tor 
Emotion at Mount Govardhan." In Divine Passions: The Social Construction of 
Emotions in India , edited by Owen M. Lynch, 159-181. Berkeley: University of 
California Press, 1990. 

Torella, Rafaelle. The!svarapratyabhijhakdrikd oj Utpaladeva with the Author's \ rtti , critical 
edition and translation. Rome: Instituto Italiano Per 11 Medio Ed Estremo Oriente, 
1994 . 

-. The Philosophical Traditions of India: An Appraisal. Varanasi: Indica, 2011. 

Vakyapadlya of Bhartrhari, translated by K.A.S. Iyer. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1974. 



Poetry and Ksemaraja’s Hermeneutics of 

Non-dualism 1 

Hamsa Stainton 


In the first half of the eleventh century, the Kashmirian theologian and scholar 
Ksemaraja (fl. 1000-1050)—the most prolific and influential disciple of the great 
polymath Abhinavagupta—wrote commentaries on many texts popular in 
Kashmir at the time. Through his exegesis of these texts, Ksemaraja sought to 
bring diverse features of religious life in Kashmir into alignment with his own 
religious tradition. This consisted of a radical Saiva-Sakta non-dualism inflected 
primarily by the Pratyabhijna philosophical and theological tradition, the Trika 
tradition at the center of the writings of his teacher Abhinavagupta, and the 
Krama tradition that Ksemaraja highlights in his own writings. 2 Abhinavagupta 
focused his exegesis on the central scriptures of the Trika tradition (influenced 
by the language and theology of both the Pratyabhijna and Krama). But 
Ksemaraja extended his own exegesis to the scriptures of two Saiva cults popular 

1. I'm grateful to my colleague Ben Williams for a number of conversations that have 
benefitted this article. He explores some of the same themes and texts as this essay 
in his excellent unpublished paper, “Suggesting Similitude: The Saiva Poetics of 
Ksemaraja" (which engaged questions and texts I discussed in an earlier paper of 
my own). 

2. Alexis Sanderson’s work remains the definitive reference point for any discussion 
of these traditions. For the texts and traditions relevant to Abhinavagupta and 
Ksemaraja’s own positions and exegesis, see Alexis Sanderson, The Saiva Exegesis 
of Kashmir,” in Melanges tantriques a la memoire d’Helene Brunner / Tantric Studies 
in Memory of Helene Brunner , ed. Dominic Goodall and Andre Padoux (Pondicherry. 
Institut frangais d’Indologie / fecole frangaise d’Extreme-Orient, 2007). 




340 TANTRAPUSPASJALI 


in Kashmir, those of Svacchandabhairava and Amrtesvarabhairava, as well 
as a number of devotional texts open to a wider audience of §aivas, including 
uninitiated lay practitioners . 3 Two of these commentaries are on individual 
hymns: the Sambapancasika (attributed to Samba) and the Stavacintamani of 
Bhatta Narayana. A third is on the collection of Utpaladeva’s hymns and verses 
called the Scvastotravali. These commentaries can be seen as a sub-group within 
K$emaraja’s writings. They present a distinct perspective on a body of devotional 
poetry called stotras, “hymns of praise .” 4 These commentaries address issues 
central to the stotra genre, such as the nature of bhcikti. In particular, these 
commentaries show how K?emaraja’s non-dual exegesis engages both the 
theological challenges and opportunities created by using poetic language to 
praise a deity in the form of a hymn. 

The Sambapancasika ( SP ), Stavacintamani (StC), and Stvastotravali (SsA) 
have distinct theological commitments. But as a commentator, K§emaraja 
seeks to bring this diverse group of texts into alignment with his own particular 
tradition. This is simpler in some cases than in others. The ,$& 4 , for instance, 
was composed by his own great-grand-teacher, Utpaladeva, and most naturally 
accords with K§emaraja’s exegesis. But sometimes K§emaraja totally reconfigures 
a text, as he does with the SP —a work dedicated to the sun-god, rather than 
to Siva, K§emaraja s central deity. In order to accomplish this reconfiguration, 
K§emaraja uses several hermeneutic strategies that overlap but nevertheless 
can be productively disaggregated. His standard approach is to give technical 
interpretations of most verses, aligning them more closely with the complex 
theology of his own tradition. In doing so he privileges an esoteric understanding 
the texts. Second, he consistently emphasizes what he sees as the underlying 
non-duality of these hymns, particularly in his analysis of bhakti and praise, 
ch might otherwise suggest duality. Lastly, he engages with these texts as 
poetry. He sometimes discusses them using terminology from the discourse of 
Sanskrit aesthetics, for instance, which he uses to support his particular non- 
dualistic Saiva reading of these hymns. 

3. Sanderson, “Saiva Exegesis,” 399 and 427. 

4 - On the stotra genre, see Hamsa Stainton, “Stotras, Sanskrit Hymns,” in Brill's 
Encyclopedia of Hinduism. Volume Two: Sacred Texts, Ritual Traditions, Arts, Concepts , 
edited by Knut A. Jacobsen et al. (Leiden: Brill Academic Publishers, 2010). 


POETRY AND K§EMARAJA’S HERMENEUTICS OF NON-DUALISM | 341 


Such exegetical projects are certainly not unusual in South Asia. The literary 
qualities of some genres, including stotras, provide commentators additional 
leeway for creative interpretations. Madhusudana SarasvatT (i6th-i7th cent), 
for instance, used his commentary on the Mahimnahstava —perhaps the 
best-known literary hymn to Siva—to recast the text as a hymn to Vi§nu. Such 
interpretations raise challenging questions about how to adjudicate between 
interpretations, long a contentious issue within hermeneutics and literary theory. 
Yigal Bronner has discussed at length how one particular literary figure called 
sle?a —“simultaneous narration,” or conveying two (or more) meanings with one 
set of syllables—has served as a powerful hermeneutic tool for commentators. 5 
Some authors use such literary figures to the extreme, multiplying meanings 
for texts that had previously been understood in singular terms. In other cases, 
exegesis may serve as a means of enjoying a text. Steven Hopkins argues that 
in the £rivai§nava tradition, “to comment on a text is not so much to dissect it 
into minute doctrinal particulars, but rather to reexperience it” [italics original]. 6 
Yet commentators do not simply appreciate a text as if its meaning and beauty 
are transparent and readily available. In his own commentaries on the SP, StC, 
and SsA, K§emaraja takes advantage of the literary features of his root texts 
to interpret layers of meaning that bring all three into alignment with his 
own tradition of Saiva non-dualism. Historically, his project has been largely 
successful: his commentaries have been highly influential in shaping how later 
Kashmiri Hindus and scholars have interpreted these texts. 

In this article I analyze K§emaraja’s interpretive strategies across these three 
commentaries. While the SP was probably composed earlier than the other 
texts, I begin with the StC. The other two root texts represent opposite ends of 
a spectrum. The SP is a Saura text—that is, it is devoted to the sun-god, rather 
than to Siva—and therefore K§emaraja’s commentary uses distinct strategies for 
recasting the original text. In contrast, the S &4 was composed within K§emaraja’s 
own inherited tradition of Saiva non-dualism. It is also unique in that it is a 

5. See Yigal Bronner, Extreme Poetry: The South Asian Movement of Simultaneous 
Narration (New York: Columbia University Press, 2010), especially Chapter Six, 
“Slesa as Reading Practice,” 155-194. 

6. Steven Paul Hopkins, Singing the Body of God: The Hymns ofVedantadesika in Their 
South Indian Tradition (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2002), 139. 






342 TAXTRAPUSPAXJALI 


collection of hymns redacted posthumously, rather than a single, relatively short 
work. As a set, these commentaries indicate both the strategies of Ksemaraja’s 
exegetical project and the flexible, enduring appeal of stotra literature that has 
been central to its success not just in Kashmir, but throughout South Asia. 

This topic is particularly fitting for a volume in honor of Pandit H.N. 
Chakrabarty. I read part of the StC and Ksemaraja s commentary with Panditji in 
2008, and he also suggested I work on the SP. Recently, as I re-read my notebooks 
from when I studied with him, I was overwhelmed once again by his generosity, 
his extensive knowledge, his appetite for learning (even in his nineties!), and his 
genuine excitement to help his students. He showed me what it truly means to 
be a Pandit. I often think of when he told me once, in his playful, humble way: 
“I’m a little bit of a scholar, more of a bhakta ...” I offer this essay in honor of his 
kindness, sincerity, and wisdom as a teacher and scholar. Thank you Panditji. 

KSEMARAJA AND THE WISH-FULFILLING GEM OF PRAISE 

The Stavacintamani —The Wish-fulfilling Gem of Praise—consists of 120 verses 7 
in the flexible Anustubh meter in praise of Siva as the supreme god. It was 
composed by the Kashmirian Bhatta Narayana, and we have no other texts by 
this author. 8 9 His stotra is usually dated to the tenth or late ninth century.'* We also 

7. The Kashmir Series in Texts and Studies (KSTS) edition actually contains 121 verses, 
since there are two different verses numbered 47. All numbering and references to 
the StC and Ksemaraja’s commentary in this article refer to the KSTS edition, unless 
otherwise noted ( The Stava-Chintamani of Bhatta Narayana with Commentary by 
Kshemaraja, ed. Mukunda Rama Shastrl, KSTS No. X [Srinagar: Kashmir Pratap 
Steam Press, 1918]). 

8. The earliest (and majority of) references to the Stavacintamani come from 
Kashmirian authors, the majority of manuscripts of the text come from Kashmir, 
and Bhatta was a common title (and later name) for Kashmirian Brahmans, 
hence Bhatta Narayana was almost certainly from Kashmir. Note that his name 
is sometimes rendered as Bhattanarayana, Narayana Bhatta or Narayanabhatta 
(e.g., in Mark Dyczkowski, The Stanzas on Vibration: the Spandakarika with Four 
Commentaries [Albany: SUNY Press, 1992], 28, 304,313^). Attempts to identity this 
Bhatta Narayana with other authors bearing similar name have been tentative at 
best. 

9. For further discussion of this dating, see Hamsa Stainton, Poetry and Prayer: Stotras 
in the Religious and Literary History of Kashmir (Ph.D. diss., Columbia University, 
New York, 2013), 165-166. 



POETRY AND KSEMARAjA’S HERMENEUTICS OF NON-DUALISM j 343 


have some information about how the StC may have been used and perceived 
within elite circles in Kashmir, thanks to the eleventh century satirical work by 
Ksemendra called the Nannamdla (Garland of Satire). In this work, Ksemendra 
contrasts a government official’s sanctimonious recitation of the StC with his 
cruel orders to manipulate the political scene in Kashmir. 10 Like most satirists, 
Ksemendra frequently uses hyperbole to criticize hypocrisy. Nevertheless, 
this episode, which quotes from the StC without ever mentioning it by name, 
indicates that this hymn was familiar to elite political and literary circles in 
eleventh-century Kashmir. It also suggests that this stotra was indeed recited 
or sung in public or semi-public contexts. The popularity of this hymn most 
likely derived from its content, which combines appealing literary figures with 
devotional, exoteric Saivism. 

The StC is not a particularly technical or sectarian poem, focusing instead 
on practices and concepts accessible to a larger audience of Saiva devotees. 
While it espouses a non-dual theology, the religious practices and ideas it depicts 
remain relatively exoteric, without assuming prior knowledge of technical Saiva 
scriptures or rituals. But Ksemaraja presents the StC as having a more fixed 
and esoteric meaning that accords with his own tradition, a practice that is 
consistent throughout his many commentaries. This approach is apparent in 
his lengthy exposition of the first verse of the StC, which mentions the level of 
speech known as pasyantl, the “seeing” word. The grammarian and philosopher 
Bhartrhari, who argued for pasyantl as the third and final level of speech, was 
criticized harshly by non-dual Saiva philosophers in Kashmir, who proposed a 
fourth level identical with the supreme transcendent reality (para vak). u It is 
unclear whether Bhatta Narayana intended pasyantl as the third and highest level 
of speech or assumed a fourth level of supreme speech, but Ksemaraja assumes 
the latter and interprets the verse in terms of four levels of speech (para vak, 
pasyantl, madhyama, and vaikhart). Moreover, he correlates these four stages 
with another set developed within the Trika tradition, namely the seven levels 


10. The Narmamala of Ksemendra, ed. and trans. Fabrizia Baldissera, Beitrage zur 
Sudasienforschung 197 (Heidelberg: Sudasien-Institut Ergon Verlag, 2005), 48-50. 

11. For a description of this debate, see John Nemec, The Ubiquitous Siva: Somananda’s 
Sivadrsti and His Tantric Interlocutors (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2011), 59-64. 





344 TANTRAPUSPANJALI 


of perceivers (prama.tr ).' 1 In doing so, Ksemaraja locks in a technical meaning 
for Bhatta Narayana’s ambiguous reference to a well-known level of speech, and 
goes even further by integrating it into a larger theological system, even though 
the StC itself gives little or no support for this move. Such examples could easily 
be multiplied, showing how K$emaraja’s commentary is more esoteric than the 
StC itself and in all likelihood not intended for the average lay Saiva devotee. 
In this way, Ksemaraja repeatedly reframes the StC as having fixed, layered, and 
esoteric meanings. 

In tandem with this approach to the text, Ksemaraja consistently emphasizes 
the non-dual theology he sees underlying the StC. He does this in a variety of 
ways, including the kind of expositions I have already mentioned. But the most 
important and pervasive interpretive tool in K$emaraja’s commentary on all 
three of the texts under discussion in this chapter is the concept of samavesa. 
He uses it throughout these commentaries to interpret and emphasize the non- 
dualistic nature of almost every aspect of these hymns. Scholars have recognized 
the general importance of this term before, and they have charted some of its 
crucial evolutions. 13 In Saiva and Sakta scriptures the term (and, more frequently, 
the closely related term avesa) referred to possession by something, such as 
possession by goddesses or yoginis in some Kaula contexts. 14 But during the 
development of non-dualistic Saiva (and Sakta-Saiva) exegesis in Kashmir, the 
meaning was expanded to include both the transitive and intransitive sense of 
the root sfvis, i.e., “to enter, to penetrate" and “to be entered, to be penetrated, 


12. StC pp. 2-5. On the seven perceivers and the Trika tradition, see Somadeva Vasudeva, 
The Yoga of the Malincvijayottaratantra, Chapters 1-4, 7, 77-/7, Collection Indologie 
Pondichery 19 (Pondicherry: Institut fran^ais de Pondichery; Ecole franyaise 
d Extreme-Orient. 2004), especially 151-178. 

13- See in particular: The isvarapratyabhijhakarika of Utpaladeva, with the Author’s 
Vrtti, ed. and trans. Raffaele Torella (Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 2002), xxxii-iii; 
Christopher Wallis, ‘The Descent of Power: Possession, Mysticism, and Initiation 
in the Saiva Theology of Abhinavagupta," in the Journal of Indian Philosophy 36 
(2) (2008), and Frederick Smith, The Self Possessed: Deity and Spirit Possession in 
South Asian Literature and Civilization (New York: Columbia University Press, 2006), 
passim. 

14. Wallis, “Descent of Power." 



POETRY AND K$EMARAjA'S HERMENEUTICS OF NON-DUALISM | 345 

to be possessed.” 15 Thus for authors like Utpaladeva, Abhinavagupta, and 
Ksemaraja, samavesa refers to the mfer-possession or interpenetration between 
the Saiva devotee’s own consciousness and Siva. 16 Thus it can mean immersion or 
absorption, which suggests unity, rather than possession, which implies multiple 
entities. 

The specific significance of samavesa in K$emaraja’s commentaries, however, 
and especially in stotras, has not been fully appreciated. For Ksemaraja, samavesa 
(and less frequently dvesa, which he almost always uses interchangeably) is the 
most efficient hermeneutic tool for casting almost any external or internal action 
in a non-dualistic light. He introduces Bhatta Narayana’s first verse by saying 
that “here, at the beginning of this stotra, the poet [...], in order to reflect on 
absorption (samavesa) in the nature of Paramesvara, the supreme reality that is 
one’s own self, even in the midst of daily life, says” this verse. 17 Elsewhere, when 
Bhafta Narayana says “we praise,” K$emaraja glosses it as “we become absorbed 
in the nature of Siva, the possessor of Sakti, preceded by absorption in the 
reflexive awareness of that,” or else simply as “we become absorbed in.” Similarly, 
when Bhatta Narayana offers “homage,” Ksemaraja interprets it as “we become 
absorbed by means of a subjugation of our body and so on,” and when the poet 
expresses hope that “we might perceive” Siva, his commentator explains that “we 
become absorbed in” Siva. 18 Basically, the term samavesa enables Ksemaraja to 
present anything in non-dualistic terms, from homage to praise to devotion. At 
the end of his commentary on the final verse of the StC, he marks samavesa as 
the supreme wealth (taksmi) embraced by devotees by means of listening to and 


15. Torella, IPK, xxxii. 

16. For an example of Abhinavagupta’s interpretation of bhakti and worship in terms 
of samavesa, see Bettina Baumer, Abhinavagupta’s Hermeneutics of the Absolute: 
An Interpretation of his Paratrisika Vivarana (Shimla: Indian Institute of Advanced 
Study, 2011), 252-253. 

17. iha stotradau stotrakarah [...] svdtmaparamdrthaparamesvarasvarupasamdvesam 
vyutthane vimrastum aha; StC, p. 2. 

18. stumah tadvimarsavesapurahsaram saktimatsvarupam samdvisamah, StC p. 17; 
stumah samdvisamah, StC p. 43; nomas sarlrddiprahvibhdvayuktyd tad eva tattvam 
samdvisamah, StC pp. 7-8; pasyema samdviiema, StC p. 22. 




346 TANTRAPUSPANJALI 


reciting this stotra."' Overall, samdvesa serves as a kind of global gloss on the 
text, a flexible concept that summarizes his overarching interpretation anti can 
also be applied to a wide variety of acts or states to depict them as inherently 
non-dualistic. 

One of the major concepts in the StC that has a potentially dualistic 
meaning is bhakti. Ksemaraja makes bhakti a central part of his commentary. 
He frequently introduces Bhatta Narayana’s verses by referring to it in some 
way. For instance, he describes the poet as having an abundance of bhakti 
(bhaktyudreka), being absorbed in bhakti (bhaktibhardvista ) and impelled by 
bhakti (bhaktibharocchalita )/“ In general, his commentary stresses that bhakti 
is a cause ( hetu) 2 ' or effective means of obtaining various goals, following the 
emphasis of the StC itself. While occasionally Ksemaraja stresses the non-duality 
of bhakti itself (something much more common in his other commentaries 
discussed in this article), more often he focuses on how it produces great results, 
especially the realization of oneness with Siva. Thus when StC verse 43 compares 
bhakti to a seed whose fruits are endless, Ksemaraja explains that as the fruit 
of this bhakti one obtains oneness with Siva/ 4 Elsewhere he says that the poet 
prays for bhakti alone, out of a desire to obtain the highest perfection from the 
lord, and shows through his homage to Siva that bhakti culminates in the highest 
perfection/ 3 When Bhatta Narayana describes the obtainment of extraordinary 
powers, sovereignty, and the cessation of rebirth as buds on the wish-fulfilling 
tree of bhakti, Ksemaraja emphasizes that they are only nascent buds, not full¬ 
blown flowers or fruits. The flower of this tree is identity with Siva’s Sakti, and 
the fruit is identity with Siva himself/ 4 Finally, Ksemaraja goes so far as to claim 
that Bhatta Narayana shows that bhakti is superior even to Paramesvara. This is a 
rhetorical claim based on StC v. 116, which says: 

19. StC, p. 129. He actually says “by listening, reciting, and so on” 
(1 etatstotrasravanapathanadina ); presumably he means reflecting on the stotra, 
since he mentions this near the end of his commentary on the Sambapancasika 

(<etatstotrapathavamarsabhyam; p. 31). 

20. StC, pp. 22, 33, and 98. 

21. E.g., in his commentary on StC v. 101, p. 107. 

22. tvadaikyavaptirupam phalamyasyam tarn; StC p. 52. 

23. Introduction and commentary on StC v. gg, p. 106. 

24. On StC v. 55, pp. 64-65. 



POETRY AND KSEMAR.AJA'S HERMENEUTICS OF NON-DUALISM 347 


You yourself produce everything, 
both auspicious and inauspicious. 

But your hhakti, O lord, 

only produces the auspicious. // StC 116 // 25 

According to Ksemaraja, “the auspicious" means that which manifests unity 
with Siva. - ’ In other words, while bhakti might seem to imply duality, Ksemaraja 
explains that it leads to the realization of non-duality. Thus Ksemaraja follows 
the NYC’s presentation of bhakti as an effective means, but stresses that the 
ultimate result of this bhakti is the state of identity with Siva. 

Finally, Ksemaraja’s commentary also addresses the poetic language and 
literary figures in the StC. This is a significant aspect of his commentary. At the 
most basic level, the poetic features of this hymn enable him to interpret the 
text in multiple ways, thereby giving him the interpretive space to frame the 
text according to his own tradition. His commentary privileges an esoteric Saiva 
explanation of each verse, spending most of its time giving an exposition steeped 
in non-dualistic Saiva theology. The last part of his commentary on a given verse, 
however, often includes some mention of the poetic features of the text. If the 
verse contains a suggested comparison, for instance, he briefly explains this at 
the end of his commentary on that verse. This latter interpretation is sometimes 
referred to as external or exoteric ( bahya ). His commentary on StC v. 51, for 
example, first glosses the verse according to an inner or esoteric method of 
interpretation ( dntarena kramenarthah ), and then according to an external or 
exoteric one ( bahyena). i: In general, Ksemaraja downplays the poetic meanings 
of the StC in favor of his interpretation of its internalized, esoteric Saiva meaning. 
Nevertheless, he does pay some attention to the poetic elements of the text, 
interpreting them according to classical Sanskrit poetics. Such analysis opens the 

25. subhdsubhasya sarvasya svayam karta bhavan api / bhavadbhaktis tu janam 
subhasyaivesa kevalam //StC 116 // 

26. bhavadbhaktis tu tvadabhedaprathatmanah subhasyaiva paramjananl; StC, p. 122. 

27. For example, the verse describes Siva as upasamhrtakdmaya, “he by whom kama 
has been destroyed;’’ Ksemaraja first explains this means Siva is without any 
desires {kama) because he is perpetually satisfied from relishing his own inner 
bliss (svdnandacamatkdranityatrptah), and only later explains that Siva is also the 
destroyer of Kamadeva, the god of love (dagdhamanmathaya) (StC, pp. 60-61). 



348 TANTRAPUSPANJALI 


text to multiple levels of interpretation, which becomes particularly important 
in his commentary on the Sambapancdsika. 

Ksemaraja also uses the poetic elements of the hymn to make specific 
theological points. At the end of his commentary on the third verse, for example, 
he claims that the first three verses of the StC use slesa to encode the names of 
Bhatta Narayana’s family members. The first verse of the StC praises Paramesvara, 
the supreme lord. The second verse praises Aparajita, “the unconquered one," 
an epithet applicable to Siva, whose fullness unfolds through his splendour (srt) 
and compassion (d.ctyd). 1 *' In the third verse, Bhatta Narayana pays homage to 
Samkara, another name for Siva. Many of the words in these first verses are rich 
with possible associations, and Ksemaraja unsurprisingly spends a long time 
unpacking what he presents as the most important meaning of these verses. At 
the end of his lengthy commentary on verse three, he explains that, according 
to those who know the history” ( dkhyayikavidah ), Paramesvara was the name of 
Bhatta Narayana s paternal grandfather, Aparajita was his father’s name, Sridaya 
his mothers, and Samkara his older brother’s. Thus the first three verses also 
praise his grandfather, his father and mother together, and his elder brother, 
respectively . 29 As K§emaraja explains: “this praise (stuti) is also for his family 
members, who are immersed in non-duality with the supreme lord.’’ 1 ” In this way, 
the double meaning of these words embodies the unity or identity understood 
as the reality underlying apparent differences; the poetic “embrace” (slesa) of 
two meanings parallels the embrace between these individuals and Siva. In 
poetry, slesa can demonstrate a non-dualism that theological expositions can 
only talk about. Ksemaraja’s interpretation of sle?a in these first verses (whether 

28. The phrase sridaya is actually part of a larger compound (sridaydbodhaparamdn 

asarppa a), which Ksemaraja, in typical style, interprets in terms of Siva’s five 
powers ( saktis) (StC, pp. 6-7). 

9 Other authors in medieval Kashmir, notably Abhinavagupta, also use ilesa in the 
opening verses of non-dualistic texts to praise respected family members. See, 
or example, Alexis Sanderson, “A Commentary on the Opening Verses of the 
Tantrasdra of Abhinavagupta, in Samarasya: Studies in Indian Arts, Philosophy, and 
Interreligious Dialogue in Honour of Bettina Baumer, ed. Sadananda Das and Ernst 
Furlinger (New Delhi: D.K. Printworld, 2005), 89-148. 

30. tatah tesam apiparamesvarabhedabhajam iyam stutih, iti akhydyikavidah; StC, p. 10. 



POETRY AND K$EMARAJA’S HERMENEUTICS OF NON-DUALISM ; 349 

it is historically true or not) helps to praise and establish a specific theological 
position—in this case, the identification between true Saiva devotees and Siva. 

Ksemaraja offers a formal analysis and classification of the poetic features 
of the StC in his commentary on many verses. This is not, however, the only way 
that he uses the language of poetics. Often he invokes central terms from Sanskrit 
aesthetics related to the aesthetic experience of a poem or drama’s audience, 
such as rasa. For Ksemaraja, true rasa refers to the blissful experience of the Saiva 
devotee, rather than to that of the aesthetic connoisseur. Hence he characterizes 
“your bhaktirasa” as “consisting of absorption" ( samavesatma)?' He explicitly 
says that StC v. 48 suggests adbhutarasa, the wondrous rasa. 32 This refers to the 
experience of devotees who are amazed by the power of the lord, since he makes 
everyone, from an insect to Brahma, eligible for the contemplation on him that 
leads to liberation. The metaphor of relishing or savoring ( camatkara , dsvada, and 
related words) is also central in his commentary. When Bhatta Narayana praises 
those who are “eager to enjoy Siva’s majesty” ( sambhavim bhutim upabhoktumya 
udyatah), Ksemaraja glosses “to enjoy” as “to relish without differentiation from 
one’s own self” (svatmabhedena camatkartum). 33 In such instances, Ksemaraja 
adopts the metaphors of Sanskrit aesthetics—specifically, the metaphor of 
certain experiences being like the relishing of a flavor or taste that produces joy 
or bliss—but he leaves aside the essential feature of the aesthetic experience: 
the demarcation of an aesthetic realm, distinct from normal experience, through 
a variety of elements (a stage, costumes, poetic language, etc.). Ksemaraja uses 
terms like camatkara and rasa in the context of poetry, where one might expect 
them, but for him they refer to the blissful experience of the Saiva devotee. 

At the same time, Ksemaraja also uses aesthetic language to characterize 
the experience of Siva himself. His commentary is based on a non-dualistic 
theology that seeks to reinterpret anything that might be seen as creating a 
division between the individual and Siva. But it also follows the emphasis of the 
StC itself and concentrates on the experience of the individual. Occasionally, 
both Bhatta Narayana and Ksemaraja suggest that Siva is the ultimate agent 
and enjoyer. In StC v. 63, Bhatta Narayana pays homage to Siva as the enjoyer 


31. On StC v. 50, p. 190. 

32. adbhutaraso dhvanyate-, StC, p. 188. 
33 - StC v. 20 and commentary, pp. 29-30. 




350 TANTRAPUSPAS'JALI 


of the universe in general terms ( bhoktr ); Ksemaraja specifies that Siva is the 
“relisher’ (camatkartr )/ 4 When Bhatta N'arayana depicts Siva united with Lina 
(even though he has incinerated Kamadeva and destroys all desires), Ksemaraja 
describes Siva as “immersed in the extraordinary erotic sentiment brought to 
perfection by the supporting and stimulating factors." Thus he uses standard 
terms from Sanskrit aesthetics to explain the vision of Siva presented in this 
hymn. While the majority of Ksemaraja’s commentary focuses on the experience 
of the Saiva devotee, it also applies the terminology of Sanskrit aesthetics to 
Siva himself. This shift in focus from the Saiva devotee to Siva himself is not 
surprising, given the ontological identity' between the devotee and Siva espoused 
by non-dual Saivas. 30 

Ksemaiajas commentary on the StC evinces his basic interpretive strategies 
in dealing with stotras, which combine poetic expression with devotion and 
prayer. His commentaries on the Sivastotravali and Sambapancasikd share many 
features with his exegesis of the StC, but they also have different emphases and 
objectives that provide additional evidence for the nature and history of stotras 
and their interpretation in Kashmir. 


COMMENTING ON THE POETRY OF UTPALADEVA 

There are, it is true, everywhere thousands of rivers of beautiful verses, but none of them 
lesembles the divine river of the Stotravail? 1 

This well-known and oft-quoted verse (at least since it was cited by K.C.Pandey 
^ n ^ asira P ar ^tnarsa of Madhuraja testifies to the popularity and 

the a collection of hymns and verses to Siva by Utpaladeva 

(c- 925 - 975 ).* Ma ny manuscripts of the text survive, and it has been edited and 

34 - StC p. 73. 

mbano ddip a navibhavasarnpumdsdmdnyasrngaranivlstatvam; StC v. 51 a ncl 
commentary, pp, 60-61. 

r, ^ ^ movernen t in the realm of philosophy, see the opening verses of the 

p tyabhijndkdrikd, where Siva is identified as the supreme knower and agent 
,dent,cal with the limited knowet and agent. 

in K H 3 ' ^ verse from Sastrapcirdmarsa of Madhuraja (v. 8), cited 

in andey, Abhinavagupta: An Historical and Philosophical Study (Varanr^ 
Chaukhamba Amarabharati Prakashan, 2000 [1963]), 163ns. 

3 • °n this dating, see Sanderson, “Saiva Exegesis," 411. 


iasi: 



POETRY AND KSEMARAJA'S HERMENEUTICS OF NON-DUALISM 351 


published numerous times. Swami Lakshman Joo (1907-1991), the Saiva guru 
and scholar from Kashmir, published a Hindi gloss on the text in 1964, and his 
English comments on each verse were edited and published posthumously bv 
his disciples in 2008. The SSA continues to he recited by Kashmiri Pandits today. 40 

I he text itself did not originally have the form it does now. According to 
Ksemaraja, the hymns and individual verses composed by Utpaladeva were 
redacted at least twice after their composition. In his commentary, Ksemaiaja 
says (in Sanderson’s translation): 

[Utpaladeva] composed the Saniyrahastotra, Jayastotra, and Bhaktistotra , and also a 
number of single-verse poetic hymns for his daily devotions. Some time theiealter, Rama 
and Adityaraja received the latter mixed up with the former and then edited them in the 
form of a series of [multi-verse] hymns. It is reported that Visvavarta then [re-]arranged 
them as twentv hvmns with titles of his own invention. 4 


Part of the fame of these hymns derives from Utpaladeva’s renown as 
a philosopher and theologian, a central figure in an influential tradition ot 
Saiva non-dualism “that proved to have a pan-Indian appeal and influence 
that extends from the Kashmir Valley of the tenth century to contemporary 
times.” 4 - This tradition came to be referred to as the Pratyabhijna, based on the 
prominence of “recognition” (pratyabhijna) in Utpaladeva’s formulation^ of 
this non-dualistic doctrine-recognition of Siva as the one supreme lord, who 


39- E.g., Constantina Rhodes Bailly, Shaiva Devotional Son 3 s °J K « slwW: 
and Study of Utpaladeva’s Shcvastotravali (Albany: SUNA ress, 19 

Sivastotrlali of Utpaladevachdrya, With the Sanskrit Commentary 

\ i Doionob laksmana (Varanasi: ChauknamDa 
ed. (with a Hindi commentary) by Rajanaka Laksn l k - spmar aia’s 

. , or Mvnuotations from the SSA and Ksemaraja s 

Amarabharati Prakashan, 2008 [1984])• > d no editjon of the Sivastotrdvall 

commentary refer to the latter. Interesting y, 

in >he Kashmir Series of Texts and Studies. a , , east ones! „,m daily" 

40. According to Bet.ina Bat,men many on . Slvastotr avalI of Utpaladeva: A 

and “know many verses by heat t ( Laks hman Joo, transcribed and ed. 

Mystical Hymn of Kashmir, exposition by Svs a 
Ashok Kaul [New Delhi: D.K. Printworld, 2008J, 4 ). 

4 1. Sanderson, “Saiva Exegesis,” 399-4000563- 

42 . Nemec, The Ubiquitous §iva 3 - non . dua lism that pratyabhijiid gains the 

43 - It is in Utpaladeva’s formulation ^ nQt occur wit h its later technical 

prominence it has since retaine , 
meaning in Somananda’s extant work (Torella, ffK. - >■ 



352 TANTRAPUSPANJALI 


is conscious, dynamic, blissful, and identical with one’s own consciousness. 44 
Utpaladeva’s most well-known philosophical/theological composition is 
the Isvarapratyabhijhdkarikd (Verses on the Recognition of the Lord). 4 ' 
But his SSA remains the most popular and accessible entree into this complex 
tradition. 

Ksemaraja employs many of the same exegetical practices in his 
commentary on the SSA that he does in his commentary on the StC. He expands 
upon the esoteric meaning of its verses, often interpreting them in terms of 
the Trika and Krama traditions. In his exposition of the first verse, for instance, 
he quotes the MaLinivijayottaratantra, the Trika scripture so central to his 
teacher Abhinavagupta’s writings, and interprets standard religious practice 
(meditation and the repetition of mantras) in doctrinal, gnostic terms (the light 
of consciousness and reflexive awareness [prcikasa and vimarsa ]). 4h Similarly, he 
overlays the $SA with the classification of seven levels of perceivers, just as he did 
the StC . 47 In both cases, this privileges an esoteric, internalized interpretation of 
these hymns that frames them within his own non-dual tradition. 

Ksemaraja relies heavily on samavesa as a flexible conceptual tool in this 
context as well, especially in his interpretations of bhakti. His commentary on the 
first occurrence of bhakti in the S’SA, the very first verse of the collection in which 
Utpaladeva offers homage to the one who is full of bhakti, is a prime example. 
Here, according to Ksemaraja, bhakti means "interpenetration” or "absorption” 
(samavesa), 48 and to be full of bhakti means to be offering praise without being 
tainted by the desire for some result different from that same bhakti . 4 ' 4 In other 
words, bhakti consists in an interpenetration or immersion in Siva that is its own 
reward. This explanation wards off two kinds of dualistic interpretation: that 

44 - For the basic positions of this tradition, see the introductions to Nemec, Ubiquitous 
Siva, and Torella, lPK. 

45 - While his teacher Somananda has been seen as the founder of this tradition, 
Utpaladeva’s own work became the normative expression of Pratyabhijna 
philosophy. Nemec, Ubiquitous Siva, 3. 

46. SSA, p. 3. 

47. For example, see the commentary on SsA 1.12. 

48. SSA, p. 2; later he glosses “devotees” ( bhaktah ) as “those who are possessed of 
interpenetration” ( sama.vesasd.Unah ) (commentary on SsA 15.3). 

49. slaghamanam na tu tadatinktaphaidkanksdkaiankita\ SsA, p. 2. 


POETRY AND KSEMARAjA'S HERMENEUTICS OF NON-DUALISM 353 


bhakti is a relationship between two distinct things, and that bhakti produces 
some result that is distinct from bhakti as the means. 50 In his commentary on 

16.13, he makes it clear that samavesa is the defining feature of non-dualistic 
bhakti: “one obtains Siva by means of both dualistic and non-dualistic bhakti ,” 
says K$emaraja, “but non-dualistic bhakti is immediate, consisting as it does 
in absorption, whereas dualistic bhakti consists in the longing for Siva’s state 
because it is not like that,” i.e., it does not consist in absorption but rather in 
separation. 51 Both K§emaraja and Utpaladeva celebrate and teach a type of 
bhakti that is an immediate experience of immersion and full of pleasure, like 
the savoring of nectar. 

K^emaraja consistently glosses bhakti in terms of samavesa ,* 2 even more so 
than he does in his commentary on the StC, but he also uses the latter concept to 
explain many other aspects of the $S/ 4 . He interprets “I bow" ( naumi ) as “I immerse 
myself in” ( samavisami), “may I honor” (arcayeyam) as “may I be immersed 
in," and both “enjoyment" ( sambhoga ) and “the great festival of worship” 
(pujamahotsava) as "having the nature of interpenetration” ( samavesatma ). 53 
Such examples span diverse internal and external practices and experiences, but 
the common denominator is that they all could be interpreted dualistically. As 
in his commentary on the StC, therefore, samavesa serves as a global interpretive 
tool for framing Utpaladeva’s poetry in order to ensure a non-dualistic reading of 
a host of practices and experiences. 

K§emaraja’s commentary also relies on terms and concepts from Sanskrit 
aesthetics. In fact, he often uses it to explain terms like samavesa, and vice versa. 
In his introduction to the first verse of the for example, he characterizes 
immersion in the supreme lord (paramesvarasamavesa) as “consisting in the 
relishing of the rasa that comes from embracing the wealth [or the goddess 


50. In his commentary on SsA 17.40, Ksemaraja makes a similar point about worship 
(puja )—for those who are stuck in a dualist framework, worship is a means, but 
for true devotees it is an activity, rather than an accomplishment, which consists in 
oneness. 

51. dvaitabhakter advaitabhaktes ca sivapraptir bhavaty eva kintv advaitabhaktih sactyah 
samavesamayi dvaitabhaktis tv atathdtvdc chivatakanksamayi; SsA, p. 257. 

52. E.g., his commentary on &SA 9.4 and 15.12. 

53. On &L 4 16.29 (p- 268), 18.20 (p. 322), 9.1 (p. 115), and 17.1 (p. 271). 



354 TANTRAPUSPAN'JALI 


LaksmI] that is liberation.” 54 Just as he does when commenting on the StC, 
Ksemaraja uses aesthetic language in two general ways: to analyze the poetic 
features of a verse, and to expand on specific theological points, particularly the 
experience of the true devotee who realizes and enjoys his or her identification 
with Siva. The former deploys the basic terms and concepts of classical 
Sanskrit poetics, such as specific poetic figures or varieties of suggestion. In 
his commentary on 16.2, for instance, he points out the use of apparent 
contradiction ( virodhdbhdsa ), since Utpaladeva says that Siva appears with 
various qualities at various times to aid devotees, yet he also exists at all times 
as the pure self, beyond specific qualities and sequence. In his commentary 
on $SA 7.4, he categories the literary figure in the verse as slesopamddhvuni — 
the suggestion of a simile through slesa —and in his explanation of &V1 13.13, 
he says there is drsta.ntdlankaradh.vani —the suggestion of the poetic figure of 
an example. Often he simply explains what a given word or section of a verse 
“suggests” ( dhvanati ). 3 '’ Overall, this aspect of his commentary indicates that, 
at least in some way, Ksemaraja considered these hymns poetry, since it is 
only for poetry that such technical terms, strictly taken, were relevant. In other 
words, he regards these stotras as poetry worthy of an interpretation based on 
classical Sanskrit poetics (alankarasastra), and in doing so he makes an implicit 
argument about the status of this genre. This practice, combined with the fact 
that he composed commentaries at all on these stotras, may reflect the growing 
importance of stotras as popular literature among Saivas in Kashmir during the 
tenth and eleventh centuries. It is also evidence for how the poetic features of the 
text support its theological and devotional content. Various types of suggestion, 
as well as literary figures like apparent contradiction, can indirectly point 
beyond the normal usage of language and thereby skirt some of the limitations 
of language and thus of ontology—that Utpaladeva and Ksemaraja wish to 
avoid, namely the reification of separation and difference. 

But as often as Ksemaraja uses poetic terms to analyze the verses of the 
&S/ 4 , he also uses it to serve another purpose, distinct from the formal analysis 
of poetry. As in his commentary on the StC , Ksemaraja uses terms and concepts 

54. moksalaksmisamdslesarasdsvddamayasya paramesvarasamdvesasyaiva; $SA, p. 2. 

55. See the commentary on SSA 16.2. 

56. E.g., in his commentary on $SA 1.26,10.13,11.9, 13.3, and 14.1. 



POETRY AND KSEMARAjA S HERMENEUTICS OF NON-DUALISM 355 


from Sanskrit aesthetics to characterize and cultivate a distinct Saiva experience 
of non-duality. His commentary on the SSA emphasizes that this is separate 
from normal experience. It is alaukikci —extraordinary' or beyond the mundane. 
Traditionally it is the world of the theater or literature that is considered alaukika, 
a space separate from the normal world ( loka ). Experiencing grief in the theater, 
for instance, is very different from experiencing grief in everyday life. Ksemaraja is 
interested in what is alaukika, but he is not concerned with the world of literature 
or the theater as a distinct space (at least in his commentaries on stotras). So 
when Utpaladeva refers to a special rasa one experiences when repeating the 
name “Siva,” Ksemaraja calls it alaukika, and does the same elsewhere for the 
special worship of devotees who pray to Siva without asking for anything. 5 ' Saiva 
devotion, like literature and drama, creates an extraordinary experience, and 
both are facilitated in part by poetic language, but there is a crucial difference. For 
Ksemaraja, the extraordinary experience facilitated by Saiva devotion does not 
necessarily remain distinct from the world. It can transform one’s experience of 
the entire world into something alaukika, something extraordinary and beyond 
normal experience. In his view, one’s experience of the world (loka) can be 
entirely alaukika for the devotee. This transformation, this radical re-envisioning 
of the world, is what Ksemaraja attempts to cultivate in his commentary, through 
the help of terminology from aesthetics (rasa, cisvada, camatkara, dhvani, 
etc.) and the deployment of hermeneutic theological tools like the concept of 
samcivesa. For both Utpaladeva and Ksemaraja, poetry and aesthetics are ways 
of moving beyond normal, dualistic language and understandings to cultivate an 
extraordinary experience for their audiences grounded in a radical theology of 
non-dualism. 


REFRAMING SAMBA’S HYMN TO THE SUN 

The Sambapancdsika —Samba’s Fifty Verses—is a poetic hymn to the sun-god 
in fifty-three verses, all but the first and fifty-third in the elegant Mandakranta 
meter. It has been well known in Kashmir since at least the eleventh century, but 
this is primarily because of its assimilation into the Saivism that came to prevail 


gy pQj- other examples, see his commentary on SSA 1.26 and 17.241 and his introduction 
to 13.4. 



356 : TANTRAPUSPANJALI 


among Kashmiri Pandits. 58 The SP is attributed to “Samba” (both in the title and in 
verses 51-52), but Samba, son of Krsna, is a semi-legendary figure in the cult of the 
sun-god, known as the Saura tradition. 5 '* The forty-sixth verse of the SP suggests 
what became a trope in Saura worship, namely that the author worshipped the 
sun-god to free himself of disease. 60 In this way the SP echoes two other famous 
hymns to the sun-god—the Adityahrdaya , a popular passage found in most 
southern recensions of the Ramayana, and the seventh century Suryasataka of 
Mayura; all three associate praising the sun-god with revitalization. 61 

58. Bettina Baumer reports that she has “heard it recited with a slow and impressive 
rhythm in Kashmir during the annual yajha at Ishvar Ashram and Guptaganga 
Temple” (“Surya in a Saiva Perspective: the Sambapancdsika, A Mystical Hymn of 
Kashmir and Its Commentary by Ksemaraja,” in Sahrdaya: Studies in Indian and 
South East Asian Art in Honour of Dr. R. Nagaswamy, ed. Bettina Baumer et aL , 1-28 
[Chennai: Tamil Arts Academy, 2006], 1). 

59. According to Andre Padoux, tradition considers Krsna the author of the first ten 
verses and his son Samba as the author of the remaining forty-three, but there 
is no evidence internal to the text itself to suggest this dual authorship or any 
divisions within the text. As he notes, Samba has an Upapurana devoted to him (the 
Sambapurana), and he appears as a figure in the Mahabharata and other Puranas 
(“ Sambapancdsika, Les cinquante strophes de Samba [a la gloire du soleil]” in Le 
parole e i marmu studi in onore di Raniero Gnoli nel suo 70 compleanno , ed. Raffaele 
Torella [Rome: Instituto Italiano per lAfricta e POriente], 565). 

60. “Those who, intent on enjoyment and yoga, say that the Lord grants freedom from 
disease when worshipped are both wise and fortunate. Who else but the immortal 
Sun gives people both enjoyment and liberation, the sum of all happiness?” II SP 
46 11 ye carogyam disati bhagavan sevito ‘py evam ahus te tattvajha jagati subhaga 
bhogayogapradhanah / bhukter mukter api ca jagatam yac ca purnam sukhanam 
tasyanyo ( rkad amrtavapusah ko hi namastu data // SP 46 // Unless otherwise noted, 
all references are to the edition in Tantrasamgraha, Parti , ed. Goplnatha Kaviraja, 

Yogatantra-Granthamala Vol. Ill (Varanasi: Sampumanand Sanskrit University, 
2002).] 

61. The Adityahrdaya is placed after the 93rd chapter of book 6 ( Yuddhakanda ) in 
the critical edition of the Ramayana. When Rama appears exhausted and anxious 
during his climactic battle with Ravana, the sage Agastya teaches him a hymn of 
praise to the sun-god. After memorizing it, gazing at the sun, and reciting it, he 
returns to battle rejuvenated. See Robert P. Goldman et aL, The Ramayana ofValmiki 
VI. Yuddhakanda (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2009), 1341-1348. 



POETRY AND KSEMARAjA'S HERMENEUTICS OF NON-DUALISM 357 


As for the date of the SP, we have little textual evidence, aside from the upper 
limit of the eleventh century, when K§emaraja composed his commentary. But 
as scholars have noted, there is evidence that the Saura tradition flourished in 
Kashmir in the eighth century, exemplified by the magnificent temple to the sun- 
god and his consort at Martan^atlrtha (modern Ma{an), built by King Lalitaditya 
in the mid-eighth century. 1 ’ 2 It is likely, therefore, that the SP was composed 
during this flourishing of the Saura tradition in the eighth century, and it may 
have been associated with the Martantja temple.” 3 

The content of the SP draws heavily on Vedic imagery and practices, yogic 
physiology, and a theology of speech and sound. 1 ’ 4 The second verse, for example, 
praises the sun within the body as the sound “om" and as what stabilizes the 
in-breath and out-breath. K§emaraja introduces this verse by saying that “the 
poet, having praised the supreme sun as all-pervasive (in verse one), now 
praises the sun as pervading the central channel in the body.” 1 ’ 5 Both Ksemaraja’s 
commentary and the SP itself embrace the rich potential of imagery related to 
the sun, from whiteness and light to narrative allusions—much of which can be 
depicted as both external and internal, symbolic phenomena. 

While K$emaraja’s commentary clearly interprets the SP according to his 
own non-dual tradition, one can also discern a strong non-dual trend within the 
SP itself. Surely this was one of the features of this Saura poem that appealed 
to K§emaraja. For example, the thirty-second verse suggests the unity of the 
speaker and the addressee: 

Since you are the cause of the universe, all things exist eternally in your body, and you in 
each one of theirs simultaneously, like a possessor of qualities who is at the same beyond 
all qualification. When you are like this, 0 lord, truly I am nothing other than you but 

As for the Suryasataka, tradition holds that Mayura was cured of leprosy through 
his composition of a hymn to the sun-god, and interpreters have found this frame 
story suggested within the Suryasataka itself (specifically, v. 6). 

62. Sanderson, “The Saiva Age,” 57; Baumer, “Surya in a Saiva Perspective,” 2. 

63. Baumer, “Surya in a Saiva Perspective," 2. 

64. Padoux, “Les cinquante strophes de Samba,” 566. For some examples of Vedic 
references, see SP w. 10, 24, and 27; for examples of yogic physiology, SP w. 2, 5,14, 
19, 2 9.35> and 50; for the theology of speech and sound, SP w. 1,2,4,13,21,23, and 32. 

65. evam sdmdnyayydptyd paramarkam stutva dehasthamadhyanddcvyaptyd stauti; SP, 
p. 2. 



358 TANTRAPUSPANJALI 


still you are the omniscient, supreme person (purusa). and I am a limited knower by nature 
( prakrti ). 6 ” 

Despite this ontological unity, however, there remains an epistemological 
difference between them, which the poet addresses throughout the poem. 
Several verses, for instance, explore the (ontological) falseness in the distinction 
between the poet who offers praise and the one being praised, yet maintain the 
usefulness of such praise in uprooting ignorance. ' From verse to verse, the poem 
shifts between different conceptions of Surya as the supreme deity, the physical 
sun, and a light or energy within the body." h 

Despite the fascinating content of the SP as a Saura hymn, we primarily have 
access to it because it was incorporated into the Saiva traditions of Kashmii 
through the commentary of Ksemaraja. It is an excellent example of the 
“etiolation and subsumption of the cult of the Sun-god” within 6aivism, a trend 
that has been charted by Alexis Sanderson.''' Bettina Biiumer likewise notes that 
the absorption of this tradition within Saivism “was surely facilitated in the case 
of the Advaita Saiva tradition of Kashmir because the Sun became a symbol 
of the Supreme Light of Consciousness ( cit , samvit, prakdsa) and was hence 
identified with Siva.’’ 7 " Ksemaraja had no connection (that we know of) with 
the SP or its author beyond his appreciation for the content of the poem. The 

66 . Lokah sarve vapusi niyatam te sthitas tvam ca tesam ekaikasmin yugapad aguno 
visvahetor guntva / itthambhute bhavati bhagavan na tvadanyo ‘smi satyam ktntujhas 
tvam paramapuruso ‘ham prakrtyatva cajhah // SP 32 //The verse is full of references 
to the Samkhya tradition—the deity possesses qualities like omniscience, but is also 
separate from the three gunas that constitute limited existence; and the references 
to the paired categories of purusa and prakrti suggest that the poet is separated 
from the deity by means his involvement with the material basis of the universe, 
needing only to overcome this limiting entanglement to realize his identity with the 
deity. 

67. See SP w. 11 and 15, discussed below. 

68. As Padoux notes; “Throughout, the hymn mingles or alternates forms of homage or 
worship with micro- and macro-cosmic identifications and correspondences, the 
sun being at once the supreme deity, a star, and an aspect of the energy that is both 
cosmic and human” (“Les cinquante strophes de Samba,” 568; my translation). 

69. “Saiva Age,” 53-58. His treatment is necessarily brief, due to the dearth of Saura 
scriptures available to us. 

70. Baumer, “Surya in a Saiva Perspective,” 3. 



POETRY AND KSEMARAJA'S HERMENEUTICS OF NON-DUALISM 359 


rich visual elements of the SP, its non-dual orientation, and its own tendency to 
move between macro- and microcosmic visions must have appealed greatly to 
Ksemaraja, whose own non-dual tradition relied heavily on metaphors relating 
to light (prakdsa, dbhdsa, etc.)-" 1 Ksemaraja’s commentary on the SP ofters some 
of the most interesting examples of the relationship between poetics and Saiva 
hermeneutics, as well as the interpretation of stotra s. Through both literary and 
theological techniques, Ksemaraja reframes the SP in a fully non-dualistic Saiva 
light and subsumes a dynamic Saura composition within his own tradition. He 
uses many of the same interpretive practices found in the two commentaries 
already discussed, as well as others that rely more explicitly on literary features 
of the text or on metaphorical readings of its Saura elements. 

Ksemaraja consistently interprets various terms that could be construed 
dualistically in terms of sumdvesa, absorption or immersion in Siva. F01 instance, 
SP v. 1 says, “1 offer homage to that supreme brahman, Ksemaiaja explains. By 
eliminating the state of being a limited subject, which consists in having a body 
and so on, I become absorbed in (avisami) that (supreme biahman). Similarly, 
his commentary on SPv. 2 glosses “1 surrender ( prapadye) with I am absorbed 
in” (samdvisdmi),'* and such examples could be multiplied. 

Despite his frequent use of sumdvesa to emphasize non-duality, however, 
Ksemaraja also emphasizes that bhakti and praise can function instiumentally. 
This follows, in part, the content of his root text, which we also saw in his 
commentary on the StC. On SPv. 11, for instance, he glosses stuti as the 1 effecting 
on the greatness of the supreme Self that is the undivided bliss of consciousness, 
and says that it bestows immersion in the supreme. 4 His commentary on SP v. 
16 likewise suggests that bhakti helps one obtain the nectai that is immersion 


71. For an overview, see Bettina Bauiner, “Light and Reflection. The Metaphysical 
Background of Aesthetics in Kashmir Saivism,” in Aesthetic Theories an 01 ms in 
Indian Traditions, ed. Kapila Vatsyayan and D.P. Chattopadhyaya (Delhi: Project of 
History of Indian Science, Philosophy and Culture, 2008), 128 14 

72. dehadipramdtrtaprasamanena tad ev avis amity arthah, SP, p- 1 
70 SP p. 2. 

74. cidanaadaghanaparamatmotmotkampammarSdtmd stutih pammasamave- 

sapradety arthah: SP, p. 9. He glosses stuti as pardmaria in other places os well, such 
as his commentary on SPv. 33. 



360 TANTRAPUSPANJAL! 


(dvesa)P' These interpretations are rooted in the SP’s verses, which present 
praise and bhcikti as instrumental means. When compared with Ksemaraja’s 
commentary on the SSA in particular, we see how he can interpret bhakti 
and praise as both the means and the goal of his non-dualistic theology; they 
lead to scimdvesa and also represent the enjoyment of that state.' In the end, 
though, praise and bhakti involve no differentiation for Ksemaraja. Consider his 
commentary on SP v. 15. The verse itself reads: 

You alone, who have the nature of the agent, the object of action, and the action itself, 
play as the one who praises, the one to be praised, and the praise itself. Therefore I have 
no independence in the act of praising you. On the other hand, whatever pleasing prayers 
I offer, O lord of the rays," are real, for anything in the universe that seems different from 
you would be meaningless. // SP 15 IP'* 

Ksemaraja explains: 

“I” is only something constructed by you. Therefore, “I"—in the sense of a limited perceiver 
dominated by contraction, and dependent on this stotra as a means that is still no different 
from you—“praise” ( staumi ) the self that is consciousness and you alone. “1" does not mean 
anything separate. And whatever pleasing prayers, that is, beautiful supplications, I offer 
as one who is identical with you, those are all real, i.e„ they are nothing but the supreme 
reality that is you. For what in the world is different from the self that is consciousness and 
you alone? Nothing. And if something like that were imagined, it would be meaningless. It 
is impossible. [...] Thus, logically, the essence of praise (. stutih ) is non-differentiation from 
you. 79 


75. SP, p. 12. 

76. The latter is suggested by his gloss on SP v. 37: “Make me one who enjoys the rasa 
of immersion in the supreme” (ninyutthdnasamdvesarasdsvddinam mam kurv ity 
arthah ; SP, p. 25). 

77 - The term used here— gopati— can mean either the “lord of the rays,” i.e„ the sun, or 
“lord of speech.” 

78. stotd stutyah stutir iti bhavdn kartrkarmakriydtmd krldaty ekas tava nutmdhdv 
asvatantras tato ‘ham /yad vd vacmi pranayasubhagam gopate tac ca tathyam tvatto 
hy any at kim iva jagatam vidyate tanmrsa syat // SP 15 // 

79 * yato ham. iti bhavatkaipitam eva / tato ham iti samkocapradhano mayapramata 
tvatstotrakarane ‘svatantras tvam eva cidatmdnam staumi / na tv aham 
namdnyah kas cid ity arthah / yac ca kin at tvadatmaivaham pranayasubhagam 
prarthanasundaram vacmi tatsarvam tathyam tvatparamdrtham eva /yatas tvattas 
cidatmano vyatiriktam jagatam kim eva vidyate ? na kin cid asti / yadi vd tathdpi kin 
citsamkalpyate tanmrsa syat / naiva bhavet / [...] itthamyuktitas tvadabhedasaraiva 
stutih; SP , p. 11-12. 


POETRY AND KSEMARAJA’S HERMENEUTICS OF NON-DUALISM 361 


The key point is that for Ksemaraja, the “I” that offers praise is no different 
from the supreme “I"—Siva as the dynamic consciousness underlying all 
existence. Throughout his commentary, Ksemaraja uses passages such as this 
one to systematically reframe basic elements of stotra literature, such as bhakti 
and praise. 

There are also a variety of ways that K$emaraja takes advantage of literary 
features of the SP to do this, or uses literary frameworks to interpret its verses. The 
most basic and pervasive of these is the metaphor of the sun as consciousness. 80 
In the opening verse ( mcingalasloka ) of his commentary he says: “1 bow to the 
one sun that is consciousness” ( naumi cidbhanum ekam).*' In his commentary on 
SP v. 7 he explicitly equates Surya with Parama^iva (although as Baumer notes, 
this is a rare occurrence). 8 " In his commentary on SPv. 11, in which the poet says 
“I offer praise” ( staumy evdham), K?emaraja glosses it emphatically: “I praise you 
alone, the sun that is consciousness, but not as some limited deity.” 83 The equation 
of the sun with consciousness permeates Ksemaraja’s commentary, and it is 
facilitated by the well-established tradition of using metaphors associated with 
light within non-dualistic Saiva theology. Often Ksemaraja interprets the SP’s 
verses in multiple ways, and he consistently gives consciousness as the supreme 
form or meaning of “sun.” 

Ksemaraja systematically interprets the SP in ways that multiply its meanings, 
giving theologically-inflected depth to each verse. This is no surprise, given that 
he composed a Saiva commentary on a Saura text. Equating the sun and its light 
with consciousness is only the beginning of his esoteric interpretation of the SP. 
He often explicitly acknowledges the difference between such interpretations and 

80. While he equates the sun with consciousness most frequently, he also identifies it 
as the self, as in his introduction to SPv. 1: “Illustrious Samba, for the benefit of the 
world, begins his praise-poem to the sun-god who is the self by saying... ( srlsamba 
svdtmavtvasvatstutim jagato ‘nugrahaya vaktum upakramate; SP, p. 1). 

81. SP, p. 1. 

82. “Surya in a Saiva Perspective," 9- While consciousness is often described in terms 
relating to light, the equation of the sun-god (Surya), a specific deity, with supreme 
and all-encompassing Paramasiva is unusual. Surya is more often related to a specific 
form of Siva, Martanda-Bhairava, or else interpreted as the light of consciousness 
( prakasa). 

83. tv dm eva cidarkam staumi na tu parimitam kancana devatam; SP, p. 9 - 



362 TAXTRAPUSPAN'JALI 


his explanation of the external ( bdhya ) elements of the verse. His commentary 
on SPv. 9 is paradigmatic. The verse praises the sun-god. but uses.s : /t-.s« to compare 
him to Visnu in the form of a Brahman youth. Both spread throughout the 
universe by means of their padas —in the case of the sun, his “rays;” in the case of 
\ isnu, his feet. This refers to the well-known and old story in which Visnu takes 
on the foim of a young (or dwarf) Brahman to trick the powerful demon Bali into 
giving him whatever land he can cover in three steps, which end up covering far 
more than Bali expects. Ksemaraja’s commentary, however, does not begin by- 
addressing either the literal meaning of the verse, or the comparison with Visnu 
suggested by the slesas it contains. Rather, he begins by explaining what he calls 
the ultimate or supreme meaning ( paramdrthah ).** This equates the sun with 
sattva, the quality of lucidity and the very existence of all things, whose form 
consists in the great light ( mahdprakdsa ), which is the nature of consciousness 
and the ground for all existence. He goes on to gloss the various parts of the 
verse with technical terms from his own tradition; for example, he interprets 
the seven worlds ( sciptaloka ) as the seven levels of perceivers {prama.tr), from 
Siva down to the most limited perceivers called sakalas. Only near the end of his 
commentary does he acknowledge that the verse is also referring to the external 
{bdhya) sun/sun-god, whose lays are traditionally described as seven horses. 
After briefly discussing this meaning of the verse he ends by explaining its slesa 
suggesting the comparison between the sun-god and Visnu.-' Ksemaraja repeats 
this general foimat in the rest of his commentary, and often signals a switch from 
an esoteric 01 supieme {para) reading to an exoteric or mundane one with the 

word "external” {bdhya)*" In this way his commentary prioritizes internalized 
interpretations. 

Elsewheie Ksemaiaja uses a tripartite classification to establish levels of 
meaning in the text. The SPitself suggests such a classification-in SPv. n, quoted 
above, we saw that this Sauia poet praises the sun as having three forms, namely 
manifest {sthuia), subtle ( suksma ) and supreme {para). Ksemaraja identifies the 


84. SP, p. 7. 

85. SP, pp. 7-8. 

86. E.g., SP w. 8,24. 


POETRY AND KSEMAIUAJAS HERMENEUTICS OF NON-DUALISM 363 


first as the sun whose existence is external, the second as the supreme brahman 
existing within the body as the central channel,* and the third as the unbroken 
bliss that is consciousness, the nature of the universe. 1 * He invokes this tripartite 
classification in his commentary on other verses as well/ and it opens the 
doorway to a hierarchy of interpretations that Ksemaraja uses to assimilate the 
dominant Saura elements of this poem into his own tradition. 

As in his commentaries on the StC and SSA, Ksemarajas commentary on 
the SP frequently uses terms that overlap with aesthetic discouise in ambiguous 
ways. This is particularly true of rasa , as in his opening veises. 

With words burst forth out of the abandon of this immersion (avesa), 

I will reflect a little on this hymn of praise (stuti), the illustrious Sdmbapancdsika. 

May this supreme nectar {rasa) be relished (. rasyatdm ) by connoisseurs (rasajnaih) 

II mancjalaslokas 2-3ab 

Thus, Ksemaraja associates this hymn of praise (stuti), the SP, with rasa, 
and hopes that it is enjoyed by those who appreciate rasa (.rasajna ). As we have 
seen, Ksemaraja does not conceive of this audience as spectators like those in 
a theater; rather, lie (and Utpaladeva) present these connoisseurs as devotees 
who are able to hear and recite these poems in theologically-inflected ways; 
Saivas bhaktas who are also aesthetes. But there is also the implication that Siva 
himself appreciates the rasa of the poem. In his commentary on SP 42, in which 
the poet requests the lord to listen to his pathetic (karuna) plea, Ksemaraja 
explains that “pathetic" means being dominated by the karunarasa, a specific 


87 On the idea of the supreme sun as having the form of brahman as the central channel 
within the body, see Ksemaraja’s commentary on SPv. 2 (SP, pp. 2-3), especially: turn 

paramddityam parabrahmasvarupam eva dehastlutam madliyanadlgatapranabrah 
manivistarn ddyam visvacitrabhittlbhutam sapadi prapadye abliisandhyavadlmnena 
samavisami. 

88 . sthulam bdhyaprdndrkarupam / suksmam madhyanddigatam prdnabrahmarupam 
/param cdnavacchinnam visvdtmacidanandaghanam ; SP, p. 9 - 

89. E.g., SP W. 12, 22. 

90. etadavesavatvasyapronmisaddhisana vayam /vimtsdmo mandk 
chrlmatsdmbapancdsikdstutim // so ‘yam paramrtaraso rasajnair iha rasyatdm / 
mangalaslokas 2-3ab // SP, p. 1. 



364 tantrapuspAnjali 


poetic sentiment." 1 Elsewhere, this is how Ksemaraja glosses the poet’s prayer 
for help: “make me one who relishes the rasa of absorption in the supreme,” '' 
in which case it is the speaker of the hymn who enjoys this rasa. This ambiguity 
about the site of rasa as a subjective experience accords with the non-dualistic 
theology underlying the poem. This ambiguity, in other words, is resolved when 
the distinctions between the deity being praised and the devotee offering praise 
dissolves. 

Ksemaraja uses many other concepts and terms from Sanskrit aesthetics 
to analyze the SP. He identifies figures such as apparent contradiction 
( virodhabhasa ), complex puns ( slesa ), and simile ( upamd ), in addition to 
instances of poetic suggestion ( dhvam ). Usually his explanations of such features 
of the SP occur briefly near the end of his commentary on a given verse, and they 
gloss the basic operation of the poetic features of the hymn. However, they also 
allow for complex interpretations of the SP, and in this way they are part of his 
strategy of multiplying the meanings of the text in order to align it, ultimately, 
with his own tradition. In other words, discussing the layers of meaning created by 
sbsa or dhvani open the text to the kind of complex, multi-leveled interpretation 
Ksemaraja espouses. In this way his analysis of the SP as poetry, in particular, 
supports his complex theological readings of the text. 

Simply discussing the poetic features of the text and the multiple meanings 
that they create lends credence to complex readings of the text. But Ksemaraja 
sometimes uses literary readings of the text to justify a specific theological 
interpretation. For instance, by consistently glossing the word ‘sun" with "the 
sun of consciousness" he imposes a metaphor onto the text as a whole, creating 
mu tiple layers of meaning with every usage of this term (and related ones). 
Sometimes his interpretations of sfesa or dhvani in a given verse extend this use 
of metaphor to create multiple meanings for the SP. Consider SP v 37- 


Even though you terminated the darkness that seemed to swallow up the whole world, 
your heart ,s scented with compassion, so you maintain the night and the day by separating 


91. SP, p. 27. 

92. mrvyutthanasamavesarasasvddinam mam kurv ity arthah; SP, p. 25. 



POETRY AND KSEMARAjA'S HERMENEUTICS OF NON-DUALISM 1 365 


the light and dark paths. O sun-god, save me as well from the disgrace of my wicked deeds! 

/ / SP v. 37 / /' M 

The verse itself simply praises the sun, without explicitly triggering a 
multivalent interpretation. But for Ksemaraja, darkness always suggests 
ignorance as well, so he analyzes the verse as containing a slesopama a 
comparison by means of a complex pun. What is striking, however, is that he 
takes the literal reading of the verse as secondary. In other words, he explains 
that the verse means the inner sun of consciousness removes the darkness of 
ignorance, just as the external sun removes darkness. 94 Thus his analysis of the 
SPs poetic features serves to reinforce and develop the hierarchized layering of 
meaning he creates for this Saura poem. 

As a whole, K§emaraja’s commentary on this hymn is concerned with 
framing things that seem to involve duality— bhcikti, stuti, natnas, and so on in 
ways that highlight both their potential as means to an end and at the same time 
as expressions or enjoyments of that end. Since Ksemaraja is commenting on a 
Saura text, he also stresses a hierarchized layering of meaning in each verse. He 
does this by interpreting verses primarily in metaphorical terms, and by drawing 
on the frameworks of inner and outer meaning as well as a tripartite classification 
of mundane, subtle, and supreme. His interpretations of the literary features of 
the text, such as slesa and dhvcini, not only unpack the meaning of each verse but 
also reinforce and support the overall multiplicity of meanings, which sometimes 
go beyond what the SP itself seems to suggest. 

CONCLUSION 

In this article I have analyzed shared themes and strategies across Ksemaraja s 
three commentaries on stotras, a distinct sub-group within his exegetical oeuvre. 
In his exegesis of the Stavacintamani, Scvastotrdvall, and Sambapancasika, 
Ksemaraja both narrows and multiplies meanings. He consolidates meaning 


93. yena grdslkrtam ivajagat sarvam aslt tad astam dhvdntam nitva punar apivibho tad 
daydghrdtacittah / dhatse naktamdinam api gatl suktakrsne vibhajya trdtd tasmad 
bhava paribhave duskrte me ‘pi bhano II SP 37 II 
94 - SP, p. 25. 


366 TANTRAPUSPANJALI 


by bringing these texts into alignment with his own larger project. For instance, 
while his root texts often present bhakti in terms of devotion and loving worship 
to a deity as an efficient means of obtaining religious benefits, Ksemaraja relies 
on the concept of “absorption" (samdvesa) to recast bhakti (and anything else that 
might suggest duality) as being essentially non-dualistic. At the same time, he 
takes advantage of the poetic features of these hymns to read layers of meaning 
in them, and specifically technical and esoteric meanings. This is particularly 
important in the case of the SP, a hymn to the sun-god. While he notes the 
literary features of the hymn, he is more concerned with his own metaphorical 
reading of the text that transforms its Saura references into esoteric Saiva ones. 
Moreover, Ksemaraja actively applies the compelling metaphors developed 
in the field of Sanskrit aesthetics to Saiva devotional practices. But at least in 
the context of these devotional poems he ignores any separation between an 
aesthetic realm and normal existence. Instead, he emphasizes the experience of 
the Saiva devotee who hears, recites, or composes such hymns. Thus, aesthetic 
terminology has become a way of analyzing and describing religious experience 
without necessitating a specific theory of art as a distinct realm of human 
experienced For Ksemaraja, this description of the devotee’s experience parallels 
(and ultimately merges with) the experience of Siva as the ultimate enjoyer, for 
whom the dynamics of the universe are nothing but his own play to be relished. 

Ksemaraja's commentaries on these three devotional stotras showcase 
a non dual, literary hermeneutics. I am sure that this combination of bhakti, 
aita, and kdvya was one of the main reasons that our Panditji—like many 
others before him, both inside and outside of Kashmir—enjoyed these texts so 

much, and taught others to savor them as well. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Bailly, Constantina Rhodes. Shaiva Devotional Songs of Kashmir: A Translation and Study of 
Utpaladevas Shcvastotravali. Albany: SUNY Press, 1987. 

Baumer Bettina. Surya in a Saiva Perspective: the Sdmbapancdsikd, A Mystical Hymn of 
r and Its Commentary by Ksemaraja." In Sahrdaya: Studies in Indian and 
East Asian Art in Honour of Dr. R. Nagaswamy, edited by Bettina Baumer etaL, 
1-28. Chennai: Tamil Arts Academy, 2006. 

95. For more on this development, and the positions of Utpaladeva and Bhatta Narayana 
themselves, see Stainton, Poetry and Prayer , chapter three. 



POETRY AND KSEMAR. 4 JAS HERMENEUTICS OF NON-DUALISM 367 


-. “Introduction" to Sivastotravall of Utpaladeva: .4 Mystical Hymn of Kashmir, 

exposition by Swami Lakshman Joo, transcribed and edited by Ashok Kaul. New 
Delhi: D.K. Prinrworld, 2008. 

_. “Light and Reilection: The Metaphysical Background of Aesthetics in Kashmir 

Saivism." In Aesthetic Theories and Forms in Indian Traditions, edited by Kapila 
Y’atsyavail and D.P. Chattopadhyaya. 128-146. Delhi: Project of History of Indian 
Science, Philosophy and Culture. 2008. 

-. Abhinavagupta’s Hermeneutics of the Absolute: An Interpretation of his Pardtrisika 

Vivarana. Shiinla: Indian Institute of Advanced Study, 2011. 

Bronner, Yigal. Extreme Poetry: The South Asian Movement of Simultaneous Narration. New 
York: Columbia University Press, 2010. 

Dyczkowski, Mark, trans. The Stanzas on Vibration: the Spandakdrika with Four 
Commentaries. Albany: SUNT Press, 1 99 -■ 

Goldman, Robert P. et at., trans. The Rdmayana ofVdlmikkAn Epic of Ancient India, Volume 
VI: Yuddhakdnda. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2009. 

Hopkins, Steven Paul. Singing the Body of God: The Hymns ofVeddntadesika in Their South 
Indian Tradition. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2002. 

Kaviraja, Gopinatha, ed. Tantrasamgraha, PartI. Yogatantra-Granthamala Vol. III. Varanasi. 
Sampurnanand Sanskrit University, 2002. 

Ksemendra. The Narmamala of Ksemendra, edited and translated by Fabrizia Baldissera. 
Beitriige zur Siidasienforschung 197. Heidelberg: Siidasien-lnstitut Ergon Verlag, 
2005. 

Laksmana, Rajanaka [=Swami Lakshman Joo], ed. (with Hindi commentary). The 
Sivastotravall of Utpaladevdchdrya, With the Sanskrit Commentary of Ksemardja. 
Varanasi: Chaukhamba Amarabharati Prakashan, 2008 [1964]. 

Nemec, John. The Ubiquitous Siva: Somananda’s Stvadpsti and His Tantric Interlocutors. 

Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2011. 

Padoux, Andre. “ Sdmbapancdsikd, Les Cinquante Strophes de Samba [a la gloire du solei ]. 
In Lc Parole e iMarmi:Studiin OnorediRaniero Gnoli nelsuo 70°Compleanno, edite 
by Raffaele Torella, 565-580. Rome: Instituto Italiano per lAfrica e l’Oriente, 2001. 
Pandey, K.C. Abhinavagupta: An Historical and Philosophical Study. Chaukhamba Sanskrit 
Studies, Vol. I. Varanasi: Chaukhamba Amarabharati Prakashan, 2000 [1963]. 
Sanderson, Alexis. “A Commentary on the Opening Verses of the Tantrasdra of 
Abhinavagupta." In Sdmarasya: Studies in Indian Arts, Philosophy, and Interreligious 
Dialogue in Honour ofBettina Bdumer, edited by Sadananda Das and Ernst Furlinger, 
89-148. New Delhi: D.K. Printworld. 2005. 

-. “ T he Saiva Exegesis of Kashmir.” In Melanges tantriques a la memoire d’Helene 

Brunner / Tantric Studies in Memory of Helene Brunner, edited by Dominic Goodall 
and Andre Padoux, 231-442. Pondicherry: Institut Francis d’lndologie / Ecole 
Fran^aise d’Extreme-Orient, 2007. 



368 TAXTRAPUSPAXJALI 


. Swami Lakshman Joo and His Place in the Kashmirian Saiva Tradition” In 
Samvidulldsah , edited by Bettina Baumer and Sarla Kumar, 93-126. New Delhi: D.K. 
Printworld, 2007. 

• The Saiva Age: The Rise and Dominance of Saivism during the Early Medieval 
Period. In Genesis and Development of Tantrism, edited by Shingo Einoo, 41-^50. 
Institute of Oriental Culture Special Series, 23. Tokyo: Institute of Oriental Culture, 
University of Tokyo, 2009. 

Shastri, Mukunda Rama, ed. The Stava-Chintdmani of Ilhatta Ndrdyana with Commentary 
by Kshemaraja. Kashmir Series of Texts and Studies 10. Srinagar: Kashmir Pratap 
Steam Press, 1918. 

Smith, Fredrick. The Self Possessed: Deity and Spirit Possession in South Asian Literature and 
Civilization. New York: Columbia University Press, 2006. 

Stainton, Hamsa. Stotras, Sanskrit Hymns.” In Brill’s Encyclopedia of Hinduism. Volume 
Two. Sacred Texts, Ritual Traditions, Arts, Concepts, edited by Knut A. Jacobsen etal., 
193-207. Leiden: Brill Academic Publishers, 2010. 

. Poetry and Prayer: Stotras in the Religious and Literary History of Kashmir. Ph.D. diss., 
Columbia University, New York, 2013. 

Torella, Raffaele, ed. and trans. The Isvarapratyabhijhdkarikd of Utpaladeva, with the 
Author’s Vrtti. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 2002 [1994]. 

Vasudeva, Somadeva. The Yoga of the MdlinMjayottaratantra: Chapters ,- 4l 7 , 

Collection Indologie Pondichery 19. Pondicherry: Institut Francis de Pondichery/ 
Ecole Fran^aise d’fextreme-Orient, 2004. 

Wallis, Christopher. “The Descent of Power: Possession, Mysticism, and Initiation in the 
Saiva Theology of Abhinavagupta. Journal of Indian Philosophy 36, no. 2 (2008): 
247 - 295 - 

Williams, Ben. Suggesting Similitude: The Saiva Poetics of Ksemaraja.” Unpublished 
manuscript. 2011. 


POST-SCRIPTS 




Ksana: Its Spiritual Significance 1 2 

Pt. Hemendra Nath Chakravarty 


Ksana is a very peculiar term known to people in general, but it has a deeper 
implication in spiritual sadhana. We know that ksana is a minute unit of time, 
but we do not have enough knowledge about how ksana is attained. When it is 

really attained, it opens up the door of the Infinite. 

In the commentary of Vyasa on Patanjali’s Yogasutra, it has been stated that 
ksana really exists. In that single ksana the entire universe experiences a change! 

Time is sequential. It is inevitable for whatever appears in time to pass 
through sequence. Kratna, or the order of succession, is the attribute of time, 
but in the ksana of which we are speaking, order of any sort, either temporal 
or spatial, is absent. Gradual development is only possible for the thing which 
exists in time, but ksana is partless and devoid of succession, so no development 

is possible there. 

The basic vibration or spanda, the very source of the multifarious nature of 
the universe, on account of kdlasamkarsana, comes to a stand in equilibrium. It 
is realized that this very equilibrium is ksana. When this equilibrium oscillates 
by the impelling force of spanda, it appears then as time. 

Really speaking, ksana is one and in its single uniqueness the whole universe 
manifests and shines inseparably. But an ordinary human being with his 

1. [Editors’ note: This article was originally published in The Indian Theosophist, Thakur 
(Dr.)Jaideva Singh Felicitation Number, Vol. 82 Nos. 10 & 11, October-November, 1985. 
We have made minor edits throughout. All translations are by Pt. H.N. Chakravarty.] 

2. Patanjali’s Yogasutra , III.52. 




372 TANTRAPUSPANJALI 


limitations fails to apprehend its real nature. We cannot speak of it in reference 
to time. Hence Utpalacarya rightly said: 

The realization of Thy union is neither called perpetual, nor has it happened then, nor 
occurred once. The concept of temporal measurement cannot be applied here. Thy 
darsana is neither called eternal, nor non-eternal." 

We have spoken above that on account of spanda , time with its nature of 
succession becomes manifest. Kscinci gives rise to prana as the first external 
manifestation of vibration. It should be borne in mind that ksana , though free 
from vibration, yet pulsates with vibration, the play of the Lord. In some measure 
it is compared with the ocean which breaks into waves, while otherwise it is calm 
and tranquil. The transcendent is an ocean of pure consciousness ( akula-bodha- 
samudra) where no vibration is perceptible. The moment vibration arises in 
it on account of its freedom, it appears as if associated with spanda. The first 
manifestation of spanda is the vital energy [prana). The pulsation of prana is the 
very life of everything. It is said of prana that pure consciousness in its creative 
impulse shows its earliest appearance as prana [prak samvit prane parinata). The 
human body pulsates with life because of its presence. When this is lacking, the 
body, though it remains as a body, is nothing but a log of wood. 

In the Trika literature, kala, viewed in the Absolute Parama Siva, represents 
His Supreme Freedom looked upon as kriya sakti projecting the universe, till now 
unified with the Absolute, making it appear as external to It 

Kala, it should be remembered, is a sakti of Parama Siva which constitutes 
the essential nature of Siva and is distinguished from Kdlatattva, which veils the 
nature of the self. The apparent extemalization of the eternal Consciousness is 
the outer aspect of krtyasakti, which in spite of its seeming externality, retains 
always its self-contained ( svdtma visrdnta) nature. The truth is that the Absolute 
Consciousness first appears as life or prdria on which as a base is built up the 
entire fabric of Time and Space.” 3 4 

The proper conception of k?ana is difficult to reach, but Yogins have 
endeavoured to discover it, even while remaining under the veil of Time. They 

3. Utpaladeva, Scvastotravali 12.5. 

4. MM. G.N. Kaviraj, Introduction to Haranacandra Bhattacarya, Kala Siddhanta- 
darsinl (Calcutta, 1941), p. 5. 




KSANA: ITS SPIRITUAL SIGNIFICANCE ‘ 373 


can at least realize that even in the order of succession ksana lies hidden. By day 
and night, some terminal points of movement exist, which are observable even 
in the empirical succession of time. In accordance with one’s convenience, one 
divides the day into three divisions and tries to watch k$ana in its gross form at 
such junctures. 

The Vedic Risis had a clear conception of this and because of it they fixed 
three sandhyas, the junctures of the two moments, that is, the early dawn, 
midday and dusk, for the worship of GdyatrL 

In Tantrik literature we find a few hints on how to arrive at ksana even 
under the influence of time. It is stated that in each inhaling and exhaling tithi, 
masa and others arise. With each inhaling of prana arising from the heart, it 
proceeds upward and ends at the top of the head called dvadasanta, while 
the outgoing apdna has its rise there and finds its end in the heart. The course 
measures thirty-six digits. A tuti, a time unit, covers only two and a quarter digits 
which represents a tithi. All the fifteen tithis from pratipat onward are located 
along both the courses of prana and apdna. These two courses are known as 
the day and night or the sun and the moon or bindu and nada respectively. The 
auspicious moments of sandhya also occur in two dvadasantas and similarly the 
midday sandhya is supposed to occur at the juncture of eighteen digits. A full 
year consisting of 360 days is adjusted with three hundred and sixty movements 
of prana, but externally it is the duration of an hour. 

This being so, samkranti, the passage of the sun from one rasi to another, 
occurs in a single prana. Moreover, when the movement of prana becomes 
equal, it helps the Yogin to have the touch of k$ana. The Yogin, by his meditative 
effort, strives to adjust a year, then twelve years, and lastly the duration of sixty 
years in a single prana. 

Ksemaraja, in his commentary on Svacchanda Tantra, writes: 

In a single movement of prana any obligatory deed once performed by a person having 
proper knowledge about the all-pervasive nature of it, is performed for all time. 5 

Thus, in the movement of prana from the heart onward, the space of one 
digit is divided by the observant Yogin into sixty, which is supposed to be the 
duration of a day and a night. If he further likes to adjust the duration of twelve 


5. Uddyota of Ksemaraja on Svacchanda Tantra [Vol. 3, KSTS 44], Ch. VII, p. 249. 



374 TANTRAPUSPANJALI 


years he divides the digit accordingly, and for the adjustment of sixty years he 
divides the digit into three hundred and sixty portions. 

In this way, kalagrdsa, the cessation of time, comes about and the Yigin 
attains the Supreme Equilibrium or ksana known to western mystics as the 
Eternal Moment. Hence Abhinavagupta writes: 

When Time is consumed in this way, the Yogin attains the state of KdUisamkarsana when 
the single and full pure consciousness shines with the distinctions of concepts forever put 
to rest.' 

Sri Vdmakesvarl-matam states that the Supreme Sakti is really the pacifier of 
time. She is called Kalahallohalollola-kalandsama-kdrinl (v. 2). It is commented 
upon byjayaratha that by the momentum of Time the rays that come forth are 
minute time units. It is on account of their impelling force that all objects shine 
forth in temporal succession. When 6akti, by her grace, removes all limitations 
and bestows upon the sadhaka intuitive insight of ascertainment, then he is 
able to remain steady in that glorious abode where Time does not function. 
It is partless ( akhanda ), full and of the characteristic of pure consciousness 
(paripurna samviddtmaka).' 

From the quotation above, it is quite evident that the terminating point 
from where Time begins to function is called Equilibrium ( samyasamjnd ), where 
distinctions have their end, for any bhava on which Time can put its mould is 
absent there. Similarly, it is from the state of Equilibrium that Time puts its 
stamp ( kaiayet) upon all, beginning from samana down to the Earth. Everything, 
one with the light, is thrown outside; in other words, everything is manifested 
externally and regarded as distinct from each other. Further, it draws them 
within and makes them one with the self. For this reason of katana, throwing 
outside, drawing within and getting them absorbed with the self, it is termed as 
kata, Time. 

Holy texts like the Svacchanda Tantra, the YoginI Hrdaya and others have 
shown how a Yogin can, by means of treading the path of Time, arrive at 
timelessness. The Tantraloka also has given hints as regards to this. The cessation 
of time can be brought about by two means, the one is hathapakaprasamana 


6. Tantraloka , Ch. 7, verses 22-23. 

7. Vamakesvarimatam [KSTS 66], commentary of Jayaratha, pp. 6-7. 



KSAXA: ITS SPIRITUAL SIGNIFICANCE 375 


and the other is madhurapakaprasamana. By the former, the duality of names 
and forms is removed immediately, as if by a leap, without any stages. It is as if all 
the objects of experience are offered bv one’s own sakti (hathakramena ) into the 
Hre of consciousness in order to make it blaze more brightly. 

Madhurapdka (maturing in an agreeable way), on the other hand, means 
a journey towards the Supreme by an orderly succession. It begins only when a 
person receives his initiation from a spiritual teacher and performs the duties 
enjoined by him and then after a prolonged effort becomes free from all limiting 
adjuncts of time. 

The journey of the spiritual seeker begins when he realizes that the final 
goal of his life is to arrive at niskala, the Absolute, where kalas do not have any 
existence. By the grace of his spiritual teacher he strives to pacify the movement 
of his mind, by putting a brake to it either by stopping the movement of prana or 
by deep meditation of mdntrik syllables along the path known as madhyamdrga 
or swjiumnd. 

It is known to us that the mind is ever fluctuating. It is always occupied with 
thoughts. Indian saints of old could see that the mind passes through the three 
stages of waking, dreaming and deep slumber. This journey of the mind does not 
end so long as the seeker is unable to experience the straight movement ( sarala 
marga). It can only be secured by the grace of a guru. Once the straight path 
is open, although it is not totally free from the impact of time, it reveals new 
horizons of spiritual experience. 

The attainment of the straight movement is nothing but freedom of the 
mind from the impact of Time. Besides, the mind consisting of one mdtrd is 
broken into two. As a result of this the seeker can reach ardhamatra. 

Mahamahopadhyaya G.N. Kaviraj in one of his articles writes how by 
practice and concentration the mind becomes steady in the mdtrd (measure) 
and how a Yogin with the aid of his spiritual teacher is able to receive the light of 
cit reflected on the clear mirror of the mind and is then able to become steady in 
ardhamatra. This is the preliminary step towards the straight movement of the 
mind. Ardhamatra is the measure of bindu, that is generally found at the end of 
all sorts of seed mantras like Om, Hrlm and others. 

Ardhamatra symbolizes the principle known as Isvara. From bindu onward 
the up-going movement of the Yogin continues and the minds couise towards 



376 TA.NTRAPUSPANJALI 


the Infinite becomes ever subtler (not only the course but the mind also) than 
the preceding one. The mind does not remain attached to ardharndtrci for long, 
but proceeds further by breaking this matra in half. The stage next to it is known 
as ardhacandra. The journey continues and the Yogin tries to make the mind still 
more subtle in order to receive the light of consciousness in a greater measure. 
The journey which begins in bindu has its terminating point in unmanci, where 
the mind itself wanes. Thus, the Yogin arrives at the timeless state where mind 
and time both cease to function, which is what is known as ksana. 



Posthumous Letter to Panditji 
Hemendra Nath Chakravarty 

Bettina Sharada Baumer 


Ishvar Parvat, 8th April 2011 


Panditji! 

I can no longer touch your physical feet, but I can pay my pranam to you 
mentally. 

May I tell you now what I could not tell you when you were in the body? 

I missed the chance, but is not death always a surprise and an interference in 
our relationship with the loved and respected person? Are we not always behind 
what we would like to express and then, suddenly, it is too late? Time, space and 
death have already separated us. 

In a way, Panditji, I am confident that you knew my sentiments, and that 
you know them now more fully. May be it is for my own satisfaction that I am 
expressing them, having missed you in these last days of your life on earth. 

What would Banaras in these last 25 years have been without you? How 
empty will it be now. 

Panditji, whether I met you frequently or rarely, as the situation was, just 
the thought of you being there, that any time I could meet you, discuss a topic 
or study a text, was so reassuring. As we say about some scholars in Banaras, you 
were an institution by yourself. I could always bring a student or scholar to you 
and you always welcomed them in your kindness. 

There was a deep bond between us which occasionally found expression. 



378 TANTRAPUSPANJALI 


I “discovered” you, maybe, when we had discussions in the Banaras Hindu 
University house of Bithika Mukerji on the Volumes on Hindu Spirituality edited 
by K. Sivaraman. I could feel something special in you, not the typical Pandit, 
much less intellectual. You were a specialist in Tantra, but there was not the 
pride of the one who knows everything. There was certainty hut at the same 
time humility. 

Then I engaged you in the initial stage of Indira Gandhi National Centre 
for the Arts in Varanasi, maybe first in the Alice Boner Foundation, and then in 
the Kalakosa. It was a welcome engagement for two reasons: financial, but you 
never mentioned that aspect as most important. You were rather grateful that I 
asked you to read many texts for the project, such as the Tantrdloku, entirely. You 
enjoyed that task, as also the occasions to meet many Pandits and scholars. 

Our close collaboration taught me a lot, and reading a text with you was 
always a rich experience. 

But the most significant shared experience was when we were both invited by 
the Indian Council for Philosophical Research to a seminar on Kashmir Saivism 
in Srinagar in 1986 (September). It was my great desire to meet the great master 
of Kashmir Saivism, Swami Lakshman Joo, and before the Seminar started we 
hatched a secret plan to hire a taxi at 6 a.m. to take us to Nishat and to Ishvar 
Ashram. We reached the simple door of the Ashram before 8, and a servant told 
us that this was not the time to meet Swamiji, we should come in the afternoon. 
But the afternoon was already planned for an audience with Swamiji with all the 
scholars attending the seminar. So I insisted and finally, through the mediation 
of Prabha Devi, we could meet Swami Lakshman Joo alone that quiet morning. It 
was a definitive meeting for me, and you were the witness. Your connection was 
through Gopinath Kaviraj, mine through Jaideva Singh, who had passed away 
a few months earlier. It was also the beginning of our work on the Pardtrisikd 
Vivuruna. which would engage us for a long time. 

When, the following year, I received initiation from the great Master, and I 
returned to Banaras from Srinagar, at the first meeting with you I did not need to 
describe what had happened. You looked at me and said: Saktipata ? 

Then I also invited you to some of the interreligious seminars I organized 
which exposed you to the interreligious dialogue. Your guru Gopinath Kaviraj 



POSTHUMOUS LETTER TO PANDITJ 1 HEMENDRA NATH CHAKRAVARTY 379 


had already opened your perspective and overcome any kind of narrow 
fundamentalism. But our commitment to Kashmir Saivism was total. 

Your collaboration at the Kashmir Saivism Workshops which I organised for 
some 7-8 years was very precious. 1 cannot forget how deeply you were immersed 
in teaching us Nctru Tantrci on the roof of Jain Ghat, when a sudden storm carried 
away the shamiana (tent) and almost buried you under it! The last one took place 
in my Library SamviduUjya, which you had helped me to establish, and where at 
present a collection of your books is kept. The Library is on the 2nd floor, and 
at that time (you were almost 90) you could not climb the stairs, so two of your 
students carried you up on a chair, so that we could have the benefit of your 
teaching Tantrdloka every day! 

Apart from your knowledge of the texts and your readiness to teach them, 
1 also enjoyed your sense of humour and your subtle and sometimes sharp 
criticism of scholars and students. You were never opportunistic, and kept youi 
critical sense alive. 

Another great experience was when we studied Pciratrisikd Vtvarana with 
you and Professor K.D. Tripathi at the Alice Boner Institute at Assi, maybe the 
first seed which would sprout into the tree of the Kashmir Saivism Workshops. 
There was both complementarity and disagreement between the two great 
Pandits, which made the sessions alive. For a few of my students the text was 
so difficult that one compared the teaching to “climbing Mount Everest starting 
from the summit!” 

Panditji, I have seen you in very poor living conditions, and moving up only 
in the last years of your life, but I admired your equanimity. You have certainly 
gone through very hard times, but your faith in the tradition has cariied you 

through. 

1 was deeply moved by your contributing to my Felicitation Volume a 
translation of the Bahurupagarbhastotra, an important Stotra of the tradition 
belonging to the Svacchanda Tantra. It will remain helpful to whoever studies 
and recites this powerful Hymn. 

It was only a small sign of my gratitude that we bestowed on you the Thakur 
Jaideva Singh Award in 2003. 

Oh yes: Panditji! I almost forgot another common experience. It was in the 
first years of IGNCA, may be 1987 or 1988, that Dr. Kapila Vatsyayan organised a 



380 TANTRAPUSPANJALI 


Seminar in Chidambaram on Chidambaram. I involved you also and we enjoyed 
the ritual and artistic traditions of this centre of Saivism. For me it was the 
beginning of an engagement with Chidambaram. 

It is with a deep sense of gratitude that I send you this letter to the beyond, 
but at the same time with a great sense of loss. May your spirit remain with us, 
your students, and inspire us to the same kind of dedication to the authentic- 
knowledge of the tradition. 






*n>?fawrfuq 
pfir^FIIffin 

', ir^n 

^y^q^trr^qftqTrnaq^ fai^^rq^'sfl 
^vmt% ^gsn?tn*r«i^^‘7tiiqTp|^7firiq v« 
^yrvinr?fl?Ti^ 

\ ii H%q^^ti 
^rq ^^v^Tn^i^iiHR2n’>n^vn7mi^f^^ 


































qr^frjrim^ K#|^T?ig5iif|^|^qfq^^^ 

', Ttj\n 

■^y^^^r^q^qTrnaq^ 

*.v*rcm. ^snrrn^^tf:^*q^i|^Fm^ 
fmmvimTim w*ip *w*rMl 
*TCY*nrsfteW 

*l3p*«fi9W^ 'V THD^B^fWW^rirfl 
^r5?q^5f#j|^!^^ \ ii T^q^^tl 






































